THE  UNIVERSITY 
OF  ILLINOIS 
LIBRARY 

"•  • • ■:  <X; 

Presented  by 
Stuart  R.  Scott 
Champaign,  111. 
in  1926 

Z0&  r •'  v.v 

tS4-8w 


Return  this  book  on  or  before  the 
Latest  Date  stamped  below. 


% 


V* 


V 


+:  - * 


* 


t 


A 


mw~,w 

nf  the 

k ViitoSj  I jf  (if  *UJU6JS 


4 V 


4 


}» 


+> 


THE 


OF  THE 


REV.  JOHN  NEWTON, 

LATE  PASTOR  OF  THE  UNITED  PARISHES  OF  ST.  MARY  WOOLNOTH  AND  ST.  MARY  WOOL- 
CHURCIl-HAW,  LOMBARD  STREET,  LONDON. 


CONTAINING, 


A N AUTHENTIC  NARRATIVE,  ETC.  LETTERS  ON  RELIGIOUS  SUBJECTS,  CARDIPHONIA,  DISCOURSES 
INTENDED  FOR  THE  PULPIT,  SERMONS  PREACHED  IN  THE  PARISH  CHURCH  OF  OLNEY, 

A REVIEW  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY,  OLNEY  HYMNS,  POEMS,  MESSIAH, 
OCCASIONAL  SERMONS,  AND  TRACTS. 


TO  WHICH  ARE  PREFIXED, 

MEMOIRS  OF  HIS  LIFE,  &c. 

BY  THE  REV.  RICHARD  CECIL,  A.  M. 


COMPLETE  IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 
VOL.  I. 


NEW  YORK: 

ROBERT  CARTER  & BROTH  E R S, 

No.  2 8 5 BROADWAY. 


1851 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 

University  of  Illinois  Urbana-Champaign  Alternates 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnne00newt_0 


A 7 


?!  y 9 ' jut*  ^ 

CONTENTS  OF  THE  FIRST  VOLUME. 


/ 


,> 


\3 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEW- 
TON. 


Page. 

Preface 5 

Memoirs,  &c 7 

Review  of  his  Character 56 

Remarks  in  Familiar  Conversation 60 

General  Observations 67 


AN  AUTHENTIC  NARRATIVE,  &c. 


LET.  I.— Introductory  Observations 80 

II. — Occurrences  in  early  Life 81 

III. — Journey  to  Kent,  voyage  to  Venice,  & c.  83 

IV.  — Voyage  to  Madeira,  Entry  on  board  a 

Guineaman,  and  voyage  to  Africa  . . 87 

V.  — Hardships  endured  in  Africa 89 

VI.— Enlargement  in  Africa 92 

VII.— Voyage  from  Cape  Lopez  to  England, 

&,c 94 

VIII.— Danger,  &c.  in  the  Voyage  from  Cape 

Lopez 96 

IX —Events  in  Ireland,  and  arrival  in  Eng- 
land   98 

X — Voyage  to  Africa 100 

XL — Voyage  to  Antigua,  Return  to  England, 

and  Marriage 102 

XII. — Another  Voyage  to  Africa 105 

XIII  —Last  Voyage  to  Africa,  &c 107 

XIV.— Conclusion  of  the  Narrative 109 


LETTERS  ON  RELIGIOUS  SUBJECTS. 


LET.  I.— On  Trust  in  God 112 

II.— To  a Student  of  Divinity  . < . . • 114 

III. — On  2 Cor.  v.  10,  and  Rom.  xiv.  12.  . .116 

IV. — On  Family-worship 118 

V. — On  the  difficulties  attending  the  Mi- 
nistry   120 

VI.— On  the  Influence  of  Faith 122 

VII.— On  a Ministerial  Address  to  the  Un- 
converted   124 

VIII.— On  the  Inward  Witness 127 

IX.— On  Election  and  Perseverance  . . . 129 

X.— On  Grace  in  the  Blade 132 

XL— On  Grace  in  the  Ear 134 

XII.— On  Grace  in  the  Full  Corn  ....  1.36 

XIII. — On  Hearing  Sermons 138 

XIV. — On  Temptation 141 

XV.— A Plan  of  a Christian  Library  . . . 146 

XVI.— On  the  Inefficacy  of  Knowledge  . . . 147 

XVII.— On  a Believer’s  Frames 149 

XVII I. — On  Social  Prayer 152 

XIX.— On  Controversy 154 

XX.— On  Conformity  to  the  World  . . . .156 

XXL— On  Spiritual  blindness 158 

XXII. — On  a State  of  Poverty 160 

XX III  — On  Simplicity  and  Sincerity  ....  163 

XXIV.— On  Communion  with  God 165 

XXV. — On  Faith,  and  the  Communion  of 

Saints 168 

XXVI. — On  Gospel  Illumination 170 

XXVII. —On  Union  with  Christ ib. 

XXVIII.— On  the  Divine  Guidance  . . . • . 171 

XXIX.— On  Rom.  viii.  19,  20,  21 173 

XXX.— On  the  Right  Use  of  the  Law  ...  176 

XXXI  —On  Love  to  the  Brethren 179 

XXXII— On  Candour 180 

XXXIII.— (1)  On  Man  in  his  Fallen  Estate  . . 183 
XXXIV.— (2)  On  Man  in  his  Fallen  Estate  . . 185 

XXXV.— On  Phil  iv.  8 188 

XXXVI.— To  a Friend  on  his  Recovery  from 

Illness 190 


1 age. 

XXXVII—  On  Christian  Experience iii 

XXXVIII.— On  Religion  as  being  necessary  to  the 

Enjoyment  of  Life 194 

XXXIX.— A Word  in  Season 1% 

XL. — To  Professors  in  Trade  ......  f98 

XLL— On  the  Ministry  of  Angels  ....  199 


CARDIPHONIA. 


Twenty-six  Letters  to  a Nobleman 202 

Eight  Letters  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  S . . . - . 243 

Eleven  Letters  to  Mr.  B , &c 263 

Four  Letters  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  R 272 

A Letter  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  O 276 

Seven  Letters  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  P 278 

Three  Letters  to  Mrs.  G 284 

Two  Letters  to  Miss  F 289 

Four  Letters  to  the  Rev.  Dr. 291 

Seven  Letters  to  Mrs. 294 

Four  Letters  to  Mrs.  T 304 

Five  Letters  to  Mr. 309 

Eight  Letters  to  the  Rev.  Mr. 315 

Four  Letters  to  Mrs.  P 322 

Six  Letters  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  B 327 

Nine  Letters  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  R 333 

Three  Letters  to  Aliss  Th 340 

Seven  Letters  to 343 

Five  Letters  to  Air.  C 347 

Eight  Letters  to  Mrs. 352 

Five  Letters  to  Miss  D 363 

Three  Letters  to  Mrs.  H 368 

Two  Letters  to  Aliss  P 371 

Fourteen  Letters  to  the  Rev.  Mr.  B ....  373 


DISCOURSES  INTENDED  FOR  THE 
PULPIT. 

SERMON  I. — On  the  Dcceitfulness  of  the  Heart. — 

“ The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and  des- 
perately wicked  ; who  can  know  it?  I the  Lord 
search  the  heart,  I try  the  reins,  even  to  give  every 
man  according  to  his  ways,  and  according  to  the 

fruit  of  his  doings,”  Jer.  xvii.  9,  10 382 

SERAION  II. — On  the  Saviour  and  his  Salvation. — 

“ This  is  a faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  ac- 
ceptation, that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world 
to  save  sinners,  of  whom  I am  chief,”  ITim.  i.  15  387 
SERAION  III. — On  the  Christian  Name.—“  And  the 
disciples  were  called  Christians  first  at  Antioch,” 
Acts  xi  26  »••••••••••  . 3d2 

SERMON  IV.— On.  all  Things  being  given  us  with 
Christ.—  He  that  spared  not  his  own  son,  but 
delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with 
him  also  freely  give  us  all  things?”  Rom.  viii.  32.  396 
SER  MO N V . — On  searching  the  Scriptu res. — ‘ ‘Search 
the  scriptures,  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eter- 
nal life,  and  they  are  they  which  testify  of  me,” 

John  v.  39 402 

SERMON  VI.— The  same  subject  continued  . . . 407 


SERMONS  PREACHED  IN  THE  PARISH 
CHURCH  OF  OLNEY. 

SERMON  I.—  The  small  Success  of  a Gospel.  Minis- 
try.— “ At  that  time  Jesus  answered  and  said,  I 
thank  Uiee,  O Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth, 
because  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise 
and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed  them  unto  babes,” 
Matt.  xi.  25 414 

3 


6X1741 


4 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

SERMON  II. — The  Mysteries  of  the  Gospel  hid  from. 

Many. — Same  text 417 

SERMON  III.—  Of  those  from  whom  the  Gospel-Doc- 
trines are.  Aid.— Same  text 421 

SERMON  IV. — The  Mature  of  Spiritual  Revelation , 
and  who  are  favoured  with  it. — Same  text  . . . 424 
SERMON  V.—  The  Sovereignty  of  Divine  Grace 
asserted  and  illustrated — “ Even  so,  Father,  for  so 
it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight,”  Matt.  xi.  26.  . . 427 

SERMON  VI. — Of  the  Person  of  Christ. — “All 
things  are  delivered  unto  me  of  my  Father:  and 


no  man  knoweth  the  Son  but  the  Father ; nei- 
ther knoweth  any  man  the  Father,  save  the  Son, 
and  he  to  whomsoever  the  Son  will  reveal  him,” 

Vitt.  xi.  27  431 

SERMON  VII. — Of  the  Authority  of  Christ — Same 
text  . 434 

SERMON  VIIL — The  Glory' and  Grace  of  God' re- 

vealed  in.  Jesus  Christ. — Same  text 438 

SERMON  IX. — Labouring  and  heavy-laden  Sinners 
described. — “Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour, 
and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I will  give  you  rest,” 

Matt.  xi.  28 441 

SERMON  X. — Of  Coming  to  Christ. — Same  text  . 444 
SERMON  XI. — Of  Believers'  Rest  in  Christ. — Same 

text 447 

SERMON  XII.— Of  the  Yoke  of  Christ.—' " Take  my 
yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me ; for  I am  meek 
and  lowly  in  heart : and  ye  shall  find  rest  for  your 

souls.”  Matt,  xi  29 451 

SERMON  XIII. — The  Service  of  Christ  easy  and 
pleasant. — “ For  my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  burden 
is  light,”  Matt.  xi.  30 454 


Page 


SERMON  XIV. — Believers  cautioned  against  Mis- 
conduct in  their  Profession. — “ Let  not  your  good 

be  evil  spoken  of.”  Rom.  xiv.  16 457 

SERMON  XV. — The  Extent  and  Sanction  of  the 
Third  Commandment. — “ Thou  shalt  not  take  the 
name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain;  for  the  Lord 
will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  his  name 

in  vain.”  Exod.  xx.  7 461 

SERMON  XVI. — The  Christian  Life  compared  to  a 
Race. — “ So  run  that  ye  may  obtain,”  1 Cor.  iv. 

24 465 


SERMON  XVII. — JV"o  Access  to  God  but  by  the  Gos- 
pel of  Christ. — “ Wherewith  shall  I come  before 
the  Lord,  and  bow  myself  before  the  high  God? 
Shall  I come  before  him  with  burnt-offerings, 
with  calves  of  a year  old?  Will  the  Lord  be 
pleased  with  thousands  of  rams,  or  with  ten  thou- 
sands of  rivers  of  oil  ? Shall  I give  my  first  born 
for  my  transgression,  the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the 
sin  of  my  soul?  He  hath  showed  thee,0  man. 
what  is  good ; and  what  doth  the  Lord  require 
of  thee,  but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and 
to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God?”  Micah  vi. 

6—8.  468 

SERMON  XVIII.— Of  a Living  and  a Dead  Faith. 

— “ For  as  the  body  without  the  spirit  is  dead,  so 
faith  without  works  is  dead  also,”  James  ii.  26.  472 

SERMON  XIX. — Guilt  removed  and  Peace  restor- 
ed — “ O Lord,  open  thou  my  lips,  and  my  mouth 
shall  show  forth  thy  praise,”  Psalm  li.  15.  . . . 475 
SERMON  XX  — Of  the  Assurance  of  Faith.—1'  And 
we  know  that  we  are  of  God,”  1 John  v.  19.  . 481 


MEMOIRS 


OP 

THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


PREFACE. 

X he  Memoirs  of  the  Hon.  and  Rev.  William  Bromley  Cadogan, 
and  those  of  John  Bacon,  Esq.  were  written  at  the  particular  re- 
quest of  their  relations.  But  in  publishing  these  of  the  late  Rev. 
John  Newton,  I profess  myself  a volunteer;  and  my  motives  were 
the  following: — When  I perceived  my  venerable  friend  bending  un- 
der a weight  of  years,  and  considered  how  soon,  from  the  very 
course  of  nature,  the  world  must  lose  so  valuable  an  instructor  and 
example ; when  I reflected  how  common  it  is  for  hasty  and  inaccu- 
rate accounts  of  extraordinary  characters  to  be  obtruded  on  the  pub- 
lic by  venal  writers,  whenever  more  authentic  documents  are  want- 
ing ; above  all,  when  I considered  how  striking  a display  such  a 
life  affords  of  the  nature  of  true  religion,  of  the  power  of  divine 
grace,  of  the  mysterious  but  all-wise  course  of  divine  providence, 
and  of  the  encouragement  afforded  for  our  dependence  upon  that 
providence  in  the  most  trying  circumstances ; I say,  on  these  ac- 
counts I felt,  that  the  leading  features  of  such  a character  should  not 
be  neglected,  whilst  it  was  easy  to  authenticate  them  correctly. 

Besides  which,  I have  observed  a want  of  books  of  a certain  class 
for  young  people ; and  have  often  been  inquired  of  by  Christian  pa- 
rents for  publications  that  might  amuse  their  families,  and  yet  tend 
to  promote  their  best  interests.  The  number,  however,  of  this  kind 
which  X have  seen,  and  that  appeared  unexceptionable,  is  but  small : 
For,  as  the  characters  and  sentiments  of  some  men  become  moral 
blights  in  society,  men  whose  mouths  seldom  open  but,  like  that  of 
sepulchres,  they  discover  the  putridity  they  contain,  and  infect  more 


VJ 


PREFACE. 


or  less  whoever  ventures  within  their  baneful  influence ; so  the  re- 
formed subject  of  these  Memoirs  was  happily  a remarkable  instance 
of  the  reverse.  The  change  that  took  place  in  his  heart,  after  such  a 
course  of  profligacy,  affords  a convincing  demonstration  of  the  truth 
and  force  of  Christianity.  Instead  of  proceeding  as  a blight  in  society, 
he  became  a blessing ; his  future  course  was  a striking  example  of 
the  beneficial  effects  of  the  Gospel ; and  that,  not  only  from  the  pul- 
pit and  by  his  pen,  but  also  by  his  conversation  in  the  large  circle 
of  his  acquaintance,  of  which  there  is,  yet  living,  a multitude  of 
witnesses. 

Impressed,  therefore,  with  the  advantages  which  I conceived 
would  result  from  the  publication  of  these  Memoirs,  I communica  ted 
my  design  some  years  ago  to  Mr.  N.  Whatever  tended  to  promote 
that  cause  in  which  his  heart  had  been  long  engaged,  I was  sure 
would  not  fail  to  obtain  his  concurrence.  He  accordingly  promised 
to  afford  whatever  materials  might  be  necessary,  beyond  those 
which  his  printed  Narrative  contained.  He  promised  also  to  read 
over  and  revise  w hatever  was  added  from  my  own  observation ; and 
he  soon  after  brought  me  an  Account  in  writing,  containing  every 
thins  memorable  which  he  recollected  before  the  commencement  of 
his  Narrative.  I shall,  therefore,  detain  the  reader  no  longer  than 
to  assure  him,  that  the  whole  of  the  following  Memoirs  (except 
what  relates  to  Mr.  N.’s  character)  was  submitted  to  him  in  MS. 
while  he  w^as  capable  of  correcting  it,  and  received  his  sanction. 


MEMOIRS, 

&C.  8{C. 


These  Memoirs  seem  naturally  to  commence  with  the  Account  mentioned  in 
the  Preface,  and  which  I here  transcribe ; — 

“ I was  born  in  London,  the  24th  July,  1725,  old  style.  My  parents,  though 
not  wealthy,  were  respectable.  My  father  was  many  years  master  of  a ship  in 
the  Mediterranean  trade.  In  the  year  1748  he  went  Governor  of  York  Fort,  in 
Hudson’s  Bay,  where  he  died  in  the  year  1750. 

“ My  mother  was  a Dissenter,  a pious  woman,  and  a member  of  the  late  Dr. 
Jenning’s  church.  She  was  of  a weak,  consumptive  habit,  and  loved  retirement; 
and  as  I was  her  only  child,  she  made  it  the  chief  business  and  pleasure  of  her 
life  to  instruct  me,  and  bring  me  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  I 
have  been  told,  that  from  my  birth  she  had,  in  her  mind,  devoted  me  to  the  minis- 
try ; and  that,  had  she  lived  till  I was  of  a proper  age,  I was  to  have  been  sent 
to  St.  Andrews,  in  Scotland,  to  be  educated.  But  the  Lord  had  appointed  other- 
wise. My  mother  died  before  I was  seven  years  of  age. 

“ I was  rather  of  a sedentary  turn,  not  active  and  playful,  as  boys  commonly  are, 
but  seemed  as  willing  to  learn  as  my  mother  was  to  teach  me.  I had  some  ca- 
pacity, and  a retentive  memory.  When  I was  four  years  old,  I could  read  (hard 
names  excepted)  as  well  as  I can  now ; and  could  likewise  repeat  the  answers  to 
the  questions  in  the  Assembly’s  Shorter  Catechism,  with  the  proofs ; and  all  Dr. 
Watts’s  smaller  Catechisms,  and  his  Children’s  Hymns. 

‘‘When  my  father  returned  from  sea,  after  my  mother’s  death,  he  married 
again.  My  new  mother  was  the  daughter  of  a substantial  grazier  at  Aveley  in 
Essex.  She  seemed  willing  to  adopt  and  bring  me  up;  but,  after  two  or  three 
years,  she  had  a son  of  her  own,  who  engrossed  the  old  gentleman’s  notice.  My 
father  was  a very  sensible  and  a moral  man,  as  the  world  rates  morality,  but 
neither  he  nor  my  step-mother  were  under  the  impressions  of  religion ; I was, 
therefore,  much  left  to  myself,  to  mingle  with  idle  and  wicked  boys,  and  soon 
learnt  their  ways. 

“ I never  was  at  school  but  about  two  years  (from  my  eighth  to  my  tenth  year ;) 
it  was  a boarding-school  at  Stratford  in  Essex.  Though  my  father  left  me  much 
to  run  about  the  streets,  yet,  when  under  his  eye,  he  kept  me  at  a great  distance. 
I am  persuaded  he  loved  me,  but  he  seemed  not  willing  that  I should  know  it. 
I was  with  him  in  a state  of  fear  and  bondage.  His  sternness,  together  with  the 
severity  of  my  schoolmaster,  broke  and  overawed  my  spirit,  and  almost  made  me 
a dolt ; so  that  part  of  the  two  years  I was  at  school,  instead  of  making  progress. 
I nearly  forgot  all  my  good  mother  had  taught  me. 

“ The  day  I was  eleven  years  old,  I went  on  board  my  father’s  ship  in  Long- 
reach.  I made  five  voyages  with  him  to  the  Mediterranean.  In  the  course  of 
the  last  voyage,  he  left  me  some  months  at  Alicant  in  Spain,  with  a merchant,  a 
particular  friend  of  his,  with  whom  I might  have  done  well,  if  I had  behaved 
well.  But  by  this  time  my  sinful  propensities  had  gathered  strength  by  habit : 
I was  very  wicked,  and  therefore  very  foolish;  and,  being  my  own  enemy,  I 
seemed  determined  that  nobody  should  be  my  friend. 

" My  father  left  the  sea  in  the  year  1742.  I made  one  voyage  afterwards  to 

7 


8 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


Venice  before  the  mast;  and  soon  after  my  return,  was  impressed  on  board  the 
Harwich.  Then  began  my  awfully  mad  career,  as  recorded  in  the  Narrative  ; to 
which,  and  to  the  Letters  to  a wife,  I must  refer  you  for  any  farther  dates  ana 
incidents. 1 am  truly  yours, 

" JOHN  NEWTON. 

“Dec.  19,  1795.” 


A few  articles  may  be  added  to  this  account  from  the  Narrative,  where  we 
find,  that  his  pious  mother  “ stored  his  memory  with  whole  chapters,  and  smader 
portions  of  Scripture,  catechisms,  hymns,  and  poems ; and  often  commended  him 
with  prayers  and  tears  to  God :”  also,  that  in  his  sixth  year  he  began  to  learn 
Latin,  though  the  intended  plan  of  his  education  was  soon  broken ; and  that  he 
lost  this  valuable  parent,  July  11,  1732. 

We  also  find,  that,  after  his  father’s  second  marriage,  he  was  sent  to  the  school 
above  mentioned ; and  in  the  last  of  the  two  years  he  spent  there,  a new  usher 
came,  who,  observing  and  suiting  his  temper,  he  prosecuted  Latin  with  great 
eagerness,  and  before  he  was  ten  years  old  he  had  reached  and  maintained  the 
first  post  in  the  second  class,  which,  in  that  school,  was  Tully  and  Virgil.  But 
by  being  pushed  forward  too  fast,  and  not  properly  grounded  (a  method  too  com- 
mon in  inferior  schools,)  he  soon  lost  all  he  had  learned. 

In  the  next  and  most  remarkable  period  of  Mr.  N.’s  life,  we  must  be  conducted 
by  the  Narrative  above  mentioned.  It  has  been  observed,  that  at  eleven  years 
of  age  he  was  taken  by  his  father  to  sea.  His  father  was  a man  of  remarkably 
good  sense,  and  great  knowledge  of  the  world;  he  took  much  care  of  his  son’s 
morals,  but  could  not  supply  a mother’s  part.  The  father  had  been  educated  at  a 
Jesuits’  college,  near  Seville  in  Spain,  and  had  an  air  of  such  distance  and 
severity  in  his  carriage  as  discouraged  his  son,  who  always  was  in  fear  when 
before  him,  and  which  deprived  him  of  that  influence  he  might  otherwise  have 
had. 

From  this  time  to  the  year  1742,  Mr.  N.  made  several  voyages,  but  at  consi- 
derable intervals:  these  intervals  were  chiefly  spent  in  the  country,  excepting  a 
few  months  in  his  fifteenth  year,  when  he  was  placed,  with  a very  advantageous 
prospect,  at  Alicant,  already  mentioned. 

About  this  period  of  his  life,  w ith  a temper  and  conduct  exceedingly  various, 
he  was  often  disturbed  with  religious  convictions ; and  being  from  a child  fond 
of  reading,  he  met  with  Bennet’s  “Christian  Oratory:”  and  though  he  under- 
stood little  of  it,  the  course  of  life  it  recommended,  appeared  very  desirable.  He 
therefore  began  to  pray,  to  read  the  Scriptures,  to  keep  a diary,  and  thought  him- 
self religious ; but  soon  became  weary  of  it,  and  gave  it  up.  He  then  learned  to 
curse  and  to  blaspheme,  and  was  exceedingly  wicked  when  out  of  the  view  of  his 
parents,  though  at  so  early  a period. 

Upon  his  being  thrown  from  a horse  near  a dangerous  hedge-row,  newly  cut, 
his  conscience  suggested  to  him  the  dreadful  consequences  of  appearing  in  such  a 
state  before  God.  This  put  him,  though  but  for  a time,  upon  breaking  off  his 
profane  practices ; but  the  consequence  of  these  struggles  between  sin  and  con- 
science was,  that  on  every  relapse  he  sunk  into  still  greater  depths  of  wickedness. 
He  was  roused  again  by  the  loss  of  a companion,  who  had  agreed  to  go  with  him 
one  Sunday  on  board  a man-of-war.  Mr.  N.  providentially  coming  too  late,  the 
boat  had  gone  without  him,  and  was  overset,  by  which  his  companion  and  several 
others  were  drowned.  He  was  exceedingly  affected  at  the  funeral  of  this  com- 
panion, to  think,  that  by  the  delay  of  a few  minutes  (which  at  the  time  occa- 
sioned much  anger)  his  life  had  been  preserved : but  this  also  was  soon  forgotten. 
The  perusal  of  the  “Family  Instructor”  produced  another  temporary  reforma- 
tion. In  short,  he  took  up  and  laid  aside  a religious  profession  three  or  four  dif- 
ferent times  before  he  was  sixteen  years  of  age. 

“ A.11  this  while,”  says  he,  “ my  heart  was  insincere;  I often  saw  the  necessity 
of  religion,  as  a means  of  escaping  hell,  but  I loved  sin,  and  was  unwilling  to  for 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


9 


sake  it.  I was  so  strangely  blind  and  stupid,  that  sometimes,  when  I have  been 
determined  upon  things  which  I knew  were  sinful,  I could  not  go  on  quietly  till  I 
had  first  despatched  my  ordinary  task  of  prayer,  in  which  I have  grudged  every 
moment  of  the  time;  when  this  was  finished,  my  conscience  was  in  some  measure 
pacified,  and  I could  rush  into  folly  with  little  remorse.” 

But  his  last  reform  was  the  most  remarkable.  “Of  this  period,”  says  he,  “ at 
least  of  some  part  of  it,  I may  say  in  the  apostle’s  words,  ‘ After  the  strictest  sect 
of  our  religion,  I lived  a Pharisee.’  I did  every  thing  that  might  be  expected 
from  a person  entirely  ignorant  of  God’s  righteousness,  and  desirous  to  establish 
his  own.  I spent  the  greatest  part  of  every  day  in  reading  the  Scriptures,  and  in 
meditation  and  prayer.  I fasted  often  : I even  abstained  from  all  animal  food 
for  three  months.  I would  hardly  answer  a question,  for  fear  of  speaking  an  idle 
word.  I seemed  to  bemoan  my  former  miscarriages  very  earnestly,  and  sometimes 
with  tears : in  short,  I became  an  ascetic,  and  endeavoured,  as  far  as  my  situation 
woyld  permit,  to  renounce  society,  that  I might  avoid  temptation.” 

This  reformation,  it  seems,  continued  for  more  than  two  years.  “ But,”  he 
idds,  “it  was  a poor  religion;  it  left  me  in  many  respects  under  the  power  of 
sin ; and,  so  far  as  it  prevailed,  only  tended  to  make  me  gloomy,  stupid,  unso- 
ciable, and  useless.” 

That  it  was  a poor  religion,  and  quite  unlike  that  which  he  afterwards  possessed, 
will  appear  from  what  immediately  follows : for  had  it  been  taken  up  upon  more 
scriptural  ground,  and  been  attended  with  that  internal  evidence  and  satisfaction, 
which  true  religion  only  brings,  he  could  not  so  soon  have  fallen  a dupe  to  such 
a writer  as  Shaftesbury.  It  was  at  a petty  shop  at  Middleburgh,  in  Holland,  that 
he  first  met  with  a volume  of  the  Characteristics.  The  declamation,  called  by  his 
Lordship  a Rhapsody,  suited  the  romantic  turn  of  his  mind.  Unaware  of  its  ten- 
dency, he  imagined  he  had  found  a valuable  guide.  This  book  was  always  in  his 
hand,  till  he  could  nearly  repeat  the  Rhapsody.  Though  it  produced  no  immediate 
effect,  it  operated  like  a slow  poison,  and  prepared  the  way  for  all  that  followed. 

About  the  year  1742,  having  lately  come  from  a voyage,  his  father,  not  intend- 
ing to  return  to  sea,  was  contriving  for  Mr.  N.’s  settlement  in  the  world.  But 
to  settle  a youth  who  had  no  spirit  for  business,  who  knew  but  little  of  men  or 
things,  who  was  of  a romantic  turn — a medley,  as  he  expressed  it,  of  religion, 
philosophy,  and  indolence,  and  quite  averse  to  order — must  prove  a great  difficulty. 
At  length  a merchant  in  Liverpool,  an  intimate  friend  of  the  father,  and  after- 
wards a singular  friend  to  the  son,  offered  to  send  him  for  some  years  to  Jamaica, 
and  undertook  the  charge  of  his  future  welfare.  This  was  consented  to,  and  pre- 
paration made  for  the  voyage,  which  was  to  be  prosecuted  the  following  week. 
In  the  mean  time,  he  was  sent  by  his  father,  on  some  business,  to  a place  a few 
miles  beyond  Maidstone  in  Kent.  But  the  journey,  which  was  designed  to  last 
but  three  or  four  days,  gave  such  a turn  to  his  mind  as  roused  him  from  his  habi- 
tual indolence,  and  produced  a series  of  important  and  interesting  occurrences. 

A few  days  before  this  intended  journey,  he  received  an  invitation  to  visit  some 
distanTTeTaffa^  They  were  particular  friends  of  his  mother,  who  died 

at  their  house;  but  a coolness  haying’.taken  place  upon  hiYTather’s  second  mar- 
riage, aTTiirtercourse  between  them  had  ceased.  TAsIus  road  lay  within  half  a 
mile 'of  the  house7and~Tie  obtained  his  fathers  leave  to  call  on  them,  he  went 
thither,  and  met  with  the  kindest  reception  from  these  friends.  They  had  two 
daughters : it  seems  the  elder  had  been  intended,  by  both  the  mothers,  for  his 
future  wife.  Almost  at  the  first  sight  of  this  girl,  then  under  fourteen _y ears  of 
age,  he  was  impressed  with  such  an  affection  for  her,  as  appears  to  have  equalled 
11  that  .th£-Wjitefs~bT  rqm ance  have~ImagIhedV~ 

;£  I soon  lost,”  says  he,  “ all  sense  of  religi o n , and  became  deaf  to  the  remon- 
strances of  conscience  and  prudence,  but  my  regard  for  her  was  always  the  same  ; 
and  I may,  perhaps,  venture  to  say,  that  none  of  the  scenes  of  misery  and  wick- 
edness I afterwards  experienced,  ever  banished  her  a single  hour  together  from 
Saqr  waking  thoughts  for  the  seven  following  years.* 


10 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


His  heart  being  now  riveted  to  a particular  object,  every  thing  with  which  he 
was  concerned  appeared  in  a new  light.  He  could  not  now  bear  the  thought  of 
jiving  at  such  a distance  as  Jamaica,  for  four  or  five  years,  and  therefore  deter- 
mined not  to  go  thither.  He  dared  not  communicate  with  his  father  on  this  point, 
but,  instead  of  three  days,  he  staid  three  weeks  in  Kent,  till  the  ship  had  sailed, 
and  then  he  returned  to  London.  His  father,  though  highly  displeased,  became 
reconciled,  and  in  a little  time  he  sailed  with  a friend  of  his  father’s  to  Venice. 

In  this  voyage,  being  a common  sailor,  and  exposed  to  the  company  of  his  com- 
rades, he  began  to  relax  from  the  sobriety  which  he  had  preserved,  in  some  de- 
gree, for  more  than  two  years.  Sometimes,  pierced  with  convictions,  he  made  a 
few  faint  efforts,  as  formerly,  to  stop ; and  though  not  yet  absolutely  profligate, 
he  was  making  large  strides  towards  a total  apostacy  from  God.  At  length  he 
received  a remarkable  check  by  a dream,  which  made  a very  strong,  though  not 
abiding  impression  upon  his  mind. 

I shall  relate  this  dream  in  his  own  words,  referring  to  the  Narrative  those  who 
wish  to  know  his  opinion  of  dreams,  and  his  application  of  this  one  in  particular 
to  his  own  circumstances : — 

“The  scene  presented  to  ray  imagination  was  the  harbour  of  Venice,  where 
we  had  lately  been.  I thought  it  was  night,  and  my  watch  upon  the  deck ; and 
that,  as  I was  walking  to  and  fro  by  myself,  a person  came  to  me  (I  do  not  re- 
member from  whence)  and  brought  me  a ring,  with  an  express  charge  to  keep  it 
carefully  ; assuring  me,  that  while  I preserved  that  ring  I should  be  happy  and 
successful  : but,  if  I lost  or  parted  with  it,  I must  expect  nothing  but  trouble  and 
misery.  I accepted  the  present  and  the  terms  willingly,  not  in  the  least  doubting 
my  own  care  to  preserve  it,  and  highly  satisfied  to  have  my  happiness  in  my  own 
keeping.  I was  engaged  in  these  thoughts,  when  a second  person  came  to  me, 
and,  observing  the  ring  on  my  finger,  took  occasion  to  ask  me  some  questions 
concerning  it.  I readily  told  him  its  virtues;  and  his  answer  expressed  a sur- 
prise at  my  weakness,  in  expecting  such  effects  from  a ring.  I think  he  reasoned 
with  me  some  time  upon  the  impossibility  of  the  thing ; and  at  length  urged  me, 
in  direct  terms,  to  throw  it  away.  At  first  I was  shocked  at  the  proposal ; but  his 
insinuations  prevailed.  I began  to  reason  and  doubt,  and  at  last  plucked  it  off  my 
finger,  and  dropped  it  over  the  ship’s  side  into  the  water,  which  it  had  no  sooner 
touched  than  I saw,  at  the  same  instant,  a terrible  fire  burst  out  from  a range  of 
mountains  (a  part  of  the  Alps,)  which  appeared  at  some  distance  behind  the  city 
of  Venice.  I saw  the  hills  as  distinct  as  if  awake,  and  that  they  were  all  in 
flames.  I perceived,  too  late,  my  folly  ; and  my  tempter  with  an  air  of  insult  in- 
formed me,  that  all  the  mercy  God  had  in  reserve  for  me  was  comprised  in  that 
ring,  which  I had  wilfully  thrown  away.  I understood,  that  I must  now  go  with 
him  to  the  burning  mountains,  and  that  all  the  flames  I saw  were  kindled  on  my 
account.  I trembled,  and  was  in  a great  agony ; so  that  it  was  surprising  I did 
not  then  awake : but  my  dream  continued,  and  when  I thought  myself  upon  the 
point  of  a constrained  departure,  and  stood  self-condemned,  without  plea  or  hope, 
suddenly  either  a third  person,  or  the  same  who  brought  the  ring  at  first,  (I  am 
not  certain  which,)  came  to  me,  and  demanded  the  cause  of  my  grief.  I told  him 
the  plain  case,  confessing  that  I had  ruined  myself  wilfully,  and  deserved  no  pity. 
He  blamed  my  rashness,  and  asked  if  I should  be  wiser,  supposing  I had  my  ring 
again.  I could  hardly  answer  to  this,  for  I thought  it  was  gone  beyond  recal.  I 
believe,  indeed,  I had  not  time  to  answer,  before  I saw  this  unexpected  friend  go 
down  under  the  water,  just  in  the  spot  where  I had  dropped  it,  and  he  soon  re- 
turned, bringing  the  ring  with  him : the  moment  he  came  on  board,  the  flames 
in  the  mountains  were  extinguished,  and  my  seducer  left  me.  Then  was  ‘ the 
prey  taken  from  the  hand  of  the  mighty,  and  the  lawful  captive  delivered.’  My 
fears  were  at  an  end,  and  with  joy  and  gratitude  I approached  my  kind  deliverer 
to  receive  the  ring  again ; but  he  refused  to  return  it,  and  spoke  to  this  effect : 
4If  you  should  be  intrusted  with  this  ring  again,  you  would  very  soon  bring  your- 
self into  the  same  distress ; you  are  not  able  to  keep  it,  but  I will  preserve  it  foi 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


11 


you,  and  whenever  it  is  needful  will  produce  it  in  your  behalf.’  Upon  this  I 
awoke,  in  a state  of  mind  not  to  be  described : I could  hardly  eat,  or  sleep,  or 
transact  my  necessary  business  for  two  or  three  days;  but  the  impression  soon 
wore  olF,  and  in  a little  time  I totally  forgot  it;  and  I think  it  hardly  occurred  to 
~*y  mind  again  till  several  years  afterwards.” 

Nothing  remarkable  happened  in  the  following  part  of  that  voyage.  Mr.  N. 
returned  home  in  December,  1743,  and,  repeating  his  visit  to  Kent,  protracted 
his  stay  in  the  same  imprudent  manner  he  had  done  before.  This  so  disappointed 
his  father’s  designs  for  his  interest,  as  almost  induced  him  to  disown  his  son.  Be- 
fore any  thing  suitable  offered  again,  this  thoughtless  son,  unmindful  of  the  con- 
sequence of  appearing  in  a check  shirt,  was  marked  by  a lieutenant  of  the  Har- 
wich man-of-war,  who  immediately  impressed  and  carried  him  on  board  a ten- 
der This  was  at  a critical  juncture,  as  the  French  fleets  were  hovering  upon 
our  coast : so  that  his  father  was  incapable  of  procuring  his  release.  A few  days 
after,  he  was  sent  on  board  the  Harwich  at  the  Nore.  Here  a new  scene  of  life 
was  presented,  and  for  about  a month  much  hardship  endured.  As  a war  was 
daily  expected,  his  father  was  willing  he  should  remain  in  the  navy,  and  procu- 
red him  a recommendation  to  the  captain,  who  sent  him  upon  the  quarter-deck 
as  a midshipman.  He  might  now  have  had  ease  and  respect,  had  it  not  been 
for  his  unsettled  mind  and  indifferent  behaviour.  The  companions  he  met  with 
here  completed  the  ruin  of  his  principles ; though  he  affected  to  talk  of  virtue, 
and  preserved  some  decency,  yet  his  delight  and  habitual  practice  was  wickedness. 

His  principal  companion  was  a person  of  talents  and  observation,  an  expert 
and  plausible  infidel,  whose  zeal  was  equal  to  his  address.  “ I have  been  told,” 
says  Mr.  N.,  “ that  afterwards  he  was  overtaken  in  a voyage  from  Lisbon  in  a 
violent  storm ; the  vessel  and  people  escaped,  but  a great  sea  broke  on  board,  and 
swept  him  into  eternity.”  Being  fond  of  this  man’s  company,  Mr.  N.  aimed  to 
discover  what  smattering  of  reading  he  had  : his  companion,  observing  that  Mr. 
N.  had  not  lost  all  the  restraints  of  conscience,  at  first  spoke  in  favour  of  religion ; 
and  having  gained  Mr.  N.’s  confidence,  and  perceiving  his  attatchment  to  the 
Characteristics,  he  soon  convinced  his  pupil  that  he  had  never  understood  that 
book.  By  objections  and  arguments  Mr.  N.’s  depraved  heart  was  soon  gained. 
He  plunged  into  infidelity  with  all  his  spirit ; and,  like  an  unwary  sailor,  who 
quits  his  post  just  before  a rising  storm,  the  hopes  and  comforts  of  the  Gospel 
were  renounced  at  the  very  time  when  every  other  comfort  was  about  to  fail. 

In  December  1744,  the  Harwich  was  in  the  Downs,  bound  to  the  East  Indies. 
The  captain  gave  Mr.  N.  leave  to  go  on  shore  for  a day;  but,  with  his  usual  in- 
consideration, and  following  the  dictates  of  a restless  passion,  he  went  to  take  a 
last  leave  of  the  object  with  which  he  was  so  infatuated.  Little  satisfaction  at- 
tended the  interview  in  such  circumstances,  and  on  new-year’s  day  he  returned 
to  the  ship.  The  captain  was  so  highly  displeased  at  this  rash  step,  that  it  occa- 
sioned ever  after  the  loss  of  his  favour. 

At  length  they  sailed  from  Spithead,  with  a very  large  fleet.  They  put  into 
Torbay,  with  a change  of  wind,  but  sailed  the  next  day,  on  its  becoming  fair. 
Several  of  the  fleet  were  lost  at  leaving  the  place,  but  the  following  night  the 
whole  fleet  was  greatly  endangered  upon  the  coast  of  Cornw  all,  by  a storm  from 
the  southward.  The  ship  on  which  Mr.  N.  was  aboard  escaped  unhurt,  though 
several  times  in  danger  of  being  run  down  by  other  vessels ; but  many 
suffered  much  : this  occasioned  their  putting  back  to  Plymouth. 

While  they  lay  at  Plymouth,  Mr.  N.  heard  that  his  father,  who  had  an  in- 
terest in  some  of  the  ships  lately  lost,  was  come  down  to  Torbay.  He 
thought,  that,  if  he  could  see  his  father,  he  might  easily  be  introduced  into  a 
service  which  would  be  better  than  pursuing  a long  and  uncertain  voyage  to  the 
East  Indies.  It  was  his  habit  in  those  unhappy  days,  never  to  deliberate:  as 
soon  as  the  thought  occurred,  he  resolved  to  leave  the  ship  at  all  events : he  did 
«o,  and  in  the  worst  manner  possible.  He  was  sent  one  day  in  the  boat  to  pre- 
vent others  from  desertion,  but  betrayed  his  trust,  and  deserted  himself.  Not 


12 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


knowing  which  road  to  take,  and  fearing  to  inquire,  lest  he  should  be  suspected 
yet  having  some  geueral  idea  of  the  country,  he  found,  after  he  had  travelled 
some  miles,  that  he  was  on  the  road  to  Dartmouth.  That  day,  and  part  of  the 
next,  every  thing  seemed  to  go  on  smoothly.  He  walked  fast,  and  thought  to 
have  seen  his  father  in  about  two  hours,  when  he  was  met  by  a small  party  of 
soldiers,  whom  he  could  not  avoid  or  deceive : they  brought  him  back  to  Ply- 
mouth, through  the  streets  of  which  he  proceeded  guarded  like  a felon.  Full  ol 
indignation,  shame,  and  fear,  he  was  confined  two  days  in  the  guard-house, 
then  sent  on  ship-board,  and  kept  a while  in  irons ; next  he  was  publicly  stript 
and  whipt,  degraded  from  his  office,  and  all  his  former  companions  forbidden  to 
show  him  the  least  favour,  or  even  to  speak  to  him.  As  midshipman  he  had 
been  entitled  to  command,  in  which  (being  sufficiently  haughty  and  vain)  he  had 
not  been  temperate ; but  was  now  in  his  turn  brought  down  to  a level  with  the 
lowest,  and  exposed  to  the  insults  of  all. 

The  state  of  his  mind  at  this  time  can  only  be  properly  expressed  in  his  own 
words : — 

“ As  my  present  situation  was  uncomfortable,  my  future  prospects  were  still 
worse  ; the  evils  I suffered  were  likely  to  grow  heavier  every  day.  While  my 
catastrophe  was  recent,  the  officers  and  my  quondam  brethren  w ere  somew  hat 
disposed  to  screen  me  from  ill  usage  ; but  during  the  little  time  I remained  with 
them  afterwards,  I found  them  cool  very  fast  in  their  endeavours  to  protect  me. 
Indeed,  they  could  not  avoid  such  conduct,  without  running  a great  risk  of  shar 
ing  with  me : for  the  captain,  though  in  general  a humane  man,  who  behaved 
very  well  to  the  ship’s  company,  was  almost  implacable  in  his  resentment,  and 
took  several  occasions  to  show  it,  and  the  voyage  wras  expected  to  be  (as  it  proved) 
for  five  years.  Yet  nothing  I either  felt  or  feared  distressed  me  so  much,  as  to 
see  myself  thus  forcibly  torn  away  from  the  object  of  my  affections,  under  a great 
improbability  of  seeing  her  again,  and  a much  greater,  of  returning  in  such  a man- 
ner as  would  give  me  hope  of  seeing  her  mine. 

“ Thus  I was  as  miserable  on  all  hands,  as  could  well  be  imagined.  My  breast 
was  filled  w ith  the  most  excruciating  passions,  eager  desire,  bitter  rage,  and  black 
despair.  Every  hour  exposed  me  to  some  new  insult  and  hardship,  with  no 
hope  of  relief  or  mitigation  ; no  friend  to  take  my  part,  nor  to  listen  to  my  com- 
plaint. Whether  I looked  inw'ard  or  outward,  I could  perceive  nothing  but  dark- 
ness and  misery.  I think  no  case,  except  that  of  a conscience  wounded  by  the 
wrath  of  God,  could  be  more  dreadful  than  mine.  I cannot  express  with  what 
wishfulness  and  regret  I cast  my  last  looks  upon  the  English  shore ; I kept  my 
eyes  fixed  upon  it,  till  the  ship’s  distance  increasing,  it  insensibly  disappeared  ; 
and,  when  I could  see  it  no  longer,  I was  tempted  to  throw'  myself  into  the  sea, 
which  (according  to  the  wicked  system  I had  adopted)  would  put  a period  to  all 
my  sorrows  at  once.  But  the  secret  hand  of  God  restrained  me.” 

During  his  passage  to  Madeira,  Mr.  N.  describes  himself  as  a prey  to  the  most 
gloomy  thoughts  ; though  he  had  deserved  all.  and  more  than  all  he  had  met  with 
from  the  captain,  yet  pride  suggested  that  he  had  been  grossly  injured;  “and 
this  so  far,”  says  he,  “ wrought  upon  my  wicked  heart,  that  I actually  formed 
designs  against  his  life,  and  that  w as  one  reason  w hich  made  me  willing  to  pro- 
long my  owrn.  I was  sometimes  divided  between  the  two,  not  thinking  it  prac- 
ticable to  effect  both.  The  Lord  had  now  to  appearance  given  me  up  to  judicial 
hardness  ; I was  capable  of  any  thing.  I had  not  the  least  fear  of  God  before 
my  eyes,  nor  (so  far  as  1 remember)  the  least  sensibility  of  conscience.  I was 
possessed  with  so  strong  a spirit  of  delusion,  that  I believed  my  own  lie,  and  was 
firmly  persuaded,  that  after  death  I should  cease  to  be.  Yet  the  Lord  preserved 
me!  Some  intervals  of  sober  reflection  w'ould  at  times  take  place:  when  I have 
chosen  death  rather  than  life,  a ray  of  hope  w'ould  come  in  (though  there  was 
little  probability  for  such  hope)  that  I should  yet  see  better  days,  that  I might 
return  to  England,  and  have  my  wishes  crow'ned,  if  I did  not  w ilfully  throw'  my- 
self away.  In  a wrord,  my  love  to  Mrs.  N.  was  now  the  only  restraint  I had 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON  13 

left : though  I neither  feared  God,  nor  regarded  man,  I could  not  bear  that  she 
should  think  meanly  of  me  when  I was  dead. 

Mr.  N.  had  been  at  Madeira  some  time ; and  the  business  of  the  fleet  being 
now  completed,  they  were  to  sail  the  following  day.  On  that  memorable  morn- 
ing he  happened  to  be  late  in  bed,  and  would  have  continued  to  sleep,  but  that 
an  old  companion,  a midshipman,  came  down,  between  jest  and  earnest,  and  bid 
him  rise.  As  he  did  not  immediately  comply,  the  midshipman  cut  down  the 
hammock  in  which  he  lay  ; this  obliged  him  to  dress  himself ; and  though 
very  angry  he  durst  not  resent  it,  but  was  little  aware  that  this  person,  without 
design,  was  a special  instrument  of  God’s  providence.  Mr.  N.  said  little,  but 
went  upon  deck,  where  he  saw  a man  putting  his  clothes  into  a boat,  who  in- 
formed him  he  was  going  to  leave  the  ship.  Upon  inquiry,  he  found  that  two 
men  from  a Guinea  ship,  which  lay  near  them,  had  entered  on  board  the  Har- 
wich, and  that  the  commodore  (the  late  Sir  George  Pocock)  had  ordered  the 
captain  to  send  two  others  in  their  room.  Inflamed  with  this  information, 
Mr.  N.  requested  that  the  boat  might  be  detained  a few  minutes ; he  then  en- 
treated the  lieutenants  to  intercede  with  the  captain,  that  he  might  be  dismissed 
upon  this  occasion : though  he  had  formerly  behaved  ill  to  these  officers,  they 
were  moved  with  pity,  and  were  disposed  to  serve  him.  The  captain,  who  had 
refused  to  exchange  him  at  Plymouth,  though  requested  by  Admiral  Medley, 
was  easily  prevailed  with  now.  In  little  more  than  half  an  hour  from  his 
being  asleep  in  bed,  he  found  himself  discharged,  and  safe  on  board  another  ship. 
The  events  depending  upon  this  change,  will  show  it  to  have  been  the  most  criti- 
cal and  important. 

The  ship  he  now  entered  was  bound  to  Sierra  Leone,  and  the  adjacent  parts  of 
what  is  called  the  windward  coast  of  Africa.  The  commander  knew  his  father — 
received  him  kindly — and  made  professions  of  assistance ; and  probably  would 
have  been  his  friend,  if,  instead  of  profiting  by  his  former  errors,  he  had  not  pur- 
sued a course,  if  possible,  worse.  He  was  under  some  restraint  on  board  the 
Harwich,  but  being  now  among  strangers,  he  could  sin  without  disguise.  “ I 
well  remember,”  says  he,  “ that  while  I was  passing  from  the  one  ship  to  the 
other,  I rejoiced  in  the  exchange,  with  this  reflection,  that  I might  now  be  as  aban- 
doned as  I pleased,  without  any  control  ; and  from  this  time  I was  exceedingly 
vile  indeed,  little,  if  any  thing,  short  of  that  animated  description  of  an  almost 
irrecoverable  state,  which  we  have  in  2 Pet.  ii.  14.  I not  only  sinned  with  a 
high  hand  myself,  but  made  it  my  study  to  tempt  and  seduce  others  upon  every 
occasion  : nay,  I eagerly  sought  occasion,  sometimes  to  my  own  hazard  and  hurt. 
By  this  conduct  he  soon  forfeited  the  favour  of  his  captain  : for,  besides  being  care- 
less and  disobedient,  upon  some  imagined  affront,  he  employed  his  mischievous 
wit  in  making  a song  to  ridicule  the  captain  as  to  his  ship,  his  designs,  and  his 
person  ; and  he  taught  it  to  the  whole  ship’s  company. 

He  thus  proceeded  for  about  six  months,  at  which  time  the  ship  was  preparing 
to  leave  the  coast;  but,  a few  days  before  she  sailed,  the  captain  died.  Mr.  N. 
was  not  upon  much  better  terms  with  his  mate,  who  succeeded  to  the  command, 
and  upon  some  occasion  had  treated  him  ill.  He  felt  certain,  that,  if  he  went 
in  the  ship  to  the  West  Indies,  the  mate  would  have  put  him  on  board  a man- 
of-war,  a consequence  more  dreadful  to  him  than  death  itself : to  avoid  this,  he 
determined  to  remain  in  Africa,  and  pleased  himself  writh  imagining  it  would  be 
an  opportunity  of  improving  his  fortune. 

Upon  that  part  of  the  coast  there  were  a few  white  men  settled,  whose  busi- 
ness it  was  to  purchase  slaves,  &C.  and  sell  them  to  the  ships  at  an  advanced, 
price  : one  of  these,  who  had  first  landed  in  circumstances  similar  to  Mr.  N.’s,  had 
acquired  considerable  wealth.  This  man  had  been  in  England,  and  was  re- 
turning in  the  same  vessel  with  Mr.  N.  of  which  he  owned  a quarter  part.  His 
example  impressed  Mr  N.  with  hopes  of  the  same  success,  and  he  obtained  his 
discharge,  upon  condition  of  entering  into  the  trader’s  service,  to  whose  gene- 
rosity he  trusted  without  the  precaution  of  terms.  He  received,  however,  no 


14 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


compensation  for  his  time  on  board  the  ship,  but  a bill  upon  the  owners  in  Eng- 
land, who  failing  before  his  return,  the  bill  was  never  paid;  the  day,  therefore, 
on  which  the  vessel  sailed,  he  landed  upon  the  island  of  Benanoes  like  one  ship- 
'wrecked,  with  little  more  than  the  clothes  upon  his  back. 

i ‘ The  two  following  years,”  says  he,  “ of  which  I am  now  to  give  some  account, 
will  seem  as  an  absolute  blank  in  my  life  : but  I have  seen  frequent  causes  since  to 
admire  the  mercy  of  God  in  banishing  me  to  those  distant  parts,  and  almost  exclud- 
ing me  from  all  society,  at  a time  when  I was  big  with  mischief,  and,  like  one 
infected  with  a pestilence,  was  capable  of  spreading  a taint  wherever  I went.  But 
the  Lord  wisely  placed  me  where  I could  do  little  harm.  The  few  I had  to  con- 
verse with  were  too  much  like  myself;  and  I was  soon  brought  into  such  abject 
circumstances  that  I was  too  low  to  have  any  influence.  I was  rather  shunned 
and  despised  than  imitated,  there  being  few,  even  of  the  Negroes  themselves, 
during  the  first  year  of  my  residence,  but  thought  themselves  too  good  to  speak 
to  me.  I was  as  yet  an  outcast' ready  to  perish;  but  the  Lord  beheld  me  with 
mercy — he  even  now  bid  me  live ; and  I can  only  ascribe  it  to  his  secret  upholding 
power,  that  what  l suffered,  in  a part  of  this  interval,  did  not  bereave  me  either 
of  my  life  or  senses.” 

The  reader  will  have  a better  idea  of  the  situation  Mr.  N.  was  now  in  by  his 
brief  sketch  of  it. — 

“From  Cape  de  Verd,  the  most  western  point  of  Africa,  to  Cape  Mount,  the 
whole  coast  is  full  of  rivers : the  principal  are  the  Gambia,  Rio  Grande,  Sierra 
Leone,  and  Sherbro.  Of  the  former,  as  it  is  well  known,  and  as  I was  never  there, 
I need  say  nothing.  The  Rio  Grande  (like  the  Nile)  divides  into  many  branches 
near  the  sea.  On  the  most  northerly,  called  Cacheo,  the  Portuguese  have  a set- 
tlement. The  most  southern  branch,  known  by  the  name  of  Rio  Nuna,  is,  or  was 
the  usual  boundary  of  the  white  men’s  trade  northward.  Sierra  Leone  is  a moun- 
tainous peninsula,  uninhabited,  and  I believe  inaccessible,  upon  account  of  the 
thick  woods,  excepting  those  parts  which  lie  near  the  water.  The  river  is  large 
and  navigable.  From  hence  about  twelve  leagues  to  the  south-east  are  three  con- 
tiguous islands,  called  the  Benanoes,  twenty  miles  in  circuit : this  was  about  the 
centre  of  the  white  men’s  residence.  Seven  leagues  farther,  the  same  way,  lie 
the  Plantanes,  three  small  islands,  two  miles  distant  from  the  continent,  at  the 
point  which  forms  one  side  of  the  Sherbro.  This  river  is  more  properly  a 
sound,  running  within  a long  island,  and  receiving  the  confluence  of  several  large 
rivers,  ‘ rivers  unknown  to  song,’  but  far  more  deeply  engraven  in  my  remem- 
brance than  the  Po  or  Tiber.  The  southernmost  of  these  has  a very  peculiar  course, 
almost  parallel  to  the  coast : so  that  in  tracing  it  a great  many  leagues  upwards,  it 
will  seldom  lead  one  above  three  miles,  and  sometimes  not  more  than  half  a mile 
from  the  sea  shore.” 

Mr.  N.’s  new  master  had  resided  near  Cape  Mount,  but  at  this  time  had  settled 
at  the  Plantanes,  on  the  largest  of  the  three  islands.  It  is  low  and  sandy,  about 
two  miles  in  circumference,  and  almost  covered  with  palm-trees.  They  imme- 
diately began  to  build  a house.  Mr.  N.  had  some  desire  to  retrieve  his  time  and 
character,  and  might  have  lived  tolerably  well  with  his  master,  if  this  man  had  not 
been  much  under  the  direction  of  a black  woman,  who  lived  with  him  as  a wife, 
and  influenced  him  against  his  new  servant.  She  was  a person  of  some  consequence 
in  her  own  country,  and  he  owed  his  first  rise  to  her  interest.  This  woman,  foi 
reasons  not  known,  was  strangely  prejudiced  against  Mr.  N.  from  the  first ; he  also 
had  unhappily  a severe  fit  of  illness  which  attacked  him  before  he  had  an  oppor- 
tunity to  show  what  he  could  or  would  do  in  the  service  of  his  master.  Mr.  N. 
was  sick  when  his  master  sailed  in  a shallop  to  Rio  Nuna,  and  was  left  in  the 
hands  of  this  woman.  He  was  taken  some  care  of  at  first,  but  not  soon  recover- 
ing, her  attention  was  wearied,  and  she  entirely  neglected  him.  Sometimes  it  was 
with  difficulty  he  could  procure  a draught  of  cold  water  when  burning  with  t 
fever  ! His  bed  was  a mat,  spread  upon  a board  or  chest,  with  a log  for  his  pillow 
Upon  his  appetite  returning,  after  the  fever  left  him,  he  would  gladly  have  eater 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


15 


Out  “ no  one  gave  unto  him.’’  She  lived  in  plenty,  hut  scarcely  allowed  him  suffi- 
cient to  sustain  life,  except  now  and  then,  when  in  the  highest  good  humour  she 
would  send  him  victuals  in  her  own  plate  after  she  had  dined.  And  this  (so 
greatly  was  he  humbled)  he  received  with  thanks  and  eagerness,  as  the  most  needy 
beggar  does  an  alms. 

“ Once,”  says  he,  “ I well  remember,  I was  called  to  receive  this  bounty  from 
her  own  hand ; but,  being  exceedingly  weak  and  feeble,  I dropped  the  plate. 
Those  who  live  in  plenty  can  hardly  conceive  how  this  loss  touched  me : but  she 
had  the  cruelty  to  laugh  at  my  disappointment,  and  though  the  table  was  covered 
with  dishes  (for  she  lived  much  in  the  European  manner)  she  refused  to  give  me 
any  more.  My  distress  has  been  at  times  so  great  as  to  compel  me  to  go  by  night, 
and  pull  up  roots  in  the  plantation  (though  at  the  risk  of  being  punished  as  a thief,) 
which  I have  eaten  raw  upon  the  spot  for  fear  of  discovery.  The  roots  I speak 
of  are  very  wholesome  food,  when  boiled  or  roasted,  but  as  unfit  to  be  eaten  raw 
m any  quantity  as  a potato.  The  consequence  of  this  diet,  which  after  the  first 
experiment  I always  expected,  and  seldom  missed,  was  the  same  as  if  I had  taken 
tartar  emetic  ; so  that  I have  often  returned  as  empty  as  I went,  yet  necessity 
urged  me  to  repeat  the  trial  several  times.  I have  sometimes  been  relieved  by 
strangers ; yea,  even  by  the  slaves  in  the  chain,  who  have  secretly  brought  me 
victuals  (for  they  durst  not  be  seen  to  do  it)  from  their  own  slender  pittance. 
Next  to  pressing  want,  nothing  sits  harder  upon  the  mind  than  scorn  and  con- 
tempt, and  of  this  likewise  I had  an  abundant  measure.” 

When  slowly  recovering,  the  same  woman  would  sometimes  pay  Mr.  N.  a visit, 
not  to  pity  or  relieve,  but  to  insult  him.  She  w ould  call  him  worthless  and  indo- 
lent, and  compel  him  to  walk ; w hich,  when  he  could  scarcely  do,  she  would  set 
her  attendants  to  mimic  his  motions,  to  clap  their  hands,  laugh,  throw  limes  at 
him,  and  sometimes  they  would  even  throw  stones.  But  though  her  attendants 
were  forced  to  join  in  this  treatment,  Mr.  N.  was  rather  pitied  than  scorned  by 
the  meanest  of  her  slaves,  on  her  departure. 

When  his  master  returned  from  the  voyage,  Mr.  N.  complained  of  ill  usage,  but 
was  not  credited,  and  as  he  did  it  in  her  hearing,  he  fared  worse  for  it.  He 
accompanied  his  master  in  his  second  voyage,  and  they  agreed  pretty  well  till  his 
master  was  persuaded  by  a brother  trader,  that  Mr.  N.  was  dishonest.  This  seems 
to  be  the  only  vice  he  could  not  be  charged  with,  as  his  honesty  seemed  to  be  the 
last  remains  of  a good  education  which  he  could  now  boast  of:  and  though  his  great 
distress  might  have  been  a strong  temptation  to  fraud,  it  seems  he  never  once 
thought  of  defrauding  his  master  in  the  smallest  matter.  The  charge,  however,  was 
believed,  and  he  was  condemned  without  evidence.  From  that  time  he  was  used 
very  hardly  ; whenever  his  master  left  the  vessel,  he  was  locked  upon  deck  with  a 
pint  of  rice  for  his  day’s  allowance,  nor  had  he  any  relief  till  his  master’s  return. 
“ Indeed,”  says  he,  “ I believe  I should  have  been  nearly  starved,  but  for  an  oppor- 
tunity of  catching  fish  sometimes.  When  fowls  were  killed  for  my  master’s  own 
use,  I seldom  was  allowed  any  part  but  the  entrails,  to  bait  my  hooks  with  : and  at 
what  we  called  slack-water,  that  is,  about  the  changing  of  the  tides,  when  the  cur- 
rent was  still,  I used  generally  to  fish  (for  at  other  times  it  was  not  practicable,)  and 
I very  often  succeeded.  If  I saw  a fish  upon  my  hook,  my  joy  was  little  less  than 
any  other  person  would  have  found  in  the  accomplishment  of  the  scheme  he  had 
most  at  heart.  Such  a fish  hastily  broiled,  or  rather  half  burnt,  without  sauce, 
salt,  or  bread,  has  afforded  me  a delicious  meal.  If  I caught  none,  I might,  if  I 
could,  sleep  away  my  hunger  till  the  next  return  of  slack-water,  and  then  try  again. 

“ Nor  did  I suffer  less  from  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  and  the  want  of 
clothes.  The  rainy  season  was  now  advancing  ; my  whole  suit  was  a shirt,  a pair 
of  trowsers,  a cotton  handkerchief  instead  of  a cap,  and  a cotton  cloth  about  two 
yards  long,  to  supply  the  want  of  upper  garments  : and  thus  accoutred,  I have  been 
exposed  for  twenty,  thirty,  perhaps  near  forty  hours  together,  in  incessant  rains, 
accompanied  with  strong  gales  of  wind,  without  the  least  shelter,  when  my  master 
was  on  shore.  I feel  to  this  day  some  faint  returns  of  the  violent  pains  I then  con- 


16 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


tracted.  The  excessive  cold  and  wet  I endured  in  that  voyage,  and  so  soon  after  1 
had  recovered  from  a long  sickness,  quite  broke  my  constitution  and  my  spirits ; 
the  latter  were  soon  restored,  but  the  effects  of  the  former  still  remain  with  me,  as 
a needful  memento  of  the  service  and  the  wages  of  sin. 

In  about  two  months  they  returned,  and  the  rest  of  the  time  Mr.  N.  spent 
with  his  master  was  chiefly  at  the  Plantanes,  and  under  the  same  regimen  as  has 
been  mentioned.  His  heart  was  now  bowed  down,  but  not  at  all  to  a whole- 
some repentance.  While  his  spirits  sunk,  the  language  of  the  prodigal  was  far 
from  him  : destitute  of  resolution,  and  almost  all  reflection,  he  had  lost  the  fierce- 
ness which  fired  him  when  on  board  the  Harwich,  and  rendered  him  capable  of 
the  most  desperate  attempts ; but  he  was  no  farther  changed  than  a tiger  tamed 
by  hunger. 

However  strange  it  may  appear,  he  attests  it  as  a truth,  that  though  destitute 
both  of  food  and  clothing,  and  depressed  beyond  common  wretchedness,  he  could 
sometimes  collect  his  mind  to  mathematical  studies.  Having  bought  Barrow’s 
Euclid  at  Plymouth,  and  it  being  the  only  volume  he  brought  on  shore,  he  used 
to  take  it  to  remote  corners  of  the  island,  and  draw  his  diagrams  with  a long 
stick  upon  the  sand.  “Thus,”  says  he,  “I  often  beguiled  my  sorrows,  and 
almost  forgot  my  feelings  ; and  thus  without  any  other  assistance,  1 made  my- 
self in  a good  measure  master  of  the  first  six  books  of  Euclid.” 

“ With  my  staff  I passed  this  Jordan,  and  now  I am  become  two  bands.” 
These  words  of  Jacob  might  well  affect  Mr.  N.  when  remembering  the  days  in 
which  he  was  busied  in  planting  some  lime  or  lemon  trees.  The  plants  he 
put  into  the  ground  were  no  higher  than  a young  gooseberry  bush.  His  master 
and  mistress,  in  passing  the  place,  stopped  a while  to  look  at  him  ; at  length 
his  master  said,  “ Who  knows  but,  by  the  time  these  trees  grow  up  and  bear, 
you  may  go  home  to  England,  obtain  the  command  of  a ship,  and  return  to  reap 
the  fruits  of  your  labours  ? We  see  strange  things  sometimes  happen.” 

“ This,”  says  Mr.  Newton,  “as  he  intended  it,  was  a cutting  sarcasm.  I be- 
lieve he  thought  it  full  as  probable  that  I should  live  to  be  king  of  Poland  ; yet 
it  proved  a prediction,  and  they  (one  of  them  at  least,)  lived  to  see  me  return 
from  England,  in  the  capacity  he  had  mentioned,  and  pluck  some  of  the  first 
limes  from  those  very  trees.  How  can  I proceed  in  my  relation,  till  I raise  a 
monument  to  the  Divine  goodness,  by  comparing  the  circumstances  in  which  the 
Lord  has  since  placed  me  with  what  I was  in  at  that  time ! Had  you  seen  me, 
sir,  then  go  so  pensive  and  solitary  in  the  dead  of  night  to  wash  my  one  shirt 
upon  the  rocks,  and  afterwards  put  it  on  wet,  that  it  might  dry  upon  my  back, 
while  I slept — had  you  seen  me  so  poor  a figure,  that  when  a ship’s  boat  came 
to  the  island,  shame  often  constrained  me  to  hide  myself  in  the  woods,  from  the 
sight  of  strangers ; especially,  had  you  known  that  my  conduct,  principles,  and 
heart,  were  still  darker  than  my  outward  condition — how  little  would  you  have 
imagined,  that  one  who  so  fully  answered  to  the  irruy'^TOj  xsti  ftirowns^  of  the  apos- 
tle, was  reserved  to  be  so  peculiar  an  instance  of  the  providential  care  and  exu- 
berant goodness  of  God.  There  was  at  that  time  but  one  earnest  desire  of  my 
heart,  which  was  not  contrary  and  shocking  both  to  religion  and  reason  ; and 
that  one  desire,  though  my  vile  licentious  life  rendered  me  peculiarly  unworthy 
of  success,  and  though  a thousand  difficulties  seemed  to  render  it  impossible,  the 
Lord  was  pleased  to  gratify.” 

Things  continued  thus  nearly  twelve  months.  In  this  interval  Mr.  N.  wrote 
two  or  three  times  to  his  father,  describing  his  condition,  and  desiring  his  assist- 
ance : at  the  same  time  signifying,  that  he  had  resolved  not  to  return  to  England 
unless  his  parent  were  pleased  to  send  for  him.  His  father  applied  to  his  friend 
at  Liverpool,  who  gave  orders  accordingly  to  a captain  of  his,  who  was  then  fit- 
ting out  for  Gambia  and  Sierra  Leone. 

Sometime  within  the  year,  Mr.  N.  obtained  his  master’s  consent  to  live  with 


♦ Hateful  and  hating  one  another. 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


17 


another  trader,  who  dwelt  upon  the  same  island.  This  change  was  much  to  his 
advantage,  as  he  was  soon  decently  clothed,  lived  in  plenty,  was  treated  as  a 
companion,  and  trusted  with  his  effects  to  the  amount  of  some  thousand  pounds. 
This  man  had  several  factories,  and  white  servants  in  different  places ; particu- 
larly one  in  Ivittam,  the  river  already  described  as  running  so  near  along  the  sea 
coast.  Mr.  N.  was  soon  appointed  there,  and  had  a share  in  the  management 
of  business,  jointly  with  another  servant ; they  lived  as  they  pleased  ; business 
flourished,  and  their  employer  was  satisfied. 

“ Here,”  says  he,  “I  began  to  be  wretch  enough  to  think  myself  happy. 
There  is  a significant  phrase  frequently  used  in  those  parts,  that  such  a white 
man  is  grown  black.  It  does  not  intend  an  alteration  of  complexion,  but  disposi- 
tion. I have  known  several,  who  settling  in  Africa  after  the  age  of  thirty  or 
forty,  have  at  that  time  of  life  been  gradually  assimilated  to  the  tempers,  customs 
and  ceremonies  of  the  natives,  so  far  as  to  prefer  that  country  to  England  ; they 
have  even  become  dupes  to  all  the  pretended  charms,  necromancies,  amulets,  and 
divinations  of  the  blinded  Negroes,  and  put  more  trust  in  such  things  than  the 
wiser  sort  among  the  natives.  A part  of  this  spirit  of  infatuation  was  growing 
upon  me  : in  time,  perhaps,  I might  have  yielded  to  the  whole.  I entered  into 
closer  engagements  with  the  inhabitants,  and  should  have  lived  and  died  a wretch 
amongst  them,  if  the  Lord  had  not  watched  over  me  for  good.  Not  that  I had 
lost  those  ideas  which  chiefly  engaged  my  heart  to  England ; but  a despair  of 
seeing  them  accomplished,  made  me  willing  to  remain  where  I was.  I thought 
I could  more  easily  bear  the  disappointment  in  this  situation  than  nearer  home. 
But,  as  soon  as  I had  fixed  my  connexions  and  plans  with  these  views,  the  Lord 
providentially  interposed  to  break  them  in  pieces,  and  save  me  from  ruin  in  spite 
of  myself.” 

In  the  meantime,  the  ship  that  had  orders  to  bring  Mr.  N.  home,  arrived  at 
Sierra  Leone.  The  captain  made  inquiry  for  Mr.  N.  there,  and  at  the  Benanoes; 
but  finding  he  was  at  a great  distance,  thought  no  more  about  him.  A special 
providence  seems  to  have  placed  him  at  Kittam  just  at  this  time ; for  the  ship 
coming  no  nearer  the  Benanoes,  and  staying  but  a few  days,  if  he  had  been  at 
the  Plantanes,  he  would  not  probably  have  heard  of  the  ship  till  she  had  sailed : 
the  same  must  certainly  have  been  the  event  had  he  been  sent  to  any  other  fac- 
tory, of  which  his  new  master  had  several.  But  though  the  place  he  went  to 
was  a long  way  up  a river,  much  more  than  a hundred  miles  distance  from  the 
Plantanes,  yet,  by  its  peculiar  situation  already  noticed,  he  was  still  within  a 
mile  of  the  sea  coast.  The  interposition  was  also  more  remarkable,  as  at  that 
very  juncture  he  was  going  in  quest  of  trade,  directly  from  the  sea,  and  would 
have  set  out  a day  or  two  before,  but  that  they  waited  for  a few  articles  from  the 
next  ship  that  came,  in  order  to  complete  the  assortment  of  goods  he  was  to  take 
with  him. 

They  used  sometimes  to  walk  to  the  oeach,  in  hopes  of  seeing  a vessel  pass 
by  : but  this  was  very  precarious,  as  at  that  time  the  place  was  not  resorted  to  by 
‘ Lips  of  trade  : many  passed  in  the  night;  others  kept  at  a considerable  distance 
li  om  the  shore,  nor  does  he  remember  that  any  one  had  stopped  while  he  wras 
tii  ere. 

In  February  1747,  his  fellow-servant,  walking  down  to  the  beach  in  the  fore- 
noon. saw  a vessel  sailing  by,  and  made  a smoke  in  token  of  trade.  She  was 
already  beyond  the  place,  and  the  wind  being  fair,  the  captain  demurred  about 
stopping  : had  Mr.  N.’s  companion  been  half  an  hour  later,  the  vessel  would 
have  been  beyond  recall.  When  he  saw  her  come  to  an  anchor,  he  went  on 
board  in  a canoe,  and  this  proved  the  very  ship  already  spoken  of,  which 
brought  an  order  for  Mr.  N.’s  return.  One  of  the  first  questions  the  captain  put 
was  concerning  Mr.  N.;  and  understanding  he  was  so  near,  the  captain  came  on 
shore  to  deliver  h-is  message. 

“ Had,”  says  he,  “ an  invitation  from  home  reached  me  when  I was  sick  and 
starving  at  the  Plantanes,  I should  have  received  it  as  life  from  the  dead  : but 
0 


18 


MEMOIRS  CF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON 


now,  for  the  reasons  already  given,  I heard  it  at  first  with  indifference.'*  The 
captain,  however,  unwilling  to  lose  him,  framed  a story,  and  gave  him  a very 
plausible  account  of  his  having  missed  a large  packet  of  letters  and  papers,  which 
he  should  have  brought  with  him  ; but  said  he  had  it  from  his  father’s  own 
mouth,  as  well  as  from  his  employer,  that  a person  lately  dead  had  left  Mr.  N. 
four  hundred  pounds  per  annum  ; and  added,  that,  if  embarrassed  in  his  circum- 
stances, he  had  express  orders  to  redeem  Mr.  N.  though  it  should  cost  one  half 
of  his  cargo.  Every  particular  of  this  was  false  ; nor  could  Mr.  N.  believe  what 
was  said  about  the  estate,  except  that,  as  he  had  some  expectations  from  an  aged 
relation,  he  thought  a part  of  it  might  be  true. 

But  though  his  father’s  care  and  desire  to  see  him  was  treated  So  lightly,  and 
would  have  been  insufficient  alone  to  draw  him  from  his  retreat,  yet  the  remem- 
brance of  Mrs.  N.,  the  hopes  of  seeing  her,  and  the  possibility  that  his  accepting 
this  offer  might  once  more  put  him  in  the  way  of  gaining  her  hand,  prevailed 
over  all  other  considerations. 

The  captain  farther  promised,  (and  in  this  he  kept  his  worn.)  that  Mr.  N. 
should  lodge  in  his  cabin,  dine  at  his  table,  and  be  his  companion,  without  being 
liable  to  service.  Thus  suddenly  was  he  freed  from  a captivity  of  about  fifteen 
months.  He  had  neither  a thought  nor  a desire  of  this  change  one  hour  before 
it  took  place  ; but,  embarking  with  the  captain,  he  in  a few  hours  lost  sight  of 
Kittam. 

The  ship  in  which  he  embarked  as  a passenger,  was  on  a trading  voyage  for 
gold,  ivory,  dyers’  wood,  and  bees’  wax.  Such  a cargo  requires  more  time  to 
collect  than  one  of  slaves.  The  captain  began  his  trade  at  Gambia,  had  been 
already  four  or  five  months  in  Africa,  and,  during  the  course  of  a year  after  Mr. 
N.  had  been  with  him,  they  ranged  the  whole  coast  as  far  as  Cape  Lopez,  which 
lies  about  a degree  south  of  the  equinoxial,  and  more  than  a thousand  miles  fur- 
ther from  England  than  the  place  from  whence  he  embarked. 

“ I have,”  says  he,  “little  to  offer  worthy  of  notice,  in  the  course  of  this  tedi- 
ous voyage.  I had  no  business  to  employ  my  thoughts,  but  sometimes  amused 
myself  with  mathematics  ; excepting  this,  my  whole  life,  when  awake,  was  a 
course  of  most  horrid  impiety  and  profaneness.  I know  not  that  I have  ever  since 
met  so  daring  a blasphemer.  Not  content  with  common  oaths  and  imprecations, 
1 daily  invented  new  ones ; so  that  I was  often  seriously  reproved  by  the  captain, 
who  was  himself  a very  passionate  man,  and  not  at  all  circumspect  in  his  ex- 
pressions. From  the  relation  I at  times  made  him  of  my  past  adventures,  and 
what  he  saw  of  my  conduct,  and  especially  towards  the  close  of  the  voyage, 
when  we  met  with  many  disasters,  he  would  often  tell  me,  that,  to  his  great 
grief,  he  had  a Jonah  on  board  ; that  a curse  attended  me  wherever  I went ; and 
that  all  the  troubles  he  met  with  in  the  voyage  were  owing  to  his  having  taken 
me  into  his  vessel.” 

Although  Mr.  N.  lived  long  in  the  excess  of  almost  every  other  extravagance, 
he  was  never,  it  seems,  fond  of  drinking  : his  father  was  often  heard  to  say,  that 
while  his  son  avoided  drunkenness,  some  hopes  might  be  entertained  of  his  re- 
covery. Sometimes,  however,  in  a frolic,  he  would  promote  a drinking  bout : 
not  through  love  of  liquor,  but  disposition  to  mischief.  The  last  proposal  he 
made  of  this  kind,  and  at  his  own  expense,  was  in  the  river  Gabon,  whilst  the 
ship  was  trading  on  the  coast,  as  follows  : — 

Four  or  five  of  them  sat  down  one  evening,  to  try  who  could  hold  out  longest 
in  drinking  geneva  and  rum  alternately  ; a large  sea-shell  supplied  the  place  of 
a glass.  Mr.  N.  was  very  unfit  for  such  a challenge,  as  his  head  was  always 
incapable  of  bearing  much  liquor  : he  began,  however,  and  proposed,  as  a toast, 
some  imprecation  against  the  person  who  should  start  first : this  proved  to  be 
himself.  Fired  in  his  brain,  he  arose  and  danced  on  the  deck  like  a madman  ; 
and  while  he  was  thus  diverting  his  companions,  his  hat  went  overDoard.  See- 
ing the  ship’s  boat  by  moonlight,  he  endeavoured  eagerly  to  throw  himself  over 
(he  side  into  the  boat,  that  he  might  recover  his  hat.  His  sight,  however,  de- 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


19 


ceived  him,  for  the  boat  was  not  (as  he  supposed,)  within  his  reach,  but  perhaps 
twenty  feet  from  the  ship’s  side.  He  was,  however,  half  overboard,  and  would 
in  the  space  of  a moment  have  plunged  into  the  water,  when  somebody  caught 
hold  of  his  clothes,  and  pulled  him  back.  This  was  an  amazing  escape,  as  he  could 
not  swim,  had  he  been  sober ; the  tide  ran  very  strong,  his  companions  were 
too  much  intoxicated  to  save  him,  and  the  rest  of  the  ship’s  company  were 
asleep. 

Another  time,  at  Cape  Lopez,  before  the  ship  left  the  coast,  he  went  with 
some  others  into  the  woods,  and  shot  a buffalo,  or  wild  cow  : they  brought  a 
part  of  it  on  board,  and  carefully  marked  the  place  (as  he  thought,)  where  the 
rest  was  left.  In  the  evening  they  returned  to  fetch  it,  but  set  out  too  late. 
Mr.  N.  undertook  to  be  their  guide;  but  night  coming  on  before  they  could  reach 
the  place,  they  lost  their  way.  Sometimes  they  were  in  swamps,  and  up  to  their 
middle  in  water  ; and,  when  they  recovered  dry  land,  they  could  not  tell  whether 
they  were  proceeding  towards  the  ship,  or  the  contrary  way.  Every  step  in- 
creased their  uncertainty — night  grew  darker — and  they  were  entangled  in  thick 
woods,  which  perhaps  the  foot  of  man  had  never  trodden,  and  which  abound 
with  wild  beasts;  besides  which,  they  had  neither  light,  food,  nor  arms,  while 
expecting  a tiger  to  rush  from  behind  every  tree.  The  stars  were  clouded,  and 
they  had  no  compass  to  form  a judgment  which  way  they  were  going.  But  it 
pleased  God  to  secure  them  from  the  beasts;  and,  after  some  hours  perplexity, 
the  moon  arose,  and  pointed  out  the  eastern  quarter.  It  appeared  then,  that  in- 
stead of  proceeding  towards  the  sea,  they  had  been  penetrating  into  the  country; 
at  length,  by  the  guidance  of  the  moon,  they  recovered  the  ship. 

These,  and  many  other  deliverances,  produced  at  that  time  no  salutary  effect. 
The  admonitions  of  conscience,  which  from  successive  repulses  had  grown  weaker 
and  weaker,  at  length  entirely  ceased  ; and  for  the  space  of  many  months,  if  not 
for  some  years,  he  had  not  a single  check  of  that  sort.  At  times  he  was  visited 
with  sickness,  and  believed  himself  to  be  near  death,  but  had  not  the  least  con- 
cern about  the  consequences.  “ In  a word,”  says  he,  “ I seemed  to  have  every 
mark  of  final  impenitence  and  rejection ; neither  judgments  nor  mercies  made 
the  least  impression  on  me.” 

At  length,  their  business  being  finished,  they  left  Cape  Lopez,  and  after  a few 
days  stay  at  the  island  of  Annabona,  in  order  to  lay  in  provisions,  they  sailed 
homeward  about  the  beginning  of  January,  1784.  From  Annabona  to  England 
is  perhaps  more  than  seven  thousand  miles,  if  the  circuits  are  included,  which 
are  necessary  to  be  made  on  account  of  the  trade  winds.  They  sailed  first  west- 
ward, till  near  the  coast  of  Brazil,  then  northward,  to  the  banks  of  Newfound- 
land, without  meeting  any  thing  extraordinary.  On  these  banks  they  stopped 
half  a day  to  fish  for  cod : this  was  then  chiefly  for  diversion,  as  they  had  pro- 
vision enough,  and  little  expected  those  fish,  (as  it  afterwards  proved,)  would  be 
all  they  wrould  have  to  subsist  on.  They  left  the  banks,  March  1st,  with  a hard 
gale  of  wind  westerly,  which  pushed  them  fast  homewards.  By  the  length  of  this 
voyage,  in  a hot  climate,  the  vessel  was  greatly  out  of  repair,  and  very  unlit  to 
endure  stormy  weather.  The  sails  and  cordage  were  likewise  very  much  worn, 
and  many  such  circumstances  concurred  to  render  what  followed  imminently 
dangerous. 

Among  the  few  books  they  had  on  board  was  Stanhope’s  Thomas  a Kempis. 
Mr.  N.  carelessly  took  it  up,  as  he  had  often  done  before,  to  pass  away  the  time, 
but  which  he  had  read  with  the  same  indifference  as  if  it  were  a romance.  But 
in  reading  it  this  time,  a thought  occurred,  “ What  if  these  things  should  be 
true  ?”  He  could  not  bear  the  force  of  the  inference,  and  therefore  shut  the 
book,  concluding  that,  true  or  false,  he  must  abide  the  consequences  of  his  own 
choice,  and  put  an  end  to  these  reflections  by  joining  in  the  vain  conversation 
which  came  in  his  way. 

“ But  now,”  says  he,  “ the  Lord’s  time  was  come,  and  the  conviction  I was  so 
unwilling  to  receive  was  deeply  impressed  upon  me  by  an  awful  dispensation.” 


20 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


He  went  to  bed  that  night  in  his  usual  carnal  security,  but  was  awaked  from 
a sound  sleep  by  the  force  of  a violent  sea  which  broke  on  board  : so  much  of  it 
came  down  as  filled  the  cabin  with  water  in  which  he  lay.  This  alarm  was 
followed  by  a cry  from  the  deck,  that  the  ship  was  sinking.  He  essayed  to  go 
upon  deck  but  was  met  upon  the  ladder  by  the  captain,  who  desired  him  to 
bring  a knife.  On  his  returning  for  the  knife,  another  person  went  up  in  his 
place,  who  was  instantly  washed  overboard.  They  had  no  leisure  to  lameut  him, 
nor  expected  to  survive  him  long,  for  the  ship  was  filling  with  water  very  fast. 
The  sea  had  torn  away  the  upper  timbers  on  one  side,  and  made  it  a mere 
wreck  in  a few  minutes ; so  that  it  seems  almost  miraculous  that  any  survived  to 
relate  the  story.  They  had  immediate  recourse  to  the  pumps,  but  the  water  in- 
creased against  their  efforts.  Some  of  them  were  set  to  bailing,  though  they  had 
but  eleven  or  twelve  people  to  sustain  this  service  : but  notwithstanding  all  they 
could  do,  the  vessel  was  nearly  full,  and  with  a common  cargo  must  have  sunk ; 
but  having  a great  quantity  of  bees’  wax  and  wood  on  board,  which  was  speci- 
fically lighter  than  water,  and  providentially  receiving  this  shock  in  the  very 
crisis  of  the  gale,  towards  morning  they  were  enabled  to  employ  some  means  for 
safety,  which  succeeded  beyond  hope.  In  about  an  hour’s  time  day  began  to 
break,  and  the  wind  abated : they  expended  most  of  their  clothes  and  bedding 
to  stop  the  leaks  ; over  these  they  nailed  pieces  of  boards,  and  at  last  perceived 
the  water  within  to  subside. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  scene  Mr.  N.  was  little  affected : he  pumped  hard, 
and  endeavoured  to  animate  himself  and  his  companions.  He  told  one  of  them, 
that  in  a few  days  this  distress  would  serve  for  a subject  over  a glass  of  wine ; 
but  the  man  being  less  hardened  than  himself,  replied,  with  tears,  “ No ; it  is 
too  late  now.”  About  nine  o’clock,  being  almost  spent  with  cold  and  labour, 
Mr.  N.  went  to  speak  with  the  captain;  and,  as  he  was  returning,  said,  almost 
without  meaning,  “If  this  will  not  do,  the  Lord  have  mercy  upon  us!”  thus 
expressing,  though  with  little  reflection,  his  desire  of  mercy  for  the  first  time 
within  the  space  of  many  years.  Struck  with  his  own  words,  it  directly  occurred 
to  him,  “ What  mercy  can  there  be  for  me!”  He  was,  however,  obliged  to  re- 
turn to  the  pump,  and  there  continued  till  noon,  almost  every  passing  wave 
breaking  over  his  head,  being,  like  the  rest,  secured  by  ropes,  that  they  might 
not  be  washed  away.  He  expected,  indeed,  that  every  time  the  vessel  descended 
in  the  sea,  she  would  rise  no  more  ; and  though  he  dreaded  death  now,  and  his 
heart  foreboded  the  worst,  if  the  Scriptures,  which  he  had  long  opposed,  were 
true,  yet  he  was  still  but  half  convinced,  and  remained  for  a time  in  a sullen 
frame,  a mixture  of  despair  and  impatience.  He  thought,  if  the  Christian  reli- 
gion were  true,  he  could  not  be  forgiven,  and  was  therefore  expecting,  and  al- 
most at  times  wishing,  to  know  the  worst  of  it. 

, The  following  part  of  his  Narrative  will,  I think,  be  best  expressed  in  his  own 
words  : — “ The  10th,  that  is,  in  the  present  style,  the  21st  of  March,  is  a day 
much  to  be  remembered  by  me,  and  I have  never  suffered  it  to  pass  wholly  un- 
noticed since  the  year  1748.  On  that  day  the  Lord  sent  from  on  high,  and 
\ delivered  me  out  of  deep  waters.  I continued  at  the  pump  from  three  in  the 
morning  till  near  noon,  and  then  I could  do  no  more.  I went  and  lay  down 
upon  my  bed,  uncertain,  and  almost  indifferent,  whether  I should  rise  again. 
In  an  hour’s  time  I was  called,  and,  not  being  able  to  pump,  I went  to  the  helm, 
and  steered  the  ship  till  midnight,  excepting  a small  interval  for  refreshment.  I 
had  here  leisure  and  convenient  opportunity  for  reflection.  I began  to  think  of 
my  former  religious  professions — the  extraordinary  turns  of  my  life — the  calls, 

1 warnings,  and  deliverances  I had  met  with — the  licentious  course  of  my  conver- 
\ sation — particularly  by  unparalleled  effrontery,  in  making  the  Gospel  history 
\ (which  I could  not  be  sure  was  false,  though  I was  not  yet  assured  it  was  true) 
the  constant  subject  of  profane  ridicule.  I thought,  allowing  the  Scripture  pre- 
mises, there  never  was  or  could  be  such  a sinner  as  myself ; and  then  comparing 
tire  advantages  I had  broken  through,  I concluded  at  first,  that  my  sins  were  too 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


•21 


great  to  be  forgiven.  The  Scripture  likewise  seemed  to  say  the  same  : for  I had 
formerly  been  well  acquainted  with  the  Bible,  and  many  passages  upon  this  re- 
turned upon  my  memory;  particularly  those  awful  passages,  Prov.  i.  24 — 31; 
Heb.  vi.  4,  6;  and  2 Pet.  ii.  20;  which  seemed  so  exactly  to  suit  my  case  and 
character,  as  to  bring  with  them  a presumptive  proof  of  a divine  original. 

“ Thus,  as  I have  said,  I have  waited  with  fear  and  impatience  to  receive  my 
inevitable  doom.  Yet  though  I had  thoughts  of  this  kind,  they  were  exceeding 
faint  and  disproportionate  ; it  was  not  till  after  (perhaps)  several  years,  that  I had 
gained  some  clear  views  of  the  infinite  righteousness  and  grace  of  Christ  Jesus 
my  Lord,  that  I had  a deep  and  strong  apprehension  of  my  state  by  nature  and 
practice  ; and  perhaps,  till  then,  I could  not  have  borne  the  sight:  so  wonderfully 
does  the  Lord  proportion  the  discoveries  of  sin  and  grace ; for  he  knows  our 
frame,  and  that  if  he  were  to  put  forth  the  greatness  of  his  power,  a poor  sinner 
would  be  instantly  overwhelmed,  and  crushed  as  a moth. 

But  to  return:  when  I saw  beyond  all  probability,  that  there  was  still  hope  of 
respite,  and  heard  about  six  in  the  evening  that  the  ship  was  freed  from  water, 
there  arose  a gleam  of  hope.  I thought  I saw  the  hand  of  God  displayed  in  our 
favour.  I began  to  pray  : I could  not  utter  the  prayer  of  faith  : I could  not  draw 
near  to  a reconciled  God  and  call  him  Father:  my  prayer  was  like  the  cry 
of  the  ravens,  which  yet  the  Lord  does  not  disdain  to  hear.  I now  began  to 
think  of  that  Jesus  whom  I had  so  often  derided  : I recollected  the  particulars  of 
\ his  life  and  of  his  death  ; a death  for  sins  not  his  own,  but,  as  I remembered,  for 
the  sake  of  those,  who,  in  their  distress,  should  put  their  trust  in  him.  And  now 
I chiefly  wanted  evidence.  The  comfortless  principles  of  infidelity  were  deeply 
riveted,  and  I rather  washed  than  believed  these  things  were  real  facts.  You 
will  please  to  observe,  that  I collect  the  strain  of  the  reasonings  and  exercises  of 
my  mind  in  one  view ; but  I do  not  say  that  all  this  passed  at  one  time.  The 
great  question  now  was,  how  to  obtain  faith  ? I speak  not  of  an  appropriating 
faith  (of  which  I then  knew  neither  the  nature  nor  necessity,)  but  how  I should 
gain  an  assurance  that  the  Scriptures  were  of  divine  inspiration,  and  a sufficient 
warrant  for  the  exercise  of  trust  and  hope  in  God. 

“ One  of  the  first  helps  I received,  (in  consequence  of  a determination  to  ex- 
amine the  New  Testament  carefully,)  was  from  Luke  xi.  13.  I had  been  sensi- 
ble, that  to  profess  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  when,  in  reality,  I did  not  believe  his 
history,  was  no  better  than  a mockery  of  the  heart-searching  God  ; but  here  I 
found  a Spirit  spoken  of,  which  was  to  be  communicated  to  those  w ho  ask  it. 
Upon  this  I reasoned  thus  : If  this  book  be  true,  the  promise  in  this  passage 
must  be  true  likewise  : I have  need  of  that  very  Spirit,  by  which  the  whole  was 
written,  in  order  to  understand  it  aright.  He  has  engaged  here  to  give  that 
Spirit  to  those  who  ask  : I must  therefore  pray  for  it,  and  if  it  be  of  God  he  will 
make  good  his  own  word.  My  purposes  were  strengthened  by  John  vii.  17. 

I concluded  from  thence,  that  though  I could  not  say  from  my  heart,  that  I be- 
lieved the  Gospel,  yet  I would,  for  the  present,  take  it  for  granted ; and  that  by 
studying  it  in  this  light,  I should  be  more  and  more  confirmed  in  it. 

“If  what  I am  writing  could  be  perused  by  our  modern  infidels,  they  would 
say,  (for  I too  well  know  their  manner,)  that  I was  very  desirous  to  persuade 
myself  into  this  opinion.  I confess  I was,  and  so  would  they  be,  if  the  Lord 
should  show  them,  as  he  was  pleased  to  show  me  at  that  time,  the  absolute  ne- 
cessity of  some  expedient  to  interpose  between  a righteous  God  and  a sinful  soul: 
upon  the  Gospel  scheme  I saw  at  least  a peradventure  of  hope,  but  on  every  other 
side  I was  surrounded  with  black,  unfathomable  despair.” 

The  wrind  being  now  moderate,  and  the  ship  drawing  nearer  to  its  port,  the 
ship’s  company  began  to  recover  from  their  consternation,  though  greatly  alarmed 
by  their  circumstances.  They  found,  that  the  water  having  floated  their  move- 
ables in  the  hold,  all  the  casks  of  provisions  had  been  beaten  to  pieces  by  the 
violent  motion  of  the  ship.  On  the  other  hand,  their  live  stock  had  been  washea 
overboard,  in  the  storm.  In  short,  all  the  provisions  they  saved,  except  the  fish 


22 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


ately  caught  on  the  banks  for  amusement,  and  a little  of  the  pulse  kind,  which  used 
to  be  given  to  the  hogs,  would  have  supported  them  but  a week,  and  that  at  a 
scanty  allowance.  The  sails,  too,  were  mostly  blown  away,  so  that  they  ad- 
vanced but  slowly  even  while  the  wind  was  fair.  They  imagined  they  were 
about  a hundred  leagues  from  land,  but  were  in  reality  much  farther.  Mr.  N.’s 
leisure  was  chiefly  employed  in  reading,  meditation  on  the  Scriptures,  and  prayer 
for  mercy  and  instruction. 

Things  continued  thus  for  about  four  or  five  days,  when  they  were  awakened 
one  morning  by  the  joyful  shouts  of  the  watch  upon  deck,  proclaiming  the  sight 
of  land,  with  which  they  were  ail  soon  raised.  The  dawning  was  uncommonly 
beautiful,  and  the  light,  just  sufficient  to  discover  distant  objects,  presented  what 
seemed  a mountainous  coast,  about  twenty  miles  off,  with  two  or  three  small 
islands;  the  whole  appeared  to  be  the  north-west  extremity  of  Ireland,  for 
which  they  were  steering.  They  sincerely  congratulated  each  other,  having  no 
doubt,  that,  if  the  wind  continued,  they  should  be  in  safety  and  plenty  the  next 
day.  Their  brandy,  which  was  reduced  to  a little  more  than  a pint,  was,  by 
the  captain’s  orders,  distributed  among  them  ; who  added,  “ We  shall  soon  have 
brandy  enough.”  They  likewise  ate  up  the  residue  of  their  bread,  and  were  in 
the  condition  of  men  suddenly  reprieved  from  death. 

But  while  their  hopes  were  thus  excited,  the  mate  sunk  their  spirits  by  say- 
ing, in  a graver  tone,  that  “ he  wished  it  might  prove  land  at  last.”  If  one  of 
the  common  sailors  had  first  said  so,  the  rest  would  probably  have  beaten  him. 
The  expression,  however,  brought  on  warm  debates,  whether  it  was  land  or  not; 
but  the  case  was  soon  decided  ; for  one  of  their  fancied  islands  began  to  grow  red 
from  the  approach  of  the  sun.  In  a word,  their  land  was  nothing  but  clouds  ; 
and  in  half  an  hour  more  the  whole  appearance  was  dissipated. 

Still,  however,  they  cherished  hope  from  the  wind  continuing  fair  ; but  of  this 
hope  they  were  soon  deprived.  That  very  day,  their  fair  wind  subsided  into 
a calm,  and  the  next  morning  the  gale  sprung  up  from  the  south-east,  directly 
against  them,  and  continued  so  for  more  than  a fortnight  afterwards.  At  this  time 
the  ship  was  so  wrecked,  that  they  were  obliged  to  keep  the  wind  always  on  the 
broken  side,  except  when  the  weather  was  quite  moderate  ; and  were  thus  driven 
still  farther  from  their  port  in  the  north  of  Ireland,  as  far  as  the  Lewis  or  western 
isles  of  Scotland.  Their  station  now  was  such  as  deprived  them  of  any  hope  of 
relief  from  other  vessels.  “ It  may  indeed  be  questioned,”  says  Mr.  N.,  “whether 
our  ship  was  not  the  very  first  that  had  been  in  that  part  of  the  ocean,  at  the 
same  time  of  the  year.” 

Provisions  now  began  to  fall  short,  the  half  of  a salted  cod  was  a day’s  subsist- 
ence for  twelve  people  : they  had  no  stronger  liquor  than  water,  no  bread,  hardly 
any  clothes,  and  very  cold  weather.  They  had  also  incessant  labour  at  the 
pumps,  to  keep  the  ship  above  water.  Much  labour  and  little  food  wasted  them 
fast,  and  one  man  died  under  the  hardship.  Yet  their  sufferings  'were  light 
when  compared  with  their  fears.  Their  bare  allowance  could  continue  but  little 
longer,  and  a dreadful  prospect  appeared  of  their  being  either  starved  to  death,  or 
reduced  to  feed  upon  one  another. 

At  this  time  Mr.  N.  had  a farther  trouble,  peculiar  to  himself.  The  captain, 
whose  temper  was  quite  soured  by  distress,  was  hourly  reproaching  him  as  the 
sole  cause  of  the  calamity,  and  was  confident,  that  his  being  thrown  overboard 
would  be  the  only  means  of  preserving  them.  The  captain,  indeed,  did  not  in- 
tend to  make  the  experiment,  but  “ the  continued  repetition  of  this  in  my  ears,” 
says  Mr.  N.,  “ gave  me  much  uneasiness;  especially  as  my  conscience  seconded 
his  words ; I thought  it  very  probable,  that  all  that  had  befallen  us  was  on  my 
account- — that  I was  at  last  found  out  by  the  powerful  hand  of  God — and  con- 
demned in  my  own  breast.” 

While,  however,  they  were  thus  proceeding,  at  the  time  when  they  were 
ready  to  give  up  all  for  lost,  and  despair  appeared  in  every  countenance,  the; 
began  to  conceive  hope,  from  the  wind’s  shifting  to  the  desired  point,  so  as  l-eci 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


£3 


to  suit  that  broken  part  of  the  ship,  which  must  be  kept  out  of  the  water,  and  so 
gently  to  blow  as  their  few  remaining  sails  could  bear.  And  thus  it  continued,  at 
an  unsettled  time  of  the  year,  till  they  were  once  more  called  up  to  see  land,  and 
which  was  really  such.  They  saw  the  island  of  Tory,  and  the  next  day  an- 
chored in  Lough  S willy,  in  Ireland,  on  the  8th  of  April,  just  four  weeks  after 
the  damage  they  had  sustained  from  the  sea.  When  they  came  into  this  port, 
their  very  last  victuals  were  boiling  in  the  pot,  and  before  they  had  been  there 
two  hours,  the  wind,  which  seemed  to  have  been  providentially  restrained  till 
they  were  in  a place  of  safety,  began  to  blow  with  great  violence;  so  that,  if 
they  had  continued  at  sea  that  night,  they  must,  in  ail  human  estimation,  have 
gone  to  the  bottom  ! “ About  this  time,”  says  Mr.  N.,  “ I began  to  know  that 

there  is  a God,  who  hears  and  answers  prayer.” 

Mr.  N.’s  history  is  now  brought  down  to  the  time  of  his  arrival  in  Ireland,  in 
the  year  1748;  and  the  progress  he  had  hitherto  made  in  religion  will  be  best  re- 
lated in  his  own  words.  I shall,  therefore,  make  a longer  extract  than  usual, 
because  it  is  important  to  trace  the  operation  of  real  religion  in  the  heart.  Speak- 
ing of  the  ship  in  which  he  lately  sailed,  he  says,  “ There  were  no  persons  on 
board  to  whom  I could  open  myself  with  freedom,  concerning  the  slate  of  mtf 
soul;  none  from  whom  I could  ask  advice.  As  to  books,  I had  a New  Testa- 
ment, Stanhope,  already  mentioned,  and  a volume  of  Bishop  Beveridge’s  Ser- 
mons, one  of  which,  upon  our  Lord’s  passion,  affected  me  much.  In  perusing 
the  New  Testament,  I was  struck  with  several  passages,  particularly  that  of  the 
fig-tree,  Luke  xiii.  the  case  of  St.  Paul,  1 Tim.  i.  but  particularly  that  of  the  pro- 
digal, Luke  xv.  I thought  that  had  never  been  so  nearly  exemplified  as  by  my- 
self. And  then  the  goodness  of  the  father  in  receiving,  nay,  in  running  to  meet 
such  a son,  and  this  intended  only  to  illustrate  the  Lord’s  goodness  to  returning 
sinners  ! Such  reflections  gaining  upon  me,  I continued  much  in  prayer  ; I saw 
that  the  Lord  had  interposed  so  far  to  save  me,  and  I hoped  he  would  do  more. 
Outward  circumstances  helped  in  this  place  to  make  me  still  more  serious  and 
earnest  in  crying  to  him,  who  alone  could  relieve  me  ; and  sometimes  I though 
I could  be  content  to  die  even  for  want  of  food,  so  I might  but  die  a believer. 

“ Thus  far  I was  answered,  that  before  we  arrived  in  Ireland  I had  a satisfac- 
tory evidence,  in  my  own  mind,  of  the  truth  of  the  Gospel,  as  considered  in 
itself,  and  of  its  exact  suitableness  to  answer  all  my  needs.  1 saw,  that,  by  the 
way  they  were  pointed  out,  God  might  declare,  not  his  mercy  only,  but  his  jus- 
tice also,  in  the  pardon  of  sin,  on  account  of  the  obedience  and  sufferings  of  Jesus 
Christ.  My  judgment,  at  that  time,  embraced  the  sublime  doctrine  of  ‘ God  ma- 
nifest in  the  flesh,  reconciling  the  world  unto  himself.’  I had  no  idea  of  those 
systems,  which  allow  the  Saviour  no  higher  honour  than  that  of  an  upper  ser- 
vant, or  at  the  most  a demi-god.  I stood  in  need  of  an  Almighty  Saviour,  and 
such  a one  I found  described  in  the  New  Testament.  Thus  far  the  Lord  had 
wrought  a marvellous  thing  ; I was  no  longer  an  infidel ; I heartily  renounced 
my  former  profaneness,  and  had  taken  up  some  right  notions  ; was  seriously  dis- 
posed, and  sincerely  touched  with  a sense  of  the  undeserved  mercy  1 had  re- 
ceived, in  being  brought  safe  through  so  many  dangers.  I was  sorry  for  my 
past  mispent  life,  and  proposed  an  immediate  reformation.  I was  quite  freed 
from  the  habit  of  swearing,  which  seemed  to  have  been  deeply  rooted  in  me,  as 
a second  nature.  Thus,  to  all  appearance,  I was  a new  man. 

“ But  though  I cannot  doubt  that  this  change,  so  far  as  it  prevailed,  was 
wrought  by  the  Spirit  and  power  of  God,  yet  still  I was  greatly  deficient  in 
many  respects.  I was  in  some  degree  affected  with  a sense  of  my  enormous 
sins;  but  I was  little  aware  of  the  innate  evils  of  my  heart.  I had  no  appre- 
hension of  the  spirituality  and  extent  of  the  law  of  God  ; the  hidden  life  of  a 
Christian,  as  it  consists  in  communion  with  God  by  Jesus  Christ ; a continual 
dependence  on  him  for  hourly  supplies  of  wisdom,  strength,  and  comfort,  was  a 
mystery  of  which  I had  as  yet  no  knowdedge.  I acknowledged  the  Lord’s 
mercy  in  pardoning  what  was  past,  but  depended  chiefly  upon  my  own  resolu 


24 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


tion  to  do  better  for  the  time  to  come.  I had  no  Christian  friend  or  faithful 
minister  to  advise  me,  that  my  strength  was  no  more  than  my  righteousness  , 
and  though  I soon  began  to  inquire  for  serious  books,  yet,  not  having  spiritua. 
discernment,  I frequently  made  a wrong  choice ; and  I was  not  brought  in  the 
way  of  evangelical  preaching  or  conversation,  (except  the  few  times  when  I 
heard  but  understood  not,)  for  six  years  after  this  period.  Those  things  the 
Lord  was  pleased  to  discover  to  me  gradually.  I learnt  them  here  a little,  and 
there  a little,  by  my  own  painful  experience,  at  a distance  from  the  common 
means  and  ordinances,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  same  course  of  evil  company,  and 
bad  examples,  I had  been  conversant  with  for  some  time. 

“From  this  period  I could  no  more  make  a mock  of  sin,  or  jest  with  holy 
things ; I no  more  questioned  the  truth  of  Scripture,  or  lost  a sense  of  the  re- 
bukes of  .conscience.  Therefore  I consider  this  as  the  beginning  of  my  return 
to  God,  or  rather  of  his  return  to  me  ; but  I cannot  consider  myself  to  have  been 
a believer,  (in  the  full  sense  of  the  word,)  till  a considerable  time  afterwards.” 

While  the  ship  was  refitting  at  Lough  Swilly,  Mr.  N.  repaired  to  London- 
derry, where  he  soon  recruited  his  health  and  strength.  He  was  now  a serious 
rofessor,  went  twice  a day  to  the  prayers  at  church,  and  determined  to  receive 
he  sacrament  the  next  opportunity.  When  the  day  came,  he  arose  very  early, 
was  very  earnest  in  his  private  devotions,  and  solemnly  engaged  himself  to,  the 
Lord  ; not  with  a formal,  but  sincere  surrender,  and  under  a strong  sense  of  the 
mercies  lately  received.  Having,  however,  as  yet  but  an  imperfect  knowledge 
of  his  own  heart,  and  of  the  subtlety  of  Satan’s  temptations,  he  was  afterwards 
seduced  to  forget  the  vows  of  God  that  were  upon  him.  Yet  he  felt  a peace 
and  satisfaction  in  the  ordinance  of  that  day,  to  which  he  had  been  hitherto  an 
utter  stranger. 


The  next  day  he  went  abroad  with  the  mayor  of  the  city,  and  some  gentlemen, 
shooting  ; climbing  up  a steep  bank,  and  pulling  his  fowling-piece  in  a perpen- 
dicular direction  after  him,  it  went  off  so  near  his  face  as  to  destroy  the  corner 
of  his  hat.  The  remark  he  makes  on  this  ought  not  to  be  omitted:  “ Thus, 
when  we  think  ourselves  in  the  greatest  safety,  we  are  no  less  exposed  to  dan- 
ger, than  when  all  the  elements  seem  conspiring  to  destroy  us.  The  divine 
Providence,  which  is  sufficient  to  deliver  us  in  our  utmost  extremity,  is  equally 
necessary  to  our  preservation  in  the  most  peaceful  situation.” 

During  their  stay  in  Ireland,  Mr.  N.  wrote  home.  The  vessel  he  was  in  had 
not  been  heard  of  for  eighteen  months,  and  was  given  up  for  lost.  His  father 
had  no  expectation  of  hearing  that  his  son  was  alive,  but  received  his  letter  a 
few  days  before  he  embarked  from  London  to  become  governor  of  York  Fort,  in 
Hudson’s  Bay,  where  he  died.  He  intended  to  take  his  son  with  him,  had  he 
returned  to  England  in  time.  Mr.  N.  received  two  or  three  affectionate  letters 
from  his  father  ; and  hoped,  that  in  three  years  more  he  should  have  had  the 
opportunity  of  asking  his  forgiveness,  for  the  uneasiness  his  disobedience  nad 
occasioned  ; but  the  ship  that  was  to  have  brought  his  father  home  came  without 
him.  It  appears  he  was  seized  with  the  cramp,  when  bathing,  and  was  drowned 
before  the  ship  arrived  in  the  Bay.  Before  his  father’s  departure  from  Eng- 
land, he  had  paid  a visit  in  Kent,  and  gave  his  consent  to  the  union  that  had 
been  so  long  talked  of. 

Mr.  N.  arrived  at  Liverpool  the  latter  end  of  May  1748,  about  the  same  day 
that  his  father  sailed  from  the  Nore.  He  found,  however,  another  father  in  the 
gentleman  whose  ship  had  brought  him  home.  This  friend  received  him  with 
great  tenderness,  and  the  strongest  assurances  of  assistance  ; yet  not  stronger  than 
he  afterwards  fulfilled;  for  to  this  instrument  of  God’s  goodness  he  felt  he  owed 
every  thing.  “ Yet,”  as  Mr.  N.  justly  observes,  “it  would  not  have  been  in 
the  power  even  of  this  friend  to  have  served  me  effectually,  if  the  Lord  had  not 
met  me  on  my  way  home,  as  l have  related.  Till  then,  I was  like  the  man  pos- 
sessed with  the  legion.  No  arguments,  no  persuasion,  no  views  of  interest,  no 
remembrance  of  the  past,  nor  regard  to  the  future  could  have  restrained  me 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


25 


within  the  bounds  of  common  prudence;  but  now  I was  in  some  measure  restored 
to  my  senses.” 

This  friend  immediately  offered  Mr.  N.  the  command  of  a ship,  which,  upon 
mature  consideration,  he  for  the  present  declined.  He  prudently  considered  that 
hitherto  he  had  been  unsettled  and  careless ; and  therefore  that  he  had  better 
make  another  voyage,  and  learn  obedience  and  acquire  farther  experience  in 
business,  before  he  ventured  to  undertake  such  a charge.  The  mate  of  the  ves- 
sel in  which  he  came  home  was  preferred  to  the  command  of  a new  ship,  and 
Mr.  N.  engaged  to  go  in  the  station  of  mate  with  him. 

There  was  something  so  peculiar  in  Mr.  N.’s  case,  after  this  extraordinary 
deliverance,  and  because  others  in  like  circumstances  might  be  tempted  to  de- 
spair, that  I think  it  proper  to  make  another  extract  from  his  Narrative,  as  such 
accounts  cannot  be  well  conveyed  but  in  his  own  words. 

“ We  must  not  make  the  experience  of  others  in  all  respects  a rule  fo  our- 
selves, nor  our  own  a rule  to  others : yet  these  are  common  mistakes,  and  pro- 
ductive of  many  more.  As  to  myself,  every  part  of  my  case  has  been  extraordi- 
nary— I have  hardly  met  a single  instance  resembling  it.  Few,  very  few,  have 
been  recovered  from  such  a dreadful  state  ; and  the  few  that  have  been  thus  fa- 
voured, have  generally  passed  through  the  most  severe  convictions  : and,  after 
the  Lord  has  given  them  peace,  their  future  lives  have  been  usually  more  zeal- 
ous, bright,  and  exemplary  than  common.  Now,  as,  on  the  one  hand,  my  convictions 
were  very  moderate,  and  far  below  what  might  have  been  expected  from  the 
dreadful  review  I had  to  make  ; so,  on  the  other,  my  first  beginnings  in  a re- 
ligious course  were  as  faint  as  can  be  well  imagined.  I never  knew  that  season 
alluded  to,  Jer.  ii.  2 ; Rev.  ii.  4,  usually  called  the  time  of  the  first  love.  Who 
would  not  expect  to  hear,  that,  after  such  a wonderful  and  unhoped-for  deliver- 
ance as  I had  received,  and  after  my  eyes  were  in  some  measure  enlightened  to 
see  things  aright,  I should  immediately  cleave  to  the  Lord  and  his  ways  with 
full  purpose  of  heart,  and  consult  no  more  with  flesh  and  blood  ? But,  alas ! it 
was  far  otherwise  with  me  : I had  learned  to  pray : I set  some  value  upon  the 
word  of  God  ; and  was  no  longer  a libertine  ; but  my  soul  still  ‘ cleaved  to  the 
dust.’  Soon  after  my  departure  from  Liverpool,  I began  to  intermit  and  grow 
slack  in  waiting  upon  the  Lord : I grew  vain  and  trifling  in  my  conversation ; 
and  though  my  heart  smote  me  often,  yet  my  armour  was  gone,  and  I declined 
fast : and  by  the  time  we  arrived  at  Guinea,  I seemed  to  have  forgotten  all  the 
Lord’s  mercies,  and  my  own  engagements,  and  was,  (profaneness  excepted,)  al- 
most as  bad  as  before.  The  enemy  prepared  a train  of  temptations,  and  I be- 
came his  easy  prey  ; for  about  a month  he  lulled  me  asleep  in  a course  of  evil, 
of  which,  a few  months  before,  I could  not  have  supposed  myself  any  longer  ca- 
pable. How  much  propriety  is  there  in  the  apostle’s  advice,  ‘ Take  heed  lest 
any  of  you  be  hardened  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.’  ” 

In  this  voyage  Mr.  N.’s  business,  while  upon  the  coast,  was  to  sail  in  the  long 
boat,  from  place  to  place,  in  order  to  purchase  slaves.  The  ship,  at  this  time, 
was  at  Sierra  Leone,  and  he  at  the  Plantanes,  the  scene  of  his  former  captivity, 
and  where  every  thing  he  saw  tended  to  remind  him  of  his  present  ingratitude. 
He  was  now  in  easy  circumstances,  and  courted  by  those  who  had  once  despised 
him.  The  lime-trees  he  had  formerly  planted,  were  growing  tall  and  promised 
fruit,  upon  his  expected  return  with  a ship  of  his  own.  Unaffected,  however, 
with  these  things,  he  needed  another  providential  interposition  to  rouse  him  ; 
and  accordingly  he  w'as  visited  with  a violent  fever,  which  broke  the  fatal  chain, 
and  once  more  brought  him  to  himself.  Alarmed  at  the  prospect  before  him,  he 
thought  himself  now  summoned  away.  The  dangers  and  deliverances  through 
which  he  had  passed — his  earnest  prayers  in  the  time  of  trouble — his  solemn 
vows  before  the  Lord  at  his  table — and  his  ungrateful  returns  for  all  his  goodness 
— were  present  at  once  to  his  mind.  He  began  then  to  wish  that  he  had  sunk  in 
the  ocean,  when  he  first  cried  for  mercy.  For  a short  time  he  concluded  that  the 
door  of  hope  was  quite  shut.  W eak,  and  almost  delirious,  he  arose  from  his  bed 


26 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


crept  to  a retired  part  of  the  island,  and  here  found  a renewed  liberty  in  prayer; 
daring  to  make  no  more  resolves,  he  cast  himself  upon  the  Lord,  to  do  with  him 
as  he  should  please.  It  does  not  appear  that  any  thing  new  was  presented  to 
his  mind,  but  that,  in  general,  he  was  enabled  to  hope  and  believe  in  a crucified 
Saviour. 

After  this,  the  burthen  was  removed  from  his  conscience,  and  not  only  his 
peace,  but  his  health  was  gradually  restored,  when  he  returned  to  the  ship. 
And  though  subject  to  the  efforts  and  conflicts  of  sin,  dwelling  in  him,  he  was 
ever  after  delivered  from  the  power  and  dominion  of  it. 

His  leisure  hours  in  this  voyage  were  chiefly  employed  in  acquiring  Latin, 
which  he  had  now  almost  forgotten.  This  desire  took  place  from  an  imitation 
he  had  seen  of  one  of  Horace’s  Odes  in  a Magazine.  In  this  attempt  at  one  of 
the  most  difficult  of  the  poets,  he  had  no  other  help  than  an  old  English  translation, 
with  Castalio’s  Latin  Bible.  He  had  the  edition  in  usum  Delphini,  and,  by  com- 
paring the  odes  with  the  interpretation,  and  tracing  such  words  as  he  understood 
from  place  to  place  by  the  index,  together  with  what  assistance  he  could  get 
from  the  Latin  Bible,  he  thus,  by  dint  of  hard  industry,  made  some  progress. 
He  not  only  understood  the  sense  of  many  odes,  and  some  of  the  epistles,  but 
“ I began,”  says  he,  “ to  relish  the  beauties  of  the  composition  ; acquired  a spice 
of  what  Mr.  Law  calls,  ‘ classical  enthusiasm  ;*  and,  indeed,  by  this  means  I had 
Horace  more  ad  unguem  than  some  wrho  are  masters  of  the  Latin  tongue  ; for 
my  helps  were  so  few,  that  I generally  had  the  passage  fixed  in  my  memory  be- 
fore I could  fully  understand  its  meaning.” 

During  the  eight  months  they  were  employed  upon  the  coast,  Mr.  N.’s  busi- 
ness exposed  him  to  innumerable  dangers  from  burning  suns,  chilling  dews, 
winds,  rains,  and  thunder  storms,  in  an  open  boat ; and  on  shore,  from  long 
journeys  through  the  woods,  and  from  the  natives,  who  in  many  places  are 
cruel,  treacherous,  and  watching  opportunities  for  mischief.  Several  boats, 
during  this  time,  were  cut  off,  several  white  men  poisoned,  and  from  his  own 
boat  he  buried  six  or  seven  people,  with  fevers ; when  going  on  shore,  or  re- 
turning, he  was  more  than  once  overset  by  the  violence  of  the  surf,  and  brought 
to  land  half  dead,  as  he  could  not  swim.  Among  a number  of  such  escapes,  which 
remained  upon  his  memory,  the  following  w ill  mark  the  singular  providence  that 
was  over  him  : — 

On  finishing  their  trade,  and  being  about  to  sail  to  the  West  Indies,  the  only 
service  Mr.  N.  had  to  perform  in  the  boat,  was  to  assist  in  bringing  the  wrood 
and  water  from  the  shore.  They  were  then  at  Rio  Cestors.  He  used  to  go  into 
the  river,  in  the  afternoon,  with  the  sea-breeze,  to  procure  his  lading  in  the 
evening,  in  order  to  return  on  board  in  the  morning  with  the  land-wind.  Se- 
veral of  these  little  voyages  he  had  made ; but  the  boat  was  grown  old,  and  al- 
most unfit  for  use ; this  service  likewise  was  almost  completed.  One  day,  hav- 
ing dined  on  board,  he  was  preparing  to  return  to  the  river  as  formerly — he  had 
taken  leave  of  the  captain — received  his  orders — was  already  in  the  boat — and 
just  going  to  put  off;  in  that  instant  the  captain  came  up  from  the  cabin,  and 
called  him  on  board  again.  Mr.  N.  wrent,  expecting  farther  orders,  but  the  cap- 
tain  said,  “he  had  taken  it! n foffiiTsHTeadT”^^  d'TlTyThat  ?v Jr.  N. 

slTould"reTnaiti  that  day  "in  the  ship,  arahnccordtligly  ordemLanothcr  man  to  go 
in  his  room.' MrTJS^-was^surprised  at  thjs^jtg  the  b^at^ad^-neveiiffieen  jsent 
away  without  him  before.  Ileasked  TluPcaptain  the  reason  of  hjsjgsolu  ti  on , 
but  none  was  assigned,  exceplTas  above,  that  so  he  wmuldHTaveit.  ^JXlie  boat 
Therelore  went  without  Mr.  N.,  britTetlirned~nbTnore  : it  sunk  that  night  in  the 
river;  and  the~~peisun  vvItct  supplied  Mt.  N.’s  pface  drowned!  Mr.  N. 
was  much  struck  when  news  of  the  event  was  received  the  next  morning 
The  captain  himself,  though  quite  a stranger  to  religion,  even  to  the  denying  a 
particular  providence,  could  not  help  being  affected  ; but  declared,  that  he  had 
no  other  reason  for  countermanding  Mr.  IN.  at  that  time,  but  that  it  came  sud- 
denly into  his  mind  to  detain  him. 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


27 


A short  time  after  he  was  thus  surprisingly  preserved,  they  sailed  for  Antigua, 
and  from  thence  to  Charleston,  in  South  Carolina.  In  that  place  there  were 
many  serious  people  ; but,  at  this  time,  Mr.  N.  was  little  capable  of  availing 
himself  of  their  society,  supposing  that  all  who  attended  public  worship  were 
good  Christians,  and  that  whatever  came  from  the  pulpit  must  be  very  good.  He 
had  two  or  three  opportunities,  indeed,  of  hearing  a minister  of  eminent  character 
and  gifts,  whom,  though  struck  with  his  manner,  he  did  not  rightly  understand. 
Almost  every  day,  when  business  would  permit,  he  used  to  retire  into  the  woods 
and  fields,  (being  his  favourite  oratories,)  and  began  to  taste  the  delight  of  com- 
munion with  God,  in  the  exercises  of  prayer  and  praise  ; and  yet  so  much  in- 
consistency prevailed,  that  he  frequently  spent  the  evening  in  vain  and  worthless 
company.  His  relish,  indeed,  for  worldly  diversions  was  much  weakened  ; and 
he  was  rather  a spectator  than  a sharer  in  their  pleasures  ; but  he  did  not  as  yet 
see  the  necessity  of  absolutely  relinquishing  such  society.  It  appears,  that  com- 
pliances of  this  sort,  in  his  present  circumstances,  were  owing  rather  to  a want 
of  light  than  to  any  obstinate  attachment:  as  he  was  kept  from  what  he  knew 
to  be  sinful,  he  had,  for  the  most  part,  peade  oTl^nscTeuee ; , and  liis---stronges,t 
desires  were  towards  the  tilings  of  Go37~He  did  not  as^yet  apprehend  the  force  of 
-that  precept,  “ Abstain  from-all  appearance  of " but  he  very  often  ventured 
upon  the  brink  of  temptation.  He  did  not  break  with  the  world  at_once,  as 
mf^iriiave^jjoiuj-^q^eeterlvbut  Was  gradual! v led  to  see  the  i nconveme nee  and 
” II  y of  fiist~mie  thing  and  then  anntlrer,liiicr  as  such  to  give  them  upT 
They  finished  their  voyage,  and  arrived  in  Liverpool.  When  the  ship’s  affairs 
were  settled,  Mr.  N.  went  to  London,  and  from  thence  he  soon  repaired  to  Kent. 
More  than  seven  years  had  now  elapsed  since  his  first  visit : no  views  of  the 
kind  seemed  more  chimerical  than  his,  or  could  subsist  under  greater  discourage- 
ments ; yet  while  he  seemed  abandoned  to  his  passions,  he  was  still  guided  by  a 
hand  that  he  knew  not,  to  the  accomplishment  of  his  wishes.  Every  obstacle 
was  now  removed — he  had  renounced  his  former  follies — his  interest  was  estab- 
lished— and  friends  on  all  sides  consenting.  The  point  was  now  entirely  be- 
tween the  parties  immediately  concerned  ; and  after  what  had  passed,  was 
easily  concluded  ; accordingly  their  hands  were  joined,  February  the  1st,  1750. 

“ But,  alas  !”  says  he,  “this  mercy,  which  raised  me  to  all  I could  ask  or  wish 
in  a temporal  view,  and  which  ought  to  have  been  an  animating  motive  to  obe- 
dience and  praise,  had  a contrary  effect : I rested  in  the  gift  and  forgot  the  giver. 
My  poor  narrow  heart  was  satisfied.  A cold  and  careless  frame  as  to  spiritual 
things,  took  place,  and  gained  ground  daily.  Happy  for  me,  the  season  was  ad- 
vancing ; and  in  June  I received  orders  to  repair  to  Liverpool.  This  roused 
me  from  my  dream  ; and  I found  the  pains  of  absence  and  separation  fully  pro- 
portioned to  my  preceding  pleasure.*  Through  all  my  following  voyages,  my 
irregular  and  excessive  affections  were  as  thorns  in  my  eyes,  and  often  made  my 
other  blessings  tasteless  and  insipid.  But  he,  who  doth  all  things  well,  over- 
ruled this  likewise  for  good  ; it  became  an  occasion  of  quickening  me  in  prayer, 
both  for  her  and  myself ; it  increased  my  indifference  for  company  and  amuse- 


* In  writing  to  Mrs.  Newton  from  St.  Alban’s,  he  inserts  a prayer  for  his  own  health  and  that  of 
Mrs.  N.,  upon  which  he  remarks  as  follows : — 

“ This  prayer  includes  all  that  I at  that  time  knew  how  to  ask  for;  and  had  not  the  Lord  given  me 
more  than  I knew  how  to  a^jt  or  think,  I should  now  be  completely  miserable.  The  prospect  of  this 
separation  was  terrible  to  me  as  death : to  avoid  it,  I repeatedly  purchased  a ticket  in  the  lottery : 
thinking,  ‘ Who  knows  but  I may  obtain  a considerable  prize, 'and  be  thereby  saved  from  the  necessity 
of  going  to  sea?’  Happy  for  me.  the  lot,  which  I then  considered  as  casual,  was  at  thy  disposal.  The 
money,  which  I could  not  with  prudence  have  spared  at  the  time,  was  lost : all  my  tickets  proved 
blanks,  though  1 attempted  to  bribe  thee,  by  promising,  if  I succeeded,  to  give  a considerable  part  to 
the  poor.  But  these  blanks  were  truly  prizes.  Thy  mercy  sent  me  to  sea  against  my  own  will.  To 
thy  blessing,  and  to  my  solitary  sea-hours,  I was  indebted  for  all  my  temporal  comforts  and  future 
hopes. 

“ Thou  wert  pleased  likewise  to  disappoint  me,  b^  thy  providence,  of  some  money,  which  I expected 
to  receive  on  my  marriage ; so  that,  excepting  our  apparel,  when  I sailed  from  Liverpool  on  my  first 
voyage,  the  sum  total  of  my  worldly  inventory  was — seventy  pounds  in  debt.” 


28 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


ment , it  habituated  me  to  a kind  of  voluntary  self-denial,  which  I was  after 
wards  taught  to  improve  to  a better  purpose.” 

Mr.  N.  sailed  from  Liverpool,  in  August  1750,  commander  of  a good  ship. 
He  had  now  the  command  and  care  of  thirty  persons : he  endeavoured  to  treat 
them  with  humanity,  and  to  set  them  a good  example.*  He  likewise  established 
public  worship,  according  to  the  Liturgy  of  the  church  of  England,  officiating 
himself  twice  every  Lord’s  day.  He  did  not  proceed  farther  than  this  w hile  he 
continued  in  that  occupation. 

Having  now  much  leisure,  he  prosecuted  the  study  of  Latin  with  good  success. 
He  remembered  to  take  a Dictionary  this  voyage,  and  added  Juvenal  to  Horace  ; 
and,  for  prose  authors,  Livy,  Caesar,  and  Sallust.  He  was  not  aware  of  the  mis- 
take of  beginning  with  such  difficult  waiters  ; but,  having  heard  Livy  highly 
commended,  he  was  resolved  to  understand  him:  he  began  with  the  first  page, 
and  made  it  a rule  not  to  proceed  to  a second  till  he  understood  the  first.  Often 
at  a stand,  but  seldom  discouraged,  here  and  there  he  found  a few  lines  quite 
obstinate,  and  was  forced  to  give  them  up,  especially  as  his  edition  had  no  notes. 
Before,  however,  the  close  of  that  voyage,  he  informs  us,  that  he  could,  with  a 
few  exceptions,  read  Livy  almost  as  readily  as  an  English  author.  Other  prose 
authors,  he  says,  cost  him  but  little  trouble,  as  in  surmounting  the  former  diffi- 
culty he  had  mastered  all  in  one.  In  short,  in  the  space  of  two  or  three  voyages, 
he  became  acquainted  with  the  best  classics.  He  read  Terence,  Virgil,  several 
pieces  of  Cicero,  and  the  modern  classics,  Buchanan,  Erasmus,  and  Casimir  ; and 
made  some  essays  towards  writing  elegant  Latin. 

“But  by  this  time,”  he  observes,  “the  Lord  was  pleased  to  draw  me  nearer 
to  himself,  and  to  give  me  a fuller  view  of  the  pearl  of  great  price,  the  inestima- 
ble treasure  hid  in  the  field  of  the  Holy  Scriptures ; and  for  the  sake  of  this  I 
was  made  willing  to  part  with  all  my  newly-acquired  riches.  I began  to  think, 
that  life  was  too  short  (especially  my  life,)  to  admit  of  leisure  for  such  elaborate 
trifling.  Neither  poet  nor  historian  could  tell  me  a word  of  Jesus  ; and  I there- 
fore applied  myself  to  those  who  could.  The  classics  were  at  first  restrained  to 
one  morning  in  the  week,  and  at  length  laid  aside.” 

This  his  first  voyage  after  his  marriage  lasted  the  space  of  fourteen  months, 
through  various  scenes  of  danger  and  difficulty  ; but  nothing  very  remarkable  oc- 
curred ; and,  after  having  seen  many  fall  on  his  right  hand  and  on  his  left,  he  was 
brought  home  in  peace,  Nov.  2,  1751. 

In  the  interval,  between  his  first  and  second  voyage,  he  speaks  of  the  use  he 
found  in  keeping  a sort  of  diary,  of  the  unfavourable  tendency  of  a life  of  ease 
among  his  friends,  and  of  the  satisfaction  of  his  wishes  proving  unfavourable  to 
the  progress  of  grace  ; upon  the  whole,  however,  he  seems  to  have  gained 
ground,  and  was  led  into  farther  views  of  Christian  doctrine  and  experience  by 
ScougaFs  Life  of  God  in  the  Soul  of  Man,  Hervey’s  Meditations,  and  the  Life 
of  Colonel  Gardiner.  He  seems  to  have  derived  no  advantages  from  the  preach- 
ing he  heard,  or  the  Christian  acquaintance  he  made  ; and  though  he  could 
not  live  without  prayer,  he  durst  not  propose  it,  even  to  his  wife,  till  she  first 
urged  him  to  the  mutual  practice  of  it. 

In  a few  months,  the  returning  season  called  him  abroad  again,  and  he  sailed 
from  Liverpool,  in  a new  ship,  July  1752.f  “ I never  knew,”  says  he,  “ sweeter 
or  more  frequent  hours  of  Divine  communion  than  in ' my  two  last  voyages  to 
Guinea  when  I was  either  almost  secluded  from  society  on  shipboard,  or  when 


* I have  heard  Mr.  Newton  observe,  that  as  the  commander  of  a slave-ship,  he  had  a number  of 
women  under  his  absolute  command ; and  knowing  the  danger  of  his  situation  on  that  account,  lie 
resolved  to  abstain  from  flesh  in  his  food,  and  to  drink  nothing  stronger  than  water,  during  the  voyage; 
that,  by  abstemiousness,  he  might  subdue  every  improper  emotion : and  that,  upon  his  setting  sail,  the 
sight  of  a certain  point  of  land  was  the  signal  for  his  beginning  a rule,  which  he  was  enabled  to  keep. 

t Mr.  N.  had  had  an  unexpected  call  to  London ; and,  on  his  return,  when  within  a few  miles  of  Liver- 
pool, he  mistook  a marl-pit  for  a pond,  and,  in  attempting  to  water  his  horse,  both  the  horse  and  the 
rider  plunged  into  it  overhead.  He  was  afterwards  told,  that,  near  that  time,  three  persons  had  lost 
their  lives  by  a mistake  of  the  same  kind. 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


29 


on  shore  among  the  natives.  I have  wandered  through  the  woods,  reflecting  on 
the  singular  goodness  of  the  Lord  to  me,  in  a place  where,  perhaps,  there  was 
not  a person  who  knew  me  for  some  thousand  miles  round.  Many  a time,  upon 
these  occasions,  I have  restored  the  beautiful  lines  of  Propertius  to  the  right 
owner ; lines  full  of  blasphemy  and  madness  when  addressed  to  a creature,  but 
full  of  comfort  and  propriety  in  the  mouth  of  a believer. 


Sic  ego  desertis  possim  bene  vivere  sylvis, 
Q.uo  nulla  humano  sit  via  trita  pede ; 

Tu  mihi  curarum  requies,  in  nocte  vel  artra 
Lumen,  et  in  solis  tu  mihi  turba  locis. 

PARAPHRASED. 

In  desert  woods,  with  thee,  my  God, 

Where  human  footsteps  never  trod, 

How  happy  could  I be  ! 

Thou  my  repose  from  care,  my  light 
Amidst  the  darkness  of  the  night, 

In  solitude  my  company.” 


In  the  course  of  this  voyage,  Mr.  N.  was  wonderfully  preserved  through 
many  unforeseen  dangers.  At  one  time  there  was  a conspiracy  among  his  own 
people  to  become  pirates,  and  take  possession  of  the  ship.  When  the  plot  was 
nearly  ripe,  they  watched  only  for  opportunity  : two  of  them  were  taken  ill  in 
one  day ; one  of  them  died.  This  suspended  the  affair,  and  opened  a way  to 
its  discovery.  The  slaves  on  board  frequently  plotted  insurrections,  and  were 
sometimes  upon  the  very  brink  of  one  when  it  was  disclosed.  When  at  a place 
called  Mana,  near  Cape  Mount,  Mr.  N.  intended  to  go  on  shore  the  next  morn- 
ing to  settle  some  business;  but  the  surf  of  the  sea  ran  so  high,  that  he  was  afraid 
to  attempt  landing.  He  had  often  ventured  at  a worse  time  ; but  then  feeling  a 
backwardness  which  he  could  not  account  for,  the  high  surf  furnished  a pretext 
for  indulging  it:  he  therefore  returned  to  the  ship  without  doing  any  business. 
He  afterwards  found,  that,  on  the  day  he  intended  to  land,  a scandalous  and 
groundless  charge  had  been  laid  against  him,  which  greatly  threatened  his  honour 
and  interest,  both  in  Africa  and  England,  and  would  perhaps  have  affected  his 
life,  had  he  landed.  The  person  most  concerned  in  this  affair  owed  him  about 
a hundred  pounds,  which  he  sent  in  a huff,  and  otherwise,  perhaps,  would  not 
have  paid  it  at  all.  Mr.  N.  heard  no  more  of  this  accusation  till  the  next  voyage, 
and  then  it  was  publicly  acknowledged  to  have  been  a malicious  calumny,  with- 
out the  least  shadow  of  a ground. 

But,  as  these  things  did  not  occur  every  day,  Mr.  N.  prosecuted  his  Latin, 
being  very  regular  in  the  management  of  his  time.  He  allotted  about  eight 
hours  for  sleep  and  meals,  eight  hours  for  exercise  and  devotion,  and  eight  hours 
to  his  books ; and  thus,  by  diversifying  his  engagements,  the  whole  day  was 
agreeably  filled  up. 

From  the  coast  he  went  to  St.  Christopher’s,  where  he  met  with  a great  dis- 
appointment: for  the  letters,  which  he  expected  from  Mrs.  N.,  were  by  mistake 
forwarded  to  Antigua.  Certain  of  her  punctuality  in  writing,  if  alive,  be  con- 
cluded by  not  hearing  from  her,  that  she  was  surely  dead.  This  fear  deprived 
him  of  his  appetite  and  rest,  caused  an  incessant  pain  in  his  stomach,  and,  in  the 
space  of  three  weeks,  he  was  near  sinking  under  the  weight  of  an  imaginary 
stroke.  “ I felt,”  says  he,  “some  severe  symptoms  of  that  mixture  of  pride  and 
madness,  commonly  called  a broken  heart ; and,  indeed,  I wonder  that  this  case  is 
not  more  common.  How  often  do  the  potsherds  of  the  earth  presume  to  contend 
with  their  Maker ! and  what  a wonder  of  mercy  is  it  that  they  are  not  all  broken  ! 
This  was  a sharp  lesson,  but  I hope  it  did  me  good ; and  w hen  I had  thus  suf- 
fered some  weeks,  I thought  of  sending  a small  vessel  to  Antigua.  I did  so,  and 
she  brought  me  several  packets,  which  restored  my  health  and  peace,  and  gave 


30 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  RE\  JOHN  NEWTON. 


me  a strong  contrast  of  the  Lord’s  goodness  to  me,  and  of  my  unbelief  and  in- 
gratitude towards  him.” 

In  August,  1753,  Mr.  N.  returned  to  Liverpool : after  that  voyage,  he  con- 
tinued only  six  weeks  at  home,  and,  in  that  space,  nothing  very  memorable 

occurred. 

We  now  follow  Mr.  N.  in  his  third  voyage  to  Guinea:  it  seems  to  be  the 
shortest  of  any  that  he  had  made,  and  which  is  principally  marked  by  an  account 
of  a young  man,  who  had  formerly  been  a midshipman,  and  his  intimate  com- 
panion on  board  the  Harwich.  This  youth,  at  the  time  Mr.  N.  first  knew  him, 
was  sober,  but  afterwards  sadly  infected  with  Mr.  N.’s  then  libertine  principles. 
They  met  at  Liverpool,  and  renewed  their  former  acquaintance : as  their  con- 
versation frequently  turned  upon  religion,  Mr.  N.  was  very  desirous  to  recover 
his  companion,  to  whom  he  gave  a plain  account  of  the  manner  and  reasons  of 
his  own  change,  and  used  every  argument  to  induce  him  to  relinquish  his  infi- 
delity. When  pressed  very  close,  his  usual  reply  was,  that  Mr.  N . was  the  first 
person  who  had  given  him  an  idea  of  his  liberty,  which  naturally  occasioned 
many  mournful  reflections  in  the  mind  of  his  present  instructor.  This  person 
was  going  master  to  Guinea  himself;  but,  meeting  with  a disappointment,  Mr. 
N.  offered  to  take  him  as  a companion,  with  a view  of  assisting  him  in  gaining 
future  employment ; but,  principally,  that  his  arguments,  example,  and  prayers, 
might  be  attended  with  good  effect.  But  his  companion  was  exceedingly  pro- 
fane ; grew  worse  and  worse ; and  presented  a lively,  but  distressing  picture, 
continually  before  Mr.  N.’s  eyes,  of  what  he  himself  had  once  been.  Besides 
this,  the  man  was  not  only  deaf  to  remonstrance  himself,  but  laboured  to  coun- 
teract Mr.  N.’s  influence  upon  others;  his  spirit  and  passions  were  likewise  so 
exceedingly  high,  that  it  required  all  Mr.  N.’s  prudence  and  authority  to  hold 
him  in  any  degree  of  restraint. 

At  length  Mr.  N.  had  an  opportunity  cf  buying  a small  vessel,  which  he  sup- 
plied with  a cargo  from  his  own  ship  : he  gave  his  companion  the  command  of 
it : and  sent  him  away  to  trade  on  the  ship’s  account.  When  they  parted,  Mr. 
N.  repeated  and  enforced  his  best  advice : it  seemed  greatly  to  affect  his  com- 
panion at  the  time  ; but  when  he  found  himself  released  from  the  restraint  of 
his  instructor,  he  gave  a loose  to  every  appetite ; and  his  violent  irregularities, 
joined  to  the  heat  of  the  climate,  soon  threw  him  into  a malignant  fever,  which 
carried  him  off  in  a few  days.  He  seems  to  have  died  convinced,  but  not 
changed  : his  rage  and  despair  struck  those  who  were  about  him  with  horror  • 
and  he  pronounced  his  own  fatal  doom  befbre  he  expired,  without  any  sign  that 
he  either  hoped  or  asked  for  mercy. — I trust  the  reader  will  deem  the  features 
of  this  awful  case  (though  a digression  from  the  principal  subject)  too  instructive 
to  be  omitted. 

Mr.  N.  left  the  coast  in  about  four  months,  and  sailed  for  St.  Christopher’s. 
Hitherto,  he  had  enjoyed  a perfect  and  equal  state  of  health  in  different  climates 
for  several  years.  But  in  this  passage  he  was  visited  with  a fever,  which  gave 
him  a very  near  prospect  of  eternity : he  was,  however,  supported  in  a silent 
composure  of  spirit  by  the  faith  of  Jesus,  and  found  great  relief  from  those  words, 
“ He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost.”  He  was  for  a while  troubled,  whether 
by  a temptation,  or  by  the  fever  disordering  his  faculties,  that  he  should  be  lost 
or  overlooked  amidst  the  myriads  that  are  continually  entering  the  unseen  world  ; 
but  the  recollection  of  that  Scripture,  “the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his,” 
put  an  end  to  his  doubts.  After  a few  days,  however,  he  began  to  amend,  and 
by  the  time  they  arrived  in  the  West  Indies,  he  was  perfectly  recovered. 

In  this  way  he  was  led  for  about  the  space  of  six  years:  he  had  learnt  some- 
thing of  the  evil  of  his  heart — had  read  the  Bible  over  and  over — had  perused 
several  religious  books — and  had  a general  view  of  Gospel  truth  : but  his  con- 
ceptions still  remained  confused  in  many  respects,  not  having,  in  all  this  time 
met  with  one  acquaintance  qualified  to  assist  his  inquiries. 

On  his  arrival  at  St.  Christopher’s,  he  found  a captain  of  a ship  from  London 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


31 


a man  of  experience  in  the  things  of  God.  For  near  a month,  they  spent  every 
evening  together  on  board  each  other’s  ship  alternately  : prolonging  their  visits 
till  near  day-break.  While  Mr.  N.  was  an  eager  recipient,  his  companion’s  dis- 
course not  only  informed  his  understanding,  but  inflamed  his  heart — encouraged 
him  in  attempting  social  prayer — taught  him  the  advantage  of  Christian  converse 
— put  him  upon  an  attempt  to  make  his  profession  more  public,  and  to  venture 
to  speak  for  God.  His  conceptions  now  became  more  clear  and  evangelical ; he 
was  delivered  from  a fear  which  had  long  troubled  him,  of  relapsing  into  his  for- 
mer apostacy  ; and  taught  to  expect  preservation,  not  from  his  own  power  and 
holiness,  but  from  the  power  and  promise  of  God.  From  this  friend  he  likewise 
received  a general  view  of  the  present  state  of  religion,  and  of  the  prevailing 
errors  and  controversies  of  the  times,  and  a direction  where  to  inquire  in  Lon- 
don for  further  instruction.  Mr.  N.’s  passage  homewards  gave  him  leisure 
to  digest  what  he  had  received : and  he  arrived  safely  at  Liverpool,  August 
1754.* 

His  stay  at  home,  however,  was  intended  to  be  but  short ; and  by  the  begin- 
ning of  November  he  was  ready  again  for  the  sea.  But  the  Lord  saw  fit  to  over- 
rule his  design.  It  seems,  from  the  account  he  gives,  that  he  had  not  the  least 
scruple  as  to  the  lawfulness  of  the  slave-trade  : he  regarded  it  as  the  appointment 
of  Providence  : he  considered  this  employment  as  respectable  and  profitable  ; yet 
he  could  not  help  thinking  himself  a sort  of  gaoler,  and  was  sometimes  shocked 
with  an  employment  so  conversant  with  chains,  bolts,  and  shackles.  On  this 
account  he  had  often  prayed  that  he  might  be  fixed  in  a more  humane  profes- 
sion, where  he  might  enjoy  more  frequent  communion  with  the  people  and  ordi- 
nances of  God ; and  be  freed  from  those  long  domestic  separations,  which  he 
found  so  hard  to  bear.  His  prayers  were  now  answered,  though  in  an  unex- 
pected way. 

Mr.  N.  was  within  two  days  of  sailing,  and  in  apparent  good  health ; but  as 
he  was  one  afternoon  drinking  tea  with  Mrs.  N.  he  was  seized  with  a fit,  which 
deprived  him  of  sense  and  motion.  When  he  had  recovered  from  this  fit,  which 
lasted  about  an  hour,  it  left  a pain  and  dizziness  in  his  head,  which  continued, 
with  such  symptoms,  as  induced  the  physicians  to  judge  it  would  not  be  safe  for 
him  to  proceed  on  the  voyage.  By  the  advice  of  a friend,  therefore,  to  whom 
the  ship  belonged,  he  resigned  the  command  on  the  day  before  she  sailed  ; and 
thus  he  was  not  only  freed  from  that  service,  but  from  the  future  consequences 
of  a voyage  which  proved  extremely  calamitous.  The  person  who  went  in  his 
room,  died ; as  did  most  of  the  officers,  and  many  of  the  crew. 

As  Mr.  N.  was  now  disengaged  from  business,  he  left  Liverpool,  and  spent 
most  of  the  following  year  in  London,  or  in  Kent-  Here  he  entered  upon  a new 
trial,  in  a disorder  that  was  brought  upon  Mrs.  N.  from  the  shock  she  received 
in  his  late  illness ; as  he  grew  better,  she  became  worse  with  a disorder  which 
the  physicians  could  not  define,  nor  medicines  remove.  Mr.  N.  was  therefore 
placed  for  about  eleven  months  in  what  Dr.  Young  calls  the 

Dreadful  post  of  observation, 

Darker  every  hour. 

* In  a MS.  note  on  a letter  from  sea,  Mr.  Newton  remarks: — “I  now  enter  my  70th  year. 
Still  thou  art  singularly  bountiful  to  me  : still  I have  reason  to  think  myself  favoured,  as  to  externals, 
beyond  the  common  lot  of  mortals.  Thou  didst  bear  me  above  the  removal  of  her  I most  valued,  io 
the  admiration  of  all  who  knew  me.  The  best  part  of  my  childhood  and  youth  was  vanity  and  folly  ; 
but,  before  I attained  the  age  of  man,  I became  exceedingly  vile  indeed ; and  was  seated  in  the  chair 
of  the  scorncr  in  early  life.  The  troubles  and  miseries  I for  a lime  endured  were  my  own.  I brought 
them  upon  myself,  by  forsaking  thy  good  and  pleasant  paths ; and  choosing  the  way  of  transgressors, 
which  1 found  very  hard;  they  led  to  slavery,  contempt,  famine,  and  despair. 

“ But  my  recovery  from  that  dreadful  state  was  wholly  of  thee.  Thou  didst  prepare  the  means,  un- 
thought of  and  undcsired  by  me.  How  nice  were  the  turns  upon  which  my  delivery  from  Africa  depend- 
ed ! Had  the  ship  passed  one  quarter  of  an  hour  sooner,  I hid  died  there  a wretch,  as  I had  lived.  But 
thou  didst  pity,  and  hear  my  first  lispings  in  prayer,  at  the  time  the  storm  fell  upon  me.  Thou  didst 
preserve  me  from  sinking  and  starving.  Thus  I returned  home,  and  thou  didst  provide  me  friends, 
when  I was  destitute  and  a stranger.” 


32 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


The  reader  will  recollect,  that  Mr.  N.’s  friend  at  St.  Christopher’s  had  givetk 
him  information  for  forming  a religious  acquaintance  in  London ; in  consequence 
of  which,  he  became  intimate  with  several  persons  eminent  for  that  character, 
and  profited  by  the  spiritual  advantages  which  a great  city  affords  with  respect 
to  means.  When  he  was  in  Kent,  his  advantages  were  of  a different  kind  ; most 
of  his  time  he  passed  in  the  fields  and  woods.  “ It  has  been  my  custom,”  says  he, 
“ for  many  years,  to  perform  my  devotional  exercises  sub  dio  when  I have  op- 
portunity, and  I always  find  these  scenes  have  some  tendency  both  to  refresh  and 
compose  my  spirits.  A beautiful,  diversified  prospect  gladdens  my  heart.  When 
I am  withdrawn  from  the  noise  and  petty  works  of  men,  I consider  myself  as  in 
the  great  temple,  which  the  Lord  has  built  for  his  own  honour.” 

During  this  time  he  had  to  weather  two  trials,  the  principal  of  which  was 
Mrs.  N.’s  illness.  She  still  grew  worse,  and  he  had  daily  more  reason  to  fear 
that  hour  of  separation,  which  appeared  to  be  at  hand.  He  had  likewise  to  pro- 
vide some  future  settlement ; the  African  trade  was  overdone  that  year,  and  his 
friends  did  not  care  to  fit  out  another  ship  till  that  which  had  been  his  returned. 
Though  a provision  of  food  and  raiment  had  seldom  been  with  him  a cause  of 
great  solicitude,  yet  he  was  some  time  in  suspense  on  this  account ; but,  in  Au- 
gust following,  he  received  a letter,  that  he  was  nominated  to  a post,  which 
afforded  him  a competency,  both  unsought  and  unexpected. 

When  he  had  gained  this  point,  his  distress  respecting  Mrs.  N.  was  doubled ; 
he  was  obliged  to  leave  her  in  the  greatest  extremity  of  pain  and  illness ; and 
when  he  had  no  hope  that  he  should  see  her  again  alive.  He  was,  however, 
enabled  to  resign  her  and  himself  to  the  divine  disposal ; and,  soon  after  he  was 
gone,  she  began  to  amend,  and  recovered  so  fast,  that  in  about  two  months  he 
had  the  pleasure  to  meet  her  at  Stone,  on  her  journey  to  Liverpool. 

From  October  1755,  he  appears  to  have  been  comfortably  settled  at  Liverpool, 
and  mentions  his  having  received,  since  the  year  1757,  much  profit  from  his  ac- 
quaintance in  the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire.  “I  have  conversed,”  says  he, 
“ at  large,  among  all  parties,  without  joining  any  ; and  in  my  attempts  to  hit  the 
golden  mean,  I have  been  sometimes  drawn  too  near  the  different  extremes ; yet 
the  Lord  has  enabled  me  to  profit  by  my  mistakes.”  Being  at  length  placed  in 
a settled  habitation,  and  finding  his  business  would  afford  him  much  leisure,  he 
considered  in  what  manner  he  could  improve  it.  Having  determined,  with  the 
apostle,  “ to  know  nothing  but  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified,”  he  devoted  his 
life  to  the  prosecution  of  spiritual  knowledge,  and  resolved  to  pursue  nothing  but 
in  subservience  to  this  design.  But  as  what  follows  will  appear  most  natural, 
and  must  be  better  expressed  in  his  own  words,  I shall  transcribe  them  from  the 
conclusion  of  his  narrative. 

“ This  resolution,”  says  Mr.  N.,  “ divorced  me  (as  I have  already  hinted)  from 
the  classics  and  mathematics.  My  first  attempt  was  to  learn  so  rr*!ch  Greek  as 
would  enable  me  to  understand  the  New  Testament  and  Septuagint;  and  when 
I had  made  some  progress  this  way,  I entered  upon  the  Hebrew"  the  following 
year ; and  two  years  afterwards,  having  surmised  some  advantages  from  the  Syriac 
version,  I began  with  that  language.  You  must  not  think  that  I have  attained, 
or  even  aimed  at  a critical  skill  in  any  of  these  ; I had  no  business  with  them, 
but  as  in  reference  to  something  else.  I never  read  one  classic  author  in  the 
Greek  ; I thought  it  too  late  in  life  to  take  such  a round  in  this  language  as  I 
had  done  in  the  Latin.  I only  wanted  the  signification  of  scriptural  words  and 
phrases,  and  for  this  I thought  I might  avail  myself  of  Scapula,  the  Synopsis, 
and  others,  who  had  sustained  the  drudgery  before  me.  In  the  Hebrew",  I can 
read  the  historical  books  and  Psalms  with  tolerable  ease  ; but  in  the  prophetical 
and  difficult  parts,  I am  frequently  obliged  to  have  recourse  to  Lexicons,  &c. 
However,  I know  so  much  as  to  be  able,  w ith  such  helps  as  are  at  hand,  to  judge 
for  myself  the  meaning  of  any  passage  I have  occasion  to  consult. 

“ Together  with  these  studies,  I have  kept  up  a course  of  reading  the  best 
writers  in  Divinity,  that  have  come  to  my  hand,  in  the  Latin  and  English  tongues, 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


33 


and  some  French,  for  I picked  up  the  French  at  times  while  I used  the  sea.  But 
within  these  two  or  three  years,  I have  accustomed  myself  chiefly  to  writing,  and 
have  not  found  time  to  read  many  books  besides  the  Scriptures. 

“ I am  the  more  particular  in  this  account,  as  my  case  has  been  something  sin 
gular ; for  in  all  my  literary  attempts  I have  been  obliged  to  strike  out  my  own 
path  by  the  light  I could  acquire  from  books,  as  I have  not  had  a teacher  or  assist- 
ant since  I was  ten  years  of  age. 

One  word  concerning  my  views  to  the  ministry,  and  I have  done.  I have 
told  you,  that  this  was  my  dear  mother’s  hope  concerning  me  ; but  her  death,  and 
the  scenes  of  life  in  which  I afterwards  engaged,  seemedl^ciff  off  theT probability. 
The  first  desires  of  this  sort  in  my  own  mind,  arose  many  years  ago,  from  re- 
-flection  on  Gal,  j.  2-3,  2L  I couTdbuFvvisli  for  such  a public  opportunity  to  tes- 
tifythe  riches  oFDivine  grace.  I thought  I was,  above  most  living,  a fit  person 
to  proclaim  that  faithful  saying,  ‘ that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save 
\ the  chief  of  sinners;’  and  as  my  life  had  been  full  of  remarkable  turns,  and  I 
' seemed  selected  to  show  what  the  Lord  could  do,  I was  in  some  hopes,  that  per- 
haps, sooner  or  later,  he  might  call  me  into  his  service. 

“ I believe  it  was  a distant  hope  of  this  that  determined  me  to  study  the  ori- 
ginal Scriptures  ; but  it  remained  an  imperfect  desire  in  my  own  breast,  till  it  was 
recommended  to  me  by  some  Christian  friends.  I started  at  the  thought  when 
first  seriously  proposed  to  me ; but,  afterwards,  set  apart  some  weeks  to  consider 
the  case,  to  consult  my  friends,  and  to  entreat  the  Lord’s  direction.  The  judgment 
of  mv  friends,  and  many  things  that  occurred,  tended  to  engage  me.  My  first 
thought  was  to  join  the  Dissenters,  from  a presumption  that  I could  not  honestly 

make  the  required  subscriptions  ; but  Mr.  C , in  a conversation  upon  these 

points,  moderated  my  scruples  ; and,  preferring  the  Established  Church  in  some 
respects,  I accepted  a title  from  him  some  months  afterwards,  and  solicited  ordi 
nation  from  the  late  Archbishop  of  York.  I need  not  tell  you  I met  a refusal, 
nor  what  steps  I took  afterwards  to  succeed  elsewhere.  At  present  I desist  from 
any  applications.  My  desire  to  serve  the  Lord  is  not  weakened  ; but  I am  not 
so  hasty  to  push  myself  forward  as  I was  formerly.  It  is  sufficient  that  he  knows 
how  to  dispose  of  me,  and  that  he  both  can  and  will  do  what  is  best.  To  him 
I commend  myself : I trust  that  his  will  and  my  true  interest  are  inseparable. 
To  his  name  be  glory  for  ever;  and  with  this  I conclude  my  story.” 

A variety  of  remarks  occurred  to  me  while  abridging  the  narrative,  but  I re- 
frained from  putting  them  down,  lest,  by  interrupting  its  course,  and  breaking 
the  thread  of  history,  I should  rather  disgust  than  profit  the  reader.  I have  heard 
Mr.  N.  relate  a few  additional  particulars,  but  they  were  of  too  little  interest  to 
be  inserted  here ; they  went,  however,  like  natural  incidents,  to  a farther  authen- 
tication of  the  above  account,  had  it  needed  any  other  confirmation  than  the 
solemn  declaration  of  the  pious  relator.  Romantic  relations,  indeed,  of  unprinci- 
pled travellers,  which  appear  to  have  no  better  basis  than  a disposition  to  amuse 
credulity,  to  exhibit  vanity,  or  to  acquire  gain,  may  naturally  raise  suspicion  and 
produce  but  a momentary  effect  at  most  on  the  mind  of  the  reader ; but  facts,,  like 
the  present,  manifest  such  a display  of  the  power,  providence,  and  grace  of  God ; 
and  at  the  same  time  such  a deep  and  humbling  view  of  human  depravity, 
when  moved  and  brought  forth  by  circumstances,  as  inexperience  can  scarcely 
credit,  but  which  must  interest  the  eye  of  pious  contemplation,  and  open  a new 
world  of  wonders. 

I must  now  attempt  to  conduct  the  reader  without  the  he  p of  Mr.  N.’s  IS  ax 
rative,  finished  Feb.  2,  1763  ; to  which,  as  I have  already  observed,  he  referred 
me  for  the  former  and  most  singular  part  of  his  life.  When  I left  the  above  ac- 
count with  him  for  revision,  he  expressed  full  satisfaction  as  to  all  the  facts  re- 
lated ; but  said,  he  thought  I had  been  too  minute  even  in  the  abridgment,  since  the 
Narrative  itself  had  been  long  before  the  public.  I remarked,  in  reply,  that  the 
Narrative  contained  a great  variety  of  facts — that  these  Memoirs  might  fall  into 
the  hands  of  persons  who  had  not  seen  the  Narrative — but  that  without  some 


34 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


abridgment  of  it,  no  clear  view  could  be  formed  of  the  peculiarity  of  his  whole 
dispensation  and  character — and,  therefore,  that  such  an  abridgment  appeared  to 
be  absolutely  necessary,  and  that  he  had  recommended  it  at  my  first  undertaking 
the  work.  With  these  reasons  he  was  well  satisfied.  I now  proceed  to  the  re- 
maining, though  less  remarkable  part  of  his  life. 

Mr.  Manesty,  who  had  long  been  a faithful  and  generous  friend  of  Mr.  N. 
having  procured  him  the  place  of  tide-surveyor  in  the  port  of  Liverpool,  Mr.  N. 
gives  the  following  account  of  it ; — “ I entered  upon  business  yesterday.  I find 
my  duty  is  to  attend  the  tides  one  week,  and  visit  the  ships  that  arrive,  and  such 
as  are  in  the  river ; and  the  other  week  to  inspect  the  vessels  that  are  in  the  docks  ; 
and  thus  alternately  the  year  round.  The  latter  is  little  more  than  a sinecure, 
but  the  former  requires  pretty  constant  attendance,  both  by  day  and  night.  I have 
a good  office, with  fire  and  candle,  and  fifty  or  sixty  people  under  my  direction: 
with  a handsome  six-oared  boat  and  a coxswain  to  row  me  about  in  form.”* 

We  cannot  wonder  that  Mr.  N.  latterly  retained  a strong  impression  of  a par- 
ticular providence,  superintending  and  conducting  the  steps  of  man  ; since  he 
was  so  often  reminded  of  it  in  his  own  history.  The  following  occurrence  is 
one  of  many  instances.  Mr.  N.  after  his  reformation,  was  remarkable  for  his 
punctuality : I remember  his  often  sitting  with  his  watch  in  his  hand  lest  he 
should  fail  in  keeping  his  next  engagement.  This  exactness  with  respect  to 
time,  it  seems,  was  his  habit  while  occupying  his  post  at  Liverpool.  One  day, 
however,  some  business  had  so  detained  him,  that  he  came  to  his  boat  much 
later  than  usual,  to  the  surprise  of  those  who  had  observed  his  former  punctuality. 
He  went  out  in  the  boat  as  heretofore,  to  inspect  a ship,  but  the  ship  blew  up 
just  before  he  reached  her  : it  appears,  that  if  he  had  left  the  shore  a few 
minutes  sooner,  he  must  have  perished  with  the  rest  on  board. 

This  anecdote  I had  from  a clergyman,  upon  whose  word  I can  depend,  who 
had  been  long  in  intimate  habits  with  Mr.  N.,  and  who  had  it  from  Mr.  N. 
himself : the  reason  of  its  not  appearing  in  his  letters  from  Liverpool  to  Mrs.  N. 
I can  only  suppose  to  be,  his  fearing  to  alarm  her  with  respect  to  the  dangers  of 
his  station.  But  another  providential  occurrence,  which  he  mentions  in  those 
letters,  I shall  transcribe. 

“ When  I think  of  my  settlement  here,  and  the  manner  of  it,  I see  the  ap- 
pointment of  Providence  so  good  and  gracious,  and  such  a plain  answer  to  my 
poor  prayers,  that  I cannot  but  wonder  and  adore.  I think  I have  not  yet  told 
you,  that  my  immediate  predecessor  in  office,  Mr.  C — , had  not  the  least  inten- 
tion of  resigning  his  place  on  the  occasion  of  his  father’s  death  ; though  such  a 
report  was  spread  about  the  town  without  his  knowledge,  or  rather  in  defiance 
of  all  he  could  say  to  contradict  it.  Yet  to  this  false  report  I owe  my  situation. 
For  it  put  Mr.  M — upon  an  application  to  Mr.  S — , the  member  for  the  town  ; 
and,  the  very  day  he  received  the  promise  in  my  favour,  Mr.  C — was  found 
dead  in  his  bed,  though  he  had  been  in  company,  and  in  perfect  health,  the 
night  before.  If  I mistake  not,  the  same  messenger  who  brought  the  promise, 
carried  back  the  news  of  the  vacancy  to  Mr.  S — , at  Chester.  About  an  hour 
after,  the  mayor  applied  for  a nephew  of  his ; but,  though  it  was  only  an  hour 
or  two,  he  was  too  late.  Mr.  S — had  already  written,  and  sent  off  the' letter  ; 
and  I was  appointed  accordingly.  These  circumstances  appear  to  me  extraordi- 
nary, though  of  a piece  with  many  other  parts  of  my  singular  history.  And  the 
more  so,  as  by  another  mistake  I missed  the  land  waiter’s  place,  which  was  my 
first  object,  and  which  I now  see  would  not  have  suited  us  nearly  so  well.  1 
thank  God  I can  now  look  through  instruments,  and  second  causes,  and  see  his 
wisdom  and  goodness  immediately  concerned  in  fixing  my  lot.” 

Mr.  N.  having  expressed,  near  the  end  of  his  Narrative,  the  motives  which 
induced  him  to  aim  at  a regular  appointment  to  the  ministry  in  the  church  of 
England,  and  of  the  refusal  he  met  with  in  his  first  making  the  attempt,  the 


* Letters  to  a Wife,  vol.  ii.  p.  7. 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


35 


reader  is  farther  informed,  that,  on  Dec.  16,  1758,  Mr.  N.  received  a title  to  a 
curacy  from  the  Rev.  Mr.  C — , and  applied  to  the  archbishop  of  York,  Dr.  Gil- 
bert, for  ordination.  The  bishop  of  Chester  having  countersigned  his  testimo- 
nials, directed  him  to  Dr.  Newton,  the  archbishop’s  chaplain.  He  was  referred 
to  the  secretary,  and  received  the  softest  refusal  imaginable.  The  secretary  in- 
formed him,  that  he  had  “represented  the  matter  to  the  archbishop;  but  his 
Grace  was  inflexible  in  supporting  the  rules  and  canons  of  the  church,”  &c. 

Travelling  to  Loughborough,  Mr.  N.  stopped  at  W elwyn,  and  sending  a note 
to  the  celebrated  Dr.  Young,  he  received  for  answer,  that  the  doctor  would  be 
glad  to  see  him.  He  found  the  doctor’s  conversation  agreeable,  and  to  answer 
his  expectation  respecting  the  author  of  the  Night  Thoughts.  The  doctor  like- 
wise seemed  pleased  with  Mr.  N.  He  approved  Mr.  N.’s  design  of  entering 
the  ministry,  and  said  many  encouraging  things  upon  the  subject : and  when  he 
dismissed  Mr.  N.  desired  him  never  to  pass  near  Welwyn  without  calling  upon 
him. 

Mr.  N.  it  seems,  had  made  some  small  attempts  at  Liverpool,  in  a way  of 
preaching  or  expounding.  Many  wished  him  to  engage  more  at  large  in  those 
ministerial  employments,  to  which  his  own  mind  was  inclined  : and  he  thus  ex- 
presses his  motives  in  a letter  to  Mrs.  N.  in  answer  to  the  objections  she  had 
formed.  “ The  late  death  of  Mr.  Jones,  of  St.  Saviour’s,  has  pressed  this  con- 
cern more  closely  upon  my  mind.  I fear  it  must  be  wrong,  after  having  so 
solemnly  devoted  myself  to  the  Lord  for  his  service,  to  wear  away  my  time,  and 
bury  my  talents  in  silence,  (because  I have  been  refused  orders  in  the  church,) 
after  all  the  great  things  he  has  done  for  me.”* 

In  a note  annexed,  he  observes,  that  “the  influence  of  his  judicious  and  affec- 
tionate counsellor  moderated  the  zeal  which  dictated  this  letter,  written  in  the 
year  1762 ; that  had  it  not  been  for  her,  he  should  probably  have  been  precluded 
from  those  important  scenes  of  service,  to  which  he  was  afterwards  appointed 
but  he  adds,  “ The  exercises  of  my  mind  upon  this  point,  I believe,  have  not 
been  peculiar  to  myself.  I have  known  several  persons,  sensible,  pious,  of  com- 
petent abilities,  and  cordially  attached  to  the  established  church,  who,  being 
wearied  out  with  repeated  refusals  of  ordination,  and,  perhaps,  not  having  the 
advantage  of  such  an  adviser  as  I had,  have  at  length  struck  into  the  itinerant 
path,  or  settled  among  the  Dissenters.  Some  of  these,  yet  living,  are  men  of 
respectable  characters,  and  useful  in  their  ministry ; but  their  influence,  which 
would  once  have  been  serviceable  to  the  true  interests  of  the  Church  of  England  , 
now  rather  operates  against  it.” 

In  the  year  1764,  Mr.  N.  had  the  curacy  of  Olney  proposed  to  him,  and  was 
recommended  by  Lord  D — to  Dr.  Green,  bishop  of  Lincoln  ; of  whose  candoui 
and  tenderness  he  speaks  with  much  respect.  The  bishop  had  admitted  him  as 
a candidate  for  orders.  “ The  examination,”  says  he,  “ lasted  about  an  hour, 
chiefly  upon  the  principal  heads  of  Divinity.  As  I resolved  not  to  be  charged 
hereafter  with  dissimulation,  I was  constrained  to  differ  from  his  lordship  in  some 
points  : but  he  was  not  offended  ; he  declared  himself  satisfied,  and  has  promised 
to  ordain  me,  either  next  Sunday,  in  town,  or  the  Sunday  following,  at  Buck- 
den.  Let  us  praise  the  Lord!”! 

Mr.  N.  was  ordained  deacon  at  Buckden,  April  29,  1764,  and  priest  in  June 
the  following  year.  In  the  parish  of  Olney,  he  found  many,  who  not  only  had 
evangelical  views  of  the  truth,  but  had  also  long  walked  in  the  light  and  experi- 
ence of  it.  The  vicarage  was  in  the  gift  of  the  Earl  of  D — , the  nobleman  to 
whom  Mr.  N.  addressed  the  first  twenty-six  letters  in  his  Cardiphonia.  The 
earl  was  a man  of  real  piety,  and  most  amiable  disposition  ; he  had  formerly  ap- 
pointed the  Rev.  Moses  Brown  vicar.  Mr.  Brown  was  an  evangelical  minister 
and  a good  man  ; of  course  he  had  afforded  wholesome  instruction  to  the  parish- 
ioners of  Olney,  and  had  been  the  instrument  of  a sound  conversion  in  many  of 


Letters  to  a Wife,  vol.  ii.  p,  7C. 


t Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  8? 


36 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


hem.  He  was  the  author  of  a poetical  piece  entitled  Sunday  Thoughts,  a 
translation  of  Professor  Zimmerman’s  Excellency  of  the  Knowledge  of  Jesus 
Christ,  &c. 

But  Mr.  Brown  had  a numerous  family,  and  met  with  considerable  trials  in  it; 
he  too  much  resembled  Eli  in  his  indulgence  of  his  children.  He  was  also  under 
the  pressure  of  pecuniary  difficulties,  and  had  therefore  accepted  the  chaplaincy 
of  Morden  College,  Blackheath,  while  vicar  of  Olney.  Mr.  N.  in  these  circum- 
stances, undertook  the  curacy  of  Olney,  in  which  he  continued  near  sixteen 
years,  previous  to  his  removal  to  St.  Mary  Woolnoth,  to  which  he  was  after- 
wards presented,  bv  the  late  John  Thornton,  Esq. 

As  Mr.  N.  was  under  the  greatest  obligations  to  Mr.  Thornton’s  friendship 
while  at  Olney,  and  had  been  enabled  to  extend  his  own  usefulness  by  the  bounty 
of  that  extraordinary  man,  it  may  not  be  foreign  to  our  subject  to  give  some  ge- 
neral outline  of  Mr.  Thornton’s  character  in  this  place. 

It  is  said  of  Solomon,  that  “ the  Lord  gave  him  largeness  of  heart,  even  as  the 
sand  on  the  sea-shore  such  a peculiar  disposition  for  whatever  was  good  or 
benevolent  was  also  bestowed  on  Mr.  Thornton.  He  differed  as  much  from  rich 
men  of  ordinary  bounty,  as  they  do  from  others  that  are  parsimonious.  Nor 
was  this  bounty  the  result  of  occasional  impulse,  like  a summer  shower,  violent 
and  short;  on  the  contrary,  it  proceeded  like  a river  pouring  its  waters  through 
various  countries,  copious  and  inexhaustible.  Nor  could  those  obstructions  of 
imposture  and  ingratitude,  which  have  often  been  advanced  as  the  cause  of 
damming  up  other  streams,  prevent  or  retard  the  course  of  this.  The  generosity 
of  Mr.  Thornton,  indeed,  frequently  met  with  such  hindrances,  and  led  him  to 
increasing  discrimination;  but  the  stream  of  his  bounty  never  ceased  to  hold  its 
course.  Deep,  silent,  and  overwhelming,  it  still  rolled  on,  nor  ended  even  with 
his  life. 

But  the  fountain  from  whence  this  beneficence  flowed,  and  by  which  its  per- 
manency and  direction  were  maintained,  must  not  be  concealed.  Mr.  Thornton 
was  a Christian.  Let  no  one,  however,  so  mistake  me  here,  as  to  suppose,  that 
I mean  nothing  more  by  the  term  Christian,  than  the  state  of  one,  who,  con- 
vinced of  the  truth  of  revelation,  gives  assent  to  its  doctrines — regularly  attends 
its  ordinances — and  maintains  an  external  moral  and  religious  deportment.  Such 
a one  may  have  a name  to  live  while  he  is  dead  ; he  may  have  a form  of  godli- 
ness without  the  power  of  it ; he  may  even  be  found  denying  and  ridiculing  that 
power — till  at  length  he  can  only  be  convinced  of  his  error  at  an  infallible  tribu- 
nal ; where  a widow,  that  gives  but  a mite,  or  a publican,  that  smites  on  his 
breast,  shall  be  preferred  before  him. 

Mr.  Thornton  was  a Christian  indeed ; that  is,  he  was  alive  to  God  by  a spi- 
ritual regeneration.  VVith  this  God  he  was  daily  and  earnestly  transacting  that 
infinitely  momentous  affair — the  salvation  of  his  own  soul ; and,  next  to  that,  the 
salvation  of  the  souls  of  others.  Temperate  in  all  things,  though  mean  in  nothing, 
he  made  provision  for  doing  good  with  his  opulence,  and  seemed  to  be  most  in 
his  element  when  appropriating  a considerable  part  of  his  large  income  to  the 
necessities  of  others. 

But  Mr.  Thornton  possessed  that  discrimination  in  his  attempts  to  serve  his 
fellow-creatures,  which  distinguishes  an  enlightened  mind  ; he  habitually  con- 
templated man,  as  one,  wrho  has  not  only  a body,  subject  to  want,  affliction,  and 
death,  but  also  a spirit,  which  is  immortal,  and  must  be  happy  or  miserable  for 
^ver.  He  therefore  felt,  that  the  noblest  exertions  of  charity  are  those  which 
are  directed  to  the  relief  of  the  noblest  part  of  our  species.  Accordingly,  he  left 
no  mode  of  exertion  untried  to  relieve  man  under  his  natural  ignorance  and  de- 
pravity. To  this  end,  he  purchased  advowsons  and  presentations,  with  a view 
to  place  in  parishes  the  most  enlightened,  active  and  useful  ministers.  He  em- 
ployed the  extensive  commerce  in  which  he  was  engaged,  as  a powerful  instru- 
ment for  conveying  immense  quantities  of  Bibles,  prayer-books,  and  the  most 
useful  publications,  to  every  place  visited  by  our  trade.  He  printed,  at  his  own 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


37 


sole  expense,  large  editions  of  the  latter  for  that  purpose  ; and  it  may  safely  be 
affirmed,  that  there  is  scarcely  a part  of  the  known  world,  where  such  books 
could  be  introduced,  which  did  not  feel  the  salutary  influence  of  this  single  in- 
dividual. 

Nor  was  Mr.  Thornton  limited  in  his  views  of  promoting  the  interests  of  real 
religion,  with  what  sect  soever  it  was  connected.  He  stood  ready  to  assist  a be- 
neficial design  in  every  party,  but  would  be  the  creature  of  none.  General  good 
was  his  object,  and  wherever  or  however  it  made  its  way,  his  maxim  seemed 
constantly  to  be,  “ valeat  quantum , valere  potest.” 

But  the  nature  and  extent  of  his  liberality  will  be  greatly  misconceived,  if  any 
one  should  suppose  it  confined  to  moral  and  religious  objects,  though  the  grand- 
est and  most  comprehensive  exertions  of  it.  Mr.  Thornton  was  a philanthro- 
pist on  the  largest  scale — the  friend  of  man  under  all  his  wants.  His  manner 
of  relieving  his  fellow-men  was  princely  ; instances  might  be  mentioned  of  it, 
were  it  proper  to  particularize,  w hich  would  surprise  those  who  did  not  know 
Mr.  Thornton.  They  were  so  much  out  of  ordinary  course  and  expectation,  that 
I know  some  who  felt  it  their  duty  to  inquire  of  him,  whether  the  sum  they  had 
received  was  sent  by  his  intention,  or  by  mistake?  To  this  may  be  added, 
that  the  manner  of  presenting  his  gifts  was  as  delicate  and  concealed,  as  the  mea- 
sure was  large. 

Besides  this  constant  course  of  private  donations,  there  was  scarcely  a public 
charity,  or  occasion  of  relief  to  the  ignorant  or  necessitous,  which  did  not  meet 
with  his  distinguished  support.  His  only  question  was,  “May  the  miseries  of 
man,  in  any  measure,  be  removed  or  alleviated?”  Nor  was  he  merely  distin- 
guished by  stretching  out  a liberal  hand  : his  benevolent  heart  was  so  intent  on 
doing  good,  that  he  was  ever  inventing  and  promoting  plans  for  its  diffusion  at 
home  or  abroad. 

He  that  wisely  desires  any  end,  will  as  wisely  regard  the  means ; in  this  Mr. 
Thornton  was  perfectly  consistent.  In  order  to  execute  his  beneficent  designs, 
he  observed  frugality  and  exactness  in  his  personal  expenses.  By  such  pros- 
pective methods,  he  was  able  to  extend  the  influence  of  his  fortune  far  beyond 
those  who,  in  still  more  elevated  stations,  are  slaves  to  expensive  habits.  Such 
men  meanly  pace  in  trammels  of  the  tyrant  custom,  till  it  leaves  them  scarcely 
enough  to  preserve  their  conscience,  or  even  their  credit,  much  less  to  employ 
their  talents  in  Mr.  Thornton’s  nobler  pursuits.  He,  however,  could  afford  to 
be  generous;  and,  while  he  was  generous,  did  not  forget  his  duty  in  being  just- 
He  made  ample  provision  for  his  children  ; and  though,  while  they  are  living 
it  would  be  indelicate  to  say  more,  I am  sure  of  speaking  truth  when  I say,  they 
are  so  far  from  thinking  themselves  impoverished  by  the  bounty  of  their  father, 
that  they  contemplate  with  the  highest  satisfaction  the  fruit  of  those  benefits  to 
society  which  he  planted,  which  it  may  be  trusted  will  extend  with  time  itself, 
and  which,  after  his  example,  they  still  labour  to  extend. 

But,  with  all  the  piety  and  liberality  of  his  honoured  character,  no  man  had 
deeper  views  of  his  own  unworthiness  before  his  God.  To  the  Redeemer’s  work 
alone  he  looked  for  acceptance  of  his  person  and  services : he  felt,  that  all  he  did 
or  could  do,  was  infinitely  short  of  that  which  had  been  done  for  him,  and  of  the 
obligations  that  were  thereby  laid  upon  him.  It  was  this  abasedness  of  heart  to 
wards  God,  combined  with  the  most  singular  largeness  of  heart  toward  his  fellow 
creatures,  which  distinguished  John  Thornton  among  men. 

To  this  common  patron  of  every  useful  and  pious  endeavour,  Mr.  N.  sent  the 
Narrative,  from  which  the  former  part  of  these  Memoirs  is  extracted.  Mr 
Thornton  replied  in  his  usual  manner;  that  is,  by  accompanying  his  letter  with 
a valuable  bank  note  ; and,  some  months  after,  he  paid  Mr.  N.  a visit  at  Olney 
A closer  connexion  being  now  formed  between  friends,  who  employed  their  dis 
tinct  talents  in  promoting  the  same  benevolent  cause,  Mr.  Thornton  left  a sum 
ot  money  with  Mr.  N.  to  be  appropriated  to  the  defraying  his  necessary  expenses 
and  relieving  the  poor.  “Be  hospitable,”  said  Mr.  Thornton,  “and  keep  an 


38 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


open  house  for  such  as  are  worthy  of  an  entertainment : help  the  poor  and  need> 

I will  statedly  allow  you  <£*200  a-year,  and  readily  send  whatever  you  have  oc- 
casion to  draw  for  more.”  Mr.  N.  told  me,  that  he  thought  he  had  received 
of  Mr.  Thornton  upwards  of  £ 3000  in  this  way,  during  the  time  he  resided  at 
Olney. 

The  case  of  most  ministers  is  peculiar  in  this  respect : some  among  them  may 
be  looked  up  to,  on  account  of  their  publicity  and  talents ; they  may  have  made 
great  sacrifices  of  their  personal  interest,  in  order  to  enter  on  their  ministry,  and 
may  be  possessed  of  the  strongest  benevolence  ; but,  from  the  narrowness  of  their 
pecuniary  circumstances,  and  from  the  largeness  of  their  families,  they  often  per- 
ceive, that  an  ordinary  tradesman  in  their  parishes,  can  subscribe  to  a charitable 
or  popular  institution  much  more  liberally  than  themselves.  This  would  have 
been  Mr.  N.’s  case,  but  for  the  above-mentioned  singular  patronage. 

A minister,  however,  should  not  be  so  forgetful  of  his  dispensation,  as  to  repine 
at  his  want  of  power  in  this  respect.  He  might  as  justly  estimate  his  deficiency 
by  the  strength  of  the  lion,  or  the  flight  of  the  eagle.  The  power  communicated 
to  him  is  of  another  kind  ; and  power  of  every  kind  belongs  to  God,  who  gives 
gifts  to  every  man  severally  as  he  will.  The  two  mites  of  the  widow  were  all 
the  power  of  that  kind  which  was  communicated  to  her,  and  her  bestowment  of 
her  two  mites  was  better  accepted  than  the  large  offerings  of  the  rich  man.  The 
powers,  therefore,  of  Mr.  Thornton,  and  of  Mr.  -N.,  though  of  a different  order, 
were  both  consecrated  to  God  ; and  each  might  have  said,  “ Of  tliine  own  have 
we  given  thee.” 

Providence  seems  to  have  appointed  Mr.  N.’s  residence  at  Olney,  among  other 
reasons,  for  the  relief  of  the  depressed  mind  of  the  poet  Cowper;*  There  has 
gone  forth  an  unfounded  report,  that  the  deplorable  melancholy  of  Cowper  was 
in  part,  derived  from  his  residence  and  connexions  in  that  place.  The  fact,  how 
ever,  is  the  reverse  of  this ; and  as  it  may  be  of  importance  to  the  interests  o 
true  religion  to  prevent  such  a misrepresentation  from  taking  root,  I will  presen 
the  real  state  of  the  case,  as  I have  found  it  attested  by  the  most  respectable  liv 
ing  witnesses ; and  more  especially  as  confirmed  by  a MS.,  written  by  the  poet 
himself,  at  the  calmest  period  of  his  life  ; with  the  perusal  of  which  I was  fa- 
voured by  Mr.  N. 

It  most  evidently  appears,  that  symptoms  of  Mr.  Cowper’s  morbid  state  began 
to  discover  themselves  in  his  earliest  youth.  He  seems  to  have  been  at  all  times 
disordered,  in  a greater  or  less  degree.  He  was  sent  to  Westminster  school  at 
the  age  of  nine  years,  and  long  endured  the  tyranny  of  an  elder  bov,  of  which 
he  gives  a shocking  account  in  the  paper  above-mentioned;  and  which  “pro- 
duced,” as  one  of  his  biographers  observes,  who  had  long  intimacy  with  him, 
“ ail  indelible  effect  upon  his  mind  through  life.”  A person  so  naturally  bashful 
and  depressed  as  Cowper,  must  needs  find  the  profession  of  a barrister  a farther 
occasion  of  anxiety : the  post  obtained  for  him  by  his  friends  in  the  House  of  Lords, 
overwhelmed  him  ; and  the  remonstrances  which  those  friends  made  against  his 
relinquishing  so  honourable  and  lucrative  an  appointment,  (but  which  soon  after 
actually  took  place,)  greatly  increased  the  anguish  of  a mind  already  incapacitated 
for  business.  To  all  this  were  added  events,  which  of  themselves  have  been 
found  sufficient  to  overset  the  minds  of  the  strongest ; namely,  the  decease  of  his 
particular  friend  and  intimate,  Sir  William  Russel;  and  his  meeting  with  a dis- 
appointment in  obtaining  a lady  upon  whom  his  affections  were  placed. 

But  the  state  of  a person,  torn  and  depressed,  not  by  his  religious  connexions 
but  by  adverse  circumstances,  and  these  meeting  a naturally  morbid  sensibility 
long  before  he  knew  Olney,  or  had  formed  any  connexion  with  its  inhabitants 
will  best  appear  from  some  verses  which  he  sent  at  this  time  to  one  of  his  femak 
relations,  and  for  the  communication  of  which  we  are  indebted  to  Mr.  Hayley  : — 

“ Doom’d,  as  I am,  in  solitude  to  waste 

The  present  moments,  and  regret  the  past ; 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


39 


.Depriv’d  of  every  joy  I valued  most — 

My  friend  torn  from  me,  and  my  mistress  .ost : 

Call  not  this  gloom  I wear,  this  anxious  mien, 

The  dull  effect  of  humour  or  of  spleen  ; 

Still,  still  I mourn,  with  each  returning  da}', 

Him — snatch’d  by  fate,  in  early  youth,  away  ; 

And  her,  through  tedious  years  of  doubt  and  pain, 

Fix’d  in  her  choice,  and  faithful — but  in  vain. 

See  me,  ere  yet  my  destin’d  course  half  done, 

Cast  forth  a wand’rer  on  a wild  unknown  ! 

See  me.  neglected  on  the  world’s  rude  coast, 

Each  dear  companion  of  my  voyage  lost! 

Nor  ask,  why  clouds  of  sorrow  shade  my  brow, 

And  ready  tears  wait  only  leave  to  flow  : 

Why  all  that  soothes  a heart,  from  anguish  free, 

All  that  delights  the  happy — palls  with  me  ? 

That  any  man,  under  such  pressures,  should  at  first  turn  his  mind  to  those  re- 
sources, which  religion  alone  can  afford,  is  both  natural  and  rational.  But  Mr. 
Ccwper  was  like  a person  looking  from  a high  tower,  who  perceives  only  the 
danger  of  falling,  but  neither  the  security  nor  prospect  it  presents;  and  therefore 
it  is  no  wonder,  with  so  melancholy,  morbid,  and  susceptible  a mind,  that  his 
unhappiness  should  be  increased.  And  yet  this  very  mind  of  Cowper,  when 
put  under  the  care  of  Dr.  Cotton,  of  St.  Alban’s  (a  physician  as  capable  of  ad- 
ministering to  the  spiritual  as  to  the  natural  maladies  of  his  patients,)  received 
the  first  consolation  it  ever  tasted,  and  that  from  evangelical  truths.  It  was 
under  the  care  of  this  physician,  that  Mr.  Cowper  first  obtained  a clear  view  of 
those  sublime  and  animating  truths,  which  so  distinguished  and  exalted  his  future 
strains  as  a poet.  Here  also  he  received  that  settled  tranquillity  and  peace, 
which  he  enjoyed  for  several  years  afterwards.  So  far,  therefore,  was  his  con- 
stitutional malady  from  being  produced  or  increased  by  his  evangelical  connexions, 
either  at  St.  Alban’s  or  at  Olney,  that  he  seems  never  to  have  had  any  settled 
peace  but  from  the  truths  he  learned  in  these  societies.  It  appears,  that  among 
them  alone  he  found  the  only  sunshine  he  ever  enjoyed  through  the  cloudy  day 
of  his  afflicted  life. 

It  appears  also,  that,  while  at  Dr.  Cotton’s,  Mr.  Cowper’s  distress  was,  for  a 
long  time,  entirely  removed,  by  marking  that  passage  in  Rom.  iii.  25:  “Him 
hath  God  set  forth  to  be  a propitiation,  through  faith  in  his  blood,  to  declare  his 
righteousness  for  the  remission  of  sins  that  are  past.”  In  this  scripture  he  saw 
the  remedy,  which  God  provides  for  the  relief  of  a guilty  conscience,  with  such 
clearness,  that,  for  several  years  after,  his  heart  was  filled  with  love,  and  his  life 
occupied  with  prayer,  praise,  and  doing  good  to  his  needy  fellow-creatures. 

Mr.  N.  told  me,  that  from  Mr.  Cowper’s  first  coming  to  Olney,  it  wras  ob- 
served he  had  studied  his  Bible  with  such  advantage,  and  was  so  well  acquainted 
with  its  design,  that  not  only  his  troubles  were  removed,  but  that  to  the  end  of 
his  life  he  never  had  clearer  views  of  the  peculiar  doctrines  of  the  gospel  than 
when  he  first  became  an  attendant  upon  them  ; that  (short  intervals  excepted) 
Mr.  Cowper  enjoyed  a course  of  peace  for  several  successive  years  ; that,  during 
this  period,  the  inseparable  attendants  of  a lively  faith  appeared,  by  Mr.  Cowper  s 
exerting  himself  to  the  utmost  of  his  power  in  every  benevoh  service  he  could 
render  to  his  poor  neighbours  ; and  that  Mr.  N.  used  to  consider  him  as  a sort  of 
curate,  from  his  constant  attendance  upon  the  sick  and  afflicted,  in  that  large  and 
necessitous  parish. 

But  the  malady,  which  seemed  to  be  subdued  by  the  strong  consolations  of  the 
gospel,  wras  still  latent ; and  only  required  some  occasion  of  irritation  to  break  out 
again,  and  overwhelm  the  patient.  Any  object  of  constant  attention,  that  shall  oc- 
cupy a mind  previously  disordered,  whether  fear,  or  love,  or  science,  or  religion, 
will  not  be  so  much  the  cause  of  the  disease,  as  the  accidental  occasion  of  exciting  it. 
Cowper’s  Letters  will  show  us  howr  much  his  mind  was  occupied  at  one  time  by 
the  truths  of  the  Bible,  and  at  another  time  by  the  fictions  of  H omer  : but  his 
melancholy  was  originally  a constitutional  disease,  a physical  disorder,  w hich,  in- 


40 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


deed,  could  be  affected  either  by  the  Bible  or  by  Homer,  but  was  utterly  distinct 
in  its  nature  from  the  mere  matter  of  either.  And  here  I cannot  but  mark  this 
necessary  distinction,  having  often  been  witness  to  cases  where  religion  has  been 
assigned  as  the  proper  cause  of  insanity,  when  it  has  been  only  an  accidental  oc- 
casion, in  the  case  of  one  already  affected.*  Thus  Cowper’s  malady,  like  a strong 
current,  breaking  down  the  banks  wffiich  had  hitherto  sustained  the  pressure  and 
obliquity  of  its  course,  prevailed  against  the  supports  he  had  received,  and  pre- 
cipitated him  again  into  his  former  distress. 

I inquired  of  Mr.  N.  as  to  the  manner  in  which  Mr.  Cowper’s  disorder  re- 
turned, after  an  apparent  recovery  of  nearly  nine  years  continuance:  and  was 
informed  that  the  first  symptoms  were  discovered  one  morning,  in  his  discourse, 
soon  after  he  had  undertaken  a new  engagement  in  composition. 

As  a general  and  full  account  of  this  extraordinary  genius  is  already  before  the 
public,  such  particulars  would  not  have  occupied  so  much  room  in  these  Me- 
moirs, but  with  the  view  of  removing  the  false  statements  that  have  been  made. 

Of  great  importance  also  was  the  vicinity  of  Mr.  N.’s  residence  to  that  of  the 
Rev.  Mr.  Scott,  then  curate  of  Ravenstone  and  Weston  Underwood,  and  now 
rector  of  Aston  Sandford  ; a man  whose  ministry  and  writings  have  since  been 
so  useful  to  mankind.  This  clergyman  was  nearly  a Socinian : he  was  in 
the  habit  of  ridiculing  evangelical  religion,  and  laboured  to  bring  over  Mr.  N. 
to  his  own  sentiments.  Mr.  Scott  had  married  a lady  from  the  family  of  a Mr. 
Wright,  a gentleman  in  his  parish,  who  had  promised  to  provide  for  him.  But 
Mr.  Scott’s  objections  to  subscription  arose  so  high,  that  he  informed  his  patron 
it  would  be  in  vain  to  attempt  providing  for  him  in  the  Church  of  England,  as 
he  could  not  conscientiously  accept  a living  on  the  condition  of  subscribing  its 
Liturgy  and  Articles.  “ This,”  said  Mr.  N.,  “gave  me  hopes  of  Mr.  Scott’s 
being  sincere,  however  wrong  in  his  principles.” 

But  the  benefit  which  Mr.  Scott  derived  from  his  neighbour,  will  best  appear 
in  his  own  words  : — t 

“ I was,”  says  he,  “ full  of  proud  self-sufficiency,  very  positive,  and  very  ob- 
stinate ; and  being  situated  in  the  neighbourhood  of  some  of  those  whom  the 
world  calls  Methodists  I joined  in  the  prevailing  sentiment;  held  them  in  sove- 
reign contempt ; spoke  of  them  with  derision  ; declaimed  against  them  from  the 
pulpit,  as  persons  full  of  bigotry,  enthusiasm,  and  spiritual  pride ; laid  heavy 
things  to  their  charge;  and  endeavoured  to  prove  the  doctrine,  which  I supposed 
them  to  hold  (for  1 had  never  read  their  books,)  to  be  dishonourable  to  God, 
and  destructive  of  morality ; and  though  in  some  companies  I chose  to  conceal 
part  of  my  sentiments,  and  in  all  affected  to  speak  as  a friend  to  universal  toler- 
ation, yet  scarcely  any  person  could  be  more  proudly  and  violently  prejudiced 
against  both  their  persons  and  principles  than  I then  was. 

“ In  January  1774,  two  of  my  parishioners,  a man  and  his  wife,  lay  at  the 
point  of  death.  I had  heard  of  the  circumstance,  but,  according  to  my  general 

* I have  been  an  eye-witness  of  several  instances  of  this  kind  of  misrepresentation,  but  will  detain 
the  reader  with  mentioning  only  one.  I was  called  to  visit  a woman  whose  mind  was  disordered,  and 
on  my  observing,  that  it  was  a case  which  required  the  assistance  of  a physician  rather  than  that  of  a 
clergyman,  her  husband  replied  : “ Sir,  we  sent  to  you,  because  it  is  a religious  case — her  mind  has 
been  injured  by  constantly  reading  the  Bible.”  “ I have  known  many  instances,”  said  I,  “of  persons 
brought  to  their  senses  by  reading  the  Bible  ; but  it  is  possible,  that  too  intense  an  application  to  that, 
as  well  as  to  any  other  subject,  may  have  disordered  your  wife.”  “There  is  every  proof  of  it,”  said 
he ; and  was  proceeding  to  multiply  his  proofs,  till  his  brother  interrupted  him  by  thus  addressing 
me : — 

“ Sir,  I have  no  longer  patience  to  stand  by  and  see  you  imposed  on.  The  truth  of  the  matter  is  this : 
my  brother  has  forsaken  his  wife,  and  been  long  connected  with  a loose  woman.  He  had  the  best  of 
wives  in  her,  and  one  who  was  strongly  attached  to  him  : but  she  has  seen  his  heart  and  property 
given  to  another,  and  in  her  solitude  and  distress,  went  to  the  Bible,  as  the  only  consolation  left  her. 
Her  health  and  spirits  at  length  sunk  under  her  troubles ; and  there  she  lies  distracted,  not  from  read- 
ing her  Bible,  but  from  the  infidelity  and  cruelty  of  her  husband.”  Does  the  reader  wish  to  know 
what  reply  the  husband  made  to  this  1 He  made  no  reply  at  all,  but  left  the  room  with  confusion  of 
face. 

+ Scott’s  Force  of  Truth,  p.  11,  fifth  edition. 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


41 


custom,  not  being  sent  for,  I took  no  notice  of  it ; till  one  evening,  the  woman 
being  now  dead,  and  the  man  dying,  I heard  that  my  neighbour  Mr.  N.  had 
been  several  times  to  visit  them.  Immediately  my  conscience  reproached  me 
with  being  shamefully  negligent,  in  sitting  at  home  within  a few  doors  of  dying 
persons,  my  general  hearers,  and  never  going  to  visit  them.  Directly  it  occur- 
red to  me,  that  whatever  contempt  I might  have  for  Mr.  N.’s  doctrines,  I must 
acknowledge  his  practice  to  be  more  consistent  with  the  ministerial  character 
than  my  own.  He  must  have  more  zeal  and  love  for  souls  than  I had,  or  he 
would  not  have  walked  so  far  to  visit  and  supply  my  lack  of  care  to  those,  who, 
as  far  as  I was  concerned,  might  have  been  left  to  perish  in  their  sins. 

“ This  reflection  affected  me  so  much,  that  without  delay,  and  very  earnestly 
yea,  with  tears,  I besought  the  Lord  to  forgive  my  past  neglect ; and  I resolved 
thenceforth  to  be  more  attentive  to  this  duty:  which  resolution,  though  at  first 
formed  in  ignorant  dependence  on  my  own  strength,  I have  by  divine  grace  been 
enabled  hitherto  to  keep.  I went  immediately  to  visit  the  survivor;  and  the  af- 
fecting sight  of  one  person  already  dead,  and  another  expiring  in  the  same  cham- 
ber, served  more  deeply  to  impress  my  serious  convictions. 

“ It  was  at  this  time  that  my  correspondence  with  Mr.  N.  commenced.  At 
a visitation,  May  1775,  we  exchanged  a few  words  on  a controverted  subject, 
in  the  room  among  the  clergy,  which  I believe  drew  many  eyes  upon  us.  At 
that  time  he  prudently  declined  the  discourse  ; but  a day  or  two  after  he  sent 
me  a short  note,  with  a little  book  for  my  perusal.  This  was  the  very  thing  I 
wanted  ; and  I gladly  embraced  the  opportunity,  which,  according  to  my  wishes, 
seemed  now  to  offer ; God  knoweth,  with  no  inconsiderable  expectations,  that 
my  arguments  would  prove  irresistibly  convincing,  and  that  I should  have  the 
honour  of  rescuing  a well-meaning  person  from  his  enthusiastical  delusions. 

“ I had,  indeed,  by  this  time  conceived  a very  favourable  opinion  of  him,  and 
a sort  of  respect  for  him,  being  acquainted  with  the  character  he  sustained,  even 
among  some  persons  who  expressed  a disapprobation  of  his  doctrines.  They 
were  forward  to  commend  him  as  a benevolent,  disinterested,  inoffensive  person, 
and  a laborious  minister.  But  on  the  other  hand  I looked  upon  his  religious 
sentiments  as  rank  fanaticism ; and  entertained  a very  contemptible  opinion  of 
his  abilities,  natural  and  acquired.  Once  I had  the  curiosity  to  hear  him  preach ; 
and,  not  understanding  his  sermon,  I made  a very  great  jest  of  it,  where  I could 
do  it  without  giving  offence.  I had  also  read  one  of  his  publications ; but  for  the 
same  reason  I thought  the  greater  part  of  it  whimsical,  paradoxical,  and  unintel- 
ligible. 

“ Concealing,  therefore,  the  true  motives  of  my  conduct,  under  the  offer  of 
friendship,  and  a professed  desire  to  know  the  truth  (which,  amidst  all  my  self- 
sufficiency  and  prejudice,  I trust  the  Lord  had  even  then  given  me,)  with  the 
greatest  affectation  of  candour,  and  of  a mind  open  to  conviction,  I wrote  him 
a long  letter ; purposing  to  draw  from  him  such  an  avowal  and  explanation  of 
his  sentiments,  as  might  introduce  a controversial  discussion  of  our  religious  dif- 
ferences. 

“The  event  by  no  means  answered  my  expectation.  He  returned  a very 
friendly  and  long  answer  to  my  letter,  in  which  he  carefully  avoided  the  mention 
of  those  doctrines  which  he  knew  would  offend  me.  He  declared  that  he  be- 
lieved me  to  be  one  who  feared  God,  and  was  under  the  teaching  of  his  Holy 
Spirit;  that  he  gladly  accepted  my  offer  of  friendship,  and  was  no  ways  inclined 
to  dictate  to  me  ; but  that,  leaving  me  to  the  guidance  of  the  Lord,  he  would  be 
glad,  as  occasion  served  from  time  to  time,  to  bear  testimony  to  the  truths  of  the 
gospel,  and  to  communicate  his  sentiments  to  me  on  any  subject  with  all  the 
confidence  of  friendship. 

“ In  this  manner  our  correspondence  began ; and  it  was  continued,  in  the  in- 
terchange of  nine  or  ten  letters,  till  December,  in  the  same  year.  Throughout  I 
held  my  purpose,  and  he  his.  I made  use  of  every  endeavour  to  draw  him  into  con- 
troversy, and  filled  my  letters  with  definitions,  inquiries,  arguments,  objections,  and 


42 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


consequences,  requiring  explicit  answers.  He,  on  the  other  hand,  shunned  every 
thing  controversial  as  much  as  possible,  and  filled  his  letters  with  the  most  useful 
and  least  offensive  instructions  ; except  that  now  and  then  he  dropped  his  hints 
concerning  the  necessity,  the  true  nature,  and  the  efficacy  of  faith,  and  the  man- 
ner in  which  it  was  to  be  sought  and  obtained;  and  concerning  some  other  mat- 
ters suited,  as  he  judged,  to  help  me  forward  in  my  inquiry  after  truth.  But  they 
much  offended  my  prejudices,  afforded  me  matter  of  disputation,  and  at  that  time 
were  of  little  use  to  me. 

“ When  I had  made  this  little  progress  in  seeking  the  truth,  my  acquaintance 
with  Mr.  N.  was  resumed.  From  the  conclusion  of  our  correspondence  in  De- 
cember 1775,  till  April  1777,  it  had  been  almost  wholly  dropped.  To  speak 
plainly,  I did  not  care  for  his  company : I did  not  mean  to  make  any  use  of  him 
as  an  instructor,  and  I was  unwilling  the  world  should  think  us  in  any  way  con- 
nected. But,  under  discouraging  circumstances,  I had  occasion  to  call  upon  him ; 
and  his  discourse  so  comforted  and  edified  me,  that  my  heart,  being  by  his 
means  relieved  from  its  burden,  became  susceptible  of  affection  for  him.  From 
that  time  I was  inwardly  pleased  to  have  him  for  my  friend;  though  not,  as  now, 
rejoiced  to  call  him  so.  1 had,  however,  even  at  that  time  no  thoughts  of  learn- 
ing doctrinal  truth  from  him,  and  was  ashamed  to  be  detected  in  his  company  ; 
but  I sometimes  stole  away  to  spend  an  hour  with  him.  About  the  same  period 
I once  heard  him  preach ; but  still  it  was  foolishness  to  me,  his  sermon  being 
principally  upon  the  believer’s  experience,  in  some  particulars  with  which  I was 
unacquainted ; so  that,  though  I loved  and  valued  him,  I considered  him  as  a 
person  misled  by  enthusiastical  notions;  and  strenuously  insisted,  that  we  should 
never  think  alike  till  we  met  in  heaven.” 

Mr.  Scott,  after  going  on  to  particularize  his  progress  in  the  discovery  of  truth 
and  the  character  of  Mr.  N.  as  its  minister,  afterwards  adds  : — 

f‘  The  pride  of  reasoning,  and  the  conceit  of  superior  discernment,  had  ail 
along  accompanied  me  ; and  though  somewhat  broken,  had  yet  considerable  in- 
fluence. Hitherto,  therefore,  I had  not  thought  of  hearing  any  person  preach ; 
because  I did  not  think  any  one  in  the  circle  of  my  acquaintance  capable  of  giv- 
ing me  such  information  as  I wanted.  But  being  at  length  convinced  that  Mr. 
N.  had  been  right,  and  that  I had  been  mistaken,  in  the  several  particulars  in 
which  we  had  differed,  it  occurred  to  me,  that,  having  preached  those  doctrines  so 
long,  he  must  understand  many  things  concerning  them  to  which  I was  a stranger. 
Now,  therefore,  though  not  without  much  remaining  prejudice,  and  not  less  in 
the  character  of  a judge  than  of  a scholar,  I condescended  to  be  his  hearer,  and 
occasionally  to  attend  his  preaching,  and  that  of  some  other  ministers.  I soon 
perceived  the  benefit ; for  from  time  to  time  the  secrets  of  my  heart  were  disco- 
vered to  me,  far  beyond  what  I had  hitherto  noticed;  and  I seldom  returned 
from  hearing  a sermon  without  having  conceived  a meaner  opinion  of  myself — 
without  having  attained  to  a farther  acquaintance  with  my  deficiencies,  weak- 
nesses, corruptions,  and  wants — or  without  being  supplied  with  fresh  matter  for 
prayer,  and  directed  to  greater  watchfulness.  I likewise  learned  the  use  of  ex- 
perience in  preaching;  and  was  convinced  that  the  readiest  way  to  reach  the 
hearts  and  consciences  of  others,  was  to  speak  from  my  own.  In  short,  I gradu- 
ally saw  more  and  more  my  need  of  instruction,  and  was  at  length  brought  to 
consider  myself  as  a very  novice  in  religious  matters.  Thus  I began  experiment- 
ally to  perceive  our  Lord’s  meaning,  when  he  says,  ‘Except  ye  receive  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  as  a little  child,  ye  shall  in  nowise  enter  therein.’  ” 

If  I have  seemed  to  digress  in  dwelling  so  long  on  these  three  characters,  let 
the  reader  consider  the  importance  of  the  facts — their  intimate  connexion  with 
Mr.  N.’s  history — and  let  me  inform  him,  that  the  author  has  something  much 
nearer  his  heart  than  that  of  precision  in  setting  forth  the  history  of  an  indivi- 
dual ; namely,  that  of  exhibiting  the  nature  and  importance  of  vital  and  experi- 
mental religion  : he  therefore  gladly  brings  forward  any  fact  found  in  his  way, 
which  may  tend  to  illustrate  it- 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


43 


But  to  return  to  the  more  immediate  subject  of  these  Memoirs.  In  the  year 
1776,  Mr.  N.  was  afflicted  with  a tumour,  or  wen,  which  had  formed  on  his 
thigh ; and  on  account  of  its  growing  more  large  and  troublesome,  he  resolved  to 
undergo  the  experiment  of  extirpation.  This  obliged  him  to  go  to  London  for 
the  operation,  which  was  successfully  performed,  October  10th,  by  the  late  Mr. 
Warner,  of  Guy’s  Hospital.  I remember  hearing  him  speak  several  years  after- 
wards of  this  trying  occasion  ; but  the  trial  did  not  seem  to  have  affected  him  as 
a painful  operation,  so  much  as  a critical  opportunity  in  which  he  might  fail  in 
demonstrating  the  patience  of  a Christian  under  pain.  “ I felt,”  said  he,  “that 
being  enabled  to  bear  a very  sharp  operation,  with  tolerable  calmness  and  confi- 
dence, was  a greater  favour  granted  to  me  than  the  deliverance  from  my  malady.* 

While  Mr.  N.  thus  continued  faithfully  discharging  the  duties  of  his  station, 
and  watching  for  the  temporal  and  eternal  welfare  of  his  flock,  a dreadful  fire 
broke  out  at  Olney,  October  <1777.  Mr.  N.  took  an  active  part  in  comforting 
and  relieving  the  sufferers  : he  collected  upwards  of  £ 200  for  them  ; a consider- 
able sum  of  money,  when  the  poverty  and  late  calamity  of  the  place  are  regarded. 
Such  instances  of  benevolence  towards  the  people,  with  the  constant  assistance 
he  afforded  the  poor,  by  the  help  of  Mr.  Thornton,  naturally  led  him  to  expect 
that  he  should  have  so  much  influence  as  to  restrain  gross  licentiousness  on  par- 
ticular occasions.  But,  to  use  his  own  expression,  he  had  “ lived  to  bury  the  old 
crop  on  which  any  dependence  could  be  placed.”  He  preached  a weekly  lec- 
ture, which  occurred  that  year  on  the  5th  of  November  ; and,  as  he  feared  that 
the  usual  way  of  celebrating  it  at  Olney  might  endanger  his  hearers  in  their  at- 
tendance at  the  church,  he  exerted  himself  to  preserve  some  degree  of  quiet  on 
that  evening.  Instead,  however,  of  hearkening  to  his  entreaties,  the  looser  sort 
exceeded  their  former  extravagance,  drunkenness,  and  rioting,  and  even  obliged 
him  to  send  out  money,  to  preserve  his  house  from  violence.  This  happened 
but  a year  before  he  finally  left  Olney.  When  he  related  this  occurrence  to  me, 
he  added,  that  he  believed  he  should  never  have  left  the  place  while  he  lived,  had 
not  so  incorrigible  a spirit  prevailed  in  a parish  he  had  long  laboured  to  reform. 

But  I must  remark  here,  that  this  is  no  solitary  fact,  nor  at  all  unaccountable. 
The  gospel,  we  are  informed,  is  not  merely  “ a savour  of  life  unto  life,”  but  also 
“ of  death  unto  death.”  Those  whom  it  does  not  soften  it  is  often  found  to 
harden.  Thus  we  find  St.  Paul  “ went  into  the  synagogue  and  spake  boldly  for 
the  space  of  three  months,  disputing  and  persuading  the  things  concerning  the 
kingdom  of  God.  But  when  divers  were  hardened,  and  believed  not,  but  spake 
evil  of  that  way  before  the  multitude,  he  departed  from  them.” 

“ The  strong  man  armed,”  seeks  to  keep  his  “ house  and  goods  in  peace,” 
and,  if  a minister  is  disposed  to  let  this  sleep  of  death  remain,  that  minister’s  own 
house  and  goods  may  be  permitted  to  remain  in  peace  also.  Such  a minister 
may  be  esteemed  by  his  parish  as  a good  kind  of  man — quiet,  inoffensive,  candid, 
&c.  ; and  if  he  discover  any  zeal,  it  is  directed  to  keep  the  parish  in  the  state 
he  found  it ; that  is,  in  ignorance  and  unbelief,  worldly-minded  and  hard-hearted 
— the  very  state  of  peace  in  which  the  strong  man  armed  seeks  to  keep  his 
palace  or  citadel,  the  human  heart. 

But  if  a minister,  like  the  subject  of  these  Memoirs,  enters  into  the  design  of 
his  commission — if  he  be  alive  to  the  interest  of  his  own  soul,  and  that  of  the 
souls  committed  to  his  charge;  or,  as  the  apostle  expresses  it,  “ to  save  himself 


*, His  reflections  upon  the  occasion,  m his  diary,  are  as  follow: — “Thou  didst  support  me,  and 
make  this  operation  very  tolerable.  The  cure,  by  thy  blessing,  was  happily  expedited:  so  that,  on 

Sunday  the  27th,  I was  enabled  to  go  to  church  and  hear  Mr.  F , and  the  Sunday  following, 

to  preach  for  him.  The  tenderness  and  attention  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  F , with  whom  we  were,  I 

cannot  sufficiently  describe ; nor,  indeed,  the  kindness  of  many  other  friends.  To  them  I would  be 
thankful,  my  Lord,  but  especially  to  thee ; for  what  are  creatures  but  instruments  in  thy  hand,  ful- 
filling thy  pleasure  7 At  home  all  was  preserved  quiet,  and  I met  with  no  incident  to  distress  or  dis- 
turb me  while  absent.  The  last  fortnight  I preached  often,  and  was  hurried  about  in  seeing  my 
friends.  But  though  I nad  a litile  leisure  or  opportunity  for  retirement,  and  my  heart,  alas ! as  usual* 
6adly  reluctant  and  duJ  in  secret,  yet  in  public  thou  wert  pleased  to  favour  me  with  liberty.” 


44 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


and  those  that  hear  him,”  he  may  depend  upon  meeting  in  his  own  experience 
the  truth  of  that  declaration,  “Yea,  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall 
suffer  persecution,”  in  one  form  of  it  or  another.  One  of  the  most  melancholy 
sights  we  behold  is  when  any  part  of  the  church,  through  prejudice,  joins  the 
world  in  throwing  the  stone.  There  is,  however,  such  a determined  enmity  to 
godliness  itself,  in  the  breast  of  a certain  class  of  men  existing  in  most  parishes, 
that  whatever  learning  and  good  sense  are  found  in  their  teacher — whatever 
consistency  of  character,  or  blameless  deportment  he  exhibits — whatever  benevo 
lence  or  bounty  (like  that  which  Mr.  N.  exercised  at  Olney,)  may  constantly 
appear  in  his  character — such  men  remain  irreconcileable.  They  will  resist 
every  attempt  made  to  appease  their  enmity.  God  alone,  who  changed  the  hearts 
of  Paul  and  of  Newton,  can  heal  these  bitter  waters. 

I recollect  to  have  heard  Mr.  N.  say  on  such  an  occasion,  “ When  God  is 
about  to  perform  any  great  work,  he  generally  permits  some  great  opposition  to 
it.  Suppose  Pharaoh  had  acquiesced  in  the  departure  of  the  children  of  Israel, 
or  that  they  had  met  with  no  difficulties  in  the  way,  they  would,  indeed,  have 
passed  from  Egypt  to  Canaan  with  ease ; but  they,  as  well  as  the  church  in  all 
future  ages,  would  have  been  great  losers.  The  wonder-working  God  would 
not  have  been  seen  in  those  extremities,  which  make  his  arm  so  visible.  A 
smooth  passage,  here,  would  have  made  but  a poor  story.” 

But,  under  such  disorders,  Mr.  N. , in  no  one  instance  that  I ever  heard  of. 
was  tempted  to  depart  from  the  line  marked  out  by  the  precept  and  example  of 
his  Master.  He  continued  to  “ bless  them  that  persecuted  him,”  knowing  that 
“the  servant  of  the  Lord  must  not  strive,  but  be  gentle  unto  all  men,  apt  to 
teach,  patient.”  To  the  last  day  he  spent  among  them,  he  went  straight  for- 
ward, “ in  meekness  instructing  those  that  opposed,  if  God  peradventure  might 
give  them  repentance  to  the  acknowledging  the  truth.” 

But,  before  we  take  a final  leave  of  Olney,  the  reader  must  be  informed  of 
another  part  of  Mr.  N.’s  labours.  He  had  published  a volume  of  Sermons  before 
he  took  orders,  dated  Liverpool,  January  1,  1760.  In  1762  he  published  his 
Omicron,  to  which  his  letters,  signed  Vigil,  were  afterwards  annexed.  In  1764 
appeared  his  Narrative.  In  1767,  a volume  of  Sermons,  preached  at  Olney.  In 
1769  his  Review  of  Ecclesiastical  History  : and  in  1779,  a volume  of  Hymns,  of 
which  some  were  composed  by  Mr.  Cowper,  and  distinguished  by  a C.  To 
these  succeeded,  in  1781,  his  valuable  work,  Cardiphonia ; but  more  will  be  said 
of  these  in  their  place. 

From  Olney  Mr.  N.  was  removed  to  the  rectory  of  the  united  parishes  of  St. 
Mary  Woolnoth,  and  St.  Mary  Woolchurch  Haw,  Lombard  Street,  on  the  pre- 
sentation of  his  friend  Mr.  Thornton. 

It  is  remarkable,  that  these  parishes  had  been  favoured  with  two  very  emi- 
nent pastors,  before  Mr.  N.  appeared  ; namely,  the  Rev.  Josias  Shute,  B.  D., 
archdeacon  of  Colchester,  and  rector  of  St.  Mary  Woolnoth,  who  died  1643 — and 
the  Rev.  Ralph  Robinson,  who  died  in  1655.  * There  is  a well  written  account 
of  Mr.  Shute  in  the  Christian  Observer  of  January  1804  ; from  which  it  appears, 
that  his  piety,  ministerial  talents,  and  moderation  in  those  difficult  times,  were 
very  much  distinguished  during  the  thirty-three  years  he  continued  rector.* 
Mr.  Robinson  died  young,  but  has  left  a volume  of  truly  evangelical  discourses 
preached  at  St.  Mery’s. 

Some  difficulty  arose  on  Mr.  N.’s  being  presented,  by  Mr  Thornton’s  right 
of  presentation  being  claimed  by  a nobleman ; the  question  was,  therefore,  at 


* Grander  in  his  Biographical  History  of  England,  says  that  “ His  learning  in  divinity  and  eccle- 
siastical history  was  extensive,  indeed  almost  universal.”'  And  even  Walker,  in  his  account  of  the 
Clergy,  says,  that,  “ In  the  beginning  of  the  troubles,  he  was  molested  and  harassed  to  death,  and 
denied  a funeral  sermon  to  be  preached  for  him  by  Dr.  Holdsworth,  as  he  desired— that  he  was  a 
person  of  great  pietv,  charity,  and  gravity,  and  of  a most  sweet  and  affable  temper.”  It  farther  ap- 
pears, that,  like  his  successor  Mr.  N.,  he  preached  twice  on  the  Sunday,  and  had  a lecture  in  his 
church  every  Wednesday. 


race  n 


u Jim  Barlow 

!hurch  family  is Steve  Storckman 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


45 


length  brought  before  the  House  of  Lords,  and  determined  in  favour  of  Mr. 
Thornton.  Mr.  N.  preached  his  first  sermon  in  these  parishes,  Dec.  19,  1779, 
from  Eph.  iv.  15.  “ Speaking  the  truth  in  love.”  It  contained  an  affectionate 
address  to  his  parishioners,  and  was  directly  published  for  their  use. 

Here  a new  and  very  distinct  scene  of  action  and  usefulness  was  set  before  him. 
Placed  in  the  centre  of  London — in  an  opulent  neighbourhood — with  connexions 
daily  increasing,  he  had  now  a course  of  service  to  pursue,  in  several  respects 
different  from  his  former  at  Olney.  Being,  however,  well  acquainted  with  the 
word  of  God,  and  the  heart  of  man,  he  proposed  to  himself  no  new  weapons  of 
warfare  for  pulling  down  the  strong  holds  of  sin  and  Satan  around  him.  He 
perceived,  indeed,  most  of  his  parishioners  too  intent  upon  their  wealth  and  mer- 
chandise to  pay  much  regard  to  their  new  minister ; but,  since  they  would  not 
come  to  him,  he  was  determined  to  go,  as  far  as  he  could,  to  them ; and,  there- 
fore, soon  after  his  institution,  he  sent  a printed  address  to  his  parishioners  : he 
afterwards  sent  them  another  address,  on  the  usual  prejudices  that  are  taken  up 
against  the  gospel.  What  effects  these  attempts  had  then  upon  them  does  not  ap- 
pear; certain  it  is,  that  these,  and  other  acts  of  his  ministry,  will  be  recollected  by 
them,  when  the  objects  of  their  present  pursuits  are  forgotten  or  lamented. 

I have  heard  Mr.  N.  speak  with  great  feeling  on  the  circumstances  of  his  last 
important  station.  “ That  one,”  said  he,  “ of  the  most  ignorant,  the  most  mise- 
rable, and  the  most  abandoned  of  slaves,  should  be  plucked  from  his  forlorn  state 
of  exile  on  the  coast  of  Africa,  and  at  length  be  appointed  minister  of  the  parish 
of  the  first  magistrate  of  the  first  city  in  the  world — that  he  should  there  not  only 
testify  of  such  grace,  but  stand  up  as  a singular  instance  and  monument  of  it — that 
he  should  be  enabled  to  record  it  in  his  history,  preaching,  and  writings  to  the  world 
at  large — is  a fact  I can  contemplate  with  admiration,  but  never  sufficiently  esti- 
mate.” This  reflection,  indeed,  was  so  present  to  his  mind  on  all  occasions,  and  in 
all  places,  that  he  seldom  passed  a single  day  anywhere,  but  he  was  found  referring 
to  the  strange  event,  in  one  way  or  other. 

It  may  be  necessary  to  add,  that  the  latter  part  of  these  Memoirs  leads  me  to 
speak  so  personally  of  my  friend,  that  any  farther  inspection  from  his  own  eye 
was  deemed  improper. 

When  Mr.  N.  came  to  St.  Mary’s,  he  resided  for  sometime  in  Charles’  Square, 
Hoxton  ; afterwards  he  removed  to  Coleman  Street  Buildings,  where  he  continued 
till  his  death.  Being  of  the  most  friendly  and  communicative  disposition,  his 
house  was  open  to  Christians  of  all  ranks  and  denominations.  Here,  like  a 
father  among  his  children,  he  used  to  entertain,  encourage,  and  instruct  his  friends, 
especially  younger  ministers,  or  candidates  for  the  ministry.  Here  also  the  poor, 
the  afflicted,  and  the  tempted,  found  an  asylum  and  a sympathy,  which  they 
could  scarcely  find,  in  an  equal  degree,  anywhere  besides. 

His  timely  hints  were  often  given  with  much  point,  and  profitable  address,  to 
tbe  numerous  acquaintance  which  surrounded  him  in  this  public  station.  Some 
time  after  Mr.  N.  had  published  his  Omicron,  and  described  the  three  stages  of 
growth  in  religion,  from  the  blade,  the  ear,  and  the  full  corn  in  the  ear,  distin- 
guishing them  by  the  letters  A,  B,  and  C,  a conceited  young  minister  wrote  to 
Mr.  N.,  telling  him,  that  he  read  his  own  character  accurately  drawn  in  that  of 
C.  Mr.  N.  wrote  in  reply,  that  in  drawing  the  character  of  C,  or  full  maturity 
he  had  forgotten  to  add,  till  now,  one  prominent  feature  of  C’s  character,  namely, 
that  C never  knew  his  own  face. 

“ It  grieves  me,”  said  Mr.  N.,  “to  see  so  few  of  my  wealthy  parishioners 
come  to  church.  I always  consider  the  rich  as  under  greater  obligations  to  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel  than  the  poor.  For  at  church,  the  rich  must  hear  the 
whole  truth  as  well  as  others.  There  they  have  no  mode  of  escape.  But  let 
them  once  get  home,  you  will  be  troubled  to  get  at  them;  and,  when  you  are 
admitted,  you  are  so  fettered  with  punctilio,  so  interrupted  and  damped  with  the 
frivolous  conversation  of  their  friends,  that,  as  Archbishop  Leighton  says  1 it  is 
well  if  your  visit  does  not  prove  a blank  or  a blot.’  ” 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


Mr.  N.  used  to  improve  every  occurrence  which  he  could  with  propriety  brmt, 
«nto  the  pulpit.  One  night  he  found  a bill  put  up  at  St.  Mary  Woolnoth’s,  upon 
which  he  commented  a great  deal  when  he  came  to  preach.  The  bill  was  to 
this  effect;  “A  young  man  having  come  to  the  possession  of  a very  considerable 
fortune,  desires  the  prayers  of  the  congregation,  that  he  may  be  preserved  from 
the  snares  to  which  it  exposes  him.” — “ Now,  if  the  man,”  said  Mr.  N.,  “ had 
lost  a fortune,  the  world  would  not  have  wondered  to  have  seen  him  put  up  a bill ; 
but  this  man  has  been  better  taught.” 

Coming  out  of  his  church,  on  a Wednesday,  a lady  stopped  him  on  the  steps, 
and  said,  “ The  ticket,  of  which  I held  a quarter,  is  drawn  a prize  of  ten  thou- 
sand pounds:  I know  you  will  congratulate  me  upon  the  occasion.”  “ Madam,” 
said  he,  “ as  for  a friend  under  temptation,  I will  endeavour  to  pray  for  you.” 

Soon  after  he  came  to  St.  Mary’s,  I remember  to  have  heard  him  say,  in  a certain 
company,  “ Some  have  observed,  that  I preach  shorter  sermons  on  a Sunday 
morning,  and  with  more  caution:  but  this  I do  upon  principle.  I suppose  I 
may  have  two  or  three  of  my  bankers  present,  and  some  others  of  my  parish, 
who  have  hitherto  been  strangers  to  my  views  of  truth.  I endeavour  to  imitate 
the  apostle.  ‘ I became,’  says  he,  1 all  things  to  all  men  but  observe  the  end: 
it  was  in  order  to  gain  some.  The  fowler  must  go  cautiously  to  meet  shy  birds, 
but  he  will  not  leave  his  powder  and  shot  behind  him.  ‘ I have  fed  you  with 
milk,’  says  the  apostle  ; but  there  are  some,  that  are  not  only  for  forcing  strong 
meat,  but  bones  too,  down  the  throat  of  the  child.-?- We  must  have  patience  with 
a single  step  in  the  case  of  an  infant ; and  there  are  one-step  books  and  sermons, 
which  are  good  in  their  place.  Christ  taught  his  disciples  as  they  were  able  to 
bear  ; and  it  was  upon  the  same  principle  that  the  apostle  accommodated  himself  to 
prejudice. — Now,”  continued  he,  “ what  I wish  to  remark  on  these  considera- 
tions is,  that  this  apostolical  principle,  steadily  pursued,  will  render  a minister 
apparently  inconsistent — superficial  hearers  will  think  him  a trimmer.  On  the 
other  hand,  a minister,  destitute  of  the  apostolical  principle  and  intention,  and 
directing  his  whole  force  to  preserve  the  appearance  of  consistency,  may  thus 
seem  to  preserve  it;  but,  let  me  tell  you,  here  is  only  the  form  of  faithfulness, 
without  the  spirit.” 

I could  not  help  observing  one  day,  how  much  Mr.  N.  was  grieved  with  the 
mistake  of  a minister,  who  appeared  to  pay  too  much  attention  to  politics.  “For 
my  part,”  said  he,  “ I have  no  temptation  to  turn  politician,  and  much  less  to 
inflame  a party,  in  these  times.  When  a ship  is  leaky,  and  a mutinous  spirit  di- 
vides the  company  on  board,  a wise  man  would  say,  ‘ My  good  friends,  while 
we  are  debating,  the  water  is  gaining  on  us — we  had  better  leave  the  debate, 
and  go  to  the  pumps.’ — I endeavour,”  continued  he,  “ to  turn  my  people’s  eyes 
from  instruments  to  God.  I am  continually  attempting  to  show  them,  how  far 
they  are  from  knowing  either  the  matter  of  fact,  or  the  matter  of  right.  I incul- 
cate our  great  privileges  in  this  country,  and  advise  a discontented  man  to  take 
a lodging  for  a little  while  in  Russia  or  Prussia.” 

Though  no  great  variety  of  anecdote  is  to  be  expected  in  a course  so  stationary 
as  this  part  of  Mr.  N.’s  life  and  ministry ; (for  sometimes  the  course  of  a single 
day  might  give  the  account  of  a whole  year,)  yet  that  day  was  so  benevolently 
spent,  that  he  was  found  in  it  “not  only  rejoicing  with  those  that  rejoiced,” 
but  literally  “weeping  with  those  that  wept.”  The  portrait  which  Goldsmith 
drew  from  imagination,  Mr.  N.  realized  in  fact;  insomuch  that  had  Mr.  N.  sat 
for  his  picture  to  the  poet,  it  could  not  have  been  more  accurately  delineated  than 
by  the  following  lines  in  his  Deserted  Village  :— 

♦ 

“ Unskilful  he  to  fawn,  or  seek  for  power, 

By  doctrines  fashion’d  to  the  varying  hour  ; 

Far  other  aims  his  heart  had  learn’d  to  prize, 

More  bent  to  raise  the  wretched  than  to  rise. 

Thus  to  relieve  the  wretched  was  his  pride, 

And  even  his  failings  lean’d  to  virtue’s  side; 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


47 


But  in  his  duty  prompt  at  every  call, 

He  watch’d  and  wept,  he  prayed  and  felt,  for  all : 

And  as  a bird  each  fond  endearment  tries, 

To  tempt  its  new-fledg’d  offspring  to  the  skies, 

He  tried  each  art,  reproved  each  dull  delay, 

Allured  to  brighter  worlds,  and  led  the  way.” 

I remember  to  have  heard  him  say,  when  speaking  of  his  continual  interrup- 
tions, “ I see  in  this  world  two  heaps  of  human  happiness  and  misery  ; now  if  I 
can  take  but  the  smallest  bit  from  one  heap  and  add  to  the  other,  I carry  a point 
— If,  as  I go  home,  a child  has  dropped  a halfpenny,  and  if,  by  giving  it  another, 
I can  wipe  away  its  tears,  I feel  I have  done  something.  I should  be  glad  in- 
deed to  do  greater  things,  but  I will  not  neglect  this.  When  I hear  a knock  at 
my  study  door,  I hear  a message  from  God  ; it  may  be  a lesson  of  instruction, 
perhaps  a lesson  of  patience;  but,  since  it  is  his  message,  it  must  be  interesting.” 

But  it  was  not  merely  under  his  own  roof  that  his  benevolent  aims  were  thus 
exerted  ; he  was  found  ready  to  take  an  active  part  in  relieving  the  miserable, 
directing  the  anxious,  or  recovering  the  wanderer,  in  whatever  state  or  place  he 
discovered  such  : of  which,  take  the  following  instance: — 

Mr. , who  is  still  living,  and  who  holds  a post  of  great  importance 

abroad,  was  a youth  of  considerable  talents,  and  who  had  had  a respectable  edu- 
cation. I am  not  informed  of  his  original  destination  in  point  of  profession  ; but 
certain  it  is,  that  he  left  his  parents  in  Scotland,  with  a design  of  viewing  the 
world  at  large,  and  that  without  those  pecuniary  resources,  which  could  render 
such  an  undertaking  convenient  or  even  practicable.  Yet  having  the  sanguine 
expectations  of  youth,  together  with  its  inexperience,  he  determinately  pursued 
his  plan.  I have  seen  an  account  from  his  own  hand,  of  the  strange,  but  by  no 
means  dishonourable  resources  to  which  he  was  reduced  in  the  pursuit  of  this 
scheme ; nor  can  romance  exceed  the  detail.  But  the  particulars  of  his  long 
journey,  till  he  arrived  in  London,  and  those  which  have  since  occurred,  would 
not  be  proper,  at  present,  for  any  one  to  record  except  himself ; and  I cannot  but 
wish  he  would  favour  the  world  with  them,  on  the  principle  which  led  Mr.  N. 
to  write  his  Narrative.  To  London,  however,  he  came;  and  then  he  seemed  to 
come  to  himself.  He  had  heard  Mr.  N.’s  character,  and  on  a Sunday  evening 
he  came  to  St.  Mary  Woolnoth,  and  stood  in  one  of  the  aisles  while  Mr.  N. 
preached.  In  the  course  of  that  week  he  wrote  Mr.  N.  some  account  of  his  ad- 
venture, and  state  of  mind.  Such  circumstances  could  be  addressed  to  no  man 
more  properly.  Mr.  N.’s  favourite  maxim  was  often  in  his  mouth,  more  often 
in  his  actions,  and  always  in  his  heart 

“ Haud  ignara  mali,  miseris  succurrere  disco.” 

Mr.  N.  therefore  gave  notice  from  the  pulpit  on  the  following  Sunday  evening, 
that,  if  the  person  was  present  who  had  sent  him  such  a letter,  he  would  be  glad 
to  speak  with  him. 

Mr. gladly  accepted  the  invitation,  and  came  to  Mr.  N.’s  house,  where 

a friendship  began,  which  continued  till  Mr.  N.’s  death.  Mr.  N.  not  only  all’orded 
this  youth  the  instruction,  which  he,  at  this  period,  so  deeply  needed  : but 
marking  his  fine  abilities  and  corrected  inclination,  he  introduced  him  to  Henry 
Thornton  Esq.;  who,  inheriting  his  father’s  unbounded  liberality  and  determined 

adherence  to  the  cause  of  real  religion,  readily  patronized  the  stranger.  Mr. 

was,  by  the  munificence  of  this  gentleman,  supported  through  a university  edu- 
cation, and  was  afterwards  ordained  to  the  curacy  of . It  was,  however, 

thought  expedient,  that  his  talents  should  be  employed  in  an  important  station 
abroad,  which  he  readily  undertook,  and  in  which  he  now  maintains  a very  dis- 
tinguished character. 

It  ought  not  to  be  concealed,  that  Mr. , since  his  advancement  has 

not  only  returned  his  patron  the  whole  expense  of  his  university  education,  but 


48 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


has  also  placed  in  his  hands  an  equal  sum,  for  the  education  of  some  pious  youth, 
who  might  be  deemed  worthy  of  that  assistance  once  afforded  to  himself! 

Mr.  N.  used  to  spend  a month  or  two,  annually,  at  the  house  of  some  friend  in 
the  country  ; he  always  took  an  affectionate  leave  of  his  congregation  before  he 
departed,  and  spake  of  his  leaving  town  as  quite  uncertain  of  returning  to  it, 
considering  the  variety  of  incidents  which  might  prevent  that  return.  Nothing 
was  more  remarkable  than  his  constant  habit  of  regarding  the  hand  of  God  in 
every  event,  however  trivial  it  might  appear  to  others.  On  every  occasion — in 
the  concerns  of  every  hour — matters  public  or  private,  like  Enoch,  he  “walked 
with  God.”  Take  a single  instance  of  his  state  of  mind  in  this  respect.  In  walk- 
ing to  his  church,  he  would  say,  *'  ‘ The  way  of  man  is  not  in  himself,’  nor  can 
he  conceive  what  belongs  to  a single  step.  When  I go  to  St.  Mary  Woolnoth,  it 
seems  the  same  whether  I turn  down  Lothbury  or  go  through  the  Old  Jewry ; 
but  the  going  through  one  street  and  not  another,  may  produce  an  effect  of  lasting 
consequences.  A man  cut  down  my  hammock  in  sport,  but  had  he  cut  it  down 
half-an-hour  later,  I had  not  been  here  ; as  the  exchange  of  crew  was  then  ma- 
king. A man  made  a smoke  on  the  sea-shore  at  the  time  a ship  passed,  which 
was  thereby  brought  to,  and  afterwards  brought  me  to  England.” 

Mr.  N.  had  experienced  a severe  stroke  soon  after  he  came  to  St.  Mary’s  and 
while  he  resided  in  Charles’s  Square,  in  the  death  of  his  niece,  Miss  Eliza  Cun- 
ningham. He  loved  her  with  the  affection  of  a parent,  and  she  wras,  indeed, 
truly  lovely.  He  had  brought  her  up,  and  had  observed,  that,  with  the  most 
amiable  natural  qualities,  she  possessed  a real  piety.  With  every  possible  atten- 
tion from  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Newton  and  their  friends,  they  saw  her  gradually  sink 
into  the  arms  of  death  ; but  fully  prepared  to  meet  him  as  a messenger  sent  from 
a yet  kinder  Father,  to  whom  she  departed,  October  6th,  1785,  aged  fourteen 
years  and  eight  months.  On  this  occasion  Mr.  N.  published  some  brief  memoirs 
of  her  character  and  death. 

In  the  year  1784  and  17S5  Mr.  N.  preached  a course  of  sermons,  on  an  occa- 
sion, of  which  he  gives  the  following  account  in  his  first  discourse  : “ Conversa- 
tion in  almost  every  company,  for  some  time  past,  has  much  turned  upon  the 
commemoration  of  Handel,  and  particularly  on  his  Oratorio  of  the  Messiah.  I 
mean  to  lead  your  meditations  to  the  language  of  the  oratorio,  and  to  consider, 
in  their  order  (if  the  Lord,  on  whom  our  breath  depends,  shall  be  pleased  to  af- 
ford life,  ability,  and  opportunity,)  the  several  sublime  and  interesting  passages 
of  Scripture,  which  are  the  basis  of  that  admired  composition.”  In  the  year 
1786  he  published  these  discourses,  in  two  volumes  octavo.  There  is  a passage 
so  original,  at  the  beginning  of  his  fourth  sermon,  from  Mai.  iii.  1 — 3,  “ The 
Lord,  whom  ye  s-eek,  shall  suddenly  come  to  his  temple,”  &c.  that  I shall  tran- 
scribe it  for  the  use  of  such  as  have  not  seen  these  discourses ; at  the  same 
time,  it  will,  in  a few  words,  convey  Mr.  N.’s  idea  of  the  usual  performance  of 
this  oratorio,  or  attending  its  performance,  in  present  circumstances. 

“ ‘ Whereunto  shall  we  liken  the  people  of  this  generation,  and  to  what  are 
they  like  ?’  I represent  to  myself  a number  of  persons,  of  various  characters, 
involved  in  one  common  charge  of  high  treason.  They  are  already  in  a state  of 
confinement,  but  not  yet  brought  to  their  trial.  The  facts,  however,  are  so  plain, 
and  the  evidence  against  them  so  strong  and  pointed,  that  there  is  not  the  least 
doubt  of  their  guilt  being  fully  proved,  and  that  nothing  but  a pardon  can  pre- 
serve them  from  punishment.  In  this  situation,  it  should  seem  their  wisdom  to 
avail  themselves  of  every  expedient  in  their  power  for  obtaining  mercy.  But 
they  are  entirely  regardless  of  their  danger,  and  wholly  taken  up  with  contriving 
methods  of  amusing  themselves,  that  they  may  pass  away  the  term  of  their  im- 
prisonment with  as  much  cheerfulness  as  possible.  Among  other  resources,  they 
call  in  the  assistance  of  music.  And  amidst  a great  variety  of  subjects  in  this 
way,  they  are  particularly  pleased  with  one.  They  choose  to  make  the  solemni- 
ties of  their  impending  trial,  the  character  of  their  Judge,  the  methods  of  his 
procedure,  and  the  awful  sentence  to  which  they  are  exposed,  the  groundwork 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


49 


of  a musical  entertainment.  And,  as  if  they  were  quite  unconcerned  in  the 
event,  their  attention  is  chiefly  fixed  upon  the  skill  of  the  composer,  in  adapting 
the  style  of  his  music  to  the  very  solemn  language  and  subject  with  which  they 
are  trifling.  The  king,  however,  out  of  his  great  clemency  and  compassion  to- 
wards those  who  have  no  pity  for  themselves,  prevents  them  with  his  goodness. 
Undesired  by  them,  he  sends  them  a gracious  message.  He  assures  them,  that 
he  is  unwilling  they  should  suffer : he  requires,  yea,  he  entreats  them  to  submit. 
He  points  out  a way  in  which  their  confession  and  submission  shall  be  cer- 
tainly accepted ; and  in  this  way,  which  he  condescends  to  prescribe,  he  offers 
them  a free  and  a full  pardon.  But  instead  of  taking  a single  step  towards  a com- 
pliance with  his  goodness,  they  set  his  message  likewise  to  music:  and  this,  together 
with  a description  of  their  present  state,  and  of  the  fearful  doom  awaiting  them 
if  they  continue  obstinate,  is  sung  for  their  diversion,  accompanied  with  the 
sound  of  cornet,  flute,  harp,  sackbut,  psaltery,  dulcimer,  and  all  kinds  of  in- 
struments. Surely,  if  such  a case  as  I have  supposed  could  be  found  in  real  life, 
though  I might  admire  the  musical  taste  of  these  people,  I should  commiserate 
their  insensibility  !” 

But  “clouds  return  after  the  rain:”  a greater  loss  than  that  of  Miss  C.  was 
to  follow.  Enough  has  been  said  in  these  Memoirs  already,  to  show  the  more 
than  ordinary  affection  Mr.  N.  felt  for  her  who  had  been  so  long  his  idol,  as  he 
used  to  call  her ; of  which  I shall  add  but  one  more  instance,  out  of  many  that 
might  easily  be  collected. 

Being  with  him  at  the  house  of  a lady  at  Blackheath,  we  stood  at  a window, 
which  had  a prospect  of  Shooter’s  Hill.  “ Ah,”  said  Mr.  M.,  “ I remember  the 
many  journeys  I took  from  London  to  stand  at  the  top  of  that  hill,  in  order  to 
1 ok  towards  the  part  in  which  Mrs.  N.  then  lived  : not  that  I could  see  the  spot 
itself,  after  travelling  several  miles,  for  she  lived  far  beyond  what  I could  see, 
v.  hen  on  the  hill  ; but  it  gratified  me  even  to  look  towards  the  spot:  and  this 
I did  always  once,  and  sometimes  twice  a week.”  “ Why,”  said  I,  “this  is 
more  like  one  of  the  vagaries  of  Romance  than  of  real  life.”  “ True,”  replied 
he,  “ but  real  life  has  extravagances,  that  would  not  be  admitted  to  appear  in  a 
well-written  romance — they  would  be  said  to  be  out  of  nature.” 

In  such  a continued  habit  of  excessive  attachment,  it  is  evident  how  keenly 
Mr.  N.  must  have  felt,  while  he  observed  the  progress  of  a threatening  indura- 
tion in  her  breast.  This  tumour  seemed  to  have  arisen  from  a blow  she  received 
before  she  left  Liverpool.  The  pain  it  occasioned  at  the  time  soon  wore  off,  but 
a small  lump  remained  in  the  part  affected.  In  October  1788,  on  the  tumour’s 
increasing,  she  applied  to  an  eminent  surgeon,  who  told  her  it  was  a cancer,  and 
now  too  large  for  extraction,  and  that  he  could  only  recommend  quiet.  As  the 
spring  of  1789  advanced,  her  malady  increased  ; and  though  she  was  able  to  bear 
a journey  to  Southampton,  from  which  she  returned,  in  other  respects,  tolerably 
well  ; she  grew  gradually  worse  with  the  cancer  till  she  expired,  December  15, 1790. 

Mr.  N.  made  this  remark  on  her  death,  “ Just  before  Mrs.  N.’s  disease  became 
so  lormidable,  I was  preaching  on  the  waters  of  Egypt  being  turned  into  blood. 
The  Egyptians  had  idolized  their  river,  and  God  made  them  loathe  it.  I was 
apprehensive  it  would  soon  be  a similar  case  with  me.”  During  the  very  affect- 
ing season  of  Mrs.  N.’s  dissolution,  Mr.  N.,  like  David,  wept  and  prayed  ; but  the 
desire  of  his  eyes  being  taken  away  by  the  stroke,  he  too,  like  David,  “ arose  from 
the  earth,  and  came  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  and  worshipped,”  and  that  in  a 
manner  which  surprised  some  of  his  friends. 

1 must  own  I was  not  one  of  those  who  saw  any  thing  that  might  not  be  ex- 
pected from  such  a man,  surrounded  with  such  circumstances.  I did  not  wonder 
at  his  undertaking  to  preach  Mrs.  N.’s  funeral  Sermon,  on  the  following  Sunday, 
at  St.  Mary’s:  since  I always  considered  him  as  an  original,  and  his  case  quite 
an  exception  to  general  habits  in  many  respects.  There  also  could  be  no  ques- 
tion as  to  the  affection  he  had  borne  to  the  deceased  : it  had  even  prevailed,  as  he 
readily  allowed,  to  an  eccentric  and  blamable  degree  ; and  indeed  after  her  re- 


50 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON- 


raoval,  he  used  to  observe  an  annual  seclusion,  for  a special  recollection  of  her, 
whom  through  the  year  he  had  never  forgotten,  and  from  which  proceeded  a sort 
of  little  elegies  or  sonnets  to  her  memory.  But  he  clearly  recognized  the  will  of  God 
in  the  removal  of  his  idol,  and  reasoned  as  David  did  on  the  occasion : “ While 
she  was  yet  alive  I fasted  and  wept:  for  I said,  who  can  tell  whether  God  will  be 
gracious  to  me,  that  she  may  live  ? But,  now  she  is  dead,  wherefore  should  I fast? 
Can  I bring  her  back  again  ? I shall  go  to  her,  but  she  shall  not  return  to  me.” 

Besides  which,  Mr.  N.  had  a favourite  sentiment,  which  I have  heard  him  ex- 
press in  different  ways  long  before  he  had  so  special  an  occasion  for  illustrating 
it  in  practice.  “ God  in  his  providence,”  he  used  to  say,  “ is  continually  bring- 
ing about  occasion  to  demonstrate  characters.”  He  used  to  instance  the  case  of 
A chan  and  Judas  among  bad  men  ; and  that  of  St.  Paul,  Acts  xxvii.  among  good 
ones.  “ If  any  one,”  said  he,  “ had  asked  the  centurion,  who  Paul  the  prisoner 
was,  that  sailed  with  them  on  board  the  ship-— it  is  probable  he  would  have  thus 
replied,  ‘ He  is  a troublesome  enthusiast,  who  had  lately  joined  himself  to  a 
certain  sect.  These  people  affirm,  that  a Jewish  malefactor,  who  was  crucified 
some  years  ago  at  Jerusalem,  rose  the  third  day  from  the  dead ; and  this  Paul  is 
mad  enough  to  assert,  that  Jesus,  the  leader  of  their  sect,  is  not  only  now  alive, 
but  that  he  himself  has  seen  him,  and  is  resolved  to  live  and  die  for  him — Poor 
crazy  creature !’  But  God  made  use  of  this  occasion  to  discover  the  real  charac- 
ter of  Paul,  and  taught  the  centurion,  from  the  circumstances  which  followed, 
to  whom  it  was  he  owed  his  direction  in  the  storm,  and  for  whose  sake  he  re- 
ceived his  preservation  through  it.” 

In  all  trying  occasions,  therefore,  Mr.  N.  was  particularly  impressed  with  the 
idea  of  a Christian,  and  especially  of  a Christian  minister,  being  called  to  stand 
forward  as  an  example  to  his  flock- — to  feel  himself  placed  in  a post  of  honour — 
a post  in  which  he  may  not  only  glorify  God,  but  also  forcibly  demonstrate  the 
peculiar  supports  of  the  gospel.  More  especially,  when  this  could  be  done  (as 
in  his  own  case)  from  no  doubtful  motive ; then  it  may  be  expedient  to  leave  the 
path  of  ordinary  custom,  for  the  greater  reason  of  exhibiting  both  the  doctrines  of 
truth,  and  the  experience  of  their  power. 

Though  I professedly  publish  none  of  Mr.  M.’s  letters,  for  reasons  hereafter  as- 
signed, yet  I shall  take  the  liberty  to  insert  part  of  one,  with  which  I am  fa- 
voured by  J.  F — — , Esq.  of  Stanmore  Hill,  written  to  him  while  at  Rome,  and 
dated  December  5th,  1798.  It  shows  the  interest  which  the  writer  took  in 
the  safety  of  his  friend,  and  his  address  in  attempting  to  break  the  enchantments 
with  which  men  of  taste  are  surrounded,  when  standing  in  the  centre  of  the 
fine  arts. 

“ The  true  Christian,  in  strict  propriety  of  speech,  has  no  home  here;  he  is, 
and  must  be,  a stranger  and  a pilgrim  upon  earth : his  citizenship,  treasure,  and 
real  home  are  in  a better  world ; and  every  step  he  takes,  whether  to  the  east,  or 
to  the  west,  is  a step  nearer  to  his  Father’s  house.  On  the  other  hand,  when  in 
the  path  of  duty,  he  is  always  at  home  ; for  the  whole  earth  is  the  Lord’s:  and  as 
we  see  the  same  sun  in  England  or  Italy,  in  Europe  or  Asia,  so  wherever  he  is, 
he  equally  sets  the  Lord  always  before  him ; and  finds  himself  equally  near  the 
throne  of  grace  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places.  God  is  every  where,  and,  by  faith  in  the 
great  Mediator,  he  dwells  in  God,  and  God  in  him ; to  him  that  line  of  Horace 
may  be  applied  in  the  best  sense, — 

t(  Cesium,  non  animum  mutant,  qui  trans  marc  currunt.” 

“ I trust,  my  dear  Sir,  that  you  will  carry  out  and  bring  home  with  you,  a de- 
termination similar  to  that  of  the  patriarch  Jacob  ; who  vowed  a vow,  saying,  ‘ If 
God  will  be  with  me,  and  will  keep  me  in  the  way  that  I go,  and  will  give  me 
bread  to  eat,  and  raiment  to  put  on,  so  that  I come  again  to  my  father’s  house  in 
peace,  then  shall  the  Lord  be  my  God  !’  May  the  Lord  himself  write  it  on  you 
heart ! 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


52 


“ You  are  now  at  Rome,  the  centre  of  the  tine  arts ; a place  abounding  with 
every  thing  to  gratify  a person  of  your  taste.  Athens  had  the  pre-eminence  in 
the  apostle  Paul’s  time ; and  I think  it  highly  probable,  from  many  passages  in 
his  writings,  that  he  likewise  had  a taste  capable  of  admiring  and  relishing  the 
beauties  of  painting,  sculpture,  and  architecture,  which  he  could  not  but  observe 
during  his  abode  in  that  city  ; but  then  he  had  a higher,  a spiritual,  a divine 
taste,  which  was  greatly  shocked  and  grieved  by  the  ignorance,  idolatry,  and 
wickedness,  which  surrounded  him,  insomuch  that  he  could  attend  to  nothing 
else.  This  taste,  which  cannot  be  acquired  by  any  effort  or  study  of  ours,  but  is 
freely  bestowed  on  all  who  sincerely  ask  it  of  the  Lord,  divests  the  vanities, 
which  the  world  admire,  of  their  glare ; and  enables  us  to  judge  of  the  most 
splendid  and  specious  works  of  men,  who  know  not  God,  according  to  the  de- 
claration of  the  prophet,  ‘ They  hatch  cockatrice  eggs,  and  weave  the  spider’s 
web.’  Much  ingenuity  is  displayed  in  the  weaving  of  a cobweb ; but  when 
finished  it  is  worthless  and  useless  : incubation  requires  close  diligence  and  at- 
tention ; if  the  hen  is  too  long  from  her  nest,  the  egg  is  spoiled  ; but  why  should 
she  sit  at  all  upon  the  egg,  and  watch  it,  and  warm  it  night  and  day,  if  it  only 
produce  a cockatrice  at  last  ? Thus  vanity  or  mischief  are  the  chief  rulers  of  un- 
sanctified genius  ; the  artists  spin  webs,  and  the  philosophers,  by  their  learned 
speculations,  hatch  cockatrices,  to  poison  themselves  and  their  fellow-creatures : 
few  of  either  sort  have  one  serious  thought  of  that  awful  eternity,  upon  the 
brink  of  which  they  stand  for  a while,  and  into  the  depth  of  which  they  suc- 
cessively fall. 

“ A part  of  the  sentence  denounced  against  the  city,  which  once  stood  upon 
seven  hills,  is  so  pointed  and  graphical,  that  I must  transcribe  it : ‘ And  the 
voice  of  harpers,  and  musicians,  and  pipers,  and  trumpeters,  shall  be  heard  no 
more  at  all  in  thee ; and  no  craftsman,  of  whatsoever  craft  he  be,  shall  be  found 
any  more  in  thee,  and  the  light  of  a candle  shall  no  more  be  seen  in  thee.’ 
Now,  I am  informed,  that,  upon  certain  occasions,  the  whole  cupola  of  St.  Peter’s 
is  covered  with  lamps,  and  affords  a very  magnificent  spectacle  : if  I saw  it,  it 
would  remind  me  of  that  time  wrhen  there  will  not  be  the  shining  of  a single 
candle  in  the  city  ; for  the  sentence  must  be  executed,  and  the  hour  may  be  ap- 
proaching : — 


Sic  transit  gloria  mundi ! 

“You  kindly  inquire  after  my  health  : myself  and  family  are,  through  the  di- 
vine favour,  perfectly  well ; yet,  healthy  as  I am,  I labour  under  a growing  dis- 
order, for  which  there  is  no  cure — I mean  old  age.  I am  not  sorry  it  is  a mortal 
disease,  from  which  no  one  recovers  ; for  who  would  live  always  in  such  a 
world  as  this,  who  has  a scriptural  hope  of  an  inheritance  in  the  world  of  light  ? 
I am  now  in  my  seventy-second  year,  and  seem  to  have  lived  long  enough  for 
myself;  I have  known  something  of  the  evil  of  life,  and  have  had  a large  share 
of  the  good.  I know  what  the  world  can  do,  and  what  it  cannot  do  : it  can 
neither  give  nor  take  away  that  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding 
it  cannot  soothe  a wounded  conscience,  nor  enable  us  to  meet  death  with  comfort. 
That  you,  my  dear  sir,  may  have  an  abiding  and  abounding  experience  that  the 
gospel  is  a catholicon,  adapted  to  all  our  wants  and  all  our  feelings,  and  a suitable 
help  when  every  other  help  fails,  is  the  sincere  and  ardent  prayer  of 

“ Your  affectionate  friend, 

“ JOHN  NEWTON.’1 

But  in  proportion  as  Mr.  N.  felt  the  vanity  of  the  pursuits  he  endeavoured  to 
expose  in  the  foregoing  letter,  he  was  as  feelingly  alive  to  whatever  regarded 
eternal  concerns.  Take  an  instance  of  this,  in  a visit  which  he  paid  to  another 
friend.  This  friend  was  a minister,  who  affected  great  accuracy  in  his  discourses, 
and  who,  on  that  Sunday,  had  nearly  occupied  an  hour  in  insisting  on  several 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


5*i 

laboured  and  nice  distinctions  made  in  his  subject.  As  he  had  a high  estimation 
of  Mr.  N.’s  judgment,  he  inquired  of  him,  as  they  walked  home,  whether  he 
thought  the  distinctions  just  now  insisted  on  were  full  and  judicious  ? Mr.  N. 
said  he  thought  them  not  full,  as  a very  important  one  had  been  omitted. 

What  can  that  be  ?”  said  the  minister ; “ for  I had  taken  more  than  ordinary  care 
to  enumerate  them  fully.”  “ I think  not,”  replied  Mr.  N.  ; “ for  when  many 
of  your  congregation  had  travelled  several  miles  for  a meal,  I think  you  should 
not  have  forgotten  the  important  distinction  which  must  ever  exist  between  meat 
and  bones.” 

In  the  year  1790,  Mr.  M.  had  the  honorary  degree  of  D.  D.  conferred  upon 
him  by  the  University  of  New-Jersey  in  America,  and  the  diploma  sent  him. 
He  also  received  a work  in  two  volumes,  dedicated  to  him  with  the  above  title 
annexed  to  his  name.  Mr.  N.  w'rote  the  author  a grateful  acknowledgment  for 
the  work,  but  begged  to  decline  an  honour  which  he  never  intended  to  accept. 
“ I am  (said  he,)  as  one  born  out  of  due  time.  I have  neither  the  pretension  nor 
wish  to  honours  of  this  kind.  However,  therefore,  the  University  may  overrate 
ray  attainments,  and  thus  shcnv  their  respect,  I must  not  forget  myself.  It  would 
be  both  vain  and  improper  were  I to  concur  in  it.” 

But  Mr.  N.  had  yet  another  storm  to  weather.  While  we  were  contemplating 
the  long  and  rough  voyage  he  had  passed,  and  thought  he  had  only  now  to  rest 
in  a quiet  haven,  and  with  a fine  sunsetting  at  the  close  of  the  evening  of  his  life, 
clouds  began  to  gather  again,  and  seemed  to  threaten  a wreck  at  the  very  entry 
of  the  port.* 

He  used  to  make  excursions  in  the  summer  to  different  friends  in  the  country, 
endeavouring  to  make  these  visits  profitable  to  them  and  their  neighbours,  by 
his  continual  prayers,  and  the  expositions  he  gave  of  the  scriptures  read  at  their 
morning  and  evening  wrorship.  I have  heard  of  some,  wrho  were  first  brought 
to  the  knowledge  of  themselves  and  of  God  by  attending  his  exhortations  on 
these  occasions ; for,  indeed,  besides  w hat  he  undertook  in  a more  stated  way  at 
the  church,  he  seldom  entered  a room,  but  something  both  profitable  and  entertain- 
ing fell  from  his  lips.  After  the  death  of  Miss  Cunningham  and  Mrs.  N.,  his 
companion  in  these  summer  excursions  was  his  other  niece,  Miss  Elizabeth  Cat- 
lett. This  young  lady  had  also  been  brought  up  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  N.  with  Miss 
Cunningham,  and  on  the  death  of  the  two  latter,  she  became  the  object  of  Mr. 
N.’s  naturally  affectionate  disposition.  She  also  became  quite  necessary  to  him 
by  her  administrations  in  his  latter  years ; she  watched  him,  walked  with  him, 
visited  wherever  he  went : when  his  sight  failed,  she  read  to  him,  divided  his 
food,  and  was  unto  him  all  that  a dutiful  daughter  could  be. 

But,  in  the  year  3 601 , a nervous  disorder  seized  her,  by  which  Mr.  N.  was 
obliged  to  submit  to  her  being  separated  from  him.  During  the  twelvemonth  it 
lasted,  the  w eight  of  the  affliction,  added  to  his  weight  of  years,  seemed  to  over- 
whelm him.  I extracted  a few'  of  his  reflections  on  the  occasion,  w7ritten  on 
some  blank  leaves  in  an  edition  of  his  Letters  to  a Wife,  which  he  lent  me  on  my 
undertaking  these  Memoirs,  and  subjoin  them  in  a note.!  It  may  give  the  reader 


* In  a MS.  note  on  a letter,  dated  15th  Dec.  1197,  he  writes,  “ Though  I am  not  so  sensibly  af- 
fected as  I could  wish,  I hope  I am  truly  affected  by  the  frequent  reviews  I make  of  my  past  life. 
Perhaps  the  annals  of  thy  church  scarcely  afford  an  instance  in  all  respects  so  singular.  Perhaps  thy 
grace  may  have  recovered  some  from  an  equal  decree  of  apostaev,  infidelity,  and  profligacy ; but  few 
of  them  have  been  redeemed  from  such  a state  of  misery  and  depression  as  I was  in,  upon  the  coast  of 
Africa,  when  thy  unsought  mercy  wrought  l'or  my  deliverance  : but  that  such  a wretch  should  not 
only  be  spared  and  pardoned,  but  reserved  to  the  honour  of  preaching  thy  gospel,  which  he  had  blas- 
phemed and  renounced,  and  at  length  be  placed  in  a very  public  situation,  and  favoured  with  accept- 
ance and  usefulness,  both  from  the  pulpit  and  the  press : so  that  my  poor  name  is  known  in  most  parts 
of  the  world,  where  there  are  any  who  know  thee — this  is  wondeful  indeed ! The  mope  thou  hast  ex- 
alted me,  the  more  I ought  to  abase  myself.” 

t “ August  1,  1801.  I now  enter  my  77th  year.  I have  been  exercised  this  year  with  a trying  and 
unexpected  change ; but  it  is  by  thy  appointment,  my  gracious  Lord ; and  thou  art  unchangeably  wise, 
good,  and  merciful.  Thou  gavest  me  my  dear  adopted  child.  Thou  didst  own  my  endeavours  to 
bring  her  up  for  thee.  I have  no  doubt  that  thou  hast  called  her  by  thy  grace.  I thank  thee  for  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


53 


pleasure  to  be  informed,  that  Miss  Catlett  returned  home — gradually  recovered — 
and  afterwards  married  a worthy  man  of  the  name  of  Smith. 

It  was  with  a mixture  of  delight  and  surprise,  that  the  friends  and  hearers  oi 
this  eminent  servant  of  God  beheld  him  bringing  forth  such  a measure  of  fruit  is 
extreme  age.  Though  then  almost  eighty  years  old,  his  sight  nearly  gone,  and 
incapable,  through  deafness,  of  joining  in  conversation,  yet  his  public  ministry 
was  regularly  continued,  and  maintained  with  a considerable  degree  of  his  formei 
animation.  His  memory,  indeed,  was  observed  to  fail,  but  his  judgment  in  di- 
vine things  still  remained  ; and  though  some  depression  of  spirits  was  observed, 
which  he  used  to  account  for  from  his  advanced  age,  his  perception,  taste,  and 
zeal  for  the  truths  he  had  long  received  and  taught,  were  evident.  Like 
Simeon,  having  seen  the  salvation  of  the  Lord,  he  now  only  waited  and  prayed 
to  depart  in  peace. 

After  Mr.  N.  was  turned  of  eighty,  some  of  his  friends  feared  he  might  continue 
his  public  ministrations  too  long  ; they  marked  not  only  his  infirmities  in  the 
pulpit,  but  felt  much  on  account  of  the  decrease  of  his  strength,  and  of  his  oc- 
casional depressions.  Conversing  with  him  in  January  1806  on  the  latter,  he 
observed,  that  he  had  experienced  nothing  which  in  the  least  affected  the  princi- 
ples he  had  felt  and  taught ; that  his  depressions  were  the  natural  result  of  four- 
score years,  and  that,  at  any  age,  we  can  only  enjoy  that  comfort  from  our 
principles  which  God  is  pleased  to  send.  “ But  (replied  I,)  in  the  article  of 
public  preaching,  might  it  not  be  best  to  consider  your  work  as  done,  and  stop 
before  you  evidently  discover  you  can  speak  no  longer?”  “ I cannot  stop,” 
said  he,  raising  his  voice  ; What ! shalt  the  old  African  blasphemer  stop  while 
he  can  speak  ?” 

In  every  future  visit  I perceived  old  age  making  rapid  strides.  At  length  his 
friends  found  some  difficulty  in  making  themselves  known  to  him:  his  sight,  his 
hearing,  and  his  recollection  exceedingly  failed  ; but,  being  mercifully  kept  from 
pain,  he  generally  appeared  easy  and  cheerful.  Whatever  he  uttered  was  per- 
fectly consistent  with  the  principles  he  had  so  long  and  so  honourably  main- 
tained. Calling  to  see  him  a few  days  before  he  died,  with  one  of  his  most 
intimate  friends,  we  could  not  make  him  recollect  either  of  us ; but  seeing  him 
afterwards,  when  sitting  up  in  his  chair,  I found  so  much  intellect  remaining  as 
produced  a short  and  affectionate  reply,  though  he  was  utterly  incapable  of  con- 
versation. 

Mr.  N.  declined  in  this  very  gradual  way,  till  at  length  it  was  painful  to  ask 
him  a question,  or  attempt  to  rouse  faculties  almost  gone  ; still  his  friends  were 
anxious  to  get  a word  from  him,  and  those  friends  who  survive  him  will  be  as  anx- 
ious to  learn  the  state  of  his  mind  in  his  latest  hours.  It  is  quite  natural  thus  to 
inquire,  though  it  is  not  important,  how  such  a decided  character  left  this  world. 
I have  heard  Mr.  N.  say,  when  he  has  heard  particular  inquiry  made  about  the 
last  expressions  of  an  eminent  believer,  “Tell  me  not  how  the  man  died,  but 
how  he  lived.” 

Still  I say  it  is  natural  to  inquire,  and  I will  meet  the  desire,  not  by  trying  to 
expand  uninteresting  particulars,  but  as  far  as  I can  collect  encouraging  facts , 


many  years  comfort  (ten)  I have  had  in  her,  and  for  the  attention  and  affection  she  has  always  shown 
me,  exceeding  that  of  most  daughters  to  their  own  parents.  Thou  hast  now  tried  me,  as  thou  didst 
Abraham,  in  my  old  age ; when  my  eyes  are  failing,  and  my  strength  declines.  Thou  hast  called  for 
my  Isaac,  who  had  so  Tong  been  my  chief  stay  and  staff ; but  it  was  thy  blessing  that  made  her  so.  A 
nervous  disorder  has  seized  her,  and  I desire  to  leave  her  under  thy  care  ; and  chiefly  pray  for  myself, 
that  I may  be  enabled  to  await  thy  time  and  will,  without  betraying  any  signs  of  impatience  or  de- 
spondency unbecoming  my  profession  and  character.  Hitherto  thou  hast  helped  me ; and  to  thee  I 
look  for  help  in  future.  Let  all  issue  in  thy  glory,  that  my  friends  and  hearers  may  be  encouraged  by 
seeing  how  I am  supported  : let  thy  strength  be  manifested  in  my  weakness,  and  thy  grace  be  sufficient 
for  me,  and  let  all  finally  work  together  for  our  good.  Amen.  I aim  to  say  from  my  heart,  not  my 
will,  but  thine  be  done.  But  though  thou  hast  in  a measure  made  my  spirit  willing,  thou  knowest, 
and  I feel,  that  the  flesh  is  weak.  Lord,  I believe  ; help  thou  my  unbelief.  Lord,  I submit,  subdue 
every  rebellious  thought  that  dares  arise  against  thy  will.  Spare  my  eyes,  if  it  please  thee ; but,  above 
all,  strengthen  my  faith  and  love.” 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


54 

and  I learn  from  a paper,  kindly  sent  me  by  his  family,  all  that  is  interesting  and 
authentic. 

About  a month  before  Mr.  N.’s  death,  Mr.  Smith’s  neice  was  sitting  by  him, 
to  whom  he  said,  It  is  a great  thing  to  die  ; and  when  flesh  and  heart  fail,  to 
have  God  for  the  strength  of  our  heart,  and  our  portion  for  ever:  I know  whom 
I have  believed,  and  he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I have  committed,  against 
that  great  day.  Henceforth  there  is  laid  up  for  me  a crown  of  righteousness, 
which  the  Lord,  the  righteous  judge,  shall  give  me  at  that  day.” 

When  Mrs.  Smith  came  into  the  room,  he  said,  “ I have  been  meditating  on 
a subject,  ‘ Come,  and  hear,  all  ye  that  fear  God,  and  I will  declare  what  he  hath 
done  for  my  soul.’  ” 

At  another  time  he  said,  “More  light,  more  love,  more  liberty — Hereafter  I 
hope,  when  I shut  my  eyes  on  the  things  of  time,  I shall  open  them  in  a better 
world.  What  a thing  it  is  to  live  under  the  shadow  of  the  wings  of  the  Al- 
might}^ ! I am  going  the  way  of  all  flesh.”  And  when  one  replied,  “ The  Lord  is 
gracious,”  he  answered,  “ If  it  were  not  so,  how  could  l dare  to  stand  before 
him  ?” 

The  Wednesday  before  he  died,  Mrs.  G asked  him  if  his  mind  was  com- 

fortable ; he  replied,  “ I am  satisfied  with  the  Lord’s  will.” 

Mr.  N.  seemed  sensible  to  his  last  hour,  but  expressed  nothing  remarkable 
after  these  wrords.  He  departed  on  the  21st,  and  was  buried  in  the  vault  of  his 
church  the  31st  of  December  1807,  having  left  the  following  injunction,  in  a let- 
ter for  the  direction  of  his  executors. 

“ I propose  writing  an  epitaph  for  myself,  if  it  may  be  put  up,  on  a plain 
marble  tablet,  near  the  vestry  door,  to  the  following  purport : — 

John  Newton,  Clerk, 

Once  an  infidel  and  libertine, 

A servant  of  slaves  in  Africa, 

Was  by  the  rich  mercy  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ, 

Preserved,  restored,  pardoned, 

And  appointed  to  preach  the  faith  he 
Had  long  laboured  to  destroy, 

Near  1(5  years  at  Olney  in  Bucks ; 

And  — years  in  this  church. 

On  Feb.  I,  1750,  he  married 
Mary, 

Daughter  of  the  late  George  Catlett, 

Of  Chatham,  Kent. 

He  resigned  her  to  the  Lord  who  gave  her, 

On  the  15th  of  December,  1790. 

“ And  1 earnestly  desire,  that  no  other  monument,  and  no  inscription  but  to 
this  purport,  may  be  attempted  for  me.” 

The  following  is  a copy  of  the  exordium  of  Mr.  Newton’s  will,  dated  June 
13,  1803 : — 


“ In  the  name  of  God,  amen.  I,  John  Newton,  of  Coleman  street  Buildings, 
in  the  parish  of  St.  Stephen,  Coleman  Street,  iiLthe  city  of  London,  Clerk,  being 
through  mercy  in  good  health  and  of  sound  and  disposing  mind,  memory,  and  un- 
derstanding, although  in  the  seventy-eighth  year  of  my  age,  do,  for  the  settling 
of  my  temporal  concerns,  and  for  the  disposal  of  all  the  worldly  estate  which  it 
hath  pleased  the  Lord  in  his  good  providence  to  give  me,  make  this  my  last  Will 
and  Testament  as  follows.  I commit  my  soul  to  my  gracious  God  and  Saviour 
who  mercifully  spared  and  preserved  me,  when  I was  an  apostate,  a blasphemer 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


55 


and  an  infidel,  and  delivered  me  from  that  state  of  misery  on  the  coast  of  Africa 
into  which  my  obstinate  wickedness  had  plunged  me ; and  who  has  been 
pleased  to  admit  me  (though  most  unworthy,)  to  preach  his  glorious  gospel.  I 
rely  with  humble  confidence  upon  the  atonement  and  mediation  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  God  and  Man,  which  I have  often  proposed  to  others  as  the  only  founda- 
tion whereon  a sinner  can  build  his  hope  ; trusting  that  he  will  guard  and  guide 
me  through  the  uncertain  remainder  of  my  life,  and  that  he  will  then  admit  me 
into  his  presence  in  his  heavenly  kingdom.  I would  have  my  body  deposited 
in  the  vault  under  the  parish  church  of  St.  Mary  Woolnoth,  close  to  the  coffins 
of  my  late  dear  wife  and  my  dear  niece  Elizabeth  Cunningham ; and  it  is  my 
desire,  that  my  funeral  may  be  performed  with  as  little  expense  as  possible,  con  - 
sistent with  decency.”—-- - 


0 


REVIEW 


OF 

MR.  NEWTON’S  CHARACTER. 


There  seems  to  be  little  need  of  giving  a general  character  of  Mr.  N.  after 
the  particulars  which  appear  in  the  foregoing  Memoirs.  He  unquestionably  was 
the  child  of  a peculiar  providence,  in  every  step  of  his  progress ; and  his  deep 
sense  of  the  extraordinary  dispensation  through  which  he  had  passed,  was  the 
prominent  topic  in  his  conversation.  Those  who  personally  knew  the  man,  could 
have  no  doubt  of  the  probity  with  which  his  Narrative  (singular  as  it  may  ap- 
pear) was  written.  They,  however,  wTho  could  not  view  the  subject  of  these  Me- 
moirs so  nearly  as  his  particular  friends  did,  may  wish  to  learn  something  farther 
of  his  character  with  respect  to  his  literary  attainments — his  ministry — 

his  FAMILY  HABITS his  WRITINGS and  his  FAMILIAR  CONVERSATION. 

Of  his  literature,  we  learn  from  his  Narrative  what  he  attained  in  the 
learned  languages,  and  that  by  almost  incredible  efforts.  Few  men  have  un- 
dertaken such  difficulties,  under  such  disadvantages.  It,  therefore,  seems  more 
extraordinary  that  he  should  have  attained  so  much,  than  that  he  should  not 
have  acquired  more.  Nor  did  he  quit  his  pursuits  of  this  kind,  but  in  order  to 
gain  that  knowledge  which  he  deemed  much  more  important.  Whatever  he 
conceived  had  a tendency  to  qualify  him  as  “ a scribe  well  instructed  in  the 
kingdom  of  God,  bringing  out  of  his  treasury  things  new  and  old” — I say,  in 
pursuit  of  this  point,  he  might  have  adopted  the  apostle’s  expression,  “ One  thing 
[ do.”  By  a principle  so  simply  and  firmly  directed,  he  furnished  his  mind 
with  much  information : he  had  consulted  the  best  old  divines ; had  read  the 
moderns  of  reputation  with  avidity  ; and  was  continually  watching  whatever 
might  serve  for  analogies  or  illustrations,  in  the  service  of  religion.  ‘£  A minis- 
ter,” he  used  to  say,  “ wherever  he  is,  should  be  always  in  his  study.  He  should 
look  at  every  man,  and  at  every  thing,  as  capable  of  affording  him  some  instruc- 
tion.” His  mind,  therefore,  was  ever  intent  on  his  calling — ever  extracting  some- 
thing, even  from  the  basest  materials,  which  he  could  turn  into  gold. 

In  consequence  of  this  incessant  attention  to  his  object,  while  many,  whose 
early  advantages  greatly  exceeded  his,  were  found  excelling  Mr.  N.  in  the  know- 
ledge and  investigation  of  some  curious  abstract,  but  very  unimportant  points  ; 
he  was  found  vastly  excelling  them  in  points  of  infinitely  higher  importance  to 
man.  In  the  knowledge  of  God,  of  his  word,  and  of  the  human  heart,  in  its 
wants  and  resources,  Newton  would  have  stood  among  mere  scholars  as  his 
name-sake  the  philosopher  stood  in  science  among  ordinary  men.  I might  say 
the  same  of  some  others  who  have  set  out  late  in  the  profession,  but  who,  with 
a portion  of  Mr.  N.’s  piety  and  ardour,  have  greatly  outstripped  those  who  have 
had  every  early  advantage  and  encouragement.  Men  with  specious  titles  and 
high  connexions  have  received  the  rewards;  while  men,  like  Newton,  without 
them,  have  done  the  work. 

With  respect  to  his  ministry,  he  appeared,  perhaps,  to  least  advantage  in  the 
pulpit ; as  he  did  not  generally  aim  at  accuracy  in  the  composition  of  his  ser- 
mons, nor  at  any  address  in  the  delivery  of  them.  His  utterance  was  far  from 
clear,  and  his  attitudes  ungraceful.  He  possessed,  however,  so  much  affection  foi 

56 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


57 


his  people,  and  zeal  for  their  best  interests,  that  the  defect  of  his  manner  Was 
of  little  consideration  with  his  constant  hearers:  at  the  same  time,  his  capacity, 
and  habit  of  entering  into  their  trials  and  experience,  gave  the  highest  interest 
to  his  ministry  among  them.  Besides  which,  he  frequently  interspersed  the 
most  brilliant  allusions,  and  brought  forward  such  happy  illustration  of  his  sub- 
ject, and  those  with  so  much  unction  on  his  own  heart,  as  melted  and  enlarged 
theirs.  The  parent-like  tenderness  and  affection  which  accompanied  his  instruc- 
tion, made  them  prefer  him  to  preachers,  who,  on  other  accounts,  were  much 
more  generally  popular.  It  ought  also  to  be  noted,  that  amidst  the  extravagant 
notions  and  unscriptural  positions,  which  have  sometimes  disgraced  the  religious 
world,  Mr.  N.  never  departed,  in  any  instance,  from  soundly  and  seriously  pro- 
mulgating the  “ faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints,”  of  which  his  writings  will 
remain  the  best  evidence.  His  doctrine  was  strictly  that  of  the  Church  of  Eng- 
land, urged  on  the  consciences  of  men  in  the  most  practical  and  experimental 
manner.  “ I hope,”  said  he  one  day  to  me,  smiling,  “ I hope  I am  upon  the 
whole  a scriptural  preacher  : for  I find  I am  considered  as  an  Arminian  among 
the  high  Calvinists,  and  as  a Calvinist  among  the  strenuous  Arminians.” 

I never  observed  any  thing  like  bigotry  in  his  ministerial  character,  though  he 
seemed  at  all  times  to  appreciate  the  beauty  of  order,  and  its  good  effects  in  the 
ministry.  He  had  formerly  been  intimately  connected  with  some  highly  re- 
spectable ministers  among  the  dissenters,  and  retained  a cordial  regard  for  many 
to  the  last.  He  considered  the  strong  prejudices  w hich  attach  to  both  Church- 
men and  Dissenters,  as  arising  more  from  education  than  from  principle.  But 
being  himself  both  a clergyman  and  an  incumbent  in  the  Church  of  England,  he 
wished  to  be  consistent.  In  public,  therefore,  he  felt  he  could  not  act  with  some 
ministers,  whom  he  thought  truly  good  men,  and  to  whom  he  cordially  wished 
success  in  their  endeavours;  and  he  patiently  met  the  consequence.  They  called 
him  a bigot,  and  he  in  return  prayed  for  them  that  they  might  not  be  really  such. 

He  had  formerly  taken  much  pains  in  composing  his  sermons,  as  I could 
perceive  in  one  MS.  which  I looked  through  ; and  even  latterly,  I have  known 
him,  whenever  he  felt  it  necessary,  produce  admirable  plans  for  the  pulpit.  I 
own  I thought  his  judgment  deficient  in  not  deeming  such  preparation  necessary 
at  all  times.  I have  sat  in  pain  when  he  has  spoken  unguardedly  in  this  way 
before  young  ministers : men,  who,  with  but  comparatively  slight  degrees  of  his 
information  and  experience,  would  drajsr  encouragement  to  ascend  the  pulpit  with 
but  little  previous  study  of  their  subject.  A minister  is  not  to  be  blamed,  who 
cannot  rise  to  qualifications  which  some  of  his  brethren  have  attained ; but  he  is 
certainly  bound  to  improve  his  own  talent  to  the  utmost  of  his  power : he  is  not  to 
cover  his  sloth,  his  love  of  company,  or  his  disposition  to  attend  a wealthy  patron, 
with  the  pretence  of  depending  entirely  on  divine  influence.  Timothy  had  at 
least  as  good  ground  for  expecting  such  influence  as  any  of  his  successors  in  the 
ministry  ; and  yet  the  apostle  admonishes  him  to  “give  attendance  to  reading, 
to  exhortation,  and  to  doctrine — not  to  neglect  the  gift  that  was  in  him — -to  me- 
ditate upon  these  things — to  give  himself  wholly  to  them,  that  his  profiting 
might  appear  to  all.” 

Mr.  N.  regularly  preached  on  the  Sunday  morning  and  evening  at  St.  Mary 
Woolnoth,  and  also  on  the  Wednesday  morning.  After  he  was  turned  of  seven- 
ty, he  often  undertook  to  assist  other  clergymen ; sometimes  even  to  the  preach- 
ing six  sermons  in  the  space  of  a week.  What  was  more  extraordinary,  he  con- 
tinued his  usual  course  of  preaching  at  his  own  church  after  he  was  fourscore  years 
old,  and  that  when  he  could  no  longer  see  to  read  his  text ! His  memory  and 
voice  sometimes  failed  him ; but  it  was  remarked,  that,  at  this  great  age,  he  was 
nowhere  more  collected  or  lively  than  in  the  pulpit.  He  was  punctual  as  to  time 
with  his  congregation;  and  preached  every  first  Sunday  evening  in  the  month  on 
relative  duties.  Mr.  Alderman  Lea  regularly  sent  his  carriage  to  convey  him  to 
the  church,  and  Mr.  Bates  sent  his  servant  to  attend  him  in  the  pulpit;  which 
friendly  assistance  was  continued  till  Mr.  N.  could  appear  no  longer  in  public. 


58 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


His  ministerial  visits  were  exemplary.  I do  not  recollect  one,  though  favoured 
with  many,  in  which  his  general  information  and  lively  genius  did  not  commu- 
nicate instruction,  and  his  affectionate  and  condescending  sympathy  did  not 
leave  comfort. 

Truth  demands  it  should  be  said,  that  he  did  not  always  administer  consolation 
nor  give  an  account  of  characters,  with  sufficient  discrimination.  His  talent  did 
not  lie  in  “discerning  of  spirits.”  I never  saw  him  so  much  moved  as  when 
any  friend  endeavoured  to  correct  his  errors  in  this  respect.  His  credulity  seem- 
ed to  arise  from  the  consciousness  he  had  of  his  own  integrity,  and  from  that  sort 
of  parental  fondness  which  he  bore  to  all  his  friends,  real  or  pretended.  I knew 
one,  since  dead,  whom  he  thus  described,  while  living — “ He  is  certainly  an 
odd  man,  and  has  his  failings;  but  he  has  great  integrity,  and  I hope  is  going  to 
heaven.”  Whereas  almost  all  who  knew  him  thought  the  man  should  go  first 
into  the  pillory  ! 

In  his  family  Mr.  N.  might  be  admired  more  safely  than  imitated.  His  ex- 
cessive attachment  to  Mrs.  N.  is  so  fully  displayed  in  his  Narrative,  and  con- 
firmed in  the  two  volumes  he  thought  proper  to  publish,  entitled,  “ Letters  to  a 
Wife,”  that  the  reader  will  need  no  information  on  this  subject.  Some  of  his 
friends  wished  this  violent  attachment  had  been  cast  more  into  the  shade,  as  tend- 
ing to  furnish  a spur,  where  human  nature  generally  needs  a curb.  He  used, 
indeed,  to  speak  of  such  attachments,  in  the  abstract,  as  idolatry ; though  his 
own  was  providentially  ordered  to  be  the  main  hinge  on  which  his  preservation 
and  deliverance  turned,  while  in  his  worst  state.  Good  men,  however,  cannot 
be  too  cautious  how  they  give  sanction,  by  their  expressions  or  example,  to  a 
passion,  'which,  when  not  under  sober  regulation,  has  overwhelmed  not  only 
families,  but  states,  with  disgrace  and  ruin. 

With  his  unusual  degree  of  benevolence  and  affection,  it  was  not  extraordinary 
that  the  spiritual  interests  of  his  servants  were  brought  forward,  and  examined 
severally  every  Sunday  afternoon  ; and  that,  being  treated  like  children,  they 
should  grow  old  in  his  service.  In  short,  Mr.  N.  could  live  no  longer  than  he 
could  love  ; it  is  no  wonder,  therefore,  if  his  nieces  had  more  of  his  heart  than 
is  generally  afforded  to  their  own  children  by  the  fondest  parents.  It  has  already 
been  mentioned,  that  his  house  was  an  asylum  for  the  perplexed  and  afflicted. 
Young  ministers  were  peculiarly  the  objects  of  his  attention:  he  instructed  them, 
he  encouraged  them,  he  warned  them ; and  might  truly  be  said  to  be  a father  in 
Christ,  “ spending  and  being  spent”  for  the  interest  of  his  church.  In  order 
thus  to  execute  the  various  avocations  of  the  day,  he  used  to  rise  early  ; he  sel- 
dom was  found  abroad  in  the  evening,  and  was  exact  in  his  appointments. 

Of  liis  writings,  I think  little  need  be  said  here  ; they  are  in  wide  circulation, 
and  be&t  speak  for  themselves.  What  I shall  observe  upon  them,  therefore,  will 
be  general  and  cursory. 

The  Sermons  Mr.  N.  published  at  Liverpool,  after  being  refused  on  his  first 
application  for  Orders,  were  intended  to  show  what  he  would  have  preached, 
had  he  been  admitted  ; they  are  highly  creditable  to  his  understanding  and  to 
his  heart.  The  facility  with  which  he  attained  so  much  of  the  learned  languages 
seems  partly  accounted  for,  from  his  being  able  to  acquire,  so  early,  a neat  and 
natural  style  in  his  own  language,  and  that  under  such  evident  disadvantages. 
His  Review  of  Ecclesiastical  History,  so  far  as  it  proceeded,  has  been  much  es- 
teemed ; and,  if  it  had  done  no  more  than  excite  the  Rev.  J.  Milner  (as  that 
most  valuable  and  instructive  author  informs  us  it  did)  to  pursue  Mr.  N.’s  idea 
more  largely,  it  was  sufficient  success.  Before  this,  the  world  seems  to  have  lost 
sight  of  a history  of  real  Christianity,  and  to  have  been  content  with  what,  for 
the  most  part,  was  but  an  account  of  the  ambition  and  politics  of  secular  men, 
assuming  the  Christian  name. 

It  must  be  evident  to  any  one,  who  observes  the  spirit  of  all  his  sermons, 
hymns,  tracts,  &c.  that  nothing  is  aimed  at  which  should  be  met  bv  critical  in- 
vestigation. In  the  preface  to  his  hymns,  he  remarks,  “ Though  I would  v-r> 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


59 


offend  readers  of  taste  by  a wilful  coarseness  and  negligence,  1 do  not  write  pro- 
fessedly for  them.  I have  simply  declared  my  own  views  and  feelings,  as  I 
might  have  done  if  I had  composed  hymns  in  some  of  the  newly  discovered 
islands  in  the  South  sea,  where  no  person  had  any  knowledge  of  the  name  of 
Jesus  but  myself.” 

To  dwell,  therefore,  with  a critical  eye  on  this  part  of  his  public  character, 
would  be  absurd  and  impertinent,  and  to  erect  a tribunal  to  which  he  seems  not 
amenable.  He  appears  to  have  paid  no  regard  to  a nice  ear,  or  an  accurate  re- 
viewer ; but,  preferring  a style  at  once  neat  and  perspicuous,  to  have  laid  out 
himself  entirely  for  the  service  of  the  church  of  God,  and  more  especially  for  the 
tried  and  experienced  part  of  its  members. 

His  chief  excellence  seemed  to  lie  in  the  easy  and  natural  style  of  his  episto 
lary  correspondence.  His  letters  will  be  read  while  real  religion  exists  ; and  the) 
are  the  best  draught  of  his  own  mind. 

He  had  so  largely  communicated  to  his  friends  in  this  way,  that  I have  heard 
him  say,  “ he  thought,  if  his  letters  were  collected,  they  would  make  several 
folios.”  He  selected  many  of  these  for  publication,  and  expressed  a hope,  thal 
no  other  person  would  take  that  liberty  with  the  rest,  which  were  so  widely 
spread  abroad.  In  this,  however,  he  was  disappointed  and  grieved,  as  he  once 
remarked  to  me  ; and  for  which  reason  I do  not  annex  any  letters  that  I received 
from  him.  He  esteemed  that  collection  published  under  the  title  of  Cardipho- 
nia”  as  the  most  useful  of  his  writings,  and  mentioned  various  instances  of  the 
benefits  which  he  heard  they  had  conveyed  to  many. 

His  Apologia,  or  defence  of  conformity,  was  written  on  occasion  of  some  reflec- 
tions (perhaps  only  jocular)  cast  on  him  at  that  time.  His  Letters  to  a Wife, 
written  during  his  three  voyages  to  Africa,  and  published  1793,  have  been  re- 
ceived with  less  satisfaction  than  most  of  his  other  writings.  While,  however, 
his  advanced  age  and  inordinate  fondness  may  be  pleaded  for  this  publication, 
care  should  be  taken  lest  men  fall  into  a contrary  extreme ; and  suppose  that 
temper  to  be  their  wisdom,  which  leads  them  to  avoid  another,  which  they  consider 
as  his  weakness.  But  his  Messiah,  before  mentioned,  his  Letters  of  the  Rev 
Mr.  Vanlier,  chaplain  at  the  Cape,  his  Memoirs  of  the  Rev.  John  Cowper 
(brother  to  the  poet,)  and  those  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Grimshaw  of  Yorkshire,  together 
with  his  single  sermons  and  tracts,  have  been  well  received,  and  will  remain  a 
public  benefit. 

I recol'lect  reading  a MS.  which  Mr.  N.  lent  me,  containing  a correspondence 
that  had  passed  between  himself  and  the  Rev.  Dr.  Dixon,  principal  of  St.  Edmund 
Hall,  Oxford ; and  another  MS.  of  a correspondence  between  him  and  the  late 
Rev.  Martin  Madan.  They  would  have  been  very  interesting  to  the  public,  par- 
ticularly the  latter,  and  were  striking  evidences  of  Mr.  N.’s  humility,  piety,  and 
faithfulness;  but  reasons  of  delicacy  led  him  to  commit  the  whole  to  the  flames. 

To  speak  of  his  writings  in  the  mass,  they  certainly  possess  what  many  have 
aimed  at,  but  very  few  attained,  namely  originality.  They  are  the  language  of 
the  heart;  they  show  a deep  experience  of  its  religious  feelings,  a continual  anxiety 
to  sympathize  with  man  in  his  wants,  and  to  direct  him  to  his  only  resources. 

His  conversation,  and  familiar  habits  with  his  friends,  were  more  peculiar, 
amusing,  and  instructive,  than  any  I ever  witnessed.  It  is  difficult  to  convey 
a clear  idea  of  them  by  description.  I venture,  therefore,  to  add  a few  pages  of 
what  I may  call  his  table-talk , which  I took  down  at  different  times,  both  in 
company  and  in  private,  from  his  lips.  Such  a collection  of  printed  remarks 
will  not  have  so  much  point  as  when  spoken  in  connexion  with  the  occasion 
that  produced  them  : they  must  appear  to  considerable  disadvantage  thus  detached, 
and  candid  allowance  should  be  made  by  the  reader  on  this  account.  They, 
however,  who  had  the  privilege  of  Mr.  N.’s  conversation  when  living,  cannot 
but  recognize  the  speaker  in  most  of  them,  and  derive  both  profit  and  pleasure 
from  these  remains  of  their  late  valuable  friend ; and  such  as  had  not,  will  (if  I 
do  not  mistake)  think  them  the  most  valuable  part  of  this  book 


REMARKS 


MADE  BY  MR.  NEWTON 

IN  FAMILIAR  CONVERSATION. 


While  the  mariner  uses  the  loadstone,  the  philosopher  may  attempt  to  inves- 
tigate the  cause ; but  after  all,  in  steering  through  the  ocean,  he  can  make  no 
other  use  of  it  than  the  mariner. 

If  an  angel  were  sent  to  find  the  most  perfect  man,  he  would  probably  not  find 
him  composing  a body  of  divinity,  but  perhaps  a cripple  in  a poor-house,  whom 
the  parish  wish  dead,  and  humbled  before  God  with  far  lower  thoughts  of  him- 
self than  others  think  of  him. 

When  a Christian  goes  into  the  world,  because  he  sees  it  is  his  call,  yet,  while 
he  feels  it  also  his  cross,  it  will  not  hurt  him. 

Satan  will  seldom  come  to  a Christian  with  a gross  temptation  : a green  log 
and  a candle  may  be  safely  left  together ; but  bring  a few  shavings,  then  some 
small  sticks,  and  then  larger,  and  you  may  soon  bring  the  green  log  to  ashes. 

If  two  angels  came  down  from  heaven  to  execute  a divine  command,  and  one 
was  appointed  to  conduct  an  empire,  and  the  other  to  sweep  a street  in  it,  they 
would  feel  no  inclination  to  change  employments. 

The  post  of  honour  in  an  army  is  not  with  the  baggage,  nor  with  the  women 

What  some  call  providential  openings  are  often  powerful  temptations ; the 
heart,  in  wandering,  cries,  Here  is  a way  opened  before  me  ; but,  perhaps,  not 
to  be  trodden,  but  rejected. 

Young  people  marry  as  others  study  navigation,  by  the  fire-side.  If  they 
marry  unsuitably,  they  can  scarcely  bring  things  to  rule  ; but,  like  sailors,  they 
must  sail  as  near  the  wind  as  they  can.  I feel  myself  like  a traveller  with  his 
wife  in  his  chaise  and  one ; if  the  ground  is  smooth,  and  she  keep  the  right 
pace,  and  is  willing  to  deliver  the  reins  when  I ask  for  them,  I am  always  willing 
to  let  her  drive. 

I should  have  thought  mowers  very  idle  people ; but  they  work  while  they 
whet  their  scythes.  Now  devotedness  to  God,  whether  it  mows  or  whets  the 
scythe,  still  goes  on  with  the  work. 

A Christian  should  never  plead  spirituality  for  being  a sloven  ; if  he  be  but  a 
shoe-cleaner,  he  should  be  the  best  in  the  parish. 

In  chosing  my  text,  I feel  myself  like  a servant  to  whom  a key  has  been  given, 
which  opens  a particular  drawer,  but  who  has  not  the  bunch  of  keys,  which 
open  all  the  drawers.  I therefore  expect  to  be  helped  to  only  one  text  at  a 
time. 

My  course  of  study,  like  that  of  a surgeon,  has  principally  consisted  in  walking 
the  hospital. 

In  divinity,  as  well  as  in  other  professions,  there  are  the  little  artists.  A man 
may  be  able  to  execute  the  buttons  of  a statue  very  neatly,  but  I could  not  cal 
him  an  able  artist.  There  is  an  air,  there  is  a taste,  to  which  his  narrow  capa 
city  cannot  reach.  Now  in  the  church,  there  are  your  dexterous  button-makers. 

My  principal  method  for  defeating  heresy,  is  by  establishing  truth.  One 
proposes  to  fill  a bushel  with  tares ; now  if  I can  fill  it  first  with  wheat,  I shall 
defy  his  attempts. 

When  some  people  talk  of  religion,  they  mean  they  have  heard  so  many  ser- 

60 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


61 


mons,  and  performed  so  many  devotions,  and  thus  mistake  the  meavts  for  the 
end.  But  true  religion  is  an  habitual  recollection  of  God  and  intention  to  serve 
him,  and  thus  turns  every  thing  into  gold.  We  are  apt  to  suppose  that  we 
need  something  splendid  to  evince  our  devotion,  but  true  devotion  equals  things 
— washing  plates,  and  cleaning  shoes,  is  a high  office,  if  performed  in  a right 
spirit.  If  three  angels  were  sent  to  earth,  they  would  feel  perfect  indifference 
who  should  perform  the  part  of  prime-minister,  parish-minister,  or  watchman. 

When  a ship  goes  to  sea,  among  the  vast  variety  of  its  articles  and  circumstances, 
there  is  but  one  object  regarded,  namely,  doing  the  business  of  the  voyage:  every 
bucket  is  employed  with  respect  to  that. 

Many  have  puzzled  themselves  about  the  origin  of  evil ; I observe  there  is 
evil,  and  that  there  is  a way  to  escape  it,  and  with  this  I begin  and  end. 

Consecrated  things  under  the  law  were  first  sprinkled  with  blood,  and  then 
anointed  with  oil,  and  thenceforward  were  no  more  common.  Thus  under  the 
gospel,  every  Christian  has  been  a common  vessel  for  profane  purposes  ; but, 
when  sprinkled  and  anointed,  he  becomes  separated  and  consecrated  to  God. 

I would  not  give  a straw  for  that  assurance,  which  sin  will  not  damp.  If 
David  had  come  from  his  adultery,  and  had  talked  of  his  assurance  at  that  time, 
I should  have  despised  his  speech. 

A spirit  of  adoption  is  the  spirit  of  a child  ; he  may  disoblige  his  father,  yet 
he  is  not  afraid  of  being  turned  out  of  doors.  The  union  is  not  dissolved,  though 
the  communion  is.  He  is  not  well  with  his  father,  therefore  must  be  unhappy, 
as  their  interests  are  inseparable. 

We  often  seek  to  apply  cordials  when  the  patient  is  not  prepared  for  them, 
and  it  is  the  patient’s  advantage,  that  he  cannot  take  a medicine  when  prema- 
turely offered.  When  a man  comes  to  me,  and  says,  “ I am  quite  happy,”  I am 
not  sorry  to  find  him  come  again  with  some  fears.  I never  saw  a work  stand 
well  without  a check.  “ I only  want,”  says  one,  “ to  be  sure  of  being  safe,  and 
then  I will  go  on.”  No  ; perhaps  then  you  will  go  off. 

For  an  old  Christian  to  say  to  a young  one,  “ Stand  in  my  evidence,”  is 
like  a man,  who  has  with  difficulty  climbed  by  a ladder  or  scaffolding  to  the  top 
of  the  house,  and  cries  to  one  at  the  bottom,  “ This  is  the  place  for  a prospect — 
come  up  at  a step  ” 

A Christian,  like  a miser,  will  ask  the  price  of  his  pleasures : the  miser  has  no 
objection  to  go  to  Brighton,  but  always  asks  what  it  will  cost  ? The  miser,  indeed, 
has  this  advantage,  that  he  is  always  in  the  same  frame. 

A Christian  in  the  world,  is  like  a man  who  has  had  a long  intimacy  with  one 
whom  at  length  he  finds  out  was  the  murderer  of  a kind  father ; the  intimacy, 
after  this,  will  surely  be  broken. 

“ Except  a man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God.”  A man 
may  live  in  a deep  mine  in  Hungary,  never  having  seen  the  light  of  the  sun  ; 
he  may  have  received  accounts  of  prospects,  and  by  the  help  of  a candle,  may 
have  examined  a few  engravings  of  them ; but  let  him  be  brought  out  of  the 
mine,  and  set  on  the  mountain,  what  a difference  appears  ! 

In  our  fallen  state,  we  are  a sort  of  solecism  in  the  universe  : other  animals  are 
faithful  to  their  instincts ; lambs  do  not  wish  to  swim,  nor  fish  to  feed  in  a mea- 
dow. If  the  sun  were  a rational  creature  he  would  delight  to  shine,  otherwise 
he  ought  to  be  extinguished. 

Candour  will  always  allow  much  for  inexperience.  I have  been  thirty  years 
forming  my  own  views,  and  in  the  course  of  this  time  some  of  my  hills  have 
been  sinking,  and  some  of  my  valleys  have  risen  ; but  how  unreasonable  would 
it  be  to  expect  all  this  should  take  place  in  another  person,  and  that  in  the  course 
of  a year  or  two. 

Candour  forbids  us  to  estimate  a character  from  its  accidental  blots.  Yet  it  is 
thus  that  David,  and  others  have  been  treated. 

Apollos  met  with  two  candid  people  in  the  church  : they  neither  ran  away 
because  he  was  legal,  nor  were  carried  away  because  he  was  eloquent. 


62 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


There  is  the  analogy  of  faith  ; it  is  a master-key,  which  not  only  opens  par- 
ticular doors,  but  carries  you  through  the  whole  house ; but  an  attachment  to  a 
rigid  system  is  dangerous.  Luther  once  turned  out  the  epistle  of  St.  James,  be- 
cause it  disturbed  his  system.  Dr.  Owen  will  be  ashamed  of  his  wisdom  and 
clearness,  live  minutes  after  he  has  been  in  heaven.  I shall  preach,  perhaps, 
very  usefully  upon  two  opposite  texts,  while  kept  apart;  but  if  I attempt  nicely 
to  reconcile  them,  it  is  ten  to  one  if  I don’t  begin  to  bungle. 

1 can  conceive  a living  man  without  an  arm  or  a leg,  but  not  without  a head 
or  a heart : so  there  are  some  truths  essential  to  vital  religion,  and  which  all 
awakened  souls  are  taught. 

Apostacy,  in  all  its  branches,  takes  its  rise  from  atheism.  “ I have  set  the 
Lord  always  before  me,”  &-c.  The  doctrine  of  omnipresence  is  universally  al- 
lowed. 

We  are  surprised  at  the  fall  of  a famous  professor  ; but,  in  the  sight  of  God, 
the  man  was  gone  before  ; it  is  only  we  that  have  now  first  discovered  it.  “ He 
that  despiseth  small  things,  shall  fall  by  little  and  little.” 

There  are  critical  times  of  danger.  After  great  services,  honours,  and  conso- 
lations, we  should  stand  upon  our  guard.  Noah,  Lot,  David,  and  Solomon,  fell 
in  these  circumstances.  Satan  is  a footpad  : a footpad  will  not  attack  a man  in 
going  to  the  bank,  but  in  returning  with  his  pocket  full  of  money. 

A Christian  is  like  a young  nobleman,  who,  on  going  to  receive  his  estate,  is 
at  first  enchanted  by  its  prospects ; this  in  a course  of  time  may  wear  off,  but  a 
sense  of  the  value  of  the  estate  grows  daily. 

When  we  first  enter  into  the  divine  life,  we  propose  to  grow  rich ; God’s  plan 
is  to  make  us  feel  poor. 

Good  men  have  need  to  take  heed  of  building  upon  groundless  impressions. 
Mr.  Whitfield  had  a son,  which  he  imagined  was  born  to  be  a very  extraordi- 
nary man  : but  the  son  soon  died,  and  the  father  was  cured  of  his  mistake. 

I remember,  in  going  to  undertake  the  care  of  a congregation,  I was  reading, 
as  I walked  in  a green  lane,  “ Fear  not,  Paul,  I have  much  people  in  this  city 
but  I soon  afterwards  was  disappointed  in  finding  that  Paul  was  not  John,  and 
Corinth  was  not  Warwick. 

Christ  has  taken  our  nature  into  heaven  to  represent  us ; and  has  left  us  on 
earth,  with  his  nature,  to  represent  him. 

Worldly  men  will  be  true  to  their  principles  ; and  if  we  were  as  true  to  ours, 
the  visits  between  the  two  parties  would  be  short  and  seldom. 

A Christian  in  the  world  is  like  a man  transacting  his  affairs  in  the  rain.  He 
will  not  suddenly  leave  his  client,  because  it  rains ; but  the  moment  the  business 
is  done,  he  is  off : as  it  is  said  in  the  Acts,  “ Being  let  go,  they  went  to  their 
own  company.” 

When  a man  is  joined  to  Christ,  Christ  says  to  him,  as  it  was  once  said  to  the 
Levite,  “ Let  all  thy  wants  lie  upon  me,  only  abide  not  in  the  street.” 

God’s  word  is  certainly  a restraint ; but  it  is  such  a restraint  as  the  irons  which 
prevent  children  from  getting  into  the  fire. 

The  scriptures  are  so  full,  that  every  case  may  be  found  in  them.  A rake 
went  into  a church,  and  tried  to  decoy  a girl  by  saying,  “ Why  do  you  attend  to 
such  stuff  as  these  scriptures  ?”  “ Because,”  said  she,  “ they  tell  me,  that  in  the 
last  days  there  shall  come  such  scoffers  as  you.” 

God  deals  with  us  as  we  do  with  our  children:  he  first  speaks,  then  gives  a 
gentle  stroke,  at  last  a blow. 

The  religion  of  a sinner  stands  on  two  pillars : namely,  what  Christ  did  for  us 
in  his  flesh,  and  what  he  performs  in  us  by  his  Spirit.  Most  errors  arise  from 
an  attempt  to  separate  these  two. 

We  blame  an  Arminian  for  his  want  of  submission  to  divine  sovereignty  ; yet 
let  a shower  of  rain  fall  on  a suit  of  new  clothes,  and  we  cannot  submit  ourselves. 

Man  is  not  taught  any  thing  to  purpose  till  God  becomes  his  teacher,  and  then 
the  glare  of  the  world  is  put  out,  and  the  value  of  the  soul  rises  in  full  view. 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


63 

A man’s  present  sentiments  may  not  be  accurate,  but  we  make  too  much  of  sen- 
timents. We  pass  a field  with  a few  blades,  we  call  it  a field  of  wheat;  but 
here  is  no  wheat ; no,  not  in  perfection,  but  wheat  is  sown,  and  full  ears  may  be 
expected. 

The  word  temperance,  in  the  New  Testament,  signifies  self-possession;  it  is 
a disposition  suitable  to  one  who  has  a race  to  run,  and  therefore  wTill  not  load 
his  pockets  with  lead. 

One  reason  why  we  must  not  attempt  to  pull  up  the  tares  which  grow  among 
the  wheat  is,  that  we  have  not  skill  for  the  work  ; like  a weeder,  whom  Mrs. 
N.  employed  in  my  garden  at  Olney,  who  for  weeds  pulled  up  some  of  her 
favourite  flowers. 

Contrivers  of  systems  on  earth  are  like  contrivers  of  systems  in  the  heavens ; 
where  the  sun  and  moon  keep  the  same  course,  in  spite  of  the  philosophers. 

I endeavour  to  walk  through  the  world  as  a physician  goes  through  Bedlam  : 
the  patients  make  a noise,  pester  him  with  impertinence,  and  hinder  him  in  his 
business  ; but  he  does  the  best  he  can,  and  so  gets  through. 

A man  always  in  society,  is  one  always  on  the  spend  : on  the  other  hand,  a 
mere  solitary  is  at  his  best  but  a candle  in  an  empty  room. 

If  we  were  upon  the  watch  for  improvement,  the  common  news  of  the  day 
would  furnish  it:  the  falling  of  the  tower  of  Siloam,  and  the  slaughter  of  the 
Galileans,  were  the  news  of  the  day,  which  our  Lord  improved. 

The  generality  make  out  their  righteousness  by  comparing  themselves  with 
some  others  whom  they  think  worse : thus  a woman  of  the  town,  who  was 
rotting  in  the  Lock  Hospital,  was  offended  at  a minister  speaking  to  her  as  a 
sinner,  because  she  had  never  picked  a pocket. 

Take  away  a toy  from  a child,  and  give  him  another,  and  he  is  satisfied  ; but 
if  he  be  hungry,  no  toy  will  do.  Thus  as  new  born  babes,  true  believers  desire 
the  sincere  milk  of  the  word  ; and  the  desire  of  grace,  in  this  way,  is  grace. 

One  said,  that  the  great  saints  in  the  calendar  were  many  of  them  poor  sinners  ; 
Mr.  N.  replied  they  were  poor  saints  indeed,  if  they  did  not  feel  that  they  were 
great  sinners. 

A wise  man  looks  upon  men  as  he  does  upon  horses , and  considers  their 
caparisons  of  title,  wealth,  and  place,  but  as  harness. 

The  force  of  what  we  deliver  from  the  pulpit  is  often  lost  by  a starched,  and 
what  is  often  called  a correct  style,  and  especially  by  adding  meretricious  orna- 
ments. I called  upon  a lady  who  had  been  robbed,  and  she  gave  me  a striking 
account  of  the  fact ; but  had  she  put  it  in  heroics,  I should  neither  so  well  have 
understood  her,  nor  been  so  well  convinced  that  she  was  robbed. 

When  a man  says  he  received  a blessing  under  a sermon,  I begin  to  inquire 
who  this  man  is,  that  speaks  of  the  help  he  has  received.  The  Roman  people 
proved  the  effect  they  received  under  a sermon  of  Antony  when  they  flew  to 
avenge  the  death  of  Caesar. 

The  Lord  has  reasons,  far  beyond  our  ken,  for  opening  a wide  door,  while  he 
stops  the  mouth  of  a useful  preacher.  John  Bunyan  would  not  have  done  half 
the  good  he  did,  if  he  had  remained  preaching  in  Bedford,  instead  of  being  shut 
up  in  Bedford  prison. 

If  I could  go  to  France,  and  give  every  man  in  it  a right  and  peaceable  mind 
by  my  labour,  I should  have  a statue ; but  to  produce  such  an  effect  in  the 
conversion  of  one  soul  would  be  a far  greater  achievement. 

Ministers  would  over-rate  their  labours,  if  they  did  not  think  it  worth  while 
to  be  born  and  spend  ten  thousand  years  in  labour  and  contempt,  to  recover  one 
soul. 

Don’t  tell  me  of  your  feelings.  A traveller  would  be  glad  of  fine  weather; 
but,  if  he  be  a man  of  business,  he  will  go  on.  Bunyan  says,  You  must  not 
judge  of  a man’s  haste  by  his  horse  ; for  when  the  horse  can  hardly  move,  you 
may  see  by  the  rider’s  urging  him,  what  a hurry  he  is  in. 

A man  and  a beast  may  stand  upon  the  same  mountain,  and  even  touch  one 


64 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


another ; yet  they  are  in  two  different  worlds  : the  beast  perceives  nothing  but 
the  grass  ; but  the  man  contemplates  the  prospect,  and  thinks  of  a thousand  remote 
things.  Thus  a Christian  may  be  solitary  at  a full  exchange ; he  can  converse 
with  the  people  there  upon  trade,  politics,  and  the  stocks;  but  they  cannot  talk 
'w'ith  him  upon  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding. 

Love  and  fear  are  like  the  sun  and  moon,  seldom  seen  together. 

Two  men  go  into  a wood  with  their  guns,  and  one  fires  as  often  as  the 
v)ther  : but  one  kills  a great  quantity  of  game,  because  he  fires  with  shot.  Some, 
like  Zaccheus,  think  they  sit  very  snug  in  a corner,  and  are  brought  down  much 
before  they  expect  it. 

I dreamt  one  night  that  I saw  Matthew  Henry  lay  open  at  this  text,  “ Let  your 
women  keep  silence  in  the  churches,”  and  thought  I read  the  following  note  at 
bottom:  “ Note — We  see  the  reason  why  women  are  forbid  to  preach  the  gospel, 
for  they  would  persuade  without  argument,  and  reprove  without  giving  offence.” 

It  is  a mere  fallacy  to  talk  of  the  sins  of  a short  life.  The  sinner  is  always  a 
sinner.  Put  a pump  into  the  river,  you  may  throw  out  some  water,  but  the  river 
remains. 

Professors,  who  own  the  doctrines  of  free  grace,  often  act  inconsistently  with 
their  own  principles,  when  they  are  angry  at  the  defects  of  others.  A company 
of  travellers  fall  into  a pit,  one  of  them  gets  a passenger  to  draw  him  out : now 
he  should  not  be  angry  with  the  rest  for  falling  in,  nor  because  they  are  not  yet 
out,  as  he  is.  He  did  not  pull  himself  out ; instead,  therefore,  of  reproaching  them, 
he  should  show  them  pity ; he  should  avoid  at  any  rate  going  down  upon  their 
ground  again,  and  show  how  much  better  and  happier  he  is  upon  his  own.  We 
should  take  care  that  we  do  not  make  our  profession  of  religion  a receipt  in  full 
for  all  other  obligations.  A man,  truly  illuminated,  will  no  more  despise  others, 
than  Bartimeus,  after  his  own  eyes  were  opened,  would  take  a stick,  and  beat 
every  blind  man  lie  met. 

We  are  much  mistaken  in  supposing,  that  the  removal  of  a particular  obstruc- 
tion would  satisfy  the  objector.  Suppose  I am  in  bed,  and  want  to  know  whether 
it  be  light,  it  is  not  enough  if  I draw  the  curtain;  for  if  there  be  light,  I must 
have  eyes  to  see  it. 

Too  deep  a consideration  of  eternal  realities  might  unfit  a man  for  his  present 
circumstances.  Walking  through  St.  Bartholomew’s  Hospital  or  Bedlam  must 
deeply  affect  a feeling  mind,  but  in  reality  this  world  is  a far  wrorse  scene ; it 
has  but  two  wards : in  the  one,  men  are  miserable ; in  the  other  mad. 

Some  preachers  near  Olney  dwelt  on  the  doctrine  of  predestination ; an  old 
woman  said — “ Ah  ! I have  long  settled  that  point ; for  if  God  had  not  chosen 
me  before  I was  born,  I am  sure  he  would  have  seen  nothing  in  me  to  have 
chosen  me  for  afterwards.” 

Law  has  swept  away  Warburton’s  cobweb,  with  a single  brush.  Abel  pleased 
God,  but  Cain  killed  him  ; therefore,  it  was  a dangerous  thing  to  please  God,  if 
there  were  no  future  state. 

I see  the  unprofitableness  of  controversy  in  the  case  of  Job  and  his  friends;  for 
if  God  had  not  interposed,  and  they  had  lived  to  this  day,  they  would  have  con- 
tinued the  dispute. 

It  is  pure  mercy  that  negatives  a particular  request.  A miser  would  pray  very 
earnestly  for  gold,  if  he  believed  prayer  would  gain  it;  whereas,  if  Christ  had  any 
favour  to  him,  he  would  take  his  gold  away.  A child  walks  in  the  garden  in 
spring  and  sees  cherries  ; he  knows  they  are  good  fruit,  and  therefore  asks  for 
them.  “No,  my  dear,”  says  the  father,  “ they  are  not  ripe  : stay  till  the  season.” 

If  I cannot  take  pleasure  in  infirmities,  I can  sometimes  feel  the  profit  of  them.  I 
can  conceive  a king  to  pardon  a rebel,  and  take  him  into  his  family,  and  then  say, 
“I  appoint  you  for  a season  to  wear  a fetter.  At  a certain  season  I will  send  a 
messenger  to  knock  it  off  In  the  mean  time  this  fetter  will  serve  to  remind 
you  of  your  state  ; it  may  humble  you,  and  restrain  you  from  rambling.” 

Some  Christians,  at  a glance,  seem  of  a superior  order,  and  are  not ; they  want 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


65 


a certain  quality.  At  a florist’s  feast  the  other  day,  a certain  flower  was  deter- 
mined to  bear  the  bell ; but  it  was  found  to  be  an  artifical  flower ; there  is  a 
quality  called  growth,  which  it  had  not. 

Doctor  Taylor  of  Norwich  said  to  me,  “ Sir,  I have  collated  every  word 
in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  seventeen  times  ; and  it  is  very  strange,  if  the  doc- 
trine of  atonement  you  hold  should  not  have  been  found  by  me.”  I am  not 
surprised  at  this : I once  went  to  light  my  candle  with  the  extinguisher  on  it. 
Now,  prejudices  from  education,  learning,  &>c.  often  form  an  extinguisher.  It 
is  not  enough  that  you  bring  the  candle,  you  must  remove  the  extinguisher. 

I measure  ministers  by  square  measure.  I have  no  idea  of  the  size  of  a table,  if 
you  only  tell  me  how  long  it  is;  but  if  you  also  say  how  broad,  I can  tell  its  di- 
mensions. So  when  you  tell  what  a man  is  in  the  pulpit,  you  must  also  tell  me 
what  he  is  out  of  it,  or  I shall  not  know  his  size 

If  Nebuchadnezzar’s  image  was  of  solid  gold,  and  every  worshipper  was  to 
have  a bit  of  it,  I fear  our  nation,  as  well  as  his,  would  be  ready  to  fall  down  be- 
fore it. 

There  were  two  sorts  of  Calvinists  at  Olney,  and  they  always  reminded  me 
of  the  two  baskets  of  Jeremiah’s  figs. 

A man  should  be  born  to  high  things  not  to  lose  himself  in  them.  Slaters 
will  walk  on  the  ridge  of  a house  with  ease,  which  would  turn  our  heads. 

Much  depends  on  the  way  we  come  into  trouble.  Paul  and  Jonah  were  both 
in  a storm,  but  in  very  different  circumstances. 

I have  read  of  many  wicked  Popes ; but  the  worst  Pope  I ever  met  with,  is 
Pope  Self. 

The  men  of  this  world  are  children.  Offer  a child  an  apple  and  a bank-note 
he  will  doubtless  choose  the  apple. 

A pious  gentlewoman  told  me  of  her  pottery  being  burnt.  “ I congratulate, 
you,  madam,”  said  I,  “in  possessing  something  you  cannot  lose.” 

The  heir  of  a great  estate,  while  a child,  thinks  more  of  a few  shillings  in 
his  pocket,  than  of  his  inheritance.  So  a Christian  is  often  more  elated  by  some 
frame  of  heart,  than  by  his  title  to  glory. 

A dutiful  child  is  ever  looking  forward  to  the  holidays,  when  he  shall  return 
to  his  father  ; but  he  does  not  think  of  running  from  school  before. 

The  gospel  is  a proclamation  of  free  mercy  to  guilty  creatures — an  act  of  grace 
to  rebels.  Now,  though  a rebel  should  throw  away  his  pistols,  and  determine 
to  go  into  the  woods,  and  make  his  mind  better  before  he  goes  to  court  and 
pleads  the  act ; he  may,  indeed,  not  be  found  in  arms,  yet,  being  taken  in  his  re- 
forming scheme,  he  will  be  hanged 

The  devil  told  a lie  when  he  said,  “ All  these  things  are  mine,  and  to  whom- 
soever I will,  I give  them  for  if  he  had  the  disposal  of  preferments,  since  he 
knows  the  effect  of  them,  you  and  I,  brother  C — , should  soon  be  dignitaries. 

Man  is  made  capable  of  three  births — by  nature  he  enters  the  present  world — 
by  grace  into  spiritual  light  and  life — by  death  into  glory. 

In  my  imagination,  I sometimes  fancy  I could  make  a perfect  minister.  I 

take  the  eloquence  of , the  knowledge  of , the  zeal  of , and  the 

pastoral  meekness,  tenderness,  and  piety  of ; then  putting  them  all  together 

into  one  man,  I say  to  myself,  this  would  be  a perfect  minister.  Now,  there  is 
One  who,  if  he  chose  it,  could  actually  do  this ; but  he  never  did  : he  has  seen 
fit  to  do  otherwise,  and  to  divide  these  gifts  to  every  man  severally  as  he  will. 

I feel  like  a man  who  has  no  money  in  his  pocket,  but  is  allowed  to  draw  for 
all  he  wants  upon  one  infinitely  rich  : I am,  therefore,  at  once  both  a beggar  and 
a rich  man. 

I went  one  day  to  Mrs.  G ’s  just  after  she  had  lost  all  her  fortune:  I 

could  not  be  surprised  to  find  her  in  tears;  but  she  said,  “ I suppose  you  think 
I am  crying  for  my  loss:  but  that  is  not  the  case — I am  now  weeping  to 
think  I should  feel  so  much  uneasiness  on  the  account.”  After  that  I never 
heard  her  speak  again  upon  the  subject  as  long  as  she  lived. — Why,  now 


66 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


this  is  just  as  it  should  be. — Suppose  a man  was  going  to  York  to  take 
possession  of  a large  estate,  and  his  chaise  should  break  down  a mile  before  he 
got  to  the  city,  which  obliged  him  to  walk  the  rest  of  the  way ; what  a fool 
we  should  think  him  if  we  saw  him  wringing  his  hands,  and  blubbering  out 
all  the  remaining  mile,  “ My  chaise  is  broken  ! my  chaise  is  broken  !” 

I have  many  books  that  I cannot  sit  down  to  read  ; they  are,  indeed,  good 
and  sound  ; but,  like  halfpence,  there  goes  a great  quantity  to  a little  amount 
There  are  silver  books,  and  a very  few  golden  books ; but  I have  one  book 
worth  more  than  all,  called  the  Bible,  and  that  is  a book  of  bank-notes. 

I conclude  these  remarks,  not  because  my  memorandum-book  is  exhausted, 
but  lest  the  reader  should  think  I forget  the  old  maxim,  ne  quid  nhnis.  No  un- 
due liberty,  however,  has  been  taken  in  publishing  Mr.  N.’s  private  conversa- 
tion ; since  all  the  above  remarks  were  submitted  to  him,  as  intended  for  this 
publication,  and  were  approved. 


GENERAL  OBSERVATIONS 


The  difference  of  mental  improvement,  among  men,  seems  very  much  to  de- 
pend on  their  capacity  and  habit  of  gathering  instruction  from  the  objects  which 
are  continually  presented  to  their  observation.  Two  men  behold  the  same  fact : 
one  of  them  is  in  the  habit  of  drawing  such  remarks  and  inferences  as  the 
fact  affords,  and  learns  something  from  every  thing  he  sees;  while  the  other 
sees  the  same  fact,  and  perhaps  with  a momentary  admiration,  but  lets  it  pass 
without  making  so  much  as  one  profitable  reflection  on  the  occasion.  The  ex- 
cursions of  the  bee  and  the  butterfly  present  an  exact  emblem  of  these  two  cha- 
racters. 

I have  present  to  my  mind  an  acquaintance,  who  has  seen  more  of  the  outside 
of  the  world  than  most  men  : he  has  lived  in  most  countries  of  the  civilized 
world  ; yet  I scarcely  know  a man  of  a less  improved  mind.  With  every  exter- 
nal advantage,  he  has  learned  nothing  to  any  useful  purpose.  He  seems  to  have 
passed  from  flower  to  flower  without  extracting  a drop  of  honey ; and  now  he 
tires  all  his  friends  with  the  frivolous  garrulity  of  a capricious,  vacant,  and  petu- 
lant old  age. 

I wish  the  reader  of  these  Memoirs  may  avoid  such  an  error  in  passing  over 
the  history  here  laid  before  him.  An  extraordinary  train  of  facts  is  presented 
to  his  observation  ; and  if  “ the  proper  study  of  mankind  is  man,”  the  history 
before  us  will  surely  furnish  important  matter  of  the  kind,  to  the  eye  of  every 
wise  moral  traveller. 

I would  here  call  the  attention  of  three  classes  of  men  to  a single  point  of  prime 
importance ; namely,  to  the  efficacy  and  excellency  of  real  Christianity,  as  ex- 
hibited in  the  principles  and  practice  of  the  subject  of  these  Memoirs. 

I.  Suppose  the  reader  to  be  so  unhappy  (though  his  misfortune  may  be  least 
perceived  by  himself,)  as  to  be  led  astray  by  bad  society,  in  conjunction  with  “an 
evil  heart  of  unbelief.”  1 will  suppose  him  to  be  now  in  the  state  in  which 
Mr.  N.  describes  himself  formerly  to  have  been,  and  in  which  also  the  writer  of 
these  Memoirs  once  was.  I will  suppose  him  to  be  given  up  to  “ believe  his 
own  lie ;”  and  that  he  may  be  in  the  habit  of  thinking,  that  God,  when  he  made 
man,  left  him  to  find  his  way,  without  any  express  revelation  of  the  mind  and 
will  of  his  Maker  and  Governor;  or,  at  most,  that  he  is  left  to  the  only  rule  in 
morals,  which  nature  may  be  supposed  to  present.  What  that  way  is,  which 
such  a thinker  will  take,  is  sufficiently  evident  from  the  general  course  and 
habits  of  unbelievers. — But  there  is  a conscience  in  man.  Conscience,  in  sober 
moments,  often  alarms  the  most  stout-hearted.  When  such  an  unbeliever  meets 
an  overwhelming  providence,  or  lies  on  a death-bed,  he  will  probably  awake  to 
a strong  sense  of  his  real  condition.  He  will  feel,  if  not  very  hardened  indeed, 
in  what  a forlorn,  unprovided,  and  dangerous  state  he  exists.  Life  is  the  mo- 
ment in  which  only  this  sceptical  presumption  can  continue  ; and,  when  it  is 
terminating,  where  is  he  to  set  the  sole  of  his  foot  ? He  wildly  contemplates  the 
book  of  nature,  in  which  he  may  have  been  persuaded,  that  man  may  read  all  he 
needs  to  know  ; but  the  forlorn  outcast  sees  nothing  there  to  meet  his  case  as  a 
sinner.  Infinite  power,  wisdom,  contrivance,  general  provision  alone  appear; 
but  nothing  of  that  further  and  distinct  information,  which  a dying  offender 
needs.  He  wants  footing,  and  finds  none.  He  needs  the  hand  of  a friend  to 
grasp,  but  none  is  seen.  Possibilities  shock  his  apprehension.  He  may,  per- 
haps discern,  that  the  present  system  has  a moral  government,  which  frowns 


68 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


upon  guilt ; and,  for  aught  he  knows  to  the  contrary,  the  next  scene  may  pre- 
sent a Judge  upon  his  throne  of  justice — this  world,  his  present  idol,  vanished 
like  smoke — and  quick  and  dead  called  to  give  their  account.  Where  then  is 
he  ? — an  atom  of  guilt  and  wretchedness!  All  this,  I say,  may  be,  for  aught  he 
knows  to  the  contrary.  But  the  express  and  well-authenticated  revelation,  which 
that  Judge  hath  sent  to  man,  tells  us  plainly  that  all  this  shall  be,  and  that  every 
eye  shall  behold  it ! 

“Be  it  so,”  such  a reader  may  reply,  “still  I am  what  I am.  My  habits 
of  thinking  are  fixed ; and  I perceive  my  habits  of  life  can  only  be  decently 
borne  out  by  my  profession  of  unbelief.  Both  are  now  inveterate.  Nor  do  I 
see,  all  things  considered,  what  can  be  done  in  my  case.  How  can  I adopt  the 
Christian  revelation?  and  what  could  it  do  for  me  if  I could  ?”  I answer  by 
calling  your  attention  to  the  fact  before  us.  What  was  the  case  of  John  New- 
ton ? 

Could  any  one  be  more  deeply  sunk  in  depravity,  in  profligacy,  in  infidelity, 
than  he  ? Can  you  even  conceive  a rational  creature  more  degraded,  or  more 
hardened  in  his  evil  habits?  Would  you  attempt  to  recover  such  a mind  by 
arguments,  drawn  from  the  advantage  which  virtue  has  over  vice  ? or  by  rous- 
ing his  attention  to  the  duties  of  natural  religion?  or  the  possible  consequences  of 
a future  retribution  ? He  would  have  gone  on  thinking  he  had  made  the  most  of 
his  circumstances,  in  his  practice  of  catching  fish,  and  eating  them  almost  raw — 
He  would  sullenly  have  proceeded  to  sleep  through  the  drying  of  his  one  shirt, 
which  he  had  just  washed  on  the  rock,  and  put  on  wet — He  would,  with  a sa- 
vage ferocity,  have  watched  an  opportunity  for  murdering  his  master — He  would 
have  drowned  all  reflection  in  a drunken  revel,  and  overwhelmed  all  remon- 
strance by  belching  out  newly-invented  blasphemies ; and  then  sought  to  rush 
headlong,  in  a drunken  paroxysm,  into  the  ocean. 

Here  is  certainly  presented  the  utmost  pitch  of  a depraved  and  a degraded  na- 
ture ; nor  does  it  seem  possible  for  Satan  to  carry  his  point  farther  with  a man — 
except  in  one  single  instance,  namely,  by  the  final  disbelief  of  a remedy. 

Now,  by  God’s  help,  this  divine  remedy  was  applied,  and  its  efficacy  demon- 
strated, of  which  there  are  thousands  of  living  witnesses.  A plain  matter  of  fact 
is  before  us.  It  pleased  God,  by  a train  of  dispensations,  that  this  prodigal  should 
“ come  to  himself.”  He  is  made  to  feel  his  wants  and  misery.  He  follows  the 
“ light  shining  in  a dark  place.”  He  calls  for  help.  He  is  made  willing  to  fol- 
low his  guide.  He  proceeds  with  implicit  confidence.  And  now  let  us  examine 
to  what,  at  length,  he  is  brought ; and  also  by  what  means. 

I speak  of  a matter  of  fact — whither  is  he  brought  ? He  is  brought  from  the 
basest,  meanest,  under-trodden  state  of  slavery — from  a state  of  mind  still  more 
degraded,  being  “ foolish,  disobedient,  deceived,  serving  divers  lusts  and  plea- 
sures. living  in  malice  and  envy,  hateful  and  hating” — wanting  nothing  of  a com- 
plete devil  but  his  powers.  This  man  is  brought,  I say,  to  be  a faithful  and 
zealous  servant  of  his  God ; an  able  and  laborious  minister  of  Christ ; a useful 
and  benevolent  friend  to  his  neighbour ; wise  to  secure  the  salvation  of  his  own 
soul,  and  wise  to  win  the  souls  of  others. 

Consider  also  the  means  by  which  he  was  brought.  It  was  not  by  the  argu- 
ments of  philosophers,  or  the  rational  considerations  of  what  is  called  natural  re- 
ligion. Mr.  N.’s  own  account  informs  us,  that  the  peculiar  discoveries  of  revealed 
truth  gradually  broke  in  upon  his  mind  ; till,  at  length,  he  was  made  sensible 
that  there  was  a remedy  provided  in  the  gospel,  and  which  was  fully  sufficient 
to  meet  even  his  case,  and  he  found  that,  and  that  only,  to  be  “ the  power  of 
God  unto  salvation.” 

The  result,  therefore,  which  should  be  drawn  from  these  premises  is  the  fol- 
lowing:— There  exists  a desperate  disorder  in  the  world,  called  sin.  Heathens 
as  well  as  Christians  have  marked  its  malignant  influence:  they  have  tried  various 
expedients,  which  have  been  prescribed  for  its  cure,  or  at  least  its  mitigation; 
but  no  means,  except  God’s  own  appointed  means,  have  been  discovered,  that 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


69 


have  been  able  to  relieve  so  much  as  a single  individual.  Yet,  strange  to  say, 
this  medicina  mentis  of  God’s  own  appointment,  to  which  only  he  has  promised 
a peculiar  blessing,  and  by  which  he  is  daily  recovering  men  in  the  most  despe- 
rate circumstances,  who  actually  employ  it:  strange  to  say,  this  remedy  still  re- 
mains a stumbling  block — is  counted  foolishness — insomuch,  that  many  will 
rather  dash  this  cup  of  salvation  from  the  lips  of  a profligate,  like  Newton,  when 
disposed  to  receive  it,  than  he  should  obtain  relief  that  way.  Their  conduct 
seems  to  say,  “ Rather  let  such  a wretch  go  on  in  his  profligacy,  than  the  gos- 
pel be  acknowledged  to  be  the  wisdom  and  the  power  of  God.” 

Not  that  the  case  of  Mr.  N.,  here  presented  to  the  consideration  of  an  unbe- 
liever, is  brought  forward  as  if  the  gospel  needed  any  farther  evidence,  or  has 
occasion  for  facts  of  our  own  time  to  give  it  additional  authenticity ; but  we  are 
directed  to  regard  the  “cloud  of  witnesses,”  among  which  our  departed  brother 
was  distinguished;  “and  though  now  dead,  yet  speaketh.”  May  the  reader 
have  ears  to  hear  the  important  report ! 

Does  the  question  return,  therefore,  as  to  what  the  unbeliever  should  do  ? Let 
him,  after  seriously  considering  what  is  here  advanced,  consider  also  what  con- 
duct is  becoming  a responsible,  or  at  least  a rational  creature  ? Surely  it  becomes 
such  a one  to  avoid  all  means  of  stifling  the  voice  of  conscience  whenever  it 
begins  to  speak  ; to  regard  the  voice  of  God  yet  speaking  to  him  in  the  revelation 
of  his  grace,  and  that  much  more  humbly  and  seriously  than  such  persons  are 
wont  to  do.  It  becomes  him,  if  he  have  any  regard  to  the  interest  of  his  own 
soul,  or  the  souls  of  his  fellow-creatures,  to  give  no  countenance,  by  his  declara- 
tions or  example,  to  the  senseless  cavils,  and  indecent  scoffs,  by  which  the  pro- 
fligate aim  to  cloak  the  disorders  of  their  hearts  ; by  which  vanity  aims  at  distinc 
tion,  and  lialf-thinkers  affect  depth.  The  person  I am  now  speaking  to  cannot 
but  observe  how  much  the  judgment  becomes  the  dupe  of  the  passions.  “ If  the 
veil  be  upon  the  heart,  it  will  be  upon  every  thing.”  We  need  not  only  an 
object  presented,  but  an  organ  to  discern  it.  Now  the  gospel,  only,  affords  both 
these.  Mr.  N.  becomes  an  instructive  example  in  this  respect  to  the  unbe- 
liever. “One  of  the  first  helps,”  says  he,  “I  received  (in  consequence  of  a 
determination  to  examine  the  New  Testament  more  carefully)  was  from  Luke 
vi.  13,  £ If  ye  then,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  to  your  children, 
how  much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that 
ask  him  ?’  I had  been  sensible,  that  to  profess  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  when,  in 
reality,  1 did  not  believe  his  history,  was  no  better  than  a mockery  of  the  heart- 
searching God  ; but  here  I found  a Spirit  spoken  of,  which  was  to  be  communi- 
cated to  those  who  ask  it.  Upon  this  I reasoned  thus : if  this  book  be  true,  the 
promise  in  this  passage  must  be  true  likewise.  I have  need  of  that  very  Spirit 
by  which  the  whole  was  written,  in  order  to  understand  it  aright.  He  has 
engaged  here,  to  give  that  Spirit  to  those  who  ask ; and  if  it  be  of  God,  he  will 
make  good  his  own  word.” 

A man,  therefore,  who  is  found  in  this  unhappy  state,  but  not  judicially  har- 
dened in  it,  should  mark  this  stage  of  Mr.  N.’s  recovery,  and  attend  to  the 
facts  and  evidences  of  the  powrer  and  excellency  of  real  religion,  such  as  this 
before  him.  He  should  appreciate  that  gospel,  which  it  lias  pleased  God  to 
employ  as  his  instrument  for  displaying  the  wonders  of  his  might  in  the  moral 
world.  He  should  pray  that  he  may  experience  the  power  of  it  in  his  own 
heart,  and  thus  not  lose  the  additional  benefit  of  the  cases  presented  to  him  in 
Memoirs  like  these  ; a case  probably  far  exceeding  his  own  in  the  malignity  of  its 
symptoms.  Let  him  also  consider,  that,  while  such  convictions  can  produce  no 
real  loss  to  him,  they  may  secure  advantages  beyond  calculation.  He  may  not 
be  able  at  present  to  comprehend  how  “ godliness  is  profitable  for  all  things,  in 
having  not  only  the  promise  of  the  life  that  now  is,  but  that  which  is  to  come 
but  he  may  see,  as  a rational  creature,  that,  at  the  very  lowest  estimation,  he  has 
taken  a safe  side,  by  embracing  the  only  hope  set  before  him  : and  on  this  ground 
it  is  clearly  demonstrable,  that  not  only  the  grossest  folly  must  attach  to  the 


70 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


rejector  of  a revelation  attended  with  such  accumulated  evidences,  but  also  actual 
guilt,  and  the  highest  ingratitude  and  presumption. 

II.  But  there  is  another  class  of  men,  to  whom  I would  recommend  a 
serious  consideration  of  Mr.  N.’s  religious  character  and  principles.  The  persons 
whom  I am  now  addressing  are  convinced  of  the  truth  of  revelation,  and  some 
of  them  ably  contend  for  it  against  unbelievers.  They  are  also  conscientious — 
they  are  often  useful  in  society — and  are  sometimes  found  amiable  and  benevolent: 
they  are  even  religious,  according  to  their  views  of  religion ; and  some  of  them 
are  exact  in  thAr  devotions.  Yet  from  certain  morbid  symptoms,  they  appear 
not  to  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  truth,  nor  to  be  cordially  disposed  to  the  spirit 
of  the  gospel.  So  much  apparent  right  intention  and  exemplary  conduct  seems, 
indeed,  to  demand  respect:  and  a respect  which  some,  who  possess  more  zeal 
than  judgment,  do  not  duly  pay  them. 

Ardelio  despises  his  neighbour  Eusebius’s  religious  views  and  habits;  and 
not  only  deems  him  a blind  Pharisee,  but  has  sometimes  expressed  the  sentiment 
in  the  rudest  terms.  This  reminds  me  of  the  old  story  of  Diogenes’  walking  on 
the  costly  carpet  of  his  brother  philosopher,  saying,  “ I trample  on  the  pride 
of  Plato.”  “ Yes,”  said  Plato,  “ but  with  greater  pride,  Diogenes.” 

If  it  be  asked,  Why  should  any  one  judge  unfavourably  of  such  a character 
as  Eusebius  ? I answer,  we  may  charitably  seek  to  convince  one  whom  we  have 
reason  to  think  under  fatal  mistakes,  without  any  disposition  to  judge  or  condemn 
him.  I meet  a traveller  who  is  confidently  pursuing  a path,  which  I have  reason 
to  believe  is  both  wide  of  his  mark,  and  dangerous  to  his  person : I may  charita- 
bly attempt  to  direct  his  steps,  without  thinking  ill  of  his  intention.  It  is  re- 
corded of  our  Lord,  that  he  even  loved  a young  man,  who  went  away  sorrowful 
on  having  his  grand  idol  exposed.  But  why,  it  is  asked,  should  you  suspect  any 
thing  essentially  wrong  in  such  characters  as  you  describe  ? I reply,  for  the  fol- 
lowing reasons : — 

I have  observed  with  much  concern,  when  God  hath  wrought  such  a mighty 
operation  of  grace  in  the  heart  of  a man  like  Newton,  that  this  man  has  not,  upon 
such  a saving  change  being  wrought,  suited  the  religious  taste  of  the  persons  just 
mentioned.  They  will,  indeed,  commend  his  external  change  of  conduct ; but 
by  no  means  relish  his  broken  and  contrite  spirit,  or  his  ascribing  the  change  to  free 
and  unmerited  favour,  and  his  “ counting  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency 
of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus,”  as  that  Lord  who  has  thus  called  him  “ from 
darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  to  God.”  They  will  not  relish 
the  zeal  and  evangelical  strain  of  his  preaching,  his  endeavouring  to  alarm  a 
stupid  sleeping  conscience,  to  probe  a deceitful  heart,  to  expose  the  wretchedness 
of  the  world,  and  to  rend  the  veil  from  formality  and  hypocrisy  ; nay,  they  will 
rather  prefer  some  dry  moralist,  or  mere  formalist,  who,  instead  of  having  ex- 
perienced any  such  change  of  heart,  will  rather  revile  it. 

Again,  I have  observed  a lamentable  disposition  of  mind  in  such  persons  to  form 
false  and  unfavourable  associations.  They  will  pay  too  much  attention  to  inju 
rious  representations,  true  or  false,  of  a religious  class  of  mankind,  whom  the 
world  has  branded  with  some  general  term  of  reproach.  Two  or  three  ignorant 
or  extravagant  fanatics  shall  be  admitted  to  represent  the  religious  world  at  large, 
not  considering  how  much  such  offensive  characters  are  actually  grieving  those 
whose  cause  I am  pleading.  No  one,  indeed,  can  have  lived  long  in  society,  but  he 
must  needs  have  met  the  counterfeit  of  every  excellence.  In  the  article  of  property, 
for  instance,  who  is  not  on  the  watch  lest  he  should  be  imposed  on  ? And,  while 
the  love  of  property  is  so  general,  who  is  not  studious  to  discover  the  dilference 
between  the  true  and  the  false?  It  will  be  so  in  religion,  wherever  there  is  the 
attention  which  its  worth  so  imperiously  demands.  Love  has  a piercing  eye, 
which  will  discover  its  object  in  a crowd.  But  if  there  be  this  disposition  to 
confound  in  the  lump  the  precious  with  the  vile,  it  is  symptomatic  of  something 
morbid  in  the  heart.  W e have  reason  to  fear  a latent  aversion  from  vital  and 
spiritual  religion,  notwithstanding  all  the  allowance  that  can  be  made  for  the 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


71 


prevailing  prejudices  of  their  education  and  circumstances,  in  the  persons  offended 
And  here,  also,  we  cannot  but  lament  the  effect  of  such  a disposition  in  those 
perverse  conclusions  these  persons  are  often  observed  to  draw  from  a sermon, 
Of  the  two  handles  which  attach  to  every  thing,  what  must  we  think  of  that 
mind  which  is  ever  choosing  the  wrong  ? Jesus  Christ,  for  instance,  shows  how 
much  the  farm,  the  oxen,  and  the  wife  became  impediments  in  the  way  of  those 
who  refused  his  invitation.  But  a perverse  conclusion  would  infer  that  he  was, 
therefore,  an  enemy  to  lawful  engagements.  Candour,  however,  sees  at  a glance, 
that  this  was  not  his  design  in  speaking  the  parable.  His  drift  was  evidently  to 
mark  the  state  and  spirit  of  the  recusants,  and  not  to  discountenance  their  lawful 
occupations.  He  meant  to  show,  that  even  lawful  pursuits  may  be  unlawfully 
pursued,  when  they  become  sole  objects,  and  are  thus  preferred  to  his  inestima- 
ble proposal.  It  is  thus  the  well-disposed  hearer  will  mark  the  design  of  his 
minister,  and  draw  wholesome  nourishment  from  that  discourse,  which  another 
will  turn  to  poison,  by  stopping  to  cavil  at  the  letter. 

Another  objection  arises  from  the  affinity  which  characters  of  this  class  have 
with  a “ world  which  lieth  in  wickedness.”  In  this  instance  of  their  worldly 
attachments,  their  charity  will  readily  “ cover  a multitude  of  sins,”  and  form  ex- 
cuses for  serious  breaches  of  both  tables  of  the  law,  in  their  worldly  friends. 
They  appear  in  their  element  while  in  the  society  of  these  friends,  especially  if 
wealthy  and  accomplished.  If  any  person’s  ear  is  wounded  with  a profane  ex- 
pression from  one  of  their  rich  or  fashionable  acquaintance,  they  are  ready  to 
whisper,  that,  “notwithstanding  his  unguarded  language,  he  has  yet  upon  the 
whole  one  of  the  best  of  hearts.” 

Yet  an  infallible  monitor  has  said,  “ Know  ye  not,  that  the  friendship  of  the 
world  is  enmity  with  God  ?”  If  the  old  maxim  does  not  always  hold  good,  that 
“ A man  is  known  by  the  company  he  keeps,”  it  will  infallibly  stand  good  if  we 
add  one  veord  to  it,  namely,  “ that  a man  is  known  by  the  company  he  chooses  to 
keep.”  The  physician  may  be  detained  in  an  infectious  chamber,  and  the  lawyer 
be  found  conversing  with  his  client  in  a shower  of  rain ; but  nobody  will  infer  from 
thence,  that  the  one  chooses  to  breathe  foul  air,  or  that  the  other  chooses  to  be 
wet  to  the  skin.  While  the  true  Christian,  therefore,  w ill  avoid  inurbanity,  fanat- 
icism, or  becoming  the  dupe  of  any  religious  party,  he  will  also  join  the  Psalmist 
in  declaring,  “I  am  a companion  of  all  them  that  fear  thee,  and  of  them  that 
keep  thy  precepts.” 

Again,  these  moral  and  religious  characters,  whom  I am  labouring  to  convince 
of  their  errors,  have  been  observed  to  be  more  disposed  to  nurse,  than  to  examine 
their  prejudices  against  a minister  of  Mr.  N.’s  principles.  “ His  teaching,”  say 
they,  “tends  to  divide  a parish,  or  a family.”  But  why  do  they  not  examine 
the  reason  ? Why  do  they  not  consider,  that  introducing  good  has  ever  been  the 
occasion  of  disturbing  evil  ? I recollect  a great  family,  whose  servants  were  in  a 
ferment,  because  one  truly  conscientious  man  wras  found  among  them.  “ He 
will  spoil  the  place,”  wras  their  term,  because  he  would  not  connive  at  their  ini- 
quity. But  let  me  ask,  what  was  to  be  blamed  in  this  affair  ? His  integrity  or 
their  corruption  ? The  master  understood  the  case,  and  valued  his  servant  in 
proportion  as  he  marked  the  division.  And  thus  it  is  in  religion,  while  moving 
in  a blind  and  corrupt  world.  Christ,  though  the  Prince  of  Peace,  expressly  de- 
clared, that  his  doctrine  would  be  the  occasion  of  much  division  in  the  world  ; 
that  he  “ came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a sword ;”  that  he  should  be  the  occasion 
of  family  variance,  &c.  Matt.  x.  34,  35 ; and  warns  his  disciples  of  what  they 
must  expect  while  they  endeavour  faithfully  to  conduct  his  interests.  Plain 
matter  of  fact  declares,  that  to  maintain  truth  has  been  the  occasion  of  the  suffer- 
ing state  of  the  true  church  in  all  ages,  and  that  often  unto  the  death  of  its  in- 
numerable martyrs.  But,  should  a man  who  reads  his  Bible,  or  has  any  regard 
for  the  interests  of  truth,  need  to  have  this  explained  ? 

Another  mistake  might  be  exposed  in  the  stale  objection,  that  such  principles 
as  Mr.  N ’s  toad  injure  the  interests  of  morality,  from  his  strictly  adhering  tc 


72 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


the  doctrine  of  our  eleventh  article,  on  justification  by  faith.  I would  hope  that 
this  objection,  in  many,  arises  from  a very  slight  acquaintance  with  the  subject. 
It  requires,  indeed,  but  little  attention  to  mark  how  expressly  the  Scriptures 
maintain  our  justification  on  the  sole  merit  of  our  Redeemer,  while  they  as  fully 
maintain  the  necessity  of  our  sanctification,  or  holiness,  by  his  Spirit.  It  has  been 
proved  over  and  over,  by  sound  and  incontestable  arguments,  that  these  two 
grand  fundamentals  of  our  religion  are  so  far  from  opposing  each  other,  either  in 
Scripture  or  experience,  that,  when  real,  they  are  found  inseparable.  But,  be- 
cause this  is  not  the  place  to  either  state  or  defend  this  doctrine  at  large,  it  may 
help  such  as  have  hitherto  stumbled  respecting  it,  to  observe  an  illustration  and 
proof  of  this  position,  in  the  matter  of  fact  just  now  presented  to  our  view. 

To  one  willing  to  learn,  I would  say,  what  proof  would  you  require  of  the 
practical  tendency  of  principles  like  Mr.  N.’s?  We  bring  you,  in  his  history,  a 
most  deplorable  instance  of  human  depravity  and  deep  moral  disorder.  What 
experiment  shall  be  tried  to  recover  this  wretched  creature  to  God  and  to  him- 
self? Regard,  I say,  the  fact  in  this  man’s  history.  You  will  find,  that  his  re- 
covery was  not  brought  about  by  such  considerations  as  are  urged  in  what  are 
termed  moral  or  rational  discourses ; but,  on  the  contrary,  by  such  truths  as  he 
laboured  throughout  his  ministry  to  establish,  not  only  from  the  Scriptures,  but 
from  his  own  experience  of  their  efficacy.  He  dwelt  on  truths,  which  are  es- 
sential and  peculiar  to  Christianity ; such  as  the  guilt  and  utter  depravity  of  our 
fallen  nature,  whereby  man  is  become  an  alien  and  apostate  from  his  God  ; his 
inability  to  recover  himself  without  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit ; the  necessity 
of  regeneration  by  the  same  Spirit,  and  of  faith  in  the  Redeemer,  not  only  as  the 
only  ground  of  his  justification  before  God,  but  as  the  root  and  motive  of  all  ac- 
ceptable obedience  and  good  works.  “ If  I wanted  a man  to  fly,”  said  Mr.  N., 
ie  I must  contrive  to  find  him  wings ; and  thus,  if  I would  successfully  enforce 
moral  duties,  I must  advance  evangelical  motives.”  He  preached  truths  like 
these  constantly  and  fervently,  and  he  lived  a consistent  example  of  them. 

Thus  in  all  things  approving  himself  a true  disciple  and  minister  of  Christ, 
those  who  knew  him,  know,  without  making  any  odious  comparison,  it  might  be 
literally  affirmed  of  Mr.  N.,  that  “ by  pureness,  by  knowledge,  by  long-suffering, 
by  kindness,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  by  love  unfeigned,  by  the  word  of  truth,  by  the 
power  of  God,  by  the  armour  of  righteousness  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  left,” 
his  mouth  was  opened  and  his  heart  enlarged  towards  men. 

I trust  it  is  from  a pure  motive  that  I am  endeavouring  to  convince  persons  of 
the  class  I am  addressing  of  their  mistake.  And  I am  the  more  induced  to  bring 
a case  in  point  before  them,  because  I think  it  cannot  be  paralleled  as  an  instance 
of  the  power  of  religion  among  those  who  labour  to  keep  up  prejudices  against 
ministers  of  Mr.  N.’s  character ; or  who,  by  unfair  or  partial  statements,  strive 
to  subvert  the  doctrines  he  preached,  and  the  great  end  to  which  all  his  labours 
were  directed,  namely,  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man. 

If,  indeed,  any  one  “ is  willing  to  be  deceived,  let  him  be  deceived.”  At  least 
such  an  one  will  not  be  addressed  here.  But  if  a man  has  any  serious  sense  of 
the  value  of  his  soul — of  its  lost  condition  by  sin,  and  of  recovering  the  friendship 
of  his  God — if  he  feel  the  express  declaration  in  the  Scriptures  of  an  eternity  of 
happiness  or  misery  to  be  of  infinite  importance,  and  to  which  the  weightiest 
concern  in  this  perishing  world  is  but  as  the  “dust  on  the  balance” — let  such  an  one 
consider  these  things.  Let  him  inquire,  whether  those  who  object  to  the  charac- 
ter and  views  of  such  a minister  as  Mr.  N.  labour  first  to  probe  the  state  of  their 
own  hearts  deeply,  as  he  did?  When  he  was  no  longer  an  infidel,  had  renounced 
his  grosser  habits,  and  was  to  all  appearance  a new  man ; “Yet,”  says  he. 
“ though  I cannot  doubt  that  this  change,  so  far  as  it  prevailed,  was  wrought  by 
the  Spirit  and  power  of  God,  still  l was  greatly  deficient  in  many  respects.  I 
was  in  some  degree  affected  with  a sense  of  my  enormous  sins,  but  I was  little 
aware  of  the  innate  evils  of  my  heart.  I had  no  apprehension  of  the  spirituality 
and  extent  of  the  law  of  God.  The  hidden  life  of  a Christian,  as  it  consists  in 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


73 


communion  with  God  by  Jesus  Christ,  and  a continual  dependence  upon  him  for 
hourly  supplies  of  wisdom,  strength,  and  comfort,  was  a mystery  of  which  I had 
as  yet  no  knowledge.  I acknowledged  the  Lord’s  mercy  in  pardoning  what  was 
past,  but  depended  chiefly  upon  my  own  resolution  to  do  better  for  the  time  to 
come.” 

Let  the  honest  inquirer  also  consider,  whether  the  objectors  just  spoken  of  are 
observed  to  be  as  anxious  in  their  pursuits  to  serve  God  and  propagate  his  will 
to  glorify  his  Son,  and  to  save  the  souls  of  men?  Whether  they  have  experi- 
enced the  force  of  truth  in  the  conversion  of  their  own  hearts  and  lives?  “ Con- 
formed to  the  world,”  as  he  once  was,  have  they  been  since  “ transformed  by  the 
renewing  of  their  minds,”  as  he  at  length  became?  A few  such  questions  as 
these,  well  considered,  would  lead  to  important  discoveries.  Such  an  inquiry 
would  show,  that,  however  some  persons  may  be  able  to  treat  the  outworks  of 
revelation,  as  they  may  of  any  other  science  they  have  studied ; yet  for  such  to 
dogmatize  on  religion,  as  it  consists  in  a vital,  spiritual,  and  experimental  princi- 
ple, would  be  as  absurd  as  for  a man  originally  deprived  of  one  of  the  five  senses, 
to  deny  the  perceptions  of  those  who  possess  them  all.  In  short,  it  is  as  ridiculous 
as  it  is  profane,  for  men  rashly  to  assert  on  religious  points,  who  evidently  appear 
to  have  nothing  so  little  at  heart  as  the  real  influence  and  actual  interests  of  re- 
ligion. 

Lastly,  let  nominal  Christians  seriously  consider  whether  our  immortal  interests 
are  not  much  too  important  to  be  stated  upon  a mere  prejudice  of  education — an 
old  unrevised  habit  of  thinking — a taking  it  for  granted  that  they  are  right,  when 
the  event  may  awfully  prove  the  reverse  ; and  that  too,  when  such  errors  can 
never  be  rectified  ? The  persons  with  whom  I have  been  pleading  would  pity 
the  Jew  or  the  Pagan  in  such  an  error : I earnestly  pray  that  they  may  be  ena- 
bled to  see  as  clearly  their  own  mistake,  and  not  resent  the  admonition  of  a real 
friend  now  seeking  to  prevent  it. 

III.  But  there  yet  remains  a class  of  persons,  found  in  the  religious  world,  who 
entertain  a high  regard  for  Mr.  N.’s  character,  and  who  should  gather  that  in- 
struction from  it  of  which  they  appear  to  stand  in  great  need.  “ They  should 
all  take  care,”  as  he  expresses  it,  “ that  they  do  not  make  their  profession  of  re- 
ligion a receipt  in  full  for  all  other  obligations.”  I do  not  regard  this  class  as 
hypocrites,  so  much  as  self-deceivers.  They  have  a zeal  for  the  gospel ; but 
without  a comprehensive  view  of  its  nature.  They  do  not  consider,  that,  in 
avoiding  error  on  the  one  hand,  they  are  plunging  into  a contrary  mistake.  Like 
a child  crossing  a bridge,  they  tremblingly  avoid  the  deep  water  which  they  per- 
ceive is  roaring  on  one  side ; and  recede  from  it  till  they  are  ready  to  perish, 
from  not  perceiving  the  danger  of  that  which  lies  on  the  other  side. 

The  class  of  which  I am  here  speaking  are  defective  in  the  grand  article  of  a 
humble  and  contrite  spirit.  I remember  Mr.  N.  used  to  remark,  that  “ if  any 
one  criterion  could  be  given  of  a real  work  of  grace  begun  in  the  heart  of  a sin- 
ner, it  would  be  found  in  his  contrite  spirit.”  Nothing  is  more  insisted  on  in 
Scripture,  as  essential  to  real  religion.  I never  knew  any  truly  serious  Christian 
but  would  readily  join  in  acknowledging,  that  “ the  religion  of  a sinner,”  as  Mr. 
N.  expresses  it,  “stands  on  two  pillars;  namely,  what  Christ  did  for  us  in  his 
flesh,  and  what  he  performs  in  us  by  his  Spirit.  Most  errors,”  says  he,  “arise 
from  an  attempt  to  separate  these  two.”  But  as  it  was  in  the  beginning,  so 
it  is  now ; the  enemy  comes  and  sows  tares  among  the  wheat ; and  a sort  of  loose 
profession  has  obtained,  which  has  brought  much  reproach  on  religion,  and  be- 
come a cause  of  stumbling  to  many,  who  perceive  a class  of  Christians  contend- 
ing for  only  a part  of  Christianity. 

Fou  can  prevail  little  with  a professor  of  this  description,  in  exhorting  him  by 
“the  meekness  and  gentleness  of  Christ,”  to  self-denying,  patient,  or  forbearing 
habits.  If  you  state  the  genius  of  Christ’s  religion  as  it  relates  to  the  returning 
good  for  evil ; in  blessing  them  that  curse,  and  praying  for  such  as  revile  and 
persecute ; in  showing,  out  of  a good  conversation,  their  works  with  meekness 
K 


74 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


of  wisdom ; or  in  having  a fervent  charity  towards  all  men,  &c.  he  is  ready  ta 
kindle,  and  to  cover  his  conduct  by  a crude  system  of  mere  doctrinal  points,  ill  un- 
derstood. It  is  well  if  your  charitable  remonstrance  does  not  lead  him  to  ask, 
Whether  you  mean  to  bring  him  back  to  the  Whole  Duty  of  Man,  or  to  Nelson’s 
Festivals  and  Fasts  ? He  laments  that  you  yourself  are  not  clear  in  the  gospel, 
because  you  maintain  the  whole  of  it ; and  that  you  are  not  faithful,  if  you  main- 
tain the  whole  of  it  in  a patient,  forbearing  spirit. 

The  views  of  such  persons,  and  the  evil  tempers  to  which  they  give  place  in 
their  spiritual  warfare,  have  often  reminded  me  of  the  shrewd  answer  which 
our  Richard  I.  sent  the  Pope  ; who  was  angry  because  a certain  warlike  bishop 
had  fallen  by  Richard  in  battle,  and  whom,  being  an  ecclesiastic,  the  Pope  called 
his  son.  Richard  sent  the  bishop’s  armour  to  the  Pope,  with  the  words  of  Joseph’s 
brethren,  “ Know  now,  whether  this  be  thy  son’s  coat  or  not.” 

Nothing,  however,  could  be  more  opposed  to  the  spirit  and  character  of  our 
departed  friend  than  the  temper  that  has  just  been  described.  His  zeal  in  pro- 
pagating the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth,  was  not  more 
conspicuous  than  the  tenderness  of  his  spirit  as  to  the  manner  of  his  maintaining 
and  delivering  it.  He  was  found  constantly  “ speaking  the  truth  in  love,  and 
in  meekness  instructing  those  that  oppose  themselves,  if  God  peradventure  would 
give  them  repentance  to  the  acknowledging  the  truth.”  There  was  a gentle- 
ness, a candour,  and  a forbearance  in  him,  that  I do  not  recollect  to  have  seen  in 
an  equal  degree  among  his  brethern  ; and  which  had  so  conciliating  an  effect, 
that  even  the  enemies  of  truth  often  spoke  loudly  in  praise  of  his  character.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  generated  such  an  affection  in  his  friends,  that,  had  he  at- 
tempted to  preach  longer  than  he  did,  a great  part  of  his  congregation  would 
have  gathered,  were  it  only  for  the  pleasure  they  had  in  seeing  his  person. 

That  this  account  is  not  panegyric,  is  clear  to  all  who  personally  knew  Mr.  N. 
But  as  many  who  may  read  these  Memoirs  had  not  that  pleasure,  I will  add  the 
testimony  of  one,  whose  nice  discernment  of  character  will  admit  of  no  ques- 
tion : — 

“ A people  will  love  a minister,  if  a minister  seems  to  love  his  people ; the 
old  maxim  simile  agit  in  simile,  is  in  no  case  more  exactly  verified ; therefore 
you  were  beloved  at  Olney  ; and,  if  you  preached  to  the  Chickasaws  and  Choc- 
taws, would  be  equally  beloved  by  them.”* 

As  this  spirit  of  Christian  benevolence  and  charity  seems  not  to  have  been 
sufficiently  cultivated  among  us,  while  a furious  and  often  abusive  zeal  for  certain 
points,  as  Cowper  remarks,  has  been  substituted  for  the  whole  truth,  I am  led  to 
dwell  longer  than  I intended  in  enforcing  this  amiable  feature  of  Mr.  N.’s  cha- 
racter ; especially  on  account  of  those  Christians,  who  have  imbibed  a false  taste 
in  their  religion,  from  such  teachers,  or  books,  as  have  fallen  in  their  way.  I 
therefore  earnestly  request  those  persons  to  weigh  well  the  inquiries  which  fol- 
low : — 

Have  you  ever  sufficiently  considered  the  evil  of  divisions  and  heart-burnings 
in  a church ; and  what  interest  that  enemy,  who  comes  to  sow  tares  among  the 
wheat,  takes  in  promoting  them?  Do  you  reflect,  that  another  Christian  may 
be  doing  God’s  work,  though  his  mode  of  doing  it  may  not  meet  your  taste,  any 
more  than  your  taste  meets  his  ? Do  you  consider  how  much  greater  evil  a 
wrong  spirit  and  temper  produce  than  the  things  you  object  against  ? Do  you 
weigh  the  consequences  of  your  haste  in  weakening  the  hands  and  grieving  the 
heart  of  any  godly  minister,  whom  you  constantly  or  occasionally  attend  ; and  in 
actually  laying  a stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  the  ungodly,  while  you  depre- 
ciate him  and  his  services  ? Nothing  affected  that  eminent  character,  Mr.  Cado- 
gan,  like  what  he  met  from  some  religious  persons  of  this  kind,  as  I have  related 
from  his  own  lips,  in  his  Memoirs.! 

Let  me  farther  exhort  such  as  are  in  danger  from  this  unchastised  spirit  to  coiv 


Haley’s  life  of  Cowper,  Letter  xxvii. 


t See  Memoirs  of  Cadogan,  p.  39. 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


75 


sider,  bow  much  corrupt  nature  is  at  the  bottom  of  this  error.  Corrupt  nature 
frets  and  rages  at  any  supposed  contradiction  or  restraint : it  would  substitute  the 
work  of  the  tongue  for  that  of  the  heart : in  the  mean  time,  real  religion  i3 
scorned  by  the  world,  which  cannot  distinguish  between  a thing  so  deformed, 
and  the  thing  as  it  ought  to  appear. 

Consider,  also,  whether  there  needs  any  grace  at  all  in  order  to  maintain  such 
a sort  of  profession.  We  require  only  to  christen  the  evil  passions  of  corrupt 
nature,  and  then  may  call  names,  hate,  boast,  and  give  ourselves  the  preference, 
as  much  as  any  ungodly  man  whatever ! A zealot  at  an  election  can  fight  and 
strive  for  his  favourite  candidate  ; with  inflamed  zeal  he  can  cause  divisions,  ex- 
hibit pride,  self-will,  and  impatience  of  subordination : but,  let  me  ask,  will  the 
same  evil  tempers  change  their  nature  because  they  are  employed  about  spiritual 
objects  ? 

Much  blame  attaches,  too,  respecting  certain  disputable  points  for  which  such 
persons  strive.  It  seems  as  if  some,  who  are  otherwise  good  men,  did  not  relish 
the  Bible  till  they  had  garbled  and  selected  it ; and  that,  if  the  whole  were  not 
of  acknowledged  authority,  they  would  condemn  it  as  it  now  stands.  They  speak 
as  if  it  were  not  accurate  in  its  terms,  or  sufficiently  express  or  decisive  in  con- 
firming their  fond  opinions.  This  leads  them  to  be  shy  of  some  parts  of  revela- 
tion, and  to  distort  others,  in  order  to  fit  them  for  their  system  ; and  while  con- 
tending for  that  system,  they  appear  to  forget  the  stress  which  the  apostle  lays 
upon  the  holy,  humble,  self-denying,  affectionate  spirit  of  Christianity,  in  1 Cor. 
xiii. ; how  gentle  it  is,  how  easy  to  be  entreated,  how  it  hopeth  and  endureth  all 
things,  &c.  While,  on  the  contrary,  they  who  can  speak  with  the  tongues  of 
men  and  of  angels,  who  have  all  knowledge,  who  can  work  miracles,  and  even 
die  martyrs,  would,  without  this  distinguishing  characteristic  of  Christianity,  be 
considered  of  God  as  nothing.  The  Old  Testament  dispensation,  it  is  granted, 
had  a severe  aspect,  and  special  occasions  may  be  pleaded  for  special  expressions 
of  holy  indignation  under  any  dispensation  ; but  when  the  prophet  describes  the 
brighter  day,  he  foretells,  that  then  “ the  wolf  shall  dwell  with  the  lamb,”  &c., 
as  emblematical  of  the  prevalence  of  that  grace  described  by  the  apostle,  in  the 
chapter  just  quoted.  Hold,  therefore,  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints  as 
firmly  as  possible,  but  hold  it  in  love.  “ Buy  the  truth  and  sell  it  not rather 
die  for  it,  than  part  with  it ; but  “ speak  it  in  love  and  walk  in  it  “ as  Christ 
also  walked,”  ever  remembering,  that  “ the  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the 
righteousness  of  God.” 

I feel  conscious  that  it  is  simply  with  a view  to  convince  many  well  meaning 
Christians  of  their  error  (and  I have  found  more  or  less  of  this  class  in  almost 
every  place  where  I have  been,)  that  I thus  speak.  If  a gross  superstition,  arising 
in  the  Church,  perverted  the  Christianity  of  former  ages ; I wish  I may  mistake 
in  supposing,  that  a loose  and  unscriptural  profession  is  widely  spreading  as 
the  bane  of  our  age.  Against  such  a departure  from  the  true  genius  of  Christian- 
ity, I certainly,  as  a minister  of  Christ,  ought  to  bear  my  feeble  testimony.  Con- 
sider, therefore,  that  what  is  said,  is  with  a single  view  to  your  best  interests ; 
and  the  Lord  give  you  understanding  in  all  things. 

As  I referred  the  Christians  who  were  last  addressed,  to  the  character  of  Mr. 
N.  as  an  example,  so  I never  knew  a more  perfect  one  to  my  purpose.  When 
any  person  depreciated  the  ministry  of  a good  man,  who,  by  advancing  important 
truths,  was  opposing  the  reigning  errors  of  the  times ; but  who,  from  timidity 
or  prejudice,  was  shy  of  Mr.  N.,  he  would  imitate  his  Divine  Master  by  saying, 
“ Let  him  alone ; he  that  is  not  against  us  is  on  our  side.  Make  no  man  an  of- 
fender for  a word.  He  is  doing  good,  according  to  his  views.  Let  us  pray 
for  him,  and  by  no  means  weaken  his  hands.  Who  knows  but  God  may  one  day 
put  him  far  above  our  heads  both  in  knowledge  and  usefulness  I” 

His  grand  point,  in  a few  words,  as  he  used  to  express  it,  was,  “to  break  a 
HARD  HEART,  AND  TO  HEAL  A BROKEN  HEART.”  To  implant  the  life  of  God  ill 


76 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV  JOHN  NEWTON. 


the  soul  of  man,  he  would  sacrifice  every  subordinate  consideration.  He  felt  every 
other  consideration  comparatively  insignificant.  He  saw  the  spirit  of  ancient 
Pharisaism  working  among  those  who  cry  out  the  most  against  it ; who  exact 
to  a scruple,  in  the  tvthe  of  mint,  anise,  and  cummin  of  their  own  peculiarities, 
while  they  pass  over  the  weightier  matters  of  unity  and  love  ; straining  at  the 
gnat  of  a private  opinion,  and  swallowing  the  camel  of  a deadly  discord.  On  the 
contrary,  as  far  as  order  and  circumstances  would  admit,  Mr.  N.  clave  to  every 
good  man,  and  endeavoured  to  strengthen  his  hands,  in  whatever  denomination 
of  Christians  he  was  found.  His  character  well  illustrated  the  Scripture,  that 
though  “ scarcely  for  a righteous  (or  just)  man  would  one  die  ; yet  for  a good 
man  (i.  e.  one  eminent  for  his  candour  and  benevolence)  some  would  even  dare 
to  die.”  However  they  admired  some  ministers,  they  all  loved  him;  and  saw 
exemplified  in  him  that  “ wisdom  which  is  from  above,  which  is  first  pure, 
then  peaceable,  gentle,  and  easy  to  be  intreated,  full  of  mercy  and  good  fruits 
without  partiality  and  without  hypocrisy.” 

I conclude  these  Memoirs  with  a word  to  such  as  are  endeavouring  to  follow 
the  steps  of  their  late  faithful  friend,  as  he  followed  Christ.  We  cannot  but  la- 
ment the  errors  just  described.  We  cannot,  if  we  have  any  zeal  for  the  gospel, 
but  protest  against  them.  But  let  us  recollect,  that  they  are  not  the  only  errors 
which  are  found  in  the  church  ; and  therefore  let  us  watch,  lest  any  other  “root 
of  bitterness  spring  up  to  trouble  us,  and  defile  many.”  While  you  lament  w ith 
me  the  removal  of  ministers  like  Mr.  N.,  let  us  recollect  that  Eternal  Friend, 
who  will  never  leave  his  church  without  witnesses  to  the  truth  ; and  w ho,  among 
other  reasons  for  removing  earthly  helps,  teaches  us  thereby  to  rest  only  upon 
that  help  which  cannot  be  removed.  Let  us  take  comfort  too  in  recollecting, 
that,  spotted  as  the  church  may  appear  from  the  inconsistencies  of  many  of  its 
members,  yet  all  the  real  good  that  is  to  be  found  in  this  corrupt  world,  is  to  be 
found  in  that  church.  God  saw  seven  thousand  true  believers  in  Israel  wThile 
his  prophet  could  see  but  one.  Where  some  Jehu  is  sounding  a trumpet  before 
him,  many  are  quietly  passing  to  heaven  without  any  such  clamour.  As  a great 
writer  remarks,  “ Because  half  a dozen  grasshoppers,  under  a fern,  make  the 
field  ring  with  their  importunate  chink,  while  thousands  of  great  cattle  chew  the 
cud  and  are  silent,  pray  do  not  imagine  that  those,  who  make  the  noise,  are  ‘ the 
only  inhabitants  of  the  field.’  ” 

But  I must  remark,  that  nothing  has  been  more  profitable  to  myself  in  consider- 
ing Mr.  N.’s  life,  than  the  exhibition  it  makes  of  a particular  providence.  If 
the  church  be  not  conducted  by  such  visible  signs  now,  as  formerly,  it  is  found 
to  be  as  actually  conducted.  We  read  of  a Divine  hand  concerned  in  the  fall  of 
sparrows,  in  numbering  the  hairs  of  our  head,  and  in  raising  our  dust  to  life  ; 
but  with  what  little  interest  we  read  this,  appears  by  our  distrust  in  the  first  trial 
we  meet.  If  wre  do  not  dare  to  join  the  sentiments  of  some,  wrho  regard  such 
expressions  as  purely  figurative  and  hyperbolical,  yet  our  imagination  is  so  over- 
whelmed with  the  difficulty  of  the  performance,  that  wre  are  apt  to  turn  from  the 
subject  with  some  general  hope,  but  with  a very  indistinct  and  vague  idea  of 
“ a God  at  hand,”  faithful  to  his  promise,  and  almighty  to  deliver.  Yet  howr 
many  cases  occur  in  the  history  of  every  one  of  us,  where  nothing  short  of  an  Al- 
mighty arm  could  prove  “ a present  help  in  the  time  of  trouble.” 

Now,  this  short  history  before  us  is  admirably  calculated  to  encourage  our  faith 
and  hope,  when  we  are  called  to  pass  through  those  deep  waters,  that  seem  to 
bid  defiance  to  human  strength  and  contrivance.  What,  for  instance,  but  a Divine 
interference  caused  Mr.  N.  to  be  roused  from  sleep  on  board  the  Harwich  at  the 
moment  of  exchanging  men,  and  thereby  effected  his  removal  ? What  placed  him 
in  a situation  so  remarkably  suited  to  his  recovering  the  ship,  which  had  already 
passed  the  place  of  his  station  in  Africa,  and  brought  him  back  to  his  country  > 
what  kept  him  from  returning  in  the  boat,  that  wras  lost  at  Rio  Cestors  ? or  from 
the  ship  that  was  blown  up  near  Liverpool  ? not  to  mention  many  other  of  his 
special  deliverances 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


77 


“ I am  a wonder  unto  many,”  says  he,  in  the  motto  of  his  Narrative;  and  if 
we  as  distinctly  considered  the  strange  methods  of  mercy  which  have  occurred 
in  our  own  cases,  we  should  at  least  be  a wonder  to  ourselves.  But  my  aim  is 
to  point  out  the  use  we  should  make  of  these  Memoirs  in  this  respect.  We 
should,  as  Christians,  mark  the  error  of  despair.  We  should  see,  that  the  case 
of  a praying  man  cannot  be  desperate ; that  if  a man  be  out  of  the  pit  of  hell, 
he  is  on  the  ground  of  mercy.  We  should  recollect,  that  God  sees  a way  of 
escape  when  we  see  none  ; that  nothing  is  too  hard  for  him;  that  he  warrants  our 
dependence,  and  invites  us  to  call  on  him  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  gives  a 
promise  of  deliverance.  We  should,  therefore,  in  every  trial,  adoot  the  lan- 
guage of  Mr.  N.’s  favourite  Herbert : 

“Away,  despair;  my  gracious  Lord  doth  hear; 

Though  winds  and  waves  assault  my  keel, 

He  doth  preserve  it ; he  doth  steer, 

Ev’n  when  the  boat  seems  most  to  reel. 

Storms  are  the  triumph  of  his  art : 

Well  may  he  close  his  eyes,  but  not  his  heart.” 


From  these  facts  we  should  see,  that  Christ  is  able,  not  only  “ to  save  to  the 
uttermost  all  that  come  unto  God  by  him ;”  but  also  that  he  is  able  to  bring  the 
most  hardened  blasphemer  and  abject  slave  from  his  chains  of  sin  and  misery,  to 
stand  in  the  most  honourable  and  useful  station,  and  proclaim  to  the  wretched 
and  to  the  ruined  the  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace.  I have  observed,  from  my 
own  experience  as  well  as  from  that  of  others,  how  strong  a hold  Satan  builds  by 
despair.  The  pressing  fascinations  of  the  world,  the  secret  invitations  of  sensu- 
ality, and  the  distant  prospect  of  eternal  things,  form  a powerful  current  against 
vital  religion.  The  heart  of  a Christian  is  ready  to  sink  whenever  these  proud 
waters  rise.  Let  him,  therefore,  recollect,  that  his  hope,  his  only  hope,  is  in 
pressing  right  onward  through  a world  of  lies  and  vanity;  that  his  present  dis- 
pensation is  the  walk  of  faith  and  not  of  sight;  and  that  “by  two  immutable 
things,  in  which  it  is  impossible  for  God  to  lie,  he  has  given  strong  consolation 
to  such  as  flee  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  them.” 

One  could,  indeed,  scarcely  conjecture,  that  cases  like  Mr.  N.’s  should  be  so 
perverted  by  any  of  our  children,  as  that  they  should  take  confidence  in  their 
sins  from  his  former  course  of  life ; but,  because  such  facts,  as  I am  credibly  in- 
formed, do  exist,  let  us  be  upon  the  watch  to  counteract  this  deep  device  of  the 
great  enemy. 

My  dear  young  friends,  who  may  have  read  these  Memoirs,  perhaps  merely 
for  your  amusement,  consider  with  what  a contrary  design  St.  Paul  states  his 
former  unrenewed  condition:  “I  was,”  says  he,  “before  a blasphemer,  a per- 
secutor, and  injurious;  but  for  this  cause  I obtained  mercy.”  For  what  cause  ? 
Was  it  that  men  should  continue  in  sin,  because  a miracle  of  special  grace  had 
been  wrought?  To  “ do  evil  that  good  may  come”  is  the  black  mark  of  a repro- 
bate mind.  But  “for  this  cause,”  saith  the  apostle,  “I  obtained  mercy;  that 
in  me  first  Jesus  Christ  might  show  forth  all  long-suffering,  for  a pattern  to  them 
who  should  hereafter  believe  in  him  to  life  everlasting.”  The  same  caution  is 
necessary  whenever  you  may  be  tempted  to  hope  for  such  a recovery  as  Mr.  N.’s, 
after  erring  like  him.  To  proceed  upon  such  a hope,  is  a gross  presumption. 
Thousands  perish  in  wrong  courses,  for  one  who  escapes  from  their  natural  con- 
sequences. Pray,  therefore,  that  you  may  be  enabled  to  resist  the  temptation 
of  perverting  such  extraordinary  cases.  God  affords  them  to  be  “a  savour  of 
life  unto  life,”  while  Satan  would  employ  them  to  be  “a  savour  of  death  unto 
death.”  One  almighty  to  save,  affords  you  here,  indeed,  an  instance  of  special 
mercy,  which  gives  you  the  strongest  encouragement  in  setting  your  face  towards 
his  kingdom;  and  this  is  the  proper  use  to  be  made  of  such  a case. 

Your  parents,  your  most  disinterested  friends,  are  anxiously  watching  for  your 


78 


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  REV.  JOHN  NEWTON. 


good  : and  they,  perhaps,  have  put  this  book  into  your  hand  with  a view  of  pro- 
moting it.  The  author  has  cause  to  thank  God,  who  put  it  into  the  heart  of  his 
pious  parent  to  make  a similar  attempt,  and  bless  it  with  success ; and  he  could 
tell  of  more  such  instances.  May  it  please  God  that  you  may  be  added  to  the 
number  ! Worldly  prosperity  would  rather  hurt  than  help  you  before  your  minds 
become  rightly  directed.  Mr.  N.  shows  us,*  that  his  firmest  friend  could  not  have 
served  him  effectually  had  not  God  first  prepared  his  mind  for  the  advancement. 
An  enemy  would  occupy  your  minds  with  perishing  objects;  bat  God  calls  you 
to  cultivate  nobler  views.  He  proposes  glory,  honour,  immortality,  and  eternal 
life  by  the  gospel.  “ Seek,”  therefore,  “ first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righ- 
teousness and  all  other  things  shall  be  added  to  you.” 


Memoirs,  page  26. 


AN 


AUTHENTIC  NARRATIVE,  &c. 


LETTER  I. 


REVEREND  AND  DEAR  SIR, 

I make  no  doubt  but  you  have  at  times 
had  pleasing  reflections  upon  that  promise 
made  to  the  Israelites,  Deut.  viii.  2.  They 
were  then  in  the  wilderness,  surrounded 
with  difficulties,  which  were  greatly  aggra- 
vated by  their  own  distrust  and  perverseness : 
they  had  experienced  a variety  of  dispensa- 
tions, the  design  of  which  they  could  not  as 
yet  understand ; they  frequently  lost  sight  of 
God’s  gracious  purposes  in  their  favour,  and 
were  much  discouraged  by  reason  of  the  way. 
To  compose  and  animate  their  minds,  Moses 
here  suggests  to  them,  that  there  was  a fu- 
ture happy  time  drawing  near,  when  their 
journey  and  warfare  should  be  finished ; that 
they  should  soon  be  put  in  possession  of  the 
promised  land,  and  have  rest  from  all  their 
fears  and  troubles ; and  then  it  would  give 
them  pleasure  to  look  back  upon  what  they 
now  found  so  uneasy  to  bear : — “ Thou  shalt 
remember  all  the  way,  by  which  the  Lord 
thy  God  led  thee  through  this  wilderness.” 

But  the  importance  and  comfort  of  these 
words  is  still  greater,  if  we  consider  them 
in  a spiritual  sense,  as  addressed  to  all  who 
are  passing  through  the  wilderness  of  this 
world  to  a heavenly  Canaan ; who  by  faith 
in  the  promises  and  power  of  God  are  seek- 
ing eternal  rest  in  that  kingdom  which  can- 
not be  shaken.  The  hope  of  that  glorious 
inheritance  inspires  us  with  some  degree  of 
courage  and  zeal  to  press  forward,  to  where 
Jesus  has  already  entered  as  our  forerunner; 
and  when  our  eye  is  fixed  upon  him,  we  are 
more  than  conquerors  over  all  that  would 
withstand  our  progress.  But  we  have  not 
yet  attained  it ; we  still  feel  the  infirmities 
of  a fallen  nature : through  the  remains  of 
ignorance  and  unbelief,  we  often  mistake  the 
Lord’s  dealings  with  us,  and  are  ready  to 
complain,  when,  if  we  knew  all,  we  should 
rather  rejoice.  But  to  us  likewise  there  is 
a time  coming,  when  our  warfare  shall  be 
accomplished,  our  views  enlarged,  and  our 
.ight  increased : then,  with  what  transports 
of  adoration  and  love  shall  we  look  back  j 
upon  the  way,  by  which  the  Lord  led  us ! 1 


We  shall  then  see  and  acknowledge,  that 
mercy  and  goodness  directed  every  step ; 
we  shall  see,  that  what  our  ignorance  once 
called  adversities  and  evils,  were  in  reality 
blessings  which  we  could  not  have  done 
well  without ; that  nothing  befel  us  without  a 
cause : that  no  trouble  came  upon  us  sooner, 
or  pressed  us  more  heavily,  or  continued 
longer,  than  our  case  required : in  a word, 
that  our  many  afflictions  were  each  in  their 
place  among  the  means  employed  by  divine 
grace  and  wisdom,  to  bring  us  to  the  posses- 
sion of  that  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory,  which  the  Lord  has  prepared  for  his 
people.  And  even  in  this  imperfect  state, 
though  we  are  seldom  able  to  judge  aright 
of  our  present  circumstances,  yet,  if  we  look 
upon  the  years  of  our  past  life,  and  compare 
the  dispensations  we  have  been  brought 
through,  with  the  frame  of  our  minds  under 
each  successive  period ; if  we  consider,  how 
wonderfully  one  thing  has  been  connected 
with  another ; so  that  what  we  now  number 
amongst  our  greatest  advantages,  perhaps 
took  their  first  rise  from  incidents  which  we 
thought  hardly  worth  our  notice ; and  that 
we  have  sometimes  escaped  the  greatest  dan- 
gers that  threatened  us,  not  by  any  wisdom 
or  foresight  of  our  own,  but  by  the  interven- 
tion of  circumstances,  which  we  neither  de- 
sired nor  thought  of ; — I say,  when  we  com- 
pare and  consider  these  things  by  the  light 
afforded  us  in  the  holy  scriptures,  we  may 
collect  indisputable  proof,  from  the  narrow 
circle  of  our  own  concerns,  that  the  wise  and 
good  providence  of  God  watches  over  his 
people  from  the  earliest  moment  of  their 
life,  overrules  and  guards  them  through  all 
their  wanderings  in  a state  of  ignorance,  leads 
them  in  a way  they  know  not,  till  at  length 
his  providence  and  grace  concur  in  those 
events  and  impressions,  which  bring  them  to 
the  knowledge  of  him  and  themselves. 

I am  persuaded  that  every  believer  will, 
upon  due  reflection,  see  enough  in  his  own 
case  to  confirm  this  remark ; but  not  all  in 
the  same  degree.  The  outward  circum 
stances  of  many  ha,ve  been  uniform;  the? 

79 


80 


INTRODUCTORY  OBSERVATIONS. 


have  known  but  little  variety  in  life ; and  I 
with  respect  to  their  inward  change,  it  has  I 
been  effected  in  a secret  way,  unnoticed  by 
others,  and  almost  unperceived  by  them- 
selves. The  Lord  has  spoken  to  them,  not 
in  thunder  and  tempest,  but  with  a still  small 
voice  he  has  drawn  them  gradually  to  him- 
self; so  that,  though  they  have  a happy  as- 
surance of  the  thing,  that  they  know  and 
love  him,  and  are  passed  from  death  unto  life ; 
yet  of  the  precise  time  and  manner,  they 
can  give  little  account.  Others  he  seems 
to  select,  in  order  to  show  the  exceeding 
riches  of  his  grace,  and  the  greatness  of  his 
mighty  power : he  suffers  the  natural  rebel- 
lion and  wickedness  of  their  hearts  to  have 
full  scope ; while  sinners  of  less  note  are  cut 
off  with  little  warning,  these  are  spared, 
though  sinning  with  a high  hand,  and,  as  it 
were,  studying  their  own  destruction.  At 
length,  when  all  that  knew  them  are  perhaps 
expecting  to  hear,  that  they  are  made  signal 
instances  of  divine  vengeance,  the  Lord 
(whose  thoughts  are  high  above  ours,  as  the 
heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth)  is  pleased 
to  pluck  them  as  brands  out  of  the  fire,  and 
to  make  them  monuments  of  his  mercy,  for 
the  encouragement  of  others ; they  are,  be- 
yond expectation,  convinced,  pardoned,  and 
changed.  A case  of  this  sort  indicates  a di- 
vine power  no  less  than  the  creation  of  a 
world : and  it  is  evidently  the  Lord’s  doing, 
and  it  is  marvellous  in  the  eyes  of  all  those, 
who  are  not  blinded  by  prejudice  and  unbelief. 

Such  was  the  persecuting  Saul : his  heart 
was  full  of  enmity  against  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
and  therefore  he  persecuted  and  made  havoc 
of  his  disciples.  He  had  been  a terror  to 
the  church  of  Jerusalem,  and  was  going  to 
Damascus  with  the  same  views.  He  was 
yet  breathing  out  threatenings  and  slaughter 
against  all  that  loved  the  Lord  Jesus.  He 
thought  little  of  the  mischief  he  had  hitherto 
done.  He  was  engaged  for  the  suppression 
of  the  whole  sect ; and  hurrying  from  house 
to  house,  from  place  to  place,  he  carried  me- 
naces in  his  look,  and  repeated  threatenings 
with  every  breath.  Such  was  his  spirit  and 
temper,  when  the  Lord  Jesus,  whom  he  hated 
and  opposed,  checked  him  in  the  height  of 
his  rage,  called  this  bitter  persecutor  to  the 
honour  of  an  apostle,  and  inspired  him  with 
great  zeal  and  earnestness,  to  preach  that 
faith  which  he  had  so  lately  attempted  to  de- 
stroy. 

Nor  are  we  without  remarkable  displays 
of  the  same  sovereign,  efficacious  grace  in  our 
own  times ; — I may  particularly  mention  the 
instance  of  the  late  colonel  Gardiner.  If 
any  real  satisfaction  could  be  found  in  a sin- 
ful course,  he  would  have  met  with  it ; for  he 
pursued  the  experiment  with  all  possible  ad- 
vantages. He  was  habituated  to  evil ; and 
many  uncommon,  almost  miraculous  deliver- 
ances, made  no  impression  upon  him.  Yet 


[let.  .. 

| he  was  likewise  made  willing  in  the  day  of 

I God’s  power : and  the  bright  example  of  his 
life,  illustrated  and  diffused  by  the  account 
of  him,  published  since  his  death,  has  afford- 
ed an  occasion  of  much  praise  to  God  and 
much  comfort  to  his  people. 

After  the  mention  of  such  names,  can  you 
permit  me,  Sir,  to  add  my  own  1 If  I do,  it 
must  be  with  a very  humbling  distinction. 
These  once  eminent  sinners,  proved  sincere 
Christians:  much  had  been  forgiven  them, 
therefore  they  loved  much.  St.  Paul  could 
say,  “ The  grace  bestowed  upon  me  was  not 
in  vain ; for  I laboured  more  abundantly  than 
they  all.”  Colonel  Gardiner  likewise  was  as 
a city  set  upon  a hill,  a burning  and  a shining 
light : the  manner  of  his  conversion  was 
hardly  more  singular,  than  the  whole  course 
of  his  conversation  from  that  time  to  his 
death.  Here,  alas ! the  parallel  greatly  fails. 
It  has  not  been  thus  with  me ; — I must  take 
deserved  shame  to  myself,  that  I have  made 
very  unsuitable  returns  for  what  I have  re- 
ceived. But,  if  the  question  is  only  concern- 
ing the  patience  and  long-suffering  of  God, 
the  wonderful  interposition  of  his  providence 
in  favour  of  an  unworthy  sinner,  the  power 
of  his  grace  in  softening  the  hardest  heart, 
and  the  riches  of  his  mercy  in  pardoning  the 
most  enormous  and  aggravated  transgres- 
sions ; in  these  respects,  I know  no  case  more 
extraordinary  than  my  own.  And  indeed 
many  persons,  to  whom  I have  related  my 
story,  have  thought  it  worthy  of  being  pre- 
served. 

I never  gave  any  succinct  account  in  writ- 
ing, of  the  Lord’s  dealing  with  me,  till  very 
lately ; for  I was  deterred,  on  the  one  hand, 
by  the  great  difficulty  of  writing  properly 
where  self  is  concerned  ; on  the  other,  by  the 
ill  use  which  persons  of  corrupt  and  perverse 
minds  are  often  known  to  make  of  such  in- 
stances. The  Psalmist  reminds  us  that  a re- 
serve in  these  things  is  proper,  when  he  says, 
“ Come  unto  me,  all  you  that  fear  God,  and 
I will  tell  you  what  he  hath  done  for  iny 
soul and  our  Lord  cautions  us  not  to  “ cast 
our  pearls  before  swine.”  The  pearls  of  a 
Christian  are,  perhaps,  his  choice  experiences 
of  the  Lord’s  power  and  love  in  the  concerns 
of  his  soul ; and  these  should  not  be  at  all 
adventures  made  public,  lest  we  give  occa- 
sion to  earthly  and  grovelling  souls,  to  pro- 
fane what  they  cannot  understand.  These 
were  the  chief  reasons  of  my  backwardness : 
but,  a few  weeks  since,  I yielded  to  the  judg- 
ment and  request  of  a much  respected  friend, 
and  sent  him  a relation  at  large,  in  a series 
of  eight  letters.  The  event  has  been  what 
I little  expected ; I wrote  to  one  person,  but 
my  letters  have  fallen  into  many  hands: 
amongst  others,  I find  they  have  reached 
your  notice ; and  instead  of  blaming  me  tor 
being  too  tedious  and  circumstantial,  which 
was  the  fault  I feared  I had  committed,  you 


OCCURRENCES  IN  EARLY  LIFE. 


81 


LET.  II.] 

are  pleased  to  desire  a still  more  distinct  de- 
tail. As  you  and  others  of  my  friends  appre- 
hend my  compliance  with  this  request  may 
be  attended  with  some  good  effect,  may  pro- 
mote the  pleasing  work  of  praise  to  our  ador- 
able Redeemer,  to  confirm  the  faith  of  some 
or  other  of  his  people,  I am  willing  to  obey ; 
1 give  up  my  own  reasonings  upon  the  inex- 
pediency of  so  inconsiderable  a person  as  my- 
self adventuring  in  so  public  a point  of  view. 
If  God  may  be  glorified  on  my  behalf,  and 
nis  children  in  any  measure  comforted  or  in- 
structed by  what  I have  to  declare  of  his 
goodness,  I shall  be  satisfied ; and  am  con- 
tent to  leave  all  other  possible  consequences 
of  this  undertaking  in  his  hands,  who  does 
all  things  well. 

I must  again  have  recourse  to  my  memory, 
as  I retained  no  copies  of  the  letters  you  saw. 
So  far  as  I can  recollect  what  I then  wrote, 
I will  relate,  but  shall  not  affect  a needless 
variety  of  phrase  and  manner,  merely  be- 
cause those  have  been  already  perused  by 
many.  I may  perhaps,  in  some  places,  when 
repeating  the  same  facts,  express  myself  in 
nearly  the  same  words;  yet  I propose,  ac- 
cording to  your  desire,  to  make  this  relation 
more  explicit  and  particular  than  the  former, 
especially  towards  the  close,  which  I wound 
up  hastily,  lest  my  friend  should  be  wearied. 

I hope  you  will  likewise  excuse  me,  if  I do 
not  strictly  confine  myself  to  narration,  but 
now  and  then  intersperse  such  reflections  as 
may  offer,  while  I am  writing : and  though 
you  have  signified  your  intentions  of  com- 
municating what  I send  you  to  others,  I must 
not,  on  this  account,  affect  a conciseness  and 
correctness  which  is  not  my  natural  talent, 
lest  the  whole  should  appear  dry  and  con- 
strained. I shall  therefore  (if  possible)  think 
only  of  you,  and  write  with  that  confidence 
and  freedom  which  your  friendship  and  can- 
dour deserve.  This  sheet  may  stand  as  a 
preface,  and  I purpose,  as  far  els  I can,  to  in- 
termit many  other  engagements,  until  I have 
completed  the  task  you  have  assigned  me. 
In  tne  mean  time,  I entreat  the  assistance  of 
your  prayers,  that  in  this,  and  all  my  poor 
attempts,  I may  have  a single  eye  to  his 
glory,  who  was  pleased  to  call  me  out  of 
horrid  darkness,  into  the  marvellous  light  of 
his  gospel. — I am,  with  sincere  respect,  dear 
sir.  your  obliged  and  affectionate  servant. 
January  12,  1763. 


LETTER  II. 

reverend  sir, — I can  sometimes  feel  a 
pleasure  in  repeating  the  grateful  acknow- 
ledgment of  David,  “ O Lord,  I am  thy  ser- 
vant, the  son  of  thine  handmaid ; thou  hast 
loosed  my  bands.”  The  tender  mercies  of 
God  towards  me  were  manifest  in  the  first 
L 


moment  of  my  life ; — I was  bom  as  it  were 
in  his  house,  and  dedicated  to  him  in  my  in- 
fancy. My  mother  (as  I have  heard  from 
many)  was  a pious  experienced  Christian; 
she  was  a dissenter,  in  communion  with  the 
late  Doctor  Jennings.  I was  her  only  child; 
and  as  she  was  of  a weak  constitution  and  a 
retired  temper,  almost  her  whole  employ- 
ment was  the  care  of  my  education.  I have 
some  faint  remembrance  of  her  care  and  in- 
structions. At  a time  when  I could  not  be 
more  than  three  years  of  age,  she  herself 
taught  me  English,  and  with  so  much  suc- 
cess (as  I had  something  of  a forward  turn,) 
that  when  I was  four  years  old  I could  read 
with  propriety,  in  any  common  book  that  of- 
fered. She  stored  my  memory,  which  was 
then  very  retentive,  with  many  valuable 
pieces,  chapters,  and  portions  of  scripture, 
catechisms,  hymns  and  poems.  My  temper, 
at  that  time  seemed  quite  suitable  to  her 
wishes:  I had  little  inclination  to  the  noisy 
sports  of  children,  but  was  best  pleased  when 
in  her  company,  and  always  as  willing  to 
learn  as  she  was  to  teach  me.  How  far  the 
best  education  may  fall  short  of  reaching  the 
heart,  will  strongly  appear  in  the  sequel  of 
my  history : yet,  I think,  for  the  encourage- 
ment of  pious  parents  to  go  on  in  the  good 
way  of  doing  their  part  faithfully  to  form 
their  children’s  minds,  I may  properly  pro- 
pose myself  as  an  instance.  Though  in  pro- 
cess of  time,  I sinned  away  all  the  advantages 
of  these  early  impressions,  yet  they  were  for 
a great  while  a restraint  upon  me ; they  re- 
turned again  and  again,  and  it  was  very  long 
before  I could  wholly  shake  them  oft*;  and 
when  the  Lord  at  length  opened  my  eyes,  I 
found  a great  benefit  from  the  recollection 
of  them.  Further,  my  dear  mother,  besides 
the  pains  she  took  with  me,  often  commend- 
ded  me  with  many  prayers  and  tears  to  God ; 
and  I doubt  not  but  I reap  the  fruits  of  these 
prayers  to  this  hour. 

My  mother  observed  my  early  progress 
with  peculiar  pleasure,  and  intended  from 
the  first  to  bring  me  up  with  a view  to  the 
ministry,  if  the  Lord  should  so  incline  my 
heart.  In  my  sixth  year  I began  to  learn 
Latin ; but,  before  I had  time  to  know  much 
about  it,  the  intended  plan  of  my  education 
was  broke  short. — The  Lord’s  designs  were 
far  beyond  the  views  of  an  earthly  parent ; he 
was  pleased  to  reserve  me  for  an  unusual  proof 
of  his  patience,  providence,  and  grace,  and 
therefore  overruled  the  purpose  of  my  friends, 
by  depriving  me  of  this  excellent  parent, 
when  I was  something  under  seven  years 
old.  I was  born  the  24th  of  July,  1725,  and 
she  died  the  11th  of  that  month,  1732. 

My  father  was  then  at  sea  (he  was  a com- 
mander in  the  Mediterranean  trade  at  that 
time :)  he  came  home  the  following  year, 
and  soon  after  married  again.  Thus  I pass- 
ed into  different  hands.  I was  well  *reated 


82 


OCCURRENCES  IN  EARLY  LIFE. 


in  all  other  respects ; but  the  loss  of  my  mo- 
ther’s instructions  was  not  repaired.  I was 
now  permitted  to  mingle  with  careless  and 
profane  children,  and  soon  began  to  learn 
their  ways.  Soon  after  my  father’s  marriage 
I was  sent  to  a boarding  school  in  Essex, 
where  the  imprudent  severity  of  the  master 
almost  broke  my  spirit  and  relish  for  books. 
With  him  I forgot  the  first  principles  and 
rules  of  arithmetic,  which  my  mother  had 
taught  me  years  before.  I staid  there  two 
years;  in  the  last  of  the  two  a new  usher 
coming,  who  observed  and  studied  my  temper, 
I took  to  the  Latin  with  great  eagerness ; so 
that  before  I was  ten  years  old,  I reached 
and  maintained  the  first  post  in  the  second 
class,  which  in  that  school  read  Tully  and 
Virgil.  I believe  I was  pushed  forward  too 
fast,  and  therefore  not  being  grounded,  I soon 
lost  all  I had  learned  (for  I left  school  in  my 
tenth  year,)  and  when  I long  afterwards  un- 
dertook the  Latin  language  from  books,  1 
think  I had  little,  if  any  advantage,  from 
what  I had  learned  before. 

My  father’s  second  marriage  was  from  a 
family  in  Essex;  and  when  I was  eleven 
years  old,  he  took  me  with  him  to  sea.  He 
was  a man  of  remarkable  good  sense,  and 
great  knowledge  of  the  world ; he  took  great 
care  of  my  morals,  but  could  not  supply 
my  mother's  part.  Having  been  educated 
himself  in  Spain,  he  always  observed  an  air 
of  distance  and  severity  in  his  carriage, 
which  overawed  and  discouraged  my  spirit. 
I was  always  in  fear  when  before  him,  and 
therefore  he  had  the  less  influence.  From 
that  time  to  the  year  1742,  I made  several 
voyages,  but  with  considerable  intervals  be- 
tween, which  were  chiefly  spent  in  the 
country,  excepting  a few  months  in  my  fif- 
teenth year,  when  I was  placed  upon  a very 
advantageous  prospect  at  Alicant  in  Spain ; 
but  my  unsettled  behaviour  and  impatience 
of  restraint  rendered  that  design  abortive. 

In  this  period  my  temper  and  conduct 
were  exceedingly  various.  At  school,  or 
soon  after,  I had  little  concern  about  reli- 
gion, and  easily  received  very  ill  impressions. 
But  I was  often  disturbed  with  convictions ; 
I was  fond  of  reading  from  a child ; among 
other  books,  Bonnet’s  Christian  Oratory  often 
came  in  my  way ; and  though  I understood  but 
little  of  it,  the  course  of  life  therein  recom- 
mended appeared  very  desirable,  and  I was 
inclined  to  attempt  it.  1 began  to  pray,  to 
read  the  scriptures,  and  to  keep  a sort  of 
diary  ; I was  presently  religious  is  my  own 
eyes ; but  alas ! this  seeming  goodness  had 
no  solid  foundation,  but  passed  away  like  a 
morning  cloud,  or  early  dew.  I was  soon 
weary,  gradually  gave  it  up,  and  became 
worse  than  before:  instead  of  prayer,  I 
learned  to  curse  and  blaspheme,  and  was  ex- 
ceedingly wicked,  when  from  under  my 
parents’  view.  All  this  was  before  I was 


[let.  ii. 

twelve  years  old.  About  that  time  I had  s. 
dangerous  fall  from  a horse ; I was  throwi, 
I believe,  within  a few  inches  of  a hedge-row 
newly  cut  down ; I got  no  hurt ; but  could 
not  avoid  taking  notice  of  a gracious  provi- 
dence in  my  deliverance;  for  had  I fallen 
upon  the  stakes,  I had  inevitably  been  killed ; 
my  conscience  suggested  to  me  the  dreadful 
consequences,  if  in  such  a state  I had  been 
summoned  to  appear  before  God.  I presently 
broke  off  from  my  profane  practices,  and  ap- 
peared quite  altered ; but  was  not  long  before 
I declined  again.  These  struggles  between 
sin  and  conscience  were  often  repeated  ; but 
the  consequence  was,  that  every  relapse 
sunk  me  into  still  greater  depths  of  wicked- 
ness. I was  once  roused  by  the  loss  of  an 
intimate  companion.  We  had  agreed  to  go  on 
board  a man-of-war  (I  think  it  was  on  Sun- 
day,) but  I providentially  came  too  late ; the 
boat  was  overset,  and  he  and  several  others 
were  drowned.  I was  invited  to  the  funeral 
of  my  play-fellow,  and  was  exceedingly  af- 
fected, to  think  that  by  a delay  of  a few 
minutes  (which  had  much  displeased  and 
angered  me  till  I saw  the  event,)  my  life 
had  been  preserved.  However,  this  like- 
wise was  soon  forgot.  At  another  time, 
the  perusal  of  the  Family  Instructor  put  me 
upon  a partial  and  transient  reformation.  In 
brief,  though  I cannot  distinctly  relate  par- 
ticulars, I think  I took  up  and  laid  aside  a 
religious  profession  three  or  four  different 
times  before  I was  sixteen  years  of  age ; but 
all  this  while  my  heart  was  insincere.  I of- 
ten saw  a necessity  of  religion  as  a means 
of  escaping  hell ; but  I loved  sin,  and  was 
unwilling  to  forsake  it.  Instances  of  this,  I 
can  remember,  were  frequent  in  the  midst 
of  all  my  forms;  I was  so  strangely  blind 
and  stupid,  that  sometimes  when  I have  been 
determined  upon  things  which  I knew  were 
sinful  and  contrary  to  my  duty,  I could  not 
go  on  quietly,  till  I had  first  despatched  my 
ordinary  task  of  prayer,  in  which  I have 
grudged  every  moment  of  my  time ; and 
when  this  was  finished,  my  conscience  was 
in  some  measure  pacified,  and  I could  rush 
into  folly  with  little  remorse. 

My  last  reform  was  the  most  remarkable 
both  for  degree  and  continuance.  Of  this 
period,  at  least  of  some  part  of  it,  I may  say, 
in  the  apostle’s  words,  “ After  the  strictest 
sect  of  our  religion,  I lived  a pharisee.”  I 
did  every  thing  that  might  be  expected  from 
a person  entirely  ignorant  of  God’s  righte- 
I ousness,  and  desirous  to  establish  his  own. 
T spent  the  greatest  part  of  every  day  in 
reading  the  scriptures,  meditation  and  pray- 
er; I fisted  often ; I even  abstained  from  all 
1 animal  food  for  three  months ; I would  hardly 
! answer  a question  for  fear  of  speaking  an  idle 
j word.  I seemed  to  bemoan  my  former  miscar- 
| riages  very  earnestly,  sometimes  with  tears. 
! In  short  I became  an  ascetic,  and  endeavoured, 


JOURNEY  TO  KENT,  &c. 


83 


LET.  III.] 

so  far  as  my  situation  would  permit,  to  re- 
nounce society,  that  I might  avoid  tempta- 
tion. I continued  in  this  serious  mood  (I  can- 
not give  it  a higher  title)  for  more  than  two 
years,  without  any  considerable  breaking  off! 
But  it  was  a poor  religion ; it  left  me  in  many 
respects  under  the  power  of  sin,  and  so  far 
as  it  prevailed,  only  tended  to  make  me 
gloomy,  stupid,  unsociable,  and  useless. 

Such  was  the  frame  of  my  mind,  when  I 
became  acquainted  with  Lord  Shaftesbury. 
I saw  the  second  volume  of  his  Characteris- 
tics in  a petty  shop  at  Middleburgh  in  Hol- 
land. The  title  allured  me  to  buy  it,  and 
the  style  and  manner  gave  me  great  plea- 
sure in  reading,  especially  the  second  piece, 
which  his  lordship,  with  great  propriety,  has 
entitled  a Rhapsody.  Nothing  could  be  more 
suited  to  the  romantic  turn  of  my  mind,  than 
the  address  of  this  pompous  declamation ; of 
the  design  and  tendency  I was  not  aware ; 
I thought  the  author  a most  religious  person, 
and  that  I had  only  to  follow  him,  and  be 
happy.  Thus  with  fine  words  and  fair 
speeches  my  simple  heart  was  beguiled. 
This  book  was  always  in  my  hand ; I read  it 
till  I could  very  nearly  repeat  the  Rhapsody 
verbatim  from  beginning  to  end.  No  imme- 
diate effect  followed,  but  it  operated  like  a 
slow  poison,  and  prepared  the  way  for  all 
that  followed-. 

This  letter  brings  my  history  down  to  De- 
cember, 1743.  I was  then  lately  returned 
from  a voyage,  and  my  father  not  intending 
me  for  the  sea  again,  was  thinking  how  to 
settle  me  in  the  world ; but  I had  little  life 
or  spirit  for  business : I knew  but  little  of 
men  or  things.  I was  fond  of  a visionary 
scheme  of  contemplative  life ; a medley  of 
religion,  philosophy,  and  indolence;  and  was 
quite  averse  to  the  thoughts  of  an  industrious 
application  to  business.  At  length  a mer- 
chant in  Liverpool,  an  intimate  friend  of  my 
father  (to  whom,  as  the  instrument  of  God’s 
goodness,  I have  since  been  chiefly  indebted 
for  all  my  earthly  comforts,)  proposed  to  send 
me  for  some  years  to  Jamaica,  and  to  charge 
himself  with  the  care  of  my  future  fortune. 

I consented  to  this,  and  every  thing  was  pre- 
pared for  my  voyage.  I was  upon  the  point 
of  setting  out  the  following  week.  In  the 
meantime,  my  father  sent  me  on  some  busi- 
ness to  a place  a few  miles  beyond  Maid- 
stone in  Kent;  and  this  little  journey,  which 
was  to  have  been  only  for  three  or  four  days, 
occasioned  a sudden  and  remarkable  turn, 
which  roused  me  from  the  habitual  indolence 
I had  contracted,  and  gave  rise  to  the  series 
of  uncommon  dispensations,  of  which  you 
desire  a more  particular  account.  So  true 
it  is,  “ that  the  way  of  man  is  not  in  himself; 
it  is  not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his 
steps.” — I am  affectionately  your’s  in  the 
best  bonds. 

January  13,  1763. 


LETTER  III. 

dear  sir, — A few  days  before  my  intend- 
ed journey  into  Kent,  I received  an  invita- 
tion to  visit  a family  in  that  county.  They 
were  distant  relations,  but  very  intimate 
friends  of  my  dear  mother : she  died  in  their 
house;  but  a coolness  took  place  upon  my 
father’s  second  marriage,  and  I had  heard 
nothing  of  them  for  many  years.  As  my 
road  lay  within  half  a mile  of  their  house,  I 
obtained  my  father’s  leave  to  call  on  them. 
I was,  however,  very  indifferent  about  it,  and 
sometimes  thought  of  passing  on : however  I 
went.  I was  known  at  first  sight,  before  I 
could  tell  my  name,  and  met  with  the  kind- 
est reception,  as  the  child  of  a dear  deceased 
friend.  My  friends  had  two  daug-hters. 
The  eldest  (as  I understood  some  years 
afterwards)  had  been  often  considered,  by 
her  mother  and  mine,  as  a future  wife  for 
me  from  the  time  of  her  birth.  I know  in- 
deed, that  intimate  friends  frequently  amuse 
themselves  with  such  distant  prospects  for 
their  children,  and  that  they  miscarry  much 
oftener  than  succeed.  I do  not  say  that  my 
mother  predicted  what  was  to  happen,  yet 
there  was  something  remarkable  in  the  man- 
ner of  its  taking  place.  All  intercourse  be- 
tween the  families  had  been  long  broken  off; 
I was  going  into  a foreign  country,  and  only 
called  to  pay  a hasty  visit;  and  this  I should 
not  have  thought  of,  but  for  a message  re- 
ceived just  at  that  crisis  (for  I had  not  been 
invited  at  any  time  before.)  Thus  the  cir- 
cumstances were  precarious  in  the  highest 
degree,  and  the  event  was  as  extraordinary. 
Almost  at  the  first  sight  of  this  girl  (for  she 
was  then  under  fourteen,)  I was  impressed 
with  an  affection  for  her,  which  never  abated 
or  lost  its  influence  a single  moment  in  my 
heart  from  that  hour.  In  degree,  it  actually 
equalled  all  that  the  writers  of  romance  have 
imaged ; in  duration,  it  was  unalterable.  I 
soon  lost  all  sense  of  religion,  and  became 
deaf  to  the  remonstrances  of  conscience  and 
prudence ; but  my  regard  for  her  was  always 
the  same ; and  I may  perhaps  venture  to  say, 
that  none  of  the  scenes  of  misery  and  wick- 
edness I afterwards  experienced,  ever  ban- 
ished her  a single  hour  together  from  my 
waking  thoughts,  for  the  seven  following 
years. 

Give  me  leave,  Sir,  to  reflect  a little  upon 
this  unexpected  incident,  and  to  consider 
its  influence  upon  my  future  life,  and  how 
far  it  was  subservient  to  the  views  of  divine 
providence  concerning  me,  which  seem  to 
have  been  twofold ; that  by  being  given  up, 
for  awhile,  to  the  consequences  of  own  wil- 
fulness, and  afterwards  reclaimed  by  a high 
hand,  my  case,  so  far  as  it  should  be  known, 
might  be  both  a warning  and  an  encourage, 
ment  to  others. 

In  the  first  place,  hardly  any  thing  less 


84 


JOURNEY  TO 

than  this  violent  and  commanding-  passion 
would  have  been  sufficient  to  awaken  me 
from  the  dull  melancholy  habit  I had  con- 
tracted. I was  almost  a misanthrope,  notwith- 
standing- I so  much  admired  the  pictures  of 
virtue  and  benevolence  as  drawn  by  lord 
Shaftesbury : but  now  my  reluctance  to  ac- 
t ve  life  was  overpowered  at  once,  and  I was 
willing  to  be  or  to  do  any  thing,  which  might 
subserve  the  accomplishment  of  my  wishes 
at  some  future  time. 

Farther,  when  I afterwards  made  ship- 
wreck of  faith,  hope,  and  conscience,  my 
love  to  this  person  was  the  only  remaining 
principle,  which  in  any  degree  supplied  their 
place ; and  the  bare  possibility  of  seeing  her 
again  was  the  only  present  and  obvious 
means  of  restraining  me  from  the  most  hor- 
rid designs  against  myself  and  others. 

But  then  the  ill  effects  it  brought  upon 
me  counterbalanced  these  advantages.  The 
interval,  usually  styled  the  time  of  courtship, 
is  indeed  a pleasing  part  of  life,  where  there 
is  a mutual  affection,  the  consent  of  friends,  a 
reasonable  prospect  as  to  settlement,  and  the 
whole  is  conducted  in  a prudential  manner, 
and  in  subordination  to  the  will  and  fear  of 
God.  When  things  are  thus  situated,  it  is  a 
blessing  to  be  susceptive  of  the  tender  pas- 
sions ; but  when  these  concomitants  are 
wanting,  what  we  call  love  is  the  most  tor- 
menting passion  in  itself,  and  the  most  de- 
structive in  its  consequences,  that  can  be 
named : and  they  were  all  wanting,  in  my 
case.  I durst  not  mention  it  to  her  friends, 
or  to  my  own,  nor  indeed  for  a considerable 
time  to  herself,  as  I could  make  no  propo- 
sals : it  remained  as  a dark  fire,  locked  up  in 
my  own  breast,  which  gave  me  a constant 
uneasiness.  By  introducing  an  idolatrous 
regard  to  a creature,  it  greatly  weakened  my 
sense  of  religion,  and  made  farther  way  for 
the  entrance  of  infidel  principles:  and 
though  it  seemed  to  promise  great  things,  as 
an  incentive  to  diligence  and  activity  in  life, 
in  reality  it  performed  nothing.  I often 
formed  mighty  projects  in  my  mind,  of  what 
I would  willingly  do  or  suffer  for  the  sake  of 
her  I loved ; yet,  while  I could  have  her 
company,  I was  incapable  of  forcing  myself 
away  to  improve  opportunities  that  offered ; 
still  less  could  it  do  in  regulating  my  man- 
ners. It  did  not  prevent  me  from  engaging 
in  a long  train  of  excess  and  riot,  utterly  un- 
worthy the  honourable  pretensions  I had 
formed.  And  though  through  the  wonderful 
interposition  of  divine  goodness,  the  maze  of 
my  follies  was  at  length  unravelled,  and  my 
wishes  crowned  in  such  a manner  as  over- 
paid my  sufferings ; yet,  I am  sure,  I would 
not  go  through  the  same  series  of  trouble 
again  to  possess  all  the  treasures  of  both  the 
Indies.  I have  enlarged  more  than  I intend- 
ed on  this  point,  as  perhaps  these  papers  may 
be  useful  to  caution  others  against  indulging 


KENT,  AND  [let.  iii. 

an  ungovernable  passion  by  my  painful  ex- 
perience. How  often  may  such  headstrong 
votaries  be  said  “ to  sow  the  wind,  and  reap 
the  whirlwind.” 

My  heart  being  now  fixed  and  riveted  to  a 
particular  object,  I considered  every  thing  I 
was  concerned  with  in  a new  light.  I con- 
cluded it  would  be  absolutely  impossible  to 
live  at  such  a distance  as  Jamaica,  for  a term 
of  four  or  five  years,  and  therefore  deter- 
mined at  all  events  that  I would  not  go.  I 
could  not  bear  either  to  acquaint  my  father 
with  the  true  reason,  or  to  invent  a false 
one;  therefore,  without  giving  any  notice  to 
him  why  I did  so,  I staid  three  weeks  instead 
of  three  days  in  Kent,  till  I thought  (as  it 
proved)  the  opportunity  would  be  lost,  and 
the  ship  sailed.  I then  returned  to  London. 
I had  highly  displeased  my  father  by  this 
disobedience ; but  he  was  more  easily  re- 
conciled than  I could  have  expected.  In  a 
little  time  I sailed  with  a friend  of  his  to 
Venice.  In  this  voyage,  I was  exposed  to 
the  company  anti  ill  example  of  the  common 
sailors  among  whom  I ranked.  Importunity 
and  opportunity  presenting  every  day,  I once 
more  began  to  relax  from  the  sobriety  and 
order  which  I had  observed,  in  some  degree, 
for  more  than  two  years.  I was  sometimes 
pierced  with  sharp  convictions;  but  though  I 
made  a few  faint  efforts  to  stop,  as  I had  done 
from  several  before ; I did  not,  indeed,  as  yet 
turn  out  profligate ; but  I was  making  large 
strides  towards  a total  apostacy  from  God. 
The  most  remarkable  check  and  alarm  I re- 
ceived (and  for  what  I know,  the  last,)  was  oy 
a dream,  which  made  a very  strong,  though 
not  any  abiding  impression  upon  my  mind. 

The  consideration  of  whom  I writing  to 
renders  it  needless  for  me  either  to  enter 
upon  a discussion  of  the  nature  of  dreams  in 
general,  or  to  make  an  apology  for  recording 
my  own.  Those  who  acknowledge  scripture 
will  allow  that  there  have  been  monitory 
and  supernatural  dreams,  evident  communi- 
cations from  heaven,  either  directing  or  fore- 
telling future  events:  and  those  who  are 
acquainted  with  the  history  and  experience 
of  the  people  of  God  are  well  assured,  that 
such  intimations  have  not  been  totally  with- 
held in  any  period  dowm  to  the  present  times. 
Reason,  far  from  contradicting  this  supposi- 
tion, strongly  pleads  for  it,  where  the  process 
of  reasoning  is  rightly  understood,  and  care- 
fully pursued.  So  that  a late  eminent  wri- 
ter,* who,  I presume,  is  not  generally  charged 
with  enthusiasm,  undertakes  to  prove,  that 
the  phenomenon  of  dreaming  is  inexplicable 
at  least,  if  not  absolutely  impossible,  without, 
taking  in  the  agency  and  intervention  of 
spiritual  beings,  to  us*  invisible.  I would  re- 
fer the  incredulous  to  him.  For  my  own 
part,  I can  say,  without  scruple,  “ The  dream 


* Baxter  or  the  Vis  Inertia;, 


85 


VOYAGE  TO  VENICE,  &c. 


LET.  III.] 

is  certain,  and  the  interpretation  thereof 
sure.”  1 am  sure  I dreamed  to  the  following 
effect,  and  I cannot  doubt,  from  what  I have 
seen  since,  that  it  had  a direct  and  easy  ap- 
plication to  my  own  circumstances,  to  the 
dangers  into  which  I was  about  to  plunge 
myself,  and  to  the  unmerited  deliverance 
and  mercy  which  God  would  be  pleased  to 
offer  me  in  the  time  of  my  distress. 

Though  I have  wrote  out  a relation  of  this 
dream  more  than  once  for  others,  it  has  hap- 
pened tlfcit  I never  reserved  a copy ; but  the 
principal  incidents  are  so  deeply  engraven  in 
my  memory,  that  I believe  I am  not  liable  to 
any  considerable  variations  in  repeating  the 
account.  The  scene  presented  to  my  imagi- 
nation was  the  harbour  of  Venice,  where  we 
had  lately  been.  I thought  it  was  night, 
and  my  watch  upon  the  deck ; and  that,  as 
I was  walking  to  and  fro  by  myself,  a person 
came  to  me,  (I  do  not  remember  from 
whence,)  and  brought  me  a ring,  with  an 
express  charge  to  keep  it  carefully ; assur- 
ing me  that  while  I preserved  that  ring,  I 
should  be  happy  and  successful : but,  if  I lost 
or  parted  with  it,  I must  expect  nothing  but 
trouble  and  misery.  I accepted  the  present 
and  the  terms  willingly,  not  in  the  least 
doubting  my  own  care  to  preserve  it,  and 
highly  satisfied  to  have  my  happiness  in 
my  own  keeping.  I was  engaged  in  these 
thoughts,  when  a second  person  came  to  me, 
and  observing  the  ring  on  my  finger,  took 
occasion  to  ask  me  some  questions  concern- 
ing it.  I readily  told  him  its  virtues,  and 
his  answer  expressed  a surprise  at  my  weak- 
ness, in  expecting  such  effects  from  a ring. 
I think  he  reasoned  with  me  some  time  upon 
the  impossibility  of  the  thing,  and  at  length 
urged  me  in  direct  terms  to  throw  it  away. 
At  first,  I was  shocked  at  the  proposal ; but 
his  insinuations  prevailed.  I began  to  reason 
and  doubt  myself,  and  at  last  plucked  it  off 
my  finger,  and  dropt  it  over  the  ship’s  side 
into  the  water,  which  it  had  no  sooner 
touched,  than  I saw,  the  same  instant,  a ter- 
rible fire  burst  out  from  a range  of  moun- 
tains, (a  part  of  the  Alps,)  which  appeared 
at  some  distance  behind  the  city  of  Venice. 
I saw  the  hills  as  distinct  as  if  awake,  and 
they  were  all  in  flames.  I perceived  too 
late  my  folly ; and  my  tempter,  with  an  air 
of  insult,  informed  me,  that  all  the  mercy 
God  had  in  reserve  for  me,  was  comprised 
in  that  ring,  which  I had  wilfully  thrown 
away.  I understood  that  I must  now  go 
with  him  to  the  burning  mountains,  and  that 
all  the  flames  I saw  were  kindled  upon  my 
account.  I trembled,  and  was  in  a great 
agony ; so  that  it  was  surprising  I did  not 
then  awake : but  my  dream  continued,  and 
when  I thought  myself  upon  the  point  of  a 
constrained  departure,  and  stood  self-con- 
demned, without  plea  or  hope  ; suddenly, 
either  a third  person,  or  the  same  who 


brought  the  ring  at  first,  (I  am  not  certain 
which,)  came  to  me,  and  demanded  the  cause 
of  my  grief.  I told  him  the  plain  case,  con- 
fessing that  I had  ruined  myself  wilfully, 
and  deserved  no  pity.  He  blamed  my  rash- 
ness, and  asked  if  I should  be  wiser,  sup- 
posing I had  my  ring  again.  I could  hardly 
answer  to  this ; for  I thought  it  was  gone 
beyond  recal.  I believe,  indeed,  I had  not 
time  to  answer,  before  I saw  this  unexpected 
friend  go  down  under  the  water,  just  in  the 
spot  where  I dropped  it;  and  he  scon  re- 
turned, bringing  the  ring  with  him.  The 
moment  he  came  on  board,  the  flames  in  the 
mountains  were  extinguished,  and  my  sedu- 
cer left  me.  Then  was  “the  prey  taken 
from  the  hand  of  the  mighty,  and  the  lawful 
captive  delivered.”  My  fears  were  at  an 
end,  and  with  joy  and  gratitude  I approached 
my  kind  deliverer  to  receive  the  ring  again ; 
but  he  refused  to  return  it,  and  spoke  to  this 
effect : “ If  you  should  be  entrusted  with  this 
ring  again,  you  would  very  soon  bring  your- 
self into  the  same  distress ; you  are  not  able 
to  keep  it ; but  I will  preserve  it  for  you, 
and  whenever  it  is  needful,  will  produce  it 
in  your  behalf.”— Upon  this  I awoke,  in  a 
state  of  mind  not  to  be  described : I could 
hardly  eat,  or  sleep,  or  transact  my  necessary 
business  for  two  or  three  days ; but  the  im- 
pression soon  wore  off,  and  in  a little  time  I 
totally  forgot  it ; and  I think  it  hardly  oc- 
curred to  my  mind  again,  till  several  years 
afterwards.  It  will  appear,  in  the  course  of 
these  papers,  that  a time  came,  when  1 
found  myself  in  circumstances  very  nearly 
resembling  those  suggested  by  this  extraor- 
dinary dream,  when  I stood  helpless  and 
hopeless  upon  the  brink  of  an  awful  eternity : 
and  I doubt  not,  but  had  the  eyes  of  my  mind 
been  then  opened,  I should  have  seen  my 
grand  enemy,  who  had  seduced  me,  wilfully 
to  renounce  and  cast  away  my  religious  pro- 
fession, and  to  involve  myself  in  the  most 
complicated  crimes ; I say,  I should  probably 
have  seen  him  pleased  with  my  agonies,  and 
waiting  for  a permission  to  seize  and  bear 
away  my  soul  to  this  place  of  torment.  I 
should  perhaps  have  seen  likewise  that  Jesus, 
whom  I had  persecuted  and  defied,  rebuking 
the  adversary,  challenging  me  for  his  own, 
as  a brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire,  and  say- 
ing, “ Deliver  him  from  going  down  into  the 
pit;  I have  found  a ransom.”  However, 
though  I saw  not  these  things,  I found  the 
benefit;  I obtained  mercy.  The  Lord  an- 
swered for  me  in  the  day  of  my  distress; 
and,  blessed  be  his  name,  he  who  restored 
the  ring,  (or  what  was  signified  by  it,)  vouch- 
safes to  keep  it.  O what  an  unspeakable 
comfort  is  this,  that  I am  not  in  mine  own 
keeping.  “ The  Lord  is  my  shepherd :”  I 
have  been  able  to  trust  my  all  in  his  hands, 
and  I know  in  whom  I have  believed.  Satan 
still  desires  to  have  me,  that  he  might  sift 


66 


JOURNEY  TO  KENT,  &c. 


as  wheat ; but  my  Saviour  has  prayed  for 
me,  that  my  faith  may  not  fail.  Here  is  my 
security  and  power ; a bulwark,  against 
which  the  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail.  But 
for  this,  many  a time  and  often,  if  possible, 

I should  have  ruined  myself,  since  my  first 
deliverance ; nay,  I should  fall,  and  stumble, 
and  perish  still,  after  all  that  the  Lord  has  done 
for  me,  if  his  faithfulness  was  not  engaged 
in  my  behalf,  to  be  my  sun  and  shield  even 
unto  death. — “ Bless  the  Lord,  O my  soul.” 

Nothing  very  remarkable  occurred  in  the 
following  part  of  that  voyage.  I returned 
home  in  December,  1743,  and  soon  after  re- 
peated my  visit  to  Kent,  where  I protracted 
my  stay  in  the  same  imprudent  manner  I 
had  done  before,  which  again  disappointed 
my  father's  designs  in  my  favour,  and  almost 
provoked  him  to  disown  me.  Before  any 
thing  suitable  offered  again  I was  impressed 
(owing  entirely  to  my  own  thoughtless  con- 
duct which  was  all  of  a piece.)  and  put  on 
board  a tender : it  was  a critical  juncture, 
when  the  French  fleets  were  hovering  upon 
our  coast,  so  that  my  father  was  incapable  to 
procure  my  release.  In  a few  days  I was 
sent  on  board  the  Harwich  man-of-war,  at 
the  Nore.  I entered  here  upon  quite  a new 
scene  of  life,  and  endured  much  hardship  for 
about  a month.  My  father  was  then  willing 
that  I should  remain  in  the  navy,  as  a war 
was  daily  expected,  and  procured  me  a re- 
commendation to  the  captain,  who  took  me 
upon  the  quarter  deck  as  a midshipman.  I 
had  now  an  easy  life,  as  to  externals,  and 
might  have  gained  respect;  but  my  mind 
was  unsettled,  and  my  behaviour  very  indif- 
ferent I here  met  with  companions  who 
completed  the  ruin  of  my  principles;  and 
though  I affected  to  talk  of  virtue,  and  was 
not  utterly  abandoned  as  afterwards,  yet  my 
delight  and  habitual  practice  was  wicked- 
ness : my  chief  intimate  was  a person  of  ex- 
ceeding good  natural  talents,  and  much  ob- 
servation ; he  was  the  greatest  master  of 
what  is  called  the  free-thinking  scheme  I 
remember  to  have  met  with,  and  knew  how 
to  insinuate  his  sentiments  in  the  mast  plau- 
sible way.  And  his  zeal  was  equal  to  his  ad- 
dress; he  could  hardly  have  laboured  more  in 
the  cause,  if  he  had  expected  to  gain  heaven 
by  it.  Allow  me  to  add,  while  I think  of  it, 
that  this  man,  whom  i honoured  as  my  mas- 
ter, and  whose  practice  I adopted  so  eagerly, 
'perished  in  the  same  way  as  I expected  to 
ha7e  done.  I have  been  told,  that  he  was 
overtaken  in  a voyage  from  Lisbon  with  a 
violent  storm : the  vessel  and  people  escaped, 
but  a great  sea  broke  on  board  and  swept 
him  into  eternity.  Thus  the  Lord  spares  or 
punishes  according  to  his  sovereign  pleasure ! 
But  to  return : — I was  fond  of  his  company, 
and  having  myself  a smattering  of  books, 
was  eager  enough  to  show  my  reading.  He 
soon  perceived  my  case  that  I had  not  wholly 


[let.  III. 

broke  through  the  restraints  of  conscience, 
and  therefore  did  not  shock  me  at  first  with 
too  broad  intimations  of  his  design ; he  rather, 
as  I thought,  spoke  favourably  of  religion : 
but  when  he  had  gained  my  confidence,  he 
began  to  speak  plainer ; and  perceiving  my 
ignorant  attachment  to  the  characteristics, 
he  joined  issue  with  me  upon  that  book,  and 
convinced  me  that  I had  never  understood 
it  In  a word,  he  so  plied  me  with  objec- 
tions and  arguments,  that  my  depraved  heart 
was  soon  gained,  and  I entered  into  his  plan 
with  all  my  spirit.  Thus,  like  an  unwary 
sailor,  who  quits  his  port  just  before  the  ris- 
ing storm,  I renounced  the  hopes  and  com- 
forts of  the  gospel  at  the  very  time  when 
every  other  comfort  was  about  *to  fail  me. 

In  December,  1744,  the  Harwich  was  in 
the  Downs,  bound  to  the  East  Indies.  The 
captain  gave  me  liberty  to  go  on  shore  for  a 
day ; but  without  consulting  prudence,  or 
regarding  consequences,  I took  horse,  and 
followed  the  dictates  of  my  restless  passion ; 
I went  to  take  a last  leave  of  her  I loved.  I 
had  little  satisfaction  in  the  interview,  as  I 
was  sensible  that  I was  taking  pains  to  mul- 
tiply my  own  troubles.  The  short  time  I 
could  stay  passed  like  a dream,  and  on  new- 
year’s  day,  1745,  I took  my  leave  to  return 
to  the  ship.  The  captain  was  prevailed  on 
to  excuse  my  absence;  but  this  rash  step 
(especially  as  it  was  not  the  first  step  of  the 
kind  I had  taken,)  highly  displeased  him, 
and  lost  me  his  favour,  which  I never  re- 
covered. 

At  length  we  sailed  from  Spithead  with  a 
very  large  fleet.  We  put  into  Torbay  with 
a change  of  wind;  but  it  returning  fair 
again,  wTe  sailed  the  next  day.  Several  of 
our  fleet  wrere  lost  in  attempting  to  leave 
that  place:  and  the  following  night  the 
whole  fleet  was  greatly  endangered  upon 
the  coast  of  Cornwall,  b}’-  a storm  from  the 
southward.  The  darkness  of  the  night,  and 
the  number  of  the  vessels,  occasioned  much 
confusion  and  damage.  Our  ship,  though 
several  times  in  imminent  danger  of  being 
run  down  by  other  vessels,  escaped  unhurt ; 
but  many  suffered  much,  particularly  the 
admiral.  This  occasioned  our  putting  back 
to  Plymouth. 

While  we  lay  at  Plymouth,  I heard  that 
my  father,  who  had  interest  in  some  of  the 
ships  lately  lost,  was  come  down  to  Torbay. 
He  had  a connexion  at  that  time  with  the 
African  company.  I thought  if  I could  get 
to  him,  he  might  easily  introduce  me  into 
that  service,  which  would  be  better  than 
pursuing  a long  uncertain  voyage  to  the 
East  Indies.  It  was  a maxim  with  me  in 
those  unhappy  days,  never  to  deliberate ; the 
thought  hardly  occurred  to  me  before  I was 
resolved  to  leave  the  ship  at  all  events : I 
did  so,  and  in  the  wrongest  manner  possible. 
I was  sent  one  day  in  the  boat,  to  take  care 


VOYAGE  TO  MADEIRA,  &c. 


87 


LET.  IV.] 

I hat  none  of  the  people  deserted;  but  I be- 
trayed my  trust,  and  tvent  off  myself.  I 
knew  not  what  road  to  take,  and  durst  not 
ask  for  fear  of  being’  suspected ; yet  having' 
some  general  idea  of  the  country,  I guessed 
right ; and  when  I had  travelled  some  miles, 
I found  upon  inquiry,  that  I was  on  the  road 
to  Dartmouth.  All  went  smoothly  that  day, 
and  part  of  the  next:  I walked  apace,  and 
expected  to  have  been  with  my  father  in 
about  two  hours,  when  I was  met  by  a small 
party  of  soldiers;  I could  not  avoid  or  de- 
ceive them.  They  brought  me  back  to  Ply- 
mouth. I walked  through  the  streets  guarded 
like  a felon.  My  heart  was  full  of  indigna- 
tion, shame,  and  fear.  I was  confined  two 
3ays  in  the  guard  house,  then  sent  on  board 
jny  ship,  and  kept  awhile  in  irons,  then  pub- 
icly  stripped  and  whipped ; after  which  I 
was  degraded  from  my  office,  and  all  my 
former  companions  forbidden  to  show  me  the 
least  favour,  or  even  to  speak  to  me.  As 
midshipman,  T had  been  entitled  to  some 
command,  which  (being  sufficiently  haughty 
and  vain,)  I had  not  been  backward  to  exert. 
I was  now  in  my  turn  brought  down  to  a 
level  with  the  lowest,  and  exposed  to  the  in- 
sults of  all. 

And  as  my  present  situation  was  uncom- 
fortable, my  future  prospects  were  still  worse : 
the  evils  I suffered  were  likely  to  grow  heavier 
every  day.  While  my  catastrophe  was  recent, 
the  officers  and  my  quondam  brethren  were 
something  disposed  to  screen  me  from  ill 
usage ; but,  during  the  little  time  I remained 
with  them  afterwards,  I found  them  cool  very 
fast  in  their  endeavours  to  protect  me.  Indeed 
they  could  not  avoid  it  without  running  a 
great  risk  of  sharing  with  me ; for  the  captain, 
though  in  general  a humane  man,  who  be- 
haved very  well  to  the  ship’s  company,  was 
almost  implacable  in  his  resentment,  when 
he  had  been  greatly  offended,  and  took  se- 
veral occasions  to  show  himself  so  to  me ; 
and  the  voyage  was  expected  to  be,  as  it 
proved,  for  five  years.  Yet  I think  nothing 
I either  felt  or  feared  distressed  me  so  much, 
as  to  see  myself  thus  forcibly  torn  a way  from 
the  object  of  my  affections,  under  a great 
improbability  of  seeing  her  again,  and  a 
much  greater  of  returning  in  such  a manner 
as  would  give  me  hopes  of  seeing  her  mine. 
Thus  I was  as  miserable  on  all  hands  as  could 
well  be  imagined.  My  breast  was  filled 
with  the  most  excruciating  passions,  eager 
desire,  bitter  rage,  and  black  despair.  Every 
hour  exposed  me  to  some  new  insult  and 
hardship,  with  no  hope  of  relief  or  mitigation, 
no  friend  to  take  my  part,  or  to  listen  to  my 
complaint.  Whether  I looked  inward  or  out- 
ward, I could  perceive  nothing  but  darkness 
and  misery.  I think  no  case  except  that  of 
a conscience  wounded  by  the  wrath  of  God, 
could  be  more  dreadful  than  mine.  I cannot 
express  with  what  wishfulness  and  regret  I 


cast  my  last  looks  upon  the  English  shore ; i 
kept  my  eyes  fixed  upon  it  till,  the  ship’s 
distance  increasing,  it  sensibly  disappeared , 
and  when  I could  see  it  no  longer,  I was 
tempted  to  throw  myself  into  the  sea,  which 
(according  to  the  wicked  system  I had 
adopted)  would  put  a period  to  all  my  sorrows 
at  once.  But  the  secret  hand  of  God  re- 
strained me. — Help  me  to  praise  him,  dear 
Sir,  for  his  wonderful  goodness  to  the  most 
unworthy  of  all  creatures. — I am  your  most 
obliged  servant. 

January  15,  1763. 


LETTER  IV. 

dear  .sir, — Though  I desired  your  instruc- 
tions as  to  the  manner  and  extent  of  these  me- 
moirs, I began  to  write  before  I received  them, 
and  had  almost  finished  the  preceding  sheet 
when  your  favour  of  the  11th  came  to  hand.  I 
shall  find  another  occasion  to  acknowledge 
my  sense  of  your  kind  expressions  of  friend- 
ship, which,  I pray  the  Lord,  I may  never 
give  you  cause  to  repent  or  withdraw;  at 
present  I shall  confine  myself  to  what  more 
particularly  relates  to  the  task  assigned  me. 
I shall  obey  you,  Sir,  in  taking  ndtice  of  the 
little  incidents  you  recal  to  my  memory,  and  of 
others  of  the  like  nature,  which,  without  your 
direction,  I should  have  thought  too  trivial, 
and  too  much  my  own  to  deserve  mentioning. 
When  I began  the  eighth  letter,  I intended 
to  say  no  more  of  myself  than  might  be  neces- 
sary to  illustrate  the  wonders  of  divine  pro- 
vidence and  grace  in  the  leading  turns  of  my 
life ; but  I account  your  judgment  a sufficient 
warrant  for  enlarging  my  plan. 

Amongst  other  things,  you  desired  a more 
explicit  account  of  the  state  and  progress  of 
my  courtship,  as  it  is  usually  phrased.  This 
was  the  point  in  which  I thought  it  especially 
became  me  to  be  very  brief ; but  I submit  to 
you  ; and  this  seems  a proper  place  to  resume 
it,  by  telling  you  how  it  stood  at  the  time  of 
my  leaving  England. — When  my  inclinations 
first  discovered  themselves,  both  parties  were 
so  young,  that  no  one  but  myself  considered 
it  in  a serious  view.  It  served  for  tea-table 
talk  amongst  our  friends,  and  nothing  further 
was  expected  from  it.  But  afterwards,  when 
my  passion  seemed  to  have  abiding  effects,  so 
that  in  an  interval  of  two  years  it  was  not  at 
all  abated,  and  especially  as  it  occasioned  me 
to  act  without  any  regard  to  prudence  or 
interest,  or  my  father’s  Resigns,  and  as  there 
was  a coolness  between  him  and  the  family, 
her  parents  began  to  consider  it  as  a matter 
of  consequence ; and  when  I took  my  last 
leave  of  them,  her  mother  (at  the  same  time 
she  expressed  the  most  tender  affection  for 
me,  as  if  I had  been  her  own  child)  told  me, 
that  though  she  had  no  objections  to  make, 


88 


VOYAGE  TO  MADEIRA,  &c. 


upon  a supposition  that,  at  a maturer  age, 
there  should  be  a probability  of  our  engaging 
upon  a prudent  prospect,  yet,  as  things  then 
stood,  she  thought  herself  obliged  to  inter- 
fere ; and  therefore  desired  I would  no  more 
think  of  returning  to  her  house,  unless  her 
daughter  was  from  home,  till  such  time  as  I 
could  either  prevail  with  myself  entirely  to 
give  up  my  pretensions,  or  could  assure  her 
that  I had  my  father’s  express  consent  to  go 
on.  Much  depended  upon  Mrs.  N*****’s  part 
in  this  affair ; it  was  something  difficult ; but 
though  she  was  young,  gay,  and  quite  un- 
practised in  such  matters,  she  was  directed 
to  a happy  medium.  A positive  encourage- 
ment, or  an  absolute  refusal,  would  have  been 
attended  with  equal,  though  different  disad- 
vantages. But  without  much  studying  about 
it,  I found  her  always  upon  her  guard : she 
had  penetration  to  see  her  absolute  power 
over  me,  and  prudence  to  make  a proper  use 
of  it ; she  would  neither  understand  my  hints, 
nor  give  me  room  to  come  to  a direct  ex- 
planation. She  has  said  since,  that  from  the 
first  discovery  of  my  regard,  and  long  before 
the  thought  was  agreeable  to  her,  she  had 
often  an  unaccountable  impression  upon  her 
mind,  that  sooner  or  later  she  should  be  mine. 
Upon  these  terms  we  parted. 

I now  return  to  my  voyage.  During  our 
passage  to  Maderia,  I was  a prey  to  the  most 
gloomy  thoughts.  Though  I had  well  de- 
served all  I met  with,  and  the  captain  might 
have  been  justified  if  he  had  carried  his  re- 
sentment still  farther ; yet  my  pride  at  that 
time  suggested  that  I had  been  grossly  injur- 
ed, and  this  so  far  wrought  upon  my  wicked 
heart,  that  I actually  formed  designs  against 
his  life ; and  this  was  one  reason  that  made 
me  willing  to  prolong  my  own.  I was  some- 
times divided  between  the  two,  not  thinking 
it  practicable  to  effect  both.  The  Lord  had 
now  to  appearance  given  me  up  to  judicial 
blindness;  I was  capable  of  any  thing.  I 
had  not  the  least  fear  of  God  before  my  eyes, 
nor  (so  far  as  I remember)  the  least  sensibility 
of  conscience.  I was  possessed  of  so  strong 
a spirit  of  delusion,  that  I believed  my  own 
lie,  and  was  firmly  persuaded  that  after  death 
I should  cease  to  be  : yet  the  Lord  preserved 
me ! Some  intervals  of  sober  reflection  would 
at  times  take  place:  when  I have  chosen 
death  rather  than  life,  a ray  of  hope  would 
come  in  (though  there  was  little  probability 
for  such  a hope)  that  I should  yet  see  better 
days,  that  I might  again  return  to  England, 
and  have  my  wishes  crowned,  if  I did  not 
wLfully  throw  inyself  away.  In  a word,  my 
love  to  Mrs.  N*****  was  now  the  only  re- 
straint I had  left:  though  I neither  feared 
God,  nor  regarded  men,  I could  not  bear  that 
she  should  think  meanly  of  me  when  I was 
dead.  As  in  the  outward  concerns  of  life, 
the  weakest  means  are  often  employed  by 
divine  providence  to  produce  great  effects, 


[let.  iv. 

beyond  their  common  influence  (as  when  a 
disease,  for  instanqp,  has  been  removed  by 
a fright,)  so  I found  it  then:  this  single 
thought,  which  had  not  restrained  me  from  a 
thousand  smaller  evils,  proved  my  only  and 
effectual  barrier  against  the  greatest  and  most 
fatal  temptations.  How  long  I could  have  sup- 
ported this  conflict,  or  what,  humanly  speak- 
ing, would  have  been  the  consequence  of  my 
continuing  in  that  situation,  I cannot  say ; but 
the  Lord  whom  I little  thought  of,  knew  my 
danger,  and  was  providing  for  my  deliverance. 

Two  things  I had  determined  when  at  Ply- 
mouth, that  I would  not  go  to  India,  and  that 
I would  go  to  Guinea ; and  such,  indeed,  was 
the  Lord’s  will  concerning  me;  but  they 
were  to  be  accomplished  in  his  way,  not  in 
my  own.  W e had  been  now  at  Maderia  some 
time ; the  business  of  the  fleet  was  complet- 
ed, and  we  were  to  sail  the  following  day. 
On  that  memorable  morning  I was  late  in 
bed,  and  had  slept  longer,  but  that  one  of  the 
midshipmen  (an  old  companion)  came  down, 
and  between  jest  and  earnest  bade  me  rise ; 
and  as  I did  not  immediately  comply,  be  cut 
down  the  hammock  or  bed  in  which  I lay, 
which  forced  me  to  dress  myself.  I was  very 
angry,  but  durst  not  resent  it.  I was  little 
aware  how  much  his  caprice  affected  me,  and 
that  this  person,  who  had  no  design  in  what 
he  did,  was  the  messenger  of  God’s  provi- 
dence. I said  little,  but  went  upon  deck, 
where  I that  moment  saw  a man  putting  his 
clothes  into  a boat,  who  told  me  he  was  going 
to  leave  us.  Upon  inquiring,  I was  inform- 
ed that  two  men  from  a Guinea  ship,  which 
lay  near  us,  had  entered  on  board  the  Har- 
wich, and  that  the  commodore  (the  present 
Sir  George  Pocock)  had  ordered  the  captain 
to  send  two  others  in  their  room.  My  heart 
instantly  burned  like  fire.  I begged  the  boat 
might  be  detained  a few  minutes ; I ran  to 
the  lieutenants,  and  intreated  them  to  inter- 
cede with  the  captain  that  I might  be  dis- 
missed. Upon  this  occasion,  though  I had 
been  formerly  on  ill  terms  with  these  officers, 
and  had  disobliged  them  all  in  their  turns,  yet 
they  had  pitied  my  case,  and  were  ready  to 
serve  me  now.  The  captain,  who,  when  we 
were  at  Plymouth,  had  refused  to  exchange 
me,  though  at  the  request  of  admiral  Medley, 
was  now  easily  prevailed  on.  I believe,  in 
little  more  than  half  an  hour  from  my  being 
asleep  in  my  bed,  I saw  myself  discharged, 
and  safe  on  board  another  ship.  This  was 
one  of  the  many  critical  turns  of  my  life, 
in  which  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  display  his 
providence  and  care,  by  causing  many  un- 
expected circumstances  to  concur  in  almost 
an  instant  of  time.  These  sudden  opportu- 
nities were  several  times  repeated : each  of 
them  brought  me  into  an  entire  new  scene 
of  action ; and  they  were  usually  delayed  to 
almost  the  last  moment,  in  which  they  could 
have  taken  place. 


HARDSHIPS  ENDURED  IN  AFRICA. 


89 


LET.  V.] 

The  ship  T went  on  hoard  of  was  bound  to 
Sierra  Leone,  and  the  adjacent  parts  of  what 
ia  called  the  Windward  Coast  of  Africa. 
The  commander,  I found,  was  acquainted 
with  my  father : he  received  me  very  kindly, 
and  made  fair  professions  of  assistance,  and 
i believe  he  would  have  been  my  friend  ; 
but  without  making*  the  least  advantage  of 
former  mistakes  and  troubles,  I pursued  the 
same  course ; nay,  if  possible,  I acted  much 
worse.  On  board  the  Harwich,  though  my 
principles  were  totally  corrupted,  yet,  as 
upon  my  first  going  there  I was  in  some 
degree  staid  and  serious,  the  remembrance 
of  this  made  me  ashamed  of  breaking  out  in 
that  notorious  manner  I could  otherwise 
have  indulged.  But  now,  entering  amongst 
strangers,  I could  appear  without  disguise ; 
and  I well  remember,  that  while  I was  pass- 
ing from  the  one  ship  to  the  other,  this  was 
one  reason  why  I rejoiced  in  the  exchange, 
and  one  reflection  I made  upon  the  occasion, 
viz.  that  I now  might  be  as  abandoned  as  I 
pleased,  without  any  control : and,  from  this 
time,  I was  exceedingly  vile  indeed,  little  if 
any  thing  short  of  that  animated  description 
of  an  almost  irrecoverable  state,  which  we 
have  in  2 Peter  ii.  14.  I not  only  sinned 
with  a high  hand  myself,  but  made  it  my 
study  to  tempt  and  seduce  others  upon  every 
occasion:  nay,  I eagerly  sought  occasion 
sometimes  to  my  own  hazard  and  hurt.  One 
natural  consequence  of  this  carriage  was,  a 
loss  of  the  favour  of  my  new  captain ; not 
that  he  was  at  all  religious,  or  disliked  my 
wickedness,  any  further  than  it  affected  his 
interest ; but  I became  careless  and  disobe- 
dient ; I did  not  please  him,  because  I did 
not  intend  it ; and,  as  he  was  a man  of  an 
odd  temper  likewise,  we  the  more  easily  dis- 
agreed. Besides,  I had  a little  of  that  un- 
lucky wit,  which  can  do  little  more  than 
multiply  troubles  and  enemies  to  its  pos- 
sessor; and  upon  some  imagined  affront,  I 
made  a song,  in  which  I ridiculed  his  ship, 
his  designs,  and  his  person,  and  soon  taught 
it  to  the  whole  ship’s  company.  Such  was 
the  ungrateful  return  I made  for  his  offers 
of  friendship  and  protection.  I had  men- 
tioned no  names,  but  the  allusion  was  plain, 
and  he  was  no  stranger  either  to  the  inten- 
tion or  the  author. — I shall  say  no  more  of 
this  part  of  my  story ; let  it  be  buried  in 
eternal  silence.  But  let  me  not  be  silent 
from  the  praise  of  that  grace  which  could 
pardon,  that  blood  which  could  expiate  such 
sins  as  mine ; yea,  “ the  Ethiopian  may 
change  his  skin,  and  the  leopard  his  spots,” 
since  I,  who  was  the  willing  slave  of  every 
evil,  possessed  with  a legion  of  unclean 
spirits,  have  been  spared,  and  saved,  and 
changed,  to  stand  a monument  of  his  Al- 
mighty power  for  ever. 

Thus  I went  on  for  about  six  months,  by 
*vhich  time  the  sh;p  was  preparing  to  leave 
M 


the  coast.  A few  days  before  she  sailed  the 
captain  died.  I was  not  upon  much  better 
terms  with  his  mate,  who  now  succeeded  to 
the  command,  and  had  upon  some  occasion 
treated  me  ill : I made  no  doubt,  but,  if  I 
went  with  him  to  the  West  Indies,  he  would 
put  me  on  board  a man-of-war ; and  this, 
from  what  I had  known  already,  was  more 
dreadful  to  me  than  death.  To  avoid  it,  1 
determined  to  remain  in  Africa,  and  amused 
myself  wit.  >.  many  golden  dreams,  that  here 
I should  find  an  opportunity  of  improving  my 
fortune. 

There  are  still  upon  that  part  of  the  coast 
a few  white  men  settled,  (and  there  were 
many  more  at  the  time  I was  first  there,) 
whose  business  it  was  to  purchase  slaves,  & c. 
in  the  rivers  and  country  adjacent,  and  sell 
them  to  the  ships  at  an  advanced  price. 
One  of  these,  who  at  first  landed  in  my  in- 
digent circumstances,  had  acquired  consider- 
able wealth : he  had  lately  been  in  England, 
and  was  returning  in  the  vessel  I was  in,  of 
which  he  owned  a quarter  part.  His  ex- 
ample impressed  me  with  hopes  of  the  same 
success ; and  upon  condition  of  entering  into 
his  service,  I obtained  my  discharge.  I had 
not  the  precaution  to  make  any  terms,  but 
trusted  to  his  generosity.  I received  no 
compensation  for  my  time  on  board  the  ship, 
but  a bill  upon  the  owners  in  England,  which 
was  never  paid ; for  they  failed  before  my 
return.  The  day  before  the  vessel  sailed  I 
landed  upon  the  island  of  Benanoes,  with 
little  more  than  the  clothes  upon  my  back, 
as  if  I had  escaped  shipwreck. — I am,  dear 
Sir,  your’s,  &c. 

January  17,  1763. 


LETTER  V. 

dear  sir, — There  seems  an  important  in- 
struction, and  of  frequent  use,  in  these  words 
of  our  dear  Lord,  “ Mine  hour  is  not  yet  come.” 
The  two  following  years,  of  which  I am  now 
to  give  some  account,  will  seem  as  an  abso- 
lute blank  in  a very  short  life : but  as  the 
Lord’s  hour  of  grace  was  not  yet  come,  and 
I was  to  have  still  deeper  experience  of  the 
dreadful  state  of  the  heart  of  man,  when  left 
to  itself ; I have  seen  frequent  cause  since, 
to  admire  the  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  banish- 
ing me  to  those  distant  parts,  and  almost  ex- 
cluding me  from  human  society,  at  a time 
when  1 was  big  with  mischief,  and,  like  one 
infected  with  a pestilence,  was  capable  of 
spreading  a taint  wherever  I went.  Had 
my  affairs  taken  a different  turn ; had  I suc- 
ceeded in  my  designs,  and  remained  in  Eng- 
land, my  sad  story  would  probably  have  been 
worse.  Worse  in  myself,  indeed,  I could 
have  hardly  been ; but  my  wickedness  would 
have  had  greater  scope ; I might  have  been 


90 


HARDSHIPS  ENDURED  IN  AFRICA. 


I LET.  V. 


very  hurtful  to  others,  and  multiplied  irre- 
parable evils ; but  the  Lord  wisely  placed  me 
Wiiere  I could  do  little  harm.  The  few  I 

ln . 1  to  converse  with  were  too  much  like 
myself,  and  I was  soon  brought  into  such 
abject  circumstances,  that  I was  too  low  to 
have  any  influence.  I was  rather  shunned 
and  despised  than  imitated;  there  being  few 
even  of  the  negroes  themselves,  during  the 
first  year  of  my  residence  amongst  them, 
Liit  thought  themselves  too  good  to  speak  to 

me.  I was  as  yet  an  “ outcast  lying  in  my 
blood,”  (Ezek.  xvi.)  and  to  all  appearance 
exposed  to  perish.  But  the  Lord  beheld  me 
with  mercy, — he  did  not  strike  me  to  hell, 
as  I justly  deserved  ; “ he  passed  by  me 
when  I was  in  my  blood,  and  said  unto  me 
live.”  But  the  appointed  time  for  the  mani- 
festation of  his  love,  to  cover  all  my  iniqui- 
ties with  the  robe  of  his  righteousness,  and 
to  admit  me  to  the  privileges  of  his  children, 
was  not  till  long  afterwards ; yet  even  now 
he  bade  me  live ; and  I can  only  ascribe  it 
to  his  secret  upholding  power,  that  what  I 
suffered  in  a part  of  this  interval,  did  not  be- 
reave me  either  of  my  life  or  senses ; yet  as 
by  these  sufferings  the  force  of  my  evil  ex- 
ample and  inclinations  was  lessened,  I have 
reason  to  account  them  amongst  my  mercies. 

It  may  not,  perhaps,  be  amiss  to  digress 
for  a few  lines,  and  give  you  a very  brief 
sketch  of  the  geography  of  the  circuit  I was 
now  confined  to,  especially  as  I may  have 
frequent  occasion  to  refer  to  places  I shall 
now  mention  ; for  my  trade  afterwards  when 
the  Lord  gave  me  to  see  better  days,  was 
chiefly  to  the  same  places,  and  with  the  same 
persons,  where  and  by  whom  I had  been  con- 
sidered as  upon  a level  with  their  meanest 
slaves.  From  Cape  De  Verd,  the  most  wes- 
tern point  of  Africa,  to  Cape  Mount,  the 
whole  coast  is  full  of  rivers:  the  principal 
are  Gambia,  Rio  Grande,  Sierra  Leone,  and 
Sherbro.  Of  the  former,  as  it  is  well  known, 
and  I was  never  there,  I need  say  nothing. 
The  Rio  Grande,  like  the  Nile,  divides  into 
many  branches  near  the  sea.  On  the  most 
northerly,  called  Cacheo,  the  Portuguese 
have  a settlement.  The  most  southern 
branch,  known  by  the  name  of  Rio  Nuna, 
is,  or  then  was,  the  usual  boundary  of  the 
white  men’s  trade  northward.  Sierra  Leone 
is  a mountainous  peninsula,  uninhabited,  and 
I believe  inaccessible,  upon  account  of  the 
thick  woods,  excepting  those  parts  which  lie 
near  the  water.  The  river  is  large  and  na- 
vigable. From  hence,  about  twelve  leagues 
to  the  south-east,  are  three  contiguous  is- 
lands, called  the  Benanoes,  about  twenty 
miles  in  circuit : this  was  about  the  centre 
of  the  white  men’s  residence.  Seven  leagues 
farther  the  same  way,  lie  the  Plantanes,  three 
small  islands,  two  miles  distant  from  the  con- 
tinent at  the  point  which  forms  one  side  of 
the  Sherbro.  This  river  is  more  properly  a 


sound,  running  within  a long  island,  and  re- 
ceiving the  confluence  of  several  large  rivers, 
“ rivers  unknown  to  song,”  but  far  more 
deeply  engraven  in  my  remembrance  than 
the  Po  or  Tyber.  The  southernmost  of  these 
has  a very  peculiar  course,  almost  parallel  to 
the  coast ; so  that  in  tracing  it  a great  many 
leagues  upwards,  it  will  seldom  lead  one 
above  three  miles,  and  sometimes  not  more 
than  half  a mile  from  the  sea-shore.  Indeed 
I know  not,  but  that  all  these  rivers  may 
have  communications  with  each  other,  and 
with  the  sea  in  many  places,  which  I have 
not  remarked.  If  you  cast  your  eyes  upon 
a large  map  of  Africa,  while  you  are  read- 
ing this,  you  will  have  a general  idea  of  the 
country  I was  in  ; for  though  the  maps  are 
very  incorrect,  most  of  the  places  I have 
mentioned  are  inserted,  and  in  the  same 
order  as  I have  named  them. 

My  new  master  had  formerly  resided  near 
Cape  Mount,  but  he  now  settled  at  the  Plan- 
tanes, upon  the  largest  of  the  three  islands. 
It  is  a low  sandy  island,  about  two  miles  in 
circumference,  and  almost  covered  with  palm- 
trees.  We  immediately  began  to  build  a 
house,  and  to  enter  upon  trade.  I had  now 
some  desire  to  retrieve  my  lost  time,  and  to 
exert  diligence  in  what  was  before  me ; and 
he  was  a man  with  whom  I might  have  lived 
tolerably  well,  if  he  had  not  been  soon  influ- 
enced against  me : but  he  was  much  under 
the  direction  of  a black  woman,  who  lived 
with  him  as  a wife.  She  was  a person  of 
some  consequence  in  her  own  country,  and 
he  owed  his  first  rise  to  her  interest.  This 
woman,  (I  know  not  for  what  reason,)  was 
strangely  prejudiced  against  me  from  the 
first;  and  what  made  it  still  worse  for  me, 
was  a severe  fit  of  illness,  which  attacked 
me  very  soon,  before  I had  opportunity  to 
show  what  I could  or  would  do  in  his  service. 
I was  sick  when  he  sailed  in  a shallop  to 
Rio  Nuna,  and  he  left  me  in  her  hands. 
At  first  I was  taken  some  care  of ; but,  as  I 
did  not  recover  very  soon,  she  grew  weary, 
and  entirely  neglected  me.  I had  sometimes 
not  a little  difficulty  to  procure  a draught  of 
cold  water,  when  burning  with  a fever.  My 
bed  was  a mat,  spread  upon  a board  or  chest, 
and  a log  of  wood  my  pillow.  When  my 
fever  left  me,  and  my  appetite  returned,  I 
would  gladly  have  eaten,  but  there  was  no 
one  gave  unto  me.  She  lived  in  plenty  her- 
self, but  hardly  allowed  me  sufficient  to  sus- 
tain life,  except  now  and  then,  when  in  the 
highest  good  humour,  she  would  send  me 
victuals  in  her  own  plate,  after  she  had 
dined ; and  this,  (so  greatly  was  my  pride 
humbled,)  I received  with  thanks  and  eager 
ness,  as  the  most  needy  beggar  does  an  alms. 
Once,  I well  remember,  I was  called  to  re- 
ceive this  bounty  from  her  own  hand ; but, 
being  exceedingly  weak  and  feeble,  I drop- 
ped the  plate.  Those  who  live  in  plenty  can 


HARDSHIPS  ENDURED  IN  AFRICA. 


91 


1«ET.  V.] 

hardly  conceive  how  this  loss  touched  me  ; 
but  she  had  the  cruelty  to  laugh  at  my  dis- 
appointment ; and  though  the  table  was  co- 
vered with  dishes,  (for  she  lived  much  in  the 
European  manner,)  she  refused  to  give  me 
any  more.  My  distress  has  been  at  times  so 
great,  as  to  compel  me  to  go,  by  night,  and 
pull  up  roots  in  the  plantation,  (though  at 
the  risk  of  being  punished  as  a thief,)  which 
I have  eaten  raw  upon  the  spot,  for  fear  of 
discovery.  The  roots  I speak  of  are  very 
wiiolesome  food,  when  boiled  or  roasted,  but 
as  unfit  to  be  eaten  raw  in  any  quantity,  as 
a potatoe.  The  consequence  of  this  diet, 
which,  after  the  first  experiment,  I always 
expected,  and  seldom  missed,  was  the  same 
as  if  I had  taken  tartar  emetic ; so  that  I 
often  returned  as  empty  as  I went : yet  ne- 
cessity urged  me  to  repeat  the  trial  several 
times.  I have  sometimes  been  relieved  by 
strangers;  nay,  even  by  the  slaves  in  the 
chain,  who  secretly  brought  me  victuals  (for 
they  durst  not  be  seen  to  do  it,)  from  their 
own  slender  pittance.  Next  to  pressing  want, 
nothing  sits  harder  upon  the  mind  than  scorn 
and  contempt : and  of  this  likewise  I had  an 
abundant  measure.  When  I was  very  slowly 
recovering,  this  woman  would  sometimes 
pay  me  a visit,  not  to  pity  or  relieve,  but  to 
insult  me.  She  would  call  me  worthless 
and  indolent,  and  compel  me  to  walk,  which 
when  I could  hardly  do,  she  would  set  her 
attendants  to  mimic  my  motions,  to  clap 
their  hands,  laugh,  throw  limes  at  me ; or, 
if  they  chose  to  throw  stones,  (as  I think 
was  the  case  once  or  twice,)  they  were  not 
rebuked:  but,  in  general,  though  all  who 
depended  on  her  favour  must  join  in  her 
treatment,  yet,  when  she  was  out  of  sight,  I 
was  rather  pitied  than  scorned,  by  the  mean- 
est of  her  slaves.  At  length  my  master  re- 
turned from  his  voyage ; I complained  of  ill 
usage,  but  he  could  not  believe  me  ; and,  as 
I did  it  in  her  hearing,  I fared  no  better  for  it. 
But  in  his  second  voyage  he  took  me  with 
him.  We  did  pretty  well  for  a while,  till  a 
brother  trader  he  met  in  the  river,  persuaded 
him  that  I was  unfaithful,  and  stole  his  goods 
in  the  night,  or  when  he  was  on  shore.  This 
was  almost  the  only  vice  I could  not  be  justly 
charged  with:  the  only  remains  of  a good 
education  I could  boast  of,  was  what  is  com- 
mon^ called  honesty : and,  as  far  as  he  had 
entrusted  me,  I had  always  been  true  ; and 
though  my  great  distress  might,  in  some 
measure,  have  excused  it,  I never  once 
thought  of  defrauding  him  in  the  smallest 
matter.  However,  the  charge  was  believed, 
and  I condemned  without  evidence.  From 
that  time  he  likewise  used  me  very  hardly ; 
whenever  he  left  the  vessel  I was  locked 
upon  deck,  with  a pint  of  rice  for  my  day’s 
allowance ; and  if  he  staid  longer,  I had  no 
relief  till  his  return.  Indeed,  I believe  I 
should  have  been  nearly  starved,  but  for 


an  opportunity  of  catching  fish  sometimes. 
When  fowls  were  killed  for  his  own  use,  I 
seldom  was  allowed  any  part  but  the  entrails, 
to  bait  my  hooks  with : and,  at  what  we  call 
slack  water , that  is,  about  the  changing  of 
the  tides,  when  the  current  was  still,  I used 
generally  to  fish,  (for  at  other  times  it  was 
not  practicable,)  and  I very  often  succeeded. 
If  1 saw  a fish  upon  my  hook,  my  joy  was 
little  less  than  any  other  person  may  have 
found,  in  the  accomplishment  of  the  scheme 
he  had  most  at  heart.  Such  a fish,  hastily 
broiled,  or  rather  half  burned,  without  sauce, 
salt,  or  bread,  has  afforded  me  a delicious 
meal.  If  I caught  none,  I might,  if  I could, 
sleep  away  my  hunger  till  the  next  return 
of  slack  water,  and  then  try  again.  Nor  did 
I suffer  less  from  the  inclemency  of  the 
weather  and  the  want  of  clothes.  The 
rainy  season  was  now  advancing ; my  whole 
suit  was  a shirt,  a pair  of  trowsers,  a cotton 
handkerchief  instead  of  a cap,  and  a cotton 
cloth  about  two  yards  long,  to  supply  the 
want  of  upper  g-arments:  and  thus  accoutred, 
I have  been  exposed  for  twenty,  thirty,  per- 
haps near  forty  hours  together,  in  incessant 
rains,  accompanied  with  strong  gales  of  wind, 
without  the  least  shelter,  when  my  master 
was  on  shore.  I feel  to  this  day  some  faint 
returns  of  the  violent  pains  I then  contracted. 
The  excessive  cold  and  wet  I endured  in 
that  voyage,  and  soon  after  I had  recovered 
from  a long  sickness,  quite  broke  my  con- 
stitution and  my  spirits ; the  latter  were  soon 
restored,  but  the  effects  of  the  former  still 
remain  with  me,  as  a needful  memento  of 
the  service  and  the  wages  of  sin. 

In  about  two  months  we  returned,  and 
then  the  rest  of  the  time  I remained  with 
him  was  chiefly  spent  at  the  Plantanes  under 
the  same  regimen  as  I have  already  men- 
tioned. My  haughty  heart  was  now  brought 
down,  not  to  a wholesome  repentance,  not 
to  the  language  of  the  prodigal ; this  was 
far  from  me ; but  my  spirits  were  sunk ; ] 
lost  all  resolution,  and  almost  all  reflection. 
I had  lost  the  fierceness  which  fired  me 
when  on  board  the  Harwich,  and  which 
made  me  capable  of  the  most  desperate  at- 
tempts ; but  I was  no  further  changed  than 
a tyger  tamed  by  hunger — remove  the  occa- 
sion, and  lie  will  be  as  wild  as  ever. 

One  thing,  though  strange,  is  most  true. 
Though  destitute  of  food  and  clothing,  de- 
pressed to  a degree  beyond  common  wretch- 
edness, I could  sometimes  collect  my  mind 
to  mathematical  studies.  I had  bought  Bar- 
row’s Euclid  at  Portsmouth ; it  was  the  only 
volume  I brought  on  shore;  it  was  always 
with  me,  and  1 used  to  take  it  to  remote 
corners  of  the  island  by  the  sea  side,  and 
draw  my  diagrams  with  a long  stick  upon 
the  sand.  Thus  I often  beguiled  my  sor- 
rows, and  almost  forgot  my  feeling:  and 
thus,  without  any  other  assistance,  I made 


92 


ENLARGEMENT  IN  AFRICA. 


myself,  in  good  measure,  master  of  the  first 
six  books  of  Euclid. — I am,  your’s  as  before. 
January  17,  1763. 


LETTER  VI. 

dear  sir, — There  is  much  piety  and  spirit 
in  the  grateful  acknowledgment  of  Jacob, 
“ With  my  staff  I passed  this  Jordan,  and  now 
I am  become  two  bands.”  They  are  words 
which  ought  to  affect  me  with  a peculiar 
emotion.  I remember  that  in  some  of  those 
mournful  days,  to  which  my  last  letter  re- 
fers, I was  busied  in  planting  some  lime  or 
lemon  trees.  The  plants  I put  into  the 
ground  were  no  longer  than  a young  goose- 
berry bush ; my  master  and  his  mistress 
passing  by  the  place,  stopped  a while  to  look 
at  me;  at  last,  “Who  knows,”  says  he,  “who 
knows  but  by  the  time  these  trees  grow  up 
and  bear,  you  may  go  home  to  England,  ob- 
tain the  command  of  a ship,  and  return  to 
reap  the  fruits  of  your  labours;  we  see 
strange  things  sometimes  happen.”  This,  as 
he  intended  it,  was  a cutting  sarcasm.  I be- 
lieve he  thought  it  full  as  probable,  that  I 
should  live  to  be  king  of  Poland;  yet  it 
proved  a prediction,  and  they  (one  of  them  at 
least)  lived  to  see  me  return  from  England 
in  the  capacity  he  had  mentioned,  and  pluck 
some  of  the  first  limes  from  those  very  trees. 
How  can  I proceed  in  my  relation,  till  I raise 
a monument  to  the  divine  goodness,  by  com- 
paring the  circumstances  in  which  the  Lord 
has  since  placed  me,  with  what  I was  at  that 
time ! Had  you  seen  me,  Sir,  then  go  so 
pensive  and  solitary  in  the  dead  of  night  to 
wash  my  one  shirt  upon  the  rocks,  and  after- 
wards put  it  on  wet,  that  it  might  dry  upon 
my  back,  while  I slept;  had  you  seen  me  so 
poor  a figure,  that  when  a ship’s  boat  came 
to  the  island,  shame  often  constrained  me  to 
hide  myself  in  the  woods,  from  the  sight  of 
strangers;  especially,  had  you  known  that 
my  conduct,  principles,  and  heart,  were  still 
darker  than  my  outward  condition,  how  little 
would  you  have  imagined  that  one,  who  so 
fully  answered  to  the  -/.**  nHrwres*  of 

the  apostle,  was  reserved  to  be  so  peculiar 
an  instance  of  the  providential  care  and  ex- 
uberant goodness  of  God.  There  was,  at 
that  time,  but  one  earnest  desire  in  my 
heart,  which  was  not  contrary  and  shocking 
both  to  religon  and  reason ; that  one  desire, 
though  my  vile  licentious  life  rendered  me 
peculiarly  unworthy  of  success,  and  though  a 
thousand  difficulties  seemed  to  render  it  im- 
possible, the  Lord  was  pleased  to  gratify. 
But  this  favour,  though  great,  and  greatly 
prized,  was  a small  thing  compared  to  the 
blessings  of  his  grace : he  spared  me,  to  give 


[let.  hi. 

me  the  knowledge  of  himself,  in  the  person 
of  Jesus  Christ ; in  love  to  my  soul  he  de- 
livered me  from  the  pit  of  corruption,  and 
cast  all  my  aggravated  sins  behind  his  back. 
He  brought  my  feet  into  the  paths  of  peace. 
This  is  indeed  the  chief  article,  but  it  is  not 
the  whole.  When  he  made  me  acceptable 
to  himself  in  the  beloved,  he  gave  me  favour 
in  the  sight  of  others.  He  raised  me  new 
friends,  protected  and  guided  me  through  a 
long  series  of  dangers,  and  crowned  every 
day  with  repeated  mercies.  To  him  I owe 
it  that  I am  still  alive,  and  that  I am  not 
still  living  in  hunger,  and  in  thirst,  and  in 
nakedness,  and  the  want  of  all  things : into 
that  state  I brought  myself,  but  it  was  he 
who  delivered  me.  He  has  given  me  an 
easy  situation  in  life,  some  experimental 
lino wl  edge  of  his  gospel,  a large  acquaint- 
ance amongst  his  people,  a friendship  and 
correspondence  with  several  of  his  most 
honoured  servants.  But  it  is  as  difficult  to 
enumerate  my  present  advantages,  as  it  is 
fully  to  describe  the  evils  and  miseries  of  the 
preceding  contrast. 

I know  not  exactly  how  long  things  con- 
tinued with  me  thus,  but  I believe  near  a 
twelvemonth.  In  this  interval  I wrote  two  or 
three  times  to  my  father;  I gave  him  an  ac- 
count of  my  condition,  and  desired  his  assist- 
ance, intimating  at  the  same  time,  that  I bad 
resolved  not  to  return  to  England,  unless  he 
was  pleased  to  send  for  me ; I have  likewise 
letters  by  me  wrote  to  Mrs.  N*****  in  that 
dismal  period;  so  that  at  the  lowest  ebb,  it 
seems  I still  retained  a hope  of  seeing  her 
again.  My  father  applied  to  his  friend  in 
Liverpool,  of  whom  I have  spoken  before, 
who  gave  orders  accordingly  to  a captain  of 
his,  who  was  then  fitting  out  for  Gambia  and 
Sierra  Leone. 

Some  time  within  the  year,  as  I have 
said,  I obtained  my  master’s  consent  to  live 
with  another  trader,  who  dwelt  upon  the 
same  island.  Without  his  consent  I could 
not  be  taken,  and  he  was  unwilling  to  do  it 
sooner,  but  it  was  then  brought  about.  This 
was  an  alteration  much  to  my  advantage ; I 
was  soon  decently  clothed,  lived  in  plenty, 
was  considered  as  a companion,  and  trusted 
with  the  care  of  all  his  domestic  effects, 
which  were  to  the  amount  of  some  thousand 
pounds.  This  man  had  several  factories  and 
white  servants  in  different  places,  particu- 
larly one  in  Kittam,  the  river  I spoke  of  which 
runs  so  near  along  the  sea  coast.  I was 
soon  appointed  to  go  there,  where  I had  a 
share  in  the  management  of  business,  jointly 
with  another  of  his  servants:  we  lived  as  we 
pleased,  business  flourished,  and  our  employ- 
er was  satisfied.  Here  I began  to  be  wretch 
enough  to  think  myself  happy.  There  is  a 
significant  phrase  frequently  used  in  those 
parts,  that  such  a white  man  is  grown  black. 
It  does  not  intend  an  alteration  of  com 


Hateful  and  hating  one  another. 


ENLARGEMENT  IN  AFRICA. 


LET.  VI.] 

plexion,  but  disposition.  I have  known  several, 
w ho,  settling  in  Africa  after  the  age  of  thirty 
or  forty,  have  at  that  time  of  life  been  gradu- 
ally assimilated  to  the  tempers,  customs,  and 
ceremonies  of  the  natives,  so  far  as  to  prefer 
that  country  to  England ; they  have  even 
become  dupes  to  all  the  pretended  charms, 
necromances,  amulets,  and  divinations  of  the 
blinded  negroes,  and  put  more  trust  in  such 
things  than  the  wiser  sort  among  the  na- 
tivas.  A part  of  this  spirit  of  infatuation  was 
growing  upon  me ; in  time,  perhaps,  I might 
have  yielded  to  the  whole : I entered  into 
closer  engagements  with  the  inhabitants,  and 
should  have  lived  and  died  a wretch  amongst 
them,  if  the  Lord  had  not  watched  over  me 
for  good.  Not  that  I had  lost  those  ideas 
which  chiefly  engaged  my  heart  to  England, 
but  despair  of  seeing  them  accomplished 
made  me  willing  to  remain  where  I was.  I 
thought  I could  more  easily  bear  the  dis- 
appointment in  this  situation,  than  nearer 
uome.  But,  so  soon  as  I had  fixed  my  con- 
nexions and  plans  with  these  views,  the 
Lord  providentially  interposed  to  break  them 
in  pieces,  and  save  me  from  ruin  in  spite  of 
myself 

In  the  mean  time,  the  ship  that  had  orders 
to  bring  me  home  arrived  at  Sierra  Leone : 
the  captain  made  inquiry  for  me  there  and 
at  the  Benanoes ; but  understanding  that  I 
was  at  a great  distance  in  the  country,  he 
thought  no  more  about  me.  Without  doubt 
the  hand  of  God  directed  my  being  placed 
at  Kittam  just  at  this  time ; for,  as  the  ship 
came  no  nearer  than  the  Benanoes,  and  staid 
but  a few  days,  if  I had  been  at  the  Plantanes, 
I could  not  perhaps  have  heard  of  her  till 
she  had  been  sailed.  The  same  must  have 
certainly  been  the  event,  had  I been  sent  to 
any  other  factory,  of  which  my  new  master 
had  several  upon  different  rivers.  But  though 
the  place  I was  at,  was  a long  way  up  a 
river,  much  more  than  a hundred  miles  dis- 
tant from  the  Plantanes,  yet,  by  the  peculiar 
situation  which  I have  already  noticed,  I 
was  still  within  a mile  of  the  sea  coast.  To 
make  the  interposition  more  remarkable,  I 
was  at  that  very  juncture  going  in  quest  of 
trade  to  a place  at  some  distance  directly 
from  the  sea,  and  should  have  set  out  a day 
or  two  before,  but  that  we  waited  for  a few 
articles  from  the  next  ship  that  offered,  to 
complete  the  assortment  of  goods  I was  to 
take  with  me.  We  used  sometimes  to  walk 
to  the  beach,  in  expectation  of  seeing  a 
vessel  pass  by,  but  this  was  very  precarious, 
as  at  that  time  the  place  was  not  at  all  re- 
sorted to  by  ships  for  trade.  Many  passed 
in  the  night,  others  kept  at  a considerable  dis- 
tance from  the  shore.  In  a word,  I do  not 
Know  that  any  one  had  stopped  while  I was 
there,  though  some  had  before,  upon  observ- 
ing a signal  made  from  the  shore.  In  Feb- 
ruary, 1747  (I  know  not  the  exact  day,)  my 


9*1 

fellow  servant  walking  down  to  the  beach 
in  the  forenoon,  saw  a vessel  sailing  past, 
and  made  a smoke  in  token  of  trade.  She 
was  already  a little  beyond  the  place,  and,  as 
the  wind  was  fair,  the  captain  was  in  some 
demur  whether  to  stop  or  not : however,  had 
my  companion  been  half  an  hour  later,  she 
would  have  gone  beyond  recal ; but  he  scon 
saw  her  come  to  anchor,  and  went  on  board 
in  a canoe : and  this  proved  the  very  ship  1 
have  spoken  of.  One  of  the  first  questions 
he  was  asked,  was  concerning  me ; and  when 
the  captain  understood  I was  so  near,  he 
came  on  shore  to  deliver  his  message.  Had 
an  invitation  from  home  reached  me,  when 
I was  sick  and  starving  at  the  Plantanes,  I 
should  have  received  it  as  life  from  the  dead ; 
but  now,  for  the  reasons  already  given,  I 
heard  it  at  first  with  indifference.  The 
captain,  unwilling  to  lose  me,  told  a story 
altogether  of  his  own  framing : he  gave  me 
a very  plausible  account,  how  he  had  missed 
a large  packet  of  letters  and  papers,  which 
he  should  have  brought  with  him  ; but  this, 
he  said,  he  was  sure  of,  having  had  it  from 
my  father’s  own  mouth,  as  well  as  from  his 
employer,  that  a person  lately  dead  had  left 
me  £400  per  annum;  adding  further,  that 
if  I was  any  way  embarrassed  in  my  cir- 
cumstances, he  had  express  orders  to  redeem 
me,  though  it  should  cost  one  half  of  his 
cargo.  Every  particular  of  this  was  false ; 
nor  could  I myself  believe  what  he  said  about 
the  estate ; but,  as  I had  some  expectations 
from  an  aged  relation,  I thought  a part  of  it 
might  be  true.  But  I was  not  long  in  sus- 
pense : for  though  my  father’s  care  and  de- 
sire to  see  me  had  too  little  weight  with  me, 
and  would  have  been  insufficient  to  make 
me  quit  my  retreat,  yet  the  remembrance  of 
Mrs.  N*****,  the  hopes  of  seeing  her,  and 
the  possibility,  that  accepting  this  offer  might 
once  more  put  me  in  a way  of  gaining  her 
hand,  prevailed  over  all  other  considerations. 
The  captain  further  promised  (and  in  this  he 
kept  his  word,)  that  I should  lodge  in  his 
cabin,  dine  at  his  table,  and  be  his  constant 
companion,  without  expecting  any  service 
from  me.  And  thus  I was  suddenly  freed  from 
a captivity  of  about  fifteen  months.  I had 
neither  a thought  nor  a desire  of  this  change 
one  hour  before  it  took  place.  I embarked 
with  him,  and  in  a few  hours  lost  sight  of 
Kittam. 

Plow  much  is  their  blindness  to  be  pitied, 
who  can  see  nothing  but  chance  in  events  of 
this  sort ! So  blind  and  stupid  was  I at  that 
time,  I made  no  reflection.  I sought  no  di- 
rection in  what  had  happened ; like  a wave 
of  the  sea  driven  with  the  wind,  and  tossed, 
I was  governed  by  present  appearances  and 
looked  no  further.  But  he,  who  is  eyes  to 
the  blind,  was  leading  me  in  a way  that  I 
knew  not. 

Now  1 am  in  some  measure  enlightened,  I 


94 


VOYAGE  FROM  CAPE  LOPEZ  FOR  ENGLAND. 


[let.  VII. 


can  easily  perceive  that  it  is  in  the  adjust- 
ment and  concurrence  of  these  seemingly 
fortuitous  circumstances,  that  the  ruling 
power  and  wisdom  of  God  is  most  evidently 
displayed  in  human  affairs.  How  many  such 
casual  events  may  we  remark  in  the  his- 
tory of  Joseph,  which  had  each  a necessary 
influence  in  his  ensuing  promotion ! If  he 
had  not  dream0 1,  or  if  he  had  not  told  his 
dream  ; if  the  Mi  Hanites  had  passed  by  a day 
sooner  or  later  ; i f they  had  sold  him  to  any 
person  but  Potipnar;  if  his  mistress  had  been 
a better  woman ; if  Pharaoh’s  officers  had  not 
displeased  their  lord ; or  if  any  or  all  these 
things  had  fallen  out  in  any  other  manner  or 
time  than  they  did,  all  that  followed  had 
been  prevented : the  promises  and  purposes 
of  God  concerning  Israel,  their  bondage,  de- 
liverances, polity,  and  settlement,  must  have 
failed ; and,  as  all  these  things  tended  to,  and 
centered  in  Christ,  the  promised  Saviour, 
the  desire  of  all  nations  would  not  have  ap- 
peared ; mankind  had  been  still  in  their  sins, 
without  hope,  and  the  counsels  of  God's  eter- 
nal love  in  favour  of  sinners  defeated.  Thus 
we  may  see  a connexion  between  Joseph’s 
first  dream,  and  the  death  of  our  Lord  Christ, 
with  all  its  glorious  consequences.  So  strong, 
though  secret,  is  the  concatenation  between 
the  greatest  and  the  smallest  events ! What 
a comfortable  thought  is  this  to  a believer  to 
know,  that  amidst  all  the  various  inter- 
fering designs  of  men,  the  Lord  has  one  con- 
stant design  which  he  cannot,  will  not  miss, 
namely,  nis  own  glory  in  the  complete  sal- 
vation of  his  people ; and  that  he  is  wise, 
and  strong,  and  faithful,  to  make  even  those 
things,  which  seem  contrary  to  this  design, 
subservient  to  promote  it.  You  have  allowed 
me  to  comment  upon  my  own  text,  yet  the 
length  of  this  observation  may  need  some 
apology.  Relieve  me  to  be,  with  great 
respect,  dear  sir,  your  affectionate  and 
obliged  servant. 

January  18,  1763. 


LETTER  VII. 

deyr  sir, — The  ship  I was  now  on  board 
as  a passenger,  was  on  a trading  voyage  for 
gold,  ivory,  dyers’  wood,  and  bees’  wax.  It 
requires  much  longer  time  to  collect  a cargo 
of  this  sort  than  of  slaves.  The  captain 
began  his  trade  at  Gambia,  had  been  already 
lour  or  five  months  in  Africa,  and  continued 
there  a year,  or  thereabouts,  after  I was  with 
him;  in  which  time  we  ranged  the  whole 
coast,  as  far  as  Cape  Lopez,  which  lies  about 
a degree  south  of  the  Equinoctial,  and  more 
than  a thousand  miles  farther  from  England 
than  the  place  where  I embarked.  I have 
little  to  offer  worthy  your  notice,  in  the 
course  of  this  tedious  voyage.  I lad  no 


business  to  employ  my  thoughts,  but  some- 
times amused  myself  with  mathematics : ex- 
cepting this,  my  whole  life,  when  awake, 
was  a course  of  most  horrid  impiety  and  pro- 
faneness. I know  not  that  I have  ever  since 
met  so  daring  a blasphemer:  not  content 
with  common  oaths  and  imprecations,  I daily 
invented  new  ones ; so  that  I was  often  se- 
riously reproved  by  the  captain,  who  was 
himself  a very  passionate  man,  and  not  at  all 
circumspect  in  his  expressions.  From  the 
relation  I at  times  made  him  of  my  past  ad- 
ventures, and  what  he  saw  of  my  conduct, 
and  especially  towards  the  close  of  the 
voyage,  when  we  met  with  many  disasters, 
he  would  often  tell  me  that,  to  his  great 
grief  he  had  a Jonah  on  board ; that  a curse 
attended  me  wherever  I went ; and  that  all 
the  troubles  he  met  with  in  the  voyage,  were 
owing  to  his  having  taken  me  into  the  vessel. 
I shall  omit  any  further  particulars,  and  after 
mentioning  an  instance  or  two  of  the  Lord’s 
mercy  to  me,  while  I was  thus  defying  his 
power  and  patience,  I shall  proceed  to  some- 
thing more  worthy  your  perusal. 

Although  I lived  long  in  the  excess  of  al- 
most every  other  extravagance,  I never  was 
fond  of  drinking;  and  my  father  has  often 
been  heard  to  say,  that  while  I avoided 
drunkenness,  he  should  still  entertain  hopes 
of  my  recovery.  But  sometimes  I would 
promote  a drinking-bout  for  a frolic’s  sake, 
as  I termed  it : for  though  I did  not  love  the 
liquor,  I ws  • sold  to  do  iniquity,  and  delight- 
ed in  mischief.  The  last  abominable  frolic 
of  this  sort  I engaged  in,  was  in  the  river 
Gabon ; the  proposal  and  expense  were  my 
own.  Four  or  five  of  us  one  evening  sat 
down  upon  deck,  to  see  who  could  hold  out 
longest  in  drinking  geneva  and  rum  alter- 
nately ; a large  sea-shell  supplied  the  place 
of  a glass.  I was  very  unfit  for  a challenge 
of  this  sort,  for  my  head  was  always  incapa- 
ble of  bearing  much  strong  drink.  H owever, 
I began  and  proposed  the  first  toast,  which,  [ 
well  remember,  was  some  imprecation  against 
the  person  who  should  start  first.  This  prov- 
ed to  be  myself.  My  brain  was  soon  fired: 
I arose  and  danced  about  the  deck  like  a 
madman;  and  while  I was  thus  diverting 
my  companions,  my  hat  went  overboard. 
By  the  light  of  the  moon,  I saw  the  ship's 
boat,  and  eagerly  threw  myself  over  the  side 
to  get  into  her,  that  I might  recover  my  hat. 
My  sight  in  that  circumstance  deceived  me, 
for  the  boat  was  not  within  my  reach,  as  I 
had  thought,  but  perhaps  twenty  feet  from 
the  ship’s  side.  I was,  however,  half  over 
board,  and  should  in  one  moment  more  have 
plunged  myself  into  the  water,  when  some- 
body catched  hold  of  my  clothes  behind,  and 
pulled  me  back.  This  was  an  amazing 
escape,  for  I could  not  swim  if  I had  been 
sober;  the  tide  ran  very  strong;  my  com- 
panions were  too  much  intoxicated  to  save 


95 


let.  vii.]  VOYAGE  FROM  CAPE 

me ; and  the  rest  of  the  ship’s  company  were 
asleep.  So  near  I was,  to  appearance,  of  per- 
ishing- in  that  dreadful  condition,  and  sinking 
into  eternity  under  the  weight  of  my  own 
curse ! 

Another  time,  at  cape  Lopez,  some  of  us 
had  been  in  the  woods,  and  shot  a buffalo  or 
v/ild  cow.  We  brought  a part  of  it  on  board, 
and  carefully  marked  the  place  (as  I thought) 
where  we  left  the  remainder.  In  the  even- 
ing, we  returned  to  fetch  it;  but  we  set 
out  too  late.  I undertook  to  be  their  guide ; 
but  night  coming  on  before  we  could  reach 
the  place,  we  lost  our  way.  Sometimes  we 
were  in  swamps  up  to  the  middle  in  water, 
and  when  we  recovered  dry  land,  we  could 
not  tell  whether  we  were  walking  towards 
the  ship,  or  wandering  farther  from  her. 
Every  step  increased  our  uncertainty.  The 
night  grew  darker,  and  we  were  entangled 
in  inextricable  woods,  where  perhaps  the 
foot  of  man  had  never  trod  before.  That 
part  of  the  country  is  entirely  abandoned  to 
wild  beasts,  with  which  it  prodigiously 
abounds.  We  were  indeed  in  a terrible 
case,  having  neither  light,  food,  nor  arms, 
and  expecting  a tiger  to  rush  from  behind 
every  tree.  The  stars  were  clouded,  and 
we  had  no  compass  to  form  a judgment 
which  way  we  were  going.  Had  things  con- 
tinued thus,  we  had  probably  perished ; but 
it  pleased  God,  no  beast  came  near  us ; and 
after  some  hours  perplexity,  the  moon  arose 
and  pointed  out  the  eastern  quarter.  It  ap- 
peared then,  as  we  had  expected,  that  in- 
stead of  drawing  near  to  the  sea  side,  we 
had  been  penetrating  into  the  country;  but 
by  the  guidance  of  the  moon,  we  at  length 
came  to  the  water  side,  a considerable  dis- 
tance from  the  ship.  We  got  safe  on  board, 
without  any  other  inconvenience  than  what 
we  suffered  from  fear  and  fatigue. 

Those  and  many  other  deliverances  were 
all,  at  that  time,  entirely  lost  upon  me.  The  ad- 
monitions of  conscience,  which,  from  succes- 
sive repulses,  had  grown  weaker  and  weaker, 
at  length  entirely  ceased ; and  for  a space  of 
many  months,  if  not  for  some  years,  I cannot 
recollect  that  I had  a single  check  of  that 
sort.  At  times  I have  been  visited  with 
sickness,  and  have  believed  myself  near  to 
death,  but  I had  not  the  least  concern  about 
the  consequences.  In  a word,  I seemed  to 
have  every  mark  of  final  impenitence  and 
rejection;  neither  judgments  nor  mercies 
made  the  least  impression  on  me. 

At  length,  our  business  finished,  we  left 
Cape  Lopez,  and  after  a few  days  stay  at  the 
island  of  Annabona,  to  lay  in  provisions,  we 
sailed  homeward  about  the  beginning  of  Ja- 
nuary 1748.  From  Annabona  to  England, 
without  touching  at  any  intermediate  port,  is 
a very  long  navigation,  perhaps  more  than 
seven  thousand  miles,  if  we  include  the  cir- 
cuits necessary  to  be  made  on  account  of  the 


LOPEZ  FOR  ENGLAND. 

trade-winds.  We  sailed  first  westward,  till 
near  the  coast  of  Brazil,  then  northward,  to 
the  banks  of  Newfoundland,  with  the  usual 
variations  of  wind  and  weather,  and  without 
meeting  any  thing  extraordinary.  On  these 
banks  we  stopped  half  a day  to  fish  for  cod ; 
this  was  then  chiefly  for  diversion ; we  had 
provisions  enough,  and  little  expected  those 
fish  (as  it  afterwards  proved)  would  be  all 
we  should  have  to  subsist  on.  We  left  the 
banks  on  the  first  of  March,  with  a hard  gale 
of  wind,  westerly,  which  pushed  us  fast 
homewards.  I should  here  observe,  that, 
with  the  length  of  this  voyage,  in  a hot  cli- 
mate, the  vessel  was  greatly  out  of  repair, 
and  very  unfit  to  support  stormy  weather; 
the  sails  and  cordage  were  likewise  very 
much  worn  out,  and  many  such  circum- 
stances concurred  to  render  what  followed 
more  dangerous.  I think  it  was  on  the 
ninth  of  March,  the  day  before  our  catastro- 
phe, that  I felt  a thought  pass  through  my 
mind,  which  I had  long  been  a stranger  to. 
Among  the  few  books  we  had  on  board,  one 
was  Stanhope’s  Thomas  a Kempis ; I care- 
lessly took  it  up,  as  I had  often  done  before, 
to  pass  away  the  time  ; but  I had  still  read 
it  with  the  same  indifference  as  if  it  was  en- 
tirely a romance.  However,  while  I was 
reading  this  time,  an  involuntary  suggestion 
arose  in  my  mind : What  if  these  things 
should  be  true  1 I could  not  bear  the  force 
of  the  inference,  as  it  related  to  myself: 
and  therefore  shut  the  book  presently.  My 
conscience  witnessed  against  me  once  more, 
and  I concluded  that,  true  or  false,  I must 
abide  the  consequences  of  my  own  choice. 
I put  an  abrupt  end  to  these  reflections,  by 
joining  in  with  some  vain  conversation  or 
other  that  came  in  my  way. 

But  now  the  Lord’s  time  was  come,  and 
the  conviction  I was  so  unwilling  to  receive, 
was  deeply  impressed  upon  me  by  an  awful 
dispensation.  I went  to  bed  that  night  in 
my  usual  security  and  indifference,  but  was 
awakened  from  a sound  sleep  by  the  force  of 
a violent,  sea,  which  broke  on  board  us ; so 
much  of  it  came  down  below  as  filled  the 
cabin  I lay  in  with  water.  This  alarm  was 
followed  by  a cry  from  the  deck,  that  the 
ship  was  going  down  or  sinking.  As  soon 
as  I could  recover  myself,  I essayed  to  go 
upon  deck : but  was  met  upon  the  ladder  by 
the  captain,  who  desired  me  to  bring  a knife 
with  me.  While  I returned  for  the  knife, 
another  person  went  up  in  my  room,  ,vho  was 
instantly  washed  overboard.  We  had  no 
leisure  to  lament  him,  nor  did  we  expect  to 
survive  him  long;  for  we  soon  found  the  ship 
was  filling  with  water  very  fast.  The  sea 
had  torn  away  the  upper  timbers  on  one 
side,  and  made  a mere  wreck  in  a few  mi- 
nutes. I shall  not  affect  to  describe  this 
disaster  in  marine  dialect,  which  would  be 
understood  by  few ; and  therefore  I can  give 


96 


DANGER,  &c.  IN  THE 


[let  VIII. 


you  but  a very  inadequate  idea  of  it.  Taking- 
in  all  circumstances,  it  was  astonishing,  and 
almost  miraculous,  that  any  of  us  survived  to 
relate  the  story.  We  had  immediate  re- 
course to  the  pumps ; but  the  water  increased 
against  our  efforts.  Some  of  us  were  set  to 
baling  in  another  part  of  the  vessel ; that  is, 
to  lade  it  out  with  buckets  and  pails.  We 
had  but  eleven  or  twelve  people  to  sustain 
this  service;  and,  notwithstanding  all  we 
could  do,  she  was  full,  or  very  near  it : and 
then,  with  a common  cargo,  she  must  have 
sunk  of  course ; but  we  had  a great  quantity 
of  bees’  wax  and  wood  on  board,  which  were 
specifically  lighter  than  the  water ; and  as  it 
pleased  God  that  we  received  this  shock  in 
the  very  crisis  of  the  gale,  towards  morning 
we  were  enabled  to  employ  some  means  for 
our  safety,  which  succeeded  beyond  hope. 
In  about  an  hour’s  time,  the  day  began  to 
break,  and  the  wind  abated.  We  expended 
most,  of  our  clothes  and  bedding  to  stop  the 
’oaks  (though  the  weather  was  exceedingly 
cold,  especially  to  us,  who  had  so  lately  left 
a hot  climate  ;)  over  these  we  nailed  pieces 
of  boards,  and  at  last  perceived  the  water 
abate.  At  the  beginning  of  this  hurry,  I was 
little  affected.  I pumped  hard,  and  endea- 
voured to  animate  myse  f and  companions : 
I told  one  of  them,  that  in  a few  days,  this 
distress  would  serve  us  to  talk  of  over  a glass 
of  wine ; but  he  being  a less  hardened  sinner 
than  myself,  replied,  with  tears,  “ No  ; it  is 
too  late  now.”  About  nine  o’clock,  being 
almost  spent  with  cold  and  labour,  I went  to 
speak  with  the  captain,  who  was  busied  else- 
where, and  just  as  I was  returning  from  him, 
I said  almost  without  any  meaning,  “ If  this 
will  not  do  the  Lord  have  mercy  upon  us.” 
This  (though  spoken  with  little  reflection) 
was  the  first  desire  I had  breathed  for  mere}*- 
for  the  space  of  many  years.  I was  instantly 
struck  with  my  own  words;  and,  as  Jehu 
said  once,  “ what  hast  thou  to  do  with  peace?” 
so  it  directly  occurred,  “ What  mercy  can 
there  be  for  me  ?”  I was  obliged  to  return 
to  the  pump,  and  there  I continued  till  noon, 
almost  every  passing  wave  breaking  over 
my  head ; but  we  made  ourselves  fast  with 
ropes,  that  we  might  not  be  washed  away. 
Indeed,  I expected  that  every  time  the  ves- 
sel descended  in  the  sea,  she  would  rise  no 
more ; and  though  I dreaded  death  now,  and 
my  heart  foreboded  the  worst,  if  the  scrip- 
tures, which  I had  long  since  opposed,  were 
indeed  true;  yet  still  I was  but  half  con- 
vinced, and  remained  for  a space  of  time  in 
a sullen  frame,  a mixture  of  despair  and  im- 
patience. I thought,  if  the  Christian  religion 
was  true,  I could  not  be  forgiven ; and  was, 
therefore,  expecting,  and  almost,  at  times, 
wishing,  to  know  the  worst  of  it. — I am 
your’s,  &c. 

January  19,  1763. 


LETTER  VIII. 

dear  sir, — Tne  tenth  (that  is,  m the  pre- 
sent style,  the  twenty-first)  c£  March,  is  a 
day  much  to  be  remembered  by  me,  and  I 
have  never  suffered  it  to  pass  wholly  un- 
! noticed  since  the  year  1748.  On  that  day 
! the  Lord  sent  from  on  high,  and  deliver- 
! ed  me  out  of  the  deep  waters.  I continued 
| at  the  pump  from  three  in  the  morning  till 
i near  noon,  and  then  I could  do  no  more.  I 
went  and  lay  down  upon  my  bed,  uncertain 
and  almost  indifferent,  whether  I should  rise 
again.  In  an  hour’s  time  I was  called,  and 
not  being  able  to  pump,  I went  to  the  helm, 
and  steered  the  ship  till  midnight,  excepting 
a small  interval  for  refreshment.  I had 
here  leisure  and  convenient  opportunity  for 
reflection.  I began  to  think  of  my  former 
religious  professions ; the  extraordinary  turns 
in  my  life ; the  calls,  warnings,  and  deliver- 
ances I had  met  with ; the  licentious  course 
of  my  conversation,  particularly  my  unparal- 
leled effrontery  in  making  the  gospel  his- 
tory (which  I could  not  now  be  sure  was 
false,  though  I was  not  yet  assured  it  was 
true)  the  constant  subject  of  profane  ridi- 
cule. I thought,  allowing  the  scripture 
premises,  there  never  was  nor  could  be  such 
a sinner  as  myself ; and  then,  comparing 
the  advantages  I had  broken  through,  I 
concluded,  at  first,  that  my  sins  were  too 
great  to  be  forgiven.  The  scripture  likewise 
seemed  to  say  the  same ; for  I had  formerly 
been  well  acquainted  with  the  Bible,  and 
many  passages,  upon  this  occasion,  returned 
upon  my  memory,  particularly  those  awful 
i passages,  Prov.  i.  24 — 31.  Heb.  vi.  4,  6,  and 
2 Pet.  ii.  20,  which  seemed  so  exactly  to  suit 
my  case  and  character,  as  to  bring  with  them 
a presumptive  proof  of  a divine  original. 
Thus,  as  I have  said,  I waited  with  fear  and 
impatience  to  receive  my  inevitable  doom. 
Yet,  though  I had  thoughts  of  this  kind,  they 
were  exceeding  faint  and  disproportionate. 
It  was  not  till  long  after  (perhaps  several 
years,)  till  I had  gained  some  clear  views  of 
the  infinite  righteousness  and  grace  of  Christ 
Jesus,  my  Lord,  that  I had  a deep  and  strong 
apprehension  of  my  state  by  nature  and  prac- 
tice ; and,  perhaps,  till  then,  I could  not  have 
borne  the  sight.  So  wonderfully  does  the  Lord 
proportion  the  discoveries  of  sin  and  grace ; 
for  he  knows  our  frame,  and  that  if  he  was  to 
put  forth  the  greatness  of  his  power,  a poor 
sinner  would  be  instantly  overwhelmed,  and 
crushed  as  a moth.  But  to  return : when  I 
saw,  beyond  all  probability,  there  was  still 
hope  of  respite,  and  heard,  about  six  in  the 
evening,  that  the  ship  was  freed  from  water, 
there  arose  a gleam  of  hope.  I thought  I 
saw  the  hand  of  God  displayed  in  our  favour ; 
I began  to  pray ; I could  not  utter  the  prayer 
of  faith ; I could  not  draw  near  to  a recon- 


VOYAGE  FROM  CAPE  LOPEZ. 


97 


LET.  VI.] 

?iled  God,  and  call  him  father : my  prayer 
was  like  the  cry  of  the  ravens,  which  yet  the 
Lord  does  not  disdain  to  hear.  I now  began 
to  think  of  that  Jesus  whom  I had  so  often 
derided : I recollected  the  particulars  of  his 
life  and  of  his  death  ; a death  for  sins  not  his 
own,  but,  as  I remembered,  for  the  sake  of 
those  who,  in  their  distress,  should  put  their 
trust  in  him.  And  now  I chiefly  wanted 
evidence.  The  comfortless  principles  of  in- 
fidelity were  deeply  riveted,  and  I rather 
wished  than  believed  these  things  were  real 
facts.  You  will  please  to  observe,  Sir,  that 
I collect  the  strain  of  the  reasonings  and  ex- 
ercises of  my  mind  in  one  view ; but  I do 
not  say  that  all  this  passed  at  one  time.  The 
great  question  now  was,  how  to  obtain  faith. 
I speak  not  of  an  appropriating  faith,  (of 
which  I then  knew  neither  the  nature  nor  ne- 
cessity,) but  how  I should  gain  an  assurance 
that  the  scriptures  were  of  divine  inspiration, 
and  a sufficient  warrant  for  the  exercise  of 
trust  and  hope  in  God.  One  of  the  first  helps 
I received,  (in  consequence  of  a determina- 
tion to  examine  the  New  Testament  more 
carefully,)  was  from  Luke  xi.  13.  I had 
been  sensible,  that  to  profess  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ,  when  in  reality  I did  not  believe  his 
history,  was  no  better  than  a mockery  of  the 
heart-searching  God;  but  here  1 found  a 
Spirit  spoken  of,  which  was  to  be  communi- 
cated to  those  who  ask  it.  Upon  this  I rea- 
soned thus  : If  this  book  is  true,  the  promise 
in  this  passage  must  be  true  likewise;  I 
have  need  of  that  very  Spirit,  by  which  the 
whole  was  written,  in  order  to  understand  it 
aright.  He  has  engaged  here  to  give  that 
Spirit  to  those  who  ask.  I must  therefore 
pray  for  it,  and,  if  it  is  of  God,  he  will  make 
good  his  own  word.  My  purposes  were 
strengthened  by  John  vii.  17.  I concluded 
from  thence,  that  though  I could  not  say  from 
my  heart,  that  I believed  the  gospel,  yet  I 
would,  for  the  present,  take  it  for  granted ; 
and  that,  by  studying  it  in  this  light,  I should 
be  more  and  more  confirmed  in  it.  If  what 
I am  writing  could  be  perused  by  our  mo- 
dern infidels,  they  would  say,  (for  I too  well 
know  their  manner,)  that  I was  very  de- 
sirous to  persuade  myself  into  this  opinion. 
I confess  I was,  and  so  would  they  be,  if  the 
Lord  should  show  them,  as  he  was  pleased 
to  show  me  at  that  time,  the  absolute  neces- 
sity of  some  expedient  to  interpose  between 
a righteous  God  and  a sinful  soul.  Upon  the 
gospel  scheme  I saw,  at  least,  a peradventure 
of  hope,  but  on  every  other  side  I was  sur- 
rounded with  black  unfathomable  despair. 

The  wind  was  now  moderate,  but  con- 
tinued fair,  and  wc  were  still  drawing  nearer 
to  our  port.  We  began  to  recover  from 
our  consternation,  though  we  were  greatly 
alarmed  by  our  circumstances.  Wc  found 
that,  the  water  having  floated  all  our  move- 
ables in  the  hold,  all  the  casks  of  provision 
N 


had  been  beaten  to  pieces  by  the  violent  mo- 
tion of  the  ship : on  the  other  hand,  our  live 
stock,  such  as  pigs,  sheep,  and  poultry,  had 
been  washed  overboard  in  the  storm.  In 
effect,  all  the  provisions  we  saved,  except 
the  fish  I have  mentioned,  and  some  food  of 
the  pulse  kind,  which  used  to  be  given  to 
the  hogs  (and  there  was  but  little  of  this  left,) 
all  our  other  provisions  would  have  subsisted 
us  but  a week,  at  scanty  allowance.  The 
sails,  too,  were  mostly  blown  away,  so  that 
we  advanced  but  slowly,  even  while  the  wind 
was  fair.  We  imagined  ourselves  about  a 
hundred  leagues  from  the  land,  but  were  in 
reality  much  further.  Thus  we  proceeded 
with  an  alternate  prevalence  of  hope  and 
fear.  My  leisure  time  was  chiefly  employ- 
ed in  reading  and  meditating  on  the  scrip- 
tures, and  praying  to  the  Lord  for  mercy  and 
instruction. 

Things  continued  thus  for  four  or  five  days, 
or  perhaps  longer,  till  we  were  awakened 
one  morning,  by  the  joyful  shout  of  the 
watch  upon  deck,  proclaiming  the  sight  of 
land.  We  were  all  soon  raised  at  the  sound. 
The  dawning  was  uncommonly  beautiful,  and 
the  light,  (just  strong  enough  to  discover 
distant  objects)  presented  us  with  a gladden- 
ing prospect:  it  seemed  a mountainous  coast, 
about  twenty  miles  from  us,  terminating  in 
a cape  or  point,  and  a little  farther,  two  or 
three  small  islands,  or  hummucks,  as  if  just 
rising  out  of  the  water : the  appearance  and 
position  seemed  exactly  answerable  to  our 
hopes,  resembling  the  north-west  extremity 
of  Ireland,  which  we  were  steering  for.  We 
sincerely  congratulated  each  other,  making 
no  doubt,  but  that  if  the  wind  continued,  we 
should  be  in  safety  and  plenty  the  next  day. 
The  small  remainder  of  our  brandy  (which 
was  reduced  to  little  more  than  a pint)  was, 
by  the  captain’s  orders,  distributed  amongst 
us ; he  adding  at  the  same  time,  “ We  shall 
soon  have  brandy  enough.”  We  likewise 
eat  up  the  residue  of  our  bread  for  joy  of  this 
welcome  sight,  and  were  in  the  condition  of 
men  suddenly  reprieved  from  death.  While 
we  were  thus  alert,  the  mate  with  a graver 
tone  than  the  rest,  sunk  our  spirits  by  saying 
that,  “ he  wished  it  might  prove  land  at  last.” 
If  one  of  the  common  sailors  had  first  said  so, 
I know  not  but  the  rest  would  have  beat  him 
for  raising  such  an  unreasonable  doubt.  It 
brought  on,  however,  warm  debates  and  dis- 
putes whether  it  was  land  or  no ; but  the 
case  was  soon  unanswerably  decided;  for 
the  day  was  advancing  fast,  and  in  a little 
time,  one  of  our  fancied  islands  began  to 
grow  red,  from  the  approach  of  the  sun, 
which  soon  arose  just  under  it.  In  a word, 
we  had  been  prodigal  of  our  bread  and  brandy 
too  hastily ; our  land  was  literally  in  nubibus , 
nothing  but  clouds,  and  in  half  an  hour  more 
the  whole  appearance  was  dissipated.  Sea- 
men have  often  known  deceptions  of  this 


98 


EVENTS  IN  IRELAND,  &c. 


sort,  but  in  our  extremity  we  were  loath  to 
be  undeceived.  However,  we  comforted 
ourselves,  that  though  we  could  not  see  the 
land,  yet  we  should  soon,  the  wind  hitherto 
continuing  fair ; but,  alas ! we  were  deprived 
of  this  hope  likewise.  That  very  day,  our 
fair  wind  subsided  into  a calm,  and  the  next 
morning  the  gales  sprung  up  from  the  south- 
east, directly  against  us,  and  continued  so 
for  more  than  a fortnight  afterwards.  The 
6hip  was  so  wrecked,  that  we  were  obliged 
to  keep  the  wind  always  on  the  broken  side, 
unless  the  weather  was  quite  moderate  : thus 
we  were  driven,  by  the  wind  fixing  in  that 
quarter,  still  further  from  our  port,  to  the 
northward  of  all  Ireland,  as  far  as  the  Lewis 
or  western  islands  of  Scotland,  but  a long 
way  to  the  westward.  In  a word,  our  station 
Was  such  as  deprived  us  of  any  hope  of  being 
relieved  by  other  vessels : it  may,  indeed,  be 
questioned,  whether  our  ship  was  not  the 
very  first  that  had  been  in  that  part  of  the 
ocean,  at  the  same  season  of  the  year. 

Provisions  now  began  to  grow  very  short ; 
the  half  of  a salted  cod  was  a day’s  subsist- 
ence for  twelve  people ; we  had  plenty  of 
fresh  water,  but  not  a drop  of  stronger  liquor ; 
no  bread,  hardly  any  clothes,  and  very  cold 
weather.  W e had  incessant  labour  with  the 
pumps,  to  keep  the  ship  above  water.  Much 
labour  and  little  food,  wasted  us  fast,  and  one 
man  died  under  the  hardship.  Yet  our  suf- 
ferings were  light  in  comparison  of  our  just 
fears ; we  could  not  afford  this  bare  allow- 
ance much  longer,  but  had  a terrible  pros- 
pect of  being  either  starved  to  death,  or  re- 
duced to  feed  upon  one  another.  Our  ex- 
pectations grew  darker  every  day,  and  I had 
a further  trouble  peculiar  to  myself.  The 
captain,  whose  temper  was  quite  soured  by 
distress,  was  hourly  reproaching  me  (as  I 
formerly  observed)  as  the  sole  cause  of  the 
calamity,  and  was  confident  that  if  I was 
thrown  overboard,  and  not  otherwise,  they 
should  be  preserved  from  death.  He  did  not 
intend  to  make  the  experiment,  but  continual 
repetition  of  this  in  my  ears  gave  me  much 
uneasiness,  especially  as  my  conscience  se- 
conded his  words.  I thought  it  very  probable, 
that  all  that  had  befallen  us  was  on  my  ac- 
count. I was,  at  last,  found  out  by  the  power- 
ful hand  of  God,  and  condemned  in  my  own 
breast.  However,  proceeding  in  the  method 
I have  described,  we  began  to  conceive  hopes 
greater  than  all  our  fears,  especially,  when 
at  the  time  we  were  ready  to  give  up  all  for 
lost,  and  despair  was  taking  place  in  every 
countenance,  we  saw  the  wind  come  about 
to  the  very  point  we  wished  it,  so  as  best  to 
suit  that  broken  part  of  the  ship  which  must 
be  kept  out  of  the  water,  and  to  blow  so  gent- 
ly as  our  few  remaining  sails  could  bear;  and 
thus  it  continued  without  any  observable  al- 
teration or  increase,  though  at  an  unsettled 
time  of  the  year,  till  we  once  more  were  call- 


[let.  ix. 

ed  up  to  see  the  land,  and  were  convinced 
that  it  was  land  indeed.  We  saw  the  island 
Tory,  and  the  next  day  anchored  in  Lcugh 
Swilly,  in  Ireland ; this  was  the  eighth  of 
April,  just  four  weeks  after  the  damage  was 
sustained  from  the  sea.  When  we  came 
into  this  port  our  very  last  victuals  were 
boiling  in  the  pot;  and  before  we  had  been 
there  two  hours,  the  wind,  which  seemed  to 
have  been  providentially  restrained  till  we 
were  in  a place  of  safety,  began  to  blow  with 
great  violence,  so  that  if  we  had  continued 
at  sea  that  night  in  our  shattered,  enfeebled 
condition,  we  must,  in  all  human  appear- 
ance, have  gone  to  the  bottom.  About  this 
time  I began  to  know  that  there  is  a God 
that  hears  and  answers  prayer.  How  many 
times  has  he  appeared  for  me  since  this 
great  deliverance  ! — yet,  alas ! how  distrust- 
ful and  ungrateful  is  my  heart  unto  this 
hour ! — I am,  dear  sir,  your  obliged  humble 
servant. 

January  19,  1763. 


LETTER  IX. 

dear  sir, — I have  brought  my  history 
down  to  the  time  of  my  arrival  in  Ireland, 
1748 ; but  before  I proceed,  I would  look 
back  a little,  to  give  you  some  farther  account 
of  the  state  of  my  mind,  and  how  far  I was 
helped  against  inward  difficulties,  which  be- 
set me,  at  the  time  I had  many  outward 
hardships  to  struggle  with.  The  straits  of 
hunger,  cold,  weariness,  and  the  fears  of 
sinking  and  starving,  I shared  in  common 
with  others ; but  besides  these,  I felt  a heart- 
bitterness,  which  was  properly  my  own ; no 
one  on  board,  but  myself,  being  impressed 
with  any  sense  of  the  hand  of  God  in  our 
danger  and  deliverance,  at  least  not  awak- 
ened to  any  concern  for  their  souls.  No  tem- 
poral dispensations  can  reach  the  heart,  un- 
less the  Lord  himself  applies  them.  My 
companions  in  danger  were  either  quite  un- 
affected, or  soon  forgot  it  all ; but  it  was  not 
so  with  me : not  that  I was  any  wiser  or  bet- 
ter than  they,  but  because  the  Lord  was 
pleased  to  vouchsafe  me  peculiar  mercy, 
otherwise  I was  the  most  unlikely  person  in 
the  ship  to  receive  an  impression,  having 
been  often  before  quite  stupid  and  hardened 
in  the  very  face  of  great  dangers,  and  al- 
ways to  this  time  had  hardened  my  neck 
still  more  and  more  after  every  reproof  I 
can  see  no  reason  why  the  Lord  singled  me 
out  for  mercy,  but  this,  “that  so  it  seemed 
good  to  him ;”  unless  it  was  to  show,  by  one 
astonishing  instance,  that  with  him  “nothing 
is  impossible.” 

There  wepe  no  persons  on  board  to  whom 
I could  open  myself  with  freedom,  concerning 
the  state  of  my  soul,  none  from  whom  I could 


EVENTS  IN  IRELAND. 


99 


LET.  IX.] 

ask  advice.  As  to  books,  I had  a New  Tes- 
tament, Stanhope,  already  mentioned,  and  a 
volume  of  bishop  Beveridge’s  sermons,  one  of 
which,  upon  our  Lord’s  passion,  affected  me 
much.  In  perusing  the  New  Testament,  I 
was  struck  with  several  passages,  particular- 
ly that  of  the  fig-tree,  Luke  xiii.  The  case 
of  St.  Paul,  1 Tim.  i.  but  particularly  the 
prodigal,  Luke  xv.  a case,  I thought,  that 
had  never  been  so  nearly  exemplified,  as  by 
myself ; and  then  the  goodness  of  the  father 
in  receiving,  nay,  in  running  to  meet  such  a 
son,  and  this  intended  only  to  illustrate  the 
Lord’s  goodness  to  returning  sinners, — this 
gained  upon  me.  I continued  much  in 
prayer ; I saw  that  the  Lord  had  interposed 
so  far  to  save  me,  and  I hoped  he  would  do 
more.  The  outward  circumstances  helped 
in  this  place  to  make  me  still  more  serious 
and  earnest  in  crying  to  him,  who  alone  could 
relieve  me ; and  sometimes  I thought  I could 
be  content  to  die,  even  for  want  of  food,  so  I 
might  but  die  a believer.  Thus  far  I was 
answered,  that  before  we  arrived  in  Ireland, 
I had  a satisfactory  evidence  in  my  own  mind 
of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  as  considered  in 
itself,  and  its  exact  suitableness  to  answer 
all  my  needs.  I saw  that,  by  the  way  they 
are  pointed  out,  God  might  declare  not  his 
mercy  only,  but  his  justice  also,  in  the  par- 
don of  sin  on  the  account  of  the  obedience 
and  sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ.  My  judgment, 
at  that  time,  embraced  the  sublime  doctrine 
of  “ God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  reconciling 
the  world  to  himself.”  I had  no  idea  of  those 
systems  which  allow  the  Saviour  no  higher 
honour  than  that  of  an  upper  servant,  or,  at  the 
most,  a demi-god.  I stood  in  need  of  an  Al- 
mighty Saviour,  and  such  a one  I found  de- 
scribed in  the  New  Testament.  Thus  far 
the  Lord  had  wrought  a marvellous  thing : 
I was  no  longer  an  infidel;  I heartily  re- 
nounced my  former  profaneness,  and  I had 
taken  up  some  right  notions,  was  seriously 
disposed,  and  sincerely  touched  with  a sense 
of  the  undeserved  mercy  I had  received,  in  be- 
ing brought  safe  through  so  many  dangers.  I 
was  sorry  for  my  misspent  life,  and  purposed 
an  immediate  reformation  : I was  quite  freed 
from  the  habit  of  swearing,  which  seemed 
to  have  been  deeply  rooted  in  me,  as  a 
second  nature.  Thus,  to  all  appearance,  I 
was  a new  man. 

But  though  I cannot  doubt  that  this 
change,  so  far  as  it  prevailed,  was  wrought 
by  the  Spirit  and  power  of  God,  yet  still  I 
was  greatly  deficient  in  many  respects.  I 
was  in  some  degree  affected  with  a sense  of 
rny  more  enormous  sins,  but  I was  little 
aware  of  the  innate  evils  of  my  heart.  I had 
no  apprehension  of  the  spirituality  and  extent 
of  the  law  of  God ; the  hidden  life  of  a Chris- 
tian, as  it  consists  in  communion  with  God  by 
Jesus  Christ,  and  a continual  dependence  on 
him  for  hourly  supplies  of  wisdom,  strength, 


and  comfort,  was  a mystery  of  which  I had 
as  yet  no  knowledge.  I acknowledged  the 
Lord’s  mercy  in  pardoning  what  was  past,  but 
depended  chiefly  upon  my  own  resolution  to 
do  better  for  the  time  to  come.  I had  no  Chris- 
tian friend  or  faithful  minister  to  advise  me, 
that  my  strength  was  no  more  than  my  righte- 
ousness ; and  though  I soon  began  to  inquire 
for  serious  books,  yet,  not  having  spiritual  dis- 
cernment, I frequently  made  a wrong  choice, 
and  I was  not  brought  in  the  way  of  evan- 
gelical preaching  or  conversation  (except  a 
few  times  when  I heard  but  understood  not) 
for  six  years  after  this  period.  Those  things 
the  Lord  was  pleased  to  discover  to  me  gra- 
dually. I learnt  them  here  a little  and  there 
a little,  by  my  own  painful  experience,  at  a 
distance  from  the  common  means  and  ordi- 
nances, and  in  the  midst  of  the  same  course 
of  evil  company  and  bad  examples  I had  been 
conversant  with  for  some  time.  F rom  this  pe- 
riod I could  no  more  make  a mock  at  sin,  or  jest 
with  holy  things ; I no  more  questioned  the 
truth  of  scripture,  or  lost  a sense  of  the 
rebukes  of  conscience.  Therefore  I consider 
this  as  the  beginning  of  rny  return  to  God, 
or  rather  of  his  return  to  me ; but  I cannot 
consider  myself  to  have  been  a believer  (in 
the  full  sense  of  the  word)  till  a considerabla 
time  afterwards. 

I have  told  you  that,  in  the  time  of  our  dis- 
tress, we  had  fresh  water  in  abundance  ; this 
was  a considerable  relief  to  us,  especially  as 
our  spare  diet  was  mostly  salt  fish,  without 
bread.  We  drank  plentifully,  and  were  not 
afraid  of  wanting  water ; yet  our  stock  of 
this  likewise  was  much  nearer  to  an  end 
than  we  expected ; we  supposed  that  we  had 
six  large  butts  of  water  on  board,  and  it  was 
well  that  we  were  safe  arrived  in  Ireland, 
before  we  discovered  that  five  of  them  were 
empty,  having  been  removed  out  of  their 
places  and  stove  by  the  violent  agitation,  when 
the  ship  was  full  of  water.  If  we  had  found 
this  out  while  we  were  at  sea,  it  would  have 
greatly  heightened  our  distress,  as  we  must 
have  drank  more  sparingly. 

While  the  ship  was  refitting  at  Lough 
Swiliy,  I repaired  to  Londonderry.  I lodged 
at  an  exceeding  good  house,  where  I was 
treated  with  much  kindness,  and  soon  re- 
cruited my  health  and  strength.  I was  now 
a serious  professor,  went  twice  a day  to  the 
prayers  at  church,  and  determined  to  receive 
the  sacrament  the  next  opportunity.  A few 
days  before,  I signified  my  intention  to  the 
minister,  as  the  rubric  directs ; but  I found 
this  practice  was  grown  obsolete.  At  length 
the  day  came ; I arose  very  early,  was  very 
particular  and  earnest  in  my  private  devotion ; 
and,  with  the  greatest  solemnity,  engaged 
myself  to  be  the  Lord’s  for  ever,  and  only  his. 
This  was  not  a formal,  but  a sincere  sur- 
render, under  a warm  sense  of  mercies  re- 
cently received ; and  yet,  for  want  of  a better 


100 


ARRIVAL  IN  ENGLAND. 


knowledge  of  myself  and  the  subtilty  of 
Satan’s  temptations,  I was  seduced  to  forget 
the  vows  of  God  that  were  upon  me.  Upon 
the  whole,  though  my  views  of  the  gospel 
salvation  were  very  indistinct,  I experienced 
a peace  and  satisfaction  in  the  ordinance  that 
day,  to  which  I had  been  hitherto  a perfect 
stranger. 

The  next  day  I was  abroad  with  the  mayor 
of  the  city  and  some  other  gentlemen  a-shoot- 
ing ; I climbed  up  a steep  bank,  and  pulling 
my  fowling-piece  after  me,  as  I held  it  in  a 
perpendicular  direction,  it  went  off  so  near 
my  face,  as  to  burn  away  the  corner  of  my 
liat.  Thus,  when  we  think  ourselves  in  the 
greatest  safety,  we  are  no  less  exposed  to 
danger  than  when  all  the  elements  seem  con- 
spiring to  destroy  us.  The  divine  providence, 
which  is  sufficient  to  deliver  us  in  our  utmost 
extremity,  is  equally  necessary  to  our  preser- 
vation in  the  most  peaceful  situation. 

During  our  stay  in  Ireland  I wrote  home. 
The  vessel  I was  in  had  not  been  heard  of 
for  eighteen  months,  and  was  given  up  for 
lost  long  before.  My  father  had  no  more 
expectation  of  hearing  that  I was  alive,  but 
he  received  my  letter  a few  days  before  he 
left  London.  He  was  just  going  out  governor 
of  York  Fort,  in  Hudson’s  bay,  from  whence 
he  never  returned.  He  sailed  before  I 
arrived  in  England,  or  he  had  purposed  to 
take  me  with  him ; but  God  designing  other- 
wise, one  hindrance  or  other  delayed  us  in 
Ireland  till  it  was  too  late.  I received  two 
or  three  affectionate  letters  from  him,  but  I 
never  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  him  more. 
I had  hopes,  that  in  three  years  more  I should 
have  had  an  opportunity  of  asking  his  for- 
giveness for  the  uneasiness  my  disobedience 
had  given  him ; but  the  ship  that  was  to  have 
brought  him  home,  came  without  him.  Ac- 
cording to  the  best  accounts  wrn  received,  he 
was  seized  with  the  cramp  when  bathing, 
and  drowned  a little  before  her  arrival  in  the 
bay. — Excuse  this  digression. 

My  father,  willing  to  contribute  all  in  his 
power  to  my  satisfaction,  paid  a visit  before 
his  departure  to  my  friends  in  Kent,  and  gave 
his  consent  to  the  union  which  had  been  so 
long  talked  of.  Thus,  when  I returned  to 

, I found  I had  only  the  consent  of 

one  person  to  obtain  : with  her  I as  yet  stood 
at  as  great  an  uncertainty  as  on  the  first  day 
I saw  her. 

I arrived  at in  the  latter  end  of  May, 

1748,  about  the  same  day  that  my  father  sail- 
ed from  the  Nore,  but  found  the  Lord  had 
provided  me  another  father,  in  the  gentle- 
man whose  ship  had  brought  me  home.  He 
received  me  with  great  tenderness,  and  the 
strongest  expressions  of  friendship  and  assist- 
ance : yet  not  more  than  he  has  since  made 
good  ; for  to  him,  as  the  instrument  of  God’s 
goodness,  I owe  my  all.  Yet  it  would  not 
have  been  in  the  po  ver,  even  of  this  friend,  to 


[let.  x. 

have  served  me  effectually,  if  the  Lord  had 
not  met  with  me  on  my  way  home,  as  I have 
related.  Till  then  I was  like  the  man  possess- 
ed with  the  legion.  No  arguments,  no  per 
suasion,  no  views  of  interest,  no  remem 
brance  of  the  past,  or  regard  to  the  future, 
could  have  constrained  me  within  the  bounds 
of  common  prudence.  But  now  I wras  in 
some  measure  restored  to  my  senses.  My 
friend  immediately  offered  me  the  command 
of  a ship ; but,  upon  mature  consideration,  I 
declined  it  for  the  present.  I had  been  hith- 
erto always  unsettled  and  careless,  and  there- 
fore thought  I had  better  make  another  voyage 
first,  and  learn  to  obey,  and  acquire  a farther 
insight  and  experience  in  business,  before  I 
ventured  to  undertake  such  a charge.  The 
mate  of  the  vessel  I came  home  in,  was  pre- 
ferred to  the  command  of  a new  ship,  and  I 
engaged  to  go  in  the  station  of  mate  with 
him.  I made  a short  visit  to  London,  &c. 
which  did  not  fully  answer  my  views.  I had 
but  one  opportunity  of  seeing  Mrs.  N*****, 
of  which  I availed  myself  very  little,  for  I 
was  always  exceeding  awkward  in  pleading 
my  own  cause,  viva  voce.  But  after  my  re- 
turn to  L , I put  the  question  in  such 

a manner,  by  letter,  that  she  could  not  avoid 
(unless  I had  greatly  mistaken  her)  coming 
to  some  sort  of  an  explanation.  Her  answer, 
though  penned  with  abundance  of  caution, 
satisfied  me ; as  I collected  from  it,  that  she 
was  free  from  any  other  engagement,  and 
not  un  willing  to  wait  the  event  of  the  voyage 
I had  undertaken.  I should  be  ashamed  to 
trouble  you  with  these  little  details,  if  you  had 
not  yourself  desired  me. — I am,  your’s,  &c. 
January  20,  1763. 


LETTER  X. 

dear  sir, — My  connexions  with  sea  affairs 
have  often  led  me  to  think,  that  the  varieties 
observable  in  Christian  experience  may  be 
properly  illustrated  from  the  circumstances 
of  a voyage.  Imagine  to  yourself  a number 
of  vessels,  at  different  times,  and  from  dif- 
ferent places,  bound  to  the  same  port ; there 
are  some  things  in  which  all  these  would 
agree, — the  compass  steered  by,  the  port  in 
view,  the  general  rules  of  navigation,  both 
as  to  the  management  of  the  vessel  and  de- 
termining their  astronomical  observations, 
would  be  the  same  in  all.  In  other  respects 
they  would  differ ; perhaps  no  two  of  them 
would  meet  with  the  same  distribution  of 
winds  and  weather.  Some  we  see  set  out 
with  a prosperous  gale ; and,  when  they  al- 
most think  their  passage  secured,  they  are 
checked  by  adverse  blasts ; and  after  endur- 
ing much  hardship  and  danger,  and  frequent 
expectations  of  shipwreck,  they  just  escape 
and  reach  the  desired  haven.  Others  meet 


VOYAGE  TO  AFRICA. 


101 


LET.  X.] 

the  greatest  difficulties  at  first;  they  put 
forth  in  a storm,  and  are  often  beaten  back ; 
at  length  their  voyage  proves  favourable, 
and  they  enter  the  port  with  a a 

rich  and  abundant  entrance.  Some  are  hard 
beset  with  cruisers  and  enemies,  and  obliged 
to  fight  their  way  through ; others  meet  with 
iittle  remarkable  in  their  passage.  Is  it  not 
thus  in  the  spiritual  life  1 All  true  believers 
walk  by  the  same  rule,  and  mind  the  same 
things.  The  word  of  God  is  their  compass  ; 
Jesus  is  both  their  polar  star  and  their  sun 
of  righteousness ; their  hearts  and  faces  are 
all  set  Sion-ward.  Thus  far  they  are  as  one 
body,  animated  by  one  spirit ; yet  their  ex- 
perience, formed  upon  these  common  princi- 
ples, is  far  from  being  uniform.  The  Lord,  in 
his  first  call,  and  his  following  dispensations, 
has  a regard  to  the  situation,  temper,  and 
talents  of  each,  and  to  the  particular  services 
or  trials  he  has  appointed  them  for.  Though 
all  are  exercised  at  times,  yet  some  pass 
through  the  voyage  of  life  much  more 
smoothly  than  others.  But  he  “ who  walk- 
eth  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind,  and  mea- 
sures the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,” 
will  not  suffer  any  of  whom  he  has  taken 
charge,  to  perish  in  the  storms,  though,  for 
a season,  perhaps,  many  of  them  are  ready 
to  give  up  all  hopes. 

We  must  not,  therefore,  make  the  experi- 
ence of  others,  in  all  respects,  a rule  to  our- 
selves, nor  our  own,  a rule  to  others;  yet, 
these  are  common  mistakes,  and  productive 
of  many  more.  As  to  myself,  every  part  of 
my  case  has  been  extraordinary.  I have 
hardly  met  a single  instance  resembling  it. 
Few,  very  few,  have  been  recovered  from 
such  a dreadful  state  ; and  the  few  that  have 
bean  thus  favoured,  have  generally  passed 
through  the  most  severe  convictions;  and 
after  the  Lord  has  given  them  peace,  their 
future  lives  have  been  usually  more  zealous, 
bright,  and  exemplary,  than  common.  Now, 
as  on  the  one  hand,  my  convictions  were 
very  moderate,  and  far  below  what  might 
have  been  expected  from  the  dreadful  review 
I had  to  make ; so,  on  the  other,  my  first  be- 
ginnings in  a religious  course  were  as  faint 
as  can  be  well  imagined.  I never  knew 
that  season  alluded  to,  Jer.  ii.  2.  Rev.  ii.  4. 
usually  called  the  time  of  the  first  love. 
Who  would  not  expect  to  hear,  that,  after 
such  a wonderful  unhoped-for  deliverance, 
as  I had  received,  and,  after  my  eyes  were 
in  some  measure  enlightened  to  see  things 
aright,  I should  immediately  cleave  to  the 
Lord  and  his  ways,  with  full  purpose  of  heart, 
and  consult  no  more  with  flesh  and  blood  1 
But,  alas  ! it  was  far  otherwise  with  me : I 
had  learned  to  pray  ; I set  some  value  upon 
the  word  of  God,  and  was  no  longer  a liber- 
tine ; but  my  soul  still  cleaved  to  the  dust. 

Soon  after  my  departure  from  L , I 

began  to  intermit,  and  grow  slack  in  waiting 


upon  the  Lord ; I grew  vain  and  trifling  in 
my  conversation ; and  though  my  heart 
smote  me  often,  yet  my  armour  was  gone, 
and  I declined  fast;  and  by  the  time  I 
arrived  at  Guinea,  I seemed  to  have  for- 
gotten all  the  Lord’s  mercies,  and  my  own 
engagements,  and  was  (profaneness  except- 
ed) almost  as  bad  as  before.  The  enemy 
prepared  a train  of  temptations,  and  I be- 
came his  easy  prey  ; and,  for  about  a month, 
he  lulled  me  asleep  in  a course  of  evil,  of 
which,  a few  months  before,  I could  not  have 
supposed  myself  any  longer  capable.  How 
much  propriety  is  there  in  the  apostle’s  ad- 
vice, “ Take  heed  lest  any  of  you  be  harden- 
ed through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.”  O, 
who  can  be  sufficiently  upon  their  guard! 
Sin  first  deceives,  and  then  it  hardens.  I 
was  now  fast  bound  in  chains ; I had  little 
desire,  and  no  power  at  all  to  recover  myself 
I could  not  but  at  times  reflect  how  it  was 
with  me:  but,  if  I attempted  to  struggle 
with  it,  it  was  in  vain.  I was  just  like  Sam- 
son, when  he  said,  “ I will  go  forth  and  shake 
myself  as  at  other  times ;”  but  the  Lord  was 
departed,  and  he  found  himself  helpless  in 
the  hands  of  his  enemies.  By  the  remem- 
brance of  this  interval,  the  Lord  has  often 
instructed  me  since,  what  a poor  creature  I 
am  in  myself,  incapable  of  standing  a single 
hour  without  continual  fresh  supplies  of 
strength  and  grace  from  the  fountain  head. 

At  length  the  Lord,  whose  mercies  are  in- 
finite, interposed  in  my  behalf.  My  business 
in  this  voyage,  while  upon  the  coast,  was  to 
sail  from  place  to  place  in  the  long-boat  to 
purchase  slaves.  The  ship  was  at  Sierra 
Leone,  and  I then  at  the  Plantanes,  the  scene 
of  my  former  captivity,  where  every  thing  I 
saw  might  seem  to  remind  me  of  my  ingrati- 
tude. I was  in  easy  circumstances,  courted 
by  those  who  formerly  despised  me.  The 
lime  trees  I had  planted  were  grown  tall,  and 
promised  fruit  the  following  year;  against 
which  time  I had  expectations  of  returning 
with  a ship  of  my  own.  But  none  of  these 
things  affected  me,  till,  as  I have  said,  the 
Lord  again  interposed  to  save  me.  He 
visited  me  with  a violent  fever,  which  broke 
the  fatal  chain,  and  once  more  brought  me 
to  myself.  But,  O what  a prospect ! I thought 
myself  now  summoned  away.  My  past  dan- 
gers and  deliverances,  my  earnest  prayers 
in  the  time  of  trouble,  my  solemn  vows  be- 
fore the  Lord  at  his  table,  and  my  ungrateful 
returns  for  all  his  goodness  were  all  present 
to  my  mind  at  once.  Then  I began  to  wish 
that  the  Lord  had  suffered  me  to  sink  into 
the  ocean,  when  I first  besought  his  mercy. 
For  a little  while  I concluded  the  door  of 
hope  to  be  quite  shut ; but  this  continued  not 
long.  Weak,  and  almost  delirious,  I arose 
from  my  bed,  and  crept  to  a retired  part 
of  the  island ; and  here  I found  a renewed 
liberty  to  pray.  I durst  make  no  more 


102 


VOYAGE  TO  AFRICA. 


resolves,  but  cast  myself  before  the  Lord,  to  do  1 
with  me  as  he  should  please.  I do  not  re- 1 
member  that  any  particular  text,  or  remark-  j 
able  discovery,  was  presented  to  my  mind ; | 
but  in  general  I was  enabled  to  hope  and 
believe  in  a crucified  Saviour.  The  burden 
was  removed  from  my  conscience,  and  not 
only  my  peace,  but  my  health  was  restored ; 

I cannot  say  instantaneously,  but  I recovered 
from  that  hour ; and  so  fast,  that  when  I re- 
turned to  the  ship,  two  days  afterwards,  I 
was  perfectly  well  before  I got  on  board. 
And  irom  that  time,  I trust,  I have  been  de- 
livered from  the  power  and  dominion  of  sin ; 
though,  as  to  the  effects  and  conflicts  of  sin 
dwelling  in  me,  I still  “ groan,  being  burden- 
ed.” I now  began  again  to  wait  upon  the 
Lord ; and  though  I have  often  grieved  his 
Spirit,  and  foolishly  wandered  from  him 
since,  (when,  alas ! shall  I be  more  wise  1) 
yet  his  powerful  grace  has  hitherto  preserv- 
ed me  from  such  black  declensions  as  this  I 
nave  last  recorded ; and  I humbly  trust  in 
his  mercy  and  promises,  that  he  will  be  my 
guide  and  guard  to  the  end. 

My  leisure  hours  in  this  voyage  were 
chiefly  employed  in  learning  the  Latin  lan- 
guage, which  I had  now  entirely  forgot.  This 
desire  took  place  from  an  imitation  I had 
seen  of  one  of  Horace’s  odes  in  a magazine. 

I began  the  attempt  under  the  greatest  dis- 
advantages possible;  for  I pitched  upon  a 
poet,  perhaps  the  most  difficult  of  the  poets, 
even  Horace  himself,  for  my  first  book.  I 
had  picked  up  an  old  English  translation  of 
him,  which,  with  Castalio’s  Latin  Bible,  were 
all  my  helps.  I forgot  a Dictionary ; but  I 
would  not  therefore  give  up  my  purpose.  I 
had  the  edition  in  usum  Delphini,  and  by 
comparing  the  Odes  with  the  interpretation, 
and  tracing  the  words,  I could  understand 
from  one  place  to  another,  by  the  index,  with 
the  assistance  I could  get  from  the  Latin 
Bible ; in  this  way,  by  dint  of  hard  industry, 
often  waking  when  I might  have  slept,  I 
made  some  progress  before  I returned,  and 
not  only  understood  the  sense  and  meaning 
of  many  Odes,  and  some  of  the  Epistles, 
but  began  to  relish  the  beauties  of  the  com- 
position, and  acquire  a spice  of  what  Mr. 
Law  calls  classical  enthusiasm.  And,  indeed, 
by  this  means,  I had  Horace  more  ad  un- 
guent than  some  who  arc  masters  of  the  Latin 
tongue ; for  my  helps  were  so  few,  that  I ge- 
nerally had  the  passage  fixed  in  my  memory, 
before  I could  fully  understand  its  meaning. 

My  business  in  the  long-boat,  during  the 
eight  months  we  were  upon  the  coast,  ex- 
posed me  to  innumerable  dangers  and  perils, 
from  burning  suns,  and  chilling  dews,  winds, 
rains,  and  thunder-storms,  in  the  open  boat ; 
and  on  shore,  from  long  journeys  through  the 
woods,  and  the  temper  of  the  natives,  who 
are,  in  many  places,  cruel,  treacherous,  and 
vatching  opportunities  for  mischief.  Several 


[let.  XI. 

j boats  in  the  same  time  were  cut  off;  severa. 
white  men  poisoned,  and,  in  my  own  boat 

j I buried  six  or  seven  people  with  fevers. 

I When  going  on  shore,  or  returning  from  it, 
in  their  little  canoes,  I have  been  more  than 
once  or  twice  overset  by  the  violence  of  the 
surf,  or  break  of  the  sea,  and  brought  to  land 
half  dead  (for  I could  not  swim.)  An  account 
of  such  escapes  as  I still  remembt  r,  would 
swell  to  several  sheets,  and  many  more  I have 
perhaps  forgot;  I shall  only  select  one  instance, 
as  a specimen  of  that  wonderful  providence 
which  watched  over  me  for  good,  and  which, 
I doubt  not,  you  will  think  worthy  of  notice. 

When  our  trade  was  finished,  and  we  were 
near  sailing  to  the  West  Indies,  the  only  re- 
maining service  I had  to  perform  in  the  boat, 
was  to  assist  in  bringing  the  wood  and  water 
from  the  shore.  We  were  then  at  Rio  Ces- 
tors.  I used  to  go  into  the  river  in  the  after- 
noon, with  the  sea  breeze,  procure  my  load 
ing  in  the  evening,  and  return  on  board  in 
the  morning,  with  the  land  wind.  Several 
of  these  little  voyages  I had  made ; but  the 
boat  was  grown  old,  and  almost  unfit  for  use. 
This  service  likewise  was  almost  completed. 
One  day  having  dined  on  board,  I was  pre 
paring  to  return  to  the  river,  as  formerly;  * 
had  taken  leave  of  the  captain,  received  hifl 
orders,  was  ready  in  the  boat,  and  just  go 
ing  to  put  off,  as  we  term  it ; that  is,  to  lei 
go  our  ropes  and  sail  from  the  ship.  In  thal 
instant,  the  captain  came  up  from  the  cabin, 
and  called  me  on  board  again.  I went,  ex 
pecting  further  orders ; but  he  said  he  hai 
“taken  it  in  his  head”  (as  he  phrased  it,) 
that  I should  remain  that*  day  in  the  ship, 
and  accordingly  ordered  another  man  to  go 
in  my  room.  I was  surprised  at  this,  as  the 
boat  had  never  been  sent  awTay  without  me 
before ; and  asked  him  the  reason.  He  could 
give  me  no  reason,  but  as  above,  that  so  he 
would  have  it.  Accordingly,  the  boat  went 
without  me,  but  returned  no  more.  She  sunk 
that  night  in  the  river,  and  the  person  who 
had  supplied  my  place  was  drowned.  I wTas 
much  struck  when  we  received  news  of 
the  event  the  next  morning.  The  captain 
himself,  though  quite  a stranger  to  religion, 
so  far  as  to  deny  a particular  providence, 
could  not  help  being  affected;  but  he  de- 
clared, that  he  had  no  other  reason  for  coun- 
termanding me  at  that  time,  but  that  it 
came  suddenly  into  his  mind  to  detain  me. 
I wonder  I omitted  it  in  my  eight  letters,  as 
I have  always  thought  it  one  of  the  most  ex- 
traordinary circumstances  of  my  life.  I am, 
dear  sir,  your  humble  servant. 

January  21,  1763. 


LETTER  XI. 

de\r  sir, — A few  days  after  I was  thus 
wonderfully  saved  from  an  unforeseen  danger, 


103 


RETURN  TO  ENGLAND,  &c. 


LET.  XI.] 

we  sailed  for  Antigua,  and  from  thence  pro- 
ceeded to  Charleston,  in  South  Carolina.  In 
this  place  there  are  many  serious  people ; 
but  I knew  not  how  to  find  them  out.  In- 
deed, I was  not  aware  of  a difference ; but 
supposed  that  all  who  attended  public  wor- 
ship were  good  Christians.  I was  as  much 
in  the  dark  about  preaching,  not  doubting  but 
whatever  came  from  the  pulpit  must  be  very 
good.  I had  two  or  three  opportunities  of 
hearing  a dissenting  minister,  named  Smith, 
who,  by  what  I have  known  since,  I believe 
to  have  been  an  excellent  and  powerful 
preacher  of  the  gospel ; and  there  was  some- 
thing in  his  manner  that  struck  me ; but  I 
did  not  rightly  understand  him.  The  best 
words  that  men  can  speak  are  ineffectual, 
till  explained  and  applied  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  who  alone  can  open  the  heart.  It 
pleased  the  Lord  for  some  time,  that  I should 
learn  no  more  than  what  he  enabled  me  to 
collect  from  my  own  experience  and  reflec- 
tion. My  conduct  was  now  very  inconsist- 
ent. Almost  every  day,  when  business  would 
permit,  I used  to  retire  into  the  woods  and 
fields  (for  these,  when  at  hand,  have  always 
been  my  favourite  oratories ;)  and  I trust  I 
began  to  taste  the  sweets  of  communion  with 
God,  in  the  exercises  of  prayer  and  praise, 
and  yet  I frequently  spent  the  evening  in 
vain  and  worthless  company.  Indeed,  my 
relish  for  worldly  diversions  was  much 
weakened,  and  I was  rather  a spectator  than 
a sharer  in  their  pleasures ; but  I did  not  as 
yet  see  the  necessity  of  an  absolute  forbear- 
ance. Yet,  as  my  compliance  with  custom 
and  company  was  chiefly  owing  to  want  of 
light,  rather  than  to  an  obstinate  attachment, 
and  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  preserve  me 
from  what  I knew  was  sinful,  I had,  for  the 
most  part,  peace  of  conscience,  and  my 
strongest  desires  were  towards  the  things  of 
God.  As  yet  I knew  not  the  force  of  that 
precept,  “Abstain  from  all  appearance  of 
evil,”  but  very  often  ventured  upon  the  brink 
of  temptation ; but  the  Lord  was  gracious  to 
my  weakness,  and  would  not  suffer  the  ene- 
my to  prevail  against  me.  I did  not  break 
with  the  world  at  once  (as  might,  in  my 
case,  have  been  expected,)  but  I was  gradu- 
ally led  to  see  the  inconvenience  and  folly 
of  one  thing  after  another,  and,  when  I saw 
it,  the  Lord  strengthened  me  to  give  it  up. 
But  it  was  some  years  before  I was  set  quite 
at  liberty  from  occasional  compliance  in 
many  things  in  which,  at  this  time,  I dare  by 
no  means  allow  myself. 

We  finished  our  voyage,  and  arrived  in 
L . When  the  ship’s  affairs  were  set- 

tled, I went  to  London,  and  from  thence  (as 
you  may  suppose)  I soon  repaired  to  Kent. 
More  than  seven  years  were  now  elapsed 
since  my  first  visit.  No  views  of  the  kind 
could  seem  more  chimerical,  or  could  subsist 
under  great  discouragements,  than  mine  had  , 


done ; yet,  through  the  over-ruling  goodness 
of  God,  while  I seemed  abandoned  to  myself, 
and  blindly  following  my  own  passions,  I 
was  guided,  by  a hand  that  I knew  not,  to 
the  accomplishment  of  my  wishes.  Every 
obstacle  was  now  removed.  I had  renounced 
my  former  follies,  my  interest  was  establish- 
ed, and  friends  on  all  sides  consenting,  the 
point  was  now  entirely  between  ourselves, 
and  after  what  had  passed,  was  easily  con- 
cluded. Accordingly,  our  hands  were  joined 
on  the  first  of  February  1750. 

The  satisfaction  I have  found  in  this  union, 
you  will  suppose,  has  been  greatly  heighten- 
ed by  reflections  on  the  former  disagreeable 
contrasts  I had  passed  through,  and  the 
views  I have  had  of  the  singular  mercy  and 
providence  of  the  Lord  in  bringing  it  to  pass. 
If  you  please  to  look  back  to  the  beginning 
of  my  sixth  letter,  I doubt  not  but  you  will 
allow  that  few  persons  have  known  more, 
either  of  the  misery  or  happiness,  of  which 
human  life  (as  considered  in  itself)  is  capa- 
ble. How  easily,  at  a time  of  life  when  I 
was  so  little  capable  of  judging  (but  a few 
months  more  than  seventeen,)  might  my  af- 
fections have  been  fixed  where  they  could 
have  met  with  no  return,  or  where  success 
would  have  been  the  heaviest  disappointment. 
The  long  delay  I met  with  was  likewise  a 
mercy;  for,  had  I succeeded  a year  or  two 
sooner,  before  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  change 
my  heart,  we  must  have  been  mutually  un- 
happy, even  as  to  the  present  life.  Surely 
goodness  and  mercy  have  followed  me  all 
my  days. 

But  alas ! I soon  began  to  feel  that  my 
heart  was  still  hard  and  ungrateful  to  the 
God  of  my  life.  This  crowning  mercy, 
which  raised  me  to  all  I could  ask  or  wish 
in  a temporal  view,  and  which  ought  to  have 
been  an  animating  motive  to  obedience  and 
praise,  had  a contrary  effect.  I rested  in 
the  gift,  and  forgot  the  giver.  My  poor  nar- 
row heart  was  satisfied.  A cold  and  care- 
less frame,  as  to  spiritual  things,  took  place 
and  gained  ground  daily.  Happy  for  me, 
the  season  was  advancing,  and  in  June  I re- 
ceived orders  to  repair  to  L . This 

roused  me  from  my  dream.  I need  not  tell 
you,  that  I found  "the  pains  of  absence  and 
separation  fully  proportioned  to  my  preced- 
ing pleasure.  It  was  hard,  very  hard,  to  part, 
especially  as  conscience  interfered,  and  sug- 
gested to  me  how  little  I deserved  that  we 
should  be  spared  to  meet  again.  But  the  Lord 
supported  me.  I was  a poor  faint  idolatrous 
creature ; but  I had  now  some  acquaintance 
with  the  way  of  access  to  a throne  of  grace, 
by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  peace  was  soon 
restored  to  my  conscience.  Yet,  through  all 
the  following  voyage,  my  irregular  and  ex- 
cessive affections  were  as  thorns  in  my  eyes, 
and  often  made  my  other  blessings  tasteless 
and  insipid.  But  He,  who  doth  all  things 


104 


VOYAGE  TO  AFRICA. 


[LET.  XI. 


well,  over-ruled  this  likewise  for  good.  It 
became  an  occasion  of  quickening  me  in 
prayer,  both  for  her  and  myself ; it  increased 
my  indifference  for  company  and  amusement; 
it  habituated  me  to  a kind  of  voluntary  self- 
denial,  which  I was  afterwards  taught  to 
improve  to  a better  purpose. 

While  I remamed  in  England,  we  corres- 
ponded every  post;  and  all  the  while  I used 
the  sea  afterwards,  I constantly  kept  up  the 
practice  of  writing  two  or  three  times  a week 
(if  weather  and  business  permitted,)  though 
no  conveyance  homeward  offered  for  six  or 
eight  months  together.  My  packets  were 
usually  heavy;  and  as  not  one  of  them  at 
any  time  miscarried,  I have  to  the  amount 
of  nearly  two  hundred  sheets  of  paper  now 
lying  in  my  bureau  of  that  correspondence. 

I mention  this  little  relief  I had  contrived  to 
soften  the  intervals  of  absence,  because  it  i 
had  a good  effect  beyond  my  first  intention. 
It  habituated  me  to  think  and  write  upon  a 
great  variety  of  subjects;  and  I acquired,  in- 
sensibly, a greater  readiness  of  expressing 
myself,  than  I should  have  otherwise  attain- 
ed. As  I gained  more  ground  in  religious 
knowledge,  my  letters  became  more  serious, 
and,  at  times,  I still  find  an  advantage  in 
looking  them  over,  especially  as  they  remind 
me  of  many  providential  incidents,  and  the 
state  of  my  mind  at  different  periods  in  these 
voyages,  which  would  otherwise  have  esca- 
ped my  memory. 

I sailed  from  L in  August  1750, 

commander  of  a good  ship.  I have  no  very 
extraordinary  events  to  recount  from  this 
period,  and  shall  therefore,  contract  my  me- 
moirs, lest  I become  tedicus ; yet  I am  will- 
ing to  give  you  a brief  sketch  of  my  history 
down  to  1755,  the  year  of  my  settlement  in 
my  present  situation.  I had  now  the  com- 
mand and  care  of  thirty  persons ; I endea- 
voured to  treat  them  with  humanity,  and  to 
set  them  a good  example.  I likewise  es- 
tablished public  worship,  according  to  the 
liturgy,  twice  every  Lord's  day,  officiating 
myself.  Farther  than  this  I did  not  proceed, 
while  I continued  in  that  employment. 

Having  now  much  leisure,  I prosecuted 
the  study  of  the  Latin  with  good  success.  I 
remembered  a dictionary  this  voyage,  and 
procured  two  or  three  other  books ; but  still 
it  was  my  hap  to  choose  the  hardest.  I ad- 
ded Juvenal  to  Horace;  and,  for  prose  au- 
thors, I pitched  upon  Livy,  Caesar,  and  Sal- 
lust. You  will  easily  conceive,  Sir,  that  I 
had  hard  work  to  begin  (where  I should 
have  left  off)  with  Horace  and  Livy.  I was 
not  aware  of  the  difference  of  style ; I had 
heard  Livy  highly  commended,  and  was  re- 
solved to  understand  him.  I becran  with  the 
first,  page,  and  laid  down  a rule,  which  I 
seldom  departed  from,  not  to  proceed  to  a 
second  period  till  I understood  the  first,  and 
so  on.  I was  often  at  a stand,  but  seldom  dis- 


couraged ; here  and  there  I found  a few  lines 
quite  obstinate,  and  was  forced  to  break  in 
upon  my  rule,  and  gave  them  up,  especially 
as  my  edition  had  only  the  text,  without  any 
notes  to  assist  me.  But  there  were  not 
many  such ; for,  before  the  close  of  that  voy- 
age, I could  (with  a few  exceptions)  read 
Livy  from  end  to  end,  almost  as  readily  as 
an  English  author.  And  I found,  in  sur- 
mounting this  difficulty,  I had  surmounted 
all  in  one.  Other  prose  authors,  when  they 
came  in  my  way,  cost  me  little  trouble.  In 
short,  in  the  space  of  two  or  three  voyages, 
1 became  tolerably  acquainted  with  the  best 
classics  (I  put  all  I have  to  say  upon  this 
subject  together;)  I read  Terence,  Virgil, 
and  several  pieces  Of  Cicero,  and  the  modern 
classics,  Buchanan,  Erasmus,  and  Caeeunrr. 
At  length  I conceived  a design  of  becoming 
Ciceronian  myself,  and  thought  it  would  be 
a fine  thing  indeed  to  write  pure  and  elegant 
Iiatin.  I made  some  essays  towards  it,  but 
by  this  time,  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  draw 
me  nearer  to  himself,  and  to  give  me  a fuller 
view  of  the  “pearl  of  great  price,”  the 
inestimable  treasure  hid  in  the  field  of  the 
holy  scriptures ; and,  for  the  sake  of  this,  I 
was  made  willing  to  part  with  all  my  newly 
acquired  riches.  I began  to  think  that  life 
was  too  short  (especially  my  life)  to  admit 
of  leisure  for  such  elaborate  trifling.  Neither 
poet  nor  historian  could  tell  me  a word  of 
Jesus,  and  I therefore  applied  myself  to  those 
who  could.  The  classics  were  at  first  re- 
strained to  one  morning  in  the  week,  and  at 
length  quite  laid  aside.  I have  not  looked 
into  Livy  these  five  years,  and  I suppose 
I could  not  well  understand  him.  Some 
passages  in  Horace  and  Virgil  I still  admire, 
but  they  seldom  come  in  iny  way.  I prefer 
Buchanan’s  Psalms  to  a whole  shelf  of  Elze- 
virs. But  thus  much  I have  gained,  and 
more  than  this  I am  not  solicitous  about,  so 
much  of  the  Latin  as  enables  me  to  read  any 
useful  or  curious  book  that  is  published  in 
that  language.  About  the  same  time,  and 
for  the  same  reason  that  I quarrelled  with 
Livy,  I laid  aside  the  mathematics.  I found 
they  not  only  cost  me  much  time,  but  en- 
grossed my  thoughts  too  far : my  head  was 
literally  full  of  schemes.  I was  weary  of 
cold  contemplative  truths,  which  can  neither 
warm  nor  amend  the  heart,  but  rather  tend 
to  aggrandize  self.  I found  no  traces  of  this 
wisdom  in  the  life  of  Jesus,  or  the  writings 
of  Paul.  I do  not  regret  that  I have  had 
some  opportunities  of  knowing  the  first  prin- 
ciples of  these  things ; but  I see  much  cause 
to  praise  the  Lord,  that  he  inclined  me  to 
stop  in  time ; and  that  whilst  I was  “ spend- 
ing my  labour  for  that  which  is  not  bread,” 
he  was  pleased  to  set  before  me  “ wine  and 
milk,  without  money  and  without  price.” 

My  first  voyage  was  fourteen  months, 
through  various  scenes  of  danger  and  diffi 


LET.  XII.] 


ANOTHER  VOYAGE  TO  AFRICA. 


105 


cult}',  but  nothing1  very  remarkable  ; and  as 
I intend  to  be  more  particular  with  regard  to 
the  second,  I shall  only  say  that  I was  pre- 
served from  every  harm ; and  having  seen 
many  fall  on  my  right  hand  and  on  my  left, 
I was  brought  home  in  peace,  and  restored 
to  where  my  thoughts  had  been  often  direct- 
ed, November  2,  1751. — I am,  your’s,  &c. 

January  22,  1763. 


LETTER  XII. 

dear  sir, — I almost  wish  I could  recall 
my  last  sheet,  and  retract  my  promise.  I 
fear  I have  engaged  too  far,  and  shall  prove 
a mere  egotist.  What  have  I more  that  can 
deserve  your  notice!  However,  it  is  some 
satisfaction  that  I am  now  writing  to  yourself 
only ; and  I believe,  you  will  have  candour 
to  excuse,  what  nothing  but  a sense  of  your 
kindness  could  extort  from  me. 

Soon  after  the  period  where  my  last  closes, 
that  is,  in  the  interval  between  my  first  and 
second  voyage  after  my  marriage,  I began 
to  keep  a sort  of  diary,  a practice  which  I 
have  found  of  great  use.  I had,  in  this  in- 
terval, repeated  proofs  of  the  ingratitude  and 
evil  of  my  heart.  A life  of  ease,  in  the  midst 
of  my  friends,  and  a full  satisfaction  of  my 
wishes,  was  not  favourable  to  the  progress 
of  grace,  and  afforded  cause  of  daily  humilia- 
tion. Yet,  upon  the  whole,  I gained  ground. 
I became  acquainted  with  books,  which  gave 
me  a further  view  of  Christian  doctrine  and 
experience,  particularly  Scougal’s  Life  of 
God  in  the  Soul  of  Man,  Hervey’s  Medita- 
tions, and  the  Life  of  Colonel  Gardiner.  As 
to  preaching,  I heard  none  but  of  the  common 
sort,  and  had  hardly  an  idea  of  any  better ; nei- 
ther had  I the  advantage  of  Christian  acquaint- 
ance ; I was  likewise  greatly  hindered  by  a 
cowardly  reserved  spirit ; I was  afraid  of  being 
thought  precise ; and,  though  I could  not  live 
without  prayer,  I durst  not  propose  it,  even  to 
mv  wife,  till  she  herself  first  put  me  upon  it ; 
so  far  was  I from  those  expressions  of  zeal  and 
love, which  seemed  so  suitable  to  the  case  of 
one  who  has  had  much  forgiven.  In  a few 
months  the  returning  season  called  me  abroad 

again,  and  I sailed  from  L in  a new 

6hip,  July  1752. 

A sea-faring  life  is  necessarily  excluded 
from  the  benefit  of  public  ordinances  and 
Christian  communion;  but,  as  I have  ob- 
served, my  loss  upon  these  heads  was  at  this 
time  but  small.  In  other  respects,  I know 
not  any  calling  that  seems  more  favourable, 
or  affords  greater  advantages  to  an  awaken- 
ed mind,  for  promoting  the  life  of  God  in  the 
soul,  especially  to  a person  who  nas  the  com- 
mand of  a ship,  and  thereby  has  it  in  his 
power  to  restrain  gross  irregularities  in 
others,  and  to  dispose  of  his  own  time ; and 


still  more  so  in  African  voyages,  as  these 
ships  carry  a double  proportion  of  men  and  offi- 
cers to  most  others,  which  made  my  depart- 
ment very  easy  ; and,  excepting  the  hurry  of 
trade,  &c.  upon  the  coast,  which  is  rather 
occasional  than  constant,  afforded  me  abun- 
dance of  leisure.  To  be  at  sea  m these  cir- 
cumstances, withdrawn  out  of  the  reach  of 
innumerable  temptations,  with  opportunity 
and  a turn  of  mind  disposed  to  observe  the 
wonders  of  God  m the  great  deep,  with  the 
two  noblest  objects  of  sight,  the  expanded 
heavens,  and  the  expanded  ocean,  continual- 
ly in  view ; and  where  evident  interpositions 
of  Divine  Providence,  in  answer  to  prayer, 
occur  almost  every  day ; these  are  helps  to 
quicken  and  confirm  the  life  of  faith,  which, 
in  a good  measure,  supply  to  a religious  sailor 
the  want  of  those  advantages  which  can  be 
only  enjoyed  upon  the  shore.  And,  indeed, 
though  my  knowledge  of  spiritual  things  (as 
knowledge  is  usually  estimated)  was,  at  this 
time,  very  small,  yet  I sometimes  look  back 
with  regret  upon  those  scenes.  I never 
knew  sweeter  or  more  frequent  hours  of  di- 
vine communion  than  in  my  two  last  voyages 
to  Guinea,  when  I was  either  almost  seclud- 
ed from  society  on  ship-board,  or  when  on 
shore  among  the  natives.  I have  wandered 
through  the  woods,  reflecting  on  the  singular 
goodness  of  the  Lord  to  me,  in  a place  where, 
perhaps,  there  was  not  a person  who  knew 
him  for  some  thousand  miles  round  me. 
Many  a time,  upon  these  occasions,  I have 
restored  the  beautiful  lines  of  Propertius  to 
the  right  owner ; lines  full  of  blasphemy  and 
madness,  when  addressed  to  a creature,  but 
full  of  comfort  and  propriety  in  the  mouth 
of  a believer. 

Sic  ego  desertis  possim  bene  vivere  si/lvis 
Quo  nulla  humano  sit  via  trita  pede ; 

Tu  mild  curarum  requies,  in  node  velatra 
Lumen , el  in  solis  tu  mihi  turba  loeis. 

PARAPHRASED. 

In  desert  woods  with  thee,  my  God, 

Where  human  footsteps  never  trod, 

How  happy  could  I be  ! 

Thou  my  repose  from  care,  my  light 
Amidst  the  darkness  of  the  night, 

In  solitude  my  company. 

In  the  course  of  this  voyage,  I was  wonder- 
fully preserved  in  the  midst  of  many  obvious 
unforeseen  dangers.  At  one  time  there  was 
a conspiracy  amongst  my  own  people  to  turn 
pirates,  and  take  the  ship  from  me.  When 
the  plot  was  nearly  ripe,  and  they  only 
waited  a convenient  opportunity,  two  of  those 
concerned  in  it  were  taken  ill  one  day  ; one 
of  them  died,  and  he  was  the  only  person  I 
buried  while  on  board.  This  suspended  the 
affair,  and  opened  the  way  to  its  discovery, 
or  the  consequence  might  have  been  fatal. 
The  slaves  on  board  were  likewise  frequent- 
ly plotting  insurrections,  and  were  sometimes 


106 


ANOTHER  VOYAGE  TO  AFRICA. 


upon  the  very  brink  of  mischief;  but  it  was 
always  disclosed  in  due  time.  When  I have 
thought  myself  most  secure,  I have  been 
suddenly  alarmed  with  danger ; and  when  I 
have  almost  despaired  of  life,  as  sudden  a. 
deliverance  has  been  vouchsafed  me.  My 
stay  upon  the  coast  was  long,  and  the  trade 
very  precarious ; and,  in  the  pursuit  of  my 
business,  both  on  board  and  on  shore,  I was  in 
deaths  often.  Let  the  following  instance 
serve  as  a specimen. 

I was  at  a place  called  Mana,  near  Cape 
Mount,  where  I had  transacted  very  large 
concerns,  and  had,  at  the  time  I am  speak- 
ing of,  some  debts  and  accounts  to  settle, 
which  required  my  attendance  on  shore,  and 
I intended  to  go  the  next  morning.  When 
I arose,  I left  the  ship  according  to  my  pur- 
pose ; but  when  I came  near  the  shore,  the 
surf,  or  break  of  the  sea,  ran  so  high,  that  I 
was  almost  afraid  to  attempt  landing.  Indeed 
I had  often  ventured  at  a worse  time,  but  I 
felt  an  inward  hinderance  and  backwardness, 
which  I could  not  account  for : the  surf  fur- 
nished a pretext  for  indulging  it ; and  after 
waiting  and  hesitating  for  about  half  an  hour, 
I returned  to  the  ship,  without  doing  any 
business ; which  I think  I never  did  but  that 
morning,  in  all  the  time  I used  that  trade. 
But  I soon  perceived  the  reason  of  all  this.  It 
seems  the  day  before  I intended  to  lasfd,  a 
scandalous  and  groundless  charge  had  been 
laid  against  me  (by  whose  instigation  I could 
never  learn,)  which  greatly  threatened  my 
nonour  and  interest,  both  in  Africa  and  Eng- 
land, and  would  perhaps,  humanly  speaking, 
have  affected  my  life,  if  I had  landed  accord- 
ing to  my  intention.  I shall,  perhaps,  inclose 
a letter,  which  will  give  a full  account  of  this 
strange  adventure ; and  therefore  shall  say 
no  more  of  it  here,  any  further  than  to  tell 
you,  that  an  attempt  aimed  to  destroy  either 
my  life  or  my  character,  and  which  might 
very  probably,  in  its  consequences  have  ruin- 
ed my  voyage,  passed  off  without  the  least 
inconvenience.  The  person  most  concerned 
owed  me  about  a hundred  pounds,  which  he 
sent  me  in  a huff;  and  otherwise,  perhaps, 
would  not  have  paid  me  at  all.  I was  very 
uneasy  for  a few  hours,  but  was  soon  after- 
wards comforted.  I heard  no  more  of  my 
accusation  till  the  next  voyage,  and  then  it 
was  publicly  acknowledged  to  have  been  a 
malicious  calumny,  without  the  least  shadow 
of  a ground. 

Such  were  the  vicissitudes  and  difficulties 
through  which  the  Lord  preserved  me. 
Now  and  then  both  faith  and  patience  were 
sharply  exercised,  but  suitabl  strength  was 
given ; and  as  those  things  did  not  occur 
every  day,  the  study  of  the  Latin,  of  which  I 
gave  a general  account  in  m last,  was  re- 
newed, and  carried  on  from  time  to  time, 
when  business  would  permit.  I was  mostly 
very  regular  in  the  manageme  t of  my  time. 


[let.  XII. 

I allotted  about  eight  hours  for  sleep  and 
meals,  eight  hours  for  exercise  and  devotion, 
and  eight  hours  to  my  books ; and  thus,  by 
diversifying  my  engagements,  the  whole  day 
was  agreeably  filled  up,  and  I seldom  found 
a day  too  long,  or  an  hour  to  spare.  My 
studies  kept  me  employed,  and  so  far  it  was 
well ; otherwise  they  were  hardly  worth  the 
time  they  cost,  as  they  led  me  to  an  admira- 
tion of  false  models  and  false  maxims;  an 
almost  unavoidable  consequence,  I suppose, 
of  an  admiration  of  classic  authors.  Abating 
what  I have  attained  of  the  language,  I think 
I might  have  read  Cassandra  or  Cleopatra 
to  as  good  purpose  as  I read  Livy,  whom  I 
now  account  an  equal  romancer,  though  in 
a different  way. 

From  the  coast,  I went  to  St.  Christopher’s ; 
and  here  my  idolatrous  heart  was  its  own  pun- 
ishment. The  letters  I expected  from  Mrs 
N*****  were,  by  mistake,  forwarded  to  An- 
tigua, which  had  been  at  first  proposed  as  oui 
port.  As  I was  certain  of  her  punctuality 
in  writing,  if  alive,  I concluded,  by  not  hear- 
ing from  her,  that  she  was  surely  dead. 
This  fear  affected  me  more  and  more  ; I lost 
my  appetite  and  rest ; I felt  an  incessant  pain 
in  my  stomach,  and  in  about  three  weeks  time 
I was  near  sinking  under  the  weight  of  an 
imaginary  stroke.  I felt  some  severe  symp- 
toms of  that  mixture  of  pride  and  madness, 
which  is  commonly  called  a broken  heart; 
and,  indeed,  I wonder  that  this  case  is  not 
more  common  than  it  appears  to  be.  How 
often  do  the  potsherds  of  the  earth  presume 
to  contend  with  their  maker!  and  what  a 
wonder  of  mercy  is  it,  that  they  are  not  all 
broken  ! However,  my  complaint  was  not  all 
grief ; conscience  had  a share.  I thought  my 
unfaithfulness  to  God  had  deprived  me  of 
her,  especially  my  backwardness  in  speaking 
of  spiritual  things,  which  I could  hardly  at- 
tempt even  to  her.  It  was  this  thought,  that 
I had  lost  invaluable,  irrecoverable  opportu- 
nities, which  both  duty  and  affection  should 
have  engaged  me  to  improve,  that  chiefly 
stung  me ; and  I thought  I could  have  given 
the  world  to  know  that  she  was  living,  that 
I might  at  least  discharge  my  engagements  by 
waiting,  though  I were  never  to  see  her  again. 
This  was  a sharp  lesson,  but  I hope  it  did 
me  good ; and  when  I had  thus  suffered  some 
weeks,  I thought  of  sending  a small  vessel 
to  Antigua.  I did  so,  and  she  brought  me 
several  packets,  which  restored  my  health 
and  peace,  and  gave  me  a strong  contrast  of 
the  Lord’s  goodness  to  me,  and  my  unbelief 
and  ingratitude  towards  him. 

In  August,  1753,  I returned  to  L . 

My  stay  was  very  short  at  home  that  voyage, 
only  six  weeks ; in  that  space  nothing  very 
remarkable  occurred ; I shall  therefore  begin 
my  next  with  an  account  of  my  third  and 
last  voyage.  And  thus  I give  both  you  and 
myself  hopes  of  a speedy  period  to  these 


LAST  VOYAGE  TO  AFRICA. 


107 


LET.  XIII.  J 

memoirs,  which  begin  to  be  tedious  and 
minute,  even  to  myself ; only  I am  animated 
by  the  thought  that  I write  at  your  request, 
and  have  therefore  an  opportunity  of  show- 
ing myself,  your  obliged  servant. 

January  31,  1763. 


LETTER  XIII. 

dear  sir, — My  third  voyage  was  shorter 
and  less  perplexed  than  either  of  the  former. 
Before  I sailed,  I met  with  a young  man,  who 
had  formerly  been  a midshipman  and  my  in- 
timate companion,  on  board  the  Harwich. 
He  was,  at  the  time  I first  knew  him,  a so- 
ber youth,  but  I found  too  much  success 
in  my  unhappy  attempts  to  infect  him  with 

libertine  principles.  When  we  met  at  L , 

our  acquaintance  renewed  upon  the  ground 
of  our  former  intimacy.  He  had  good  sense, 
and  had  read  many  books.  Our  conversation 
frequently  turned  upon  religion,  and  I was 
desirous  to  repair  the  mischief  I had  done  him. 
I gave  him  a plain  account  of  the  manner  and 
reason  of  my  change,  and  used  every  argu- 
ment to  persuade  him  to  relinquish  his  infi- 
del schemes ; and  when  I sometimes  pressed 
him  so  close  that  he  had  no  other  reply  to 
make,  he  would  remind  me  that  I was  the 
very  first  person  who  had  given  him  an  idea 
of  his  liberty.  This  occasioned  me  many 
mournful  reflections.  He  was  then  going 
master  to  Guinea  himself,  but  before  his  ship 
was  ready,  his  merchant  became  a bankrupt, 
which  disconcerted  his  voyage.  As  he  had 
no  further  expectations  for  that  year,  I offer- 
ed to  take  him  with  me  as  a companion,  that 
he  might  gain  a knowledge  of  the  coast ; and 
the  gentleman  who  employed  me  promised  to 
provide  for  him  upon  his  return.  My  view 
in  this  was  not  so  much  to  serve  him  in  his 
business,  as  to  have  opportunity  of  debating 
the  point  with  him  at  leisure ; and  I hoped, 
in  the  course  of  my  voyage,  my  arguments, 
example,  and  prayers,  might  have  some  good 
effect  on  him.  My  intention  in  this  step 
was  better  than  my  judgment,  and  I had  fre- 
quent reason  to  repent  it.  He  was  exceed- 
ingly  profane,  and  grew  worse  and  worse : I 
saw  in  him  a most  lively  picture  of  what  I 
had  once  been,  but  it  was  very  inconvenient 
to  have  it  always  before  my  eyes.  Besides, 
he  was  not  only  deaf  to  my  remonstrances 
himself,  but  laboured  all  that  he  could  to 
counteract  my  influence  upon  others.  His 
spirit  and  passions  were  likewise  exceeding 
high,  so  that  it  required  all  my  prudence  and 
authority  to  hold  him  in  any  degree  of  re- 
straint. He  was  as  a sharp  thorn  in  my  side 
for  some  time ; but  at  length  I had  an  oppor- 
tunity upon  the  coast  of  buying  a small  vessel 
which  I supplied  with  a cargo  from  my  own, 
and  gave  him  the  command,  and  sent  him 


away  to  trade  on  the  ship’s  account.  When 
we  parted,  I repeated  and  enforced  my  best 
advice.  I believe  his  friendship  and  regard 
were  as  great  as  could  be  expected,  where 
principles  were  so  diametrically  opposite. 
He  seemed  greatly  affected  when  I left 
him,  but  my  words  had  no  weight  with  him. 
When  he  found  himself  at  liberty  from  un- 
der my  eye,  he  gave  a hasty  loose  to  every 
appetite ; and  his  violent  irregularities,  joined 
to  the  heat  of  the  climate,  soon  threw  him 
into  a malignant  fever,  which  carried  him 
off’  in  a few  days.  He  died  convinced,  but 
not  changed.  The  account  I had  from  those 
who  were  with  him  was  dreadful ; hig  rage 
and  despair  struck  them  all  with  horror,  and 
he  pronounced  his  own  fatal  doom  before  he 
expired,  without  any  appearance  that  he 
either  hoped  or  asked  lor  mercy.  I thought 
this  awful  contrast  might  not  be  improper  to 
give  you,  as  a stronger  view  of  the  distin- 
guishing goodness  of  God  to  me  the  chief  of 
sinners. 

I left  the  coast  in  about  four  months,  and 
sailed  for  St.  Christopher’s.  Hitherto  I had 
enjoyed  a perfect  state  of  health,  equally  in 
every  climate,  for  several  years;  but,  upon 
this  passage,  I was  visited  with  a fever, 
which  gave  me  a very  near  prospect  of  eter- 
nity. I have  obtained  liberty  to  enclose  you 
three  or  four  letters,  which  will  more  clearly 
illustrate  the  state  and  measure  of  my  expe- 
rience, at  different  times,  than  any  thing  I 
can  say  at  present.  One  of  them  you  will 
find  was  written  at  this  period,  when  I could 
hardly  hold  a pen,  and  had  some  reason  to 
believe  I should  write  no  more.  I had  not 
that  tr\neo$ot>ix,*  which  is  so  desirable  at  a 
time  when  flesh  and  heart  fail ; but  my 
hopes  were  greater  than  my  fears,  and  I felt 
a silent  composure  of  spirit,  which  enabled 
me  to  wait  the  event  without  much  anxiety. 
My  trust,  though  weak  in  degree,  was  alone 
fixed  upon  the  blood  and  righteousness  of 
Jesus ; and  those  words,  “he  is  able  to  save 
to  the  uttermost,”  gave  me  great  relief.  I 
was  for  a while  troubled  with  a very  singular 
thought.  Whether  it  was  a temptation,  or 
that  the  fever  disordered  my  faculties,  I can- 
not say,  but  I seemed  not  so  much  afraid  of 
wrath  and  punishment,  as  of  being  lost  and 
overlooked  amidst  the  myriads  that  are  con- 
tinually entering  the  unseen  world.  What 
is  my  soul,  thought  I,  among  such  an  innu- 
merable multitude  of  beings  1 And  this 
troubled  me  greatly.  Perhaps  the  Lord  will 
take  no  notice  of  me.  I was  perplexed  thus 
for  some  time,  but  at  last  a text  of  scripture, 
very  apposite  to  the  case,  occurred  to  my 
mind,  and  put  an  end  to  the  doubt ; “ The 
Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  his.”  In  about 
ten  days,  beyond  the  hopes  of  those  about 
me,  I began  to  amend,  and  by  the  time  of 


* Full  assurance. 


103 


LAST  VOYAGE 

our  arrival  in  the  West  Indies,  I was  per- 
fectly recovered. — I hope  this  visitation  was 
made  useful  to  me. 

Thus  far,  that  is,  for  about  the  space  of  six 
years,  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  lead  me  in  a 
secret  way.  I had  learned  something  of  the 
evil  of  my  heart ; I had  read  the  Bible  over 
and  over,  with  several  good  books,  and  had  a 
general  view  of  gospel  truths.  But  my  con- 
ceptions were,  in  many  respects,  confused ; 
not  having,  in  all  this  time,  met  with  one 
acquaintance  who  could  assist  my  inquiries. 
But  upon  my  arrival  at  St.  Christopher’s,  this 
voyage,  I found  a captain  of  a ship  from  Lon- 
don, .whose  conversation  was  greatly  helpful 
to  me.  He  was,  and  is  a member  of  Mr. 

B r’s  church,  a man  of  experience  in  the 

things  of  God,  and  of  a lively,  communicative 
turn.  We  discovered  each  other  by  some 
casual  expressions  in  mixed  company,  and 
soon  became  (so  far  as  business  would  per- 
mit) inseparable.  For  near  a month,  we 
spent  every  evening  together,  on  board  each 
other's  ship  alternately,  and  often  prolonged 
our  visits  till  towards  day-break.  I was  all 
ears;  and  what  was  better,  he  not  only  inform- 
ed my  understanding,  but  his  discourse  in- 
flamed my  heart.  He  encouraged  me  to  open 
my  mouth  in  social  prayer ; he  taught  me  the 
advantage  of  Christian  converse ; he  put  me 
upon  an  attempt  to  make  my  profession  more 
public,  and  to  venture  to  speak  for  God. 
From  him,  or  rather  from  the  Lord,  by  his 
means,  I received  an  increase  of  know- 
ledge ; my  conceptions  became  clearer  and 
more  evangelical,  and  I was  delivered  from 
a fear  which  had  long  troubled  me,  the  fear 
of  relapsing  into  my  former  apostacy.  But 
now  I began  to  understand  the  security  of 
the  covenant  of  grace,  and  to  expect  to  be 
preserved,  not  by  my  own  power  and  holiness, 
but  by  the  mighty  power  and  promise  of 
God,  through  faith  in  an  unchangeable  Sa- 
viour. He  likewise  gave  me  a general  view 
of  the  state  of  religion,  with  the  errors  and 
controversies  of  the  times  (things  to  which  I 
hid  been  entirely  a stranger,)  and  finally 
directed  me  where  to  apply  in  London  for 
further  instruction.  With  these  newly  ac- 
quired advantages,  I left  him,  and  my  pas- 
sage homewards  gave  me  leisure  to  digest 
what  I had  received.  I had  much  comfort 
and  freedom  during  those  seven  weeks,  and 
my  sun  was  seldom  clouded.  I arrived  safe 
in  L , August,  1754. 

My  stay  at  home  was  intended  to  be  but 
short,  and  by  the  beginning  of  November,  I 
was  again  ready  for  the  sea : but  the  Lord 
saw  fif  to  over-rule  my  design.  During  the 
time  I was  engaged  in  the  slave  trade,  I 
never  had  the  least  scruple  as  to  its  lawful- 
ness. I was,  upon  the  whole,  satisfied  with 
it,  as  the  appointment  Providence  had  mark- 
ed out  for  me ; yet  it  was,  in  many  respects, 
far  from  eligible.  It  is,  indeed,  accounted  a 


TO  AFRICA,  &c.  [let.  xiii. 

genteel  employment,  and  is  usually  very 
profitable,  though  to  me  it  did  not  prove  so, 
the  Lord  seeing  that  a large  increase  of 
wealth  could  not  be  good  for  me.  However 
I considered  myself  as  a sort  of  gaoler  01 
turnkey  ; and  I was  sometimes  shocked  with 
an  employment  that  was  perpetually  conver- 
sant with  chains,  bolts,  and  shackles.  In 
this  view  I had  often  petitioned,  in  my  pray- 
ers, that  the  Lord,  in  his  own  time,  would 
be  pleased  to  fix  me  in  a more  humane  call- 
ing, and,  if  it  might  be,  place  me  where  I 
might  have  more  frequent  converse  with 
his  people  and  ordinances,  and  be  freed  from 
those  long  separations  from  home,  which 
very  often  were  hard  to  bear.  My  prayers 
were  now  answered,  though  in  a way  I little 
expected.  I now  experienced  another  sud- 
den, unforeseen  change  of  life.  I was  within 
two  days  of  sailing,  and,  to  all  appearance,  in 
good  health  as  usual;  but  in  the  afternoon, 
as  I was  sitting  with  Mrs.  N*****,  by  our- 
selves, drinking  tea,  and  talking  over  past 
events,  I was  in  a moment  seized  with  a fit, 
which  deprived  me  of  sense  and  motion,  and 
left  me  no  other  sign  of  life  than  that  of 
breathing.  I suppose  it  was  of  the  apoplec- 
tic kind.  It  lasted  about  an  hour,  and  when 
I recovered,  it  left  a pain  and  dizziness  in 
my  head,  which  continued  with  such  symp- 
toms as  induced  the  physicians  to  judge  it 
would  not  be  safe  or  prudent  for  me  to  pro- 
ceed on  the  voyage.  Accordingly,  by  the 
advice  of  my  friend,  to  whom  the  ship  be- 
longed, I resigned  the  command  the  day  be- 
fore she  sailed ; and  thus  I was  unexpectedly 
called  from  that  service,  and  freed  from  a 
share  of  the  future  consequences  of  that 
voyage,  which  proved  extremely  calamitous. 
The  person  who  went  in  my  room,  most  of 
the  officers,  and  many  of  the  crew,  died,  and 
the  vessel  was  brought  home  with  great  dif- 
ficulty. 

As  I was  now  disengaged  from  business.  I 

left  L , and  spent  most  of  the  following 

year  at  London,  and  in  Kent.  But  I entered 
upon  a new  trial.  You  will  easily  conceive 
that  Mrs.  N*****  was  not  an  unconcerned 
spectator,  when  I lay  extended,  and,  as  she 
thought,  expiring  upon  the  ground.  In  effect, 
the  blow  that  struck  me  reached  her  in  the 
same  instant : she  did  not,  indeed,  immediate- 
ly feel  it,  till  her  apprehensions  on  my  ac- 
count began  to  subside ; but  as  I grew  bet- 
ter, she  became  worse:  her  surprise  threw 
her  into  a disorder,  which  no  physicans  could 
define,  or  medicines  remove.  Without  any 
of  the  ordinary  symptoms  of  a consumption, 
she  decayed  almost  visibly,  till  she  became 
so  weak  that  she  could  hardly  bear  any  one 
to  walk  across  the  room  she  was  in.  I was 
placed  for  about  eleven  months  in  what  Dr. 
Young  calls  the 

— dreadful  post  of  observation, 

Darker  everv  hour  ” 


CONCLUSION  OF  THE  NARRATIVE. 


109 


r.ET.  XIV  ] 

It  was  not  till  after  my  settlement  in  my 
present  station,  that  the  Lord  was  pleased  to 
restore  her  by  his  own  hand,  when  all  hopes 
from  ordinary  means  were  at  an  end.  But 
before  this  took  place,  I have  some  other 
particulars  to  mention,  which  must  be  the 
subject  of  the  following  sheet,  which  I hope 
will  be  the  last  on  this  subject,  from — Your 
» ffcctionate  servant. 

February  1,  1764. 


LETTER  XIV. 

dear  sir, — By  the  directions  I had  receiv- 
ed from  my  friend  at  St.  Kitt’s,  I soon  found 
out  a religious  acquaintance  in  London.  I 
first  applied  to  Mr.  B , and  chiefly  attend- 

ed upon  his  ministry,  when  in  town.  From 
him  I received  many  helps  both  in  public  and 
private;  for  he  was  pleased  to  favour  me 
with  his  friendship,  from  the  first.  His  kind- 
ness and  the  intimacy  between  us  have  con- 
tinued and  increased  to  this  day;  and  of  all 
my  many  friends,  I am  most  deeply  indebted 

to  him.  The  late  Mr.  II d was  my  second 

acquaintance ; a man  of  a choice  spirit,  and 
an  abundant  zeal  for  the  Lord’s  service.  I 
enjoyed  his  correspondence  till  near  the  time 

of  his  death.  Soon  after,  upon  Mr.  W d’s 

return  from  America,  my  two  good  friends 
introduced  me  to  him;  and  though  I had  little 
personal  acquaintance  with  him  till  after- 
wards, his  ministry  was  exceeding  useful  to 
me.  I had  likewise  access  to  some  religious 
societies,  and  became  known  to  many  excel- 
lent Christians  in  private  life.  Thus,  when 
at  London,  I lived  at  the  fountain  head,  as  it 
were,  for  spiritual  advantages.  When  I was 
in  Kent,  it  was  very  different,  yet  I found 
some  serious  persons  there ; but  the  fine  va- 
riegated woodland  country  afforded  me  ad- 
vantages of  another  kind.  Most  of  my  time, 
at  least  some  hours  every  day,  I passed  in 
retirement,  when  the  weather  was  fair ; 
sometimes  in  the  thickest  woods,  sometimes 
on  the  highest  hills,  where  almost  every  step 
varied  the  prospect.  It  has  been  my  custom 
for  many  years,  to  perform  my  devotional 
exercises  sub  dio , when  I have  opportunity, 
and  I always  find  these  rural  scenes  have 
some  tendency  both  to  refresh  and  compose 
my  spirits.  A beautiful  diversified  prospect 
gladdens  my  heart.  When  I am  withdrawn 
from  the  noise  and  petty  works  of  men,  I 
consider  myself  as  in  the  great  temple,  which 
the  Lord  hath  built  for  his  own  honour. 

The  country  between  Rochester  and  Maid- 
stone, bordering  upon  the  Medway,  was  well 
suited  to  the  turn  of  my  mind ; and  was  I to 
go  over  it  now,  I could  point  to  many  a place 
where  I remember  either  to  have  earnestly 
sought,  or  happily  found,  the  Lord’s  comforta- 
ble presence  with  my  soul.  And  thus  I lived, 


j sometimes  at  London,  and  sometimes  in  the 
country,  ill  the  autumn  of  the  following  year. 
All  this  while  I had  two  trials,  more  or  less, 
upon  my  mind ; the  first  and  principal  was 
Mrs.  N*****’s  illness ; she  still  grew  worse, 
and  I had  daily  more  reason  to  fear  that  the 
hour  of  separation  was  at  hand.  When  faith 
was  in  exercise,  I was  in  some  measure  re- 
signed to  the  Lord’s  will ; but  too  often  my 
heart  rebelled,  and  I found  it  hard  either  to  trust 
or  to  submit.  I had  likewise  some  care  about 
my  future  settlement;  the  African  trade  was 
overdone  that  year,  and  my  friends  did  not 
care  to  fit  out  another  ship  till  mine  return- 
ed. I was  sometime  in  suspense ; but,  indeed, 
a provision  of  food  and  raiment  has  seldom 
been  a cause  of  great  solicitude  to  me.  I 
found  it  easier  to  trust  the  Lord  in  this  point 
than  in  the  former,  and  accordingly  this  was 
first  answered.  In  August  I received  an 
account  that  I was  nominated  to  the  office 

of . These  places  are  usually  obtained, 

or  at  least  sought,  by  dint  of  much  interest 
and  application ; but  this  came  to  me  un- 
sought and  unexpected.  I knew,  indeed,  my 

good  friend  in  L had  endeavoured  to 

procure  another  post  for  me,  but  found  it 
pre-engaged.  I found  afterwards,  that  the 
place  I had  missed  would  have  been  very 
unsuitable  for  me,  and  that  this,  which  I had 
no  thought  of,  was  the  very  tiling  I could 
have  wished  for,  as  it  afforded  me  much 
leisure,  and  the  liberty  of  living  in  my  own 
way.  Several  circumstances,  unnoticed  by 
others  concurred,  to  show  me  that  the  good 
hand  of  the  Lord  was  as  remarkably  con- 
cerned in  this  event  as  in  any  other  leading 
turn  of  my  life. 

But  when  I gained  this  point,  my  distress 
in  the  other  was  doubled;  I was  obliged  to 
leave  Mrs.  N*****,  in  the  greatest  extremity 
of  pain  and  illness,  when  the  physicians 
could  do  no  more,  and  I had  no  ground  of 
hope  that  I should  see  her  again  alive,  but 
this,  that  nothing  is  impossible  with  the 
Lord.  I had  a severe  conflict ; but  faith  pre- 
vailed. I found  the  promise  remarkably 
fulfilled,  of  strength  proportioned  to  my  need. 
The  day  before  I set  out,  and  not  till  then, 
the  burden  was  entirely  taken  from  my  mind. 
I was  strengthened  to  resign  both  her  and 
myself  to  the  Lord’s  disposal,  and  departed 
from  her  in  a cheerful  frame.  Soon  after  I 
was  gone,  she  began  to  amend,  and  recover- 
ed so  fast,  that  in  about  two  months  I had 
the  pleasure  to  meet  her  at  Stone,  on  her 
journey  to  L . 

And  now,  I think,  I have  answered,  if  not 
exceeded,  your  desire.  Since  October  1755, 
we  have  been  comfortably  settled  here,  and 
all  my  circumstances  have  been  as  remark- 
ably smooth  and  uniform  as  they  were  vari- 
ous in  former  years.  My  trials  have  been 
light  and  few,  not  but  that  I still  find,  in  the 
experience  of  every  day,  the  necessity  of  a 


110 


CONCLUSION  OF  THE  NARRATIVE. 


[let.  XIV. 


life  of  fiith.  My  principal  trial  is,  the  body 
of  sin  and  death,  which  makes  me  often  to 
sigh  oat  the  apostle’s  complaint,  “ O wretch- 
ed man,  &:c.”  But  with  him  likewise  I can 
say,  “ I thank  God  through  Jesus  Christ  my 
Lord.”  I live  in  a barren  land,  where  the 
knowledge  and  power  of  the  gospel  is  very 
low  ; yet  here  are  a few  of  the  Lord's  people  ; 
and  this  wilderness  has  been  a useful  school 
to  me,  where  I rive  studied  more  leisurely 
the  truths  which  I gathered  up  in  London. 
I brought  down  with  me  a considerable  stock 
of  notional  truths;  but  I have  since  found, 
that  there  is  no  effectual  teacher  but  God ; 
that  we  can  receive  no  further  than  he  is 
pleased  to  communicate  ; and  that  no  know- 
ledge is  truly  useful  to  me,  but  what  is  made 
my  own  by  experience.  Many  things,  I 
thought  I had  learned,  would  not  stand  in 
an  hour  of  temptation,  till  I had  in  this  way 
learned  them  over  again.  Since  the  year 
1757, 1 have  had  an  increasing  acquaintance 
in  the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  where  the 
gospel  flourishes  greatly.  This  has  been  a 
good  school  to  me.  I have  conversed  at 
large  among  all  parties,  without  joining  any ; 
and  in  my  attempts  to  hit  the  golden  mean, 
I have  sometimes  been  drawn  too  near  the 
different  extremes ; yet  the  Lord  has  enabled 
me  to  profit  by  my  mistakes.  In  brief,  I am 
still  a learner,  and  the  Lord  still  condescends 
to  teach  me.  I begin  at  length  to  see  that 
I have  attained  but  very  little ; but  I trust  in 
him  to  carry  on  his  own  work  in  my  soul,  and, 
by  all  the  dispensations  of  his  grace  and  pro- 
vidence, to  increase  my  knowledge  of  him 
and  of  myself. 

When  I was  fixed  in  a house,  and  found 
my  business  would  afford  me  much  leisure 
time,  I considered  in  what  manner  I should 
improve  it.  And  now,  having  reason  to  close 
with  the  apostle’s  determination,  “ to  know 
nothing  but  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified,” 
I devoted  my  life  to  the  prosecution  of  spirit- 
ual knowledge,  and  resolved  to  pursue  no- 
thing but  in  subservience  to  this  main  design. 
This  resolution  divorced  me,  as  I have  al- 
ready hinted,  from  the  classics  and  mathema- 
tics. My  first  attempt  was  to  learn  so  much 
Greek  as  would  enable  me  to  understand  the 
New  Testament  and  Septuagint;  and  when 
I had  made  some  progress  this  way,  I enter- 
ed upon  the  Hebrew  the  following  year ; and 
two  years  afterwards,  having  surmised  some 
advantages  from  the  Syriac  version,  I began 
with  that  language.  You  must  not  think 
t-hatihave  attained,  or  ever  aimed  at,  a cri- 
tical~skill  in  any  of  these.  I had  no  business 
with  them  but  as  in  reference  to  something 
else.  I never  read  one  classic  author  in  tfye 
Greek.  I thought  it  too  late  in  life  th 
take  such  a round  in  this  language  as  I had 
doneln  the  Latin.  I only  wanted  the  signifi- 
cation of  scriptural  words  and  phrases ; and 
for  this  I thought  I might  avail  myself  of 


Scapula,  the  Synopis,  and  others,  who  had 
sustained  the  drudgery  before  me.  In  the 
Hebrew,  I can  read  the  historical  books  and 
psalms  with  tolerable  ease;  but  in  the  pro- 
phetical and  difficult  parts,  I am  frequently 
obliged  to  have  recourse  to  lexicons,  &c. 
However,  I know  so  much  as  to  be  able, 
with  such  helps  as  are  at  hand,  to  judge  for 
myself  the  meaning  of  any  passage  I have 
occasion  to  consult.  Beyond  this  I do  not 
think  of  proceeding,  if  I can  find  better  em- 
ployment ; for  I would  rather  be  some  way 
useful  to  others,  than  die  with  the  reputation 
of  an  eminent  linguist. 

Together  with  these  studies,  I have  kept 
up  a course  of  reading  of  the  best  writers  in 
divinity  that  have  come  to  my  hand,  in  the 
Latin  and  English  tongues,  and  some  French ; 
for  I picked  up  the  French  at  times  while  I 
used  the  sea.  But  within  these  two  or  three 
years  I have  accustomed  myself  chiefly  to 
writing,  and  have  not  found  time  to  read 
many  books  besides  the  scriptures. 

I am  the  more  particular  in  this  account, 
as  my  case  has  been  somewhat  singular ; for 
in  all  my  literary  attempts,  I have  been 
obliged  to  strike  out  my  own  path,  by  the 
light  I could  acquire  from  books,  as  I have  not 
had  a teacher  or  assistant  since  I wTas  ten 
years  of  age. 

One  word  concerning  my  views  to  the  mi- 
nistry, and  I have  done.  I have  told  you, 
that  this  was  my  dear  mother’s  hope  concern- 
ing me ; but  her  death,  and  the  scenes  of  life 
in  which  I afterwards  engaged,  seemed  to 
cut  off  the  probability.  The  first  desires  of 
this  sort  in  my  own  mind,  arose  many  year9 
ago,  from  a reflection  on  Gal.  i.  23,  2*4.  I 
could  not  but  wish  for  such  a public  opportu- 
nity to  testify  the  riches  of  divine  grace.  I 
thought  I was,  above  most  living,  a fit  person 
to  proclaim  that  faithful  saying,  “ That  Jesus 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  the  chief 
of  sinners;”  and  as  my  life  had  been  full  of 
remarkable  turns,  and  I seemed  selected  to 
show  what  the  Lord  could  do,  I was  in  some 
hopes  that,  perhaps,  sooner  or  later,  he  might 
call  me  into  his  service. 

I believe  it  was  a distant  hope  of  this  that 
determined  me  to  study  the  original  scrip- 
tures ; but  it  remained  an  imperfect  desire  in 
my  own  breast,  till  it  was  recommended  to 
me  by  some  Christian  friends.  I started  at 
the  thought,  when  first  seriously  proposed 
to  me ; but  afterwards  set  apart  some  weeks 
to  consider  the  case,  to  consult  my  friends, 
and  to  in  treat  the  Lord’s  direction.  The 
judgment  of  my  friends,  and  many  things 
' that  occurred,  tended  to  engage  me.  My 
j first  thought  was  to  join  the  dissenters,  from 
! a presumption  that  I could  not  honestly  make 

i the  required  subscriptions ; but  Mr.  C , 

in  a conversation  upon  these  points,  mode- 
rated my  scruples  ; and  preferring  the  esta- 
blished church  in  some  other  respects,  I ac- 


CONCLUSION  OF  THE  NARRATIVE. 


Ill 


LIST.  XIV.] 

cepted  a title  from  him,  some  months  after- 
wards, and  solicited  ordination  from  the  late 
archbishop  of  York.  I need  not  tell  you  I 
met  a refusal,  nor  what  steps  I took  after- 
wards to  succeed  elsewhere.  At  present  I 
desist  from  any  applications.  My  desire  to 
serve  the  Lord  is  not  weakened ; but  I am 
not  so  hasty  to  push  myself  forward  as  I was 
former!  v It  is  sufficient  that  he  knows  how 


to  dispose  of  me,  and  that  he  both  can  and 
will  do  what  is  best.  To  him  I commend  my- 
self : I trust  that  his  will  and  my  true  interest 
are  inseparable.  To  his  name  be  glory  for 
ever.  And  thus  I conclude  my  story,  and 
presume  you  will  acknowledge  I have  been 
particular  enough.  I have  room  for  no  more, 
but  to  repeat  that  I am,  sir,  your’s,  &c. 
February  2,  1764. 


FORTY-ONE  FETTERS 


ON 

RELIGIOUS  SUBJECTS. 


ORIGINALLY 

PUBLISHED  UNDER  THE  SIGNATURES 

OF 

OMICRON  AND  VIGIL. 


LETTER  I. 

On  Trust  in  the  Providence  of  God , and 
Benevolence  to  his  Poor. 

my  dear  friend, — The  more  I think  of 
the  point  you  proposed  to  me,  the  more  I am 
confirmed  to  renew  the  advice  I then  gave. 
There  is  doubtless  such  a thing  as  Christian 
prudence ; but,  my  friend,  beware  of  coun- 
terfeits. Self-love,  and  the  evil  heart  of  un- 
belief, will  endeavour  to  obtrude  upon  us  a 
prudence  so  called,  which  is  as  opposite  to 
the  former  as  darkness  to  light.  I do  not 
say  that,  now  you  have  a wife,  and  the  pros- 
sent  of  a family,  you  are  strictly  bound  to  com- 
municate with  the  poor  in  the  same  propor- 
tion as  formerly.  I say,  you  are  not  bound : 
for  every  thing  of  this  sort  should  proceed 
from  a willing  mind.  But  if  you  should  tell 
me,  the  Lord  has  given  you  such  a zeal  for 
his  glory,  such  a concern  for  the  honour  of 
the  gospel,  such  a love  to  his  members,  such 
a grateful  sense  of  his  mercies  (especially 
by  granting  you,  in  this  late  instance  of  your 
marriage,  the  desire  of  your  heart,)  and  such 
an  affiance  in  his  providence  and  promises, 
that  you  find  yourself  very  unwilling  to  be 
one  sixpence  in  the  year  less  useful  than  you 
was  before,  I could  not  blame  you,  or  dis- 
suade you  from  it.  But  1 do  not  absolutely 
advise  it ; because  I know  not  the  state  of 
your  mind,  or  what  measure  of  faith  the  Lord 
has  given  you.  Only  this  I believe,  that 
when  the  Lord  gives  such  a confidence,  he 
will  not  disappoint  it. 

When  I look  among  the  professors,  yea, 
among  the  ministers  of  the  gospel,  there  are 
few  things  I see  a more  general  want  of, 


than  such  a trust  in  God  as  to  temporals,  anu 
such  a sense  of  the  honour  of  being  permit- 
ted to  relieve  the  necessities  of  his  people, 
as  might  dispose  them  to  a more  liberal  dis- 
tribution of  what  they  hove  at  present  in 
their  power,  and  to  a reliance  on  him  for  a 
sufficient  supply  in  future.  Some  excep- 
tions there  are.  Some  persons  I have  the 
happiness  to  know,  whose  chief  pleasure  it 
seems  to  be,  to  devise  liberal  things.  Fcr 
the  most  part,  we  take  care,  first,  to  be  well 
supplied,  if  possible,  wTith  all  the  necessaries, 
conveniences,  and  not  a few  of  the  elegan- 
cies of  life ; then  to  have  a snug  fund  laid 
up  against  a rainy  day,  as  the  phrase  is  (if 
this  is  in  an  increasing  way,  so  much  the 
belter,)  that  when  we  look  at  children  and 
near  relatives,  we  may  say  to  our  hearts, 
“ New  they  are  well  provided  for.”  And 
w hen  we  have  gotten  all  this,  and  more,  we 
are,  perhaps,  content,  for  the  love  of  Christ, 
to  bestow  a pittance  of  our  superfluities,  a 
tenth  or  a twentieth  part  of  what  we  spend 
or  hoard  up  for  ourselves,  upon  the  poor.  But, 
alas ! what  do  we  herein  more  than  others  I 
Multitudes,  who  know  nothing  of  the  love 
of  Christ,  will  do  thus  much,  yea,  perhaps, 
greatly  exceed  us,  from  the  mere  feelings  of 
humanity. 

But  it  may  be  asked,  Would  you  show  no 
regard  to  the  possibility  of  leaving  your  wife 
or  children  unprovided  fori  Quite  the  re- 
verse. I would  have  you  attend  to  it  very 
much,  and  behold  the  scriptures  show  you 
the  more  excellent  way.  If  you  had  a little 
money  to  spare,  would  you  not  lend,  it  to  me, 
if  I assured  you  it  should  be  repaid  when 
wantedl  I can  point  out  to  you  better  interest 
no 


ON  TRUST  IN  GOD. 


113 


LET.  I.] 

md  better  security  than  I could  possibly 
give  you : Prov.  xix.  17,  “ He  that  hath  pity 
upon  the  poor,  lendeth  unto  the  Lord ; and 
thai  which  he  hath  given,  will  he  pay  him 
again.”  What  think  you  of  this  text  1 Is  it 
the  word  of  God  or  not?  Is  he  worthy  of  be- 
'ief,  or  not?  Is  he  able  to  make  good  his 
word,  or  is  he  not  ? I dare  stake  all  my  in- 
terest in  your  friendship  (which  I should  be 
very  loath  to  forfeit,)  that  if  you  act  upon 
this  maxim,  in  a spirit  of  prayer  and  faith, 
and  with  a single  eye  to  his  glory,  you  shall 
not  be  disappointed.  Read  over  Matt.  vi. 
26 — 34.  Shall  we  confine  that  reasoning 
and  those  promises  to  the  primitive  times  ? 
Say  not,  “if  the  Lord  would  make  windows 
in  heaven,  this  thing  might  be.”  He  has 
more  ways  to  bless  and  prosper  those  who 
trust  in  him,  than  we  are  able  to  point  out 
to  him.  But  I tell  you,  my  friend,  he  will 
sooner  make  windows  in  heaven,  turn  stones 
into  bread,  yea,  stop  the  sun  in  his  course, 
than  he  will  suffer  those  who  conscientiously 
serve  him,  and  depend  upon  him,  to  be  des- 
titute. 

Some  instances  we  have  had  of  ministers, 
who  have  seemed  to  transgress  the  bounds 
of  strict  prudence  in  their  attention  to  the 
poor.  But  if  they  have  been  men  of  faith, 
prayer,  and  zeal ; if  they  did  it,  not  from  a 
caprice  of  humour,  or  a spirit  of  indolence, 
but  from  such  motives  as  the  scripture  sug- 
gests and  recommends,  I believe  their  fami- 
lies have  seldom  suffered  for  it.  I wish  you 
to  consult,  upon  this  head,  what  Mrs.  Alleine 
says,  in  the  affecting  account  she  has  given 
of  that  honoured  and  faithful  servant  of  God, 
her  husband,  Joseph  Alleine.  Besides,  you 
know  not  what  you  may  actually  save  in  a 
course  of  years  by  this  method.  The  apos- 
tle, speaking  of  some  abuses  that  obtained  in 
the  church  of  Corinth,  says,  “ For  this  cause 
many  are  sick  among  you.”  If  prudence 
should  shut  up  the  bowels  of  your  compassion 
(which  I trust  it  never  will,)  the  Lord  might 
quarter  an  apothecary  upon  your  family, 
which  would,  perhaps,  cost  you  twice  the 
money  that  would  have  sufficed  to  refresh 
his  people,  and  to  commend  your  ministry 
and  character. 

But  if,  after  all,  prudence  will  be  heard,  I 
counsel  you  to  do  these  two  things.  First, 
Be  very  certain  that  you  allow  yourselves  in 
nothing  superfluous.  You  cannot,  I trust,  in 
conscience  think  of  laying  out  one  penny 
more  than  is  barely  decent,  unless  you  have 
another  penny  to  help  the  poor.  Then,  se- 
condly, Let  your  friends,  who  are  in  good 
circumstances,  be  plainly  told,  that,  though 
you  love  them,  prudence  and  the  necessary 
charge  of  a family,  will  not  permit  you  to 
entertain  them ; no,  not  for  a night.  What 
say  you  ! shut  my  door  against  my  friends? 
Yes,  by  all  means,  rather  than  against  Christ. 
If  the  Lord  Jesus  was  again  upon  earth  in  a 
P 


state  of  humiliation,  ard  he,  and  the  best 
friend  you  have,  standing'  at  your  door,  and 
your  provision  so  strait  that  you  could  not 
receive  both,  which  would  you  entertain  1 
Now,  he  says  of  the  poor,  “Inasmuch  as  you 
did  it  to  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  you 
did  it  unto  me.”  Your  friends  have  houses 
of  their  own,  and  money  to  pay  at  an  inn,  if 
you  do  not  take  them  in ; but  the  poor  need 
relief.  One  would  almost  think  that  pas- 
sage, Luke  xiv.  12,  13,  14,  was  not  con- 
sidered as  a part  of  God’s  word ; at  least  I 
believe  there  is  no  one  passage  so  generally 
neglected  by  his  own  people.  I do  not  think 
it  unlawful  to  entertain  our  friends ; but  if 
these  words  do  not  teach  us,  that  it  is  in  some 
respects  our  duty  to  give  a preference  to  the 
poor,  I am  at  a loss  to  understand  them. 

I was  enabled  to  set  out  upon  the  plan  I 
recommend  to  you,  at  a time  when  my  cer- 
tain income  was  much  too  scanty  for  my  own 
provision,  and  before  I had  the  expectation  or 
promise  of  assistance  from  any  person  upon 
earth.  Only  I knew  that  the  Lord  could  pro- 
vide me  with  whatever  he  saw  needful ; and 
I trusted,  that  if  he  kept  me  dependant  upon 
himself,  and  desirous  to  live  for  his  service 
only,  he  assuredly  would  do  so.  I have  as 
yet  seen  no  cause  to  repent  it.  I live  upon 
his  promise ; for  as  to  any  present  ways  or 
means,  every  thing  here  below  is  so  uncer- 
tain, that  I consider  myself  in  the  same 
situation  with  the  birds  of  the  air,  who  have 
neither  store-house  nor  barn.  To-day  I have 
enough  for  myself,  and  something  to  impart 
to  them  that  need ; as  to  futurity,  the  Lord 
must  provide ; and  for  the  most  part  I can 
believe  he  will.  I can  tell  you,  however, 
that  now  and  then  my  heart  is  pinched ; un- 
belief creeps  in,  and  self  would  much  rather 
choose  a strong  box,  or  what  the  world  calls 
a certainty,  than  a life  of  absolute  depend- 
ence upon  the  providence  of  God.  However, 
in  my  composed  hours  I am  well  satisfied. 
Hitherto  he  has  graciously  taken  care  of  me ; 
therefore  may  my  heart  trust  in  him,  and  not 
be  afraid. 

Consider,  my  friend,  the  Lord  has  done 
well  for  you  likewise.  He  has  settled  you 
peaceably  in  a good  and  honourable  interest; 
he  has  now  answered  your  prayers,  in  giving 
you  a partner,  with  whom  you  may  take 
sweet  counsel,  one  that  will  help  and 
strengthen  you  in  your  best  desires.  Be- 
ware, therefore,  of  that  reasoning  which 
might  lead  you  to  distrust  the  Lord  your 
God,  or  to  act  as  if  you  did.  You  complain 
that  there  is  too  much  of  an  expensive  taste 
among  some  persons  in  your  congregation. 
If  you  set  yourself  to  discountenance  this,  and 
should  at  the  same  time  too  closely  shut  up 
your  hand,  they  will  be  ready  to  charge  you 
with  being  governed  by  the  same  worldly 
spirit,  though  in  another  form.  If  you  have 
been  hitherto  tender  and  bountiful  to  the 


114 


TO  A STUDENT  IN  DIVINITY. 


[let.  .1. 


poor,  and  should  make  too  great  and  too  sud- 
den an  alteration  in  this  respect,  if  the  blame 
should  not  fall  upon  you,  it  probably  would 
upon  your  wife,  who,  I believe,  would  be  far 
from  deserving  it.  If  the  house  which  had 
been  open  to  the  poor  in  former  times,  should 
be  shut  against  them,  now  yen  live  in  it, 
would  it  not  lead  the  people’s  thoughts  back  1 
Would  it  not  open  the  mouths  of  those  who 
do  not  love  your  ministry,  to  say,  That,  not- 
withstanding all  your  zeal  about  doctrines, 
you'  know  how  to  take  care  of  your  own  in- 
terest, as  well  as  those  whom  you  have 
thought  indifferent  and  lukewarm  in  the 
cause  of  the  gospel } Would  it  not  1 But 
1 forbear.  I Irnow  you  need  no  such  argu- 
ments. Yet  consider  how  many  eyes  are 
upon  you,  watching  for  your  halting.  Now, 
at  your  first  setting  out,  is  the  proper  time 
seriously  to  seek  the  Lord’s  direction,  that 
you  may,  from  the  beginning,  adopt  such  a 
plan  as  may  be  most  for  your  own  comfort,  the 
honour  of  your  character  as  a minister,  the 
glory  of  him  who  has  called  you,  and  the  edi- 
fication of  your  people.  It  is  easier  to  begin 
well,  than  to  make  alterations  afterwards. 

I trust  the  Lord  will  guide  and  bless  you  in 
your  deliberations.  And,  for  my  own  part, 

I am  not  in  the  least  afraid,  that  you  will 
ever  have  cause  to  blame  me  for  the  advice 
I have  given,  if  you  should  be  disposed  to 
follow  it. 

I have  given  you  my  opinion  freefy,  and, 
perhaps,  with  an  appearance  of  more  strict- 
ness than  is  necessary.  But  I would  apply 
our  Lord’s  words  in  another  case  to  this:  , 
“ All  men  cannot  receive  this  saying ; he 
that  is  able  to  receive  it,  let  him  receive  it.”  j 
If  the  Lord  has  given  you  this  confidence  in 
his  word,  you  are  happy.  It  is  better  than 
the  possession  of  thousands  by  the  year. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

Extract  of  a Letter  to  a Student  in  Divinity. 

de.\r  sir, — The  subject  of  your  last  is  im- 
portant. I can  sympathise  with  your  anxiety, 
having  known  much  of  it  myself,  and  there- 
fore willingly  devote  my  first  leisure  to  your 
service.  But  shall  I indeed  condole  with 
you  1 or  shall  I rather  congratulate  you  on 
the  perplexity  you  complain  of*  I know  it 
is  not  pleasing;  but  I hope  it  will  be  sancti- 
fied and  profitable  to  you. 

Though  I am  no  enemy  to  the  acquisition 
of  useful  knowledge,  I have  seen  many  in- 
stances of  young  men  who  have  been  much 
hurt  by  what  they  expected  to  reap  ad  van-  j 
tage  from.  They  have  gone  to  the  academy  ' 
humble,  peaceable,  spiritual,  and  lively;  but 
have  come  out  self- wise,  dogmatical,  censo- 
rious, anl  full  of  a prudence  founded  upon 


the  false  maxims  of  the  world.  I have  been 
ready  to  address  them  with  that  line  of  Mil- 
ton  : 

M If  thou  art  he — But  ah  ! how  fali’n  !” 

I do  not  mention  this  as  the  necessary 
fault  of  the  institution,  but  as  the  frequent 
effect  of  notions  too  hastily  picked  up,  when 
not  sanctified  by  grace,  nor  balanced  by  a 
proportionable  depth  of  spiritual  experience. 
Iam  therefore  glad  to  hear,  that  notwith- 
standing the  advantages  you  have  had  in  the 
pursuit  of  your  studies,  you  feel  an  inward 
conviction,  that  you  still  need  something 
which  you  cannot  receive  from  men,  or 
books,  in  order  to  complete  your  fitness  for 
the  ministry ; that  you  may  be  “ a workman 
that  needs  not  to  be  ashamed,”  and  enabled 
rightly  to  divide  (to  distinguish  and  distribute) 
the  word  of  truth. 

It  seems  to  me  a point  of  more  curiosity 
than  use,  to  inquire  too  nicely  into  the  modus 
of  the  Holy  Spirit's  assistance  in  the  com- 
posure and  delivery  of  sermons.  If  we  can- 
not exactly  state  the  boundaries  between 
what  we  may  deem  the  result  of  our  own 
thoughts,  and  the  needful  influence  of  the 
[Ioly^  Spirit,  it  seems  a safe  way  to  give  him 
the  "honour  of  the  whole,  and  to  attribute 
nothing  to  our  selves  but  our  infirmities.  If 
we  have  a capacity,  means  for  improvement, 
diligence  to  make  use  of  those  means,  and 
if  that  diligence  is  attended  with  any  degree 
of  success,  may  we  not  acknowledge,  that 
the  former  links  of  this  chain  are  the  effects 
of  his  goodness  and  favour,  no  less  than  the 
latter? 

To  the  question,  How  far  is  it  lawful  to 
expect  this  assistance  ? I answer,  It  is  law- 
I fill  very  far,  even  to  lay  the  whole  stress  up- 
j on  it,  so  as  to  be  firmly  persuaded  that  we 
j can  neither  meditate  nor  speak  to  purpose 
i without  it ; that  if  we  have  not  this  assist- 
| ance,  whatever  else  we  have,  or  may  think 
; we  have,  we  shall  but  “ darken  counsel  by 
! words  without  knowledge.”  For  this,  I 
j think,  I have  warrant  in  John  xv.  5.  If  any 
person  supposes  he  has  so  far  mastered  a 
system  of  divinity,  that  though  he  can  indeed 
do  betfer  with  the  Spirit’s  assistance,  yet  he 
can  make  a tolerable  shift  without  it,  I envy 
him  not  this  attainment. 

But  if  the  question  intends,  IIow  far  a de- 
pendence upon  the  Holy  Spirit  may  lawfully 
supersede  the  use  of  means?  I answer,  Not 
in  the  least.  The  blessing  and  the  means 
! are  so  closely  united,  that  they  cannot  bo 
separated.  The  blessing  may  be  surely  ex- 
’ pected,  if  diligently  sought  in  the  use  of 
proper  means  ; and  we  have  no  just  reason 
to  expect  it  without  them.  But  to  clear  up 
the  whole,  let  it  be  considered.  What  may 
deserve  the  name  of  diligence  in  this  matter  ? 
and  what  are  the  proper  means  ? 

By  diligence,  I understand  spiritual  di!i- 


TO  A STUDENT  IN  DIVINITY. 


115 


LET.  II.] 

gence;  such  an  active,  improving,  indus- 
trious habit,  as  is  peculiar  to  a heart  im- 
pressed with  some  real  abiding  sense  of  the 
Jove  of  God,  the  worth  of  souls,  the  shortness 
of  time,  and  the  importance  of  eternity. 
Without  this  turn  of  mind,  though  a man 
should  spend  sixteen  hours  every  day  in  his 
study,  he  may  be  a mere  trifler.  The  great- 
est part  of  his  application  will  be  spent  on 
what  is  least  necessary,  and  his  knowledge 
will  chiefly  prove  of  that  sort  which  pufleth 
up,  without  communicating  any  real  benefit. 
Gen.  xli.  21.  Psal.  cxxvii.  2. 

The  chief  means  for  attaining  wisdom, 
and  suitable  gifts  for  the  ministry,  are,  the 
holy  scriptures  and  prayer.  The  one  is  the 
fountain  of  living  water,  the  other  the 
bucket  with  which  we  are  to  draw.  And  I 
believe  you  will  find,  by  observation,  that 
the  man  who  is  most  frequent  and  fervent  in 
prayer,  and  most  devoted  to  the  word  of  God, 
will  shine  and  flourish  above  his  fellows. 
Next  to  these,  and  derived  from  them,  is 
meditation.  By  this  I do  not  mean  a stated 
exercise  upon  some  one  particular  subject,  so 
much  as  a disposition  of  mind  to  observe 
carefully  what  passes  within  us  and  around 
us ; what  we  see,  hear,  and  feel ; and  to  apply 
all  for  the  illustration  and  confirmation  of 
the  written  word  to  us.  In  the  use  of  these 
means,  and  an  humble  dependence  upon  the 
Lord  in  all  the  changing  dispensations  we 
pass  through,  our  spiritual  experience  will 
enlarge ; and  this  experience  is  the  proper 
fund  of  our  ministerial  capacity,  so  far  as  it 
may  be  considered  inherent  in  us.  Prov. 
xvi.  23.  Mat.  xiii.  52.  1 John  i.  3. 

These  means  are  of  universal  importance. 
The  wisest  can  do  nothing  without  them; 
the  weakest  shall  not  use  them  in  vain. 
There  are  likewise  subordinate  means,  which 
may  be  helpful,  and  should  in  general  be  at- 
tended to.  Yet  they  ought  not,  I apprehend, 
to  be  considered  as  a sine  qua  non  in  a mi- 
nister’s call  and  fitness.  The  first  preachers 
had  them  not,  and  some  in  the  present  day 
are  enabled  to  do  well  without  them.  Under 
this  head,  I principally  intend  all  that  comes 
under  the  usual  denomination  of  literature. 
A competent  acquaintance  with  the  learned 
languages,  history,  natural  philosophy,  &c. 
is  very  desirable.  If  these  things  are  held 
in  a proper  subserviency,  if  they  do  not  en- 
gross too  much  of  our  time,  nor  add  fuel  to 
the  fire  of  that  self  importance  which  is  our 
great  snare,  they  may  contribute  to  increase 
and  enlarge  our  ideas,  and  facilitate  our 
expressing  ourselves  with  propriety.  But 
these  attainments,  like  riches,  are  attended 
with  their  peculiar  temptations ; and  unless 
they  are  under  the  regulation  of  a sound 
judgment,  and  spiritual  frame  of  mind,  will 
prove,  like  Saul’s  armour  to  David,  rather 
cumbersome  than  useful  in  preaching.  The 
sermons  of  preachers  th  is  qualified  are  often 


more  ingenious  than  edifying,  and  rather  set 
off  the  man,  than  commend  the  gospel  of 
Christ. 

As  you  desire  my  advice  with  respect  to 
your  future  studies,  I shall  comply,  without 
hesitation  or  ceremony. 

The  original  scriptures  well  deserve  your 
pains,  and  will  richly  repay  them.  There  is, 
doubtless,  a beauty,  fulness,  and  spirit,  in 
the  originals,  which  the  best  translations  do 
not  always  express.  When  a word  or 
phrase  admits  of  various  senses,  the  transla- 
tors can  only  preserve  one ; and  it  is  not  to 
be  supposed,  unless  they  were  perfectly  un- 
der the  influence  of  the  same  infallible  Spirit, 
that  they  should  always  prefer  the  best 
Only  be  upon  your  guard,  lest  you  should  bo 
tempted  to  think,  that  because  you  are  master 
of  the  grammatical  construction,  and  can  tell 
the  several  acceptations  of  the  words  in  the 
best  authors,  you  are  therefore  and  thereby 
master  of  the  spiritual  sense  likewise.  Thi3 
you  must  derive  from  your  experimental 
knowledge,  and  the  influence  and  teaching 
of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

Another  thing  which  will  much  assist  you 
in  composing,  and  speaking  properly  and  ac- 
ceptably, is  logic.  This  will  teach  you  what 
properly  belongs  to  your  subject,  and  what 
may  be  best  suppressed  ; and  likewise  to  ex- 
plain, divide,  enumerate,  and  range  your 
ideas  to  advantage.  A lax,  immethodical, 
disproportionate  manner  is  to  be  avoided; 
yet  beware  of  the  contrary  extreme.  An 
affected  stare hness  and  over-accuracy  will 
fetter  you,  will  make  your  discourse  lean 
and  dry,  preclude  an  useful  variety,  and 
savour  more  of  the  school-lamp,  than  of  tha 
heavenly  fire,  which  alone  can  make  our 
meditations  efficacious,  and  profitable  either 
to  ourselves  or  our  hearers.  The  proper  me- 
dium can  hardly  be  taught  by  rule  ; experi- 
ence, observation,  and  prayer,  are  the  best 
guides. 

As  your  inquiry  seems  chiefly  to  be,  How 
to  fill  up  your  outlines  1 I would  advise  you 
to  study  the  living,  as  well  as  the  dead,  or 
rather  more.  Converse  much  with  experi- 
enced Christians,  and  exercised  souls.  You 
will  find  advantage  in  this  respect,  not  only 
from  the  wise,  but  from  the  weak  of  the  flock. 
In  the  course  of  your  acquaintance,  you  will 
meet  with  some  in  a backsliding  state,  some 
under  temptations,  some  walking  in  dark- 
ness, others  rejoicing  in  the  light,  &c.  Ob- 
serve how  their  spirits  work,  what  they  say, 
and  how  they  reason  in  their  several  cases; 
what  methods  and  arguments  you  find  most 
successful  in  comforting  the  feeble-minded, 
raising  up  those  who  are  oast  down,  and 
the  like ; and  what  answers  they  return. 
Compare  these  with  the  word  of  God,  and 
your  own  heart.  What  you  observe  of  ten 
persons  in  these  different  situations,  may  be 
applied  to  ten  thousand.  For  though  some 


116 


TO  A STUDENT  IN  DIVINITY. 


circumstances  vary,  the  heart  of  man,  the 
aids  of  grace,  and  the  artifices  of  Satan,  in 
genera],  are  universally  the  same.  And 
whenever  you  are  to  preach,  remember  that 
some  of  all  these  so  *ts  will  probably  be  before 
you,  and  each  should  have  something  said  to 
their  own  peculiar  case. 

The  tempted  and  distressed  will  be  most 
probably  relieved,  by  opening  the  various 
states  and  exercises  of  the  heart,  and  by 
showing,  from  scriptural  and  other  examples, 
that  no  new  thing  has  befallen  them.  The 
careless  and  backsliders,  who  have  made  a 
profession,  should  be  reminded  of  that  bless- 
edness they  once  spoke  of,  and  warned  of 
their  danger.  Those  who  are  now  upon  the 
mount,  should  be  cautioned  to  expect  a 
change,  and  to  guard  against  security  and 
spiritual  pride.  To  the  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins  (some  such  will  be  always  present,)  it 
is  needful  to  preach  the  spirituality  and  sanc- 
tion of  the  law,  that  they  may  be  stirred  up 
to  seek  Jesus.  Of  him  all  awakened  souls 
love  to  hear  much.  Let  him,  therefore,  be 
your  capital  subject.  If  you  discuss  some 
less  essential  topic,  or  bend  all  your  strength 
to  clear  up  some  dark  text,  though  you  should 
display  much  learning  and  ingenuity,  you 
will  probably  fall  short  of  your  main  design, 
which  I dare  say,  will  be  to  promote  the 
glory  of  God,  and  the  good  of  souls. 

You  will  likewise  find  advantage,  by  at- 
tending as  much  as  you  can  on  those  preach- 
ers, whom  God  has  blessed  with  much  power, 
life,  and  success  in  their  ministry;  and  in 
this  you  will  do  well  not  to  confine  yourself 
to  any  denomination  or  party ; for  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  is  not  confined.  Different  men 
have  different  gifts  and  talents.  I would  not 
wish  you  to  be  a slavish  admirer  of  any  man. 
Christ  alone  is  our  Master  and  Teacher.  But 
study  the  excellencies  of  each;  and  if  you 
observe  a fault  in  any  (for  no  human  models 
are  perfect,)  you  will  see  what  you  are  your- 
self to  avoid. 

Your  inquiries  respecting  my  own  experi- 
ence on  this  subject,  must  be  answered  very 
briefly.  I have  long  since  learned,  that  if  I 
was  ever  to  be  a minister,  faith  and  prayer 
must  make  me  one.  I desire  to  seek  the 
Lord’s  direction,  both  in  the  choice  and  man- 
agement of  subjects ; but  I do  not  expect  it 
in  a way  of  extraordinary  impulse,  but  in 
endeavouring  to  avail  myself,  to  the  best 
of  my  judgment,  of  present  circumstances. 
The  converse  I have  with  my  people  usually 
suggests  what  I am  to  preach  to  them.  At 
first,  my  chief  solicitude  used  to  be,  what  I 
should  find  to  say ; I hope  it  is  now,  rather 
that  I may  not  speak  in  vain.  For  the  Lord 
has  sent  me  here,  not  to  acquire  the  charac- 
ter of  a ready  speaker,  but  to  win  souls  to 
Christ,  and  to  edify  his  people.  As  to  pre- 
paration, I make  little  use  of  books,  except- 
ing the  Bible  and  Concordance.  Though  I 


[let.  ii. 

preach  without  notes,  I must  frequently 
write  more  or  less  upon  the  subject.  Often, 
when  I begin,  I am  at  a loss  how  I shall  pro- 
ceed ; but  one  thing  insensibly  offers  after 
another ; and  in  general,  I believe,  the  best 
and  most  useful  parts  of  my  sermon  occur  de 
novo , while  I am  preaching.  This  reminds 
me  of  Luther’s  maxim,  “ Bene  precasse  esl 
bene  studuisse .”  When  I can  find  my  .heart 
in  frame  and  liberty  for  prayer,  every  thing 
else  is  comparatively  easy. 

I should  be  very  glad  if  any  thing  I have 
offered,  may  afford  you  satisfaction.  The 
sum  of  my  advice  is  this : Examine  your 
heart  and  views.  Can  you  appeal  to  him 
who  knows  all  things  concerning  the  sin- 
cerity of  your  aim,  that  you  devote  yourself 
to  the  work  of  the  ministry,  not  for  worldly 
regards,  but  with  an  humble  desire  to  pro- 
mote the  Redeemer’s  kingdom  1 If  so,  and 
his  providence  has  thus  far  concurred  with 
you,  trust  him  for  your  sufficiency  of  every 
kind,  and  he  will  not  disappoint  you,  but  will 
be  near  to  strengthen  you  according  to  your 
[ day.  Depend  not  upon  any  cisterns  you  can 
hew  out  for  yourself,  but  rejoice  that  you  have 
liberty  to  come  to  the  fountain  that  is  always 
full,  and  always  flowing.  You  must  not  expect 
a mechanical  sufficiency,  such  as  artificers  ac- 
quire by  habit  and  exercise  in  their  business. 
When  you  have  preached  well  nineteen 
times,  this  will  be  no  security  for  the  twen- 
tieth. Yea,  when  you  have  been  upheld  for 
twenty  years,  should  the  Lord  withhold  his 
hand,  you  would  be  as  much  at  a loss  as  at 
first. 

If  you  lean  upon  books  or  men,  or  upon 
your  own  faculties  and  attainments,  you  will 
be  in  fear  and  in  danger  of  falling  continual- 
ly. But  if  you  stay  yourself  upon  the  Lord, 
he  will  not  only  make  good  your  expecta- 
tions, but  in  time  will  give  you  a becoming 
confidence  in  his  goodness,  and  free  you 
from  your  present  anxiety. 

One  thing  more  I must  mention  as  belong- 
ing to  the  subject:  That  a comfortable  free- 
dom for  public  service  depends  much  upon 
the  spirituality  of  our  walk  before  God  and 
man.  Wisdom  will  not  dwell  with  a trifling, 
an  assuming,  a censorious,  or  a worldly  spirit. 
But  if  it  is  our  business,  and  our  pleasure,  to 
contemplate  Jesus,  and  to  walk  in  his  steps, 
he  will  bless  us;  we  shall  be  like  trees 
planted  by  a constant  stream,  and  he  will 
prosper  the  work  of  our  hands. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

A letter  to  a friend,  on  the  Question , W heth- 
er the  sins  of  believers  shall  be  publicly 
declared  at  the  great  day  ? or,  how  are  we 
to  understand  the  apostle's  assertion,  “ we 
must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-scat 


LET.  III.] 

of  Christ ; that  every  one  may  receive  the 

things  done  in  his  body , according  to  that 

he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad  ?” 

2 Cor.  v.  10,  compared  with  Rom.  xiv.  12. 

my  hear  sir, — My  heart  congratulates 
you.  What  changes  and  events  many, 
in  younger  life,  may  be  reserved  to  see,  who 
can  tell  f But  your  pilgrimage  is  nearly 
finished;  you  stand  upon  the  river’s  brink, 
with  the  city  full  in  view,  waiting  and  wish- 
ing for  the  appointed  hour.  You  need  not  be 
anxious  concerning  your  passage ; for  every 
circumstance  attending  it  is  already  adjusted 
by  infinite  wisdom  and  love,  and  the  King 
himself  will  be  ready  to  receive  you.  While 
you  continue  here,  I am  glad  to  hear  from 
you,  and  should  be  glad  to  contribute  in  any 
way  or  degree  to  your  satisfaction,  or  even 
to  show  my  willingness,  if  I can  do  no  more. 
I can  propose  little  more  than  the  latter,  by 
offering  my  thoughts  on  the  subject  you  pro- 
pose from  2 Cor.  v.  10,  and  the  apparent 
difficulty  of  understanding  that  passage,  in 
full  harmony  with  the  many  texts  which 
seem  expressly  to  assert,  that  the  sins  of  be- 
lievers are  so  forgiven  as  to  be  remembered 
no  more. 

There  is  doubtless,  as  you  observe,  a per- 
fect consistence  in  every  part  of  the  word 
of  God;  the  difficulties  we  meet  with  are 
wholly  owing  to  the  narrowness  of  our  fa- 
culties, and  the  ignorance  which,  in  some 
decree,  is  inseparable  from  our  present  state 
of  imperfection.  And  we  may,  in  general, 
rest  satisfied  with  the  thought,  that  there  is 
a bright  moment  approaching,  when  the 
veil  shall  be  wholly  taken  away.  It  is  the 
part  of  faith  to  rest  upon  the  plain  declara- 
tions of  Scripture,  without  indulging  a 
blameable  curiosity  of  knowing  more  than  is 
clearly  revealed ; yet,  while  we  humbly  de- 
pend upon  divine  teaching,  it  is  right  to  aim 
at  as  enlarged  a sense  of  what  is  revealed 
as  we  can  attain  to.  Every  acquisition 
of  this  kind  is  more  valuable  than  gold,  es- 
pecially respecting  those  points  which  have 
an  immediate  tendency  to  comfort  and  sup- 
port us  under  the  view  of  an  approaching 
dissolution.  The  question  you  have  propo- 
sed is  undoubtedly  of  this  nature. 

May  the  Lord  direct  my  thoughts  and  pen, 
that  I may  not  “ darken  counsel  by  words 
without  knowledge  !”  I have  been  looking 
over  the  passage  you  refer  to  in  Dr.  Ridgely, 
and  think  I might  be  well  excused  from  say- 
ing any  thing  further  on  the  subject,  as  he 
hath  briefly  and  fully  stated  all  the  argu- 
ments that  have  occurred  to  me  on  either 
side  of  the  question,  and  closes  with  a proper 
caution  not  to  be  peremptory  in  determining, 
lest  by  attempting  to  be  wise  above  what  Is 
written,  I should  betray  my  own  folly.  Yet, 
as  you  desire  to  have  my  thoughts,  I must 
say  something.  I wish  I may  not  give  you 


117 

reason  to  think  that  this  caution  has  been  lost 
upon  me. 

I think  all  the  great  truths  in  which  we 
are  concerned,  are  clearly,  and  expressly 
laid  down,  not  only  in  one,  but  in  many  pla- 
ces of  scripture ; but  it  sometimes  happens, 
that  here  and  there  we  meet  with  a text, 
which,  in  the  first  and  obvious  sound  of  the 
words,  seems  to  speak  differently  from  what 
is  asserted  more  largely  elsewhere  ; which 
texts,  singly  taken,  afford  some  men  their 
only  ground  for  the  hypothesis  they  maintain. 
Thus  the  Arians  lay  a great  stress  on  John 
xiv.  28,  and  the  Arminians  on  James  ii.  24, 
&c.  But  their  true  interpretation  is  to  be 
sought  according  to  the  analogy  of  faith. 
They  are  capable  of  a sense  agreeable  to 
the  others,  though  the  others  are  not  intelli- 
gible in  the  sense  they  would  fix  upon  these. 
In  like  manner,  I would  say,  whatever  may 
be  the  precise  meaning  of  2 Cor.  v.  10,  we 
are  sure  it  cannot  be  designed  to  weaken 
what  we  are  taught  in  almost  every  page,  of 
the  free,  absolute  and  unalterable  nature 
of  a believer’s  justification ; the  benefit  of 
which,  as  to  the  forgiveness  of  sin,  is  signi- 
fied by  the  phrases  of  “blotting  out,” — “not 
remembering,” — “casting  behind  the  back,” 
— and  “into  the  depths  of  the  sea.”  The 
sins  of  a believer  are  so  effectually  removed, 
that  even  when,  or  if  they  are  sought  for, 
they  cannot  be  found;  for  Jesus  has  borne 
them  away : believers  are  complete  in  him, 
and  clothed  in  his  righteousness.  They  shall 
stand  before  God  without  spot  or  wrinkle. 
Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  their  charge! 

But  it  is  probable  that  those  stray  expres- 
sions chiefly,  if  not  entirely,  respect  the 
guilt,  imputation,  and  deserved  consequences 
of  sin.— None  can  suppose  that  the  Lord 
will,  or  can  forget  the  sins  of  his  people,  or 
that  they  can  ever  be  hid  from  his  all-com- 
prehending view.  Neither  can  I think  they 
themselves  will  forget  them.  Their  song  is 
founded  upon  a recollection  of  their  sins  and 
their  circumstances  in  this  life,  Rev.  v.  9; 
and  their  love,  and  consequently,  their  hap- 
piness, seems  inseparably  connected  with  the 
consciousness  of  what  they  were,  and  what 
they  had  done,  Luke  vii.  47.  And  I think 
those  are  the  sweetest  moments  in  this  life, 
when  we  have  the  clearest  sense  of  our  own 
sins,  provided  the  sense  of  our  acceptance  in 
the  Beloved  is  proportionably  clear,  and  we 
feel  the  consolations  of  his  love,  notwith- 
standing all  our  transgressions.  When  we 
arrive  in  glory,  unbelief  and  fear  will  cease 
for  ever;  our  nearness  to  God,  and  commu- 
nion with  him,  will  be  unspeakable  beyond 
what  we  can  now  conceive.  Therefore,  the 
remembrance  of  our  sins  will  be  no  abate- 
ment of  our  bliss,  but  rather  the  contrary. 
When  Pharaoh  and  his  host  were  alive,  and 
pursuing  them,  the  Israelites  were  terrified ; 
but  afterwards,  when  they  saw  their  enemies 


ON  2 COR.  V.  10,  AND  ROM.  XIV.  12. 


118 


ON  FAMILY-WORSHIP. 


dead  upon  the  shore,  their  joy  and  triumph 
were  not  abated,  but  heightened,  by  the  con- 
sideration of  their  number. 

With  respect  to  our  sins  being  made  known 
toothers,  I acknowledge  with  you,  that  I could 
not  now  bear  to  have  any  of  my  fellow  crea- 
tures made  acquainted  with  what  passes  in 
my  heart  for  a single  day ; but,  I apprehend 
it  is  a part,  and  a proof  of  my  present  de- 
pravity, that  I feel  myself  disposed  to  pay  so 
great  a regard  to  the  judgment  of  men, 
while  I am  so  little  affected  with  what  I am 
in  the  sight  of  a pure  and  holy  God.  But 
I believe  that  hereafter,  when  self  shall  be 
entirely  rooted  out,  and  my  will  perfectly 
united  to  the  divine  will,  I should  feel  no  re- 
luctance, supposing  it  for  the  manifestation  of 
his  glorious  grace,  that  men,  angels,  and  ! 
devils,  should  know  the  very  worst  of  me. 
Whether  it  will  be  so  or  no,  I dare  not  deter- 
mine. Perhaps  the  difficulty  chiefly  lies  in 
the  necessity  of  our  being  at  present  taught 
heavenly  things  by  earthly.  In  the  descrip- 
tions we  have  of  the  great  day,  allusion  is 
made  to  what  is  most  solemn  in  human  trans- 
actions. The  ideas  of  the  judgment-seat, 
the  great  trumpet,  of  the  book  being  opened, 
and  the  pleadings,  Matt.  xxv.  37 — 44,  seem 
to  be  borrowed  from  the  customs  that  obtain 
amongst  men,  to  help  our  weak  conceptions, 
rather  than  justly  and  fully  to  describe  what 
will  be  the  real  process.  Now,  when  we  at- 
tempt to  look  into  the  unseen  world,  we 
carry  our  ideas  of  time  and  place,  and  sensi- 
ble objects,  along  with  us;  and  we  cannot 
divest  ourselves  of  them,  or  provide  ourselves 
with  better:  yet,  perhaps,  they  have  as  little 
relation  to  the  objects  we  aim  at,  as  the  ideas 
which  a man  born  blind  acquires  from  what 
he  hears  and  feels,  have  to  the  true  nature 
of  light  and  colours.  Mr.  Locke  mentions 
one,  who,  after  much  thought  and  conversa- 
tion, supposed  he  had  got  a tolerable  notion 
of  scarlet,  and  that  it  was  something  nearly 
resembling  the  sound  of  a trumpet.  Per- 
haps, this  is  no  improper  emblem  of  the  ut- 
most we  can  attain  to,  when  we  are  endea- 
vouring to  realize  the  solemnities  of  the 
judgment-day.  What  we  mean  by  memory 
and  reasoning,  may  possibly  have  no  place 
in  the  world  of  spirits.  We  guess  at  some- 
thing more  suitable,  perhaps,  when  we  use 
the  term  intuition.  But  I apprehend  we 
must  die  before  we  can  fully  understand 
what  it  signifies : perhaps,  thoughts  may  be 
as  intelligible  there  as  words  are  here. 

In  a word,  my  dear  Sir,  if  1 have  not  given 
you  satisfaction  (I  am  sure  I have  not  satis- 
fied myself,)  accept  my  apology  in  the  words 
of  a much  wiser,  and  an  inspired  man  : “ Such 
knowledge  is  too  wonderful  for  me:  it  is 
high,  I cannot  attain  unto  it.”  Ere  long 
we  shall  know : in  the  mean  while  our  cause 
is  in  sure  hands : we  have  a shepherd  who 
will  guide  us  below,  an  Advocate  who  will 


[let.  iv. 

receive  and  present  us  before  the  throne 
above.  I trust  we  meet  daily  before  the 
throne  of  grace;  hereafter  vre  shall  meet  in 
glory.  The  paper  will  allow  no  mere.  Be- 
lieve me  yours  in  the  Lord,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

To  Theron,  on  Family  Worship. 

sir, — A neglect  of  family-prayer  is,  I am 
afraid,  too  common  amongst  professors  in  this 
day.  I am  glad  that  you  consider  it  both  as 
a duty  and  a privilege,  and  are  by  grace  de- 
termined, that  when  you  shall  commence 
master  of  a family,  you  will  worship  God 
with  all  your  house.  It  was  Abraham’s  com- 
mendation, that  he  not  only  served  the  Lord 
himself,  but  was  solicitous  that  his  children 
and  household  might  serve  him  likewise.  I 
trust  that  he  who  inclines  yrour  heart  to  walk 
in  the  footsteps  of  faithful  Abraham  will 
bless  you  in  the  attempt,  and  give  you  peace 
in  your  dwelling ; a mercy  which  is  seldom 
enjoyed,  which,  indeed,  can  hardly  be  expect- 
ed by  those  families  wliich  call  not  upon  the 
Lord. 

Though  I readily  comply  with  your  re- 
quest, and  should  be  glad  if  I can  offer  any 
thing  that  may  assist  or  animate  you  in  your 
good  purpose  ; I am  afraid  I shall  not  answer 
your  expectations  with  regard  to  the  parti- 
culars of  your  inquiry7,  concerning  the  most 
proper  method  of  conducting  family  worship. 
The  circumstances  of  families  are  so  various, 
that  no  determinate  rules  can  be  laid  down, 
nor  has  the  word  of  God  prescribed  any ; be- 
cause, being  of  universal  obligation,  it  is 
wisely  and  graciously  accommodated  to  suit 
the  different  situations  of  his  people.  You 
must,  therefore,  as  to  circumstantials,  judge 
for  yourself.  You  will  do  well  to  pursue 
such  a method  as  you  shall  find  most  con- 
venient to  yourself  and  family,  without  scru- 
pulously binding  yourself,  when  the  scripture 
has  left  you  free. 

We  have  no  positive  precept  enjoining  us 
any  set  time  for  prayer,  nor  even  how  often 
we  should  pray,  either  in  public  or  private ; 
though  the  expressions  of,  continuing  in- 
stant in  prayer,”  “ praying  without  ceasing,” 
and  the  like,  plainly  intimate  that  prayer 
should  be  frequent.  Daniel  prayed  three 
times  a dajr ; which  the  Psalmist  speaks  of 
as  his  practice  likewise ; and  in  one  place 
declares  his  purpose  of  praising  God  seven 
times  a day.  This  last  expression  is,  perhaps, 
indefinite ; not  precisely  seven  times,  but 
very  often.  Indeed,  a person  who  lives  in 
the  exercise  of  faith  and  love,  and  who  finds, 
by  experience,  that  it  is  good  for  him  to  draw 
nigh  to  God,  will  not  want  to  be  told  how 
often  he  must  pray,  any  more  than  how  often 


ON  FAMILY  WORSHIP. 


.19 


LET.  IV.] 

ho  mast  converse  with  an  earthly  friend. 
Those  whom  we  love,  we  love  to  be  much 
with.  Love  is  the  best  casuist,  and  either 
resolves  or  prevents  a thousand  scruples  and 
questions,  which  may  perplex  those  who  only 
serve  God  from  principles  of  constraint  and 
fear.  And  a believer  will  account  those  his 
happiest  days,  when  he  has  most  leisure,  and 
most  liberty  of  spirit,  for  the  exercise  of 
prayer.  However,  I think  family  prayer  can- 
not be  said  to  be  stated,  unless  it  be  performed 
at  least  daily,  and  when  unavoidable  hinder- 
ances  do  not  prevent,  twice  a day.  Though 
all  times  and  seasons  are  alike  to  the  Lord, 
and  his  ear  is  always  open,  whenever  we 
have  a heart  to  call  upon  him;  yet  to  us 
there  is  a peculiar  suitableness  in  beginning 
and  closing  the  day  with  prayer : in  the  morn- 
ing, to  acknowledge  his  goodness  in  our  pre- 
servation through  the  night,  and  entreat  his 
presence  and  blessing  on  our  persons  and 
callings  in  the  course  of  the  day;  and  at 
night,  to  praise  him  for  the  mercies  of  the 
day  past,  to  humble  ourselves  before  him  for 
what  has  been  amiss,  to  wait  on  him  for  a re- 
newed manifestation  of  his  pardoning  love, 
and  to  commit  ourselves  and  our  concerns 
to  his  care  and  protection  while  we  sleep. 
You  will  of  course  choose  those  hours  when 
you  are  least  liable  to  be  incommoded  by  the 
calls  of  business,  and  when  the  family  can 
assemble  with  the  most  convenience;  only 
I would  observe,  that  it  greatly  preserves 
regularity  and  good  order  in  a house,  to  keep 
constantly  to  the  same  hours  when  it  is  prac- 
ticable ; and  likewise,  that  it  is  best  not  to 
defer  evening-prayer  till  late,  if  it  can  be 
well  avoided,  lest  some  who  join  in  the  ex- 
orcise, and  perhaps  the  person  himself  who 
leads  in  it,  should  be  too  weary  or  sleepy  to 
give  a due  attention.  Oil  this  account,  I 
should  advise  to  have  family-prayer  before 
supper,  where  people  have  the  choice  and 
disposal  of  their  own  hours. 

I think,  with  you,  that  it  is  very  expedient 
and  proper  that  reading  a portion  of  the  word 
of  God  should  be  ordinarily  a part  of  our  fa- 
mily-^ worship;  so  likewise,  to  sing  a hymn 
or  psalm,  or  part  of  one,  at  discretion,  pro- 
vided there  are  some  persons  in  the  family 
who  have  enough  of  the  musical  ear  and 
voice  to  conduct  the  singing  in  a tolerable 
manner ; otherwise,  perhaps,  it  may  be  better 
omitted.  If  you  read  and  sing,  as  well  as 
pray,  care  should  be  taken  that  the  combined 
services  do  not  run  into  an  inconvenient 
length. 

The  chief  thing  to  be  attended  to  is,  that 
it  may  be  a spiritual  service ; and  the  great 
evil  to  be  dreaded  and  guarded  against  in 
the  exercise  of  every  duty  that  returns  fre- 
quently upon  us,  is  formality.  If  a stated 
couise  of  family-prayer  is  kept  up  as  con- 
stantly in  its  season  as  the  striking  of  the 
dock,  it  may  come  in  time  to  be  almost  as 


| mechanically  performed,  unless  We  are  con- 
tinually looking  to  the  Lord  to  keep  our 
hearts  alive.  It  most  frequently  happens, 
that  one  or  more  members  of  a family  are 
unconverted  persons.  When  there  are  such 
present,  a great  regard  should  be  had  to  them, 
and  every  thing  conducted  with  a view  to 
their  edification,  that  they  may  not  be  dis- 
gusted, or  wearied,  or  tempted  to  think  that 
it  is  little  more  than  the  fashion  or  custom 
of  the  house;  which  will  probably  be  the 
case,  unless  the  master  of  the  family  is  lively  * 
and  earnest  in  the  performance  of  the  duty, 
and  likewise  circumspect  and  consistent  in 
every  part  of  his  behaviour  at  other  times. 
By  leading  in  the  worship  of  God  before  chil- 
dren, servants,  strangers,  a man  gives 
bond,  as  it  were,  for  his  behaviour,  and  adds 
strength  to  every  other  motive  which  should 
engage  him  to  abstain  from  all  appearance 
of  evil.  It  should  be  a constant  check  upon 
our  language  and  tempers  in  the  presence  of 
our  families,  to  consider  that  we  began  the 
day,  and  propose  to  end  it,  with  them  in 
prayer.  The  Apostle  Peter  uses  this  argu- 
ment to  influence  the  conduct  of  husbands 
and  wives  towards  each  other ; and  it  is 
equally  applicable  to  all  the  members  of  a 
family ; “ That  your  prayers  be  not  hindered 
that  is,  either  prevented  and  cut  off,  or  de- 
spoiled of  all  life  and  efficacy,  by  the  fer- 
ment of  sinful  passions.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  proper  exercise  of  family-prayer,  when 
recommended  by  a suitable  deportment,  is  a 
happy  means  of  instructing  children  and  ser- 
vants in  the  great  truths  of  religion,  of  soften- 
ing their  prejudices,  and  inspiring  them  with 
a temper  of  respect  and  affection,  which 
will  dispose  them  to  cheerful  obedience,  and 
make  them  unwilling  to  grieve  or  offend.  In 
this  instance,  as  in  every  other,  we  may  ob- 
serve, that  the  Lord’s  commands  to  his  peo- 
ple are  not  arbitrary  appointments,  but  that, 
so  far  as  they  are  conscientiously  complied 
with,  they  have  an  evident  tendency  and  suit- 
ableness to  promote  our  own  advantage.  He 
requires  us  to  acknowledge  him  in  our  fami- 
lies, for  our  own  sakes ; not  because  he  has 
need  of  our  poor  services,  but  because  we  have 
need  of  his  blessing,  and  without  the  influ- 
ence of  his  grace  (which  is  promised  to  all 
who  seek  it)  are  sure  to  be  unhappy  in  our- 
selves and  in  all  our  connexions. 

When  husband  and  wife  are  happily  par- 
takers of  the  same  faith,  it  seems  expedient, 
and  for  their  mutual  good,  that,  besides  their 
private  devotions,  and  joining  in  family 
prayer,  they  should  pray  together.  They 
have  many  wants,  mercies,  and  concerns,  in 
common  with  each  other,  and  distinct  from 
the  rest  of  the  family.  The  manner  in 
which  they  should  improve  a little  time  in 
this  joint  exercise  cannot  well  be  prescribed 
by  a third  person ; yet  I will  venture  to  sug- 
gest one  thing : and  the  rather  as  I do  not 


120 


ON  THE  SNARES  AND  DIFFICULTIES,  &c. 


remember  to  have  met  with  it  in  print.  1 
conceive  that  it  may  prove  much  to  their 
comfort  to  pray  alternately,  not  only  the 
husband  with  and  for  the  wife,  but  the  wife 
with  and  for  the  husband.  The  Spirit  of 
God  by  t ie  apostle,  has  expressly  restrained 
women  from  the  exercise  of  spiritual  gifts  in 
public,  but  I apprehend  the  practice  I am 
speaking  of  can  no  way  interfere  with  that 
restriction.  I suppose  them  in  private  to- 
gether, and  then  I judge  it  to  be  equally  right 
and  proper  for  either  of  them  to  pray  with 
the  other.  Nor  do  I meet  with  any  thing  in 
St.  Paul’s  writings  to  prevent  my  thinking, 
that  if  he  had  been  a married  man,  he  would, 
though  an  apostle,  have  been  glad  of  the 
prayers  of  his  wife.  If  you  ask,  how  often 
they  should  pray  together  ? I think  the  of- 
tener  the  better,  provided  it  does  not  break 
in  upon  their  duties;  once  a day  at  least; 
and  if  there  is  a choice  of  hours,  it  might  be 
as  well  at  some  distance  from  their  other 
seasons  of  worship.  But  I would  observe, 
as  before,  that  in  matters  not  expressly  com- 
manded, prudence  and  experience  must  di- 
rect. 

I have  written  upon  the  supposition  that 
you  use  extempore  prayer;  but  as  there  are 
many  heads  of  families  who  fear  the  Lord, 
and  have  not  yet  attained  liberty  to  pray  ex- 
tempore before  others,  I would  add,  that  their 
inability  in  this  respect,  whether  real,  or 
whether  only  proceeding  from  fear,  and  an 
undue  regard  to  self,  will  not  justify  them  in 
the  omission  of  family  prayer.  Helps  may 
be  procured.  Mr.  Jenk’s  Devotions  are  in 
many  hands,  and  I doubt  not  but  there  are 
other  excellent  books  of  the  same  kind,  w7ith 
which  I am  not  acquainted.  If  they  begin 
with  a form,  not  with  a design  to  confine 
themselves  always  to  one,  but  make  it  a part 
of  their  secret  pleading  at  the  throne  of 
grace,  that  they  may  be  favoured  with  the 
gift  and  spirit  of  prayer;  and  accustom  them- 
selves while  they  use  a form,  to  intersperse 
some  petitions  of  their  own ; there  is  little 
doubt  but  they  will  in  time  find  a growth  in 
liberty  and  ability,  and  at  length  lay  their 
book  entirely  aside.  For  it  being  every  be- 
liever’s duty  to  worship  God  in  his  family, 
his  promise  may  be  depended  upon,  to  give 
them  a sufficiency  in  all  things,  for  those 
services  which  he  requires  of  them. 

Happy  is  that  family  where  the  worship  of 
God  is  constantly  and  conscientiously  main- 
tained. Such  houses  are  temples,  in  which 
the  Lord  dwells,  and  castles  garrisoned  by  a 
divine  power.  I do  not  say,  that,  by  honour- 
ing God  in  your  house,  you  will  wholly  es- 
cape a share  in  the  trials  incident  to  the  pre- 
sent uncertain  state  of  things.  A measure  of 
such  trials  will  be  necessary  for  the  exercise 
and  manifestation  of  your  graces,  to  give  you 
a more  convincing  proof  of  the  truth  and 
sweetness  of  the  promises  made  to  a time  of 


[let.  v. 

affliction  to  mortify  the  body  of  sin,  and  tc 
wean  you  more  effectually  from  the  world. 
But  this  I will  confidently  say,  that  the  Lord 
will  both  honour  and  comfort  those  who  thus 
honour  him.  Seasons  w7ill  occur  in  w7hieh 
you  shall  know,  and  probably  your  neighbours 
shall  be  constrained  to  take  notice,  that  he 
has  not  bid  you  seek  him  in  vain.  If  you 
meet  with  troubles,  they  shall  be  accompa- 
nied by  supports,  and  followed  by  deliver- 
ance; and  you  shall  upon  many  occasions 
experience,  that  he  is  your  protector,  pre- 
serving you  and  yours  from  the  evils  by 
which  you  will  see  others  suffering  around 
you. 

I have  rather  exceeded  the  limits  I propo- 
sed, and  therefore  shall  only  add  a request, 
that  in  your  addresses  at  the  throne  of  grace 
you  will  remember,  &c. 


LETTER  V. 

On  the  Snares  and  Difficulties  attending  the 
Ministry  of  the  Gospel. 

dear  sir, — I am  glad  to  hear  that  you  are 
ordained,  and  that  the  Lord  is  about  to  fix 
you  in  a place  where  there  is  a prospect  of 
your  being  greatly  useful.  He  has  given 
you  the  desire  of  your  heart ; and  I hope  he 
has  given  you  likewise  a heart  to  devote 
yourself,  without  reserve,  to  his  service,  and 
the  service  of  souls  for  his  sake.  I willingly 
comply  with  your  request ; and  shall  without 
ceremony,  offer  you  such  thoughts  as  occur 
to  me  upon  this  occasion. 

You  have  doubtless  often  anticipated  in 
your  mind  the  nature  of  the  service  to  which 
you  are  now  called,  and  made  it  the  subject 
of  much  consideration  and  prayer.  But  a 
distant  view  of  the  ministry  is  generally  very 
different  from  what  it  is  found  to  be  when  we 
are  actually  engaged  in  it.  The  young  sol- 
dier, who  has  never  seen  an  enemy,  may 
form  some  general  notions  of  what  is  before 
him ; but  his  ideas  will  be  much  more  lively 
and  diversified  when  he  comes  upon  the  field 
of  battle.  If  the  Lord  was  to  show  us  the 
whole  beforehand,  who  that  has  a due  sense 
of  his  own  insufficiency  and  weakness,  would 
venture  to  engage!  But  he  first  draws  us  by 
a constraining  sense  of  his  love,  and  by  giv- 
iig  us  an  impression  of  the  worth  of  souls, 
and  leaves  us  to  acquire  a knowledge  of  what 
is  difficult  and  disagreeable  by  a gradual  ex- 
perience. The  ministry  of  the  gospel,  like 
the  book  which  the  apostle  John  ate,  is  a bit- 
ter sweet ; but  the  sweetness  is  tasted  first ; 
the  bitterness  is  usually  known  afterwards 
when  we  are  so  far  engaged  that  there  is  no 
going  back. 

Yet  I would  not  discourage  you;  it  is  a 
good  and  noble  cause,  and  we  serve  a good 


LET.  V.] 

and  gracious  Master ; who,  though  he  will 
make  us  feel  our  weakness  and  vileness,  will 
not  suffer  us  to  sink  under  it.  His  grace  is 
sufficient  for  us ; and  if  he  favours  us  with 
an  humble  and  dependant  spirit,  a single  eye 
and  a simple  heart,  he  will  make  every  diffi- 
culty give  way,  and  mountains  will  sink  into 
plains  before  his  power. 

You  have  known  sunething  of  Satan’s  de- 
vices while  you  were  in  private  life : how  he 
has  envied  your  privileges,  assaulted  your 
peace,  and  laid  snares  for  your  feet : though 
the  Lord  would  not  suffer  him  to  hurt  you, 
he  has  permitted  him  to  sift  and  tempt,  and 
shoot  his  fiery  arrows  at  you.  Without  some 
of  this  discipline,  you  would  have  been  very 
unfit  for  that  part  of  your  office  which  con- 
sists in  speaking  a word  in  season  to  weary 
and  heavy-laden  souls.  But  you  may  now 
expect  to  hear  from  him,  and  to  be  beset  by 
his  power  and  subtilty  in  a different  manner. 
You  are  now  to  be  placed  in  the  forefront 
of  the  battle,  and  to  stand  as  it  were,  for  his 
mark : so  far  as  he  can  prevail  against  you 
now,  not  yourself  only,  but  many  others,  will 
be  affected  ; many  eyes  will  be  upon  you ; 
and  if  you  take  a wrong  step,  or  are  ensnared 
into  a wrong  spirit,  you  will  open  the  mouths 
of  the  adversaries  wider,  and  grieve  the 
hearts  of  believers  more  sensibly  than  if  the 
same  things  had  happened  to  you  while  you 
was  a layman.  The  word  of  the  ministry  is 
truly  honourable ; but,  like  the  post  of  honour 
in  a battle,  it  is  attended  with  peculiar  dan- 
gers ; therefore  the  apostle  cautions  Timo- 
thy, “ Take  heed  to  thyself,  and  to  thy  doc- 
trine.” To  thyself  in  the  first  place,  and 
then  to  thy  doctrine  ; the  latter  without  the 
former  would  be  impracticable  and  vain. 

You  have  need  to  be  upon  your  guard  in 
whatever  way  your  first  attempts  to  preach 
the  gospel  may  seem  to  operate.  If  you 
should  (as  may  probably  be  the  case  where 
the  truth  has  been  little  known)  meet  with 
much  opposition,  you  will  perhaps  find  it  a 
heavier  trial  than  you  are  aware  of;  but  I 
speak  of  it  only  as  it  might  draw  forth  your 
corruptions,  and  give  Satan  advantage  against 
you,  and  this  may  be  two  ways;  first,  by 
embittering  your  spirit  against  opposers,  so 
as  to  speak  in  anger,  to  set  them  at  defiance, 
or  retaliate  upon  them  in  their  own  way ; 
which,  besides  bringing  guilt  upon  your  con- 
science, would  of  course  increase  your  diffi- 
culties, and  impede  your  usefulness.  A vio- 
lent opposition  against  ministers  and  profess- 
ors of  the  gospel  is  sometimes  expressed  by 
the  devil’s  roaring,  and  some  people  think  no 
good  can  be  done  without  it.  It  is  allowed, 
that  men  who  love  darkness  will  show  their 
dislike  of  the  light;  but,  I believe,  if  the  wis- 
dom and  meekness  of  the  friends  of  the  gos- 
pel had  been  always  equal  to  their  good  in- 
tentions and  zeal,  the  devil  would  not  have 
had  opportunity  of  roaring  so  loud  as  he  has 


121 

sometimes  done.  The  subject-matter  of  the 
gospel  is  offence  enough  to  the  carnal  heart 
we  must  therefore  expect  opposition;  but  we 
should  not  provoke  or  despi'se  it,  or  do  any 
thing  to  aggravate  it.  A patient  continuance 
in  well-doing,  a consistency  in  character,  and 
an  attention  to  return  kind  offices  for  hard 
treatment,  will,  in  course  of  time,  greatly 
soften  the  spirit  of  opposition  ; and  instances 
are  to  be  found  of  ministers,  who  are  treated 
with  some  respect,  even  by  those  persons  in 
their  parishes  who  are  most  averse  to  their 
doctrine.  When  the  apostle  directs  us,  “ If  it 
be  possible,  and  as  much  as  in  us  lies,  to  live 
peaceably  with  all  men,”  he  seems  to  intimate, 
that  though  it  be  difficult,  it  is  not  wholly 
impracticable.  We  cannot  change  the  root- 
ed prejudices  of  their  hearts  against  the  gos- 
pel ; but  it  is  possible,  by  the  Lord’s  blessing, 
to  stop  their  mouths,  and  make  them  ashamed 
of  discovering  it,  when  they  behold  our  good 
conversation  in  Christ.  And  it  is  well  worth 
our  while  to  cultivate  this  outward  peace, 
provided  we  do  not  purchase  it  at  the  ex- 
pense of  truth  and  faithfulness  ; for  ordinari- 
ly we  cannot  hope  to  be  useful  to  our  people, 
unless  we  give  them  reason  to  believe  that 
we  love  them,  and  have  their  interest  at 
heart.  Again,  opposition  will  hurt  you,  if  it 
should  give  you  an  idea  of  your  own  import- 
ance, and  lead  you  to  dwell  with  a secret 
self-approbation  upon  your  own  faithfulness 
and  courage  in  such  circumstances.  If  you 
are  able  to  stand  your  ground  uninfluenced 
either  by  the  favour  or  the  fear  of  men,  you 
have  reason  to  give  glory  to  God ; but.  re- 
member, that  you  cannot  thus  stand  an  hour, 
unless  he  upholds  you.  It  shows  a strong 
turn  of  mind,  when  we  are  very  ready  to  speak 
of  our  trials  and  difficulties  of  this  kind,  and 
of  our  address  and  resolution  in  encountering 
them.  A natural  stiffness  of  spirit,  with  a 
desire  to  have  self  taken  notice  of,  may  make 
a man  willing  to  endure  those  kind  of  hard- 
ships, though  he  has  but  little  grace  in  ex- 
ercise; but  true  Christian  fortitude,  from  a 
consciousness  that  we  speak  the  truths  of 
God,  and  are  supported  by  his  power  is  a 
very  different  thing. 

If  you  should  meet  with  but  little  opposi- 
tion, or  if  the  Lord  should  be  pleased  to  make 
your  enemies  your  friends,  you  will  probably 
be  in  danger  from  the  opposite  quarter.  If 
opposition  has  hurt  many,  popularity  has 
wounded  more.  To  say  the  truth,  I am  in 
some  pain  for  you.  Your  natural  abilities 
are  considerable ; you  have  been  diligent  in 
your  studies ; your  zeal  is  warm,  and  your 
spirit  is  lively.  With  these  advantages,  I 
expect  to  see  you  a popular  preacher.  The 
more  you  are  so,  the  greater  will  your  field  of 
usefulness  be : but,  alas ! you  cannot  yet  km  ^ 
to  what  it  will  expose  you.  It  is  like  walking 
upon  ice.  When  you  shall  see  an  attentive 
congregation  hanging  upon  your  words; 


ON  THE  SNARES  AND  DIFFICULTIES,  &c. 


122 


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  FAITH. 


[let.  yl 


when  you  shall  hear  the  well-meant,  but  often 
injudicious,  commendations  of  those  to  whom 
the  Lord  shall  make  you  useful ; when  you 
shall  find,  upon  an  intimation  of  your  preach- 
ing in  a strange  place,  people  thronging  from 
all  parts  to  hear  you,  how  will  your  heart  feel  1 
It  is  easy  for  me  to  advise  you  to  be  humble, 
and  for  you  to  acknowledge  the  propriety  of 
the  advice;  but  while  human  nature  remains 
in  its  present  state,  there  will  be  almost  the 
same  connection  between  popularity  and 
pride,  as  between  fire  and  gunpowder ; they 
cannot  meet  without  an  explosion,  at  least, 
not  unless  the  gunpowder  is  kept  very  damp. 
»3o  unless  the  Lord  is  constantly  moistening 
our  hearts  (if  I may  so  speak)  by  the  influ- 
ences of  his  Spirit,  popularity  will  soon  set 
us  in  a blaze.  You  will  hardly  find  a person, 
who  has  been  exposed  to  this  fiery  trial,  with- 
out suffering  loss.  Those  whom  the  Lord 
loves,  he  is  able  to  keep,  and  he  will  keep 
them  upon  the  whole ; yet  by  such  means, 
and  in  a course  of  such  narrow  escapes, 
that  they  shall  have  reason  to  look  upon 
their  deliverance  as  no  less  than  miraculous. 
Sometimes,  if  his  ministers  are  not  watchful 
against  the  first  impressions  of  pride,  he  per- 
mits it  to  gather  strength ; and  then  it  is  but 
a small  thing,  that  a few  of  their  admirers 
may  think  them  more  than  men  in  the  pulpit, 
if  they  are  left  to  commit  such  mistakes  when 
out  of  it,  as  the  weakest  of  the  flock  can 
discover  and  pity.  And  this  will  certainly 
be  the  case,  while  pride  and  self-sufficiency 
have  the  ascendant.  Beware,  my  friend,  of 
mistaking  the  ready  exercise  of  gifts  for  the 
exercise  of  grace.  The  minister  may  be 
assisted  in  public  for  the  sake  of  his  hearers ; 
and  there  is  something  in  the  nature  of  our 
public  work,  when  surrounded  by  a con- 
course of  people,  that  is  suited  to  draw 
forth  the  exertion  of  our  abilities,  and  to  en- 
gage our  attention  in  the  outward  services, 
when  the  frame  of  the  heart  may  be  far  from 
being  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  When 
Moses  smote  the  rock,  the  water  followed; 
yet  he  spoke  unadvisedly  with  his  lips,  and 
greatly  displeased  the  Lord.  However,  the 
congregation  was  not  disappointed  for  his 
fault,  nor  was  he  put  to  shame  before  them ; 
but  he  was  humbled  for  it  afterwards.  They 
are  happy  whom  the  Lord  preserves  in  some 
degree  humble,  without  leaving  them  to  ex- 
pose themselves  to  the  observation  of  men, 
and  to  receive  such  wounds  as  are  seldom 
healed  without  leaving  a deep  scar.  But 
even  these  have  much  to  suffer.  Many  dis- 
tressing exercises  you  will  probably  meet 
with,  upon  the  best  supposition,  to  preserve 
in  you  a due  sense  of  your  own  unworthi- 
ness, and  to  convince  you,  that  your  ability, 
your  acceptance,  and  your  usefulness,  de- 
pend upon  a power  beyond  your  own.  Some- 
times, perhaps,  you  will  feel  such  an  amaz- 
ing difference  between  the  frame  of  your 


spirit  in  public  and  in  private,  when  the  eyes 
of  men  are  not  upon  you,  as  will  make  you, 
almost  ready  to  conclude,  that  you  are  no 
better  than  a hypocrite,  a mere  stage-player, 
who  derives  all  his  pathos  and  exertion  from 
the  sight  of  the  audience.  At  other  times, 
you  will  find  such  a total  emptiness  and  in- 
disposition of  mind,  that  former  seasons  of 
liberty  in  preaching  will  appear  to  you  like 
the  remembrance  of  a dream,  and  you  will 
hardly  be  able  to  persuade  yourself  you  shall 
ever  be  capable  of  preaching  again ; the 
scriptures  will  appear  to  you  like  a sealed 
book,  and  no  text  or  subject  afford  any  light 
or  opening  to  determine  your  choice;  and 
this  perplexity  may  not  only  seize  you  in 
the  study,  but  accompany  you  to  the  pulpit. 
If  you  are  enabled  at  some  times  to  speak  tc 
the  people  with  power,  and  to  resemble  Sam- 
son, when,  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength, 
he  bore  away  the  gates  of  the  city,  you  will, 
perhaps,  at  others,  appear  before  them  like 
Samson  when  his  locks  were  shorn,  and  he 
stood  in  fetters.  So  that  you  need  not  tell 
the  people  you  have  no  sufficiency  in  your- 
self ; for  they  will  readily  perceive  it  without 
your  information.  These  things  are  hard  to 
bear  ; yet  successful  popularity  is  not  to  be 
preserved  upon  easier  terms ; and  if  they  are 
but  sanctified  to  hide  pride  from  you,  you 
will  have  reason  to  number  them  amongst 
your  choicest  mercies. 

I have  but  just  made  an  entrance  upon 
the  subject  of  the  difficulties  and  dangers 
attending  the  ministry.  But  my  paper  is  full. 
If  you  are  willing  I should  proceed,  let  me 
know,  and  I believe  I can  easily  find  enough 
to  fill  another  sheet.  May  the  Lord  make 
you  wise  and  watchful ! That  he  may  be 
the  light  of  your  eye,  the  strength  of  your 
arm,  and  the  joy  of  your  heart,  is  the  sincere 
prayer  of,  &c. 


LETTER  VI. 

On  the  Practical  Influence  of  Faith. 

sir, — The  use  and  importance  of  faith,  as 
it  respects  a sinner’s  justification  before  God, 
has  been  largely  insisted  on ; but  it  is  likewise 
of  great  use  and  importance  in  the  daily 
concerns  of  life.  It  gives  evidence  and  sub- 
sistence to  things  not  seen,  and  realizes  the 
great  truths  of  the  gospel,  so  as  that  they 
become  abiding  and  living  principles  of  sup- 
port and  direction,  wdiile  wre  are  passing 
through  this  wilderness.  Thus,  it  is  as  the 
eye  and  the  hand,  without  which  we  cannot 
take  one  step  with  certainty,  or  attempt  any 
service  with  success.  It  is  to  be  wished,  that 
this  practical  exercise  of  faith  we're  duly 
attended  to  by  all  professors.  We  should 
not  then  meet  with  so  many  cases  that  put 


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  FAITH. 


123 


1. 1ST.  VI.] 

us  to  a stand,  and  leave  us  at  a great  difficulty 
I/.)  reconcile,  what  we  see  in  some,  of  whom 
we  would  willingly  hope  well,  with  what  we 
read  in  scripture,  of  the  inseparable  con- 
comitants of  a true  and  lively  faith.  For  how 
can  we  but  be  staggered,  when  we  hear  per- 
sons speaking  the  language  of  assurance, 
that  they  know  their  acceptance  with  God 
through  Christ,  and  have  not  the  least  doubt 
of  their  interest  in  all  the  promises  ; while,  at 
the  same  time,  we  see  them  under  the  influ- 
ence of  unsanctified  tempers,  of  a proud, 
passionate,  positive,  worldly,  selfish,  or  churl- 
ish carriage ! 

It  is  not  only  plain  from  the  general  tenure 
of  scripture,  that  a covetous,  a proud,  or  a 
censorious  spirit,  are  no  more  consistent  with 
the  spirit  of  the  gospel,  than  drunkenness  or 
whoredom  ; but  there  are  many  express  texts 
directly  pointed  against  the  evils  which  too 
often  are  found  amongst  professors.  Thus 
the  apostle  James  assures  us,  “That  if  any 
man  seemeth  to  be  religious,  and  bridleth 
not  his  tongue,  his  religion  is  vain and  the 
apostle  John,  “ That  if  any  mar.  love  the  world, 
the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him and 
he  seems  to  apply  this  character  to  any  man, 
whatever  his  profession  or  pretences  may  be, 
“ who  having  this  world’s  goods,  and  seeing 
his  brother  have  need,  shutteth  up  his  bowels 
of  compassion  from  him.”  Surely  these  texts 
more  than  intimate,  that  the  faith  which  jus- 
tifies the  soul,  does  likewise  receive  from 
Jesus  grace  for  grace,  whereby  the  heart  is 
purified,  and  the  conversation  regulated  as 
becomes  the  gospel  of  Christ. 

There  are  too  many  who  would  have  the 
ministry  of  the  gospel  restrained  to  the  pri- 
vileges of  believers;  and  when  the  fruits 
of  faith,  and  the  tempers  of  the  mind,  which 
should  be  manifest  in  those  who  have  “tasted 
that  the  Lord  is  gracious,”  are  inculcated, 
think  they  sufficiently  evade  all  that  is  said, 
by  calling  it  legal  preaching.  I would  be 
no  advocate  for  legal  preaching;  but  we 
must  not  be  deterred  by  the  fear  of  a hard 
word,  from  declaring  the  whole  counsel  of 
God ; and  we  have  the  authority  and  example 
of  St.  Paul,  who  was  a champion  of  the  doc- 
trines of  free  grace,  to  animate  us  in  exhort- 
ing professors  to  “ walk  worthy  of  God,  who 
has  called  them  to  his  kingdom  and  glory.” 
And  indeed  the  expression  of  a believer’s 
privilege  is  often  misunderstood.  It  is  a 
believer’s  privilege  to  walk  with  God  in  the 
exercise  of  faith,  and,  by  the  power  of  his 
Spirit,  to  mortify  the  whole  body  of  sin ; to 
gain  a growing  victory  over  the  world  and 
self,  and  to  make  daily  advances  in  conformity 
to  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ.  And  noth- 
ing that  we  profess  to  know,  believe,  or  hope 
for,  deserves  the  name  of  a privilege,  farther 
than  we  are  influenced  by  it  to  die  unto  sin, 
and  to  live  unto  righteousness.  Whosoever 
is  possessed  of  true  faith,  will  not  confine 


his  inquiries  to  the  single  point  of  his  accept- 
ance with  God,  or  be  satisfied  with  the  distant 
hope  of  heaven  hereafter.  He  will  likewise 
be  solicitous  how  he  may  glorify  God  in  the 
world,  and  enjoy  such  foretastes  of  heaven 
as  are  attainable  while  he  is  yet  upon  earth. 

Faith,  then,  in  its  practical  exercise,  has 
for  its  object  the  whole  word  of  God,  and 
forms  its  estimate  of  all  things  with  which 
the  soul  is  at  present  concerned,  according 
to  the  standard  of  scripture.  Like  Moses,  it 
“ endures,  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible.” 
When  our  Lord  was  upon  earth,  and  con- 
versed with  his  disciples,  their  eyes  and 
hearts  were  fixed  upon  him.  In  danger  he 
was  their  defender ; their  guide  when  in  per- 
plexity; and  to  him  they  looked  for  the  solution 
of  all  their  doubts,  and  the  supply  of  all  their 
wants.  He  is  now  withdrawn  from  our  eyes ; 
but  faith  sets  him  still  before  us  for  the  same 
purposes,  and,  according  to  its  degree,  with 
the  same  effects,  as  if  we  actually  saw  him. 
His  spiritual  presence,  apprehended  by  faith, 
is  a restraint  from  evil,  an  encouragement  to 
every  service,  and  afiords  a present  refuge 
and  help  in  every  time  of  trouble.  To  this 
is  owing  the  delight  a believer  takes  in  ordi- 
nances, because  there  he  meets  his  Lord; 
and  to  this  likewise  it  is  owing,  that  his  re- 
ligion is  not  confined  to  public  occasions ; 
but  he  is  the  same  person  in  secret  as  he 
appears  to  be  in  the  public  assembly ; for  he 
worships  him  who  sees  in  secret,  and  dares 
appeal  to  his  all-seeing  eye  for  the  sincerity 
of  his  desires  and  intentions.  By  faith  he  is 
enabled  to  use  prosperity  with  moderation  ; 
and  knows  and  feels,  that  what  the  world 
calls  good  is  of  small  value,  unless  it  is  ac- 
companied with  the  presence  and  blessing  of 
Him  whom  his  soul  loveth.  And  his  faith 
upholds  him  under  all  trials,  by  assuring 
him  that  every  dispensation  is  under  the  di- 
rection of  his  Lord ; that  chastisements  are 
a token  of  his  love ; that  the  season,  measure, 
and  continuance  of  his  sufferings,  are  appoint- 
ed by  infinite  wisdom,  and  designed  to  work 
for  his  everlasting  good ; and  that  grace  and 
strength  shall  be  afforded  him,  according  to 
his  day.  Thus,  his  heart  being  fixed,  trust- 
ing in  the  Lord,  to  whom  he  has  committed 
all  his  concerns,  and  knowing  that  his  best 
interests  are  safe,  he  is  not  greatly  afraid  of 
evil  tidings,  but  enjoys  a stable  peace  in  the 
midst  of  a changing  world.  For  though  he 
cannot  tell  what  a day  may  bring  forth,  he 
believes  that  He,  who  has  invited  and  enabled 
him  to  cast  all  his  cares  upon  him,  will  suffer 
nothing  to  befall  him  but  what  shall  be  made 
subservient  to  his  chief  desires,  the  git  *ry  of 
God  in  the  sanctification  and  final  sal  vation 
of  his  soul.  And  if,  through  the  weakness 
of  his  flesh,  he  is  liable  to  be  startled  by  the 
first  impression  of  a sharp  and  sudden  trial, 
he  quickly  flees  to  his  strong'  refuge,  remem- 
bers it  is  the  Lord’s  doing,  resigns  himself 


124 


ON  THE  INFLUENCE  OF  FAITH. 


[let.  VII. 


to  his  will,  and  patiently  expects  a happy  is- 
sue. 

By  the  same  principle  of  faith,  a believer’s 
conduct  is  regulated  towards  his  fellow-crea- 
tures ; and  in  the  discharge  of  the  several 
duties  and  relations  of  life,  his  great  aim  is  to 
please  God,  and  to  let  his  light  shine  in  the 
world.  He  believes  and  feels  his  own  weak- 
ness and  unworthiness,  and  lives  upon  the 
grace  and  pardoning  love  of  his  Lord.  This 
gives  him  an  habitual  tenderness  and  gentle- 
ness of  spirit.  Humbled  under  the  sense  of 
much  forgiveness  to  himself,  he  finds  it  easy 
to  forgive  others,  if  he  has  aught  against  any. 
A due  sense  of  wdiat  he  is  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  preserves  him  from  giving  way  to  an- 
ger, positiveness,  and  resentment.  He  is  not 
easily  provoked,  but  is  “ swift  to  hear,  slow 
to  speak,  slow  to  wrath;”  and  if  offended, 
easy  to  be  entreated,  and  disposed,  not  only 
to  yield  to  a reconciliation,  but  to  seek  it. 
As  Jesus  is  his  life,  and  righteousness,  and 
strength,  so  he  is  his  pattern.  By  faith  he 
contemplates  and  studies  this  great  exemplar 
of  philanthropy.  With  a holy  ambition,  he 
treads  in  the  footsteps  of  his  Lord  and  Mas- 
ter, and  learns  of  him  to  be  meek  and  lowly, 
to  requite  injuries  with  kindness,  and  to  over- 
come evil  with  good.  From  the  same  views, 
by  faith  he  derives  a benevolent  spirit,  and, 
according  to  his  sphere  and  ability,  he  endea- 
vours to  promote  the  welfare  of  all  around 
him.  The  law  of  love  being  thus  written  in 
his  heart,  and  his  soul  set  at  liberty  from  the 
low  and  narrow  dictates  of  a selfish  spirit, 
his  language  will  be  truth,  and  his  dealings 
equity.  His  promise  may  be  depended  on, 
without  the  interposition  of  an  oath,  bond,  or 
witness ; and  the  feelings  of  his  own  heart, 
under  the  directions  of  an  enlightened  con- 
science, and  the  precepts  of  scripture,  prompt 
him  to  do  unto  others  as  he  would  desire  they, 
in  the  like  circumstances,  should  do  unto  him. 
If  he  is  a master,  he  is  gentle  and  compas- 
sionate ; if  a servant,  he  is  faithful  and  obedi- 
ent ; for  in  either  relation  he  acts  by  faith, 
under  the  eye  of  his  Master  in  heaven.  If 
he  is  a trader,  he  neither  dares  nor  wishes  to 
take  advantage,  either  of  the  ignorance  or 
the  necessities  of  those  with  whom  he  deals. 
And  the  same  principle  of  love  influences  his 
whole  conversation.  A sense  of  his  own  in- 
firmities makes  him  candid  to  those  of  others. 
Ke  will  not  readily  believe  reports  to  their 
prejudice,  without  sufficient  proof;  and  even 
then,  he  will  not  repeat  them,  unless  he  is 
lawfully  called  to  it.  He  believes  that  the 
precept,  “ Speak  evil  of  no  man,”  is  founded 
upon  the  same  authority  with  those  which  for- 
bid committing  adultery  or  murder,  and  there- 
fore he  “ keeps  his  tongue  as  with  a bridle.  ” 
Lastly,  faith  is  of  daily  use  as  a preserva- 
tive from  a compliance  with  the  corrupt  cus- 
toms and  maxims  of  the  world.  The  be- 
liever though  in  the  world,  is  not  of  it.  By 


faith  he  triumphs  over  its  smiles  and  entice 
ments;  he  sees  that  all  that  is  m the  world, 
suited  to  gratify  the  desires  of  the  flesh  or 
the  eye,  is  not  only  to  be  avoided  as  sinful, 
but  as  incompatible  with  his  best  pleasures. 
He  will  mix  with  the  world  so  far  as  is  ne- 
j cessarj7,  in  the  discharge  of  the  duties  of  that 
j station  of  life  in  which  the  providence  of  God 
has  placed  him,  but  no  farther.  His  leisure 
and  inclinations  are  engaged  in  a different 
pursuit.  They  who  fear  the  Lord  are  his 
chosen  companions;  and  the  blessings  he 
derives  from  the  word,  and  throne,  and  ordi- 
nances of  grace,  make  him  look  upon  the 
poor  pleasures  and  amusements  of  those  who 
| live  without  God  in  the  world  with  a mix- 
I ture  of  disdain  and  pity;  and  by  faith  he  is 
J proof  against  its  frowns.  He  will  obey  God 
| rather  than  man.  He  will  “have  no  fellow- 
ship with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness, 
but  will  rather  reprove  them.”  And  if,  upon 
this  account,  he  should  be  despised  and  in- 
juriously treated,  whatever  loss  he  suffers  in 
such  a cause,  he  accounts  his  gain,  and  es- 
teems such  disgrace  his  glory. 

I am  not  aiming  to  draw  a perfect  charac- 
ter, but  to  show  the  proper  effects  of  that 
faith  wThich  justifies,  wrhich  purifies  the 
heart,  w’hich  worketh  by  love,  and  overcomes 
the  world  An  habitual  endeavour  to  possess 
such  a frame  of  spirit,  and  thus  to  adorn  the 
gospel  of  Christ,  and  that  with  growing  suc- 
cess, is  what  I am  persuaded  you  are  not  a 
stranger  to ; and  I am  afraid  that  they  who 
can  content  themselves  wTith  aiming  at  any 
thing  short  of  this  in  their  profession,  are  too 
much  strangers  to  themselves,  and  to  the 
nature  of  that  liberty  wherewith  Jesus  has 
promised  to  make  his  people  free.  That  you 
may  go  on  from  strength  to  strength,  increas- 
ing in  the  light  and  image  of  our  Lord  and  Sa- 
viour, is  the  sincere  prayer  of,  &c. 


LETTER  Vll. 

On  the  Propriety  of  a Ministerial  Address 
to  the  Unconverted. 

sir, — In  a late  conversation,  you  desired  my 
thoughts  concerning  a scriptural  and  consis- 
tent manner  of  addressing  the  consciences 
of  unawakened  sinners  in  the  course  of  your 
ministry.  It  is  a point  on  which  many  emi- 
nent ministers  have  been,  and  are  not  a little 
divided;  and  it  therefore  becomes  me  to  pro- 
pose my  sentiments  with  modesty  and  cau- 
tion, so  far  as  I am  constrained  to  differ  from 
any,  from  w'hom,  in  general,  I would  be  glad 
to  learn. 

Some  think  that  it  is  sufficient  to  preach 
| the  great  truths  of  the  word  of  God  in  their 
hearing ; to  set  forth  the  utterly  ruined  and 
j helpless  state  of  fallen  man  by  nature,  and 


ON  MINISTERIAL  ADDRESS. 


125 


LET.  VII.] 

the  appointed  method  of  salvation  by  grace, 
through  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; and 
then  to  leave  the  application  entirely  to  the 
agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  alone  can 
enlighten  the  dark  understandings  of  sinners, 
and  enable  them  to  receive,  in  a due  manner, 
the  doctrines  of  either  the  law  or  the  gospel. 
And  they  apprehend,  that  all  exhortations, 
arguments,  and  motives,  addressed  to  those 
who  are  supposed  to  be  still  under  the  influ- 
ence of  a carnal  mind,  are  inconsistent  with 
the  principles  of  free  grace,  and  the  acknow- 
ledged inability  of  such  persons  to  perform 
any  spiritual  acts;  and  that,  therefore,  the 
preachers  who,  avowing  the  doctrines  of  free 
grace,  do,  notwithstanding,  plead  and  expos- 
tulate with  sinners,  usually  contradict  them- 
selves, and  retract  in  their  application  what 
they  had  laboured  to  establish  in  the  course 
of  their  sermons. 

There  are  others,  who,  though  they  would 
be  extremely  unwilling  to  derogate  from  the 
free  grace  and  sovereign  power  of  God  in 
the  great  work  of  conversion,  or  in  the  least 
degree  to  encourage  the  mistaken  notion 
which  every  unconverted  person  has  of  his 
own  power ; yet  think  it  their  duty  to  deal 
with  sinners  as  rational  and  moral  agents ; 
and  as  such,  besides  declaring  tne  counsel 
of  God  in  a doctrinal  way,  to  warn  them 
by  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  and  to  beseech 
them,  by  his  tender  mercies,  that  they  re- 
ceive not  the  grace  of  God  in  a preached 
gospel  in  vain.  Nor  can  it  be  denied,  but 


of  eternal  things,  have  sometimes,  in  the 
warmth  of  their  hearts,  dropped  unguarded 
expressions,  and  such  as  have  been  justly 
liable  to  exception. 

If  we  were  to  decide  to  which  of  these 
different  methods  of  preaching  the  prefer- 
ence is  due,  by  the  discernible  effects  of 
each,  it  will,  perhaps,  appear  in  fact,  with- 
out making  any  invidious  comparisons,  that 
those  ministers  whom  the  Lord  has  honoured 
with  the  greatest  success  in  awakening  and 
converting  sinners,  have  generally  been  led 
to  adopt  the  more  popular  way  of  exhortation 
or  address ; while  they  who  have  been  stu- 
diously careful  to  avoid  any  direct  applica- 
tion to  sinners,  as  unnecessary  and  improper, 
if  they  have  not  been  altogether  without 
seals  to  their  ministry,  yet  their  labours  have 
been  more  owned  in  building  up  those  who 
have  already  received  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth,  than  in  adding  to  their  number.  Now, 
as  “ he  that  winneth  souls  is  wise,”  and  as 
every  faithful  labourer  has  a warm  desire  of 
being  instrumental  in  raising  the  dead  in  sin 
to  a life  of  righteousness,  this  seems  at  least 
a presumptive  argument  in  favour  of  those 
who,  besides  stating  the  doctrines  of  the  gos- 
pel, endeavour,  by  earnest  persuasions  and 
expostulations,  to  impress  them  upon  the 


hearts  of  their  hearers,  and  intreat  and  warn 
them  to  consider  “ how  they  shall  escape,  if 
they  neglect  so  great  salvation.”  For  it  is 
not  easy  to  conceive,  that  the  Lord  should 
most  signally  bear  testimony  in  favour  of 
that  mode  of  preaching  which  is  least  con- 
sistent with  the  truth,  and  with  itself. 

But  not  to  insist  on  this,  nor  to  rest  the 
cause  on  the  authority  or  examples  of  men, 
the  best  of  whom  are  imperfect  and  fallible, 
let  us  consult  the  scriptures,  which,  as  they 
furnish  us  with  the  whole  subject-matter  of 
our  ministry,  so  they  afford  us  perfect  pre- 
cepts and  patterns  for  its  due  and  orderly 
dispensation.  With  respect  to  the  subject 
of  our  inquiry,  the  examples  of  our  Lord 
Christ,  and  of  his  authorised  ministers,  the 
apostles,  are  both  our  rule  and  our  warrant. 
The  Lord  Jesus  was  the  great  preacher  of 
free  grace,  “ who  spake  as  never  man  spake ;” 
and  his  ministry,  while  it  provided  relief  for 
the  weary  and  heavy-laden,  was  eminently 
designed  to  stain  the  pride  of  all  human  glory. 
He  knew  what  was  in  man,  and  declared, 
that  none  could  come  unto  him,  unless  drawn 
and  taught  of  God  ; John  vi.  44 — 46.  And 
yet  he  often  speaks  to  sinners  in  terms, 
which,  if  they  were  not  known  to  be  his, 
might  perhaps,  be  censured  as  inconsistent 
and  legal ; John  vi.  27 ; Luke  xiii.  24 — 27  ; 
John  xii.  35. — It  appears,  both  from  the  con- 
text and  the  tenor  of  these  passages,  that 
they  were  immediately  spoken  not  to  his 
disciples,  but  to  the  multitude.  The  apostles 
copied  from  their  Lord  : they  taught,  that  we 
have  no  sufficiency  of  ourselves,  even  to  think 
a good  thought,  and  that  “ it  is  not  of  him 
that  willeth,  or  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of 
God  who  showeth  mercy ;”  yet  they  plainly 
call  upon  sinners  (and  that,  before  they  had 
given  evident  signs  that  they  were  pricked 
to  the  heart,  as  Acts  iii.  31.)  “ to  repent,  and 
to  turn  from  their  vanities  to  the  living  God 
Acts  iii.  19,  and  xiv.  15,  and  xvii.  30. — Peter's 
advice  to  Simon  Magus  is  very  full  and  ex- 
press to  this  point : for  though  he  perceived 
him  to  be  “ in  the  very  gall  of  bitterness,  and 
in  the  bond  of  iniquity,”  he  exhorted  him  “ to 
repent,  and  to  pray,  if  perhaps  the  thought 
of  his  heart  might  be  forgiven.”  It  may  be 
presumed,  that  we  cannot  have  stronger  evi- 
dence, that  any  of  our  hearers  are  in  a carnal 
and  unconverted  state,  than  Peter  had  in  the 
case  of  Simon  Magus ; and  therefore  there 
seems  no  sufficient  reason  why  we  should 
hesitate  to  follow  the  apostle’s  example. 

You  have  been  told,  that  repentance  and 
faith  are  spiritual  acts,  for  the  performance 
of  which,  a principle  of  spiritual  life  is  abso- 
lutely necessary:  and  that  therefore,  to  exhort 
an  unregenerate  sinner  to  repent  or  believe, 
must  be  as  vain  and  fruitless  as  to  call  a dead 
person  out  of  his  grave.  To  this  it  may  be 
answered,  that  we  might  cheerfully  and  con- 
fidently undertake  even  to  call  the  dead  out 


123 


ON  MINISTERIAL  ADDRESS. 


of  their  graves,  if  we  had  the  command  and 
promise  of  God  to  warrant  the  attempt;  for 
then  we  might  expect  his  power  would  ac- 
company our  word.  The  vision  of  Ezekiel, 
chap,  xxxvii.  may  be  fitly  accommodated  to 
illustrate  both  the  difficulties  and  the  encour- 
agement of  a gospel  minister.  The  deplora- 
ble state  of  many  of  our  hearers  may  often 
remind  us  of  the  Lord's  question  to  the  pro- 
phet, “Can  the -e  dry  bones  live  1”  Our  re- 
source, like  thr  of  the  prophet,  is  entirely 
in  the  sovereignty,  grace,  and  power  of  the 
Lord : “ O Lord,  thou  knowest,  impossible  as 
it  is  to  us,  it  is  easy  for  thee  to  raise  them  unto 
life ; therefore  we  renounce  our  own  reason- 
ings ; and  though  we  see  that  they  are  dead, 
we  call  upon  them  at  thy  bidding,  as  if  they 
were  alive,  and  say,  O ye  dry  bones,  hear 
the  word  of  the  Lord ! The  means  is  our 
part,  the  work  is  thine,  and  to  thee  be  all  the 
praise.”  The  dry  bones  could  not  hear  the 
prophet ; but  while  he  spoke,  the  Lord  caused 
breath  to  enter  into  them,  and  they  lived, 
but  the  word  was  spoken  to  them  considered 
as  dry  and  dead. 

It  is  true  the  Lord  can,  and  I hope  he  often 
does  make  that  preaching  effectual  to  the 
conversion  of  sinners,  wherein  little  is  said 
expressly  to  them,  only  the  truths  of  the 
gospel  are  declared  in  their  hearing  ; but  he 
who  knows  the  frame  of  the  human  heart, 
has  provided  us  with  a variety  of  the  topics 
which  have  a moral  suitableness  to  engage 
the  faculties,  affections,  and  consciences  of 
sinners,  so  far  at  least  as  to  leave  themselves 
condemned  if  they  persist  in  their  sins,  and  by 
which  he  often  effects  the  purposes  of  his 
grace ; though  none  of  the  means  of  grace 
by  which  he  ordinarily  works,  can  produce 
a real  change  in  the  heart,  unless  they  are 
accompanied  with  the  efficacious  power^of 
his  Spirit.  Should  we  admit,  that  an  uncon- 
verted person  is  not  a proper  subject  of  minis- 
terial exhortation,  because  he  has  no  power 
in  himself  to  comply,  the  just  consequence 
of  this  position  would,  perhaps,  extend  too 
far,  oven  to  prove  the  impropriety  of  all  ex- 
hortation universally : for  when  we  invite 
the  weary  and  heavy  laden  to  come  to  Jesus, 
that  they  may  find  rest ; when  we  call  upon 
backsliders  to  remember  from  whence  they 
are  fallen,  “to  repent  and  to  do  their  first 
works yea,  when  we  exhort  believers  “ to 
walk  worthy  of  God,  who  has  called  them 
to  his  kingdom  and  glory;”  in  each  of  these 
cases  we  press  them  to  acts  for  which  they 
have  no  inherent  power  of  their  own ; and 
unless  the  Lord  the  Spirit  is  pleased  to  apply 
the  words  to  their  hearts,  we  do  but  speak 
to  the  air ; and  our  endeavours  can  .have  no 
more  effect  in  these  instances,  than  if  we 
were  to  say  to  a dead  body,  “ Arise,  and  walk.” 
For  an  exertion  of  divine  power  is  no  less 
necessary  to  the  healing  of  a wounded  con- 
science, than  the  breaking  of  a hard  heart ; 


[let.  vii. 

and  only  he  who  has  begun  the  good  work 
of  grace,  is  able  either  to  revive  or  to  main- 
tain it. 

Though  sinners  are  destitute  of  spiritual 
life,  they  are  not  therefore  mere  machines. 
They  have  a power  to  do  many  things,  which 
they  may  be  called  upon  to  exert.  They  are 
capable  of  considering  their  ways : they  know 
they  are  mortal ; and  the  bulk  of  them  are 
persuaded  in  their  consciences,  that  after 
death  there  is  an  appointed  judgment.  They 
are  not  under  an  inevitable  necessity  of  liv- 
ing in  known  and  gross  sins ; that  they  do 
so,  is  not  for  want  of  power,  but  for  want  of 
will.  The  most  profane  swearer  can  refrain 
from  his  oaths,  while  in  the  presence  of  a 
person  whom  he  fears,  and  to  whom  he  knows 
it  would  be  displeasing.  Let  a drunkard  see 
poison  put  into  his  liquor,  and  it  may  stand 
by  him  untasted  from  morning  till  night.  And 
many  would  he  deterred  from  sins  to  which 
they  are  greatly  addicted,  by  the  presence 
of  a child,  though  they  have  no  fear  of  God 
before  their  eyes.  They  have  a power  like- 
wise of  attending  upon  the  means  of  grace  ; 
and  though  the  Lord  only  can  give  them  true 
faith  and  evangelical  repentance,  there  seems 
no  impropriety  to  invite  them,  upon  the 
ground  of  the  gospel-promises,  to  seek  to  him 
who  is  exalted  to  bestow  these  blessings,  and 
who  is  able  to  do  that  lor  them,  which  they 
cannot  do  for  themselves,  and  who  has  said, 
“ Him,  that  cometh  unto  me,  I will  in  no  wise 
cast  out.”  Perhaps  it  will  not  be  easily  prov- 
ed, that  intreaties,  arguments,  warnings, 
formed  upon  these  general  principles,  which 
are  in  the  main  agreeable  and  adequate  to 
the  remaining  light  of  natural  conscience, 
are  at  all  inconsistent  with  those  doctrines 
which  ascribe  the  whole  of  a sinner’s  salva- 
tion, from  first  to  last,  to  the  free  sovereign 
grace  of  God. 

We  should,  undoubtedly,  endeavour  to 
maintain  a consistency  in  our  preaching; 
but  unless  we  keep  the  plan  and  manner  of 
the  scripture  constantly  in  view,  and  attend 
to  every  part  of  it,  a design  of  consistency 
may  fetter  our  sentiments,  and  greatly  pre- 
clude our  usefulness.  We  need  not  wish  to 
be  more  consistent  than  the  inspired  writers, 
nor  be  afraid  of  speaking,  as  they  have  spo- 
ken before  us.  We  may  easily  perplex  our- 
selves, and  our  hearers  by  nice  reasonings 
on  the  nature  of  human  liberty,  and  the  divine 
agency  on  the  hearts  of  men ; but  such  dis- 
quisitions are  better  avoided.  W e shall,  per- 
haps, never  have  full  satisfaction  on  these 
subjects,  till  we  arrive  in  the  world  of  light. 
In  the  mean  time,  the  path  of  duty,  the  good 
old  way,  lies  plain  before  us.  If  when  you 
are  in  the  pulpit,  the  Lord  favours  you  with 
a lively  sense  of  the  greatness  of  the  trust, 
and  the  worth  of  the  souls  committed  to  your 
charge,  and  fills  your  heart  with  his  con- 
straining love,  many  little  curious  distinctions. 


ON  THE  INWARD  WITNESS  OF  FAITH. 


127 


LET.  VIII.] 


which  amused  you  at  other  times,  will  be 
forgotten.  Your  soul  will  go  forth  with 
your  words;  and  while  your  bowels  yearn 
over  poor  sinners,  you  will  not  hesitate  a 
moment,  whether  you  ought  to  warn  them 
of  their  danger  or  not.  That  great  champion 
of  free  grace,  Dr.  Owen,  has  a very  solemn 
address  to  sinners,  the  running  title  to  which 
is,  “ Exhortations  unto  believing.”  It  is  in  his 
Exposition  of  the  130th  Psalm,  from  p.  242, 
to  247,  London  edition,  1609,  which  I re- 
commend to  your  attentive  consideration.  I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  VIII. 

On  the  Inward  Witness  to  the  Ground  and 
Reality  of  Faith. 

sir, — I readily  offer  you  my  thoughts  on 
1 John  v.  10,  “ He  that  believeth  on  the  Son 
of  God,  hath  the  witness  in  himself;”  though, 
perhaps,  you  will  think  I am  writing  a ser- 
mon rather  than  a letter.  If  we  believe  in 
the  Son  of  God,  whatever  trials  we  may  meet 
with  in  the  present  life,  our  best  concerns 
are  safe,  and  our  happiness  is  sure.  If  we  do 
not,  whatever  else  we  have,  or  seem  to  have, 
we  are  in  a state  of  condemnation  ; and  liv- 
ing- and  dying  so,  must  perish.  Thousands, 
it  is  to  be  feared,  persuade  themselves  that 
they  are  believers,  though  they  cannot  stand 
the  test  of  scripture.  And  there  are  many 
real  believers,  who,  through  the  prevalence 
of  remaining  unbelief  and  the  temptations 
of  Satan,  form  hard  conclusions  against 
themselves  though  the  scripture  speaks  peace 
to  them.  But  how  does  this  correspond  with 
the  passage  before  us  which  asserts  univer- 
sally, “He  that  believeth,  hath  the  witness  in 
himself  1”  for  can  a man  have  a witness  in 
himself  and  yet  not  know  it ! It  may  be  an- 
swered, The  evidence,  in  its  own  nature,  is 
sufficient  and  infallible ; but  we  are  very  apt, 
when  we  would  form  a judgment  of  our- 
selves, to  superadd  rules  and  marks  of  trial 
which  are  not  given  us,  for  that  purpose,  in 
the  Bible.  That  the  word  and  Spirit  of  God 
do  witness  for  his  children,  is  a point  in  which 
many  are  agreed,  who  are  far  from  being 
agreed  as  to  the  nature  and  manner  of  that 
witness.  It  is,  therefore,  very  desirable 
rightly  to  understand  the  evidence  by  which 
we  are  to  judge  whether  we  are  believers 
or  not. 

The  importance  and  truth  of  the  gospel- 
salvation  is  witnessed  to  in  heaven,  by  “ the 
Father,  the  Word,  and  the  Spirit.”  It  is 
witnessed  to  on  earth,  by  “ the  Spirit,  the 
water,  and  the  blood,”  verses  7 and  8.  The 
Spirit,  in  verse  8, 1 apprehend,  denotes  a di- 
vine light  in  the  understanding,  communi- 
cated by  the  Spirit  of  God,  enabling  the  soul 


to  perceive  and  approve  the  truth.  The  water 
seems  to  intend  the  powerful  influence  of 
this  knowledge  and  light,  in  the  work  of 
sanctification.  And  the  blood,  the  applica- 
tion of  the  blood  of  Jesus  to  the  conscience 
relieving  it  from  guilt  and  fear,  and  impart- 
ing a “ peace  which  passes  all  understand- 
ing.” And  he  that  believeth  hath  this  united 
testimony  of  the  Spirit,  the  water,  and  the 
blood,  not  by  hearsay  only,  but  in  himself. 
According  to  the  measure  of  liis  faith  (for 
faith  has  various  degrees)  he  has  a living 
proof  that  the  witness  is  true,  by  the  effects 
wrought  in  his  own  heart. 

These  things,  which  God  has  joined  toge- 
ther are  too  often  attempted  to  be  separated. 
Attempts  of  this  kind  have  been  a principal 
source  and  cause  of  most  of  the  dangerous 
errors  and  mistakes  which  are  to  be  found 
among  professors  of  religion.  Fome  say 
much  concerning  the  Spirit,  and  lay  claim 
to  an  inward  light,  whereby  they  think  they 
know  the  things  of  God.  Others  lay  great 
stress  upon  the  water ; maintaining  a regular 
conversation,  abstaining  from  the  defilements 
of  the  world,  and  aiming  at  a mastery  over 
their  natural  desires  and  tempers ; but  neither 
the  one  nor  the  other  appear  to  be  duly  sen- 
sible of  the  value  of  the  blood  of  atonement, 
as  the  sole  ground  of  their  acceptance,  and 
the  spring  of  their  life  and  strength.  Others, 
again,  are  all  for  the  blood ; can  speak  much 
of  Jesus,  and  his  blood  and  righteousness; 
though  it  does  not  appear  that  they  are  truly 
spiritually  enlightened  to  perceive  the  beauty 
and  harmony  of  gospel-truths,  or  that  they 
pay  a due  regard  to  that  holiness  without 
which  no  man  can  see  the  Lord.  But  Jesus 
came,  not  by  water  only,  cr  by  bleed  only, 
but  by  water  and  blood ; and  the  Spirit  bears 
witness  to  both,  because  the  Spirit  is  truth. 
The  water  alone  affords  but  a cold  starched 
form  of  godliness,  destitute  of  that  enliven- 
ing power  which  is  derived  from  a knowledge 
of  the  preciousness  of  Jesus,  as  the  Lamb 
that  was  slain.  And  if  any  talk  of  the  blood 
without  the  water,  they  do  but  turn  the  grace 
of  God  into  licentiousness;  so,  likewise,  to 
pretend  to  the  Spirit,  and  at  the  same  time 
to  have  low  thoughts  of  Jesus,  is  a delusion 
and  vanity ; for  the  true  Spirit  testifies  and 
takes  of  his  glory,  and  presents  it  to  the  sou!. 
But  the  real  believer  receives  the  united 
testimony,  and  has  the  witness  in  himself 
that  he  does  so. 

To  have  the  witness  in  ourselves,  is  to 
have  the  truths  that  are  declared  in  the 
scripture  revealed  in  our  hearts.  This  brings 
an  experimental  conviction,  which  may  be 
safely  depended  on,  that  “ we  have  received 
the  grace  of  God  in  truth.”  A man  born 
blind  may  believe  that  the  sun  is  bright  upon 
the  testimony  of  another ; but  if  he  should 
obtain  his  sight,  he  would  have  the  witness 
in  himself.  Believing  springs  from  a sense 


128 


ON  THE  INWARD  WITNESS  OF  FAITH. 


and  perception  of  the  truths  of  the  gospel ; 
and  whoever  hath  this  spiritual  perception  is 
a believer.  He  has  a witness  in  himself. 
He  has  received  the  Spirit ; his  understand- 
ing is  enlightened,  whereby  he  sees  things 
to  be  as  they  are  described  in  the  word  of 
Goi,  respecting  his  own  state  by  sin,  and  the 
utter  impossibility  of  his  obtaining  relief  by 
any  other  means  than  those  proposed  in  the 
gospel.  These  things  are  hidden  from  us 
bv  nature.  He  has  likewise  received  the 
blood.  The  knowledge  of  sin,  and  its  de- 
merits, if  alone,  would  drive  us  to  despair;  but 
by  the  same  light  of  the  Spirit,  Jesus  is  appre- 
hended as  a suitable  and  all -sufficient  Saviour. 
All  that  is  declared  concerning  his  person, 
offices,  love,  sufferings,  and  obedience,  is 
understood  and  approved.  Here  the  wound- 
ed and  weary  soul  finds  healing  and  rest. 
Then  the  apostle’s  language  is  adopted,  “ Yea, 
doubtless,  and  I count  all  things  but  loss  for 
the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
Jesus  my  Lord.”  He  has  likewise  received 
the  water,  considered  as  the  emblem  of  sanc- 
tification. To  a believer,  all  that  the  scripture 
teaches  concerning  the  nature,  beauty,  and 
necessity  of  holiness,  as  a living  principle 
in  *he  heart,  carries  conviction  and  evidence. 
A deliverance  from  the  power,  as  well  as 
from  the  guilt  of  sin,  appears  to  be  an  im- 
portant, and  essential  part  of  salvation.  He 
sees  his  original  and  his  proper  happiness, 
that  nothing  less  than  communion  with  God 
and  conformity  to  him,  is  worth  his  pursuit. 
And  therefore  he  can  say,  “ My  soul  thirsteth 
for  thee ; I delight  in  the  law  of  God  after 
the  inward  man.”  In  a word,  his  judgment 
and  his  choice  are  formed  upon  a new  spi- 
ritual taste,  derived  from  the  written  word, 
and  correspondent  with  it,  as  the  musical 
ear  is  adapted  to  relish  harmony:  so  that 
what  God  has  forbidden,  appears  hateful; 
what  he  has  commanded,  necessary ; what  he 
has  promised,  desirable ; and  what  he  has  re- 
vealed, glorious.  Whoever  has  these  percep- 
tions, has  the  witness  in  himself,  that  he  has 
been  taught  of  God,  and  believes  in  his  Son. 

If  you  think  this  explanation  is  agreeable 
to  the  scripture,  you  will  be  satisfied  that  the 
witness  spoken  of  in  this  passage,  is  very  dif- 
ferent from  what  some  persons  understand  it 
to  be.  It  is  not  an  impulse,  or  strong  per- 
suasion impressed  upon  us  in  a way  of  which 
we  can  give  no  account,  that  “we  are  the  ! 
children  of  God,”  and  that  our  sins  are  freely 
forgiven ; nor  is  the  powerful  application  of 
a particular  text  of  scripture  necessary  to 
produce  it;  neither  is  it  always  connected 
with  a very  lively,  and  sensible  comfort. 
These  things,  in  some  persons,  and  instances, 
may  accompany  the  witness  or  testimony  we 
are  speaking  of*,  but  do  not  properly  belong 
to  it ; and  they  may  be,  and  often  have  been, 
counterfeited.  But  what  I have  described  is 
inimitable  and  infallible:  it  is  undubitably,  as 


[let.  viii. 

the  magicians  confessed  of  the  miracles  of 
Moses,  the  finger  of  God,  as  certainly  the 
effect  of  his  divine  power  as  the  creation  of 
the  world.  It  is  true,  many  who  have  this  wit- 
ness walk  in  darkness,  and  are  harassed  with 
many  doubts  and  perplexities  concerning 
their  state ; but  this  is  not  because  the  wit- 
ness is  not  sufficient  to  give  them  satisfaction, 
but  because  they  do  not  account  it  so;  being 
misled  by  the  influence  of  self-will  and  a le- 
gal spirit,  they  overlook  this  evidence  as  too 
simple,  and  expect  something  extraordinary ; 
at  least,  they  think  they  cannot  be  right,  un- 
less they  are  led  in  the  same  way  in  which 
the  Lord  has  been  pleased  to  lead  others, 
with  whom  they  may  have  conversed.  But 
the  Lord  the  Spirit  is  sovereign  and  free  in 
his  operations;  and  though  he  gives  to  all 
who  are  the  subjects  of  his  grace,  the  same 
views  of  sin,  of  themselves,  and  of  the  Sa- 
viour ; yet  with  respect  to  the  circumstan- 
tials of  his  work,  there  is,  as  in  the  features 
of  our  faces,  such  an  amazing  variety,  that 
perhaps  no  two  persons  can  be  found  whose 
experiences  have  been  exactly  alike:  but,  as 
the  apostle  says,  that  “ he  that  believeth,” 
that  is,  whosoever  believeth,  without  excep- 
tion, “ has  the  witness  in  himself ;”  it  must, 
consequently,  arise  from  what  is  common  to 
them  all,  and  not  from  what  is  peculiar  to  a 
few. 

Before  I conclude,  I would  make  two  or 
three  observations.  In  the  first  place,  I think 
it  is  plain,  that  the  supposition  of  a real  be- 
liever’s living  in  sin,  or  taking  encourage- 
ment from  the  gospel  so  to  do,  is  destitute  of 
the  least  loundation  in  truth,  and  can  only 
proceed  from  an  ignorance  of  the  subject. 
Sin  is  the  burden  under  which  he  groans ; 
and  he  would  account  nothing  short  of  a de- 
liverance from  it  worthy  the  name  of  salva- 
tion. A principal  part  of  his  evidence,  that 
he  is  a believer,  arises  from  that  abhorrence 
of  sin  which  he  habitually  feels.  It  is  true, 
sin  still  dwelleth  in  him  ; but  he  loaths  and 
resists  it : upon  this  account  he  is  in  a state 
of  continual  warfare ; if  he  was  not  so,  he 
could  not  have  the  witness  in  himself,  that 
he  is  born  of  God. 

Again,  from  hence  arises  a solid  evidence, 
that  the  scripture  is  indeed  the  word  of  God, 
because  it  so  exactly  describes  what  is  ex- 
emplified in  the  experience  of  all  who  are 
i subjects  of  a work  of  grace.  While  we  are 
in  a natural  state,  it  is  to  us  as  a sealed  book ; 
though  we  can  read  it,  and  perhaps  assent  to 
the  facts,  we  can  no  more  understand  our 
own  concernments  in  what  we  read,  than  if 
it  was  written  in  an  unknown  tongue.  But 
when  the  mind  is  enlightened  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  scripture  addresses  us  as  it  were 
by  name,  explains  every  difficulty  under 
which  we  laboured,  and  proposes  an  ade- 
quate and  effectual  remedy  for  the  relief  of 
all  our  wants  and  fears. 


ON  ELECTION  AND  PERSEVERANCE. 


129 


LET.  IX.] 


Lastly,  it  follows,  that  the  hope  of  a be- 
liever, is  built  upon  a foundation  that  cannot 
be  shaken,  though  it  may,  and  will  be,  as- 
saulted. It  does  not  depend  upon  occasional 
and  changeable  frames,  upon  any  that  is  pre- 
carious and  questionable,  but  upon  a corres- 
pondence and  agreement  with  the  written 
word.  Nor  does  this  agreement  depend  upon 
a train  of  laboured  arguments  and  deductions, 
but  is  self-evident,  as  light  is  to  the  eye,  to 
every  person  who  has  a real  participation  of 
the  grace  of  God.  It  is  equally  suited  to  all 
capacities ; by  this  the  unlearned  are  enabled 
to  know  their  election  of  God,  and  to  “ rejoice 
with  a joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.” 
And  the  wisest,  if  destitute  of  this  percep- 
tion, though  they  may  be  masters  of  all  the 
external  evidences  of  Christianity,  and  able 
to  combat  the  cavils  of  infidels,  can  see  no 
real  beauty  in  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  nor 
derive  any  solid  comfort  from  them. 

I have  only  sent  you  a few  hasty  hints : it 
would  be  easy  to  enlarge ; but  I sat  down, 
not  to  write  a book,  but  a letter.  May  this 
inward  witness  preside  with  power  in  our 
hearts,  to  animate  our  hopes,  and  to  mortify 
our  corruptions ! — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IX. 

On  the  Doctrines  of  Election  and  final  Per- 
severance. 

dear  sir, — Your  letter  breathes  the  spirit 
of  a Christian,  though  you  say  you  are  not  a 
Calvinist.  I should  have  still  confined  my- 
self, in  my  letters,  to  the  great  truths  in 
which  we  are  agreed,  if  you  had  not  invi- 
ted me  to  touch  upon  the  points  wherein  we 
differ.  If  you  were  positive  and  peremp- 
tory in  your  present  sentiments,  I should  not 
think  it  my  duty  to  debate  with  you ; in  that 
case,  we  might  contend  as  much  for  vic- 
tory as  for  truth.  But  as  you  profess  your- 
self an  inquirer,  and  are  desirous  of  forming 
your  judgment  agreeable  to  the  word  of  God, 
without  being  influenced  by  the  authority  of 
names  and  parties,  I willingly  embrace  the 
occasion  you  offer  me.  You  say,  that  though 
you  are  not  prejudiced  against  the  doctrines 
of  election,  and  perseverance  of  the  saints, 
they  appear  to  you  attended  with  such  diffi- 
culties, that  you  cannot  yet  heartily  and  ful-  , 
< v assent  to  them.  May  the  Lord  the  Spirit, 
wnose  office  it  is  to  guide  his  peop.e  into  all 
truth,  dictate  to  my  pen,  and  accompany 
what  I shall  write  with  his  blessing. 

It  is  not  my  intention  to  prove  and  illus- 
trate these  doctrines  at  large,  or  to  encounter 
the  various  objections  that  have  been  raised 
against  them.  So  much  has  been  done  in 
this  way  already,  that  I could  only  repeat 
what  has  been  said  to  greater  advantage  by 


others.  Nor  need  I refer  you  to  the  books 
which  have  been  professedly  written  upon 
this  argument. — In  a letter  to  a friend,  I shall 
not  aim  at  the  exactness  of  a disputant,  but 
only  offer  a few  unpremeditated  hints,  in  the 
same  manner  as  if  I had  the  pleasure  of  per 
sonally  conversing  with  you. 

Permit  me  to  remind  you,  in  the  first  place, 
of  that  important  aphorism,  John  iii.  27, 
(which,  by  the  by,  seems  to  speak  strongly 
in  favour  of  the  doctrines  in  question  :)  “ A 
man  can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be  given 
him  from  heaven.”  If  you  should  accede  to 
my  opinions  upon  my  persuasion  only,  you 
would  be  little  benefitted  by  the  exchange. 
The  Lord  alone  can  give  us  the  true,  vital, 
comfortable,  and  useful  knowledge  of  his 
own  truths.  We  may  become  wise  in  no- 
tions, and  so  far  masters  of  a system  or 
scheme  of  doctrines,  as  to  be  able  to  argue, 
object,  and  fight,  in  favbur  of  our  own  hypo- 
thesis, by  dint  of  application,  and  natural 
abilities ; but  we  rightly  understand  what  we 
say,  and  whereof  we  affirm,  no  farther  than 
we  have  a spiritual  perception  of  it  wrought 
in  our  hearts  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
It  is  not,  therefore,  by  noisy  disputation,  but 
by  humble  waiting  upon  God  in  prayer,  and 
a careful  perusal  of  his  holy  word,  that  we 
are  to  expect  a satisfactory,  experimental, 
and  efficacious  knowledge  of  the  truth  as  it 
is  in  Jesus.  I am  persuaded,  that  you  are 
seeking  in  this  way ; if  so,  I am  confident, 
you  shall  not  seek  in  vain.  The  Lord  teaches 
effectually,  though  for  the  most  part  gradu- 
ally. The  path  of  the  just  is  compared  to 
the  light,  which  is  very  faint  at  the  early 
dawn,  but  shineth  more  and  more  to  the  per- 
fect day. 

If  you  sincerely  seek  the  Lord’s  direction 
by  prayer,  you  will  of  course  make  use  of  his 
appointed  means  of  information,  and  search 
the  scriptures.  Give  me  leave  to  offer  you 
the  following  advices,  while  you  are  reading 
and  comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual. 
First,  not  to  lay  too  great  stress  upon  a few 
detached  texts,  but  seek  for  that  sense  which 
is  most  agreeable  to  the  general  strain  of  the 
scripture.  The  infallible  word  of  God  must 
doubtless  be  consistent  with  itself.  If  it  does 
not  appear  so  to  us,  the  obscurity  and  seeming 
inconsistency  must  be  charged  to  the  remain- 
ing darkness  and  ignorance  of  our  minds.  As 
many  locks,  whose  wards  differ,  are  opened 
rwith  equal  ease  by  one  master-key ; so  there 
is  a certain  comprehensive  view  of  scriptural 
truth,  which  opens  hard  places,  solves  objec- 
tions, and  happily  reconciles,  illustrates,  and 
harmonizes  many  texts,  which,  to  those  who 
have  not  this  master-key,  frequently  styled 
the  analogy  of  faith,  appear  little  less  than 
contradictory  to  each  other.  When  you  ob- 
tain this  key,  you  will  be  sure  that  you  have 
the  right  sense. 

Again,  you  will  do  well  to  consult  expe- 


130 


ON  ELECTION  AND  PERSEVERANCE. 


[let.  IX. 


rience  as  you  go  along.  For  though  this  is 
not  to  be  depended  upon  in  the  first  instance, 
but  must  itself  be  subjected  to  the  rule  of  the 
written  word,  yet  it  is  a good  subordinate 
help.  Consider  which  sense  is  most  agree- 
able to  what  passes  within  you  and  around 
you,  and  which  best  answers  to  the  dealings 
of  God  with  yourself,  and  to  what  you  can 
observe  of  his  dealings  with  others. 

Farther,  when  you  are  led  (as  I think  you 
will  be,  if  you  are  not  already)  to  view  the 
Calvinist  doctrines  in  a favourable  light,  be 
not  afraid  of  embracing  them,  because  there 
may  be,  perhaps,  some  objections,  which,  for 
want  of  a full  possession  of  the  key  I men- 
tioned, you  are  not  able  to  clear  up;  but 
consider  if  there  are  not  as  strong  or  stronger 
objections  against  the  other  side.  We  are 
poor  weak  creatures : and  the  clearing  up  of 
every  difficulty  is  not  what  we  are  immedi- 
ately called  to,  but  rather  to  seek  that  light 
which  may  strengthen  and  feed  our  souls. 

Lastly,  compare  the  tendency  of  different 
opinions.  This  is  an  excellent  rule,  if  we 
can  fairly  apply  it.  Whatever  is  from  God 
has  a sure  tendency  to  ascribe  glory  to  him. 
to  exclude  boasting  from  the  creature,  to 
promote  the  love  and  practice  of  holiness, 
and  increase  our  dependence  upon  his  grace 
and  faithfulness.  The  Calvinists  have  no  rea- 
son to  be  afraid  of  resting  the  merits  of  their 
cause  upon  this  issue ; notwithstanding  the 
unjust  misrepresentations  which  have  been 
often  made  of  their  principles,  and  the  un- 
generous treatment  of  those  who  would 
charge  the  miscarriages  of  a few  individuals, 
as  the  necessary  consequence  of  embr 
those  principles. 

But  I must  check  myself,  or  I shall  finish 
my  letter  before  I properly  begin  my  subject. 
You  have  objections  to  the  doctrine  of  elec- 
tion. You  will,  however,  agree  with  me, 
that  the  scripture  does  speak  of  it,  and  that 
in  very  strong  and  express  terms,  particular- 
ly St.  Paul.  I have  met  with  some  sincere 
people,  as  I believe,  who  have  told  me  that 
they  could  not  bear  to  read  his  eighth  chap- 
ter to  the  Romans,  but  always  passed  it  over; 
so  that  their  prejudices  against  election,  pre- 
judiced them  against  a part  of  the  scripture 
likewise.  But  why  so,  unless  because  the 
dreaded  doctrine  is  maintained  too  plainly  to 
be  evaded  1 But  you  will  say,  that  some 
writers  and  preachers  attempt  to  put  an 
easier  sense  upon  the  apostle’s  words.  Let 
us  judge  then,  as  I lately  proposed,  from  ex- 
perience. Admitting,  what  I am  sure  you 
will  admit,  the  total  depravity  of  human  na- 
ture, how  can  we  account  for  the  conversion 
of  a soul  to  God,  unless  we  likewise  admit 
an  election  of  grace  1 The  work  must  be- 
gin somewhere.  Either  the  sinner  first 
seeks  the  Lord,  or  the  Lord  first  seeks  the 
sinner.  The  former  is  impossible,  if  by  na- 
ture we  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins ; if 


the  God  of  this  world  have  blinded  our  eyes, 
and  maintains  the  possession  of  our  hearts ; 
and  if  our  carnal  minds,  so  far  from  being 
disposed  to  seek  God,  are  enmity  against  him. 
Let  me  appeal  to  yourself.  I think  you  know 
yourself  too  well  to  say,  that  you  either 
sought  or  loved  the  Lord*  first ; perhaps  you 
arc  conscious,  that  for  a season,  and  so  fa” 
as  in  you  lay,  you  even  resisted  his  call ; 
and  must  have  perished,  if  he  had  not  made 
you  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power,  and 
saved  you  in  defiance  of  yourself.  In  your 
own  case,  you  acknowledge  that  he  began 
with  you ; and  it  must  be  the  case  univer- 
sally with  all  that  are  called,  if  the  whole 
race  of  mankind  are  by  nature  enemies  to 
God.  Then  farther,  there  must  be  an  elec- 
tion, unless  all  are  called.  But  we  are  as- 
sured that  the  broad  road  which  is  thronged 
with  the  greatest  multitudes,  leads  to  de- 
struction. Were  not  you  and  I in  this  road  I 
Were  we  better  than  those  who  continue  in 
it  still  1 What  has  made  us  differ  from  our 
former  selves  1 Grace.  What  he  s made  us 
differ  from  those  who  are  now  as  we  once 
were 1 Grace.  Then  this  grace,  by  the  very 
terms,  must  be  differencing,  or  distinguishing 
grace ; that  is,  in  other  words,  electing  grace. 
And  to  suppose,  that  God  should  make  this 
election  or  choice  only  at  the  time  of  our 
= calling,  is  not  only  unscriptural,  but  contrary 
to  the  dictates  of  right  reason,  and  the  ideas 
we  have  of  the  divine  perfections,  particular- 
ly those  of  omniscience  and  immutability. 
They  who  believe  there  is  any  power  in  man 
by  nature,  whereby  he  can  turn  to  God,  may 
contend  for  a conditional  election  upon  the 
foresight  of  faith  and  obedience ; but  while 
others  dispute,  let  you  and  me  admire ; for 
we  know  that  the  Lord  foresaw  us  (as  we 
were)  in  a state  utterly  incapable  either  of  be- 
lieving or  obeying,  unless  he  was  pleased  to 
work  in  us  to  will  and  to  do  according  to  his 
own  good  pleasure. 

As  to  final  perseverance,  whatever  judg- 
ment we  form  of  it  in  a doctrinal  view,  un- 
less we  obrselves  do  so  persevere,  our  pro- 
fession of  religion  will  be  utterly  vain ; for 
only  “ they  that  endure  to  the  end  shall  be 
saved.”  It  should  seem,  that  whoever  be- 
lieves this,  and  is  duly  apprized  of  his  own 
weakness,  the  number  and  strength  of  his 
spiritual  enemies,  and  the  difficulties  and 
dangers  arising  from  his  situation  in  this  evil 
world,  will  at.  least  he  desirous  to  have,  if 
possible,  some  security  that  his  labour  and 
expectation  shall  not  be  in  vain.  To  be  at 
an  uncertainty  in  a point  of  so  great  import- 
ance, to  have  nothing  to  trust  to  for  our  con- 
tinuance in  well  doing,  but  our  own  feeble 
efforts,  our  partial  diligence,  and  short-sight- 
ed care,  must  surely  be  distressing,  if  we 
rightly  consider  how  unable  we  are  in  our- 
selves to  withstand  tne  forces  of  the  devil, 

! the  world,  and  the  flesh,  which  are  combined 


ON  ELECTION  AND  PERSEVERANCE. 


131 


LET.  IX.  J 

Against  our  peace.  In  this  view  I should 
expect,  that  the  opposers  of  this  doctrine,  if 
thoroughly  sensible  of  their  state  and  situa- 
tion, upon  a supposition  that  they  should  be 
able  to  prove  it  unscriptural  and  false,  would 
weep  over  their  victory,  and  be  sorry  that  a 
sentiment,  so  apparently  suited  to  encourage 
and  animate  our  hope,  should  not  be  founded 
in  truth.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that 
this  doctrine,  which  gives  to  the  Lord  the 
glory  due  to  his  name,  and  provides  so  effec- 
tually for  the  comfort  of  his  people,  should 
be  opposed  and  traduced  by  men  of  corrupt 
hearts.  But  it  may  well  seetn  strange,  that 
they  who  feel  their  need  of  it,  and  cannot  be 
comfortable  without  it,  should  be  afraid  or 
unwilling  to  receive  it.  Yet  many  a child 
of  light  is  walking  in  darkness  upon  this  ac- 
count. Either  they  are  staggered  by  the  sen- 
timents of  those  whom  they  think  wiser  than 
themselves,  or  stumbled  by  the  falls  of  pro- 
fessors who  were  once  advocates  for  this 
doctrine,  or  perplexed  be  ause  they  cannot 
rightly  understand  those  passages  of  scripture 
which  seem  to  speak  a different  language. 
But  as  light  and  knowledge  increase,  these 
difficulties  are  lessened.  The  Lord  claims  the 
honour,  and  he  engages  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  a complete  salvation,  that  no  power 
shall  pluck  his  people  out  of  his  hand,  or  se- 
parate them  from  his  love.  Their  perseve- 
rance in  grace,  besides  being  asserted  in 
many  express  promises,  may  be  proved  with 
the  fullest  evidence  from  the  unchangeable- 
ness of  God,  the  intercession  of  Christ,  the 
union  which  subsists  between  him  and  his 
people,  and  from  the  principle  of  spiritual 
life  he  has  implanted  in  their  hearts,  which, 
in  its  own  nature,  is  connected  with  ever- 
lasting life;  for  grace  is  the  seed  of  glory.  I 
have  not  room  to  enlarge  on  these  particu- 
lars, but  refer  you  to  the  following  texts, 
from  which  various  strong  and  invincible  ar- 
guments might  be  drawn  for  their  confirma- 
tion ; Luke  xiv.  23 — 30,  compared  with  Phil, 
i.  6 ; Heb.  vii.  24,  with  Rom.  viii.  34 — 39 ; 
John  xiv.  19,  with  xv.  1,  2,  and  iv.  14.  Up- 
on these  grounds,  my  friend,  why  may  not 
you,  who  have  fled  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set 
before  you,  and  committed  your  soul  to  Jesus, 
rejoice  in  his  salvation ; and  say,  “ While 
Christ  is  the  foundation,  root,  and  head,  and 
husband  of  his  people,  while  the  word  of  God 
is  Yea  and  Amen,  while  the  counsels  of  God 
arc  unchangeable,  while  we  have  a Mediator 
and  High  Priest  before  the  throne,  while  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  willing  and  able  to  bear  wit- 
ness to  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  while  God  is 
wiser  than  men,  and  stronger  than  Satan,  so 
long  the  believer  in  Jesus  is  and  shall  be  safe. 
Heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away,  but  the 
promise,  the  oath,  and  the  blood,  on  which 
my  soul  relies,  afford  me  a security  which 
can  never  fail.” 

As  the  doctrines  of  election  and  perse- 


verance are  comfortable,  so  they  cut  off  all 
pretence  of  boasting  and  self-dependence, 
when  they  are  truly  received  in  the  heart, 
and  therefore  tend  to  exalt  the  Saviour.  Of 
course  they  stain  the  pride  of  all  human  glory, 
and  leave  us  nothing  to  glory  in  but  the  Lord. 
The  more  we  are  convinced  of  our  utter  de- 
pravity and  inability  from  first  to  last,  the 
more  excellent  will  Jesus  appear.  The 
whole  may  give  the  physician  a good  word, 
but  the  sick  alone  know  how  to  prize  him. 
And  here  I cannot  but  remark  a difference 
between  those  who  have  nothing  to  trust  to 
but  free  grace,  and  those  who  ascribe  a little 
at  least  to  some  good  disposition  and  ability 
in  man.  We  assent  to  whatever  they  en- 
force from  the  word  of  God  on  the  subject  of 
sanctification.  We  acknowledge  its  import- 
ance, its  excellency,  its  beauty ; but  we  could 
wish  they  would  join  more  with  us  in  exalt- 
ing the  Redeemer’s  name.  Their  experience 
seems  to  lead  them  to  talk  of  themselves,  of 
the  change  that  is  wrought  in  them,  and  the 
much  that  depends  upon  their  own  watchful- 
ness and  striving.  We  likewise  would  be 
thankful  if  we  could  perceive  a change 
wrought  in  us  by  the  power  of  grace.  We 
desire  to  be  found  watching  likewise.  But 
when  our  hopes  are  most  alive,  it  is  less  from 
a view  of  the  imperfect  beginnings  of  grace 
in  our  hearts,  than  from  an  apprehension  of 
him  who  is  our  all  in  all.  His  person,  his 
love,  his  sufferings,  his  intercession,  compas- 
sion, fulness,  and  faithfulness, — these  are  our 
delightful  themes,  which  leave  us  little  lei- 
suie,  when  m our  best  frames,  to  speak  of 
ourselves.  How  do  our  hearts  soften,  and 
our  eyes  melt,  when  we  feel  some  liberty  in 
thinking  and  speaking  of  him ! For  we  i.ad 
no  help  in  time  past,  nor  can  have  any  in 
time  to  come,  but  from  him  alon  > If  any 
persons  have  contributed  a mite  to  their  own 
salvation,  it  was  more  than  we  could  do.  If 
any  were  obedient  and  faithful  to  the  first 
calls  and  impressions  of  his  Spirit,  it  was  not 
our  case.  If  any  were  prepared  to  receive 
him  beforehand,  we  know  that  we  were  in  a 
state  of  alienation  from  him.  We  needed 
sovereign  irresistible  grace  to  save  us,  or  we 
had  been  lost  for  ever.  If  there  are  any  who 
have  a power  of  their  own,  we  must  confess 
ourselves  poorer  than  they  are.  We  cannot 
watch,  unless  he  watches  with  us  ; we  can- 
not strive,  unless  he  strives  with  us ; we  can- 
not stand  one  moment,  unless  he  holds  us  up ; 
and  we  believe  we  must  perish  after  all,  un- 
less his  faithfulness  is  engaged  to  keep  us 
But  this,  we  trust,  he  will  do,  not  for  our 
righteousness,  but  for  his  own  name’s  sake, 
and  because,  having  loved  us  with  an  ever- 
lasting love,  he  has  been  pleased,  in  loving- 
kindness, to  draw  us  to  himself,  and  to  be 
found  of  us  when  we  sought  him  not. 

Can  you  think,  dear  Sir,  that  a person  who 
lives  under  the  influence  of  these  sentiments 


132 


ON  GRACE  IN  THE  BLADE. 


will  desire  to  continue  in  sin,  because  gTace 
abounds  1 No ; you  are  too  candid  an  ob- 
server of  men  and  manners,  to  believe  the 
calumnies  which  are  propagated  against  us. 
It  is  true,  there  are  too  many  false  and  empty 
professors  amongst  us ; but  are  there  none 
amongst  those  who  hold  the  opposite  senti- 
ments ! And  I would  observe,  that  the  ob- 
jection drawn  from  the  miscarriages  of  re- ! 
puted  Calvinists  is  quite  beside  the  purpose.  I 
We  maintain  that  no  doctrines  or  means  can  | 
change  the  heart,  or  produce  a gracious  con- 
versation, without  the  efficacious  power  of 
almighty  grace  : therefore,  if  it  is  found  to  be 
so  in  fact,  it  should  not  be  charged  against  our 
doctrine,  but  rather  admitted  as  a proof  and 
confirmation  of  it.  We  confess,  that  we  fall 
sadly  short  in  every  thing,  and  have  reason 
to  be  ashamed  and  amazed  that  we  are  so  I 
faintly  influenced  by  such  animating  prin- 
ciples ; yet,  upon  the  whole,  our  consciences 
bear  us  witness,  and  we  hope  we  may  declare 
it  both  to  the  church  and  to  the  world,  with- 
out just  fear  of  contradiction,  that  the  doc- 
trines of  grace  are  doctrines  according  to 
godliness. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  X. 

A ; or,  Grace  in  the  Blade. — Mark  iv.  23. 


dear  sir, — According  to  your  desire,  I sit 
down  to  give  you  my  general  views  of  a pro- 
gressive work  of  grace,  in  the  several  stages 
of  a believer’s  experience,  which  I shall 
mark  by  the  different  characters,  A,  B,  C, 
answerable  to  the  distinctions  our  Lord  teach- 
es us  to  observe  from  the  growth  of  the  corn, 
Mark  iv.  23,  “ First  the  blade,  then  the  ear, 
after  that  the  full  corn  in  the  ear.”  The 
Lord  leads  all  his  people  effectually  and  sav- 
ingly to  the  knowledge  of  the  same  essential 
truths,  but  in  such  a variety  of  methods, 
that  it  will  be  needful,  in  this  disquisition,  to 
set  aside,  as  much  as  possible,  such  things 
as  may  be  only  personal  and  occasional  in 
the  experience  of  each,  and  to  collect  those 
only  which,  in  a greater  or  less  degree,  are 
common  to  them  all.  I shall  not,  therefore, 
give  you  a copy  of  my  own  experience,  or 
of  that  of  any  individual;  but  shall  endea- 
vour, as  clearly  as  I can,  to  state  what  the 
scripture  teaches  us  concerning  the  nature 
and  essentials  of  a work  of  grace,  so  far  as 
it  will  bear  a general  application  to  all  those 
who  are  the  subjects  of  gracious  operations. 

By  nature  we  are  all  dead  in  trespasses 
and  sins,  not  only  strangers  to  God,  but  in  a 
state  of  enmity  and  opposition  to  his  govern- 
ment and  grace.  In  this  respect,  whatever 
difference  there  may  be  in  the  characters  of 
men  as  members  of  society,  they  are  all, 
whether  wise  or  ignorant,  whether  sober  or 


I 


[let.  X. 

profane,  equally  incapable  of  receiving  or 
approving  divine  truths,  1 Cor.  ii.  14.  On 
this  ground  our  Lord  declares,  “ No  man  can 
come  unto  me,  except  the  Father  who  has 
sent  me  draws  him.”  Though  the  term  Fa- 
ther most  frequently  expresses  a known  and 
important  distinction  in  the  adorable  Trinity, 
I apprehend  our  Lord  sometimes  uses  it,  to 
denote  God,  or  the  Divine  Nature,  in  contra- 
distinction from  his  humanity,  as  in  John  xiv. 
9.  And  this  I take  to  be  the  sense  here : 
“No  man  can  come  unto  me,  unless  he  is 
taught  of  God,”  and  wrought  upon  by  a di- 
vine power.  The  immediate  exertion  of  this 
power,  according  to  the  economy  of  salvation, 
is  rather  ascribed  to  the  Holy  Spirit  than  to 
the  Father,  John  xvi.  8 — 11.  But  it  is  the 
power  of  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ; and  therefore  severally  attri- 
buted to  the  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit,  John  v. 
21,  and  ch.  vi.  44,  63;  2 Cor.  iii.  13;  2 
Thes.  iii.  5. 

By  A,  I would  understand  a person  who 
is  under  the  drawings  of  God,  which  will  in- 
fallibly lead  him  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
for  life  and  salvation.  The  beginning  of  this 
work  is  instantaneous.  It  is  effected  by  a 
certain  kind  of  light  communicated  to  the 
soul,  to  which  it  was  before  an  utter  stranger. 
The  eyes  of  the  understanding  are  opened 
and  enlightened.  The  light  at  first  afforded 
is  weak  and  indistinct,  like  the  morning 
dawn ; but  when  it  is  once  begun,  it  will  cer- 
tainly increase  and  spread  to  the  perfec  t day. 
We  commonly  speak  as  if  conviction  of  sin 
was  the  first  work  of  God  upon  the  soul  that 
he  is  in  mercy  about  to  draw  unto  himself 
But  I think  this  is  inaccurate.  Conviction 
is  only  a part,  or  rather  an  immediate  effect 
of  that  first  work  ; and  there  are  many  con- 
victions which  do  not  at  all  spring  from  it,  and 
therefore  are  only  occasional  and  temporary, 
though  for  a season  they  may  be  very  sharp, 
and  put  a person  upon  doing  many  things. 
In  order  to  a due  conviction  of  sin,  we  must 
previously  have  some  adequate  conceptions 
of  the  God  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  Sin 
may  be  feared  as  dangerous  without  this; 
but  its  nature  and  demerit  can  only  be  under- 
stood by  being  contrasted  with  the  holiness, 
majesty,  goodness,  and  truth,  of  the  God 
against  whom  it  is  committed.  No  outward 
means,  no  mercies,  judgments,  or  ordinances, 
can  communicate  such  a discovery  of  God, 
or  produce  such  a conviction  of  sin,  without 
the  concurrence  of  this  divine  light  and  power 
to  the  soul.  The  natural  conscience  and  pas- 
sions may  indeed  be  so  far  wrought  upon  by 
outward  means,  as  to  stir  up  some  desires 
and  endeavours ; but  if  these  are  not  founded 
in  a spiritual  apprehension  of  the  perfections 
of  God,  according  to  the  revelatini  he  has 
made  of  himself  in  his  word,  they  will  sooner 
or  later  come  to  nothing;  and  the  person 
affected  will  either  return  by  degrees  to  his 


ON  GRACE  IN  THE  BLADE. 


LET.  X.] 

former  ways,  2 Peter  ii.  20,  or  he  will  sink 
into  a self-righteous  form  of  godliness,  des- 
titute of  the  power,  Luke  xviii.  11.  And 
therefore,  as  there  are  so  many  things  in  the 
dispensation  of  the  gospel  suited  to  work 
upon  the  natural  passions  of  men,  the  many 
woful  miscarriages  and  apostacies  amongst 
professors  are  more  to  be  lamented  than 
wondered  at.  For  though  the  seed  may  seem 
to  spring  up,  and  look  green  for  a season,  if 
there  be  not  depth  for  it  to  take  root,  it  will 
surely  wither  away.  We  may  be  unable  to 
judge  with  certainty  upon  the  first  appear- 
ance of  a religious  profession,  whether  the 
work  be  thus  deep  and  spiritual,  or  not ; but 
“ the  Lord  knows  them  that  are  his and 
wherever  it  is  real,  it  is  an  infallible  token 
of  salvation.  Now,  as  God  only  thus  reveals 
himself  by  the  medium  of  scriptu-re-truth,  the 
light  received  this  way  leads  the  soul  to  the 
scripture  from  whence  it  springs,  and  all  the 
leading  truths  of  the  word  of  God  soon  be- 
gin to  be  perceived  and  assented  to.  The 
evil  of  sin  is  acknowledged,  the  evil  of  the 
heart  is  felt.  There  may  be  for  a while  some 
efforts  to  obtain  the  favour  of  God  by  prayer, 
repentance,  and  reformation;  but  for  the 
most  part  it  is  not  very  long  before  these 
things  are  proved  tb  be  vain  and  ineffectual. 
The  soul,  like  the  woman  mentioned  Mark  v. 
26,  wearied  with  vain  expedients,  finds  itself 
worse  and  worse,  and  is  gradully  brought  to 
see  the  necessity  and  sufficiency  of  the  gos- 
pel salvation.  A may  soon  be  a believer 
thus  far : That  he  believes  the  word  of  God, 
sees  and  feels  things  to  be  as  they  are  thus 
described,  hates  and  avoids  sin,  because  he 
knows  it  is  displeasing  to  God,  and  contrary 
to  his  goodness;  he  receives  the  record 
which  God  has  given  of  his  Son ; has  his 
heart  affected  and  drawn  to  Jesus  by  views 
of  his  glory,  and  of  his  love  to  poor  sinners ; 
ventures  upon  his  name  and  promises  as  his 
only  encouragement  to  come  to  a throne  of 
grace;  waits  diligently  in  the  use  of  all 
means  appointed  for  the  communion  and 
growth  of  grace ; loves  the  Lord’s  people, 
accounts  them  the  excellent  of  the  earth, 
and  delights  in  their  conversation.  He  is 
longing,  waiting,  and  praying  for  a share  in 
those  blessings  which  he  believes  they  enjoy, 
and  cm  be  satisfied  with  nothing  less.  He  is 
convinced  of  the  power  of  Jesus  to  save  him  ; 
but  through  remaining  ignorance  and  legal- 
ity, the  remembrance  of  sin  committed,  and 
t.he  sense  of  present  corruption,  he  often 
questions  his  willingness ; and,  not  knowing 
the  abounding  of  grace,  and  the  security  of 
the  promises,  he  fears  lest  the  compassionate 
Saviour  should  spurn  him  from  his  feet. 

While  he  is  thus  young  in  the  knowledge 
of  the  gospel,  burdened  with  sin,  and,  per- 
haps, beset  with  Satan’s  temptations,  the 
Lord,  “ who  gathers  the  lambs  in  his  arms, 
and  carries  them  in  his  bosom,”  is  pleased,  at 


i33 

times,  to  favour  him  with  cordials,  that  he 
may  not  be  swallowed  up  with  overmuch 
sorrow.  Perhaps  his  heart  is  enlarged  in 
prayer,  or  under  hearing,  or  some  good  pro- 
mise is  brought  home  to  his  mind,  and  appli- 
ed with  power  and  sweetness.  He  mistakes 
the  nature  and  design  of  these  comforts, 
which  are  not  given  him  to  rest  in,  but  to  en- 
courage him  to  press  forward.  He  thinks 
he  is  then  right,  because  he  has  them,  and 
fondly  hopes  to  have  them  always.  Then 
his  mountain  stands  strong.  But  ere  long 
he  feels  a change ; his  comforts  are  with- 
drawn ; he  finds  no  heart  to  pray ; no  atten- 
tion in  hearing ; indwelling  sin  revives  with 
fresh  strength,  and,  perhaps,  Satan  returns 
with  redoubled  rage.  Then  he  is  at  his  wit’s 
end : thinks  his  hopes  were  presumptuous, 
and  his  comforts  delusions.  He  wants  to 
feel  something  that  may  give  him  a warrant 
to  trust  in  the  free  promises  of  Christ.  His 
views  of  the  Redeemer’s  gracefulness  are 
very  narrow ; he  sees  not  the  harmony  and 
glory  of  the  divine  attributes  in  the  salva- 
tion of  a sinner ; he  sighs  for  mercy,  but  fears 
that  justice  is  against  him.  However,  by 
these  changing  dispensations,  the  Lord  is 
training  him  up,  and  bringing  him  forward. 
He  receives  grace  from  Jesus,  whereby  he 
is  enabled  to  fight  against  sin ; his  conscience 
is  tender;  his  troubles  are  chiefly  spiritual 
troubles ; and  he  thinks,  if  he  could  but  at- 
tain a sure  and  abiding  sense  of  his  accept- 
ance in  the  Beloved,  hardly  any  outward 
trial  would  be  capable  of  giving  him  much 
disturbance.  Indeed,  notwithstanding  the 
weakness  of  his  faith,  and  the  prevalence  of 
a legal  spirit,  which  greatly  hurts  him,  there 
are  some  things  in  his  present  experience 
which  he  may,  perhaps,  look  back  upon  with 
regret  hereafter,  when  his  hope  and  know- 
ledge will  be  more  established.  Particularly 
that  sensibility  and  keenness  of  appetite 
with  which  he  now  attends  the  ordinances, 
desiring  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word  with 
earnestness.and  eagerness  as  a babe  does  the 
breast.  He  counts  the  hours  from  one  oppor- 
tunity to  another ; and  the  attention  and  de- 
sire with  which  he  hears  may  be  read  in  hi& 
countenance.  His  zeal  is  likewise  lively; 
and  may  be  for  want  of  more  experience,  too 
importunate  and  forward.  He  has  a love  for 
souls,  and  a concern  for  the  glory  of  God, 
which,  though  it  may  at  some  times  create 
him  trouble,  and  at  others  be  mixed  with 
some  undue  motions  of  self,  yet  in  its  prin- 
ciple is  highly  desirable  and  commendable, 
John  xviii.  10. 

The  grace  of  God  influences  both  the  un- 
derstanding and  the  affections.  Warm  affec- 
tions, without  knowledge,  can  rise  no  higher 
than  superstition  ; and  that  knowledge  which 
does  not  influence  the  heart  and  affections, 
will  only  make  a hypocrite.  The  true  be- 
liever is  rewarded  in  both  respects ; yet  we 


134 


ON  GRACE  IN  THE  EAR. 


may  observe,  that  though  A is  not  without 
knowledge,  this  state  is  more  usually  remark- 
able for  the  warmth  and  liveliness  of  the  af- 
fections. On  the  other  hand,  as  the  work 
advances,  though  the  affections  are  not  left 
out,  yet  it  seems  to  be  carried  on  principally 
in  the  understanding.  The  old  Christian  has 
more  solid,  judicious,  and  connected  views 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  glories  of 
his  person  and  redeeming  love : hence  his 
hope  is  more  established,  his  dependence 
more  simple,  and  his  peace  and  strength, 
catena  paribus,  more  abiding  and  uniform, 
than  in  the  case  of  a young  convert ; but  the 
latter  has,  for  the  most  part,  the  advantage 
in  point  of  sensible  fervency.  A tree  is  most 
valuable  when  laden  with  ripe  fruit ; but  it 
it  has  a peculiar  beauty  when  in  blossom.  It 
is  spring-time  with  A;  he  is  in  bloom,  and, 
by  the  grace  and  blessing  of  the  heavenly 
husbandman,  will  bAr  fruit  in  old  age.  His 
ffiith  is  weak,  but  his  heart  is  warm.  He 
will  seldom  venture  to  think  himself  a be- 
liever ; but  he  sees  and  feels,  and  does  those 
things  which  no  one  could,  unless  the  Lord 
was  with  him.  The  very  desire  and  bent  of 
his  soul  is  to  God,  and  to  the  word  of  his 
grace.  His  knowledge  is  but  small : but  it 
is  growing  every  day.  If  he  is  not  a father 
or  a young  man  in  grace,  he  is  a dear  child. 
The  Lord  has  visited  his  heart,  delivered 
him  from  the  love  of  sin,  and  fixed  his  desire 
supremely  upon  Jesus  Christ.  The  spirit  of 
bondage  is  gradually  departing  from  him, 
and  the  hour  of  liberty,  which  he  longs  for 
is  approaching,  when,  by  a further  discovery 
of  the  glorious  gospel,  it  shall  be  given  him 
to  know  his  acceptance,  and  to  rest  upon  the 
Lord’s  finished  salvation.  We  shall  then 
take  notice  of  him  by  the  name  of  B in  a 
second  letter,  if  you  are  not  unwilling  that 
I should  prosecute  the  subject. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XI. 

B ; or  Grace  in  the  Ear. — Mark  iv.  28. 

dear  sir, — The  manner  of  the  Lord’s 
work  in  the  hearts  of  his  people  is  not  easily 
traced,  though  the  fact  is  certain,  and  the 
evidence  demonstrable  from  scripture.  In 
attempting  to  explain  it,  we  can  only  speak 
in  general,  and  are  at  a loss  to  form  such  a 
description  as  shall  take  in  the  immense  vari- 
ety of  cases  which  occur  in  the  experience 
of  believers.  I have  already  attempted  such 
a general  delineation  of  a young  convert, 
under  the  character  of  A,  and  am  now  to 
speak  of  him  by  the  name  of  B. 

This  state  I suppose  to  commence  when 
the  soul,  after  an  interchange  of  hopes  and 
fears,  according  to  the  different  frames  it 
passes  through,  is  brought  to  rest  in  Jesus, 
by  a spiritual  apprehension  of  his  complete 


[let.  xi 

suitableness  and  sufficiency,  as  the  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption 
of  all  who  trust  in  him,  and  is  enabled,  by  an 
appropriating  faith,  to  say,  “He  is  mine,  and 
I am  his.”  There  are  various  degrees  of  this 
persuasion ; it  is  of  a growing  nature,  and  is 
capable  of  increase  so  long  as  we  remain  in 
this  world.  I call  it  assurance,  when  it 
arises  from  a simple  view  of  the  grace  and 
glory  of  the  Saviour,  independent  of  our  sen- 
sible frames  and  feelings,  so  as  to  enable  us 
to  answer  all  objections  from  unbelief  ani 
Satan,  with  the  apostle’s  words,  “ Who  is  he 
that  condemneth  I It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea, 
rather,  that  is  risen  again ; who  is  even  at 
the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  in- 
tercession for  us.”  Rom.  viii.  34.  This  in 
my  judgment  does  not  belong  to  the  essence 
of  faith,  so  that  B should  be  deemed  more 
truly  a believer  than  A,  but  to  the  establish- 
ment of  faith.  And  now  faith  is  stronger,  it 
has  more  to  grapple  with.  I think  the  cha- 
racteristic of  the  state  of  A is  desire,  and 
of  B is  conflict.  Not  that  B’s  desires  have 
subsided,  or  that  A was  a stranger  to  con- 
flict ; but  as  there  was  a sensible  eagerness 
and  keenness  in  A’s  desires,  which,  perhaps, 
is  seldom  known  to  be  equally  strong  after- 
wards; so  there  are  usually  trials  and  exer- 
cises in  B’s  experience,  something  different 
in  their  kind,  and  sharper  in  their  measure, 
than  what  A was  exposed  to  or  indeed  had 
strength  to  endure.  A,  like  Israel,  has  been 
delivered  from  Egypt  by  great  power  and 
a stretched-out  arm,  has  been  pursued  and 
terrified  by  many  enemies,  has  given  himself 
up  for  lost  again  and  again.  He  has  at  last 
seen  his  enemies  destroyed,  and  has  sung  the 
song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb  upon  the  banks 
of  the  Red'  Sea.  Then  he  commences  B. 
Perhaps,  like  Israel,  he  thinks  his  difficulties 
are  at  an  end,  and  expects  to  go  on  rejoicing 
till  he  enters  the  promised  land.  But  alas! 
his  difficulties  are  in  a manner  but  beginning; 
he  has  a wilderness  before  him,  of  which  he 
is  not  aware.  The  Lord  is  now  about  to  suit 
his  dispensations  to  humble  and  to  prove  him, 
and  to  show  what  is  in  his  heart,  that  he 
may  do  him  good  at  the  latter  end,  that  all 
the  glory  may  redound  to  his  own  free  grace. 

Since  the  Lord  hates  and  abhors  sin,  and 
teaches  his  people,  whom  he  loves,  to  hate  it 
likewise ; it  might  seem  desirable  (and  all 
things  are  equally  easy  to  him,)  that  at  the 
same  time  they  are  delivered  from  the  guilt 
and  reigning  power  of  sin,  they  should  like- 
wise be  perfectly  freed  from  the  defilement 
of  indwelling  sin,  and  be  made  fully  conform- 
able to  him  at  once.  His  wisdom  has,  how- 
ever, appointed  otherwise.  But  from  the 
above  premises  of  his  hatred  of  sin,  and  his 
love  to  his  people,  I think  we  may  certainly 
conclude,  that  he  would  not  suffer  sin  to  re- 
main in  them,  if  lie  did  not  purpose  to  over- 
rule it,  for  the  fuller  manifestation  of  the 


ON  GRACE  IN  THE  EAR. 


135 


LET.  XI.] 


glory  of  his  grace  and  wisdom,  and  for  the 
making  his  salvation  more  precious  to  their 
souls.  It  is,  however,  his  command,  and 
therefore  their  duty ; yea,  further,  from  the 
new  nature  he  has  given  them,  it  is  their  de- 
sire, to  watch  and  strive  against  sin ; and  to 
propose  the  mortification  of  the  whole  body 
of  sin,  and  the  advancement  of  sanctification 
in  their  hearts,  as  their  great  and  constant 
aim,  to  which  they  are  to  have  an  habitual 
persevering  regard.  Upon  this  plan  B sets 
out.  The  knowledge  of  our  acceptance  with 
God,  and  of  our  everlasting  security  in  Christ, 
has,  in  itself,  the  same  tendency  upon  earth 
as  it  will  have  in  heaven,  and  would,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  degree  of  evidence  and  clear- 
ness, produce  the  same  effects,  of  continual 
love,  joy,  peace,  gratitude,  and  praise,  if  there 
was  nothing  to  counteract  it.  But  B is  not 
all  spirit.  A depraved  nature  still  cleaves 
to  him,  and  he  has  the  seeds  of  every  natural 
corruption  yet  remaining  in  his  heart.  He 
lives  likewise  in  a world  that  is  full  of  snares 
and  occasions  suited  to  draw  forth  those  cor- 
ruptions ; and  he  is  surrounded  by  invisible 
spiritual  enemies,  the  extent  of  whose  power 
and  subtility  he  is  yet  to  learn  by  painful  ex- 
perience. B knows,  in  general,  the  nature 
of  his  Christian  warfare,  and  sees  his  right 
to  live  upon  Jesus  for  righteousness  and 
strength.  He  is  not  unwilling  to  endure 
hardships  as  a good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ; 
and  believes,  that  though  he  may  be  sore 
thrust  at  that  he  may  fall,  the  Lord  will  be 
his  stay.  He  knows,  that  his  heart  is  “ de- 
ceitful and  desperately  wicked but  he  does 
not,  he  cannot  know  at  first,  the  full  mean- 
ing of  that  expression.  Yet  it  is  for  the 
Lord’s  glory,  and  will,  in  the  end,  make  his 
grace  and  love  still  more  precious,  that  B 
should  find  new  and  mortifying  proofs  of  an 
evil  nature  as  he  goes  on,  such  as  he  could 
not  once  have  believed,  had  they  been  fore- 
told to  him,  as  in  the  case  of  Peter,  Mark  xiv. 
29.  And  in  effect,  the  abominations  of  the 
heart  do  not  appear  in  their  full  strength  and 
aggravation,  but  in  the  case  of  one,  who,  like 
B,  has  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  and 
rejoiced  in  his  salvation.  The  exceeding 
sinfulness  of  sin  is  manifested,  not  so  much 
by  its  breaking  through  the  restraint  of 
threatenings  and  commands,  as  by  its  being 
capable  of  acting  against  light  and  against 
love.  Thus  it  was  with  Hezekiah.  He  had 
been  a faithful  and  zealous  servant  of  the 
Lord  for  many  years ; but  I suppose  he  knew 
more  of  God  and  of  himself,  in  the  time  of 
his  sickness,  than  he  had  ever  done  before. 
The  Lord,  who  had  signally  defended  him 
from  Sennacherib,  was  pleased  likewise  to 
raise  him  from  the  borders  of  the  grave  by 
a miracle,  and  prolonged  the  time  of  his  life 
in  answer  to  prayer.  It  is  plain  from  the 
song  which  he  penned  upon  his  recovery, 
that  he  was  greatly  affected  with  the  mer- 


cies he  had  received;  yet  still  there  was 
something  in  his  heart  which  he  knew  not, 
and  which  it  was  for  the  Lord’s  glory  he 
should  be  made  sensible  of ; and  therefore  he 
was  pleased  to  leave  him  to  himself.  It  is 
the  only  instance  in  which  he  is  said  t-o  have 
been  left  to  himself,  and  the  only  instance  in 
which  his  conduct  is  condemned.  I appre- 
hend, that  in  the  state  of  B,  that  is,  for  a 
season  after  we  have  known  the  Lord,  we 
have  usually  the  most  sensible  and  distress- 
ing experience  of  our  evil  natures.  I do  not 
say,  that  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  be 
left  to  fall  into  gross  outward  sin,  in  order 
to  know  what  is  in  our  hearts  ; though  I be- 
lieve many  have  thus  fallen,  whose  hearts, 
under  a former  sense  of  redeeming  love, 
have  been  as  truly  set  against  sin,  as  the 
hearts  of  others  who  have  been  preserved 
from  such  outward  falls.  The  Lord  makes 
some  of  his  children  examples  and  warnings 
to  others,  as  he  pleases.  They  who  are 
spared,  and  whose  worst  deviations  are  only 
known  to  the  Lord  and  themselves,  have 
great  reason  to  be  thankful.  I am  sure  I 
have : the  merciful  Lord  has  not  suffered  me 
to  make  any  considerable  blot  in  my  profes- 
sion during  the  time  I have  been  numbered 
amongst  his  people.  But  I have  nothing  to 
boast  of  herein.  It  has  not  been  owing  to 
my  wisdom,  watchfulness,  or  spirituality, 
though  in  the  main  he  has  not  suffered  me 
to  live  in  the  neglect  of  his  appointed  means. 
But  I hope  to  go  softly  all  my  days  under  the 
remembrance  of  many  things,  for  which  I 
have  as  great  cause  to  be  abased  before  him, 
as  if  I had  been  left  to  sin  grievously  in  the 
sight  of  men.  Yet,  with  respect  to  my  ac- 
ceptance in  the  Beloved,  I know  not  if  I have 
had  a doubt  of  a quarter  of  an  hour’s  con- 
tinuance for  many  years  past.  But  oh  ! the 
multiplied  instances  of  stupidity,  ingratitude, 
impatience,  and  rebellion,  to  which  my  con- 
science has  been  witness!  And  as  every 
heart  knows  its  own  bitterness,  I have  gene- 
rally heard  the  like  complaints  from  others 
of  the  Lord’s  people  with  whom  I have  con- 
versed, even  from  those  who  have  appeared  to 
be  eminently  gracious  and  spiritual.  B does 
not  meet  with  these  things  perhaps  at  first, 
nor  every  day.  The  Lord  appoints  occasions 
and  turns  in  life,  which  try  our  spirits.  There 
are  particular  seasons,  when  temptations  are 
suited  to  our  frames,  tempers,  and  situations; 
and  there  are  times  when  lie  is  pleased  to 
withdraw,  and  to  permit  Satan’s  approach, 
that  we  may  feel  how  vile  we  are  in  our- 
selves. We  are  prone  to  spiritual  pride,  to 
self  dependence,  to  vain  confidence,  to  cre- 
ate attachments,  and  a train  of  evils.  The 
Lord  often  discovers  to  us  one  single  dispo- 
sition by  exposing  us  to  another.  He  some- 
times shows  us  what  he  can  do  for  us  and  in 
us;  and  at  other  times  how  little  we  can  do, 
and  how  unable  we  are  to  stand  without  him. 


136 


ON  GRACE  IN  THE  FULL  CORN. 


By  a variety  of  these  exercises,  through  the 
over-ruling  and  edifying  influences  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  B is  trained  up  in  a growing 
knowledge  of  himself  and  of  the  Lord.  He 
learns  to  be  more  distrustful  of  his  own  heart, 
and  to  suspect  a snare  in  every  step  he  takes. 
The  dark  and  disconsolate  hours  which  he 
has  brought  upon  himself  in  times  past,  make 
him  doubly  prize  the  light  of  God’s  counte- 
nance, and  teach  him  to  dread  whatever 
might  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  cause 
him  to  withdraw  again.  The  repeated  and 
multiplied  pardons  which  he  has  received, 
increase  his  admiration  of,  and  the  sense  of 
his  obligations  to,  the  rich,  sovereign,  abound- 
ing mercy  of  the  covenant.  Much  has  been 
forgiven  him,  therefore  he  loves  much,  and 
therefore  he  knows  how  to  forgive  and  to 
pity  others.  He  does  not  call  evil  good,  or 
good  evil;  but  his  own  experiences  teach 
him  tenderness  and  forbearance.  He  expe- 
riences a spirit  of  meekness  towards  those 
who  are  overtaken  in  a fault,  and  his  attempts 
to  restore  such,  are  according  to  the  pattern 
of  the  Lord’s  dealings  with  himself.  In  a 
word,  B’s  character,  in  my  judgment,  is  com- 
plete, and  he  becomes  a C when  the  habitual 
frame  of  his  heart  answers  to  that  passage  in 
the  prophet  Ezekiel,  chap.  xvi.  63,  “ That 
thou  mayest  remember,  and  be  confounded, 
and  never  open  thy  mouth  any  more  (to 
boast,  complain,  or  censure,)  because  of  thy 
shame,  when  I am  pacified  towards  thee  for 
all  that  thou  hast  done,  saith  the  Lord  God.” 
— I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XII. 

C ; or,  Grace  in  the  Full  Corn  in  the  Ear. 
Mark  iv.  28. 

dear  sir, — By  way  of  distinction,  I as- 
signed to  A the  characteristic  of  desire,  to  B 
that  of  conflict.  I can  think  of  no  single 
word  more  descriptive  of  the  state  of  C than 
contemplation.  His  eminence,  in  compari- 
son of  A,  does  not  consist  in  the  sensible 
warmth  and  fervency  of  his  affections:  in 
this  respect  many  of  the  most  exemplary  be- 
lievers have  looked  back  with  a kind  of  re- 
gret upon  the  time  of  their  espousals,  when, 
though  their  judgments  were  but  imperfect- 
ly formed,  and  their  views  of  gospel-truths 
were  very  indistinct,  they  felt  a fervour  of 
spirit,  the  remembrance  of  which  is  both 
humbling  and  refreshing ; and  yet  they  can- 
not recall  the  same  sensations.  Nor  is  he 
properly  distinguished  from  B by  a conscious- 
ness of  his  acceptance  in  the  Beloved,  and  an 
ability  of  calling  God  his  father ; for  this  I 
have  supposed  B has  attained  to.  Though 
as  there  is  a growth  in  every  grace,  C having 
had  his  views  of  the  gospel,  and  of  the  Lord’s 


[let.  XII. 

faithfulness  and  mercy,  confirmed  by  a long- 
er experience,  his  assurance  is  of  course 
more  stable  and  more  simple,  than  when  he 
first  saw  himself  safe  from  all  condemnation. 
Neither  has  C,  properly  speaking,  any  more 
strength  or  stock  of  grace  inherent  in  him- 
self than  B,  or  even  than  A.  He  is  in  the 
same  state  of  absolute  dependence,  as  inca- 
pable of  performing  spiritual  acts,  or  of  re- 
sisting temptations  by  his  own  power,  as  he 
was  at  the  first  day  of  his  setting  out.  Yet, 
in  a sense,  he  is  much  stronger,  because  he 
has  a more  feeling  and  constant  sense  of  his 
own  weakness.  The  Lord  has  been  long 
teaching  him  this  lesson  by  a train  of  various 
dispensations ; and  through  grace  he  can  say, 
He  has  not  suffered  so  many  things  in  vain. 
His  heart  has  deceived  him  so  often,  that 
he  is  now  in  a good  measure  weaned  from 
trusting  to  it;  and  therefore  he  does  not 
meet  with  so  many  disappointments.  And 
having  found  again  and  again  the  vanity  of 
all  other  helps,  he  is  now  taught  to  go  to  the 
Lord  at  once  for  “grace  to  help  in  every 
time  of  need.”  Thus  he  is  strong  not  in 
himself,  but  in  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus. 

But  C’s  happiness  and  superiority  to  B lies 
chiefly  in  this,  that  by  the  Lord’s  blessing  on 
the  use  of  means,  such  as  prayer,  reading, 
and  hearing  of  the  word,  and  by  a sanctified 
improvement  of  what  he  has  seen  of  the 
Lord,  and  of  his  own  heart,  in  the  course  of 
his  experience,  he  has  attained  clearer,  deep- 
er, and  more  comprehensive  views  of  the  mys- 
tery of  redeeming  love ; of  the  glorious  ex- 
cellency of  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  his  person,  offi- 
ces, grace,  and  faithfulness ; of  the  harmony 
and  glory  of  all  the  divine  perfections  manifest- 
ed in  and  by  him  to  the  church ; of  the  stabil- 
ity, beauty,  fulness,  and  certainty  of  the  holy 
scriptures,  and  of  the  heights,  depths,  lengths, 
and  breadths  of  the  love  of  God  in  Christ. 
Thus,  though  his  sensible  feelings  may  not 
be  so  warm  as  when  he  was  in  the  state  of 
A,  his  judgment  is  more  solid,  his  mind  more 
fixed,  his  thoughts  more  habitually  exercised 
upon  the  things  within  the  vail.  His  great 
business  is  to  behold  the  glory  of  God  in 
Christ ; and  by  beholding,  he  is  changed  in- 
to the  same  image,  and  brings  fortii,  in  an 
eminent  and  uniform  manner,  the  fruits  of 
righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ  to 
the  glory  and  praise  of  God.  His  contem- 
plations are  not  barren  speculations,  but  have 
a real  influence,  and  enable  him  to  exemplify 
the  Christian  character  to  more  advantage, 
and  with  more  consistence,  than  can,  in  the 
present  state  of  things,  be  expected  either 
from  A or  B.  The  following  particulars 
may  illustrate  my  meaning. 

1.  Humility.  A measure  of  this  grace  is 
to  be  expected  in  every  true  Christian ; but  it 
can  only  appear  in  proportion  to  the  know  • 
ledge  they  have  of  Christ,  and  of  their  own 


ON  GRACE  IN  THE  FULL  CORN. 


137 


LET.  XII.] 

nearts.  It  is  a part  of  C’s  daily  employment 
to  look  back  upon  the  way  by  which  the  Lord 
has  led  him : and  while  he  reviews  the  Ebe- 
nezers  he  has  set  up  all  along’  the  road,  he 
sees,  in  almost  an  equal  number,  the  monu- 
ments of  his  own  perverse  returns,  and  how 
he  has,  in  a thousand  instances,  rendered  to 
the  Lord  evil  for  good.  Comparing  these 
things  together,  he  can,  without  affectation, 
adopt  the  apostle’s  language,  and  style  him- 
self “ less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  and  of 
sinners  the  chief.”  A and  B know  that  they 
ought  to  be  humbled ; but  C is  truly  so,  and 
feels  the  force  of  that  text  which  I mention- 
ed in  my  last,  Ezek.  xvi.  63.  Again,  as  he 
knows  most  of  himself,  so  he  has  seen  most 
of  the  Lord.  The  apprehension  of  infinite 
majesty  combined  with  infinite  love,  makes 
him  shrink  into  the  dust.  From  the  exer- 
cise of  this  grace  he  derives  two  others, 
which  are  exceedingly  ornamental,  and  prin- 
cipal branches  of  the  mind  which  was  in 
Christ. 

The  one  is,  submission  to  the  will  of  God. 
The  views  he  has  of  his  own  vileness,  un- 
worthiness, and  ignorance,  and  of  the  divine 
sovereignty,  wisdom,  and  love,  teach  him  to 
be  content  in  every  state,  and  to  bear  his  ap- 
pointed lot  of  suffering  with  resignation,  ac- 
cording to  the  language  of  David  in  a time 
of  affliction,  “I  was  dumb,  and  opened  not 
my  mouth,  because  thou  didst  it.” 

The  other  is,  tenderness  of  spirit  towards 
his  fellow  Christians.  He  cannot  but  judge 
of  their  conduct  according  to  the  rule  of  the 
word.  But  his  own  heart,  and  the  know- 
ledge he  has  acquired  of  the  snares  of  the 
world,  and  the  subtilty  of  Satan,  teach  him 
to  make  all  due  allowances,  and  qualify  him 
for  admonishing  and  restoring,  in  the  spirit 
of  meekness,  those  who  have  been  overtaken 
in  a fault.  Here  A is  usually  blamable;  the 
warmth  of  his  zeal,  not  being  duly  corrected 
by  a sense  of  his  own  imperfections,  betrays 
him  often  into  a censorious  spirit.  But  C 
can  bear  with  A likewise,  because  he  hath 
been  so  himself,  and  he  will  not  expect  green 
fruit  to  be  ripe. 

2.  Spirituality.  A spiritual  taste,  and  a 
disposition  to  account  all  things  mean  and 
vain,  in  comparison  of  the  knowledge  and 
love  of  God  in  Christ,  are  essential  to  a true 
Christian.  The  world  can  never  be  his  pre- 
vailing choice,  1 John  ii.  13.  Yet  we  are  re- 
newed but  in  part,  and  are  prone  to  an  undue 
attachment  to  worldly  things.  Our  spirits 
cleave  to  the  dust,  in  defiance  of  the  dictates 
of  our  better  judgments ; and  I believe  the 
Lord  seldom  gives  his  people  a considerable 
victory  over  this  evil  principle,  until  he  has 
let  them  feel  how  deeply  it  is  rooted  in  their 
hearts.  We  may  often  see  persons  entangled 
and  clogged  in  this  respect,  of  whose  sincer- 
ity in  the  main  we  cannot  justly  doubt;  espe- 
cially upon  some  sudden  and  unexpected  turn 


I in  life,  which  brings  them  into  a situation 
they  have  not  been  accustomed  to.  A consi- 
derable part  of  our  trials  are  mercifully  ap- 
pointed to  wean  us  from  this  propensity ; and 
it  is  gradually  weakened  by  the  Lord’s  show- 
ing us  at  one  time  the  vanity  of  the  creature, 
and  at  another  his  own  excellence  and  all- 
sufficiency.  Even  C is  not  perfect  in  this 
respect ; but  he  is  more  sensible  of  the  evil 
of  such  attachments,  more  humbled  for  them, 
more  watchful  against  them,  and  more  deli- 
vered from  them.  He  still  feels  a fetter,  but 
he  longs  to  be  free.  His  allowed  desires  are 
brought  to  a point;  and  he  sees  nothing 
worth  a serious  thought,  but  communion 
with  God  and  progress  in  holiness.  Whatever 
outward  changes  C may  meet  with,  he  will, 
in  general,  be  the  same  man  still.  He  has 
learned  with  the  apostle,  not  only  to  suffer 
want,  but  which  is  perhaps  the  harder  lesson, 
how  to  abound.  A palace  would  be  a prison 
to  him,  without  the  Lord’s  presence;  and 
with  this  a prison  would  be  a palace.  From 
hence  arises  a peaceful  reliance  upon  the 
Lord : he  has  nothing  which  he  cannot  com- 
mit into  his  hands,  which  he  is  not  habitually 
aiming  to  resign  to  his  disposal.  Therefore, 
he  is  not  afraid  of  evil  tidings;  but  when  the 
hearts  of  others  shake  like  the  leaves  of  a 
tree,  he  is  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord,  who, 
he  believes,  can  and  will  make  good  every 
loss,  sweeten  every  bitter,  and  appoint  ail 
things  to  work  together  for  his  advantage. 
He  sees  that  the  time  is  short,  lives  upon  the 
foretastes  of  glory,  and  therefore  accounts 
not  his  life,  or  any  inferior  concernment  dear, 
so  that  he  may  finish  his  course  with  joy. 

3.  A union  of  heart  to  the  glory  and  will 
of  God,  is  another  noble  distinction  of  C’s 
spirit.  The  glory  of  God,  and  the  good  of 
his  people  are  inseparably  connected.  But 
of  these  great  ends,  the  first  is  unspeakably 
the  highest  and  most  important,  and  into 
which  every  thing  else  will  be  finally  resolv- 
ed. Now,  in  proportion  as  we  advance  near- 
er to  him,  our  judgment,  aim,  and  end,  will 
be  conformable  to  his,  and  his  glory  will  have 
the  highest  place  in  our  hearts.  At  first  it 
is  not  so,  or  but  very  imperfectly.  Our  con- 
cern is  chiefly  about  ourselves ; nor  can  it 
be  otherwise.  The  convinced  soul  inquires, 
What  shall  I do  to  be  saved  ? The  young 
convert  is  intent  upon  sensible  comforts ; and 
in  the  seasons  when  he  sees  his  interest  se- 
cure, the  prospect  of  the  troubles  he  may 
meet  with  in  life  makes  him  often  wish  for 
an  early  dismission,  that  he  may  be  at  rest, 
and  avoid  the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day. 
But  C has  attained  to  more  enlarged  views ; 
he  has  a desire  to  depart  and  to  be  with 
Christ,  which  would  be  importunate,  if  he 
considered  only  himself;  but  his  chief  desire 
is,  that  God  may  be  glorified  in  him,  whether 
by  his  life,  or  by  his  death.  He  is  not  his 
own  ; nor  does  he  desire  to  be  his  own  ; but 


133 


ON  HEARING  SERMONS. 


so  that  the  power  of  Jesus  may  be  manifested 
in  him,  he  will  take  pleasure  in  infirmities, 
in  distresses,  in  temptations ; and  though  he 
longs  for  heaven,  would  be  content  to  live  as 
long  as  Methuselah  upon  earth,  if  by  any 
thing  he  could  do  or  suffer,  the  will  and  J 
glory  of  God  might  be  promoted.  And  | 
though  he  loves  and  adores  the  Lord  for  what  i 
he  has  done  and  suffered  for  him,  delivered  j 
him  from,  and  appointed  him  to ; yet  he  loves  I 
and  adores  him  likewise,  with  a more  simple 
and  direct  love,  in  which  self  is  in  a manner  j 
forgot,  from  the  consideration  of  his  glorious 
excellence  and  perfections,  as  he  is  in  himself,  j 
That  God  in  Christ  is  glorious  over  all,  and  : 
blessed  for  ever,  is  the  very  joy  of  his  soul ; j 
and  his  heart  can  frame  no  higher  wish,  than  i 
that  the  sovereign,  wise,  holy  will  of  God, 
may  be  accomplished  in  him,  and  all  his  crea- 
tures. Upon  this  grand  principle  his  prayers, 
schemes,  and  actions  are  formed.  Thus  C is 
already  made  like  the  angels,  and,  so  far  as 
consistent  with  the  inseparable  remnants  of 
a fallen  nature,  the  will  of  God  is  regarded 
by  him  upon  earth,  as  it  is  by  the  inhabitants 
of  heaven. 

The  power  of  divine  grace  in  C may  be  ex- 
em:  lified  in  a great  variety  of  situations.  C 
may  be  rich  or  poor,  learned  or  illiterate,  of 
a lively  natural  spirit,  or  of  a more  slow  and 
phlegmatical  constitution.  He  may  have  a 
comparatively  smooth,  or  a remarkably  thorny 
path  in  life ; he  may  be  a minister  or  a lay- 
man : these  circumstances  will  give  some 
tincture  and  difference  in  appearance  to  the 
work ; but  the  work  itself  is  the  6ame ; and 
we  must,  as  far  as  possible,  drop  the  consi- 
deration of  them  all,  or  make  proper  allow-  j 
ances  for  each,  in  order  to  form  a right  judg-  j 
meat  of  the  life  of  faith.  The  outward  ex- 1 
pression  of  grace  may  be  heightened  and  set  j 
off.  to  advantage  by  many  things  which  are  j 
merely  natural,  such  as  evenness  of  temper,  j 
good  sense,  a knowledge  of  the  world,  and  \ 
the  like : and  it  may  be  darkened  by  things  i 
which  are  not  properly  sinful,  but  unavoid- 
able, such  as  lowness  of  spirits,  weak  abili-  j 
ties,  and  pressure  of  temptations,  which  may 
have  effects  that  they  who  have  not  had  ex-  : 
perience  in  the  same  things,  cannot  properly  j 
account  for.  A double  quantity  of  real  grace,  ; 
if  I may  so  speak,  that  has  a double  quantity 
of  hinderances  to  conflict  with,  will  not  be  | 
easily  observed,  unless  these  hinderances  are  ! 
likewise  known  and  attended  to;  and  a I 
smaller  measure  of  grace  may  appear  great ' 
when  its  exercise  meets  with  no  remarkable 
obstruction.  For  these  reasons  we  can  never 
be  competent  judges  of  each  other,  because 
we  cannot  be  competently  acquainted  with 
the  whole  complex  case.  But  our  great  and 
merciful  High  Priest  knows  the  whole ; he 
considers  our  frame,  “remembers  that  we 
are  but  dust:”  makes  gracious  allowances, 
pities,  bears,  accepts,  and  approves,  with  un- . 


[let.  xm. 

[ erring  judgment.  The  sun,  in  his  daily 
course,  beholds  nothing  so  excellent  and 
honourable  upon  earth  as  C,  though  perhaps 
he  may  be  confined  to  a cottage,  and  is  little 
known  or  noticed  by  men.  But  he  is  the  ob- 
ject and  residence  of  divine  love,  the  charge 
of  angels,  and  ripening  for  everlasting  glory. 
Happy  C ! his  toils,  sufferings,  and  exercises 
will  be  soon  at  an  end ; soon  his  desires  will 
be  accomplished ; and  he  who  has  loved  him, 
and  redeemed  him  with  his  own  blood,  will 
receive  him  to  himself,  with  a “ Well  done, 
good  and  faithful  servant;  enter  thou  into 
the  joy  of  thy  Lord.” 

If  this  representation  is  agreeable  to  the 
scriptures,  how  greatly  are  they  mistaken, 
and  how  much  to  be  pitied,  who,  while  they 
make  profession  of  the  gospel,  seem  to  have 
no  idea  of  the  effects  it  is  designed  to  pro- 
duce upon  the  hearts  of  believers,  but  either 
allow7  themselves  in  a worldly  spirit  and  con- 
versation, or  indulge  their  mi  sane  tiffed  tem- 
pers, by  a fierce  contention  for  names,  no- 
tions, and  parties.  May  the  Lord  give  to  you 
and  to  me  daily  to  grow  in  the  experience 
of  that  wisdom  which  “is  first  pure,  then 
peaceable,  gentle,  and  easy  to  be  entreated, 
full  of  mercy  and  good  works,  without  par- 
tiality, and  without  hypocrisy.” — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  Xm. 

On  Hearing  Sermons. 

dear  sir, — I am  glad  to  find  that  the  Lord 
has  at  length  been  pleased  to  fix  you  in  a fa- 
voured situation,  where  you  have  frequent 
opportunities  of  hearing  the  gospel.  This  is 
a great  privilege ; but,  like  all  other  outward 
privileges,  it  requires  grace  and  wisdom  to 
make  a due  improvement  of  it : and  the  great 
plenty  of  ordinances  you  enjoy,  though  in 
itself  a blessing,  is  attended  with  snares, 
which,  unless  they  are  carefully  guarded 
against,  may  hinder,  rather  than  promote, 
your  edification.  I gladly  embrace  the  occa- 
sion you  afford  me,  of  offering  you  my  advice 
upon  this  subject.  A remembrance  of  the 
mistakes  I have  myself  formerly  committed, 
and  the  observations  I have  made  upon  the 
conduct  of  professors,  considered  as  hearers, 
will,  perhaps,  in  some  measure  qualify  me 
for  the  task  you  have  assigned  me. 

The  faithful  ministers  of  the  gospel,  are 
all  the  servants  and  ambassadors  of  Christ ; 
they  are  called  and  furnished  by  his  Holy 
Spirit ; they  speak  in  his  name ; and  their 
success  in  the  discharge  of  their  office,  he  it 
more  or  less,  depends  entirely  upon  his  bless- 
ing: so  far  they  are  all  upon  a par.  But  *n 
the  measure  of  their  ministerial  abilities,  and 
in  the  peculiar  turn  of  their  preaching,  there 
is  a great  variety.  There  are  “ diversities  of 


ON  HEARING  SERMONS. 


139 


LET.  XII I.  J 

gifts  from  the  same  Spirit ; and  he  distributes 
to  every  man  severally  according  to  his  own 
will.”  Some  are  more  happy  in  alarming 
the  careless,  others  in  administering  conso- 
lation to  the  wounded  conscience.  Some  are 
set  more  especially  for  the  establishment  and 
confirmation  of  the  gospel-doctrines ; others 
are  skilful  in  solving  casuistical  points ; others 
are  more  excellent  in  enforcing  practical 
godliness ; and  others  again,  having  been  led 
through  depths  of  temptation  and  spiritual 
distress,  are  best  acquainted  with  the  various 
workings  of  the  heart,  and  know  best  how  to 
speak  a word  in  season  to  weary  and  exer- 
cised souls.  Perhaps  no  true  minister  of  the 
gospel  (for  all  such  are  taught  of  God)  is 
wholly  at  a loss  upon  either  of  these  points ; 
but  few,  if  any,  are  remarkably  and  equally 
excellent  in  managing  them  all.  Again,  as 
to  their  manner,  some  are  more  popular  and 
pathetic,  but  at  the  same  time  more  general 
and  diffuse ; while  the  want  of  that  life  and 
earnestness  in  delivery  is  compensated  in 
others,  by  the  closeness,  accuracy,  and  depth 
of  their  compositions.  In  this  variety  of  gifts, 
the  Lord  has  a gracious  regard  to  the  differ- 
ent tastes  and  dispositions,  as  well  as  to  the 
wants  of  his  people ; and  by  their  combined 
effects,  the  complete  system  of  his  truth  is 
illustrated,  and  the  good  of  his  church  pro- 
moted with  the  highest  advantage ; while  his 
ministers,  like  officers  assigned  to  different 
stations  in  an  army,  have  not  only  the  good 
of  the  whole  in  view,  but  each  one  his  par- 
ticular post  to  maintain.  This  would  be  more 
evidently  the  case,  if  the  remaining  depravity 
of  our  hearts  did  not  afford  Satan  but  too 
much  advantage  in  his  subtile  attempts  to 
hurt  and  ensnare  us.  But  alas ! how  often 
has  he  prevailed  to  infuse  a spirit  of  envy  or 
dislike  in  ministers  towards  each  other,  to 
withdraw  hearers  from  their  proper  concern- 
ment, by  dividing  them  into  parties  and  stir- 
ring them  up  to  contend  for  a Paul,  an  Apol- 
los,  or  a Cephas,  for  their  own  favourites,  to 
the  disparagement  of  others  who  are  equally 
dear  to  the  Lord,  and  faithful  in  his  service  1 
You  may  think  my  preamble  long:  but  I shall 
deduce  my  advices  chiefly  from  it;  taking  it 
for  granted,  that  to  you  I may  have  no  need 
of  proving  at  large  what  I have  advanced. 

As  the  gifts  and  talents  of  ministers  are 
different,  I advise  you  to  choose  for  your 
stated  pastor  and  teacher,  one  whom  you  find 
most  suitable,  upon  the  whole,  to  your  own 
taste,  and  whom  you  are  likely  to  hear  with 
the  most  pleasure  and  advantage.  Use  some 
deliberation  and  much  prayer  in  this  matter. 
Intreat  the  Lord,  who  knows  better  than  you 
do  yourself,  to  guide  you  where  your  soul 
may  be  best  fed ; and  when  your  choice  is 
fixed,  you  will  do  well  to  make  a point  of  at- 
tending his  ministry  constantly,  I mean,  at 
least  the  stated  times  of  worship  on  the  Lord’s 
day.  I do  not  say,  that  no  circumstance  will 


justify  your  going  elsewhere  at  such  times 
occasionally;  but  I think  the  seldomer  you 
are  absent  the  better.  A stated  and  regular 
attendance  encourages  the  minister,  affords  a 
good  example  to  the  congregation ; and  a 
hearer  is  more  likely  to  meet  with  what  is 
directly  suited  to  his  own  case,  from  a minis- 
ter who  knows  him,  and  expects  to  see  him, 
than  he  can  be  from  one  who  is  a stranger. 
Especially,  I would  not  wish  you  to  be  absent 
for  the  sake  of  gratifying  your  curiosity,  to 
hear  some  new  preacher,  who  you  have,  per- 
haps, been  told,  is  a very  extraordinary  man. 
For  in  your  way  such  occasions  might  pos- 
sibly offer  almost  every  week.  What  I have 
observed  of  many,  who  run  about  unseason- 
ably after  new  preachers,  has  reminded  me 
of  Prov.  xxvii.  8.  “As  a bird  that  wand  ere  th 
from  her  nest,  so  is  the  man  that  wandereth 
from  his  place.”  Such  unsettled  hearers  sel- 
dom thrive,  they  usually  grow  wise  in  their 
own  conceits,  have  their  heads  filled  with 
notions,  acquire  a dry,  critical,  and  censorious 
spirit ; and  are  more  intent  upon  disputing 
who  is  the  best  preacher,  than  upon  obtaining 
benefit  to  themselves  from  what  they  hear. 
If  you  could  find  a man,  indeed,  who  had  a 
power  in  himself  of  dispensing  a blessing  to 
your  soul,  you  might  follow  him  from  place 
to  place ; but  as  the  blessing  is  in  the  Lord’s 
hand,  you  will  be  more  likely  to  receive  it 
by  waiting  where  his  providence  has  placed 
you,  and  where  he  has  met  with  you  before. 

But  as  human  nature  is  prone  to  extremes, 
permit  me  to  give  you  a caution  on  the  other 
hand.  If  the  minister  under  whom  you 
statedly  attend,  is  made  very  acceptable  to 
you,  you  will  be  in  the  less  danger  of  slight- 
ing him.  But  be  careful  that  you  do  not 
slight  any  other  minister  of  Christ.  If,  there- 
fore, when  you  come  to  hear  your  own 
preacher,  you  find  another  in  the  pulpit,  do 
not  let  your  looks  tell  him,  that  if  you  had 
known  lie  had  been  there  you  would  not  have 
come.  I wish  indeed  you  may  never  think 
so  in  your  heart ; but  though  we  cannot  pre- 
vent evil  thoughts  from  rising  in  our  minds, 
we  should  endeavour  to  combat  and  suppress 
them.  Some  persons  are  so  curious,  or  rather 
so  weak,  that  if  their  favourite  minister  is 
occasionally  absent, they  hardly  think  it  worth 
their  while  to  hear  another.  A judicious  and 
faithful  minister,  in  this  case,  instead  of  being 
delighted  with  such  a mark  of  peculiar  at- 
tachment to  himself,  will  be  grieved  to  think 
that  they  have  profited  no  more  by  his  labours ; 
for  it  is  his  desire  to  win  souls,  not  to  him- 
self, but  to  Jesus  Christ.  I hope  you,  my 
friend,  will  always  attend  the  ordinances  with 
a view  to  the  Lord’s  presence ; and  when 
you  are  in  your  proper  place,  consider  the 
preacher  (if  he  preaches  the  truth)  as  one 
providentially  and  expressly  sent  by  the  Lord 
to  you  at  that  time ; and  that  you  could  not 
choose  better  for  yourself,  all  things  con- 


140 


ON  HEARING  SERMONS. 


[let.  XIII. 


sidered,  than  he  has  chosen  for  you.  Do  not 
limit  the  Almighty,  by  confining  your  ex- 
pectations to  a single  instrument.  If  you  do, 
you  will  probably  procure  your  own  disap- 
pointment. If  you  fix  your  hopes  upon  the 
man,  the  Lord  may  withhold  his  blessing,  and 
then  the  best  men  and  the  best  sermons  will 
prove  to  you  but  as  clouds  without  water. 
But,  besides  the  more  stated  seasons  of  wor- 
ship on  the  Lord’s  day,  you  have  many  op- 
portunities of  hearing  sermons  occasionally 
in  the  course  of  the  week ; and  thus  you  may 
partake  of  that  variety  of  gifts  which  I have 
already  spoken  of.  This  will  be  either  a 
benefit,  or  otherwise,  according  to  the  use 
you  make  of  it.  I would  recommend  to  you 
to  improve  these  occasions,  but  under  some 
restrictions. 

In  the  first  place,  be  cautious  that  you  do 
not  degenerate  into  the  spirit  of  a mere 
hearer,  so  as  to  place  the  chief  stress  of  your 
profession  upon  running  hither  and  thither 
after  preachers.  There  are  many  who  are 
always  upon  the  wing : and,  without  a due 
regard  to  what  is  incumbent  upon  them  in 
the  shop,  in  the  family,  or  in  the  closet,  they 
seem  to  think  they  were  sent  into  the  world 
only  to  hear  sermons,  and  to  hear  as  many 
in  a day  as  they  possibly  can.  Such  persons 
may  be  fitly  compared  to  Pharaoh’s  lean 
kine;  they  devour  a great  deal;  but  for 
w ant  of  a proper  digestion,  they  do  not  flour- 
ish; their  souls  are  lean;  they  have  little 
6olid  comfort ; and  their  profession  abounds 
more  in  leaves  than  in  fruit.  If  the  twelve 
apostles  were  again  upon  earth,  and  you 
could  hear  them  all  every  week ; yet  if  you 
were  not  attentive  to  the  duties  of  the  closet, 
if  you  did  not  allow  yourself  time  for  read- 
ing, meditation,  and  prayer ; and  if  you  did 
not  likewise  conscientiously  attend  to  the 
concernments  of  your  particular  calling,  and 
the  discharge  of  your  duties  in  relative  life, 
I should  be  more  ready  to  blame  your  indis- 
cretion, than  to  admire  your  zeal.  Every 
thing  is  beautiful  in  its  season;  and  if  one 
duty  frequently  jostle  out  another,  it  is  a sign 
either  of  a weak  judgment,  or  of  a wrong 
turn  of  mind.  No  public  ordinances  can 
make  amends  for  the  neglect  of  secret  pray- 
er; nor  will  the  most  diligent  attendance 
upon  them  justify  us  in  the  neglect  of  those 
iuties,  which,  by  the  command  and  appoint- 
ment of  God,  we  owe  to  society. 

Again,  as  it  is  our  trial  to  live  in  a day 
wherein  so  many  contentions,  and  winds  of 
strange  doctrines  abound,  I hope  you  will 
watch  and  pray  that  you  may  not  have  itch- 
ing ears,  inclining  you  to  hearken  after 
novel  and  singular  opinions,  and  the  errone- 
ous sentiments  of  men  of  unstable  minds, 
who  are  not  sound  in  the  faith.  I have 
known  persons,  who,  from  a blameable  curi- 
osity, have  gone  to  hear  such,  not  for  the 
sake  of  edification,  which  they  could  not  ex- 


pect, but  to  know  what  they  had  to  say,  sup- 
posing that  they  themselves  were  tco  well 
established  in  the  truth  to  be  hurt  by  them. 
But  the  experiment  (without  a just  and  law- 
ful call)  is  presumptuous  and  dangerous.  In 
this  way  many  have  been  hurt,  yea,  many 
have  been  overthrown.  Error  is  like  poison ; 
the  subtilty,  quickness,  and  force  of  its  opera- 
tion, is  often  amazing.  As  we  pray  not  to 
be  led  into  temptation,  we  should  take  care 
not  to  run  into  it  wilfully.  If  the  Lord  has 
shown  you  what  is  right,  it  is  not  worth  your 
while  to  know  (if  you  could  know  it)  how 
many  ways  there  are  of  being  wrong. 

Farther,  I advise  you,  when  you  hear  a 
gospel  sermon,  and  it  is  notin  all  respects  to 
your  satisfaction,  he  not  too  hasty  to  lay  the 
whole  blame  upon  the  preacher.  The  Lord’s 
ministers  have  not  much  to  say  in  their  own 
behalf.  They  feel  (it  is  to  he  hoped)  their 
own  weakness  and  defects,  and  the  greatness 
and  difficulty  of  their  work.  They  are  con- 
scious that  their  warmest  endeavours  to  pro- 
claim the  Saviour’s  glory  are  too  cold ; and 
their  most  importunate  addresses  to  con- 
sciences of  men  are  too  faint ; and  sometimes 
they  are  burdened  with  such  discourage- 
ments, that  even  their  enemies  would  pity 
them,  if  they  knew  their  case.  Indeed,  they 
have  much  to  be  ashamed  of ; but  it  will  be 
more  useful  for  you,  who  are  a hearer,  to 
consider  whether  the  fault  may  not  possibly 
be  in  yourself.  Perhaps  you  thought  too 
highly  of  the  man,  and  expected  too  much 
from  him  ; or  perhaps  you  thought  too  mean- 
ly of  him,  and  expected  too  little.  In  the 
former  case,  the  Lord  justly  disappointed 
you;  in  the  latter,  you  received  according 
to  your  faith.  Perhaps  you  neglected  to 
pray  for  him ; and  then,  though  he  might  be 
useful  to  others,  it  is  not  at  all  strange  that 
he  was  not  so  to  you.  Or  possibly  you  have 
indulged  a trifling  spirit,  and  brought  a dearth 
and  deadness  upon  your  own  soul,  for  which 
you  had  not  been  duly  humbled,  and  the 
Lord  chose  that  time  to  rebuke  you. 

Lastly,  as  a hearer,  you  have  a right  to  try 
all  doctrines  by  the  wTord  of  God ; and  it  is 
your  duty  so  to  do.  Faithful  ministers  will 
remind  you  of  this;  they  will  not  wish  to 
hold  you  in  an  implicit  and  blind  obedience 
to  what  they  say  upon  their  own  authority, 
nor  desire  that  you  should  follow  them  far- 
ther than  they  have  the  scriptures  for  their 
warrant.  They  would  not  be  lords  over 
your  conscience,  but  helpers  of  your  joy. 
Prize  this  gospel-liberty,  which  sets  you  free 
from  the  doctrines  and  commandments  of 
men ; but  do  not  abuse  it  to  the  purposes  of 
pride  and  self.  There  are  hearers  who  make 
themselves,  and  not  the  scripture,  the  stand- 
ard of  their  judgment  They  attend  not  so 
much  to  be  instructed,  as  to  pass  their  sen- 
tence. To  them  the  pulpit  is  the  bar  at 
which  the  minister  stands  to  take  his  trial 


ON  TEMPTATION. 


141 


LET.  XIA\] 

Defore  them, — a bar  at  which  few  escape 
censure,  from  judges  at  once  so  severe  and 
inconsistent.  For  as  these  censors  are  not 
all  of  a mind,  and,  perhaps,  agree  in  nothing 
so  much  as  in  the  opinion  they  have  of  their 
own  wisdom,  it  has  often  happened,  that,  in 
the  course  of  one  and  the  same  sermon,  the 
minister  has  been  condemned  as  a legalist, 
and  an  antinomian;  as  too  high  in  his  no- 
tions, and  to  low;  as  having  too  little  action, 
and  too  much.  Oh ! this  is  a hateful  spirit, 
that  prompts  hearers  to  pronounce  ex  cathe- 
dra, as  if  they  were  infallible,  breaks  in  upon 
the  rights  of  private  judgment,  even  in  mat- 
ters not  essential,  and  makes  a man  an  of- 
fender for  a word.  This  spirit  is  one  fre- 
quent unhappy  evil,  which  springs  from  the 
corruption  of  the  heart,  when  the  Lord  af- 
fords the  means  of  grace  in  great  abundance. 
How  highly  would  some  of  the  Lord’s  hidden 
ones,  who  are  destitute  of  the  ordinances, 
prize  the  blessing  of  a preached  gospel,  with 
which  too  many  professors  seem  to  be  sur- 
feited. I pray  God  to  preserve  you  from 
such  a spirit  (which,  I fear,  is  spreading,  and 
infects  us  like  the  pestilence,)  and  to  guide 
you  in  all  things. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XIV. 

On  Temptation. 

dear,  sir, — What  can  you  expect  from 
me  on  the  subject  of  temptation,  with  which 
you  have  been  so  much  more  conversant 
than  myself  1 On  this  point  I am  more  dis- 
posed to  receive  information  from  you,  than 
to  older  my  advice.  You,  by  the  Lord’s  ap- 
pointment, have  had  much  business  and  ex- 
ercise on  these  great  waters;  whereas  the 
knowledge  I have  of  what  passes  there,  I have 
gained  more  from  observation  than  from  ac- 
tual experience.  I shall  not  wonder,  if  you 
think  I write  like  a novice  ; however,  your 
request  has  the  force  of  a command  with  me. 
I shall  give  you  my  thoughts,  or  rather  shall 
take  occasion  to  write,  not  so  much  to  you  as 
to  others,  who,  though  they  may  be  plunged 
in  the  depths  of  temptation,  have  not  yet 
seen  so  much  of  the  wisdom  and  power  of 
God  in  these  dispensations  as  yourself.  I 
shall  first  inquire,  why  the  Lord  permits 
some  of  his  people  to  suffer  such  violent  as- 
saults from  the  powers  of  darkness;  and 
then  suggest  a few  advices  to  tempted  souls. 

The  temptations  of  Satan  (which  though 
not  the  most  painful,  are  in  reality  the  most 
dangerous)  do  not  directly  belong  to  my  pre- 
sent design.  I mean  those  by  which  he  is 
too  successful  in  drawing  many  professors 
from  the  path  of  duty,  in  filling  them  with 
spiritual  pride,  or  lulling  them  into  carnal 
security.  In  these  attempts,  he  is  often 


most  powerful  and  prevalent  when  he  i3 
least  perceived.  He  seldom  distresses  those 
whom  he  can  deceive.  It  is  chiefly  when 
these  endeavours  fail,  that  he  fights  against 
the  peace  of  the  soul.  He  hates  the  Lord’s 
people,  grudges  them  all  their  privileges  and 
all  their  comforts ; and  will  do  what  he  can 
to  disquiet  them,  because  he  cannot  prevail 
against  them.  And  though  the  Lord  sets 
such  bounds  to  his  rage  as  he  cannot  pass, 
and  limits  him  both  as  to  manner  and  time, 
he  is  often  pleased  to  suffer  him  to  dis- 
cover his  malice  to  a considerable  degree ; 
not  to  gratify  Satan,  but  to  humble  and  prove 
them ; to  show  them  what  is  in  their  hearts, 
to  make  them  truly  sensible  of  their  imme- 
diate and  absolute  dependence  upon  himselfi 
and  to  quicken  them  to  watchfulness  and 
prayer.  Though  temptations,  in  their  own 
nature  are  grievous  and  dreadful,  yet,  when 
by  the  grace  of  God,  they  are  productive  of 
these  effects,  they  deserve  to  be  numbered 
among  the  “all  things,”  which  are  appointed 
to  work  together  for  the  good  of  those  whe 
love  him.  The  light  carriage,  vain  confi- 
dence, and  woful  backslidings  of  man}'  pro- 
fessors, might,  perhaps  (speaking  after  the 
manner  of  men,)  have  been  in  some  measure 
prevented,  had  they  been  more  acquainted 
with  this  spiritual  warfare,  and  had  they 
drunk  of  the  cup  of  temptation,  which  but 
few  of  those  who  walk  humbly  and  uprightly 
are  exempted  from  tasting  of,  though  not  all 
in  the  same  degree.  One  gracious  end,  there- 
fore, that  the  Lcrd  has  in  permitting  his  peo- 
ple to  be  tempted,  is  for  the  prevention  of 
greater  evils,  that  they  may  not  grow  proud 
or  careless,  or  be  ensnared  by  the  corrupt 
customs  of  the  world.  In  this  view,  I doubt 
not,  however  burdensome  your  trials  may  at 
some  seasons  prove,  you  are  enabled,  by  your 
composed  judgment,  to  rejoice  in  them,  and 
be  thankful  for  them.  You  know  what  you 
suffer  now ; but  you  know  not  what  might 
have  been  the  consequence,  if  you  had  never 
smarted  by  the  fiery  darts  of  the  wicked  one. 
Yoit  might  have  been  taken  in  a more  fatal 
snare,  and  been  numbered  with  those  who, 
by  their  grievous  declensions  and  falls,  have 
caused  the  ways  of  truth  to  be  evil  spoken 
of. 

Another  design  is,  for  the  manifestation  of 
his  power,  and  wisdom,  and  grace,  in  sup- 
porting the  soul  under  such  pressures  as  are 
evidently  beyond  its  own  strength  to  sustain. 
A bush  on  fire,  and  not  consumed,  engaged 
the  attention  of  Moses.  This  emblem  is  gene- 
rally applicable  to  the  state  of  a Christian  in 
the  present  life;  but  never  more  so  than 
when  he  is  in  the  fire  of  temptation.  And 
though  his  heaviest  sufferings  of  this  kind 
are  usually  hidden  from  the  notice  of  his  fel- 
low-creatures, yet  there  are  other  eyes  al- 
ways upon  him.  “We  are,”  says  the  apos- 
tle, “ a spectacle  to  the  world ;”  not  only  to 


142 


ON  TEMPTATION. 


men,  but  to  angels  also.  Many  things  pro- 
bably pass  in  the  invisible  slate,  in  which  we 
have  a nearer  concernment  than  we  are  or- 
dinarily aware  of.  The  beginning  of  the 
book  of  Job  throws  some  light  upon  this 
point,  and  informs  us  (of  which  we  should 
have  been  otherwise  totally  ignorant)  of  the 
true  source  of  his  uncommon  sufferings. — 
Satan  had  challenged  him,  charged  him  as  a 
hypocrite,  and  thought  he  was  able  to  prove 
him  one,  if  he  <vild  have  permission  to  at- 
tack him.  The  Lord,  for  the  vindication  of 
Job's  integrity,  and  for  the  manifestation  of 
his  own  faithfulness  and  power  in  favour  of 
his  servant,  was  pleased  to  give  Satan  leave 
to  try  what  he  could  do.  The  experiment 
answered  many  good  purposes ; Job  was  hum- 
bled, yet  approved ; his  friends  were  instruct- 
ed ; Satan  was  confuted  and  disappointed ; 
and  the  wisdom  and  mercy  of  the  Lord,  in 
his  darkest  dispensations  towards  his  people, 
were  gloriously  illustrated.  This  contest, 
and  the  event,  were  recorded  for  the  direc- 
tion and  encouragement  of  his  church  to  the 
end  of  time.  Satan’s  malice  is  not  abated ; 
and  though  he  has  met  with  millions  of  dis- 
appointments, he  still,  like  Goliah  of  old,  de- 
fies the  armies  of  God’s  Israel;  he  chal- 
lenges the  stoutest,  and  “desires  to  have 
them,  that  he  may  sift  them  as  wheat,”  In- 
deed, he  is  far  an  overmatch  for  them,  con- 
sidered as  in  themselves;  but  though  they 
are  weak,  their  Redeemer  is  mighty,  and 
they  are  for  ever  secured  by  his  love  and  in- 
tercession. “ The  Lord  knows  them  that  are 
his,”  and  no  weapon  formed  against  them 
can  prosper.  That  this  may  appear  with  the 
fullest  evidence,  Satan  is  allowed  to  assault 
them.  We  handle  vessels  of  glass  or  china 
with  caution,  and  endeavour  to  preserve  them 
from  falls  and  blows,  because  we  know  they 
are  easily  broken.  But  if  a man  had  the  art 
of  making  glass  malleable,  and,  like  iron, 
capable  of  bearing  the  stroke  of  a hammer 
without  breaking,  it  is  probable,  that  instead 
of  locking  it  carefully  up,  he  would  rather,  for 
the  commendation  of  his  skill,  permit  many 
to  attempt  to  break  it,  when  he  knew  their 
attempts  would  be  in  vain.  Believers  are 
compared  to  earthen  vessels,  liable  in  them- 
selves to  be  destroyed  by  a small  blow ; but 
they  are  so  strengthened  and  tempered  by 
the  power  and  supply  of  divine  grace,  that 
the  fiercest  efforts  of  their  fiercest  enemies 
against  them  may  be  compared  to  the  dash- 
ing of  waves  against  a rock.  And  that  this 
may  be  known  and  noticed,  they  are  exposed 
to  many  trials ; but  the  united  and  repeated 
assaults  of  the  men  of  the  world,  and  the 
powers  of  darkness,  afford  but  the  more  in- 
contestible  demonstration,  that  the  Lord  is 
with  them  of  a truth,  and  that  his  strength  is 
made  perfect  in  their  weakness.  Surely 
this  thought,  my  friend,  will  afford  you  con- 
solation; and  you  will  be  content  to  suf- 


[let.  xiv 

fer,  if  God  may  be  glorified  by  you  and  in 
you. 

Farther,  by  enduring  temptation,  you,  as 
a living  member  of  the  body  of  Christ,  have 
the  honour  of  being  conformed  to  your  head. 
He  suffered,  being  tempted ; and  because  he 
loves  you,  he  calls  you  to  a participation  of 
his  sufferings,  and  to  taste  of  his  cup ; not 
the  cup  of  the  wrath  of  God ; this  he  drank 
alone,  and  he  drank  it  all.  But  in  affliction 
he  allows  his  people  to  have  fellowship  with 
him.  Thus  they  fill  up  the  measure  of  his 
sufferings,  and  can  say,  “ As  he  was,  so  are 
we  in  the  world.”  Marvel  not  that  the  world 
hates  you,  neither  marvel  that  Satan  rages 
against  you.  Should  not  the  disciple  be  as 
his  Lord  1 Can  the  servant  expect  or  desire 
peace  from  the  avowed  enemies  of  his  Mas- 
ter? We  are  to  follow  his  steps;  and  can 
we  wish,  if  it  were  possible,  to  walk  in  a path 
strewed  with  flowers,  when  his  was  strewed 
with  thorns  ? Let  us  be  in  nothing  terrified 
by  the  power  of  our  adversaries,  which  is  to 
them  an  evident  token  of  perdition,  but  to 
us  of  salvation,  and  that  of  God.  To  us  it  is 
given,  not  only  to  believe  in  Christ,  but  also 
to  suffer  for  his  sake.  If  we  ‘would  make 
peace  with  the  world,  the  world  would  let  us 
alone ; if  we  would  be  content  to  walk  in  the 
ways  of  sin,  Satan  would  give  us  no  disturb- 
ance ; but  because  grace  has  rescued  us  from 
his  dominion,  and  the  love  of  Jesus  constrains 
us  to  live  to  him  alone,  therefore  the  enemy, 
like  a lion  robbed  of  his  prey,  roars  against 
us.  He  roars,  but  he  cannot  devour;  he 
plots  and  rages,  but  he  cannot  prevail ; ho 
disquiets,  but  he  cannot  destroy.  If  we  suf- 
fer with  Christ,  we  shall  also  reign  with  him. 

In  due  time  he  will  bruise  Satan  under  our 
feet,  make  us  more  than  conquerors,  and 
place  us  where  we  shall  hear  the  voice  of 
war  no  more  for  ever. 

Again,  as  by  temptations  we  are  conformed 
to  the  life  of  Christ,  so  likewise,  by  the  sanc- 
tifying power  of  grace,  they  are  made  sub- 
servient to  advance  our  conformity  to  his  im- 
age; particularly  as  we  thereby  acquire  a 
sympathy  and  fellow-feeling  with  our  suffer- 
ing brethren.  This  is  eminently  a branch  of 
the  mind  that  was  in  Christ.  He  knows 
how  to  pity  and  help  those  who  are  tempted, 
because  he  has  been  tempted  himself.  He 
knows  what  temptations  mean,  not  only  with 
that  knowledge  whereby  he  knows  all  things, 
but  by  experience.  He  well  remembers  what 
he  endured  in  the  wilderness  and  in  the  gar- 
den ; and  though  it  is  for  his  glory  and  our  « 
comfort  that  he  suffered  temptation  without 
sin,  yet  for  that  very  reason,  and  because  lie 
was  perfectly  holy,  the  temptations  of  Satan 
were  unspeakably  more  bitter  to  him  than 
they  can  be  to  us.  The  great  duty  and  re- 
fuge of  the  tempted  now  is,  to  apply  to  him, 
and  they  have  the  highest  encouragement  to 
do  so,  in  that  they  are  assured  he  is  touched 


ON  TEMPTATION. 


LET.  XIV  J 

with  a feeling1  of  our  infirmities.  And,  for  I 
the  like  reason,  they  find  some  consolation  in 
applying  to  those  of  their  brethren  who  have 
suffered  the  same  things.  None  but  these 
can  either  understand  or  pity  their  com- 
plaints. If  the  Lord  has  any  children  who 
are  not  exercised  with  spiritual  temptations, 

I am  sure  they  are  but  poorly  qualified  to 
“ speak  a word  in  season  to  them  that  are 
weary.  ’ In  this  school  you  have  acquired 
the  tongue  of  the  learned;  and  let  it  not 
seem  a small  thing  to  you,  if  the  Lord  has 
given  you  wisdom  and  ability  to  comfort  the 
afflicted  ones.  If  your  prayers,  your  con- 
versation, and  the  knowledge  they  have  of 
your  trials,  afford  them  some  relief  in  a dark 
hour,  this  is  an  honour  and  a privilege  which 
I am  persuaded  you  will  think  you  have  not 
purchased  too  dear  by  all  that  you  have  en- 
dured. 

Once  more,  temptations,  by  giving  us  a 
painful  sensibility  of  the  weakness  of  our 
graces,  and  the  strength  of  our  inward  cor- 
ruptions, tend  to  mortify  the  evil  principles  of 
self-dependence  and  self-righteousness,  which 
are  so  deeply  rooted  in  our  fallen  nature ; to 
make  Christ,  in  all  his  relations,  offices,  and 
characters,  more  precious  to  us ; and  to  con- 
vince us,  that  without  him  we  can  do  nothing. 
It  would  be  easy  to  enlarge  upon  these  and 
other  advantages  which  the  Lord  enables  his 
people  to  derive  from  the  things  which  they 
suffer ; so  that  they  may  say,  with  Samson, 

“ Out  of  the  eater  comes  forth  meat and 
that  what  their  adversary  designs  for  their 
overthrow,  contributes  to  their  establishment. 
But  I have  already  exceeded  my  limits. — 
Enough  I hope  has  been  said  to  prove,  that 
he  has  wise  and  gracious  ends  in  permitting 
them,  for  a season,  to  be  tossed  with  tempest, 
and  not  comforted.  Ere  long  these  designs 
will  be  more  fully  unfolded  to  us ; and  we 
shall  be  satisfied  that  he  has  done  all  things 
well.  In  the  mean  while  it  is  our  duty,  and 
will  be  much  for  our  comfort,  to  believe  it 
upon  the  authority  of  his  word. 

I should  now  proceed  to  offer  some  advices 
to  those  who  are  tempted  ; but  I am  ready  to 
say,  To  what  purpose  1 When  the  enemy 
comes  in  like  a flood ; when  the  very  founda- 
tions of  hope  are  attacked ; when  suspicions 
are  raised  in  the  mind,  not  only  concerning 
an  interest  in  the  promises,  but  concerning 
the  truth  of  the  scripture  itself ; when  a dark 
cloud  blots  out,  not  only  the  sense,  but  al- 
most the  remembrance  of  past,  comforts; 
when  the  mind  is  overwhelmed  with  torrents 
of  blasphemous,  unclean,  or  monstrous  ima- 
ginations, things  horrible  and  unutterable; 
when  the  fiery  darts  of  Satan  have  set  the 
corruptions  of  the  heart  in  a flame ; at  such 
a season  a person  is  little  disposed  or  able  to 
listen  to  advice.  I shall,  however,  mention 
some  things  by  which  ordinarily  Satan  main- 
tains his  advantage  against  them  in  these 


143 

1 circumstances,  that  they  may  be  upon  their 
guard  as  much  as  possible. 

His  principal  devices  are : 

1.  To  hide  from  them  the  Lord’s  designs,  in 
permitting  him  thus  to  rage.  Some  of  these 
I have  noticed ; and  they  should  endeavour 
to  keep  them  upon  their  minds.  It  is  hard 
for  them,  during  the  violence  of  the  storm, 
to  conceive  that  any  good  can  possibly  trise 
from  the  experience  of  so  much  evil.  But 
when  the  storm  is  over,  they  find  that  the 
Lord  is  still  mindful  of  them.  Now,  though 
a young  soldier  may  well  be  startled  at  the 
first  onset  in  the  field  of  battle,  it  seems  pos- 
sible, that  those  who  have  been  often  en- 
gaged, should  at  length  gain  confidence  from 
the  recollection  of  the  many  instances  in 
which  they  have  formerly  found,  by  the  event, 
that  the  Lord  was  surely  with  them  in  the 
like  difficulties,  and  that  their  fears  were 
only  groundless  and  imaginary.  When  the 
warfare  is  hottest,  they  have  still  reason  to 
say,  “ Hope  thou  in  God ; for  I shall  yet 
praise  him.” 

2.  To  make  them  utter  impatient  speeches, 
which  do  but  aggravate  their  distress.  It  is 
said  of  Job,  under  his  first  trials,  “ In  all  this 
he  sinned  not  with  his  lips,  nor  charged  God 
foolishly  ” So  long  Satan  was  unable  to  pre 
vail.  Afterwards  he  opened  his  mouth,  as 
Jeremiah  did  likewise,  and  cursed  the  day  of 
his  birth.  When  he  once  began  h)  complain, 
his  causes  of  complaint  increased.  We  can- 
not prevent  dreadful  thoughts  from  arising 
in  our  hearts ; but  we  should  be  cautious  of 
giving  them  vent  by  speaking  unadvisedly. 
This  is  like  letting  in  wind  upon  a smother- 
ing fire,  which  will  make  it  burn  more 
fiercely. 

3.  To  persuade  them  that  all  they  feel  and 
tremble  at,  arises  immediately  from  their  own 
hearts.  Indeed,  it  is  a most  awful  proof  of 
our  depravity,  that  we  feel  something  within 
ready  to  close  with  the  suggestions  of  the 
enemy,  in  defiance  of  our  better  judgment 
and  desires.  But  it  is  not  so  in  all  cases.  It 
is  not  always  easy,  nor  is  it  needful,  exactly 
to  draw  the  line  between  the  temptations  of 
Satan  and  our  own  corruptions;  but  some- 
times it  is  not  impossible  to  distinguish  them. 
When  a child  of  God  is  tempted  to  blaspheme 
the  name  that  he  adores,  or  to  commit  such 
evils  as  even  unsanctified  nature  would  recoi’t 
at ; the  enemy  has  done  it,  and  shall  be  an- 
swerable for  the -whole  guilt.  The  soul,  in 
this  case,  is  passive,  and  suffers  with  extreme 
reluctance,  what  it  more  dreads  than  the 
greatest  evils  which  can  affect  the  body. — 
Nor  do  the  deepest  wounds  of  this  kind  leave 
a scar  upon  the  conscience,  when  the  storm 
is  over ; which  is  a proof  that  they  are  not 
our  own  act. 

4.  To  drive  them  from  the  throne  of  grace. 
Prayer,  which  is  at  all  times  necessary,  is 
especially  so  in  a time  of  temptation.  But 


144 


ON  A CHRISTIAN  LIBRARY. 


now  hard  is  it  to  come  boldly,  that  we  may 
obtain  help  in  this  time  of  need  ! But,  how- 
ever hard,  it  must  be  attempted.  By  discon- 
tinuing prayer,  we  give  the  enemy  the  great- 
est encouragement  possible ; for  then  he  sees 
that  his  temptations  have  the  effect  which  he 
intends  by  them,  to  intercept  us  from  our 
strong-hold.  When  our  Lord  was  in  an  agony, 
he  prayed  the  most  earnestly ; the  ardour  of 
his  prayer  increased  with  the  distress  of  his 
soul.  It  would  be  happy  if  we  could  always 
imitate  him  in  this;  but  too  often  temptations 
and  difficulties,  instead  of  rousing  our  appli- 
cation, disheartens  and  enfeebles  us ; so  that 
our  cries  are  the  faintest  when  we  stand 
most  in  need  t>f  assistance.  But,  so  long  as 
prayer  is  restrained,  our  burden  is  increased, 
Psalm  xxxii.  3,  5.  If  he  cannot  make  them 
omit  praying,  he  will  repeatedly  endeavour 
to  weary  them,  by  working  upon  the  legality 
which  cleaves  so  close  to  the  heart.  Satan 
is  a hard  task-master,  when  he  interferes  in 
the  performance  of  our  spiritual  duties.  This 
he  does,  perhaps,  more  frequently  than  we 
think  of ; for  he  can,  if  it  serves  his  purpose, 
appear  as  an  angel  of  light.  When  the  soul 
is  in  a tempest,  and  attempts  to  pray,  he  will 
suggest,  that  prayer  on  these  occasions  should 
be  protracted  to  such  a length,  and  performed 
with  such  steadiness,  as  is  found  to  be  at  that 
season  quite  impracticable.  Such  constrained 
efforts  are  wearisome ; and  from  the  manner 
of  the  performance,  he  takes  occasion  to  fix 
fresh  guilt  upon  the  conscience.  Short,  fre- 
quent, and  fervent  petitions,  which  will  al- 
most necessarily  arise  from  what  is  felt  when 
temptation  is  violent,  are  best  suited  to  the 
case ; and  we  need  not  add  to  the  burden,  by 
tasking  ourselves  beyond  our  power,  as  if  we 
expected  to  be  heard  for  our  much  speaking. 
Blessed  be  God,  that  we  fight  with  an  enemy 
already  vanquished  by  our  Lord,  and  that  we 
have  a sure  promise  of  victory.  The  Lord  is 
our  banner. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XV. 

A Plan  of  a Compendious  Christian 
Library. 

dear  sir, — An  eager  desire  of  reading 
many  books,  though  it  is  often  supposed  to 
be  the  effect  of  a taste  for  knowledge,  is  per- 
haps a principal  cause  of  detaining  multi- 
tudes in  ignorance  and  perplexity.  When 
an  unexperienced  person  thus  ventures  into 
the  uncertain  tide  of  opinions,  he  is  liable  to 
be  hurried  hither  and  thither  with  the  chang- 
ing stream ; to  fall  in  with  every  new  pro- 
posal, and  to  be  continually  embarrassed 
with  the  difficulty  of  distinguishing  between 
probability  and  truth.  Or  if,  at  last,  he 
happily  finds  a clue  tc  lead  him  through  the 


[let.  xr. 

labyrinth  wherein  so  many  have  been  lost, 
he  will  acknowledge,  upon  a review,  tha« 
from  what  he  remembers  to  have  read  (for 
perhaps,  the  greater  part  he  has  wholly  for 
gotten)  he  has  gained  little  more  than  a dis 
covery  of  what  mistakes,  uncertainty,  insig 
nificance,  acrimony,  and  presumption,  arc 
often  obtruded  on  the  world  under  the  dis- 
guise of  a plausible  title-page. 

It  is  far  from  my  intention  to  depreciate 
the  value,  or  deny  the  usefulness  of  books, 
without  exception  : a few  well  chosen  trea- 
tises, carefully  perused,  and  thoroughly  di- 
gested, will  deserve'  and  reward  our  pains ; 
but  a multiplicity  of  reading  is  seldom  at- 
tended with  a good  effect.  Besides  the  con- 
fusion it  often  brings  upon  the  judgment  and 
memory,  it  occasions  a vast  expense  of  time, 
indisposes  for  close  thinking,  and  keeps  us 
poor  in  the  midst  of  seeming  plenty,  by  re- 
ducing us  to  live  upon  a foreign  supply,  in- 
stead of  labouring  to  improve  and  increase 
the  stock  of  our  own  reflections. 

Every  branch  of  knowledge  is  attended 
with  this  inconvenience ; but  it  is  in  no  one 
more  sensibly  felt  than  when  the  inquiry  is 
directed  to  the  subject  of  religion.  Perhaps 
no  country  has  abounded  so  much  with  re- 
ligious books  as  our  own ; many  of  them  are 
truly  excellent ; but  a very  great  number  of 
those  which  are  usually  more  obvious  to  be 
met  with,  as  they  stand  recommended  by 
great  names,  and  the  general  taste  of  the 
public,  are  more  likely  to  mislead  an  inqui- 
rer, than  to  direct  him  into  the  paths  of  true 
peace  and  wisdom. 

And  even  in  those  books  which  are  in  the 
main  agreeable  to  the  word  of  God,  there  is 
often  so  great  a mixture  of  human  infirmity, 
so  much  of  the  spirit  of  controversy  and 
party,  such  manifest  defects  in  some,  and  sc 
many  unwarrantable  additions  to  the  simple 
truth  of  the  gospel  in  others,  that,  unless  a 
person’s  judgment  is  already  formed,  or  he 
has  a prudent  friend  to  direct  his  choice,  he 
will  probably  be  led  into  error  or  prejudice 
before  he  is  aware,  by  his  attachment  to  a 
favourite  author. 

Allowing,  therefore,  the  advantage  of  a dis- 
creet and  seasonable  use  of  human  writings, 
I would  point  out  a still  more  excellent  way 
for  the  acquisition  of  true  knowledge  : a me- 
thod, which,  if  wholly  neglected,  the  utmost 
diligence  in  the  use  of  every  other  means 
will  prove  ineffectual ; but  which,  if  faithful- 
ly pursued  in  an  humble  dependence  upon 
the  divine  blessing,  will  not  only  of  itself 
lead  us  by  the  straightest  path  to  wisdom, 
but  will  also  give  a double  efficacy  to  every 
subordinate  assistance. 

If  I may  be  allowed  to  use  the  term  book 
in  a metaphorical  sense,  I may  say,  that  tho 
most  high  God,  in  condescension  to  the  weak- 
ness of  our  faculties,  the  brevity  of  our  lives, 
and  our  many  avocations,  has  comprised  all 


ON  A CHRISTIAN  LIBRARY. 


145 


LET  XV.] 

the  knowledge  conducive  to  our  real  happi- 
ness in  four  comprehensive  volumes.  The 
first,  which  may  be  considered  as  the  text, 
is  cheap,  portable,  and  compendious,  so  that 
hardly  any  person  in  our  favoured  land,  who 
is  apprized  of  its  worth,  need  be  without  it ; 
and  the  other  three,  which  are  the  best  and 
fullest  commentaries  upon  this,  are  always 
at  hand  for  our  perusal,  and  pressing  upon 
our  attention  in  every  place  and  circumstance 
of  our  lives. 

It  will  be  easily  apprehended,  that,  by  the 
first  book,  or  volume,  I mean  that  perfect 
and  infallible  system  of  truth,  the  Bible. 
The  internal  characters  of  this  book,  arising 
from  its  comprehensiveness,  simplicity,  ma- 
jesty, and  authority,  sufficiently  prove  to 
every  enlightened  mind,  that  it  is  given  by 
inspiration  of  God.  Tiiey  who  are  competent 
judges  of  this  evidence,  are  no  more  disturb- 
ed by  the  suggestions  of  some  men  reputed 
wise,  that  it  is  of  human  composition,  than 
if  they  were  told  that  men  had  invented  the 
sun,  and  placed  it  in  the  firmament.  Its  ful- 
ness speaks  its  author.  No  case  has  yet 
occurred,  or  ever  will,  for  which  there  is  not 
a sufficient  provision  made  in  this  invaluable 
treasury.  Here  we  may  seek  (and  we  shall 
not  seek  in  vain)  wherewith  to  combat  and 
vanquish  every  error,  to  illustrate  and  con- 
firm every  spiritual  truth.  Here  are  pro- 
mises suited  to  every  want,  directions  adapted 
to  every  doubt  that  can  possibly  arise.  Here 
is  milk  for  babes,  meat  for  strong  men,  medi- 
cines for  the  wounded,  refreshment  for  the 
weary.  The  general  history  of  a’l  nations 
and  ages,  and  the  particular  experience  of  j 
each  private  believer,  from  the  beginning  to 
the  end  of  time,  are  wonderfully  comprised  in 
this  single  volume;  so  that  whoever  reads 
and  improves  it  aright,  may  discover  his  state, 
his  progress,  his  temptations,  his  danger,  and 
his  duty,  as  distinctly  and  minutely  marked 
out,  as  if  the  whole  had  been  written  for  him 
alone.  In  this  respect,  as  well  as  in  many 
others,  great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness. 

The  simplicity,  as  well  as  the  subject-mat- 
ter of  the  Bible,  evinces  its  divine  original. 
Though  it  has  depths  sufficient  to  embarrass 
and  confound  the  proudest  efforts  of  unsanc- 
tified  reason,  it  does  not,  as  to  its  general  im- 
port, require  an  elevated  genius  to  under- 
stand it,  but  is  equally  addressed  to  the  level 
of  every  capacity.  As  its  contents  are  of 
universal  concernment,  they  are  proposed  in 
such  a manner  as  to  engage  and  satisfy  the 
inquiries  of  all ; and  the  learned,  with  re- 
spect to  their  own  personal  interest,  have  no 
advantage  above  the  ignorant.  That  it  is  in 
fact  read  by  many  who  receive  no  instruction 
or  benefit  from  it,  is  wholly  owing  to  their  in- 
attention or  vanity.  This  event  may  rather 
excite  grief  than  wonder.  The  Bible  teaches 
us  to  expect  it.  It  forewarns  us  that  the  na- 
t'^ral  man  cannot  receive  the  things  of  God, ' 
T 


can  neither  understand  nor  approve  them. 
It  points  out  to  us  the  necessity  of  a heaven- 
ly teacher,  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  has  promised 
to  guide  those  who  seek  him  by  prayer,  into 
all  necessary  truth.  They  who  implore  his 
assistance,  find  the  seals  opened,  the  vail 
taken  away,  and  the  way  of  salvation  made 
plain  before  them. 

The  language  of  the  Bible  is  likewise 
clothed  with  inimitable  majesty  and  author- 
ity. God  speaks  in  it,  and  reveals  the  glory 
of  his  perfections,  his  sovereignty,  holiness, 
justice,  goodness,  and  grace,  in  a manner 
worthy  of  himself,  though,  at  the  same  time, 
admirably  adapted  to  our  weakness.  The 
most  laboured  efforts  of  human  genius  are 
flat  and  languid,  in  comparison  of  those  parts 
of  the  Bible  which  are  designed  to  give  us 
due  apprehension  of  the  God  with  whom  we 
have  to  do.  Where  shall  we  find  such  in- 
stances of  the  true  sublime,  the  great,  the 
marvellous,  the  beautiful,  the  pathetic,  as  in 
the  holy  scriptures  1 Again,  the  effects  which 
it  performs  demonstrate  it  to  be  the  word 
of  God.  With  a powerful  and  penetrating 
energy,  it  alarms  and  pierces  the  conscience, 
discovers  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the 
heart,  convinces  the  most  obstinate,  and 
makes  the  most  careless  tremble.  With 
equal  authority  and  efficacy,  it  speaks  peace 
to  the  troubled  mind,  heals  the  wounded 
spirit,  and  can  impart  a joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory,  in  the  midst  of  the  deeped 
distress.  It  teaches,  persuades,  comforts,  ai£i 
reproves  with  an  authority  that  can  neither 
be  disputed  nor  evaded ; and  often  communi- 
| cates  more  light,  motives,  and  influence,  by 
a single  sentence,  to  a plain  unlettered  be- 
liever, than  he  could  derive  from  all  the 
voluminous  commentaries  of  the  learned. 
In  a word,  it  answers  the  character  the  apos- 
tle gives  of  it:  “ It  is  able  to  make  us  wise 
unto  salvation  ; it  is  completely  and  alone 
sufficient  to  make  the  man  of  God  perfect, 
thoroughly  furnished  for  every  good  work.” 
The  doctrines,  histories,  prophecies,  pro- 
mises, precepts,  exhortations,  examples,  and 
warnings,  contained  in  the  Bible,  form  a per- 
fect whole,  a complete  summary  of  the  will 
of  God  concerning  us,  in  which  nothing  is 
wanting,  nothing  is  superfluous. 

The  second  volume  which  deserves  our 
study  is  the  book  of  Creation.  “ The  hea- 
vens declare  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  fir- 
mament showeth  his  handy  work  nor  can 
we  cast  our  eyes  any  where,  without  meet- 
ing innumerable  proofs  of  his  wisdom,  power, 
goodness,  and  presence.  God  is  revealed 
in  the  least,  as  well  as  in  the  greatest  of  his 
works.  The  sun  and  the  glow-worm,  the 
fabric  of  the  universe,  and  each  single  blade 
of  grass,  are  equally  the  effects  of  divine 
power.  The  lines  of  this  book,  though  very 
beautiful  and  expressive  in  themselves,  are 
not  immediately  legible  by  fallen  man.  The 


146 


ON  A CHRISTIAN  LIBRARY. 


[let.  XV. 


works  of  creation  may  be  compared  to  a fair 
character  in  cypher,  of  which  the  Bible  is 
the  key : and  without  this  key  they  cannot 
be  understood.  This  book  was  always  open 
to  the  Heathens ; but  they  could  not  read  it, 
nor  discern  the  proofs  of  his  eternal  power 
and  godhead  which  it  affords.  “ They  became 
vain  in  their  own  imaginations,  and  wTor- 
shipped  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator.” 
The  case  is  much  the  same  at  this  day  with 
many  reputed  wise,  whose  hearts  are  not 
subjected  to  the  authority  of  the  Bible.  The 
study  of  the  works  of  God,  independent  of 
his  word,  though  dignified  with  the  name  of 
philosophy,  is  no  better  than  an  elaborate 
trifling  and  waste  of  time.  It  is  to  be  feared 
none  are  more  r.emotc  from  the  true  know- 
ledge of  God,  than  many  of  those  who  value 
themselves  most  upon  their  supposed  know- 
ledge of  his  creatures.  They  may  speak  in 
general  terms  of  his  wisdom ; but  they  live 
without  him  in  the  world ; and  their  philo- 
sophy cannot  teach  them  either  to  love,  or 
serve,  to  fear,  or  trust  him.  They  who  know 
God  in  his  word,  may  find  both  pleasure  and 
profit  in  tracing  his  wisdom  in  his  works,  if 
their  inquiries  are  kept  within  due  bounds, 
and  in  a proper  subservience  to  things  of 
greater  importance ; but  they  are  compara- 
tively few  who  have  leisure,  capacity,  or 
opportunity,  for  these  inquiries.  But  the 
book  of  creation  is  designed  for  the  instruc- 
tion of  all  believers.  If  they  are  not  qualified 
to  be  astronomers  or  anatomists,  yet,  from  a 
view  of  the  heavens,  the  work  of  God’s  fin- 
gers, the  moon  and  the  stars,  which  he  hath 
created,  they  learn  to  conceive  of  his  conde- 
scension, power,  and  faithfulness.  Though 
they  are  unacquainted  with  the  theory  of 
light  and  colours,  they  can  see  in  the  rain- 
bow a token  of  God's  covenant-love.  Per- 
haps they  have  no  idea  of  the  magnitude  or 
distance  of  the  sun ; but  it  reminds  them  of 
Jesus  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  the  source 
of  light  and  life  to  their  souls.  The  Lord  has 
established  a wonderful  analogy  between  the 
natural  and  the  spiritual  world.  This  is  a 
secret  only  known  to  them  that  fear  him ; but 
they  contemplate  it  with  pleasure ; and  al- 
most every  object  they  see,  when  they  are 
in  the  right  frame  of  mind,  either  leads  their 
thoughts  to  Jesus,  or  tends  to  illustrate  some 
spiritual  truth  or  promise.  This  is  the  best 
method  of  studying  the  book  of  Nature,  and 
for  this  purpose  it  is  always  open  and  plain 
to  those  who  love  the  Bible,  so  that  he  who 
runs  may  read. 

The  book  of  Providence  is  the  third  volume, 
by  which  those  who  fear  the  Lord  are  instruc- 
ted. This  likewise  is  inextricable  and  unin- 
telligible to  the  wisest  of  men  who  arc  not 
governed  by  the  word  of  God.  But  when 
the  principles  of  scripture  are  admitted  and 
understood,  they  throw  a pleasing  light  upon 
the  study  of  divine  providence,  and  at  the 


! same  time,  are  confirmed  and  illustrated  by 
| it.  What  we  read  in  the  Bible  of  the  sove- 
j reignty,  wisdom,  power,  omniscience,  and 
! omnipresence  of  God,  of  his  overruling  all 
| events  to  the  accomplishment  of  bis  coun- 
' sols,  and  the  manifestation  of  his  glory,  of 
| the  care  he  maintains  of  his  church  and  pe^- 
j pie,  and  of  his  attention  to  their  prayers,  is 
| exemplified  by  the  history  of  nations  and 
j families,  and  the  daily  occurrences  of  private 
life.  The  believer  receives  bour'y  and  in- 
! dubitable  proofs  that  the  Lord  reigns  ; that 
j verily  there  is  a God  that  judges  in  the  earth. 
Hence  arises  a solid  confidence : he  sees  that 
his  concerns  are  in  safe  hands ; and  he  needs 
not  be  afraid  of  evil  tidings.  His  heart  is 
fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord ; while  others  live 
at  an  uncertainty,  exposed  to  the  impressions 
of  every  new  appearance ; and,  like  a ship 
in  a storm,  without  rudder  or  pilot,  abandon- 
ed to  the  power  of  the  winds  and  waves,  in 
the  history  of  Joseph,  and  in  the  book  of 
Esther,  and  indeed  throughout  the  Bible, 
we  have  specimens  of  the  wise  unerring 
providence  of  God;  what  important  conse- 
quences depend,  under  his  management,  upon 
the  smallest  events;  and  with  what  certainty 
seeming  contingencies  are  directed  to  the 
issue  which  he  has  appointed.  By  these  au- 
| thentic  specimens  we  learn  to  judge  of  the 
whole;  and  with  still  greater  advantage  by  the 
light  of  the  New  Testament,  which  shows 
us,  that  the  administration  of  all  power  in 
heaven  and  earth  is  in  the  hands  of  Jesus. 
The  government  is  upon  his  shoulders.  The 
King  of  saints  is  King  of  nations,  King  of 
kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  Not  a sparrow 
falls  to  the  ground,  nor  a hair  from  our  heads, 
without  his  cognizance.  And  though  his 
ways  are  higher  than  our  ways,  and  his 
thoughts  than  our  thoughts;  though  his 
agency  is  veiled  from  the  eye  of  sense  by 
the  intervention  of  second  causes,  yet  faith 
perceives,  acknowledges,  admires,  and  trusts 
| his  management  This  study,  like  the  for- 
mer, does  not  require  superior  natural  abili- 
ties, but  is  obvious  to  the  weakest  and  mean- 
est of  his  people,  so  far  as  their  own  duty 
and  peace  are  concerned. 

The  fourth  volume  is  the  hook  of  the  Heart, 
or  of  Human  Nature,  comprehending  the 
experience  of  what  passes  within  our  own 
breasts,  and  the  observations  we  make  upon 
the  principles  and  conduct  of  others,  com- 
pared with  what  we  read  in  the  word  of  God. 
The  heart  of  man  is  deep;  but  all  its  princi- 
ples and  workings  in  every  possible  situation, 
and  the  various  manners  in  which  it  is  affect- 
ed by  sin,  by  Satan,  by  worldly  objects,  and 
by  grace,  in  solitude  and  in  company,  in  pros- 
perity and  in  affliction,  are  disclosed  and  un- 
folded in  the  scriptures.  Many  who  are  proud 
of  their  knowledge  of  what  they  may  he  safe- 
ly ignorant  of,  are  utter  strangers  to  them- 
, selves.  Having  no  acquaintance  with  the  scri> 


147 


LET.  XVI.]  ON  THE  INEFFICACY 

tures  they  have  neither  skill  nor  inclination  to 
ook  into  their  own  hearts,  nor  any  certain 
criterion  whereby  to  judge  of  the  conduct  of 
human  life.  But  the  Bible  teaches  us  to  read 
this  mysterious  book  also;  shows  us  the 
source,  nature,  and  tendency  of  our  hopes, 
fears,  desires,  pursuits,  and  perplexities;  the 
reasons  why  we  cannot  be  happy  in  our- 
selves, and  the  vanity  and  insufficiency  of 
every  thing  around  us  to  help  us.  The  rest 
and  happiness  proposed  in  the  gospel,  is  like- 
wise found  to  be  exactly  suitable  to  the  de- 
sires and  necessities  of  the  awakened  heart ; 
and  the  conduct  of  those  who  reject  this  sal- 
vation as  well  as  the  gracious  effects  produ- 
ced in  those  who  receive  it,  prove  to  a de- 
monstration, that  the  word  of  God  is  indeed 
a diseerner  of  the  thoughts  and  intents  of 
the  heart. 

My  limits  will  admit  but  of  a few  hints 
upon  these  extensive  subjects.  I shall  only 
observe  that  whoever  is  well  read  in  these 
four  books,  is  a wise  person,  how  little  soever 
he  may  know  of  what  the  men  of  the  world 
call  science.  On  the  other  hand,  though  a 
man  should  be  master  of  the  whole  circle 
of  classical,  polite,  and  philosophical  know- 
ledge, if  he  has  no  taste  for  the  Bible,  and 
has  no  ability  to  apply  it  to  the  works  of 
creation  and  providence,  and  his  own  expe- 
rience, he  knows  nothing  yet  as  he  ought 
to  know.  I have  pointed  out  a treasure  of 
more  worth  than  all  the  volumes  in  the  Vati- 
can.— I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XVI. 

On  the  Licjjicacy  of  our  Knowledge. 

dear  sir, — To  be  enabled  to  form  a clear, 
consistent,  and  comprehensive  judgment  of 
the  truths  revealed  in  the  scriptures,  is  a 
great  privilege : but  they  who  possess  it  are 
exposed  to  the  temptation  of  thinking  too 
highly  of  themselves,  and  too  meanly  of 
others,  especially  of  those  who  not  only  re- 
fuse to  adopt  their  sentiments,  but  venture 
to  oppose  them.  We  see  few  controversial 
writings,  however  excellent  in  other  respects, 
but  are  tinctured  with  this  spirit  of  self-su- 
periority ; and  they  who  are  not  called  to  this 
service,  if  they  are  attentive  to  what  passes 
in  their  hearts,  may  feel  it  working  within 
them,  upon  a thousand  occasions;  though,  so 
far  as  it  prevails,  it  brings  forcibly  home  to 
ourselves  the  charge  of  ignorance  and  in- 
consistence, which  we  are  so  ready  to  fix 
upon  our  opponents.  I know  nothing  as  a 
means  more  likely  to  correct  this  evil,  than 
a serious  consideration  of  the  amazing  differ- 
ence between  our  acquired  judgment,  and 
our  actual  experience;  or,  in  other  words, 
how  little  influence  our  knowledge  and  judg- 


)F  OUR  KNOWLEDGE. 

ment  have  upon  our  own  conduct.  Thi3 
may  confirm  to  us  the  truth  and  propriety  of 
the  apostle’s  observation,  “ If  any  man  think 
that  he  knoweth  any  thing,  he  knoweth  no- 
thing yet  as  he  ought  to  know.”  Not  that 
we  are  bound  to  be  insensible  that  the  Lord 
has  taught  us  what  we  were  once  ignorant 
of;  nor  is  it  possible  that  we  should  be  so : 
but,  because,  if  we  estimate  our  knowledge 
by  its  effects,  and  value  it  no  farther  than  it 
is  experimental  and  operative  (which  is  the 
proper  standard  whereby  to  try  it,)  we  shall 
find  it  so  faint  and  feeble  as  hardly  to  de- 
serve the  name. 

How  firmly,  for  instance,  are  we  persuaded, 
in  our  judgments,  that  God  is  omnipresent. 
Great  as  the  difficulties  may  be  which  attend 
our  conceptions  of  this  point,  the  truth  itself 
is  controverted  by  few.  It  is  generally  ac- 
knowledged by  unawakened  persons ; and,  I 
may  add,  too  frequently  known  even  by  be- 
lievers, as  if  they  knew  it  not.  If  the  eyes 
of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place,  how  strong  a 
guard  should  this  thought  be  upon  the  con- 
duct of  those  who  profess  to  fear  him  ! We 
know  how  wo  are  often  affected  when  in  tho 
presence  of  a fellow-worm;  if  he  is  one  on 
whom  we  depend,  or  who  is  considerably  our 
superior  in  life,  how  careful  are  we  to  com- 
pose our  behaviour,  and  to  avoid  whatever 
might  be  deemed  improper  or  offensive  ! Is 
it  not  strange,  that  those  who  have  taken 
their  ideas  of  the  divine  majesty,  holiness, 
and  purity  from  the  scriptures,  and  are  not 
wholly  insensible  of  their  inexpressible  obli- 
gations to  regulate  all  they  say  or  do  by  his 
precepts,  should,  upon  many  occasions,  be 
betrayed  into  improprieties  of  behaviour, 
from  which  the  presence  of  a nobleman,  or 
a prince,  would  have  effectually  restrained 
them,  yea,  sometimes,  perhaps,  even  the  pre- 
sence of  -a  child  1 Even  in  the  exercise  of 
prayer,  by  which  we  profess  to  draw  near 
the  Lord,  the  consideration  that  his  eye  is 
upon  us,  has  little  power  to  engage  our  at- 
tention, or  prevent  our  thoughts  from  wan- 
dering, like  the  fool’s  eyes,  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  What  should  we  think  of  a person, 
who,  being  admitted  into  the  king’s  presence 
upon  business  of  the  greatest  importance, 
should  break  off  in  the  midst  of  his  address, 
to  pursue  a butterfly  1 Could  such  an  in- 
stance of  weakness  bo  met  with,  it  would 
be  but  a faint  emblem  of  the  inconsistencies 
which  they  who  are  acquainted  with  their 
own  hearts,  can  often  charge  themselves 
with  in  prayer.  They  are  not  wholly  igno- 
rant in  what  a frame  of  spirit  becomes  a 
needy,  dependent  sinner  to  approach  that 
God,  before  whom  the  angels  arc  represent- 
ed as  veiling  their  faces;  yet,  in  defiance  cf 
their  better  judgment,  their  attention  is  di- 
verted from  him  with  whom  they  have  to  do, , 
to  the  merest  trifles ; they  are  not  able  to 
realize  that  presence  with  which  they  be- 


148 


ON  THE  INEFFICACY  OF  OUR  KNOWLEDGE.  [let.  xvi. 


lieve  themselves  to  be  surrounded,  but  speak 
as  if  they  were  speaking  to  the  air.  Further, 
if  our  sense  that  God  is  always  present,  was 
in  any  good  measure  answerable  to  the  con- 
viction of  our  judgment,  would  it  not  be  an 
effectual  preservative  from  the  many  impor- 
tunate, though  groundless  fears,  with  which 
we  are  harassed ! He  says,  “ Fear  not,  I am 
with  thee:”  he  promises  to  be  a shield  and 
a guard  to  those  who  put  their  trust  in  him ; 
yet  though  we  profess  to  believe  his  word, 
and  to  hope  that  he  is  our  protector,  we  sel- 
dom think  ourselves  safe,  even  in  the  path 
of  duty,  a moment  longer  than  danger  is 
kept  out  of  our  view.  Little  reason  have 
wre  to  value  ourselves  upon  our  knowledge 
of  this  indisputable  truth,  when  it  has  no 
more  effective  and  habitual  influence  upon 
our  conduct. 

The  doctrine  of  God’s  sovereignty  like- 
wise, though  not  so  generally  owned  as  the 
former,  is  no  less  fully  assented  to  by  those 
who  are  called  Calvinists.  We  zealously 
contend  for  this  point  in  our  debates  with 
the  Arminians,  and  are  ready  to  wonder  that 
any  should  be  hardy  enough  to  dispute  the 
Creator’s  right  to  do  what  lie  will  with  his 
own.  While  we  are  only  engaged  in  de- 
fence of  the  election  of  grace,  and  have  a 
comfortable  hope  that  we  are  ourselves  of 
that  number,  we  seem  so  convinced,  by  the 
arguments  scripture  affords  us  in  support  of 
this  truth,  that  we  can  hardly  forbear  charg- 
ing our  adversaries  with  perverse  obstinacy 
and  pride  for  opposing  it.  Undoubtedly  the 
ground  of  this  opposition  lies  in  the  pride  of 
the  human  heart : but  this  evil  principle  is 
not  confined  to  any  party ; and  occasions  fre- 
quently arise,  when  they  who  contend  for 
the  divine  sovereignty  are  little  more  prac- 
tically influenced  by  it  than  their  oppo- 
nents. This  humiliating  doctrine  concludes 
as  strongly  for  submission  to  the  will  of  God, 
under  every  circumstance  of  life,  as  it  does  for 
our  acquiescing  in  his  purpose  to  have  mercy 
upon  whom  he  will  have  mercy.  But,  alas ! 
how  often  do  we  find  ourselves  utterly  un- 
able to  apply  it,  so  as  to  reconcile  our  spirits 
to  those  afflictions  which  he  is  pleased  to  al- 
lot us.  So  far  as  we  are  enabled  to  say, 
when  we  are  exercised  with  poverty,  or 
heavy  losses  or  crosses,  “I  was  dumb,  and 
opened  not  my  mouth,  because  thou  didst  it,” 
so  far,  and  no  farther,  are  we  truly  con- 
vinced that  God  has  a sovereign  right  to  dis- 
pose of  us,  and  all  our  concernments,  as  he 
pleases.  How  often,  and  how  justly,  at  such 
seasons,  might  the  argument  we  offer  to 
others,  as  sufficient  to  silent  all  their  objec- 
tions, be  retorted  upon  ourselves:  “Nay,  but 
who  art  thou,  O man,  who  repliest  against 
God ! Shall  the  thing  formed  say  unto  him 
that  formed  it,  Why  hast  thou  made  me 
thus  1” — a plain  proof  that  our  knowledge  is 
more  notional  than  experimental.  What  an 


inconsistence,  that  while  we  think  God  is  just 
and  righteous  in  withholding  from  others  the 
things  which  pertain  to  their  everlasting 
peace,  we  should  find  it  so  hard  to  submit  to 
his  dispensations  to  ourselves  in  matters  of 
unspeakably  less  importance ! 

But  the  Lord’s  appointments,  to  those  who 
fear  him,  are  not  only  sovereign,  but  wise 
and  gracious.  He  has  connected  their  good 
with  his  own  glory,  and  is  engaged,  by  pro- 
mise, to  make  all  things  work  together  for 
1 their  advantage.  He  chooses  for  his  people 
| better  than  they  could  choose  for  themselves. 

I If  they  are  in  heaviness,  there  is  a need-be 
! for  it,  and  he  withholds  nothing  from  them 
but  what,  upon  the  whole,  it  is  better  they 
should  be  without.  Thus  the  scriptures  teach, 
and  thus  we  profess  to  believe.  Furnished 
with  these  principles,  we  are  at  no  loss  to 
! suggest  motives  of  patience  and  consolation 
i to  our  brethren  that  are  afflicted.  We  can 
j assure  them,  without  hesitation,  that  if  they 
I are  interested  in  the  promises,  their  concerns 
j are  in  safe  hands ; that  the  things  which  at 
i present  are  not  joyous,  but.  grievous,  shall  in 
due  season  yield  the  peaceful  fruits  of  righ- 
teousness, and  that  their  trials  are  as  certainly 
mercies  as  their  comforts.  We  can  prove  to 
them,  from  the  history  of  Joseph,  David,  Job, 
and  other  instances  recorded  in  scripture, 
that,  notwithstanding  any  present  dark  ap- 
pearances, it  shall  certainly  be  wrell  with 
the  righteous;  that  God  can  and  will  make 
crooked  things  straight:  and  that  he  often 
produces  the  greatest  good  from  those  events 
which  we  are  apt  to  look  upon  as  evil.  From 
hence  we  can  infer,  not  only  the  sinfulness, 
but  the  folly  of  finding*  fault  with  any  of  his 
dispensations.  We  can  tell  them,  that  at 
the  worst,  the  sufferings  of  the  present  life 
are  not  worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory 
that  shall  be  revealed ; and  that,  therefore, 
under  the  greatest  pressures,  they  should  so 
weep  as  those  who  expect,  in  a little  time,  to 
have  all  their  tears  wiped  away.  But  when 
the  case  is  our  own,  wrhen  we  are  troubled 
on  every  side,  or  touched  in  the  tenderest 
part,  how  difficult  is  it  to  feel  the  force  of 
these  reasonings,  though  we  know  they  are 
true  to  a demonstration  1 Then,  unless  w*e 
! are  endued  with  fresh  strength  from  on  high, 

| we- are  as  liable  to  complain  and  despond,  as 
j if  we  thought  our  afflictions  sprung  out  of  the 
' ground,  and  that  the  Lord  had  forgotten  to 
j be  gracious. 

1 might  proceed  to  show  the  difference  be- 
tween our  judgment,  -when  most  enlightened 
: and  our  actual  experience  with  respect  to 
I every  spiritual  truth.  We  know  there  is  no 
| proportion  between  time  and  eternity,  be- 
| tween  God  and  the  creature,  the  favour  of 
the  Lord  and  the  favour  or  the  frowns  of 
men ; and  yet  often,  when  these  things  are 
brought  into  close  competition,  we  are  scrcly 
put  to  it  to  keep  steadfast  in  the  path  of  duty ; 


ON  A BELIEVER’S  FRAMES. 


149 


LET.  XVII.] 


nay,  without  new  supplies  of  grace,  we  should 
certainly  fail  in  the  time  of  trial,  and  our 
knowledge  would  have  no  other  effect  than 
to  render  our  guilt  more  inexcusable.  We 
seem  to  be  as  sure  that  we  are  weak,  sinful, 
fallible  creatures,  as  we  are  that  we  exist; 
and  yet  we  are  prone  to  act  as  if  we  were 
wise  and  good.  In  a word,  we  cannot  deny 
that  a great  part  of  our  knowledge  is,  as  I 
have  described  it,  like  the  light  of  the  moon, 
destitute  of  heat  and  influence ; and  yet  we 
can  hardly  help  thinking  of  ourselves  too 
highly  upon  the  account  of  it. 

May  we  not  say  with  the  psalmist,  “ Lord, 
what  is  man !”  yea,  what  an  enigma,  what  a 
poor  inconsistent  creature,  is  a believer  ! In 
one  view,  how  great  are  his  character  and 
privileges ! He  knows  the  Lord ; he  knows 
himself.  His  understanding  is  enlightened 
to  apprehend  and  contemplate  the  great  mys- 
teries of  the  gospel.  He  has  just  ideas  of  the 
evil  of  sin,  the  vanity  of  the  world,  the  beau- 
ties of  holiness,  and  the  nature  of  true  hap- 
piness. He  was  once  darkness,  but  now  he 
is  light  in  the  Lord.  He  has  access  to  God 
by  Jesus  Christ,  to  whom  he  is  united,  and 
in  whom  he  lives  by  faith.  While  the  prin- 
ciples he  has  received  are  enlivened  by  the 
agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  can  do  all 
things.  He  is  humble,  gentle,  patient,  watch- 
ful, faithful.  He  rejoices  in  afflictions,  tri-  j 
umphs  over  temptation,  lives  upon  the  fore-  j 
tastes  of  eternal  glory,  and  counts  not  his 
life  dear,  so  he  may  glorify  God  his  Saviour, 
and  finish  his  course  with  joy.  But  his 
strength  is  not  his  own  ; he  is  absolutely  de- 
pendent, and  is  still  encompassed  with  in- 
firmities, and  burdened  with  a depraved  na- 
ture. If  the  Lord  withdraws  his  power,  he 
becomes  weak  as  another  man,  and  drops,  as 
a stone  sinks  to  the  earth  by  its  own  weight. 
His  inherent  knowledge  may  be  compared 
to  the  windows  of  a house,  which  can  t.rans-  j 
mit  the  light,  but  cannot  retain  it.  Without 
renewed  and  continual  communications  from 
the  Spirit  of  grace,  he  is  unable  to  withstand 
the  smallest  temptation,  to  endure  the  slight- 
er;; trial,  to  perform  the  least  service  in  a due 
manner,  or  even  to  think  a good  thought.  He 
knows  this,  and  yet  he  too  oflen  forgets  it. 
But  the  Lord  reminds  him  of  it  frequently, 
by  suspending  that  assistance,  without  which 
lie  can  do  nothing.  Then  he  feels  what  he 
is,  and  is  easily  prevailed  upon  to  act  in  con- 
tradiction to  his  better  judgment.  Thus 
repeated  experience  of  his  own  weakness 
teaches  him,  by  degrees,  where  his  strength 
lies : that  it  is  not  in  any  thing  that  he  has 
already  attained,  or  can  call  his  own,  but  in 
the  grace,  power,  and  faithfulness  of  his  Sa- 
viour. He  learns  to  cea’se  from  his  own  un- 
derstanding, to  be  ashamed  of  his  best  en- 
deavours, to  abhor  himself  in  dust  and  ashes, 
md  to  glory  only  in  the  Lord. 

From  hence  we  may  observe,  that  be- 


lievers who  have  most  knowledge,  are  no., 
therefore,  necessarily  the  most  spiritual. — 
Some  may,  and  do,  walk  more  honourably 
and  more  comfortably  with  two  talents,  than 
others  with  five.  He  who  experimentally 
knows  his  own  weakness,  and  depends  sim- 
ply upon  the  Lord,  will  surely  thrive,  though 
his  acquired  attainments  and  abilities  may 
be  but  small ; and  he  who  has  the  greatest 
gifts,  the  clearest  judgment,  and  the  most 
extensive  knowledge,  if  he  indulges  high 
thoughts  of  his  advantages,  is  in  imminent 
danger  of  mistaking  and  falling  at  every 
step ; for  the  Lord  will  suffer  none  whom  he 
loves  to  boast  in  themselves.  He  will  guide 
the  meek  with  his  eye,  and  fill  the  hungry 
with  good  things ; but  the  rich  he  sendeth 
empty  away.  It  is  an  invariable  maxim  in 
his  kingdom,  that  whosoever  exalteth  him- 
self shall  be  abased ; but  he  that  humbleth 
himself  shall  be  exalted. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XVII. 

On  a Believer's  Frames. 

dear  sir, — You  ask  me,  in  your  letter. 
What  one  should  do  when  he  finds  himself 
always  still,  quiet,  and  stupid,  except  in  the 
pulpit;  when  he  is  made  useful  there,  but 
cannot  get  either  comfort  or  sorrow  out  of  it, 
or  but  very  rarely!  You  describe  a case 
which  my  own  experience  has  made  very 
familiar  to  me : I shall  therefore  take  the 
occasion  to  offer  you  a few  miscellaneous 
thoughts  upon  the  subject  of  a believer’s 
frames;  and  I send  them  to  you,  not  by  post, 
but  from  the  press ; because  I apprehend  the 
exercise  you  speak  of  is  not  peculiar  to  you 
or  to  me,  but  is,  in  a greater  or  less  degree, 
the  burden  of  all  who  are  spiritually  minded, 
and  duly  attentive  to  what  passes  in  their 
own  hearts,  whether  they  are  in  the  ministry 
or  not. 

As  you  intimate  that  you  are,  in  the  main, 
favoured  with  liberty  and  usefulness  in  the 
pulpit,  give  me  leave  to  ask  you,  What  you 
would  do,  if  yomilid  not  find  yourself  occa- 
sionally poor,  insufficient,  and,  as  you  ex- 
press it,  stupid,  at  other  times!  Are  you 
aware  of  what  might  be  the  possible,  the 
probable,  the  almost  certain  consequences,  if 
you  always  found  your  spirit  enlarged,  and 
your  frames  lively  and  comfortable ! Would 
you  not  be  in  great  danger  of  being  puffed 
up  with  spiritual  pride ! Would  you  not  be 
less  sensible  of  your  absolute  dependence 
upon  the  pow7er  of  Christ,  and  of  your  con- 
tinual need  of  his  blood,  pardon,  and  inter- 
cession! Would  you  not  be  quite  at  a loss 
to  speak  suitably  and  feelingly  to  the  case  of 
many  gracious  souls,  who  are  groaning  un- 
der those  effects  of  a depraved  nature,  from 


150 


ON  A BELIEVER’S  FRAMES. 


which,  upon  that  supposition,  you  would  be 
exempted  1 How  could  you  speak  properly 
upon  the  deceitfulness  of  the  heart,  if  you 
did  not  feel  the  deceitfulness  of  your  own ; or 
adapt  yourself  to  the  changing1  experiences 
through  which  your  hearers  pass,  if  you  your- 
self were  always  alike  or  nearly  sol  Or  how 
could  you  speak  pertinently  of  the  inward  j 
warfare,  the  contrary  principles  of  flesh  and 
spirit  fighting  one  against  another,  if  your 
awn  spiritual  desires  were  always  vigorous 
and  successful,  and  met  with  little  opposition 
or  concroul  1 

The  apostle  Paul,  though  favoured  with  a 
singular  eminency  in  grace,  felt  at  times  that 
ne  had  no  sufficiency  in  himself,  even  so 
much  as  to  think  a good  thought ; and  he  saw 
there  was  a danger  of  his  being  exalted 
above  measure,  if  the  Lord  had  not  wisely 
and  graciously  tempered  his  dispensations  to 
prevent  it.  By  “ being  exalted  above  mea- 
sure,” perhaps  there  may  be  a reference,  not 
only  to  his  spirit,  lest  he  should  think  more 
highly  of  himself  than  he  ought,  but  likewise 
to  his  preaching,  lest,  not  having  the  same 
causes  of  complaint  and  humiliation  in  com- 
mon with  others,  he  should  shoot  over  the 
heads  of  his  hearers,  confine  himself  chiefly 
to  speak  of  such  comforts  and  privileges  as 
he  himself  enjoyed,  and  have  little  to  say  for 
the  refreshment  of  those  who  were  discour- 
aged and  cast  down  by  continual  conflict  with 
indwelling  sin.  The  angel  who  appeared  to 
Cornelius,  did  not  preach  the  gospel  to  him, 
but  directed  him  to  send  for  Peter;  for, 
though  the  glory  and  grace  of  the  Saviour 
seems  a fitter  subject  for  an  angel’s  powers, 
than  for  the  poor  stammering  tongues  of  sin- 
ful men,  yet,  an  angel  could  not  preach  ex- 
perimentally, nor  describe  the  warfare  be- 
tween grace  and  sin  from  his  own  feelings. 
And  if  we  could  suppose  a minister  as  full 
of  comforts,  and  as  free  from  failings  as  an 
angel,  though  he  would  be  a good  and  happy 
man,  I cannot  conceive  that  he  would  be  a 
good  or  useful  preacher;  for  he  would  not 
know  how  to  sympathize  with  the  weak  and 
afflicted  of  the  flock,  or  to  comfort  them  under 
their  difficulties  with  the  consolations  where- 
with he  himself,  in  similar  circumstances, 
had  been  comforted  of  God.  It  belongs  to 
your  calling  of  God  as  a minister,  that  you 
should  have  a taste  of  the  various  spiritual 
trials  which  are  incident  to  the  Lord’s  peo- 
ple, that  thereby  you  may  possess  the  tongue 
of  the  learned,  and  know  how  to  speak  a 
word  in  season  to  them  that  are  weary ; and 
it  is  likewise  needful  to  keep  you  perpetu- 
ally attentive  to  that  important  admonition, 

‘ Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing.” 

Thus  much,  considering  you  as  a minister. 
But  we  may  extend  the  subject  so  as  to  make 
it  applicable  to  believers  in  general.  I would 
observe,  therefore,  that  it  is  a sign  of  a sad 
declension,  if  one,  who  has  tasted  that  the 


[let.  XVII. 

Lord  is  gracious,  should  be  capable  of  being 
fully  satisfied  with  any  thing  short  of  the 
light  of  his  countenance,  which  is  better  than 
life.  A resting  in  notions  of  gospel-truth,  or 
in  the  recollection  of  past  comforts,  without 
a continual  thirst  for  fresh  communications 
from  the  fountain  of  life,  is,  I am  afraid,  the 
j canker  which  eats  away  the  beauty  and  fruit- 
fulness of  many  professor's  in  the  present  day ; 
and  which,  if  it  does  not  prove  them  to  be 
absolutely  dead,  is,  at  least,  a sufficient  evi- 
dence that  they  are  lamentably  sick.  But, 
if  we  are  conscious  of  the  desire,  if  we  seek  it 
carefully  in  the  use  of  all  appointed  means, 
if  we  willingly  allow  ourselves  in  nothing 
which  has  a known  tendency  to  grieve  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and  to  damp  our  sense  of 
divine  things;  then,  if  the  Lord  is  pleased  to 
keep  us  short  of  those  comforts  which  he  has 
taught  us  to  prize,  and,  instead  of  lively 
sensations  of  joy  and  praise,  we  feel  a lan- 
guor and  deadness  of  spirit,  provided  we  do 
indeed  feel  it,  and  are  humbled  for  it,  wo 
have  no  need  to  give  way  to  despondency  or 
excessive  sorrow ; still  the  foundation  of  our 
hope,  and  the  ground  of  our  abiding  joys,  is 
the  same;  and  the  heart  may  be  as  really 
alive  to  God,  and  grace  as  truly  in  exercise, 
when  we  walk  in  comparative  darkness  and 
see  little  light,  as  when  the  frame  of  our 
spirits  is  more  comfortable.  Neither  the 
reality  nor  the  measure  of  grace  can  be  pro- 
perly estimated  by  the  degree  of  our  sensible 
comforts.  The  great  question  is,  How  are 
we  practically  influenced  by  the  word  of  God 
as  the  ground  of  our  hope,  and  as  the  govern- 
ing rule  of  our  tempers  and  conversation  ! 
The  apostle  exhorts  believers  to  rejoice  in 
the  Lord  always.  He  well  knew  that  they 
were  exposed  to  trials  and  temptations,  and 
to  much  trouble,  from  an  evil  heart  of  unbe- 
lief; and  he  prevents  the  objections  we  might 
be  ready  to  make,  by  adding,  “ And  again,  I 
say,  rejoice !”  As  if  he  had  said,  I speak 
upon  mature  consideration ; I call  upon  you 
to  rejoice,  not  at  some  times  only,  but  at  all 
times ; not  only  when  upon  the  mount,  but 
when  in  the  valley ; not  only  when  you  con- 
quer, but  while  you  are  fighting ; not  only 
when  the  Lord  shines  upon  you,  but  when 
he  seems  to  hide  his  face.  When  he  enables 
you  to  do  all  things,  you  are  no  better  in 
yourselves  than  you  were  before  ; and  wher 
you  feel  you  can  do  nothing,  you  are  no 
worse.  Your  experiences  will  vary ; but  his 
love  and  promises  are  always  unchangeable. 
Though  our  desires  of  comfort,  and  what  we 
call  lively  frames,  cannot  be  too  importunate, 
while  they  are  regulated  by  a due  submission 
to  his  will,  yet  they  may  be  inordinate  for 
want  of  such  submission.  Sinful  principles 
may,  and  too  often  do,  mix  with  and  defile 
our  best  desires.  I have  often  detected  tho 
two  vile  abominations  self-will  and  self-righ- 
teousness, insinuating  themselves  into  this 


ON  A BELIEVER'S  FRAMES. 


151 


LET.  XVII.] 

concern  ; like  Satan,  who  works  by  them, 
they  can  occasionally  assume  the  appearance 
of  an  angel  of  light.  I have  felt  an  impa- 
tience in  my  spirit,  utterly  unsuitable  to  my 
state  as  a sinner  and  a beggar,  and  to  my 
profession  of  yielding  myself  and  all  my  con- 
cerns to  the  Lord’s  disposal.  He  has  merci- 
fully convinced  me  that  I labour  under  a 
complication  of  disorders,  summed  up  in  the 
word  sin ; he  has  graciously  revealed  him- 
self to  me  as  the  infallible  Physician,  and 
has  enabled  me  to  commit  myself  to  him  as 
such,  and  to  expect  my  cure  from  his  hand 
alone.  Yet  how  often,  instead  of  thankfully 
accepting  his  prescriptions,  have  I foolishly 
and  presumptuously  ventured  to  prescribe  to 
him.  and  to  point  out  how  I would  have  him 
deal  with  me ! How  often  have  I thought 
something  was  necessary,  which  he  saw  best 
to  deny,  and  that  I could  have  done  better 
without  those  dispensations  which  his  wis- 
dom appointed  to  work  for  my  good  ! He  is 
God,  and  not  man,  or  else  he  would  have 
been  weary  of  me,  and  left  me  to  my  own 
management  long  ago.  How  inconsistent! 
to  acknowledge  that  I am  blind,  to  intreat 
him  to  lead  me,  and  yet  to  want  to  choose  my 
own  way,  in  the  same  breath.  I have  limited 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  and  not  considered, 
that  he  magnifies  his  wisdom  and  grace  in 
working  by  contraries,  and  bringing  good  out 
of  seeming  evil.  It  has  cost  me  something 
to  bring*  myself  to  confess  that  he  is  wiser 
than  I ; but  I trust,  through  his  blessing,  I 
have  not  suffered  wholly  in  vain.  My  sensi- 
ble comforts  have  not  been  great ; the  proofs 
I have  had  of  the  evils  of  my  sinful  nature, 
my  incapacity  and  aversion  to  good,  have 
neither  been  few  nor  small ; but  by  these 
unpromising  means,  I hope,  he  has  made  his 
grace  and  salvation  precious  to  my  soul,  and 
in  some  measure  weaned  me  from  leaning 
to  my  own  understanding. 

Again,  self-righteousness  has  had  a consi- 
derable hand  in  dictating  many  of  my  desires 
for  an  increase  of  comfort  and  spiritual 
strength.  I have  wanted  some  stock  of  my 
own.  I have  been  wearied  of  being  so  per- 
petually beholden  to  him,  and  necessitated  to 
come  to  him  always  in  the  same  strain,  as  a 
poor  miserable  sinner.  I could  have  liked 
to  have  done  something  for  myself  in  com- 
mon, and  to  have  depended  upon  him  chiefly 
upon  extraordinary  occasions.  I have  found, 
indeed,  that  I could  do  nothing  without  his 
assistance,  nor  any  thing,  even  with  it,  but 
what  1 have  reason  to  be  ashamed  of.  If  this 
had  only  humbled  me,  and  led  me  to  rejoice 
in  his  all-sufficiency,  it  would  have  been 
well.  But  it  has  often  had  a different  effect, 
to  make  me  sullen,  angry,  and  discontented ; 
as  if  it  was  not  best  and  most  desirable,  that 
he  should  have  all  the  glory  of  his  own  \\  ork, 
and  I should  have  nothing*  to  boast  of,  but 
that  in  the  Lord  I have  righteousness  and 


strength.  I am  now  learning  to  glory  only 
in  my  infirmities,  that  the  power  of  Christ 
may  rest  upon  me;  to  be  content  to  be  no- 
thing, that  he  may  be  all  in  all.  But  I find 
this  a hard  lesson  ; and  when  1 seem  to  have 
made  some  proficiency,  a slight  turn  in  my 
spirit  throws  me  back,  and  I have  to  begin 
all  again. 

Tli is  is  an  inseparable  connexion  between 
causes  and  effects.  There  can  be  no  effect 
without  a cause,  no  active  cause  without  a 
proportionable  effect.  Now  indwelling  sin 
is  an  active  cause;  and  therefore,  while  it 
remains  in  our  nature,  it  will  produce  effects 
according  to  its  strength.  Why  then  should 
I be  surprised,  that  if  the  Lord  suspends  his 
influence  for  a moment,  in  that  moment  sin 
will  discover  itself!  Why  should  I wonder 
that  I can  feel  no  lively  exercise  of  grace, 
no  power  to  raise  my  heart  to  God  any  far- 
ther than  he  is  pleased  to  work  in  me 
mightily, — any  more  than  I wonder  that  I 
do  not  find  fire  in  the  bottom  of  a well,  or 
that  it  should  not  be  day  when  the  sun  is  with- 
drawn from  the  earth ! Humbled  I ought  to 
be,  to  find  I am  so  totally  depraved  ; but  not 
discouraged,  since  Jesus  is  appointed  to  me 
of  God,  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifica- 
tion, and  redemption ; and  since  I find  that, 
in  the  midst  of  all  this  darkness  and  dead- 
ness, he  keeps  alive  the  principle  of  grace 
which  he  has  implanted  in  my  heart. 

As  to  Mr.  Rutherford’s  expression  which 
you  mention,  that  “ there  is  no  temptation 
like  being  without  temptation ;”  I allow  it 
in  a qualified  sense  ; that  is,  it  is  the  better 
of  the  two,  to  suffer  from  Satan’s  fiery  darts, 
than  to  be  lulled  asleep,  and  drawn  into  a 
careless  security,  by  his  more  subtile,  though 
less  perceptible  devices ; so  as  to  grow  indif- 
ferent to  the  means  of  grace,  and  sink  into  a 
worldly  spirit,  or,  like  the  church  of  I.aodi- 
cea,  to  imagine  ourselves  rich,  and  increased 
in  goods,  and  that  we  have  need  of  nothing. 
But  I am  persuaded  this  is  not  your  case; 
the  deadness  you  complain  of,  and  which  is 
a burden  you  groan  under,  is  a very  different 
thing.  And  I advise  you  to  be  cautious  how 
you  indulge  a desire  to  be.  exercised  with 
Satan’s  temptations, .as  supposing  they  would 
be  conducive  to  make  you  more  spiritual, 
or  would,  of  course,  open  you  a way  to  greater 
consolations.  If  you  have  such  a desire,  I 
may  say  to  you,  in  the  Lord’s  words,  “ Yoi, 
know  not  what  you  ask.”  He  who  kno 
our  weakness,  ar.d  the  power  of  our  adver 
sary,  lias  graciously  directed  us  to  pray, 
that  we  enter  not  into  temptation.  Have 
you  considered  what  the  enemy  can  do,  if  he 
is  permitted  to  come  in  like  a flood  1 In  one 
hour  he  could  raise  such  a storm,  as  would 
put  you  to  your  wit’s  end.  He  could  bring 
such  a dark  cloud  over  your  mind  as  would 
blot  out  all  remembrance  of  your  past  com- 
forts, or  at  least  prevent  you  from  deriving 


152 


ON  SOCIAL  PRAYER. 


the  least  support  from  them.  He  could  not 
only  fight  against  your  peace,  but  shake 
the  very  foundations  of  your  hope,  and  bring 
you  to  question,  not  only  your  interest  in  the 
promises,  but  even  to  doubt  of  the  most  im- 
portant and  fundamental  truths  upon  which 
your  hopes  have  been  built.  Be  thankful, 
therefore,  if  the  Lord  restrains  his  malice. 
A young  sailor  is  often  impatient  of  a short 
calm ; but  the  experienced  mariner,  who  has 
been  often  tossed  with  tempests,  and  upon 
the  point  of  perishing,  will  seldom  wish  for 
a storm.  In  a word,  let  us  patiently  wait 
upon  the  Lord,  and  be  content  to  follow  as 
he  leads,  and  he  will  surely  do  us  good. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  XVIII. 

Thoughts  on  the  Exercise  of  Social  Prayer. 

sir, — I account  it  a great  mercy,  that,  at 
this  time,  when  iniquity  so  generally  abounds, 
there  is  a number,  1 hope  a growing  number, 
whose  eyes  affect  their  hearts,  and  who  are 
stirred  up  to  unite  in  prayer  for  the  spread- 
ing of  gospel-knowledge,  and  a blessing  upon 
our  sinful  land.  Meetings  for  social  prayer 
are  frequent  in  different  parts  of  the  king- 
dom, and  among  various  denominations  of 
Christians.  As  the  Lord  has  promised,  that 
when  he  prepares  the  heart  to  pray,  he  will 
graciously  incline  his  ear  to  hear,  who  can 
tell  but  he  may  yet  be  intreated  for  us,  and 
avert  the  heavy  and  justly-deserved  judg- 
ments which  seem  to  hang  over  us  I 

It  is  much  to  be  desired,  that  our  hearts 
might  be  so  affected  with  a sense  of  divine 
things,  and  so  closely  engaged  when  we  are 
worshipping  God,  that  it  might  not  be  in  the 
power  of  little  circumstances  to  interrupt  and 
perplex  us,  and  to  make  us  think  the  service 
wearisome,  and  the  time  which  we  employ 
in  it  tedious.  But  as  your  infirmities  are 
many  and  great,  and  the  enemy  of  our  souls 
is  watchful  to  discompose  us,  if  care  is  not 
taken  by  those  who  lead  in  social  prayer, 
the  exercise  which  is  approved  by  the  judg- 
ment, may  become  a burden,  and  an  occasion 
of  sin.  Complaints  of  this  kind  are  frequent, 
and  might  perhaps  be  easily  rectified,  if  the 
persons  chiefly  concerned  were  spoken  to  in 
love.  But  as  they  are  usually  the  last  who 
hear  of  it,  it  may  perhaps  be  of  service  to  com- 
municate a few  remarks  on  a subject  of  such 
general  concern. 

The  chief  fault  of  some  good  prayers  is, 
that  they  are  too  long;  not  that  1 think  we 
should  pray  by  the  clock,  and  limit  ourselves 
precisely  to  a certain  number  of  minutes ; 
but  it  is  the  better  of  the  two,  that  the  hear- 
ers should  wish  the  prayer  had  been  longer, 
than  spend  half  or  a considerable  part  of  the 


[let.  XVIII. 

time  in  wishing  it  was  over.  This  is  fre- 
quently owing  to  an  unnecessary  enlarge- 
ment upon  every  circumstance  that  oilers,  as 
well  as  to  the  repetition  of  the  same  things. 
If  we  have  been  copious  in  pleading  for  spi- 
ritual blessings,  it  may  be  best  to  be  brief  and 
summary  in  the  article  of  intercession  for 
others ; or  if  the  frame  of  our  spirits,  or  the 
circumstances  of  affairs,  lead  us  to  be  more 
large  and  particular  in  laying  the  cases  of 
others  before  the  Lord,  respect  should  be  had 
to  this  intention  in  the  former  part  of  the 
prayer.  There  are,  doubtless,  seasons  when 
the  Lord  is  pleased  to  favour  those  who  pray 
with  a peculiar  liberty ; they  speak  because 
they  feel;  they  have  a wrestling  spirit,  and 
hardly  know  how  to  leave  off  When  this 
is  the  case,  they  who  join  with  them  are  sel- 
dom wearied,  though  the  prayer  should  be 
protracted  something  beyond  the  usual  limits. 
But  I believe  it  sometimes  happens,  both  in 
praying,  and  in  preaching,  that  we  are  apt 
to  spin  out  our  time  to  the  greatest  lengtii, 
when  we  have,  in  reality,  the  least  to  say. 
Long  prayers  should  in  general  be  avoided, 
especially  where  several  persons  are  to  pray 
successively ; or  else  even  spiritual  hearers 
will  be  unable  to  keep  up  their  attention. 
And  here  I would  just  notice  an  impropriety 
we  sometimes  meet  with,  that  when  a person 
gives  expectation  that  he  is  just  going  to 
conclude  his  prayer,  something  not  tiiougnt  ol 
in  its  proper  place  occurring  that  instant  to 
his  mind,  leads  him  as  it  were  to  begin  again. 
But  unless  it  is  a matter  of  singular  import- 
ance, it  would  be  better  omitted  lor  that  time. 

The  prayers  of  some  good  men  are  more 
like  preaching  than  praying.  They  rather 
express  the  Lord’s  mind  to  the  people,  than 
the  desires  of  the  people  to  the  Lord.  In- 
deed this  can  hardly  be  called  prayer.  It 
might,  in  another  place,  stand  for  a part  of 
a good  sermon ; but  will  afford  little  help  to 
those  who  desire  to  pray  with  their  hearts. 
Prayer  should  be  sententious,  and  made  up 
of  breathings  to  the  Lord,  either  of  confes- 
sion, petition,  or  praise.  It  should  be,  not 
only  scriptural  and  evangelical,  but  experi- 
mental, a simple  and  unstudied  expression 
of  the  wants  and  feelings  of  the  soul.  It 
will  be  so  if  the  heart  is  lively  and  affected 
in  the  duty ; it  must  be  so  if  the  edification 
of  others  is  the  point  in  view. 

Several  books  have  been  written  to  assist 
in  the  gift  and  exercise  of  prayer,  as  by  Lr. 
Watts,  and  others:  and  many  useful  hints 
may  be  borrowed  from  them ; but  a too  close 
attention  to  the  method  and  transitions  there- 
in recommended,  gives  an  air  of  study  and 
formality,  and  ohends  against  that  simplicity 
which  is  so  essentially  necessary  to  a good 
prayer,  that  no  degree  of  acquired  abilities 
can  compensate  for  the  want  of  it.  It  is  pos- 
I sible  to  learn  to  pray  mechanically,  and  by 
I rule ; but  it  is  barely  possible  to  do  so  with 


ON  SOCIAL  PRAYER. 


153 


LET.  XVIII.] 

acceptance,  and  benefit  to  others.  When 
the  several  parts  of  invocation,  adoration, 
confession,  petition,  &c.  follow  each  other  in 
a stated  order,  the  hearer’s  mind  generally 
goes  bo  fore  the  speaker’s  voice,  and  we  can 
form  a tolerable  conjecture  what  is  to  come 
next.  On  this  account  we  often  find,  that 
unlettered  people,  who  have  had  little  or  no 
help  from  books,  or  rather  have  not  been  fet- 
tered by  them,  can  pray  with  an  unction  and 
savour  in  an  unpremeditated  way,  while  the 
prayers  of  persons  of  much  superior  abilities, 
perhaps  even  of  ministers  themselves,  are, 
though  accurate  and  regular,  so  dry  and 
starched,  that  they  afford  little  either  of 
pleasure  or  profit  to  a spiritual  mind.  The 
spirit  of  prayer  is  the  truth  and  token  of  the 
spirit  of  adoption.  The  studied  addresses 
with  which  some  approach  the  throne  of 
grace,  remind  us  of  a stranger’s  coming  to  a 
great  man’s  door;  he  knocks  and  waits,  sends 
in  his  name,  and  goes  through  a course  of 
ceremony  before  he  gains  admittance ; while 
a child  of  the  family  uses  no  ceremony  at  all, 
but  enters  freely  when  he  pleases  because 
he  knows  he  is  at  home.  It  is  true  we  ought 
always  to  draw  near  the  Lord  with  great  hu- 
miliation of  spirit,  and  a sense  of  our  unwor- 
thiness. But  this  spirit  is  not  always  best 
expressed  or  promoted  by  a pompous  enume- 
ration of  the  names  and  titles  of  the  God 
with  whom  we  have  to  do,  or  by  fixing  in 
our  minds  beforehand,  the  exact  order  in 
which  we  propose  to  arrange  the  several 
parts  of  our  prayer.  Some  attention  to  me- 
thod may  be  proper,  for  the  prevention  of 
repetitions ; and  plain  people  may  be  a little 
defective  in  it  sometimes;  but  this  defect 
will  not  be  half  so  tiresome  and  disagreeable 
as  a studied  and  artificial  exactness. 

Many,  perhaps  most  people,  who  pray  in 
public,  have  some  favourite  word  or  expres- 
sion which  recurs  too  often  in  their  prayers, 
and  is  frequently  used  as  a mere  expletive, 
having  no  necessary  connexion  with  the 
sense  of  what  they  are  speaking.  The  most 
disagreeable  of  these  is,  when  the  name  of 
the  blessed  God,  with  the  addition  of  perhaps 
one  or  more  epithets,  as  Great,  Glorious, 
Holy,  Almighty,  &c.  is  introduced  so  often, 
and  without  necessity,  as  seems  neither  to 
indicate  a due  reverence  in  the  person  who 
uses  it,  or  suited  to  excite  reverence  in  those 
who  hear.  I will  not  say,  that  this  is  taking 
the  name  of  God  in  vain,  in  the  usual  sense 
of  the  phrase ; it  is,  however,  a great  impro- 
priety, and  should  be  guarded  against.  It 
would  be  well  if  they  who  use  redundant  ex- 
pressions had  a friend  to  give  them  a caution, 
as  they  might,  with  a little  care,  be  retrench- 
ed; and  hardly  any  person  can  be  sensible 
of  the  little  peculiarities  he  may  inadvertent- 
ly adopt,  unless  he  is  told  of  it. 

There  are  several  things  likewise  respect- 
ing the  voice  and  manner  of  prayer,  which  a 


person  may,  with  due  care,  correct  in  him- 
self, and  which,  if  generally  corrected,  would 
make  meetings  for  prayer  more  pleasant 
than  they  sometimes  are.  These  I shall 
mention  by  pairs,  as  the  happy  and  agreeable 
way  is  a medium  between  two  inconvenient 
extremes. 

Very  loud  speaking  is  a fault,  when  the 
size  of  the  place,  and  the  number  of  hearers 
do  not  render  it  necessary.  The  end  of 
speaking  is, to  be  heard;  ond,  when  that  end 
is  attained,  a greater  elevation  of  the  voice 
is  frequently  hurtful  to  the  speaker,  and  is 
more  likely  to  confuse  a hearer  than  to  fix 
his  attention.  I do  not  deny  hut  allowance 
must  be  made  for  constitution,  and  the 
warmth  of  the  passions,  which  dispose  some 
persons  to  speak  louder  than  others.  Yet 
such  will  do  well  to  restrain  themselves  as 
much  as  they  can.  It  may  seem  indeed  to 
indicate  great  earnestness,  and  that  the  heart 
is  much  affected;  yet  it  is  often  but  false 
fire.  It  may  be  thought  speaking  with  pow- 
er ; but  a person  who  is  favoured  with  the 
Lord’s  presence  may  pray  with  power  in  a 
moderate  voice;  and  there  may  be  very  lit- 
tle power  of  the  Spirit,  though  the  voice 
should  be  heard  in  the  street  and  neighbour- 
hood. 

The  other  extreme,  of  speaking  too  low, 
is  not  so  frequent ; but  if  we  are  not  heard, 
we  might  as  well  altogether  hold  our  peace. 
It  exhausts  the  spirits,  and  wearies  the  at- 
tention, to  be  listening  for  a length  of  time 
to  a very  low  voice.  Some  words  or  sen- 
tences will  be  lost,  which  will  render  what 
is  heard  less  intelligible  and  agreeable.  If 
the  speaker  can  be  heard  by  the  person  far- 
thest distant  from  him  the  rest  will  hear  of 
course. 

The  tone  of  the  voice  is  likewise  to  be  re- 
garded. Some  have  a tone  in  prayer,  so 
very  different  from  their  usual  way  of  speak- 
ing, that  their  nearest  friends,  if  not  accus- 
tomed to  them,  could  hardly  know  them  by 
their  voice.  Sometimes  the  tone  in  changed, 
perhaps  more  than  once,  so  that  if  our  eyes 
did  not  give  us  more  certain  information  than 
our  ears,  we  might  think  two  or  three  per- 
sons had  been  speaking  by  turns.  It  is  pity 
that  when  we  approve  what  is  spoken,  we 
should  be  so  easily  disconcerted  by  an  awk- 
wardness of  delivery ; yet  so  it  often  is,  and 
probably  so  it  will  be,  in  the  present  weak 
and  imperfect  state  of  human  nature.  It  is 
more  to  be  lamented  than  wondered  at,  that 
sincere  Christians  are  sometimes  forced  to 
confess,  “ He  is  a good  man,  and  his  prayers, 
as  to  their  substance,  are  spiritual  and  judi- 
cious; but  there  is  something  so  displeasing 
in  his  manner,  that  I am  always  uneasy 
when  I hear  him.” 

Contrary  to  this,  and  still  more  offensive, 
is  a custom  that  some  have  of  talking  to  the 
Lord  in  prayer.  It  is  their  natural  voice,  in- 


ON  CONTROVERSY. 


154 

deed,  but  it  is  that  expression  of  it  which 
they  use  upon  the  most  familiar  and  trivial 
occasions.  The  human  voice  is  capable  of 
so  many  inflexions  and  variations,  that  it  can 
adapt  itself  to  the  different  sensations  of  our 
mind,  as  joy,  sorrow,  fear,  desire,  &c.  If  a 
man  was  pleading-  for  his  life,  or  expressing 
his  thanks  to  the  king  for  a pardon,  common 
sense  and  decency  would  teach  him  a suit- 
ableness of  manner;  and  any  one  who  could 
not  understand  his  language  might  know, 
bv  the  sound  of  his  words,  that  he  was  not 
making  a bargain,  or  telling  a story.  How 
much  more,  when  we  speak  to  the  King  of 
kings,  should  the  consideration  of  his  glory, 
and  our  own  vileness,  and  of  the  important 
concerns  we  are  engaged  in  before  him,  im- 
press us  with  an  air  of  seriousness  and  reve- 
rence, and  prevent  us  from  speaking  to  him 
as  if  he  was  altogether  such  a one  as  our- 
selves 1 The  liberty  to  which  we  are  called 
by  the  gospel,  does  not  at  all  encourage  such 
a pertness  and  familiarity  as  would  be  unbe- 
coming to  use  towards  a fellow-worm  who 
was  a little  advanced  above  us  in  worldly 
dignity. 

I shall  be  glad  if  these  hints  may  be  of  any 
service  to  those  who  desire  to  worship  God 
in  spirit  and  in  truth,  and  who  wish  that 
whatever  has  a tendency  to  damp  the  spirit 
of  devotion,  either  in  themselves  or  in  others, 
might  be  avoided.  It  is  a point  of  delicacy 
and  difficulty  to  tell  any  one  what  we  wish 
could  be  altered  in  his  manner  of  prayer,  but 
it  can  give  no  just  offence  to  ask  a friend,  if 
he  has  read  a letter  on  this  subject,  in  “A 
Collection  of  Twenty-six  Letters,”  published 
in  1775. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XIX. 

On  Controversy. 

dear  sir, — As  you  are  likely  to  be  engaged 
in  controversy,  and  your  love  of  truth  is 
joined  with  a natural  warmth  of  temper,  my 
friendship  makes  me  solicitous  on  your  be- 
half. You  are  of  the  strongest  side : for  truth 
is  great,  and  must  prevail ; so  that  a person 
of  abilities,  inferior  to  yours,  might  take  the 
field  with  a confidence  of  victory.  I am  not 
therefore  anxious  for  the  event  of  the  battle ; 
but  I would  have  you  more  than  a conqueror, 
and  to  triumph  not  only  over  your  adversary, 
but  over  yourself.  If  you  cannot  be  van- 
quished, you  may  be  wounded.  To  preserve 
you  from  such  wounds  as  might  give  you 
cause  of  weeping  over  your  conquests,  I 
would  present  you  with  some  considerations, 
which,  if  duly  attended  to,  will  do  you  the 
service  of  a coat  of  mail ; such  armour,  that 
you  need  not  complain,  as  David  did  of  Saul’s 
that  it  will  be  more  cumbersome  than  useful ; 


[let.  xix. 

for  you  will  easily  perceive  it  is  taken  fron 
that  great  magazine  provided  for  a Christian 
soldier,  the  word  of  God.  I take  it  for  grant- 
ed, that  you  will  not  expect  any  apology  foi 
my  freedom,  and  therefore  I shall  not  offer 
one.  For  method’s  sake,  I may  reduce  my 
advice  to  three  heads,  — respecting  your  oppo- 
nent, the  public,  and  yourself. 

As  to  your  opponent,  I wish,  that  before 
you  set  pen  to  paper  against  him,  and  during 
the  whole  time  you  are  preparing  your  an- 
swer, you  may  commend  him  by  earnest 
prayer  to  the  Lord’s  teaching  and  blessing. 
This  practice  will  have  a direct  tendency  to 
conciliate  your  heart  to  love  and  pity  him ; 
and  such  a disposition  will  have  a good  in- 
fluence upon  every  page  you  write.  If  you 
account  him  a believer,  though  greatly  mis- 
taken in  the  subject  of  debate  between  you, 
the  words  of  David  to  Joab,  concerning  Ab- 
salom, are  very  applicable : “ Deal  gently 
with  him  for  my  sake.”  The  Lord  loves 
him  and  bears  with  him ; therefore  you  must 
not  despise  him,  or  treat  him  harshly.  The 
Lord  bears  with  you  likewise,  and  expects 
that  you  should  show  tenderness  to  others, 
from  a sense  of  the  much  forgiveness  you 
need  yourself.  In  a little  while  you  will 
meet  in  heaven ; he  will  then  be  dearer  to 
you  than  the  nearest  friend  you  have  upon 
earth  is  to  you  now.  Anticipate  that  period 
in  your  thoughts ; and  though  you  may  find 
it  necessary  to  oppose  his  errors,  view  him 
personally  as  a kindred  soul,  with  whom  you 
are  to  be  happy  in  Christ  for  ever.  But  if 
you  look  upon  him  as  an  unconverted  person, 
in  a state  of  enmity  against  God  and  his  grace 
(a  supposition  which,  without  good  evidence, 
you  should  be  very  unwilling  to  admit,)  he 
is  a more  proper  object  of  your  compassion 
than  of  your  anger.  Alas ! lie  knows  not 
what  he  does : but  you  know  who  has  made 
you  to  differ.  If  God  in  his  sovereign  plea- 
sure had  so  appointed,  you  might  have  been 
as  he  is  now ; and  he,  instead  of  you,  might 
have  been  set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel. 
You  were  both  equally  blind  by  nature.  If 
you  attend  to  this,  you  will  not  reproach  or 
hate  him,  because  the  Lord  has  been  pleased 
to  open  your  eyes,  and  not  his.  Of  all  peo- 
ple who  engage  in  controversy,  we,  who  are 
called  Calvinists,  are  most  expressly  bound 
by  our  own  principles  to  the  exercise  of  gen- 
tleness and  moderation.  If,  indeed,  they 
who  differ  from  us  have  a power  of  chang- 
ing themselves,  if  they  can  open  their  own 
eyes,  and  soften  their  own  hearts,  then  we 
might  with  less  inconsistence  be  offended  at 
their  obstinacy  ; but  if  we  believe  the  very 
contrary  to  this,  our  part  is,  not  to  strive,  but 
in  meekness  to  instruct  those  who  oppose, 
“ if  peradventure  God  will  give  them  repent- 
ance to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  truth.” 
If  you  write  with  a desire  of  being  an  in- 
strument of  correcting  mistakes,  you  will  of 


ON  CONTROVERSY. 


lr>5 


ICT.  XIX.] 

course  be  cautious  of  laying  stumbling-ff'ocks 
in  the  way  of  the  blind,  or  of  using  any  ex- 
pressions "that  may  exasperate  their  passions, 
confirm  them  in  their  prejudices,  and  there- 
by make  their  conviction,  humanly  speaking, 
more  impracticable. 

By  printing,  you  will  appeal  to  the  public, 
where  your  readers  may  be  ranged  under 
three  divisions.  First,  such  as  differ  from 
you  in  principle.  Concerning  these  I may 
refer  you  to  what  I have  already  said. 
Though  you  have  your  eyes  upon  one  per- 
son chiefly,  there  are  many  like-minded  with 
him;  and  the  same  reasoning  will  hold, 
whether  as  to  one  or  to  a million.  There 
will  be  likewise  many  who  pay  too  little 
regard  to  religion,  to  have  any  settled  sys- 
tem of  their  own,  and  yet  are  pre-engaged 
in  favour  of  those  sentiments  which  are 
least  repugnant  to  the  good  opinion  men 
naturally  have  of  themselves.  These  are 
very  incompetent  judges  of  doctrines,  but 
they  can  form  a tolerable  judgment  of  a 
writer’s  spirit.  They  know  that  meekness, 
humility,  and  love,  are  the  characteristics  of 
a Christian  temper  ; and  though  they  affect  to 
treat  the  doctrines  of  grace  as  mere  notions 
and  speculations,  which,  supposing  they 
adopted  them,  would  have  no  salutary  influ- 
ence upon  their  conduct ; yet  from  us,  who 
profess  these  principles,  they  always  expect 
such  dispositions  as  correspond  with  the  pre- 
cepts of  the  gospel.  They  are  quick-sighted 
to  discern  when  we  deviate  from  such  a 
spirit,  and  avail  themselves  of  it  to  justify 
their  contempt  of  our  arguments.  The  scrip- 
tural maxim,  That  “ the  wrath  of  man 
worketh  not  the  righteousness  of  God,”  is 
verified  by  daily  observation.  If  our  zeal  is 
embittered  by  expressions  of  anger,  invec- 
tive, or  scorn,  we  may  think  we  are  doing 
service  to  the  cause  of  truth,  when  in  reality 
we  shall  only  bring  it  into  discredit.  The 
weapons  of  our  warfare,  and  which  alone 
are  powerful  to  break  down  the  strong  holds 
of  error,  are  not  carnal,  but  spiritual ; argu- 
ments fairly  drawn  from  scripture  and  ex- 
perience, and  enforced  by  such  a mild  address, 
as  may  persuade  our  readers,  that,  whether 
we  can  convince  them  or  not,  we  wish  well 
to  their  souls,  and  contend  only  for  the  truth’s 
sake : if  we  can  satisfy  them  that  we  act  up 
to  these  motives,  our  point  is  half  gained ; 
they  will  be  more  disposed  to  consider  calm- 
ly what  we  offer;  and  if  they  should  still 
dissent  from  our  opinions,  they  will  be  con- 
strained to  approve  of  our  intentions. 

You  will  have  a third  class  of  readers,  who, 
being  of  your  own  sentiments,  will  readily 
approve  of  what  you  advance,  and  may  be 
further  established  and  confirmed  in  their 
views  of  scripture  doctrines,  by  a clear  and 
masterly  elucidation  of  your  subject.  You 
may  be  instrumental  to  their  edification,  if 
the  laws  of  kindness,  as  well  as  of  truth,  re- 


gulates your  pen ; otherwise  you  may  do  them 
harm.  There  is  a principle  of  self,  which 
disposes  us  to  despise  those  who  differ  from 
us ; and  we  are  often  under  its  influence, 
when  we  think  we  are  only  showing  a be- 
coming zeal  in  the  cause  of  God.  I readily 
believe,  that  the  leading  points  of  Arminian- 
ism  spring  from,  and  are  nourished  by,  the 
pride  of  the  human  heart ; but  I should  be 
glad  if  the  reverse  was  always  true ; and 
that  to  embrace  what  are  called  the  Calvin- 
istic  doctrines  was  an  infallible  token  of  an 
humble  mind.  I think  I have  known  some 
Arminians,  that  is,  persons  who,  for  want  of 
clearer  light,  have  been  afraid  of  receiving 
the  doctrines  of  free  grace,  who  yet  have 
given  evidence  that  their  hearts  were  in  a 
degree  humbled  before  the  Lord.  And,  I 
am  afraid,  there  are  Calvinists,  who,  while 
they  account  it  a proof  of  their  humility,  that 
they  are  willing,  in  words,  to  debase  the 
creature,  and  to  give  all  the  glory  of  salva- 
tion to  the  Lord,  yet  know  not  what  manner 
of  spirit  they  are  of.  Whatever  it  be  that 
makes  us  trust  in  ourselves  that  we  are  com- 
paratively wise  or  good,  so  as  to  treat  those 
with  contempt  who  do  not  subscribe  to  our 
doctrines,  or  follow  our  party,  is  a proof  and 
fruit  of  a self-righteous  spirit.  Self-righteous- 
ness can  feed  upon  doctrines,  as  well  as 
upon  works ; and  a man  may  have  the  heart 
of  a Pharisee,  while  his  head  is  stored  with 
orthodox  notions  of  the  unworthiness  of  the 
creature,  and  the  riches  of  free  grace.  Yea, 
I would  add,  the  best  of  men  are  not  wholly 
free  from  this  leaven ; and  therefore  are  too 
apt  to  be  pleased  with  such  representations 
as  hold  up  our  adversaries  lo  ridicule,  and, 
by  consequence,  flatter  our  own  superior  judg- 
ments. Controversies,  for  the  most  part,  are 
so  managed  as  to  indulge,  rather  than  to  re- 
press this  wrong  disposition  ; and,  therefore, 
generally  speaking,  they  are  productive  of 
little  good.  They  provoke  those  whom  they 
should  convince,  and  puff  up  those  whom 
they  should  edify.  I hope  your  performance 
will  savour  of  a spirit  of  true  humility,  and 
be  a means  of  promoting  it  in  others. 

Tliis  leads  me,  in  the  last  place,  to  con- 
sider your  own  concern  in  your  present  un- 
dertaking. It  seems  a laudable  service  to 
defend  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints; 
we  are  commanded  to  contend  earnestly  for 
it,  and  to  convince  gainsay ers.  If  ever  such 
defences  were  seasonable  and  expedient, 
they  appear  to  be  so  in  our  day,  when  errors 
abound  on  all  sides,  and  every  truth  of  the 
gospel  is  either  directly  denied,  or  grossly 
misrepresented.  And  yet  we  find  but  very 
few  writers  of  controversy  who  have  not 
been  manifestly  hurt  by  it.  Either  they 
grow  in  a sense  of  their  own  importance,  or 
imbibe  an  angry,  contentious  spirit,  or  they 
insensibly  withdraw  their  attention  from 
those  things  which  are  the  food,  and  imma 


153 


ON  CONFORMITY  TO  THE  WORLD. 


diate  support  of  the  life  of  faith,  and  spend 
their  time  and  strength  upon  matters  winch, 
at  most,  are  but  of  a secondary  value.  This 
shows,  that  if  the  service  is  honourable,  it  is 
dangerous.  What  will  it  profit  a man,  if  he 
gain  his  cause  and  silence  his  adversary,  if 
at  the  same  time  he  loses  that  humble,  ten- 
der frame  of  spirit  in  which  the  Lord  delights, 
and  to  which  the  promise  of  his  presence  is 
made  1 Your  aim,  I doubt  not,  is  good  ; but 
you  have  need  to  watch  and  pray,  for  you 
will  find  Satan  at  your  right  hand,  to  resist 
you.  He  will  try  to  debase  your  views ; and 
though  you  set  out  in  defence  of  the  cause 
of  God,  if  you  are  not  continually  looking  to 
the  Lord  to  keep  you,  it  may  become  your 
own  cause,  and  awaken  in  you  those  tem- 
pers which  are  inconsistent  with  true  peace 
of  mind,  and  will  surely  obstruct  communion 
with  God.  Be  upon  your  guard  against  ad- 
mitting any  thing  personal  into  the  debate. 
If  you  think  you  have  been  ill  treated,  you 
will  have  an  opportunity  of  showing  that  you 
are  a disciple  of  Jesus,  who,  “ when  he  was 
reviled,  reviled  not  again ; when  he  suffered, 
he  threatened  not.”  This  is  our  pattern; 
thus  we  are  to  speak  and  write  for  God,  “ not 
rendering  railing  for  railing,  but  contrari- 
wise, blessing;  knowing  that  hereunto  we 
are  called.”  The  wisdom  that  is  from  above 
is  not  only  pure,  but  peaceable  and  gentle ; 
and  the  want  of  these  qualifications,  like  the 
dead  fly  in  the  pot  of  ointment,  will  spoil  the 
savour  and  efficacy  of  our  labours.  If  we 
act  in  a wrong  spirit,  we  shall  bring  little 
glory  to  God,  do  little  good  to  our  fellow-crea- 
tures, and  procure  neither  honour  nor  com- 
fort to  ourselves.  If  you  can  be  content  with 
showing  your  wit,  and  gaining  the  laugh  on 
your  side,  you  have  an  easy  task ; but  I hope 
you  have  a far  nobler  aim,  and  that,  sensible 
of  the  solemn  importance  of  gospel-truths, 
and  the  compassion  due  to  the  souls  of  men, 
you  would  rather  be  a means  of  removing 
prejudices  in  a single  instance,  than  obtain 
the  empty  applause  of  thousands.  Go  forth, 
therefore,  in  the  name  and  strength  of  the 
Lord  of  Hosts,  speaking  the  truth  in  love ; 
and  may  he  give  you  a witness  in  many 
hearts,  that  you  are  taught  of  God,  and  fa- 
voured with  the  unction  of  his  Holy  Spirit. 
I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XX. 

On  Conformity  to  the  World. 

dear  sir, — You  will,  perhaps,  be  sur- 
prised to  see  my  thoughts  on  your  query  in 
print,  rather  than  to  receive  them  by  post, 
as  you  expected.  But  as  the  subject  of  it  is 
of  general  concern,  I hope  that  you  will  not 
be  displeased  that  I have  taken  this  method. 


[let.  XX. 

It  would  do  honour  to  the  pen  of  an  able 
casuist,  and  might  be  of  considerable  service 
in  the  present  day,  clearly  to  explain  the 
force  of  the  apostle's  precept,  “ Be  not  con- 
formed to  this  world;”  and  to  state  the  just 
boundary  between  a sinful  compliance  with 
the  world,  and  that  scrupulous  singularity 
which  springs  from  a self-righteous  principle, 
and  a contracted  view  of  the  spirit  and 
liberty  of  the  gospel.  To  treat  this  point 
accurately,  would  require  a treatise,  rather 
than  a letter;  I only  undertake  to  offer 
you  a few  hints ; and,  indeed,  when  the 
mind  is  formed  to  a spiritual  taste,  a simple 
desire  to  be  guided  by  the  word  and  Spirit 
of  God,  together  with  a due  attention  to  our 
own  experience,  will,  in  most  practical  cases, 
supersede  the  necessity  of  long  and  elaborate 
disquisitions. 

By  the  world,  in  the  passage  alluded  to, 
Rom.  xii.  2,  I suppose  the  apostle  means 
the  men  of  the  world,  in  distinction  from 
believers  ; these,  not  having  the  love  of  God 
in  their  hearts,  or  his  fear  before  their  eyes, 
are,  of  course,  engaged  in  such  pursuits  and 
practices  as  are  inconsistent  with  our  holy 
calling,  and  which  we  cannot  imitate  or  com- 
ply with  them,  without  hurting  our  peace 
and  our  profession.  We  are,  therefore,  bound 
to  avoid  conformity  to  them  in  all  such  in- 
stances ; but  we  are  not  obliged  to  decline 
all  intercourse  with  the  world,  or  to  impose 
restraints  upon  ourselves,  when  the  scriptures 
do  not  restrain  us,  in  order  to  make  us  as 
unlike  the  world  as  possible.  To  instance 
in  a few  particulars : — 

It  is  not  necessary,  perhaps  it  is  not  law- 
ful, wholly  to  renounce  the  society  of  the 
world.  A mistake  of  this  kind  took  place 
in  the  early  ages  of  Christianity,  and  men 
(at  first,  perhaps,  with  a sincere  desire  of 
serving  God  without  distraction)  withdrew 
into  deserts  and  uninhabited  places,  and 
wasted  their  lives  at  a distance  from  their 
fellow-creatures.  But  unless  we  could  flee 
from  ourselves  likewise,  this  would  afford  us 
no  advantage  ; so  long  as  we  carry  our  own 
wicked  hearts  with  us,  we  shall  be  exposed 
to  temptation,  go  where  we  will.  Besides, 
this  would  be  thwarting  the  end  of  our  voca- 
tion. Christians  are  to  be  the  salt  and  the 
light  of  the  world,  conspicuous  as  cities  set 
upon  a hill;  they  are  commanded  to  “let 
their  light  shine  before  men,  that  they,  be- 
holding their  good  works,  may  glorify  their 
Father  who  is  in  heaven.”  This  injudicious 
deviation  from  the  paths  of  nature  and  provi- 
dence, gave  occasion,  at  length,  to  the  vilest 
abominations ; and  men,  who  withdrew  from 
the  world  under  the  pretence  of  retirement, 
became  the  more  wicked  and  abandoned,  as 
they  lived  more  out  of  public  view  and  ob- 
servation. 

Nor  are  we  at  liberty,  much  less  are  we 
enjoined,  to  renounce  the  duties  of  relative 


ON  CONFORMITY  TO  THE  WORLD. 


157 


LET.  XX.] 


.ife,  so  as  to  become  careless  in  the  discharge 
of  them.  Allowances  should,  indeed,  be  made 
for  the  distress  of  persons  newly  awakened, 
or  under  the  power  of  temptation,  which 
may,  for  a time,  so  much  engross  their 
thoughts,  as  greatly  to  indispose  them  for 
their  bounden  duty.  But  in  general,  the 
proper  evidence  of  true  Christians,  is,  not 
merely  that  they  can  talk  about  divine  things, 
but  that,  by  the  grace  of  God,  they  live  and 
act  agreeable  to  the  rules  of  his  word,  in  the 
state  in  which  his  providence  has  placed 
them,  whether  as  masters  or  servants,  hus- 
bands or  wives,  parents  or  children  : bearing 
rule,  or  yielding  obedience,  as  in  his  sight. 
Diligence  and  fidelity  in  the  management 
of  temporal  concernments,  though  observable 
in  the  practice  of  many  worldly  men,  may 
be  maintained  without  a sinful  conformity 
to  the  world. 

Neither  are  we  required  to  refuse  a mode- 
rate use  of  the  comforts  and  conveniencies 
of  life,  suitable  to  the  station  which  God 
has  appointed  us  in  the  world.  The  spirit 
of  self-righteousness  and  will-worship  works 
much  in  this  way,  and  supposes  that  there  is 
something  excellent  in  long  fastings,  in  ab- 
staining from  pleasant  food,  in  wearing  mean- 
er clothes  than  is  customary  with  those  in 
the  same  rank  of  life,  and  in  many  other 
austerities  and  singularities  not  commanded 
by  the  word  of  God.  And  many  persons, 
who  are  in  the  main  sincere,  are  grievously 
burdened  with  scruples  respecting  the  use 
of  lawful  things.  It  is  true,  there  is  need 
of  a constant  watch,  lest  what  is  lawful  in 
itself  become  hurtful  to  us  by  its  abuse.  But 
these  outward  strictnesses  may  be  carried 
to  great  lengths,  without  a spark  of  true 
grace,  and  even  without  the  knowledge  of 
the  true  God.  The  mortifications  and  aus- 
terities practised  by  the  Bramins  in  India 
(if  the  accounts  we  have  of  them  be  true) 
are  vastly  more  severe  than  the  most  zeal- 
ous effects  of  modern  superstition  in  our 
country.  There  is  a strictness  which  arises 
rather  from  ignorance  than  knowledge, 
is  wholly  conversant  about  externals,  and 
gratifies  the  spirit  of  self  as  much  in  one 
way  as  it  seems  to  retrench  it  in  another. 
A man  may  almost  starve  his  body  to  feed 
his  pride ; but  to  those  who  fear  and  serve 
the  Lord,  every  creature  of  God  is  good, 
and  nothing  to  be  refused,  if  it  be  received 
with  thanksgiving;  for  it  is  sanctified  by  the 
word  of  God  and  prayer. 

Notwithstanding  these  limitations,  the  pre- 
cept is  very  extensive  and  important,  “ Be 
not  conformed  to  the  world.”  As  believers, 
we  are  strangers  and  pilgrims  upon  earth. 
Heaven  is  our  country,  and  the  Lord  is  our 
King.  Wo  are  to  be  known  and  noticed  as 
his  subjects,  and  therefore,  it  is  his  pleasure, 
that  we  do  not  speak  the  language,  or  adopt 
the  customs  of  the  land  in  which  we  sojourn. 


We  are  not  to  conform  to  the  world,  as  we 
did  in  the  days  of  our  ignorance.  And  though 
we  have  received  the  principles  of  grace, 
and  have  tasted  of  the  goodness  of  the  Lord, 
the  admonition  is  still  needful ; for  we  are 
renewed  but  in  part,  and  are  liable  to  be 
drawn  aside  to  our  hurt,  by  the  prevalence 
of  evil  examples  and  customs  around  us. 

We  must  not  conform  to  the  spirit  of  tho 
world.  As  members  of  society,  we  have  a 
part  to  act  in  it,  in  common  with  others. 
But  if  our  business  is  the  same,  our  princi- 
ples and  ends  are  to  be  entirely  different. 
Diligence  in  our  respective  callings  is,  as  ] 
have  already  observed,  commendable,  and  our 
duty;  but  not  with  the  same  views  which 
stimulate  the  activity  of  the  men  of  the  world. 
If  they  rise  early,  and  take  rest  late,  their  en- 
deavours spring  from,  and  terminate  in  self, 
to  establish  and  increase  their  own  impor- 
tance, to  add  house  to  house,  and  field  to 
field,  that,  like  the  builders  of  Babel,  they 
may  get  themselves  a name,  or  provide  means 
for  the  gratification  of  their  sinful  passions. 
If  they  succeed,  they  sacrifice  to  their  own 
net;  if  they  are  crossed  in  their  designs,  they 
are  filled  with  anxiety  and  impatience;  they 
either  murmur  or  despond.  But  a Christian 
is  to  pursue  his  lawful  calling  with  an  oyo 
to  the  providence  of  God,  and  with  submis- 
sion to  his  wisdom.  Thus,  so  far  as  he  acts 
in  the  exercise  of  faith,  he  cannot  be  disap- 
pointed. He  casts  his  care  upon  his  heavenly 
Father,  who  has  promised  to  take  care  of 
him.  What  he  gives,  he  receives  with  thank- 
fulness, and  is  careful,  as  a faithful  steward, 
to  improve  for  the  furtherance  of  the  cause 
of  God,  and  the  good  of  mankind ; and  if  he 
meets  with  losses  and  crosses,  he  is  not  dis- 
concerted, knowing  that  all  his  concerns  are 
under  a divine  direction ; that  the  Lord, 
whom  he  serves,  chooses  for  him  better  than 
he  could  choose  for  himself : and  that  his 
best  treasure  is  safe,  out  of  the  reach  of  the 
various  changes  to  which  all  things  in  the 
present  state  are  liable. 

We  must  not  conform  to  the  maxims  of 
the  world.  The  world,  in  various  instances, 
calls  evil  good,  and  good  evil.  But  we  are 
to  have  recourse  to  the  law  and  to  the  testi- 
mony, and  to  judge  of  things  by  the  unerring 
word  of  God,  uninfluenced  by  the  determina- 
tion of  the  great,  or  the  many.  We  are  to 
obey  God  rather  than  man,  though  upon  this 
account,  we  may  expect  to  be  despised  or 
reviled,  to  be  made  a gazing-stock  or  a laugh- 
ing-stock to  those  who  set  his  authorit}'-  at 
defiance.  We  must  bear  our  testimony  to 
the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  avow  the  cause  of 
his  despised  people,  and  walk  in  the  practice 
of  universal  obedience,  patiently  endure  re- 
proaches, and  labour  to  overcome  evil  with 
good.  Thus  we  shall  show  that  we  are  not 
ashamed  of  him.  And  there  is  an  hour  com- 
ing, when  he  will  not  be  ashamed  of  us,  who 


15S 


I WAS  ONCE  BLIND,  BUT  NOW  I SEE. 


lave  followed  him,  and  borne  his  cross,  in  the 
midst  of  a perverse  generation, but  will  own  our 
worthless  names  before  the  assembled  world.  I 

W e must  not  conform  to  the  world  in  their  | 
amusements  and  diversions.  We  are  to  mix 
with  the  world  so  far  as  our  necessary  and 
providential  connexions  engage  us;  so  far 
as  we  have  a reasonable  expectation  of  doing, 
or  getting  good,  and  no  further.  “ What 
fellowship  hath  light  with  darkness,  or  what 
concord  hath  t iirist  with  Belial  1”  What 
call  can  a believer  have  into  those  places  and 
companies,  where  every  thing  tends  to  pro- 
mote a spirit  of  dissipation ; where  the  fear 
of  God  has  no  place ; where  things  are  pur- 
posely disposed  to  inflame,  or  indulge  cor- 
rupt and  sinful  appetites  and  passions,  and  to 
banish  all  serious  thoughts  of  God  and  our- 
selves 1 If  it  is  our  duty  to  redeem  time,  to 
walk  with  God,  to  do  all  things  in  the  name 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  follow  the  ex- 
ample which  he  set  us  when  he  was  upon 
earth,  and  to  work  out  our  salvation  with 
fear  and  trembling;  it  must  of  course  be  our 
duty  to  avoid  a conformity  with  the  world 
in  those  vain  and  sensual  diversions,  which 
stand  in  as  direct  contradiction  to  a spiritual 
frame  of  mind  as  darkness  to  light. 

The  leading  desires  of  every  person  under 
the  influence  of  gospel-principles,  will  be  to 
maintain  a habitual  communion  with  God  in 
his  own  soul,  and  to  manifest  the  power  of 
] is  grace  in  the  sight  of  men.  fSo  far  as  a 
Christian  is  infected  by  a conformity  to  the 
spirit,  maxims,  and  sinful  customs  of  the 
world,  these  desires  will  be  disappointed. 
Fire  and  water  arc  not  more  opposite  than 
that  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  under- 
standing, and  that  poor  precarious  pleasure 
which  is  sought  in  a compliance  with  the 
world ; a pleasure  (if  worthy  the  name)  which 
grieves  the  Spirit  ot  God  and  stupifies  the 
heart.  Whoever,  after  having  tasted  that  the 
Lord  is  gracious,  has  been  prevailed  on  to  make 
the  experiment, and  to  mingle  with  the  world’s 
vanities,  has  certainly  thereby  brought  a 
damp  upon  his  experience,  and  indisposed 
himself  for  the  exercise  of  prayer,  and  the 
contemplation  of  divine  truths.  And  if  any 
are  not  sensible  of  a difference  in  this  respect, 
it  is  because  the  poison  has  taken  a still 
deeper  effect,  so  as  to  benumb  their  spiritual 
senses.  Conformity  to  the  world  is  the  bane 
of  many  professors  in  this  day.  They  have 
iound  a way,  as  they  think,  to  serve  both 
Go  l and  mammon.  But  because  they  are 
double-minded,  they  are  unstable;  they 
make  no  progress ; and  notwithstanding  their 
frequent  attendance  upon  ordinances,  they 
are  lean  from  day  to  day ; a form  of  godli- 
ness, a scheme  of  orthodox  notions  they  may 
attain  to,  but  they  will  remain  destitute  of 
the  life,  power>  and  comfort  of  religion,  so 
long  as  they  cleave  to  those  things  which 
are  incompatible  with  it. 


[let.  xxi. 

I Conformity  to  the  world  is  equally  an  ob- 
struction in  the  way  of  those  who  profess  a 
desire  of  glorifying  God  in  the  sight  of  men. 
I Such  professors  do  rather  dishonour  him;  by 
their  conduct,  as  far  as  in  them  lies,  they 
declare,  that  they  do  not  find  the  religion  of 
the  gospel  answer  their  expectations;  that  it 
does  not  afford  them  the  satisfaction  they 
once  hoped  for  from  it;  and  that  therefore 
they  are  forced  to  seek  relief  from  the  world. 
They  grieve  the  people  of  God  by  their  com- 
pliances, and  ofttimes  they  mislead  the  wTeak, 
and,  by  their  examples  encourage  them  to  ven- 
ture upon  the  like  liberties,  which  otherwise 
they  durst  not  have  attempted.  They  em- 
bolden the  wicked  likewise  in  their  evil  ways, 
while  they  see  a manifest  inconsistence  be- 
tween their  avowed  principles  and  their  prac- 
tice ; and  thus  they  cause  the  ways  of  truth  to 
be  evil  spoken  of. — The  paper  constrains  me 
to  conclude  abruptly.  May  the  Lord  enable 
you  and  me  to  lay  this  subject  to  heart,  and 
to  pray  that  we  may,  on  the  one  hand,  right- 
ly understand  and  prize  our  Christian  liberty; 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  be  preserved  from 
tiiat  growing  evil,  a conformity  to  the  world 
— I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXI. 

“ I teas  once  blind , but  now  I see.” 

dear  sir, — The  question,  What  is  the 
discriminating  characteristic  nature  of  a 
work  of  grace  upon  the  soul  1 has  been  upon 
my  mind  ; if  I am  able  to  give  you  satisfac- 
tion concerning  it,  1 shall  think  my  time 
well  employed. 

The  reason  why  men  in  a natural  state 
are  utterly  ignorant  of  spiritual  truths,  is,  that 
they  are  wholly  destitute  of  a faculty  suited 
to  their  perception.  A remarkable  instance 
we  have  in  the  absurd  construction  which 
Nicodemus  put  upon  what  our  Lord  had 
spoken  to  him  concerning  the  new  birth. 
And  in  the  supernatural  communication  of 
this  spiritual  faculty,  by  the  agency  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  I apprehend  the  inimitable  and 
abiding  criterion,  which  is  the  sub  ject  of  our 
inquiry,  does  primarily  consist.  Those  pas- 
sages of  scripture  wherein  the  gospel-truth 
is  compared  to  light,  lead  to  a familiar  illus- 
tration of  my  meaning.  Men,  by  nature,  are 
stark  blind  with  respect  to  this  light;  by 
grace  the  eyes  of  the  understanding  are 
opened.  Among  a number  of  blind  men, 
some  may  be  more  ingenious  and  of  better 
capacity  than  others.  They  may  be  better 
qualified  for  such  studies  and  employments 
which  do  not  require  eye-sight,  than  many 
who  can  see,  and  may  attain  to  considerable 
skill  in  them ; but  with  respect  to  the  true 
nature  of  light  and  colours,  they  are  all  ox- 


ON  SPIRITUAL  BLINDNESS. 


159 


LET.  XXI.] 


actly  upon  a level:  A blind  man,  if  inge- 
nious and  inquisitive,  may  learn  to  talk  about 
the  light,  the  sun,  or  the  rainbow,  in  terms 
borrowed  from  those  who  have  seen  them ; 
but  it  is  impossible  that  he  can  have  (I  mean 
a man  bom  blind)  a just  idea  of  either ; and 
whatever  hearsay  knowledge  he  may  have 
acquired,  he  can  hardly  talk  much  upon  these 
subjects  without  betraying  his  real  ignorance. 
The  case  of  one  mentioned  by  Mr.  Locke  has 
been  often  quoted.  He  believed,  that  after 
much  inquiry  and  reflection,  he  had  at  last 
found  out  what  scarlet  was;  and  being  asked 
to  explain  himself,  “I  think,”  says  he,  “scar- 
let has  something  like  the  sound  of  a trum- 
pet.” This  man  had  about  the  same  know- 
ledge of  natural  light  as  Nicodemus  had  of 
spiritual.  Nor  can  all  the  learning  or  study 
in  the  world  enable  any  person  to  form  a suit- 
able judgment  of  divine  truth,  till  the  eyes 
of  his  mind  are  opened,  and  then  he  will 
perceive  it  at  once. 

Indeed  this  comparison  is  well  suited  to 
show  the  entire  difference  between  nature 
and  grace,  and  to  explain  the  ground  of  that 
enmity  and  scorn  which  fills  the  hearts  of 
blinded  sinners,  against  those  who  profess  to 
have  been  enlightened  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 
The  reason  why  blind  men  are  not  affronted 
when  we  tell  them  they  cannot  see,  seems 
to  be,  that  they  are  borne  down  by  the  united 
testimony  of  all  who  are  about  them.  Every 
one  talks  of  seeing ; and  they  find  by  expe- 
rience, that  those  who  say  they  can  see,  can 
do  many  things  which  the  blind  cannot.  Some 
such  conviction  as  this  many  have  who  live 
where  the  gospel  is  preached,  and  is  made  the 
power  of  God  to  the  salvation  of  others.  The 
conversation  and  conduct  of  the  people  of 
God  convinces  them,  that  there  is  a differ- 
ence, though  they  cannot  tell  wherein  it 
consists.  But  if  we  would  suppose  it  possi- 
ble, that  there  was  a whole  nation  of  blind 
men,  and  one  or  two  persons  should  go 
amongst  them,  and  profess  that  they  could 
see,  while  they  could  not  offer  them  such  a 
proof  of  their  assertion  as  they  were  capable 
of  receiving,  nor  even  explain,  to  their  satis- 
faction, what  they  meant  by  sight,  what  may 
we  imagine  would  be  the  consequence  1 I 
think  there  is  little  doubt  but  these  innovators 
would  experience  much  the  same  treatment 
as  the  believers  of  Jesus  often  meet  with  from 
a blind  world.  The  blind  people  would  cer- 
tainly hate  and  despise  them  for  presuming  to 
pretend  to  what  they  had  not.  They  would 
try  to  dispute  them  out  of  their  senses,  and 
bring  many  arguments  to  prove,  that  there 
could  be  no  such  thing  as  either  light  or  sight. 
They  would  say,  as  many  say  now,  How  is 
it  if  these  things  are  so,  that  we  should  know 
nothing  of  them  1 Yea,  I think  it  probable, 
they  would  rise  against  them  as  deceivers 
and  enthusiasts,  and  disturbers  of  the  public 
peace,  and  say,  “Away  with  such  fellows  from 


the  earth ; it  is  not  fit  that  they  should  live.” 
But  if  we  should  suppose  further,  that  during 
the  heat  of  the  contest,  some  of  these  blind 
men  should  have  their  eyes  suddenly  opened 
the  dispute  as  to  them  would  be  at  an  end  in 
a minute:  they  would  confess  their  former 
ignorance  and  obstinacy,  confirm  the  testi- 
mony of  those  whom  they  before  despised, 
and  of  course  share  in  the  same  treatment 
from  their  blind  brethren,  perhaps  be  treated 
still  worse,  as  apostates  from  the  opinion  of 
the  public. 

If  this  illustration  is  justly  applicable  to 
our  subject,  it  may  lead  us  to  several  obser- 
vations, or  inferences,  which  have  a tenden- 
cy to  confirm  what  we  are  elsewhere  ex- 
pressly taught  by  the  word  of  God. 

In  the  first  place,  it  shows,  that  regenera- 
tion, or  that  great  change  without  which  a 
man  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God,  is  the 
effect  of  almighty  power.  Neither  educa- 
tion, endeavours,  or  arguments,  can  open  the 
eyes  of  the  blind.  It  is  God  alone,  who  at 
first  caused  light  to  shine  out  of  darkness, 
who  can  shine  into  our  hearts  “ to  give  us 
the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God 
in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ.”  People  may 
attain  some  natural  ideas  of  spiritual  truths 
by  reading  books,  or  hearing  sermons,  and 
may  thereby  become  wise  in  their  own  con- 
ceits : they  may  learn  to  imitate  the  lan- 
guage of  an  experienced  Christian;  but  they 
know  not  wlial.  they  say,  nor  whereof  they 
affirm,  and  are  as  distant  from  the  true  mean- 
ing of  the  terms,  as  a blind  man  who  pro- 
nounces the  words  blue  or  rod,  is  from  the 
ideas  which  those  words  raise  in  the  minds  of 
a person  who  can  distinguish  colours  by  his 
sight.  And  from  hence  we  may  infer  the 
sovereignty  as  well  as  the  efficacy  of  grace; 
since  it  is  evident,  not  only  that  the  objective 
light,  the  word  of  God,  is  not  afforded  uni- 
versally to  all  men ; but  that  those  who  en- 
joy the  same  outward  means  have  not  all  the 
same  perceptions.  There  are  many  who 
stumble  in  the  noon-day,  not  for  want  of  light 
but  for  want  of  eyes;  and  they  who  now  see, 
were  once  blind  even  as  others,  and  had  nei- 
ther power  nor  will  to  enlighten  their  own 
minds.  It  is  a mercy,  however,  when  peo- 
ple are  so  far  sensible  of  their  own  blindness 
as  to  be  willing  to  wait  for  the  manifestation 
of  the  Lord’s  power,  in  the  ordinances  of  his 
appointment.  He  came  into  the  world,  and 
lie  sends  forth  his  gospel,  that  those  who  see 
not  may  see;  and  when  there  i£  a desire 
raised  in  the  heart  for  spiritual  sight,  it  shall 
in  his  due  time  be  answered. 

From  hence  likewise  we  may  observe  the 
proper  use  and  value  of  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel,  which  is  the  great  instrument  by 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  opens  the  blind  eyes. 
Like  the  rod  of  Moses,  it  owes  all  its  efficacy 
to  the  appointment  and  promises  of  God. 
Ministers  cannot  be  too  earnest  in  the  dis- 


ISO 


ON  THE  ADVANTAGES  OF  POVERTY. 


[let.  XXII. 


charge  of  their  office ; it  behoves  them  to  use 
all  diligence  to  find  out  acceptable  words,  and 
to  proclaim  the  whole  counsel  of  God.  Yet 
when  they  have  done  all,  they  have  done  no- 
thing, unless  their  word  is  accompanied  to  the 
heart  by  the  power  and  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit.  Without  this  blessing,  an  apostle  might 
labour  in  vain : but  it  shall  be  in  a measure 
afforded  to  all  who  preach  the  truth  in  love, 
in  simplicity,  and  in  an  humble  dependence 
upon  him  who  alone  can  give  success.  This, 
in  a great  measure,  puts  all  faithful  ministers 
on  a level,  notwithstanding  any  seeming  dis- 
parity in  gifts  and  abilities.  Those  who  have 
a lively  and  pathetic  talent  may  engage  the 
ear,  and  raise  the  natural  passions  of  their 
hearers;  but  they  cannot  reach  the  heart. 
The  blessing  may  be  rather  expected  to  at- 
tend the  humble  than  the  voluble  speaker. 

Further  w may  remark,  that  there  is  a 
difference  in  kind,  between  the  highest  at- 
tainments of  nature,  and  the  effects  of  grace 
in  the  lowest  degree.  Many  are  convinced, 
who  are  not  truly  enlightened;  are  afraid  of 
the  consequences  of  sin,  though  they  never 
saw  its  evil ; have  a seeming  desire  of  salva- 
tion, which  is  not  founded  upon  a truly  spi- 
ritual discovery  of  their  own  wretchedness, 
and  the  excellency  of  Jesus.  These  may, 
for  a season,  hear  the  word  with  joy,  and 
walk  in  the  way  of  professors ; but  we  need 
not  be  surprised  if  they  do  not  hold  out,  for 
they  have  not  root.  Though  many  shall  fall, 
the  foundation  of  God  still  standeth  sure. 
We  may  confidently  affirm,  upon  the  war- 
rant of  scripture,  that  they  who,  having  for 
awhile  escaped  the  pollutions  of  the  world, 
are  again  habitually  entangled  in  them,  or 
who,  having  been  distressed  upon  the  ac- 
count of  sin,  can  find  relief  in  a self-righteous 
course,  and  stop  short  of  Christ,  “ who  is  the 
end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one 
that  believeth;”  we  may  affirm,  that  these, 
whatever  profession  they  may  have  made, 
were  never  capable  of  receiving  the  beauty 
and  glory  of  the  gospel-salvation.  On  the 
other  hand,  though  where  the  eyes  are  di- 
vinely enlightened,  the  soul’s  first  views  of 
itself  and  of  the  gospel  may  be  confused  and 
indistinct,  like  him  who  saw  men,  as  it  were 
trees  walking;  yet  this  light  is  like  the 
dawn,  which,  though  weak  and  faint  at  its 
first  appearance,  slnneth  more  and  more  un- 
to the  perfect  day.  It  is  the  work  of  God ; 
and  his  work  is  perfect  in  kind,  though  pro- 
gressive in  the  manner.  He  will  not  despise 
or  forsake  the  day  of  small  things.  When 
he  thus  begins,  he  will  make  an  end  ; and 
such  persons,  however  feeble,  poor,  and 
worthless,  in  their  own  apprehensions,  if  they 
have  obtained  a glimpse  of  the  Redeemer’s 
glory,  as  he  is  made  unto  us,  of  God,  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption, 
so  that  his  name  is  precious,  and  the  desire 
of  their  hearts  is  towards  him,  have  good 


reason  to  hope  and  believe,  as  the  wife  of 
Manoah  did  in  a similar  case,  that  if  the 
Lord  had  been  pleased  to  kill  them,  he  would 
not  have  showed  them  such  things  as  these. 

Once  more,  this  spiritual  sight  and  faculty 
is  that  which  may  be  principally  considered 
as  inherent  in  a believer.  He  has  no  stock 
of  grace,  or  comfort,  or  strength,  in  himself. 
He  needs  continual  supplies ; and  if  the  Lord 
withdraws  from  him,  he  is  as  weak  and  un- 
skilful, after  he  has  been  long  engaged  in 
the  Christian  warfare,  as  he  was  when  he 
first  entered  upon  it.  The  eye  is  of  little 
present  use  in  the  dark;  for  it  cannot  see 
without  light.  But  the  return  of  light  is  no 
advantage  to  a blind  man.  A believer  may 
be  much  in  the  dark;  but  his  spiritual  sight 
remains.  Though  the  exercise  of  grace  may 
be  low,  he  knows  himself,  he  knows  the 
Lord,  he  knows  the  way  of  access  to  a throne 
of  grace.  His  frames  and  feelings  may  alter; 
but  he  has  received  such  a knowledge  of 
the  person  and  offices,  the  power  and  grace, 
of  Jesus  the  Saviour,  as  cannot  be  taken  from 
him  ; and  could  withstand  even  an  angel  that 
should  preach  another  gospel,  because  he  has 
seen  the  Lord. — The  paper  constrains  mo 
to  break  off.  May  the  Lord  increase  hir 
light  in  your  heart,  and  in  the  heart  of,  &.C* 


LETTER  XXII. 

On  the  Advantages  of  a State  of  Poverty. 

my  dear  friexd, — I confess  myself  almost 
ashamed  to  write  to  you.  You  are  pinched 
by  poverty,  suffer  the  want  of  many  things, 
and  your  faith  is  often  sharply  tried,  when 
you  look  at  your  family,  and,  perhaps,  can 
hardly  conceive  how  you  shall  be  able  to 
supply  them  with  bread  to  the  end  of  the 
week.  The  Lord  has  appointed  me  a differ- 
ent lot.  I am  favoured,  not  only  with  the 
necessaries,  but  with  the  comforts  of  life. 
Now,  I could  easily  give  you  plenty  of  good 
advice ; I could  tell  you,  it  is  your  duty  to  be 
patient,  and  even  thankful,  in  the  lowest 
state  ; that  if  you  have  bread  and  water,  it  is 
more  than  you  deserve  at  the  Lord’s  hands ; 
and  that,  as  you  are  out  of  hell,  and  made  a 
partaker  of  the  hope  of  the  gospel,  you  ought 
not  to  think  any  thing  hard  that  you  meet 
with  in  the  way  of  heaven.  If  I should  say 
thus,  and  say  no  more,  you  would  not  dispute 
the  truth  of  my  assertions;  but,  as  coming 
from  me,  who  live  at  ease,  to  you,  who  are 
beset  with  difficulties,  you  might  question 
their  propriety,  and  think  that  I know  but  little 
of  my  own  heart,  and  could  feel  but  little  for 
your  distress.  You  would  probably  compare 
me  to  one  who  should  think  himself  a mari- 
ner, because  he  has  studied  the  art  of  navi- 
gation by  the  fireside,  though  he  had  never 


ON  THE  ADVANTAGES  OF  POVERTY. 


161 


LET.  XXII.] 

seen  the  sea.  Yet  I hope,  by  my  frequent 
converse  with  the  Lord’s  poor  (for  I live  in 
the  midst  of  an  afflicted  and  poor  people,)  I 
have  made  some  observations,  which,  though 
not  strictly  the  fruit  of  my  own  experience, 
may  not  be  wholly  unseasonable  or  unaccept- 
able to  you. 

Whether  the  rich  or  the  poor,  who  live 
without  God  in  the  world,  are  most  to  be 
pitied  is  not  easy  to  determine.  It  is  a 
dreadful  case  to  be  miserable  in  both  worlds; 
but  yet  the  parade  and  seeming  prosperity  in 
which  some  live  for  a few  years,  will  be  no 
abatement,  but  rather  a great  aggravation, 
of  their  future  torment.  A madman  is  equally 
to  be  pitied,  whether  he  is  laid  upon  a bed  of 
state,  or  a bed  of  straw.  Madness  is  in  the 
heart  of  every  un regenerate  sinner;  and  the 
more  he  possesses  of  this  world’s  goods,  he  is 
so  much  the  more  extensively  mischievous. 
Poverty  is  so  far  a negative  good  to  those 
who  have  no  other  restraint,  that  it  confines 
the  effects  of  the  evil  heart  within  narrower 
bounds,  and  the  small  circle  of  their  imme- 
diate connexions;  whereas  the  rich,  who 
live  under  the  power  of  sin,  are  unfaithful 
stewards  of  a larger  trust,  and,  by  their 
pernicious  influence,  are  often  instrumental 
in  diffusing  profaneness  and  licentiousness 
through  a country  or  a kingdom,  besides  the 
innumerable  acts  of  oppression,  and  the  rava- 
ges of  war,  which  are  perpetrated  to  gratify 
the  insatiable  demands  of  luxury,  ambition,  ; 
and  pride.  But  to  leave  this,  if  we  turn  our 
eyes  from  the  false  maxims  of  the  world,  and 
weigh  things  in  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary, 

I believe  we  shall  find  that  the  believing 
poor,  though  they  have  many  trials  which 
call  for  our  compassion,  have  some  advanta- 
ges above  those  of  the  Lord’s  people  to  whom  ; 
he  has  given  a larger  share  of  the  good  things  | 
of  the  present  life.  Why  else  does  the 
apostle  say,  “ God  has  chosen  the  poor  1”  or 
why  do  we  see,  in  fact,  that  so  few  of  the  rich  j 
or  wise,  or  mighty  are  called  1 Certainly  he 
does  not  choose  them  because  they  are  poor; 
for  “ he  is  no  respecter  of  persons rather,  I 
think,  we  may  say,  that  knowing  what  is 
in  their  hearts,  the  nature  of  the  world  ! 
through  which  they  are  to  pass,  and  what 
circumstances  are  best  suited  to  manifest 
the  truth  and  efficacy  of  his  grace,  he  has,  ! 
in  the  general,  chosen  poverty  as  the  best 
state  for  them.  Some  exceptions  he  has 
made  that  his  people  may  not  be  wholly 
without  support  and  countenance,  and  that 
the  sufficiency  of  his  grace  may  be  made 
known  in  every  state  of  life ;'  but,  for  the 
most  part,  they  are  a poor  and  afflicted  peo- 
ple ; and  in  this  appointment  he  has  had  a re- 
gard to  their  honour,  their  safety,  and  their 
comfort.  I have  room  but  for  a very  brief 
illustration  of  these  particulars. 

Sanctified  poverty  is  an  honourable  state : 
net  so,  indeed,  in  the  judgment  of  the  world. 


The  rich  have  many  friends;  the  poor  are 
usually  despised.  But  I am  speaking  of  that 
honour  which  cometh  from  God  only.  The 
poor,  who  are  “ rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of  the 
kingdom,”  are  honoured  with  the  nearest 
external  conformity  to  Jesus,  their  Saviour, 
wdio,  though  he  was  Lord  of  all,  was  pleased, 
for  our  sakes,  to  make  himself  so  poor,  that 
he  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head,  and  sub- 
mitted to  receive  assistance  from  the  con- 
tributions of  his  followers,  Luke  viii.  3.  By 
this  astonishing  humiliation,  he  poured  con- 
tempt upon  all  human  glory,  and  made  the 
state  of  poverty  honourable:  and  now,  “he 
that  reproacheth  the  poor,  despiseth  his 
Maker.”  And  as  he  was,  so  were  his  apos- 
tles in  this  world.  They  were  not  only  des- 
titute of  rank,  titles,  and  estates,  but  were 
often  in  hunger  and  nakedness,  and  had  no 
certain  dwelling  place.  To  infer  from  hence 
as  some  have  done,  that  riches,  and  the  ac- 
commodations of  life,  are  unsuitable  to  the 
state  of  a Christian,  is  the  mark  of  a super- 
stitious and  legal  spirit.  There  were,  in 
those  days,  several  believers  that  were  in 
a state  of  affluence ; as,  for  instance,  The- 
ophilus,  whom  Luke  addresses  by  a title  of 
honour,  Kpxno-n  (most  noble,  or  excellent,) 
the  same  which  St.  Paul  ascribes  to  the 
Roman  governor.  But  we  may  safely  infer, 
that  that  state  of  life  in  which  our  Lord  was 
pleased  to  converse  with  men,  and  which 
was  the  lot  of  his  apostles,  and  most  favoured 
servants,  is  honourable  in  the  sight  of  God. 

Again,  poverty  is  honourable,  because  it 
affords  a peculiar  advantage  for  glorifying 
God,  and  evidencing  the  power  of  his  grace, 
and  the  faithfulness  of  his  promises,  in  the 
sight  of  men.  A believer,  if  rich,  lives  by 
| faith,  and  his  faith  meets  with  various  trials. 
He  himself  knows  by  whom  he  stands ; but  it 
is'  not  ordinarily  so  visible  to  others,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  poor.  When  ministers  speak  of 
the  all-sufficiency  of  God  to  those  who  trust 
in  him,  and  the  certain  effect  of  the  princi- 
ples of  the  gospel,  in  supporting,  satisfying, 
and  regulating  the  mind  of  man,  the  poor 
arc  the  best  and  most  unsuspected  witnesses 
for  the  truth  of  their  doctrine.  If  we  are 
asked,  Where  do  these  wonderful  people 
live,  who  can  delight  themselves  in  God, 
esteem  a day  in  his  courts  better  than  a thou- 
sand, and  prefer  the  light  of  his  countenance 
to  all  earthly  joy  1 we  can  confidently  send 
them  to  the  poor  of  the  flock.  Amongst  the 
number  who  are  so  called,  there  are  some 
who  will  not  disappoint  our  appeal.  Let  the 
world,  who  refuse  to  believe  the  preachers, 
believe  their  own  eyes;  and  when  they  see 
a poor  person  content,  thankful,  rejoicing, 
admiring  the  Lord’s  goodness  for  affording 
him  what  they  account  hard  fare,  and,  in 
the  midst  of  various  pressures,  incapable  of 
being  bribed  by  offers,  or  terrified  by  threats, 
to  swerve  a step  from  the  path  of  known 


102 


ON  THE  ADVANTAGES  OF  POVERTY. 


duty,  let  them  acknowledge  that  this  is  the 
linger  of  God.  If  they  harden  themselves 
against  this  evidence,  “ neither  would  they 
be  persuaded,  though  one  should  arise  from 
the  dead.” 

And  as  poverty  is  an  honourable,  so  it  is 
comparatively  a safe  state.  True,  it  is  at- 
tended with  its  peculiar  temptations ; but  it 
is  not  near  so  suitable  to  draw  forth  and 
nourish  the  two  grand  corruptions  of  the 
heart,  self-importance,  and  an  idolatrous 
cleaving  to  the  world,  as  the  opposite  state 
of  riches.  They  who  are  rich  in  this  world, 
and  who  know  the  Lord  and  their  own  hearts, 
feel  the  wisdom  and  propriety  of  the  apostle’s 
charge,  “Not  to  be  high-minded,  nor  to 
trust  in  uncertain  riches.”  If  poor  believers 
consider  the  snares  to  which  their  brethren 
are  exposed,  they  will  rather  pray  for  and 
pity,  than  envy  them.  Their  path  is  slip- 
pery; they  have  reason  to  cry  continually, 
“ Hold  thou  me  up,  and  I shall  be  safe ;”  tor 
they  live  in  the  midst  of  the  hurries  and 
vanities  of  the  world,  are  engaged  in  a large 
sphere  of  action,  and  are  incessantly  ex- 
posed to  interruptions  and  snares.  The  car- 
riage of  all  around  them  reminds  them  of 
their  supposed  consequence;  and,  by  the 
nature  of  their  situation,  they  are  greatly 
precluded  from  plain  dealing  and  friendly 
advice.  But  the  poor  are  not  surrounded 
with  flatterers,  nor  teased  with  impertinen- 
ces. They  meet  with  little  to  stimulate 
their  pride,  or  to  soothe  their  vanity.  They 
not  only  believe  in  their  judgments,  but  are 
constrained  to  feel,  by  the  experience  of 
every  day,  that  this  world  cannot  afford  them 
rest.  If  they  have  food  and  raiment,  and 
grace  therewith  to  be  content,  they  have 
reason  to  be  thankful  for  an  exemption  from 
those  splendid  cares  and  delusive  appear- 
ances, which  are  the  inseparable  attendants 
of  wealth  and  worldly  distinction,  and  which, 
if  not  more  burdensome,  are,  humanly  speak- 
ing, much  more  dangerous,  and  greater  im- 
pediments to  the  progress  of  a spiritual  life, 
than  the  ordinary  trials  of  the  poor. 

The  believing  poor  have  likewise,  for  the 
most  part,  the  advantage  in  point  of  spiritual 
comfort,  and  that  principally  in  two  respects. 
First,  As  they  are  called  to  a life  of  more  im- 
mediate dependence  upon  the  promise  and  pro- 
vidence of  God  (having  little  else  to  trust  to,) 
they  have  a more  direct  and  frequent  experi- 
ence of  his  interposition  in  their  favour.  Oba- 
diah  was  a servant  of  God,  though  he  lived  in 
t'ne  court  of  Ahab.  He,  doubtless,  had  his  dif- 
ficulties in  such  a situation  ; but  he  was  not 
in  want.  He  had  not  only  enough  for  him- 
self in  a time  of  dearth,  but  was  able  to  im- 
part to  others.  We  may  believe  that  he  well 
knew  he  was  indebted  to  the  Lord’s  good- 
ness for  his  provision ; but  he  could  hardly 
have  so  sweet,  so  strong,  so  sensible  an 
impression  qf  God’s  watchful  care  over 


[let.  xxii, 

him  as  Elijah  had,  who,  when  he  was  de4 
prived  of  all  human  support,  was  statedly 
fed  by  the  ravens.  Such  of  the  Lord’s  peo- 
ple who  have  estates  in  land,  or  thousands 
in  the  bank,  will  acknowledge,  that  even 
the  bread  they  eat  is  the  gift  of  the  Lord’s 
bounty ; yet,  having  a moral  certainty  of  a 
provision  for  life,  I should  apprehend  that 
they  cannot  exercise  faith  in  the  divine  pro- 
vidence, with  respect  to  their  temporal  sup- 
plies, so  distinctly  as  the  poor,  who,  having 
no  friend  or  resource  upon  earth,  are  neces- 
sitated to  look  immediately  to  their  Father 
who  is  in  heaven,  for  their  daily  bread.  And 
though  it  is  not  given  to  the  world  to  know 
what  an  intercourse  is  carried  on  between 
heaven  and  earth,  nor  with  what  acceptance 
the  prayers  of  the  poor  and  afflicted  enter 
into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  hosts ; yet  many 
of  them  have  had  such  proofs  of  his  attention, 
wisdom,  faithfulness,  power,  and  love,  in  sup- 
plying their  wants,  and  opening  them  a way 
of  relief,  when  they  have  been  beset  with 
difficulties  on  all  sides,  as  have  been,  to  them- 
selves at  least,  no  less  certain  and  indisputa- 
ble, I had  almost  said,  no  less  glorious,  than 
the  miracles  which  he  wrought  for  Israel, 
when  he  divided  the  Red  Sea  before  them, 
and  gave  them  food  from  the  clouds.  Such 
evidences  of  the  power  of  faith,  the  efficacy 
of  prayer,  and  the  truth  of  the  scriptures 
(preferable  to  mountains  of  gold  and  silver, 
and  for  which  the  state  of  poverty  furnishes 
the  most  frequent  occasions,)  are  a rich 
overbalance  for  all  its  inconveniences.  But, 
Secondly,  I apprehend  that  the  humble 
and  believing  poor  have,  in  general,  the 
greatest  share  of  those  consolations,  which 
are  the  effect  of  the  I.ght  of  God’s  counte- 
nance lifted  up  up:r.  the  soul,  of  his  love  shed 
abroad  in  the  heart,  or  of  a season  of  refresh- 
ment from  his  presence.  By  such  expres 
sions  as  these,  the  scriptures  intimate  tha„ 
“joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory;”  a de- 
scription of  which,  those  who  have  tasted  it 
will  not  require,  and  those  who  are  strangers 
to  it,  could  not  understand.  This  joy  is  not 
always  the  companion  of  faith,  not  even  of 
strong  faith  ; but  it  is  that  which  a believer, 
whether  rich  or  poor,  incessantly  thirsts  af- 
ter ; and,  in  comparison  whereof,  all  worldly 
good  is  but  vanity  and  disappointment.  The 
Lord  imparts  this  joy  to  his  people,  in  season 
and  measure,  as  he  sees  fit ; but  his  poor  peo- 
ple have  the  largest  share.  They  have  lit- 
tle comfort  from  the  world,  therefore  he  is 
pleased  to  be  their  comforter.  They  have 
many  trials  and  sufferings ; and  he  with 
whom  they  have  to  do,  knows  their  situation 
and  pressures;  he  has  promised  to  make 
their  strength  equal  to  their  day,  and  to  re- 
vive their  fainting  spirits  writh  heavenly  cor- 
dials. When  it  is  thus  with  them,  they  can 
say  with  Jacob,  “ I have  enough;”  or,  as  it 
is  in  the  original,  “I  have  all.”  This  makes 


let.  xxiil]  ON  SIMPLICITY  AND  SINCERITY.  163 

nard  things  easy,  and  the  burden  light,  which  nary  wants  and  real  dangers,  and  furnishes 
the  flesh  would  otherwise  complain  of  as  us  with  the  fairest  opportunities  for  the 
heavy.  This  has  often  given  a sweeter  re-  manifestation,  exercise,  and  increase  of  the 
lish  to  bread  and  water,  than  the  sensualist  graces  he  has  implanted  in  you. — Influenced 
ever  found  to  be  in  the  most  studied  and  ex-  by  these  views,  I trust  you  can  cheerfully 


pensive  refinements  of  luxury.  Blessed  are 
the  poor,  who  are  rich  in  faith,  and  heirs  of 
the  kingdom  which  God  has  promised  to 
them  that  love  him.  They  often  enjoy  the 
most  lively  foretastes  of  the  glory  which  shall 
be  revealed. 

Have  not  you,  my  friend,  found  these  things 
true  in  your  own  experience)  Yes;  the  Lord 
has  sanctified  your  crosses,  and  supported 
you  under  them.  Hitherto  he  has  helped 
you,  and  he  will  be  with  you  to  the  end.  As 
you  have  followed  him  upon  earth,  you  will 
ere  long  follow  him  to  heaven.  You  are 
now  called  to  sow  in  tears  ; there  you  shall 
reap  in  joy,  and  God  shall  wipe  away  all 
tears  from  your  eyes.  In  the  mean  time,  be 
thankful  that  he  honours  you,  in  appointing 
you  to  be  a witness  for  the  truth  and  power 
of  his  grace,  in  the  midst  of  an  unbelieving 
world. 

It  is  true,  that  even  where  the  spirit  is 
willing,  the  flesh  is  weak.  You  have  sharp 
trials,  which,  for  the  present,  cannot  be  joy- 
ous, but  grievous ; and  you  have  doubtless 
felt  the  depravity  of  your  nature,  and  the 
subtilty  of  Satan,  at  some  times  prompting 
you  to  impatience,  envy,  and  distrust.  But 
these  evils  are  not  peculiar  to  a state  of  po- 
verty ; you  would  have  been  exposed  to  the 
same  had  you  lived  in  affluence,  uigether 
with  many  others,  from  which  y'-<  are  now 
exempted  ; for  riches  and  pov ty  are  but 
comparative  terms,  and  it  is  only  the  grace 
of  God  that  can  teach  us  to  be  content  in 
any  possible  situation  of  life.  The  rich  are 
as  prone  to  desire  something  which  they  have 
not  as  the  poor ; and  they  who  have  most  to 
lose  have  most  to  fear.  That  a man’s  life 
(the  happiness  of  his  life)  “ consisteth  not  in 
the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  pos- 
sessed,” is  an  aphorism  founded  upon  the 
highest  authority,  and  confirmed  by  univer- 
sal experience  and  observation. 

In  a word,  you  are  not  poor,  but  rich.  The 
promises  are  your  inheritance ; heaven  is 
your  home ; the  angels  of  the  Lord  are  mi- 
nistering spirits,  who  rejoice  to  watch  over 
you  for  good  ; and  the  Lord  of  angels  him- 
self is  your  sun,  and  shield,  and  everlasting 
portion.  It  is  impossible  that  you,  to  whom 
he  has  given  Himself,  his  Son,  his  Spirit,  his 
grace,  his  kingdom,  can  want  any  thing  that 
is  truly  good  for  you.  If  riches  were  so,  he 
could  pour  them  upon  you  in  abundance,  as 
easily  as  he  provides  you  your  daily  bread. 
But  these,  for  the  most  part,  he  bestows 
on  those  who  have  no  portion  but  in  the 
present  life.  You  have  great  reason  to  re- 
joice in  the  lot  he  has  appointed  for  you, 
which  secures  you  from  numberless  imagi- 


say, 

What  others  value  I resign : 

Lord,  ’tis  enough  that  thou  art  mine. 

I commend  you  to  the  blessing  of  our  co- 
venant God,  and  to  Jesus  our  Saviour,  who, 
when  he  was  rich,  made  himself  poor  for  our 
sakes,  that  we  through  his  poverty  might  be 
rich. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXIII. 

On  Simplicity  and  godly  Sincerity. 

dear  sir, — It  would  be  a happy  time  if  all 
professors  of  the  gospel  could,  with  the  apos- 
tle, rejoice  in  the  testimony  of  their  con- 
sciences, that  they  walked  in  simplicity  and 
godly  sincerity.  How  many  evils  and  scan- 
dals would  be  then  prevented  1 But,  alas ! too 
many  who  name  the  name  of  Christ,  seem 
to  have  hardly  any  idea  of  this  essential  part 
of  the  Christian  character.  A few  thoughts 
upon  a subject  so  little  attended  to,  may  not 
be  unseasonable.  The  most  advanced  in  the 
Christian  life  have  something  of  this  lesson 
yet  to  learn ; and  the  greater  proficiency  we 
make  in  it,  the  greater  will  be  our  inward 
peace,  and  the  more  will  our  light  shine  be- 
fore men,  to  the  glory  of  our  heavenly  Fa- 
ther. 

Simplicity  and  sincerity,  though  insepara- 
ble, may  be  distinguished.  The  former  is 
the  principle  from  which  the  latter  is  deriv- 
ed. Simplicity  primarily  respects  the  frame 
of  our  spirit  in  the  sight  of  God  ; sincerity 
more  directly  regards  our  conduct  as  it  falls 
under  the  observation  of  men.  It  is  true, 
the  terms  are  frequently  used  indifferently 
for  each  other,  and  may  be  so  without  occa- 
sioning any  considerable  mistake;  but  as 
they  are  not  precisely  the  same,  it  may  be 
proper,  if  we  would  speak  accurately,  to 
keep  this  distinction  in  view. 

Some  persons  who  have  been  more  ena- 
moured with  the  name  of  simplicity,  than 
acquainted  with  its  nature,  have  substituted 
in  its  stead  a childishness  of  language  and 
manners,  as  if  they  understood  the  word  sim- 
ple only  in  the  mere  vulgar  sense,  as  equiva- 
lent to  foolish.  But  this  infantine  softness 
gives  just  disgust  to  those  who  have  a true 
taste  and  judgment  of  divine  things;  not 
only  as  it  is  an  unnecessary  deviation  from 
the  common  usages  of  mankind,  but  because, 
being  the  effect  of  art  and  imitation,  it  palpa- 
bly defeats  its  own  pretences.  An  artificial, 
or  affected  simplicity,  is  a contradiction  in 


104 


ON  SIMPLICITY  AND  SINCERITY. 


[let.  XXIII. 


terms,  and  differs  as  much  from  the  simpli- 
city of  the  gospel,  as  paint  does  from  beauty. 

The  true  simplicity,  which  is  the  honour 
and  strength  of  a believer,  is  the  effect  of  a 
spiritual  perception  of  the  truths  of  the  gos- 
pel. It  arises  from,  and  bears  a proportion 
to,  the  sense  we  have  of  our  own  unworthi- 
ness, the  power  and  grace  of  Christ,  and  the 
greatness  of  our  obligations  to  him.  So  far 
as  our  knowledge  of  these  things  is  vital  and 
experimental,  it  will  make  us  simple-hearted. 
This  simplicity  may  be  considered  in  two  re- 
spects,— a simplicity  of  intention,  and  a sim- 
plicity of  dependence.  The  former  stands  in 
opposition  to  the  corrupt  workings  of  self 
the  latter  to  the  false  reasonings  of  unbelief. 

Simplicity  of  intention  implies,  that  we 
have  but  one  leading  aim,  to  which  it  is  our 
deliberate  and  unreserved  desire,  that  every 
thing  else  in  which  we  are  concerned  may 
be  subordinate  and  subservient ; in  a word, 
that  we  are  devoted  to  the  Lord,  and  have, 
Tby  grace,  been  enabled  to  choose  him,  and  to 
yield  ourselves  to  him,  so  as  to  place  our 
happiness  in  his  favour,  and  to  make  his 
glory  and  will  the  ultimate  scope  of  all  our 
actions.  He  well  deserves  this  from  us.  He 
is  the  all-sufficient  good.  He  alone  is  able  to 
satisfy  the  vast  capacity  he  has  given  us  ; for 
he  formed  us  for  himself : and  they  who  have 
tasted  that  he  is  gracious,  know  that  his  “ lov- 
ing-kindness is  better  than  life and  that 
his  presence  and  fulness  can  supply  the  want, 
or  make  up  the  loss  of  all  creature-comforts. 
So  likewise,  he  has  a just  claim  to  us  that 
we  should  be  wholly  his ; for  besides  that,  as 
his  creatures,  we  are  in  his  hand  as  clay  in 
the  hands  of  the  potter,  he  has  a redemption 
title  to  us.  He  loved  us,  and  bought  us  with 
his  own  blood.  He  did  not  hesitate  or  halt 
between  two  opinions,  when  he  engaged  to 
redeem  our  souls  from  the  curse  of  the  law, 
and  the  power  of  Satan.  He  could,  in  the 
hour  of  his  distress,  have  summoned  legions 
of  angels,  had  that  been  needful,  to  his  assist- 
ance, or  have  destroyed  his  enemies  with  a 
word  or  a look ; he  could  easily  have  saved 
himself : but  how  then  could  his  people  have 
been  saved,  or  the  promises  of  the  scriptures 
have  been  fulfilled  ! Therefore  he  willingly 
endured  the  cross,  he  gave  his  back  to  the 
smiters,  he  poured  out  his  blood,  he  laid 
down  his  life.  Here  was  an  adorable  sim- 
plicity of  intention  in  him  ; and  shall  we  not, 
O thou  lover  of  souls,  bo  simply,  heartily, 
and  wholly  thine  ? Shall  we  refuse  the  cup  of 
affliction  from  thy  hand,  or  for  thy  sake  1 Or 
shall  we  desire  to  drink  of  the  cup  of  sinful 
pleasure,  when  we  remember  what  our  sins 
have  cost  thee?  Shall  we  wish  to  be  loved 
by  the  world  that  hated  thee,  or  to  be  admired 
by  the  world  that  despised  thee  ? Shall  we 
be  ashamed  of  professing  our  attachment  to 
such  a Saviour?  Nay,  Lord,  forbid  it.  Let 
thy  love  constrain  us,  let  thy  name  be  glori- 


fied, and  thy  will  be  done  by  us  and  in  us. 
Let  us  count  all  things  loss  and  dung  for  the 
excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord.  Let  us  not  desire  any  thing  thou 
seest  fit  to  withhold,  nor  repine  to  part  with 
what  thou  callest  for ; nor  even  take  plea- 
sure in  what  thou  bestowest,  unless  we  can 
improve  it  tor  thee,  and  ever  prefer  thy  love 
above  our  chief  temporal  joy ! Such  is  the 
language  of  the  heart  that  is  blessed  with 
gospel  simplicity.  It  was  once  the  strong- 
hold of  sin,  the  throne  of  self : but  now  self 
is  cast  down,  and  Jesus  rules  by  the  golden 
sceptre  of  love.  This  principle  preserves 
the  soul  from  low,  sordid,  and  idolatrous  pur- 
suits, will  admit  of  no  rival  near  the  Beloved, 
nor  will  it  yield  either  to  the  bribes  or  threats 
of  the  world. 

There  is  likewise  a simplicity  of  depend- 
ence. Unbelief  is  continually  starting  ob- 
jections, magnifying  and  multiplying  diffi- 
culties. But  faith  in  the  power  and  promises 
of  God,  inspires  a noble  simplicity,  and  casts 
every  care  upon  him,  who  is  able,  and  has 
engaged  to  support  and  provide.  Thus,  when 
Abraham,  at  the  Lord’s  call,  forsook  his  coun- 
try and  his  father’s  house,  the  apostle  observes, 
“He  went  out,  not  knowing  whither  he 
went.”  It  was  enough  that  he  knew  whom 
he  followed.  The  all-sufficient  God  was  his 
guide,  his  shield,  and  his  exceeding  great 
reward.  So,  when  exercised  with  long  wait- 
ing for  the  accomplishment  of  the  promise, 
he  staggered  not,  ou  he  did  not  dis* 

pute  or  question,  but  simply  depended  upon 
God,  who  had  spoken  and  was  able  also  to 
perform.  So  likewise,  when  he  received  that 
hard  command,  to  offer  up  his  son,  of  whom 
it  was  said,  “ In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  call- 
ed,” he  simply  obeyed,  and  depended  upon 
the  Lord  to  make  good  his  own  word,  Heb. 
xi.  17,  19,  19.  In  this  spirit  David  went 
forth  to  meet  Goliah,  and  overcame  him ; and 
thus  the  three  worthies  were  unawed  by  the 
threats  of  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  rather  chose 
to  be  cast  into  a burning  furnace,  than  to 
sin  against  the  Lord.  And  thus  Elijah,  in  a 
time  of  famine,  was  preserved  from  anxiety 
and  want,  and  supported  by  extraordinary 
methods,  1 Kings  xvii.  4,  6,  14.  In  these 
times  we  do  not  expect  miracles,  in  the  strict 
sense  of  the  word,  but  they  who  simply  de- 
pend upon  the  Lord,  will  meet  with  such 
tokens  of  his  interposition  in  a time  of  need, 
as  will,  to  themselves  at  least,  be  a satisfy- 
ing proof  that  he  careth  for  them.  How  com- 
fortable is  it  to  us,  as  well  as  ornamental  to 
our  profession,  to  be  able  to  trust  the  Lord 
in  the  path  of  duty ; to  believe  that  he  will 
supply  our  wants,  direct  our  steps,  plead  our 
cause,  and  control  our  enemies!  Thus  he 
has  promised,  and  it  belongs  to  gospel-simpli- 
city to  take  his  word  against  all  discourage- 
ments. This  will  animate  us  in  the  use  of 
all  lawful  means,  because  the  Lord  has  com- 


ON  COMMUNION  WITH  GOD. 


LET.  XXJV.] 

maided  us  to  wait  upon  him  in  them ; but  it 
will  likewise  inspire  confidence  and  hope 
when  all  means  seem  to  fail,  Heb.  iii.  17,  18. 
For  want  of  this  dependence,  many  dishonour 
their  profession,  and  even  make  shipwreck 
of  the  faith.  Their  hearts  are  not  simple  ; 
they  do  not  trust  in  the  Lord,  but  lean  unto 
their  own  understandings,  and  their  hopes 
or  fears  are  influenced  by  worms  like  them- 
selves. This  causes  a duplicity  of  conduct. 
They  fear  the  Lord  and  serve  other  gods. 
By  their  language,  at  some  times,  one  would 
suppose,  they  desire  to  serve  the  Lord  only  ; 
but,  as  if  they  feared  that  he  was  not  able  to 
protect  or  provide  for  them,  they  make  a 
league  with  the  world,  and  seek  either  secu- 
rity or  advantage  from  sinful  compliances. 
These  cannot  rejoice  in  the  testimony  of  a 
good  conscience.  They  must  live  miserably. 
They  are  attempting  to  reconcile  what  our 
Lord  has  declared  to  be  utterly  incompatible, 
the  service  of  God  and  mammon.  They  have 
so  much  sense  of  religion  as  embitters  their 
worldly  pursuits;  and  so  much  regard  to  the 
world  as  prevents  their  receiving*  any  real 
comfort  from  religion.  These  are  the  luke- 
warm professors,  neither  hot  nor  cold ; nei- 
ther approved  of  men  nor  accepted  of  God. 
They  can  attend  upon  ordinances,  and  speak 
like  Christians;  but  their  tempers  are  un- 
sanctified,  and  their  conduct  irregular  and 
blamable.  They  are  not  simple ; and  there- 
fore they  cannot  be  sincere. 

I need  not  take  time  to  prove,  that  the  ef- 
fect- of  simplicity  will  be  sincerity.  For 
they  who  love  the  Lord  above  all,  who  pre- 
fer the  light  of  his  countenance  to  thousands 
of  gold  and  silver,  who  are  enabled  to  trust 
him  with  all  their  concerns,  and  would  rather 
be  at  his  disposal  than  at  their  own,  will  have 
but  little  temptation  to  insincerity.  The 
principles  and  motives  upon  which  their  con- 
duct is  formed,  are  the  same  in  public  as  in 
private.  Their  behaviour  will  be  all  of  a 
piece,  because  they  have  but  one  design. 
They  will  speak  the  truth  m love,  observe  a 
■st  net  punctuality  in  their  dealings,  and  do 
unto  others  as  they  would  have  others  should 
do  unto  them;  because  these  things  are  es- 
sential to  their  great  aim  of  glorifying  and 
enjoying  their  Lord.  A fear  of  dishonouring 
Ins  name,  and  of  grieving  his  Spirit,  will 
teach  them  not  only  to  avoid  gross  and  known 
sins,  but  to  abstain  from  all  appearance  of 
3vil.  Their  conduct  will  therefore  be  con- 
sistent ; and  they  will  be  enabled  to  appeal 
to  all  who  know  them,  “ that  in  simplicity 
and  godly  sincerity,  not  in  fleshly  wisdom, 
but  by  the  grace  of  God,  they  have  had  their 
conversation  in  the  world.” 

To  a sincere  Christian,  that  craft  and  cun- 
ning which  passes  for  wisdom  in  the  world, 
appears  to  be  not  only  unlawful  but  un- 
necessary. He  has  no  need  of  the  little  re- 
serves, evasions,  and  disguises,  by  which  de- 


165 

signing  men  endeavour  (though  often  in  vain) 
to  conceal  their  proper  characters,  and  to 
escape  deserved  contempt.  He  is  what  he 
seems  to  be,  and  therefore  is  not  afraid  of 
being  found  out.  He  walks  by  the  light  of 
the  wisdom  that  is  from  above,  and  leans 
upon  the  arm  of  almighty  power : therefore 
he  walks  at  liberty,  trusting  in  the  Lord, 
whom  he  serves  with  his  spirit  in  the  gospel 
of  his  Son. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXIV. 

On  Communion  with  God. 

dear  sir, — Though  many  authors  have 
written  largely  and  well  concerning  com- 
munion with  God,  I shall  not  refer  you  to 
books,  or  have  recourse  to  them  myself ; but 
in  compliance  with  your  request,  shall  simply 
offer  you  what  occurs  to  my  thoughts  upon 
the  subject.  I propose  not  to  exceed  the 
limits  of  a sheet  of  paper,  and  must  there- 
fore come  immediately  to  the  point 

That  God  is  to  be  worshiped,  is  generally 
acknowledged ; but  that  they  who  worship 
him  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  have  real  friendship 
and  communion  with  him,  is  known  only 
to  themselves.  The  world  can  neither  un 
derstand  nor  believe  it.  Many  who  would 
not  be  thought  to  have  cast  off  all  reverence 
for  the  scriptures,  and  therefore  do  not  choose 
flatly  to  contradict  the  apostle’s  testimony, 
1 John  i.  3,  attempt  to  evade  its  force  by  re- 
straining it  to  the  primitive  times.  They 
will  allow  that  it  might  be  so  then;  but  they 
pretend  that  circumstances  with  us  are 
greatly  altered.  Circumstances  are,  indeed, 
altered  with  us,  so  far,  that  men  may  now 
pass  for  Christians  who  confess  and  manifest 
themselves  strangers  to  the  Spirit  of  Christ: 
but  who  can  believe  that  the  very  nature 
and  design  of  Christianity  should  alter  in  the 
course  of  time  1 And  that  communion  with 
God,  which  was  essential  to  it  in  the  apos- 
tles, days,  should  now  be  so  unnecessary  and 
impracticable,  as  to  expose  all  who  profess 
an  acquaintance  with  it,  to  the  charge  of 
enthusiasm  and  folly  1 However,  they  who 
have  tasted  that  the  LoYd  is  gracious,  will 
not  be  disputed  out  of  their  spiritual  senses. 
If  they  are  competent  judges  whether  they 
ever  saw  the  light,  or  felt  the  beams  of  the 
sun,  they  are  no  less  certain  that,  by  the 
knowledge  of  the  gospel,  they  are  brought 
into  a state  of  communion  with  God. 

Communion  presupposes  union.  By  nature 
we  are  strangers,  yea,  enemies  to  God  ; but 
we  are  reconciled,  brought  nigh,  and  become 
his  children  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  We 
can  have  no  true  knowledge  of  God,  desire 
towards  him,  access  unto  him,  or  gracious 
communications  from  him,  but  in  and  through 
the  Son  of  his  love.  He  is  the  medium  of 


166 


OX  COMMUNION  WITH  GOD. 


[let.  xxit. 


this  inestimable  privilege ; for  he  is  the  way, 
the  only  way  of  intercourse  between  heaven 
and  earth ; the  sinner’s  way  to  God,  and  God's 
way  of  mercy  to  the  sinner.  If  any  pretend 
to  know  God,  and  to  have  communion  with 
him,  otherwise  than  by  the  knowledge  of  Je- 
sus Christ,  whom  he  hath  sent,  and  by  faith 
in  his  name,  it  is  a proof  that  they  neither 
know  God  nor  themselves.  God,  if  considered 
abstracted  from  the  revelation  of  himself  in 
the  person  of  Jesus,  is  a consuming  fire ; and 
if  he  should  look  upon  us  without  respect  to 
his  covenant  of  mercy  established  in  the  Me- 
diator, we  could  expect  nothing  from  him 
but  indignation  and  wrath.  But  when  his 
Holy  Spirit  enables  us  to  receive  the  record 
which  he  has  given  of  his  Son,  we  are  de- 
livered and  secured  from  condemnation  : we 
are  accepted  in  the  Beloved;  we  are  united 
to  him  in  whom  all  the  fulness  of  the  God- 
head substantially  dwells,  and  all  the  riches 
of  divine  wisdom,  power,  and  love,  are  trea- 
sured up.  Thus,  in  him,  as  the  temple  where- 
in the  glory  of  God  is  manifested,  and  by  him, 
as  the  representative  and  high  priest  of  his 
peopl  e,  and  through  him,  as  the  living  head 
of  his  mystical  body  the  church,  believers 
maintain  communion  with  God.  They  have 
meat  to  eat  which  the  world  knows  not  of, 
honoul  which  cometh  of  God  only,  joy  which 
a stranger  intermeddleth  not  with.  They 
are,  for  the  most  part,  poor  and  afflicted,  fre- 
quently scorned  and  reproached,  accounted 
hypocrites  or  visionaries,  knaves  or  fools : but 
this  one  thing  makes  amends  for  all,  “ They 
have  fellowship  with  the  Father,  and  with 
his  Son,  Jesus  Christ.” 

I would  observe  further,  that  as  the  incar- 
nation of  that  mighty  One,  on  whom  our  help 
is  laid,  was  necessary,  that  a perfect  obedi- 
ence to  the  law,  and  a complete  and  proper 
atonement  for  sin,  might  be  accomplished 
in  the  human  nature  that  had  sinned,  and 
fallen  short  of  the  glory  of  God ; so  in  another 
view  it  affords  us  unspeakable  advantage  for 
our  comfortable  and  intimate  communion 
with  God  by  him.  The  adorable  and  aw- 
ful perfections  of  Deity  are  softened,  if  I may 
so  speak,  and  rendered  more  familiar  and  en- 
gaging to  our  apprehensions,  when  we  con- 
sider them  as  resident  in  him,  who  is  very 
bone  of  our  bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh ; and 
who,  having  by  himself  purged  our  sins,  is 
now  seated  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty 
on  high,  and  reigns,  in  the  nature  of  man, 
over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever.  Thus  he  who 
knows  our  frame  by  becoming  man  like  our- 
selves, is  the  supreme  and  ultimate  object  of 
that  philanthropy,  that  human  affection 
which  he  originally  implanted  in  us.  He 
has  made  us  susceptive  of  the  endearments 
of  friendship  and  relative  life ; and  he  admits 
us  to  communion  with  himself  under  the 
most  engaging  characters  and  relations,  as 
our  friend,  our  brother,  and  our  husband. 


They  who.  by  that  faith  which  is  of  the 
operation  of  God,  are  thus  united  to  him  in 
Christ,  are  brought  thereby  into  a state  of 
real  habitual  communion  with  hii).  The 
degree  of  its  exercise  and  sensible  percep- 
tion on  our  parts,  is  various  in  different  per- 
sons, and  in  the  same  person  at  different 
times ; for  it  depends  upon  the  communica- 
tions we  receive  from  the  Lord  the  Spirit, 
who  distributes  to  every  man  severally  ac- 
cording to  his  will,  adjusting  his  dispensa- 
tions with  a wise  and  merciful  respect  to  our 
present  state  of  discipline.  If  we  were 
wholly  freed  from  the  effects  of  a depraved 
nature,  the  snares  of  an  evil  world : and  the 
subtle  temptations  of  Satan,  our  actual  com- 
munion with  God  would  be  always  lively, 
sensible,  and  fervent  It  will  be  thus  in 
heaven : there  its  exercise  will  be  without 
obstruction,  abatement,  or  interruption.  But 
so  long  as  we  are  liable  to  security,  spiritual 
pride,  indolence,  an  undue  attachment  to 
worldly  things,  and  irregular  distempered 
passions,  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  afford,  in- 
crease, suspend,  or  renew  the  sensible  im- 
pressions of  his  love  and  grace,  in  such  sea- 
sons and  measures  as  he  sees  most  suitable 
to  prevent  or  control  these  evils,  or  to  hum- 
ble us  for  them.  We  grieve  his  Spirit,  and 
he  withdraws;  but,  by  his  secret  power  over 
our  hearts,  he  makes  us  sensible  of  our  folly 
and  loss,  teaches  us  to  mourn  after  him,  and 
to  entreat  his  return.  These  desires,  which 
are  the  effects  of  his  own  grace,  he  answers 
in  his  own  time,  and  shines  forth  upon  the 
soul  with  healing  in  his  beams.  But  such  is 
our  weakness,  and  so  unapt  are  we  to  retain 
even  those  lessons  which  we  have  learned,  by 
painful  experience,  that  we  are  prone  to  re- 
peat our  former  miscarriages,  and  to  render 
a repetition  of  the  same  changes  necessary. 
From  hence  it  is,  that  what  we  call  our 
frames  are  so  very  variable,  and  our  com- 
fortable sense  of  divine  communion  is  rafher 
transient  than  abiding.  But  the  communion 
itself,  upon  which  the  life  and  safety  of  our 
souls  depend,  is  never  totally  obstructed ; 
nor  can  it  be,  unless  God  should  be  unmind- 
ful of  his  covenant,  and  forsake  the  work  of 
his  own  hands.  And  when  it  is  not  per- 
ceptible to  sense,  it  may  ordinarily  be  made 
evident  to  faith,  by  duly  comparing  what  we 
read  in  the  scriptures  with  what  passes  in 
our  hearts.  I say  ordinarily,  because  there 
may  be  some  excepted  cases.  If  a believer 
is  unhappily  brought  under  the  power  of 
some  known  sin,  or  has  grievously  and  no- 
toriously declined  from  his  profession,  it  is 
possible  that  the  Lord  may  hide  himself  be- 
hind so  dark  a cloud,  and  leave  him  for  a 
while  to  such  hardness  of  heart,  as  that  he 
shall  seem  to  himself  to  be  utterly  destitute 
and  forsaken.  And  the  like  apprehensions 
may  be  formed  under  some  of  Satan's  violent 
temptations,  when  he  is  permitted  to  come 


ON  COMMUNION  WITH  GOD. 


167 


LET.  XXIV.] 

in  as  a flood,  and  to  overpower  the  apparent  I 
exercise  of  every  grace,  by  a torrent  of  blas- 
phemous and  evil  imaginations.  Yet  the 
Lord  is  still  present  with  his  people  in  the 
darkest  hours,  or  the  unavoidable  event  of 
such  cases  would  be  apostasy  or  despair. 
Psalm  xli.  11. 

The  communion  we  speak  of  comprises 
a mutual  intercourse  and  communication  in 
love,  in  counsels,  and  in  interests. 

In  love. — The  Lord,  by  his  Spirit,  mani- 
fests and  confirms  his  love  to  his  people. 
For  this  purpose  he  meets  them  at  his  throne 
of  grace,  and  in  his  ordinances.  There  he 
makes  himself  known  unto  them,  as  he  does 
not  unto  the  world ; causes  his  goodness  to 
pass  before  them ; opens,  applies,  and  seals  to 
them  his  exceeding  great  and  precious  pro- 
mises ; and  gives  them  the  Spirit  of  adoption, 
whereby,  unworthy  as  they  are,  they  are  ena- 
bled to  cry,  “Abba,  Father.”  He  causes  them 
to  understand  that  great  love  wherewith  he 
has  loved  them,  in  redeeming  them  by  price 
and  by  power,  washing  them  from  their  sins 
in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  recovering  them 
from  the  dominion  of  Satan,  and  preparing  for 
them  an  everlasting  kingdom,  where  they 
shall  see  his  face,  and  rejoice  in  his  glory. 
The  knowledge  of  this  his  love  to  them,  pro- 
duces a return  of  love  from  them  to  him. 
They  adore  him  and  admire  him ; they  make 
an  unreserved  surrender  of  their  hearts  to 
him.  They  view  him,  and  delight  in  him 
as  their  God,  their  Saviour,  and  their  portion. 
They  account  his  favour  better  than  life.  He 
is  the  sun  of  their  souls : if  he  is  pleased  to 
shine  upon  them,  all  is  well,  and  they  are  not 
greatly  careful  about  other  things;  but  if  he 
hides  his  face,  the  smiles  of  the  whole  crea- 
tion can  afford  them  no  solid  comfort.  They 
esteem  one  day  or  hour  spent  in  the  delight- 
ful contemplation  of  his  glorious  excellences, 
and  in  the  expression  of  their  desires  towards 
him,  better  than  a thousand ; and  when  their 
love  is  most  fervent,  they  are  ashamed  that 
it  is  so  faint,  and  chide  and  bemoan  them- 
selves, that  they  can  love  him  no  more. 
This  often  makes  them  long  to  depart,  will- 
ing to  leave  their  dearest  earthly  comforts, 
that  they  may  see  him  as  he  is,  without  a 
vail  or  cloud;  for  they  know  that  then,  and 
not  till  then,  they  shall  love  him  as  they 
ought. 

In  counsels. — The  secret  of  the  Lord  is 
with  them  that  fear  him.  He  deals  fami- 
liarly with  them.  He  calls  them  not  ser- 
vants only,  but  friends;  and  he  treats  them 
as  friends.  He  affords  them  more  than  pro- 
mises; for  he  opens  to  them  the  plan  of  his 
great  designs  from  everlasting  to  everlast- 
ing; shows  them  the  strong  foundations  and 
inviolable  securities  of  his  favour  towards 
them,  the  height,  and  depth,  and  length,  and 
breadth  of  his  love,  which  passeth  knowledge, 
and  the  unsearchable  riches  of  his  grace. 


I He  instructs  them  in  the  mysterious  conduct 
of  his  providence,  the  reasons  and  ends  of  all 
his  dispensations  in  which  they  are  concern- 
ed ; and  solves  a thousand  hard  questions  to 
their  satisfaction,  which  are  inexplicable  to 
the  natural  wisdom  of  man.  He  teaches 
them  likewise  the  beauty  of  his  precepts,  the 
path  of  their  duty,  and  the  nature  of  their 
warfare.  He  acquaints  them  with  the  plots 
of  their  enemies,  the  snares  and  dangers  they 
are  exposed  to,  and  the  best  methods  of 
avoiding  them.  And  he  permits  and  enables 
them  to  acquaint  him  with  all  their  cares, 
fears,  v/ants,  and  troubles,  with  more  free- 
dom than  they  can  unbosom  themselves  tc 
their  nearest  earthly  friends.  His  ear  is 
always  open  to  them;  he  is  never  weary 
of  hearing  their  complaints,  and  answer- 
ing their  petitions.  The  men  of  the  world 
would  account  it  a high  honour  and  pri- 
vilege to  have  an  unrestrained  liberty  of 
access  to  an  earthly  king ; but  what  words 
can  express  the  privilege  and  honour  of  be- 
lievers, who,  whenever  they  please,  have 
audience  of  the  King  of  kings,  whose  com- 
passion, mercy,  and  power,  are  like  his  ma- 
jesty, infinite.  The  world  wonders  at  their 
indifference  to  the  vain  pursuits  and  amuse- 
ments by  which  others  are  engrossed ; that 
they  are  so  patient  in  trouble,  so  inflexible  in 
their  conduct,  so  well  satisfied  with  that  state 
of  poverty  and  obscurity  which  the  Lord,  for 
the  most  part,  allots  them ; but  the  wonder 
would  cease  if  what  passes  in  secret  were 
publicly  known.  They  have  obtained  the 
pearl  of  great  price;  they  have  communion 
with  God;  they  derive  their  wisdom,  strength, 
and  comfort  from  on  high,  and  cast  all  their 
cares  upon  him  who,  they  assuredly  know, 
vouchsafes  to  take  care  of  them.  This  re- 
minds me  of  another  branch  of  their  commu- 
nion, namely, 

In  interests. — The  Lord  claims  them  for 
his  portion;  he  accounts  them  his  jewels, 
and  their  happiness  in  time  and  in  eternity 
is  the  great  end  which,  next  to  his  own 
glory,  and  inseparable  connexion  with  it,  he 
has  immediately  and  invariably  in  view.  In 
this  point  all  his  dispensations  of  grace  and 
providence  shall  finally  terminate.  He  him- 
self is  their  guide  and  their  guard ; he  keeps 
them  as  the  apple  of  his  eye ; the  hairs  of 
their  heads  are  numbered;  and  not  an  event 
in  their  lives  takes  place  but  in  an  appointed 
subserviency  to  their  final  good.  And  as  he 
is  pleased  to  espouse  their  interest,  they 
through  grace,  are  devoted  to  his.  They  are 
no  longer  their  own;  they  would  not  be 
their  own  ; it  is  their  desire,  their  joy,  their 
glory,  to  live  to  him  who  died  for  them.  He 
has  won  their  hearts  by  his  love,  and  made 
them  a willing  people  in  the  day  of  his 
power.  The  glory  of  his  name,  the  success 
of  his  cause,  the  prosperity  of  his  people,  the 
accomplishment  of  his  will,  these  are  the 


168 


ON  FAITH,  AND 


great  and  leading  objects  which  are  engraven 
upon  their  hearts,  and  to  which  all  their 
prayers,  desires,  and  endeavours,  are  direct- 
ed. They  would  count  nothing  dear,  not 
even  their  lives,  if'  set  in  competition  with 
these.  In  the  midst  of  their  afflictions,  if  the 
Lord  is  glorified,  if  sinners  are  converted,  if 
the  church  flourishes,  they  can  rejoice.  But 
when  iniquity  abounds,  when  love  waxes 
cold,  when  professors  depart  from  the  doc- 
trines of  truth  and  the  power  of  godliness, 
then  they  are  grieved  and  pained  to  the 
heart;  then  they  are  touched  in  what  they 
account  their  nearest  interest,  because  it  is 
their  Lord’s. 

This  is  the  spirit  of  a true  Christian.  May 
the  Lord  increase  it  in  us,  and  in  all  who 
love  his  name.  I have  room  only  to  sub- 
scribe myself,  &c. 


LETTER  XXV. 

On  Faith  and  the  Communion  of  Saints. 

dear  sir, — In  compliance  with  your  re- 
quest, I freely  give  you  my  sentiments  on 
the  particulars  you  desired.  Your  candour 
will  pass  over  all  inadvertencies,  when  I 
give  you  such  thoughts  as  offer  themselves 
spontaneously,  and  without  study.  If  the 
Lord  is  pleased  to  bring  any  thing  valuable 
to  my  mind,  I shall  be  glad  to  send  it  to  you ; 
and  I am  willing  to  believe,  that  when  chris- ! 
tians,  in  his  name  and  fear,  are  writing  to 
one  another,  he  does  often  imperceptibly 
guide  us  to  drop  “ a word  in  season,”  which, 

I hope,  will  be  the  case  at  present. 

The  first  object  of  solicitude  to  an  awaken- 
ed soul,  is  safety.  The  law  speaks,  the  sin- 
ner hears  and  fears.  A holy  God  is  revealed, 
the  sinner  sees  and  trembles.  Every  false 
hope  is  swept  away ; and  an  earnest  inquiry 
takes  place,  “ What  shall  I do  to  be  saved  ?” 
In  proportion  as  faith  is  given,  Jesus  is  disco- 
vered as  the  only  Saviour,  and  the  question 
is  answered ; and  as  faith  increases,  fear 
subsides,  and  a comfortable  hope  of  life  and 
immortality  succeeds. 

When  we  have  thus  “a  good  hope  through 
grace,”  that  heaven  shall  be  our  home,  I 
think  the  next  inquiry  is,  or  should  he,  How 
we  may  possess  as  much  of  heaven  by  the 
way  as  is  possible  ? in  other  words,  How  a 
fife  of  communion  with  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
may  be  maintained  in  the  greatest  power, 
and  with  the  least  interruption  that  is  con- 
sistent with  the  present  imperfect  state  of 
things'?  I am  persuaded,  dear  Sir,  this  is 
the  point  that  lies  nearest  your  heart ; and, 
therefore,  I shall  speak  freely  my  mind 
upon  it. 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  plain  from  scripture 
and  experience,  that  all  our  abatements,  de-  j 


[let.  XXV. 

clensions,  and  languors,  arise  from  a defect 
of  faith  ; from  the  imperfect  manner  in  which 
we  take  up  the  revelation  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  the  scriptures.  If  our  apprehen- 
sions of  him  were  nearly  suitable  to  the 
characters  which  he  bears  in  his  own 
word  ; if  we  had  a strong  and  abiding  sens*, 
of  his  power  and  grace  always  upon  ou? 
hearts,  doubts  and  complaints  would  cease. 
This  would  make  hard  things  easy,  and  bitter 
things  sweet,  and  dispose  our  hearts  with 
cheerfulness  to  do  and  suffer  the  whole  will 
of  God ; and  living  upon  and  to  him,  as  our 
wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  joy,  and 
supreme  end,  we  should  live  a heaven  upon 
earth.  The  face  of  the  question  is,  there- 
fore, a little  changed,  and  amounts  to  this, 
What  are  the  means  to  increase  and 
strengthen  our  faith? 

I apprehend  that  the  growth  of  faith,  no 
less  than  of  all  other  graces,  of  which  faith 
is  the  root,  is  gradual,  and  ordinarily  effected 
in  the  use  of  appointed  means ; yet  not  alto- 
gether arbitrary,  but  appointed  by  him  who 
knows  our  frame,  and  therefore  works  in  us, 
in  a way  suited  to  those  capacities  he  has 
endued  us  with. 

1.  If  faith  arises  from  the  knowledge  of 
Christ,  and  this  knowledge  is  only  contained 
in  the  word  of  God,  it  follows,  that  a careful 
and  frequent  perusal  of  the  scriptures,  which 
testify  of  him,  is  a fit  and  a necessary  means 
of  improving  our  faith. 

2.  If,  besides  the  outward  revelation  of 

! the  word,  there  must  be  a revelation  of  the 

Spirit  of  God  likewise,  whose  office  it  is  to 
take  of  the  things  of  Jesus,  and  show  them 
to  the  soul,  by  and  according  to  the  written 
word,  Johnxvi.  14;  2 Cor.  iii.  18;  and  if  this 
Spirit  is  promised  and  limited  to  those  who 
ask  it ; then  it  follows  likewise,  that  secret 
prayer  is  another  necessary  means  of  strength- 
ening faith.  Indeed,  these  two  I account 
the  prime  ordinances.  If  we  were  providen- 
tially, and  not  wilfully  restrained  from  all 
the  rest,  the  word  of  grace,  and  the  throne 
of  grace,  would  supply  their  wants.  With 
these  we  might  be  happy  in  a dungeon  or  in 
a desert ; but  nothing  will  compensate  the 
neglect  of  these.  Though  we  should  be  en- 
gaged in  a course  of  the  best  conversation, 
and  attend  upon  sermons  from  one  end  of 
the  week  to  the  other,  we  would  languish 
and  starve  in  the  midst  of  plenty ; our  souls 
would  grow  dry  and  lean,  unless  these  se- 
cret exercises  are  kept  up  with  some  degree 
of  exactness. 

3.  Another  means  to  this  purpose,  is  faith- 
fulness to  light  already  received,  John  xiv. 
15 — 24,  especially  ver.  21.  It  is  worth  ob- 
servation, that  faith  and  fidelity,  the  act  of 
dependence,  and  the  purpose  of  obedience,  are 
expressed  in  the  Greek  by  the  same  word. 
Though  the  power  is  all  of  God,  and  the 

j blessing  of  mere  free  grace ; yet,  if  there  is 


THE  COMMUNION  OF  SAINTS. 


160 


LET.  XXV.] 

any  secret  reserve,  any  allowed  evil  con- 
nived at  in  the  heart  and  life,  this  will  shut  up 
the  avenues  to  comfort,  and  check  the  growth 
of  faith.  I lay  very  little  stress  upon  that 
faith  or  comfort  which  is  not  affected  by  un- 
steady walking. 

The  experience  of  past  years  has  taught 
me  to  distinguish  between  ignorance  and 
disobedience.  The  Lord  is  gracious  to  the 
weakness  of  his  people:  many  involuntary 
mistakes  will  not  interrupt  their  communion 
with  him ; he  pities  their  infirmity,  and 
teaches  them  to  do  better.  But  if  they  dis- 
pute his  known  will,  and  act  against  the 
dictates  of  conscience,  they  will  surely  suf- 
fer for  it.  This  will  weaken  their  hands, 
and  bring  distress  into  their  hearts.  Wil- 
ful sin  sadly  perplexes  and  retards  our  pro- 
gress. May  the  Lord  keep  us  from  it ! It 
raises  a dark  cloud,  and  hides  the  Sun  of 
righteousness  from  our  view ; and  till  he  is 
pleased  freely  to  shine  forth  again,  we  can 
do  nothing;  and  for  this,  perhaps,  he  will 
make  us  wait,  and  cry  out  often,  “ How  long, 
O Lord  ! how  long  ?” 

Thus,  by  reading  the  word  of  God,  by  fre- 
quent prayer,  by  a simple  attention  to  the 
Lord’s  will,  together  with  the  use  of  public 
ordinances,  and  the  observations  we  are  able 
to  make  upon  what  passes  within  us  and 
without  us,  which  is  what  we  call  experience, 
the  Lord  watering  and  blessing  with  the  in- 
fluence of  his  Holy  Spirit,  may  we  grow  in 
grace,  and  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour,  be  more  humbled  in  our  own  eyes, 
more  weaned  from  self,  more  fixed  on  him  as 
our  all  in  all,  till  at  last  we  shall  meet  before 
his  throne. 

The  communion  of  saints,  another  point 
you  desire  my  thoughts  upon,  is  the  great 
privilege  of  all  the  children  of  God  : they 
may  be  separate  from  each  other  in  body,  and 
yet  may  daily  meet  at  the  throne  of  grace.  This 
is  one  branch  of  the  communion  of  saints,  to 
be  present  in  spirit  to  each  other ; sharing 
in  common  of  the  influences  of  the  same 
Spirit,  they  feel  the  same  desires,  aim  at  the 
same  objects,  and,  so  far  as  they  are  person- 
ally acquainted,  are  led  to  bear  each  other 
upon  their  hearts  in  prayer.  It  has  often 
been  an  encouragement  to  me  in  a dark 
and  dull  hour,  when  rather  the  constraint 
of  duty,  than  the  consideration  of  privilege, 
has  brought  me  upon  my  knees,  to  reflect 
how  many  hearts,  and  eyes,  and  hands,  have 
been  probably  lifted  up  in  the  same  moment 
with  mine.  This  thought  has  given  me  new 
courage.  O,  what  a great  family  has  our 
Father ! and  what  David  says  of  the  natural, 
is  true  of  the  spiritual  life,  Psalm  civ.  “ These 
all  wait  upon  thee,  that  thou  mayest  give  them 
their  meat  in  due  season.  That  thou  givest 
(hern,  they  gather : thou  openest  thine  hand, 
and  they  are  filled  with  good.”  Then  I par- 


ticularly think  of  those  who  have  been  helpful 
to  me  in  time  past;  the  seasons  of  sweet 
communion  we  have  enjoyed  together,  the 
subjects  of  our  mutual  complaint.-, 
Where  are  they,  or  how  engaged,  now  ? 
Perhaps  this  moment  praying,  or  thinking 
about  me.  Then  I am  roused  to  make  theig 
cases  my  own,  and  by  attempting  to  plead 
for  them,  I get  strength  to  pray  for  myself 
It  is  an  encouragement,  no  doubt,  in  a field 
of  battle,  to  know  that  the  army  we  belong  to 
is  large,  unanimous,  all  in  action,  pressing  on 
from  every  side  against  the  common  enemy, 
and  gaining  ground  in  every  attack.  But 
if  we  derive  fresh  spirits  from  considering 
our  friends  and  associates  on  earth,  how 
should  we  take  fire,  if  we  could  penetrate 
within  the  vail,  and  take  a view  of  the  in- 
visible world!  We  should  not  then  com- 
plain that  we  were  serving  God  alone.  O the 
numbers,  the  voices,  the  raptures,  of  that 
heavenly  host ! Not  one  complaining  note, 
not  one  discordant  string.  How  many 
thousand  years  has  the  harmony  been 
strengthening,  by  the  hourly  accession  of 
new  voices ! 

I sometimes  compare  this  earth  to  a tem- 
porary gallery  or  stage,  erected  for  all  the 
heirs  of  glory  to  pass  over,  that  they  may 
join  in  the  coronation  of  the  Great  King ! a 
solemnity  in  which  they  shall  not  be  mere 
spectators,  but  deeply  interested  parties ; for 
he  is  their  husband,  their  Lord ; they  bear 
his  name,  and  shall  share  in  all  his  honours. 
Righteous  Abel  led  the  van  ; the  procession 
has  been  sometimes  broader,  sometimes  nar- 
rowed to  almost  a single  person,  as  in  the 
days  of  Noah.  After  many  generations  had 
successively  entered  and  disappeared,  the 
King  himself  passed  on  in  person,  preceded 
by  one  chosen  harbinger.  He  received  many 
insults  on  his  passage ; but  he  bore  all  for  the 
sake  of  those  he  loved,  and  entered  trium- 
phant into  his  glory. 

He  was  followed  by  twelve  faithful  ser- 
vants, and  after  them  the  procession  became 
wider  than  ever.  There  are  many  yet  un- 
born who  must,  as  we  do  now,  tread  in  the 
steps  of  those  gone  before;  and  when  the 
whole  company  is  arrived,  the  stage  shall 
be  taken  down  and  burnt. 

Then  all  the  faithful,  chosen  race 
Shall  meet  before  the  throne, 

Shall  bless  the  conduct  of  his  grace, 

And  make  its  wonders  known. 

Let  us  then,  dear  Sir,  be  of  good  courage, 
all  the  saints  on  earth,  all  the  saints  in  heaven, 
the  angels  of  the  Lord,  yea,  the  Lord  of 
angels  himself,  all  are  on  our  side.  Though 
the  company  is  large,  yet  there  is  room ; 
there  are  many  mansions ; — a place  for 
you;  a place,  I trust,  for  worthless  me. — I 
am,  &c. 


170 


ON  GOSPEL-ILLUMINATION. 


[let.  XXVII. 


LETTER  XXVI. 

On  the  gradual  Increase  of  Gospel-illumi- 
nation. 

dear  sir, — The  day  is  now  breaking : 
ht,\v  beautiful  its  appearance  ! how  welcome 
the  expectation  of  the  approaching  sun  ! It 
is  this  thought  makes  the  dawn  agreeable, 
that  it  is  the  presage  of  a brighter  light ; 
otherwise,  if  we  expect  no  more  day  than 
it  is  this  minute,  we  should  rather  complain 
of  darkness,  than  rejoice  in  the  early  beau- 
ties of  the  morning.  Thus  the  life  of  grace 
is  the  dawn  of  immortality;  beautiful  beyond 
expression,  if  compared  with  the  night  and 
thick  darkness  which  formerly  covered  us, 
yet  faint,  indistinct,  and  unsatisfying,  in 
comparison  of  the  glory  which  shall  be  re- 
vealed. 

It  is,  however,  a sure  earnest.  So  surely 
as  we  now  see  the  light  of  the  Sun  of  righte- 
ousness, so  surely  shall  we  see  the  Sun  him- 
self, Jesus  the  Lord,  in  all  his  glory  and 
lustre.  In  the  mean  time,  we  have  reason 
to  be  thankful  for  a measure  of  light  to  walk 
and  work  by,  and  sufficient  to  show  us  the 
pits  and  snares  by  which  we  might  be  en- 
dangered ; and  we  have  a promise,  that  our 
present  light  shall  grow  stronger  and  stronger, 
if  we  are  diligent  in  the  use  of  the  appointed 
means,  till  the  messenger  of  Jesus  shall  lead 
us  within  the  vail,  and  then  farewell  shades 
and  obscurity  for  ever ! 

I can  now  almost  see  to  write,  and  shall 
soon  put  the  extinguisher  over  my  candle.  I 
do  this  without  the  least  reluctance,  when  I 
enjoy  a better  light ; but  I should  have  been 
unwilling  half  an  hour  ago.  Just  thus,  me- 
thinks,  when  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel 
shines  into  the  heart,  all  our  former  feeble 
lights,  our  apprehensions,  and  our  contrivan- 
ces, become  at  once  unnecessary  and  unno- 
ticed. How  cheerfully  did  the  apostle  put 
out  the  candle  of  his  own  righteousness,  at- 
tainments, and  diligence,  when  the  true  Sun 
arose  upon  him]  Phil.  iii.  7,  8.  Your  last 
letter  is  as  a comment  upon  his  determination. 
Adored  be  the  grace  that  has  given  us  to  be 
like-minded,  even  to  “ account  all  things  but 
loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.” 

While  I am  writing,  a new  lustre,  which 
gilds  the  house  on  the  hill,  opposite  to  my 
study-window,  informs  me  that  the  sun  is  now 
rising:  he  is  rising  to  others,  but  not  yet  to 
me ; my  situation  is  lower,  so  that  they  enjoy 
a few  gleams  of  sunshine  before  me;  yet 
this  momentary  difference  is  inconsiderable, 
when  compared  to  the  duration  of  a whole 
day.  Thus,  some  are  called  by  grace  earlier 
in  life,  and  some  later ; but  the  seeming  dif- 
ference will  be  lost  and  vanish  when  the 
great  day  of  eternity  comes  on.  There  is  a 
time  the  Lord’s  best  appointed  time,  when 


he  will  arise  and  shine  upon  many  a soul 
that  now  sits  “ in  darkness,  and  in  the  region 
of  the  shadow  of  death.” 

I have  been  thinking  on  the  Lord’s  con- 
ference with  Nicodemus : it  is  a copious  sub- 
ject, and  affords  room,  in  one  part  or  other, 
for  the  whole  round  of  doctrinal  or  experi- 
mental topics.  Nicodemus  is  an  encourag- 
ing example  to  those  who  are  seeking  the 
Lord’s  salvation.  He  had  received  some  fa- 
vourable impressions  of  Jesus;  but  he  was 
very  ignorant,  and  much  under  the  fear  of 
man.  He  durst  only  come  by  night;  and  at 
first,  though  he  heard,  he  understood  not; 
but  he,  who  opens  the  eyes  of  the  blind, 
brought  him  surely,  though  gently  forward. 
The  next  time  we  hear  of  him,  he  durst  put 
in  a word  in  behalf  of  Christ,  even  in  the 
midst  of  his  enemies,  John  vii. ; and  at  last, 
he  had  the  courage  openly  and  publicly  to 
assist  in  preparing  the  body  of  his  Master 
for  its  funeral,  at  a time  when  our  Lord’s 
more  avowed  followers  had  all  forsaken  him, 
and  fled.  So  true  is  that,  “ Then  shall  ye 
know,  if  ye  follow  on  to  know  the  Lord ;” 
and  again,  “ He  giveth  power  to  the  faint ; 
and  to  them  that  have  no  might,  he  inereaseth 
strength.” 

Hope  then,  my  soul,  against  hope  : though 
thy  graces  are  faint  and  languid,  he  who 
planted  them,  will  water  his  own  work,  and 
not  suffer  them  wholly  to  die.  He  can  make 
a little  one  as  a thousand ; at  his  presence 
mountains  sink  into  plains,  streams  gush  out 
of  the  flinty  rock,  and  the  wilderness  blos- 
soms as  the  rose.  He  can  pull  down  what 
sin  builds  up,  and  build  up  what  sin  pulls 
down ; that  which  was  impossible  to  us,  is 
easy  to  him,  and  he  has  bid  us  expect  sea- 
sons of  refreshment  from  his  presence. 
Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXVII. 

On  Union  with  Christ. 

dear  sir, — The  union  of  a believer  with 
Christ  is  so  intimate,  so  unalterable,  so  rich 
in  privilege,  so  powerful  in  influence,  that 
it  cannot  be  fully  represented  by  any  de- 
scription or  similitude  taken  from  earthly 
things.  The  mind,  like  the  sight,  is  incapa- 
ble of  apprehending  a great  object,  without 
viewing  it  on  different  sides.  To  help  our 
weakness,  the  nature  of  < his  union  is  illus- 
trated in  the  scriptures,  by  four  comparisons, 
each  throwing  additional  light  on  the  sub- 
ject, yet  all  falling  short  of  the  thing  signi- 
fied. 

In  our  natural  state,  we  are 
xx,  5r£f«®«eo^vo<,  driven  and  tossed  about  by  the 
changing  winds  of  opinion,  and  the  waves  of 
trouble,  which  hourly  disturb  and  threaten 


LET.  XXVIII.] 

us  upon  the  uncertain  sea  of  human  life. 
But  faith,  uniting  us  to  Christ,  fixes  us  upon 
a sure  foundation,  the  Rock  of  Ages,  where 
we  stand  immoveable,  though  storms  and 
floods  unite  their  force  against  us. 

By  nature  we  are  separated  from  the  di- 
vine life,  as  branches  broken  off,  withered 
and  fruitless.  But  grace,  through  faith,  unties 
us  to  Christ  the  living  vine,  from  whom,  as 
the  root  of  all  fulness,  a constant  supply  of 
sap  and  influence  is  derived  into  each  of  his 
mystical  branches,  enabling  them  to  bring 
forth  fruit  unto  God,  and  to  persevere  and 
abound  therein. 

By  nature  we  are  0-™^™.  ***  .^w<rowT*j,  hate- 
ful and  abominable  in  the  sight  of  a holy  God, 
and  full  of  enmity  and  hatred  towards  each 
other.  By  faith  uniting  us  to  Christ,  we 
have  fellowship  with  the  Father  and  the  Son, 
and  join  communion  among  ourselves;  even 
as  the  members  of  the  same  body  have  each 
of  them  union,  communion,  and  sympathy 
with  the  head,  and  with  their  fellow  members. 

In  our  natural  estate,  we  were  cast  out 
naked  and  destitute,  without  pity,  and  with- 
out help,  Ezek.  xvi. ; but  faith  uniting  us  to 
Christ,  interests  us  in  his  righteousness,  his 
riches,  and  his  honours.  Our  Redeemer  is 
our  husband  ; our  debts  are  paid,  our  settle- 
ment secured,  and  our  names  changed. 

Thus  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  declaring  himself 
the  foundation,  root,  head,  and  husband  of 
his  people,  takes  in  all  the  ideas  we  can 
frame  of  an  intimate,  vital,  and  inseparable 
union.  Yet  all  these  fall  short  of  truth ; and 
he  has  given  us  one  farther  similitude,  of 
which  we  can  by  no  means  form  a just  con- 
ception, till  we  shall  be  brought  to  see  him 
as  he  is  in  his  kingdom,  John  xvii.  21.  “ That 
they  all  may  be  one,  as  thou,  Father,  art  in 
me,  and  I in  thee ; that  they  also  may  be  one 
in  us.” 

W ell  may  we  say,  What  hath  God  wrought ! 
How  inviolable  is  the  security,  how  ines- 
timable the  privilege,  how  inexpressible  the 
happiness,  of  a believer  ! How  greatly  is  he 
indebted  to  grace ! He  was  once  afar  off, 
but  he  is  brought  nigh  to  God  by  the  blood 
of  Christ ; he  was  once  a child  of  wrath,  but 
is  now  an  heir  of  everlasting  life.  How 
strong  then  are  his  obligations  to  walk 
worthy  of  God,  who  has  called  him  to  his 
kingdom  and  glory ! — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXVIII. 

Answer  to  the  Question , In  what  Manner 
are  we  to  expect  the  Lord's  promised 
Guidance , to  influence  our  Judgments , 
and  direct  our  Steps  in  the  Path  of  Duty  ? 

DE\R  sir, — It  is  well  for  those  who  are 
duly  sensible  of  their  own  weakness  and  falli- 


171 

bility,  and  of  the  difficulties  with  which  they 
are  surrounded  in  life,  that  the  Lord  has  pro- 
mised to  guide  his  people  with  his  eye,  and 
to  cause  them  to  hear  a word  behind  them, 
saying,  “ This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,” 
when  they  are  in  danger  of  turning  aside 
either  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left.  For 
this  purpose  he  has  given  us  the  written 
word  to  be  a lamp  to  our  feet;  and  en- 
couraged us  to  pray  for  the  teaching  of  his 
Holy  Spirit,  that  we  may  rightly  understand 
and  apply  it.  It  is,  however,  too  often  seen, 
that  many  widely  deviate  from  the  path  of 
duty,  and  commit  gross  and  perplexing  mis- 
takes, while  they  profess  a sincere  desire  to 
know  the  will  of  God,  and  think  they  have 
his  warrant  and  authority.  This  must  cer- 
tainly be  owing  to  misapplication  of  the 
rule  by  which  they  judge,  since  the  rule 
itself  is  infallible,  and  the  promise  sure.  The 
scriptures  cannot  deceive  us,  if  rightly  un- 
derstood ; but  they  may,  if  perverted,  prove 
the  occasion  of  confirming  us  in  a mistake. 
The  Holy  Spirit  cannot  mislead  those  who 
are  under  his  influence ; but  we  may  suppose 
that  we  are  so,  when  we  are  not.  It  may 
not  be  unseasonable  to  offer  a few  thoughts 
upon  a subject  of  great  importance  to  the 
peace  of  our  minds,  and  to  the  honour  of  our 
holy  profession. 

Many  have  been  deceived  as  to  what  they 
ought  to  do,  or  in  forming  a judgment  before- 
hand of  events  in  which  they  are  nearly  con- 
cerned, by  expecting  direction  in  ways  which 
the  Lord  has  not  warranted. — I shall  men- 
tion some  of  the  principal  of  these,  for  it  is 
not  easy  to  enumerate  them  all. 

Some  persons,  when  two  or  more  things 
have  been  in  view,  and  they  could  not  imme- 
diately determine  which  to  prefer,  have  com- 
mitted their  case  to  the  Lord  by  prayer,  and 
have  then  proceeded  to  cast  lots ; taking  it 
for  granted,  that  after  such  a solemn  appeal, 
the  turning  up  of  the  lot  might  be  safely 
rested  in  as  an  answer  from  God.  It  is  true, 
the  scriptures,  and,  indeed,  right  reason  as- 
sures us,  that  the  Lord  disposes  the  lot ; and 
there  are  several  cases  recorded  in  the  Old 
Testament,  in  which  lots  were  used  by  di- 
vine appointment ; but  I think  neither  these, 
nor  the  choosing  Matthias  by  lot  to  the  apos- 
tleship,  are  proper  precedents  for  our  con- 
duct. In  the  division  of  the  land  of  Canaan, 
in  the  affair  of  Achan,  and  in  the  nomination 
of  Saul  to  the  kingdom,  recourse  was  had  to 
lots  by  God’s  express  command.  The  in- 
stance of  Matthias  likewise  was  singular, 
such  as  can  never  happen  again,  namely,  the 
choice  of  an  apostle,  who  would  not  have 
been  upon  a par  with  the  rest,  who  were 
chosen  immediately  by  the  Lord,  unless  He 
had  been  pleased  to  interpose  in  some  ex- 
traordinary way ; and  all  these  were  before 
the  canon  of  scripture  was  completed,  and 
before  the  full  descent  and  communication  of 


IN  WHAT  MANNER,  &c. 


172 


IN  WHAT  MANNER,  &c. 


.he  Holy  Spirit,  who  was  promised  to  dwell 
with  the  church  to  the  end  of  time.  Under  the 
New-Testament  dispensation,  we  are  invited 
to  come  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace,  to 
make  our  request  known  to  the  Lord,  and  to 
cast  our  cares  upon  him : but  we  have  neither 
precept  nor  promise,  respecting  the  use  of 
lots ; and  to  have  recourse  to  them  without 
his  appointment,  seems  to  be  tempting  him 
rather  than  honouring  him,  and  to  savour 
more  of  presumption  than  dependence.  The 
effects  likewise  of  this  expedient,  have  often 
been  unhappy  and  hurtful.  A sufficient 
proof  how  little  it  is  to  be  trusted  to  as  a 
guide  of  our  conduct. 

Others,  when  in  doubt,  have  opened  the 
Bible  at  a venture,  and  expected  to  find 
something  to  direct  them,  in  the  first  verse 
they  should  cast  their  eye  upon.  It  is  no 
small  discredit  to  this  practice,  that  the  hea- 
thens who  knew  not  the  Bible,  used  some  of 
their  favourite  books  in  the  same  way ; and 
grounded  their  persuasions  of  what  they 
ought  to  do,  or  of  what  should  befall  them, 
according  to  the  passage  they  happened  to 
open  upon.  Among  the  Romans,  the  writ- 
ings of  Virgil  w'ere  frequently  consulted 
upon  these  occasions ; which  gave  rise  to  the 
well-known  expression  of  the  Sortes  Virgil- 
iancB.  And  indeed  Virgil  is  as  well  adapted 
to  satisfy  inquirers  in  this  way,  as  the  Bible 
itself ; for  if  people  will  be  governed  by  the 
occurrence  of  a single  text  of  scripture,  with- 
out regarding  the  context,  or  duly  compar- 
ing it  with  the  general  tenor  of  the  word  of 
God,  and  with  their  own  circumstances,  they 
may  commit  the  greatest  extravagances, 
expect  the  greatest  impossibilities,  and  con- 
tradict the  plainest  dictates  of  common  sense, 
while  they  think  they  have  the  word  of  God 
on  their  side.  Can  the  opening  upon  2 Sam- 
uel vii.  3.  when  Nathan  said  unto  David, 
“ Do  all  that  is  in  thine  heart,  for  the  Lord 
is  with  thee,”  be  sufficient  i.o  determine  the 
lawfulness  or  expediency  of  actions]  Or  can 
a glance  of  the  eye  upon  our  Lord’s  words 
to  the  woman  of  Canaan,  Matthew  xv.  23, 

Be  it  unto  thee  even  as  thou  wilt,”  amount 
to  a proof,  that  the  present  earnest  desire  of 
the  mind  (whatever  it  may  be)  shall  be  surely 
accomplished  ! Yet  it  is  certain  that  matters, 
big  with  important  consequences,  have  been 
engaged  in,  and  the  most  sanguine  expecta- 
tions formed,  upon  no  better  warrant  than  dip- 
ping (as  it  is  called)  upon  a text  of  scripture. 

A sudden  strong  impression  of  a text,  that 
seems  to  have  some  resemblance  to  the  con- 
cern upon  the  mind,  has  been  accepted  by 
many  as  an  infallible  token  that  they  were 
right,  and  that  things  would  go  just  as  they 
would  have  them ; or,  on  the  other  hand,  if 
the  passage  bore  a threatening  aspect,  it  has 
filled  them  with  fears  and  disquietudes,  which 
they  have  afterwards  found  were  groundless 
and  unnecessary.  These  impressions,  being 


[let.  XXVIII. 

more  out  of  their  power  than  their  former 
method,  have  been  more  generally  regarded 
and  trusted  to,  but  have  frequently  proved 
no  less  delusive.  It  is  allowed,  that  such 
impressions  of  a precept  or  a promise,  as 
humble,  animate,  or  comfort  the  soul,  by 
giving  it  a lively  sense  of  the  truth  contained 
in  the  words,  are  both  profitable  and  pleasant; 
and  many  of  the  Lord’s  people  have  been 
instructed  and  supported  (especially  in  a 
time  of  trouble)  bv  some  seasonable  word  of 
grace  applied  and  sealed  by  his  Spirit  with 
power  to  their  hearts.  But  if  impressions  oi 
impulses  are  received  as  a voice  from  heaven, 
directing  to  such  particular  actions  as  could 
not  be  proved  to  be  duties  without  them,  a 
person  may  be  unwarily  misled  into  great 
evils,  and  gross  delusions;  and  many  have 
been  so.  There  is  no  doubt  but  the  enemy 
of  our  souls,  if  permitted,  can  furnish  us  with 
scriptures  in  abundance  in  this  way,  and  for 
these  purposes. 

Some  persons  judge  of  the  nature  and 
event  of  their  designs,  by  the  freedom  which 
they  find  in  prayer.  They  say,  they  com- 
mit their  ways  to  God,  seek  his  direction, 
and  are  favoured  with  much  enlargement  of 
spirit : and  therefore  they  cannot  doubt  but 
what  they  have  in  view  is  acceptable  in  the 
Lord’s  sight.  I would  not  absolutely  reject 
every  plea  of  this  kind,  yet  without  other 
corroborating  evidence  I could  not  admit  it 
in  proof  of  what  it  is  brought  for.  It  is  not 
always  easy  to  determine  when  we  have 
spiritual  freedom  in  prayer.  Self  is  deceit- 
ful; and  when  our  hearts  are  much  fixed  and 
bent  upon  a thing,  this  may  put  words  and 
earnestness  into  our  mouths.  Too  often  we 
first  secretly  determine  for  ourselves,  and 
then  come  to  ask  counsel  of  God  ; in  such  a 
disposition  we  are  ready  to  catch  at  every 
thing  that  may  seem  to  favour  our  darling 
scheme : and  the  Lord,  for  the  detection  and 
chastisement  of  our  hypocrisy,  (for  hypocrisy 
it  is,  though  perhaps  hardly  perceptible  to 
ourselves,)  may  answer  us  according  to  our 
idols;  see  Ezek.  xiv.  3, 4.  Besides,  the  grace  oi 
prayer  may  be  in  exercise,  when  the  subject- 
matter  of  the  prayer  may  be  founded  upon  a 
mistake,  from  the  intervention  of  circum- 
stances which  we  are  unacquainted  with. 
Thus,  I may  have  a friend  in  a distant  coun- 
try : I hope  he  is  alive,  I pray  for  him,  and  it  is 
my  duty  so  to  do.  The  Lord,  by  his  Spirit,  as- 
sists his  people  in  what  is  their  present  duty 
If  1 am  enabled  to  pray  with  much  liberty  lor 
my  distant  friend,  it  may  be  a proof  that  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  assist  my  infir- 
mities, but  it  is  no  proof  that  my  friend  is  cer- 
tainly alive  at  the  time  I am  praying  for  him  : 
and  if  the  next  time  I pray  for  him  I should 
find  my  spirit  straitened,  I arn  not  to  con- 
clude that  my  friend  is  dead,  and  therefore 
the  Lord  will  not  assist  me  in  praying  for  him 
any  longer. 


173 


ON  ROM.  VIII.  19,  20,  21. 


LET.  XXIX.] 

Once  more,  a remarkable  dream  has  some- 
times been  thought  as  decisive  as  any  of 
the  foregoing  methods  of  knowing  the  will 
of  God.  That  many  wholesome  and  sea- 
sonable admonitions  have  been  received  in 
dreams,  I willingly  allow ; but  though  they 
may  be  occasionally  noticed,  to  pay  a great 
attention  to  dreams,  especially  to  be  guided 
by  them,  to  form  our  sentiments,  conduct  our 
expectations  upon  them,  is  superstitious  and 
dangerous.  The  promises  are  not  made  to 
those  who  dream,  but  to  those  who  watch. 

Upon  the  whole,  though  the  Lord  may 
give  to  some  persons,  upon  some  occasions, 
a hint  or  encouragement  out  of  the  common 
way,  yet  expressly  to  look  for  and  seek  his 
direction  in  such  things  as  I have  mentioned 
is  unscriptural  and  ensnaring.  I could  fill 
many  sheets  with  a detail  of  the  inconve- 
niences and  evils  which  have  followed  such 
a dependence,  within  the  course  of  my  own 
observation.  I have  seen  some  presuming 
they  were  doing  God’s  service  while  acting 
in  contradiction  to  his  express  commands.  I 
have  known  others,  infatuated  to  believe  a 
lie,  declaring  themselves  assured,  beyond  the 
shadow  of  a doubt,  of  things  which,  after  all, 
never  came  to  pass ; and,  when  at  length 
disappointed,  Satan  has  improved  the  occa- 
sion to  make  them  doubt  of  the  plainest  and 
most  important  truths,  and  to  account  their 
whole  former  experience  a delusion.  By 
these  things  weak  believers  have  been 
stumbled,  cavils  and  offences  against  the 
gospel  multiplied,  and  the  ways  of  truth  evil 
spoken  of. 

But  how,  then,  may  the  Lord’s  guidance 
be  expected!  After  what  has  been  pre- 
mised negatively,  the  question  may  be  an- 
swered in  a few  words.  In  general,  he 
guides  and  directs  his  people  by  affording 
them,  in  answer  to  prayer,  the  light  of  his 
Holy  Spirit,  which  enables  them  to  under- 
stand and  to  love  the  scriptures.  The  word 
of  God  is  not  to  be  used  as  a lottery,  nor  is  it 
designed  to  instruct  us  by  shreds  and  scraps, 
which,  detached  from  their  proper  places, 
have  no  determined  import;  but  it  is  to  fur- 
nish us  with  just  principles,  right  apprehen- 
sions, to  regulate  our  judgments  and  affec- 
tions, and  thereby  to  influence  and  direct 
nur  conduct.  They  who  study  the  scriptures, 
in  an  humble  dependence  upon  divine  teach- 
ing, are  convinced  of  their  own  weakness, 
are  taught  to  make  a true  estimate  of  every 
thing  around  them,  are  gradually  formed  into 
a spirit  of  submission  to  the  will  of  God,  dis- 
cover the  nature  and  duties  of  their  several 
situations  and  relations  in  life,  and  the  snares 
and  temptations  to  which  they  are  exposed. 
The  word  of  God  dwells  richly  in  them,  is  a 
preservative  from  error,  a light  to  their  feet, 
and  a spring  of  strength  and  consolation.  By 
treasuring  up  the  doctrines,  precepts,  pro- 
mises, examples,  and  exhortations  of  scrip- 


ture in  their  minds,  and  daily  comparing 
themselves  with  the  rule  by  which  they  walk, 
they  grow  into  an  habitual  frame  of  spiritual 
wisdom,  and  acquire  a gracious  taste,  which 
enables  them  to  judge  of  right  and  wrong 
with  a degree  of  readiness  and  certainty,  as  a 
musical  ear  judges  of  sounds;  and  they  are 
seldom  mistaken,  because  they  are  influenced 
by  the  love  of  Christ  which  rules  in  their 
hearts,  and  a regard  to  the  glory  of  God,  which 
are  the  great  objects  they  have  in  view. 

In  particular  cases  the  Lord  opens  and 
shuts  for  them,  breaks  down  walls  of  difficulty 
which  obstruct  their  path,  or  hedges  up  their 
way  with  thorns,  when  they  are  in  danger  of 
going  wrong,  by  the  dispensations  of  his  pro- 
vidence. They  know  that  their  concern- 
ments are  in  his  hands;  they  are  willing  to 
follow  whither  and  when  he  leads,  but  are 
afraid  of  going  before  him.  Therefore  they 
are  not  impatient.  Because  they  believe, 
they  will  not  make  haste,  but  wait  daily  upon 
him  in  prayer ; especially  when  they  find  their 
hearts  most  engaged  in  any  purpose  or  pur- 
suit, they  are  most  jealous  of  being  deceived 
by  appearances,  and  dare  not  move  farther  or 
faster  than  they  can  perceive  his  light  shining 
upon  their  paths.  I express  at  least  their 
desire,  if  not  their  attainment:  thus  they 
would  be.  And  though  there  are  seasons 
when  faith  languishes,  and  self  too  much 
prevails,  this  is  their  general  disposition, 
and  the  Lord,  whom  they  serve,  does  not 
disappoint  their  expectations ; he  leads  them 
by  a right  way,  preserves  them  from  a thou- 
sand snares,  and  satisfies  them  that  he  is 
and  will  be  their  guide  even  unto  death. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXIX. 

Thoughts  on  Rom.  viii.  19,  20,  21. 

dear  sir, — The  apostle  evidently  introdu- 
ces this  passage  in  confirmation  of  what  he 
had  said  before,  ver.  17,  19.  The  privileges 
of  the  children  of  God  are  not  only  great,  but 
sure.  Every  thing  we  see  confirms  our  ex- 
pectation of  what  God  has  promised.  The 
whole  frame  of  nature,  in  its  present  state 
of  imperfection,  strongly  pleads  for  a future 
and  better  dispensation,  as  necessary  to  vindi- 
cate the  wisdom,  goodness,  and  justice  of  God ; 
and  this  shall  take  place  when  the  sons  of, 
God  shall  be  manifested,  and  shall  shine  forth 
in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father.  It  would 
be  injurious  to  the  honour  of  God  to  suppose 
that  things  were  at  first  created  in  the  state 
they  arc  now  in,  or  that  they  will  always 
continue  so,  and  therefore  the  creature,  which 
was  originally  designed  to  show  forth  the 
glory  of  God,  is  represented  as  burdened  and 
groaning  till  those  impediments  are  removed 


174 


ON  ROM.  VIII.  19,  20,  21. 


which  prevent  it  from  fully  answering-  its 
proper  end. 

Dr.  Guyse’s  proposal  of  reading  the  20th 
verse  (the  words  in  hope  excepted)  in  a pa- 
renthesis, seems  greatly  to  free  the  sense 
from  embarrassment.  Then  the  proposition 
in  the  19th  and  21st  verses  will  be,  “ The 
earnest  expectation  of  the  creature  waiteth 
in  hope  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of 
God;  because  Men  the  creature  also  shall 
be  delivered  fr«  ■ n the  bondage  of  corruption,” 
&c.  The  20th  verse  expresses  the  creature’s 
present  state,  “ It  is  subject  to  vanity and 
intimates  the  cause,  “ Not  willingly,  but  by 
reason  of  him  who  hath  subjected  the  same.” 

By  the  creature  some  understand  mankind, 
as  the  word  is  used  Mark  xvi.  15 ; and  it  is  cer- 
tain that,  partly  from  imperfect  tradition,  and 
partly  from  a general  rumour  of  the  prophe- 
cies extant  among  the  Jews,  the  heathens  had 
some  confused  apprehension  of  a deliverer 
from  misery ; agreeably  to  which,  or  rather 
on  account  of  their  need  of  a saviour,  whether 
they  knew  it  or  not,  Christ  is  styled  “ the 
desire  of  all  nations.”  But  this  does  not  seem 
to  be  the  sense ; because  the  creature  here 
is  said  to  be  subject  to  vanity,  not  willingly , 
and  is  represented  as  groaning,  travailing, 
and  longing  (ver.  22,)  for  deliverance.  But 
it  is  so  far  from  being  the  concurrent  desire 
of  all  mankind,  or  indeed  the  desire  of  any 
single  person,  to  obtain  freedom  from  the 
bondage  of  sin,  that  we  are  naturally  pleased 
with  it,  and  yield  a willing  subjection.  Be- 
sides, the  period  referred  to  is  beyond  the 
present  life,  and  intends  not  a partial  relief 
here,  but  a full  deliverance  hereafter.  It 
seems,  therefore,  that  creature , in  these 
verses,  and  creation , in  ver.  22,  as  they  are 
both  expressed  by  the  same  word  in  the  Greek, 
are  to  be  taken  in  the  same  sense.  The 
whole  frame  of  this  lower  world,  which  is 
now  subject  to  vanity  on  account  of  the  sin 
of  man,  is  represented  as  longing  and  waiting 
for  deliverance. 

The  word  which  we  render 

“ earnest  expectation,”  is  very  emphatical ; 
it  imports  a raising  up  or  thrusting  forward 
the  head,  as  persons  who  are  in  suspense 
for  the  return  of  a messenger,  or  the  issue 
of  some  interesting  event.  Compare  Judges 
v.  23,  Luke  xxi.  23.  It  occurs  but  once 
more  in  the  New  Testament,  Phil.  i.  20, 
where  the  apostle  is  describing,  in  one  view, 
the  confidence  of  his  hope  and  the  many 
conflicts  and  oppositions  which  were  the 
daily  exercise  of  his  faith. 

Now  it  is  a frequent  beauty  in  the  scrip- 
ture language  to  apply  human  affections  to 
the  inanimate  creation,  and  these  expressions 
are  to  be  taken  in  a figurative  sense,  as  de- 
noting the  importance  and  evidence  of  what 
is  said.  See  Gen.  iv.  11,  Isa.  i.  2,  Luke  xix. 
40.  The  “ earnest  expectation  of  the  crea- 
ture,” therefore,  teaches  us  two  things,  the 


[let.  xxix. 

weight  and  burden  of  the  evils  under  which 
the  world  groans,  and  the  sure  purpose  of 
God  to  restore  all  things  by  Jesus  Christ. 
There  is  a period  approaching  when  all  that 
is  now  rough  and  crooked  shall  be  made  plain 
and  straight.  The  Lord  has  promised  it,  md 
therefore  all  his  works  are  representec  as 
expecting  and  waiting  for  it. 

This  shall  be  at  “ the  manifestation  of  the 
sons  of  God.”  They  are  now  hidden,  un- 
known, unnoticed,  and  misrepresented,  for 
the  most  part.  Their  life  is  in  many  respects 
hidden  from  themselves,  and  their  privileges 
altogether  hidden  from  the  world  ; but  ere 
long  they  will  be  manifested,  their  God  will 
openly  acknowledge  them,  every  cloud  by 
which  they  are  now  obscured  shall  be  re- 
moved, and  they  shall  shine  like  the  sun  in 
the  kingdom  of  their  Father.  They  have 
now  a gracious  liberty-;  they  are  freed  from 
condemnation,  from  the  power  of  sin,  from 
the  law  as  a covenant  of  works,  from  the  yoke 
of  carnal  ordinances,  from  the  traditions  and 
inventions  of  men,  and  from  the  spirit  of  bond- 
age; yet  they  suffer  much  from  indwelling  sin, 
the  temptations  of  Satan,  and  their  situation  in 
a wicked  and  ensnaring  world.  But  they  are 
animated  with  the  hope  of  a glorious  liberty, 
when  every  evil,  imperfection,  and  abatement 
shall  cease,  when  they  shall  be  put  in  the 
full  possession  of  a happiness  answerable  to 
the  riches  of  divine  love,  and  the  efficacy  of 
the  blood  and  mediation  of  Jesus ; and  then 
the  curse  shall  be  fully  removed  from  the 
creation;  the  Lord  shall  create  all  things 
new,  and  again  pronounce  all  things  good. 
When  they  are  thus  manifested,  the  crea- 
ture’s expectation  shall  be  answered ; it  shall 
be  restored  to  its  honour  and  use.  Under 
what  circumstances,  and  to  what  particular 
purposes,  this  change  will  take  place  we 
know  not,  but  a change  worthy  of  divine 
wisdom,  though  beyond  the  limits  of  our 
weak  apprehensions,  we  are  warranted  from 
scripture  to  expect.  It  is  asserted  in  this 
passage,  to  which,  perhaps,  we  may  properly 
add  2 Pet.  iii.  13,  Rev.  xxi.  1.  It  would  be 
easy  to  indulge  in  vain  conjectures  upon  this 
subject,  but  it  is  more  safe  to  restrain  them, 
and  to  content  ourselves  with  what  is  clearly 
revealed.  The  hour  is  coming  when  all  dif- 
ficulties shall  be  explained,  when  the  mys- 
terious plan  of  divine  providence  shall  be 
unfolded,  vindicated,  and  completed ; then  it 
shall  appear  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  head  and  restorer  of  the  creation,  and 
how  fully,  in  every  sense,  he  has  repaired  the 
ruin  brought  into  the  world  by  sin,  and  de- 
stroyed the  works  of  the  devil. 

In  the  meantime,  the  sons  of  God  groan, 
waiting  for  their  adoption,  and  the  creation 
groans  with  them.  At  present  it  is  subject 
to  vanity.  Its  original  design  was  to  fulfil 
the  will,  and  to  set  forth  the  glory  of  God  ; 
but,  by  the  sin  of  man,  it  is  disappointed  wTith 


175 


ON  ROM.  VIII.  19,  20,  21. 


LET.  XXIX.] 

respect  to  these  ends,  not  absolutely,  for  still 
the  heavens  declare  his  glory  and  the  earth 
is  full  of  his  goodness ; but,  with  regard  to 
outward  appearances,  there  is  a great  abate- 
ment in  both  these  respects.  We  may  in- 
stance a few  particulars  in  which  the  crea- 
ture is  abused  and  oppressed  contrary  to  the 
design  of  its  creation. 

The  creature  was  intended  to  show  forth 
the  glory  of  God  : but  here  it  has  been  dis- 
appointed, and  has  groaned,  being  burdened 
in  all  ages.  Vain  man  has  always  been  dis- 
posed to  serve  and  worship  the  creature  more 
than  the  Creator.  The  whole  world  formerly, 
except  the  Jews,  were  sunk  in  idolatry,  pay- 
ing divine  honours  to  the  sun  and  moon,  yea, 
to  stocks  and  stones ; and  a great  part  of  the 
earth  is  to  this  moment  covered  with  the 
same  darkness.  When  this  is  the  case,  the 
creature  groans  under  vanity,  being  pervert- 
ed directly  contrary  to  its  proper  end ; and 
there  is  another  idolatry,  if  not  so  gross,  yet 
in  us  more  inexcusable,  by  which  the  gene- 
rality of  those  who  bear  the  name  of  Chris- 
tians are  no  less  alienated  from  the  knowledge 
and  love  of  the  true  God,  than  the  heathens 
themselves. 

Again,  the  creatures,  as  the  servants  of 
God,  are  properly  designed  to  promote  the 
welfare  of  his  children,  1 Cor.  iii.  22,  Job  v. 
23.  This  great  end  is  indeed  finally  secured 
by  the  promise,  that  all  shall  work  together 
for  their  good ; but  at  present  they  are  ex- 
posed to  great  sufferings ; all  things  seem  to 
come  alike  to  all.  This,  on  the  Lord’s  part, 
is  a wise  and  gracious  appointment  for  the 
exercise  of  faith,  the  mortification  of  sin,  and 
the  advancement  of  sanctification ; but  still, 
in  itself,  it  is  a vanity  under  which  the  crea- 
tion groans.  When  Jesus  was  crucified  in 
person,  the  sun  withdrew  his  light,  rocks 
rent,  and  the  earth  quaked.  There  is  a pro- 
portionable constraint  upon  nature  when  he 
suffers  in  his  members.  Sometimes  this  part 
of  the  vanity  has  been  suspended,  as  in  the 
case  of  Daniel  and  his  companions;  and, 
doubtless,  the  creatures  would  in  general 
reverence  the  Heir  of  glory,  were  not  the 
effects  of  sin  upon  them  continued  for  wise 
reasons.  They  were  subject  to  man,  when 
man  was  subject  to  his  Maker.  At  present 
there  is  an  apparent  inconsistence,  when 
beasts,  and  storms,  and  seas  rage  against 
those  whom  the  Creator  is  pleased  to  fa- 
vour. 

Once  more,  the  creatures  of  God  might  be 
expected  to  engage  in  his  behalf  against  his 
enemies ; but  it  is  subject  to  vanity  here  like- 
wise. The  earth  is  the  Lord’s,  yet  the  chief 
parts  and  possessions  of  it  are  in  the  hands 
of  those  who  hate  him ; yea,  his  enemies 
employ  his  creatures  against  his  own  friends. 
Surely,  if  the  secret  powerful  restraint  of  his 
providence  were  taken  off,  it  would  be  other- 
wise. How  ready  all  the  creatures  are  to 


fight  in  the  Lord’s  cause,  if  he  please  to  em- 
ploy them,  we  may  learn  from  the  history 
of  Egypt,  in  Exodus,  from  the  death  of  Da- 
than  and  Abiram,  and  the  destruction  of 
Sennacherib’s  army.  It  is  therefore  a bond- 
age introduced  by  sin,  and  under  which  they 
groan,  that  they  are  compelled  to  prolong 
the  lives  and  serve  the  occasions  of  ungodly 
sinners. 

The  effect  being  manifest,  that  the  crea- 
ture is  subject  to  vanity,  the  apostle  briefly 
intimates  the  cause:  “Not  willingly.”  The 
creature,  considered  in  itself,  is  not  in 
fault.  All  things  were  created  good  in  the 
beginning,  and  in  themselves  are  good 
still.  Not  the  fault,  but  the  perversion 
and  subjection  of  the  creature,  are  here 
complained  of.  A beauty,  variety,  and 
order  in  the  works  of  God  are  still  discerni- 
ble, sufficient  to  fill  an  attentive  and  enlight- 
ened mind  with  wonder,  love,  and  praise; 
though  it  must  be  allowed,  that  sin  has  not 
only  alienated  our  hearts,  and  disabled  our 
faculties,  so  that  we  cannot  rightly  contem- 
plate God  and  his  works,  but  has  likewise  oc- 
casioned a considerable  alteration  in  the  visi- 
ble state  of  things.  One  instance  is  express- 
ly specified,  Gen.  iii.  16. 

The  positive  cause  is  ascribed  to  “him 
who  has  subjected  the  same.”  These  words 
may  bear  three  different  senses  in  agreement 
with  the  current  doctrine  of  the  scriptures. 
The  prime  author  of  the  mischief  was  Satan. 
Full  of  malice  and  enmity  against  God  and 
his  creatures,  he  attempted  to  bring  evil  into 
this  lower  world,  and  was  permitted  to  suc- 
ceed ; the  Lord  purposing  to  over-rule  it  to 
his  own  glory.  But  for  a season,  the  work 
of  the  devil  has  been  to  introduce  and  main- 
tain a sad  scene  of  vanity  and  misery.  Our 
first  father  Adam  was  the  direct  and  imme- 
diate cause  of  the  entrance  of  sin  and  vanity 
into  the  creation.  He  was  created  upright 
and  all  things  good  about  him ; but  he  list 
ened  to  Satan,  and  sinned,  and  by  his  sin 

Brought  death  into  the  world,  and  all  our  woe ; 

for  we  were  concerned  in  his  transgression, 
as  he  was  our  head,  both  in  nature  and 
law.  But  we  may  refer  the  him  to  God ; and 
this  seems  best  to  suit  the  apostle’s  design 
here.  God,  the  righteous  judge,  subjected 
the  creature  to  vanity,  as  the  just  consequence 
and  desert  of  man’s  disobedience.  But  he 
has  subjected  it  in  hope,  with  a reserve  in 
favour  of  his  own  people,  by  which,  though 
they  are  liable  to  trouble,  they  are  secured 
from  the  penal  desert  of  sin,  and  the  vanity 
of  the  creature  is,  by  his  wisdom,  over-ruled 
to  wise  and  gracious  purposes.  The  earth, 
and  all  in  it,  was  made  for  the  sake  of  man ; 
for  his  sin  it  was  first  cursed,  and  afterwards 
destroyed  by  water ; and  sin  at  last  shall  set 
it  on  fire.  But  God,  who  is  rich  in  mercy, 
appointed  a people  to  himself  out  of  the  fallen 


176 


ON  THE  RIGHT  USE  OF  THE  LAW.  [let.  xxx. 


race.  For  their  sakes,  and  as  a theatre 
whereon  to  display  the  wonders  of  his  provi- 
dence and  grace,  it  was  renewed  after  the 
flood,  and  still  continues,  but  not  in  its  origi- 
nal state  ; there  are  marks  of  the  evil  of  sin, 
and  of  God’s  displeasure  against  it,  wherever 
we  turn  our  eyes.  This  truth  is  witnessed 
to  by  every  thing  without  us,  and  within  us. 
But  there  shall  be  a deliverance  to  those  who 
fear  him ; and  by  his  word  and  Spirit,  he 
teaches  them  to  receive  instruction  and 
benefit  even  from  this  root  of  bitterness. 
Even  now  they  are  the  sons  of  God;  but 
it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  they  will  be 
when  he  shall  appear,  and  be  admired  in  all 
them  that  believe.  Then  they  shall  be  ma- 
nifested, and  then  the  creature  also  shall  be 
delivered  from  the  bondage  of  corruption. 

How  blind,  then,  are  they  who  expect 
happiness  from  the  creature,  which  is  itself 
subject  to  vaiiity,  and  who  are  meanly  con- 
tent with  the  present  state  of  things?  It  is 
because  they  are  estranged  from  God,  have 
no  sense  of  his  excellency,  no  regard  for  his 
glory,  no  knowledge  of  their  own  proper 
good.  They  are  farther  removed  from  the 
desires  they  ought  to  have,  in  their  present 
circumstances,  than  the  brute  creation,  or ; 
the  very  ground  they  walk  on ; for  all  things  ! 
but  man  have  an  instinct,  or  natural  princi- 
ple to  answer  the  end  for  which  they  were 
appointed.  Fire  and  hail,  wind  and  storm, 
fulfil  the  word  of  God,  though  we  poor  mor- 
tals dare  to  disobey  it.  But  if  the  secret 
voice  of  the  whole  creation  desires  the  con- 
summation of  all  things,  surely  they  who 
have  the  light  of  God’s  word  and  Spirit 
will  look  forward,  and  long  for  that  glorious 
day.  Amen,  even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus! — 

I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXX. 

On  the  right  Use  of  the  Law. 

dear  sir, — You  desire  my  thoughts  on 
I Tim.  i.  8.  “ We  know  the  law  is  good  if  a 

man  use  it  lawfully,”  and  I willingly  com- 
ply. I do  not  mean  to  send  you  a sermon  on 
the  text;  yet  a little  attention  to  method 
may  not  be  improper  upon  this  subject,  though 
in  a letter  to  a friend.  Ignorance  of  the  na- 
ture and  design  of  the  law  is  at  the  bottom 
of  most  religious  mistakes.  This  is  the  root ; 
of  self-righteousness,  the  grand  reason  why  ; 
the  gospel  of  Christ  is  no  more  regarded,  and 
the  cause  of  that  uncertainty  and  inconsist- 
ency in  many,  who,  though  they  profess  them- 
selves teachers,  understand  not  what  they 
say,  nor  whereof  they  affirm.  If  we  previ- 
ously state  what  is  meant  by  the  law,  and  by 
what  means  we  know  the  law  to  be  good,  I 
think  it  will,  from  these  premises,  be  easy 


to  conclude  what  it  is  to  use  the  law  law* 
fully. 

The  law,  in  many  passages  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament, signifies  the  whole  revelation  of  the 
will  of  God,  as  in  Psalm  i.  2,  and  xix.  7. 
But  the  law,  in  a strict  sense,  is  contradis- 
tinguished from  the  gospel.  Thus  the  apos- 
tle considers  it  at  large  in  his  epistle  to  the 
Romans  and  Galatians.  I think  it  is  evident, 
that,  in  the  passage  you  have  proposed,  the 
apostle  is  speaking  of  the  law  of  Moses. 
But,  to  have  a clearer  view  of  the  subject,  it 
may  be  proper  to  look  back  to  a more  early 
period. 

The  law  of  God,  then,  in  the  largest  sense, 
is  that  rule,  or  prescribed  course,  which  he 
has  appointed  for  his  creatures,  according  to 
| their  several  natures  and  capacities,  that 
I they  may  answer  the  end  for  which  he  has 
; created  them.  Thus  it  comprehends  the  in- 
animate creation : the  wind  and  storm  fulfil 
his  word,  or  law.  He  hath  appointed  the 
moon  for  seasons ; and  the  sun  knoweth  his 
time  for  going  down,  and  going  forth,  and 
performs  all  his  revolutions  according  to  his 
Maker’s  pleasure.  If  we  could  suppose  the 
son  was  an  intelligent  being,  and  should  re- 
fuse to  shine,  or  should  wander  from  the 
station  in  which  God  had  placed  him,  he 
would  then  be  a transgressor  of  the  law. 
But  there  is  no  such  disorder  in  the  natural 
world.  The  law  of  God  in  this  sense,  or 
what  many  choose  to  call  the  law  of  nature, 
is  no  other  than  the  impression  of  God’s 
power,  whereby  all  things  continue  and  act 
according  to  his  will  from  the  beginning ; for 
“ he  spake,  and  it  was  done ; he  commanded, 
and  it  stood  fast.” 

The  animals,  destitute  of  reason,  are  like- 
wise under  a law  ; that  is,  God  has  given 
them  instincts  according  to  their  several 
kinds,  for  their  support  and  preservation,  tc 
which  they  invariably  conform.  A wisdom 
unspeakably  superior  to  all  the  contrivances 
of  man  disposes  their  concernments,  and  is 
visible  in  the  structure  of  a bird’s  nest,  or 
the  economy  of  a bee-hive.  But  this  wisdom 
is  restrained  within  narrow  limits  ; they  act 
without  any  remote  design,  and  are  incapa- 
ble either  of  good  or  evil  in  a moral  sense. 

When  God  created  man,  he  taught  him 
more  than  the  beasts  of  the  earth,  and  made 
him  wiser  than  the  fowls  of  heaven.  He 
formed  him  for  himself,  breathed  into  him  a 
spirit  immortal  and  incapable  of  dissolution, 
gave  him  a capacity  not  to  be  satisfied  with 
any  creature-good,  endued  him  with  an  un- 
derstanding, will,  and  affections,  which  qual- 
ified him  for  the  knowledge  and  service  of 
his  Maker,  and  a life  of  communion  with 
him.  The  law  of  God,  therefore,  concerning 
man,  is  that  rule  of  disposition  and  conduct 
to  which  a creature  so  constituted  ought  to 
conform ; so  that  the  end  of  his  creation 
might  be  answered  and  the  wisdom  of  Goc 


ON  THE  RIGHT  USE  OF  THE  LAW. 


177 


LET.  XXX.] 

oe  manifested  in  him  and  by  him.  Man’s 
continuance  in  this  regular  and  happy  state 
was  not  necessary  as  it  is  in  the  creatures, 
who,  having  no  rational  faculties,  have  pro- 
perly no  choice,  but  act  under  the  immedi- 
ate agency  of  divine  power.  As  man  was 
capable  of  continuing  in  the  state  in  which  he 
was  created,  so  he  was  capable  of  forsaking 
it.  He  did  so,  and  sinned,  by  eating  the  for- 
bidden fruit.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that 
this  prohibition  was  the  whole  of  the  law  of 
Adam,  so  that  if  he  had  abstained  from  the 
tree  of  knowledge,  he  might,  in  other  re- 
spects, have  done  (as  we  say)  what  he  pleased. 
This  injunction  was  the  test  of  his  obedience ; 
and  while  he  regarded  it,  he  could  have  no 
desire  contrary  to  holiness,  because  his  na- 
ture was  holy.  But  when  he  broke  through 
it,  he  broke  through  the  whole  law,  and 
stood  guilty  of  idolatry,  blasphemy,  rebellion, 
and  murder.  The  divine  light  in  his  soul  was 
extinguished,  the  image  of  God  defaced; 
he  became  like  Satan,  whom  he  had  obeyed, 
and  lost  the  power  to  keep  that  law  which 
was  connected  with  happiness.  Yet,  still 
the  law  remained  in  force  : the  blessed  God 
could  not  lose  his  right  to  that  reverence-, 
love,  and  obedience,  which  must  always  be 
due  to  him  from  his  intelligent  creatures. 
Thus  Adam  became  a transgressor,  and  in- 
curred the  penalty,  death.  But  God,  who  is 
rich  in  mercy,  according  to  his  eternal  pur- 
pose, revealed  the  promise  of  the  seed  of  the 
woman,  and  instituted  sacrifices  as  types  of 
that  atonement  for  sin,  which  He,  in  the  ful- 
ness of  time,  should  accomplish  by  the  sacri- 
fice of  himself. 

Adam,  after  his  fall,  was  no  longer  a pub- 
lic person ; he  was  saved  by  grace  through 
faith ; but  the  depravity  he  had  brought  upon 
human  nature  remained.  His  children,  and 
so  all  his  posterity,  were  born  in  his  sinful 
likeness,  without  either  ability  or  inclina- 
tion to  keep  the  law.  The  earth  was  soon 
filled  with  violence.  But  a few  in  every 
successive  age  were  preserved  by  grace,  and 
faith  in  the  promise.  Abraham  was  favoured 
with  a more  full  and  distinct  revelation  of 
the  covenant  of  grace ; he  saw  the  day  of 
Christ,  and  rejoiced.  In  the  time  of  Moses, 
God  was  pleased  to  set  apart  a peculiar  peo- 
ple to  himself,  and  to  them  he  published  his 
law  with  great  solemnity  at  Sinai.  This 
law  consisted  of  two  distinct  parts,  very  dif- 
ferent in  their  scope  and  design,  though  both 
enjoined  by  the  same  authority. 

The  decalogue,  or  ten  commandments, 
uttered  by  the  voice  of  God  himself,  is  an 
abstract  of  that  original  law  under  which 
man  was  created,  but  published  in  a pro- 
hibitory form;  the  Israelites,  like  the  rest  of 
mankind,  being  depraved  by  sin,  and  strongly 
inclined  to  the  commission  of  every  evil. 
This  law  could  not  be  designed  as  a covenant, 
by  obedience  to  which  man  should  be  justi- 


fied ; for  long  before  its  publication,  the  gos- 
pel had  been  preached  to  Abraham,  Galatians 
iii.  8.  But  the  law  entered  that  sin  might 
abound  ; that  the  extent,  the  evil,  and  the 
desert  of  sin  might  be  known  ; for  it  reaches 
to  the  most  hidden  thoughts  of  the  heart,  re- 
quires absolute  and  perpetual  obedience,  and 
denounces  a curse  upon  all  who  continue  not 
therein. 

To  this  was  superadded  the  ceremonial  or 
levitical  law,  prescribing  a variety  of  institu- 
tions, purifications,  and  sacrifices,  the  obser- 
vance of  which  were,  during  that  dispensa- 
tion, absolutely  necessary  to  the  acceptable 
worship  of  God.  By  obedience  to  these  pre- 
scriptions, the  people  of  Israel  preserved 
their  legal  right  to  the  blessings  promised  tc 
them  as  a nation,  and  which  were  not  con 
fined  to  spiritual  worshippers  only ; and  the} 
were  likewise  ordinances  and  helps  to  leac 
those  who  truly  feared  God,  and  had  con- 
sciencs  of  sin,  to  look  forward,  by  faith,  to  the 
great  sacrifice,  the  Lamb  of  God,  who,  in  the 
fulness  of  time,  was  to  take  away  sin  by  the 
sacrifice  of  himself.  In  both  these  respects, 
the  ceremonial  law  was  abrogated  by  the 
death  of  Christ.  The  Jews  then  ceased  tc 
be  God’s  peculiar  people  ; and  Jesus  having 
expiated  sin,  and  brought  in  an  everlasting 
righteousness,  by  his  obedience  unto  death, 
all  other  sacrifices  became  unnecessary  and 
vain.  The  gospel  supplies  the  place  of  the 
ceremonial  law,  to  the  same  advantage  as 
the  sun  abundantly  compensates  for  the 
twinkling  of  the  stars,  and  the  feeble  glim- 
mering of  the  moon-light,  which  are  con- 
cealed by  its  glory.  Believers  of  old  were 
relieved  from  the  strictness  of  the  moral  law' 
by  the  sacrifices  which  pointed  to  Christ. 
Believers  under  the  gospel  are  relieved  by 
a direct  application  to  the  blood  of  the  cove- 
nant. Both  renounce  any  dependence  on 
the  moral  law  for  justification,  and  both  ac- 
cept it  as  a rule  of  life  in  the  hands  of  the 
Mediator,  and  are  enabled  to  yield  it  a sin- 
cere, though  not  a perfect  obedience. 

If  an  Israelite,  trusting  in  his  obedience 
to  the  moral  law,  had  ventured  to  reject  the 
ordinances  of  the  ceremonial,  he  would  have 
been  cut  off!  In  like  manner,  if  any  who 
are  called  Christians  are  so  well  satisfied  with 
their  moral  duties,  that  they  see  no  neces- 
sity of  making  Christ  their  only  hrpe,  the 
law,  by  which  they  seek  life,  will  oe  to  them 
a ministration  unto  death.  Christ,  and  he 
alone,  delivers  us,  by  faith  in  his  name,  from 
the  curse  of  the  law,  having  been  made  a 
curse  for  us. 

A second  inquiry  is,  How  we  come  to  know 
the  law  to  be  good  1 for  naturally  we  do  not, 
we  cannot  think  so.  We  cannot  be  at  enmity 
with  God,  and  at  the  same  time  approve  of 
his  law  ; rather  this  is  the  ground  of  our  dis- 
like to  him,  that  we  conceive  the  law,  by 
which  we  are  to  be  judged,  is  too  strict  in 


178 


ON  THE  RIGHT  USE  OF  THE  LAW. 


its  precepts,  and  too  severe  in  its  threaten- 
ing^ ; and  therefore  men,  so  far  as  in  them 
lies,  are  for  altering1  this  law.  They  think 
it  would  be  better  if  it  required  no  more  than 
we  can  perform ; if  it  allowed  us  more  liberty ; 
and  especially  if  it  was  not  armed  against 
transgressors  with  the  penalty  of  everlasting 
punishment.  This  is  evident  from  the  usual 
pleas  of  unawakened  sinners.  Some  think, 
44 1 am  not  so  bad  as  some  others by  which 
they  mean,  God  will  surely  make  a differ- 
ence, and  take  favourable  notice  of  what  they 
suppose  good  in  themselves.  Others  plead, 
“ If  I should  not  obtain  mercy,  what  will  be- 
come of  the  greater  part  of  mankind!”  by 
which  they  plainly  intimate,  that  it  would 
be  hard  and  unjust  in  God  to  punish  such 
multitudes.  Others  endeavour  to  extenuate 
their  sins,  as  Jonathan  once  said,  “I  did 
but  taste  a little  honey,  and  I must  die 
“ These  passions  are  natural  to  me,  and 
must  I die  for  indulging  them !”  In  short, 
the  spirituality  and  strictness  of  the  lawr,  its 
severity,  and  its  levelling  effect,  confounding 
all  seeming  differences  in  human  characters, 
and  stopping  every  mouth  without  distinc- 
tion, are  three  properties  of  the  law,  which 
the  natural  man  cannot  allow  to  be  good. 

These  prejudices  against  the  law  can  only 
be  removed  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
It  is  his  office  to  enlighten  and  convince  the 
conscience;  to  communicate  an  impression 
of  the  majesty,  holiness,  justice,  and  au- 
thority of  the  God  with  whom  we  have  to 
do,  whereby  the  evil  and  desert  of  sin  are 
apprehended.  The  sinner  is  then  stript  of 
all  his  vain  pretences,  is  compelled  to  plead 
guilty,  and  must  justify  his  judge  even  though 
he  should  condemn  him.  It  is  his  office  like- 
wise to  discover  the  grace  and  glory  of  the 
Saviour,  as  having  fulfilled  the  law  for  us, 
and  as  engaged,  by  promise,  to  enable  those 
who  believe  in  him  to  honour  it  writh  a due 
obedience  in  their  own  persons.  Then  a 
change  of  judgment  takes  place,  and  the  sin- 
ner consents  to  the  law,  that  it  is  holy,  just, 
and  good.  Then  the  law  is  acknowledged 
to  be  holy ; it  manifests  the  holiness  of  God ; 
and  a conformity  to  it  is  the  perfection  of 
human  nature.  There  can  be  no  excellence 
in  man,  but  so  far  as  he  is  influenced  by  God’s 
law;  without  it,  the  greater  his  natural  pow- 
ers and  abilities  are,  he  is  but  so  much  the 
more  detestable  and  mischievous.  It  is  as- 
sented to  as  just,  springing  from  his  indubit- 
able right  and  authority  over  his  creatures, 
and  suited  to  their  dependence  upon  him, 
and  the  abilities  with  which  he  originally 
endowed  them.  And  though  we,  by  sin, 
have  lost  those  abilities,  his  right  remains 
unalienable ; and  therefore  he  can  justly 
punish  transgressors.  And  as  it  is  just  in 
respect  to  God,  so  it  is  good  for  man ; his 
obedience  to  the  law,  and  the  favour  of  God 
therein,  being  his  proper  happiness;  and  it  is 


[let.  xxx. 

impossible  for  him  to  be  happy  in  any  other 
way.  Only,  as  I have  hinted,  to  sinners 
these  things  must  be  applied  according  to  the 
gospel,  and  to  their  new  relation,  by  faith,  to 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  obeyed  the 
law,  and  made  atonement  for  sin  on  their  be- 
half ; so  that  through  him  they  are  delivered 
from  condemnation,  and  entitled  to  all  the 
benefits  of  his  obedience.  From  him  like- 
wise they  receive  the  law,  as  a rule  enforced 
by  his  own  example,  and  their  unspeakable 
obligations  to  his  redeeming  love.  This 
makes  obedience  pleasing,  and  the  strength 
they  derive  from  him  makes  it  easy. 

We  may  now  proceed  to  inquire,  in  the 
last  place,  What  it  is  to  use  the  law  law- 
fully ! The  expression  implies,  that  it  may 
be  used  unlawfully ; and  it  is  so  by  too  many. 
It  is  not  a lawful  use  of  the  law  too  seek  jus- 
tification and  acceptance  with  God  by  our 
obedience  to  it;  because  it  is  not  appointed  for 
this  end,  or  capable  of  answering  it,  in  our 
circumstances.  The  very  attempt  is  a daring 
impeachment  of  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of 
God ; for  if  righteousness  could  come  by  the 
law,  then  Christ  has  died  in  vain,  Gal.  ii.  21, 
iii.  21 ; so  that  such  a hope  is  not  only  ground- 
less, but  sinful ; and,  when  persisted  in  un- 
der the  light  of  the  gospel,  is  no  less  than  a 
wilful  rejection  of  the  grace  of  God.  Again, 
it  is  an  unlawful  use  of  the  law,  that  is,  an 
abuse  of  it,  an  abuse  both  of  law  and  gospe  , 
to  pretend  that  its  accomplishment  by  Christ 
releases  believers  from  any  obligation  to  it  as 
a rule.  Such  an  assertion  is  not  only  wicked, 
but  absurd  and  impossible  in  the  highest  de- 
gree ; for  the  law  is  founded  in  the  relation 
between  the  Creator  and  the  creature,  and 
must  unavoidably  remain  in  force  so  long  as 
that  relation  subsists.  While  he  is  God,  and 
we  are  creatures,  in  every  possible  or  suppos* 
able  change  of  state  or  circumstances,  he  musl 
have  an  unrivalled  claim  to  our  reverence, 
love,  trust,  service,  and  submission.  No  true 
believer  can  deliberately  admit  a thought  or 
a wish  of  being  released  from  his  obligation 
of  obedience  to  God,  in  whole  or  in  part ; he 
will  rather  start  from  it  with  abhorrence.  But 
Satan  labours  to  drive  unstable  souls  from 
one  extreme  to  the  other,  and  has  too  often 
succeeded.  Wearied  with  vain  endeavours 
to  keep  the  law,  that  they  might  obtain  life 
by  it,  and  afterwards  taking  up  with  a notion 
of  the  gospel  devoid  of  power,  they  have  at 
length  despised  that  obedience  which  is  the 
honour  of  a Christian,  and  essentially  belongs 
to  his  character,  and  have  abused  the  grace 
of  God  to  licentiousness.  But  we  have  not 
so  learned  Christ. 

To  speak  affirmatively,  the  law  is  lawfully 
used  as  a means  of  conviction  of  sin.  For 
this  purpose  it  was  promulgated  at  Sinai. 
The  law,  entered  that  sin  might  abound : not 
to  make  men  more  wicked,  though  occasion- 
ally, and  by  abuse,  it  has  that  effect,  but  to 


ON  LOVE  TO  THE  BRETHREN. 


17S 


LET.  XXXI.] 


make  them  sensible  how  wicked  they  are. 
Having  God’s  law  in  our  hands,  we  are  no 

onger  to  form  our  judgments  by  the  maxims 
and  customs  of  the  world,  where  evil  is  called 
good,  and  good  evil ; but  are  to  try  every 
principle,  temper,  and  practice  by  this  stand- 
ard. Could  men  be  prevailed  upon  to  do 
this,  they  would  soon  listen  to  the  gospel  with 
attention.  On  some  the  spirit  of  God  does 
thus  prevail ; then  they  earnestly  make  the 
jailor’s  inquiry,  “What  must  I do  to  be 
saved  1”  Here  the  work  of  grace  begins; 
and  the  sinner,  condemned  in  his  own  con- 
science, is  brought  to  Jesus  for  life. 

Again,  when  we  use  the  law  as  a glass,  to 
behold  the  glory  of  God,  we  use  it  lawfully. 
His  glory  is  eminently  revealed  in  Christ ; 
but  much  of  it  is  with  a special  reference  to 
the  law,  and  cannot  be  otherwise  discerned. 
We  see  the  perfection  and  excellence  of  the 
aw  in  his  life.  God  was  glorified  by  his  obe- 
dience as  a man.  What  a perfect  character 
did  he  exhibit ! yet  it  is  no  other  than  a tran- 
script of  the  law.  Such  would  have  been  the 
character  of  Adam  and  all  his  race,  had  the 
law  been  duly  obeyed.  It  appears,  therefore, 
a wise  and  holy  institution,  fully  capable  of 
displaying  that  perfection  of  conduct  by  which 
man  would  have  answered  the  end  of  his  crea- 
tion. And  we  see  the  inviolable  strictness  of 
the  law  in  his  death.  There  the  glory  of  God 
in  the  law  is  manifested.  Though  he  was  the 
beloved  Son,  and  had  yielded  personal  obe- 
dience in  the  utmost  perfection,  yet,  when  he 
stood  in  our  place,  to  make  atonement  for 
sin,  he  was  not  spared.  From  what  he  en- 
dured in  Gethsemane  arid  upon  the  cross,  we 
learn  the  meaning  of  that  awful  sentence, 

“ The  soul  that  sinneth  shall  die.” 

Another  lawful  use  of  the  law  is,  to  con- 
sult it  as  a rule  and  pattern,  by  which  to  re- 
gulate our  spirit  and  conversation.  The  grace 
of  God,  received  by  faith,  will  dispose  us  to 
obedience  in  general;  but  through  remaining 
darkness  and  ignorance,  we  are  much  at  a loss 
as  to  particulars.  We  are,  therefore,  sent  to 
the  law,  that  we  may  learn  how  to  walk 
worthy  of  God,  who  has  called  us  to  his  king- 
dom and  glory ; and  every  precept  has  its 
pioper  place  and  use. 

Lastly,  wTe  use  the  law  lawfully  when  we 
improve  it  as  a test  whereby  to  judge  of  the 
exercise  of  grace.  Believers  differ  so  much 
from  what  they  once  were,  and  from  what 
many  still  are,  "that  without  this  right  use  of 
the  law,  comparing  themselves  with  their 
former  selves,  or  with  others,  they  would  be 
prone  to  think  more  highly  of  their  attain- 
ments than  they  ought.  But  when  they  re- 
cur to  this  standard,  they  sink  into  the  dust, 
and  adopt  the  language  of  Job,  “ Behold,  I 
am  vile : I cannot  answer  thee  one  of  a thou- 
sand.” 

From  hence  we  may  collect,  in  brief,  how 
he  law  is  good  to  them  that  use  it  lawfully.  | 


I It  furnishes  them  with  a comprehensive  and 
accurate  view  of  the  will  of  God,  and  the 
path  of  duty.  By  the  study  of  the  law,  they 
acquire  an  habitual  spiritual  taste  of  what  is 
right  or  wrong.  The  exercised  believer,  like 
a skilful  workman,  has  a rule  in  his  hand, 
whereby  he  can  measure  and  determine  with 
certainty , whereas  others  judge  as  it  were  by 
the  eye,  and  can  only  make  a random  guess, 
in  which  they  are  generally  mistaken.  It 
likewise,  by  reminding  them  of  their  defi- 
ciencies and  short-comings,  is  a sanctified 
means  of  making  and  keeping  them  humble ; 
and  it  exceedingly  endears  Jesus,  the  law- 
fulfiller,  to  their  hearts,  and  puts  them  in 
mind  of  their  obligations  to  him,  and  of  their 
absolute  dependence  upon  him  every  mo- 
ment. 

If  these  reflections  should  prove  acceptable 
to  you,  I have  my  desire ; and  I send  them 
to  you  by  the  press,  in  hopes  that  the  Lord 
may  accompany  them  with  his  blessing  to 
others.  The  subject  is  of  great  importance, 
and  were  it  rightly  understood,  might  conduce 
to  settle  some  of  the  angry  controversies 
which  have  been  lately  agitated.  Clearly  to 
understand  the  distinction,  connexion,  and 
harmony  between  the  law  and  the  gospel, 
and  their  mutual  subserviency  to  illustrate 
and  establish  each  other,  is  a singular  privi- 
lege, and  a happy  means  of  preserving  the 
soul  from  being  entang.ed  by  errors  on  the 
right  hand  or  the  left. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXXI. 

On  Love  to  the  Brethren. 

dear  sir, — The  apostle  having  said 
“Marvel  not,  my  brethren,  if  the  world  hate 
you,”  immediately  subjoins,  “We  know  that 
we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because 
we  love  the  brethren.”  By  the  manner  of 
his  expression,  he  sufficiently  intimates,  that 
the  want  of  this  love  is  so  universal,  till  the 
Lord  plants  it  in  the  heart,  that  if  we  possess 
it,  we  may  thereby  be  sure  he  has  given  us 
of  his  Spirit,  and  delivered  us  from  condem- 
nation. But  as  the  heart  is  deceitful,  and 
people  may  be  awfully  mistaken  in  the  judg- 
ment they  form  of  themselves,  we  have  need 
to  be  very  sure  that  we  rightly  understand 
what  it  is  to  love  the  brethren,  before  we 
draw  the  apostle’s  conclusion  from  it,  and 
admit  it  as  an  evidence  in  our  own  favour, 
that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life. 
Let  me  invite  you,  reader,  to  attend  with  me 
a little  to  this  subject. 

There  are  some  counterfeits  of  this  love  to 
the  brethren,  which,  it  is  to  be  feared,  have 
often  been  mistaken  for  it,  and  have  led  peo- 
ple to  think  themselves  something,  when,  in- 
deed, they  were  nothing.  For  instance: — ( 


180 


ON  LOVE  TO  THE  BRETHREN. 


[let.  XXXI. 


There  is  a natural  love  of  the  brethren. 
People  may  sincerely  love  their  relations, 
Friends,  and  benefactors,  who  are  of  the  breth- 
ren, and  yet  be  utter  strangers  to  the  spirit- 
ual love  the  apostle  speaks  of.  So  Orpah  had 
a great  affection  for  Naomi,  though  it  was  not 
strong  enough  to  make  her  willing,  with 
Ruth,  to  leave  her  native  country,  and  her 
idol-gods.  Natural  affection  can  go  no  far- 
ther than  to  a personal  attachment;  and  they 
who  thus  love  the  brethren,  and  upon  no  bet- 
ter ground,  are  often  disgusted  with  those 
things  in  them,  for  which  the  real  brethren 
chiefly  love  one  another. 

There  is  likewise  a love  of  convenience. 
The  Lord’s  people  are  gentle,  peaceable,  bene- 
volent, swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak,  slow  to 
wrath.  They  are  desirous  of  adorning  the 
doctrine  of  God  their  Saviour,  and  approving 
themselves  followers  of  him  who  pleased  not 
himself,  but  spent  his  life  in  doing  good  to 
others.  Upon  this  account  they  who  are  full 
of  themselves,  and  love  to  have  their  own  way, 
rnay  like  their  company,  because  they  find 
more  compliances,  and  less  opposition  from 
them,  than  from  such  as  themselves.  For  a 
while  Laban  loved  Jacob:  he  found  him  dili- 
gent and  trust-worthy,  and  perceived  that  the 
Lord  had  prospered  him  upon  Jacob’s  ac- 
count; but  when  he  saw  that  Jacob  flourish- 
ed, and  apprehended  he  was  likely  to  do 
without  him,  his  love  was  soon  at  an  end ; 
for  it  was  only  founded  in  self-interest. 

A party-love  is  also  common.  The  objects 
of  this  are  those  who  are  of  the  same  senti- 
ment, who  worship  in  the  same  way,  or  are 
attached  to  the  same  minister.  They  who  are 
united  in  such  narrow  and  separate  associa- 
tions, may  express  warm  affections,  without 
giving  any  proof  of  true  Christian  love ; for, 
upon  such  grounds  as  these,  not  only  profes- 
sed Christians,  but  Jews  and  Turks,  may  be 
said  to  love  one  another.  Though  it  must  be 
allowed,  that  believers  being  renewed  but  in 
part,  the  love  which  they  bear  to  the  brethren 
is  too  often  debased  and  allayed  by  a mixture 
of  selfish  affections. 

The  principle  of  true  love  to  the  brethren, 
is  the  love  of  God,  that  love  which  produceth 
obedience,  1 John  v.  2.  “By  this  we  know  that 
we  love  the  children  of  God,  if  we  love  God, 
and  keep  his  commandments.”  When  people 
are  free  to  form  their  connexions  and  friend- 
ships, the  ground  of  their  communion  is  in  a 
sameness  of  inclination.  The  love  spoken  of 
is  spiritual.  The  children  of  God,  who  there- 
fore stand  in  the  relation  of  brethren  to  each 
other,  though  they  have  too  many  unhappy 
differences  in  points  of  smaller  importance, 
agree  in  the  supreme  love  they  bear  to  their 
heavenly  Father,  and  to  Jesus  their  Saviour; 
of  course  they  agree  in  disliking  and  avoiding 
sin,  which  is  contrary  to  the  will  and  com- 
mand of  the  God  whom  they  love  and  wor- 
ship. Upon  these  accounts  they  love  one 


another,  they  are  like-minded ; and  they  live 
in  a world  where  the  bulk  of  mankind  are 
against  them,  hate  no  regard  their  Beloved, 
and  live  in  the  sinful  practices  which  his  grace 
has  taught  them  to  hate.  Their  situation, 
therefore,  increases  their  afiection  to  each 
other.  They  are  washed  by  the  same  blood, 
supplied  by  the  same  grace,  opposed  by  the 
same  enemies,  and  have  the  same  heaven  in 
view ; therefore  they  love  one  another  with 
a pure  heart  fervently. 

The  properties  of  this  love,  where  its  ex- 
ercise is  not  greatly  impeded  by  ignorance 
and  bigotry,  are  such  as  prove  its  heavenly 
original.  It  extends  to  all  who  love  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity,  cannot  be 
confined  within  the  pale  of  a denomination, 
nor  restrained  to  those  with  whom  it  is  more 
immediately  connected.  It  is  gentle,  and 
not  easily  provoked ; hopes  the  best,  makes 
allowances  for  infirmities,  and  is  easily  in- 
treated.  It  is  kind  and  compassionate  ; and 
this,  not  in  words  c-niy,  but  sympathises  with 
the  afflicted,  and  relieves  the  indigent,  ac- 
cording to  its  ability ; and  as  it  primarily  re- 
spects the  image  of  Christ  in  its  objects,  it 
feels  a more  peculiar  attachment  to  those 
whom  it  judges  to  be  the  most  spiritual,  though 
without  undervaluing  or  despising  the  weak- 
est attainments  in  the  true  grace  of  the  gos- 
pel. 

They  are  happy  who  thus  love  the  breth- 
ren. They  have  passed  from  death  unto  life ; 
and  may  plead  this  gracious  disposition, 
though  not  before  the  Lord  as  the  ground  of 
their  hope,  yet  against  Satan,  when  he  would 
tempt  them  to  question  their  right  to  the  pro- 
mises. But  alas ! as  I before  hinted,  the  ex- 
ercise of  this  love,  when  it  really  is  implanted, 
is  greatly  obstructed  through  the  remaining 
depravity  which  cleaves  to  believers.  W e 
cannot  be  too  watchful  against  those  tempers 
which  weaken  the  proper  effects  of  brotherly 
love,  and  thereby  have  a tendency  to  darken 
the  evidence  of  our  having  passed  from  death 
unto  life.  We  live  in  a day,  when  the  love 
of  many  (of  whom  we  would  hope  the  best) 
is,  at  least,  grown  very  cold.  The  effects 
of  a narrow,  suspicious,  a censorious,  and  a 
selfish  spirit,  are  but  too  evident  amongst 
professors  of  the  gospel.  If  I were  to  insist 
at  large  upon  the  offences  of  this  kind  which 
abound  amongst  us,  I should  seem  almost 
reduced  to  the  necessity,  either  of  retract- 
ing what  I have  advanced,  or  of  maintaining, 
that  a great  part  (if  not  the  greatest  part)  of 
those  who  profess  to  know  the  Lord,  are  de- 
ceiving themselves  with  a form  of  godliness, 
being  destitute  of  its  power:  for  though 
they  may  abound  in  knowledge  and  gifts, 
and  have  much  to  say  upon  the  subject  ol 
Christian  experience,  they  appear  to  want 
the  g-eat,  the  inimitable,  the  indispensible 
criterion  of  true  Christianity,  a love  to  the 
brethren;  without  which  all  other  seem- 


ON  CANDOUR. 


isi 


LET.  XXXII.] 

mg  advantages  and  attainments  are  of  no 
avail.  How  is  this  disagreeable  dilemma  to 
be  avoided  1 

I believe  they  who  are  most  under  the  in- 
fluence of  divine  love,  will  join  with  me  in 
lamenting  their  deficiency.  It  is  well  that 
we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace ; 
for  on  whatever  point  we  try  ourselves  by 
the  standard  of  the  sanctuary,  we  shall  find 
reason  to  say,  “ Enter  not  into  judgment  with 
thy  servant,  O Lord.”  There  is  an  amazing 
and  humbling  difference  between  the  con- 
viction we  have  of  the  beauty  and  excellence 
of  divine  truths,  and  our  actual  experience 
of  their  power  ruling  in  our  hearts.  In  our 
happiest  hours,  when  we  are  most  affected 
with  the  love  of  Jesus,  we  feel  our  love  fer- 
vent towards  his  people.  W e wish  it  were 
always  so ; but  we  are  poor,  inconsistent  crea- 
tures, and  find  we  can  do  nothing  as  we 
ought,  but  as  we  are  enabled  by  his  grace. 
But  we  trust  we  do  not  allow  ourselves  in 
what  is  wrong ; and,  notwithstanding  we 
may,  in  particular  instances,  be  misled  by 
ignorance  and  prejudice,  we  do  in  our  hearts 
love  the  brethren,  account  them  the  excel- 
lent of  the  earth,  and  desire  to  have  our  lot 
and  portion  with  them  in  time  and  in  eter- 
nity. We  know  that  the  love  we  bear  them 
is  for  his  sake ; and  when  we  consider  his 
interest  in  them,  and  our  obligations  to  him, 
we  are  ashamed  and  grieved  that  we  love 
them  no  better. 

If  we  could  not  conscientiously  say  thus 
much,  we  should  have  just  reason  to  ques- 
tion our  sincerity,  and  the  safety  of  our  state ; 
for  the  scriptures  cannot  be  broken ; nor  can 
the  grace  of  God  fail  of  producing,  in  some 
degree,  its  proper  fruits.  Our  Saviour,  be- 
fore whom  we  must  shortly  appear  as  our 
judge,  has  made  love  the  characteristic  of 
his  disciples ; and  without  some  evidence 
that  this  is  the  prevailing  disposition  of  our 
hearts,  we  could  find  little  comfort  in  call- 
ing him  God.  Let  not  this  be  accounted 
legality,  as  if  our  dependence  was  upon 
something  in  ourselves.  The  question  is  not 
concerning  the  method  of  acceptance  with 
God,  but  concerning  the  fruits  or  tokens  of 
an  accepted  state.  The  most  eminent  of 
these,  by  our  Lord’s  express  declaration,  is 
brotherly  love.  “ By  this  shall  all  men  know 
that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  love  one  ano- 
ther.” No  words  can  be  plainer ; and  the 
consequence  is  equally  plain,  however  hard 
it  may  bear  upon  many  professors,  that 
though  they  could  speak  with  the  tongues 
of  angels,  had  the  knowledge  of  all  myste- 
ries, a power  of  working  miracles,  and  a 
zeal  prompting  them  to  give  their  bodies  to 
be  burned  in  defence  of  the  truth;  yet  if 
they  love  not  the  brethren,  they  are  but  as 
sounding  brass  or  tinkling  cymbals:  they 
may  make  a great  noise  in  the  church  and 
in  the  world;  they  may  be  wise  and  able 


men,  as  the  words  are  now  frequently  under- 
stood ; they  may  pray  or  preach  with  great 
fluency;  but  in  the  sight  of  God  their  faith 
is  dead,  and  their  religion  is  vain. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXXII. 

On  Candour. 

dear  sir, — I am  with  you  an  admirer  of 
candour;  but  let  us  beware  of  counterfeits. 
True  candour  is  a Christian  grace,  and  will 
grow  in  no  soil  but  a believing  heart.  It  is 
an  eminent  and  amiable  property  of  that  love 
which  beareth,  believeth,  hopeth,  and  en- 
dureth  all  things.  It  forms  the  most  favour- 
able judgment  of  persons  and  characters,  and 
puts  the  kindest  construction  upon  the  con- 
duct of  others  that  it  possibly  can,  consistent 
with  the  love  of  truth.  It  makes  due  allow- 
ances for  the  infirmities  of  human  nature, 
will  not  listen  with  pleasure  to  wha„  is  said 
to  the  disadvantage  of  any,  nor  repeat  it 
without  a justifiable  cause.  It  will  not  be 
confined  within  the  walls  of  a party,  nor  re- 
strain the  actings  of  benevolence  to  those 
whom  it  fully  approves;  but  prompts  the 
mind  to  an  imitation  of  Him  who  is  kind  to 
the  evil  and  the  unthankful,  and  has  taught 
us  to  consider  every  person  we  see  as  our 
neighbour. 

Such  is  the  candour  which  I wish  to  de- 
rive from  the  gospel : and  I am  persuaded, 
they  who  have  imbibed  most  of  this  spirit, 
will  acknowledge  that  they  are  still  defec- 
tive in  it.  There  is  an  unhappy  propensity, 
even  in  good  men,  to  a selfish,  narrow,  cen- 
sorious turn  of  mind ; and  the  best  are  more 
under  the  power  of  prejudice  than  they  are 
aware.  A want  of  candour  among  the  pro- 
fessors of  the  same  gospel,  is  too  visible  in 
the  present  day.  A truly  candid  person  will 
acknowledge  what  is  right  and  excellent  in 
those  from  whom  he  may  be  obliged  to  dif- 
fer ; he  will  not  charge  the  faults  or  extrava- 
gances of  a few  upon  a whole  party  or  de- 
nomination. If  he  thinks  it  his  duty  to  point 
out  or  refute  the  errors  of  any  persons,  he 
will  not  impute  to  them  such  consequences 
of  their  tenets  as  they  expressly  disavow ; 
he  will  not  wilfully  misrepresent  or  aggra- 
vate their  mistakes,  or  make  them  offenders 
for  a word  : he  will  keep  in  view  the  distinc- 
tion between  those  things  which  are  funda- 
mental and  essential  to  the  Christian  life,  and 
those  concerning  which  a difference  of  senti- 
ment may,  and  often  has,  obtained  among 
true  believers.  Were  there  more  candour 
among  those  who  profess  to  love  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity,  the  emotions  of 
anger  or  scorn  would  not  be  so  often  felt  or 
excited,  by  pronouncing  or  hearing  the  words, 
churchman,  or  dissenter,  or  Calvinist,  or  even 


182 


ON  CANDOUR. 


Arminian.  Let  us,  my  friend,  be  candid ; let 
us  remember  how  totally  ignorant  we  our- 
selves once  were,  how  often  we  have  changed 
our  sentiments  in  one  particular  or  other, 
since  we  first  engaged  in  the  search  of  truth ; 
how  often  we  have  be en^m posed  upon  by 
appearances  ; and  to  how  many  different  per- 
sons and  occurrences  we  have  been  indebted, 
under  God,  for  the  knowledge  which  we 
have  already  attained.  Let  us  likewise  con- 
sider what  treatment  we  like  to  meet  with 
from  others ; and  do  unto  them  a s we  would 
they  should  do  unto  us.  These  considera- 
tions will  make  the  exercise  of  candour  ha- 
bitual and  easy. 

But  there  is  a candour,  falsely  so  called, 
which  springs  from  an  indifference  to  the 
truth,  and  is  governed  by  the  fear  of  men 
and  the  love  of  praise.  This  pretended  can- 
dour depreciates  the  most  important  doc- 
trines of  the  gospel,  and  treats  them  as  points 
of  speculation  and  opinion.  It  is  a tempo- 
rizing expedient  to  stand  fair  with  the  world, 
and  to  avoid  that  odium  which  is  the  un- 
avoidable consequence  of  a steadfast,  open, 
and  hearty  adherence  to  the  truth  as  it  is  in 
Jesus.  It  aims  to  establish  an  intercommu- 
nity between  light  and  darkness,  Christ  and 
Belial;  and,  under  a pretence  of  avoiding 
harsh  and  uncharitable  judgments,  it  intro- 
duces a mutual  connivance  in  principles  and 
practices,  which  are  already  expressly  con- 
demned by  clear  decisions  of  scripture.  Let 
us  not  listen  to  the  advocates  for  a candour 
of  this  sort;  such  a lukewarm  temper  in 
those,  who  would  be  thought  the  friends  of 
the  gospel,  is  treason  against  God  and  trea- 
chery to  the  souls  of  men.  It  is  observable 
that  they  who  boast  most  of  this  candour, 
and  pretend  to  the  most  enlarged  and  liberal 
way  of  thinking,  are  generally  agreed  to  ex- 
clude from  their  comprehension  all  whom 
they  call  bigots;  that  is,  in  other  words, 
those  who,  having  been  led  by  divine  grace 
to  build  their  hopes  upon  the  foundation 
which  God  has  laid  in  Zion,  are  free  to  de- 
clare their  conviction  that  other  foundation 
can  no  man  lay ; and  who,  having  seen  that 
the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with 
God,  dare  no  longer  conform  to  its  leading 
maxims  or  customs,  nor  express  a favoura- 
ble judgment  of  the  state  or  conduct  of  those 
who  do.  Candour  itself  knows  not  how  to 
be  candid  to  these  : their  singularity  and  im- 
portunity are  offensive ; and  it  is  thought  no 
way  inconsistent  with  the  specious  boast  of 
benevolence  and  moderation  to  oppose,  hate, 
and  revile  them.  A sufficient  proof  that  the 
candour  which  many  plead  for  is  only  a softer 
name  for  that  spirit  of  the  world  which  op- 
poses itself  to  the  truth  and  obedience  of  the 

II  person  be  an  avowed  Socinian  or  deist, 
l am  still  to  treat  him  with  candour  ; he  has 
a right  from  me,  so  far  as  he  comes  in  my 


[let.  xxxii. 

way,  to  all  the  kind  offices  of  humanity.  I 
am  not  to  hate,  reproach,  or  affront  him,  or 
to  detract  from  what  may  be  valuable  in  his 
character,  considered  as  a member  of  society. 
I may  avail  myself  of  his  talents  and  abili- 
ties in  points  where  I am  not  in  danger  cf 
being  misled  by  him.  He  may  be  a good 
; lawyer,  or  historian,  or  physician ; and  I am 
not  to  lessen  him  in  these  respects  because 
I cannot  commend  him  as  a divine.  1 am 
bound  to  pity  his  errors,  and  to  pray  if  per- 
! adventure  God  will  give  him  repentance  to 
! the  acknowledgment  of  the  truth ; and,  if  I 
| have  a call  to  converse  with  him,  I should 
j speak  with  all  gentleness  and  meekness,  re- 
; membering  that  grace  alone  has  made  me  to 
differ.  But  I am  not  to  compliment  him,  to 
| insinuate,  or  even  to  admit,  that  there  can  be 
( any  safety  in  his  principles.  Far  he  that  can- 
! dour  from  us,  which  represents  the  scriptures 
1 as  a nose  of  wax,  so  that  a person  may  reject 
J or  elude  the  testimonies  there  given  to  the 
| deity  and  atonement  of  Christ,  and  the  all-pow- 
| erful  agency  ofthe  Holy  Spirit,  with  impunity. 

On  the  other  hand,  they  who  hold  the  Head, 
I who  have  received  the  record  which  God  hath 
| given  of  his  Son ; who  have  scriptural  views 
! of  sin  and  grace,  and  fix  their  hopes  for  time 
and  eternity  upon  the  Saviour;  in  a word,  all 
who  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity ; 
— these,  I apprehend,  if  they  are  prevented 
from  receiving,  acknowledging,  and  loving 
each  other,  as  he  has  received,  owned,  and 
loved  them,  are  justly  chargeable  with  a want 
of  candour.  Shall  I be  cold  to  those  whom 
Jesus  loves!  Shall  I refuse  them  whom  he 
has  accepted!  I find,  perhaps,  that  they  can- 
not rightly  understand,  and  therefore  cannot 
readily  embrace,  some  points  of  doctrine  in 
which  the  Lord  has  been  pleased  to  enlighten 
me ; that  is,  I (supposing  my  knowledge  to 
be  real  and  experimental)  have  received  five 
I talents,  and  they  have  as  yet  obtained  but 
| two : must  I for  this  estrange  myself  from 
I them!  Rather  let  me  be  careful,  lest  they  be 
i found  more  faithful  and  exemplary  in  the 
improvement  of  two  talents,  than  I am  in  the 
management  of  five.  Again,  why  should  some 
of  those  who  know,  or  might  know,  that  my 
j hope,  my  way,  my  end,  and  my  enemies  are 
the  same  with  theirs,  stand  aloof  from  me,  and 
I treat  me  with  coldness  and  suspicion  because 
! I am  called  a Calvinist ! I was  not  born  a 
Calvinist,  and  possibly  they  may  not  die  as 
they  are.  However  that  may  be,  if  our  hearts 
are  fixed  upon  the  same  Jesus,  we  shall  be 
perfectly  of  one  mind  ere  long:  why  should 
we  not  encourage  and  strengthen  one  another 
now ! O that  the  arm  of  the  Lord  might  be 
revealed,  to  revive  that  candour  which  the 
j apostle  so  strongly  enforces  both  by  precept 
j and  example ! Then  the  strong  would  bear 
I the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  and  believers 
1 would  receive  each  other  without  doubtful 
i disputation. 


183 


let.  xxxin.]  (1.)  ON  MAN  IN  HIS  FALLEN  ESTATE. 


Once  more,  however  sound  and  orthodox 
(as  the  phrase  is)  professors  may  be  in  their 
principles,  though  true  candour  will  make 
tender  allowances  for  the  frailty  of  nature 
and  the  power  of  temptation,  yet  neither  can- 
dour nor  charity  will  require  us  to  accept  them 
as  real  believers,  unless  the  general  strain 
and  tenor  of  their  deportment  be  as  becometh 
the  gospel  of  Christ.  It  is  to  be  lamented  that 
too  many  judge  rather  by  the  notions  which 
people  express  than  by  the  fruits  which  they 
produce ; and,  as  they  judge  of  others,  so  they 
often  judge  of  themselves.  We  cannot  have 
opportunity  to  say  all  we  could  wish,  and  to 
all  to  whom  we  would  wish  to  say  it,  upon 
this  subject,  in  private  life ; therefore  it  is 
the  wisdom  and  duty  of  those  who  preach, 
and  of  those  who  print,  to  drop  a word  of  cau- 
tion in  the  way  of  their  hearers  and  readers, 
that  they  may  not  mistake  notion  for  life,  nor 
a form  of  godliness  for  the  power.  The  grace 
of  God  is  an  operative  principle,  and,  where 
it  really  has  place  in  the  heart,  the  effects  will 
be  seen,  (Acts  xi.  23;)  effects  so  uniform  and 
extensive  that  the  apostle  James  makes  one 
single  branch  of  conduct,  and  that  such  a one 
as  is  not  usually  thought  the  most  important, 
a sufficient  test  of  our  state  before  God ; for  he 
affirms  universally,  that  if  any  man  seem  to 
be  religious,  and  “ bridleth  not  his  tongue, 
his  religion  is  vain and  again  he  assures  us, 
that  “ whoever  will  be  a friend  of  the  world  is 
the  enemy  of  God and  to  the  same  purpose, 
Paul  expresses  himself  on  the  subject  of  love 
(that  love  which  he  describes  so  accurately 
that  none  can  mistake  it  unless  they  willingly 
deceive  themselves,)  he  declares  that,  without 
this  love,  the  brightest  knowledge,  the  warm- 
est zeal,  and  the  most  splendid  gifts,  are  no- 
thing worth.  It  is  to  be  feared  these  deci- 
sions will  bear  hard  upon  many  who  have  a 
name  to  live  among  the  churches  of  Christ. 
They  are  hearers  and  approvers  of  the  gos- 
pel, and  express  a regard  for  those  who  preach 
it : they  will  stickle  and  fight  for  the  doc- 
trines, and  know  not  how  to  bear  those  who 
fall  a hair’s  breadth  short  of  their  standard, 
and  yet  there  is  so  much  levity  or  pride,  cen- 
soriousness or  worldliness,  discoverable  in 
their  general  behaviour,  that  their  characters 
appear  very  dubious;  and,  though  we  are 
bound  to  wish  them  well,  candour  will  not 
oblige  or  warrant  us  to  judge  favourably  of 
such  conduct;  for  the  unerring  word  of  God 
is  the  standard  to  which  our  judgments  are 
to  be  referred  and  conformed. 

In  the  sense,  and  under  the  limitations 
which  I have  expressed,  we  ought  to  cultivate 
a candid  spirit,  and  learn  from  the  experience 
of  our  own  weakness  to  be  gentle  and  tender 
to  others,  avoiding,  at  the  same  time,  that  in- 
difference and  cowardice  which,  under  the 
name  of  candour,  countenances  error,  extenu- 
ates sin,  and  derogates  from  the  authority 
of  sc  fipture. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXXIII. 

(1.)  On  Man  in  his  Fallen  Estate. 

“ Lord  what  is  Man !” 

dear  sir, — We  hear  mmch  in  the  present 
day  of  the  dignity  of  human  nature,  and  it  ia 
allowed  that  man  was  an  excellent  creature 
as  he  came  out  of  the  hands  of  God  ; but,  if 
we  consider  this  question  with  a view  tc 
fallen  man  as  depraved  by  sin,  how  can  we 
but  join  with  the  psalmist  in  wonder  that 
the  great  God  should  make  any  account  of 
him. 

Fallen  as  man  is  from  his  original  state  of 
happiness  and  holiness,  his  natural  faculties 
and  abilities  afford  sufficient  evidence  that  the 
hand  which  made  him  is  divine.  He  is  ca- 
pable of  great  things : his  understanding,  will, 
affections,  imagination,  and  memory  are  noble 
and  amazing  powers.  But  view  him  in  a mo- 
ral light,  as  an  intelligent  being,  incessantly 
dependent  upon  God,  accountable  to  him,  and 
appointed  by  him  to  a state  of  existence  in  an 
unchangeable  world.  Considered  in  this  re- 
lation, man  is  a monster,  a vile,  base,  stupid, 
obstinate,  and  mischievous  creature:  no  words 
can  fully  describe  him.  Man,  with  all  his 
boasted  understanding  and  attainments  is  a 
fool.  So  long  as  he  is  destitute  of  the  saving 
grace  of  God,  his  conduct,  as  to  his  most  im- 
portant concernments,  is  more  absurd  and 
inconsistent  than  that  of  the  meanest  idiot ; 
with  respect  to  his  affections  and  pursuits, 
he  is  degraded  far  below  the  beasts ; and. 
for  the  malignity  and  wickedness  of  his  will, 
can  be  compared  to  nothing  so  properly  as 
the  devil. 

The  question  here  is  not  concerning  this  or 
that  man,  a Nero  or  a Heliogabulus,  but  con- 
cerning human  nature,  the  whole  race  of  man- 
kind, the  few  excepted  who  are  born  of  God. 
There  is  indeed  a difference  among  men,  but 
it  is  owing  to  the  restraints  of  divine  provi- 
dence, without  which  earth  would  be  the  very 
image  of  hell.  A wolf  or  a lion,  while  chained, 
cannot  do  so  much  mischief  as  if  they  were 
loose ; but  the  nature  is  the  same  in  the  whole 
species.  Education  and  interest,  fear  and 
shame,  human  laws,  and  the  secret  power  of 
God  over  the  mind,  combine  to  form  many 
characters,  that  are  externally  decent  and  re- 
spectable ; and  even  the  most  abandoned  are 
under  a restraint  which  prevents  them  from 
manifesting  a thousandth  part  of  the  wicked- 
ness which  is  in  their  hearts ; but  the  heart 
itself  is  universally  deceitful  and  desperately 
wicked. 

Man  is  a fool. — He  can,  indeed,  measure  the 
earth,  and  almost  count  the  stars  : he  abounds 
in  arts  and  inventions,  in  science  and  policy  ; 
and  shall  he  then  be  called  a fool  ? The 
ancient  heathens,  the  inhabitants  of  Egypt, 
Greece,  and  Rome,  were  eminent  for  this  kinu 
of  wisdom.  They  are  to  this  day  studied  as 


(1.)  ON  MAN  IN  HIS  FALLEN  ESTATE.  [let.  xxxiii. 


itt-i 

models  by  those  who  aim  to  excel  in  history, 
poetry,  painting,  architecture,  and  other  ex- 
ertions of  human  genius,  which  are  suited  to 
polish  the  manners  without  improving  the 
heart ; but  their  most  admired  philosophers, 
legislators,  logicians,  orators,  and  artists,  were 
as  destitute,  as  infants  or  idiots,  of  that  know- 
ledge which  alone  deserves  the  name  of  true 
wisdom.  Professing  themselves  to  be  wise, 
they  became  fools.  Ignorant  and  regardless 
of  God,  yet  conscious  of  their  weakness  and 
of  their  dependence  upon  a power  above  their 
own,  and  stimulated  by  an  inward  principle 
of  fear,  of  which  they  knew  neither  the  ori- 
gin nor  right  application,  they  worshipped 
the  creature  instead  of  the  Creator;  yea, 
placed  their  trust  in  stocks  and  stones,  in  the 
work  of  men’s  hands,  in  nonentities  and  chi- 
meras. An  acquaintance  with  their  mytho- 
logy, or  system  of  religious  fables,  passes  with 
us  for  a considerable  branch  of  learning,  be- 
cause it  is  drawn  from  ancient  books  written 
in  languages  not  known  to  the  vulgar ; but, 
in  point  of  certainty  or  truth,  we  might  re- 
ceive as  much  satisfaction  from  a collection  of 
dreams,  or  from  the  ravings  of  lunatics.  If, 
therefore,  we  admit  these  admired  sages  as  a 
tolerable  specimen  of  mankind,  must  we  not 
confess  that  man  in  his  best  estate,  while  un- 
instructed by  the  Spirit  of  God,  is  a fool  1 
But  are  we  wiser  than  they  1 Not  in  the 
least,  till  the  grace  of  God  makes  us  so.  Our 
superior  advantages  only  show  our  folly  in  a 
more  striking  light.  Why  do  we  account  any 
persons  foolish  1 A fool  has  no  sound  judg- 
ment: he  is  governed  wholly  by  appearances, 
and  would  prefer  a tine  coat  to  the  writings 
of  a large  estate : he  pays  no  regard  to  con- 
sequences. Fools  have  sometimes  hurt  or 
killed  their  best  friends,  and  thought  that  they 
did  no  harm.  A fool  cannot  reason,  there- 
fore arguments  are  lost  upon  him.  At  one 
time,  if  tied  with  a straw,  he  dares  not  stir ; 
at  another  time,  perhaps,  he  can  hardly  be 
persuaded  to  move,  though  the  house  were  on 
fire.  Are  these  the  characteristics  of  a fool? 
Then  there  is  no  fool  like  the  sinner,  who 
prefers  the  toys  of  earth  to  the  happiness  of 
heaven ; who.  is  held  in  bondage  by  the  fool- 
ish customs  of  the  world,  and  is  more  afraid 
of  the  breath  of  man  than  of  the  wrath  of 
God. 

Again,  man  in  his  natural  state  is  a beast, 
yea,  below  the  beasts  that  perish.  In  two 
things  he  strongly  resembles  them ; in  looking 
no  higher  than  to  sensual  gratifications,  and 
in  that  selfishness  of  spirit  which  prompts  him 
to  propose  himself  and  his  own  interest  as  his 
proper  and  highest  end.  But  in  many  re- 
spects he  sinks  sadly  beneath  them.  Unna- 
tural lusts,  and  the  want  of  natural  affection 
towards  their  offspring,  are  abominations  not 
to  be  found  among  the  brute  creation.  What 
shall  we  say  of  mothers  destroying  their 
children  with  their  own  hands,  or  of  the  hor- 


rid act  of  self-murder ! Men  are  worse  than 
beasts,  likewise,  in  their  obstinacy ; they  will 
not  be  warned.  If  a beast  escapes  from  a 
trap,  he  will  be  cautious  how  he  goes  neai 
it  again,  and  in  vain  is  the  net  spread  in  the 
sight  of  any  bird : but  man,  though  he  be  of- 
ten reproved,  hardens  his  neck ; he  rushes 
upon  his  ruin  with  his  eyes  open,  and  can 
defy  God  to  his  face,  and  dare  damnation. 

Once  more,  let  us  observe  how  man  re- 
sembles the  devil.  There  are  spiritual  sins, 
and  from  these  in  their  height  the  scriptures 
teach  us  to  judge  of  Satan’s  character.  Every 
feature  in  this  description  is  strong  in  man  ; 
so  that  what  our  Lord  said  to  the  Jews  is  of 
general  application,  “ Ye  are  of  your  father 
the  devil,  and  the  lust  of  your  father  that  you 
will  do.”  Man  resembles  Satan  in  pride. 
This  stupid  wicked  creature  values  himself 
upon  his  wisdom,  power,  and  virtue,  and  will 
talk  of  being  saved  by  his  good  works ; though, 
if  he  can,  Satan  himself  need  not  despair 
He  resembles  him  in  malice ; and  this  diabo- 
lical disposition  often  proceeds  to  murder, 
and  would  daily,  if  the  Lord  did  not  restrain 
it.  He  derives  from  Satan  the  hateful  spirit 
of  envy : he  is  often  tormented  beyond  ex- 
pression, by  beholding  the  prosperity  of  his 
neighbours;  and  proportionably  pleased  with 
their  calamities,  though  he  gains  no  other 
advantage  from  them  than  the  gratification 
of  this  rancorous  principle.  Fie  bears  the 
image  likewise  of  Satan  in  his  cruelty.  This 
evil  is  bound  up  in  the  heart  even  of  a child. 
A disposition  to  take  pleasure  in  giving  pain 
to  others  appears  very  early.  Children,  if 
left  to  themselves,  soon  feel  a gratification  in 
torturing  insects  and  animals.  What  misery 
does  the  wanton  cruelty  of  men  inflict  upon 
cocks,  dogs,  bulls,  bears,  and  other  creatures, 
which,  they  seem  to  think,  were  formed  for 
no  other  end  than  to  feast  their  savage  spirits 
with  their  torments ! If  we  form  our  judg- 
ment of  men,  when  they  seem  most  pleased, 
and  have  neither  anger  nor  resentment  to 
plead  in  their  excuse,  it  is  too  evident,  even 
from  the  nature  of  their  amusements,  whose 
they  are,  and  whom  they  serve ; and  they  are 
the  worst  of  enemies  to  each  other.  Think 
of  the  horrors  of  war,  the  rage  of  duellists, 
of  the  murders  and  assassinations  with  which 
the  world  is  filled,  and  then  say,  “ Lord, 
what  is  man!”  Farther,  if  deceit  and 
treachery  belong  to  Satan’s  character,  then 
surely  man  resembles  him.  Is  not  the  uni- 
versal observation  and  complaint  of  all  ages 
an  affecting  comment  upon  the  prophet’s 
words,  “Trust  jTe  not  in  a friend,  put  not 
confidence  in  a guide,  keep  the  doors  of  thy 
j mouth  from  her  that  lieth  in  thy  bosom,  for 
i they  hunt  every  man  his  brother  with  a net!” 
| How  many  have  at  this  moment  cause  to  say 
! with  David,  “ The  words  of  his  mouth  were 
! smoother  than  butter,  but  war  was  in  his 
I heart : his  words  were  softer  than  oil,  yet 


185 


(2.)  ON  MAN  IN  HIS  FALLEN  ESTATE. 


LET.  XXXIV.] 

were  they  drawn  swords!”  Again,  like 
Satan,  men  are  eager  in  tempting  others  to 
sin.  Not  content  to  damn  themselves,  they 
employ  all  their  arts  and  influence  to  draw 
as  many  as  they  can  with  them  into  the  same 
destruction.  Lastly,  in  direct  opposition  to 
God  and  goodness,  in  contemptuous  enmity 
to  the  gospel  of  his  grace,  and  a bitter  per- 
secuting spirit  against  those  who  profess  it, 
Satan  himself  can  hardly  exceed  them. 
Herein,  indeed,  they  are  his  agents  and  will- 
ing servants ; and  because  the  blessed  God 
is  himself  out  of  their  reach,  they  labour  to 
show  their  despite  to  him  in  the  persons  of 
his  people. 

I have  drawn  but  a sketch,  a few  outlines, 
of  the  picture  of  fallen  man.  To  give  an 
exact  copy  of  him,  to  charge  every  feature 
with  its  full  aggravation  of  horror,  and  to 
paint  him  as  he  is,  would  be  impossible. 
Enough  has  been  observed  to  illustrate  the 
propriety  of  the  exclamation,  “ Lord,  what 
is  man !”  Perhaps  some  of  my  readers  may 
attempt  to  deny  or  extenuate  the  charge, 
and  may  plead  that  I have  not  been  describ- 
ing mankind,  but  some  of  the  most  abandoned 
of  the  species,  who  hardly  deserve  the  name 
of  men.  But  I have  already  provided  against 
this  exception.  It  is  human  nature  I de- 
scribe ; and  the  vilest  and  most  profligate  in- 
dividuals cannot  sin  beyond  the  powers  and 
limits  of  that  nature  which  they  possess  in 
common  with  the  more  mild  and  moderate. 
Though  there  may  be  a difference  in  the 
fruitfulness  of  trees,  yet  the  production  of 
one  apple  decides  the  nature  of  the  tree  upon 
which  it  grew,  as  certainly  as  if  it  had  pro- 
duced a thousand;  so  in  the  present  case, 
should  it  be  allowed  that  these  enormities 
cannot  be  found  in  all  persons,  it'  would  be  a 
sufficient  confirmation  of  what  I have  ad- 
vanced, if  they  can  be  found  in  any ; unless 
it  could  be  likewise  proved,  that  those  who 
appeared  more  wicked  than  others  were  of 
a different  species  from  the  rest.  But  I need 
not  make  this  concession ; they  must  be  in- 
sensible indeed,  who  do  not  feel  something 
within  them  so  very  contrary  to  our  common 
notions  of  goodness,  as  would  perhaps  make 
them  rather  submit  to  be  banished  from  hu- 
man society,  than  to  be  compelled  bona  fide 
to  disclose  to  their  fellow-creatures  every 
thought  and  desire  which  arises  in  their 
nearts. 

Many  useful  reflections  may  be  drawn 
frcm  this  unpleasing  subject.  We  cannot 
at  present  conceive  how  much  we  owe  to 
the  guardian  care  of  divine  providence,  that 
any  of  us  are  preserved  in  peace  and  safety 
lor  a single  day,  in  such  a world  as  this 
Live  where  we  will,  we  have  those  near  us, 
who,  both  by  nature,  and  by  the  power  which 
Satan  has  over  them,  are  capable  of  the  most 
atrocious  crimes.  But  he  whom  they  know 
not,  restrains  them,  so  that  they  cannot  do 
2 A 


the  things  that  they  would.  When  he  sus« 
pends  the  restraint,  they  act  immediately ; 
then  we  hear  of  murders,  rapes,  and  outrages. 
But  did  not  the  Lord  reign  with  a strong 
hand,  such  evils  would  be  perpetrated  every 
hour,  and  no  one  would  be  safe  in  the  house 
or  in  the  field.  His  ordinance  of  civil  go- 
vernment is  one  great  means  of  preserving 
the  peace  of  society;  but  this  is  in  many 
cases  inadequate.  The  heart  of  man,  when 
fully  bent  upon  evil,  will  not  be  intimidated 
or  stopt  by  gibbets  or  racks. 

How  wonderful  is  the  love  of  God  in  giv- 
ing his  Son  to  die  for  such  wretches ! And 
how  strong  and  absolute  is  the  necessity  of 
a new  birth  if  we  would  be  happy  ! Can 
beasts  and  devils  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
God  ! The  due  consideration  of  this  subject 
is  likewise  needful,  to  preserve  believers  in 
an  humble,  thankful,  watchful  frame  of  spirit. 
Such  we  once  were,  and  such,  with  respect 
to  the  natural  principle  remaining  in  us, 
which  the  apostle  calls  the  flesh,  or  the  old 
man,  we  still  are.  The  propensities  of  fallen 
nature  are  not  eradicated  in  the  children  of 
God,  though  by  grace  they  are  made  parta- 
kers of  a new  principle,  which  enables  them, 
in  the  Lord’s  strength,  to  resist  and  mortify 
the  body  of  sin,  so  that  it  cannot  reign  in 
them.  Yet  they  are  liable  to  sad  surprisals; 
and  the  histories  of  Aaron,  David,  Solomon, 
and  Peter,  are  left  on  record,  to  teach  us 
what  evil  is  latent  in  the  hearts  of  the  best 
men,  and  what  they  are  capable  of  doing,  if 
left  but  a little  to  themselves.  “ Lord,  what 
is  man !” — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXXIV. 

(2.)  On  Man  in  his  Fallen  Estate. 

“ Lord,  what  is  man !” 

dear  sir, — The  nature  of  fallen  man 
agrees  to  the  description  the  apostle  has 
given  us  of  his  boasted  wisdom : it  is  earthly, 
sensual,  devilish.  I have  attempted  some 
general  delineation  of  it  in  the  preceding 
letter;  but  the  height  of  its  malignity  can- 
not be  properly  estimated,  unless  we  con- 
sider its  actings  with  respect  to  the  light  of 
the  gospel.  The  Jews  were  extremely 
wicked  at  the  time  of  our  Lord’s  appearance 
upon  earth ; yet  he  said  of  them,  “ If  I had 
not  come  and  spoken  to  you,  ye  had  not  had 
sin ;”  that  is,  as  the  light  and  power  of  his 
ministry  deprived  them  of  all  excuse  for  con- 
tinuing in  sin,  so  it  proved  the  occasion  of 
showing  their  wickedness  in  the  most  aggra- 
vated manner ; and  all  their  other  sins  were 
but  faint  proofs  of  the  true  state  of  their 
hearts,  if  compared  with  the  discovery  they 
made  of  themselves,  by  their  pertinacious 


186 


(2.)  ON  MAN  IN  HIS 

opposition  to  him.  In  this  sense,  what  the 
apostle  has  observed  of  the  law  of  Moses, 
may  be  applied  to  the  gospel  of  Christ : it 
entered,  that  sin  might  abound.  If  we  would 
estimate  the  utmost  exertions  of  human  de- 
pravity, and  the  strongest  effects  it  is  capa- 
ble of  producing,  we  must  select  our  instan- 
ces from  the  conduct  of  those  to  whom  the 
gospel  is  known.  The  Indians,  who  roast 
their  enemies  alive,  give  sufficient  proof  that 
man  is  barbarous  to  his  own  kind;  which 
may  likewise  be  easily  demonstrated  with- 
out going  so  far  from  home ; but  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel  discovers  the  enmity  of  the 
heart  against  God,  in  ways  and  degrees,  of 
which  the  unenlightened  savages  and  hea- 
thens are  not  capable. 

By  the  gospel,  I now  mean,  not  merely 
the  doctrine  of  salvation,  as  it  lies  in  the  holy 
scriptures,  but  that  public  and  authoritative 
dispensation  of  this  doctrine  which  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  has  committed  to  his  true  minis- 
ters, who,  having  been  themselves,  by  the 
power  of  his  grace,  brought  out  of  darkness 
into  marvellous  light,  are,  by  his  Holy  Spirit, 
qualified  and  sent  forth  to  declare  to  their 
fellow-sinners  what  they  have  seen,  and  felt, 
and  tasted,  of  the  word  of  life.  Their  com- 
mission is,  to  exalt  the  Lord  alone,  to  stain 
the  pride  of  all  human  glory.  They  are  to 
set  forth  the  evil  and  demerit  of  sin,  the 
strictness,  spirituality,  and  sanction  of  the 
law  of  God,  the  total  apostacy  of  mankind ; 
and  from  these  premises  to  demonstrate  the 
litter  impossibility  of  a sinner’s  escaping  con- 
demnation by  any  works  or  endeavours  of 
his  own  ; and  then  to  proclaim  a full  and  free 
salvation  from  sin  and  wrath,  by  faitli  in  the 
name,  blood,  obedience,  and  mediation  of 
God  manifest  in  the  flesh;  together  with  a 
denunciation  of  eternal  misery  to  all  who 
shall  finally  reject  the  testimony  which  God 
has  given  of  his  Son.  Though  these  several 
branches  of  the  will  of  God  respecting  sin- 
ners, and  other  truths  in  connexion  with 
them,  are  plainly  revealed,  and  repeatedly 
inculcated  in  the  Bible,  and  though  the  Bible 
is  to  be  found  in  almost  every  house,  yet  we 
see,  in  fact,  it  is  as  a sealed  book,  little  read, 
little  understood,  and,  therefore,  but  little 
regarded,  except  in  those  places  which  the 
Lord  is  pleased  to  favour  with  ministers  who 
can  confirm  them  from  their  own  experience ; 
and  who,  by  a sense  of  his  constraining  love, 
and  the  worth  of  souls,  are  animated  to  make 
the  faithful  discharge  of  their  ministry  the 
one  great  business  of  their  lives ; who  aim 
not  to  possess  the  wealth,  but  to  promote  the 
welfare,  of  their  hearers,  are  equally  regard- 
less of  the  frowns  or  smiles  of  the  world,  and 
count  not  their  lives  dear,  so  that  they  may 
be  wise  and  successful  in  winning  souls  to 
Christ. 

When  the  gospel,  in  this  sense  of  the 
word,  first  comes  to  a place,  though  the  peo- 


FALLEN  ESTATE.  [let.  xxxiv. 

pie  are  going  on  in  sin,  they  may  be  said  tc 
sin  ignorantly ; they  have  not  yet  been 
warned  of  their  danger.  Some  are  drinking 
down  iniquity  like  water ; others  more  soberly 
burying  themselves  alive  in  the  cares  and 
business  of  the  world;  others  find  a little 
time  for  what  they  call  religious  duties, 
which  they  persevere  in,  though  they  are 
utter  strangers  to  the  nature  or  the  pleasure 
of  spiritual  worship ; partly,  as  thereby  they 
think  to  bargain  with  God,  and  to  make 
amends  for  such  sins  as  they  do  not  choose 
to  relinquish;  and  partly  because  it  gratifies 
their  pride  and  affords  them  (as  they  think) 
some  ground  for  saying,  “ God,  I thank  thee, 
I am  not  as  other  men.”  The  preached  gos- 
pel declares  the  vanity  and  danger  of  these 
several  ways  which  sinners  choose  to  walk 
in.  It  declares  and  demonstrates,  that,  dif- 
ferent as  they  appear  from  each  other,  they 
are  equally  remote  from  the  path  of  safety 
and  peace,  and  all  tend  to  the  same  point, 
the  destruction  of  those  who  persist  in  them. 
At  the  same  time,  it  provides  against  that 
despair  into  which  men  would  be  otherwise 
plunged,  when  convinced  of  their  sins,  by 
revealing  the  immense  love  of  God,  the  glory 
and  grace  of  Christ,  and  inviting  all  to  come 
to  him,  that  they  may  obtain  pardon,  life, 
and  happiness.  In  a word,  it  shows  the  pit 
of  hell  under  men’s  feet,  and  opens  the  gate, 
and  points  out  the  way  to  heaven.  Let  us 
now  briefly  observe  the  effects  it  produces 
in  those  who  do  not  receive  it  as  the  powmr 
of  God  unto  salvation.  These  effects  are 
various,  as  tempers  and  circumstances  vary ; 
but  they  may  all  lead  us  to  adopt  the  psalm- 
ist’s exclamation,  “ Lord,  what  is  man  !” 

Many  who  have  heard  the  gospel  once  or 
a few  times,  will  hear  it  no  more ; it  awakens 
their  scorn,  their  hatred,  and  rage.  They  pour 
contempt  upon  the  wisdom  of  God,  despise 
his  goodness,  defy  his  power;  and  their  very 
looks  express  the  spirit  of  the  rebellious  Jews, 
who  told  the  prophet  Jeremiah  to  his  face, 
“ As  to  the  word  which  thou  hast  spoken  to  us 
in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  we  will  not  hearken 
to  thee  at  all.”  The  ministers  who  preach 
it  are  accounted  men  that  turn  the  world  up- 
side down ; and  the  people  who  receive  it, 
fools  or  hypocrites.  The  word  of  the  Lord 
is  a burden  to  them,  and  they  hate  it  with  a 
perfect  hatred.  How  strongly  is  the  disposi- 
tion of  the  natural  heart  manifested,  by  the 
confusion  which  often  takes  place  in  families, 
where  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  awaken  one  or 
two  in  a house,  while  the  rest  remain  in  their 
sins ! To  profess,  or  even  to  be  suspected  of 
an  attachment  to  the  gospel  of  Christ,  is  fre- 
quently considered  and  treated  as  the  worst 
of  crimes,  sufficient  to  cancel  the  strongest 
obligations  of  relation  or  friendship.  Parents 
upon  such  a provocation,  will  hate  their  chil- 
dren, and  children  ridicule  their  parents. 
Many  find,  agreeably  to  our  Lord  s declara* 


187 


(2.)  ON  MAN  IN  HIS  FALLEN  ESTATE. 


LET.  XXXIV.  J 

tion,  that  from  the  time  a sense  of  his  love 
engaged  their  hearts  to  love  him  again,  their 
worst  foes  have  been  those  of  their  own 
household ; and  that  they  who  expressed  the 
greatest  love  and  tenderness  for  them  before 
their  conversion,  can  now  hardly  bear  to  see 
them. 

The  bulk  of  a people  will  perhaps  continue 
to  hear,  at  least  now  and  then ; and  to  those 
who  do,  the  Spirit  of  God  usually,  at  one  time 
or  other,  bears  testimony  to  the  truth.  Their 
consciences  are  struck,  and  for  a season  they 
believe  and  tremble.  But  what  is  the  con- 
sequence! No  man  who  has  taken  poison 
seeks  more  earnestly  or  speedily  for  an  an- 
tidote, than  those  do  for  something  to  stifle 
and  smother  their  convictions.  They  run  to 
company,  to  drink,  to  any  thing,  for  relief 
against  the  unwelcome  intrusion  of  serious 
thoughts ; and  when  they  succeed,  and  reco- 
ver their  former  indifference,  they  rejoice,  as 
if  they  had  escaped  some  great  danger.  The 
next  step  is,  to  ridicule  their  own  convic- 
tions ; and  next  to  that,  if  they  see  any  of  their 
acquaintance  under  the  like  impressions,  to 
use  every  art,  and  strain  every  nerve,  that 
they  may  render  them  as  obstinate  as  them- 
selves. For  this  purpose,  they  watch  as  a 
fowler  for  the  bird,  flatter  or  revile,  tempt  or 
threaten ; and  if  they  can  prevail,  and  are  the 
occasion  of  hardening  any  in  their  sins,  they 
rejoice  and  triumph,  as  if  they  accounted  it 
their  interest  and  their  glory  to  ruin  the  souls 
of  their  fellow-creatures. 

By  frequent  hearing,  they  receive  more 
light.  They  are  compelled  to  know,  whether 
they  will  or  not,  that  the  wrath  of  God  hangs 
over  the  children  of  disobedience.  They  carry 
a sting  in  their  consciences,  and  at  times  feel 
themselves  most  miserable,  and  cannot  but 
wish  they  had  never  been  born,  or  that  they 
had  been  dogs  or  toads,  rather  than  rational 
creatures.  Yet  they  harden  themselves  still 
more.  They  affect  to  be  happy  and  at  ease, 
and  force  themselves  to  wear  a smile,  when 
anguish  preys  upon  their  hearts.  They 
blaspheme  the  way  of  truth,  watch  for  the 
faults  of  professors,  and,  with  a malicious 
joy,  publish  and  aggravate  them.  They  see, 
perhaps,  how  the  wicked  die,  but  are  not 
alarmed ; they  see  the  righteous  die,  but  are 
not  moved.  Neither  providences  nor  ordi- 
nances, mercies  nor  judgments,  can  stop 
them;  for  they  are  determined  to  go  on, 
and  perish  with  their  eyes  open,  rather  than 
submit  to  the  gospel. 

But  they  do  not  always  openly  reject  the 
gospel-truths.  Some  who  profess  to  approve 
and  receive  them,  do  thereby  discover  the 
evils  of  the  heart  of  man  if  possible  in  a yet 
stronger  light.  They  make  Christ  the  minis- 
ter of  sin,  and  turn  his  grace  into  licentious- 
ness. Like  Judas,  they  say,  Hail  Master ! 
and  betray  him.  This  is  the  highest  pitch 
of  iniquity.  They  pervert  all  the  doctrines 


I of  the  gospel.  From  election  they  draw  an 
excuse  for  continuing  in  their  evil  ways; 
and  contend  for  salvation  without  works,  be- 
cause they  love  not  obedience.  They  extol 
the  righteousness  of  Christ,  but  hold  it  in  op- 
position to  personal  holiness.  In  a word,  be- 
cause they  hear  that  God  is  good,  they  de- 
termine to  persist  in  evil.  “ Lord  what  is 
man  1” 

Thus  wilful  and  impenitent  sinners  go  on 
from  bad  to  worse,  deceiving  and  being  de- 
ceived. The  word  which  they  despise,  be- 
comes to  them  a savour  of  death  unto  death. 
They  take  different  courses,  but  all  are  tra- 
velling down  to  the  pit;  and,  unless  sove- 
reign mercy  interpose,  will  soon  sink  to  rise 
no  more.  The  final  event  is  usually  twofold. 
Many,  after  they  have  been  more  or  less 
shaken  by  the  word,  settle  in  formality.  If 
hearing  would  supply  the  place  of  faith,  love 
and  obedience,  they  would  do  well ; but  by 
degrees  they  become  sermon-proof.  The 
truths  which  once  struck  them,  lose  their 
power  by  being  often  heard  ; and  thus  mul- 
titudes live  and  die  in  darkness,  though  the 
light  has  long  shone  around  them.  Others 
are  more  openly  given  up  to  a reprobate  mind. 
Contempt  of  the  gospel  makes  infidels,  deists, 
and  atheists.  They  are  filled  with  a spirit 
of  delusion  to  believe  a lie.  These  are  scof- 
fers, walking  after  their  own  lusts;  for 
where  the  principles  of  religion  are  given 
up,  the  conduct  will  be  vile  and  abominable. 
Such  persons  sport  themselves  with  their 
own  deceivings,  and  strongly  prove  the  truth 
of  the  gospel,  while  they  dispute  against  it. 
We  often  find  that  people  of  this  cast  have 
formerly  been  the  subjects  of  convictions ; 
but  when  the  evil  spirit  has  seemed  to  de- 
part for  a season,  and  returns  again,  the  last 
state  of  that  person  is  worse  than  the  first. 

It  is  not  improbable  that  some  of  my  read- 
ers may  meet  with  their  own  characters  un- 
der one  or  other  of  the  views  I have  given 
of  the  desperate  wickedness  of  the  heart,  in 
its  actings  against  the  truth.  May  the  Spirit 
of  God  constrain  them  to  read  with  attention. 
Your  case  is  dangerous,  but  I would  hope  not 
utterly  desperate.  Jesus  is  mighty  to  save. 
His  grace  can  pardon  the  most  aggravated 
offences,  and  subdue  the  most  inveterate 
habits  of  sin.  The  gospel  you  have  hitherto 
slighted,  resisted,  or  opposed,  is  still  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation.  The  blood  of 
Jesus,  upon  which  you  have  hitherto  tram- 
pled, speaks  better  things  than  the  blood  of 
Abel,  and  is  of  virtue  to  cleanse  those  \\  hose 
sins  are  scarlet  and  crimson,  and  to  make 
them  white  as  snow.  As  yet  you  are  spared ; 
but  it  is  high  time  to  stop,  to  throw  down 
your  arms  of  rebellion,  and  humble  your- 
selves at  his  feet.  If  you  do,  you  may  yet 
escape ; but  if  not,  know  assuredly  tha 
wrath  is  coming  upon  you  to  the  uttermost : 
and  you  will  shortly  find,  to  your  unspeak- 


188 


ON  SOME  BLEMISHES. 


able  dismay,  that  it  is  a fearful  thing  to  fall 
into  the  hands  of  the  living  God. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXXV. 

Whatsoever  things  are  lovely , whatsoever 

things  are  of  good  report , — think  on 

these  things.  Phil.  iv.  8. 

dear  sir, — The  precept  which  I have 
chosen  for  my  motto  is  applicable  to  many 
particulars,  which  are  but  seldom  and  occa- 
sionally mentioned  from  the  pulpit.  There 
are  improprieties  of  conduct,  which,  though 
usually  considered  as  foibles  that  hardly  de- 
serve a censure,  are  properly  sinful ; for 
though  some  of  them  may  not  seem  to  violate 
any  express  command  of  scripture,  yet  they 
are  contrary  to  that  accuracy  and  circum- 
spection which  become  our  profession.  A 
Christian,  by  the  tenor  of  his  high  calling,  is 
bound  to  avoid  even  the  appearance  of  evil ; 
and  his  deportment  should  not  only  be  up- 
right as  to  his  leading  principles,  but  amiable 
and  engaging,  and  as  free  as  possible  from 
every  inconsistence  and  blemish.  The  cha- 
racters of  some  valuable  persons  are  clouded ; 
and  the  influence  they  might  otherwise  have, 
greatly  counteracted  by  comparatively  small 
faults ; yet  faults  they  certainly  are ; and  it 
would  be  well  if  they  could  be  made  so  sen- 
sible of  them,  and  of  their  ill  effects,  as  that 
they  might  earnestly  watch  and  strive,  and 
pray  against  them.  I know  not  how  to  ex- 
plain myself  better  than  by  attempting  the 
outlines  of  a few  portraits,  to  each  of  which 
I apprehend  some  strong  resemblances  may 
be  found  in  real  life.  I do  not  wish  to  set 
my  readers  to  work  to  find  out  such  resem- 
blances among  their  neighbours;  but  would 
advise  them  to  examine  carefully,  whether 
they  cannot,  in  one  or  other  of  them,  dis- 
cover some  traces  of  their  own  features. 
And  though  I speak  of  men  only,  counter- 
parts to  the  several  characters,  may,  doubt- 
less, be  found  here  and  there  among  the  wo- 
men : for  the  imperfections  and  evils  of  a 
fallen  nature,  are  equally  entailed  upon  both 
sexes. 

Aijsterus  is  a solid  and  exemplary  Chris- 
tian. He  has  a deep,  extensive,  and  experi- 
mental knowledge  of  divine  things.  Inflexi- 
bly and  invariably  true  to  his  principles,  he 
stems  with  a noble  singularity  the  torrent  of 
the  world,  and  can  neither  be  bribed  nor  in- 
timidated from  the  path  of  duty.  He  is  a 
rough  diamond  of  great  intrinsic  value,  and 
would  sparkle,  with  a distinguished  lustre, 
if  he  were  more  polished.  But  though  the 
word  of  God  is  his  daily  study,  and  he  prizes 
the  precepts,  as  well  as  the  promises,  more 
than  thousands  of  gold  and  silver,  there  is  one 
precept  he  seems  to  have  overlooked : I mean 


[let.  XXXV. 

that  of  the  apostle,  he  courteous.  Instead  oi 
that  gentleness  and  condescension  which 
will  always  be  expected  from  a professed  fol- 
lower of  the  meek  and  lowly  Jesus ; there  is 
a harshness  in  his  manner,  which  makes 
him  more  admired  that  beloved ; and  they 
who  truly  love  him,  often  feel  more  con- 
straint than  pleasure  when  in  his  company. 
His  intimate  friends  are  satisfied  that  he  is 
no  stranger  to  true  humility  of  heart : but 
these  are  few.  By  others  he  is  thought 
proud,  dogmatic,  and  self-important ; nor  can 
this  prejudice  against  him  be  easily  removed, 
until  he  can  lay  aside  that  cynical  air  which 
he  has  unhappily  contracted. 

Humanus  is  generous  and  benevolent. 
His  feelings  are  lively,  and  his  expressions 
of  them  strong.  No  one  is  more  distant  from 
sordid  views,  or  less  influenced  by  a selfish 
spirit.  His  heart  burns  with  love  to  Jesus, 
and  he  is  ready  to  receive,  with  open  arms, 
all  who  love  his  Saviour.  Yet,  with  an  up- 
right and  friendly  spirit,  which  entitles  him 
to  the  love  and  esteem  of  all  who  know 
him,  he  has  not  every  thing  we  would  wish 
in  a friend.  In  some  respects,  though  not  in 
the  most  criminal  sense,  he  bridleth  not  his 
tongue.  Should  you,  without  witness  or 
writing,  intrust  him  with  untold  gold,  you 
would  run  no  risk  of  loss ; but  if  you  intrust 
him  with  a secret,  you  thereby  put  it  in  the 
possession  of  the  public.  Not  that  he  would 
wilfully  betray  you,  but  it  is  his  infirmity 
He  knows  not  how  to  keep  a secret ; it  es- 
capes from  him  before  he  is  aware.  So,  like- 
wise, as  to  matters  of  fact : in  things  which 
are  of  great  importance,  and  where  he  is 
sufficiently  informed,  no  man  has  a stricter 
regard  to  truth ; but  in  the  smaller  concerns 
of  common  life,  whether  it  be  from  credulity, 
or  from  a strange  and  blameable  inadvertency, 
he  frequently  grieves  and  surprises  those  who 
know  his  real  character,  by  saying  the  thing 
that  is  not.  Thus  they  to  whom  he  opens 
his  very  heart,  dare  not  make  him  returns  of 
equal  confidence ; and  they  who,  in  some 
cases,  would  venture  their  lives  upon  his 
word,  in  others  are  afraid  of  telling  a story 
after  him.  How  lamentable  are  such  blem- 
ishes in  such  a person. 

Prudens,  though  not  of  a generous  natural 
temper,  is  a partaker  of  that  grace  which 
opens  the  heart,  and  inspires  a disposition  to 
love  and  to  good  works.  He  bestows  not 
his  alms  to  be  seen  of  men ; but  they  who 
have  the  best  opportunities  of  knowing  what 
he  does  for  the  relief  of  others,  and  of  com- 
paring it  with  his  ability,  can  acquit  him  in 
good  measure  of  the  charge  which  anothei 
part  of  his  conduct  exposes  him  to.  Foi 
Prudens  is  a great  economist;  and  though 
he  would  not  willingly  wrong  or  injure  any 
person,  yet  the  meanness  to  which  he  will 
submit,  either  to  save  or  gain  a penny,  in 
what  he  accounts  an  honest  way,  are  a great 


IN  CHRISTIAN  CHARACTERS. 


189 


LET.  XXXV.] 

discredit  to  his  profession.  He  is  punctual 
in  fulfilling  his  engagements ; but  exceed- 
ingly hard,  strict,  and  suspicious  in  making 
his  bargains.  And  in  his  dress,  and  every 
article  of  his  personal  concerns,  he  is  con- 
tent to  be  so  much  below  the  station  in 
which  the  providence  of  God  has  placed  him, 
that  to  those  who  are  not  acquainted  with 
his  private  benefactions  to  the  poor,  he  ap- 
pears under  the  hateful  character  of  a miser, 
and  to  be  governed  by  that  love  of  money 
which  the  scriptures  declare  to  be  the  root 
of  all  evil,  and  inconsistent  with  the  true 
love  of  God  and  of  the  saints. 

Volatilis  is  sufficiently  exact  in  perform- 
ing his  promises  in  such  instances  as  he 
thinks  of  real  importance.  If  he  bids  a per- 
son depend  upon  his  assistance  he  will  not 
disappoint  his  expectations.  Perhaps  he  is 
equally  sincere  in  all  his  promises  at  the  time 
of  making  them  ; but  for  want  of  method  in 
the  management  of  his  affairs,  he  is  always 
in  a hurry,  always  too  late,  and  has  al- 
ways some  engagement  upon  his  hands 
with  which  it  is  impossible  he  can  comply. 
Yet  he  goes  on  in  this  way,  exposing  himself 
and  others  to  continual  disappointments.  He 
accepts,  without  a thought,  proposals  which 
are  incompatible  with  each  other,  and  will 
perhaps  undertake  to  be  at  two  or  three  dif- 
ferent and  distant  places  at  the  same  hour. 
This  has  been  so  long  his  practice  that  no- 
body now  expects  him  till  they  see  him.  In 
other  respects  he  is  a good  sort  of  man ; but 
this  want  of  punctuality,  which  runs  through 
his  whole  deportment,  puts  every  thing  out 
of  course  in  which  he  is  concerned,  abroad 
and  at  home.  Yolatilis  excuses  himself  as 
well  as  he  can,  and  chiefly  by  alleging,  that 
the  things  in  which  he  fails  are  of  no  great 
consequence.  But  he  would  do  well  to  re- 
member, that  truth  is  a sacred  thing,  and 
ought  not  to  be  violated  in  the  smallest  mat- 
ters, without  an  unforeseen  and  unavoidable 
prevention.  Such  a trifling  turn  of  spirit 
lessens  the  weight  of  a person’s  character, 
though  he  makes  no  pretensions  to  religion, 
and  is  still  a greater  blemish  in  a professor. 

Cessator  is  not  chargeable  with  being 
buried  in  the  cares  and  business  of  the  pre- 
sent life,  to  the  neglect  of  the  one  thing  need- 
ful ; but  he  greatly  neglects  the  duties  of  his 
station.  Had  he  been  sent  into  the  world 
only  to  read,  pray,  hear  sermons,  and  join  in 
religious  conversation,  he  might  pass  for  an 
eminent  Christian.  But  though  it  is  to  be 
hoped,  that  his  abounding  in  these  exercises 
springs  from  a heart-attachment  to  divine 
things,  his  conduct  evidences  that  his  judg- 
ment is  weak,  and  his  views  of  his  Christian 
calling  are  very  narrow  and  defective.  He 
does  not  consider  that  waiting  upon  God  in 
the  public  and  private  ordinances,  is  designed, 
not  to  excuse  us  from  a discharge  of  the  du- 
ties of  civil  life,  but  to  instruct,  strengthen, 


and  qualify  us  for  their  performance.  His 
affairs  are  in  disorder,  and  his  family  con- 
nexions are  likely  to  suffer  by  his  indolence. 
He  thanks  God  that  he  is  not  worldly-minded ; 
but  he  is  an  idle  and  unfaithful  member  of 
society,  and  causes  the  way  of  truth  to  be 
evil  spoken  of.  Of  such  the  apostle  has  de- 
termined, that  “ if  any  man  will  not  work, 
neither  should  he  eat.” 

Curious  is  upright  and  unblamable  in  his 
general  deportment,  and  no  stranger  to  the 
experiences  of  a true  Christian.  His  conver- 
sation upon  these  subjects  is  often  satisfactory 
and  eddying.  He  would  be  a much  more 
agreeable  companion,  were  it  not  for  an  im- 
pertinent desire  of  knowing  every  body’s 
business,  and  the  grounds  of  every  hint  that 
is  occasionally  dropped  in  discourse  where 
he  is  present.  This  puts  him  upon  asking  a 
multiplicity  of  needless  and  improper  ques- 
tions, and  obliges  those  who  know  him,  to 
be  continually  upon  their  guard,  and  to  treat 
him  with  reserve.  He  catechises  even 
strangers,  and  is  unwilling  to  part  with  them 
till  he  is  punctually  informed  of  all  their 
connexions,  employments,  and  designs.  For 
this  idle  curiosity  he  is  marked  and  avoided 
as  a busybody ; and  they  who  have  the  best 
opinion  of  him  cannot  but  wonder,  that  a 
man  who  appears  to  have  so  many  better 
things  to  employ  his  thoughts,  should  find 
leisure  to  amuse  himself  with  what  does  not 
at  all  concern  him.  Were  it  not  for  the 
rules  of  civility  he  would  be  affronted  every 
day : and  if  he  would  attend  to  the  cold  and 
evasive  answers  he  receives  to  his  inquiries, 
or  even  to  the  looks  with  which  they  are  ac- 
companied, he  might  learn,  that,  though  he 
means  no  harm,  he  appears  to  a great  disad- 
vantage, and  that  this  prying  disposition  is 
very  unpleasing. 

Querulus  wastes  much  of  his  precious 
time  in  declaiming  against  the  management 
of  public  affairs ; though  he  has  neither  ac- 
cess to  the  springs  which  move  the  wheels 
of  government,  nor  influence  either  to  ac- 
celerate or  retard  their  motions.  Our  na- 
tional concerns  are  no  more  affected  by  the 
remonstrances  of  Querulus,  than  the  hea- 
venly bodies  are  by  the  disputes  of  astrono- 
mers. While  the  newspapers  are  the  chief 
sources  of  his  intelligence,  and  his  situation 
precludes  him  from  being  a competent  judge, 
either  of  matters  of  fact,  or  matters  of  right, 
why  should  Querulus  trouble  himself  with 
politics ! This  would  be  a weakness,  if  \v  3 
consider  him  only  as  a member  of  society ; 
but  if  we  consider  him  as  a Christian,  it  is 
worse  than  weakness ; it  is  a sinful  confor- 
mity to  the  men  of  the  world,  who  look  no 
farther  than  to  second  causes,  and  forget  that 
the  Lord  reigns.  If  a Christian  be  placed  in 
a public  sphere  of  action,  he  should  undoubt- 
edly be  faithful  to  his  railing,  and  endeavour, 
by  all  lawful  methods,  to  transmit  our  privi- 


190 


TO  A GAY 

. eges  to  posterity ; but  it  would  be  better  for 
Querulus  to  let  the  dead  bury  their  dead. 
There  are  people  enough  to  make  a noise 
about  political  matters,  who  know  not  how 
to  employ  their  time  to  better  purpose.  Our 
Lord’s  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world;  and 
most  of  his  people  may  do  their  country  much 
more  essential  service  by  pleading  for  it  in 
prayer,  than  by  finding  fault  with  things 
which  they  have  no  power  to  alter.  If  Que- 
rulus had  opportunity  of  spending  a few 
months  under  some  of  the  governments  upon 
the  continent,  I may  indeed  say,  under  any 
of  them,  he  would  probably  bring  home  with 
him  a more  grateful  sense  of  the  Lord’s  good- 
ness to  him,  in  appointing  his  lot  in  Britain. 
As  it  is,  his  zeal  is  not  only  unprofitable  to 
others,  but  hurtful  to  himself.  If  imbitters 
his  spirit,  it  diverts  his  thoughts  from  things 
of  greater  importance,  and  prevents  him  from 
feeling  the  value  of  those  blessings,  civil  and 
religious,  which  he  actually  possesses ; and 
could  he,  as  he  wishes,  prevail  on  many  to 
act  in  the  same  spirit,  the  governing  powers 
might  be  irritated  to  take  every  opportunity 
of  abridging  that  religious  liberty  which  we 
are  favoured  w7ith,  above  all  the  nations  upon 
earth.  Let  me  remind  Querulus,  that  the 
hour  is  approaching,  when  many  things, 
which  at  present  too  much  engross  his 
thoughts  and  inflame  his  passions,  will  appear 
as  foreign  to  him,  as  what  is  now  transact- 
ing among  the  Tartars  or  Chinese. 

Other  improprieties  of  conduct,  which  les- 
sen the  influence  and  spot  the  profession  of 
some  who  wish  wTell  to  the  cause  of  Christ, 
might  be  enumerated,  but  these  may  suffice 
for  a specimen. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXXVI. 

To  a Gay  Friend,  on  his  Recovery  from 
Illness . 

dear  sir, — I suppose  you  will  receive 
many  congratulations  on  your  recovery  from 
your  late  dangerous  illness ; most  of  them, 
perhaps,  more  sprightly  and  better  turned, 
but  none,  I persuade  myself,  more  sincere 
and  affectionate  than  mine.  I beg  you  would 
prepare  yourself  by  this  good  opinion  of  me, 
before  you  read  further ; and  let  the  reality 
of  my  regard  excuse  what  you  may  dislike 
in  my  manner  of  expressing  it. 

When  a person  is  returned  from  a doubt- 
ful, distant  voyage,  we  are  naturally  led  to 
inquire  into  the  incidents  he  has  met  with, 
and  the  discoveries  he  has  made.  Indulge 
me  in  a curiosity  of  this  kind,  especially  as 
my  affection  gives  me  an  interest  and  con- 
cern in  the  event.  You  have  been,  my 
friend,  upon  the  brink,  the  very  edge  of  an 
eternal  state ; but  God  has  restored  you  back 


FRIEND,  &c.  [let.  xxxvi 

to  the  world  again.  Did  you  meet  with,  or 
have  you  brought  back,  nothing  new  1 Did 
nothing  occur  to  stop  or  turn  your  usual 
train  of  thought  1 Were  your  apprehensions 
of  invisible  things  exactly  the  same  in  the 
height  of  your  disorder,  when  you  were  cut 
off  from  the  world  and  all  its  engagements, 
as  when  you  were  in  perfect  health,  and  in 
the  highest  enjoyment  of  your  own  inclina- 
tions! If  you  answer  me,  “Yes,  all  things 
are  just  the  same  as  formerly,  the  difference 
between  sickness  and  health  only  excepted 
I am  at  a loss  how  to  reply.  I can  only  sigh 
and  wonder:  sigh,  that  it  should  be  thus 
with  any,  that  it  should  be  thus  with  you, 
whom  I dearly  love ; and  wonder,  since  this 
unhappy  case,  strange  as  it  seems  in  one 
view,  is  yet  so  frequent,  why  it  was  not  al- 
ways thus  with  myself;  for  long  and  often 
it  was  just  so.  Many  a time,  when  sickness 
had  brought  me,  as  we  say,  to  death’s  door,  I 
was  as  easy  and  insensible  as  the  sailor,  who, 
in  the  height  of  a storm,  should  presume  to 
sleep  upon  the  top  of  the  mast,  quite  re- 
gardless that  the  next  tossing  wrave  might 
plunge  him  into  the  raging  ocean,  beyond 
all  possibility  of  relief.  But  at  length  a day 
came,  which,  though  the  most  terrible  day  I 
ever  saw,  I can  now  look  back  upon  with 
thankfulness  and  pleasure ; I say,  the  time 
came,  when,  in  such  a helpless  extremity, 
and  under  the  expectation  of  immediate 
death,  it  pleased  God  to  command  the  vail 
from  my  eyes,  and  I saw  things  in  some 
measure  as  they  really  were.  Imagine 
with  yourself,  a person  trembling  upon  the 
point  of  a dreadful  precipice,  a powerful  and 
inexorable  enemy  eager  to  push  him  down, 
and  an  assemblage  of  all  that  is  horrible  wait- 
ing at  the  bottom  for  his  fall ; even  this  will 
give  you  but  a faint  representation  of  the 
state  of  my  mind  at  that  time.  Believe  me, 
it  was  not  a whim,  or  a dream,  which  changed 
my  sentiments  and  conduct,  but  a powerful 
conviction,  which  will  not  admit  the  least 
doubt ; an  evidence  which,  like  that  I have 
of  my  own  existence,  I cannot  call  in  ques- 
tion, without  contradicting  all  my  senses. 
And  though  my  case  was  in  some  respects 
uncommon,  yet  something  like  it  is  known 
by  one  and  another  every  day ; and  I have 
myself  conversed  with  many,  who,  after  a 
course  of  years  spent  in  defending  deisticai 
principles,  or  indulging  libertine  practices, 
when  they  have  thought  themselves  con- 
firmed in  their  schemes  by  the  cool  assent 
of  what  they  then  deemed  impartial  reason, 
have  been  like  me,  brought  to  glory  in  the 
cross  of  Christ,  and  to  live  by  that  faith  which 
they  had  before  slighted  and  opposed.  By 
these  instances,  I know  that  nothing  is  too 
hard  for  the  Almighty.  The  same  power 
which  humbled  me,  can  undoubtedly  bring 
down  the  most  haughty  infidel  upon  earth. 
And  as  I likewise  knew,  that,  to  show  hi* 


ON  CHRISTIAN  EXPERIENCE. 


193 


LET.  XXXVII.] 

power,  he  is  often  pleased  to  make  use  of 
weak  instruments,  I am  encouraged,  notwith- 
standing the  apparent  difficulty  of  succeed- 
ing, to  warn  those,  over  whom  friendship  or 
affection  gives  me  any  influence,  of  the  evil 
and  the  danger  of  a course  of  life  formed  up- 
on the  prevailing  maxims  of  the  world.  So 
far  as  I neglect  this,  I am  unfaithful  in  my 
professions,  both  to  God  and  man. 

I shall  not  at  present  trouble  you  in  an  ar- 
gumentative way.  If  by  dint  of  reasoning 
I could  effect  some  change  in  your  notions, 
my  arguments,  unless  applied  by  a superior 
power,  would  still  leave  your  heart  un- 
changed and  untouched.  A man  may  give 
his  assent  to  the  gospel,  and  be  able  to  de- 
fend it  against  others,  hnd  yet  not  have  his 
own  spirit  truly  influenced  by  it.  This 
thought  I shall  leave  with  you,  that  if  your 
scheme  be  not  true  to  a demonstration,  it 
must  necessarily  be  false ; for  the  issue  is 
too  important  to  make  a doubt  on  the  danger- 
ous side  tolerable.  If  the  Christian  could 
possibly  be  mistaken,  he  is  still  upon  equal 
terms  with  those  who  pronounce  him  to  be 
so ; but  if  the  deist  be  wrong  (that  is,  if  we 
are  in  the  right,)  the  consequence  to  him 
must  be  unavoidable  and  intolerable.  This, 
you  will  say,  is  a trite  argument : I own  it ; 
but,  beaten  as  it  is,  it  will  never  be  worn  out 
or  answered. 

Permit  me  to  remind  you  that  the  points  in 
debate  between  us  are  already  settled  in  them- 
selves, and  that  our  talking  cannot  alter  or 
affect  the  nature  of  things,  for  they  will  be  as 
they  are,  whatever,  apprehensions  we  may 
form  of  them ; and  remember,  likewise,  that 
we  must  all,  each  one  for  himself,  experience 
on  which  side  the  truth  lies.  I used  a wrong 
word  when  I spoke  of  your  recovery : my  dear 
friend,  look  upon  it  only  as  a reprieve , for  you 
carry  the  sentence  of  death  about  with  you 
still,  and  unless  you  should  be  cut  off  (which 
God  in  his  mercy  forbid  !)  by  a sudden  stroke, 
you  will  as  surely  lie  upon  a deathbed  as  you 
have  been  now  raised  from  a bed  of  sickness ; 
and  remember  likewise  (how  can  I bear  to 
write  it !)  that  should  you  neglect  my  admo- 
nitions, they  will,  notwithstanding,  have  an 
effect  upon  you,  though  not  such  an  effect  as  I 
could  wish : they  will  render  you  more  inex- 
cusable. I have  delivered  my  own  soul  by 
faithfully  warning:  but  if  you  will  not  ex- 
amine the  matter  with  that  seriousness  it 
calls  for ; if  you  will  not  look  up  to  God,  the 
former  of  your  body  and  the  preserver  of  your 
spirit,  for  direction  and  assistance  how  to 
please  him ; if  you  will  have  your  reading 
and  conversation  only  on  one  side  of  the 
question  ; if  you  determine  to  let  afflictions 
and  dangers,  mercies  and  deliverances,  all 
pass  without  reflection  and  improvement ; if 
you  will  spend  your  life  as  though  you 
thought  you  were  sent  into  the  world  only 
to  eat,  sleep,  and  play,  and,  after  a course 


of  years,  be  extinguished  like  the  snuff  of  a 
candle; — why,  then,  you  must  abide  the 
consequences.  But  assuredly,  sooner  or 
later,  God  will  meet  you.  My  hearty  daily 
prayer  is,  that  it  may  be  in  a way  of  mercy, 
and  that  you  may  be  added  to  the  number 
of  the  trophies  of  his  invincible  grace. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXXVII. 

Some  Points  of  Christian  Experience  Con - 
sidered. 

TO  A FRIEND. 

dear  sir, — I trust  the  difference  of  our 
sentiments,  since  we  are  agreed  in  the  one 
thing  needful,  will  no  more  interrupt  our 
union  and  fellowship  than  the  difference  of 
our  features  or  the  tone  of  our  voices.  I 
wish  you  to  believe  that  I would  be  no  advo- 
cate for  carelessness  or  formality.  I hope  my 
conscience  bears  me  witness  that,  besides 
trusting  in  the  letter  of  scripture,  I likewise 
desire  an  increase  of  that  inward  and  com- 
fortable sense  of  divine  things,  in  which  I 
believe  you  are  happy  ; and  that  I wish  not 
only  to  be  a subject  of  the  kingdom  of  Jesus, 
but  likewise  to  have  that  kingdom  power- 
fully set  up  in  my  heart,  which  consists  of 
righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Indeed  I see  not  how  these  can  be 
distinguished,  or  what  ground  I could  have 
to  think  myself  a subject  of  his  kingdom,  un- 
less I earnestly  desired  to  have  that  kingdom 
in  all  its  branches  and  blessings  flourishing 
in  my  soul.  I do  not  know  that  I live  in  the 
neglect  of  any  means  appointed  of  God  for 
my  growth  in  these  blessings,  or  willingly 
allow  myself  in  what  is  inconsistent  with 
them:  I think  my  heart  is  habitually  in  the 
pursuit  of  them,  and  that  there  is  seldom  an 
hour  in  any  day  when  lively  communion 
with  my  God,  in  Christ,  is  not  present  to  my 
view  as  the  chief  good.  To  this  purpose, 
through  grace,  I can  venture  to  express 
myself  to  man,  though  still  it  is  true,  when 
I come  before  the  Lord,  notwithstanding  the 
diligence  and  circumspection  I would  aim 
at,  I see  myself  a poor  inconsistent  creature, 
that  my  strength  is  perfect  weakness,  and 
all  I have  is  sin.  I confess  I am  afraid  of 
fixing  the  criterion  of  a work  of  grace  too 
high,  lest  the  mourners  in  Zion  should  be 
discouraged ; because  I find  it  is  the  will  of 
God  that  such  should  not  be  discouraged,  but 
comforted,  and  because  it  appears  that  the 
scriptural  marks  have  respect  rather  to  de- 
sires, if  real,  than  to  attainments,  or  at  least 
to  those  attainments  which  are  often  possess- 
ed by  persons  who  are  kept  very  short  of  sen 
sible  comforts,  Matt.  v.  3 — 9,  Luke  xviii.  12, 
13,  1 Pet.  ii.  7. 


192 


ON  CHRISTIAN  EXPERIENCE. 


The  points  between  you  and  me  seem  chiefly 
the  following- : 1.  When  may  a person  be  pro- 
perly denominated  a believer  1 2.  What  are 
the  proper  evidences  and  necessary  concomi- 
tants of  a lively,  thriving  frame  of  spirit? 
3.  Whether  such  a degree  of  faithfulness  to 
light  received  as  is  consistent  with  the  rem- 
nant of  a depraved  nature  in  our  present  state, 
will  certainly  and  always  preserve  our  souls 
from  declensions  and  winter-seasons?  4.  Whe- 
ther that  gracious  humility  which  arises  from 
a due  sense  of  our  own  vileness  and  of  the 
riches  of  divine  grace  be  ordinarily  attainable 
without  some  mortifying  experience  of  the 
deceitfulness  an  d desperate  wickedness  of  our 
own  hearts  ? A few  lines  upon  each  of  these 
particulars  will,  I think,  take  in  the  chief 
parts  of  your  letter. 

1.  We  differ  something  with  respect  to  what 
constitutes  a believer.  I own  nothing  has  sur- 
prised me  more,  in  the  course  of  our  friendly 
debate,  than  your  supposing  that  a person 
should  date  his  conversion  and  his  commen- 
cing a believer  from  the  time  of  his  receiving 
the  gospel-truths  with  that  clearness  and  pow- 
er as  to  produce  in  him  an  abiding  assurance. 
The  apostle,  in  Eph.  i.  13,  makes  a plain  dis- 
tinction between  believing  and  being  sealed 
with  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise.  By  the  ex- 
perience and  observation  of  many  years,  I 
have  been  more  and  more  persuaded,  that  to 
represent  assurance  as  being  of  the  essence 
of  faith,  is  not  agreeable  to  scripture,  which, 
in  many  places,  either  expressly  asserts  or 
strongly  intimates  the  contrary,  John  i.  50, 
and  xx.  29,  Rom.  x.  9,  1 John  v.  1.  Who- 
ever is  not  a believer  must  be  an  unbeliever; 
there  can  be  no  medium.  Either  there  are 
many  believers  who  have  not  assurance,  or 
else  there  are  many  unbelievers  who  love 
the  Lord  Jesus,  hate  sin,  are  poor  in  spirit, 
and  adorn  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel  .by 
their  temper  and  conversation ; and  I doubt 
not  but  those  who  now  have  assurance,  had 
before  they  attained  it,  a something  which 
wrought  by  love,  and  overcame  the  world. 
I know  no  principle  capable  of  these  effects 
but  faith,  which  though  at  first  it  be  like  a 
grain  of  mustard-seed,  is  the  seed  of  God : 
though  it  be  faint,  it  is  genuine,  as  the  dawn- 
ing of  light  is  of  the  same  nature  with  that 
which  flows  from  the  noon-day  sun.  I al- 
low that,  while  faith  is  weak,  there  may  be 
little  solid  comfort,  if  by  that  expression  abi- 
ding comfort  be  meant.  Faith  gives  safety 
and  spiritual  life ; abiding  peace  and  esta- 
blishment follow  the  sealing  of  the  Spirit. 
But  though  an  infant  has  not  the  strength, 
activity,  and  understanding,  which  he  will 
attain  when  he  arrives  to  the  age  of  man- 
hood, he  is  as  fully  possessed  of  a principle 
of  life  while  he  is  an  infant  as  at  any  time 
afterwards. 

2.  We  seem  to  differ  likewise  as  to  the 
marks  of  a lively,  thriving  spirit ; at  least  if  ! 


[let.  XXXVII, 

any  are  supposed  to  be  better  or  surer  thaa 
those  to  which  our  Lord  has  promised  blessed- 
ness, Matt.  v.  3 — 9.  He  has  said,  “ Blessed 
are  they  that  mourn but  he  has  not  said, 
More  blessed  are  they  that  are  comforted. 
They  are,  to  be  sure,  more  happy  at  present: 
but  their  blessedness  consists  not  in  their  pre- 
sent comforts,  but  in  those  perceptions  of  gos- 
pel-truths which  form  them  to  that  contrite 
spirit  in  which  God  delighteth,  Isa.  lvii.  IS. 
and  which  make  them  capable  of  divine 
comforts,  and  spiritual  hungering  and  thirst- 
ing after  them.  Perhaps  we  do  not  argue 
ad  idem;  we  may  mean  different  things.  I 
would  not  represent  myself  as  a stranger  to 
peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  fn  the 
midst  of  all  my  conflicts  I have  a heartfelt 
satisfaction  from  the  gospel,  which  nothing 
else  could  give.  But  I mean,  though  this  be 
with  me  as  an  abiding  principle,  it  rarely  af- 
fords me  what  I think  you  intend  when  you 
speak  of  sensible  comforts.  I cannot  feel 
that  warmth  of  heart,  that  glowing  of  love, 
which  the  knowledge  of  such  a Saviour  should 
inspire.  I account  it  my  sin,  and  I feel  it 
my  burden  that  I cannot.  And  when  I truly 
do  this,  when  I abhor  myself  for  my  stupidi- 
ty, mourn  over  it,  and  humbly  look  up  to  the 
Lord  for  relief  against  it,  I judge  my  soul  to 
be  at  such  times  as  much  alive  to  God  as  it 
would  be  if  he  saw  fit  to  increase  my  com- 
fort. Let  me  always  either  rejoice  in  him 
or  mourn  after  him : I would  leave  the  al- 
ternative to  him,  who  knows  best  how  to 
suit  his  dispensations  to  my  state ; and  I 
trust  he  knows  that  I do  not  say  this  because 
I set  a small  value  upoif  his  presence.  As  to 
the  experience  of  the  apostles,  I believe  they 
were  patterns  to  all  succeeding  believers  • 
but,  with  some  regard  to  the  several  trials 
and  services  to  which  we  may  be  called  in  this 
world,  he  distributes  severally  to  all  his  peo- 
ple according  to  his  own  will,  yet  with  a wise 
and  gracious  accommodation  to  the  circum- 
stances and  situations  of  each.  The  apostle 
Paul  connects  the  abounding  of  his  consola- 
tions with  the  abounding  of  his  afflictions, 
and  with  the  state  of  the  people  to  whom  hc- 
preached,  2 Cor.  i.  4 — 7 ; and  if,  instead  of 
preaching  the  gospel  from  Jerusalem  to  Illy- 
ricum  in  the  face  of  persecution,  he  had  lived 
in  a land  of  liberty,  and  been  confined  to  a 
parochial  cure,  for  aught  I know,  his  cup 
might  not  have  run  over  so  often.  Succeed- 
ing ministers  of  the  gospel,  when  called  to 
very  laborious  and  painful  services,  have,  for 
the  like  reasons,  been  often  favoured  with  a 
double  portion  of  that  joy  which  makes  hard 
things  easy  and  bitter  things  sweet ; and,  in 
general,  all  the  Lord’s  people  who  walk  hum- 
bly before  him,  may  expect  that  in,  or  after 
seasons  of  great  trial,  and  in  proportion  to 
their  pressures, .he  will  favour  them  with  pe- 
culiar comforts.  It  is  in  this  way,  he,  in  a 
great  measure,  fulfils  his  promise  of  making 


ON  CHRISTIAN  EXPERIENCE. 


193 


LET.  XXXVII.] 

their  strength  equal  to  their  day ; and  I am 
enabled  to  trust  him  in  this  matter,  that  if 
he  should,  at  any  time,  see  fit  to  call  me  to 
a more  difficult  and  dangerous  sphere  of  ser- 
vice, or  lead  me  into  the  furnace  of  affliction, 
he  would,  if  he  saw  it  needful,  support  and 
refresh  me  by  such  manifestations  of  his 
glory  and  love,  as  I know  but  little  of  at 
present.  In  a word,  an  humble,  dependent 
frame  of  spirit,  perseverance  in  the  use  of 
appointed  means,  care  to  avoid  all  occasions 
of  sin,  an  endeavour  to  glorify  God  in  our 
callings,  and  an  eye  to  Jesus  as  our  all  in 
all ; — these  things  are  to  me  sure  indica- 
tions that  the  soul  is  right,  that  the  Lord 
is  present,  and  that  grace  is  thriving  and 
in  exercise,  whether  sensible  consolations 
abound  or  not. 

3.  I propose  the  third  question,  concern- 
ing such  a degree  of  faithfulness  to  light  re- 
ceived, as  is  consistent  with  the  remnants  of 
a depraved  nature,  because  I apprehend  one 
effect  of  indwelling  sin  is,  to  render  it  mo- 
rally impossible  for  us  to  be  entirely  faithful 
to  that  light  and  power  which  God  has  given 
us.  It  may  sound  like  a contradiction,  to 
say  we  cannot  do  what  we  can  do ; but  there 
are  many  enigmas  in  a believer’s  experience, 
at  least  in  mine  ; and  I never  expect  to  meet 
the  man  that  knows  his  own  heart,  that  will 
say  he  is  always  faithful,  diligent,  and  obedi- 
ent, to  the  full  extent  of  his  ability ; I rather 
expect  he  would  confess  with  me,  that  he 
feels  a need  of  more  ability,  and  fresh  sup- 
plies of  grace,  to  enable  him  to  make  a better 
improvement  of  what  he  had  already  re- 
ceived. If  some,  as  you  suppose,  in  their 
dullest  frames  can  read  the  Bible,  go  to  the 
throne  of  grace,  and  mourn  (as  they  ought) 
over  what  is  amiss,  I must  say  for  myself,  I 
can,  and  I cannot.  Without  doubt  I can  take 
the  Bible  in  my  hand,  and  force  myself  to 
read  it ; I can  kneel  down,  and  I can  see  I 
ought  to  mourn ; but  to  understand  and  at- 
tend to  what  1 read,  to  engage  my  heart  in 
prayer,  or  to  be  duly  humbled  under  the 
sense  of  so  dark  and  dissipated  a state  of 
mind ; these  things,  at  some  seasons,  I can 
no  more  do  than  raise  the  dead,  and  yet  I 
cannot  plead  positive  inability ; I am  satis- 
fied that  what  prevents  me  is  my  sin,  but  it 
is  the  sin  of  my  nature,  the  sin  that  dwelleth 
in  me : and  I expect  it  will  be  thus  with  me 
at  times,  in  a greater  or  less  degree,  till  this 
body  of  sin  shall  be  wholly  destroyed.  Yet 
I believe  the  Lord  is  with  me,  even  when 
he  seems  to  be  absent,  otherwise  my  corrup- 
tions, at  such  seasons,  might  easily  prevail 
to  betray  me  into  open  or  allowed  sin, 
which,  blessed  be  the  grace  and  care  of  my 
good  Shepherd,  is  not  the  case.  I know  not 
if  I rightly  understand  the  expression,  “We 
may  humbly  hope,  that  those  things  we  fall 
into,  which  are  not  in  our  power  to  prevent, 
will  not  be  set  to  our  account.”  The  least 
2 B 


of  the  evils  I feel,  and  which  seem  most  in- 
voluntary, if  set  to  my  account,  would  ruin 
me ; and  I trust,  that  even  my  worst  devia- 
tions shall  not  appear  against  me,  because  I 
am  a believer  in  Jesus ; and  I know,  and  am 
sure,  that  I do  not  wish  to  continue  in  sin 
that  grace  may  abound.  My  conscience 
bears  me  witness,  that  I would  not  desire 
the  rule  of  duty  to  be  narrowed  or  accommo- 
dated to  my  imperfections  in  a single  in- 
stance. If  the  expression  only  means,  that 
these  unavoidable  effects  of  our  evil  nature 
should  not  break  our  peace  of  conscience,  or 
discourage  us  in  our  approaches  to  God,  I am 
of  the  same  mind  ; through  mercy  I have 
seldom  any  more  doubt  of  my  acceptance  in 
the  Beloved,  when  in  a dark  frame,  than 
when  I am  most  favoured  with  liberty. 

4.  Whether  true  evangelical  humility,  and 
an  enlarged  view  of  the  grace  of  God  in 
Christ,  triumphing  over  all  obstacles,  be  or- 
dinarily attainable  without  an  experience  of 
declensions,  backslidings,  and  repeated  for- 
giveness, is  the  last  question  I shall  consider. 
I dare  say  you  will  do  me  the  justice  to  be- 
lieve, that  I would  not  advise  any  one  to  run 
into  sin  in  order  to  get  a knowledge  of  his 
own  heart.  David  broke  his  bones  thereby ; 
he  obtained  an  affecting  proof  of  his  inability 
of  standing  in  his  own  strength,  and  of  the 
skill  and  goodness  of  his  Physician  who 
healed  him ; yet  no  man  in  his  wits  would 
break  his  bones  for  the  sake  of  making  ex- 
periments, if  he  were  ever  so  sure  they 
would  be  well  set  again.  You  think  that  a 
believer  is  never  more  humble  in  his  own 
eyes,  or  admires  Jesus  more  than  when  he 
is  filled  with  joy  and  peace.  I readily  allow, 
that  the  present  impressions  of  divine  love 
are  humbling : however,  the  direct  tendency 
of  gracious  consolations  in  themselves  is  one 
thing  ; what  evils  they  may  afterwards  occa- 
sion through  the  desperate  depravity  of  our 
hearts,  is  another.  We  have  a memorable 
case  in  point  to  explain  my  meaning.  The 
apostle  Paul’s  recollection  of  his  course  while 
in  a natural  state,  and  the  singular  manner 
of  his  conversion,  were  evidently  suited  to 
make  him  an  humble  Christian,  and  he  was 
so.  By  an  especial  favour  of  the  Lord,  he 
was  afterwards  taken  up  into  the  third 
heaven ; what  he  saw  or  heard  there  he  has 
not  told  us,  but  surely  he  met  with  nothing 
that  could  have  a tendency  to  make  him 
proud ; doubtless  he  saw  Jesus  in  his  glory, 
and  the  humble  spiritual  worship  of  heaven ; 
a sight  which  we  might  deem  sufficient  to 
make  him  walk  in  self-abasement  all  the 
days  of  his  life  : but  Paul,  though  an  eminent 
saint,  was  still  liable  to  the  effects  of  indwell- 
ing sin ; he  was  in  danger  of  being  exalted 
through  the  abundance  of  revelations,  and 
the  Lord,  his  wise  and  gracious  keeper,  saw 
fit,  in  order  to  prevent  it,  that  a messenger 
from  Satan  should  be  given  him  to  buffet 


194 


ON  RELIGION  AS  NECESSARY  TO 


him.  Pride  is  so  subtle,  that  it  can  gather 
strength,  even  from  those  gracious  manifes- 
tations which  seem  directly  calculated  to 
mortify  it;  so  dangerous,  that  a messenger 
from  Satan  himself  may  be  esteemed  a 
mercy,  if  over-ruled  and  sanctified  by  the 
Ix)rd,  to  make  or  keep  us  more  humble : 
therefore,  though  we  can  never  be  too  ear- 
nest in  striving  against  sin,  too  watchful  in 
abstaining  from  all  appearance  of  evil,  and 
though  they  who  wait  upon  the  Lord  may 
comfortably  hope,  that  he  will  preserve  them 
from  such  things  as  would  dishonour  their 
profession  in  the  sight  of  men,  yet  I appre- 
hend they  who  appear  most  to  adorn  the  gos- 
pel in  their  outward  conversation,  are  consci- 
ous of  many  things  between  the  Lord  and 
their  own  souls,  which  covers  them  with 
shame,  and  that  his  tenderness  and  mercy  to 
them,  notwithstanding  their  perverseness, 
constrains  them  with  admiration  to  adopt  the 
language  of  Micah,  “Who  is  a God  like 
unto  thee,  that  pardoneth  iniquity,  and  pass- 
eth  by  the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of 
his  heritage !”  and  I believe  likewise,  that, 
without  such  striking  and  repeated  proofs  of 
what  is  in  their  hearts,  they  would  not  so 
feelingly  enter  into  the  spirit  of  Job’s  con- 
fession, “ Behold,  I am  vile  !”  nor  would  they 
have  such  a lively  sense  of  their  obligations 
to  the  merciful  care  and  faithfulness  of  their 
great  Shepherd,  or  of  their  entire  and  abso- 
lute dependence  upon  him,  for  wisdom,  right- 
eousness, sanctification,  and  redemption.  I 
find  these  considerations  useful  and  necessary 
to  reconcile  me  to  my  lot.  The  Lord  knows 
what  I need,  and  what  I can  bear : gladly 
would  I receive,  earnestly  would  I desire, 
more  of  comforts  while  here  ; but  if  I mourn 
now,  I hope  to  be  comforted  in  heaven.  In 
the  mean  time  it  is  more  immediately  neces- 
sary for  me,  both  as  a Christian  and  a minis- 
ter, that  I should  be  humbled ; the  Lord’s 
will  be  done.  I cannot  pretend  to  determine 
what  ministers,  or  what  body  of  people  come 
nearest  the  character  of  the  primitive  times, 
but  in  my  judgment  they  are  the  happiest 
who  have  the  lowest  thoughts  of  themselves, 
and  in  whose  eyes  Jesus  is  most  glorious  and 
precious. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXXVIII. 

That  True  Religion  is  necessary , in  order 
to  the  best  Enjoyment  of  the  Pleasures 
of  the  present  Life. 

TO  A GAY  FRIEND. 

dear  sir, — Though  I truly  love  you,  and 
have  no  reason  to  doubt  of  the  reality  of  your 
friendship  to  me  ; yet  I cannot  but  apprehend, 
that  notwithstanding  our  mutual  regard, 


[let.  xxxviii. 

and  my  frequent  attempts  to  be  witty,  if  I 
could,  for  your  diversion,  there  is  a some- 
thing in  most  of  my  letters  (which  I cannot, 
dare  not,  wholly  suppress,)  that  disgusts  and 
| wearies  you,  and  makes  you  less  inclined  to 
j keep  up  a frequent  intercourse  than  you 
i would  otherwise  be.  Rather  than  lose  you 
! quite,  I will  in  general  spare  you  as  mu<  h 
1 as  I can ; but  at  present  you  must  bear  with 
j me,  and  allow  me  full  scope  You  have  given 
| me  a challenge,  which  I know  not  how  to 
I pass  over ; and  since  you  so  far  justify  my 
j preaching,  as  to  condescend  to  preach  (in 
j your  way)  yourself,  permit  me,  for  this  time, 
to  preach  again,  and  to  take  some  passages 
j in  your  letter  for  my  text. 

In  the  present  debate,  I will  accept  your 
! compliment,  and  suppose  myself  to  be,  as  you 
say,  a man  of  sense.  You  allow,  then,  that 
| all*  the  sense  is  not  on  your  side.  This,  in- 
, deed,  you  cannot  deny ; for  whatever  becomes 
I of  me,  it  is  needless  to  tell  you,  that  Hale, 
Boyle,  and  other  great  names  I could  men- 
tion, were  men  of  as  great  penetration  and 
judgment,  had  as  good  opportunities,  and 
took  as  much  pains  to  be  informed  of  the 
truth,  as  any  of  the  advocates  for  infidelity 
can  pretend  to.  And  you  cannot,  with  any 
modesty  or  consistence,  absolutely  determine, 
that  they  had  not  as  good  grounds  for  think- 
ing themselves  right,  as  you  can  have  for 
concluding  they  were  wrong. 

But  declining  the  advantage  of  human  au- 
thority, 1 am  content  the  point  should  rest  be- 
tween you  and  me.  And  here  I beg  you  to 
observe,  that  I have  one  evident  advantage 
over  you  in  judging,  namely,  that  I have  ex- 
perienced the  good  and  evil  on  both  sides,  and 
you  only  on  one.  If  you  were  to  send  me  an 
inventory  of  your  pleasures,  how  charmingly 
your  time  runs  on,  and  how  dexterously  it  is 
divided  between  the  coffee-house,  play-house, 
the  card-table,  and  tavern,  with  intervals  of 
balls,  concerts,  &c. ; I could  answer,  that  most 
of  these  I have  tried,  and  tried  again,  and  know 
the  utmost  they  can  yield,  and  have  seen 
enough  of  the  rest,  most  heartily  to  despise 
them  all.  Setting  religion  entirely  out  of  the 
question,  I profess  I had  rather  be  a worm  to 
crawl  upon  the  ground,  than  to  bear  the  name 
of  Man  upon  the  poor  terms  of  whiling  away 
my  life  in  an  insipid  round  of  such  insignificant 
and  unmanly  trifles.  I will  return  your  own 
expression, — I believe  you  to  be  a person  of 
sense ; but  alas ! how  do  you  prostitute  your 
talents  and  capacity ; how  far  do  you  act  be- 
low yourself,  if  you  know  no  higher  purpose 
of  life  than  these  childish  dissipations,  toge- 
ther with  the  more  serious  business  of  rising 
early  and  sitting  up  late,  to  amass  money, 
that  you  may  be  able  to  enlarge  your  ex- 
penses ! I am  sure,  while  I lived  in  these 
things,  I found  them  unsatisfying  and  empty 
to  the  last  degree ; and  the  only  advantage 
they  afforded  (miserable  are  they  who  are 


THE  ENJOYMENT  OF  LIFE. 


195 


LET.  XXXVIII. J 


forced  to  deem  it  an  advantage)  was,  that 
they  often  relieved  me  from  the  trouble  and 
burden  of  thinking.  If  you  have  any  other 
pleasures  than  these,  they  are  such  as  must  be 
evil  and  inconvenient,  even  upon  your  own 
plan ; and,  therefore,  my  friendship  will  not  al- 
low me  to  bring  them  into  the  account.  I am 
willing  to  hope  you  do  not  stoop  still  lower 
in  pursuit  of  satisfaction.  Thus  far  we  stand 
upon  even  ground.  You  know  all  that  a 
life  of  pleasure  can  give,  and  I know  it  like- 
wise. 

On  the  other  hand,  if  I should  attempt  to 
explain  to  you  the  source  and  streams  of  my 
best  pleasures,  such  as  a comfortable  assu- 
rance of  the  pardon  of  my  sins,  an  habitual 
communion  with  the  God  who  made  heaven 
and  earth,  a calm  reliance  on  the  divine  pro- 
vidence, the  cheering  prospect  of  a better  life 
in  a better  world,  with  the  pleasing  foretastes 
of  heaven  in  my  own  soul ; should  I,  or  could 
l,  tell  you  the  pleasure  I often  find  in  read- 
ing the  scriptures,  in  the  exercise  of  prayer, 
and  in  that  sort  of  preaching  and  conversa- 
tion which  you  despise ; I doubt  not  but  you 
would  think  as  meanly  of  my  happiness  as  I 
do  of  yours.  But  here  lies  the  difference,  my 
dear  friend,  you  condemn  that  which  you 
have  never  tried.  You  know  no  more  of  these 
things  than  a blind  man  does  of  colours  ; and, 
notwithstanding  all  your  flourishes,  I defy 
you  to  be  at  all  times  able  to  satisfy  yourself, 
that  things  may  not  possibly  be  as  I have  re- 
presented them. 

Besides,  what  do  I lose  upon  my  plan,  that 
should  make  me  so  worthy  of  your  pity  ? 
Have  you  a quicker  relish  in  the  prudent  use 
of  temporal  comforts'?  Do  you  think  I do 
not  eat  my  food  with  as  much  pleasure  as  you 
can  do,  though  perhaps,  with  less  cost  and 
variety  ? Is  your  sleep  sounder  than  mine? 
Have  not  I as  much  satisfaction  in  social  life? 
It  is  true,  to  join  much  with  the  gay  flutter- 
ing tribe,  who  spend  their  days  in  laugh  and 
sing-song,  is  equally  contrary  to  my  duty  and 
inclination.  But  I have  friends  and  acquaint- 
ance as  well  as  you.  Among  the  many  who 
favour  me  with  their  esteem  and  friendship, 
there  are  some  who  are  persons  of  sense, 
learning,  wit,  and  (what,  perhaps,  may  weigh 
as  much  with  you)  of  fortune  and  distinction. 
And  if  you  should  say,  “Ay,  but  they  are 
all  enthusiasts  like  yourself,”  you  would  say 
nothing  to  the  purpose,  since,  upon  your 
maxim,  that  “happiness  is  according  to  opi- 
nion,” it  cannot  be  an  objection,  but  the  con- 
trary, to  have  my  acquaintance  to  my  own 
taste.  Thus  much  for  the  brighter  side  of 
your  situation ; or,  let  me  add  one  thing  more. 

I know  you  have  thoughts  of  marriage ; do 
you  think,  if  you  should  enter  into  this  rela- 
tion, your  principles  are  calculated  to  make 
you  more  happy  in  it  than  I am?  You  are 
well  acquainted  with  our  family-life.  Do 
you  propose  to  know  more  of  the  peace  and 


heartfelt  joy  of  domestic  union  than  I have 
known,  and  continue  to  know  to  this  hour  ? 
I wish  you  may  equal  us ; and  if  you  do,  we 
shall  still  be  as  before,  but  upon  even  ground. 
I need  not  turn  deist,  to  enjoy  the  best  and 
the  most  that  this  life  can  afford. 

But  I need  not  tell  you,  that  the  present 
life  is  not  made  up  of  pleasureable  incidents 
only.  Pain,  sickness,  losses,  disappointments, 
injuries,  and  affronts  with  men,  will  more  or 
less,  at  one  time  or  other  be  our  lot.  And 
can  you  bear  these  trials  better  than  I ? You 
will  not  pretend  to  it.  Let  me  appeal  to 
yourself:  How  often  do  you  toss  and  disquiet 
yourself,  like  a wild  bull  in  a net,  when 
things  cross  your  expectations?  As  your 
thoughts  are  more  engrossed  by  what  you 
see,  you  must  be  more  keenly  sensible  of 
what  you  feel.  You  cannot  view  these  trials 
as  appointed  by  a wise  and  heavenly  Father, 
in  subservience  to  your  good:  you  cannot 
taste  the  sweetness  of  his  promises,  nor  feel 
the  secret  supports  of  his  strength,  in  an 
hour  of  affliction ; you  cannot  so  cast  your 
burden  and  care  upon  him  as  to  find  a sensi- 
ble relief  to  your  spirit  thereby;  nor  can 
you  see  his  hand  engaged  and  employed  in 
effecting  your  deliverance.  Of  these  things 
you  know  no  more  than  of  the  art  of  flying; 
but  I seriously  assure  you,  and  I believe  my 
testimony  will  go  farther  with  you  than  my 
judgment,  that  they  are  realities,  and  that 
I have  found  them  to  be  so.  When  my 
worldly  concerns  have  been  most  thorny  and 
discouraging,  I have  once  and  again  felt  the 
most  of  that  peace  which  the  world  can  nei- 
ther give  nor  take  away.  However,  I may 
state  the  case  still  lower.  You  do  pretty 
well  among  your  friends ; but  how  do  you 
like  being  alone  ? Would  you  not  give 
something  for  that  happy  secret,  which  could 
enable  you  to  pass  a rainy  day  pleasantly, 
without  the  assistance  of  business,  company, 
or  amusement?  Would  it  not  mortify  you 
greatly  to  travel  for  a week  in  an  unfre- 
quented road,  where  you  should  meet  with 
no  lively  incidents  to  recruit  and  raise  your 
spirits?  Alas  ! what  a poor  scheme  of  plea- 
sure is  yours,  that  will  not  support  an  inter- 
val of  reflection  ? 

What  you  have  heard  is  true : I have  a 
few  friends,  who  meet  at  my  house  once  a 
fortnight,  and  we  spend  an  hour  or  two  in 
worshipping  the  God  who  made  us.  And  can 
this  move  your  indignation  or  your  compas- 
sion ? Does  it  show  a much  nobler  spirit,  a 
more  refined  way  of  thinking,  to  live  altoge- 
ther without  God  in  the  world  ? If  I kept  a 
card-assembly  at  those  times,  it  would  not  dis- 
please you.  How  can.  you,  as  a person  of 
sense,  avoid  being  shocked  at  your  own  un- 
happy prejudice?  But  I remember  how  it 
was  once  with  myself,  and  forbear  to  wonder. 
May  He  who  has  opened  my  eyes,  open  yours. 
He  only  can  do  it.  I do  not  expect  to  con- 


196 


A WORD  IN  SEASON. 


vince  you  by  any  thing1 1 can  say  as  of  my- 
self; but  if  He  is  pleased  to  make  use  of  me 
as  his  instrument,  then  you  will  be  convinced. 
How  should  I then  rejoice!  I should  re- 
joice to  be  useful  to  any  one,  but  especially 
to  you,  whom  I dearly  love.  May  God  show 
you  your  true  self,  and  your  true  state  ; then 
you  will  attentively  listen  to  what  you  now 
disdain  to  hear  of,  his  goodness  in  providing 
redemption  and  pardon  for  the  chief  of  sinners, 
through  him  who  died  upon  the  cross  for  sins 
not  his  own.  Keep  this  letter  by  you  at  my 
request ; and  when  you  write,  tell  me  that 
you  receive  it  in  good  part,  and  that  you  still 
believe  me  to  be,  &c. 


LETTER  XXXIX. 

A Word  in  Season. 

dear  sir, — -In  this  dark  and  declining  day, 
when  iniquity  abounds,  the  awful  tokens  of 
God’s  displeasure  are  multiplying  around  us, 
and  too  many  professors,  not  duly  sensible  of 
the  real  cause  of  all  the  evils  we  either  feel 
or  have  reason  to  fear,  are  disputing,  instead 
of  praying,  may  the  Lord  bestow  upon  you, 
and  rne,  and  upon  all  who  fear  his  name,  a 
spirit  suited  to  the  times ; that  the  words  of 
David,  “I  beheld  the  transgressors,  and  was 
grieved,”  may  express  the  very  sensation  and 
frame  of  our  hearts.  Permit  me  to  keep  this 
expression  in  my  view  while  I write,  though 
it  may  perhaps  give  my  letter  something  of 
the  air  of  a sermon. 

The  Hebrew  word  answering  to  “I  was 
grieved,”  signifies  such  a kind  of  grief  as  is 
mixed  with  dislike;  such  a grief  as  a believer 
must  feel  when  he  has  a sense  of  his  own 
corruptions.  It  is  frequently  rendered  as  in 
Ezek.  xx.  43.  to  loathe : “ You  shall  loathe 
yourselves  in  your  own  sight.”  We  are  not 
required  strictly  to  hate  ourselves,  but  the 
evil  that  is  in  us.  So,  when  we  look  at  trans- 
gressors, we  are  not  to  hate  but  to  pity  them, 
mourn  over  them,  and  pray  for  them ; nor 
have  we  any  right  to  boast  over  them ; for  by 
by  nature,  and  of  ourselves,  we  are  no  better 
than  they.  But  their  sinfulness  should  cause 
a dislike,  an  holy  indignation ; as  it  is  re- 
corded of  our  Lord,  who  though  full  of  com- 
passion and  tenderness,  so  that  he  wept  over 
his  enemies,  and  prayed  for  his  actual  mur- 
derers, yet  looked  upon  transgressors  with 
anger,  being  grieved  for  the  hardness  of  their 
hearts. 

A feeling  of  this  kind  seems  essential  to 
that  new  nature  which  characterises  . the 
children  of  God ; and,  where  it  is  not  in  ha- 
bitual exercise,  it  is  a sufficient  evidence 
that  the  soul,  if  truly  alive  to  God  at  all,  is 
at  least  in  a lean  and  distempered  state. 
Who  can  avoid  being  grieved  and  hurt  by 


[let.  xxxix. 

that  which  is  in  direct  opposition  to  what  he 
most  loves?  Believers  love  holiness,  and, 
unless  when  stupified  by  the  arts  of  Satan, 
can  hardly  bear  themselves  for  what  they 
find  contrary  to  it  within  their  own  breasts, 
and  must  therefore,  of  course,  be  grieved 
with  the  sins  of  others.  Like  righteous  Lot, 
and  from  his  principles,  they  are  “ vexed 
with  the  conversation  of  the  wicked.”  Can 
they  who  reverence  the  name  of  God  be 
easy  and  unconcerned  when  they  hear  it 
blasphemed]  No:  their  ears  are  wounded 
and  their  hearts  are  pained.  Can  they  who 
are  followers  of  peace  and  purity  behold  un- 
moved the  riots,  licentiousness,  and  daring 
wickedness  of  those  who  have  cast  off  both 
shame  and  fear  ] Can  they  who  have  bow- 
els of  mercy  and  compassion,  be  unaffected 
when  they  see  the  iron  hand  of  oppression 
grinding  the  faces  of  the  poor]  Or  can 
any  who  love  the  songs  of  Zion,  help  being 
shocked  with  the  songs  of  drunkards]  I 
trust  there  are  many,  who,  upon  these  ac- 
counts are  daily  crying,  “ My  soul  is  among 
lions:”  “Wo  is  me  that  I dwell  in  Meshech!” 
“ O gather  not  my  soul  with  sinners.”  The 
thought  of  being  shut  up  forever  with  the 
ungodly  would  be  terrible  as  hell  to  a gra- 
cious soul,  though  there  were  no  devouring 
fire,  no  keen  sense  of  the  wrath  of  God  to  be 
feared. 

They  are  grieved  likewise  upon  their 
Lord’s  account,  for  they  have  obtained  a 
spark  of  zeal  for  his  honour  and  glory.  With 
Elijah,  they  are  “ very  jealous  for  the  Lord  of 
hosts.”  They  feel  their  obligations  to  him, 
and  know  he  well  deserves  to  reign  in  every 
heart.  But  when,  on  the  contrary,  they  see 
almost  every  one  in  a conspiracy  against 
him,  despising  him  to  his  face,  trampling 
upon  his  laws,  rejecting  his  authority,  and 
abusing  his  patience,  their  eyes  affect  their 
hearts.  What  man  of  sensibility  could  brook 
to  see  every  one  about  him  contriving  how 
to  affront  and  injure  the  person  whom  he 
most  loved  ] Now  the  Lord  is  the  believer's 
best  friend,  the  beloved  of  his  soul ; and  there- 
fore he  is  grieved  and  troubled  when  he 
“ beholds  the  transgressors.” 

This  emotion  is  likewise  heightened  by 
compassion  to  souls.  Grace  gives  some  view 
of  the  evil  of  sin,  the  dreadfulness  of  the 
wrath  of  God,  and  the  vast  importance  of  that 
word  eternity.  Thus  instructed  in  the  sanc- 
tuary of  God,  they  would  be  stocks  and  stones, 
were  they  capable  of  beholding  sinners  rush- 
ing upon  destruction  without  being  grieved 
for  them.  But  they  cannot  bear  it;  they 
cannot  but  give  and  repeat  a faithful  warn- 
ing, though  they  have  little  reason  to  expect 
any  better  return  than  scorn  and  ill-treatment 
for  what  the  world  accounts  an  impertinent 
officiousness. 

But  who  then  are  believers?  Who  are 
thus  “on  the  Lord’s  side!”  If  these  senti 


A WORD  IN  SEASON. 


197 


LET.  XXXIX.] 

merits  are  common  and  radical  to  all  who  are  i 
born  of  God,  can  we  make  no  abatement  1 1 
Or  must  we  unchristian  perhaps  the  greater 
part  of  professors  at  this  time  ! for  it  is  too 
evident  that  many,  who  bear  the  name  of 
gospel  professors,  discover  but  little  of  this 
concern.  In  general,  I think  this  subject  af- 
fords no  improper  test  for  the  trial  of  our 
spirits.  The  etfects  of  grace,  in  similar  cir- 
cumstances, are  uniform;  but  if  any,  who 
think  themselves  possessors  of  it,  feel  no 
grief  for  the  abounding  of  sin  and  the  obsti- 
nacy of  sinners,  they  differ  from  the  saints 
recorded  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testa- 
ment, and  it  will  be  their  wisdom  to  examine 
and  take  heed  lest  they  be  deceived.  It  is 
easy  to  call  Christ,  Lord,  Lord ; but  a crimi- 
nal lukewarmness  of  spirit,  where  his  cause, 
honour,  and  gospel  are  in  question,  will  one 
day  meet  with  an  awful  rebuke,  and  be 
treated,  in  those  who  make  mention  of  his 
name,  as  high  treason  against  his  person  and 
government 

But  if  we  allow  that,  through  the  conta- 
gion of  the  times  and  the  power  of  Satan,  it 
is  possible  for  true  Christians  to  sink  into  this 
indifference,  and  for  the  wise,  as  well  as  the 
foolish  virgins,  to  sleep,  when  they  should 
be  watching  unto  prayer ; even  these  have 
much  to  fear,  lest  they  should  largely  par- 
ticipate in  the  sufferings  which  the  provoca- 
tions they  connive  at  have  a direct  tendency 
to  bring  upon  a sinful  people.  When  na- 
tional sins  draw  down  national  judgments, 
the  Lord  has  given  us  a hope,  that  he  will  fix 
a mark  of  protection  upon  them  who  sigh 
and  mourn  in  secret  before  him,  for  the  evils 
which  they  are  unable  to  prevent.  To  these 
he  will  be  a sanctuary ; he  will  either  pre- 
serve them  unhurt  in  the  midst  of  surround- 
ing calamities,  or  he  will  support  them  with 
consolations  superior  to  all  their  troubles, 
when  the  hearts  of  others  are  shaken  like 
leaves  in  a storm.  But  none  have  reason  to 
expect  to  be  thus  privileged,  who  have  not 
a heart  given  them  to  lament  their  own  sins 
and  the  sins  of  those  among  whom  they  live. 

Surely  the  I^ord  has  a controversy  with 
this  land  ; and  there  hardly  can  be  a period 
assigned  in  the  annals  of  ages,  when  it  was 
more  expedient  or  seasonable  for  those  who 
fear  him  to  stir  up  each  other  to  humiliation 
and  prayer  than  at  present.  What  is  com- 
monly called  our  national  debt  is  swelled  to 
an  enormous  greatness.  It  may  be  quickly 
expressed  in  figures;  but  a person  must  be 
something  versed  in  calculation  to  form  a 
tolerable  idea  of  accumulated  millions.  But 
what  arithmetic  is  sufficient  to  compute  the 
immensity  of  our  national  debt  in  a spiritual 
sense  ! or,  in  other  words,  the  amount  of  our 
national  sins  ! The  spirit  of  infidelity,  which, 
for  a time,  distinguished  comparatively  a 
few,  and,  like  a river,  was  restrained  within 
narrow  bounds,  has  of  late  years  broken  down 


its  banks  and  deluged  the  land.  This  wide- 
spreading  evil  has,  in  innumerable  instances, 
as  might  be  expected,  emboldened  the  natu- 
ral heart  against  the  fear  of  God,  hardened 
it  to  an  insensibility  of  moral  obligation,  and 
strengthened  its  prejudices  against  the  gos- 
pel. The  consequence  has  been,  that  profli- 
gate wickedness  is  become  almost  as  univer- 
sal as  the  air  we  breathe,  and  is  practised 
with  little  more  reserve  or  secrecy  than  the 
transactions  of  common  business,  except  in 
such  instances  as  would  subject  the  ohender 
to  the  penalty  of  human  laws.  O the  un- 
speakable patience  of  God ! The  multiplied 
instances  of  impiety,  blasphemy,  cruelty, 
adultery,  villany,  and  abominations  not  to  be 
thought  of  without  horror,  under  which  this 
land  groans,  are  only  known  to  him  who 
knoweth  all  things.  There  are  few  sins 
which  imply  greater  contempt  of  God,  or  a 
more  obdurate  state  of  mind  in  the  offender, 
than  perjury,  yet  the  guilt  of  it  is  so  little 
regarded,  and  temptations  to  it  so  very  fre- 
quent, that  perhaps  I do  not  go  too  far  in  sup- 
posing there  are  more  deliberate  acts  of  per- 
jury committed  amongst  us  than  among  all 
the  rest  of  mankind  taken  together.  Though 
some  of  the  Roman  poets  and  historians  have 
given  very  dark  pictures  of  the  times  they 
lived  in,  their  worst  descriptions  of  this  kind 
would  hardly  be  found  exaggerated  if  applied 
to  our  own.  But  what  are  the  sins  of  hea- 
thens, if  compared  with  the  like  evils  perpe- 
trated in  a land  bearing  the  name  of  Chris- 
tian, favoured  with  the  word  of  God,  the  light 
of  the  gospel,  and  enjoying  the  blessings  of 
civil  and  religious  liberty  and  peace  in  a 
higher  degree,  and  for  a longer  continuance, 
than  was  afforded  to  any  people  of  whose 
history  we  have  heard  1 

The  state  of  the  churches  of  Christ  at  this 
time  affords  likewise  ample  cause  for  hu- 
miliation and  grief.  The  formality,  confor- 
mity to  the  world,  the  want  of  love,  the 
intemperate,  and  unprofitable  contentions, 
which  prevail  among  us,  show  how  faintly 
the  power  of  the  gospel  is  felt,  even  by  many 
who  profess  to  have  embraced  it.  The  true 
and  undefiled  doctrine  of  Jesus  is  not  only 
opposed  by  its  declared  enemies,  but  wounded 
and  dishonoured  in  the  house  of  its  friends. 
And  though  the  sins  of  those  who  avow  sub- 
jection to  the  institutions  of  Christ,  may  not 
have  so  gross  a stamp  of  profligacy  and  im- 
morality, as  of  those  who  set  him  openly  at 
defiance ; yet  they  have,  in  some  respects, 
an  aggravation,  of  which  the  others  are  not 
capable ; as  being  committed  against  clearer 
light,  and  peculiar  acknowledged  obligations. 
From  the  consideration  of  both  taken  to- 
gether, who,  that  has  a spark  of  seriousness 
and  attention,  and  that  has  learned  from 
scripture  and  history  the  sure  connexion  be- 
tween sin  and  trouble,  can  forbare  trembling 
at  that  alarming  question,  so  often  proposed 


398 


TO  PROFESSORS  IN  TRADE. 


to  the  consciences  of  ungrateful  Israel  of 
old,  “ Shall  not  I visit  for  these  things]  saith 
the  Lord : and  shall  not  my  soul  be  avenged 
on  such  a nation  as  this  3”  especially  when 
we  see  the  dispensations  of  God’s  providence 
so  awfully  corresponding  with  the  threaten- 
ings  in  his  word. 

How  much  is  it  to  be  desired,  then,  that 
all  who  truly  fear  the  Lord,  instead  of  wast- 
ing their  time  in  useless  squabbles,  may 
unite  in  earnest  prayer  ; and,  with  deep  com- 
punction of  heart,  bemoan  those  evils,  which, 
unless  repented  of  and  forsaken,  may  bring 
upon  us,  as  a people,  such  distress  as  neither 
we  nor  our  fathers  have  known  ! If  he  is 
pleased  thus  to  give  us  a heart  to  seek  him, 
he  will  yet  be  found  of  us ; but  if  when  his 
hand  is  lifted  up,  we  cannot,  or  will  not  see, 
nor  regard  the  signs  of  the  times,  there  is 
great  reason  to  fear,  that  our  case  is  deplora- 
ble indeed. 

A few,  however,  there  will  be,  who  will 
lay  these  things  suitably  to  heart ; and  whom 
the  Lord  will  favour  and  spare,  as  a man 
spareth  his  only  son  that  serveth  him.  That 
you  and  I may  be  of  this  happy  number,  is 
the  sincere  prayer  of,  &c. 


LETTER  XL. 

A Word  to  Professors  in  Trade. 

dear  sir, — It  is  suspected,  or  rather  it  is 
too  certainly  known,  that,  among  those  who 
are  deemed  gospel-professors,  there  are  some 
persons  who  allow  themselves  in  the  practice 
of  dealing  in  prohibited,  uncustomed,  or,  as 
the  common  phrase  is,  smuggled  goods,  to 
the  prejudice  of  the  public  revenue,  and  the 
detriment  of  the  fair  trader. 

The  decisions  of  the  word  of  God  upon  this 
point,  are  so  plain  and  determinate,  that  it  is 
rather  difficult  to  conceive  how  a sincere 
mind  can  either  overlook  or  mistake  them. 
The  same  authority  which  forbids  us  to  com- 
mit adultery,  or  murder,  requires  us  to  “ ren- 
der unto  Cesar  the  things  that  are  Cesar’s 
to  render  unto  ail  their  dues:  tribute  to  whom 
tribute,  custom  to  whom  custom.  These  pre- 
cepts enjoin  no  more  than  what  the  common 
sense  of  mankind  pronounces  to  be  due  from 
subjects  and  members  of  society,  to  the  go- 
vernments they  live  under,  and  by  which 
they  are  protected.  But  the  obligation  is 
greatly  enforced  upon  those  who  acknow- 
ledge themselves  the  disciples  of  Christ,  since 
he  has  been  pleased  to  make  their  compli- 
ance herein  a part  of  the  obedience  they 
owe  to  himself.  And  it  is  plain,  that  these 
injunctions  are  universal  and  binding,  under 
all  civil  governments,  as  such ; for  none  can 
justly  suppose  that  tributes  exacted  by  the 
Roman  emperors,  (under  whose  dominion  the 


[let.  *l. 

first  Christians  lived)  such  as  Tiberius  or 
Nero,  had  the  sanction  of  our  Lord  and  his 
apostles  on  account  of  their  peculiar  equity. 

The  vending  smuggled  goods,  or  the  buy- 
ing them,  if  known  to  be  so,  is  likewise  in- 
jurious to  the  fair  trader,  who  conscientiously 
paying  the  prescribed  duties,  cannot  afford 
to  sell  so  cheap  as  the  smuggler : and  there- 
fore, must  expect  the  fewer  customers.  In  this 
view,  it  offends  the  royal  law,  of  “ doing  to 
others  as  we  would  they  should  do  unto  us.” 
The  force  of  this  argument  may  be  easily 
felt  by  any  one  who  will  honestly  make  the 
case  his  own.  Without  any  nice  reasoning, 
people  may  know  in  a moment,  that  they 
should  not  like  to  be  put  to  this  disadvantage. 
It  is,  therefore,  unjust,  (i.  e.  sinful,  and  utterly 
unbecoming  a professor  of  religion)  to  pur- 
chase smuggled  goods,  even  in  small  quanti- 
ties, and  for  family-use.  As  for  those  who, 
being  in  trade  themselves,  make  this  practice 
a branch  of  their  business,  and,  under  the 
semblance  of  a fair  reputation,  are  doing 
things  in  secret,  which  they  would  tremble 
to  have  discovered,  being  afraid  of  the  ex- 
chequer, though  not  of  God,  I can  only  pray, 
that  God  may  give  them  repentance;*  for  it 
is  a wTork  cf  darkness,  and  needs  it.  Trans- 
actions of  this  kind  cannot  be  carried  on  for 
a course  of  time,  without  such  a series  and 
complication  of  fraud  and  meanness,*  and, 
for  the  most  part,  of  perjury  likewise,  as 
would  be  scandalous,  not  only  in  a professed 
Christian,  but  in  an  avowed  infidel. 

It  should  be  observed  likewise,  that  there 
is  hardly  any  set  of  men  more  lost  to  societv, 
or  in  a situation  more  dangerous  to  them- 
selves and  others,  than  the  people  who  are 
called  smugglers.  Frequent  fightings,  and 
sometimes  murder  itself,  are  the  consequence 
of  their  illicit  commerce.  Their  money  is 
ill  gotten,  and  it  is  generally  ill  spent.  They 
are  greatly  to  be  pitied.  The  employment 
they  are  accustomed  to,  has  a direct  tendency 
to  deprive  them  of  character,  and  the  privi- 
leges of  social  life,  and  to  harden  their  hearts, 
and  stupify  their  consciences,  in  the  ways  of 
sin.  But  for  whom  are  they  risking  their 
lives,  and  ruining  their  souls  I I would 
hope,  reader,  not  for  you,  if  you  account  your- 
self a Christian.  If  you,  for  the  sake  of  gain, 
encourage  or  assist  them,  by  buying  or  sell- 
ing their  goods,  you  are  so  far  responsible  for 
the  consequences.  You  encourage  them  in 
sin  ; you  expose  them  to  mischief.  And  have 
you  so  learned  Christ  1 Is  this  the  testimony 
you  give  of  the  uprightness  of  your  hearts 
and  wrays  ] Is  it  thus  you  show  your  com- 
passion for  the  souls  of  men  I Ah  ! shako 
your  hands  from  gain  so  dearly  earned 
Think  not  to  support  the  cause  of  God  with 
such  gain  ; he  hates  robbery  for  burnt-offer- 

* Dr  Johnson,  defining  a smuggler,  says,  he  is  “ a 
wretch  who  imports  or  exports  goods  without  paymaat 
of  the  customs.” 


ON  THE  MINISTRY  OF  ANGELS. 


199 


LET.  XLI.] 

mg.  Think  it  not  lawful,  or  safe,  to  put  a 
farthing  of  it  into  your  treasury,  lest  it 
secretly  communicate  a moth  and  a curse  to 
all  that  you  possess ; for  it  is  the  price  of 
blood,  the  blood  of  souls.  If  you  are  indeed 
a child  of  God,  and  will  persist  in  this  path 
after  admonition  received,  be  assured  your  sin 
will  find  you  out.  If  the  Lord  loves  you,  he 
will  not  suffer  you  to  prosper  in  your  perverse- 
ness. You  may  rather  expect,  that  as  a 
little  damaged  corn  is  sufficient  to  spoil  a 
whole  heap  to  which  it  is  laid,  so  money, 
thus  obtained,  will  deprive  you  of  the  blessing 
and  comfort  you  might  otherwise  expect  from 
your  lawful  acquisitions. 

If  you  are  determined  to  persist  in  opposi- 
tion to  scripture,  to  law,  to  equity  and  hu- 
manity, you  have,  doubtless,  as  I suppose  you 
a professor,  some  plea  or  excuse  with  which 
you  attempt  to  justify  yourself  and  to  keep 
your  conscience  quiet.  See  to  it,  that  it  be 
such  a one  as  will  bear  the  examination  of  a 
dying  hour.  You  will  not  surely  plead  that 
“ things  are  come  to  such  a pass,  there  is  no 
carrying  on  business  upon  other  terms  to  ad- 
vantage!” Will  the  practice  of  the  world, 
who  knew  not  Christ,  be  a proper  precedent 
for  you  who  call  yourself  by  his  name  1 That 
cannot  be,  since  his  command  is,  “ Thou  shalt 
not  follow  a multitude  to  do  evil.”  That  the 
truth  and  power  of  his  grace  may  be  mani- 
fested, he  is  pleased  to  put  his  servants  into 
such  situations,  that  they  must  forego  some 
seeming  advantages,  and  suffer  some  seem- 
ing hardships,  in  their  worldly  connexions, 
if  they  will  approve  themselves  faithful  to 
him,  and  live  in  the  exercise  of  a good  con- 
science. He  promises,  that  his  grace  shall  j 
be  sufficient  for  them.  It  is  the  blessing  of  ! 
the  Lord  that  maketh  rich  ; and,  for  want  of  j 
this,  we  see  many  rise  early,  take  late  rest, ! 
and  eat  the  bread  of  carefulness,  to  no  pur-  j 
pose.  And  I believe,  integrity  and  diligence  I 
in  business,  with  a humble  dependence  upon  J 
his  providence,  are  the  best  methods  of 
thriving  even  in  temporals.  However,  they 
who  lose  for  him  are  in  no  danger  of  losing 
by  him.  They  may  be  confident  of  so  much 
as  he  sees  best  for  them  ; and  they  shall  have 
his  peace  and  blessing  with  it.  But  if,  when 
you  are  placed  in  a state  of  trial,  the  love  of 
the  world  is  so  powerful  in  your  heart,  that 
you  cannot  resist  the  temptation  of  enrich- 
ing yourself  by  unlawful  means,  you  have 
great  reason  to  fear  you  have  not  his  Spirit, 
and  are  therefore  none  of  his. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XLT. 

On  the  Ministry  of  Angels. 

dear  sir, — The  saints  on  earth,  though 
exposed  to  many  sufferings,  and  assaulted 


by  many  enemies,  are  as  safe  as  the  saints 
in  glory.  They  have  been  enabled,  in  the 
day  of  God’s  power  to  commit  themselves  to 
the  care  of  Jesus,  the  great  shepherd,  who 
is  faithful  to  his  trust,  and  able  to  save  them 
to  the  uttermost.  His  eye  is  always  upon 
them,  his  everlasting  arms  are  underneath 
them,  and  no  power,  or  policy,  can  separate 
them  from  his  love. 

The  apostle,  in  the  name  and  behalf  of  the 
church  militant,  having  taken  a leisurely  and 
distinct  survey  of  all  the  difficulties  and  op- 
position they  can  possibly  meet  with,  in  life 
or  in  death,  from  the  visible  or  invisible 
worlds,  triumphs  in  an  assurance,  that  none 
of  these  things  singly,  nor  all  of  them  to- 
gether, shall  prevail ; but  that,  on  the  con- 
trary, believers  shall  be  made  conquerors, 
yea,  more  than  conquerors,  through  him  who 
has  loved  them. 

In  the  course  of  his  enumeration  of  the 
real  and  supposed  dangers  to  which  the  peo- 
ple of  Christ  are  exposed,  he  particularly 
mentions,  angels,  principalities,  and  powers, 
intimating  to  us  a subject  of  great  impor- 
tance, though  too  seldom  and  too  faintly  at- 
tended to  by  us ; I mean  the  part  which  the 
inhabitants  of  the  unseen  world  take  in  our 
concerns.  Angel  is  a general  name ; the 
terms,  pincipalities  and  powers,  and  else- 
where, thrones  and  dominions,  apply  to  them, 
we  shall  not,  perhaps,  clearly  understand, 
till  we  mingle  with  the  world  of  spirits. 
These  different  names  seem,  however,  to 
imply  that  some  difference  of  degree,  and 
possibly  some  subordination  of  rule,  obtains 
among  them.  But  they  shall  not  be  able 
either  singly  or  collectively  to  separate  be- 
lievers from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus. 

The  general  distribution  of  angels,  princi- 
palities, and  powers,  is  into  good  and  evil. 
They  were  all  created  glorious  and  excellent 
creatures ; for  nothing  but  good  could  origi- 
nally proceed  from  God,  the  fountain  of  good- 
ness. But  some  of  them  “kept  not  their 
first  estate.”  Sin  dispoiled  them  of  their 
glory,  and  changed  them  from  angels  of  light 
into  powers  of  darkness.  And  though  they 
have  a permissive  liberty,  subservient  to  the 
limitations  and  designs  of  divine  wisdom,  to 
influence  the  minds,  and  to  interfere  in  the 
affairs  of  mankind  ; yet  they  are  confined  in 
chains  of  darkness  which  they  cannot  break, 
and  are  reserved  to  the  judgment  of  the 
great  day. 

There  are  likewise  an  innumerable  com- 
pany of  elect  and  good  angels,  Rev  iii.  11. 
who  were  preserved  by  sovereign  grace,  and 
are  now  established  (together  with  believers) 
in  Christ  Jesus,  the  great  head  of  the  whole 
family  of  God,  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  From 
these,  we  may  be  sure,  believers  have  no 
thing  to  fear.  They  are  our  brethren  and  fel- 
low-servants. They  join  in  the  song  of  the 


200 


ON  THE  MINISTRY  OF  ANGELS. 


redeemed  before  the  throne ; and  rejoice  in 
the  conversion  of  a sinner  upon  earth.  We 
cann  )t  include  these  in  the  apostle’s  chal- 
lenge, any  farther  than  by  way  of  supposi- j 
tion  ; as  he  expresses  himself  upon  another  j 
occasion,  Gal.  i.  8.  It  is  not  possible  that  an 
angel  from  heaven  should  preach,  if  he  came 
to  preach  any  other  gospel  than  that  which 
is  revealed  in  scripture ; but  if  such  a thing 
could  be  supposed,  we  ought  not  to  re- 
gard him.  So  it  is  not  to  be  thought  that 
the  elect  angels  of  God  should  wish  to  hinder 
the  salvation  of  a sinner.  But  if  you  con- 
ceive for  a moment,  that  any,  or  all  of  them 
could  form  such  a design,  they  would  not  be 
able  to  succeed ; for  they  are  all  subject  to  him 
who  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins 
in  his  own  blood.  So  far,  however,  are  the  holy 
angels  from  designing  us  harm,  that  they  are 
greatly  instrumental  in  promoting  our  good. 
They  are  “ ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to 
minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation and  they 
rejoice  in  the  service,  and  account  it  their 
honour  to  be  thus  employed. 

I propose,  in  this  paper,  briefly  to  consider 
the  ministry  of  good  angels ; and  may,  per- 
haps, hereafter  offer  a few  thoughts  on  the 
influence  and  interference  of  evil  angels, 
who  are  continually  labouring  to  disturb 
and  trouble  those  whom  they  are  not  per- 
mitted to  destroy.  And  I shall  not  attempt 
to  amuse  the  reader  with  new  and  strange 
conjectures  upon  these  subjects,  or  to  intrude 
into  those  things  which  are  not  revealed,  but 
shall  confine  myself  to  the  express  declara- 
tions of  the  word  of  God. 

The  great  God  works  all  in  all,  in  both 
worlds.  It  is  he  who  filleth  the  earth  with 
good  things,  causes  the  grass  to  grow  for 
the  cattle,  and  provides  corn  for  the  food  of 
man.  But  in  thus  spreading  a table  for  us 
he  makes  use  of  instruments.  He  commands 
his  sun  to  shine  and  his  rain  to  descend.  So 
he  is  the  life,  strength,  and  comfort  of  the 
renewed  soul.  All  the  streams  of  grace 
flow  from  Christ  the  fountain.  But,  from  | 
the  analogy  observable  in  his  works,  we  might  i 
reasonably  suppose,  that,  on  many  occasions, 
he  is  pleased  to  use  means  and  instruments,  j 
and  particularly  the  ministry  of  his  angels, 1 
to  communicate  good  to  his  children.  Scrip-  j 
ture  expressly  confirms  this  inference,  and  i 
leaves  it  no  longer  a point  of  mere  conjee- 1 
ture.  He  gives  his  angels  charge  over  them,  j 
and  they  encamp  round  about  them  that  fear 
him.  In  this  way  honour  is  given  to  Jesus,  i 
is  the  Lord  both  of  angels  and  men  ; and  a 
sweet  intercourse  is  kept  up  between  the  J 
different  parts  of  the  household  of  God.  That 
angels  have  been  thus  employed  in  fact,  is : 
plain  from  the  history  both  of  the  Old  and  j 
New  Testament.  They  have  often  made  j 
themselves  visible  when  sent  to  declare  the  i 
will  of  God ; as  to  Jacob,  Elijah,  and  David.  | 
Gabriel  appeared  to  Zaeharias  and  Mary ; j 


[let.  xu. 

and  a multitude  joined  in  ascribing  “ glory 
to  God  in  the  highest”  when  they  brought  to 
the  shepherds  the  joyful  news  of  a Saviour’s 
birth.  An  angel  delivered  Peter  from  prison, 
and  comforted  Paul  when  tossed  by  a tem- 
pest upon  the  sea  How  far  the  visible 
ministrations  of  angels  is  continued  in  these 
days  is  not  easy  to  determine.  Many  per- 
sons have  been  imposed  upon  by  Satan, 
through  such  expectations ; and  it  is  not  safe 
to  look  for  extraordinary  things ; yet  I do 
not  knew  that  W3  have  warrant  from  scrip- 
ture to  limit  the  Lord,  so  far  as  to  affirm  that 
he  doth  not,  nor  ever  will,  upon  any  occa- 
sion, permit  his  angels  to  be  seen  by  men, 
as  in  former  times.  The  apostle,  pressing 
believers  to  exercise  hospitality,  uses  this 
argument,  that  “ thereby  some  have  enter- 
tained angels  unawares which  would 
hardly  seem  to  be  a pertinent  motive,  if  it 
were  absolutely  certain  that  angels  would 
never  offer  themselves  as  visitants  to  the  ser- 
vants of  God  in  future  times  as  they  had  former- 
ly done.  But,  waving  speculations  as  to  their 
visible  appearance,  it  is  sufficient  to  know 
that  they  are  really,  though  invisibly,  near 
us,  and  mindful  of  us. 

May  we  not  receive  assistance  from  the 
angels  in  our  spiritual  warfare  I That  evil 
angels  have  an  influence  and  power  to  distress 
and  disquiet  us,  is  well  known  to  exercised 
souls ; and  it  seems  quite  reasonable  to  believe 
that  the  good  angels  are  as  willing  and  as 
able  to  communicate  helpful  and  encouraging 
impressions.  As  it  is  not  always  easy  to  dis- 
tinguish between  the  temptations  of  Satan 
and  the  workings  of  our  own  evil  hearts;  so  it 
may  be  equally  or  more  difficult  to  distinguish 
these  assistances  from  the  effects  of  gracious 
principles  abiding  in  us,  or  from  the  leadings 
and  motions  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Nor  need 
we  be  anxious  about  it.  We  cannot  err  in 
ascribing  all  to  the  Lord.  Yet  there  is  some- 
thing cheering  in  the  thought  that  we  are  ac- 
companied and  surrounded  by  these  blessed 
spirits,  who  have  both  inclination  and  ability 
to  relieve,  strengthen,  and  admonish  us,  in 
ways  which  we  cannot  fully  understand. 
Who  can  tell  how  often,  and  how  seasonably 
a promise,  a caution,  a direction,  from  or 
agreeable  to  the  word  of  God,  is  darted  upon 
our  minds  by  these  kind  messengers  of  our 
Father’s  love  ? 

We  may  warrantably  think  they  are  em- 
ployed in  restraining,  over-ruling,  and  con- 
troling  the  designs  of  Satan  and  his  angels. 
The  power,  malice,  and  subtiltv  of  our  enemy 
are  very  great.  We  may  learn  what  be 
would  do  to  us  all,  if  he  could,  from  the  in- 
stance of  Job.  But  the  Lord  rebukes  him, 
and  that  most  probably  by  the  ministry  of 
unfallen  angels,  who  are  said  to  encamp 
round  his  people  to  deliver  them ; and  doubt- 
less their  care  is  especially  employed  where 
the  greatest  danger  lies.  Much  to  this  pur- 


ON  THE  MINISTRY  OF  ANGELS. 


201 


LET.  XL!.] 

pose  seems  to  be  implied  in  the  following’  pas- 
sages, Dan.  x.  13,  Rev.  xii.  7,  Jude  9. 

They  are  witnesses  to  the  sufferings  and 
to  the  worship  of  his  people,  1 Cor.  iv.  9. 
Though  they  do  not  show  themselves  to  us 
as  heretofore  to  Peter  or  Paul,  they  are  still 
near  and  attentive,  are  interested  in  the  con- 
victs and  rejoice  in  the  victories  of  a poor 
believer.  They  are  present  likewise  in  our 
solemn  assemblies ; therefore  the  apostle 
charges  Timothy,  as  “ Before  the  elect  an- 
gels,” and  seems  to  refer  to  them  in  1 Cor. 
xi.  10.  This  reflection  should  enliven  and 
regulate  our  thoughts  when  we  come  to- 
gether ; for,  though  the  presence  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  is  the  great  consideration,  yet 
this  likewise  may,  in  its  proper  place,  have 
some  influence  to  compose  our  behaviour, 
Heb.  xii.  22. 

The  ministry  of  angels  preserves  us  from 
innumerable  dangers  and  alarms  which  await 
us  in  our  daily  path.  This  is  expressly 
taught  in  Psalm  xci.  When  we  receive  lit- 
tle or  no  harm  from  a fall,  or  when  a sudden 
motion  of  our  minds  leads  us  to  avoid  a dan- 
ger which  we  were  not  aware  of,  perhaps 
the  angels  of  God  have  been  the  means  of 
our  preservation;  nay,  it  may  be  owing  to 
their  good  offices  that  we  ever  perform  a 
journey  in  safety,  or  are  preserved  from  the 
evils  we  are  liable  to  when  sleeping  upon 
our  beds,  and  incapable  of  taking  any  care  of 
ourselves. 

Finally  they  are  appointed  to  attend  the 
saints  in  their  last  hours,  and,  in  a manner 
beyond  our  present  apprehension,  to  keep  off 
the  powers  of  darkness,  and  bear  the  children, 
of  God  safely  home  to  their  Father’s  house, 
Luke  xvi.  22. 

The  limits  of  a sheet  will  not  admit  of  en- 
largement upon  these  particulars.  The  sub- 
ject is  pleasing  and  comfortable,  and  well 
suited  to  encourage  believers  under  two  very 
common  trials. 

1.  We  are  often  cast  down  to  think  how 
few  there  are  who  worship  God  in  spirit  and 
in  truth,  and  are  ready  to  complain,  with 
Elijah,  that  we  are  almost  left  to  serve  him 
alone.  But  Jesus  is  not  slighted  and  despised 
in  yonder  world  as  he  is  in  this.  If,  like  the 
servant  of  Elisha,  our  eyes  were  supernatu- 
rally  opened  to  take  a glance  within  the  vail, 
what  a glorious  and  astonishing  prospect 
would  the  innumerable  host  of  angels  afford 
us ! Then  we  should  be  convinced  that,  far 
from  being  alone,  there  are  unspeakably 
2 C 


more  for  us  than  against  us.  Faitn  supplies 
the  want  of  sight,  is  the  evidence  of  tilings 
not  seen,  and,  upon  the  authority  of  the  word 
of  God,  is  as  well  satisfied  of  their  existence 
and  employment  as  if  they  were  actually  in 
our  view. 

Again,  2.  Many  of  the  Lord’s  people  are 
tempted  to  think  themselves  neglected  by 
their  fellow-christians  because  they  are  poor, 
a discouragement  for  which  there  is  often 
too  much  occasion  given.  But,  poor  believer, 
be  not  greatly  distressed  upon  this  account. 
If  your  brethren  upon  earth  are  too  prone  to 
slight  you,  your  heavenly  friends  are  not  so 
proud  and  foolish.  The  angels  will  attend 
and  assist  you,  though  you  live  in  a poor 
mud-walled  cottage,  as  willingly  as  if  you 
were  lodged  in  the  palace  of  a king.  They 
are  not  affected,  one  way  or  the  other,  with 
those  trivial  distinctions  which  are  so  apt  to 
bias  the  judgment  and  regard  of  mortals. 

May  we  take  a pattern  from  the  angels ! 
Their  whole  desire  is  to  fulfil  the  will  of  God, 
and  they  account  no  service  mean  in  which 
he  is  pleased  to  employ  them,  otherwise, 
great  and  holy  as  they  are,  they  might  dis- 
dain to  wait  upon  sinful  worms.  Our  vanity 
prompts  us  to  aim  at  something  great,  and 
to  wish  for  such  services  as  might  make  us 
known,  talked  of,  and  regarded.  But  a child 
of  God,  if  in  the  way  of  duty,  and  in  the  place 
which  the  Lord’s  providence  has  allotted  him, 
is  well  employed,  though  he  should  have  no 
higher  service  than  to  sweep  the  streets, 
provided  he  does  it  humbly,  thankfully,  and 
heartily,  as  to  the  Lord.  An  angel  so  placed 
could  do  no  more. 

This  paper  will  doubtless  fall  into  the 
hands  of  some  who  are  not  believers,  but  are 
spending  their  days  in  sin.  With  a word  to 
such  as  these,  I would  conclude.  To  you 
this  is  but  a dark  subject.  You  have  reason 
to  be  alarmed ; for,  be  assured,  the  whole 
host  of  heaven  is  against  you,  while  they 
consider  you  in  a state  of  rebellion  against 
their  Lord.  They  burn  with  an  holy  zeal 
to  avenge  his  cause,  and  only  wait  his  com- 
mand to  smite  you  as  one  of  them  smote 
Herod,  for  not  giving  glory  to  God.  Prav 
for  faith  and  repentance.  If  you  believe 
in  Jesus,  and  turn  from  your  evil  ways, 
the  angels  will  love  you,  rejoice  over 
you,  watch  over  you,  fight  for  you,  and  at 
last  convey  you  into  his  glorious  presence. 
— I am,  &c. 

March  5,  1777. 


CARDIPHONIA; 

OR, 


THE  UTTERANCE  OF  THE  HEART 


IN  THE  COURSE  OF 

A REAL  CORRESPONDENCE. 


Haec  res  et  jungit,  junctos  et  servat  amicos. — Hor.  Lib.  i.  Sat.  3. 

As  in.  water  face  ansvvereth  to  face,  so  the  heart  of  man  to  man. — Prow,  xxvii.  19 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


LETTER  I. 

March — 1765. 

my  lord, — I remember,  when  I once  had 
the  pleasure  of  waiting  on  you,  you  were 
pleased  to  begin  an  interesting  conversation, 
which,  to  my  concern,  was  soon  interrupted. 
The  subject  was  concerning  the  causes,  na- 
ture, and  marks  of  a decline  in  grace ; how  it 
happens  that  we  loose  that  warm  impression 
of  divine  things,  which  in  some  favoured  mo- 
ments we  think  it  almost  impossible  to  for- 
get; how  far  this  change  of  frame  is  consist-  ' 
ent  with  a spiritual  growth  in  other  respects ; 
how  to  form  a comparative  judgment  of  our 
proficiency  upon  the  whole ; and  by  what 
steps  the  losses  we  sustain  from  our  neces- 
sary connexion  with  a sinful  nature  and  a 
sinful  world  may  be  retrieved  from  time  to 
time.  I beg  your  Lordship’s  permission  to 
fill  up  the  paper  with  a view  to  these  inqui- 
ries. I do  not  mean  to  offer  a laboured  essay 
on  them,  but  such  thoughts  as  shall  occur 
while  the  pen  is  in  my  hand. 

The  awakened  soul  (especially  when,  after 
a season  of  distress  and  terror,  it  begins  to 
taste  that  the  Lord  is  gracious)  finds  itself 
as  in  a new  world.  No  change  in  outward 
life  can  be  so  sensible,  so  affecting.  No 
wonder,  then,  that,  at  such  a time,  little  else 
can  be  thought  of.  The  transition  from  dark- 
ness to  light,  from  a sense  of  wrath  to  a hope 
of  glory,  is  the  greatest  that  can  be  imagined, 
and  is  often  times  as  sudden  as  wonderful. 
Hence  the  general  characteristics  of  young 
(Converts  are  zeal  and  love.  Like  Israel  at 
202 


the  Red  Sea,  they  have  just  seen  the  won- 
derful works  of  the  Lord,  and  they  cannot 
but  sing  his  praise  ; they  are  deeply  affected 
with  the  danger  they  have  lately  escaped, 
and  with  the  case  of  multitudes  around  them, 
who  are  secure  and  careless  .in  the  same 
alarming  situation  ; and  a sense  of  their  own 
mercies,  and  a compassion  for  the  souls  of 
others,  is  so  transporting,  that  they  can 
hardly  forbear  preaching  to  every  one  they 
meet. 

This  emotion  is  highly  just  and  reason- 
able, with  respect  to  the  causes  from  whence 
I it  springs ; and  it  is  doubtless  a proof,  not 
only  of  the  imperfection,  but  the  depravity 
! of  our  nature,  that  we  are  not  always  thus 
affected.  Yet  it  is  not  entirely  genuine.  If 
we  examine  this  character  closely,  which 
seems,  at  first  sight,  a pattern  and  a reproof 
to  Christians  of  longer  standing,  we  shall,  for 
the  most  part,  find  it  attended  with  consider- 
able defects. 

1.  Such  persons  are  very  weak  in  faith. 
Their  confidence  arises  rather  from  the 
lively  impressions  of  joy  within,  than  from  a 
distinct  and  clear  apprehension  of  the  work 
of  God  an  Christ.  The  comforts  which  are 
intended  as  cordials,  to  animate  them  against 
the  opposition  of  an  unbelieving  world,  they 
mistake  and  rest  in  as  the  proper  evidences 
of  their  hope.  And  hence  it  comes  to  pass, 
that  when  the  Lord  varies  his  dispensations, 
and  hides  his  face,  they  are  soon  troubled, 
and  at  their  wits  end. 

2.  They  who  are  in  this  state  of  their  first 
love,  are  seldom  free  from  something  of  a 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


LET.  I.] 

censorious  spirit.  They  have  not  yet  felt  all 
the  deceitfulness  of  their  own  hearts;  they 
are  not  well  acquainted  with  the  devices  or 
temptations  of  Satan;  and  therefore  know 
not  how  to  sympathize  or  make  allowances 
where  allowances  are  necessary  and  due, 
and  can  hardly  bear  with  any  who  do  not 
discover  the  same  earnestness  as  themselves. 

3.  They  are  likewise  more  or  less  under 
the  influence  of  self-righteousness  and  self- 
will.  They  mean  well ; but  not  being  as  yet 
well  acquainted  with  the  spiritual  meaning 
and  proper  use  of  the  law,  nor  established  in 
the  life  of  faith,  a part  (oftentimes  a very 
considerable  part)  of  their  zeal  spends  itself 
in  externals  and  non-essentials,  prompts  them 
to  practise  what  is  not  commanded,  to  re- 
frain from  what  is  lawful,  and  to  observe 
various  and  needless  austerities  and  singu- 
larities, as  their  tempers  and  circumstances 
differ. 

However,  with  all  their  faults,  methinks 
there  is  something  very  beautiful  and  enga- 
ging in  the  honest  vehemence  of  a young 
convert.  Some  cold  and  rigid  judges  are 
ready  to  reject  these  promising  appearances 
on  account  of  incidental  blemishes.  But 
would  a gardener  throw  away  a fine  nec- 
tarine, because  it  is  green,  and  has  not  yet 
attained  all  that  beauty  and  flavour  which  a 
few  more  showers  and  suns  will  impart? 
Perhaps  it  will  hold,  for  the  most  part,  in 
grace  as  in  nature ; some  exceptions  there 
are : if  there  is  not  some  fire  in  youth,  we 
can  hardly  expect  a proper  warmth  in  old 
age. 

But  the  great  and  good  Husbandman 
watches  over  what  his  own  hand  has  planted, 
and  carries  on  his  work  by  a variety  of  dif- 
ferent, and  even  contrary  dispensations. 
While  their  mountain  stands  thus  strong, 
they  think  they  shall  never  be  moved ; but 
at  length  they  find  a change.  Sometimes 
it  comes  on  by  insensible  degrees.  That 
part  of  their  affection,  which  was  purely  natu- 
ral, will  abate,  of  course,  when  the  power  of 
novelty  ceases ; they  will  begin,  in  some  in- 
stances, to  perceive  their  own  indiscretions ; 
and  an  endeavour  to  correct  the  excesses  of 
imprudent  zeal  will  often  draw  them  towards 
the  contrary  extreme  of  remissness : the 
evils  of  their  hearts,  which,  though  over- 
powered, were  not  eradicated,  will  revive 
again : the  enemy  will  watch  his  occasions 
to  meet  them  with  suitable  temptations ; and 
as  it  is  the  Lord’s  design  that  they  should 
experimentally  learn  and  feel  their  own 
weakness,  he  will,  in  some  instances,  be  per- 
mitted to  succeed.  When  guilt  is  thus 
brought  upon  the  conscience,  the  heart 
grows  hard,  the  hands  feeble,  and  the  knees 
weak  ; then  confidence  is  shaken,  the  spirit 
of  prayer  interrupted,  the  armour  gone,  and 
thus  things  grow  worse  and  worse,  till  the 
Lord  is  pleased  to  interpose ; for  though  we 


2U|| 

can  fall  of  ourselves,  we  cannot  rise  witho" 
his  help.  Indeed,  every  sin,  in  its  own  na- 
ture, has  a tendency  towards  a final  apostacv ; 
but  there  is  a provision  in  the  covenant  of 
grace,  and  the  Lord,  in  his  own  time,  returns 
to  convince,  humble,  pardon,  comfort,  and 
renew  the  soul.  He  touches  the  rock  and 
the  waters  flow.  By  repeated  experiments 
and  exercises  of  this  sort  (for  this  wisdom 
is  seldom  acquired  by  one  or  a few  lessons,) 
we  begin  at  length  to  learn  that  we  are 
nothing,  have  nothing,  can  do  nothing  but 
sin.  And  thus  we  are  gradually  prepared 
to  live  more  out  of  ourselves,  and  to  derive 
all  our  sufficiency  of  every  kind  from  Jesus, 
the  fountain  of  grace.  We  learn  to  tread 
more  warily,  to  trust  less  to  our  own 
strength,  to  have  lower  thoughts  of  our- 
selves, and  higher  thoughts  of  him  ; in  which 
two  last  particulars,  I apprehend,  what  the 
scriptures  mean  by  a growth  of  grace  does 
properly  consist.  Both  are  increasing  in  the 
lively  Christian,  every  day  show  him  more 
of  his  own  heart,  and  more  of  the  power,  suf- 
ficiency, compassion,  and  grace  of  his  ador- 
able Redeemer ; but  neither  will  be  complete 
till  we  get  to  heaven. 

I apprehend,  therefore,  that  though  we 
find  an  abatement  of  that  sensible  warmth 
of  affection  which  we  felt  at  first  setting  out ; 
yet,  if  our  views  are  more  evangelical,  our 
judgment  more  ripened,  our  hearts  more  ha- 
bitually humbled  under  a sense  of  inward 
depravity,  our  tempers  more  softened  into 
sympathy  and  tenderness ; if  our  prevailing 
desires  are  spiritual,  and  we  practically  es- 
teem the  precepts,  ordinances,  and  people  of 
God ; we  may  warrantably  conclude,  that  his 
good  work  of  grace  in  us  is,  upon  the  whole, 
on  the  increase. 

But  still  it  is  to  be  lamented,  that  an  in- 
crease of  knowledge  and  experience  should 
be  so  generally  attended  with  a decline  of 
fervour.  If  it  was  not  for  what  has  passed 
in  my  own  heart,  I should  be  ready  to  think 
it  impossible.  But  this  very  circumstance 
gives  me  a still  more  emphatical  conviction 
of  my  own  vileness  and  depravity.  The  want 
of  humiliation  humbles  me,  and  my  very  in- 
difference rouses  and  awakens  me  to  earnest- 
ness. There  are,  however,  seasons  of  re- 
freshment, ineffable  glances  of  light  and 
power  upon  the  soul,  which,  as  they  are  de- 
rived from  clearer  displays  of  divine  grace, 
if  not  so  tumultuous  as  the  first  joys,  are 
more  penetrating,  transforming,  and  animat- 
ing. A glance  of  these,  when  compared 
with  our  sluggish  stupidity  when  they  are 
withheld,  weans  the  heart  from  this  wretched 
state  of  sin  and  temptation,  and  makes  the 
thoughts  of  death  and  eternity  desirable. 
Then  this  conflict  shall  cease:  I shall  sin 
and  wander  no  more,  see  him  as  lie  is,  and 
be  like  him  forever. 

If  the  question  is,  How  are  these  bright 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


[LET.  II, 


moments  to  be  prolonged,  renewed,  or  re- 
trieved] We  are  directed  to  faith  and  dili- 
gence. A careful  use  of  the  appointed  means 
of  grace,  a watchful  endeavour  to  avoid  the 
occasions  and  appearances  of  evil,  and  es- 
pecially assiduity  in  secret  prayer,  will  bring 
as  much  as  the  Lord  sees  good  for  us.  He 
knows  best  why  we  are  not  to  be  trusted 
with  them  continually.  Here  we  are  to 
walk  by  faith,  to  be  exercised  and  tried ; by 
and  by  we  shall  be  crowned,  and  the  desires 
he  has  given  shall  be  abundantly  satisfied. — 
I am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

April  — 1766. 

my  lord, — I shall  embrace  your  permis- 
sion to  fill  my  paper. — As  to  subject,  that 
which  has  been  a frequent  theme  of  my  heart 
of  late,  I shall  venture  to  lay  before  your 
Lordship : I mean  the  remarkable  and  hum- 
bling difference  which  I suppose  all  who 
know  themselves  may  observe,  between 
their  acquired  and  their  experimental  know- 
ledge, or,  in  other  words,  between  their  judg- 
ment and  their  practice.  To  hear  a believer 
speak  his  apprehensions  of  the  evil  of  sin, 
the  vanity  of  the  world,  the  love  of  Christ, 
the  beauty  of  holiness,  or  the  importance  of 
eternity,  who  would  not  suppose  him  proof 
against  temptation]  To  hear  with  what 
strong  arguments  he  can  recommend  watch- 
fulness, prayer,  forbearance,  and  submission, 
when  he  is  teaching  or  advising  others,  who 
would  not  suppose  but  he  could  also  teach 
himself,  and  influence  his  own  conduct]  Yet, 
alas ! quam  dispar  sibi ! The  person  who 
rose  from  his  knees,  before  he  left  his  cham- 
ber, a poor,  indigent,  fallible,  dependant  crea- 
ture, who  saw  and  acknowledged  that  he 
was  unworthy  to  breathe  the  air,  or  to  see 
the  light,  may  meet  with  many  occasions, 
before  the  day  is  closed,  to  discover  the  cor- 
ruptions of  his  heart,  and  to  show  how  weak 
and  faint  his  best  principles  and  clearest  con- 
victions are  in  their  actual  exercise.  And 
iri  this  view,  how  vain  is  man  ! what  a contra- 
diction is  a believer  to  himself!  He  is  called 
a believer  emphatically,  because  he  cordially 
assents  to  the  word  of  God  ; but,  alas  ! how 
often  unworthy  of  the  name  ! If  I was  to  de- 
scribe him  from  the  scripture-character,  I 
should  say,  he  is  one  whose  heart  is  athirst 
lor  God,  for  his  glory,  his  image,  his  presence ; 
his  affections  are  fixed  upon  an  unseen  Sa- 
viour; his  treasures,  and  consequently  his 
thoughts,  are  on  high,  beyond  the  bounds  of 
sense.  Having  experienced  much  forgive- 
ness, he  is  full  of  bowels  of  mercy  to  all 
around ; and  having  been  often  deceived  by 
his  own  heart,  he  dares  trust  ;t  no  more,  but 
lives  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  for  wisdom, 


righteousness,  and  sanctification,  and  derives 
from  him  grace  for  grace ; sensible  that  with- 
out him  he  has  not  sufficiency  even  to  think 
a good  thought.  In  short,  he  is  dead  to  the 
world,  to  sin,  to  self,  but  alive  to  God,  and 
lively  in  his  service.  Prayer  is  his  breath, 
the  word  of  God  his  food,  and  the  ordinances 
more  precious  to  him  than  the  light  of  the 
sun.  Such  is  a believer — in  his  judgment 
and  prevailing  desires. 

But  was  I to  describe  him  from  experience, 
especially  at  some  times,  how  different  would 
the  picture  be  ! Though  he  knows  that  com- 
munion with  God  is  his  highest  privilege, 
he  too  seldom  finds  it  so;  on  the  contrary,  if 
duty,  conscience,  and  necessity,  did  not  com- 
pel, he  would  leave  the  throne  of  grace  un- 
visited from  day  to  day.  He  takes  up  the 
Bible,  conscious  that  it  is  the  fountain  of  life 
and  true  comfort ; yet,  perhaps,  while  fie  is 
making  the  reflection,  he  feels  a secret  dis- 
taste, which  prompts  him  to  lay  it  down,  and 
give  his  preference  to  a newspaper.  He 
needs  not  to  be  told  of  the  vanity  and  un- 
certainty of  all  beneath  the  sun ; and  yet  is 
almost  as  much  elated  or  cast  down  by  a 
trifle,  as  those  who  have  their  portion  in  this 
world.  He  believes  that  all  things  shall 
work  together  for  his  good,  and  that  the  most 
high  God  appoints,  adjusts,  and  over-rules  all 
his  concerns ; yet  he  feels  the  risings  of  fear, 
anxiety,  and  displeasure,  as  though  the  con- 
trary was  true.  He  owns  himself  ignorant, 
and  liable  to  be  deceived  by  a thousand  falla- 
cies; yet  is  easily  betrayed  into  positive- 
ness and  self-conceit.  He  feels  himself  an 
unprofitable,  unfaithful,  unthankful  servant, 
and  therefore  blushes  to  harbour  a thought 
of  desiring  the  esteem  and  commendations 
of  men ; yet  he  cannot  suppress  it.  Finally 
(for  I must  observe  some  bounds,)  on  account 
of  these,  and  many  other  inconsistencies,  he 
is  struck  dumb  before  the  Lord,  stripped  of 
every  hope  and  plea,  but  what  is  provided  in 
the  free  grace  of  God,  and  yet  his  heart  is 
continually  leaning  and  returning  to  a cove- 
nant of  works. 

Two  questions  naturally  arise  from  such 
a view  of  ourselves.  First,  How  can  these 
things  be,  or  why  are  they  permitted  ] Since 
the  Lord  hates  sin,  teaches  his  people  to  hate 
it,  and  cry  against  it,  and  has  promised  tc 
hear  their  prayers,  how  is  it  that  they  go 
thus  burdened]  Surely  if  he  could  not  or 
would  not  over-rule  evil  for  good,  he  would 
not  permit  it  to  continue.  By  these  exer- 
cises he  teaches  us  more  truly  to  know  and 
feel  the  utter  depravity  and  corruption  of  our 
whole  nature,  that  we  are  indeed  defiled  in 
every  part.  His  method  of  salvation  is  like- 
wise hereby  exceedingly  endeared  to  us ; we 
see  that  it  is  and  must  be  of  grace,  wholly 
of  grace ; and  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  his  perfect  righteousness,  is  and  must  be 
our  all  in  all.  His  power  likewise  in  main* 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


205 


LET.  III.] 

taining  his  own  work,  notwithstanding  our 
infirmities,  temptations,  and  enemies,  is 
hereoy  displayed  in  the  clearest  light,  his 
strength  is  manifested  in  our  weakness. 
Satan  likewise  is  more  remarkably  disap- 
pointed and  put  to  shame,  when  he  finds 
bounds  set  to  his  rage  and  policy,  beyond 
which  he  cannot  pass;  and  that  those  in 
whom  he  finds  too  much  to  work  upon,  and 
over  whom  he  so  often  prevails  for  a season, 
escape  at  last  out  of  his  hands.  He  casts 
them  down,  but  they  are  raised  again ; he 
wounds  them,  but  they  are  healed ; he  ob- 
tains his  desire  to  sift  them  as  wheat,  but 
the  prayer  of  their  great  Advocate  prevails 
for  the  maintenance  of  their  faith.  Farther, 
by  what  believers  feel  in  themselves  they 
learn  by  degrees  how  to  warn,  pity,  and  bear 
with  others.  A soft,  patient,  and  compassion- 
ate spirit,  and  a readiness  and  skill  in  com- 
forting those  who  are  cast  down,  is  not  per- 
haps attainable  in  any  other  way.  And 
lastly,  I believe  nothing  more  habitually  re- 
conciles a child  of  God  to  the  thought  of  death, 
than  the  wearisomeness  of  this  warfare. 
Death  is  unwelcome  to  nature:  but  then, 
and  not  till  then,  the  conflict  will  cease. 
Then  we  shall  sin  no  more.  The  flesh,  with 
all  its  attendant  evils,  will  be  laid  in  the 
grave : then  the  soul,  which  has  been  par- 
taker of  a new  and  heavenly  birth,  shall  be 
freed  from  every  incumbrance,  and  stand 
perfect  in  the  Redeemer’s  righteousness  be- 
fore God  in  glory. 

But  though  these  evils  cannot  be  wholly 
removed,  it  is  worth  while  to  enquire,  Se- 
condly, How  they  may  be  mitigated.  This 
we  are  encouraged  to  hope  for.  The  word 
of  God  directs  and  animates  to  a growth  in 
grace.  And  though  we  can  do  nothing  spi- 
ritually of  ourselves,  yet  there  is  a part  as- 
signed us.  We  cannot  conquer  the  obstacles 
in  our  way  by  our  own  strength,  yet  we  can 
give  way  to  them;  and  if  we  do,  it  is  our 
sin,  and  will  be  our  sorrow.  The  disputes 
concerning  inherent  power  in  the  creature, 
have  been  carried  to  inconvenient  lengths ; 
for  my  own  part,  I think  it  safest  to  use 
spiritual  language.  The  apostles  exhort  11s, 
to  give  all  diligence,  to  resist  the  devil,  to 
purge  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the 
flesh  and  spirit,  to  give  ourselves  to  reading, 
meditation,  and  prayer,  to  watch,  to  put  on 
the  whole  armour  of  God,  and  to  abstain 
from  all  appearance  of  evil.  Faithfulness 
to  light  received,  and  a sincere  endeavour 
to  conform  to  the  means  prescribed  in  the 
word  of  God,  with  an  humble  application  to 
the  blood  of  sprinkling,  and  the  promised 
Spirit,  will  undoubtedly  be  answered  by  in- 
creasing measures  of  light,  faith,  strength, 
and  comfort : and  we  shall  know,  if  we  fol- 
low on  to  know  the  Lord. 

I need  not  tell  your  Lordship  that  I am  an 
extempore  writer.  I dropt  the  consideration 


of  whom  I was  addressing  from  the  first 
paragraph ; but  I now  return,  and  subscribe 
myself,  with  the  greatest  deference,  &c. 


IiETTER  III. 

April  — 1770. 

my  lord, — I have  a desire  to  fill  the  pa- 
per, and  must  therefore  betake  myself  to  the 
expedient  I lately  mentioned.  Glorious 
things  are  spoken  of  the  city  of  God,  or  (as 
I suppose)  the  state  of  glory,  in  Rev.  xxi. 
from  verse  10  ad  Jinem.  The  description 
is  doubtless  mystical,  and,  perhaps,  nothing 
short  of  a happy  experience  and  participation 
will  furnish  an  adequate  exposition.  One 
expression,  in  particular,  has,  I believe,  puz- 
zled wiser  heads  than  mine  to  explain.  “The 
street  of  the  city  was  pure  gold,  as  it  were 
transparent  glass.”  The  construction  like- 
wise in  the  Greek  is  difficult.  Some  render 
it  pure  gold  transparent  as  glass:  this  is 
the  sense,  but  then  it  should  be  neuter,  o»*<?*v£s, 
to  agree  with  %e»<r‘ ov.  If  our  reading  is  right, 
we  must  understand  it  either  of  gold  pure, 
bright,  and  perspicuous  as  the  finest  trans- 
parent glass,  (for  all  glass  is  not  transparent,) 
or  else,  as  two  distinct  comparisons,  splendid 
and  durable  as  the  purest  gold,  clear  and 
transparent  as  the  finest  glass.  In  that  happy 
world  the  beauties  and  advantages  which 
here  are  divided  and  incompatible,  will  unite 
and  agree.  Our  glass  is  clear,  but  brittle ; 
our  gold  is  shining  and  solid,  but  it  is  opaque, 
and  discovers  only  a surface.  And  thus  it 
is  with  our  minds.  The  powers  of  the  ima- 
gination are  lively  and  extensive,  but  tran- 
sient and  uncertain.  The  powers  of  the  un- 
derstanding are  more  solid  and  regular,  but 
at  the  same  time  more  slow  and  limited,  and 
confined  to  the  outside  properties  of  the  few 
objects  around  us.  But  when  we  arrive 
within  the  vail,  the  perfections  of  the  glass 
and  the  gold  will  be  combined,  and  the  im- 
perfections of  each  will  entirely  cease.  Then 
we  shall  know  more  than  we  can  now  ima- 
gine. The  glass  will  be  all  gold.  And  then 
we  shall  apprehend  truth  in  its  relations 
and  consequences;  not  (as  at  present)  by 
that  tedious  and  fallible  process  which  we 
call  reasoning,  but  by  a single  glance  of 
thought,  as  the  sight  pierces  in  an  instant 
through  the  largest  transparent  bodies.  The 
gold  will  be  all  glass. 

I do  not  offer  this  as  the  sense  of  the  pas- 
sage, but  as  a thought  which  once  occurred 
to  me  while  reading  it.  I daily  groan  under 
a desultory,  ungovernable  imagination,  and  a 
palpable  darkness  of  understanding,  which 
greatly  impede  me  in  my  attempts  to  con- 
template the  truths  of  God.  Perhaps  these 
complaints,  in  a greater  or  less  degree,  are 
common  to  all  our  fallen  race,  and  exhibit 


206 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


mournful  proofs  that  our  nature  is  essentially 
depraved.  The  grace  of  God  affords  some 
assistance  for  correcting  the  wildness  of  the 
fancy,  and  enlarging  the  capacity  of  the 
mind : yet  the  cure  at  present  is  but  pallia- 
tive ; but  ere  long  it  shall  be  perfect,  and  our 
complaints  shall  cease  for  ever.  Now  it 
costs  us  much  pains  to  acquire  a pittance  of 
solid  and  useful  knowledge;  and  the  ideas 
we  have  collect  • 1 are  far  from  being  at  the 
disposal  of  judgment,  and,  like  men  in  a 
crowed,  are  perpetually  clashing  and  inter- 
fering with  each  other.  But  it  will  not  be 
so,  when  we  are  completely  freed  from  the 
effects  of  sin.  Confusion  and  darkness  will 
not  follow  us  into  the  world  where  light  and 
order  reign.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  our 
knowledge  will  be  perfect,  and  our  posses- 
sion of  it  uninterrupted  and  secure. 

Since  the  radical  powers  of  the  soul  are 
thus  enfeebled  and  disordered,  it  is  not  to  be 
wondered  at,  that  the  best  of  men,  and  un- 
der their  highest  attainments,  have  found 
cause  to  make  the  acknowledgement  of  the 
apostle,  “ When  I would  do  good,  evil  is 
present  with  me.”  But,  blessed  be  God, 
though  we  must  feel  hourly  cause  for  shame 
and  humiliation  for  what  we  are  in  ourselves, 
we  have  cause  to  rejoice  continually  in 
Christ  Jesus,  who,  as  he  is  revealed  to  us 
under  the  various  names,  characters,  rela- 
tions, and  offices,  which  he  bears  in  the  scrip- 
tures, holds  out  to  our  faith  a balm  for  every 
wound,  a cordial  for  every  discouragement, 
and  a sufficient  answer  to  every  objection 
which  sin  or  Satan  can  suggest  against  our 
peace.  If  we  are  guilty,  he  is  our  righteous- 
ness; if  we  are  sick,  he  is  our  infallible  phy- 
sician ; if  we  are  weak,  helpless,  and  defence- 
less, he  is  the  compassionate  and  faithful 
shepherd,  wTho  has  taken  charge  of  us,  and 
will  not  suffer  any  thing  to  disappoint  our 
hopes,  or  to  separate  us  from  his  love.  He 
knows  our  frame,  he  remembers  that  we  are 
but  dust,  and  has  engaged  to  guide  us  by  his 
counsel,  support  us  by  his  power,  and  at 
length  to  receive  us  to  his  glory,  that  we 
may  be  with  him  for  ever. — 1 am  with  the 
greatest  deference,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

February  — 1772. 

my  lord, — I have  been  sitting,  perhaps  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  with  my  pen  in  my  hand, 
and  my  finger  upon  my  upper  lip,  contriving 
how  1 should  begin  my  letter.  A detail  of 
the  confused,  incoherent  thoughts  which 
have  successively  passed  through  my  mind, 
would  have  more  than  filled  the  sheet ; but 
your  Lordship’s  patience,  and  even  your 
charity  for  the  writer,  would  have  been  tried 
to  the  uttermost,  if  I could  have  penned  them 


[let.  it. 

all  down.  At  length  my  suspense  remiriden 
me  of  the  apostle’s  words,  Gal.  v.  17,  “ Ye 

cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would.”  This 
is  an  humbling,  but  a just  account  of  a Chris- 
tian’s attainments  in  the  present  life,  and  is 
equally  applicable  to  the  strongest  and  to  the 
weakest.  The  weakest  need  not  say  less, 
the  strongest  will  hardly  venture  to  say 
more.  The  Lord  has  given  his  people  a de- 
sire and  will  aiming  at  great  things : with- 
out this  they  would  be  unworthy  the  name 
of  Christians ; but  they  cannot  do  as  they 
would.  Their  best  desires  are  weak  and  in- 
effectual, not  absolutely  so  (for  he  who  works 
in  them  to  will,  enables  them  in  a measure 
to  do  likewise,)  but  in  comparison  with  the 
mark  at  which  they  aim.  So  that  while 
they  have  great  cause  to  be  thankful  for  the 
desire  he  has  given  them,  and  for  the  degree 
in  which  it  is  answered,  they  have  equal 
reason  to  be  ashamed  and  abased  under  a 
sense  of  their  continual  defects,  and  the  evil 
mixtures  which  taint  and  debase  their  best 
endeavours.  It  would  be  easy  to  make  out 
a long  list  of  particulars  which  a believer 
would  do  if  he  could,  but  in  which,  from  first 
to  last,  he  finds  a mortifying  inability.  Per- 
mit me  to  mention  a few,  which  I need  not 
transcribe  from  books,  for  they  are  always 
present  to  my  mind. 

He  would  willingly  enjoy  God  in  prayer. 
He  knows  that  prayer  is  his  duty ; but,  in 
his  judgment,  he  considers  it  likewise  as  his 
greatest  honour  and  privilege.  In  this  light 
he  can  recommend  it  to  others,  and  can  tell 
them  of  the  wonderful  condescension  of  the 
great  God,  who  humbles  himself  to  behold 
the  things  that  are  in  heaven,  that  he  should 
stoop  so  much  lower,  to  afford  his  gracious 
ear  to  the  supplications  of  sinful  worms  upon 
earth.  He  can  bid  them  expect  a pleasure  in 
waiting  upon  the  Lord,  different  in  kind,  and 
greater  in  degree,  than  all  that  the  world  can 
afford.  By  prayer,  he  can  say,  You  have 
liberty  to  cast  all  your  cares  upon  him  that 
careth  for  you.  By  one  hour’s  intimate  ac- 
cess to  the  throne  of  grace,  where  the  Lord 
causes  his  glory  to  pass  before  the  soul  that 
seeks  him,  you  may  acquire  more  true  spi- 
ritual knowledge  and  comfort,  than  by  a day 
or  a week’s  converse  with  the  best  of  men,  or 
the  most  studious  perusal  of  many  folios : and 
in  this  light  he  would  consider  it  and  improve 
it  for  himself.  But,  alas ! how  seldom  can 
he  do  as  he  would  ! How  often  does  he  find 
this  privilege  a mere  task,  which  he  would 
be  glad  of  a just  excuse  to  omit ! and  the 
chief  pleasure  he  derives  from  the  perform- 
ance is  to  think  that  his  task  is  finished  : he 
has  been  drawing  near  to  God  with  his  lips, 
while  his  heart  was  far  from  him.  Surely 
this  is  not  doing  as  he  would,  when  (to  bor- 
row the  expression  of  an  old  w oman  here)  he 
is  dragged  before  God  like  a slave,  and  comes 
away  like  a thief. 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


207 


LET.  V.] 

The  like  may  be  said  of  reading  the  scrip- 
tures. He  believes  them  to  be  the  word  of 
God ; he  admires  the  wisdom  and  grace  of 
the  doctrines,  the  beauty  of  the  precepts,  the 
richness  and  suitableness  of  the  promises ; and 
therefore,  with  David,  he  accounts  it  prefer- 
able to  thousands  of  gold  and  silver,  and 
sweeter  than  honey  or  the  honeycomb.  Yet 
while  he  thus  thinks  of  it,  and  desires  that  it 
may  dwell  in  him  richly,  and  be  his  medita- 
tion night  and  day,  he  cannot  do  as  he  would. 
It  will  require  some  resolution  to  persist  in 
reading  a portion  of  it  every  day ; and  even 
then  his  heart  is  often  less  engaged  than 
when  reading  a pamphlet.  Here  again  his 
privilege  frequently  dwindles  into  a task. 
His  appetite  is  vitiated,  so  that  he  has  but 
little  relish  for  the  food  of  his  soul. 

He  would  willingly  have  abiding,  admiring 
thoughts  of  the  person  and  love  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Glad  is  he,  indeed,  of  those 
occasions  which  recall  the  Saviour  to  his 
mind ; and  with  this  view,  notwithstand- 
ing all  discouragements,  he  perseveres  in 
attempting  to  pray  and  read,  and  waits 
upon  ordinances.  Yet  he  cannot  do  as  he 
would.  Whatever  claims  he  may  have  to 
the  exercise  of  gratitude  and  sensibility  to- 
wards his  fellow-creatures,  he  must  confess 
himself  mournfully  ungrateful  and  insensible 
towards  his  best  Friend  and  Benefactor. 
Ah ! what  trifles  are  capable  of  shutting 
Him  out  of  our  thoughts,  of  whom  we  say, 
he  is  the  beloved  of  our  souls,  who  loved  us, 
and  gave  himself  for  us,  and  whom  we  have 
deliberately  chosen  as  our  chief  good  and 
portion.  What  can  make  us  amends  for  the 
loss  we  suffer  here]  Yet  surely  if  we  could 
we  would  set  him  always  before  us;  his 
love  should  be  the  delightful  theme  of  our 
hearts, 

From  morn  to  noon,  from  noon  to  dewy  eve. 

But  though  we  aim  at  this  good,  evil  is  pre- 
sent with  us ; we  find  we  are  renewed  but 
in  part,  and  have  still  cause  to  plead  the 
Lord’s  promise,  to  take  away  the  heart  of 
stone,  and  give  us  a heart  of  flesh. 

He  would  willingly  acquiesce  in  all  the 
dispensations  of  divine  providence.  He  be- 
lieves that  all  events  are  under  the  direction 
of  infinite  wisdom  and  goodness,  and  shall 
surely  issue  in  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good 
of  those  who  fear  him.  He  doubts  not  but 
the  hairs  of  his  head  are  all  numbered ; — that 
the  blessings  of  every  kind  which  he  possesses 
were  bestowed  upon  him,  and  are  preserved 
to  him,  by  the  bounty  and  special  favour  of 
the  Lord  whom  he  serves; — that  afflictions 
spring  not  out  of  the  ground,  but  are  fruits 
and  tokens  of  divine  love,  no  less  than  his 
oumforts ; — that  there  is  a need-be,  whenever 
for  a season  he  is  in  heaviness.  Of  these 
principles  he  can  no  more  doubt  than  of  what 
he  sees  with  his  eyes,  and  there  are  seasons 


when  he  thinks  they  will  prove  sufficient  tc 
reconcile  him  to  the  sharpest  trials.  But 
often  when  he  aims  to  apply  them  in  an  hour 
of  present  distress,  he  cannot  do  what  he 
would.  He  feels  a law  in  his  members  war- 
ring against  the  law  in  his  mind ; so  that,  in 
defiance  of  the  clearest  convictions,  seeing 
as  though  he  perceived  not,  he  is  ready  to 
complain,  murmur,  and  despond.  Alas  ! how 
vain  is  man  in  his  best  estate  ! How  much 
weakness  and  inconsistency,  even  in  those 
whose  hearts  are  right  with  the  Lord  ! And 
what  reason  have  we  to  confess  that  we  are 
unworthy,  unprofitable  servants ! 

It  were  easy  to  enlarge  in  this  way,  would 
paper  and  time  permit.  But,  blessed  be  God 
we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace : 
and  even  these  distressing  effects  of  the  rem- 
nants of  indwelling  sin  are  over-ruled  for 
good.  By  these  experiences  the  believer  is 
weaned  more  from  self,  and  taught  more 
highly  to  prize  and  more  absolutely  to  rely  on 
him,  who  is  appointed  unto  us  of  God,  wis- 
dom, righteousness,  sanctification,  and  re- 
demption. The  more  vile  we  are  in  our  own 
eyes,  the  more  precious  he  will  be  to  us:  and 
a deep,  repeated  sense  of  the  evil  of  our  nearts 
is  necessary  to  preclude  all  boasting,  and  to 
make  us  willing  to  give  the  whole  glory  of 
our  salvation  where  it  is  due.  Again,  a sense 
of  these  evils  will,  when  hardly  any  thing  else 
can  do  it,  reconcile  us  to  the  thoughts  of 
death,  yea  make  us  desirous  to  depart  that 
we  may  sin  no  more,  since  we  find  depravity 
so  deep  rooted  in  our  nature,  that,  like  the 
leprous  house,  the  whole  fabric  must  be 
taken  down  before  we  can  be  freed  from  its 
defilement.  Then,  and  not  till  then,  we 
shall  be  able  to  do  the  thing  that  we  would  : 
when  we  see  Jesus  we  shall  be  transformed 
into  his  image,  and  have  done  with  sin  and 
sorrow  for  ever. — I am  with  great  defer- 
ence, &c. 


LETTER  V. 

March  — 1772. 

my  lord, — I think  my  last  letter  turned 
upon  the  apostle’s  thought,  Gal.  v.  17,  “Ye 
cannot  do  the  things  that  ye  would.”  In  the 
parallel  place,  Rom.  vii.  19,  there  is  an- 
other clause  subjoined,  “The  evil  which  I 
would  not,  that  I do.”  This  addreu  io  the 
former,  would  complete  the  dark  side  of  my 
experience.  Permit  me  to  tell  your  Lord- 
ship  a little  part  (for  some  things  must  not, 
cannot  be  told,)  not  of  what  I have  read,  but 
of  what  I have  felt,  in  illustration  of  this 
passage. 

I would  not  be  the  sport  and  prey  of  wild, 
vain,  foolish,  and  worse  imaginations,  but  this 
evil  is  present  with  me:  my  heart  is  like  a 
city  without  walls  or  gate.  Nothing  so  false, 


208 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


so  frivolous,  so  absurd,  so  impossible,  or  so 
horrid,  but  it  can  obtain  access,  and  that  at 
any  time,  or  in  any  place:  neither  the  study, 
the  pulpit,  nor  even  the  Lord’s  table,  exempt 
rneVrom  their  intrusion.  I sometimes  com- 
pare my  words  to  the  treble  of  an  instru- 
ment which  my  thoughts  accompany  with  a 
kind  of  bass,  or  rather  anti-bass,  in  which 
every  rule  of  harmony  is  broken,  every  pos- 
sible combination  of  discord  and  confusion  is 
introduced,  utterly  inconsistent  with,  and 
contradictory  to,  the  intended  melody.  Ah  ! 
what  music  would  my  praying  and  preaching 
often  make  in  the  ear  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts, 
if  he  listened  to  them  as  they  are  mine  only! 
By  men,  the  upper  part  only  (if  I may  so 
speak)  is  heard ; and  small  cause  there  is  for 
self-gratulation,  if  they  should  happen  to 
commend,  when  conscience  tells  me  they 
would  be  struck  with  astonishment  and  ab- 
horrence could  they  hear  the  whole. 

But  if  this  awlTTl  effect  of  heart  depravity 
cannot  be  wholly  avoided  in  the  present  state 
of  human  nature,  yet  at  least  I would  not  al- 
low and  indulge  it ; yet  this  I find  I do.  In 
defiance  of  my  best  judgment  and  best  wishes, 
I find  something  within  me  which  cherishes 
and  cleaves  to  those  evils,  from  which  I ought 
to  start  and  flee,  as  I should  if  a toad  or  a ser- 
pent was  put  in  my  food  or  in  my  bed.  Ah ! 
how  vile  must  the  heart,  at  least  my  hear*,  be, 
that  can  hold  a parley  with  such  abominations 
when  I so  well  know  their  nature  and  their 
tendency.  Surely  he  who  finds  himself  ca- 
pable of  this,  may,  without  the  least  affecta- 
tion of  humility  (however  fair  his  outward 
conduct  appears,)  subscribe  himself  less  than 
the  least  of  all  saints,  and  of  sinners  the  very 
chief. 

I would  not  be  influenced  by  a principle 
of  self  on  any  occasion  ; yet  this  evil  I often 
do.  I see  the  baseness  and  absurdity  of  such 
conduct  as  clearly  as  I see  the  light  of  the 
day.  I do  not  affect  to  be  thought  ten  feet 
high,  and  I know  that  a desire  of  being 
thought  wise  or  good  is  equally  contrary  to 
reason  and  truth.  I should  be  grieved  or 
angry  if  my  fellow-creatures  supposed  I had 
such  a desire ; and  therefore  I fear  the  very 
principle  of  self,  of  which  I complain,  has  a 
considerable  share  in  prompting  my  desires 
to  conceal  it.  The  pride  of  others  often  of- 
fends me,  and  makes  me  studious  to  hide  my 
own,  because  their  good  opinion  of  me  de- 
pends much  upon  their  own  perceiving  it. 
But  the  Lord  knows  how  this  dead  fly  taints 
and  spoils  my  best  services,  and  makes  them 
no  better  than  specious  sins. 

I would  not  indulge  vain  reasonings  con- 
cerning the  counsels,  ways,  and  providence 
of  God,  yet  I am  prone  to  do  it.  That  the 
Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  do  right,  is  to  me 
as  evident  and  necessary  as  that  two  and  two 
make  four  I believe  that  he  has  a sovereign 


[let.  v. 

right  to  do  what  he  will  with  his  own,  and 
that  his  sovereignty  is  but  another  name  for 
the  unlimited  exercise  of  wisdom  and  good- 
ness. But  my  reasonings  are  often  such  as 
if  I had  never  heard  of  these  principles,  01 
had  formerly  renounced  them.  I feel  the 
workings  of  a presumptuous  spirit,  that 
would  account  for  every  thing,  and  venture 
to  dispute  whatever  it  cannot  comprehend. 
What  an  evil  is  this,  for  a potsherd  of  the 
earth  to  contend  with  its  maker  ! I do  not 
act  thus  towards  my  fellow-creatures  ; I do 
not  find  fault  with  the  decisions  of  a judge, 
or  the  dispositions  of  a general,  because, 
though  I know  they  are  fallible,  yet  I sup- 
pose they  are  wiser  in  their  respective  de- 
partments than  myself.  But  I am  often 
ready  to  take  this  liberty  when  it  is  most 
unreasonable  and  inexcusable. 

I would  not  cleave  to  a covenant  of  works. 
It  should  seem  from  the  foregoing  particu- 
lars, and  many  others  which  I could  mention, 
that  I have  reasons  enow  to  deter  me  from 
this : yet  even  this  I do.  Not  but  that  I say, 
and  I hope  from  my  heart,  “ Enter  not  into 
judgment  with  thy  servant,  O Lord.”  I em- 
brace it  as  a faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of 
all  acceptation,  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into 
the  world  to  save  sinners ; and  it  is  the  main 
pleasure  and  business  of  my  life  to  set  forth 
the  necessity  and  all-sufficiency  of  the  Me- 
diator between  God  and  man,  and  to  make 
mention  of  his  righteousness,  even  of  his 
only.  But  here,  as  in  every  thing  else,  I 
find  a vast  difference  between  my  judgment 
and  my  experience.  I am  invited  to  take 
the  water  of  life  freely,  yet  I am  often  dis- 
couraged, because  I have  nothing  wherewith 
to  pay  for  it.  If  I am  at  times  favoured  with 
some  liberty  from  the  above  mentioned  evils, 
it  rather  gives  me  a more  favourable  opinion 
of  myself  than  increase  my  admiration  of  the 
Lord’s  goodness  to  so  unworthy  a creature ; 
and  when  the  returning  tide  of  my  corrup- 
tions convince  me  that  I am  still  the  same, 
an  unbelieving  legal  spirit  would  urge  me 
to  conclude  that  the  Lord  is  changed  ; at  least, 
I feel  a weariness  of  being  beholden  to  him 
for  such  continued  multiplied  forgiveness, 
and  I fear  that  some  part  of  my  striving 
against  sin,  and  my  desires  after  an  increase 
of  sanctification  arise  from  a secret  wish  that 
I might  not  be  so  absolutely  and  entirely  in- 
debted to  him. 

This,  my  Lord,  is  only  a faint  sketch  of  my 
heart,  but  it  is  taken  from  the  life : it  would 
require  a volume  rather  than  a letter  to  fill 
up  the  outlines.  But  I believe  you  will  not 
regret  that  I chuse  to  say  no  more  upon  such 
a subject.  But  though  my  disease  is  griev- 
ous, it  is  not  desperate;  I have  a gracious 
and  infallible  Physician.  I shall  not  die, 
but  live,  and  declare  the  works  of  the  Ix>rd. 
— I remain,  my  Lord,  &c. 


LET.  VI.] 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


209 


LETTER  VI. 

April  — 1772. 

my  lord, — My  two  last  letters  turned 
upon  a mournful  subject,  the  depravity  of  the 
heart,  which  impedes  us  when  we  would  do 
good,  and  pollutes  our  best  intended  services 
with  evil.  We  have  cause,  upon  this  account, 
to  go  softly  all  our  days ; yet  we  need  not 
sorrow  as  those  who  have  no  hope.  The 
Lord  has  provided  his  people  relief  under 
those  complaints,  and  teaches  us  to  draw 
improvement  from  them.  If  the  evils  we 
feel  were  not  capable  of  being  over-ruled  for 
good,  he  would  not  permit  them  to  remain 
in  us.  This  we  may  infer  from  his  hatred  to 
sin,  and  the  love  which  he  bears  to  his  people. 

As  to  the  remedy,  neither  our  state  nor 
his  honour  are  affected  by  the  workings  of 
indwelling  sin,  in  the  hearts  of  those  whom 
he  has  taught  to  wrestle,  strive,  and  mourn, 
on  account  of  what  they  feel.  Though  sin 
wars,  it  shall  not  reign : and  though  it  breaks 
our  peace,  it  cannot  separate  from  his  love. 
Nor  is  it  inconsistent  with  his  holiness  and 
nerfection,  to  manifest  his  favour  to  such 
poor  defiled  creatures,  or  to  admit  them  to 
communion  with  himself;  for  they  are  not 
considered  as  in  themselves,  but  as  one  with 
Jesus,  to  whom  they  have  fled  for  refuge, 
and  by  whom  they  live  a life  of  faith.  They 
are  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  they  have  an 
Advocate  with  the  Father,  who  once  made 
an  atonement  for  their  sins,  and  ever  lives  to 
make  intercession  for  their  persons.  Though 
they  cannot  fulfil  the  law,  he  has  fulfilled 
it  for  them;  though  the  obedience  of  the 
members  is  defiled  and  imperfect,  the  obe- 
dience of  the  Head  is  spotless  and  complete ; 
and  though  there  is  much  evil  in  them,  there 
is  something  good,  the  fruit  of  his  own  gra- 
cious Spirit.  They  act  from  a principle  of 
love,  they  aim  at  no  less  than  his  glory,  and 
their  habitual  desires  are  supremely  fixed 
upon  himself.  There  is  a difference  in  kind 
between  the  feeblest  efforts  of  faith  in  a real 
believer,  while  he  is  covered  with  shame  at , 
the  thought  of  his  miscarriages,  and  the  high- 
est and  most  specious  attainments  of  those  , 
who  are  wise  in  their  own  eyes,  and  prudent 
in  their  own  sight.  Nor  shall  this  conflict , 
remain  long,  or  the  enemy  finally  prevail ; 
over  them.  They  are  supported  by  almighty  j 
power,  and  led  on  to  certain  victory.  They  j 
shall  not  always  be  as  they  are  now  ; yet  a j 
little  while,  and  they  shall  be  freed  from  this  ! 
vile  body,  which,  like  the  leprous  house,  is 
incurably  contaminated,  and  must  be  entirely 
taken  down.  Then  they  shall  see  Jesus  as 
be  is,  and  be  like  him,  and  with  him  forever. 

The  gracious  purposes  to  which  the  Lord 
makes  the  sense  and  feeling  of  our  depravity 
subservient.,  are  manifold.  Hereby  his  own 
power,  wisdom,  faithfulness,  and  love,  are 
2 I) 


| more  signally  displayed : His  power, — in 
maintaining  his  own  work  in  the  midst  of 
! much  opposition,  like  a spark  burning  in  the 
! water,  or  a bush  unconsumed  in  the  flames ; 
; His  wisdom, — in  defeating  and  controlling 
| all  the  devices  which  Satan,  from  his  know- 
j ledge  of  the  evil  of  our  nature,  is  encouraged 
to  practise  against  us.  He  has  overthrown 
| many  a fair  professor,  and,  like  Goliah,  he 
' challenges  the  whole  army  of  Israel ; yet  he 
finds  there  are  some  against  whom,  though 
he  thrusts  sorely  he  cannot  prevail ; notwith- 
| standing  any  seeming  advantage  he  gains  at 
; some  seasons,  they  are  still  delivered,  for  the 
; Lord  is  on  their  side.  The  unchangeable- 
j ness  of  the  Lord’s  love,  and  the  riches  of  his 
! mercy,  are  likewise  more  illustrated  by  the 
■ multiplied  pardons  he  bestows  upon  his 
I people,  than  if  they  needed  no  forgiveness 
' at  all. 

| Hereby  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  more  en- 
j deared  to  the  soul ; all  boasting  is  effectually 
! excluded,  and  the  glory  of  a full  and  free 
1 salvation  is  ascribed  to  him  alone.  If  a 
mariner  is  surprised  by  a storm,  and  after 
one  night  spent  in  jeopardy,  is  presently 
brought  safe  into  port ; though  he  may  re- 
joice in  his  deliverance,  it  will  not  affect  him 
so  sensibly,  as  if  after  being  tempest-tossed 
for  a long  season,  and  experiencing  a great 
number  and  variety  of  hair-breadth  escapes, 
he  at  last  gains  the  desired  haven.  The 
righteous  are  said  to  be  scarcely  saved,  not 
with  respect  to  the  certainty  of  the  event, 
for  the  purpose  of  God  in  their  favour  cannot 
j be  disappointed,  but  in  respect  of  their  own 
! apprehensions,  and  the  great  difficulties  they 
I are  brought  through.  But  when,  after  a 
i long  experience  of  their  own  deceitful  hearts, 
after  repeated  proofs  of  their  weakness,  wil- 
fulness, ingratitude,  and  insensibility,  they 
find  that  none  of  these  things  can  separate 
them  from  the  love  of  God  in  Christ,  Jesus 
becomes  more  and  more  precious  to  their 
souls.  They  love  much,  because  much  has 
been  forgiven  them.  They  dare  not,  they 
will  not,  ascribe  any  thing  to  themselves, 
but  are  glad  to  acknowledge,  that  they  must 
have  perished,  if  possible,  a thousand  times 
over,  if  Jesus  had  not  been  their  Saviour, 
their  shepherd,  and  their  shield.  When 
they  were  wandering,  he  brought  them  back; 
when  fallen,  he  raised  them  ; when  wounded, 
he  healed  them  ; when  fainting,  he  revived 
them.  By  him  out  of  weakness  they  have 
been  made  strong  ; he  has  taught  their  hands 
to  war,  and  covered  their  heads  in  the  day 
of  battle.  In  a.  word,  some  of  the  clearest 
proofs  they  have  had  of  his  excellence,  have 
been  occasioned  by  the  mortifying  proofs 
they  have  had  of  their  own  vileness.  They 
would  not  have  known  as  much  of  him, 
if  they  had  not  known  so  much  of  them 
selves. 


210 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


[let.  vu 


Farther,  a spirit  of  humiliation,  which  is 
both  decus  et  tutamen,  the  strength  and 
beauty  of  our  profession,  is  greatly  promoted 
by  our  feeling,  as  well  as  reading,  that  when 
we  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  us. 
A broken  and  a contrite  spirit  is  pleasing  to 
the  Lord ; he  has  promised  to  dwell  with 
those  who  have  it;  and  experience  shows, 
that  the  exercise  of  all  our  graces  is  in  pro- 
portion to  the  humbling  sense  we  have  of  the 
depravity  of  our  nature.  But  that  we  are 
so  totally  depraved,  is  a truth  which  no  one 
ever  truly  learned  by  being  only  told  it.  1 11- 
deed,  if  we  could  receive,  and  habitually 
maintain  a right  judgment  of  ourselves,  by 
what  is  plainly  declared  in  the  scriptures,  it 
would  probably  save  us  many  a mournful 
hour;  but  experience  is  the  Lord’s  school, 
and  they  who  are  taught  by  him  usually 
learn,  that  they  have  no  wisdom  by  the  mis- 
takes they  make,  and  that  they  have  no 
strength  by  the  slips  and  falls  they  meet 
with.  Every  day  draws  forth  some  new 
corruption,  which  before  was  little  observed, 
or  at  least  discovers  it  in  a stronger  light 
than  before.  Thus,  by  degrees,  they  are 
weaned  from  leaning  to  any  supposed  wis- 
dom, power,  or  goodness  in  themselves ; they 
feel  the  truth  of  our  Lord’s  words,  “ With- 
out me  ye  can  do  nothing  ;”  and  the  neces- 
sity of  crying,  with  David,  “ O lead  me  and 
guide  me,  for  thy  name’s  sake.”  It  is  chiefly 
by  this  frame  of  mind  that  one  Christian  is 
differenced  from  another ; for  though  it  is  an 
inward  feeling,  it  has  very  observable  out- 
ward effects,  which  are  expressively  intimated, 
Ezek.  xvi.  63,  “ Thou  shalt  be  dumb,  and  not 
open  thy  mouth,  in  the  day  when  I am  paci- 
fied towards  thee,  saith  the  Lord  God.”  The 
knowledge  of  my  full  and  free  forgiveness, 
of  thy  innumerable  backs!  idings  and  trans- 
gressions, shall  make  thee  ashamed,  and 
silence  the  unruly  workings  of  thine  heart. 
Thou  shalt  open  thy  mouth  in  praise ; but 
thou  shalt  no  more  boast  in  thyself,  or  cen- 
sure others,  or  repine  at  my  dispensations. 
In  these  respects  we  are  exceedingly  prone 
to  speak  unadvisedly  with  our  lips.  But  a 
sense  of  great  unworthiness  and  much  for- 
giveness checks  these  evils.  Whoever  is 
truly  humbled  will  not  be  easily  angry,  will 
not  be  positive  and  rash,  will  be  compassion- 
ate and  tender  to  the  infirmities  of  his  fel- 
low-sinners, knowing,  that  if  there  be  a dif- 
ference, it  is  grace  that  has  made  it,  and  that 
he  has  the  seeds  of  every  evil  in  his  own 
heart;  and,  under  all  trials  and  afflictions,  he 
will  look  to  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  and  lay 
his  mouth  in  the  dust,  acknowledging  that 
he  suffers  much  less  than  his  iniquities  have 
deserved.  These  are  some  of  the  advantages 
and  good  fruits  which  the  Lord  enables  us  to 
obtain  from  that  bitter  root  indwelling  sir.. — 
I am,  with  deference,  &c. 


LETTER  VII. 

September  — 1772. 

my  lord, — Weak,  unskilful,  and  unfaith- 
ful as  I am  in  practice,  the  Lord  has  been 
pleased  to  give  me  some  idea  of  what  a 
Christian  ought  to  be,  and  of  what  is  actually 
attainable  in  the  present  life,  by  those  whom 
he  enables  earnestly  to  aspire  towards  the 
prize  of  their  high  calling.  They  who  are 
versed  in  mechanics  can,  from  a knowledge 
of  the  combined  powers  of  a complicated  ma- 
chine, make  an  exact  calculation  of  what  it. 
is  able  to  perform,  and  what  resistance  it 
can  counteract:  hut  who  can  compute  the 
possible  effects  of  that  combination  of  princi- 
ple and  motives  revealed  in  the  gospel,  upon 
a heart  duly  impressed  with  a sense  of  their 
importance  and  glory  ? When  I was  lately 
at  Mr.  Cox’s  museum,  while  I was  fixing 
my  attention  upon  some  curious  movements, 
imagining  that  I saw  the  whole  of  the  ar- 
tist’s design,  the  person  who  showed  it  touch- 
ed a little  spring,  and  suddenly  a thousand 
new  and  unexpected  motions  took  place,  and 
the  whole  peace  seemed  animated  from  the 
top  to  the  bottom.  I should  have  formed  but 
a very  imperfect  judgment  of  it,  had  I seen  no 
more  than  what  I saw  at  first.  I thought  it 
might  in  some  measure  illustrate  the  vast 
difference  that  is  observable  amongst  profes- 
sors, even  amongst  those  who  are,  it  is  to  be 
hoped,  sincere.  There  are  persons,  who  ap- 
pear to  have  a true  knowledge,  in  part,  of 
the  nature  of  gospel  religion,  but  seem  not  to 
be  apprized  of  its  properties,  in  the  :r  com- 
prehension and  extent.  If  they  have  attained 
to  some  hope  of  their  acceptance,  if  they  find 
at  seasons  some  communion  with  God  in  the 
means  of  grace,  if  they  are  in  measure  de- 
livered from  the  prevailing  and  corrupt  cus- 
toms of  the  world,  they  seem  to  be  satisfied, 
as  if  they  were  possessed  of  all.  These  are 
indeed  great  things;  sed  meliora  latent.  The 
profession  of  too  many,  whose  sincerity  cha- 
rity would  be  unwilling  to  impeach,  is  greatly 
blemished,  notwithstanding  their  hopes  and 
their  occasional  comforts,  by  the  breakings 
forth  of  unsanctified  tempers,  and  the  indul- 
gence of  vain  hopes,  anxious  cares,  and  sel- 
fish pursuits.  Far,  very  far,  am  I from  that 
unscriptural  sentiment  of  sinless  perfection 
in  fallen  man.  To  those  who  have  a due 
sense  of  the  spirituality  and  ground  of  the 
divine  precepts,  and  of  what  passes  in  their 
own  hearts,  there  will  never  be  wanting 
causes  of  humiliation  and  self-abasement  on 
the  account  of  sin ; yet  still  there  is  a liberty 
and  privilege  attainable  by  the  gospel,  be- 
yond what  is  ordinarily  thought  of.  Permit 
me  to  mention  two  or  three  particulars,  in 
which  those  who  have  a holy  ambition  of  as- 
piring to  them  shall  not  be  altogether  disap- 
pointed. 


LET.  VII  ! 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


211 


A delight  in  the  Lord’s  all-sufficiency,  to 
l>e  satisfied  in  him  as  our  present  and  eternal 
portion.  This,  in  the  sense  in  which  I under- 
stand it,  is  not  the  effect  of  a present  warm 
frame,  but  of  a deeply-rooted  and  abiding 
principle,  the  habitual  exercise  of  which  is  to 
be  estimated  by  the  comparative  indifference 
with  which  other  things  are  regarded.  The 
soul  thus  principled,  is  not  at  leisure  to  take 
or  to  seek  satisfaction  in  any  thing  but  what 
has  a known  subserviency  to  this  leading  taste. 
Either  the  Lord  is  present,  and  then  he  is  to 
be  rejoiced  in ; or  else  he  is  absent,  and  then 
:ie  is  to  be  sought  and  waited  for.  They  are 
to  be  pitied,  who,  if  they  are  sometimes  hap- 
py in  the  Lord,  can  at  other  times  be  happy 
without  him,  and  rejoice  in  broken  cisterns, 
when  their  spirits  are  at  a distance  from  the 
fountain  of  living  waters.  I do  not  plead  for 
an  absolute  indifference  to  temporal  bless- 
ings : he  gives  us  all  things  richly  to  enjoy, 
and  a capacity  of  relishing  them  is  his  gift 
likewise ; but  then  the  consideration  of  his 
love  in  bestowing  should  exceedingly  en- 
hance the  value,  and  a regard  to  his  will 
should  regulate  their  use.  Nor  can  they  all 
supply  the  want  of  that  which  we  can  only 
receive  immediately  from  himself.  This  prin- 
ciple likewise  moderates  that  inordinate  fear 
and  sorrow  to  which  we  are  liable  upon  the 
prospect  or  the  occurrence  of  great  trials,  for 
which  there  is  a sure  support  and  resource 
provided  in  the  all-sufficiency  of  infinite 
goodness  and  grace.  What  a privilege  is 
this,  to  possess  God  in  all  things  while  we 
have  them,  and  all  things  in  God  when  they 
ure  taken  from  us ! 

An  acquiescence  in  the  Lord’s  will,  founded 
in  a persuasion  of  his  wisdom,  holiness,  sove- 
reignty, and  goodness.  This  is  one  of  the 
greatest  privileges  and  brightest  ornaments  of 
our  profession.  So  far  as  we  attain  to  this,  we 
are  secure  from  disappointment.  Our  own 
limited  views  and  short-sighted  purposes  and 
desires,  may  be,  and  will  be  often  over-ruled, 
but  then  our  main  and  leading  desire,  that  the 
will  of  the  Lord  may  be  done,  must  be  accom- 
plished. How  highly  does  it  become  us,  both 
as  creatures  and  as  sinners,  to  submit  to  the 
appointments  of  our  Maker!  and  how  neces- 
sary is  it  to  our  peace  ! This  great  attainment 
is  too  often  unthought  of,  and  overlooked; 
we  are  prone  to  fix  our  attention  upon  the 
second  causes  and  immediate  instruments  of 
events ; forgetting  that  whatever  befals  us  is 
according  to  his  purpose,  and  therefore  must 
be  right  and  seasonable  in  itself,  and  shall, 
in  the  issue,  be  productive  of  good.  From 
hence  arise  impatience,  resentment,  and  se- 
cret repinings,  which  are  not  only  sinful  but 
tormenting ; whereas,  if  all  things  are  in  his 
hand ; if  the  very  hairs  of  our  head  are  num- 
bered; if  every  event,  great  and  small,  is 
under  the  direction  of  his  providence  and 
purpose;  and,  if  he  has  a wise,  holy,  and 


gracious  end  in  view,  to  which  every  thing 
that  happens  is  subordinate  and  subservient; 
— then  we  have  nothing  to  do  but,  with  pa- 
tience and  humility,  to  follow  as  he  leads, 
and  cheerfully  to  expect  a happy  issue.  The 
path  of  present  duty  is  marked  out ; and  the 
concerns  of  the  next  and  every  succeeding 
hour  are  in  his  hands.  How  happy  are  they 
who  can  resign  all  to  him,  see  his  hand  in 
every  dispensation,  and  believe  that  he 
chooses  better  for  them  than  they  possibly 
could  for  themselves! 

A single  eye  to  his  glory,  as  the  ultimate 
scope  of  all  our  undertakings.  The  Lord 
can  design  nothing  short  of  his  own  glory ; 
nor  should  we.  The  constraining  love  of 
Christ  has  a direct  and  marvellous  tendency, 
in  proportion  to  the  measure  of  faith,  to  mor- 
tify the  corrupt  principle,  self,  which,  for  a 
season,  is  the  grand  spring  of  our  conduct, 
and  by  which  we  are  too  much  biassed  after 
we  know  the  Lord.  But  as  grace  prevails, 
self  is  renounced.  We  feel  that  we  are  not 
our  own,  that  we  are  bought  with  a price ; 
and  that  it  is  our  duty,  our  honour,  and  our 
happiness,  to  be  the  servants  of  God,  and  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  To  devote  soul  and 
body,  every  talent,  power,  and  faculty  to  the 
service  of  his  cause  and  will;  to  let  our  light 
shine  (in  our  several  situations)  to  the  praise 
of  his  grace ; to  place  our  highest  joy  in  the 
contemplation  of  his  adorable  perfections ; 
to  rejoice  even  in  tribulations  and  distresses, 
in  reproaches  and  infirmities,  if  thereby  the 
power  of  Christ  may  rest  upon  us,  and  be 
magnified  in  us  ; to  be  content,  yea,  glad  to 
be  nothing,  that  he  may  be  all  in  all ; to  obey 
him,  in  opposition  to  the  threats  or  solicita- 
tions of  men ; to  trust  him,  though  all  out- 
ward appearances  seem  against  us;  to  re- 
joice in  him,  though  we  should  (as  will  sooner 
or  later  be  the  case)  have  nothing  else  to  re- 
joice in;  to  live  above  the  world,  and  to  have 
our  conversation  in  heaven,  to  be  like  the 
angels,  finding  our  own  pleasure  in  perform- 
ing his.  This,  my  lord,  is  the  prize,  the 
mark  of  our  high  calling,  to  which  we  are 
encouraged,  with  a holy  ambition,  continually 
to  aspire.  It  is  true,  we  shall  still  fall  short; 
we  shall  find,  that  when  we  would  do  good, 
evil  will  be  present  with  us.  But  the  attempt 
is  glorious,  and  shall  not  be  wholly  in  vain. 
He  that  gives  us  thus  to  will,  will  enable  us 
to  perform  with  growing  success,  and  teach 
us  to  profit  even  by  our  mistakes  and  imper- 
fections. 

O blessed  man  ! that  thus  fears'  the  Lord, 
that  delights  in  his  word,  and  derives  his 
principles,  motives,  maxims,  and  consola- 
tions, from  that  unfailing  source  of  light  and 
strength  1 He  shall  be  like  a tree  planted  by 
the  rivers  of  water,  whose  leaf  is  always 
green,  and  fruit  abundant.  The  wisdom 
that  is  above  shall  direct  his  plans,  inspire 
his  counsels;  and  the  power  of  God  shall 


212 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


guard  him  on  every  side,  and  prepare  his 
way  through  every  difficulty;  he  shall  see 
mountains  sink  into  plains,  and  streams 
spring  up  in  the  dry  wilderness.  The  Lord’s 
enemies  will  be  his;  and  they  may  be  per- 
mitted to  fight  against  him,  but  they  shall 
not  prevail,  for  the  Lord  is  with  him  to  de- 
liver him.  The  conduct  of  such  a one, 
though  in  a narrow  and  retired  sphere  of  life, 
is  of  more  real  excellence  and  importance, 
than  the  most  splendid  actions  of  kings  and 
conquerors,  which  fill  the  annals  of  history, 
Prov.  xvi.  32.  And  if  the  God  whom  he 
serves  is  pleased  to  place  him  in  a more  pub- 
lic light,  his  labours  and  cares  will  be  amply 
compensated,  by  the  superior  opportunities 
afforded  him  of  manifesting  the  power  and 
reality  of  true  religion,  and  promoting  the 
good  of  mankind. 

I hope  I may  say,  that  I desire  to  be  thus 
entirely  given  up  to  the  Lord ; I am  sure,  I 
must  say,  that  what  I have  written  is  far 
from  being  my  actual  experience.  Alas ! I 
might  be  condemned  out  of  my  own  mouth, 
were  the  Lord  strict  to  mark  what  is  amiss. 
But,  O the  comfort ! we  are  not  under  the 
law,  but  under  grace.  The  gospel  is  a dis- 
pensation for  sinners,  and  we  have  an  advo- 
cate with  the  Father.  There  is  the  unshaken 
ground  of  hope ; a reconciled  Father,  a pre- 
vailing advocate,  a powerful  shepherd,  a 
compassionate  friend,  a Saviour,  who  is  able 
and  willing  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  He 
knows  our  frame;  he  remembers  that  we 
are  but  dust : and  he  has  opened  for  us  a new 
and  blood-besprinkled  way  of  access  to  the 
throne  of  grace,  that  we  may  obtain  mercy, 
and  find  grace  to  help  in  every  time  of  need. 
— I pjn,  &c. 


LETTER  VIII. 

April  — 1772. 

my  lord, — For  five  or  six  weeks  past,  I 
have  been  a good  deal  indisposed.  The 
ground  of  my  complaint  was  a cold,  attended 
with  a slight  fever,  and  for  some  time  with  a 
cough,  which  made  me  feel  some  inconveni- 
ence in  preaching.  To  this  succeeded  a 
deafness,  so  great  as  to  cut  me  off  from  con- 
versation ; for  I could  not  hear  the  sound  of 
a voice,  unless  it  was  spoken  loud  in  my  ear. 
But  the  Lord  has  mercifully  removed  the 
fever  and  cough,  opened  my  ears,  and  I am 
now  nearly  as  well  as  usual.  I had  cause 
to  be  thankful,  especially  for  two  things  un- 
der this  dispensation : First,  that  I was  en- 
abled, though  sometimes  with  a little  difficul- 
ty, to  go  on  with  my  public  work.  It  is  a 
singular  favour  I have  to  acknowledge,  that 
for  the  space  of  almost  nine  years,  since  I 
have  been  in  the  ministry,  our  sabbath  and 
weekly  opportunities  have  not  been  once 


[let.  VIII. 

suspended ; whereas  1 have  seen  many  of 
the  Lord’s  servants  laid  by  for  a considerable 
space  within  that  time.  My  other  great 
mercy  was,  that  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  pre- 
serve me  in  a peaceful  resigned  frame ; so 
that,  when  I was  deaf,  and  could  not  be  cer- 
tain that  I should  recover  my  hearing  any 
more,  I was  in  general  as  cheerful  and  easy 
as  at  other  times.  This  was  the  effect  of  his 
goodness : for  though  I know  enough  of  his 
sovereignty,  wisdom,  and  faithfulness,  of  his 
right  to  do  what  he  pleases,  and  the  certainty 
that  he  does  all  things  well,  to  furnish  me 
with  arguments  enough  to  prove  that  sub- 
mission to  his  will  is  our  absolute  duty ; yet 
I am  sensible,  that  when  the  trial  actually 
comes,  notwithstanding  all  the  advice  I may 
have  offered  to  others,  I should  myself  toss 
like  a wild  bull  in  a net;  rebel  and  repine  ; 
forget  that  I am  a sinner,  and  that  he  is  a 
sovereign:  this,  I say,  would  always  and  in- 
variably be  the  case,  unless  he  was  gra- 
ciously pleased  to  fulfil  his  word,  that 
strength  shall  be  according  to  the  day.  J 
hope  my  deafness  has  been  instructive  to  me. 
The  exercise  of  our  senses  is  so  easily  and 
constantly  performed,  that  it  seems  a thing 
of  course ; but  I was  then  reminded  how  pre- 
carious the  tenure  is  by  which  we  hold  those 
blessings  which  seem  most  our  own,  and 
which  are  most  immediately  necessary  to 
the  comfortable  enjoyment  of  life.  Outward 
senses,  mental  faculties,  health  of  body,  and 
peace  of  mind,  are  extremely  valuable ; but 
the  continuance  of  them  for  a single  moment 
depends  upon  him,  who,  if  he  opens,  none  can 
shut,  and  when  he  shuts,  none  can  open.  A 
minute  is  more  than  sufficient  to  deprive  us 
of  what  we  hold  most  dear,  or  to  prevent  us 
from  deriving  the  least  comfort  from  it,  if  it 
is  not  taken  away.  I am  not  presuming  to 
give  your  Lordship  information ; but  only 
mentioning  the  thoughts  that  were  much 
upon  my  mind  while  I was  incapable  of  con- 
versation. These  are  indeed  plain  and  ob- 
vious truths,  which  I have  long  acknow- 
ledged as  indisputable ; but  I have  reason  tc 
be  thankful  when  the  Lord  impresses  them 
with  fresh  power  upon  my  heart,  even  though 
he  sees  fit  to  do  it  through  the  medium  of  af- 
flictions. I have  seen,  of  late,  something  of 
the  weight  and  importance  of  that  admoni- 
tion, Jer.  ix.  23,  24;  a passage  which, 
though  addressed  to  the  wise,  the  mighty, 
and  the  rich,  is  of  universal  application  ; fo* 
self,  unless  corrupted  and  mortified  by  grace 
will  find  something  whereof  to  glory,  in  the 
meanest  characters  and  the  lowest  situations. 
And  indeed,  when  things  come  to  be  weighed 
in  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary,  the  lunatics 
in  bedlam,  some  of  whom  glory  in  their  straw 
or  their  chains,  as  marks  of  splendour  or  en- 
signs of  royalty,  have  as  much  reason  on 
their  side  as  any  persons  upon  earth  who 
glory  in  themselves.  This  alone  is  the 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


213 


LET.  IX.] 

proper  ground  of  glory  and  joy,  if  we  know 
the  Lord.  Then  all  is  safe  at  present,  and 
all  will  be  happy  for  ever.  Then,  whatever 
changes  may  affect  our  temporal  concern- 
ments, our  best  interests  and  hopes  are 
secured  beyond  the  reach  of  change;  and 
whatever  we  may  lose  or  suffer  during  this 
little  span  of  time,  will  be  abundantly  com- 
pensated in  that  glorious  state  of  eternity, 
which  is  just  at  hand. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IX. 

December  — 1772. 

my  lord, — I lately  employed  some  of  my 
leisure  hours  (which,  when  I am  not  indolent, 
are  but  few)  in  reading  the  Memoirs  of  the 
duke  of  Sully,  which  occasionally  came  in 
my  way.  It  afforded  me  matter  for  variety 
of  reflections.  I pity  the  duke  of  Sully, 
whose  attachment  to  the  name  of  Protestant 
seems  to  have  been  little  more  than  a point 
of  honour,  who  drew  all  his  resources  from 
himself,  and  whose  chief  aim  seems  to  have 
been,  to  approve  himself  faithful  to  an  earth- 
ly master.  He  acted  as  well  as  could  be  ex- 
pected from  natural  principles ; and  the  Lord, 
who  employed  him  as  an  instrument  in  his 
providence,  rewarded  his  fidelity  with  suc- 
cess, honour,  and  riches:  a reward  which, 
though  in  itself  a poor  one,  is  suited  to  the 
desires  of  men  who  place  their  happiness  in 
worldly  things,  and  is  so  far  a compensation 
of  their  services.  It  is  given  to  your  Lord- 
ship  to  act  from  nobler  principles,  and  with 
more  enlarged  views.  You  serve  a Master, 
of  whose  favour,  protection,  and  assistance 
you  cannot  be  deprived,  who  will  not  over- 
look or  misconstrue  the  smallest  services 
you  attempt  for  him,  who  will  listen  to  no 
insinuations  against  you,  who  is  always  near, 
to  comfort,  direct,  and  strengthen  you,  and 
who  is  preparing  for  you  such  honours  and 
blessings  as  he  only  can  give,  an  inheritance 
(the  reverse  of  all  earthly  good) 

* Thus  animated,  and 
thus  supported,  assisted  likewise  by  the 
prayers  of  thousands,  may  we  not  warranta- 
bly  hope  that  your  Lordship  will  be  an  in- 
strument of  great  good,  and  that  both  churcn 
and  state  will  be  benefited  by  your  example, 
counsels,  and  care. 

In  another  view,  the  duke  of  Sully’s  his- 
tory exhibits  a comment  upon  the  psalmist’s 
words,  “ Surely  man  in  his  best  estate  is 
altogether  vanity.”  View  him  in  one  light, 
he  seems  to  have  possessed  all  that  the  most 
aspiring  mind  could  aim  at — the  favour  and 
confidence  of  his  prince,  accumulated  wealth, 
great  honours,  and  such  powers  by  his  offices 
and  influence  with  the  king,  that  he  could 
almost  do  what  he  pleased.  Yet  he  had  so 


much  to  suffer  from  the  fatigues  and  difficul- 
ties of  his  station,  and  the  cabals  and  malice 
of  his  enemies,  that,  in  the  midst  of  all  his 
grandeur,  a dispassionate  mind  would  rather 
pity  than  envy  him.  And  how  suddenly 
were  his  schemes  broken  by  the  death  of  the 
king  1 Then  he  lost  his  friend,  his  protec- 
tor, his  influence.  The  remainder  of  his 
days  were  embittered  by  many  inquietudes 
He  lived  indeed,  if  that  could  afford  any  con 
solation,  in  much  state  and  pageantry  after 
wards ; but  after  having  toiled  through  more 
than  fourscore  years,  died  at  last  almost  of  a 
broken  heart,  from  domestic  uneasiness.  And 
is  this  all  that  the  world  can  do  for  those  who 
are  accounted  most  successful]  Alas ! 

Too  low  they  build  who  build  below  the  skies. 

And  what  a picture  of  the  instability  of 
human  things  have  we  in  his  master,  Henry  ! 
Admired,  beloved,  dreaded,  full  of  vast  de- 
signs, fondly  supposing  himself  born  to  be  the 
arbiter  of  Europe,  in  an  awful  moment,  and  in 
the  midst  of  his  friends,  suddenly  struck  from 
the  height  of  his  grandeur,  and  snatched  into 
the  invisible,  unchangeable  world.  In  that 
moment  all  his  thoughts  perished. 

How  unspeakably  awful  such  a transition  ! 
How  remarkable  were  his  own  forebodings  of 
the  approaching  hour!  O Lord,  how  dost 
thou  pour  contempt  upon  princes,  and  teach 
us  that  the  great  and  the  mean  are  equally 
in  thy  hands,  and  at  thy  disposal,  as  clay  in 
the  hands  of  the  potter!  Poor  king!  while 
he  expected  obedience  to  his  own  commands, 
he  lived  in  habitual  defiance  of  the  commands 
of  God.  Men  may  respect  his  memory,  for 
his  sincerity,  benevolence,  and  other  amiable 
qualities ; but,  besides  that  he  was  engrossed 
by  a round  of  sensual  pleasure,  (when  busi- 
ness of  state  did  not  interfere,)  his  life  was 
stained  with  adultery.  Happy,  if,  in  the 
hours  he  spent  in  retirement,  when  the  pre- 
intimation of  his  death  hung  heavy  upon  his 
mind,  the  Lord  humbled  and  softened  his 
heart,  and  gave  him  repentance  unto  life ! I 
wish  the  history  afforded  a proof  of  this. 
However,  in  his  death,  we  see  an  affecting 
proof,  that  no  human  dignity  or  power  can 
ward  off  the  stroke  of  the  Almighty,  who  by 
such  sudden  and  unexpected  dispensations 
often  shows  himself  terrible  to  the  princes 
and  great  men  of  the  earth.  O ! that  they 
could  see  his  hand,  and  wisely  consider  his 
doing  in  them  ! 

But  happy  is  the  man  who  fears  the  Lord, 
and  delights  in  his  commandments : who  sets 
God  always  before  him,  and  acts  under  the 
constraining  influence  of  redeeming  love.  lie 
is  the  real  friend,  and  the  best  champion  of 
his  country,  who  makes  not  the  vague  no- 
tions of  human  wisdom  and  honour,  but  the 
precepts  and  example  of  the  blessed  Jesus, 
the  model  and  the  motive  of  his  conduct. 
He  inculcates,  as  occasion  offers,  the  great 


Incorruptible,  undefiled,  unfading. 


214 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


LET.  X. 


truths  of  religion  in  his  conversation,  and 
demonstrates  them  by  his  practice ; yet  the 
best  part  of  his  life  is  known  only  to  God 
and  himself.  His  time  is  divided  between 
serving  his  country  in  public,  and  wrestling 
for  it  in  private.  Nor  shall  his  labours  or 
his  prayers  be  lost.  Either  he  shall  have 
the  desire  of  his  heart,  and  shall  see  the  re- 
ligion and  the  liberty  he  so  highly  values 
transmitted  to  posterity  ; or,  if  he  should  live 
when  wrath  is  decreed,  and  there  is  no  re- 
medy, the  promise  and  the  providence  of 
God  .diall  seal  him  as  the  peculiar  charge  of 
angels,  in  the  midst  of  public  calamity.  And 
when  all  things  are  involved  in  confusion, 
when  the  hearts  of  the  wicked  shall  shake 
like  the  leaves  of  the  forest,  he  shall  be  kept 
in  perfect  peace,  trusting  in  the  Lord. — I 
am,  with  the  greatest  deference,  & c. 


LETTER  X. 

March  — 1773. 

my  lord, — Usually  for  some  days  before 
[ purpose  writing  to  your  Lordship  my 
thoughts  are  upon  the  stretch  for  a subject ; 
1 do  not  mean  all  day  long,  but  it  is  so  more  or 
less : but  I might  as  well  spare  my  inquiries, 
I can  come  to  no  determination,  and,  lor  the 
most  part,  begin  to  write  at  an  absolute  un- 
certainty how  I am  to  proceed.  Since  I 
cannot  premeditate,  my  heart  prays  that  it 
may  be  given  me  in  the  same  hour  what  I 
shall  offer.  A simple  dependence  upon  the 
teaching  and  influence  of  the  good  Spirit  of 
God,  so  as  not  to  supersede  the  use  of  ap- 
pointed means,  would,  if  it  could  be  uni- 
formly maintained,  make  every  part  of  duty 
easy  and  successful.  It  would  free  us  from 
much  solicitude,  and  prevent  many  mistakes. 
Methinks  I have  a subject  in  view  already, 
a subject  of  great  importance  to  myself,  and 
which,  perhaps,  will  not  be  displeasing  to  your 
Lordship,  viz.  how  to  walk  with  God  in  the 
daily  occurrences  of  life,  so  as  to  do  every 
thing  for  his  sake  and  by  his  strength. 

When  we  are  justified  by  faith,  and  ac- 
cepted in  the  Beloved,  we  become  heirs  of 
everlasting  life : but  we  cannot  know  the 
full  value  of  our  privileges  till  we  enter  upon 
the  state  of  glory.  For  this,  most  who  are 
converted,  have  to  wait  some  time  after  they 
are  partakers  of  grace.  Though  the  Lord 
loves  them,  hates  sin,  and  teaches  them  to 
hate  it,  he  appoints  them  to  remain  awhile 
in  a sinful  world,  and  to  groan  under  the 
burden  of  a depraved  nature.  He  could  put 
them  in  immediate  possession  of  the  heaven 
for  which  he  has  given  them  a meetness,  but 
he  does  not.  He  has  a service  for  them  here, 
an  honour  which  is  worth  all  they  can  suffer, 
and  for  which  eternity  will  not  afford  an  op- 
portunity, namely  to  be  instruments  of  pro- 
moting his  designs,  and  manifesting  his 


I grace  in  the  world.  Strictly  speaking,  this 
is  the  whole  of  our  business  here,  the  only 
reason  why  life  is  prolonged,  or  for  which  it 
; is  truly  desirable,  that  we  may  fill  up  our 
connexions  and  situations,  improve  our  com- 
j forts  and  our  crosses,  in  such  a manner  as 
j that  God  may  be  glorified  in  us  and  by  us. 

| As  he  is  a bountiful  Master  and  a kind  Fa- 
I ther,  he  is  pleased  to  afford  a variety  of  tem- 
| poral  blessings,  which  sweeten  cur  service, 
and  as  coming  from  his  hand  are  very  valu- 
able, but  are  by  no  means  w*  r .h  living  for, 
considered  in  themselves,  as  they  can  nei- 
I ther  satisfy  our  desires,  nor  preserve  us  from 
! trouble  or  support  us  under  it.  That  light 
1 of  God’s  countenance  which  can  pervade  the 
I walls  and  dissipate  the  gloom  of  a dungeon, 

; is  unspeakably  preferable  to  all  that  can  be 
| enjoyed  in  a palace  without  it.  The  true  end 
j of  life  is,  to  live  not  to  ourselves,  but  to  him 
! who  died  for  us;  and  while  we  devote  our- 
! selves  to  his  service  upon  earth,  to  rejoice  in 
j the  prospect  of  being  happy  with  him  for  ever 
| in  heaven.  These  things  are  generally  known 
and  acknowledged  by  professors;  but  they  are 
a favoured  few  who  act  consistently  with  their 
| avowed  principles ; who  honestly,  diligently, 

| and  without  reserve,  endeavour  to  make  the 
j most  of  their  talents  and  strength  in  promo- 
! ting  the  Lord’s  service,  and  allow  themselves 
j in  no  views  or  designs,  but  what  are  plainly 
I subordinate  and  subservient  to  it.  Yea,  I be 
lieve,  the  best  of  the  Lord’s  servants  see  cause 
enough  to  confess,  that  they  are  not  only  un- 
profitable in  comparison  of  what  they  wish  to 
be,  but  in  many  instances  unfaithful  likewise. 
They  find  so  many  snares,  hindrances,  and 
temptations,  arising  from  w ithout,  and  somuch 
embarrassment  from  sin  which  dwells  within, 
that  they  have  more  cause  for  humiliation  1 han 
self-complacence,  when  they  seem  most  earn- 
est and  most  useful.  However,  we  have  no 
scriptural  evidence  that  we  serve  the  Lord  at 
all,  any  farther  than  we  find  an  habitual  desire 
and  aim  to  serve  him  wholly.  He  is  gracious 
to  our  imperfections  and  w eakness;  yet  he  re- 
quires all  the  heart,  and  will  not  be  served  by 
halves,  nor  accept  what  is  performed  by  a di- 
vided spirit.  I lately  met  with  some  profane 
scoffs  of  Voltaire  upon  the  sentiment  of  doing 
all  to  the  Glory  of  God  ("such  as  might  be  ex- 
pected from  such  a man ;)  howrever,  this  is 
the  true  alchymy  wThich  turns  every  thing  to 
j gold,  and  ennobles  the  common  actions  of 
I life  into  acts  of  religion,  1 Cor.  x.  31.  Nor 
j is  there  a grain  of  real  goodness  in  the  most 
I specious  actions  which  are  performed  without 
a reference  to  God’s  glory.  This  the  wrorld 
cannot  understand ; but  it  will  appear  highly 
reasonable  to  those  who  take  their  ideas  of 
God  from  the  scriptures,  and  who  have  felt 
the  necessity,  and  found  the  benefits  of  re- 
demption. We  are  debtors  many  w^ays.  The 
Lord  has  a right  to  us  by  creation,  by  redemp- 
tion, by  conquest,  when  he  freed  us  from  Sa- 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


215 


LET.  XI.] 

tan’s  power,  and  took  possession  of  our  hearts 
by  his  grace ; and  lastly,  by  our  own  volun- 
tary surrender  in  the  day  when  he  enabled  us 
to  fix  our  choice  on  himself,  as  our  Lord  and 
our  portion.  Then  we  felt  the  force  of  our 
obligations,  we  saw  the  beauty  and  honour  of 
his  service,  and  that  nothing  was  worthy  to 
stand  in  the  least  degree  of  competition  with 
it.  This  is  always  equally  true,  though  our 
perceptions  of  it  are  not  always  equally  strong. 
But  where  it  has  been  once  really  known,  it 
cannot  be  wholly  forgotten,  or  cease  to  be  the 
governing  principle  of  life;  and  the  Lord  has 
promised  to  revive  the  impression  in  those 
who  wait  upon  him,  and  thereby  to  renew 
their  strength.  For  in  proportion  as  we  feel 
by  what  ties  we  are  his,  we  shall  embrace 
his  service  as  perfect  freedom. 

Again,  when  the  eye  is  thus  single,  the 
whole  body  will  be  full  of  light.  The  princi- 
ple, of  acting  simply  for  God,  will  in  general 
make  the  path  of  duty  plain,  solve  a thousand 
otherwise  dubious  questions,  lead  to  the  most 
proper  and  obvious  means,  and  preclude  that 
painful  anxiety  about  events,  which  upon  no 
other  plan  can  be  avoided.  The  love  of  God 
is  the  best  casuist ; especially  as  it  leads  us 
to  a careful  attendance  to  his  precepts,  a re- 
liance on  his  promises,  and  a submission  to 
his  will.  Most  of  our  perplexities  arise  from 
an  undue,  though  perhaps  unperceived,  at- 
tachment to  self.  Either  we  have  some 
scheme  of  our  own  too  closely  connected  with 
our  general  view  of  serving  the  Lord,  or  lay 
some  stress  upon  our  own  management,  which, 
though  we  suspect  it  may  possibly  fail  us,  we 
cannot  entirely  help  trusting  to.  In  these  re- 
spects, the  Lord  permits  his  servants  occasion- 
ally to  feel  their  own  weakness;  but  if  they  are 
sincerely  devoted  to  him,  he  will  teach  them  to 
profit  by  it,  and  bring  them  by  degrees  to  a 
simplicity  of  dependence,  as  well  as  of  in- 
tention. Then  all  things  are  easy.  Acting 
from  love,  and  walking  by  faith,  they  can 
neither  be  disappointed  nor  discouraged. 
Duty  is  their  part,  care  is  his,  and  they  are 
enabled  to  cast  it  upon  him.  They  know 
that  when  their  expedients  seem  to  fail,  he 
is  still  all-sufficient.  They  know  that,  being 
engaged  in  his  cause  they  cannot  miscarry  ; 
and  that  though  in  some  things  they  may 
seem  to  fall  short  of  success,  they  are  sure 
of  meeting  acceptance,  and  that  he  will  es- 
timate their  services,  not  by  their  actual  ef- 
fects, but  according  to  the  gracious  princi- 
ple and  desire  he  has  put  into  their  hearts, 
2 Chron.  vi.  7,  8. — I am,  with  the  greatest 
respect,  &c. 


LETTER  XI. 


June  —1773. 

my  lord, — My  old  cast-off  acquaintance, 
Horace,  occasionally  came  in  my  way  this 


morning.  I opened  it  upon  lib.  3.  od.  29. 
Did  I not  know  the  proposal  to  be  utterly 
impracticable,  how  gladly  should  I imitate  it. 
and  send  your  Lordship,  in  honest  prose,  if 
not  in  elegant  verse,  an  invitation.  But  I 
must  content  myself  with  the  idea  of  the 
pleasure  it  would  give  me  to  sit  with  you 
half  a day  under  my  favourite  great  tree,  and 
converse  with  you,  not  concerning  the  com- 
paratively petty  affairs  of  human  govern- 
ments, but  of  the  things  pertaining  to  the 
kingdom  of  God.  How  many  delightful  sub- 
jects would  suggest  themselves  in  a free  and 
retired  conversation!  The  excellency  of 
our  King,  the  permanency  and  glory  of  his 
kingdom,  the  beauty  of  his  administration, 
the  privileges  of  his  subjects,  the  review  of 
what  he  has  done  for  us,  and  the  prospect  of 
what  he  has  prepared  for  us  in  future ; and 
if,  while  we  were  conversing,  he  should  be 
pleased  to  join  us  (as  he  did  the  disciples 
when  walking  to  Emmaus,)  how  would  our 
hearts  burn  within  us ! Indeed,  whether  we 
are  alone,  or  in  company,  the  most  interest- 
ing topics  strike  us  but  faintly,  unless  he  is 
pleased  to  afford  his  gracious  influence ; but 
when  he  is  present,  light,  love,  liberty,  and 
joy,  spring  up  in  the  hearts  that  know  him. 
This  reminds  me  (as  I have  mentioned  Ho- 
race) to  restore  some  beautiful  lines  to  their 
proper  application.  They  are  impious  and 
idolatrous  as  he  uses  them,  but  have  an  ex- 
pressive propriety  in  the  mouth  of  a believ- 
er : — 


Lucem  redde  tuse,  dux  bone,  patriae 
Instar  veris  enim  vultus  ubi  tuus 
Affulsit  populo,  gratior  it  dies, 

Et  soles  melius  nitent. 


But  we  cannot  meet.  All  that  is  left  for 
me  is  to  use  the  liberty  you  allow  me  of  offer- 
ing a few  hints  upon  these  subjects  by  letter, 
not  because  you  know  them  not,  but  because 
you  love  them.  The  hour  is  coming-  when  all 
impediments  shall  be  removed.  All  distinc- 
tions shall  cease  that  are  founded  upon  sublu- 
nary things,  and  the  earth  and  all  its  works 
shall  be  burnt  up.  Glorious  day  ! May  our 
souls  be  filled  with  the  thought,  and  learn  to 
estimate  all  things  around  us  now  by  the 
view  in  which  they  will  appear  to  us  then ! 
Then  it  will  be  of  small  moment  who  was 
the  prince  and  who  was  the  beggar  in  this 
life,  but  who,  in  their  several  situations, 
sought  and  loved,  and  feared  and  honoured 
the  Lord.  Alas ! how  many  of  the  kings  of 
the  earth,  and  the  rich  men  and  the  chief 
captains,  and  the  mighty  men  will  then  say, 
in  vain,  to  the  mountains  and  the  rocks, 
“ Fall  on  us  and  hide  us !”  In  this  world 
they  are  for  the  most  part  too  busy  to  regard 
the  commands  of  God,  or  too  happy  to  seek 
his  favour : they  have  their  good  things  here; 
they  please  themselves  for  a while,  and  in  a 
moment  they  go  down  to  the  grave.  In  that 


216 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


moment  their  thoughts  perish,  their  schemes 
are  left  unfinished,  they  are  torn  from  their 
possessions,  and  enter  upon  a new,  an  un- 
tried, an  unchangeable,  a never-ending  state 
of-  existence.  Alas!  is  this  all  the  world 
can  afford ! I congratulate  you,  my  Lord, 
not  because  God  has  appointed  you  to  appear 
in  an  elevated  rank  (this,  abstracted  from 
the  opportunity  it  affords  you  of  greater  use- 
fulness, would  perhaps  be  a more  proper 
subject  for  condolence ;)  but  that  he  has  ad- 
mitted you  to  those  honours  and  privileges 
which  come  from  him  only,  and  which  so 
few  in  the  superior  ranks  of  life  think  worthy 
of  their  attention.  I doubt  not  but  you  are 
often  affected  with  a sense  of  this  distin- 
guishing mercy.  But  though  we  know  that 
we  are  debtors,  great  debtors  to  the  grace 
of  God,  which  alone  has  made  us  to  differ, 
we  know  it  but  imperfectly  at  present.  It 
doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be,  nor 
can  we  form  a just  conception  of  the  misery 
from  which  we  are  redeemed,  much  less  of 
the  price  paid  for  our  redemption.  How  lit- 
tle do  we  know  of  the  Redeemer’s  dignity, 
and  of  the  unutterable  distress  he  endured 
when  his  soul  was  made  an  offering  for  sin, 
and  it  pleased  the  Father  to  bruise  him,  that 
by  his  stripes  we  might  be  healed.  These 
things  will  strike  us  quite  in  another  man- 
ner, when  we  view  them  in  the  light  of 
eternity.  Then,  to  return  to  the  thought 
from  which  I have  rambled,  then  and  there 
I trust  we  shall  meet  to  the  highest  advan- 
tage, and  spend  an  everlasting  day  together 
in  happiness  and  praise.  With  this  thought 
I endeavour  to  comfort  myself,  under  the  re- 
gret I sometimes  feel  that  I can  have  so  lit- 
tle intercourse  with  you  in  this  life. 

May  the  cheering  contemplation  of  the  hope 
set  before  us,  support  and  animate  us  to  im- 
prove the  interval  and  fill  us  with  a holy  am- 
bition of  shining  as  lights  in  the  world,  to 
the  praise  and  glory  of  his  grace  who  has 
called  us  out  of  darkness.  Encompassed  as 
we  are  with  snares,  temptations,  and  infirmi- 
ties, it  is  possible,  by  his  promised  assistance, 
to  live  in  some  good  measure  above  the  world 
while  we  are  in  it ; above  the  influence  of  its 
cares,  its  smiles,  or  its  frowns.  Our  conver- 
sation, ttox.tju/4*,  our  citizenship,  is  in  heaven. 
W e are  not  at  home,  but  only  resident  here 
for  a season  to  fulfil  an  appointed  service ; 
and  the  Lord,  whom  we  serve,  has  encouraged 
us  to  hope  that  he  will  guide  us  by  his  wis- 
dom, strengthen  us  by  his  power,  and  com- 
fort us  with  the  light  of  his  countenance, 
which  is  better  than  life.  Every  blessing  we 
receive  from  him  is  a token  of  his  favour,  and 
a pledge  of  that  far  more  exceeding  and  eter- 
nal weight  of  glory  which  he  has  reserved 
fl>r  us.  O!  to  hear  him  say  at  last,  “ Well 
done,  good  and  faithful  servant,  enter  thou  in- 
to the  joy  of  thy  Lord !”  will  be  a rich  amends 
for  all  that  we  can  lose,  suffer,  or  forbear,  for 


[let.  xii. 


his  sake. — I subscribe  myself,  with  great  sin 
cerity,  &c. 


LETTER  XII. 

February — 1774. 

my  lord, — The  first  line  of  Horace’s  epis- 
tle to  Augustus,  when  rightly  applied,  sug- 
gests a grand  and  cheering  idea.  As  ad- 
dressed by  the  poet,  nothing  can  be  more 
blasphemous,  idolatrous,  and  absurd ; but 
with  what  comfort  and  propriety  may  a 
Christian  look  up  to  him  to  whom  all  power 
is  committed  in  heaven  and  earth,  and  say, 
Cum  tot  sustineas  et  tanta  negotia  solus ! 
Surely  a more  weighty  and  comprehensive 
sentence  never  dropped  from  an  uninspired 
pen.  And  how  beautifully  and  expressively  is 
it  closed  by  the  word  solus  ! the  government 
is  upon  his  shoulders : and  though  he  is  con- 
cealed by  a veil  of  second  causes  from  com- 
mon eyes,  so  that  they  can  perceive  only  the 
means,  instruments,  and  contingencies  by 
which  he  works,  and  therefore  think  he  does 
nothing,  yet  in  reality  he  does  all,  according 
to  his  own  counsel  and  pleasure,  in  the  armies 
of  heaven,  and  among  the  inhabitants  of  the 
earth. 

Who  can  enumerate  the  tot  et  tanta  nego- 
tia, which  are  incessantly  before  his  eye,  ad- 
justed by  his  wisdom,  dependent  on  his  will, 
and  regulated  by  his  power,  in  his  kingdoms 
of  providence  and  grace  1 If  we  consider  the 
heavens,  the  work  of  his  fingers,  the  moon 
and  the  stars  which  he  has  ordained ; if  we 
call  in  the  assistance  of  astronomers  and 
glasses,  to  help  us  in  forming  a conception  of 
the  number,  distances,  magnitudes,  and  mo- 
tions of  the  heavenly  bodies : the  more  we 
search,  the  more  we  shall  be  confirmed,  that 
these  are  but  a portion  of  his  ways.  But  he 
calls  them  all  by  their  names,  upholds  them 
by  his  power,  and  without  his  continual 
energy  they  would  rush  into  confusion,  or 
sink  into  nothing.  If  we  speak  of  intelligen- 
ces, he  is  the  life,  the  joy,  the  sun  of  all  that 
are  capable  of  happiness.  Whatever  may 
be  signified  by  the  thrones,  principalities, 
and  powers  in  the  world  of  light,  they  are 
all  dependent  upon  his  power,  and  obedient 
to  his  command ; it  is  equally  true  of  angels 
as  of  men,  that  without  him  they  can  do  no- 
thing. The  powers  of  darkness  are  likewise 
under  his  subjection  and  control.  Though 
but  little  is  said  of  them  in  scripture,  we  read 
enough  to  assure  us  that  their  number  must 
| be  immensely  great,  and  that  their  strength, 

| subtilty,  and  malice,  are  such,  as  we  may 
tremble  to  think  of  them  as  our  enemies,  and 
; probably  should,  but  for  our  strange  insensi- 
bility to  whatever  does  not  fall  under  the 
; cognizance  of  our  outward  senses.  But  he 
! holds  them  all  in  a chain,  so  that  they  can 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


23? 


LET.  XII.] 

do  or  attempt  nothing  but  by  his  permission ; 
and  whatever  he  permits  them  to  do  (though 
they  mean  nothing  less)  has  its  appointed 
subserviency  in  accomplishing  his  designs. 

But  to  come  nearer  home,  and  to  speak  of 
what  seems  more  suited  to  our  scanty  appre- 
hensions ; still  we  may  be  lost  in  wonder. 
Before  this  blessed  and  only  Potentate,  all 
t ie  nations  of  the  earth  are  but  as  the  dust 
upon  the  balance  and  the  small  drop  of  a 
bucket,  and  might  be  thought  (if  compared 
with  the  immensity  of  his  works)  scarcely 
worthy  of  his  notice ; yet  here  he  presides, 
pervades,  provides,  protects,  and  rules.  In 
him  his  creatures  live,  move,  and  have  their 
being;  from  him  is  their  food  and  preserva- 
tion. The  eyes  of  all  are  upon  him ; what 
he  gives  they  gather,  and  can  gather  no 
more;  and  at  his  word  they  sink  into  the 
dust.  There  is  not  a worm  that  crawls  upon 
the  ground,  or  a flower  that  grows  in  the 
pathless  wilderness,  or  a shell  upon  the  sea- 
shore, but  bears  the  impress  of  his  wisdom, 
power,  and  goodness.  With  respect  to  men, 
he  reigns  with  uncontrolled  dominion  over 
every  kingdom,  family,  and  individual.  Here 
we  may  be  astonished  at  his  wisdom,  in  em- 
ploying free  agents,  the  greater  part  of  whom 
are  his  enemies,  to  accomplish  his  purposes. 
But,  however  reluctant,  they  all  serve  him. 
His  patience,  likewise  is  wonderful.  Multi- 
tudes, yea  nearly  our  whole  species,  spend 
the  life  and  strength  which  he  affords  them, 
and  abuses  all  the  bounties  he  heaps  upon 
them,  in  the  ways  of  sin.  His  commands 
are  disregarded,  his  name  blasphemed,  his 
mercy  disdained,  his  power  defied ; yet  still 
he  spares.  It  is  an  eminent  part  of  his  go- 
vernment, to  restrain  the  depravity  of  human 
nature,  and  in  various  ways  to  check  its  ef- 
forts which,  if  left  to  itself,  without  his  pro- 
vidential control,  would  presently  make 
earth  the  very  image  of  hell.  For  the  vilest 
men  are  not  suffered  to  perpetrate  a thou- 
sandth part  of  the  evil  which  their  hearts 
would  prompt  them  to.  The  earth,  though 
lying  in  the  wicked  one,  is  filled  with  the 
goodness  of  the  Lord.  He  preserveth  man 
and  beast,  sustains  the  young  lions  in  the 
forest,  feeds  the  birds  of  the  air,  which  have 
neither  store-house  nor  barn,  and  adorns  the 
i nsects  and  flowers  of  the  field  with  a beauty 
and  elegance,  far  beyond  what  can  be  found 
in  tne  courts  of  kings. 

Still  more  wonderful  is  his  administration 
in  his  kingdom  of  grace.  He  is  present  with 
all  his  creatures,  but  in  a peculiar  manner 
with  his  own  people.  Each  of  these  are  mo- 
numents of  a more  illustrious  display  of  power, 
than  that  which  spreads  abroad  the  heavens 
like  a curtain,  and  laid  the  foundations  of 
the  earth ; for  he  finds  them  all  in  a state 
of  rebellion  and  enmity,  and  makes  them  a 
willing  people ; and  from  the  moment  he  re- 
veals his  love  to  them,  he  espouses  their 
2 E 


cause,  and  takes  all  their  concerns  into  his 
own  hands.  He  is  near  and  attentive  to 
every  one  of  them,  as  if  there  was  only  that 
one.  This  high  and  lofty  One,  who  inhabits 
eternity,  before  whom  the  angels  vail  their 
faces,  condescends  to  hold  communion  with 
those  whom  men  despise.  He  sees  not  as 
man  seeth — rides  on  a cloud,  disdainful  by  a 
sultan  or  a czar,  to  manifest  himself  to  a 
humble  soul  in  a mud-walled  cottage.  He 
comforts  them  when  in  trouble,  strengthens 
them  when  weak,  makes  their  beds  in  sick- 
ness, revives  them  when  fainting,  upholds 
them  when  failing,  and  so  seasonably  and  ef- 
fectually manages  for  them,  that  though  they 
are  persecuted  and  tempted,  though  their 
enemies  are  many  and  mighty,  nothing  that 
they  feel  or  fear  is  able  to  separate  them 
from  his  love. 

And  all  this  he  does  solus.  All  the  abili- 
ties, powers,  and  instincts,  that  are  found 
amongst  creatures,  are  emanations  from  his 
fulness.  All  changes,  successes,  disappoint- 
ments, all  that  is  memorable  in  the  annals  of 
history,  all  the  risings  and  falls  of  empires, 
all  the  turns  in  human  life,  take  place  ac 
cording  to  his  plan.  In  vain  men  contrive 
and  combine  to  accomplish  their  own  coun- 
sels; unless  they  are  parts  of  his  counsel 
likewise,  the  efforts  of  their  utmost  strength 
and  wisdom  are  crossed  and  reversed  by 
the  feeblest  and  most  unthought-of  circum- 
stances. But  when  he  has  a work  to  accom- 
plish, and  his  time  is  come,  however  inade- 
quate and  weak  the  means  he  employs  may 
seem  to  a carnal  eye,  the  success  is  infalli- 
bly secured;  for  all  things  serve  him,  and 
are  in  his  hands  as  clay  in  the  hands  of  the 
potter.  Great  and  marvellous  are  thy  works, 
Lord  God  Almighty  ! just  and  true  are  thy 
ways,  thou  King  of  saints  ! 

This  is  the  God  whom  we  adore.  This  is 
he  who  invites  us  to  lean  upon  his  almighty 
arm,  and  promises  to  guide  us  with  his  un- 
erring eye.  He  says  to  you,  my  Lord,  and 
even  to  me,  “ Fear  not,  I am  with  thee ; be 
not  dismayed.  I am  thy  God : I will 
strengthen  thee,  yea  I will  help  thee,  yea  I 
will  uphold  thee  with  the  right  hand  of  my 
righteousness.”  Therefore,  while  in  the  path 
of  duty,  and  following  his  call,  we  may  cheer- 
fully pass  on,  regardless  of  apparent  difficul- 
ties ; for  the  Lord,  whose  we  are,  and  who 
has  taught  us  to  make  his  glory  our  highest 
end,  will  go  before  us,  and  at  his  word  crook- 
ed things  become  straight,  light  shines  out 
of  darkness,  and  mountains  sink  into  plains. 
Faith  may  and  must  be  exercised,  experience 
must  and  will  confirm  what  his  word  de- 
clares, that  the  heart  is  deceitful,  and  that 
man  in  his  best  estate  is  vanity.  But  his 
promises  to  them  that  fear  him  shall  be  con- 
firmed likewise,  and  they  shall  find  him,  in 
all  situations,  a sun,  a shield,  and  an  exceed- 
ing great  reward. 


213 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


[let.  XIII. 


I have  lost  another  of  my  people,  a mother 
unto  our  Israel ; a person  of  much  experi- 
ence, eminent  grace,  wisdom,  and  usefulness. 
She  walked  with  God  forty  years : she  was 
one  of  the  Lord’s  poor ; but  her  poverty  was 
decent,  satisfied,  and  honourable ; she  lived 
respected,  and  her  death  is  considered  as  a 
public  loss.  It  is  a great  loss  to  me;  I shall 
miss  her  advice  and  example,  by  which  I 
have  been  often  edified  and  animated.  But 
Jesus  still  lives.  Almost  her  last  words  were, 
The  Lord  is  my  portion,  saith  my  soul. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  XIII. 

March  10,  1774. 

my  lord, — For  about  six  weeks  past  I 
have  had  occasion  to  spend  several  hours  of 
almost  every  day  with  the  sick  and  the  dying. 
These  scenes  are  to  a minister  like  walking 
the  hospitals  to  a young  surgeon.  The  vari- 
ous cases  which  occur,  exemplify,  illustrate, 
and  explain,  with  a commanding  energy, 
many  truths,  which  may  be  learned  indeed 
at  home,  but  cannot  be  so  well  understood, 
or  their  force  so  sensibly  felt,  without  the 
advantage  of  experience  and  observation. 
As  physicians,  besides  that  competent  gene- 
ral knowledge  of  their  profession  which 
should  be  common  to  them  all,  have  usually 
their  several  favourite  branches  of  study, 
some  applying  themselves  more  to  botany, 
others  to  chemistry,  others  to  anatomy ; so 
ministers  as  their  inclinations  and  gifts  differ, 
are  led  more  closely  to  consider  some  par- 
ticular branch  of  the  system  of  divine  truth. 
Some  are  directed  to  state  and  defend  the 
doctrines  of  the  gospel ; some  have  a talent 
for  elucidating  difficult  texts  of  scripture; 
some  have  a turn  for  explaining  the  pro- 
phetical parts,  and  so  of  the  rest.  For  my- 
self, if  it  be  lawful  to  speak  of  myself,  and 
so  far  as  I can  judge,  anatomy  is  my  favour- 
ite branch ; I mean  the  study  of  the  human 
heart,  with  its  workings  and  counter- work- 
ings, as  it  is  differently  affected  in  a state  of 
nature  or  of  grace  in  the  different  seasons  of  j 
prosperity,  adversity,  conviction,  temptation, 
sickness,  and  the  approach  of  death.  The 
Lord,  by  sending  me  hither,  provided  me  a 
good  school  for  these  purposes.  I know  not 
where  I could  have  had  a better,  or  one  af- 
fording a greater  variety  of  characters,  in 
proportion  to  the  number  of  people ; and  as 
they  are  mostly  poor  people,  and  strangers 
to  that  address  which  is  the  result  of  educa- 
tion and  converse  with  the  world,  there  is  a 
simplicity  in  what  they  say  or  do,  which 
gives  me  a peculiar  advantage  in  judging  of 
their  cases. 

But  I was  about  to  speak  of  death.  Though 
the  grand  evidence  of  those  truths  upon 
which  our  hopes  are  built,  arises  from  the  au- 


thority of  God  speaking  them  in  his  word, 
and  revealing  them  by  his  Spirit,  to  the  awa- 
kened heart  (for  till  the  heart  is  awakened  it 
is  incapable  of  receiving  this  evidence ;)  yet 
some  of  these  truths  are  so  mysterious,  so 
utterly  repugnant  to  the  judgment  of  de- 
praved nature,  that,  though  the  remaining 
influence  of  unbelief  and  vain  reasoning,  the 
temptations  of  Satan,  and  the  subtle  argu- 
ments with  which  some  men  reputed  wise, 
attack  the  foundations  of  our  faith,  the  minds 
even  of  believers  are  sometimes  capable  of 
being  shaken.  I know  no  better  corrobora- 
ting evidence  for  the  relief  of  the  mind  under 
such  assaults  than  the  testimony  of  dying 
persons,  especially  of  such  as  have  lived  out 
of  the  noise  of  controversy,  and  who  perhaps 
never  heard  a syllable  of  what  has  been 
started  in  these  evil  days  against  the  deity 
of  Christ,  his  atonement,  and  other  impor- 
tant articles.  Permit  me,  my  Lord,  to  relate, 
upon  this  occasion,  some  things  which  ex- 
ceedingly struck  me  in  the  conversation  I 
had  with  a young  woman  whom  I visited  in 
her  last  illness  about  two  years  ago.  She 
was  a sober,  prudent  person,  of  plain  sense, 
could  read  her  Bible,  but  had  read  little  be- 
sides. Her  knowledge  of  the  world  was 
nearly  confined  to  the  parish  ; for  I suppose 
she  was  seldom,  if  ever,  twelve  miles  from 
home  in  her  life.  She  had  known  the  gos- 
pel about  seven  years  before  the  Lord  visited 
her  with  a lingering  consumption,  which  at 
length  removed  her  to  a better  world.  A 
few  days  before  her  death,  I had  been  pray- 
ing by  her  bed-side,  and  in  my  prayer,  I 
thanked  the  Lord,  that  he  gave  her  now  to 
see  that  she  had  not  followed  cunningly-de- 
vised fables.  When  I had  finished,  she  re- 
peated that  word,  “No,”  she  said,  “not  cun- 
ningly-devised fables,  these  are  realities  in- 
deed : I feel  their  truth,  I feel  their  comfort. 
O,  tell  my  friends,  tell  my  acquaintance,  tell 
enquiring  souls,  tell  poor  sinners,  tell  all  the 
daughters  of  Jerusalem  (alluding  to  Solo- 
mon's Song,  v.  16.  from  which  she  had  just 
before  desired  me  to  preach  at  her  funeral,) 
what  Jesus  has  done  for  my  soul.  Tell  them 
that  now  in  the  time  of  need  I find  him  my 
beloved  and  my  friend,  and  as  such  I com- 
mend him  to  them.”  She  then  fixed  her 
eyes  steadfastly  upon  me,  and  proceeded,  as 
well  as  I can  recollect,  as  follows : “ Sir,  you 
are  highly  favoured  in  being  called  to  preach 
the  gospel.  I have  often  heard  you  with 
pleasure ; but  give  me  leave  to  tell  you,  that 
I now  see  all  you  have  said  or  can  say,  is 
comparatively  but  little.  Nor  till  you  come 
into  my  situation,  and  have  death  and  eter- 
nity full  in  your  view,  will  it  be  possible  for 
you  to  conceive  the  vast  weight  and  impor- 
tance of  the  truths  you  declare.  Oh ! Sir, 
it  is  a serious  thing  to  die,  no  words  can  ex- 
press what  is  needful  to  support  the  soul  in 
the  solemnity  of  a dying  hour.” 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


219 


LET.  XIV.] 

I believe  it  was  the  next  day  when  I 
visited  her  again.  After  some  discourse,  as 
usual,  she  said,  with  a remarkable  vehemence 
of  speech,  “ Are  you  sure  I cannot  be  mis- 
taken?” I answered  without  hesitation,  Yes, 
I am  sure ; I am  not  afraid  to  say,  my  soul 
for  your’s  that  you  are  right.  She  paused  a 
little,  and  then  replied,  “ You  say  true,  I 
know  I am  right.  I feel  that  my  hope  is 
fixed  upon  the  Rock  of  ages;#  I know  in 
whom  I have  believed.  Yet  if  you  could  see 
with  my  eyes,  you  would  not  wonder  at  my 
question.  But  the  approach  of  death  pre- 
sents a prospect,  which  is  till  then  hidden 
from  us,  and  which  cannot  be  described.” 
She  said  much  more  to  the  same  purpose ; 
and  in  all  she  spoke  there  was  a dignity, 
weight,  and  evidence  which  I suppose  few 
professors  of  divinity,  when  lecturing  from 
the  chair,  have  at  any  time  equalled.  We 
may  well  say,  with  Elihu,  “ Who  teacheth 
like  him  1”  Many  instances  of  the  like  kind 
I have  met  with  here.  I have  a poor  girl 
near  me  who  looks  like  an  idiot,  and  Tier 
natural  capacity  is  indeed  very  small,  but 
the  Lord  has  been  pleased  to  make  her  ac- 
quainted alternately  with  great  temptations 
and  proportionably  great  discoveries  of  his 
love  and  truth.  Sometimes,  when  her  heart 
is  enlarged,  I listen  to  her  with  astonish- 
ment. I think  no  books  or  ministers  I ever 
met  with  have  given  me  such  an  impression 
and  understanding  of  what  the  apostle  styles 
rx  /2xSi,  tbv  &bou*  as  I have  upon  some  occa- 
sions received  from  her  conversation. 

But  I am  rambling  again.  My  attendance 
upon  the  sick  is  not  always  equally  comfort- 
able, but,  could  I learn  aright,  it  might  be 
equally  instructive.  Some  confirm  the  pre- 
ciousness of  a Saviour  to  me,  by  the  cheer- 
fulness with  which  through  faith  in  his  name, 
they  meet  the  king  of  terrors.  Others  no 
less  confirm  it,  by  the  terror  and  reluctance 
they  discover  when  they  find  they  must  die ; 
for  though  there  are  too  many  who  sadly 
slight  the  blessed  gospel  while  they  are  in 
health,  yet  in  this  place  most  are  too  far  en- 
lightened to  be  quite  thoughtless  about  their 
souls,  if  they  retain  their  senses  in  their  last 
illness.  Then,  like  the  foolish  virgins,  they 
sav,  “ Give  us  of  your  oil.”  Then  they  are 
willing  that  ministers  and  professors  should 
pray  with  them  and  speak  to  them.  Through 
the  Lord's  goodness,  several  whom  I have 
visited  in  these  circumstances  have  afforded 
me  good  hope ; they  have  been  savingly 
changed  by  his  blessing  upon  what  has 
passed  at  the  eleventh  hour.  I have  seen  a 
marvellous  and  blessed  change  take  place  in 
their  language,  views,  and  tempers,  in  a few 
davs.  I now  visit  a young  person,  who  is 
rut  short  in  her  nineteenth  year  by  a con- 


sumption, and  I think  cannot  live  many  days. 
I found  her  very  ignorant  and  insensible,  and 
she  remained  so  a good  while ; but  of  late  I 
hope  her  heart  is  touched.  She  feels  her 
lost  state,  she  seems  to  have  some  right  de- 
sires, she  begins  to  pray,  and  in  such  a man- 
ner as  1 cannot  but  hope  the  Lord  is  teach- 
ing her,  and  will  reveal  himself  to  her  before 
she  departs.  But  it  is  sometimes  otherwise. 
I saw  a young  woman.die  last  week:  I had 
been  often  with  her ; but  the  night  she  was 
removed  she  could  only  say,  “O,  I cannot 
live,  I cannot  live !”  She  repeated  this 
mournful  complaint  as  long  as  she  could 
speak ; for,  as  the  vital  powers  were  more 
oppressed,  her  voice  was  changed  into  groans; 
her  groans  grew  fainter  and  fainter,  and,  in 
about  a quarter  of  an  hour  after  she  had  done 
speaking,  she  expired.  Poor  thing,  I thought, 
as  I stood  by  her  bed-side,  if  you  were  a 
duchess,  in  this  situation,  what  could  the 
world  do  for  you  now  ! I thought  likewise 
how  many  things  are  there  that  now  give 
us  pleasure  or  pain,  and  assume  a mighty 
importance  in  our  view,  which  in  a dying 
hour,  will  be  no  more  to  us  than  the  clouds 
which  fly  unnoticed  over  our  heads.  Then 
the  truth  of  our  Lord’s  aphorism  will  be  seen, 
felt,  and  acknowledged,  “ One  thing  is  need- 
ful and  we  shall  be  ready  to  apply  Grotius’s 
dying  confession  to,  alas ! a great  part  of  our 
lives  ! Ah  vitcim  perdidi , nihil  agendo  labo~ 
riose.  f 

Your  Lordship  allows  me  to  send  unpre- 
meditated letters.  I need  not  assure  you 
this  is  one. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XIV. 

March  24,  1774. 

my  lord, — What  a mercy  is  it  to  be  sepa- 
rated in  spirit,  conversation,  and  interest  from 
the  world  that  knows  not  God  ! where  all 
are  alike  by  nature.  Grace  makes  a happy 
and  unspeakable  difference.  Believers  were 
once  under  the  same  influence  of  that  spirit 
who  still  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobe- 
dience, pursuing  different  paths,  but  all 
equally  remote  from  truth  and  peace  ; some 
hatching  cockatrice  eggs,  others  weaving 
spider  webs.  These  two  general  heads  of 
mischief  and  vanity  include  all  the  schemes, 
aims,  and  achievements  of  which  man  is 
capable,  till  God  is  pleased  to  visit  the  heart 
with  his  grace.  The  busy  part  of  mankind 
are  employed  in  multiplying  evils  and  mise- 
ries ; the  more  retired,  speculative,  and  curi- 
ous are  amusing  themselves  with  what  will 
hereafter  appear  as  unsubstantial,  unstable, 
and  useless  as  a cobweb.  Death  will  soon  sweep 


The  deep  things  of  God. 


1 1 have  lost  a life  in  laborious  trifling. 


220 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


away  all  that  the  philosophers,  the  virtuosi, 
the  mathematicians,  the  antiquarians,  and 
other  learned  triflers  are  now  weaving  with 
so  much  self-applauded  address.  Nor  will 
the  fine-spun  dresses  in  which  the  moralist 
and  the  self-righteous  clothe  themselves,  be 
of  more  advantage  to  them,  either  for  orna- 
ment or  defence,  than  the  produce  of  a 
spider.  But  it  is  given  to  a few  to  know 
their  present  state  and  future  destination. 
These  build  upon  the  immoveable  rock  of 
ages  for  eternity.  These  are  trees  spring- 
ing from  a living  root,  and  bear  the  fruits  of 
righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ,  to 
the  glory  and  praise  of  God.  These  only 
are  awake,  while  the  rest  of  the  world  are  in 
a sleep,  indulging  in  vain  dreams,  from  which 
likewise  they  will  shortly  awake ; but  O, 
with  what  consternation,  when  they  shall 
find  themselves  irrecoverably  divorced  from 
all  their  delusive  attachments,  and  compelled 
to  appear  before  that  God  to  whom  they  have 
lived  strangers,  and  to  whom  they  must 
give  an  account ! O for  a thousand  tongues 
to  proclaim  in  the  ears  of  thoughtless  mortals 
that  important  aphorism  of  our  Lord,  “ One 
thing  is  needful !”  Yet  a thousand  tongues 
would  be,  and  are  employed  in  vain,  unless 
so  far  as  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  send  the 
watchman’s  warning,  by  the  power  and 
agency  of  his  own  Spirit.  I think  the  poet 
tells  us,  that  Cassandra  had  the  gift  of  truly 
foretelling  future  events ; but  she  was  after- 
wards laid  under  a painful  embarrassment, 
that  nobody  should  believe  her  words. 
Such,  with  respect  to  the  bulk  of  their  audi- 
tories, is  the  lot  of  gospel-ministers:  they 
are  enlightened  to  see,  and  sent  forth  to  de- 
clare, the  awful  consequences  of  sin  ; but, 
alas!  how  few  believe  their  report!  To 
illustrate  our  grief  and  disappointment,  I 
sometimes  suppose  a dangerous  water  to  be 
in  the  way  of  travellers,  over  which  there  is 
a bridge,  which  those  who  can  be  prevailed 
upon  may  pass  with  safety.  By  the  side  of 
this  bridge  watchmen  are  placed,  to  warn 
passengers  of  the  danger  of  the  waters ; to 
assure  them,  that  all  who  attempt  to  go 
through  them  must  inevitably  perish ; to 
invite,  entreat,  and  beseech  them,  if  they 
value  their  lives,  to  cross  the  bridge.  Me- 
thinks  this  should  be  an  easy  task : yet  if  we 
should  see  in  fact  the  greater  part  stopping 
their  ears  to  the  friendly  importunity ; many 
so  much  offended  by  it,  as  to  account  the 
watchman’s  care  impertinent,  and  only  de- 
serving of  scorn  and  ill  treatment;  hardly 
one  in  fifty  betaking  themselves  to  the 
friendly  bridge,  the  rest  eagerly  plunging 
into  the  waters,  from  which  none  return,  as 
if  they  were  determined  to  try  who  should 
be  drowned  first.  This  spectacle  would  be  no 
unfit  emblem  of  the  reception  the  gospel 
meets  with  from  a blinded  world.  The  mi- 


[let.  xiv 

nisters  are  rejected,  opposed,  vilified  ; they 
are  accounted  trou biers  of  the  world,  because 
they  dare  not,  cannot  stand  silent,  while 
sinners  are  perishing  before  their  eyes : and 
if,  in  the  course  of  many  sermons,  they  can 
prevail  but  on  one  soul  to  take  timely  warn- 
ing, and  to  seek  to  Jesus,  who  is  the  way, 
the  truth,  and  the  life,  they  may  account  it  a 
mercy  and  an  honour,  sufficient  to  overba- 
lance all  the  labour  and  reproaches  they  are 
called  to  endure.  From  the  most  they  must 
expect  no  better  reception  than  the  Jews 
gave  to  Jeremiah,  who  told  the  prophet  to  his 
face,  “ As  to  the  word  thou  hast  spoken  to 
us  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  we  will  not 
hearken  to  thee  at  all ; but  we  will  certainly 
do  whatsoever  thing  goeth  forth  out  of  our 
own  mouth.”  Surely,  if  the  Lord  has  given 
us  any  sense  of  the  worth  of  our  souls,  any 
compassion  towards  them,  this  must  be  a 
painful  exercise ; and  experience  must  teach 
us  something  of  the  meaning  of  Jeremiah’s 
pathetic  exclamation,  “ O that  my  head  were 
waters,  and  mine  eyes  fountains  of  tears! 
that  I might  weep  day  and  night  for  the 
slain  of  the  daughters  of  my  people.”  It  is 
our  duty  to  be  thus  affected.  Our  relief  lies 
in  the  wisdom  and  sovereignty  of  God.  He 
reveals  his  salvation  to  whom  fje  pleases,  for 
the  most  part  to  babes;  from,  the  bulk  of  the 
wise  and  the  prudent  it  is  hidden:  ^Ilius  it  hath 
pleased  him,  and  therefore  it  must  be  right. 
Yea  he  will  one  day  condescend  to  justify 
the  propriety  and  equity  of  his  proceedings  t< 
his  creatures:  then  every  mouth  will  be 
; stopped,  and  none  will  be  able  to  reply 
against  his  judge.  Light  is  come  into  the 
world,  but  men  prefer  darkness.  They  hate 
the  light,  resist  it,  and  rebel  against  it.  It 
is  true,  all  do  so;  and  therefore,  if  all  were 
to  perish  under  the  condemnation,  their  ruin 
would  be  their  own  act.  It  is  of  grace  that 
any  are  saved,  and  in  the  distribution  of  that 
grace,  he  does  what  he  will  with  his  own  ; a 
right  which  most  are  ready  enough  to  claim 
in  their  own  concerns,  though  they  are  so 
unwilling  to  allow  it  to  the  Lord  of  all. 
Many  perplexing  and  acrimonious  disputes 
have  been  started  upon  this  subject ; but  the 
redeemed  of  the  Lord  are  called,  not  to  dis- 
pute, but  to  admire  and  rejoice ; to  love,  adore, 
and  obey.  To  know  that  he  loved  us,  and 
gave  himself  for  us,  is  the  constraining  argu- 
ment and  motive  to  love  him,  and  surrender 
ourselves  to  him ; to  consider  ourselves  as  no 
longer  our  own,  but  to  devote  ourselves,  with 
every  faculty,  power,  and  talent  to  his  ser- 
vice and  glory.  He  deserves  our  all : for  he 
parted  with  all  for  us.  He  made  himself  poor ; 
he  endured  shame,  torture,  death,  and  the 
curse  for  us,  that  we,  through  him,  might  in- 
herit everlasting  life.  Ah ! the  hardness  of  my 
heart,  that  I am  no  more  affected,  astonished, 
overpowered,  with  this  thought. — I am,  &c 


KT.  XV.] 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


221 


LETTER  XY. 

April  20,  1774. 

my  lord, — I have  been  pondering-  a good 
while  tor  a subject,  and  at  last  I begin  with- 
out one,  hoping  that,  as  it  has  often  hap- 
pened, while  I am  writing  one  line,  some- 
thing will  occur  to  fill  up  another.  Indeed, 
I have  an  inexhaustible  fund  at  hand;  but  it 
is  to  me  often  like  a prize  in  the  hand  of  a 
fool;  I want  skill  to  improve  it.  O for  a 
warm,  a suitable,  a seasonable  train  of 
thought,  that  might  enliven  my  own  heart, 
and  not  be  unworthy  your  Lordship’s  peru- 
sal ! Methinks  the  poets  can  have  but  cold 
comfort,  when  they  invocate  a fabled  Muse ; 
but  we  have  a warrant,  a right,  to  look  up 
for  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  or- 
dains strength  for  us,  and  has  promised  to 
work  in  us.  What  a comfort,  what  an  honour 
is  this,  that  worms  have  liberty  to  look  up  to 
God ! and  that  He,  the  high  and  holy  One  who 
inhabiteth  eternity,  is  pleased  to  look  down 
upon  us,  to  maintain  our  peace,  to  supply  our 
wants,  to  guide  us  with  his  eye,  to  inspire  us 
with  wisdom  and  grace  suitable  to  our  occa- 
sions ! They  who  profess  to  know  something 
of  this  intercourse,  and  to  depend  upon  it, 
are  by  the  world  accounted  enthusiasts,  who 
know  not  what  they  mean,  or  perhaps  hypo- 
crites, who  pretend  to  what  they  have  not,  in 
order  to  cover  some  base  designs.  But  we 
have  reason  to  bear  their  reproaches  with 
patience. — Could  the  miseff  say, 

Populus  me  sibilat,  at  mihi  plaudo 

Ipse  domi,  simul  ac  nummos  contemplor  in  area. 

Well,  then,  may  the  believer  say,  let  them 
laugh,  let  them  rage,  let  them,  if  they  please, 
point  at  me  for  a fool,  as  I walk  the  streets ; 
if  I do  but  take  up  the  Bible,  or  run  over  in 
my  mind  the  inventory  of  the  blessings  with 
which  the  Lord  has  enriched  me,  I have  suf- 
ficient amends.  Jesus  is  mine ; in  him  I 
have  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification, 
and  redemption,  an  interest  in  all  the  pro- 
mises, and  in  all  the  perfections  of  God  ; he 
will  guide  me  by  his  counsel,  support  me  by 
his  power,  comfort  me  with  his  presence, 
while  I am  here,  and  afterwards,  when  flesh 
and  heart  fail,  he  will  receive  me  to  his  glory. 

Let  them  say  what  they  will,  they  shall  not 
dispute  or  laugh  us  out  of  our  spiritual  senses. 
If  all  the  blind  men  in  the  kingdom  should 
endeavour  to  bear  me  down,  that  the  sun  is 
not  bright,  or  that  the  rainbow  has  no  colours, 
I would  still  believe  my  own  eyes.  I have 
seen  them  both,  they  have  not.  I cannot 
prove  to  their  satisfaction  what  I assert,  be- 
cause they  are  destitute  of  sight,  the  necessary 
medium ; yet  their  exceptions  produce  no  un- 
certainty in  my  mind ; they  would  not,  they 
could  not  hesitate  a moment,  if  they  were 
not  blind,  Just  so,  they  who  have  been 
taught  of  God,  who  have  tasted  that  the  Lord 


is  gracious,  have  an  experimental  perception 
of  the  truth,  which  renders  them  proof  against 
all  the  sophistry  of  infidels.  I am  persuaded 
we  have  many  plain  people  here,  who,  if  a 
wise  man  of  the  world  was  to  suggest  that 
the  Bible  is  a human  invention,  would  be 
quite  at  a loss  how  to  answrer  him,  by  argu- 
ments drawn  from  external  evidences;  yet 
they  have  found  such  effects  from  this  blessed 
book,  that  they  would  be  no  more  moved  by 
the  insinuation,  than  if  they  were  told,  that  a 
cunning  man,  or  set  of  men,  invented  the 
sun,  and  placed  it  in  the  firmament.  So  if  a 
wise  Socinian  was  to  tell  them,  that  the  Sa- 
viour was  only  a man  like  themselves,  they 
would  conceive  just  such  an  opinion  of  his 
skill  in  divinity,  as  a philosopher  would  do  of 
a clown's  skill  in  astronomy,  who  should  af- 
firm that  the  sun  was  no  bigger  than  a cart- 
wheel. 

It  remains  therefore  a truth,  in  defiance  of 
all  the  cavils  of  the  ignorant,  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  does  influence  the  hearts  of  all  the 
children  of  God,  or  in  other  words,  they  are 
inspired,  not  with  new  revelations,  but  with 
grace  and  wisdom  to  understand,  apply  and 
feed  upon  the  great  things  already  revealed 
in  the  scriptures,  without  which  the  scriptures 
are  as  useless  as  spectacles  to  the  blind.  Were 
it  not  so,  when  we  become  acquainted  with 
the  poverty,  ignorance,  and  wickedness  of  our 
hearts,  we  must  sit  down  in  utter  despair  of 
being  ever  able  to  think  a good  thought,  to 
offer  a single  petition  aright  in  prayer,  or  to 
take  one  safe  step  in  the  path  of  life.  But 
now  we  may  be  content  with  our  proper 
weakness,  since  the  power  and  spirit  of  Christ 
are  engaged  to  rest  upon  us ; and  wThile  we 
are  preserved  in  a simple  dependence  upon 
this  help,  though  unable  of  ourselves  to  do 
any  thing,  we  shall  find  an  ability  to  do  every 
thing  that  our  circumstances  and  duty  call 
for.  What  is  weaker  than  a worm?  Yet  the 
Lord’s  worms  shall  in  his  strength,  thrash  the 
mountains,  and  make  the  hills  as  chaff*.  But. 
this  life  of  faith,  this  living  and  acting  by  a 
power  above  our  own,  is  an  inexplicable  rnyw 
tery,  till  experience  makes  it  plain.  I hive 
often  wondered  that  St.  Paul  has  obtained  so 
much  quarter  at  the  hands  of  some  people,  as 
to  pass  with  them  for  a man  of  sense ; for 
surely  the  greatest  part  of  his  writings  must 
be  to  the  last  degree  absurd  and  unintelligible, 
upon  their  principles.  How  many  contra-' 
dictions  must  they  find,  for  instance,  if  they 
give  any  attention  to  what  they  read  in  that 
one  passage,  Gal.  ii.  20,  “ I am  crucified 
with  Christ:  Nevertheless  I live;  yet  not  I, 
but  Christ  liveth  in  me:  and  the  life  which  I 
now  live  in  the  flesh,  I live  by  faith  in  the  Son 
of  God,  who  loved  me,  and  gave  himself  for 
me.” 

And  as  believers  are  thus  inspired  by  thfc 
Holy  Spirit,  who  furnishes  them  with  desire*, 
motives,  and  abilities,  to  perform  what  k 


222 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


agreeable  to  his  will ; so  I apprehend,  that 
they  who  live  without  God  in  the  world,  whom 
the  apostle  styles  sensual,  not  having  the 
Spirit,  are  in  a greater  or  less  degree  ad  cap- 
lam  recipientis,  under  what  I may  call  a 
black  inspiration.  After  making  the  best 
allowances  I can,  both  for  the  extent  of  hu- 
man genius  and  the  deplorable  evil  of  the 
human  heart,  I cannot  suppose  that  one  half 
of  the  wicked  wit,  of  which  some  persons  are 
so  proud,  is  properly  their  own.  Perhaps 
such  a one  as  Voltaire  would  neither  have 
written,  nor  have  been  read  or  admired  so 
much,  if  he  had  not  been  the  amanuensis  of 
an  abler  hand  in  his  own  way.  Satan  is  al- 
ways near,  when  the  heart  is  disposed  to 
receive  him;  and  the  Lord  withdraws  his 
restraints,  to  heighten  the  sinner's  ability  of 
sinning  with  an  eclat,  and  assisting  him  with 
such  strokes  of  blasphemy,  malice,  and  false- 
hood, as  perhaps  he  could  not  otherwise 
have  attained.  Therefore,  I do  not  wonder 
that  they  are  clever  and  smart,  that  they  raise 
a laugh,  and  are  received  with  applause 
among  those  who  are  like-minded  with  them- 
selves. But  unless  the  Lord  is  pleased  to 
grant  them  repentance,  though  it  is  rather  to 
be  feared  some  of  them  are  given  up  to 
judicial  hardness  of  heart,  how  much  better 
would  it  have  been  for  them,  had  they  been 
born  idiots  or  lunatics,  than  to  be  distin- 
guished as  the  willing,  industrious,  and  suc- 
cessful instruments  of  the  powers  of  darkness, 
in  beguiling,  perverting,  and  ruining  the 
souls  of  men  ! Alas,  what  are  parts  and  ta- 
lents, or  any  distinctions  which  give  pre-emi- 
nence in  life,  unless  they  are  sanctified  by 
the  grace  of  God,  and  directed  to  the  accom- 
plishment of  his  will  and  glory!  From  the 
expression,  “ Bind  them  in  bundles,  and  burn 
them,”  I have  been  led  to  think,  that  the  de- 
ceivers and  the  deceived,  they  who  have 
prostituted  their  gifts  or  influence  to  encou- 
rage others  in  sin,  and  they  who  have  perish- 
ed by  their  means,  may  in  another  world 
-ve  some  peculiar  and  inseparable  connec- 
:n,  and  spend  an  eternity  in  fruitless  lamen- 
' that  ever  they  were  connected  here. 
Vour  Lordship,  I doubt  not,  feels  the  force 
that  line, 

O,  to  grace  how  great  a debtor! 

/ Had  not  the  Lord  separated  you  for  him- 
self, your  rank,  your  abilities,  your  influence, 
which  now  you  chiefly  value  as  enlarging 
ycur  opportunities  of  usefulness,  might,  nay 
certainly  would,  have  been  diverted  into  the 
opposite  channel. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XVI. 

November  5,  1774. 

my  lord, — I have  not  very  lately  had  re- 
course to  the  expedient  of  descanting  upon 


[let.  xvr. 

a text,  but  I believe  it  the  best  method  I 
can  take  to  avoid  ringing  changes  upon  a 
few  obvious  topics,  which  1 suppose  uniformly 
present  themselves  to  my  mind  when  I am 
about  to  write  to  your  Lordship.  Just  now, 
that  sweet  expression  of  David  occurred  to 
my  thoughts,  “The  Lord  is  my  shepherd.’ 
Permit  me,  without  plan  or  premeditation, 
to  make  a few  observations  upon  it;  and  may 
your  Lordship  feel  the  peace,  the  confidence, 
the  blessedness,  which  a believing  applica- 
tion of  the  words  is  suited  to  inspire. 

The  Socinians,  and  others,  in  their  unhappy 
laboured  attempts  to  darken  the  principal 
glory  and  foundation-comfort  of  the  gospel, 
employ  their  critical  sophistry  against  those 
texts  which  expressly  and  doctrinally  declare 
the  Redeemer’s  character,  and  affect  to 
triumph,  if  in  any  manuscript  or  ancient 
version  they  can  find  a variation  from  the  re- 
ceived copies  which  seems  to  favour  their 
cause.  But  we  may  venture  to  wave  the 
authority  of  every  disputed  or  disputable  text, 
and  maintain  the  truth  against  their  cavils  from 
the  current  language  and  tenor  of  the  whole 
scripture.  David’s  words,  in  Psalm  xxiii,  are 
alone  a decisive  proof  that  Jesus  is  Jehovah, 
if  they  will  but  allow  two  things,  which  I 
think  they  cannot  deny : — 1.  That  our  Sa- 
viour assumes  to  himself  the  character  of  the 
Shepherd  of  his  people ; — and,  2.  That  he 
did  not  come  into  the  world  to  abridge  those 
advantages  which  the  servants  of  God  en- 
joyed before  his  incarnation.  Upon  these 
premises,  which  cannot  be  gainsaid  without 
setting  aside  the  whole  New  Testament,  the 
conclusion  is  undeniable : for  if  Jehovah  was 
David’s  Shepherd,  unless  Jesus  be  Jehovah, 
we  who  live  under  the  gospel  have  an  un- 
speakable disadvantage,  in  being  entrusted 
to  the  care  of  one  who,  according  to  the  Soci- 
nians, is  a mere  man ; and  upon  the  Arian 
scheme,  is  at  the  most  a creature,  and  infi- 
nitely short  of  possessing  those  perfections 
which  David  contemplated  in  his  Shepherd. 
He  had  a Shepherd  whose  wisdom  and  power 
were  infinite,  and  might  therefore  warranta- 
bly  conclude  he  should  not  want,  and  need 
not  fear.  And  we  also  may  conclude  the 
same,  if  our  Shepherd  be  the  Lord  or  Jeho- 
vah, but  not  otherwise.  Besides,  the  very 
nature  of  the  Shepherd’s  office  respecting 
the  state  of  such  frail  creatures  as  we  are, 
requires  those  attributes  for  the  due  dis- 
charge of  it  which  are  incommunicably  di- 
vine. He  must  intimately  know  every  indi- 
vidual of  the  flock:  his  eye  must  be  upon 
them  every  one,  and  his  ear  open  to  their 
prayers,  and  his  arm  stretched  out  for  their 
relief,  in  all  places  and  in  all  ages : every 
thought  of  every  heart  must  be  open  to  his 
view,  and  his  wisdom  must  penetrate,  and  his 
arm  control  and  over-rule  all  the  hidden 
and  complicated  machinations  of  the  powers 
of  darkness : he  must  have  the  administration 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


223 


LET.  XVI.] 

of  universal  providence  over  all  the  nations, 
families,  and  persons  upon  earth,  or  he  could 
not  effectually  manage  for  those  who  put 
their  trust  in  him,  in  that  immense  variety 
of  cases  and  circumstances  in  which  they  are 
found.  Reason,  as  well  as  scripture,  may 
convince  us,  that  he  who  gatliereth  the  out- 
casts of  Israel,  who  healeth  the  broken  in 
heart,  who  upholdeth  all  that  fall,  raiseth  up 
all  that  are  bowed  down,  and  upon  whom  the 
eyes  of  all  wait  for  their  support,  can  be  no 
other  than  he  who  telleth  the  number  of  the 
stars,  and  calleth  them  all  by  their  names, 
who  is  great  in  power,  and  whose  under- 
standing is  infinite.  To  this  purpose  like- 
wise the  prophet  Isaiah  describes  this  mighty 
Shepherd,  chap.  xl.  9 — 17,  both  as  to  his 
person  and  office. 

But  is  not  this  indeed  the  great  mystery 
of  godliness ! How  just  is  the  apostle’s  ob- 
servation, that  no  man  can  say  Jesus  Christ 
is  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost!  How  as- 
tonishing the  thought, — that  the  Maker  of 
heaven  and  earth,  the  holy  one  of  Israel,  be- 
fore whose  presence  the  earth  shook,  the 
heavens  dropped  when  he  displayed  a faint 
emblem  of  his  majesty  upon  Sinai,  should 
afterwards  appear  in  the  form  of  a servant, 
and  hang  upon  a cross,  the  sport  and  scorn  of 
wicked  men  ! I cannot  wonder  that  to  the 
wise  men  of  the  world  this  appears  absurd, 
unreasonable,  and  impossible ; yet  to  right 
reason,  to  reason  enlightened,  and  sanctified, 
however  amazing  the  proposition  be,  yet  it 
appears  true  and  necessary,  upon  a supposi- 
tion that  a holy  God  is  pleased  to  pardon 
sinners  in  a way  suited  to  display  the  awful 
glories  of  his  justice.  The  same  arguments 
which  prove  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  in- 
sufficient to  take  away  sin,  will  conclude 
against  the  utmost  doings  or  sufferings  of 
men  or  angels.  The  Redeemer  of  sinners 
must  bo  mighty ; he  must  have  a personal 
dignity,  to  stamp  such  a value  upon  his  un- 
dertakings as  that  thereby  God  may  ap- 
pear just  as  well  as  merciful  in  justifying 
the  ungodly  for  his  sake ; and  he  must  be 
all-sufficient  to  bless,  and  almighty  to  pro- 
tect those  who  come  unto  him  for  safety  and 
life. 

.Such  a one  is  our  Shepherd.  This  is  he 
of  whom  we,  through  grace,  are  enabled  to 
say,  we  are  his  people,  and  the  sheep  of 
his  pasture.  We  are  his  by  every  tie  and 
right;  he  made  us,  he  redeemed  us,  he  re- 
claimed us  from  the  hand  of  our  enemies,  and 
we  are  his  by  our  own  voluntary  surrender 
of  ourselves ; for,  though  we  once  slighted, 
despised,  and  opposed  him,  he  made  us  will- 
ing in  the  day  of  his  power : he  knocked  at 
the  door  of  our  hearts;  but  we,  at  least  I, 
barred  and  fastened  it  against  him  as  much 
and  as  long  as  possible.  But  when  he  re- 
vealed his  love  we  could  stand  out  no  longer. 
Like  sheep,  we  are  weak,  destitute,  defence- 


less, prone  to  wander,  unao.e  to  return,  and 
always  surrounded  with  wolves.  But  a.l  is 
made  up  in  the  fulness,  ability,  wisdom, 
compassion,  care,  and  faithfulness  of  our 
great  Shepherd.  He  guides,  protects,  feeds, 
heals,  and  restores,  and  will  be  our  guide 
and  our  God  even  until  death.  Then  he 
will  meet  us,  receive  us,  and  present  us  unto 
himself,  and  we  shall  be  near  him,  and  like 
him,  and  with  him  for  ever. 

Ah ! my  Lord,  what  a subject  is  this ! I 
trust  it  is  the  joy  of  your  heart.  Placed  as 
you  are  by  his  hand  in  a superior  rank,  you 
see  and  feel  that  the  highest  honours,  and 
the  most  important  concernments  that  termi- 
nate ’with  the  present  life,  are  trivial  as  the 
sports  of  children  in  comparison  with  the 
views  and  the  privileges  you  derive  from  the 
glorious  gospel ; and  your  situation  in  life 
renders  the  grace  bestowed  upon  you  the 
more  conspicuous  and  distinguishing.  I have 
somewhere  met  with  a similar  reflection 
Henry  IV.  of  France,  to  this  purpose,  tt 
though  many  came  into  the  world  the  saiiiu 
day  writh  him,  he  was  probably  the  only  one 
among  them  that  was  born  \o  be  a king. 
Your  Lordship  is  acquainted  with  many, 
who,  if  not  born  on  the  same  day  with  you, 
were  born  to  titles,  estates,  and  honours; 
but  how  few  of  them  were  born  to  the  honour 
of  making  a public  and  consistent  profession 
of  the  glorious  gospel ! The  hour  is  coming 
when  all  honours  and  possessions,  but  this 
which  cometh  of  God  only,  will  be  eclipsed 
and  vanish,  and,  like  the  baseless  fabric  of  a 
vision,  leave  not  a wreck  behind.  How 
miserable  will  they  then  be  who  must  leave 
their  all  ! What  a mortifying  thought  dot  s 
Horace  put  in  the  way  of  those  who  disdain 
to  read  the  scriptures ! 

Linquenda  tellus,  et  domus,  et  placens 

Uxor:  neque  harum,  quas  colis,  arbor  uni 
Te,  prseter  invisas  eupressos, 

Ulla  brevem  dominum  sequetur. 

But  grace  and  faith  can  make  the  lowest 
state  of  life  supportable,  and  make  a dismis- 
sion from  the  highest  desirable.  Of  the  for- 
mer I have  many  living  proofs  and  witnesses 
around  me.  Your  Lordship,  I trust,  will 
have  sweet  experience  of  the  latter,  when, 
after  having  fulfilled  the  will  of  God  in  your 
generation,  you  shall  be  called  (I  hope  in 
some  yet  distant  day)  to  enter  into  your  Mas- 
ter’s joy.  In  the  mean  time,  how  valuable 
are  life,  talents,  influence,  and  opportunities 
of  every  kind,  if  we  are  enabled  to  improve 
and  lay  out  all  for  him  who  hath  thus  loved 
us,  thus  provided  for  us ! As  to  myself,  I 
would  hope  there  are  few  who  have  so  clear 
a sense  of  their  obligations  to  him,  who  make 
such  unsuitable  and  languid  returns  as  I do. 

I think  I have  a desire  to  serve  him  better ; 
but,  alas!  evil  is  present  with  me.  Surely 
I shall  feel  something  like  shame  and  regret 


224 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


or  my  coldness,  even  in  heaven,  for  I find  I 
am  never  happier  than  when  I am  most 
ashamed  of  myself  upon  this  account  here. — 
I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XVII. 

December  8,  1774. 

my  lord, — How  wonderful  is  the  patience 
of  God  towards  sinful  men  ! In  him  they 
live,  and  move,  and  have  their  being1,  and, 
if  he  were  to  withdraw  his  support  for  a 
single  moment,  they  must  perish.  He  main- 
tains their  lives,  guards  their  persons,  sup- 
plies their  wants,  while  they  employ  the 
powers  and  faculties  they  receive  from  him 
in  a settled  course  of  opposition  to  his  will. 
They  trample  upon  his  laws,  affront  his 
government,  and  despise  his  grace ; yet  still 
he  spares.  To  silence  all  his  adversaries  in 
a moment  would  require  no  extraordinary 
exertion  of  his  power ; but  his  forbearance 
towards  them  manifests  his  glory,  and  gives 
us  cause  to  say,  Who  is  a God  like  unto 
thee ! 

Sometimes,  however,  there  are  striking  in- 
stances of  his  displeasure  against  sin.  When 
such  events  take  place,  immediately  upon  a 
public  and  premeditated  contempt  offered  to 
Him  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens,  I own  they 
remind  me  of  the  danger  of  standing,  if  I 
may  so  speak,  in  the  Lord’s  way ; for  though 
his  long-suffering  is  astonishing,  and  many 
dare  him  to  his  face  daily,  with  seeming  im- 
punity, yet  he  sometimes  strikes  an  awful 
and  unexpected  blow,  and  gives  an  illustra- 
tion of  that  solemn  word,  “ Who  ever  har- 
dened himself  against  the  Lord  and  pros- 
pered 1”  But  how  am  I to  make  this  ob- 
servation 1 I ought  to  do  it  with  the  deepest 
humiliation,  remembering  that  I once  stood, 
according  to  my  years  and  ability,  in  the 
foremost  rank  of  his  avowed  opposers,  and, 
with  a determined  and  unwearied  enmity 
renounced,  defied,  and  blasphemed  him. 
“ But  he  will  have  mercy  on  whom  he  will 
have  mercy;”  and  therefore  I was  spared, 
and  reserved  to  speak  of  his  goodness. 

Josephus,  when  speaking  of  the  death  of 
Herod  Agrippa,  ascribes  it  to  a natural  cause, 
and  says,  he  was  seized  with  excruciating 
pains  in  his  bowels.  But  Luke  informs  us 
of  the  true  cause : an  angel  of  the  Lord  smote 
him.  Had  we  a modern  history,  written  by 
an  inspired  pen,  we  should  probably  often  be 
reminded  of  such  an  interposition  where  we 
are  not  ordinarily  aware  of  it.  For  though 
the  springs  of  actions  and  events  are  conceal- 
ed from  us  for  the  most  part,  and  vain  men 
carry  on  their  schemes  with  confidence,  as 
though  the  Lord  had  forsaken  the  earth,  yet 
they  are  under  his  eye  and  control ; and 
raith,  in  some  measure,  instructed  by  the 


[let  xvir. 

specimens  of  his  government  recorded  in  the 
scriptures,  can  trace  and  admire  his  hand,  and 
can  see  how  he  takes  the  wise  in  their  own 
craftiness,  stains  the  pride  of  human  glory; 
and  that  when  sinners  speak  proudly,  he  is 
above  them,  and  makes  every  thing  Dend  or 
break  before  him. 

While  we  lament  the  growth  and  perni- 
cious effects  of  infidelity,  and  see  how  wicked 
men  and  seducers  wax  worse  and  worse,  de- 
ceiving, and  being  deceived;  what  gratitude 
should  fill  our  hearts  to  him,  who  has  been 
pleased  to  call  us  out  of  the  horrid  darkness 
in  which  multitudes  are  bewildered  and  lost, 
into  the  glorious  light  of  his  gospel ! Faint 
are  our  warmest  conceptions  of  this  mercy. 
In  order  to  understand  it  fully,  we  should 
have  a full  and  adequate  sense  of  the  evil  from 
which  we  are  delivered ; the  glory  to  which 
we  are  called ; and  especially,  of  the  astonish- 
ing means  to  which  we  owe  our  life  and  hope 
the  humiliation,  sufferings,  and  death  of  the 
Son  of  God.  But  our  views  of  these  points 
while  in  our  present  state,  are  and  must  be 
exceedingly  weak  and  disproportionate.  We 
know  them  but  in  part,  we  see  them  St  irorrTfCu, 
by  reflection,  rather  the  images  than  the  things 
themselves ; and  though  they  are  faithfully 
represented  in  the  mirror  of  God’s  word,  to 
us  they  appear  indistinct,  because  we  see 
them  through  a gross  medium  of  ignorance 
and  unbelief.  Hereafter  every  vail  shall  be 
removed  ; we  shall  know,  in  another  manner 
than  we  do  now,  the  unspeakable  evil  of  sin, 
and  the  insupportable  dreadfulness  of  God’s 
displeasure  against  it,  when  we  see  the  world 
in  flames,  and  hear  the  final  sentence  de- 
nounced upon  the  ungodly.  We  shall  have 
far  other  thoughts  of  Jesus  when  we  see  him 
as  he  is : and  shall  then  be  able  to  make  a 
more  affecting  estimate  of  the  love  whic? 
moved  him  to  be  made  a substitute  and  ? 
curse  for  us  : and  we  shall  then  know  what 
great  things  God  has  prepared  for  them  that 
love  him.  Then  with  transport,  we  shall 
adopt  the  queen  of  Sheba’s  language,  It  was 
a true  report  we  heard  in  yonder  dark  world ; 
but,  behold,  the  half,  the  thousandth  part, 
was  not  told  us ! In  the  mean  time,  may 
such  conceptions  as  we  are  enabled  to  form 
of  these  great  truths,  fill  our  hearts,  and  be 
mingled  wTith  all  our  thoughts,  and  all  our 
concerns;  may  the  Lord,  by  faith,  give  us  an 
abiding  evidence  of  the  reality  end  import- 
ance of  the  things  wdiich  cannot  yet  be  seen; 
so  shall  we  be  enabled  to  live  above  the  world 
while  we  are  in  it,  uninfluenced  either  bv  its 
blandishments  or  its  frowns ; and,  with  a 
noble  simplicity  and  singularity,  avow  and 
maintain  the  cause  of  God  in  truth,  in  the 
midst  of  a crooked  and  perverse  generation. 
He  whom  we  serve  is  able  to  support  and 
protect  us;  and  he  well  deserves  at  our  bands, 
that  we  should  be  willing  to  endure,  for  his 
sake,  much  more  than  he  will  ever  permit  us 


LET,  XVIII.] 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


225 


to  bo  exercised  with.  The  believer’s  call, 
duty,  and  privilege,  is  beautifully  and  forci- 
bly set  forth  in  Milton’s  character  of  Abdiel, 
at  the  end  of  the  fifth  book : 

Faithful  found 

Amo.ig  the  faithless,  faithful  only  he, 

Among  innumerable  false;  unmov'd, 

Unshaken,  unseduc’d,  unterrified, 

His  loyalty  he  kept,  his  love,  his  zeal : 

Nor  number,  nor  example,  with  him  wrought 
To  swerve  from  truth,  or  change  his  constant  mind 
Though  single 

Methinks  your  Lordship’s  situation  parti- 
cularly resembles  that  in  which  the  poet  has 
placed  Abdiel.  You  are  not,  indeed,  called 
to  serve  God  quite  alone  ; but  amongst  those 
of  your  own  rank,  and  with  whom,  the  sta- 
tion in  which  he  has  placed  you,  necessitates 
you  to  converse,  how  few  are  there  who  can 
understand,  second,  or  approve,  the  principles 
upon  wiiich  you  act,  or  easily  bear  a conduct 
which  must  impress  conviction,  or  reflect  dis- 
honour upon  themselves ! But  you  are  not 
alone ; the  Lord’s  people  (many  of  whom 
you  will  not  know  till  you  meet  them  in  glo- 
ry) are  helping  you  here  with  their  prayers ; 
his  angels  are  commissioned  to  guard  and 
guide  your  steps;  yea,  the  Lord  himself 
fixes  his  eye  of  mercy  upon  your  private  and 
your  public  path,  a"d  is  near  you  at  your  right 
hand,  that  you  may  not  be  moved.  That  he 
may  comfort  you  with  the  light  of  his  coun- 
tenance, and  uphold  you  with  the  arm  of  his 
power,  is  my  frequent  prayer. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XVIII. 

January  20,  1775. 

my  lord, — We  have  entered  upon  another 
year.  So  have  thousands,  perhaps  millions, 
who  will  not  see  it  close.  An  alarming 
thought  to  the  worldling ! at  least  it  should 
be  so.  I have  an  imperfect  remembrance  of 
an  account  I read  when  I was  a boy,  of  an 
ice-palace,  built  one  winter  at  Petersburgh. 
The  walls,  the  roof,  the  floors,  the  furniture, 
were  all  of  ice,  but  finished  with  taste;  and 
every  thing  that  might  be  expected  in  a royal 
palace  was  to  he  found  there;  the  ice,  while 
in  the  state  of  water,  being  previously  co- 
loured, so  that  to  the  eye  all  seemed  formed 
of  proper  materials : but  all  was  cold,  useless, 
and  transient.  Had  the  frost  continued  till 
now,  the  palace  might  have  been  standing ; 
but  with  the  returning  spring  it  melted  away, 
like  the  baseless  fabric  of  a vision.  Methinks 
there  should  have  been  one  stone  in  the 
building,  to  have  retained  the  inscription,  Sic 
transit  gloria  mundi!  for  no  contrivance 
could  exhibit  a fitter  illustration  of  the  vanity 
of  human  life.  Men  build  and  plan  as  if  their 
works  were  to  endure  for  ever;  but  the  wind 
passes  over  them,  and  they  are  gone.  1 n the 


midst  of  all  their  preparations,  or  at  farthest, 
when  they  think  they  have  just  completed 
their  designs,  their  breath  goeth  forth,  they 
return  to  their  earth;  in  that  very  day  their 
thoughts  perish. 

How  many  sleep  who  kept  the  world  awake ! 

Yet  this  ice-house  had  something  of  a lei- 
surely dissolution,  though,  when  it  began  to 
decay,  all  the  art  of  man  was  unable  to  prop 
it:  but  often  death  comes  hastily,  and,  like 
the  springing  of  a mine,  destroys  to  the  very 
foundations,  without  previous  notice.  Then 
all  we  have  been  concerned  in  here  (all  but 
the  consequences  of  our  conduct,  which  will 
abide  to  eternity)  will  be  no  more  to  us  than 
the  remembrance  of  a dream.  This  truth  is 
too  plain  to  be  denied ; but  the  greater  part 
of  mankind  act  as  if  they  were  convinced  it 
was  false : they  spend  their  days  in  vanity, 
and  in  a moment  they  go  down  to  the  grave. 
What  cause  of  thankfulness  have  they  who 
are  delivered  from  this  delusion,  and  who,  by 
the  knowledge  of  the  glorious  gospel,  have 
learned  their  true  state  and  end,  are  saved 
from  the  love  of  the  present  world,  from  the 
heart-distressing*  fear  of  death ; and  know, 
that  if  their  earthly  house  were  dissolved, 
like  the  ice-palace,  they  have  a house  not 
made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens! 

Yet  even  these  are  much  concerned  to  rea- 
lize the  brevity  and  uncertainty  of  their  pre- 
sent state,  that  they  may  be  stimulated  to 
make  the  most  and  the  best  of  it;  to  redeem 
their  time,  and  manage  their  precarious  op- 
portunities, so  as  may  most  tend  to  the  praise 
and  glory  of  him  who  has  called  them  out  of 
darkness  into  marvellous  light.  Why  should 
any  that  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious 
wish  to  live  another  day,  but  that  they  may 
have  the  honour  to  be  fellow-workers  with 
him,  instrumental  in  promoting  his  designs, 
and  of  laying  themselves  out  to  the  utmost  of 
their  abilities  and  influence  in  his  service  1 
To  enjoy  a sense  of  his  loving-kindness,  and 
to  have  the  light  of  his  countenance  lifted  up 
upon  our  souls,  is  indeed,  respecting  ourselves, 
the  best  part  of  life,  yea,  better  than  life  it- 
self; but  this  we  shall  have  to  unspeakably 
greater  advantage,  when  we  have  finished  our 
course,  and  shall  be  wholly  freed  from  the 
body  of  sin.  And  therefore,  the  great  desi- 
rable while  here,  seems  to  be  grace,  that  we 
may  serve  him  and  suffer  for  him  in  the  world. 
Though  our  first  wish  immediately  upon  our 
own  accounts  might  be,  to  depart  and  be  with 
Jesus,  which  is  v,«  xf;*o -<rov,  yet  a 

lively  thought  of  our  immense  obligations  to 
his  redeeming  love,  may  reconcile  us  to  a 
much  longer  continuance  here,  if  we  may  by 
any  means  be  subservient  to  diffuse  the  glory 
of  his  name,  and  the  blessings  of  his  salva- 
tion, which  is  God’s  great  and  principle  end 
in  preserving  the  world  itself.  When  histo- 
rians and  politicians  descant  upon  the  rise  and 


228 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


fall  of  empires,  with  all  their  professed  saga- 
city, in  tracing  the  connection  between  causes 
and  effects,  they  are  totally  unacquainted  with 
the  great  master-wheel  which  manages  the 
whole  movement,  that  is,  the  Lord’s  design 
in  favour  of  his  church  and  kingdom.  To 
this  every  event  is  subordinate ; to  this  every 
interfering  interest  must  stoop.  How  easily 
might  this  position  be  proved,  by  reviewing 
the  history  of  the  period  about  the  Reforma- 
tion. Whether  Hr.  Robertson  considers 
things  in  this  light,  in  his  history  of  Charles  V. 

I know  not.,  as  I have  not  seen  his  books; 
but  if  not,  however  elaborate  his  performance 
may  be  in  other  respects,  I must  venture  to 
say,  it  is  essentially  defective,  and  cannot  give 
that  light  and  pleasure  to  a spiritual  reader  of 
which  the  subject  is  capable.  And  1 doubt 
not,  that  some  who  are  yet  unborn  will  here- 
after clearly  see  and  remark,  that  the  present 
unhappy  disputes  between  Great  Britain  and 
America,  with  their  consequences,  whatever 
they  may  be,  are  part  of  a series  of  events,  of 
which  the  extension  and  interests  ofthe  church 
of  Christ  were  the  principal  final  causes.  In 
a word,  that  Jesus  may  be  known,  trusted, 
and  adored,  and  sinners,  by  the  power  of  his 
gospel,  be  rescued  from  sin  and  Satan,  is 
comparatively,  the  to  j.-,  the  one  great  busi- 
ness, for  the  sake  of  which  the  succession  of  | 
day  and  night,  summer  and  winter,  is  still 
maintained ; and  when  the  plan  of  redemp- 
tion is  consummated,  sin,  which  now  almost 
fills  the  earth,  will  then  set  it  on  fire ; and 
the  united  interest  of  all  the  rest  of  mankind, 
when  detached  from  that  of  the  people  of 
God,  will  not  plead  for  its  preservation  a sin- 
gle day.  In  this  view,  I congratulate  your 
Lordship,  that  however  your  best  endeavours 
to  serve  the  temporal  interests  of  the  nation 
may  fall  short  of  your  wishes;  yet,  so  far  as 
your  situation  gives  you  opportunity  of  sup- 
porting the  gospel-cause,  and  facilitating  its 
progress,  you  have  a prospect  both  of  a more 
certain  and  more  important  success.  For 
instance,  it  was,  under  God,  your  Lordship’s 
favour  and  influence  that  brought  me  into 
the  ministry.  And  though  I be  nothing,  yet 
lie  who  put  it  into  your  heart  to  patronise 
me  has  been  pleased  not  to  suffer  what  you 
then  did  for  his  sake  to  be  wholly  in  vain.  lie 
has  been  pleased,  in  a course  of  years,  by  so 
unworthy  an  instrument  as  I am,  to  awaken 
a number  of  persons,  who  were  at  that  time 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins ; but  now  some  of 
them  are  pressing  on  to  the  prize  of  their  high 
-jailing  in  Christ  Jesus;  and  some  of  them 
are  already  before  the  throne.  Should  I sug- 
gest in  some  companies,  that  the  conversion 
of  a hundred  sinners  (more  or  less)  to  God, 
is  an  event  of  more  real  importance  than  the 
temporal  prosperity  of  the  greatest  nation  up- 
on earth,  I should  be  charged  with  ignorance 
and  arrogance  ; but  your  Lordship  is  skilled 
in  scriptural  arithmetic,  which  alone  can  teach 


| 


i 

! 


[let.  XIX. 

us  to  estimate  the  value  of  souls,  and  wii! 
agree  with  me,  that  one  soul  is  worth  more 
than  the  whole  world,  on  account  of  its  re- 
demption-price, its  vast  capacities,  and  its 
duration.  Should  we  suppose  a nation  to 
consist  of  forty  millions,  the  whole  and  each 
individual  to  enjoy  as  much  good  as  this  life 
can  afford,  without  abatement,  for  a term  of 
fifty  years  each ; all  this  good,  or  an  equal 
quantity,  might  be  exhausted  by  a single  per- 
son in  two  thousand  millions  of  years,  which 
would  be  but  a moment  in  comparison  of  the 
eternity  which  would  still  follow,  and  if  this 
good  were  merely  temporal  good,  the  whole 
aggregate  of  it  would  be  evil  and  misery,  if 
compared  with  that  happiness  in  God,  of 
which  only  they  who  are  made  partakers  of 
a divine  life  are  capable.  On  the  other  hand, 
were  a whole  nation  to  be  destroyed  by  such 
accumulated  miseries  as  attended  the  siege 
of  Jerusalem,  the  sum  total  of  these  calami- 
ties would  be  but  trifling,  if  set  in  competi- 
tion with  what  every  single  person  that  dies 
in  sin  has  to  expect,  when  the  sentence  cf 
everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of 
the  Lord,  and  the  glory  of  his  power,  shall 
be  executed. 

What  an  unexpected  round  have  my 
thoughts  taken  since  I set  out  from  the  ice- 
palace  1 It  is  time  to  relieve  your  Lordship 
and  to  subscribe  myself,  &c. 


LETTER  XIX. 

February  23,  1775. 

my  lord, — I assent  to  our  Lord’s  declara- 
tion, “ Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing,”  not 
only  upon  the  authority  of  the  speaker,  hut 
from  the  same  irresistible  and  experimental 
evidence,  as  if  he  had  told  me,  that  I cannot 
make  the  sun  to  shine,  or  change  the  course 
of  the  seasons.  Though  my  pen  and  my 
tongue  sometimes  move  freely,  yet  the  total 
incapacity  and  stagnation  of  thought  I labour 
under  at  other  times,  convinces  me,  that,  in 
myself,  I have  not  sufficiency  to  think  a good 
thought ; and,  I believe  the  case  would  be 
the  same,  if  that  little  measure  of  knowledge 
and  abilities,  which  I am  too  prone  to  look 
upon  as  my  own,  were  a thousand  times 
greater  than  it  is.  For  every  new  service  I 
stand  in  need  of  a now  supply,  and  can  bring 
forth  nothing  of  my  supposed  store  into  ac- 
tual exercise,  but  by  his  immediate  assist- 
ance. His  gracious  influence  is  that  to  those 
who  are  best  furnished  with  gifts,  which  the 
water  is  to  the  mill,  or  the  wind  to  the  ship, 
without  which  the  whole  apparatus  is  motion- 
less and  useless.  I apprehend  that  we  lose 
much  of  the  comfort  which  might  arise  from 
a sense  of  our  continual  dependence  upon 
him,  and  of  course  fall  short  of  acknowledg- 
ing, as  we  ought,  what  we  receive  from  him 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


227 


LET.  XIX.] 

by  mistaking  the  manner  of  his  operation. 
Perhaps  we  take  it  too  much  for  granted, 
that  communications  from  himself  must  bear 
some  kind  of  sensible  impression  that  they 
are  his,  and  therefore  are  ready  to  give  our 
own  industry  or  ingenuity  credit  for  those 
performances  in  which  we  can  perceive  no 
such  impression;  yet  it  is  very  possible  that 
we  may  be  under  his  influence  when  we 
are  least  aware  of  it ; and  though  what  we 
say,  or  write,  or  do,  may  seem  no  way  ex- 
traordinary, yet  that  we  should  be  led  to 
such  a particular  turn  of  thought  at  one  time 
rather  than  at  another,  has,  in  my  own  con- 
cerns, often  appeared  to  me  remarkable,  from 
the  circumstances  which  have  attended,  or 
the  consequences  which  have  followed.  How 
often,  in  the  choice  of  a text,  or  in  the  course 
of  a sermon,  or  in  a letter  to  a friend,  have 
I been  led  to  speak  a word  in  season ! and 
what  I have  expressed  at  large,  and  in  gene- 
ral, has  been  so  exactly  suited  to  some  case 
which  I was  utterly  unacquainted  with,  that 
I could  hardly  have  hit  it  so  well,  had  I been 
Dreviously  informed  of  it.  Some  instances 
of  this  kind  have  been  so  striking,  as  hardly 
to  admit  a doubt  of  superior  agency.  And 
indeed,  if  believers  in  Jesus,  however  un- 
worthy in  themselves,  are  the  temples  of  the 
Holy  Ghost ; if  the  Lord  lives,  dwells,  and 
walks  in  them ; if  he  is  their  life  and  their 
light;  if  he  has  promised  to  guide  them  with 
his  eye,  and  to  work  in  them  both  to  will 
and  to  do  of  his  own  good  pleasure, — me- 
thinks  what  I have  mentioned,  and  more, 
may  be  reasonably  expected.  That  line  in 
the  hymn, 

Help  I every  moment  need, 

is  not  a hyperbolical  expression,  but  strictly 
and  literally  true,  not  only  in  great  emergen- 
cies, but  in  our  smoother  hours,  and  most  fa- 
miliar paths.  This  gracious  assistance  is  af- 
forded in  a way  imperceptible  to  ourselves, 
to  hide  pride  from  us,  and  to  prevent  us  from 
being  indolent  and  careless  with  respect  to 
the  use  of  appointed  means ; and  it  would  be 
likewise  more  abundantly,  and  perhaps  more 
sensibly  afforded,  w?ere  our  spirits  more 
simple  in  waiting  upon  the  Lord.  But  alas ! 
a divided  heart,  an  undue  attachment  to  some 
temporal  object,  sadly  deaden  our  spirits  (I 
speak  for  myself,)  and  grieves  the  Lord’s 
Spirit;  so  that  we  walk  in  darkness  and  at  a 
distance,  and  though  called  to  great  privi- 
leges, live  far  below  them.  But  methinks 
the  thought  of  him  who  is  always  near,  and 
upon  whom  we  do  and  must  incessantly  de- 
pend, should  suggest  a powerful  motive  for 
the  closest  attention  to  his  revealed  will,  and 
the  most  punctual  compliance  with  it;  for  so 
far  as  the  Lord  withdraws  we  become  as 
jlind  men,  and  with  the  clearest  light,  and 
upon  the  plainest  ground,  we  are  liable,  or 
rather  sure,  to  stumble  at  every  step. 


Though  there  is  a principle  of  conscious- 
ness and  a determination  of  the  will,  suffi- 
cient to  denominate  our  thoughts  and  per- 
formances our  own,  yet  I believe  mankind 
in  general  are  more  under  an  invisible 
agency  than  they  apprehend.  The  Lord, 
immediately  from  himself,  and  perhaps  by 
the  ministry  of  the  holy  angels,  guides, 
prompts,  restrains,  or  warns  his  people.  So 
there  undoubtedly  is  what  I may  call  a black 
inspiration,  the  influence  of  the  evil  spirits 
who  work  in  the  hearts  of  the  disobedient, 
and  not  only  excite  their  wills,  but  assist 
their  faculties,  and  qualify  as  well  as  incline 
them  to  be  more  assiduously  wicked,  and 
more  extensively  mischievous,  than  they 
could  be  of  themselves.  I consider  Voltaire, 
for  instance,  and  many  writers  of  the  same 
stamp,  to  be  little  more  than  secretaries  and 
amanuenses  of  one  who  has  unspeakably 
more  wit  and  adroitness  in  promoting  infi- 
delity and  immorality,  than  they  of  them- 
selves can  justly  pretend  to.  They  have,  for 
a while  the  credit  (if  I may  so  call  it)  of  the 
fund  from  whence  they  draw ; but  the  world 
little  imagines  who  is  the  real  and  original 
author  of  that  philosophy  and  poetry,  of  tnose 
fine  turns  and  sprightly  inventions,  which 
are  so  generally  admired.  Perhaps  many, 
now  applauded  for  their  genius,  would  have 
been  comparatively  dolts,  had  they  not  been 
engaged  in  a cause  which  Satan  has  so  much 
interest  in  supporting. 

But  to  return  to  the  more  pleasing  sub- 
ject. How  great  and  honourable  is  the  pri- 
vilege of  a true  believer ! That  he  has  neither 
wisdom  nor  strength  in  himself  is  no  disad- 
vantage ; for  he  is  connected  with  infinite 
wisdom  and  almighty  power.  Though  weak 
as  a worm,  his  arms  are  strengthened  by  the 
mighty  God  of  Jacob,  and  all  things  become 
possible,  yea  easy,  to  him,  that  occur  within 
the  compass  of  his  proper  duty  and  oalling. 
The  Lord  whom  he  serves,  engages  to  pro- 
portion his  strength  to  his  day,  whether  it  be 
a day  of  service  or  of  suffering ; and  though  he 
be  fallible  and  short-sighted,  exceeding  liable 
to  mistake  and  imposition,  yet,  while  he  re- 
tains a sense  that  he  is  so,  and,  with  the  sim- 
plicity of  a child,  asks  counsel  and  direction 
of  the  Lord,  he  seldom  takes  a wrong  step, 
at  least  not  in  matters  of  consequence,  and 
even  his  inadvertencies  are  over-ruled  for 
good.  If  he  forgets  his  true  state,  and  thinks 
himself  to  be  something,  he  presently  finds 
he  is  indeed  nothing ; but  if  he  is  content  to 
be  nothing  and  to  have  nothing,  he  is  sure  to 
find  a seasonable  and  abundant  communica- 
tion of  all  that  ho  wants.  Thus  he  lives,  like 
Israel  in  the  wilderness,  upon  mere  bounty ; 
but  then  it  is  a bounty  unchangeable,  un- 
wearied, inexhaustible,  and  all-sufficient. 
Moses,  wlien  speaking  of  the  methods  the 
Lord  took  to  humble  Israel,  mentions  his 
feeding  them  with  manna  as  one  method.  I 


228 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


could  not  understand  this  for  a time.  I 
thought  they  were  rather  in  danger  of  being 
proud,  when  they  saw  themselves  provided 
for  in  such  an  extraordinary  way.  But  the 
manna  would  not  keep ; they  could  not  hoard 
it  up,  and  were  therefore  in  a state  of  abso- 
lute dependence  from  day  to  day.  This  ap- 
pointment was  well  suited  to  humble  them. 
Thus  it  is  with  us  in  spirituals.  We  should 
be  better  pleased,  perhaps,  to  be  set  up  with 
a stock  or  sufficiency  at  once, — such  an  in- 
herent portion  of  wisdom  and  power,  as  we 
might  depend  upon,  at  least  for  common  oc- 
casions, without  being  constrained  by  a sense 
of  indigence,  to  have  continual  recourse  to 
the  Lord  for  every  thing  we  want.  But  his 
way  is  best.  His  own  glory  is  most  dis- 
played, and  our  safety  most  secured,  by  keep- 
ing us  quite  poor  and  empty  in  ourselves, 
and  supplying  us  from  one  minute  to  another, 
according  to  our  need.  This,  if  any  thing, 
will  prevent  boasting,  and  keep  a sense  of 
gratitude  awake  in  our  hearts.  This  is  well 
adapted  to  quicken  us  in  prayer,  and  fur- 
nishes us  with  a thousand  occasions  for 
praise  which  would  otherwise  escape  our 
notice. 

But  who  or  what  are  we,  that  the  Most 
High  should  thus  notice  us ! should  visit  us 
every  morninof.  and  water  us  every  moment ! 
It  is  an  astonishing  thought,  that  God  should 
thus  dwell  with  men  ! that  he,  before  whom 
the  mightiest  earthly  potentates  are  less 
than  nothing,  and  vanity,  should  thus  stoop 
and  accommodate  himself  to  the  situation, 
wants,  and  capacities  of  the  weakest,  mean- 
est, and  poorest  of  his  children ! But  so  it 
hath  pleased  mm.  He  seeth  not  as  man 
seeth. — 1 am.  &c. 


LETTER  XX. 

August  — 1775. 

my  lord. — I have  no  apt  preface  or  in- 
troduction at  hand : and  as  I have  made  it 
almost  a rule  not  to  study  for  what  I should 
offer  your  Lordship.  I therefore  beg  leave  to 
begin  abruptly.  It  is  the  future  promised 
privilege  of  believers  in  Jesus,  that  they 
shall  be  as  the  angels:  and  there  is  a sense 
in  which  we  should  endeavour  to  be  as  the 
angels  now.  This  is  intimated  to  us  where 
we  are  taught  to  pray,  “Thv  will  be  done 
on  earth  as  it  ism  heaven.”  I have  some- 
times amused  myself  with  supposing  an 
angel  should  be  appointed  to  reside  a while 
upon  earth  in  a human  body ; not  in  sinful 
flesh,  like  ours,  but  in  a body  free  from  in- 
firmity, and  still  perceiving  an  unabated 
sense  "of  his  own  hap  ;in?ss  in  the  favour  of 
God,  and  ofliis  unspeakable  obligation  to  his 
gooiness;  and  then  I have  tried  to  judge,  as 
well  as  J.  could,  how  such  an  angel  would  coin- 


[let.  XX. 

port  himself  in  such  a situation.  I know  not 
that  I ever  enlarged  upon  the  thought,  either 
in  preaching  or  writing.  Permit  me  to 
follow  it  a little  in  this  paper. 

Were  I acquainted  with  this  heavenly  visit- 
ant, I am  willing  to  hope  I should  greatly  reve- 
rence him;  and,  if  permitted,  be  glad,  in  some 
cases,  to  consult  him:  in  some,  but  not  in  all; 
for  I think  my  fear  would  be  equal  to  my 
love.  Methinks  I could  never  venture  to  open 
my  heart  freely  to  him,  and  unfold  to  him  my 
numberless  complaints  and  infirmities;  for,  as 
he  could  have  no  experience  of  the  like  things 
himself,  I should  suppose  he  would  not  know 
how  fully  to  pity  me,  indeed  hardly  how  to 
bear  with  me,  if  I told  him  all.  Alas  J what 
a preposterous,  strange,  vile  creature  should  I 
appear  to  an  angel,  if  he  knew  me  as  I am  ! 
It  is  well  for  me  that  Jesus  was  made  lower 
than  the  angels,  and  that  the  human  nature 
he  assumed  was  not  distinct  from  the  common 
nature  of  mankind,  though  secured  from  the 
common  depravity ; and  because  he  submit- 
ted to  be  under  the  law  in  our  name  and 
stead,  though  he  was  free  from  sin  himself, 
yet  sin  and  its  consequences  being,  for  our 
sakes,  charged  upon  him,  he  acquired,  in  the 
days  of  his  humiliation,  an  experimental  sym- 
pathy with  his  poor  people.  He  knows  the 
effects  of  sin  and  temptation  upon  us,  by  that 
knowledge  whereby  he  knows  all  things;  but 
he  knows  them  likewise  in  a way  more  suit- 
able for  our  comfort  and  relief,  by  the  suffer- 
ings and  exercises  he  passed  through  for  us. 
Hence  arises  encouragement.  We  have  not 
an  high  priest  who  cannot  be  touched  with  a 
feeling  of  our  infirmities,  but  was  in  all  points 
tempted  even  as  we  are.  When  1 add  to  this, 
the  consideration  of  his  power,  promises,  and 
grace,  and  that  he  is  exalted  on  purpose  to 
pity,  relieve,  and  save,  I gather  courage.  With 
him  I dare  be  free,  and  am  not  sorry,  but 
glad,  that  he  knows  me  perfectly,  that  not  a 
thought  of  my  heart  is  hidden  from  him.  For 
without  this  infinite  and  exact  knowledge  of 
my  disease,  how  could  he  effectually  adminis- 
ter to  my  cure! — But  whither  am  I ratn- 
bling]  I seem  to  have  lost  sight  of  the  angel 
already.  I am  now  coming  back,  that  if  he 
cannot  effectually  pity  me,  he  may  at  least 
animate  and  teach  me. 

In  the  first  place,  I take  it  for  granted  this 
angel  would  think  himself  a stranger  and  pil- 
grim upon  earth.  He  would  not  forget  that 
his  TrokiTivjux*  was  in  heaven.  Surely  he  would 
look  upon  all  the  bustle  of  human  life  (far- 
ther than  the  design  of  his  mission  might  con- 
nect him  with  it)  with  more  indifference  than 
we  look  upon  the  sports  of  children,  or  the 
amusements  of  idiots  and  lunatics,  which  give 
us  an  uneasiness,  rather  than  excite  a desire 
of  joining  in  them.  He  would  judge  of  every 
tiling  around  him  by  the  reference  and  ten- 


Citizensliip,  or  conversation. 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


229 


LET.  XXI.] 

dency  it  had  to  promote  the  will  of  him  that 
sent  him ; and  the  most  specious  or  splendid 
appearances,  considered  in  any  other  view, 
would  made  no  impression  upon  him. 

Consequently,  as  to  nis  own  concernment, 
ail  his  aim  and  desire  would  be,  to  fulfil  the 
will  of  God.  All  situations  would  be  alike  to 
him  ; whether  he  was  commanded,  as  in  the 
case  of  Sennacherib,  to  destroy  a mighty  army 
with  a stroke ; or,  as  in  the  case  of  Hagar, 
to  attend  upon  a woman,  a servant,  a slave ; 
both  services  would  be  to  him  equally  ho- 
nourable and  important,  because  he  was  in 
both  equally  pleasing  his  Lord,  which  would 
be  his  element  and  his  joy,  whether  he  was 
aopointed  to  guide  the  reins  of  empire,  or  to 
sweep  the  streets. 

Again,  the  angel  would  doubtless  exhibit  a 
striking  example  of  benevolence;  for,  being 
free  from  selfish  bias,  filled  with  a sense  of 
tiie  love  of  God,  and  a knowledge  of  his 
adorable  perfections,  his  whole  heart,  and  soul, 
and  strength,  would  be  engaged  and  exerted 
both  from  duty  and  inclination,  to  relieve  the 
miseries,  and  advance  the  happiness  of  all 
around  him  : and  in  this  he  would  follow  the 
pattern  of  him  who  doth  good  to  all,  com- 
manding his  sun  to  rise,  and  his  rain  to  fall, 
upon  the  just  and  the  unjust;  though,  from 
tne  same  pattern,  he  would  show  an  especial 
regard  to  the  household  of  faith.  An  angel 
would  take  but  little  part  in  the  controver- 
sies, contentions,  and  broils,  which  might 
happen  in  the  time  of  his  sojourning  here, 
but  would  be  a friend  to  all,  so  far  as  con- 
sistent with  the  general  good. 

The  will  and  glory  of  God  being  the  an- 
gel’s great  view,  and  having  a more  lively 
sense  of  the  realities  of  an  unseen  world  than 
we  can  at  present  conceive,  he  would  cer- 
tainly, in  the  first  and  chief  place,  have  the 
success  and  spread  of  the  glorious  gospel  at 
heart.  Angels,  though  not  redeemed  with 
blood,  yet  feel  themselves  nearly  concerned 
in  the  work  of  redemption.  They  admire  its 
mysteries.  We  may  suppose  them  well  in- 
formed in  the  works  of  creation  and  provi- 
dence. But,  unlike  to  many  men,  who  are 
satisfied  with  the  knowledge  of  astronomy, 
mathematics,  or  history,  they  search  and  pry 
into  the  counsels  of  redeeming  love,  rejoice  at 
the  conversion  of  a sinner,  and  think  them- 
selves well  employed  to  be  ministering  spirits, 
to  minister  to  the  heirs  of  salvation.  Jt  would 
therefore  be  his  chief  delight  to  espouse  and 
promote  their  cause,  and  to  employ  all  his 
talents  and  influence  in  spreading  the  favour 
and  knowledge  of  the  name  of  Jesus,  which 
is  the  only  and  effectual  means  of  bringing 
sinners  out  of  bondage  and  darkness  into  the 
glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God. 

Lastly,  though  his  zeal  for  the  glory  of  his 
liord  would  make  him  willing  to  continue 
here  till  he  had  finished  the  work  given  him 
to  do,  he  would,  I am  persuaded,  look  for- 


ward with  desire  to  the  appointed  moment  of 
his  recal,  that  he  might  be  freed  from  behold- 
ing and  mixing  with  the  sin  and  vanity  of 
those  who  know  not  God,  render  his  account 
with  joy,  and  be  welcomed  to  heaven  with  a 
“ Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant.” 
Surely  lie  would  long  for  this,  as  a labourer 
for  the  setting  sun ; and  would  not  form  any 
connection  with  the  things  of  time,  which 
should  prompt  him  to  wish  his  removal  pro- 
tracted for  a single  hour  beyond  the  period 
of  his  prescribed  service. 

Alas,  why  am  I not  more  like  an  angel 1 
My  views,  in'  my  better  judgment,  are  the 
same.  My  motives  and  obligations  are  even 
stronger ; an  angel  is  not  so  deeply  indebted 
to  the  grace  of  God,  as  a believing  sinner, 
who  was  once  upon  the  brink  of  destruction, 
who  has  been  redeemed  with  blood,  and  might 
justly  have  been,  before  now,  shut  up  with 
the  powers  of  darkness  without  hope.  Yet 
the  merest  trifles  are  sufficient  to  debase  my 
views,  damp  my  activity,  and  impede  my  en- 
deavours in  the  Lord’s  service,  though  I pro- 
fess to  Have  no  other  end  or  desire  which 
can  make  a continuance  in  life  worthy  my 
wish. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXI. 

November  — 1775. 

my  lord, — Burn  loquimur  tempus  fugit. 
In  the  midst  of  the  hurries  and  changes  of 
this  unsettled  state,  we  glide  along  swiftly 
towards  an  unchangeable  world,  and  shall 
soon  have  as  little  connection  with  the  scenes 
we  are  now  passing  through  as  we  have  witfy 
what  happened  before  the  flood.  All  that 
appears  great  and  interesting  in  the  present 
life,  abstracted  from  its  influence  upon  our 
internal  character,  and  our  everlasting  al- 
lotment, will  soon  be  as  unreal  as  the  visions 
of  the  night.  This  we  know  and  confess ; 
but  though  our  judgments  are  convinced,  it 
is  seldom  our  hearts  are  duly  affected  by  the 
thought.  And  while  I find  it  easy  to  write 
in  this  moralizing  strain,  I feel  myself  dis- 
posed to  be  seriously  engaged  about  trifles, 
and  trifling  in  the  most  serious  concerns,  as 
if  I believed  the  very  contrary.  It  is  with  good 
reason  the  Lord  challenges  as  his  own  pre- 
rogative the  full  knowledge  of  the  deceitful- 
ness, desperate  wickedness,  and  latent  depths 
of  the  human  heart,  which  is  capable  of 
making  even  his  own  people  so  shamefully 
inconsistent  with  themselves  and  with  their 
acknowledged  principles. 

I find  that,  when  I have  something  agree- 
able in  expectation  (suppose,  for  instance,  it 
were  a few  hours  conversation  with  your 
Lordship,)  my  imagination  paints  and  prepares 
the  scene  beforehand ; hurries  me  over  the 
intervening  space  of  time,  as  though  it  were 


230 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


[let.  XXII 


a useless  blank,  and  anticipates  the  pleasure 
I propose.  Many  of  my  thoughts  of  this 
kind  are  mere  waking  dreams;  for  perhaps 
the  opportunity  I am  eagerly  waiting  lor 
never  happens,  lv.it  is  swallowed  up  by  some 
unforeseen  disappointment;  or  if  not,  some- 
thing from  within  or  without  prevents  its  an- 
swering the  idea  I had  formed  of  it.  Nor 
does  my  fancy  confine  itself  within  the  nar- 
row limits  of  probabilities ; it  can  busy  itself 
as  easrerly  in  ranging  after  chimeras  and  im- 
possibilities, and  engage  my  attention  to  the 
ideal  pursuit  of  things  that  are  never  likely  to 
happen.  In  these  respects  my  imagination 
travels  with  wings;  so  that  if  the  wildness, 
the  multiplicity,  the  variety  of  the  phantoms 
which  pass  through  my  mind  in  the  space  of 
a winter’s  day  were  known  to  my  fellow- 
creatures,  they  would  probably  deem  me,  as 
I am  often  ready  to  deem  myself,  but  a more 
sober  and  harmless  kind  of  lunatic.  But  if  I 
endeavour  to  put  this  active  roving  power  in 
a right  track,  and  to  represent  to  myself  those 
scenes  which,  though  not  yet  present,  I know 
will  soon  be  realised,  and  have  a greatness 
which  the  most  enlarged  exercise  of  my 
powers  cannot  comprehend : if  I would  fix 
my  thoughts  upon  the  hour  of  death,  the  end 
of  the  world,  the  coming  of  the  Judge,  or 
similar  subjects;  then  my  imagination  is 
presently  tame,  cold,  and  jaded,  travels  very 
slowly,  and  is  soon  wearied  in  the  road  of 
truth ; though  in  the  fairy  fields  of  uncer- 
tainty and  folly,  it  can  skip  from  mountain 
to  mountain.  Mr.  Addison  supposes,  that 
the  imagination  alone,  as  it  can  be  differently 
affected,  is  capable  of  making  us  either  in- 
conceivably happy  or  miserable.  I am  sure 
it  is  capable  of  making  us  miserable,  tnough 
T believe  it  seldom  gives  us  much  pleasure, 
but  such  as  is  to  be  found  in  a fool’s  para- 
dise. But  I am  sure,  were  my  outward  life 
and  conduct  perfectly  free  from  blame,  the 
disorders  and  defilement  of  my  imagination 
are  sufficient  to  constitute  me  a chief  sinner 
in  the  sight  of  him  to  whom  the  thoughts 
and  intents  of  the  heart  are  continually  open, 
and  who  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  ini- 
quity. 

LTpon  this  head  I cannot  but  lament  how 
universally  almost  education  is  suited,  and 
as  it  were  designed,  to  add  to  the  stimulus 
of  depraved  nature.  A cultivated  imagina- 
tion is  commended  and  sought  after  as  a 
very  desirable  talent,  though  it  seldom  means 
more  than  the  possession  of  a large  stock  of 
other  people’s  dreams  and  fables,  with  a 
certain  quickness  in  compounding  them,  en- 
larging upon  them,  and  exceeding  them  by 
inventions  of  our  own.  Poets,  painters,  and 
even  historians  are  employed  to  assist  us 
from  our  early  years  in  forming  an  habitual 
relish  for  shadows  and  colourings,  which 
both  indispose  for  the  search  of  truth  and 
even  unfit  us  for  its  reception,  unless  pro- 


posed just  in  our  own  way.  The  best  effei ; 
of  the  belles  lettres  upon  the  imagination 
seems  generally  expressed  by  the  word  taste. 
And  what  is  this  taste,  but  a certain  disposi- 
tion which  loves  to  be  humoured,  soothed, 
arid  flattered,  and  which  can  hardly  receive 
or  beai  the  most  important  truths,  if  they  be 
not  decorated  and  set  off  with  such  a deli- 
cacy and  address  as  taste  requires ! I say 
the  most  important  truths;  because  truths 
of  a secular  importance  strike  so  closely  upon 
the  senses,  that  the  decision  of  taste  perhaps 
j is  not  waited  for.  Thus,  if  a man  be  in- 
formed of  the  birth  of  his  child,  or  that  his 
house  is  on  fire,  the  message  takes  up  his 
thoughts,  and  he  is  seldom  much  disgusted 
with  tlie  manner  in  which  it  is  delivered. 
But  what  an  insuperable  bar  is  the  refined 
taste  of  many  to  their  profiting  by  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  or  even  to  their 
hearing  it.  Though  the  subject  of  a dis- 
course be  weighty,  and  some  just  representa- 
tion given  of  the  evil  of  sin,  the  worth  of  the 
soul,  and  the  love  of  Christ ; yet,  if  there  be 
something  amiss  in  the  elocution,  language, 
or  manner  of  the  preacher,  people  of  taste 
must  be  possessed,  in  a good  measure,  of 
grace  likewise,  if  they  can  hear  him  with 
tolerable  patience.  And  perhaps  three 
fourths  of  those  who  are  accounted  the  most 
sensible  and  judicious  in  the  auditory,  will 
remember  little  about  the  sermon,  but  the 
tone  of  the  voice,  the  awkwardness  of  the 
attitude,  the  obsolete  expressions,  and  the 
like ; while  the  poor  and  simple,  not  being 
incumbered  with  this  hurtful  accomplish- 
ment, receive  the  messenger  as  the  Lord’s 
servant,  and  the  truth  as  the  Lord’s  word, 
and  are  comforted  and  edified. — But  I stop. 
Some  people  would  say,  that  I must  suppose 
your  Lordship  to  have  but  little  taste,  or  else 
much  grace,  or  I should  not  venture  to 
trouble  you  with  such  letters  as  mine. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXII. 

my  lord, — The  apostle  speaks  of  a bless- 
edness which  it  is  the  design  of  the  gospel 
to  impart  to  those  who  receive  it.  The  Gala- 
tians once  had  it,  and  spoke  of  it.  The 
apostle  reminds  them  of  their  loss,  which  is 
left  upon  record  as  a warning  to  us.  His 
expression  has  led  me  sometimes  to  consider 
wherein  a Christian’s  present  blessedness 
consists ; I mean,  that  which  is  attainable  in 
tli is  state  of  trial,  and  the  sense  and  exercise 
of  which  may  be,  and  too  often  is,  suspended 
| and  taken  from  us.  It  is  a blessedness  which, 
j if  we  speak  of  man  in  a natural  state,  his  eye 
j hath  not  seen,  nor  his  ear  heard  so  as  to  un- 
i derstand  it,  nor  can  the  idea  of  it  arise  in  his 
I heart.  It  is  no  way  dependent  upon  outward 


let.  xxil]  LETTERS  TO 

circumstances.  Prosperity  cannot  impart  it, 
preserve  or  supply  the  want  of  it ; nor  can 
adversity  put  it  out  of  our  reach.  The  wise 
cannot  acquire  it  by  dint  of  superior  abili- 
ties ; nor  shall  the  simple  miss  it  for  want 
of  capacity. 

The  slate  of  true  believers,  compared  with 
that  of  others,  is  always  blessed.  If  they 
are  born  from  above,  and  united  to  Jesus, 
they  are  delivered  from  condemnation,  and 
are  heirs  of  eternal  life,  and  may  therefore 
well  be  accounted  happy.  But  I consider 
now,  not  their  harvest,  but  their  first  fruits ; 
not  their  portion  in  reversion,  but  the  earnest 
attainable  in  this  life;  not  what  they  shall  be 
in  heaven,  but  what,  in  an  humble  attend- 
ance upon  the  Lord,  they  may  be  while  upon 
earth.  There  is  even  at  present  a prize  of 
our  high  calling  set  before  us.  It  is  much 
to  be  desired,  that  we  had  such  a sense  of 
its  value  as  might  prompt  us  so  to  run  that 
we  might  obtain.  I have  thought  this  bless- 
edness may  be  comprised  in  five  particulars, 
though,  in  order  to  take  a succinct  view  of 
the  subject  some  of  these  might  be  branched 
out  into  several  others;  but  I would  not  by 
too  many  subdivisions  give  my  letter  the  air 
of  a sermon. 

In  the  first  place,  a clear,  well  grounded, 
habitual  persuasion  of  our  acceptance  in  the 
Beloved  is  attainable;  and  though  we  may 
be  safe,  we  cannot  be  said  to  enjoy  blessed- 
ness without  it.  To  be  in  a state  of  suspense 
and  uncertainty  in  a point  of  so  great  import- 
ance is  painful ; and  the  Lord  has  accordingly 
provided  that  his  people  may  have  strong 
consolation  on  this  head.  They  are  blessed 
therefore  who  have  such  views  of  the  power, 
grace,  and  suitableness  of  Jesus,  and  the 
certainty  and  security  of  redemption  in  him, 
together  with  such  a consciousness  that  they 
have  anchored  their  hopes  and  ventured 
their  all  upon  his  person,  work,  and  promise, 
as  furnishes  them  with  a ready  answer  to 
all  the  cavils  of  unbelief  and  Satan,  in  the 
apostle’s  manner,  Rom.  viii.  31 — 37.  That 
Paul  could  thus  challenge  and  triumph  over 
all  charges  and  enemies,  was  not  an  appen- 
dage of  his  office  as  an  apostle,  but  a part  of 
his  experience  as  a believer ; and  it  lies 
equally  open  to  us,  for  we  have  the  same 
gospel  and  the  same  promises  as  he  had  : nor 
is  the  efficacy  of'  the  Holy  Spirit's  teaching 
a whit  weakened  by  length  of  time.  But 
many  stop  short  of  this.  They  have  a hope, 
but  it  rather  springs  from  their  frames  and 
feelings  than  from  a spiritual  apprehension 
of  the  Redeemer’s  engagements  and  fulness, 
and  therefore  fluctuates  and  changes  like 
the  weather.  Could  they  be  persuaded  to 
pray  with  earnestness  and  importunity,  as 
the  apostle  prays  for  them,  Ephes.  i.  17,  18, 
and  iii.  l(j,  19.  they  would  find  a blessedness 
which  they  have  not  yet  known ; for  it  is 
said,  “ Ask,  and  ye  shall  receive.”  And  it 


A NOBLEMAN.  23i 

is  said  likewise,  “ Ye  receive  not  because 
ye  ask  not.” 

Could  this  privilege  be  enjoyed  singly,  the 
natural  man  would  have  no  objection  to  it. 
He  would  (as  he  thinks)  be  pleased  to  know 
he  should  be  saved  at  last,  provided  that 
while  here  he  might  live  in  his  sins.  But 
the  believer  will  not,  cannot  think  himself 
blessed,  unless  he  has  likewise  a conscience 
void  of  offence.  This  was  the  apostle’s  daily 
exercise,  though  no  one  was  farther  from  a 
legal  spirit,  or  more  dependent  upon  Jesus 
for  acceptance.  But  if  we  live  in  any  known 
sin,  or  allow  ourselves  in  the  customary 
omission  of  any  known  duty,  supposing  it 
possible  in  such  a case  to  preserve  a sense 
of  our  acceptance  (which  can  hardly  be  sup- 
posed ; for  if  the  spirit  be  grieved,  our  evi- 
dences decline  of  course)  yet  we  could  not 
be  easy.  If  a traveller  was  absolutely  sure 
of  reaching  his  journey’s  end  in  safety,  yet 
if  he  walked  with  a thorn  in  his  foot,  he 
must  take  every  step  in  pain.  Such  a thorn 
will  be  felt  in  the  conscience  till  we  are 
favoured  with  a simplicity  of  heart,  and  made 
willing  in  all  things,  great  or  small,  to  yield 
obedience  to  the  authority  of  the  Lord’s  pre- 
cepts, and  make  them  the  standing  rule  of 
our  conduct,  without  wilfully  admitting  a 
single  exception.  At  the  best,  we  shall  be 
conscious  of  innumerable  shortcomings,  and 
shameful  defilements ; but  these  things  will 
not  break  our  peace,  if  our  hearts  are  up- 
right. But  if  we  trifle  with  light,  and  con- 
nive at  what  we  know  to  be  wrong,  we  shall 
be  weak,  restless,  and  uncomfortable.  How 
many  who,  we  W'ould  hope,  are  the  children 
of  the  King,  are  lean  from  day  to  day,  be- 
cause some  right-hand  or  right-eye  evil, 
which  they  cannot  persuade  themselves  to 
part  with,  keeps  them  halting  between  two 
opinions!  and  they  arc  as  distant  from  happi- 
ness, as  they  are  from  tiic  possibility  of  re- 
conciling the  incompatible  services  of  God  and 
the  world.  But  happy  indeed  is  he  who  con- 
demneth  not  himself  in  that  thing  which  lie 
alloweth. 

Real  communion  with  the  Lord,  in  his  ap- 
pointed means  of  grace,  is  likewise  an  im- 
portant branch  of  this  blessedness.  They 
were  instituted  for  this  end,  and  are  suffi- 
cient, by  virtue  of  his  power  and  Spirit,  to 
answer  it.  I do  not  believe  this  enjoyment 
will  be  always  equal.  But  I believe  a com- 
fortable sense  of  it,  in  some  measure,  is  gene- 
rally attainable.  To  read  the  scriptures, 
not  as  an  attorney  may  read  a will,  merely 
to  know  the  sense,  but  as  the  heir  reads  it, 
as  a description  and  proof  of  his  interest;  to 
hear  the  gospel,  as  the  voice  of  our  Beloved, 
so  as  to  have  little  leisure  either  for  admir- 
ing the  abilities  or  censuring  the  defects 
of  the  preacher;  and.  in  prayer,  to  feel  a 
liberty  of  pouring  out  our  hearts  before  the 
Lord,  to  behold  some  glances  of  his  goodness 


232 

passing  before  us,  and  to  breathe  forth  before 
him  the  tempers  of  a child,  the  spirit  of  adop- 
tion ; — and  thus,  by  beholding  his  glory,  to 
be  conformed  more  and  more  to  his  image, 
and  to  renew  our  strength,  by  drawing  water 
out  of  the  wells  of  salvation:  Herein  is  bless- 
edness. They  who  have  tasted  it  can  say, 
it  is  good  for  me  to  draw  nigh  to  God.  The 
soal,  thus  refreshed  by  the  water  of  life,  is 
preserved  from  thirsting  after  the  vanities  of 
the  world,  thus  instructed  in  the  sanctuary, 
comes  down  from  the  mount  filled  with  hea- 
venly wisdom,  anointed  with  a holy  unction, 
and  therefore  qualified  to  judge,  speak,  and 
act  in  character,  in  all  the  relations  and  oc- 
casions of  secular  life.  In  this  way,  besides 
the  pleasure,  a spiritual  taste  is  acquired, 
something  analogous  to  the  meaning  of  the 
word  taste  when  applied  to  music  or  good 
breeding,  by  which  discords  and  impropri- 
eties are  observed  and  avoided,  as  it  were  by 
instinct,  and  what  is  right  is  felt  and  fol- 
lowed, not  so  much  by  the  force  of  rules,  as 
by  a habit  insensibly  acquired,  and  in  which 
the  substance  of  all  necessary  rules  are, 
if  I may  so  say,  digested.  O that  I knew 
more  of  this  blessedness,  and  more  of  its 
effects ! 

Another  branch  of  blessedness  is  a power 
of  reposing  ourselves  and  our  concerns  upon 
the  Lord’s  faithfulness  and  care,  and  may  be 
considered  in  two  respects.  A reliance  upon 
him  that  he  will  surely  provide  for  us,  guide 
us,  protect  us,  be  our  help  in  trouble,  our 
shield  in  danger;  so  that,  however  poor, 
weak,  and  defenceless  in  ourselves,  we  may 
rejoice  in  his  all-sufficiency  as  our  own : — 
and  farther,  in  consequence  of  this,  a peace- 
ful, humble  submission  to  his  will,  under  all 
events,  which,  upon  their  first  impression, 
are  contrary  to  our  own  views  and  desires. 
Surely,  in  a world  like  this,  where  every 
thing  is  uncertain,  where  we  are  exposed  to 
trials  on  every  hand,  and  know  not  but  a 
single  hour  may  bring  forth  something  pain- 
ful, yea  dreadful  to  our  natural  sensations, 
there  can  be  no  blessedness  but  so  far  as  we 
are  thus  enabled  to  entrust  and  resign  all  to 
the  direction  and  faithfulness  of  the  Lord 
our  Shepherd.  F or  want  of  more  of  this  spirit, 
multitudes  of  professing  Christians  perplex 
and  wound  themselves,  and  dishonour  their 
high  calling,  by  continual  anxieties,  alarms, 
*nd  complaints.  They  think  nothing  safe 
under  the  Lord’s  keeping,  unless  their  own 
eye  is  likewise  upon  it,  and  are  seldom  satis- 
fied with  any  of  his  dispensations ; for,  though 
he  gratify  their  desires  in  nine  instances,  a 
refusal  in  the  tenth  spoils  the  relish  of  all, 
and  they  show  the  truths  of  the  gospel  can 
afford  them  little  comfort,  if  self  is  crossed. 
But,  blessed  is  the  man  who  trusteth  in  the 
Lord,  and  whose  hope  the  Lord  is ! He 
shall  not  be  afraid  of  evil  tidings:  he  shall 
oe  kept  in  perfect  peace  though  the  earth 


[let.  XXIII. 

be  moved,  and  the  mountains  cast  into  the 
midst  of  the  sea. 

The  paper  admonishes  me  it  is  time  to  re- 
lieve your  Lordship.  And  I have  not  rooia 
to  detain  you  long  upon  the  fifth  particular. 
It  belongs  to  a believer’s  blessedness  to  feel 
his  spirit  cheerful  and  active  for  the  Lord’s 
service  in  the  world.  For  to  what  other  end 
should  he  wish  to  live  ) If  he  thought  of 
himself  only,  it  would  be  better  to  depart  and 
be  with  Jesus  immediately.  But  lie  Is  a debtor 
to  his  grace  and  love ; and,  though  strictly 
he  can  make  no  returns,  yet  he  longs  to  show 
his  thankfulness;  and,  if  the  Lord  give  him  a 
heart  to  redeem  his  time,  to  devote  his  strength 
and  influence,  and  lay  himself  out  for  his  ser- 
vice,— that  he  may  be  instrumental  in  pro- 
moting his  cause,  in  comforting  his  people, 
— or  enable  him  to  let  his  light  shine  before 
men,  that  his  God  and  his  Father  may  be 
honoured ; — he  will  account  it  blessedness. 
This  is  indeed  the  great  end  of  life,  and  he 
knows  it  will  evidently  appear  so  at  the  ap- 
proach of  death,  and  therefore,  while  others 
are  cumbered  about  many  things,  he  esteems 
this  the  one  thing  needful. — I remain,  my 
Lord,  &.c. 


LETTER  XXIII. 

July  — 1776. 

my  lord, — That  I may  not  weary  you  by 
a preamble,  I oblige  myself  to  take  the  turn 
of  my  letter  from  some  passage  of  scripture  , 
and  I fix  upon  that  which  just  now  occurred 
to  my  thoughts,  a clause  in  that  pattern  of 
prayer,  which  he  who  best  knows  our  state 
has  been  pleased  to  leave  for  the  instruction 
of  his  people,  in  their  great  concern  of  wait- 
ing at  his  throne  of  grace,  Matt.  vi.  13. 
“ Lead  us  not  into  temptation.”  This  peti- 
tion is  seasonable  at  all  times,  and  to  all  per- 
sons who  have  any  right  knowledge  of  them- 
selves, or  their  spiritual  calling. 

The  word  temptation,  taken  at  large,  in- 
cludes every  kind  of  trial.  To  tempt  is  to  try 
or  prove.  In  this  sense,  it  is  said,  the  Lord 
tempted  Abraham,  that  is,  he  tried  him ; for 
God  cannot  tempt  to  evil.  He  proposed 
such  an  act  of  obedience  to  him,  as  was  a 
test  of  his  faith,  love,  dependence,  and  in- 
tegrity. Thus,  all  our  afflictions,  under  his 
gracious  management,  are  appointed  to  prove, 
manifest,  exercise,  and  purify  the  graces  of  his 
children.  And  not  afflictions  only ; prosperity 
likewise  is  a state  of  temptation  ; and  many 
who  have  endured  sharp  sufferings,  and  came 
off  honourably,  have  been  afterwards  greatly 
hurt  and  ensnared  by  prosperity.  To  this 
purpose  the  histories  of  David  and  Hezekiah 
are  in  point.  But  by  temptation  we  more 
frequently  understand  the  wiles  and  forco 
which  Satan  employs  in  assaulting  our  peace 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


233 


LET.  XXIII.] 

or  spreading  snares  for  our  feet.  He  is  al- 
ways practising  against  us,  either  directly  and 
from  himself,  by  the  access  he  has  to  our 
hearts,  or  mediately,  by  the  influence  he  has 
over  the  men  and  the  things  of  this  world. 
The  words  which  follow  confirm  this  sense, 
— “ Lead  us  not  into  temptation;  but  deliver 
us  from  evil,”  U7T0  TO U TTOVqgQV)  from  the  evil  one , 
as  it  might  be  properly  rendered  here,  and 
in  1 John  v.  19.  The  subtilty  and  power  of 
this  adversary  are  very  great : he  is  an  over- 
match for  us ; and  we  have  no  hope  of  safety 
but  in  the  Lord’s  protection.  Satan’s  action 
upon  the  heart  may  be  illustrated  by  the  ac- 
tion of  the  wind  upon  the  sea.  The  sea 
sometimes  appears  smooth,  but  it  is  always 
disposed  to  swell  and  rage,  and  to  obey  the 
impulse  of  every  storm.  Thus  the  heart  may 
be  sometimes  quiet ; but  the  wind  of  tempta- 
tion will  awaken  and  rouse  it  in  a moment: 
for  it  is  essential  to  our  depraved  nature  to 
be  unstable  and  yielding  as  the  water ; and 
when  it  is  under  the  impression  of  the  ene- 
my, its  violence  can  only  be  controlled  by 
him  who  says  to  the  raging  sea,  “ Be  still ; 
here  shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed.”  The 
branches  of  temptation  are  almost  innume- 
rable ; but  the  principal  may  be  reduced  to 
the  several  faculties  of  the  soul  (as  we  com- 
monly speak)  to  which  they  are  more  directly 
suited. 

He  has  temptations  for  the  understanding. 
He  can  blind  the  mind  with  prejudices  and 
false  reasonings,  and  ply  it  with  arguments 
for  infidelity,  till  the  most  obvious  truths  be- 
come questionable.  Even  where  the  gospel 
has  been  received,  he  can  insinuate  error, 
which,  for  the  suddenness  and  malignity  of  its 
effects,  may  be  properly  compared  to  poison. 
A healthy  man  may  be  poisoned  in  a mo- 
ment; and,  if  he  be,  the  baneful  drug  is  usu- 
ally mixed  with  his  food.  Many,  who  for  a 
while  seemed  to  be  sound  in  the  faith,  have 
had  their  judgments  strongly  and  strangely 
perverted,  and  prevailed  upon  to  renounce  and 
oppose  the  truths  they  once  prized  and  de- 
fended. Such  instances  are  striking  proofs 
of  human  weakness,  and  loud  calls  to  watch- 
fulness and  dependence,  and  to  beware  of 
leaning  to  our  own  understandings.  For 
these  purposes  he  employs  both  preachers 
and  authors,  who,  by  fine  words  and  fair 
speeches  beguile  the  hearts  of  the  unwary. 
And,  by  his  immediate  influence  upon  the 
mind,  he  is  able,  if  the  Lord  permits  him,  to 
entangle  those  who  are  providentially  placed 
out  of  the  reach  of  corrupt  and  designing 
men. 

He  tempts  the  conscience.  By  working 
upon  the  unbelief  of  our  hearts,  and  darken- 
ing the  glory  of  the  gospel,  he  can  hold  down 
the  soul  to  the  number,  weight,  and  aggrava- 
tion of  its  sins,  so  that  it  shall  not  be  able  to 
look  up  to  Jesus,  nor  draw  any  comfort  from 
his  blood,  promises,  and  grace.  How  many 
2 G 


go  burdened  in  this  maimer,  seeking  relief 
from  duties,  and  perhaps  spending  their 
strength  in  things  not  commanded,  though 
they  hear,  and  perhaps  acknowledge  the  gos- 
pel] Nor  are  the  wisest  and  most  established 
able  to  withstand  his  assaults,  if  the  Lord  with- 
draw, and  give  him  leave  to  employ  his  power 
and  subtilty  unrestrained.  The  gospel  af- 
fords sufficient  ground  for  an  abiding  assur- 
anceofhope;  nor  should  we  rest  satisfied  with- 
out it.  However,  the  possession  and  preserv- 
ation of  this  privilege  depends  upon  the 
Lord’s  presence  with  the  soul,  and  his  shield- 
ing us  from  Satan’s  attacks ; for  I am  per- 
suaded he  is  able  to  sift  and  shake  the  strong- 
est believer  upon  earth. 

He  has  likewise  temptations  suited  to  the 
will.  Jesus  makes  his  people  willing  in  the 
day  of  his  power ; yet  there  is  a contrary  prin- 
ciple remaining  with  them,  of  which  Satan 
knows  how  to  avail  himself.  There  are  occa- 
sions in  which  he  almost  prevails  to  set  self 
again  upon  the  throne,  as  Dagon  was  raised 
after  he  had  fallen  before  the  ark.  How  else 
should  any  who  have  tasted  that  the  Lord  is 
gracious,  give  way  to  a repining  spirit,  ac- 
count his  dispensations  hard,  or  his  precepts 
too  strict,  so  as  to  shrink  from  their  observ- 
ance through  the  fear  of  men,  or  a regard  to 
their  worldly  interest  1 

Farther,  he  has  snares  for  the  affections. 
In  managing  these,  he  gains  a great  advan- 
tage from  our  situation  in  a world  that  knows 
not  God.  The  scriptures  give  Satan  the 
title  of  god  of  this  world ; and  believers  learn, 
by  painful  experience,  how  great  his  power 
is  in  and  over  the  persons  and  things  of  it. 
So  that  to  be  stedfast  in  wisdom’s  ways,  re- 
quires unremitted  efforts,  like  pressing 
through  a crowd,  or  swimming  against  a 
stream.  How  hard  is  it  to  live  in  the  midst 
of  pitch  and  not  to  be  defiled  I The  air  of 
the  world  is  infectious.  Our  business  and 
unavoidable  connections  are  so  interwoven 
with  occasions  of  sin,  and  there  is  so  much 
in  our  hearts  suited  to  them,  that  unless  we 
are  incessantly  upheld  by  almighty  strength, 
we  cannot  stand  a day  or  an  hour.  Past 
victories  afford  us  no  greater  security  than 
they  did  Samson,  who  was  shamefully  sur- 
prised by  enemies  whom  he  had  formerly 
conquered.  Nor  are  we  only  tempted  Fry 
compliances  that  are  evil  in  themselves.  With 
respect  to  these,  perhaps,  conscience  may  be 
awake,  and  we  stand  upon  our  guard ; but 
we  are  still  upon  Satan’s  ground,  and  while 
he  may  seem  to  allow  himself  defeated,  lie 
can  dexterously  change  his  method,  and  come 
upon  us  where  we  do  not  suspect  him ; for, 
perimus  in  licitis ; perhaps  our  greatest  dan- 
ger arises  from  things  in  themselves  lawful. 
He  can  tempt  us  by  our  nearest  and  dearest 
friend,  and  pervert  every  blessing  of  a kind 
providence  into  an  occasion  of  drawing  our 
hearts  from  the  Giver ; yea  spiritual  blessings, 


234 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


gifts,  comforts,  and  even  graces,  are  some- 
times the  engines  by  which  he  practises 
against  us,  to  till  us  with  vain  confidence  and 
self-sufficiency,  or  to  lull  us  into  formality 
and  indolence. 

That  wonderful  power  which  we  call  the 
imagination,  is  I suppose  rather  the  medium 
of  the  soul’s  perceptions  during  its  present 
state  of  union  with  the  body,  than  a spiritual 
faculty,  strictly  speaking ; but  it  partakes 
largely  of  that  depravity  which  sin  has  brought 
upon  our  whole  frame,  and  affords  Satan  an 
avenue  for  assaulting  us  with  the  most  terri- 
fying, if  not  the  most  dangerous  of  his  tempt- 
ations. At  the  best,  we  have  but  an  indif- 
ferent command  over  it.  We  cannot,  by  an 
act  of  our  own  will,  exclude  a thousand  pain- 
ful, wild,  inconsistent,  and  hurtful  ideas,  which 
are  ever  ready  to  obtrude  themseives  upon  our 
minds;  and  a slight  alteration  in  the  animal 
system,  in  the  motion  of  the  blood  or  nervous 
spirit,  is  sufficient  to  withdraw  it  wholly  from 
cur  dominion,  and  to  leave  us  like  a city  with- 
out walls  or  gates,  exposed  to  the  incursion 
of  our  enemy.  We  are  fearfully  and  won- 
derfully made ; and,  with  all  our  boasted 
knowledge  of  other  things,  can  form  no  con- 
ception of  what  is  so  vastly  interesting  to  us, 
the  mysterious  connection  between  soul  and 
body : and  the  manner  in  which  they  are  mu- 
tually affected  by  each  other.  The  effects  we 
too  sensibly  feel.  The  wisest  of  men  would 
be  accounted  fools  or  mad,  were  they  to  ex- 
press in  words  a small  part  of  what  passes 
within  them ; and  it  would  appear  that  much 
of  the  soberest  life  is  little  better  than  a wak- 
ing dream ; but  how  dreadful  are  the  conse- 
quences when  the  Lord  permits  some  hidden 
pin  in  the  human  machine  to  be  altered  ! Im- 
mediately a door  flies  open,  which  no  hand  but 
his  can  shut,  and  the  enemy  pours  in,  like  a 
flood,  falsehood  and  horror,  and  the  blackness 
of  darkness ; the  judgment  is  borne  down  and 
disabled,  and  the  most  distressing  illusions 
seize  us  with  all  the  apparent  force  of  evidence 
and  demonstration.  When  this  is  the  case  in 
a certain  degree,  we  call  it  distraction ; but 
there  are  various  degrees  of  it,  which  leave  a 
person  in  the  possession  of  his  senses  as  to  the 
things  of  common  life,  and  yet  are  sufficient, 
with  respect  to  his  spiritual  concerns,  to  shake 
the  very  foundations  of  his  hope,  and  deprive 
him  of  aii  peace  and  comfort,  and  make  him  a 
terror  to  himself.  All  the  Lord's  people  are 
not  called  to  navigate  in  these  deep  waters  of 
soul  distress ; but  all  are  liable.  Ah  ! if  we 
knew  what  some  suffer,  the  horrifnlia  de  Deo , 
and  the  terribilia  de  fide,  which  excruciate 
the  minds  of  those  over  whom  Satan  is  per- 
mitted to  tyrannize  in  this  way,  surely  we 
should  be  more  earnest  and  frequent  in  pray- 
ing, “Lead  us  not  into  temptation.”  From 
some  little  sense  I have  of  the  malice  and 
suotilty  of  our  spiritual  enemies,  and  the 
weakness  of  those  barriers  which  we  have  to 


[let.  xxiii. 

prevent  their  assaults,  I am  fully  persuaded 
that  nothing  less  than  the  continual  exertion 
of  that  almighty  power  which  preserves  the 
stars  in  their  orbits,  can  maintain  our  peace 
of  mind  for  an  hour  or  a minute.  In  this 
view,  all  comparative  difference  in  external 
; situations  seems  to  be  annihilated ; for,  as  the 
Lord’s  presence  can  make  his  people  happy 
in  a dungeon,  so  there  are  temptations  which, 
if  we  felt  them,  would  instantly  render  us 
incapable  of  receiving  a moment’s  satisfaction 
from  an  assemblage  of  all  earthly  blessings 
and  make  the  company  of  our  dearest  friends 
! tasteless,  if  not  insupportable. 

! Ah!  how  little  do  the  gay  and  the  busy 
think  of  these  things ! How  little  indeed 
do  they  think  of  them  who  profess  to  believe 
| them  ! How  faint  is  the  sense  of  our  obli- 
i gations  to  him,  who  freely  submitted  to  the 
I fiercest  onsets  of  the  powers  of  darkness,  to 
free  us  from  the  punishment  due  to  our  sins ! 
otherwise  we  must  have  been  for  ever  shut 
up  with  those  miserable  and  merciless  spirits 
who  delight  in  our  torment,  and  who,  even 
in  the  present  state,  if  they  get  access  to  our 
minds,  can  make  our  existence  a burden. 

But  our  Lord,  who  knows  and  considers 
our  weakness,  of  which  we  are  so  little 
aware,  allows  and  directs  us  to  pray,  “ Lead 
us  not  into  temptation.”  We  are  not  to  ex- 
pect an  absolute  freedom  from  temptation ; 
we  are  called  to  be  soldiers,  and  must  some- 
times meet  with  enemies,  and  perhaps  with 
wounds ; yet,  considering  this  prayer  as  pro- 
vided by  him  who  knows  what  we  are,  and 
where  we  are,  it  may  afford  us  both  instruc- 
tion and  consolation. 

It  calls  to  a constant  reflection  upon  our 
own  weakness.  Believers,  especially  young 
ones,  are  prone  to  rest  too  much  in  grace  re- 
ceived. They  feel  their  hearts  warm,  and, 
like  Peter,  are  ready  to  please  themselves 
with  thinking  how  they  would  act  in  such 
or  such  a state  of  trial.  It  is  as  if  the  Lord 
had  said,  “ Poor  worms,  be  not  high  minded ; 
but  fear;  and  pray,  that  if  it  may  be,  you 
may  be  kept  from  learning,  by  bitter  experi- 
ence how  weak  your  supposed  strength  is.’' 
It  sweetly  intimates,  that  all  our  ways,  and 
all  our  enemies,  are  in  the  hands  of  our  great 
Shepherd.  He  knows  our  path.  We  are 
short-sighted,  and  cannot  tell  what  an  hour 
may  bring  forth ; but  we  are  under  his  pro- 
tection, and,  if  we  depend  upon  him,  we 
need  not  be  anxiously  afraid.  He  will  be 
faithful  to  the  trust  we  repose  in  him,  and 
will  suffer  no  temptation  to  overtake  us,  but 
what  he  will  support  us  under  and  bring  us 
through.  But  it  becomes  us  to  beware  of 
security  and  presumption,  to  keep  our  eyes 
upon  him,  and  not  to  think  ourselves  safe  a 
moment  longer  than  our  spirits  feel  and 
breathe  the  meaning  of  this  petition. 

It  implies,  likewise,  the  duty  of  watchful- 
ness on  our  part,  as  our  Lord  joins  them  else- 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


235 


LET.  XXIV.] 

where,  “Watch  and  pray.”  If  we  desire 
not  to  be  led  into  temptation,  surely  we  are 
not  to  run  into  it.  If  we  wish  to  be  pre- 
served from  error,  we  are  to  guard  against 
a curious  and  reasoning  spirit.  If  we  would 
preserve  peace  of  conscience,  we  must  be- 
ware of  trifling  with  the  light  and  motions 
of  the  Holy  Spirit;  for  without  his  assistance 
we  cannot  maintain  faith  in  exercise.  If  we 
would  not  be  ensnared  by  the  men  of  the 
world,  we  are  to  keep  at  a proper  distance 
from  them.  The  less  we  have  to  do  with 
them,  the  better,  excepting  so  far  as  the  pro- 
vidence of  God  makes  it  our  duty  in  the  dis- 
charge of  our  callings  and  relations,  and 
taking  opportunities  of  doing  them  good. 
And  though  we  cannot  wholly  shut  Satan  out 
of  our  imaginations,  we  should  be  cautious 
that  we  do  not  wilfully  provide  fuel  for  his 
flame ; but  entreat  the  Lord  to  set  a watch 
upon  our  eyes  and  our  ears,  and  to  teach  us 
to  reject  the  first  motions  and  the  smallest 
appearance  of  e vil. 

I have  been  so  intent  upon  my  subject, 
that  I have  once  and  again  forgot  I was  writ- 
ing to  your  Lordship,  otherwise  I should  not 
have  let  my  lucubration  run  to  so  great  a 
length,  which  I certainly  did  not  intend  when 
I began.  I shall  not  add  to  this  fault,  by 
making  an  apology.  I have  touched  upon  a 
topic  of  great  importance  to  myself.  I am 
one  among  many  who  have  suffered  greatly 
_for  want  of  paying  more  attention  to  my 
need  of  this  prayer.  O that  I could  be  wiser 
hereafter,  and  always  act  and  speak  as  know- 
ing that  I am  always  upon  a field  of  battle, 
and  beset  by  legions ! — I am,  with  great  re- 
spect, &c. 


LETTER  XXIY. 

September  — 1776. 

my  lord, — Without  any  preamble,  I pur- 
pose now  to  wait  on  your  Lordship,  with  a 
few  thoughts  on  the  meaning  of  that  name 
which  first  obtained  at  Antioch ; in  other 
words,  what  it  is  to  be  a Christian  1 What 
are  the  effects  which,  making  allowance  for 
;he  unavoidable  infirmities  attending  upon 
the  present  state  of  mortality,  may  be  ex- 
pected from  a real  experimental  knowledge 
of  the  gospel  1 I would  not  insinuate  that 
none  are  Christians  who  do  not  come  up  to 
the  character  I would  describe ; for  then  I 
fear  I should  unchristian  myself;  but  only  to 
consider  what  the  scriptures  encourage  us  to 
aim  at,  as  the  prize  of  cur  high  calling  in 
this  life.  It  is  generally  allowed  and  la- 
mented, that  we  are  too  apt  to  live  below 
our  privileges,  and  to  stop  short  of  what  the 
spirit  and  the  promises  of  the  gospel  point 
out  to  us  as  attainable. 

Mr.  Pope’s  admired  line,  “An  honest  man’s 


the  noblest  work  of  God,”  may  be  admitted 
as  a truth  when  rightly  explained.  A Chris- 
tian is  the  noblest  work  of  God  in  this  visi- 
ble world,  and  bears  a much  brighter  im- 
pression of  his  glory  and  goodness  than  the 
sun  in  the  firmament;  and  none  but  a Chris- 
tian can  be  strictly  and  properly  honest:  all 
others  are  too  much  under  the  power  of  self, 
to  do  universally  to  others  as  they  would 
others  should  do  unto  them ; and  nothing  but 
a uniform  conduct  upon  this  principle  de- 
serves the  name  of  honesty. 

The  Christian  is  a new  creature,  born  and 
taught  from  above.  He  has  been  convinced 
of  his  guilt  and  misery  as  a sinner,  has  fled 
for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  him,  1ms 
seen  the  Son,  and  believed  on  him.  His 
natural  prejudices  against  the  glory  and 
grace  of  God’s  salvation  have  been  subdued 
and  silenced  by  almighty  power : he  has  ac- 
cepted the  Beloved,  and  is  made  acceptable 
in  him.  He  now  knows  the  Lord : he  has 
renounced  the  confused,  distant,  and  uncom- 
fortable notions  he  once  formed  of  God ; and 
beholds  him  in  Christ,  who  is  the  way,  the 
truth,  and  the  life,  the  only  door  by  which 
we  can  enter  to  any  true  satisfying  know- 
ledge of  God,  or  communion  with  him.  But 
he  sees  God  in  Christ  reconciled,  a Father, 
a Saviour,  and  a Friend,  who  has  freely  for- 
given him  all  his  sins,  and  given  him  the 
spirit  of  adoption.  He  is  now  no  longer  a 
servant,  much  less  a stranger,  but  a son ; and 
because  a son  an  heir,  already  interested  in 
all  the  promises,  admitted  to  the  throne  ot 
grace,  and  an  assured  expectant  of  eternal 
glory.  The  gospel  is  designed  to  give  us 
not  only  a perad venture  or  a probability,  but 
a certainty,  both  of  our  acceptance  and  our 
perseverance,  till  death  shall  be  swallowed 
up  in  life.  And  though  many  are  sadly 
fluctuating  and  perplexed  upon  this  head, 
and  perhaps  all  are  so  for  a season,  yet  there 
are  those  who  can  say,  we  know  that  we  are 
of  God ; and  therefore  they  are  stedfast  and 
immoveable  in  his  way,  because  they  are 
confident  that  their  labour  shall  not  be  in 
vain,  but  that,  when  they  shall  be  absent 
from  the  body,  they  shall  be  present  with  the 
Lord.  This  is  the  state  of  the  advanced  ex- 
perienced Christian,  who,  being  enabled  to 
make  his  profession  the  chief  business  of  his 
life,  is  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power 
of  his  might.  Every  one  who  has  this  hope 
in  Christ,  purifieth  himself  even  as  he  is 
pure.  I would  now  attempt  a sketch  of  the 
Christian’s  temper,  formed  upon  these  princi- 
ples and  hopes,  under  the  leading  branches 
of  its  exercises,  respecting  God,  himselfi 
and  his  fellow-creatures. 

The  Christian’s  temper  God-ward  is  evi- 
denced by  humility.  lie  has  received  from 
Gethsemane  and  Golgotha  such  a sense  of 
the  evil  of  sin,  and  of  the  holiness  of  God, 
combined  with  his  matchless  love  to  sinners, 


236 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


as  has  deeply  penetrated  his  heart : he  has 
an  affecting*  remembrance  of  the  state  of  re- 
bellion and  enmity  in  which  he  once  lived 
against  this  holy  and  good  God ; and  he  has 
a quick  perception  of  the  defilements  and  de- 
fects which  still  debase  his  best  services. 
His  mouth  is  therefore  stopped  as  to  boast- 
ing ; he  is  vile  in  his  own  eyes,  and  is  filled 
with  wonder  that  the  Lord  should  visit  such 
a sinner  with  such  a salvation.  He  sees  so 
vast  a disproportion  between  the  obligations 
he  is  under  to  grace,  and  the  returns  he 
makes,  that  he  is  disposed,  yea  constrained, 
to  adopt  the  apostle’s  words  without  affecta- 
tion, and  to  account  himself  less  than  the 
least  of  all  saints;  and  knowing  his  own 
heart,  while  he  sees  only  the  outside  of 
others,  he  is  not  easily  persuaded  there  can 
be  a believer  upon  earth  so  faint,  so  unfruit- 
ful, so  unworthy  as  himself.  Yet,  though 
abased,  he  is  not  discouraged,  for  he  enjoys 
peace.  The  dignity,  offices,  blood,  righteous- 
ness, faithfulness,  and  compassion  of  the  Re- 
deemer, in  whom  he  rests,  trusts,  and  lives, 
for  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and 
redemption,  are  adequate  to  all  his  wants  and 
wishes,  provide  him  with  an  answer  to 
every  objection,  and  give  him  no  less  confi- 
dence in  God,  than  if  he  were  sinless  as  an 
angel : for  he  sees,  that  though  sin  has 
abounded  in  him,  grace  has  much  more 
abounded  in  Jesus.  With  respect  to  the 
past  all  things  are  become  new;  with  re- 
spect to  the  present  and  future,  he  leans 
upon  an  almighty  arm,  and  relies  upon  the 
word  and  power  which  made  and  upholds  the 
heavens  and  the  earth.  Though  he  feels 
himself  unworthy  of  the  smallest  mercies, 
he  claims  and  expects  the  greatest  blessings 
that  God  can  bestow ; and  being  rooted  and 
grounded  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of 
Christ,  his  peace  abides,  and  is  not  greatly 
affected,  either  by  the  variation  of  his  own 
frames,  or  the  changes  of  God’s  dispensations 
towards  him  while  here.  With  such  a sense 
of  himself,  such  a heartfelt  peace  and  hea- 
venly hope,  how  can  his  spirit  but  breathe 
love  to  his  God  and  Saviour  '.1  It  is  indeed 
the  perfection  of  his  character  and  happiness, 
that  his  soul  is  united  by  love  to  the  chief 
good.  The  love  of  Christ  is  the  joy  of  his 
heart,  and  the  spring  of  his  obedience.  With 
his  Saviour’s  presence,  he  finds  a heaven 
begun  upon  earth ; and  without  it,  all  the 
other  glories  of  the  heavenly  state  would  not 
content  him.  The  excellence  of  Christ,  his 
love  to  sinners,  especially  his  dying  love ; his 
love  to  himself  in  seeking  and  saving  him 
when  lost,  saving  him  to  the  utmost — But  I 
must  stop. — Your  Lordship  can  better  con- 
ceive than  I can  describe,  how  and  why  Je- 
sus is  dear  to  the  heart  that  knows  him. 
That  part  of  the  Christian’s  life  which  is  not 
employed  in  the  active  service  of  his  Lord, 


[let.  xxiv. 

is  chiefly  spent  in  seeking  and  maintaining 
communion  with  him.  For  this  he  plies  the 
throne  and  studies  the  word  of  grace,  and 
frequents  the  ordinances,  where  the  Lord 
has  promised  to  meet  with  his  people.  These 
are  his  golden  hours;  and  when  thus  em- 
ployed, how  poor  and  trivial  does  all  that  the 
world  calls  great  and  important  appear  in  his 
eyes  ! Yea,  he  is  solicitous  to  keep  up  an  in- 
tercourse of  heart  with  his  Beloved  in  his 
busiest  scenes ; and  so  far  as  he  can  succeed, 
it  alleviates  all  his  labours,  and  sweetens  al. 
his  troubles.  And  when  he  is  neither  com- 
muning with  his  Lord,  nor  acting  for  him 
he  accounts  his  time  lost,  and  is  ashamec 
and  grieved.  The  truth  of  his  love  is  mam 
fested  by  submission.  This  is  twofold  and 
absolute,  and  without  reserve  in  each.  He 
submits  to  his  revealed  will,  as  made  knowr 
to  him  by  precept  and  by  his  own  example. 
He  aims  to  tread  in  all  his  Saviour’s  foot- 
steps, and  makes  conscience  of  all  his  com- 
mandments, without  exception  and  without 
hesitation.  Again,  he  submits  to  his  provi- 
dential will : he  yields  to  his  sovereignty,  ac- 
quiesces in  his  wisdom ; he  knows  he  has  no 
right  to  complain  of  any  thing,  because  he  is 
a sinner ; and  he  has  no  reason,  because  he 
is  sure  the  Lord  does  all  things  well.  There- 
fore this  submission  is  not  forced,  but  is  an  act 
of  trust.  He  knows  he  is  not  more  unworthy 
than  he  is  unabled  to  choose  for  himself,  and 
therefore  rejoices  that  the  Lord  has  under- 
taken to  manage  for  him  ; and  were  he  com- 
pelled to  make  his  own  choice,  ke  could 
only  choose,  that  all  his  concerns  should  re- 
main in  that  hand  to  which  he  has  already 
committed  them.  And  thus  he  judges  of 
public  as  well  as  of  his  personal  affairs.  He 
cannot  be  an  unaffected  spectator  of  national 
sins,  nor  without  apprehension  of  their  de- 
served consequences.  He  feels,  and  almost 
trembles  for  others,  but  he  himself  dwells 
under  the  shadow  of  the  Almighty,  in  a 
sanctuary  that  cannot  be  forced ; and  there- 
fore, should  he  see  the  earth  shaken,  and  the 
mountains  cast  into  the  midst  of  the  sea,  his 
heart  would  not  be  greatly  moved,  for  God  is 
his  refuge.  The  Lord  reigns.  He  sees  his 
Saviour’s  hands  directing  every  dark  appear- 
ance, and  over-ruling  all  to  the  accomplish- 
ment of  his  own  great  purposes ; this  satisfies 
him,  and  though  the  winds  and  waves  should 
be  high,  he  can  venture  his  own  little  bark 
in  the  storm,  for  he  has  an  infallible  and  al- 
mighty pilot  on  board  with  him.  And  in- 
deed, why  should  he  fear  when  he  has  no- 
thing to  lose  1 His  best  concerns  are  safe ; 
and  other  things  he  holds  as  gifts  from  his 
Lord,  to  whose  call  he  is  ready  to  resign 
them,  in  whatever  way  he  pleases;  well 
knowing,  that  creatures  and  instruments 
cannot  of  themselves  touch  a hair  of  his 
head  without  his  Lord’s  permission,  and  that 


LET.  XXIV.] 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


237 


if  he  dees  permit  them,  it  must  be  for  the 
best. 

I might  enlarge  farther. — But  I shall  pro- 
ceed to  consider  the  Christian’s  temper  res- 
pecting himself.  He  lives  godly  and  soberly. 
Bv  sobriety  we  mean  more  than  that  he  is 
not  a drunkard ; his  tempers  towards  God  of 
course  form  hirn  to  a moderation  in  all  tempo- 
ral things.  He  is  not  scrupulous  or  supersti- 
tious ; he  understands  the  liberty  of  the  gos- 
pel, that  every  creature  of  God  is  good  if  it 
be  received  with  thanksgiving.  He  does  not 
aim  at  being  needlessly  singular,  nor  practise 
self-devised  austerities.  The  Christian  is  nei- 
ther a Stoic  nor  a Cynic;  yet  he  finds  daily 
cause  for  watchfulness  and  restraint.  Satan 
will  not  often  tempt  a believer  to  gross  crimes: 
our  greatest  snares  and  sorest  conflicts  are 
usually  found  in  things  lawful  in  themselves, 
but  hurtful  to  us  by  their  abuse,  engrossing 
too  much  of  our  time,  or  of  our  hearts,  or 
somehow  indisposing  us  for  communion  with 
the  Lord.  The  Christian  will  be  jealous  of 
any  thing  that  might  entangle  his  affections, 
damp  his  zeal,  or  straiten  him  in  his  opportu- 
nities of  serving  his  Saviour.  He  is  likewise 
content  with  his  situation,  because  the  Lord 
chooses  it  for  him  ; his  spirit  is  not  eager  for 
additions  and  alterations  in  his  circumstances. 
If  divine  providence  points  out  and  leads  to  a 
change,  he  is  ready  to  follow,  though  it  should  i 
be  what  the  world  would  call  from  a better  to  !■ 
a worse ; for  he  is  a pilgrim  and  a stranger 
here,  and  a citizen  of  heaven.  As  people 
of  fortune  sometimes,  in  travelling,  submit 
cheerfully  to  inconvenient  accommodations, 
very  different  from  their  homes,  and  comfort 
themselves  with  thinking  they  are  not  always 
to  live  so ; so  the  Christian  is  not  greatly  soli- 
citous about  externals.  If  he  has  them,  he 
will  use  them  moderately.  If  he  has  but  little 
of  them,  he  can  make  a good  shift  without 
them  : he  is  but  upon  a journey,  and  will  soon 
be  at  home.  If  he  be  rich,  experience  con- 
firms our  Lord’s  words,  Luke  xii.  15;  and 
satisfies  him,  that  a large  room,  a crowd  of 
servants,  and  twenty  dishes  upon  his  table, 
add  nothing  to  the  real  happiness  of  life. 
Therefore  he  will  not  have  his  heart  set  upon 
such  things.  If  he  be  in  a humbler  state,  he 
is  more  disposed  to  pity  than  to  envy  those 
above  him ; for  he  judges  they  must  have 
many  incumbrances  from  which  he  is  freed. 
However,  the  will  of  God,  and  the  light  of 
his  countenance,  are  the  chief  things  the 
Christian,  whether  rich  or  poor,  regards;  and 
therefore  his  moderation  is  made  known  unto 
all  men. 

A third  branch  of  the  Christian’s  temper 
respects  his  fellow-creatures.  And  here,  me- 
thinks,  if  I had  not  filled  a sheet  already,  I 
could  enlarge  with  pleasure.  We  have  in 
this  degenerate  day,  among  those  who  claim 
and  are  allowed  the  name  of  Christian,  too 


many  of  a narrow,  selfish,  mercenary  spirit : 
but  in  the  beginning’  it  was  not  so.  The 
gospel  is  designed  to  cure  such  a spirit,  but 
gives  no  indulgence  to  it.  A Christian  has 
the  mind  of  Christ,  who  went  about  doing 
good,  who  makes  his  sun  to  shine  upon  the 
good  and  the  evil,  and  sendeth  rain  cn  the 
just  and  the  unjust.  His  Lord's  example 
forms  him  to  the  habit  of  diffusive  benevo- 
lence; he  breathes  a spirit  of  gcod  will  to 
mankind,  and  rejoices  in  every  opportunity 
of  being  useful  to  the  souls  and  bodies  of 
others,  without  respect  to  parties  or  interests. 
He  commiserates,  and  would  if  possible  alle- 
viate the  miseries  of  all  around  him  ; and  if 
his  actual  services  are  restrained  by  want;  of 
ability,  yet  all  share  in  his  sympathy  and 
prayers.  Acting  in  the  spirit  of  his  Master, 
he  frequently  meets  with  a measure  of  the 
like  treatment : but  if  his  good  is  requited 
with  evil,  he  labours  to  overcome  evil  with 
good.  He  feels  himself  a sinner,  and  needs 
much  forgiveness : this  makes  him  ready  to 
forgive.  He  is  not  haughty,  captious,  easily 
offended,  or  hard  to  be  reconciled ; for  at  the 
feet  of  Jesus  he  has  learned  meekness.  And 
when  he  meets  with  unkindness  or  injustice, 
he  considers,  that  though  he  has  not  deserved, 
such  things  from  men,  they  are  instruments 
employed  by  his  heavenly  Father  (from  whom 
he  has  deserved  to  suffer  much  more,)  for 
his  humiliation  and  chastisement;  and  is 
therefore  more  concerned  for  their  sins  than 
for  his  own  sufferings,  and  prays,  after  the 
pattern  of  his  Saviour,  “Father,  forgivethem, 
for  they  know  not  what  they  do.”  He 
knows  he  is  fallible ; therefore  cannot  be 
positive.  He  knows  he  is  frail ; and  there- 
fore dares  not  be  censorious.  As  a member 
of  society,  he  is  just,  punctual  in  the  dis- 
charge of  every  relative  duty,  faithful  to  his 
engagements  and  promises,  rendering  to  all 
their  dues,  obedient  to  lawful  authority,  and 
acting  to  all  men  according  to  the  golden 
rule,  of  doing  as  he  would  be  done  by.  His 
conduct  is  simple,  devoid  of  artifice,  and  con- 
sistent, attending  to  every  branch  of  duty; 
and  in  the  closet,  the  family,  the  church,  and 
the  transactions  of  common  life,  he  is  the 
same  man ; for  in  every  circumstance  he 
serves  the  Lord,  and  aims  to  maintain  a con- 
science void  of  offence  in  his  sight.  No 
small  part  of  the  beauty  of  his  profession  in 
the  sight  of  men,  consists  in  the  due  govern- 
ment of  his  tongue.  The  law  of  truth,  and 
kindness,  and  purity,  is  upon  his  lips.  He 
abhors  lying;  and  is  so  far  from  inventing  a. 
slander,  that  he  will  not  repeat  a report  to 
the  disadvantage  of  his  neighbour,  however 
true,  without  a proper  call.  His  converse  is 
cheerful,  but  inoffensive;  and  he  will  no  more 
wound  another  with  his  wit  (if  he  has  a ta- 
lent that  way)  than  with  a knife.  His 
speech  is  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt, 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


233 


[let.  XXV. 


and  suited  to  promote  the  peace  and  edifica- 
tion of  all  around  him. 

Such  is  the  Christian  in  civil  life;  but 
though  he  loves  all  mankind,  he  stands  in  a 
nearer  relation,  and  bears  an  especial  bro- 
therly love,  to  ail  who  are  partakers  of  the 
faith  and  hope  of  the  gospel.  This  regard  is 
not  confined  within  the  pale  of  a denomina- 
tion, but  extended  to  all  who  love  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity.  He  calls  no  man 
master  himself;  nor  does  he  wish  to  im- 
pose a Shibboleth  of  his  own  upon  others. 
He  rejoices  in  the  image  of  God,  wherever 
he  sees  it,  and  in  the  work  of  God,  wherever 
it  is  carried  on.  Though  tenacious  of  the 
truths  which  the  Lord  has  taught  him,  his 
heart  is  open  to  those  who  differ  from  him 
in  less  essential  points,  and  allows  to  others 
that  right  of  private  judgment  which  he 
claims  for  himself,  and  is  disposed  to  hold 
communion  in  love  with  all  who  hold  the 
Head.  He  cannot,  indeed,  countenance 
those  who  set  aside  the  one  foundation  which 
God  has  laid  in  Zion,  and  maintain  errors 
derogatory  to  the  honour  of  his  Saviour,  or 
subversive  of  the  faith  and  experience  of  his 
people ; yet  he  wishes  well  to  their  persons, 
pities  and  prays  for  them,  and  is  ready  in 
meekness  to  instruct  them  that  oppose ; but 
there  is  no  bitterness  in  his  zeal,  being  sen- 
sible that  raillery  and  invective  are  dis- 
nonourable  to  the  cause  of  truth,  and  quite 
unsuitable  in  the  mouth  of  a sinner,  who 
owes  all  that  distinguishes  him  from  the 
vilest  of  men  to  the  free  grace  of  God.  In  a 
word,  he  is  influenced  by  the  wisdom  from 
above,  which,  as  it  is  pure,  is  likewise  peace- 
able, gentle,  and  easy  to  be  entreated,  full  of 
mercy  and  good  works,  without  partiality, 
and  without  hypocrisy. 

I must  just  recur  to  my  first  head,  and 
observe,  that  with  this  spirit  and  deportment, 
the  Christian,  while  he  is  enabled  to  main- 
tain a conscience  void  of  offence  towrards  God 
and  man,  is  still  sensible  and  mindful  of  in- 
dwelling sin.  He  has  his  eye  more  upon 
his  rule  than  upon  his  attainments;  and 
therefore  finds  and  confesses,  that  in  every 
thing  he  comes  exceedingly  short,  and  that 
his  best  services  are  not  only  defective,  but 
defiled.  He  accounts  himself  an  unprofitable 
servant,  is  abased  in  his  own  eyes,  and  de- 
rives all  his  hope  and  comfort,  as  well  as  his 
strength,  from  Jesus,  whom  he  has  known, 
received,  and  trusted,  to  whom  he  has  com- 
mitted his  soul,  in  whom  he  rejoices,  and 
worships  God  in  the  spirit,  renouncing  all 
confidence  in  the  flesh,  and  esteeming  all 
things  as  loss,  for  the  excellency  of  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord. 

If  I have  lately  been  rather  tardy  in  making 
my  payments  to  your  Lordship,  I have  pro- 
portionably  increased  the  quantity.  It  is 
high  time  I should  now  relieve  your  patience. 


I hope  I long  to  be  a Christian  indeed ; and  1 
hope  this  hasty  exemplification  of  my  wishes 
will  answer  to  your  Lordship’s  experience 
better  than  I fear  it  does  to  my  own.  May 
I beg  a remembrance  in  your  prayers,  that 
he  who  has  given  me  to  will  and  desire,  may 
work  in  me  to  be  and  to  do  according  to  his 
own  good  pleasure. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XXV. 


November  — 1776. 

my  lord, — My  London  journey,  which  pre- 
vented my  writing  in  October,  made  me 
amends  by  an  opportunity  of  waiting  upon 
your  Lordship  in  person.  Such  seasons  are 
not  only  pleasant  at  the  time,  but  afford  me 
pleasure  in  the  review.  I could  have  wished 
the  half-hour  we  were  together  by  ourselves 
prolonged  to  half  a day.  The  subject  your 
Lordship  was  pleased  to  suggest  has  been 
often  upon  my  mind  ; and  glad  should  I he, 
were  I able  to  offer  you  any  thing  satisfac- 
tory upon  it.  There  is  no  doubt  but  first 
religious  impressions  are  usually  mingled 
with  much  of  a legal  spirit ; and  that  con- 
science at  such  a time  is  not  only  tender,  but 
misinformed  and  scrupulous ; and  I believe, 
as  your  Lordship  intimated,  that  when  the 
mind  is  more  enlightened,  and  we  feel  a 
liberty  from  many  fetters  we  had  imposed 
upon  ourselves,  we  are  in  danger  of  verging 
too  far  towards  the  other  extreme.  It  seems  :o 
me  that  no  one  person  can  adjust  the  medium, 
and  draw  the  line  exactly  for  another.  There 
are  so  many  particulars  in  every  situation, 
of  which  a stranger  cannot  be  a competent 
judge,  and  the  best  human  advices  and  models 
are  mixed  with  such  defects,  that  it  is  not 
right  to  expect  others  to  be  absolutely  guided 
by  our  rules,  nor  is  it  safe  for  us  implicitly 
to  adopt  the  decisions  or  practices  of  others. 
But  the  scriptures  undoubtedly  furnish  suffi- 
cient and  infallible  rules  for  every  person, 
however  circumstanced ; and  the  throne  of 
grace  is  appointed  for  us  to  wait  upon  the 
Lord  for  the  best  exposition  of  his  precepts. 
Thus  David  often  prays  to  be  led  in  the  right 
way,  in  the  path  of  judgment.  By  frequent 
prayer  and  close  acquaintance  with  the  scrip- 
tures, and  an  habitual  attention  to  the  frame 
of  our  hearts,  there  is  a certain  delicacy  of 
spiritual  taste  and  discernment  to  be  ac- 
quired, which  renders  a nice  disquisition 
concerning  the  nature  and  limits  of  the  adia- 
phora,  as  they  are  called,  or  how  near  we 
may  go  to  the  utmost  bounds  of  what  is  right, 
without  being  wrong,  quite  unnecessary. 
Love  is  the  clearest  and  most  persuasive 
casuist ; and  when  our  love  to  the  Lord  is  in 
lively  exercise,  and  the  rule  of  his  word  is  in 
our  eye,  we  seldom  make  great  mis  takes 


LETTERS  10  A NOBLEMAIN. 


239 


LET.  XXV.] 

And  I believe  the  overdoings  of  i young  con- 
vert, proceeding  from  an  honest  simplicity 
of  heart,  and  a desire  of  pleasing  the  Lord, 
are  more  acceptable  in  his  sight,  than  a 
certain  coolness  of  conduct  which  frequently 
takes  place  afterwards,  when  we  are  apt  to 
look  back  with  pity  upon  our  former  weak- 
ness, and  secretly  to  applaud  ourselves  for 
our  present  greater  attainments  in  know- 
ledge, though  perhaps  (alas  that  it  should 
ever  be  so !)  we  may  have  lost  as  much  in 
warmth  as  we  have  gained  in  light. 

From  the  time  wo  know  the  Lord,  and  are 
bound  to  him  by  the  cords  of  love  and  grati- 
tude, the  two  chief  points  we  should  have  in 
our  view,  I apprehend,  are  to  maintain  com- 
munion with  him  in  our  own  souls,  and  to 
glorify  him  in  the  sight  of  men.  Agreeable 
to  these  views,  though  the  scriptures  do  not 
enumerate  or  decide,  totidem  verbis , for  or 
against  many  things  which  some  plead  for, 
and  others  condemn ; yet  they  furnish  us 
with  some  general  canons,  which,  if  rightly 
applied,  will  perhaps  go  a good  way  towards 
settling  the  debate,  at  least  to  the  satisfaction 
of  those  who  would  rather  please  God  than 
man.  Some  of  these  canons  I will  just  mark 
t*  your  Lordship; — Rom.  xii.  1,  2;  1 Cor. 
viii.  13  and  x.  31 ; 2 Cor.  vi.  17 ; Ephes. 
iv.  30;  Ephes.  v.  11. 15, 16;  1 Thes.  v.  22; 
Ephes.  vi.  18 ; to  which  I may  add,  as  suit- 
able to  the  present  times,  Isa.  xxii.  12 ; Luke 
xxi.  34.  I apprehend  the  spirit  of  these  and 
similar  passages  of  scripture  (for  it  would  be 
easy  to  adduce  a larger  number)  will  bring  a 
Christian  under  such  restrictions  as  follow : 

To  avoid  and  forbear,  for  his  own  sake, 
whatever  has  a tendency  to  damp  and  indis- 
pose his  spirit  in  attendance  upon  the  means 
of  grace ; for  such  things,  if  they  be  not  con- 
demned as  sinful  per  se,  if  they  be  not  abso- 
^tely  unlawful,  yea  though  they  be,  when 
duly  regulated,  lawful  and  right  (for  often 
our  chief  snares  are  entwined  with  our  bless- 
ings ;)  yet  if  they  have  a repeated  and  evi- 
dent tendency  to  deaden  our  hearts  to  divine 
things,  of  which  each  person’s  experience 
must  determine,  there  must  be  something  in 
them,  either  in  season,  measure,  or  circum- 
stance, wrong  to  us ; and  let  them  promise 
what  they  will,  they  do  but  rob  us  of  our 
gold  to  pay  us  with  counters.  For  the  light 
of  God’s  countenance,  and  an  open  cheerful- 
ness of  spirit  in  walking  with  him  in  private, 
is  our  chief  joy;  and  we  must  be  already 
greatly  hurt,  if  any  thing  can  be  pursued, 
allowed,  or  rested  in,  as  a tolerable  substitute 
for  it. 

For  the  sake  of  the  church,  and  the  influ- 
ence example  may  nave  upon  his  fellow-chris- 
tians,  the  law  of  charity  and  prudence  will 
often  require  a believer  to  abstain  from  some 
things,  not  because  they  are  unlawful,  but 
inexpedient.  Thus  the  apostle,  though 


strenuous  for  the  right  of  his  Christian  li- 
berty, would  have  abridged  himself  of  the 
use,  so  as  to  eat  no  flesh,  rather  than  offend 
a weak  brother,  rather  than  mislead  him  to 
act  against  the  present  light  of  his  con- 
science. Upon  this  principle,  if  I could, 
without  hurt  to  myself,  attend  some  public 
amusements,  as  a concert  or  oratorio,  and  re- 
turn from  thence  with  a warm  heart  to  my 
closet  (the  possibility  of  which  in  my  own 
case  I greatly  question;)  yet  I should  think 
it  my  duty  to  forbear,  lest  some  weaker  than 
myself  should  be  encouraged  by  me  to  make 
the  like  experiment,  though  in  their  own 
minds  they  might  fear  it  was  wrong’,  and 
have  no  other  reason  to  think  it  lawful  but 
because  I did  it;  in  which  case,  I should 
suspect,  that  though  I received  no  harm, 
they  would.  And  I have  known  and  con- 
versed with  some,  who  I fear  have  made 
shipwreck  of  their  profession,  who  have  dated 
their  first  decline  from  imitating  others, 
whom  they  thought  wiser  and  better  than 
| themselves,  in  such  kind  of  compliances. 
And  it  seems  that  an  obligation  to  this  sort 
of  self-denial  rises  and  is  strengthened  in 
proportion  to  the  weight  and  influence  of 
our  characters.  Were  I in  private  life,  I do 
not  know  that  I should  think  it  sinful  to  kill 
a partridge  or  a hare ; but,  as  a minister,  I 
no  more  dare  do  it  than  I dare  join  in  a 
drunken  frolic,  because  I know  it  would  give 
offence  to  some,  and  be  pleaded  for  as  a li- 
cence by  others. 

There  is  a duty,  and  a charity  likewise, 
which  we  owe  to  the  world  at  large,  as  well 
as  a faithfulness  to  God  and  his  grace,  in  our 
necessary  converse  among  them.  This  seems 
to  require,  that  though  we  should  not  be 
needlessly  singular,  yet,  for  their  instruction, 
and  for  the  honour  of  our  Lord  and  Master, 
we  should  keep  up  a certain  kind  of  singu- 
larity, and  show  oifrselves  called  to  be  a 
separated  people ; — that  though  the  provi- 
dence of  God  has  given  us  callings  and 
relations  to  fill  up  (in  which  we  cannot  be 
too  exact,)  yet  we  are  not  of  the  world,  but 
belong  to  another  community,  and  act  from 
other  principles,  by  other  rules,  and  to  other 
ends,  than  the  generality  of  those  about  us. 
I have  observed,  that  the  world  will  often 
leave  professors  in  quiet  possession  of  their 
notions  and  sentiments,  and  places  of  worship, 
provided  they  will  not  be  too  stiff  in  the  mat- 
ter of  conformity  with  their  more  general 
customs  and  amusements.  But  I fear  many 
of  them  have  had  their  prejudices  strength 
ened  against  our  holy  religion  by  such  com 
pliances,  and  have  thought,  that  if  there  were 
such  joy  and  comfort  to  be  found  in  the  ways 
of  God  as  they  hear  from  our  pulpits,  profes- 
sors would  not,  in  such  numbers,  and  so  often, 
run  amongst  them,  to  beg  a relief  from  the 
burden  of  time  hanging  upon  their  hands. 


240 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


As  our  Lord  Jesus  is  the  great  representa- 
tive of  his  people  in  heaven,  he  does  them 
the  honour  to  continue  a succession  of  them 
as  his  representatives  upon  earth.  Happy 
are  they  who  are  favoured  with  most  of  the 
holy  unction,  and  best  enabled  to  manifest 
to  all  around  them,  by  their  spirit,  tempers, 
and  conversation,  what  is  the  proper  design 
and  genuine  effect  of  his  gospel  upon  the 
hearts  of  sinners. 

In  our  way  of  little  life  in  the  country, 
serious  people  often  complain  of  the  snares 
they  meet  with  from  worldly  people,  and  yet 
they  must  mix  with  them  to  get  a livelihood. 

I advise  them,  if  they  can,  to  do  their  busi- 
ness with  the  world  as  they  do  it  in  the  rain. 
If  their  business  calls  them  abroad,  they  will 
not  leave  it  undone  for  fear  of  being  a little 
wet;  but  then,  when  it  is  done,  they  pre- 
sently seek  shelter,  and  will  not  stand  in  the 
rain  for  pleasure  : so  providential  and  neces- 
sary calls  of  duty,  that  lead  us  into  the  world, 
will  not  hurt  us,  if  we  find  the  spirit  of  the 
world  unpleasant,  and  are  glad  to  retire  from 
it,  and  keep  out  of  it  as  much  as  our  relative 
duties  will  permit.  That  which  is  our  cross 
is  not  so  likely  to  be  our  snare ; but  if  that 
spirit  which  we  should  always  watch  and 
pray  against,  infects  and  assimilates  our 
minds  to  itself,  then  we  are  sure  to  suffer 
loss,  and  act  below  the  dignity  of  our  profes- 
sion. 

The  value  of  time  is  likewise  to  be  taken 
into  the  account.  It  is  a precious  talent, 
and  our  Christian  profession  opens  a wide 
field  for  the  due  improvement  of  it.  Much  of 
it  has  been  already  lost,  and  therefore  we  are 
exhorted  to  redeem  it.  I think  many  things 
which  custom  pleads  for  will  be  excluded 
from  a suitableness  to  a Christian,  for  this 
one  reason,  that  they  are  not  consistent  with 
the  simplest  notion  of  the  redemption  of  time. 
It  is  generally  said,  we, need  relaxation ; I 
allow  it  in  a sense ; the  Lord  himself  has 
provided  it;  and  because  our  spirits  are  too 
weak  to  be  always  upon  the  wing  in  medi- 
tation and  prayer,  he  has  appointed  to  all 
men,  from  the  king  downwards,  something 
10  do  in  a secular  way.  The  poor  are  to 
labour,  the  rich  are  not  exempted  from  some- 
thing equivalent.  And  when  every  thing  of 
this  sort  in  each  person’s  situation  is  pro- 
perly attended  to,  I apprehend,  if  the  heart 
be  alive  and  in  a right  state,  spiritual  con- 
cernments will  present  themselves,  as  afford- 
ing the  noblest,  sweetest,  and  most  interest- 
ing relaxation  from  the  cares  and  business 
of  life ; as  on  the  other  hand,  that  business 
will  be  the  best  relaxation  and  unbending  of 
the  mind  from  religious  exercises ; and  be- 
tween the  two,  perhaps  there  ought  to  be 
but  little  mere  leisure  time.  A life  in  this 
sense,  divided  between  God  and  the  world, 
is  desirable ; when  one  part  of  it  is  spent  in  I 


[let.  xxv. 

retirement,  seeking  after  and  conversing 
with  him  whom  our  souls  love ; and  the  other 
part  of  it  employed  in  active  services  for  the 
good  of  our  family,  friends,  the  church,  and 
society,  for  his  sake.  Every  hour  which 
does  not  fall  in  with  one  or  other  of  these 
views,  I apprehend,  is  lost  time. 

The  day  in  which  we  live  seems  likewise 
to  call  for  something  of  a peculiar  spirit  in 
the  Lord’s  people.  It  is  a day  of  abounding 
sin,  and,  I fear,  a day  of  impending  judg- 
ment. The  world,  as  it  was  in  the  days  of 
Noah  and  Lot,  is  secure.  We  are  soon  to 
have  a day  of  apparent  humiliation ; but  the 
just  causes  for  it  are  not  confined  to  one  day, 
but  will  subsist,  and  too  probably  increase, 
every  day.  If  I am  not  mistaken  in  the  signs 
of  the  times,  there  never  was,  within  the 
annals  of  the  English  history,  a period  in 
which  the  spirit  and  employment  described, 
Ezek.  ix.  4,  could  be  more  suitable  than  the 
present.  The  Lord  calls  for  mourning  and 
weeping ; but  the  words  of  many  are  stout 
against  him.  New  species  of  dissipation 
are  invented  almost  daily,  and  the  lan- 
guage of  those  who  bear  the  greatest 
sway  in  what  is  called  the  polite  circle,  I 
mean  the  interpretative  language  of  their 
hearts,  is  like  that  of  the  rebellious  Jew’s, 
Jer.  xliv.  16,  17,  &c.  “As  for  the  word 
which  thou  hast  spoken,  we  will  not  hearken 
unto  thee  at  all.”  In  short,  things  are  com- 
ing to  a point,  and  it  seems  to  be  almost  put- 
ting to  the  vote,  whether  the  Lord  or  Baa 
be  God.  In  this  state  of  affairs,  methinks, 
wre  cannot  be  too  explicit  in  avowing  our  at- 
tachment to  the  Lord,  nor  too  careful  in 
avoiding  an  improper  correspondence  with 
those  w7ho  are  in  confederacy  against  him. 
We  know  not  how  soon  we  may  greatly 
need  that  mark  of  providential  protection 
which  is  restrained  to  those  who  sigh  and 
cry  for  our  abominations.  Upon  the  w’hole,  it 
appears  to  me,  that  it  is  more  honourable, 
comfortable,  and  safe  (if  wTe  cannot  exactly 
hit  tfrfe  golden  mean,)  to  be  thought  by  some 
too  scrupulous  and  precise,  than  actually  to 
be  found  too  compliant  with  those  things 
wThich,  if  not  absolutely  contrary  to  a divine 
commandment,  are  hardly  compatible  with 
the  genius  of  the  gospel  or  conformable  to 
the  mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus,  which 
ought  also  to  be  in  his  people.  The  places 
and  amusements  which  the  world  frequent 
and  admire,  where  occasions  and  temptations 
to  sin  are  cultivated,  where  the  law  of  what 
is  called  good  breeding  is  the  only  law  which 
may  not  be  violated  with  impunity,  where 
sinful  passions  are  provoked  and  indulged, 
where  the  fear  of  God  is  so  little  known  or 
regarded,  that  those  who  do  fear  him  must 
hold  their  tongues,  though  they  should  hear 
his  name  blasphemed,  can  hardly  be  a chris- 
I tian’s  voluntary  chosen  ground.  Yet  1 fear 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


241 


LET.  XXVI.] 

,hese  characters  will  apply  to  every  kind  of 
polite  amusement  or  assembly  in  the  king- 
dom. 

As  to  family  connexions,  I cannot  think 
we  are  bound  to  break  or  slight  them.  But 
as  believers  and  their  friends  often  live  as  it 
were  in  two  elements,  there  is  a mutual 
awkwardness,  which  makes  their  interviews 
rather  dry  and  tedious.  But,  upon  that  ac- 
count, they  are  less  frequent  than  they 
would  otherwise  be,  which  seems  an  advan- 
tage. Both  sides  keep  up  returns  of  civility 
and  affection ; but  as  they  cannot  unite  in 
sentiment  and  leading  inclination,  they  will 
not  contrive  to  be  very  often  together,  ex- 
cept there  is  something  considerable  given 
up  by  one  or  the  other;  and  I think  Chris- 
tians ought  to  be  very  cautious  what  conces- 
sions they  make  upon  this  account.  But  as 
I said  at  the  beginning,  no  general  positive 
rules  can  be  laid  down. 

1 have  simply  given  your  Lordship  such 
thoughts  as  have  occurred  to  me  while  writ- 
ing, without  study,  and  without  coherence. 
I dare  not  be  dogmatical ; but  I think  what 
I have  written  is  agreeable  both  to  particu- 
lar texts,  and  to  the  general  tenor  of  scrip- 
ture. I submit  it  to  your  judgment. — I 
j%m,  &c. 


LETTER  XXVI. 

July  — 1777. 

MV  lord, — I owe  your  Lordship  a quire 
of  letters  for  the  favour  and  pleasure  of  your 
late  visit ; and  therefore  I must  begin  and 
write  away. 

I have  lately  read  Robertson’s  History  of 
Charles  V.,  which,  like  most  other  histories, 
I consider  as  a comment  upon  those  passages 
of  scripture  which  teach  us  the  depravity  of 
man,  the  deceitfulness  of  the  heart,  the  ruin- 
ous effects  of  sin,  and  the  powerful,  though 
secret  rule  of  divine  providence,  moving,  di- 
recting, and  controlling  the  designs  and  ac- 
tions of  men,  with  an  unerring  hand,  to  the 
accomplishment  of  his  own  purposes,  both 
of  mercy  and  judgment.  Without  the  clue 
and  the  light  which  the  word  of  God  affords, 
the  history  of  mankind,  of  any,  of  every  age, 
only  presents  to  view  a labyrinth  and  a 
chaos ; a detail  of  wickedness  and  misery  to 
make  us  tremble,  and  a confused  jumble  of 
interfering  incidents,  as  destitute  of  stability, 
connexion,  or  order,  as  the  clouds  which  fly 
over  our  heads.  In  this  view,  D dir  ant 
reges , plectuntur  Achivi , may  serve  as  a 
motto  to  all  the  histories  I have  seen ; but, 
with  the  scripture  key,  all  is  plain,  all  is  in- 
structive. Then  I see  verily  there  is  a God, 
who  governs  the  earth,  who  pours  contempt 
upon  princes,  takes  the  wise  in  their  own 
craftiness,  over-rules  the  wrath  and  pride  of 
2 H 


man,  to  bring  his  own  designs  to  pass,  an  i 
restrains  all  that  is  not  necessary  to  that 
end ; blasting  the  best  concerted  enterprizc  s 
at  one  time,  by  means  apparently  slight,  and 
altogether  unexpected,  and  at  other  times 
producing  the  mast  important  events,  from 
instruments  and  circumstances  which  are, 
at  first  thought,  too  feeble  and  trivial  to  de- 
serve notice.  I should  like  to  see  a writer 
of  Dr.  Robertson’s  abilities  give  us  a history 
upon  this  plan  ; but  I think  his  reflections  of 
this  sort  are  too  general,  too  cold,  and  too 
few.  What  an  empty  phantom  do  the  great 
men  of  the  world  pursue,  while  they  wage 
war  with  the  peace  of  mankind,  and  butcher, 
in  the  course  of  their  lives,  perhaps  hundreds 
of  thousands,  to  maintain  the  shadow  of  au- 
thority over  distant  nations,  whom  they  can 
reach  with  no  other  influence  than  that  of 
oppression  and  devastation!  But  when  we 
consider  those  who  are  sacrificed  to  their 
ambition,  as  justly  suffering  for  their  sins, 
then  heroes  and  conquerors  appear  in  their 
proper  light,  and  worthy  to  be  classed  with 
earthquakes  and  pestilences,  as  instruments 
of  divine  vengeance.  So  many  cares,  so 
much  pains,  so  many  mischiefs, — merely  to 
support  the  idea  a worm  has  formed  of  his 
own  grandeur,  is  a proof  that  man,  by  nature, 
is  not  only  depraved,  but  infatuated.  Permit 
me  to  present  my  thoughts  to  more  advan- 
tage in  the  words  of  M.  Nicole : 

“Un  grand  dans  son  idee  n’est  pas  un 
seul  homme;  c’est  un  homme  environ  de 
tous  ceux  qui  sont  a lui,  et  qui  s’imagine 
avoir  autant  de  bras  qu’ils  en  ont  tous  en- 
semble, parc.e  qu’il  en  dispose  et  qu’il  les  re- 
mue.  Un  general  d’armee  se  represente 
toujours  a luimeme  au  milieu  de  tous  ses 
soldats.  Ainsi  chacun  tache  d’occuper  le 
plus  de  place  qu’il  peut  dans  son  imagination, 
et  Ton  ne  se  pousse,  et  ne  s’aggrandit  dans 
le  monde,  que  pour  augmenter  l’idee  que 
chacun  se  forme  de  soi-meme.  Voila  le  but 
de  tous  les  desseins  ambitieux  des  hommes ! 
Alexandre  et  Caesar  n’ont  point  eu  d’autre 
vue  dans  toutes  leurs  batailles  que  celle-la. 
Et  si  l’on  demande  pourquoi  le  Grand  Seig- 
neur a fait  depuis  peu  perir  cent  mille  hom- 
mes devant  Candie,  on  peut  repondre  sure- 
ment,  que  ce  n’est  que  pour  attacher  encore 
a cette  image  interieure  qu’il  a de  lui-meme, 
le  titre  de  conquerant.”  * 

How  awful  is  the  case  of  those  who  live 
and  die  in  such  a spirit,  and  who  have  multi- 
plied miseries  upon  their  fellow-creatures,  in 
order  to  support  and  feed  it ! Perhaps  they 
may,  upon  their  entrance  on  another  state, 
be  accosted  by  multitudes,  to  the  purport  of 
that  sarcastical  language  in  the  prophet’s 
sublime  ode  of  triumph  over  the  king  of 
Babylon,  Is.  xiv.  5 — 17. 


* Essais  de  Morale,  vol.  i. 


242 


LETTERS  TO  A NOBLEMAN. 


[let.  XXVI. 


Hie  est,  quem  fuga,  quern  pavor 
Praecessit  ? hie,  quern  terrieolis  gravis 
Strages  secuta  est,  vastitasque  ? hie 
Attoniti  spoliator  orbis  ? 

But  though  the  effects  of  this  principle  of 
seif  are  more  extensive  and  calamitous,  in 
proportion  as  those  who  are  governed  by  it 
are  more  elevated,  the  principle  itself  is  deep- 
rooted  in  every  heart,  and  is  the  spring  of 
every  action,  till  grace  infuses  a new  prin- 
ciple, and  self,  like  Dagon,  falls  before  the 


| Lord  of  Hosts.  Great  and  small  are  but 
I relative  terms  ; and  the  passions  of  discon- 
tent, pride,  and  envy,  which,  in  the  breast 
of  a potentate,  are  severely  felt  by  one  half 
of  Europe,  exert  themselves  with  equal 
strength  in  the  heart  of  a peasant , though, 
for  want  of  materials  and  opportunities, 
their  operations  are  confined  within  narrow 
bounds.  We  are  fallen  into  a state  of  gross 
idolatry,  and  self  is  the  idol  we  worship. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO 

THE  REVEREND  MR.  S 


LETTER  I. 

June  23,  1775. 

dear  sir, — I have  met  with  interruptions, 
till  now,  or  you  would  have  heard  from  me 
sooner.  My  thoughts  have  run  much  upon 
the  subject  of  your  last,  because  I perceive 
it  has  a near  connexion  with  your  peace. 
Your  integrity  greatly  pleases  me ; far  be  it 
from  me  to  shake  the  principle  of  your  con- 
duct, yet  in  the  application  I think  there  is  a 
possibility  of  carrying  your  exceptions  too 
far. 

From  the  account  you  give  me  of  your  sen- 
timents, I cannot  but  wonder  you  find  it  so 
difficult  to  accede  to  the  Athanasian  Creedr 
when  it  seems  to  me  you  believe  and  avow 
what  that  Creed  chiefly  sets  forth.  The  doc- 
trine of  the  Trinity,  some  explication  of  the 
terms  being  subjoined,  is  the  catholic  faith, 
without  the  belief  of  which  a man  cannot  be 
saved.  This  damnatory  clause  seems  to  me 
proved  by  Mark  xvi.  16,  “ He  that  believeth 
shall  be  saved,”  &c.  The  object  of  faith  must 
be  truth.  The  doctrine  of  the  deity  of  Christ, 
and  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  union  with  the  Fa- 
ther, so  that  they  are  not  three  Gods,  but  one 
God,  is  not  merely  a proposition  expressed  in 
words,  to  which  our  assent  is  required,  but  is 
absolutely  necessary  to  be  known,  since  with- 
out it  no  one  truth  respecting  salvation  can 
be  rightly  understood,  no  one  promise  duly 
believed,  no  one  duty  spiritually  performed. 

I take  it  for  granted,  that  this  doctrine  must 
appear  irrational  and  absurd  in  the  eye  of 
reason,  if  by  reason  we  mean  the  reason  of 
man  in  his  fallen  state,  before  it  is  corrected 
and  enlightened  by  a heavenly  teacher.  No 
man  can  say  Jesus  is  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  I believe  with  you,  that  a man  may 
be  saved  who  never  heard  of  the  Creed,  who 
never  read  any  book  but  the  New  Testament 
or  perhaps  a single  Evangelist;  but  he  must 
be  taught  of  God  the  things  that  accompany 
salvation,  or  I do  not  think  he  can  be  saved. 
The  mercies  of  God  in  Christ  will  not  save 
any,  as  I apprehend,  but  according  to  the  | 


method  revealed  in  his  word ; tnat  is,  the** 
who  are  truly  partakers  of  faith  and  holiness. 
For  as  the  religion  of  the  New  Testamen 
ascribes  all  power  to  God,  and  considers  ah 
goodness  in  us  as  the  effect  of  his  communica 
tion,  we  being  by  nature  destitute  of  spiritua. 
life  or  light,  so  those  whom  God  himself  is 
pleased  to  teach,  will  infallibly  attain  the 
knowledge  of  all  that  they  are  concerned  to 
know.  This  teaching  you  are  waiting  for, 
and  it  shall  be  given  you ; yea,  the  Lord,  I 
trust,  has  begun  to  teach  you  already ; but 
if  you  consider  yourself  as  a learner,  and 
that  it  is  possible,  under  the  Spirit’s  increas- 
ing illumination,  you  may  hereafter  adopt 
some  things  which  at  present  you  cannot  ap- 
prove, I should  think  it  too  early  as  yet  to 
prescribe  to  yourself  rules  and  determinations 
for  the  government  of  your  future  life 
Should  the  will  of  God  appoint  you  a new 
path  for  service,  he  may,  sooner  than  you  are 
aware,  quiet  your  mind,  and  enable  you  to 
subscribe  with  as  full  a persuasion  of  mind  as 
you  now  object  to  subscription.  If  it  de- 
pended upon  me,  I could  be  content  that  the 
Creed  should  rest  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea, 
rather  than  embarrass  a single  person  of  your 
disposition.  Nor  am  I a warm  stickler  for 
subscription  in  itself ; but  something  of  this 
kind  seems  necessary,  upon  the  supposition 
of  an  establishment. 

When  I think  of  an  inclosure,  some  hedge, 
wall,  bank,  ditch,  &c.  is  of  course  included 
in  my  idea ; for  who  can  conceive  of  an  in- 
closure without  a boundary!  So,  in  a na- 
tional church,  there  must  be,  I apprehend, 
something  marked  out,  the  approbation  or 
refusal  of  which  will  determine  who  do  or  do 
not  belong  to  it ; and  for  this  purpose  articles 
of  some  kind  seem  not  improper.  You  think 
it  would  be  better  to  have  these  articles  in 
scriptural  expressions.  But  if  it  be  lawful 
to  endeavour  to  exclude  from  our  pulpits 
men  who  hold  sentiments  the  most  repug- 
nant to  the  truth,  I wish  you  to  consider, 
whether  this  can  be  in  any  measure  secured 
by  articles  in  which  the  scripture-doctrines 
243 


244 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REY.  MR.  S- 


ire  not  explained  and  stated,  as  well  as  ex- 
pressed. This  proposal  is  strenuoasly  plead- 
ed for  by  many  in  our  day,  upon  views  very 
different  from  yours.  The  Socinians,  for  in- 
stance, would  readily  subscribe  a scriptural 
declaration  of  the  high  priesthood,  atonement, 
and  intercession  of  Christ  (while  they  are  al- 
lowed to  put  their  own  sense  upon  the  terms,) 
though  the  sense  they  maintain  be  utterly 
inconsistent  with  what  those  who  are  en- 
lightened by  the  Holy  Spirit  learn  from  the 
same  expressions. 

I acknowledge,  indeed,  that  the  end  is  not 
answered  by  the  present  method ; since  there 
are  too  many,  like  the  person  you  mention, 
who  would  easily  subscribe  nine  hundred  ar- 
ticles, rather  than  baulk  his  preferment : yet 
the  profligacy  of  some  seems  to  be  no  just 
reason  why  the  church,  why  any  church, 
should  not  be  at  liberty  to  define  the  terms 
upon  which  they  will  accept  members  or 
teachers,  or  why  conscientious  persons  should 
object  to  these  terms  (if  they  think  them 
agreeable  to  the  truth,)  merely  because  they 
are  not  expressed  in  the  precise  words  of 
scripture.  If  allowance  may  be  made  for 
human  infirmity  in  the  Liturgy,  I see  not 
why  the  Articles  may  not  be  entitled  to  the 
same  privilege.  For  it  seems  requisite  that 
we  should  be  as  well  satisfied  with  the  ex- 
pressions we  use  with  our  lips,  in  frequent 
solemn  prayer  to  God,  as  in  what  we  subscribe 
with  our  hands.  I am  persuaded  that  the 
leaders  of  the  Association  at  the  Feathers 
Tavern,  some  of  them  at  least,  though  they 
begin  with  the  affair  of  subscription,  would 
not  (if  they  might  have  their  wish)  stop  there, 
but  would  go  on  with  their  projected  reform, 
till  they  had  overturned  the  Liturgy  also,  or 
at  least  weeded  it  from  every  expression  that 
bears  testimony  to  the  deity  of  the  Saviour, 
and  the  efficacious  influence  of  the  Holy  Spi- 
rit. I bless  God  that  you  are  far  otherwise 
minded. 

I hope,  however,  though  you  should  not 
think  yourself  at  liberty  to  repeat  your  sub- 
scription, the  Lord  will  make  you  comforta- 
ble and  useful  in  your  present  rank  as  a cu- 
rate. Preferment  is  not  necessary,  either  to 
our  peace  or  usefulness.  We  may  live  and 
die  contentedly,  without  the  honours  and 
emoluments  which  aspiring  men  thirst  after, 
if  he  be  pleased  to  honour  us  with  a dispen- 
sation to  preach  his  gospel,  and  to  crown  our 
endeavours  with  a blessing.  He  that  win- 
neth  souls  is  wise ; wise  in  the  choice  of  the 
highest  end  he  can  propose  to  himself  in  this 
life;  wise  in  the  improvement  of  the  only 
means  by  which  this  desirable  end  can  be  at- 
tained. Wherever  we  cast  our  eyes,  the  bulk 
of  the  people  are  ignorant,  immoral,  careless. 
They  live  without  God  in  the  world ; they  are 
neither  awed  by  his  authority,  nor  affected  by 
his  goodness,  nor  enabled  to  trust  to  his  pro- 
mises, nor  disposed  to  aim  at  his  glory.  If, 


[let.  i. 

perhaps,  they  have  a serious  interval,  or  some 
comparative  sobriety  of  character,  they  ground 
their  hopes  upon  their  own  doings,  endeavours, 
or  purposes ; and  treat  the  inexpressible  love 
of  God  revealed  in  Christ,  and  the  gospel 
method  of  salvation  by  faith  in  his  name,  with 
neglect,  often  with  contempt.  They  have 
preachers,  whom  perhaps  they  hear  with  some 
pleasure  because  they  neither  alarm  their 
consciences  by  insisting  on  the  spirituality  and 
sanction  of  the  divine  law,  nor  offend  their 
pride  by  publishing  the  humiliating  doctrines 
of  that  gospel,  which  is  the  power  of  God 
through  faith  untc>  salvation.  Therefore 
what  they  do  speak,  they  speak  in  vain ; the 
world  grows  worse  and  worse  under  their  in- 
structions; infidelity  and  profligacy  abound 
more  and  more ; for  God  will  own  no  other 
doctrine  but  what  the  apostle  calls  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus ; that  doctrine  which  drives 
the  sinner  from  all  his  vain  pleas,  and  points 
out  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  only  ground 
of  hope,  the  supreme  object  of  desire,  as  ap- 
pointed of  God  to  be  wisdom,  righteousness, 
sanctification,  and  redemption,  to  all  who  be- 
lieve in  his  name.  When  ministers  them- 
selves are  convinced  of  sin,  and  feel  the  ne- 
cessity of  an  almighty  Saviour,  they  pre- 
sently account  their  former  gain  but  loss,  and 
determine,  with  the  apostle,  to  know  nothing 
but  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified.  In  pro- 
portion as  they  do  this,  they  are  sure  to  be 
wondered  at,  laughed  at,  and  railed  at,  if  the 
providence  of  God  and  the  constitution  of 
their  country,  secure  them  from  severer  treat- 
ment. But  they  have  this  invaluable  com- 
pensation, that  they  no  longer  speak  without 
effect.  In  a greater  or  less  degree  a change 
takes  place  in  their  auditories ; the  blind  re- 
ceive their  sight,  the  deaf  hear,  the  lepers  are 
cleansed ; — sinners  are  turned  from  darkness 
to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  to  God ; 
— sinful  practices  are  forsaken ; and  a new 
course  of  life  in  the  converts,  evidences  that 
they  have  not  followed  cunningly-devised 
fables,  or  taken  up  with  uncenaiu  ^otions; 
but  that  God  has  indeed  quickened  them  by 
his  Spirit,  and  given  them  an  understanding 
to  know  him  that  is  true.  The  preacheis, 
likewise,  while  they  attempt  to  teach  others, 
are  taught  themselves : a blessing  descends 
upon  their  studies  and  labours,  upon  their 
perusal  of  the  scriptures,  upon  their  attention 
to  what  passes  within  them  and  around  them. 
The  events  of  every  day  contribute  to  throw 
light  upon  the  word  of  God  : their  views  of 
divine  truth  grow  more  enlarged,  connected, 
and  comprehensive ; many  difficulties  which 
perplexed  them  at  their  first  setting  out, 
trouble  them  no  more ; the  God  whom  they 
serve,  and  on  whom  they  wait,  reveals  to 
them  those  great  things,  which,  though 
plainly  expressed  in  the  letter  of  scripture, 
cannot  be  understood  and  realized  without 
divine  teaching,  L Cor.  ii.  9 to  15.  Thus 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  S 


245 


LET.  II.] 

they  go  on  from  strength  to  strength ; hard 
things  become  easy,  and  a divine  light  shines 
upon  their  paths.  Opposition  from  men  per- 
haps may  increase ; they  may  expect  to  be 
represented,  as  those  who  turn  the  world 
upside  down  ; the  cry,  will 

be  raised  against  them,  the  gates  of  the  tem- 
ple of  preferment  will  be  seldom  open  to 
them;  but  they  will  have  the  unspeakable 
consolation  of  applying  to  themselves  those 
lively  words  of  the  apostle, 

XXIt>OVTiSf  tuc  TTO'Kkevg  Sc  !T*.OUTj£ovT£J,  tuj 

IXOVTSS,  xai  vzxvX'X  xxrixivre;.f 

It  is  the  strain  of  evident  sincerity  which 
runs  through  your  letters,  that  gives  me  a 
pleasing  confidence  the  Lord  is  with  you. 
A disinterested  desire  of  knowing  the  truth, 
with  a willingness  to  follow  it  through  all 
disadvantages,  is  a preparation  of  the  heart 
which  only  God  can  give.  He  has  directed 
you  to  the  right  method,  searching  the  scrip- 
tures, with  prayer.  Go  on,  and  may  his 
blessing  attend  you.  You  may  see,  from 
what  I have  written  above,  what  is  the  de- 
sire of  my  heart  for  you.  But  I am  not  im- 
patient. Follow  your  heavenly  leader,  and 
in  his  own  time  and  manner  he  will  make 
your  way  plain.  I have  travelled  the  path 
before  you,  I see  what  you  yet  want ; I can- 
not impart  it  to  you,  but  he  can,  and  I trust 
he  will.  It  will  rejoice  my  soul  to  be  any 
way  assistant  to  you ; but  I am  afraid  I 
should  not  afford  you  much,  either  profit  or 
satisfaction,  by  entering  upon  a dry  defence 
of  creeds  and  articles. 

The  truths  of  scripture  are  not  like  mathe- 
matical theorems,  which  present  exactly  the 
same  ideas  to  every  person  who  understands 
the  terms.  The  word  of  God  is  compared 
to  a mirror,  2 Cor.  iii.  18 : but  it  is  a mirror 
in  which  the  longer  we  look  the  more  we 
see ; the  view  will  be  still  growing  upon  us  ; 
and  still  we  shall  see  but  in  part  while  on 
this  side  eternity.  When  our  Lord  pro- 
nounced Peter  blessed,  declaring  he  had 
learnt  that  which  flesh  and  blood  could  not 
have  taught  him,  yet  Peter  was  at  that  time 
much  in  the  dark.  The  sufferings  and  death 
of  Jesus,  though  the  only  and  necessary 
means  of  his  salvation,  were  an  offence  to 
him.  But  he  lived  to  glory  in  what  he  once 
could  not  bear  to  hear  of.  Peter  had  re- 
ceived grace  to  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  follow 
him,  to  venture  all,  and  to  forsake  all  for 
him;  these  first  good  dispositions  were  of 
God,  and  they  led  to  further  advances.  So 
it  is  still.  By  nature,  self  rules  in  the  heart: 
when  this  idol  is  brought  low,  and  we  are 
truly  willing  to  be  the  Lord’s,  and  to  apply 
to  him  for  strength  and  direction,  that  we 
may  serve  him,  the  good  work  is  begun  ; for 
it  is  a truth  that  upholds  universally  and 
without  exception,  a man  can  receive  noth- 
ing except  it  be  given  him  from  heaven.  The 


Lord  first  finds  us  when  we  are  thinking  of 
something  else,  Isaiah  lxv.  1 ; and  then  we 
begin  to  seek  him  in  good  earnest,  and  he 
has  promised  to  be  found  of  us.  People  may, 
by  industry  and  natural  abilities,  make  them- 
selves masters  of  the  external  evidences  of 
Christianity,  and  have  much  to  say  for  and 
against  different  schemes  and  systems  of 
sentiments ; but  all  this  while  the  heart  re- 
mains untouched.  True  religion  is  not  a 
science  of  the  head,  so  much  as  an  inward 
and  heartfelt  perception,  which  casts  down 
imaginations,  and  every  u'W*  that  exalteth 
itself  in  the  mind,  and  brings  every  thought 
into  a sweet  and  willing  subjection  to  Christ 
by  faith.  Here  the  learned  have  no  real  ad- 
vantage above  the  ignorant ; both  see  when 
the  eyes  of  the  understanding  are  enlight- 
ened ; till  then  both  are  equally  blind.  And 
the  first  lesson  in  the  school  of  Christ  is  to 
become  a little  child,  sitting  simply  at  his 
feet,  that  we  may  be  made  wise  unto  salva- 
tion. 

I was  not  only  prevented  beginning  my 
letter  so  soon  as  I wished,  but  have  been  un- 
usually interrupted  since  I began  it.  Often, 
as  soon  as  I could  well  take  the  pen  in  hand, 
I have  been  called  away  to  attend  company 
and  intervening  business.  Though  T per- 
suade myself,  after  what  I have  formerly 
said,  you  will  put  a favourable  construction 
upon  my  delay,  yet  it  has  given  me  some 
pain.  I set  a great  value  upon  your  offer  of 
friendship,  which,  I trust,  will  not  be  inter- 
rupted on  either  side  by  the  freedom  with 
which  we  mutually  express  our  difference  of 
sentiments,  when  we  are  constrained  to  differ. 
You  please  me  with  entrusting  me  with  the 
first  rough  draught  of  your  thoughts;  and 
you  may  easily  perceive  by  my  manner  of 
writing,  that  I place  equal  confidence  in 
your  candour.  I shall  be  glad  to  exchange 
letters  as  often  as  it  suits  us,  without  con- 
straint, ceremony,  or  apology;  and  may  he 
who  is  always  present  with  our  hearts  make 
our  correspondence  useful.  I pray  God  to  be 
your  sun  and  shield,  your  light  and  strength, 
to  guide  you  with  his  eye,  to  comfort  you 
with  his  gracious  presence  in  your  own 
soul,  and  to  make  you  a happy  instrument 
of  comforting  many. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

July  14,  1775. 

my  dear  friend, — I gladly  adopt  your 
address,  and  can  assure  you  that  the  inter- 
change of  every  letter  unites  my  heart  more 
closely  to  you.  I am  glad  to  find  that  your 
views  of  articles  and  creeds  are  not  likely  to 
hinder  you  from  going  forward  in  your  pre- 
sent situation ; and  if,  without  contracting 
your  usefulness,  they  only  prove  a bar  to 


* Great  is  Diana. 


t 2 Cor.  vi.  10. 


246 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  S- 


your  preferment,  I am  sure  it  will  be  no 
grief  of  mind  to  you  at  the  hour  of  death,  or 
the  day  of  judgment,  that  you  were  enabled 
to  follow  the  dictates  of  conscience,  in  oppo- 
sition to  all  the  pleas  of  custom  or  interest. 
Since,  therefore,  I have  no  desire  of  shaking 
your  resolves,  may  we  not  drop  this  subject 
entirely  ? For,  indeed,  I act  but  an  awk- 
ward part  in  it,  being  by  no  means  myself 
an  admirer  of  a;  cles  and  creeds,  or  disposed 
to  be  a warm  advocate  for  church-powTer. 
The  propriety  of  our  national  establishment, 
or  of  any  other,  is  w’hat  I have  not  much  to 
do  with ; I found  it  as  it  is,  nor  have  I influ- 
ence to  alter  it  wTere  I willing.  The  question 
in  which  I was  concerned  was  simply, 
Whether  I,  rebus  sic  stantibus , could  sub- 
mit to  it,  so  as  conscientiously  to  take  a 
designation  to  the  ministry  under  it  ? I 
thought  I could : I accordingly  did,  and  I am 
thankful  that  I never  have  seen  cause  to  re- 
pent it. 

You  seem  gently  to  charge  me  with  a 
want  of  candour  in  what  I observed  or  appre- 
hended concerning  the  gentlemen  of  the 
Feathers  Tavern.  If  I mistake  not  (for  I re- 
tain no  copies  of  my  letters,)  I expressed  my- 
self with  a double  restriction,  by  first  saying 
“ the  leaders  of  that  society,”  and  then  add- 
ing, “ or  some  of  them  at  least.”  I appre- 
hend your  candour  will  hardly  lead  you  to 
suppose  that  there  are  none  amongst  them 
who  would  pull  down  the  whole  fabric,  that 
is,  I mean  so  far  as  it  crosses  the  Socinian 
scheme,  if  it  was  left  to  their  choice.  I ap- 
prehend I may,  without  the  least  breach  of 
candour,  suppose  that  the  exceptions  which 
Mr.  Lindsay  has  made  to  the  Liturgy  are 
not  peculiar  to  himself.  It  seems  plain  in 
his  case,  and  from  his  own  writings,  that  the 
mere  removal  of  subscriptions,  which  is  the 
immediate  and  ostensible  object  of  the  cleri- 
cal petition,  could  not  have  satisfied  him ; and 
it  is  past  a doubt  with  me,  that  there  are 
others  of  the  clergy  like  minded  with  him. 
Indeed,  I could  wish  to  be  thought  candid 
by  you;  though,  1 confess,  I am  not  a friend 
to  that  lukewarmness  and  indifference  for 
truth,  which  bears  the  name  of  candour 
among  many  in  the  present  day.  I desire 
to  maintain  a spirit  of  candour  and  benevo- 
lence to  all  men,  to  wish  them  wTell,  to  do 
them  every  good  office  in  my  power,  and  to 
commend  what  appears  to  me  commendable 
m a Socinian,  as  readily  as  in  a Calvinist. 
But  with  some  people  I can  only  go  usque 
ad  aras.  I must  judge  of  principles  by  the 
word  of  God,  and  of  the  tree  by  its  fruit  I 
meddle  with  no  man’s  final  state ; because  I 
know  that  he  who  is  exalted  to  give  repent- 
ance and  remission  of  sins,  can  do  it  when- 
ever, and  to  whomsoever  he  is  pleased : yet 
I firmly  believe,  and  I make  no  scruple  of 
proclaiming  it  that  swearers,  drunkards, 
adulterers,  continuing  such,  cannot  inherit 


[let.  ii. 

the  kingdom  of  God  ; and  I look  with  no  less 
compassion  upon  some  persons,  whose  charac- 
ters in  common  life  may  be  respectable,  when 
I see  them  unhappily  blinded  by  their  own 
wisdom ; and  while  they  account  themselves, 
and  are  accounted  by  many  others,  master- 
builders  in  Zion,  rejecting  the  only  founda- 
tion upon  which  a sinner’s  hope  can  be 
safely  built. 

I am  far  from  thinking  the  Socinians  all 
hypocrites ; but  I think  they  are  all  in  a most 
dangerous  error ; nor  do  their  principles  ex- 
hibit to  my  view  a whit  more  of  the  genuine 
fruits  of  Christianity  than  deism  itself.  You 
say,  “ if  they  be  sincere,  and  fail  not  for  want 
of  diligence  in  searching,  I cannot  help  think- 
ing, that  God  will  not  condemn  them  for  an 
inevitable  defect  in  their  understandings.” 
Indeed,  my  friend,  I have  such  a low  opinion 
of  man  in  his  depraved  state,  that  I believe 
no  one  has  real  sincerity  in  religious  matters 
till  God  bestows  it ; and  wrhen  he  makes  a 
person  sincere  in  his  desires  after  truth,  he 
will  assuredly  guide  him  to  the  possession  of 
it  in  due  time,  as  our  Lord  speaks,  John  vi. 
44,  45.  To  suppose  that  any  persons  can 
sincerely  seek  the  way  of  salvation,  and  yet 
miss  it  through  an  inevitable  defect  of 
their  understandings,  would  contradict  the 
plain  promises  of  the  gospel,  such  as  Matt, 
vii.  7,  8,  John  vii.  16,  17 ; but  to  suppose  that 
nothing  is  necessary  to  be  known  which 
some  persons  wTho  profess  sincerity  cannot 
receive,  would  be  in  effect  to  make  the  scrip- 
tures a nose  of  wax  and  open  a wide  door 
for  scepticism.  I am  not  a judge  of  the 
heart;  but  I may  be  sure,  that  whoever 
makes  the  foundation-stone  a rock  of  offence, 
cannot  be  sincere  in  his  inquiries.  He  may 
study  the  scriptures  accurately,  but  he  brings 
his  own  preconceived  sentiments  with  him, 
and,  instead  of  submitting  them  to  the  touch- 
stone of  truth,  he  makes  them  a rule  by 
which  he  interprets.  That  they  who  lean 
to  their  own  understandings  should  stumble 
and  miscarry,  I cannot  wonder ; for  the  same 
God  w’ho  has  promised  to  fill  the  hungry  writh 
good  things,  has  threatened  to  send  the  rich 
empty  away.  So  Matt  xi.  25.  It  is  not 
through  defect  of  understanding,  but  a want 
of  simplicity  and  humility,  that  so  many 
stumble  like  the  blind  at  noon-day,  and  can 
see  nothing  of  those  great  truths  which  are 
written  in  the  gospel  as  wdth  a sun-beam. 

You  wish  me  to  explain  myself  concerning 
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity.  I will  try ; yet 
I know  I cannot,  any  farther  than  as  he  who 
taught  me  shall  be  pleased  to  bear  witness  in 
your  heart  to  what  I say.  My  first  principle 
in  religion  is  what  the  scriptures  teach  me 
of  the  utter  depravity  of  human  nature,  in 
connexion  with  the  spirituality  and  sanction 
of  the  law  of  God.  I believe  we  are  by  na- 
ture sinners,  by  practice  universally  trans- 
gressors ; that  we  are  dead  in  trespasses  and 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  S- 


247 


LET.  II. J 

sins ; and  that  the  bent  of  our  natural  spirit 
is  enmity  against  the  holiness,  government, 
and  grace  of  God.  Upon  this  ground  I see, 
feel,  and  acknowledge  the  necessity  of  such  a 
salvation  as  the  gospel  proposes,  which,  at  the 
same  time  that  it  precludes  boasting,  and 
stains  the  pride  of  all  human  glory,  affords 
encouragement  to  those  who  may  be  thought, 
or  who  may  think  themselves,  the  weakest  or 
the  vilest  of  mankind.  I believe,  that  what- 
ever notions  a person  may  take  up  from  edu- 
cation, or  system,  no  one  ever  did,  or  ever 
will  feel  himself  and  own  himself  to  be  such 
a lost,  miserable,  hateful  sinner,  unless  he  be 
powerfully  and  supernaturally  convinced  by 
the  Spirit  of  God.  There  is,  when  God 
pleases,  a certain  light  thrown  into  the  soul, 
which  differs,  not  merely  in  degree  but  in 
kind,  toto  genere , from  any  thing  that  can  be 
effected  or  produced  by  moral  suasion  or  ar- 
gument. But  (to  take  in  another  of  your 
queries)  the  Holy  Spirit  teaches  or  reveals  no 
new  truths,  either  of  doctrine  or  precept ; but 
only  enables  us  to  understand  what  is  already 
revealed  in  the  scriptures.  Here  a change 
takes  place ; the  person  that  was  spiritually 
blind  begins  to  see.  The  sinner’s  character, 
as  described  in  the  word  of  God,  he  finds  to 
be  a description  of  himself ; that  he  is  afar  off, 
a stranger,  a rebel ; that  he  has  hitherto  lived 
in  vain.  Now  he  begins  to  see  the  necessity 
of  an  atonement,  an  advocate,  a shepherd,  a 
comforter ; he  can  no  more  trust  to  his  own 
wisdom,  strength,  and  goodness,  but,  account- 
ing all  his  former  gain  but  loss,  for  the  ex- 
cellency of  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  he  re- 
nounces every  other  refuge,  and  ventures  his 
all  upon  the  person,  work,  and  promise  of  the 
Redeemer.  In  this  way,  I say  he  will  find 
the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  not  only  a propo- 
sition but  a principle ; that  is,  from  his  own 
wants  and  situation  he  will  have  an  abiding 
conviction  that  the  Son  and  Holy  Spirit  are 
God,  and  must  be  possessed  of  the  attributes 
and  powers  of  Deity,  to  support  the  offices 
the  scriptures  assign  them,  and  to  deserve 
the  confidence  and  worship  the  scriptures  re- 
quire to  be  placed  in  them,  and  paid  to  them. 
Without  this  awakened  state  of  mind,  a di- 
vine, reputed  orthodox,  will  blunder  wretch- 
edly even  in  defending  his  own  opinions.  I 
have  seen  laboured  defences  of  the  Trinity, 
which  have  given  me  not  much  more  satis- 
faction than  I should  probably  receive  from  a 
dissertation  upon  the  rainbow,  composed  by 
a man  blind  from  his  birth.  In  effect,  the 
knowledge  of  God  cannot  be  attained  by  stu- 
dious discussion  on  our  parts;  it  must  be  by 
a revelation  on  his  part,  Matt.  xi.  27,  and 
xvi.  17 ; a revelation,  not  objectively  of  new 
truth,  but  subjectively  of  new  light  in  us. 
Then  he  that  runs  may  read.  Perhaps  you 
may  not  quite  understand  my  meaning,  or 
not  accede  to  my  sentiments  at  present;  I 
have  little  doubt,  however,  but  the  time  is 


coming  when  you  will.  I believe  the  Lord 
God  has  given  you  that  sincerity  which  he 
never  disappoints. 

Far  be  it  from  me  to  arrogate  infallibility 
to  myself,  or  to  any  writer  or  preacher ; yet, 
blessed  be  God,  I am  not  left  to  float  up  and 
down  the  uncertain  tide  of  opinion,  in  those 
points  wherein  the  peace  of  my  soul  is  nearly 
concerned.  I know,  yea,  I infallibly  know, 
whom  I have  believed.  I am  under  no  more 
doubt  about  the  way  of  salvation  than  of  the 
way  to  London.  I cannot  be  deceived,  be- 
cause the  word  of  God  cannot  deceive  me. 
It  is  impossible,  however,  for  me  to  give  you, 
or  any  person,  full  satisfaction  concerning  my 
evidence,  because  it  is  of  an  experimental 
nature,  Rev.  ii.  17.  In  general,  it  arises 
from  the  views  I have  received  of  the  power, 
compassion,  and  grace  of  Jesus,  and  a con- 
sciousness that  I,  from  a conviction  of  my 
sin  and  misery,  have  fled  to  him  for  refuge, 
entrusted  and  devoted  myself  and  my  all  to 
him.  Since  my  mind  has  been  enlightened, 
every  thing-  within  me,  and  every  thing 
around  me,  confirms  and  explains  to  me  what 
I read  in  scripture ; and  though  I have  reason 
enough  to  distrust  my  own  judgment  every 
hour,  yet  I have  no  reason  to  question  the 
great  essentials,  which  the  Lord  himself  hath 
taught  me. 

Besides  a long  letter,  I send  you  a g real 
book.  A part  of  it,  for  I do  not  ask  you  to 
read  the  whole,  may  perhaps  explain  my 
meaning  better  than  I have  leisure  to  do 
myself.  I set  a high  value  upon  this  book 
of  Mr.  Haly burton’s ; so  that,  unless  I could 
replace  it  with  another,  I know  not  if  I 
would  part  with  it  for  its  weight  in  gold. 
The  first  and  longest  treatise  is,  in  my  judg- 
ment, a masterpiece ; but  I would  chiefly  wish 
you  to  peruse  the  essay  concerning  faith,  to- 
wards the  close  of  the  book.  I need  not  beg 
you  to  read  it  carefully,  and  to  read  it  all. 
The  importance  of  the  subject,  its  immediate 
connexion  with  your  inquiries,  and  the  ac- 
curacy of  the  reasoning,  will  render  the  mo- 
tive of  my  request  unnecessary.  I cannot 
style  him  a very  elegant  writer;  and,  being 
a Scotchman,  he  abounds  with  the  Scottish 
idiom ; but  you  will  prefer  truth  to  ornament. 
I long  to  Hear  your  opinion  of  it.  It  seems 
to  me  so  adapted  to  some  things  that  have 
passed  between  us  as  if  written  on  purpose. 

The  Inquiry  concerning  Regeneration  and 
J ustification,  which  stands  last  in  the  book,  I 
do  not  desire,  or  even  wish  you  to  read  ; but 
if  you  should,  and  then  think  that  you  have 
read  a speculation  more  curious  than  useful, 

I shall  not  contradict  you.  I think  it  must 
appear  to  you  in  that  light;  but  it  was  bound 
up  with  the  rest,  and  therefore  could  not  stay 
behind ; but  I hope  the  Essay  on  Faith  will 
please  you. 

I take  great  pleasure  in  your  correspond- 
ence, still  more  in  the  thought  of  your  friend- 


248 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  S- 


shi|S  which  I hope  to  cultivate  to  the  utmost, 
and  to  approve  myself  sincerely  and  affection- 
ately yours. 


LETTER  HI. 

August  11, 1775. 

my  dear  friend, — Next  week  I go  to 
London,  where  I purpose,  if  nothing  un- 
foreseen prevents,  to  stay  a month.  Many 
things  wrhich  must  necessarily  be  attended 
to  before  my  departure,  abridge  me  of  that 
leisure  which  I could  wish  to  employ  in  an- 
swering your  last.  However,  I will  spare 
you  what  I can.  I thank  you  for  yours. 
Your  objections  neither  displease  nor  weary 
me.  While  truth  is  the  object  of  your  in- 
quiry, the  more  freedom  you  use  with  me 
the  better.  Nor  do  they  surprise  me ; for  1 
have  formerly  made  the  like  objections  my- 
self. I have  stood  upon  your  ground,  and  I 
continue  to  hope  you  will  one  day  stand  upon 
mine.  As  I have  told  you  more  than  once, 
I do  not  mean  to  dictate  to  you,  or  wish  you 
to  receive  any  thing  upon  my  ipse  dixit ; but, 
in  the  simplicity  of  friendship,  I will  give  you 
my  thoughts  from  time  to  time  upon  the 
points  you  propose,  and  leave  the  event  to  the 
divine  blessing. 

I am  glad  you  do  not  account  the  Socini- 
ans  master-builders.  However,  they  esteem 
themselves  so,  and  are  so  esteemed,  not  only 
by  a few,  as  you  think,  but  by  many.  I fear 
Socinianism  spreads  rapidly  amongst  us,  and 
bids  fair  to  be  the  prevailing  scheme  in  this 
land,  especially  with  those  who  profess  to  be 
the  thinking  part.  The  term  Arminian,  as 
at  present  applied,  is  very  indiscriminate,  and 
takes  in  a great  variety  of  persons  and  senti- 
ments, amongst  wdiom,  I believe,  there  are 
many  who  hold  the  fundamental  truths  of  the 
gospel,  and  live  a life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of 
God.  I am  far  from  supposing  that  God  will 
guide  every  sincere  person  exactly  to  adopt 
all  my  sentiments.  But  there  are  some  sen- 
timents w hich  I believe  essential  to  the  very 
state  and  character  of  a true  Christian.  And 
these  make  him  a Christian,  not  merely  by 
being  his  acknowledged  sentiments,  but  by  a 
certain  peculiar  maimer  in  which  he  pos- 
sesses them.  There  is  a certain  important 
change  takes  place  in  the  heart,  by  the  ope- 
ration of  the  Spirit  of  God,  before  the  sound- 
est and  most  orthodox  sentiments  can  have 
their  proper  influence  upon  us.  This  work, 
or  change,  the  scriptures  describe  by  various 
names,  each  of  which  is  designed  to  teach  us 
the  marvellous  effects  it  produces,  and  the 
almighty  power  by  which  it  is  produced.  It 
is  sometimes  called  a new  birth,  John  iii.  3; 
sometimes  a new  creature,  or  a new  creation, 
os  2 Cor.  v.  17;  sometimes  the  ca  using  light 
to  shine  out  of  darkness,  2 Cor.  iv.  (j ; some- 


[let.  hi. 

times  the  opening  the  eyes  of  the  blind,  Acts 
xxvi.  18 ; sometimes  the  raising  the  dead  to 
life,  Ephes.  ii.  5.  Till  a person  has  experi- 
enced this  change,  he  will  be  at  a loss  to  form 
a right  conception  of  it : but  it  means,  not 
being  proselyted  to  an  opinion,  but  receiving 
a principle  of  divine  life  and  light  in  the  soul. 
And  till  this  is  received,  the  things  of  God, 
the  truths  of  the  gospel  cannot  be  rightly  dis- 
cerned or  understood  by  the  utmost  powers  of 
fallen  man,  who,  with  all  his  wisdom,  reason, 
and  talents,  is  still  but  what  the  apostle  calls 
the  natural  man,  till  the  power  of  God  visits 
his  heart,  1 Cor.  ii.  14.  This  work  is  some- 
times wrought  suddenly,  as  in  the  case  of 
Lydia,  Acts  xvi.  14;  at  other  times  very  gra- 
dually. A person  who  before  was  a stranger 
even  to  the  form  of  godliness,  or  at  best,  con- 
tent with  a mere  form,  finds  new  thoughts 
arising  in  his  mind,  feels  some  concern  about 
his  sins,  some  desire  to  please  God,  some  sus- 
picions that  all  is  not  right.  He  examines  his 
views  of  religion,  hopes  the  best  of  them,  and 
yet  cannot  rest  satisfied  in  them.  To-day 
perhaps,  he  thinks  himself  fixed  ; to-morrow 
he  will  be  all  uncertainty.  He  inquires  of 
others;  weighs,  measures,  considers,  meets 
with  sentiments  which  he  had  not  attended  to, 
thinks  them  plausible;  but  is  presently  shock- 
ed with  objections  or  supposed  consequences, 
which  he  finds  himself  unable  to  remove.  As 
he  goes  on  in  his  inquiry,  his  difficulties  in- 
crease. New  doubts  arise  in  his  mind ; even 
the  scriptures  perplex  him,  and  appear  to  as- 
sert contrary  things.  He  wTould  sound  the 
depths  of  truth  by  the  plummet  of  his  reason; 
but  he  finds  his  line  is  too  short.  Yet  even 
now  the  man  is  under  a guidance,  which  will 
at  length  lead  him  right.  The  importance  of 
the  subject  takes  up  his  thoughts,  and  takes 
off  the  relish  he  once  had  for  the  things  of 
the  world.  He  reads,  he  prays,  he  strives,  he 
resolves;  sometimes  inward  embarrassments 
and  outward  temptations  bring  him  to  his 
wits  end.  He  almost  wishes  to  stand  where 
he  is,  and  inquire  no  more ; but  he  cannot 
stop.  At  length  he  begins  to  feel  the  inward 
depravity,  which  he  had  before  owned  as  an 
opinion  ; a sense  of  sin  and  guilt  cuts  him  out 
new  work.  Here  reasoning  will  stand  him  m 
no  stead.  This  is  a painful  change  of  mind ; 
but  it  prepares  the  way  for  a blessing.  It 
silences  some  objections  better  than  a thou- 
sand arguments,  it  cuts  the  comb  of  his  own 
wisdom  and  attainments;  it  makes  him  weary 
of  working  for  life,  and  teaches  him,  in  God’s 
due  time  the  meaning  of  that  text,  “ To  him 
that  w’orketh  not,  but  believeth  in  him  who 
justifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  counted  for 
righteousness.”  Then  he  learns  that  scrip- 
tural faith  is  a very  different  thing  from  a 
rational  assent  to  the  gospel, — that  it  is  the 
immediate  gift  of  God ; (Ephes.  ii.  8 the 
operation  of  God ; (Col.  ii.  12 ;)  that  Christ 
is  not  only  the  object,  but  the  author  and 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  & 


249 


LET.  III. 


finisher  of  faith  (Heb.  xii.  2 ;)  and  that  faith 
is  not  so  properly  a part  of  that  obedience 
we  owe  to  God,  as  an  inestimable  benefit  we 
receive  from  him,  for  Christ’s  sake,  (Phil.  i. 
29,)  which  is  the  medium  of  our  justification, 
(Rom.  v.  1.)  and  the  principle  by  which  we 
are  united  to  Christ,  as  the  branch  to  the 
vine  (John  xvii.  21.)  I am  well  aware  of  the 
pains  taken  to  put  a different  sense  upon 
these  and  other  seemingly  mysterious  passa- 
ges of  scripture ; but  thus  far  we  speak  that 
which  we  know,  and  testify  that  which  we 
have  seen.  I have  described  a path  in  which 
I have  known  many  led,  and  in  which  I have 
walked  myself. 

The  gospel,  my  dear  Sir,  is  a salvation  ap- 
pointed for  those  who  are  ready  to  perish, 
and  is  not  designed  to  put  them  in  a way  to 
save  themselves  by  their  own  works.  It 
speaks  to  us  as  condemned  already,  and  calls 
upon  us  to  believe  in  a crucified  Saviour, 
that  we  may  receive  redemption  through  his 
blood,  even  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins.  And 
the  Spirit  of  God,  by  the  gospel,  first  con- 
vinces us  of  unbelief,  sin,  and  misery ; and 
then,  by  revealing  the  things  of  Jesus  to  our 
minds,  enables  us,  as  helpless  sinners,  to 
come  to  Christ,  to  receive  him,  to  behold  him, 
or  in  other  words,  to  believe  in  him,  and  ex- 
pect pardon,  life,  and  grace  from  him;  re- 
nouncing every  hope  and  aim  in  which  we 
once  rested,  and  accounting  ail  things  loss 
and  dung  for  the  excellency  of  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ,  John  vi.  35 ; Is.  xlv.  22,  with 
John  vi.  49 ; Col.  ii.  6.  In  some  of  Omicron’s 
letters  you  will  find  my  thoughts  more  at 
large  upon  these  subjects  than  I have  now 
time  to  write  them.  For  a farther  illustra- 
tion, I refer  you  to  the  MSS.  sent  herewith. 
The  first  part,  written  in  short  hand,  does 
not  so  immediately  concern  our  present  point 
as  the  second,  which  you  may  read  without 
a key.  It  relates  to  a matter  of  indisputable 
fact,  concerning  a person  with  whom,  as  you 
will  perceive,  I was  well  acquainted.  You 
may  depend  upon  the  truth  of  every  tittle. 
I entrust  it  to  you  in  the  confidence  of  friend- 
ship, and  beg  that  it  may  not  go  out  of  your 
hands,  and  that,  when  you  have  perused  it, 
you  will  return  it,  sealed  up,  by  a safe  con- 
veyance, to  my  house.  You  will  see  in  it 
the  sentiments  of  a man  of  great  learning, 
sound  reasoning,  an  amiable  and  irreproacha- 
ble character,  and  how  little  he  accounted 
of  all  these  advantages,  when  the  Lord  was 
pleased  to  enlighten  his  mind. 

Though  we  have  not  exactly  the  same 
views  of  human  depravity,  yet  as  we  both 
agree  to  take  our  measure  of  it  from  the 
word  of  God,  I trust  we  shall  not  always  dif- 
fer about  it.  Adam  was  created  in  the  image 
of  God,  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness, 
Ephes.  iv.  24.  This  moral  image,  I believe, 
was  totally  lost  by  sin.  In  that  sense  he 
died  the  day,  the  moment,  he  ate  the  for- 
21 


bidden  fruit.  God  was  no  longer  his  joy  and 
delight ; he  was  averse  from  the  thoughts  of 
his  presence,  and  would,  if  possible,  have  hid 
himself  from  him.  His  natural  powers, 
though  doubtless  impaired,  were  not  de- 
stroyed. Man,  by  nature,  is  still  capable  of 
great  things.  His  understanding,  reason, 
memory,  imagination,  &c.  sufficiently  pro- 
claim that  the  hand  that  made  him  is  divine. 
He  is,  as  Milton  says  of  Beelzebub,  majestic, 
though  in  ruins.  He  can  reason,  invent,  and, 
by  application,  attain  a considerable  know- 
ledge in  natural  things.  The  exertions  of 
human  genius,  as  specified  in  the  characters 
of  some  philosophers,  poets,  orators,  &c.  are 
wonderful.  But  man  cannot  know,  love,  trust, 
or  serve  his  Maker,  unless  he  be  renewed  in 
the  spirit  of  his  mind.  God  has  preserved 
in  him  likewise  some  feelings  of  benevolence, 
pity,  some  sense  of  natural  justice  and  truth, 
&.c.  without  which  there  could  be  no  society: 
but  these,  I apprehend,  are  little  more  than 
instincts,  by  which  the  world  is  kept  in 
some  small  degree  of  order ; but,  being  under 
the  direction  of  pride  and  self,  do  not  deserve 
the  name  of  virtue  and  goodness;  because 
the  exercise  of  them  does  not  spring  from  a 
principle  of  love  to  God,  nor  is  directed  to  his 
glory,  or  regulated  by  the  rule  of  his  word, 
till  a principle  of  grace  is  superadded.  You 
think  I will  not  say,  “ that  God  judicially,  in 
punishment  of  one  man’s  sin,  added  these 
corruptions  to  all  his  posterity.”  Let  us 
suppose,  that  the  punishment  annexed  to  eat- 
ing the  forbidden  fruit  had  been  the  loss  of 
Adam’s  rational  powders,  and  that  he  should 
be  degraded  to  the  state  and  capacity  of  a 
brute.  In  this  condition,  had  he  begotten 
children,  after  the  fall,  in  his  own  likeness, 
his  nature  being  previously  changed,  they 
must  have  been  of  course  brutes  like  himself; 
for  he  cculd  not  convey  to  them,  those  origi- 
nal powers  which  he  had  lost.  Will  this  il- 
lustrate my  meaning!  Sin  did  not  deprive 
him  of  rationality,  but  of  spirituality.  His 
nature  became  earthly,  sensual,  yea  devilish; 
and  this  fallen  nature,  this  carnal  mind, 
which  is  enmity  against  God,  which  is  not 
subject  to  his  law,  neither  indeed  can  be 
(Rom.  viii.  7,)  we  universally  derive  from 
him.  Look  upon  children:  they  presently 
show  themselves  averse  from  good,  but  ex- 
ceedingly propense  to  evil.  This  they  can 
learn  even  without  a master ; but  ten  thou- 
sand instructors  and  instructions  cannot  in- 
stil good  into  them,  so  as  to  teach  them  to 
love  their  Creator  unless  a divine  power  co- 
operates. Just  as  it  is  with  the  earth,  which 
produces  weeds  spontaneously;  but  if  you 
see  a cabbage,  or  an  apple-tree,  you  are  sure 
it  was  planted  or  sown  there,  and  did  not 
spring  from  the  soil.  I know  many  hard 
questions  may  be  started  upon  this  subject ; 
but  the  Lord,  in  due  time,  will  clear  his  own 
cause,  and  vindicate  his  own  ways.  I leave 


250 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REY.  MR.  S- 


[LET.  III. 


all  difficulties  with  him.  It  is  sufficient  for 
me  that  scripture  asserts,  and  experience 
proves,  that  it  is  thus  in  fact,  Rom.  iii.  9 — 51 ; 
Job  xiv.  4.  Thus  we  have  not  only  forfeited 
our  happiness  by  transgression,  but  are,  by 
our  depravity,  incapable  of  it,  and  have  no 
more  desire  or  taste  for  such  a state  as  the 
scriptures  describe  heaven  to  be,  than  a man 
born  deaf  can  have  for  a concert  of  music. 
And  therefore  our  Lord  declares,  that  except 
a man  be  born  again,  he  not  only  shall  not, 
but  cannot,  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  Hence 
a twofold  necessity  of  a Saviour — his  blood 
for  the  pardon  of  sins,  and  his  life,  spirit, 
and  grace,  to  quicken  our  souls,  and  form  us 
anew  for  himself,  that  we  may  feel  his  love, 
and  show  forth  his  praise. 

St.  Paul,  before  his  conversion,  was  not 
sincere,  in  the  sense  I hope  you  to  be.  He 
thought  himself  in  the  right,  without  doubt, 
as  many  have  done  when  they  killed  God’s 
servants,  John  xvi.  2.  He  was  blindly  and 
obstinately  zealous.  I think  he  did  not  enter 
into  the  merits  of  the  cause,  or  inquire  into 
facts  with  that  attention  which  sincerity 
would  have  put  him  upon.  You  think  that 
his  sincerity  and  zeal  were  the  very  things 
that  made  him  a chosen  instrument ; he  him- 
self speaks  of  them  as  the  very  things  that 
made  him  peculiarly  unworthy  of  that  honour, 
(1  Cor.  xv.  9 ;)  and  he  tells  us,  that  he  was 
set  forth  as  a pattern  of  the  Lord’s  long-suf- 
ferings and  mercy,  that  the  very  chief  of 
sinners  might  be  encouraged,  1 Tim.  i.  15, 
16.  Had  he  been  sincerely  desirous  to  know 
whether  Jesus  was  the  Messiah,  there  was 
enough  in  his  character,  doctrines,  miracles, 
and  the  prophecies  concerning  him,  to  have 
cleared  up  the  point;  but  he  took  it  for 
granted  he  was  right  in  his  opinion,  and 
hurried  blindly  on,  and  was,  as  he  said  him- 
self, exceedingly  mad  against  them.  Such 
a kind  of  sincerity  is  common  enough.  Peo- 
ple believe  themselves  right,  and  therefore 
treat  others  with  scorn  or  rage,  appeal  to  the 
scriptures,  but  first  lay  down  their  own  pre- 
conceived sentiments  for  truths,  and  then 
examine  what  scriptures  they  can  find  to 
countenance  them.  Surely  a person’s  think- 
ing himself  right,  will  not  give  a sanction  to 
all  that  he  does  under  that  persuasion. 

Ignorance  and  obstinacy  are  in  themselves 
sinful,  and  no  plea  of  sincerity  will  exempt 
from  the  danger  of  being  under  their  influ- 
ence, Is.  xxvii.  11,  Luke  vi.  39.  It  appears 
to  me,  that,  though  you  will  not  follow  any 
man  implicitly,  you  are  desirous  of  discover- 
ing your  mistakes,  supposing  you  are  mis- 
taken in  any  point  of  importance.  You  read 
and  examine  the  word  of  God,  not  to  find 
arms  wherein  to  defend  your  sentiments  at 
all  events,  but  to  know  whether  they  are  de- 
fensible or  not.  You  pray  for  God’s  light 
and  teaching,  and  in  this  search  you  are  wil- 
ling to  risk  what  men  are  commonly  much 


afraid  of  hazarding — character,  interest,  pre- 
ferment, favour,  &c.  A sincerity  of  this 
kind  I too  seldom  meet  with : when  I do, 
I account  it  a token  for  good,  and  am  ready 
to  say,  “ No  man  can  do  this,  except  God  be 
with  him.”  However,  sincerity  is  not  con- 
version ; but  I believe  it  is  always  a fore- 
runner of  it. 

I would  not  be  uncharitable  and  censori- 
ous, hasty  and  peremptory  in  judging  my 
fellow-creatures.  But  if  I acknowledge  the 
word  of  God,  I cannot  avoid  forming  my 
judgment  upon  it.  It  is  true,  I cannot  look 
into  people’s  hearts  ; but  hearts  and  princi- 
ples are  delineated  to  my  hand  in  the  scrip- 
tures. I read,  that  no  murderer  has  eternal 
life  in  him : I read  likewise,  “ if  any  man 
love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be 
anathema and  therefore  I conclude,  that 
there  are  speculative  errors,  as  heinous  in 
their  guilt,  as  destructive  in  their  effects,  as 
murder ; and  that  the  most  moral,  regular 
man,  as  to  social  life,  if  he  loves  not  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  in  the  sight  of  God,  the 
judge  of  all,  as  displeasing  as  a murderer. 
It  has  pleased  God  for  the  peace  and  support 
of  society,  to  put  a black  mark  upon  those 
sins  which  affect  the  peace  and  welfare  of 
our  neighbour,  such  as  adultery  and  murder. 
But  undoubtedly  the  sins  committed  imme- 
diately against  himself  must  be  more  heinous 
than  any  which  offend  our  fellow-creatures. 
The  second  commandment  (Matt.  xxii.  39,) 
is  like  the  first ; but  it  depends  upon  it,  and 
is  therefore  inferior  to  it.  Men  ordinarily 
judge  otherwise.  To  live  regardless  of  God 
and  the  gospel  is  looked  upon  as  a mere 
pecadillo  in  comparison  with  offences  against 
society.  But  sooner  or  later  it  will  appear 
otherwise  to  all.  A parcel  of  robbers  may 
pique  themselves  upon  the  justice,  honour, 
and  truth  they  observe  towards  one  another ; 
but,  because  they  set  up  a petty  interest, 
which  is  inconsistent  with  the  public  good, 
they  are  deservedly  accounted  villains,  and 
treated  as  such,  notwithstanding  their  petty 
morality  among  themselves.  Now  such  a 
company  of  robbers  bears  a much  greater 
proportion  to  a whole  nation,  than  a nation, 
or  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  bears  to  the 
great  God.  Our  dependence  upon  him  is  ab- 
solute, our  obligations  to  him  infinite.  In 
vain  shall  men  plead  their  moral  discharge 
of  relative  duties  to  each  other,  if  they  fail 
in  the  unspeakably  greater  relation  under 
which  they  stand  to  God ; and  therefore, 
when  I see  people  living  without  God  in  the 
world,  as  all  do  till  they  are  converted,  I 
cannot  but  judge  them  in  a dangerous  state : 
— not  because  I take  pleasure  in  censuring, 
or  think  myself  authorised  to  pass  sentence 
upon  my  fellow  caeatures,  but  because  the 
scriptures  decide  expressly  on  the  case,  and 
I am  bound  to  take  my  sentiments  froir 
thence. 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  S- 


251 


LET.  V.] 

The  jailor  was  certainly  a Christian  when 
baptized,  as  you  observe.  He  trembled ; he 
cried  out,  “ What  must  I do  to  be  saved  1” 
Paul  did  not  bid  him  amend  his  life,  but  be- 
lieve in  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  believed  and  re- 
joiced. But  the  Lord  blessed  the  apostle’s 
words,  to  produce  in  him  that  saving  faith 
which  filled  him  with  joy  and  peace.  It  was, 
as  I observed  before,  something  more  than  an 
assent  to  the  proposition,  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ ; a resting  in  him  for  forgiveness  and 
acceptance,  and  a cleaving  to  him  in  love. 
No  other  faith  will  purify  the  heart,  work  by 
love,  and  overcome  the  world. 

I need  not  have  pleaded  want  of  leisure  as 
an  excuse  for  a short  letter,  for  I have  writ- 
ten a long  one.  I feel  myself  much  inter- 
ested in  your  concerns ; and  your  unexpected 
frank  application  to  me  (though  you  well 
know  the  light  in  which  I appear  to  some 
people)  I consider  as  a providential  call  which 
binds  me  to  your  service.  I hope  our  corres- 
pondence will  be  productive  of  happy  effects, 
and  that  we  shall  both  one  day  rejoice  in  it. 
— I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

September  6,  1775. 

'my  dear  friend, — I begin  to  fear  I shall 
fall  under  a suspicion  of  unkindness  and  for- 
getfulness towards  you,  and  therefore  I am 
willing  to  write  a line  by  way  of  prevention, 
though  I have  not  leisure  to  attempt  any 
thing  like  an  answer  to  the  letter  you  put 

into  my  hand  the  evening  before  I left  O ; 

I must  therefore  content  myself  with  a ten- 
der of  affection  and  respect,  and  an  inquiry 
after  your  welfare. 

Your  letter  will  give  me  an  opportunity  of 
saying  something  farther  when  time  shall  ad- 
mit ; but  an  endeavour  to  answer  all  the  ob- 
jections that  may  be  started  between  us,  in  a 
way  of  reasoning,  would  require  a volume, 
and  would  likewise  interfere  with  the  leading 
principle  upon  which  my  hope  of  giving  you 
satisfaction  in  due  time  is  grounded.  You 
seem  to  expect  that  I should  remove  your 
difficulties ; but  it  is  my  part  only  to  throw 
in  a word  occasionally,  as  a witness  of  what 
the  Lord  has  been  pleased  to  teach  me  from 
the  scriptures,  and  to  wait  for  the  rest  till  he 
(who  alone  is  able)  shall  be  pleased  to  com- 
municate the  same  views  to  you  : for,  till  we 
6ee  and  judge  by  the  same  medium,  and  are 
agreed  in  the  fundamental  point,  that  faith 
is  not  the  effect  of  reasoning,  but  a special 
gift  of  God,  which  he  bestows  when  and  to 
whom  he  pleases,  it  will  not  be  possible  for 
me  to  convince  you  by  dint  of  argument.  I 
believe,  as  I have  observed  before,  that  he 
has  already  given  you  a desire  to  know  his 
will,  and  there*W,  I trust  he  will  not  disap- 


point your  search.  At  present  I think  you 
want  one  thing,  which  it  is  not  in  my  power 
to  impart,  I mean,  such  a sense  of  the  de- 
pravity of  human  nature,  and  the  state  of 
all  mankind  considered  as  sinners,  as  may 
make  you  feel  the  utter  impossibility  of  at- 
taining to  the  peace  and  hope  of  the  gospel 
in  any  other  way,  than  by  renouncing  all 
hope  of  succeeding  by  any  endeavours  of 
your  own,  farther  than  by  humbly  waiting 
at  the  throne  of  grace,  for  power  to  cast 
yourself,  without  terms  and  conditions,  upon 
him  who  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost. 
We  must  feel  ourselves  sick,  before  we  can 
duly  prize  the  great  Physician,  and  feel  a 
sentence  of  death  in  ourselves  before  we 
can  effectually  trust  in  God,  who  raiseth  the 
dead. 

I have  not  brought  your  sermons  with  me, 
for  I thought  I should  not  have  time  to  read 
them  attentively  while  in  this  hurrying 
place.  I purpose  to  consider  them  with 
care,  and  to  give  you  my  thoughts  with 
frankness,  when  I return.  However,  if  they 
are  upon  the  plan  intimated  in  your  letter,  I 
will  venture  to  say  one  thing  beforehand, 
that  they  will  not  answer  your  desired  end. 
I am  persuaded  you  wish  to  be  useful — to 
reclaim  sinners  from  their  evil  ways — to 
inspire  them  with  a love  to  God,  and  a sin- 
cere aim  to  walk  in  obedience  to  his  will. 
May  I not  venture  to  appeal  to  yourself, 
that  you  meet  with  little  success, — that  the 
people  to  whom  you  preach,  though  they 
perhaps  give  you  a patient  hearing,  yet  re- 
main as  they  were,  unchanged,  and  unholy  1 
It  must  be  so : there  is  but  one  sort  of  preach- 
ing which  God  blesses  to  these  purposes,  that 
which  makes  all  the  world  guilty  before  God, 
and  sets  forth  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  brazen 
serpent  was  proposed  by  Moses,  that  guilty 
and  condemned  sinners,  by  looking  to  him, 
and  believing  on  his  name,  may  bo  healed 
and  saved.  The  most  pressing  exhortations 
to  repentance  and  amendment  of  life,  un- 
less they  are  enforced  in  a certain  way, 
which  only  God  can  teach,  will  leave  our 
hearers  much  as  they  find  them.  When  we 
meet,  or  when  I have  leisure  to  write  from 
home,  I will  trouble  you  with  my  thoughts 
more  at  large.  Till  then,  permit  me  to  as- 
sure you  of  my  sincere  regard  and  best 
wishes,  and  that — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  V. 

October  21,  1775 

my  dear  friend, — The  calls  and  engage- 
ments which  I told  you  engrossed  and  antfi 
cipated  my  time  when  I wrote  last,  have 
continued  without  any  intermission  hitherto, 
and  I am  still  far  behind-hand  with  my  busi- 
ness. I am  willing  to  hope,  that  the  case 


252 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR,  S- 


has  been  much  the  same  with  you,  and  that 
want  of  leisure  has  been  the  only  cause  of  my 
not  having  been  pleasured  with  so  much  as 
a note  from  you  since  my  return  from  Lon- 
don. 

I am  loath,  for  my  own  sake,  to  charge 
your  silence  to  any  unwillingness  of  continu- 
ing that  intercourse  which  I have  been,  and 
still  find  myself,  desirous  to  improve  on  my 
part.  For  though  we  are  not  agreed  in 
our  views,  yet  while  our  preliminary  agree- 
ment, to  allow  mutual  freedom,  and  to  exer- 
cise mutual  candour,  in  expressing  our  senti- 
ments, subsists,  we  may,  and  I hope  shall,  be 
glad  to  hear  from  each  other.  It  may  seem 
to  intimate  I have  a better  opinion  of  myself 
than  of  you,  that  while  I seem  confident  your 
freedom  will  not  offend  me,  I feel  now  and 
then  a fear,  lest  mine  should  prove  displeas- 
ing to  you.  But  friendship  is  a little  suspi- 
cious when  exercised  with  long  silence,  and  a 
plain  declaration  of  my  sentiments  has  more 
than  once  put  amiable  and  respectable  per- 
sons to  the  full  trial  of  their  patience. 

I now  return  your  sermons ; 1 thank  you 
for  the  perusal ; I see  much  in  them  that  I 
approve,  and  nothing  in  them  but  what  I for- 
merly espoused.  But  in  a course  of  years,  a 
considerable  alteration  has  taken  place  in 
my  judgment  and  experience,  I hope,  yea,  1 
may  boldly  say,  I am  sure,  not  for  the  worse. 
Then  l was  seeking,  and  now,  through  mer- 
cy, I have  found  the  pearl  of  great  price.  It 
is  both  the  prayer  and  the  hope  of  my  heart, 
that  a day  is  coming  when  you  shall  make 
the  same  acknowledgment.  From  your  let- 
ters and  sermons,  I am  encouraged  to  ad- 
dress you  in  our  Lord’s  words,  “ Thou  art 
not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God.”  I am 
persuaded  the  views  you  have  received  will 
not  suffer  you  to  remain  where  you  are. 
But  fidelity  obliges  me  to  add,  “ Yet  one 
thing  thou  lackest.”  That  one  thing  I trust 
the  Lord  will  both  show  you,  and  bestow 
upon  you,  in  his  due  time.  You  speak  some- 
where of  “ atoning  for  disobedience  by  re- 
pentance.” Ah ! my  dear  Sir,  when  we  are 
brought  to  estimate  our  disobedience,  by 
comparing  it  with  such  a sense  of  the  ma- 
jesty, holiness,  and  authority  of  God,  and 
the  spirituality,  extent,  and  sanction  of  his 
holy  law,  as  he,  and  he  only,  can  impress 
upon  the  heart  of  a sinner,  we  shall  be  con- 1 
vinced,  that  nothing  but  the  blood  of  the  Son 
of  God  can  atone  for  the  smallest  instance  of 
disobedience. 

I intimated,  in  my  letter  from  London,  one 
defect  of  your  scheme,  which  will  probably  be 
the  first  to  engage  your  notice.  I am  sure 
you  have  a desire  to  be  useful  to  the  souls  of 
men,  to  be  an  instrument  of  reclaiming  them 
from  that  course  of  open  wickedness,  or  life- 
less formality,  in  which  you  see  them  en- 
slaved ; and  in  a word,  to  prevail  with  them 
to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly,  accord- 


[let.  vi. 

ing  to  the  just  and  comprehensive  sense  you 
have  given  of  those  words,  in  your  sermon  on 
Tit.  ii.  11,  12.  Now,  inw7ard  experience, 
and  a pretty  extensive  observation  of  what 
passes  abroad,  have  so  perfectly  convinced  me 
there  is  but  one  mode  of  preaching  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  owns  to  the  producing  of  these  tf 
fects,  that  I am  not  afraid  to  pronounce  con 
fidently,  you  will  not  have  the  desires  of  your 
heart  gratified  upon  your  present  plan.  The 
people  will  give  you  a hearing,  and  remain 
just  as  they  are,  till  the  Lord  leads  you  to 
speak  to  them  as  criminals  condemned  already 
and  whose  first  essential  step  it  is,  to  seek 
forgiveness  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  a 
change  of  heart  and  state  by  his  grace,  before 
they  can  bring  forth  any  fruit  acceptable  to 
God. 

As  I have  little  time  for  writing,  and  little 
hope  of  succeeding  in  a way  of  argumenta- 
tion, I have  substituted,  instead  of  a longer 
letter,  the  heads  of  some  sermons  I preached 
nine  or  ten  years  ago,  on  our  Lord’s  discourse 
with  Nicodemus.  However,  when  I have 
heard  that  you  are  well,  and  that  you  are 
still  disposed  to  correspond  with  me,  I shall 
be  ready  to  give  a more  particular  answer 
to  the  subjects  you  pointed  out  to  me  in  the 
letter  you  favoured  me  with  the  day  before 
I left  London.  I pray  God  to  bless  you  in 
all  your  ways,  and  beg  you  to  believe,  that  I 
am,  with  sincerity,  &c. 


LETTER  VI. 

October  28. 

my  dear  friend, — It  never  entered  my 
pericranium,  that  you  expected  I should  fully 
and  directly  answer  your  letter  while  I was 
in  London ; and  yet  you  reasonably  might, 
as  you  knew  nothing  of  my  engagements  : 
but.  indeed,  it  was  impracticable ; I could 
only  send  you  a hasty  line,  as  a token  that  I 
remembered  you.  I informed  you,  when  I 
returned,  that  I was  just  going  out  again. 
Since  I came  home  the  second  time,  I have 
been  engrossed  by  things  that  would  admit 
of  no  delay ; and,  at  length,  not  having  so 
much  as  a note  from  you,  I thought  I would 
wait  till  I heard  farther.  But,  from  first  to 
last  it  was  my  intention,  and  I think,  my 
promise,  to  answer  in  the  manner  you  pro- 
posed as  soon  as  I could.  And  even  now  I 
must  beg  a little  longer  time.  Believe  me, 
that  as  the  wise  and  good  providence  of  God 
brought  us  together,  without  any  expecta- 
tion of  mine,  I will  do  all  in  my  power  to 
preserve  the  connexion,  and  particularly  by 
giving  my  thoughts  on  such  questions  as  you 
propose.  And  though  to  consider  your 
questions  in  the  manner  you  wish,  and  to 
point  out  the  agreement  of  detached  te^ts 
(as  they  occur)  with  mv  views,  seems  t 


253 


LET.  VII.]  LETTERS  TO  THE 

prospect,  to  require  a volume  rather  than  a 
sheet,  yet  I am  not  discouraged ; only  I beg 
you  to  make  allowance  for  other  things,  and 
to  be  assured,  that  before  I had  the  pleasure 
of  corresponding  with  you,  I had  very  little 
spare  time.  Expect  then  the  best  satisfaction 
I am  able  to  give  you,  as  soon  as  possible.  To 
prepare  the  way,  T will  try  hard  for  a little 
leisure,  to  give  you  a few  thoughts  upon  yours, 
which  came  last  night. 

You  complain  that.  I have  hitherto  disap- 
pointed your  expectations.  If  you  have  pre- 
served my  first  papers,  I believe  you  will 
find,  that  I apprised  you  this  might  probably 
be  the  event,  and  certainly  must,  unless  it 
should  please  God  to  make  what  I should 
write  a means  of  giving  you  the  same  views 
with  myself.  I only  proposed,  as  a witness, 
to  bear  a simple  testimony  to  what  I have 
6een  and  known.  So  far  as  you  believe  me 
sincere  and  unwilling  to  impose  upon  you,  I 
thought  you  might  admit,  there  was  perhaps 
some  weight  in  what  I advanced,  though  for 
the  present,  you  could  not  see  things  in  the 
same  light.  And  if  you  allowed  a possibility, 
that  mv  changing  the  sentiments  which  I 
once  held  in  common  with  yourself,  might 
be  upon  sufficient  grounds,  you  would,  as  I 
trust  you  do,  wait  upon  the  great  Teacher 
for  his  instruction;  otherwise  I did  not  ex- 
pect to  convince  you,  nor  do  I yet,  only  I am 
glad  to  put  myself  in  his  hands  as  an  instru- 
ment. 

You  quite  misunderstood  what  I spoke  of 
the  light  and  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
He  reveals  to  me  no  new  truths,  but  has 
only  shown  me  the  meaning  of  his  own  writ- 
ten word ; nor  is  this  light  a particular  reve- 
lation, it  is  common  to  all  who  are  born 
again.  And  thus,  though  you  and  I cannot 
fully  agree  about  it,  yet  I almost  daily  meet 
with  persons  from  the  east,  west,  north,  and 
south,  whom,  though  I never  saw  them  be- 
fore, I find  we  understand  each  other  at 
once.  This  (as  you  bid  me  be  explicit)  is 
the  one  thing  which  I think  you  at  present 
lack.  And  I limited  my  expression,  to  one 
thing,  because  it  is  our  Lord’s  expression, 
and  because  that  one  thing  includes  many. 
As  I said  before,  I cannot  give  it  you ; but. 
the  Lord  can : and  from  the  desire  he  has 
raised  in  your  heart,  I have  a warm  hope 
that  he  will.  You  place  the  whole  stress  of 
your  inquiries  upon  reason : I am  far  from 
discarding  reason,  when  it  is  enlightened 
and  sanctified ; but  spiritual  things  must  be 
spiritually  discerned,  and  can  be  received 
and  discerned  no  other  way ; for  to  our  natu- 
ral reason  they  are  foolishness,  1 Cor.  ii.  14, 
15 ; Matth.  xi.  25.  This  certain  some- 
thing I can  no  more  describe  to  those  who 
have  not  experienced  it,  than  I could  de- 
scribe the  taste  of  a pine-apple  to  a person 
who  had  never  seen  one.  But  scriptural 
proofe  might  be  adduced  in  abundance,  yet 


REV.  MR.  S 

not  so  as  to  give  solid  conviction  of  it,  til] 
we  actually  experience  it.  Thus  it  was  with 
my  friend,  whose  case  I sent  you.  When 
God  gave  him  the  key,  as  he  expressed  it, 
then  the  scriptures  were  unlocked.  His 
wishing  himself  a deist  some  time  before* 
was  not  from  any  libertine  exceptions  he 
made  to  the  precepts  of  the  gospel,  but  from 
the  perplexing  embarrassments  he  had  found, 
by  endeavouring  to  understand  the  doctrines 
by  dint  of  reason,  though  reason  in  him  was 
as  strong  and  penetrating  as  in  most  men 
I ever  met  with.  Upon  your  present  plan, 
how  can  I hope  to  satisfy  you,  though  even 
St.  Paul  asserts  it,  that  the  carnal  mind  is 
enmity  against  God  1 You  will  readily 
agree  with  me  to  the  proposition  as  it  stands 
in  St.  Paul's  words;  but  I think  you  will  not 
so  readily  assent  to  what  I have  no  more 
doubt  than  of  my  own  existence,  is  the  sense 
of  it,  That  the  heart  of  man,  of  any  man, 
every  man,  however  apparently  amiable  in 
his  outward  conduct,  however  benevolent 
to  his  fellow-creatures,  however  abundant 
and  zealous  in  his  devotions,  is  by  nature 
enmity  against  God;  not  indeed  against  the 
idea  he  himself  forms  of  God,  but  against  the 
character  which  God  has  revealed  of  himself 
in  the  scriptures.  Man  is  an  enemy  to  the 
justice,  sovereignty,  and  law  of  God,  and  to 
the  alone  method  of  salvation  he  has  ap- 
pointed in  the  gospel  by  faith  only : by  such 
a faith,  as  it  is  no  more  in  his  power  to  con- 
tribute to  the  production  of  in  himself,  than 
he  can  contribute  to  raising  the  dead,  or 
making  a world.  Whatever  is  of  the  flesh  is 
flesh,  and  can  rise  no  higher  than  its  princi- 
ple ; but  the  Lord  could  convince  you  of  this 
by  a glance  of  thought. 

But  I must  break  off,  for  want  both  of  room 
and  time.  Let  me  remind  you  of  our  agree- 
ment, to  use  and  to  allow  the  greatest  free- 
dom, and  not  to  be  offended  with  what  is 
meant  well  on  either  side.  Something  in 
your  last  letter  made  me  apprehensive  you 
were  a little  displeased  with  me.  He  that 
knows  my  heart,  knows  that  I wish  you  well 
as  my  own  soul. 

The  expression,  of  atoning  for  disobedi- 
ence by  repentance,  was  in  one  of  your  ser 
mons.  I considered  it  as  unguarded;  but  on 
my  view  of  things,  it  were  in  a manner  im- 
possible I could  use  that  expression,  though, 
perhaps,  too  often  unguarded  myself — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  VII. 

November  17,  1775. 

my  dear  friend, — At  length  I take  up 
your  favour  of  August  14,  with  design  to 
give  it  a more  explicit  answer.  My  delay- 
ing hitherto  has  been  unavoidable;  I am 


[LET.  VII. 


254  LETTERS  TO  THE 

sorry  to  have  your  patience  put  to  so  long  a 
trial,  and  should  be  more  sorry,  but  that  I 
consider,  that  in  my  former  papers,  sermons, 
Omicron’s  letters,  &c.  you  already  possess 
the  whole  (in  substance)  of  what  I have  to 
offer.  My  present  part  is  but  actum  agere, 
to  repeat  what  I have  elsewhere  expressed, 
only  with  some  variety  and  enlargement. 
You  yourself  will  state  the  situation  of  our 
debate,  when  you  say,  “ Nor  in  truth  do  you 
offer  any  arguments  to  convince  me,  nor  does 
it  seem  very  consistent  on  your  grounds  so 
to  do.  And  if  this  important  change  is  to 
be  brought  about  by  the  intervention  of  some 
extraordinary  impulse  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
cannot  be  brought  about  without  it ; I do  not 
see  any  thing  farther  that  I have  to  do,  than 
to  keep  my  mind  as  much  unbiased  as  I can, 
and  to  wait  and  pray  for  it.”  I think  my 
letter  from  London  was  to  the  purport  of 
these  your  own  words,  though  you  seemed 
dissatisfied  with  it.  While  we  see  through 
a different  medium,  it  will  be  easy  for  you 
to  answer  every  text  I might  adduce  in  sup- 
port of  my  sentiments,  as  you  have  those  I 
have  already  brought,  “ That  you  understand 
them  otherwise.”  In  order  to  support  my 
sense  of  one  text,  I should  perhaps  quote  and 
argue  from  twenty  more,  and  still  “ you 
would  understand  them  otherwise.”  The 
life  of  man,  yea  of  Methuselah,  would  hardly 
suffice  to  prove,  object,  and  defend,  all  that 
might  be  alledged  on  both  sides  in  this  way ; 
and  at  last  we  should  leave  oft’  as  we  began, 
more  fully  confirmed  in  our  own  opinions, 
unless  the  Lord,  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  should 
be  pleased  to  show  the  person  who  main- 
tained the  wrong  side  of  the  argument 
where  his  mistake  lay.  However,  I mean 
to  take  some  notice  of  your  queries  as  they 
offer  themselves. 

The  first  which  occurs  is  complicated. 
The  substance  I think  is,  Whether  such  be- 
lief and  aims  as  you  possess,  will  stand  you 
in  no  stead  unless  you  likewise  believe  grace 
irresistible,  predestination  absolute,  faith  in 
supernatural  impulses,  &c.  1 You  may  have 
observed,  I have  several  times  waived  speak- 
ing about  predestination  or  election,  not  that 
I am  ashamed  of  the  doctrine  ; because,  if  it 
be  indeed  absurd,  shocking,  and  unjust,  the 
blame  will  not  deservedly  fall  upon  me,  for 
I did  not  invent  it,  but  upon  the  scriptures, 
where  I am  sure  it  is  laid  down  in  as  plain 
terms,  as  that  God  created  the  heavens  and 
the  earth.  I own  I cannot  but  wonder,  that 
persons  professing  any  reverence  for  the 
Bible  should  so  openly  and  strongly  declare 
their  abhorrence  of  what  the  Bible  so  ex- 
pressly teaches ; namely,  that  there  is  a dis- 
crimination of  persons  by  the  grace  and  good 
pleasure  of  God,  where  by  nature  there  is 
no  difference ; and  that  all  things  respecting 
the  salvation  of  these  persons  is  infallibly  se- 
cured by  a divine  predestination. 


REV.  MR.  S 

I do  not  offer  this  as  a rational  doctrine 
though  it  be  highly  so  to  me ; but  it  is  scrip- 
tural, or  else  the  scriptures  are  a mere  nose 
of  wax,  and  without  a determinate  meaning. 
What  ingenuity  is  needful  to  interpret  many 
passages  in  a sense  more  favourable  to  our 
natural  prejudices  against  God’s  sovereignty ' 
Matt.  xi.  25,  26,  and  xiii.  10 — 17 ; Mark  xiii. 
20.  22;  John  xvii.  passim ; John  x.  26 ; Rom. 
viii.  28 — 30,  and  ix.  13 — 24,  and  xi.  7 ; Eph. 
i.  4,  5,  1 Pet.  i.  2.  Were  I fond  of  dis- 
puting, as  I am  not,  I think  I could  put  a 
close  reasoner  hard  to  it,  to  maintain  the 
truth  of  scripture-prophecies,  or  the  belief 
of  a particular  providence,  unless  he  would 
admit  a divine  predestination  of  causes  and 
events  as  the  ground  of  his  arguments.  How- 
ever, as  I said,  I have  chosen  to  waive  the 
point;  because,  however  true  and  necessary 
in  itself,  the  knowledge  and  comprehension 
of  it  is  not  necessary  to  the  being  of  a true 
Christian,  though  I can  hardly  conceive  he 
can  be  an  established  consistent  believer 
without  it.  This  doctrine  is  not  the  turning 
point  between  you  and  me ; the  nature  of 
justification,  and  the  method  of  a sinner’s  ac- 
ceptance with  God,  are  of  much  more  imme- 
diate importance;  and  therefore,  if  I am  to 
speak  plainly,  I must  say,  that  I look  upon 
your  present  sentiments,  attainments,  and 
advances,  as  you  describe  them,  to  constitute 
that  kind  of  gain  the  apostle  speaks  ofi  and 
concerning  which  I hope  you  will  one  day 
be  of  his  mind,  and  be  glad  to  account  it  a 1. 
loss,  that  you  may  win  Christ,  and  be  found 
in  him,  “ not  having  your  own  righteousness, 
which  is  of  the  law,  but  the  righteousness 
which  is  of  God  by  faith,”  Phil.  iii.  4.  7 — 10. 
For,  as  you  tell  me,  you  never  remember  a 
time  when  you  were  not  conscious  before 
God  of  great  unworthiness,  and  intervals  of 
earnest  endeavours  to  serve  him,  though  not 
with  the  same  success,  yet  something  in  the 
same  way,  as  at  present ; this  is  but  saying, 
in  other  words,  you  never  remember  a time 
when  old  things  passed  away,  and  all  things 
became  new;  and  yet  the  apostle  insists 
much  upon  this,  2 Cor.  iv.  6,  and  v.  17.  The 
convictions  of  natural  conscience,  and  those 
which  are  wrought  in  the  heart  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  are  different,  not  only  in  degree,  but 
in  kind ; the  light  of  a glow-worm  and  of  the 
sun  do  not  more  essentially  differ.  The  former 
are  partial  and  superficial,  leave  us  in  pos- 
session of  a supposed  power  of  our  own,  are 
pacified  by  some  appearances  of  an  outward 
change,  and  make  us  no  farther  sensible  of 
the  necessity  of  a Saviour,  than  to  make  our 
doings  and  duties  (if  I may  so  express  myself) 
full  weight,  which  perhaps  might  otherwise 
be  a little  deficient  when  brought  to  the  ba- 
lance of  the  sanctuary.  But  truly  spiritual 
convictions  give  us  far  other  views  of  sin ; they 
lead  us  to  a deep  and  awful  consideration  of 
the  root  of  our  total  absolute  depravity,  and 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  S- 


255 


LET.  VII.] 

our  utter  apostacy  from  God  by  which  we 
are  as  incapable  of  doing  good,  as  a dead 
man  is  of  performing  the  functions  of  life. 
They  lead  us  to  the  rule  and  standard,  the 
strict,  holy,  inflexible  law  of  God,  which 
reaches  to  the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the 
heart ; requires  perfect,  universal,  persever- 
ing obedience;  denounces  a curse  upon 
every  failure  (Gal.  iii.  10,)  and  affords  nei- 
ther place  nor  strength  for  repentance.  Thus 
they  sweep  away  every  hope  and  refuge  we 
had  before,  and  fix  upon  us  a sense  of  guilt 
and  condemnation,  from  which  there  is  no 
relief,  till  we  can  look  to  Jesus,  as  the 
wounded  Israelites  did  to  the  brazen  serpent; 
which  was  not  to  give  efficacy  to  medicines, 
and  plasters  of  their  own  application,  but  to 
heal  them  completely  of  itself  by  looking  at 
it.  John  iii.  14,  15,  and  vi.  40 ; Isaiah  xliii. 
22. 

You  wish  me  to  explain  my  distinction  be- 
tween faith  and  rational  assent;  and  though 
I know  no  two  things  in  the  world  more 
clearly  distinct  in  themselves,  or  more  express- 
ly distinguished  in  scripture,  yet  I fear  I 
may  not  easily  make  it  appear  to  you.  You 
allow  faith,  in  your  sense,  to  be  the  gift  of 
God ; but  in  my  sense,  it  is  likewise  wrought 
by  the  operation  of  God,  Col.  ii.  12,  to 

Kcv  fcsysoog  Svvausuig  ctvrov — x*t«  t>jv  evigysiot v tov 

XJ5ST0US  THIS  IT%'J05  «UT0t)  ;*  that  same  energy  of 
the  power  of  his  strength,  by  which  the  dead 
body  of  Jesus  was  raised  from  the  dead.  Can 
these  strong  expressions  intend  no  more  than 
a rational  assent,  such  as  we  give  to  a pro- 
position in  Euclid  1 I believe  fallen  reason 
is,  of  itself,  utterly  incapable  even  of  assent- 
ing to  the  great  truths  of  revelation ; it  may 
assent  to  the  terms  in  which  they  are  pro- 
posed, but  it  must  put  its  own  interpretation 
upon  them,  or  it  would  despise  them.  The 
natural  man  can  neither  receive  nor  discern 
the  things  of  God  ; and  if  any  one  would  be 
wise,  the  apostle’s  first  advice  to  him  is,  Let 
him  become  a fool,  that  he  may  be  wise;  for 
the  wisdom  of  the  world  is  foolishness  with 
God. 

Indeed  when  the  heart  is  changed,  and  the 
mind  enlightened,  then  reason  is  sanctified, 
and  if  I may  so  say,  baptized,  renounces  its 
curious  disquisitions,  and  is  content  humbly 
to  tread  in  the  path  of  revelation.  This  is 
one  difference ; assent  may  be  the  act  of  our 
natural  reason ; faith  is  the  effect  of  imme- 
diate almighty  power.  Another  difference  is, 
faith  is  always  efficacious,  “ it  worketh  by 
love;”  whereas  assent  is  often  given  where  it 
has  little  or  no  influence  upon  the  conduct. 
Thus,  for  instance,  every  one  will  assent  to 
this  truth,  All  men  are  mortal.  Yet  the  great- 
est part  of  mankind,  though  they  readily  as- 
sent to  the  proposition,  and  it  would  be  highly 
irrational  to  do  otherwise,  live  as  they  might 


do  if  the  reverse  were  true.  But  they  who 
have  divine  faith  feel,  as  well  as  say,  they  are 
pilgrims  and  sojourners  upon  earth.  Again, 
faith  gives  peace  of  conscience,  access  to  God, 
and  a sure  evidence  and  subsistence  of  things 
not  seen  (Rom.  v.  1,  2 ; Heb.  xi.  1 ;)  whereas, 
a calm  dispassionate  reasoner  may  be  com- 
pelled to  assent  to  the  external  arguments  in 
favour  of  Christianity,  and  yet  remain  a total 
stranger  to  that  communion  with  God,  that 
spirit  of  adoption,  that  foretaste  of  glory,  which 
is  the  privilege  and  portion  of  believers.  So 
likewise  faith  overcomes  the  world,  which  ra- 
tional assent  will  not  do.  Witness  the  lives 
and  tempers  of  thousands,  who  yet  would  be 
affronted,  if  their  assent  to  the  gospel  should 
be  questioned.  To  sum  up  all  in  a word,  “ He 
that  believes  shall  be  saved.”  But  surely 
many  who  give  a rational  assent  to  the  gospel 
live  and  die  in  those  sins  which  exclude  from 
the  kingdom  of  God,  Gal.  v.  19 — 21.  Faith 
is  the  effect  of  a principle  of  new  life  im- 
planted in  the  soul,  that  was  before  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins ; and  it  qualifies  not  only 
for  obeying  the  Saviour’s  precepts,  but  chiefly 
and  primarily  for  receiving  from  and  rejoicing 
in  his  fulness,  admiring  his  love,  his  work, 
his  person,  his  glory,  his  advocacy.  It  makes 
Christ  precious,  enthrones  him  in  the  heart, 
presents  him  as  the  most  delightful  object  to 
our  meditations;  as  our  wisdom,  righteous- 
ness, sanctification,  and  strength ; our  root, 
head,  life,  shepherd,  and  husband.  These  are 
all  scriptural  expressions  and  images,  setting 
forth,  so  far  as  words  can  declare,  what  Jesus 
is  in  himself  and  to  his  believing  people.  But 
how  cold  is  the  comment  which  rational  as- 
sent puts  upon  very  many  passages  wherein 
the  apostle  Paul  endeavours,  but  in  vain,  to 
express  the  fulness  of  his  heart  upon  this  sub- 
ject. A most  valued  friend  of  mine,  a cler- 
gyman, now  living,  had  for  many  years  given 
a rational  assent  to  the  gospel.  He  laboured 
with  much  earnestness  upon  your  plan,  was 
very  exemplary  in  his  whole  conduct,  preach- 
ed almost  incessantly  (two  or  three  times 
every  day  in  the  week  for  years,)  having  a 
parish  in  the  remote  parts  of  Yorkshire,  of 
great  extent,  and  containing  five  or  six  dif- 
ferent hamlets  at  some  distance  from  each 
other.  He  succeeded  likewise  with  his  peo- 
ple, so  far  as  to  break  them  off  from  outward 
irregularities ; and  was  mentioned  in  a let- 
ter to  the  Society  for  Propagating  the  Gos- 
pel, which  I have  seen  in  print,  as  the  most 
perfect  example  of  a parish-priest  which  this 
nation,  or  perhaps  this  age,  has  produced. 
Thus  he  went  on  for  many  years  teaching 
his  people  what  he  knew,  for  he  could  teach 
them  no  more.  He  lived  in  such  retirement 
and  recess,  that  he  was  unacquainted  with 
the  persons  and  principles  of  any  who  are 
now  branded  as  enthusiasts  and  methodists. 
One  day  reading  Ephes.  iii.  in  his  Greek 
Testament,  his  thoughts  were  stopped  by 


* Ephes.  i.  19. 


256 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REY.  MR.  S 


'.he  word  in  verse  8.  He  was 

Struck,  and  led  to  think  with  himself,  to  this 
purpose : — “ The  apostle,  when  speaking1  of 
the  love  and  riches  of  Christ,  uses  remarka- 
ble expressions ; he  speaks  of  heights,  depths, 
and  lengths,  and  breadths,  and  unsearchable- 
ness, where  I seem  to  find  every  thing  plain, 
easy,  and  rational.  He  finds  mysteries  where 
I can  perceive  none.  Surely,  though  I use 
the  words  gospel,  faith,  and  grace  with  him, 
my  ideas  of  them  must  be  different  from 
his.”  This  led  him  to  a close  examination 
of  all  his  epistles,  and,  by  the  blessings  of 
God,  brought  on  a total  change  in  his  views 
and  preaching.  He  no  longer  set  his  people 
to  keep  a law  of  faith,  to  trust  in  their  sin- 
cerity and  endeavours  upon  some  general 
hope  that  Christ  would  help  them  out  where 
they  came  short;  but  he  preached  Christ 
himself,  as  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteous- 
ness to  every  one  that  belie veth.  He  felt 
himself,  and  laboured  to  convince  others, 
that  there  is  no  hope  for  a sinner,  but  merely 
in  the  blood  of  Jesus,  and  no  possibility  of 
his  doing  any  works  acceptable  to  God,  till 
he  himself  be  first  made  accepted  in  the  Be- 
loved. Nor  did  he  labour  in  vain.  Now  his 
preaching  effected  not  only  an  outward  re- 
formation, but  a real  change  of  heart,  in  very 
many  of  his  hearers.  The  word  was  received, 
as  Paul  expresses  it,  not  with  a rational  assent 
only,  but  with  demonstration  and  power  in 
the  Holy  Ghost,  and  in  much  assurance;  and 
their  endeavours  to  observe  the  gospel  pre- 
cepts were  abundantly  more  extensive,  uni- 
form, and  successful,  when  they  were  brought 
to  say,  with  the  apostle,  “ I am  crucified 
with  Christ : nevertheless  I live,  yet  not  I, 
but  Christ  liveth  in  me ; and  the  life  I live 
in  the  flesh,  I live  by  faith  in  the  Son  of 
God.” 

Such  a change  of  views  and  sentiments  I 
pray  God  my  friend  may  experience.  These 
things  may  appear  uncouth  to  you  at  present, 
as  they  have  done  to  many,  who  now  bless 
God  for  showing  them  what  their  reason  could 
never  have  taught  them.  My  divinity  is  un- 
fashionable enough  at  present,  but  it  was  not 
so  always ; you  will  find  few  books  written 
from  the  era  of  the  Reformation  till  a little 
before  Laud’s  time,  that  set  forth  any  other. 
There  were  few  pulpits  till  after  the  Restora- 
tion from  which  any  other  was  heard.  A la- 
mentable change  has  indeed  since  taken 
place;  but  God  has  not  left  himself  without 
witnesses.  You  think,  though  I disclaim  in- 
fallibility, I arrogate  too  much,  in  speaking 
with  so  much  certainty.  I am  fallible,  in- 
deed; but  I am  sure  of  the  main  points  of 
doctrine  I hold.  I am  not  in  the  least  doubt, 
whether  salvation  be  of  faith  or  of  works ; 
whether  faith  be  of  our  own  power,  or  of 
God’s  operation ; whether  Christ’s  obedience 
or  our  own  be  the  just  ground  of  our  hope ; 
whether  a man  can  truly  call  Jesus  Lord, 


[let.  vii. 

but  by  the  teaching  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  J 
have  no  more  hesitation  about  these  points 
than  I should  have,  were  I asked,  Whether 
it  was  God  or  man  that  created  the  heavens 
and  the  earth]  Besides,  as  I have  more 
than  once  observed,  your  sentiments  were 
once  my  own ; so  that  I,  who  have  travelled 
both  roads,  may  have,  perhaps,  some  stronger 
reason  to  determine  me  which  is  the  right, 
than  you  can  have,  who  have  only  travellea 
one. 

Your  two  sheets  may  lead  me  to  write  as 
many  quires,  if  I do  not  check  myself.  I 
now  come  to  the  two  queries  you  propose, 
the  solution  of  which,  you  think,  will  clearly 
mark  the  difference  of  our  sentiments.  The 
substance  of  them  is,  1st,  Whether  I think 
any  sinner  ever  perished  in  his  sins  (to  whom 
the  gospel  has  been  preached,)  because  God 
refused  to  supply  him  with  such  a proportion 
of  his  assistance  as  was  absolutely  necessary 
to  his  believing  and  repenting,  or  without  his 
having  previously  rejected  the  incitements  of 
his  Holy  Spirit  1 A full  answer  to  this  would 
require  a sheet.  But  briefly,  I believe,  that 
all  mankind  being  corrupt  and  guilty  before 
God,  he  might,  without  impeachment  to  his 
justice,  have  left  them  all  to  perish,  as  we  are 
assured  he  did  the  fallen  angels.  But  he  was 
pleased  to  show  mercy,  and  mercy  must  be 
free.  If  the  sinner  has  any  claim  to  it,  so  far 
it  is  justice  not  mercy.  He  who  is  to  be  our 
Judge  assures  us,  that  few  find  the  gate  that 
leadeth  to  life,  while  many  throng  the  road  to 
destruction.  Your  question  seems  to  imply, 
that  you  think  God  either  did  make  salvation 
equally  open  to  all,  or  that  it  would  have 
been  more  becoming  his  goodness  to  have 
done  so. 

But  he  is  the  potter,  we  are  the  clay  ; his 
ways  and  thoughts  are  above  ours,  as  the  hea- 
vens are  higher  than  the  earth.  The  Judge 
of  all  the  earth  will  do  right.  He  has  ap- 
pointed a day,  when  he  will  manifest,  to  the 
conviction  of  all,  that  he  has  done  right. 
Till  then,  I hold  it  best  to  take  things  upon 
his  word,  and  not  too  harshly  determine  what 
it  becomes  Jehovah  to  do.  Instead  of  say- 
ing what  I think,  let  it  suffice  to  remind  you 
of  what  St.  Paul  thought,  Rom.  ix.  15 — 21. 
But  farther,  I say,  that  unless  mercy  were  af- 
forded to  those  who  are  saved,  in  a way  pe- 
culiar to  themselves,  and  which  is  not  afforded 
to  those  who  perish,  I believe  no  one  soul 
could  be  saved.  For  I believe  fallen  man, 
universally  considered  as  such,  is  as  incapable 
of  doing  the  least  thing  towards  his  salvation 
till  prevented  by  the  grace  of  God  (as  our 
Article  speaks,)  as  a dead  body  is  of  restoring 
itself  to  life.  Whatever  d iffcrence  takes  place 
between  men  in  this  respect  is  of  grace,  that 
is,  of  God,  undeserved.  Yea,  his  first  ap- 
proaches to  our  hearts  are  undesired  too;  for 
till  he  seeks  us,  we  cannot,  we  will  not,  seek 
him,  Psalm  cx.  3.  It  is  in  the  day  of  hia 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REY.  MR.  S-— 


257 


LET.  VII.] 

power,  and  not  before,  his  people  are  made 
willing.  Bat  I believe,  where  the  gospel  is 
preached,  they  who  do  perish,  do  wilfully  re- 
sist the  light,  and  choose  and  cleave  to  dark- 
ness, and  stifle  the  convictions  which  the 
truths  of  God,  when  his  true  gospel  is  indeed 
preached,  will,  in  one  degree  or  other,  force 
upon  their  minds.  The  cares  of  this  world, 
the  deceitfulness  of  riches,  the  love  of  other 
things,  the  violence  of  sinful  appetites,  their 
prejudices,  pride,  and  self-righteousness, 
either  prevent  the  reception,  or  choke  the 
growth,  of  the  good  seed:  thus  their  own 
sin  and  obstinacy  is  the  proper  cause  of  their 
destruction ; they  will  not  come  to  Christ, 
that  they  may  have  life.  At  the  same  time, 
it  is  true  that  they  cannot,  unless  they  are 
supernaturally  drawn  of  God,  John  v.  40, 
vi.  44.  They  will  not,  and  they  cannot 
come.  Both  are  equally  true,  and  they  are 
consistent.  For  a man’s  cannot  is  not  a natu- 
ral, but  a moral  inability:  not  an  impossi- 
bility in  the  nature  of  things,  as  it  is  for  me 
to  walk  upon  the  water,  or  to  fly  in  the  air ; 
but  such  an  inability  as,  instead  of  extenua- 
ting, does  exceedingly  enhance  and  aggra- 
vate his  guilt.  He  is  so  blinded  by  Satan, 
so  alienated  from  God  by  nature  and  wicked 
works,  so  given  up  to  sin,  so  averse  from 
that  way  of  salvation,  which  is  contrary  to 
his  pride  and  natural  wisdom,  that  he  will 
not  embrace  it,  or  seek  after  it ; and  there- 
fore he  cannot,  till  the  grace  of  God  power- 
fully enlightens  his  mind,  and  overcomes  his 
obstacles.  But  this  brings  me  to  your  second 
query : 

2.  Do  I think  that  God,  in  the  ordinary 
course  of  his  providence,  grants  this  assist- 
ance in  an  irresistible  manner,  or  effects 
faith  and  conversion  without  the  sinner’s 
own  hearty  consent  and  concurrence  1 I 
rather  choose  to  term  grace  invincible  than 
irresistible : for  it  is  too  often  resisted  even 
by  those  who  believe ; but  because  it  is  in- 
vincible, it  triumphs  over  all  resistance  when 
He  is  pleased  to  bestow  it.  For  the  rest,  I 
believe  no  sinner  is  converted  without  his 
own  hearty  will  and  concurrence.  But  he 
is  not  willing  till  he  is  made  so.  Why  does 
he  at  all  refuse]  Because  he  is  insensible 
of  his  state ; because  he  knows  not  the  evil 
of  sin,  the  strictness  of  the  law,  the  majesty 
of  God  whom  he  has  offended,  nor  the  total 
apostacy  of  his  heart;  because  he  is  blind  to 
eternity,  and  ignorant  of  the  excellency  of 
Christ ; because  he  is  comparatively  whole, 
and  sqes  not  his  need  of  this  great  physician ; 
because  he  relies  upon  his  own  wisdom, 
power,  and  supposed  righteousness.  Now, 
in  this  state  of  things,  when  God  comes  with 
a purpose  of  mercy,  he  begins  by  convincing 
the  person  of  sin,  judgment,  and  righteous- 
ness, causes  him  to  feel  and  know  that  he  is 
a lost,  condemned,  helpless  creature,  and 
then  discovers  to  him  the  necessity,  suffici- 
2 K 


ency,  and  willingness,  of  Christ  to  save  them 
that  are  ready  to  perish,  without  money  or 
price,  without  doings  or  deservings.  Then 
he  sees  faith  to  be  very  different  from  a 
rational  assent,  finds  that  nothing  but  the 
power  of  God  can  produce  a well  grounded 
hope  in  the  heart  of  a convinced  sinner; 
therefore  looks  to  Jesus,  who  is  the  author 
and  finisher  of  faith,  to  enable  him  to  believe. 
For  this  he  waits  in  what  we  call  the  means 
of  grace ; he  prays,  he  reads  the  word,  he 
thirsts  for  God,  as  the  heart  pants  for  the 
water  brooks ; and  though,  perhaps,  for  a 
while  he  is  distressed  with  many  doubts  and 
fears,  he  is  encouraged  to  wait  on,  because 
Jesus  has  said,  “ Him  that  cometh  unto  me, 
I will  in  no  wise  cast  out.”  The  obstinacy  of 
the  will  remains  while  the  understanding  is 
dark,  and  ceases  when  that  is  enlightened. 
Suppose  a man  walking  in  the  dark,  where 
there  are  pits  and  precipices  of  which  he  is 
not  aware.  You  are  sensible  of  his  danger, 
and  call  after  him : but  he  thinks  he  knows 
better  than  you,  refuses  your  advice,  and  is 
perhaps  angry  with  you  for  your  importunity. 
He  sees  no  danger,  therefore  will  not  be 
persuaded  there  is  any ; but  if  you  go  with  a 
light,  get  before  him,  and  show  him  plainly 
that  if  lie  takes  another  step  he  falls  beyond 
the  power  of  recovery;  then  he  will  stop  of 
his  own  accord,  blame  himself  for  not  mind- 
ing you  before,  and  be  ready  to  comply  with 
your  farther  directions.  In  either  case  man’s 
will  acts  with  equal  freedom ; the  difference 
of  his  conduct  arises  from  conviction.  Some- 
thing like  this  is  the  case  of  our  spiritual 
concerns.  Sinners  are  called  and  warned  by 
the  word ; but  they  are  wise  in  their  own 
eyes,  and  take  but  little  notice  till  the  Lord 
gives  them  light,  which  he  is  not  bound  to 
give  to  any,  and  therefore  cannot  be  bound 
to  give  to  all.  They  who  have  it  have  reason 
to  be  thankful,  and  subscribe  to  the  apostle’s 
words,  “By  grace  are  ye  saved,  through  faith; 
and  that  not  of  yourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of 
God.” 

I have  not  yet  half  done  with  the  first  sheet: 
I shall  consider  the  rest  at  leisure,  but  send 
this  as  a specimen  of  my  willingness  to  clear 
my  sentiments  to  you  as  far  as  I can.  Un- 
less it  should  please  God  to  make  what  1 offer 
satisfactory,  I well  know  beforehand  what 
objections  and  answers  will  occur  to  you, 
for  these  points  have  been  often  debated ; 
and,  after  a course  of  twenty-seven  years,  in 
which  religion  has  been  the  chief  object  of 
my  thoughts  and  inquiries,  I am  not  entirely 
a stranger  to  what  can  be  offered  no  either 
side.  What  1 write,  I write  simply  and  in 
love,  beseeching  him  who  alone  can  set  a 
seal  to  his  own  truth  to  guide  you  and  bless 
you.  This  letter  has  been  more  than  a week 
in  hand:  I have  been  called  from  it,  I sup- 
pose,  ten  times,  frequently  in  the  middle  c7 
a period  or  a line.  My  leisure,  which  befr/a 


258 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  S 


was  small,  is  now  reduced  almost  to  a no- 
thing. But  I am  desirous  to  keep  up  my  cor- 
respondence with  you,  because  I feel  an  af- 
fectionate interest  in  you,  and  because  it 
pleased  God  to  put  it  into  your  heart  to  apply 
to  me.  You  cannot  think  how  your  first 
letter  struck  me : it  was  so  unexpected,  and 
seemed  so  improbable  that  you  should  open 
your  mind  to  me,  I immediately  conceived  a 
hope  it  would  prove  for  good.  Nor  am  I yet 
discouraged. 

When  you  have  leisure  and  inclination, 
write ; I shall  always  be  glad  to  hear  from 
you,  and  I will  proceed  in  answering  what  I 
have  already  by  me  as  fast  as  I can.  But  I 
have  many  letters  now  waiting  for  answers, 
which  must  be  attended  to. 

I recommend  you  to  the  blessing  and 
care  of  the  great  Shepherd,  and  remain,  &c. 


LETTER  VIII. 


December  8,  1775. 

my  dear  friend, — Are  you  willing  I 
should  still  call  you  so,  or  are  you  quite 
weary  of  me  1 Your  silence  makes  me  sus- 
pect the  latter.  However,  it  is  my  part  to 
fulfil  my  promise,  and  then  leave  the  event 
to  God.  As  I have  but  an  imperfeet  remem- 
brance of  what  I have  already  written,  I 
may  be  liable  to  some  repetitions.  I cannot 
stay  to  comment  upon  every  line  in  your 
letter,  but  I proceed  to  notice  such  passages 
as  seem  most  to  affect  the  subject  in  debate. 
When  you  speak  of  the  scriptures  maintain- 
ing one  consistent  sense,  which,  if  the  word 
of  God,  it  certainly  must  do,  you  say  you 
read  and  understand  it  in  this  one  consistent 
sense ; nay,  you  cannot  remember  the  time 
when  you  did  not.  It  is  otherwise  with  me 
and  with  multitudes ; we  remember  when  it 
was  a sealed  book,  and  we  are  sure  it  would 
have  been  so  still,  had  not  the  Holy  Spirit 
opened  our  understandings.  But  when  you 
add,  though  I pretend  not  to  understand  the 
whole,  yet  what  I do  understand  appears 
perfectly  consistent,  I know  not  how  far  this 
exception  may  extend,  for  perhaps  the  reason 
why  you  allow  you  do  not  understand  some 
parts,  is  because  you  cannot  make  them  con- 
sistent with  the  sense  you  put  upon  other 
parts.  You  quote  my  words,  “That  when 
we  are  conscious  of  our  depravity,  reasoning 
stands  us  in  no  stead.”  Undoubtedly  reason 
always  will  stand  rational  creatures  in  some 
stead ; but  my  meaning  is,  that  when  we  are 
deeply  convinced  of  sin,  all  our  former  rea- 
sonings upon  the  ways  of  God,  while  we 
made  our  conceptions  the  standard  by  which 
we  judge  what  is  befitting  him  to  do,  as  if  he 
were  altogether  such  an  one  as  ourselves, — 
all  those  cobweb  reasonings  are  swept  away, 
and  we  submit  to  his  »?>j  without  reason- 


i 


[let.  VIII. 

ing,  though  not  without  reason.  For  we 
have  the  strongest  reason  imaginable  to  ac- 
knowledge ourselves  vile  and  lost  without 
righteousness  and  strength,  when  we  actu- 
ally feel  ourselves  to  be  so.  You  speak  of 
the  gospel  terms  of  justification.  This  term 
is  faith.  Mark  xvi.  16,  Acts  xiii.  39.  The 
gospel  propounds,  admits  no  other  term. 
But  this  faith,  as  I endeavoured  to  show 
in  my  former  letter,  is  very  different  from 
rational  assent.  You  speak  likewise  of  the 
law  of  faith,  by  which,  if  you  mean  what 
some  call  the  remedial  law,  which  we  are  to 
obey  as  well  as  we  can,  and  such  obedience, 
together  with  our  faith,  will  entitle  us  to  ac- 
ceptance with  God,  I am  persuaded  the 
scriptures  speak  of  no  such  thing.  Grace 
and  works  of  any  kind,  in  the  point  of  accep- 
tance with  God,  are  mentioned  by  the  apos- 
tle not  only  as  opposites  or  contraries,  but 
as  absolutely  contradictory  to  each  other, 
like  fire  and  water,  light  and  darkness ; so 
that  the  affirmation  of  one  is  the  denial  of 
the  other.  Rom.  iv.  5,  and  xi.  6.  God  jus- 
tifies freely,  justifies  the  ungodly,  and  him 
that  worketh  not.  Though  justifying  faith 
be  indeed  an  active  principle,  it  worketh 
by  love,  yet  not  for  acceptance.  Those 
whom  the  apostle  exhorts  “to  work  out  their 
own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,”  he 
considers  as  justified  already ; for  he  con- 
siders them  as  believers,  in  whom  he  sup- 
posed God  had  already  begun  a good  work ; 
and  if  so,  was  confident  he  would  accomplish 
it,  Phil.  i.  6.  To  them,  the  consideration 
that  God,  who  dwells  in  the  heart  of  believ- 
ers, wrought  in  them  to  will  and  to  do,  was 
a powerful  motive  and  encouragement  o 
them  to  work,  that  is,  to  give  all  diligence 
in  his  appointed  means,  as  a right  sense  of 
the  sin  that  dwelleth  in  us,  and  the  snares 
and  temptations  around  us,  will  teach  us  still 
to  work  with  fear  and  trembling.  You  sup- 
pose a difference  between  Christians  (so 
called)  who  are  devoted  to  God  in  baptism, 
and  those  who  in  the  first  ages  were  con- 
verted from  abominable  superstitions  and 
idolatrous  vices.  It  is  true  in  Christian 
countries  we  do  not  worship  heathen  divini- 
ties eo  nomine  ; and  this  is  the  principal  dif- 
ference I can  find.  Neither  reason  nor  ob- 
servation will  allow  me  to  think,  that  human 
nature  is  a whit  better  now  than  it  was  in 
the  apostle’s  time.  I know  no  kinds  or  de- 
grees of  wickedness,  which  prevailed  among 
heathens  which  are  not  prevalent  among 
nominal  Christians,  who  have  perhaps  been 
baptized  in  their  infancy ; and  therefore,  as 
the  streams  in  the  life  are  equally  worldly, 
sensual,  devilish,  I doubt  not  but  the  foun- 
tain of  the  heart  is  equally  polluted  and  poi- 
sonous ; and  that  is  as  true,  as  in  the  days  of 
Christ  and  his  apostles,  that  unless  a man  be 
born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of 
God.  You  sent  me  a sermon  upon  the  new 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  S 


259 


LET.  VIII.] 

birth,  or  regeneration,  and  you  have  several 
of  mine  on  the  same  subject.  I wish  you  to 
compare  them  with  each  other,  and  with 
scripture ; and  I pray  God  to  show  you 
wherein  the  difference  consists,  and  on 
which  side  the  truth  lies. 

When  you  desire  me  to  reconcile  God’s 
being  the  author  of  sin  with  his  justice,  you 
show  that  you  misunderstand  the  whole 
strain  of  my  sentiments ; for  l am  persuaded 
you  would  not  misrepresent  them.  It  is 
easy  to  charge  harsh  consequences,  which  I 
neither  allow,  nor  indeed  do  they  follow  from 
my  sentiments.  God  cannot  be  the  author 
of  sin  in  that  sense  you  would  fix  upon  me ; 
but  is  it  possible  that  upon  your  plan  you  find 
no  difficulty  in  what  the  scriptures  teach  us 
upon  this  subject!  I conceive  that  those 
who  were  concerned  in  the  death  of  Christ 
were  very  great  sinners,  and  that  in  nailing 
him  to  the  cross  they  committed  atrocious 
wickedness ; yet  if  the  apostle  may  be  be- 
lieved, all  this  was  according  to  the  determi- 
nate counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  Acts 
ii.  23 ; and  they  did  no  more  than  what  his 
hand  and  purpose  had  determined  should  be 
done,  chap.  iv.  28.  And  you  will  observe 
that  this  wicked  act  (wicked  with  respect  to 
the  perpetrators)  was  not  only  permitted,  but 
fore-ordained  in  the  strongest  and  most  ab- 
solute sense  of  the  word.  The  glory  of  God 
and  the  salvation  of  men  depended  upon  its 
oeing  done,  and  just  in  that  manner,  and 
with  all  those  circumstances  which  actually 
took  place,  and  yet  Judas  and  the  rest  acted 
xreely,  and  their  wickedness  was  probably 
their  own.  Now,  my  friend,  the  arguments 
which  satisfy  you  that  the  scriptures  do  not 
represent  God  as  the  author  of  this  sin  in 
this  appointment,  will  plead  for  me  at  the 
same  time ; and  when  you  think  you  easily 
overcome  me  by  asking,  “ Can  God  be  the 
author  of  sin!”  your  imputation  falls  so  di- 
rectly upon  the  word  of  God  himself.  God 
is  no  more  the  author  of  sin  than  the  sun  is 
the  cause  of  ice;  but  it  is  in  the  nature  of 
water  to  congeal  into  ice  when  the  sun’s  in- 
fluence is  suspended  to  a certain  degree. 
So  there  is  sin  enough  in  the  hearts  of  men 
to  make  the  earth  the  very  image  of  hell, 
and  to  prove  that  men  are  no  better  than  in- 
carnate devils,  were  he  to  suspend  his  influ- 
ence and  restraint.  Sometimes,  and  in  some 
nstances,  he  is  pleased  to  suspend  it  con- 
siderably ; and,  so  far  as  he  does,  human 
nature  quickly  appears  in  its  true  colours. 
Objections  of  this  kind  have  been  repeated 
and  refuted  before  either  you  or  I were  born  ; 
and  the  apostle  evidently  supposes  they  would 
be  urged  against  the  doctrine,  when  he  ob- 
viates the  question,  “ Why  doth  he  yet  find 
fault ; who  hath  resisted  his  will !”  To 
which  he  gives  no  other  answer  than  by  re- 
ferring it  to  God’s  sovereignty,  and  the 
power  which  a potter  has  over  the  clay.  I 


think  I have  in  a former  letter  made  some 
reply  to  the  charge  of  positiveness  in  my 
own  opinion.  I acknowledge  that  I am  falli- 
ble, yet  I must  again  lay  claim  to  a certainty 
about  the  way  of  salvation.  I am  as  sure 
of  some  things  as  of  my  own  existence : I 
should  be  so  if  there  was  no  human  creature 
upon  earth  but  myself.  However,  my  senti- 
ments are  confirmed  by  the  suffrages  of  thou- 
sands who  have  lived  before  me,  of  many 
with  whom  I have  personally  conversed  in 
different  places  and  circumstances,  unknown 
to  each  other ; yet  all  have  received  the  same 
views,  because  taught  by  the  same  Spirit 
And  I have  likewise  been  greatly  confirmed 
by  the  testimony  of  many  with  whom  I have 
conversed  in  their  dying  hours.  I have  seen 
them  rejoicing  in  the  prospect  of  death,  free 
from  fears,  breathing  the  air  of  immortality; 
heartly  disclaiming  their  duties  and  perform 
ances ; acknowledging  that  their  best  actions 
were  attended  with  evil  sufficient  to  con- 
demn them ; renouncing  every  shadow  of 
hope,  but  what  they  derived  from  the  blood 
of  Christ,  as  the  sole  cause  of  their  accept- 
ance; yet  triumphing  in  him  over  every 
enemy  and  fear,  and  as  sure  of  heaven  as  if 
they  were  already  there.  And  such  were 
the  apostle’s  hopes,  wholly  founded  on  know- 
ing whom  he  had  believed,  and  his  persua- 
sion of  his  ability  to  keep  that  which  he  had 
committed  unto  him.  This  is  faith,  a re- 
nouncing of  every  thing  we  are  apt  to  call 
our  own,  and  relying  wholly  upon  the  blood, 
righteousness,  and  intercession  of  Jesus. 
However,  I cannot  communicate  this  my 
certainty  to  you ; I only  tell  you  there  is  such 
a thing,  in  hopes,  if  you  do  not  think  I wil- 
fully lie  both  to  God  and  man,  you  will  be 
earnest  to  seek  it  from  him  who  bestowed  it 
on  me,  and  who  will  bestow  it  upon  all  who 
will  sincerely  apply  to  him,  and  patiently 
wait  upon  him  for  it. 

I cannot  but  wonder,  that  while  you  pro- 
fess to  believe  the  depravity  of  human  na- 
ture, you  should  speak  of  good  qualities  in- 
herent in  it.  The  word  of  God,  describes  it 
as  evil,  only  evil,  and  that  continually.  That 
there  are  such  qualities  as  Stoics  and  infidels 
call  virtue,  I allow.  God  has  not  left  man 
destitute  of  such  dispositions  as  are  neces- 
sary to  the  peace  of  society ; but  I deny  there 
is  any  moral  goodness  in  them,  unless  they 
are  founded  in  a supreme  love  to  God,  have 
his  glory  for  their  aim,  and  are  produced  by 
faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  A man  may  give  all 
his  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  his  body  to 
be  burned,  in  zeal  for  the  truth,  and  yet  be 
a mere  nothing,  a tinkling  cymbal,  in  the 
sight  of  him  who  seeth  not  as  man  seeth, 
but  judgeth  the  heart.  Many  infidels  and 
avowed  enemies  to  the  grace  and  gospel  of 
Christ,  have  made  a fair  show  of  what  the 
world  call  virtue;  but  Christian  virtue  is 
grace,  the  effect  of  a new  nature  and  new 


260 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  S 


life;  and  works  thus  wrought  in  God  are  as 
different  from  the  faint,  partial  imitations 
of  them  which  fallen  nature  is  capable  of 
producing,  as  a living  man  is  from  a statue. 
A statue  may  express  the  features  and  linea- 
ments of  the  person  whom  it  represents,  but 
there  is  no  life. 

, Your  comment  on  the  seventh  to  the  Ro- 
mans, latter  part,  contradicts  my  feelings. 
You  are  either  of  a different  make  and  na- 
ture from  me,  or  else  you  are  not  rightly  ap- 
prised of  your  own  state,  if  you  do  not  find 
the  apostle’s  complaint  very  suitable  to  your- 
self. I believe  it  applicable  to  the  most  holy 
Christian  upon  earth.  But  controversies  of 
this  kind  are  worn  thread-bare.  When  you 
speak  of  the  spiritual  part  of  a natural  m'an, 
it  sounds  to  me  like  the  living  part  of  a dead 
man,  or  the  seeing  part  of  a blind  man. 
Paul  tells  me,  that  the  natural  man,  what- 
ever his  spiritual  part  may  be,  can  neither 
receive  nor  discern  the  things  of  God.  What 
the  apostle  speaks  of  himself  (Rom.  vii.)  is 
no  more,  when  rightly  understood,  than  what 
he  affirms  of  all  who  are  partakers  of  a spi- 
ritual life,  or  who  are  true  believers,  Gal.  v. 
17.  The  carnal  natural  mind  is  enmity 
against  God,  not  subject  to  the  law  of  God, 
neither  indeed  can  be.  When  you  subjoin, 
“ Till  it  be  set  at  liberty  from  the  law  of 
sin,”  you  do  not  comment  upon  the  text,  but 
make  an  addition  of  your  own,  which  the 
text  will  by  no  means  bear.  The  carnal 
mind  is  enmity.  An  enemy  may  be  recon- 
ciled, but  enmity  itself  is  incurable.  This 
carnal  mind,  natural  man,  old  man,  flesh  (for 
the  expressions  are  all  equivalent,  and  de- 
note and  include  the  heart  of  man  as  he  is 
by  nature,)  may  be  crucified,  must  be  morti- 
fied, but  cannot  be  sanctified.  All  that  is 
good  and  gracious,  is  the  effect  of  a new 
creation,  a supernatural  principle,  wrought 
in  the  heart  by  the  gospel  of  Christ,  and  the 
agency  of  his  Spirit;  and,  till  that  is  effected, 
the  ” uvi *■»'’,  the  highest  attainment,  the  finest 
qualifications  in  man,  however  they  may 
exhalt  him  in  his  own  eyes,  or  recommend 
him  to  the  notice  of  his  fellow-worms,  are 
but  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God,  Luke 
xvi.  15.  The  gospel  is  calculated  and  de- 
signed to  stain  the  pride  of  human  glory.  It 
is  provided,  not  for  the  wise  and  the  righte- 
ous, for  those  who  think  they  have  good  dis- 
positions and  good  works  to  plead,  but  for 
the  guilty,  the  helpless,  the  wretched,  for 
those  who  are  ready  to  perish ; it  fills  the 
hungry  with  good  things,  but  it  sends  the 
rich  empty  away.  See  Rev.  iii.  17,  IS. 

You  ask.  If  man  can  do  nothing  without 
an  extraordinary  impulse  from  on  high,  is 
he  to  sit  still  and  careless!  By  no  means — 
I am  far  from  saying  man  can  do  nothing, 
though  I believe  he  cannot  open  his  own 
eyes,  or  give  himself  faith.  I wish  every 
man  to  abstain  carefully  from  sinful  company, 


[let.  VIII. 

and  sinful  actions,  to  read  the  Bible,  to  pray 
to  God  for  his  heavenly  teaching.  For  this 
waiting  upon  God  he  has  a moral  ability; 
and  if  he  persevere  thus  in  seeking,  the 
promise  is  sure,  that  he  shall  not  seek  in 
vain.  But  I would  not  have  him  mistake 
the  means  for  the  end ; think  himself  good 
because  he  is  preserved  from  gross  vices  and 
follies,  or  trust  to  his  religious  course  of  duties 
for  acceptance,  nor  be  satisfied  till  Christ  be 
revealed  in  him,  formed  within  him,  dwell 
in  his  heart  by  faith,  and  till  he  can  say  upon 
good  grounds,  “I  am  crucified  with  Christ; 
nevertheless  I live;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ 
liveth  in  me.”  I need  not  tell  you,  these  are 
scriptural  expressions;  I am  persuaded,  if 
they  were  not,  they  would  be  exploded  by 
many  as  unintelligible  jargon.  True  faith, 
my  dear  Sir,  unites  the  soul  to  Christ,  and 
thereby  gives  access  to  God,  and  fills  it  with 
a peace  passing  understanding,  a hope,  a joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory ; teaches  us 
that  we  are  weak  in  ourselves,  but  enables 
us  to  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the 
pov/er  of  his  might.  To  those  who  thus  be- 
lieve, Christ  is  precious,  their  beloved ; they 
hear  and  know  his  voice : the  very  sound  of 
his  name  gladdens  their  hearts,  and  he  mani- 
fests himself  to  them  as  he  does  not  to  the 
world.  Thus  the  scriptures  speak,  thus  the 
first  Christians  experienced ; and  this  is  pre- 
cisely the  language,  which,  in  our  days,  Is 
despised  as  enthusiasm  and  folly.  For  it  is 
now  as  it  was  then,  though  these  things  are 
revealed  to  babes,  and  they  are  as  sure  of 
them  as  that  they  see  the  noon-day  sun,  they 
are  hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  till 
the  Lord  makes  them  willing  to  renounce 
their  own  wisdom,  and  to  become  fools,  that 
thay  may  be  truly  wise,  1 Cor.  i.  18,  19; 
iii.  8. ; viii.  2.  Attention  to  the  education  of 
children  is  an  undoubted  duty;  and  it  is  a 
mercy  when  it  so  far  succeeds  as  to  preserve 
them  from  gross  wickedness ; but  it  will  not 
change  the  heart.  They  who  receive  Christ 
are  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the 
flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God, 
John  i.  13. 

If  a man  professes  to  love  the  Lord  Jesus, 
I am  willing  to  believe  him,  if  he  does  not 
give  me  proof  to  the  contrary ; but  I am  sure, 
at  the  same  time,  no  one  can  love  him  in  the 
scriptural  sense,  who  does  not  know  the  need 
and  the  worth  of  a Saviour;  in  other  words, 
who  is  not  brought,  as  a ruined,  helpless  sin- 
ner, to  live  upon  him  for  wisdom,  righteous- 
ness, sanctification,  and  redemption.  They 
who  love  him  thus  will  speak  highly  of  him, 
and  acknowledge  that  he  is  their  all  in  all. 
And  they  who  thus  love  him,  and  speak  of 
him,  will  get  little  thanks  for  their  pains  in 
such  a world  as  this  : “ All  that  live  godly  in 
Christ  Jesus  must  suffer  persecution;”  the 
world  that  hated  him,  will  hate  them.  And 
| though  it  is  possible,  by  his  grace  to  put  tc 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  S 


261 


LET.  VIII.] 

silence,  in  some  measure,  the  ignorance  of 
foolish  men  ; and  though  his  providence  can 
protect  his  people,  so  that  not  a hair  of  their 
heads  can  be  hurt  without  his  permission : yet 
the  world  will  show  their  teeth , if  they  are 
not  suffered  to  bite.  The  apostles  were  ac- 
counted babblers,  «>s  row  aoo-^ou  x** 

5T XVT(x)V  7TSglm^/V]f*X,  I need  not  point  out  to  you 
the  force  of  these  expressions.  We  are  no 
better  than  the  apostles ; nor  have  we  rea- 
son to  expect  much  better  treatment,  so  far 
as  we  walk  in  their  steps.  On  the  other 
hand,  there  is  a sober,  decent  way  of  speak- 
ing of  God,  and  goodness,  and  benevolence, 
and  sobriety,  which  the  world  will  bear  well 
enough ; nay,  we  may  say  a little  about  Jesus 
Christ,  as  ready  to  make  up  the  deficiencies 
of  our  honest  and  good  endeavours,  and  this 
will  not  displease  them.  But  if  we  preach 
him  as  the  only  foundation,  lay  open  the 
horrid  evils  of  the  human  heart,  tell  our 
hearers  that  they  are  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins,  and  have  no  better  ground  of  hope  in 
themselves  than  the  vilest  malefactors,  in 
order  to  exalt  the  glory  of  Jesus,  as  saving 
those  who  are  saved  wholly  and  freely  for 
his  own  name’s  sake  ; if  we  tell  the  virtuous 
and  decent,  as  well  as  the  profligate,  that 
unless  they  are  born  again,  and  made  par- 
takers of  living  faith,  and  count  all  things  loss 
for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ, 
they  cannot  be  saved : this  the  world  cannot 
bear.  We  shall  be  called  knaves  or  fools, 
uncharitable  bigots,  and  twenty  hard  names. 
If  you  have  met  with  nothing  like  this,  I 
wish  it  may  lead  you  to  suspect  whether  you 
have  yet  received  the  right  key  to  the  doc- 
trines of  Christ : for  depend  upon  it,  the  of- 
fence of  the  cross  is  not  ceased. 

I am  grieved  and  surprised  that  you  seem 
to  take  little  notice  of  anything  in  the  account 
of  my  deceased  friend,  but  his  wishing  him- 
self to  be  a deist,  and  his  having  play-books 
about  him  in  his  illness.  As  to  the  plays, 
they  were  Shakespeare’s,  which,  as  a man  of 
taste,  it  is  no  great  wonder  he  should  some- 
times look  in.  Your  remark  on  the  other 
point  shows  that  you  are  not  much  acquainted 
with  the  exercises  of  the  human  mind  under 
certain  circumstances.  I believe  I observed 
formerly,  that  it  was  not  a libertine  wish. 
Had  you  known  him,  you  would  have  known 
one  of  the  most  amiable  and  unblemished 
characters.  Few  were  more  beloved  and  ad- 
mired for  an  uniform  course  of  integrity,  mo- 
deration, and  benevolence ; but  he  was  dis- 
couraged. He  studied  the  Bible,  believed  it 
in  general  to  be  the  word  of  God ; but  his 
wisdom,  his  strong  turn  for  reasoning,  stood 
so  in  his  way,  that  he  could  get  no  solid  com- 
fort from  it.  He  felt  the  vanity  of  the  schemes 
proposed  by  many  men  admired  in  the  world 
as  teachers  of  divinity ; and  he  felt  the  vanity 
likewise  of  his  own.  He  was  also  a minister, 
and  had  a sincere  design  of  doing  good.  He 


wished  to  reform  the  profligate,  and  comfoit 
the  afflicted  by  his  preaching ; but  as  he  was 
not  acquainted  with  that  one  kind  of  preach- 
ing which  God  owns  to  the  edification  of  the 
hearers,  he  found  he  could  do  neither.  A 
sense  of  disappointments  of  this  kind  distress- 
ed him.  Finding  in  himself  none  of  that 
peace  which  the  scriptures  speak  of,  and  none 
of  the  influence  he  hoped  for  attending  his 
ministry,  he  was  led  sometimes  to  question 
the  truth  of  the  scriptures.  We  have  a spi- 
ritual enemy  always  near,  to  press  upon  a 
mind  in  this  desponding  situation  : nor  am  I 
surprised  that  he  should  then  wish  himself  a 
deist;  since,  if  there  were  any  hope  for  a 
sinner  but  by  faith  in  the  blood  of  Jesus,  he 
had  as  much  of  his  own  goodness  to  depend 
upon  as  most  I have  known.  As  for  the  rest, 
if  you  could  see  nothing  admirable  and  won- 
derful in  the  clearness,  the  dignity,  the  spi- 
rituality of  his  expressions,  after  the  Lord  re- 
vealed the  gospel  to  him,  I can  only  say,  I 
am  sorry  for  it.  This  I know,  that  some  per- 
sons of  sense,  taste,  learning,  and  reason,  and 
far  enough  from  my  sentiments,  have  been 
greatly  struck  with  them.  You  say,  a death- 
bed repentance  is  what  you  would  be  sorry  to 
give  any  hope  of.  My  dear  friend,  it  is  well 
for  poor  sinners  that  God’s  thoughts  and  ways 
are  as  much  above  men’s,  as  the  heavens  are 
higher  than  the  earth.  We  agree  to  commu- 
nicate our  sentiments  freely,  and  promised 
not  to  be  offended  with  each  other’s  freedom, 
if  we  could  help  it.  I am  afraid  of  offending 
you  by  a thought  just  now  upon  my  mind, 
and  yet  I dare  not  in  conscience  suppress  it 
I must  therefore  venture  to  say,  that  I hope 
they  who  depend  upon  such  a repentance  as 
your  scheme  points  out,  will  repent  of  their  re- 
pentance itself  upon  their  death-bed  at  least, 
if  not  sooner.  You  and  I perhaps,  should 
have  encouraged  the  fair  spoken  young  man 
who  said  he  had  kept  all  the  commandments 
from  his  youth,  and  rather  have  left  the  thief 
upon  the  cross  to  perish  like  a villain,  as  he 
lived.  But  Jesus  thought  differently.  I do 
not  encourage  sinners  to  defer  their  repent- 
ance to  their  death-beds.  I press  the  necessity 
of  a repentance  this  moment.  But  then  I take 
care  to  tell  them,  that  repentance  is  the  gift 
of  God ; that  Jesus  is  exalted  to  bestow  it; 
and  that  all  their  endeavours  that  way,  unless 
they  seek  to  him  for  grace,  will  be  vain  as 
washing  a blackmoor,  and  transient  as  wash- 
ing a sow  which  will  soon  return  to  the 
mire  again.  I know  the  evil  heart  will  abuse 
the  grace  of  God;  the  apostle  knew  this  like- 
wise, Rom.  iii.  8,  and  vi.  3.  But  this  did 
not  tempt  him  to  suppress  the  glorious  grace 
of  the  gospel,  the  power  of  Jesus  to  save  to 
the  uttermost,  and  his  merciful  promise,  that 
whosoever  cometh  unto  him,  he  will  in  no 
wise  cast  him  out.  The  repentance  of  a 
natural  heart  proceeding  wholly  from  fear, 
like  that  of  some  malefactors,  who  are  sorry, 


262 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  S- 


not  that  they  have  committed  robbery  or 
murder,  but  that  they  must  be  hanged  for 
it;  this  undoubtedly  is  nothing  worth, 
whether  in  time  of  health,  or  in  a dying 
hour.  But  that  /xiTxvotx,  that  gracious  change 
of  heart,  views,  and  dispositions,  which  al- 
ways takes  place  when  Jesus  is  made  known 
to  the  soul  as  having  died,  that  the  sinner 
might  live,  and  been  wounded,  that  he  might 
be  healed ; this,  at  whatever  period  God  is 
pleased  to  afford  and  effect  it  by  his  Spirit, 
brings  a sure  and  everlasting  salvation  with  it. 

Still  I find  I have  not  done : you  ask  my 
exposition  of  the  parables  of  the  talents  and 
pounds ; but  at  present  I can  write  no  more. 
I have  only  just  time  to  tell  you,  that  when  I 
begged  your  acceptance  of  Omicron,  nothing 
was  farther  from  my  expectation  than  a cor- 
respondence with  you.  The  frank  and  kind 
manner  in  which  you  wrote  presently  won 
upon  my  heart.  In  the  course  of  our  letters 
upon  subscription,  I observed  an  integrity  and 
disinterestedness  in  you,  which  endeared  you 
to  me  still  more.  Since  that  our  debates 
have  taken  a much  more  interesting  turn  ; I 
have  considered  it  as  a call,  and  an  opportu- 
nity put  in  my  hand,  by  the  special  provi- 
dence of  him  who  ruleth  over  all.  I have 
embraced  the  occasion,  to  lay  before  you  sim- 
ply, and  rather  in  a way  of  testimony  than 
argumentation,  what,  in  the  main,  I am  sure 
is  truth.  I have  done  enough  to  discharge 
my  conscience,  but  shall  never  think  I do 
enough  to  answer  the  affection  I bear  you. 

I have  done  enough  likewise  to  make  you 
weary  of  my  coriespondence,  unless  it  should  ! 


[let.  viii. 

please  God  to  fix  the  subject  deeply  upon  youi 
mind,  and  make  you  attentive  to  the  possi- 
bility and  vast  importance  of  a mistake  in 
matters  of  everlasting  concernment.  I pray 
that  the  good  Spirit  of  God  may  guide  you 
into  all  truths.  He  only  is  the  effectual 
teacher.  I still  retain  a cheerful  hope,  that 
some  things  you  cannot  at  present  receive, 
will  hereafter  be  the  joy  and  comfort  of  your 
heart : but  I know  it  cannot  be  till  the  Lord’s 
own  time.  I cannot  promise  to  give  such 
long  answers  as  your  letters  require,  to  clear 
up  every  text  that  may  be  proposed,  and  to 
answer  every  objection  that  may  be  started ; 
yet  I shall  be  glad  to  change  a letter  now 
and  then.  At  present,  it  remains  with  you 
whether  our  correspondence  continues  or  not, 
as  this  is  the  third  letter  1 have  written  since 
I heard  from  you,  and  therefore  must  be  the 
last  till  I do.  I should  think  what  remains 
might  be  better  settled  viva  voce ; for  which 
purpose  I shall  be  glad  to  see  you,  or  ready 
to  wait  on  you  when  leisure  will  permit,  and 
when  I know  it  will  be  agreeable : but  if 
(as  life  and  all  its  affairs  are  precarious)  we 
should  never  meet  in  this  world,  I pray  God 
we  may  meet  at  the  right  hand  of  Jesus,  in 
the  great  day  when  he  shall  come  to  gather 
up  his  jewels,  and  to  judge  the  world.  There 
is  an  endless  diversity  of  opinions  in  matters 
of  religion ; which  of  them  are  right  and 
safe,  and  will  lead  to  eternal  glory,  dies  iste 
indicabit.  I am  still  in  a manner  lost  amidst 
more  engagements  than  I Lave  time  to 
comply  with ; but  I feel  i id  know  that  I 
am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO  MR.  B , &c. 


LETTER  I. 

September  28,  1774. 

my  dearest  sir, — I see  the  necessity  of 
having',  if  possible,  my  principles  at  my 
fingers’  ends,  that  I may  apply  them  as  occa- 
sions arise  every  hour.  Certainly  if  my 
ability  was  equal  to  my  inclination,  I would 
remove  your  tumour  with  a word  or  a touch ; 
I would  exempt  you  instantly  and  constantly 
from  every  inconvenience  and  pain : but  you 
are  in  the  hands  of  one  who  could  do  all  this 
and  more,  and  who  loves  you  infinitely  better 
than  I can  do,  and  yet  he  is  pleased  to  per- 
mit you  to  suffer.  What  is  the  plain  infer- 
ence ! Certainly  that  at  the  present  junc- 
ture, he  to  whom  all  the  concatenations  and 
consequences  of  events  are  present  in  one 
view,  sees  it  better  for  you  to  have  this  tu- 
mour than  to  be  without  it ; for  I have  no 
more  idea  of  a tumour  rising,  or  any  other 
incidental  trial  befalling  you,  without  a 
cause,  without  a need-be,  without  a designed 
advantage  to  result  from  it,  than  I have  of  a 
mountain  or  pyramid  rising  up  of  its  own  ac- 
cord in  the  middle  of  Salisbury  Plain.  The 
promise  is  express,  and  literally  true,  that 
all  things,  universally  and  without  exception, 
shall  work  together  for  good  to  them  that 
love  God.  But  they  work  together;  the 
smallest  as  well  as  the  greatest  events  have 
their  place  and  use, — like  the  several  stones 
in  the  arch  of  a bridge,  where  no  one  would 
singly  be  useful,  but  every  one  in  its  place 
is  necessary  to  the  structure  and  support  of 
the  arch  ; or  rather  like  the  movement  of  a 
watch,  where  though  there  is  an  evident 
subordination  of  parts,  and  some  pieces  have 
a greater  comparative  importance  than 
others,  yet  the  smallest  pieces  have  their 
place  and  use,  and  are  so  far  equally  import- 
ant, that  the  whole  design  of  the  machine 
would  be  obstructed  for  want  of  them.  Some 
dispensations  and  turns  of  divine  providence 
may  be  compared  to  the  main  spring  or  capital 
wheels  which  have  a more  visible,  sensible, and 
determining  influence  upon  the  whole  tenor 
of  our  lives : but  the  more  ordinary  occur- 
rences of  every  day  are  at  least  pins  and 


pivots,  adjusted,  timed,  and  suited  with  equa. 
accuracy,  by  the  hand  of  the  same  great  Artist 
who  planned  and  executes  the  whole ; and 
we  are  sometimes  surprised  to  see  how  much 
more  depends  and  turns  upon  them  than  we 
were  aware  of.  Then  we  admire  his  skill, 
and  say  he  has  done  all  things  well.  Indeed, 
with  respect  to  his  works  of  providence,  as 
well  as  of  creation,  he  well  deserves  the  title 
of  Maximus  in  minimis.  Such  thoughts  as 
these,  when  I am  enabled  to  realize  them, 
in  some  measure  reconcile  me  to  what  he 
allots  for  myself  or  my  friends,  and  con- 
vince me  of  the  propriety  of  that  expostula- 
tion, which  speaks  the  language  of  love  as 
well  as  of  authority,  “Be  still,  and  know 
that  I am  God.”  I sympathize  with  you  in 
your  trial,  and  pray  and  trust  that  your  Shep- 
herd will  be  your  Physician ; will  superin- 
tend and  bless  the  use  of  means ; will  give 
you  in  his  good  time  health  and  cure,  and  at 
all  times  reveal  unto  you  abundance  of  peace. 
His  promises  and  power  are  necessary  for 
our  preservation  in  the  smoother  scenes  he 
has  allotted  for  us,  and  they  are  likewise 
sufficient  for  the  roughest.  We  are  always 
equally  in  danger  in  ourselves,  and  always 
equally  safe  under  the  shadow  of  his  wings. 
No  storms,  assaults,  sieges,  or  pestilences 
can  hurt  us,  till  we  have  filled  up  his  ap- 
pointed measure  of  service ; and  when  our 
work  is  done,  and  he  has  ripened  us  for  glory, 
it  is  no  great  matter  by  what  means  he  is 
pleased  to  call  us  home  to  himself. 

I have  only  room  to  present  our  joint  and 
sincerest  respects.  The  Lord  bless  you  all. — 

I am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

October  15,  1774. 

my  dearest  sir, — I think  the  greatness 
of  trials  is  to  be  estimated,  rather  by  the  im- 
pression they  make  upon  our  spirits,  than 
by  their  outward  appearance.  ' The  small- 
est will  be  too  heavy  for  us  if  we  are  left 
to  grapple  with  it  in  our  own  strength,  or 
rather,  weakness ; and  if  the  Lord  is  pleased 
263 


264 


LETTERS  TO  MR.  B 


[let.  III. 


to  put  forth  his  power  in  us,  he  can  make  the 
heaviest  light.  A lively  impression  of  his 
love,  or  of  his  sufferings  for  us,  or  of  the 
glories  within  the  vail,  accompanied  with  a 
due  sense  of  the  misery  from  which  we  are 
redeemed  ; these  thoughts  will  enable  us  to 
be  not  only  submissive,  but  even  joyful  in 
tribulations.  When  faith  is  in  exercise, 
though  the  flesh  will  have  its  feelings,  the 
spirit  will  triumph  over  them.  But  it  is 
needful  we  should  know  that  we  have  no 
sufficiency  in  ourselves,  and  in  order  to  know 
it,  we  must  feel  it;  and  therefore,  the  Lord 
sometimes  withdraws  his  sensible  influence, 
and  then  the  buzzing  of  a fly  will  be  an  over- 
match for  our  patience ; at  other  times,  he 
will  show  us  what  he  can  do  in  us  and  for 
us ; then  we  can  adopt  the  apostle’s  words, 
and  say,  I can  do  and  suffer  all  things  through 
Christ  strengthening  me.  He  has  said,  My 
grace  is  sufficient  for  thee.  It  is  observ- 
able, that  the  children  of  God  seldom  disap- 
point our  expectations  under  great  trials ; if 
they  show  a wrongness  of  spirit,  it  is  usually 
in  such  little  incidents,  that  we  are  ready  to 
wonder  at  them  : for  which,  two  reasons  may 
be  principally  assigned.  When  great  trials 
are  in  view,  we  run  simply  and  immediately 
to  our  all-sufficient  friend,  feel  our  depen- 
dance,  and  cry  in  good  earnest  for  help ; but 
if  the  occasion  seems  small,  wre  are  too  apt 
secretly  to  lean  to  our  own  wisdom  and 
strength,  as  if  in  such  slight  matters  we 
could  make  shift  without  him.  Therefore, 
in  these  we  often  fail.  Again,  the  Lord 
deals  wflth  us  as  we  sometimes  see  mothers 
with  their  children.  When  a child  begins 
to  walk,  he  is  often  very  self-important ; he 
thinks  he  needs  no  help,  and  can  hardly  bear 
to  be  supported  by  the  finger  of  another. 
Now,  in  such  a case,  if  there  is  no  danger 
of  harm  from  a fall,  as  if  he  is  oil  a plain 
carpet,  the  mother  will  let  him  alone  to  try 
how  he  can  walk.  He  is  pleased  at  first, 
but  presently  down  he  comes ; and  a few  ex- 
periments of  this  kind  convince  him  he  is 
not  so  strong  and  able  as  he  thought,  and 
make  him  willing  to  be  led.  But  was  he 
upon  the  brink  of  a river  or  a precipice,  from 
whence  a fall  might  be  fatal,  the  tender  mother 
would  not  trust  him  to  himself,  no  not  for  a 
moment.  I have  not  room  to  make  the  ap- 
plication, nor  is  it  needful.  It  requires  the 
same  grace  to  bear  with  a right  spirit  a cross 
word,  as  a cross  injury ; or  the  breaking  of  a 
china-plate,  as  the  death  of  an  only  son. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

November  23,  1774. 

my  dear  sir, — I hope  to  be  informed  in 
due  time,  that  the  Lord  has  given  you  full 


health  and  cure.  He  has  preserved  me 
hitherto  from  the  hands  of  surgeons ; but  1 
feel  as  if  my  flesh  would  prove,  as  you  say, 
a very  coward,  were  it  needful  to  submit  to 
a painful  operation.  Yet  I observe,  when 
such  operations  are  necessary,  if  people  are 
satisfied  of  a surgeon’s  skill  and  prudence, 
they  will  not  only  yield  to  be  cut  at  his 
pleasure,  without  pretending  to  direct  him 
where,  or  how  long  he  shall  make  the  inci- 
sion, but  will  thank  and  pay  him  for  putting 
them  to  pain,  because  they  believe  it  for 
their  advantage.  I wish  I could  be  more 
like  them  in  my  concerns.  My  body,  as  I 
said,  is,  through  mercy,  free  from  considera- 
ble ailments,  but  I have  a soul  that  requires 
surgeon’s  work  continually;  there  is  some 
tumour  to  be  discussed  or  laid  open,  some 
dislocation  to  be  reduced,  some  fracture  to 
be  healed,  almost  daily.  It  is  my  great 
mercy,  that  one  who  is  infallible  in  skill, 
who  exercises  incessant  care,  and  boundless 
compassion  towards  all  his  patients,  has  un- 
dertaken my  case ; and  complicated  as  it  is, 
I dare  not  doubt  his  making  a perfect  cure. 
Yet  alas ! I too  often  discover  such  impa- 
tience, distrust,  and  complaining,  when  un- 
der his  hand,  am  so  apt  to  find  fault  with 
the  instruments  he  is  pleased  to  make  use  of, 
so  ready  to  think  the  salutary  wounds  he 
makes,  unnecessary  or  too  large ; in  a word, 
I show  such  a promptness  to  control,  were 
I able,  or  to  direct  his  operations,  that,  were 
not  his  patience  beyond  expression,  he  would 
before  now  have  given  me  up.  I am  per- 
suaded, no  money  would  induce  Mr. to 

attend  upon  a patient  who  should  act  towards 
him  as  I have  done  towards  my  best  Physi- 
cian. Sometimes  I indulge  a hope  that  I am 
growing  wiser,  and  think  surely,  after  such 
innumerable  proofs  as  I have  had,  that  he 
does  all  things  well,  I shall  now  be  satisfied 
to  leave  myself  quietly  and  without  reserve 
to  his  disposal.  A thousand  such  surrenders 
I have  made,  and  a thousand  times  I have  in- 
terpretatively  retracted  them.  Yet  still  he 
is  gracious.  O,  how  shall  I praise  him  at 
last ! 

I thank  you  for  your  letter ; I never  re- 
ceive one  from  you  without  pleasure,  and,  I 
believe,  seldom  without  profit,  at  least  for 
the  time.  I believe,  with  you,  that  there  is 
much  of  the  proper  and  defined  efficacy  of 
the  gospel-ministry  which  I have  not  yet  ex- 
perienced. And  I suppose  they  who  are  ad 
vanced  far  beyond  me  in  the  divine  life,  judge 
the  same  of  their  utmost  present  attainments. 
Yet  I have  no  idea  of  any  permanent  state 
in  this  life,  that  shall  make  my  experience 
cease  to  be  a state  of  warfare  and  humiliation. 
At  my  first  setting  out,  indeed,  I thought  to 
be  better,  and  to  feel  myself  better  from  year 
to  year ; I expected  by  degrees  to  attain 
every  thing  which  I then  comprised  in  my 
idea  of  a saint  I thought  my  grain  of  grace, 


LETTERS  TO  MR.  B- 


205 


LET.  V.J 

oy  much  diligence  and  careful  improvement, 
would  in  time  amount  to  a pound,  that  pound 
in  a farther  space  of  time  to  a talent,  and 
then  I hoped  to  increase  from  one  talent  to 
many ; so  that  supposing  the  Lord  should 
spare  me  a competent  number  of  years,  I 
pleased  myself  with  the  thoughts  of  dying 
rich.  But,  alas ! these  my  golden  expecta- 
tions have  been  like  South  Sea  dreams;  I 
have  lived  hitherto  a poor  sinner,  and  I be- 
lieve I shall  die  one.  Have  I then  gained 
nothing  by  waiting  upon  the  Lord  1 Yes,  I 
have  gained  that,  which  I once  would  rather 
have  been  without,  such  accumulated  proofs 
of  the  deceitfulness  and  desperate  wickedness 
of  my  heart,  as  I hope,  by  the  Lord’s  blessing, 
has  in  some  measure  taught  me  to  know 
what  I mean,  when  I say,  Behold  T am  vile ! 
And  in  connexion  with  this,  I have  gained 
such  experience  of  the  wisdom,  power,  and 
compassion  of  my  Redeemer,  the  need,  the 
worth  of  his  blood,  righteousness,  attention, 
and  intercession — the  glory  that  he  displays 
in  pardoning  iniquity  and  sin,  and  passing 
by  the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  his 
heritage,  that  my  soul  cannot  but  cry  out, 
Who  is  a God  like  unto  thee ! Thus,  if  I 
have  any  meaner  thoughts  of  myself  (Ezek. 
xvi.  63,)  and  any  higher  thoughts  of  him 
than  I had  twenty  years  ago,  I have  reason 
to  be  thankful ; every  grain  of  this  experi- 
ence is  worth  mountains  of  gold.  And  if, 
by  his  mercy,  I shall  yet  sink  more  in  my  own 
esteem,  and  he  will  be  pleased  to  rise  still 
more  glorious  to  my  eyes,  and  more  precious 
to  my  heart ; I expect  it  will  be  much  in  the 
same  way.  I was  ashamed  when  I began 
to  seek  him,  I am  more  ashamed  now ; and 
I expect  to  be  most  of  all  ashamed  when  he 
shall  appear  to  destroy  my  last  enemy.  But, 
O ! I may  rejoice  in  him,  to  think  that  he 
will  not  be  ashamed  of  me. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

May  19,  1775. 

my  dear  sir, — I hope  you  find  the  Lord 
present  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places. 
When  it  is  so,  we  are  at  home  everywhere ; 
when  it  is  otherwise,  home  is  a prison,  and 
abroad  a wilderness.  I know  what  I ought 
to  desire,  and  what  I do  desire.  I point  him 
out  to  others  as  the  all  in  all ; I esteem  him 
as  such  in  my  own  judgment;  but,  alas! 
my  experience  abounds  with  complaints. 
He  is  my  sun ; but  clouds,  and  sometimes 
walls,  intercept  him  from  my  view.  He  is 
my  strength ; yet  I am  prone  to  lean  upon 
reeds.  He  is  my  friend ; but  on  my  part 
there  is  such  coldness  and  ingratitude  as  no 
other  friend  could  bear.  But  still  he  is  gra- 
cious, and  shames  me  with  his  repeated  mul- 
tiplied goodness.  O for  a warmer  heart,  a 
2 L 


more  simple  dependance,  a more  active  zeal, 
a more  sensible  deliverance  from  the  effects 
of  this  body  of  sin  and  death ! He  helps  me 
in  my  endeavours  to  keep  the  vineyards  of 
others ; but,  alas ! my  own  does  not  seem  to 
flourish  as  some  do  around  me.  However, 
though  I cannot  say  I labour  more  abun- 
dantly than  they  all,  I have  reason  to  say 
with  thankfulness,  “ By  the  grace  of  God,  1 
am  what  I am.”  My  poor  story  would  soon 
be  much  worse,  did  not  he  support,  restrain, 
and  watch  over  me  every  minute.  Let  mo 
intreat  your  praises  and  prayers  on  the  be- 
half of  me  and  mine,  and  may  the  Lord  bless 
you  and  yours  with  an  increase  in  every  good. 
— I am,  &c. 


LETTER  V. 

September  2,  1776. 

my  dear  sir, — The  young  woman  I spoke 
of  is  still  living,  and  not  much  weaker  than 
when  I left  her.  The  Lord  was  pleased  to 
relieve  her  on  Tuesday  evening,  and  she 
was  comfortable  the  remainder  of  the  week. 
But  yesterday  her  conflicts  returned,  and  she 
was  in  great  distress.  The  enemy  who  al- 
ways fights  against  the  peace  of  the  Lord’s 
children,  finds  great  advantage  against  them 
when  their  spirits  are  weakened  and  worn 
down  by  long  illness,  and  is  often  permitted 
to  assault  them.  The  reasons  are  hidden 
from  us,  but  they  are  doubtless  worthy  of 
his  wisdom  and  love,  and  they  terminate  in 
victory  to  the  praise  of  his  glorious  grace, 
which  is  more  signally  manifested  by  his 
leading  them  safely  through  fire  and  water, 
than  if  their  path  was  always  smooth.  He 
is  sovereign  in  his  dispensations,  and  ap- 
points some  of  his  people  to  trials  and  exer- 
cises to  which  others,  perhaps,  are  strangers 
all  their  days.  Believers  are  soldiers : all  sol- 
diers, by  their  profession,  are  engaged  to  fight 
if  called  upon,  but  who  shall  be  called  to  sus- 
tain the  hottest  service,  and  be  most  frequently 
exposed  upon  the  field  of  battle,  depends  upon 
the  will  of  the  general  or  king.  Some  of  our 
soldiers  are  now  upon  hard  service  in  Ame- 
rica, while  others  are  stationed  round  the 
palace,  see  the  King’s  face  daily,  and  have 
no  dangers  or  hardships  to  encounter.  These, 
however,  are  as  liable  to  a call  as  the  others ; 
but  if  not  called  upon,  they  may  enjoy  with 
thankfulness  the  more  easy  post  assigned 
them.  Thus  the  Captain  of  our  salvation 
allots  to  his  soldiers  such  stations  as  he  thinks 
proper.  He  has  a right  to  employ  whom  he 
will,  and  where  he  will.  Some  are  compa- 
ratively at  ease;  they  are  not  exposed  to  the 
fiercest  onsets,  but  live  near  his  presence : 
others  are,  to  appearance,  pressed  above 
measure,  beyond  strength,  so  that  they  des- 
air  even  of  life;  yet  they  are  supported, 


266 


LETTERS  TO  MR.  B 


and  in  the  end  made  more  than  conquerors, 
through  him  that  hath  loved  them.  Long 
observation  convinces  me,  that  the  tempta- 
tions which  some  endure  are  not  chastise- 
ments brought  upon  them  by  unfaithfulness, 
or  for  any  thing  remarkably  wrong  in  their 
spirit  or  walk ; I often  rather  consider  that 
in  this  warfare,  as  in  worldly  wars,  the  post 
of  danger  and  difficulty  is  the  post  of  honour, 
and  as  such  assigned  to  those  whom  he 
has  favoured  with  a peculiar  measure  of  his 
grace.  This  young  woman,  in  particular, 
was  always  from  her  first  awakening  remark- 
ably humble  and  spiritual,  and  possessed  of  a 
broken  and  contrite  spirit.  I never  saw  her 
in  a wrong  spirit,  or  heard  her  speak  an  un- 
advised word ; yet  I believe  it  is  impossible 
to  express  the  agonies  she  has  endured.  The 
effect  of  them  is  visible.  Her  animal  frame 
was  unable  to  sustain  the  burden.  I believe 
they  were  the  immediate  cause  of  that  illness 
which  is  now  bringing  her  down  to  the  grave. 
I doubt  not  but  these  cases  depend  in  a great 
measure  upon  constitution ; but  then  the 
temperament  of  our  bodies  depends  upon  his 
pleasure,  for,  if  the  very  hairs  of  our  head  are 
numbered,  it  is  impossible  that  those  circum- 
stances of  our  frame  which,  by  the  near  con- 
nexion between  body  and  soul,  have  a pow- 
erful influence  upon  the  state  of  our  minds, 
can  escape  his  notice.  He  could  cure  such 
bodily  disorders  as  effect  the  peace  of  his 
people  in  a moment,  yet  he  does  not,  though 
he  loves  them.  There  must  be  therefore 
wise  reasons  why  he  does  not ; and,  though 
vve  know  them  not  now,  we  shall  know  them 
nereafter.  Possibly  some  suffer  for  the  in- 
struction of  the  rest,  that  we  may  learn  to  be 
more  thankful  to  him  for  the  peace  we  en- 
joy, and  to  be  more  humbly  dependant  upon 
him  for  the  continuance  of  it.  The  Lord's 
way  is  in  the  deep,  and  his  path  in  the  great 
waters,  untraceable  by  our  feeble  reasonings, 
but  faith  brings  in  a good  report.  We  need 
not  doubt  but  he  does  all  things  well,  and  in 
due  time  we  shall  see  it.  In  the  meanwhile 
he  checks  our  vain  inquiries,  and  calls  upon 
us  to  be  still,  and  know  that  he  is  God. 

I brought  home  with  me  a thankful  sense 
of  the  kindness  and  friendship  I am  favoured 
with  from  you  and  all  yours.  I account  this 
connexion  one  of  the  great  comforts  of  my 
life,  and  I hope  it  has  been,  and  will  be,  not 
only  pleasant  but  profitable  to  me.  Though 
I am  but  an  unapt  scholar,  I hope  I am  not 
unwilling  to  learn,  and  the  Lord,  in  his  mer- 
ciful providence,  appoints  me  many  teachers. 
This  is  little  praise  due  to  us,  if  we  either 
communicate  or  receive  benefit  in  our  inter- 
course with  our  fellow-disciples.  In  both  we 
are  but  instruments  under  the  influence  of  a 
higher  hand.  Were  Christians  to  meet  to- 
gether without  their  Lord,  they  would  either 
trifle  or  quarrel  their  time  away.  But  as 
he  has  said,  where  two  or  three  are  met, 


[let.  VI. 

there  am  I in  the  midst  of  them,  we  may 
well  be  glad  of  opportunities  of  coming  to- 
gether. And  though,  for  my  own  part,  I am 
so  poor  an  improver  of  such  seasons,  that  the 
recollection  of  them,  when  past,  is  generally 
accompanied  with  shame  and  regret,  yet  he 
is  gracious  and  merciful,  and  seldom  leaves 
me  to  complain  that  they  were  wholly  in  vain. 
— I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VI. 

July  22,  1777. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, 


The  complaints  you  make  of  what  passes 
within,  encourage  me  under  what  I feel  my- 
self. Indeed,  if  those  whom  I have  reason 
to  believe  are  more  spiritual  and  humble 
than  I am,  did  not  give  some  testimony  that 
they  find  their  hearts  made  of  the  same  ma- 
terials as  mine  is,  I should  be  sometimes 
hard  put  to  it  to  believe  that  I have  any  part 
or  lot  in  the  matter,  or  any  real  knowledge 
of  the  life  of  faith.  But  this  concurrent  tes- 
timony of  many  witnesses  confirms  me  in 
what  I think  the  scriptures  plainly  teach, 
that  the  soil  of  human  nature,  though  many 
spots  are  certainly  better  weeded,  planted, 
and  manured  than  others,  is  everywhere  the 
same,  universally  bad ; so  bad  that  it  cannot 
be  worse,  and  of  itself  is  only  capable  of  pro- 
ducing noxious  weeds,  and  nourishing  ve- 
nomous creatures.  We  often  see  the  effects 
of  culture,  skill,  and  expense  will  make  a 
garden  where  all  was  desert  before.  When 
Jesus,  the  good  husbandman,  incloses  a soil, 
and  separates  it  from  the  waste  of  the  world, 
to  make  it  a residence  for  himself,  a change 
presently  takes  place ; it  is  planted  and  wa- 
tered from  Rbove,  and  visited  with  beams 
infinitely  more  cheering  and  fertalizing  than 
those  of  the  material  sun.  But  its  natural 
propensity  to  bring  forth  weeds  still  con- 
tinues, and  one  half  of  his  dispensations  may 
be  compared  to  a company  of  weeders,  whom 
he  sends  forth  into  his  garden  to  pluck  up 
all  which  he  has  not  planted  with  his  own 
hand,  and  vvhich,  if  left  to  grow,  would 
quickly  overpower  and  overtop  the  rest. 
But,  alas ! the  ground  is  so  impregnated 
with  evil  seeds,  and  they  shoot  in  such  quick 
succession,  that  if  this  weeding  work  were 
not  constantly  Repeated,  all  former  labour 
would  be  lost.  Hinc  illce  lachrym<E  ! hence 
arises  the  necessity  of  daily  crosses  and  dis- 
appointments, daily  changes  of  frame,  and 
such  multiplied  convictions  thai  we  are  no- 
thing and  can  do  nothing  of  ourselves ; all 
are  needful,  and  barely  sufficient  to  prevent 
our  hearts  from  being  over-run  with  pride, 
self-dependance,  and  security. — Yours,  &c. 


LET.  VII.] 


LETTERS  TO  MR.  B 


267 


LETTER  VII. 

November  6,  1777. 

my  dear  sir, — You  say  you  are  more  dis- 
posed to  cry  miserere  than  hallelujah.  Why 
not  both  together  1 When  the  treble  is 
praise,  and  heart-humiliation  for  the  bass,  the 
melody  is  pleasant,  and  the  harmony  good. 
However,  if  not  both  together,  we  must  have 
them  alternately  ; not  all  singing,  not  all 
sighing,  but  an  interchange  and  balance, 
that  we  may  be  neither  lifted  too  high,  nor 
cast  down  too  low,  which  would  be  the  case 
if  we  were  very  comfortable  or  very  sorrow- 
ful for  a long  continuance.  But  though  we 
change,  the  Saviour  changes  not.  All  our 
concerns  are  in  his  hands,  and  therefore  safe. 
His  path  is  in  the  deep  waters,  his  thoughts 
and  methods  of  conduct  are  as  high  above 
ours  as  the  heavens  are  high  above  the  earth ; 
and  he  often  takes  a course  for  accomplish- 
ing his  purposes  directly  contrary  to  what 
our  narrow  views  would  prescribe.  He 
wounds  in  order  to  heal,  kills  that  he  may 
make  alive,  casts  down  when  he  designs  to 
raise,  brings  a death  upon  our  feelings, 
wishes,  and  prospects,  when  he  is  about  to 
give  us  the  desire  of  our  hearts.  These 
things  he  does  to  prove  us ; but  he  himself 
knows,  and  has  determined  beforehand,  what 
he  will  do.  The  proof  indeed  usually  turns 
out  to  our  shame.  Impatience  and  unbelief 
show  their  heads,  and  prompt  us  to  suppose 
this  and  the  other  thing,  yea  perhaps  all 
things  are  against  us,  to  question  whether  he 
be  with  us  and  for  us,  or  not.  But  it  issues 
likewise  in  the  praise  of  his  goodness,  when 
we  find  that,  maugre  all  our  unkind  com- 
plaints and  suspicions,  he  is  still  working 
wonderfully  for  us,  causing  light  to  shine 
out  of  darkness,  and  doing  us  good  in  defiance 
of  ourselves. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VIII. 

TO  MR.  B , JUN. 

August  24,  1774. 

dear  sir, — The  lowness  of  your  voice, 
and  a blameable  absence  of  mind  on  my  part, 
prevented  me  from  understanding  what  you 
said  when  you  took  your  leave  of  me ; nor 
did  I just  at  that  instant  recollect  that  you 
were  so  soon  going  away.  I could  not  other- 
wise have  parted  with  you,  without  a par- 
ticular expression  of  my  warmest  wishes  for 
your  welfare,  and  commending  you  with  an 
emotion  which  my  heart  always  feels  for 
you  to  our  God  and  the  word  of  his  grace. 
Permit  me,  therefore,  by  writing,  to  assure 
you,  so  far  as  I can  answer  for  myself,  that 
the  request  you  were  pleased  to  make  for 
my  remembrance  will  not  be  forgotten  by  me.  { 


You  are  going  abroad:  you  will  carry  with 
you,  I doubt  not,  the  best  advice,  strength- 
ened by  the  authority  and  affection  of  parents, 
whom  you  greatly  love  and  greatly  reve- 
rence. This  may  seem  to  make  anything  a 
stranger  can  offer  unnecessary,  if  not  im- 
pertinent; yet,  confiding  in  your  candour 
and  in  your  good  opinion  of  my  intention,  I 
shall  venture  to  let  my  pen  run  on  a little 
longer.  Not  only  my  wishes,  but  my  hopes 
are  strong  in  your  behalf.  Perhaps  there  is 
hardly  a young  man  in  the  kingdom,  born  to 
a fortune,  who  is  setting  out  in  life  upon 
equal  advantages  with  yourself.  How  many, 
at  your  years,  who  have  been  brought  up  in 
affluence,  are  unprincipled,  uninstructed, 
and  have  already  entered  upon  a course  of 
dissipation  and  folly,  in  which  it  is  impossi- 
ble they  themselves  can  find  satisfaction, 
and  which,  unless  they  are  reclaimed  from  it 
by  an  almighty  arm,  will  infallibly  preclude 
them  from  usefulness  and  esteem ; whereas 
your  early  years  have  been  successfully  em- 
ployed in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge,  and  your 
education  formed  under  the  most  animating 
and  endearing  influence;  and  the  Lord  has 
furnished  you  with  every  natural  ability  of 
body  and  mind,  which  may  qualify  you  to 
serve  him  in  that  situation  of  life  which  bis 
providence  has  allotted  you. 

What  may  I not,  then,  farther  hope  from 
these  beginnings,  especially  as  it  is  easy  to  ob- 
serve, that  he  has  given  you  an  amiable  and 
promising  disposition  of  spirit,  and  has  not 
only  preserved  you  from  being  hurried  down 
the  stream  of  a giddy  world,  but  enabled  you 
to  account  the  tender  restraint  under  which 
you  have  been  educated,  not  a yoke,  hut  a 
privilege. 

I sympathize  with  you  at  what  you  will 
feel  when  you  are  first  separated  from  your 
happy  family.  But  the  Lord  God,  who  is 
the  sun  and  shield  of  those  who  fear  him,  will 
be  always  near  you  ! His  favour  is  the  one 
thing  needful,  which  no  outward  advantages 
can  compensate  the  want  of ; and  the  right 
knowledge  of  him  is  the  one  thing  needful, 
which  no  human  teaching  can  communicate. 

Were  I more  intimate  with  you,  I could 
have  asked  the  question,  and  perhaps  re- 
ceived the  satisfaction  to  know,  that  you 
have  already  begun  to  consider  him  in  this 
light  ; that  you  feel  a vanity  in  science,  an 
emptiness  in  creatures,  and  find  that  you 
have  desires,  which  only  He  who  gave  them 
can  satisfy.  I trust  it  either  is,  or  w ill  be 
thus.  As  to  learning,  though  it  is  useful 
when  we  know  how  to  make  a right  use  of 
it,  yet,  considered  as  in  our  own  power,  and 
to  those  who  trust  in  it,  without  seeking  a 
superior  guidance,  it  is  usually  the  source  of 
perplexity,  strife,  scepticism,  and  infidelity. 
It  is  indeed  like  a sword  in  a madman’s 
hands,  which  gives  him  the  more  opportunity 
of  hurting  himself  and  others.  As  to  what 


J>63 


LETTERS  TO  MISS  M 


the  world  calls  pleasure,  there  is  so  little  in 
it,  that  even  the  philosophers  of  old,  or  many 
of  them,  though  they  had  little  of  value  to 
substitute  in  its  room,  could  despise  it.  You 
will  perhaps  meet  with  some,  who  will  talk 
another  language,  who  will  pretend  to  be 
too  wise  to  submit  to  the  Bible,  and  too 
happy  in  worldly  things,  to  expect  or  desire 
any  happiness  besides ; but  I trust  you  have 
seen  enough  to  enable  you  to  treat  such 
persons  with  pity,  and  such  pretensions  with 
the  contempt  they  deserve. 

Should  we  set  our  concerns  with  an  eter- 
nal world  aside  for  a moment,  it  would  be 
easy  to  demonstrate  that  religion  is  neces- 
sary, in  order  to  make  the  most  of  this  life, 
and  to  enjoy  temporal  good  with  the  high- 
est relish.  In  such  a world  as  this,  where 
we  are  every  moment  liable  to  so  many  un- 
foreseen and  unavoidable  contingencies,  a 
man  without  religion  may  be  compared  to  a 
ship  in  a storm,  without  either  rudder,  anchor, 
or  pilot.  But  then,  the  religion  which  only 
deserves  the  name,  must  come  from  above : 
it  must  be  suited  to  the  state  and  wants  of  a 
sinner,  it  must  be  capable  of  comforting  the 
heart,  it  must  take  away  the  sting  and  dread 
of  death,  and  fix  our  confidence  upon  one 
who  is  always  able  to  help  us.  Such  is  the 
leligion  of  Jesus,  such  are  its  effects,  and 
such  are  the  criteria  whereby  we  are  to 
judge  of  the  various  forms  and  schemes  un- 
der which  it  is  proposed  to  us.  But  I for- 
bear ; I am  only  reminding  you  of  what  you 
know,  and  what  you  have  known  to  be  veri- 
fied by  living  and  dying  examples.  This 
happiness,  my  dear  Sir,  is  open  to  you,  to  all 
who  seek.  He  is  enthroned  in  heaven,  but 
prayer  will  bring  him  down  to  the  heart. 
Indeed,  he  is  always  beforehand  with  us; 
and  if  we  feel  one  desire  towards  him,  we 
may  accept  it  as  a token  that  he  gave  it  us 
to  encourage  us  to  ask  for  more. 

May  he  be  your  guide  and  guard,  be  with 
you  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  and  bring 
you  back  to  your  father’s  house  in  peace. 
Should  I live  to  see  that  day,  you  have  few 
friends  whose  congratulations  would  be 
wrarmer  or  more  sincere  than  mine ; and  if, 
when  you  are  settled  and  at  leisure,  you  will 
afford  me  a letter,  it  will  be  both  a pleasure 
and  a favour  to,  dear  Sir, — Yours,  &c. 


LETTER  IX 

TO  MISS  M B . 

November  11,  1775. 

my  dear  miss  m , — Our  late  visit  to 

was  very  pleasant  to  myself;  if  any  i 

thing  passed  that  was  of  service  to  you,  we 
know  to  whom  the  thanks  are  due ; for  we 
can  neither  communicate  nor  receive  any  j 


[let.  ix. 

thing,  but  so  far  as  he  is  pleased  to  enable 
us.  One  reason  why  he  often  disappoints 
us  is,  that  we  may  learn  to  depend  on  him 
alone.  We  are  prone,  as  you  observe,  to 
rest  too  much  upon  sensible  comforts,  yet 
they  are  very  desirable ; only  as  to  the  mea- 
sure and  seasons,  it  is  well  to  be  submissive 
to  his  will,  to  be  thankful  for  them  when  we 
have  them,  and  humbly  waiting  for  them 
when  we  have  them  not.  They  are  not 
however,  the  proper  ground  of  our  hope ; a 
good  hope  springs  from  such  a sense  of  our 
wants,  and  such  a persuasion  of  his  power 
and  grace,  as  engages  the  heart  to  venture, 
upon  the  warrant  of  his  promises,  to  trust  in 
him  for  salvation.  In  a sense,  we  are  often 
hindering  him  by  our  impatience  and  unbe- 
lief; but,  strictly  speaking,  when  he  really 
begins  the  good  work,  and  gives  us  a desire 
which  will  be  satisfied  with  nothing  short  of 
himself,  he  will  not  be  hindered  from  carry- 
ing it  on ; for  he  has  said,  I v/ill  work,  and 
none  shall  let  it.  Ah ! had  it  depended  upon 
myself,  upon  my  wfisdom  or  faithfulness,  I 
should  have  hindered  him  to  purpose,  and 
ruined  myself  long  ago.  How  often  have  I 
grieved  and  resisted  his  Spirit ! but  hereby  I 
have  learned  more  of  his  patience  and  ten- 
derness than  I could  otherwise  have  known. 
He  knows  our  frame,  and  what  effects  our 
evil  nature,  fomented  by  the  artifices  of 
Satan,  will  have ; he  sees  us  from  first  to 
last.  A thousand  evils  arise  in  our  hearts. 
A thousand  wrongnesses  in  our  conduct, 
which,  as  they  do  arise,  are  new  to  ourselves, 
and  perhaps,  at  some  times,  we  were  ready 
to  think  we  were  incapable  of  such  things ; 
but  none  of  them  are  new  to  him,  to  whom 
past,  present,  and  future  are  the  same.  The 
foresight  of  them  did  not  prevent  his  calling 
us  by  his  grace.  Though  he  knew  we  were 
vile,  and  should  prove  ungrateful  and  un- 
faithful, yet  he  would  be  found  of  us;  he 
would  knock  at  the  door  of  our  hearts,  and 
gain  himself  an  entrance.  Nor  shall  they 
prevent  his  accomplishing  his  gracious  pur- 
pose. It  is  our  part  to  be  abased  before  him, 
and  quietly  to  hope  and  wait  for  his  salva- 
tion, in  the  use  of  his  appointed  means.  The 
power,  success,  and  blessing,  are  wholly  from 
himself.  To  make  us  more  sensible  of  this, 
he  often  withdraws  from  our  perceptions; 
and  as,  in  the  absence  of  the  sun,  the  wild 
beasts  of  the  forest  roam  abroad ; so  when 
Jesus  hides  himself,  we  presently  perceive 
what  is  in  our  hearts,  and  what  a poor  shift 
we  can  make  without  him  ; when  he  returns, 
his  light  chaces  the  evils  away,  and  wre  are 
well  again.  However,  they  are  not  dead 
when  most  controlled  by  his  presence. 

It  is  your  great  and  singular  mercy,  my 
dear  Miss,  that  he  has  taught  you  to  seek  him 
so  early  in  life.  You  are  entered  in  the  way 
of  salvation,  but  you  must  not  expect  all  at 
I once.  The  work  of  grace  is  compared  to  the 


LETTERS  TO  MISS  M — B 


269 


LET.  XI. 


corn,  and  to  a building’;  the  growth  of  the 
one,  and  the  carrying  forward  of  the  other, 
are  gradual.  In  a building,  for  instance,  if 
it  be  large,  there  is  much  to  be  done  in  pre- 
paring and  laying  the  foundation,  before  the 
walls  appear  above  ground  ; much  is  doing 
within,  when  the  work  does  not  seem,  per- 
haps, to  advance  without;  and  when  it  is 
considerably  forward,  yet  being  encumbered 
with  scaffolds  and  rubbish,  a bystander  sees 
it  at  a great  disadvantage,  and  can  form  but 
an  imperfect  judgment  of  it.  But  all  this 
while  the  architect  himsel’f,  even  from  the  lay- 
ing of  the  first  stone,  conceives  of  it  accord- 
ng  to  the  plan  and  design  he  has  formed ; he 
prepares  and  adjusts  the  materials,  disposing 
*ach  in  its  proper  time  and  place,  and  views 
t in  idea  as  already  finished.  In  due  season 
it  is  completed,  but  not  in  a day.  The  top- 
stone  is  fixed,  and  then,  the  scaffolds  and  rub- 
bish being  removed,  it  appears  to  others  as  he 
intended  it  should  be.  Men  indeed  often  plan 
what,  for  want  of  skill  or  ability,  or  from 
unforeseen  disappointments,  they  are  unable 
to  execute.  But  nothing  can  disappoint  the 
heavenly  Builder;  nor  will  he  ever  be  re- 
roached  with  forsaking  the  work  of  his  own 
ands,  or  beginning  that  which  he  could  not 
or  would  not  accomplish,  Phil,  i,  6.  Let  us 
therefore  be  thankful  for  beginnings,  and  pa- 
tiently wait  the  event.  His  enemies  strive  to 
retard  the  work,  as  they  did  when  the  Jews, 
by  his  order,  set  about  rebuilding  the  temple, 
yet  it  was  finished  in  defiance  of  them  all. — 
Believe  me  to  be,  &c. 


LETTER  X. 

April  29, 1776. 

my  dear  miss  m , — I thank  you  for 

vour  last ; and  I rejoice  in  the  Lord’s  good- 
ness to  you.  To  be  drawn  by  love,  exempt- 
ed from  tho:  e distressing  terrors  and  tempt- 
ations which  some  are  beset  with ; to  be  fa- 
voured with  the  ordinances  and  means  of 
grace,  and  connected  with  those,  and  with 
those  only,  who  are  disposed  and  qualified  to 
assist  and  encourage  you  in  seeking  the  Sa- 
viour ; these  are  peculiar  privileges,  which 
al!  concur  in  your  case;  he  loves  you,  he 
deals  gently  with  you,  he  provides  well  for 
vou,  and  accompanies  every  outward  privi- 
lege with  his  special  blessing ; and  I trust  he 
will  lead  you  on  from  strength  to  strength, 
and  show  you  still  greater  things  than  you 
have  yet  seen.  They  whom  he  teaches  are  al- 
ways increasing  in  knowledge,  both  of  them- 
selves and  of  him.  The  heart  is  deep,  and 
like  Ezekiel’s  vision,  presents  so  many  cham- 
bers of  imagery,  one  within  another,  that  it 
requires  time  to  get  a considerable  acquaint- 
ance with  it,  and  we  shall  never  know  it  tho- 
roughly. It  is  now  more  than  twenty-eight 


years  since  the  Lord  began  to  open  mine  ic 
my  own  view ; and  from  that  time  to  this,  .al- 
most every  day  has  discovered  to  me,  some 
thing  which  till  then  was  unobserved ; and 
the  farther  I go,  the  more  I seem  convinced 
that  I have  entered  but  a little  way.  A per- 
son that  travels  in  some  parts  of  Derbyshire 
may  easily  be  satisfied  that  the  country  is 
cavernous ; but  how  large,  how  deep,  how 
numerous,  the  caverns  may  be,  which  are 
hidden  from  us  by  the  surface  of  the  ground, 
and  what  is  contained  in  them,  are  questions 
which  our  nicest  inquiries  cannot  fully  an- 
swer. Thus  I judge  of  my  heart,  that  it  is 
very  deep  and  dark,  and  full  of  evil;  but  as 
to  particulars,  I know  not  one  of  a thousand. 

And  if  our  own  hearts  are  beyond  our  com- 
prehension, how  much  more  incomprehensi- 
ble is  the  heart  of  Jesus ! If  sin  abounds  in  us, 
grace  and  love  superabound  in  him  ; his  way3 
and  thoughts  are  higher  than  ours,  as  the 
heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth ; his  love 
has  a height,  and  depth,  and  length,  and 
breadth,  that  passeth  all  knowledge ; and  his 
riches  of  grace  arc  unsearchable  riches,  Eph. 
iii.  8.  18,  19.  All  that  we  have  received  or 
can  receive  from  him,  or  know  of  him  in  this 
life,  compared  with  what  he  is  in  himself,  or 
what  he  has  done  for  us,  is  but  as  the  drop  of  a 
bucket  compared  with  the  ocean,  or  a single 
ray  of  light  in  respect  of  the  sun.  The  waters 
of  the  sanctuary  flow  to  us  at  first  almost 
upon  a level,  ankle  deep,  so  graciously  does 
the  Lord  condescend  to  our  weakness : but 
they  rise  as  we  advance,  and  constrain  us  to 
cry  out  with  the  apostle,  O the  depth ! We 
find  before  us,  as  Dr.  Watts  beautifully  ex- 
presses it, 

A sea  of  love  and  grace  unknown 

Without  a bottom  or  a shore. 

0 the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ. 
It  will  be  growing  upon  us  through  time,  yea, 

1 believe  through  eternity.  What  an  astonish- 
ing and  what  a cheering  thought,  that  this 
high  and  lofty  One  should  unite  himself  to 
our  nature,  that  so,  in  a way  worthy  of  his 
adorable  perfections,  he  might  by  his  Spirit, 
unite  us  to  himself!  Could  such  a thought 
have  arisen  in  our  hearts,  without  the  war- 
rant of  his  word  (but  it  is  a thought  which 
no  created  mind  was  capable  of  conceiving 
till  lie  revealed  it,)  it  would  have  been  pre- 
sumption and  blasphemy;  but  now  he  has 
made  it  known,  it  is  the  foundation  of  our 
hope,  and  an  exhaustible  spring  of  life  and 
joy.  Well  may  we  say,  Lord,  what  is  man 
that  thou  shouldst  thus  visit  him ! — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XI. 

September  3,  1776. 

my  dear  miss  m ,— We  saw  no  dan- 

ger upon  the  road  home  ward  : but  my  judg- 


277 


LETTERS  TO  MISS  M B- 


ment  tells  me  we  are  always  upon  the  brink 
of  danger,  though  we  see  it  not ; and  that, 
without  the  immediate  protection  and  care 
of  him  who  preserveth  the  stars  in  their 
courses,  there  could  be  no  travelling  safely 
a few  miles,  nor  even  sitting  in  safety  by 
the  fire-side.  But  with  him  we  are  safe  in 
all  places  and  circumstances,  till  our  race 
is  done,  and  his  gracious  purposes  concern- 
ing us,  in  the  present  life,  are  completely 
answered ; then  he  will  call  us  home,  that 
we  may  see  his  face,  and  be  with  him  for 
ever,  and  then  it  will  not  much  signify  what 
messenger  he  shall  be  pleased  to  send  for  us. 

While  he  took  care  of  us  abroad,  he 
watched  over  our  concerns  at  home  likewise; 
so  that  we  found  all  well  upon  our  return, 
and  met  with  nothing  to  grieve  us.  Many 
go  out  and  return  home  no  more,  and  many 
find  distressing  things  have  happened  in  their 
absence,  but  we  have  to  set  up  our  Ebenezer, 
and  to  say,  Hitherto  he  has  helped  us.  As- 
sist me  to  praise  him.  The  Lord  is  leading 
you  in  the  good  old  way,  in  which  you  may 
perceive  the  footsteps  of  his  flock  who  have 
gone  before  you.  They  had  in  their  day  the 
same  difficulties,  fears,  and  complaints,  as  we 
have  and  through  mercy  we  partake  of  the 
same  consolation  which  supported  and  re- 
freshed them ; and  the  promises  which  they 
trusted  and  found  faithful,  are  equally  sure 
to  us.  It  is  still  true,  that  they  who  believe 
shall  never  be  confounded.  If  left  to  our- 
selves, we  should  have  built  upon  sand  ; but 
be  has  provided  and  revealed  a sure  founda- 
tion, removed  our  natural  prejudices  against 
it ; and  now,  though  rains,  and  floods,  and 
storms  assault  our  building,  it  cannot  fall,  for 
it  is  founded  upon  a rock.  The  suspicions 
and  fears  which  arise  in  an  awakened  mind, 
proceed,  in  a good  measure,  from  remaining 
unbelief ; but  not  wholly  so,  for  there  is  a 
jealousy  and  diffidence  of  ourselves,  a wari- 
ness owing  to  a sense  of  the  deceitfulness  of 
our  hearts,  which  is  a grace  and  a gift  of  the 
Lord.  Some  people  who  have  much  zeal, 
but  are  destitute  of  this  jealous  fear,  may  be 
compared  to  a ship  that  spreads  a great  deal 
of  sail,  but  is  not  properly  ballasted,  and  is 
therefor^in  danger  of  being  overset  whenever 
a storm  comes.  A sincere  person  has  many 
reasons  for  distrusting  his  own  judgment ; is 
sensible  of  the  vast  importance  of  the  case, 
and  afraid  of  too  hastily  concluding  in  his 
own  favour,  and  therefore  not  easily  satis- 
fied. However,  this  fear,  though  useful,  es- 
pecially to  young  beginners,  is  not  comfort- 
able ; and  they  who  simply  wait  upon  Jesus, 
are  gradually  freed  from  it,  in  proportion  as 
their  knowledge  of  him,  and  their  experi- 
ence of  his  goodness,  increases.  He  has  a 
time  for  settling  and  establishing  them  in 
himself,  and  hislime  is  best.  We  are  hasty, 
and  would  be  satisfied  at  once,  but  his  word 
is,  Tarry  thou  the  Lord’s  leisure.  The  work 


[let.  xi. 

of  grace  is  not  like  Jonah’s  gourd,  which 
sprang  up  and  flourished  in  a night,  and  as 
quickly  withered,  but  rather  like  the  oak, 
which,  from  a little  acorn  and  a tender  plant, 
advances  with  an  almost  imperceptible 
growth  from  year  to  year,  till  it  becomes  a 
broad  spreading  and  deep-rooted  tree,  and 
then  it  stands  for  ages.  The  Christian  oak 
shall  grow  and  flourish  for  ever.  When  I 
see  any  soon  after  they  appear  to  be  awaken- 
ed, making  a speedy  profession  of  great  joy, 
before  they  have  a due  acquaintance  with 
their  own  hearts,  I am  in  pain  for  them.  I 
am  not  sorry  to  hear  them  afterwards  com- 
plain that  their  joys  are  gone,  and  they  are 
almost  at  their  wits  end ; for  without  some 
such  check,  to  make  them  feel  their  weak- 
ness and  dependence,  I seldom  find  them 
turn  out  well ; either  their  fervour  insensi- 
bly abates  till  they  become  quite  cold,  and 
sink  into  the  world  again,  (of  which  I have 
seen  many  instances,)  or  if  they  do  not  give 
up  all,  their  walk  is  uneven,  and  their  spirit 
has  not  that  savour  of  brokenness  and  true 
humility,  which  is  a chief  ornament  of  our 
holy  profession.  If  they  do  not  feel  the 
plague  of  their  hearts  at  first,  they  find  it 
out  afterwards,  and  too  often  manifest  it  to 
others.  Therefore  though  I know  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  is  free,  and  will  not  be  confined 
to  our  rules,  and  there  may  be  excepted 
cases ; yet,  in  general,  I believe  the  old  pro- 
verb, “ Soft  and  fair  goes  far,”  will  hold 
good  in  Christian  experience.  Let  us  be 
thankful  for  the  beginnings  of  grace,  and 
wait  upon  our  Saviour  patiently  for  the  in- 
crease. And  as  we  have  chosen  him  for  our 
physician,  let  us  commit  ourselves  to  his 
management,  and  not  prescribe  to  him  what 
he  shall  prescribe  for  us.  He  knows  us  and 
he  loves  us  better  than  we  do  ourselves,  and 
will  do  all  things  well. 

You  say,  “ It  never  came  with  power  and 
life  to  my  soul,  that  he  died  for  me.”  If  you 
mean  you  never  had  any  extraordinary  sud- 
den manifestation,  something  like  a vision 
or  a voice  from  heaven,  confirming  it  to  you, 
I can  say  the  same.  But  I know  he  died  for 
sinners ; I know  I am  a sinner : I know  he 
invites  them  that  are  ready  to  perish ; I am 
such  a one : I know,  upon  his  own  invitation, 
I have  committed  myself  to  him;  and  1 
know,  by  the  effects,  that  he  has  been  with 
me  hitherto,  otherwise  I should  have  been 
an  apostate  long  ago ; and  therefore  I know 
that  he  died  for  me ; for  had  he  been  pleased 
to  kill  me  (as  he  justly  might  have  done,)  he 
would  not  have  shown  me  such  things  as  these. 

If  I must  perish,  would  the  Lord 

Have  taught  my  heart  to  love  his  word  ? 

Would  he  have  given  me  eyes  to  see 

My  danger  and  my  remedy  ? 

Reveal'd  his  name,  and  bid  me  pray, 

Had  he  resolv’d  to  6ay  me  nay  ? 

I know  that  I am  a child,  because  ne 


LETTERS  TO  MISS  M B 


271 


LET.  XI.  j 

teaches  me  to  say,  Abba,  Father.  I know 
that  I am  his,  because  he  has  enabled  me  to 
choose  him  for  mine.  For  such  a choice  and 
desire  could  never  have  taken  place  in  my 
heart,  if  he  had  not  placed  it  there  himself. 
By  nature  I was  too  blind  to  know  him,  too 
proud  to  trust  him,  too  obstinate  to  serve  him, 
too  base-minded  to  love  him ; the  enmity  I 
was  filled  with  against  his  government, 


righteousness,  and  grace,  was  too  strong  to 
be  subdued  by  any  power  but  his  own.  The 
love  I bear  to  him  is  but  a faint  and  feeble 
spark,  but  it  is  an  emanation  from  himself 
He  kindled  it,  and  he  keeps  it  alive ; and  be- 
cause it  is  his  work,  I trust  many  waters 
shall  not  quench  it. 

I have  only  room  to  assure  you,  that  I 
am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO 

THE  REVEREND  MR.  R 


LETTER  I. 

April  15,  1776. 

MY  DEAR  SIR, - 

: often  rejoice  on  your  behalf.  Your  call 
out  of  the  world  was  a singular  and  comfort- 
able instance  of  the  power  of  grace.  And 
when  I consider  the  difficulties  and  snares 
of  your  situation,  and  that  you  have  been 
kept  in  the  middle  path,  preserved  from  un- 
due compliances  on  the  one  hand,  and  un- 
necessary singularities  on  the  other,  I cannot 
doubt  but  the  l ord  has  hitherto  helped  and 
guided  you.  Indeed,  you  have  need  of  his 
guidance.  At  your  years,  and  with  your 
expectations  in  life,  your  health  firm,  and 
your  natural  spirits  lively,  you  are  exposed 
to  many  snares ; yet,  if  the  Lord  keeps  you 
sensible  of  your  danger,  and  dependent  upon 
him,  you  will  walk  safely.  Your  security, 
success,  and  comfort,  depend  upon  him ; and 
in  the  way  of  means,  chiefly  upon  your  be- 
ing preserved  in  an  humble  sense  of  your 
own  weakness.  It  is  written,  “ Fear  not,  1 
am  with  thee.”  It  is  written  again,  “ Blessed 
is  the  man  who  feareth  always.”  There  is 
a perfect  harmony  in  those  seemingly  differ- 
ent texts.  May  the  wisdom  that  cometh 
from  above  teach  you  and  me  to  keep  them 
both  united  in  our  view.  If  the  Lord  be 
with  us,  we  have  no  cause  of  fear.  His  eye 
is  upon  us,  his  arm  over  us,  his  ear  open  to 
our  prayer ; his  grace  sufficient,  his  promise 
unchangeable.  Under  his  protection,  though 
the  path  of  duty  should  lie  through  fire  and 
water,  we  may  cheerfully  and  confidently 
pursue  it.  On  the  other  hand,  our  hearts 
are  so  deceitful,  fallible,  and  frail ; our  spi- 
ritual enemies  so  subtile,  watchful,  and  pow- ! 
erful;  and  they  derive  so  many  advantages 
from  the  occasions  of  every  day,  in  which  we 
are  unavoidably  and  unexpectedly  concerned ; 
there  is  so  much  combustible  within,  and  so 
many  temptations  arising  from  without,  capa- 
ble of  setting  all  in  a flame ; that  we  cannot 
be  too  jealous  of  ourselves  and  our  circum- 1 
272 


stances.  The  duke  of  Devonshire’s  motto, 
if  I mistake  not.  well  suits  the  Christian, 
Cavendo  tutus.  When  we  can  say,  in  the 
psalmist’s  spirit,  “Hold  thou  me  up,”  we 
may  warrantably  draw  his  conclusion,  “ and 
I shall  be  safe ;”  but  the  moment  we  lean  to 
our  own  understanding,  we  are  in  imminent 
danger  of  falling.  The  enemy  who  wars 
against  our  souls  is  a consummate  master  in 
his  way,  fertile  in  stratagems,  and  equally 
skilful  in  carrying  on  his  assaults  by  sap  or 
by  storm.  He  studies  us,  if  I may  so  say, 
all  around,  to  discover  our  weak  sides ; and 
he  is  a very  Proteus  for  changing  his  appear- 
ances, and  can  appear  as  a sly  serpent,  a 
roaring  lion,  or  an  angel  of  light,  as  best 
suits  his  purpose.  It.  is  a great  mercy  to  be 
in  some  measure  acquainted  with  his  devices, 
and  aware  of  them.  They  who  wait  humbly 
upon  the  Lord,  and  consult  carefully  at  his 
word  and  throne  of  grace,  are  made  wiser 
than  their  enemy,  and  enabled  to  escape  and 
withstand  his  wriles.  I know  you  will  not 
expect  me  to  apologise  for  putting  you  in 
mind  of  these  things,  though  you  know  them. 
I have  a double  warrant ; the  love  I bear  you, 
and  the  Lord’s  command,  Heb.  iii.  13.  Use 
the  like  freedom  with  me;  I need  it,  and 
hope  to  be  thankful  for  it,  and  accept  it  as 
one  of  the  best  proofs  of  friendship. 

The  Lord  bless  and  keep  you.  Pray  for 
us,  and  believe  me  to  be  sincerely  yours. 


LETTER  II. 

July  13,  1776 

my  dear  sir, — The  Lord,  who  mercifully 
called  you  out  of  a state  of  thoughtless  dissi- 
pation, and  has  hitherto  been  with  you,  will, 
I trust,  sweeten  all  your  trials,  and  cause  his 
light  to  shine  upon  your  paths.  It  seems 
probable,  that  if  you  pay  a just  regard  to 
your  father’s  negative,  which  I really  think 
lie  has  a right  to  expect  from  you,  and,  at 
the  same  time,  make  a steady  and  conscien 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  R- 


273 


I.ET.  IN.] 

tious  use  of  that  negative,  which  he  gene- 
rously allows  you  to  put  upon  his  proposals, 
to  which  I think  you  have  an  equal  right ; I 
say,  while  things  remain  in  this  situation, 
and  you  continue  to  think  differently,  it 
seems  probable  that  the  hour  of  your  ex- 
cnar.ging  a single  for  the  marriage  state  is 
yet  at  some  distance.  But  let  not  this  grieve 
you.  The  Lord  is  all-sufficient.  A lively 
sense  of  his  love,  a deep  impression  of  eter- 
nity, a heart  filled  with  zeal  for  his  cause, 
and  a thirst  for  the  good  of  souls,  will,  I 
hope,  enable  you  to  make  a cheerful  sacri- 
fice of  whatever  has  no  necessary  connexion 
with  your  peace  and  his  service.  And  you 
may  rest  assured,  that  whenever  he,  who 
Coves  you  better  than  you  do  yourself,  sees  it 
best  for  you,  upon  the  whole  to  change  your 
condition,  he  will  bring  it  about,  he  will 
point  out  the  person,  prepare  the  means,  and 
secure  the  success,  by  his  providence,  and 
the  power  he  has  over  every  heart.  And 
you  shall  see  that  all  previous  difficulties 
were  either  gracious  preventions,  which  he 
threw  in  the  way  to  prevent  you  taking  a 
wrong  step,  or  temporary  bars,  which  by  his 
removing  them  afterwards,  should  give  you 
opportunity  of  more  clearly  perceiving  his 
care  and  interposition  in  your  favour.  In 
the  mean  time,  remember  your  high  calling. 
You  are  a minister  and  an  ambassador  of 
Christ ; you  are  entrusted  with  the  most  ho- 
nourable and  important  employment  that 
can  engage  and  animate  the  heart  of  man. 

Taura  fiuKiTX,  tv  Tovrot;  itr5if  trrifttvt  xvroig.* 

Filled  and  fired  with  a constraining  sense 
of  the  love  of  Jesus,  and  the  worth  of  souls ; 
impressed  with  an  ardour  to  carry  war  into 
Satan’s  kingdom,  to  storm  his  strongholds, 
and  rescue  his  captives ; you  will  have  little 
leisure  to  think  of  any  thing  else.  How  does 
the  love  of  glory  stimulate  the  soldier,  make 
him  forget  and  forego  a thousand  personal 
tendernesses,  and  prompt  him  to  cross  oceans, 
to  traverse  deserts,  to  scale  mountains,  and 
plunge  into  the  greatest  hardships  and  the 
thickest  dangers ! He  does  it  for  a corrupti- 
ble crown,  a puff  of  breath,  an  empty  fame  ; 
his  highest  prospect  is  the  applause  and  fa- 
vour of  his  prince.  We  likewise  are  sol- 
diers; we  have  a Prince  and  Captain  who 
deserves  our  all.  They  who  know  him, 
and  have  hearts  to  conceive  of  his  excel- 
lence, and  to  feel  their  obligations  to  him, 
cannot  indeed  seek  their  own  glory,  but  his 
glory  is  dearer  to  them  than  a thousand  lives. 
They  owe  him  their  souls,  for  he  redeemed 
them  with  blood,  his  own  blood ; and  by  his 
grace  he  subdued  and  pardoned  them  when 
they  were  rebels,  and  in  arms  against  him. 
Therefore  they  are  not  their  own,  they 
would  not  be  their  own.  When  his  stand- 
ard is  raised,  when  his  enemies  are  in  mo- 


tion, when  his  people  are  to  be  rescued ; 
they  go  forth  clothed  with  his  panoply,  they 
fight  under  his  eye,  they  are  sure  of  his  sup- 
port, and  he  shows  them  the  conqueror’s 
crown.  O,  when  they  think  of  that  tv 
yeeas,*  with  which  he  has  promised  to  welcome 
them  home,  when  the  campaign  is  over,  hard 
things  seem  easy,  and  bitter  things  sweet; 
they  count  nothing,  not  even  their  own  lives, 
dear,  so  that  they  may  finish  their  course 
with  joy.  May  the  Lord  make  us  thus  mind- 
ed ; give  us  a hearty  concern  for  his  busi- 
ness, and  he  has  engaged  to  take  care  of  ours; 
and  nothing  that  can  conduce  to  our  real 
comfort  and  usefulness  shall  be  withheld. — 
Believe  me  to  be  sincerely  yours. 


LETTER  III. 

December  21,  1770. 

my  dear  friend, — Your  letter  brought 
me  tidings  of  joy,  and  then  furnished  me 
with  materials  for  a bonfire  upon  the  occa- 
sion. It  was  an  act  of  passive  obedience  to 
burn  it,  but  I did  not  obey.  I congratulate 
you  upon  the  happy  issue  to  which  the  Ixml 
has  brought  your  affairs.  I see  that  his  good 
Spirit  and  good  providence  have  been  and 
are  with  you.  I doubt  not  but  your  union 

with  Miss will  be  a mutual  blessing, 

and,  on  your  part,  heightened  by  being  con- 
nected with  such  a family.  I could  enlarge 
upon  this  head,  if  my  letter  likewise  was 
to  be  burnt  as  soon  as  you  have  read  it. 
I look  upon  the  friendship  the  Lord  has 
given  me  there  as  one  of  my  prime  privi- 
leges, and  I hope  I shall  always  be  thankful 
that  it  proved  a means  of  introducing  you 
into  it. 

I congratulate  you  likewise  upon  your  ac- 
cession to , not  because  it  is  a good  liv- 

ing, in  a genteel  neighbourhood,  and  a fine 
country,  but  because  I believe  the  Lord  sends 
you  there  for  fulfilling  the  desires  he  has 
given  you  of  being  useful  to  souls.  Church- 
preferment,  in  any  other  view,  is  dreadful ; 
and  I would  as  soon  congratulate  a man  upon 
seeing  a millstone  tied  about  his  neck,  to  sink 
him  into  the  depths  of  the  sea,  as  upon  his 
obtaining  what  is  called  a good  living,  except 
I thought  him  determined  to  spend  and  be 
spent  in  the  cause  of  the  gospel.  A parisii 
is  an  awful  millstone  indeed  to  those  who  see 
nothing  valuable  in  the  flock  but  the  fleece ; 
but  the  Lord  has  impressed  your  heart  with  a 
sense  of  the  glory  and  importance  of  his  truth 
and  the  worth  of  souls,  and  animated  your 
zeal  by  the  most  powerful  motive,  the  know- 
ledge of  his  constraining  love.  Your  case  is 
extraordinary.  Perhaps,  when  you  review  in 
your  mind  the  circle  of  your  former  gay  ac- 
quaintance, you  may  say,  with  Job’s  servant 


* 1 Tim.  iv.  15,  16. 

2 M 


t Well  done,  good  servant. 


274 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  R- 


I only  am  escaped  alive The  rest  are 
either  removed  into  an  eternal  state,  or  are 
still  hurrying  down  the  stream  of  dissipation, 
and  living  without  God  in  the  world.  Yet 
there  was  a time  when  there  seemed  no  more 
probability,  on  your  side  than  on  theirs,  that 
you  should  obtain  mercy,  and  be  called  to 
the  honour  of  preaching  the  glorious  gospel. 
You  are  setting  out  with  every  possible  ad- 
vantage. In  early  life,  with  a cheerful  flow 
••'f  spirits,  affluent  circumstances,  and  now, 
to  crown  all,  the  Lord  gives  you  the  very 
choice  of  your  heart  in  a partner ; one  who, 
besides  deserving  and  meeting  your  affec- 
tion, will,  I am  persuaded,  be  a real  help- 
meet to  you  in  your  spiritual  walk.  How 
much  is  here  to  be  thankful  for  ! 

I trust  the  Lord  has  given  you,  and  will 
maintain  in  you,  a right  spirit,  so  as  not  to 
rest  in  his  gifts,  but  to  hold  them  in  connex- 
ion with  the  love  and  favour  of  the  giver. 
It  is  a low  time  with  us,  when  the  greatest 
assemblage  of  earthly  blessings  can  seem  to 
satisfy  us  without  real  communion  with  him. 
His  grace  is  sufficient  for  you  ; but  undoubt- 
edly such  a scene  of  prosperity  as  seems  to 
lie  before  you,  is  full  of  snares,  and  calls  for 
a double  effort  of  watchfulness  and  prayer. 
Your  situation  will  fix  many  eyes  upon  you, 
and  Satan  will  doubtless  watch  you,  and  ex- 
amine every  corner  of  the  hedge  around  you, 
.o  see  if  he  can  find  a gap  by  which  to  enter. 
We  have  but  few  rich  gospel-ministers;  but 
it  is  too  evident  that  he  has  found  a way  to 
damp  the  zeal  and  hurt  the  spirits  of  some  of 
those  few,  who  for  a time  acted  nobly,  and 
seemed  to  walk  out  of  the  reach  of  the  allure- 
ments of  the  world.  I am  not  jealous  of  you ; 
I feel  a comfortable  persuasion,  that  the  Lord 
has  taken  a fast  hold  of  your  heart,  and  given 
you  a fast  hold  of  his  almighty  arm ; yet  I 
believe  you  will  not  be  displeased  with  me 
for  dropping  a hint  of  this  kind,  and  at  this 
time. 

You  have  heard  of  the  trial  with  which  the 
Lord  has  been  pleased  to  visit  us:  it  still  con- 
tinues, though  considerably  alleviated.  It  is 
tempered  with  many  mercies,  and  I hope  he 
disposes  us  in  a measure  to  submission.  I 
trust  it  will  be  for  good.  My  dear  friend,  you 
are  now  coming  into  my  school,  where  you 
will  learn,  as  occasions  offer,  to  feel  more  in 
the  person  of  another  than  in  your  own.  But 
be  not  discouraged,  the  Lord  only  afflicts  for 
our  good.  It  is  necessary  that  our  sharpest 
trials  should  sometimes  spring  from  our  dear- 
est comforts,  else  we  should  be  in  danger  of 
forgetting  ourselves,  and  setting  up  our  rest 
here.  In  such  a world,  and  with  such  hearts 
as  we  have,  we  shall  often  need  something  to 
prevent  our  cleaving  to  the  dust,  to  quicken 
us  to  prayer,  and  to  make  us  feel  that  our 
dependence  for  one  hour’s  peace  is  upon  the 
Lord  alone.  I am  ready  to  think  I have 
known  as  much  of  the  good  and  happiness 


[let.  iv. 

which  this  world  can  afford,  as  most  people 
who  live  in  it.  I never  saw  the  person  with 
whom  I wished  to  exchange  in  temporals. 
And  for  many  years  past  I have  thought  my 
trials  have  been  light  and  few,  compared 
with  what  many,  or  most  of  the  Lord’s  peo- 
ple have  endured.  And  yet,  though  in  the 
main  possessed  of  my  own  wishes,  when  I 
look  back  upon  the  twenty-seven  years  past, 
I am  ready  to  style  them,  with  Jacob,  few  and 
evil ; and  to  give  the  sum-total  of  their  con- 
tents in  Solomon’s  words, — all  is  vanity.  If 
1 take  these  years  to  pieces,  I see  a great 
part  of  them  wras  filled  up  with  sin,  sorrows, 
and  inquietudes.  The  pleasures  too  are 
gone,  and  have  no  more  real  existence  than 
the  baseless  fabric  of  a dream.  The  shadows 
of  the  evening  will  soon  begin  to  come  over 
us ; and  if  our  lives  are  prolonged,  a thousand 
pains  and  infirmities,  from  which  the  Lord 
has  in  a remarkable  measure  exempted  us 
hitherto,  will  probably  overtake  ns,  and  at 
last  we  must  feel  the  parting  pang.  Sic 
transit  gloria  mundi.  Sin  has  so  envenom- 
ed the  soil  of  this  earth,  that  the  amaranth 
will  not  grow  upon  it.  But  we  are  hasting 
to  a better  world,  and  to  bright  unclouded 
skies,  where  our  sun  will  no  more  go  down, 
and  where  all  tears  shall  be  wiped  from  our 
eyes. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

September  27,  1777. 

my  dear  friend, — Mr. called  upon 

us  on  Thursday  evening,  and  from  that  hour 
my  thoughts,  when  awake,  have  seldom 

been  absent  from . Few  people  are 

better  qualified  to  feel  for  you,  yourself  and 
the  family  excepted ; perhaps  there  is  no 
person  living  more  nearly  interested  in  what 

concerns  Mrs. than  myself.  I could 

not  therefore,  at  such  a time  as  this,  refrain 
from  writing ; and  glad  should  \ be,  if  the 
Lord  may  help  me  to  drop  a suitable  word, 
and  accompany  it  with  a blessing  to  you  in 
the  reading. 

I am  glad  to  be  assured,  though  I ex- 
pected no  less,  that  Mrs. happily  feels 

herself  safe  in  the  Lord’s  hand,  and  under 
the  care  of  the  Good  Shepherd  and  Saviour, 
to  whom  she  has  often  committed  herself; 
and  finds  him  faithful  to  his  promise,  giving 
her  strength  in  her  soul  according  to  her  day, 
and  enabling  her  quietly  to  submit  to  his 
holy,  wise,  and  gracious  will.  And  it  is  my 
prayer,  that  he  may  strengthen  you  likewise, 
and  reveal  his  own  all-sufficiency  so  clearly 
and  powerfully  to  your  heart,  that  you  may 
not  be  afraid  of  any  event,  but  cheerfully 
rely  upon  him,  to  be  all  that  to  you,  in  every 
circumstance  and  change,  which  his  promise 
warrants  you  to  expect. 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  R 


275 


LIT.  IV.] 

I am  willing  to  hope,  that  this  is  but  a 
short  season  of  anxiety,  appointed  for  the  ex- 
ercise of  your  faith  and  patience,  and  to  give 
you,  in  his  good  time,  a signal  proof  of  his 
power  and  goodness  in  answering  prayer, 
lie  sometimes  brings  us  into  such  a situation 
that  the  help  of  creatures  is  utterly  unavail- 
ing, that  we  may  afterwards  be  more  clearly 
sensible  of  his  interposition.  Then  we  ex- 
perimentally learn  the  vanity  of  all  things 
here  below,  and  are  brought  to  a more  im- 
mediate and  absolute  dependence  upon  him- 
self. We  have  need  of  having  these  lessons 
frequently  inculcated  upon  us;  but  when  his 
end  is  answered,  how  often,  after  he  has 
caused  grief,  does  he  show  his  great  com- 
passions, and  save  us  from  our  fears  by  an 
outstretched  arm,  and  such  a seasonable  and 
almost  unexpected  relief,  as  constrains  us  to 
cry  out,  What  has  God  wrought  1 and  who 
is  a God  like  unto  thee  1 Such,  I hope,  will 
be  the  issue  of  your  present  trial,  and  that 
he  who  gave  her  to  you  at  first  will  restore 
her  to  you  again.  I see  you  in  the  furnace ; 
but  the  Lord  is  sitting  by  it  as  a refiner  of 
silver,  to  moderate  the  fire,  and  manage  the 
process,  so  that  you  shall  lose  nothing  but 
dross,  and  be  brought  forth  refined  as  gold, 
to  praise  his  name.  Apparent  difficulties, 
however  great,  are  nothing  to  him.  Tf  he 
speaks  it  is  done ; for  to  God  the  Lord  belong 
the  issues  from  death.  Should  his  pleasure 
be  otherwise,  and  should  he  call  your  dear 
partner  to  a state  of  glory  before  you,  still  I 
know  he  is  able  to  support  you.  What  he 
does,  however  painful  to  the  flesh,  must  be 
right,  because  he  does  it.  Having  bought 
us  with  his  blood,  and  saved  our  souls  from 
hell,  he  has  every  kind  of  right  to  dispose  of 


us  and  ours  as  he  pleases ; and  this  we  are 
sure  of,  he  will  not  lay  so  much  upon  us  as 
he  freely  endured  for  us,  and  he  can  make  us 
amends  for  all  we  suffer,  and  for  all  we  lose, 
by  the  light  of  his  countenance.  A few 
years  will  set  all  to  rights ; and  they  who 
love  him  and  are  beloved  by  him,  though  they 
may  suffer  as  others,  shall  not  sorrow  as 
others,  for  the  Lord  will  be  with  them  here, 
and  he  will  soon  have  them  with  him ; there 
all  tears  shall  be  wiped  from  their  eyes. 

Perhaps  I know  as  well  how  to  calculate 
the  pain  of  such  a separation  as  any  one 
who  has  not  actually  experienced  it.  Many 
a time  the  desire  of  my  eyes  has  been  threat- 
ened, many  a time  my  heart  has  been  brought 
low ; but  from  what  I have  known  at  such 
seasons,  I have  reason  to  hope,  that  had  it 
been  his  pleasure  to  bring  upon  me  the  thing 
that  I feared,  his  everlasting  arm  would 
have  upheld  me  from  sinking  under  the 
stroke.  As  ministers,  we  are  called  to  com- 
fort the  Lord’s  afflicted  people,  and  to  tell 
them,  the  knowledge  of  his  love  is  a cordial 
able  to  keep  the  soul  alive  under  the  sharp- 
est trials.  We  must  not  wonder  that  he 
sometimes  puts  us  in  a way  of  showing  that 
we  do  not  deal  in  unfelt  truths,  but  that  we 
find  ourselves  that  solid  consolation  in  the 
gospel  which  we  encourage  others  to  expect 
from  it.  You  have  now  such  an  occasion  of 
glorifying  the  Lord,  I pray  he  may  enable 
you  to  improve  it,  and  that  all  around  you 
may  see  that  he  is  with  you,  and  that  his 
good  word  is  the  support  and  anchor  of  your 
soul.  Then  I am  sure,  if  it  upon  the  whole 
is  best  for  you,  he  will  give  you  the  desire 
of  your  heart,  and  you  shall  yet  live  to  praise 
him  together.-— I am,  &c. 


LETTER 


TO 

THE  REVEREND  MR.  0 


April  3,  1759. 

dear  sir, — You  see  [ have  prevented  you 
m your  promise  of  writing  first ; and,  having 

found  a pretext  for  troubling  Mr. , I was 

willing  to  venture  upon  you  without  any,  un- 
less you  will  let  me  plead  a desire  of  show- 
ing you  how  welcome  your  correspondence 
would  be  to  me.  I know  not  if  my  heart 
was  ever  more  united  to  any  person,  in  so 
short  a space  of  time,  than  to  you ; and  what 
engaged  me  so  much  was,  the  spirit  of  meek- 
ness and  of  love  (that  particular  and  inimita- 
ble mark  of  true  Christianity)  which  I ob- 
served in  you.  I mean  it  not  to  your  praise. 
May  all  the  praise  be  to  him,  from  whom 
every  good  and  perfect  gift  cometh,  who 
alone  maketh  the  best  to  differ  from  the 
worst ; but  I think  I may  well  mention,  to 
your  encouragement,  that  all  who  conversed 
with  you  greatly  regret  your  speedy  depar- 
ture ; and  I am  persuaded  the  same  temper, 
the  same  candour,  will  make  you  accepta- 
ble, honourable,  and  useful,  wherever  you 
go.  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  the  meek, 
the  merciful,  and  the  peace-makers;  they 
shall  obtain  the  mercy  they  want,  and  possess 
the  peace  they  love.  They  shall  inherit  the 
earth.  The  earth,  sinful  and  miserable  as  it 
is,  shall  be  worthy  to  be  called  an  inheritance 
to  them,  for  they  shall  enjoy  a comparative 
heaven  in  it.  They  shall  be  called  the  chil- 
dren of  God,  though  dignified  with  no  title 
among  men.  Alas,  how  much  are  these 
overlooked  even  by  many  who,  I would  hope, 
are  real  believers ! Methinks  a very  differ- 
ent spirit  from  that  of  the  church  of  Laodicea, 
is  to  be  seen  amongst  us,  though  perhaps  it 
is  not  easy  to  say  which  is  the  best  of  the 
two.  That  was  neither  cold  nor  hot,  this 
( mirabile  dictu ) i#  both  cold  and  hot  at  once, 
and  both  to  the  extreme.  Hot,  hasty,  and 
arbitrary  in  those  few  things  where  medio- 
crity is  a virtue ; but  cool  and  remiss  in  those 
great  points,  where  the  application  of  the 
whole  heart,  and  soul,  and  mind,  and  strength, 
is  so  absolutely  necessary,  and  so  positively 
enjoined.  Surely  there  is  too  much  room 
276 


for  this  observation,  and  I perhaps  stand  self, 
condemned  in  making  it. 

I hope  you  will  take  opportunity  to  im- 
prove your  interest  in  Mr.  by  letter. 

He  expressed  much  satisfaction  in  the  hour 
he  spent  with  you  before  you  sailed,  and  a 
great  regard  for  you ; therefore  would,  I 
doubt  not,  give  you  a fair  hearing ; and  the 
phrase  litera  script.a  manet  is  true  in  more 
senses  than  one.  He  makes  such  large  con- 
cessions sometimes,  that  I am  apt  to  think 
he  is  conscious  of  the  weakness  of  his  own 
argument ; and  then  he  is  as  soon  angry  with 
himself  for  complying  so  far,  and  flies  off  to 
the  other  extreme.  Yet,  for  the  most  part, 
when  he  speaks  plain,  and  is  not  restrained 
by  complaisance  for  particular  persons,  he 
appears  not  only  a stranger  to  experimental 
religion,  but  averse  to  the  notion,  and  gene- 
rally inclined  to  treat  it  with  levity.  Bis  ob- 
stacles are  very  many  and  very  great;  his 
reputation  as  a learned  man,  his  years,  his 
regular  life,  and  perhaps,  above  all,  his  per- 
formances in  print,  especially  his  last  book, 
are  so  many  barriers  that  must  be  broke 
through  before  conviction  can  reach  him. 
But  the  grace  of  God  can  do  all  this  and 
more ; and  indeed,  when  I think  of  the  many 
truly  valuable  parts  of  his  character,  and  the 
indefatigable  pains  he  has  taken  in  his  re- 
searches after  truth,  I am  willing  to  hope, 
that  the  Lord  will  at  length  teach  him  the 
true  wisdom,  and  enable  him,  however  hard 
it  may  seem,  to  give  up  his  own  attainments, 
and  sit  down  like  a little  child  at  the  feet  of 
Jesus. 

I hope  to  hear  soon  and  often  from  you.  I 
number  my  Christian  correspondents  among 
my  principal  blessings,  a few  judicious  pious 
friends,  to  whom,  when  I can  get  leisure  to 
write,  I send  my  heart  by  turns.  I can  trust 
them  with  my  inmost  sentiments,  and  can 
write  with  no  more  disguise  than  I think.  I 
shall  rejoice  to  add  you  to  the  number,  if  you 
can  agree  to  take  me  as  I am,  as  I think  you 
will,  and  suffer  me  to  commit  my  whole  self 
to  paper,  without  respect  to  names,  parties, 


LETTER  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  O 


277 


and  sentiments.  I endeavour  to  observe  my 
Lord’s  commands,  to  call  no  man  master 
upon  earth ; yet  I desire  to  own  and  honour 
the  image  of  God  wherever  I find  it.  I dare 
not  say  I have  no  bigotry,  for  I know  not 
myself;  and  remember,  to  my  shame,  that 
formerly,  when  I ignorantly  professed  my- 
self free  from  it,  I was  indeed  over-run  with 
it ; but  this  I can  say,  I allow  it  not : I strive 
and  pray  against  it ; and  thus  far,  by  the 
grace  of  God,  I have  attained,  that  I find  my 
heart  as  much  united  to  many  who  differ 
from  me  in  some  points,  as  to  any  who  agree 
with  me  in  all.  I set  no  value  upon  any 
doctrinal  truth,  farther  than  it  has  a tendency 
to  promote  practical  holiness.  If  others 
should  think  those  things  hinderances  which 
I judge  to  be  helps  in  this  respect,  I am  con- 
tent they  should  go  on  in  their  own  way,  ac- 
cording to  the  light  God  has  given  them, 
provided  they  will  agree  with  me  **  ™ e*-*- 
vxyxsi.  If  it  should  be  asked,  which  are  the 
necessary  things '!  I answer,  Those  in  which 
the  spiritual  worshippers  of  all  ages  and 
countries  have  been  agreed.  Those,  on  the 
contrary,  are  mere  subordinate  matters,  in 
which  the  best  men,  those  who  have  been 
the  most  eminent  for  faith,  prayer,  humility, 
and  nearness  to  God,  always  have  been,  and 
still  are,  divided  in  their  judgments.  Upon 
this  plan  I should  think  it  no  hard  matter  to 
draw  up  a form  of  sound  words  (whether 
dignified  with  the  name  of  a creed  or  no,  I 
care  not,)  to  which  true  believers  of  all  sorts 
and  sizes  would  unanimously  subscribe. 
Suppose  it  ran  something  in  the  following 
manner : — I believe  that  sin  is  the  most  hate- 
ful thing  in  the  world ; that  I and  all  men 
\re  by  nature  in  a state  of  wrath  and  depra- 


vity, utterly  unable  to  sustain  the  penalty 
or  to  fulfil  the  commands  of  God’s  holy  law ; 
and  that  we  have  no  sufficiency  of  ourselves 
to  think  a good  thought.  I believe  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  chief  among  ten  thousands ; that 
he  came  into  the  world  to  save  the  chief  of 
sinners,  by  making  a propitiation  for  sin  by 
his  death,  by  paying  a perfect  obedience  to 
the  law  in  our  behalf;  and  that  he  is  now 
exalted  on  high,  to  give  repentance  and  re- 
mission of  sins  to  all  that  believe ; and  that 
he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us. 
I believe  that  the  Holy  Spirit  (the  gift  of 
God  through  Jesus  Christ)  is  the  sure  and 
only  guide  into  all  truth,  and  the  common 
privilege  of  all  believers  ; and  under  his  in- 
fluence, I believe  the  holy  scriptures  are  able 
to  make  us  wise  unto  salvation,  and  to  fur- 
nish us  thoroughly  for  every  good  work.  I 
believe  that  love  to  God,  and  to  man,  for 
God’s  sake,  is  the  essence  of  religion,  and 
the  fulfilling  of  the  law  ; that  without  holi- 
ness no  man  shall  see  the  Lord  ; that  those 
who,  by  a patient  course  in  well-doing,  seek 
glory,  honour,  and  immortality,  shall  receive 
eternal  life  ; and  I believe  that  this  reward 
is  not  of  debt,  but  of  grace,  even  to  the  praise 
and  glory  of  that  grace  whereby  he  has  made 
us  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  Amen. 

I pretend  not  to  accuracy  in  this  hasty 
draught;  they  are  only  outlines,  which,  if 
you  please  to  retouch,  and  fill  up  at  your  lei- 
sure, I hope  you  will  favour  me  with  a sight 
of  it.  1 fear  I have  tired  you,  and  shall  only 
add  my  prayers,  that  the  Lord  may  be  with 
you,  and  crown  your  labours  of  love  with 
success,  that  you  may  hereafter  shine  among 
those  who  have  been  instrumental  in  turning 
many  to  righteousness. — I am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO 

THE  REVEREND  MR.  P 


LETTER  I. 

dear  sir, — The  account  which  I received 

by  Mr.  C , and  by  the  letter  which  he 

brought  from  you,  of  your  welfare  and  the 
welfare  of  your  people,  was  very  pleasing, 
though  indeed  no  more  than  I expected.  I be- 
lieved, from  the  first  of  your  going  to  S , 

that  you  would  like  the  people,  arid  I be- 
lieved the  Lord  had  given  you  that  frame  of 
spirit  which  he  has  promised  to  bless.  What 
reason  have  we  to  praise  him  for  the  know- 
ledge of  his  gospel,  and  for  the  honour  of  be- 
ing called  to  preach  it  to  others ! and  like- 
wise that  he  has  been  pleased  to  cast  your 
lot  and  mine  amongst  a people  who  value  it. 
and  to  crown  our  poor  labours  with  come 
measure  of  acceptance  and  usefulness.  JT'.w 
little  did  we  think,  in  the  unawakened  part 
of  our  life,  to  what  it  was  his  good  pleasure 
to  reserve  us ! 

The  Lord  is  pleased,  in  a measure,  to  show 
me  the  suitableness  arid  necessity  of  an  hum- 
ble dependent  frame  of  heart,  a ceasing  from 
self,  and  a reliance  upon  him  in  the  due  use 
of  appointed  means ; I am  far  from  having 
attained,  but  I hope  I am  pressing,  at  least 
seeking  after  it.  1 wisli  to  speak  the  word 
simply  and  experimentally,  and  to  be  so  en- 
gaged with  the  importance  of  the  subject, 
the  wTorth  of  souls,  and  the  thought  that  I am 
speaking  in  the  name  and  presence  of  the 
Most  High  God,  as  that  I might,  if  possible, 
forget  every  thing  else.  This  would  be  an 
at  ainment  indeed  ! More  good  might  be 
expected  from  a broken  discourse,  delivered 
in  such  a frame,  than  from  the  most  advan- 
tageous display  of  knowledge  and  gifts  with- 
out it.  Not  that  I would  undervalue  pro- 
priety and  pertinence  of  expression ; it  is  our 
duty  to  study  to  find  out  acceptable  words, 
and  to  endeavour  to  appear  as  workmen  that 
need  not  be  ashamed ; but  those  who  have 
most  ability  in  this  way,  have  need  of  a dou- 
ble guard  of  grace  and  wisdom,  lest  they  be 
278 


tempted  to  trust  in  it,  or  to  value  themselves 
upon  it.  They  that  trust  in  the  Lord  shall 
never  be  moved ; and  they  that  abase  them- 
selves before  him,  he  will  exalt.  I am  well 
persuaded  that  your  conduct  and  views  have 
been  agreeable  to  these  sentiments ; and 
therefore  the  Lord  has  supported,  encou- 
raged, and  owned  you ; and  1 trust  he  will  still 
bless  you,  and  make  you  a blessing  to  many. 
He  that  walketh  humbly  walketh  surely. — 
Believe  me  to  b<*.  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

August  14,  1770. 

my  dear  sir, — Your  letter  did  me  good 
when  I received  it,  at  least  gave  me  much 
pleasure ; and  I think  it  has  given  me  a lift 
while  I have  been  just  now  reading  it.  I 
! know  not  that  I ever  had  those  awful  views 
of  sin  which  you  speak  of ; and  though  I be- 
lieve I should  be  better  for  them,  I dare  not 
seriously  wish  for  them.  There  is  a petition 
which  I have  heard  in  public  prayer,  “ Lord, 
show  us  the  evil  of  our  hearts.”  To  this 
petition  I cannot  venture  to  set  my  Amen, 
at  least  not  without  a qualification.  Show 
me  enough  of  thyself  to  balance  the  view, 
and  then  show  me  what  thou  pleasest.  I 
think  I have  a very  clear  and  strong  con- 
viction in  my  judgment,  that  I am  vile  and 
worthless,  that  my  heart  is  full  of  evil,  only 
evil,  and  that  continually  I know  some- 
thing of  it  too  experimentally ; and  therefore, 
judging  of  the  whole  by  the  sample,  though 
I am  not  suitably  affected  with  what  I do 
see,  I tremble  at  the  thought  of  seeing  more. 
A man  may  look  with  some  pleasure  upon 
the  sea  in  a storm,  provided  he  stands  safe 
upon  the  land  himself ; but  to  be  upon  the 
sea  in  a storm,  is  quite  another  thing.  And 
yet  surely  the  coldness,  worldliness,  pride, 
and  twenty  other  evils  under  which  I groan, 


LET.  III.] 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  P- 


279 


owe  much  cf  their  strength  to  the  want  of 
that  feeling  sense  of  my  own  abominations 
with  which  you  have  been  favoured  : — I.  say 
favoured  ; for  I doubt  not  but  the  Lord  gave 
it  you  in  mercy,  and  that  it  has  proved,  and 
will  prove,  a mercy  to  you,  to  make  you 
more  humble,  spiritual,  and  dependent,  as 
well  as  to  increase  your  ability  for  preaching 
the  gospel  of  his  grace.  Upon  these  accounts, 
I can  assure  you,  that  upon  a first  reading, 
and  till  I stopped  a moment  to  count  the 
cost,  I was  ready  to  envy  you  all  that  you 
had  felt.  I often  seem  to  know  what  the 
scriptures  teach,  both  of  sin  and  grace,  as 
if  I knew  them  not ; so  faint  and  languid  are 
my  perceptions,  I often  seem  to  think  and 
talk  of  sin  without  any  sorrow,  and  of  grace 
without  any  joy. 

I have  had  some  people  awakened  by  dreams 
as  you  had  by  streamers ; but,  for  ought  I 
know,  we  are  no  less  instrumental  to  the  good 
of  these,  than  to  any  other  person,  upon  whom, 
when  we  look,  our  hearts  are  ready  to  exult 
and  say,  See  what  the  Lord  has  done  by  me. 
I do  not  think  that,  strictly  speaking,  all  the 
streamers  of  the  north  are  able  to  awaken  a 
dead  soul.  I suppose  people  may  be  terrified 
by  them,  and  made  thoughtful,  but  awakened 
only  by  the  word.  The  streamers  either  sent 
them  to  hear  the  gospel,  or  rousea  them  to 
attend  to  it ; but  it  was  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth  brought  home  to  the  heart,  that  did  the 
business.  Perhaps  the  streamers  reminded 
them  of  what  they  had  heard  from  you  before. 
Two  persons  here,  who  lived  like  heathens, 
and  never  came  to  church,  were  alarmed  by 
some  terrifying  dreams,  and  came  out  to  hear- 
ing forthwith.  There  the  Lord  was  pleased 
tc  meet  with  them.  One  of  them  died  tri- 
umphing ; the  other,  I hope,  will  do  so  when 
her  time  comes.  Whatever  means,  instru- 
ments, or  occasions  he  is  pleased  to  employ, 
the  work  is  all  his  own ; and  I trust  you  and 
I are  made  willing  to  give  him  all  the  glory, 
and  to  sink  into  the  dust  at  the  thought  that 
he  should  ever  permit  us  to  take  his  holy 
name  in  our  polluted  lips. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

June  13,  1772. 

my  dear  sir, — You  say  that  your  experi- 
ence agrees  with  mine.  It  must  be  so,  be- 
cause our  hearts  are  alike.  The  heart  is 
deceitful  and  desperately  wicked,  destitute 
of  good,  and  prone  to  evil.  This  is  the  cha- 
racter of  mankind  universally,  and  those  who 
are  made  partakers  of  grace  are  renewed 
but  in  part;  tlie  evil  nature  still  cleaves  to 
them,  and  the  root  of  sin,  though  mortified, 
is  far  from  being  dead.  While  the  cause 
remains  it  will  have  its  elfects,  and  while  we 
are  burdened  with  the  body  of  this  death,  we 


must  groan  under  it.  But  we  need  not  be 
swallowed  up  with  overmuch  sorrow,  since 
we  have  in  Jesus,  a Saviour,  a righteousness, 
an  advocate,  a shepherd.  “ He  knows  our 
frame,  and  remembers  that  we  are  but  dust.” 
If  sin  abounds  in  us,  grace  abounds  much 
more  in  him ; nor  would  he  suffer  sin  to  re- 
main in  his  people,  if  he  did  not  know  how 
to  over-rule  it,  and  make  it  an  occasion  of 
endearing  his  love  and  grace  so  much  the 
more  to  their  souls.  The  Lord  forbid  that 
we  should  plead  his  goodness  as  an  encour- 
agement to  sloth  and  indifference.  Humilia- 
tion, godly  sorrow,  and  self-abasement  be- 
come us;  but  at  the  same  time,  we  may 
rejoice  in  the  Lord.  Though  sin  remains,  it 
shall  not  have  dominion  over  us ; though  it 
wars  in  us,  it  shall  not  prevail  against  us. 
We  have  a mercy-seat  sprinkled  with  blood, 
we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  we 
are  called  to  this  warfare,  and  we  fight  un- 
der the  eye  of  the  captain  of  our  salvation, 
who  i3  always  near  to  renew  our  strength, 
to  heal  our  wounds,  and  to  cover  our  heads 
in  the  heat  of  battle.  As  ministers,  we 
preach  to  those  who  have  like  passions  and 
infirmities  with  ourselves,  and  by  our  own 
feelings,  fears,  and  changes,  we  learn  to 
speak  a word  .'n  season  to  them  that  are 
weary,  to  warn  those  who  stand,  and  to 
stretch  out  a hand  of  compassion  towards 
them  that  are  fallen ; and  to  commend  it  to 
others,  from  our  own  experience,  as  a faith- 
ful saying,  that  Jesus  came  to  save  the  chief 
of  sinners.  Besides,  if  the  Lord  is  pleased  to 
give  us  some  liberty,  acceptance,  and  success 
in  preaching  the  gospel,  we  should  be  in  great 
danger  of  running*  mad  with  spiritual  pride, 
if  the  Lord  did  not  permit  us  to  feel  the  de- 
pravity and  vileness  of  our  hearts,  and  there- 
by keep  us  from  forgetting  what  we  are  in 
ourselves. 

With  regard  to  your  young  people,  you 
must  expect  to  meet  with  some  disappoint- 
ment. Perhaps  not  every  one  of  whom  you 
have  conceived  hopes  will  stand,  and  some 
who  do  belong  to  the  Lord  are  permitted  to 
make  sad  mistakes  for  their  future  humilia- 
tion. It  is  our  part  to  watch,  warn,  and  ad- 
monish, and  we  ought  likewise  to  be  concern- 
ed for  those  slips  and  miscarriages  which  we 
cannot  prevent.  A minister,  if  faithful,  and 
of  a right  spirit,  can  have  no  greater  joy  than 
to  see  his  people  walking  honourably  and 
steadily  in  the  truth ; and  hardly  any  thing 
will  give  him  more  sensible  grief,  than  to  see 
any  of  them  taken  in  Satan’s  wiles.  Yet  still 
the  gospel  brings  relief  here.  He  is  wiser 
than  we  are,  and  knows  how  to  make  those 
things  subservient  to  promote  his  work, 
which  we  ought  to  guard  against  as  evils 
and  hinderances.  We  are  to  use  the  means. 
He  is  to  rule  the  whoie.  If  the  faults  of 
some  are  made  warnings  to  others,  and  prove 
in  the  end  occasions  of  illustrating  the  riches 


280 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  P- 


of  divine  grace,  this  should  reconcile  us  to 
what  we  cannot  help,  though  such  consi- 
derations should  not  slacken  our  diligence 
in  sounding  an  alarm,  and  reminding  our 
hearers  of  their  continual  danger. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

Jan.  26,  1775. 

dear  sir, — I lately  read  in  the  fifth  vo- 
lume of  the  Morning  Exercises,  a sermon  of 
Mr.  Baxter’s,  on  Matt.  v.  16.  My  mind  is 
something  impressed  with  the  subject,  and 
with  his  manner  of  treating  it.  Some  of  Mr. 
Baxter’s  sentiments  in  divinity  are  rather 
cloudy,  and  he  sometimes,  upon  that  account, 
met  with  but  poor  quarter  from  the  staunch 
Calvinists  of  his  day.  But,  by  what  I have 
read  of  him,  where  he  is  quiet  and  not  ruflled 
by  controversy,  he  appears  to  me,  notwith- 
standing some  mistakes,  to  have  been  one  of 
the  greatest  men  of  his  age,  and  perhaps  in 
fervour,  spirituality,  and  success,  more  than 
equal,  both  as  a minister  and  a Christian,  to 
some  twenty  taken  together,  of  those  who 
affect  to  undervalue  him  in  this  present  day. 
There  is  a spirit  in  some  passages  of  his 
“ Saints  Rest,”  his  “ Dying  Thoughts,”  and 
other  of  his  practical  treatises,  compared  with 
which,  many  modern  compositions,  though 
well  written  and  well  meant,  appear  to  me 
to  great  disadvantage.  But  I was  speaking 
of  his  sermon.  He  points  out  the  way  at 
which  we  should  aim  to  let  our  light  shine 
in  the  world,  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  the 
conviction  and  edification  of  men.  I have 
mentioned  where  it  is  to  be  found,  that,  if 
you  have  the  Morning  Exercises,  or  if  they 
should  come  in  your  way,  you  may  look  at 
it.  I think  you  would  like  it.  The  perusal 
suggested  to  me  some  instruction,  and 
much  reproof.  Alas!  my  friend,  are  we 
not  too  often  chargeable  with  a sad,  shame- 
ful selfishness  and  narrowness  of  spirit,  far, 
very  far  different  from  that  activity,  en- 
largement, and  generosity  of  soul,  which 
such  a gospel  as  we  have  received  might 
be  expected  to  produce  ? For  myself,  I 
must  plead  guilty.  It  seems  as  if  my  heart 
was  always  awake,  and  keenly  sensible 
to  my  own  concernments,  while  those  of 
my  Lord  and  Master  affect  me  much  less 
forcibly,  at  least  only  by  intervals.  Were  a 
stranger  to  judge  of  me  by  what  I sometimes 
6ay  in  the  pulpit,  he  might  think  that,  like 
the  angels,  I had  but  two  things  in  view — 
to  do  the  will  of  God,  and  to  behold  his 
face.  But,  alas ! would  he  not  be  almost  as 

much  mistaken,  as  if,  seeing  Mr.  G in 

the  character  of  a tragedy-hero,  he  should 
suppose  him  to  be  the  very  person  whom  he 
only  represents  ! I hope  Satan  will  never  be 
able  to  persuade  me  that  I am  a mere  hypo* 


[let.  v. 

crite  and  stage-p[ayer ; but  sure  I am,  that 
there  is  so  much  hypocrisy  in  me,  so  many 
littlenesses  and  self-seekings  insinuating  into 
my  plan  of  conduct,  that  I have  humbling 
cause  to  account  myself  unworthy  and  un- 
profitable, and  to  say,  “ Enter  not  into  judg- 
ment with  thy  servant,  O Lord.”  I have 
some  tolerable  idea  of  what  a Christian  ought 
to  be,  and  it  is,  I hope,  what  I desire  to  be. 
A Christian  should  be  conformable  to  Christ 
in  his  spirit  and  in  his  practice  ; that  is,  he 
should  be  spiritually  minded,  dead  to  the 
world,  filled  with  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God, 
the  spread  of  the  gospel,  and  the  good  of 
souls.  He  should  be  humble,  patient,  meek, 
cheerful,  thankful  under  all  events  and 
changes.  He  should  account  it  the  business 
and  honour  of  his  life  to  imitate  him,  who 
pleased  not  himself,  who  went  about  doing 
good,  and  has  expressed  to  us  the  very  feel- 
ings of  his  heart,  in  that  divine  aphorism, 
which  surpasses  all  the  fine  admirable  say- 
ings of  the  philosophers,  as  much  as  the  sun 
outshines  a candle,  “ It  is  more  blessed  to 
give  than  to  receive.”  The  whole  deport- 
ment of  a Christian  should  show  that  the 
knowledge  of  Jesus,  which  he  has  received 
from  the  gospel,  affords  him  all  he  could  ex- 
pect from  it, — a balm  for  every  grief,  an 
amends  for  every  loss,  a motive  for  every 
duty,  a restraint  from  every  evil,  a pattern 
for  every  thing  which  he  is  called  to  do  or 
suffer,  and  a principle  sufficient  to  constitute 
the  actions  of  every  day,  even  in  common 
life,  acts  of  religion.  He  should  (as  the 
children  of  this  world  are  wise  to  do  in  their 
generation)  make  every  occurrence  through 
which  he  passes  subservient  and  subordinate 
to  his  main  design.  Gold  is  the  worldly 
man’s  god,  and  his  worship  and  service  are 
uniform  and  consistent,  and  consist,  not  by 
fits  and  starts,  but  from  morning  to  night, 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  year, 
he  is  the  same  man.  He  will  not  slip  an 
opportunity  of  adding  to  his  pelf  to-day,  be- 
cause be  may  have  another  to-morrow,  but 
he  heartily  and  eagerly  embraces  both ; and 
so  far  as  he  carries  his  point,  though  his  per- 
severance may  expose  him  to  the  ridicule  or 
reproach  of  his  neighbours,  he  thinks  himself 
well  paid,  and  says, 

Populus  me  sibilat ; at  mihi  plaudo 

Ipsedomi.simulnummus  contemplor  in  acra 

I am,  &c. 


LETTER  V. 

Jan.  — 1776. 

dear  sir, — I may  learn,  only  I am  a sad 
dunce,  by  small  and  common  incidents,  as 
well  as  by  some  more  striking  and  important 
turns  in  life,  that  it  is  not  in  man  that  walk- 


LET  VI.] 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  P- 


281 


eth  to  direct  his  steps.  It  is  not  for  me  to 
say,  To-day  or  to-morrow  I will  do  this  or 
that.  I cannot  write  a letter  to  a friend 
without  leave  or  without  help,  for  neither 
opportunity  nor  ability  are  at  my  own  dispo- 
sal. It  is  not  needful  that  the  Lord  should 
raise  a mountain  in  my  way  to  stop  my  pur- 
pose ; if  he  only  withdraw  a certain  kind  of 
imperceptible  support,  which  in  general  I 
have,  and  use  without  duly  considering 
whose  it  is,  then,  in  a moment,  I feel  myself 
unstrung  and  disabled,  like  a ship  that  has 
lost  her  masts,  and  cannot  proceed  till  he  is 
pleased  to  refit  me  and  renew  my  strength. 
My  pride  and  propensity  to  self-dependence 
render  frequent  changes  of  this  kind  neces- 
sary to  me,  or  I should  soon  forget  what  I 
am,  and  sacrifice  to  my  own  drag.  There- 
fore, upon  the  whole,  I am  satisfied,  and  see 
it  best,  that  I should  be  absolutely  poor  and 
pennyless  in  myself,  and  forced  to  depend 
upon  the  Lord  for  the  smallest  things  as  well 
as  the  greatest.  And  if,  by  his  blessing,  my 
experience  should  at  length  tally  with  my 
judgment  in  this  point,  that  without  him  I 
can  do  nothing,  then  I know  I shall  find  it 
easy,  through  him,  to  do  <**11  things,  for  the 
door  of  his  mercy  is  always  open,  and  it  is 
but  ask  and  have.  But  alas ! a secret  per- 
suasion (though  contrary  to  repeated  convic- 
tions) that  I have  something  at  home,  too 
often  prevents  me  from  going  to  him  for  it, 
and  then  no  wonder  I am  disappointed.  The 
life  of  faith  seems  so  simple  and  easy  in 
theory,  that  I can  point  it  out  to  others  in 
few  words ; but  in  practice  it  is  very  diffi- 
cult, and  my  advances  are  so  slow  that  I 
hardly  dare' say  I get  forward  at  all.  It  is  a 
great  thing  indeed  to  have  the  spirit  of  a 
little  child,  so  as  to  be  habitually  afraid  of 
taking  a single  step  without  leading. 

I have  heard  of  you  more  than  once  since 
I heard  from  you,  and  am  glad  to  know  the 
Lord  is  still  with  you:  I trust  he  has  not 
withdrawn  wholly  from  us.  We  have  much 
call  for  thankfulness  and  much  for  humilia- 
tion. Some  have  been  removed,  some  are 
evidently  ripening  for  glory,  and  now  and 
then  we  have  a new  inquirer.  But  the  pro- 
gress of  wickedness  amongst  the  unconverted 
here  is  awful.  Convictions,  repeatedly  sti- 
fled in  many,  have  issued  in  a hardiness  and 
boldness  in  sinning  which  I believe  is  seldom 
found  but  in  those  places  where  the  light  of 
the  gospel  has  been  long  resisted  and  abused. 
If  ray  eyes  suitably  affected  my  heart,  I 
should  weep  day  and  night  upon  this  ac- 
count, but  alas ! I am  too  indifferent.  I feel 
a woful  defect  in  my  zeal  for  God  and  com- 
passion for  souls;  and  when  Satan  and  con- 
science charge  me  with  cowardice,  treachery, 
and  stupidity,  I know  not  what  to  reply.  I 
am  generally  carried  through  my  public 
work  with  some  liberty;  and,  because  I am 
not  put  to  shame  before  the  people,  I seem 
2 N 


content  and  satisfied.  I wish  to  be  more 
thankful  for  what  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  do 
amongst  us,  but,  at  the  same  time,  to  be  more 
earnest  with  him  for  a farther  out-pouring 
of  his  Spirit.  Assist  me  herein  with  your 
prayers. 

As  to  my  own  private  experience,  the  ene- 
my is  not  suffered  to  touch  the  foundation  of 
my  faith  and  hope : thus  far  I have  peace. 
But  my  conflicts  and  exercises  with  the  ef- 
fects of  indwelling  sin  are  very  distressing. 
I cannot  doubt  of  my  state  and  acceptance, 
and  yet  it  seems  no  one  can  have  more  cause 
for  doubts  and  fears  than  myself,  if  such 
doubtings  were  at  all  encouraged  by  the 
gospel : but  I see  they  are  not ; I see  that 
what  I want  and  hope  for,  the  Lord  promises 
to  do,  for  his  own  name’s  sake,  and  with  a 
non  obstante  to  all  my  vileness  and  perver- 
sion ; and  I cannot  question  but  he  has  given 
me  (for  how  else  could  I have  it  ?)  a thirst 
for  that  communion  with  him,  in  love  and 
conformity  to  his  image,  of  which,  as  yet,  I 
have  experienced  but  very  faint  and  imper- 
fect beginnings.  But  if  he  has  begun,  I ven- 
ture, upon  his  word,  that  he  will  not  forsake 
the  work  of  his  own  hands. 

On  public  affairs  I say  but  little.  Many 
are  censuring  men  and  measures,  but  I would 
lay  all  the  blame  upon  sin.  It  appears  plain 
to  me  that  the  Lord  has  a controversy  with 
us,  and  therefore  I fear  what  we  have  yet 
seen  is  but  the  beginning  of  sorrow's.  I am 
ready  to  dread  the  event  of  this  summer ; but 
I remember  the  Lord  reigns.  He  has  his 
own  glory  and  the  good  of  his  church  in  view’, 
and  will  not  be  disappointed.  He  knows  how 
likewise  to  take  care  of  those  who  fear  him. 
1 wish  there  was  more  sighing  and  mourning 
amongst  professors,  for  the  sins  of  the  nation 
and  the  churches.  But  I must  conclude,  and 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  VI. 

dear  sir, — No  very  considerable  altera- 
tion has  taken  place  since  I wrote,  except 

the  death  of  Mrs.  L , who  was  removed 

to  a better  world  in  September  last.  The 
latter  part  of  her  course  wras  very  painful , 
but  the  Lord  made  her  more  than  conqueror, 
and  she  had  good  cause  to  apply  the  apos- 
tle’s words,  2 Tim.  iv.  7,  8.  She  repeated 
that  passage  in  her  last  illness,  and  chose  it 
for  her  funeral  text.  She  was  a Christian  in- 
deed. Her  faith  wTas  great,  and  so  were  her 
trials.  Now  she  is  above  them  all,  now  she  is 
before  the  throne.  The  good  Lord  help  us  to 
be  foll""ers  of  those  who,  through  faith  and 
patience,  have  attained  to  the  hope  set  before 
them. 

The  number  of  professors  still  increase 
with  us,  and  a greater  number  of  persons  af- 
fords a greater  variety  of  cases,  and  gives 


282 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  P . 


[l.ET.  VII. 


greater  scope  to  observe  the  workings  of  the  I 
heart  and  Satan.  For  seven  years  I had  to  j 
say,  that  I had  not  seen  a person  of  whom  I 
had  conceived  a good  hope  go  back,  but  1 1 
have  met  with  a few  disappointments  since. ! 
However,  upon  the  whole,  I trust  the  Lord  , 
is  still  wTith  us.  The  enemy  tries  to  disturb 
and  defile  us,  and  if  the  Lord  did  not  keep  j 
the  city,  the  poor  watchmen  would  walk  in  ' 
vain.  But  the  eye  that  never  slumbereth 
nor  sleepeth  has  been  upon  us  for  good ; and, 
though  we  have  cause  of  humiliation  and 
complaint,  we  have  likewise  much  cause  of 
thankfulness.  My  health  is  still  preserved ; 
and  I hope  that  the  Lord  does  not  suffer  my 
desires  of  personal  communion  with  him,  and 
of  usefulness  in  the  ministry,  to  decline.  He 
supplies  me  with  fresh  strength  and  matter 
in  my  public  work : I hear  now  and  then  of 
one  brought  to  enquire  the  way  ; and  his 
presence  is  at  times  made  known  to  many 
in  the  ordinances. 

To  combine  zeal  wfith  prudence  is  indeed 
difficult  There  is  often  too  much  self  in  our 
zeal,  and  too  much  of  the  fear  of  man  in  our 
prudence.  However,  what  we  cannot  attain  ! 
by  any  skill  or  resolution  of  our  own,  we  ! 
may  hope  in  measure  to  receive  from  him  who 
giveth  liberally  to  those  w ho  seek  him,  and 
desire  to  serve  him.  Prudence  is  a word 
much  abused,  but  there  is  a heavenly  w'isdora 
which  the  Lord  has  promised  to  give  to  those 
who  humbly  wait  upon  him  for  it.  It  does 
not  consist  in  forming  a bundle  of  rules  and 
maxims,  but  in  a spiritual  taste  and  discern- 
ment, derived  from  an  experimental  know- 
ledge of  the  truth,  and  of  the  heart  of  man 
as  described  in  the  word  of  God ; and  its  ex- 
ercise consists  much  in  a simple  dependence 
upon  the  Lord,  to  guide  and  prompt  us  in 
every  action.  We  seldom  act  wrong  w7hen 
we  truly  depend  upon  him,  and  can  cease 
from  leaning  to  our  own  understanding. 
When  the  heart  is  thus  in  a right  tune  and 
frame,  and  his  w7ord  dwells  richly  in  us, 
there  is  a kind  of  immediate  perception  of 
what  is  proper  for  us  to  do  in  present  circum- 
stances, without  much  painful  inquiry:  a 
light  shines  before  us  upon  the  path  of  duty  ; 
and.  if  he  permits  us  in  such  a spirit  to  make 
some  mistakes,  he  will  likewise  teach  us  to 
profit  by  them,  and  our  reflections  upon  what 
was  wrong  one  day  will  make  us  to  act  more 
wisely  the  next.  At  the  best  we  must  al- 
ways expect  to  meet  with  new  proofs  of  our 
own  weakness  and  insufficiency,  otherwise 
how  should  we  be  kept  humble,  or  know 
how  to  prize  the  liberty  he  allows  us  of  com- 
ing to  the  throne  of  grace  for  fresh  forgiveness 
and  direction  every  day  ? But  if  he  ena- 
bles us  to  walk  before  him  with  a single  eye, 
he  will  graciously  accept  our  desire  of  serv- 
ing him  better  if  we  could,  and  his  blessing 
will  make  our  feeble  endeavours  in  some 
degree  successful,  at  the  same  time  that  we 


see  defects  and  evils  attending  our  best 
services,  sufficient  to  make  us  ashamed  of 
them. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VIL 

January  11,  1777. 

dear  sir, — We  all  need,  and  at  the  sea- 
sons the  Lord  sees  best  we  all  receive  chas- 
tisement. I hope  you  likewise  have  reason 
to  praise  him,  for  supporting,  sanctifying, 
and  delivering  mercy.  The  coward  flesh 
presently  shrinks  under  the  rod,  but  faith 
need  not  fear  it,  for  it  is  in  the  hand  of  one 
who  loves  us  better  than  we  do  ourselves, 
and  who  knows  our  frame,  that  we  are  but 
dust,  and  therefore  will  not  suffer  us  to  be 
overdone  and  overwhelmed. 

I feel  as  a friend  should  feel  for  Mr.  B ; 

were  I able  I would  soon  send  him  health. 
If  the  Lord,  who  is  able  to  remove  his  illness 
in  a minute,  permits  it  to  continue,  we  may 
be  sure,  upon  the  whole,  it  will  be  better  for 
him.  It  is,  however,  very  lawful  to  pray 
that  his  health  n^iy  be  restored  and  his  use- 
fulness prolonged  I beg  you  to  give  my 
love  to  him,  and  tell  him  that  my  heart  bears 
him  an  affectionate  remembrance ; and  I 
know  the  God  whom  he  serves  will  make 
every  dispensation  supportable  and  profitable 
to  him. 

If,  as  you  observe,  the  Song  of  Solomon 
describes  the  experience  of  his  church,  it 
shows  the  dark  as  well  as  the  bright  side. 
No  one  part  of  it  is  the  experience  of  every 
individual  at  any  particular  time.*  Some  are 
in  his  banqueting-house,  others  upon  their 
beds.  Some  sit  under  his  banner,  supported 
by  his  arm,  while  others  have  a faint  per- 
ception of  him  at  a distance,  with  many  a 
hill  and  mountain  between.  In  one  thing, 
however,  they  all  agree,  that  he  is  the  lead- 
ing object  of  their  desires,  and  that  they 
have  had  such  a discovery  of  his  person, 
work,  and  love,  as  makes  him  precious  to 
their  hearts.  Their  judgment  of  him  is  al- 
ways the  same,  but  their  sensibility  varies. 

; The  love  they  bear  him,  though  rooted 
and  grounded  in  their  hearts,  is  not  always 
1 equal  in  exercise,  nor  can  it  be  so.  We  are 
like  trees,  which,  though  alive,  cannot  put 
| forth  their  leaves  and  fruit  without  the  influ- 
i ence  of  the  sun.  They  are  alive  in  winter 
! as  well  as  in  summer  ; but  how  different  is 
I their  appearance  in  these  different  seasons ! 
| Were  we  always  alike,  could  we  always  be- 
! lieve,  love,  and  rejoice,  we  should  think  the 
! power  inherent,  and  our  own ; but  it  is  more 
| for  the  Lord’s  glory,  and  more  suited  to  form 
us  to  a temper  becoming  the  gospel,  that  we 
should  be  made  deeply  sensible  of  our  own 
inability  and  dependence,  than  that  wo  should 
| be  always  in  a lively  frame.  I am  persuaded 


t 


let.  vii.]  LETTERS  TO  THE 

a broken  and  a contrite  spirit,  a conviction 
of  our  vileness  and  nothingness,  connected 
with  a cordial  acceptance  of  Jesus  as  revealed 
in  the  gospel,  is  the  highest  attainment  we 
can  reach  in  this  life.  Sensible  comforts 
are  desirable,  and  we  must  be  sadly  declined 
when  they  do  not  appear  so  to  us ; but  I be- 
lieve there  may  be  a real  exercise  of  faith 
and  growth  in  grace,  when  our  sensible  feel- 
ings are  faint  and  low.  A soul  may  be  in 
as  thriving  a state,  when  thirsting,  seeking, 
and  mourning  after  the  Lord,  as  when  actu- 
ally rejoicing  in  him,  as  much  in  earnest 
when  fighting  in  the  valley  as  when  singing 
upon  the  mount;  nay,  dark  seasons  afford 
the  surest  and  strongest  manifestations  of 
the  power  of  faith.  To  hold  fast  the  word 


REV.  MR.  P . 283 

of  promise,  to  maintain  a hatred  of  sin,  to  go 
on  steadfastly  in  the  path  of  duty,  in  defiance 
both  of  the  frowns  and  the  smiles  of  the 
world,  when  we  have  but  little  comfort,  is  a 
more  certain  evidence  of  grace  than  a thou- 
sand things  which  we  may  do  or  forbear 
when  our  spirits  are  warm  and  lively.  I 
have  seen  many  who  have  been  upon  the 
whole  but  uneven  walkers,  though  at  times 
they  seem  to  enjoy,  at  least  have  talked  of 
great  comforts.  I have  seen  others,  for  the 
most  part,  complain  of  much  darkness  and 
coldness,  who  have  been  remarkably  hum- 
ble, tender,  and  exemplary  in  their  spirit 
and  conduct.  Surely,  were  I to  choose 
my  lot,  it  should  be  wAi  the  latter. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO  MRS.  G 


LETTER  I. 

June  20,  1776. 

madam, — It  would  be  both  unkind  and  un- 
grateful in  me,  to  avail  myself  of  any  plea 
of  business,  for  delaying  the  acknowledg- 
ment I owe  you  for  your  acceptable  favour 
from , which,  though  dated  the  6th  in- 

stant, I did  not  receive  till  the  10th. 

Could  I have  known  in  time  that  you  were 

at  Mr. 's,  I should  have  endeavoured  to 

have  called  upon  you  while  there ; and  very 
glad  should  I have  been  to  have  seen  you 
with  us.  But  they  who  fear  the  Lord  may  be 
sure,  that  whatever  is  not  practicable  is  not 
necessary.  He  could  have  over-ruled  every 
difficulty  in  your  way,  had  he  seen  it  expe- 
dient ; but  he  is  pleased  to  show  you,  that 
you  depend  not  upon  men,  but  upon  himself; 
and  that,  notwithstanding  your  connexions 
may  exclude  you  from  some  advantages  in 
point  of  outward  means,  he  who  has  begun  a 
good  work  in  you,  is  able  to  carry  it  on,  in  de- 
fiance of  all  seeming  hinderances,  and  make 
all  things  (even  those  which  have  the  most 
unfavourable  appearances)  work  together  for 
your  good. 

A sure  effect  of  his  grace,  is  a desire  and 
longing  for  gospel-ordinances;  and  when 
they  are  afforded,  they  cannot  be  neglected 
without  loss.  But  the  Lord  sees  many  souls 
who  are  dear  to  him,  and  whom  he  is  train- 
ing up  in  a growing  meetness  for  his  king- 
dom, who  are  by  his  providence  so  situated, 
that  it  is  not  in  their  power  to  attend  upon 
gospel  preaching;  and  perhaps  they  have  sel- 
dom either  Christian  minister  or  Christian 
friend  to  assist  or  comfort  them.  Such  a 
situation  is  a state  of  trial ; but  Jesus  is  all- 
sufficient,  and  he  is  always  near.  They 
cannot  he  debarred  from  his  word  of  grace, 
which  is  every  where  at  hand,  nor  from  his 
throne  of  grace ; for  they  who  feel  their  need 
of  him,  and  whose  hearts  are  drawn  towards 
him,  are  always  at  the  foot  of  it.  Every 
room  in  the  house,  yea,  every  spot  they  stand 
on,  fields,  lanes,  and  hedge-rows,  all  is  holy 
ground  to  them ; for  the  Lord  is  there.  The 
chief  difference  between  us,  and  the  disciples 
when  our  Saviour  was  noon  earth,  is  in  this: 
284 


They  then  walked  by  sight,  and  we  are  called 
to  walk  by  faith.  They  could  see  him  with 
their  bodily  eyes,  we  cannot ; but  he  said 
before  he  left  them,  “It  is  expedient  for  you 
that  I go  away.”  How  could  this  be,  unless 
that  spiritual  communion  which  he  promised 
to  maintain  with  his  people  after  hi's  ascension, 
were  preferable  to  that  intercourse  he  al- 
lowed them  whilst  he  was  visibly  with  them  1 
But  we  are  sure  it  is  preferable,  and  they 
who  had  tried  both  were  well  satisfied  he 
had  made  good  his  promise ; so  that  though 
they  had  known  him  after  the  flesh,  they 
were  content  not  to  know  him  so  any  more. 
Yes,  madam,  though  we  cannot  see  him,  he 
sees  us ; lie  is  nearer  to  us  than  we  are  to 
ourselves.  Tn  a natural  state,  we  have  very 
dark  and  indeed  dishonourable  thoughts  of 
God  : we  conceive  of  him  as  at  a distance ; 
but  when  the  heart  is  awakened,  v»c  begin 
to  make  Jacob’s  reflection,  “ Surely  the  Lord 
is  in  this  place,  and  I knew  it  not.”  And 
when  we  receive  faith,  we  begin  to  know 
that  this  ever  present  God  is  in  Christ : that 
the  government  of  heaven  and  earth,  the 
dispensations  of  the  kingdom  of  nature,  pro- 
vidence, and  grace,  are  in  the  hands  of  Je- 
sus, that  it  is  he  with  whom  we  have  to  do, 
who  once  suffered  agony  and  death  for  our 
redemption,  and  whose  compassion  and  ten- 
derness are  the  same,  now  he  reigns  over  all 
blessed  for  ever,  as  when  he  conversed 
amongst  men  in  the  days  of  his  humiliation. 
Thus  God  is  made  known  to  us  by  the  gos- 
pel, in  the  endearing  views  of  a Saviour,  a 
Shepherd,  a Husband,  a Friend:  and  a way 
of  access  is  opened  lor  us  through  the  vail, 
that  is,  the  human  nature,  of  our  Redeemer, 
to  enter,  with  humble  confidence,  into  the 
holiest  of  all,  and  to  repose  all  our  cares 
and  concerns  upon  the  strength  of  that  ever- 
lasting arm  which  upholds  heaven  and  earth, 
and  upon  that  infinite  love  which  submit- 
ted to  the  shame,  pain,  and  death  of  the  cross, 
to  redeem  sinners  from  wrath  and  misery. 

Though  there  is  a height,  a breadth,  a 
length,  and  a depth,  in  this  mystery  of  re- 
deeming love,  exceeding  the  comprehensioi. 
of  all  finite  minds;  yet  the  great  and  lead 
ing  principles  which  are  necessary  tor  th* 


285 


LETTERS  TO  MRS.  G- 


let.  ii.] 

support  and  comfort  of  our  souls,  may  be  sum- 
med up  in  a very  few  words.  Such  a sum- 
mary we  are  favoured  with  in  Titus  ii.  11 — 
14,  where  the  whole  of  salvation,  all  that  is 
needful  to  be  known,  experienced,  practised, 
and  hoped  for,  is  comprised  within  the  com- 
pass of  four  verses.  If  many  books,  much 
study,  and  great  discernment,  were  neces- 
sary in  order  to  be  happy,  what  must  the 
poor  and  simple  do  1 Yet  for  them  especially 
is  the  gospel  designed ; and  few  but  such  as 
Jiese  attain  the  knowledge  and  comfort  of 
;t.  The  Bible  is  a sealed  book  till  the  heart 
be  awakened,  and  then  he  that  runs  may 
read.  The  propositions  are  few : I am  a 
sinner,  therefore  I need  a Saviour,  one  who 
is  able  and  willing  to  save  to  the  uttermost : 
such  a one  is  Jesus ; he  is  all  that  I want, 
wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and 
redemption.  But  will  he  receive  me  ? Can 
I answer  a previous  question!  Am  I will- 
ing to  receive  him ! If  so,  and  if  his  word 
may  be  taken,  if  he  meant  what  he  said,  and 
promised  no  more  than  he  can  perform,  I 
may  be  sure  of  a welcome.  He  knew  long 
before,  the  doubts,  fears,  and  suspicions, 
which  would  arise  in  my  mind,  when  I should 
come  to  know  what  I am,  what  I have  done, 
and  what  I have  deserved ; and  therefore 
he  declared,  before  he  left  the  earth,  “ Him 
that  cometh  to  me,  I will  in  no  wise  cast 
out.”  I have  no  money  or  price  in  my  hand, 
no  worthiness  to  recommend  me ; and  I need 
none,  for  he  saveth  freely  for  his  own  name’s 
sake.  I have  only  to  be  thankful  for  what 
he  has  already  shown  me,  and  to  wait  upon 
him  for  more.  It  is  my  part  to  commit  my- 
self to  him  as  the  physician  of  sin-sick  souls, 
not  to  prescribe  to  him  how  he  shall  treat 
me.  To  begin,  carry  on,  and  perfect  the 
cure,  is  his  part. 

The  doubts  and  fears  you  speak  of,  are,  in 
a greater  or  less  degree,  the  common  expe- 
rience of  all  the  Lord’s  people,  at  least  for  a 
time.  Whilst  any  unbelief  remains  in  the 
heart,  and  Satan  is  permitted  to  tempt,  we 
shall  feel  these  things.  In  themselves  they 
are  groundless  and  evil ; yet  the  Lord  per- 
mits and  over-rules  them  for  good.  They 
tend  to  make  us  know  more  of  the  plagues 
of  our  own  hearts,  and  feel  more  sensibly 
the  need  of  a Saviour,  and  make  his  rest 
(when  we  attain  it)  doubly  sweet  and  sure. 
And  they  likewise  qualify  us  for  pitying  and 
comforting  others.  Fear  not;  only  believe, 
wait,  and  pray.  Expect  not  all  at  once.  A 
Christian  is  not  of  hasty  growth,  like  a 
mushroom,  but  rather  like  the  oak,  the  pro- 
gress of  which  is  hardly  perceptible,  but 
which  in  time  becomes  a great  deep-rooted 
tree.  If  my  writings  have  been  useful  to 
you,  may  the  Lord  have  the  praise.  To  ad- 
minister any  comfort  to  his  children  is  the 
greatest  honour  and  pleasure  I can  receive 
in  this  life.  I cannot  promise  to  be  a very 


punctual  correspondent,  having  many  en- 
gagements ; but  I hope  to  do  all  in  my  pow- 
er to  show  myself,  madam, — Yours,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

August  20,  1776. 

madam, — Though  in  general  l think  my- 
self tolerably  punctual  when  1 can  answer  a 
letter  in  six  or  seven  weeks  after  the  re- 
ceipt, yet  I feel  some  pain  for  not  having  ac- 
knowledged yours  sooner.  A case  like  that 
which  you  have  favoured  me  with  an  ac- 
count of,  deserved  an  immediate  attention, 
and  when  I read  it,  I proposed  writing 
within  a post  or  two,  and  I can  hardly  al- 
low any  plea  of  business  to  be  a sufficient 
excuse  for  delaying  it  so  long;  but  our  times 
are  in  the  Lord’s  hands.  May  he  now  ena- 
ble me  to  send  you  what  may  prove  a word 
in  season. 

Your  exercises  have  been  by  no  means 
singular,  though  they  may  appear  so  to 
yourself ; because,  in  your  retired  situation, 
you  have  not  (as  you  observe)  had  much  op- 
portunity of  knowing  the  experience  of  other 
Christians ; nor  has  the  guilt  with  which 
your  mind  has  been  so  greatly  burdened  been 
properly  your  own.  It  was  a temptation 
forced  upon  you  by  the  enemy,  and  he  shall 
answer  for  it.  Undoubtedly  it  is  a mourn- 
ful proof  of  the  depravity  of  our  nature,  that 
there  is  that  within  us  which  renders  us  so 
easily  susceptive  of  his  suggestions ; a proof 
of  our  extreme  weakness,  that  after  the 
clearest  and  most  satisfying  evidences  of  the 
truth,  we  are  not  able  to  hold  fast  our  confi- 
dence, if  the  Lord  permits  Satan  to  sift  and 
shake  us.  But  I can  assure  you  these 
changes  are  not  uncommon.  I have  known 
persons,  who,  after  walking  with  God  com- 
fortably in  the  main  for  forty  years,  have 
been  at  their  wits  end  from  such  assaults  as 
you  mention,  and  been  brought  to  doubt, 
not  only  of  the  reality  of  their  own  hopes, 
but  of  the  very  ground  and  foundation  upon 
which  their  hopes  were  built.  Had  you  re- 
mained, as  it  seems  you  once  were,  attached 
to  the  vanities  of  a gay  and  dissipated  life, 
or  could  you  have  been  content  with  a form 
of  godliness,  destitute  of  the  power,  it  is 
probable  you  would  have  remained  a stranger 
to  these  troubles.  Satan  would  have  em- 
ployed his  arts  in  a different  and  less  per- 
ceptible way,  to  have  soothed  you  into  a 
false  peace,  and  prevented  any  thought  or 
suspicion  of  danger  from  arising  in  your 
mind.  But  when  he  could  no  longer  detain 
you  in  his  bondage,  or  seduce  you  back  again 
into  the  world,  then  of  course  he  would 
change  his  method,  and  declare  open  war 
against  you.  A specimen  of  his  power  and 
malice  you  have  experienced  ; and  the  Lord 


286 


LETTERS  TO  MRS.  G- 


whom  you  loved,  because  he  first  loved  you, 
permitted  it,  not  to  gratify  Satan,  but  for 
your  benefit — to  humble  and  prove  you,  to 
show  you  what  is  in  your  heart,  and  to  do 
you  good  in  the  issue.  These  things  for  the 
present  are  not  joyous  but  grievous ; yet,  in 
the  end,  they  yield  the  peaceable  fruits  of 
righteousness.  In  the  mean  time  his  eye 
is  upon  you : he  has  appointed  bounds  both 
to  the  degree  and  duration  of  the  trial ; 
and  he  does  and  will  afford  you  such  sup- 
ports, that  you  shall  not  be  tried  beyond 
what  you  are  able  to  bear.  I doubt  not 
but  your  conflicts  and  sorrows,  will,  in  due 
time,  terminate  in  praise  and  victory,  and 
be  sanctified  to  your  fuller  establishment  in 
the  truth. 

I greatly  rejoice  in  the  Lord’s  goodness 
to  your  dying  parent.  How  wisely  timed, 
and  how  exactly  suited,  was  that  affecting 
dispensation,  to  break  the  force  of  those  sug- 
gestions with  which  the  enemy  was  aiming 
to  overwhelm  your  spirit!  He  could  not 
stand  against  such  an  illustrious  demonstra- 
tive attestation,  that  the  doctrines  you  had 
embraced  were  not  cunningly  devised  fables. 
He  could  proceed  no  farther  in  that  way ; 
but  he  is  fruitful  in  resources.  His  next 
attempt,  of  course,  was  to  fix  guilt  upon  your 
conscience,  as  if  you  had  yourself  formed 
and  willingly  entertained  those  thoughts, 
which,  indeed,  you  suffered  with  extreme 
reluctance  and  pain.  Here  likewise  I find 
he  succeeded  for  a time ; but  he  who  broke 
the  former  snare,  will  deliver  you  from  this 
likewise. 

The  dark  and  dishonourable  thoughts  of 
God,  which  I hinted  at  as  belonging  to  a 
natural  state,  are  very  different  from  the 
thoughts  of  your  heart  concerning  him.  You 
do  not  conceive  of  him  as  a hard  master,  or 
think  you  could  be  more  happy  in  the  breach 
than  in  the  observance  of  his  precepts.  You 
do  not  prefer  the  world  to  his  favour,  or  think 
you  can  please  him,  and  make  amends  for 
, your  sins,  by  an  obedience  of  your  own. 
These,  and  such  as  these,  are  the  thoughts 
of  the  natural  heart, — the  very  reverse  of 
yours.  One  thought,  however,  I confess 
you  have  indulged,  which  is  no  less  disho- 
nourable to  the  Lord  than  uncomfortable  to 
yourself.  You  say,  “I  dare  not  believe  that 
God  will  not  impute  to  me  as  sin,  the  ad- 
mission of  thoughts  which  my  soul  ever  ab- 
horred, and  to  which  my  will  never  consent- 
ed.” Nay,  you  fear  lest  they  should  not  only 
be  imputed,  but  unpardonable.  But  how  can 
this  be  possible ! Indeed,  I will  not  call  it 
your  thought,  it  is  your  temptation.  You  tell 
me  you  have  children.  Then  you  will  easily 
feel  a plain  illustration,  which  just  now  oc- 
curs to  me.  Let  me  suppose  a case  which  has 
sometimes  happened ; a child,  three  or  four 
years  of  age  we  will  say,  while  playing  incau- 
tiously at  a little  distance  from  home,  should 


[let.  II. 

be  suddenly  seized  and  carried  away  by  a 
gipsy.  Poor  thing ! how  terrified,  how  dis- 
tressed must  it  be ! Methinks  I hear  its 
cries.  The  sight  and  violence  of  the  stran- 
ger, the  recollection  of  its  dear  parents,  the 
loss  of  its  pleasing  home,  the  dread  and  un- 
certainty of  what  is  yet  to  befal  it.  Is  it  not 
a wonder  that  it  does  not  die  in  agonies! 
But  see,  help  is  at  hand  ! the  gipsy  is  pur- 
sued, and  the  child  recovered.  Now,  my 
dear  madam,  permit  me  to  ask  you,  if  this 
were  your  child,  how  would  you  receive  it  ? 
Perhaps,  when  the  first  transports  of  your 
joy  for  its  safety  would  permit  you,  you 
might  gently  chide  it  for  leaving  your  door. 
But  would  you  disinherit  it]  Would  you 
disown  itl  Would  you  deliver  it  up  again 
to  the  gipsy  with  your  own  hands,  because 
it  had  suffered  a violence  which  it  could  not 
withstand,  which  it  abhorred  and  to  which 
its  will  never  consented  ? And  yet  what  is 
the  tenderness  of  a mother,  of  ten  thousand 
mothers,  to  that  which  our  compassionate 
Saviour  bears  to  every  poor  soul  that  has 
been  enabled  to  flee  to  him  for  salvation ! 
Let  us  be  far  from  charging  that  to  him,  of 
which  we  think  we  are  utterly  incapable 
ourselves.  Take  courage,  madam ; resist 
the  devil  and  he  will  flee  from  you.  If  he 
were  to  tempt  you  to  any  thing  criminal, 
you  would  start  at  the  thought,  and  renounce 
it  with  abhorrence.  Do  the  same  when  he 
tempts  you  to  question  the  Lord's  compas- 
sion and  goodness.  But  there  he  imposes 
upon  us  with  a show  of  humility,  and  per- 
suades us  that  we  do  well  to  oppose  our  un- 
worthiness  as  a sufficient  exception  to  the 
many  express  promises  of  the  word.  It  is 
said,  the  blood  of  Jesus  cleanse th  from  all 
sin  : that  all  manner  of  sin  shall  be  forgiven 
for  his  sake ; that  whosoever  cometh  to  him 
he  will  in  no  wise  cast  him  out;  and  that  he 
is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  Believe 
his  word,  and  Satan  shall  be  found  a liar. 
If  the  child  had  deliberately  gone  away 
with  the  gipsy,  had  preferred  that  wretched 
way  of  life,  and  laid  refused  to  return, 
though  frequently  and  tenderly  invited 
home  ; perhaps  a parent’s  love  might,  in 
time,  be  too  weak  to  plead  for  the  pardon  of 
such  continued  obstinacy.  But,  indeed,  in 
this  manner  we  have  all  dealt  with  the 
Lord;  and  yet,  whenever  we  are  willing  to 
return,  he  is  willing  to  receive  us  with  open 
arms,  and  without  an  upbraiding  word,  Luke 
xv.  20.  22.  Though  our  sins  have  been 
deep-dyed  like  scarlet  and  crimson,  enor- 
mous as  mountains,  and  countless  as  the 
sands,  the  sum  total  is  only  this,  Sin  has 
abounded : but  where  sin  has  abounded, 
grace  has  much  more  abounded.  After  all, 
I know  the  Lord  keeps  the  key  of  comfort 
in  his  own  hands,  yet  he  lias  commanded  ua 
to  attempt  comforting  one  another.  I slioulo 
rejoice  to  be  his  instrument  of  administering 


287 


LET.  in.J  LETTERS  TO 

comfort  to  you.  I shall  hope  to  hear  from 
you  soon  ; and  that  you  will  then  be  able 
to  inform  me  he  has  restored  to  you  the 
joys  of  his  salvation.  But  if  not,  yet  wait 
for  him,  and  you  shall  not  wait  in  vain. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

June  — 1777. 

my  dear  madam, — Temptations  may  be 
compared  to  the  wind,  which,  when  it  has 
ceased  raging  from  one  point,  after  a short 
calm,  frequently  renews  its  violence  from 
another  quarter.  The  Lord  silenced  Satan's 
former  assaults  against  you,  but  he  is  per- 
mitted to  try  you  again  in  another  way.  Be 
of  good  courage,  madam,  wait  upon  the  Lord 
and  the  present  storm  shall  likewise  subside 
in  good  time.  You  have  an  infallible  pilot, 
and  are  embarked  in  a bottom  against  which 
the  winds  and  waves  cannot  prevail.  You 
may  be  tossed  about,  and  think  yourself  in 
apparent  jeopardy;  but  sink  you  shall  not, 
except  the  promises  and  faithfulness  of  God  i 
can  fail.  Upon  an  attentive  consideration  of  j 
your  complaint,  it  seems  to  me  to  amount 
only  to  this,  that  though  the  Lord  has  done 
great  things  for  you,  he  has  not  yet  brought 
you  to  a state  of  independence  on  himself) 
nor  released  you  from  that  impossibility 
which  all  his  people  feel,  of  doing  any  thing 
without  him.  And  is  this  indeed  a matter 
of  complaint  1 Is  it  not  every  way  better, 
mo'e  for  his  glory,  and  more  suited  to  keep 
us  mindful  of  our  obligations  to  him,  and  in 
the  event,  more  for  our  safety,  that  we  should 
be  reduced  to  a happy  necessity  of  receiving 
daily  out  of  his  fulness  (as  the  Israelites  re- 
ceived the  manna,)  than  to  be  set  up  with 
something  of  a stock  of  wisdom,  power,  and 
goodness  of  our  own  ! Adam  was  thus  fur- 
nished at  the  beginning  with  strength  to  stand ; 
yet,  mutability  being  essential  to  a creature, 
he  quickly  fell  and  lost  all.  We,  who  are 
by  nature  sinners,  are  not  left  to  so  hazard- 
ous an  experiment.  He  has  himself  engaged 
to  keep  us,  and  treasured  up  all  fulness  of 
grace  for  our  support  in  a Head  who  cannot 
fail.  Our  gracious  Saviour  will  communi- 
cate all  needful  supplies  to  his  members,  yet 
in  such  a manner,  that  they  shall  feel  their 
need  and  weakness,  and  have  nothing  to 
boast  of  from  first  to  last,  but  his  wisdom, 
compassion,  and  care.  We  are  in  no  worse 
circumstances  than  the  apostle  Paul,  who 
though  eminent  and  exemplary  in  the  Chris- 
tian life,  found  and  freely  confessed,  that  he 
nad  no  sufficiency  in  himself  to  think  a good 
thought.  Nor  did  he  wish  it  otherwise  ; he 
even  gloried  in  his  infirmities,  that  the  power  ! 
of  Christ  might  rest  upon  him.  Unbelief,  ! 
and  a thousand  evils,  are  still  in  our  hearts ; 


MRS.  G- 

though  their  reign  and  dominion  is  at  an  end, 
they  are  not  slain  or  eradicated  ; their  effects 
will  be  felt  more  or  less  sensibly,  as  the  Lord 
is  pleased  more  or  less  to  afford  or  abate  his 
gracious  influence.  When  they  are  kept 
down,  we  are  no  better  in  ourselves,  for 
they  are  not  kept  down  by  us;  but  we  are 
very  prone  to  think  better  of  ourselves  at 
such  a time,  and  therefore,  he  is  pleased  to 
permit  us  at  seasons  to  feel  a difference,  that 
we  may  never  forget  how  weak  and  how  vile 
we  are.  We  cannot  absolutely  conquer  these 
evils,  but  it  becomes  us  to  be  humbled  for 
them ; and  we  are  to  fight,  and  strive,  and 
pray  against  them.  Our  great  duty  is  to  be 
at  his  footstool,  and  to  cry  to  him  who  has 
promised  to  perform  all  things  lor  us..  Why 
are  we  called  soldiers,  but  because  we  are 
called  to  a warfare  1 And  how  could  we 
fight,  if  there  were  no  enemies  to  resist  ! 
The  Lord’s  soldiers  are  not  merely  for  show, 
to  make  an  empty  parade  in  a uniform,  and 
to  brandish  their  arms  when  none  but  friends 
and  spectators  are  around  them.  No,  we 
must  stand  upon  the  field  of  battle ; we  must 
face  the  fiery  darts  ; we  must  wrestle  (which 
i is  the  closest  and  most  arduous  kind  of  fight- 
I ing)  with  our  foes:  nor  can  we  well  expect 
wholly  to  escape  wounds ; but  the  leaves  of 
the  tree  of  life  are  provided  for  our  healing. 
The  Captain  of  our  salvation  is  at  hand,  and 
leads  us  on  with  an  assurance,  which  might 
make  even  a coward  bold, — that  in  the  end 
we  shall  be  more  than  conquerors  through 
him  who  has  loved  us. 

I am  ready  to  think,  that  some  of  the  sen- 
timents in  your  letters  are  not  properly 
yours,  such  as  you  yourself  have  derived  from 
the  scriptures,  but  rather  borrowed  from  au- 
thors or  preachers,  whose  judgment  your  hu- 
mility has  led  you  to  prefer  to  your  own.  At 
least,  I am  sure  the  scriptures  do  not  author- 
ise the  conclusion  which  distresses  you,  that 
if  you  were  a child  of  God,  you  should  not 
feel  such  changes  and  oppositions.  Were  I 
to  define  a Christian,  or  rather  to  describe  him 
at  large,  I know  no  text  I would  choose 
sooner,  as  a ground  for  the  subject,  than  Gal. 
v.  17.  A Christian  has  noble  aims,  which 
distinguish  him  from  the  bulk  of  mankind. 
His  leading  principles,  motives,  and  desires, 
are  all  supernatural  and  divine.  Could  he 
do  as  he  would,  there  is  not  a spirit  befbre 
the  throne  should  excel  him  in  holiness,  love, 
and  obedience.  He  would  tread  in  the  very 
footsteps  of  his  Saviour,  fill  up  every  moment 
in  his  service,  and  employ  every  breath  in 
his  praise.  This  he  would  do,  but  alas ! he 
cannot.  Against  this  desire  of  the  spirit, 
there  is  a contrary  desire  and  working  of  a 
corrupt  nature,  which  meets  him  at  every 
turn.  He  has  a beautiful  copy  set  before 
him ; he  is  enamoured  with  it ; and  though 
he  does  not  expect  to  equal  it,  he  writes 
carefully  after  it,  and  longs  to  attain  to  the 


288 


LETTERS  TO 

nearest  possible  imitation.  Bat  indwelling 
sin  and  Satan  continually  jog  his  hand,  and 
spoil  his  strokes.  You  cannot,  madam,  form 
a right  judgment  of  yourself,  except  you 
make  due  allowance  for  those  things  which 
are  not  peculiar  to  yourself,  but  common  to 
all  who  have  spiritual  perception,  and  are  in- 
deed the  inseparable  appendages  of  this  mortal 
state.  If  it  were  not  so,  why  should  the 
most  spiritual  and  gracious  people  be  so 
ready  to  confess  themselves  vile  and  worth- 
less 1 One  eminent  branch  of  our  holiness, 
is  a sense  of  shame  and  humiliation  for  those 
evils  which  are  only  known  to  ourselves,  and 
to  him  who  searches  our  hearts,  joined  with 
an  acquiescence  in  Jesus,  who  is  appointed 
of  God,  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification, 
and  redemption.  I will  venture  to  assure 
you,  that  though  you  will  possess  a more  sta- 
ble peace,  in  proportion  as  the  Lord  enables 
you  to  live  more  simply  upon  the  blood, 
righteousness,  and  grace  of  the  Mediator,  you 
will  never  grow  into  a better  opinion  of 
yourself  than  you  have  at  present.  The 
nearer  you  are  brought  to  him,  the  quicker 
sense  you  will  have  of  your  continual  need 
of  him,  and  thereby  your  admiration  of  his 
power,  love,  and  compassion,  will  increase 
likewise  from  year  to  year. 

I would  observe  farther,  that  our  spiritual 
exercises  are  not  a little  influenced  by  our 
constitutional  temperament.  As  you  are  only 
an  ideal  correspondent,  I can  but  conjecture 
about  you  upon  this  head.  If  your  frame  is 
delicate,  and  your  nervous  system  very  sen- 
sible and  tender,  I should  probably  ascribe 
some  of  your  apprehensions  to  this  cause.  It 
is  an  abstruse  subject,  and  I will  not  enter 
into  it ; but,  according  to  the  observations  I 


MRS.  G . [let  iii 

have  made,  persons  of  this  habit  seem  to  live 
more  upon  the  confines  of  the  invisible  world, 
if  I may  so  speak,  and  to  be  more  susceptive 
of  impressions  from  it,  than  others.  That 
complaint,  which,  fir  wrant  of  a better  name, 
we  call  lowness  of  spirits,  may  probably  af- 
ford the  enemy  some  peculiar  advantages  and 
occasions  of  distressing  you.  The  mind  theu 
perceives  objects  as  through  a tinctured  me- 
dium, which  gives  them  a dark  and  discou- 
raging appearance ; and  I believe  Satan  has 
more  influence  and  address  than  we  are 
aware  of  in  managing  the  glass.  And  when 
this  is  not  the  case  at  all  times,  it  may  be  so 
occasionally,  from  sickness,  or  other  circum- 
stances. You  tell  me  that  you  have  lately 
been  ill,  which,  together  with  your  present 
situation,  and  the  prospect  of  your  approach- 
ing hour,  may  probably  have  such  an  effect 
as  I have  hinted.  You  may  be  charging 
yourself  with  guilt,  for  what  springs  from 
indisposition,  in  which  you  are  merely  pas- 
sive, and  which  may  be  no  more  properly 
sinful  than  the  head-ach,  or  any  of  the 
thousand  natural  shocks  the  flesh  is  heir  to. 
The  enemy  can  take  no  advantage  but  what 
the  Lord  permits  him ; and  he  will  permit 
him  none  but  what  he  designs  to  over-rule 
for  your  greater  advantage  in  the  end.  He 
delights  in  your  prosperity ; and  you  should 
not  be  in  heaviness  for  an  hour,  were  there 
not  a need-be  for  it.  Notwithstanding  your 
fears,  I have  a good  hope,  that  he  who  you 
say  has  helped  you  in  six  troubles,  will  ap- 
pear for  you  in  the  seventh ; that  you  will 
not  die,  but  live,  and  declare  the  works  cf 
the  Lord,  and  come  forth  to  testify  to  his 
praise,  that  he  has  turned  your  mourning 
into  joy. — I am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO  MISS  F 


LETTER  I. 

October  3,  1778. 

dear  madam, — You  would  have  me  tell 
you  what  are  the  best  means  to  be  used  by  a 
young  person,  to  prevent  the  world,  with  all 
its  opening  and  ensnaring  scenes,  from  draw- 
ing the  heart  aside  from  God.  It  is  an  im- 
portant question ; but  I apprehend  your  own 
heart  will  tell  you,  that  you  are  already  pos- 
sessed of  all  the  information  concerning  it 
which  you  can  well  expect  from  me.  I 
could  only  attempt  to  answer  it  from  the  Bi- 
ble, which  lies  open  to  you  likewise.  If 
your  heart  is  like  minerit  must  confess,  that 
when  it  turns  aside  from  God,  it  is  seldom 
through  ignorance  of  the  proper  means  or 
motives  which  should  have  kept  us  near  him, 
but  rather  from  an  evil  principle  within, 
which  prevails  against  our  better  judgment, 
and  renders  us  unfaithful  to  light  already 
received. 

I could  offer  you  rules,  cautions,  and  ad- 
vices in  abundance;  for  I find  it  compara- 
tively easy  to  preach  to  others.  But  if  you 
should  farther  ask  me,  How  you  shall  effec- 
tually reduce  them  to  practice  I I feel  that 
I am  so  deficient,  and  so  much  at  a loss  in 
this  matter  myself,  that  I know  not  well 
what  to  say  to  you.  Yet  something  must  be 
said. 

In  the  first  place,  then,  I would  observe, 
that  though  it  be  our  bounden  duty,  and  the 
highest  privilege  we  can  propose  to  ourselves, 
to  have  our  hearts  kept  close  to  the  Lord ; 
yet  we  must  not  expect  it  absolutely  or  per- 
fectly, much  less  all  at  once ; we  shall  keep 
close  to  him,  in  proportion  as  we  are  solidly 
convinced  of  the  infinite  disparity  between 
him  and  the  things  which  would  presume  to 
stand  in  competition  with  him,  and  the  folly, 
as  well  as  ingratitude,  of  departing  from  him. 
But  these  points  are  only  to  be  learned  by 
experience,  and  by  smarting  under  a series 
of  painful  disappointments  in  our  expecta-  j 
Lions  from  creatures.  Our  judgments  may 
be  quickly  satisfied,  that  his  favour  is  better 
2 0 


than  life,  while  yet  it  is  in  the  power  of  a 
mere  trifle  to  turn  us  aside.  The  Lord  per- 
mits us  to  feel  our  weakness,  that  we  may 
be  sensible  of  it;  for  though  we  are  ready, 
in  words,  to  confess  that  we  are  weak,  we 
do  not  so  properly  know  it,  till  that  secret, 
though  unallowed  dependence  we  have  upon 
some  strength  in  ourselves,  is  brought  to  the 
trial,  and  fails  us.  To  be  humble,  and  like 
a little  child,  afraid  of  taking  a step  alone, 
and  so  conscious  of  snares  and  dangers  around 
us,  as  to  cry  to  him  continually  to  hold  us 
up,  that  we  may  be  safe,  is  the  sure,  the  in- 
fallible, the  only  secret  of  walking  closely 
with  him. 

But  how  shall  we  attain  this  humble  frame 
of  spirit  ? It  must  be,  as  I said,  from  a real 
and  sensible  conviction  of  our  weakness  and 
vileness,  which  we  cannot  learn  (at  least  I 
have  not  been  able  to  learn  it)  merely  from 
books  or  preachers.  The  providence  of  God 
concurs  with  his  Holy  Spirit  in  his  merciful 
design  of  making  us  acquainted  with  our- 
selves. It  is  indeed  a great  mercy  to  be 
preserved  from  sucii  declensions  as  might 
fall  under  the  notice  of  our  fellow-creatures; 
but  when  they  can  observe  nothing  of  conse- 
quence to  object  to  us,  things  may  be  far 
from  right  with  us  in  the  sight  of  him  who 
judges  not  only  actions,  but  the  thoughts  and 
first  motions  of  the  heart.  And  indeed, 
could  we  for  a season  so  cleave  to  God,  as 
to  find  little  or  nothing  in  ourselves  to  be 
ashamed  of,  we  are  such  poor  creatures,  that 
we  should  presently  grow  vain  and  self-suffi- 
cient, and  expose  ourselves  to  the  greatest 
danger  of  falling. 

There  are,  however,  means  to  be  observed 
on  our  part ; and  though  you  know  them,  I 
will  repeat  the  principal,  because  you  desire 
me.  The  first  is  Prayer ; and  here,  above 
all  things,  we  should  pray  for  humility.  It 
may  be  called  both  the  guard  of  all  other 
graces,  and  the  soil  in  which  they  grow, 
j The  second,  Attention  to  the  scriptures. 
Your  question  is  directly  answered  in  Psalm 
I cxix.  9.  The  precepts  are  our  rule  and  de- 


290 


LETTERS  TO  MISS  F- 


[let.  II. 


light,  the  promises  our  strength  and  encou- 
ragement : the  good  recorded  of  the  saints 
is  proposed  for  our  encouragement;  their 
miscarriages  are  as  land-marks  set  up  to 
warn  us  of  the  rocks  and  shoals  which  lie 
in  the  way  of  our  passage.  The  study  of 
the  whole  scheme  of  gospel-salvation,  re- 
specting the  person,  life,  doctrine,  death  and 
glory  of  our  Redeemer,  is  appointed  to  form 
our  souls  to  a spiritual  and  divine  taste ; and 
so  far  as  this  prevails  and  grows  in  us,  the 
trifles  that  would  draw  us  from  the  Lord  will 
lose  their  influence,  and  appear,  divested  of 
the  glare  with  which  they  strike  the  senses, 
mere  vanity  and  nothing.  The  third  grand 
means  is,  Consideration  or  Recollection;  a 
careful  regard  to  those  temptations  and 
snares,  to  which,  from  our  tempers,  situa- 
tions, or  connections,  we  are  more  immedi- 
ately exposed,  and  by  which  we  have  been 
formerly  hindered.  J.t  may  be  well  in  the 
morning,  ere  we  leave  our  chambers,  to  fore- 
cast, as  far  as  wTe  are  able,  the  probable  cir- 
cumstances of  the  day  before  us.  Yet  the 
observance  of  this  as  well  as  of  every  rule 
that  can  be  offered,  may  dwindle  into  a mere 
form.  However,  I trust  the  Lord,  who  has 
given  you  a desire  to  live  to  him,  will  be 
your  guard  and  teacher.  There  is  none 
teacheth  like  him. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

March  — 1779. 

dear  madam, — Our  experiences  pretty 
much  tally ; they  may  be  drawn  out  into 
sheets  and  quires,  but  the  sum  total  may  be 
comprised  in  a short  sentence,  “ Our  life  is 
a warfare.”  For  our  encouragement,  the 
apostle  calls  it  a good  warfare.  We  are  en- 
gaged in  a good  cause,  fight  under  a good 
Captain,  the  victory  is  sure  beforehand,  and 
the  prize  is  a crown,  a crown  of  life.  Such 
considerations  might  make  even  a coward 
bold.  But  then  we  must  be  content  to  fight; 
and  considering  the  nature,  number,  situa- 
tion, and  subtilty  of  our  enemies,  we  may 
expect  sometimes  to  receive  a wound ; but 
there  is  a medicinal  tree,  the  leaves  of  which 
are  always  at  hand  to  heal  us.  We  cannot 
be  too  attentive  to  the  evil  which  is  always 
working  in  us,  or  to  the  stratagems  which 
are  employed  against  us ; yet  our  attention 
should  not  be  wholly  confined  to  these  things. 
We  are  to  look  upwards  likewise  to  him, 
who  is  our  head,  our  life,  our  strength.  One 
glance  of  Jesus  will  convey  more  effectual 
assistance  than  poring  upon  our  own  hearts 
for  a month.  The  one  is  to  be  done ; but  the 
other  should  upon  no  account  be  omitted.  It 


was  not  by  counting  their  wounds,  but  by 
beholding  the  brazen  serpent,  the  Lord’s  in- 
stituted means  of  cure,  that  the  Israelite? 
were  healed.  That  was  an  emblem  for  our 
instruction.  One  great  cause  of  our  fre- 
quent conflicts  is,  that  we  have  a secret  de- 
sire to  be  rich,  and  it  is  the  Lord’s  design  to 
make  us  poor ; we  want  to  gain  an  ability  of 
doing  something ; and  he  suits  his  dispensa- 
tions, to  convince  us  that  we  can  do  nothing : 
we  want  a stock  in  ourselves,  and  he  would 
have  us  absolutely  dependent  upon  him.  So 
far  as  we  are  content  to  be  weak,  that  his 
power  may  be  magnified  in  us,  so  far  we 
shall  make  our  enemies  know  that  we  are 
strong,  though  we  ourselves  shall  never  be 
directly  sensible  that  we  are  so;  only  by 
comparing  what  we  are  with  the  opposition 
we  stand  against,  we  may  come  to  a comfort- 
able conclusion,  that  the  Lord  worketh 
mightily  in  us,  Psal.  xli.  11. 

If  our  views  are  simple,  and  our  desires 
towards  the  Lord,  it  may  be  of  use  to  con- 
sider some  of  your  faults  and  mine,  not  as 
the  faults  of  you  and  me  in  particular,  but  as 
the  fault  of  that  depraved  nature  which  is 
common  with  us  to  all  the  Lord’s  people,  and 
which  made  Paul  groan  as  feelingly  and  as 
heartily  as  we  can  do.  But  this  considera- 
j tion,  though  true  and  scriptural,  can  only  be 
safely  applied  when  the  mind  is  sincerely 
'•  and  in  good  earnest  devoted  to  the  Lord. 
I There  are  too  many  unsound  and  half  pro- 
! fessors,  who  eagerly  catch  at  it  as  an  ex- 
i cuse  for  those  evils  they  are  unwilling  to 
i part  with.  But  I trust  I may  safely  recom- 
mend it  to  you.  This  evil  nature,  this  in- 
dwelling sin,  is  a living  principle,  an  active, 
powerful  cause ; and  a cause  that  is  active 
will  necessarily  produce  an  effect  Sin  is 
the  same  thing  in  believers  as  in  the  unrege- 
nerate : they  have  indeed  a contrary  princi- 
ple of  grace,  which  counteracts  and  resists 
it,  which  can  prevent  its  outbreakings,  but 
will  not  suppress  its  risings.  As  grace  re- 
sists sin,  so  sin  resists  grace,  Gal.  v.  17.  The 
proper  tendency  of  each  is  mutually  weak- 
ened on  both  sides ; and,  between  the  two, 
the  poor  believer,  however  blameless  and 
exemplary  in  the  sight  of  men,  appears  in 
his  own  view  the  most  inconsistent  charac- 
ter under  the  sun.  He  can  hardly  think  it 
is  so  with  others ; and,  judging  of  them  by 
what  he  sees,  and  of  himself  by  what  he  feels, 
in  lowliness  of  heart  he  esteems  others  better 
than  himself.  This  proves  him  to  be  right, 
for  it  is  the  will  of  God  concerning  him,  Phil, 
ii.  3.  This  is  the  warfare.  But  it  shall  not 
always  be  so.  Grace  shall  prevail.  The 
evil  nature  is  already  enervated,  and  ere 
long  it  will  die  the  death.  Jesus  will  make 
us  more  than  conquerors. — I am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO 

THE  REVEREND  DR. 


LETTER  I. 

April  17,  1776. 

dear  sir, — By  this  time  I hope  you  are 
both  returned  in  peace,  and  happy  together  in 
your  stated  favoured  tract;  rejoicing  in  the 
name  of  Jesus  yourselves,  and  rejoicing  to 
see  the  savour  of  it  spreading  like  a precious 
perfume  among  the  people.  Every  day  I 
hope  you  find  prejudices  wearing  off,  and 
more  disposed  to  hear  the  words  of  life. 
The  Lord  has  given  you  a fine  first-fruits, 
which  I trust  will  prove  the  earnest  of  a 
plentiful  harvest.  In  the  mean  time  he  will 
enable  you  to  sow  the  seed  in  patience,  leav- 
ing the  event  in  his  hands.  Though  it  does 
not  spring  up  visibly  at  once,  it  will  not  be 
lost.  I think  he  would  not  have  sent  you  if 
he  had  not  a people  there  to  call ; but  they 
can  only  come  forth  to  view  as  he  is  pleased 
to  bring  them.  Satan  will  try  to  hinder  and 
disturb  you,  but  he  is  in  a chain  which  he  can- 
not break,  nor  go  a step  farther  than  he  is 
permitted.  And  if  you  have  been  instru- 
mental to  the  conversion  of  but  a few,  in 
those  few  you  have  an  ample  reward  al- 
ready for  all  the  difficulties  you  have  or  can 
meet  with.  It  is  more  honourable  and  im- 
portant to  be  an  instrument  of  saving  one 
soul  than  to  rescue  a whole  kingdom  from 
temporal  ruin.  Let  us  therefore,  while  we 
earnestly  desire  to  be  more  useful,  not  for- 
get to  be  thankful  for  what  the  Lord  has 
been  pleased  already  to  do  for  us;  and  let 
us  expect,  knowing  whose  servants  we  are, 
and  what  a gospel  we  preach,  to  see  some 
new  miracles  wrought  from  day  to  day,  for 
indeed  every  real  conversion  may  be  ac- 
counted miraculous,  being  no  less  than  an 
immediate  exertion  of  that  power  which 
made  the  heavens,  and  commanded  the  light 
to  shine  out  of  darkness.  Your  little  teles- 
cope is  safe.  I wish  I had  more  of  that 
clear  air  and  sunshine  you  speak  of,  that 
with  you  I might  have  more  distinct  views  | 


of  the  land  of  promise.  I cannot  say  my 
prospect  is  greatly  clouded  by  doubts  of  my 
reaching  it  at  last ; but  then  there  is  such  a 
languor  and  deadness  hanging  upon  my 
mind,  that  it  is  almost  amazing  to  me  how 
I can  entertain  any  hopes  at  all.  It  seems, 
if  doubting  could  ever  be  reasonable,  there 
is  no  one  who  has  greater  reason  for  doubt- 
ing than  myself.  But  I know  not  how  to 
doubt,  when  I consider  the  faithfulness, 
grace,  and  compassion  of  him  who  has 
promised.  If  it  could  be  proved  that 
Christ  had  not  died,  or  that  he  did  not 
speak  the  words  which  are  ascribed  to  him 
in  the  gospel,  or  that  he  is  not  able  to  make 
them  good,  or  that  his  word  cannot  safely 
be  taken;  in  any  of  these  cases  I should 
doubt  to  purpose,  and  lie  down  in  despair. — 
I am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

July  15,  1776. 

my  dear  sir, — I begin  with  congratula- 
tions first  to  you  and  Mrs. , on  your  safe 

journey  and  good  passage  over  the  formi- 
dable Humber.  Mrs. has  another  river 

to  cross  (may  it  be  many  years  before  she 
approaches  the  bank)  over  which  there  is 
no  bridge.  Perhaps  at  seasons  she  may 
think  of  it  with  that  reluctance  which  she 
felt  before  she  saw  the  Humber ; but  as  her 
fears  were  then  agreeably  disappointed,  and 
she  found  the  experiment,  when  called  to 
make  it  neither  terrifying  nor  dangerous- 
so  I trust  she  will  find  it  in  the  other  case. 
Did  not  she  think,  the  Lord  tinows  where 
I shall  be,  and  he  will  meet  me  there  with 
a storm,  because  I am  such  a sinner ) Then 
how  the  billows  will  foam  and  rage  at  me, 
and  what  a long  passn  ;e  I shall  have,  and 
perhaps  I shall  sink  in  the  middle,  and  never 
set  my  foot  in  Hull.  It  is  true,  I am  not 


292 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  DR. 


so  much  afraid  of  the  journey  I go  by  land, 
though  I know  that  every  step  of  the  way 
the  horses  or  the  chaise  may  fall,  and  I be 
killed ; but  how  do  I know  but  he  may  pre- 
serve me  on  the  road  on  purpose  to  drown 
me  in  the  river!  But  behold,  when  she 
came  to  it  all  was  calm,  or  what  was  better, 
a gentle,  fair  breeze,  to  waft  her  pleasantly 
over  before  she  was  aware.  Thus  we  are 
apt  perversely  to  reason  ; he  guides  and 
guards  me  through  life ; he  gives  me  new 
mercies,  and  new  proofs  of  his  power  and 
care  every  day ; and  therefore,  when  I come 
to  die,  he  will  forsake  me  and  let  me  be  the 
sport  of  winds  and  waves.  Indeed  the  Lord 
does  not  deserve  such  hard  thoughts  at  our 
hands  as  we  are  prone  to  form  of  him.  But 
notwithstanding  we  make  such  returns,  he 
is  and  will  be  gracious  and  shame  us  out  of 
our  unkind,  ungrateful,  unbelieving  fears 
at  last.  If,  after  my  repeated  kind  recep- 
tion at  your  house,  1 should  always  be  teas- 
ing Mrs. with  suspicions  of  her  good- 

will, and  should  tell  every  body  I saw,  that 
I verily  believed  the  next  time  1 went  to 
see  her  she  would  shut  the  door  in  my  face, 
and  refuse  me  admittance,  would  she  not  be 
grieved,  offended,  and  affronted  ! W ould 
she  not  think,  What  reason  can  he  assign 
for  this  treatment  ! He  knows  I did  every 
thing  in  my  power  to  assure  him  of  a wel- 
come, and  told  him  so  over  and  over  again. 
Does  he  count  me  a deceiver!  Yes,  he 
does : I see  his  friendship  is  not  worth  pre- 
serving ; so  farewell.  I will  seek  friends 
among  such  as  believe  my  words  and  actions. 
Well,  my  dear  madam,  I am  clear,  I always 
believed  you  ; I make  no  doubt  but  you  will 
treat  me  kindly  next  time,  as  you  did 
the  last.  But  pray,  is  not  the  Lord  as 
worthy  of  being  trusted  as  yourself,  and  are 
not  his  invitations  and  promises  as  hearty 
and  as  honest  as  yours ! Let  us  therefore 
beware  of  giving  way  to  such  thoughts  of 
him  as  we  could  hardly  forgive  in  our  dear- 
est friends,  if  they  should  harbour  the  like 
of  us. 

I have  heard  of  nothing  of  Mr.  P yet, 

but  that  he  is  in  town,  very  busy  about  that 
precious  peace  of  furniture  called  a wife. 
May  the  Lord  direct  and  bless  his  choice. 
In  Captain  Cook’s  voyage  to  the  Houth  Sea, 
6ome  fish  were  caught  which  looked  as  well 
as  others,  but  those  who  ate  of  them  were 
poisoned  : alas  for  the  poor  man  who  catches 
a poisonous  wife ! There  are  such  to  be 
met  with  in  the  matrimonial  seas,  that  look 
passing  well  to  the  eye,  but  a connexion 
with  them  proves  baneful  to  domestic  peace, 
and  hurtful  to  the  life  of  grace.  I know 
two  or  three  people,  perhaps  a few  more, 
who  have  great  reason  to  be  thankful  to  him  | 
who  sent  the  fish,  with  the  money  in  its 
mouth,  to  Peter’s  hook.  He  secretly  in- 1 
structed  and  guided  us  where  to  angle,  and,  , 


[let.  IV. 

if  we  have  caught  prizes,  w e owe  it  not  to 
our  own  skill,  much  less  to  our  deserts,  but 
to  his  goodness. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

September  4,  1776. 

my  dear  sir, Poor  little  boy,  it  is  a 

mercy  indeed  that  he  recovered  from  such  a 
formidable  hurt.  The  Lord  wounded  and 
the  Lord  healed.  I ascribe,  with  you,  what 
the  world  calls  accident  to  him,  and  believe 
that  without  his  permission  for  wise  and 
good  ends,  a child  can  no  more  pull  a bowl 
of  boiling  water  on  itself  than  it  could  pull 
the  moon  out  of  her  orbit.  And  why  does 
he  permit  such  things ! One  reason  or  two 
is  sufficient  for  us ; it  is  to  remind  us  of  the 
uncertainty  of  life  and  all  creature-com- 
forts ; to  make  us  afraid  of  cleaving  too 
close  to  pretty  toys,  which  are  so  precari- 
ous, that  often  while  we  look  at  them  they 
vanish,  and  to  lead  us  to  a more  entire  de- 
pendence upon  himself ; that  we  might  ne- 
ver judge  ourselves  or  our  concerns  safe 
from  outward  appearances  only,  but  that  the 
Lord  is  our  keeper,  and  were  not  his  eye 
upon  us,  a thousand  dangers  and  painful 
changes,  which  we  can  neither  foresee  nor 
prevent,  are  lurking  about  us  every  step, 
ready  to  break  in  upon  us  every  hour 
Men  are  but  children  of  a larger  growth. 
How  many  are  labouring  and  planning  in 
the  pursuit  of  things,  the  event  of  which,  if 
they  obtain  them  will  be  but  like  pulling 
scalding  water  upon  their  own  heads.  They 
must  have  the  bowl  by  all  means,  but  they 
are  not  aware  what  is  in  it  till  they  feel  it. — 
I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IY. 

July  7,  1777. 

sir, — I have  had  a letter  from  your  mi- 
nister since  his  arrival  at . I hope  he 

will  be  restored  to  you  again  before  long, 
and  that  he  and  many  of  your  place  will  re- 
joice long  in  each  other.  Those  are  favoured 
places  which  are  blessed  with  a sound  and 
faithful  gospel-ministry,  if  the  people  know 
and  consider  the  value  of  their  privileges, 
and  are  really  desirous  of  profiting  by  them  ; 
but  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word,  but 
in  power.  I hope  those  who  profess  the 
gospel  with  you  will  wrestle  in  prayer  for 
grace  to  walk  worthy  of  it.  A minister’s 
j hands  are  strengthened,  when  he  can  point 
to  his  people,  as  so  many  living  proofs,  that 
j the  doctrines  he  preaches  are  doctrines  ac- 
cording to  godliness;  when  they  walk  in 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  DR. 


293 


LET.  IV.] 

mutual  love ; when  each  one,  in  their  seve- 
ral places,  manifests  an  humble,  spiritual, 
and  upright  conduct ; when  they  are  Chris- 
tians, not  only  at  church,  but  in  the  family, 
the  shop,  and  the  field ; when  they  fill  up 
their  relations  in  life,  as  husbands  or  wives, 
masters  or  servants,  parents  or  children,  ac- 
cording to  the  rule  of  the  word ; whej  they 
are  evidently  a people  separated  from  the 
world  while  conversant  in  it,  and  are  careful 
to  let  their  light  shine  before  men.  not  only 
by  talking,  but  by  acting  as  the  discipies  of 
Christ ; when  they  go  on  steadily,  not  by  fits 
and  starts,  prizing  the  means  of  grace,  with- 
out resting  in  them : when  it  is  thus,  wg  can 
gay,  Now  we  live,  if  you  stand  fast  m the  i 


Lord.  Then  we  come  forth  with  pleasure, 
and  our  service  is  our  delight,  and  we  are  en- 
couraged to  hope  for  an  increasing  blessing. 
But  if  the  people  in  whom  we  have  rejoiced 
sink  into  formality  or  a worldly  spirit ; if  they 
have  dissensions  and  jealousies  among  them- 
selves, if  they  act  improperly,  and  give  the 
enei*  ies  occasion  to  say,  There,  there,  so 
would  we  have  it : then  our  hearts  are  wound- 
ed and  our  zeal  damped,  and  we  know  not 
how  to  speak  with  liberty.  It  is  my  heart’s 
desire  and  prayer  for  you,  that  whether  I see 
you,  or  else  be  absent  from  you,  I may  know 
that  you  stand  fast  in  one  spirit  and  one 
mind,  striving  together  for  the  faith  of  the 
' gospei. — I am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO  MRS. 


LETTER  I. 

No  v.  — 1775. 

my  dear  madam, — Too  much  of  that  im- 
patience which  you  speak  of,  towards  those 
who  differ  from  us  in  some  religious  senti- 
ments, is  observable  on  all  sides.  I do  not 
consider  it  as  the  fault  of  a few  individuals, 
or  of  this  or  that  party,  so  much  as  the  effect 
of  that  inherent  imperfection  which  is  com- 
mon to  our  whole  race.  Anger  and  scorn 
are  equally  unbecoming  in  those  who  pro- 
fess to  be  followers  of  the  meek  and  lowly 
Jesus,  and  who  acknowledge  themselves  to 
be  both  sinful  and  fallible ; but  too  often  some- 
thing of  this  leaven  will  be  found  cleaving 
to  the  best  characters,  and  mixed  with  honest 
endeavours  to  serve  the  best  cause.  But 
thus  it  was  from  the  beginning;  and  we  have 
reason  to  confess  that  we  are  no  better  than 
the  apostles  were,  who,  though  they  meant 
well,  manifested  once  and  again  a wrong  spi- 
rit in  their  zeal,  Luke  ix.  §4.  Observation 
and  experience  contribute,  by  the  grace  of 
God,  gradually  to  soften  and  sweeten  our  spi- 
rits ; but  then  there  will  always  be  ground 
for  mutual  forbearance  and  mutual  forgive- 
ness on  his  head.  However,  so  far  as  I may 
judge  of  myself,  I think  this  hastiness  is  not 
my  most  easily  besetting  sin.  I am  not  in- 
deed an  advocate  for  that  indifference  and 
lukewarmness  to  the  truths  of  God,  which 
seem  to  constitute  the  candour  many  plead 
lor  in  the  present  day.  But  while  I desire 
to  hold  fast  the  sound  doctrines  of  the  gospel, 
towards  the  persons  of  my  fellow-creatures, 
I wish  to  exercise  all  moderation  and  benevo- 
lence. Protestants  or  Papists,  Socinians  or 
Deists,  Jews,  Samaritans,  or  Mahometans, 
all  are  my  neighbours,  they  have  all  a claim 
upon  ine  for  the  common  offices  of  humanity. 
As  to  religion,  they  cannot  all  be  right ; nor 
may  I compliment  them  by  allowing  the  dif- 
ferences between  us  are  but  trivial,  when  I 
believe  and  know  they  are  important ; but  I 
am  not  to  expect  them  to  see  with  my  eyes. 
I am  deeply  convinced  of  the  truth  of  John 
294 


Baptist’s  aphorism,  John  iii.  27.  “A  man 
can  receive  nothing,  except  it  be  given  him 
from  heaven.”  I well  know,  that  the  little 
measure  of  knowledge  I have  obtained  in 
the  things  of  God,  has  not  been  owing  to  my 
own  wisdom  and  docility,  but  to  his  goodness. 
Nor  did  I get  it  all  at  once ; he  has  been 
pleased  to  exercise  much  patience  and  long- 
suffering  towards  me,  for  about  twenty-seven 
years  past,  since  he  first  gave  me  a desire  of 
learning  from  himself.  He  has  graciously  ac- 
commodated himself  to  my  weakness,  borne 
with  mistakes,  and  helped  me  through  in- 
numerable prejudices,  which,  but  for  his 
mercy,  would  have  been  insuperable  hin- 
derances : I have  therefore  no  right  to  be  an- 
gry, impatient,  or  censorious,  especially  as  I 
have  still  much  to  learn,  and  am  so  poorly 
influenced  by  what  I seem  to  know.  I am 
weary  of  controversies  and  disputes,  and  de- 
sire to  choose  for  myself,  and  to  point  out  to 
others,  Mary’s  part,  to  sit  at  Jesus’  feet,  and 
to  hear  his  words.  And,  blessed  be  his 
name ! so  far  as  I have  learned  from  him,  I 
am  favoured  with  a comfortable  certainty  : I 
know  whom  I have  believed,  and  am  no 
longer  tossed  about  by  the  various  winds  and 
tides  of  opinions,  by  which  I see  many  are 
dashed  one  against  the  other.  But  I cannot, 
I must  not,  I dare  not  contend ; only,  as  a 
witness  for  God,  I am  ready  to  bear  my  sim- 
ple testimony  to  what  I have  known  of  his 
truth,  whenever  I am  properly  called  to  it. 

I agree  with  you,  that  some  accounted 
evangelical  teachers  have  too  much  confined 
themselves  to  a few  leading  and  favourite 
topics.  I think  this  a fault;  and  believe, 
when  it  is  constantly  so,  the  auditors  are  de- 
prived of  much  edification  and  pleasure, 
which  they  might  receive  from  a more  judi- 
cious and  comprehensive  plan.  The  whole 
scripture,  as  it  consists  of  histories,  prophe- 
cies, doctrines,  precepts,  promises,  exhort- 
ations, admonitions,  encouragements,  and 
reproofs,  is  the  proper  subject  of  the  gospel- 
ministry  ; and  every  part  should  in  its  place 
and  course  be  attended  to ; yet,  so  as  that,  in 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


295 


LET.  I.] 

every  compartment  we  exhibit,  Jesus  should 
be  the  capital  figure ; in  whom  the  prophecies 
are  fulfilled,  the  promises  established;  to 
whom,  in  a way  of  type  and  emblem,  the 
most  important  parts  of  scripture  history 
have  an  express  reference ; and  from  whom 
alone  we  can  receive  that  life,  strength,  and 
encouragement,  which  are  necessary  to  make 
obedience  either  pleasing  or  practicable.  And 
where  there  is  true  spiritual  faith  in  the 
heart,  and  in  exercise,  I believe  a person 
will  not  so  much  need  a detail  of  what  he  is 
to  practice,  as  to  be  often  greatly  at  a loss 
without  it.  Our  Saviour’s  commandments 
are  plain  and  clear  in  themselves ; and  that 
love  which  springs  from  faith,  is  the  best 
casuist  and  commentator  to  apply  and  en- 
force them. 

You  are  pleased  to  say,  “ Forgive  me  if  I 
transgress ; I know  the  place  whereon  I stand 
is  holy  ground.”  Permit  me  to  assure  you, 
my  dear  madam,  that  were  I,  which  I am 
not,  a person  of  some  importance,  you  would 
run  no  hazard  of  offending  me  by  controvert- 
ing any  of  my  sentiments:  I hold  none 
(knowingly)  which  I am  not  willing  to  sub- 
mit to  examination  ; nor  am  I afraid  of  of- 
fending you  by  speaking  freely,  when  you 
point  out  my  way.  I should  wrong  you,  if 
I thought  to  please  you  by  palliating  or  dis- 
guising the  sentiments  of  my  heart ; and  if  I 
attempt  to  do  so,  you  would  soon  see  through 
the  design,  and  despise  it.  There  may  per- 
haps be  an  improper  manner  of  chiming  upon 
the  name  of  Jesus,  and  I am  not  for  vindicat- 
ing any  impropriety ; yet,  could  I feel  what 
I ought  to  mean  when  I pronounce  that 
name,  I should  not  fear  mentioning  it  too 
often.  I am  afraid  of  no  excess  in  thinking 
highly  of  it,  because  I read  it  is  the  will  of 
God  that  all  men  should  honour  the  Son  as 
they  honour  the  Father.  Laboured  explica- 
tions of  the  Trinity  I always  avoid.  I am 
afraid  of  darkening  counsel  by  words  with- 
out knowledge.  Scripture,  and  even  reason, 
assures  me,  there  is  but  one  God,  whose  name 
alone  is  Jehovah.  Scripture  likewise  as- 
sures me  that  Christ  is  God,  that  Jesus  is 
Jehovah.  I cannot  say  that  reason  assents 
with  equal  readiness  to  this  proposition  as  to 
the  former.  But,  admitting  what  the  scrip- 
tures teach  concerning  the  evil  of  sin,  the 
depravity  of  human  nature,  the  method  of 
salvation,  and  the  office  of  the  Saviour ; ad- 
mitting that  God  has  purposed  to  glorify, 
not  his  mercy  only,  but  his  justice,  in  the 
work  of  redemption ; that  the  blood  shed  upon 
the  cross  is  a proper,  adequate  satisfaction 
for  sin ; and  that  the  Redeemer  is  at  present 
the  Shepherd  of  those  who  believe  in  him, 
and  will  hereafter  be  the  Judge  of  the  world ; ' 
that,  in  order  to  give  the  effectual  help  which  - 
we  need,  it  is  necessary  that  he  be  always  < 
intimately  with  those  who  depend  upon  him,  < 
in  every  age,  in  every  place ; must  know  the  ; 


thoughts  and  intents  of  every  heart ; must 
i have  his  eye  always  upon  them,  his  ear  al- 
1 ways  open  to  them,  his  arm  ever  stretched 
out  for  their  relief ; that  they  can  receive  no- 
thing but  what  he  bestows,  can  do  nothing 
but  as  he  enables  them,  nor  stand  a moment 
but  as  he  upholds  them  : admitting  these  and 
the  like  promises,  with  which  the  word  of 
God  abounds,  reason  must  allow,  whatever 
difficulties  may  attend  the  thought,  that  only 
he  who  is  God  over  all,  blessed  for  ever,  is 
able  or  worthy  to  execute  this  complicated 
plan,  every  part  of  which  requires  the  exer- 
tion of  infinite  wisdom  and  almighty  power ; 
nor  am  I able  to  form  any  clear,  satisfactory, 
or  comfortable  thoughts  of  God,  suited  to 
awaken  my  love  or  engage  my  trust,  but  as 
he  has  been  pleased  to  reveal  himself  in  the 
person  of  Jesus  Christ.  I believe,  with  the 
apostle,  that  God  was  once  manifested  in  the 
flesh  upon  earth,  and  that  he  is  now  mani- 
fested in  the  flesh  in  heaven ; and  that  the 
worship,  not  only  of  redeemed  sinners,  but  of 
the  holy  angels,  is  addressed  to  the  Lamb  that 
was  slain,  and  who,  in  that  nature  in  which 
he  suffered,  now  exercises  universal  domi- 
nion, and  has  the  government  of  heaven, 
earth,  and  hell  upon  his  shoulders.  This 
truth  is  the  foundation  upon  which  my  hope 
is  built,  the  fountain  from  whence  I derive 
all  my  strength  and  consolation,  and  my  only 
encouragement  for  venturing  to  the  throne 
of  grace,  for  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need. 

Till  God  in  human  flesh  I see. 

My  thoughts  no  comfort  find ; 

The  holy,  just,  and  sacred  Three 
Are  terrors  to  my  mind. 

But  if  Immanuel’s  face  appear, 

My  hope,  lay  joy  begins ; 

His  name  forbids  my  slavish  fear, 

His  grace  removes  my  sins. 

I am,  however,  free  to  confess  to  you,  that, 
through  the  pride  and  unbelief  remaining  in 
my  heart,  and  the  power  of  Satan’s  tempta- 
tions, there  are  seasons  when  I find  no  small 
perplexity  and  evil  reasonings  upon  this  high 
point;  but  it  is  so  absolutely  essential  to  my 
peace  that  I cannot  part  with  it,  for  I can- 
not give  it  up  without  giving  up  all  hope  of 
salvation  on  the  one  hand,  and  giving  up  the 
Bible,  as  an  unmeaning,  contradictory  fable, 
on  the  other;  and,  through  mercy,  for  fie 
most  part,  when  I am  in  my  right  mind,  I 
am  as  fully  persuaded  of  this  truth  as  I am 
of  my  own  existence ; but,  from  the  exercises 
I have  had  about  it,  I have  learned  to  sub- 
scribe to  the  apostle’s  declaration,  that  “ no 
man  can  say  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  but 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.”  I am  well  satisfied  it 
will  not  be  a burden  to  me  at  the  hour  of 
death,  nor  be  laid  to  my  charge  at  the  day 
of  judgment,  that  I have  thought  too  highly 
of  Jesus,  expected  too  much  from  him  myself 
or  laboured  too  much  in  commending  ar.d 
setting  him  forth  to  others  as  the  Alpha  and 


298 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


Omega,  the  true  God  and  eternal  life.  On 
the  contrary,  alas ! alas ! my  guilt  and  grief 
are,  that  ray  thoughts  of  him  are  so  faint,  so 
infrequent,  and  my  commendations  of  him  so 
lamentably  cold  and  disproportionate  to  what 
they  ought  to  be. 

I know  not  whose  letters  are  rapturous, 
but  I wish  mine  were  more  so ; not  that  I am 
a friend  to  ungrounded  sallies  of  imagina- 
tion, flights  of  animal  passions,  or  heat  with- 
out light.  But  it  would  be  amazing  to  me, 
were  I not  aware  of  human  depravity,  of 
which  I consider  this  as  one  of  the  most 
striking  proofs,  that  they  who  have  any  good 
hope  of  an  interest  in  the  gospel  salvation 
do  not  find  their  hearts  (as  Dr.  Watts  ex- 
presses it)  all  on  fire,  and  that  their  very 
looks  do  not  express  a transport  of  admira- 
tion, gratitude,  and  love,  when  they  consider 
from  what  misery  they  are  redeemed,  to 
what  happiness  they  are  called,  and  what  a 
price  was  paid  for  their  souls.  I wish  to  be 
more  like  the  apostle  Paul  in  this  respect, 
who,  though  he  often  forms  and  compounds 
new  words,  seems  at  a loss  for  any  that 
could  suitably  describe  the  emotions  of  his 
heart  But  I am  persuaded  you  would  not 
object  to  the  just  fervour  of  scriptural  devo- 
tion. But  this  holy  flame  can  seldom  be 
found  unsullied  in  the  present  life.  The  tem- 
per, constitution,  and  infirmities  of  indivi- 
duals will  mix  more  or  less  with  what  they 
say  or  do.  Allowances  must  be  made  for 
such  things  in  the  present  state  of  infirmity, 
for  who  can  hope  to  be  perfectly  free  from 
them  1 If  the  heart  is  right  with  God,  and 
sincerely  affected  with  the  wonders  of  re- 
deeming love,  our  gracious  High-priest,  who 
knows  our  weakness,  pities  and  pardons  what 
is  amiss,  accepts  our  poor  efforts,  and  gra- 
dually teaches  us  to  discern  and  avoid  what 
is  blameable.  The  work  of  grace,  in  its  first 
stages,  I sometimes  compare  to  the  lighting 
of  a fire,  where  for  a while  there  is  abund- 
ance of  smoke,  but  by  and  by  it  burns  clear- 
er and  clearer.  There  is  often,  both  in  let- 
ters and  books,  what  might  be  very  well 
omitted  ; but  if  a love  to  God  and  souls  be 
the  leading  principle,  T pass  as  gentle  cen- 
sure upon  the  rest  as  I can,  and  apply  to 
some  eccentric  expressions,  what  Mr.  Prior 
somewhere  says  of  our  civil  dissensions  in 
this  land  of  liberty, 

A bad  effect,  but  from  a noble  cause. 

1 am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

February  16, 1776. 

my  dear  madam, — It  gave  me  great  com- 
fort to  find,  that  what  I wrote  concerning  the 
divine  character  of  Jesus,  as  God  manifest 


[let.  ii. 

in  the  flesh,  met  with  your  approbation. 
This  doctrine  is,  in  my  view,  the  great  found- 
ation-stone upon  which  all  true  religion  is 
built ; but,  alas ! in  the  present  day,  it  is  the 
stumbling-stone  and  rock  of  offence,  upon 
which  too  many,  fondly  presuming  upon 
their  own  wisdom,  fall  and  are  broken.  I 
am  so  far  from  wondering  that  any  should 
doubt  of  it,  that  I am  firmly  persuaded  none 
can  truly  believe  it,  however  plainly  set 
forth  in  scripture,  unless  it  be  revealed  to 
them  from  heaven,  or,  in  the  apostle's  words, 
that  “ no  one  can  call  Jesus  Christ  Lord,  but 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.”  I believe  there  are 
many  who  think  they  believe  it,  because 
they  have  taken  it  for  granted,  and  never 
attentively  considered  the  difficulties  with 
which  it  is  attended  in  the  eye  of  fallen 
reason.  Judging  by  natural  light,  it  seems 
impossible  to  believe  that  the  title  of  the 
true  God  and  eternal  life  should  properly  be- 
long to  that  despised  man  who  hung  dead 
upon  the  cross,  exposed  to  the  insults  of  his 
cruel  enemies.  I know  nothing  that  can  ob- 
viate the  objections  the  reasoning  mind  is 
ready  to  form  against  it,  but  a real  convic- 
tion of  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  and  the  state  of 
a sinner  as  exposed  to  the  curse  of  the  holy 
law,  and  destitute  of  every  plea  and  hope  in 
himself.  Then  the  necessity  of  a Redeemer, 
and  the  necessity  of  this  Redeemer’s  being 
almighty,  is  seen  and  felt,  with  an  evidence 
which  bears  down  all  opposition ; for  neither 
the  efficacy  of  his  atonement  and  interces- 
sion, nor  his  sufficiency  to  guide,  save,  pro- 
tect, and  feed  those  who  trust  in  him,  can 
be  conceived  of  without  it.  When  the  eyes 
of  the  understanding  are  opened,  the  soul 
made  acquainted  with  and  attentive  to  its 
own  state  and  wants,  he  that  runs  may  read 
this  truth,  not  in  a few  detached  texts  of  a 
dubious  import,  and  liable  to  be  twisted  and 
tortured  by  the  arts  of  criticism,  but  as  inter- 
woven in  the  very  frame  and  texture  of  the 
Bible,  and  written,  as  with  a sun-beam, 
throughout  the  principal  parts  both  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament.  If  Christ  be  the 
shepherd  and  the  husband  of  his  people  under 
the  gospel,  and  if  his  coming  into  the  world 
did  not  abridge  those  who  feared  God  of  the 
privileges  they  were  entitled  to  before  his 
appearance,  it  follows,  by  undeniable  conse- 
quence, “that  he  is  God  over  all,  blessed 
for  ever.”  For  David  tells  us,  that  his  shep- 
herd was  Jehovah  ; and  the  husband  of  the 
Old  Testament  church  was  the  Maker  and 
God  of  the  whole  earth,  the  Holy  One  of  Is- 
rael, whose  name  is  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  Psalm 
xxiii.  1 ; Is.  liv.  8,  with  xlvii.  4.  I agree 
with  you,  madam,  that  among  the  many  at- 
tempts which  have  been  made  to  prove  and 
illustrate  the  scripture  doctrine,  that  the  Fa- 
ther, the  Word,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  arc  one 
God,  there  have  been  many  injudicious,  un- 
warrantable things  advanced,  which  have 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


297 


LET  II.  J 

perplexed,  instead  of  instructing',  and  of 
which  the  enemies  of  the  truth  have  known 
how  to  make  their  advantage.  However, 
there  have  been  tracts  upon  these  sublime 
subjects,  which  have  been  written  with  judg- 
ment and  an  unction,  and,  I believe,  attended 
with  a blessing.  I seem  to  prefer  Mr.  Jones’s 
book  on  the  Trinity  to  any  I have  seen,  be- 
cause he  does  little  more  than  elate  some  of 
the  scripture  evidence  for  it,  and  draws  his 
inferences  briefly  and  plainly ; though  even 
lie  has  admitted  a few  texts,  which  may,  per- 
haps, be  thought  not  quite  full  to  the  point; 
and  he  has  certainly  omitted  several  of  the 
most  express  and  strongest  testimonies.  The 
best  and  happiest  proof  of  all,  that  this  doc- 
trine is  true  in  itself,  and  true  to  us,  is  the 
experience  of  its  effects.  They  who  know 
his  name  will  put  their  trust  in  him : they 
who  are  rightly  impressed  with  his  astonish- 
ing condescension  and  love,  in  emptying 
himself,  and  submitting  to  the  death  of  the 
cross  for  our  sakes,  will  find  themselves  un- 
der a sweet  constraint  to  love  him  again,  and 
will  feel  a little  of  that  emotion  of  heart 
which  the  apostle  expresses  in  that  lively 
passage,  Gal.  vi.  14.  The  knowledge  of* 
Christ  crucified,  like  Ithuriel’s  spear,  re- 
moves the  false  appearance  by  which  we 
have  been  too  long  cheated,  and  shows  us  the 
men  and  the  things,  the  spirit,  customs,  and 
maxims  of  the  world,  in  their  just  light. 
Were  1 perfectly  master  of  myself  and  my 
subject,  I would  never  adduce  any  text  in 
proof  of  a doctrine  or  assertion  from  the  pul- 
pit, which  was  not  direct  and  conclusive; 
because,  if  a text  is  pressed  into  an  argument 
to  which  it  has  no  proper  relation,  it  rather 
encumbers  than  supports  it,  and  raises  a sus- 
picion that  the  cause  is  weak,  and  better 
testimonies  in  its  favour  cannot  be  obtained. 
Some  misapplications  of  this  kind  have  been 
so  long  in  use,  that  they  pass  pretty  current, 
though,  if  brought  to  the  assay,  they  would 
be  found  not  quite  sterling : but  I endeavour 
to  avoid  them  to  the  best  of  my  judgment. 
Thus,  for  instance,  I have  often  heard  (Rom. 
xiv.  23,)  “Whatever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin,” 
quoted  to  prove,  that  without  a principle  of 
saving  faith,  we  can  perform  nothing  accept- 
able to  God : whereas  it  seems  clear  from  the 
context,  that  faith  is  there  used  in  another 
sense,  and  signifies  a firm  persuasion  of  mind 
respecting  the  lawfulness  of  the  action. 
However,  I doubt  not  but  the  proposition  in 
itself  is  strictly  true  in  the  other  sense,  if 
considered  detached  from  the  connexion  in 
which  it  stands ; but  I should  rather  choose 
to  prove  it  from  other  passages,  where  it  is 
directly  affirmed,  as  Heb.  xi.  6 ; Matth.  xii. 
33.  In  such  cases,  I think  hearers  should  be 
careful  not  to  be  prejudiced  against  a doc- 
trine, merely  because  it  is  not  well  sup- 
ported ; for  perhaps  it  is  capable  of  solid  proof, 
though  the  preacher  was  not  so  happy  as  to 


hit  upon  that  which  was  most  suitable ; and 
extempore  preachers  may  sometimes  hope 
for  a little  allowance  upon  this  head  from  the 
more  candid  part  of  their  auditory,  and  not 
be  made  offenders  for  an  inadvertence,  which 
they  cannot  perhaps  always  avoid  in  the 
hurry  of  speaking.  With  respect  to  the  ap- 
plication of  some  passages  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment to  our  Lord  and  Saviour,  I hold  it  safest 
to  keep  close  to  the  specimens  the  apostles 
have  given  us,  and  I would  venture  with 
caution,  if  I go  beyond  their  line ; yet  it  is 
probable  they  have  only  given  us  a specimen; 
and  that  there  are  a great  number  of  pas- 
sages which  have  a direct  reference  to  gos- 
pel-truths, though  we  may  run  some  hazard 
in  making  out  the  allusion.  If  St.  Paul  had 
not  gone  before  me,  I should  have  hesitated 
to  assert,  that  the  prohibition,  “ Thou  shalt 
not  muzzle  the  ox  that  treadeth  out  the  corn,” 
was  given,  not  upon  the  account  of  oxen,  but 
altogether  for  our  sakes : nor  should  I,  with- 
out his  assistance,  have  found  out  that  the 
history  of  Sarah  and  Hagar  was  a designed 
allegory,  to  set  forth  the  difference  between 
the  law  and  gospel  covenants.  Therefore, 
when  I hear  ministers  tracing  some  other 
allusions,  I cannot  be  always  sure  that  they 
push  them  too  far,  though  perhaps  they  are 
not  quite  satisfactory  to  my  judgment ; for  it 
may  be,  they  have  a farther  insight  into  the 
meaning  of  these  places  than  myself  And  I 
think  scriptures  may  be  sometimes  used  to 
advantage,  by  way  of  accommodation,  in  po- 
pular discourses,  and  in  something  of  a dif- 
ferent sense  from  what  they  bear  in  the 
place  where  they  stand,  provided  they  are 
not  alleged  as  proofs,  but  only  to  illustrate 
a truth  already  proved  or  acknowledged. 
Though  Job’s  friends  and  Job  himself  were 
mistaken,  there  are  many  great  truths  in 
their  speeches,  which,  as  such,  may,  I think, 
stand  as  the  foundation  of  a discourse.  Nay, 
I either  have,  or  have  often  intended,  to 
borrow  a truth  even  from  the  mouth  of  Satan, 
“Hast  thou  not  set  a hedge  about  him!” 
Such  a confession  extorted  from  our  grand 
adversary,  placing  the  safety  of  the  Lord’s 
people,  under  his  providential  care,  in  a very 
striking  light. 

I perfectly  agree  with  you,  madam,  that 
our  religious  sensations  and  exercises  are 
much  influenced  and  tinctured  by  natural 
constitution ; and  that,  therefore,  tears  and 
warm  emotions  on  the  one  hand,  or  a com- 
parative dryness  of  spirit  on  the  other,  are 
no  sure  indications  of  the  real  state  of  the 
heart.  Appearances  may  agree  in  different 
persons,  or  vary  in  the  same  person,  from 
causes  merely  natural:  even  a change  of 
weather  may  have  some  influence  in  raising 
or  depressing  the  spirits,  where  the  nerves 
are  very  delicate  ; and  I think  such  persons 
are  more  susceptive  of  impressions  from  the 
agency  of  invisible  powers,  both  good  and 


293 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


evil ; an  agency  which,  though  we  cannot 
explain,  experience  will  not  permit  us  to 
deny.  However,  though  circumstantials  rise 
and  fall,  the  real  difference  between  nature 
and  grace  remains  unalterable.  That  wrork 
of  God  upon  the  heart,  which  is  sometimes 
called  a new  birth,  at  others  a new  creation, 
is  as  distant  from  the  highest  effects  of  na- 
tural principles,  or  the  most  specious  imita- 
tions which  education  or  resolutions  can  pro- 
duce, as  light  is  from  darkness,  or  life  from 
death.  Only  he  who  made  the  world  can 
either  make  a Christian,  or  support  and  carry 
on  his  own  work.  A thirst  after  God  as  our 
portion,  a delight  in  Jesus,  as  the  only  way 
and  door  ; a renunciation  of  self  and  of  the 
world,  so  far  as  it  is  opposite  to  the  spirit  of 
the  gospel ; these,  and  the  like  fruits  of  that 
grace,  which  bringeth  salvation,  are  not  only 
beyond  the  power  of  our  fallen  nature,  but 
contrary  to  its  tendency ; so  that  we  can  have 
no  desires  of  this  kind  till  they  are  given  us 
from  above,  and  can  for  a season  hardly  bear 
to  hear  them  spoken  of,  either  as  excellent 
or  necessary. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

September  17,  1776. 

my  dear  madam, — We  are  much  indebt- 
ed to  you  for  your  kind  thoughts  of  us. 
Hitherto  I feel  no  uneasiness  about  what  is 
before  me ; but  I am  afraid  my  tranquillity 
does  not  wholly  spring  from  trust  in  the 
Lord,  and  submission  to  his  will,  but  that  a 
part  of  it  at  least  is  derived  from  the  assur- 
ances Mr.  VV.  gave  me,  that  the  operation 
would  be  neither  difficult  nor  dangerous.  I 
have  not  much  of  the  hero  in  my  constitu- 
tion : if  in  great  pains  or  sharp  trials  I should 
ever  show  a becoming  fortitude,  it  must  be 
given  me  from  above.  I desire  to  leave  all 
with  him,  in  whose  hands  my  ways  are,  and 
who  has  promised  me  strength  according  to 
my  day. 

I rejoice  that  the  Lord  has  not  only  made 
you  desirous  of  being  useful  to  others  in  their 
spiritual  concerns,  but  has  given  you  in  some 
instances,  to  see  that  your  desires  and  at- 
tempts have  not  been  in  vain.  I shall  thank- 
fully accept  of  the  commission  you  are 
pleased  to  offer  me,  and  take  a pleasure  in 
perusing  any  papers  you  may  think  proper 
to  put  into  my  hands,  and  offer  you  my  sen- 
timents with  that  simplicity  which  I am  per- 
suaded will  be  much  more  agreeable  to  you 
than  compliments.  Though  I know  there 
is  in  general  a delicacy  and  difficulty  in  ser- 
vices of  this  kind,  yet,  with  respect  to  your- 
self, I seem  to  have  nothing  to  fear. 

I have  often  wished  we  had  more  female 
pens  employed  in  the  service  of  the  sanctuary. 
Though  few  ladies  encumber  themselves 


[let.  III. 

with  the  apparatus  of  Latin  or  Greek,  or  en 
gage  in  voluminous  performances,  yet,  in 
the  article  of  essay-writing,  I think  many 
are  qualified  to  succeed  better  than  most 
men,  having  a peculiar  easiness  of  style, 
which  few  of  us  can  imitate.  I remember 
you  once  showed  me  a paper,  together  with 
the  corrections  and  alterations  proposed  by  a 
gentleman  whose  opinion  you  had  asked.  I 
thought  his  corrections  had  injured  it,  and 
given  it  an  air  of  stiffness,  which  is  often 
observable  when  learned  men  write  in  Eng- 
lish. Grammatical  rules,  as  they  are  call- 
ed, are  wholly  derived  from  the  mode  of 
speaking  or  writing  which  obtains  amongst 
those  who  best  undersand  the  language,  for 
the  language  must  be  supposed  established 
before  any  grammar  can  be  made  for  it ; and 
therefore  women,  who,  from  the  course  of 
their  education  and  life,  have  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  reading  the  best-written  books,  and 
conversing  with  those  who  speak  well,  though 
they  do  not  burden  themselves  with  the  for- 
mality of  grammar,  have  often  more  skill  in 
the  English  language  than  the  men  who  can 
call  every  figure  of  speech  by  a Latin  or 
Greek  name.  You  may  be  sure,  madam,  I 
shall  not  wish  your  papers  suppressed,  merely 
because  they  were  not  written  by  a learned 
man.  Language  and  style,  however,  are 
but  the  dress.  Trifles,  however  adorned,  are 
trifles  still.  A person  of  spiritual  discern- 
ment would  rather  be  the  author  of  one  page 
written  in  the  humble  garb  of  Bunyan,  upon 
a serious  subject,  than  to  be  able  to  rival  the 
sprightliness  and  elegance  of  Lady  M.  W. 
Montague,  unless  it  could  be  with  a view  tc 
edification.  The  subjects  you  propose  are 
important ; and,  with  respect  to  sacramental 
meditations,  and  all  devotional  exercises  so- 
called,  I perfectly  agree  with  you,  that  to  be 
affecting  and  useful,  they  must  be  dictated 
rather  by  the  heart  than  by  the  head,  and 
are  most  likely  to  influence  others  when  they 
are  the  fruits  and  transcripts  of  our  own  ex- 
perience. So  far  as  I know,  we  are  but 
scantily  provided  with  specimens  of  this  son 
in  print,  and  therefore  I shall  be  glad  to  see 
an  accession  to  the  public  stock.  Your  other 
thought  of  helps  to  recollection  on  Saturday 
evenings  is,  I think,  an  attempt  in  which 
none  have  been  beforehand  with  you.  So 
that,  according  to  the  general  appearance,  I 
feel  myself  disposed  to  encourage  you  to  do 
as  you  have  purposed.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  I meet  with  any  thing,  on  the  perusal  of 
the  papers,  which  in  my  view  may  seem  to 
need  alteration,  I will  freely  and  faithfully 
point  it  out. 

I can  almost  smile  now,  to  think  you  once 
classed  me  amongst  the  Stoics.  If  I dare 
speak  with  confidence  of  myself  in  any  thing, 
I think  I may  lay  claim  to  a little  of  that  pleas- 
ing, painful  thing,  sensibility.  I need  not 
boast  of  it,  for  it  has  too  often  been  my 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


299 


LET.  IV.] 


snare,  my  sm,  and  my  punishment.  Yet  I 
would  be  thankful  for  a spice  of  it,  as  the 
Lord’s  gift,  and  when  rightly  exercised,  it 
is  valuable ; and  I think  I should  make  but 
an  awkward  minister  without  it,  especially 
here.  Where  there  is  this  sensibility  in 
the  natural  temper,  it  will  give  a tincture 
or  cast  to  our  religious  expression.  Indeed 
I often  find  this  sensibility  weakest  where  it 
should  be  strongest,  and  have  reason  to  re- 
proach myself  that  I am  not  more  affected 
by  the  character,  love,  and  sufferings  of  my 
Lord  and  Saviour,  and  my  own  peculiar  per- 
sonal obligations  to  him.  However,  my 
views  of  religion  have  been  such  for  many 
years,  as  I supposed  more  likely  to  make  me 
be  deemed  an  enthusiast  than  a stoic.  A 
moonlight  head-knowledge  derived  from  a 
system  of  sentiments,  however  true  in  them- 
selves, is  in  my  judgment  a poor  thing ; nor, 
on  the  other  hand,  am  I an  admirer  of  those 
rapturous  sallies,  which  are  more  owing  to  a 
warm  imagination  than  to  a just  perception 
of  the  power  and  importance  of  gospel-truth. 
The  gospel  addresses  both  head  and  heart ; 
and,  where  it  has  its  proper  effect,  where  it 
is  received  as  the  word  of  God,  and  is  clothed 
with  the  authority  and  energy  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  understanding  is  enlightened,  the 
affections  awakened  and  engaged,  the  will 
brought  into  subjection,  and  the  whole  soul 
delivered  to  its  impression,  as  wax  to  the  seal. 
When  this  is  the  case,  when  the  affections  do 
not  take  the  lead,  and  push  forward  with  a 
blind  impulse,  but  arise  from  the  principles  of 
scripture,  and  are  governed  by  them,  the  more 
warmth  the  better.  Yet  in  this  state  of  in- 
firmity nothing  is  perfect,  and  our  natural 
temperament  and  disposition  will  have  more 
influence  upon  our  religious  sensations  than 
we  are  ordinarily  aware.  It  is  well  to  know 
how  to  make  proper  allowances  and  abate- 
ments upon  this  head,  in  the  judgment  we 
form  both  of  ourselves  and  of  others.  Many 
good  people  are  distressed  and  alternately 
elated  by  frames  and  feelings,  which  perhaps 
are  more  constitutional  than  properly  re- 
ligious experiences.  I dare  not  tell  you, 
madam,  what  I am,  but  I can  tell  you  what 
I wish  to  be.  The  love  of  God,  as  manifest- 
ed in  Jesus  Christ,  is  what  I would  wish  to 
be  the  abiding  object  of  my  contemplation ; 
not  merely  to  speculate  upon  it  as  a doctrine, 
but  so  feel  it,  and  my  own  interest  in  it,  as 
to  have  my  heart  filled  with  its  effects,  and 
transformed  into  its  resemblance  ; that  with 
this  glorious  exemplar  in  my  view,  I may  be 
animated  to  a spirit  of  benevolence,  love,  and 
compassion  to  all  around  me;  that  my  love 
may  be  primarily  fixed  upon  him  who  has  so 
loved  me,  and  then,  for  his  sake,  diffused  to 
all  his  children,  and  to  all  his  creatures. 
Then,  knowing  that  much  is  forgiven  to  me, 

I should  be  prompted  to  the  ready  exercise 
forgiveness,  if  I have  aught  against 


any.  Then  I should  be  humble,  patient,  and 
submissive  under  all  his  dispensations,  meek, 
gentle,  forbearing,  and  kind  to  my  fellow- 
worms.  Then  I should  be  active  and  dili- 
gent in  improving  all  my  talents  and  powers 
in  his  service,  and  for  his  glory,  and  live  not 
to  myself,  but  to  him  who  loved  me,  and  gave 
himself  for  me. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

November  29,  1776. 

my  dear  madam, — I am  persuaded  you 
need  not  to  be  told,  that  though  there  are  per- 
haps supposable  extremities,  in  which  self 
would  prevail  over  all  considerations,  yet  in 
general  it  is  more  easy  to  suffer  in  our  own 
persons  than  in  the  persons  of  those  whom 
we  dearly  love ; for  through  such  a medium 
our  apprehensions  possibly  receive  the  idea 
of  the  trouble  enlarged  beyond  its  just  di- 
mensions, and  it  would  sit  lighter  upon  us  if 
it  were  properly  our  own  case,  for  then  we 
should  feel  it  all,  and  there  would  be  no  room 
for  imagination  to  exaggerate. 

But  though  I feel  grief,  I trust  the  I.ord 
has  mercifully  preserved  me  from  impatience 
and  murmuring,  and  that,  in  the  midst  of 
all  the  pleadings  of  flesh  and  blood,  there  is 
a something  within  me  that  aims  to  say,  with- 
out reserve  or  exception,  “ Not  my  will,  but 
thine  be  done.” 

It  is  a comfortable  consideration,  that  he 
with  whom  we  have  to  do,  our  great  High- 
priest,  who  once  put  away  our  sins  by  the 
sacrifice  of  himself,  and  now’  for  ever  appears 
in  the  presence  of  God  for  us,  is  not  only 
possessed  of  sovereign  authority  and  infinite 
power,  but  wears  our  very  nature,  and  feels 
and  exercises  in  the  highest  degree  those 
tendernesses  and  commiserations  which  I 
conceive  are  essential  to  humanity  in  its  per- 
fect state.  The  whole  history  of  his  wonder- 
ful life  is  full  of  inimitable  instances  of  this 
kind.  His  bowels  were  moved  before  his 
arm  was  exerted : he  condescended  to  mingle 
tears  with  mourners,  and  wept  over  dis- 
tresses which  he  intended  to  relieve.  He  is 
still  the  same  in  his  exalted  state : compas- 
sions dwell  within  his  heart.  In  a way  in- 
conceivable to  us,  but  consistent  w7ith  his 
supreme  dignity  and  perfection  of  happiness 
and  glory,  he  still  feels  for  his  people.  When 
Saul  persecuted  the  members  upon  earth, 
the  Head  complained  from  heaven ; and 
sooner  shall  the  most  tender  mother  sit  in- 
sensible and  inattentive  to  the  cries  and 
W'ants  of  her  infant,  than  the  Lord  Jesus  be 
an  unconcerned  spectator  of  his  suffering 
children.  No ! with  the  eye,  and  the  ear, 
and  the  heart  of  a friend,  he  attends  to  their 
sorrows;  he  counts  their  sighs,  puts  their 
tears  in  his  bottle ; and,  when  our  spirits,  are 


300 


LETTERS  TO 

overwhelmed  within  us,  he  knows  our  path, 
and  adjusts  the  time,  the  measure  of  our 
trials,  and  every  thing  that  is  necessary  for 
our  present  support  and  seasonable  deliver- 
ance, with  the  same  unerring  wisdom  and 
accuracy  as  he  weighed  the  mountains  in 
scales,  and  hills  in  a balance,  and  meted  out 
the  heavens  with  a span.  Still  more,  besides 
his  benevolent,  he  has  an  experimental  sym- 
pathy. He  knows  our  sorrows,  not  merely 
as  he  knows  all  things,  but  as  one  who  has 
been  in  our  situation,  and  who  though  with- 
out sin  himself,  endured,  when  upon  earth, 
inexpressibly  more  for  us  than  he  will  ever 
lay  upon  us.  He  has  sanctified  poverty, 
pain,  disgrace,  temptation,  and  death,  by  pass- 
ing through  these  states;  and,  in  whatever 
states  his  people  are,  they  may  by  faith  have 
fellowship  with  him  in  their  sufferings,  and 
he  will,  by  sympathy  and  love,  have  fellow- 
ship and  interest  with  them  in  theirs.  What, 
then,  shall  we  fear,  or  of  what  shall  we  com- 
plain, when  all  our  concerns  are  written 
upon  his  heart,  and  their  management,  to 
the  very  hairs  of  our  head,  are  under  his  care 
and  providence ; when  he  pities  us  more  than 
we  can  do  ourselves,  and  has  engaged  his  al- 
mighty power  to  sustain  and  relieve  us. 
However,  as  he  is  tender,  he  is  wise  also ; 
he  loves  us,  but  especially  with  regard  to 
our  best  interests.  If  there  were  not  some- 
thing in  our  hearts  and  our  situation  that 
required  discipline  and  medicine,  he  so  de- 
lights in  our  prosperity  that  we  should  never 
be  in  heaviness.  The  innumerable  comforts 
and  mercies  with  which  he  enriches  even 
those  we  call  our  darker  days,  are  sufficient 
proofs  that  he  does  not  willingly  grieve  us ; 
but  when  he  sees  a need-be  for  chastisement, 
he  will  not  withhold  it  because  he  loves  us ; 
on  the  contrary,  that  is  the  very  reason  why 
he  afflicts.  He  will  put  his  silver  into  the 
fire  to  purify  it ; but  he  sits  by  the  furnace 
as  a refiner,  to  direct  the  process,  and  to  se- 
cure the  end  he  has  in  view,  that  we  may 
neither  suffer  too  much,  nor  suffer  in  vain. — 

I am,  &c. 


LETTER  V. 

December  — 1776. 

my  dear  madam, — I have  often  preached 
to  others  of  the  benefit  of  affliction,  but  my 
own  path  for  many  years  has  been  so  smooth, 
and  my  trials,  though  I have  not  been  without 
trials  comparatively  so  light  and  few,  that  I 
nave  seemed  to  myself  to  speak  by  rote  upon 
a subject  of  which  I had  not  a proper  feeling. 
Yet  the  many  exercises  of  my  poor  afflicted 
people,  and  the  sympathy  the  Lord  has  given 
me  with  them  in  their  troubles,  has  made 
this  a frequent  and  favourite  topic  of  my 
ministry  among  them.  The  advantages  of 


MRS.  [let.  v. 

afflictions,  when  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  employ 
them  for  the  good  of  his  people,  are  many 
and  great.  Permit  me  to  mention  a few  of 
them,  and  the  Lord  grant  that  we  may  all 
find  those  blessed  ends  answered  to  ourselves, 
by  the  trials  he  is  pleased  to  appoint  us. 

Afflictions  quicken  us  to  prayer.  It  is  a 
pity  it  should  be  so.  Experience,  however, 
testifies  that  a long  course  of  ease  and  pros- 
perity, without  painful  changes,  has  an  un- 
happy tendency  to  make  us  cold  and  formal 
in  our  secret  worship,  but  troubles  rouse  our 
spirits,  and  constrain  us  to  call  upon  the 
Lord  in  good  earnest,  when  we  feel  a need  of 
that  help  which  we  only  can  have  from  him. 

They  are  useful,  and  in  a degree  neces- 
sary, to  keep  alive  in  us  a conviction  of  the 
vanity  and  unsatisfying  nature  of  the  present 
world  and  all  its  enjoyments,  to  remind  us 
that  this  is  not  our  rest,  and  to  call  our 
thoughts  upwards,  where  our  true  treasure 
is,  and  where  our  conversation  ought  to  be. 
When  things  go  on  much  to  our  wish,  our 
hearts  are  too  prone  to  say,  “ It  is  good  to  be 
here.”  It  is  probable,  that  had  Moses,  when 
he  came  to  invite  Israel  to  Canaan  found  them 
in  prosperity,  as  in  the  days  of  Joseph,  they 
would  have  been  very  unwilling  to  remove ; 
but  the  afflictions  they  were  previously 
brought  into  made  his  message  welcome. 
Thus  the  Lord,  by  pain,  sickness,  and  disap- 
pointments, by  breaking  our  cisterns,  and 
withering  our  gourds,  weakens  our  attach- 
ment to  this  worfe,  and  makes  the  thought 
of  quitting  it  more  familiar  and  more  de- 
sirable. 

A child  of  God  cannot  but  greatly  desire 
a more  enlarged  and  experimental  acquaint- 
ance with  his  holy  word,  and  this  attainment 
is  greatly  promoted  by  our  trials.  The  far 
greater  part  of  the  promises  in  scripture  are 
made  and  suited  to  a state  of  affliction ; and 
though  w'e  may  believe  they  are  true,  we 
cannot  so  well  know  their  sweetness,  power, 
and  suitableness,  unless  we  ourselves  are  in 
a state  to  which  they  refer.  The  Lord  says, 
“ Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  I 
will  deliver.”  Now  till  the  day  of  trouble 
comes,  such  a promise  is  like  a city  of  refuge 
to  an  Israelite,  who,  not  having  slain  a man, 
was  in  no  danger  of  the  avenger  of  blood. 
He  had  a privilege  near  him,  of  which  he 
knew  not  the  use  and  value,  because  he  was 
not  in  the  case  for  which  it  was  provided. 
But  some  can  say,  I not  only  believe  this 
promise  upon  the  authority  of  the  speaker, 
but  I can  set  my  seal  to  it ; I have  been  in 
trouble ; I took  this  course  for  relief,  and  I 
was  not  disappointed.  The  Lord  verily 
heard  and  delivered  me.  Thus  afflictions 
likewise  give  occasion  of  our  knowing  and 
noticing  more  of  the  Lord’s  wisdom,  power, 
and  goodness,  in  supporting  and  relieving, 
than  we  should  otherwise,  have  known. 

I have  not  time  to  take  another  sheet,  and 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


301 


LET.  tl. 


must  therefore  contract  my  homily.  Afflic- 
tions evidence  to  ourselves,  and  manifest  to 
others,  the  reality  of  grace.  And  when  we 
suffer  as  Christians,  exercise  some  measure  of 
that  patience  and  submission,  and  receive 
some  measure  of  these  supports  and  supplies 
which  the  gospel  requires  and  promises  to 
believers,  we  are  more  confirmed  that  \vc 
have  not  taken  up  with  mere  notions;  and 
others  may  be  convinced,  that  we  do  not 
follow  cunningly  devised  fables.  They  like- 
wise strengthen  by  exercise  our  graces.  As 
our  limbs  and  natural  powers  would  be  fee- 
ble if  not  called  to  daily  exertion ; so  the 
graces  of  the  Spirit  would  languish,  unless 
something  was  provided  to  draw  them  out  to 
use.  And,  to  say  no  more,  they  are  honour- 
able as  they  advance  our  conformity  to  Jesus 
our  Lord,  who  was  a man  of  sorrows  for  our 
sakes.  Methinks,  if  we  might  go  to  heaven 
without  suffering,  we  should  be  unwilling  to 
desire  it.  Why  should  we  ever  wish  to  go 
by  any  other  path  than  that  which  he  has 
consecrated  and  endeared  by  his  own  exam- 
ple '!  especially  as  his  people’s  sufferings  are 
not  penal ; there  is  no  wrath  in  them ; the 
cup  he  puts  in  their  hands  is  very  different 
from  that  w'hich  he  drank  for  their  sakes,  and 
is  only  medicinal  to  promote  their  chief  good. 
Here  I must  stop;  but  the  subject  is  fruitful, 
and  might  be  pursued  through  a quire  of  pa- 
per.— 1 am,  &c. 


LETTER  VI. 

August  — 1778. 

my  dear  madam, — Your  obliging  favour 

of  the  22d  from  B , which  I received  last 

night,  demands  an  immediate  acknowledg- 
ment. Many  things  which  would  have  of- 
fered by  way  of  answer,  must  for  the  present 
be  postponed ; for  the  same  post  brought  an 
information  which  turns  my  thoughts  to  one 
subject.  What  shall  I say  1 Topics  of  con- 
solation are  at  hand  in  abundance;  they  are 
familiar  to  your  mind ; and  were  I to  fill  the 
sheet  with  them  I could  suggest  nothing  but 
what  you  already  know.  Then  are  they 
consolatory  indeed,  when  the  Lord  himself 
is  pleased  to  apply  them  to  the  heart.  This  he 
has  promised,  and  therefore,  we  are  encou- 
raged to  expect  it.  This  is  my  prayer  for 
you : I sincerely  sympathize  with  you ; I 
cannot  comfort  you ; but  he  can ; and  I trust 
he  will.  How  impertinent  would  it  be  to 
advise  you  to  forget  or  suspend  the  feelings 
Which  such  a stroke  must  excite ! Who  can 
help  feeling ! nor  is  sensibility  in  itself  sinfa'i. 
Christian  resignation  is  very  different  from 
that  stoical  stubbornness,  which  is  most  easily 
practised  by  those  unamiable  characters  whose 
regards  centre  wholly  in  self;  nor  could  we 
in  a proper  manner  exercise  submission  to  the 


will  of  God  under  our  trials,  if  we  did  not  feel 
them.  He  who  knows  our  frame  is  pleased 
to  allow,  that  afflictions  for  the  present  are  not 
joyous,  but  grievous.  But  to  them  that  fear 
him  he  is  near  at  hand,  to  support  their  spirts, 
to  moderate  their  grief,  and  in  the  issue  to 
sanctify  it;  so  that  they  shall  come  out  of  the 
furnace  refined,  more  humble,  and  more  spi- 
ritual. There  is,  however,  a part  assigned 
us;  we  are  to  pray  for  the  help  in  need  ; and 
we  are  not  wilfully  to  give  way  to  the  im- 
pression of  overwhelming  sorrow.  We  are 
to  endeavour  to  turn  our  thoughts  to  such 
considerations  as  are  suited  to  alleviate  it; 
our  deserts  as  sinners,  the  many  mercies  we 
are  still  indulged  with,  the  still  greater 
afflictions  which  many  of  our  fellow-creatures 
endure,  and  above  all,  the  sufferings  of  Jesus, 
that  man  of  sorrows,  who  made  himself  inti- 
mately acquainted  with  grief  for  our  sakes. 

When  the  will  of  the  Lord  is  manifested 
to  us  by  the  event,  we  are  to  look  to  him  for 
grace  and  strength,  and  to  be  still  and  know 
that  he  is  God,  that  he  has  a right  to  dispose 
of  us  and  ours  as  he  pleases,  and  that  in  the 
exercise  of  this  right  he  is  most  certainly  good 
and  wise.  We  often  complain  of  losses;  but 
the  expression  is  rather  improper.  Strictly 
speaking,  we  can  lose  nothing,  because  we 
have  no  real  property  in  any  thing.  Our 
earthly  comforts  are  lent  us,  and  when  recall- 
ed, we  ought  to  return  and  resign  them  with 
thankfulness  to  him  who  has  let  them  re- 
main so  long  in  our  hands.  But,  as  I said 
above,  I do  not  mean  to  enlarge  in  this  strain; 
I hope  the  Lord,  the  only  Comforter  will 
bring  such  thoughts  with  wrarmth  and  efficacy 
upon  your  mind.  Your  wound,  while  fresh, 
is  painful ; but  faith,  prayer,  and  time  will, 
I trust,  gradually  render  it  tolerable.  There 
is  something  fascinating  in  grief : painful  as 
it  is,  we  are  prone  to  indulge  it,  and  to  brood 
over  the  thoughts  and  circumstances  which 
are  suited  (like  fuel  to  fire)  to  heighten  and 
prolong  it.  When  the  Lord  afflicts,  it  is  his 
design  that  we  should  grieve ; but  in  this,  as 
in  all  other  things  there  is  a certain  modera- 
tion which  becomes  a Christian,  and  which 
only  grace  can  teach  ; and  grace  teaches  us, 
not  by  books  or  by  hearsay,  but  by  experi- 
mental lessons:  ail  beyond  this  should  be 
avoided  and  guarded  against  as  sinful  and 
hurtful.  Grief,  when  indulged  and  excessive, 
preys  upon  the  spirits,  injures  health,  indis- 
poses us  for  duty,  and  causes  us  to  shed  tears 
which  deserve  more  tears.  This  is  a weep- 
ing world.  Sin  has  filled  it  with  thorns  and 
briars,  with  crosses  and  calamities.  It  is  a 
great  hospital,  resounding  with  groans  in 
every  quarter.  It  is  as  a field  of  battle, 
where  many  are  falling  around  us  continual- 
ly ; and  it  is  more  wonderful  that  we  escape 
so  well,  than  that  we  are  sometimes  wounded. 
We  must  have  some  share ; it  is  the  unavoid- 
able lot  of  our  nat  ure  and  state.  It  is  like- 


302 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


wise  needful  in  point  of  discipline : the  Lord 
will  certainly  chasten  those  whom  he  loves, 
though  others  may  seem  to  pass  for  a time 
~vit.h  impunity.  That  is  a sweet,  instructive, 
t.nd  important  passage,  Heb.  xii.  5.  11.  It 
is  so  plain,  that  it  needs  no  comment;  so  full 
*hat  a comment  would  but  weaken  it.  May 
vhe  Lord  inscribe  it  upon  your  heart,  my  dear 
i . adam,  and  upon  mine. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VII. 

November  — 1778. 

my  dear  madam, — Your  obliging  favour 
raised  in  me  a variety  of  emotions  when  I 
first  received  it,  and  has  revived  them  this 
morning  while  perusing  it  again.  I have 
mourned  and  rejoiced  with  you,  and  felt 
pain  and  pleasure  in  succession,  as  you  di- 
versified the  subject.  However,  the  weight 
of  your  grief  I was  willing  to  consider  as  a 
thing  that  is  past ; and  the  thought  that  you 
had  been  mercifully  supported  under  it,  and 
brought  through  it,  that  you  were  restored 
home  in  safety,  and  that  the  time  of  writing 
you  were  tolerably  well  and  composed,  made 
joy  upon  the  whole  preponderate , and  I am 
more  disposed  to  congratulate  you,  and  join 
you  in  praising  the  Lord  for  the  mercies  you 
enumerate,  than  to  prolong  my  condolence 
upon  the  mournful  parts  of  your  letter.  Re- 
peated trying  occasions  have  made  me  well 
acquainted  with  the  anxious  inquiries  with 
which  the  busy  poring  mind  is  apt  to  pursue 
departed  friends.  It  can  hardly  be  other- 
wise under  some  circumstances.  I have 
found  prayer  the  best  relief.  I have  thought 
it  very  allowable  to  avail  myself  to  the  ut- 
most of  every  favourable  consideration ; but 
I have  had  the  most  comfort,  when  I have 
been  enabled  to  resign  the  whole  concern 
into  his  hands,  whose  thoughts  and  ways, 
whose  power  and  goodness,  are  infinitely  su- 
perior to  our  conceptions.  I consider,  in 
such  cases,  that  the  great  Redeemer  can 
save  to  the  uttermost,  and  the  great  teacher 
can  communicate  light,  and  impress  truth, 
when  and  how  he  pleases.  I trust  the  power 
of  his  grace  and  compassion  will  hereafter 
triumphantly  appear,  in  many  instances,  of 
persons,  who,  on  their  dying  beds,  and  in 
their  last  moments,  have  been,  by  his  mercy, 
constrained  to  feel  the  importance  and  reality 
of  truths,  which  they  did  not  properly  under- 
stand and  attend  to  in  the  hour  of  health  and 
prosperity.  Such  a salutary  change  I have 
frequently,  or  at  least  more  than  once,  twice 
or  thrice,  been  an  eye-witness  to,  accompa- 
nied with  such  evidence  as,  I think,  has  been 
quite  satisfactory.  And  who  can  say  such  a 
change  may  not  often  take  place,  when  the 
person  who  is  the  subject  of  it  is  too  much 
enfeebled  to  give  an  account  to  by-standers 


[let.  vii. 

of  what  is  transacting  in  his  mind  ! Thus  1 
have  encouraged  my  hope.  But  the  best 
satisfaction  of  all,  is  to  be  duly  impressed 
with  the  voice  that  says,  “ Be  still,  and  know 
that  I am  God.”  These  words  direct  us, 
not  only  to  his  sovereignty,  his  undoubted 
right  to  do  what  he  will  with  his  own,  but  to 
all  his  adorable  and  amiable  perfections,  by 
which  he  has  manifested  himself  to  us  in  the 
Son  of  his  love. 

As  I am  not  a Sadducee ; the  account  you 
give  of  the  music  which  entertained  you  on 
the  road  does  not  put  my  dependence  either 
upon  your  veracity  or  your  judgment  to  any 
trial.  We  live  upon  the  confines  of  the  in- 
visible world,  or  rather  perhaps  in  the  midst 
of  it.  That  unseen  agents  have  a power  of 
operating  upon  our  minds,  at  least  upon  that 
mysterious  faculty  we  call  the  imagination, 
is  with  me  not  merely  a point  of  opinion,  or 
even  of  faith,  but  of  experience.  That  evil 
spirits,  can,  when  permitted,  disturb,  distress, 
and  defile  us,  I know,  as  well  as  I know  that 
the  fire  can  burn  me.  And  though  their  in- 
terposition is  perhaps  more  easily  and  cer- 
tainly distinguishable,  yet,  from  analogy,  I con- 
clude that  good  spirits  are  equally  willing,  and 
equally  able,  to  employ  their  kind  offices  for 
our  relief  and  comfort.  I have  formed  in 
my  mind  a kind  of  system  upon  this  subject, 
which  for  the  most  part  I keep  pretty  much 
to  myself ; but  I can  entrust  my  thoughts  to 
you  as  they  occasionally  offer.  I apprehend 
that  some  persons  (those  particularly  who 
rank  under  the  class  of  nervous)  are  more 
open  and  accessible  to  these  impressions  than 
others,  and  probably  the  same  person  more 
so  at  some  times  than  others.  And  though 
we  frequently  distinguish  between  imaginary 
and  real  (which  is  one  reason  why  nervous 
people  are  so  seldom  pitied,)  yet  an  impres- 
sion upon  the  imagination  may,  as  to  the 
agent  that  produces  it,  and  to  the  person  that 
receives  it,  be  as  much  a reality  as  any  of 
the  sensible  objects  around  him ; though  a 
by-stander,  not  being  able  to  share  in  the 
perception,  may  account  it  a mere  whim,  and 
suppose  it  might  be  avoided  or  removed  by 
an  act  of  the  will.  Nor  have  any  a right  to 
withhold  their  assent  to  what  the  scriptures 
teach,  and  many  sober  persons  declare,  of 
this  invisible  agency,  merely  because  we 
cannot  answer  the  questions,  How  1 or  Why  1 
The  thing  may  be  certain,  though  we  can- 
not easily  explain  it ; and  there  may  be  just 
and  important  reasons  for  it,  though  we 
should  not  be  able  to  assign  them.  If  what 
you  heard,  or  which,  in  my  view,  is  much 
the  same,  what  you  thought  you  heard,  had  a 
tendency  to  compose  your  spirit,  and  to  encou  • 
rage  your  application  to  the  Lord  for  help,  at 
the  time  when  you  were  about  to  stand  in 
need  of  especial  assistance,  then  there  is  a 
sufficient  and  suitable  reason  assigned  for  it 
at  once,  without  looking  any  farther.  It 


303 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


LET  TH.] 

would  be  dangerous  to  make  impressions 
a rule  of  duty ; but  if  they  strengthen  us, 
and  assist  us  in  the  performance  of  what  we 
know  to  be  our  duty,  we  may  be  thankful  for 
them. 

You  have  taken  leave  of  your  favourite 
trees,  and  the  scenes  of  your  younger  life, 
but  a few  years  sooner  than  you  must  have 
done,  if  the  late  dispensation  had  not  taken 
place.  All  must  be  left  soon ; for  all  below 
is  polluted,  and,  in  its  best  state,  is  too  scanty 
to  afford  us  happiness.  If  we  are  believers 
in  Jesus,  all  we  can  quit  is  a mere  nothing, 


compared  with  what  we  shall  obtain.  To  ex- 
change a dungeon  for  a palace,  earth  for  hea- 
ven, will  call  for  no  self-denial  when  we  stand 
upon  the  threshold  of  eternity,  and  shall  have 
a clearer  view  than  we  have  now  of  the  va- 
nity of  what  is  passing  from  us,  and  the  glory 
of  what  is  before  us.  The  partial  changes  we 
meet  with  in  our  way  through  life  are  de- 
signed to  remind  us  of,  and  prepare  us  for, 
the  great  change  which  awaits  us  at  the  end 
of  it.  The  Lord  grant  that  we  may  find 
mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  solemn  hour. — -I 
am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO  MRS.  T 


LETTER  I. 

March  12,  1774. 

my  dear  madam, — My  heart  is  full,  yet  I j 
must  restrain  it.  Many  thoughts  which  j 
crowd  my  mind,  and  would  have  vent,  were  | 
I writing  to  another  person,  would  to  you  be 
unseasonable.  I write,  not  to  remind  you  of 
what  you  have  lost,  but  of  wThat  you  have, 
which  you  cannot  lose.  May  the  Lord  put 
a word  into  my  heart  that  may  be  acceptable,  j 
and  may  his  good  Spirit  accompany  the  pe- ! 
rusal,  and  enable  you  to  say,  with  the  apos- 1 
tie,  that  as  sufferings  abound,  consolations 
also  abound  by  Jesus  Christ.  Indeed,  I can 
sympathize  with  you.  I remember,  too,  the  j 
delicacy  of  your  frame,  and  the  tenderness 
of  your  natural  spirits;  so  that,  were  you  not 
interested  in  the  exceeding  great  and  preci- 
ous promises  of  the  gospel,  I should  be  ready 
to  fear  you  must  sink  under  your  trial.  But 
I have  some  faint  conceptions  of  the  all-suffi- 
ciency and  faithfulness  of  the  Lord,  and  may 
address  you  in  the  king’s  words  to  Daniel, 

“ Thy  God,  whom  thou  servest  continually, 
he  will  deliver  thee.”  Motives  for  resigna- 
tion to  his  will  abound  in  his  word ; but  it  is 
an  additional  and  crowning  mercy,  that  he 
has  promised  to  apply  and  enforce  them  in 
time  of  need.  He  has  said,  “ My  grace  shall  { 
be  sufficient  for  thee  and  “ as  thy  day  is,  i 
so  shall  thy  strength  be.”  This,  I trust  you  j 
have  already  experienced.  The  Lord  is  so  j 
rich  and  so  good,  that  he  can,  by  a glance  of  | 
thought,  compensate  his  children  for  what-  j 
ever  his  wisdoin  sees  fit  to  deprive  them  of.  | 
It  he  gives  them  a lively  sense  of  what  he  j 
has  delivered  them  from,  and  prepared  for' 
them,  or  of  what  he  himself  submitted  to  en- 
dure for  their  sakes,  they  find  at  once  light 
springing  up  out  of  darkness,  hard  things  be- 
come easy,  and  bitter  sweet.  I remember  ! 
to  have  read  of  a good  man  in  the  last  con- 1 
tury  (probably  you  may  have  m°t  with  the  I 
story,)  who  when  his  beloved  and  only  son  I 
lay  ill,  was  for  some  time  greatly  anxious 
about  the  event.  One  morning  he  staid 
longer  than  usual  in  his  closet;  while  he 
was  there,  his  son  died.  When  he  came  out, 
his  family  were  afraid  to  tell  him,  but,  like 


David,  he  perceived  it  by  their  looks,  and 
when,  upon  inquiry,  they  said  it  was  so,  he 
received  the  news  with  a composure  that 
surprised  them.  But  he  soon  explained  the 
reason,'  by  telling  them,  that  for  such  dis- 
coveries of  the  Lord’s  goodness  as  he  had 
been  favoured  with  that  morning,  he  could 
be  content  to  lose  a son  every  day.  Yes, 
madam,  though  every  stream  must  fail,  the 
fountain  is  still  lull,  and  still  flowing.  All 
the  comfort  you  ever  received  in  your  dear 
friend  was  from  the  Lord,  who  is  abundantly 
able  to  comfort  you  still ; and  he  is  gone  but 
a little  before  you.  May  your  faith  antici- 
pate the  joyful  and  glorious  meeting  you 
will  shortly  have  in  a better  world.  Then 
your  worship  and  converse  together  will  be 
to  unspeakable  advantage,  without  imperfec- 
tion, interruption,  abatement,  or  end.  Then 
all  tears  shall  be  wiped  away,  and  every 
cloud  removed ; and  then  you  will  see,  that 
all  your  concernments  here  below  (the  late 
afflicting  dispensation  not  excepted,)  were 
appointed  and  adjusted  by  infinite  wisdom 
and  infinite  love. 

The  Lord,  who  knows  our  frame,  does  not 
expect  or  require  that  we  should  aim  at  a 
stoical  indifference  under  his  visitations.  He 
allows,  that  afflictions  are  at  present  not  joy- 
ous, but  grievous;  vea,  he  was  pleased,  when 
upon  earth,  to  weep  with  his  mourning 
friends  when  Lazarus  died.  But  he  has 
graciously  provided  for  the  prevention  of  that 
anguish  and  bitterness  of  sorrow,  which  is, 
upon  such  occasions,  the  portion  of  such  as 
live  without  God  in  the  world ; and  has  en- 
gaged that  all  shall  work  together  for  good, 
and  yield  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness. May  he  bless  you  with  a sweet  se- 
renity of  spirit,  and  a cheerful  hope  of  the 
glory  that  shall  shortly  be  revealed. 

I intimated  that  I would  not  trouble  you 
with  my  own  sense  and  share  of  this  loss. 
If  you  remember  the  great  kindness  I always 

received  from  Mr.  T and  yourself,  as 

often  as  opportunity  afforded,  and  if  you  will 
believe  me  possessed  of  any  sensibility  or 
gratitude,  you  will  conclude  that  my  concern 
is  not  small.  I feel  likewise  for  the  public. 
Will  it  be  a consolation  to  you,  madam,  to 


LETTERS  TO  MRS.  T 


305 


LET.  ir.] 

know  that  you  do  not  mourn  alone  1 A cha- 
racter so  exemplary  as  a friend,  a counsellor, 
a Christian,  and  a minister,  will  be  long-  and 
deeply  regretted ; and  many  will  join  with 
me  in  praying,  that  you,  who  are  most  nearly 
interested,  may  be  signally  supported,  and 
feel  the  propriety  of  Mrs.  Rowe’s  acknow- 
ledgment, 

Thou  dost  but  take  the  dying  lamp  away, 

To  bless  me  with  thine  own  unclouded  day. 

We  join  in  most  affectionate  respects  and 
condolence.  May  the  Lord  bless  you  and 
keep  you,  lift  up  the  light  of  his  countenance 
upon  you,  and  give  you  peace. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

April  3,  1775. 

my  dear  madam, — I have  long  and  often 

fmrposed  waiting  upon  you  with  a second 
etter,  though  one  thing  or  other  still  caused 
delay ; for  though  I could  not  but  wish  to 
hear  from  you,  I was  tar  from  making  that  a 
condition  of  my  writing.  If  you  have  leisure 
and  spirits  to  favour  me  with  a line  now  and 
then,  it  will  give  us  much  pleasure;  but  if 
not,  it  will  be  a sufficient  inducement  with 
me  to  write,  to  know  that  you  give  me 
liberty,  and  that  you  will  receive  my  letters 
in  good  part.  At  the  same  time,  I must  add, 
that  my  various  engagements  will  not  permit 
me  to  break  in  upon  you  so  often  as  my 
sincere  affection  would  otherwise  prompt  me 
to  do. 

I heartily  thank  you  for  yours,  and  hope 
my  soul  desires  to  praise  the  Lord  on  your 
behalf.  I am  persuaded  that  his  goodness  to 
you,  in  supporting  you  under  a trial  so  sharp 
in  itself,  and  in  the  circumstances  that  at- 
tended it,  has  been  an  encouragement  and 
comfort  to  many.  It  is  in  such  apparently 
severe  times  that  the  all-sufficiency  and  faith- 
fulness of  the  Lord,  and  the  power  and  pro- 
per effects  of  his  precious  gospel,  are  most 
eminently  displayed.  I would  hope,  and  I 
do  believe,  that  the  knowledge  of  your  case 
has  animated  some  of  the  Lord’s  people 
against  those  anxious  fears,  which  they  some- 
times feel  when  they  look  upon  their  earthly 
comforts  with  too  careful  an  eye,  and  their 
hearts  are  ready  to  sink  at  the  thought. 
What  should  I do,  and  how  should  I behave, 
were  the  Lord  pleased  to  take  away  my  de- 
sire with  a stroke  1 But  we  see  he  can  sup- 
ply their  absence,  and  afford  us  superior 
comforts  without  them.  The  gospel  reveals 
one  thing  needful,  the  pearl  of  great  price ; 
and  supposes  that  they  who  possess  this  are 
provided  for  against  all  events,  and  have 
ground  of  unshaken  hope,  and  a source  of 
never-failing  consolation  under  every  change 
they  can  meet  with  during  their  pilgrimage 
*tate.  When  his  people  are  enabled  to  set 


their  seal  to  this,  not  only  in  theory,  when 
all  things  go  smooth,  but  practically,  when 
called  upon  to  pass  through  the  fire  and 
water,  then  his  grace  is  glorified  in  them 
and  by  them : then  it  appears  botn  to  them- 
selves and  to  others,  that  they  have  neither 
followed  cunningly  devised  fables,  nor  amused 
themselves  with  empty  notions;  then  they 
know  in  themselves,  and  it  is  evidenced  to 
others,  that  God  is  with  them  of  a truth.  In 
this  view  a believer,  when  in  some  good 
measure  divested  from  that  narrow  selfish 
disposition  which  cleaves  so  close  to  us  by 
nature,  will  not  only  submit  to  trials,  but 
rejoice  in  them,  notwithstanding  the  feelings 
and  reluctance  of  the  flesh.  For  if  I am 
redeemed  from  misery  by  the  blood  of  Jesus, 
and  if  he  is  now  preparing  me  a mansion 
near  himself,  that  I may  drink  of  the  rivers 
of  pleasure  at  his  right  hand  for  evermore, 
the  question  is  not  (at  least  ought  not  to  be,) 
How  may  I pass  through  life  with  the  least 
inconvenience  1 but,  How  may  my  little  span 
of  life  be  made  most  subservient  to  the  praise 
and  glory  of  him  who  loved  me,  and  gave 
himself  for  me!  Where  the  Lord  gives  this 
desire,  he  will  gratify  it ; and  as  afflictions 
for  the  most  part  afford  the  fairest  opportuni- 
ties of  this  kind,  therefore  it  is,  that  those 
whom  lie  is  pleased  eminently  to  honour  are 
usually  called,  at  one  time  or  another,  to  the 
heaviest  trials ; not  because  he  loves  to  grieve 
them,  but  because  he  hears  their  prayers,  and 
accepts  their  desires  of  doing  him  service  in 
the  world.  The  post  of  honour  in  wars  is 
so  called  because  attended  with  difficulties 
and  dangers  which  but  few  are  supposed 
equal  to ; yet  generals  usually  allot  these 
hard  services  to  their  favourites  and  friends, 
who,  on  their  parts,  eagerly  accept  them  as 
tokens  of  favour  and  marks  of  confidence. 
Should  we,  therefore,  not  account  it  an  ho- 
nour and  a privilege,  when  the  Captain  of 
our  salvation  assigns  us  a difficult  post ! since 
he  can  and  does  (which  no  earthly  com- 
mander can)  inspire  his  soldiers  with  wisdom, 
courage,  and  strength,  suitable  to  their  situa- 
tion, 2 Cor.  xii.  9, 10.  I atn  acquainted  with 
a few  who  have  been  led  thus  into  the  fore- 
front of  the  battle : they  suffered  much ; but 
I have  never  heard  them  say  they  suffered 
too  much ; for  the  Lord  stood  by  them  and 
strengthened  them.  Go  on,  my  dear  madam ; 
yet  a little  while,  Jesus  will  wipe  away  all 
tears  from  your  eyes;  you  will  see  your 
beloved  friend  again,  and  he  and  you  will 
rejoice  together  for  ever. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

October  24,  1775. 

my  dear  madam, — The  manner  in  which 
you  mention  Omicron’s  letters,  I hope,  wiL 
rather  humble  me  than  puff  me  up.  Your 


LETTERS  TO  MRS.  T- 


306 

avourable  acceptance  of  them,  if  alone,  might 
have  the  latter  effect;  but  alas ! I feel  myself 
so  very  defective  in  those  things,  the  import- 
ance of  which  I endeavoured  to  point  out  to 
others,  that  I almost  appear  to  myself  to  be 
one  of  those  who  say,  but  do  not.  I find  it 
much  easier  to  speak  to  the  hearts  of  others 
than  to  my  own.  Yet  I have  cause  beyond 
many  to  bless  God,  that  he  has  given  me  some 
idea  of  what  a Christian  ought  to  be,  and  I 
hope  a real  desire  of  being  one  myself;  but 
verily  I have  attained  but  a very  little  way. 
A friend  hinted  to  me,  that  the  character  I 
have  given  of  C,  or  Grace  in  the  full  ear, 
must  be  from  my  own  experience,  or  I could 
not  have  written  it.  To  myself,  however,  it 
appears  otherwise ; but  I am  well  convinced, 
that  the  state  of  C is  attainable,  and  more  to 
be  desired  than  mountains  of  gold  and  silver. 
But  I find  you  complain  likewise ; though  it 
appears  to  me,  and  I believe  to  all  who  know 
you,  that  the  Lord  has  been  peculiarly  gra- 
cious to  you,  in  giving  you  much  of  the  spirit 
in  which  he  delights,  and  by  which  his  name 
and  the  power  of  his  gospel  are  glorified. 
It  seems,  therefore,  that  we  are  not  competent 
judges  either  of  ourselves  or  of  others.  I 
take  it  for  granted,  that  they  are  the  most 
excellent  Christians  who  are  most  abased  in 
their  own  eyes : but  lest  you  think  upon  this 
ground  that  I am  something,  because  I can 
say  so  many  humiliating  things  of  myself,  I 
must  prevent  your  over-rating  me,  by  assur- 
ing you,  that  my  confessions  rather  express 
what  I know  I ought  to  think  of  myself,  than 
what  I actually  do.  Naturalists  suppose, 
that  if  the  matter  of  which  the  earth  is 
formed  were  condensed  as  much  as  it  is 
capable  of,  it  would  occupy  but  a very  small 
space ; in  proof  of  which  they  observe,  that  a 
cubical  pane  of  glass,  which  appears  smooth 
and  impervious  to  us,  must  be  exceedingly 
porous  in  itself;  since  in  every  assignable 
point  it  receives  and  transmits  the  rays  of 
light ; and  yet  gold,  which  is  the  most  solid 
substance  we  are  acquainted  with,  is  but 
about  eight  times  heavier  than  glass  which 
is  made  up  (if  I may  say  so)  of  nothing  but 
Cores.  In  like  manner,  I conceive,  that  in- 
e ent  grace,  when  it  is  dilated,  and  appears 
iO  tne  greatest  advantage  in  a sinner,  would 
ne  found  to  be  very  small  and  inconsiderable, 
if  it  were  condensed,  and  absolutely  separated 
from  every  mixture.  The  highest  attain- 
ments in  this  life  are  very  inconsiderable, 
compared  with  what  should  properly  result 
from  our  relation  and  obligations  to  a God  of 
infinite  holiness.  The  nearer  we  approach 
to  him,  the  more  we  are  sensible  of  this. 
While  we  only  hear  of  God  as  it  were  by 
the  ear,  we  seem  to  be  something ; but  when, 
as  in  the  case  of  Job,  he  discovers  himself 
more  sensibly  to  us,  Job’s  language  becomes 
ours,  and  the  height  of  our  attainment  is,  to 
abhor  ourselves  in  dust  and  ashes. 


[let.  IV. 

I hope  I do  not  write  too  late  to  meet  you 
at  Bath.  I pray  that  your  health  may  be 
benefited  by  the  waters,  and  your  soul  com- 
forted by  the  Lord’s  blessing  upon  the  ordi- 
nances, and  the  converse  of  his  children.  II 
any  of  the  friends  you  expected  to  see  are 
still  there,  to  whom  we  are  known,  and  my 
name  should  be  mentioned,  I beg  you  to  say, 
we  desire  to  be  respectfully  remembered  to 
them.  Had  I wings,  I would  fly  to  Bath 
while  you  are  there.  As  it  is,  I endeavour  to 
be  with  you  in  spirit.  There  certainly  is  a 
real,  though  secret,  a sweet,  though  mysteri- 
ous communion  of  saints,  by  virtue  of  their 
common  union  with  Jesus.  Feeding  upon 
the  same  bread,  drinking  of  the  same  fountain, 
waiting  at  the  same  mercy-seat,  and  aiming 
at  the  same  ends,  they  have  fellowship  one 
with  another,  though  at  a distance.  Who 
can  tell  how  often  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is 
equally  present  with  them  all,  touches  the 
hearts  of  two  or  more  of  his  children  at  the 
same  instant,  so  as  to  excite  a sympathy  of 
pleasure,  prayer,  or  praise,  on  each  other’s 
account  l It  revives  me  sometimes  in  a dull 
and  dark  hour  to  reflect,  that  the  Lord  has  in 
mercy  given  me  a place  in  the  hearts  of 
many  of  his  people ; and  perhaps  some  of 
them  may  be  speaking  to  him  on  my  behalf, 
when  I have  hardly  power  to  utter  a word 
for  myself.  For  kind  services  of  this  sort,  I 
persuade  myself  I am  often  indebted  to  you. 

0 that  I were  enabled  more  fervently  to 
repay  you  in  the  same  way  ! I can  say,  that 

1 attempt  it;  I love  and  honour  you  greatly, 
and  your  concernments  are  often  upon  my 
mind. 

We  spent  most  of  a week  with  Mr.  B 

since  we  returned  from  London,  and  he  has 
been  once  here.  We  have  reason  to  be  very 
thankful  for  his  connexion ; I find  but  few 
like-minded  with  him,  and  his  family  is  filled 
with  the  grace  and  peace  of  the  gospel.  I 
never  visit  them  but  I meet  with  something 
to  humble,  quicken,  and  edify  me.  Oh  ! what 
will  heaven  be,  where  there  shall  be  all  who 
love  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  they  only ; where  all 
imperfection,  and  whatever  now  abates  or  in- 
terrupts their  joy  in  their  Lord  and  in  each 
other,  shall  cease  for  ever.  There  at  least  I 
hope  to  meet  you,  and  spend  an  eternity  with 
you,  in  admiring  the  riches  and  glory  of  re- 
deeming love. 

We  join  in  a tender  of  the  most  affection- 
ate respects. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

October  28,  1777. 

my  dear  madam, — What  can  I say  for 
myself,  to  let  your  obliging  letter  remain  so 
long  unanswered,  when  your  kind  solicitude 
for  us  induced  you  to  write  1 I am  ashamed 


307 


LETTERS  TO  MRS.  T- 


LET.  IV.  J 

of  the  delay.  You  would  have  heard  from 
me  immediately,  had  I been  at  home.  But 
I have  reason  to  be  thankful  that  we  were 
providentially  called  to  London  a few  days 
before  the  fire ; so  that  Mrs. was  mer- 

cifully preserved  from  the  alarm  and  shock 
she  must  have  felt,  had  she  been  upon  the 
snot.  Your  letter  followed  me  hither,  and 
was  in  my  possession  more  tnan  a week  be- 
fore my  return.  I purposed  writing'  every 
day,  but  indeed  I was  much  hurried  and  en- 
gaged. Yet  I am  not  excused:  I ought  to 
have  saved  time  from  my  meals  or  my  sleep, 
rather  than  appear  negligent  or  ungrateful. 
I now  seize  the  first  post  I could  write  by 
since  I came  home.  The  fire  devoured 
twelve  houses  ; and  it  was  a mercy,  and  al- 
most a miracle,  that  the  whole  town  was  not 
destroyed,  which  must,  humanly  speaking, 
have  been  the  case,  had  not  the  night  been 
calm,  as  two  thirds  of  the  buildings  were 
thatched.  No  lives  were  lost,  no  person 
considerably  hurt,  and  I believe  the  contri- 
butions of  the  benevolent  will  prevent  the 
loss  from  being  greatly  felt.  It  was  at  the 
the  distance  of  a quarter  of  a mile  from  my 
house. 

Your  command  limits  my  attention  at 
present  to  a part  of  your  letter,  and  points 
me  out  a subject.  Yet,  at  the  same  time, 
you  lay  me  under  a difficulty.  I would  not 
willingly  offend  you,  and  I hope  the  Lord 
has  taught  me  not  to  aim  at  saying  hand- 
some things.  I deal  not  in  compliments,  and 
religious  compliments  are  the  most  unseemly 
of  any.  But  why  might  I not  express  my 
sense  of  the  grace  of  God  manifested  in  you  as 
well  as  in  another  1 I believe  our  hearts  are 
all  alike  destitute  of  every  good,  and  prone 
to  every  evil.  Like  money  from  the  same 
mint,  they  bear  the  same  impression  of  total 
depravity  ; but  grace  makes  a difference,  and 
grace  deserves  the  praise.  Perhaps  it  ought 
not  greatly  to  displease  you,  that  others  do, 
and  must,  and  will  think  better  of  you  than 
you  do  of  yourself.  If  I do,  how  can  I help 
it.  when  I form  my  judgment  entirely  from 
what  you  say  and  write  1 I cannot  consent 
that  you  should  seriously  appoint  me  to  ex- 
amine and  judge  of  your  state.  I thought 
you  knew  beyond  the  shadow  of  a doubt, 
what  your  views  and  desires  are ; yea,  you 
express  them  in  your  letter,  in  full  agree- 
ment with  what  the  scriptures  declare  of  the 
principles,  desires,  and  feelings  of  a Chris- 
tian. It  is  true  that  you  feel  contrary  prin- 
ciples, that  you  are  conscious  of  defects  and 
defilements ; but  it  is  equally  true  that  you 
could  not  be  right  if  you  did  not  feel  these 
things.  To  be  conscious  of  them,  and  hum- 
bled for  them,  is  one  of  the  surest  marks  of 
grace ; and  to  be  more  deeply  sensible  of 
them  than  formerly  is  the  best  evidence  of 
growth  in  grace.  But  when  the  enemy 
would  tempt  us  to  doubt  and  distrust,  be- 


cause we  are  not  perfect,  then  he  fights,  not 
only  against  our  peace,  but  against  the  ho- 
nour and  faithfulness  of  our  dear  Lord.  Our 
righteousness  is  in  him,  and  our  hope  de- 
pends, not  upon  the  exercise  of  grace  in  us, 
but  upon  the  fulness  of  grace  and  love  in  him, 
and  upon  his  obedience  unto  death. 

There  is,  my  dear  madam,  a difference  be- 
tween the  holiness  of  a sinner  and  that  of  an 
angel.  The  angels  have  never  sinned,  nor 
have  they  tasted  of  redeeming  love ; they 
have  no  inward  conflicts,  no  law  of  sin  war- 
ring in  their  members ; their  obedience  is  per- 
fect; their  happiness  is  complete.  Yet  if  I 
be  found  among  redeemed  sinners,  I need 
not  wish  to  be  an  angel.  Perhaps  God  is 
not  less  glorified  by  your  obedience,  and,  not 
to  shock  you,  I will  add  by  mine,  than  by 
Gabriel’s.  It.  is  a mighty  manifestation  of 
his  grace  indeed,  when  it  can  live,  and  act, 
and  conquer  in  such  hearts  as  ours ; when, 
in  defiance  of  an  evil  nature  and  an  evil 
world,  and  all  the  force  and  subtilty  of  Satan, 
a weak  wrorm  is  still  upheld,  and  enabled  not 
only  to  climb,  but  to  thresh  the  mountains; 
when  a small  spark  is  preserved  through 
storms  and  floods.  In  these  circumstances, 
the  work  of  grace  is  to  be  estimated,  not 
merely  from  its  imperfect  appearance,  but 
from  the  difficulties  it  has  to  struggle  with 
and  overcome ; and  therefore  our  holiness 
does  not  consist  in  great  attainments,  but  in 
spiritual  desires,  in  hungerings,  thirstings, 
and  mournings ; in  humiliation  of  heart,  po- 
verty of  spirit,  submission,  meekness ; in  cor- 
dial admiring  thoughts  of  Jesus,  and  de- 
pendence upon  him  alone  for  all  we  want. 
Indeed  these  may  be  said  to  be  great  attain- 
ments ; but  they  who  have  most  of  them  are 
most  sensible  that  they,  in  and  of  themselves, 
are  nothing,  have  nothing,  can  do  nothing, 
and  see  daily  cause  for  abhorring  themselves, 
and  repenting  in  dust  and  ashes. 

Our  view  of  death  will  not  always  be  alike, 
but  in  proportion  to  the  degree  in  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  pleased  to  communicate  his 
sensible  influence.  We  may  anticipate  the 
moment  of  dissolution  with  pleasure  and  de- 
sire in  the  morning,  and  be  ready  to  shrink 
from  the  thought  of  it  before  night.  But 
though  our  frames  and  perceptions  vary,  the 
report  of  faith  concerning  it  is  the  same. 
The  Lord  usually  reserves  dying  strength 
for  a dying  hour.  When  Israel  was  to  pass 
Jordan,  the  ark  was  in  the  river ; and  though 
the  rear  of  the  host  could  not  see  it,  yet  as 
they  successively  came  forward  and  ap- 
proached the  banks,  they  all  beheld  the  ark, 
and  all  went  safely  over.  As  vou  are  not 
weary  of  living,  if  it  be  the  Lord’s  pleasure, 
so  I hope,  for  the  sake  of  your  friends  and 
the  people  whom  you  love,  he  will  spare  you 
amongst  us  a little  longer;  but  when  the 
time  shall  arrive  which  he  has  appointed  for 
your  dismission,  I make  no  doubt  but  he  will 


308 


LETTERS  TO  MRS.  T- 


overpower  all  your  fears,  silence  all  your  j 
enemies,  and  give  you  a comfortable,  triumph- 
ant entrance  into  his  kingdom.  You  have 
nothing  to  fear  from  death ; for  Jesus,  by  dy- 
ing, has  disarmed  it  of  its  sting,  has  perfum- 
ed the  grave,  and  opened  the  gates  of  glory 
for  his  believing  people.  Satan,  so  far  as  he 
is  permitted,  will  assault  our  peace,  but  he  is 
a vanquished  enemy ; our  Lord  holds  him  in  a 
chain,  and  sets  him  bounds  which  he  cannot 
pass.  He  provides  for  us  likewise  the  whole 
armcur  of  God,  and  lias  promised  to  cover 


[let.  iv, 

j our  heads  himself  in  the  day  of  battle,  to 
bring  us  honourably  through  every  skirmish, 
and  to  make  us  more  than  conquerors  at  last. 
If  you  think  iny  short  unexpected  interview 

with  Mr.  C may  justify  my  wishing  he 

should  know  that  1 respect  his  character, 
love  his  person,  and  rejoice  in  what  the  Lord 
has  done  and  is  doing  for  him  and  by  him,  I 
beg  you  tell  him  so ; but  I leave  it  entirely 
to  yourself. 

We  join  in  most  affectionate  respects. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO  MR. 


LETTER  I. 

March  7,  1765. 

dear  sir, — Your  favour  of  the  19th  Fe- 
bruary came  to  my  hand  yesterday.  I have 
read  it  with  attention,  and  very  willingly  sit 
down  to  offer  you  my  thoughts.  Your  case 
reminds  me  of  my  own:  my  first  desires 
towards  the  ministry  were  attended  with 
great  uncertainties  and  difficulties,  and  the 
perplexity  of  my  own  mind  was  heightened 
by  the  various  and  opposite  judgments  of  my 
friends.  The  advice  I have  to  offer  is  the 
result  of  painful  experience  and  exercise,  and 
for  this  reason,  perhaps,  may  not  be  unac- 
ceptable to  you.  I pray  our  gracious  Lord 
to  make  it  useful. 

I was  long  distressed,  as  you  are,  about 
what  was  or  was  not  a proper  call  to  the 
ministry.  It  now  seems  to  me  an  easy  point 
to  solve;  but,  perhaps,  it  will  not  be  so  to 
you,  till  the  Lord  shall  make  it  clear  to 
yourself  in  your  own  case.  I have  not 
room  to  say  so  much  as  I could.  In  brief,  I 
think  it  principally  includes  three  things: 

1.  A warm  and  earnest  desire  to  be  em- 
ployed in  this  service.  I apprehend  the  man 
who  is  once  moved  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to 
this  work,  will  prefer  it,  if  attainable,  to 
thousands  of  gold  and  silver:  so  that,  though 
he  is  at  times  intimidated  by  a sense  of  its 
importance  and  difficulty,  compared  with  his 
own  great  insufficiency  (for  it  is  to  be  pre- 
sumed a call  of  this  sort,  if  indeed  from  God, 
will  be  accompanied  with  humility  and  self- 
abasement,)  yet  he  cannot  give  it  up.  I 
hold  it  a good  rule  to  inquire  in  this  point, 
whether  the  desire  to  preach  is  most  fervent , 
in  our  most  lively  and  spiritual  frames,  or 
when  we  are  most  laid  in  the  dust  before  the 
Lord  1 If  so,  it  is  a good  sign.  But  if,  as  is 
sometimes  the  case,  a person  is  very  earnest 
to  be  a preacher  to  others,  when  he  finds  but 
little  hungerings  and  thirstings  after  grace 
in  his  own  soul,  it  is  then  to  be  feared,  his 
zeal  springs  rather  from  a selfish  principle 
than  from  the  Spirit  of  God. 


2.  Besides  this  affectionate  desire  and  rea- 
diness to  preach,  there  must  in  due  season 
appear  some  competent  sufficiency  as  to  gifts, 
knowledge,  and  utterance.  Surely,  if  the 
Lord  sends  a man  to  teach  others,  he  will 
furnish  him  with  the  means.  I believe  many 
have  intended  well  in  setting  upfor  preachers, 
who  yet  went  beyond  or  before  their  call  in 
so  doing.  The  main  difference  between  a 
minister  and  a private  Christian,  seems  to 
consist  in  these  ministerial  gifts,  which  are 
imparted  to  him,  not  for  his  own  sake,  but 
for  the  edification  of  others.  But  then  I say, 
these  are  to  appear  in  due  season;  they  are 
not  to  be  expected  instantaneously,  but  gra- 
dually, in  the  use  of  proper  means.  They 
are  necessary  for  the  discharge  of  the  minis- 
try, but  not  necessary  as  pre-requisites  to 
warrant  our  desires  after  it.  In  your  case, 
you  are  young,  and  have  time  before  you ; 
therefore,  I think  you  need  not  as  yet  perplex 
yourself  with  inquiring  if  you  have  these 
gifts  already.  It  is  sufficient  if  your  desire 
is  fixed,  and  you  are  willing,  in  the  way  of 
prayer  and  diligence,  to  wait  upon  the  Lord 
for  them  ; as  yet  you  need  them  not. 

3.  That  which  finally  evidences  a proper 
call,  is  a correspondent  opening  in  providence, 
by  a gradual  train  of  circumstances  pointing 
out  the  means,  the  time,  the  place,  of  actually 
entering  upon  the  work.  And  till  this  coin- 
cidence arrives,  you  must  not  expect  to  be 
always  clear  from  hesitation  in  your  own 
mind.  The  principal  caution  on  this  head 
is,  not  to  be  too  hasty  in  catching  at  first  ap- 
pearances. If  it  be  the  Lord’s  will  to  bring 
you  into  his  ministry,  he  has  already  ap- 
pointed your  place  and  service  ; and  though 
you  know  it  not  at  present,  you  shall  at  a 
proper  time.  If  you  had  the  talents  of  an 
angel,  you  could  do  no  good  with  them  till  his 
hour  is  come,  and  till  he  leads  you  to  the 
people  whom  he  has  determined  to  bless  by 
your  means.  It  is  very  difficult  to  restrain 
ourselves  within  the  bounds  of  prudence  here, 
wh  en  our  zeal  is  warm : a sense  of  the  love 
of  Christ  upon  our  hearts,  and  a tender  coin- 

309 


310 


LETTERS  TO  MR. 


passion  for  poor  sinners,  is  ready  to  prompt 
us  to  break  out  too  soon ; — but  he  that  be- 
lieveth,  shall  not  make  haste.  I was  about 
five  years  under  this  constraint:  sometimes 
I thought  I must  preach,  though  it  was  in 
tiie  streets.  I listened  to  every  thing  that 
seemed  plausible,  and  to  many  things  which 
were  not  so.  But  the  Lord  graciously,  and 
as  it  were  insensibly,  hedged  up  my  way 
with  thorns;  otherwise,  if  I had  been  left  to 
my  own  spirit,  i should  have  put  it  quite  out 
of  my  power  to  have  been  brought  into  such 
a sphere  of  usefulness,  as  he  in  good  time 
has  been  pleased  to  lead  me  to.  And  I can 
now  see  clearly,  that  at  the  time  I would  first 
have  gone  out,  though  my  intention  was,  I 
hope,  good  in  the  main,  yet  I overrated  my- 
self and  had  not  that  spiritual  judgment  and 
experience,  which  are  requisite  for  so  great  a 
service.  I wish  you  therefore  to  take  time ; 
and  if  you  have  a desire  to  enter  into  the  es- 
tablished church,  endeavour  to  keep  your  zeal 
within  moderate  bounds,  and  avoid  every  thing 
that  might  unnecessarily  clog  your  admission 
with  difficulties.  I would  not  have  you  hide 
your  profession,  or  to  be  backward  to  speak 
for  God ; but  avoid  what  looks  like  preach- 
ing, and  be  content  with  being  a learner  in 
the  school  of  Christ  for  some  years.  The  de- 
jay  will  not  be  lost  time ; you  will  be  so  much 
the  more  acquainted  with  the  gospel,  with 
your  own  heart,  and  with  human  nature:  the 
last  is  a necessary  branch  of  a minister’s 
knowledge,  and  can  only  be  acquired  by 
comparing  what  passes  within  us,  and 
around  us,  with  what  we  read  in  the  word 
of  God. 

I am  glad  to  find  you  have  a distaste  both 
for  Arminian  and  Antinomian  doctrines;  but 
let  not  the  mistakes  of  others  sit  too  heavy 
upon  you.  Be  thankful  for  the  grace  that 
has  made  you  to  differ ; be  ready  to  give  a 
reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you  with  meek- 
ness and  fear  ; but  beware  of  engaging  in  dis- 
putes without  evident  necessity,  and  some 
probable  hope  of  usefulness.  They  tend  to 
eat  out  the  life  and  savour  of  religion,  and  to 
make  the  soul  lean  and  dry.  Where  God 
has  begun  a real  work  of  grace,  incidental 
mistakes  will  be  lessened  by  time  and  expe- 
-ience;  where  he  has  not,  it  is  of  little  sig- 
nification what  sentiments  people  hold,  or 
whether  they  call  themselves  Arminians  or 
Calvinists. 

I agree  with  you,  it  is  time  enough  for  you 
to  think  of  Oxford  yet;  and  that  if  your  pur- 
pose is  fixed,  and  all  circumstances  render  it 
prudent  and  proper  to  devote  yourself  to  the 
ministry,  you  will  do  well  to  spend  a year  or 
two  in  private  studies.  It  would  be  further 
helpful,  in  this  view,  to  place  yourself  where 
there  is  gospel-preaching,  and  a lively  peo- 
ple. If  your  favourable  opinion  of  this  place 
should  induce  you  to  come  here,  I shall  be 
very  ready  to  give  you  every  assistance  in 


[let.  ii. 

my  power.  As  I have  trod  exactly  the  path 
you  seem  to  be  setting  out  in,  I might  so  far 
perhaps,  be  more  serviceable  than  those  who 
are  in  other  respects  much  better  qualified 
to  assist  you.  I doubt  not  but  in  this,  and 
every  other  step,  you  will  intreat  the  Lord’s 
direction ; and  I hope  you  will  not  forget  to 
pray  for,  Sir, — Your  affectionate  friend,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

January  7,  1767. 

dear  sir, — I must  beg  you  once  for  all, 
to  release  me  from  any  constraint  about  the 
length  or  frequency  of  my  letters.  Believe 
that  I think  of  you,  and  pray  for  you  when  you 
do  not  hear  from  me.  Your  correspondence 
is  not  quite  so  large  as  mine,  therefore  you 
may  write  the  oftener.  Your  letters  will  be 
always  welcome;  and  I will  write  to  you 
when  I find  a leisure  hour,  and  have  any 
thing  upon  my  mind  to  offer. 

You  seem  sensible  where  your  most  observ- 
able failing  lies,  and  to  take  reproof  and  ad- 
monition concerning  it  in  good  part;  I there- 
fore hope  and  believe  the  Lord  will  give  you 
a growing  victory  over  it.  You  must  not  ex- 
pect habits  and  tempers  will  be  eradicated  in- 
stantaneously ; but  by  perseverance  in  prayer, 
and  observation  upon  the  experience  of  every 
day,  much  may  be  done  in  time.  Now  and 
then  you  will  (as  is  usual  in  the  course  of 
war)  lose  a battle ; but  be  not  discouraged, 
but  rally  your  forces,  and  return  to  the  fight. 
There  is  a comfortable  word,  a leaf  of  the  tree 
of  life,  for  healing  the  wounds  we  receive,  in 
1 John  ii.  1.  If  the  enemy  surprises  you, 
and  your  heart  smites  you,  do  not  stand  as- 
tonished as  if  there  was  no  help,  nor  give  way 
to  sorrow,  as  if  there  was  no  hope,  nor  at- 
tempt to  heal  yourself ; but  away  immediately 
to  the  throne  of  grace,  to  the  great  physician, 
to  the  compassionate  High-priest,  and  teli 
him  all.  Satan  knows,  that  if  he  can  keep  us 
from  confession,  our  wounds  will  rankle;  but 
do  you  profit  by  David's  experience,  Psalm 
xxxii.  3 — 5.  When  we  are  simple  and  open- 
hearted  in  abasing  ourselves  before  the  Lord, 
though  we  have  acted  foolishly  and  ungrate- 
fully, he  will  seldom  let  us  remain  long, 
without  affording  us  a sense  of  his  compas- 
sion ; for  he  is  gracious;  he  knows  our  frame, 
and  how  to  bear  with  us,  though  we  can 
hardly  bear  with  ourselves  or  with  one 
another. 

The  main  thing  is  to  have  the  heart  right 
with  God ; this  will  bring  us  in  the  end  safely 
through  many  mistakes  and  blunders;  but  a 
double  mind,  a selfish  spirit,  that  would  halve 
things  between  God  and  the  world,  the  Lord 
abhors.  Though  I have  not  yet  had  many 
opportunities  of  commending  your  prudence, 
I have  always  had  a good  opinion  of  your 


LETTERS  TO  MR. 


311 


LET.  III.] 

sincerity  and  integrity  ; if  I am  not  mistaken 
in  this,  1 make  no  doubt  of  your  doing  well. 
If  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  bless  you,  he  will 
undoubtedly  make  you  humble ; for  you  can- 
not be  either  happy  or  safe,  or  have  any  pro- 
bable hope  of  abiding  usefulness,  without  it. 
I do  not  know  that  I have  had  any  thing  so 
much  at  heart  in  my  connexions  with  you,  as 
to  impress  you  with  a sense  of  the  necessity 
and  advantages  of  an  humble  frame  of  spirit; 
I hope  it  has  not  been  in  vain.  O,  to  be  lit- 
tle in  our  own  eyes ! This  is  the  ground-work 
of  every  grace ; this  leads  to  a continual  de- 
pendence upon  the  Lord  Jesus;  this  is  the 
spirit  which  he  has  promised  to  bless ; this 
conciliates  us  good  will  and  acceptance 
amongst  men : for  he  that  abaseth  himself  is 
sure  to  be  honoured.  And  that  this  temper 
is  so  hard  to  attain  and  preserve,  is  a striking 
proof  of  our  depravity.  For  are  we  not  sin- 
ners ! Were  we  not  rebels  and  enemies  be- 
fore we  knew  the  gospel  1 and  have  we  not 
been  unfaithful,  backsliding,  and  unprofitable 
ever  since  1 Are  we  not  redeemed  by  the 
blood  of  Jesus '!  and  can  we  stand  a single 
moment  except  he  upholds  us  1 Have  we  any 
thing  which  we  have  not  received  1 or  have 
we  received  any  thing  which  we  have  not 
abused  ? Why  then  is  dust  and  ashes  proud  ! 

I am  glad  you  have  found  some  spiritual 
acquaintance  in  your  barren  land.  1 hope 
you  will  be  helpful  to  them,  and  they  to  you. 
You  do  well  to  guard  against  every  appear- 
ance of  evil.  If  you  are  heartily  for  Jesus, 
Satan  owes  you  a grudge.  One  way  or  other, 
he  will  try  to  cut  you  out  work,  and  the  Lord 
may  suffer  him  to  go  to  the  length  of  his 
chain.  But  though  you  are  to  keep  your  eye 
upon  him,  and  expect  to  hear  from  him  at 
every  step,  you  need  not  be  slavishly  afraid 
of  him;  for  Jesus  is  stronger  and  wiser  than 
he,  and  there  is  a complete  suit  of  armour 
provided  for  all  who  are  engaged  on  the  Lord’s 
side. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

Oct.  20,  1767. 

dear  sir, — A concern  for  the  perplexity 
ou  have  met  with,  from  the  objections  which 
nave  been  made  against  some  expressions  in 
my  printed  sermons,  and  in  general,  against 
exhorting  sinners  to  believe  in  Jesus,  engages 
me  to  write  immediately ; otherwise  I should 
have  waited  a little  longer ; for  we  are  now 
upon  the  point  of  removing  to  the  vicarage, 
and  I believe  this  will  be  the  last  letter  I 
shall  write  from  the  old  house.  I shall  chiefly 
confine  myself  at  present  to  the  subject  you 
propose. 

In  the  first  place,  I beg  you  to  be  upon  your 
guard  against  a reasoning  spirit.  Search  the 
scriptures;  and  where  you  can  find  a plain 


rule  or  warrant  for  any  practice,  go  boldly 
on;  and  be  not  discouraged  because  you  may 
not  be  clearly  able  to  answer  or  reconcile 
every  difficulty  that  may  either  occur  to  your 
own  mind,  or  be  put  in  your  way  by  others. 
Our  hearts  are  very  dark  and  narrow,  and  the 
very  root  of  all  apostacy,  is  a proud  disposi- 
tion to  ( uestion  the  necessity  or  propriety  of 
divine  appointment.  But  the  child-like  sim- 
plicity of  faith,  is  to  follow  God  without  rea- 
soning; taking  it  for  granted  a thing  must 
be  right  if  he  directs  it,  and  charging  all 
seeming  inconsistences  to  the  account  of  our 
own  ignorance. 

I suppose  the  people  that  trouble  you  upon 
this  head  are  those  who  preach  upon  Armi- 
nian  principles,  and  suppose  a free  will  in 
man,  in  a greater  or  less  degree,  to  turn  to 
God  when  the  gospel  is  proposed.  These,  if 
you  speak  to  sinners  at  large,  though  they 
will  approve  of  your  doing  so,  will  take  oc- 
casion, perhaps,  to  charge  you  with  acting  in 
contradiction  to  your  own  principles.  So,  it 
seems,  Mr. has  said.  I love  and  ho- 

nour that  man  greatly,  and  I beg  you  will 
tell  him  so  from  me ; and  tell  him  farther, 
that  the  reason  why  he  is  not  a Calvinist,  is 
because  he  misapprehends  our  principles.  If 
I had  a proper  call,  I would  undertake  to 
prove  the  direct  contrary ; namely,  that  to  ex- 
hort and  deal  plainly  with  sinners,  to  stir  them 
up  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,  and  to  lay 
hold  of  eternal  life,  is  an  attempt  not  recon - 
cileable  to  sober  reason,  upon  any  other  grounds 
than  those  doctrines  which  we  are  called  Cal- 
vinists for  holding;  and  that  all  the  absurdi- 
ties which  are  charged  upon  us,  as  conse- 
quences of  what  we  teach,  are  indeed  truly 
chargeable  upon  those  who  differ  from  us  in 
these  points.  I think  this  unanswerably 
proved  by  Mr.  Edwards,  in  his  Discourse  on 
the  Freedom  of  the  Will,  though  the  chain  of 
reasoning  is  so  close,  that  few  will  give  atten- 
tion or  take  pains  to  pursue  it.  As  to  myself, 
if  I was  not  a Calvinist,  I think  1 should  have 
no  more  hope  of  success  in  preaching  to  met 
than  to  horses  or  cows. 

But  these  objections  are  more  frequently 
urged  by  Calvinists  themselves ; many  of  them 
I doubt  not,  good  men,  but  betrayed  into  a 
curiosity  of  spirit,  which  often  makes  their 
ministry  (if  ministers)  dry  and  inefficacious, 
and  their  conversation  sour  and  unsavoury. 
Such  a spirit  is  too  prevalent  in  many  profes- 
sors, that  if  a man  discovers  a warm  zeal  for 
the  glory  of  God,  and  is  enabled  to  bear  a 
faithful  testimony  to  the  gospel-truths  ; yea, 
though  the  Lord  evidently  blesses  him,  they 
overlook  all,  and  will  undervalue  a sermon, 
which,  upon  the  whole,  they  cannot  but  ac- 
knowledge to  be  scriptural,  if  they  meet  with 
a single  sentence  contrary  to  the  opinion  they 
have  taken  up.  I am  sorry  to  see  such  a 
spirit  prevailing.  But  this  I observe,  that  the 
ministers  who  give  into  this  way,  though  good 


312 


LETTERS  TO  MR. 


men  and  good  preachers  in  other  respects,  are 
seldom  very  useful  or  very  zealous ; and  those 
who  are  in  private  life,  are  more  ready  tor 
dry  points  of  disputation,  at  least  harping  up- 
on a string  of  doctrines,  than  for  experimen- 
tal and  heart-searching  converse,  whereby  one 
may  warm  and  edify  another.  Blessed  be 
God,  who  has  kept  me  and  iny  people  from 
this  turn ; if  it  should  ever  creep  in  or  spread 
among  us,  I should  be  ready  to  write  Ichabod 
ipon  our  assemblies. 

I advise  you,  therefore,  to  keep  close  to  the 
Bible  and  prayer : bring  your  difficulties  to 
the  Lord,  and  entreat  him  to  give  you,  and 
maintain  in  you  a simple  spirit.  Search  the 
scriptures.  How  did  Peter  deal  with  Simon 
Magus  1 We  have  no  right  to  think  worse  of 
any  who  can  hear  us,  than  the  apostle  did  of 
him.  He  seemed  almost  to  think  his  case 
desperate,  and  yet  he  advised  him  to  repent- 
ance and  prayer.  Examine  the  same  apostle’s 
discourse,  Acts  iii.,  and  the  close  of  St.  Paul’s 
sermon,  Acts  xiii.  The  power  is  all  of  God ; 
the  means  are  likewise  of  his  appointment ; 
and  he  always  is  pleased  to  work  by  such 
means  as  may  show  that  the  power  is  his. 
What  was  Moses’s  rod  in  itself,  or  the  trum- 
pets that  threw  down  Jericho  ! What  influ- 
ence could  the  pool  of  Siloam  have,  that  the 
eyes  of  the  blind  man,  by  washing  in  it,  should 
be  opened  1 or  what  could  Ezekiel’s  feeble 
breath  contribute  to  the  making  dry  bones 
live  1 All  these  means  were  exceedingly  dis- 
proportioned  to  the  effect ; but  he  who  order- 
ed them  to  be  used,  accompanied  them  with 
his  power.  Yet,  if  Moses  had  gone  without 
his  rod,  if  Joshua  had  slighted  the  rams’ 
horns,  if  the  prophet  had  thought  it  foolish- 
ness to  speak  to  dry  bones,  or  the  blind  man 
refused  to  wash  his  eyes,  nothing  could  have 
been  done.  The  same  holds  good  in  the 
present  subject:  I do  not  reason,  expostu- 
late, and  persuade  sinners,  because  I think  I 
can  prevail  with  them,  but  because  the  Lord 
has  commanded  it.  He  directs  me  to  address 
them  as  reasonable  creatures : to  take  them 
by  every  handle ; to  speak  to  their  conscien- 
ces; to  tell  them  of  the  terrors  of  the  Lord, 
and  of  his  tender  mercies;  to  argue  with 
them  what  good  they  find  in  sin;  whether 
they  do  not  need  a Saviour;  to  put  them  in 
mind  of  death,  judgment,  and  eternity,  &c. 
When  I have  done  all.  I know  it  is  to  little 
purpose,  except  the  Lord  speaks  to  their 
hearts  ; and  this  to  his  own,  and  at  his  own 
time,  l am  sure  he  will,  because  he  has  pro- 
mised it.  Sec  Isaiah  lv.  10,  11  ; Matt, 
xxviii.  20.  Indeed,  1 have  heard  expressions 
in  the  warmth  of  delivery,  which  I cculd  not 
wholly  approve,  and  therefore  do  not  imitate. 
But  in  general,  I see  no  preaching  made  very 
useful  for  the  gathering  of  souls,  where  poor 
sinners  are  shut  out  of  the  discourse.  I think 
one  of  the  closest  and  most  moving  addresses 
to  sinners  I ever  met  with,  is  in  I)r.  Owen’s 


[let.  iv. 

Exposition  of  the  cxxxth  Psalm,  from  p.  243 
to  276  (in  my  edition.)  If  you  get  it  and 
examine  it,  I think  you  will  find  it  all  agree- 
able to  scripture;  and  he  was  a steady,  deep- 
sighted  Calvinist.  I wish  you  to  study  it 
well,  and  make  it  your  pattern.  He  handles 
the  same  point  likewise  in  other  places,  and 
shows  the  weakness  of  the  exceptions  taken, 
somewhere  at  large,  but  I cannot  just  now 
find  the  passage.  Many  think  themselves 
quite  right,  because  they  have  not  had  their 
thoughts  exercised  at  large,  but  have  confined 
themselves  to  one  track.  There  are  ex- 
tremes in  every  thing.  I pray  God  to  show 
you  the  golden  mean. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IY. 

Aug.  30, 1770. 

dear  sir, — T would  steal  a few  minutes 
here  to  write,  lest  I should  not  have  leisure 
at  home.  I have  not  your  letter  with  me, 
and  therefore  can  only  answer  so  far  as  I 
retain  a general  remembrance  of  the  con- 
tents. 

You  will,  doubtless,  find  rather  perplexity 
than  advantage  from  the  multiplicity  of  ad- 
vice you  may  receive,  if  you  endeavour  to  re- 
concile and  adopt  the  very  different  sentiments 
of  your  friends.  I think  it  will  be  best  to 
make  use  of  them  in  a full  latitude ; that  is, 
to  correct  and  qualify  them  one  by  another, 
and  to  borrow  a little  from  each,  without  con- 
fining yourself  entirely  to  any.  You  will 
probably  be  advised  to  different  extremes:  it 
will  then  be  impossible  to  follow  both ; but  it 
may  be  practicable  to  find  a middle  path  be- 
tween them ; and  I believe  this  will  generally 
prove  the  best  and  safest  method.  Only  con- 
sult your  own  temper,  and  endeavour  to  in- 
cline rather  to  that  side  to  which  you  are  the 
least  disposed,  by  the  ordinary  strain  of  your 
own  inclination ; for  on  that  side  you  will  be 
in  the  least  danger  of  erring.  Warm  and 
hasty  dispositions  will  seldom  move  too  slow; 
and  those  who  are  naturally  languid  and  cool 
are  as  little  liable  to  over-act  their  part. 

With  respect  to  the  particulars  you  in- 
stance, I have  generally  thought  you  warm 
and  enterprising  enough,  and  therefore 
thought  it  best  to  restrain  you  ; but  I meant 
only  to  hold  you  in,  till  you  had  acquired 
some  farther  knowledge  and  observation  both 
of  yourself  and  of  others.  I have  the  plea- 
sure to  hope  (especially  of  late)  that  you  are 
become  more  self-diffident  and  weary  than 
you  were  some  time  ago.  And  therefore, 
as  your  years  and  time  are  advancing,  and 
you  have  been  for  a tolerable  space  under  a 
probation  of  silence,  I can  make  no  objection 
to  your  attempting  sometimes  to  speak  in 
select  societies;  but  let  your  attempts  be 
confined  to  such ; I mean  where  you  are  ac 


313 


[let.  v.  LETTERS  TO  MR. 


quainted  with  the  people,  or  the  leading  part 
of  them,  and  be  upon  your  guard  against 
opening  yourself  too  much  among  strangers. 
And  again,  I earnestly  desire  you  would  not 
attempt  any  thing  of  this  sort  in  a very  pub- 
lic way,  which  may  perhaps  bring  you  under 
inconveniences  and  will  be  inconsistent  with 
the  part  you  ought  to  act  (in  my  judgment) 
from  the  time  you  receive  Episcopal  ordina- 
tion. You  may  remember  a simile  I have 
sometimes  used  of  green  fruit ; children  are 
impatient  to  have  it  while  it  is  green,  but 
persons  of  more  judgment  will  wait  till  it  is 
ripe.  Therefore  I would  wish  your  exhor- 
tations to  be  brief,  private,  and  not  very  fre- 
quent. Rather  give  yourself  to  reading,  me- 
ditation, and  prayer. 

As  to  speaking  without  notes,  in  order  to 
do  it  successfully,  a fund  of  knowledge  should 
be  first  possessed.  Indeed,  in  such  societies 
as  I hope  you  will  confine  your  attempts  to, 
it  would  not  be  practicable  to  use  notes  ; but 
I mean,  that  if  you  design  to  come  out  as  a 
preacher  without  notes  from  the  first,  you 
must  use  double  diligence  in  study;  your 
reading  must  not  be  confined  to  the  scrip- 
tures ; you  should  be  acquainted  with  church 
history,  have  a general  view  of  divinity  as 
a system,  know  something  of  the  state  of 
controversies  in  past  times  and  at  present, 
and  indeed  of  the  general  history  of  mankind. 
I do  not  mean  that  you  should  enter  deeply 
into  these  things:  but  you  will  need  to  have 
your  mind  enlarged,  your  ideas  increased, 
your  style  and  manner  formed ; you  should 
read,  think,  write,  compose,  and  use  all  dili- 
gence to  exercise  and  strengthen  your  facul- 
ties. If  you  would  speak  extempore  as  a 
clergyman,  you  must  be  able  to  come  off 
roundly,  and  to  fill  up  your  hour  with  vari- 
ous matter,  in  tolerable  coherence,  or  else 
you  will  not  be  able  to  overcome  the  pre- 
judice which  usually  prevails  among  the 
p3ople  Perhaps  it  may  be  as  well  to  use 
some  little  scheme  in  the  note-way,  espe- 
cially at  the  beginning ; but  a little  trial  will 
best  inform  you  what  is  most  expedient. 

Let  your  backwardness  to  prayer  and  read- 
ing the  scriptures  be  ever  so  great,  you  must 
strive  against  it.  This  backwardness,  with 
the  doubts  you  speak  of,  are  partly  from  your 
own  evil  heart,  but  perhaps  chiefly  tempta- 
tions of  Satan : he  knows,  if  he  can  keep 
you  from  drawing  water  out  of  the  wells  of 
salvation,  he  will  have  much  advantage. 
My  soul  goes  often  mourning  under  the 
same  complaints,  but  at  times  the  Lord  gives 
me  a little  victory.  I hope  he  will  over-rule 
all  our  trials,  to  make  us  more  humble,  de- 
pendent, and  to  give  us  tenderness  of  spirit 
towards  the  distressed.  The  exercised  and 
experienced  Christian,  by  the  knowledge  he 
has  gained  of  his  own  heart,  and  the  many 
difficulties  he  has  had  to  struggle  with,  ac- 
quires Kill  and  compassion  in  dealing  with 
2 R 


others;  and  without  such  exercise,  all  our 
study,  diligence,  • and  gifts  in  other  ways, 
would  leave  us  much  at  a loss  in  some  of  the 
most  important  parts  of  our  calling. 

You  have  given  yourself  to  the  Lord  for 
the  ministry : his  providence  has  thus  far 
favoured  your  views ; therefore  harbour  not 
a thought  of  flinching  from  the  battle,  be- 
cause the  enemy  appears  in  view,  but  re- 
solve to  endure  hardship  as  a good  soldier 
of  Jesus  Christ.  Lift  up  your  banner  in  his 
name ; trust  in  him,  and  he  will  support  you ; 
but,  above  all  things,  be  sure  not  to  be  either 
enticed  or  terrified  from  the  privilege  of  a 
throne  of  grace. 

Who  your  enemies  are,  or  what  they  say, 
I know  not ; for  I never  conversed  with  them. 
Your  friends  here  have  thought  you  at  times 
harsh  and  hasty  in  your  manner,  and  rather 
inclining  to  self-confidence.  These  things  I 
have  often  reminded  you  of : but  I considered 
them  as  blemishes  usually  attendant  upon 
youth,  and  which  experience,  temptation, 
and  prayer  would  correct.  I hope  and  be- 
lieve you  will  do  well.  You  will  have  a 
share  in  my  prayers  and  best  advice : and 
when  I see  occasion  to  offer  a word  of  re- 
proof, I shall  not  use  any  reserve. — Yours, 
&c. 


LETTER  V. 

July  25,  1772. 

dear  sir, — I am  glad  to  hear  you  are  ac- 
commodated at  D , where  I hope  your 

best  endeavours  will  not  be  wanting  to  make 
yourself  agreeable,  by  an  humble,  inoffensive, 
and  circumspect  behaviour. 

I greatly  approve  of  your  speaking  from 
one  of  the  lessons  in  the  afternoon ; you  will 
find  it  a great  help  to  bring  you  gradually  to 
that  habit  and  readiness  of  expression  which 
you  desire:  and  you  will  perhaps  find  it  make 
more  impression  upon  your  hearers  than 
what  you  read  to  them  from  the  pulpit. 
However,  I would  not  discourage  or  dissuade 
you  from  reading  your  sermons  for  a time. 
The  chief  inconvenience  respecting  yourself 
is  that  which  you  mention.  A written  ser- 
mon is  something  to  lean  upon;  but  it  is  best 
for  a preacher  to  lean  wholly  upon  the  Lord. 
But  set  off  gradually ; the  Lord  will  not  de- 
spise the  day  of  small  things;  pray  heartily 
that  your  spirit  may  be  right  with  him,  and 
then  all  the  rest  will  be  well.  And  keep  on 
writing;  if  you  compose  one  sermon,  and 
should  find  your  heart  enlarged  to  preach 
another,  still  your  labour  of  writing  will  not 
be  lost.  If  your  conscience  bears  you  wit- 
ness that  you  desire  to  serve  the  Lord,  his 
promise  (now  he  has  brought  you  into  the 
ministry)  of  a sufficiency  and  ability  for  the 
work,  belongs  to  you  as  much  as  to  another. 


314 


LETTERS  TO  MR. 


Your  borrowing  help  from  others  may  arise 
from  a diffidence  of  yourself,  which  is  not 
blamable ; but  it  may  arise  in  part  likewise 
from  a diffidence  of  the  Lord,  which  is  hurt- 
ful. I wish  you  may  get  encouragement 
from  that  word,  Exodus  iv.  11,  12.  It  was  a 
great  encouragement  to  me.  While  I would 
press  you  to  diligence  in  every  rational 
means  for  the  improvement  of  your  stock  in 
knowledge,  and  your  ability  of  utterance,  I 
would  have  you  remember  that  preaching  is 
a gift.  It  cannot  be  learned  by  industry  and 
imitation  only,  as  a man  may  learn  to  make 
a chair  or  a table : it  comes  from  above  : and 
if  you  patiently  w7ait  upon  God,  he  will  be- 
stow this  gift  upon  you,  and  increase  it  in 
ou.  It  wTill  grow  by  exercise.  To  him  that 
ath  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  more 
abundantly.  And  be  chiefly  solicitous  to  ob- 
tain an  unction  upon  what  you  do  say.  Per- 
haps those  sermons  in  which  you  feel  your- 
self most  deficient,  may  be  made  most  useful 
to  others.  I hope  you  w'ill  endeavour  like- 
wise, to  be  plain  and  familiar  in  your  lan- 


[let.  v. 

guage  and  manner  (though  not  low  or  vul- 
gar,) so  as  to  suit  yourself  as  much  as  possi- 
ble to  the  apprehensions  of  the  most  ignorant 
people.  There  are  in  all  congregations  some 
persons  exceedingly  ignorant ; yet  they  have 
precious  souls,  and  the  Lord  often  calls  such. 
I pray  the  Lord  to  make  you  wise  to  win 
souls.  I hope  he  will.  You  cannot  be  too 
jealous  of  your  own  heart : but  let  not  such 

instances  as  Mr.  M discourage  you. 

Cry  to  him  who  is  able  to  hold  you  up,  that 
you  may  be  safe,  and  you  shall  not  cry  in 
vain.  It  is,  indeed,  an  alarming  thought, 
that  a man  may  pray  and  preach,  be  useful 
and  acceptable  for  a time,  and  yet  be  noth- 
ing. But  still  the  foundation  of  God  stand- 
eth  sure.  I have  a good  hope,  that  I shall 
never  have  cause  to  repent  the  part  I have 
taken  in  your  concerns.  While  you  keep  in 
the  path  of  duty,  you  will  find  it  the  path  of 
safety.  Be  punctual  in  waiting  upon  God 
in  secret.  This  is  the  life  of  every  thing ; the 
only  w*ay,  and  the  sure  w7ay  of  maintaining 
and  renewing  your  strength. — I am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO 

THE  REVEREND  MR. 


LETTER  I. 

June  29,  1757. 

bear  sir — I endeavour  to  be  mindful  of 
you  in  my  prayers,  that  you  may  find  both 
satisfaction  and  success,  and  that  the  Lord 
himself  may  be  your  light,  to  discover  to  you 
every  part  of  your  duty.  I would  earnestly 
press  you  and  myself  to  be  followers  of 
those  who  have  been  followers  of  Christ; 
to  aim  at  a life  of  self-denial ; to  renounce 
self-will,  and  to  guard  against  self- wis- 
dom. The  less  we  have  to  do  with  the 
world  the  better;  and,  even  in  conversing 
with  our  brethren,  we  have  been,  and  unless 
we  watch  and  pray,  shall  often  be  ensnared. 
Time  is  precious,  and  opportunities  once 
gone,  are  gone  for  ever.  Even  by  reading, 
and  what  we  call  studying,  we  may  be  com- 
paratively losers.  The  shorter  way  is  to  be 
closely  waiting  upon  God  in  humble,  secret, 
fervent  prayer.  The  treasures  of  wisdom 
and  knowledge  are  in  his  hands ; and  he 
gives  bountifully,  without  upbraiding.  On 
the  other  hand,  whatever  we  may  undertake 
with  a sincere  desire  to  promote  his  glory, 
we  may  comfortably  pursue ; nothing  is  trivial 
that  is  done  for  him.  In  this  view,  I would 
have  you,  at  proper  intervals,  pursue  your 
studies,  especially  at  those  times  when  you 
are  unfit  for  better  work.  Pray  for  me,  that 
I may  be  enabled  to  break  through  the  snares 
of  vanity  that  lie  in  my  way;  that  I may  be 
crucified  with  Christ,  and  live  a hidden  life 
by  faith  in  him  who  loved  me  and  gave  him- 
self for  me. — Adieu. 


LETTER  II. 

August  31,  1757. 

dear  sir, — I wish  you  much  of  that  spirit 
which  was  in  the  apostle,  which  made  him 
content  to  become  all  things  to  all  men,  that 
he  might  gain  some.  I am  persuaded  that 


I love  and  humility  are  the  highest  attainments 
in  the  school  of  Christ,  and  the  brightest  evi- 
dences that  he  is  indeed  our  master.  If  any 
should  seem  inclined  to  treat  you  with  less 
regard,  because  you  are  or  have  been  a 
Methodist  teacher,  you  will  find  forbearance, 
meekness,  and  long-suffering,  the  most  pre- 
vailing means  to  conquer  their  prejudices. 
Our  Lord  has  not  only  taught  us  to  expect 
persecution  from  the  world,  though  this  alone 
is  a trial  too  hard  for  flesh  and  blood ; but  we 
must  look  for  what  is  much  more  grievous 
to  a renewed  mind ; to  be  in  some  respects 
slighted,  censured,  and  misunderstood,  even 
by  our  Christian  brethren,  and  that,  perhaps, 
in  cases  where  we  are  really  striving  to  pro- 
mote the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  souls, 
and  cannot,  without  the  reproach  of  our  con- 
sciences, alter  our  conduct,  however  glad  we 
should  be  to  have  their  approbation.  There- 
fore, we  are  required,  not  only  to  resist  the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  but  likewise 
to  bear  one  another’s  burdens:  which  plainly 
intimates  there  will  be  something  to  be  borne 
with  on  all  hands ; and  happy  indeed  is  he 
that  is  not  offended.  You  may  observe  what 
unjust  reports  and  surmises  were  received, 
even  at  Jerusalem,  concerning  the  apostle 
Paul : and  it  seems  he  was  condemned  un- 
heard, and  that  by  many  thousands  too, 
Acts  xxi.  20,  21  : but  we  do  not  find  that  he 
was  at  all  ruffled,  or  that  he  sought  to  retort 
any  thing  upon  them,  though  doubtless,  had 
he  been  so  disposed,  he  might  have  found 
something  to  have  charged  them  with  in  his 
turn ; but  he  calmly  and  willingly  complied 
with  every  thing  in  his  power  to  £ often 
and  convince  them.  Let  us  be  followers  of 
this  pattern,  so  far  as  he  was  a follower  of 
Christ ; for  even  Christ  pleased  not  himself. 
How  did  he  bear  with  the  mistakes,  weak- 
ness, intemperate  zeal,  and  imprudent  propo- 
sals of  his  disciples,  while  on  earth ; and  how 
does  he  bear  with  the  same  things  from  you 
and  me,  and  every  one  of  his  followers  now  ? 
315 


316 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR. 


and  do  we,  can  we,  think  much  to  bear  with 
each  other  for  his  sake?  Have  we  all  a full 
remission  of  ten  thousand  talents,  which  we 
owed  him,  and  were  utterly  unable  to  pay, 
and  do  we  wrangle  amongst  ourselves  for  a 
few  pence?  God  forbid  ! 

If  you  should  be  numbered  among  the  re- 
gular Independents,  I advise  you  not  to  of- 
fend any  of  them  by  unnecessary  singulari- 
ties. I wish  you  not  to  part  with  any  truth, 
or  with  any  thing  really  expedient ; but  if 
the  omitting  any  thing  of  an  indifferent  na- 
ture will  obviate  prejudices,  and  increase  a 
mutual  confidence,  why  should  not  so  easy 
a sacrifice  be  made?  Above  all,  my  dear 
friend,  let  us  keep  close  to  the  Lord  in  a way 
of  prayer : he  giveth  wisdom  that  is  profita- 
ble to  direct;  he  is  the  Wonderful  Coun- 
sellor ; there  is  no  teacher  like  him.  Why 
do  the  living  seek  to  the  dead ! Why  do  we 
weary  our  friends  and  ourselves  in  running 
up  and  down,  and  turning  over  books  for  ad- 
vice ? If  we  shut  our  eyes  upon  the  world 
and  worldly  things,  and  raise  our  thoughts 
upwards  in  humility  and  silence,  should  we 
not  often  hear  the  secret  voice  of  the  Spirit 
of  God  whispering  to  our  hearts,  and  pointing 
out  to  us  the  way  of  truth  and  peace  ! Have 
we  not  often  gone  astray,  and  hurt  either 
ourselves  or  our  brethren,  for  want  of  attend- 
ing to  this  divine  instruction  ? Have  we  not 
sometimes  mocked  God,  by  pretending  to  ask 
direction  from  him,  when  we  had  fixed  our 
determination  beforehand ! It  is  a great 
blessing  to  know  that  we  are  sincere ; and 
next  to  this,  to  be  convinced  of  our  insin- 
cerity, and  to  pray  against  it. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

November  21,  1757. 

dear  sir, — Can  you  forgive  so  negligent 
a correspondent  ? I am  indeed  ashamed  ; but 
(if  that  is  any  good  excuse)  I use  you  no 
worse  than  my  other  friends.  Whenever  I 
write,  I am  obliged  to  begin  with  an  apology; 
for,  what  with  business  and  the  incidental 
duties  of  every  day,  my  time  is  always  mort- 
gaged before  it  comes  into  my  hands,  especi- 
ally as  I have  so  little  skill  in  redeeming  and 
improving  it.  I long  to  hear  from  you,  and 
I long  to  see  you : and  indeed,  from  the  terms 
of  yours,  I expected  you  here  before  this ; 
which  has  been  partly  a cause  of  my  delay. 
I have  mislaid  your  letter,  and  cannot  re- 
member the  particulars;  in  general,  I re- 
member you  were  well,  and  going  on  com- 
fortably in  your  work ; which  was  matter  of 
joy  to  me ; and  my  poor  prayers  are  for  you, 
that  the  Lord  may  own  and  prosper  you  more 
and  more.  The  two  great  points  we  are 
called  to  pursue  in  this  sinful  divided  world, 
are  peace  and  holiness ; I hope  you  are  much 


[let.  III. 

in  the  study  of  them.  These  are  the  peculiar 
characteristics  of  a disciple  of  Jesus;  they 
are  the  richest  part  of  the  enjoyments  of 
heaven  ; and  so  far  as  they  are  received  into 
the  heart,  they  bring  down  heaven  upon 
earth ; and  they  are  more  inseparably  con- 
nected between  themselves  than  some  of  us 
are  aware  of.  The  longer  I live,  the  more 
I see  of  the  vanity  and  the  sinfulness  of  our 
unchristian  disputes;  they  eat  up  the  very 
vitals  of  religion.  I grieve  to  think  how 
often  I have  lost  my  time  and  my  temper 
that  way,  in  presuming  to  regulate  the  vine- 
yards of  others,  when  I have  neglected  my 
own  ; when  the  beam  in  my  own  eye  has  so 
contracted  my  sight,  that  I could  discern  no- 
thing but  the  mote  in  my  neighbour’s.  I 
am  now  desirous  to  choose  a better  part. 
Could  I speak  the  publican’s  word  with  a 
proper  feeling,  I wish  not  for  the  longue  of 
men  or  angels  to  fight  about  notions  or  senti- 
ments. I allow  that  every  branch  of  gospel- 
truth  is  precious,  that  errors  are  abounding, 
and  that  it  is  our  duty  to  bear  an  honest  tes- 
timony to  what  the  Lord  has  enabled  us  to 
find  comfort  in,  and  to  instruct  with  meek- 
ness such  as  are  willing  to  be  instructed ; 
but  I cannot  see  it  my  duty,  nay,  I believe 
it  would  be  my  sin,  to  attempt  to  beat  my 
notions  into  other  people’s  heads.  Too  often 
I have  attempted  it  in  time  past ; but  now  I 
judge,  that  both  my  zeal  and  my  weapons 
were  carnal.  When  our  dear  Lord  questioned 
Peter,  after  his  fall  and  recovery,  he  said 
not,  Art  thou  wise,  learned,  and  eloquent  '1 
Nay,  he  said  not,  Art  thou  clear,  and  sound, 
and  orthodox  ? But  this  only,  “ Lovest  thou 
me  ?”  An  answer  to  this  was  sufficient  then ; 
why  not  now  ? Any  other  answer,  we  may 
believe,  would  have  been  insufficient  then.  If 
Peter  had  made  the  most  pompous  confession 
of  his  faith  and  sentiments,  still  the  first 
question  would  have  recurred,  “ Lovest  thou 
me  !”  This  is  a scripture  precedent.  Happy 
the  preacher,  whoever  he  be,  my  heart  and 
my  prayers  are  with  him,  who  can  honestly 
and  steadily  appropriate  Peter’s  answer. 
Such  a man  I say,  I am  ready  to  hear,  though 
he  should  be  as  much  mistaken  in  some 
points  as  Peter  afterwards  appears  to  have 
been  in  others.  What  a pity  is  it,  that 
Christians  in  succeeding  ages  should  think 
the  constraining  force  of  the  love  of  Christ 
too  weak,  and  suppose  the  end  better  an- 
swered by  forms,  subscriptions,  and  questions 
of  their  own  devising ! I cannot  acquit  even 
those  churches  who  judge  themselves  near- 
est the  primitive  rule  in  this  respect : alas ! 
will-worship  and  presumption  may  creep  into 
the  best  external  forms.  But  the  misfor- 
tune both  in  churches  and  private  Christians 
is,  that  we  are  too  prone  rather  to  compare 
ourselves  with  others,  than  to  judge  by  the 
scriptures ; and  while  each  can  see  that  they 
give  not  into  the  errors  and  mistakes  of  the 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR. 


31 T 


LET.  V.] 

opposite  party,  both  are  ready  to  conclude 
that  they  are  right : and  thus  it  happens,  that 
an  attachment  to  a supposed  gospel-order 
will  recommend  a man  sooner  and  farther  to 
some  churches,  than  an  eminency  of  gospel- 
practice.  I hope  you  will  beware  of  such  a 
spirit,  whenever  you  publicly  assume  the  In- 
dependent character;  this,  like  a worm  at 
the  root,  has  nipt  the  graces,  and  hindered  the 
usefulness  of  many  a valuable  man;  and 
those  who  change  sides  and  opinions  are  the 
most  liable  to  it.  For  the  pride  of  our  heart 
insensibly  prompts  us  to  cast  about  far  and 
near  for  arguments  to  justify  our  own  beha- 
viour, and  makes  us  too  ready  to  hold  the 
opinions  we  have  taken  up  to  the  very  ex- 
treme, that  those  amongst  whom  we  are 
newly  come  may  not  suspect  our  sincerity. 
In  a word,  let  us  endeavour  to  keep  close  to 
God,  to  be  much  in  prayer,  to  watch  care- 
fully over  our  hearts,  and  leave  the  busy 
warm  spirits  to  make  the  best  of  their  work. 
The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that 
fear  him,  and  that  wait  on  him  continually ; 
to  these  he  will  show  his  covenant,  not  no- 
tionally,  but  experimentally.  A few  minutes 
of  the  Spirit's  teaching  will  furnish  us  with 
more  real  useful  knowledge,  than  toiling 
through  whole  folios  of  commentators  and 
expositors.  They  are  useful  in  their  places, 
and  are  not  to  be  undervalued  by  those  who  can 
perhaps  in  general  do  better  without  them  ; 
but  it  will  be  our  wisdom  to  deal  less  with 
the  streams,  and  be  more  close  in  applying 
to  the  fountain  head.  The  scripture  itself, 
and  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  the  best  and  the 
only  sufficient  expositors  of  scripture.  What- 
ever men  have  valuable  in  their  writings, 
they  got  it  from  hence;  and  the  way  is  as 
open  to  us  as  to  any  of  them.  There  is  no- 
thing required  but  a teachable  humble  spirit; 
and  learning,  as  it  is  commonly  called,  is  not 
necessary  in  order  to  this.  I commend  you 
to  the  grace  of  God,  and  remain — Yours,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

Jan.  10,  1760. 

dear  sir, — I have  procured  Cennick’s 
sermons ; they  are,  in  my  judgment,  sound 
and  sweet.  O that  you  and  I had  a double 
portion  of  that  spirit  and  unction  which  is  in 
them.  Come,  let  us  not  despair ; the  foun- 
tain is  as  full  and  as  free  as  ever ; — precious 
fountain,  ever  flowing  with  blood  and  water, 
milk  and  wine.  This  is  the  stream  that 
heals  the  wounded,  refreshes  the  weary,  sa- 
tisfies the  hungry,  strengthens  the  weak,  and 
confirms  the  strong ; it  opens  the  eyes  of  the 
blind,  softens  the  heart  of  stone,  teaches  the 
dumb  to  sing,  and  enables  the  lame  and 
paralytic  to  walk,  to  leap,  to  run,  to  fly,  to 
mount  up  with  eagles’  wings : a taste  of  this 


stream  raises  earth  to  heaven,  and  brings 
down  heaven  upon  earth.  Nor  is  it  a foun- 
tain only  ; it  is  a universal  blessing,  and  as- 
sumes a variety  of  shapes  to  suit  itself  to  our 
wants.  It  is  a sun,  a shield,  a garment,  a 
shade,  a banner,  a refuge : it  is  bread,  the 
true  bread,  the  very  staff  of  life:  it  is  life  it- 
self, immortal,  eternal  life ! 

The  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  my  Lord, 

Is  food  and  med’cine,  shield  and  sword. 

Take  that  for  your  motto ; wear  it  in  your 
heart ; keep  it  in  your  eye : have  it  often  in 
your  mouth  till  you  can  find  something  better. 
The  cross  of  Christ  is  the  tree  of  life  and 
the  tree  of  knowledge  combined.  Blessed  be 
God,  there  is  neither  prohibition  nor  flaming 
sword  to  keep  us  back;  but  it  stands  like  a 
tree  by  the  highway-side,  which  affords  its 
shade  to  every  passenger  without  distinction. 
Watch  and  pray.  We  live  in  a sifting  time; 
error  gains  ground  every  day.  May  the  name 
and  love  of  our  Saviour  Jesus  keep  us  and  all 
his  people.  Either  write  or  come  very  soon 
to, — Yours,  &c. 


LETTER  V. 

November  15,  1760. 

dear  sir, — If  your  visit  should  be  delayed, 
let  me  have  a letter.  I want  either  good 
news  or  good  advice ; to  hear  that  your  soul 
prospers,  or  to  receive  something  that  may 
quicken  my  own.  The  apostle  says,  “Ye 
know  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ:” 
alas ! we  know  hfrw  to  say  something  about 
it,  but  how  faint  and  feeble  are  our  real  per- 
ceptions of  it ! Our  love  to  him  is  the  proof 
and  measure  of  what  we  know  of  his  love  to 
us.  Surely  then  we  are  mere  children  in 
this  kind  of  knowledge,  and  every  other  kind 
is  vain.  What  should  we  think  of  a man 
who  should  neglect  his  business,  family,  and 
all  the  comforts  of  life,  that  he  might  study 
the  Chinese  language ; though  he  knows  be- 
forehand he  should  never  be  able  to  attain 
it,  nor  ever  find  occasion  or  opportunity  to 
use  it?  The  pursuit  of  every  branch  of 
knowledge  that  is  not  closely  connected 
with  the  one  thing  needful,  is  no  iess  ridi- 
culous. * 

You  know  something  of  our  friend  Mrs. 

B . She  has  been  more  than  a month 

confined  to  her  bed,  and  I believe  her  next 
remove  will  be  to  her  coffin.  The  Lord  has 
done  great  things  for  her.  Though  she  has 
been  a serious  exemplary  person  all  her  life, 
when  the  prospect  of  death  presented,  she  be- 
gan to  cry  out  earnestly,  “ What  shall  I do 
to  be  saved !”  But  her  solicitude  is  at  an  end ; 
she  has  seen  the  salvation  of  God,  and  now  for 
the  most  part  rejoices  in  something  more  than 
hope.  This  you  will  account  good  news,  I 


318 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR. 


am  sure.  Let  it  be  your  encouragement  and 
mine.  The  Lord’s  arm  is  not  shortened,  nor 
is  his  presence  removed  ; he  is  near  us  still, 
though  we  perceive  him  not.  May  he  guide 
you  with  his  eye  in  all  your  public  and  pri- 
vate concerns,  and  may  he  in  particular  bless 
our  communications  to  our  mutual  advantage. 
I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VI. 

July  29,  1761. 

dear  sir, — Are  the  quarrels  made  up? 
Tell  those  who  know  what  communion  with 
Jesus  is  worth,  that  they  will  never  be  able 
to  maintain  it,  if  they  give  way  to  the  work- 
ings of  pride,  jealousy,  and  anger.  This  will 
provoke  the  Lord  to  leave  them  dry,  to  com- 
mand the  clouds  of  his  grace  that  they  rain  no 
rain  upon  them.  These  things  are  sure  signs 
of  a low  frame,  and  a sure  way  to  keep  it  so. 
Could  they  be  prevailed  upon,  from  a sense 
of  the  pardoning  love  of  God  to  their  own 
souls,  to  forgive  each  other,  as  the  Lord  for- 
gives us,  freely,  fully,  without  condition  and 
without  reserve,  they  would  find  this  like 
breaking  down  a stone  wall,  which  has  hither- 
to shut  up  their  prayers  from  the  Lord’s  ears, 
and  shut  out  his  blessing  from  filling  their 
hearts.  Tell  them,  I hope  to  hear  that  all 
animosities,  little  and  big,  are  buried  by  mu- 
tual consent,  in  the  Redeemer’s  grave.  Alas ! 
the  people  of  God  have  enemies  enough: 
Why,  then,  will  they  weaken  their  own 
hands?  Why  will  they  help  their  enemies 
to  pull  down  the  Lord’s  work  ? Why  will 
they  grieve  those  that  wish  them  well,  cause 
the  weak  to  stumble,  the  wicked  to  rejoice, 
and  bring  a reproach  upon  their  holy  profes- 
sion? Indeed,  this  is  no  light  matter;  I 
wish  it  may  not  lead  them  to  something 
worse ; I wish  they  may  be  wise  in  time, 
lest  Satan  gains  further  advantage  over 
them,  and  draw  them  to  something  that  shall 
make  them  (as  David  did)  roar  under  the 
pains  of  broken  bones.  But  I must  break 
off.  May  God  give  you  wisdom,  faithful- 
ness, and  patience.  Take  care  that  you  do 
not  catch  an  angry  spirit  yourself,  while  you 
aim  to  suppress  it  in  others ; this  will  spoil 
all,  and  you  will  exhort,  advise,  and  weep  in 
vain.  May  you  rather  be  an  example  and  pat- 
tern to  the  flock ; and  in  this  view,  be  not  sur- 
prised if  you  yourself  meet  some  hard  usage ; 
rather  rejoice  that  you  will  thereby  have 
an  opportunity  to  exemplify  your  own  rules, 
and  to  convince  your  people,  that  what  you 
recommend  to  them  you  do  not  speak  by 
rote,  but  from  the  experience  of  your  heart. 
One  end  why  our  Lord  was  tempted,  was 
for  the  encouragement  of  his  poor  followers, 
that  they  might  know  him  to  be  a High- 
Priest  suited  to  them,  having  had  a fellow- 


[let.  VII, 

feeling  in  their  distresses.  For  the  like 
reason,  he  appoints  his  ministers  to  be  sorely 
exercised  both  from  without  and  within,  that 
they  may  sympathize  with  their  flock,  and 
know  in  their  own  hearts  the  deceitfulness 
of  sin,  the  infirmities  of  the  flesh,  and  the 
way  in  which  the  Lord  supports  and  bears 
with  all  that  trust  him.  Therefore  be  not 
discouraged  ; usefulness  and  trials,  comforts 
and  crosses,  strength  and  exercise,  go  to- 
gether. But  remember  he  has  said,  “ I will 
never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee ; be  thou 
faithful  unto  death,  and  I will  give  thee  a 
crown  of  life.”  When  you  get  to  heaven, 
you  will  ngt  complain  of  the  way  by  which 
the  Lord  brought  you.  Farewell.  Pray  for 
us. — Yours,  &c. 


LETTER  VII. 

Dec.  14,  1761. 

dear  sir, — I pray  the  Lord  to  accompany 
you  ; but  cannot  help  fearing  you  go  on  too 
fast.  If  you  have  not  (as  I am  sure  you 
ought  not)  made  an  absolute  promisq,  but 
only  conditional,  you  need  not  be  so  solicit- 
ous ; depend  upon  it,  when  the  Lord  is  pleas- 
ed to  remove  you,  he  will  send  one  to  supply 
your  place.  I am  grieved  that  your  mind  is 
so  set  upon  a step,  which,  I fear,  will  occa- 
sion many  inconveniences  to  a people  who 
have  deserved  your  best  regard.  Others 
may  speak  you  fairer,  but  none  wishes  you 
better  than  myself;  therefore  I hope  you  al- 
low me  to  speak  my  mind  plainly,  and  be- 
lieve that  it  is  no  pleasure  to  me  to  oppose 
your  inclinations.  As  to  your  saying  they 
will  take  no  denial,  it  has  no  weight  with 
me.  Had  they  asked  what  you  were  ex- 
ceedingly averse  to,  you  would  soon  have  ex- 
pressed yourself  so  as  to  convince  them  it 
was  to  no  purpose  to  urge  you  ; but  they 
saw  something  in  your  manner  or  language 
that  encouraged  them ; they  saw  the  propo- 
sal was  agreeable  to  you,  that  you  were  not 
at  all  unwilling  to  exchange  your  old  friends 
for  new  ones;  and  this  is  the  reason  they 
would  take  no  denial.  If  you  should  live  to 
see  those  who  are  most  forward  in  pressing 
you  become  the  first  to  discourage  you,  you 
will  think  seriously  of  my  words. 

If  I thought  my  advice  would  prevai\  it 
should  be  this:  call  the  people  together,  aru 
desire  them,  if  possible,  to  forget  you  ever  in- 
tended to  depart  from  them : and  promise  not 
to  think  cf  a removal,  till  the  Lord  shall  make 
your  way  so  clear,  that  even  they  shall  have 
nothing  reasonable  to  object  against  it.  You 
may  keep  your  word  with  your  other  friends 
too  ; for  when  a proper  person  shall  offer,  as 
likely  to  please  and  satisfy  the  people  as  your- 
self, I will  give  my  hearty  consent  to  voui 
removal. 


LET.  VIII. J 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR. 


319 


Consider  what  it  is  you  would  have  in  your 
office,  but  maintenance,  acceptance,  and  suc- 
cess. Have  you  not  these  where  you  are? 
Are  you  sure  of  having-  them  where  you  are 
going?  Are  you  sure  the  Spirit  of  God 
(without  which  you  will  do  nothing)  will  be 
with  you  there,  as  he  has  been  with  you 
hitherto?  Perhaps,  if  you  act  in  your  own 
spirit  you  may  find  as  great  a change  as 
Samson.  I am  ready  to  weep  when  I think 
what  difficulties  were  surmounted  to  accom- 
plish your  ordination;  and  now,  when  the 
people  thought  themselves  fixed,  that  you 
should  so  soon  disappoint  them. — Yours,  &c. 


LETTER  VIII. 

February  15,  1762. 

bear  sir, — I have  been  often  thinking  of 
you  since  your  removal,  and  was  glad  to  re- 
ceive your  letter  to-day.  I hope  you  will 
still  go  on  to  find  more  and  more  encourage- 
ment to  believe,  that  the  Lord  has  disposed 
and  led  you  to  the  step  you  have  taken.  For 
though  I wrote  with  the  greatest  plainness 
and  earnestness,  and  would,  if  in  my  power, 
have  prevented  it  while  under  deliberation, 
yet,  now  it  is  done  and  past  recall,  I would 
rather  help  than  dishearten  you.  Indeed,  I 
cannot  say  that  my  view  of  the  affair  is  yet 
altered.  The  best  way  not  to  be  cast  down 
hereafter,  is  not  to  be  too  sanguine  at  first. 
You  know  there  is  something  pleasing  in 
novelty ; as  yet  you  are  new  to  them,  and 
they  to  you : I pray  God,  that  you  may  find 
as  cordial  a regard  from  them  as  at  present, 
when  you  have  been  with  them  as  many 
years  as  in  the  place  you  came  from.  And 
if  you  have  grace  to  be  watchful  and  prayer- 
ful, all  will  be  well;  for  we  serve  a gracious 
Master,  who  knows  how  to  overrule  even 
our  mistakes  to  his  glory  and  our  own  advan- 
tage. Yet  I observe,  that  when  we  do  wrong, 
sooner  or  later  we  smart  for  our  indiscretion, 
perhaps  many  years  afterwards.  After  we 
have  seen  and  confessed  our  fault,  and  re- 
ceived repeated  proofs  of  pardoning  love,  as 
to  the  guilt,  yet  chastisement,  to  remind  us 
more  sensibly  of  our  having  done  amiss,  will 
generally  find  us  out.  So  it  was  with  David 
in  the  matter  of  Uriah  ; the  Lord  put  away 
his  sin,  healed  his  broken  bones,  and  restored 
unto  him  the  light  of  his  countenance ; yet 
many  troubles,  in  consequence  of  this  affair, 
followed  one  upon  another,  till  at  length 
(many  years  afterwards)  he  was  driven  from 
Jerusalem  by  his  own  son.  So  it  was  with 
Jacob:  he  dealt  deceitfully  with  his  brother 
Esau ; notwithstanding  this  the  Lord  ap- 
peared to  him  and  blessed  him,  gave  him 
comfortable  promises,  and  revealed  himself 
to  him  from  time  to  time ; yet  after  an  inter- 
val of  twenty  years,  his  fault  was  brought 


afresh  to  his  remembrance,  and  his  heart 
trembled  within  him,  when  he  heard  his 
brother  was  coming  with  armed  men  to  meet 
him.  And  thus  I have  found  it  in  my  own 
experience  ; things  which  I had  forgotten  a 
long  while  have  been  brought  to  my  mind 
by  providential  dispensations  which  I little 
expected  ; but  the  first  rise  of  which  I have 
been  able  to  trace  far  back,  and  forced  to 
confess,  tluit  the  Lord  is  indeed  He  that  judg- 
eth  the  heart  and  trieth  the  reins.  I hint 
this  for  your  caution ; you  know  best  upon 
what  grounds  you  have  proceeded  ; but  if 
(though  I do  not  affirm  it,  I hope  other- 
wise,) I say,  if  you  have  acted  too  much  in 
your  own  spirit,  been  too  hasty  and  precipi- 
tate ; if  you  have  not  been  sufficiently  tender 
of  your  people,  nor  thoughtful  of  the  conse- 
quences which  your  departure  will  probably 
involve  them  in ; if  you  were  impatient  un- 
der the  Lord’s  hand,  and,  instead  of  waiting 
his  time  and  way  of  removing  the  trials  and 
difficulties  you  found,  you  have  ventured 
upon  an  attempt  to  free  and  mend  yourself ; 
I say,  if  any  of  these  things  have  mixed  with 
your  determinations,  something  will  fall  out 
to  show  you  your  fault : either  you  will  not 
find  the  success  you  hope  for,  or  friends  will 
grow  cold,  or  enemies  and  difficulties  you 
dream  not  of,  will  present  themselves ; or 
your  own  mind  will  alter,  so  as  what  seems 
now  most  pleasant  will  afford  you  little  plea- 
sure. Yet,  though  I write  thus,  I do  not 
mean,  as  I said  before,  to  discourage  you, 
but  that  you  may  be  forewarned,  humble,  and 
watchful.  If  you  should  at  any  time  have  a 
different  view  of  things,  you  may  take  com- 
fort from  the  instances  I have  mentioned. 
The  trials  of  David  and  Jacob  were  sharp, 
but  they  were  short ; and  they  proved  to  their 
advantage,  put  them  upon  acts  of  humiliation 
and  prayer,  and  ended  in  a double  blessing. 
Nothing  can  harm  us  that  quickens  our  ear- 
nestness and  frequency  in  applying  to  a 
throne  of  grace : only  trust  the  Lord,  and 
keep  close  to  him,  and  all  that  befalls  you 
shall  be  for  good.  Temptations  end  in  vic- 
tory; troubles  prove  an  increase  of  consola- 
tion; yea,  our  very  falls  and  failings  tend  to 
increase  our  spiritual  wisdom,  to  give  us  a 
greater  knowledge  of  Satan’s  devices,  and 
make  us  more  habitually  upon  our  guard 
against  them.  Happy  case  of  the  believer 
in  Jesus ! when  bitten  by  the  fiery  serpent 
he  needs  not  go  far  for  a remedy ; he  has  only 
to  look  to  a bleeding  Saviour,  and  be  healed. 

I think  one  great  advantage  that  attends  a 
removal  into  a new  place  is,  that  it  gives  an 
easy  opportunity  of  forming  a new  plan,  ana 
breaking  off  any  little  habits  which  we  have- 
found  inconvenient,  and  yet,  perhaps,  could 
not  so  readily  lay  aside,  where  our  customs 
and  acquaintance  had  been  long  formed.  I 
earnestly  recommend  to  you  to  reflect,  if 
you  cannot  recollect  some  things  which  you 


320 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR. 


have  hitherto  omitted,  which  may  properly 
be  now  taken  up ; some  things  formerly  al- 
lowed, which  may  now  with  ease  and  con- 
venience be  laid  aside.  I only  give  the  hint 
in  general ; for  I have  nothing  in  particular 
to  charge  you  with.  I recommend  to  you  to 
be  very  choice  of  your  time,  especially  the 
fore  part  of  the  day.  Let  your  morning 
hours  be  devoted  to  prayer,  reading,  and 
study;  and  suffer  not  the  importunity  of 
friends  to  rob  you  of  the  hours  before  noon, 
without  a just  necessity:  and  if  you  accustom 
yourself  to  rise  early  in  the  morning,  you 
will  find  a great  advantage.  Be  careful  to 
avoid  losing  your  thoughts,  whether  in  books 
or  otherwise,  upon  any  subject  which  are 
not  of  a direct  subserviency  to  your  great  de- 
sign, till  towards  dinner-time.  The  after- 
noon is  not  so  favourable  to  study : this  is  a 
proper  time  for  paying  and  receiving  visits, 
conversing  among  your  friends,  or  unbending 
with  a book  of  instructive  entertainment, 
6uch  as  history,  &c.  which  may  increase 
your  general  knowledge,  without  a great 
confinement  of  your  attention ; but  let  the 
morning  hours  be  sacred.  I think  you  would 
likewise  find  advantage  in  using  your  pen 
more.  Write  short  notes  upon  the  scriptures 
you  read,  or  transcribe  the  labours  of  others ; 
make  extracts  from  your  favourite  authors, 
especially  those  who,  besides  a fund  of  spirit- 
ual and  evangelical  matter,  have  a happy 
talent  of  expressing  their  thoughts  in  a clear 
and  lively,  or  pathetic  manner.  You  would 
find  a continued  exercise  in  this  wTay  would 
be  greatly  useful  to  form  your  own  style, 
and  help  your  delivery  and  memory;  you 
would  become  insensibly  master  of  their 
thoughts,  and  find  it  more  easy  to  express 
yourself  justly  and  clearly : what  we  read  we 
easily  lose,  but  what  we  commit  to  paper  is 
not  so  soon  forgot.  Especially  remember 
(what  you  well  know,  but  we  cannot  too 
often  remind  each  other,)  that  frequent  secret 
prayer  is  the  life  of  all  we  do.  If  any  man 
lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,  and  it  shall 
be  given ; but  all  our  diligence  will  fail,  if 
we  are  remiss  in  this  particular.  I am  glad 
it  is  not  thought  necessary  for  you  to  go  to 
London  on  this  occasion.  I hope  you  will 
not  think  it  necessary  upon  any  other  ac- 
count. Rather  keep  close  to  the  work  you 
have  undertaken,  and  endeavour  to  avoid  any 
thing  that  looks  like  ostentation,  or  a desire 
to  be  taken  notice  of.  You  see  I advise  you 
with  the  freedom  of  a friend  who  loves  you, 
and  longs  to  see  your  work  and  your  soul 
prosper. 

You  will,  I doubt  not,  endeavour  to  pro- 
mote the  practice  of  frequent  prayer  in  the 
houses  that  receive  you.  I look  upon  prayer- 
meetings  as  the  most  profitable  exercises 
(excepting  the  public  preaching)  in  which 
Christians  can  engage : they  have  a direct 
tendency  to  kill  a worldly,  trifling  spirit,  to 


[let.  Til*. 

draw  down  a divine  blessing  upon  all  our 
concerns,  compose  differences,  and  enkindle 
(at  least  to  maintain)  the  flame  of  divine  love 
amongst  brethren.  But  I need  not  tell  you 
the  advantages;  you  know  them;  I only 
would  exhort  you,  and  the  rather  as  I find 
in  my  own  case  the  principal  cause  of  my 
leanness  and  unfruitfulness  is  owing  to  an 
unaccountable  backwardness  to  pray.  I can 
write,  or  read,  or  converse,  or  hear,  with  a 
ready  will ; but  prayer  is  more  spiritual  and 
inward  than  any  of  these,  and  the  more  spi- 
ritual any  duty  is,  the  more  my  carnal  heart 
is  apt  to  start  from  it.  May  the  Lord  pour 
forth  his  precious  spirit  of  prayer  and  sup- 
plication in  both  our  hearts ! 

1 am  not  well  pleased  with  the  account  you 
give  of  so  many  dry  bones.  It  increases  my 
wonder,  that  you  could  so  readily  exchange 
so  much  plump  flesh  and  blood  as  you  had 
about  you  for  a parcel  of  skeletons.  I wish 
they  may  not  haunt  you  and  disturb  your 
peace.  I wish  these  same  dry  bones  do  not 
prove  thorns  in  your  sides  and  in  your  eyes. 
You  say,  now  you  have  to  pray,  and  pro- 
phecy, and  wait  for  the  four  winds  to  come 
and  put  life  into  these  bones.  God  grant 
that  your  prayers  may  be  answered ; but  if  I 
knew  a man  who  possessed  a field  in  a tolera- 
ble soil,  which  had  afforded  him  some  in- 
crease every  year,  and  if  this  man,  after  hav- 
ing bestowed  seven  years’  labour  in  culti- 
vating, weeding,  manuring,  fencing,  &c.,  just 
when  he  has  brought  his  ground  fin  his 
neighbour’s  judgment)  into  good  order,  and 
might  reasonably  hope  for  larger  crops  than 
he  had  ever  yet  seen,  should  suddenly  forego 
all  his  advantages,  leave  his  good  seed  for 
the  birds  to  eat,  pull  up  the  young  fences 
which  cost  him  so  much  pains  to  plant,  and 
all  this  for  the  sake  of  making  a new  ex- 
periment upon  the  top  of  a mountain ; though 
I might  heartily  wish  him  great  success  I 
could  not  honestly  give  him  great  encourage- 
ment. You  have  parted  with  that  for  a 
trifle  which  in  my  eyes  seems  an  inestimable 
jewel,  I mean  the  hearts  and  affections  of  an 
enlightened  people.  This  appears  to  me  one 
of  the  greatest  honours  and  greatest  plea- 
sures a faithful  minister  can  possess,  and 
which  many  faithful  and  eminent  ministers 
have  never  been  able  to  obtain.  This  gave 
you  a vast  advantage ; your  gift  was  more 
acceptable  there  than  that  of  any  other  per- 
son, and  more  than  you  will  probably  find 
elsewhere.  For  I cannot  make  a comparison 
between  the  hasty  approbation  of  a few, 
whose  eyes  are  but  beginning  to  open,  and 
their  affections  and  passions  warm,  so  that 
they  must,  if  possible,  have  the  man  that  first 
catches  their  attention : I say,  I cannot  think 
this  worthy  to  be  compared  to  the  regard 
of  a people  who  understood  the  gospel,  were 
able  to  judge  of  men  and  doctrines,  and  had 
trial  of  you  for  so  many  years.  It  is,  indeed, 


LETTERS  TO  TIIE  REV.  MR. 


321 


LET.  VIII.] 


much  to  your  honour  (it  proves  that  you 
were  faithful,  diligent,  and  exemplary,)  that 
the  people  proved  so  attached  to  you ; but 
that  you  should  force  yourself  from  them, 
when  they  so  dearly  loved  you,  and  so  much 
needed  you,  this  has  made  all  your  friends 
in  these  parts  to  wonder,  and  your  enemies 
to  rejoice ; and  I,  alas ! know  not  what  to 
answer  in  your  behalf  to  either.  Say  not 
“ I hate  this  Micaiah,  for  he  prophecies  not 
good  of  me,  but  evil,”  but  allow  me  the  pri- 
vilege of  a friend.  My  heart  is  full  when  I 
think  what  has  happened,  and  what  will  pro- 
bably be  the  consequence.  In  a few  words, 


I am  strongly  persuaded  you  have  taken  an 
unadvised  step,  and  would  therefore  prepare 
you  for  the  inconvenience  and  uneasiness 
you  may  probably  meet  with.  And  if  I am 
(as  I desire  I may  prove)  mistaken,  my  ad- 
vice will  do  no  harm;  you  will  want  some- 
thing to  balance  the  caresses  and  success  you 
meet  with. 

We  should  be  very  glad  to  see  you,  and 
hope  you  will  take  your  measures,  when  you 
do  come,  to  lengthen  your  usual  stay,  in  pro- 
portion to  the  difference  of  the  distance.  Pray 
for  us. — I am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO  MRS.  P 


LETTER  I. 

May  — , 1774. 

my  dear  madam, — I have  had  sudden 
notice  that  I may  send  you  a hasty  line,  to 
express  our  satisfaction  in  hearing  that  you 
had  a safe  though  perilous  journey.  I hope 
I shall  be  always  mindful  to  pray  that  the 
Lord  may  guide,  bless,  and  comfort  you,  and 
give  you  such  a manifestation  of  his  person, 
power,  and  grace,  as  may  set  you  at  liberty 
from  all  fear,  and  fill  you  with  abiding  peace 
and  joy  in  believing.  Remember  that  Jesus 
has  all  power,  the  fulness  of  compassion, 
and  embraces  with  open  arms  all  that  come 
to  him  for  life  and  salvation. 

I know  not  whether  Mrs. ’s  illness 

was  before  or  since  my  last.  Through  mercy 
she  is  better  again ; and  I remain  so,  though 
death  and  illness  are  still  walking  about  the 
town.  O for  grace  to  take  warning  by  the 
suffering  of  others,  to  sit  loose  to  the  world, 
and  so  to  number  our  days,  as  to  incline  our 
hearts  to  the  one  thing  needful ! Indeed  that 
one  thing  includes  many  things  sufficient  to 
engage  the  best  of  our  thoughts  and  the  most 
of  our  time,  if  we  were  duly  sensible  of  their 
importance ; but  I may  adopt  the  psalmist’s 
expression,  “ My  soul  cleaveth  to  the  dust.” 
How  is  it  that  the  truths  of  which  I have  the 
most  undoubted  conviction,  and  which  are 
of  all  others  the  most  weighty,  should  make 
so  little  impression  upon  me  ! 0 1 know  the 
cause  ! it  is  deeply  rooted.  An  evil  nature 
cleaves  to  me ; so  that  when  I would  do  good 
evil  is  present  with  me.  It  is,  however,  a 
mercy  to  be  made  sensible  of  it,  and  in  any 
measure  humbled  for  it.  Ere  long  it  will  be 
dropped  in  the  grave ; then  all  compliments 
shall  cease.  That  thought  gives  relief.  I 
shall  not  always  live  this  poor  dying  life : I 
hope  one  day  to  be  all  ear,  all  heart,  all 
tongue;  when  I shall  see  the  Redeemer  as  he 
is,  I shall  be  like  him.  This  will  be  a heaven 
indeed,  to  behold  his  glory  without  a vail,  to 
rejoice  in  his  love  without  a cloud,  and  to 
sing  his  praises,  without  one  jarring  or  wan- 
dering note,  for  ever.  In  the  mean  tim  ?, 
may  he  enable  us  to  serve  him  with  our  bes  „ 


O that  every  power,  faculty,  efsu  talent,  were 
devoted  to  him ! he  deserves  all  we  have,  and 
ten  thousand  times  more  if  we  had  it ; for  he 
has  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in 
his  own  blood.  He  gave  himself  for  us.  In 
one  sense  we  are  well  suited  to  answer  his 
purpose ; for  if  we  were  not  vile  and  worth- 
less, beyond  expression,  the  exceeding  riches 
of  his  grace  wTould  not  have  been  so  glorious- 
ly displayed.  His  glory  shines  more  in  re- 
deeming one  sinner,  than  in  preserving  a 

thousand  angels.  Poor  Mr. is  still 

in  the  dark  valley ; but  we  trust  prayer  shall 
yet  bring  him  out.  Mighty  things  have 
been  done  in  answer  to  prayer ; and  the 
Lord’s  arm  is  not  shortened,  neither  is  his 
ear  heavy.  It  is  our  part  to  wait  till  we 
have  an  answer.  One  of  his  own  hymns 
says, 

The  promise  may  be  long  deferr’d, 

But  never  comes  too  late. 

I suppose  you  have  heard  of  the  death  of 

Mr.  T of  R . This  is  apparently  a 

heavy  blow.  He  was  an  amiable,  judicious, 
candid  man,  and  an  excellent  preacher  in  a 
great  sphere  of  usefulness ; and  his  age  and 
constitution  gave  hopes  that  he  might  have 
been  eminently  serviceable  for  many  years. 
How  often  does  the  Lord  write  Vanity  upon 
all  our  expectations  from  men.  He  visited  a 
person  ili  of  a putrid  fever,  and  carried  the 
seeds  of  infection  with  him  to  London,  where 

he  died.  Mrs. is  a very  excellent  and 

accomplished  wToman,  but  exceedingly  deli- 
cate in  her  frame  and  spirits.  How  can  she 
bear  so  sudden  and  severe  a stroke ! But 
yet  I hope  she  will  afford  a proof  of  the 
Lord’s  all-sufficiency  and  faithfulness.  O 
madam,  the  Lord  our  God  is  a great  God  ! 
If  he  frowms,  the  smiles  of  the  whole  creation 
can  afford  no  comfort ; and  if  he  is  phased 
to  smile,  he  can  enable  the  soul  under  the 
darkest  dispensations  to  say,  All  is  well. 
Yet  the  flesh  will  feel,  and  it  ought:  other- 
wise the  exercise  of  faith,  patience,  and  re- 
signation, would  be  impracticable.  I have 
lost  in  him  one  of  my  most  valued  and  valu- 
able friends  ; but  w7hat  is  my  loss  to  that  o 
' his  people  I 


322 


323 


LET.  in.]  LETTERS  TO 

The  Lord  bless  you  and  keep  you.  The 
Lord  increase  you  more  and  more,  you  and 
your  children.  The  Lord  lift  up  the  light  of 
his  countenance  upon  you,  and  give  you  his 
peace.  I thank  him  for  leading  you  to  us, 
but  especially  for  making  your  visit  there  in 
any  measure  agreeable  and  profitable  to  your- 
self. If  I have  been  an  instrument  in  his 
hand  for  your  comfort,  I have  reason  to  re- 
member it  among  the  greatest  favours  he  has 
conferred  upon  me.  And  now,  dear  Madam, 
once  more  farewell.  If  the  Lord  spares  our 
lives,  I hope  we  shall  see  each  other  again 
upon  earth.  But,  above  all,  let  us  rejoice  in 
the  blessed  gospel,  by  which  immortality  is 
brought  to  light,  and  a glorious  prospect  open- 
ed beyond  the  grave. 

There  sits  our  Saviour  thron’d  in  light, 

Cloth’d  with  a body  like  our  own. 

There  at  least,  after  all  the  changes  and  trials 
of  this  state,  we  shall  meet  to  part  no  more. 
— I am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

1775. 

my  dear  madam,— I should  have  been 
more  uneasy  at  being  prevented  writing 
immediately,  had  I any  reason  to  apprehend 
my  advice  necessary  upon  the  point  you  pro- 
pose, which,  by  this  time,  I suppose  is  settled 
as  it  should  be  without  me.  I smiled  at  Miss 

M ’s  disappointment.  However,  if  the 

Lord  favours  her  with  a taste  for  the  library  of 
my  proposing,  she  will  be  like  the  merchant- 
man seeking  goodly  pearls,  and  will  count 
all  other  books  but  pebbles  in  comparison  of 
those  four  volumes,  which  present  us  with 
something  new  and  important  whenever  we 
look  into  them.  I shall  be  much  obliged  to 
her  if  she  will  commit  the  third  chapter  of 
Proverbs  to  her  memory,  and  I shall  pray  the 
Lord  to  write  it  in  her  heart. 

You  surprise  me  when  you  tell  me,  the  in- 
cident of  my  birth-day  was  noticed  by  those 
I never  saw.  Be  so  good  as  to  return  my 
thanks  to  my  unknown  friends,  and  tell  them, 
that  I pray  our  common  Lord  and  Saviour  to 
bless  them  abundantly.  His  people  while 
here  are  scattered  abroad,  separated  by  hills 
and  rivers,  and  too  often  by  names  and  pre- 
judices, but  by  and  by  we  shall  all  meet, 
where  we  shall  all  know  and  acknowledge 
each  other,  and  rejoice  together  for  evermore. 
I have  lately  read  with  much  pleasure,  and 
I hope  with  some  profit,  the  history  of  the 
Greenland  Mission.  Upon  the  whole,  it  is  a 
glorious  work.  None  who  love  the  Lord 
will  refuse  to  say,  it  is  the  finger  of  God 
indeed.  For  my  own  part,  my  soul  rejoices 
in  it : and  I honour  the  instruments,  as  men 
who  have  hazarded  their  lives  in  an  extra- 


MRS.  P- 

ordinary  manner  for  the  sake  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  Sure  I am  that  none  could  have  sus- 
tained such  discouragements  at  first,  or  have 
obtained  such  success  afterwards,  unless  the 
Lord  had  sent,  supported,  and  owned  them. 

I hope  we  shall  have  an  interest  in  your 
prayers.  I trust  the  Lord  is  yet  with  us. 
We  have  some  ripe  for  the  sickle,  and  some 
just  springing  up ; some  tokens  of  his  gracious 
presence  among  us ; but  sin  and  Satan  cut 
us  out  abundance  of  work  as  individuals, 
though,  through  mercy,  as  a society,  we  walk 
in  peace. 

The  toad  and  spider  is  an  exhibition  of  my 
daily  experience.  1 am  often  wounded,  but 
the  Lord  is  my  health : still  I am  a living 
monument  of  mercy ; and  I trust  that  word, 
“ Because  I live,  you  shall  live  also,”  will 
carry  me  to  the  end.  1 am  poor,  weak,  and 
foolish ; but  Jesus  is  wise,  strong,  and  abound- 
ing in  grace.  He  has  given  me  a desire  to 
trust  my  all  in  his  hands,  and  he  will  not  dis- 
appoint the  expectation  which  he  himself  has 
raised.  At  present  I have  but  little  to  say, 
and  but  little  time  to  say  it  in.  When  you 
think  of  this  place,  I hope  you  will  think  and 
believe,  that  you  have  friends  here  most  cor- 
dially interested  in  your  welfare,  and  often 
remembering  you  in  prayer.  May  the  Lord 
be  your  guide  and  shield,  and  give  you  the 
best  desires  of  your  heart.  I pray  him  to 
establish  and  settle  you  in  the  great  truths 
of  his  word.  I trust  he  will.  We  learn 
more,  and  more  effectually,  by  one  minute’s 
communication  with  him  through  the  medium 
of  his  written  word,  than  we  could  from  an 
assembly  of  divines,  or  a library  of  books. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

August  — 1775. 

MY  DEAR  MADAM, It  is  not  Owing  to 

forgetfulness  that  your  letter  has  been  thus 
long  unanswered.  It  has  lain  within  my 
view  this  fortnight,  demanding  my  first 
leisure  hour ; but  affairs  of  daily  occurrence 
have  been  so  many  and  so  pressing,  that  I 
have  been  constrained  to  put  it  off  till  now. 
I trust  the  Lord,  by  his  Spirit  and  providence, 
will  direct  and  prosper  the  settlement  of  your 

children.  I desire  my  love  to  Miss  M . 

My  idea  of  her  enlarges.  Methinks  I see 
her  aspiring  to  be  as  tall  as  her  mamma.  I 
hope  likewise  that  she  increases  in  grace 
and  wisdom  as  in  years  and  stature ; and  that 
hearing  our  Lord’s  flock  is  a little  flock,  she 
feels  an  earnest  thirst  to  be  one  of  the  happy 
number  which  constitutes  his  fold. 

There  the  Lord  dwells  amongst  them  upon  his  own 
hill, 

With  the  flocks  all  around  him,  awaiting  his  will 
if  she  has  such  a desire,  I can  tell  who  gave 


324  LETTERS  TO 

it.  her,  for  I am  persuaded  it  was  not  born 
with  her:  and  where  the  good  husbandman 
sows,  there  will  he  also  reap.  Therefore, 

dear  Miss  M , press  forward:  knock  and 

it  shall  be  opened  unto  you,  for  yet  there  is 
room.  O what  a fold ! O what  a pasture ! 
O what  a shepherd ! Let  us  love,  and  sing, 
and  wonder. 

I hope  the  good  people  at  Bristol,  and  every 
where  else,  are  praying  for  our  sinful,  dis- 
tracted land,  in  this  dark  day.  The  Lord 
is  angry,  the  sword  is  drawn,  and  I am  afraid 
nothing  but  the  spirit  of  wrestling  prayer 
can  prevail  for  the  returning  it  into  the  scab- 
bard. Could  things  have  proceeded  to  these 
extremities,  except  the  Lord  had  withdrawn 
his  salutary  blessing  from  both  sides'?  It  is  a 
time  of  prayer.  We  see  the  beginning  of 
trouble,  but  who  can  foresee  the  possible  con- 
sequences? The  fire  is  kindled,  but  how  far 
it  may  spread,  those  who  are  above  may  per- 
haps know  better  than  we.  I meddle  not 
with  the  disputes  of  party,  nor  concern  myself 
about  any  political  maxims,  but  such  as  are 
laid  down  in  scripture.  There  I read,  that 
righteousness  exalteth  a nation,  and  that  sin 
is  the  reproach,  and  if  persisted  in,  the  ruin 
of  any  people.  Some  people  are  startled  at 
the  enormous  sum  of  our  national  debt:  they 
who  understand  spiritual  arithmetic,  may  well 
be  startled  if  they  sit  down  and  compute  the 
debt  of  national  sin.  Imprimis , Infidelity; 
Item,  Contempt  of  the  gospel ; Item,  The  pro- 
fligacy of  manners;  Item,  Perjury;  Item, 
The  cry  of  blood,  the  blood  of  thousands,  per- 
haps millions,  from  the  East  Indies.  It  would 
take  sheets,  yea  quires,  to  draw  out  the  parti- 
culars under  each  of  these  heads,  and  then 
much  would  remain  untold.  What  can  we 
rnswer,  when  the  Lord  saith,  “ Shall  not  I 
visit  for  these  things?  shall  not  my  soul  be 
avenged  on  such  a nation  as  this?”  Since  we 
received  the  news  of  the  first  hostilities  in 
America,  we  have  had  an  additional  prayer- 
meeting. Could  I hear  that  professors  in 
general,  instead  of  wasting  their  breath  in 
censuring  men  and  measures,  were  plying  the 
throne  of  grace,  I should  still  hope  for  a re- 
spite. Poor  New  England!  once  the  glory 
of  the  earth,  now  likely  to  be  visited  with  fire 
and  sword ! They  have  left  their  first  love, 
and  the  Lord  is  sorely  contending  with  them. 
Yet  surely  their  sins  as  a people  are  not  to 
be  compared  with  ours.  I am  just  so  much 
affected  with  these  things,  as  to  know  that  I 
am  not  affected  enough.  Oh ! my  spirit  is 
sadly  cold  and  insensible,  or  I should  lay  them 
to  heart  in  a different  manner;  yet  I endeavour 
to  give  the  alarm  as  far  as  I can.  There  is 
one  political  maxim  which  comforts  me,  “ The 
Lord  reigns.”  His  hand  guides  the  storm ; 
and  he  knows  them  that  are  his,  how  to  pro- 
tect, support,  and  deliver  them.  He  will 
take  care  of  his  own  cause,  yea,  he  will 
extend  his  kingdom,  even  by  these  formidable 


MRS.  P . [let.  hi. 

methods.  Men  have  one  thing  in  view,  he 
has  another,  and  his  counsel  shall  stand. 

The  chief  piece  of  news  since  my  last  is 
concerning  B.  A.  She  has  finished  her  course, 
and  is  now  with  the  great  multitude  who  have 
overcome  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  by 
the  word  of  his  testimony.  Tuesday,  the  1st 
of  February,  she  was  in  our  assembly,  was 
taken  ill  the  next  day,  and  died  while  we 
were  assembled  the  Tuesday  following.  She 
had  an  easy  dissolution,  retained  her  senses 
and  her  speech  to  the  last  minute,  and  went 
without  a struggle  or  a sigh.  She  was  not 
in  raptures  during  her  illness,  but  was  com- 
posed, and  maintained  a strong  and  lively 
faith.  She  had  a numerous  levee  about  her 
bed  daily,  who  were  all  witnesses  to  the  power 
of  faith,  and  to  the  faithfulness  of  the  Lord, 
enabling  her  to  triumph  over  the  approaches 
of  death;  for  she  was  well  known  and  well 
respected.  She  will  be  much  missed ; but  I 
hope  he  will  answer  the  many  prayers  she  put 
up  for  us,  and  raise  up  others  in  her  room. 
“Blessed  are  the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord.” 
Blessed  are  they  who  know  whom  they  have 
believed,  and  when  death  comes,  can  cheer- 
fully rest  their  hopes  on  him  who  died  that 
we  might  live.  B had  been  long  a pre- 

cious and  honourable  woman ; but  her  hope 
in  the  trying  hour  rested  not  in  what  she  had 
done  for  the  Lord,  but  upon  what  he  had 
done  for  her ; not  upon  the  change  his  grace 
hjd  wrought  in  her,  but  upon  the  righteous- 
ness he  had  wrought  out  for  her  by  his  obe- 
dience unto  death.  This  supported  her,  for 
she  saw  nothing  in  herself  but  what  she  was 
ashamed  of.  She  saw  reason  to  renounce 
her  own  goodness,  as  well  as  her  own  sins, 
as  to  the  point  of  acceptance  with  God,  and 
died,  as  St.  Paul  lived,  determined  to  know 
nothing  but  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified. 

The  time  when  Mr.  and  Mrs.  C re- 
move to  Scotland  drawing  near,  Mrs. is 

gone  to  spend  a week  or  two  with  them,  and 
take  her  leave.  She  feels  something  at  part- 
ing with  a sister,  who  is  indeed  a valuable 
person ; and  from  children  they  have  always 
lived  in  the  most  tender  intimacy  and  unin- 
terrupted friendship.  But  all  beneath  the 
moon  (like  the  moon  itself)  is  subject  to  in- 
cessant change.  Alterations  and  separations 
are  graciously  appointed  of  the  Lord,  to  re- 
mind us  that  this  is  not  our  rest,  and  to  pre- 
pare our  thoughts  for  that  approaching  change 
which  shall  fix  us  for  ever  in  an  unchange- 
able state.  O Madam  ! what  shall  we  poor 
worms  render  to  him  who  has  brought  life 
and  immortality  to  life  by  the  gospel,  taken 
away  the  sting  of  death,  revealed  a glorious 
prospect  beyond  the  grave,  and  given  us  eyes 
to  see  it?  Now  the  reflection,  that  we  must 
ere  long  take  a final  farewell  of  what  is  most 
capable  of  pleasing  us  upon  earth,  is  not  only 
tolerable,  but  pleasant.  For  we  know  we 
1 cannot  fully  possess  our  best  friend,  our  chief 


LETTERS  TO  MRS.  P- 


325 


LET.  IV.] 

treasure,  till  we  have  done  with  all  below; 
nay,  we  cannot  till  then  properly  see  each 
other.  We  are  cased  up  in  vehicles  of  clay, 
and  converse  together  as  if  we  were  in  differ- 
ent coaches,  with  the  blinds  close  drawn 
round.  We  see  the  carriage,  and  the  voice 
tells  us  that  we  have  a friend  within ; but 
we  shall  know  each  other  better,  when  death 
shall  open  the  coach  doors,  and  hand  out  the 
company  successively,  and  lead  them  into  the 
glorious  apartments  which  the  Lord  has  ap- 
pointed to  be  the  common  residence  of  them 
that  love  him.  What  an  assembly  will  there 
be ! What  a constellation  of  glory,  when 
each  individual  shall  shine  like  the  sun  in  the 
kingdom  of  their  Father ! No  sins,  sorrows, 
temptations;  no  vails,  clouds,  or  prejudices, 
shall  interrupt  us  then.  All  names  of  idle 
distinction  (the  fruits  of  present  remaining 
darkness,  the  channels  of  bigotry,  and  the 
stumbling-block  of  the  world)  will  be  at  an 
end. 

The  description  you  give  of  your  present 
residence  pleases  me  much,  and  chiefly  be- 
cause it  describes  and  manifests  to  me  some- 
thing still  more  interesting,  I mean  the 
peaceable  situation  of  your  mind.  Had  he 
placed  you  in  an  Eden  some  months  ago,  it 
would  hardly  have  awakened  your  descriptive 
talent.  But  he  whom  the  wind  and  seas  obey 
has  calmed  your  mind,  and  I trust  will  go 
on  to  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believ- 
ing. It  is  no  great  matter  where  we  are, 
provided  we  see  that  the  Lord  has  placed  us 
there,  and  that  he  is  with  us. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

1776. 

So,  my  dear  madam,  I hope  we  have  found 
you  out,  and  that  this  letter  will  reach  you  in 
good  time  to  welcome  you  in  our  names  to 
London.  We  are  ready  to  take  it  for  granted 
that  you  will  now  most  certainly  make  us  a 
visit.  Do  come  as  soon,  and  stay  as  long,  as 
you  possibly  can.  Methinks  you  will  be  glad 
to  get  out  of  the  smell  and  noise  as  soon  as 
possible.  If  we  did  not  go  to  London  now 
and  then,  we  should  perhaps  forget  how  peo- 
ple live  there.  Especially  I pity  professors; 
they  are  exposed  to  as  many  dangers  as  peo- 
ple who  live  in  mines;  chilling  damps,  scorch- 
ing blasts,  epidemical  disorders,  owing  to  the 
impure  air.  Such  are  the  winds  of  false  doc- 
trines, the  explosions  of  controversy,  the 
blights  of  worldly  conversation,  the  contagion 
of  evil  custom.  In  short,  a person  had  need 
have  a good  constitution  of  grace,  and  like- 
wise to  be  well  supplied  with  antidotes,  to 
preserve  a tolerable  share  of  spiritual  health 
in  such  a situation. 

And  now,  how  shall  I fill  up  the  rest  of  the 
paper?  It  is  a shame  for  a Christian  and  a 


minister  to  say  he  has  no  subject  at  hand, 
when  the  inexhaustible  theme  of  redeeming 
love  is  ever  pressing  upon  our  attention.  I 
will  tell  you,  then,  though  you  know  it,  that 
the  Lord  reigns.  He  who  once  bore  our  sins, 
and  carried  our  sorrows,  is  seated  upon  a 
throne  of  glory,  and  exercises  all  power  in 
heaven  and  on  earth.  Thrones,  principalities, 
and  powers,  bow  before  him.  Every  event  in 
the  kingdoms  of  providence  and  of  grace  are 
under  his  rule.  His  providence  pervades  and 
manages  the  whole,  and  is  as  minutely  atten- 
tive to  every  part,  as  if  there  were  only  that 
single  object  in  his  view.  From  the  highest 
archangel  to  the  meanest  ant  or  fly,  ail  de- 
pend on  him  for  their  being,  their  preserva- 
tion, and  their  powers.  He  directs  the  spar- 
rows where  to  build  their  nests,  and  to  find 
their  food.  He  over-rules  the  rise  and  fall  of 
nations,  and  bends,  with  an  invincible  energy 
and  unerring  wisdom,  all  events;  so  that, 
while  many  intend  nothing  less,  in  the  issue 
their  designs  all  concur  and  coincide  in  the 
accomplishment  of  his  holy  will.  Lie  restrains 
with  a mighty  hand  the  still  more  formidable 
efforts  of  the  powers  of  darkness ; and  Satan, 
with  all  his  hosts,  cannot  exert  their  malice 
a hair’s  breadth  beyond  the  limits  of  his  per- 
mission. This  is  he  who  is  the  head  and  hus- 
band of  his  believing  people.  How  happy  are 
they  whom  it  is  his  good  pleasure  to  bless! 
How  safe  are  they  whom  he  has  engaged  to 
protect!  How  honoured  and  privileged  are 
they  to  whom  he  is  pleased  to  manifest  him- 
self, and  whom  he  enables  and  warrants  to 
claim  him  as  their  friend  and  their  portion ! 
Having  redeemed  them  by  his  own  blood,  he 
sets  a high  value  upon  them : he  esteems 
them  his  treasure,  his  jewels,  and  keeps  them 
as  the  pupil  of  his  eye.  They  shall  not  want; 
they  need  not  fear;  his  eye  is  upon  them  in 
every  situation,  his  ear  is  open  to  their 
prayers,  and  his  everlasting  arms  are  under 
them  for  their  sure  support.  On  earth  lie 
guides  their  steps,  controls  their  enemies, 
and  directs  all  his  dispensations  for  their 
good ; while  in  heaven,  he  is  pleading  their 
cause,  preparing  them  a place,  and  communi- 
cating down  to  them  the  reviving  foretastes 
of  the  glory  that  shall  be  shortly  revealed. 
O how  is  this  mystery  hidden  from  an  un- 
believing world ! Who  can  believe  it,  till  it 
is  made  known  by  experience,  what  an  in- 
tercourse is  maintained  in  this  land  of  shadows 
between  the  Lord  of  glory  and  sinful  worms ! 
How  should  we  praise  him,  that  he  has  visited 
us;  for  we  were  once  blind  to  his  beauty, 
and  insensible  to  his  love,  and  should  have 
remained  so  to  the  last,  had  he  not  prevented 
us  with  his  goodness,  and  been  found  of  us 
when  we  sought  him  not. 

Mrs. presents  her  love.  The  bite  of 

the  leech  which  I mentioned  to  you  has  con- 
fined her  to  the  house  ever  since ; but  I hope 
she  will  be  able  to  go  out  to-morrow.  W e 


326 


LETTERS  TO  MRS.  P- 


jLET.  IV. 


were  for  a while  apprehensive  of  worse  con- 
sequences; but  the  Lord  is  gracious:  he  shows 
us,  in  a variety  of  instances,  what  dependent 
creatures  we  are,  how  blind  to  events,  and 
how  easily  the  methods  which  we  take  to 
relieve  ourselves  from  a small  inconvenience 
may  plunge  us  into  a greater.  Thus  we  learn 
(happy,  indeed,  if  we  can  effectually  learn  it,) 
that  there  is  no  safety  but  in  his  protection, 
and  that  nothin  r can  do  us  good  but  by  his 
blessing.  As  for  myself,  I see  so  many  rea- 
sons why  he  might  contend  with  me,  that  I 


am  amazed  he  affords  me  and  mine  so  much 
peace,  and  appoints  us  so  few  trials.  We 
live  as  upon  a field  of  battle ; many  are  hourly 
suffering  and  falling  around  us,  and  I can 
give  no  reason  why  we  are  preserved,  but 
that  he  is  God,  and  not  man.  What  a mercy 
that  we  are  only  truly  known  to  him,  who  is 
alone  able  to  bear  us ! 

May  the  Lord  bless  you  and  yours;  may 
he  comfort  you,  guide  you,  and  guard  yoiv 
Come  quickly  to, — Yours,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO 

THE  REVEREND  MR.  B 


LETTER  I. 

September  14,  1765. 

rev.  and  dear  sir, — When  I was  at 
London,  in  June  last,  your  name  first  reached 
me,  and  from  that  time  I have  been  desirous 
to  wish  you  success  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
A few  weeks  ago,  I received  a farther  account 
from  Mrs. , with  a volume  of  your  ser- 

mons: she  likewise  gave  me  a direction 
where  to  write,  and  an  encouragement  that 
a letter  would  not  be  unacceptable.  The 
latter,  indeed,  I did  not  much  need,  when  I 
had  read  your  book.  Though  we  have  no 
acquaintance,  we  are  already  united  in  the 
strictest  ties  of  friendship,  partakers  of  the 
same  hope,  servants  of  the  same  Lord,  and  in 
the  same  part  of  his  vineyard : I therefore 
hold  all  apologies  needless.  I rejoice  in  the 
Lord’s  goodness  to  you;  I pray  for  his  abun- 
dant blessing  upon  your  labours;  I need  an 
interest  in  your  prayers;  I have  an  affec- 
tionate desire  to  know  more  concerning  you : 
these  are  my  motives  for  writing. 

Mrs. tells  me  that  you  have  read  my 

Narrative:  I need  not  tell  you,  therefore, 
that  I am  one  of  the  most  astonishing  in- 
stances of  the  forbearance  and  mercy  of  God 
upon  the  face  of  the  earth.  In  the  close  of 
it,  I mention  a warm  desire  I had  to  the  mi- 
nistry: this  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  keep 
alive  for  several  years,  through  a succession 
of  views  and  disappointments.  At  length  his 
hour  came,  and  my  way  was  made  easy.  I 
have  been  here  about  fifteen  months.  The 
Lord  has  led  me,  by  a way  that  I little  ex- 
pected, to  a pleasant  lot,  where  the  gospel 
has  been  many  years  known,  and  is  highly 
valued  by  many.  We  have  a large  church 
and  congregation,  and  a considerable  num- 
ber of  lively  thriving  believers,  and  in 
general  go  on  with  great  comfort  and  har- 
mony. I meet  with  less  opposition  from 
the  world  than  is  usual  where  the  gospel  is 
preached.  This  burden  was  borne  by  Mr. 

B for  ten  years,  and  in  that  course  of 

time,  some  of  the  fiercest  opposers  were  re- 


moved, some  wearied,  and  some  softened;  so 
that  we  are  now  remarkably  quiet  in  that  re- 
spect. May  the  Lord  teach  us  to  improve  the 
privilege,  and  preserve  us  from  indifference. 
How  unspeakable  are  our  obligations  to  the 
grace  of  God ! What  a privilege  is  it  to  be  a 
believer ! They  are  comparatively  few,  and 
we  by  nature  were  no  nearer  than  others ; it 
was  grace,  free  grace,  that  made  the  differ- 
ence. What  an  honour  to  be  a minister  of 
the  everlasting  gospel!  These,  upon  com- 
parison, are  perhaps  fewer  still.  How  won- 
derful that  one  of  these  few  should  be  sought 
for  among  the  wilds  of  Africa,  reclaimed 
from  the  lowest  state  of  impiety  and  misery, 
and  brought  to  assure  other  sinners,  from  his 
own  experience,  that  “there  is  forgiveness 
with  him,  that  he  may  be  feared.”  And  you, 
sir,  though  not  left  to  give  such  flagrant 
proofs  of  the  wickedness  of  the  heart  and  the 
power  of  Satan,  yet  owe  your  present  views 
to  the  same  almighty  grace.  If  the  Lord 
had  not  distinguished  you  from  your  brethren, 
you  would  have  been  now  in  the  character 
of  a minister  misleading  the  people,  and 
opposing  those  precious  truths  you  are  now 
labouring  to  establish.  Not  unto  us,  O Lord ! 
but  unto  thy  name  be  the  glory.  I shall  be 
thankful  to  hear  from  you  at  your  leisure. 
Be  pleased  to  inform  me,  whether  you  re- 
ceived the  knowledge  of  the  truth  before  or 
since  you  were  in  orders ; how  long  you  have 
preached  the  joyful  sound  of  salvation  by 
Jesus,  and  what  is  the  state  of  things  in  your 
parts. 

We  are  called  to  an  honourable  service, 
but  it  is  arduous.  What  wisdom  does  it  re- 
quire to  keep  the  middle  path  in  doctrines, 
avoiding  the  equally  dangerous  errors  on  the 
right  hand  and  the  left ! What  steadiness,  to 
speak  the  truth  boldly  and  faithfully  in  the 
midst  of  a gainsaying  world  ! What  humility, 
to  stand  against  the  tide  of  popularity ! What 
meekness,  to  endure  all  things  for  the  elect’s 
sake,  that  they  may  be  saved  ! “ Who  is  suf- 
ficient for  these  things'?”  We  are  not  in  our- 
selves, but  there  is  an  all-sufficiency  in  Jesus. 
327 


32S 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REY.  MR.  B 


Our  enemy  watches  us  close ; he  challenges 
and  desires  to  have  us,  that  he  may  sift  us  as 
wheat;  he  knows  he  can  easily  shake  us,  if 
we  are  left  to  ourselves ; but  we  have  a Shep- 
herd, a Keeper,  who  never  slumbers  nor 
sleeps.  If  he  permits  us  to  be  exercised,  it 
is  for  our  good  ; he  is  at  hand  to  direct,  mode- 
rate, and  sanctify  every  dispensation ; he  has 
prayed  for  us,  that  our  faith  mav  not  fail,  and 
he  has  promised  to  maintain  his  fear  in  our 
hearts,  that  we  may  not  depart  from  him. 
When  we  are  prime  to  wander,  he  calls  us 
back ; when  we  say,  My  feet  slip,  his  mercy 
holds  us  up;  when  we  are  wounded,  he  heals; 
when  we  are  ready  to  faint,  he  revives.  The 
people  of  God  are  sure  to  meet  with  enemies, 
but  especially  the  ministers:  Satan  bears 
them  a double  grudge : the  world  watches 
iOr  their  halting,  and  the  Lord  will  suffer 
them  to  be  afflicted,  that  they  may  be  kept 
humble,  that  they  may  acquire  a sympathy 
with  the  sufferings  of  others,  that  they  may 
be  experimentally  qualified  to  advise  and 
help  them,  and  to  comfort  them  with  the 
comforts  with  which  they  themselves  have 
been  comforted  of  God.  But  the  Captain  of 
our  salvation  is  with  us ; his  eye  is  upon  us, 
his  everlasting  arms  beneath  us;  in  his  name, 
therefore,  we  may  go  on,  lift  up  our  banners, 
and  say,  “ If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be 
against  us  1 Nay,  in  all  these  things  we  are 
more  than  conquerors,  through  him  that  loved 
us.”  The  time  is  short : yet  a little  while, 
and  he  will  wipe  all  tears  from  our  eyes, 
and  put  a crown  of  life  upon  our  head  with 
his  own  gracious  hand.  In  this  sense,  how 
beautiful  are  those  lines : 

Temporis  illius 

Me  consolor  imagine ; 

Festis  quum  populus  me  reducem  choris, 
Faustisque  exeipiet  vocibus,  et  Dei 
Pompa  cum  celebri,  me  comitabitur 
Augusta  ad  penetralia. 

Buch.  in  Psal.  xlh. 

If  any  occasions  should  call  you  into  these 
parts,  my  house  and  pulpit  will  be  glad  to 
receive  you.  Pray  for  us,  dear  sir,  and  be- 
lieve me  to  be, — Yours,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

November  2,  1765. 

very  dear  sir, — Your  letter  of  the  4th 
ult.  gave  me  great  pleasure.  I thank  you 
for  the  particular  account  you  have  favoured 
me  with.  I rejoice  with  you,  sympathize 
with  you,  and  find  my  heart  opened  to  cor- 
respond with  unreserved  freedom.  May  the 
Lord  direct  our  pens,  and  help  us  to  help  each 
other.  The  work  you  are  engaged  in  is 
great,  and  your  difficulties  many  ; but  faith- 
ful is  he  that  hath  called  you,  who  also  will 
do  it.  The  weapons  which  he  has  now  put 


[let.  ii. 

in  your  hands  are  not  carnal,  but  mighty 
through  God  to  the  pulling  down  of  strong 
holds.  Men  may  fight,  but  they  shall  not 
prevail  against  us,  if  we  are  but  enabled  to 
put  our  cause  simply  into  the  Lord’s  hands, 
and  keep  steadily  on  in  the  path  of  duty. 
He  will  plead  our  cause,  and  fight  oui  battles; 
he  will  pardon  our  mistakes,  and  teach  us  to 
do  better.  My  experience  as  a minister  is 
but  small,  having  been  but  about  eighteen 
months  in  the  vineyard ; but  for  about  twelve 
}mars  I have  been  favoured  with  an  increas- 
ing acquaintance  among  the  people  of  God, 
of  various  ranks  and  denominations,  which, 
together  with  the  painful  exercises  of  my 
own  heart,  gave  me  opportunity  of  making 
observations  which  were  of  great  use  to  me 
when  I entered  upon  the  work  myself;  and 
ever  since,  I have  found  the  Lord  graciously 
supplying  new  lights  and  new  strength,  as 
new  occurrences  arise.  So,  I trust  it  will 
be  with  you.  I endeavour  to  avail  myself  of 
the  examples,  advice,  and  sentiments  of  my 
brethren,  yet  at  the  same  time  to  guard 
against  calling  any  man  master.  This  is  the 
peculiar  of  Christ.  The  best  are  but  men : 
the  wisest  may  be  mistaken ; and  that  which 
may  be  right  in  another,  may  be  wrong  in 
me,  through  a difference  of  circumstances. 
The  Spirit  of  God  distributes  variously,  both 
in  gifts  and  dispensations ; and  I would  no 
more  be  tied  to  act  strictly  by  others’  rules, 
than  to  walk  in  shoes  of  the  same  size.  My 
shoes  must  fit  my  own  feet. 

I endeavour  to  guard  against  extremes;  our 
nature  is  prone  to  them;  and  we  are  liable 
likewise,  when  we  have  found  the  inconve- 
nience of  one  extreme,  to  revert  insensibly 
(sometimes  to  fly  suddenly)  to  the  other.  I 
pray  to  be  led  in  the  midst  of  the  path.  I 
am  what  they  call  a Calvinist ; yet  there  are 
flights,  niceties,  and  hard  sayings,  to  be  found 
among  some  of  that  system,  which  I do  not 
choose  to  imitate.  I dislike  those  sentiments 
against  which  you  have  borne  your  testimony 
in  the  note  at  the  end  of  your  preface ; but 
having  known  many  precious  souls  in  that 
party,  I have  been  taught,  that  the  kingdom 
of  God  is  not  in  names  and  sentiments,  but 
in  righteousness,  faith,  love,  peace,  and  joy  in 
the  Holy  Ghost.  I should,  however,  upon 
some  occasions,  oppose  those  tenets,  if  they 
had  any  prevalence  in  my  neighbourhood; 
but  they  have  not ; and  in  general,  I believe, 
the  surest  way  to  refute  or  prevent  error,  is 
to  preach  the  truth.  I am  glad  to  find  you 
are  aware  of  that  spirit  of  enthusiasm  which 
has  so  often  broken  loose  and  blemished  hope- 
ful beginnings,  and  that  the  foundation  you 
build  upon  is  solid  and  scriptural : this  will, 
I hope,  save  you  much  trouble,  and  prevent 
many  offences.  Let  us  endeavour  to  make 
our  people  acquainted  with  the  scriptures,  and 
to  impress  them  with  a high  sense  of  its  au- 
thority, excellence,  and  sufficiency.  Satan 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  B- 


329 


LET.  III. J 

seldom  remarkably  imposes  on  ministers  or 
people,  except  where  the  word  of  God  is  too 
little  consulted  or  regarded.  Another  point 
in  which  I aim  at  a medium,  is  in  what  is 
called  prudence.  There  is  certainly  such  a 
thing  as  Christian  prudence,  and  a remarkable 
deficiency  of  it  is  highly  inconvenient.  But 
caution  too  often  degenerates  into  cowardice ; 
and  if  the  fear  of  man,  under  the  name  of 
prudence,  gets  within  our  guard,  like  a chill- 
ing frost,  it  nips  every  thing  in  the  bud. 
Those  who  trust  the  Lord,  and  act  openly 
with  an  honest  freedom  and  consistence,  I ob- 
serve, he  generally  bears  them  out,  smoothes 
their  way,  and  makes  their  enemies  their 
friends,  or  at  least  restrains  their  rage ; while 
such  as  halve  things,  temporise,  and  aim  to 
please  God  and  man  together,  meet  with 
double  disappointment,  and  are  neither  useful 
nor  respected.  If  we  trust  to  him,  he  will 
stand  by  us ; if  we  regard  men,  he  will  leave 
us  to  make  the  best  we  can  of  them. 

I have  set  down  hastily  what  occurred  to 
my  pen,  not  to  dictate  to  you,  but  to  tell  you 
how  I have  been  led,  and  because  some  ex- 
pressions in  your  letter  seemed  to  imply  that 
you  would  not  be  displeased  with  me  for  so 
doing.  As  to  books,  I think  there  is  a me- 
dium here  likewise.  I have  read  too  much 
in  time  past : yet  I do  not  wholly  join  with 
some  of  our  brethren,  who  would  restrain  us 
entirely  to  the  word  of  God.  Undoubtedly 
this  is  the  fountain ; here  we  should  dwell : 
but  a moderate  and  judicious  perusal  of 
other  authors  may  have  its  use ; and  I am 
glad  to  be  beholden  to  such  helps,  either  to 
explain  what  I do  not  understand,  or  to  con- 
firm me  in  what  I do.  Of  these,  the  writ- 
ings of  the  last  age  afford  an  immense  va- 
riety. ' 

But  above  all,  may  we,  dear  sir,  live  and 
feed  upon  the  precious  promises,  John  xiv. 
16,  17.  26,  and  xvi.  13 — 15.  There  is  no 
teacher  like  Jesus,  who,  by  his  Holy  Spirit, 
reveals  himself  in  his  word  to  the  understand- 
ing and  affections  of  his  children.  When  we 
thus  behold  his  glory  in  the  gospel-glass,  we 
are  changed  into  the  same  image.  Then  our 
hearts  melt,  our  eyes  flow,  our  stammering 
tongues  are  unloosed.  That  this  may  be  your 
increasing  experience  is  the  prayer  of,  dear 
sir, — Yours,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

January  21,  1768. 

dear  sir, — Your  letters  give  me  the  sin- 
ccrest  pleasure.  Let  us  believe  that  we  are 
daily  thinking  of  and  praying  for  each  other, 
and  write  when  opportunity  offers  without 
apologies.  I praise  the  Lord  he  has  led  you 
so  soon  to  a settled  judgment  in  the  leading 
truths  of  the  gospel.  For  want  of  this,  many 


have  been  necessitated  with  their  own  hands 
to  pull  down  what,  in  the  first  warm  emo- 
tions of  their  zeal,  they  had  laboured  hard  to 
build.  It  is  a mercy  likewise  to  be  enabled 
to  acknowledge  what  is  excellent  in  the 
writings  or  conduct  of  others,  without  adopt- 
ing their  singularities,  or  discarding  the 
whole  on  account  of  a few  blemishes.  We 
should  be  glad  to  receive  instruction  from 
all,  and  avoid  being  led  by  the  ipse  dixit  of 
any.  Nullius  jurare  in  verbum , is  a fit 
motto  for  those  who  have  one  master,  even 
Christ.  We  may  grow  wise  apace  in  opinions, 
by  books  and  men ; but  vital,  experimental 
knowledge,  can  only  be  received  from  the 
Holy  Spirit,  the  great  instructor,  and  com- 
forter of  his  people.  And  there  are  two 
things  observable  in  his  teaching:  1.  That 
he  honours  the  means  of  his  own  appoint- 
ment, so  that  we  cannot  expect  to  make  any 
great  progress  without  diligence  on  our  parts. 
2.  That  he  does  not  teach  all  at  once,  but  by 
degrees.  Experience  is  his  school ; and  by 
this  I mean  the  observation  and  improve- 
ment of  what  passes  within  us  and  around 
us  in  the  course  of  every  day.  The  word 
of  God  affords  a history  in  miniature  i f tne 
heart  of  man,  the  devices  of  Satan,  the  state 
of  the  world,  and  the  method  of  grace.  And 
the  most  instructing  and  affecting  commen- 
tary on  it  to  an  enlightened  mind,  may  be 
gathered  from  what  we  see,  feel,  and  hear 
from  day  to  day.  Res,  (etas,  usus,  semper 
aliquid  apportent  novi;  and  no  knowledge  in 
spiritual  things  but  what  we  acquire  in  this 
way  is  properly  our  own,  or  will  abide  the 
time  of  trial.  This  is  not  always  sufficiently 
considered : we  are  ready  to  expect  that 
others  should  receive  upon  our  word,  in  half 
an  hour’s  time,  those  views  of  things  which 
have  cost  us  years  to  attain.  But  none  can 
be  brought  forward  faster  than  the  Lord  is 
pleased  to  communicate  inward  light.  Upon 
this  ground  controversies  have  been  multi- 
plied among  Christians  to  little  purpose,  for 
plants  of  different  standings  will  be  {ceteris- 
paribus ) in  different  degrees  of  forwardness. 
A young  Christian  is  like  a green  fruit  ; itr, 
has  perhaps  a disagreeable  austerity,  which 
cannot  be  corrected  out  of  its  proper  course 
it  wants  time  and  growth  : wait  a while,  andi 
by  the  nourishment  it  receives  from  the  root*, 
together  with  the  action  of  the  sun,  wind,, 
and  rain,  in  succession  from  without,  it  will 
insensibly  acquire  that  flavour  and  maturity,, 
for  the  want  of  which  an  unskilful  judge  would 
bo  ready  to  reject  it  as  nothing  worth.  We- 
are  favoured  with  many  excellent  books  in  our, 
tongue;  but  I,  with  you,  agree  in  assigning 
one  of  the  first  places,  as  a teacher,  to  Dr. 
Owen.  I have  just  finished  his  discourse  on. 
the  Holy  Spirit,  which  is  an  epitome,,  if  not 
the  master-piece,  of  his  writings.  I shculdi 
be  glad  to  see  the  re-publication  you  speak 
of:  but  l question  if  the  booksellers- will  ven- 


330 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  B- 


vure  upon  it  I shall  perhaps  mention  it  to  my 
London  friends.  As  to  archbishop  Leighton, 
besides  his  select  works,  there  are  two  octavo 
volumes  published  at  Edinburgh,  in  the  year 
1748,  and  since  reprinted  at  London.  They 
contain  a valuable  commentary  on  St.  Peter’s 
First  Epistle,  and  lectures  on  Isa.  vi ; Psal. 
xxxix,  cxxx  ; Rom.  iv,  and  a part  of  chap.  xii. 

I have  likewise  a small  quarto  in  Latin,  of  his 
Divinity  Lectures,  when  professor  at  Edin- 
burgh ; the  short  title,  is,  Prcelectionis  Theo- 
logies. Mine  was  printed  in  London,  1698. 

I believe  this  book  is  scarce ; I set  the  high- 
est value  upon  it.  He  has  wonderfully  united 
the  simplicity  of  the  gospel,  with  all  the 
captivating  beauties  of  style  and  language. 
Bishop  Burnet  says,  he  was  the  greatest  mas- 
ter of  the  Latin  tongue  he  ever  knew7,  of 
which,  together  with  his  compass  of  learning, 
he  has  given  proof  in  his  lectures ; yet  in  his 
gayer  dress,  his  eminent  humility  and  spiri- 
tuality appear  to  no  less  advantage  than  when 
clad  in  plain  English.  I think  it  may  be 
said  to  be  a diamond  set  in  gold.  I could 
wish  it  translated,  if  it  wTas  possible  (which  I 
almost  question)  to  preserve  the  beauty  and 
spirit  of  the  original. 

Edwards  on  Free-will  I have  read  w’ith 
pleasure,  as  a good  answer  to  the  proud  rea- 
soners  in  their  own  way ; but  a book  of  that 
sort  cannot  be  generally  read : wThere  the 
subject-matter  is  unpleasing,  and  the  method 
of  treating  it  requires  more  attention  than 
the  Athenian  spirit  of  the  times  will  bear,  I 
wonder  not  if  it  is  uncalled  for,  and  am  afraid 
we  shall  not  see  him  upon  Original  Sin,  if  it 
depends  upon  the  sale  of  the  other.  His  an- 
swer to  Dr.  Taylor,  which  you  speak  of,  is  not 
a MS.  but  has  been  already  printed  at  Boston. 

You  send  us  good  news  indeed,  that  tw7o 
more  of  your  brethren  are  declaring  on  the 
gospel  side.  The  Lord  confirm  and  strengthen 
them,  add  yet  to  your  numbers,  and  make  J 
you  helps  and  comforts  to  each  other.  Surely  ; 
he  is  about  to  spread  his  work.  Happy  those  j 
whom  he  honours  to  be  fellow-workers  with 
him.  Let  us  account  the  disgrace  w7e  suffer 
for  his  name’s  sake  to  be  our  great  honour. 
Many  will  be  against  us,  but  there  are  more 
for  us.  All  the  praying  souls  on  earth,  all 
the  glorified  saints  in  heaven,  all  the  angels 
of  God,  yea  the  God  of  angels  himself,  all 
are  on  our  side.  Satan  may  rage,  but  he  is 
a chained  enemy.  Men  may  contradict  and 
fight,  but  they  cannot  prevail.  Two  things 
we  shall  especially  need,  courage  and  patience, 
that  we  neither  faint  before  them,  nor  upon 
any  provocation  act  in  their  spirit.  If  we  j 
can  pity  and  pray  for  them,  return  good  for  ! 
evil,  make  them  sensible  that  wTe  bear  them 
a hearty  good-will,  and  act  as  the  disciples  of 
him  who  wept  for  his  enemies  and  prayed  for 
his  murderers ; in  this  way  we  shall  find  the 
Lord  will  plead  our  cause,  soften*  opposers, 
and  by  degrees,  give  us  a measure  of  outward 


[let.  iv. 

peace.  Warmth  and  imprudence  have  often 
added  to  the  necessary  burden  of  the  cross. 
I rejoice  that  the  Lord  hefs  led  you  in  a dif- 
ferent way,  and  I hope  your  doctrine  and  ex- 
ample will  make  your  path  smoother  every 
day  : you  find  it  so  in  part  already.  As  the 
Lord  brings  you  out  a people  witness  lor 
you  to  the  truth  of  his  word,  you  will  find 
advantage  in  bringing  them  often  together. 
The  interval  from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath  is  a 
good  while,  and  affords  time  for  the  world 
and  Satan  to  creep  in.  Intermediate  meet- 
ings for  prayer,  &c.  when  properly  conducted, 
are  greatly  useful.  I could  wish  for  larger 
sheets  and*  longer  leisure,  but  I am  constrain- 
ed to  say  adieu,  in  our  dear  Lord  and  Saviour. 
— Yours,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

December  12,  1737. 

dear  sir, — This  is  not  intended  as  an 
answer  to  your  last  acceptable  letter,  but  an 
occasional  line,  in  consequence  of  the  account 

Mr.  T has  given  me  of  your  late  illness. 

I trust  this  dispensation  will  be  useful  to  you, 
and  I wish  the  knowledge  of  it  may  be  so  to 
me.  I am  favoured  with  an  unusual  share 
of  health  and  an  equal  flow  of  spirits.  If 
the  blow  you  have  received  should  be  a 
warning  to  me,  I shall  have  cause  to  be 
thankful.  I am  glad  to  hear  you  are  better: 
I hope  the  Lord  has  no  design  to  disable  you 
from  service,  but  rather  (as  he  did  Jacob)  to 
strengthen  you  by  wounding  you ; to  main- 
tain and  increase  in  you  that  conviction 
which,  through  grace,  you  have  received,  of 
the  vanity  and  uncertainty  of  every  thing 
below;  to  give  you  a lively  sense  of  the 
value  of  health  and  opportunities,  and  to  add 
to  the  treasury  of  your  experience  new  proofs 
of  his  power  and  goodness  in  supporting, 
comforting,  and  healing  you,  and  likewise  to 
quicken  the  prayers  of  your  people  for  you, 
and  to  stir  them  up  to  use  double  diligence 
in  the  present  improvement  of  the  means  of 
grace,  while  by  this  late  instance  they  see 
how  soon  and  suddenly  you  might  have  been 
removed  from  them. 

I understand  you  did  not  feel  that  lively 
exercise  of  faith  and  joy  which  you  would 
have  hoped  to  have  found  at  such  a season ; 
but  let  not  this  discourage  you  from  a firm 
confidence  that,  when  the  hour  of  dismission 
shall  come,  the  Lord  will  be  faithful  to  his 
gracious  promise,  and  give  you  strength  suf- 
ficient to  encounter  and  vanquish  your  last 
enemy.  You  had  not  this  strength  lately, 
because  you  needed  it  not;  for,  though  you 
might  think  yourself  near  to  death,  the  Lord 
intended  to  restore  you,  and  he  permitted  you 
to  feel  weakness,  that  you  might  know  your 
strength  does  not  consist  in  grace  received, 
but  in  his  fulness,  and  his  promise  to  commu- 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  B- 


331 


LET.  V.] 

nicate  from  himself  as  your  occasions  require. 
O,  it  is  a great  thing  to  be  strong  in  the 
grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus  ! but  it  is  a hard 
lesson:  it  is  not  easy  to  understand  it  in 
theory,  but  when  the  Lord  has  taught  us  so 
far,  it  is  still  more  difficult  to  reduce  our 
knowledge  to  practice.  But  this  is  one  end 
he  has  in  view  in  permitting  us  to  pass 
through  such  a variety  of  inward  and  outward 
exercises,  that  we  may  cease  from  trusting 
in  ourselves,  or  in  any  creature,  or  frame,  or 
experiences,  and  be  brought  to  a state  of 
submission  and  dependence  upon  him  alone. 
I was  once  visited  something  in  the  same 
way,  seized  with  a fit  of  the  apoplectic  kind, 
which  held  me  near  an  hour,  and  left  a disor- 
der in  my  head,  which  quite  broke  the  scheme 
of  life  I was  then  in,  and  was  consequently 
one  of  the  means  the  Lord  appointed  to  bring 
me  into  the  ministry ; but  I soon  perfectly 
recovered.  From  the  remembrance  Mrs. 

has  of  what  she  then  suffered,  she  knows 

how  to  sympathize  with  Mrs.  B in  her 

share  of  your  trial.  And  I think  dear  Mr. 

some  years  since  had  a sudden  stroke 

on  a Christmas  day,  which  disabled  him  from 
duty  for  a time.  To  him  and  to  me  these 
turns  were  only  like  the  caution  which  Philip 
of  Macedon  ordered  to  be  repeated  to  him 
every  morning,  “ Remember  thou  art  a man.” 
I hope  it  will  be  no  more  to  you,  but  that  you 
shall  live  to  praise  him,  and  to  give  many 
cause  to  praise  him  on  your  behalf  Blessed 
be  God  we  are  in  safe  hands : the  Lord  him- 
self is  our  keeper ; nothing  befals  us  but 
what  is  adjusted  by  his  wisdom  and  love. 
Health  is  his  gift,  and  sickness,  when  sancti- 
fied, is  a token  of  love  likewise.  Here  we 
may  meet  with  many  things  which  are  not 
joyous  but  grievous  to  the  flesh ; but  he  will, 
in  one  way  or  other,  sweeten  every  bitter 
cup,  and  ere  long  he  will  wipe  away  all  tears 
from  our  eyes.  O that  joy,  that  crown,  that 
glory  which  awaits  the  believer ! Let  us  keep 
the  prize  of  our  high  calling  in  view,  and  press 
forward  in  the  name  of  Jesus  the  Redeemer, 
and  he  will  not  disappoint  our  hopes. 

I am  but  just  come  off  from  a journey,  am 
weary,  and  it  grows  late ; I must  therefore 
break  off.  When  you  have  leisure  and  strength 
to  write,  oblige  me  with  a confirmation  of  your 
recovery,  for  I shall  be  something  anxious 
about  you. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  V. 

March  14,  1775. 

my  dear  friend, — I thought  you  long  in 
writing,  but  am  afraid  I have  been  longer. 
A heavy  family  affliction  called  me  from 
home  in  December,  which  put  me  out  of  my 
usual  course,  and  threw  me  behind-hand  in 
my  correspondence ; yet  I did  not  suspect  the 
date  of  your  last  letter  was  so  old  by  two 


I months  as  I find  it.  Whether  I write  more 
frequently  or  more  seldom,  the  love  of  my 
heart  to  you  is  the  same,  and  I shall  believe 
the  like  of  you ; yet,  if  it  can  be  helped,  I 
hope  the  interval  will  not  be  so  long  again 
on  either  side.  I am  glad  that  the  Lord’s 
work  still  flourishes  in  your  parts,  and  that 
you  have  a more  comfortable  prospect  at 
home  than  formerly ; and  I was  pleased  with 

the  acceptance  you  found  at  S , which 

I hope  will  be  an  earnest  of  greater  things. 
I think  affairs  in  general,  with  respect  to  this 
land,  have  a dark  appearance ; but  it  is  com- 
fortable to  observe,  that,  amidst  the  abound- 
ings  of  iniquity,  the  Lord  is  spreading  his 
gospel,  and  that  though  many  oppose,  yet  in 
most  places  whither  the  word  is  sent,  great 
numbers  seem  disposed  to  hear.  I am  going 
(if  the  Lord  please)  into  Leicestershire  on 
Friday.  This  was  lately  such  a dark  place 
as  you  describe  your  country  to  be,  and  much 
of  it  is  so  still ; but  the  Lord  has  visited  three 
of  the  principal  towns  with  gospel-light.  I 
have  a desire  of  visiting  these  brethren  in 
the  vineyard,  to  bear  my  poor  testimony  to 
the  truths  they  preach,  and  to  catch,  if  I may, 
a little  fire  and  fervour  among  them.  I do 
not  often  go  abroad ; but  I have  found  a little 
excursion  now  and  then  (when  the  way  is 
made  plain)  has  its  advantages,  to  quicken 
the  spirits  and  enlarge  the  sphere  of  observa- 
tion. On  these  accounts  the  recollection  of 

my  N journey  gives  me  pleasure  to  this 

day;  and  very  glad  should  I be  to  repeat  it, 
but  the  distance  is  so  great  that  I consider  it 
rather  as  desirable  than  practicable. 

My  experiences  vary  as  well  as  yours : but 
possibly  your  sensations,  both  of  the  sweet 
and  of  the  bitter,  may  be  stronger  than  mine. 
The  enemy  assaults  me  more  by  sap  than 
storm,  and  I am  ready  to  think  I suffer  more 
by  languor  than  some  of  my  friends  do  by 
the  sharper  conflicts  to  which  they  are  called. 
So  likewise  in  these  seasons,  which  compara- 
tively I call  my  best  hours,  my  sensible  com- 
forts are  far  from  lively.  But  I am  in  gene- 
ral enabled  to  hold  fast  my  confidence,  and 
to  venture  myself  upon  the  power,  faithful- 
ness, and  compassion  of  that  adorable  Saviour, 
to  whom  my  soul  has  been  directed  and  en- 
couraged to  flee  for  refuge.  I am  a poor, 
changeable,  inconsistent  creature;  but  he 
deals  graciously  with  me ; he  does  not  leave 
me  wholly  to  myself ; but  I have  such  daily 
proofs  of  the  malignity  and  efficacy  of  the  sin 
that  dwelleth  in  me,  as  ought  to  cover  me 
with  shame  and  confusion  of  face,  and  make 
me  thankful  if  I am  permitted  to  rank  with 
the  meanest  of  those  who  sit  at  his  feet. 
That  I was  ever  called  to  the  knowledge  of 
his  salvation,  was  a singular  instance  of  his 
sovereign  grace ; and  that  I am  still  preserved 
in  the  way,  in  defiance  of  all  that  has  arisen 
from  within  and  from  without  to  turn  me 
aside,  must  be  wholly  ascribed  to  the  same 


332 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  B 


sovereignty:  ana  it,  as  I trust,  he  shall  be 
pleased  to  make  me  a conqueror  at  last,  I 
shall  have  peculiar  reason  to  say,  Not  unto 
me,  not  unto  me,  but  unto  thy  name,  O Lord, 
be  the  glory  and  the  praise ! 

How  oft  have  sin  and  Satan  strove 
To  rend  my  soul  from  thee,  my  God! 

But  everlasting  is  thy  love, 

And  Jesus  seals  it  with  his  blood. 

The  Lord  leads  me  in  the  course  of  my 
preaching  to  insist  much  on  a life  of  commu- 
nion with  himself,  and  of  the  great  design  of 
the  gospel  to  render  us  conformable  to  him  in 
love ; and  as  by  his  mercy  nothing  appears  in 
my  outward  conduct  remarkably  to  contra- 
dict what  I say,  many  who  only  can  judge  by 
what  they  see,  suppose  I live  a very  happy 
life.  But,  alas  ! if  they  knew  what  passes  in 
my  heart,  how  dull  my  spirit  is  in  secret,  and 
how  little  I am  myself  affected  by  the  glo- 
rious truths  I propose  to  others,  they  would 
form  a different  judgment.  Could  I be  my- 
self what  I recommend  to  them,  I should  be 
happy  indeed.  Pray  for  me,  my  dear  friend, 
that  now  the  Lord  is  bringing  forward  the 
pleasing  spring,  he  may  favour  me  with  a 
spring-season  in  my  soul ; for  indeed  I mourn 
under  a long  winter. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VI. 

April  16,  1772. 

my  dear  friend, — I hope  the  Lord  has 
contracted  my  desires  and  aims  almost  to  the 
on-  point  of  study,  the  knowledge  of  his  truth. 
All  other  acquisitions  are  transient  and  com- 
paratively vain.  And  yet,  alas ! I am  a slow 
scholar ; nor  can  I see  in  what  respect  I get 
forward,  unless  that  every  day  I am  more 
confirmed  in  the  conviction  of  my  own 
emptiness  and  inability  to  all  spiritual  good. 
And  as,  notwithstanding  this,  I am  still 
enabled  to  stand  my  ground,  I would  hope 
since  no  effect  can  be  without  an  adequate 
cause,  that  I have  made  some  advance,  though 
in  a manner  imperceptible  to  myself,  towards 
a more  simple  dependence  upon  Jesus  as  my 
all  in  all.  It  is  given  me  to  thirst  and  to 
taste,  if  it  is  not  given  me  to  drink  abun- 
dantly; and  I would  be  thankful  for  the 
desire.  I see  and  approve  the  wisdom,  grace, 
suitableness,  and  sufficiency  of  the  gospel- 
salvation;  and  since  it  is  for  sinners,  and  I 
am  a sinner,  and  the  promises  are  open,  I 
do  not  hesitate  to  call  it  mine.  I am  a 
weary,  laden  soul ; Jesus  has  invited  me  to 
come,  and  has  enabled  me  to  put  my  trust  in 
him.  I seldom  have  an  uneasy  doubt,  at 
least  not  of  any  continuance,  respecting  my 
pardon,  acceptance,  and  interest  in  all  the 
blessings  of  the  New  Testament.  And, 
amidst  a thousand  infirmities  and  evils  under 
wnich  I groin,  I have  the  testimony  of  my 
conscience  when  under  the  trial  of  his  word, 


[let.  VI. 

that  my  desire  is  sincerely  towards  him,  that 
I choose  no  other  portion,  that  I allowedly 
serve  no  other  master.  When  I told  oui 
friend lately  to  this  purpose,  he  won- 

dered and  asked,  “ How  is  it  possible  that  if 
you  can  say  these  things,  you  should  not  be 
always  rejoicing!”  Undoubtedly  I derive 
from  the  gospel  a peace  at  bottom  which  is 
worth  more  than  a thousand  worlds ; but  so 
it  is,  I can  only  speak  for  myself,  though  I 
rest  and  live  upon  the  truths  of  the  gospel, 
they  seldom  impress  me  with  a warm  and 
lively  joy.  In  public,  indeed,  I sometimes 
seem  in  earnest  and  much  affected,  but  even 
then  it  appears  to  me  rather  as  a part  of  the 
gift  intrusted  to  me  for  the  edification  of 
others,  than  as  a sensation  which  is  properly 
my  own.  For  when  I am  in  private,  I am 
usually  dull  and  stupid  to  a strange  degree, 
or  the  prey  to  a wild  and  ungoverned  ima- 
gination ; so  that  I may  truly  say,  when  I 
would  do  good,  evil,  horrid  evil,  is  present 
with  me.  Ah,  how  different  is  this  from  sen- 
sible comfort ! and  if  I was  to  compare  my- 
self with  others,  to  make  their  experience 
my  standard,  and  was  not  helped  to  retreat 
to  the  sure  word  of  God  as  my  refuge,  how- 
hard  should  I find  it  to  maintain  a hope  that 
I had  either  part  or  lot  in  the  matter.  What 
I call  my  good  times  are,  when  I can  find 
my  attention  in  some  little  measure  fixed  to 
what  I am  about,  which,  indeed,  is  not  always 
nor  frequently  my  case  in  prayer,  and  ■ till 
seldomer  in  reading  the  scriptures.  My 
judgment  embraces  these  means  as  blessed 
privileges,  and  Satan  has  not  prevailed  to 
drive  me  from  them  ; but  in  the  performance, 
I too  often  find  them  tasks,  feel  a reluctance 
when  the  seasons  return,  and  am  glad  when 
they  are  finished.  O what  a mystery  is  the 
heart  of  man  ! W hat  a warfare  is  the  life  of 
faith,  at  least  in  the  path  the  Lord  is  pleased 
to  lead  me ! What  reason  have  I to  lie  in  the 
dust  as  the  chief  of  sinners  ! and  what  cause 
for  thankfulness  that  salvation  is  wholly  of 
grace.  Notwithstanding  all  my  complaints, 
it  is  still  true  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again, 
that  he  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession,  and 
is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  But,  on  the 
other  hand,  to  think  of  that  joy  of  heart  in 
which  some  of  his  people  live,  and  to  com- 
pare it  with  that  apparent  deadness  and  want 
of  spirituality  which  I feel,  this  makes  me 
mourn.  However,  I think  there  is  a scrip- 
tural distinction  between  faith  and  feeling, 
grace  and  comfort ; they  are  not  inseparable, 
and  perhaps  when  together,  the  degree  of 
the  one  is  not  often  the  just  measure  of  the 
other.  But  though  I pray  that  I may  be  ever 
longing  and  panting  for  the  light  of  his 
countenance,  yet  I would  be  so  far  satisfied,  as 
to  believe  the  Lord  has  wise  and  merciful  rea- 
sons for  keeping  me  so  short  of  the  comforts 
which  he  has  taught  me  to  desire  and  value 
more  than  the  light  of  the  sun. — l am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO 

THE  REVEREND  MR.  R- 


LETTER  I. 

January  16,  1772. 

dear  sir, — It  is  true,  I was  apprehensive 
from  your  silence  that  I had  offended  you ; 
but  when  your  letter  came,  it  made  me  full 
amends ; and  now  I am  glad  I wrote  as  I did, 
though  I am  persuaded  I shall  never  write  to 
you  again  in  the  same  strain.  I am  pleased 
with  the  spirit  you  discover ; and  your  bear- 
ing so  well  to  be  told  of  the  mistakes  I pointed 
out  to  you,  endears  you  more  to  me  than  if 
you  had  not  made  them.  Henceforward  I 
can  converse  freely  with  you,  and  shall  be 
glad  when  I have  the  opportunity. 

As  to  your  view  of  justification,  I did  not 
oppose  it ; I judge  for  myself,  and  I am  wil- 
ling others  should  have  the  same  liberty.  If 
we  hold  the  Head,  and  love  the  Lord,  we  agree 
in  him,  and  I should  think  my  time  ill  em- 
ployed in  disputing  the  point  with  you.  I 
only  meant  to  except  against  the  positive 
manner  in  which  you  had  expressed  yourself. 
My  end  is  answered,  and  I am  satisfied.  In- 
deed, I believe  the  difference  between  a 
judicious  Supra-lapsarian,  and  a sound  Sub- 
lapsarian,  lies  more  in  a different  way  of  ex- 
pressing their  sentiments  than  is  generally 
thought.  At  the  close  of  Halyburton’s  In- 
sufficiency of  Natural  Religion,  he  has  an 
Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of  Regeneration  and 
Justification,  wherein  he  promises  a scheme, 
in  which,  if  I mistake  not,  the  moderate  of 
both  parties  might  safely  unite.  I have  used 
the  epithets  judicious  and  sound , because, 
as  I acknowledge,  some  of  the  one  side  are 
not  quite  sound , so  I think  some  on  the  other 
side  are  not  so  judicious  as  T could  wish ; 
that  is,  I think  they  do  not  sufficiently  advert 
to  the  present  state  of  human  nature,  and  the 
danger  which  may  arise  from  leading  those 
who  are  weak  in  faith  and  judgment,  into 
inquiries  and  distinctions,  evidently  beyond 
the  line  of  their  experience,  and  which  may 
be  hurtful : because,  admitting  them  to  be  I 


true  when  properly  explained,  they  are  very 
liable  to  be  misunderstood.  To  say  nothing 
of  Mr.  Hussey  (in  whose  provisions  I have 
frequently  found  more  bones  than  meat,  and 
seasoned  with  much  of  an  angry  and  self- 
important  spirit,)  I have  observed  passages 
in  other  writers,  for  whom  I have  a higher 
esteem,  which,  to  say  the  least,  appear  to 
me  paradoxical,  and  hard  to  be  understood ; 
though,  perhaps,  I can  give  my  consent  to 
them,  if  I had  such  restrictions  and  limita- 
tions as  the  authors  would  not  refuse.  But 
plain  people  are  easily  puzzled.  And  though  I 
know  several  in  the  Supra-lapsarian  scheme, 
at  whose  feet  I am  willing  to  sit  and  learn, 
and  have  found  their  preaching  and  conver- 
sation savoury  and  edifying;  yet  I must  say, 
I have  met  with  many,  who  have  appeared 
to  be  rather  wise  than  warm,  rather  positive 
than  humble,  rather  captious  than  lively,  and 
more  disposed  to  talk  of  speculations  than 
experience.  However,  let  us  give  ourselves 
to  the  study  of  the  word  and  to  prayer:  and 
may  the  great  Teacher  make  every  scrip- 
tural truth  food  to  our  souls.  I desire  to 
grow  in  knowledge,  but  I want  nothing 
which  bears  that  name,  that  has  not  a direct 
tendency  to  make  sin  more  hateful,  Jesus 
more  precious  to  my  soul ; and  at  the  same 
time  to  animate  me  to  a diligent  use  of  every 
appointed  means,  and  an  unreserved  regard 
to  every  branch  of  duty.  I think  the  Lord  has 
shown  me  in  a measure,  there  is  a consistent 
sense  running  through  the  whole  scriptures, 
and  I desire  to  be  governed  and  influenced 
by  it  all : doctrines,  precepts,  promises,  warn- 
ings, all  have  their  proper  place  and  use ; and 
I think  many  of  the  inconveniencies  which 
obtain  in  the  present  day,  spring  from  sepa- 
rating those  things  which  God  hath  joined 
together,  and  insisting  on  some  parts  of  the 
word  of  God,  almost  to  the  exclusion  of  the 
rest. 

I have  filled  my  paper  with  what  I did  not 
intend  to  say  a word  of  when  I began,  and  1 
333 


334 


LETTERS  TO  THE 

.must  leave  other  things  which  were  more 
upon  my  mind  for  another  season.  I thank 
you  for  saying1  you  pray  for  me.  Continue 
that  kindness ; I both  need  it  and  prize  it. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

July  31,  1773. 

dear  str, — I received  your  sorrowful  epis- 
tle yesterday,  and  in  order  to  encourage  you 
to  write,  I answer  it  to-day. 

The  ship  was  safe  when  Christ  was  in  her, 
though  he  was  really  asleep.  At  present  I 
can  tell  you  good  news,  though  you  know  it; 
he  is  wide  awake,  and  his  eyes  are  in  every 
place.  You  and  I,  if  we  could  be  pounded 
together,  might  perhaps  make  two  tolerable 
ones.  You  are  too  anxious,  and  I am  too 
easy  in  some  respects.  Indeed,  I cannot  be 
too  easy,  when  I have  a right  thought  that 
all  is  safe  in  his  hands ; but  if  your  anxiety 
makes  you  pray,  and  my  composure  makes 
me  careless,  you  have  certainly  the  best  of  it. 
However,  the  ark  is  fixed  upon  an  immove- 
able foundation;  and  if  we  think  we  see  it 
totter,  it  is  owing  to  a swimming  in  our  heads. 
Seriously,  the  times  look  dark  and  stormy, 
and  call  for  much  circumspection  and  prayer; 
but  let  us  not  forget  that  we  have  an  infallible 
pilot,  and  that  the  power,  and  wisdom,  and 
honour  of  God,  are  embarked  with  us.  At 
Venice  they  have  a fine  vessel,  called  the 
Rucentaur,  in  which,  on  a certain  day  of  the 
year,  the  Doge  and  nobles  embark,  and  go  a 
little  way  to  sea,  to  repeat  the  foolish  cere- 
mony of  marriage  between  the  Republic  and 
the  Adriatic  (in  consequence  of  some  lying, 
antiquated  Pope’s  bull,  by  which  the  banns 
of  matrimony  between  Venice  and  the  Gulf 
were  published  in  the  dark  ages,)  when,  they 
say,  a gold  ring  is  very  gravely  thrown  over- 
board. Upon  this  occasion,  I have  been  told, 
when  the  honour  and  government  of  Venice 
are  shipped  on  board  the  Bueentaur,  the  pilot 
is  obliged  by  his  office  to  take  an  oath,  that 
he  will  bring  the  vessel  safely  back  again,  in 
defiance  of  wind  and  weather.  Vain  mortals ! 
If  this  be  true,  what  an  instance  of  God’s 
long-suffering  is  it,  that  they  have  never  yet 
sunk  as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters ! But  my 
story  will  probably  remind  you,  that  Jesus 
has  actually  entered  into  such  an  engagement 
in  behalf  of  his  church.  And  well  he  may,  for 
both  wind  and  weather  are  at  his  command; 
and  he  can  turn  the  storm  into  a calm  in  a 
moment.  We  may  therefore  safely  and  con- 
fidently leave  the  government  upon  his  shoul- 
ders. Duty  is  our  part,  the  care  is  his. 

A revival  is  wanted  with  us  as  well  as  with 
you,  and  I trust  some  of  us  are  longing  for 
it  We  are  praying  and  singing  for  one ; and 
l send  you,  on  the  other  side,  a hymn,  that 


REV.  MR.  R . [let.  hi. 

you  (if  you  like  it)  may  sing  with  us.  Let 
us  take  courage ; though  it  may  seem  mar- 
vellous in  our  eyes,  it  is  not  so  in  the  Lord’s. 
He  changes  the  desert  into  a fruitful  field, 
and  bids  dry  bones  live.  And  if  he  prepare 
our  hearts  to  pray,  he  will  surely  incline  his 
ear  to  hear. 

The  miscarriages  of  professors  are  griev- 
ous; yet  such  things  must  be;  how  else  could 
the  scriptures  be  fulfilled?  But  there  is  one 
who  is  able  to  keep  us  from  falling.  Some 
who  have  distressed  us,  perhaps  never  were 
truly  changed ; how  then  could  they  stand  ? 
We  see  only  the  outside.  Others  who  are 
sincere  are  permitted  to  fall  for  our  instruc- 
tion, that  we  may  not  be  high-minded,  but 
fear.  However,  he  that  walketh  humbly, 
walketh  surely. — Believe  me,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

February  22,  1774. 

dear  sir, — Your  letter  by  last  post  sur- 
prised and  grieved  me.  We  knew  nothing 

of  the  subject,  though  Mrs. remembers, 

when  was  here,  a hint  or  two  were 

dropped  which  she  did  not  understand,  but 
no  name  was  mentioned. 

This  instance  shows  the  danger  of  leaning 
to  impressions.  Texts  of  scripture,  brought 
powerfully  to  the  heart,  are  very  desirable 
and  pleasant,  if  their  tendency  is  to  humble 
us,  to  give  us  a more  feeling  sense  of  the 
preciousness  of  Christ,  or  of  the  doctrines  of 
grace,  if  they  make  sin  more  hateful,  enliven 
our  regard  to  the  means,  or  increase  our  con- 
fidence in  the  power  and  faithfulness  of  God. 
But  if  they  are  understood  as  intimating  our 
path  of  duty  in  particular  circumstances,  or 
confirming  us  in  purposes  we  may  have  al- 
ready formed,  not  otherwise  clearly  warrant- 
ed by  the  general  strain  of  the  word,  or  by  the 
leadings  of  Providence,  they  are  for  the  most 
part  ensnaring,  and  always  to  be  suspected. 
Nor  does  their  coming  into  the  mind  at  the 
time  of  prayer  give  them  more  authority  in 
this  respect.  When  the  mind  is  intent  upon 
any  subject  the  imagination  is  often  watchful 
to  catch  at  any  thing  which  may  seem  to 
countenance  the  favourite  pursuit.  It  is  too 
common  to  ask  counsel  of  the  Lord  when  we 
have  already  secretly  determined  for  our- 
selves; and  in  this  disposition  we  may  easily 
be  deceived  by  the  sound  of  a text  of  scrip- 
ture, which  detached  from  the  passage  in 
which  it  stands,  may  seem  remarkably  to 
tally  with  our  wishes.  Many  have  been  de- 
ceived this  way ; and  sometimes,  when  the 
event  has  shown  them  they  were  mistaken, 
it  has  opened  a door  for  great  distress,  and 
Satan  has  found  occasion  to  make  them  doubt 
even  of  their  most  solid  experiences. 

I have  sometimes  talked  to  upon 

this  subject,  though  without  the  least  suspi 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  R- 


335 


LEI  IV.] 

cion  of  any  thing1  like  what  has  happened. 
As  to  the  present  case,  it  may  remind  us  all 
of  our  weakness.  I would  recommend  prayer, 
patience,  much  tenderness  towards  her,  join- 
ed with  faithful  expostulation.  Wait  a little 
while,  and  I trust  the  Lord  who  loves  her 
w ill  break  the  snare.  I am  persuaded,  in  her 
better  judgment,  she  would  dread  the  thoughts 
of  doing  wrong ; and  I hope  and  believe  the 
good  Shepherd,  to  whom  she  has  often  com- 
mitted her  soul  and  her  ways,  will  interpose 
to  restore  and  set  her  to  rights,  - - - - 

- - - I am  sorry  you  think  any  of  whom 

you  have  hoped  well  are  going  back;  but  be 
not  discouraged.  I say  again,  pray  and  wait, 
and  hope  the  best.  It  is  common  for  young 
professors  to  have  a slack  time ; it  is  almost 
necessary,  that  they  may  be  more  sensible  of 
the  weakness  and  deceitfulness  of  their  hearts, 
and  be  more  humbled  in  future,  when  the 
Lord  shall  have  healed  their  breaches,  and 
restored  their  souls.  W e join  in  love  to  you 
and  yours.  Pray  for  us. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

February  3,  1775. 

dear  sir, — It  would  be  wrong  to  make 
you  wait  long  for  an  answer  to  the  point  you 
propose  in  your  last.  It  is  an  important  one. 
I am  not  a casuist  by  profession,  but  I will 
do  my  best.  Suppose  I imitate  your  laconic 
manner  of  stating  the  question  and  circum- 
stances. 

I doubt  not  but  it  is  very  lawful  at  your 
age  to  think  of  marriage,  and,  in  the  situa- 
tion you  describe,  to  think  of  money  likewise. 
I am  glad  you  have  no  person,  as  you  say, 
fixedly  in  view ; in  that  case  advice  comes  a 
post  or  two  too  late.  But  your  expression 
seems  to  intimate  that  there  is  one  transient- 
ly in  view.  If  it  be  so,  since  you  have  no 
settlement,  if  she  has  no  money,  I cannot  but 
wish  she  may  pass  on  till  she  is  out  of  sight 
and  out  of  mind.  I see  this  will  not  do ; I 
must  get  into  my  own  grave  way  about  this 
grave  business.  I take  it  for  granted  that  my 
friend  is  free  from  the  love  of  filthy  lucre, 
and  that  money  will  never  be  the  turning 
point  with  you  in  the  choice  of  a wife.  Me- 
thinks  I hear  you  think,  if  I wanted  money, 
I would  either  dig  or  beg  for  it;  but  to  preach 
or  marry  for  money,  that  be  far  from  me.  I 
commend  you.  However,  though  the  love 
of  money  be  a great  evil,  money  itself,  ob- 
tained in  a fair  and  honourable  way,  is  de- 
sirable upon  many  accounts,  though  not  for 
its  own  sake.  Meat,  clothes,  fire,  and  books, 
cannot  easily  be  had  without  it ; therefore, 
if  these  be  necessary,  money,  which  pro- 
cures them,  must  be  a necessary  likewise. 
If  things  were  otherwise  than  you  represent 


them,  if  you  were  able  to  provide  for  a wife 
yourself,  then  I would  say,  Find  a gracious 
girl  (if  she  be  not  found  already,)  whose  per- 
son you  like,  whose  temper  you  think  will 
suit,  and  then,  with  your  father  and  mother’s 
consent  (without  which  I think  you  would  be 
unwilling  to  move,)  thank  the  Lord  for  her, 
marry  her,  and  account  her  a valuable  por- 
tion, though  she  should  not  have  a shilling. 
But,  while  you  are  without  income  or  settle- 
ment, if  you  have  thoughts  of  marriage,  I 
hope  they  will  be  regulated  by  a due  regard 
to  consequences.  They  who  set  the  least 
value  upon  money  have  in  some  respects  the 
most  need  of  it.  A generous  mind  will  feel  a 
thousand  pangs  in  straitening  circumstances, 
which  some  unfeeling  hearts  would  not  be 
sensible  of.  You  could  perhaps  endure  hard- 
ships alone,  yet  it  might  pinch  you  to  the 
very  bone  to  see  the  person  you  love  exposed 
to  them.  Besides,  you  might  have  a John, 
a Thomas,  and  a William,  and  perhaps  half 
a dozen  more  to  feed  (for  they  must  all  eat;) 
and  how  this  could  be  done  without  a com- 
petency on  one  side  or  the  other,  or  so  much 
on  both  sides  as  will  make  a competency 
when  united,  I see  not.  Besides,  you  would 
be  grieved  not  to  find  an  occasional  shilling 
in  your  pocket  to  bestow  upon  one  or  other 
of  the  Lord’s  poor,  though  you  should  be  able 
to  make  some  sort  of  a shift  for  those  of  your 
own  house. 

But  is  it  not  written,  “ The  Lord  will  pro- 
vide!” It  is;  but  it  is  written  again,  “Thou 
shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God.”  Hastily 
to  plunge  ourselves  into  difficulties  upon  a 
persuasion  that  he  will  find  some  way  to 
extricate  us,  seems  to  me  a species  of  tempt- 
ing him. 

Therefore  I judge,  it  is  so  far  lawful  for 
you  to  have  a regard  to  money  in  looking  out 
for  a wife,  that  it  would  be  wrong,  that  is,  in 
other  words,  unlawful  for  you  to  omit  it, 
supposing  you  have  a purpose  of  marrying  in 
your  present  situation. 

Many  serious  young  women  have  a predi- 
lection in  favour  of  a minister  of  the  gospel ; 
and  I believe  among  such  one  or  more  may 
be  found  as  spiritual,  as  amiable,  as  suitable 
to  make  you  a good  wife,  with  a tolerable  for- 
tune to  boot,  as  another  who  has  not  a penny. 
If  you  are  not  willing  to  trust  your  own  judg- 
ment in  the  search,  entreat  the  Lord  to  find 
her  for  you.  He  chose  well  for  Isaac  and 
Jacob ; and  you,  as  a believer,  have  warrant 
to  commit  your  way  to  him,  and  many 
more  express  promises  than  they  had  for 
your  encouragement.  He  knows  your  state, 
your  wants,  what  you  are  at  present,  and 
what  use  he  designs  to  make  of  you. 
Trust  in  him,  and  wait  for  him ; prayer 
and  faith,  and  patience,  are  never  disap- 
pointed. I commend  you  to  his  blessing 
and  guidance.  Remember  us  to  all  in  your 
house. — I am,  &c. 


330 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  R- 


LETTER  V. 

May  28,  1775. 

DEAR  SIR, 

- - You  must  not  expect  a 

long  letter  this  morning ; we  are  just  going 
to  court,  in  hopes  of  seeing  the  King,  for  he 
has  promised  to  meet  us.  We  can  say  he  is 
mindful  of  his  promises ; and  yet  is  it  not 
strange,  that  though  we  are  all  in  the  same 
place,  and  the  King  in  the  midst  of  us,  it  is 
but  here  and  there  one  (even  of  those  who 
love  him)  can  see  him  at  once ! However,  in 
our  turns,  we  are  all  favoured  with  a glimpse 
of  him,  and  have  had  cause  to  say,  How  great 
is  his  goodness ! How  great  is  his  beauty ! 
We  have  the  advantage  of  the  queen  of  She- 
ba, a more  glorious  object  to  behold,  and  not 
so  far  to  go  for  the  sight  of  it.  If  a transient 
glance  exceeds  all  that  the  world  can  afford 
for  a long  continuance,  what  must  it  be  to 
dwell  with  him  ! If  a day  in  his  courts  be 
better  than  a thousand,  what  will  eternity  be 
in  his  presence  ! I hope  the  more  you  see, 
the  more  you  loye ; the  more  you  drink,  the 
more  you  thirst ; the  more  you  do  for  him, 
the  more  you  are  ashamed  you  can  do  so  lit- 
tle ; and  that  the  nearer  you  approach  to  your 
journey’s  end,  the  more  your  pace  is  quick- 
ened. Surely  the  power  of  spiritual  attrac- 
tion should  increase  as  the  distance  lessens. 
O that  heavenly  load-stone ! may  it  so  draw 
us,  that  we  may  not  creep,  but  run.  In  com- 
mon travelling,  the  strongest  become  weary, 
if  the  journey  be  very  long ; but  in  the  spi- 
ritual journey,  we  are  encouraged  with  a 
hope  of  going  on  from  strength  to  strength. 
Instaurabit  iter  vires , as  Johnson  expresses 
it.  No  road  but  the  road  to  heaven  can  thus 
communicate  refreshment  to  those  who  walk 
in  it,  and  make  them  more  fresh  and  lively 
when  they  are  just  finishing  their  course, 
than  when  they  first  set  out. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VI. 

April  18,  1776. 

dear  sir, — Are  you  sick,  or  lame  of  your 
right  hand,  or  are  you  busy  in  preparing  a 
folio  for  the  press,  that  I hear  nothing  from 
you  ? You  see,  by  the  excuses  I would  con- 
trive, I am  not  willing  to  suppose  you  have 
forgotten  me,  but  that  your  silence  is  rather 
owing  to  a cannot  than  a will  not. 

I hope  your  soul  prospers.  I do  not  ask 
you,  if  you  are  always  filled  with  sensible 
comfort:  but  do  you  find  your  spirit  more 
bowed  down  to  the  feet  and  will  of  Jesus,  so 
as  to  be  willing  to  serve  him  for  the  sake  of 
serving  him,  and  to  follow  him,  as  we  say, 
through  thick  and  thin ; to  be  willing  to  be 
any  thing  or  nothing,  so  that  he  may  be  glo- 
rified? I could  give  you  plenty  of  good  ad- 


[let.  1 .1. 

vice  upon  this  head  ; but  I am  ashamed  to  do 
it,  because  I so  poorly  follow  it  myself,  i 
want  to  live  with  him  by  the  day,  to  do  all 
for  him,  to  receive  all  from  him,  to  possess 
all  in  him,  to  live  all  to  him,  to  make  him  my 
hiding-place  and  my  resting-place.  I want 
to  deliver  up  that  rebel  self  to  him  in  chains ; 
but  the  rogue,  like  Proteus,  puts  on  so  many 
forms,  that  he  slips  through  my  fingers:  but 
I think  I know  what  I would  do,  if  I could 
fairly  catch  him. 

My  soul  is  like  a besieged  city ; a legion 
of  enemies  without  the  gates,  and  a nest  of 
restless  traitors  within,  that  hold  a corres- 
pondence with  them  without;  so  that  I am 
deceived  and  counteracted  continually.  It  is 
a mercy  that  I have  not  been  surprised  and 
overwhelmed  long  ago ; without  help  from  on 
high,  it  would  soon  be  over  with  me.  How 
often  have  I been  forced  to  cry  out,  O God, 
the  heathen  are  got  into  thine  inheritance ; 
thy  holy  temple  have  they  defiled,  and  de- 
faced all  thy  work  ! Indeed,  it  is  a miracle 
that  I still  hold  out.  I trust,  however,  I 
shall  be  supported  to  the  end,  and  that  my 
Lord  will  at  length  raise  the  siege,  and  cause 
me  to  shout  deliverance  and  victory. 

Pray  for  me,  that  my  walls  may  be  strength- 
ened, and  wounds  healed.  We  are  all  pretty 
well  as  to  the  outward  man,  and  join  in  love 
to  all  friends. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VII. 

July  6,  1776. 

dear  sir, — I was  abroad  when  your  letter 
came,  but  employ  the  first  post  to  thank  you 
for  your  confidence.  My  prayers  (when  I 
can  pray)  you  may  be  sure  of.  As  to  advice, 
l see  not  that  the  case  requires  much.  Only 
be  a quiet  child,  and  lie  patiently  at  the 
Lord’s  feet.  He  is  the  best  friend  and  ma- 
nager in  these  matters,  for  he  has  a key  to 
open  every  heart  - - - 


I should  not  have  taken  Mr 

Z ’s  letter  for  a denial,  as  it  seems  you 

did.  Considering  the  years  of  the  parties, 
and  other  circumstances,  a prudent  parent 
could  hardly  say  more,  if  he  were  inclined  to 
favour  your  views.  To  me  you  seem  to  be 
in  a tolerable  fair  way  ; but  I know,  in  affairs 
of  this  kind,  Mr.  Self  does  not  like  suspense, 
but  would  willingly  come  to  the  point  at 
once;  but  Mr.  Faith,  when  he  gets  liberty 
to  hold  up  his  head,  will  own,  that  in  order 
to  make  our  temporal  mercies  wear  well,  and 
to  give  us  a clearer  sense  of  the  hand  that 
bestows  them,  a waiting  and  a praying  time 
are  very  seasonable.  Worldly  people  expect 
their  schemes  to  run  upon  all-fours,  as  we 
say,  and  the  objects  of  their  wishes  to  dn  p 
into  their  mouths  without  difficulty;  and  if 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  R- 


337 


LET.  VIII.] 

they  succeed,  they  of  course  burn  incense  to 
their  own  drag,  and  say,  This  was  my  doing ; 
but  believers  meet  with  rubs  and  disappoint- 
ments, which  convince  them,  that  if  they  ob- 
tain any  thing,  it  is  the  Lord  must  do  it  for 
them.  For  this  reason,  I observe,  that  he 
usually  brings  a death  upon  our  prospects, 
even  when  it  is  his  purpose  to  give  us  success 
in  the  issue.  Thus  we  become  more  assured 
that  we  did  not  act  in  our  own  spirits,  and 
have  a more  satisfactory  view,  that  his  pro- 
vidence has  been  concerned  in  filling  up  the 
rivers  and  removing  the  mountains  that  were 
in  our  way.  Then,  when  he  has  given  us  our 
desire,  how  pleasant  is  it  to  look  at  it,  and 
say,  This  I got  not  by  my  own  sword,  and 
my  own  bow,  but  I wrestled  for  it  in  prayer, 
I waited  for  it  in  faith,  I put  it  into  the  Lord’s 
hand,  and  from  his  hand  I received  it? 

You  have  met  with  the  story  of  one  of  our 
kings  (if  I mistake  not,)  who  wanted  to  send 
a nobleman  abroad  as  his  ambassador,  and  he 
desired  to  be  excused  on  account  of  some  af- 
fairs which  required  his  presence  at  home : 
the  king  answered,  “ Do  you  take  care  of 
my  business,  and  I will  take  care  of  yours.” 
I would  have  you  think  the  Lord  says  thus 
to  you.  You  were  sent  into  the  world  for  a 
nobler  end  than  to  be  pinned  to  a girl’s  apron- 
string ; and  yet,  if  the  Lord  sees  it  not  good 
for  you  to  be  alone,  he  will  provide  you  a 
help-mate.  I say,  if  he  sees  the  marriage- 
state  best  for  you,  he  has  the  proper  person 
already  in  his  eye,  and  though  she  were  in 
Peru  or  Nova  Zembla,  he  knows  how  to  bring 
you  together.  In  the  mean  time,  go  thou 
and  preach  the  gospel.  Watch  in  all  things; 
endure  afflictions:  do  the  work  of  an  evan- 
gelist ; make  full  proof  of  your  ministry : and 
when  other  thoughts  rise  in  your  mind  (for 
you  have  no  door  to  shut  them  quite  out,) 
run  with  them  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and 
commit  them  to  the  Lord.  Satan  will  per- 
haps try  to  force  them  upon  you  unseasonably 
and  inordinately;  but  if  he  sees  they  drive  you 
to  prayer,  he  will  probably  desist,  rather  than 
be  the  occasion  of  doing  you  so  much  good. 
Relieve,  likewise,  that  as  the  Lord  has  the  ap- 
pointment of  the  person,  so  he  fixes  the  time. 
His  time  is  like  the  time  of  the  tide ; all  the 
art  and  power  of  man  can  neither  hasten  nor 
retard  it  a moment:  it  must  be  waited  for; 
nothing  can  be  done  without  it,  and  when  it 
comes,  nothing  can  resist  it.  It  is  unbelief  that 
talks  of  delays;  faith  knows  that  properly 
there  can  be  no  such  thing.  The  only  reason 
why  the  Lord  seems  to  delay  what  he  after- 
wards grants,  is,  that  the  best  hour  is  not  yet 
come.  I know  you  have  been  enabled  to 
commit  and  resign  your  all  to  his  disposal. 
You  did  well.  May  he  help  you  to  stand  to 
the  surrender.  Sometimes  he  will  put  us  to 
the  trial,  whether  we  mean  what  we  say.  He 
takes  his  course  in  a way  we  did  not  ex- 
pect ; and  then,  alas!  how  often  does  the  trial 
2 U 


put  us  to  shame ! Presently  there  is  an  out* 
cry  raised  in  the  soul  against  his  manage- 
ment; this  is  wrong,  that  unnecessary,  the 
other  has  spoiled  the  whole  plan : in  short, 
all  these  things  are  against  us.  And  then  we 
go  into  the  pulpit,  and  gravely  tell  the  people 
how  wise  and  how  good  he  is ; and  preach 
submission  to  his  will,  not  only  as  a duty,  but 
a privilege.  Alas ! how  deceitful  is  the  heart ! 
Yet,  since  it  is,  and  will  be  so,  it  is  neces- 
sary we  should  know  it  by  experience.  We 
have  reason,  however,  to  say,  He  is  good  and 
wise ; for  he  bears  with  our  perverseness,  and 
in  the  event  shows  us,  that  if  he  had  listened 
to  our  murmurings,  and  taken  the  methods 
we  would  have  prescribed  to  him,  we  should 
have  been  ruined  indeed,  and  that  he  has 
been  all  the  while  doing  us  good  in  spite  of 
ourselves. 

If  I judge  right,  you  will  find  your  way 
providentially  opened  more  and  more;  and 
yet  it  is  possible,  that  when  you  begin  to 
think  yourself  sure,  something  may  happen 
to  put  you  in  a panic  again.  But  a believer, 
like  a sailor,  is  not  to  be  surprised  if  the 
wind  changes,  but  to  learn  the  art  of  suiting 
himself  to  all  winds  for  the  time ; and  though 
many  a poor  sailor  is  shipwrecked,  the  poor 
believer  snail  gain  his  port.  O,  it  is  good 
sailing  with  an  infallible  pilot  at  the  helm, 
who  has  the  wind  and  weather  at  his  com- 
mand ! 

I have  been  much  abroad,  which  of  course 
puts  things  at  sixes  and  sevens  at  home.  If 
I did  not  love  you  well,  I could  not  have 
spared  so  much  of  the  only  day  I have  had 
to  myself  for  this  fortnight  past.  But  I was 
willing  you  should  know  that  I think  of  you, 
and  feel  for  you,  if  I cannot  help  you. 

I have  read  Mr. ’s  book.  Some 

things  I think  strongly  argued  ; in  some  he 
has  laid  himself  open  to  a blow,  and  I doubt 
not  but  he  will  have  it.  I expect  answers, 
replies,  rejoinders,  &c.  &c.  and  say,  with 
Leah,  Gad,  a troop  cometh.  How  the  wolf 
will  grin  to  see  the  sheep  and  the  shepherds 
biting  and  worrying  one  another ! And  well 
he  may.  He  knows  that  contentions  are  a 
surer  way  to  weaken  the  spirit  of  love,  and 
stop  the  progress  of  the  gospel,  than  his  old 
stale  method  of  fire  and  sword.  Well,  I trust 
we  shall  be  of  one  heart  and  one  mind  when 
we  get  to  heaven  at  last. 

Let  who  will  fight,  I trust  neither  water 
nor  fire  shall  set  you  and  me  at  variance. 
We  unite  in  love  to  you.  The  Lord  is  gra- 
cious to  us,  &c. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VIII. 

1776. 

dear  sir, — I do  not  often  serve  your  letters 
so,  but  this  last  I burnt,  believing  you  woulce 


3d8 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  R- 


like  to  have  it  out  of  danger  of  falling  into 
improper  hands.  When  I saw  how  eagerly 
the  flames  devoured  the  paper,  how  quickly 
and  entirely  every  trace  of  the  writing  was 
consumed,  I wished  that  the  fire  of  the  love 
of  Jesus  might  as  completely  obliterate  from 
your  heart  every  uneasy  impression  which 
your  disappointment  has  given  you  - - - 


. . ...  . _ Surely  when  he  crosses  our 

wishes,  it  is  always  in  mercy,  and  because  we 
short-sighted  creatures  often  know  not  what 
we  ask  nor  what  would  be  the  consequences 
if  our  desires  were  granted. 

Your  pride,  it  seems,  has  received  a fall, 
by  meeting  a repulse.  I know  self  does  not 
like  to  be  mortified  in  these  affairs ; but  if 
you  are  made  successful  in  wooing  souls  for 
Christ,  I hope  that  will  console  you  for  meet- 
ing a rebuff  when  only  wooing  for  yourself. 
Besides,  I would  have  you  pluck  up  your 
spirits.  I have  two  good  old  proverbs  at  your 
service : “ There  is  as  good  fish  in  the  sea  as 
any  that  are  brought  out  of  it:”  and,  “If 
one  won’t,  another  will,  or  wherefore  serves 
the  market  1”  Perhaps  all  your  difficulties 
have  arisen  from  this,  that  you  have  not  yet 
seen  the  right  person ; if  so,  you  have  reason 
to  be  thankful  that  the  Lord  would  not  let 
you  take  the  wrong,  though  you  unwittingly 
would  have  done  it  if  you  could.  Where 
the  right  one  lies  hid  I know  not ; but  upon  a 
supposition  that  it  will  be  good  for  you  to 
marry,  I may  venture  to  say, 

Ubi  ubi  est,  diu  celari  non  potest. 

The  Lord  in  his  providence  will  disclose  her, 
put  her  in  your  way,  and  give  you  to  under- 
stand, This  is  she.  Then  you  will  find  your 
business  go  forward  with  wheels  and  wings, 
and  have  cause  to  say,  His  choice  and  time 
were  better  than  your  own. 

Did  I not  tell  you  formerly,  that  if  you 
would  take  care  of  his  business,  he  will  take 
care  of  yours!  I am  of  the  same  mind  still. 
He  will  not  suffer  them  who  fear  him  and  de- 
pend upon  him  to  want  any  thing  that  is  truly 
good  for  them.  In  the  mean  while,  I advise 
you  to  take  a lodging  as  near  as  you  can  to 
Gethsemane,  and  to  walk  daily  to  mount  Gol- 
gotha, and  borrow  (which  may  be  had  for 
asking)  that  telescope  which  gives  a prospect 
into  the  unseen  world.  A view  of  what  is 
passing  within  Jhe  vail  has  a marvellous  effect 
to  compose  our  spirits,  with  regard  to  the 
little  things  that  are  daily  passing  here. 
Praise  the  Lord,  who  has  enabled  you  to  fix 
your  supreme  affection  upon  him,  who  is 
alone  the  proper  and  suitable  object  of  it,  and 
from  whom  you  cannot  meet  a denial,  or  fear 
a change.  He  loved  you  first,  and  he  will 
love  you  for  ever ; and  if  he  be  pleased  to 
arise  and  smile  upon  you,  you  are  in  no  more 
necessity  of  begging  for  happiness  to  the 


[let.  ix. 

prettiest  creature  upon  earth,  than  of  the  light 
of  a candle  on  midsummer  noon. 

Upon  the  whole,  I pray  and  hope  the  Lord 
will  sweeten  your  cross,  and  either  in  kind 
or  in  kindness  make  you  good  amends. 
Wait,  pray,  and  believe,  and  all  shall  be  well. 
A cross  we  must  have  somewhere ; and  they 
who  are  favoured  with  health,  plenty,  peace, 
and  a conscience  sprinkled  with  the  blood  of 
Jesus,  must  have  more  causes  for  thankful- 
ness than  grief.  Look  round  you,  and  take 
notice  of  the  very  severe  afflictions  which 
many  of  the  Lord’s  own  people  are  groaning 
under,  and  your  trials  will  appear  compara- 
tively light.  Our  love  to  all  friends. — I am, 
&c. 


LETTER  IX. 

June  3,  1777. 

dear  sir, — It  seems  I must  write  some- 
thing about  the  small-pox,  but  I know  not 
well  what;  having  had  it  myself,  I cannot 
judge  how  I should  feel  if  I were  actually 
exposed  to  it.  I am  not  a professed  advocate 
for  inoculation ; but  if  a person  who  fears  the 
Lord  should  tell  me,  “I  think  I can  do  it  in 
faith,  looking  upon  it  as  a salutary  expedient, 
which  he  in  his  providence  has  discovered, 
and  which,  therefore,  appears  my  duty  to 
have  recourse  to,  so  that  my  mind  does  not 
hesitate  with  respect  to  the  lawfulness,  nor 
am  I anxious  about  the  event ; being  satisfied, 
that  whether  I live  or  die,  I am  in  that  path 
in  which  I can  cheerfully  expect  his  blessing,” 
I do  not  know  that  I could  offer  a word  by 
way  of  dissuasion. 

If  another  person  should  say,  “ My  times 
are  in  the  Lord’s  hands ; I am  now  in  health, 
and  am  not  willing  to  bring  upon  myself  a 
disorder,  the  consequences  of  which  I cannot 
possibly  foresee : if  I am  to  have  the  small- 
pox, I believe  he  is  the  best  judge  of  the  sea- 
son and  manner  in  which  I shall  be  visited, 
so  as  may  be  most  for  his  glory  and  my  own 
good : and  therefore  I choose  to  wait  his  ap- 
pointment, and  not  to  rush  upon  even  the  pos- 
sibility of  danger  without  a call.  If  the  very 
hairs  of  my  head  are  numbered,  I have  no 
reason  to  fear,  that,  supposing  I receive  the 
small-pox  in  a natural  way,  I shall  have  a 
single  pimple  more  than  he  sees  expedient ; 
and  why  should  I wish  to  have  one  less  * 
Nay,  admitting,  which,  however,  is  not  al- 
ways the  case,  that  inoculation  might  exempt 
me  from  some  pain  and  inconvenience,  and 
lessen  the  apparent  danger,  might  it  not  like- 
wise, upon  that  very  account,  prevent  my  re- 
ceiving some  of  those  sweet  consolations, 
which  I humbly  hope  my  gracious  Lord 
would  afford  me,  if  it  were  his  pleasure  to 
call  me  to  a sharp  trial.  Perhaps  the  chief 
design  of  this  trying  hour  if  it  comes,  may 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  R- 


339 


LET.  IX.] 

be  to  show  me  more  of  his  wisdom,  power, 
and  love,  than  I have  ever  yet  experienced. 
If  I could  devise  a mean  to  avoid  the  trouble, 
I know  not  how  great  a loser  I may  he  in 
point  of  grace  and  comfort.  Nor  am  I afraid 
of  my  face ; it  is  now  as  the  Lord  has  made 
it,  and  it  will  be  so  after  the  small-pox.  If 
it  pleases  him,  I hope  it  will  please  me.  In 
short,  though  I do  not  censu're  others,  yet,  as 
to  myself,  inoculation  is  what  I dare  not 
venture  upon.  If  I did  venture,  and  the  issue 
should  not  be  favourable,  I should  blame  my- 
self for  having  attempted  to  take  the  manage- 
ment out  of  the  Lord’s  hand  into  my  own, 
which  I never  did  yet  in  other  matters,  with- 
out finding  I am  no  more  able  than  I am 
worthy  to  choose  for  myself.  Besides,  at  the 
best,  inoculation  would  only  secure  me  from 
one  of  the  innumerable  natural  evils  the  flesh 
is  heir  to ; I should  still  be  as  liable  as  I am 
at  present  to  a putrid  fever,  a bilious  colic, 
an  inflammation  in  the  bowels  or  in  the  brain, 
and  a thousand  formidable  diseases  which 
are  hovering  round  me,  and  only  wait  his 
permission  to  cut  me  off  in  a few  days  or 
hours:  and  tnerefore  I am  determined,  by 
his  grace,  to  resign  myself  to  his  disposal. 
Let  me  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Lord  (for 
his  mercies  are  great,)  and  not  into  the  hands 
of  men.” 

If  a person  should  talk  to  me  in  this  strain, 
most  certainly  I could  not  say,  Notwithstand- 
ing all  this,  your  safest  way  is  to  be  inocu- 
kted. 


We  preach  and  hear,  and  I hope  we  know 
something  of  faith,  as  enabling  us  to  intrust 
the  Lord  with  our  souls : I wish  we  had  all 
more  faith  to  intrust  him  with  our  bodies,  our 
health,  our  provision,  and  our  temporal  com- 
forts likewise.  The  former  should  seem  to 
require  the  strongest  faith  of  the  two.  How 
strange  is  it,  that  when  we  think  we  can  do 
the  greater,  we  should  be  so  awkward  and 
unskilful  when  we  aim  at  the  less ! Give  my 
love  to  your  friend.  I dare  not  advise : but 
if  she  can  quietly  return  at  the  usual  time, 
and  neither  run  intentionally  into  the  way 
of  the  small-pox,  nor  run  out  of  the  way,  but 
leave  it  simply  with  the  Lord,  I shall  not 
blame  her.  And  if  you  will  mind  your  praying 
and  preaching,  and  believe  that  the  Lord  can 
take  care  of  her  without  any  of  your  contri- 
vances, I shall  not  blame  you : nay,  I shall 
praise  him  for  you  both.  My  prescription  is, 
to  read  Dr.  Watts’  cxxi.st  Psalm  every  morn- 
ing before  breakfast,  and  pray  it  over  till  the 
cure  is  effected.  Probatum  est. 

Hast  thou  not  given  thy  word, 

To  save  my  soul  from  death  ? 

And  I can  trust  my  Lord 
To  keep  my  mortal  breath. 

I’ll  go  and  come, 

Nor  fear  to  die, 

Till  from  on  high 
Thou  call  me  home. 

Adieu.  Pray  for  your’e. 


o 


LETTERS 

TO  MISS  TH 


LETTER  I. 

my  dear  madam, — Let  what  has  been 
said  on  the  subject  of  acquaintance,  &c.  suf- 
fice. It  was  well  meant  on  my  side  and 
well  taken  on  yours.  You  may,  perhaps,  see 
that  my  hints  were  not  wholly  unnecessary, 
and  I ought  to  be  satisfied  with  your  apology, 
and  am  so.  The  circumstance  of  your  being 
seen  at  the  play  house  has  nothing  at  all 
mysterious  in  it:  as  you  say  you  have  not 
been  there  this  six  or  seven  years,  it  was 
neither  more  nor  less  than  a mistake.  I 
heard  you  had  been  there  within  these  two 
years:  I am  glad  to  find  I was  misinformed. 

I think  there  is  no  harm  in  your  supposing, 
that  of  the  many  thousands  who  frequent 
public  diversions  some  may  in  other  respects 
be  better  than  yourself;  but  I hope  your 
humble  and  charitable  construction  of  their 
mistake  will  not  lead  you  to  extenuate  the 
evil  of  those  diversions  in  themselves.  For 
though  I am  persuaded,  that  a few,  who 
know  better  what  to  do  with  themselves,  are 
for  want  of  consideration,  drawn  in  to  expose 
themselves  in  such  places;  yet  I am  well 
satisfied  that,  if  there  is  any  practice  in  this 
land  sinful,  attendance  on  the  playhouse  is 
properly  and  eminently  so.  The  theatres  are 
fountains  and  means  of  vice ; I had  almost 
said,  in  the  same  manner  and  degree  as  the 
ordinances  of  the  gospel  are  the  means  of 
grace : and  I can  hardly  think  there  is  a Chris- 
tian upon  earth  who  would  dare  to  be  seen 
there,  if  the  nature  and  effects  of  the  theatre 
were  properly  set  before  them.  Dr.  Wither- 
spoon of  Scotland,  has  written  an  excellent 
piece  upon  the  stage,  or  rather  against  it, 
which  I wish  every  person  who  makes  the 
least  pretence  to  fear  God  had  an  opportunity 
of  perusing.  I cannot  judge  much  more  fa- 
vourably of  Ranelagh,  Vauxhall,  and  all  the 
innumerable  train  of  dissipations  by  which 
the  god  of  this  world  blinds  the  eyes  of  mul- 1 
titudes,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  ; 
should  shine  in  upon  them.  What  an  awful 
aspect  upon  the  present  times  have  such 


texts  as  Isa.  xxii.  12 — 14,  iii.  12,  Amos  vl 
3,  6,  James  iv.  4.  I wish  you,  therefore,  not 
to  plead  for  any  of  them,  but  use  all  your  in- 
fluence to  make  them  shunned  as  pest-houses, 
and  dangerous  nuisances  to  precious  souls ; 
especially,  if  you  know  any  who,  you  hope, 
in  the  main  are  seriously  disposed,  who  yet 
venture  themselves  in  those  purlieus  of  Satan, 
endeavour  earnestly  and  faithfully  to  unde- 
ceive them. 

The  time  is  short,  eternity  at  the  door : and 
was  there  no  other  evil  in  these  vain  amuse- 
ments than  the  loss  of  precious  time  (but, 
alas  ! their  name  is  legion,)  we  have  not  lei- 
sure, in  our  circumstances,  to  regard  them. 
But,  blessed  be  God ! we  need  them  not 
The  gospel  opens  a source  of  purer,  sweeter, 
and  more  substantial  pleasures : we  are  in- 
vited to  communion  with  God ; we  are  called 
to  share  in  the  theme  of  angels ; the  songs  of 
heaven,  and  the  wonders  of  redeeming  love 
are  laid  open  to  our  view.  The  Lord  him- 
self is  waiting  to  be  gracious,  waiting  with 
promises  and  pardons  in  his  hands.  Well, 
then,  may  we  bid  adieu  to  the  perishing  plea- 
sures of  sin ; well  may  we  pity  those  who 
can  find  pleasure  in  those  places  and  parties 
where  he  is  shut  out;  where  his  name  is  only 
mentioned  to  be  profaned ; where  his  com- 
mandments are  not  only  broken  but  insulted ; 
where  sinners  proclaim  their  shame  as  in  So- 
dom, and  attempt  not  to  hide  it;  where  at 
best  wickedness  is  wrapt  up  in  a disguise  of 
delicacy,  to  make  it  more  insinuating,  and 
nothing  is  offensive  that  is  not  grossly  and 
un  politely  indecent. 

I sympathize  with  all  your  complaints; 
but  if  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  make  them  sub- 
servient to  the  increase  of  your  sanctifica- 
tion, to  wean  you  more  and  more  from  this 
world,  and  to  draw  you  nearer  to  himself, 
you  will  one  day  see  cause  to  be  thankful 
for  them,  and  to  number  them  amongst 
' your  choicest  mercies.  A hundred  years 
; hence  it  will  signify  little  to  you  whether 
: you  were  sick  or  well  the  day  I wrote  this 
l letter. 


340 


LETTERS  TO  MISS  TH- 


341 


LET.  III.] 

We  thank  you  for  your  kind  condolence. 
There  is  a pleasure  in  the  pity  of  a friend ; 
but  the  Lord  alone  can  give  true  comfort.  1 
hope  he  will  sanctify  the  breach,  and  do  us 

good.  Mrs. exchanges  forgiveness  with 

you  about  your  not  meeting  in  London ; that 
is,  you  forgive  her  not  coming  to  you,  and  she 
forgives  you  entertaining  a suspicious  thought 
of  her  friendship  (though  but  for  a minute) 
on  account  of  what  she  was  really  unable  to 
do. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

September  1,  1767. 

my  dear  madam, — I shall  not  study  for 
expressions  to  tell  my  dear  friend  how  much 
we  were  affected  by  the  news  that  came  last 
post.  We  had,  however,  the  pleasure  to 
hear  that  your  family  was  safe.  I hope  this 
will  find  you  recovered  from  the  hurry  of 
spirits  you  must  have  been  thrown  into,  and 
that  both  you  and  your  papa  are  composed 
under  the  appointment  of  him  who  has  a 
right  to  dispose  of  his  own  as  he  pleases ; for 
we  know,  that  whatever  may  be  the  second 
causes  and  occasions,  nothing  can  happen  to 
us  but  according  to  the  will  of  our  heavenly 
Father.  Since  what  is  past  cannot  be  re- 
called, my  part  is  now  to  pray,  that  this,  and 
every  other  dispensation  you  meet  with,  may 
be  sanctified  to  your  soufs  good,  that  you 
may  be  more  devoted  to  the  God  of  your  life, 
and  have  a clearer  sense  of  your  interest  in 
that  kingdom  which  cannot  be  shaken,  that 
treasure  which  neither  thieves  nor  flames  can 
touch,  that  better  and  more  enduring  sub- 
stance which  is  laid  up  for  believers,  where 
Jesus  their  Head  and  Saviour  is.  With  this 
view  you  may  take  joyfully  the  spoiling  of 
your  goods. 

I think  I can  feel  for  my  friends ; but  for 
such  as  I hope  have  a right  to  that  promise, 
that  all  things  shall  work  together  for  their 
good,  I soon  check  my  solicitude,  and  ask 
myself,  Do  I love  them  better,  or  could  I 
manage  more  wisely  for  them,  than  the  Lord 
does'?  Can  I wish  them  to  be  in  safer  or 
more  compassionate  hands  than  in  his?  Will 
he  who  delights  in  the  prosperity  of  his  ser- 
vants, afflict  them  with  sickness,  losses,  and 
alarms,  except  he  sees  there  is  need  of  these 
things  ? Such  thoughts  calm  the  emotions 
of  my  mind.  I sincerely  condole  you ; but 
the  command  is,  to  rejoice  always  in  the  Lord. 
The  visitation  was  accompanied  with  mercy. 
Not  such  a case  as  that  of  the  late  Lady 
Molesworth’s,  which  made  every  one’s  ears 
to  tingle  that  heard  it.  Nor  is  yours  such  a 
case  as  of  some,  who,  in  almost  every  great 
fire  lose  their  all,  and  perhaps  have  no  know- 
ledge of  God  to  support  them. 

Though  our  first  apprehensions  were  for 


you,  we  almost  forgot  you  for  a moment, 
when  we  thought  of  your  next-door  neigh- 
bour, and  the  circumstance  she  was  in,  so  un- 
fit to  bear  either  a fright  or  a removal.  We 
shall  be  in  much  suspense  till  we  hear  from 
you.  God  grant  that  you  may  be  able  to 
send  us  good  news,  that  you  are  all  well, 
at  least  as  well  as  can  be  expected  after  such 
a distressing  scene.  If  what  has  happened 
should  give  you  more  leisure,  or  more  incli- 
nation to  spend  a little  time  with  us,  I think 
I need  not  say  we  shall  rejoice  to  receive  you. 
— I am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

September  17,  1767. 

my  dear  madam, — The  vanity  of  all  things 
below  is  confirmed  to  us  by  daily  experience. 
Amongst  other  proofs,  one  is,  the  precarious- 
ness of  our  intimacies,  and  what  little  things, 
or  rather  what  nothings  will  sometimes  pro- 
duce a coolness,  or  at  least  a strangeness  be- 
tween the  dearest  friends.  How  is  it  that 
our  correspondence  has  been  dropt,  and  that, 
after  having  written  two  letters  since  the 
fire,  which  removed  you  from  your  former 
residence,  I should  be  still  disappointed  in 
my  hopes  of  an  answer?  On  our  parts  1 
hope  there  has  been  no  abatement  of  regard ; 
nor  can  I charge  you  with  any  thing  but  re- 
missness.  Therefore,  waving  the  past,  and 
all  apologies  on  either  side,  let  me  beg  you 
to  write  soon,  to  tell  us  how  it  is  with  you, 
and  how  you  have  been  supported  under  the 
various  changes  you  have  met  with  since 
we  saw  you  last.  I doubt  not  but  you  have 
met  with  many  exercises.  I pray  that  they 
may  have  been  sanctified  to  lead  you  nearer 
to  the  Lord,  the  foundation  of  all  consola- 
tion, who  is  the  only  refuge  in  time  of  trou- 
bles, and  whose  gracious  presence  is  abun- 
dantly able  to  make  up  every  deficiency  and 
every  loss.  Perhaps  the  reading  of  this  may 
recal  to  your  mind  our  past  conversations, 
and  the  subjects  of  the  many  letters  we  have 
exchanged.  I know  not  in  what  manner  to 
write  after  so  long  an  interval.  I would  hope 
your  silence  to  us  has  not  been  owing  to  any 
change  of  sentiments,  which  might  make  such 
letters  as  mine  less  welcome  to  you.  Yet 
when  you  had  a friend,  who,  I think  you  be- 
lieved very  nearly  interested  himself  in  your 
welfare,  it  seems  strange  that  in  a course  of 
two  years  you  should  have  nothing  to  com- 
municate. I cannot  suppose  you  have  for- 
gotten me ; lam  sure  I have  not  forgotten 
you  ; and  therefore  I long  to  hear  from  you 
soon,  that  I may  know  how  to  write ; and 
should  this  likewise  pass  unanswered,  I must 
sit  down  and  mourn  over  my  loss. 

As  to  our  affairs,  I can  tell  you  the  Lord 
has  been  and  is  exceedingly  gracious  to  us ; 


LETTERS  TO  MISS  TH- 


342 

our  lives  are  preserved,  our  healths  continued, 
an  abundance  of  mercies  and  blessings  on 
every  side ; but  especially  we  have  to  praise 
him  that  he  is  pleased  to  crown  the  means 
and  ordinances  of  his  grace  with  tokens  of  his 
presence.  It  is  my  happiness  to  be  fixed 
amongst  an  affectionate  people,  who  make  an 
open  profession  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus, 
and  are  enabled,  in  some  measure,  to  show 
forth  its  power  in  their  lives  and  conversation. 
We  walk  in  peace  and  harmony.  I have 


[let.  III. 

reason  to  say  the  Lord  Jesus  is  a good  master, 
and  that  the  doctrine  of  free  salvation,  by 
faith  in  his  name,  is  a doctrine  according  to 
godliness ; for  through  mercy  I find  it  daily 
effectual  to  the  breaking  down  the  strongholds 
of  sin,  and  turning  the  hearts  of  sinners  from 
dead  works  to  serve,  the  living  God.  May 
the  Lord  give  my  dear  friend  to  live  in  the 
power  and  consolation  of  his  precious  truth  i 
— I am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO 


LETTER  I. 

March  18,  1767. 

I can  truly  say,  that  I bear  you  upon  ray 
heart  and  in  my  prayers.  I have  rejoiced  to 
see  the  beginning-  of  a good  and  gracious  work 
in  you ; and  I have  confidence  in  the  Lord 
Jesus,  that  he  will  carry  it  on  and  complete 
it,  and  that  you  will  be  amongst  the  number 
of  those  who  shall  sing  redeeming  love  to  eter- 
nity. Therefore,  fear  none  of  the  things  ap- 
pointed for  you  to  suffer  by  the  way ; but  gird 
up  the  loins  of  your  mind,  and  hope  to  the 
end.  Be  not  impatient,  but  wait  humbly  up- 
on the  Lord.  You  have  one  hard  lesson  to 
learn,  that  is,  the  evil  of  your  own  heart ; 
you  know  something  of  it,  but  it  is  needful 
that  you  should  know  more ; for  the  more  we 
know  of  ourselves,  the  more  we  shall  prize  and 
love  Jesus  and  his  salvation.  I hope  what 
you  find  in  yourself  by  daily  experience  will 
humble  you,  but  not  discourage  you ; hum- 
ble you  it  should,  and  I believe  it  does.  Are 
not  you  amazed  sometimes  that  you  should 
have  so  much  as  a hope,  that,  poor  and  needy 
as  you  are,  the  Lord  thinketh  of  you  1 But 
let  not  all  you  feel  discourage  you ; for  if  our 
Physician  is  almighty,  our  disease  cannot  be 
desperate ; and  if  he  cast  none  out  that  come 
to  him,  why  should  you  fear T Our  sins  are 
many,  but  his  mercies  are  more : our  sins  are 
great,  but  his  righteousness  is  greater : we 
are  weak,  but  he  is  power.  Most  of  our 
complaints  are  owing  to  unbelief,  and  the  re- 
mainder of  a legal  spirit ; and  these  evils  are 
not  removed  in  a day.  Wait  on  the  Lord, 
and  he  will  enable  you  to  see  more  and  more 
of  the  power  and  grace  of  our  High-Priest. 
The  more  you  know  him,  the  better  you  will 
trust  him : the  more  you  trust  him,  the  better 
you  will  love  him ; the  more  you  love  him, 
the  better  you  will  serve  him.  This  is  God’s 
way : you  are  not  called  to  buy,  but  to  beg ; 
not  be  strong  in  yourself,  but  in  the  grace 
that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  He  is  teaching  you 
these  things,  and  I trust  he  will  teach  you  to 
the  end.  Remember  the  growth  of  a be- 
liever is  not  like  a mushroom,  but  like  an  oak, 


which  increases  slowly  indeed,  but  surely. 
Many  suns,  showers,  and  frosts,  pass  upon  it 
before  it  comes  to  perfection ; and  in  winter 
when  it  seems  dead,  it  is  gathering  strength  at 
the  root.  Be  humble,  watchful,  and  diligent 
in  the  means,  and  endeavour  to  look  through 
all,  and  fix  your  eye  upon  Jesus,  and  all  shall 
be  well.  I commend  you  to  the  care  of  the 
good  Shepherd,  and  remain,  for  his  sake, — 
Yours,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

May  31,  1769. 

I was  sorry  I did  not  write  as  you  expected, 
but  I hope  it  will  do  now.  Indeed,  I have 
not  forgotten  you;  you  are  often  in  my 
thoughts,  and  seldom  omitted  in  my  prayers. 
I hope  the  Lord  will  make  what  you  see  and 
hear  while  abroad  profitable  to  you,  to  increase 
your  knowledge,  to  strengthen  your  faith,  and 
to  make  you  from  henceforth  well  satisfied 
with  your  situation.  If  I am  not  mistaken, 
you  will  be  sensible,  that  though  there  are 
some  desirable  things  to  be  met  with  in  Lon- 
don preferable  to  any  other  place,  yet  upon 
the  whole,  a quiet  situation  in  the  country, 
under  one  stated  ministry,  and  in  connexion 
with  one  people,  has  the  advantage.  It  is 
pleasant  now  and  then  to  have  opportunity  of 
hearing-  a variety  of  preachers,  but  the  best 
and  greatest  of  them  are  no  more  than  instru- 
ments ; some  can  please  the  ear  better  than 
others,  but  none  can  reach  the  heart  any  far- 
ther than  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  open  il. 
This  he  showed  you  upon  your  first  going 
up,  and  I doubt  not  but  your  disappointment 
did  you  more  good  than  if  you  had  heard 
with  all  the  pleasure  you  expected. 

The  Lord  was  pleased  to  visit  me  with  a 
slight  illness  in  my  late  journey.  I was  far 
from  well  on  the  Tuesday,  but  supposed  it 
owing  to  the  fatigue  of  riding,  and  the  heat 
of  the  weather;  but  the  next  day  I was  taker: 
with  a shivering,  to  which  a fever  succeeded. 
I was  then  near  sixty  miles  from  home.  The 
Lord  gave  me  much  peace  in  my  soul,  and  I 
343 


[LET.  IV 


844  LETTERS 

was  enabled  to  hope  he  would  bring  me  safe 
home,  in  which  I was  not  disappointed ; and 
though  I had  the  fever  most  part  of  the  way, 
my  journey  was  not  unpleasant.  He  likewise 
strengthened  me  to  preach  twice  on  Sunday ; 
and  at  night  I found  myself  well,  only  very 
weary,  and  I have  continued  well  ever  since. 
I have  reason  to  speak  much  of  his  goodness, 
and  to  kiss  the  rod,  for  it  was  sweetened  with 
abundant  mercies.  I thought  that,  had  it 
been  his  pleasure  I should  have  continued 
sick  at  Oxford,  or  even  have  died  there,  I 
had  no  objection.  Though  I had  not  that  joy 
and  sensible  comfort  which  some  are  favoured 
with,  yet  I was  quite  free  from  pain,  fear,  and 
care,  and  felt  myself  sweetly  composed  to  his 
will,  whatever  it  might  be.  Thus  he  fulfils 
his  promise  in  making  our  strength  equal  to 
our  day ; and  every  new  trial  gives  us  a new 
proof  how  happy  it  is  to  be  enabled  to  put  our 
trust  in  him. 

I hope,  in  the  midst  of  all  your  engage- 
ments, you  find  a little  time  to  read  his  good 
word,  and  to  wait  at  his  mercy-seat.  It  is 
good  for  us  to  draw  nigh  to  him.  It  is  an 
honour  that  he  permits  us  to  pray ; and  we 
shall  surely  find  he  is  a prayer-hearing  God. 
Endeavour  to  be  diligent  in  the  means ; yet 
watch  and  strive  against  a legal  spirit,  which 
is  always  aiming  to  represent  him  as  a hard 
master,  watching  as  it  were  to  take  advantage 
of  us.  But  it  is  far  otherwise.  His  name  is 
Love ; he  looks  upon  us  with  compassion ; 
he  knows  our  frame,  and  remembers  that  we 
are  but  dust ; and  when  our  infirmities  pre- 
vail, he  does  not  bid  us  despond,  but  reminds 
us  that  we  have  an  advocate  with  the  Father, 
who  is  able  to  pity,  to  pardon,  and  to  save  to 
the  uttermost.  Think  of  the  names  and  re- 
lations he  bears.  Does  he  not  call  himself  a 
Saviour,  a shepherd,  a friend,  and  a husband  1 
Has  he  not  made  known  unto  us  his  love,  his 
blood,  his  righteousness,  his  promises,  his 
power,  and  his  grace,  and  all  for  our  encour- 
agement) Away,  then,  with  all  doubting, 
unbelieving  thoughts ; they  will  not  only  dis- 
tress your  heart,  but  weaken  your  hands. 
Take  it  for  granted,  upon  the  warrant  of  his 
word,  that  you  are  his  and  he  is  yours ; that 
he  has  loved  you  with  an  everlasting  love,  and 
therefore  in  loving-kindness  has  drawn  you 
to  himself;  that  he  will  surely  accomplish 
that  which  he  has  begun,  and  that  nothing 
which  can  be  named  or  thought  of  shall  ever 
be  able  to  separate  you  from  him.  This 
persuasion  will  give  you  strength  for  the 
battle;  this  is  the  shield  which  will  quench  the 
fiery  darts  of  Satan ; this  is  the  helmet  which 
the  enemy  cannot  pierce.  Whereas,  if  we 
go  forth  doubting  and  fearing,  and  are  afraid 
to  trust  any  farther  than  we  can  feel,  we  are 
weak  as  water,  and  easily  overcome.  Be 
strong,  therefore,  not  in  yourself,  but  in  the 
grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  Pray  for  me, 
and  believe  me  to  be, — Yours,  &c. 


TO  . 

LETTER  III. 

March  14, 

1 think  you  would  hardly  expect  me  to 
write  if  you  knew  how  I am  forced  to  live  in 
London.  However,  I would  have  you  believe 
I am  as  willing  to  write  to  you  as  you  are  to 
receive  my  letters.  As  a proof,  I try  to  s nd 
you  a few  lines  new,  though  I am  writing  to 

you  and  talking  to  Mrs. both  at  once ; 

and  this  is  the  only  season  I can  have  to 
change  a few  words  with  her.  She  is  a 
woman  of  a sorrowful  spirit ; she  talks  and 
weeps.  I believe  she  would  think  herself 
happy  to  be  situated  as  you  are,  notwith- 
standing the  many  advantages  she  has  at 
London.  I see  daily,  and  I hope  you  have 
likewise  learned,  that  places  and  outward 
circumstances  cannot  of  themselves  either 
hinder  or  help  us  in  walking  with  God.  So 
far  as  he  is  pleased  to  be  -with  us,  and  teach 
us  by  his  Spirit,  wherever  we  are  we  shall 
get  forward  ; and  if  he  does  not  bless  us  and 
water  us  every  moment,  the  more  we  have 
of  our  own  wishes  and  wills,  the  more  uneasy 
we  shall  make  ourselves. 

One  thing  is  needful ; an  humble,  dependent 
spirit,  to  renounce  our  own  wills,  and  give 
up  ourselves  to  his  disposal  without  reserve. 
This  is  the  path  of  peace,  and  it  is  the  path 
of  safety ; for  he  has  said,  The  meek  he  wL. 
teach  his  way,  and  those  who  yield  up  them- 
selves to  him  he  will  guide  with  his  eye.  I 
hope  you  will  fight  and  pray  against  every 
rising  of  a murmuring  spirit,  and  be  thankful 
for  the  great  things  which  he  has  already 
done  for  you.  It  is  good  to  be  humbled  for 
sin,  but  not  to  be  discouraged  ; for  though 
we  are  poor  creatures,  Jesus  is  a complete 
Saviour;  and  we  bring  more  honour  to  God, 
by  believing  in  his  name,  and  trusting  his 
word  of  promise,  than  we  could  do  by  a 
thousand  outward  works. 

I pray  the  Lord  to  shine  upon  your  soul, 
and  to  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  be- 
lieving. Remember  to  pray  for  us,  that  we 
may  be  brought  home  to  you  in  peace. — 1 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  IY. 

London , August  19,  1775. 

You  see  I am  mindful  of  my  promise,  and 
glad  should  I be  to  write  something  that  the 
Lord  may  be  pleased  to  make  a word  in  sea- 
son. I went  yesterday  into  the  pulpit  very 
dry  and  heartless.  I seemed  to  have  fixed 
upon  a text ; but  when  I came  to  the  pinch,  it 
was  so  shut  up  that  I could  not  preach  from 
it.  I had  hardly  a minute  to  choose,  and 
therefore  was  forced  to  snatch  at  that  which 
came  first  upon  my  mind,  which  proved  2 
Tim.  i.  12.  Thus  I set  off  at  a venture, 


345 


let.  v.]  LETTERS 

having  no  resource  but  in  the  Lord’s  mercy 
and  faithfulness ; and,  indeed,  what  other  can 
we  wish  fori  Presently  my  subject  opened, 
and  I know  not  when  I have  been  favoured 
with  more  liberty.  Why  do  I tell  you  this  1 
Only  as  an  instance  of  his  goodness,  to  en- 
courage you  to  put  your  strength  in  him,  and 
not  to  be  afraid,  even  when  you  feel  your 
own  weakness  and  insufficiency  most  sensibly. 
We  are  never  more  safe,  never  have  more 
reason  to  expect  the  Lord’s  help,  than  when 
we  are  most  sensible  that  we  can  do  nothing 
without  him.  This  was  the  lesson  Paul 
learned,  to  rejoice  in  his  own  poverty  and 
emptiness,  that  the  power  of  Christ  might  rest 
upon  him.  Could  Paul  have  done  any  thing, 
Jesus  would  not  have  had  the  honour  of  doing 
all.  This  way  of  being  saved  entirely  by 
grace,  from  first  to  last,  is  contrary  to  our 
natural  wills;  it  mortifies  self,  leaving  it 
nothing  to  boast  of,  and  through  the  remains 
of  an  unbelieving,  legal  spirit,  it  often  seems 
discouraging.  When  we  think  ourselves  so 
utterly  helpless  and  worthless,  we  are  too 
ready  to  fear  that  the  Lord  will  therefore 
reject  us;  whereas,  in  truth,  such  a poverty 
of  spirit  is  the  best  mark  we  can  have  of  an 
interest  in  his  promises  and  care. 

How  often  have  I longed  to  be  an  instru- 
ment of  establishing  you  in  the  peace  and 
hope  of  the  gospel ! and  I have  but  one  way 
of  attempting  it,  by  telling  you  over  and  over 
of  the  power  and  grace  of  Jesus.  You  want 
nothing  to  make  you  happy,  but  to  have  the 
eyes  of  your  understanding  more  fixed  upon 
the  Redeemer,  and  more  enlightened  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  to  behold  his  glory.  O ! he  is  a 
suitable  Saviour  ! He  has  power,  authority, 
and  compassion,  to  save  to  the  uttermost.  He 
has  given  his  word  of  promise  to  engage  our 
confidence,  and  he  is  able  and  faithful  to 
make  good  the  expectations  and  desires  he 
has  raised  in  us.  Put  your  trust  in  him ; be- 
lieve, as  we  say,  through  thick  and  thin,  in 
defiance  of  all  objections  from  within  and 
without.  For  this  Abraham  is  recommended 
as  a pattern  to  us.  He  overlooked  all  diffi- 
culties, he  ventured  and  hoped  even  against 
hope,  in  a case  which,  to  appearance,  was 
desperate  ; because  he  knew  that  he  who  had 
promised  was  able  to  perform. 

Your  sister  is  much  upon  my  mind ; her 
illness  grieves  me ; were  it  in  my  power,  I 
would  quickly  remove  it.  The  Lord  can,  and 
I hope  he  will,  when  it  has  answered  the  end 
for  which  he  sent  it.  I trust  he  has  brought 
her  to  us  for  good,  and  that  she  is  chastised 
by  him,  that  she  may  not  be  condemned  with 
the  world.  I hope,  though  she  says  little, 
she  lifts  up  her  heart  to  him  for  a blessing. 
I wish  you  may  be  enabled  to  leave  her  and 
yourself,  and  all  your  concerns,  in  his  hands. 
He  has  a sovereign  right  to  do  with  us  as  he 
pleases;  and  if  we  consider  what  we  are, 
surely  we  shall  confess  we  have  no  reason  to 
2 X 


TO 

complain;  and  to  those  who  see*  him,  his 
sovereignty  is  exercised  in  a way  of  grace. 
All  shall  work  together  for  good  ; every  thing 
is  needful  that  he  sends;  nothing  can  be 
needful  that  he  withholds.  Be  content  to 
bear  the  cross ; others  have  borne  it  before 
you.  You  have  need  of  patience ; and  if  you 
ask,  the  Lord  will  give  it ; but  there  can  be 
no  settled  peace  till  our  will  is  in  a measure 
subdued.  Hide  yourself  under  the  shadow 
of  his  wings ; rely  upon  his  care  and  power ; 
look  upon  him  as  a physician  who  has  gra- 
ciously undertaken  to  heal  your  soul  of  the 
worst  of  sickness,  sin.  Yield  to  his  pre- 
scriptions, and  fight  against  every  thought 
that  would  represent  it  as  desirable  to  be 
permitted  to  choose  for  yourself.  W hen  you 
cannot  see  your  way,  be  satisfied  that  he  is 
your  leader.  When  your  spirit  is  over- 
whelmed within  you,  he  knows  your  path ; 
he  will  not  leave  you  to  sink.  He  has  ap- 
pointed seasons  of  refreshment,  and  you  shall 
find  he  does  not  forget  you.  Above  all,  keep 
close  to  the  throne  of  grace.  If  we  seem  to 
get  no  good  by  attempting  to  draw  near  him, 
we  may  be  sure  we  shall  get  none  by  keeping 
away  from  him. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  V. 

I promised  you  another  letter,  and  now 
for  the  performance.  If  I had  said,  it  may 
be,  or,  perhaps  I will,  you  would  be  in  sus- 
pense ; but  if  I promise,  then  you  expect 
that  I will  not  disappoint  you,  unless  some- 
thing should  render  it  impossible  for  me  to 
make  my  word  good.  I thank  you  for  your 
good  opinion  of  me,  and  for  thinking  I mean 
what  I say ; and  I pray  that  you  may  be  en- 
abled more  and  more  to  honour  the  Lord,  by 
believing  his  promise ; for  he  is  not  a man 
that  he  should  fail  or  change,  or  be  prevented 
by  any  thing’  unforeseen  from  doing  what  he 
has  said.  And  yet  we  find  it  easier  to  trust 
to  worms  than  to  the  God  of  truth.  Is  it  not 
so  with  you  I And  I can  assure  you  it  is 
often  so  with  me.  But  here  is  the  mercy, 
that  his  ways  are  above  ours,  as  the  heavens 
are  higher  than  the  earth.  Though  we  are 
foolish  and  unbelieving,  he  remains  faithful ; 
he  will  not  deny  himself.  I recommend  to 
you  especially  that  promise  of  God,  which  is 
so  comprehensive,  that  it  takes  in  all  our 
concernments,  I mean,  that  all  things  shall 
work  together  for  good.  How  hard  is  it  to 
believe,  that  not  only  those  things  which  are 
grievous  to  the  flesh,  but  even  those  things 
which  draw  forth  our  corruptions,  and  discover 
to  us  what  is  in  our  hearts,  and  fill  us  with 
guilt  and  shame,  should  in  the  issue  work  for 
our  good ! Yet  the  Lord  has  said  it.  All 
your  pains  and  trials,  all  that  befals  you  in 
your  own  person,  or  that  affects  you  upon  the 


346 


LETTERS  TO 


[let.  VII. 


account  of  others,  shall  in  the  end  prove  to 
your  advantage.  And  your  peace  does  not 
depend  upon  any  change  of  circumstances 
which  may  appear  desirable,  but  in  having 
your  will  bowed  to  the  Lord’s  will,  and  made 
willing  to  submit  all  to  his  disposal  and 
management.  Pray  for  this,  and  wait  patiently 
for  him,  and  he  will  do  it.  Be  not  surprised 
to  find  yourself  poor,  helpless,  and  vile ; all 
whom  he  favours  and  teaches  will  find  them- 
selves so.  The  more  grace  increases,  the 
more  we  shall  see  to  abase  us  in  our  own 
eyes;  and  this  will  make  the  Saviour  and 
his  salvation  more  precious  to  us.  He  takes 
his  own  wise  methods  to  humble  you,  and  to 
prove  you,  and  I am  sure  he  will  do  you  good 
in  the  end. — I am,  &c. 


expected.  I spoke  to  them  near  an  hour  and 
a half.  I shed  many  tears  myself,  and  saw 
some  of  them  shed  tears  likewise.  Ah ! had 
you  seen  their  present  condition,  and  could 
you  hear  the  history  of  some  of  them,  it 
would  make  you  sing, 

O to  grace  how  great  a debtor ! 

By  nature  they  were  no  worse  than  the  most 
sober  and  modest  people.  And  there  was 
doubtless  a time  when  many  of  them  little 
thought  what  they  should  live  to  do  and  suf- 
fer. 1 might  have  been,  like  them,  in  chains, 
and  one  of  them  have  come  to  preach  to  me, 
had  the  Lord  so  pleased. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VII. 


LETTER  VI. 

September  16,  1775. 

W hen  you  receive  this,  I hope  it  will  give 
you  pleasure  to  think,  that  if  the  Lord  be 
pleased  to  favour  us  with  health,  we  shall  all 
meet  again  in  a few  days.  I have  met  with 
much  kindness  at  London,  and  many  com- 
forts and  mercies ; however,  I shall  be  glad 
to  return  home.  There  my  heart  lives,  let 
my  body  be  where  it  will.  I long  to  see  all 
my  dear  people,  and  I shall  be  glad  to  see 
you.  I steal  a little  time  to  write  another 
line  or  two,  more  to  satisfy  you,  than  for  any 
thing  particular  I have  to  say.  I thank  you 
for  your  letter.  I doubt  not  but  the  Lord  is 
bringing  you  forward,  and  that  you  have  a 
good  right  to  say  to  your  soul,  Why  art  thou 
cast  down  and  disquieted  1 Hope  thou  in 
God;  for  I shall  yet  praise  him.  An  evil 
heart,  an  evil  temper,  and  the  many  crosses 
we  meet  with  in  passing  through  an  evil 
world,  will  cut  us  out  trouble : but  the  Lord 
has  provided  a balm  for  every  wound,  a cor- 
dial for  every  care ; the  fruit  of  all  is  to  take 
away  sin,  and  the  end  of  all  will  be  eternal 
life  in  glory.  Think  of  these  words,  put 
them  in  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary ; and 
then  throw  all  your  trials  into  the  opposite 
scale,  and  you  will  find  there  is  no  propor- 
tion between  them.  Say  then,  “ Though  he 
slay  me,  I will  trust  in  him ;”  for  when  he 
has  fully  tried  me,  I shall  come  forth  like 
gold.  You  would  have  liked  to  have  been 
with  me  last  Wednesday.  I preached  at 
Westminster  bridewell.  It  is  a prison  and 
house  of  correction.  The  bulk  of  my  con- 
gregation were  housebreakers,  highwaymen, 
pickpockets,  and  poor  unhappy  women,  such 
as  infest  the  streets  of  this  city,  sunk  in  sin, 
and  lost  to  shame.  I had  a hundred  or  more 
of  these  before  me.  I preached  from  1 Tim. 
i.  15,  and  began  with  telling  them  my  awn 
6tory : this  gained  their  attention  more  than  I 


Oct.  10,  1777. 

I am  just  come  from  seeing  A A" . 

The  people  told  me  she  is  much  better  than 
she  was,  but  she  is  far  from  being  well.  She 
was  brought  to  me  into  a parlour,  which  saved 
me  the  painful  task  of  going  to  inquire  and 
seek  for  her  among  the  patients.  My  spirits 
always  sink  when  I am  within  those  mourn- 
ful walls,  and  I think  no  money  could  prevail 
on  me  to  spend  an  hour  there  every  day.  Yet 
surely  no  sight  upon  earth  is  more  suited  to 
teach  one  thankfulness  and  resignation. 
Surely  I have  reason,  in  my  wTorst  times,  to 
be  thankful  that  I am  out  of  hell,  out  of  bed- 
lam, out  of  Newgate.  If  my  eyes  were  as 
bad  as  yours,  and  my  back  worse,  still  I hope 
I should  set  a great  value  upon  this  mercy, 
that  my  senses  are  preserved.  I hope  you 
will  think  so  too.  The  Lord  afflicts  us  at 
times;  but  it  is  always  a thousand  times  less 
than  we  deserve,  and  much  less  than  many 
of  our  fellow-creatures  are  suffering  around 
us.  Let  us,  therefore,  pray  for  grace  to  be 
humble,  thankful,  and  patient. 

This  day  twelvemonth  I was  under  Mr. 

W ’s  knife;  there  is  another  cause  for 

thankfulness,  that  the  Lord  inclined  me  to 
submit  to  the  operation,  and  brought  me 
happily  through  it.  In  short,  I have  so  many 
reasons  for  thankfulness,  that  I cannot  count 
them.  I may  truly  say,  they  are  more  in 
number  than  the  hairs  of  my  head.  And  yet, 
alas ! how  cold,  insensible,  and  ungrateful ! I 
could  make  as  many  complaints  as  you  ; but 
j I find  no  good  by  complaining,  except  to  him 
j who  is  able  to  help  me.  It  is  better  for  you 
' and  me  to  be  admiring  the  compassion  and 
; fulness  of  grace  that  is  in  our  Saviour,  than 
to  dwell  and  pore  too  much  upon  our  own 
poverty  and  vileness.  He  is  able  to  help  and 
save  to  the  uttermost : there  I desire  to  cast 
anchor,  and  wish  you  to  do  so  likewise. 
Hope  in  God,  for  you  shall  yet  praise  him. — 
I am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO  MR.  C 


LETTER  I. 

January  16,  1775. 

dear  sir, — The  death  of  a near  relative 
called  me  from  home  in  December,  and  a 
fortnight’s  absence  threw  me  so  far  behind- 
hand in  my  course,  that  I deferred  acknow- 
ledging your  letter  much  longer  than  I 
intended.  I now  thank  you  for  it.  I can 
sympathize  with  you  in  your  troubles ; yet 
knowing  the  nature  of  our  calling,  that,  by  an 
unalterable  appointment,  the  way  to  the  king- 
dom lies  through  many  tribulations,  I ought  to 
rejoice  rather  than  otherwise,  that  to  you 
it  is  given,  not  only  to  believe,  but  also  to 
suffer.  If  you  escaped  these  things,  whereof 
all  the  Lord’s  children  are  partakers,  might 
you  not  question  your  adoption  into  his  fami- 
ly 1 How  could  the  power  of  grace  be  mani- 
fest, either  to  you,  in  you,  or  by  you,  without 
afflictions  1 How  could  the  corruptions  and 
devastations  of  the  heart  be  checked  without 
a cross  ! How  could  you  acquire  a tender- 
ness and  skill  in  speaking  to  them  that  are 
weary,  without  a taste  of  such  trials  as  they 
also  meet  with  ? You  could  only  be  a hear- 
say witness  to  the  truth,  power,  and  sweet- 
ness of  the  precious  promises,  unless  you 
have  been  in  such  a situation  as  to  need 
them,  and  to  find  their  suitableness  and  suffi- 
ciency. The  Lord  has  given  you  a good  de- 
sire to  serve  him  in  the  gospel,  and  he  is 
now  training  you  for  that  service.  Many 
things,  yea,  the  most  important  things  be- 
longing to  the  gospel-ministry,  are  not  to  be 
learned  by  books  and  study,  but  by  painful 
experience.  You  must  expect  a variety  of 
exercises ; but  two  things  he  has  promised 
you,  that  you  shall  not  be  tried  above  what 
he  will  enable  you  to  bear,  and  that  all  shall 
work  together  for  your  good.  We  read 
somewhere  of  a conceited  orator,  who  de- 
claimed upon  the  management  of  war  in  the 
presence  of  Hannibal,  and  of  the  contempt 
with  which  Hannibal  treated  his  perform- 
ance. He  deserved  it;  for  how  should  a 
man  who  had  never  seen  a field  of  battle  be 
a competent  judge  of  such  a subject!  Just 
so,  were  we  to  acquire  no  other  knowledge 
of  the  Christian  warfare  than  what  we  could 
derive  from  cool  and  undisturbed  study,  in- 
stead of  coming  forth  as  able  ministers  of  the 


New  Testament,  and  competently  acquaint- 
ed with  the  T 36  VO'djWSCTCCj  with  the  devices,  the 
deep-laid  counsels  and  stratagems  of  Satan, 
we  should  prove  but  mere  declaimers.  But  the 
Lord  will  take  better  care  of  those  whom  he 
loves  and  designs  to  honour.  He  will  try, 
and  permit  them  to  be  tried  in  various  ways. 
He  will  make  them  feel  much  in  themselves, 
that  they  may  know  how  to  feel  much  for 
others ; according  to  that  beautiful  and  ex- 
pressive line, 

Haud  ignara  mali,  miseris  succurrere  disco. 

And  as  this  previous  discipline  is  necessary 
to  enable  us  to  take  the  field  in  a public  ca- 
pacity with  courage,  wisdom,  and  success,  that 
we  may  lead  and  animate  others  in  the  fight, 
it  is  equally  necessary,  for  our  own  sakes, 
that  we  may  obtain  and  preserve  the  grace 
of  humility,  which  I perceive  with  pleasure 
he  has  taught  you  to  set  a high  value  upon. 
Indeed  we  cannot  value  it  too  highly ; for  we 
can  be  neither  comfortable,  safe,  nor  habit- 
ually useful  without  it.  The  root  of  pride 
lies  deep  in  our  fallen  nature,  and,  where  the 
Lord  has  given  natural  and  acquired  abilities, 
it  would  grow  apace  if  he  did  not  mercifully 
watch  over  us,  and  suit  his  dispensations  to 
keep  it  down.  Therefore  I trust  he  will 
make  you  willing  to  endure  hardships,  as  a 
good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ.  May  he  enable 
you  to  behold  him  with  faitli  holding  out  the 
prize,  and  saying  to  you,  Fear  none  of  these 
things  that  thou  shalt  suffer : be  thou  faithful 
unto  death,  and  I will  give  thee  a crown  of  life. 

We  sail  upon  a turbulent  and  tumultuous 
sea ; but  we  are  embarked  on  a good  bottom, 
and  in  a good  cause,  and  we  have  an  infalli- 
ble and  almighty  pilot,  who  has  the  winds 
and  weather  at  his  command,  and  can  silence 
the  storm  into  a calm  with  a word  whenever 
he  pleases.  We  may  be  persecuted,  but  we 
shall  not  be  forsaken : we  may  be  cast  down, 
but  we  cannot  be  destroyed.  Many  will 
thrust  sore  at  us  that  we  may  fall,  but  the 
Lord  will  be  our  stay. 

I am  sorry  to  find  you  are  quite  alone  at 
Cambridge,  for  I hoped  there  would  be  a 
succession  of  serious  students  to  supply  the 
place  of  those  who  are  transplanted  to  shine 
as  lights  in  the  world.  Yet  vou  are  not  alone; 
347 


348 


LETTERS  TO  MR.  C . [let.  in. 


for  the  Lord  is  with  you,  the  best  counsellor 
and  the  best  friend.  There  is  a strange  back- 
wardness in  us,  at  least  in  me,  fully  to  im- 
prove that  gracious  intimacy  to  which  he 
invites  us.  Alas ! that  we  so  easily  wander 
from  the  fountain  of  life  to  hew  out  cisterns 
for  ourselves,  and  that  we  seem  more  at- 
tached to  a few  drops  of  his  grace  in  our 
fellow-creatures,  than  to  the  fulness  of  grace 
that  is  in  himself.  I think  nothing  gives  me 
a more  striking  sense  of  my  depravity  than 
my  perverseness  and  folly  in  this  respect; 
yet  he  bears  with  me,  and  does  me  good  con- 
tinually.— I am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

March  — , 1776. 

dear  sir, — I know  not  the  length  of  your 
college-terms,  but  hope  this  may  come  time 
enough  to  find  you  still  resident.  I shall  not 
apologise  for  writing  no  sooner,  because  I 
leave  other  letters  of  much  longer  date  un- 
answered that  I may  write  so  soon.  It  gave 
me  particular  pleasure  to  hear  that  the  Lord 
helped  you  through  your  difficulties,  and 
succeeded  your  desires.  And  I have  sympa- 
thized with  you  in  the  complaints  you  make 
of  a dark  and  mournful  frame  of  spirits  after- 
wards. Rut  is  not  this  upon  the  whole  right 
and  salutary,  that  if  the  Lord  is  pleased  at 
one  time  to  strengthen  us  remarkably  in  an- 
swer to  prayer,  he  should  leave  us  at  another 
time,  so  far  as  to  give  us  a real  sensibility 
that  we  were  supported  by  his  power  and 
not  our  own  1 Besides,  as  you  feel  a danger 
of  being  elated  by  the  respect  paid  you,  was 
it  not  a merciful  and  seasonable  dispensation 
that  made  you  feel  your  own  weakness,  to 
prevent  your  being  exalted  above  measure! 
The  Lord,  by  withdrawing  his  smiles  from 
you,  reminded  you  that  the  smiles  of  men 
are  of  little  value,  otherwise  perhaps  you 
might  have  esteemed  them  too  highly.  In- 
deed you  scholars  that  know  the  Lord  are 
singular  instances  of  the  power  of  his  grace ; 
for  (like  the  young  men  in  Dan.  iii.)  you  live 
in  the  very  midst  of  the  fire.  Mathematical 
studies,  in  particular,  have  such  a tendency 
to  engross  and  fix  the  mind  to  the  contem- 
plation of  cold  and  uninteresting  truth,  and 
you  are  surrounded  with  so  much  intoxicating 
applause  if  you  succeed  in  your  researches, 
that  for  a soul  to  be  kept  humble  and  alive 
in  such  a situation,  is  such  a proof  of  the 
Lord’s  presence  and  power  as  Moses  had 
when  he  saw  the  bush  unconsumed  in  the 
midst  of  the  flames.  I believe  I had  natu- 
rally a turn  for  the  mathematics  myself,  and 
dabbled  in  them  a little  way ; and  though  I 
did  not  go  far,  my  head,  sleeping  and  waking, 
was  stuffed  with  diagrams  and  calculations. 
Every  thing  I looked  at,  that  exhibited  either 
a,  right  line  or  a curve,  set  my  wits  a wool- 


gathering. What,  then,  must  have  been  the 
case,  had  I proceeded  to  the  interior  arcana 
of  speculative  geometry ! I bought  my  name- 
sake’s Principia,  but  I have  reason  to  be 
thankful  that  I left  it  as  I found  it,  a scaled 
book,  and  that  the  bent  of  my  mind  was 
drawn  to  something  of  more  real  importance 
before  I understood  it.  I say  not  this  to  dis- 
courage you  in  your  pursuits;  they  lie  in 
your  line  and  path  of  duty,  in  mine  they  did 
not.  As  to  your  academics,  I am  glad  that 
the  Lord  enables  you  to  show  those  among 
whom  you  live,  that  the  knowledge  of  his 
gospel  does  not  despoil  you  either  of  dili- 
gence or  acumen.  However,  as  I said,  you 
need  a double  guard  of  grace,  to  preserve 
you  from  being  either  puffed  up  or  deadened 
by  those  things,  which,  considered  in  any 
other  view  than  quoad  hoc,  to  preserve  your 
rank  and  character  in  the  university  while 
you  remain  there,  are,  if  taken  in  the  aggre- 
gate, little  better  than  a splendidum  nihil. 

If  my  poor  people  at could  form  the 

least  conception  of  what  the  learned  at  Cam- 
bridge chiefly  admire  in  each  other,  and 
wThat  is  the  intrinsic  reward  of  all  their  toil, 
they  would  s^y  (supposing  they  could  speak 
Latin,)  Quam  suave  istis  suavitatibus  ca- 
rere ! How  gladly  would  some  of  them,  if 
such  mathematical  and  metaphysical  lumber 
could  by  any  means  get  into  their  heads 
how  gladly  would  they  drink  at  Lethe’s 
stream  to  get  it  out  again ! How  many  per- 
plexities are  they  freed  from  by  their  happy 
ignorance,  which  often  pester  those  to  their 
lives  end  who  have  had  their  natural  prone- 
ness to  vain  reasoning  sharpened  by  acade- 
mical studies. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

May  18,  1776 

dear  sir, — Though  I wished  to  hear  from 
you  sooner,  I put  a candid  interpretation  upon 
your  silence,  was  something  apprehensive  for 
your  health,  but  felt  no  disposition  to  anger. 
Let  your  correspondence  be  free  from  fetters. 
Write  when  you  please,  and  when  you  can : 
I will  do  the  like.  Apologies  may  be  spared 
on  both  sides.  I am  not  a very  punctual  cor- 
respondent myself,  having  so  many  letters  to 
write,  and  therefore,  have  no  right  to  stand 
upon  punctilios  with  you. 

I sympathize  with  you  in  your  sorrow  for 
your  friend’s  death.  Such  cases  are  very 
distressing!  But  such  a case  might  have 
been  our  own.  Let  us  pray  for  grace  to  be 
thankful  for  ourselves,  and  submit  every 
thing  in  humble  silence  to  the  sovereign 
Lord,  who  has  a right  to  do  as  he  pleases 
with  his  own.  We  feel  what  happens  in  our 
own  little  connexions;  but,  O the  dreadfu 
mischief  of  sin ! Instances  of  this  kind  are 
as  frequent  as  the  hours,  the  minutes,  per- 


349 


LETTERS  TO  MR.  C 


LET.  IV.] 

haps  the  moments  of  every  day : and  though 
we  know  but  one  in  a million,  the  souls  of 
others  have  an  equal  capacity  for  endless 
happiness  or  misery.  In  this  situation  the 
Lord  has  honoured  us  with  a call  to  warn 
our  fellow-sinners  of  their  danger,  and  to  set 
before  them  his  free  and  sure  salvation ; and 
if  he  is  pleased  to  make  us  instrumental  of 
snatching  but  one  as  a brand  out  of  the  fire, 
it  is  a service  of  more  importance  than  to  be 
the  means  of  preserving  a whole  nation  from 
temporal  ruin.  I congratulate  you  upon 
your  admission  into  the  ministry,  and  pray 
him  to  favour  you  with  a single  eye  to  his 
glory,  and  a fresh  anointing  of  his  Holy 
Spirit,  that  you  may  come  forth  as  a scribe 
well  instructed  in  the  mysteries  of  his  king- 
dom, and  that  his  word  in  your  mouth  may 
abundantly  prosper. 

T truly  pity  those  who  rise  early  and  take 
late  rest,  and  eat  the  bread  of  carefulness, 
with  no  higher  prize  and  prospect  in  view 
than  the  obtaining  of  academical  honours. 
Such  pursuits  will,  ere  long,  appear  (as  they 
really  are)  vain  as  the  sports  of  children. 
May  the  Lord  impress  them  with  a noble 
ambition  of  living  to  and  for  him.  If  these 
adventurers,  who  are  labouring  for  pebbles 
under  the  semblance  of  goodly  pearls,  had  a 
discovery  of  the  pearl  of  great  price,  how 
quickly  and  gladly  would  they  lay  down 
their  admired  attainments,  and  become  fools 
that  they  might  be  truly  wise ! What  a 
snare  have  you  escaped  ! You  would  have 
been  poorly  content  with  the  name  of  a 
mathematician  or  a poet,  and  looked  no  far- 
ther, had  not  he  visited  your  heart,  and  en- 
lightened you  by  his  grace.  Now  I trust  you 
account  your  former  gain  but  loss,  for  the 
excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ 
the  Lord.  What  you  have  attained  in  a way 
of  literature  will  be  useful  to  you  if  sancti- 
fied, and  chiefly  so  by  the  knowledge  you 
have  of  its  insufficiency  to  any  valuable  pur- 
pose, in  the  great  concerns  of  walking  with 
God,  and  winning  souls. 

I am  pleased  with  your  fears  lest  you  should 
not  be  understood  in  your  preaching.  Indeed, 
there  is  a danger  of  it.  It  is  not  easy  for 
persons  of  quick  parts  duly  to  conceive  how 
amazingly  ignorant  and  slow  of  apprehension 
the  bulk  of  our  congregations  generally  are. 
When  our  own  ideas  are  clear,  and  our  ex- 
pressions proper,  we  are  ready  to  think  we 
have  sufficiently  explained  ourselves;  and 
yet,  perhaps,  nine  out  of  ten  (especially  of 
those  who  are  destitute  of  spiritual  light) 
know  little  more  of  what  we  say  than  if  we 
were  speaking  Greek.  A degree  of  this  in- 
convenience is  always  inseparable  from  writ- 
ten discourses.  They  cast  our  thoughts  into 
a style  which,  though  familiar  to  ourselves, 
is  too  remote  from  common  conversation  to 
be  comprehended  by  narrow  capacities ; 
which  is  one  chief  reason  of  the  preference 


I give  ( cceteris  panbus ) to  extempore 
preaching.  When  we  read  to  the  people, 
they  think  themselves  less  concerned  in 
what  is  offered,  than  when  we  speak  to  them 
point-blank.  It  seems  a good  rule,  which  I 
have  met  with  somewhere,  and  which,  per- 
haps, I have  mentioned  to  you,  to  fix  our 
eyes  upon  some  one  of  the  auditory  whom  we 
judge  of  the  least  capacity;  if  we  can  make 
him  understand,  we  may  hope  to  be  under- 
stood by  the  rest.  Let  those  who  seek  to  be 
admired  for  the  exactness  of  their  composi- 
tions, enjoy  the  poor  reward  they  aim  at.  1 1 
is  best  for  gospel-preachers  to  speak  plain 
language.  If  we  thus  singly  aim  at  the 
glory  of  our  Master  and  the  good  of  souls, 
we  may  hope  for  the  accompanying  power 
of  his  Spirit,  which  will  give  our  discourses 
a weight  and  energy  that  Demosthenes  had 
no  conception  of. 

I can  give  you  no  information  of  a curacy 
in  a better  situation.  But  either  the  Lord 
will  provide  you  one,  or  I trust  he  will  give 
you  usefulness,  and  a competency  of  health 
and  spirits  where  you  are.  He  who  caused 
Daniel  to  thrive  upon  pulse,  can  make  you 
strong  and  cheerful  even  in  the  Fens,  if  he 
sees  that  best  for  you.  All  things  obey  him, 
and  you  need  not  fear  but  he  will  enable  you 
for  whatever  service  he  has  appointed  you  to 
perform. 

This  letter  has  been  a week  in  hand,  owing 
to  a variety  of  interruptions  from  without, 
and  indispositions  within.  I seem  to  while 
away  my  life,  and  shall  be  glad  to  be  saved 
upon  the  footing  of  the  thief  upon  the  cross, 
without  any  hope  or  plea  but  the  power  and 
grace  of  Jesus,  who  has  said,  I will  in  no 
wise  cast  out.  Adieu. — Pray  for  yours,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

September  10,  1777. 

dear  sir, — I was  glad  to  hear  from  you 
at  last,  not  being  willing  to  think  myself  for- 
gotten. I supposed  you  were  ill.  It  seems, 
by  your  account,  that  you  are  far  from  being 
well;  but  I hope  you  are  as  well  as  you 
ought  to  be,  that  is,  as  well  as  the  Lord  sees 
it  good  for  you  to  be.  I say,  I hope  so ; for  I 
am  not  sure  that  the  length  and  vehemence 
of  your  sermons,  which  you  tell  me  astonish 
many  people,  may  not  be  rather  improper 
and  imprudent,  considering  the  weakness  of 
your  constitution  ; at  least,  if  this  expression 
of  your’s  be  justly  expounded  by  a report 
which  has  reached  me,  that  the  length  of 
your  sermons  is  frequently  two  hours,  and 
the  vehemence  of  your  voice  so  great,  that 
you  may  be  heard  far  beyond  the  church- 
walls.  Unwilling  should  I be  to  damp  your 
zeal;  but  I feel  unwilling  likewise,  that  by 
excessive,  unnecessary  exertions,  you  should 
wear  away  at  once,  and  preclude  your  own 


350 


LETTERS  TO 

usefulness.  This  concern  is  so  much  upon 
my  mind,  that  I begin  with  it,  though  it 
makes  me  skip  over  the  former  part  of  your 
letter;  but  when  I have  relieved  myself  upon 
this  point,  I can  easily  skip  back  again.  I 
am  perhaps  the  more  ready  to  credit  the  re- 
port, because  I know  the  spirits  of  you  nerv- 
ous people  are  highly  volatile.  I consider 
you  as  mounted  upon  a fiery  steed ; and  pro- 
vided you  use  due  management  and  circum- 
spection, you  travel  more  pleasantly  than  we 
plodding  folks  upon  our  sober,  phlegmatic 
nags;  but  then,  if,  instead  of  pulling  the  rein 
you  plunge  in  the  spurs,  and  add  wings  to  the 
wind,  I cannot  but  be  in  pain  for  the  conse- 
quences. Permit  me  to  remind  you  of  the 
Terentian  adage,  Ne  quid  nimis.  The  end  of 
speaking  is  to  be  heard,  and  if  the  person 
farthest  from  the  preacher  can  hear,  he  speaks 
loud  enough.  Upon  some  occasions,  a few 
sentences  of  a discourse  may  be  enforced  with 
a tone  of  voice  still  more  elevated ; but  to  be 
uncommonly  loud  from  beginning  to  end,  is 
hurtful  to  the  speaker,  and,  I apprehend,  no 
way  useful  to  the  hearer.  It  is  a fault  which 
many  inadvertently  give  into  at  first,  and 
which  many  have  repented  of  too  late;  when 
practice  has  rendered  it  habitual  it  is  not  easi- 
ly corrected.  I know  some  think,  that  preach- 
ing very  loudly,  and  preaching  with  power, 
are  synonymous  expressions,  but  your  judg- 
ment is  too  good  to  fall  in  with  that  prejudice. 
If  I were  a good  Grecian,  I would  send  you  a 
quotation  from  Homer,  where  he  describes 
the  eloquence  of  Nestor,  and  compares  it,  if  I 
remember  right,  not  to  a thunder-storm  or  a 
hurricane,  but  to  a fall  of  snow,  which,  though 
pressing,  insinuating,  and  penetrating,  is  soft 
and  gentle.  You  know  the  passage ; I think 
the  simile  is  beautiful  and  expressive. 

Secondly  (as  we  say,)  as  to  long  preaching, 
there  is  still  in  being  an  old-fashioned  instru- 
ment, called  an  hour-glass,  which,  in  days  of 
yore,  .before  clocks  and  watches  abounded, 
used  to  be  the  measure  of  many  a good  sermon, 
and  I think  it  a tolerable  stint.  I cannot  wind 
up  my  ends  to  my  own  satisfaction  in  a much 
shorter  time,  nor  am  I pleased  with  myself  if 
I greatly  exceed  it.  If  an  angel  was  to  preach 
for  two  hours,  unless  his  hearers  were  angels 
likewise,  I believe  the  greater  part  of  them 
would  wish  he  had  done.  It  is  a shame  it 
should  be  so ; but  so  it  is,  partly  through  the 
weakness,  and  partly  through  the  wickedness 
of  the  flesh,  we  can  seldom  stretch  our  atten- 
tion to  spiritual  things  for  twm  hours  together 
without  cracking  it,  and  hurting  its  spring ; 
and  when  weariness  begins,  edification  ends. 
Perhaps  it  is  better  to  feed  our  people  like 
chickens,  a little  and  often,  than  to  cram 
them  like  turkeys,  till  they  cannot  hold  one 
gobbet  more.  Besides,  over-long  sermons 
break  in  upon  family  concerns,  and  often  call 
off  the  thoughts  from  the  sermon  to  the  pud- 
ding at  home,  which  is  in  danger  of  being 


MR.  C — -.  [let.  iv. 

over-boiled.  They  leave  likewise  but  little 
time  for  secret  or  "family  religion,  which  are 
both  very  good  in  their  place,  and  are  entitled 
to  a share  in  the  Lord’s  day.  Upon  the 
preacher  they  must  have  a bad  effect,  and 
tend  to  wear  him  down  before  his  time : and 
I have  known  some,  by  over-acting  at  first, 
have  been  constrained  to  sit  still  and  do  little 
or  nothing  for  months  or  years  afterwards.  I 
rather  recommend  to  you  the  advice  of  your 
brother  Cantab,  Hobson  the  carrier,  so  to  set 
out  as  that  you  may  hold  out  to  your  jour- 
ney’s end. 

Now,  if  Fame,  with  her  hundred  mouths, 
has  brought  me  a false  report  of  you,  and 
you  are  not  guilty  of  preaching  either  toe 
long  or  too  loud,  still  I am  not  willing  my 
remonstrance  may  stand  for  nothing.  I de- 
sire you  will  accept  it,  and  thank  me  for  it, 
as  a proof  of  my  love  to  you,  and  likewise  of 
the  sincerity  of  my  friendship;  for  if  I had 
wished  to  flatter  you,  I could  easily  have 
called  another  subject. 

I have  one  more  report  to  trouble  you  with, 
because  it  troubles  me;  and  therefore  you 
must  bear  a part  of  my  burden.  Assure  me  it 
is  false,  and  I will  send  you  one  of  the  hand- 
somest letters  I can  devise  by  way  of  thanks. 
It  is  reported,  then,  (but  I will  not  believe  it 
till  you  say  I must,)  that  you  stand  upon  your 
tiptoes,  upon  the  point  of  being  whirled  out 
of  our  vortex,  and  hurried  away,  comet-like, 
into  the  regions  of  eccentricity ; in  plain  Eng- 
lish, that  you  have  a hankering  to  be  an  itine- 
rant. If  this  be  true,  I will  not  be  the  first 
to  tell  it  in  St.  John’s  College,  or  to  publish  it 
on  the  banks  of  Cam,  lest  the  mathematicians 
rejoice,  and  the  poets  triumph.  But,  to  be 
serious,  for  it  is  a serious  subject,  let  me  beg 
you  to  deliberate  well,  and  to  pray  earnestly 
before  you  take  this  step.  Be  afraid  of  acting 
in  your  own  spirit,  or  under  a wrong  impres- 
sion ; however  honestly  you  mean,  you  may 
be  mistaken.  The  Lord  has  given  you  a little 
charge ; be  faithful  in  it,  and  in  his  good  time 
he  will  advance  you  to  a greater : but  let  his 
providence  evidently  open  the  door  for  you, 
and  be  afraid  of  moving  one  step  before  the 
cloud  and  pillar.  I have  had  my  warm  fits 
and  desires  of  this  sort  in  my  time ; but  I 
have  reason  to  be  thankful  that  I was  held 
in  with  a strong  hand.  I wish  there  were 
more  itinerant  preachers.  If  a man  has  grace 
and  zeal,  and  but  little  fund,  let  him  go  and 
diffuse  the  substance  of  a dozen  sermons  over 
as  many  counties ; but  you  have  natural  and 
acquired  abilities,  which  qualify  you  for  the 
more  difficult,  and,  in  my  judgment,  not  less 
important  station  of  a parochial  minister.  I 
wish  you  to  be  a burning,  shining,  steady  light 
You  may  perhaps  have  less  popularity,  that 
is,  you  will  be  less  exposed  to  workings  of 
self  and  the  snares  of  Satan,  if  you  stay  with 
us ; but  I think  you  may  live  in  the  full  ex- 
ercise of  your  gifts  and  graces,  be  more  con- 


351 


LETTERS  TO  MR.  C 


LET.  V.] 

sistent  with  your  voluntary  engagements, 
and  have  more  peace  of  mind,  and  humble 
intercourse  with  God,  in  watching  over  a 
flock  which  he  has  committed  to  you,  than, 
by  forsaking  them,  to  wander  up  and  down 
the  earth  without  a determined  scope. 

Thus  far  I have  been  more  attentive  to  the 
utile  than  the  dulce.  I should  now  return  to 
join  you  in  celebrating  the  praises  of  poetry, 
and  the  other  subjects  of  your  letter;  but 
time  and  paper  fail  together.  Let  me  hear 
from  you  soon,  or  I shall  fear  I have  displeas- 
ed you,  which,  fond  as  I am  of  poetry,  would 
give  me  more  pain  than  I ever  found  pleasure 
in  reading  Alexander’s  Feast.  Indeed  I love 
you;  I often  measure  over  the  walks  we 
have  taken  together ; and  when  I come  to  a 
favourite  stile,  or  such  a favourite  spot  upon 
the  hill-top,  I am  reminded  of  something  that 
passed,  and  say,  or  at  least  think,  Hie  stetit 
C T am,  &c. 


LETTER  V. 

dear  sir, — By  your  flying  letter  from 
London,  as  well  as  by  your  more  particular 
answer  to  my  last,  I judge  that  what  I 
formerly  wrote  will  answer  no  other  end 
than  to  be  a testimony  of  my  fidelity  and 
friendship.  I am  ready  to  think  you  were  so 
far  determined  before  you  applied  to  the 
Bishop,  as  to  be  rather  pleased  than  disap- 
pointed by  a refusal  which  seemed  to  afford 
you  liberty  to  preach  at  large.  As  your 
testimonium  was  not  countersigned,  the  con- 
sequence was  no  other  than  might  have  been 
expected ; yet  I have  been  told  (how  true  I 
know  not,)  that  the  Bishop  would  have  passed 
over  the  informality,  if  you  had  not,  unasked 
by  him,  avowed  yourself  a Methodist.  I 
think,  if  you  had  been  unwilling  to  throw 
hinderances  in  your  own  way,  the  most  perfect 
simplicity  would  have  required  no  more  of 
you  than  to  have  given  a plain  and  honest 
answer  to  such  questions  as  he  might  think 
proper  to  propose.  You  might  have  assisted 

Mr. for  a season  without  being  in  full 

orders ; and  you  may  still,  if  you  are  not  re- 
solved at  all  events  to  push  out.  He  wrote 
to  me  about  you,  and  you  may  easily  judge 
what  answer  I gave.  I have  heard  from  him 
a second  time,  and  he  laments  that  he  cannot 
have  you.  I likewise  lament  that  you  cannot 
be  with  him.  I think  you  would  have  loved 
him ; and  I hoped  his  acquaintance  might 
not  have  proved  unuseful  to  you. 

If  you  have  not  actually  passed  the  Rubi- 
con ; if  there  be  yet  room  for  deliberation,  I 
once  more  intreat  you  to  pause  and  consider. 
In  many  respects  I ought  to  be  willing  to 
learn  from  you ; but  in  one  point  I have  a 
little  advantage  of  you:  I am  some  years 
older,  both  in  life  and  in  profession ; and  in 


this  difference  of  time  perhaps  I have  learned 
something  more  of  the  heart,  the  world,  and 
the  devices  of  Satan,  than  you  have  had  an 
opportunity  for.  I hope  I would  not  damp 
your  zeal,  but  l will  pray  the  Lord  to  direct 
it  into  the  best  channel  for  permanent  use- 
fulness. I say  permanent : I doubt  not  that 
you  would  be  useful  in  the  itinerant  way : 
but  I more  and  more  observe  great  incon- 
veniences follow  in  that  vtfay.  Where  you 
make  a gathering  of  people,  others  will 
follow  you ; and  if  they  all  possessed  your 
spirit,  and  had  your  disinterested  views  it 
might  be  well.  But  generally  an  able 
preacher  only  so  far  awakens  people  to  a 
desire  to  hear,  as  exposes  them  to  the  incur- 
sions of  various  winds  of  doctrine  and  the 
attempts  of  injudicious  pretenders,  who  will 
resemble  you  in  nothing  but  your  eagerness 
to  post  from  place  to  place.  From  such 
measures  in  time  proceed  errors,  parties,  con- 
tentions, offences,  enthusiasm,  spiritual  pride, 
and  a noisy  ostentatious  form  of  godliness, 
but  little  of  that  power  and  life  of  faith  which 
shows  itself  by  humility,  meekness,  and  love. 

A parochial  minister,  who  lives  among  his 
people,  who  sees  and  converses  with  them 
frequently,  and  exemplifies  his  doctrine  in 
their  view  by  his  practice,  having  knowledge 
of  their  states,  trials,  growth,  and  dangers, 
suits  himself  to  their  various  occasions,  and, 
by  the  blessing  of  God,  builds  them  up,  and 
brings  them  forward  in  faith  and  holiness. 
He  is  instrumental  in  forming  their  ex- 
perience ; he  leads  them  to  a solid,  orderly, 
and  scriptural  knowledge  of  divine  things. 
If  his  name  is  not  in  so  many  mouths  as  that 
of  the  itinerant,  it  is  upon  the  hearts  of  the 
people  of  his  charge.  He  lives  with  them 
as  a father  with  his  children.  His  steady 
consistent  behaviour  silences  in  some  measure 
the  clamours  of  his  enemies ; and  the  Lord 
opens  him  doors  of  occasional  usefulness  in 
many  places,  without  provoking  our  superiors 
to  discountenance  other  young  men  who  are 
seeking  orders. 

I now  wish  I had  taken  larger  paper,  for  I 
have  not  room  for  all  1 would  say.  I have 
no  end  to  serve.  I am  of  no  party.  I wish 
well  to  irregulars  and  itinerants  who  love 
and  preach  the  gospel.  I am  content  that 
they  should  labour  that  way,  who  have  not 
talents  nor  fund  to  support  the  character  and 
fill  up  the  office  of  a parochial  minister.  But 
I think  you  are  qualified  for  more  important 
service.  If  you  had  patient  faith  to  wait  a 
while  for  the  Lord’s  opening,  I doubt  not  but 
you  might  yet  obtain  Priest’s  orders.  We 
are  hasty  like  children;  but  God  often  ap- 
points us  a waiting  time.  Perhaps  it  requires 
as  much  or  more  grace  to  wait  than  to  be 
active ; for  it  is  more  trying  to  self.  After 
all,  whatever  course  you  take,  I shall  love 
you,  pray  for  you,  and  be  glad  to  see  you. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO  MRS, 


LETTER  1. 

July  — , 1764. 

my  dear  madam, — The  complaints  you 
make  are  inseparable  from  a spiritual  ac- 
quaintance with  our  own  hearts  : I would  not 
wish  you  to  be  less  affected  with  a sense  of 
indwelling'  sin.  It  becomes  us  to  be  humbled 
unto  the  dust;  yet  our  grief,  though  it  cannot 
be  too  great,  may  be  under  a wrong  direction; 
and  if  it  leads  us  to  impatience  or  distrust,  it 
certainly  is  so. 

Sin  is  the  sickness  of  the  soul,  in  itself 
mortal  and  incurable,  as  to  any  power  in  hea- 
ven or  earth  but  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus  only. 
But  he  is  the  great,  the  infallible  Physician. 
Have  we  the  privilege  to  know  his  name  ? 
Have  we  been  enabled  to  put  ourselves  into 
his  hand  J We  have  then  no  more  to  do  but  to 
attend  to  his  prescriptions,  to  be  satisfied  with 
his  methods,  and  to  wait  his  time.  It  is  law- 
ful to  wish  we  were  well ; it  is  natural  to 
groan,  being  burdened ; but  still  he  must  and 
will  take  his  own  course  with  us ; and,  how- 
ever dissatisfied  with  ourselves,  we  ought  still 
to  be  thankful  that  he  has  begun  his  work  in 
us,  and  to  believe  that  he  will  also  make  an 
end.  Therefore,  while  we  mourn,  we  should 
likewise  rejoice ; we  should  encourage  our- 
selves to  expect  all  that  he  has  promised ; and 
we  should  limit  our  expectations  by  his  pro- 
mises. We  are  sure  that  when  the  Lord  de- 
livers us  from  the  guilt  and  dominion  of  sin, 
he  could  with  equal  ease  free  us  entirely  from 
sin  if  he  pleased.  The  doctrine  of  sinless  per- 
fection is  not  to  be  rejected,  as  though  it  were 
a thing  simply  impossible  in  itself,  for  no- 
thing is  too  hard  for  the  Lord,  but  because  it 
is  contrary  to  that  method  which  he  has  chosen 
to  proceed  by.  He  has  appointed  that  sancti- 
fication should  be  effected,  and  sin  mortified, 
not  at  once  completely,  but  by  little  and 
little ; and  doubtless  he  has  wise  reasons  for 
it.  Therefore,  though  we  are  to  desire  a ; 
growth  in  grace,  we  should  at  the  same  time  J 
acquiesce  in  his  appointment,  and  not  to  be 
discouraged  or  despond,  because  we  feel  that 


conflict  which  his  word  informs  us  will  only 
terminate  with  our  lives. 

Again,  some  of  the  first  prayers  which  the 
Spirit  of  God  teaches  us  to  put  up,  are  for  a 
clearer  sense  of  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  and  our 
vileness  on  account  of  it.  Now,  if  the  Iiord 
is  pleased  to  answer  your  prayers  in  this  re- 
spect, though  it  will  afford  you  cause  enough 
for  humiliation,  yet  it  should  be  received 
likewise  with  thankfulness,  as  a token  for 
good.  Your  heart  is  not  worse  than  it  was 
formerly,  only  your  spiritual  knowledge  is 
increased ; and  this  is  no  small  part  of  the 
growth  in  grace  which  you  are  thirsting  after, 
to  be  truly  humbled,  and  emptied,  and  made 
little  in  your  own  eyes. 

Farther,  the  examples  of  the  saints  record- 
ed in  scripture  (and  indeed  of  the  saints  in 
general)  prove,  that  the  greater  measure  any 
person  has  of  the  grace  of  God  in  truth,  the 
more  conscientious  and  lively  they  have  been ; 
and  the  more  they  have  been  favoured  with 
assurances  of  the  divine  favour,  so  much  the 
more  deep  and  sensible  their  perception  of 
indwelling  sin  and  infirmity  has  always  been ; 
so  it  was  with  Job,  Isaiah,  Daniel,  and  Paul. 
It  is  likewise  common  to  overcharge  our- 
selves. Indeed  we  cannot  think  ourselves 
worse  than  we  really  are ; yet  some  things 
which  abate  the  comfort  and  alacrity  of  our 
Christian  profession  are  rather  impediments 
than  properly  sinful,  and  will  not  be  imputed 
to  us  by  him  who  knows  our  frame,  and  re- 
members that  we  are  but  dust.  Thus,  to 
have  an  infirm  memory,  to  be  subject  to  dis- 
ordered, irregular,  or  low  spirits,  are  faults 
of  the  constitution,  in  which  the  will  has  no 
share,  though  they  are  all  burdensome  and 
oppressive,  and  sometimes  needlessly  so,  by 
our  charging  ourselves  with  guilt  on  their  ac- 
count. The  same  may  be  observed  of  the 
unspeakable  and  fierce  suggestions  of  Satan 
with  which  some  persons  are  pestered,  but 
which  shall  be  laid  to  him  from  whom  they 
proceed,  and  not  to  them  who  are  troubled 
and  terrified  because  they  are  forced  to  fet 
them. 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


353 


LET-.  IL] 

Lastly,  it  is  by  the  experience  of  these 
evils  within  ourselves,  and  by  feeling  our  ut- 
ter insufficiency,  either  to  perform  duty,  or 
to  withstand  our  enemies,  that  the  Lord  takes 
occasion  to  show  us  the  suitableness,  the  suf- 
ficiency, the  freeness,  the  unchangeableness 
of  his  power  and  grace.  This  is  the  infer- 
ence St.  Paul  draws  from  his  complaints, 
Rom.  vii.  25,  and  he  learned  it  upon  a try- 
ing occasion  from  the  Lord’s  own  mouth,  2 
Cor.  xii.  8,  9. 

Let  us,  then,  dear  madam,  be  thankful  and 
cheerful,  and,  while  we  take  shame  to  our- 
selves, let  us  glorify  God  by  giving  Jesus  the 
honour  due  to  his  name.  Though  we  are 
poor,  he  is  rich ; though  we  are  weak,  he  is 
strong;  though  we  have  nothing,  he  pos- 
sesses all  things.  He  suffered  for  us ; he 
calls  us  to  be  conformed  to  him  in  sufferings. 
He  conquered  in  his  own  person,  and  he  will 
make  each  of  his  members  more  than  con- 
querors in  due  season.  It  is  good  to  have  one 
eye  upon  ourselves,  but  the  other  should  ever 
be  fixed  on  him  who  stands  in  the  relation  of 
Saviour,  Husband,  Head,  and  Shepherd.  In 
him  we  have  righteousness,  peace,  and  power. 
He  can  control  all  that  we  fear ; so  that,  if 
our  path  should  be  through  the  fire  or  through 
the  water,  neither  the  flood  shall  drown  us 
nor  the  flame  kindle  upon  us,  and  ere  long 
he  will  cut  short  our  conflicts,  and  say,  Come 
up  hither.  “ Then  shall  our  grateful  songs 
abound,  and  every  tear  be  wiped  away.” 
Having  such  promises  and  assurances,  let  us 
lift  up  our  banner  in  his  name  and  press  on 
through  every  discouragement. 

With  regard  to  company,  that  have  not  a 
savour  of  the  best  things,  as  it  is  not  your 
choice,  I would  advise  you  (when  necessary) 
to  bear  it  as  a cross.  We  cannot  suffer  by 
being  where  we  ought  to  be,  except  through 
our  own  impatience ; and  I have  an  idea, 
that  when  we  are  providentially  called  among 
such  (for  something  is  due  to  friends  and  re- 
lations, whether  they  walk  with  us  or  no,)  that 
the  hours  need  not  be  wholly  lost.  Nothing 
can  pass  but  may  be  improved : the  most  tri- 
vial conversation  may  afford  us  new  views  of 
the  heart,  new  confirmations  of  scripture,  and 
renew  a sense  of  our  obligations  to  distin- 
guishing grace,  which  has  made  us  in  any  de- 
gree to  differ.  I would  wish,  when  you  go 
amongst  your  friends,  that  you  do  not  con- 
fine your  views  to  getting  safe  away  from 
them  without  loss,  but  entertain  a hope  that 
you  may  be  sent  to  do  some  of  them  good. 
You  cannot  tell  what  effect  a word  or  a look 
may  have,  if  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  bless  it. 
I think  we  may  humbly  hope,  that  while  we 
sincerely  desire  to  please  the  Lord,  and  to  be 
guided  by  him  in  all  things,  he  will  not  suf- 
fer us  to  take  a journey,  or  hardly  to  make  a 
short  visit,  which  shall  not  answer  some  good 
purpose  to  ourselves  or  others,  or  both.  While 
vour  gav  friends  affect  an  air  of  raillery,  the 
2 Y 


Lord  may  give  you  a secret  w.itness  in  their 
consciences ; and  something  they  observe  in 
you,  or  hear  from  you,  may  set  them  on  think- 
ing, perhaps  after  you  are  gone,  or  after  the 
first  occasion  has  entirely  slipped  your  me- 
mory, Eccles.  xi.  1.  For  my  own  part,  when 
I consider  the  power,  the  freedom  of  divine 
grace,  and  how  sovereign  the  Lord  is  in  the 
choice  of  the  instruments  and  means  by  which 
he  is  pleased  to  work,  I live  in  hopes  from 
day  to  day  of  hearing  of  winders  of  this  sort. 
I despair  of  nobody ; and  if  I sometimes  am 
ready  to  think  such  or  such  a person  seems 
more  unlikely  than  others  to  be  brought  in, 
I relieve  myself  by  a possibility  that  that  very 
person,  and  for  that  very  reason,  may  be  the 
first  instance.  The  Lord’s  thoughts  are  not 
like  ours : in  his  love  and  in  his  ways  there 
are  heights  which  we  cannot  reach,  depths 
which  we  cannot  fathom,  lengths  and 
breadths  beyond  the  ken  of  our  feeble  sight. 
Let  us,  then,  simply  depend  upon  him,  and 
do  our  little  best,  leaving  the  event  in  hia 
hand. 

I cannot  tell  if  you  know  any  thing  of  Mrs. 

. In  a letter  I received  yesterday,  she 

writes  thus : — “ I am  at  present  very  ill  with 
some  disorder  in  my  throat,  which  seems  to 
threaten  my  life;  but  death  or  life,  things 
present  or  things  to  come,  all  things  are  mine, 
and  I am  Christ’s,  and  Christ  is  God’s.  O 
glorious  privilege ! precious  foundation  of 
soul-rest  and  peace,  when  all  things  about 
us  are  most  troublous ! Soon  we  shall  be  at 
home  with  Christ,  where  sin,  sorrow,  and 
death  have  no  place ; and  in  the  mean  time 
our  Beloved  will  lead  us  through  the  wilder- 
ness. How  safe,  how  joyous  are  we,  may 
we  be,  in  the  most  evil  case !”  If  these 
should  be  some  of  the  last  notes  of  this  swan, 
I think  them  worth  preserving.  May  we  not 
with  good  reason  say,  Who  would  not  be  a 
Christian  1 The  Lord  grant  that  you  and  I, 
madam,  and  yours  and  mine,  may  be  happy 
in  the  same  assurance,  when  we  shall  have 
death  and  eternity  near  in  view. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

September  — , 1764. 

my  dear  madam, — Your  welfare  I rejoice 
in : your  warfare  I understand  something  of 
St  Paul  describes  his  own  case  in  few  words, 
“ Without  were  fightings,  within  were  fears.” 
Does  not  this  comprehend  all  you  would  say! 
And  how  are  you  to  know  experimentally  either 
your  own  weakness,  or  the  power,  wisdom,  and 
grace  of  God,  seasonably  and  sufficiently  af- 
forded, but  by  frequent  and  various  trials'? 
How  are  the  graces  of  patience,  resignation, 
meekness,  and  faith,  to  be  discovered  and  in- 
creased, but  by  exercise?  The  Lord  has 
chosen,  called,  and  armed  us  for  the  fight 


354 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. . [let.  ii. 


and  shall  wt  wish  to  he  excused  1 Shall  we 
not  rather  rejoice  that  we  have  the  honour  to 
appear  in  such  a cause,  under  such  a captain, 
such  a banner,  and  in  such  company!  A 
complete  suit  of  armour  is  provided,  weapons 
not  to  be  resisted,  and  precious  balm  to  heal  j 
us  if  haply  we  receive  a wound,  and  precious 
ointment  to  revive  us  when  we  are  in  danger 
of  fainting.  Further,  we  are  assured  of  the 
victory  beforehand ; and  O what  a crown  is 
prepared  for  every  conqueror,  which  Jesus, 
the  righteous  Judge,  the  gracious  Saviour, 
shall  place  upon  every  faithful  head  with  his  I 
own  hand ! Then  let  us  not  be  weary  and  j 
faint,  for  in  due  season  we  shall  reap.  The  j 
time  is  short;  yet  a little  while,  and  the  strug-  j 
gle  of  indwelling  sin,  and  the  contradiction 
of  surrounding  sinners,  shall  be  known  no 
more.  You  are  blessed,  because  you  hunger 
and  thirst  after  righteousness:  he  whose 
name  is  Amen  has  said  you  shall  be  filled. 
To  claim  the  promise  is  to  make  it  our  own ; 
yet  it  is  becoming  us  to  practise  submission 
and  patience,  not  in  temporals  only,  but  also 
in  spirituals.  We  should  be  ashamed  and 
grieved  at  our  slow  progress,  so  far  as  it  is 
properly  chargeable  to  our  remissness  and 
miscarriages;  yet  we  must  not  expect  to 
receive  every  thing  at  once,  but  wait  for  a 
gradual  increase  ; nor  should  we  forget  to  be 
thankful  for  what  we  may  account  a little  in 
comparison  of  the  much  we  suppose  others 
have  received.  A little  grace,  a spark  of 
true  love  to  God,  a grain  of  living  faith, 
though  small  as  mustard-seed,  is  worth  a 
thousand  worlds.  One  draught  of  the  water 
of  life  gives  interest  in  and  earnest  of  the 
whole  fountain.  It  becometh  the  Lord’s  ( 
people  to  be  thankful ; and  to  acknowledge  ; 
his  goodness  in  what  we  have  received,  is  ' 
the  surest  as  well  as  the  pleasantest  method  : 
of  obtaining  more.  Nor  should  the  grief 
arising  from  what  we  know  and  feel  of  our  j 
own  hearts,  rob  us  of  the  honour,  comfort,  \ 
and  joy  which  the  word  of  God  designs  us, 
in  what  is  there  recorded  of  the  person, ; 
offices,  and  grace  of  Jesus,  and  the  relations  j 
he  is  pleased  to  stand  in  to  his  people,  Psal.  j 
xxiii.  1,  Isa.  liv.  5,  Cant.  v.  16,  John  xv.  15, 

1 John  ii.  1,  John  xv.  1,  Jer.  xxiii.  5,  1 Cor. 
i.  30,  Matt.  i.  21 — 23.  Give  me  leave  to  re- 
commend to  your  consideration  Psal.  Ixxxix. 
15 — 18.  These  verses  may  be  called  the 
Believer’s  Triumph : though  they  are  nothing 
in  themselves,  yet  having  all  in  Jesus,  they 
may  rejoice  in  his  name  all  the  day.  The 
Lord  enable  us  so  to  do ! The  joy  of  the 
Lord  is  the  strength  of  his  people  ; whereas 
unbelief  makes  our  hands  hang  down,  and 
our  knees  feeble,  dispirits  ourselves,  and  dis-  j 
courages  others ; and  though  it  steals  upon  ' 
us  under  a semblance  of  humility,  it  is  indeed  | 
the  very  essence  of  pride.  By  inward  and  ' 
outward  exercises  the  Lord  is  promoting  the  ! 
best  desire  of  your  heart,  and  answering  your  j 


daily  prayers.  Would  you  have  assurance? 
The  true  solid  assurance  is  to  be  obtained  no 
other  way.  When  young  Christians  are 
greatly  comforted  with  the  Lord’s  love  and 
presence,  their  doubts  and  fears  are  for  that 
season  at  an  end.  But  this  is  not  assurance : 
so  soon  as  the  Lord  hides  his  face,  they  are 
troubled,  and  ready  to  question  the  very  foun- 
dation of  hope.  Assurance  grows  by  repeated 
conflicts,  by  our  repeated  experimental  proof 
of  the  Lord's  power  and  goodness  to  save : 
when  we  have  been  brought  very  low  and 
helped,  sorely  wounded  and  healed,  cast  down 
and  raised  again,  have  given  up  all  hope,  and 
been  suddenly  snatched  from  danger,  and 
placed  in  safety,  and  when  these  things  have 
been  repeated  to  us  and  in  us  a thousand 
times  over,  we  begin  to  learn  to  trust  simply 
to  the  word  and  power  of  God,  beyond  and 
against  appearances;  and  this  trust,  when 
habitual  and  strong,  bears  the  name  of  assur- 
ance, for  even  assurance  has  degrees. 

You  have  good  reason,  madam,  to  suppose 
that  the  love  of  the  best  Christians  to  an  un- 
seen Saviour  is  far  short  of  what  it  ought  to 
be.  If  your  heart  he  like  mine,  and  you  ex- 
amine your  love  to  Christ  by  the  warmth  and 
frequency  of  your  emotions  towards  him,  you 
will  often  be  in  a sad  suspense  whether  or  no 
you  love  him  at  all.  The  best  mark  to  judge, 
and  which  he  has  given  us  for  that  purpose, 
is  to  inquire  if  his  word  and  will  have  a pre- 
vailing, governing  influence  upon  our  lives 
and  temper.  If  we  love  him,  we  do  endea- 
vour to  keep  his  commandments ; and  it  will 
hold  the  other  way,  if  we  have  a desire  to 
please  him  we  undoubtedly  love  him.  Obe- 
dience is  the  best  test;  and  when,  amidst  all 
our  imperfections,  we  can  humbly  appeal 
concerning  the  sincerity  of  our  views,  this  is 
a mercy  for  which  we  ought  to  be  greatly 
thankful.  He  that  has  brought  us  to  will, 
will  likewise  enable  us  to  do  according  to  his 
good  pleasure.  I doubt  not  but  the  Lord 
whom  you  love,  and  on  whom  you  depend, 
will  lead  you  in  a sure  way,  and  establish 
and  strengthen,  and  settle  you  in  his  love 
and  grace.  Indeed  he  has  done  great  things 
for  you  already.  The  Lord  is  your  Shep- 
herd ; — a comprehensive  word.  The  sheep 
can  do  nothing  for  themselves ; the  shepherd 
must  guide,  guard,  feed,  heal,  recover.  Well 
for  us  that  our  Shepherd  is  the  Lord  Almighty. 
If  his  power,  care,  compassion,  fulness,  were 
not  infinite,  the  poor  sheep  would  be  forsaken, 
starved,  and  worried.  But  we  have  a Shep- 
herd full  of  care,  full  of  kindness,  full  of 
power,  who  has  said,  I will  seek  that  which 
is  lost,  and  bind  up  that  which  was  broken, 
and  bring  again  that  which  was  driven  away, 
and  will  strengthen  that  which  was  sick. 
How  tender  are  these  expressions,  and  how 
well  fulfilled  ! His  6heep  feed  in  the  midst 
of  wolves,  yet  are  preserved  safe ; for  though 
they  see  him  not,  his  eyes  and  his  heart  aie 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


355 


LET.  III.] 

upon  them.  Do  we  wonder  that  Daniel  was 
preserved  in  the  lions’  den  1 Why,  it  is  a 
common  case.  Which  of  God’s  children 
have  not  cause  to  say,  “ My  soul  is  among 
lions  1”  But  the  Angel  of  the  covenant  stops 
their  mouths,  or  only  permits  them  to  gape 
and  roar,  to  show  their  teeth,  and  what  they 
would  do  if  they  might;  but  they  may  not, 
they  shall  not  bite  and  tear  us  at  their  own 
will.  Let  us  trust  him,  and  all  shall  be  well. 

As  to  daily  occurrences,  it  is  best  to  be- 
lieve that  a daily  portion  of  comforts  and 
crosses,  each  one  the  most  suitable  to  our 
case,  is  adjusted  and  appointed  by  the  hand 
which  was  once  nailed  to  the  cross  for  us ; 
that  where  the  path  of  duty  and  prudence 
leads,  there  is  the  best  situation  we  could 
possibly  be  in  at  that  juncture.  We  are  not 
required  to  afflict  ourselves  immoderately  for 
what  is  not  in  our  power  to  prevent,  nor 
should  any  thing  that  affords  occasions  for 
mortifying  the  spirit  of  self  be  accounted  un- 
necessary.— I am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

1768. 

1 have  been  for  some  time  hoping  to  hear 
from  you,  but  Mr. was  here  last  Satur- 

day, and  informed  me  that  you  were  ill,  or 
had  been  so  very  lately.  This  intelligence 
prompted  me  to  write  as  soon  as  I could  find 
leisure.  I think  the  Lord  has  seen  fit  to  visit 
you  with  much  indisposition  of  late ; I say  he 
has  seen  fit,  for  all  our  trials  are  under  his 
immediate  direction,  and  we  are  never  in 
heaviness  without  a need  be.  I trust  he  does 
and  will  give  you  strength  equal  to  your  day, 
and  sweeten  what  would  be  otherwise  bitter 
with  the  essence  of  his  precious  love.  I 
hope  soon  to  hear  that  you  are  restored  to 
health,  and  that  you  have  found  cause  to 
praise  him  for  the  rod. 

How  happy  is  the  state  of  a believer,  to 
have  a sure  promise  that  all  shall  work  to- 
gether for  good  in  the  end,  and  in  the  mean 
time  a sure  refuge  where  to  find  present  re- 
lief, support,  and  protection  ! How  comfort- 
able is  it,  wlien  trouble  is  near,  to  know  that 
the  Lord  is  near  likewise,  and  to  commit  our- 
selves and  all  our  cares  simply  to  him,  be- 
lieving that  his  eve  is  upon  us,  and  his  ear 
open  to  our  prayers.  Under  the  conduct  of 
such  a Shepherd  we  need  not  fear ; though 
we  are  called  to  pass  through  fire  and  water, 
through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death, 
he  will  be  with  us,  and  will  show  himself 
mighty  on  our  behalf.  It  seems  almost  need- 
less to  say,  that  we  were  very  happy  in  the 

company  of : the  only  inconvenience 

was,  that  it  renewed  the  pain  it  always  gives 
me  to  part  with  them.  Though  the  visit  was 
full  as  long  as  I could  possibly  expect,  it 


seemed  very  short.  This  must  be  the  case 
while  we  are  here : our  pleasures  are  short, 
interrupted,  and  mixed  with  troubles : this  is 
not,  cannot  be  our  rest.  But  it  will  not  be 
always  the  case : we  are  travelling  to  a better 
world,  where  every  evil  and  imperfection  shall 
cease ; then  we  shall  be  for  ever  with  the 
Lord  and  with  each  other.  May  the  pros- 
pect of  this  blessed  hope  set  before  us  revive 
our  fainting  spirits,  and  make  us  willing  to 
endure  hardships  as  good  soldiers  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Here  we  must  often  sow  in  tears, 
but  there  we  shall  reap  in  joy,  and  all  tears 
shall  be  wiped  from  our  eyes  for  ever.  I 
hope  the  conversation  of  friends  whom  I so 
greatly  love  and  honour  afforded  me  not  only 
pleasure  but  profit ; it  left  a savour  upon  my 
mind,  and  stirred  up  my  languid  desires  after 
the  Lord.  I wish  I could  say  the  good  effect 
has  remained  with  me  to  this  hour ; but  alas ! 
I am  a poor  creature,  and  have  had  many 
causes  of  humiliation  since.  But  blessed  be 
God,  amidst  all  my  changes  I find  the  foun- 
dation stands  sure,  and  lam  seldom  or  never 
left  to  doubt  either  of  the  Lord’s  love  to  me 
or  the  reality  of  the  desires  he  has  given  me 
towards  himself;  though,  when  I measure 
my  love  by  the  degrees  of  its  exercise,  or  the 
fruits  it  produceth,  I have  reason  to  sit  down 
ashamed,  as  the  chief  of  sinners  and  the  least 
of  all  saints.  But  in  him  I have  righteous- 
ness and  peace,  and  in  him  I must  and  will 
rejoice. 

I w7ould  willingly  fill  up  my  sheet,  but  feel 
a straitness  in  my  spirit,  and  know  not  what 
farther  to  say.  O for  a ray  of  divine  light 
to  set  me  at  liberty,  that  I might  write  a few 
lines  worth  reading,  something  that  might 
warm  my  heart,  and  comfort  yours.  Then 
the  subject  must  be  Jesus;  but  of  him  what 
can  I say  that  you  do  not  know!  Well, 
though  you  know  him,  you  are  glad  to  hear 
of  him  again  and  again.  Come,  then,  mag- 
nify the  Lord  with  me,  and  let  us  exalt  his 
I name  together.  Let  us  adore  him  for  his 
love,  that  love  which  has  a height,  and  depth, 
and  length,  and  breadth,  beyond  the  grasp  of 
our  poor  conceptions ; a love  that  moved  him 
to  empty  himself,  to  take  on  him  the  form  of 
a servant,  and  to  be  obedient  unto  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross ; a love  that  pitied 
us  in  our  lost  estate,  that  found  us  when  we 
sought  him  not,  that  spoke  peace  to  our  souls 
in  the  day  of  our  distress ; a love  that  bears 
with  all  our  present  weakness,  mistakes, 
backslidings,  and  shortcomings ; a love  that 
is  always  watchful,  always  ready  to  guide, 
to  comfort,  and  to  heal ; a love  that  will  not 
be  wearied,  cannot  be  conquered,  and  is  in- 
capable of  changes;  a love  that  will,  in  the 
end,  prevail  over  all  opposition,  will  perfect 
that  which  concerns  us,  and  will  not  leave 
us  till  it  has  brought  us  perfect  in  holiness 
and  happiness,  to  rejoice  in  his  presence  in 
glory.  The  love  of  Christ ! it  is  the  w onder, 


356 


LETTERS  TO 

the  joy,  the  song*,  of  angels,  and  the  sense  of 
it  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts,  makes  life 
pleasant,  and  death  welcome. — Alas ! what 
a heart  have  I,  that  I love  him  no  better! 
But  I hope  he  has  given  me  a desire  to  make 
him  my  all  in  all,  and  to  account  every  thing 
loss  and  dross  that  dares  to  stand  in  competi- 
tion with  him. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

1769. 

I found,  this  morning,  among  my  unan- 
swered letters,  one  from  you,  but  I hope  I 
left  it  among  them  by  mistake.  I am  willing, 
however,  to  be  on  the  sure  side,  and  would 
rather  write  twice  than  be  too  long  silent. 
I heard  of  your  being  laid  on  the  bed  of 
affliction,  and  of  the  Lord’s  goodness  to  you 
there,  and  of  his  raising  you  up  again.  Bless- 
ed be  his  name!  he  is  all-sufficient  and  faith- 
ful ; and  though  he  cause  grief,  he  is  sure  to 
show  compassion  in  supporting  and  deliver- 
ing. Ah ! the  evil  of  our  nature  is  deeply 
rooted  and  very  powerful,  or  such  repeated, 
continual  corrections  and  chastisements 
would  not  be  necessary,  and  were  they  not 
necessary  we  should  not  have  them.  But 
such  we  are,  and  therefore  such  must  be  our 
treatment ; for  though  the  Lord  loves  us  with 
a tenderness  beyond  what  the  mother  feels 
for  her  sucking  child,  yet  it  is  a tenderness 
directed  by  infinite  wisdom,  and  very  differ- 
ent from  that  weak  indulgence  which  in 
parents  we  call  fondness,  which  leads  them 
to  comply  with  their  children’s  desires  and 
inclinations,  rather  than  to  act  with  a steady 
view  to  their  true  welfare.  The  Lord  loves 
his  children,  and  is  very  indulgent  to  them, 
so  far  as  they  can  safely  bear  it,  but  he  will 
not  spoil  them.  Their  sin-sickness  requires 
medicines,  some  of  which  are  very  unpalat- 
able; but  when  the  case  calls  for  such,  no 
short-sighted  entreaties  of  ours  can  excuse 
us  from  taking  what  he  prepares  for  our 
good.  But  every  dose  is  prepared  by  his 
own  hand,  and  not  one  is  administered  in 
vain,  nor  is  it  repeated  any  oftener  than  is 
needful  to  answer  the  proposed  end.  Till 
then,  no  other  end  can  remove  what  he  lays 
upon  us;  but  when  his  merciful  design  is 
answered,  he  will  relieve  us  himself,  and  in 
the  mean  time,  he  will  so  moderate  the  ope- 
ration, or  increase  our  ability  to  bear,  that  we 
shall  not  be  overpowered.  It  is  true,  without 
a single  exception,  that  all  his  paths  are 
mercy  and  truth  to  them  that  fear  him.  His 
love  is  the  same  when  he  wounds  as  when 
he  heals,  when  he  takes  away  as  when  he 
gives:  we  have  reason  to  thank  him  for  all, 
but  most  for  the  severe. 

I received  a letter  from  you,  which  men- 
tions dear  Mrs. ’s  case  a very  trying 


MRS.  . [let.  iv. 

one;  but  in  this  likewise  we  see  the  Lord’? 
faithfulness.  Our  own  experience,  and  all 
that  we  observe  of  his  dealings  with  others, 
may  convince  us  that  we  need  not  be  afraid 
to  entrust  ourselves  and  our  dearest  concerns 
in  his  hands;  for  he  can  and  will  make  every 
thing  work  for  good. 

How  little  does  the  world  know  of  that  in- 
tercourse which  is  carried  on  between  heaven 
and  earth ! what  petitions  are  daily  presented, 
and  what  answers  are  received,  at  the  throne 
of  grace ! O the  blessed  privilege  of  prayer ! 
O the  wonderful  love,  care,  attention,  and 
power  of  our  great  Shepherd ! His  eve  is  al- 
ways upon  us ; when  our  spirits  are  almost 
overwhelmed  within  us,  he  knoweth  our  path. 
His  ear  is  always  open  to  us;  let  who  will 
overlook  and  disappoint  us,  he  will  not.  When 
means  and  hope  fail,  when  every  thing  looks 
dark  upon  us,  when  we  seem  shut  up  on  every 
side,  when  we  are  brought  to  the  lowest  ebb, 
still  our  help  is  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  who 
made  heaven  and  earth.  To  him  all  things 
are  possible ; and  before  the  exertion  of  his 
power,  when  he  is  pleased  to  arise  and  work, 
all  hinderances  give  way,  and  vanish  like  a 
mist  before  the  sun.  And  he  can  so  manifest 
himself  to  the  soul,  and  cause  his  goodness 
to  pass  before  it,  that  the  hour  of  affliction 
shall  be  the  golden  hour  of  the  greatest  con- 
solation. He  is  the  fountain  of  life,  strength, 
grace,  and  comfort,  and  of  his  fulness  his 
children  receive  according  to  their  occasions: 
but  this  is  all  hidden  from  the  world ; they 
have  no  guide  in  prosperity,  but  hurry  on  as 
they  are  instigated  by  their  blinded  passions, 
and  are  perpetually  multiplying  mischiefs 
and  miseries  to  themselves;  and  in  adversity 
they  have  no  resource,  but  must  feel  all  the 
evil  of  affliction,  without  inward  support, 
and  without  deriving  any  advantage  from  it. 
We  have,  therefore,  cause  for  continual 
praise.  The  Lord  has  given  us  to  know  his 
name,  as  a resting-place  and  a hiding-place, 
a sun  and  a shield.  Circumstances  and  crea- 
tures may  change;  but  he  will  be  an  un- 
changeable friend.  The  way  is  rough,  but 
he  trod  it  before  us,  and  is  now  with  us  in 
every  step  we  take;  and  every  step  brings 
us  nearer  to  our  heavenly  home.  Our  in- 
heritance is  surely  reserved  for  us,  and  we 
shall  be  kept  for  it  by  his  power  through 
faith.  Our  present  strength  is  small,  and, 
without  a fresh  supply,  would  be  quickly  ex- 
hausted; but  he  has  engaged  to  renew  it 
from  day  to  day;  and  he  will  soon  appear,  to 
wipe  all  tears  from  our  eyes;  and  then  we 
shall  appear  with  him  in  glory. 

I am  very  sorry  if  our  friend  Mr. ap- 

pears to  be  aiming  to  reconcile  things  that  are 
incompatible.  I am,  indeed,  afraid  that  he 
has  been  for  some  time  under  a decline ; and, 
as  you  justly  observe,  we  meet  with  too  many 
instances  to  teach  us,  that  they  who  express 
the  warmest  zeal  at  their  fi>*st  setting  out, 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


357 


LET.  V.] 

do  not  always 'prove  the  most  steady  and 
thriving-  afterwards;  yet  I am  willing  to 
hope  in  this  case,  that  he  will  revive  and 
flourish  again.  Sometimes  the  Lord  permits 
those  whom  he  loves  to  wander  from  him  for 
a season ; and  when  his  time  comes  to  heal 
their  backslidings,  they  walk  more  humbly, 
thankfully,  and  fruitfully  afterwards.,  from  a 
sense  of  his  abounding  mercy,  and  the  know- 
ledge they  have  by  experience  acquired  of 
the  deceitfulness  and  ingratitude  of  their 
hearts.  I hope  and  pray  it  will  be  so  with 
him.  However,  these  things  for  the  present 
are  grievous;  and  usually  before  the  Lord 
heals  such  breaches,  he  makes  his  people 
sensible,  that  it  is  an  evil  thing  and  a bitter, 
to  forsake  him  when  he  led  them  by  the  way. 

Indeed,  London  is  a dangerous  and  ensnar- 
ing place  to  professors.  I account  myself 
happy  that  my  lot  is  cast  at  a distance  from 
it.  It  appears  to  me  like  a sea,  wherein  most 
are  tossed  by  storms,  and  many  suffer  ship- 
wreck. In  this  retired  situation,  I seem  to 
stand  upon  a cliff*;  and  while  I pity  those 
whom  1 cannot  help,  I hug  myself  in  the 
thoughts  of  being  safe  upon  the  shore.  Not 
that  we  are  without  our  trials  here ; the  evil 
of  our  own  hearts,  and  the  devices  of  Satan, 
cut  us  out  work  enough ; but  we  are  happily 
screened  from  many  things  which  must  be 
either  burdensome  or  hurtful  to  those  who 
live  in  the  way  of  them ; such  as,  political 
disputes,  winds  of  doctrine,  scandals  of  false 
professors,  parties  for  and  against  particular 
ministers,  and  fashionable  amusements,  in 
some  measure  countenanced  by  the  presence 
of  persons  in  other  respects  exemplary.  In 
this  view,  I often  think  of  our  dear  friend’s 
expression,  upon  a certain  occasion,  of  the 
difference  between  London  and  country  grace. 
I hold  it  in  a twofold  sense.  By  London 
grace,  when  genuine,  I understand  grace  in 
a very  advanced  degree.  The  favoured  few 
who  are  kept  alive  to  God,  simple-hearted, 
and  spiritually-minded  (I  mean  especially  in 
genteel  life,)  in  the  midst  of  such  snares  and 
temptations,  appear  to  me  to  be  the  first  rate 
Christians  of  the  land : I adore  the  power  of 
the  Lord  in  them,  and  compare  them  to  the 
young  men  who  walked  unhurt  in  the  midst 
of  the  fire.  In  another  sense,  the  phrase 
London  grace  conveys  no  great  idea  to  me. 
T think  there  is  no  place  in  the  kingdom 
where  a person  rnay  set  up  for  a professor 
upon  a smaller  stock.  If  people  can  abstain 
from  open  immoralities,  if  they  will  fly  to  all 
parts  of  the  town  to  hear  sermons,  if  they 
can  talk  about  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  if 
they  have  something  to  say  upon  that  use- 
less question,  Who  is  the  best  preacher  1 if 
they  can  attain  to  a speaking  acquaintance 
with  some  of  an  acknowledged  character, 
then  they  expect  to  pass  muster.  I am  afraid 
there  are  many  who,  upon  no  better  evi- 
dences than  these  deceive  both  themselves 


and  others  for  a course  of  years.  Though  I 
feel  not  in  a writing  cue  to-day,  I have  al- 
most filled  the  sheet  somehow ; and  if  a line 
or  a word  may  be  a.  means  of  suggesting  a 
seasonable  and  comfortable  thought  to  you,  I 
have  my  end.  Through  mercy  we  are  all 
pretty  well.  My  soul  is  kept  alive,  as  it  were, 
by  miracle.  I feel  much  inward  warfare: 
the  enemy  thrusts  sore  at  me,  that  I may 
fall ; and  I have  abundant  experience  of  the 
evil  and  deceitfulness  of  my  heart ; bui  the 
Lord  is  gracious,  and,  in  the  midst  of  all 
conflicts,  I have  a peace  springing  from  the 
knowledge  of  his  power  and  grace,  and  a 
consideration  that  I have  been  helped  to 
commit  myself  to  him. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  V. 

1769. 

We  are  much  obliged  to  you  for  your  late 
visit;  and  I am  glad  to  find  that  the  Lord  is 
pleased  to  give  you  some  tokens  of  his  pre- 
sence when  you  are  with  us,  because  I hope 
it  will  encourage  you  to  come  again.  I ought 
to  be  very  thankful  that  our  Christian  friends 
in  general  are  not  wholly  disappointed  of  a 
blessing  when  they  visit  us. 

I hope  the  Lord  will  give  me  an  humble 
sense  of  what  I am,  and  that  broken  and 
contrite  frame  of  heart  in  which  he  delights. 
This  is  to  me  the  chief  thing.  I had  rather 
have  more  of  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ, 
more  of  a meek,  quiet,  resigned,  peaceful, 
and  loving  disposition,  than  to  enjoy  the 
greatest  measure  of  sensible  comforts,  if  the 
consequence  should  be  (as  perhaps  it  would; 
spiritual  pride,  self-sufficiency,  and  a want 
of  that  tenderness  to  others  which  becomes 
one  who  has  reason  to  style  himself  the  chief 
of  sinners.  I know,  indeed,  that  the  proper 
tendency  of  sensible  consolations  is  to  hum- 
ble ; but  I can  see,  that  through  the  depravi- 
ty of  human  nature,  they  have  not  always 
that  effect.  And  I have  been  sometimes 
disgusted  with  an  apparent  want  of  humility, 
an  air  of  self-will  and  self-importance,  in 
persons  of  whose  sincerity  I could  not  at  all 
doubt.  It  has  kept  me  from  envying  them 
those  pleasant  frames  with  which  they  have 
sometimes  been  favoured ; for  I be'ieve  Sa- 
tan is  never  nearer  us  than  at  some  times 
when  we  think  ourselves  nearest  the  Lord. 

What  reason  have  we  to  charge  our  souls 
in  David’s  words,  “My  soul,  wait  thou  only 
upon  God.”  A great  stress  should  be.  laid 
upon  that  word  only.  We  dare  not  entirely 
shut  him  out  of  our  regards,  but  we  are  too 
apt  to  suffer  something  to  share  with  him. 
This  evil  disposition  is  deeply  fixed  in  our 
hearts ; and  the  Lord  orders  all  his  dispensa- 
tions towards  us  with  a view  to  rooting  it 
out;  that,  being  wearied  with  repeated  dis- 


&58 

appointments,  we  may  at  length  be  compell- 
ed to  betake  ourselves  to  him  alone.  Why 
else  do  we  experience  so  many  changes  and 
« crosses]  why  are  we  so  often  in  heaviness? 
We  know  that  he  delights  in  the  pleasure 
and  prosperity  of  his  servants;  that  he  does 
not  willingly  afflict  or  grieve  his  children ; 
but  there  is  a necessity  on  our  parts,  in  or- 
der to  teach  us  that  we  have  no  stability  in 
ourselves,  and  that  no  creature  can  do  us 
good  but  by  his  appointment.  While  the 
people  of  Israel  depended  upon  him  for  food, 
they  gathered  up  the  manna  every  morning 
in  the  field ; but  when  they  would  hoard  it  up 
in  their  houses,  that  they  might  have  a stock 
within  themselves,  they  had  it  without  his 
blessing,  and  it  proved  good  for  nothing ; it 
soon  bred  worms,  and  g*rew  offensive.  We 
may  often  observe  something  like  this  occur 
both  in  our  temporal  and  spiritual  concerns. 
The  Lord  gives  us  a dear  friend  to  our  com- 
fort ; but  ere  long  we  forget  that  the  friend 
is  the  only  channel  of  conveyance,  and  that 
all  the  comfort  is  from  himself.  To  remind 
us  of  this,  the  stream  is  dried  up,  the  friend 
torn  away  by  death,  or  removed  far  from  us, 
or  perhaps  the  friendship  ceases,  and  a cool- 
ness insensibly  takes  place,  we  know  not 
how  or  why:  the  true  reason  is,  that  when 
we  rejoice  amiss  in  our  gourd,  the  Lord,  for 
our  good,  sends  a worm  to  the  root  of  it.  In- 
stances of  this  kind  are  innumerable ; and 
the  great  inference  from  them  all  is,  Cease 
from  man,  cease  from  creatures,  for  wherein 
are  they  to  be  accounted  of?  My  soul,  wait 
thou  only,  only  upon  the  Lord,  who  is  (ac- 
cording to  the  expressive  phrase,  Heb.  iv.  13,) 
he  with  whom  we  have  to  do  for  soul  and 
body,  for  time  and  eternity.  What  thanks 
do  we  owe,  that  though  we  have  not  yet  at- 
tained perfectly  this  great  lesson,  yet  we  are 
admitted  into  that  school  where  alone  it  can 
be  learned!  and  though  we  are  poor,  slow 
scholars,  the  great  and  effectual  Teacher  to 
whom  we  have  been  encouraged  and  enabled 
to  apply,  can  and  will  bring  us  forward! 
He  communicates  not  only  instructions,  but 
capacities  and  powers.  There  is  none  like 
him ; he  can  make  the  blind  to  see,  the  deaf 
to  hear,  and  the  dumb  to  speak : and  how 
great  is  his  condescension  and  patience  ! how 
does  he  accommodate  himself  to  our  weak- 
ness, and  teach  us  as  we  are  able  to  bear. 
Though  all  are  very  dunces  when  he  first 
receives  them,  not  one  was  ever  turned  out 
as  incapable,  for  he  makes  them  what  he 
would  have  them  to  be.  O that  we  may  set 
him  always  before  us,  and  consider  every 
dispensation,  person,  thing,  we  meet  in  the 
course  of  every  day,  as  messengers  from  him, 
each  bringing  us  some  line  of  instruction  for 
us  to  copy  into  that  day’s  experience.  What- 
ever passes  within  us  or  around  us  may  be 
improved  (when  he  teaches  us  how)  as  a 
perpetual  commentary  upon  his  good  word. 


[let.  v 

If  we  converse  and  observe  tvith  this  view 
we  may  learn  something  every  moment, 
wherever  the  path  of  duty  leads  us,  in  the 
streets  as  well  as  in  the  closet,  and  from  the 
conversation  of  those  who  knew  not  God 
(when  we  cannot  avoid  being  present  at  it,) 
as  well  as  from  those  who  do. 

Separation  of  dear  friends,  is,  as  you  ob- 
served, hard  to  flesh  and  blood ; but  grace 
can  make  it  tolerable.  I have  an  abiding 
persuasion,  that  the  Lord  can  easily  give  more 
than  ever  he  will  take  away.  Which  part 
of  the  alternative  must  be  rr>y  lot,  or  when, 
he  only  knows;  but  in  general  I can  rely  on 
him  to  appoint  the  time,  the  manner;  and  I 
trust  his  promise  of  strength  suited  to  the  day 
shall  be  made  good.  Therefore  I can  for  the 
most  part  rejoice,  that  all  things  are  in  the 
hand  and  under  the  direction  of  Him  who 
knows  our  frame,  and  has  himself  borne  our 
griefs  and  carried  our  sorrows  in  his  own 
body.  A time  of  weeping  must  come,  but 
the  morning  of  joy  will  make  amends  for  all. 
Who  can  expound  the  meaning  of  that  one 
expression,  “an  exceeding  and  eternal  weight 
of  glory?”  The  case  of  unconverted  friends 
is  still  more  burdensome  to  think  of ; but  we 
have  encouragement  and  warrant  to  pray  and 
to  hope.  He  who  called  us  can  easily  call 
others ; and  he  seldom  lavs  a desire  of  this 
sort  very  closely  and  warmly  upon  the  hearts 
of  his  people,  but  when  it  is  his  gracious 
design  sooner  or  later  to  give  an  answer  of 
peace.  However,  it  becomes  us  to  be  thank- 
ful for  ourselves,  and  to  bow  our  anxieties 
and  reasonings  before  his  sovereign  will,  who 
doth  as  he  pleases  with  his  own. 

Methinks  winter  is  your  summer.  You 
have  been,  like  the  bee,  collecting  from  many 
flowers;  I hope  you  will  carry  good  store  of 
honey  home  with  you.  May  you  find  the 
Lord  there,  and  he  can  easily  supply  the 
failure  of  means  and  creatures.  We  cannot 
be  in  any  place  to  so  much  advantage  as 
where  the  call  of  duty  leads.  What  we 
cannot  avoid,  may  we  cheerfully  submit  to, 
and  not  indulge  a vain  thought,  that  we  could 
choose  a better  situation  for  ourselves  (all 
things  considered)  than  he  has  chosen  for  us. 

When  we  have  opportunity  of  enjoying 
many  ordinances,  it  is  a mercy  to  be  able  to 
prize  and  improve  them  ; but  when  he  cuts 
us  short  for  a season,  if  we  wait  upon  him, 
we  shall  do  well  without  them.  Secret 
prayer,  and  the  good  word,  are  the  chief 
wells  from  whence  we  draw  the  water  of 
salvation.  These  will  keep  the  soul  alive 
when  creature-streams  are  cut  off;  but  the 
richest  variety  of  public  means,  and  the 
closest  attendance  upon  them  will  leave  us 
lean  and  pining  in  the  midst  of  plenty,  if  we 
are  remiss  and  formal  in  the  other  two.  I 
think  David  never  appears  in  a more  lively 
frame  of  mind  than  when  he  wrote  the  42d, 
63d,  and  84th  Psalms,  whieh  were  all  penned 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


359 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


LET.  VI.] 

in  a dry  land,  and  at  a distance  from  the 
public  ordinances. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VI. 

1772. 

I had  been  wishing  to  hear  from  you,  that 
I might  know  where  to  write.  I hope  I can 
assure  you  of  a friendly  sympathy  with  you 
in  your  trials.  I can,  in  some  measure,  guess 
at  what  you  feel,  from  what  I have  seen  and 
felt  myself  in  cases  where  I have  been  nearly 
concerned.  But  my  compassion,  though  sin- 
cere, is  ineffectual : if  I can  pity,  I cannot 
relieve.  All  I can  do  is,  as  the  Lord  enables 
me,  to  remember  you  both  before  him.  But 
there  is  one  whose  compassion  is  infinite. 
The  love,  and  tenderness  of  ten  thousand 
earthly  friends,  of  ten  thousand  mothers  to- 
wards their  sucklings,  if  compared  with  his, 
are  less  than  a drop  of  water  to  the  ocean ; 
and  his  power  is  infinite  too.  Why  then  do 
our  sufferings  continue,  when  he  is  so  com- 
passionate, and  could  remove  them  with  a 
word  ] Surely,  if  we  cannot  give  the  parti- 
cular reasons  (which  yet  he  will  acquaint  us 
with  hereafter,  John  xiii.  7,)  the  general  rea- 
son is  at  hand ; he  afflicts  not  for  his  own 
pleasure,  but  for  our  profit;  to  make  us  par- 
takers of  his  holiness,  and  because  he  loves  us. 

Judge  not  the  Lord  by  feeble  sense, 

But  trust  him  for  his  grace; 

Behind  a frowning  providence 
He  hides  a smiling  face. 

I wish  you  much  comfort  from  David’s 
thought,  Psal.  cxlii.  3.  “When  my  spirit  was 
overwhelmed  within  me,  thou  knewest  my 
path.”  The  Lord  is  not  withdrawn  to  a great 
distance,  but  his  eye  is  upon  you,  and  he  sees 
you  not  with  the  indifference  of  a mere 
spectator,  but  he  observes  with  attention ; he 
knows,  he  considers  your  path ; yea,  he  ap- 
points it,  and  every  circumstance  about  it  is 
under  his  direction.  Your  trouble  began  at 
the  hour  he  saw  best;  it  could  not  come 
before,  and  he  has  marked  the  degree  of  it  to 
a hair’s-breadth  and  the  duration  to  a minute. 
He  knows  likewise  how  your  spirit  is  affect- 
ed ; and  such  supplies  of  grace  and  strength, 
and  in  such  seasons  as  he  sees  needful,  he 
will  afford.  So  that  when  things  appear 
darkest,  you  shall  still  be  able  to  say,  Though 
chastened,  not  killed.  Therefore  hope  in 
God,  for  you  shall  yet  praise  him. 

I shall  pray  that  the  Bath  waters  may  be 
beneficial ; and  that  the  waters  of  the  sanc- 
tuary there  maybe  healing  and  enlivening  to 
you  all.  Our  all-sufficient  God  can  give 
seasons  of  refreshment  in  the  darkest  hours, 
and  break  through  the  thickest  clouds  of  out- 
ward affliction  or  distress.  To  you  it  is  given, 
E3t  only  to  believe  in  Jesus,  but  to  suffer  for 


his  sake : for  so  we  do,  not  only  when  we  are 
called  to  follow  him  to  imprisonment  or  death, 
but  when  he  enables  us  to  bear  afflictive  dis- 
pensations with  due  submission  and  patience. 
Then  he  is  glorified;  then  his  grace  and 
power  are  manifested  in  us.  The  world,  so 
far  as  they  know  our  case,  have  a proof  be- 
fore them,  that  our  religion  is  not  merely 
notional,  but  that  there  is  a power  and  reality 
in  it.  And  the  Lord’s  people  are  encouraged 
by  what  they  see  of  his  faithfulness  to  our- 
selves. And  there  are  more  eyes  upon  us 
still.  We  are  a spectacle  to  the  universe,  to 
angels  as  well  as  to  men.  Cheer  up:  thu 
Lord  hath  put  you  in  your  present  trying 
situation,  that  you  may  have  the  fairer  op- 
portunity of  adorning  your  profession  of  the 
gospel;  and  though  you  suffer  much,  he  is 
able  to  make  you  abundant  amends.  Nor 
need  I remind  you,  that  he  has  suffered  un- 
speakably more  for  you;  he  drank  for  your 
sakes  a cup  of  unmixed  wrath,  and  only  puts 
into  your  hand  a cup  of  affliction  mixed  with 
many  mercies. 

The  account  you  gave  of  the  poor  man  de- 
tained in  the  inn  was  very  affecting.  Such 
scenes  are  or  should  be  instructive,  to  teach 
us  resignation  under  the  trials  we  must  meet 
with  every  day.  For  not  only  are  we  visited 
less  than  our  iniquities  have  deserved,  but 
much  less  than  many  of  our  fellow-creatures 
daily  meet  with.  We  need  not  look  about 
for,  or  long  to  find,  others  in  a worse  situation 
than  ourselves.  If  a fit  of  the  gout  or  cho- 
lic is  so  grievous  and  so  hard  to  bear,  what  do 
we  owe  to  him  who  delivered  us  from  that 
place  of  unutterable  torment,  where  there  is 
weeping,  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth  for 
ever,  without  hope  or  respite  ] And  if  we 
cannot  help  interesting  ourselves  in  the 
groans  of  a stranger,  how  ought  the  groans 
of  Jesus  to  be,  as  it  were,  continually  sound- 
ing in  our  ears]  What  are  all  other  suffer- 
ings compared  to  his]  and  yet  he  endured 
them  freeiy.  He  needed  not  to  have  borne 
them,  if  he  would  have  left  us  to  perish ; but 
such  was  his  love,  he  died  that  we  might  live, 
and  endured  the  fiercest  agonies,  that  he 
might  open  to  us  the  gate  of  everlasting  peace 
and  happiness.  How  amazingly  perverse  is 
my  heart,  that  I can  be  more  affected  with  a 
melancholy  story  in  a newspaper  concerning 
persons  I never  saw,  than  with  all  that  I read 
of  his  bitter  passion  in  the  garden  and  on  the 
cross,  though  I profess  to  believe  he  endured 
it  all  for  me!  O!  if  we  could  always  behold 
him  by  faith  as  evidently  crucified  before  our 
eyes,  how  would  it  compose  our  spirits  as  to 
all  the  sweets  and  bitters  of  this  poor  life ! 
What  a barrier  would  it  prove  against  all  the 
snares  and  temptations  whereby  Satan  would 
draw  us  into  evil;  and  what  firm  ground  of 
confidence  w'ould  it  afford  us  amidst  the  con- 
flicts we  sustain  from  the  workings  of  un- 
belief and  indwelling  sin!  I long  for  more  of 


360 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


[let.  vij 


that  faith  which  is  the  substance  of  things 
hoped  for,  and  the  evidence  of  things  not 
seen,  that  I may  be  preserved  humble,  thank- 
ful, watchful,  and  dependent.  To  behold  the 
glory  aid  the  love  of  Jesus,  is  the  only 
effectua . way  to  participate  of  his  image. 

We  are  to  set  out  to-night  from  the  inter- 
preter’s house  towards  the  hill  Difficulty,  and 
hope  to  be  favoured  with  a sight  of  the  cross 
by  the  way.  To  stand  at  the  foot  of  it,  with 
a softened  heart  and  melting  eyes ; to  forget 
our  sins,  sorrows,  and  burdens,  while  we  are 
wholly  swallowed  up  in  the  contemplation  of 
him  who  bore  our  sins  in  his  own  body  upon 
the  tree,  is  certainly  the  most  desirable  situa- 
tion on  this  side  the  grave.  To  speak  of  it, 
and  to  see  it  by  the  light  of  the  Spirit,  are 
widely  different  things;  and  though  we  can- 
not always  enjoy  this  view,  yet  the  remem- 
brance of  what  we  have  seen  is  an  excellent 
means  of  encouragement  to  mount  the  hill, 
and  to  face  the  lions. 

I believe  I shall  hardly  find  leisure  to  fill 
my  paper  this  time.  I*t  is  now  Saturday 
evening,  and  growing  late.  I am  just  re- 
turned from  a serious  walk,  which  is  my 
usual  manner  of  closing  the  week,  when  the 
weather  is  fine.  I endeavour  to  join  in  heart 
with  the  Lord’s  ministers  and  people,  who 
are  seeking  a blessing  on  to-morrow’s  ordi- 
nances. At  such  times  I especially  remem- 
ber those  friends  with  whom  I have  gone  to 
the  house  of  the  Lord  in  company,  con- 
sequently you  are  not  forgot.  I can  venture 
to  assure  you,  that  if  you  have  a value  tor 
our  prayers,  you  have  a frequent  share  in 
them,  yea,  are  loved  and  remembered  by 
many  here ; but  as  we  are  forgetful  creatures, 
I hope  you  will  always  refresh  our  memory, 
and  quicken  our  prayers,  by  a yearly  visit. 
In  the  morning  I shall  think  of  you  again. 
What  a multitude  of  eyes  and  hearts  will  be 
directed  to  our  Redeemer  to-morrow!  He 
has  a numerous  and  necessitous  family,  but 
he  is  rich  enough  to  supply  them  all,  and  his 
tender  compassions  extend  to  the  meanest 
and  most  unworthy.  Like  the  sun,  he  can 
cheer  and  enlighten  thousands  and  millions 
at  once,  and  give  to  each  as  bountifully  as  if 
there  were  no  more  to  partake  of  his  favour. 
His  best  blessings  are  not  diminished  by 
being  shared  among  many.  The  greatest 
earthly  monarch  would  soon  be  poor  if  he 
was  to  give  a little  (though  but  a little)  to 
all  his  subjects;  but  Jesus  has  unsearchable, 
inexhaustible  riches  of  grace  to  bestow.  The 
innumerable  assembly  before  the  throne  have 
been  all  supplied  from  his  fulness,  and  yet 
there  is  enough  and  to  spare  for  us  also,  and 
for  all  that  shall  come  after  us.  May  he  give 
us  an  eager  appetite,  a hunger  and  thirst 
that  will'  not  be  put  off  with  any  thing  short 
of  the  bread  of  life;  and  then  we  may  con- 
fidently open  our  mouths  wide,  for  he  has 
promised  to  fill  them. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VII. 

1773. 

Since  I wrote  last,  the  Lord  has  been  gra- 
cious to  us  here.  He  crowned  the  last  year 
with  his  goodness,  and  renews  his  benefits  tc 
us  every  day.  He  has  been  pleased  to  bless 
the  preaching  of  his  gospel  amongst  us,  both 
to  consolation  and  conviction ; and  several 
are,  I hope,  earnestly  seeking  him,  who  were 
lately  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  Dear 

Mr. was  released  from  all  his  complaints 

on  the  25th  of  November.  A few  days  be- 
fore his  death  he  wTas  enabled  to  speak  more 
intelligibly  than  usual  for  about  a quarter  of 
an  hour,  and  expressed  a comfortable  hope, 
which  was  a great  satisfaction  to  us;  for 
though  we  had  not-the  least  doubt  of  his  being 
built  upon  the  Rock,  it  was  to  us  an  answer 
to  prayer  that  he  could  again  speak  the 
language  of  faith;  and  much  prayer  had 
been  made  on  this  account,  especially  that 
very  evening.  After  that  night  he  spoke 
little,  and  hardly  took  any  notice,  but  con- 
tinued chiefly  drowsy  till  he  died.  I preached 
his  funeral  sermon,  from  Lam.  iii.  31 — 33. 

Mrs.  L ’s  complaint  grows  worse  and 

worse ; she  suffers  much  in  her  body,  and  has 
much  more  perhaps  to  suffer:  but  her  con- 
solations in  the  Lord  abound.  He  enables 
her  to  maintain  faith,  patience,  and  submis- 
sion, in  an  exemplary  manner,  and  show's  us, 
in  his  dealings  with  her,  that  he  is  all-suffi- 
cient and  faithful  to  those  who  put  their  trust 
in  him.  I am  glad  to  hear  that  you  had 
comfortable  seasons  while  at  Bath.  It  is, 
indeed,  a great  mercy  that  God’s  ordinances 
are  established  in  that  place  of  dissipation ; 
and  I hope  many  who  go  there  with  no  higher 
view  than  to  drink  the  Bath  wraters,  will  be 
j brought  to  draw  with  joy  the  waters  of  life 
from  those  wells  of  salvation.  He  does  no- 
thing in  vain,  and  when  he  affords  the  means, 
we  may  confidently  hope  he  will  bestow  the 
blessing.  The  dissipation  of  spirit  you  com- 
plain of,  when  you  are  in  a strange  place,  is, 
I suppose,  felt  by  most,  if  not  by  all,  who  can 
be  satisfied  in  no  place  without  some  token 
of  the  Lord’s  presence.  I consider  it  rather 
I as  an  infirmity  than  a sin,  strictly  speaking ; 
though  all  our  infirmities  are  sinful,  being 
the  effects  of  a depraved  nature.  In  our 
present  circumstances  new  things  excite  new 
ideas,  and  when  our  usual  course  of  life  is 
broken  in  upon,  it  disjoints  and  unsettles  our 
thoughts.  It  is  a proof  of  our  weakness;  it 
may,  and  ought  to  be,  lamented ; but  I believe 
we  shall  not  get  the  better  of  it,  till  we  leave 
j the  mortal  body  to  moulder  into  dust.  Per- 
haps few  suffer  more  inconveniences  from 
this  article  than  myself,  which  is  one  reason 
! why  I love  home,  and  seldom  leave  it  without 
some  reluctance ; and  it  is  one  reason  why 
. we  should  love  heaven,  and  long  for  the  hour 
| when,  at  liberty  from  all  incumbrance,  we 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


SOI 


LET.  VIII.] 

shall  sec  the  Lord  without  a vail,  and  serve 
him  without  distraction.  The  Lord,  by  his 
providence,  seconds  and  confirms  the  declara- 
tions of  his  word  and  ministry.  Much  we 
read  and  much  we  hear  concerning  the  empti- 
ness, vanity,  and  uncertainty  of  the  present 
state.  When  our  minds  are  enlightened  by 
his  Holy  Spirit,  we  receive  and  acknowledge 
what  his  word  declares  to  be  truth ; yet  if 
we  remain  long  without  changes,  and  our 
path  is  very  smooth,  we  are  for  the  most  part 
but  faintly  affected  with  what  we  profess  to 
believe.  But  when  some  of  our  dearest 
friends  are  taken  from  us,  the  lives  of  others 
threatened,  and  we  ourselves  are  brought  low 
with  pain  and  sickness,  then  we  not  only  say, 
but  feel,  that  this  must  not,  cannot,  be  our 
rest.  You  have  had  several  exercises  of  this 
kind  of  late  in  your  family,  and  I trust  you 
will  be  able  to  set  your  seal  to  that  gracious 
word,  That  though  afflictions  in  themselves 
are  not  joyous,  but  grievous,  yet  in  due  sea- 
son they  yield  the  peaceful  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness. Various  and  blessed  are  the  fruits  they 
produce.  By  affliction  prayer  is  quickened, 
for  our  prayers  are  very  apt  to  grow  languid 
and  formal  in  a time  of  ease.  Affliction 
greatly  helps  us  to  understand  the  scriptures, 
especially  the  promises,  most  of  which  being 
made  to  times  of  trouble,  we  cannot  so  well 
know  their  fulness,  sweetness,  and  certainty, 
as  when  we  have  been  in  the  situation  to 
which  they  are  suited,  have  been  enabled  to 
trust  and  plead  them,  and  found  them  fulfilled 
in  our  own  case.  We  are  usually  indebted 
to  affliction  as  the  means  or  occasion  of  the 
most  signal  discoveries  we  are  favoured  with 
of  the  wisdom,  power,  and  faithfulness  of  the 
Lord.  These  are  best  observed  by  the  evident 
proofs  we  have  that  hre  is  near  to  support  us 
under  trouble,  and  that  he  can,  and  does, 
deliver  us  out  of  it.  Israel  would  not  have 
seen  so  much  of  the  Lord’s  arm  outstretched 
in  their  behalf,  had  not  Pharaoh  oppressed, 
opposed,  and  pursued  them.  Afflictions  are 
designed  likewise  for  the  manifestation  of 
our  sincerity  to  ourselves  and  to  others. 
When  faith  endures  the  fire,  we  know  it  to 
be  of  the  right  kind;  and  others,  who  see 
we  are  brought  safe  out,  and  lose  nothing 
but  the  dross,  will  confess  that  God  is  with  us 
of  a truth,  Dan.  iii.  27,  28.  Surely  this 
thought  should  reconcile  us  to  suffer,  not 
only  with  patience,  but  with  cheerfulness,  if 
God  may  be  glorified  in  us.  This  made  the 
apostle  rejoice  in  tribulation,  that  the  power 
of  Christ  might  be  noticed,  as  resting  upon 
him,  and  working  mightily  in  him.  Many 
of  our  graces,  likewise,  cannot  thrive  or  show 
themselves  to  advantage  without  trials,  such 
as  resignation,  patience,  meekness,  long- 
suffering.  I observe  some  of  the  London 
porters  do  not  appear  to  be  very  strong  men, 
yet  they  will  trudge  along  under  a burden 
which  some  stouter  people  could  not  carry 
2 Z 


so  well ; the  reason  is,  that  they  are  accus- 
tomed to  carry  burdens,  and  by  continual 
exercise  their  shoulders  acquire  a strength 
suited  to  their  work.  It  is  so  in  the  Christian 
life;  activity  and  strength  of  grace  is  not 
ordinarily  acquired  by  those  who  sit  still  and 
live  at  ease,  but  by  those  who  frequently 
meet  with  something  which  requires  a full 
exertion  of  what  power  the  Lord  has  given 
them.  So  again,  it  is  by  our  own  sufferings 
we  learn  to  pity  and  sympathize  with  others 
in  their  sufferings;  such  a compassionate 
disposition,  which  excites  our  feelings  for 
the  afflicted,  is  an  eminent  branch  of  the 
mind  which  was  in  Christ.  But  these  feelings 
would  be  very  faint,  if  we  did  not  in  our  ex- 
perience know  what  sorrows  and  temptations 
mean.  Afflictions  do  us  good  likewise,  as 
they  make  us  more  acquainted  with  what  is 
in  our  own  hearts,  and  thereby  promote 
humiliation  and  self-abasement.  There  are 
abominations  which,  like  nests  of  vipers,  lie 
so  quietly  within,  that  we  hardly  suspect  they 
are  there,  till  the  rod  of  affliction  rouses  them : 
then  they  hiss  and  show  their  venom.  This 
discovery  is,  indeed,  very  distressing;  yet, 
till  it  is  made,  we  are  prone  to  think  ourselves 
much  less  vile  than  we  really  are,  and  cannot 
so  heartily  abhor  ourselves,  and  repent  in  dust 
and  ashes. 

But  I must  write  a sermon  rather  than  a 
letter,  if  I would  enumerate  all  the  good  fruits 
which,  by  the  power  of  sanctifying  grace,  are 
produced  from  this  bitter  tree.  May  we, 
under  our  several  trials,  find  them  all  reveal- 
ed in  ourselves,  that  we  may  not  complain  of 
having  suffered  in  vain.  While  we  have  such 
a depraved  nature,  and  live  in  such  a pollut- 
ed world;  while  the  roots  of  pride,  vanity, 
self-dependence,  self-seeking,  are  so  strong 
within  us,  we  need  a variety  of  sharp  dispen- 
sations to  keep  us  from  forgetting  ourselves, 
and  from  cleaving  to  the  dust. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VIII. 

1774. 

The  very  painful  illness  which  Mrs. 

so  long  endured,  had,  doubtless,  not  only  pre- 
pared you  to  expect  the  news  of  her  dismis- 
sion, but  made  you  more  willing  to  resign 
her.  You  are  bereaved  of  a valuable  friend ; 
but  life  in  her  circumstances  was  burdensome ; 
and  who  can  be  sorry  to  consider  her  now  as 
freed  from  all  suffering,  and  possessed  of  all 
happiness!  But,  besides  this,  1 trust  the  Lord 
has  favoured  you  with  an  habitual  sense  of 
the  wisdom  and  propriety  of  all  his  appoint- 
ments; so  that  when  his  will  is  manifested 
by  the  event,  you  are  enabled  to  say,  “All 
is  well.”  “I  was  dumb,  and 'opened  not  my 
mouth,  because  thou  didst  it.”  She  is  but 
gone  a little  before  you ; and  after  a few  more 


362 


LETTERS  TO  MRS. 


changes,  you  will  meet  her  again  to  un- 
speakable advantage,  and  rejoice  together 
before  the  throne  for  ever.  There  every 
tear  will  be  wiped  away,  and  you  shall  weep 
no  more.  The  Lord  could  have  prevented 
the  cause  of  her  great  sufferings;  but  I 
doubt  not  he  afflicted  her  in  wisdom  and 
mercy : he  could  easily  have  restored  her  to 
health ; but  the  time  was  hastening  when  he 
purposed  to  have  her  with  him  where  he  is, 
that  she  might  behold  his  glory,  and  have  all 
the  desires  he  put  into  her  heart  abundantly 
satisfied.  Precious  in  his  sight  is  the  death 
of  his  saints,  and  every  circumstance  is  un- 
der the  direction  of  infinite  wisdom.  His 
sovereignty  forbids  us  to  say,  Why  hast  thou 
done  this  1 and  his  love  assures  us  that  he 
does  all  things  well.  I have  lost  a friend 
likewise.  I believe  I may  say  few  persons 
not  immediately  related  to  her,  could  value 
her  more  highly  than  myself ; and  though  of 
late  years  I could  not  have  the  pleasure  of 
her  company,  it  was  a constant  satisfaction 
to  me  to  know  I had  such  a friend. 

Mr.  T ’s  sickness  and  death  followed 

immediately  upon  this  stroke.  I doubt  not 
but  you  have  been  much  affected  with  this 
dispensation  likewise.  But  here  again  we 
have  the  same  stronghold  to  retreat  to : the 
Lord  has  done  it.  What  a pleasing  prospect 
of  increasing  usefulness  is  now  interrupted ! 
How  many  will  mourn  his  loss ! Yet  we  are 
sure  the  work  which  the  Lord  had  appointed 
him  was  finished.  They  who  loved  his  mi- 
nistry, and  were  profited  by  it,  are  left,  appa- 
rently destitute ; but  Jesus,  the  good  Shep- 
herd, is  able  to  take  care  of  his  own,  and  will 
fulfil  his  promise  to  them  all.  He  has  said, 
Verily  they  shall  be  fed. 

We  have  had  trying  and  dying  times  here; 
half  my  time  almost  has  been  taken  up  with 
visiting  the  sick.  I have  seen  death  in  a variety 
of  forms,  and  have  had  frequent  occasion  of 
observing  how  insignificant  many  things  which 
are  now  capable  of  giving  us  pain  or  plea- 
sure, will  appear,  when  the  soul  is  brought 
near  to  the  borders  of  eternity.  All  the  con- 
cerns which  relate  solely  to  this  life,  will  then 
be  found  as  trivial  as  the  traces  of  a dream 
from  which  we  are  awakened.  Nothing  will 
then  comfort  us  but  the  knowledge  of  Jesus 
and  his  love ; nothing  grieve  us  but  the  re-  j 
membrance  of  our  unfaithful  carriage  to  him, 
and  what  poor  returns  we  made  to  his  abund- 
ant goodness.  The  Lord  forbid  that  this 
thought  should  break  our  peace  ! No,  faith  in 


[let.  VIII. 

his  name  may  forbid  our  fear,  though  we  shall 
see  and  confess  we  have  been  unprofitable 
servants.  There  shall  be  no  condemnation 
to  them  that  are  in  him ; but  surely  shame 
and  humiliation  will  accompany  us  to  the 
very  threshold  of  heaven,  and  ought  to  do  so. 
I surely  shall  then  be  more  affected  than  I 
am  now  with  the  coolness  of  my  love,  the 
faintness  of  my  zeal,  the  vanity  of  my  heart, 
and  my  undue  attachment  to  the  things  of 
time.  O these  clogs,  fetters,  vales,  and 
mountains,  which  obstruct  my  course,  darken 
my  views,  slacken  my  pace,  and  disable  me 
in  service.  Well  it  is  for  me  that  I am  not 
under  the  law,  but  under  grace. 

To-morrow  is  the  Sabbath.  I am  usually 
glad  when  it  returns,  though  it  seldom  finds 
me  in  that  frame  of  mind  which  I would  de- 
sire. But  it  is  my  happiness  to  live  amongst 
many  who  count  the  hours  from  one  ordinance 
to  another.  I know  they  pray  that  I may  be 
a messenger  of  peace,  and  an  instrument  of 
good  to  their  souls ; and  I have  cause  to  hope 
their  prayers  are  in  a measure  answered.  For 
their  sakes,  as  much  as  my  own,  I am  glad  to 
go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord.  O that  in 
watering  others,  I may  be  also  watered  my- 
self! I have  been  praying  that  to-morrow 
may  be  a day  of  power  with  you  and  with  us, 
and  with  all  that  love  Jesus  in  sincerity ; that 
we  may  see  his  glory,  and  taste  his  love  in 
the  sanctuary.  When  it  is  thus,  the  Sabbath 
is  a blessed  day  indeed,  an  earnest  of  heaven. 
There  they  keep  an  everlasting  Sabbath, 
and  cease  not  night  or  day  admiring  the 
riches  of  redeeming  love,  and  adoring  him 
who  washed  his  people  from  their  sins  in  his 
own  blood.  To  have  such  imperfect  commu- 
nion with  them  as  is  in  this  state  attainable  in 
this  pleasing  exercise  is  what  alone  can  make 
life  worth  the  name.  For  this  I sigh  and 
long  and  cry  to  the  Lord  to  rend  the  vail  of 
unbelief,  scatter  the  clouds  of  ignorance,  and 
break  down  the  walls  which  sin  is  daily 
building  up  to  hide  him  from  my  eyes.  I 
hope  I can  say,  my  soul  is  athirst  for  God, 
and  nothing  less  than  the  light  of  his  coun- 
tenance can  satisfy  me.  Blessed  be  his 
name  for  the  desire ; it  is  his  own  gift,  and 
he  never  gives  it  in  vain.  He  will  afford  U3 
a taste  of  the  water  of  life  by  the  way ; and 
ere  long  we  shall  drink  abundantly  at  the 
fountain  head,  and  have  done  with  complaint 
for  ever.  May  we  be  thankful  for  what  we 
receive,  and  still  earnestly  desirous  of  more 
— I am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO  MISS  D 


LETTER  I. 

August  — , 1772. 

y dear  miss, — The  Lord  brought  us 

home  in  peace.  My  visit  to  was 

agreeable,  and  I shall  often  think  of  it  with 
pleasure,  though  the  deadness  and  dryness 
of  my  own  spirit  a good  part  of  the  time  I 
was  there  proved  a considerable  abatement. 
[ am  eager  enough  to  converse  with  the 
Lord’s  people,  when  at  the  same  time  I am 
backward  and  indisposed  to  communion  with 
the  Lord  himself.  The  two  evils  charged 
upon  Israel  of  old,  a proneness  to  forsake  the 
fountain  of  living  waters  and  to  trust  to  bro- 
ken cisterns  (which  can  do  me  no  good  un- 
less he  supplies  them,)  run  through  the  whole 
of  my  experience  abroad  and  at  home.  A 
few  drops  of  grace  in  my  fellow  worms  en- 
dear them  to  me  exceedingly.  If  I expect 
to  see  any  Christian  friends,  I count  the 
hours  till  we  meet,  and  promise  myself  great 
benefit;  but  if  the  Lord  withdraws  his  in- 
fluence, the  best  of  them  prove  to  me  but 
clouds  without  water.  It  was  not,  however, 
wholly  so  with  me  all  the  time  I staid  with 
my  friends,  but  I suffer  much  in  learning  to 
depend  upon  the  Lord  alone.  I have  been 
at  this  lesson  many  a long  year,  but  am  so 
poor  and  dull  a scholar,  that  I have  not  yet 
made  any  tolerable  progress  in  it.  I think 
I received  some  instruction  and  advantage 
where  I little  expected  it;  I mean  at  Mr. 
Cox’s  Museum.  The  efforts  of  his  ingenuity 
amazed  me,  while  at  the  same  time  I was 
struck  with  their  insignificance.  His  fine 
things  were  curious  beyond  all  that  I had 
any  idea  of ; and  yet,  what  are  they  better 
than  toys  and  amusement,  suited  to  the  taste 
of  children ! And  notwithstanding  the  va- 
riety of  their  motions  they  were  all  destitute 
of  life.  There  is  unspeakably  more  wisdom 
and  contrivance  in  the  mechanism  of  a but- 
terfly or  a bee,  that  flies  unnoticed  in  the 
fields,  than  in  all  his  apparatus  put  together. 
But  the  works  of  God  are  disregarded,  while 


the  feeble  imitations  of  them  which  men  can 
produce  gain  universal  applause. 

If  you  and  I could  make  self-moving  dra- 
gons and  elephants,  what  would  it  profit  us! 
Blessed  be  God,  that  he  has  given  us  some 
glimpses  of  his  wisdom  and  love,  by  which 
our  hearts,  more  hard  and  lifeless  by  nature 
than  the  stones  in  the  streets,  are  constrain- 
ed and  enabled  to  move  upwards,  and  to 
seek  after  the  Lord  He  has  given  us  in  his 
word  a greater  treasure  than  all  that  we 
ever  beheld  with  our  eyes,  and  a hope  which 
shall  flourish  when  the  earth  and  all  its 
works  shall  be  burnt  up.  What  will  all  the 
fine  things  of  men’s  device  be  worth  in  that 
day ! 

I think  the  passage  you  refer  to  in  Mr. 

justly  exceptionable.  His  intention  is 

good,  and  the  mistake  he  would  censure  very 
dangerous,  but  he  might  have  explained  him- 
self more  clearly.  I apprehend  he  and  you 
do  not  mean  the  same  thing  by  being  in  the 
dark.  It  is  not  an  uncomfortable,  but  a 
careless  frame  which  he  would  censure.  They 
who  walk  in  darkness  and  see  no  light,  and 
yet  are  exhorted  to  stay  themselves  upon  God 
(Isa..  1.  10,)  are  said  to  hearken  to  the  voice 
of  his  servant.  Though  they  cannot  see  the 
Lord,  they  are  seeking  and  mourning  after 
him,  and  waiting  in  the  use  of  means,  and 

warring  against  sin.  Mr. had  another 

set  of  people  in  view,  who  trust  in  the  no- 
tions of  gospel-truth,  or  some  past  convictions 
and  comforts,  though  at  present  they  give  no 
evidence  of  spiritual  desires,  but  are  worldly 
in  their  spirit  and  conversation  ; talk  of  trust- 
ing in  the  Lord ; account  it  a weakness  to 
doubt  of  their  state,  and  think  all  is  well  be- 
cause they  profess  to  believe  the  doctrines  of 
grace.  In  a word,  it  is  the  darkness  of  sin 
and  sloth  against  which  his  observation  is 
pointed.  Or  if,  indeed,  he  meant  more  than 
this,  we  are  not  obliged  to  believe  him.  Re- 
member your  privilege;  you  have  the  Bible 
in  your  hands,  and  are  not  bound  to  follow 
books  or  preachers  anv  farther  than  whai 
363 


364 


LETTERS  TO  MISS  D 


they  deliver  agrees  with  the  oracles  of  truth. 
W » have  great  reason  to  be  thankful  for  the 
instructions  and  writings  of  spiritual  men, 
but  they  are  all  fallible  even  as  ourselves. 
One  is  our  master,  even  Christ:  what  he 
says  we  are  to  receive  implicitly;  but  we 
do  not  owe  implicit  subjection  to  the  best  of 
our  fellow-creatures.  The  Bereans  were 
commended  that  they  would  not  take  even 
the  apostle  Paul  upon  trust,  but  searched  the 
scriptures  to  see  whether  these  things  were 
so.  May  the  Lord  give  us  a spirit  of  hu- 
mility and  discernment  in  all  things! — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

May  4,  1773. 

Methinks  it  is  high  time  to  ask  you  how 
you  do,  to  thank  you  for  your  last  letter,  and 
to  let  you  know,  that  though  necessity  makes 
me  slack  in  writing,  yet  I can  and  do  often 
think  of  you.  My  silence  has  sometimes  been 
owing  to  want  of  leisure;  and  sometimes 
when  I could  have  found  leisure,  my  harp 
has  been  out  of  tune,  and  I had  no  heart  to 
write.  Perhaps  you  are  ready  to  infer,  by 
my  sitting  down  to  write  at  last,  that  my  harp 
is  now  well-tuned,  and  I have  something  ex- 
traordinary to  offer  : beware  of  thinking  so, 
lest  you  should  be  sadly  disappointed.  Should 
I make  myself  the  subject,  I could  give  you 
at  present  but  a mournful  ditty.  I suppose 
you  have  heard  I have  been  ill : through 
mercy  I am  now  well.  But  indeed  I must 
farther  tell  you,  that  when  I was  sick  I was 
well;  and  since  the  Lord  has  removed  my 
illness,  I have  been  much  worse.  My  illness 
was  far  from  violent  in  itself,  and  was  greatly 
sweetened  by  a calm  submissive  frame  the 
Lord  gave  me  under  it.  My  heart  seemed 
more  alive  to  him  then  than  it  has  done  since 
my  cough,  fever,  and  deafness  have  been 
removed.  Shall  I give  you  another  bit  of 
a riddle,  that,  notwithstanding  the  many 
changes  I pass  through,  I am  always  the 
same  1 This  is  the  very  truth : “ In  me,  that 
is,  in  my  flesh,  dwelleth  no  good  thing ;”  so 
that,  if  sometimes  my  spirit  is  in  a measure 
humble,  lively,  and  dependent,  it  is  not  be- 
cause I am  grown  better  than  I was,  but  the 
Lord  is  pleased  to  put  forth  his  gracious 
power  in  my  weakness ; and  when  my  heart 
is  dry  and  stupid,  when  I can  find  no  pleasure 
in  waiting-  upon  God,  it  is  not  because  lam 
worse  than  I was  before,  but  only  the  Lord 
sees  it  best  that  I should  feel  as  well  as  say 
what  a poor  creature  I am.  My  heart  was 
once  like  a dungeon,  out  of  the  reach  of  day, 
and  always  dark:  the  Lord,  by  his  grace, 
has  been  pleased  to  make  this  dungeon  a 
room,  by  putting  windows  in  it;  but  I need 
not  tell  you,  that  though  windows  will  trans- 


[let.  II. 

mit  the  day-light  into  a room,  they  cannoi 
supply  the  want  of  it.  When  the  day  is 
gone,  windows  are  of  little  use:  when  the 
day  returns,  the  room  is  enlightened  by  them 
again.  Thus,  unless  the  Lord  shines,  I can- 
not retain  to-day  the  light  I had  yesterday ; 
and  though  his  presence  makes  a delightful 
difference,  I have  no  more  to  boast  of  in  my- 
self at  one  time  than  another ; yet  vvhon  it  is 
dark,  I am  warranted  to  expect  the  return  of 
light  again.  When  he  is  with  me,  all  goes 
on  pleasantly;  when  he  withdraws,  I find  1 
can  do  nothing  without  him.  I need  not 
wonder  that  I find  it  so,  for  it  must  be  so  of 
course,  if  I am  what  I confess  myself  to  be, 
a poor,  helpless,  sinful  creature  in  myself. 
Nor  need  I be  over-much  discouraged,  since 
the  Lord  has  promised  to  help  those  who  can 
do  nothing  without  him,  not  those  who  can 
make  a tolerable  shift  to  help  themselves. 
Through  mercy  he  does  not  so  totally  with- 
draw, as  to  leave  me  without  any  power  or 
will  to  cry  for  his  return.  I hope  he  main- 
tains in  me  at  all  times  a desire  of  his  pre- 
sence ; yet  it  becomes  me  to  wait  for  him 
with  patience,  and  to  live  upon  his  faithful- 
ness, when  I can  feel  nothing  but  evil  in 
myself. 

In  your  letter,  after  having  complained  of 
your  inability,  you  say,  you  converse  with 
many  who  find  it  otherwise,  who  can  go 
whenever  they  will  to  the  Father  of  mercies 
with  a child-like  confidence,  and  never  return 
without  an  answer,  an  answer  of  peace.  If 
they  only  mean  that  they  are  favoured  w;th 
an  established  faith,  and  can  see  that  the 
Lord  is  always  the  same,  and  that  their  right 
to  the  blessings  of  the  covenant  is  not  at  all 
affected  by  their  unworthiness,  I wish  you 
and  I had  more  experience  of  the  same  pri- 
vilege. In  general,  the  Lord  helps  me  tc 
aim  at  it,  though  I find  it  sometimes  difficult 
to  hold  fast  my  confidence.  But  if  they  speak 
absolutely  with  respect  to  their  frames,  that 
they  not  only  have  something  to  support 
them  under  their  changes,  but  meet  with  nr 
changes  that  require  such  support,  I must 
say,  it  is  well  that  they  do  not  live  here ; if 
they  did,  they  would  not  know  how  to  pity 
us,  and  we  should  not  know  how  to  under- 
stand them.  We  have  an  enemy  at 

that  fights  against  our  peace,  and  I know  not 
one  amongst  us  but  often  groans  under  the 
warfare.  I advise  you  not  to  be  troubled  by 
what  you  hear  of  other  folks’  experience,  but 
keep  dose  to  the  written  word,  where  you 
will  meet  with  much  to  encourage  you, 
though  you  often  feel  yourself  weary  and 
heavy  laden.  For  my  own  part,  I like 
that  path  best  which  is  well  beaten  by 
the  foot-steps  of  the  flock,  though  it  is 
not  always  pleasant,  and  strewed  with 
flowers.  In  our  way,  we  find  some  hills, 
from  whence  we  can  cheerfully  look  about 
,us;  but  we  meet  with  deep  valleys  like- 


LET.  TV.  J 


LETTERS  TO  MISS  D 


365 


wise,  and  seldom  travel  long1  upon  even 
ground. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

1775. 

I am  satisfied  with  your  answer  to  my 
question : we  are  not  proper  judges  of  each 
other’s  circumstances,  and  I am  in  some 
measure  weaned  from  judging  hastily,  that 
what  would  not  be  convenient  for  me,  must 
therefore  necessarily  be  wrong  for  another. 
However,  my  solicitude  for  your  welfare 
made  me  venture  to  drop  a hint,  as  I was 
persuaded  you  would  take  it  in  good  part. 
Indeed,  all  situations  and  circumstances  (sup- 
posing them  not  sinful  in  themselves,  and 
that  we  are  lawfully  placed  in  them)  are 
nearly  alike.  In  London  I am  in  a crowd ; 
;n  the  country  I am  sure  there  is  a crowd  in 
,ie.  To  what  purpose  do  I boast  of  retire- 
ment, when  I am  pestered  by  a legion  in 
every  place 7 How  often,  when  I am  what 
I call  alone,  may  my  mind  be  compared  to  a 
puppet-show,  a fair,  a Newgate,  or  any  of 
those  scenes  where  folly,  noise,  and  wicked- 
ness most  abound  1 On  the  contrary,  some- 
times I have  enjoyed  sweet  recollection  and 
composure  where  I could  have  hardly  ex- 
pected it.  But  still,  though  the  power  be  all 
of  the  Lord,  and  we  of  ourselves  can  do 
nothing,  it  is  both  our  duty  and  our  wisdom 
to  be  attentive  to  the  use  of  appointed  means 
on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other,  watchful 
against  those  things  which  we  find,  by  ex- 
perience, have  a tendency  to  damp  our 
fervour,  or  to  dissipate  our  spirits.  A com- 
fortable intimacy  with  a fellow-worm  cannot 
be  maintained  without  a certain  delicacy  and 
circumspection,  a studiousness  in  improving 
opportunities  of  pleasing,  and  in  avoiding 
what  is  known  to  be  offensive.  For  though 
love  will  make  large  allowances  for  involun- 
tary mistakes,  it  cannot  easily  brook  a slight. 
We  act  thus  as  it  were  by  instinct  towards 
those  whom  we  dearly  love,  and  to  whom  we 
feel  ourselves  greatly  obliged:  and  happy  are 
they  who  are  most  influenced  by  this  senti- 
ment in  their  walk  before  the  Lord.  But, 
alas ! here  we  are  chargeable  with  such  in- 
consistencies as  we  should  be  greatly  ashamed 
of  in  common  life.  And  well  it  is  for  us  that 
the  Lord’s  thoughts  and  ways  are  above  ours, 
and  that  he  is  infinite  in  mercy  as  well  as  in 
power;  for  surely  our  dearest  friends  would 
have  been  weary  of  us,  and  have  renounced 
us  long  ago,  had  we  behaved  to  them  as  we 
have  too  often  done  to  him.  Tie  is  God,  and 
not  man,  and  therefore  he  still  waits  to  be 
gracious,  though  we  have  so  often  trifled  with 
him.  Surely  we  may  well  say  with  the 
prophet,  “ Who  is  a God  like  unto  thee,  that 
pardoneth  iniquity !”  His  tenderness  and  for- 


bearance towards  his  own  people  (whose  sins 
being  committed  against  love,  and  light,  and 
experience,  are  more  aggravated  than  others) 
is  astonishing  indeed.  But  oh ! may  the  times 
past  suffice  to  have  grieved  his  Spirit,  and 
may  we  be  enabled  from  henceforth  to  serve 
him  with  a single  eye  and  a simple  heart,  to 
be  faithful  to  every  intimation  of  his  will,  and 
to  make  him  our  all  in  all ! 

Mr. has  been  here,  and  I have  been 

with  him  at since  his  return.  We  seem 

glad  to  be  together  when  we  can.  When  I 
am  with  him,  I feel  quite  at  home  and  at 
ease,  and  can  tell  him  (so  far  as  I dare  tell  a 
creature)  all  that  is  in  my  heart;  a plain  proof 
that  union  of  spirit  depends  no  more  upon  an 
exact  uniformity  of  sentiment  than  on  a uni- 
formity of  prayers;  for  in  some  points  of 
doctrine  we  differ  considerably;  but  I trust  I 
agree  with  him  in  the  views  I have  of  the  ex- 
cellency, suitableness,  and  sufficiency  of  the 
Saviour,  and  of  his  right  to  reign  without  a 
rival  in  the  hearts  of  his  redeemed  people. 
An  experimental  knowledge  of  Jesus,  as  the 
deliverer  from  sin  and  wrath,  and  the  author 
of  eternal  life  and  salvation  to  all  who  are  en- 
abled to  believe,  is  a sufficient  ground  for 
union  of  heart.  In  this  point,  all  who  ire 
taught  of  God  are  of  one  mind.  Buc  an 
eager  fighting  for  or  against  those  points 
which  are  usually  made  the  subject  of  con- 
troversy, tends  to  nourish  pride  and  evil 
tempers  in  ourselves,  and  to  alienate  our 
hearts  from  those  we  hope  to  spend  an  eternity 
with.  In  heaven,  we  shall  neither  be  Dis- 
senters, Moravians,  nor  Methodists;  neither 
Calvinists  nor  Arrninians ; but  followers  of 
the  Lamb,  and  children  of  the  kingdom. 
There  we  shall  hear  the  voice  of  war  no  more. 

We  are  still  favoured  with  health  and 
many  temporal  blessings.  My  spiritual  walk 
is  not  so  smooth  as  my  outward  path.  In 
public  I am  mercifully  supported  ; in  secret 
I most  sensibly  feel  my  own  vileness  and 
weakness ; but  through  all  the  Lord  is  gra- 
cious.— I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

January  10,  1775. 

There  is  hardly  any  thing  in  which  the 
Lord  permits  me  to  meet  with  more  disap- 
pointment, than  m the  advantage  I am  ready 
to  promise  myself  from  creature-converse. 
When  I expect  to  meet  any  of  my  Christian 
friends,  mj  loughts  usually  travel  much 
faster  than  my  body ; l anticipate  the  hour 
of  meeting,  and  my  imagination  is  warmed 
with  the  expectation  of  what  I shall  say  and 
what  I shall  hear;  and  sometimes  I have 
had  seasons  for  which  I ought  to  be  more 
thankful  than  I am.  It  is  pleasant,  indeed, 
when  the  Lord  favours  us  with  a happy  hour. 


366 


LETTERS  TO 

and  is  pleased  to  cause  our  hearts  to  burn 
wilhin  us  while  we  are  speaking1  of  his  good- 
ness. But  often  it  is  far  otherwise  with  me : 
t carry  with  me  a dissipation  of  spirit,  and 
find  that  I can  neither  impart  nor  receive. 
Something  from  within  or  from  without 
crosses  my  schemes;  and  when  I retire  I 
seem  to  have  gained  nothing  but  a fresh 
conviction,  that  we  can  neither  help  nor  be 
helped,  unless  the  Lord  himself  is  pleased  to 
help  us.  With  his  presence  in  our  hearts, 
we  might  be  comfortable  and  happy  though 
shut  up  in  one  of  the  cells  of  Newgate:  with- 
out it,  the  most  select  company,  the  most 
desirable  opportunities,  prove  but  clouds 
without  water. 

I have  sometimes  thought  of  asking  you, 
whether  you  find  that  difference  between  be- 
ing abroad  and  at  home  that  I do!  But  I 
take  it  for  granted  that  you  do  not:  your 
connexions  and  intimacies  are,  I believe, 
chiefly  with  those  who  are  highly  favoured 
of  the  Lord,  and  if  you  can  break  through 
or  be  upon  your  guard  against  the  inconve- 
niencies  which  attend  frequent  changes  and 
much  company,  you  must  be  very  happy  in 
them.  But,  I believe,  considering  my  weak- 
ness, the  Lord  has  chosen  wisely  and  well 
for  me,  in  placing  me  in  a state  of  retire- 
ment, and  not  putting  it  in  my  power,  were 
it  ever  so  much  my  inclination,  to  be  often 
abroad.  As  I stir  so  seldom,  I believe,  when 
I do,  it  is  not  upon  the  whole  to  my  disad- 
vantage; for  I meet  with  more  or  less  upon 
which  my  reflections  afterwards  may,  by  his 
blessing,  be  useful  to*me,  though  at  the  time 
my  visits  most  frequently  convince  me,  how 
little  wisdom  or  skill  I have  in  improving 
time  and  opportunities.  But  were  I to  live 
in  London,  I know  not  what  might  be  the 
consequence.  Indeed,  I need  not  puzzle  my- 
self about  it,  as  my  call  does  not  lie  there  ; 
but  I pity  and  pray  for  those  who  do  live 
there,  and  I admire  such  of  them  as,  in 
those  circumstances  which  appear  so  formi- 
dable to  me,  are  enabled  to  walk  simply, 
humbly,  and  closely  with  the  Lord.  They 
remind  me  of  Daniel,  unhurt  in  the  midsi 
of  lions,  or  of  the  bush  which  Moses  saw 
surrounded  with  flames,  yet  not  consumed, 
because  the  Lord  was  there.  Some  such  I do 
know,  and  I hope  you  are  one  of  the  number. 

This  is  certain,  that  if  the  light  of  God’s 
countenance,  and  communion  with  him  in 
love,  afford  the  greatest  happiness  we  are 
capable  of,  then  whatever  tends  to  indispose 
us  for  this  pursuit,  or  to  draw  a vail  between 
him  and  our  souls,  must  be  our  great  loss. 
If  we  walk  with  him,  it  must  be  in  the  path 
of  duty,  which  lies  plain  before  us  when  our 
eye  is  single,  and  we  are  waiting  with  atten- 
tion upon  his  word,  Spirit,  and  providence. 
Now,  wherever  the  path  of  duty  leads  we  are 
safe ; and  it  often  does  lead  and  place  us  in 
such  circumstances  as  no  other  consideration 


MISS  D . [let.  v. 

would  make  us  choose.  We  were  not  de- 
signed to  be  mere  recluses,  but  have  all  a 
part  to  act  in  life.  Now,  if  I find  myself  in 
the  midst  of  things  disagreeable  enough  in 
themselves  to  the  spiritual  life,  yet — if,  when 
the  question  occurs,  What  dost  thou  here : 
my  heart  can  answer,  I am  here  by  the  will 
of  God, — I believe  it  to  be,  all  things  consi- 
dered, my  duty  to  be  here  at  this  time  rather 
than  elsewhere.  If,  I say,  I am  tolerably 
satisfied  of  this,  then  I would  not  burden  and 
grieve  myself  about  what  I cannot  avoid  or 
alter,  but  endeavour  to  take  all  such  things 
up  with  cheerfulness,  as  a part  of  my  daily 
cross;  since  I am  called,  not  only  to  do  the 
will  of  God,  but  to  suffer  for  it ; but  if  I am 
doing  my  own  will  rather  than  his,  then  I 
have  reason  to  fear,  lest  I should  meet  with 
either  a snare  or  a sting  at  every  step.  May 
the  Lord  Jesus  be  with  you. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  V. 

April  13,  1776. 

dear  madam, — I am  rather  of  the  latest 
to  present  my  congratulations  to  you  and 

Mr. on  your  marriage,  but  I have  not 

been  unmindful  of  you.  My  heart  has  re- 
peatedly wished  you  all  that  my  pen  can  ex- 
press, that  the  new  relation  in  which  the 
providence  of  God  has  placed  you  may  be 
blessed  to  you  in  every  respect,  may  afford 
you  much  temporal  comfort,  promote  your 
spiritual  progress,  and  enlarge  your  sphere 
of  usefulness  in  the  world  and  in  the  church. 

By  this  time  I suppose  visits  and  ceremo- 
nies are  pretty  well  over,  and  you  are  be- 
ginning to  be  settled  in  your  new  situation. 
What  an  important  period  is  a wedding-day ! 
What  an  entire  change  of  circumstances 
does  it  produce!  What  an  influence  it  has 
upon  every  day  of  future  life ! How  many 
cares,  inquietudes,  and  trials,  does  it  expose 
us  to,  which  we  might  otherwise  have  avoid- 
ed! But  they  who  love  the  Lord,  and  are 
guided  by  his  word  and  providence,  have  no- 
thing to  fear;  for  in  every  state,  relation, 
and  circumstance  in  life,  he  will  be  with 
them,  and  will  surely  do  them  good.  His 
grace,  which  is  needful  in  a single,  is  suffi- 
cient for  a married  life.  I sincerely  wish 

Mr. and  you  much  happiness  together; 

that  you  may  be  mutually  helps  meet,  and 
assist  each  other  in  walking  as  fellow-heirs 
of  the  hope  of  eternal  life.  Your  cares  and 
trials,  I know,  must  be  increased ; may  your 
comforts  be  increased  proportionally ! They 
will  be  so,  if  you  are  enabled  heartily  and 
simply  to  entreat  the  Lord  to  keep  your 
heart  fixed  near  to  himself.  All  the  tempo- 
ral blessings  and  accommodations  he  pro- 
vides to  sweeten  life,  and  make  our  passage 
through  this  wilderness  more  agreeable,  will 


LETTERS  TO  MISS  D- 


367 


LET.  V.] 

fail  and  disappoint  us,  and  produce  us  more 
thorns  than  roses,  unless  we  can  keep  sight 
of  his  hand  in  bestowing  them,  and  hold  and 
use  the  gifts  in  some  due  subserviency  to 
what  we  owe  to  the  giver.  But  alas ! we 
are  poor  creatures,  prone  to  wander,  prone 
to  admire  our  gourds,  cleave  to  our  cisterns, 
and  think  of  building  tabernacles,  and  taking 
our  rest  in  this  polluted  world.  Hence  the 
Lord  often  sees  it  necessary,  in  mercy  to  his 
children,  to  embitter  their  sweets,  to  break 
their  cisterns,  to  send  a worm  to  their  gourds, 
and  to  draw  a dark  cloud  over  their  most 
pleasing  prospects.  His  word  tells  us,  that 
all  here  is  vanity,  compared  with  the  light 
of  his  countenance ; and  if  we  cannot,  or 
will  not,  believe  it  upon  the  authority  of  his 
word,  we  must  learn  it  by  experience.  May 
he  enable  you  to  settle  it  in  your  hearts,  that 
creature-comforts  are  precarious,  insufficient, 
and  ensnaring;  that  all  good  comes  from  his 
hand,  and  that  nothing  can  do  us  good,  but 
so  far  as  he  is  pleased  to  make  it  the  instru- 
ment of  communicating,  as  a stream,  that 
goodness  which  is  in  him  as  a fountain. 
Even  the  bread  which  we  eat,  without  the 
influence  of  his  promise  and  blessing,  would 
no  more  support  us  than  a stone;  but  his 
blessing  makes  every  thing  good,  gives  a 
tenfold  value  to  our  comforts,  and  greatly  di- 
minishes the  weight  of  every  cross. 

The  ring  upon  your  finger  is  of  some  value 
af  gold,  but  this  is  not  much;  what  makes 
it  chiefly  valuable  to  you  is,  that  you  consider 


it  as  a pledge  and  token  of  the  relation  you 
bear  to  him  who  gave  it  you.  I know  no 
fitter  emblem  of  the  light  in  which  we  should 
consider  all  those  good  things  which  the  Lord 
gives  us  richly  to  enjoy.  When  every  thing 
we  receive  from  him  is  received  and  prized 
as  a fruit  and  a pledge  of  his  covenant-love, 
then  his  bounties,  instead  of  being  set  up  as 
rivals,  and  idols  to  draw  our  hearts  from  him, 
awaken  us  to  fresh  exercises  of  gratitude, 
and  furnish  us  with  fresh  motives  of  cheerful 
obedience  every  hour. 

Time  is  short,  and  we  live  in  a dark  and 
cloudy  day.  When  iniquity  abounds,  the  love 
of  many  waxes  cold ; and  we  have  reason  to 
fear  the  Lord’s  hand  is  lifted  up  in  displea- 
sure at  our  provocations.  May  he  help  us  to 
sit  loose  to  all  below,  to  watch  unto  prayer 
for  grace  to  keep  our  garments  clean,  and  to 
be  faithful  witnesses  for  him  in  our  several 
places!  O,  it  is  my  desire  for  myself  and 
for  all  my  dear  friends,  that  whilst  too  many 
seem  content  witfi  a half  profession,  a name 
to  live,  an  outward  attachment  to  ordinances, 
and  sentiments,  and  parties,  we  may  be  am- 
bitious to  experience  what  the  glorious  gos- 
pel is  capable  of  effecting,  both  as  to  sancti- 
fication and  consolation,  in  this  state  of 
infirmity ; that  we  may  have  our  loins  gird- 
ed, and  our  lamps  burning,  and  by  our  sim- 
plicity and  spirituality  constrain  those  who 
know  us  to  acknowledge  that  we  have  been 
with  Jesus,  have  sat  at  his  feet,  and  drank 
of  his  Spirit. — I am.  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO  MRS.  H 


LETTER  I. 

Long  and  often  have  I thought  of  writing 
to  you  ; now  the  time  is  come.  May  the  Lord 
help  me  to  send  a word  in  season ! I know 
not  how  it  may  be  with  yoy,  but  he  does,  and 
to  him  I look  to  direct  my  thoughts  accord- 
ingly. I suppose  you  are  still  in  the  school 
of  the  cross,  learning  the  happy  art  of  extract- 
ing real  good  out  of  seeming  evil,  and  to  grow 
tall  by  stooping.  The  flesh  is  a sad  unto- 
ward dunce  in  this  school ; but  grace  makes 
the  spirit  willing  to  learn  by  suffering ; yea  it 
cares  not  what  it  endures,  so  sin  may  be  mor- 
tified, and  a conformity  to  the  image  of  Jesus 
be  increased.  Surely  when  we  see  the  most 
and  the  best  of  the  Lord’s  children  so  often  in 
heaviness,  and  when  we  consider  how  much 
he  loves  them,  and  what  he  has  done  and 
prepared  for  them,  we  may  take  it  for  granted 
that  there  is  a need-be  for  their  sufferings. 
For  it  would  be  easy  to  his  power,  and  not  a 
thousandth  part  of  what  his  love  intends  to  do 
for  them,  should  he  make  their  whole  life  here, 
from  the  hour  of  their  conversion  to  their  death, 
a continued  course  of  satisfaction  and  com- 
fort, without  any  thing  to  distress  them  from 
within  or  without.  But  were  it  so,  should  we 
not  miss  many  advantages'?  In  the  first  place, 
we  should  not  then  be  very  conformable  to 
our  Head,  nor  be  able  to  say,  As  he  was,  so 
are  we  in  this  world.  Methinks  a believer 
would  be  ashamed  to  be  so  utterly  unlike  his 
Lord.  What ! the  master  always  a man  of 
sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief,  and  the 
servant  always  happy  and  full  of  comfort ! 
Jesus  despised,  reproached,  neglected,  op- 
posed, and  betrayed,  and  his  people  admired 
and  caressed ; he  living  in  the  want  of  all 
things,  and  they  filled  with  abundance ; he 
sweating  blood  for  anguish,  and  they  stran- 
gers to  distress : how  unsuitable  would  these 
things  be  ! how  much  better  to  be  called  to  the 
honour  of  filling  up  the  measure  of  his  suffer- 
ings ! A cup  was  put  into  his  hand  on  our 
account,  and  his  love  engaged  him  to  drink 
it  for  us.  The  wrath  which  it  contained  he 
drank  wholly  himself,  but  he  left  us  a little 


affliction  to  taste,  that  we  might  pledge  him, 
and  remember  how  he  loved  us,  and  how 
much  more  he  endured  for  us  than  he  wiL 
ever  call  us  to  endure  for  him.  Again,  how 
could  we,  without  sufferings,  manifest  the 
nature  and  truth  of  gospel-grace  ? What 
place  should  we  then  have  for  patience,  sub- 
mission, meekness,  forbearance,  and  a readi- 
ness to  forgive,  if  we  had  nothing  to  try  us 
either  from  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  or  from  the 
hand  of  men.  A Christian  without  trials 
would  be  like  a mill  without  wind  or  water ; 
the  contrivance  and  design  of  the  wheel-work 
within  side  would  be  unnoticed  and  un- 
known, without  something  to  put  it  in  mo- 
tion from  without.  Nor  would  our  graces 
grow,  unless  they  were  called  out  to  exer- 
cise : the  difficulties  we  meet  with  not  only 
prove  but  strengthen  the  graces  of  the  Spirit. 
If  a person  was  always  to  sit  still,  without 
making  use  of  legs  or  arms,  he  would  proba- 
bly wholly  lose  the  power  of  moving  his 
limbs  at  last ; but  by  walking  and  working  he 
becomes  strong  and  active.  So,  in  a long 
course  of  ease,  the  powers  of  the  new  man 
would  certainly  languish:  the  soul  would 
grow  soft,  indolent,  cowardly,  and  faint ; and 
therefore  the  Lord  appoints  his  children  such 
dispensations  as  make  them  strive,  and  strug- 
gle, and  pant.  They  must  press  through  a 
crowd,  swim  against  a stream,  endure  hard- 
ships, run,  wrestle,  and  fight;  and  thus  their 
strength  grows  in  the  using. 

By  these  things,  likewise,  they  are  made 
more  willing  to  leave  the  present  world,  to 
which  we  are  prone  to  cleave  too  closely  in 
our  hearts  when  our  path  is  very  smooth. 
Had  Israel  enjoyed  their  former  peace  and 
prosperity  in  Egypt,  when  Moses  came  to 
invite  them  to  Canaan,  I think  they  would 
hardly  have  listened  to  him.  But  the  Lord 
suffered  them  to  be  brought  into  great  trou- 
ble and  bondage,  and  then  the  news  of  deli- 
verance was  more  welcome ; yet  still  they 
were  but  half  willing,  and  they  carried  a love 
to  the  flesh-pots  of  Egypt  with  them  into  the 
wilderness.  We  are  like  them  : though  we 
say  this  world  is  vain  and  sinful  we  are  toe 


let.  ii.]  LETTERS  TO 

fond  of  it ; and  though  we  hope  for  true  hap- 
piness only  in  heaven,  we  are  often  well  con- 
tent to  stay  longer  here.  But  the  Lord  sends 
afflictions  one  after  another  to  quicken  our 
desires,  and  to  convince  us  that  this  cannot 
be  our  rest.  Sometimes,  if  you  drive  a bird 
from  one  branch  of  a tree,  he  will  hop  to  an- 
other a little  higher,  and  from  thence  to  a 
third  ; but  if  you  continue  to  disturb  him,  he 
will  at  last  take  wing  and  fly  quite  away. 
Thus  we,  when  forced  from  one  creature- 
comfort,  perch  upon  another,  and  so  on  ; 
but  the  Lord  mercifully  follows  us  with  trials, 
and  will  not  let  us  rest  upon  any.  By  de- 
grees our  desires  take  a nobler  flight,  and 
can  be  satisfied  with  nothing  short  of  him- 
self ; and  wre  say,  To  depart  and  be  with  Jesus 
is  best  of  all. 

I trust  you  find  the  name  and  grace  of 
Jesus  more  and  more  precious  to  you ; his 
promises  more  sweet,  and  your  hope  in  them 
more  abiding  ; your  sense  of  your  own  'weak- 
ness and  unworthiness  daily  increasing ; and 
your  persuasion  of  his  all-sufficiency  to  guide, 
support,  and  comfort  you,  more  confirmed. 
You  owe  your  growth  in  these  respects  in  a 
great  measure  to  his  blessing  upon  those  af- 
flictions which  he  has  prepared  for  you,  and 
sanctified  to  you.  May  you  praise  him  for 
all  that  is  past,  and  trust  him  for  all  that  is  to 
come. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

Though  I have  the  pleasure  of  hearing  of 
you,  and  sending  a remembrance  from  time 
to  time,  I am  willing,  by  this  opportunity,  to 
direct  a few  lines  to  you,  as  a more  express 
testimony  of  my  sincere  regard. 

I think  your  experience  is  generally  of  the 
fearful,  doubting  cast.  Such  souls,  howrever, 
the  Lord  has  given  particular  charge  to  his 
ministers  to  comfort;  He  knows  our  infirm- 
ities, and  what  temptations  mean,  and  as  a 
good  shepherd  he  expresses  a peculiar  care 
and  tenderness  for  the  weak  of  the  flock, 
Isaiah  xl.  4.  But  how  must  I attempt  your 
comfort  1 Surely  not  by  strengthening  a mis- 
take to  which  we  are  all  too  liable,  by  lead- 
ing you  to  look  into  your  own  heart  for 
(what  you  will  never  find  there)  something 
in  yourself  whereon  to  ground  your  hopes,  if 
not  wholly,  yet  at  least  in  part.  Rather  let 
me  endeavour  to  lead  you  out  of  yourself ; 
let  me  invite  you  to  look  unto  Jesus.  Should 
we  look  for  light  in  our  own  eyes,  or  in  the 
sun  ? Is  it  indwelling  sin  distresses  you? 
Then  I can  tell  you  (though  you  know  it) 
that  Jesus  died  for  sin  and  sinners.  I can 
tell  you,  that  his  blood  and  righteousness  are 
of  infinite  value ; that  his  arm  is  almighty, 
and  his  compassions  infinite ; yea,  you  your- 
self read  his  promises  every  day,  and  why 


MRS.  H . 369 

should  you  doubt  their  being  fulfilled  ? If  you 
say  you  do  not  question  their  truth,  or  that 
they  are  accomplished  to  many,  but  that  you 
can  hardly  believe  they  belong  to  you; 
I would  ask,  what  evidence  you  would  re- 
quire 1 A voice  or  an  angel  from  heaven  you 
do  not  expect.  Consider,  if  many  of  the 
promises  are  not  expressly  directed  to  those 
to  whom  they  belong.  When  you  read 
your  name  on  the  superscription  of  this 
letter,  you  make  no  scruple  to  open  it : why, 
then,  do  you  hesitate  at  embracing  the  pro- 
mises of  the  gospel,  where  you  read  that  they 
are  addressed  to  those  who  mourn,  who  hun- 
ger and  thirst  after  righteousness,  who  are 
poor  in  spirit,  &e.  and  cannot  but  be  sensible 
that  a gracious  God  has  begun  to  work  these 
dispositions  in  your  heart ! If  you  say,  that 
though  you  do  at  times  mourn,  hunger,  &c. 
you  are  afraid  you  do  it  not  enough,  or  not 
aright ; consider,  that  this  sort  of  reasoning 
is  very  far  from  the  spirit  and  language  of 
the  gospel ; for  it  is  grounded  on  a secret  sup- 
position, that  in  the  forgiveness  of  sin  God 
has  a respect  to  something  more  than  the 
atonement  and  mediation  of  Jesus  ; namely, 
to  some  previous  good  qualifications  in  a sin- 
ner’s heart,  which  are  to  share  with  the  blood 
of  Christ  in  the  honour  of  salvation.  The 
enemy  deceives  us  in  this  matter  the  more 
easily,  because  a propensity  to  the  covenant 
of  works  is  a part  of  our  natural  depravity. 
Depend  upon  it,  you  will  never  have  a suit- 
able and  sufficient  sense  of  the  evil  of  sin, 
and  of  your  share  in  it,  so  long  as  you  have 
any  sin  remaining  in  you.  We  must  see 
Jesus  as  he  is,  before  our  apprehensions  of 
any  spiritual  truth  will  be  complete.  But 
if  we  know  that  we  must  perish  without 
Christ,  and  that  he  is  able  to  save  to  the  ut- 
termost, we  know  enough  to  warrant  us  to 
cast  our  souls  upon  him,  and  we  dishonour 
him  by  fearing  that  when  we  do  so  he  will 
disappoint  our  hope.  But  if  you  are  still 
perplexed  about  the  high  points  of  election, 
&c.  I would  advise  you  to  leave  the  disposal 
of  others  to  the  great  Judge;  and  as  to  your- 
self, I think  I need  not  say  much  to  persuade 
you,  that  if  ever  you  are  saved  at  all,  it  must 
be  in  a way  of  free  and  absolute  grace.  Leave 
disputes  to  others ; wait  upon  the  Lord,  and 
he  will  teach  you  all  things,  in  such  degree 
and  time  as  he  sees  best.  Perhaps  you  have 
suffered  for  taking  things  too  much  upon  trust 
from  men.  Cease  from  man,  whose  breath  is 
in  his  nostrils.  One  is  your  master,  even 
Christ.  Study  and  pray  over  the  Bible ; and 
you  may  take  it  as  a sure  rule,  that  whatever 
sentiment  makes  any  part  of  the  word  of  God 
unwelcome  to  you,  is  justly  to  be  suspected. 
Aim  at  a cheerful  spirit.  The  more  you 
trust  God,  the  better  you  will  serve  him. 
While  you  indulge  unbelief  and  suspicion, 
you  weaken  your  own  hands,  and  discourage 
others.  Be  thankful  for  what  he  has  shown 


370 


LETTERS  TO  MRS.  H . 


you,  and  wait  upon  him  for  more ; you  shall 
find  he  has  not  said,  “ Seek  ye  my  face  in 
vain.”  I heartily  commend  you  to  his  grace 
and  care,  and  am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

At  length,  and  without  farther  apology  for 
my  silence,  I sit  down  to  ask  you,  how  you 
fare  1 Afflictions  I hear  have  been  your  lot; 
and  if  I had  not  heard  so,  I should  have  taken 
it  for  granted,  for  I believe  the  Lord  loves 
ou,  and  as  many  as  he  loves  he  chastens, 
think  you  can  say  afflictions  have  been  good 
for  you,  and  I doubt  not  but  you  have  found 
strength  according  to  your  day;  so  that 
though  you  may  have  been  sharply  tried,  you 
have  not  been  overpowered.  For  the  Lord 
has  engaged  his  faithfulness  for  this  to  all  his 
children,  that  he  will  support  them  in  all  their 
trials,  so  that  the  fire  shall  not  consume  them 
nor  the  floods  drown  them,  1 Cor.  x.  13;  Isa. 
xliii.  2. 

If  you  can  say  thus  much,  cannot  you  go  a 
little  further,  and  add,  in  the  apostle’s  words, 
“None  of  these  things  move  me,  neither 
count  I my  life  dear.  I rather  glory  in  my 
infirmities,  that  the  power  of  Christ  may  rest 
upon  me;  yea,  doubtless,  I count  all  things 
loss  and  of  no  regard,  for  the  excellency  of 
the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord ; for 
when  I am  weak,  then  am  I strong.”  Me- 
thinks  I hear  you  say,  “ God,  who  comforteth 
those  who  are  cast  down,  has  comforted  my 
soul;  and  as  my  troubles  have  abounded,  my 
consolations  in  Christ  have  abounded  also. 
He  has  delivered,  he  does  deliver,  and  in  him 
I trust  that  he  will  yet  deliver  me.”  Surely 
you  can  set  your  seal  to  these  words.  The 
Lord  help  you,  then,  to  live  more  and  more 
a life  of  faith,  to  feed  upon  the  promises,  and 
to  rejoice  in  the  assurance  that  all  things  are 
yours,  and  shall  surely  work  for  your  good. 
If  T guess  right  at  what  passes  in  your 


[let.  III. 

heart,  the  name  of  Jesus  is  precious  to  you, 
and  this  is  a sure  token  of  salvation,  and  that 
of  God.  You  could  not  have  loved  hirn  if  he 
had  not  loved  you  first.  He  spoke  to  you, 
and  said,  “ Seek  my  face,”  before  your  heart 
cried  to  him  “Thy  face,  O Lord,  will  I seek.” 
But  you  complain,  “ Alas ! I love  him  so 
little.”  That  very  complaint  proves  that  you 
love  him  a great  deal,  for  if  you  loved  him 
but  a little  you  would  think  you  loved  him 
enough.  A mother  loves  her  child  a great 
deal,  yet  does  not  complain  for  not  loving  it 
more,  nay,  perhaps,  she  hardly  thinks  it 
possible.  But  such  an  infinite  object  is  Jesus, 
that  they  who  love  him  better  than  parents 
or  child,  or  any  earthly  relation  or  comfort, 
will  still  think  they  hardly  love  him  at  all, 
because  they  see  such  a vast  disproportion 
between  the  utmost  they  can  give  him  and 
what  in  himself  he  deserves  from  them.  But 
I can  give  you  good  advice  and  good  news : 
love  him  as  well  as  you  can  now,  and  ere 
long  you  shall  love  him  better.  O,  when  you 
see  him  as  he  is,  then  I am  sure  you  will 
love  him  indeed ! If  you  want  to  love  him 
better  now  while  you  are  here,  I believe  I can 
tell  you  the  secret  how  this  is  to  be  attained : 
trust  him.  The  more  you  trust  him  the  better 
you  will  love  him.  If  you  ask  farther,  How 
shall  I do  to  trust  him  1 I answer,  Try  him. 
The  more  you  make  trial  of  him,  the  more 
your  trust  in  him  will  be  strengthened. 
Venture  upon  his  promises;  carry  them  to 
him,  and  see  if  he  will  not  be  as  good  as  hi? 
word.  But,  alas ! Satan  and  unbelief  work 
the  contrary  way.  We  are  unwilling  to  try 
him,  and  therefore  unable  to  trust  him ; and 
what  wonder,  then,  that  our  love  is  faint,  for 
who  can  love  at  uncertainties  1 

If  you  are  in  some  measure  thankful  for 
what  you  have  received,  and  hungering  and 
thirsting  for  more,  you  are  in  the  frame  1 
would  wish  for  myself,  and  I desire  to  praise 
the  Lord  on  your  behalf.  Pray  for  us.  W t 
join  in  love  to  you. — I am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO  MISS  P- 


LETTER  I. 

August  17,  1776. 

It  is  indeed  natural  to  us  to  wish  and  to 
plan,  and  it  is  merciful  in  the  Lord  to  disap- 
point our  plans,  and  to  cross  our  wishes.  For 
we  cannot  be  safe,  much  less  happy,  but  in 
proportion  as  we  are  weaned  from  our  own 
wills,  and  made  simply  desirous  of  being  di- 
rected by  his  guidance.  This  truth,  when 
we  are  enlightened  by  his  word,  is  sufficiently 
familiar  to  the  judgment,  but  we  seldom  learn 
to  reduce  it  into  practice,  without  being  trained 
a while  in  the  school  of  disappointment.  The 
schemes  we  form  look  so  plausible  and  con- 
venient, that  when  they  are  broken  we  are 
ready  to  say,  What  a pity  ! We  try  again, 
and  with  no  better  success ; we  are  grieved, 
and  perhaps  angry,  and  plan  out  another,  and 
so  on : at  length,  in  a course  of  time,  ex- 
perience and  observation  begin  to  convince 
us  that  we  are  not  more  able  than  we  are 
worthy  to  choose  aright  for  ourselves.  Then 
the  Lord’s  invitation  to  cast  our  cares  upon 
him,  and  his  promise  to  take  care  of  us, 
appear  valuable;  and  when  we  have  done 
planning,  his  plan  in  our  favour  gradually 
opens,  and  he  does  more  and  better  for  us  than 
we  could  either  ask  or  think.  I can  hardly 
recollect  a single  plan  of  mine  of  which  I have 
not  since  seen  reason  to  be  satisfied,  that  had 
it  taken  place  in  season  and  circumstance 
just  as  I proposed,  it  would,  humanly  speak- 
ing, have  proved  my  ruin,  or  at  least  it  would 
have  deprived  me  of  the  greater  good  the 
Lord  had  designed  for  me.  We  judge  of 
things  by  their  present  appearances,  but  the 
Lord  sees  them  in  their  consequences.  If 
we  could  do  so  likewise,  we  should  be  per- 
fectly of  his  mind,  but  as  we  cannot,  it  is  an 
unspeakable  mercy  that  he  will  manage  for 
us,  whether  we  are  pleased  with  his  manage- 
ment or  not;  and  it  is  spoken  of  as  one  of  his 
heaviest  judgments,  when  he  gives  any  person 
or  people  up  to  the  way  of  their  own  hearts, 
and  to  walk  after  their  own  counsels. 

Indeed,  we  may  admire  his  patience  to- 


wards us.  If  we  were  blind,  anc?  reduced  to 
desire  a person  to  lead  us,  and  should  yet 
pretend  to  dispute  with  him,  and  direct  him 
at  every  step,  we  should  probably  soon  weary 
him,  and  provoke  him  to  leave  us  to  find  the 
way  by  ourselves  if  we  could.  But  our  gra- 
cious Lord  is  long-suffering  and  full  of  com- 
passion: he  bears  with  our  frowardness,  yet 
he  will  take  methods  both  to  shame  and  to 
humble  us,  and  to  bring  us  to  a confession 
that  he  is  wiser  than  we.  The  great  and  un- 
expected benefit  he  intends  us,  by  all  the  dis- 
cipline we  meet  with,  is  to  tread  down  our 
wills,  and  bring  them  into  subjection  to  his. 
So  far  as  we  attain  to  this,  we  are  out  of  the 
reach  of  disappointment,  for  when  the  will 
of  God  can  please  us,  we  shall  be  pleased 
every  day,  and  from  morning  to  night,  I 
mean  with  respect  to  his  dispensations.  O 
the  happiness  of  such  a life ! I have  an  idea 
of  it:  I hope  I am  aiming  at  it,  but  surely  I 
have  not  attained  it.  Self  is  active  in  my 
heart,  if  it  does  not  absolutely  reign  there. 
I profess  to  believe  that  one  thing  is  needful 
and  sufficient,  and  yet  my  thoughts  are  prone 
to  wander  after  a hundred  more.  If  it  be 
true  that  the  light  of  his  countenance  is  bet- 
ter than  life,  why  am  I solicitous  about  any 
thing  elsel  If  he  be  all-sufficient,  and  gives 
me  liberty  to  call  him  mine,  why  do  I go 
a-begging  to  creatures  for  help?  If  he  be 
about  my  path  and  bed ; if  the  smallest,  as 
well  as  the  greatest  events  in  which  I am 
concerned  are  under  his  immediate  direction ; 
if  the  very  hairs  of  my  head  are  numbered ; 
then  my  care  (any  farther  than  a care  to  walk 
in  the  paths  of  his  precepts,  and  to  follow  the 
openings  of  his  providence)  must  be  useless 
and  needless,  yea  indeed  sinful  and  heathen- 
ish, burdensome  to  myself  and  dishonourable 
to  my  profession.  Let  us  cast  down  the  load 
we  are  unable  to  carry,  and  if  the  Lord  be 
our  shepherd,  refer  all  and  trust  all  to  him. 
Let  us  endeavour  to  live  to  him  and  for  him 
to-day,  and  be  glad  that  to-morrow,  with  all 
that  is  behind  it,  is  in  his  hands. 

It  is  storied  of  Pompey,  that  when  his 
371 


872 


[let.  II. 


LETTERS  TO  MISS  P- 


friends  would  have  dissuaded  him  from  put- 
ting to  sea  in  a storm,  he  answered,  It  is 
necessary  for  me  to  sail,  but  it  is  not  neces- 
sary for  me  to  live.  O pompous  speech,  in 
Pompey’s  sense ! He  was  full  of  the  idea  of 
his  own  importance,  and  would  rather  have 
died  than  have  taken  a step  beneath  his  sup- 
posed dignity.  But  it  may  be  accommodated 
with  propriety  to  a believer’s  case.  It  be- 
comes us  to  say,  it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to 
be  rich,  or  what  the  world  accounts  wise ; to 
be  healthy,  or  admired  by  my  fellow- worms ; 
to  pass  through  life  in  a state  of  prosperity 
and  outward  comfort; — these  things  may  be, 
or  they  may  be  otherwise,  as  the  Lord  in  his 
wisdom  shall  appoint,  but  it  is  necessary  for 
me  to  be  humble  and  spiritual,  to  seek  com- 
munion with  God,  to  adorn  my  profession  of 
the  gospel,  and  to  yield  submissively  to  his 
disposal,  in  whatever  way,  whether  of  service 
or  suffering,  he  shall  be  pleased  to  call  me  to 
glorify  him  in  the  world : it  is  not  necessary 
for  me  to  live  long,  but  highly  expedient 
that  whilst  I do  live  I should  live  to  him. 
Here,  then,  I would  bound  my  desires,  and 
here,  having  his  word  both  for  my  rule  and 
my  warrant,  I am  secured  from  asking  amiss. 
Let  me  have  his  presence  and  his  Spirit, 
wisdom  to  know  my  calling,  and  opportuni- 
ties and  faithfulness  to  improve  them  ; and  as 
to  the  rest,  Lord,  help  me  to  say,  What  thou 
wilt,  when  thou  wilt,  and  how  thou  wilt. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

dear  mad\m, — What  a poor,  uncertain, 
dying  world  is  this ! What  a wilderness  in 
itself!  How  dark,  how  desolate,  without  the 
light  of  the  gospel  and  the  knowledge  of 
Jesus ! It  does  not  appear  so  to  us  in  a state 
of  nature,  because  we  are  then  in  a state  of 
enchantment,  the  magical  lantern  blinding 
us  with  a splendid  delusion. 

Thus  in  the  desert’s  dreary  waste, 

By  magic  power  produced  in  haste, 

As  old  romances  say, 

Castles  and  groves,  and  music  sweet, 

The  senses  of  the  trav’ller  cheat. 

And  stop  him  in  his  way. 


But  while  he  gazes  with  surprise, 

The  charm  dissolves,  the  vision  dies, 

’Twas  but  enchanted  ground : 

Thus,  if  the  Lord  our  spirit  touch, 

The  world,  which  promised  us  so  much, 

A wilderness  is  found. 

It  is  a great  mercy  to  be  undeceived  in 
time ; and  though  our  gay  dreams  are  at  an 
end,  and  we  awake  to  every  thing  that  is  dis- 
gustful and  dismaying,  yet  we  see  a highway 
through  the  wilderness,  a powerful  guard,  an 
infallible  guide  at  hand  to  conduct  us  through ; 
and  we  can  discern,  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
wilderness,  a better  land,  where  we  shall  be 
at  rest  and  at  home.  What  will  the  difficul- 
ties we  meet  by  the  way  then  signify  1 The 
remembrance  of  them  will  only  remain  to 
heighten  our  sense  of  the  love,  care,  and 
power  of  our  Saviour  and  leader.  O how 
shall  we  then  admire,  adore,  and  praise  him, 
when  he  shall  condescend  to  unfold  to  us  the 
beauty,  propriety,  and  harmony  of  the  whole 
train  of  his  dispensations  towards  us,  and  give 
us  a clear  retrospect  of  all  the  way,  and  all 
the  turns  of  our  pilgrimage ! 

In  the  mean  while,  the  best  method  of 
adorning  our  profession,  and  of  enjoying 
peace  in  our  souls,  is  simply  to  trust  him, 
and  absolutely  to  commit  ourselves  and  oui 
all  to  his  management.  By  casting  our  bur 
dens  upon  him,  our  spirits  become  light  and 
cheerful ; we  are  freed  from  a thousand  anx 
ieties  and  inquietudes,  which  are  wearisome 
to  our  minds,  and  which,  with  respect  to 
events,  are  needless  for  us,  yea,  useless.  But 
though  it  may  be  easy  to  speak  of  this  trurt, 
and  it  appears  to  our  judgment  perfectly 
right  and  reasonable,  the  actual  attainment 
is  a great  thing ; and  especially  so  to  trust 
the  Lord,  not  by  fits  and  starts,  surrendering 
one  day,  and  retracting  the  next,  but  to  abide 
by  our  surrender,  and  go  habitually  trusting 
through  all  the  changes  we  meet,  knowing 
that  his  love,  purpose,  and  promise,  are  un- 
changeable. Some  little  faintings  perhaps 
none  are  freed  from ; but  I believe  a power 
of  trusting  the  Lord  in  good  measure  at  all 
times,  and  living  quietly  under  the  shadow 
of  his  wing,  is  what  the  promise  warrants  us 
to  expect,  if  we  seek  it  by  diligent  prayer ; 
if  not  all  at  once,  yet  by  a gradual  increase. 
May  it  be  your  experience  and  mme. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTERS 


TO 

THE  REVEREND  MR.  E 


LETTER  I. 

January  27,  1778. 

dear  and  reverend  sir, — I call  you  Dear 
because  I love  you,  and  I shall  continue  to 
style  you  Reverend  as  long  as  you  dignify 
me  with  that  title.  It  is,  indeed,  a pretty 
sounding  epithet,  and  forms  a striking  con- 
trast in  the  usual  application.  The  inha- 
bitants of  the  moon  (if  there  be  any)  have 
perhaps  no  idea  how  many  Reverend,  Right 
Reverend,  and  Most  Reverend,  sinners  we 
have  in  Europe.  And  yet  you  are  reverend, 
and  I revere  you,  because  I believe  the  Lord 
liveth  in  you,  and  has  chosen  you  to  be  a 
temple  of  his  presence,  and  an  instrument 
of  his  grace. 

I hope  the  two  sermons  you  preached  in 
London  were  made  useful  to  others,  and  the 
medicines  you  took  there  were  useful  to  your- 
self. I am  glad  to  hear  you  are  safe  at  home, 
and  something  better.  Cheerful  spring  is  ap- 
proaching : then  I hope  the  barometer  of  your 
spirits  will  rise.  But  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  can  bring  a pleasanter  spring  than 
April,  and  even  in  the  depth  of  winter. 

At  present  it  is  January  with  me,  both  with- 
in and  without.  The  outward  sun  shines  and 
looks  pleasant,  but  his  beams  are  faint,  and 
too  feeble  to  dissolve  the  frost.  So  is  it  in 
my  heart ; I have  many  bright  and  pleasant 
beams  of  truth  in  my  view,  but  cold  predo- 
minates in  my  frost-bound  spirit,  and  they 
have  but  little  power  to  warm  me.  I could 
tell  a stranger  something  about  Jesus  that 
would  perhaps  astonish  him : such  a glorious 
person!  such  wonderful  love!  such  humili- 
ation ! such  a death ! and  then  what  he  is 
now  himself,  and  what  he  is  to  his  people ! 
What  a sun ! what  a shield ! what  a root ! 
what  a life ! what  a friend  ! My  tongue  can 
run  on  upon  these  subjects  sometimes;  and 
could  my  heart  keep  pace  with  it  I should 
be  the  happiest  fellow  in  the  country.  Stupid 
creature ! to  know  these  things  so  well,  and 

373 


yet  be  no  more  affected  with  them ! Indeed, 
I have  reason  to  be  upon  ill  terms  with  my- 
self! It  is  strange  that  pride  should  ever  find 
any  thing  in  my  experience  to  feed  upon ; 
but  this  completes  my  character  for  folly, 
vileness,  and  inconsistence,  that  I am  not  only 
poor,  but  proud ; and  though  I am  convinced 
I am  a very  wretch,  a nothing  before  the 
Lord,  I am  prone  to  go  forth  among  my  fel- 
low-creatures as  though  I were  wise  and 
good. 

You  wonder  what  I am  doing ; and  well 
you  may : I am  sure  you  would,  if  you  lived 
with  me.  Too  much  of  my  time  passes  in 
busy  idleness,  too  much  in  waking  dreams. 
I aim  at  something;  but  hinderances  from 
within  and  without  make  it  difficult  for  me 
to  accomplish  any  thing.  I dare  not  say  I 
am  absolutely  idle,  or  that  I wilfully  waste 
much  of  my  time.  I have  seldom  one  hour 
free  from  interruption.  Letters  come  that 
must  be  answered,  visitants  that  must  be  re- 
ceived, business  that  must  be  attended  to.  I 
have  a good  many  sheep  and  lambs  to  look 
after,  sick  and  afflicted  souls,  dear  to  the 
Lord;  and,  therefore,  whatever  stands  still, 
these  must  not  be  neglected.  Amongst  thesp 
various  avocations,  night  comes  before  I ana 
ready  for  noon  ; and  the  week  closes,  when, 
according  to  the  state  of  my  business,  it  should 
not  be  more  than  Tuesday.  O precious,  ir- 
recoverable time ! O that  I had  more  wisdom 
in  redeeming  and  improving  thee ! Pray  for 
me,  that  the  Lord  may  teach  me  to  serve 
him  better. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  II. 

April  28, 1778. 

dear  sir, — I was  not  much  disappointed 
at  not  meeting  you  at  home;  I know  how 

difficult  it  is  to  get  away  from , if  you 

are  seen  in  the  street  after  breakfast.  The 


374 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  B- 


horse-leech  has  two  daughters,  saying,  Give, 
give : the  cry  there  is,  Preach,  preach.  When 
you  have  told  them  all,  you  must  tell  them 
more,  or  tell  it  them  over  again.  Whoever 
will  find  tongue,  they  will  engage  to  find 
ears.  Yet  I do  not  blame  this  importunity,  I 
wish  you  were  teased  more  with  it  in  your 
own  town;  for  though,  undoubtedly,  there 

are  too  many,  both  at  N and  here, 

whose  religion  lies  too  much  in  hearing,  yet 
in  many  it  proceeds  from  a love  to  the  truth, 
and  to  the  ministers  who  dispense  it.  And  I 
generally  observe,  that  they  who  are  not 
willing  to  hear  a stranger  (if  his  character  is 
known,)  are  indifferent  enough  about  hear- 
ing their  own  minister. 

I beg  you  to  pray  for  me.  I am  a poor 
creature,  full  of  wants.  I seem  to  need  the 
wisdom  of  Solomon,  the  meekness  of  Moses, 
and  the  zeal  of  Paul,  to  enable  me  to  make 
full  proof  of  my  ministry.  But,  alas!  you 
may  guess  the  rest. 

Send  me  “ The  way  to  Christ.”  I am  will- 
ing to  be  a debtor  to  the  wise  and  unwise, 
to  doctors  and  shoemakers,  if  I can  get  a hint, 
or  a Nota  Bene,  from  any  one,  without  re- 
spect to  parties.  When  a house  is  on  fire, 
Churchmen,  Dissenters,  Methodists,  Papists, 
Moravians,  and  Mystics,  are  all  welcome  to 
bring  water.  At  such  times,  nobody  asks, 
Pray,  friend,  whom  do  you  hear  1 or,  What 
do  you  think  of  the  five  points'?  &c.  &c. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  III. 

July  7,  1778. 

my  dear  friend, — I know  not  that  I have 
any  thing  to  say  worth  postage,  though  per- 
haps, had  I seen  you  before  you  set  off,  some- 
thing might  have  occurred  which  will  not 
be  found  in  my  letter.  Yet  I write  a line, 
because  you  bid  me,  and  are  now  in  a far, 

foreign  country.  You  will  find  Mr. a 

man  to  your  tooth,  but  he  is  in  Mr.  W ’s 

connexion.  So  I remember  venerable  Bede, 
after  giving  a high  character  of  some  con- 
temporary, kicks  his  full  pail  of  milk  down, 
and  reduces  him  almost  to  nothing,  by  add- 
ing, in  the  close,  to  this  purpose  : “but,  un- 
happy man,  he  did  not  keep  Easter  our 
way.”  A fig  for  all  connexions,  say  I,  and 
say  you,  but  that  which  is  formed  by  the 
bands,  joints,  and  ligaments  the  apostle 
speaks  of,  Eph.  iv.  1G,  et  alibi.  Therefore,  I 

venture  to  repeat  it,  that  Mr. , though 

he  often  sees  and  hears  Mr.  W , and  I 

believe  loves  him  well,  is  a good  man; 
and  you  will  see  the  invisible  mark  upon  his 
forehead,  if  you  examine  him  with  your 
spiritual  spectacles. 

Now,  methinks  I do  pity  you:  I see  you 
melted  with  heat,  stifled  with  smoke,  and 
stunned  with  noise.  Ah ! what  a change 


[let.  iv. 

from  the  brooks,  and  bushes,  and  birds,  and 
green  fields,  to  wThich  you  had  lately  access  * 
Of  old  they  used  to  retire  into  the  deserts  for 
mortification.  If  I was  to  set  myself  a mo- 
derate penance,  it  might  be  to  spend  a fort- 
night in  London  in  the  height  of  summer. 
But  I forget  myself: — I hope  the  Lord  is 
with  you,  and  then  all  places  are  alike.  He 
makes  the  dungeon  and  the  stocks  comfort- 
able (Acts  xvi ;)  yea,  a fiery  furnace,  or  a 
lion’s  den.  A child  of  God  in  London  seems 
to  be  in  all  these  trying  situations:  but 
Jesus  can  preserve  his  own.  I honour  the 
grace  of  God  in  those  few  (comparatively 
few,  I fear)  who  preserve  their  garments 
undefiled  in  that  Sardis.  The  air  is  filled 
with  infection,  and  it  is  by  special  power 
and  miraculous  preservation  they  enjoy 
spiritual  health,  when  so  many  sicken  and 
fall  around  them  on  the  right  hand  and  on 
the  left.  May  the  Lord  preserve  you  from 
the  various  epidemical  soul-diseases  which 
abound  where  you  are,  and  be  your  comfort 
and  defence  from  day  to  day. 

Last  week  we  had  a lion  in  town.  I went 
to  see  him.  He  was  wonderfully  tame ; as 
familiar  with  his  keeper,  as  docile  and  obe- 
dient as  a spaniel.  Yet  the  man  told  me  he 
had  his  surly  fits,  when  they  durst  not  touch 
him.  No  looking-glass  could  express  my 
face  more  justly  than  this  lion  did  my  heart. 
I could  trace  every  feature : as  wild  and 
fierce  by  nature,  yea,  much  more  so ; but 
grace  has  in  some  measure  tamed  me.  I 
know  and  love  my  Keeper,  and  sometimes 
watch  his  looks  that  I may  learn  his  will. 
But,  oh ! I have  my  surly  fits  too : seasons 
when  I relapse  into  the  savage  again,  as 
though  I had  forgotten  all. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  IV. 

July  13,  1778. 

my  dear  friend, — As  we  are  so  soon  to 
meet,  and  as  I have  nothing  very  important 
to  communicate,  and  many  things  occur 
which  might  demand  my  time,  I have  no 
other  plea  to  offer,  either  to  you  or  myself, 
for  writing  again,  but  because  I love  you. 

I pity  the  unknown  considerable  minister, 
with  whom  you  smoked  your  morning-pipe. 
But  we  must  take  men  and  things  as  we  find 
them : and  when  we  fall  in  company  with 
those  from  whom  we  can  get  little  other 
good,  it  is  likely  we  shall  at  least  find  occa- 
sion for  the  exercise  of  patience  and  charity 
towards  them,  and  of  thankfulness  to  Him 
who  hath  made  us  to  differ.  And  these  are 
good  things,  though,  perhaps,  his  occasion 
may  not  be  pleasant.  Indeed,  a Christian,  if 
in  a right  spirit,  is  always  in  his  Lord’s 
school,  and  may  learn  either  a new  lesson,  or 
how  to  practise  an  old  one,  by  every  thing 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  B- 


375 


LET.  V.] 

he  sees  or  hears,  provided  he  does  not  wil- 
fully tread  upon  forbidden  ground.  If  he 
were  constrained  to  spend  a day  with  the 
poor  creatures  in  the  common  side  of  New- 
gate, though  he  could  not  talk  with  them  of 
what  God  has  done  for  his  soul,  he  might  be 
more  sensible  of  his  mercy  by  the  contrast 
he  would  observe  around  him.  He  might 
rejoice  for  himself,  and  mourn  over  them, 
and  thus  perhaps  get  as  much  benefit  as 
from  the  best  sermon  he  ever  heard. 

It  is  necessary,  all  things  taken  together, 
to  have  connexion  more  or  less  with  nar- 
row-minded people.  If  they  are,  notwith- 
standing their  prejudices,  civil  to  us,  they 
have  a right  to  some  civility  from  us.  We 
may  love  them,  though  we  cannot  admire 
them,  and  pick  something  good  from  them, 
notwithstanding  we  see  much  to  blame.  It 
is,  perhaps,  the  highest  triumph  we  can  ob- 
tain over  bigotry,  when  we  are  able  to  bear 
with  bigots  themselves.  For  they  are  a set 
of  troublesome  folks,  whom  Mr.  Self  is  often 
very  forward  to  exclude  from  the  compre- 
hensive candour  and  tenderness  which  he 
professes  to  exercise  towards  those  who  dif- 
fer from  him. 

I am  glad  your  present  home  (a  believer 
should  be  always  at  home)  is  pleasant ; the 
rooms  large  and  airy ; your  host  and  hostess 
kind  and  spiritual ; and,  upon  the  whole,  all 
things  as  well  as  you  could  expect  to  find 
them,  considering  where  you  are.  I could 
give  you  much  such  an  account  of  my  usual 
head-quarters  in  the  city ; but  still  London 
is  .London.  I do  not  wash  you  to  live  there, 
for  my  own  sake  as  well  as  yours ; but  if  the 
Lord  should  so  appoint,  I believe  he  can 
make  you  easy  there,  and  enable  me  to 
make  a tolerable  shift  without  you.  Yet  I 
certainly  should  miss  you;  for  I have  no 
person  in  this  neighbourhood  writh  whom  my 
heart  so  thoroughly  unites  in  spirituals, 
though  there  are  many  whom  I love.  But 
conversation  with  most  Christians  is  some- 
thing like  going  to  court ; where,  except 
you  are  dressed  exactly  according  to  a pre- 
scribed standard,  you  will  either  not  be  ad- 
mitted, or  must  expect  to  be  heartily  stared 
at.  But  you  and  I can  meet  and  converse, 
sans  contrainte,  in  an  undress,  without  fear 
of  offending,  or  being  accounted  offenders  for 
a word  out  of  place,  and  not  exactly  in  the 
pink  of  the  mode. 

I know  not  how  it  is : I think  my  senti- 
ments and  experience  are  as  orthodox  and 
Calvin istical  as  need  be ; and  yet  I am  a sort 
of  speckled  bird  among  my  Calvinist  bre- 
thren. I am  a mighty  good  Churchman,  but 
pass  amongst  such  as  a Dissenter  in  prunello. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Dissenters  (many  of 
them  I mean)  think  me  defective,  either  in 
understanding  or  in  conscience,  for  staying 
where  1 am.  Well,  there  is  a middle  party, 


called  Methodists,  but  neither  do  my  dimen- 
sions exactly  fit  with  them.  I am  somehow 
disqualified  for  claiming  a full  brotherhood 
with  any  party.  But  there  are  a few  among 
all  parties  who  bear  with  me  and  love  me, 
and  with  this  I must  be  content  at  present. 
But  so  far  as  they  love  the  Lord  Jesus,  I de- 
sire, and  by  his  grace  I determine  (with  or 
without  their  leave)  to  love  them  all.  Party- 
walls,  though  stronger  than  the  walls  of  Ba- 
bylon, must  come  down  in  the  general  ruin, 
when  the  earth  and  all  its  works  shall  be 
burnt  up,  if  not  sooner. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  V. 

July  — , 1778. 

my  dear  sir, — I was  glad  to  hear  that  you 
were  again  within  a few  miles  of  me;  and  I 
would  praise  the  Lord,  who  led  you  out,  and 
brought  you  home  in  safety,  and  preserved 
all  in  peace  while  you  were  abroad,  so  that 
you  found  nothing  very  painful  to  embitter 
your  return.  Many  go  abroad  well,  but  re- 
turn no  more.  The  affectionate  wife,  the 
prattling  children,  listen  for  the  well-known 
sound  of  papa’s  foot  at  the  door;  but  they 
listen  in  vain:  a fall  or  a fever  has  inter- 
cepted him,  and  he  is  gone  far,  far  away. 
Some  leave  all  well  when  they  go  from 
home;  but  how  changed,  how  trying  the 
scene  when  they  come  back ! In  their  ab- 
sence, the  Lord  has  taken  away  the  desire 
of  their  eyes  with  a stroke,  or  perhaps  ruffians 
have  plundered  and  murdered  their  family 
in  the  dead  of  the  night,  or  the  fire  devoured 
their  habitation. 

Ah ! how  large  and  various  is  the  list  of 
evils  and  calamities  with  which  sin  has  filled 
the  world!  You,  and  I,  and  ours  escape 
them : we  stand,  though  in  a field  of  battle, 
where  thousands  fall  around  us,  because  the 
Lord  is  pleased  to  keep  us.  May  he  have 
the  praise,  and  may  we  only  live  to  love  and 
serve  him. 

Mrs. has  been  very  ill,  and  my  heart 

often  much  pained  while  you  have  been  ab- 
sent. But  the  Lord  has  removed  his  hand ; 
she  is  much  better,  and  I hope  she  will  be 
seen  in  his  house  to-morrow.  I have  few 
trials  in  my  own  person;  but  when  the 
Lord  afflicts  her,  I feel  it.  It  is  a mercy  that 
he  has  made  us  one ; but  it  exposes  us  to 
many  a pain,  which  we  might  have  missed, 
if  we  cared  but  little  for  each  other.  Alas ! 
there  is  usually  an  ounce  of  the  golden  calf, 
of  idolatry  and  dependence,  in  all  the  warm 
regard  we  bear  to  creatures.  Ilinc  ilia 
lachryma ! For  this  reason,  our  sharpest 
trials  usually  spring  from  our  most  valued 
comforts. 

I cannot  come  to  you : therefore  you  must 


[let.  Til. 


376  LETTERS  TO  THE 

Come  hither  speedily.  Be  sure  to  bring1  Mr. 

B with  you.  I shall  be  very  glad  to  see 

him,  and  I long  to  thank  him  for  clothing 
my  book.  It  looks  well  on  the  outside,  and 
I hope  to  find  it  sound  and  savoury.  I love 
the  author,  and  that  is  a step  towards  liking 
the  book.  For  where  we  bve,  we  are  gene- 
rally tender,  and  favourably  take  every  thing 
by  the  best  handle,  and  are  vastly  full  of  can- 
dour : but  if  we  are  prejudiced  against  the 
man,  the  poor  book  is  half  condemned  before 
we  open  it.  It  had  need  be  written  well,  for 
it  will  be  read  with  a suspicious  eye,  as  if 
we  wished  to  find  treason  in  every  page.  I 
am  glad  I diverted  and  profited  you  by  call- 
ing you  a speckled  bird.  I can  tell  you,  such 
a bird  in  this  day,  that  wears  the  full  colour 
of  no  sect  or  party,  is  rara  avis ; if  not  quite 
so  scarce  as  the  phoenix,  yet  to  be  met  with 
but  here  and  there.  It  is  impossible  I should 
be  all  of  a colour,  when  I have  been  a debtor 
to  all  sorts ; and,  like  the  jay  in  the  fable, 
have  been  beholden  to  most  of  the  birds  in 
the  air  for  a feather  or  two.  Church  and 
Meeting,  Methodist  and  Moravian,  may  all 
perceive  something  in  my  coat  taken  from 
them.  None  of  them  are  angry  with  me  for 
borrowing  from  them ; but  then,  why  could 
not  I be  content  with  their  colour,  without 
going  amongst  other  flocks  and  coveys,  to 
make  myself  such  a motley  figure!  Let 
them  be  angry;  if  I have  culled  the  best 
feathers  from  all,  then  surely  I am  finer  than 
any. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VI. 

August  — , 1778. 

dear  sir, — If  the  Lord  affords  health,  if 
the  weather  be  tolerable,  if  no  unforeseen 
change  takes  place,  if  no  company  comes  in 
upon  me  to-night  (which  sometimes  unex- 
pectedly happens,) — with  these  provisos,  Mr. 

S and  I have  engaged  to  travel  to 

on  Monday  next,  and  hope  to  be  with  you  by 
or  before  eleven  o’clock. 

In  such  a precarious  world,  it  is  needful 
to  form  our  plans  at  two  days’  distance,  with 
precaution  and  exceptions,  James  iv.  13. 
However,  if  it  be  the  Lord’s  will  to  bring  us 
together,  and  if  the  purposed  interview  be  for 
nis  glory  and  our  good,  then  I am  sure  no- 
thing shall  prevent  it.  And  who  in  his  right 
wits  would  wish  either  to  visit  or  be  visited 
upon  any  other  terms ! O ! if  we  could  but 
be  pleased  with  his  will,  we  might  be  pleased 
from  morning  to  night,  and  every  day  in  the 
year. 

Pray  for  a blessing  upon  our  coming  toge- 
ther. It  would  be  a pity  to  walk  ten  miles 
to  pick  straws,  or  to  come  with  our  empty 
vessels  upon  our  heads,  saying,  we  have  found 
no  water. — I am,  &c. 


REV.  MR.  B . 

LETTER  VII. 

October  —,  1778. 

my  dear  friend, — Your  letters  are  always 
welcome ; the  last  doubly  so,  for  being  unex 
pected.  If  you  never  heard  before  of  a line 
of  yours  being  useful,  I will  tell  you  for  once, 
that  I get  some  pleasure  and  instruction 
whenever  you  write  to  me.  And  I see  not 
but  your  call  to  letter- writing  is  as  clear  as 
mine,  at  least  when  you  are  able  to  put  pen 
to  paper. 

I must  say  something  to  your  queries  about 
2 Sam.  xiv.  I do  not  approve  of  the  scho- 
lastic distinctions  about  inspiration,  which 
seem  to  have  a tendency  to  explain  away  the 
authority  and  certainty  of  one  half  of  the 
Bible  at  least.  Though  the  penmen  of  the 
scriptures  were  ever  so  well  informed  of 
some  facts,  they  would,  as  you  observe,  need 
express,  full,  and  infallible  inspiration,  to 
teach  them  what  the  Lord  would  have  se- 
lected and  recorded  for  the  use  of  the  church, 
amongst  many  others  which  to  themselves 
might  appear  equally  important. 

However,  with  respect  to  historical  pass- 
ages, I dare  not  pronounce  positively  that 
any  of  them  are,  even  in  the  literal  sense,  un- 
worthy of  the  wisdom  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
the  dignity  of  inspiration.  Some,  yea  many 
of  them,  have  often  appeared  trivial  to  me  ; 
but  I check  the  thought,  and  charge  it  to  my 
own  ignorance  and  temerity.  It  must  have 
some  importance,  because  I read  it  in  God’s 
book.  On  the  other  hand,  though  I will  not 
deny  that  they  all  may  have  a spiritual  and 
mystical  sense  (for  I am  no  more  qualified  to 
judge  of  the  deep  things  of  the  Spirit,  than 
to  tell  you  what  is  passing  this  morning  at 
the  bottom  of  the  sea ;)  yet  if,  with  my  pre- 
sent modicum  of  light,  I should  undertake  to 
expound  many  passages  in  a mystical  sense,  I 
fear  such  a judge  as  you  would  think  my  in- 
terpretations fanciful,  and  not  well  supported. 
1 suppose  I should  have  thought  the  Bible 
complete,  though  it  had  not  informed  me  of 
the  death  of  Rebekah’s  nurse,  or  where  she 
was  buried.  But  some  tell  me  that  Deborah 
is  the  law,  and  that  by  the  oak  I am  to  un- 
derstand the  cross  of  Christ : and  I remem- 
ber to  have  heard  of  a preacher  who  discover- 
ed a type  of  Christ  crucified  in  Absalom  hang- 
ing  by  the  hair  on  another  oak.  Iam  quite 
a mole  when  compared  with  these  eagle-eyed 
divines,  and  must  often  content  myself  with 
plodding  upon  the  lower  ground  of  accommo- 
dation and  allusion,  except  when  the  New- 
Testament  writers  assure  me  what  the  mind 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  was.  I can  find  the  gospel 
with  more  confidence  in  the  history  of  Sarah 
and  Hagar,  than  in  that  of  Leah  and  Rachel ; 
though,  without  Paul’s  help,  I should  have 
considered  them  both  as  family-squabbles,  re- 
corded chiefly  to  illustrate  the  general  truth, 
that  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit  are  incident 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  B- 


377 


LET.  VIH.] 

to  the  best  men,  in  the  most  favoured  situa- 
tions. And  I think  there  is  no  part  of  Old- 
Testament  history  from  which  I could  not 
(the  Lord  helping  me)  draw  observations  that 
might  be  suitable  to  the  pulpit,  and  profitable 
to  his  people : so  I might,  perhaps,  from 
Livy  or  Tacitus.  But  then  with  the  Bible 
in  my  hands,  I go  upon  sure  grounds : I am 
certain  of  the  facts  I speak  from,  that  they 
really  did  happen.  I may  likewise  depend 
upon  the  springs  and  motives  of  actions,  and 
not  amuse  myself  and  my  hearers  with 
speeches  which  were  never  spoken,  and  mo- 
tives which  were  never  thought  of,  till  the 
historian  rummaged  his  pericranium  for  some- 
thing to  embellish  his  work.  I doubt  not 
but,  were  you  to  consider  Joab’s  courtly 
conduct  only  in  a literal  sense,  how  it  tallied 
with  David’s  desire,  and  how  gravely  and 
graciously  he  granted  himself  a favour  while 
he  professed  to  oblige  Joab:  I say,  in  this 
view,  you  would  be  able  to  illustrate  many 
important  scriptural  doctrines,  and  to  show 
that  the  passage  is  important  to  those  who  are 
engaged  in  studying  the  anatomy  of  the  hu- 
man heart. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  VIII. 

October  27,  1778. 

my  dear  friend, — I have  been  witness 
to  a great  and  important  revolution  this 
morning,  which  took  place  while  the  great- 
est part  of  the  world  was  asleep.  Like 
many  state  revolutions,  its  first  beginnings 
were  almost  undiscernible ; but  the  progress, 
though  gradual,  was  steady,  and  the  event 
decisive.  A while  ago  darkness  reigned. 
Had  a man  then  dropped,  for  the  first  time, 
into  our  world,  he  might  have  thought  him- 
self banished  into  a hopeless  dungeon.  How 
could  he  expect  light  to  rise  out  of  such  a 
state  1 And  when  he  saw  the  first  glimmer- 
ing of  dawn  in  the  east,  how  could  he  pro- 
mise himself  that  it  was  the  forerunner  of 
such  a glorious  sun  as  has  since  arisen. 
With  what  wonder  would  such  a new  comer 
observe  the  bounds  of  his  view  enlarging,  and 
the  distinctness  of  objects  increasing  from  one 
minute  to  another;  and  how  well  content 
would  he  be  to  part  with  the  twinklings  of  the 
stars,  when  he  had  the  broad  day  all  around  him 
in  exchange ! I cannot  say  this  revolution  is 
extraordinary,  because  it  happens  every  morn- 
ing ; but  surely  it  is  astonishing,  or  rather  it 
would  be  so,  if  man  was  not  astonish ingrly 
stupid. 

Such  strangers  once  were  we.  Darkness, 
gross  darkness,  covered  us.  How  confined 
were  our  views ! And  even  the  things  which 
were  within  our  reach  we  could  not  distin- 
guish. Little  did  we  then  think  what  a glo- 
rious day  we  were  appointed  to  see ; what  an 
unbounded  prospect  would  ere  long  open  be- 


fore us.  We  knew  not  that  there  was  a Sun 
of  righteousness,  and  that  he  would  dawn, 
and  rise,  and  shine  upon  our  hearts.  And  as 
the  idea  of  what  we  see  now  was  then  hidd,en 
from  us,  so  at  present  we  are  almost  equally 
at  a loss  how  to  form  any  conception  of  the 
stronger  light  and  brighter  prospects  which 
we  wait  and  hope  for.  Comparatively  we  are 
in  the  dark  still : at  the  most,  we  have  but  a 
dim  twilight,  and  see  nothing  clearly;  but  it 
is  the  dawn  of  immortality,  and  a sure  pre- 
sage and  earnest  of  glory. 

Thus,  at  times,  it  seems,  a darkness  that 
may  be  felt  broods  over  your  natural  spirits ; 
but  when  the  day-star  rises  upon  your  heart, 
you  see  and  rejoice  in  his  light.  You  have 
days  as  well  as  nights ; and  after  a few  more 
vicissitudes,  you  will  take  your  flight  to  the 
regions  of  everlasting  light,  where  your  sun 
will  go  down  no  more.  Happy  you,  and 
happy  I,  if  I shall  meet  you  there,  as  I trust 
I shall.  How  shall  we  love,  and  sing,  and 
wonder  and  praise  the  Saviour’s  name. 

Last  Sunday,  a young  man  died  here  of 
extreme  old  age,  at  twenty-five.  He  laboured 
hard  to  ruin  a good  constitution,  and  unhap- 
pily succeeded ; yet  amused  himself  with  the 
hopes  of  recovery  almost  to  the  last.  We 
have  a sad  knot  of  such  poor  creatures  in 
this  place,  who  labour  to  stifle  each  other’s 
convictions,  and  to  ruin  themselves  and  as- 
sociates, soul  and  body.  How  industriously 
is  Satan  served  ! I was  formerly  one  of  his 
most  active  under-tempters.  Not  content 
with  running  the  broad  way  myself,  I was 
indefatigable  in  enticing  others ; and  had  my 
influence  been  equal  to  my  wishes,  I would 
have  carried  all  the  human  race  with  me. 
And,  doubtless,  some  have  perished,  to  whose 
destruction  I was  greatly  instrumental,  by 
tempting  them  to  sin,  and  by  poisoning  and 
hardening  them  with  principles  of  infidelity; 
and  yet  I was  spared.  When  I think  of  the 
most  with  whom  I spent  my  unhappy  days 
of  ignorance,  I am  ready  to  say,  I only  am 
escaped  alive  to  tell  thee.  Surely  I have 
not  half  the  activity  and  zeal  in  the  service 
of  him  who  snatched  me  as  a brand  out  of 
the  burning,  as  I had  in  the  service  of  his 
enemy.  Then  the  whole  stream  of  my  en- 
deavours and  affections  went  one  way ; now 
my  best  desires  are  continually  crossed, 
counteracted,  and  spoiled,  by  the  sin  which 
dwelleth  in  me ; then  the  tide  of  a corrupt 
nature  bore  me  along,  now  I have  to  strive 
and  swim  against  it.  The  Lord  cut  me 
short  of  opportunities,  and  placed  me  where 
I could  do  but  little  mischief;  but  had  my 
abilities  and  occasions  been  equal  to  my 
heart,  I should  have  been  a Voltaire  and  a 
Tiberius  in  one  character,  a monster  of  pro- 
faneness and  licentiousness.  “ O to  grace 
how  great  a debtor !”  A common  drunkard 
or  profligate  is  a petty  sinner  to  what  I was. 
I had  the  ambition  of  a Csesar  or  an  Alexan 


378 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  B 


der,  and  wanted  to  rank  in  wickedness 
among  the  foremost  of  the  human  race. 
When  you  have  read  this,  praise  the  Lord 
for  his  mercy  to  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  pray 
that  I may  have  grace  to  be  faithful. — But  I 
have  rambled.  I meant  to  tell  you,  that  on 
Sunday  afternoon  I preached  from  Ezekiel 
xxxiii.  10,  11,  “Why  will  ye  die!”  &c.  I 
endeavoured  to  show  poor  sinners,  that  if 
they  died,  it  was  because  they  would,  and  if 
they  would  they  must.  I was  much  affect- 
ed for  a time : I could  hardly  speak  for  weep- 
ing, and  some  wept  with  me.  From  some, 
alas ! I can  no  more  draw  a tear,  or  a re- 
lenting thought,  than  from  a mill-stone. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  IX. 

November  27,  1778. 

my  dear  friend, — You  are  a better  ex- 
positor of  scripture  than  of  my  speeches,  if 
you  really  inferred  from  my  last  that  I think 
you  shall  die  soon.  I cannot  say  positively 
you  will  not  die  soon,  because  life  at  all  times 
is  uncertain ; however,  according  to  the 
doctrine  of  probabilities,  I think,  and  always 
thought,  you  bid  fair  enough  to  outlive  me. 
The  gloomy  tinge  of  your  weak  spirits  led 
you  to  consider  yourself  much  worse  in  point 
of  health  than  you  appear  to  me  to  be. 

In  the  other  point  I dare  be  more  positive, 
that  die  when  you  will,  you  will  die  in  the 
Lord.  Of  this  I have  not  the  least  doubt; 
and  I believe  you  doubt  of  it  less,  if  possible, 
than  I,  except  in  those  darker  moments  when 
the  atrabilious  humour  prevails. 

I heartily  sympathize  with  you  in  your 
complaints;  but  I see  you  in  safe  hands. 
The  Lord  loves  you,  and  will  take  care  of 
you.  He  who  raises  the  dead,  can  revive 
your  spirits  when  you  are  cast  down.  He 
who  sets  bounds  to  the  sea,  and  says, 
“ Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  and  no  further,” 
can  limit  and  moderate  that  gloom  which 
sometimes  distresses  you.  He  knows  why 
he  permits  you  to  be  thus  exercised.  I can- 
not assign  the  reasons,  but  I am  sure  they  are 
worthy  of  his  wisdom  and  love,  and  that  you 
will  hereafter  see,  and  say,  He  has  done  all 
things  well.  If  I was  as  wise  as  your  philo- 
sopher, I might  say  a great  deal  about  a melan- 
choly complexion ; but  I love  not  to  puzzle 
myself  with  second  causes,  while  the  first 
cause  is  at  hand,  which  sufficiently  accounts 
for  every  phenomenon  in  a believer’s  ex- 
perience. Your  constitution,  your  situation, 
your  temper,  your  distemper,  all  that  is  either 
comfortable  or  painful  in  your  lot,  is  of  his 
appointment.  The  hairs  of  your  head  are 
all  numbered:  the  same  power  which  pro- 
duced the  planet  Jupiter  is  necessary  to  the 
production  of  a single  hair,  nor  can  one  of 
them  fall  to  the  ground  without  his  notice, 


[let.  x. 

any  more  than  the  stars  can  fall  from  their 
orbits.  In  providence,  no  less  than  in  crea- 
tion, he  is  Maximus  in  minimis.  Therefore 
fear  not ; only  believe.  Our  sea  may  some- 
times be  stormy,  but  we  have  an  infallible 
pilot,  and  shall  infallibly  gain  our  port. — I 
am,  &c. 


LETTER  X. 

February  23,  1779. 

my  dear  friend, — On  Saturday,  and  not 
before,  I heard  you  had  been  ill.  Had  the 
news  reached  me  sooner,  I should  have  sent 
you  a line  sooner.  I hope  you  will  be  able 
to  inform  me  that  you  are  now  better,  and 
that  the  Lord  continues  to  do  you  good  by 
every  dispensation  he  allots  you.  Healing 
and  wounding  are  equally  from  his  hand,  and 
equally  tokens  of  his  love  and  care  over  us. 
I have  but  little  affliction  in  my  own  person, 
but  I have  been  often  chastened  of  late  by 
proxy.  The  Lord,  for  his  people’s  sake,  is 
still  pleased  to  give  me  health  and  strength 
for  public  service,  but  when  I need  the  rod 

he  lays  it  upon  Mrs. . In  this  way  I 

have  felt  much,  without  being  disabled  or 
laid  aside.  But  he  has  heard  prayer  for  her 
likewise,  and  for  more  than  a fortnight  past 
she  has  been  comfortably  well.  I lay  at  least 
one  half  of  her  sickness  to  my  own  account: 
she  suffers  for  me,  and  I through  her.  It  is 
indeed  touching  me  in  a tender  part.  Per- 
haps if  I could  be  more  wise,  watchful,  and 
humble,  it  might  contribute  more  to  the  re- 
establishment of  her  health  than  all  the  me- 
dicines she  takes. 

I somehow  neglected  to  confer  with  you 
| about  the  business  of  the  Fast-day.  The 
| last  of  my  three  sermons,  when  I had,  as  I ex- 
: pected,  the  largest  congregation,  was  a sort 
i of  historical  discourse,  from  Deut.  xxxii.  15, 

! in  which,  running  over  the  leading  national 
I events  from  the  time  of  Wickliff,  I endea- 
j voured  to  trace  the  steps  and  turns  by  which 
j the  Lord  has  made  us  a fat  and  thriving  peo- 
ple, and  in  the  event  blessed  us  beyond  his 
favourite  Jeshurun  of  old,  with  civil  and  re- 
ligious liberty,  peace,  honour,  and  prosperity, 
and  gospel-privileges : How  fat  we  were 
when  the  war  terminated  in  the  year  1763, 
and  how  we  have  kicked,  and  forsaken  the 
Rock  of  our  salvation  of  late  years.  Then 
j followed  a sketch  of  our  present  state  and 
spirit  as  a people,  both  in  a religious  and 
j political  view.  I started  at  the  picture  while 
I drew  it,  though  it  was  a very  inadequate 
| representation.  We  seemed  willing  to  afflict 
our  souls,  for  one  day,  as  Dr.  Lowth  reads 
Isa.  lviii.  5.  But  the  next  day,  things  re- 
turned into  their  former  channel:  the  fast 
and  the  occasion  seemed  presently  forgotten, 
except  by  a few  simple  souls,  who  are  des- 
pised and  hated  by  the  rest  for  their  precise- 


379 


LET,  XIII.]  LETTERS  TO  THE 

nets,  because  they  think  sin  ought  to  be 
lamented  every  day  in  the  year. 

Who  would  envy  Cassandra  her  gift  of 
prophecy  upon  the  terms  she  had  it,  that  her 
declarations,  however  true,  should  meet  with 
no  belief  or  regard  1 It  is  the  lot  of  gospel- 
ministers,  with  respect  to  the  bulk  of  their 
hearers.  Rut  blessed  be  the  grace  which 
makes  a few  exceptions.  Here  and  there 
one  will  hear,  believe,  and  be  saved.  Every 
one  of  these  is  worth  a world,  and  our  success 
with  a few  should  console  us  for  all  our  trials. 

Come  and  see  us  as  soon  as  you  can,  only 

not  to-morrow,  for  I am  then  to  go  to  T . 

My  Lord,  the  great  Shepherd,  has  one  sheep 
there,  related  to  the  fold  under  my  care.  I 
can  seldom  see  her,  and  she  is  very  ill.  I 
expect  she  will  be  soon  removed  to  the  pas- 
ture above.  Our  love  to  Mrs.  B . — 

Believe  me  yours.  &c. 


LETTER  XI. 

April  23,  1779. 

my  dear  friend, — May  I not  style  myself 
a friend,  when  I remember  you  after  an  in- 
terval of  several  weeks  since  I saw  you,  and 
through  a distance  of  threescore  miles'?  But 
the  truth  is,  you  have  been  neither  absent  nor 
distant  from  my  heart  a day.  Your  idea  has 
travelled  with  me : you  are  a kind  of  familiar, 
very  often  before  the  eye  of  my  mind.  This,  I 
hope,  may  be  admitted  as  a proof  of  friendship. 

I know  the  Lord  loves  you,  and  you  know 
it  likewise : every  affliction  affords  you  a fresh 
proof  of  it.  How  wise  his  management  in 
our  trials!  How  wisely  adjusted  in  season, 
weight,  and  continuance,  to  answer  his  gra- 
cious purposes  in  sending  them ! How  un- 
speakably better  to  be  at  his  disposal  than  at 
our  own ! So  you  say,  so  you  think,  so  you 
find.  You  trust  in  him,  and  shall  not  be  dis- 
appointed. Help  me  with  your  prayers,  that 
I may  trust  him  too,  and  be  at  length  enabled 
to  say  without  reserve,  What  thou  wilt,  when 
thou  wilt,  how  thou  wilt.  I had  rather  speak 
these  three  sentences  from  my  heart,  in  my 
mother-tongue,  than  be  master  of  all  the  lan- 
guages in  Europe. — I am  yours,  &c. 


LETTER  XII. 

August  19,  1779. 

my  dear  friend, — Among  the  rest  of 
temporal  mercies,  I would  be  thankful  for  pen, 
ink,  and  paper,  and  the  convenience  of  the 
post,  by  which  means  we  can  waft  a thought 
to  a friend  when  we  cannot  get  at  him.  My 
will  has  been  good  to  see  you,  but  you  must 
accept  the  will  for  the  deed.  The  Lord  has 
not  permitted  me. 

I have  been  troubled  of  late  with  the  rheu- 
matism in  my  left  arm.  Mine  is  a sinful, 


REV.  MR.  B- 

vile  body,  and  it  is  a mercy  that  any  part  cf 
it  is  free  from  pain.  It  is  virtually  the  seat 
and  subject  of  all  diseases;  but  the  Lord 
holds  them  like  wild  beasts  in  a chain,  under 
a strong  restraint:  were  that  restraint  taken 
off,  they  wTould  rush  upon  their  prey  from 
every  quarter,  and  seize  upon  every  limb, 
member,  joint,  and  nerve,  at  once.  Yet, 
though  l am  a sinner,  and  though  my  whole 
texture  is  so  frail  and  exposed,  I have  en- 
joyed for  a number  of  years  an  almost  perfect 
exemption  both  from  pain  and  sickness.  This 
is  wonderful  indeed,  even  in  my  own  eyes. 

But  my  soul  is  far  from  being  in  a healthy 
state.  There  I have  laboured,  and  still  la- 
bour, under  a complication  of  diseases;  and, 
but  for  the  care  and  skill  of  an  infallible 
Physician,  I must  have  died  the  death  long 
ago.  At  this  very  moment  my  soul  is  feverish, 
dropsical,  paralytic.  I feel  a loss  of  appetite, 
a disinclination  both  to  food  and  to  medicine, 
so  that  I am  alive  by  miracle : yet  I trust  I 
shall  not  die,  but  live,  and  declare  the  works 
of  the  Lord.  When  I faint,  he  revives  me 
again.  I am  sure  he  is  able,  and  I trust  he 
has  promised  to  heal  me ; but  how  inveterate 
must  my  disease  be,  that  is  not  yet  subdued, 
even  under  his  management ! 

Well,  my  friend,  there  is  a land  where  the 
inhabitants  shall  no  more  say,  I am  sick. 
Then  my  eyes  will  not  be  dim,  nor  my  ear 
heavy,  nor  my  heart  hard. 

One  sight  of  Jesus  as  he  is 

Will  strike  all  sin  for  ever  dead. 

Blessed  be  his  name  for  this  glorious  hope ! 
May  it  cheer  us  under  all  our  present  uneasy 
feelings,  and  reconcile  us  to  every  cross. 
The  way  must  be  right,  however  rough,  that 
leads  to  such  a glorious  end. 

O for  more  of  that  gracious  influence, 
which  in  a moment  can  make  the  wilderness- 
soul  rejoice  and  blossom  like  the  rose ! I 
want  something  which  neither  critics  nor 
commentators  can  help  me  to.  The  scripture 
itself,  whether  I read  it  in  Hebrew,  Greek, 
French,  or  English,  is  a sealed  book  in  all 
these  languages,  unless  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
is  present  to  expound  and  apply.  Pray  for 
me.  No  prayer  seems  more  suitable  to  me 
than  that  of  the  psalmist : “ Bring  my  soul 
out  of  prison,  that  I may  praise  thy  name.” — 
I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XIII. 

August  28,  1779. 

my  dear  friend, — I want  to  hear  how 
you  are.  I hope  your  complaint  is  not  worse 
than  when  I saw  you.  I hope  you  are  easier, 
and  will  soon  find  yourself  able  to  move  about 
again.  I should  be  sorry,  if  to  the  symptoms 
of  the  stone  you  should  have  the  gout  super- 
added  in  your  right  hand,  for  then  you  would 
not  be  able  to  write  to  me. 


380 


LETTERS  TO  THE  REV.  MR.  B- 


We  go  on  much  as  usual,  sometimes  very 
poorly,  sometimes  a little  better:  the  latter 
is  the  case  to-day.  My  rheumatism  continues, 
but  it  is  very  moderate  and  tolerable.  The 
Lord  deals  gently  with  us,  and  gives  us  many 
proofs  that  he  does  not  afflict  willingly. 

The  days  speed  away  apace:  each  one 
bears  away  its  own  burden  with  it,  to  return 
no  more.  Both  pleasures  and  pains  that  are 
past  are  gone  for  ever.  What  is  yet  future 
will  likewise  be  soon  past.  The  end  is  com- 
ing. O,  to  realize  the  thought,  and  to  judge 
of  things  now  in  some  measure  suitable  to 
the  judgment  we  shall  form  of  them  when  we 
are  about  to  leave  them  all ! Many  things 
which  now  either  elate  or  depress  us,  will 
then  appear  to  be  trifles  light  as  air. 

One  thing  is  needful : to  have  our  hearts 
united  to  the  Lord  in  humble  faith ; to  set 
him  always  before  us ; to  rejoice  in  him  as 
our  shepherd  and  our  portion ; to  submit  to 
all  his  appointments,  not  of  necessity,  because 
he  is  stronger  than  we,  but  with  a cheerful 
acquiescence,  because  he  is  wise  and  good, 
and  loves  us  better  than  we  do  ourselves;  to 
feed  upon  his  truth ; to  have  our  understand- 
ings, wills,  affections,  imaginations,  and  me- 
mory, all  filled  and  impressed  with  the  great 
mysteries  of  redeeming  love ; to  do  all  for 
him,  to  receive  all  from  him,  to  find  all  in  him. 
I have  mentioned  many  things,  but  they  are 
all  comprised  in  one,  a life  of  faith  in  the  Son 
of  God.  We  are  empty  vessels  in  ourselves, 
but  we  cannot  remain  empty.  Except  Jesus 
dwells  in  our  hearts,  and  fills  them  with  his 
power  and  presence,  they  will  be  filled  with 
folly,  vanity,  and  vexation. — I am,  &c. 


LETTER  XIV. 

Oct.  26,  1779. 

MY  DEAR  FRIEND, Being  to  gO  OUt  of 

town  to-day,  I started  up  before  light  to  write 


[let.  xiv 

to  you,  and  hoped  to  have  sent  you  a long 
letter ; when,  behold  ! I could  not  get  at  any 
paper.  I am  now  waiting  for  a peep  at  Mr. 

B at  his  lodgings,  who  came  to  town 

last  night ; and  I shall  write  as  fast  as  I can 
till  I see  him. 

I feel  for  you  a little  in  the  same  way  as 
you  feel  for  yourself.  I bear  a friendly  sym- 
pathy in  your  late  sharp  and  sudden  trial.  I 
mourn  with  that  part  of  you  which  mourns  ; 
but  at  the  same  time  I rejoice  in  the  proof 
you  have,  and  which  you  give,  that  the  Lord 
is  with  you  of  a truth.  I rejoice  on  your  ac- 
count, to  see  you  supported  and  comforted, 
and  enabled  to  say,  He  has  done  all  things 
well.  I rejoice  on  my  own  account.  Such 
instances  of  his  faithfulness  and  all-sufficiency 
are  very  encouraging.  We  must  all  expect 
hours  of  trouble  in  our  turn.  We  must  all 
feel  in  our  concernments  the  vanity  and  un- 
certainty of  creature-comforts.  What  a mer- 
cy it  is  to  know  from  our  own  past  experience, 
and  to  have  it  confirmed  to  us  by  the  expe- 
rience of  others,  that  the  Lord  is  good,  a 
stronghold  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  that 
he  knoweth  them  that  trust  in  him.  Crea- 
tures are  like  candles,  they  waste  while  they 
afford  us  a little  light,  and  we  see  them  ex 
tinguished  in  their  sockets  one  after  another 
But  the  light  of  the  sun  makes  amends  for 
them  all.  The  Lord  is  so  rich  that  he  ea 
sily  can,  so  good  that  he  certainly  will  give 
his  children  more  than  he  ever  will  take  away. 
When  his  gracious  voice  reaches  the  heart,  It 
is  I,  be  not  afraid ; be  still,  and  know  that  I 
am  God ; when  he  gives  us  an  impression  of 
his  wisdom,  power,  love,  and  care,  then  the 
storm  which  attempts  to  rise  in  our  natural 
passions  is  hushed  into  a calm ; the  flesh  con- 
tinues to  feel,  but  the  spirit  is  made  willing. 
And  something  more  than  submission  takes 
place, — a sweet  resignation  and  acquies- 
cence, and  even  a joy  that  we  have  any  thing 
which  we  value,  to  surrender  to  his  call. — 
I am  yours,  &c. 


DISCOURSES,  OR  SERMONS, 


AS  INTENDED  FOR  THE  PULPIT. 


. i..  XtiXc;  xxt  fS'gceixjfix  ryi{  aXqSctx;.  Kxi  ojuoKoyovjusvMS  f/.syx  eo-ti  to  r>jf  tvriGnoif  pvtrrv^ it  /•  0ec<r  i$  rufooSq 

tv  <r*§x* — 1 Tim.  iii.  15,  16. 


PREFACE. 

The  following  Discourses  were  drawn  up  about  twelve  months  since,  when  I expected 
a speedy  opportunity  of  delivering  them  from  the  pulpit.  As  the  views  I then  had  are  now 
over-ruled,  I take  this  method  of  laying  them  before  the  public ; that  those  who  have  thought 
proper  to  foretell  the  part  I would  have  acted,  and  the  doctrine  I would  have  taught,  if  my 
desires  had  taken  place,  may  be  either  satisfied  or  silenced. 

Yet  I should  not  have  thought  it  worth  my  while,  to  give  either  myself  or  others  this 
trouble,  merely  for  my  own  vindication.  Attempts  of  this  kind  usually  imply  too  much  of  a 
man’s  importance  to  himself,  to  be  either  acceptable  or  successful.  Or,  at  best,  it  can  be  a point 
of  no  great  moment  to  my  real  happiness,  what  the  few  persons  to  whom  my  little  name  is 
known,  are  pleased  to  say  or  think  of  me.  Nothing  but  great  inattention  to  our  true  cir- 
cumstances, can  afford  us  leisure  either  to  censure  others,  or  to  justify  ourselves ; unless 
when  the  interests  of  religion  or  morality  are  evidently  concerned.  A few  years  will  fix 
and  determine  our  characters  beyond  all  possibility  of  mistake ; and  till  then  it  would  be 
vain  to  hope  for  it. 

The  true  reasons,  therefore,  of  this  publication  are,  the  importance  of  the  subjects  treated 
of ; and  the  probability  that,  upon  this  occasion,  many  persons  who  have  not  yet  considered 
them  with  the  attention  they  deserve,  may  be  induced  (some  from  a motive  of  friendship, 
and  others  from  curiosity)  to  read  what  might  appear  in  my  name,  the  rather  for  being  mine. 

Had  I written  with  a design  to  print,  I should  have  chosen  to  put  my  sentiments  in  an- 
other form ; and  perhaps  a desire  to  avoid  the  censure  of  severe  critics,  would  have  made 
me  more  solicitous  about  expression  and  method.  But  as  I profess  to  publish  not  wrhat  I 
might,  but  what  I really  would  have  spoken,  I could  not  allow  myself  to  deviate  from  my 
first  draught,  except  in  a few  places  where  I thought  the  sense  entangled,  ambiguous,  or 
defective.  For  the  same  reason,  I am  forced  to  decline  the  judgment  and  correction  of  my 
friends,  the  advantages  of  which,  as  well  as  my  own  great  need  of  them,  I have  more  than 
once  experienced. 

If  there  is  found  in  some  places  a coincidence  of  thought  or  expression,  I hope  it  will  be 
excused ; as  I had  not  the  least  apprehension,  at  the  time  of  composing,  that  what  I de- 
signed for  distinct  and  separate  occasions,  would  ever  appear  abroad  in  one  view. 

In  a word,  so  far  as  these  Essays  are  mine,  I entreat  a candid  perusal;  and  that  those 
who  read  them  in  order  to  form  their  judgment  of  the  author,  do  not  make  their  estimate 
from  a sentence  here  and  there,  but  have  the  patience  to  read  them  throughout.  So  far 
as  what  they  contain  is  agreeable  to  scripture,  reason,  and  experience,  any  apology  would 
be  impertinent.  In  this  case  they  deserve  attention.  Every  particle  of  truth  is  valuable 
in  itself,  by  whatever  means  or  instruments  it  may  be  conveyed  to  us;  and,  like  a torch, 
displays  itself  by  its  own  light,  without  any  relation  to  the  hand  that  bears  it. 

Liverpool  January  1,  1760. 


381 


DISCOURSES,  &c 


SERMON  I. 

ON  THE  DECEITFULNESS  OF  THE  HUMAN  HEART. 


The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things , and  desperately  wicked:  who  can  know  it  ? I the 
Lord  search  the  heart , I try  the  reins , even  to  give  every  man  according  to  his  ways , 
and  according  to  the  fruit  of  his  doings. — Jer.  xvii.  9,  10. 


The  prophet  Jeremiah  had  a hard  task.  He 
was  appointed  to  inculcate  unwelcome  truths 
upon  a vain,  insensible  people.  He  had  the 
grief  to  find  all  his  expostulations  and  warn- 
ings, his  prayers  and  tears,  had  no  other  ef- 
fect than  to  make  them  account  him  their 
enemy,  and  to  draw  reproach  and  persecution 
upon  himself.  He  lived  to  see  the  accom- 
plishment of  his  own  predictions ; to  see  the 
land  of  his  nativity  desolated,  the  city  destroy- 
ed, the  people  almost  extirpated,  and  the  few 
who  remained,  transported  into  a distant 
country,  to  end  their  days  in  captivity. 

Those  who  have  resolved,  honestly  and 
steadily,  to  declare  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
have,  in  all  ages,  found  a part  of  his  trial : 
the  message  they  have  had  to  deliver  has  been 
disagreeable  and  disregarded.  It  is  no  hard 
matter  to  frame  discourses  that  shall  meet 
with  some  degree  of  general  approbation ; 
nor  is  it  difficult  to  foresee  the  reception  which 
plain  truth  must  often  meet  with  : but  those 
who  undertake  a charge  must  perform  it;  and 
ministers  are  bound  to  declare  to  the  people 
every  thing  that  regards  their  welfare,  whe- 
ther they  will  hear,  or  whether  they  will  for- 
bear. If  the  watchman  sees  the  danger  com- 
ing, and  does  not  blow  the  trumpet,  to  give 
the  most  public  notice  possible,  he  is  answer- 
able  for  all  the  evils  that  may  follow.  This  is 
applied  as  a caution  to  the  prophet  Ezekiel ; 
and  undoubtedly,  every  one  who  administers 
in  holy  things  is  concerned  in  it.  “ So  thou, 
O son  of  man,  I have  set  thee  a watchman 
unto  the  house  of  Israel ; therefore,  thou  shalt 
hear  the  word  at  my  mouth,  and  warn  them 
from  me.  When  I say  unto  the  wicked,  O 
wicked  man,  thou  shalt  surely  die ; if  thou 
dost  not  speak  to  warn  the  wicked  from  his 
way,  that  wicked  man  shall  die  in  his  iniquity, 
but  his  blood  will  I require  at  thine  hand,” 
Ezek.  xxxiii.  Let  this  awful  passage  plead 
382 


our  excuse,  if  at  any  time  we  seem  too  urgent, 
or  too  plain,  in  our  discourses.  Too  plain  or 
urgent  we  cannot  be.  Our  business  is  most 
important ; opportunities  are  critical  and  pre- 
cious. It  is  at  the  hazard  of  our  souls  if  we 
speak  deceitfully ; and  at  the  hazard  of  yours, 
if  we  speak  in  vain. 

In  the  preceding  verses,  the  prophet  gives 
us  a striking  image  of  the  opposition  between 
the  righteous  and  the  wicked,  in  their  present 
state,  their  hopes,  and  their  end.  The  one  is 
compared  to  a tree ; the  other  to  heath  and 
stubble  : the  one  planted  by  streams  of  wa- 
ter ; the  other,  exposed  on  the  salt  burning 
desert : the  one,  green,  flourishing,  all  full  of 
fruit ; the  other,  parched  and  withering.  The 
hope  of  the  one  is  fixed  on  the  Lord,  the  all- 
sufficient,  the  almighty  God ; the  rash  de- 
pendence of  the  other,  on  a frail,  feeble  arm 
of  flesh.  Suitable  to  this  difference  is  their 
end : the  one,  blessed,  provided  against  all 
evil,  so  that  he  shall  not  be  careful  in  the  year 
of  drought;  the  other,  cursed,  and  cutoff*  from 
the  expectations  of  any  amendment.  “ He 
shall  not  see  when  good  cometh.”  The  im- 
mediate design  was  perhaps  to  show  the  Jews, 
that  there  was  no  way  to  avert  the  judgments 
of  God,  and  to  avoid  the  impending  evils 
which  threatened  them,  but  by  returning  to 
the  Lord,  who  had  begun  to  smite,  and  who 
alone  was  able  to  heal  them.  But  this  they 
refused.  They  preferred  their  own  contriv- 
ances : they  leaned  upon  an  arm  of  flesh ; 
sometimes  upon  Egypt,  sometimes  upon  As- 
syria : one  while  presuming  upon  force ; ano- 
ther while  upon  cunning.  They  were  fruit- 
ful in  expedients,  and  when  one  broken  cis- 
tern failed  them,  they  had  recourse  to  another. 
But  the  prophet  denounces  the  curse  of  God 
both  on  them  and  their  supports ; subjoining 
the  words  of  my  text,  which  may  be  under- 
stood, either  as  a farther  proof  of  what  he  had 


THE  DECEITF  [JLNESS  OF  THE  HEART. 


383 


SER.  I.] 

said,  or  an  assigned  cause  of  that  obstinacy 
and  perverseness  he  had  complained  of ; 
“ The  heart  is  deceitful  above  all  things,  and 
desperately  wicked ; who  can  know  it  1” 

But,  without  confining  the  words  to  the 
first,  occasion  of  their  delivery,  I shall  consi- 
der them,  as  teaching  us  a doctrine  abundant- 
ly confirmed  by  many  other  passages  of  scrip- 
ture, “ that  the  heart  is  deceitful  and  despe- 
rately wicked  which  I shall  endeavour  to 
illustrate  in  a plain  familiar  way.  I shall, 
secondly,  from  the  next  verse,  enforce  this 
observation,  that  the  heart  (bad  as  it  is)  is 
incessantly  under  the  divine  inspection  and 
examination ; “ I the  Lord  search  the  heart, 
I try  the  reins.”  I shall,  thirdly,  consider 
the  issue  and  design  of  this  inquest;  that 
every  man  may,  in  the  end,  receive  accord- 
ing to  his  ways,  and  according  to  the  fruit  of 
his  doings.  And  may  the  Lord  enable  us 
so  to  try  and  examine  ourselves  here,  that 
hereafter  we  may  be  found  unblameable  and 
without  rebuke  before  him,  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord. 

I.  The  heart  is  here  characterised,  first,  As 
deceitful,  and  that  above,  or  in  all  things : 
secondly,  As  desperately  wicked ; in  so  dan- 
gerous, so  deplorable  a state,  as  is  not  to  be 
conceived  or  found  out.  “ Who  can  know 
it!”  The  word  in  the  original  [jyjx]  which 
we  translate  desperately  wicked , signifies  a 
mortal,  incurable  disease : a disease  which, 
seizing  on  the  vitals,  affects  and  threatens  the 
whole  frame;  and  which  no  remedy  can 
reach.  This  idea  leads  us  to  that  first  trans- 
gression, whereby  man  departing  from  God, 
fatally  destroyed  his  soul’s  health,  and  sunk 
into  that  state  so  pathetically  described  by 
Isaiah,  chap.  i.  “ The  whole  head  is  sick,”  all 
the  powers  of  the  understanding  disordered ; 
“ and  the  whole  heart  faint,”  all  the  springs 
of  the  affections  enfeebled.  “ From  the  sole 
of  the  foot,  even  unto  the  head,  there  is  no 
soundness,  but  wounds,  bruises,  and  putrify- 
ing  sores :”  the  evil  growing  worse  contin- 
ually, and  no  help  or  helper  at  hand : “ they 
have  not  been  closed  nor  bound  up,  nor  mol- 
lified with  ointment.”  In  consequence  of  this 
deep-rooted  disorder,  the  heart  is  deceitful ; 
that  is,  it  deceives  and  fails  us  in  every  in- 
stance ; it  promises  more  than  it  can  perform ; 
it  misleads  us  with  vain  desires ; and  mocks 
us  with  unsuccessful  efforts ; like  the  faint 
attempts  of  a sick  man,  to  perform  those  ac- 
tions which  require  a state  of  sound  health 
and  strength.  That  this  is  indeed  the  case, 
will  (I  think)  appear  from  the  following  par- 
ticulars ; to  which  I entreat  your  attention. 

Scripture  and  reason  do  jointly  assure  us, 
that  all  we  see  is  the  work  of  an  Almighty 
Being. — The  heavens  and  the  earth,  the  sun, 
moon,  and  stars,  and  even  the  grass  and 
flowers  of  the  field,  loudly  proclaim  the  pre- 
sence, the  power,  the  wisdom,  and  the  good- 
ness of  God:  yet  behold  the  extreme  insen- 


sibility of  man  ! The  wisest  of  our  species, 
in  those  places  where  divine  revelation  was 
not  known,  ever  mistook  the  effect  for  the 
cause,  and  ascribed  that  honour  to  the  crea- 
ture which  is  due  only  to  the  Creator.  This 
was  the  very  best  of  the  case ; for,  in  general, 
they  sunk  still  lower  to  worship  stocks  and 
stones : nay,  to  the  eternal  reproach  of  the 
natural  understanding  in  the  things  of  God. 
the  more  civilized  any  nation  was,  the  more 
renowned  for  arts  and  arms,  the  farther  they 
were  removed  from  those  they  termed  barba- 
rians, so  much  the  more  vile  and  contempti- 
ble the  idolatry  they  established  generally 
proved.  The  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians  paid 
divine  honours  to  cats,  monkeys,  and  the  vilest 
reptiles.  The  fine  taste  of  the  Greeks  conse- 
crated those  for  gods,  who,  if  they  had  lived 
amongst  men,  would  have  been  deemed  the 
pests  of  society ; gods  who  were,  professedly, 
both  patterns  and  patrons  of  the  most  shame- 
ful vices.  The  prowess  of  the  Romans  esta- 
blished altars  to  fear  and  paleness.  So  deep- 
ly were  they  infatuated,  so  totally  lost  to  com- 
mon sense,  that  the  apostle  Paul’s  worst  ene- 
mies could  find  no  more  plausible  accusation 
against  him,  in  one  of  the  politest  cities  then 
in  the  world,  than  that  he  had  ventured  to 
affirm,  “ they  were  no  gods  who  were  made 
with  hands.” 

Thus  stood  the  case  with  heathens : let  us 
now  come  nearer  home.  It  is  to  be  feared, 
the  greatest  difference  between  them  and  the 
generality  of  us  called  Christians  is,  tnat  we 
do  not  partake  in  their  gross  outward  idola- 
try. In  other  respects,  our  insensibility  is 
perhaps  as  much  greater  than  theirs,  as  our 
superior  knowledge  renders  it  more  inexcuse- 
able.  We  acknowledge  a God  : that  there  is 
but  one  ; that  he  is  the  cause  of  all  things ; 
that  in  him  we  live  and  move,  and  have  our 
being.  Had  the  poor  heathens  known  this, 
we % may  judge  by  their  application  to  their 
mistaken  worship,  it  would  have  had  some  in- 
fluence on  their  practice.  But  what  numbers 
of  us  live  altogether  as  “ without  God  in  the 
world.”  I come  not  here  to  make  invectives ; 
let  conscience  judge  and  give  evidence  ac- 
cordingly. What  do  we  think  of  the  perpetual 
presence  of  God  around  us,  and  within  us  1 
W e know  that  he  is  acquainted  with  all  our 
thoughts,  words,  and  actions ; yet  are  we  not 
more  effectually  restrained  and  awed  by  the 
presence  of  our  fellow-worms,  than  by  the 
regard  of  that  eye  which  is  ten  thousand  times 
brighter  than  the  sun ! How  are  we  affected 
by  the  works  of  God ! Has  not  the  appear- 
ance of  a fine  day,  or  the  beauty  of  an  exten- 
sive prospect,  a force  to  extort  a sense  of  sa- 
tisfaction from  every  one!  but  how  few  are 
there  of  us  that  can  realize  and  acknowledge 
the  hand  of  the  glorious  author  of  these 
things ! How  seldom,  and  how  faintly,  do 
we  adopt  the  reflection  of  David ! “ When  I 
consider  thy  heavens,  the  work  of  thy  fingers, 


384 


ON  THE  DECEITFULNESS 


the  moon  and  the  stars  which  thou  hast  or- 
dained ; What  is  man,  that  thou  art  mind- 
ful of  him?  and  the  son  of  man  that  thou 
visitest  him  ?”  Psal.  viii.  What  is  our  judg- 
ment of  the  word  of  God,  that  glorious  mes- 
sage of  love,  in  which  he  has  pointed  out  to 
us  the  way  of  salvation?  Is  not  this  book 
the  least  read,  the  least  admired,  and  the 
least  understood  of  any  ? We  are  presently 
affected,  we  enter  with  all  our  spirit  into  the 
moving  incidents  (as  we  term  them)  of  a ro- 
mance or  tragedy,  though  we  know  they  are 
not  founded  on  truth,  nor  have  any  relation 
to  ourselves ; but  we  can  read  the  history  of 
Jesus  Christ,  his  life  and  doctrines,  his  death 
and  passion,  with  indifference,  though  we 
say,  all  he  spoke,  or  did,  or  suffered,  was  for 
our  sakes.  What  are  our  thoughts  of  that 
eternity  to  which  we  are  posting,  and  to 
which,  for  aught  we  know,  a few  hours  may 
introduce  us  ? Is  it  not  in  the  power  of  the 
merest  trifle  that  occurs,  to  hide  this  import- 
ant point  from  our  view?  It  were  easy  to 
multiply  particulars : but  are  not  these  suffi- 
cient to  show  the  deceitfulness,  the  desperate 
wickedness  of  the  heart?  Let  me  add  one 
more : the  judgments  of  God  are  now  abroad 
in  the  world  for  these  things.  We  have 
warnings  all  around  us.  We  know  that 
many  fruitful  lands  in  our  neighbourhood  are 
in  a manner  turned  into  a wilderness,  for  the 
sins  of  the  inhabitants.  Every  post  brings 
us  tidings  of  some  new  desolation,  and  we 
cannot  tell  how  soon  the  case  may  be  our 
own ; but  we  have  neither  sympathy  for  our 
fellow-creatures  nor  concern  for  ourselves. 
We  hear,  we  pity,  we  forget  in  the  same  in- 
stant : but  these  things  are  remote.  Is,  then, 
what  we  see  and  feel  more  laid  to  heart? 
Our  friends  and  acquaintance  are  taken  from 
amongst  us,  daily,  some  of  them  suddenly,  in 
the  midst  of  their  "warmest  pursuits,  or  just 
upon  the  accomplishment  of  their  most  fa- 
vourite schemes : we  drop  an  unmeaning 
tear,  and  fly  to  every  officious  vanity  for  re- 
lief. Perhaps  we  are  visited  ourselves,  and 
brought  down  to  the  borders  of  the  grave ; 
but  even  against  this  we  are,  for  the  most 
part,  proof,  or,  if  we  feel  a slight  impression, 
it  gradually  wears  off  with  the  disease,  and 
we  return,  as  soon  as  we  recover,  to  our  for- 
mer follies  with  redoubled  ardour. 

This  is  a slight  view  of  the  insensibility  of 
the  human  heart : let  us  now  consider  its  in- 
gratitude. The  Israelites  were  a sample  of 
all  mankind  in  this  respect.  God  visited  them 
in  Egypt  in  the  midst  of  their  affliction. 
Without  any  application  on  their  part,  he 
undertook  and  effected  their  deliverance: 
he  brought  them  from  among  their  enemies 
“ with  a high  hand,  and  a stretched-out  arm 
he  led  them  safely  through  the  wilderness;  he 
screened  them  with  a cloud,  from  the  piercing 
beams  of  the  sun ; he  gave  them  light  by  night, 
in  a pillar  of  fire ; he  fed  them  with  bread 


|SER.  I. 

from  heaven,  and  caused  streams  to  flow  in 
the  sandy  desert ; he  made  a covenant  with 
them,  and  chose  them  for  his  peculiar  people ; 
he  destroyed  all  their  enemies  before  them ; 
and,  at  length,  put  them  in  the  full  and  peace- 
able possession  of  a land  flowing  with  milk 
and  honey.  Interwoven  with  the  history  of 
God’s  gracious  dealings  with  them,  we  have 
an  account  of  their  behaviour  towards  him, 
which  was  a continual  series  of  rebellion, 
perverseness,  murmuring,  and  disobedience. 
And  are  we  better  than  they?  In  no  wise.  II 
we  had  leisure  to  consider  the  natural,  civil, 
and  religious  advantages  we  enjoy  as  a nation, 
it  would  appear  that  we  likewise  have  long 
been  a peculiarly  favoured  people.  The  eye 
of  the  Lord  our  God  has  been  upon  us  con- 
tinually for  good,  and  we  have  reason  to  say, 
“ He  has  not  dealt  so  with  any  nation.”  The 
history  of  all  ages  and  countries  affords  us  no 
instance  of  national  prosperity  that  can  be 
compared,  either  for  degree  or  continuance, 
with  what  we  have  enjoyed  since  the  Revolu- 
tion : nor  would  it  be  easy,  I fear,  to  find  a 
parallel  in  any  history  of  our  great  ingrati- 
tude. What  I have  said  in  the  former  arti- 
cle will  necessarily  infer  this ; for  it  is  impos- 
sible that  those  who  have  so  little  sensibility, 
either  of  the  value  of  the  gifts  of  God,  or  of 
his  hand  in  bestowing  them,  can  be  grateful. 
The  seat  of  ingratitude  is  in  the  heart : the 
proof  appears  in  words  and  actions.  Now, 
what  are  the  prevailing  subjects  of  conversa- 
tion amongst  us  ? Are  the  great  things  that 
God  has  done  for  us,  the  high  obligations  we 
are  under  to  him,  the  comforts  of  our  holy 
religion,  and  the  nature  of  that  blessed  hope 
set  before  us  by  the  gospel,  in  the  number? 
On  the  contrary,  is  not  the  least  hint  of 
these  things  in  company,  for  the  most  part, 
received  with  reserve,  if  not  with  contempt 
and  disgust  ? “ Out  of  the  abundance  of  the 

heart  the  mouth  speaketh.”  God,  and  the 
things  of  God,  have  little  place  there;  but 
levity,  detraction,  ill-temper,  and,  not  sel- 
dom, profaneness  and  obscenity,  in  our  dis- 
courses, too  plainly  discover  the  nature  of  the 
fountain  from  whence  they  flow7.  And  if  wTe 
look  upon  the  actions  of  men  in  general,  they 
are  but  of  a piece  with  their  words;  en- 
grossed by  business,  or  enslaved  to  pleasure; 
for  a season  all  upon  the  stretch  in  amassing 
treasures,  and  then  perhaps  as  Testless  and 
eager  to  dissipate  them.  Whatever  passion 
rules  them  for  the  time,  or  whatever  changes 
they  may  admit  in  their  schemes,  it  is  too 
plain,  that  a principle  of  gratitude  to  God, 
and  a conscious  desire  to  please  him,  have 
little  influence  either  in  forming  or  executing 
their  plans.  If  these  things  are  so,  we  have 
another  instance  of  the  deeeitfulness  and 
desperate  wickedness  of  the  heart : it  is  full 
of  the  blackest  ingratitude. 

Need  any  thing  be  added  to  these  two 
charges?  Have  we  not  said  enougl  jc  Jon 


SER.  I.J 

firm  the  prophet’s  assertion  ! If  not,  we  can 
name  a third  particular,  if  possible,  more 
absurd  and  inexcusable  than  either  of  the 
former.  Man  is  not  only  insensible  of  the 
greatest  part  of  those  things  which  most 
concern  him,  and  ungrateful  and  disobedient 
to  his  maker  and  preserver,  his  best  and  only 
friend,  but  he  is  proud  too.  Though  he  has 
nothing  but  what  he  has  received,  has  re- 
ceived nothing  but  what  he  has  perverted 
and  mismanaged,  and  must  render  a strict 
account  of  his  mismanagement,  yet  he  is 
proud.  We  have  already  seen  his  blindness 
ar;d  baseness;  there  wanted  only  pride  to 
make  him  a monster  indeed.  And  need  we 
spend  time  to  prove  thisl  No.  This  at  least 
is  a universal  evil.  Any  man  may  easily 
perceive  it  in  every  man  but  himself;  and 
every  thinking  man  may  perceive  it  working 
within  himself  incessantly.  Whether  we  are 
alone  or  in  company,  whether  with  friends  or 
enemies,  with  those  above  us  or  those  below 
us,  pride  will  insinuate.  Nay,  in  the  imme- 
diate presence  of  God,  when  we  come  to- 
gether to  implore  his  mercy,  while  the  most 
humbling  confessions  are  upon  our  lips,  and 
we  are  charging  ourselves  as  most  miserable, 
helpless  sinners,  even  here  pride  will  find 
us  out.  Those  must  be  great  strangers  to 
themselves,  who  are  not  sensible  of  this. 
Now,  why  is  dust  and  ashes  proud!  proud 
of  our  failings ! proud  of  our  infirmities ! Is 
t not  from  hence,  because  the  heart  is  de- 
plorably diseased,  desperately  wicked,  and 
deeply  deceitful ! 

I shaf  pursue  this  point  no  farther.  I shall 
'.<ot  attempt  to  enumerate,  at  present,  those 
" evL  thoughts,  murders,  adulteries,  forni- 
cations, thefts,  and  blasphemies”  (Mark  vii. 
21,)  which,  our  Lord  assures  us,  do  per- 
petually “proceed  from  the  heart.”  I chose 
to  insist  on  insensibility,  ingratitude,  and 
pride,  because  these  are  the  vices  which,  in 
common  life,  we  most  condemn,  are  willing 
to  think  ourselves  most  free  from,  and  can 
the  least  bear  to  be  charged  with.  And  it 
must  be  allowed,  that  between  man  and  man 
there  is  often  the  appearance  of  much  gene- 
rosity, gratitude,  and  condescension ; but 
what  will  it  avail  us,  that  we  stand  upon 
some  tolerable  terms  towards  each  other  in 
these  respects,  if  wTe  are  guilty  before  God  ! 
“ The  Lord  seeth  not  as  man  seeth”  (1  Sam. 
xvi.  7 :)  he  cannot  be  deceived  or  put  off 
with  a fair  appearance ; for  he  searcheth  the 
heart  and  trieth  the  reins.  This  is  the  next 
point  to  be  considered. 

II.  That  the  heart,  with  all  its  workings, 
and  all  its  faults,  is  incessantly  under  the  di- 
vine inspection  and  examination : “ I the 
Lord  search  the  heart,  I try  the  reins.”  The 
heart  and  reins,  as  distinguished  in  scrip- 
ture-phrase, signify  those  different  powers  of 
the  mind,  the  affections  and  the  thoughts. 
The  words  search  and  try  have  an  emphasis 
3 C 


385 

in  the  original,  which  cannot  be  reached 
without  a paraphrase,  if  at  all. 

The  Lord  searches  [Ipn]  the  heart:  he 
traces,  investigates  the  inmost  principle  of 
our  souls  to  its  first  rise,  with,  if  I may  so 
speak,  a mathematical  accuracy.  He  tries 
[jllD]  the  reins:  he  watches  every  rising 
thought ; he  brings  it  to  the  test  of  his  most 
pure  law ; he  examines  it  with  the  utmost 
exactness,  as  a refiner  assays  his  metals,  with 
a purpose  to  reject  whatever  is  inferior  to 
the  prescribed  standard.  To  form  a more 
just  idea  of  this  scrutiny,  let  us  ask  ourselves 
how  we  could  bear  to  be  obliged  to  declare 
aloud,  in  full  company,  every  thought  which 
passes  through  our  minds,  every  wish  and 
desire  of  which  we  are  conscious,  without 
the  least  reserve  or  exception ! I am  per- 
suaded there  are  few  people  so  lost  to  shame, 
but,  if  they  were  brought  to  this  trial,  they 
would  rather  choose  to  die  than  to  comply 
with  it.  Some  things  they  would  perceive, 
especially  upon  such  a provocation,  which 
they  could  hardly,  upon  any  terms,  prevail 
with  themselves  to  express.  The  Lord  has 
mercifully  kept  us  from  the  knowledge  of 
each  other’s  hearts,  any  farther  than  we  are 
willing  to  disclose  ourselves;  for,  were  every 
man  compelled  to  speak  all  he  thinks,  there 
would  be  an  en’d  of  society ; and  man  would 
no  more  venture  to  dwell  with  man  than  with 
tigers  and  bears.  We  know  what  mischief 
one  ungoverned  tongue  may  sometimes  occa- 
sion : now,  the  tongue  can  do  no  evil,  any  far- 
ther than  as  it  is  an  instrument  of  disclosing 
the  hidden  things  of  the  heart;  yet  it  is  but 
a small  part  of  these  the  worst  tongue  ia 
capable  of  disclosing.  What,  then,  would  be 
the  case,  if  all  our  hearts  were  open,  all  our 
desires  known  to  one  another!  What  a mix- 
ture of  confusion  and  defiance,  shame,  rage, 
fear,  and  contempt,  would  overspread  every 
countenance!  and  yet  thus  we  are  exposed  to 
the  searching  eye  of  a pure  and  holy  God  ! 
The  Lord  knows  the  thoughts  of  man’s  heart, 
that  they  are  vain.  He  long  ago  declared  the 
result  of  his  observation : “ God  saw  that  the 
wickedness  of  man  was  great  in  the  earth ; 
and  that  every  imagination  of  the  thoughts 
of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually,”  Gen. 
vi.  And  though  the  world  was  drowned  for 
this,  matters  were  not  mended  afterwards; 
for,  upon  a second  survey,  the  judgment 
amounts  to  the  same : “ The  Lord  looked 
down  from  heaven  upon  the  children  of  men, 
to  see  if  there  were  any  that  did  under- 
stand, and  seek  God.  They  are  all  gone 
aside;  they  are  altogether  become  filthy; 
there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one. 
Their  throat  is  an  open  sepulchre;  with 
their  tongues  they  have  used  deceit,  the 
poison  of  asps  is  under  their  lips.”  Psalm 
xiv.  Isaiah  liv.  Compare  Romans  iii.  How 
it  was  in  our  blessed  Saviour’s  time,  we  have 
already  observed ; and  neither  scripture  nor 


OF  THE  HUMAN  HEART. 


386 


DECEITFULNESS  OF  THE  HEART. 


[ser.  r. 


experience  gives  us  reason  to  hope  it  has 
been  better  since,  or  is  now.  The  apostle 
Paul  has  assured  us,  “ That,  in  the  last  days” 
t,a  character  which,  it  is  likely,  coincides 
with  our  days)  “ perilous  times  shall  come. 
For  men  shall  be  lovers  of  their  own  selves, 
covetous,  boasters,  proud,  blasphemers,  dis- 
obedient to  parents,  unthankful,  unholy,  with- 
out natural  affection,  truce-breakers,  false 
accusers,  incontinent,  fierce,  despisers  of 
those  that  are  good,  traitors,  heady,  high- 
minded,  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than  lovers 
of  God ; having  a form  of  godliness,  but  deny- 
ing the  power  thereof,”  2 Tim.  iii. — Surely, 
I say,  if  these  are  marks  of  the  last  days, 
they  must  be  already  commenced.  How- 
ever, we  see,  upon  the  whole,  how  vile  and 
hateful  our  hearts  must  appear  in  the  sight 
of  a heart-searching  God. 

III.  One  thing  more  we  have  to  consider  : 
That  the  Lord  does  not  observe  the  heart  of 
man  with  the  indifference  of  a mere  specta- 
tor, but  as  an  impartial  and  inflexible  judge ; 
“that  he  may  give  every  man  according  to 
his  ways,  and  according  to  the  fruit  of  his 
doings.”  This  was  the  third  particular  to  be 
9poken  to. 

But,  alas ! what  can  be  said  to  this  1 Is  it 
not  sufficient  to  fill  our  souls  with  astonish- 
ment, and  to  cause  all  faces  to  gather  black- 
ness, to  hear,  that  the  Lord  has  purposed  to 
render  to  every  man  according  to  his  works ; 
and  that  he  sits  judge,  not  only  upon  out- 
ward actions,  but  examines  the  very  thoughts 
and  intents  of  the  heart  1 Hare  any  of  us  abide 
the  issue  of  such  a trial  1 Which  of  us  will 
presume  to  say,  I am  clean  ? To  what  pur- 
pose can  any  of  us  plead,  I have  not  commit- 
ted adultery,  if  God  charges  us  with  every 
inordinate  desire,  with  every  offence  of  the 
eye  1 What  will  it  avail,  that  we  have  never 
assaulted  the  life  of  our  neighbour,  if  every 
angry  word,  every  degree  of  ill-will  or  re- 
venge, is  considered  as  murder  in  God's  sight  1 
It  will  not  suffice  to  say,  I am  no  thief  or  ex- 
tortioner, unless  we  can  clear  ourselves  of 
the  most  distant  wish  of  possessing  what  was 
the  property  of  another.  If  we  are  sure  that 
we  have  not  forsworn  ourselves,  but  have  per- 
formed to  the  Lord  our  oaths,  it  is  only  thus 
far  well,  that  we  shall  not  be  condemned  for 
open  and  actual  perjury:  but  if  we  have  at 
any  time  mentioned,  or  even  thought  of  the 
name  of  God,  without  the  highest  habitual 
reverence,  we  have  taken  his  name  in  vain; 
and  he  has  declared  he  will  not  hold  us  guilt- 
less. That  this  is  no  gloss  of  my  inventing, 
but  the  very  words  of  truth,  the  declaration 
of  him  by  whom  we  must  be  one  day  judged, 
the  5th  chapter  of  Matthew  will  inform  you. 
There  a wanton  glance  is  styled  adultery  ; an 
angry  expression  censured  as  murder ; and  to 
speak  unadvisedly  even  of  the  hairs  of  our 
head,  is  deemed  a branch  of  profane  swearing. 
And  why ! because  all  these  spring  from  the 


heart,  which  is  “ naked  and  open,”  without 
either  covering  or  concealment,  “ in  the  sight 
of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do,”  Heb.  iv. 
This  is  thought  uncomfortable  doctrine ; ann 
not  without  reason,  could  we  go  no  farther. 
For  there  is  nothing  in  heaven  or  in  e£ith, 
in  time  or  eternity,  that  affords  the  least 
glimpse  of  comfort  to  fallen  man,  if  either 
God  is  strict  to  mark  what  is  amiss,  or  if  he, 
trusting  in  himself,  presumes  to  plead  with 
his  Maker.  The  divine  law  requires  per- 
fect, unremitted,  unsinning  obedience ; it 
denounces  a curse  upon  the  least  failure ; 
“ Cursed  is  every  one  that  continueth  not  in 
all  things  which  are  written  in  the  book  of 
the  law  to  do  them ;”  (Gal.  iii.  10 ;)  every  one, 
without  exception  of  person  or  circumstance, 
that  continueth  not,  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end  of  life,  in  all  things,  great  and  small,  to 
do  them,  r-.-j  s-so -<r*i  aura,  to  finish  them,  to  do 
them  completely,  without  any  defect  either 
: in  matter  or  manner.  Most  uncomfortable 
doctrine  indeed,  -were  there  no  remedy  pro- 
vided. For  the  law  of  God  is  as  eternal  and 
unchangeable  as  his  nature : it  must  not,  it 
cannot  be  attempered  or  brought  down  to  our 
capacities ; neither  can  the  penalty  be  evaded : 
for  the  God  of  truth  has  said,  has  sworn,  that 
“ the  soul  that  sinneth  shall  die,”  Ezek.  xviii. 
4.  Here,  then,  we  must  receive  “ a sentence 
of  death  in  ourselves,”  2 Cor.  i.  9.  Here, 
“ every  mouth  must  be  stopped,  and  all  the 
world  become  guilty  before  God,”  Rom.  iii. 
19.  Here  we  must  say,  with  the  apostle, 
“ Therefore,  by  the  deeds  of  the  law,  there 
shall  be  no  flesh  justified  in  his  sight;”  (Gal. 
ii.  16  :)  “ for  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of 
sin,”  Rom.  iii.  20.  O that  we  could  all  sin- 
cerely say  so  ; that  we  were  brought  to  this, 
to  feel  and  confess  our  lost,  undone  estate, 
and  our  utter  inability  to  save  ourselves ! then 
with  joy  should  I proceed  to  what  I have  had 
in  my  eye  all  along.  For  with  what  view 
have  I said  so  much  upon  so  disagreeable  a 
| subject  1 why  have  I attempted  to  lay  open 
some  of  the  depths  of  the  heart  1 but  that  I 
: might  more  fully  illustrate  the  wonderful 
| grace  and  goodness  of  God,  vouchsafed  to  us  in 
the  gospel ; and  at  the  same  time  show  the 
! utter  impossibility,  not  of  being  saved  at  all, 
but  of  finding  salvation  in  any  other  way  than 
! in  that  which  God  has  appointed.  For,  be- 
, hold ! God  so  loved  the  world  (John  iii.) 

: that  he  sent  his  Son  to  accomplish  that  for 
us,  which  the  law  could  not  do  through  the 
weakness  of  our  flesh,  Rom.  viii.  Jesus 
Christ  performed  perfect  obedience  to  the 
law  of  God  in  our  behalf ; he  died,  and  satis- 
fied the  penalty  due  to  our  sins ; he  rose  from 
the  grave  as  our  representative ; he  is  entered 
into  heaven  as  our  forerunner.  “ lie  has  re- 
ceived gifts  for  men,  even  for  the  rebellious,” 
Psalms  lxviii.  He  is  “exalted”  on  high.“tc 
bestow  repentance  and  remission  of  sins” 
(Acts  v.)  on  all  that  seek  to  him.  He  has 


THE  SAVIOUR  AND  HIS  SALVATION. 


367 


SER.  II.] 

established  his  ordinances  for  this  purpose : 
he  has  commanded  his  people  not  to  neglect 
the  assembling  of  themselves  together.  He 
has  charged  his  ministers  at  such  seasons  to 
declare  first  the  guilty,  deplorable  condition 
of  mankind,  and  then  to  proclaim  the  glad 
hidings  of  salvation,  by  faith  which  is  in  him. 
He  has  promised  to  be  with  them  in  this 
work  to  the  end  of  the  world.  He  has  pro- 
mised, that  where  his  word  is  faithfully 
preached,  he  will  accompany  it  with  a spirit 
and  power  that  will  bear  down  all  opposition. 
He  has  promised,  that  while  we  are  speaking 
to  the  ear,  he  will,  by  his  secret  influence, 
apply  it  to  the  heart,  and  open  it  to  receive 
and  embrace  the  truth  spoken,  as  in  the  case 
of  Lydia.  Who  would  venture  to  preach  a 
doctrine  so  unpalatable  to  the  carnal  mind,  as 
Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified  1 Who  would 
undertake  so  ungrateful  a task  as  to  depreci- 
ate that  noble  creature  man,  and  arraign  him 
publicly  of  insensibility,  ingratitude,  pride, 
and  deceit ; were  it  not  that  we  have,  first,  a 
command,  and  that,  at  our  peril,  to  speak 
plain ; and,  secondly,  a promise  that  we  shall 
not  speak  in  vain  1 Not  that  we  can  expect  to 
be  universally  received : The  time  is  come, 
when  many  “ will  not  endure  sound  doctrine 
(2  Tim.  iv.  3;)  but  some  there  will  be,  whom 
God  is  pleased  to  save  by  the  foolishness  of 
preaching,  so  called.  Some  such  I would 
hope  are  in  this  assembly.  To  such  I say, 
think  not  to  satisfy  the  divine  justice  by  any 
poor  performances  of  your  own ; think  not  to 
cleanse  or  expiate  the  evil  of  your  hearts  by 
any  of  your  own  inventions;  but,  “behold 
the  Lamb  of  God,  who  taketh  away  the  sins 
of  the  world,”  John  i.  29.  He  died,  that  you 
may  live : he  lives,  that  you  may  live  for  ever. 
Put,  therefore,  your  trust  in  the  Lord ; for 
with  him  is  plenteous  redemption.  His  suf- 
ferings and  death  are  a complete  final  propi- 
tiation for  sin.  “ He  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost and  he  is  as  willing  as  he  is  able. 
It  was  this  brought  him  down  from  heaven  ; 
for  this  he  emptied  hitnself  of  all  glory,  and 
submitted  to  all  indignity.  His  humiliation 
expiates  our  pride ; his  perfect  love  atones 
for  our  ingratitude ; his  exquisite  tenderness 
pleads  for  our  insensibility.  Only  believe; 
commit  your  cause  to  him  by  faith  and  pray- 
er. As  a Priest,  he  shall  make  atonement 
for  your  sins,  and  present  your  persons  and 
your  services  acceptable  before  God.  As  a 
Prophet,  he  shall  instruct  you  in  the  true 
wisdom,  which  maketh  wise  to  salvation;  he 
shall  not  only  cause  you  to  know  his  com- 
mandments, but  to  love  them  too;  he  shall 
write  them  in  your  hearts.  As  a King,  he 
shall  evermore  mightily  defend  you  against 
all  your  enemies.  He  shall  enable  you  to 
withstand  temptations^ to  support  difficulties, 
to  break  through  all  opposition.  He  shall 
supply  you  with  every  thing  you  need,  for 
this  life  or  a better,  out  of  the  unsearchable 


riches  of  his  grace.  He  shall  strengthen  you 
to  overcome  all  things ; to  endure  to  the  end , 
and  then  he  shall  give  you  a place  in  his  king- 
dom ; a seat  near  his  throne ; a crown  of  life ; 
a crown  of  glory,  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and 
that  fadeth  not  away. 


SERMON  II. 

ON  THE  SAVIOUR  AND  HIS  SALVATION. 

This  is  a faithful  saying , and  worthy  of  all 

acceptation , that  Christ  Jesus  came  into 

the  world  to  save  sinners ; of  whom  I am 
chief — 1 Tim.  i.  15. 

Though  the  apostle  Paul  has  written  large- 
ly and  happily  upon  every  branch  of  Christian 
doctrine  and  practice ; and  with  respect  to 
his  writings,  as  well  as  his  preaching,  could 
justly  assert,  that  he  had  not  shunned  to  de- 
clare the  whole  counsel  of  God ; yet  there 
are  two  points  which  seem  to  have  been  (if  I 
may  so  speak)  his  favourite  topics,  which  he 
most  frequently  repeats,  most  copiously  in- 
sists on,  and  takes  every  occasion  of  intro- 
ducing. The  one  is,  to  display  the  honours, 
powers,  and  faithfulness  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ; the  other,  to  make  known  the  great 
things  God  had  done  for  his  own  soul.  How 
his  heart  was  filled  and  fired  with  the  first  of 
these,  is  evident  from  almost  every  chapter 
of  his  Epistles.  When  he  speaks  of  the  mys- 
tery of  godliness,  “ God  manifested  in  the 
flesh,”  and  the  exceeding  grace  and  love  de- 
clared to  a lost  world  through  him,  the  utmost 
powers  of  language  fall  short  of  his  purpose. 
With  a noble  freedom  he  soars  beyond  the 
little  bounds  of  criticism ; and,  finding  the 
most  expressive  words  too  weak  and  faint  for 
his  ideas,  he  forms  and  compounds  new  ones, 
heaps  one  hyperbole  upon  another ; yet,  after 
his  most  laboured  essays  to  do  justice  to  his 
subject,  he  often  breaks  off  in  a manner  that 
shows  he  was  far  from  being  satisfied  with  all 
he  could  say.  This  reflection  is  most  obvious 
to  those  who  can  read  him  in  the  original : 
but  no  disadvantages  of  a translation  can 
wholly  confine  that  inimitable  ardour  with 
which  he  seems  to  pour  his  whole  soul  into 
his  words,  when  he  is  speaking  of  his  Lord 
and  Saviour.  And  he  who  can  read  the  first 
chapters  of  his  epistles  to  the  Ephesians,  Co- 
lossians,  and  Hebrews,  the  second  to  the  Phi- 
lippians,  or  many  similar  passages,  with  in- 
difference, must  be,  I say,  not  merely  a per- 
son of  small  devotion,  but  of  little  taste  and 
sensibility. 

And  bow  deeply  his  mind  was  impressed 
with  the  mercies  he  had  received  in  his  con- 
version and  call,  is  equally  conspicuous.  He 
takes  every  occasion  to  aggrandize  the  good- 
ness of  God  to  himself ; to  exaggerate  and 


389 


ON  THE  SAVIOUR  AND  HIS  SALVATION. 


deplore  the  guilt  and  misery  of  his  former 
life,  in  which  he  once  trusted  ; and  to  lament 
the  small  returns  he  was  able  to  make  for 
such  blessings;  even  when  he  could  say, 
without  boasting,  that  he  had  “ laboured  more 
abundantly”  than  the  most  diligent  and  zeal- 
ous of  his  fellow-servants. 

A powerful  abiding  sense  of  these  two 
points  upon  the  apostle’s  mind,  have  given  rise 
to  many  sudden,  lively,  and  beautiful  digres- 
sions in  the  course  of  his  writings.  The  con- 
text to  the  passage  I have  read  is  of  this  kind. 
Having  incidentally  spoken  ofthe  gospel  in  the 
11th  verse,  he  is  suddenly  struck  with  the  re- 
flection of  his  own  misery  while  ignorant  of 
it,  and  the  wonderful  goodness  of  God,  in  af- 
fording him  the  knowledge  of  salvation,  and 
honouring  him,  who  was  before  a blasphemer, 
with  a commission  to  publish  the  same  glad 
tidings  to  others.  This  thought  suspends  his 
argument,  and  fills  his  heart  and  mouth  with 
praise.  And  having  acknowledged,  that  “ the 
grace  of  our  Lord  was  exceeding  abundant” 
towards  himself,  he  subjoins  the  words  of  the 
text,  for  an  encouragement  to  others ; assur- 
ing us,  that  his  case  was  not  so  peculiar,  but 
that  multitudes  might  be  partakers  with  him 
in  the  same  hope  of  mercy. 

The  words  easily  resolve  into  two  parts : 

1st,  A short,  but  comprehensive  proposi- 
tion, including  the  purport  of  the  whole  gos- 
pel, “ That  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world 
to  save  sinners.” 

2d,  A commendation  of  this  doctrine  in  a 
twofold  respect,  “ as  a faithful  saying,”  and 
as  “ worthy  of  all  acceptation ;”  each  of  these 
illustrated  by  the  instance  of  himself,  when 
he  adds,  “ of  whom  I am  chief.” 

I.  The  apostle  well  knew  the  different  re- 
ception the  gospel  would  meet  in  the  world ; 
that  many  poor,  guilty  souls,  trembling  under 
a sense  of  sin  and  unworthiness,  would  very 
hardly  be  persuaded,  that  such  sinners  as  they 
could  be  saved  at  all.  To  these  he  recom- 
mends it  as  “ a faithful  saying,”  founded  up- 
on the  immutable  counsel,  promise,  and  oath 
of  God,  “that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world 
to  save  sinners;”  sinners  in  general ; “the 
chief  of  sinners;”  such  as  he  represents  him- 
self to  have  been.  He  knew  likewise,  that 
many  others,  from  a mistaken  opinion  of  their 
own  goodness,  or  a mistaken  dependence  on 
something  of  their  own  choosing,  would  be 
liable  to  undervalue  this  faithful  saying.  For 
the  sake  of  these  he  adds,  “ it  is  worthy  of  all 
acceptation.”  None  are  so  bad  but  the  gos- 
pel affords  them  a ground  of  hope  ; none  are 
so  good  as  to  have  any  just  ground  of  hope 
without  it.  There  was  a time  when  St.  Paul 
could  have  made  a fair  profession  of  himself 
likewise  ; he  could  say,  “ circumcised  on  the 
eighth  day,  of  the  stock  of  Israel,  of  the  tribe 
of  Benjamin,  an  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews,  as 
to  the  law  a Pharisee,  as  to  the  righteousness 
which  is  by  the  law,  blameless,”  Phil.  iii. 


[ser.  il 

But  he  has  been  since  taught,  “ to  count  all 
things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ ;”  and  is  content  to  style  him- 
self the  chief  of  sinners. 

Having  thus  attempted  to  show  the  design 
and  meaning  of  the  words,  I propose,  some- 
what more  at  large,  to  unfold  the  proposition, 
and  point  out  some  of  those  important  and 
extensive  truths  it  contains.  I say  some  of 
them ; for  it  is  not  possible  that  either  men 
or  angels  can  fully  sound  the  depth  of  this  one 
sentence,  “ that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners.”  I shall  afterwards 
infer,  and  enforce  the  other  part  of  the  text, 
“ that  it  is  indeed  a faithful  saying,  and  wor- 
thy of  all  acceptation.”  And"  may  He,  who 
came  into  the  world  to  procure  salvation  for 
sinners,  and  is  now  exalted  on  high  to  bestow 
it,  accompany  the  whole  with  his  promised 
blessing. 

The  tenor  of  the  proposition  readily  sug- 
gests three  inquiries  : 1st,  Who  this  person 
is,  here  spoken  of,  Jesus  Christ  1 2d,  What 
is  meant  by  the  salvation  he  is  said  to  have 
undertaken  7 3d,  By  what  means  he  effect- 
ed it  7 

Let  us,  first,  speak  of  this  gracious,  this 
wonderful  person,  Jesus  Christ.  We  already 
bear  his  name  as  professed  Christians;  and  we 
speak  of  him  as  our  Master,  and  our  Lord ; 
and  so  far  we  say  well.  But,  as  he  has  told 
us,  many  will  call  him  Lord  at  the  great  day, 
to  whom  he  will  profess,  “ I never  knew  you 
whence  you  are,  depart ;”  so  it  is  to  be  fear- 
ed there  are  many  now,  that  outwardlv  ac- 
knowledge him,  who  neither  know  wnence 
he  is,  nor  who  he  is.  Though  we  have  Moses 
and  the  prophets,  the  apostles  and  evan- 
gelists, continually  with  us ; though  it  is  the 
immediate  aim  and  intent  of  all  their  writings, 
in  every  history,  promise,  prophecy,  type,  ce- 
remony, and  law,  to  set  him  before  our  eyes; 
and  though  there  is  hardly  an  image  in  the 
material  creation  but  is  adopted  by  the  scrip- 
tures to  shadow  forth  his  excellency  ; igno- 
rance of  Jesus  Christ,  and  what  he  has  done 
for  his  people,  is  the  great  cause  that  religion 
appears  so  low  and  contemptible  to  some,  and 
is  found  so  tedious  and  burdensome  by  others. 
Let  us,  therefore,  attend  to  the  record  God 
has  given  of  his  Son ; for  I propose  in  this 
article  to  say  little  of  my  own,  but  to  lay  be- 
fore you  the  express,  powerful,  indubitable 
testimony  of  holy  scripture. 

And  here  we  are  taught,  first,  That  Jesus 
Christ  is  God.  The  first  words  of  St.  John’s 
Gospel  are  full  to  this  point:  “In  the  be- 
ginning” (that  is,  at  the  commencement  of 
time  and  things,  when  as  yet  nothing  else 
existed)  “ was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was 
with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God.”  To  pre- 
vent a possibility  of  jpistake,  and  to  confirm 
the  eternity  of  this  divine  Word  in  the  strong- 
est manner,  it  is  immediately  added,  “ The 
same  was  in  the  beginning  with  God:  all 


ON  THE  SAVIOUR  AND  HIS  SALVATION. 


389 


SER.  II.] 

things  were  made  by  him.”  And  lest  this 
likewise  should  either  be  contested  or  misun- 
derstood, it  is  guarded  by  an  universal  ne- 
gative, “ without  him  was  not  any  thing  made 
that  was  made.”  Farther,  to  prevent,  if  pos- 
sible, the  surmise  that,  in  these  glorious 
works,  the  eternal  Word  acted  with  a de- 
puted power  oniy,  the  apostle  subjoins, “ In  him 
was  life,”  life  essentially ; and  from  him,  as 
the  fountain,  life  and  light  proceeded  to  his 
creatures : “ In  him  was  life,  and  that  life 
was  the  light  of  men.”  To  this  agrees  the 
declaration  of  St.  Paul,  “For  by  him  were 
all  things  created  that  are  in  heaven,  and  that 
are  in  earth,  visible  and  invisible,  whether 
thrones,  or  dominions,  or  principalities,  or 
powers ; all  things  were  created  by  him  and 
for  him  ;”  by  his  power  and  wisdom,  and  for 
his  glory  and  pleasure.  “ And  he  is  before 
all  things,  and  by  him  all  things  consist.” 
Col.  i.  Elsewhere  he  speaks  of  him  expressly, 
as  “ over  all  God  blessed  for  ever ; who  up- 
holdeth  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power ; 
the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.”  It 
were  easy  to  enlarge  this  way  ; but  I shall 
content  myself  with  observing  this  general 
proof  of  the  divinity  of  Christ,  that  the  scrip- 
tures, which  were  given  to  make  us  wise  to 
salvation,  do  ascribe  to  him  the  names  of  God, 
particularly  Jehovah  ; the  essential  attributes 
of  God,  such  as  eternity,  omnipresence,  om- 
nipotence; the  peculiar  works  of  God,  as 
creation,  providence,  redemption,  and  forgive- 
ness of  sin ; and,  finally,  commands  us  to  pay 
him  those  divine  honours,  and  to  rely  on  him 
with  that  absolute  dependence,  which  would 
be  idolatry  if  referred  anywhere  below  the 
Supreme  Majesty  of  heaven  and  earth. 

Again,  we  learn  from  scripture,  that  Christ 
is  truly  and  properly  Man.  This  is  indeed 
wonderful ! therefore  styled,  “ the  great  mys- 
tery of  godliness,”  1 Tim.  iii.  But  that  he 
of  whom  we  have  begun  to  speak  is  the  very 
person  who  came  into  the  world  to  save  sin- 
ners, we  have  abundant  proof.  The  apostle 
John,  whose  testimony  we  have  already  cited, 
says,  a few  verses  lower,  (John  i.  14,)  “ And 
the  Word”  (that  glorious  Word,  which  was 
God  with  God)  “was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt 
among  us,  and  we  beheld  his  glory ;”  (that 
is,  we  his  disciples,  whose  eyes  were  spirit- 
ually enlightened,  for  the  world  in  general 
saw  nothing  of  it ;)  “ as  the  glory  of  the  only- 
begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and 
truth.”  In  other  places  it  is  said,  “Himself 
took  our  infirmities,  and  bore  our  sicknesses, 
(Matthew  viii.  16,)  and  “ was  in  all  points 
tempted  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin,”  Heb.  iv. 
15.  “ As  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh 
and  blood,  he  also  himself  likewise  took  part 
of  the  same,”  Heb.  ii.  14.  “ In  the  fulness 
of  time,  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a 
woman,”  Gal.  iv.  Many  are  the  mistakes  of 
mortals,  and  wide  the  extremes  into  which 
mistaken  mortals  run.  Some  have  rashly  ven- 1 


tured  to  deny  our  Lord’s  divinity ; some  have 
wildly  and  fancifully  explained  away  his  hu- 
manity ; but  may  we,  through  grace,  abide 
by  the  scriptural  truth,  and  be  directed  in  the 
midst  of  the  path  of  judgment. 

From  this  mystical  union  of  the  divine  and 
human  nature  in  one  person,  the  scriptures 
speak  of  him,  thirdly,  under  the  character  of 
a Mediator , the  “ one  mediator  between  God 
and  man.”  To  this  idea  the  names  Jesus 
Christ,  which  are  as  ointment  poured  forth, 
direct  us  in  their  original  import.  The  for- 
mer, which  signifies  the  Saviour,  pointing 
out  the  success  and  efficacy  of  his  undertak- 
ing ; the  latter,  which  is  the  same  with  Mes- 
siah or  the  Anointed,  expressing  both  his  di- 
vine appointment  thereto,  and  the  complete 
supply  of  all  grace  and  power,  wherewith  he 
was  filled  for  the  discharge  of  it.  Thus  much 
for  the  person  spoken  of. 

We  proceed,  in  the  next  place,  to  consider 
the  design  of  his  appearance  in  the  world, 
“ to  save  sinners.”  And  as  the  idea  of  deli- 
verance presupposes  a state  of  distress,  it  will 
be  necessary  previously  to  inquire  into  the 
condition  of  those  whom  he  came  to  save, 
which  is  indeed  emphatically  implied  in  the 
appellation  given  them,  sinners.  Man  having 
broken  that  law  under  which  he  was  created, 
and  with  which  his  happiness  was  closely 
connected,  fell  under  accumulated  ruin.  The 
image  of  God,  in  which  he  was  formed,  was 
defaced,  and  a far  different  image  set  up  in 
his  heart,  even  of  him  who  had  seduced  him 
from  his  allegiance ; darkness  in  the  under- 
standing, rebellion  in  the  will,  sensuality  in 
the  affections ; the  justice  of  God  threatening 
a penalty  he  could  neither  satisfy  nor  sus- 
tain ; the  commandments  of  God  still  chal- 
lenging an  obedience  he  had  no  longer  any 
power  to  yield.  The  very  gifts  and  bounties 
of  God,  with  which  he  was  encompassed,  de- 
signed not  only  for  his  comfort,  but  his  in- 
struction, to  lead  him,  as  by  so  many  steps, 
to  their  gracious  author,  became  eventually 
the  occasions  of  withdrawing  him  farther  from 
his  duty,  and  increasing  as  well  as  aggravat- 
ing his  ingratitude.  Thus  stood  man  towards 
his  Maker.  With  regard  to  his  fellow-crea- 
tures, self-love  and  inordinate  desires  having 
raised  a variety  of  interfering  interests  in  the 
breasts  of  all,  peace  withdrew  from  the  earth. 
Every  man’s  heart  and  hand  was  set  against 
his  neighbour,  and  violence,  rage,  envy,  and 
confusion  overspread  the  world.  Nor  could 
he  be  easier  in  himself:  hurried  by  restless 
desires  towards  things  either  unsatisfying  or 
unattainable,  haunted  with  cares,  tortured 
with  pains,  tired  with  opposition,  shocked 
with  disappointment ; conscience,  like  the 
hand  that  appeared  at  Belshazzar’s  feast, 
(Daniel  v.)  writing  bitter  things  against  him, 
when  outward  circumstances  allowed  a short 
repose,  and  vanity,  like  a worm,  destroying 
the  root  of  every  flower  that  promised  the 


390 


ON  THE  SAVIOUR  AND  HIS  SALVATION. 


fairest  bloom  of  success.  Behold  a few  out- 
lines of  the  picture  of  fallen  man  ! miserable 
in  his  life,  more  miserable  in  the  continual 
dread  of  losing'  such  a life;  miserable  most  of 
all,  that  neither  his  fancy  can  feign,  nor  his 
fear  conceive,  the  consequences  of  the  death 
he  dreads,  which  will  introduce  him  to  the 
immediate  presence,  to  the  tribunal,  of  an 
incensed,  almighty,  ever-living  God  ! 

Such  was  the  state  from  which  Jesus  Christ 
came  to  save  us.  He  came  to  restore  us  to 
the  favour  of  God ; to  reconcile  us  to  our- 
selves and  to  each  other ; to  give  us  peace 
and  joy  in  life,  hope  and  triumph  in  death, 
and  after  death,  glory,  honour,  and  immor- 
tality. For  he  came  not  merely  to  repair,  and 
to  restore,  but  to  exalt ; not  only  “ that  we 
might  have  life,”  the  life  we  had  forfeited, 
but  “ that  we  might  have  it  more  abundant- 
ly (John  x.)  that  our  happiness  might  be 
more  exalted,  our  title  more  firm,  and  our 
possession  more  secure,  than  the  state  of 
Adam  in  paradise  could  boast,  or  than  his 
posterity  could  have  attained  unto,  if  he  had 
continued  unsinning  upon  the  tenor  of  the 
first  covenant. 

Now,  could  we  suppose  it  possible  that  a 
set  of  innocent  beings,  without  any  default 
of  their  own,  had  sunk  into  a state  of  misery, 
we  must  confess  it  would  have  been  great 
grace  and  favour  in  the  Lord  Jesus  to  save 
them.  But  let  us  not  forget  the  stress  laid 
in  the  text  upon  the  word  sinners.  He  came 
to  save,  not  the  unfortunate,  but  the  ungodly, 
Rom.  v.  How,  then,  should  every  heart 
glow  with  love  to  him,  who  hath  thus  loved 
us ! If  any  of  us  can  hear  or  speak  of  this 
subject  with  indifference  or  disgust,  it  is  to 
be  feared  we  are  quite  strangers  to  the  na- 
ture or  the  necessity  of  that  salvation  with 
which  God  has  graciously  visited  his  people. 
Let  us  no  more  usurp  the  sacred  words  of 
generosity,  sensibility,  or  gratitude,  if  this 
astonishing  instance  of  divine  goodness  leaves 
us  cold  and  unimpressed ; especially  if  to 
this  we  join  the  consideration  of  the  third 
point  I proposed  to  speak  of,  By  what  means 
Jesus  Christ  effected  this  salvation  for  sin- 
ners. 

In  the  passage  before  us,  it  is  only  said, 
that  he  came  into  the  wTorld  on  this  account  ; 
which  teaches  us,  this  was  the  sole  design 
of  his  advent;  and  that,  coming  on  set  pur- 
pose for  this,  he  would  leave  nothing  undone 
that  was  necessary  to  accomplish  it.  He 
emptied  himself  of  that  divine  glory  and 
honour  he  possessed  with  the  Father  from 
eternity.  “ He  bowed  the  heavens,  and  came 
down”  to  our  earth ; and  that  not  with  an 
external  glory,  as  a celestial  messenger,  to 
constrain  the  attention  and  homage  of  man- 
kind, “but  was  made  of  a woman;”  (Gal.  iv.) 
not  of  high  and  noble  extraction  in  the  judg- 
ment of  men,  “ but  in  the  form  of  a servant ;” 
born  in  a stable,  laid  in  a manger,  brought ! 


[ser.  II. 

up  in  an  obscure  and  contemptible  place,  and 
reputed  no  higher  than  the  son  of  a carpen- 
ter. “He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men  ; 
there  was  no  form  or  comeliness  in  him,” 
(Isa.  liii.)  to  attract  a general  regard ; on  the 
contrary,  “ he  came  to  his  own,  and  his  own 
received  him  not,”  John  i.  Farther,  as  he 
was  made  of  a woman,  he  was  “ made  under 
the  law ;”  the  one  in  order  to  the  other ; for 
this  was  the  way  divine  wisdom  had  ap- 
pointed, and  which  divine  justice  required, 
to  make  salvation  possible  to  sinners.  Eter- 
nal truth  had  pronounced  tribulation,  wrath, 
and  anguish  upon  every  soul  of  man  that 
doth  evil.  All  men,  in  every  age  and  place, 
had  corrupted  their  ways  before  God;  yet 
his  mercy  had  designed,  that  where  sin  had 
abounded,  grace  should  much  more  abound, 
Rom.  viii.  Jesus  Christ  was  the  grand  expe- 
dient, in  whom  mercy  and  truth  met  together, 
(Psal.  lxxxv.)  and  the  inflexible  righteous- 
ness of  God  was  brought  to  correspond  and 
harmonize  with  the  peace  of  sinful  man. 
That  justice  might  be  satisfied,  truth  vindi- 
cated, and  sinners  saved,  God  so  loved  a lost 
world,  that,  when  no  inferior  means  could 
avail,  when  none  in  heaven  or  earth  were 
willing,  or  worthy,  or  able,  to  interpose,  “ he 
gave  his  only-begotten  Son,”  John  iii.  Jesus 
Christ,  the  brightness  of  the  Father’s  glory, 
and  the  express  image  of  his  person,  “ so 
loved  the  world,”  that  he  assumed  our  nature, 
undertook  our  cause,  bore  our  sins,  sustained 
our  deserved  punishment ; and  having  done 
and  suffered  all  that  the  case  required,  he  is 
now  gone  before,  “ to  prepare  a place”  (John 
iv.)  for  all  that  believe  in  him  and  obey  him. 
Man  lay  under  a double  incapacity  for  happi- 
ness ; he  could  neither  keep  the  law  of  God 
in  future,  nor  satisfy  for  his  past  breach  and 
contempt  of  it.  To  obviate  the  former,  Jesus 
Christ  performed  a perfect  unsinning  obe- 
dience in  our  stead.  To  remove  the  latter, 
he  became  “ the  propitiation  for  our  sins 
yielded  up  his  life,  as  a prey,  into  the  hands 
of  murderers,  and  poured  forth  his  precious 
blood,  in  drops  of  sweat  in  the  garden,  in 
streams  from  his  side  upon  the  cross.  For 
this  he  endured  the  fiercest  temptations  of  the 
devil,  the  scorn,  rage,  and  malice  of  men,  and 
drank  the  bitter  cup  of  the  wrath  of  God, 
when  it  pleased  the  Father  to  bruise  him, 
and  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin.  His 
love  carried  him  through  all ; and  when  he 
had  finally  overcome  the  sharpness  of  death, 
he  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  be- 
lievers. In  few  words,  he  lived  and  died  for 
us  when  upon  earth  ; nor  is  he  unmindful  of 
us  in  heaven,  but  lives  and  intercedes  on  our 
behalf.  He  continually  executes  the  offices 
of  prophet,  priest,  and  king,  to  his  people ; in- 
structing them  by  his  word  and  Spirit ; pre- 
senting their  persons  and  prayers,  acceptable 
to  God  through  his  merits ; defending  them 
by  his  power,  from  all  their  enemies,  ghostly 


ON  THE  SAVIOUR  AND  HIS  SALVATION. 


39, 


SER,  II.] 

and  bodily ; and  ordering1,  by  his  providence, 
all  thing-s  to  work  tog-ether  for  their  good, 
till  at  length  they  are  brought  home,  to  be 
with  him  where  he  is,  and  to  behold  his  glory. 

II.  From  what  has  been  said,  we  may 
justly  infer,  in  the  first  place,  “ that  this  is,” 
as  the  apostle  styles  it,  “ a faithful  saying.” 
When  man  first  fell,  God,  in  the  midst  of 
judgment  remembering  mercy,  declared,  un- 
sought and  undesired,  that  the  seed  of  the 
woman  should  bruise  the  serpent’s  head, 
Gen.  iii.  In  every  succeeding  age,  he  con- 
firmed his  purpose  by  types,  promises,  pro- 
phecies, and  oaths.  At  length,  in  the  fulness 
of  time,  Christ,  the  desire  of  all  nations,  came 
into  the  world,  fulfilled  all  that  had  been 
foretold,  and  encouraged  every  humble  peni- 
tent sinner  to  come  unto  him,  that  they  might 
have  life,  pardon,  and  peace.  To  doubt,  or 
to  deny,  his  readiness  to  save,  is,  so  far  as  in 
us  lies,  to  make  the  word  of  God  of  none  ef- 
fect ; it  is,  to  charge  God  foolishly,  as  though, 
like  the  heedless  unskilful  builder  in  the  gos- 
pel, he  had  begun  to  build  that  which  was  not 
to  be  finished.  If,  after  all  that  is  set  before 
us,  it  is  possible  for  any  soul  to  miss  salva- 
tion, that  sincerely  desires  it,  and  seeks  it  in 
God’s  appointed  way,  it  must  be  because  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  either  cannot  or  will  not 
save  them.  That  he  cannot,  is  flatly  false ; 
for,  “all  power  is  his  in  heaven  and  in  earth;” 
(Matt,  xxviii.)  and  it  is  particularly  said, 
“ that  he  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost 
all  that  come  unto  God  by  him;”  (Heb.  vii.) 
and  that  he  will  not,  is  as  false ; for  he  him- 
self hath  said,  “ Whosoever  cometh  unto  me, 
I will  in  no  wise  cast  out,”  John  vi. 

We  may  infer,  2 dly,  That  this  doctrine  is 
not  onty  faithful,  but  “ worthy  of  all  accepta- 
tion.” And  here,  rnethinks,  I could  begin 
anew.  A point  so  much  mistaken  by  some, 
and  neglected  by  most,  rather  requires  a 
whole,  or  many  discourses,  than  to  be  passed 
over  in  few  words.  The  most  high  and  wise 
God  has  esteemed  the  redemption  of  mankind 
so  precious,  “ that  he  spared  not  his  only  Son,” 
Rom.  viii.  And  are  there  any  amongst  us, 
in  a land  of  gospel-light  and  liberty,  where 
the  words  of  wisdom  are  sounding  in  our  ears 
every  day,  that  dare  make  light  of  this  mes- 
sage, just  give  it  a hearing,  and  return  to 
their  farms,  their  merchandise,  and  their  di- 
versions, as  though  this  unspeakable  grace 
of  God  called  for  no  return  ! Alas!  “How 
shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect  this  salvation  1” 
Ileb.  ii.  He  that  despised  Moses’  law  died 
without  mercy.  It  was  dangerous,  it  was 
destructive,  to  refuse  him  that  spoke  upon 
earth ; take  heed  how  you  trifle  with  him 
that  speaketh  from  heaven  ! To  such  as  ne- 
glect. this,  “ there  remains  no  other  sacrifice 
for  sin,  but  a certain  fearful  looking  for  of 
fiery  indignation  that  shall  devour  his  adver- 
saries.” Heb.  x.  Let  none  of  us  think  it  is 
well  with  us,  merely  because  we  were  born 


and  educated  in  a Christian  country,  have 
means  of  instruction  in  our  hands,  and  enjoy 
frequent  opportunities  of  presenting  our- 
selves  before  God  in  public  worship.  To 
thousands  these,  so  far  from  being  advan- 
tages, will  greatly  aggravate  their  condem- 
nation, and  point  the  sting  of  the  never-dying 
worm.  Better  were  it  for  us  to  have  been 
inhabitants  of  Tyre  and  Sidon,  (Luke  x.)  yea, 
of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  than  to  appear  in 
judgment  with  no  better  plea  than  this. 
Neither  let  us  speak  peace  to  ourselves,  be- 
cause we  are  not  so  bad  as  others,  but  per- 
haps live  decently  and  comfortably,  are  use- 
ful in  society,  and  perform  many  things  that 
are  commonly  called  good  works.  If  these 
works  spring  from  a true  love  of  God,  if  they 
are  framed  according  to  the  rule  of  his  word, 
i.f  they  are  performed  by  faith  in  Christ  Je- 
sus our  Lord,  they  are  undoubtedly  good, 
and  shall  be  rewarded  before  men  and  an- 
gels; if  otherwise,  you  have  already  your 
reward,  in  the  complaisance  of  your  own 
minds,  and  the  approbation  of  friends  and  ac- 
quaintance. The  Christianity  of  the  New 
Testament  imports  more  than  all  this.  It  is, 
to  believe  in  Jesus  Christ;  so  to  believe  in 
him,  as  to  obey  him  in  all  his  commands,  to 
trust  him  in  all  his  dispensations,  to  walk  in 
his  steps,  copying  out  the  bright  example 
of  Iris  love,  meekness,  patience,  self-denial, 
and  active  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the 
good^of  mankind.  It  is,  from  a conscious- 
ness of  our  utter  inability  to  perform  these 
great  things,  to  depend  continually  upon  the 
promised  aid  and  direction  of  his  Holy  Spirit, 
to  seek  this  assistance  by  frequent  fervent 
prayer,  to  offer  up  ourselves  daily  as  living 
sacrifices  unto  God ; and,  finally,  when  we 
have  done  all,  to  be  deeply  sensible  of  our 
unworthiness  of  the  least  of  his  mercies,  to 
confess  ourselves  unprofitable  servants,  and 
to  place  all  our  hopes  upon  this  faithful  say- 
ing, “ That  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world 
to  save  sinners.” 

Thus,  from  the  consideration  of  the  person 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  greatness  of 
our  misery  by  nature,  and  the  wonderful 
things  he  has  done  and  suffered  for  our  re- 
demption, we  may  learn  the  complete  secur- 
ity of  that  salvation  he  has  provided,  the  ex- 
treme danger  of  neglecting  it,  and  the  folly 
and  presumption  of  attempting  to  establish 
a righteousness  of  our  own,  independent  of 
him  who  is  appointed  of  God  unto  us,  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption, 
1 Cor.  i.  In  setting  these  things  before  you 
plainly  and  faithfully,  I trust  I have  deliver- 
ed my  own  soul.  Time  is  short,  life  is  preca- 
rious, and  perhaps  to  some  this  may  be  ths 
last  opportunity  of  the  kind  that  may  be  af- 
forded them.  God  grant  we  may  be  wise  in 
time,  that,  to-day,  while  it  is  called  to-day 
we  may  hear  his  voice.  Then  we  shall  un- 
derstand more  of  the  text  than  words  can 


392 


ON  THE  CHRISTIAN  NAME. 


teach  us ; then  we  shall  experience  “ a peace 
which  passeth  all  understanding- (Phil,  iv.) 
“ a joy”  which  “ a stranger  intermeddleth  not 
with (Prov.  xvi.)  and  a hope  “ full  of  glo- 
ry,” which  shall  be  completed  in  the  end- 
less possession  of  those  “ pleasures  which  are 
at  the  right  hand  of  God;”  (Psal.  xvi.)  where 
sin,  and  its  inseparable  attendant  sorrow,  shall 
cease  for  ever ; where  “ there  shall  be  no 
more  grief,  or  pain,  or  fear;”  (Rev.  xxi.)  but 
every  tear  shall  be  wiped  from  every  eye. 


SERMON  III. 

ON  THE  CHRISTIAN  NAME. 

And  the  disciples  were  called  Christians 

first  at  Antioch. — Acts  xi.  26. 

The  evangelist  Luke  having  contributed 
his  appointed  part  to  the  history  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  proceeds,  in  the 
oook  we  style  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles , to 
inform  us  of  the  state  and  behaviour  of  those 
faithful  followers  he  left  behind  him  on  earth, 
when  he  ascended  in  the  name  and  behalf  of 
his  people,  to  that  heaven  from  whence  his 
love  had  brought  him  down.  We  are  inform- 
ed, that  the  gracious  promises  he  had  made 
while  he  was  yet  with  them,  began  soon  to 
take  place  ; for,  when  the  day  of  Penlecost 
was  fully  come,  (Acts  ii.)  the  Holy  Spirit  de- 
scended powerfully  upon  them,  qualified  them 
for  preaching  the  gospel  to  the  whole  world, 
and  gave  them  an  earnest  of  success  in  mak- 
ing their  first  essay  the  happy  means  of  con- 
verting about  three  thousand  souls. 

The  first  believers,  who  were  of  one  heart 
and  one  soul,  who  continued  steadfast  in  the 
apostles’  doctrine,  and  had  all  things  in  com- 
mon, would  probably  have  been  well  content 
to  have  lived  together  in  Jerusalem,  till  death 
had  successively  transplanted  them  to  the  Je- 
rusalem which  is  above.  But  this  was  not  to 
be  their  rest ; and  their  Lord,  who  had  ap- 
pointed them  to  be  “ the  salt  of  the  earth,” 
and  “the  flght  of  the  world,”  (Matt,  v.) 
made  use  of  the  rage  of  their  enemies  to  ef- 
fect that  separation  which  those  who  are 
united  by  the  grace  of  God  are  often  so  loath 
to  yield  to.  Little  did  Herod  and  the  Jews 
consider  what  would  be  the  consequence  of 
the  persecution  they  raised  against  the  church 
of  Christ:  but  persecutors  are  always  blind, 
and  counteract  their  own  designs.  So  here ; 
for  we  are  told,  that  those  whom  they  scat- 
tered abroad  “ went  every  where  preaching 
the  wrord.”  Thus  the  word  of  the  Lord  “ ran 
and  was  glorified ;”  their  bitterest  enemies 
contributing  to  push  it  forward,  till,  in  a few 
years,  it  was  published  “ from  sea  to  sea,” 
and  “ from  the  river  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,” 
Psalm  lxxii. 


For  a while  these  faithful  followers  of  the 
Lamb  were  known  only  by  particular  names, 
according  to  the  different  humours  of  differ- 
ent places, — Nazarenes,  Galileans,  the  peo- 
ple of  that  way,  pestilent  fellows,  and  the 
like ; but  at  length,  when  they  grew  more 
numerous,  when  their  societies  were  regu- 
larly formed,  and  their  enemies  universally 
alarmed,  they  began  to  bear  a more  general 
and  emphatical  name.  St.  Luke  has  inform- 
ed us,  that  this  was  the  case  in  fact,  and  has 
likewise  told  us  where  it  first  obtained  ; and 
as  I suppose  he  did  not  this  without  some  de- 
sign, I shall  endeavour  to  draw  some  obser- 
vations for  our  use  and  direction,  from  this 
remark  in  the  text,  That  “the  disciples  were 
called  Christians  first  at  Antioch,”  which  I 
shall  divide  into  two : thus, — That  the  first 
general  name  by  which  the  disciples  were 
distinguished  from  the  world,  and  united 
among  themselves,  was  that  of  Christians  ; 
and,  secondly,  That  this  took  place  first  at 
Antioch.  Thus  the  propositions  lie  in  the 
text ; but,  in  treating  of  each,  it  may  be  more 
convenient  to  invert  this  order,  and  consider 
the  latter  as  previous  to  the  former. 

Now,  if  we  consider  the  state  of  the  city 
of  Antioch,  before,  at  the  time,  and  since  the 
event  which  is  here  recorded ; from  each  of 
these  views  we  may  gather  some  lesson  of 
instruction  for  ourselves,  which  ought  to  be 
our  view  in  all  we  read,  but  especially  when 
we  read  those  books  “ which  are  able  to  make 
us  wise  unto  salvation,”  and  where  no  one 
sentence  is  insignificant.  But  let  us  not  for- 
get, with  all  we  read  and  hear  concerning 
religion,  to  mingle  our  frequent  prayers  to 
the  great  Author  and  Fountain  of  all  grace, 
for  that  aid  and  assistance  of  his  Holy  Spirit, 
without  which  we  can  do  nothing  to  advan- 
tage. 

Antioch,  the  capital  of  Syria,  built  about 
three  hundred  years  before  Christ,  had  been 
long  the  most  flourishing  city  of  the  East. 
The  most  remarkable  circumstance  of  its  an- 
cient state,  as  suiting  our  present  purpose, 
was  its  having  been  the  seat  and  residence  of 
Antiochus,  the  most  cruel  and  inveterate  ene- 
my of  the  church  and  people  of  God ; the 
most  direct  and  eminent  type  of  that  Anti- 
christ who  was  afterwards  to  appear  in  the 
world ; spoken  of  expressly  by  prophecy  in 
Daniel,  chap.  xi. ; the  completion  of  which 
you  may  see  at  large  in  the  first  book  of 
Maccabees,  in  Josephus,  and  more  briefly  in 
the  79th  and  80th  Psalms.  But  behold  the 
wisdom,  the  power,  and  the  providence  of 
God  ! when  his  people  were  brought  low,  he 
helped  them  ; he  set  those  bounds  to  the  rage 
of  the  adversary  which  could  not  be  broken 
through  ; and,  at  length,  in  his  appointed 
time,  he  erected  this  first  general  standard 
of  the  gospel  upon  the  very  spot  where  his 
grand  enemy  had  so  long  encamped,  and  from 
whence  hi*  pernicious  counsels  and  enter* 


ON  THE  CHRISTIAN  NAME. 


SER.  III.] 

prises  had  so  far  proceeded.  The  application 
of  this  is  very  suitable  to  the  times  in  which 
we  now  live.  We  see  a powerful  combina- 
tion against  the  Protestant  interest.  Our 
enemies  are  many  and  mighty : their  designs, 
we  have  reason  to  believe,  are  deep  laid,  and 
their  efforts  unwearied.  Once  and  again  our 
hopes  have  been  almost  swallowed  up ; and 
though  we,  through  the  singular  goodness  of 
God,  have  hitherto  escaped,  the  storm  has 
fallen  heavy  upon  our  brethren  abroad.  What 
may  be  the  immediate  issue  of  the  present 
threatening  appearances,  we  know  not ; but 
we  may  encourage  ourselves,  from  the  expe- 
rience of  past  ages,  as  well  as  from  the  sure 
promises  of  scripture,  that  however  the  kings 
of  the  earth  may  assemble,  and  the  rulers 
take  counsel  together,  (Psal.  ii.)  God  has  a 
hook  in  their  nose,  and  a bridle  in  their  jaws; 
(Isa.  xxxvii.)  and  all  their  force  and  policy 
shall  at  last  bring  about  what  they  least  de- 
sire and  intend, — the  welfare  and  glory  of 
God’s  church.  He  that  caused  the  Christian 
name  go  forth  first  at  Antioch,  where  the  truth 
of  God  had  been  most  eminently  and  success- 
fully opposed,  can  likewise  introduce  a tem- 
per and  worship  truly  Christian,  in  those 
places  which  at  present  seem  destitute  of 
either.  And  for  this  it  is  our  duty  continual- 
ly to  pray. 

Again,  if  we  consider  the  state  of  Antioch 
at  the  time  the  disciples  were  first  called 
Christians  there,  we  may  learn  how  to  form 
a judgment  of  our  profession.  This  city  was 
then  luxurious  arid  dissolute  to  a proverb, 
even  in  Asia,  where  luxury  and  effeminacy 
were  universally  prevalent.  Whether  this 
name  was  assumed  by  the  disciples,  or  im- 
posed by  their  enemies,  we  cannot  doubt  but 
that,  in  common  repute,  it  was  a term  of  the 
most  extreme  reproach  and  ignominy.  Nor 
can  I suppose  the  worst  appellations  any  sect 
in  succeeding  ages  has  been  doomed  to  bear, 
have  implied  half  of  that  contempt  which  an 
inhabitant  of  Antioch  or  Daphne  expressed 
when  he  called  a man  a Christian.  If  we 
imagine  a sect  of  people,  who,  at  this  time, 
in  France,  should  style  themselves  the  dis- 
ciples of  the  late  Damien,  and  be  called  after 
his  name,  we  may  perhaps  form  some  idea  of 
what  the  people  of  Antioch  understood  by 
the  word  Christian.  The  apostle  assures  us, 
that  he  and  his  brethren  were  “accounted 
the  filth  and  offscouring  of  all  things,”  (1  Cor. 

iv.)  »>S  tou  xosy-tcv — ttxvtiuv  7rt^ri/y\y.x, 

He  has  chosen  two  words  of  the  most  vile 
and  despicable  signification;  which,  I believe, 
no  two  words  in  our  language  will  fully  ex- 
press. The  outward  state  of  things  is  since 
changed,  and  the  external  profession  of  Chris- 
tianity is  now  no  reproach ; but  let  us  not 
imagine  the  nature  of  things  is  changed  too. 
It  was  then  received  as  a maxim,  That  “ all 
who  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  must  suf- 
fer persecution (2  Tim.  iii.)  and  it  is  a truth 


iWS 

I still  founded  upon  scripture,  and  confirmed  by 
experience.  If  we  know  nothing  of  it  in  our 
own  cases,  it  is  because  oui  tempers  and  man- 
ners have  hitherto  been  too  conformable  to 
that  wicked  world  which  in  our  baptisms  we 
were  engaged  to  renounce.  I shall,  have  oc- 
casion to  speak  farther  upon  this  point  before 
I close ; in  the  mean  time,  here  is  a test  to 
examine  ourselves  by.  If  we  could  not  glory 
in  the  Christian  name,  under  the  same  cir- 
cumstances as  the  disciples  bore  it  at  Antioch, 
we  are  yet  unworthy  of  it.  Let  conscience 
judge. 

Once  more,  Antioch,  the  city  where  the 
gospel  once  so  flourished,  that  from  thence 
the  whole  Christian  church  received  that 
name  by  which  it  is  still  called,  is  now  no 
more.  It  has  been  a heap  of  ruins  more  than 
five  hundred  years.  The  light  of  the  gospel 
has  been  long  withdrawn ; gaiety  and  festi- 
vity are  likewise  forgot.  Slavery,  imposture, 
and  barbarism,  have  blotted  out  the  resem- 
blance, and  even  the  remembrance  of  what  it 
once  was.  O that  our  yet  happy  land  could 
from  hence  take  a timely  warning ! Qur  pri- 
vileges are  great ; perhaps  greater,  all  things 
considered,  than  any  nation  has  possessed 
since  the  days  of  Solomon.  Our  preservation 
hitherto  has  been  wonderful ; oflen  have  we 
been  in  extreme  danger,  but  have  always 
found  deliverance  at  hand.  Yet  let  us  not  be 
high-minded ; our  sins  and  aggravations  (it  is 
to  be  feared)  have  been,  and  still  are,  very 
great  likewise ; and  God,  we  see,  is  no  more 
a respecter  of  places  than  of  persons.  Anti- 
och is  ruined;  Philadelphia,  which  received 
so  honourable  a testimony  from  the  mouth  of 
the  Lord  himself,  (Rev.  iii.)  has  been  long 
since  destroyed.  Let  us  beware  of  boasting’ ; 
let  us  not  presume  too  much  on  what  we  are ; 
nor  say.  “The  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  tem- 
ple of  the  Lord  are  these.”  Jer.  vii.  We  are 
the  bulwark  of  the  Protestant  interest,  and 
none  can  hurt  us.  If  the  Lord  is  with  us,  it 
is  true ; if  we  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation 
wherewith  we  are  called,  we  are  safe ; but, 
if  otherwise,  we  know  not  how  soon  God  may 
visit  us  with  his  heavy  judgments,  war,  fa- 
mine, discord,  or  pestilence ; till  we  become 
a warning  to  others,  as  others  are  now  pro- 
posed warnings  to  us.  Our  liberties,  our  pro- 
perties, our  religion,  are  in  God’s  hands ; may 
he  incline  our  hearts  to  true  repentance,  lest 
at  length  these  blessings  should  be  taken 
from  us,  and  given  to  a people  that  will  bring 
forth  more  fruit. 

There  is  an  ambiguity  in  the  original  word 
5jfn^«T«ra»,  which  our  translation  renders  call- 
ed ; for,  though  that  is  the  more  general 
sense  it  bears  in  Heathen  writers,  wherever 
it  occurs  in  the  New  Testament,  except  in 
this  passage,  and  in  Rom.  vii.  3,  it  signifies  to 
be  taught  or  warned  by  a Revelation  from  hea- 
ven. Thus  it  is  spoken  of  Joseph  and  the  wise 
men ; (Matt,  ii.)  Simeon ; (Luke  ii.)  Cornelius; 


394 


ON  THE  CHRISTIAN  NAME. 


(Acts  x.)  Noah ; (Heb.  xi.)  and  elsewhere. 
It  does  not  therefore  appear  quite  certain 
from  the  text,  whether  the  disciples  chose 
this  name  for  themselves,  or  the  wits  of  the 
time  fixed  it  upon  them  as  a mark  of  infamy; 
or,  lastly,  whether  it  was  by  the  special  di- 
rection of  the  Spirit  of  God  that  they  as- 
sumed it.  But  I incline  to  the  latter  suppo- 
sition ; partly,  because,  in  those  happy  days, 
it  was  the  practice  and  the  privilege  of  the 
disciples  to  ask,  and  to  receive,  direction 
from  on  high  in  almost  every  occurrence; 
hut,  chiefly,  on  account  of  the  excellent  in- 
structions couched  under  this  emphatical 
name,  sufficient  to  direct  and  to  animate 
those  who  were  to  be  known  by  it,  in  their 
duty  to  each  other,  to  God,  and  to  the  world. 
Some  of  these  I propose  to  infer  from  the 
other  proposition  contained  in  the  text,  That 
the  first  name  by  which  the  followers  of  the 
gospel  were  generally  known,  was  that  of 
Gh  ristians. 

Hitherto,  as  they  were  separated  from  the 
world,  so  they  had  been  divided  among  them- 
selves; and  so  strong  were  the  prejudices 
subsisting  between  the  members  of  the  same 
body,  that  we  find,  in  the  beginning  of  this 
chapter,  some  of  one  party  contended  with 
the  apostle  Peter  only  for  eating  with  those 
of  another.  Hence  we  read  the  phrases, 
“ We  of  the  Jews,”  “ They  of  the  Gentiles.” 
But  henceforward  they  are  taught  to  blend 
and  lose  the  greater  distinction  of  Jew  and 
Gentile,  and  the  lesser  divisions  of  Paul, 
Apollos,  and  Cephas,  in  a denomination  de- 
rived from  him  who  alone  was  worthy  to  be 
their  head,  and  who  was  equally  “ rich  in 
mercy  to  all  that  call  upon  him”  in  every 
place. 

And,  as  they  thus  were  taught  union  and 
affection  among  themselves,  so  their  relation 
to  God,  the  way  of  their  access  to  him,  and 
their  continual  dependence  upon  him,-  were 
strongly  implied  in  this  name.  A Christian 
is  the  child  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ;  he 
draws  near  to  God  in  the  name  of  Christ; 
he  is  led  and  supported  by  the  spirit  of  Christ! 
Christ  is  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the  be- 
ginning and  the  ending,  of  the  faith,  hope,  and 
love  of  every  believer.  From  him  alone  every 
good  desire  proceeds : by  him  alone  every 
good  purpose  is  established : in  him  alone  any 
of  our  best  performances  are  acceptable.  Let 
us  beware  (it  is  a necessary  caution  in  these 
days)  of  a Christianity  without  Christ.  I tes- 
tify to  you  in  plain  words,  that  this  is  no  bet- 
ter than  a house  without  a foundation,  a tree 
without  a root,  a body  without  a head,  a hope 
without  hope  ; a delusion,  which,  if  persisted 
in,  will  end  in  irremediable  destruction:  “For 
other  foundation  can  no  man  lay,  than  that 
which  is  laid,  Christ  Jesus he  is  the  cor- 
ner-stone, “chosen  of  God  and  precious.” 
Alas  for  those  who  are  offended  with  him  in 
whom  God  is  well  pleased ! but  those  who ! 


[ser.  III. 

trust  in  him  shall  never  be  ashamed.  This 
is  another  important  lesson  comprised  in  the 
word  Christian. 

Nor  is  this  all:  in  the  name  of  Christian 
they  might,  and  we  may,  read  the  terms 
upon  which  we  are  to  stand  with  the  world. 
If  I were  asked  what  the  words  Platonist 
or  Pythagorean  signified,  I should  say  they 
expressed  certain  persons  who  embraced 
the  sentiments,  submitted  to  the  institutions, 
and  imitated  the  conduct  of  Pythagoras  and 
Plato;  and,  in  order  to  describe  them  far- 
ther, I need  do  no  more  than  give  an  account 
of  the  lives  and  writings  of  their  respective 
masters.  Could  I thus,  in  some  distant,  un- 
known country,  where  the  name  of  Chris- 
tianity had  been  only  heard  of,  have  an  op- 
portunity of  declaring  the  history,  the  doc- 
trines, and  the  laws  of  Jesus  Christ ; how  he 
lived,  how  he  taught,  how  he  died,  and  upon 
what  account;  what  usage  he  himself  re- 
ceived from  the  world,  and  what  he  taught 
his  followers  to  expect  after  he  should  leave 
them  : if  I should  then  describe  the  lives  and 
the  treatment  of  his  most  eminent  servants, 
who  lived  immediately  after  him,  and  show, 
“ that  as  he  was,  so  w7ere  they  in  the  -world ;” 
(1  John  iv.)  that  pursuing  his  pattern,  they 
found  exactly  the  same  opposition ; — would 
not  the  inhabitants  of  such  a country  con- 
clude, even  as  the  scripture  has  assured  us, 
that  the  temper  of  Christianity,  and  the  tem- 
per of  the  world,  must  be  exactly  opposite ; 
and  that,  as  it  is  said,  “ Whoever  will  be  a 
friend  of  the  wrnrld  is  the  enemy  of  God,” 
(James  iv.)  so,  whoever  had  boldness  to  pro- 
fess himself  a friend  of  God,  must  necessarily 
be  an  enemy  to  the  world;  and  would  be 
sure  to  find  the  world,  and  all  in  it,  at  sworn 
enmity  with  him  1 But  if  I should  farther 
tell  them,  that  though  the  same  laws,  the 
same  warnings,  and  the  same  examples,  still 
subsist,  yet  that  fierce  opposition  I have 
spoken  of  is  at  length  nearly  over,  so  that 
none  are  better  pleased  with  the  world,  or 
more  agreeable  to  it,  than  many  of  those 
who  speak  most  honourably  of  the  Christian 
name;  would  not  these  people  immediately 
infer,  that  one  of  these  contending  powers 
must  have  yielded  to  the  triumphant  genius 
of  the  otherl  that  either  the  whole  world 
were  become  such  Christians  as  those  who 
were  first  styled  so  at  Antioch,  or  that 
modern  Christians  must  be,  for  the  most  part, 
so  only  by  profession,  and  have  neither  right 
nor  pretence  to  their  ancient  spirit  ! And 
could  we  suppose  farther,  that  after  this  in- 
formation, some  of  these  remote  people  were 
to  land  at  Dover,  and  make  the  tour  of  this 
kingdom,  can  you  think  they  w7ould  be  long 
in  determining  which  of  these  is  indeed  the 
case! 

Numbers  are  deceived  by  restricting  many 
passages  in  the  New  Testament  to  the  times 
in  which  they  were  delivered,  though  it  seems 


ON  THE  CHRISTIAN  NAME. 


395 


SER.  III.] 

to  have  been  the  great  care  of  the  apostles  to 
prevent,  if  possible,  our  making  this  mistake. 
St.  John,  having  expressly  said,  “ if  any  man 
love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not 
in  him,”  immediately  explains  what  he  means 
by  the  world,  namely,  “the  lust  of  the  flesh, 
the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life,” 
1 John  ii.  If  high  distinction,  vain  show, 
and  sensual  pleasure,  make  no  part  of  the 
world  at  this  day,  I must  allow  that  we  have 
no  part  in  the  apostle’s  decision,  nor  any 
cause  to  observe  his  caution;  but  if  these 
things  are  as  highly  prized,  as  eagerly,  and 
almost  as  universally  pursued  now  in  Bri- 
tain as  they  were  sixteen  hundred  years 
since  at  Rome  and  Antioch,  surely  we  bear 
the  name  of  Christians  in  vain ; if  our  hopes 
and  fears,  our  jcys  and  sorrows,  our  comforts 
and  our  cares  are  not  very  different  from 
those  of  the  generality  among  whom  we  live. 
“ If  any  man,”  says  St.  Paul,  “ have  not  the 
spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  his,”  Rom.  viii. 
Now,  whatever  more  is  meant  by  the  phrase 
of  having  the  spirit  of  Christ,  it  must  cer- 
tainly mean  thus  much  at  least,  a disposition 
and  turn  of  mind  in  some  degree  conforma- 
ble to  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus,  to 
be  evidenced  by  a life  and  conversation  suit- 
able to  his  precepts  and  example : “ He  was 
holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from 
sinners;  he  went  about  doing  good,”  Heb. 
vii.  He  was  gentle  and  compassionate,  meek 
and  patient  under  the  greatest  provocations ; 
so  active  for  the  glory  of  God,  that  his  zeal, 
by  a strong  and  lively  figure,  is  said  to  have 
eaten  him  up ; (John  ii.)  so  affected  with  the 
worth  of  souls,  that  he  wept  over  his  bitterest 
enemies ; so  intent  on  his  charitable  designs 
towards  men,  that  an  opportunity  of  helping 
or  instructing  them  was  as  meat  and  drink 
when  he  was  hungry,  (John  iv.)  and  made 
him  forget  weariness  and  pain;  so  full  of  de- 
votion towards  God,  that  when  the  day  had 
been  wholly  consumed  in  his  labours  of  love, 
he  would  frequently  redeem  whole  nights 

for  prayer,  Luke  vi.  But  I must  stop. No 

pen  can  describe,  no  heart  conceive,  the  life 
of  the  Son  of  God  in  the  flesh : yet,  in  all 
these  things  he  was  our  great  exemplar ; and 
no  profession  or  appellation  can  benefit  us, 
unless  we  are  of  those  who  copy  closely  and 
carefully  after  him.  For  thus  saith  the  be- 
loved apostle,  “ He  that  saith  he  abideth  in 
him,  ought  himself  so  to  walk  even  as  he 
walked.  He  that  saith  I know  him,  and 
keepeth  not  his  commandments,  is  a liar,  and 
the  truth  is  not  in  him,”  1 John  ii. 

I shall  conclude  with  a short  address  to 
three  sorts  of  persons.  And,  first,  If  there 
are  any  such  here  (would  to  God  this  part  of 
my  labour  may  prove  needless !)  1 would  re- 
commend this  subject  to  the  consideration  of 
those  who  have  almost,  if  not  altogether,  cast 
off  the  honourable  name  into  which  they  were 
baptized,  who,  trusting  to  what  they  call  the 


light  of  nature,  and  the  powers  of  human 
reason,  venture  to  determine  the  fitness  of 
things  by  their  own  standard,  and  declare  in 
their  words,  as  well  as  by  their  actions, 
“they  will  not  have  this  man  to  rule  over 
them,”  Luke  xix.  Is  not  this  an  unaccount- 
able event  upon  your  plan,  that  the  name 
which  first  went  out  from  Antioch,  under  the 
greatest  disadvantages,  should  so  soon  over- 
spread the  world,  without  arts  or  arms,  with- 
out any  force,  or  any  motive  of  any  external 
kind  ? Is  it  possible  that  any  kind  or  degree 
of  enthusiasm  could  influence,  not  a few,  at 
one  time,  or  in  one  place,  but  multitudes,  of 
all  ages,  sexes,  tempers,  and  circumstances, 
to  embrace  a profession  which,  in  proportion 
to  the  strictness  wherewith  it  was  followed, 
was  always  attended  with  reproach  and  suf- 
fering! Those  laces  which  were  most  noted 
for  opposition  to  this  way,  have  been  long 
since  buried  in  the  dust ; but  a succession  of 
those  whom  the  world  counted  “ not  worthy 
to  live,  and  of  whom  the  world  was  not 
worthy,”  (Acts  xxv.  Heb.  xi.)  has  always  sub- 
sisted, and  still  subsists.  Had  you  lived  in 
those  days  when  Jesus  Christ  assured  a com- 
pany of  poor  disregarded  fishermen,  that  nei- 
ther the  power  nor  the  policy  of  the  world, 
nor  the  gates  of  hell,  should  ever  prevail 
against  them,  (Matt,  xvi.)  you  might  have 
been  less  inexcusable  in  refusing  to  believe 
him.  But  now,  when  you  have  the  accom- 
plishment of  this  promise  before  your  eyes, 
and  well  know  (for  you  are  book-read)  what 
various  attempts  have  been  made,  with  what 
steadiness  and  formidable  appearances  they 
have  been  for  a while  carried  on,  to  render 
these  words  vain,  but  how  at  length  such  at- 
tempts have  totally  failed,  and  ended  in  the 
confusion  and  ruin  of  those  who  engaged  in 
them, — what  tolerable  reason  can  you  assign 
for  the  part  you  act ! Does  the  tendency  of 
the  gospel  displease  you ! Is  it  an  enemy  to 
that  virtue  you  are  so  fond  of  talking  of!  On 
the  contrary,  we  are  ready  to  put  it  to  the 
proof,  that  here  are  not  only  the  sublimest 
maxims  of  true  virtue,  but  that  the  practice, 
or  even  the  real  love  of  virtue,  are  quite  un- 
attainable upon  any  other  scheme,  and  that 
the  most  specious  pretences,  independent  of 
this,  are  no  more  than  great  “ swelling  words 
of  vanity,”  2 Pet.  ii.  I speak  the  more  freely 
upon  this  point,  because  I speak  from  expe- 
rience. I was  once  as  you  are.  I verily 
thought  that  I “ ought  to  do”  (or  at  least  that 
I might  do)  “ many  things  against  Jesus  of 
Nazareth,”  Acts  xxvi.  None  even  went  far- 
ther than  me,  according  to  the  limits  of  my 
years  and  capacity,  in  opposing  the  truths  of 
the  gospel.  But  the  mercy  of  God  spared 
me;  and  his  providence  having  led  me 
through  various  changes  and  circumstances 
of  life,  in  each  of  which  I have  had  a still 
deeper  conviction  of  my  former  errors,  has  at 
length  given  me  this  opportunity  to  tell  you. 


396 


ON  ALL  THINGS  BETNG 


<0  that  I could  speak  it  to  your  hearts!) 

“ that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee” 
(sooner  or  later)  “must  bow (Phil,  ii.)  be- 
fore him  every  heart  must  either  bend  or 
break ; that  he  is  full  of  mercy,  love,  and  par- 
don, to  all  that  submit  themselves  to  him ; 
but  that,  ere  long,  he  shall  be  “revealed 
from  heaven  in  flaming  fire,  to  execute  judg- 
ment, and  to  convince  ungodly  sinners  of  all 
the  hard  speeches  they  have  spoken  against 
him,”  Jude. 

I would,  2dly,  address  those  who,  while 
they  profess  to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  do 
in  their  works  manifestly  deny  him,  Tit.  i. 
This  is,  if  possible,  a worse  case  than  the 
other,  yet  how  frequent!  You  believe  that 
Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  world  both  to  be 
a propitiation  for  sin,  and  also  to  give  us  an 
example  of  a godly  life,  and  yet  continue  con- 
tentedly in  the  practice  of  those  sins  for  which 
he  poured  forth  his  soul,  in  the  pursuit  of 
those  vices  which  the  gospel  disallows,  and 
in  the  indulgence  of  those  desires  which  your 
own  consciences  condemn.  Think,  I entreat 
you,  of  these  words  in  the  50th  Psalm  ; unto 
the  wicked  God  saith,  “ What  hast  thou  to 
do,  that  thou  shouldst  take  my  covenant  into 
thy  mouth : seeing  thou  hatest.  instruction, 
ana  castest  my  words  behind  thee?”  This 
question  is  now  proposed  to  our  consciences, 
that  we  may  be  aware  in  time  of  the  danger 
of  insincerity,  and  not  “ perish  with  a lie  in 
our  right  hands,”  Is.  xliv.  If  we  cannot  an- 
swer it  now,  what  shall  we  say  in  that  awful 
hour  when  God  shall  speak  in  ten  thousand 
thunders  to  all  who,  in  this  life,  presumed  to 
mock  him  with  an  empty  outside  worship] 
“drawing  near  him  with  their  lips,  when 
their  hearts  were  far  from  him,”  Is.  xxix. 
For  the  day  is  at  hand,  the  day  of  the  Lord, 
when  God  shall  bring  every  hidden  thing  to 
light,  when  every  man’s  works  shall  be  tried 
and  weighed  ; tried  in  the  fire  of  his  purity, 
weighed  in  the  balance  of  his  righteousness ; 
and  as  the  issue  proves,  so  must  the  conse- 
quence abide  to  all  eternity : a trial  and  a 
scrutiny  which  no  flesh  could  abide,  were  it 
not  for  the  interposing  merits  of  Jesus  Christ, 
our  Saviour  and  our  Judge.  But  he  has  al- 
ready told  us  that  he  will  then  own  none  but 
those  who  were  faithfully  devoted  to  his  ser- 
vice here.  To  the  urgent  cries  and  strongest 
pleas  of  others,  he  will  give  no  other  answer, 
but  “ I know  you  not,  I never  knew  you,” 
Matt.  vii.  “ Depart  from  me  ye  cursed,  into 
everlasting  fire,”  Matt.  xxv. — What  will  it 
then  avail  to  plead  our  privileges,  when,  if 
this  be  all,  we  may  read  our  doom  already  1 
“And  that  servant  who  knew  his  master’s 
will,  and  prepared  not  himself,  neither  did 
according  to  his  will,  shall  be  beaten  with 
many  stripes ; for  unto  whomsoever  much  is 
given,  of  him  much  shall  be  required  ; and  to 
whom  men  have  committed  much,  of  him 
they  will  ask  the  more,”  Luke  xii.  O con- 


sider this,  ye  that  forget  God,  lest  he  tear 
you  in  pieces,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver. 

Finally,  let  those  who  through  grace  have 
attained  to  worship  God  in  spirit  and  in  truth, 
be  careful  to  adorn  and  hold  fast  their  profes- 
sion. You  see  your  calling  brethren : let  the 
name  of  Christian  always  remind  you  of  your 
high  obligation  to,  and  continual  dependence 
upon,  the  author  of  your  faith.  Use  it  as  a 
means  to  animate  and  regulate  your  whole 
behaviour.  And  if  upon  some  occasions,  you 
find  undeserved  ill  offices,  or  unkind  con- 
structions, wonder  not  at  it : thus  it  must  and 
will  be,  more  or  less,  to  all  who  would  exer- 
cise themselves  in  keeping  a conscience  void 
of  offence,  Acts  xxiv.  Yet  be  careful  to  mo- 
del your  actions  by  the  rule  of  God's  w7ord. 
Our  Lord  says,  “ Blessed  are  ye  when  men 
revile  you,  and  say  all  manner  of  evil  against 
you  falsely,  for  my  sake,”  Matt.  v.  Observe, 
first,  the  evil  spoken  of  you  must  be  false  and 
groundless ; and,  2dly,  the  cause  must  be  for 
the  sake  of  Christ,  and  not  for  any  singulari- 
ties of  your  own,  either  in  sentiment  or  prac- 
tice, which  you  cannot  clearly  maintain  from 
scripture.  It  is  a great  blessing  when  the 
innocence  and  simplicity  of  the  dove  is  hap- 
pily blended  with  true  wisdom.  It  is  a mercy 
to  be  kept  from  giving  unnecessary  offence, 
in  these  times  of  division  and  discord.  En- 
deavour that  a principle  of  love  to  God,  and 
to  mankind  for  his  sake,  may  have  place  in 
all  your  actions  : this  will  be  a secret,  sea- 
sonable, and  infallible  guide,  in  a thousand 
incidents,  where  particular  rules  cannot 
reach.  “ Be  sober,  be  vigilant,  continue  in- 
stant in  prayer;”  and  in  a little  while  all 
your  conflicts  shall  determine  in  conquest, 
faith  shall  give  place  to  sight,  and  hope  to 
possession.  Yet  a little  while,  and  “Christ, 
who  is  our  life,  shall  appear,”  (Col.  iii.)  to  vin- 
dicate his  truth,  to  put  a final  end  to  all  evil 
and  offence ; and  then  we  also,  even  all  who 
have  loved  him,  and  waited  for  him,  “ shall 
appear  with  him  in  glory,”  Is.  xxv. 


SERMON  IV. 

ON  ALL  THINGS  BEING  GIVEN  US  WITH  CHRIST. 

He  that  spared  not  his  oiun  Son , but  deliver- 
ed him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not  with 
him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  1 — Rom. 
viii.  32. 

Various  have  been  the  disputes,  and  va- 
rious the  mistakes  of  men,  concerning  the 
things  of  God.  Too  often,  amidst  the  heat  of 
fierce  contending  parties,  truth  is  injured  by 
both  sides,  befriended  by  neither.  Religion, 
the  pretended  cause  of  our  many  controver- 
sies, is  sometimes  wholly  unconcerned  in 
them : I mean,  that  pure  religion  and  unde- 


GIVEN  US  WITH  CHRIST. 


397 


SER.  IV.] 

filed,  that  wisdom  which  cometh  from  above, 
abounds  with  proofiof  its  divine  original,  be- 
ing “ pure,  peaceable,  gentle,  and  easy  to  be 
entreated,  full  of  mercy  and  good  works, 
without  partiality,  and  without  hypocrisy,” 
James  iii.  Religion  is  a serious  and  a per- 
sonal concern.  It  arises  from  a right  know- 
ledge of  God  and  ourselves ; a sense  of  the 
great  things  he  has  done  for  fallen  man ; a 
persuasion,  or  at  least  a well-grounded  hope, 
of  our  own  interest  in  his  favour;  and  a prin- 
ciple of  unbounded  love  to  him  who  thus  first 
loved  us.  It  consists  in  an  entire  surrender 
of  ourselves,  and  our  all  to  God ; in  setting 
him  continually  before  us,  as  the  object  of 
our  desires,  the  scope  and  inspector  of  our 
actions,  and  our  only  refuge  and  hope  in  every 
trouble : finally,  in  making  the  goodness  of 
God  to  us  the  motive  and  model  of  our  beha- 
viour to  our  fellow-creatures,  to  love,  pity,  re- 
lieve, instruct,  forbear,  and  forgive  them,  as 
occasion  offer ; because  we  ourselves  both 
need  and  experience  these  things  at  the  hand 
of  our  heavenly  Father.  The  two  great  points 
to  which  it  tends,  and  to  which  it  urges  the 
soul,  where  it  has  taken  place,  incessantly  to 
press  after,  are,  communion  with  God,  and 
conformity  to  him : and  as  neither  of  these 
can  be  fully  attained  in  this  life,  it  teaches 
us  to  pant  after  a better;  to  withdraw  our 
thoughts  and  affections  from  temporal  things, 
and  fix  them  on  that  eternal  state,  where  we 
trust  our  desires  shall  be  abundantly  satis- 
fied ; and  the  work  begun  by  grace  shall  be 
crowned  with  glory. 

Such  is  the  religion  of  the  gospel.  This 
the  life  and  doctrine  of  our  Lord,  and  the 
writings  of  his  apostles,  jointly  recommend. 
An  excellent  abridgement  of  the  whole  we 
have  in  this  8th  chapter  to  the  Romans,  de- 
scribing the  state,  temper,  practice,  privile- 
ges, and  immoveable  security  of  a true  Chris- 
tian. Every  verse  is  rich  in  comfort  and  in- 
struction, and  might,  without  violence,  afford 
a theme  for  volumes;  particularly  that  which 
I have  read,  maybe  styled  evangelium  evan- 
gelii:  a complete  and  comprehensive  epitome 
of  whatever  is  truly  worthy  of  our  knowledge 
and  our  hope.  The  limits  of  our  time  are  too 
narrow  to  admit  any  previous  remarks  on  the 
context,  or  indeed  to  consider  the  subject  ac- 
cording to  the  order  of  an  exact  division ; 
therefore,  I shall  not  at  present  use  any  arti- 
ficial method  ; but,  taking  the  words  as  they 
lie,  I shall  offer  a few  practical  observations, 
which  seem  naturally  and  immediately  to  arise 
from  the  perusal  of  them,  making  such  im- 
provement as  may  occur  as  I go  along.  And 
may  the  Father  of  mercies,  who  has  put  this 
treasure  into  our  hands,  favour  us  with  his 
gracious  presence  and  blessing ! 

I.  From  the  words,  “ He  spared  not  his 
own  Son,”  me  may  observe  in  one  view,  the 
wonderful  goodness  and  the  inflexible  seve- 
rity of  God.  So  great  was  his  goodness,  that 


when  man  was  by  sin  rendered  incapable  of 
any  happiness,  and  obnoxious  to  all  misery 
incapable  of  restoring  himself,  or  of  receiving 
the  least  assistance  from  any  power  in  heaven 
or  in  earth  ; God  spared  not  his  only-begotten 
Son,  but  in  his  unexampled  love  to  the  world, 
gave  him,  who  alone  was  able  to  repair  the 
breach.  Every  gift  of  God  is  good : the  boun- 
ties of  his  common  providence  are  very  valu- 
able : that  he  should  continue  life,  and  supply 
that  life  with  food,  raiment,  and  a variety  of 
comforts,  to  those  who  by  rebellion  had  for- 
feited all,  wTas  wonderful : but  what  are  all 
inferior  blessings,  compared  to  this  unspeak- 
able gift  of  the  Son  of  his  love  l Abraham  had 
given  many  proofs  of  his  love  and  obedience 
before  he  was  commanded  to  offer  up  Isaac 
upon  the  altar ; but  God  seems  to  pass  by  all 
that  went  before,  as  of  small  account  in  com- 
parison of  this  last  instance  of  duty  : “ Now 
I know  that  thou  fearest  God,  seeing  thou  hast 
not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  son  from  me,” 
Gen.  xxii.  Surely  we  likewise  must  say, 
“ In  this  was  manifested  the  love  of  God  to 
us,  because  he  gave  his  Son,  his  only  Son,  to 
be  the  life  of  the  world.”  But  all  comparison 
fails:  Abraham  was  bound  in  duty,  bound  by 
gratitude ; neither  was  it  a free-will  offering, 
but  by  the  express  command  of  God : but  to 
us  the  mercy  was  undesired,  as  well  as  unde- 
served. “ Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved 
God ;”  on  the  contrary,  we  were  enemies  to 
him,  and  in  rebellion  against  him  ; “ but  that 
he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  pro- 
pitiation for  our  sins,”  the  sins  we  had  com- 
mitted against  himself.  My  friends,  ought 
not  this  love  to  meet  a return  ! Is  it  not  most 
desirable  to  be  able  to  say  with  the  apostle, 
upon  good  grounds,  “We  love  him,  because 
he  first  loved  us  !”  Should  it  not  be  our  con- 
tinual inquiry,  “ What  shall  we  render  to  the 
Lord  for  all  his  benefits!”  especially  for  this, 
which  is  both  the  crown  and  the  spring  of  all 
the  rest!  Are  we  cold  and  unaffected  at  this 
astonishing  proof  of  divine  love,  and  are  our 
hearts  not.  grieved  and  humbled  at  our  own 
ingratitude ! then  are  we  ungrateful  and  in- 
sensible indeed ! 

The  justice  and  severity  of  God  is  no  less 
conspicuous  than  his  goodness  in  these  words : 
as  he  spared  not  to  give  his  Son  for  our  sakes, 
so,  when  Christ  appeared  in  our  nature,  un- 
dertook our  cause,  and  was  charged  with  our 
sins,  though  he  was  the  Father’s  well-beloved 
Son,  he  was  not  spared.  He  drank  the  bit- 
ter cup  of  the  wrath  of  God  to  the  very  dregs; 
he  bore  all  the  shame,  sorrow,  and  pain,  all 
the  distress  of  body  and  mind,  that  must  other- 
wise have  fallen  upon  our  heads.  His  whole 
life,  from  the  manger  to  the  cross,  was  one 
series  of  humiliation  and  suffering,  John  xviii. 
Observe  him  in  the  world,  despised,  vilified, 
persecuted  even  to  death,  by  unreasonable 
and  wicked  men ; ridiculed,  buffeted,  spit  up- 
on ; and  at  length  nailed  to  the  accursed  tree ! 


80S 


ON  ALL  THINGS  BEING 


Consider  him  in  the  wilderness,  (Luke  iv.) 
given  up  to  the  power  and  assaulted  by  the 
temptations  of  the  devil ! Behold  him  in  the 
garden,  (Luke  xxii.)  and  say,  “Was  ever 
sorrow  like  unto  his  sorrow,  wherewith  the 
Lord  afflicted  him  in  the  day  of  his  fierce  an- 
ger 1”  How  inconceivable  must  that  agony 
have  been,  which  caused  his  blood  to  forsake 
its  wonted  chann  els,  and  start  from  every  pore 
of  his  body  ! Behold  him,  lastly,  upon  the 
cross,  (Matt.  xx  \ ii.)  suffering  the  most  painful 
and  ignominious  death : suspended  between 
two  thieves ; surrounded  by  cruel  enemies, 
who  made  sport  of  his  pangs ; derided  by  all 
that  passed  by  ! Attend  to  his  dolorous  cry, 
expressive  of  an  imvard  distress  beyond  all 
wre  have  yet  spoken  of,  “ My  God,  my  God, 
why  hast  thou  forsaken  me!”  St.  Paul  re- 
minds the  Galatians,  that,  by  his  preaching 
among  them,  Jesus  Christ  had  “ been  evi- 
dently set  forth  crucified  before  their  eyes,” 
Gal.  iii.  Would  it  please  God  to  bless  my 
poor  words  to  the  like  purpose,  you  would  see 
a meaning  you  never  yet  observed  in  that 
awful  passage,  “ Tribulation,  and  wrath,  and 
anguish,  upon  every  soul  of  man  that  doeth 
evil ;”  (Rom.  ii.)  for  the  punishment  due  to 
the  sins  of  all  that  shall  stand  at  the  last  day 
on  the  right  hand  of  God,  met  and  centred 
in  Christ,  the  Lamb  of  expiation ; nor  was 
the  dreadful  weight  removed,  till  he,  tri- 
umphant in  death,  pronounced,  “ It  is  finish- 
ed,” John  xix.  Let  us  not  think  of  this  as  a 
matter  of  speculation  only;  our  lives,  our 
precious  souls,  are  concerned  in  it.  Let  us 
infer  from  hence,  how  fearful  a thing  it  is  to 
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God,  Heb.  x. 
The  apostle  Peter  (2  Peter  ii ) admonishes 
those  to  whom  he  wrote,  from  the  fearful  ex- 
ample of  the  angels  who  sinned,  and  of  the 
old  world ; where  the  same  word  is  used  as 
in  my  text,  oJ*  e$st<r*To:  “He  spared  them 
not :”  that  is,  he  punished  them  to  the  ut- 
most ; he  did  not  afford  them  the  least  miti- 
gation. It  is  a frequent  figure  of  speech,  by 
which  much  more  is  understood  than  is  or 
can  be  expressed.  Much  more,  then,  may 
we  say,  if  God  spared  not  his  own  Son, 
“ what  shall  be  the  end  of  those  who  obey 
not  the  gospel!”  1 Peter  iv.  If  the  holy 
Jesus  was  thus  dealt  with,  when  he  was  only 
accounted  a sinner  by  imputation,  where 
shall  the  impenitent  and  the  ungodly  ap- 
pear ! “ If  these  things  were  done  in  the 
green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  in  the  dry!” 
Luke  xxiii.  The  punishment  of  sin  in  the 
soul  in  a future  state  is  twofold : the  wrath 
of  God  in  all  its  dreadful  effects,  typified  by 
fire  unquenchable,  (Mark  ix.)  and  the  stings 
of  conscience,  represented  by  a worm  that 
never  dies.  Our  Lord  endured  the  former ; 
but  the  other  perhaps  could  have  no  place  in 
him,  who  was  absolutely  perfect  and  sinless. 
But  if  the  prospect  of  one  made  him  amazed 
and  sorrowful  beyond  measure,  what  conster- 


[ser.  :v. 

nation  must  the  concurrence  of  both  raise  in 
the  wicked,  when  they  shall  hear  and  feel 
their  irrevocable  doom ! May  we  have  grace 
to  reflect  on  these  things,  that  we  may  flee 
for  safety  to  the  hope  set  before  us,  to  Jesus 
Christ,  the  only,  and  the  sure  refuge  from 
that  approaching  storm,  which  shall  sweep 
away  all  the  workers  of  iniquity  as  a flood, 
Isa.  xxiii. 

II.  Here,  as  in  a glass,  we  may  see  the 
evil  of  sin.  The  bitter  fruits  of  sin  are  in- 
deed visible  every  where.  Sin  is  the  cause  of 
all  the  labour,  sickness,  pain,  and  grief,  under 
which  the  whole  creation  groans.  Sin  often 
makes  man  a terror  and  a burden,  both  to 
himself  and  those  about  him.  Sin  occasions 
discord  and  confusion  in  families,  cities,  and 
kingdoms.  Sin  has  always  directed  the  march, 
and  ensured  the  success,  of  those  instruments 
of  divine  vengeance  whom  w7e  style  Mighty 
Conquerors.  Those  ravagers  of  mankind, 
who  spread  devastation  and  horror  far  and 
wide,  and  ruin  more  in  a few  days  than  ages 
can  repair,  have  only  afforded  so  many  me- 
lancholy proofs  of  the  malignity  of  sin.  For 
this,  a shower  of  flaming  brimstone  fell  upon 
a wrhole  country ; for  this,  an  overwhelming 
deluge  destroyed  a whole  world  ; for  this, 
principalities  and  powers  were  cast  from  hea- 
ven, and  are  reserved  under  chains  of  dark- 
ness (2  Peter  ii.)  to  a more  dreadful  doom. 
But  none  of  these  things,  nor  all  of  them  to- 
gether, afford  such  a conviction  of  the  hein- 
ous nature,  and  destructive  effects  of  sin,  as 
we  may  gather  from  these  words,  “ He  spared 
not  his  own  Son.” 

III.  Here  we  may  likewise  see  the  value 
of  the  human  soul.  We  ordinarily  judge  of 
the  worth  of  a thing  by  the  price  which  a 
wise  man,  who  is  acquainted  with  its  intrin- 
sic excellency,  is  willing  to  give  for  it.  Now7, 
the  soul  of  a man  was  of  such  estimation  in 
the  sight  of  God,  who  made  it,  that,  when  it 
w7as  sinking  into  endless  ruin,  he  spared  not 
his  own  Son,  but  freely  delivered  him  up  for 
our  ransom.  Two  things  especially  render 
the  soul  thus  important  in  the  view  cf  infi- 
nite wisdom : 1st,  The  capacity  he  had  given 
it : for  “ he  formed  it  for  himself,”  (Isaiah 
xliii.)  capable  of  knowing,  serving,  and  en- 
joying God ; and  by  consequence,  incapable 
of  happiness  in  any  thing  beneath  him  ; for 
nothing  can  satisfy  any  being  but  the  attain- 
ment of  its  proper  end:  and,  2dly,  The  du- 
ration he  had  assigned  it,  beyond  the  limits 
of  time,  and  the  existence  of  the  material 
world.  The  most  excellent  and  exalted  be- 
ing, if  only  the  creature  of  a day,  would  be 
worthy  of  little  regard.*  On  the  other  hand, 
immortality  itself  vrould  be  of  small  value  to 
a creature  that  could  rise  no  higher  than  the 
pursuits  of  animal  life : But  in  the  soul  of 
man,  the  capability  of  complete  happiness  or 


* Vide  Young’s  Night  Thoughts,  7th  Night. 


GIVEN  US  WITH  CHRIST. 


399 


9ER.  IV  ] 

exquisite  misery,  and  that  for  ever,  makes  it 
a prize  worthy  the  contention  of  different 
worlds.  For  this  an  open  intercourse  was 
maintained  between  heaven  and  earth,  till  at 
length  the  Word  of  God  appeared  “ in  the 
likeness  of  sinful  flesh,”  that,  in  our  nature, 
he  might  encounter  and  subdue  the  sworn 
enemy  of  our  species.  All  that  has  been 
transacted  in  the  kingdoms  of  providence  and 
grace,  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  has 
been  in  subserviency  to  this  grand  point,  the 
redemption  of  the  deathless  soul.  And  is  it 
so  ! And  shall  there  be  found  amongst  us 
numbers  utterly  insensible  of  their  natural 
.dignity,  that  dare  disparage  the  plan  of  infi- 
nite wisdom,  and  stake  those  souls  for  trifles, 
which  nothing  less  than  the  blood  of  Christ 
could  redeem  ! There  is  need  to  use  great 
plainness  of  speech ; the  matter  is  of  the  ut- 
most weight ; be  not,  therefore,  offended  that 
I would  warn  you  against  the  deceitfulness 
of  sin.  Suffer  not  your  hearts  to  be  entangled 
in  the  vanities  of  the  world ; either  they  will 
fail,  and  disappoint  you  in  life,  or  at  least  you 
must  leave  them  behind  you  when  you  die. 
You  must  enter  an  invisible,  unknown  state, 
where  you  cannot  expect  to  meet  any  of 
those  amusements  or  engagements  which 
you  here  find  so  necessary  to  pass  away  the 
tedious  load  of  time  that  hangs  upon  your 
hands.  You,  to  whom  a few  hours  of  leisure 
are  so  burdensome,  have  you  considered  how 
you  shall  be  able  to  support  an  eternity! 
You  stand  upon  a brink,  and  all  about  you  is 
uncertainty.  You  see,  of  your  acquaintance, 
some  or  other  daily  called  away,  some  who 
were  as  likely  to  live  as  yourselves.  You 
know  not  but  you  may  be  the  very  next. 
You  cannot  be  certain  but  this  very  night 
your  soul  may  be  required  of  you,  Luke  xii. 
Perhaps  a few  hours  may  introduce  you  into 
the  presence  of  that  God  whom  you  have 
been  so  little  desirous  to  please.  And  can 
you,  in  such  a situation,  sport  and  play,  with 
as  little  concern  as  the  lamb,  already  marked 
out  to  bleed  to-morrow ! Oh ! it  is  strange ! 
How  fatally  has  the  god  of  this  world  blinded 
your  eyes ! and  how  dreadful  must  your  situ- 
ation be  in  death,  if  death  alone  can  unde- 
ceive you ! 

IV.  Lastly,  we  may  gather  from  these 
words  the  certainty  of  the  gospel-salvation. 
God  himself  delivered  up  his  Son  for  us  all. 
] Te  declared  himself  well  pleased  with  him 
(Matt,  iii.)  as  our  Surety,  upon  his  first  en- 
trance upon  his  work;  and  testified  his  ac- 
ceptance of  his  undertaking,  in  that  he  raised 
him  from  the  dead,  and  received  him  into 
hea  ven  as  our  Advocate.  Now,  “ if  God  him- 
self be  thus  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us!” 
Rom.  viii.  If  he  who  only  has  a right  to  judge 
us,  is  pleased  to  justify  us,  “ who  can  lay  any 
thing  to  our  charge ! If  Christ  who  died”  for 
our  sins,  and  is  risen  on  our  behalf,  has  engaged 
to  “ intercede  for  us,  who  shall  condemn !” 


“There  is  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that 
are  in  Christ  Jesus.”  Nor  is  this  all ; but 
every  thing  we  stand  in  need  of  is  fully  pro- 
vided ; and  we  may  well  argue,  as  the  apostle 
has  taught  us  elsewhere,  “ If,  when  we  were 
enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the 
death  of  his  Son,  much  more,  being  recon- 
ciled, we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life :”  (Roin.  v.) 
or,  as  in  the  passage  before  us,  “He  that 
spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up 
for  us  all,”  when  we  were  alienated  from  him, 
“ how  shall  he  not  with  him  freely  give  us  all 
things,”  now  he  has  taught  us  to  pray,  and 
given  us  his  own  promises  to  plead  for  all  we 
ask ! — This  brings  me  to  the  second  clause 
of  the  text ; only  it  may  be  proper,  before  I 
enter  upon  it,  to  subjoin  two  cautions,  to  pre- 
vent mistakes  from  what  has  been  already 
said. 

1st,  Let  us  remember  that  all  is  a free  gift. 
He  gave  his  Son  : he  gives  all  things  with 
him.  The  gospel  allows  no  place  for  merit 
of  our  own  in  any  respect,  there  was  no 
moving  cause  in  us,  unless  our  misery  may  be 
deemed  such.  Our  deliverance,  in  its  rise, 
progress,  and  accomplishment,  must  be  as- 
cribed to  grace  alone ; and  he  that  would 
glory,  must  glory  only  in  the  Lord,  1 Cor.  i. 

2dly,  Let  us  observe  the  apostle’s  phrase. 
He  says  not  absolutely  for  all,  but  for  us  all ; 
that  is,  those  who  are  described  in  the  former 
part  of  the  chapter,  “ who  are  led  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  who  walk  not  after  the  flesh, 
who  are  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  cor- 
ruption,” who  have  liberty  to  call  God  “ Ab- 
ba, father,”  and  prove  their  relation  by  fol- 
lowing him  as  “ dear  children.”  Christ  is 
“ the  author  of  eternal  salvation  to  those  only 
who  obey  him,”  Heb.  v.  It  cannot  be  other- 
wise, since  a branch  of  that  salvation  is  to  de- 
liver us  “ from  our  sins,”  and  “ the  present 
evil  world ;”  (Gal.  i.)  to  “ purify  us  from 
dead  works,  to  serve  the  living  God.”  “ Be 
not  deceived,  God  will  not  be  mocked  ; what- 
soever a man  soweth,  that  shall  he  reap.  He 
that  soweth  to  the  flesh,  shall,”  notwithstand- 
ing all  that  Christ  has  done  or  suffered,  yea 
so  much  the  rather,  “ of  the  flesh  reap  cor- 
ruption,” Gal.  vi. 

The  text  having  declared,  that  God  spared 
not  his  Son  for  our  sakes,  proceeds  to  infer, 
that  “ with  him  he  will  assuredly  give  us  ali 
things.”  Here  we  may  take  notice,  first,  that 
the  words  all  things  must  be  limited  to  such 
as  are  needful  and  good  for  us.  It  may  be 
said  of  many  of  our  desires,  “ ye  know  not 
what  ye  ask :”  (Matt,  xx.)  in  such  cases,  the 
best  answer  we  can  receive  is  a denial.  For 
those  blessings  which  God  has  promised  ab- 
solutely to  give,  such  as  pardon,  grace,  and 
eternal  life,  we  cannot  be  too  earnest  or  ex- 
plicit in  our  prayers;  but  in  temporal  things 
we  should  be  careful  to  ask  nothing  but  with 
submission  to  the  divine  will.  The  promises, 
it  is  true,  appertain  to  “ the  life  that  now  is, 


400 


ON  ALL  THINGS  BEING 


as  well  as  that  which  is  to  come,”  1 Tim.  iv. 
“ Whether  Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas,  or 
life,  or  death,  or  things  present,  or  tilings  to 
come : all  are  ours,  if  we  are  Christ’s,”  1 Cor. 
iii.  But  the  particular  modus  of  these  things 
God  has  reserved  in  his  own  hands,  to  bestow 
them  as  best  shall  suit  our  various  tempers, 
abilities,  and  occasions.  And  it  is  well  for 
us  that  it  is  so ; for  we  should  soon  ruin  our- 
selves if  left  to  our  own  choice : like  children 
who  are  fond  to  meddle  with  what  would 
hurt  them,  but  refuse  the  most  salutary  me- 
dicines, if  unpalatable;  so  we  often  pursue, 
with  earnestness  and  anxiety,  those  things, 
which,  if  we  could  obtain  them,  would  great- 
ly harm,  if  not  destroy  us.  Often,  too,  with 
a rash  and  blind  impatience,  we  struggle  to 
avoid  or  escape  those  difficulties  which  God 
sees  fit  to  appoint  for  the  most  gracious  and 
merciful  purposes, — to  correct  our  pride  and 
vanity,  to  exercise  and  strengthen  our  faith, 
to  wean  us  from  the  world,  to  teach  us  a clo- 
ser dependence  upon  himself,  and  to  awaken 
our  desires  after  a better  inheritance. 

Again,  as  God,  by  his  promise  freely  to  give 
us  all  things,  has  not  engaged  to  comply  with 
the  measure  of  our  unreasonable,  short-sight- 
ed wishes:  so  neither  has  he  confined  him- 
self as  to  the  time  or  manner  of  bestowing 
his  gifts.  The  blessing  we  seek,  though  per- 
haps not  wholly  improper,  may  be  at  present 
unseasonable : in  this  case,  the  Lord  will  sus- 
pend it,  till  he  sees  it  will  afford  us  the  com- 
fort and  satisfaction  he  intends  us  by  it : and 
then  we  shall  be  sure  to  have  it.  Sometimes 
it  is  withheld,  to  stir  us  up  to  fervency  and 
importunity  in  our  prayers,  sometimes  to 
make  it  doubly  welcome  and  valuable  when 
it  comes.  So  likewise  as  to  the  manner : we 
ask  one  good  thing,  and  he  gives  an  equiva- 
lent in  something  else ; and  when  we  come  to 
weigh  all  things,  we  see  cause  to  say  his 
choice  was  best.  Thus  David  acknowledges : 
“ In  the  day  that  I called,  thou  didst  answer 
me,  and  strengthenedst  me  with  strength  in 
my  soul,”  Psal.  cxxxviii.  David  asked  for 
deliverance  from  trouble ; the  Lord  gave  him 
strength  to  bear  it ; and  he  allows  his  prayer 
was  fully  answered.  A parallel  case  the 
apostle  records : he  besought  the  Lord  thrice 
(2  Cor.  xii.)  for  the  removal  of  that  trial 
which  he  calls  “a  thorn  in  the  flesh:”  the 
answer  he  received  was,  “ My  grace  is  suffi- 
cient for  thee.”  Such  an  assurance  was  more 
valuable  than  the  deliverance  he  sought  could 
be.  Sometimes  we  seek  a thing  in  a way  of 
our  own,  by  means  and  instruments  of  our 
own  devising.  God  crosses  our  feeble  pur- 
poses, that  he  may  give  us  the  pleasure  of  re- 
ceiving it  immediately  from  himself.  It  were 
easy  to  enlarge  on  this  head ; let  it  suffice  to 
know,  our  concerns  are  in  his  hands  who  does 
all  thing's  well;  and  who  will,  and  does,  ap- 
point all  to  work  together  for  our  good. 

From  the  latter  clause,  thus  limited  and 


[ser.  IV. 

explained,  many  useful  directions  might  be 
drawn.  I shall  only  mention  two  or  three, 
and  conclude. 

1st,  Since  we  are  told,  that  God  freely  gives 
us  all  things,  let  us  learn  to  see  and  acknow- 
ledge his  hand  in  all  we  have,  and  in  all  we 
meet  with.  When  Jacob  was  returning  to 
Canaan  after  a long  absence,  (Gen.  xxxii.) 
the  fear  of  his  brother  Esau  occasioned  him 
to  divide  his  family  and  substance  into  sepa- 
rate companies  ; and,  comparing  his  present 
situation  with  the  poor  condition  in  which  he 
had  been  driven  from  home  twenty  years  be- 
fore, he  breaks  out  into  this  act  of  praise : “I 
am  not  worthy,  O Lord,  of  all  thy  mercies; 
for  with  my  staff  I passed  over  this  Jordan, 
and  now  I am  become  two  bands  !”  How 
pious  and  how  cheering  was  this  reflection  , 
And  afterwards,  (Gen.  xxxiii.)  when  his  bro- 
ther Esau  asked  him  concerning  his  sons, 
“ They  are  the  children,  (said  he)  which  God 
has  graciously  given  thy  servant.”  Such  a 
deep  and  abiding  persuasion  of  the  most  high 
God  ordering  and  over-ruling  all  our  con- 
cerns, would,  like  the  light,  diffuse  a lustre 
and  a beauty  upon  every  thing  around  us. 
To  consider  every  comfort  of  life  as  an  effect 
and  proof  of  the  divine  favour  towards  us, 
would,  like  the  feigned  alchymist’s  stone, 
turn  all  our  possessions  into  gold,  and  stamp 
a value  upon  things  which  a common  eye 
might  judge  indifferent.  Nor  is  this  more 
than  the  truth  : “ The  hairs  of  our  head  are 
all  numbered,”  Matth.  x.  The  eye  of  divini3 
providence  is  upon  every  sparrow  of  the  field ; 
nor  can  we  properly  term  any  circumstance 
of  our  lives  small,  since  such  as  seem  most 
trifling  in  themselves  do  often  give  birth  to 
those  which  we  judge  most  important.  On 
the  other  hand,  to  be  able  to  discover  the 
wisdom  and  goodness  of  our  heavenly  Father 
through  the  darkest  cloud  of  troubles  and 
afflictions,  to  see  all  our  trials  appointed  to  us, 
in  number,  weight,  and  measure:  nothing 
befalling  us  by  chance,  nothing  without  need, 
nothing  without  a support,  nothing  without  a 
designed  advantage; — what  a stay  must  these 
apprehensions  be  to  the  soul!  Take  away 
these,  and  man  is  the  most  forlorn,  helpless, 
miserable  object  in  the  world ; pining  for  every 
thing  he  has  not,  trembling  for  every  thing 
he  has ; equally  suffering  under  the  pressure 
of  what  does  happen,  and  the  fear  of  what 
may : liable  to  thousands  of  unsuspected  dan- 
gers, yet  unable  to  guard  against  those  which 
are  most  obvious.  Were  there  no  future  life, 
it  would  be  our  interest  to  be  truly  and  uni- 
formly religious,  in  order  to  make  the  most 
of  this.  How  unhappy  must  they  be,  to  whom 
the  thoughts  of  a God  ever-present  is  a bur- 
den they  strive,  in  vain,  to  shake  off!  But 
let  us  learn  to  acknowledge  him  in  all  our 
ways,  and  then  he  will  direct  and  bless  our 
paths,  Prov.  iii. 

2d,  Since  all  we  have  is  the  gift  of  God 


GIVEN  US  WITH  CHRIST. 


401 


SER.  IV.] 

let  this  teach  us,  in  whatever  state  we  are, 
therewith  to  be  content.  Our  heavenly  Fa- 
ther knoweth  what  we  have  need  of  before 
we  ask  him,  Matth.  vi.  The  earth  is  his,  and 
the  fulness  thereof ; (Psal.  xxiv.)  and  his  good- 
ness is  equal  to  his  power,  a proof  of  which 
we  have  in  the  text.  He  has  already  given 
us  more  than  ten  thousand  worlds.  Are  you 
poor  3 Be  satisfied  with  the  Lord’s  appoint- 
ment. It  were  as  easy  to  him  to  give  you 
large  estates  as  to  supply  you  with  the  bread 
you  eat,  or  to  continue  your  breath  in  your 
nostrils : but  he  sees  poverty  best  for  you ; 
he  sees  prosperity  might  prove  your  ruin ; 
therefore  he  has  appointed  you  the  honour  of 
being  in  this  respect  conformable  to  your 
Lord,  who  when  on  earth  had  not  where  to 
lay  his  head,  Matth.  viii.  Have  any  of  you 
lost  a dear  friend  or  relative,  in  whose  life 
you  thought  your  own  lives  bound  up  3 Be 
still,  and  know  that  he  is  God,  Psal.  xlvi.  It 
was  he  who  gave  you  that  friend ; his  blessing 
made  your  friend  a comfort  to  you ; and 
though  the  stream  is  now  cut  off,  the  foun- 
tain is  still  full.  Be  not  like  a wild  bull  in 
a net;  the  Lord  has  many  ways  to  turn  your 
mourning  into  joy.  Are  any  of  you  sick  3 
Think  how  the  compassionate  Jesus  healed 
diseases  with  a word,  in  the  days  of  his  flesh. 
Has  he  not  the  same  power  now  as  then! 
Has  he  not  the  same  love 3 Has  he,  in  his 
exalted  state,  forgot  his  poor  languishing 
members  here  below 3 No,  verily:  he  still 
retains  his  sympathy;  he  is  touched  with  a 
feeling  of  our  infirmities;  he  knows  our 
frame;  he  remembers  we  are  but  dust,  Psal. 
ciii.  It  is  because  sickness  is  better  for  you 
than  health,  that  he  thus  visits  you.  He  dealt 
in  the  same  manner  with  Lazarus,  whom  he 
loved,  John  xi.  Resign  yourselves,  there- 
fore, to  his  wisdom,  and  repose  in  his  love. 
There  is  a land  where  the  blessed  inhabitant 
shall  no  more  say,  “ I am  sick ;”  (Isa.  xxxiii.) 
and  there  all  that  love  the  Lord  Jesus  shall 
shortly  be.  Are  any  of  you  tempted  3 “ Bless- 
ed is  the  man  that  endureth  temptation;  for 
when  he  is  tried,  he  shall  receive  the  crown 
of  life,  which  the  Lord  has  promised  to  them 
that  love  him,”  James  i.  Sure,  you  need  no 
other  argument  to  be  content,  shall  I say,  or 
to  rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad  3 “ My  son, 
despise  not  thou  the  chastening  of  the  Lord, 
nor  faint  when  thou  art  rebuked  of  him,” 
Heb.  xii.  Be  it  in  poverty  or  losses,  in  body 
or  mind,  in  your  own  person  or  another’s,  it 
is  all  appointed  by  God,  and  shall  issue  in 
your  great  benefit,  if  you  are  of  the  number 
of  those  that  love  him. 

3d,  Once  more,  since  it  is  said  that  all 
things  are  freely  given  us  in  and  together 
with  Christ,  let  us  “give  all  diligence  to  make 
our  calling  and  election  sure ;”  (2  Pet.  i.)  to 
know  that  we  have  an  interest  in  him  and  his 
mediation;  and  then  (if  I may  borrow  a com- 
3 E 


mon  expression)  we  are  made  for  ever.  The 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  sent  from  God  on  a mer- 
ciful errand  to  a lost  world,  did  not  come 
empty : no ; he  is  fraught  with  all  blessings, 
suitable  to  all  persons,  extending  to  all  times, 
enduring  to  all  eternity.  O make  it  your 
great  care  to  know  him  and  to  please  him ; 
study  his  word,  call  upon  his  name,  frequent 
his  ordinances,  observe  his  sayings,  seek  to 
know  him  as  the  only  way  to  God ; (John  xiv.) 
the  way  to  pardon,  peace,  and  divine  com- 
munion here,  and  to  complete  happiness  here- 
after. When  once  you  can  say,  “ My  Be- 
loved is  mine,”  (Song  ii.)  I account  all  his  in- 
terest my  own ; “and  I am  his,”  I have  given 
myself  up  to  him  without  reserve, — you  will, 
you  must  be  happy.  You  will  be  interested 
in  all  his  attributes  and  communicable  per- 
fections. His  wisdom  will  be  your  high 
tower,  his  providence  your  constant  shield, 
his  love  your  continual  solace.  “ He  will 
give  his  angels  charge  over  you,  to  keep  you 
in  all  your  ways,”  Psal.  xci.  In  times  of 
difficulty  he  will  direct  your  counsels ; in 
times  of  danger  he  will  fill  you  with  comfort, 
and  “ keep  you  in  perfect  peace,”  (Isa.  xxvi.) 
when  others  quake  for  fear.  He  will  bless 
your  basket  and  your  store,  your  substance 
and  your  families:  your  days  shall  happily 
pass  in  doing  your  Father’s  will,  and  receiv- 
iiig  renewed  tokens  of  his  favour;  and  at 
night  you  shall  lie  down,  and  your  sleep  shall 
be  sweet.  When  afflictions  befall  you  (for 
these  likewise  are  the  fruits  of  love,)  you  shall 
see  your  God  near  at  hand,  “ a very  present 
help  in  trouble;  (Psal.  xlvi.)  you  shall  find 
your  strength  increased  in  proportion  to  your 
trial ; you  shall  in  due  time  be  restored,  as 
gold  from  the  furnace,  purified  sevenfold,  to 
praise  your  great  deliverer.  Every  thing  you 
meet  in  life  shall  yield  you  profit ; and  death, 
which  puts  a fatal  period  to  the  hope  of  the 
wicked ; death,  at  whose  name  thousands  turn 
pale,  shall  to  you  be  an  entrance  into  a new 
and  endless  life.  He  who  tasted  death  for 
you,  (Heb.  ii.)  and  sanctified  it  to  you,  shall 
lead  and  support  you  through  that  dark  val- 
ley : you  shall  shut  yonr  eyes  upon  the  things 
of  time,  to  open  them  the  next  moment  in 
the  blissful  presence  of  your  reconciled  God. 
You  that  a minute  before  were  surrounded 
by  weeping,  helpless  friends,  shall,  in  an  in- 
stant, be  transported  and  inspired  to  join  that 
glorious  song,  “To  him  who  loved  us,  and 
washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood, 
and  hath  made  us  priests  and  kings  to  God 
and  his  Father ; to  him  be  glory  and  strength 
for  ever  and  ever.  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that 
was  slain,  to  receive  power  and  riches,  and 
wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour,  and  glory, 
and  blessing,”  Rev.  v.  Thus  “ blessed  shall 
the  man  be  that  fears  the  I .ord,”  Psal.  cxxviii. 
“ Thus  shall  it  be  done  to  him  whom  the 
King  delighteth  to  honour,”  Esth.  vi.  Amen. 


402 


ON  SEARCHING  THE  SCRIPTURES. 


SER.  V. 


SERMON  V. 

ON  SEARCHING  THE  SCRIPTURES. 

Search  the  scriptures , for  in  them  ye  think 

ye  have  eternal  life , and  they  are  they 

which  testify  of  me. — John  v.  39. 

The  phrase  in  the  Greek  is  ambiguous,  and 
may  be  either  rendered,  according  to  our 
reading,  as  a command,  search  the  scriptures; 
or  else  as  simply  affirming,  ye  do  search  the 
scriptures.  And  as  the  words  were  spoken 
to  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  who  were  ex- 
ceedingly studious  in  the  letter  of  the  scrip- 
tures, this  may  perhaps  have  been  their  first 
design.  The  difference  is  not  material ; and 
either  sense  will  afford  us  instruction.  If  we 
receive  it  as  a command,  we  should  consider 
it  as  given  by  the  Lord  himself,  whose  disci- 
ples we  profess  to  be,  as  bound  on  us  by  our 
own  acknowledgment,  since  in  them  we 
think  and  say  we  have  eternal  life ; and  as 
absolutely  necessary  to  be  complied  with, 
since  it  is  these,  and  these  only,  which  testify 
of  Christ,  in  the  knowledge  of  whom  our 
eternal  life  consists.  If  we  should  understand 
it  in  the  latter  sense,  as  spoken  to  the  Scribes 
and  Pharisees,  it  may  give  us  a useful  cau- 
tion not  to  lay  too  much  stress  either  on  what 
we  think  or  on  what  we  do.  For  these  per- 
sons, we  find,  had  in  some  respects  a right 
sentiment  of  the  holy  scriptures : they  be- 
lieved that  in  them  there  was  eternal  life ; 
and,  in  a sense  likewise,  they  made  this  an 
inducement  to  read,  yea,  to  search  them. 
But  though  they  thus  thought  and  thus  acted, 
and  though  the  scriptures,  from  the  first  page 
to  the  last,  do  testify  of  Christ,  yet  they  could 
not  understand  or  receive  this  testimony,  but 
rejected  the  Messiah  whom  they  professed  to 
hope  for,  and  took  all  their  pains  in  searching 
the  scriptures  to  no  purpose. 

In  what  I am  about  to  lay  before  you,  I 
propose  the  following  order:  1st,  To  men- 
tion a few  requisites,  without  which  it  is  im- 
possible rightly  to  understand  the  scriptures: 
2d,  To  show  how  the  scriptures  testify  of 
Christ:  3d,  To  consider  what  the  import  of 
their  testimony  is:  4th,  To  press  the  practice 
of  searching  the  scriptures,  from  the  argu- 
ment used  in  the  text,  which  is  equally  ap- 
plicable to  us  as  to  the  Jews  of  old,  that  in 
them  we  think  we  have  eternal  life. 

I.  The  first  requisite  I shall  mention  is 
Sincerity;  I mean  a real  desire  to  be  in- 
structed by  the  scriptures,  and  to  submit  both 
our  sentiments  and  our  practices  to  be  con- 
trolled and  directed  by  what  we  read  there. 
Without  this,  our  reading  and  searching  will 
only  issue  in  our  greater  condemnation,  and 
bring  us  under  the  heavy  doom  of  the  servant 
that  knew  his  master’s  will  and  did  it  not. 
A remarkable  instance  of  this  we  have  in  the 
42d  and  two  following  chapters  of  Jeremiah. 


After  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  and  the 
death  of  Gedaliah,  the  people  that  were  left 
intreated  the  prophet  to  inquire  of  the  Lord 
for  them,  concerning  their  intended  removal 
into  Egypt.  Their  request  was  fair : “ That 
the  Lord  thy  God  may  show  us  the  way 
wherein  we  may  walk,  and  the  thing  that  we 
may  do.”  Their  engagement  was  very  solemn : 
“ The  Lord  be  a true  and  faithful  witness  be- 
tween us,  if  we  do  not  even  according  to  all 
things  for  the  which  the  Lord  thy  God  shall 
send  to  us.  Whether  it  be  good,  or  whether 
it  be  evil,  we  will  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord 
our  God,  to  whom  we  send  thee.”  But  their 
hypocrisy  was  most  detestable.  The  Lord, 
who  seeth  the  inmost  purposes  of  the  soul, 
could  not  be  put  off  with  their  fair  pretences. 
He  sent  them  in  answer  an  express  prohibi- 
tion to  go  into  Egypt;  assuring  them  that  his 
curse  should  follow  them,  and  that  there  they 
should  certainly  perish.  Yet  they  went,  and 
verified  what  the  prophet  had  told  them  : 
“ For  ye  dissembled  in  your  hearts,  when  you 
sent  me  to  the  Lord  your  God,  saying,  Pray 
for  us  unto  the  Lord  our  God,  and  according 
to  all  that  the  Lord  our  God  shall  say,  so  de- 
clare unto  us,  and  we  will  do  it.”  Then  they 
spoke  out,  and  like  themselves,  when  they 
told  him,  “ As  for  the  word  which  thou  hast 
spoken  unto  us,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  we 
will  not  hearken  unto  thee,  but  we  will  cer- 
tainly do  whatever  thing  goeth  forth  out  of 
our  own  mouth.”  None  of  us  dare  speak 
thus  in  express  terms;  but  if  we  bring  our 
preconceived  opinions  or  purposes,  not  in  or- 
der to  examine  them  strictly  by  the  test  of 
scripture,  but  to  find  or  wrest  some  passages 
in  the  word  of  God  to  countenance  or  justify 
ourselves ; if  our  desire  is  not  simply  to  be 
led  in  the  very  way  of  God’s  commandments : 
if  we  are  not  really  willing  to  discover  every 
error  and  evil  that  may  be  in  us,  in  order  to 
forsake  them, — we  closely  imitate  these  de- 
ceitful, obstinate,  insolent  Jews,  be  our  pre- 
tences ever  so  fair,  and  are  liable  to  the  like 
dreadful  judgment  for  our  hypocrisy ; the 
curse  of  God  upon  our  devices  here,  and  the 
portion  of  his  enemies  hereafter. 

Where  this  sincerity  is  wanting,  every  thing 
is  wrong ; neither  praying,  nor  hearing,  nor 
reading,  can  profit.  The  scriptures  abound 
with  the  severest  threatenings  against  those 
who  presume  to  mock  the  all-seeing  God.  I 
shall  only  produce  one  passage,  from  Ezekiel 
xiv.  5.  “ Son  of  man,  these  men  have  set 
up  their  idols  in  their  hearts,  and  put  the 
stumbling-block  of  iniquity  before  their  faces : 
should  I be  inquired  of  at  all  by  them  J — 
Every  man  of  the  house  of  Israel  that  setteth 
up  his  idols  in  his  heart,  and  putteth  the 
stumbling-block  of  iniquity  before  his  face, 
and  cometh  to  the  prophet,  I the  Lord  will 
answer  him  that  cometh,  according  to  the 
multitude  of  his  idols.”  I say  not  this,  that  1 
would  have  any  one  throw  aside  the  ordi- 


ON  SEARCHING  THE  SCRIPTURES. 


403 


SER.  V.] 

nances  of  God,  especially  his  public  worship. 
These  are  the  means  which  God  has  appoint- 
ed, in  which  he  has  commanded  us  to  wait, 
and  where  he  is  often  pleased  to  be  found, 
even  by  those  who  seek  him  not.  But  I would 
intreat  such  persons  seriously  to  consider  the 
dreadfuj  condition  they  would  be  in,  if  death 
should  surprise  them  in  such  a state  of  insin- 
cerity as  renders  their  very  prayers  and  sa- 
crifices “ an  abomination  to  the  Lord,”  and 
perverts  those  things  which  are  designed 
for  their  advantage  into  an  occasion  of  their 
falling. 

A second  thing  necessary  is  Diligence. 
This,  with  the  former,  is  finely  described  in 
the  book  of  Proverbs.  “ My  son,  if  thou  wilt 
receive  my  words,  and  hide  my  command- 
ment within  thee  ; so  that  thou  incline  thine 
ear  to  wisdom,  and  apply  thine  heart  to  un- 
derstanding : yea,  if  thou  criest  after  know- 
ledge, and  liftest  up  thy  voice  for  understand- 
ing ; if  thou  seekest.  her  as  silver,  and  search- 
est  for  her  as  hid  treasures : then  shalt  thou 
understand  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  find  the 
knowledge  of  God,”  Prov.  ii.  The  wisdom 
cff  God,  in  which  we  are  concerned,  is  con- 
tained in  his  word.  The  best  understanding 
is  to  keep  his  commandments:  (Psal.  cxi.) 
but  as  we  cannot  keep  them  unless  we  know 
them,  neither  can  we  know  them  without  a 
diligent  inquiry.  The  word  which  is  render- 
ed search , is  borrowed  from  the  practice 

of  miners  : it  implies  two  things,  to  dig,  and 
to  examine.  First,  with  much  labour  they 
pierce  the  earth  to  a considerable  depth  ; and 
when  they  have  thus  found  a vein  of  precious 
ore,  they  then  break  and  sift  it,  and  suffer  no 
part  to  escape  their  notice.  Thus  must  we 
join  frequent  assiduous  reading,  with  a close 
and  awakened  meditation ; comparing  spiri- 
tual things  with  spiritual,  carefully  taking 
notice  of  the  circumstances,  occasion,  and  ap- 
plication of  what  we  read ; being  assured, 
that  there  is  a treasure  of  truth  and  happiness 
under  our  hands,  if  we  have  but  skill  to  dis- 
cover and  improve  it.  Only  let  us  be  mind- 
ful that  we  have  the  same  views  in  reading 
the  scriptures,  that  God  has  in  revealing  them 
to  us,  which  the  apostle  thus  enumerates : — 
“ All  scripture,”  or  the  whole  scripture, 

“ is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is 
profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  cor- 
rection, for  instruction  in  righteousness ; that 
the  man  of  God  may  be  perfect,  thoroughly 
furnished  to  every  good  work,”  2 Tim.  iii. 
And  elsewhere  it  is  said  to  be  able  to  make 
us  “ wise  unto  salvation.”  How  absurd  would 
it  be  for  a man  to  read  a treatise  of  husband- 
ry with  a design  of  learning  navigation,  or  to 
seek  the  principles  of  trade  and  commerce  in 
an  essay  on  music  1 No  less  absurd  is  it  to 
read  or  study  the  scriptures  with  any  other 
view  than  to  receive  its  doctrines,  submit  to 
its  reproofs,  and  obey  its  precepts,  that  we 
may  be  made  “ wise  unto  salvation.”  All  dis- 


quisitions and  criticisms  that  stop  short  of 
this,  that  do  not  amend  the  heart,  as  well  as 
furnish  the  head,  are  empty  and  dangerous, 
at  least  to  ourselves,  whatever  use  they  may 
be  of  to  others.  An  experience  of  this  caused 
a learned  critic  and  eminent  commentator, 
(Grotius,)  to  confess,  towards  the  close  of  his 
life,  Ah  ! vitam  prorsus  perdidi,  laboriose 
nihil  agendo  ! “ Alas ! I have  wasted  my  life  io 
much  labour  to  no  purpose  !”  But,  on  the  con 
trary,  when  we  are  diligent  and  studious,  that 
we  may  be  better  acquainted  with  the  divine 
precepts  and  promises,  and  better  inclined  to 
observe  and  trust  them,  then  we  may  hope  for 
happy  success ; for,  “ blessed  is  the  man  whose 
delight  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  who 
meditates  therein  day  and  night : for  he  shall 
be  like  a tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of  water, 
which  bringeth  forth  its  fruit  in  due  season ; 
his  leaf  also  shall  not  wither,  and  whatsoever 
he  doth”  under  this  influence  “shall  prosper,” 
Psal.  i.  Thus  God  has  promised,  and  thus 
many  have  found  it,  and  been  enabled  to  adopt 
the  words  of  David,  “Thou,  through  thy  com- 
mandments, hast  made  me  wiser  than  my 
enemies,  for  they  are  over  with  me : I have 
more  understanding  than  all  my  teachers,  for 
thy  testimonies  are  my  meditation,”  PsaL 
cxix. 

Humility  is  a third  thing  very  necessary  t© 
a profitable  perusal  of  the  scriptures.  “ God 
giveth  his  grace  to  the  humble,”  James  iv. 
“He  will  guide  the  meek  in  judgment,  he 
will  enlighten  the  simple  in  his  way,”  Psal. 
xxv.  The  proud  he  resisteth,  he 

draws  up  against  him  ; he  prepares  himself, 
as  it  were,  with  his  whole  force  to  oppose  his 
progress.  A most  formidable  expression  ! If 
God  only  leaves  ns  to  ourselves,  we  are  all 
ignorance 'and  darkness;  and  what  must  be 
the  dreadful  case  of  those  against  whom  he 
appears  in  arms?  This  has  been  a principal 
source  of  those  various  and  opposite  heresies 
and  mistakes,  which  are  the  reproach  of  our 
holy  profession,  that  vain  man,  though  born 
a mere  “wild  ass’s  colt,”  (Job  xi.)  has  under- 
taken, by  his  own  strength  and  wisdom,  to 
decide  authoritatively  on  the  meaning  of 
scripture,  without  being  aware  of  the  igno- 
rance, prejudice,  and  weakness  which  influ- 
ences his  judgment  in  religious  matters,  with 
out  knowing  the  utter  inability  of  the  natura 
man  to  discern  the  things  of  God,  and  with- 
out attending  to  those  means  the  scriptures 
themselves  have  appointed  for  the  redress  of 
these  evils.  But  would  we  not  lose  our  time 
and  pains ; would  we  wish  not  to  be  misled 
ourselves,  or  not  to  mislead  others  ? Let  us 
aim  at  a humble  spirit:  let  us  reflect  much 
on  the  majesty  and  grandeur  of  the  God  we 
serve : let  us  adore  his  condescension  in  fa- 
vouring us  with  a revelation  of  his  will : let 
us  learn  to  consider  the  word  of  God,  and  the 
wisdom  of  God,  as  terms  of  the  same  import: 
in  a word,  let  us  study  to  know  ourselves, 


404 


ON  SEARCHING  THE  SCRIPTURES. 


®ur  sinfulness  and  ignorance  ; then  we  shall 
no  longer  read  the  scriptures  with  indiffer- 
ence or  prepossession,  but  with  the  greatest 
reverence  and  attention,  and  with  the  most 
enlarged  expectation. 

I shall  mention  but  one  thing  more  upon 
this  head,  which  is  as  necessary  in  itself  as 
any  of  the  preceding,  and  likewise  necessary 
in  order  to  obtain  them,  and  that  is  Prayer. 
Sincerity,  diligence,  and  humility,  are  the 
gifts  of  God  ; the  blessing  we  seek  in  the  ex- 
ercise of  them  is  in  his  hand  ; and  he  has  pro- 
mised to  bestow  all  good  things,  even  “ his 
Holy  Spirit,  upon  those  who  ask  him.” 
Prayer  is  indeed  the  best  half  of  our  busi- 
ness while  upon  earth,  and  that  which  gives 
spirit  and  efficacy  to  all  the  rest.  Prayer  is 
not  only  our  immediate  duty,  but  the  highest 
dignity,  the  richest  privilege  we  are  capable 
erf*  receiving  on  this  side  eternity ; and  the 
neglect  of  it  implies  the  deepest  guilt,  and 
includes  the  heaviest  punishment.  A stran- 
ger to  prayer,  is  equally  a stranger  to  God  and 
to  happiness,  “ like  a wave  of  the  sea,  driven 
with  the  wind  and  tossed,”  James  i.  Are 
any  of  you,  my  friends,  unacquainted  with 
prayer!  Then  are  you  without  God  in  the 
world,  without  a guide  in  prosperity,  without 
resource  in  distress,  without  true  comfort  in 
life,  and  while  you  continue  so,  without  hope 
in  death.  But,  especially,  you  are  utterly 
unqualified  to  search  the  scriptures.  There 
is  a veil  upon  the  mind  and  heart  of  every 
man,  (as  the  apostle  assures  us,  2 Cor.  iii.)  so 
that  he  can  neither  see  nor  embrace  heavenly 
truths,  till  this  impediment  is  removed: — the 
means  of  this  is  prayer.  Therefore  David  says, 
“ Open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  I may  behold 
wondrous  things  out  of  thy  law.”  (Psal.  cxix.) 
He  knew  there  were  wonderful  things  con- 
tained in  the  law,  but  confesses  himself  inca- 
pable of  discerning  them  till  the  Lord  should 
interpose.  This  he  has  promised  to  do  in 
behalf  of  all  who  call  upon  him.  But  those 
who  seek  not  assistance  from  God,  can  find 
it  no  where  else  : “ for  every  good  and  per- 
fect gift  is  from  above,  and  cometh  down  from 
the  Father  of  lights,”  who  hath  said,  “If  any 
man  lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,” 
James  i.  A critical  knowledge  of  the  origi- 
nal languages,  a skill  in  the  customs  and 
manners  of  the  ancients,  and  acquaintance 
with  the  Greek  and  Roman  classics,  a perusal 
of  councils,  fathers,  scholiasts,  and  commen- 
tators, a readiness  in  the  subtleties  of  logical 
disputation; — these,  in  their  proper  place 
and  subserviency,  maybe  of  considerable  use 
to  clear,  illustrate,  or  enforce  the  doctrines 
of  scripture : but  unless  they  are  governed 
by  a temper  of  humility  and  prayer;  unless 
the  man  that  possesses  them  accounts  them 
altogether  as  nothing,  without  that  assistance 
of  the  Spirit  of  God  which  is  promised  to 
guide  believers  into  all  truth ; unless  he 
seeks  and  prays  for  this  guidance  no  less 


[ser.  v. 

earnestly  than  those  who  understand  nothing 
but  their  mother-tongue  ; I make  no  scruple 
to  affirm,  that  all  his  apparatus  of  knowledge 
only  tends  to  lead  him  so  much  the  farther 
astray ; and  that  a plain  honest  ploughman, 
who  reads  no  book  but  his  Bible,  and  has  no 
teacher  but  the  God  to  whom  he  prays  in 
secret,  stands  abundantly  fairer  for  the  at- 
tainment of  true  skill  in  divinity.  But  hap- 
py he,  who  by  faith  and  prayer  can  realize 
the  divine  presence  always  with  him  ! who  is 
sincere  in  his  intentions,  diligent  in  the  use 
of  means,  diffident  of  himself,  yet  full  of  trust 
and  hope,  that  God,  whom  he  desires  to  serve, 
will  lead  and  guide  him  in  the  paths  of  peace 
and  righteousness  for  his  mercies’  sake,  Psal. 
xxxi.  Those  things  which  are  necessary  for 
him  to  know,  shall  be  made  so  plain,  that  he 
shall  not  mistake  them ; and  those  things 
with  which  he  is  not  so  immediately  concern- 
ed, shall  at  least  teach  him  humility  ; teach 
him  to  adore  the  depths  of  divine  wisdom, 
and  to  long  for  that  happy  hour,  when  all 
that  is  imperfect  shall  be  done  away ; when 
we  shall  no  more  see  in  part,  but  shall  know 
even  as  we  are  known,  1 Cor.  xiii. 

II.  I proceed  to  the  second  thing  proposed : 
To  show  how  the  scriptures  testify  of  Christ 
In  general,  it  may  be  said,  that  he  is  the 
main  design  and  subject,  both  of  the  whole 
scripture,  and  of  each  particular  book.  This 
will  be  easily  allowed  of  the  New  Testament, 
but  it  is  not  so  obvious  with  regard  to  several 
parts  of  the  Old : I hope,  therefore,  it  will 
not  be  unacceptable  to  those  who  love  the 
word  of  God,  if  I consider  this  point  some- 
thing at  large,  and  help  them  to  discover  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  almost  every  page  of  the 
Bible.  This  will  be  a new  inducement  to 
them  to  search  the  scriptures,  when  they  shall 
perceive  that  many  passages  which  they  were 
accustomed  to  read  with  indifference,  as 
hardly  able  to  discern  any  wisdom  or  mean- 
ing in  them,  do  directly  testify  of  Christ. 

What  is  expressed  in  the  Old  Testament 
(for  of  this  I am  now  to  speak)  concerning 
Christ,  maybe  reduced  to  three  heads, — pro- 
phecies, types,  and  ceremonies.  To  open  and 
trace  these  in  their  proper  extent,  would  re- 
quire volumes ; but  it  is  only  a hint  of  each 
that  the  bounds  of  our  present  meeting  will 
permit  me  to  offer. 

The  first  glimmering  of  light  which  dawn- 
ed upon  a lost  world  was  that  promise  (for  I 
consider  the  promises  as  a branch  of  pro- 
phecy) which  God  (who,  in  the  midst  of  judg- 
ment, remembers  mercy)  made  to  the  woman, 
that  her  seed  should  bruise  the  serpent’s  head, 
Gen.  iii.  This  was  absolute  and  general, 
giving  hopes  of  a recovery,  but  no  informa- 
tion of  person,  time,  or  place : but  the  path 
of  this  just  one  was  as  the  light,  which  shin- 
eth  more  and  more  to  the  perfect  day,  Pro* 
iv.  In  the  time  of  Noah,  the  hope  and  de 
sire  of  all  nations  was  restrained  to  the  line 


ON  SEARCHING  THE  SCRIPTURES. 


405 


SER.  V.] 


of  Shem,  (Gen.  ix.)  and  afterwards  more  ex- 
pressly to  the  family  of  Abraham : when  this 
divided  into  two  branches,  God,  to  show  that 
his  purpose  is  of  himself,  and  that  he  will  do 
as  pleaseth  him  with  his  own,  set  aside  the 
elder,  and  confirmed  to  Jacob,  the  younger, 
“ that  in  his  seed  all  the  families  of  the  earth 
should  be  blessed,”  Gen.  xxviii.  Jacob  had 
twelve  sons,  which  made  a still  more  expli- 
cit restriction  necessary.  Accordingly,  the 
patriarch,  before  his  death,  declared  that  this 
high  privilege,  of  perpetuating  the  line  of  the 
Messiah,  was  fixed  in  the  tribe  of  Judah, 
(Gen.  xlix.)  and  the  time  of  his  advent  was 
obscurely  marked  out,  by  the  promise  “ that 
the  sceptre  should  not  depart  from  Judah  till 
the  Shiloh  came.”  The  last  personal  limita- 
tion was  to  David,  (1  Chron.  xvii.)  that  of  his 
family  God  would  raise  up  the  King,  who 
should  reign  for  ever,  and  over  all.  Suc- 
ceeding prophets  gradually  foretold  the  time, 
place,  and  circumstances  of  his  birth,  the  ac- 
tions of  his  life,  the  tenor  of  his  doctrine,  the 
success  he  met  with,  and  the  cause,  design, 
and  manner  of  his  sufferings  and  death ; in 
short,  to  almost  every  thing  that  we  read  in 
the  gospel,  we  may  annex  the  observation  that 
the  evangelists  have  made  upon  a few  in- 
stances, (in  order,  as  it  may  be  presumed,  to 
direct  us  in  searching  out  the  rest)  “then 
was  fulfilled  that  which  was  spoken  by  the 
prophets.”  From  them  we  learn,  that  the 
Messiah  should  be  born  of  a virgin,  in  Beth- 
lehem of  Judah,  four  hundred  and  ninety 
years  after  the  commandment  given  to  re- 
build Jerusalem ; that  he  should  begin  his 
ministry  in  Galilee ; that  he  should  be  de- 
spised and  rejected  of  men,  betrayed  by  one 
of  his  disciples,  sold  for  thirty  pieces  of  sil- 
ver, with  which  money  the  potters  field  should 
be  afterwards  purchased ! “ that  he  should  be 
cut  off,  but  not  for  himself;”  and  that  his 
death  should  be  followed  by  the  sudden  and 
total  ruin  of  the  Jewish  government.  To  com- 
pare these  promises  and  prophecies,  among 
themselves,  and  with  their  exact  accomplish- 
ment recorded  in  the  New  Testament, — this 
alone  would  engage  us  in  a close  and  profit- 
able search  into  the  scriptures,  and  would  af- 
ford us  the  most  convincing  proofs  of  their 
divine  original  and  excellence. 

The  types  of  Christ  in  the  Old  Testament 
may  be  considered  as  two-fold,  personal  and 
relative.  The  former  describing  under  the 
vaii  of  history,  his  character  and  offices  as 
considered  in  himself;  the  latter  teaching 
under  a variety  of  metaphors,  the  advantages 
those  who  believe  in  him  should  receive  from 
him.  Thus  Adam,  Enoch,  Melchizedek, 
Isaac,  Joseph,  Moses,  Aaron,  Joshua,  Samp- 
son, David,  Solomon,  and  others,  were  in  dif- 
ferent respects  types  or  figures  of  Christ. 
Some  more  immediately  represented  his  per- 
son ; others  prefigured  his  humiliation ; others 
referred  to  his  exaltation,  dominion,  and  glo- 


ry. So,  in  the  latter  sense,  the  ark  of  Noah, 
the  rainbow,  the  manna,  the  brazen  serpent, 
the  cities  of  refuge,  were  so  many  emblems 
pointing  out  the  nature,  necessity,  means, 
and  security  of  that  salvation  which  the  Mes- 
siah was  to  establish  for  his  people.  Nor  are 
these  fanciful  allusions  of  our  own  making, 
but  warranted  and  taught  in  scripture,  and 
easily  proved  from  thence,  would  time  per- 
mit ; for  indeed,  there  is  not  one  of  these  per- 
sons or  things  which  I have  named,  but  would 
furnish  matter  for  a long  discourse,  if  closely 
considered  in  this  view,  as  typical  of  the  pro- 
mised Redeemer. 

The  like  may  be  said  of  the  Levitical  cere- 
monies. The  law  of  Moses  is,  in  this  sense, 
a happy  schoolmaster  to  lead  us  unto  Christ : 
(Gal.  iii.)  and  it  may  be  proved  beyond  con- 
tradiction, that  in  these  the  gospel  was  preach- 
ed of  old  to  all  those  Israelites  indeed,  whose 
hearts  were  right  with  God,  and  whose  un- 
derstandings were  enlightened  by  his  Spirit. 
The  ark  of  the  covenant,  the  mercy-seat,  the 
tabernacle,  the  incense,  the  altar,  the  offer- 
ings, the  high-priest  with  his  ornaments  and 
garments,  the  laws  relating  to  the  leprosy, 
the  Nazarite,  and  the  redemption  of  lands ; 
all  these,  and  many  more,  which  I have  not 
time  to  mention,  have  a deep  and  important 
meaning  beyond  their  outward  appearance ; 
each,  in  their  place,  pointed  to  the  Lamb  of 
God  who  was  to  take  away  the  sins  of  the 
world,  (John  i.)  derived  their  efficacy  from 
him,  and  received  their  full  accomplishment 
in  him. 

Thus  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  do  mu- 
tually illustrate  each  other;  nor  can  either  be 
well  understood  singly.  The  Old  Testament, 
in  histories,  types,  prophecies,  and  ceremo- 
nies, strongly  delineates  him,  who,  in  the 
fulness  of  time,  was  to  come  into  the  world 
to  effect  a reconciliation  between  God  and 
man.  The  New  Testament  shows  that  all 
these  characters  and  circumstances  were  ac- 
tually fulfilled  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth ; and  that 
it  was  he  of  whom  “ Moses  in  the  law,  and 
the  prophets  did  write ;”  and  that  we  are  not 
to  look  for  another. 

We  read  in  Genesis,  (chap.  xxi.)that  Abra- 
ham had  two  sons, — Isaac,  the  child  of  the 
promise,  the  son  of  his  old  age,  by  his  wife 
Sarah, — and  Ishmael,  born  some  years  before, 
of  Hagar,  the  handmaid  and  servant  of  Sa- 
rah; and  that  the  latter,  with  his  mother, 
were  cast  out  of  the  family.  The  occasion 
some  would  think  trivial,  namely,  the  anger 
and  jealousy  of  Sarah,  because  Ishmael  had 
mocked  her  son  ; but  when  it  was  grievous 
to  Abraham  to  put  them  away  upon  so  slight 
a ground,  God  himself  interposed  and  com- 
manded him  to  comply  with  her  desire.  Had 
we  heard  no  more  of  this,  it  is  likely  we 
should  have  considered  it  as  a piece  of  fa 
mily-history,  of  no  very  great  importance  but 
to  those  who  were  immediately  concerned  in 


406 


ON  SEARCHING  THE  SCRIPTURES. 


it.  We  should  perhaps  have  wondered  to 
find  so  much  said  upon  such  a subject,  in  a 
book  which  we  profess  to  believe  was  writ- 
ten by  divine  inspiration ; we  should  proba- 
bly have  presumed  to  arraign  the  divine  wis- 
dom, in  descending  to  particulars,  in  which, 
according  to  our  views  of  the  fitness  of  things, 
we  could  discern  nothing  either  interesting 
or  instructive.  To  guard  us  from  these  rash 
mistakes,  to  explain  the  true  meaning  of  this 
particular  transaction,  and  at  the  same  time 
to  furnish  us  with  a key  for  understanding 
many  passages  of  the  like  nature,  in  which 
human  wisdom  can  discover  neither  beauty 
nor  benefit, — it  has  pleased  God  to  favour  us 
with  an  infallible  exposition  of  the  whole 
matter.  Not  for  the  sake  of  Abraham,  or 
Isaac,  or  Ishmael,  or  Hagar,  was  this  record- 
ed ; much  less  merely  to  gratify  our  curi- 
osity.  No:  “ These  things,”  saith  the  apos-  | 
tie  Paul,  “ are  an  allegory : for  these  are  the  i 
two  covenants ; the  one  from  the  mount  Sina, 
which  gendereth  to  bondage,  which  is  Agar.  ! 
For  this  Agar  is  mount  Sina  in  Arabia,  and 
answereth  to  Jerusalem  which  now  is,  and 
is  in  bondage  with  her  children.  But  Jeru- ; 
salem  which  is  above  is  free,  which  is  the i 
mother  of  us  all. — Now  we,  brethren,  as  Isaac  I 
was,  are  the  children  of  promise.  But  as  i 
then  he  that  was  born  after  the  flesh  perse- 1 
cuted  him  that  w’as  born  after  the  Spirit,  even  ! 
so  it  is  now.  Nevertheless,  what  saith  the  I 
scripture  1 Cast  out  the  bond-woman  and  j 
her  son : for  the  son  of  the  bond-woman  shall ! 
not  be  heir  with  the  son  of  the  free-woman. 
So  then,  brethren,  we  are  not  the  children 
of  the  bond-woman,  but  of  the  free,”  Gal.  iv. 

I must  not  detain  you  by  showing  at  large 
how  the  apostle  teaches  us  to  discover  the 
spirit  and  privileges  of  the  gospel,  together 
with  what  all  who  truly  receive  it  must  ex- 
pect to  encounter,  in  a passage  which  we  | 
might  otherwise  have  thought  superfluous,  if 
not  impertinent.  Keep  this  in  your  mind 
when  you  read  the  scriptures.  Assure  your- 
selves, that  there  is  nothing  vain  or  useless 
in  the  word  of  God.  Compare  one  place 
with  another,  the  law  with  the  gospel,  the 
prophets  with  the  evangelists ; pray  unto  God 
that  he  would  open  your  understandings  to 
understand  the  scriptures,  as  he  did  for  the 
disciples;  (Luke  xxiv.)  and  in  a little  time 
you  will  find,  that  Christ  is  not  only  spoken 
of  in  a few  verses,  here  and  there,  but  that, 
as  I said  before,  he  is  the  main  scope  and 
subject  of  every  book,  and  almost  of  every 
chapter. 

I would  add  an  instance  or  two  of  the 
meaning  of  the  ceremonies,  to  what  I have 
observed  of  Hagar  in  reference  to  the  types. 
In  the  law  of  the  Passover,  it  was  especially 
enjoined,  (Exod.  xii.)  that  not  a bone  of  the 
paschal  lamb  should  be  broken.  Now,  who 
would  have  thought  that  this  referred  to 
Christ ! yet  we  see  the  evangelist  expressly 


[SER.  V. 

applies  it  to  him,  and  is  filled  with  wonder  at 
the  accomplishment.  The  legs  of  those  who 
were  crucified  at  the  same  time  were  pur- 
posely broken,  (John  xix.)  but  our  Lord  was 
passed  by ; and  that  it  should  be  so,  was  inti- 
mated near  fifteen  hundred  years  before,  in 
this  charge  concerning  the  lamb.  Again,  we 
find,  that  in  several1  places  where  a bullock 
was  commanded  to  be  slain  for  a sin-offering, 
it  was  enjoined,  that  the  flesh  and  the  skin 
should  be  burnt  without  the  camp ; and  from 
the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  (chap,  xiii.)  we 
learn,  that  this  was  not  a slight  or  arbitrary 
circumstance.  We  have  there  this  explica- 
tion : “ For  the  bodies  of  those  beasts  whose 
blood  is  brought  into  the  sanctuary,  by  the 
high-priest,  for  sin,  were  burnt  without  the 
camp.  Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  he  might 
sanctify  the  people  with  his  own  blood,  suf- 
fered without  the  gate.  Let  us  go  forth, 
therefore,  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  re- 
proach.” I must  not  enlarge  any  farther, 
or  it  were  easy,  by  the  clue  the  apostles  in 
their  writings  have  given  us,  to  trace  the 
important  meaning  of  many  of  those  institu- 
tions, which  scoffers,  who  are  wise  in  their 
own  conceits,  though  neither  acquainted  with 
themselves  nor  the  subject,  presume  to  cen- 
sure as  frivolous.  The  sense  of  the  sacred 
writings  lies  too  deep  for  a captious,  superfi- 
cial, volatile  survey ; it  must  be  a search,  a 
scrutiny;  a humble,  diligent,  sincere,  and 
persevering  inquiry,  or  no  satisfaction  can  be 
expected. 

The  import  of  the  scripture-testimony  con- 
cerning Christ,  which  was  the  third  thing  I 
proposed  to  speak  of,  must  be  deferred  to 
another  opportunity.  I hope  what  has  been 
already  said,  may,  through  the  divine  bless- 
ing, engage  you  to  search  the  scriptures. 
Remember,  it  is  the  command  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ : it  is  the  only  appointed  way  to 
the  knowledge  of  him,  whom  to  know,  so  as 
to  love,  serve,  and  obey  him,  is  both  the  foun- 
dation and  the  sum  of  our  happiness,  here  and 
hereafter.  We,  as  well  as  the  Jews,  think 
we  have  eternal  life  in  the  scriptures,  and 
shall,  like  them,  be  inexcusable  and  self- 
condemned  if  we  neglect  it.  Let  us  not  be 
like  fools,  with  a prize,  an  inestimable  prize, 
in  our  hands,  but  without  heart  or  skill  to 
use  it.  Better  would  it  have  been  for  us  to 
have  lived  and  died  in  the  wilds  of  America, 
without  either  means  of  grace  or  hopes  of 
glory,  than  to  slight  this  record  which  God 
has  been  pleased  to  give  us  of  his  Son.  But 
happy  the  man  whose  delight  is  in  the  law 
of  his  God  ! He  has  sure  direction  in  every 
difficulty,  certain  comfort  in  every  distress. 
The  beauty  of  the  precepts  is  preferable  in 
his  eye  to  “thousands  of  gold  and  silver,” 
Psalm  cxix.  The  comforts  of  the  promises 
are  sweeter  to  his  taste,  “ than  honey  or  the 
honey-comb,”  Psalm  xix.  He  is  happy  in 
life ; for  the  word  of  God  is  to  him  as  a “ foun . 


ON  SEARCHING  THE  SCRIPTURES. 


407 


SER.  VI.] 

tain  of  living  water.”  He  shall  be  happy  in 
death ; the  promises  of  his  God  shall  support 
hirn  through  that  dark  valley ; and  he  shall 
be  happy  for  ever  in  the  presence  and  love 
of  him  for  whose  sake  he  now  searches  the 
scriptures;  “ Whom,  having  not  seen,”  yet, 
from  the  testimony  there  given  of  him,  “ he 
loves ; in  whom,  though  now  he  sees  him  not, 
yet  believing,  he  rejoices  with  joy  unspeak- 
able and  full  of  glory,”  1 Pet.  i. 


Pleraque  autem  (si  detur  libere  loquendi 
venia)  quae  etiam  in  Theologicis  scholis  trac- 
tantur,  et  magno  cum  apparatu  et  strepitu 
docentur,  et  disputantur,  spinosum  forte  acu- 
men habent,  sed  simul  certe  spinosum  sterili- 
tatem  : lacerare  et  pungere  possunt,  animos 
pascere  non  possunt:  “Nemo  enim  ex  spinis 
uvas  colligit  unquam,  aut  ex  tribulis  ficus.” 
“ Quorsutn  alta  (inquit  quidam)  de  Trinitate 
disputare,  si  careas  humilitate,  et  sic  Trinitati 
displiceas?”  Et  apte  S.  Augustinus  ad  illud 
Esaise,  “ Ego  Deus  tuus  docens  te  utilia ;” 
“ utilia  (inquit)  docens,  non  subtilia .”  Et  hoc 
est  quod  opto  et  oro;  ut  nobis  pro  modulo 
nostro  subdocentibus,  ille  efficaciter  vos  per- 
doceat,  qui  cathedrarn  in  ccelo  habens,  corda 
docet  in  terris. 

Archiep.  Leighton,  Protect . Theol. 
p.  4.  edit.  4 to.  Lond.  1693. 


SERMON  VI. 

THE  SAME  SUBJECT  CONTINUED. 

Search  the  scriptures , for  in  them  ye  think 
ye  have  eternal  life,  and  they  are  they 
which  testify  of  me. — John  v.  39. 

In  a former  discourse  on  these  words,  I 
mentioned  four  things  as  highly  requisite,  if 
we  would  acquire  an  useful  knowledge  of 
the  scriptures, — sincerity  with  respect  to  the 
end,  diligence  in  the  use  of  means,  a humble 
sense  of  our  own  weakness,  and  earnest 
prayer  to  God  for  the  assistance  of  his  grace 
and  Spirit.  To  engage  us  to  this  practice, 
and  perseverance  therein,  I next  considered 
how  the  scriptures,  when  properly  searched 
into  and  compared,  do  clearly,  and  in  every 
part  testify  of  Christ,  that  he  is  the  end  of 
the  law,  the  sum  of  the  prophets,  the  com- 
pletion of  the  promises,  the  scope  of  the  types 
and  ceremonies,  and  the  great  object  of  the 
whole  Old  Testament  dispensation.  I am 
now  to  say  something  to  the  third  point  I 
proposed. 

III.  Concerning  the  import  of  the  testi- 
mony which  the  scriptures  bear  to  Christ. 

The  principal  difficulties  on  this  head  are, 
where  to  begin  on  a subject  absolutely  bound- 
5 ess,  and  what  to  select  that  may  be  most 
suitable  and  useful  to  this  assembly,  from  the 


immense  variety  of  topics  that  offer.  For  this 
being  the  great  end  and  design  of  the  scrip- 
tures, to  proclaim  the  excellency  of  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord,  “that  we,  through  him,  may 
have  strong  consolation,”  (Heb.  xii.)  it  is  in- 
culcated in  so  many  places,  set  in  such  a 
diversity  of  views,  and  couched  under  such 
deep  and  comprehensive  expressions,  that  not 
only  our  present  opportunity  but  my  whole 
future  life,  would  be  too  short,  if  I would 
collect,  state,  and  explain  all  that  properly 
belongs  to  this  single  article.  For  order’s 
sake,  I shall  reduce  the  little  1 must  say  at 
this  time  to  three  or  four  distinct  particulars, 
— what  the  scriptures  testify  of  Christ,  as  to 
his  person,  his  offices,  his  power,  and  his  love. 

When  we  hear  of  some  great  undertaking 
to  be  performed,  we  inquire  of  course  about 
the  person  who  is  chiefly  concerned  in  it ; so, 
when  we  are  told  of  the  mighty  works  Jesus 
Christ  engaged  to  perform,  to  redeem  a lost 
world,  to  satisfy  divine  justice,  to  make  an 
end  of  sin,  to  abolish  death,  and  to  bring  life 
and  immortality  to  light ; the  first  question 
that  occurs  is,  Who  is  hel  Search  the  scrip- 
tures, and  you  will  have  a clear  and  decisivt 
answer.  The  prophet  Isaiah,  “ rapt  into  fu- 
ture times,”  describes  him  thus:  “Unto  us 
a child  is  born,  unto  us  a son  is  given,  and 
the  government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulder; 
and  he  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Counsel- 
lor, the  Mighty  God,  the  everlasting  Father 
the  Prince  of  Peace,”  Isaiah  ix.  6.  The 
union  of  the  divine  and  human  natures  in  the 
Messiah  is  so  strongly  asserted,  the  names 
and  attributes  of  God  are  so  clearly  ascribed, 
in  this  passage  to  one  who  should  be  born 
into  the  world,  that  he  who  runs  may  read ; 
the  way-faring  man,  though  a fool,  must  un- 
derstand it;  and  it  requires  a considerable 
share  of  unhappy  ingenuity,  to  wrest  the 
words  to  any  other  than  their  obvious  mean- 
ing. This  text,  though  it  stood  alone  in  the 
Bible  (supposing  the  scriptures  to  be  a reve- 
lation from  God,)  would  be  a full  warrant, 
and  a firm  foundation,  for  that  great  point  of 
Christian  faith  and  doctrine,  That  Jesus 
Christ  is  very  God,  and  very  man ; or,  as  the 
apostle  better  expresses  it,  “God  manifest  in 
the  flesh.”  But  it  is  not  alone : on  the  con- 
trary, the  Messiah  is  seldom  mentioned,  but 
something  is  either  said  of  him,  or  referred  to 
him,  which  teaches  us  the  same  important 
truth.  “ Behold  the  days  come,  saith  the 
Lord,  (by  Jeremiah,  chap,  xxiii.)  that  I wdJl 
raise  unto  David  a righteous  Branch,  and  a 
King  shall  reign  and  prosper,  and  shall  exe- 
cute judgment  and  justice  in  the  earth.  In 
his  days  Judah  shall  be  saved,  and  Israel 
shall  dwell  safely : and  this  is  his  name 
whereby  he  shall  be  called,  the  lord  our 
righteousness.”  Isaiah  in  general  styles 
him,  “A  child  to  be  born;”  Jeremiah  more 
particularly,  a “Branch  of  David:”  Isaiah  as- 
cribes to  him  the  name  of  “ The  Mighty  God ;” 


408 


ON  SEARCHING  THE  SCRIPTURES. 


Jeremiah  says,  he  shall  be  called  “ The  Lord 
our  righteousness.”  You  have  the  word  lord 
in  capital  letters  here,  as  in  other  places, 
where  it  is  in  the  original  jehovah.  Some 
of  the  names  of  God  are  occasionally  applied 
to  inferior  subjects,  to  angels,  to  magistrates, 
and  sometimes  to  idols.  But  Jehovah  is  al- 
lowed by  all  to  signify  the  essential  and  in- 
communicable name  of  the  Most  High  God. 
Yet  this  is  not  the  only  place  where  it  is  ex- 
pressly and  directly  applied  to  the  Messiah. 
David  himself  speaks  to  the  same  purpose : 
“The  Lord  said  unto  my  Lord,  Sit  thou  at 
my  right  hand,”  Psalm  cx.  That  the  Mes- 
siah was  to  be  David’s  son,  was  known  and 
acknowledged  by  the  Jews  in  our  Saviour’s 
time  ; but  how  he  could  be  the  son  of  David, 
and  yet  his  Lord,  was  a difficulty  that  utterly 
posed  and  silenced  the  most  learned  Rabbis 
and  Scribes  am.ong  them ; because,  being  des- 
titute of  that  sincerity  and  humility  we  have 
before  spoken  of,  they  could  not  understand 
the  scriptures,  which  were  read  in  their  sy- 
nagogues every  day. 

Now,  although  this  important  doctrine  was 
not  to  be  discovered  by  the  light  of  nature, 
or  the  powers  of  human  reason,  yet,  since  it 
has  pleased  God  to  make  it  known  to  us,  our 
reason,  humbly  tracing  the  steps  of  divine 
revelation,  can  easily  prove  the  expediency, 
and  even  the  necessity  that  it  should  be  so. 
When  we  are  informed  from  scripture,  that 
all  mankind  being  sunk  into  a state  of  sin  and 
misery,  God  had  in  great  mercy  appointed  a 
person  to  atone  for  the  one,  and  deliver  them 
from  the  other ; we  may  safely,  from  these 
principles,  infer,  by  our  own  reason,  1st,  That 
this  person  cannot  be  mere  man : for  as  the 
whole  human  race,  and  consequently  every 
individual,  is  supposed  to  be  previously  in- 
volved in  the  same  circumstances  of  guilt  and 
condemnation,  it  is  impossible  that  any  one 
of  these  should  be  able  either  to  answer  or 
satisfy  for  himself,  much  less  be  qualified  to 
interpose  in  behalf  of  another.  From  hence 
reason  may  ascend  a step  higher,  and  con- 
clude, 2d,  That  no  mere  creature,  however 
great  and  excellent,  can  undertake  this  part ; 
for  the  two  great  points  necessary  in  order  to 
our  redemption,  to  satisfy  the  justice  of  God, 
and  to  restore  the  divine  image  in  man,  are 
either  of  them  beyond  the  sphere  of  finite 
power.  We  read  in  the  scriptures  of  angels, 
archangels,  thrones,  principalities,  and  pow- 
ers ; and  from  several  texts  we  may  collect, 
that  their  number  and  excellencies  are  be- 
yond any  conceptions  we  can  form.  Could 
we  suppose  that  the  virtues  and  endowments 
of  all  these  various  and  exalted  beings  were 
united  and  centred  in  one  of  them ; however 
glorious  this  being  would  be  in  other  respects, 
when  we  consider  him  as  a creature  of  the 
divine  power,  he  will  be  found  to  be  as  unfit, 
and  as  unable,  to  interfere  in  the  behalf  of 
sinful  man,  as  the  meanest  worm  that  crawls 


upon  the  earth.  It  is  the  duty  of  every  being 
great  and  small,  to  be  entirely  devoted,  ac- 
cording to  the  extent  of  its  capacity,  to  the 
service  and  glory  of  its  great  Creator ; there- 
fore an  angel  is  no  more  capable  than  a man 
of  performing  the  smallest  work  of  superero- 
gation. The  highest  archangel  could  not 
magnify  the  law  of  God,  and  make  it  honour- 
able on  the  behalf  of  man,  being  already  bound 
thereto  for  himself:  much  less  can  we  suppose 
such  a being  capable  of  expiating  the  sins  of 
mankind  by  suffering.  If  divine  justice  in- 
sisted on  a propitiation,  it  must  follow,  that 
nothing  less  than  an  equivalent  could  be  ac- 
cepted. But  what  would  be  the  temporary 
sufferings  of  a creature,  or  of  all  creatures, 
in  this  view  1 A finite  satisfaction,  however 
heightened  and  exaggerated,  would  at  last  be 
infinitely  short  of  the  demand.  As  to  the 
other  branch  of  redemption,  the  restoration 
of  the  image  of  God  in  the  soul,  I need  only 
mention  it;  for  it  appears,  at  first  glance, 
that  this  must  be  the  prerogative  of  divine 
power  alone  to  effect.  It  remains,  therefore, 
that  the  deliverance  of  mankind  could  only 
be  attempted  by  him,  who,  we  are  assured 
by  the  apostle,  agreeable  to  the  passages  al- 
ready cited,  is  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever. 

That  the  Son  of  God  should  take  upon  him 
the  nature  and  circumstances  of  our  human- 
ity, sin  excepted,  in  order  to  atone  for  our 
transgressions,  is  indeed  such  an  instance  of 
condescension  and  love,  as  must  for  ever  daz- 
zle and  astonish  the  brightest  understandings. 
It  is  true,  some  persons  in  these  refined  times 
affect  to  speak  of  this  point  with  admirable 
coolness  and  precision.  But  in  the  beginning 
it  was  not  so.  Either  the  apostle  Paul  was 
less  master  of  his  temper,  or  more  unequal  to 
sublime  speculations,  than  these  gentlemen, 
or  else  we  must  allow  he  had  a very  different 
view  of  the  subject : for  he  cannot  mention  it 
without  appearing  to  be  transported,  and  (if 
I may  use  the  expression)  swallowed  up  by 
the  thought;  his  ideas  seem  too  great  for 
words ; and  it  is  well  if  his  best  attempts  to 
explain  himself  have  not  exposed  him,  in  the 
judgment  of  some  of  his  readers,  to  the  charge 
of  solecism.  However,  though  this  doctrine, 
above  any  other,  is  a proof  that  God  “is  able 
to  do  for  us  exceeding  abundantly  beyond  all 
we  could  ask  or  think,”  it  is  not,  upon  the 
premises  I before  mentioned,  in  the  least  re- 
pugnant to  right  reason  ; rather  it  is  exactly 
calculated  to  remove  all  those  surmises  which 
would  rise  in  the  mind  of  a reasonable  sinner 
upon  the  first  intimation  of  possible  forgive- 
ness. In  our  nature  Christ  fulfilled  the  law 
which  we  had  broken  : he  sustained  the  pe- 
nalty we  had  incurred : he  vanquished  the 
enemies  we  had  to  encounter;  he  trod  the 
path  which  he  has  marked  out  for  us  ; he  is 
entered  in  our  name  into  that  heaven  he  has 
promised  us ; and  retains  a sympathy  with 
us  in  all  our  sufferings  and  temptatiom,  * iu 


ON  SEARCHING  THE  SCRIPTURES. 


409 


SER.  VI.] 

as  much  as  he  himself  has  suffered,  beings 
tempted,”  Heb.  ii. 

I am  next  to  consider  the  testimony  of 
scripture,  concerning  the  offices  of  Christ. 
These  are,  in  general,  included  in  the  cha- 
racter of  Mediator.  “ There  is  one  God,  and 
one  mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  man 
Christ  Jesus,”  1 Tim.  ii.  In  this  word  is 
summed  up  all  that  Christ  has  already  done, 
now  does,  or  will  hereafter  do,  either  on  the 
part  of  God  or  on  that  of  man.  But  for  our 
better  apprehension,  it  is  proposed  to  us  under 
three  distinct  and  principal  views,  answerable 
to  the  three  particulars  in  which  the  misery 
of  fallen  man  does  principally  consist. 

And,  first,  man,  having  departed  from  God, 
“became  vain  in  his  imaginations,  and  his 
foolish  heart  was  darkened,”  (Rom.  i.)  so  that 
he  totally  lost  the  knowledge  of  his  Creator, 
and  how  entirely  his  happiness  depended 
thereon.  He  forgot  God  and  himself,  and 
sunk  so  low  as  to  worship  the  work  of  his 
own  hands.  His  life  became  vain  and  mise- 
rable : in  prosperity,  without  security  or  sa- 
tisfaction; in  adversity,  without  support  or 
resource : his  death  dark  and  hopeless ; no 
pleasing  reflection  on  the  past,  no  ray  of  light 
on  the  future.  Such  was  the  unhappy  case 
when  Christ  undertook  the  office  of  a Pro- 
phet : in  which  character,  under  various  dis- 
pensations, first  by  his  servants  inspired  of 
old,  and  afterwards  more  clearly  in  his  own 
person,  and  by  his  apostles,  he  has  instructed 
us  in  the  things  pertaining  to  our  peace  ; not 
only  renewing  in  us  the  knowledge  of  the 
true  God,  which,  where  revelation  prevailed 
not,  was  universally  lost  out  of  the  world, 
but  disclosing  to  us  the  counsels  of  divine  love 
and  wisdom  in  our  favour,  those  great  things 
wh*ch  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  and 
which  never  could  have  entered  into  the 
heart  of  man  to  conceive,  had  not  he  who 
dwelt  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father  declared 
them  to  us.  We  can  now  give  a sufficient 
answer  to  that  question,  which  must  have  for 
ever  overwhelmed  every  serious  awakened 
mind,  “Wherewithal  shall  I appear  before 
the  Most  High  God!”  Mic.  vi.  We  have 
now  learned  how  God  can  declare  and  illus- 
trate his  righteousness  and  truth,  by  that  very 
act  which,  without  respect  to  satisfaction 
given,  would  seem  the  highest  impeachment 
of  both,  I mean  his  justifying  the  ungodly. 
We  have  now  a glass  by  which  we  can  dis- 
cover the  presence  of  the  Creator  in  every 
part  of  his  creation,  and  a clue  to  lead  us 
through  the  mysterious  mazes  of  divine  pro- 
vidence. But  who  can  enumerate  the  va- 
rious, the  important,  the  interesting  lessons 
we  receive  from  this  heavenly  Teacher, 
when,  by  the  influence  of  his  Holy  Spirit  he 
powerfully  applies  his  written  word  to  the 
hearts  of  his  real  disciples,  who  search  the 
scriptures  with  a sincere  desire  to  be  made 
wise  unto  salvation ! Whatever  is  necessarv 
3 F 


to  make  life  useful  and  comfortable,  and  to 
gild  the  gloom  of  death  with  the  bright  pros- 
pect of  a glorious  immortality,  is  there  con- 
tained : so  that,  instructed  by  these  writings 
alone,  a poor  illiterate  mechanic  has  been 
often  enabled  to  converse  upon  a dying-bed 
with  more  dignity,  certainty,  and  influence, 
than  any,  or  all  the  philosophers,  ancient  or 
modern,  could  attain. 

But,  besides  the  natural  ignorance  of  fallen 
man,  he  was  chargeable  with  aggravated 
guilt.  Guilt  and  ignorance  are  reciprocally 
causes  and  consequences  of  each  other.  Every 
additional  guilt  tends  to  increase  the  stupid- 
ity of  the  human  soul,  and  every  increase  of 
this  increases  in  the  same  proportion  the  na- 
tural indisposition  for  the  practice  or  the  love 
of  virtue,  makes  the  soul  more  blind  to  con- 
sequences, more  base  in  its  pursuits,  and  thus 
to  become  a more  willing  and  assiduous  ser- 
vant of  iniquity.  No  wonder,  therefore,  that 
when  the  understanding  was  totally  darken- 
ed as  to  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  will  and 
affections  became  wholly  disobedient  to  his 
law.  But  when  a divine  light  has  in  some 
measure  discovered  the  heart  to  itself,  and  at 
the  same  time  set  an  offended  God  in  view, 
every  such  sensible  sinner  would  undoubtedly 
imitate  our  first  parents,  and  flee  (were  it 
possible)  from  the  presence  of  his  Maker  and 
his  Judge.  “ I heard  thy  voice,”  says  Adam, 
“ and  I hid  myself,  for  I was  afraid,”  Gen.  iii. 
Vain  attempt!  and,  if  it  were  practicable,  a 
dreadful  alternative ! since  absence  from  God 
imports  the  utmost  misery  to  a creature  who 
can  be  happy  only  in  his  favour.  But  here 
the  scriptures  bring  us  unspeakable  comfort, 
testifying  of  Christ  as  our  great  High-Priest. 
To  point  out  and  illustrate  this  part  of  his  cha- 
racter is  the  chief  end  and  design  of  the  whole 
Levitical  law,  the  main  points  of  which  are 
explained,  and  applied  to  our  blessed  Lord, 
throughout  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  The 
principal  parts  of  the  priests’  office  were,  to 
sacrifice  in  behalf  of  the  people,  to  make 
atonement,  to  pray  for  them,  and  to  bless 
them  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  No  sacrifices 
could  be  offered  or  accepted,  no  blessings  ex- 
pected, but  through  the  hands  of  the  priests 
whom  God  had  appointed.  Thus  Christ,  the 
High-Priest  of  our  profession,  offered  himself 
a sacrifice  without  either  spot  or  blemish : he 
entered  with  his  own  blood  within  the  vail, 
to  the  immediate  presence  of  our  offended 
God,  and  through  him  peace  and  good-will  is 
proclaimed  to  sinful  men.  He  continues  stih 
to  exercise  the  other  part  of  his  appointment : 
he  makes  continual  intercession  for  his  peo- 
ple ; he  presents  their  prayers  and  imperfect 
services  acceptable  before  the  throne  ; he 
gives  them  confidence  and  access  to  draw 
nigh  to  God;  and  he  bestows  upon  them 
those  gifts  and  blessings  which  are  the  fruits 
of  his  sufferings  and  obedience.  The  Leviti- 
cal priests  were,  like  their  people,  sinners, 


410 


ON  SEARCHING  THE  SCRIPTURES. 


and  were  therefore  constrained  first  to  make 
atonement  for  themselves ; they  were  mortal, 
therefore  their  service  passed  from  hand  to 
.land ; their  sacrifices  were  imperfect,  there- 
fore needed  continual  repetition,  and  had  at 
last  only  a typical  and  ceremonial  efficacy  ; 
for  it  was  not  possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls 
and  goats  (Heb.  ix.  and  x.)  could  remove  either 
the  guilt  or  pollution  of  sin.  “ The  law  made 
nothing  perfect.”  But  Jesus,  “the  Media- 
tor of  the  new  covenant,”  is  “ such  a High- 
Priest  as  became  us  ; holy,  harmless,  unde- 
filed, separate  from  sinners ; who  needeth  not 
(as  those  of  old)  to  offer  sacrifice,  first  for  his 
' own  sins  and  then  for  the  people ; for  this  he 
did  once,  when  he  offered  up  himself,”  Heb. 
vii.  The  great  inference  from  this  doctrine, 
several  times  repeated  by  the  apostle  in  a va- 
riety of  phrase,  is,  that  we  may  now  have  bold- 
ness to  appear  before  God,  that  our  prayers 
and  services  are  pleasing  in  his  sight,  and  all 
the  blessings  of  grace  and  glory  ready  to  be 
bestowed  on  us,  if  we  faithfully  apply  for 
them,  through  the  merits  of  his  Son. 

Once  more,  man  is  not  only  ignorant  of 
God  and  himself,  and  too  full  of  guilt  to  plead 
in  his  own  name,  but  he  is  likewise  weak  and 
defenceless ; unable  to  make  his  way  through 
the  opposition  that  withstands  his  progress  to 
eternal  life,  or  to  secure  him  from  the  many 
enemies  “ that  rise  up  against  him,”  Psalm 
iii.  We  read,  that  when  the  Gibeonites  made 
a league  with  Joshua,  (Jos.  ix.)  which  was  the 
only  step  that  could  save  them  from  utter 
ruin,  the  neighbouring  states  and  cities  all 
united  to  destroy  them : so  the  soul  that  is 
desirous  to  submit  to  Jesus  Christ,  imme- 
diately finds  itself  in  the  midst  of  war ; the 
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  unite  their 
forces,  either  to  recall  such  a one  to  the  prac- 
tice and  service  of  sin,  or  to  distress  him  to 
the  uttermost  for  forsaking  it.  And  none 
could  support  this  conflict,  if  not  themselves 
supported  by  a higher  hand.  But  Jesus,  the 
antitype  of  Joshua,  the  true  Captain  of  the 
Lord’s  hosts,  reveals  himself  in  his  word  as 
the  King  of  his  church.  lie  can  inspire  the 
fainting  soul  with  unseen  supplies  : he,  when 
the  enemy  comes  in  like  a flood,  (Isa.  lix.) 
can,  by  his  Spirit,  lift  up  a standard  against 
him ; he  can  take  the  prey  even  out  of  the 
hand  of  the  mighty.  He  has  said  it  of  his 
church  in  general,  and  he  will  make  it  good 
to  every  individual  that  trusts  in  him,  that 
the  gates  of  hell  shall  never  prevail  against 
them.  What  though  a sense  of  the  guilt 
and  remaining  power  of  sin  often  fills  the 
humble  soul  with  inexpressible  distress ! He 
that  stills  the  raging  of  the  sea,  and  the  vio- 
lence of  the  winds,  with  a word,  can  with 
equal  ease  calm  all  the  unruly  motions  of  the 
mind.  What  though  the  world  opposes  in 
every  quarter,  and  presents  snares  and  ter- 
rors all  around  ! What  though  rage  or  con- 
tempt, threats  or  allurements,  are  by  turns, 


[SER.  VI. 

or  altogether,  employed  to  rum  us ; behold 
“ greater  is  he  that  is  in  us,  than  he  that  is 
in  the  world  (1  John  iv.)  “ Christ  has  over- 
come the  world  for  us,”  (John  xvi.)  and  has 
promised  to  make  us  conquerors,  yea,  more 
than  conquerors,  in  our  turn.  What  though 
“ the  devil  goes  about  like  a roaring  lion, 
seeking  whom  he  may  devour;”  (1  Pet.  vi.) 
it  is  an  argument  of  the  strongest  kind  for 
watchfulness  and  prayer.  But  wre  need  not 
fear  him  : The  “ beloved  of  the  Lord  shall 
dwell  in  safety :”  (Deut.  xxxiii.)  The  “ Lord 
shall  cover  him  all  the  day  long ; he  shall 
deliver  him  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler 
(Psalm  xci.)  “ his  truth  shall  be  a shield  and 
buckler”  to  all  who  enlist  under  his  banner ; 
and  at  length,  yea,  shortly,  “ the  God  of 
peace  shall  bruise  Satan  under  our  feet,” 
Rom.  xvi. 

It  is  thus  the  scriptures,  to  help  the  weak- 
ness of  our  apprehensions,  testify  of  Christy 
under  the  threefold  view  of  Prophet,  Priest 
and  King  of  his  people.  These  are  his  prin 
cipal  and  leading  characters,  which  include 
and  imply  the  rest.;  for  the  time  would  fab 
to  speak  of  him,  as  he  is  declared  to  be  theb 
head,  husband,  root,  foundation,  sun,  shield, 
shepherd,  lawgiver,  exemplar,  and  forerun 
ner.  In  brief,  there  is  hardly  any  comfort- 
able relation  or  useful  office  amongst  men, 
hardly  any  object  in  the  visible  creation, 
which  either  displays  beauty  or  produces  be- 
nefit, but  what  is  applied  in  the  word  of  God, 
to  illustrate  the  excellence  and  sufficiency  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  intent  of  all  is, 
that  we  may  learn  to  trust  him,  and  delight 
to  serve  him ; for  these  must  go  together. 
Whoever  would  be  benefited  by  his  media- 
tion as  a Priest,  must  submit  to  his  instruc- 
tions as  a Prophet,  and  yield  him  universal 
obedience  as  a King.  Fatal  are  the  mistakes 
in  this  matter  now  in  the  world.  Some  talk 
highly  of  the  death  and  sufferings  of  Christ, 
who  are  little  solicitous  to  keep  his  command- 
ments ; others  labour  in  the  very  fire  to  ob- 
serve his  law ; but  “ being  ignorant  of  God’s 
righteousness,  and  going  about  to  establish 
their  own,”  (Rom.  x.)  they  labour  to  no  pur- 
pose. Dependence  on  the  merits  of  Christ, 
and  obedience  to  his  commands,  are  insepa- 
rably united ; and  only  the  man  who  aims  at 
both,  can  attain  to  either. 

I should  now  lay  before  you  some  scrip- 
ture testimonies  of  the  power  and  love  of 
Christ ; but  I have  anticipated  this  part  of 
my  subject  in  what  I have  already  said.  His 
divine  nature  proclaims  his  power,  his  offices 
display  his  love.  We  have  seen,  that  he 
emptied  himself  of  his  eternal  glories;  that 
he  bowed  the  heavens,  and  came  down  in  the 
form  of  a servant ; that  he  submitted  to  all 
imaginable  sufferings;  all  that  the  malice  of 
men,  all  that  the  avenging  justice  of  God 
could  inflict;  and  having  by  this  means  open- 
ed the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  taken  posses- 


ON  SEARCHING  THE  SCRIPTURES. 


411 


smi.  vi.] 

eion  there,  in  behalf  of  all  believers,  he  has 
caused  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  be  pub- 
lished through  the  world ; declaring,  “ that 
•whosoever  cometh  to  him,  (without  one  ex- 
ception) he  will  in  no  wise  cast  out,”  John  vi. 
Are  not  these  proofs  of  unspeakable,  unex- 
ampled love  1 We  have  seen,  that  he  fully 
performed  the  work  he  undertook ; that  he 
has  made  an  end  of  sin ; (Dan.  ix.)  brought 
in  an  everlasting  righteousness-,  spoiled  prin- 
cipalities and  powers;  (Eph.  ii.)  triumphed 
over  all  our  enemies,  broke  down  the  parti- 
tion-wall, and  brought  life  and  immortality  to 
light  by  his  gospel,  1 Tim.  i.  We  read,  that 
he  is  highly  exalted ; “ that  God  has  given 
him  a name  that  is  above  every  name (Phil, 
ii.)  that  he  is  “ far  above  all  principality,  and 
might,  and  dominion and  what  more  can 
be  said  of  his  power  ! Read  his  own  declara- 
tion, “ All  power  is  given  me  in  heaven  and 
in  earth,”  Matt,  xxviii.  Were  these  two 
points,  the  power  and  the  love  of  Christ, 
rightly  understood,  and  fully  believed,  earth 
would  be  full  of  heaven.  But,  alas ! we  are 
fools,  and  slow  of  heart  to  receive  all  that 
Moses  and  the  prophets,  (Luke  xxiv.)  the 
evangelists  and  apostles,  have  written  for  our 
instruction.  From  hence  proceeds  our  indif- 
ference, and  that  we  need  so  much  to  be 
pressed  to  search  the  scriptures,  though  we 
readily  acknowledge  that  in  them  we  have 
the  words  of  eternal  life. 

IV.  It  remains,  therefore,  in  the  fourth 
and  last  place,  that  I add  a few  words  to  re- 
commend and  enforce  the  command  in  the 
text,  “ Search  the  scriptures,”  from  the  ar- 
gument there  subjoined,  “ for  in  them  ye 
' think  ye  have  eternal  life ;”  and  we  think 
right ; for  it  “ is  eternal  life  to  know  the  only 
true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  he  hath 
sent:”  (John  xvii.)  and  every  article  of  this 
knowledge  is  contained  in  the  Old  and  New 
Testament;  nor  can  any  part  of  it  be  met 
with  any  where  else.  Yet  let  conscience 
judge  this  day,  as  in  the  presence  of  the  liv- 
ing God,  the  searcher  of  hearts,  before  whom 
our  private  judgments  must  shortly  come  un- 
der a review  : has  any  book  a smaller  share 
of  the  time,  the  memory,  or  the  affections  of 
many  of  us,  than  this  book  of  God  1 Do  not 
the  successive  returns  of  business  and  amuse- 
ment so  far  engross  our  time  and  our  thoughts, 
that  we  have  either  no  leisure,  or  no  disposi- 
tion, to  attend  to  the  things  which  pertain  to 
our  peace  1 Consider,  “ in  them  we  think  we 
have  eternal  life.”  We  know  we  are  posting 
to  eternity  as  fast  as  the  wings  of  time  can 
carry  us;  we  know  that  the  consequences  of 
our  behaviour  in  this  span  of  life  will  attend 
us  into  an  invisible  unalterable  state ; and  we 
confess,  that  the  necessary  directions  for  our 
conduct  in  these  most  important  and  preca- 
rious circumstances,  are  to  be  found  only  in 
the  Bible ; what  words  then  can  describe  our 
fatal  insensibility,  if,  all  this  acknowledged, 


we  have  no  heart  to  consult,  or  to  value,  this 
inestimable  treasure  put  into  our  hands1 

Many  inquiries,  more  curious  than  useful, 
have  been  started  concerning  the  divine  pro- 
cedure with  the  Heathen  nations,  and  those 
who  never  heard  of  the  gospel  of  peace. 
“The  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will  (undoubt- 
edly) do  right,”  (Gen.  xviii.)  and  will  be  jus- 
tified at  the  great  day,  when  every  man  shall 
receive  according  to  their  works.  Till  then 
we  must  wait  for  the  knowledge  df  what  he 
lias  not  seen  fit  to  reveal.  But  thus  much  he 
has  already  told  us,  that  however  it  may  go 
with  those  who  know  not  the  gospel,  dreadful 
will  be  the  doom  of  those  who,  having  it  pub- 
lished among  them,  refuse  to  obey  it.  “ The 
servant  who  knew  not  his  master’s  will  shall 
be  beaten  with  few  stripes,”  Luke  xii.  But 
this  will  not  be  our  case ; at  least  our  igno- 
rance will  be  rather  an  aggravation  than  an 
excuse ; a wilful,  obstinate,  infatuated  igno- 
rance. We  have  the  words  of  eternal  life  in 
our  hands ; “ line  upon  line,  precept  upon 
precept :”  but  how  do  we  imitate  those 
(whom  perhaps  we  have  been  ready  to  blame) 
spoken  of  in  the  parable,  who,  when  they  re- 
ceived a kind  and  gracious  invitation  to  a 
royal  feast,  made  light  of  it,  and  “all  with 
one  consent  began  to  make  excuse !”  Luke 
xiv.  It  is  easy  to  apply  this  to  the  Jews  of 
old ; so  David  could  clearly  judge  in  the  case 
of  the  rich  man  who  killed  his  poor  neigh- 
bour’s lamb,  (2  Sam.  xii.)  but  had  not  the 
prophet  helped  him,  he  would  not  have  col- 
lected that  he  himself  was  the  person  intend- 
ed. But  to  bring  the  general  truths  of  scrip- 
ture home  to  the  heart  is  the  work  of  God ; 
and,  perhaps,  while  I am  speaking  at  random, 
he  may  rouse  the  consciences  of  some  to  say 
in  particular,  Thou  art  the  man.  Then  they 
will  soon  see  how  much  it  behooves  them  to 
search  the  scriptures,  when  they  understand 
the  weighty  meaning  of  the  words,  eternal 
life. 

Some  of  us,  I hope,  do  already  make  con- 
science of  frequent  reading  the  scriptures ; 
but  let  us  remember  the  force  of  the  word 
search.  It  is  not  a careless  superficial  read- 
ing, or  despatching  such  a number  of  chapters 
in  a day,  as  a task,  that  will  answer  the  end. 
I have  already  reminded  you,  that  it  is  a bu- 
siness will  need  your  best  application ; a se- 
rious, impartial,  humble,  persevering  inquiry, 
accompanied  with  earnest  prayer  for  the  light 
and  assistance  of  God’s  Holy  Spirit.  When 
we  set  about  it  in  this  method,  we  shall  soon 
find  happy  effects ; pleasure  a,nd  instruction 
will  go  hand  in  hand ; and  our  knowledge 
advance  as  the  growing  light.  The  precepts 
shall  inspire  us  with  true  wisdom ; teach  us 
how  to  order  all  our  affairs,  respecting  both 
worlds ; to  fill  up  our  several  stations  in  life 
with  propriety,  usefulness,  and  comfort ; and 
to  avoid  the  numerous  evils  and  distresses 
which  those  who  live  by  no  rule,  or  by  any 


412 


ON  SEARCHING  THE  SCRIPTURES. 


other  rule  than  God’s  word,  are  perpetually 
running  into.  The  promises  shall  be  a sup- 
port in  every  trouble,  a medicine  in  every 
sickness,  a supply  in  every  need.  Above 
all,  the  scriptures  will  repay  our  trouble,  as 
they  testify  of  Christ.  The  more  we  read 
of  his  person,  offices,  power,  love,  doctrine, 
life,  and  death,  the  more  our  hearts  will 
cleave  to  him : we  shall,  by  insensible  de- 
grees, be  transformed  into  his  image.  We 
shall,  with  the  apostle,  say,  “ I know  in  whom 


I have  believed,”  2 Tim.  i.  Every  thing  we 
see  shall  be  at  once  a memorial  to  remind 
us  of  our  Redeemer,  and  a motive  to  animate 
us  in  his  service.  And  at  length  we  shall 
be  removed  to  see  him  as  he  is,  without  a 
cloud,  and  without  a vail ; to  be  for  ever 
with  him ; to  behold  and  to  share  the  glories 
of  that  heavenly  kingdom  “wffiich  (Matt, 
xxv.)  he  has  prepared  (for  his  followers) 
from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.” 
Amen. 


SERMONS 


PREACHED  IN  THE  PARISH  CHURCH  OF  OLNEY, 
BUCKINGHAMSHIRE. 


Blessed  is  the  people  that  know  the  joyful  sound : they  shall  walk,  O Lord,  in  the  light  of  thy  countenance. 
In  thy  name  shall  they  rejoice  all  the  day;  and  in  thy  righteousness  shall  they  be  exalted. — Psalm 
lxxxix.  15,  16. 


TO  THE  INHABITANTS  OF  THE  PARISH  OF  OLNEY. 

my  dear  friends: — I have  principally  two  motives  for  publishing-  these  Discourses. 
The  one  is,  to  exhibit  a specimen  of  the  doctrine  that  is  taught  and  most  surely  believed 
amongst  us,  to  satisfy  those  who  desire  information,  and  to  stop,  if  possible,  the  mouth  of 
Slander.  I cheerfully  submit  them  to  examination,  in  full  confidence  that  they  contain 
nothing  of  moment  which  is  not  agreeable  to  the  general  strain  of  the  word  of  God,  and  to 
the  principles  of  the  church  whereof  I am  a minister,  as  specified  in  the  Articles,  Liturgy, 
and  Homilies.  And  that  what  I now  print  is  to  the  same  purport  with  the  usual  course  of 
my  preaching,  I doubt  not  but  all  who  statedly  hear  me,  will  do  me  the  justice  to  ac- 
knowledge. 

My  other  motive  is,  a desire  of  promoting  your  edification.  It  is  my  comfort  that  many 
of  you  live  by  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  and  highly  prize  them.  You  will  not,  therefore,  be 
unwilling  to  view  the  substance  of  what  you  once  heard  with  acceptance.  But  it  is  to  be 
feared,  that  the  far  greater  part  of  the  congregation  have  need  to  have  the  things  pertaining 
to  their  peace  pressed  upon  them  again  and  again,  for  a different  reason ; not  because  they 
know  them,  and  therefore  love  to  have  them  brought  to  their  remembrance,  but  because 
they  have  hitherto  heard  them  without  effect.  For  the  sake  of  both,  therefore,  I am  willing 
to  leave  an  abiding  testimony  amongst  you.  I hereby  take  each  of  your  consciences  to 
witness,  that  I am  clear  of  your  blood ; and  that,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge  and  ability, 
I have  not  shunned  to  declare  the  whole  counsel  of  God. 

In  the  choice  of  the  subjects  I have  selected  for  publication,  I have  not  been  solicitous 
to  comprise  a succinct  scheme  of  gospel-doctrine,  but  have  given  the  preference  to  such 
topics,  which  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  times,  and  of  my  hearers,  make  me  desirous 
might  be  had  in  continual  remembrance. 

The  exposition  of  the  third  commandment,  which  was  first  delivered  in  your  hearing,  I 
afterwards  preached  (nearer  the  form  in  which  it  now  appears)  at  London ; and  as  it  led 
me  to  touch  on  some  particulars  of  a very  public  and  interesting  concern,  I have  given  it  a 
place  in  this  volume.  And  I shall  think  myself  happy  indeed,  if  it  may  please  God  to  give 
weight  to  the  testimony  of  so  obscure  a person,  with  respect  to  a grievance  under  which 
the  nation  groans. 

As  long  discourses  are  in  many  respects  inconvenient,  I have  chosen  to  publish  no  more 
than  a brief  summary  of  what  you  heard  more  at  large  from  the  pulpit.  And  as  I aim  to 
speak  plain  truths  to  a plain  people,  I have  purposely  avoided  any  studied  ornaments  in 
point  of  expression,  being  desirous  to  accommodate  myself  to  the  apprehensions  of  the  most 
ignorant. 

May  it  please  the  God  of  all  grace  to  accompany  my  feeble  endeavours  to  promote  the 
knowledge  of  his  truth,  with  the  powerful  influence  of  his  Holy  Spirit ! And  I earnestly 
entreat  all  who  know  how  to  draw  near  to  a throne  of  grace  by  Jesus  Christ,  to  strive 
mightily  in  prayer  for  me,  that  I may  stand  fast  in  the  faith,  and  increase  in  the  knowledge 
of  Jesus  the  Saviour ; and  that,  for  his  sake,  I may  labour,  without  fear  of  fainting,  in  the 
service  to  which  he  has  been  pleased  to  call  me.  May  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
be  with  you  all ! — I am  your  affectionate  friend,  and  servant  in  the  gospel  of  Christ, 

JOHN  NEWTON. 


Olney , January  20,  1767. 


413 


SERMONS,  &c 


SERMON  I. 

THE  SMALL  SUCCESS  OF  A GOSPEL- MINISTRY. 


4f  that  time  Jesus  answered  and  said , I thank  thee , O Father , Lord  of  heaven  and  earth , 
because  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent , and  hast  revealed  them 
unto  babes. — Matt.  xi.  25. 


Our  blessed  Lord  perfectly  knew  before- 
hand the  persons  who  would  profit  by  his 
ministry:  but  his  observations,  conduct,  and 
discourses,  were  intended  as  a pattern  and 
instruction  to  his  followers.  He  is  said  to 
have  marvelled  at  the  unbelief  of  some,  and 
at  the  faith  of  others ; not  as  though  either 
was  strange  to  him,  who  was  acquainted  with 
all  hearts,  and  always  knew  what  he  himself 
could  do ; but  it  is  spoken  of  him  as  a man, 
and  to  show  how  his  ministers  and  people 
should  be  affected  upon  the  like  occasions. 
In  the  preceding*  verses  he  had  been  speak- 
ing of  Capernaum,  and  other  places,  where 
his  mighty  works  had  been  performed  in 
vain.  He  had  denounced  a sentence  against 
them;  and  foretold  that  their  punishment 
would  be  heavier  in  proportion  to  the  grea  tness 
of  the  privileges  they  had  abused.  But  this  was 
not  his  pleasing  work.  Mercy  and  grace 
were  his  delight,  and  he  usually  expressed 
sorrow  and  pain  for  the  obstinacy  of  sinners. 
He  wept  for  his  avowed  enemies,  and  prayed 
for  the  murderers  who  nailed  him  to  the  cross. 
It  was  not  without  grief  that  he  declared  the 
approaching  doom  of  these  cities ; yet  rais- 
ing his  thoughts  from  earth  to  heaven,  he 
acquiesced  in  the  will  of  his  heavenly  Father, 
and  expressed  the  highest  satisfaction  in  his 
appointment.  He  knew,  that  however  some 
would  harden  themselves,  there  was  a rem- 
nant who  would  receive  the  truth,  and  that 
the  riches  and  glory  of  the  divine  sovereignty 
and  grace  would  be  magnified.  Before  I en- 
ter upon  the  particulars,  this  connexion  of 
the  words  will  afford  us  ground  for  some  ob- 
servations. 

I.  That  the  small  success  and  efficacy  of 
the  preached  gospel  upon  multitudes  who 
hear  it,  is  a subject  of  wonder  and  grief  to 
the  ministers  and  people  of  God.  It  was  so 
to  our  Lord  Jesus,  considered  as  a preacher 

41 


and  messenger;  and  they,  so  far  as  they 
have  received  his  Spirit,  judge  and  act  as  he 

1.  Those  who  have  indeed  tasted  that  the 
Lord  is  gracious,  have  had  such  a powerful 
experience  in  their  own  souls  of  the  necessity 
and  value  of  the  gospel,  that  in  their  firs 
warmth,  and  till  painful  experience  has  con 
vinced  them  of  the  contrary,  they  can  hardly 
think  it  possible  that  sinners  should  stand 
out  against  its  evidence.  They  are  ready  to 
say,  “ Surely  it  is  because  they  are  ignorant : 
they  have  not  had  opportunity  of  consider- 
ing the  evil  of  sin,  the  curse  of  the  law 
and  the  immense  goodness  of  God  manifested 
in  his  Son ; but  when  these  things  shall  be 
plainly  and  faithfully  set  before  them,  surely 
they  will  submit,  and  thankfully  receive  the 
glad  tidings.”  With  such  sanguine  hopes 
Melancthon  entered  the  ministry  at  the  dawn 
of  the  Reformation:  he  thought  he  had  only 
to  speak  and  to  be  heard,  in  order  to  con- 
vince ; but  he  soon  found  himself  mistaken, 
and  that  the  love  of  sin,  the  power  of  preju- 
dice, and  the  devices  of  Satan,  were  such 
obstacles  in  his  way,  as  nothing  less  than  the 
mighty  operations  of  the  Spirit  of  God  could 
break  through.  And  all  who  preach  upon 
his  principles,  and  with  his  views,  have 
known  something  of  his  disappointment. 
Speaking  from  the  feelings  of  a full  heart, 
they  are  ready  to  expect  that  others  should 
be  no  less  affected  than  themselves.  But 
when  they  find  that  they  are  heard  with  in- 
difference, perhaps  with  contempt;  that  those 
whose  salvation  they  long  for,  are  enraged 
against  them  for  their  labour  of  love ; and 
that  they  cannot  prevail  upon  even  their 
dearest  friends,  and  nearest  relatives, — this 
grieves  and  wounds  them  to  the  heart. 

2.  They  have  been  convinced  themselves, 
that  unbelief  was  the  worst  of  all  their  sins 


415 


SER.  I.]  THE  SMALL 

and  therefore,  though  they  pity  all  who  live 
in  the  practice  of  sin,  yet  they  have  a double 
grief  to  see  them  reject  the  only  means  of 
salvation:  and  that  this  contempt  will  lie 
more  heavily  upon  them,  than  any  thing  they 
can  be  charged  with  besides.  It  gladdens 
the  heart  of  a minister  to  see  a large  and  at- 
tentive assembly ; but  how  is  this  joy  damped 
by  a just  fear,  lest  any,  lest  many  of  them 
should  receive  this  grace  of  God  in  vain,  and 
have  cause  at  last  to  bewail  the  day  when 
the  name  of  Jesus  was  first  sounded  in  their 
ears ! 

It  seems  plain  then,  that  those  who  are  in- 
different about  the  event  of  the  gospel,  who 
satisfy  themselves  with  this  thought,  that  the 
elect  shall  be  saved,  and  feel  no  concern 
for  unawakened  sinners,  make  a wrong  in- 
ference from  a true  doctrine,  and  know  not 
what  spirit  they  are  of.  Jesus  wept  for  those 
who  perished  in  their  sins.  St.  Paul  had 
great  grief  and  sorrow  of  heart  for  the  Jews, 
though  he  gave  them  this  character,  “ That 
they  pleased  not  God,  and  were  contrary  to 
all  men.”  It  well  becomes  us,  while  we  ad- 
mire distinguishing  grace  to  ourselves,  to 
mourn  over  others : and  inasmuch  as  secret 
things  belong  to  the  Lord,  and  we  know  not 
but  some,  of  whom  we  have  at  present  but 
little  hopes,  may  at  last  be  brought  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  truth,  we  should  be  patient 
and  forbearing  after  the  pattern  of  our  hea- 
venly Father,  and  endeavour,  by  every  pro- 
bable and  prudent  means,  to  stir  them  up 
to  repentance,  remembering  that  they  can- 
not be  more  distant  from  God,  than  by  nature 
we  were  ourselves. 

II.  The  best  relief  against  those  discour- 
agements we  meet  with  from  men,  is  to  raise 
our  thoughts  to  God  and  heaven.  For  this 
the  Lord  Jesus  is  our  precedent  here.  He 
said,  “ I thank  thee,  O Father.”  The  word* 
signifies,  to  confess,  to  promise,  or  consent, 
and  to  praise.  As  if  it  had  been  said,  “ I 
glorify  thy  wisdom  in  this  respect,  I acknow- 
ledge, and  declare  that  it  is  thy  will,  and  I 
express  my  own  consent  and  approbation.” 
Our  Lord’s  views  of  the  divine  counsels  were 
perfect,  and  therefore  his  satisfaction  was 
complete.  It  is  said,  “ He  rejoiced  in  spirit,” 
(Luke  x.  21,)  when  he  uttered  these  words. 
And  the  more  we  increase  in  faith  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  God,  the  more  we  shall  be  sa- 
tisfied in  his  appointments,  and  shall  see  and 
say,  “ He  hath  done  all  things  well.”  It  is 
needful  for  our  comfort  to  be  well  established 
in  the  truth  suggested  in  my  text,  That  the 
Lord  hath  provided  for  the  accomplishment 
of  his  own  purposes,  and  that  his  counsels 
shall  surely  stand.  From  this  doctrine  we 
may  infer, 

1.  That  were  the  faithful  labours  and  en- 
deavours of  ministers  and  others,  to  promote 

« The  original  word,  ejjo^ox.oyto^,  occurs  Matt.  iii. 
6,  Luke  xxii.  6,  and  Rom.  xv.  9. 


SUCCESS,  &c. 

the  knowledge  of  grace  and  the  practice  of 
holiness,  fail  of  success,  yet  they  shall  be  ac* 
cepted.  The  servants  of  Christ  may  in  their 
humble  measure  adopt  the  words  of  their 
Lord  and  Master,  in  the  prophet:  “ Though 
Israel  be  not  gathered,  yet  shall  I be  glorious 
in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  and  my  God  shall  be 
my  strength,”  Isaiah  xlix.  5.  When  he  sent 
forth  his  first  disciples,  he  directed  them, 
whenever  they  entered,  to  say,  “ Peace  be  to 
this  house ! and  if  a son  of  peace  be  there,” 
if  there  be  any  who  thankfully  accept  your 
salutation  and  message,  “ your  peace  shall 
rest  upon  it ; if  not,  it  shall  return  to  you 
again,”  Luke  x.  6.  That  is,  your  good 
wishes  and  endeavours  shall  not  be  lost  for 
want  of  proper  objects,  but,  when  they  seem 
to  be  without  effect  on  others,  shall  be  pro- 
ductive of  the  happiest  consequences  to  your- 
selves: you  shall  receive  all  you  were  de- 
sirous to  communicate.  Thus  his  ministers 
are  to  declare  his  whole  will,  whether  men 
will  hear,  or  whether  they  shall  forbear.  And 
if  they  do  this  with  a single  eye  to  his  glory 
and  in  humble  dependence  upon  his  bless- 
ing, they  are  not  answerable  for  the  svent; 
they  shall  in  no  wise  lose  their  reward. 

2.  Faithful  endeavours  in  the  service  of 
the  gospel  shall  not  wholly  fail.  Though  all 
will  not  hear,  some  certainly  shall  both  hear 
and  obey.  Though  all  are  by  nature  equally 
averse  and  incapable,  yet  there  shall  be  “ a 
willing  people  in  the  day  of  God’s  power,” 
Psalm  cx.  3.  If  the  wise  and  prudent  turn 
away  from  the  truth,  there  are  babes  to  whom 
it  shall  be  revealed.  The  Lord  renews  unto 
us  a pledge  of  his  faithfulness  in  this  concern 
every  time  the  rain  descends.  For  thus  he 
has  promised,  “As  the  rain  cometh  down, 
and  the  snow  from  heaven,  and  returneth 
not  thither,  but  watereth  the  earth,  and 
maketh  it  bring  forth  and  bud,  that  it  may 
give  seed  to  the  sower,  and  bread  to  the  eat- 
er : so  shall  my  word  be  that  goeth  forth  out 
of  my  mouth : it  shall  not  return  unto  me 
void,  but  it  shall  accomplish  that  which  I 
please,  and  it  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  where- 
to I sent  it,”  Isaiah  Iv.  10. 

3.  The  divine  sovereignty  is  the  best 
thought  we  can  retreat  to  for  composing  and 
strengthening  our  minds  under  the  difficul- 
ties, discouragements,  and  disappointments 
which  attend  the  publication  of  the  gospel. 
The  more  we  give  way  to  reasonings  and  cu- 
rious inquiries,  the  more  we  shall  be  perplex- 
ed and  baffled.  When  Jeremiah  had  been 
complaining  of  some  things  that  were  toe 
hard  for  him,  the  Lord  sent  him  to  the  pot- 
ter’s house,  and  taught  him  to  infer,  from  the 
potter’s  power  over  the  clay,  the  just  right 
which  the  Lord  of  all  hath  to  do  what  he  will 
with  his  own,  Jer.  xviii.  6.  It  is  only  the 
pride  of  our  own  hearts  that  prevents  this 
consideration  from  being  perfectly  conclusive 
and  satisfactory.  How  many  schemes  dero* 


416 


THE  SMALL 

gatory  from  the  free  grace  of  God,  tending 
to  darken  the  glory  of  the  gospel,  and  to  de- 
preciate the  righteousness  of  the  Redeemer, 
have  taken  their  rise  from  vain  unnecessary 
attempts  to  vindicate  the  ways  of  God ; or  ra- 
ther to  limit  the  actions  of  Infinite  Wisdom 
to  the  bounds  of  our  narrow  understandings, 
to  sound  the  depths  of  the  divine  counsels 
with  our  feeble  plummets,  and  to  say  to  Om- 
nipotence, “ Hitherto  shait  thou  go,  and  no 
farther.”  But  upon  the  ground  of  the  divine 
sovereignty,  we  may  rest  satisfied  and  stable: 
for  if  God  appoints  and  over-rules  all  accord- 
ing to  the  purpose  of  his  own  will,  we  have 
sufficient  security,  both  for  the  present  and 
the  future. 

1st,  For  the  present.  We  may  firmly  ex- 
pect, what  scripture  and  reason  concur  to  as- 
sure us,  that  “the  Judge  of  all  the  earth 
will  do  right.”  Whatever  to  us  appears 
otherwise  in  his  proceedings,  should  be 
charged  to  the  darkness  and  weakness  of  our 
minds.  We  know,  that  in  every  point  of 
science,  difficulties  and  objections  occur  to 
young  beginners,  which,  at  first  view,  may 
seem  almost  unanswerable ; but  as  knowledge 
increases,  the  difficulties  gradually  subside, 
and  at  last  we  perceive  they  were  chiefly 
owing  to  the  defects  of  our  apprehension. 
In  divinity  it  is  wholly  so;  “God  is  light, 
and  in  him  is  no  darkness  at  all ;”  his  reveal- 
ed will  is,  like  himself,  just,  holy,  pure  in  the 
whole,  and  perfectly  consistent  in  every  part. 
We  may  safely  rest  upon  this  general  max- 
im, that  “ the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  shall  do 
right.”  Though  he  does  not  give  us  a parti- 
cular account  of  his  dealings,  and  we  are  not 
fully  able  to  comprehend  them ; yet  we  ought, 
against  all  appearances  and  proud  reasonings, 
to  settle  it.  firmly  in  our  minds,  that  every 
thing  is  conducted  worthy  the  views  which 
God  has  given  us  of  himself  in  his  holy  word, 
as  a being  of  infinite  justice,  wisdom,  good- 
ness, and  truth.  And  farther, 

2dly,  For  the  future.  He  has  appointed  a 
day  when  he  will  make  it  appear  that  he  has 
done  right.  Though  clouds  and  darkness  are 
now  upon  his  proceedings,  they  shall  ere  long 
be  removed.  When  all  his  designs  in  provi- 
dence and  grace  are  completed  ; when  the 
present  imperfect  state  of  things  shall  be 
finished ; when  the  dead,  small  and  great,  are 
summoned  to  stand  before  him, — then  the 
great  Judge  will  condescend  to  unfold  the 
whole  train  of  his  dispensations,  and  will  jus- 
tify his  proceedings  before  angels  and  men. 
Then  every  presumptuous  cavil  shall  be  si- 
lenced, and  every  difficulty  solved.  His  peo- 
ple shall  admire  his  wisdom,  his  enemies 
shall  confess  his  justice.  The  destruction  of 
those  who  perish  shall  be  acknowledged  de- 
served, and  of  themselves;  and  the  redeemed 
of  the  Lord  shall  ascribe  all  the  glory  of  their 
salvation  to  him  alone.  What  we  shall  then 


SUCCESS,  &c.  [ser.  i. 

see,  it  is  now  our  duty  and  our  comfort  as* 
suredly  to  believe. 

The  great  subject  of  our  Saviour’s  joy,  and 
which,  so  far  as  it  is  apprehended,  will  bear 
up  his  servants  above  all  their  difficulties  and 
disappointments,  I mean  the  consideration  of 
the  sovereign  hand  of  God  directing  the  suc- 
cess of  his  word  when  and  where  he  pleases, 
we  must  defer  speaking  of  till  the  next  op- 
portunity ; and  we  shall  close  at  present  with 
a few  inferences  from  what  has  been  said 
thus  far,  by  way  of  introduction. 

1.  Take  heed  how  you  hear.  The  gospel 
of  salvation,  which  is  sent  to  you,  will  be 
either  “a  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death 
unto  death,”  to  every  soul  of  you.  There  is 
no  medium.  Though,  in  a common  and  fa- 
miliar way  of  speaking,  we  sometimes  com- 
plain that  the  gospel  is  preached  without  ef- 
fect, there  is  in  reality  no  possibility  that  it 
can  be  without  effect : an  effect  it  must  and 
will  have  upon  all  who  hear  it.  Happy  they 
who  receive  and  embrace  it  as  a joyful  sound, 
the  unspeakable  gift  of  God’s  love.  To  these 
it  will  be  “ a savour  of  life  unto  life.”  It  will 
communicate  life  to  the  soul  at  first,  and 
maintain  that  life,  in  defiance  of  all  opposi- 
tion, till  it  terminates  in  glory.  But  woe, 
woe  to  those  who  receive  it  not.  It  will  be 
to  them  “a  savour  of  death  unto  death.”  It 
will  leave  them  under  the  sentence  of  death, 
already  denounced  against  them  by  the  law 
which  they  have  transgressed,  and  it  will  con- 
sign them  to  eternal  death,  under  the  hea- 
viest aggravations  of  guilt  and  misery.  Re- 
member the  doom  of  Capernaum,  and  why  it 
was  denounced.  Jesus  preached  amongst 
them  the  words  of  eternal  life,  and  they  re- 
jected him.  This  was  all.  In  other  things, 
perhaps,  they  were  no  worse  than  their  neigh- 
bours, and  probably  disdained  to  hear  them- 
selves judged  worthy  of  a heavier  punishment 
than  Sodom,  and  those  cities  which,  for  their 
abominations,  were  consumed  with  fire  from 
heaven.  But  our  Lord  assures  us,  it  shall 
be  more  tolerable  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 
in  the  day  of  judgment,  than  for  those  who 
slight  his  word.  For  this  guilt  and  condem- 
nation was  not  confined  to  the  Jews  who  re- 
jected his  person,  but  extends  to  all  who 
shall  at  any  time  treat  his  gospel  with  con- 
tempt. However  inconsiderable  his  ministers 
are  in  other  respects,  if  they  faithfully  deliver 
his  message,  he  has  declared  himself  closely 
interested  in  the  reception  they  meet  with  : 
“ He  that  receiveth  you,  receiveth  me ; and 
he  that  despiseth  you,  despiseth  both  me  and 
him  that  sent  me,”  Matt.  x.  40.  It  is  there- 
fore at  your  peril  to  treat  what  we  say  with 
indifference:  (if  we  speak  agreeably  to  the 
scriptures)  the  word  of  God  which  we  preach 
will  judge  you  at  the  last  day. 

2.  Be  afraid  of  being  wise  in  your  own 
eyes,  lest  you  should  approach  to  the  charac- 


417 


MYSTERIES  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  &c. 


SER.  II.] 

ters  of  those  from  whom  the  righteous  God 
sees  fit  to  hide  the  knowledge  of  those  truths, 
without  which  they  cannot  be  saved.  The 
gospel  is  not  proposed  to  you  to  ask  your 
opinion  of  it,  that  it  may  stand  or  fall  ac- 
cording to  your  decision,  but  it  peremptorily 
demands  your  submission.  If  you  think  your- 
selves qualified  to  judge  and  examine  it  by 
that  imperfect  and  depraved  light  wThich  you 
call  your  reason,  you  will  probably  find  rea- 
sons enow  to  refuse  your  assent.  Reason  is 
properly  exercised  in  the  ordinary  concerns 
of  life;  and  has  so  far  a place  in  religious  in- 
quiries, that  none  can  or  do  believe  the  gos- 
pel without  having  sufficient  reasons  for  it. 
But  you  need  a higher  light,  the  light  of 
God’s  Spirit,  without  which  the  most  glorious 
displays  of  his  wisdom  will  appear  foolishness 
to  you.  If  you  come  simple,  dependent,  and 
teachable ; if  you  pray  from  your  heart,  with 
David,  “open  thou  mine  eyes,  that  I may 
see  wondrous  things  in  thy  law,”  (Psalm  cxix. 
18,)  you  will  be  heard  and  answered ; you 
will  grow  in  the  knowledge  and  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ;  but  if  you  neglect  this, 
and  trust  in  yourselves,  as  supposing  this 
promised  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  unne- 
cessary, the  glorious  light  of  the  gospel  will 
shine  upon  you  in  vain ; for  Satan  will  main- 
tain such  hold  of  you  by  this  pride  of  your 
hearts,  as  still  to  keep  you  in  bondage  and 
darkness,  that  you  shall  neither  see  it,  nor 
desire  to  see  it. 

3.  Those  of  you  who  have  some  spiritual 
apprehensions  of  these  things,  have  reason  to 
praise  God  that  you  see  a little.  You  were 
once  quite  blind ; you  neither  saw  your  dis- 
ease nor  your  remedy.  You  could  discern 
nothing  of  the  excellence  of  Christ,  or  the 
beauty  of  holiness.  But  now  the  eyes  of 
your  understanding  are  in  some  measure  en- 
lightened. It  is  the  grace  of  God  has  made 
you  thus  far  to  differ  from  what  you  once 
were,  and  from  what  multitudes  around  you 
still  are.  Be  thankful.  Accept  it  as  a token 
for  good.  Be  not  discouraged  that  the  be- 
ginnings are  small,  but  wait  on  the  Lord, 
and  they  shall  be  increased.  Seek  him  by 
prayer.  Converse  with  your  bibles.  Attend 
upon  the  public  ordinances.  In  the  humble 
use  of  these  means,  (while  you  endeavour  to 
act  faithfully  according  to  the  light  you  have 
already  received,)  you  shall  grad  ually  ad  vance 
in  wisdom  and  comfort.  The  Christian  growth 
is  not  instantaneous  but  by  degrees,  as  the 
early  dawn  increases  in  brightness  till  the 
perfect  day,  (Prov.  iv.  18,)  and  as  the  corn 
comes  forward  surely,  though  un perceived, 
Matt.  xiii.  31,  3‘2.  In  this  manner  your 
views  of  gospel-truth  shall  increase  in  clear- 
ness, evidence,  and  influence,  till  you  are  re- 
moved from  this  land  of  shadows  to  the  re- 
gions of  perfect  light,  to  behold  the  truth  as 
it  shines  in  the  person  of  Jesus,  without  a 
vail,  and  without  a cloud  for  ever. 

3 G 


SERMON  II. 

THE  MYSTERIES  OF  THE  GOSPEL  HID  FROM 
MANY. 

At  that  time  Jesus  answered  and  said , I 
thank  thee , O Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth , because  thou  hast  hid  these  things 
from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  re- 
vealed them  unto  babes. — Matt.  xi.  25. 

When  our  Lord  appeared  upon  earth, 
though  he  came  on  the  most  gracious  and 
important  business,  displayed  the  perfection 
of  holiness  in  his  conduct,  and  performed  in- 
numerable acts  of  kindness  and  love,  he  met 
with  little  regard.  He  found  many  enemies, 
but  few  hearty  friends.  Especially  those  who 
were  most  eminent  for  riches,  learning,  pow- 
er, or  reputed  goodness,  disdained  him  ; and 
most  of  those  who  followed  him  were  either 
people  in  low  circumstances,  or  whose  cha- 
racter had  been  offensive.  Publicans  and  sin- 
ners, fishermen,  unlearned  and  obscure  per- 
sons, were  almost  the  only  friends  he  had. 
The  Lord  Jesus,  who  was  infinitely  above 
the  selfish  views  which  are  too  apt  to  influ- 
ence our  little  minds,  was  well  satisfied  with 
this  event.  He  did  not  desire  honour  from 
men.  “ The  souls  of  the  poor  were  precious 
in  his  sight,”  Psalm  lxxii.  13, 14.  He  spoke 
kindly  to  those  whom  men  abhorred  ; and  if 
he  mourned  over  the  obstinacy  of  the  chiefs 
of  the  people,  it  was  for  their  own  sakes.  Yet 
(as  I observed  formerly)  when  he  considered 
the  appointment  and  will  of  God  in  this  dis- 
pensation, he  was  not  only  content,  but  he 
rejoiced.  He  expressed  his  approbation  in 
these  words : “ I thank  thee,  O Father,”  &c. 
There  is  something  observable  in  this  pas- 
sage which  will  be  of  continual  use  and  ap- 
plication, so  long  as  the  gospel  shall  be 
preached.  For  as  it  was  then,  so  is  it  still ; 
the  things  that  are  hid  from  the  wise  and  pru- 
dent, are  revealed  unto  babes.  Five  particu- 
lars offer  from  the  words  for  our  consideration : 

1.  What  may  be  intended  by  these  things ? 

2.  Where  and  in  what  sense  they  are  hid? 

3.  From  whom  ? The  wise  and  prudent „ 

4.  How  the  knowledge  of  them  is  to  be  ob- 
tained ? By  revelation : Thou  hast  revealed . 

5.  Who  are  thus  favoured  ? Babes. 

I.  By  the  things  which  it  pleases  God 
should  be  hid  from  the  wise,  and  revealed  to 
babes,  we  may  understand, 

1.  In  general,  the  things  pertaining  to  sal- 
vation. That  most  men  are  ignorant  of  them, 
and  careless  about  them,  is  too  plain.  Out 
of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the  mouth 
speaketh,  and  the  tree  is  known  by  its  fruits. 
Men  speak  as  though  their  tongues  were  their 
own ; they  act  as  though  they  were  to  give 
no  account ; they  live  as  though  they  were 
to  live  here  for  ever.  The  way  of  truth  is 
hid  from  their  eyes,  and  the  fear  of  God  has 
no  place  in  their  hearts. 


418 


THE  MYSTERIES  OF  THE 


2.  More  particularly,  those  doctrines  which 
are  in  an  especial  sense  peculiar  to  the  gos- 
pel, seem  here  to  be  intended.  If  the  prin- 
ciples of  what  some  call  natural  religion, 
though  agreeable  to  the  light  of  natural  con- 
science, are  little  regarded,  the  more  spiritual 
truths  of  the  Bible  are  not  only  neglected 
but  scorned  and  opposed.  The  same  spirit 
Which  showed  itself  under  our  Lord’s  per- 
sonal ministry  still  subsists.  The  chief  doc- 
trines he  taught,  and  for  which  he  met  with 
the  fiercest  opposition,  were  precisely  the 
same  with  those  which  have  awakened  the 
scorn  and  rage  of  the  world  ever  since,  and 
which  multitudes  who  bear  the  name  of 
Christians  in  this  day  oppose  with  all  their 
strength.  Such  as, 

1st,  The  divinity  of  Christ. — When  he 
spoke  of  himself  as  existing  before  Abraham, 
and  said  that  God  was  his  own  Father,*  the 
Jews  took  up  stones  to  stone  him.  And  this 
mystery  is  still  hid  from  the  natural  man.  No 
one  can  say,  acknowledge,  and  believe  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  Lord  or  Jehovah ; that  he  who 
once  hung  upon  the  cross,  bleeding  to  death, 
is  God  the  maker  of  all  things,  the  rightful 
object  of  the  supreme  love,  trust,  and  homage 
of  men  and  angels,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
1 Cor.  xii.  3. 

2dly,  Distinguishing  grace. — When  Jesus 
first  preached  atNazareth,  the  eyes  of  all  were 
fixed  upon  him ; (Luke  iv.  16, 20 ;)  but  when, 
making  application  to  themselves,  he  touch- 
ed upon  this  point,  from  the  examples  of 
Naaman  and  Syrian,  and  the  widow  of  Sa- 
repta,  who  were  released  when  many  lepers 
and  widows  in  Israel  were  passed  by ; they 
were  filled  with  indignation,  and  would  have 
thrown  him  headlong  down  the  rock.  And 
it  is  to  this  hour  an  offensive  doctrine  to  all 
who  do  not  know  the  value  and  the  need 
of  it. 

3dly,  The  new  birth. — When  this  was  pro- 
posed to  a master  in  Israel,  he  cried  out, 
“How  can  these  things  be  1”  John  iii.  9. 
And  by  many  who  are  wise  and  prudent  in 
their  own  sight,  it  is  at  this  day  accounted 
nonsense.  A small  acquaintance  with  the 
general  strain  of  what  is  published  either 
from  the  pulpit  or  the  press,  may  prove  that 
modern  divinity  has,  for  the  most  part,  found 
a smoother  path  to  tread  than  that  by  which 
Nieodemus  was  conducted  to  the  knowledge 
of  himself  and  his  Saviour.  Such  a doubt- 
ful inquirer  might  now  be  entertained  with 


* John  v.  18.  IIzTtgz  iS»oi/  “ lie  sai  l that  God 

was  his  own  Father,”  in  a sense  peculiar  to  himself,  and 
exclusive  of  all  others.  The  Jews  well  understood  the 
meaning  of  this  assertion,  that  thereby  hr  mode  himself 
equal  with  God;  and  therefore,  as  they  did  not  b?lieve 
in  him,  they  charged  him  with  blasphemy.  It  would 
indeed  have  been  blasphemy  in  a mere  man,  or  in  the 
highest  archangel,  to  have  spoken  of  himself  in  these 
terms.  But  the  force  of  the  expression  is  lost  in  our 
version  of  the  New  Testament,  through  the  omission  of 
the  word  i£*ov,  his  own , which  seems  one  of  the  most 
important  mistakes  to  be  found  in  that  translation. 


fSE*.  I!. 

many  ingenious  essays  on  the  beauty  of  vir- 
tue, the  efficacy  of  benevolence,  the  excel- 
lency of  the  human  mind,  and  other  favourite 
topics.  He  would  find  teachers  enow  to  en- 
courage and  improve  the  idea  he  has  of  his 
own  importance,  but  he  would  hardly  meet 
with  any  who  would  speak  to  him  in  our 
Lord’s  language,  and  refer  him  to  the  bra- 
zen serpent,  and  a new  birth,  in  order  to  learn 
the  means  and  the  nature  of  the  gospel-sal- 
vation. 

4thly,  The  nature  of  the  life  of  faith. — 
When  our  Lord  spoke  of  this,  under  the  me- 
taphor of  eating  his  flesh  and  drinking  his 
blood,  many  who  till  then  had  professed  them- 
selves his  disciples,  “turned  back,  and  walk- 
ed no  more  with  him,”  John  vi.  66.  And 
none  can  bear  it  now  w ho  are  not  taught  of 
God,  to  see  such  an  excellency  and  sufficien- 
cy in  Jesus,  and  such  emptiness  in  them- 
selves, as  constrains  them  to  cry  out  with 
Peter,  “ Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go!”  John 
vi.  68.  These  things  are  hid  from  the  wise 
and  prudent.  But, 

II.  Where,  and  in  what  sense  are  these 
things  hid ! 

1.  Where  are  they  hid! 

1st,  They  are  hid  in  Christ.  “ In  him  are 
hid  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge,” Col.  ii.  3.  He  is  the  great  reposi- 
tory of  truth.  “ It  pleased  the  Father  that 
in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell,”  Col.  i.  19. 
And  he  is  the  messenger  by  whom  the  will 
of  God  is  made  known  to  man,  Luke  ix.  35; 
John  i.  18.  From  hence  observe, 

(1.)  You  can  attain  to  no  saving  truth,  but 
in  and  by  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ.  If 
they  are  hid  in  him,  it  can  be  but  lost  labour 
to  seek  them  elsewhere. 

(2.)  Whatever  seeming  knowledge  you 
have,  if  it  does  not  endear  him  to  you,  it  is 
nothing  worth.  It  is  science  falsely  so  called, 
and  can  do  you  no  good  ; for  in  the  know- 
ledge of  him,  and  of  him  alone,  is  eternal 
life,  John  xvii.  3. 

2dly,  They  are  hid  in  the  word  of  God. 

(l.j  They  are  contained  there.  “ The 
whole  scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of 
God,  and  is  able  to  make  us  wise  unto  sal- 
vation :”  (2  Tim.  iii.  16 :)  to  furnish  us  with 
a sufficiency  of  knowledge  and  motives  for 
every  good  work.  The  word  of  God  is  per- 
fect. 

(2.)  Yet  though  contained  there,  they  are 
not  plain  to  every  eye.  Though  they  are  re- 
vealed in  the  letter,  they  are  still  hid  from 
the  wise  and  prudent.  Something  more  is 
necessary  than  barely  to  read,  in  order  to  un- 
derstand* them  ; otherwise  all  who  can  read, 
and  have  the  Bible,  would  be  equally  enlight- 
ened with  equal  application.  But  experience 
shows  it  far  otherwise.  This  leads  me  far- 
ther to  inquire, 

2.  In  what  sense  they  are  hid  ! 

1st,  They  are  not  hid  as  if  it  were  on  pur- 


GOSPEL  HID  FROM  MANY. 


119 


pose  that  those  who  sincerely  seek  them 
should  be  disappointed  in  their  search.  Far 
be  it  from  us  to  think  so  hardly  of  the  Lord. 
We  have  express  promises  to  the  contrary, 
that  all  who  earnestly  seek  shall  find.  Feai 
not,  you  that  sincerely  desire  an  experiment- 
al and  practical  knowledge  of  the  truths  of 
God,  and  are  willing  to  be  taught  in  his  ap- 
pointed way : though  many  things  appear  dif- 
ficult to  you  at  present,  the  Lord  will  gra- 
dually increase  your  light,  and  crown  your 
endeavours  with  success. 

2dly,  But  from  some  persons  they  are  hid, 
even  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  whom  we 
are  to  speak  of  hereafter.  Suffer  me  to  offer 
a familiar  illustration  of  the  Lord’s  wisdom 
and  justice  in  this  procedure.  Let  me  sup- 
pose a person  to  have  a curious  cabinet,  which 
is  opened  at  his  pleasure,  and  not  exposed  to 
common  view : he  invites  all  to  come  and 
see  it,  and  offers  to  show  it  to  any  one  who 
asks  him.  It  is  hid,  because  he  keeps  the 
key ; but  none  can  complain,  because  he  is 
ready  to  open  it  whenever  he  is  desired. 
Some,  perhaps,  disdain  the  offer,  and  say, 
Why  is  it  locked  at  all  1 Some  think  it  not 
worth  seeing,  or  amuse  themselves  with 
guessing  at  the  contents.  But  those  who  are 
simply  desirous  for  themselves,  leave  others 
disputing,  go  according  to  appointment,  and 
are  gratified.  These  have  reason  to  be  thank- 
ful for  the  favour ; and  the  others  have  no 
just  cause  to  find  fault.  Thus  the  riches  of 
divine  grace  may  be  compared  to  a richly- 
furnished  cabinet,  to  which  Christ  is  the  door. 
The  word  of  God  likewise  is  a cabinet  gene- 
rally locked  up ; but  the  key  of  prayer  will 
open  it.  The  Lord  invites  all ; but  he  keeps 
the  dispensation  in  his  own  hand.  They  can- 
not see  these  things  except  he  shows  them ; 
but  then  he  refuses  none  that  sincerely  ask 
him.  The  wise  men  of  the  world  can  go  no 
farther  than  the  outside  of  this  cabinet ; they 
may  amuse  themselves  and  surprise  others 
with  their  ingenious  guesses  at  what  is  with- 
in : but  a babe  that  has  seen  it  opened,  can 
give  us  more  satisfaction,  without  studying  or 
guessing  at  all.  If  men  will  presume  to  aim 
at  the  knowledge  of  God,  without  the  know- 
ledge of  Christ,  who  is  the  way  and  the  door ; 
if  they  have  such  a high  opinion  of  their  own 
wisdom  and  penetration,  as  to  suppose  they 
can  understand  the  scriptures  without  the  as- 
sistance of  his  Spirit ; or  if  their  worldly  wis- 
dom teaches  them,  that  these  things  are  not 
worth  their  inquiry  ; what  wonder  is  it  that 
they  should  continue  to  be  hid  from  their 
eyes  1 They  will  one  day  be  stript  of  all  their 
false  pleas,  and  condemned  out  of  their  own 
mouths. 

3dly,  The  expression,  “Thou  hast  hid,” 
may  perhaps  farther  imply,  that  those  who 
seek  occasion  to  cavil  shall  meet  with  some- 
thing to  confirm  their  prejudices.  When  peo- 
ple examine  the  doctrines  or  profession  of  the 


gospel,  not  with  a candid  desire  to  learn,  imi- 
tate, and  practise,  but  in  order  to  find  some 
plausible  ground  for  misrepresentation,  they 
frequently  have  their  wish.  The  wisdom  of 
God  has  appointed,  that  difficulties,  offences, 
objections,  and  stumbling-blocks,  should  at- 
tend, to  exercise  and  manifest  the  spirits  of 
these  wise  ones.  How  largely  do  they  expa- 
tiate on  the  divisions  and  differences  of  sen- 
timents which  too  much  prevail  among  those 
who  are  united  in  the  same  leading  truths. 
If  they  can  discover  an  instance  of  error, 
folly,  or  wickedness  of  a single  person  who 
professes  to  adhere  to  the  gospel-doctrine, 
how  do  they  rejoice  as  if  they  had  found  great 
spoil,  charge  the  faults  of  a few  indiscrimi- 
nately upon  the  whole,  and  labour  to  show, 
that  every  mistake  and  inadvertence  is  a ne- 
cessary consequence  of  the  principles  which 
those  maintain  who  commit  it.  We  do  not 
plead  for  mistakes  and  errors  of  any  sort,  for 
weakness  in  judgment,  or  inconsistence  in 
practice.  But  as  these  things  are  more  or 
less  inseparable  from  the  present  state  of 
huipan  nature,  they  necessarily  increase  and 
strengthen  the  prepossessions  of  scornera 
against  the  truth,  and  are  so  far  a means  of 
hiding  it  from  their  eyes.  Yet  here  again 
the  fault  is  wholly  in  themselves ; for  they 
seek  and  desire  such  occasions  of  stumbling, 
and  would  be  disappointed  and  grieved,  if 
they  could  not  meet  with  them.  But  those 
who  are  babes  in  their  own  eyes,  humble,  sin- 
cere, and  teachable,  are  brought  safe  through, 
by  a simple  dependant  spirit,  and  are  made 
wiser  every  day  by  their  observation  of  what 
passes  around  them. 

Many  inferences  and  advices  might  be  de- 
duced from  what  has  been  said.  I shall  con- 
tent myself  with  three. 

1.  Examine  yourselves  what  understanding 
and  experience  you  have  of  the  things  I men- 
tioned under  the  first  head.  So  much  as  you 
know  of  these,  so  far  you  are  Christians,  and 
no  farther.  “ A form  of  godliness  without 
the  power,”  (2  Tim.  iii.  5,)  is  one  of  the  worst 
characters  of  the  worst  times ; yet  how  com- 
mon in  the  present  day  } How  many  who 
choose  to  be  called  Christians,  reject  the  tes- 
timony which  God  has  given  of  his  Son,  deny 
the  efficacy  of  his  grace,  speak  of  the  new 
birth  with  disdain,  as  unintelligible  and  un- 
necessary, and  account  all  that  can  be  said 
of  the  life  of  faith  (though  founded  upon  ex- 
press scripture,  and  attested  by  many  wit- 
nesses) no  better  than  enthusiastic  jargon ! 
But  if  you  are  thus  minded,  however  sober 
your  deportment,  or  professedly  benevolent 
your  disposition,  though  you  may  be  applaud- 
ed as  a pattern  of  generosity,  a philosopher, 
or  a saint,  by  your  acquaintance  and  neigh- 
bours, if  the  scriptures  are  true,  you  can  be 
but  as  a sounding  brass  and  tinkling  cymbal 
in  the  sight  of  God.  You  would  have  des- 
pised Thomas  in  your  heart,  if  you  had  been 


420 


MYSTERIES  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  &c. 


witness  to  his  joyful  exclamation  when  he 
worshipped  Jesus,  and  cried,  “My  Lord,  and 
my  God  !”  John  xx.  28.  You  would  have 
despised  Paul  as  a dark  enthusiast,  had  you 
heard  him  say,  “ The  life  which  I now  live 
in  the  flesh,  I live  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God, 
who  loved  me  and  gave  himself  for  me,”  Gal. 
ii.  20.  Yea,  you  must  have  despised  Jesus 
himself,  if  you  had  been  present  at  his  confe- 
rence with  Nicodemus.  Our  Lord  Jesus  is 
now  in  heaven,  Thomas  and  Paul  have  been 
long  dead ; you  cannot  reach  them ; nor  do 
they  stand  in  your  way ; therefore,  perhaps 
you  are  content  to  speak  well  of  them  in  ge- 
neral terms.  But  those  who  come  nearest 
to  their  language  and  spirit  are  the  objects  of 
your  scorn  and  hatred.  How  then  can  you 
pretend  to  love  him,  or  presume  that  he  loves 
you  1 Jesus  is  worshipped  in  heaven  ; how 
then  can  you  expect  to  come  there  1 or  what 
pleasure  could  you  find  there  in  your  present 
turn  of  mind  1 O,  kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be 
angry,  and  you  perish ; for  in  a little  time 
his  wrath  will  burn  like  fire. 

But  to  every  one  who  understands,  em- 
braces, and  lives  under  the  influence  of  these 
truths,  I may  safely  apply  our  Lord's  words, 
“ Blessed  art  thou,”  (Matt.  xvi.  17,)  however 
despised  by  men,  or  chastened  of  the  Ix>rd  ; 
for  “ flesh  and  blood  hath  not  revealed  these 
things  to  thee  thou  hast  assuredly  receiv- 
ed them  from  God  by  his  Spirit.  He  alone 
is  able  to  cause  the  light  to  shine  into  our 
dark  hearts,  “ to  give  us  the  knowledge  of  the 
glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,” 
2 Cor.  iv.  6. 

2.  Do  not  entertain  hard  and  perplexing 
thoughts  about  the  counsels  of  God,  either 
respecting  others  or  yourselves. 

1st,  With  regard  to  others.  It  is  a fre- 
quent difficulty,  either  thrown  in  the  way  of 
inquirers  after  truth  by  the  subtilty  of  Satan, 
or  perhaps  arising  from  the  natural  pride  of 
the  human  heart,  that  would  be  thought  able 
to  account  for  every  thing.  I say,  when  they 
begin  to  apprehend  the  gospel-way  of  salva- 
tion, this  perplexing  question  arises,  If  things 
are  so,  what  will  become  of  multitudes  1 
What ! are  all  the  Heathens,  Mahometans, 
Papists,  and  even  all  the  Protestants,  except 
the  few  who  adopt  these  singular  sentiments, 
to  be  lost  1 I shall  not  attempt  to  conquer 
this  objection  by  dint  of  reasoning,  but  would 
rather  persuade  you  to  direct  your  reasonings 
another  way.  When  the  same  question,  for 
substance,  was  proposed  to  our  Lord,  his  an- 
swer to  those  who  asked  him  was,  “ Strive 
(each  one  for  yourselves)  to  enter  in  at  the 
strait  gate,”  Luke  xiii.  23,  24.  Take  care  of 
yourselves,  and  leave  the  cases  of  others  to 
the  Lord.  Remember  he  is  God,  and  there- 
fore just  and  good. 

2dly,  With  regard  to  yourselves.  Secret 
things  belong  to  God  ; your  business  is  with 
what  is  revealed.  Some  put  the  word  of  sal- 


[ser.  II. 

vation  from  them  perversely,  and  think,  if  the 
Lord  designs  me  for  eternal  life,  he  will  call 
me  in  his  own  time ; till  then  I will  go  on  in 
my  sins.  Those  who  can  reason  thus,  and 
take  encouragement  to  persist  in  wickedness, 
from  the  consideration  of  the  powrer  and  effi- 
cacy of  God’s  grace,  do  thereby  avow  them* 
selves  to  be  Satan’s  willing  servants.  But  he 
terrifies  many  on  whom  he  cannot  thus  pre- 
vail, with  representing  to  them,  that,  let  them 
do  what  they  will,  it  is  all  in  vain  ; unless  the 
Lord  has  chosen  them,  notwithstanding  any 
good  beginnings  they  may  hope  he  has 
wrought  in  them,  they  will  come  to  nothing 
at  last.  It  is  your  business  to  give  all  dili- 
gence to  make  your  calling  sure.  If,  by  a 
humble  waiting  upon  God,  you  are  enabled 
to  have  your  conversation  according  to  the 
gospel,  listen  not  to  vain  and  perplexing  rea- 
sonings, but  commit  yourself  to  the  mercy 
and  guidance  of  the  Lord  ; and  he,  in  his 
good  time,  will  enable  you  to  see,  and  to  say, 
that  it  is  not  in  vain  to  trust  in  him.  Your 
path  shall  be  like  the  advancing  light,  that 
shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day. 
The  Lord  has  already  provided  all  that  you 
can  reasonably  desire. 

(1.)  The  means  are  pointed  out,  in  the  use 
of  which  you  are  to  be  found,  and  wherein 
you  may  expect  his  blessing.  These  are 
chiefly  secret  prayer,  the  study  of  his  written 
word,  an  attendance  on  the  preached  gospel, 
and  free  converse  (as  proper  opportunities  are 
afforded)  with  his  believing  people.  If  you 
continue  in  the  observance  of  these,  and  act 
faithfully  to  the  light  you  have  already  re- 
ceived, by  breaking  off  from  the  evil  practices 
of  the  world,  and  watching  against  those 
things  which  you  yourselves  know  to  be  evil, 
you  will  certainly  gain  ground  in  light, 
strength,  and  comfort.  You  will  see  more 
and  more  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  in  the  glass 
of  the  gospel ; and  in  proportion  to  your 
views,  you  shall  be  “ changed  into  the  same 
image  from  glory  to  glory.”  For, 

(2.)  The  promise  is  sure.  What  God  has 
said  you  may  assuredly  depend  on.  And 
what  has  he  said  1 What,  indeed,  has  he  not 
said  for  the  encouragement  of  those  who  are 
sincerely  desirous  to  seek  and  serve  him  1 
“ They  that  seek  shall  find,”  Matt.  vii.  7,  8. 
“ He  giveth  power  to  the  faint ; and  to  them 
that  have  no  might  he  increaseth  strength,” 
Ts.  xl.  29.  “They  that  wait  on  the  Lord 
shall  renew  their  strength,”  Is.  xl.  31.  “ I 

will  pour  water  upon  him  that  is  thirsty, 
and  floods  upon  the  dry  ground,”  Is.  xliv.  3. 

If,  therefore,  you  feel  yourself  a lost  sin- 
ner, see  a beauty  and  sufficiency  in  Jesus, 
have  a hunger  and  thirst  after  his  righteous- 
ness, and  are  made  willing  to  expect  the  bless- 
ing in  his  way ; you  may  look  upon  this  as 
a token  for  good.  Such  views  and  desires  as 
these  never  are  found  in  any  heart  till  he 
communicates  them.  By  nature  we  are 


FROM  WHOM  GOSPEL-DOCTRINES  ARE  HID. 


421 


SER.  III.] 

averse  and  contrary  to  them.  Give  him  the 
glory  of  what  he  has  begun  ; and  oppose  your 
temptations,  fears,  and  doubts,  with  this  ar- 
gument, drawn  from  your  own  experience, 
as  the  wife  of  Manoah  formerly  reasoned  : 
“ If  the  Lord  had  been  pleased  to  kill  us,  he 
would  not  have  enabled  and  encouraged  us 
to  call  upon  him ; neither  would  he  at  this 
time  have  shown  us  such  things  as  these,” 
Judges  xiii.  23. 


SERMON  III. 

OF  THOSE  FROM  WHOM  THE  GOSPEL-DOC- 
TRINES  ARE  HID. 

At  that  time  Jesus  answered  and  said , 1 
thank  thee , O Father , Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth , because  thou  hast  hid  these  things 
from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  re- 
vealed them  unto  babes . — Matt.  xi.  25. 

The  judgments  of  God  are  a great  deep. 
He  does  not  give  us  a full  account  of  his  mat- 
ters ; much  less  can  we  by  searching  find  out 
him  to  perfection  ; yet  if  we  carefully  attend 
to  what  he  has  revealed,  and  apply  his  writ- 
ten word  with  humility  and  caution  to  what 
passes  in  ourselves,  and  around  us,  we  may 
by  his  grace  attain  to  some  considerable  sa- 
tisfaction in  things  which  at  first  view  seem 
hard  to  be  understood.  The  subject  of  my 
text  is  of  this  nature.  That  God  should  hide 
things  of  everlasting  consequence  from  any 
person,  sounds  very  harsh ; but  I hope,  when 
the  words  are  explained,  we  shall  see,  that 
though  he  acts  as  a sovereign  in  his  dis- 
pensations, his  ways  are  just,  and  good,  and 
equal. 

We  have  already  made  an  entrance  upon 
this  attempt.  Besides  some  general  observa- 
tions in  my  first  discourse,  I endeavoured  to 
show  you,  in  the  second,  1.  What  the  things 
are  to  which  our  Lord  refers ; 2.  Where,  and 
in  what  sense  they  are  hid.  I proceed  now 
to  consider, 

III.  From  whom  they  are  hid, — the  wise 
and  prudent.  It  will,  I think,  be  readily 
supposed,  that  the  expression  does  not  mean 
those  who  are  truly  so,  and  in  God’s  account. 
He  esteems  none  to  be  wise  and  prudent  but 
those  who  are  enlightened  with  his  spiritual 
wisdom,  who  now  serve  and  love  him  in 
Christ.  “ The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  begin- 
ning (or,  as  the  word  likewise  signifies,  the 
head  or  principal  part)  of  wisdom  (Psalm 
cxi.  10 ;)  and  from  such  as  these  he  hides  or 
keeps  back  nothing  that  is  profitable  for  them : 
on  the  contrary,  that  promise  is  sure,  “ The 
secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him ; 
and  he  will  show  them  his  covenant,”  Psalm 
xxv.  14.  When  our  Lord  said,  “ The  chil- 
dren of  this  world  are  wiser  in  their  genera- 


tion than  the  children  of  light,”  (Luke  xvl 
8,)  he  did  not  mean  they  were  so  absolutely, 
for  their  boasted  wisdom  is  the  merest  folly, 
but  only  that  they  acted  consistently  with 
their  own  principles.  The  wise  and  prudent 
here  are  either  those  who  are  wise  in  their 
own  eyes,  and  prudent  in  their  own  sight,  or 
those  who  are  generally  so  reputed  by  the 
bulk  of  mankind.  And  these  two  amount  to 
the  same : for  as  the  natural  wisdom  of  man 
springs  from  the  same  fountain,  self,  and  is 
confined  to  the  same  bounds,  the  things  of 
time  and  sense,  in  all  alike,  (though  there  is 
variety  of  pursuits  within  these  limits,  as 
tempers  and  situations  differ,)  men  are  gene- 
rally prone  to  approve  and  applaud  those  who 
act  upon  their  own  principles. 

We  may  take  notice,  then,  as  a key  to  this 
inquiry,  that  what  is  accounted  wisdom  by 
the  world,  is  not  only  different  from  the  wis- 
dom of  God,  but  inconsistent  with  it,  and  op- 
posite to  it.  They  differ  as  fire  and  water, 
light  and  darkness ; the  prevalence  of  the  one 
necessarily  includes  the  suppression  of  the 
other.  See  this  at  large  insisted  on  by  St. 
Paul,  in  the  beginning  of  his  first  epistle  to 
the  Corinthians,  the  first,  second,  and  third 
chapters. 

Who,  then,  are  the  wise  and  prudent  in- 
tended in  my  text  1 May  the  Holy  Spirit  en- 
able every  conscience  to  make  faithful  appli- 
cation of  what  shall  be  offered  upon  this 
head. 

1.  In  the  judgment  of  the  world,  those  are 
wise  and  prudent  persons  who  are  very 
thoughtful  and  diligent  about  acquiring 
wealth,  especially  if  their  endeavours  are 
crowned  with  remarkable  success.  If  a man 
thrives  (as  the  phrase  is)  from  small  begin- 
nings, and  joins  house  to  house,  and  field  to 
field,  so  that  he  has  lands  to  call  after  his 
own  name,  and  large  possessions  to  leave  to 
his  children,  how  is  he  applauded  (though  at 
the  same  time  envied)  by  the  most  who  know 
him  ! I do  not  deny,  that  a proper  concern 
and  industry  in  our  secular  calling,  is  both 
lawful  and  our  duty ; and  I allow,  that  the 
providence  of  God  does  sometimes  remark- 
ably prosper  those  who  depend  on  him  in  the 
management  of  their  business;  but  I make 
no  scruple  to  affirm,  that  where  this  is  the 
main  concern,  (as  some  call  it,)  such  wisdom 
is  madness.  Such  persons  are  no  less  idola- 
ters than  those  who  worship  stocks  and  stones. 
And  if  the  things  of  God  are  hid  from  them, 
it  is  surely  their  own  fault : they  do  not  even 
complain  of  it  as  a hardship ; they  have  their 
choice,  their  reward,  and  are  satisfied.  They 
are  told  that  these  things  are  in  Christ,  and 
there  they  are  content  that  they  should  re- 
main : they  see  no  beauty  nor  suitableness  in 
them,  they  have  no  desire  after  him ; he 
might  keep  his  heaven  and  truths  to  himself 
if  they  could  always  have  their  fill  of  the 
world.  They  are  told  that  these  things  are 


422 


OF  THOSE  FROM  WHOM 


hid  in  the  scriptures,  but  they  have  neither 
leisure  nor  inclination  to  search  there  for 
them.  Their  time  is  taken  up  with  buying 
and  selling,  building  and  planting,  &c.  O, 
beware  of  this  wisdom  ! “ What  will  riches 
profit  you  in  the  day  ot  wrath,”  (Prov.  xi.  4,) 
at  death,  or  judgment  ] If  you  live  and  die 
in  this  spirit,  you  will  bemoan  your  choice 
when  it  is  too  late. 

2.  Those  are  accounted  wise  and  prudent, 

who  think  they  have  found  a way  to  recon- 
cile God  and  the  world  together.  If  a man 
should  attempt  to  fly,  or  to  walk  upon  the 
water,  he  would  be  deemed  a fool.  How  is  it 
that  this  endeavour,  which  is  equally  impos- 
sible (and  expressly  declared  so  by  our  Lord,) 
should  be  more  favourably  thought  of  I The 
deceitfulness  of  the  heart  and  the  subtilty  of 
Satan  concur  in  this  point.  You  will  have  a 
sort  of  religion,  but  then  you  take  care  not  to 
carry  things  too  far.  You  are  governed  by 
the  fear  and  regard  of  men.  Something  you 
will  do  to  satisfy  conscience,  but  not  too 
much,  lest  you  hurt  your  interest,  disoblige 
your  friends,  or  draw  on  yourselves  reproach, 
or  a hard  name.  I must  tell  you  from  the 
word  of  God,  your  attempt  to  halve  things  is  an 
abomination  in  his  sight.  Would  it  not  be 
treason  by  the  law,  to  pay  the  king  an  out- 
ward respect,  and  yet  hold  secret  correspond- 
ence with  his  enemies]  The  decisions  of  the 
word  of  God  are  to  the  same  effect  in  this 
instance.  “ Love  not  the  world,  neither  the 
things  that  are  in  the  world.  If  any  man 
love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not 
in  him,”  1 John  ii.  15.  “ Know  ye  not,  that 

the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with 
God  I Whosoever,  therefore,  will  be  a friend 
of  the  world,  is  the  enemy  of  God,”  James 
iv.  4. 

3.  A man  is  deemed  wise,  who  has  con- 
siderable knowledge  and  curiosity  about  na- 
tural things,  and  all  those  subjects  wThich 
usually  bear  the  name  of  science ; if  he  can 
talk  of  the  magnitudes,  distances,  and  mo- 
tions of  the  heavenly  bodies,  can  foretell  an 
eclipse,  has  skill  in  mathematics,  is  w7ell  read 
in  the  history  of  ancient  times,  and  can  in- 
form you  what  is  found  in  books  concerning 
the  folly  and  wickedness  of  mankind  wrho 
lived  some  thousands  of  years  ago ; or  if  he 
understands  several  languages,  and  can  call 
a thing  by  twenty  different  names.  It  is  true, 
when  these  attainments  are  sanctified  by 
grace,  they  may,  in  some  respects,  have  their 
use.  But,  in  general,  the  best  use  a believer 
will  or  can  make  of  them,  is  to  lay  them 
down  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  When  a man, 
possessed  of  a great  quantity  of  these  pebbles, 
has  his  conscience  awakened,  and  his  under- 
standing enlightened,  he  is  glad  to  renounce 
them  all  for  the  pearl  of  great  price,  and  to 
adopt  the  apostle’s  determination,  “ to  know7 
nothing  but  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified,” 
1 Cor.  ii.  2.  This  was  the  effect  when  the 


[SER.  III. 

word  of  God  mightily  grew  and  prevailed, 
Acts  xix.  19.  We  may  at  least  say,  that  tin's 
kind  of  wisdom  is  for  the  most  part  dangerous 
and  blinding  to  the  soul. 

1st,  It  tends  to  feed  and  exalt  self,  to  make 
a person  something  in  his  own  eyes.  This 
w7e  are  prone  enough  to  by  nature.  An  in- 
crease of  unsanctified  knowledge  adds  fuel 
to  the  fire. 

2dly,  It  engrosses  the  time  and  thoughts. 
Our  minds  are  narrow,  capable  of  attending 
to  but  few  things  at  once ; and  our  span  is 
short,  and  will  hardly  admit  of  many  excur- 
sions from  the  main  concern.  If  we  were 
to  live  to  the  age  of  Methuselah,  we  might 
pursue  some  things  which  at  present  are 
highly  improper  and  impertinent,  from  this 
consideration  alone.  A man  that  is  upon  an 
urgent  affair  of  life  and  death,  has  no  leisure 
for  amusement.  Such  is  our  situation.  We 
are  creatures  of  a day.  Time  is  vanishing, 
and  eternity  is  at  stake. 

3dly,  The  delusion  here  is  specious,  and 
not  easily  discovered.  A person  with  these 
accomplishments  is  not  always  enslaved  to 
money  or  to  sensual  pleasures  : he  therefore 
pities  those  who  are,  and  comparing  himself 
with  others,  supposes  he  is  well  employed  be- 
cause his  favourite  studies  are  a check  upon 
his  appetites,  and  prevents  his  selling  himself 
for  gold,  or  running  into  riot  with  the  thought- 
less. Yet  an  attachment  of  this  sort  equally 
blinds  him  with  respect  to  his  true  interest. 
Will  the  knowledge  of  books,  or  men,  or  stars, 
or  flowers,  purify  the  conscience  from  dead 
works,  to  serve  the  living  God  1 It  is  too 
plain  that  the  truths  of  the  gospel  are  hid 
from  none  more  effectually  than  from  many 
of  this  character.  None  cast  a more  daring 
or  public  slight  upon  the  revealed  will  of 
God  than  some  who  are  admired  and  ap- 
plauded on  account  of  their  knowledge  arid 
learning. 

4.  Your  nice  and  curious  veasoners  and 
disputers,  that  will  see  (as  they  profess)  the 
bottom  of  every  thing,  and  trust  to  their  own 
judgment  and  inquiries,  independent  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  are  another  sort  of  wise  per- 
sons from  whom  these  things  are  often  and 
justly  hid.  And  this  character  may  be  found 
in  many,  both  learned  and  unlearned  ; for 
many  have  good  natural  faculties,  who  have 
not  had  the  advantages  of  learning  and  edu- 
cation. But  this  spirit  is  directly  contrary 
to  that  simplicity,  dependence,  and  obedience 
of  faith,  which  "the  scriptures  exhort  us  to 
seek  after.  Its  effects  are  various : 

1st,  Some  (and  those  not  a few)  are  led  to 
reject  the  word  of  God  altogether,  because 
it  evidently  contains  many  things  above  and 
contrary  to  their  vain  imaginations.  And 
herein  they  contradict  the  most  obvious  prin- 
ciples of  that  reason  which  they  lay  claim  to. 
A revelation  from  God  can  only  be  thought 
necessary  or  probable,  but  on  the  supposition 


THE  GOSPEL-DOCTRINES  ARE  HID. 


423 


SER.  HI.] 

that  it  is  to  inform  us  of  something1  which  we 
could  not  have  known  without  it.  There- 
fore, to  pretend  to  try  the  scripture-claim  to 
this  character  by  such  criteria  or  marks  as  we 
possess  beforehand,  is  the  same  thing  in  ef- 
fect as  to  determine  to  reject  it  without  any 
trial  at  ail. 

2dly,  When  the  scriptures  as  to  the  letter, 
are  acknowledged  to  be  true,  persons  of  this 
turn,  presuming  themselves  sufficient  judges 
of  the  sense,  are  helped  by  their  ingenuity 
to  explain  away  all  the  sublime  doctrines  of 
truth,  so  as  to  suit  the  prejudices  and  appre- 
hensions of  their  own  carnal  minds.  This, 
especially  when  joined  with  a smattering  of 
learning,  has  been  the  chief  source  of  all  the 
errors  and  heresies  which  have  pestered  the 
church  of  God  in  all  ages.  This  is  a prin- 
cipal cause  why  the  depravity  of  man  by  na- 
ture, the  deity  and  atonement  of  Christ,  the 
operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  all  the 
doctrines  of  grace,  have  been  denied  by  men 
wise  in  their  own  eyes,  and  prudent  in  their 
own  sight,  though  evidently  contained  in  the 
book  which  they  profess  to  receive  as  of 
divine  inspiration. 

3dly,  Even  where  the  doctrines  of  grace 
have  been  notionally  received,  the  same  spirit 
of  wisdom  can  still  find  occasion  to  work. 
When  there  is  more  knowledge  in  the  head 
than  experience  in  the  heart,  many  and  va- 
rious are  the  evils  that  often  ensue.  Disputes 
and  hard  questions  are  started,  contentions 
and  divisions  multiplied,  and  people  are  more 
eager  to  perplex  others  than  to  edify  them- 
selves. Thus  the  name  and  counsels  of  God 
are  profaned  by  an  irreverent  curiosity,  and 
the  clear,  express  declarations  of  his  will 
darkened  by  words  without  knowledge. 
When  this  natural  wisdom  puts  on  a spiritual 
appearance,  no  persons  are  more  fatally  de- 
ceived, or  more  obstinately  hardened.  They 
think  they  can  learn  no  more,  but  are  wise 
enough  to  teach  every  one : they  neglect  the 
use  of  God’s  appointed  means  themselves, 
and  despise  them  in  others : they  are  proud, 
censorious,  obstinate,  and  full  of  conceit. 
Take  care  of  Satan  at  all  times,  but  especial- 
ly when  he  would  transform  himself  into  an 
angel  of  light.  There  is  reason  to  think  the 
things  of  God  are  entirely  hid,  as  to  their 
power  and  excellence,  from  some  who  fondly 
dream  that  none  are  acquainted  with  them 
but  themselves. 

The  consideration  of  this  subject  may  lead 
to  a variety  of  improvement.  It  may  teach 
you, 

1.  What  to  fear, — A worldly  spirit.  This 
in  a prevailing  degree  is  inconsistent  with  a 
work  of  grace,  and  in  whatever  degree  it 
obtains,  or  is  indulged,  will  proportionably 
retard  and  abate  the  light  and  comfort  of 
our  souls.  The  cares  and  pleasures  of  this 
life  are  by  our  Lord  compared  to  thorns, 
(Matthew  xiii.  22,)  unprofitable  and  painful ; 


they  produce  no  fruit,  but  they  wound  and 
tear.  Yea,  they  are  thorns  in  the  eyes,  (Josh, 
xxiii.  13,)  which  will  prevent  the  great 
things  of  God  from  being  perceived. — A 
spirit  of  self-dependence.  “ Be  not  wise  in 
your  own  conceits,”  Rom.  xii.  16.  “If  any 
man  think  that  he  knoweth  any  thing,  he 
knoweth  nothing  yet  as  he  ought  to  know,” 
1 Cor.  viii.  2.  God  giveth  wisdom  to  the 
lowly,  but  he  confounds  the  devices  of  the 
proud.  His  promises  of  teaching,  leading, 
and  guiding,  are  made  to  the  meek,  the 
simple,  and  those  who  are  little  in  their  own 
eyes. 

2.  What  to  pray  for.— A simple  child  like 
temper,  that  you  may  come  to  the  word  as  to 
the  light,  and  look  beyond  yourselves  for  the 
assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  without  which 
your  most  laboured  inquiries  will  only  mis- 
lead you  farther  and  farther  from  the  truth. 

3.  How  to  examine  yourselves, — Not  by 
your  notions  and  attainments  in  knowledge, 
for  these  you  may  have  in  a considerable  de- 
gree, and  be  wholly  destitute  of  true  grace. 
The  word  of  God  supposes  it  possible  that 
persons  may  have  great  gifts,  (1  Cor.  xfoi. 
1 — 3,)  flaming  zeal,  and  much  success,  and 
yet,  having  no  true  love  to  God,  be  in  his 
sight  no  better  than  sounding  brass  or  a tink- 
ling symbal.  But  if  you  would  know  your 
state,  examine  by  your  prevailing  desires. 
Are  your  notions  of  grace  effectual  to  lead 
you  in  the  path  of  duty!  Do  you  hunger 
and  thirst  for  an  increase  of  holiness ! Does 
the  knowledge  you  have  of  Christ  lead  you  to 
love  and  trust  him!  Are  you  poor  in  spirit! 
You  know  nothing  aright  if  you  know  not 
yourselves. 

4.  Ye  that  are  believers  may  see  cause  to 
praise  the  Lord  for  his  dispensations  towards 
you. 

1st,  Had  you  been  wise  in  men’s  esteem, 
you  might  have  continued  fools  to  the  end  of 
your  lives.  If  the  Lord  has  taught  you  the 
secret  of  them  that  fear  him ; if  he  has  shown 
you  the  way  of  salvation ; if  he  has  directed 
your  feet  in  the  paths  of  his  commandments ; 
— then  you  have  the  true  wisdom,  which  shall 
be  your  light  through  life,  and  in  death  your 
glory.  Therefore, 

2dly,  Be  not  grieved  that  ye  are  strangers 
to  human  wisdom  and  glory.  These  things 
which  others  so  highly  prize,  you  may  resign 
contentedly,  and  say,  Lord  it  is  enough  if 
thou  art  mine.  Nay,  you  have  good  reason 
to  praise  his  wisdom  and  goodness  for  pre- 
serving you  from  those  temptations  which 
have  ensnared  and  endangered  so  many. 

3dly,  Do  you  desire  more  of  this  true  wis- 
dom! Seek  it  in  the  same  way  in  which  you 
have  received  the  first  beginnings.  Be  fre- 
quent and  earnest  in  secret  prayer.  Study 
the  word  of  God,  and  study  it  not  to  recon- 
cile and  make  it  bend  to  your  sentiments, 
but  to  draw  all  your  sentiments  from  it,  to 


424 


THE  NATURE  OF  SPIRITUAL  REVELATION, 


copy  it  in  your  heart,  and  express  it  in  your 
conduct.  "Be  cautious  of  paying  too  great  a 
regard  to  persons  and  parties.  One  is  your 
master,  even  Christ.  Stand  fast  in  the  liberty 
with  which  he  has  made  you  free,  and  while 
you  humbly  endeavour  to  profit  by  all,  do  not 
resign  your  understanding  to  any  but  to  him 
who  is  the  only  wise  God,  the  only  effectual 
and  infallible  teacher.  Compare  the  expe- 
rience of  what  passes  within  your  own  breast 
with  the  observations  you  make  of  what  daily 
occurs  around  you,  and  bring  all  your  re- 
marks and  experiences  to  the  touch-stone  of 
God’s  holy  word.  Thus  shall  you  grow  in 
knowledge  and  in  grace ; and,  amidst  the  va- 
rious discouragements  which  may  arise  from 
remaining  ignorance  in  yourselves  or  others, 
take  comfort  in  reflecting  that  you  are  draw- 
ing near  to  the  land  of  light,  where  there 
will  be  no  darkness  at  all.  Then  you  shall 
know  as  you  are  known ; your  love  and  your 
joy  shall  likewise  be  perfect,  and  you  shall  be 
satisfied  with  the  rivers  of  pleasure  which  are 
before  the  throne  of  God,  world  without  end. 


SERMON  IV. 


THE  NATURE  OF  SPIRITUAL  REVELATION,  AND 
WHO  ARE  FAVOURED  WITH  IT. 


At  that  time  Jesus  answered  and  said , I 
thank  thee , O Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and 
earth,  because  thou  hast  hid  these  things 
from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  re- 
vealed them  unto  babes. — Matt.  xi.  25. 


We  proceed  now  to  the  more  pleasing 
part  of  our  subject  The  great  things  of  the 
gospel,  though  hid,  are  not  lost:  not  hid  as 
in  the  bottom  of  the  sea ; but  he  who  hides 
them  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  is  ready 
and  willing  to  make  them  known  to  every 
sincere  inquirer.  This  discovery,  on  the 
Lord’s  part,  is  a revelation,  and  the  charac- 
ter of  those  who  obtain  it  is  expressed  by  the 
word  babes.  Of  the  five  particulars  I pro- 
posed to  consider  from  the  text,  these  two 
yet  remain  to  be  spoken  to. 

IV.  The  saving  knowledge  of  divine  truth 
is  a revelation.  Our  Lord  uses  a parallel 
expression,  when  he  commends  Peter’s  con- 
fession of  his  faith,  “ Blessed  art  thou,  Si- 
mon Bar-jona : for  flesh  and  blood  hath  not 
revealed  this  unto  thee,  but  my  Father  which 
is  in  heaven,”  Matt.  xvi.  Peter  had 
Moses  and  the  prophets,  so  had  the  scribes 
and  the  Pharisees:  and  after  their  manner 
they  were  diligent  in  reading  and  searching 
them.  But  that  he  could  acknowledge  Jesus 
to  be  the  Messiah,  when  they  rejected  him, 
was  because  the  Father  had  revealed  this 
truth  to  him,  and  given  him  a clearer  know- 
ledge of  it  than  he  could  have  received  from 


[ser.  IV. 

the  written  word  alone.  But  it  may  be  pro- 
per to  inquire  into  the  meaning  of  this  term. 
What  are  we  here  to  understand  by  revela- 
tion] 

Sometimes  revelation  is  used  in  an  extra- 
ordinary sense,  as  when  of  old  the  Lord  made 
known  to  his  servants,  the  prophets,  those 
doctrines  and  events,  which  till  then  were 
neither  heard  nor  thought  of.  Of  this  we  aie 
not  now  to  speak,  but  of  that  which  is  com- 
mon to  all  believers,  and  necessary  to  salva- 
tion. 

Now  this  revelation  supposes  the  things  to 
be  revealed  were  real  and  certain  before,  but 
unknown,  and  not  to  be  found  out  any  other 
way. 

Revelation  is  not  the  creation  or  invention 
of  something  new,  but  the  manifestation  of 
what  was  till  then  unknown.  The  great 
things  of  eternity,  the  glorious  truths  of  the 
gospel,  are  real  and  certain  in  themselves 
already,  and  do  not  begin  to  be  when  we  be- 
gin to  be  acquainted  with  them  : yet  till  God 
is  pleased  to  reveal  them  to  the  heart,  we 
have  no  more  spiritual  and  effective  know- 
ledge of  them  than  if  they  were  not.  Igno- 
rance of  things  very  near  to  us,  and  in  which 
we  are  nearly  concerned,  may  be  from  two 
causes : 

1.  From  a want  of  light.  Nothing  can  be 
perceived  in  the  dark.  If  you  are  in  a dark 
room,  though  it  is  richly  adorned  and  fur- 
nished, all  is  lost  to  you.  If  you  stand  in  a 
dark  night  upon  the  top  of  a hill  that  com- 
mands a fine  prospect,  still  you  are  able  to 
see  no  more  than  if  you  were  in  a valley. 
Though  you  were  in  a dangerous  place,  with 
pitfalls,  and  precipices,  and  thieves,  and  mur- 
derers all  around  you,  still  you  might  ima- 
gine yourself  in  safety,  if  you  had  no  light 
with  you. 

2.  It  may  be  from  some  hinderance  or  ob- 
struction between  you  and  the  object.  Thus 
your  dearest  friend,  or  greatest  enemy,  might 
be  w ithin  a fewT  yards  of  you,  and  you  know 
nothing  of  it,  if  there  was  a wall  between  you. 

These  comparisons  may  in  some  measure 
represent  our  case  by  nature.  God  is  near ; 
“ in  him  we  live,  move,  and  have  our  being.” 
Eternity  is  near ; we  stand  upon  the  brink  of 
it.  Death  is  near,  advancing  towards  us  with 
hasty  strides.  The  truths  of  God’s  word  are 
most  certain  in  themselves,  and  of  the  utmost 
consequence  to  us.  But  we  perceive  none  of 
these  things;  we  are  not  affected  by  them, 
because  our  understandings  are  dark,  and 
because  thick  walls  of  ignorance,  prejudice, 
and  unbelief,  stand  before  the  eyes  of  the 
mind,  and  keep  them  from  our  view.  Even 
those  notions  of  truth  which  we  sometimes 
pick  up  by  hearing  and  reading,  are  but  like 
windows  in  a dark  room  ; they  are  suited  to 
afford  an  entrance  to  the  light  when  it  comes, 
but  can  give  no  light  of  themselves. 

I think,  therefore,  we  may  conclude,  that 


AND  WHO  ARE  FAVOURED  WITH  IT. 


425 


SER.  IV.] 

God’s  revealing1  these  things  to  us  only  sig- 
nifies his  effecting  such  a change  in  us  f>y  his 
Holy  Spirit,  as  disposes  and  enables  us  to 
behold  them.  He  sends  a divine  light  into 
the  soul ; and  things  begin  to  appear  so  plain, 
we  wonder  at  our  former  stupidity,  that  we 
could  not  perceive  them  before.  By  the 
power  of  his  spirit  he  breaks  down  the  walls 
which  prevented  and  confined  our  views; 
and  a new,  unthought-of  prospect  suddenly 
appears  before  us.  Then  the  soul  sees  its 
danger:  “I  thought  myself  secure;  but  I 
find  I am  in  the  midst  of  enemies.  Guilt 
pursues  me  behind ; fear,  and  the  snare,  and 
the  pit,  are  before  me ; which  way  shall  I 
turn  1”  Then  it  perceives  its  mistake : 
“ While  my  views  were  confined,  I thought 
there  was  nothing  but  the  span  of  life  to  take 
care  of ; but  now  I see  a boundless  eternity 
beyond  it.”  It  obtains  a glimpse  likewise  of 
the  glories  of  the  better  world,  of  the  beau- 
ties of  holiness,  of  the  excellency  of  Jesus. 
This  light  is  at  first  faint  and  imperfect,  but 
grows  stronger  by  the  use  of  appointed 
means ; and  as  it  is  increased,  every  thing 
appears  with  a stronger  evidence. 

We  may  more  particularly  illustrate  this 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  it  influences  those 
leading  faculties  of  the  soul,  the  understand- 
ing, affections,  and  will.  By  nature,  the  will 
is  perverse  and  rebellious,  and  the  affections 
alienated  from  God : <fie  primary  cause  of 
these  disorders  lies  in  the  darkness  of  the  un- 
derstanding. Here,  then,  the  change  begins. 
The  Spirit  of  God  enlightens  the  understand- 
ing, by  which  the  sinner  perceives  things  to 
be  as  they  are  represented  in  the  word  of 
God ; that  he  is  a transgressor  against  the 
divine  law,  and  on  this  account  obnoxious  to 
wrath ; that  he  is  not  only  guilty,  but  de- 
praved and  unclean,  and  utterly  unable  either 
to  repair  past  evil,  or  to  amend  his  own 
heart  and  life.  He  sees  that  the  great  God 
might  justly  refuse  him  mercy ; and  that  he 
has  no  plea  to  offer  in  arrest  of  judgment. 
This  discovery  would  sink  him  into  despair, 
if  it  went  no  farther ; but,  by  the  same  light 
which  discovers  him  to  himself,  he  begins  to 
see  a suitableness,  wisdom,  and  glory,  in  the 
method  of  salvation  revealed  in  the  gospel. 
He  reads  and  hears  concerning  the  person, 
sufferings,  and  offices  of  Christ,  in  a very  dif- 
ferent manner  from  what  he  did  before : and 
as,  by  attending  to  the  word  and  ministry,  his 
apprehensions  of  Jesus,  and  his  understand- 
ing, become  more  clear  and  distinct,  a spi- 
ritual hope  takes  place  and  increases  in  his 
soul ; and  the  sure  effects  of  this  is,  he  feels 
his  love  drawn  forth  to  him,  who  so  loved 
him  as  to  die  for  his  sins.  Beholding,  by 
faith,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  bleeding  and 
dying  upon  the  cross ; and  knowing  for  whom, 
and  on  what  account,  he  suffered,  he  learns 
to  hate,  with  a bitter  hatred,  those  sins  which 
nailed  him  there.  The  amazing  love  of  Christ 
3 H 


constrains  him  to  account  all  things  which 
he  formerly  valued,  as  dross  and  dung,  for 
the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  his  Sa- 
viour. Nor  does  his  faith  stop  here;  he 
views  him  who  once  suffered  and  died,  rising 
triumphant  from  the  tomb,  and  ascending  into 
heaven  in  the  character  of  the  representative, 
friend,  and  forerunner  of  his  people.  Having 
such  a High-Priest,  he  is  encouraged  to  draw 
near  to  God,  to  claim  an  interest  in  the  pro- 
mises, respecting  the  life  that  now  is,  and 
that  which  is  to  come.  Thus  possessing,  in 
the  beginnings  of  grace,  an  earnest  of  the 
glory  that  shall  be  revealed,  a real,  univer- 
sal, abiding  change  necessarily  takes  place 
in  the  affections  Now  old  things  are  passed 
away,  and  all  things  become  new : the  soul 
no  longer  cleaves  willingly  to  the  dust,  or  can 
be  satisfied  with  earthly  things,  but  thirsts 
for  communion  with  God,  and  an  increase  of 
holiness.  Sin  is  no  longer  consented  to,  or 
delighted  in,  but  is  opposed  and  watched 
against ; and  every  unallowed  deviation  from 
the  will  of  God  excites  the  sincerest  grief 
and  humiliation,  and  leads  to  renewed  appli- 
cation to  the  blood  and  grace  of  Jesus  for 
pardon  and  strength.  Thus  the  will  likewise 
is  brought  into  an  unreserved  subjection  and 
surrender  to  the  power  of  Christ,  and  acts  as 
freely  in  his  service  as  it  once  did  against 
him.  For  that  what  is  termed  the  freedom 
of  the  human  will  should  consist  in  a sus- 
pended indifference  between  good  and  evil, 
is  a refinement,  which,  however  admired  and 
applauded  by  many,  is  equally  contrary  both 
to  sound  reasoning  and  to  universal  expe- 
rience. The  will,  in  all  persons  and  cases, 
is  determined  by  the  present  dictates  of  the 
understanding,  and  the  bent  of  the  affections. 

By  ascribing  so  much  to  the  Spirit  of  God, 
I do  not  mean,  as  you  may  perceive  by  what 
I have  just  now  said,  to  exclude  his  holy 
word,  or  preached  gospel.  All  these  truths 
and  prospects  are  already  contained  in  the 
word  of  God ; but  without  the  light  of  the 
Spirit  they  are  not  discerned.  They  are 
propounded  to  you  in  the  public  ministry. 
We  testify  again  and  again  the  things  which 
we  have  seen  and  heard  of  the  word  of  life : 
and  when  we  are  in  some  measure  affected 
with  their  evidence,  we  are  ready  to  winder 
how  any  of  you  can  possibly  avoid  perceiv- 
ing them;  till  we  remember  how  it  was  with 
ourselves,  and  then  we  know,  by  our  own 
experience,  that  we  must  preach,  and  you 
hear  in  vain,  unless  the  Lord  is  pleased  to 
open  your  hearts.  But  observe, 

1.  The  Spirit  of  God  teaches  and  enlightens 
by  his  word  as  the  instrument.  There  is  no 
revelation  from  him,  but  what  is  (as  to  our 
perception  of  it)  derived  from  the  scriptures. 
There  may  be  supposed  illuminations,  and 
strong  impressions  upon  the  mind,  in  which 
the  word  of  God  has  no  place  or  concern ; 
but  this  alone  is  sufficient  to  discountenance 


426 


THE  NATURE  OF  SPIRITUAL  REVELATION,  &c. 


them,  and  to  prove  that  they  are  not  from  the 
Holy  Spirit.  For, 

2.  The  scriptures  are  the  appointed  rule 
and  test,  by  which  all  our  searches  and  dis- 
coveries, all  our  acquisitions  in  religious 
knowledge,  must  be  tried.  If  they  are  in- 
deed from  God,  they  will  stand  this  trial,  and 
answer  to  the  word  as  face  answers  to  face 
in  a glass,  but  not  otherwise.  “ To  the  law 
and  to  the  testimony : if  they  speak  not  ac- 
cording to  this  word,  it  is  because  there  is  no 
light  in  them,”  Isa.  viii.  20.  If  those  who 
despise  all  claims  to  the  influence  of  the  Spi- 
rit of  God,  as  enthusiasm,  had  not  been  fre- 
quently informed,  that  we  expect,  we  ac- 
knowledge, no  internal  revelation,  but  by  the 
medium  of  the  word  of  God,  and  agreeable,  to 
it,  they  would  be  less  inexcusable  in  repeat- 
ing the  charges  of  folly  and  infatuation,  which 
they  ignorantly  fix  upon  the  work  of  the  Spi- 
rit, and  all  who  profess  a dependence  on  it. 
To  those  who  are  indeed  candid  and  sincere 
inquirers  after  truth,  what  has  been  said  up- 
on this  part  of  our  subject,  will,  I hope,  sug- 
gest the  propriety  of  two  directions.  From 
hence  learn, 

1st,  To  set  a high  value  upon  the  word  of 
God.  All  that  is  necessary  to  make  you  wise 
to  salvation  is  there,  and  there  only.  In  this 
precious  book  you  may  find  a direction  for 
every  doubt,  a solution  of  every  difficulty,  a 
promise  suited  to  every  circumstance  you  can 
be  in.  There  you  may  be  informed  of  your 
disease  by  sin,  and  the  remedy  provided  by 
grace.  You  may  be  instructed  to  lgiow 
yourselves,  to  know  God  and  Jesus  Christ,  in 
the  knowledge  of  whom  standeth  eternal  life. 
The  wonders  of  redeeming  love,  the  glories 
of  the  Redeemer’s  person,  the  happiness  of 
the  redeemed  people,  the  power  of  faith,  and 
the  beauty  of  holiness,  are  here  represented 
to  the  life.  Nothing  is  wanting  to  make  life 
useful  and  comfortable,  death  safe  and  desir- 
able, and  to  bring  down  something  of  heaven 
upon  earth.  But  this  true  wisdom  can  be 
found  no  where  else.  If  you  wander  from 
the  scriptures,  in  pursuit  either  of  present 
peace,  or  future  hope,  your  search  will  end 
in  disappointment.  This  is  the  fountain  of 
living  waters:  if  you  forsake  it,  and  give  the 
preference  to  broken  cisterns  of  your  own  de- 
vising, they  will  fail  you  when  you  most  need 
them.  Rejoice,  therefore,  that  such  a trea- 
sure is  put  into  your  hand  : but  rejoice  with 
trembling.  Remember  this  is  not  all  you 
want : unless  God  likewise  gives  you  a heart 
to  use  it  aright,  your  privilege  will  only  ag- 
gravate your  guilt  and  misery.  Therefore 
remember, 

2dly,  The  necessity  of  prayer.  For  though 
the  things  of  nearest  consequence  to  you  are 
in  the  Bible,  and  you  should  read  it  over  and 
over,  till  you  commit  the  whole  book  to  your 
memory ; yet  you  will  not  understand,  or 
discern  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  unless  the 


[ser.  IV. 

Lord  the  Spirit  shows  it  to  you.  The  dis- 
pensation of  the  truth  is  in  his  hand ; and 
without  him  all  the  fancied  advantages  of  su- 
perior capacity,  learning,  criticism,  and  books, 
will  prove  as  useless  as  spectacles  to  the  blind. 
The  great  encouragement  is,  that  this  infal- 
lible Spirit,  so  necessary  to  guide  us  into  the 
way  of  peace,  is  promised  to  all  who  sincere- 
ly ask  it.  This  Spirit  Jesus  is  exalted  to  be- 
stow : and  he  has  said,  4i  Whosoever  cometh 
to  me,  I will  in  no  wise  cast  him  out.”  There- 
fore water  your  reading  with  frequent  prayer. 
We  proceed  to, 

V.  The  characters  of  those  persons  who 
succeed  in  their  inquiries,  and  have  the  things 
of  God  savingly  revealed  to  them ; they  are 
called  babes. 

1.  They  are  for  the  most  part  babes  in  the 
world’s  esteem.  They  are  despised  by  the 
wise  and  prudent  for  their  weak  capacities, 
small  attainments,  and  their  seeming  insig- 
nificance in  common  life.  But  the  Lord  does 
not  overlook  any  on  these  accounts.  He  is 
no  respecter  of  persons.  In  the  blessings  of 
his  common  providence,  those  which  are  more 
immediately  from  his  own  hand,  such  as  air 
and  light,  health  and  strength,  the  faculties  of 
sight  and  hearing,  &c.  he  bestows  as  freely, 
and  in  as  great  perfection,  to  the  poor  as  to 
the  rich,  to  the  ignorant  as  to  the  learned. 
And  thus  it  is  with  respect  to  his  grace. 
Our  incapacity  is  founded  in  our  nature,  and 
is  common  to  all,  and  not  in  any  particular 
circumstances.  He  is  as  ready  to  save  the 
mean  a»  the  noble.  Many  of  the  great  and 
wise  are  offended  at  this.  As  they  engross 
the  earth,  they  would  willingly  engross  hea- 
ven also  to  themselves.  But  the  Lord  has 
appointed  otherwise ; and  it  has  been  one  re- 
proach constantly  attending  the  gospel,  that 
fewT  but  the  common  people  (Mark  xii.  37,  John 
vii.  49, 49)  have  thought  it  worth  their  notice. 

2.  They  are  babes  in  their  own  esteem. 
Not  that  some  are  more  humble  than  others 
by  nature,  and  therefore  the  Lord  gives  them 
a preference  on  that  account,  for  by  nature 
we  are  all  alike,  equally  destitute  of  the  small- 
est good ; but  the  expression  teaches  us,  that 
those  to  whom  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  reveal 
these  things,  he  first  empties  and  humbles, 
strips  them  of  all  ground  of  boasting,  and 
brings  them  to  a dependence  on  himself.  The 
true  believer  is  frequently  compared  to  a little 
child ; and  it  is  easy  to  trace  an  instructive 
resemblance. 

1st,  A child  or  babe  has  little  knowledge, 
and  its  capacity  and  powers  are  as  yet  very 
feeble.  All  whose  understandings  have  been 
spiritually  enlightened  will  acknowledge 
themselves  children  in  this  respect.  The  lit- 
tle they  know  convinces  them  of  their  igno- 
rance. They  are  convinced  that  their  views 
of  things  are  faint,  partial,  confused ; that 
their  judgments  are  weak  ; that  if  the  Lord 
prevents  it  not,  they  are  very  liable  to  be  ira- 


SER.  V.] 

posed  on  by  the  subtilty  of  Satan,  and  the 
treachery  of  their  own  hearts.  They  feel 
that  they  have  not  in  themselves  sufficiency 
to  think  a good  thought. 

2dly,  A child  is  teachable.  Conscious  of 
their  own  ignorance,  they  listen  to  all  about 
them,  and  think  every  one  is  qualified  to  teach 
them  something.  Among  men  none  are 
5ruly  teachable,  but  those  who  know  they 
need  to  be  taught.  The  natural  man,  if  pos- 
sessed of  any  advantages,  thinks  every  one 
needs  his  help.  The  humble  Christian  gives 
this  proof,  that  the  confession  he  is  ready  to 
make  of  his  ignorance  is  genuine,  and  from 
his  heart,  that  he  is  desirous  to  learn  from  all. 
He  is  swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak,  and  open 
to  conviction.  Though  he  will  not  assent  to 
every  thing  he  hears  without  proof  or  exami- 
nation, yet  he  is  disposed  to  receive  instruc- 
tion, and  thankful  to  those  by  whom  he  is 
profited.  He  is  fearful  of  being  mistaken, 
of  giving  way  to  prejudices,  and  therefore 
gladly  improves  every  means  of  information. 

3diy,  A child  is  simple  and  dependent.  He 
does  not  reason,  but  implicitly  receives  what 
he  is  told  by  his  parents,  or  those  whom  he 
thinks  wiser  than  himself.  Such  a resigna- 
tion, indeed,  the  believer  dares  not  make  of 
his  understanding  to  any  men,  however  high- 
ly he  may  esteem  them  in  the  main ; for  he 
has  learned  from  the  word  of  God,  not  to  put 
his  trust  in  man  : but  this  is  the  desire  of  the 
renewed  heart,  with  respect  to  the  teaching 
of  God’s  word  and  Spirit.  He  allows  no  rea- 
soning or  questioning  here ; nor  will  he  say 
with  Nicodemus,  “How  can  these  things 
be  1”  It  is  enough  for  him  that  God  has 
said  it,  and  is  able  to  make  it  good.  This  is 
a happy  temper.  In  this  way  innumerable 
difficulties  that  arise  from  appearances  and 
sophisms  are  avoided;  and  the  mind,  by  faith, 
steers  in  safety  across  the  immense  ocean  of 
conjectures  and  opinions,  which  disputants 
and  reasoners,  essaying  to  do,  are  sunk  and 
overpowered.  It  is  true,  there  are  various 
degrees  of  this  simplicity  ; and  in  those  who 
possess  it  in  a larger  measure,  there  is  a re- 
maining principle  of  pride  and  unbelief,  which 
costs  them  much  prayer  and  many  conflicts 
to  subdue.  But  this,  in  some  degree,  is  essen- 
tial to  the  character  of  those  who  are  taught 
of  God  ; they  desire  and  endeavour  to  submit 
wholly  to  his  guidance  and  will  in  all  things. 

Here,  then,  is  a proper  topic  for  self-exa- 
mination. Let  each  one  ask  his  heart,  Have 
I this  simple,  child-like  disposition! 

If  you  have,  if  it  is  the  desire  of  your  soul 
to  be  taught  of  God,  if  his  word  is  your  rule, 
if  you  depend  on  his  Spirit  to  teach  you  all 
things,  and  to  lead  you  as  it  were  by  the  hand, 
sensible  that,  unless  you  are  thus  led  and 
guided,  you  shall  certainly  go  astray;  be 
thankful  for  this,  accept  it  as  a token  for 
good.  You  were  not  always  so:  there  was  a 
time  when  you  were  wise  in  your  own  eyes, 


427 

and  prudent  in  your  own  sight.  You  have 
good  warrant  to  hope  that  the  Lord,  who  has 
already  taught  you  to  depend  on  himself,  will 
show  you  all  that  is  necessary  for  you  to  know. 

But  if  this  is  not  the  case,  if  you  lean  to 
your  own  understanding,  what  wonder  is  it 
that  you  are  still  walking  in  darkness  and  un- 
certainty ! Will  you  say,  I have  read  the 
Bible  diligently  ; I have  taken  no  small  pains 
to  examine  things,  to  see  which  of  the  many 
divisions  that  obtain  among  Christians  is  pos- 
sessed of  the  truth  ; but  I am  still  at  a loss : 
surely,  if  the  tenets  some  plead  for  had  been 
in  the  scriptures,  I should  have  found  them 
there!  I answer,  without  detracting  from 
your  sagacity  or  your  sincerity,  your  case  is 
easily  accounted  for  from  the  verse  which  we 
are  upon,  if  your  inquiries  are  not  conducted 
in  a humble  dependence  upon  the  Spirit  of  God. 
Too  many  instances  we  could  produce  of  men, 
who  having  laboured  for  years  in  what  seems 
one  of  the  most  laudable  undertakings,  the  ex- 
plaining the  scriptures  lor  the  use  of  others, 
have  at  last  been  in  a remarkable  degree  un- 
settled themselves ; and  the  only  visible  fruits 
their  reading  and  industry  have  afforded,  have 
been  error,  invective,  and  dissatisfaction;  so 
that  their  labours  have  been  an  exemplifica- 
tion of  the  former  part  of  our  text,  a proof  in 
point  how  entirely  the  things  of  God  are  often 
hid  from  the  wise  and  prudent. 

You  that  are  seeking  the  Lord,  and  are  lit- 
tle in  your  own  eyes,  rejoice  that  the  dispen- 
sation of  grace  is  in  his  hands.  If  men  had 
the  disposal  of  it,  you  might  perhaps  have 
been  overlooked.  We  should  have  been  ready 
to  have  accepted  the  fair-spoken  young  man 
who  accosted  our  Lord  with  so  much  outward 
respect,  and  had  so  much  to  say  in  his  own 
behalf;  (Mark  x.  20 ;)  and  probably  we  should 
have  left  the  thief  upon  the  cross  to  perish  like 
a wretch  as  he  deserved.  “ But  the  Lord 
seeth  not  as  man  seeth,”  1 Sam.  xvi.  7.  “His 
ways  are  higher  than  our  ways,  and  his 
thoughts  than  our  thoughts,”  Isa.  Iv.  7,  9. 
Therefore  there  is  encouragement  for  the 
meanest  and  the  vilest.  lie  has  excluded 
none  but  those  who  exclude  themselves. 
“Behold,  now  is  the  accepted  time;  behold, 
now  is  the  day  of  salvation ! Let  the  wicked 
forsake  his  ways,  and  the  unrighteous  man 
his  thoughts,  and  let  him  return  unto  the 
Lord,  for  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him,  and 
to  our  God,  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon.” 


SERMON  V. 

THE  SOVEREIGNTY  OF  DIVINE  GRACE  AS- 
SERTED AND  ILLUSTRATED. 

Even  so,  Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy 
sight. — Matt.  xi.  26. 

That  the  doctrine  in  the  preceding  verse 
is  true  in  fact,  is  sufficiently  evident  from 


THE  SOVEREIGNTY  OF  DIVINE  GRACE,  &c. 


428 


THE  SOVEREIGNTY  OF  DIVINE  GRACE 


common  observation.  The  greatest  part  of 
those  whom  the  world  esteems  wise  and  pru- 
dent, and  all  to  a man  who  think  themselves 
so,  pay  but  small  regard  to  the  truths  of  the 
gospel.  They  are  hid  from  their  eyes,  and 
revealed  to  babes,  to  those  whom  they  despise 
on  account  of  their  ignorance  and  insignifi- 
cance. And  if  a few  who  are  favoured  with 
considerable  advantages  in  point  of  genius, 
education,  or  rank,  do  receive  the  truth  in 
the  love  of  it,  they  have  been  at  least  taught 
that  they  are  no  better  than  babes,  and  a>« 
glad  to  count  all  outward  things  but  loss  for 
the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
Jesus  the  Lord. 

If  we  could  give  no  other  reason  for  this 
dispensation  of  grace  than  that  which  is  as- 
signed in  our  text,  it  ought  to  be  satisfactory, 
and  would  be  so,  if  it  was  not  for  the  pride 
of  our  hearts.  Surely  that  which  seems  good 
in  the  sight  of  God,  must  be  holy,  and  wise, 
and  good  in  itself.  How  vain  and  presump- 
tuous is  blinded  man,  who  would  dare  to  re- 
ply against  his  Maker,  to  charge  his  holiness 
with  injustice,  his  wisdom  with  mistake,  his 
goodness  with  partiality  ! All  their  vain  ca- 
vils will  be  silenced  at  the  great  day,  when 
the  secrets  of  all  hearts  are  opened,  and  God 
will  be  justified  when  he  condemns.  How- 
ever, though  we  dare  not  venture  too  far  into 
the  depths  of  the  divine  counsels,  yet,  from 
the  light  he  has  afforded  us  in  his  word,  we 
may,  in  our  feeble  manner,  assert  and  prove 
that  his  ways  are  just  and  equal ; and,  be- 
sides the  argument  of  his  sovereignty,  that 
60  it  has  pleased  him,  he  has  been  pleased  to 
favour  us  with  some  of  the  reasons  why  it 
has  so  pleased  him.  And  this  is  the  subject 
I propose  to  lead  your  meditations  to  from 
these  words.  May  his  spirit  assist  me,  that 
I may  not  darken  counsel  by  words  without 
knowledge ! 

Let  us  begin  with  inquiring,  What  might 
be  his  principal  ends  in  sending  his  Son  into 
the  world,  that  we  might  have  life  through 
him?  These,  I apprehend,  were  chiefly  two: 

1.  The  redemption  and  complete  salvation 
of  all  who  believe.  All  mankind  are  by  na- 
ture in  the  same  state  of  sin  and  misery. 
But  we  are  told,  that  at  the  great  day  there 
will  be  an  unspeakable  difference  in  the  cir- 
cumstances between  some  and  others.  Many 
will  then  stand  trembling  at  his  left  hand,  to 
whom  the  King  shall  say,  “ Depart.”  But 
those  on  the  right  hand  will  hear  those  joyful 
words,  “Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  in- 
herit the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world.”  If  you  ask,  To 
what  is  this  difference  primarily  owing]  The 
answer  is  provided : “ Jesus  loved  them,  and 
washed  them  from  their  sins  in  his  own 
blood ; he  redeemed  them  out  of  every  na- 
tion, and  people,  and  language ; they  came 
out  of  great  tribulation,  and  washed  their 
robes,  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of 


the  Lamb : therefore  are  they  before  the 
throne.”  It  was  then  for  their  sakes,  who 
should  be  hereafter  found  at  the  ri<rht  nand 
of  God,  that  “ God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made 
of  a woman,  made  under  the  law,  to  redeem 
them  that  were  under  the  law,  that  we  might 
receive  the  adoption  of  sons.” 

2.  But  besides  this,  God  had  another  and 
a still  higher  end  in  the  work  of  redemption, 
namely,  the  manifestation  of  his  own  glory. 
It  was  unspeakable  love  to  us  that  he  provid- 
ed the  means  of  salvation  at  all ; and  we  can- 
not wonder,  much  less  ought  we  to  complain, 
that  in  justice  to  himself  he  appointed  such 
means,  and  such  a way,  as  that  all  the  praise 
and  glory  of  the  contrivance  should  in  the 
end  redound  to  himself  alone.  In  order  to 
this,  it  was  necessary  that  the  following 
things  should  be  manifested  with  the  fullest 
evidence. 

1st,  The  greatness  of  man’s  depravity, 
guilt,  and  misery ; that  it  was  not  a small 
tiling,  but  a case  worthy  the  interposition  of 
almighty  power  and  infinite  grace. 

2dly,  The  utter  insufficiency  of  man  to  re  • 
lieve  him*elf;  that  so  God  might  have  the 
whole  honour  of  his  recovery,  and  we  might 
be  for  ever  debtors  to  his  free  undeserved 
mercy. 

3dly,  That  whereas  there  are,  to  outward 
appearance,  a great  variety  of  characters 
among  mankind,  it  was  necessary  the  dis- 
pensation of  his  grace  should  be  so  conducted 
as  to  show  that  no  case  was  too  hard  for  his 
power,  or  too  low  and  miserable  for  his  com- 
passion and  condescension. 

Upon  these  grounds  we  may  see  something 
of  his  wisdom  in  the  methods  he  has  appoint- 
ed, and  in  the  subjects  of  his  choice  ; why  it 
has  seemed  good  in  his  sight,  to  hide  these 
things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  to  re- 
veal them  unto  babes ; for  such  reasons  as 
these : — 1.  To  stain  the  pride  of  all  human 
glory;  2.  To  exclude  every  pretence  of 
boasting;  3.  That  there  might  be  a ground 
of  hope  provided  for  the  vilest  and  meanest ; 
and,  4.  That  the  salvation  of  believers  might 
be  sure,  and  not  subject  to  miscarry. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  then,  the  Lord  of 
hosts  hath  proposed  it,  “ to  stain  the  pride  of 
all  human  glory,”  Isaiah  xxiii.  9.  How  much 
men  are  disposed  to  admire  their  own  wis- 
dom, learning,  and  fancied  accomplishments, 
is  sufficiently  obvious.  But  now  the  pride 
of  all  this  glory  is  stained,  inasmuch  as  it  is 
proved  by  experience  to  be  utterly  useless  in 
the  most  important  concerns.  One  man  has 
talents  to  rule  a kingdom,  but  is  himself  a 
slave  to  the  vilest  lusts  and  passions.  An- 
other has  courage  to  face  death  in  a field  of 
battle,  yet,  with  regard  to  religion  is  a mere 
coward : overawed  by  the  feeble  breath  of 
the  multitude,  he  is  both  ashamed  and  afraid 
to  practise  what  his  conscience  convinces 
him  is  his  duty.  Another  almost  pretends  to 


ASSERTED  AND  ILLUSTRATED. 


429 


SER.  V. 


count  the  number  of  the  stars,  and  to  call 
them  all  by  their  names ; yet  has  no  more 
thought  of  the  God  that  made  the  heavens 
and  the  earth,  than  the  beasts  that  perish. 
Another  delights  in  books  and  languages 
which  few  can  understand  but  himself;  no- 
thing so  false  or  foolish  but  he  accounts  it 
worth  his  study,  if  it  has  but  the  stamp  of  an- 
tiquity to  recommend  it;  only  the  book  of 
God,  (though  much  more  ancient  than  all  his 
fables,)  because  it  may  be  read  in  plain  En- 
glish, is  thrown  by  as  unworthy  his  notice. 
Another,  who  professes  to  be  scripture-wise, 
perverts  the  scriptures,  and  abuses  his  own 
reason,  to  establish  the  most  absurd  errors,  or 
to  overturn  the  plainest  truths.  Another 
amuses  himself  with  setting  forth  the  praises 
of  virtue  and  morality,  while  his  own  conduct 
furnishes  a standing  proof,  either  of  the  weak- 
ness of  his  scheme,  or  the  insincerity  of  his 
heart.  Time  would  fail  to  recount  all  the 
achievements  of  these  wise  and  prudent  men. 
But  behold  the  pride  of  them  all  stained  ! In 
the  midst  of  all  their  acquisitions  and  inven- 
tions, they  are  strangers  to  God,  to  themselves, 
and  to  peace ; they  are  without  Christ,  and 
without  hope : those  things  which  alone  are 
of  real  importance,  are  hid  from  their  eyes. 
Here  the  desperate  depravity  and  deceitful- 
ness  of  the  heart  are  manifested,  to  the  glory 
of  God ; and  it  is  clearly  seen,  that  if  he  does 
not  interpose  to  save,  men  are  wholly  unable 
to  save  themselves. 

II.  To  exclude  boasting.  “ Where  is  boast- 
ing then  1 It  is  excluded.”  As  the  apostle 
speaks  in  another  place,  “If  Abraham  was 
justified  by  works,  he  hath  whereof  to  glory 
(Rom.  iv.  2:)  so,  if  men  were  saved,  either 
in  whole  or  in  part,  by  their  own  wisdom  and 
prudence,  they  might  in  the  same  degree 
ascribe  the  glory  and  praise  to  themselves. 
They  might  say,  My  own  power  and  wisdom 
gave  me  this;  and  thus  God  would  be  robbed 
of  the  honour  due  to  his  name.  But  now  this 
is  prevented.  The  word  of  the  Lord  is, 
“ Let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his  wisdom, 
neither  letthe  mighty  man  glory  in  his  might ; 
let  not  the  rich  man  glory  in  his  riches ; but 
let  him  that  glorieth  glory  in  this,  that  he 
understandeth  and  knoweth  me,  that  I am  the 
Lord,”  Jeremiah  ix.  23,  24.  For  whatever 
outward  advantages  some  may  seem  to  pos- 
sess, as  to  the  things  of  God,  they  stand  al- 
together upon  a level  with  the  meanest. 
These  things  cannot  be  understood  by  any 
sagacity  on  our  parts,  but  must  be  revealed 
by  the  Father  of  lights.  What  could  be  done 
in  this  way,  you  may  recollect  from  St.  Paul’s 
representation  in  the  first  chapter  of  his  epis- 
tle to  the  Romans.  Many  of  the  Heathens 
were  eminent  for  wisdom  and  abilities,  and 
made  great  proficiency  in  science ; but  with 
regard  to  the  knowledge  of  God,  the  result  of 
all  their  researches  was  error,  superstition, 
and  idolatry : professing  themselves  to  be  wise 


they  became  fools,  and  their  disquisitions  had 
no  other  effect  than  to  leave  them  without  ex- 
cuse. Their  practice  (as  will  always  be  the 
case)  was  correspondent  to  their  principles  ; 
and  in  the  midst  of  a thousand  refinements 
in  theory,  they  were  abandoned  to  the  gross- 
est and  most  detestable  vices.  If  it  be  said, 
These  had  not  the  light  of  revelation,  we  may 
observe  the  same  or  similar  effects  where  the 
gospel  is  known.  With  this  superior  light, 
men  are  still  equally  vain  in  their  imagina- 
tions ; and  though  they  do  not  pay  an  out- 
ward and  formal  worship  to  stocks  and  stones, 
they  are  gross  idolators  ; for  they  serve,  love, 
and  trust  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator. 
When  there  is  a difference,  it  is  owing  to 
grace,  and  grace  is  acknowledged.  Such  will 
readily  say,  “ Not  unto  us,  O Lord,  not  unto 
us,  but  unto  thy  name  be  the  praise,”  Psalm 
cxv.  1.  Thus  all  pretence  to  boasting  is  ef- 
fectually excluded  ; and  he  that  can  glory  up- 
on good  grounds,  must  glory  only  in  the  Lord. 

If  it  should  be  supposed  that  this  repre- 
sentation of  things  tends  to  discourage  a dili- 
gent and  serious  inquiry  after  truth,  I answer, 
When  rightly  understood,  it  will  have  just 
the  contrary  effect.  What  can  be  more  suit- 
ed to  excite  diligence,  than  to  point  out  the 
method  in  which  it  will  assuredly  be  crowned 
with  success!  You  cannot  succeed  without 
the  light  and  assistance  of  the  Holy  Spirit ; but 
if  conscious  of  this,  and  aware  of  your  own 
insufficiency,  you  will  seek  his  direction  and 
guidance  by  humble  prayer,  it  shall  be  af- 
forded you.  If  you  know  not  this,  you  will 
certainly  be  wearied  in  the  end  by  repeated 
disappointments ; but  if  you  depend  upon  his 
teaching  and  co-operation  in  the  use  of  the 
means  he  has  appointed,  your  knowledge 
shall  advance  as  the  growing  light. 

III.  This  method  of  the  divine  procedure 
opens  a door  of  hope  to  the  vilest  and  the 
meanest.  Let.  not  any  be  cast  down  on  ac- 
count of  any  peculiar  incapacity  or  difficulty 
in  their  case.  If  none  but  the  wise  and  the 
learned,  the  rich,  and  those  who  are  esteemed 
well-behaved  and  virtuous,  could  be  saved, 
or  if  these  stood  in  a fairer  way  for  it  than 
others,  the  greatest  part  of  mankind  might 
give  up  hope,  and  sit  down  in  despair  at  once. 
But  the  case  is  exactly  the  reverse.  It  is 
true,  the  persons  I am  speaking  of  are  not  the 
worse  for  these  distinctions,  whenever  they 
are  sensible  how  vain  and  insufficient  they 
are,  and  betake  themselves  as  poor,  helpless, 
miserable,  blind,  and  naked,  to  flee  for  refuge 
to  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ.  But,  alas ! 
their  supposed  qualifications  too  often  harden 
them  to  reject  the  counsel  of  God  against 
themselves.  They  think  themselves  whole, 
and  therefore  see  not  the  necessity  or  value 
of  the  physician.  You  who  are  sensible  you 
have  nothing  of  your  own  to  trust  to,  take 
encouragement ; the  Lord  has  suited  his  gos- 
pel to  your  circumstances. 


430 


TIIE  SOVEREIGNTY 

1.  Are  ye  poor  ? The  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
lias  sanctified  the  state  of  poverty  by  taking 
it  on  himself.  He  had  not  where  to  lay  his 
head.  He  will  not  therefore  despise  you  on 
this  account.  Only  pray  that  you  may  like- 
wise be  poor  in  spirit.  He  looks  through  all 
outward  distinctions,  and  often  passes  by  a 
palace  to  make  his  presence  and  power  known 
in  a mud-waller!  cottage.  Perhaps  he  ap- 
pointed this  stafij  in  mercy  to  your  souls,  that 
you  might  not  be  distracted  with  many  things, 
nor  take  up  with  a portion  in  this  world.  You 
cannot  be  in  a lower  or  more  afflicted  state 
than  Lazarus,  who,  while  he  lay  neglected 
at  the  rich  man’s  gate,  oppressed  with  want, 
and  full  of  sores,  was  a child  of  God,  and  the 
charge  of  angels. 

2.  Are  you  ignorant  1 If  you  cannot  read, 
you  miss  indeed  a considerable  advantage 
which  you  might  derive  from  the  perusal  of 
his  good  word,  and  I would  wish  you  to  attain 
it  if  practicable.  If  not,  give  so  much  more 
diligent  attention  to  the  preaching  of  the  gos- 
pel ; entreat  others  to  read  the  scriptures  to 
you ; but  especially  pray.  The  Lord  can 
teach  you  without  a book,  and  make  up  for 
every  defect.  It  is  very  possible  for  you  to 
attain  to  know  and  love  God,  to  love  your 
neighbour,  to  rejoice  in  Christ,  to  keep  his 
precepts,  to  be  content  with  your  station,  to 
live  by  faith,  and  to  die  with  comfort,  though 
you  cannot  distinguish  one  letter  from  ano- 
ther. The  prophet  Isaiah,  in  the  prospect  of 
gospel-times,  gives  a description  of  the  way 
of  salvation,  which  is  peculiarly  suited  for 
your  comfort.  “ And  a high  way  shall  be 
there,  and  it  shall  be  called  the  way  of  holi- 
ness ; the  way-faring  men,  though  fools,  shall 
not  err  therein,”  Isa.  xxxv.  8. 

3.  Have  you  been  notorious,  open  sinners  ? 
Then  you  are  in  the  less  danger  of  trusting 
to  your  own  righteousness.  And  as  to  the 
rest,  if  you  are  sick  of  sin,  if  you  sincerely 
desire  to  be  freed,  as  well  from  the  power 
as  from  the  guilt  of  it,  you  stand  as  fair  for 
salvation  as  the  most  sober  and  regular  per- 
son upon  the  earth.  St.  Paul,  speaking  to 
those  who  had  been  partakers  of  the  saving 
grace  of  God,  after  he  had  made  an  enumera- 
tion of  the  blackest  sins  which  man  can  be 
guilty  of,  adds,  “And  such  were  some  of  you ; 
but  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but 
ye  are  justified,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Je- 
sus, and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God,”  1 Cor. 
vi.  11. 

IV.  In  this  way  the  salvation  of  believers 
is  sure.  If  it  depended  on  any  thing  in  man, 
it  might  miscarry.  Man’s  boasted  wisdom  is 
soon  changed.  A few  hours  of  a fever,  a 
small  blow  on  the  head,  may  change  a wise 
man  into  a fool.  “ But  it  is  of  grace,  to  the 


OF  DIVINE  GRACE,  &c.  [ser.  v. 

end  that  the  promise  might  be  sure  to  ail  the 
seed,”  Rom.  iv.  16.  Adam  had  a stock  of 
wisdom,  yet  when  he  was  trusted  with  his 
own  happiness,  he  could  not  preserve  it.  But 
the  second  Adam  is  all-sufficient.  Our  de- 
pendence is  upon  him.  To  those  who  are 
babes,  he  is  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifi- 
cation, and  all  that  they  want.  If  this  con- 
cern had  been  left  to  the  wisdom  of  man,  it 
is  most  probable  that  Christ  would  have  lived 
and  died  in  vain,  without  a single  real  disci- 
ple. But  now  the  dispensation  of  grace  is  in 
his  hands,  we  are  sure  that  some  will  believe 
in  him ; and  we  are  likewise  sure,  that  those 
who  truly  do  so  shall  never  be  ashamed  of 
their  hope. 

Now,  from  what  has  been  said, 

1.  Inquire  what  is  the  temper  of  your  minds 
with  regard  to  this  appointment.  Our  Lord 
rejoiced  in  it  as  the  wise  and  holy  will,  the 
good  pleasure  of  his  heavenly  Father.  If 
you  are  displeased  at  it,  is  it  not  a proof  that 
you  have  not  the  mind  which  was  in  Christ 
Jesus  I If  God  wills  one  thing,  and  you  will 
another,  where  must  the  contention  end  ? To 
what  purpose,  or  with  what  pretence  can  you 
use  that  expression  in  the  Lord’s  prayer,  “ Thy 
will  be  done,”  when  in  effect  your  hearts  rise 
with  enmity  against  it  ? This  is  one  topic  from 
whence  we  may  confirm  the  declaration  of 
scripture,  that  man  by  nature  is  not  only  a 
transgressor  of  the  law7,  but  an  enemy,  yea 
enmity  itself,  against  God,  Rom.  viii.  7.  They 
may  pay  some  profession  of  regard  to  the 
pow’erthat  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth, 
the  sea,  and  the  fountains  of  water,  while 
they  worship  they  know  not  what,  according 
to  their  own  vain  and  dark  imaginations. 
But  the  attributes  and  characters  of  God  re- 
vealed in  scripture,  his  holiness,  justice,  truth, 
and  sovereignty,  they  cannot  bear.  They 
are  enemies  to  the  declared  strictness  of  his 
moral  government,  and  enemies  to  the  me- 
thods by  which  he  has  proposed  to  communi- 
cate his  grace.  But  he  is  God,  and  who  can 
control  him  ? Who  can  say  unto  him,  What 
hast  thou  done?  You  must  either  submit  to 
his  golden  sceptre  in  time,  or  his  rod  of  iron 
will  fall  upon  you  for  ever. 

2.  Does  it  not  appear  from  hence,  that  the 
doctrine  of  free  sovereign  grace  is  rather 
an  encouragement  to  awakened  and  broken- 
hearted sinners  than  otherwise  ? If  you  are 
most  unworthy  of  mercy,  and  destitute  of 
every  plea,  should  you  not  be  glad  to  hear, 
that  the  Lord  does  not  expect  worthiness  in 
those  whom  he  saves,  but  that  he  himself  has 
provided  the  only  plea  which  he  will  accept, 
and  a plea  which  cannot  be  overruled,  the 
righteousness  and  mediation  of  his  vrell-be- 
loved  Son  ? 


SER.  VI.] 


OF  THE  PERSON  OF  CHRIST. 


431 


SERMON  VI. 

OF  THE  PERSON  OF  CHRIST. 

All  things  are  delivered  unto  me  of  my  Fa- 
ther : and  no  man  knoweth  the  Son,  but 
the  Father ; neither  knoweth  any  man  the 
Father , save  the  Son , and  he  to  whomso- 
ever the  Son  will  r eveal  him. — Matt.  xi.  27. 

The  two  preceding  verses  have  led  us  to 
consider  grace  (if  I may  so  speak)  in  the  un- 
fathomable depths  of  the  sovereign  will  and 
good  pleasure  of  God.  In  this  verse  our  Lord 
calls  us  to  the  contemplation  of  his  own  glo- 
rious person,  authority,  and  fulness.  In  him 
grace  is  treasured  up  as  in  a repository  for 
communications,  to  be  dispensed  to  needy 
perishing  sinners. 

When  an  ambassador  is  deputed  from  an 
earthly  prince,  to  transact  some  business  of 
great  importance,  he  produces  his  commission 
and  authority,  without  which  all  he  could 
propose  would  be  little  regarded ; and  those 
who  are  most  honoured  and  attended  to  are 
entrusted  with  full  powers,  that  is,  with  a 
liberty  to  act  and  propose  as  occasions  offer, 
without  farther  instructions,  and  with  full  se- 
curity that  the  king  will  ratify  and  confirm 
whatever  they  agree  to,  in  the  same  manner 
as  if  he  had  done  it  in  his  own  person.  Thus 
(if  we  may  presume  to  compare  small  things 
with  great)  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  great 
messenger  of  the  Father’s  love,  before  he  in- 
vites every  weary,  heavy-laden  sinner  to  come 
to  him,  with  a gracious  assurance  that  he  will 
receive,  and  pardon,  and  save  them  all,  he 
condescends  in  this  verse  (as  it  were)  to  open 
his  commission,  to  instruct  us  in  his  own  per- 
sonal dignity,  and  to  communicate  to  us  the 
example  and  unlimited  authority  which  he 
has  received  from  God  to  treat  with  rebels. 
He  knows  what  hearts  of  unbelief  we  have  ; 
how  greatly  an  awakened  conscience  is  ter- 
rified with  guilt ; how  busy  Satan  is  to  urge 
us  to  question  either  his  ability  or  his  willing- 
ness to  save ; and  therefore  he  would  leave 
nothing  undone  that  might  encourage  us  to 
come  to  him,  and  find  rest  for  our  souls.  May 
his  gracious  Spirit  enable  me  to  speak  aright, 
and  so  open  your  hearts  to  understand  what 
may  be  said  upon  this  high  subject,  that  we 
may  have  joy  and  peace  in  believing ! 

The  words  contain  a threefold  declaration: 

1.  Of  his  person  : “No  man  knoweth  the 
Son,  but  the  Father;  neither  knoweth  any 
man  the  Father,  save  the  Son.” 

2.  Of  his  authority : “ All  things  are  de- 
livered to  me  of  my  Father.” 

3.  Of  his  office,  summarily  intimated  in  the 
expression,  “ He  to  whomsover  the  Son  will 
reveal  him.” 

To  treat  these  points  in  their  proper  extent 
would  be  a subject  more  than  equal  to  the  abi- 
lities and  life  of  man.  Much  would  be  left 


unsaid  at  last.  We  cannot  order  our  speech 
by  reason  of  darkness.  This  is  a theme  fit  foi 
an  angel’s  longue : the  most  exalted  angel,  or 
all  the  angels  in  heaven,  would  be  unable  to 
comprehend  it,  for  it  is  infinite,  as  our  text 
declares  : “ None  knows  the  Son,  but  the  Fa- 
ther.” Here  we  are  too  prone  to  think  highly 
of  our  own  knowledge  ; but  when  we  arrive 
in  yonder  world  of  light,  to  see  him  as  he  is, 
we  will  be  ashamed  of  the  highest  conceptions 
we  had  of  him,  and  of  our  most  laboured  at- 
tempts to  express  them,  while  we  were  impri- 
soned in  this  distant  land.  Then  we  shall  say, 
with  the  queen  of  Sheba,  “ Behold,  the  half 
(the  thousandth  part)  was  not  told  us.”  In 
the  mean  time  he  is  pleased  to  accept  our  im- 
perfect stammerings,  to  assist  our  feeble  in- 
quiries, and  does  not  disdain  (as  he  justly 
might)  to  hear  us  take  his  name  into  our  pol- 
luted lips. 

I.  The  inconceivable  dignity  of  his  person 
is  pointed  out  by  two  expressions  : 

1.  “ No  man  (or  rather,  as  it  might  be  ren- 
dered here  and  in  many  other  places,  No 
one*)  knoweth  the  Father,  but  the  Son.” 
No  one — 

1st,  Not  the  wisest  man  in  a state  of  na- 
ture. Various  degrees  of  knowledge  there 
are  amongst  the  sons  of  men.  There  is  a 
great  difference  between  man  and  man ; be- 
tween one  who  knows  not  his  letters,  or  any 
thing  beyond  the  bounds  of  his  own  village, 
and  another  who  has  a large  acquaintance 
with  arts  and  sciences,  history  and  languages, 
and  has  surveyed  the  manners  and  bounda- 
ries of  many  nations.  But  with  regard  to 
the  knowledge  of  Christ,  the  philosopher  and 
the  shepherd,  the  king  and  the  beggar,  are 
just  upon  a level.  Of  two  blind  men,  one 
may  know  many  things  more  than  the  other, 
but  with  regard  to  the  knowledge  of  light 
and  colours,  they  will  be  both  ignorant  alike. 

Some  of  you  perhaps  think  yourselves  wiser 
than  many  of  your  neighbours.  But  I can- 
not too  often  remind  you,  that  if  you  know 
not  Christ,  all  your  wisdom  is  folly,  and  you 
will  find  it  so  at  last. 

2dly,  Neither  do  his  own  people  know  him 
in  the  sense  of  the  text.  Some  knowledge 
of  him  indeed  they  have,  which  is  their  dif- 
ferencing character  from  the  world.  But 
how  small  a portion  ! That  they  know  him  a 
little  is  plain,  because  they  love  him  and 
trust  him ; but  how  little,  is  plain  likewise, 
because  their  love  is  so  faint,  and  their  trust 
so  feeble.  Their  doubts,  fears,  complaints, 
and  backslidings,  are  so  many  mournful 
proofs  that  they  are  but  poorly  acquainted 
with  him,  and  sufficiently  evidence  that  a 
great  part  of  what  we  account  our  know- 
ledge, is  not  real  and  experimental,  but  no- 
tional only.  The  literal  sense  of  what  we 
read  concerning  Jesus  is  attainable  by  study 


* OvJmj, 


432 


OF  THE  PERSON  OF  CHRIST. 


and  human  teaching;  but  the  spiritual  im- 
port can  only  be  received  from  him  who 
teaches  the  heart,  who  increases  it  in  us  by 
the  various  exercises  and  dispensations  we 
pass  through;  and  the  best  have  much 
more  to  learn  than  they  have  already  attain- 
ed. There  are  indeed  happy  moments  when 
he  manifests  himself  to  the  eye  of  faith,  in 
his  glory  and  in  his  love,  as  he  did  to  Peter 
on  the  mount,  and  to  Thomas,  when  a sight 
of  his  wounds  conquered  his  unbelief,  and 
made  him,  in  a transport  of  joy,  cry  out, 
“ My  Lord  and  my  God.”  But  these  visits, 
though  they  have  a powerful  influence  to 
conquer  sin  and  fear,  are  transient ; and 
when  the  cause  is  withdrawn,  there  is  a 
proportionable  abatement  in  the  effect.  The 
knowledge  of  Christ,  in  the  present  life, 
may  be  compared  to  the  knowledge  which  a 
shepherd  has  of  the  sea,  from  having  viewed 
it  from  the  top  of  a cliff  In  a sense,  it  may 
be  said  he  has  seen  the  sea;  but  how  little 
has  he  seen  in  comparison  of  what  lies  be- 
yond the  reach  of  his  eye ! How  inadequate 
is  such  a prospect  to  give  him  an  idea  answer- 
able  to  the  length,  and  breadth,  and  depth  of 
the  immense  ocean ! Nay,  farther, 

3dly,  The  glorified  saints  and  holy  angels 
who  behold  as  much  of  his  glory  as  creatures 
can  bear,  do  not  know  him  as  he  is.  They 
are  filled  with  his  pow7er  and  love.  He  com- 
prehends them,  but  they  cannot  him.  A ves- 
sel cast  into  the  sea,  can  but  receive  accord- 
ing to  its  capacity.  Thus  are  they  filled 
with  his  fulness  till  they  can  hold  no  more ; 
but  his  glory  still  remains  infinite  and  bound- 
less. . The  glorious  seraphim,  therefore,  are 
represented  as  hiding  their  faces  with  their 
wings,  unable  to  bear  the  splendour  of  his 
presence.  For, 

4thly,  “ None  knows  the  Son  but  the  Fa- 
ther.” This  proves  his  divinity.  God  only 
knowrs  himself.  The  Son  is  his  eternal 
Word,  his  eternal  Wisdom,  and  therefore 
beyond  the  highest  reach  of  finite  under- 
standing. 

2 “ None  knows  the  Father  but  the  Son.” 
Here  I might  repeat  the  former  particulars. 
God  has  made  something  known  of  himself 
in  his  works,  much  in  his  word,  more  still  in 
his  grace.  All  men  have  some  faint  percep- 
tions of  his  power  and  presence.  He  mani- 
fests himself  to  his  own  family  below,  still 
more  to  his  family  above ; yet,  after  all,  lie 
is  said  to  dwell  in  light  which  no  man  can 
approach.  None  knows  him  but  the  Son, 
and  he  knows  him  perfectly,  knows  the  in- 
comprehensible God;  therefore  he  is  God 
himself.  As  he  said  to  Philip,  “He  that 
hath  seen  me,  hath  seen  the  Father,”  John 
xvi.  9. 

Now,  if  we  had  no  other  proof  of  this  doc- 
trine but  the  passage  before  us,  since  this  is 
the  declaration  of  the  true  and  faithful  wit- 
ness, it  should  be  accepted  as  decisive.  But 


fSER.  TL 

as  this  is  the  great  mystery  of  godliness,  the 
pillar  and  ground  of  truth,  the  foundation  of 
all  our  hopes,  I shall  take  this  opportunity  to 
confirm  it  more  largely  from  other  concur- 
rent testimonies  of  scripture. 

By  the  Son,  I mean  the  person  who  spake 
these  words:  he  who  was  foretold  by  the 
prophets  : who  in  the  fulness  of  time  came 
into  the  world ; who  with  respect  to  his  di- 
vine nature,  is  called  “the  Word”  (John 
i.  1,)  and,  with  respect  to  his  human  nature, 
was  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary : he  who  was 
known  upon  earth  by  the  name  of  Jesus; 
whose  history  is  related  by  the  evangelists ; 
who  suffered  a shameful  and  accursed  death 
upon  the  cross,  without  the  gates  of  Jerusa- 
lem. Of  him  we  affirm,  “That  he  was,  and 
is,  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life,”  1 John 
v.  20.  In  proof  of  this,  besides  what  has 
been  already  said,  let  the  following  particu- 
lars be  considered. 

1st,  That  the  proper  and  peculiar  titles  of 
God  are  attributed  to  him  frequently  in  the 
scriptures ; so  frequently,  that  it  would  be  a 
very  long  task  to  transcribe  them  all.  Let  a 
few,  the  application  of  which  to  Christ  is  ex- 
press and  indisputable,  suffice  for  a speci- 
men : “ The  Word  was  God”  (John  i.  1 :) 
“ His  name  shall  be  called  Emmanuel,  that 
is,  God  with  us”  (Matt.  i.  23:)  “Jehovah 
our  Righteousness”  (Jer.  xxiii.  6:)  “The 
mighty  God,”  Isa.  ix.  6.  In  the  same  style 
he  speaks  of  himself  by  his  servants  the 
prophets  and  apostles : “ Thy  maker  is  thine 
husband,  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name;  and 
thy  Redeemer  the  Holy  One  of  Israel ; the 
God  of  the  whole  earth  shall  he  be  called” 
(Isa.  liv.  5:)  “Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye 
saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth;  for  I am 
God,  and  there  is  none  else”  (Isa.  xlv.  22 :) 
“ I am  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning 
and  the  end,  the  first  and  the  last,  the  Al- 
mighty,” Rev.  i.  8.  11. 

Amidst  the  variety  of  testimonies  which 
might  be  adduced  to  this  purpose,  there  are 
two  which  are  peculiarly  observable.  The 
Psalmist  expresses  the  majesty,  power,  and 
immutability  of  God,  in  these  sublime  terms: 
“ Of  old  thou  hast  laid  the  foundations  of  the 
earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the  work  of  thine 
hands.  They  shall  perish,  but  thou  shalt 
endure ; yea,  all  of  them  shall  wax  old  like 
a garment : as  a vesture  thou  shalt  change 
them,  and  they  shall  be  changed : but  thou 
art  the  same,  and  thy  years  shall  have  no 
end,”  Psal.  cii.  25 — 27.  Surely  none  can 
deny  but  this  ascription  must  be  incommuni- 
cably  due  to  the  Almighty : yet  the  author 
of  the, epistle  to  the  Hebrews  (Heb.  i.  10 — 
12)  applies  these  words  directly  to  the  Son 
of  God.  The  other  passage  I intend  is  the 
vision  of  Isaiah,  recorded  in  the  sixth  chap- 
ter ; which  not  only  proves  the  point  in  hand, 
but  irrefragably  establishes  the  doctrine  of 
the  Trinity.  For  the  Lord  of  hosts,  whom 


OF  THE  PERSON  OF  CHRIST. 


433 


SEIt.  VI.] 

Isaiah  saw  and  heard,  is  affirmed  by  St.  John 
to  have  been  the  Son,  (John  xii.  41,)  by  St. 
Paul  to  have  been  the  Holy  Ghost,  Acts 
xxviii.  25.  Isaiah,  therefore,  had  a manifest- 
ation of  what  was  afterwards  in  explicit 
words  set  forth  to  the  faith  of  the  church, 
“ that  there  are  three  that  bear  record  in 
heaven,  the  Father,  the  Word,  and  the 
Holy  Ghost ; and  that  these  three  are  one,” 
1 John  v.  7. 

2d!y,  His  works  upon  earth  were  such  as 
necessarily  suppose  a divine  power.  Who 
can  control  the  elements  (Mark  iv.  39,) 
raise  the  dead  (John  xi.  43,)  command  the 
devils  (Luke  iv.  36,)  search  the  heart,  and 
forgive  sin  (Mark  ii.)  but  God  alone  ? If  it 
should  be  said,  that  many  of  his  servants 
and  followers  wrought  miracles  equal  to  his 
by  a delegated  power,  and  therefore  this  ar- 
gument is  not  conclusive ; I answer,  There 
is  an  apparent  difference  in  the  manner  of 
their  working,  which  proves  the  disparity 
between  them  and  him.  They  could  do  no- 
thing but  in  his  name,  and  by  his  power ; 
they  usually  addressed  themselves  to  him 
by  prayer,  and  always  ascribed  the  praise 
and  glory  to  him,  Acts  iii.  12 — 16.  But  his 
power  was  independent,  sovereign,  and  un- 
limited : “ he  spake,  and  it  was  done ; he 
commanded,  and  it  stood  fast.”  At  the 
breath  of  his  rebuke,  the  raging  tempest  and 
the  boisterous  seas  were  instantly  hushed 
into  a perfect  calm.  The  deaf  heard  his 
voice,  and  the  dead  came  forth  from  their 
graves,  at  the  first  call. 

3dly,  His  works  of  office  can  be  performed 
by  none  but  God.  This  might  be  proved 
concerning  each  of  the  offices  he  exercises 
in  consequence  of  his  high  character  as 
Mediator  between  God  and  man ; but  I shall 
speak  only  of  two. 

(1.)  It  is  his  office  to  keep  his  believing 
people  in  this  present  evil  world.  To  act.  the 
part  of  a shepherd  (Matt.  ii.  6.  Troiy.xvn')  to- 
wards them,  to  supply  their  wants  of  every 
kind,  to  direct  their  steps,  to  control  their 
enemies,  to  over-rule  all  things  for  their 
good,  and  to  be  a very  present  help  in  every 
time  of  trouble;  to  execute  this  important 
charge,  it  is  necessary  that  his  knowledge, 
his  compassion,  his  p nver,  and  his  patience, 
must  be  boundless.  His  eye  must  be  every 
moment  upon  all  their  cases  at  once ; his 
ear  must  be  incessantly  open  to  receive  the 
prayers  of  all  people,  nations,  and  languages; 
his  arm  must  be  continually  stretched  out 
to  support  so  many  that  stand,  to  raise  up 
so  many  that  fall,  to  afford  seasonable  and 
suitable  supplies,  at  the  same  instant,  to  the 
distresses  and  temptations  of  millions.  If 
this  is  the  office  he  has  undertaken,  and  if 
he  is  acknowledged  sufficient  and  faithful  in 
the  discharge  of  it,  what  more  undeniable 
evidence  can  be  given,  that  he  has  all  the 
attributes  we  can  conceive  as  essential  and 
3 I 


peculiar  to  the  Godhead?  The  provocations, 
defects,  and  backslidings  of  his  people,  are 
likewise  so  numerous,  so  often  repeated,  and 
attended  with  such  black  aggravations,  that 
if  he  was  not  God,  invincible  in  goodness, 
unchangeable  in  purpose,  if  his  mercy  was 
not,  as  is  his  majesty,  infinite,  he  would  be 
wearied  out,  and  provoked  to  cast  them  off 
for  ever.  The  great  reason  why  he  bore 
with  his  people  of  old,  holds  equally  strong 
with  respect  to  us:  “I  am  the  Lord,  I 
change  not,  therefore  ye  sons  of  Jacob  are 
not  consumed,”  Mai.  iii.  6. 

(2.)  The  like  may  be  said  of  the  high 
office,  character,  and  appointment,  he  has 
received,  to  be  the  Judge  of  the  world,  of 
angels,  and  of  men.  For,  besides  that  it  is 
quite  incredible,  that  God,  who  is  jealous  of 
his  glory,  should  intrust  this  most  illustrious 
prerogative  to  any  mere  creature,  it  seems 
evident,  at  first  sight,  that  no  creature  can 
be  possibly  qualified  for  the  discharge  of  it. 
To  the  great  and  final  Judge  all  hearts  must 
be  open,  all  desires  known,  and  every  se- 
cret disclosed.  He  must  be  intimately  ac- 
quainted with  the  counsels  and  plans  that 
lay  hid  in  God  from  eternity;  he  must  have  a 
sovereign,  comprehensive,  intuitive  view  of 
every  event,  of  every  design,  that  took  place 
within  the  limits  of  time  and  creation ; he 
must  have  unlimited  authority  to  pronounce 
the  decisive  sentence  which  will  fix  the  ever- 
lasting state  of  all  intelligent  beings,  and 
uncontrolled  power  for  the  immediate  and 
irrevocable  execution  of  his  supreme  decree. 
And  what  higher  than  this  can  our  most 
laboured  conceptions  reach  of  the  Almighty 
God ! If  it  be  said,  that  Christ  will  act  by 
a delegated  authority,  we  answer,  It  is  a 
contradiction  to  say,  that  God  can  delegate 
his  omniscience  to  a creature ; and  without 
this  attribute,  any  assignable  measure  of 
wisdom  or  power  would  be  insufficient.  The 
power  and  fulness  of  the  Godhead  must  so 
reside  in  the  Judge,  as  justly  to  denominate 
him  to  be  “ God  over  all  blessed  for  ever,” 
Rom.  ix.  5.  And  this  the  scriptures  assure 
us  is  the  case  in  fact.  The  man,  Christ 
Jesus,  who  is  appointed  the  Judge  of  quick 
and  dead,  is  so  intimately  and  essentially 
united  to,  and  inhabited  by  the  Deity  (Col. 
ii.  9,)  that  he  is  the  proper  object  of  our 
faith,  as  the  true  God,  and  eternal  life. 

4thly,  The  honours  he  claims  from  us  af- 
ford a further  argument  for  his  proper  di- 
vinity. He  challenges  our  supreme  love, 
obedience,  trust,  and  worship:  “ Ye  believe 
in  God,  believe  also  in  me”  (John  xiv.  1 ;) 
“Except  ye  eat  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of 
man,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in 
5'ou”  (John  vi.  23 ;)  “ That  all  men  should 
honour  the  Son  even  as  they  honour  the 
Father”  (John  v.  23 ;)  “ My  sheep  know  my 
voice,  and  I know  them,  and  they  follow 
me;  and  I give  unto  them  eternal  life” 


43*1 


OF  THE  AUTHORITY  OF  CHRIST. 


(John  x.  27,  29;)  “I  am  the  light  of  the 
world”  (John  viii.  12;)  “lam  the  resurrec- 
tion and  the  life.”  (John  xi.  25.)  If  we 
could  suppose  an  apostle  or  an  angel  speaking 
of  himself  in  terms  like  these,  requiring  our 
unlimited  dependence,  and  directing  our  hope 
and  love  to  centre  wholly  on  him,  we  might 
justly  reject  him  as  a blasphemer.  How  the 
apostles  understood  these  expressions,  and  that 
they  did  not  mistake  our  Lord’s  meaning,  is 
evident  from  the  behaviour  of  Thomas.  He 
saluted  his  risen  Saviour,  “ My  Lord  and  my 
God,”  John  xx.  28.  Had  bis  transport  of  joy 
carried  him  too  far  in  giving  this  ascription 
to  Jesus,  he  would,  doubtless,  have  corrected 
him,  and  provided  us  with  a caution  against 
committing  the  like  fault.  For  who  that 
has  tasted  his  love,  and  been  made  partaker 
of  the  power  of  his  resurrection,  can  avoid 
adoring  him  with  the  utmost  homage  their 
words  can  express,  or  their  hearts  conceive  1 

From  hence  we  may  take  occasion  to  ob- 
serve, 

1.  His  wonderful  condescension,  that  for 
us,  and  our  salvation,  he  stooped  so  low, 
drew  a vail  over  his  eternal  glories,  and  ap- 
peared in  the  form  of  a servant,  to  suffer,  and 
to  die : “ Though  he  was  rich,  for  our  sakes 
he  became  poor,  that  we  through  his  poverty 
might  be  made  rich,”  2 Cor.  viii.  9.  This 
was  love  passing  knowledge,  to  pour  out  his 
blood,  his  life,  his  soul,  for  those,  who  by  na- 
ture and  practice,  were  enemies  and  rebels, 
disobedient  to  his  government,  and  averse  to 
his  grace. 

2.  What  a blessed  and  glorious  hope  is  set 
before  awakened  sinners ! Add  to  the  con- 
sideration of  his  person,  what  we  have  yet  to 
offer  from  the  word  of  God  concerning  his 
authority  and  purpose,  and  say  if  these  truths 
do  not  give  sufficient  encouragement  to  be- 
lieve and  be  saved. 

3.  How  awful  must  be  the  case  of  those 

who  shall  be  found  in  final  rebellion  against 
him,  and  die  in  a state  of  impenitence  and 
unbelief!  Alas!  poor  obstinate  sinners,  that 
have  stood  out  so  long,  will  you  still  harden 
your  hearts,  and  stop  your  ears,  and  rush  (like 
the  thoughtless  horse  in  the  battle)  upon  your 
own  destruction]  Do  you  consider  whom 
you  are  opposing  1 “ Did  ever  any  harden 

himself  against  the  Lord  and  prosper!”  Job 
ix.  4.  “ Have  you  an  arm  like  God,  or  can 

)rou  thunder  with  a voice  like  him !”  Job  xl. 
Where  will  you  stand,  or  what  will  you  say, 
“ when  he  shall  arise  to  shake  terribly  the 
earth  1 when  he  shall  be  revealed  in  fire,  to 
take  vengeance  on  all  that  know  not  God, 
and  obey  not  the  gospel !”  2 Thess.  i.  8.  O, 
kiss  the  Son,  throw  down  your  arms,  and  fall 
prostrate  at  his  footstool,  lest  his  anger  awake, 
and  you  perish  without  hope ; for  in  a little 
time  the  great  day  of  his  wrath  will  be  re- 
vealed, which  will  burn  like  “ a furnace,  and 
all  the  proud,  yea,  and  all  that  do  wickedly, 


[ser.  vn. 

shall  be  stubble ; and  the  day  that  cometh 
shall  burn  them  up,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts, 
that  it  shall  leave  them  neither  root  nor 
branch,”  Mai.  iv.  1.  Then  will  it  appear, 
that  those,  and  those  only,  are  blessed,  who 
put  their  trust  in  him : “For  those  who  trust 
in  him  shall  never  be  ashamed : but  when 
Christ  who  is  their  life  shall  appear,  they  also 
shall  appear  with  him  in  glory,”  Col.  iii.  4. 


SERMON  VII. 

OF  THE  AUTHORITY  OF  CHRIST. 

All  things  are  delivered,  unto  me  of  my  Fa- 
ther: and  no  man  knoweth  the  Son,  but 
the  Father ; neither  knoweth  any  man  the 
Father , save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomso- 
ever the  Son  will  reveal  him. — Matt.  xi.  27. 

We  have  spoken  something  of  the  dignity 
and  excellence  of  that  Mighty  One  on  whom 
our  help  is  laid ; and  are  now  to  consider, 

II.  The  covenant-authority  he  is  intrusted 
with  to  manage  the  great  concerns  of  man’s 
salvation.  He  is  not  only  infinitely  sufficient, 
but  divinely  appointed  for  this  great  work. 

Of  this  covenant,  there  is  express  mention 
in  many  parts  of  scripture,  to  some  of  which 
I have  referred  in  the  note.*  It  is  styled  the 
covenant  of  peace,  the  everlasting,  ordered, 
and  sure  covenant.  The  power  and  efficacy 
of  this  covenant  respected  the  future  incar- 
nation of  our  Saviour.  He  asserted  his  right, 
while  in  the  form  of  a servant,  in  the  words 
of  my  text ; and  to  the  same  purpose  are  the 
words  of  John  the  Baptist : “ The  Father 
loveth  the  Son,  and  hath  delivered  all  things 
into  his  hands,”  John  iii.  35.  But  the  full 
manifestation  of  it  was  deferred  to  the  time 
of  his  resurrection,  when,  and  by  which,  he 
was  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power. 
Rom.  i.  4.  Hence,  before  he  left  his  disci- 
ples, he  assured  them,  “ All  power  is  com- 
mitted to  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth,”  Matt, 
xxviii.  18. 

The  sum  is,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
by  virtue  of  his  divine  nature,  and  his  volun- 
tary undertaking  in  our  flesh,  to  fulfil  all 
righteousness  for  us,  both  as  to  obedience  and 
satisfaction,  is  exalted  in  that  nature  wherein 
he  suffered,  to  be  the  sovereign  Judge  and 
Lord  of  all,  Phil.  ii.  6, 11.  He  it  is  now  with 
whom  we  have  to  do.  The  holy  God,  con- 
sidered without  respect  to  the  covenant  of 
grace,  is  a consuming  fire  to  sinners ; and  we 
cannot  stand  before  him.  But  now  he  re- 
veals himself,  he  dwells  as  in  his  temple,  in 
the  man  Christ  Jesus.  He  has  entrusted  all 
his  glory,  and  all  grace  in  his  hands : and  to 

* Psal.  lxxxix.  3,  19;  Prov.  viii.  23;  Isaiah  xlii.  1.  6, 
compared  with  Matt.  xii.  18,  21;  Isaiah  xlix.  8,  9; 
Zech.  vi.  13. 


OF  THE  AUTHORITY  OF  CHRIST. 


£35 


SER.  VII.] 

him  we  are  to  look,  on  him  we  are  to  depend, 
for  all  the  blessings  we  need  for  time  and 
eternity.  For  “all  things  are  delivered  to 
him  of  the  Father.”  All  things  is  a most 
comprehensive  expression.  We  may  distri- 
bute it  as  referring  to  all  persons,  all  bless- 
ings, and  all  dispensations. 

1.  All  persons  are  in  his  hands.  Hence 
his  sublime  title,  “ King  of  Kings,  and  Lord 
of  Lords,”  Rev.  xix.  16.  He  doth  what  he 
will  among  the  armies  of  heaven,  and  the  in- 
habitants of  the  earth,  Dan.  iv.  35.  Thus 
Isaiah  saw  his  glory,  and  spake  of  him,  Isaiah 
vi.  compared  with  John  xii.  41. 

1st,  He  is  Lord  over  his  enemies,  and 
those  that  hate  him.  He  rules  them  with  a 
rod  of  iron,  and  so  disposes  their  designs  as 
to  make  them  (though  against  their  wills) 
the  means  and  instruments  of  promoting  his 
own  purposes  and  glory,  Psalm  ii.  9.  They 
are  his  servants,  even  when  they  rage  most 
against  him.  He  has  a bridle  in  their  mouths 
to  check  and  turn  them  at  his  pleasure. 
He  can  and  often  does  control  them  when 
they  seem  most  sure  of  success,  and  always 
sets  them  bounds,  which  they  cannot  pass. 
So  he  showed  his  power  over  Pharaoh  of 
old ; that  haughty  king’s  resistance  only  gave 
occasion  for  a more  glorious  display  of  the 
greatness  and  goodness  of  the  God  of  Is- 
rael. So  he  humbled  the  pride  of  Herod,  and 
gave  him  up,  in  the  midst  of  his  guards,  a 
prey  to  worms,  Acts  xii.  23.  And  thus,  sooner 
or  later,  all  his  enemies  are  brought  to  lick 
the  dust  before  him. 

2dly,  But  especially  he  is  Lord  of  his  own 
people.  By  nature,  indeed,  they  likewise  are 
his  enemies,  but  he  knows  them  all  by  name. 
They  have  been  in  a peculiar  manner  given 
him  by  the  Father ; (John  xvii.  6 ;)  he  ac- 
counts them  his  portion,  and  he  will  not  lose 
his  own,  John  x.  15,  16.  He  knows  where 
to  find  them,  and  when  to  call  them ; and 
when  his  time  is  come,  one  word  or  look  from 
him  can  disarm  them  in  a moment,  and  bring 
them  humbly  to  his  feet.  How  soon  did  he 
8 top  and  change  the  persecuting  Saul ! Acts 
ix.  When  they  are  thus  made  willing  in  the 
day  of  his  power,  he  takes  them  under  his 
special  care ; and  whoso  toucheth  them, 
toucheth  the  apple  of  his  eye.  He  guides, 
and  guards,  and  feeds,  and  strengthens  them : 
he  keeps  them  night  and  day,  waters  them 
every  moment,  and  will  not  suffer  any  to 
pluck  them  out  of  his  hand,  nor  will  he  him- 
self leave  them  or  forsake  them,  till  he  has 
done  all  that  he  has  spoken  to  them  of.  He 
gives  them  likewise  a new  heart  and  gra- 
cious dispositions,  suited  to  the  honourable 
relation  he  has  brought  them  into ; so  that 
they  delight  in  his  precepts,  and  yield  him  a 
cheerful,  habitual,  and  universal  obedience, 
from  the  constraining  sense  they  have  re- 
ceived of  his  inexpressible  love. 

2.  All  blessings  are  at  his  disposal.  Is 


not  this  a welcome  declaration  to  awakened 
souls'?  What  is  the  blessing  you  want? 
Seek  to  Jesus,  and  you  shall  not  be  disap- 
pointed. Hear  his  gracious  invitation,  “ Ho, 
every  one  that  thirsteth,  come  ye  to  the 
waters,  and  he  that  hath  no  money : come 
ye,  buy  and  eat ; yea,  come,  buy  wine  and 
milk  without  money  and  without  price. — In- 
cline your  ear,  and  come  unto  me : hear,  and 
your  soul  shall  live,”  Is.  lv.  1,  3.  The  pro- 
mised blessings  which  he  holds  in  his  hands, 
are  the  very  same  that  the  awakened  en- 
lightened conscience  must  have,  and  can  have 
only  from  him. 

1st,  Pardon.  How  needful,  how  valuable 
is  the  pardon  of  sin  to  those  who  know  what 
sin  is,  wThat  it  deserves,  and  what  a share 
they  have  in  it ! Such  are  incapable  of  taking 
comfort  till  they  know  how  God  may  be  re- 
conciled, and  sin  forgiven.  These  are  the  per- 
sons to  whom  Jesus  says,  “ Look  unto  me, 
and  be  ye  saved,”  Isa.  xlv.  22.  “ I,  even  I, 

am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for 
mine  own  sake,  and  will  not  remember  thy 
sins,”  Is.  xliii.  25. 

2dly,  Righteousness.  By  believing  in  him 
sinners  are  not  only  pardoned,  but  justified. 
They  are  accepted  in  the  beloved,  and  ac- 
counted righteous  by  his  righteousness  im- 
puted to  them,  which  we  are  assured  is  unto 
all,  and  upon  all  that  believe,  without  any 
difference  or  exception,  Rom.  iii.  22.  Lienee 
his  people  adore  him,  and  glory  in  him  by  his 
name,  The  Lord  cur  Righteousness.  In  him 
they  possess  a righteousness  answerable  to 
the  demands  of  the  holy  law,  have  confidence 
and  liberty  of  access  to  God  at  present, 
though  conscious  of  innumerable  deficiencies 
in  themselves,  and  they  shall  stand  with  bold- 
ness before  him  in  this  righteousness,  and 
not  be  ashamed  in  the  great  day  of  his  ap- 
pearance, when  he  shall  come  to  judge  the 
world. 

3dly,  Strength.  The  forgiveness  of  sin 
that  is  past  would  little  avail,  unless  there 
was  provision  made  for  a continual  supply  of 
needful  grace.  Without  this  we  shall  quickly 
grow  weary,  yield  to  the  force  of  surrounding 
temptations,  till  at  length  the  latter  end 
would  be  worse  than  the  beginning.  But 
now  every  sincere  soul  may  be  freed  from 
this  fear.  The  way  of  prevention  is  pointed 
out,  and  the  success  infallibly  secured  by 
that  one  promise,  though  there  are  many  to 
the  same  effect,  “They  that  wait  on  the 
Lord  shall  renew  their  strength,”  Is.  xl.  31. 

4thly,  Healing.  This  is  often  necessary ; 
for  the  spiritual  warfare  is  not  to  be  main- 
tained long  without  wounds.  Our  great  ene- 
my is  so  subtle,  so  watchful,  so  well  provided 
with  temptations  adapted  to  every  temper 
and  circumstance;  and  we  are  so  wTeak,  un- 
practised, and  so  often  remiss  and  off  our 
guard,  that  he  will  at  times  prevail  to  bring 
us  into  a dark,  barren,  backsliding  state,  des- 


436 


OF  THE  AUTHORITY  OF  CHRIST. 


poiled  of  comfort,  and  oppressed  with  fears. 
But  see  what  a good  and  gracious  shepherd 
we  have:  hear  his  comfortable  words,  “I 
will  seek  that  which  was  lost,  and  bring 
again  that  which  was  driven  away,  and  will 
bind  up  that  which  was  broken,  and  will 
strengthen  that  which  was  sick,”  Ezekiel 
xxxiv.  16. 

5thly,  Support  under  trouble.  He  has  en- 
gaged to  lead  his  people  safely  through  fire 
and  through  water,  Isa.  xliii.  2.  He  gives 
them  leave  to  cast  all  their  care  upon  him, 
with  an  assurance  that  he  eareth  for  them, 
1 Pet.  v.  7.  He  has  said,  All  things  shall 
work  together  for  their  good ; (Rom.  viii.  2S;) 
that  his  grace  shall  be  sufficient  for  them ; 
(2  Cor.  xii.  9 ;)  and  that  in  good  time  he  will 
bruise  Satan  under  their  feet;  (Rom.  xvi.  20;) 
make  them  more  than  conquerors,  (Rom.  viii. 
37,)  and  place  them  out  of  the  reach  of  sin 
and  sorrow  for  ever.  Besides  the  habitual 
peace  which  arises  from  the  believing  consi- 
deration of  these  truths,  he  has  likewise  pe- 
culiar seasons  of  refreshment,  when  he  ma- 
nifests himself  to  the  soul  in  a way  the  world 
knows  not  of,  and  often  makes  the  hour  of 
their  sharpest  trials  the  time  of  their  sweetest 
and  highest  consolations.  “ As  the  sufferings 
of  Christ  abound  in  us,  so  our  consolation 
aboundeth  by  Christ,”  2 Cor.  i.  5. 

3.  All  dispensations  are  under  his  direc- 
tion. He  is  Lord  of  all,  and  does  according 
to  his  pleasure  among  the  armies  of  heaven, 
and  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  He  is  the 
supreme  disposer, 

1st,  Of  these  external  dispensations  which 
are  distinguished  bythenameof  providential. 

(1.)  Those  that  are  welcome  and  prosper- 
ous are  both  his  gifts  and  his  purchase.  To 
his  people  they  come  free;  but  he  paid  dear 
for  them.  And  this  gives  them  their  chief 
value  in  the  judgment  of  those  who  know 
him,  to  receive  them  as  the  pledges  and  fruits 
of  his  redeeming  love.  When  the  blessings 
of  common  providence  are  received  and  en- 
joyed as  the  gifts  of  God  reconciled  in  Christ, 
they  are  then,  and  not  otherwise,  truly  com- 
fortable. It  is  this  thought  enables  the  poor 
believer  often  to  taste  a sweeter  relish  and 
flavour  in  bread  and  water,  than  the  volup- 
tuary ever  knew  in  the  wasteful  profusion 
and  studied  refinements  of  luxury.  To  be 
able  to  look  back  and  see  how  the  hand  of 
our  gracious  Lord  has  led  us  from  our  child- 
hood, chose  and  managed  better  for  us  than 
we  could  have  done,  corrected  our  mistakes, 
and  in  many  things  exceeded  our  desires  ; to 
look  around  and  see  all  our  concerns  in  his 
sure  keeping,  who  delights  in  our  prosperity, 
and  will  suffer  nothing  to  grieve  us,  but  what 
lie  intends  to  employ  as  means  for  our  greater 
advantage  : and  to  look  forward  and  see,  that 
he  has  prepared  still  better  things  for  us  than 
ever  our  eyes  beheld,  or  our  hearts  conceived, 
— how  cheering  are  these  views!  Tiiose 


[SER.  VII. 

who  are  thus  stayed  upon  the  Lord  Jesus,  as 
over-ruling  and  managing  all  our  concerns, 
are  not  terrified  with  every  shaking  leaf: 
“ their  hearts  are  fixed,  trusting  in  the  Lord.” 

(2.)  Afflictive  dispensations  are  likewise 
of  his  sending.  And  the  consideration  of  his 
hand  in  them,  the  good  he  designs  us  by  them, 
the  assurance  we  have  of  being  supported 
under  them,  and  brought  through  them  ; ac- 
cording to  the  degree  in  which  these  things 
are  apprehended  by  faith,  and  accompanied 
with  a humbling  sense  of  their  own  demerits, 
his  people  submit  to  his  appointment  with  pa- 
tience and  thankfulness,  and  say,  after  the 
pattern  which  he  has  left  them,  The  cup 
which  my  Saviour  puts  into  my  hand,  shall  J 
not  drink  it  1 

In  brief,  it  is  he  who  appointed  the  time 
and  place  of  our  birth,  and  all  the  successive 
connections  of  our  lives.  Our  civil  and  our 
religious  liberties  are  both  owing  to  his  fa- 
vour ; and  in  these  he  has  been  peculiarly  fa  • 
vourable  to  us.  “ He  has  not  dealt  so  with 
every  nation,”  Psalm  cxlvii.  20. 

2dly,  Of  the  dispensation  of  grace.  It  ia 
he  who  raises  up  instruments  to  preach  his 
gospel,  appoints  them  their  places,  furnishes 
them  with  that  measure  of  gifts  and  suffi- 
ciency which  he  sees  requisite  and  best.  And 
it  is  he  only  that  makes  their  poor  labours 
successful.  He  sends  his  word  to  some,  and 
brings  others  to  his  word ; and  in  both  cases, 
he  90  makes  use  of  ordinary  means,  that  to  a 
common  eye  he  seems  to  do  nothing,  when  in 
reality  he  does  all.  He  brought  St.  PauHo 
Corinth,  and  maintained  him  there  a consi- 
derable time  against  all  the  efforts  of  his  ene- 
mies, Acts  xviii.  10.  He  over-ruled  the 
thoughtless  rambling  of  Onesimus,  (Phil.  11,) 
and  led  him,  by  a way  which  he  knew  not, 
to  the  means  by  which  he  had  appointed  to 
bring  him  to  the  knowledge  of  himself.  And 
these  instances  are  recorded  for  our  instruc- 
tion, as  specimens  of  what  he  does  in  the 
same  kind  every  day. 

3dly,  Of  the  dispensation  of  death.  Our 
times  are  in  his  hands.  He  claims  it  as  his 
own  prerogative  that  he  keeps  the  keys  of 
death,  and  the  invisible  stale,  Rev.  i.  18. 
None  can  remove  us  sooner,  none  can  detain 
us  a moment  longer,  than  his  call.  In  this 
likewise  he  is  little  observed.  We  charge 
death  to  fevers,  frights,  and  falls ; but  these 
are  only  the  messengers  which  he  sends.  Sin 
has  brought  us  all  under  a sentence  of  death; 
but  the  moment  and  the  manner  of  the  exe- 
cution befall  usaccordingtohisgood  pleasure. 
Till  then,  though  his  providence  leads  us 
through  fire  and  water,  though  we  walk  upon 
the  brink  of  a thousand  apparent,  and  a mil- 
lion of  unseen  dangers,  we  are  in  reality  in 
perfect  safety.  Having  appointed  St.  Paul 
to  stand  before  Ceesar,  though  the  tempest 
greatly  assaulted,  and  seemingly  overpower- 
ed the  ship  he  was  in,  St.  Paul  was  as  safe 


OF  THE  AUTHORITY  OF  CHRIST. 


437 


8ER.  TII.] 

on  the  stormy  sea,  when  all  probable  hope  of 
being’  saved  (Acts  xxvii.  24)  was  taken  away, 
as  Csesar  himself  upon  his  throne.  But  when 
his  time  is  come,  in  vain  are  all  the  assist- 
ance of  friends,  the  skill  of  the  physician,  or 
the  power  of  medicines,  to  procure  the  small- 
est respite. 

4thly,  Of  the  dispensation  of  judgment. 
u The  Father  hath  committed  all  judgment 
to  the  Son (John  v.  22 ;)  and  has  especially 
appointed  a day  wherein  he  will  judge  the 
world  in  righteousness  by  the  man  Christ  Je- 
sus whom  he  hath  ordained,  Acts  xvii.  31. 
Then  his  glory  shall  be  confessed  by  all. 
Every  eye  shall  see  him,  and  they  also  that 
pierced  him.  Awful  will  that  day  be  to  those 
who  hate  him,  when  he  shall  appear  in  flam- 
ing fire,  to  convince  sinners  of  all  their  un- 
godly deeds  which  they  have  committed,  and 
of  all  their  hard  speeches  which  they  have 
spoken  against  him,  Jude  15.  They  must 
give  an  account  of  all.  Account,  did  I say  1 
They  can  give  none,  but  will  be  struck  dumb 
before  him,  and  hear  with  horror  their  dread- 
ful doom,  “ Depart  from  me  ye  cursed,  into 
everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels,”  Matt.  xxv.  41. 

But  it  will  be  a joyful  time  to  his  own 
people.  The  clouds  of  infirmity,  affliction, 
and  reproach,  under  which  they  are  now  ob- 
scured, shall  vanish  away,  and  they  shall 
shine  forth  like  the  sun  in  the  presence  of 
their  Father.  God,  even  their  own  God,  shall 
wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes.  They 
shall  be  glorified,  and  their  enemies  ashamed. 
What  joy  will  fill  their  hearts  when  Jesus 
the  Judge  shall  own  his  relation  to  them  be- 
fore assembled  worlds,  and  shall  say,  “ Come, 
ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom 
prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world.”  Then  sorrow  and  sighing  shall  be 
heard  no  more ; but  songs  of  triumph  and 
shouts  of  everlasting  joy  shall  take  place ; 
and  so  shall  they  be  ever  with  the  Lord. 

How  are  your  hearts  affected  with  this 
subject  1 Do  you  not  expect  that  I should 
close  it  with  a suitable  word  of  application! 

1.  To  those  who  are  as  yet  in  their  sins. 
Will  you  not  tremble  before  this  great  Lord 
God  1 If  these  things  are  not  so,  if  you  can 
prove  that  we  have  followed  cunningly-de- 
vised fables,  go  on  secure.  But  have  I not 
your  consciences  on  my  side ! Do  you  not 
feel  a secret  foreboding  that  these  are  the 
truths  of  God  1 And  dare  you  still  persist  ? 
Do  you  not  see  that  you  are  already  in  his 
hands  ? In  a moment  he  could  break  you  in 
pieces,  yet  he  spares.  He  affords  you  one 
opportunity  more.  To-day,  while  it  is  called 
to-day,  hear  his  voice,  lest  to-morrow  should 
surprise  you  into  eternity,  and  the  weight  of 
un pardoned  sins  should  sink  you  into  the 
lowest  hell.  As  he  has  power  to  punish,  so 
likewise  he  is  mighty  to  save.  Believe  his 
word  and  live.  His  obedience  unto  death  is 


a plea  with  which  you  may  approach  the 
mercy-seat.  He  has  power  to  take  away 
your  heart  of  stone,  to  subdue  your  enmity, 
to  forgive  your  sins ; and  what  he  does  he  does 
freely,  without  money  and  without  price. 
You  need  not,  you  cannot  mend  yourselves 
before  you  come  to  him.  If  you  seek  him,  he 
will  be  found  of  you  ; but  if  you  obstinately 
reject  him,  you  will  perish  under  the  most 
aggravated  guilt,  as  sinners  against  the  light 
and  grace  of  the  gospel. 

2.  You  that  see  your  need  of  a Saviour,  lift 
up  your  heads  and  rejoice.  Is  he  not,  thus 
qualified,  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost ! Why 
should  you  keep  back,  when  he  bids  you 
come  unto  him  that  you  may  find  rest ? Could 
you  invent  any  invitations  more  free,  more 
full  than  those  thaX  are  recorded  in  the  gos- 
pel 1 Can  you  desire  any  stronger  security 
than  the  blood  of  Jesus  and  the  oath  of  him 
that  liveth  for  ever  1 Do  you  wish  to  know 
how  other  great  sinners  have  succeeded  in 
their  application  to  him ? Search  the  scrip- 
tures, and  read  how  he  saved  Mary  Magde- 
lene,  the  dying  thief,  the  cruel  jailor,  the  per- 
secuting Saul,  and  many  of  those  who  were 
actually  concerned  in  nailing  him  to  the  cross. 
Be  patient,  continue  waiting  on  him  in  prayer, 
and  you  shall  find  he  has  not  inclined  you  to 
seek  his  face  in  vain. 

3.  To  believers  I hope  this  is  a comfortable 
theme.  You  see  all  your  concerns  are  in  safe 
hands.  He  to  whom  you  have  committed 
your  souls  is  able  to  keep  them.  Jesus,  who 
has  all  authority  and  power  in  heaven  and  in 
earth,  vouchsafes  to  be  your  Shepherd.  What 
then  can  you  want,  who  are  at  his  providing? 
What  have  you  to  fear,  who  are  under  his 
protection  ? Why  then  do  you  so  often  dis- 
trust, so  often  complain  1 It  is  because  your 
faith  is  weak.  Are  you  tempted  to  think  you 
could  place  yourselves  to  more  advantage 
than  he  has  placed  you,  that  you  could  do  bet- 
ter without  the  afflictions  he  is  pleased  to 
send  you,  that  you  cannot  spare  what  he  takes 
away,  nor  do  well  without  something  which 
he  withholds  ? Reject  all  such  thoughts ; 
they  are  highly  dishonourable  to  your  Saviour, 
and  to  your  profession.  Those  who  know  not 
God  must  reason  thus ; but  you  have  a cove- 
nant-promise, that  all  things  are  working  to- 
gether for  your  good.  “ This  is  not  your 
rest,  it  is  polluted.”  But  you  will  soon  be 
at  home ; and  then,  when,  by  a clearer  light, 
you  look  back  upon  the  way  by  which  the 
Lord  led  you  through  the  wilderness,  you  will 
be  ashamed  (if  shame  is  compatible  with  the 
heavenly  state)  of  your  misapprehensfcsis 
while  in  this  dark  w’orld,  and  will  confess  to 
his  praise,  that  mercy  and  goodness  surround- 
ed you  in  every  step,  and  that  the  Lord  did 
all  things  well.  What  you  will  then  see,  it  is 
now  your  duty  and  your  privilege  to  believe. 
If  you  sincerely  desire  his  guidance  in  all 
things,  labour  to  submit  to  it.  The  path 


439 


THE  GLORY  AND  GRACE  OF  GOD 


which  he  has  marked  out  for  you  is  difficult, 
but  he  has  trod  it  before  you,  and  it  leads  to 
glory.  The  time  is  short.  Yet  a little  while, 
and  you  shall  receive  the  end  of  your  faith, 
even  the  salvation  of  your  souls. 


SERMON  VIII. 

THE  GLORY  AND  GRACE  OF  GOD  REVEALED  IN 
JESUS  CHRIST. 

All  things  are  delivered  unto  me  of  my  Fa- 
ther: and  no  man  knoweth  the  Son,  but 
the  Father : neither  knoweth  any  man  the 
Father,  save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomso- 
ever the  Son  will  reveal  him. — Matt.  xi.  27. 

The  love  we  bear  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  the  confidence  we  place  in  him,  will 
always  be  exactly  proportioned  to  the  appre- 
hensions we  form  of  him.  Therefore,  to 
“grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of 
him,”  (2  Pet.  ii.  18,)  are  spoken  of  as  insepa- 
rably connected.  On  this  account  the  scrip- 
tures are  frequent  and  full  in  describing  him 
to  us,  that  we  may  have  a large  acquaintance 
with  his  all-sufficiency,  and  be  delivered  from 
our  sins  and  fears.  An  awakened  conscience, 
that  sees  the  need  of  a Saviour,  well  knows 
that  the  person  who  can  deservedly  lay  claim 
to  its  trust,  must  have  these  three  properties, 
power,  authority,  and  intention  to  save.  How 
these  eminently  belong  to  Jesus,  we  learn 
from  his  own  words  here.  Power  belongeth 
to  him,  for  he  is  a divine  person,  the  Creator, 
Possessor,  and  Upholder  of  all  things.  Au- 
thority is  his,  for  all  things  are  delivered  to 
nim.  Thus  far  we  have  proceeded,  and  are 
now  to  speak  of  his  intention  or  office,  the 
design  of  his  appearance,  and  for  which  he 
is  authorised.  This  is  intimated  in  the  close 
of  my  text.  We  are  therefore  now  to  speak, 
III.  Of  his  office,  summarily  included  in 
this  one  thing,  To  reveal  the  knowledge  of 
God.  “Neither  knoweth  any  man  the  Fa- 
ther, save  the  Son,  and  he  to  whomsoever 
the  Son  will  reveal  him.” 

The  knowledge  of  God  here  spoken  of,  in- 
tends something  more  than  merely  to  know 
that  there  is  a God.  Some  faint  apprehen- 
sions of  this  all  men  have  by  nature.  This 
great  truth  is  so  clearly  manifested  in  the 
works  of  creation  and  providence,  that  any 
man  would  be  greatly  offended,  if  he  was  sup- 
posed to  be  ignorant  of  it.  But  as  it  is  one 
thing  to  know  that  there  is  a king  over  the 
nation,  and  quite  another  thing  to  know  the 
king,  so  as  to  have  liberty  of  access  to  him, 
and  an  interest  in  his  favour ; so  is  it  in  the 
ease  before  us.  Our  Lord  did  not  come  to 
tell  us  that  there  is  a God,  (the  devils  know 
this,  and  tremble,)  but  to  reveal  to  us  such  a 
knowledge  of  God  as  may  stand  with  our 


[ser.  VIII. 

comfort,  to  teach  us  how  poor,  guilty,  hell- 
deserving sinners  may  draw  near  to  God 
with  hopes  in  his  mercy,  and  call  him  their 
Father  and  their  friend. 

Now,  besides  the  revelation  of  this  know- 
ledge in  the  Old  Testament,  which  may  be 
properly  ascribed  to  Christ,  inasmuch  as  he 
was  the  Lord,  the  guide,  and  teacher  of  his 
church  from  the  beginning,  and  instructed 
Moses  and  the  prophets  in  the  things  con- 
cerning himself, — I say,  besides  this  (which 
was  made  at  sundry  times,  and  in  divers 
manners,  in  a more  dark  and  imperfect  way,) 
our  Lord  Jesus,  through  his  incarnation,  has 
vouchsafed  us  a twofold  revelation  of  that 
knowledge  of  God  in  which  standeth  our 
eternal  life, — 1-  In  his  Person ; and,  2.  By 
his  Spirit. 

I.  Jn  his  Person.  In  this  respect  he  is 
said  to  be  “ the  brightness  of  the  Father’s 
glory,  and  the  express  image  of  his  * sub- 
stance,” Heb.  i.  3.  That  God  is  great,  and 
good,  and  wise,  appears  in  part  from  his 
works ; but  it  is  only  a small  portion  of  these 
attributes  we  can  spell  out  in  this  way ; and 
there  are  other  perfections  in  God,  of  which 
we  can  gain  no  certain  knowledge,  without 
a farther  revelation.  But  would  we  see  a 
glorious  display  of  the  great  God,  let  us  turn 
our  eyes  to  Jesus,  and  behold  him  by  faith  in 
two  principal  views: 

1.  As  hanging  upon  the  cross.  Could  we 
have  seen  this  awful  transaction,  and  been  in 
a right  frame  of  mind,  we  should  naturally 
have  asked  such  questions  as  these : Who  is 
he  1 What  has  he  done  ? Had  we  been  told, 
This  person,  thus  destitute  and  tormented,  is 
the  beloved  Son  of  God,  who  knew  no  sin, 
neither  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth ; we 
must  have  farther  asked,  Why  then  was  he 
scourged,  wounded,  and  nailed  to  the  tree  1 
Why  are  those  barbarous  men  permitted  to 
mock  his  sufferings  ? Why  does  he  not  de- 
liver himself,  and  destroy  his  enemies?  The 
proper  answer  to  these  questions  includes  a 
revelation  of  the  divine  perfections. 

1st,  Wisdom.  We  had  deserved  to  perish, 
but  his  mercy  designed  to  save  us  with  an 
everlasting  salvation.  Yet  this  must  be  in  a 
way  worthy  of  himself  Sin  must  be  punish- 
ed, and  the  honour  of  his  broken  law  vindi- 
cated. How  could  this  be  done,  and  the 
righteousness  of  God  made  to  harmonise  with 
our  peace  ? A wisdom  astonishing  to  angels 
is  manifested  in  devising  this  wonderful 
means.  No  sacrifices  (Heb.  x.  4 — 7)  or  of- 
ferings, no  acts  of  obedience  or  mediation, 
which  creatures  could  supply,  would  have 
been  of  the  least  avail  when  the  in  jured  ma- 
jesty of  God  demanded  a satisfaction.  But 
the  eternal  Word,  united  to  our  nature,  af- 
forded a propitiation  worthy  of  God,  and  suit- 
able for  us.  Jesus  by  his  obedience  unto 


* T>)f  \j7ro<rTX<riu)s. 


REVEALED  IN  JESUS  CHRIST 


439 


SER.  VIII.] 

death,  has  made  an  end  of  sin,  (Dan.  ix.  24,) 
and  brought  in  an  everlasting  righteousness, 
available  for  all  those  who  flee  to  him  as  the 
hope  set  before  them,  for  refuge  from  ap- 
proaching wrath. 

2dly,  Love.  “ God  so  loved  the  world.” — 
If  you  ask,  How  1 judge  from  this  instance ; 
words  cannot  express  it.  He  so  loved  sin- 
ners, enemies,  rebels,  that  for  their  sakes  he 
abandoned  and  delivered  up  his  beloved  Son 
into  the  hands  of  wicked  men,  permitted  him 
to  be  assaulted  by  the  powers  of  darkness ; 
yea,  it  pleased  the  Father  himself  to  bruise 
him,  and  to  make  his  soul  an  offering  for  sin. 
This  is  love  without  parallel,  and  beyond 
conception.  We  can  only  admire  and  say, 
“Behold  what  manner  of  love  the  Father 
hath  bestowed  on  us,”  1 John  iii.  1.  When 
Jesus  Christ,  as  crucified,  is  clearly  appre- 
hended by  faith,  then  we  have  the  most  con- 
vincing, the  most  affecting  proof,  that  God  is 
love. 

3dly,  Justice.  Wonder  not  that  God’s  own 
Son  is  thus  treated.  He  stands  in  the  place 
of  sinners,  and  therefore  he  is  not,  he  cannot 
be,  spared.  The  words  his  enemies  use 
(Matt,  xxvii.  42)  to  his  reproach,  will,  in  the 
lips  of  his  redeemed  people,  be  an  expression 
of  his  highest  praise.  Having  undertaken  to 
save  others,  and  being  determined  not  to  give 
up  their  cause,  it  is,  in  that  respect,  abso- 
lutely impossible  for  him  to  save  himself. 

Again,  this  justice,  which  was  once  as  a 
flaming  sword,  to  forbid  and  exclude  every 
hope  of  salvation  to  fallen  man,  is  now  en- 
gaged in  our  behalf.  For  since  it  has  pleased 
the  Father  to  charge  sin  upon  his  own  Son, 
his  wrath  will  turn  away  from  all  who  be- 
lieve. The  immense  debt  is  already  paid,  and 
justice  will  not  exact  it  twice.  From  hence- 
forth God  is  not  only  gracious  and  merciful, 
but  (1  John  i.  9)  just  and  faithful,  in  the 
forgiveness  of  sin,  and  declares  his  own 
righteousness  in  justifying  the  believer  in 
Jesus,  Rom.  iii.  26. 

2.  The  knowledge  of  God  is  made  known 
in  the  person  of  Christ,  if  we  contemplate 
him  as  reigning  in  glory.  He  is  no  longer 
a man  of  sorrows,  oppressed  and  despised. 
He  is  now  upon  the  throne.  In  him  the  ful- 
ness of  the  Godhead  dwells,  and  from  him, 
as  light  from  the  sun,  the  unsearchable  riches 
of  his  goodness  are  communicated  to  indi- 
gent, unworthy  sinners.  All  the  divine  per- 
fections shine  gloriously  in  him,  as  the  God- 
man,  the  Mediator,  who  is  exalted  above  all 
conception  and  praise,  and  doth  according  to 
his  will  in  the  armies  of  heaven,  and  among 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth. 

1st,  Grace.  The  great  God  is  pleased  to 
manifest  himself  in  Christ  as  the  God  of 
grace.  This  grace  is  manifold,  pardoning, 
converting,  restoring,  persevering  grace,  be- 
stowed upon  the  miserable  and  worthless. 
Grace  finds  the  sinner  in  a hopeless,  helpless 


state,  sitting  in  darkness,  and  in  the  shadow 
of  death.  Grace  pardons  the  guilt,  cleanses 
the  pollution,  and  subdues  the  power  of  sin. 
Grace  sustains  the  bruised  reed,  binds  up  the 
broken  heart,  and  cherishes  the  smoking  flax 
into  a flame.  Grace  restores  the  soul  from 
wandering,  revives  it  when  fainting,  heals  it 
when  wounded,  upholds  it  when  ready  to  fall, 
teaches  it  to  fight,  goes  before  it  in  the  bat- 
tle, and  at  last  makes  it  more  than  conqueror 
over  all  opposition,  and  then  bestows  a crown 
of  everlasting  life.  But  all  this  gract  is  es- 
tablished and  displayed  by  covenant  in  the 
Man  Christ  Jesus,  and  without  respect  to 
him  as  living,  dying,  rising,  reigning,  and 
interceding  in  the  behalf  of  sinners,  would 
never  have  been  known. 

2dly,  Power.  The  whole  creation  proclaims 
that  power  belongs  unto  God.  But  in  nothing 
will  his  power  be  more  illustriously  displayed, 
than  in  the  wonders  of  redeeming  love ! 
What  power  is  necessary  to  raise  those  who 
are  spiritually  dead  in  sin,  to  soften  the  heart 
of  stone,  to  bring  light  out  of  darkness,  and 
order  out  of  confusion!  Wherever  his  gospel 
is  faithfully  preached,  it  is  always  confirmed 
by  this  accompanying  power.  How  quickly, 
how  easily,  did  he  change  Saul  from  a perse- 
cutor to  an  apostle ! Again,  how  is  his  powrer 
illustrated  by  the  care  he  takes  of  all  who  be- 
lieve in  his  name,  affording  to  every  one  of 
them  seasonable,  suitable,  and  sufficient  sup- 
plies in  every  time  of  need  1 So  that  his  weak, 
helpless,  and  opposed  people,  are  supported, 
strengthened,  and  enabled  to  hold  on,  and  to 
hold  out,  against  all  the  united  efforts  of  the 
world,  sin,  and  Satan. 

3dly,  Bounty.  How  glorious  is  Jesus  in 
his  kingdom ! Exalted  beyond  all  conception 
and  praise ; wearing  upon  his  vesture,  and 
upon  his  thigh,  the  name  that  is  above  every 
name ; and  having  all  thrones,  principalities, 
and  powers,  obedient  to  his  will,  and  adoring 
at  his  feet.  But  all  his  riches  and  honours 
(so  far  as  their  capacities  can  receive)  he 
condescends  to  share  with  his  people.  He 
owns  their  worthless  names,  he  permits  them 
to  claim  the  most  tender  relation  to  him,  and 
to  call  him  their  brother,  their  friend,  and 
their  husband.  Yea,  he  says  concerning  them, 
“ To  him  that  overcometh  will  I giant  to  sit 
with  me  in  my  throne,  even  as  I also  over- 
came, and  am  set  down  with  my  Father  in 
his  throne,”  Rev.  iii.  21.  To  him,  therefore, 
we  must  look  for  the  most  astonishing  and 
affecting  display  of  the  divine  bounty. 

Thus  the  knowledge  of  God  is  revealed  in 
the  person  of  Christ  by  the  word.  But  great 
and  important  as  these  truths  are,  wre  cannot 
receive  and  understand  them  merely  by  read- 
ing. The  Lord  Jesus,  therefore,  has  favoured 
his  church  with  a farther  revelation.  That  is, 

II.  By  his  Spirit.  This  was  one  principal 
fruit  of  his  ascension  and  intercession,  Acts 
ii.  33.  With  the  promise  of  his  spirit  he 


440 


THE  GLORY  AND  GRACE  OF  GOD,  &c. 


cheered  his  disciples  when  sorrowing-  under 
the  apprehension  of  his  departure:  “It  is  ex- 
pedient for  you  that  I go  away : for  if  I go 
not  away,  the  Comforter  will  not  come  to 
you ! but  if  I depart,  I will  send  him  unto 
you,”  John  xvi.  7.  The  offices  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  are  various  as  our  wants ; he  teaches, 
comforts,  sanctifies,  and  seals  the  children 
of  God  ; but  he  effects  all  these  benefits  by 
revealing  the  knowledge  of  God  as  manifest- 
ed in  Christ,  reconciling  the  world  unto 
himself. 

1.  In  convincing  sinners  of  their  lost 
estate,  which  is  absolutely  necessary  to  their 
deliverance.  None  will  prize  the  Saviour 
but  those  who  feel  their  need  of  him.  Two 
things  are  necessary  to  convince  a man  of 
his  lost  condition  by  nature  and  practice  as 
a sinner, — the  spirituality  of  the  law,  and 
the  sufferings  of  Christ:  the  one  shows  the 
universality  of  sin,  the  other  its  demerit. 
But  these  can  only  be  truly  discerned  by  the 
light  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  While  St. 
Paul  (who  was  never  absolutely  without  the 
law)  was  ignorant  of  the  law’s  spirituality, 
“I  was  (says  he)  alive,”  Rom.  vii.  9.  I had 
so  little  knowledge,  both  of  the  law  and  of 
myself,  that  I trusted  to  it  for  righteousness, 
and  vainly  thought  that  1 yielded  it  obe- 
dience, and  grounded  my  hopes  of  salvation 
thereon.  “ But  when  the  commandment 
came,”  when  the  Spirit  explained  and  en- 
forced it  in  its  full  extent,  as  reaching  to  the 
very  thoughts  of  the  heart,  and  requiring 
an  obedience  absolutely  perfect,  “ then  sin 
revived,  and  I died.”  All  my  hopes  vanish- 
ed ; I saw  every  principle,  affection,  and  ac- 
tion, polluted,  and  the  corruptions  which  I 
supposed  were  tamed,  broke  forth  with  re- 
doubled vigour.  Again,  though  sin  is  de- 
clared to  be  displeasing  to  God,  and  destruc- 
tive to  man,  by  all  the  evils  and  miseries 
with  which  the  world  is  filled,  and  all  the 
punishments  which  the  righteous  Judge  of 
all  the  earth  has  inflicted  on  the  account  of 
it;  yet  the  just  demerit  of  sin  is  not  to  be 
learned  by  the  destruction  of  Sodom,  or 
of  the  old  world,  but  only  from  the  sufferings 
of  Christ,  who  has  borne  the  curse  for  sin- 
ners. Nor  is  it  sufficient  to  know  histori- 
cally that  he  did  suffer,  and  how  he  suffered. 
Where  these  things  are  not  known  by  the 
light  of  the  Spirit,  they  are  no  more  regard- 
ed than  a worn-out  tale.  But  where  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  reveals  by  the  word,  the  na- 
ture, cause,  and  end  of  his  sufferings,  then 
sin  appears  exceedingly  sinful.  Nothing  less 
than  this  can  make  the  soul  abhor  it. 

2.  The  Spirit  produces  faith  in  Jesus,  as 
having  once  suffered,  and  now  mighty  to 
save.  His  blood,  his  righteousness,  his  in- 
tercession, compassion,  and  power,  are  pre- 
sented to  the  soul  in  a light  which  bears 
down  the  objections  of  guilt,  unbelief,  and 
Satan.  Then  the  wounds  made  by  sin  are 


[ser.  VIII. 

healed.  Then  old  things  pass  away,  all 
things  become  new,  all  difficulties  are  solv- 
ed, and  God  is  revealed  experimentally  to 
the  soul,  as  holy,  righteous,  and  true,  in  jus- 
tifying the  believer  in  Jesus. 

3.  Those  whom  the  Spirit  thus  comforts, 
he  also  seals,  Ephes.  i.  13.  He  impresses 
the  image  of  Christ  upon  them.  Such  is  the 
power  of  the  views  he  gives  them  of  his 
glory,  that  they  are  transformed  into  the 
resemblance  of  their  Lord,  2 Cor.  iii.  18. 
Though  the  first  traces  of  this  delineation 
are  faint  and  indistinct  in  the  sight  of  men, 
yet  they  are  perfect  in  kind.  The  Spirit 
impresses  feature  for  feature,  and  grace  for 
grace ; (John  i.  16 ;)  and  in  the  chief  thing 
he  designs  and  effects  by  all  his  subsequent 
dispensations  while  the  soul  remains  in  the 
body,  is  to  heighten  and  finish  the  heavenly 
signature.  Together  with  this,  and  in  the 
same  degree,  he  seals  and  ratifies  to  their 
consciences  an  interest  in  all  the  promises 
of  the  gospel;  and  by  infusing  into  their 
hearts  the  temper  of  children,  he  gives 
them  confidence  at  the  throne  of  grace,  en- 
ables them  to  cry,  Abba,  Father,  and  bears 
witness  with  their  spirits  that  they  are  born 
of  God.  Thus  God  is  revealed  not  only  to 
them,  but  in  them ; and  they  are  made  con 
formable  to  him  in  whom  they  believe,  in 
all  righteousness,  goodness,  and  truth. 

Let  me  once  more  address, 

1.  Poor  mourning  souls.  Are  you  seek- 
ing to  Jesus  1 you  have  good  reason;  you 
see  he  is  a mighty  Saviour.  He  is  furnished 
with  full  authority,  and  came  expressly  on 
purpose  to  save  such  as  you.  He  assures  you 
that  none  shall  sincerely  seek  him  in  vain. 
Believe  his  word,  and  dismiss  your  fears. 
He  has  begun  his  good  work,  by  revealing 
to  you  your  misery,  danger,  and  helplessness, 
by  leading  your  thoughts  to  himself.  He 
will  not  stop  here  ; he  will,  in  due  time,  ac- 
complish his  whole  commission,  by  revealing 
to  you  that  knowledge  of  God  in  which 
standeth  your  present  peace  and  eternal  life. 

2.  Careless  sinners.  How  greatly  will 
your  guilt  be  aggravated  if  you  receive  this 
grace  of  God,  the  gospel  of  salvation,  in 
vain?  Do  not  your  hearts  tremble  when 
you  think  of  meeting  the  Lord  Jesus  in 
glory?  Have  you  an  answer  ready,  when 
he  shall  ask  you  why  you  refused  his  in- 
struction, and  cast  his  wTords  behind  you  ? 
The  light  of  truth  has  visited  you : how  long 
will  you  resist  it?  how  long  will  Satan 
blind  your  eyes?  To  those  who  accept  not 
his  revelation  of  grace,  he  will  be  ere  long 
revealed  in  flaming  fire.  O humble  your- 
selves before  him,  while  the  hope  of  mercy 
is  yet  afforded ; and  pray  for  the  Spirit  we 
have  been  speaking  of,  that  you  may  be  re- 
covered out  of  the  snare  of  the  devil,  and 
made  partakers  of  the  knowledge  and  image 
of  God. 


LABOURING  AND  HEAVY-LADEN.  &c. 


441 


SER.  IX.] 


3.  Believers.  This  subject  is  the  food  of 
your  souls.  You  remember  when  you  had 
dark,  hard,  and  uncomfortable  thoughts  of 
God ; but  you  have  seen  his  glory  in  the 
per  =on  of  Christ,  you  have  received  not  the 
spirit  of  the  world,  but  the  Spirit  of  God, 
(1  Cor.  ii.  12,)  that  you  may  know  the  things 
that  are  freely  given  you  of  God.  You  were 
once  darkness,  but  now  you  are  light  in  the 
Lord,  Eph.  v.  8.  Walk  then  as  children  of 
the  light ; remember  your  calling,  your  pri- 
vileges, your  obligations,  your  engagements. 
Let  these  all  animate  you  to  press  forward, 
to  endure  the  cross,  to  despise  the  shame. 
Let  it  not  grieve  you  to  suffer  with  Christ 
here,  for  hereafter  you  shall  reign  with  him. 
The  hour  is  swiftly  approaching,  when  you 
shall  be  out  of  the  reach  of  changes  and  sor- 
row for  ever.  Then  “ thy  sun  shall  no  more 
go  down;  neither  shall  thy  moon  withdraw 
itself;  for  the  Lord  shall  be  thine  everlast- 
ing light,  and  the  days  of  thy  mourning  shall 
be  ended,”  Isaiah  lx.  20. 


SERMON  IX. 

LABOURING  AND  HEAVY-LADEN  SINNERS  DE- 
SCRIBED. 

Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour,  and  are 
heavy  laden,  and  I will  give  you  rest. — 
Matt.  xi.  28. 

We  read  that  when  David  was  withdrawn 
into  the  wilderness  from  the  rage  of  Saul, 
every  one  that  was  in  distress,  or  in  debt, 
or  discontented,  gathered  themselves  unto 
him,  and  he  became  their  captain,  1 Sam. 
xxii.  2.  This  would  be  reckoned  but  small 
honour  in  the  judgment  of  Saul  and  his 
court,  to  be  the  head  of  a company  of  fugi- 
tives. Those  who  judge  by  outward  ap- 
pearances, and  are  governed  by  the  maxims 
of  worldly  ^wisdom,  cannot  have  much  more 
honourable  thoughts  of  the  present  state  of 
Christ’s  mystical  kingdom  and  subjects  upon 
earth.  The  case  of  David  was  looked  upon  as 
desperate  by  those,  who,  like  Nabal,  (1  Sam. 
xxv.  10,)  lived  at  their  ease.  They  did  not 
know,  or  would  not  believe,  the  promise  of 
God,  that  he  should  be  king  over  Israel ; and 
therefore  they  preferred  the  favour  of  Saul, 
whom  God  had  rejected.  In  like  manner, 
though  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  a divine 
person,  invested  with  all  authority,  grace, 
and  blessings,  and  declared  the  purpose  of 
God  concerning  himself,  and  all  who  should 
obey  his  voice,  that  he  would  be  their  King, 
and  they  should  be  his.  happy  people ; yet 
the  most  that  heard  him  saw  no  excellence 
in  him,  or  need  of  him ; their  portion  and 
their  hearts  were  in  this  world,  therefore 
they  rejected  him,  and  treated  him  as  a blas- 


phemer and  a madman.  A few,  however, 
there  were  who  felt  their  misery,  and  de- 
sired to  venture  upon  his  word.  To  these 
he  gave  the  freest  invitation.  Those  who 
accepted  it,  found  his  promise  made  good, 
and  rejoiced  in  his  light.  Thus  it  is  still : 
he  is  no  longer  upon  earth  to  call  us  ; but  he 
has  left  these  gracious  words  for  an  encour- 
agement to  all  who  need  a Saviour.  The 
greatest  part  of  mankind,  even  in  Christian 
countries,  are  too  happy,  or  too  busy  to 
regard  him.  They  think  they  deserve 
some  commendation,  if  they  do  not  openly 
mock  his  messengers,  disdain  his  message, 
and  offer  abuse  to  all  who  would  press  them 
to-day,  while  it  is  called  to-day,  to  hear  his 
voice.  Even  this  treatment  his  servants 
must  expect  from  many.  But  there  are  a 
few,  like  David’s  men,  distressed  in  con- 
science, deeply  in  debt  to  the  law  of  God, 
and  discontented  with  the  bondage  of  sin, 
who  see  and  believe  that  He,  and  He  oniy, 
is  able  to  save  them.  To  these  labouring 
and  heavy  laden  souls,  he  still  says,  “ Come 
unto  me,  and  I will  give  you  rest.”  May  his 
gracious  Spirit  put  life  and  power  into  his 
own  words,  and  into  what  he  shall  enable  me 
to  speak  from  them,  that  they  may  at  this 
time  receive  a blessing  and  peace  from  his 
hands ! 

The  text  readily  points  out  three  inquiries: 

1.  Who  are  the  persons  here  myited! 

2.  What  is  it  to  come  to  Christ  1 

3.  What  is  implied  in  the  promised  rest! 

I.  The  persons  are  those  who  labour  (the 

Greek  expresses  toil  with  weariness*)  and 
are  heavy-laden.  This  must,  however,  be 
limited  to  spiritual  concerns,  otherwise  it 
will  take  in  all  mankind,  even  the  most 
! hardened  and  obstinate  opposers  of  Christ 
| and  the  gospel.  For  let  your  conscience 
; speak,  you  that  account  the  yoke  of  Christ  a 
I heavy  burden,  and  judge  his  people  to  be 
| miserable  and  melancholy,  are  not  you 
! wearied  and  burdened  in  your  own  way  ! 

I Surely  you  are  often  tired  of  your  drudgery. 
Though  you  are  so  wedded  and  sold  to  your 
hard  master,  that  you  cannot  break  loose; 
though  you  are  so  mad  as  to  be  fond  of  your 
chains;  yet  you  know,  and  I know  (for  I re- 
member the  gall  and  wormwood  of  that 
state,)  that  you  do  not  find  all  that  pleasure 
in  your  wickedness  which  you  pretend  to. 
So  much  as  you  affect  to  despise  hypocrisy, 
you  are  great  hypocrites  yourselves.  You 
often  laugh  when  you  are  not  pleased  ; you 
roar  out  your  boisterous  mirth  sometimes, 
when  you  are  almost  ready  to  roar  with  an- 
guish and  disquiet  of  spkit.  You  court  the 
friendship  of  those  whom  in  your  heart  you 
despise;  and  though  you  would  be  thought  to 
pay  no  regard  at  all  to  the  word  of  God, 


* Compare  Luke  v.  5,  John  iv.  6,  where  the  ctigir.a.1 
word  is  the  same. 


442 


LABOURING  AND  HEAVY-LADEN 


there  are  seasons  when  (like  him  you  serve) 
you  believe  and  tremble.  And  farther,  what 
visible  burdens  do  you  bring  upon  your- 
selves ? “ The  way  of  transgressors  is  hard,” 
Prov.  xiii.  15.  Your  follies  multiply  your 
troubles  every  day.  Confusion  and  uneasi- 
ness in  your  families,  waste  of  substance,  loss 
of  health  and  reputation,  discord,  strife,  sor- 
row, and  shame ; these  are  the  bitter  fruits 
of  your  evil  ways,  which  prey  on  your  present 
hours,  and  make  your  future  prospects  darker 
every  day.  Surely  you  are  weary  and  heavy 
laden  beyond  expression. 

But  this  is  not  the  case  with  others.  You 
avoid  gross  vices,  you  have  perhaps  a form  of 
godliness.  The  worst,  you  think,  that  can 
be  said  of  you  is,  that  you  employ  all  your 
thoughts,  and  every  means  that  will  not  bring 
you  under  the  lash  of  the  law,  to  heap  up 
money,  to  join  house  to  house,  and  field  to 
field;  or  you  spend  your  days  in  a thought- 
less indolence,  walk  in  the  way  of  your  own 
hearts,  and  look  no  farther : and  here  you 
will  say  you  find  pleasure,  and  insist  on  it, 
that  you  are  neither  weary  nor  heavy  laden. 
I might  enlarge  on  your  many  disappoint- 
ments, the  vain  fears  which  are  inseparable 
from  those  who  live  without  God  in  the  world, 
and  the  trouble  we  find  from  disorderly,  rest- 
less, and  unsatisfied  passions.  But,  to  wave 
these  things,  I say  briefly,  that  if  you  are  not 
labouring  and  heavy  laden,  then  it  is  plain 
that  you  are  not  the  persons  whom  Christ  here 
invites  to  partake  of  his  rest.  And  though 
you  can  rest  without  him  now,  think,  O think, 
what  rest  you  will  find  without  him  hereaf- 
ter ? If  you  now  say,  Depart,  he  will  then 
say,  Depart.  And  who  will  smile  upon  you 
when  he  frowns'?  To  whom  will  you  then 
flee  for  help  1 or  where  will  you  leave  your 
glory  1 O that  it  would  please  him  to  touch 
your  hearts,  that,  as  weary  and  heavy-laden 
sinners,  you  might  fall  humbly  at  his  feet, 
before  his  wrath  burn  like  fire,  and  there  be 
none  to  quench  it ! 

But  to  proceed : let  us, 

1.  Explain  the  terms,  what  it  is  to  labour 
and  be  heavy  laden. 

2.  Show  who  are  the  persons  that  answer 
this  description. 

First,  the  persons  are  said  to  be, 

1.  Labouring,  toiling,  weary.  This  is  not 
hard  to  be  understood.  Weariness  proceeds 
either  from  labour  or  from  weakness;  and 
when  these  are  united,  when  a person  has 
much  to  do,  or  to  bear,  and  but  little  strength, 
he  will  soon  be  weary.  The  case  of  some, 
however,  is,  that  when  they  are  tired,  they 
can  lay  down  their  burden,  or  leave  off  their 
work.  But  these  are  not  only  labouring, 
fainting,  weary,  but, 

2.  Heavy  laden,  likewise.  As  if  a man  had 
a burden  which  he  was  unable  to  bear  a sin- 
gle minute,  so  fastened  upon  him,  that  he 
could  not  by  any  means  be  freed  from  it; 


[SER.  IX. 

but  it  must  always  press  him  down,  night 
and  day,  abroad  or  at  home,  sleeping  (if  sleep 
in  such  a circumstance  was  possible)  and 
waking.  How  would  the  poor  creature  be 
wearied ! How  could  you  comfort  or  give 
him  ease,  unless  you  could  rid  him  of  his 
burden  1 How  desirable  would  the  prospect 
of  liberty  be  to  such  a one ! and  how  great 
his  obligations  and  acknowledgments  to  his 
deliverer ! 

Secondly,  This  representation  is  an  emblem 
of  the  distresses,  and  burdens  of  those  who 
seek  to  Jesus,  that  they  may  have  rest  in 
their  souls  ; nor  can  any  truly  seek  him  till 
they  feel  themselves  in  such  a state.  They 
may  be  generally  comprised  under  three 
classes : 

1.  Awakened  sinners.  None  but  those 
who  have  felt  it  can  conceive  how  sinners  la- 
bour, toil,  and  faint,  under  their  first  convic- 
tions. They  are  burdened, 

1st,  With  the  guilt  of  sin.  This  is  a heavy 
load.  When  Jesus  bore  it,  it  made  him  sweat 
great  drops  of  blood.  It  is  true,  he  bore  the 
weight  of  all  his  people’s  sins ; but  the  weight 
of  one  sin  is  sufficient  to  press  us  down,  if 
God  permits  it  to  lie  heavy  upon  us.  I sup- 
pose the  best  of  us  can  remember  some  ac- 
tion, some  incident  or  other,  in  our  past  lives, 
which  we  would  wish  to  forget  if  we  could. 
Now,  how  would  you  be  distressed  to  have  a 
person  sounding  in  your  ears,  from  morning 
till  night,  and  every  day  of  your  lives,  that 
worst  thing  that  ever  you  did  ? Would  it  not 
weary  you?  This  is  a faint  image  of  the 
convinced  sinner’s  state.  When  conscience 
is  truly  awakened,  it  acts  this  officious  and 
troublesome  part ; but  its  remonstrances  are 
not  confined  to  one  sin,  it  renews  the  remem- 
brance and  the  aggravations  of  multitudes. 
Nor  is  this  the  voice  of  a man,  but  indeed  of 
God,  who  speaks  in  and  by  the  conscience. 
The  poor  sinner  hears  and  trembles : then 
the  complaint  of  Job  is  understood  : “ Thou 
writest  bitter  things  against  me,  and  makest 
me  to  possess  the  iniquities  of  my  youth,” 
Job  xiii.  26.  Do  you  wonder  that  such  a one 
can  no  longer  take  pleasure  in  worldly  things? 
It  is  impossible,  unless  you  could  silence  this 
importunate  voice,  that  they  can  bear  them- 
selves at  all.  Nay,  often  it  is  so  strong  and 
urgent,  gives  them  such  a lively  sense  of 
what  sin  is,  and  what  it  deserves  from  a righ- 
teous God,  that  they  are  almost  afraid  or 
ashamed  to  see  any  person  that  knows  them. 
They  are  ready  to  think,  that  people  can  read 
in  their  faces  what  passes  in  their  hearts,  and 
almost  expect  that  the  ground  should  open 
under  their  feet.  O how  wearisome  is  it  to 
be  continually  bowed  down  with  such  a bur- 
den as  this? 

2dly,  With  the  power  of  sin.  Perhaps  they 
were  once  in  some  measure  at  ease  in  this 
respect;  they  saw  others  whom  they  suppos 
ed  to  be  worse ; and  therefore  trusted  in  them 


SINNERS  DESCRIBED. 


443 


SER.  IX.] 

selves  that  they  were  righteous.  But  con- 
victions rouse  and  inflame  our  sinful  natures. 
St.  Paul  exemplifies  this  by  his  own  case  be- 
fore conversion : “ I was  alive  without  the 
law  once,  but  when  the  commandment  came, 
sin  revived,  and  I died,”  Rom.  vii.  9.  He 
never  was  strictly  without  the  law,  for  he  ex- 
pected salvation  by  obeying  it ; but  he  was 
without  the  knowledge  of  its  spirituality,  de- 
mands, and  sanction  ; and  while  he  remained 
thus,  he  was  alive,  that  is,  his  hope  remained 
good,  and  he  was  satisfied  with  his  obedience. 
But  when  the  commandment  came,  when  its 
extent,  purity,  and  penalty  were  brought 
home  to  his  conscience,  sin  revived,  and  he 
died.  He  found  all  his  pretensions  to  liberty, 
obedience,  and  comfort  were  experimentally 
confuted  by  what  he  felt  in  himself.  The 
more  an  awakened  sinner  strives  against  his 
corruptions,  the  more  they  seem  to  increase. 
This  wearies  him ; for,  besides  the  grea-tness 
of  the  toil  itself,  he  finds  himself  weak,  weak 
as  water,  weaker  and  weaker.  And  he  is 
not  only  weary,  but  heavy  laden ; for  this 
likewise  is  a burden  which  he  cannot  shake 
off.  He  sees  that  he  cannot  succeed,  yet  he 
dares  not  desist. 

2.  Those  who  are  seeking  salvation  by  the 
works  of  the  law  are  labouring  and  heavy  la- 
den, engaged  in  what  is  beyond  their  strength, 
and  baffles  all  their  endeavours.  This  may 
appear  from  what  has  been  already  said.  It 
is  a hard  task  to  keep  the  whole  law ; and 
nothing  else  will  either  please  God,  if  made 
the  ground  of  justification,  or  satisfy  the  con- 
science that  has  any  true  light.  Those  de- 
clarations of  the  word,  that  “ cursed  is  the 
man  who  continueth  not  in  all  things  written 
in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them,”  (Gal.  iii. 
10,)  and  “ whoso  keepeth  the  whole  law,  and 
yet  offendeth  in  one  point,  he  is  guilty  of  all,” 
(James  ii.  10,)  keep  them  in  continual  anxie- 
ty and  servitude.  The  wickedness  of  their 
flesh  makes  it  impossible  for  the  law  to  give 
a ground  of  hope ; yet  they  cannot  lay  down 
their  burden,  but  are  compelled  to  renew  the 
fruitless  task.  I speak  not  of  mere  formal- 
ists, who  go  through  a round  of  external  ser- 
vices without  meaning  or  design ; but  all  who 
are  in  a measure  sincere,  find  themselves  still 
followed  with  a restless  inquiry,  “What  lack 
I yet  i”  Matt.  xix.  20.  Endless  are  the  shifts 
and  contrivances  they  are  put  to,  but  all  in 
vain ; for,  what  makes  it  worse,  they  always 
add  to  this  burden  many  inventions  of  their 
own,  as  though  the  demands  of  the  law  were 
too  few. 

3.  Those  who  are  under  temptation.  It  is 
a hard  and  wearisome  service  to  be  in  close 
conflict  with  the  powers  of  darkness.  The 
leading  branches  of  this  exercise  are, 

1st,  When  the  soul  is  assaulted,  and,  as  it 
were,  filled  with  insufferable  blasphemies. 
When  Satan  is  permitted  to  shoot  these  fiery 
darts,  none  can  express  (not  even  those  who 


have  felt  them)  the  amazement  and  confusion 
that  fills  the  mind.  For  a person  who  has* 
received  a reverence  for  the  name  and  attri- 
butes of  God  to  be  haunted  from  morning  to 
night,  from  day  to  day,  with  horrid  impreca- 
tions, so  strongly  impressed,  that  he  often 
starts  and  trembles  with  an  apprehension  that 
he  has  certainly  consented,  and  spoken  them 
aloud  with  his  lips, — this  is  irksome  and  ter- 
rifying beyond  description. 

2dly,  When  the  foundations  of  faith  and 
experience  are  attacked.  Many  who  have 
thought  themselves  grounded  in  the  truth, 
who  have  hoped  that  they  had  surely  tasted 
that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  and  have  in  their 
first  comforts  been  ready  to  say,  “ I shall 
never  be  moved,  (Psalm  xxx.  6,)  thou,  Lord, 
of  thy  goodness  hast  made  my  mountain  so 
strong,”  have  found  themselves  afterwards  at 
their  wits  end,  when  the  enemy  has  been  per- 
mitted to  come  in  upon  them  like  a flood, 
Isa.  lix.  19.  One  black  cloud  of  temptation 
has  blotted  out  all  their  comfortable  evidences ; 
and  they  have  been  left  to  question,  not  only 
the  justness  of  their  own  hopes,  but  even  the 
first  and  most  important  principles  on  which 
their  hopes  were  built. 

3dly,  When  the  hidden  corruptions  and 
abominations  of  the  heart  are  stirred  up.  And 
perhaps  there  is  no  other  way  but  this  o** 
coming  to  the  knowledge  of  what  our  de- 
praved natures  are  capable.  Such  things  a 
season  of  temptation  has  discovered  to  some, 
which  I believe  no  rack  nor  tortures  could  con- 
strain them  to  disclose,  though  but  to  their 
dearest  friend.  This  subject,  therefore,  will 
not  bear  a particular  illustration.  The  Lord’s 
people  are  not  all  acquainted  with  these  depths 
of  Satan.  As  people  who  live  on  shore  have 
a variety  of  trials,  dangers,  and  deliverances, 
yet  know  but  little  of  the  peculiar  exercises 
of  those  who  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships ; so, 
in  the  present  case  there  are  great  waters, 
(Psalm  cvii.  24,)  depths  of  temptation,  known 
comparatively  to  few.  Those  who  are  brought 
through  them,  have  more  to  say  of  the  won- 
ders of  God  in  the  great  deep  than  others ; 
and  this  is  his  design  in  permitting  it,  that 
they  may  know  more  of  him  and  more  of 
themselves.  But  while  they  are  under  these 
trials,  they  are  weary  and  heavy  laden ; and 
this  burden  they  must  bear  till  the  Lord  re- 
moves it.  The  help  of  men,  books,  and  or- 
dinances, is  sought  and  tendered  in  vain,  till 
his  appointed  hour  of  deliverance  draws  near. 

These,  therefore,  convinced,  striving,  and 
tempted  souls,  are  the  persons  to  whom  Jesus 
says,  “ Come  to  me,  and  I will  give  you  rest.” 
The  purport  of  this  gracious  invitation  we  are 
to  consider  hereafter.  In  the  mean  time  re- 
joice in  this,  Jesus  has  foreseen  your  cases, 
and  provided  accordingly.  He  says,  Come ; 
that  is,  believe , as  he  himself  expounds  it: 

“ He  that  cometh  unto  me,  shall  never  hun- 
ger ; and  he  that  bclieveth  on  me  shall  never 


444 


OF  COMING  TO  CHRIST. 


thirst,”  John  vi.  35.  See  how  his  promises 
suit  the  state  you  are  in. 

1.  Are  you  heavy  laden  with  guilt  ! The 
gospel-message  is,  “ The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  his  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin,M 
1 John  i.  7. 

2.  Are  you  groaning  under  the  power  of 
indwelling  sin  ! Hear  his  gracious  words: 
“ I am  the  resurrection  and  the  life  : he  that 
believeth  in  me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet 
shall  he  live,”  John  xi.  25.  And  to  the  same 
purpose  his  prophet : “ He  giveth  power  to 
the  faint ; and  to  them  that  have  no  might, 
he  increases  strength,”  Is.  xl.  29. 

3.  Are  you  striving  in  the  fire  to  keep  the 
law  7 “Wherefore  will  you  spend  your  mo- 
ney for  that  which  is  not  bread,  and  your  la- 
bour for  that  which  satisfieth  not!”  Forego 
the  vain  attempt.  Is  it  not  written,  “ Christ 
is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to 
every  one  that  believeth !”  Rom.  x.  4. 

4.  Are  you  in  temptation  7 He  that  says, 
“ Come  unto  me,”  has  been  tempted  himself, 
(Heb.  ii.  18,)  and  knows  how  to  pity  you. 
He  has  power  over  your  enemy,  and  can  de- 
liver you  with  a word,  Mark  i.  27.  Did  he 
not  thus  dispossess  Satan  in  the  days  of  his 
humiliation  7 And  if  then,  surely  he  is  no  less 
able  now ; for  since  that  time  he  has  glo- 
riously triumphed  over  the  powers  of  dark- 
ness, Col.  ii.  15.  And  as  his  arm  is  not 
shortened,  neither  is  his  ear  heavy ; he  has 
said,  without  exception,  “ Whosoever  cometh 
unto  me  I will  in  no  wise  cast  him  out ;”  (John 
vi.  37 ;)  and  thousands  who  have  been  in  your 
distress,  have  successively  found  that  promise 
fulfilled : “ The  God  of  peace  shall  bruise 
Satan  under  your  feet  shortly,”  Rom.  xvi.  20; 
Zech.  iii.  2. 


SERMON  X. 

OF  COMING  TO  CHRIST. 

Come  unto  me  all  ye  that  labour , and  are 
heavy  laden,  and  I will  give  you  rest. — 
Matt.  xi.  28. 

The  dispensation  of  the  gospel  may  be  com- 
pared to  the  cities  of  refuge  in  Israel.  It  was 
a privilege,  an  honour  to  the  nation  in  gene- 
ral, that  they  had  such  sanctuaries  of  divine 
appointment;  but  the  real  value  of  them  was 
known  to  few.  Those  only  who  found  them- 
selves in  that  case  for  which  they  were  pro- 
vided could  rightly  prize  them.  In  like  man- 
ner, the  gospel  of  Christ  is  the  highest  privi- 
lege and  honour  of  which  a professing  nation 
can  boast ; but  it  can  be  truly  esteemed  and 
understood  by  none  but  weary  and  heavy- 
laden  souls,  who  have  felt  their  misery  by  na- 
ture, are  tired  of  the  drudgery  of  sin,  and 
have  seen  the  curse  of  the  broken  law  pur- 


[SER.  X, 

suing  them  like  the  avenger  of  blood  of  old 
This  is  the  only  consideration  that  keeps  them 
from  despair,  that  God  has  provided  a remedy 
by  the  gospel ; and  Jesus  has  said,  “ Come 
unto  me,  and  I will  give  you  rest.”  If  they 
could  receive  the  full  comfort  of  these  words, 
and  heartily  obey  the  call,  their  complaints 
would  be  at  an  end ; but  remaining  igno- 
rance, unbelief,  and  Satan,  combine  in  va- 
rious ways  to  keep  them  back.  Some  will 
say,  “ O that  I couid  come  ! but,  alas  ! I can- 
not.” Others,  “ I fear  I do  not  come  aright.” 

Having,  therefore,  endeavoured  to  show 

you  the  persons  chiefly  intended  here  under 
the  character  of  those  who  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden,  I proceed  to  consider, 

II.  What  it  is  to  come  to  Christ.  I have 
observed  in  general,  that  it  appears  to  have 
the  same  signification  with  believing  in  him. 
But  that  we  may  understand  it  the  more 
clearly,  let  us  inquire, 

1.  How  those  to  whom  he  personally  spoke 
these  words,  in  all  probability,  understood 
them! 

2.  How  far  their  apprehensions  of  them 
are  applicable  and  suitable  to  our  circum- 
stances 7 

3.  Whether,  as  we  have  the  same  neces- 
sity, we  have  not  likewise  equal  encourage- 
ment to  come  to  him  with  those  who  were 
conversant  with  him  upon  earth  ! 

1.  It  does  not  appear,  that  those  to  whom 
our  Lord  spoke  in  person,  were  so  much  per- 
plexed as  many  are  now,  to  know  what  com- 
ing or  believing  should  mean ; he  seems  to 
have  been  understood,  (John  vi.  30,  and  xix. 
36,)  both  by  friends  and  enemies.  Many 
questioned  his  authority  and  right  to  exact  a 
dependence  on  himself : but  they  seemed  to 
be  at  no  difficulty  about  his  meaning.  It  cer- 
tainly implied  more  than  a mere  bodily  com- 
ing into  his  presence.  He  was  surrounded, 
and  even  followed,  by  multitudes,  who  never 
came  to  him  in  the  sense  of  his  invitation. 
To  such,  while  standing  about  him,  he  com- 
plained, “ Ye  will  not  come  unto  me,  that  ye 
may  have  life,”  John  v.  40.  Therefore,  if 
we  consult  what  is  written  of  those  who  came 
to  Jesus  for  relief,  and  obtained  it,  we  may 
conclude,  that  coming  to  him  implies, 

1st,  A persuasion  of  his  power,  and  of 
their  own  need  of  his  help.  They  knew  that 
they  wanted  relief,  and  conceived  of  him  as  an 
extraordinary  person,  empowered  and  able  to 
succour  them.  This  persuasion  of  Christ’s 
sufficiency  and  willingness  was  then,  as  it  is 
now,  afforded  in  different  degrees.  The  cen- 
turion spoke  with  full  assurance-  “Speak 
the  word  only,  and  my  servant  shall  be  heal- 
ed,” Matt.  viii.  8.  The  leper  more  dubious- 
ly : “ Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me 
clean,”  Matt.  viii.  2.  Another,  in  still  fainter 
language : “ If  thou  canst  do  any  thing,  have 
compassion,  and  help  us,”  Mark  ix.  22.  The 
faith  of  this  last  was,  as  the  man  himself  ac- 


OF  COMING  TO  CHRIST. 


445 


SER.  X.J 


knowledged,  mixed  with  much  unbelief  and  I 
fear ; yet  Jesus  did  not  despise  the  day  of 
small  things ; he  pardoned  his  suspicions, 
confirmed  his  fluctuating  mind,  granted  him  | 
his  request;  and  his  case  is  recorded  as  an 
instance  how  graciously  he  accepts  and  che- 
rishes the  feeblest  effects  of  true  faith  : “ He 
will  not  break  the  bruised  reed,  nor  quench 
the  smoking  flax.” 

2dly,  An  actual  application.  This  evi- 
denced their  faith  to  be  right.  They  did  not 
sit  content  with  having  heard  of  him,  but  im- 
proved it : they  went  to  him,  told  him  their 
cases,  and  implored  his  compassion.  Their 
faith  prevailed  against  all  discouragements. 
In  vain  the  multitude  charged  them  to  hold 
their  peace ; (Mark  x.  48 ;)  knowing  that  he 
only  was  able  to  relieve  them,  they  cried  so  j 
much  the  more  a great  deal.  Even  when 
he  seemed  to  discover  a great  reserve,  (Matt.  ! 
xv.  27,)  they  still  waited,  and  knew  not  how  j 
to  depart  without  an  answer.  Nor  could  a { 
sense  of  unworthiness,  fear,  or  shame,  keep 
them  back,  (Mark  v.  27,)  when  once  they 
had  a strong  persuasion  of  his  power  to  save. 

3dly,  When  he  was  sought  to  as  a soul- 
physician,  as  was  the  case  with  many  whose 
bodily  diseases  he  healed,  and  with  others 
who  were  not  sick,  those  who  came  to  him, 
continued  with  him,  and  became  his  follow- 
ers. They  depended  on  him  for  salvation, 
received  him  as  their  Lord  and  Master,  pro- 
fessed an  obedience  to  his  precepts,  accepted 
a share  in  his  reproach,  and  renounced  every 
thing  that  was  inconsistent  with  his  will, 
Luke  ix.  23,  60.  Some  had  a more  express 
and  open  call  to  this,  as  Matthew,  who  was 
sitting  at  the  receipt  of  custom,  regardless 
of  Jesus,  till  he  passed  by  him,  and  said, 
“Follow  me,”  Matt.  ix.  9.  That  word,  ac- 
companied with  the  power  of  his  love,  won 
his  heart,  and  diverted  him  from  worldly  pur- 
suits in  an  instant.  Others  were  more  se- 
cretly drawn  by  his  Spirit  and  providence,  as 
Nathaniel,  and  the  weeping  penitent,  (John 
i.  46 ; Luke  vii.  38,)  who  silently  washed  his 
feet  with  her  tears : and  this  was  the  design 
and  effect  of  many  of  their  bodily  and  family 
afflictions.  The  man  who  was  brought  to  be 
healed  of  the  palsy,  (Mark  ii.  5,)  received  the 
forgiveness  of  his  sins;  and  the  ruler,  who 
first  came  to  Jesus  with  no  other  view  than 
to  obtain  the  life  of  his  son,  (John  iv.  53,)  ob- 
tained much  more  than  he  asked  or  expected. 
The  Lord  afforded  such  an  affecting  sense  of 
his  power  and  goodness  upon  that  occasion, 
that  he  from  henceforth  believed,  with  all  his 
house. 

2.  These  things  are  applicable  to  us.  Je- 
sus is  no  longer  visible  upon  earth ; but  he 
has  promised  his  spiritual  presence  to  abide 
with  his  word,  ordinances,  and  people,  to  the 
end  of  time.  Weary  and  heavy-laden  souls 
have  now  no  need  to  take  a long  journey  to 
seek  him ; for  he  is  always  near  them,  and 


in  a spiritual  manner,  where  his  gospei  is 
preached.  Poor  and  inconsiderable  as  we  are 
in  the  judgment  ol  the  world,  I trust  we  have 
a right  to  claim  his  promise,  (Matt,  xviii. 
20,)  and  to  believe  that  he  is  even  now  in 
the  midst  of  us.  Therefore  come  unto  him  ; 
that  is, 

1st,  Raise  your  hearts  and  breathe  forth 
your  complaints  to  him.  Do  you  see  your 
need  of  him  1 Be  persuaded,  and  pray  to  him 
to  assure  you  more  strongly  of  his  power  and 
goodness.  He  is  just  such  a Saviour  as  vour 
circumstances  require,  as  you  yourself  could 
wish  for;  and  he  is  able  to  convince  you  in  a 
moment  that  he  is  so.  If  he  is  pleased  to 
cause  a ray  of  his  glory  to  break  in  upon  your 
mind,  your  fears  and  doubts,  and  griefs,  would 
instantly  give  place. 

2dly,  Persevere  in  this  application  to  him. 
Set  a high  value  upon  these  his  public  ordi- 
nances, and  be  constant  in  attending  them. 
His  eye  is  fixed  upon  us ; his  arm  is  revealed 
amongst  us.  I trust  it  is  a time  of  his  grace, 
and  that  every  day  we  meet  he  does  some- 
thing for  one  or  another  in  the  assembly.  He 
has  a fixed  time  for  every  one  whom  he  re- 
lieves. He  knew  how  long  the  poor  man  had 
waited  at  the  pool-side;  (John  v.  6;)  and 
when  his  hour  came,  he  spake  and  relieved 
him.  So  do  you  endeavour  to  be  found  in 
his  way;  and  not  here  only,  but  in  whatevei 
he  has  made  your  duty.  Read  his  word  ; be 
frequent  in  secret  prayer.  You  will  find 
many  things  arising  from  within  and  with- 
out to  discourage  and  weary  you  in  this 
course ; but  persist  in  it,  and  in  good  time 
you  shall  find  rest  for  your  souls.  These  are 
the  means  which  the  Lord  has  appointed  you. 
Converse  likewise  at  proper  opportunities 
with  his  people  ; perhaps  he  may  unexpect- 
edly join  you,  as  he  did  the  two  disciples 
when  walking  to  Emmaus,  (Luke  xxiv.  32,) 
and  cause  your  hearts  to  burn  within  you. 
Further, 

3dly,  You  are  to  follow  him,  to  take  up 
his  cross,  to  make  a profession  of  his  name 
and  gospel,  to  bear  contentedly  a share  in  the 
reproach  and  scorn  which  is  the  usual  lot  of 
those  who  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  in 
the  midst  of  an  unbelieving  and  perverse  ge- 
neration. You  are  not  only  to  trust  in  him 
as  a priest  to  atone  for  your  sins,  but  to  re- 
ceive and  obey  hirn  as  your  teacher  and  your 
Lord.  If  you  are  truly  weary  and  heavy 
laden,  you  will  be  glad  to  do  this,  and  are 
crying  to  him  to  enable  you : and  you  are 
likewise  willing  to  forsake  every  thing  that 
is  inconsistent  with  his  will  and  service.  If 
you  are  desirous  to  come  to  Christ,  it  is  not 
grievous  to  you  to  think  of  parting  with  your 
sinful  pleasures  and  vain  companions.  Ra- 
ther these  are  a part  of  the  burden  from 
which  you  long  to  be  freed. 

Come  in  this  way,  and  you  shall  find  rest 
for  your  souls.  Are  any  of  you  thinking, — 


446 


OF  COMING  TO  CHRIST. 


O that  I could ! Surely  if  I had  seen  him, 
and  heard  him,  I should  have  ventured.  But 
now  unbelief  and  fear  keep  me  back.  I ob- 
serve, therefore, 

3.  That  as  we  have  no  less  need  of  Jesus 
than  those  of  old,  who  saw  him  and  conversed 
with  him ; so  we  have  at  least  equal  encou- 
ragement to  come  unto  him.  This,  I think, 
will  appear,  if  we  consider  that, 

On  the  one  hand,  the  bodily  presence  of 
Christ,  considered  in  itself,  had  no  peculiar 
or  extraordinary  influence  upon  those  who 
saw  him,  but  all  was  wrought  by  the  power 
of  his  Spirit ; the  same  Spirit  which  is  pro- 
mised to  abide  with  his  church  for  ever. 

1st,  Multitudes  who  saw  and  heard  him 
were  unmoved  and  unconvinced  by  all  the 
wonders  of  his  love.  Though  he  spake  as 
never  man  spake,  and  went  about  doing  good, 
he  was  slighted,  opposed,  and  hated,  even  to 
the  death.  And  those  who  know  the  heart  of 
man,  and  believe  that  the  carnal  mind  is  en- 
mity against  God,  will  allow  it  highly  pro- 
bable, that  upon  a supposition  he  should  ap- 
pear again  in  the  same  circumstances  of  hu- 
miliation, and  to  use  the  same  authoritative 
freedom  in  vindicating  the  commands  of  God 
from  the  vain  figments,  traditions,  and  cus- 
toms of  men,  he  would  meet  with  little  bet- 
ter treatment,  even  in  those  countries  which 
are  called  by  his  name,  than  he  did  from  the 
proud,  self-righteous,  unbelieving  Jews.  We 
may  warrantably  suppose  there  were  many 
more  lepers,  blind,  &c.  in  the  places  where 
he  resorted,  than  those  who  came  to  him  to 
be  healed. 

2dly,  Many  of  his  professed  disciples,  even 
after  they  had  followed  him  for  a while, 
turned  back,  and  forsook  him,  John  vi.  66. 
We  have,  therefore,  the  less  reason  to  won- 
der, when  we  see  any  give  up  the  profession 
of  the  gospel,  and  return  to  the  world  again. 
It  was  thus  from  the  beginning,  and  those 
who  do  so  now,  would  have  done  so  if  they 
had  lived  then.  His  looks,  his  voice,  his  ges- 
ture, and  even  his  discourses  and  miracles, 
could  not  engage  a single  person  to  cleave 
to  him  with  full  purpose  of  heart,  unless  he 
was  likewise  spiritually  revealed  to  the  eye 
of  their  faith,  as  the  image  of  the  invisible 
God,  the  brightness  of  the  Father’s  glory, 
full  of  grace  and  truth. 

3dly,  Even  his  true  disciples,  who  were 
constantly  with  him,  to  whom  he  had  per- 
sonally made  the  most  express  and  endearing 
promises,  and  who  sometimes  thought  them- 
selves assured  beyond  the  power  of  a doubt, 
yet  could  not  maintain  their  confidence  longer 
than  his  Spirit  upheld  them.  To  them  ex- 
pressly, though  not  to  them  exclusively,  Je- 
sus had  said,  “ I go  to  prepare  a place  for 
you,”  (John  xiv.  2,)  and  I will  come  again 
to  receive  you  to  myself,  that  “ where  I am, 
there  ye  may  be  also,”  John  xiv.  3.  When 
he  had  concluded  that  affectionate  discourse, 


[SER.  X. 

their  doubts  and  fears  were  dissipated,  and 
they  could  confidently  say,  “Now  we  be- 
lieve;” (John  xvi.  30;)  yet  it  was  not  long 
before  they  found  his  reply  fulfilled.  Jesus 
said  unto  them,  “ Do  you  now  believe  1 The 
hour  is  coming,  when  you  shall  be  scattered 
every  man  to  his  own,  and  shall  leave  me 
alone,”  John  xvi.  32.  Will  not  this  in- 
stance convince  you  of  your  mistake,  when 
you  think  you  could  depend  more  on  a voice 
from  heaven,  than  on  the  written  word  1 The 
apostles  had  the  strongest  ground  of  assur- 
ance imaginable,  the  word  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
himself,  face  to  face:  and  yet  this  would  not 
support  them,  without  renewed  supplies  of 
strength. 

On  the  other  hand,  consider  if  the  loss  of 
his  bodily  presence  is  not  more  than  made  up 
to  us, 

1st,  By  the  fuller  manifestation  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  than  was  afforded  before  his  ascension. 
The  Holy  Ghost  was  not  then  given  in  that 
clear  and  abundant  measure  as  afterwards, 
(John  vii.  39,)  because  Jesus  was  not  yet 
glorified.  While  he  was  with  them  he  wa3 
their  Comforter  and  Teacher;  but  he  told 
them,  “ When  I depart,  I will  send  you  an- 
other Comforter,”  (John  xiv.  16,  and  xvi.  7,) 
whose  office  and  abode  with  you  will  be  in 
many  respects  so  much  more  advantageous, 
that  on  this  account  it  is  expedient  for  you 
that  I go  away. 

2dly,  By  the  greater  number  and  variety 
of  promises  which  we  enjoy.  We  have  not 
only  the  scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament  in 
common  with  them,  but  to  us  the  ancient 
revelations  of  the  will  and  love  of  God  are 
enlarged,  explained,  applied,  and  confirmed, 
by  the  superaddition  of  the  New,  Ephes.  iii.  5. 

3dly,  By  the  experience  of  multitudes  of 
all  ages,  people,  and  languages,  who  have 
gone  before  us,  since  their  time,  the  cloud  of 
witnesses  to  the  truth  and  grace  of  God,  the 
reality  of  eternal  things,  and  the  victorious 
power  of  faith,  is  now  increased  by  the  con- 
current evidence  of  thousands  and  millions, 
who  have  overcome  all  opposition  by  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  the  word  of  his  tes- 
timony. 

4thly,  By  the  proofs  and  living  witnesses 
of  his  power  and  grace  amongst  ourselves. 
Are  there  not  many,  with  whom  you  worship 
and  converse  from  day  to  day,  who  can  tell 
you,  they  were  even  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins,  but  he  has  quickened  them  1 They  were 
once  as  you  are,  labouring  and  heavy  laden : 
they  waited  for  him  long,  had  a share  in  such 
temptations  and  conflicts  as  you  now  feel, 
were  often  at  a stand,  and  upon  the  point  of 
concluding  their  case  to  be  desperate,  as  you 
may  think  yours  at  present ; but  at  length 
they  were  enabled  to  come  unto  him,  and 
they  have  found  rest.  Every  such  instance 
should  encourage  you  to  gird  up  the  loins  of 
your  minds ; to  be  patient,  and  hope  to  th« 


OF  BELIEVERS’  REST  IN  CHRIST. 


447 


SER.  XI.] 

end.  As  they  have  known  your  troubles,  so 
shall  you  partake  of  their  consolations  in  due 
time.  What  is  it  then  should  hinder  you  from 
coming  to  Jesus,  that  you  may  find  rest? 
What  exceptions  can  your  unbelief  devise 
against  the  invitations,  motives,  and  exam- 
ple which  the  Lord  sets  before  you  by  his 
preached  gospel  ? 

(1.)  Is  it  a sense  of  your  load  which  makes 
you  say  you  are  not  able  ? But  consider  that 
this  is  not  a work,  but  a rest.  Would  a man 
plead,  I am  so  heavy  laden,  that  I cannot 
consent  to  part  with  my  burden ; so  weary, 
that  I am  not  able  either  to  stand  still  or  lie 
down,  but  must  force  myself  farther?  The 
greatness  of  your  burden,  so  far  from  being 
an  objection,  is  the  very  reason  why  you 
should  instantly  come  to  Christ,  for  he  alone 
is  able  to  release  you. 

(2.)  But  perhaps  you  think  you  do  not 
come  aright.  I ask,  how  would  you  come  ? 
If  you  can  come  as  a helpless  unworthy  sin- 
ner, without  strength,  without  righteousness, 
without  any  hope  but  what  arises  from  the 
worth,  work,  and  word  of  Christ,  this  is  to 
come  aright.  There  is  no  other  way  of  being 
accepted.  Would  you  refresh  and  strengthen 
yourself,  wash  away  your  own  sins,  free 
yourself  from  your  burden,  and  then  come  to 
him  to  do  these  things  for  you  ? May  the 
Lord  help  you  to  see  the  folly  and  unreason- 
ableness of  your  unbelief! 

I have  observed  already,  that  coming  to 
Christ  signifies  more  at  first  than  merely  to 
come  into  his  presence ; so  likewise,  it  means 
more  now  than  to  be  found  among  his  wor- 
shippers. Let  none  of  you  be  deceived  with 
a form  of  godliness.  Examine  your  religious 
profession  by  these  tests : Have  you  laboured 
under  a sense  of  your  misery?  Have  you 
known  the  burden  of  sin?  Has  Jesus  given 
you  rest  ? Or  are  you  earnestly  seeking  to 
him  for  it?  If  you  understand  not  the  mean- 
ing of  these  questions,  you  are  not  yet  in  that 
state  to  which  the  promises  are  made.  And 
why  are  you  not  labouring  and  heavy  laden  ? 
Are  you  not  sinners  ? Has  not  the  righteous 
God  revealed  a_law?  Has  he  not  guarded 
this  law  with  the  sanction  of  a dreadful  curse  ? 
Have  you  not  transgressed  this  holy  law  in 
thought,  word,  and  deed,  times  without  num- 
ber ? If  you  have  not,  why  do  you  join  in  the 
public  confession,  and  call  for  mercy  when 
the  commandments  are  repeated?  If  you 
have,  how  will  you  escape  the  penalty  ? How 
indeed,  if  you  dare  to  neglect  this  great  sal- 
vation ? The  law  condemns  you  already ; if 
you  receive  not  the  gospel  you  must  perish 
without  remedy;  for  other  name  or  names 
whereby  men  can  be  saved  there  is  none  un- 
der heaven.  Once  more  you  are  warned  of 
danger ; once  more  the  refuge  is  set  before 
you.  We  preach  Jesus,  who  came  to  seek 
and  to  save  those  who  were  lost ; Jesus,  who 
was  wounded  with  whips,  and  thorns,  and 


nails,  that  his  enemies  might  be  healed.  Does 
not  this  thought  affect  you  ? Will  you  slight 
his  love,  despise  his  blood,  and  crucify  him 
afresh  ? God  forbid.  Is  there  not  some  hear*, 
now  relenting,  beginning  to  feel  impressions 
of  fear,  shame,  and  grief?  Happy  beginning ! 
Obey  the  voice  of  God  now  opening  in  your 
conscience ! Now  is  the  time  to  pray ; before 
you  knew  not  what  to  pray  for ; but  now 
you  see  you  want  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  the 
teaching  of  his  Spirit.  “ Ask,  and  you  shall 
receive ; and  seek,  and  you  shall  find.”  Take 
your  warrant  from  my  text ; Jesus  has  said, 
“ Come  unto  me,  and  I will  give  you  rest.” 
Let  your  hearts  answer,  “ Take  away  our 
iniquity,  and  receive  us  graciously  : Behold, 
we  come  unto  thee,  for  thou  art  the  Lord  our 
God  ; and  in  thee  the  fatherless,  the  helpless, 
the  comfortless,  find  mercy.” 


SERMON  XI. 

OF  BELIEVERS’  REST  IN  CHRIST. 

Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are 

heavy  laden , and  1 will  give  you  rest. — 
Matth.  xi.  28. 

The  learned  have  a variety  of  arguments 
whereby  to  prove  the  scriptures  to  be  the 
word  of  God.  But  though  that  kind  of  proof 
which  may  be  brought  in  a way  of  reasoning 
and  external  evidence,  is  doubtless  useful  up- 
on proper  occasions;  yet  I apprehend  the 
chief  and  most  satisfactory  argument  to  those 
who  are  capable  of  receiving  it,  arises  from 
the  correspondence  between  the  subject-mat- 
ter of  the  scriptures  and  the  state  of  an  awa- 
kened mind.  When  the  eyes  of  the  under- 
standing are  opened,  we  begin  to  see  every 
thing  around  us  to  be  just  so  as  the  scriptures 
have  described  them.  Then,  and  not  till  then, 
we  perceive,  that  what  we  read  in  the  Bible 
concerning  the  horrid  evil  of  sin,  the  vileness 
of  our  fallen  nature,  the  darkness  and  igno- 
rance of  those  who  know  not  God,  our  own 
emptiness,  and  the  impossibility  of  finding  re- 
lief and  comfort  from  creatures,  is  exactly 
true.  We  cannot  but  apply  the  words  of  the 
woman  of  Samaria,  and  say,  Come  and  see 
a book  that  has  told  me  all  that  ever  I did, 
(John  iv.  29,)  the  ground  of  all  my  com- 
plaints, the  true  cause  and  nature  of  all  the 
evil  I either  see,  hear,  or  feel,  from  day  to 
day.  And  as  we  find  our  disease  precisely 
described,  so  we  perceive  a suitableness  in 
the  proposed  remedy.  We  need  a Saviour, 
and  he  must  be  a mighty  one ; but  though 
our  wants  and  sins,  our  fears  and  enemies, 
are  great  and  numerous,  we  are  convinced 
that  the  character  of  Christ  is  sufficient  to 
answer  them  all.  We  need  a rest,  a rest 
which  the  world  cannot  give.  Inquire  whert 


418 


OF  BELIEVERS’  REST  IN  CHRIST. 


we  will  among  the  creatures,  experience 
brings  in  the  same  answer  from  all,  “ It  is 
not  in  me.”  This  again  confirms  the  word 
of  God,  which  has  forewarned  ns  that  we 
ehall  meet  nothing  but  disappointment  in 
such  pursuits.  But  there  is  a spiritual  rest 
spoken  of  which  we  know  to  be  the  very 
thing  we  want,  and  all  our  remaining  solici- 
tude is  how  to  attain  it.  From  hence,  as  I 
said,  we  may  assuredly  conclude,  that  the 
book  which  gives  us  such  just  views  of  every 
thing  that  passes,  must  be  given  by  inspira- 
tion from  him  who  is  the  searcher  of  hearts. 
T.his  proof  is  equally  plain  and  conclusive  to 
all  capacities  that  are  spiritually  enlightened, 
and  such  only  are  able  to  understand  it.  We 
are  now  to  speak, 

III.  Of  this  promised  rest.  And  here  two 
things  offer  to  our  consideration : 

1.  What  this  rest  is  I 

2.  How  it  is  obtained  1 

1.  The  Greek  word*  expresses  something 
more  than  rest,  or  a mere  relaxation  from  toil ; 
it  denotes  refreshment  likewise.  A person 
weary  with  long  bearing  a heavy  burden,  will 
need  not  only  to  have  it  removed,  but  like- 
wise he  wants  food  and  refreshment,  to  re- 
store his  spirits,  and  to  repair  his  wasted 
strength.  Such  is  the  rest  of  the  gospel.  It 
not  only  puts  a period  to  our  fruitless  labour, 
but  it  affords  a sweet  reviving  cordial. 
There  is  not  only  peace,  but  joy  in  believing. 
Taken  at  large,  we  may  consider  it  as  two- 
fold: 

1st,  A present  rest.  So  the  apostle  speaks, 
“We  who  have  believed  do  enter  into  rest,” 
Ileb.  iv.  3. 

(1.)  The  common,  wearisome  pursuit  of 
the  world,  is  described  as  “spending  their 
money  for  that  which  is  not  bread,  and  their 
labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  not ;”  (Isa.  lv. 
2 ;)  wandering  from  object  to  object  in  quest 
of  good,  (Psalm  iv.  6,)  but  still  mortified  by 
incessant  and  repeated  disappointment.  We 
should  pity  a person  whom  we  should  see 
seeking  some  necessary  thing  day  after  day, 
which  we  knew  was  impossible  to  be  found 
there.  It  is,  however,  the  case  with  all  till 
they  come  to  Christ.  Satisfaction  is  what 
they  profess  to  aim  at,  and  they  turn  every 
stone  (as  we  say,)  try  every  expedient  to  meet 
with  it,  but  in  vain.  It  is  only  to  be  found 
in  him.  When  they  come  to  him  their  wishes 
are  answered.  This  is  exemplified  by  our 
Lord  in  the  character  of  a merchant-man 
seeking  goodly  pearls,  (Matt.  xiii.  46,)  who 
was  still  upon  the  inquiry  till  he  had  found  one 
pearl  of  great  price.  This  answered  and  ex- 
ceeded his  desires:  upon  the  discovery  of 
this  one,  he  rejoiced  to  forego  all  his  former 
acquisitions,  and  to  give  up  every  other  pos- 
session on  purpose  that  he  might  obtain  it. 

(2.)  I have  spoken  something  concerning 


[ser.  XI 

the  wearisome  exercise  of  a conscience  bur 
dened  with  guilt;  but  by  coming  to  Jesus, 
and  believing  in  him,  an  end  is  put  to  this. 
When  we  are  enabled  to  view  our  sins  as  laid 
upon  Christ,  that  those  who  come  are  accept- 
ed in  the  Beloved,  that  there  is  no  more  con-? 
demnation,  but  pardon,  reconciliation,  and 
adoption  are  the  sure  privileges  of  all  who 
trust  in  him, — O the  sweet  calm  that  imme- 
diately takes  place  in  the  soul ! It  is  some- 
thing more  than  deliverance.  There  is  a 
pleasure  more  than  answerable  to  the  former 
pain,  a comfort  greater  than  all  the  trouble 
that  went  before  it.  Yea,  the  remembrance 
of  the  former  bitterness  greatly  enhances  the 
present  pleasure.  And  the  soul  understands 
and  experiences  the  meaning  of  those  scrip- 
tures : “ When  the  Lord  turned  the  captivity 
of  Zion,  then  was  our  mouth  filled  with 
laughter,  and  our  tongue  with  singing,” 
Psalm  cxxvi.  1,  2.  “ In  that  day  thou  shalt 

say,  O Lord,  I will  praise  thee  : though  thou 
wast  angry  with  me,  thine  anger  is  turned 
away,  and  thou  comfortedst  me.  Behold, 
God  is  my  salvation  : I will  trust,  and  not  be 
afraid : for  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  my  strength 
and  my  song ; he  also  is  become  my  salva- 
tion,” Isa.  xii.  1,  2. 

(3.)  There  is  likewise  a rest  from  the  pow- 
er of  sin.  In  vain  is  this  sought  from  resolu- 
tions and  endeavours  in  our  own  strength. 
Even  after  we  are  spiritually  disposed,  and 
begin  to  understand  the  gospel-sal vaticn,  it  is 
usually,  for  a season,  rather  a fight  than  a 
rest.  But  when  we  are  brought  nearer  to 
Christ,  and  taught  to  live  upon  him  as  cur 
sanctification,  deriving  all  our  strength  and 
motives  from  him  by  faith,  we  obtain  a com- 
parative rest  in  this  respect  also.  We  find 
hard  things  become  easy,  and  mountains  sink 
into  plains,  by  his  power  displayed  in  our  be- 
half. Farther, 

(4.)  There  is  a rest  from  our  own  works. 
The  believer  is  quite  delivered  from  the  law 
as  a covenant,  and  owes  it  no  longer  service 
in  that  view.  His  obedience  is  gracious, 
cheerful,  the  effect  of  love,  and  therefore  he 
is  freed  from  those  fears  and  burdens  which 
once  disturbed  him  in  the  way  of  duty.  At 
first  there  was  a secret,  though  unhallowed 
dependence  on  himself.  When  his  frames 
were  lively  he  was  strong,  and  thought  he 
had  something  to  trust  to,  but  under  a change 
(and  changes  will  happen)  he  was  at  his  wits 
end.  But  there  is  a promised,  and  therefore 
an  attainable  rest  in  this  respect, — a liberty 
and  power  to  repose  on  the  finished  work  and 
unchangeable  word  of  Christ ; to  follow  him 
steadily  through  light  and  darkness ; to  glory 
in  him  only  when  our  frames  are  brightest ; 
and  to  trust  in  him  assuredly  when  we  are  at 
our  lowest  ebb. 

Such  is  the  present  rest ; different  in  de- 
grees according  to  the  proportion  of  faith, 
and  capable  of  increase  even  in  those  who 


* Avxttxv rn. 


OF  BELIEVERS’  REST  IN  CHRIST. 


449 


SER.  XI.] 

have  attained  most,  so  long-  as  we  remain  in 
this  imperfect  state.  But  there  is, 

2dly,  A future  rest,  besides  and  beyond 
all  that  can  be  experienced  here : “ There 
remaineth  yet  a rest  for  the  people  of  God,” 
Heb.  iv.  9.  Faint  and  imperfect  are  our 
most  enlarged  ideas  of  that  glory  which  shall 
be  revealed.  “ It  does  not  yet  appear  what 
we  shall  be,”  1 John  iii.  2.  Who  can  describe 
or  conceive  the  happiness  of  heaven  1 The 
most  we  can  clearly  understand  of  it  lies  in 
negatives.  It  will  be  as  unlike  as  possible 
to  this  wilderness  of  sin  and  sorrow  where 
we  are  now  confined.  Here  we  are  in  a 
warfare,  but  then  we  shall  enter  into  perfect 
rest. 

(1.)  A rest  from  all  sin.  There  no  unclean 
thing  shall  defile  or  disturb  us  for  ever.  We 
shall  be  free  from  sin  in  ourselves.  This 
alone  would  be  worth  dying  for.  Indwrelling 
sin  is  a burden  under  which  even  the  re- 
deemed of  the  Lord  must  groan,  whilst  they 
sojourn  in  the  body;  and  those  who  are  most 
spiritual  are  most  deeply  affected  with  shame, 
humiliation,  and  grief,  on  this  account,  be- 
cause they  have  the  clearest  views  of  the  ho- 
liness of  God,  the  spirituality  of  the  law,  the 
love  of  Christ,  and  the  deceitfulness  of  their 
own  hearts.  Therefore  the  apostle  Paul, 
though  perhaps  in  grace  and  talents,  in  zeal 
and  usefulness,  distinguished  above  all  the 
children  of  Adam,  accounted  himself  the 
chief  of  sinners,  (1  Tim.  i.  15,)  less  than  the 
/east  of  all  saints,  (Eph.  iii.  8,)  and  cried  out, 
under  the  disparity  he  felt  between  what  he 
was  and  what  he  would  be,  “ O wretched 
man  that  I am  ! who  shall  deliver  me  from 
the  body  of  this  death  1”  Rom.  vii.  24.  But 
we  shall  not  carry  this  burden  beyond  the 
grave.  The  hour  of  dissolution  shall  free  us 
from  the  inbred  enemies  (the  inseparable  con- 
comitants of  this  frail  perishing  nature)  which 
now  trouble  us,  and  we  shall  see  them  no 
more  for  ever. 

Again,  we  shall  be  free  from  all  the  dis- 
pleasing effects  of  sin  in  others.  Our  hearts 
shall  be  no  more  pained,  nor  our  ears  wound- 
ed, nor  our  eyes  filled  with  tears,  by  those 
evils  which  fill  the  earth.  Now,  like  Lot  in 
Sodom,  we  are  grieved  every  day  with  the 
filthy  conversation  of  the  wicked,  2 Pet.  ii.  7. 
Who  that  has  any  love  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  any 
spark  of  true  holiness,  any  sense  of  the  worth 
of  souls  in  his  heart,  can  see  what  passes 
amongst  us  without  trembling  ? How  openly, 
daringly,  almost  universally,  are  the  com- 
mandments of  God  broken,  his  gospel  despis- 
ed, his  patience  abused,  and  his  power  defied  ! 
To  be  a silent  spectator  of  these  things  is  suf- 
ficiently grievous ; but  if  (as  we  are  in  duty 
bound)  we  dare  to  stand  as  witnesses  for  God 
in  the  midst  of  a crooked  and  perverse  nation, 
we  find  the  spirit  of  the  first-born.  Cain  in- 
stantly takes  fire,  and  denounces  war  against 
all  who  should  presume  to  say,  that  we  ought 


to  obey  and  fear  God  rather  than  men.  In- 
vectives and  ill  treatment,  are  the  certain  lot 
of  all  who  openly  and  consistently  appear  on 
the  Lord’s  side;  and  if  they  escape  stripes 
and  bonds,  imprisonment  and  death,  it  is  to 
be  ascribed  to  the  restraints  of  divine  provi- 
dence, and  (as  a means  in  our  happy  land)  to 
the  temper  of  the  laws,  and  to  the  clemency 
of  the  powers  under  whom  we  live.  These 
things  often  constrain  the  believer  to  say,  “O 
that  I had  wings  like  a dove  ! for  then  would 
I flee  away,  and  be  at  rest,”  Psalm  lv.  6. 
Let  us  not  be  weary  or  faint  in  our  minds ; 
ere  long  this  wish  shall  be  answered.  A glo- 
rious rest  awraits  you,  where  sin  and  sinners 
shall  have  no  place,  nor  the  alarms  of  war  be 
heard  any  more. 

(2.)  A rest  from  all  outward  afflictions, 
which,  though  necessary,  and,  under  the  in- 
fluence of  divine  grace,  profitable,  are  griev- 
ous to  bear ; but  then  they  will  be  necessary 
no  more.  Where  there  is  no  sin,  there  shall 
be  no  sorrow.  Then,  believers,  God  “ shall 
wipe  away  all  tears  from  your  eyes;  and 
there  shall  be  no  more  death,  neither  sorrow 
nor  crying,  neither  shall  there  be  any  more 
pain : for  the  former  things  are  passed  away,” 
Rev.  xxi.  4. 

(3.)  A rest  from  Satan’s  temptations.  How 
busy  is  this  adversary  of  God  and  man  ! what 
various  arts,  what  surprising  force,  what  con- 
stant assiduity,  does  he  employ  to  ensnare, 
distress,  and  terrify  those  who  by  grace  have 
escaped  from  his  servitude ! He  says,  like 
Pharaoh  of  old,  “ I will  pursue,  I will  over- 
take, I will  destroy,”  Exod.  xv.  9.  He  fol- 
lows them  to  the  last  stage  of  life,  but  he  can 
follow  them  no  farther.  The  moment  of  their 
departure  out  of  the  body,  shall  place  them 
beyond  his  reach  for  ever. 

(4.)  A rest  from  unsatisfied  desires.  Here 
the  more  wTe  drink,  the  more  we  thirst ; but 
there  our  highest  wishes  shall  be  crowned 
and  exceeded ; we  shall  rest  in  full  commu- 
nion with  him  whom  we  love;  we  shall  no 
more  complain  of  interruptions  and  imperfec- 
tions, of  an  absent  God,  and  a careless  heart. 
Here,  when  we  obtain  a little  glimpse  of  his 
presence,  when  he  brings  us  into  his  banquet- 
ing-house,  and  spreads  his  banner  of  love  over 
us,  how  gladly  would  we  remain  in  such  a 
desirable  frame  ! How  unwilling  are  we  to 
come  down  from  the  mount ! But  these  pleas- 
ing seasons  are  quickly  ended,  and  often: 
give  place  to  some  sudden  unexpected  trial,, 
which  robs  us  of  all  that  sweetness  in  which 
we  lately  rejoiced.  But  when  we  ascend  the 
holy  hill  of  God  above,  we  shall  come  down 
no  more  ; we  shall  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord, 
neveroffend  him,  never  be  separated  from  him 
again.  We  shall  likewise  rest  in  full  con- 
formity to  him,  Psalm  xvii.  15.  Here  we  find 
a mixture  of  evil  in  our  best  moments : when 
we  approach  nearest  to  him,  we  hawe  the 
quickest  sense  of  our  defilement,  and  how 


459 


OP  BELIEVERS’  REST  IN  CHRIST. 


much  we  fall  short  in  every  branch  of  duty, 
in  every  temper  of  our  hearts ; but  when  we 
shall  see  Jesus  as  he  is,  we  shall  be  fully 
transformed  into  his  image,  and  be  perfectly 
like  him. 

2.  But  how  is  this  rest  to  be  obtained  ? 
Blessed  be  God,  in  that  way  which  alone  can 
render  it  attainable  by  such  unworthy  indi- 
gent creatures.  If  it  was  to  be  bought,  we 
have  nothing  to  offer  for  it ; if  it  was  propos- 
ed as  a reward  of  merit,  we  can  do  nothing 
to  deserve  it.  But  Jesus  has  said,  “ I will 
give  you  rest.”  Our  title  to  it  cost  him  dear ; 
he  purchased  it  for  us  with  his  own  blood ; 
but  to  us  it  comes  freely.  Faith  in  his  name 
puts  us  in  immediate  possession  of  the  first- 
fruits,  the  earnest  of  this  inheritance;  and 
faith  will  lead  us  powerfully  and  safely 
through  all  hinderances  and  enemies  to  the 
full  enjoyment  of  the  whole.  Faith  unites  us 
to  Christ;  gives  us  an  immediate  interest  in 
all  the  benefits  of  his  life,  death,  and  interces- 
sion ; opens  the  way  of  communication  for  all 
needful  supplies  of  grace  here,  and  insures  to 
us  the  accomplishment  of  all  the  Lord  has 
spoken  to  us  of,  in  a state  of  glory.  “ He  that 
believeth  shall  be  saved ;”  (Mark  xvi.  16 ;) 
saved  in  defiance  of  all  the  opposition  of  earth 
and  hell;  saved  notwithstanding  he  is  in 
himself  unstable  as  water,  weak  as  a bruised 
reed,  and  helpless  as  infancy.  What  Jesus 
will  give,  none  can  take  away.  Only  remem- 
ber that  it  is  a free  gift.  Receive  it  thank- 
fully, and  rejoice  in  the  Giver.  Let  him  have 
all  the  glory  of  his  own  undertaking.  Re- 
nounce every  hope  and  every  plea,  but  his 
promise  and  mediation.  Commit  your  souls 
to  him,  and  then  fear  nothing.  44  The  eternal 
God  is  your  refuge,  and  underneath  are  the 
everlasting  arms,”  Deut.  xxxiii.  27.  He  will 
fight  your  battles,  heal  your  wounds,  refresh 
your  fainting  spirits,  guide  you  by  his  counsel 
while  here,  and  at  last  receive  you  to  himself. 

May  we  not  therefore  say,  Happy  are  the 
people  that  are  in  such  a case  ! happy  they, 
who  have  been  enabled  to  accept  this  gra- 
cious invitation,  who  have  already  entered 
upon  the  rest  of  grace,  and  have  a well- 
grounded  expectation  that  they  shall  rest  in 
glory  ! Believers,  what  should  you  fear,  or 
why  complain  ? Look  back  to  where  the  Lord 
found  you  sleeping  in,  helpless  and  hopeless, 
yet  insensible  of  your  danger : look  forward 
to  what  he  has  provided  for  yon,  an  inherit- 
ance incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  that,  fadeth 
not  away ; a crown  of  life,  a kingdom  that 
cannot  be  shaken : think  of  the  love,  the  suf- 
fering, the  glory  of  him  to  whom  you  owe 
these  blessings;  and  let  these  considerations 
animate  you  to  run  with  patience  and  thank- 
fulness the  race  that  is  set  before  you,  Heb. 
xii.  1. 

Happy  likewise  are  you,  whose  hearts  are 


[sfr.  XI. 

fixed  upon  this  rest,  and  this  Saviour,  though 
as  yet  you  are  in  heaviness  through  manifold 
temptations.  The  Lord  will  give  you  rest. 
Doubt  it  not ; he  cannot  deny  himself ; wait 
his  hour;  though  he  seems  to  tarry  long,  yet 
maintain  your  confidence  in  his  promise.  R e- 
double  your  prayers,  cry  mightily  to  him,  he 
will  not  (as  perhaps  many  around  you  do)  re- 
buke your  importunity,  and  charge  you  to 
hold  your  peace.  Look  at  the  generations  of 
old,  and  see ; did  ever  any  trust  in  the  Lord, 
and  was  confounded?  or  did  any  abide  in  his 
fear,  and  was  forsaken  ? or  whom  did  he  ever 
despise  that  called  upon  him  ? 

And  you,  who  are  yet  strangers  to  rest,  are 
thus  far  happy,  that  yon  are  still  spared,  and 
have  the  gospel  continued  to  you.  The  Lord 
is  still  waiting  to  be  gracious  ; he  says  to  all. 
Come  unto  me,  and  ye  shall  find  rest  for  year 
souls.  Do  you  not  see  this  rest  desirable  ? 
What  rest,  either  here  or  hereafter,  can  you 
expect,  if  you  remain  in  the  service  of  sin  ? 
Why  may  not  you  obtain  your  liberty  ? You 
are  no  worse  than  others,  either  by  nature  or 
practice.  Though  you  have  been  transgres- 
sors from  the  womb,  you  are  not  excluded,  if 
you  do  not  exclude  yourselves : though  your 
sinful  habits  and  inclinations  are  exceeding 
strong,  he  is  able  to  subdue  them.  There  is 
a power  in  his  blood,  and  in  that  Spirit  which 
he  is  exalted  to  bestow,  sufficient  to  make  the 
Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  and  the  leopard 
his  spots,  (Jer.  xiii.  23,)  to  soften  the  hardest 
heart,  and  to  pardon  the  most  aggravated 
guilt,  and  to  enable  those  to  do  good  who 
have  been  accustomed  to  do  evil.  Arise,  he 
calleth  you.  O may  he  accompany  the  out- 
ward call  of  his  word  with  the  efficacious 
pov/er  of  his  grace,  that  you  may  this  instant 
obey  his  voice,  and  flee  to  him  for  refuge  ’ 
Whither  can  you  flee  else  ? Who  but  Jesus 
can  save  you  from  the  wrath  to  come  ? Be 
wise,  and  delay  no  longer.  44  But  if  you  will 
not  hear,  mine  eye  shall  weep  for  you  in  se- 
cret places,”  Jer.  xiii.  17.  If  you  will  not 
come  to  Jesus  for  life,  you  must  die.  If  yon 
are  out  of  Christ,  God  is  angry  with  you  every 
day.  The  curse  of  his  broken  law  lies  heavy 
upon  you,  whether  you  are  asleep  or  awake 
abroad  or  at  home,  at  the  market  or  in  the 
church.  The  wrath  of  God  is  revealed  against 
you ; if  you  turn  not,  he  will  w7het  his  sword ; 
(Psalm  vii.  12 ;)  he  hath  bent  his  bow%  and 
made  it  ready : he  hath  prepared  the  instru- 
ments of  death  to  smite  you;  he  hath  or- 
dained the  arrows  of  his  vengeance  against 
you : And  can  you,  dare  you,  go  on  in  your 
sins,  and  say,  I shall  have  peace?  O may 
you  be  wise  in  time ! 44  It  is  a fearful  thing 
to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God,” 
Ileb.  x.  31.  “ Consider  this,  ye  that  forget 

him,  lest  he  tear  you  in  pieces,  and  there  b* 
non : to  deliver,”  Psalm  1.  22. 


SER.  XI.] 


OF  THE  YOKE  OF  CHRIST. 


451 


SERMON  XII. 

OF  THE  YOKE  OF  CHRIST. 

Take  my  yoke  upon  you , and  learn  of  me : 

for  I am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart : and  ye 

shall  find  rest  to  your  souls. — Matt.  xi.  29. 

Those  who  are  enabled  to  come  unto 
Christ,  not  only  experience  a change  of  state, 
but  of  character,  disposition,  and  practice. 
They  are  not  only  freed  from  condemnation, 
but  they  are  made  partakers  of  a divine  na- 
ture. They  are  delivered  from  the  slavery 
and  yoke  of  Satan,  and  made  willing  in  the 
day  of  the  Lord’s  power,  to  accept  and  em- 
brace his  yoke,  which  is  commended  to  us  in 
the  following  verse,  as  easy  and  pleasant. 
Our  Lord  speaks  of  his  service  as  a yoke  or 
burden,  because  it  is  so  esteemed  by  all  who 
know7  him  not.  They  account  him  a hard 
master,  and  think  his  service  wearisome ; but 
those  who  have  made  the  experiment,  find  it 
otherwise : though,  it  must  be  confessed,  it 
exposes  to  some  difficulties,  calls  for  the  daily 
exercise  of  self-denial,  and  will  not  admit 
either  of  competition  or  composition  with  the 
world,  nor  can  be  pleasing  to  the  unrenewed 
part  of  our  nature.  But  the  knowledge  of 
his  love,  the  hope  of  glory,  and  those  season- 
able refreshments  with  which  he  is  pleased 
to  favour  those  who  come  unto  him,  sweeten 
every  bitter  thing,  and  make  them  willing  to 
bear  his  yoke,  and  to  prefer  it  to  all  that  the 
world  accounts  freedom. 

Let  us  inquire, 

1.  What  is  meant  by  the  yoke  of  Christ  I 

2.  The  proper  means  by  which  we  are  en- 
abled to  take  it  upon  us ; that  is,  the  believ- 
ing consideration  of  him,  as  our  effectual 
teacher  and  perfect  pattern. 

3.  The  happy  effect  of  bearing  his  yoke  : 
We  shall  find  rest  to  our  souls. 

I.  The  yoke  of  Christ,  taken  at  large,  in- 
cludes all  the  dependence,  obedience,  and 
submission  which  we  owe  him,  as  our  right- 
ful Lord  and  gracious  Redeemer.  He  has 
a double  right  to  us;  “he  made  us,”  Psalm 
c.  3.  We  are  the  creatures  of  his  power: 
he  gave  us  our  being,  with  all  our  capacities 
and  enjoyments.  And  farther,  “ he  brought 
us (Acts  xx.  23 ;)  he  pitied  us  in  our  low 
and  fallen  state,  and  gave  his  owm  life,  his 
precious  blood,  to  ransom  us  from  that  ruin 
and  misery  which  was  the  just  desert  of  our 
sins.  There  is  good  reason,  therefore,  that 
we  should  be  his,  and  live  and  cleave  to  him 
in  love  alone  ; that  we  should  no  longer  live 
to  ourselves,  but  to  him  who  died  for  us,  and 
rose  again.  In  particular,  we  may  consider, 

1.  The  yoke  of  his  profession.  This  is  very 
pleasing  to  a gracious  soul,  so  far  as  faith  is 
in  exercise.  Far  from  being  ashamed  of  the 
gospel  of  Christ,  he  is  ready  and  willing  to 
tell  all  who  will  hear,  what  God  has  done  for 


his  soul.  Many  young  converts,  in  the  first 
warmth  of  their  affection,  have  more  need  of 
a bridle  than  of  a spur  in  this  concern.  For 
want  of  prudence  to  time  things  rightly,  and 
perhaps  for  want  of  more  tenderness  mixed 
with  their  zeal,  they  are  apt  to  increase  their 
own  troubles,  and  sometimes,  by  pushing 
things  too  far,  to  obstruct  the  success  of  their 
well-meant  endeavours  to  convince  others. 
But  though  this  is  a fault,  it  is  a fault  on  the 
right  side,  which  time,  experience,  and  ob- 
servation, will  correct.  And  though  we  are 
hasty  enough  to  condemn  the  irregular  over- 
flowings of  a heart  deeply  impressed  with  a 
sense  of  eternal  things,  I doubt  not  but  the 
Lord,  who  owns  and  approves  the  main  prin- 
ciple from  whence  they  spring,  beholds  them 
with  a far  more  favourable  eye  than  he  does 
the  cold,  cautious,  temporizing  conduct  of 
some  others,  who  value  themselves  upon  their 
prudence.  We  should  judge  thus,  if  we  had 
servants  of  our  own.  If  we  had  one  who  was 
heartily  and  affectionately  devoted  to  our  in- 
terests, always  ready  to  run  by  night  or  by 
day,  refusing  no  danger  or  difficulty,  from  a 
desire  to  please  us,  though  sometimes,  through 
ignorance  or  inattention,  he  should  make  a 
mistake,  we  should  prefer  him  to  another  of 
greater  knowledge  and  abilities,  who  was  al- 
ways slow  and  backward,  and  discovered  at 
least  as  much  care  to  save  himself  from 
inconveniences  as  to  promote  our  service. 
However,  this  warm  zeal  usually  suffers 
abatement ; we  are  flesh  as  well  as  spirit , 
and  there  are  some  circumstances  attending 
a profession  of  the  gospel,  on  the  account  of 
which  it  may  be  with  propriety  termed  a 
yoke  to  us,  who  have  so  many  remaining 
evils  within  us,  and  so  many  outward  tempt- 
ations to  call  them  forth.  It  will  certainly 
stir  up  opposition  from  the  world,  and  may 
probably  break  in  upon  our  dearest  connec- 
tions, and  threaten  our  most  necessary  tem- 
poral interests,  2 Tim.  iii.  12 ; Matt.  x.  36. 

2.  The  yoke  of  his  precepts.  These  the 
gracious  soul  approves  and  delights  in ; but 
still  we  are  renewed  but  in  part.  And  when 
the  commands  of  Christ  stand  in  direct  oppo- 
sition to  the  will  of  man,  or  call  upon  us  to 
sacrifice  a right  hand  or  a right  eye  ; though 
the  Lord  will  surely  make  those  who  depend 
upon  him  victorious  at  the  last,  yet  it  will  cost 
them  a struggle  ; so  that,  when  they  are  sen- 
sible how  much  they  owe  to  his  power  work- 
ing in  them,  and  enabling  them  to  overcome, 
they  will,  at  the  same  time,  have  a lively 
conviction  of  their  own  weakness.  Abraham 
believed  in  God,  and  delighted  to  obey ; yet 
when  he  was  commanded  to  sacrifice  his 
only  son,  this  was  no  easy  trial  of  his  sincer- 
ity and  obedience  ; and  all  who  are  partakers 
of  his  faith  are  exposed  to  meet,  sooner  or 
later,  with  some  call  of  duty  little  less  con- 
trary to  the  dictates  of  flesh  and  blood. 

3.  The  yoke  of  his  dispensations.  This 


452 


OF  THE  YOKE  OF  CHRIST. 


none  can  bear  as  they  ought,  but  those  who 
come  to  him.  It  is  natural  to  us  to  repine, 
to  fret,  and  toss  like  a wild  bull  in  a net,  (Isa. 
li.  20,)  when  we  are  under  afflictions.  Be- 
lievers likewise  find  their  flesh  weak,  when 
their  spirits  are  willing;  yet  they  see  suffi- 
cient reason  to  submission,  and  they  know 
where  to  apply  for  grace.  Affliction  is  a 
touchstone  that  discovers  what  spirit  a man 
is  of.  The  hypocrite  inav  keep  up  a fair 
semblance  of  true  piety,  while  all  things  go 
smooth  and  to  his  wish  ; but  in  sharp  troubles 
the  mask  will  drop  off.  Satan  proceeded 
upon  this  maxim  in  his  contest  with  Job ; and 
the  maxim  is  a truth,  though  Satan  was 
mistaken  in  the  application. 

II.  The  appointed  means  by  which  sinners 
are  enabled  to  bear  this  threefold  yoke,  is 
suggested  in  the  words,  “ Learn  of  me,  for  I 
am  meek  and  lowly.”  However  amiable  and 
desirable  the  disposition  I have  described 
may  appear,  you  will  never  acquire  it  by  any 
strength,  wisdom,  or  diligence  of  your  own. 
Our  Lord,  to  prevent  you  wearying  your- 
selves with  unsuccessful  efforts  and  needless 
disappointments,  has  assured  you  beforehand, 
“Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing,”  John  xv. 
5.  But  here  he  graciously  offers  you  the  as- 
sistance you  need.  As  if  he  had  said  I know 
you  are  unable  of  yourselves,  but  I will  help 
you.  Be  not  afraid  of  the  prospect,  but  con- 
sider what  I can  do.  To  my  power  all  things 
are  easy;  I can  make  the  crooked  straight, 
and  the  rough  smooth ; I can  sweetly  engage 
your  affections,  subdue  your  wills ; influence 
your  practice,  and  deliver  you  from  your  sin- 
ful fears.  Consider  likewise  what  I have 
done ; thousands,  who  by  nature  were  as  un- 
skilful and  impatient  as  yourselves,  have  been 
made  willing  in  the  day  of  my  power. 

Therefore,  Learn  of  me. — Be  not  afraid  to 
come  to  me,  for  I am  meek  and  lowly  of 
heart.  Great  and  mighty  as  I am,  you  may 
freely  apply  to  me  in  every  doubt  and  diffir 
culty.  Awakened  souls,  through  a sense  of 
guilt,  and  the  power  of  unbelief,  are  back- 
ward and  unwilling  to  come  to  Christ.  They 
think,  surely  he  will  take  no  notice  of  such  a 
one  as  I am.  But  observe  how  kind  and 
condescending  is  his  invitation ; how  graci- 
ously suited  to  engage  our  confidence ! It 
was  said  of  a Roman  emperor,  that  those  who 
durst  speak  to  him  were  ignorant  of  his  great- 
ness, but  those  who  durst  not  were  still  more 
ignorant  of  his  goodness.  This  was  a false 
and  impious  compliment  when  applied  to  a 
sinful  mortal ; but  it  is  justly  applicable  to 
Jesus,  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords. 
His  glorious  majesty  may  well  fill  our  hearts 
with  awe,  and  humble  us  unto  the  dust  before 
him  : but  his  immense  compassions,  tender- 
ness, and  love,  are  revealed,  to  overbalance 
our  fears,  to  give  us  confidence  to  draw  nigh 
to  him,  and  an  encouraging  hope  that  he  will 
draw  nigh  to  us. 


[ser.  XII. 

Again,  Learn  of  me. — I know  the  cause 
why  these  things  appear  so  hard.  It  is  owing 
to  the  pride  and  impatience  of  your  hearts. 
To  remedy  this,  take  me  for  your  example; 
I require  nothing  of  you  but  what  I have  per- 
formed before  you,  and  on  your  account : in 
the  path  I mark  out  for  you,  you  may  per- 
ceive my  own  footsteps  all  the  way.  This  is 
a powerful  argument,  a sweet  recommenda- 
tion of  the  yoke  of  Christ,  to  those  who  love 
him,  that  he  bore  it  himself.  He  is  not  like 
the  Pharisees,  whom  he  censured  (Matt,  xxiii. 
4)  on  this  very  account,  who  bound  heavy 
burdens,  and  grievous  to  be  borne,  and  laid 
them  on  men’s  shoulders,  but  they  themselves 
would  not  move  them  with  one  of  their  fingers. 

1.  Are  you  terrified  with  the  difficulties 
attending  your  profession,  disheartened  by 
hard  usage,  or  too  ready  to  show  resentment 
against  those  who  oppose  you]  Learn  of  Je- 
sus, imitate  and  admire  his  constancy:  “ Con- 
sider him  who  endured  the  contradiction  of 
sinners  against  himself,”  Heb.  xii.  3.  Make 
a comparison  (so  the  word*  imports)  between 
yourself  and  him,  between  the  contradiction 
which  he  endured,  and  that  which  you  are 
called  to  struggle  with,  then  surely  you  will 
be  ashamed  to  complain.  Admire  and  imitate 
his  meekness ; when  he  was  reviled,  he  re- 
viled not  again ; when  he  suffered,  he  threat- 
ened not ; he  wept  for  his  enemies,  and  pray- 
ed for  his  murderers.  Let  the  same  mind  be 
in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus. 

2.  Do  you  find  it  hard  to  walk  steadfastly 
in  his  precepts,  especially  in  some  particular 
instances,  when  the  maxims  of  worldly  pru- 
dence, and  the  pleadings  of  flesh  and  blood, 
are  strongly  against  you  ] Learn  of  Jesus. 
He  pleased  not  himself,  (Rom.  xv.  3,)  he 
considered  not  what  was  safe  and  easy,  but 
what  was  the  will  of  his  heavenly  Father. 
Intreat  him  to  strengthen  you  with  strength 
in  your  soul,  that  as  you  bear  the  name  of  his 
disciples,  you  may  resemble  him  in  every  part 
of  your  conduct,  and  shine  as  lights  in  a dark 
and  selfish  world,  to  the  glory  of  his  grace. 

3.  Are  you  tempted  to  repine  at  the  dis- 
pensations of  divine  providence ! Take  Jesus 
for  your  pattern.  Did  he  say,  when  the  un- 
speakable sufferings  he  was  to  endure  for  sin- 
ners were  just  coming  upon  him,  “The  cup 
which  my  Father  has  put  into  my  hands  shall 
I not  drink  it]”  (John  xviii.  11;)  and  shall 
we  presume  to  have  a will  of  our  own  ? es- 
pecially when  we  further  reflect,  that  as  his 
sufferings  were  wholly  on  our  account,  so  aL 
our  sufferings  are  by  his  appointment,  aDd  all 
designed  by  him  to  promote  our  best,  that  is 
our  spiritual  and  eternal  welfare  ] 

It  is  thus  by  looking  to  Jesus  that  the  be- 
liever is  enlightened  and  strengthened,  and 
grows  in  grace  and  sanctification,  according 
to  that  passage  of  St.  Paul,  “We  all  with 


* Av*\pyi< rxrSi. 


OF  THE  YOKE  OF  CHRIST. 


453 


SER.  XII.] 

open  face,”  or  unvailed  face,  “ beholding  as 
in  a glass  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed 
into  the  same  image,  from  glory  to  glory,  as 
by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,”  2 Cor.  iii.  18. 
The  word  of  God  is  a glass  in  which  the  good- 
ness and  beauty  of  the  Lord  Jesus  are  mani- 
fested to  the  eye  of  faith  by  the  light  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  In  this  wonderful  glass  the 
whole  object  is  not  seen  at  once,  but  every 
view  we  take  strengthens  the  sight  to  dis- 
cover something  not  perceived  before.  And 
the  prospect  is  not  only  affecting,  but  trans- 
forming; by  beholding  we  are  gradually 
formed  into  the  resemblance  of  him  whom 
we  see,  admire,  and  love.  All  those  whom 
fesus  thus  teaches  to  bear  his  yoke,  find  his 
promise  fulfilled  ; they  obtain, 

III.  Rest  to  their  souls.  Those  who  are 
truly  awakened  want  nothing  to  make  them 
happy,  but  to  be  assured  that  they  have  an 
interest  in  the  Redeemer’s  love.  Now,  this 
satisfaction  is  peculiar  to  those  who  take  his 
yoke  upon  them,  and  are  daily  learning  of 
him,  and  copying  after  him.  For, 

1.  This  affords  the  best  and  most  unshaken 
evidence  that  he  has  begun  a good  work  of 
grace  in  our  hearts:  I say  the  best,  because 
the  most  unshaken.  Many  are  greatly  per- 
plexed to  know  if  they  are  truly  converted ; 
and  are  kept  the  longer  in  suspense,  because 
they  overlook  the  ordinary  scriptural  method 
of  confirmation.  They  expect  to  know  it  by 
some  extraordinary  sensation  suddenly  im- 
pressed upon  their  minds.  But  besides  that 
there  have  been  many  instances  in  which 
this  expected  evidence  has  been  counter- 
feited, and  a groundless  confidence  has  been 
placed  in  a delusion  or  vain  imagination  (to 
the  hurt  of  many,  if  not  to  their  overthrow,) 
even  when  they  are  from  the  gracious  Spirit 
of  God,  they  are  for  the  most  part  transient; 
and  when  a different  frame  takes  place,  the 
believer  is  often  tempted  to  question  the 
reality  of  what  went  before.  I think  there- 
fore the  testimony  of  an  enlightened  con- 
science, judging  by  the  word  of  God,  and  de- 
ciding in  our  favour,  that  by  his  grace  we 
have  been  enabled  to  take  up  the  yoke  of 
Christ,  is  in  some  respects  a more  satisfactory 
evidence,  that  we  are  his,  and  that  he  is  ours, 
than  if  an  angel  was  sent  from  heaven  to  tell 
us,  that  our  names  are  written  in  the  book 
of  life. 

2.  The  promise  of  the  peculiar  manifesta- 
tion of  his  love,  (John  xiv.  21,)  is  made  and 
restricted  to  those  who  walk  in  the  path  of 
obedience.  If  the  discoveries  the  Lord  is 
pleased  sometimes  to  make  of  himself  to  the 
soul,  are  not  the  proper  and  direct  evidences 
of  a state  of  grace,  they  are  however  exceed- 
ingly desirable.  Whoever  has  tasted  the 
sweets  of  that  water  of  life,  cannot  but  long 
for  repeated  draughts.  When  he  lifts  up  the 
light  of  his  countenance  upon  the  soul,  then 
is  love,  joy,  and  peace  within,  however  dark 


and  distressing  things  may  be  without.  But 
this  desirable  presence  can  only  be  expected, 
while  we  bear  his  yoke  and  walk  in  his  steps. 
If  we  turn  aside  into  forbidden  paths,  if  we 
decline  or  dishonour  the  profession  of  his 
truth,  we  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit,  on  whose 
communications  our  comforts  are  suspend- 
ed ; we  give  the  enemies  of  our  souls  encour- 
agement to  assault  us,  and  are  in  danger  of 
falling  from  one  wickedness  to  another,  with- 
out the  power  of  withstanding  either  the 
greatest  or  the  smallest  temptation,  till  the 
Lord  is  pleased  to  turn  again  to  our  assistance. 
In  such  a situation  there  can  be  no  rest. 
“But  he  that  walketh  uprightly,  walketh 
surely,  and  findeth  rest,”  Prov.  x.  9. 

And  true  rest  is  no  otherwise  to  be  obtain- 
ed. Those  of  you  who  refuse  the  yoke  of 
Christ,  well  know  in  yourselves  that  you  are 
far  from  rest.  Your  experience  agrees  with 
this  declaration  in  the  prophet:  “ There  is  no 
peace,  saith  my  God,  to  the  wicked,”  Isa.  lvii. 
21.  In  what  respect  will  you  dare  to  pretend 
that  you  have  the  advantage  of  those  who 
bear  the  yoke  of  Christ  1 

We  allow,  the  profession  of  the  gospel  is 
subject  to  inconveniences,  but  surely  not  to 
so  many  as  you  meet  with  who  are  ashamed, 
or  afraid,  or  averse  to  maintain  it.  If  those 
who  are  of  your  household  are  not  your  foes 
on  this  account,  yet  we  can  see  how  it  fares 
with  those  who  live  without  the  fear  of  God. 
How  many,  and  how  sharp  are  your  trials 
from  disobedient  children,  unfaithful  servants, 
false  friendships,  ungoverned  passions,  and 
unsatisfied  desires!  Nor  do  you  save  any- 
thing in  point  of  character,  not  even  with 
those  by  whom  you  are  most  desirous  to  be 
esteemed.  They  cannot  indeed  reproach  you 
with  being  a believer,  but  may  they  not,  do 
they  not  reproach  and  despise  you  for  being 
a drunkard,  or  a liar,  or  a miser,  or  an  ex- 
tortioner 1 And  is  this  more  honourable  than 
to  suffer  shame  for  the  cause  of  Christ  1 

Do  the  precepts  of  Christ  seem  hard  1 Cer- 
tainly not  so  hard  as  that  miserable  bondage 
you  are  under  to  Satan,  the  god  of  this  world, 
who  works  in  you,  and  rules  over  you  at  his 
will.  He  will  not  allow  you  to  listen  to  the 
united  remonstrances  of  conscience,  health, 
interest,  and  reputation.  But  you  are  hurried 
on  in  his  drudgery,  constrained,  like  a mill- 
horse,  to  toil  in  the  same  tedious  round  of 
folly  and  sin,  though  you  are  aware  of  the 
consequences  and  wages  beforehand.  How 
absurd  is  it  for  you  to  boast  of  your  freedom, 
while  you  are  compelled  to  rush  into  present 
misery,  and  to  dare  your  eternal  ruin,  with 
your  eyes  open ! 

And  how  greatly  are  you  to  be  pitied  under 
the  many  unavoidable  afflictions  of  life,  to 
which  you  are  equally  liable  with  the  ser- 
vants of  Christ ! When  your  idols  are  tom 
from  you,  when  sickness  seizes  you,  or  death 
stares  you  in  the  face,  then  how  do  you  fret 


454 


THE  SERVICE  OF  CHRIST 


and  pine!  how  many  are  your  fears  and 
alarms ! Then  you  are  your  own  tormentors. 
The  review  of  the  past  affords  you  only 
shame  and  regret.  If  you  look  forward  to 
the  future,  you  are  filled  with  foreboding 
fears  and  distressing  apprehensions ; you  are 
weary  of  living  and  afraid  to  die. 

Why  then  will  you  continue  thus,  when 
Jesus  says,  “ Come  unto  me,  that  you  may 
have  rest  1”  O may  he  incline  your  hearts 
this  day  to  hear  his  voice ! Have  you  been 
hardened  in  your  evil  ways  by  a suspicion 
that  your  case  is  desperate,  that  it  is  now  too 
late,  and  that  he  whom  you  have  so  often  re- 
jected will  refuse  you  mercy  ? Beware  of 
such  a thought : “ There  is  forgiveness  with 
him,”  Ps.  cxxx.  4.  “ Behold,  now  is  the  ac- 

cepted time ; behold,  now  is  the  day  of  sal- 
vation.” He  is  gracious  to  pardon  and  mighty 
to  save;  only  acknowledge  your  offences, 
and  throw  down  the  arms  of  your  rebellion. 
He  is  mighty  to  save,  and  no  less  willing 
than  able.  As  yet  there  is  hope,  but  who  can 
tell  how  long  his  patience  may  bear  with  you! 
Take  notice  of  that  awful  denunciation,  “ He 
that  being  often  reproved  hardeneth  his  neck, 
shall  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  without 
remedy,”  Prov.  xxix.  1.  If  you  seek  him  to- 
day with  all  your  hearts,  you  shall  find  him. 
But  who  can  answer  for  to-morrow?  To- 
morrow, or  to-night,  your  souls  may  be  re- 
quired of  you ; or,  if  your  lives  are  spared, 
you  may  be  given  up  to  judicial  and  incur- 
able hardness  of  heart.  If  his  Spirit  should 
cease  from  striving  with  you,  you  are  lost 
for  ever. 


SERMON  XIII. 

THE  SERVICE  OF  CHRIST  EASY  AND  PLEASANT. 

For  my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  burden  is  light. 
Matt.  xi.  30. 

This  verse  alone,  if  seriously  attended  to, 
might  convince  multitudes,  that  though  they 
bear  the  name  of  Christians,  and  are  found 
among  the  Lord’s  worshipping  people,  they 
are  as  yet  entire  strangers  to  the  religion  of 
the  gospel.  Can  it  be  supposed  that  our  Lord 
Would  give  a false  character  of  his  yoke  ? If 
not,  how  can  any  dream  that  they  are  his  fol- 
lowers while  they  account  a life  of  commu- 
nion with  God,  and  entire  devotedness  to  his 
service,  to  be  dull  and  burdensome  ? Those, 
however,  who  have  made  the  happy  trial,  find 
it  to  be  such  a burden  as  wings  are  to  a bird. 
Far  from  complaining  of  it,  they  are  con- 
vinced that  there  is  no  real  pleasure  attain- 
able in  any  other  way. 

What  the  yoke  of  Christ  is,  we  have  already 
considered.  It  includes  the  profession  of  his 
gospel,  obedience  to  his  precepts,  and  submis- 


[SER.  XIII. 

sion  to  his  will  under  every  dispensation.  But 
since  it  is  confessed  that  a sinful  nature  and 
a sinful  world  will  bring  many  difficulties, 
trials,  and  temptations  upon  all  who  walk  in 
this  way,  it  may  be  worth  our  while  to  in- 
quire more  particularly  w hat  there  is  in  the 
yoke  of  Christ  that  overpowers  all  these  hard- 
ships, and  makes  such  amends  for  every  suf- 
fering, that,  upon  the  whole,  every  believer 
will  subscribe  to  this  as  a sure  and  expe- 
rienced truth,  that  the  “ yoke  is  easy,  and  the 
burden  light.” 

I.  Those  who  bear  the  yoke  of  Christ  act 
from  a principle  which  makes  all  things  easy. 
This  is  love.  It  is  said  of  Jacob,  that  when 
he  served  a hard  master  seven  years  for  Ra- 
chel, they  seemed  to  him  but  a few  days,  for 
the  love  which  he  bare  her,  Gen.  xxix.  20. 
And  many  of  you  find  it  easy  to  do  much  for 
your  parents,  children,  and  friends,  because 
you  love  them.  But  there  is  no  love  like 
that  which  a redeemed  sinner  bears  to  him 
who  “ has  loved  him,  and  washed  him  from 
his  sins  in  his  own  blood.”  Farther,  love  pro- 
duces the  greatest  effects  when  it  is  mutual. 
We  are  willing  to  do  and  suffer  much  to  gain 
the  affection  of  a person  we  regard,  though 
we  are  not  sure  of  success  ; but  w hen  the  af- 
fection is  reciprocal,  it  adds  strength  to  every 
motive.  Now,  the  believer  does  not  love  at 
uncertainties : he  knows  that  Jesus  loved  him 
first,  loved  him  when  he  was  in  a state  of 
enmity ; (1  John  iv.  19 ;)  and  that  nothing 
but  the  manifestation  and  power  of  this  love 
could  have  taught  his  hard,  unfeeling  heart 
to  love  him  whom  he  never  saw,  1 Pet.  i.  8. 
This  love,  therefore,  affords  two  sweet  and 
powerful  encouragements  in  service. 

1.  A cordial  desire  to  please.  Love  does 
what  it  can,  and  is  only  sorry  that  it  can  do 
no  more.  We  seldom  think  much,  as  I have 
hinted  already,  either  of  time,  pains,  or  ex- 
pense, when  the  heart  is  warmly  engaged. 
The  world,  who  understand  not  this  heart- 
felt spring  of  true  religion,  think  it  strange 
that  the  believer  will  not  run  into  the  same 
excess  of  riot  with  them,  1 Pet.  iv.  4.  They 
wonder  what  pleasure  he  can  find  in  secret 
prayer,  in  reading  and  hearing  the  word  of 
God ; they  pity  the  poor  man  who  has  such  a 
melancholy  turn,  and  gravely  advise  him  not 
to  carry  things  too  far.  But  the  believer  can 
give  them  a short  answer  in  the  apostle’s 
words  : “ The  love  of  Christ  constrains  me,” 
2 Cor.  v.  14.  His  ruling  passion  is  the  same 
with  theirs,  which  makes  his  pursuit  no  less 
uniform  and  aViding ; but  the  objects  are  a3 
different  as  light  from  darkness.  They  love 
the  perishing  pleasures  of  sin,  the  mammon 
of  unrighteousness,  and  the  praise  of  men ; 
but  he  loves  Jesus. 

2.  A pleasing  assurance  of  acceptance.  If 
we  know  not  whether  what  we  do  will  be  fa- 
vourably received  or  not,  it  makes  us  remiss 
and  indifferent.  But  this  animates  the  Lord’s 


EASY  AND  PLEASANT. 


456 


GER.  XIII.] 

* . 

people;  they  are  assured,  that  he  will  not 
overlook  the  smallest  services  or  sufferings 
they  are  engaged  in  for  his  sake.  He  has 
told  them  in  his  word,  That  if  they  give 
but  a cup  of  cold  water  in  his  name,  and  on 
his  account,  he  will  accept  and  acknowledge 
it,  as  if  it  were  done  immediately  to  himself, 
Mark  ix.  41. 

II.  It  makes  a service  still  more  easy  and 
pleasant,  if  besides  acting  from  a principle  of 
love,  the  service  itse'if  is  agreeable  to  our  in- 
clination. Esau  would  probably  have  done 
any  thing  to  please  his  father,  in  hopes  of  ob- 
taining the  blessing ; but  no  command  could 
please  him  more  than  to  be  sent  for  venison, 
because  he  was  a cunning  hunter,  and  his 
pleasure  lay  in  that  way,  Gen.  xxv.  27,  and 
xxvii.  3.  Now,  the  believer  has  received  a 
new  nature;  so  that  the  Lord’s  command- 
ments are  not  grievous  to  him,  but  he  delights 
in  them  with  his  whole  heart.  It  is  true,  he 
groans  under  remaining  corruptions;  and  this 
is  properly  his  burden,  not  the  service  of 
Christ,  which  he  approves  and  delights,  in, 
but  because  he  can  serve  him  no  better.  So 
far  as  faith  is  in  exercise,  he  rejoices  in  every 
part  of  the  yoke  of  Christ.  He  glories  in  the 
profession  of  his  name.  He  has  made  Moses’s 
choice ; he  prefers  even  the  reproach  of  Christ 
to  all  the  honours  of  the  world ; (Heb.  xi.  26 ;) 
and  has  a measure  of  that  spirit,  by  which  the 
apostles  were  enabled  to  re  joice  that  they  were 
counted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  his  name, 
Acts  v.  41.  He  heartily  consents  to  the  pre- 
cepts ; he  esteems  them  as  a light  to  his  feet ; 
he  makes  them  his  meditation  all  the  day. 
Nothing  pleases  him  more  than  to  find  an  in- 
creasing victory  over  the  hinderances  to  his 
obedience ; and  the  time  of  his  greatest  grief 
is,  when,  through  infirmity,  or  the  prevalence 
of  temptation,  he  is  seduced  to  neglect  or 
transgress  them,  though  in  the  smallest  in- 
stance, and  in  what  does  not  pass  under  hu- 
man observation.  Even  afflictions,  though 
not  joyous  in  themselves,  but  grievous,  are 
cheerfully  submitted  to,  because  the  Lord 
has  appointed  them,  and  is  pleased  to  ac- 
count them  a filling  up  of  his  sufferings, 
Col.  i.  24. 

III.  In  other  cases,  even  when  there  is  a 
principle  of  love,  and  the  service  not  disa- 
greeable in  itself,  yet  weakness  may  render 
it  wearisome  or  impracticable.  Though  per- 
haps you  would  willingly  take  a long  journey 
tc  serve  a friend  ; yet  if  you  are  sick  or  lame, 
what  could  you  do!  But  the  yoke  of  Christ 
is  light  and  easy  in  this  respect,  that  there  is 
a sufficiency  of  strength  provided  for  the  per- 
formance. This  consideration  makes  every 
difficulty  vanish  ; for  though  these  should  be 
increased  tenfold,  yet  if  strength  be  increas- 
ed in  an  equal  proportion,  it  amounts  to  the 
same  thing.  What  is  hard  or  impossible  to 
a child,  is  easy  to  a man ; what  is  hard  to 
tiesh  and  blood,  is  easy  to  faith  and  grace. 


The  believer,  though  weak  in  himself,  is 
strong  in  the  Lord.  The  power  on  which  he 
depends  is  not  in  his  own  keeping ; but  it  is 
treasured  up  in  the  covenant  of  grace,  or  in 
the  Lord  Jesus,  in  whom  all  fulness  dwells, 
and  is  alw  ays  to  be  obtained  by  prayer.  Every 
child  of  God  is  interested  in  the  blessing  of 
Asher : “ Thy  shoes  shall  be  iron  and  brass ; 
and  as  thy  day  is,  so  shall  thy  strength  be,” 
Deut.  xxxiii.  25.  By  the  day  may  be  under- 
stood, 

1.  A day  of  service.  Whatever  the  Lord 
appoints  for  us  to  do,  if  we  depend  upon  him 
in  the  use  of  appointed  means,  he  will  cer- 
tainly qualify,  furnish,  and  strengthen  us,  for 
the  accomplishment  of  it.  If  David  is  called 
out  to  meet  Goliah,  though  he  is  but  a strip- 
ling, (1  Sam.  xvii.  37,)  and  the  other  a prac- 
tised warrior  from  his  youth,  he  shall  not  be 
disheartened  or  overcome,  but  be  made  a con- 
queror though  all  appearances  are  against 
him.  If  we  are  in  the  path  of  duty,  and  if 
our  help  and  hope  is  in  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
we  may  confidently  expect  that  he  will  up- 
hold us,  however  faint  and  enfeebled  we  may 
seem  to  be  to  ourselves  or  others. 

2.  A day  of  suffering.  If,  like  Daniel  and 
his  companions,  we  should  be  threatened  with 
lions  and  flames,  we  may  confidently  commit 
our  way  to  God ; he  can  control  the  fire,  and 
stop  the  lions’  mouth,  Dan.  iii.  16,  and  vi. 
22;  Psalm  xci.  13;  2 Tim.  iv.  17.  While 
all  things  are  in  his  hands,  whose  we  are, 
and  whom  we  serve,  why  should  we  fear  that 
they  will  act  beyond  the  bounds  of  his  per- 
mission, or  that  he  will  permit  them  to  do 
any  thing  which  is  not  his  purpose  to  over- 
rule to  his  advantage ! Such  considerations 
in  the  hour  of  need,  seasonably  impressed  by 
his  good  Spirit,  together  with  a trust  in  his 
promises,  shall  inspire  us  with  new  strength 
to  meet  the  greatest  danger  undismayed ; and 
with  regard  to  trials  immediately  from  his 
own  gracious  hand,  he  will  so  adjust  them,  in 
number,  season,  weight,  and  measure,  to  the 
ability  he  communicates,  that  we  both  shall 
be  able  to  bear,  and  also  find  a way  made  for 
us  to  escape.  With  such  assurances,  we  may 
boldly  say,  “ The  Lord  is  on  my  side,  I will 
not  fear  what  man  (or  Satan)  can  do  unto 
me.” 

IV.  There  is  further,  a consideration  of 
profit  and  advantage,  which  makes  the  yoke 
of  Christ  easy.  The  believing  soul  is  not 
mercenary.  He  loves  his  master  and  his  ser- 
vice ; yet  it  is  impossible  to  serve  God  for 
nought.  In  the  keeping  of  his  command- 
ments, there  is  a reward,  though  not  of  debt, 
vet  of  grace:  (Psalm  xix.  11:)  A great,  and 
sure  reward,  respecting  both  the  life  that  now 
is,  and  that  which  is  to  come. 

Those  who  sincerely  take  up  the  yoke  of 
Christ,  and  cleave  to  him  in  love  alone,  have 
ample  compensation  in  the  present  life  for  all 
that  their  profession  can  cost  them.  They 


456 


THE  SERVICE  OF  CHRIST 


[ser.  XnL 


enjoy  the  testimony  of  a good  conscience, 
whicl.  is  compared  to  a continual  feast.  St. 
Paul,  though  a champion  for  free  grace,  and 
determined  to  glorv  only  in  the  excellency 
of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus,  (2  Cor.  i. 
12,)  expresses  a high  and  just  value  for  this 
privilege ; and  that  it  afforded  comfort,  yea 
joy,  in  a time  of  trouble.  Superadded  to  this, 
they  are  often  favoured  with  the  peculiar  con- 
solations of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which,  though 
slightly  esteemed  by  those  who  know  them 
not,  satisfy  the  soul  as  with  marrow  and  fat- 
ness, and  can  change  the  voice  of  mourning 
into  songs  of  praise  in  an  instant,  Psalm  lxiii. 
3.  And  though  these  are  not  their  constant 
food,  yet  they  have  real  and  habitual  com- 
munion with  God,  from  day  to  day,  in  his  or- 
dinances and  providences.  They  live  in  his 
presence;  they  converse  with  him,  and  he 
with  them;  their  good  things  are  doubly 
pleasing,  because  they  receive  them  from 
his  hand ; and  this  thought  likewise  sweetens 
every  bitter  cup  of  affliction  which  he  pre- 
pares for  their  good.  The  mutual  inter- 
course and  communion  his  people  have  with 
each  other,  is  likewise  a considerable  branch 
of  their  present  reward.  How  pleasing  is  it, 
when  speaking  to  each  other  in  his  name, 
they  take  sweet  counsel  together ! they  are 
confirmed  in  his  way,  by  finding  how  their 
experiences  answer  as  face  to  face  in  a 
glass;  and  he  causes  their  hearts  to  burn 
within  them,  while  they  are  freely  declaring 
what  he  has  done  for  their  souls.  Lastly, 
they  are  happy  in  a comfortable  expectation 
of  a better  world ; (Gen.  xix.  18 ;)  and  when 
the  appointed  time  comes,  death  will  put  an 
end  to  all  their  troubles ; and  then  shall  they 
fully  know  and  possess  the  future  reward 
which  the  Lord  has  prepared  and  reserved 
for  them  that  love  him. 

This  is  briefly  summed  up  by  the  apostle : 
They  shall  be  absent  from  the  body,  (2  Cor. 
v.  8,)  and  all  its  inseparable  evils;  sin  and 
sorrow,  want,  pain,  and  every  distress  that 
belongs  to  this  mortal  state,  shall  affect  them 
no  more ; and  they  shall  be  present  with  the 
Lord,  whom  they  love.  Then  they  shall  see 
his  face  without  a cloud,  and  share  his  joy 
without  abatement  or  interruption ; and  all 
this  shall  be  for  ever.  When  they  are  made 
pillars  of  the  new  Jerusalem,  (Rev.  iii.  12; 
1 Thess.  iv.  17,)  they  shall  come  out  no 
more.  The  prospect  of  this  makes  them  re- 
joice under  all  their  tribulations:  for  they 
know  whereto  they  lead,  and  how  they  will 
end.  “These  light  and  momentary  afflic- 
tions are  working  for  them  a far  more  ex- 
ceeding and  eternal  weight  of  glory,  2 Cor. 
iv.  17. 

From  these  things  I hope  it  will  appear 
that  the  yoke  of  Christ  is  easy.  His  people 
serve  him  because  they  love  him ; they  love 
his  ways : he  is  their  strength  ; he  comforts 
them  now,  and  will  be  their  portion  for  ever. 


But  perhaps  some,  whom  I would  willingly 
comfort,  will  rather  be  discouraged  by  this 
representation,  and  say,  Alas ! if  it  is  thus,  I 
am  yet  to  seek.  My  love  is  so  faint,  my 
strength  so  feeble,  my  consolations  so  small, 
my  obedience  so  imperfect,  that  I am  afraid 
I have  not  known  the  easy  yoke  of  Christ. 
There  are  therefore  some  other  things  to  be 
taken  into  the  account,  and  which  are  no 
just  exception  to  the  character  our  Lord  here 
gives  of  his  yoke. 

1.  The  entrance,  or  first  application  of  the 
mind  to  the  yoke,  or  profession  of  the  gospel, 
is  seldom  pleasant.  Though  the  work  of 
grace  leads  to  love,  it  usually  begins  in  fear. 
On  this  point  we  have  already  spoken  at 
large.  It  is  no  pleasing  state  to  be  weary 
and  heavy  laden,  to  see  ourselves  obnoxious 
to  a curse,  and  unable  to  escape;  yet,  by 
apprehensions  of  this  kind,  the  soul  is  pre- 
pared to  embrace  the  yoke  of  Christ ; and 
none  but  those  who  have  experienced  the 
misery  of  a fallen  state,  will  be  truly  de- 
sirous of  the  gospel-rest. 

2.  The  progress  is  gradual.  The  first 
dawnings  of  grace  in  the  heart  are  faint, 
and  hardly  perceptible;  hence  the  whole 
process  is  compared  to  things  that  are  very 
inconsiderable  in  their  first  principles.  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  a grain  of  mus- 
tard seed,  which  is  hid  and  lost  in  the  earth 
for  a season ; it  is  like  leaven,  which  when 
cast  into  meal  may  be  concealed  and  unno- 
ticed for  a while,  but  by  degrees  diffuses  its 
influence  through  the  whole  mass ; (Matt, 
xiii.  31,  33;)  it  is  like  the  corn,  which  springs 
up  and  comes  forward  night  and  day,  a man 
knows  not  how,  Mark  iv.  27.  The  growth 
in  the  Christian  life  being  thus  slow  and  in- 
distinct, many  who  aim  to  ascertain  their  in- 
terest rather  by  the  degree  than  the  reality 
of  grace,  are  often  dejected  to  find  their  at- 
tainments proceed  no  faster.  It  is  indeed  a 
humbling  consideration,  but  ought  not  to  rob 
us  of  the  comfort  arising  from  a believing 
view  of  what  Jesus  has  completely  wrought 
out  for  us,  and  of  what  he  has  promised  he 
will  infallibly  perform  in  us,  in  his  own 
good  time.  A deliverance  from  this  poring 
into  ourselves  for  the  grounds  of  our  hope, 
is  a part,  a considerable  part  of  the  rest  to 
which  he  invites  us. 

3.  The  difficulties  attendant  on  that  course 
of  faith  and  obedience,  which  is  included  in 
taking  his  yoke  upon  us,  are  many  and  great. 
While  we  sojourn  in  a wilderness-state,  and 
in  a sinful  nature,  there  will  be  fightings 
without  and  fears  within.  It  is  the  appointed 
and  necessary  rule  of  our  profession,  that 
“ through  much  tribulation  we  must  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  God,”  Acts  xiv.  22.  All 
who  are  against  him  will  be  against  us  for 
his  sake,  and  the  evil  heart  of  unbelief  will 
show  itself  in  a variety  of  forms,  as  it  is  act- 
ed upon  by  various  impressions,  from  tlu 


EASY  AND  PLEASANT. 


SER.  XIV.] 

things  of  sense  and  the  powers  of  darkness. 
JBut  these  troubles  do  not  arise  from  the 
spiritual  yoke  of  Christ,  but  from  our  pre- 
sent situation  and  circumstances,  and  shall 
therefore  shortly  cease  for  ever.  His  ways 
are  ways  of  pleasantness,  though  we  are 
sure  to  meet  with  perplexity  and  uneasi- 
ness, so  far  and  so  often  as  we  wander  from 
them  into  our  own  crooked  paths.  But, 

4.  The  end  is  sure.  “He  that  endureth 
to  the  end  shall  be  saved (Matt.  x.  22 ;) 
and  all  who  are  in  his  way,  have  his  pro- 
mise and  power  engaged  in  their  behalf, 
that  they  shall  certainly  endure,  that  he  will 
so  lead,  guide,  support,  and  strengthen  them, 
that  neither  life  nor  death,  nor  things  pre- 
sent, nor  things  to  come,  shall  separate  them 
from  his  love,  Rom.  viii.  38.  Your  com- 
plaints and  fears,  therefore,  are  no  proof  that 
you  are  not  right.  Go  on,  in  his  name. 
Trust  in  him  in  whom  you  have  believed, 
and  be  nothing  terrified  by  your  adversaries. 
The  longer  you  wear  the  yoke,  the  easier 
you  will  find  it. 

Let  each  one  examine  himself  by  what 
has  b?en  offered.  If  you  have  not  a princi- 
ple of  true  love  to  Christ,  and  a prevailing 
desire  to  live  in  all  holy  obedience  to  his  will, 
you  are  no  Christian;  and,  though  you  may 
begin  warmly,  you  will  not  be  able  to  hold 
out,  but  your  profession  will  wither  away 
for  want  of  root  and  moisture.  Nor  is  it  dif- 
ficult to  know  whether  you  love  him  or  no ; 
if  you  do,  you  have  seen  your  need  of  him, 
and  abhor  yourself  in  dust  and  ashes. 

From  hence  likewise  you  may  discern  the 
difference  between  the  religion  of  the  gospel 
and  the  formal  worship  that  many  are  con- 
tented with,  in  which  the  heart  has  no  place. 
Remember  that  “ God  is  a Spirit,”  (John  iv. 
24,)  and  unless  you  love  him,  you  cannot  pos- 
sibly please  him.  If  a man  would  give  all 
the  substance  of  his  house  for  love,  it  would 
be  utterly  contemned.  His  commandments 
likewise  are  spiritual;  they  extend  beyond 
the  surface  of  the  outer  conduct,  and  take 
cognizance  even  of  the  retired  thoughts  and 
intents  of  the  heart.  Many  sins  may  be 
avoided,  and  many  duties  performed,  from 
motives  and  principles  which,  not  being  de- 
rived from  his  word,  or  conformable  to  it,  are 
therefore  sinful  in  themselves,  and  make 
every  thing  proceeding  from  them  defective 
and  displeasing  in  his  sight.  If  you  are  at- 
tempting to  serve  him  by  your  own  natural 
strength  and  understanding,  be  assured  that 
you  have  not  yet  taken  up  the  yoke  of 
Christ ; if  you  had,  you  would  find  it  an- 
swerable to  the  character  he  has  given  of  it, 
for  his  word  is  truth.  But  your  constrained 
obedience  you  know  in  yourselves,  far  from 
being  easy  and  light,  is  a heavy  burden,  which 
you  would  be  glad  to  cast  offif  you  durst.  You 
serve  the  Lord  as  a slave  serves  a hard  mas- 
ter, not  with  a willing  mind,  but  of  necessity, 


457 

and  from  a dread  of  punishment.  But  in 
vain  do  you  draw  near  to  him  with  your  lips 
while  your  heart  is  far  from  him.  Therefore 
spend  no  longer  your  labour  for  that  which  is 
not  bread,  but  come  to  Jesus,  that  you  may 
find  rest  for  your  souls.  He  is  able  to  take 
away  your  heart  of  stone  and  give  you  a 
heart  of  flesh,  to  put  a new  spirit  in  you  that 
shall  delight  in  his  yoke,  to  give  you  strength 
and  ability  for  every  part  of  your  duty,  and 
to  make  you  a willing  people  in  the  day  of 
his  power. 

Believers,  rejoice  in  your  security.  The 
Lord  has  given  you  a never-dying  principle 
of  love,  and  provided  for  you  a never-failing 
supply  of  grace.  These  will  bear  you  up 
through  all  your  journey,  and  at  last  bring 
you  safely  home  to  the  mansions  provided  for 
you  in  your  Father’s  house.  Then  shall  you 
praise  him,  world  without  end. 


SERMON  XIV. 

BELIEVERS  CAUTIONED  AGAINST  MISCONDUCT 
IN  THEIR  PROFESSION. 

Let  not  your  good  be  evil  spoken  of. 
Rom.  xiv.  16. 

The  immediate  occasion  of  this  caution 
you  may  learn  from  the  context.  It  has 
pleased  God  from  the  beginning,  to  permit 
his  people,  who  all  agree  in  the  great  and 
essential  truths  of  the  gospel,  to  differ  in 
some  things  of  less  importance.  This  differ- 
ence of  judgment  gives  room  for  the  mutual 
exercise  of  patience,  forbearance,  tenderness, 
and  charity,  but,  at  the  same  time,  too  often 
affords  opportunity  for  the  remaining  corrup- 
tions of  the  heart  to  discover  and  exert  them- 
selves. The  Jewish  converts  were  for  some 
time  attached  to  the  observance  of  that  dis- 
tinction in  meats  and  drinks  which  had  been 
enjoyed  by  the  law  of  Moses  : the  Gentiles, 
on  the  contrary,  claimed  a right  to  be  free 
from  this  yoke,  as  a part  of  the  liberty  which 
they  had  received  from  Christ.  The  apostle 
does  not  in  this  place  blame  either  party 
with  respect  to  their  own  judgment  and 
practice ; but  he  reproves  them  for  censur- 
ing and  despising  each  other,  and  he  espe- 
cially reproves  those  who  understood  their 
liberty  in  the  gospel,  for  not  being  prudent 
in  the  use  of  it,  but  rather  forward  to  pro- 
voke and  offend  their  weaker  brethren.  He 
confirms  their  liberty,  but  admonishes  them 
not  to  abuse  it,  either  by  urging  others  to 
act  against  their  consciences,  or  by  treating 
them  with  contempt,  because  they  had  not 
entirely  laid  aside  these  scruples  and  preju- 
dices to  which  they  had  been  long  accus- 
tomed. “ Let  not  your  good  be  evil  spoken 
of.”  Be  thankful  for  your  liberty,  but  do  not 


458 


BELIEVERS  CAUTIONED  AGAINST 


bring  it  into  discredit  and  reproach,  by  acting 
in  an  unbecoming  spirit  towards  others. 

The  instruction  in  my  text,  understood  in 
this  sense,  has  always  been  applicable  and 
seasonable  in  the  Christian  church,  and  per- 
haps never  more  so  than  in  our  land  and  in 
our  times.  While  believers  in  Jesus,  who  are 
led  by  the  same  Spirit  into  the  same  funda- 
mental truths,  and  stand  in  the  most  endeared 
relation  to  each  other  through  their  common 
Head,  place  such  undue  stress  upon  lesser 
incidental  differences,  and  are  professed  par- 
tisans for  the  little  interests  of  systems,  de- 
nominations, and  leaders,  love,  the  grand 
characteristic  of  their  profession,  is  hardly 
discernible;  they  censure  and  grieve  each 
other,  retard  the  success  of  the  cause  which 
they  would  all  be  thought  to  have  most  at 
heart,  and  open  the  mouths  of  the  adversa- 
ries to  revile  that  which  they  understand 
not.  The  prevalence  of  this  wrong  disposi- 
tion calls  for  the  admonition  in  my  text.  Be 
thankful  for  your  privileges;  you  not  only 
claim  the  rights  of  private  judgment  and 
liberty  of  conscience,  as  men  and  as  Chris- 
tians, but  as  Britons  you  possess  them.  “ Let 
not  then  your  good  be  evil  spoken  of;”  allow 
to  others  that  freedom  which  you  expect 
yourselves;  and,  if  you  do  not  suppose  your- 
selves infallible,  suppose  it  possible  that  some 
may  be  as  near  to  the  Lord  as  yourselves, 
who  cannot  agree  with  you  in  every  senti- 
ment you  have  adopted. 

But  this  direction  may  be  taken  in  a much 
more  general  sense.  It  behoves  all  who  ho- 
nour the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  be  careful  in 
every  part  of  their  conduct,  that  they  do  not 
give  occasion  for  their  good  to  be  evil  spoken 
of.  To  make  the  subject  as  suitable  as  I can 
to  the  different  states  and  characters  of  all 
present,  1 shall, 

1.  Inquire  what  is  the  believer’s  good. 

2.  Explain  and  apply  the  advice  here  giv- 
en,  “ Let  not  your  good  be  evil  spoken  of.” 

I.  All  mankind  have  something  near  at 
heart,  on  which  their  dependence  is  placed, 
and  wherein  they  find  their  chief  pleasure. 
This  (whatever  it  is)  is  their  good  ; and,  ac- 
cording to  the  object  in  which  they  delight,  is 
their  proper  character.  By  nature  the  world 
and  worldly  things  are  the  highest  good  we 
seek  after;  and  these,  in  one  view  or  other, 
as  tempers  and  situations  vary,  are  pursued 
with  unwearied  earnestness.  Riches,  honour, 
sinful  pleasures,  are  the  poor  things  in  view, 
when  the  unrenewed  heart  cries  out,  in  its 
eager  pursuits,  “ Who  will  show  us  any 
good  1”  Psalm  iv.  6.  If  your  strongest  de- 
sires tend  this  way,  your  good  will  not  be  evil 
spoken  of  by  many.  Men  will  praise  you 
when  you  do  well  for  yourself ; you  are  not 
therefore  concerned  in  the  admonition  of  my 
text.  Only  take  notice  what  the  word  of 
God  declares  of  your  good,  and  of  you  for 
accounting  it  so.  Your  good  is  vanity,  your 


[ser.  XIV 

fruit  is  vexation  of  spirit,  and  you  who  set 
your  hearts  on  such  a good  as  the  objects  of 
sense  can  furnish,  are  adjudged  “ enemies  to 
God,”  James  iv.  4.  You  yourselves  will 
speak  evil  of  this  good  when  you  come  to  die, 
if  you  die  in  your  sins.  Then  you  will  see  a 
propriety  in  Esau’s  words  to  your  own  case, 
“Behold,  I am  at  the  point  to  die,  and  what 
profit  shall  this  birthright  do  to  me  1”  Gen. 
xxv.  23. 

As  the  world  is  the  good  of  the  unconvert- 
ed, so  a covenant  God  in  Christ  is  the  good 
and  portion  of  all  who  are  called  by  his  grace. 
They  are  ever  looking  to  the  obedience  and 
blood  of  Jesus,  applied  by  the  Spirit  of  grace, 
as  the  sole  foundation  of  their  hope  and  com- 
fort. God  is  their  good  in  the  highest  sense, 
and  every  thing  else  is  good,  so  far  as  it  leads 
to  him,  and  assists  them  in  maintaining  com- 
munion with  him.  In  this  view  we  may  men- 
tion several  particulars,  each  of  which  they 
account  their  good,  because  the  means  of  en- 
joying and  glorifying  their  God. 

1.  The  gospel,  that  gracious  revelation  by 
which  they  have  been  taught  to  know  them- 
selves, and  to  know  Jesus,  is  their  good.  All 
the  doctrines,  precepts,  and  promises,  con- 
tained in  the  scriptures,  are  a very  precious 
treasure,  in  which  they  rejoice  more  than 
those  who  find  great  spoil.  Each  of  them 
can  say  in  the  language  of  the  Psalmist, 
“ The  law  of  thy  mouth  is  dearer  to  me  than 
thousands  of  gold  and  silver.  How  sweet  aro 
thy  words  unto  my  taste,  yea,  sweeter  than 
honey  to  my  mouth ! O how  love  I thy  law  ! 
It  is  my  meditation  all  the  day  long,”  Psalm 
cxix.  72,  97,  103.  By  this  word  they  are  en- 
lightened, quickened,  warned,  comforted,  and 
supported  ; therefore  it  is  the  joy  and  rejoic- 
ing of  their  hearts,  and  more  than  their  ne- 
cessary food,  Job  xxiii.  12. 

2.  The  ordinances  make  a part  of  their 
good.  A famine  of  the  word  of  the  Lord 
would  distress  them  greatly ; and  if  they  may 
but  have  frequent  opportunities  of  this  kind, 
and  meet  with  his  gracious  presence  in  them, 
they  can  be  content  to  be  without  many  things 
which  the  men  of  this  world  highly  value. 
When  beset  with  many  straits,  and  surround- 
ed with  troubles,  they  can  find  refreshment  in 
the  Lord’s  assurance  by  the  prophet,  “ And 
though  the  Lord  give  you  the  bread  of  ad- 
versity, and  the  water  of  affliction,  yet  shall 
not  thy  teachers  be  removed  into  a corner 
any  more ; but  thine  eyes  shall  see  thy  teach- 
ers,” Isa.  xxx.  20.  If  this  promise  is  fulfilled 
to  them,  they  will  not  greatly  complain  of  the 
bread  of  adversity,  although  that  is  joined 
with  it.  But  on  the  contrary,  they  find  it  a 
hard  trial  to  be  deprived  of  lively  ordinances 
and  faithful  ministers,  however  advantageous 
and  pleasing  their  situation  may  be  in  tem- 
poral things,  because  these  are  not  their  good. 

3.  They  account  their  profession  a part  of 
their  good.  They  esteem  it  a high  privilege 


MISCONDUCT  IN  THEIR  PROFESSION. 


459 


8ER.  XIV.] 

to  bear  the  name  of  Christ,  though  it  exposes 
them  to  the  reproach  of  the  world.  They  ac- 
count it  a great  and  important  trust  to  have 
the  honour  of  the  gospel  committed  to  them, 
and  in  some  measure  dependent  on  their  con- 
duct. When  they  are  in  their  right  minds, 
they  would  rather  die  than  be  guilty  of  any 
thing  that  might  bring  it  into  discredit. 
Wilfully  they  cannot,  they  dare  not  do  it ; 
but  through  ignorance  and  infirmity  they 
are  prone  to  mistake,  and  therefore  need, 
and  are  desirous  to  observe,  the  caution  in 
my  text. 

4.  Their  experiences  are  their  good,  their 
choice  pearls ; I mean,  the  inward  dealings 
of  the  Lord  with  their  souls:  the  proofs  they 
have  had  of  his  power  and  wisdom  in  bring- 
ing them  thus  fiir  safely  on  their  way  to  his 
kingdom,  the  discoveries  he  has  given  them 
of  the  deceitfulness  of  their  own  hearts,  the 
manifestations  of  his  grace,  love,  and  nearness 
to  them,  notwithstanding  all  their  un worthi- 
ness and  unfaithfulness.  Some  of  these  ex- 
periences have  cost  them  dear,  have  cost  them 
many  a pang,  trouble,  and  conflict;  yet  they 
would  not  be  without  them  to  avoid  all  that 
they  have  suffered  ; and  they  are  content  to 
suffer  on,  if  by  any  means  they  may  increase 
this  precious  stock.  They  delight  to  recol- 
lect how  low  they  were  brought,  how  won- 
derfully delivered,  what  answers  they  have 
been  favoured  with  to  their  poor  prayers ; 
and  from  hence  to  collect  the  all-sufficiency 
and  goodness  of  him  to  whom  they  have  fled 
for  refuge,  and  to  derive  arguments  where- 
with to  combat  their  unbelieving  fears  in  time 
to  come.  Thus  far  their  experiences  are  their 
good ; not  as  the  foundation  of  their  hope,  or 
the  source  of  their  comfort,  for  these  their 
whole  reliance  is  on  the  obedience  and  blood 
of  Jesus  the  Saviour ; but  as  evidences,  that 
they  have  neither  “followed  cunningly-de- 
vised fables,  nor  received  the  grace  of  God 
in  vain,”  2 Pet.  i.  16 ; 2 Cor.  vi.  1. 

Thus  much  in  general,  that  you  may  all 
have  something  whereby  to  try  your  spirits, 
and  to  know  whether  you  have  embraced  the 
good  of  the  Lord’s  chosen  people,  Psalm  cvi. 
4,  5.  If  your  good  does  not  lie  in  such 
things  as  I have  mentioned,  you  have  no  dur- 
able riches,  nothing  but  what  you  must  soon 
leave  behind  you.  Can  you  be  content  to  be 
stript  of  all,  and  to  enter  poor,  naked,  and 
friendless,  mto  an  eternal  world  1 O that  you 
would  take  our  Lord’s  advice ! He  might 
command,  for  he  has  all  authority:  but  he 
says,  “ I counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried 
in  the  fire,  that  thou  mayest  be  rich : and 
white  raiment,  that  thou  mayest  be  clothed, 
and  that  the  shame  of  thy  nakedness  do  not 
appear ; and  anoint  thine  eyes  with  eye-salve, 
that  thou  mayest  see,”  Rev.  iii.  18. 

But  some  there  are  whose  hearts  can  go 
along  with  me  in  what  I have  said.  The 
great  God  himself  is  your  good.  His  word 


and  ordinances,  your  profession  of  his  name, 
and  your  experience  of  his  goodness,  are 
what  you  rejoice  in.  To  you,  then,  I address 
the  rest  of  my  discourse.  “ Let  not  your 
good  be  evil  spoken  of.”  I am, 

II.  To  explain  and  apply  this  advice.  The 
words  plainly  imply  two  things : 

1.  That  there  are  many  ready  enough  to 
speak  evil  of  your  good  : many  who  despise 
the  gospel,  and  you  for  professing  it ; they 
watch  for  your  halting,  and  will  be  glad  of 
the  smallest  occasion  to  expose  you.  The 
world,  that  loves  its  own,  will  make  allow- 
ances in  other  cases.  Indiscretions,  and  even 
vices,  will  be  charged  to  the  account  of  human 
infirmity,  and  the  amiable  name  of  candour 
shall  be  employed  to  conceal  or  palliate  such 
things  as  can  by  no  means  be  justified.  But 
if  you  are  a professed  believer  in  Jesus,  you 
must  not  expect  this  candour  will  be  extend- 
ed to  you  ; rather,  all  your  words  and  actions 
will  be  sifted,  your  mistakes  exaggerated 
and  if  any  part  of  your  conduct  will  bear  s 
double  construction,  it  will  generally  be  view- 
ed in  the  most  unfavourable  light.  Nay, 
even  when  there  is  no  just  occasion  afforded, 
falsehoods  and  calumnies  have  been,  and  will 
be,  industriously  propagated  against  the  ser- 
vants of  Christ,  Matt.  v.  11.  That  it  must 
be  so,  we  are  often  warned  by  scripture,  and 
it  is  abundantly  confirmed  by  experience. 

2.  That  though  it  is  impossible  wholly  to 
stop  the  mouths  of  evil-minded  men,  yet  they 
would  not  be  able  to  talk  so  fast  if  the  im- 
prudence of  believers  did  not  too  often  afford 
them  advantage.  That  such  occasions  should 
sometimes  be  given  by  those  whose  hearts 
and  aims  are  in  the  main  sincere,  will  not  be 
thought  strange  to  any  person  who  is  ac- 
quainted with  the  true  state  of  human  nature. 
Through  inadvertence,  want  of  experience, 
errors  of  judgment,  sudden  and  unexpected 
temptations,  and  other  evils  inseparable  from 
our  present  situation,  persons,  whose  chief 
desire  is  to  adorn  the  doctrine  of  their  God 
and  Saviour  in  all  things,  may,  and  do,  in 
some  instances  cause  their  good  to  be  evL 
spoken  of.  It  is,  however,  our  bounden 
duty,  as  we  regard  the  honour  of  God  and 
his  truth,  to  endeavour  as  much  as  possible 
to  cut  oft'  occasion  from  them  that  seek  occa- 
sion in  this  respect,  2 Cor.  xi.  12;  1 Pet. 
ii.  12. 

In  order  to  this,  let  us  inquire,  what  are 
the  most  common  objections  which  are  made 
against  the  gospel  preaching  and  profession, 
not  only  by  malicious  enemies,  but  sometimes 
by  persons  who  discover  no  very  bad  inten- 
tion, but  are  partly  imposed  upon  by  the  mis- 
representations of  others,  and  partly  stumbled 
by  the  faults  of  professors  1 

1st,  It  is  objected,  that  our  doctrine  lays 
no  sufficient  stress  upon  good  works.  We 
dare  not  indeed  recommend  them  out  of  their 
proper  place,  or  propose  them  as  the  ground 


460 


BELIEVERS  CAUTIONED,  &c. 


of  our  acceptance  with  God.  But  I hope 
none  who  attend  here  will  dare  to  say,  that 
they  are  not  frequently  reminded,  that  “ with- 
out holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord,” 
Heb.  xii.  14.  However,  the  world  will  judge 
more  by  what  they  see  in  you,  than  by  what 
they  hear  from  me.  Be  upon  your  guard, 
therefore,  lest  by  any  instances  of  a trifling, 
foolish,  unkind,  or  unjust  conduct,  you  let 
your  good  be  evil  spoken  of.  It  will  not  be  a 
sufficient  apology  to  say,  that  your  principles 
do  not  allow  of  these  things,  if  those  who 
know  you  can  charge  them  upon  your  prac- 
tice. 

2dly,  It  is  farther  objected,  that  the  evan- 
gelical system  is  a scheme  chiefly  made  up 
of  notions  and  subtle  distinctions,  and  opens 
a door  to  a thousand  disputes.  This  is  one 
unhappy  consequence  of  our  many  divisions 
and  subdivisions,  and  the  heat  with  which 
they  are  contended  for  by  their  respective 
partisans.  Let  this  engage  you  to  avoid  a 
disputing  contentious  spirit.  “ Be  swift  to 
hear,  slow  to  speak (James  i.  19  ;)  and  when 
a reason  is  asked  “ of  the  hope  that  is  in  you,” 
(1  Pet.  iii.  15,)  give  your  answers  with  meek- 
ness and  fear,  lest  you  cause  your  good  to  be 
evil  spoken  of. 

3dly,  It  is  likewise  a very  common  objec- 
tion, that  an  usual  effect  of  this  doctrine,  is 
to  make  people  idle  and  careless  with  regard 
to  the  necessary  concerns  and  business  of  life. 
Indeed  I should  not  be  unwilling  to  plead 
with  candid  and  fair  reasoners,  in  behalf  of 
young  converts,  on  this  point.  At  first  set- 
ting out,  the  change  is  so  great,  their  views 
of  eternal  things  so  strong  and  affecting,  that 
considering  human  infirmity,  it  can  hardly 
be  otherwise  but  that  the  attention  will  be 
almost  entirely  taken  up  with  them  for  a sea- 
son. While  a sense  of  unpardoned  sin  is  fix- 
ed upon  the  conscience  and  a person  now  duly 
aware  of  the  uncertainty  of  life,  is  in  sus- 
pence  about  the  greatest  of  all  concerns,  and 
knows  not  how  or  whether  he  shall  be  able  to 
flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,  it  is  no  wonder 
if  this  solicitude  should  in  a great  measure 
swallow  up  his  thoughts,  and  leave  him  but 
little  either  leisure  or  ability  to  attend  to 
other  concerns,  which,  however  proper  in 
their  respective  places,  are  confessedly,  in 
comparison  of  this,  of  little  or  no  importance. 
In  like  manner,  the  removal  of  this  burden  is 
usually  accompanied  with  such  a lively  sense 
of  the  wisdom,  love,  power,  and  grace  of  God, 
revealed  in  Christ  Jesus  by  the  gospel,  as 
may  for  a little  while  almost  overpower  and 
extinguish  the  apprehension  of  inferior  things. 
But  if  this  indifference  about  common  duties 
continues  very  long,  or  is  indulged  to  an  ex- 
treme, it  gives  great  and  just  offence.  It 
causes  the  ways  of  truth  to  be  evil  spoken  of, 
and  we  hardly  know  what  to  say,  but  this, 
That  the  fault  is  not  owing  to  the  gospel,  but 
to  the  neglect  of  what  the  gospel  teaches  and 


[ser.  XIV. 

enjoins.  This  is  no  new  inconvenience ; the 
apostles  observed  and  reproved  it  in  their  day. 
There  were  such  mistaken  persons  among 
the  Thessalonians,  who  supposed  or  pre- 
tended, that  the  gospel  exempted  them  from 
labour.  Of  these  he  says,  “ Now  them  that 
are  such  we  exhort  and  command,  that  with 
quietness  they  work  and  eat  their  own 
bread ;”  and  farther  directs,  “ that  if  they 
would  not  work  neither  should  they  eat,” 
2 Thess.  iii.  10 — 12.  The  Sabbath  is  the 
Lord’s;  and  the  same  command  which  forbids 
us  to  do  any  work  then,  requires  us  to  labour 
on  the  other  six  days.  “ Let  not  your  good  be 
evil  spoken  of.”  'Be  faithful  to  your  trust, 
diligent  in  your  business,  do  every  thing 
heartily  as  unto  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men. 
Give  no  one  just  cause  to  say,  that  since  you 
have  become  religious,  you  care  not  (as  the 
phrase  is)  which  end  goes  foremost ; for  this 
would  be  to  put  a stumbling-block  in  their 
way,  and  to  increase  their  prejudices  against 
the  truth. 

4thly,  Once  more,  the  gospel-doctrine  is 
charged  with  weakening  the  bands  of  natural 
and  social  relation ; that  it  makes  children  and 
servants  heady,  high-minded,  and  disobedient, 
so  that  they  presently  think  themselves  wiser 
than  all  about  them,  and  are  obstinately  bent 
to  have  their  own  wills.  This  objection  will 
indeed  cleave  to  the  gospel,  so  long  as  the 
spirit  of  the  world  and  the  spirit  of  God  are 
opposite  to  each  other.  For  cases  will  inevi- 
tably arise,  where  wre  must  either  displease 
God  or  man,  and  then  we  ought  not  to  hesi- 
tate a moment.  But  professors  should  take 
care  to  be  assured  that  there  is  such  a neces- 
sity, before  they  act  against  lawful  authority  ; 
and  especially  when  the  point  in  dispute  lies 
between  children  and  parents.  For  though 
we  ought  to  disobey  and  forsake  father  and 
mother  when  God’s  commands  require  it; 
yet  next,  under  God,  parents  are,  above  all, 
to  be  honoured,  consulted,  and  obeyed ; and 
the  excepted  cases  are  not  near  so  numerous 
as  persons  in  the  wTarmth  of  their  first  zeal 
are  apt  to  suppose.  The  enemy  suits  his 
temptations  to  occasions  ; and  it  is  no  uncom- 
mon thing  to  be  drawn  to  act  violently  in  our 
own  spirits,  while  wTe  imagine  we  are  striving 
in  the  cause  of  God  and  truth. 

In  short,  we  are  directed  to  examine  our- 
selves, and  others  are  allowed  to  examine  us 
by  our  fruits.  The  people  of  the  world  are 
not  proper  judges  of  spiritual  experiences, 
but  they  can  judge  tolerably  right  of  tempers 
and  actions.  Some  will  watch  you  out  of 
illwill,  and  some  will  observe  you  for  informa- 
tion. If  they  hear  you  have  begun  to  make 
a religious  profession,  they  will  take  notice, 
to  see  if  you  are  the  better  for  it.  They  will 
observe  you  not  only  in  the  church,  but  in 
the  shop  and  in  the  house ; and  if  they  per- 
ceive you  are  all  of  a piece,  steady,  quiet, 
humble,  diligent,  who  knows  but  this  may  be 


401 


THE  EXTENT  AND  SANCTION,  &c. 


SER.  XV.] 

a means  in  the  hand  of  God  to  win  upon 
them,  and  to  give  them  a more  favourable  re- 
gard to  the  means  which  have  wrought  so 
effectually  on  you  1 But  on  the  contrary,  if 
you  are  imprudent,  rash,  and  careless,  if  you 
either  conform  to  the  world,  or  neglect  your 
acknowledged  duty  in  it,  you  will  cause  your 
good  to  be  evil  spoken  of,  bring  difficulties 
upon  yourselves,  and  put  it  out  of  your  own 
power  to  be  useful  to  others.  Pray,  there- 
fore, for  wisdom  and  grace,  to  make  your 
light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they,  seeing 
your  good  works,  may  glorify  your  Father 
who  is  in  heaven.  This  is  the  great  design 
and  proper  effect  of  the  gospel,  when  rightly 
understood.  For  as  it  is  the  grace  of  God 
alone  which  bringeth  salvation ; so  this  grace 
not  only  enlightens  the  understanding,  but 
purifies  the  heart,  regulates  the  conduct, 
works  by  love,  and  overcomes  the  world.  It 
effectually  teaches  and  enforces  (what  the  best 
-schemes  of  morality  and  philosophy  have  al- 
vays  failed  in)  the  denial  of  all  ungodliness 
and  worldly  lusts:  (Tit.  ii.  11 — 15:)  and  by 
the  motives  it  displays,  and  the  strength  it 
communicates,  enables  the  true  Christian  to 
adorn  his  character  in  every  relation,  and  to 
fill  up  the  whole  circle  of  duty  as  it  respects 
himself,  his  neighbour,  and  the  God  with 
whom  he  has  to  do.  It  teaches  to  live  so- 
berly, righteously,  and  godly ; to  avoid  what- 
ever is  contrary  to  the  purity  of  the  gospel ; 
to  practise  moderation  in  the  use  even  of  law- 
ful things ; and  to  do  unto  others  as  we  would 
they  should  do  unto  us.  It  teaches  the  rich 
to  be  humble  and  bountiful,  the  poor  to  be 
thankful  and  resigned.  It  teaches  superiors 
to  be  kind,  inferiors  to  be  faithful.  Hus- 
bands and  wives,  parents  and  children,  mas- 
ters and  servants,  magistrates  and  people, 
are  all  instructed  by  this  grace  to  a conduct 
answerable  to  their  high  calling,  and  the  com- 
mon relation  they  stand  in  to  him  who  has 
loved  them,  and  washed  them  from  their  sins 
in  his  own  blood.  For  the  morality  of  the 
gospel  has  a nobler  spring,  a more  extensive 
scope,  than  the  ties  of  social  life.  Their 
sobriety  and  righteousness  are  not  substituted 
in  the  place  of  vital  godliness,  but  are  the 
fruits  derived  from  it.  The  grace  of  God 
teaches  them  to  live  godly,  to  delight  in  him 
to  obey  him,  to  do  every  thing  for  his  sake, 
as  under  his  eye,  and  to  be  continually  go- 
verned by  a sense  of  his  unspeakable  love 
manifested  in  his  Son,  and  “an  expectation 
of  the  blessed  hope  set  before  us,  the  odorious 
appearance  of  the  great  God,  and  our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,  who  gave  himself  for  us,  that 
by  his  blood  and  Spirit  he  might  redeem  us 
from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  himself  a 
peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works.”  La- 
bour to  show,  that  you  are  not  only  called  by 
his  name,  but  have  sat  at  his  feet,  and  drank 
of  his  Spirit ; and  if,  after  all,  unreasonable 
and  wicked  men  will  speak  evil  of  you  and 


your  good,  be  not  moved  at  it,  but  pity  and 
pray  for  them.  When  he  shall  return  to  vin- 
dicate your  cause,  and  wipe  away  your  re- 
proach, then  “ every  cloud  shall  be  removed, 
and  the  righteous  shall  shine  forth  as  the 
sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father,”  Matth. 
xiii.  43. 


SERMON  XV. 

THE  EXTENT  AND  SANCTION  OF  THE  THIRD 
COMMANDMENT. 

Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord 
thy  God  in  vain : for  the  Lord  will  not 
hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  his  name  in 
vain. — Exod.  xx.  7. 

The  foundation  of  true  religion  is  laid  in 
a right  knowledge  of  God  and  ourselves. 
How  deficient  we  are  in  each  of  these,  how 
far  fallen  from  original  righteousness,  is  strong- 
ly implied  in  this  prohibition,  which  would  be 
wholly  unnecessary,  if  we  were  not  wholly 
sunk  in  stupidity  and  wickedness.  That  such 
worms  as  we  should  be  liable  to  trifle  with 
the  Divine  Majesty,  whose  presence  fills 
the  heavens  and  the  earth,  before  whom  the 
angels  hide  their  faces ; that  such  frail  de- 
pendent creatures  have  need  to  be  cautioned, 
that  we  do  not  profane  the  name  of  the  God 
in  whom  we  live,  and  move,  and  have  our 
being*,  is  a striking  proof  of  our  depravity ; 
and  that  we  can  dare  to  break  through  this 
caution,  and  slight  the  awful  threatening 
with  which  it  is  closed,  is  a dreadful  aggra- 
vation of  our  guilt. 

These  words,  when  first  spoken  to  the  Is- 
raelites, were  delivered  in  flames  and  thun- 
der. The  mountain  shook,  the  people  trem- 
bled ; and  even  Moses,  who  had  been  honoured 
with  peculiar  freedom  of  access  to  God,  was 
constrained  to  cry,  “I  exceedingly  fear  and 
quake,”  Heb.  xii.  22.  Such  a scene,  or  rather 
an  infinitely  more  dreadful  one,  shall  here- 
after take  place,  “when  the  Lord  himself 
shall  again  descend  from  heaven  with  a 
shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and 
the  trump  of  God  ;”  (1  Thess.  iv.  16 ;)  “ when 
he  shall  be  revealed  in  flaming  fire,  to  take 
vengeance  on  all  who  know  him  not,  and 
obey  not  his  gospel :”  (2  Thess.  i.  8 :)  “ then 
shall  sinners  be  convinced  not  only  of  their 
ungodly  deeds,  but  of  all  their  hard  speeches 
which  they  have  spoken  against  him  ;”  (Jude, 
15 ;)  and  they  shall  know  the  full  meaning 
of  that  terrible  exception  which  I have  read, 
“that  the  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guiltless 
that  taketh  his  name  in  vain.” 

The  terms  of  my  text  require  little  expla- 
nation. The  name  of  God  is  in  every  one’s 
mouth  upon  one  occasion  or  other,  in  places 
where  his  revealed  will  is  known.  In  a 


482 


THE  EXTENT  AND  SANCTION 


more  eminent  and  peculiar  sense,  his  name  is 
discovered  to  his  believing  people  in  Christ 
Jesus  the  Lord ; those  who  know  the  name 
of  God  in  Christ  will  put  their  trust  in  him ; 
(Psalm  ix.  10 ;)  they  dare  not,  they  cannot, 
blaspheme  that  holy  name  by  which  they  are 
called.  But  I shall  take  it  more  extensively 
here;  for  though  but  few  understand  the 
name  of  God  in  an  evangelical  and  saving 
sense,  there  is  not  a person  in  this  assembly 
but  knows  ana  makes  mention  of  his  holy 
name,  so  far  as  to  render  them  transgressors 
of  this  commandment.  To  take  his  name  in 
vain,  is  to  use  it  falsely  or  profanely,  incon- 
siderately, without  due  reverence,  or  unpro- 
fitably,  and  without  a suitable  necessity.  The 
sanction,  “ The  Lord  will  not  hold  him  guilt- 
less,” has  indeed  a meaning  and  emphasis 
beyond  what  is  expressed.  Similar  forms  of 
speaking  are  frequent  in  scripture,  as,  “ The 
Lord  will  not  spare  that  man (Deut.  xxix. 
20 ; 2 Pet.  ii.  4,  5 ;)  that  is,  he  will  punish 
him  to  the  utmost;  for  it  is  immediately 
added,  “All  the  curses  of  this  book  shall 
come  upon  him.”  Again,  “He  spared  not 
the  angels;”  that  is  he  showed  them  no 
mercy,  as  the  following  words  declare  : “ He 
spared  not  the  old  world,  he  visited  them 
with  utter  destruction,  and  swept  them  all 
away  with  a flood.”  So  “he  will  not  hold 
him  guiltless,”  implies  two  things : 1st,  That 
the  Lord  God  has  appointed  a day  to  call 
sinners  to  an  account  for  their  words,  as  well 
as  their  actions.  2dly,  That  whatever  shall 
become  of  others,  those  who  have  presumed 
to  take  his  name  in  vain,  have  their  doom  al- 
ready determined.  Whoever  escapes,  they 
shall  surely  be  punished  ; whomsoever  he  ac- 
quits, he  will  certainly  condemn  them. 

As  the  import  of  the  expressions  is  not  dif- 
ficult, so  likewise  it  will  be  far  more  easy 
than  agreeable  to  point  out  some  of  the  many 
ways  in  which  this  commandment  is  custom- 
arily and  carelessly  broken.  The  law  is  ge- 
neral, and  each  particular  precept  is  spiritual ; 
(Rom.  vii.  14 ;)  and  perhaps  this  will  be  found 
of  a more  extensive  signification  than  some 
of  you  are  aware.  The  delightful  theme  of 
a minister  of  the  gospel  is  to  preach  Jesus 
Christ,  and  him  crucified ; to  open  the  trea- 
sures of  divine  mercy,  and  to  show  the  grace, 
freeness,  and  security  of  the  promises;  to  raise 
up  them  that  fall,  to  strengthen  those  that 
stand  ; “ to  support  the  weak,  to  comfort  the 
feeble-minded ; to  preach  deliverance  to  the 
captives,  and  theopeningof  the  prison  to  them 
that  are  bound,”  1 Thess.  v.  14 ; Luke  iv.  18. 
But  these  subjects  do  not  comprise  the  whole 
of  our  message ; and  in  general  we  find  that 
the  full  soul  loatheth  the  honey-comb ; (Prov. 
xx vii.  7 ;)  and  multitudes,  through  ignorance 
of  the  spirituality  and  purity  of  God’s  holy 
law,  and  a partial  judgment  of  their  own 
hearts,  can  neither  see  the  beauty  nor  the 
necessity  of  the  gospel-salvation.  We  are 


[ser.  xv. 

therefore  constrained  frequently  to  insist  oa 
far  less  pleasing  subjects,  to  lift  up  our 
voices  like  a trumpet,  (Isa.  lviii.  1,)  to  de- 
mand a general  attention,  while  w7e  attempt 
to  show  our  hearers  their  transgressions  and 
their  sins,  that  they  may  thereby  make  the 
doctrine  of  the  cross  of  Christ  welcome  and 
desirable.  It  is  painful  to  the  patient,  and 
without  doubt  unpleasing  to  the  human  art- 
ist, to  probe  a deep  and  dangerous  w ound : 
but  necessity  commands,  and  without  it  a 
complete  and  lasting  cure  is  not  to  be  ex- 
pected. 

1.  The  first  and  most  direct  way  in  which 
the  name  of  God  is  taken  in  vain,  is  by  per- 
jury; that  is,  when  he  is  expressly  appealed 
to  in  confirmation  of  what  is  false,  or  when 
engagements  are  made,  as  in  his  name  and 
presence,  which  are  not  strictly  and  literally 
complied  with.  I need  not  take  up  your 
time  in  proving  that  this  is  a sin  of  a deep 
dye  in  itself,  and  attended  with  peculiar  ag- 
gravations under  the  light  of  the  gospel ; and 
I wish  it  was  more  difficult  to  prove  the  fre- 
quency of  it  in  our  land,  but  this  likewise  is 
as  obvious  as  the  light.  I have  sometimes 
met  with  a random  assertion,  that  though  we 
are  wicked  enough,  we  are  not  worse  than 
other  countries.  In  other  things  I am  con- 
tent to  wave  the  parallel ; but  with  respect  to 
the  sin  of  perjury,  I fear  we  are  much  worse 
than  any  nation  now  under  the  sun,  perhaps 
worse  than  any  that  the  sun  ever  saw.  I 
am  afraid,  there  are  more  and  more  daring 
instances  of  this  wickedness  amongst  us  than 
in  all  the  rest  of  Europe.  By  an  unhappy 
kind  of  necessity,  it  is  interwoven,  as  it  were, 
with  the  very  constitution  of  the  body  poli- 
tic, and  diffuses  itself  like  a deadly  contagion 
amongst  all  orders  and  ranks  of  people. 
Oaths  are  so  excessively  multiplied,  and  so 
generally  neglected,  that  it  is  equally  dif- 
ficult and  rare  for  a person  to  engage  through 
a course  of  years  in  any  kind  of  employment, 
either  civil  or  commercial,  (O  that  it  stopped 
even  here !)  without  being  ensnared.  Some  are 
so  expressed,  that  it  is  morally  impossible  to 
comply  with  them;  others  so  circumstanced, 
that  they  are  usually  swrallowTed  without  the 
remotest  design  of  regarding  either  in  whole 
or  in  part.  If  here  and  there  a few  make 
conscience  of  their  engagements,  and  are 
desirous  to  perform  to  the  Lord  their  oaths, 
(Matt.  v.  33,)  or  decline  taking  such  as  open 
a door  either  to  honour  or  profit,  so  strong  is 
the  torrent  the  other  way,  that  it  is  well  if 
they  escape  the  charge  of  singularity  and 
preciseness.  Though  wickedness  of  every 
kind  too  much  abounds  amongst  us,  perjury 
is  perhaps  peculiarly  and  eminently  our  na- 
tional sin;  and  I tremble  to  think  it  is  so. 
for  it  gives  too  just  a ground  to  fear  the  ap- 
proach of  national  judgments.  Surely  all 
who  have  any  regard  for  the  honour  of  God, 
any  sense  of  the  worth  of  souls,  will  pray 


OP  THE  THIRD  COMMANDMENT. 


463 


SER.  XV.] 

earnestly  that  this  iniquity  may  not  be  our 
ruin,  but  that  the  Lord  would  be  pleased  to 
inspire  and  succeed  the  most  proper  means 
for  the  removal,  or  at  least  the  mitigation  of 
this  evil.  This  would  be  an  event  worthy  to 
stand  in  the  annals  of  the  happy  times  and 
auspicious  government  under  which  we  live. 

2.  And  though  the  matter  of  an  oath  be 
strictly  true,  yet  if  it  is  not  transacted  with 
a serious  acknowledgment  and  homage  of 
that  Divine  Being  to  whom  appeal  is  made, 
such  an  oath,  however  lawful  and  necessary 
it  may  be  in  itself,  is,  with  regard  to  all  such 
thoughtless  triflers,  no  better  than  taking 
the  name  of  God  in  vain.  It  cannot  but  be 
grievous  to  every  serious  mind,  to  observe  the 
little  reverence  and  solemnity,  or  rather  the 
total  want  of  common  decency,  which  too  fre- 
quently prevails  among  us  in  this  respect,  so 
tnat  sometimes  it  is  not  easy  to  say  whether 
those  who  tender  the  oath,  or  those  who 
take  it,  seem  least  in  earnest.  Without 
doubt  this  indifference  may  be  assigned  as 
one  cause  of  the  increase  and  prevalence  of 
perjury.  If  those  who  are  authorised  to  re- 
quire or  receive  those  solemn  appeals,  were 
themselves  impressed  with  a due  reverence 
of  the  awful  majesty  of  God,  and  were  soli- 
citous to  inspire  all  who  came  before  them 
with  the  same  sentiments,  and  would  re- 
mind them  (those  especially  who  appear 
very  positive  and  unguarded)  of  the  impiety 
and  danger  of  swearing  falsely,  it  is  possible 
many  mischiefs  would  be  prevented.  Some 
persons  would  probably  tremble  and  start 
back  from  the  first  temptation  to  this  wick- 
edness, and  others  might  be  deterred  from 
persisting  in  it,  who,  for  want  of  such  admo- 
nitions and  examples,  and  because  they 
never  saw  any  solemnity  observed,  precipi- 
tately rush  upon  this  enormous  evil,  and  are 
at  length  given  up  to  a dreadful  habit  of 
wilful  and  corrupt  perjury. 

3.  If  an  oath,  lawful  and  necessary  in  it- 
self, may  thus  become  criminal  through  in- 
consideration, what  shall  we  say  of  the 
throng  of  profane  swearers,  who  wound  our 
ears  and  pollute  our  language,  by  a horrid 
mixture  of  execrations  and  blasphemies  in 
their  common  conversation  1 “ Their  throats 
are  an  open  sepulchre:  their  mouths  are  full 
of  cursing  and  bitterness : the  poison  of  asps 
is  under  their  lips,”  Rom.  iii.  13,  14.  This  I 
have  to  say  from  the  word  of  God,  that  the 
Lord  will  not  hold  them  guiltless.  In  vain 
their  thoughtless  plea,  that  they  mean  no 
harm:  in  vain  their  presumptuous  compari- 
son of  themselves  with  others,  as  though 
these  were  trivial  escapes  that  did  not  affect 
the  peace  of  society.  If  these  were  small 
sins  singly,  their  frequency  would  swell  to  a 
vast  amount;  but  is  it  indeed  a small  sin, 
to  rush  against  the  thick  bosses  of  God’s 
ouckler,  and  to  despise  so  terrible  a threaten- 
ing as  this  1 Surely  “ the  plague  shall  never 


depart  from  the  house  of  the  swearer.”  “ As 
he  clotheth  himself  with  cursing  like  as 
with  his  garment;  so  it  shall  enter  into  his 
bowels  like  water,  and  like  oil  into  his 
bones,”  Ps.  cix.  17,  18.  A habit  of  swearing 
is  a sure  sign  not  only  of  an  unsanctified 
heart,  but  of  a conscience  hardened,  and 
as  it  were  seared  with  a hot  iron,  callous, 
and  quite  insensible. 

4.  Some  persons  who  scruple  expressly  to 

mention  the  name  of  God,  accustom  them- 
selves to  swear  by  his  creatures,  by  the  hea- 
vens, by  the  light,  or  by  their  own  souls,  &c. 
But  that  this  likewise  is  a direct  violation  of 
the  law,  and  exposes  to  the  same  penalties, 
we  are  assured  by  him  who  best  knew  how 
to  explain  his  own  commands.  Our  Lord  de- 
termines this  point  in  his  sermon  on  the 
mount,  so  as  not  to  leave  the  possibility  of  a 
doubt.  “ I say  urrto  you,  Swear  not  at  all ; 
neither  by  heaven,  for  it  is  God’s  throne; 
nor  by  the  earth,  for  it  is  his  footstool. — 
Neither  shalt  thou  swear  by  thy  head,  be- 
cause thou  canst  not  make  one  hair  thereof 
white  or  black,”  Matt.  v.  34 — 36.  “ And 

whoso  shall  swear  by  the  temple,  sweareth 
by  it,  and  by  him  that  dwelleth  therein : and 
he  that  shall  swear  by  heaven,  sweareth  by 
the  throne  of  God,  and  by  him  that  sitteth 
thereon,”  Matth.  xxiii.  21,  22.  “But  let 
your  communication  be  yea,  yea ; nay,  nay  ; 
for  whatsoever  is  more  than  these  cometh  of 
evil.”  This  decision  evidently  condemns, 
not  only  what  is  usually  deemed  swearing, 
but  the  whole  multitude  of  idle  expletives, 
whether  fashionable  or  vulgar,  which  have 
the  force  of  affirmations  in  common  dis- 
course. Will  any  who  live  in  a Christian 
country,  and  have  the  Bible  at  hand,  think 
to  plead  ignorance  of  these  things  in  the 
great  day  1 

5.  If  I should  stop  here,  some  of  you 
would  applaud  yourselves,  and  perhaps  not 
be  displeased  with  me  for  what  I have  hither- 
to said.  Some  who  think  themselves  clear 
thus  far,  will  join  with  me  in  saying,  “Be- 
cause of  swearing,  the  land  mourns,”  Jer. 
xxiii.  10.  But  are  there  no  other  ways  of 
taking  the  name  of  God  in  vain  1 Yes ; many 
do  it  as  often  as  they  pray ; and  it  is  easily 
proved  against  numbers  who  join  in  our 
established  worship.  Let  each  one  consider 
with  what  dispositions  and  desires  they  have 
engaged  in  the  service  we  have  already 
gone  through  this  day.  Our  mouths  have  all 
spoken  the  same  things ; but  have  they  been 
the  language  of  our  hearts  1 In  the  confes- 
sion, we  acknowledge  that  there  is  no  health 
in  us,  and  speak  as  if  we  were  true  peni- 
tents. In  the  communion-service,  we  cry  for 
mercy  as  miserable  sinners;  we  pray  that 
the  thoughts  of  our  hearts  may  be  cleansed 
by  the  inspiration  of  God’s  Holy  Spirit; 
that  we  may  perfectly  love  him,  and  worthily 
magnify  his  holy  name;  and  for  this  we 


464 


THE  EXTENT  AND  SANCTION,  &c. 


appeal  to  God,  as  to  whom  all  hearts  are 
open,  all  desires  known,  and  from  whom  no 
secrets  are  hid.  More  than  a few  of  you, 
at  certain  seasons,  publicly  declare,  that  the 
remembrance  of  your  sins  is  grievous,  and 
the  burden  of  them  is  intolerable.  Now, 
what  apprehensions  can  such  of  you  have 
of  God  as  can  dare  to  use  this  solemn  lan- 
guage when  your  hearts  meant  no  such 
thing  1 Is  not  this  to  take  his  name  in  vain 
in  the  grossest  manner  ! Is  it  not  plain  that 
you  think  him  altogether  such  a one  as  your- 
selves; (Psalm  1.  21;)  nay,  more  easily  im- 
posed upon,  and  more  safely  to  be  trifled 
with,  than  a fallible  mortal  ! Strange  it  is 
to  think,  that  many  can,  not  only  content 
themselves  with  this  lip-service,  but  make  it 
the  meritorious  ground  of  their  hope,  and 
conceit  themselves  religious  because  they 
come  so  often  to  church  to  mock  the  power 
that  made  them  ! But  hardly  can  any  wick- 
edness be  imagined  more  daring,  and  more 
dreadfully  provoking  to  the  Most  High,  than 
such  a religion  as  this.  To  all  such  wor- 
shippers I may  address  those  striking  words 
of  St.  Peter  to  Ananias,  “ Thou  hast  not  lied 
unto  men,  but  unto  God,”  Acts  v.  4. 

6.  The  whole  lives  of  those  who  live  in 
the  allowed  practice  of  known  sin,  under  the 
profession  of  the  Christian  name,  may  be 
considered  as  one  continual  breach  of  this 
command.  In  all  you  say  and  do,  you  blas- 
pheme that  holy  name  by  which  you  are  call- 
ed: and  still  more  so  if  you  are  declared 
friends  and  favourers  of  evangelical  preach- 
ing. By  your  means,  “ the  ways  of  truth 
are  evil  spoken  of,”  2 Pet.  ii.  2.  You  give 
occasion  to  those  offences  of  which  it  is  said, 
“Woe  to  that  man  by  whom  the  offence 
cometh,”  Matt,  xviii.  7.  You  injure  the 
cause  of  Christ,  stumble  the  weak  in  faith, 
grieve  the  hearts  of  all  who  love  the  Lord, 
and  make  his  enemies  rejoice.  “Better  it 
would  have  been  for  you  never  to  have 
known  the  ways  of  righteousness,”  (2  Pet. 
ii.  21,)  than  thus  to  abuse  your  knowledge. 
You  are  now  min  sled  with  his  faithful  ser- 
vants as  the  chaff  is  blended  with  the  wheat 
upon  the  floor.  But  “behold  the  Judg-e 
standeth  at  the  door,”  James  v.  9:  His  fan 
is  in  his  hand,  he  will  throughly  purge  his 
floor;  and  when  he  gathers  the  wheat  into 
his  garner,  you  will  be  consumed  like  stub- 
ble before  the  flame  of  his  indignation, 
Matt.  iii.  12.  What  distress  and  remorse 
will  seize  your  hearts,  when  you  shall  see 
them  with  whom  you  have  often  joined  in 
the  same  ordinances,  that  have  lived  with 
you  under  the  same  roof,  dined  at  the  same 
table,  perhaps  slept  in  the  same  bed,  when 
you  shall  see  them  received  into  the  king- 
dom, and  you  yourselves  excluded,  and 
thrust  into  that  outer  darkness,  where  there 
is  weeping,  and  wailing,  and  gnashing  of 
teeth  for  ever  I Luke  xiil  28. 


(ser.  xv, 

From  this  subject  we  may  ooserve,  by  way 
of  inference  and  application, 

1.  The  truth  and  propriety  of  that  scrip- 
ture, “We  know  that  what  things  soever  the 
law  saith,  it  saith  to  them  that  are  under  the 
law ; that  every  mouth  may  be  stopped,  and 
all  the  world  may  become  guilty  before  God.” 
Rom.  iii.  19.  What  person  in  this  assembly 
can  plead  guiltless  to  every  part  of  this  charge! 
Must  we  not  all  stand  silent  and  self-con- 
demned ! and  if  you  are  a transgressor,  what 
can  you  do,  either  to  repair  the  dishonour  you 
have  opened  to  the  Divine  Majesty,  or  to  pre- 
vent the  contagious  effects  of  your  own  evil 
example!  Nothing  can  be  more  false,  than  a 
too  frequent  form  of  speech  amongst  us ; when 
a man  of  some  amiable  qualifications  in  social 
life  tramples  without  fear  upon  the  laws  of 
God,  how  often  is  it  said,  by  way  of  extenua- 
tion, he  is  no  one’s  enemy  but  his  own  ! when 
indeed  his  practice  declares  him  to  be  an  ene- 
my of  God,  an  enemy  to  his  holiness  and  go- 
vernment: and  he  is  a most  mischievous  ene- 
my to  all  who  live  under  his  influence,  and 
within  the  circle  of  his  acquaintance,  by 
tempting  and  encouraging  them  to  sin  to  the 
hazard  of  their  souls.  Things  standing  thus 
with  all  men  by  nature,  with  what  language 
can  we  answer  the  law’s  demands ! Must  we 
not  adopt  the  pathetic  confession  of  the  pro- 
phet! “ For  this  our  heart  is  faint ; for  these 
things  our  eyes  are  dim.  The  crown  is  fallen 
from  our  heads ; woe  unto  us  that  we  have 
sinned  !”  Lam.  v.  16. 

2.  The  necessity  and  value  of  the  gospel; 
otherwise  how  can  you  escape  the  penalty,  and 
stand  acquitted  before  the  supreme  Judge  ! 
If  you  refuse  this,  “ there  remaineth  no  more 
sacrifice  for  sins,”  Heb.  x.  26.  But  if  you 
humble  yourself,  and  apply  to  Jesus,  there  is 
yet  hope.  He  died  for  sinners,  the  chief  of 
sinners,  and  the  greatest  of  sins.  For  his 
sake,  all  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  is  par- 
donable : “ He  is  able  to  save  to  the  utter- 
most.” But  he  must  do  the  whole,  and  have 
all  the  glory.  Believe  in  his  name.  This  is 
the  first  step ; without  grace  derived  from 
him,  you  can  do  nothing.  Remember  his 
agony  and  bloody  sweat,  his  crass  and  pas- 
sion ; and  that  he  is  now  exalted  a Prince 
and  a Saviour,  on  the  behalf  of  those  who 
are  ready  to  perish.  Let  this  be  your  plea 
and  encouragement  to  draw  near  to  a throne 
of  grace.  Pray  for  his  Spirit  to  reveal  his 
righteousness,  power,  and  love  to  your  souls; 
and  as  your  knowledge  of  him  increases, 
your  repentance  will  be  more  spiritual,  evan- 
gelical, and  effectual.  Entreat  him  to  enable 
you  to  forsake  your  former  evils,  to  set  a 
guard  upon  the  door  of  your  lips,  and  to  in- 
spire you  with  an  awful  veneration  of  that 
holy  name  which  you  have  hitherto  profaned, 
lie  can  teach  your  polluted  lips  to  show  forth 
his  praise. 

And  let  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord,  whom 


465 


THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE,  &c. 


SEE.  XVI.] 

he  has  delivered  from  the  guilt  and  power  of 
this  iniquity,  adore  the  grace  and  mercy  that 
has  saved  them.  Look  back  upon  your  past 
lives,  and  rejoice  with  trembling.  How  often 
have  you  defied  his  vengeance  and  power, 
and  perhaps  madly  uttered  horrid  impreca- 
tions against  yourselves  1 Why  have  others 
been  cut  off  in  these  sins,  and  you  spared  ? 
Yes;  “such  were  some  of  you  : but  ye  are 
washed,  ye  are  sanctified,  ye  are  justified  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  by  the  Spirit 
of  our  God,”  1 Cor.  vi.  11.  And  now  your 
tongues,  which  once  uttered  blasphemies  al- 
most with  every  breath,  or,  under  a form  of 
godliness,  pronounced  a language  foreign  to 
your  hearts,  delight  in  extolling  the  name  of 
Jesus,  and  celebrating  the  wonders  of  re- 
deeming love.  Now,  when  you  speak  of  the 
great  God,  your  hearts  are  awed  with  an  ap- 
prehension of  his  majesty,  yet  comforted  with 
the  thought  that  this  God  is  your  God,  your 
almighty  friend,  your  everlasting  portion. 
Now  you  feel  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of 
adoption,  whereby  you  cry,  “ Abba,  Father.” 
Little  did  you  think  in  the  days  of  your  ig- 
norance, that  the  God  whom  you  was  pre- 
sumptuously offending,  had,  in  the  counsels  of 
his  everlasting  love,  chosen  you  to  salvation 
by  Jesus  Christ,  Eph.  i.  4.  But  he  was  found 
of  you  when  you  sought  him  not,  Isa.  Ixv.  1. 
He  passed  by  you  when  you  were  lying  in 
your  blood,  and  bade  you  live,  Ezek.  xvi.  6,  8. 
This  was  the  secret  reason  why  you  could 
not  destroy  yourselves.  And  at  length  his 
time  of  love  came,  the  hour  which  he  had  ap- 
pointed to  open  your  eyes,  to  show  you  mer- 
cy, 1o  deliver  you  from  the  power  of  dark- 
ness, and  to  translate  you  into  the  kingdom 
of  his  dear  Son,  Col.  i.  13.  Do  not  your  hearts 
glow  with  a sense  of  your  obligations  to  him 
who  hath  loved  you,  and  washed  you  from 
your  sins  in  his  own  blood  1 Will  you  not 
live  to  him  who  has  saved  you  from  so  great 
a death?  Yea,  doubtless  you  will  count  all 
things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord.  You 
will  use  all  your  influence  to  diffuse  the  sa- 
vour of  his  precious  name.  You  will  take 
shame  to  yourselves,  and  ascribe  glory  to 
him.  You  will  be  zealous  for  his  cause,  and 
have  a tender  compassion  for  poor  sinners, 
who  know  not  what  they  do,  remembering, 
from  your  past  experience,  the  misery  and 
gall  of  an  unconverted  state.  Let  as  many 
of  us  as  have  received  mercy  be  thus  minded; 
let  it  be  our  great  study  to  show  forth  the 
praises  of  him  who  has  called  us  out  of  dark- 
ness into  his  marvellous  light,  till  the  wel- 
come hour  shall  arrive,  when  he  will  say  to 
all  who  fear  and  love  him,  and  long  for  his 
appearance,  “Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Fa- 
ther, inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you 
from  the  foundation  of  the  world,”  Matth. 
xxv.  34. 

3 N 


SERMON  XVI. 

THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE  COMPARED  TO  A RACE. 

So  run  that  ye  may  obtain. — 1 Cor.  ix.  24. 

The  scriptures  teach  us  to  derive  profit- 
able lessons  from  common  occurrences : and 
since  we  cannot  avoid  seeing  and  hearing  the 
vanities  of  those  who  know  not  God,  unless 
we  would  go  wholly  out  of  the  world,  we 
may  learn  some  instruction  from  them  at  a 
distance.  The  country  of  Greece,  and  espe- 
cially the  neighbourhood  of  Corinth,  was  fa- 
mous for  trials  of  skill  in  a variety  of  exer- 
cises, such  as  racing,  wrestling,  fighting,  and 
the  like.  And  because  the  children  of  the 
world  are  very  wise  in  their  generation,  and 
spare  no  pains  to  accomplish  the  point  they 
have  in  view,  the  apostle  would  stir  up  be- 
lievers to  diligence  from  their  example ; and 
therefore,  in  several  places,  compares  the 
Christian  life  to  one  or  other  of  the  contests 
which  were  managed  in  the  public  games, 
and  here  particularly  to  a race.  In  those 
ancient  races  much  solemnity  was  observed. 
The  ground  or  course  was  exactly  marked 
out ; 'those  who  were  to  run  went  through  a 
strict  regimen  and  exercise  beforehand ; a 
vast,  concourse  of  people  were  assembled  as 
spectators ; authorized  judges  were  appointed 
to  award  the  prize,  which  was  a crown  of 
laurel  or  oak  leaves,  to  the  winner:  and  be- 
fore they  began,  a herald  publicly  proclaimed 
the  rules  to  be  observed  by  the  competitors ; 
which  unless  strictly  complied  with,  all  their 
pains  and  endeavours  issued  only  in  disap- 
pointment and  shame.  To  each  of  these  par- 
ticulars the  apostle  alludes  in  different  parts 
of  his  writings. 

Let  us  then  briefly  consider  wherein  the 
allusion  holds,  and  take  notice  of  some  things 
in  which  there  is  a remarkable  difference. 

I.  That  the  Christian  life  is  compared  to  a 
race,  may  intimate  to  us, 

1.  That  it  is  a laborious  and  strenuous  ser- 
vice, and  incompatible  with  an  indolent  and 
careless  frame  of  spirit.  Not  that  we  can  do 
any  thing  of  ourselves;  in  this  sense,  “it  is 
not  of  him  that  willeth,  or  of  Lim  that  run- 
neth,” Rom.  ix.  16.  But  when  a believer  is 
animated  by  a view  of  Jesus,  and  the  prize 
of  the  high  calling,  to  run  the  race  set  before 
him,  he  finds  that  it  demands  his  utmost 
strength,  courag*e,  and  patience.  A spectator 
may  divert  himself  with  the  prospect,  or  the 
company;  he  may  make  observations  upon 
what  passes  around  him,  and  ride  as  softly  as 
he  pleases ; but  then  he  has  no  pretensions  to 
the  prize.  But  those  who  are  actually  can- 
didates for  it,  may  be  easily  distinguished 
without  being  pointed  out:  they  have  no  lei- 
sure for  amusement ; their  eyes  are  fixed, 
and  their  thoughts  wholly  engaged,  upon 


466 


THE  CHRISTIAN  LIFE 


wnat  they  have  in  hand ; and  they  exert  all 
their  powers,  and  strain  every  nerve,  to  reach 
the  goal.  How  inconsistent  is  the  conduct  of 
many  professors  ! They  enter  the  lists,  they 
inform  themselves  of  the  rules,  they  even 
presume  to  expect  the  prize,  though  they 
idle  away  their  whole  lives,  without  once  at- 
tempting to  run  in  good  earnest.  Not  so  those 
who  are  taught  and  called  of  God : a sense  of 
the  worth  of  their  souls,  of  the  love  of  Christ, 
of  the  glory  that  shall  be  revealed,  of  their 
own  weakness,  and  of  the  many  obstacles  that 
withstand  their  progress,  stirs  them  up  to 
watchfulness,  diligence,  and  prayer,  and  ex- 
cites a holy  jealousy,  “ lest  a promise  being 
made  of  entering  into  his  rest,  any  of  them  ! 
should  come  short  of  it,”  Heb.  iv.  1. 

2.  That  we  should  press  forward,  and  not 
rest  in  what  we  have  received.  If  a man  sets 
out  in  a race  with  the  greatest  speed,  and ' 
seems  to  outstrip  all  his  antagonists ; yet  if 
he  does  not  persevere  to  the  end,  he  will  be 
sure  to  lose.  The  apostle  alludes  to  a race 
in  another  place,  where  he  says,  “ Forgetting 
the  things  that  are  behind,  and  reaching  forth 
to  those  that  are  before,  I stretch  forward,” 
Phil.  iii.*13,  14.  The  Greek  word  beauti- 
fully expresses  the  earnestness  and  energy  of 
those  who  run,  and  are  determined  to  be  first : 
they  make  no  account  of  the  ground  already 
passed  over,  but  exert  themselves  to  the  ut- 
most, labour  with  their  hands  and  feet,  and 
strain  every  joint  to  the  utmost,  as  though 
the  whole  success  depended  on  each  single 
step.  We  see  too  many  instances  of  persons 
who  begin  warmly,  and  seem  to  run  well  for  a 
season  ; but  they  are  hindered  in  their  pro- 
gress, slacken  their  pace  first,  and  then  stop 
short.  Take  notice  of  the  exhortation  in  my 
text:  “ So  run  that  you  may  obtain  for  it  | 
will  be  a dreadful  disappointment  if  you  | 
should  be  set  aside  disapproved,  when  others  : 
receive  the  prize. 

II.  The  heralds  or  criers  in  the  Christian  > 
race  are  the  ministers  of  the  gospel,  and  their  ! 
proper  name  of  office  is  expressed  by  the 
same  word.  They  have  it  in  charge  to  invite 
all  to  run,  and  to  declare  the  prescribed  rules, ' 
and  these  must  be  carefully  attended  to  ; for  ! 
“ if,”  or,  as  it  might  be  rendered,  “ although, 
a man  strive,”  (2  Tim.  ii.  5,)  although  he 
wrestle,  and  fight,  and  run,  weary  himself, 
and  excel  others  ; yet,  after  all,  he  loses  the 
prize,  “ he  is  not  crowned,  unless  he  strive 
lawfully,”  unless  he  strictly  conforms  to  the 
prescribed  regulations : he  will  be  judged 
unqualified,  though  in  other  respects  skilful 
and  diligent,  unless  he  runs  in  the  limits 
marked  out,  fights  with  the  usual  weapons, 
and  observes  in  all  points  the  discipline  of 
the  place.  We  are  bound  in  duty,  at  the 
same  time  that  we  proclaim  the  race,  and 
point  out  the  prize  to  your  view,  to  tell  you, 
that  without  faith  and  holiness  (Mark  xvi. 


[ser.  XVL 

16 ; Heb.  xii.  14)  there  can  be  no  acceptance. 
And  we  cannot  but  be  grieved  to  see  how 
little  these  cautions  are  regarded  by  multi- 
tudes. Some  are  labouring,  as  it  were,  in  the 
fire,  to  establish  a righteousness  by  their  own 
works,  and  refuse  to  believe  in  Christ  for 
salvation.  Others  who  profess  indeed  to  be- 
lieve in  him,  call  themselves  his  people,  and 
affect  to  speak  highly  of  his  gospel,  yet  even- 
tually deny  him  by  their  works  and  conver- 
sation. But  unless  you  can  alter  the  sure  de- 
terminations of  the  word  of  God,  there  must  be 
an  alteration  in  yourselves,  or  else  when 
you  think  you  have  attained,  and  shall  confi- 
dently demand  the  prize,  you  will  hear  him 
say,  “ I know  you  not  whence  you  are  ; de- 
part from  me,  all  ve  workers  of  iniquity,” 
Luke  xiii.  27. 

There  is  a circumstance  in  this  resem- 
blance which  I would  not  pass  over,  because 
it  is  peculiar  to  the  Christian  race.  The  mi- 
nisters or  heralds  are  not  only  to  invite  others, 
but  are  likewise  to  run  themselves.  To  this 
the  apostle  alludes,  when  he  says,  “Lest, 
when  I have  preached  to  others,  I should  be 
myself  a cast  away,”  (1  Cor.  ix.  27,)  or  be 
disapproved  of  the  Judge  for  breaking  those 
regulations  himself  which  he  had  been  au- 
thorised to  propound  to  all.  \Te  have  need 
to  preach  to  ourselves  no  less  than  to  you, 
and  to  entreat  your  prayers  for  us,  that  we 
may  stand  perfect  and  complete  in  the  whole 
will  of  God.  And  the  caution  may  be  pro- 
portionally extended  to  every  one  that  is  en- 
trusted with  any  measure  of  gifts  for  the 
edification  of  the  people  of  God.  Keep  close 
to  his  word;  pray  for  his  spirit;  be  diligent 
and  temperate  in  all  things ; and  maintain  a 
watchful  jealousy  over  your  own  hearts ; — 
these  are  the  means  by  which  the  Lord  keeps 
his  people  from  falling.  But  crust  not  to  any 
outward  talent,  calling,  or  usefulness ; for  it 
is  possible  for  a man  to  be  instrumental  to  the 
good  of  others  in  families  and  societies,  and 
yet  to  come  short  of  the  kingdom  himself  at 
last. 

III.  I have  observed  that  a great  concourse 
of  spectators  attended  at  the  ancient  games. 
The  Christian,  in  his  race  and  warfare,  has 
likev  ise  innumerable  eyes  upon  him,  a great 
cloud  of  witnesses,  Heb.  xii.  1.  We  are  ex- 
hibited (says  the  apostle)  as  a spectacle  to  the 
world,  to  the  whole  universe,  both  to  angels 
and  to  men,  1 Cor.  iv.  9.  Though  he  may 
be  placed  in  an  obscure  situation,  yet  his 
neighbours  at  least  will  observe  him,  to  see 
how  his  profession  and  practice  agree.  In- 
visible beings  attend  him  in  every  step ; the 
good  angels  (Luke  xv.  10)  rejoice  over  the 
returning  tffnner,  and  it  is  probable,  by  God’f 
appointment,  support  and  refresh  him  in  way? 
which  are  beyond  our  apprehension.  The 
powers  of  darkness  watch  him  with  subtil  ty 
and  envy,  and  go  to  the  utmost  bounds  of  the  »j 


COMPARED  TO  A RACE. 


467 


8ER.  XVI.] 

commission,  in  their  endeavours  either  to 
divert  him  from  his  course,  or  to  make  it  un- 
comfortable to  him.  How  should  this  thought 
both  animate  and  humble  every  sincere  soul ! 
Be  not  discouraged,  because  to  appearance 
you  are  almost  left  to  serve  God  alone.  If 
the  vail  of  flesh  and  blood  could  be  drawn 
aside,  you  would  see  you  are  not  alone : all 
the  host  of  heaven  are  on  your  side ; the 
glorious  company  that  are  before  the  throne 
of  God,  day  without  night,  rejoicing,  are  en- 
gaged in  your  cause,  and  drink  of  the  same 
fountain  from  which  you  are  supplied.  The 
spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  who  are 
now  all  eye,  all  ear,  all  love,  were  once,  as 
you  are,  partakers  of  the  same  infirmities, 
sorrows,  and  cares ; and  you  ere  long  shall 
oe  as  they  are,  clothed  with  light,  and  freed 
from  every  burden.  And  Jesus,  the  Lord  of  an- 
gels, the -King  of  saints,  beholds  your  toil  and 
conflict  with  complacence,  and  says,  “Hold 
that  fast  which  thou  hast,  that  no  man  take 
thy  crown,”  Rev.  iii.  11.  He  is  always  near 
to  succour,  strengthen,  and  to  save.  Rejoice, 
therefore,  that  you  run  not  as  unnoticed,  but 
rejoice  with  trembling.  Be  ashamed  to  think 
how  disproportionate  your  efforts  are  to  the 
company  that  behold  you,  and  to  the  prize 
that  awaits  you.  Remember  likewise  other 
eyes  are  upon  you  ; Satan  envies  your  privi- 
leges, and  scorns  your  profession ; he  is 
every  minute  waiting  permission  to  sift  you 
as  wheat;  (Luke  xxii.  31 ;)  he  is  incessantly 
spreading  snares  for  your  feet,  and  preparing' 
his  arrows  against  you;  therefore  be  not  high- 
minded,  but  fear,  and  give  all  diligence  so  to 
run  that  you  may  obtain. 

IV.  The  judge  who  presides  at  the  end  of 
the  race  is  Jesus,  the  Judge  of  all.  He  holds 
forth  the  prize  full  in  view  to  the  eye  of  faith, 
and  shall  shortly  crown  the  conqueror  with 
his  own  hand.  How  sweetly  does  the  apostle 
spiritualize  upon  this  circumstance  ! “ I have 
fought  a good  fight,  I have  finished  my 
course;  I have  kept  the  faith.  Henceforth 
there  is  laid  up  for  me  a crown  of  life,  which 
the  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge”  (who  does 
not  decide  by  appearances,  nor  can  be  influ- 
enced by  partiality,  as  is  too  frequent  among 
men,)  “shall  give  me  at  that  day : and  not  to 
me  only,  but  to  all  who  love  his  appearing,” 

2 Tim.  iv.  7,  8.  Be  of  good  cheer,  believer ; 
your  case  may  be  misrepresented  or  misun- 
derstood by  men,  but  the  Lord,  the  righteous 
and  unerring  Judge,  will  vindicate,  approve, 
and  reward  you  in  the  great  day,  when  he 
shall  come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and 
admired  in  all  them  that  believe. 

Thus  much  concerning  the  resemblance  of 
the  Christian  life  to  a race,  to  which  the  apos- 
tle alludes.  I shall  briefly  take  notice  of  some 
particulars  in  which  the  resemblance  fails; 
and  a very  interesting  and  important  differ- 
ence may  be  observed, 

1.  In  the  reward.  The  “ bodily  exercise” 


employed  in  the  games,  (for  to  these  the 
apostle  refers,)  “ profited  little :”  (1  Tim.  iv. 
8:)  a crown  of  oak  or  laurel,  or  some  such 
bauble,  was  their  highest  aim,  and  this  the 
most  of  the  competitors  came  short  of : for 
though  all  ran,  one  only  received  the  prize. 
Of  little  more  value,  and  equal  uncertainty, 
is  the  prize  that  has  engaged  the  time  and 
thoughts  of  many.  “ But  godliness”  (the  whole 
course  and  conflict  in  which  the  believer  is 
engaged ) “ is  profitable  for  all  things,”  or  in 
every  view,  having  promises  to  support  the 
life  that  now  is,  and  to  crown  that  which  is 
to  come.  “ He  that  overcometh  shall  inherit 
all  things ; and  I will  be  his  God,  and  he 
shall  be  my  son,”  Rev.  xxi.  7.  “ I will  give 

him  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  life,  which  is  in  the 
midst  of  the  paradise  of  God,”  Rev.  ii.  7.  “ I 
will  make  him  a pillar  in  the  temple  of  my 
God,  and  he  shall  go  no  more  out;  yea,  I will 
grant  him  to  sit  down  with  me  in  my  throne,” 
Rev.  iii.  12,  21.  The  Lord  will  give  grace 
here,  and  will  withhold  no  good  thing  from 
those  who  walk  uprightly : (Psal.  Ixxxiv.  11 ;) 
and  hereafter  he  will  crown  grace  with  glory, 
and  place  his  servants  out  of  the  reach  of 
every  trouble  and  enemy,  in  the  kingdom 
which  his  love  has  prepared  for  them  from 
before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  “ Having 
therefore  these  promises,  dearly  beloved,  let 
us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the 
flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear 
of  the  Lord,”  2 Cor.  vii.  1. 

2.  In  races,  though  many  run,  one  only 
can  receive  the  prize.  But  thanks  be  to  God, 
it  is  not  so  in  the  Christian  race.  All  who 
run,  as  the  Lord  has  appointed,  shall  be  sura 
to  win.  No  opposition  can  prevail  against 
them,  nor  will  the  number  of  candidates  be 
any  diminution  to  the  happiness  of  each  indi- 
vidual. The  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light, 
like  the  light  of  the  sun,  is  not  diminished 
by  being  shared  amongst  many;  each  one 
possesses  the  whole,  in  the  same  perfection 
as  he  could  do,  if  there  was  none  to  enjoy  it 
but  himself. 

3.  In  the  races  the  apostle  alludes  to,  none 
were  compelled  to  run.  The  proclamation 
was  general : but  those  who  did  not  choose 
to  engage,  suffered  no  disadvantage.  But  it 
is  not  so  in  the  race  to  which  you  are  invited 
by  the  gospel.  The  Lord  is  greatly  offended 
with  those  who  slight  the  message,  and  refuse 
to  enter  the  list.  If  you  only  give  his  minis- 
ters a hearing,  and  return  to  your  farms  and 
merchandise,  (Matth.  xxii.  5,)  forget  the 
worth  of  your  precious  souls,  and  suffer  your 
thoughts  to  be  engrossed  with  the  cares  and 
pleasures  of  this  life,  to  the  neglect  of  this 
one  thing  needful,  the  Lord  will  account  it  a 
contempt  offered  to  himself,  and  will  ere  long 
call  you  before  his  tribunal  to  answer  for  it 

4.  Those  who  ran,  and  did  not  win  the 
prize,  only  lost  their  labour,  or  at  the  worst 
were  exposed  to  shame ; but  they  were  liable 


469 


NO  ACCESS  TO  GOD  BUT 


[SER.  XVII. 


to  no  positive  punishment.  But  you  who  are 
professors  of  the  gospel,  if  you  come  short  at 
last,  will  be  lost  for  ever.  “ So  run  that  you 
may  obtain.”  Be  not  content  with  having 
eet  out ; the  promise  is  made  to  perseverance. 
“ He  that  endureth  to  the  end  shall  be  saved 
(Matth.  x.  22 ;)  but  if  any  draw  back,  or  stop 
short,  the  Lord  will  have  no  pleasure  in  them, 
Heb.  x.  38.  They  will  not  only  lose  the  prize, 
but  will  receive  a heavy  and  aggravated 
doom.  It  would  have  been  better  for  them 
not  to  have  known  the  ways  of  righteousness, 
than  after  they  have  known  it,  to  turn  from 
the  holy  commandment  delivered  to  them. 
If  you  were  forced  to  run  for  your  lives,  you 
would  be  very  thoughtful  about  the  event. 
But  if  you  are  not  found  amongst  those  who 
come  in  for  the  prize  of  eternal  life,  you  will 
be  cast  into  outer  darkness,  and  sink  under 
the  curse  of  God  for  ever. 

Fain,  therefore,  would  I persuade  you  to 
address  yourselves  with  earnestness  to  run 
the  race  set  before  you.  Flee  from  approach- 
ing wrath.  The  wrath  of  God  is  already  re- 
vealed against  all  unrighteousness,  and  soon 
it  will  be  poured  forth  upon  the  head  of  every 
transgressor.  Though  God  is  patient  and 
forbearing,  he  is  angry  with  the  wicked 
every  day.  If  he  turn  not,  he  will  whet  his 
glittering  sword  ; he  hath  bent  his  bow.  and 
made  it  ready.  He  hath  also  preps rei  for 
him  the  instruments  of  death;  he  JMh  or- 
dained I is  arrows  against  those  who  shall 
finally  disobey  his  great  command,  to  receive 
the  gospel  of  his  grace.  It  is  impossible  to 
elude  his  eye,  or  to  withstand  his  power. 
You  are  upon  the  brink  of  danger,  if  you  are 
not  already  entered  in  this  race ; you  stand 
upon  a precipice,  and  hell  from  beneath  has 
opened  its  mouth  to  receive  you.  But  a res- 
pite is  still  afforded ; the  Lord  waits  to  be 
gracious;  and  as  yet  there  is  room.  The 
gate  of  mercy  is  not  yet  shut : “ turn  there- 
fore to  the  strong  hold,  as  prisoners  of  hope  ;” 
no  longer  refuse  his  gracious  invitation,  or 
trifle  with  your  precious  souls ; seek  to  Jesus 
that  you  may  live  ; apply  to  him  for  faith  and 
repentance  ; and  in  his  strength  and  name 
prepare  to  run  this  important  race.  Medi- 
tate upon  the  glorious  prize,  which  is  pro- 
vided for  all  who  endure  to  the  end  ; it  is 
freely  proposed  to  all  who  run.  Pardon, 
grace,  and  eternal  life,  are  promised  and  be- 
stowed, without  money  and  without  price, 
ff,  after  so  many  repeated  calls,  }*ou  still  har- 
den your  hearts,  and  stop  your  ears,  and  de- 
termine that  you  will  not  come  unto  Jesus, 
that  you  may  have  life,  you  must  assuredly 
perish  without  mercy,  and  without  excuse. 

But  if  you  are  desirous  to  run,  remember 
the  admonition  in  my  text,  “ 8o  run  that  you 
may  obtain.”  Your  steps  must  be  regulated 
by  the  word  of  God,  or  you  will  wander  wide 
from  the  good  old  way;  you  must  derive 
your  sufficiency  and  strength  from  Christ  by 


faith  and  prayer,  or  you  will  faint,  and  be 
unable  to  endure  to  the  end.  We  read  of 
some  (Gal.  v.  7)  that  run  well  for  a season, 
but  were  afterwards  hindered,  and  turned 
aside.  Be  upon  your  guard  ; for  there  are 
many  that  will  strive  to  divert  you  from 
your  course.  Satan,  the  world,  and  your 
own  evil  hearts,  will  combine,  and  form  va- 
rious attempts  to  slacken  your  pace,  and  tc 
withdraw  your  attention  from  the  one  thing 
needful.  Dread  the  thoughts  of  stopping 
short,  or  turning  back;  and  the  more  you 
meet  with  opposition,  be  so  much  the  more 
earnest  to  redouble  your  diligence,  and 
especially  to  cry  mightily  to  him  who  is 
able  to  keep  you  from  falling,  to  preserve 
you  unblameable  in  love  while  here,  and  at 
last  to  present  you  faultless  before  the  pre- 
sence of  his  glory  with  exceeding  joy. 

Believers,  why  are  not  we  as  wise  in  our 
generation  as  the  children  of  the  world  I 
We  see  how  those  who  are  fond  of  a com- 
mon horse-race  are  thinking  and  talking  of 
it,  and  preparing  for  it  every  day.  Does  not 
their  diligence  shame  us,  who  are  so  cold, 
faint,  and  dilatory,  in  the  most  important 
and  honourable  concerns!  Let  us  gird  up 
the  loins  of  our  mind  : some  of  you  have  not 
far  to  run  now ; you  have  taken  many  a 
weary  step  since  you  were  first  called ; but 
the  end  is  at  hand ; the  period  of  your  com- 
plete salvation  is  now  much  nearer  than 
when  you  first  believed,  Rom.  xiii.  11. 
Think  of  Jesus,  the  forerunner  and  the 
judge:  he  has  already  entered  within  the 
vail  for  us,  his  eye  is  upon  us,  he  is  near  to 
assist,  and  waiting  to  receive  us.  May  his 
Spirit  and  his  example  animate  us  to  press 
forward  to  the  prize  of  our  high  calling,  to 
tread  down  every  difficulty,  and  to  be  faith- 
ful unto  death,  that  we  may  receive  the 
crown  of  life ! 


SERMON  XVII. 

NO  ACCESS  TO  GOD  B-U-T  BY  THE  GOSPEL  OF 
CHRIST. 

Wherewith  shall  I come  before  the  Lord , 
and  bow  myself  before  the  high  God? 
Shall  I come  before  him  with  burnt-offer- 
ings, with  calves  of  a year  old  ? Will 
the  Lord  be  pleased  with  thousands  of 
rams , or  with  ten  thousands  of  rivers  of 
oil  ? Shall  I give  my  first-born  for  my 
transgression , the  fruit  of  my  body  for 
the  sin  of  my  soul  ? He  hath  showed  thee , 
O man,  what  is  good , and  ivliat  doth  the 
Lord  require  of  thee , but  to  do  justly,  and 
to  love  mercy , and  to  walk  humbly  with 
thy  God  ? — Micah  vi.  6,  7,  8. 

There  is  no  question  that  can  arise  in 
the  mind  of  man,  that  is  of  so  high  im- 


BY  THE  GOSPEL  OF  JESUS  CHRIST. 


469 


CER.  XVII.] 

portance  as  this  in  my  text,  and  yet,  alas ! 
how  seldom  is  it  laid  to  heart ! May  the 
Spirit  of  God  impress  it  upon  all  your  con- 
sciences ! You  are  now  come  before  God  to 
worship;  ask  yourselves,  wherewith!  On 
what  do  you  ground  your  hope,  that  you 
offer  him  acceptable  service  ! You  must 
shortly  appear  before  him  in  judgment.  Are 
you  prepared  to  meet  him!  Amos  iv.  12. 
What  plea  have  you  provided ! Take  heed 
in  time.  Be  sure  that  it  is  such  a one  as  he 
will  admit,  lest  your  hopes  should  fail,  and 
you  perish  in  his  presence  as  chaff  before 
the  devouring  flame. 

The  passage  plainly  expresses  the  inquiry 
of  an  awakened  mind.  It  is  to  be  feared 
many  of  you  have  often  read  these  words 
without  being  suitably  affected  with  their 
meaning.  But  if  you  can  indeed  make  them 
your  own,  if  you  are  truly  solicitous  how 
you  are  to  come  before  God,  both  here  and 
hereafter,  I hope  his  good  Spirit  will  enable 
you  to  receive  satisfaction  from  the  answer 
given  by  the  prophet. 

If  you  can  speak  these  words  from  your 
heart,  you  will  readily  acknowledge  that 
they  imply  the  following  things : 

1.  A sense  of  duty  ; that  you  are  under  an 
obligation  to  come  and  bow  before  the  High 
God.  You  are  sensible  that  you  ought  not, 
and  you  find  that  you  cannot,  live  without 
paying  him  homage  and  worship,  but  that 
he  has  a right  to  your  service,  and  expects  it. 
Too  many  show  in  this  respect,  that  they  are 
dead  while  they  live,  dead  to  God,  insensible 
and  regardless  of  their  many  obligations  to 
him,  in  whom  they  live,  and  move,  and  have 
their  being.  They  live  without  prayer;  they 
offer  no  praises  to  the  God  of  their  lives,  but 
rise  up  and  lie  down,  go  out  and  come  in, 
without  one  reflection  on  his  power,  good- 
ness, and  providence,  even  like  the  beasts 
that  perish.  But  the  awakened  soul  cannot 
do  so.  He  trembles  to  think  that  he  once 
could  neglect  that  God,  whom  all  the  hosts 
of  heaven  worship,  and  is  convinced,  that 
however  fair  his  character  might  have  been 
amongst  men,  he  justly  deserved  to  have 
been  struck  to  hell  for  so  long  restraining 
prayer  before  God. 

2.  A sense  of  the  majesty  and  glory  of 
God.  Whoever  seriously  asks  this  question, 
has  an  awful  view  of  the  Lord  as  the  High 
God.  Many,  who  do  not  wholly  neglect 
prayer  and  worship,  yet  have  no  spiritual 
and  humbling  apprehensions  of  the  God 
whom  they  profess  to  serve.  Their  prayers, 
whether  in  public  or  private,  are  only  lip- 
service,  as  though  they  thought  him  alto- 
gether such  a one  as  themselves.  Their 
petitions  are  not  guided  by  their  desires,  but 
they  utter  with  their  mouths  what  they  find 
in  the  book,  though  their  hearts  have  no  love 
or  relish  qf  the  things  they  ask  for.  How 
often  is  God  mocked  by  those  who  join  in 


our  established  worship!  Has  he  not  been 
so  this  morning  by  some  of  you ! How  little 
he  is  reverenced  by  many,  is  plain  from  the 
little  regard  they  pay  to  his  commands. 
They  will  break  his  Sabbaths,  blaspheme  his 
name,  live  in  drunkenness,  whoredom,  an- 
ger, and  malice,  and  yet  pretend  to  worship 
him.  But  those  who  rightly  understand  the 
inquiry  in  my  text,  cannot  do  thus.  They 
consider  him  as  the  High  God ; they  know 
that  he  humbles  himself  to  behold  even  the 
worship  of  heaven,  and  are  therefore  struck 
with  this  thought,  Wherewith  can  I,  a poor 
worm,  who  am  but  dust  and  ashes,  come  be- 
fore this  High  God ! 

3.  A sense  of  guilt.  Alas!  says  the  soul 
that  is  enlightened  to  see  itself  I am  not 
only  mean,  but  vile.  “ I have  sinned,  but 
what  shall  I do  unto  thee,  O thou  preserver 
of  men!”  Job  vii.  20.  Wherewith  shall 
such  a polluted,  obnoxious  creature  as  I am, 
appear  before  a holy  God ! Can  my  services 
atone  for  my  sins,  or  what  service  can  I per- 
form that  is  not  defiled  and  rendered  unwor- 
thy of  acceptance  by  the  evil  of  my  heart! 
But  could  I perform  ever  so  well  from  this 
day  forward,  what  would  this  avail  for  what 
is  past!  If  I had  offended  a man  like  my- 
self, I might  think  of  making  some  amends ; 
but  my  sins  are  against  God.  His  justice, 
wisdom,  holiness,  and  truth,  have  all  de- 
mands upon  me.  What  then  can  I bring  ! 
Will  sacrifices  appease  him!  No;  these, 
though  of  his  own  appointment,  are  not  of 
themselves  sufficient.  “It  is  not  possible 
for  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  to  take  away 
sins,”  Heb.  x.  4.  Though  all  the  beasts  of 
the  forest,  and  the  cattle  upon  a thousand 
hills  were  mine,  though  I should  offer  all 
Lebanon,  hills  of  frankincense,  rivers,  yea, 
ten  thousand  rivers  of  oil,  all  would  not  do. 
Or  should  I give  my  son,  my  only  son,  the 
fruit  of  my  body,  neither  would  this  atone 
for  the  sin  of  my  soul. 

Here,  then,  you  may  see,  that  to  an  awa- 
kened sinner  sin  is  the  heaviest  burden  ima- 
ginable. He  is  willing,  and  would  be  glad 
(if  it  might  be,)  to  purchase  the  pardon  of 
sin  with  the  loss  of  every  thing  he  accounts 
most  valuable.  If  he  had  the  whole  world, 
he  would  freely  part  wfith  it  to  be  free  from 
guilt.  But  at  the  same  time  he  finds  it  a 
burden  that  he  cannot  shake  off ; he  knows 
that  he  never  can  be  delivered  for  any  thing 
he  can  do  or  propose,  and  therefore  the  great 
subject  of  inquiry  always  upon  his  mind  is. 
Wherewith,  or  how  shall  I appear  and  stand 
before  the  High  God ! 

I hope  some  of  you  are  thus  minded;  to 
you  I have  a comfortable  message  from  the 
other  part  of  my  text.  But  as  I cannot  hope 
thus  of  you  all,  I must  previously  take  no- 
tice, that  there  is  hardly  any  one  passage  in 
the  Bible  more  generally  misunderstood,  and 
which  ignorant  and  careless  men  are  more 


470 


NO  ACCESS  TO  GOD  BUT 


prone  to  wrest  to  their  own  destruction,  than 
the  verses  under  our  present  consideration. 
Not  a few,  having"  their  eyes  blinded  by  the 
god  of  this  world,  and  their  hearts  enslaved 
to  the  love  and  practice  of  sin,  are  content  to 
understand  it  as  if  it  was  rather  a rebuke 
than  an  encouragement  to  them,  who,  like 
the  jailor,  (Acts  xvi.  30,)  are  deeply  affected 
with  a concern  for  the  salvation  of  their  souls. 
Their  comment  is  to  this  purpose,  “ He  hath 
showed  thee,  O man,  what  is  good that  is, 
you  need  not  terrify  yourself  at  this  rate ; 
there  is  nothing  so  evil  in  sin,  or  so  awful  in 
God's  threatenings  as  you  suppose.  He  has 
said,  indeed,  “ the  soul  that  sinneth  shall 
die;”  (Ezek.  xviii.  4;)  yet  here  you  see  an 
easy  way  to  escape,  “ Do  justly,”  which  is, 
being  interpreted,  Do  not  grossly  cheat  and 
injure  your  neighbour ; abstain  from  robbery, 
extortion,  and  heavy  oppression : and  “ love 
mercy ;”  that  is,  Be  ready  to  do  what  are 
commonly  called  good-natured  offices,  and  to 
give  a shilling  or  a guinea  (according  to  your 
circumstances)  now  and  then  to  the  poor,  and 
you  will  be  safe  enough.  How  they  explain 
the  other  clause,  “ walk  humbly,”  upon  this 
plan,  I confess  myself  unable  to  conceive, 
and  therefore  I believe  they  are  glad  to  omit 
it ; for  I am  sure  light  cannot  be  more  con- 
trary to  darkness,  than  such  language  as  this 
is  opposite  to  the  idea  of  walking  humbly 
with  God. 

According  to  this  opinion,  “to  do  justly, 
and  to  love  mercy,”  are  the  whole  of  religion. 
They  are  indeed  essential  parts  of  it;  and 
miserable  will  you  be  who  talk  in  this  strain, 
if  God,  at  the  great  day,  should  judge  you  by 
this  text  to  which  you  now  so  presumptuously 
appeal.  How  wonderful  is  the  pride  and 
arrogance  of  fallen  man,  who  will  dare  to 
urge  a plea  before  God,  which  must  issue  in 
his  own  confusion  ! Do  you  indeed  deal 
justly]  It  implies  something  more  than  not 
being  an  arrant  knave.  Do  you  at  all  times, 
and  in  all  respects,  behave  to  every  person 
as  you  would  they  should  do  unto  you  I Did 
you  never  take  the  least  advantage  of  the 
ignorance  or  necessity  of  your  neighbour] 
Did  you  never  speak  or  report  any  thing  to  ; 
his  prejudice,  without  sufficient  warrant  and 
sufficient  cause  ] You  feel  how  tender  you 
are  of  your  own  character  and  interests. 
Have  you  been  equally  tender  of  the  inter- 
ests of  others,  of  all  others  with  whom  you 
have  had  connections,  without  being  in- 
fluenced in  any  instance  or  degree  by  par- 
tiality or  mercenary  views]  If  you  cannot 
appeal  to  the  Searcher  of  hearts  that  you 
have  walked  in  this  integrity,  your  pretence 
that  you  have  done  justly  is  vile  hypocrisy, 
and  you  may  tremble  to  think  how  easily  you 
may  be  condemned  out  of  your  own  mouth. 
Alas!  if  God,  to  whom  all  your  thoughts 
and  actions  have  been  incessantly  exposed, 
should  enter  into  judgment  with  you,  how 


[SER.  XVII. 

unable  would  you  be  to  answer  him  in  one 
of  a thousand. 

Again,  do  you  love  mercy  ] Do  you  love 
it  as  a miser  loves  money  I Is  it  the  pleasure 
of  your  hearts  to  overcome  evil  with  good  J 
If  your  brother  or  neighbour  offend  you,  not 
seven  times  but  seventy  times  seven  (Matth. 
xviii.  22,)  do  you  find  it  delightful  to  repeat 
your  forgiveness,  to  bless  them  that  curse 
you,  to  pray  for  them  that  despitefully  use 
you,  and  to  requite  repeated  injuries  with 
repeated  acts  of  kindness  I If  not,  what  have 
you  to  do  with  mercy,  either  to  pretend  that 
you  love  mercy  yourself,  or  to  indulge  a hope 
of  obtaining  mercy  from  God,  if  you  know 
no  better  way  of  seeking  it  than  by  your  own 
works.  But  suppose  you  were  less  culpable 
in  these  particulars,  can  you  say  that  you 
walk  humbly  with  God  1 Alas  ! how  impossi- 
ble is  this,  while  you  trust  in  your  own  righ- 
teousness, while  you  slight  and  despise  his 
threatenings,  while  your  hearts  rise  against 
his  gospel ! Are  you  not  impatient  under  the 
afflictions  which  he  sends,  and  unthankful 
for  innumerable  mercies  which  he  is  daily 
bestowing  upon  you  I And  is  this  to  walk 
humbly  with  God  I Bear  with  me  for  a plain 
word,  which  I purposely  speak  plainly  that 
it  may  not  be  forgot ; I say,  that  if  any  man 
or  woman  can  be  saved  in  this  way,  that  is, 
upon  the  account  of  doing  justly,  loving  mer- 
cy, and  walking  humbly  with  God,  then  Satan 
himself  has  no  cause  to  despair. 

I return  now  to  those  who  see  and  acknow- 
ledge themselves  to  be  sinners,  without  righ- 
teousness and  strength,  and  are  desirous  to 
appear  before  God  with  comfort.  To  you  I 
bring  good  tidings ; the  Lord  help  you  to  be- 
lieve and  rejoice ! He  hath  showed  you  that 
which  is  good,  which  is  the  only  and  suffi- 
cient ground  whereon  to  build  your  hopes; 
he  has  showed  or  revealed  it,  for  otherwise 
you  could  never  have  found  it  out.  What 
the  law  cannot  do,  in  that  it  is  weak  and  in- 
effectual through  the  flesh,  God  has  done  by 
sending  his  Son  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh, 
Rom.  viii.  3.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  that 
good  to  which  the  prophet  refers : Moses  and 
; the  prophets,  and  all  the  scriptures,  testify  of 
him,  and  Micah  among  the  rest.  One  of  the 
most  illustrious  testimonies  to  the  person  and 
office  of  our  Emmanuel  in  the  Old  Testa- 
ment, is  to  be  found  in  the  chapter  preceding 
my  text.  “ But  thou,  Bethlehem-Ephratah, 
though  thou  be  little  among  the  thousands 
of  Judah,  yet  out  of  thee  shall  he  come  forth 
unto  me  that  is  to  be  ruler  in  Israel,  whose 
goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from 
everlasting.  And  he  shall  stand  and  feed  in 
the  strength  of  the  Lord,  in  the  majesty  of 
the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God  ; and  they  shall 
abide : for  now  shall  he  be  great  unto  the  ends 
of  the  earth.  And  this  man  shall  be  the 
peace,”  Micah  v.  2 — 5.  All  other  sacrifices 
and  saviours  are  insufficient;  but  Jesus,  by 


SER.  XVII,] 

the  once  offering  up  of  himself  hath  made  a 
full,  perfect,  and  everlasting  atonement,  and 
now  lie  reigns  in  our  nature,  possessed  of  all 
the  fulness  of  grace,  exercising  the  power  of 
God  in  the  salvation  of  men.  Would  you 
then  come  before  the  High  God?  come  in 
the  name  of  Jesus,  and  you  shall  find  accept- 
ance. In  him  God  is  well  pleased ; (Matth. 
iii.  17 ;)  and  for  his  sake  he  is  well  pleased 
with  all  who  honour  his  beloved  Son,  and  put 
their  trust  in  him.  He  has  authority  and 
compassion  sufficient  to  save  the  most  deplor- 
able and  the  most  unworthy.  If  you  read  the 
history  of  his  life  and  death,  you  will  read  of 
a display  of  love  and  grace  beyond  expression; 
and  he  is  the  same  still.  Before  he  ascend- 
ed, he  left  an  assurance  for  your  encourage- 
ment, that  whosoever  cometh  unto  him  he 
will  in  no  wise  cast  him  out.  If  you  say,  I 
want  faith,  remember  it  is  his  gift,  and  he  has 
promised  to  do  whatever  you  ask  in  his  name. 
Therefore  fight  against  unbelief,  resist  Satan 
with  the  sword  of  the  Spirit.  If  it  is  sug- 
gested that  you  are  a great  sinner,  you  can- 
not deny  it,  nor  need  you ; avow  the  charge, 
take  shame  to  yourselves,  and  give  glory  to 
God ; but  it  is  equally  true,  that  Jesus  is  a 
great  Saviour,  he  is  able  to  save  to  the  utter- 
most ; and  though  your  iniquities  are  great, 
yet  cast  not  away  your  hope,  for  his  mercy  is 
greater  than  the  heavens. 

When  you  come  in  this  way,  what  does  the 
Lord  require  of  yoq  ? Is  it  to  make  your  own 
peace  ? He  would  as  soon  require  you  to  make 
a new  heaven  and  a new  earth.  Is  it  to  keep 
your  own  soul?  No  more  than  he  requires 
you  to  keep  the  sun  in  its  course.  His  own 
arm  has  wrought  salvation,  and  he  will  secure 
it.  He  requires  none  of  your  help  here; 
nay,  he  disdains  the  thought : you  might  as 
well  offer  to  help  him  to  govern  the  world. 
But  this  he  requires  of  you,  “to  do  justly,  to 
love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy 
God;”  and  the  methods  of  his  grace  will  ena- 
ble you  to  do  so. 

1.  “ To  do  justly.”  We  are  by  nature  at- 
tached to  worldly  goods,  and  wholly  in- 
fluenced by  selfish  principles.  But  faith  in 
Jesus  communicates  new  motives,  views,  and 
aims  to  the  soul : it  teaches  us  to  have  our 
treasure  in  heaven  ; to  sit  loose  to  the  world ; 
to  be  satisfied  with  that  station  and  compe- 
tence which  Divine  Providence  has  allotted 
us ; and  to  love  our  neighbours  as  ourselves, 
because  they  are  our  fellow-sinners,  and  are 
capable  of  being  called  to  a participation  with 
us  in  the  honourable  relation  and  privilege 
of  the  children  of  God.  Upon  these  princi- 
ples the  practice  of  justice  is  attainable,  but 
upon  no  other ; for  though  there  are  many 
characters  honourable  and  blameless  in  the 
outward  concerns  of  life,  and  in  the  judg- 
ment of  men,  there  is  no  person  upon  earth 
who  does  or  can  love  or  practise  justice  in 
its  full  extent,  till  he  has  received  the  Spirit 


471 

of  Christ,  and  lives  upon  him  by  faith*  for 
wisdom  and  strength  from  day  to  day. 

2.  “ To  love  mercy.”  None  can  truly  love 
it  but  those  who  have  tasted  it.”  When  your 
hearts  feel  the  comforts  of  God’s  pardoning 
love,  you  will  delight  to  imitate  him.  When 
you  can  truly  rejoice  that  he  has  freely  for- 
given you  that  immense  debt,  which  is  ex- 
pressed by  ten  thousand  talents  (Matth.  xviii. 
24,)  you  will  have  no  desire  to  take  your  fel- 
low-servant by  the  throat  for  a few  pence. 
This  sense  of  God’s  goodness,  and  the  con- 
tinual need  you  find  of  his  renewed  mercy 
from  day  to  day,  will  soften  your  spirit  (if  you 
are  a believer,)  disarm  and  gradually  weaken 
every  proud  thought  that  would  plead  for  the 
exercise  of  anger  and  resentment  towards 
those  who  have  offended  you.  You  will  be 
swift  to  hear,  slow  to  speak,  slow  to  wrath ; 
you  will  put  on  (as  the  beloved  of  God)  bow- 
els of  meekness,  (Col.  iii.  12,)  long  suffering 
and  compassion,  forbearing  and  forgiving,  if 
you  have  ought  against  any ; because  God, 
for  Christ’s  sake,  has  freely  forgiven  you. 
If  you  find  this  practice  difficult,  it  is  owing 
partly  to  the  remaining  depravity  of  your  na- 
ture, and  partly  because  you  have  had  but  a 
faint  sense  of  his  mercy.  Pray  for  a more 
powerful  manifestation  of  it,  and  you  will  do 
better ; mercy  will  be  your  delight. 

3.  “ To  walk  humbly.”  “ Can  two  walk 
together  except  they  are  agreed  ?”  Amos  iii. 
3.  When  Christ  is  your  peace,  you  will  de- 
light in  God  ; you  will  set  him  before  you, 
commune  with  him,  study  to  please  him,  and 
to  keep  all  his  commandments.  This  is  to 
walk  with  God  ; and  you  will  walk  humbly, 
remembering  how  much  you  owe  to  free 
grace,  and  how  far  you  fall  short  in  your  best 
endeavours.  These  considerations,  impressed 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  will  humble  you,  will 
keep  you  from  being  high  in  your  own  esteem, 
wise  in  your  own  conceit,  and  from  seeking 
great  things  for  yourself.  You  will  be  habitu- 
ally thankful  when  the  Lord  gives,  content 
when  he  withholds,  patient  when  he  afflicts. 
You  will  confess  yourself  unworthy  of  the 
smallest  mercies  you  possess, and  acknowledge 
in  your  heaviest  trials,  that  he  has  laid  far 
less  upon  you  than  your  iniquities  have  de- 
served. 

This  is  the  pattern  we  are  to  copy  after, 
and  this  is  the  certain  tendency  and  effect  of 
bis  grace.  A measure  of  this  disposition  is 
found  in  all  who  are  Christians  indeed.  Yet 
we  may  take  shame  to  ourselves  that  we  are 
still  so  far  defective  in  every  branch  of  our 
duty.  I jet  us  stir  up  ourselves  to  greater 
diligence,  watchfulness,  and  prayer,  that  we 
may  obtain  more  lively,  abiding,  and  trans- 
forming views  of  that  which  is  our  true  good, 
that  so  we  may  be  enabled  to  glorify  our 
heavenly  Father,  and  to  adorn  our  profession, 
by  doing  justly,  loving  mercy,  and  walking 
humbly  with  our  God. 


BY  THE  GOSPEL  OF  JESUS  CHRIST. 


472 


OF  A LIVING  AND  A DEAD  FAITH. 


SERMON  XVIII. 

OF  A LIVING  AND  A DEAD  FAITH. 

For  as  the  body  without  the  spirit  is  dead, 

so  faith  without  works  is  dead  also. — 

James  ii.  26. 

Whoever  has  read  the  scriptures  with  at- 
tention, must  have  observed  several  passages, 
which,  at  first  view,  and  till  thoroughly  ex- 
amined and  compared,  appear  hard  to  recon- 
cile to  each  other.  No  instance  of  this  sort 
is  more  remarkable  than  the  seeming  differ- 
ence of  judgment  between  St.  Paul  and  St. 
James  on  the  point  of  justification.  St.  Paul 
having  said,  “ That  a man  is  justified  by  faith 
without  the  deeds  of  the  law,”  (Rom.  iii.  28,) 
produces  the  example  of  Abraham  to  confirm 
his  assertion.  St.  James,  (in  the  chapter  be- 
fore us,)  from  the  example  of  the  same  Abra- 
ham, draws  a conclusion  which  seems  directly 
to  contradict  this : “ Ye  see  then  how  that  by 
works  a man  is  justified,  and  not  by  faith 
only,”  James  ii.  24.  Can  any  two  opinions  be 
more  opposite  in  appearance  1 How  then 
can  both  be  true,  or  how  can  we  believe  both 
writers  infallible  in  their  doctrine,  and  in- 
fluenced by  the  unerring  Spirit  of  God  1 Must 
we  cleave  to  the  one,  and  reject  the  other  1 
and  if  so,  how  shall  we  know  which  is  the 
real  truth  1 

We  may  confidently  answer,  The  apostles 
are  both  right : their  doctrine  is  equally  from 
God,  and  does  not  clash  in  any  particular. 
The  darkness  and  difficulty  is  in  the  appre- 
hensions of  men,  and  not  in  the  word  of  God. 
Yet  a difficulty  there  is,  and  I hope  I shall 
not  detain  you  unprofitably  at  this  time,  by 
endeavouring  to  clear  it,  and  afterwards  to 
press  upon  you  the  words  of  my  text  as  a 
proper  inference  from  the  whole. 

When  men  who  are  strangers  to  Christian 
experience,  and  who  trust  more  to  their  own 
sagacity  and  learning  than  to  the  word  and 
Spirit  of  God,  attempt  to  resolve  cases  of  this 
sort,  they  make  strange  work.  And  it  is  no 
wonder;  for  how  can  any  one  explain  what 
he  does  not  understand  1 It  would  tire  you  if 
I should  relate  a tenth  part  of  the  conjectures 
of  learned  men  upon  this  very  subject.  I 
shall  mention  one  or  two  as  a specimen.  A 
writer  of  some  eminence  in  the  world  con- 
fesses the  difficulty  I have  noticed  in  its  full 
strength.  He  allows  and  affirms  that  it  is  not 
only  hard,  but  impossible,  to  reconcile  the 
apostles  to  each  other,  and  concludes  that, 
since  it  is  impossible  to  hold  both  their  sen- 
timents, we  must  abide  by  him  who  wrote  the 
last.  This,  from  many  arguments  his  learn- 
ing furnished  him  with,  he  thinks  to  have 
been  St.  James.  Accordingly,  he  gives  up  the 
other,  and  his  doctrine  of  faith  without  works, 
to  shift  for  themselves.  He  supposes  that 
St.  Paul,  in  the  heat  of  his  argument,  carried 


[SER.  XVIII. 

the  matter  a little  too  far,  and  that  St.  James 
wrote  afterwards  to  correct  him. 

But  to  show  you  (excuse  a familiar  ex- 
pression) how  doctors  differ,  and  at  the  same 
time  to  warn  even  true  believers  against 
hastily  judging  beyond  the  line  of  their  ex- 
perience, I would  observe,  that  that  great 
servant  of  God,  Luther,  soon  after  he  began 
to  preach  the  gospel,  made  a mistake  no  less 
bold  and  presuming  on  the  other  side  of  the 
question.  He  had  felt  the  power  of  St.  Paul’s 
doctrine  in  his  own  soul,  and  would  have  de- 
fied an  angel  that  would  have  dared  to  oppose 
it ; therefore,  when  his  adversaries  pressed 
him  with  the  authority  of  St.  James,  not  hav- 
ing at  that  time  light  to  give  a more  solid 
answer,  he  ventured  to  deny  the  authenticity 
of  the  whole  epistle,  and  rashly  insisted,  both 
in  his  sermons  and  books,  that  St.  James 
never  wrote  it.  But  Luther,  though  mis- 
taken in  this  point,  was  under  the  Lord’s 
teaching ; he  went  on  from  strength  to 
strength,  increasing  in  knowledge  and  grace ; 
and  when  his  judgment  was  better  informed, 
he  publicly  retracted  his  former  unguarded 
assertion. 

Leaving,  therefore,  the  authority  of  men, 
let  us  betake  ourselves  to  the  word  of  God, 
and  humbly  seek  the  light  of  his  Spirit,  who 
is  promised  to  guide  his  people  in  their  sin- 
cere inquiries  after  truth. 

Now,  if  you  consider  the  scope  and  design 
of  our  apostles,  and  take  in  the  context,  I 
hope  this  seeming  opposition  will  be  soon  re- 
moved. St.  Paul  is  evidently  treating  on  the 
great  point  of  a sinner’s  justification  in  the 
sight  of  God ; he  shows  that  it  cannot  be  of 
the  law,  because  by  the  law  all  men  were  al- 
ready condemned,  and  because  then  boasting 
could  not  be  excluded,  but  that  it  was  freely 
by  grace,  through  the  redemption  that  is  by 
Christ  Jesus.  His  reasoning  will  appear  to 
greater  advantage  by  perusing  the  whole  pas- 
sage, than  by  producing  a few  detached  sen- 
tences. After  he  had  summed  up  the  evi- 
dence with  respect  both  to  Jews  and  Gentiles, 
and  pronounced  his  verdict,  that  every  mouth 
must  be  stopped,  and  that  the  whole  world 
stood  guilty  before  God,  he  proceeds  thus : 
“ Therefore  by  the  deeds  of  the  law,  there 
shall  no  flesh  be  justified  in  his  sight : for  by 
the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin.  But  now 
the  righteousness  of  God  without  the  law  is 
manifested,  being  witnessed  by  the  law  and 
the  prophets  ; even  the  righteousness  of  God 
which  is  by  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  unto  all,  and 
upon  all  them  that  believe ; for  there  is  no 
difference:  For  all  have  sinned  and  come 
short  of  the  glory  of  God  : Being  justified 
freely  by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption 
that  is  in  Christ  Jesus;  Whom  God  hath  set 
forth  to  be  a propitiation,  through  faith  in  his 
blood,  to  declare  his  righteousness  for  the  re- 
mission of  sins  that  are  past,  through  the  for- 
bearance of  God ; to  declare,  I say,  at  this 


OF  A LIVING  AND  A DEAD  FAITH. 


473 


SER.  XVIII.] 

time  his  righteousness ; that  he  might  be  just, 
and  the  justifier  of  him  which  believeth  in 
Jesus.  Where  is  boasting  then  ! It  is  ex- 
cluded. By  what  law  1 of  works  ? Nay ; but 
by  the  law  of  faith.  Therefore  we  conclude, 
that  a man  is  justified  by  faith  without  the 
deeds  of  the  law,”  Rom.  iii.  20 — -28.  And 
because  the  Jews  had  a high  opinion  of  Abra- 
ham, he  proceeds  in  the  next  chapter  to  show 
that  Abraham  was  justified  in  the  same  way. 
“ For  what  saith  the  scripture  1 Abraham  be- 
lieved God,  and  it  was  counted  unto  him  for 
righteousness.  Now  to  him  that  worketh,  is 
the  reward  not  reckoned  of  grace,  but  of  debt. 
But  to  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth 
on  him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is 
counted  for  righteousness,”  Rom.  iv.  3 — 5. 
The  circumstance  in  Abraham’s  life  referred 
to  is,  when  he  believed  the  promise  of  God, 
that  though  he  was  then  childless,  he  should 
be  the  father  of  many  nations,  (Gen.  xii.  3 ; 
xvii.  4,)  and  that  particularly  from  him  should 
proceed  the  Messiah,  the  promised  seed,  in 
whom  both  he  himself,  and  all  the  families 
of  the  earth  should  be  blessed. 

St.  James  expressly  treats  of  those  who 
rested  in  a notion  which  they  called  faith, 
and  accounted  sufficient  for  their  salvation, 
though  it  had  no  influence  upon  their  hearts, 
tempers,  and  conduct.  He  shows  that  their 
hope  is  vain,  because  such  a faith  as  this  the 
devils  have.  And  he  proves,  by  the  example 
of  Abraham,  that  his  faith  was  very  different 
from  theirs,  because  it  enabled  him  to  perform 
the  hardest  and  most  painful  act  of  obe- 
dience, the  offering  up  of  his  only  son. 
“ What  doth  it  profit,  my  brethren,  though  a 
man  say  he  hath  faith,  and  have  not  works  1 
can  (this)*  faith  save  him  1 If  a brother  or  a 
sister  be  naked,  and  destitute  of  daily  food ; 
and  one  of  you  say  unto  them,  Depart  in 
peace,  be  you  warmed,  and  filled : notwith- 
standing ye  give  them  not  those  things  which 
are  needful  to  the  body ; what  doth  it  profit! 
Even  so  faith,  if  it  hath  not  works,  is  dead, 
being  alone.  Yea,  a man  may  say,  Thou  hast 
faith,  and  I have  works : show  me  thy  faith 
without  thy  works,  and  I will  show  thee  my 
faith  by  my  works.  Thou  believest  that  there 
is  one  God ; thou  dost  well : the  devils  also 
believe  and  tremble.  But  wilt  thou  know,  O 
vain  man ! that  faith  without  works  is  dead  1 
Was  not  Abraham,  our  father,  justified  by 
works,  when  he  had  offered  Isaac,  his  son, 
upon  the  altar ! Seest  thou  how  faith  wrought 
with  his  works,  and  by  works  was  faith  made 
perfect ! And  the  scripture  was  fulfilled  (con- 
firmed), which  saith,  Abraham  believed  God, 
and  it  was  imputed  unto  him  for  righteous- 
ness; and  he  was  called  the  friend  of  God. 
Ye  see  then  how  that  by  works  a man  is  jus- 
tified, and  not  by  faith  only,  James  ii.  14 — 
24.  It  is  exceedingly  plain  that  he  had  not 


3 O 


the  same  thing  in  view  which  St.  Paul  had  ; 
for  the  incident  to  which  he  here  refers,  hap- 
pened a great  many  years  after  Abraham  had 
been  declared  justified  in  the  sight  of  God. 

The  sum  is,  the  one  declares  that  nothing 
renders  us  acceptable  to  God  but  faith  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ;  the  other,  that  such  a 
faith,  when  true  and  genuine,  is  not  solitary, 
but  accompanied  with  every  good  work.  The 
one  speaks  of  the  justification  of  our  persons ; 
this  is  by  faith  only:  the  other,  of  the  justifi- 
cation of  our  profession ; and  this  is  by  faith 
also,  but  not  alone,  for  it  works  by  love,  and 
produces  obedience. 

St.  James  has  the  same  view  in  speaking 
of  Rahab;  (James  ii.  25;)  and  by  producing 
her  as  a confirmation,  it  is  still  more  evident, 
that  he  is  only  considering  works  as  the  proofs 
of  our  sincerity.  We  have  no  sure  ground 
to  conclude,  that  Rahab,  in  the  act  of  receiv- 
ing the  spies,  and  at  that  time,  had  any  sav- 
ing faith,  or  any  view  to  the  Messiah  and  the 
covenant  of  grace ; though  it  is  most  probable 
she  had,  after  she  was  joined  to  the  people  of 
Israel,  and  became  acquainted  with  divine 
revelation.  But  in  Jericho  her  thoughts  seem 
to  have  been  confined  to  a temporal  deliver- 
ance ; and  the  profession  of  faith  which  she 
made  to  the  spies  implies  no  more.  “ And 
she  said  unto  the  men,  I know  that  the  Lord 
hath  given  you  the  land,  and  that  your  terror 
is  fallen  upon  us,  and  that  all  the  inhabitants 
of  the  land  faint  because  of  you.  For  we 
have  heard  how  the  Lord  dried  up  the  waters 
of  the  Red-sea  for  you,  when  you  came  out 
of  Egypt ; and  what  you  did  unto  the  two 
kings  of  the  Amorites. — And  as  soon  as  we 
had  heard  these  things,  our  hearts  did  melt ; 
neither  did  there  remain  any  more  courage  in 
any  man,  because  of  you : for  the  Lord  your 
God,  he  is  God  in  heaven  above,  and  in  earth 
beneath.  Now,  therefore,  I pray  you,  swear 
unto  me  by  the  Lord,  since  I have  showed 
you  kindness,  that  you  will  also  show  kind- 
ness unto  my  father’s  house ; and  give  me  a 
true  token,”  Joshua  ii.  9 — 12.  Had  she  said 
thus,  and  yet  delivered  the  spies  up  to  the 
king  of  Jericho,  it  would  have  proved,  that 
she  did  not  speak  from  her  heart;  but  her 
profession  was  justified  by  receiving  them  in- 
to her  house,  concealing  them  from  the  search 
made  after  them,  and  sending  them  away  in 
peace.  Surely  this  conduct  of  Rahab  will 
be  sufficient  to  condemn  many  who  would  be 
thought  Christians. 

We  may,  therefore,  deduce  two  proposi- 
tions, perfectly  consistent  with  each  other, 
from  the  passage  in  question. 

1.  That  there  is  no  acceptance  for  any  of 
the  sons  of  Adam  with  the  just  and  holy  God, 
but  through  Jesus  Christ  as  our  righteous- 
ness received  by  faith  ; and  that  in  this  con- 
cern works  of  every  kind  are  absolutely  ex- 
cluded. 

This  is  the  capital  doctrine  of  the  gospel ; 


* » TTiimg,  this  faith. 


474 


OF  A LIVING  AND  A DEAD  FAITH 


[SER.  XV ill. 


it  is  not  only  clearly  asserted  in  innumerable 
passages  both  of  the  Old  Testament  and  the 
New^but  is  St  Paul’s  express  subject  and 
design  in  his  epistles  to  the  Romans  and  the 
Galatians.  Though  he  was  yielding  and 
compliant  in  many  things  of  less  importance, 
and  was  willing  to  become  all  things  to  all 
men,  yet  he  would  not  give  place,  no  not  for 
an  hour,  to  any  who  offered  to  invalidate  this 
foundation-truth.  He  declares,  that  to  mix 
any  thing,  to  contend  for  any  qualification  or 
observance,  as  of  necessary  influence,  to  con- 
cur with  the  perfect  work  of  Christ  in  the 
justification  of  a sinner,  is  to  darken,  alter, 
and  destroy  the  gospel  which  he  preached  ; 
and  denounces  an  anathema  against  every 
one  who  should  be  guilty  of  this  presumption, 
yea,  though  he  should  be  (if  such  a thing 
were  possible)  an  angel  from  heaven,  Gal.  i. 
8,  9.  How  cordially  he  rested  his  own  hope 
upon  the  truth  which  he  proposed  to  others, 
he  declares  elsewhere : “ Yea  doubtless,  and 
I count  all  things  but  loss,  for  the  excellency 
of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord : 
for  whom  I have  suffered  the  loss  of  all 
things,  and  do  count  them  but  dung  that  I 
may  win  Christ ; and  be  found  in  him,  not 
having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of* 
the  law,  but  that  which  is  through  the  faith 
of  Christ,  the  righteousness  of  God  by  faith,” 
Phil.  iii.  8,  9. 

If  this  is  the  scriptural  doctrine,  let  each 
of  you  examine  on  what  ground  you  stand. 
Has  God  appointed  one  way  of  salvation? 
and  will  any  of  you  dare  to  propose  another  ? 
This  would  be  both  wicked  and  dangerous : 
“ Other  foundation  can  no  man  lay  than  that 
which  is  laid,  which  is  Jesus  Christ,”  1 Cor. 

iii.  11.  You  may  please  yourselves  now  with 
what  you  account  your  good  works ; but  when 
God  shall  “lay  judgment  to  the  line,  and 
righteousness  to  the  plummet,”  (Isa.  xxviii. 
17,)  none  will  be  able  to  abide  his  appear- 
ance, but  those  who  can  plead  a righteous- 
ness perfectly  answerable  to  the  law’s  de- 
mands, which  can  only  be  found  in  Jesus 
Christ,  the  righteous  one. 

And  as  this  doctrine  is  of  so  great  and  es- 
sential importance,  beware  how  you  listen  to 
any  other.  Take  heed  how  you  hear ; (Mark 

iv.  24 ; Luke  viii.  18,)  be  not  influenced  by 
the  names,  characters,  or  stations  of  men, 
when  the  salvation  of  your  souls  is  at  stake. 
Prize  the  liberty,  which  as  protestants  and 
Britons  you  enjoy,  of  bringing  every  doctrine 
to  the  trial  of  God’s  word,  and  freely  use  it. 
I account  it  my  honour  and  happiness  that  I 
preach  to  a free  people,  who  have  the  Bible 
in  their  hands.  To  your  Bibles  I appeal.  I 
entreat,  I charge  you  to  receive  nothing  upon 
my  wrord,  any  farther  than  I prove  it  from  the 
word  of  God ; and  bring  every  preacher,  and 

* Ex  of  law;  that  is,  of  avy  law  whatsoever, 

not  of  the  law,  as  if  he  only  meant  the  Jewish  law.  The 
article  t*  seems  here  to  be  purposely  left  out. 


every  sermon  that  you  hear  to  the  same  stan- 
dard. If  this  is  the  truth,  you  had  need  to 
be  well  established  in  it ; for  it  is  not  the  cur- 
rent and  fashionable  doctrine  of  the  times. 
Let  me  then  farther  recommend  to  you,  (it  is 
a direction  our  Lord  has  given,)  to  examine 
doctrines  by  their  effects:  “By  their  fruits 
ye  shall  know  them,”  Matth.  vii.  16.  The 
truths  of  God,  when  faithfully  preached,  in 
humble  dependence  upon  his  blessing,  will 
be  attested  by  his  powder.  At  such  times, 
and  in  such  places,  a visible  change  will  soon 
be  observable  in  some  one  or  other  of  the 
hearers;  they  cease  to  do  evil,  they  learn  to 
do  well ; they  acknowledge  God  in  all  their 
ways,  and  glorify  him  before  men,  by  living 
according  to  his  precepts.  And  if  you  ask 
them  the  reason  of  this  change,  they  will 
freely  ascribe  it  to  the  blessing  of  God  upon 
that  sort  of  preaching,  which  by  too  many  is 
accounted  foolishness,  1 Cor.  i.  21. 

On  the  other  hand,  w7e  are  not  afraid  to 
challenge  those  who  are  most  acquainted  with 
men  and  books,  to  produce  instances  of  the 
same  effects  wrought  by  any  other  doctrine 
than  that  which  commends  the  Lord  Christ 
in  his  person,  offices,  and  power,  as  the  only 
object  of  a sinner’s  hope.  How  much  is  said 
and  wrote  to  tell  people  what  they  should  be, 
and  what  they  should  do ! yet  where  these 
principles  are  not  enforced,  there  is  nothing 
effectually  done,  nothing  indeed  attempted, 
beyond  a formal  round  of  dull  and  heartless 
service ; a little  something  that  looks  like 
religion,  on  the  Lord’s  day  to  appear  in  church 
at  the  summons  of  the  bell,  to  repeat  words 
because  other  people  do  the  same,  to  hea„* 
what  is  delivered  from  the  pulpit  with  little 
attention  or  affection,  unless  something  occurs 
that  is  suited  to  exalt  self,  or  to  soothe  con- 
science, and  then  to  run  with  eagerness  into 
the  world  again. 

Or  if  here  and  there  a person  is  truly 
touched  by  the  secret  influence  and  guidance 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  where  this  evangelical 
doctrine  is  not  publicly  maintained,  the  con- 
sequence always  is,  that  they  renounce  the 
things  which  they  before  held  for  truths,  are 
brought  into  that  way  of  thinking  which  is 
agreeable  to  St  Paul’s  doctrine,  and  receive 
it  gladly  whenever  it  comes  in  their  wTay. 

It  must  be  allowed,  however,  at  the  same 
time,  that  there  are  counterfeit  professors, 
wThose  religion  lies  in  notions,  and  who,  while 
they  profess  to  believe  in  God,  in  works  deny 
him ; by  reason  of  whom  the  ways  of  truth 
are  evil  spoken  of,  2 Pet.  ii.  2.  This  the 
apostles  have  taught  us  to  expect ; nay,  it  was 
so  from  the  beginning,  even  while  the  apos- 
tles were  themselves  personally  with  the 
churches.  To  such  St.  James  addresses  the 
passage  I have  been  reading  to  you,  of  which 
my  text  is  the  conclusion ; and  as  I dare  nc* 
hope  that  there  are  none  such  in  this  great, 
assembly,  it  is  highly  proper  that,  before  I 


GUILT  REMOVED,  &c. 


475 


SER.  XIX.] 

conclude,  I should  take  notice  of  a second 
proposition  which  naturally  offers  from  the 
subject  we  have  had  in  hand ; and  more  es- 
pecially from  the  reasoning  of  St.  James,  and 
from  the  words  of  my  text. 

2.  That  true  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
has  a prevailing  and  habitual  influence  upon 
the  hearts  and  lives  of  those  who  possess  it ; 
and  that  they  are  vain  men,  and  deceivers  of 
themselves,  who  pretend  to  faith  in  him,  while 
their  lives  and  conversations  show  them  to 
be  enslaved  to  the  love  of  the  world,  and  the 
dominion  of  sin.  The  apostle,  to  inspire  us 
with  a just  abhorrence  of  this  false  profession, 
makes  use  of  two  comparisons,  which  are  ex- 
ceedingly striking.  May  God  open  the  eyes 
of  those  who  are  concerned  in  it,  to  perceive 
and  tremble  at  the  justness  and  horror  of  the 
resemblance  ! 

1st,  He  compares  it  to  the  faith  of  devils. 
“ Thou  believest  there  is  one  God ; thou  dost 
well.  The  devils  also  believe,  and  tremble,” 
James  ii.  10.  Are  there  any  here  whom  it 
is  needful  to  address  in  this  harsh  manner! 
My  dear  brethren,  bear  with  me ; I wish  you 
well,  and  would  willingly  rejoice  in  every 
good  appearance ; but,  alas ! how  little  does  it 
signify  what  you  believe,  or  what  you  say, 
unless  your  acknowledged  principles  have  an 
effect  upon  your  conduct ! 

Do  you  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ! 
so  does  Satan.  Do  you  believe  the  election 
of  God,  the  sovereignity  of  grace,  the  perse- 
verance of  the  saints!  it  is  possible  the  devil 
may  have  a more  extensive  knowledge  in 
these  doctrines  than  the  wisest  of  men ; yet 
this  benefits  him  not ; it  is  not  want  of  know- 
ledge, but  want  of  love,  that  makes  him  what 
he  is. 

The  only  effect  mentioned  of  the  faith  of 
devils  is,  that  it  increases  their  terror  and 
aggravates  their  guilt.  They  believe  (there 
are  no  sceptics  in  hell,)  and  tremble.  Is  not 
this  too  much  the  case  of  some  of  you ! If 
you  knew  less,  you  would  be  easier  at  least, 
and  less  inexcusable ; and  yet  perhaps  you 
mistake  your  state,  and  think  yourselves,  on 
this  account,  far  less  blameable  than  you  real- 
ly are.  Perhaps  sometimes,  when  you  reflect 
sincerely  on  your  ways,  and  how  strangely 
you  are  hurried  to  act  contrary  to  the  convic- 
tions which  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  forces 
upon  you,  you  are  ready  to  charge  the  Lord 
and  his  dispensations  hardly,  and  to  say,  O 
that  he  would  give  me  his  grace!  but  if  not, 
what  can  I do  without  it ! Let  conscience 
now  speak  faithfully,  and  it  will  tell  you,  that 
if  you  are  condemned,  it  will  not  be  for  what 
you  cannot  do,  but  for  wilfully  refusing  to 
improve  the  power  already  given  you.  When 
I tell  you,  that  without  holiness  no  man  shall 
see  the  Lord  with  comfort,  and  that  you  must 
break  off  from  your  vain  company  and  evil 
practices,  if  you  expect  or  desire  to  be  saved, 
vou  know  that  I speak  the  truth ; and  your 


looks  often  testify  that  you  feel  the  force  of 
it.  Now,  while  the  word  of  God  is  sounding 
in  your  ears,  you  perhaps  are  thinking,  “It 
is  time,  high  time  indeed,  to  break  off:  though 
the  Lord  has  forborne  me  long,  he  will  surely 
strike  at  last,  if  I go  on  thus.”  And  yet, 
alas ! what  I have  formerly  seen  gives  me 
much  cause  to  fear,  that  to-morrow,  or  the 
next  time  they  entice  you,  you  will  consent 
again.  But  could  I tell  you,  that  by  going  a 
different  way,  you  might  gain  a sum  of  money, 
or  could  1 make  it  appear,  that  the  next  time 
you  went  to  such  a place,  your  house  would 
certainly  be  robbed,  I make  no  doubt  but  you 
would  forbear.  And  yet  gold  is  not  grace. 
It  is  then  plain  that  you  have  power,  but 
your  will  is  in  fault.  God  has  enlightened 
your  conscience;  but  you  rebel  against  it. 

0 repent ! while  there  is  yet  space  afforded. 
Call  upon  the  name  of  Jesus  ; who  knows  but 
he  may  even  yet  deliver  you  ! 

2dly,  He  compares  it  to  a dead  carcass, 
which  is  not  only  unprofitable,  but  loathsome 
and  offensive.  May  God  showT  you  to-day, 
how  odious  your  profession  is  in  his  sight ! 
for  by  assenting  to  the  truths  of  the  gospel, 
and  outwardly  favouring  the  cause,  and  the 
instruments  which  the  Lord  has  raised  up  to 
promote  it,  you  are  so  far  professors.  May 
he  enable  you  to  be,  not  only  almost,  but  al- 
together Christians  ! For  while  you  thus  halt 
between  two  opinions,  and  stand  divided  be- 
tween God  and  the  world,  you  are  an  a!x>- 
mination  to  God,  a grief  to  his  people,  a 
stumbling-block  to  the  ignorant,  and  are  (if 
this  was  of  any  weight  in  comparison  of  what 

1 have  already  said)  secretly  despised  by  those 
who  pretend  to  court  your  acquaintance. 
Your  guilt  is  in  some  respects  more  aggra- 
vated, and  your  example  unspeakably  more 
mischievous,  than  either  would  be  if  you 
openly  rejected  the  truth.  You  stand  in  the 
rank  of  those  wicked  servants  who  know  their 
master’s  will,  but  do  it  not.  The  great  Judge 
has  determined  concerning*  these,  that  they 
shall  be  beaten  with  many  stripes,  Luke  xii. 
48.  Awake  to  righteousness,  and  sin  not ; 
look  up  to  Jesus,  who  is  exalted  to  bestow 
both  faith  and  repentance,  that  you  may  no 
longer  be  torn  in  pieces  by  those  inward  con- 
tentions, but  experience  that  peace  which 
passes  all  understanding,  Phil.  iv.  7. 


SERMON  XIX. 

QUILT  REMOVED  AND  PEACE  RESTORED. 

O Lord,  open  thou  my  lips , and  my  mouth 
shall  show  forth  thy  praise. — Psalm  li.  15. 

The  history  of  David  is  full  of  instruction. 
Every  thing  recorded  of  him  affords  us  either 
consolation  or  caution.  In  his  example  we 


476 

see  much  of  the  sovereign  power  and  provi- 
dence of  God.  When  a youth,  though  the 
least  of  his  father’s  house,  he  was  singled  out, 
and  called  from  following  sheep,  to  rule  a 
kingdom.  We  see  him  supported  through  a 
variety  of  difficulties,  and  at  length  establish- 
ed in  his  throne,  to  the  amazement  and  con- 
fusion of  his  enemies.  In  him  likewise  we 
have  a striking  proof  of  the  evil  that  is  in  the 
heart  of  man.  Who  would  have  thought  it, 
that  David,  the  man  so  highly  favoured,  so 
wonderfully  preserved,  the  man  after  God’s 
own  heart,  who,  in  the  time  of  his  distress, 
could  say,  “ My  soul  thirsteth  for  God,  even 
for  the  living  God,”  (Psalm  xlii.  2,)  that  he 
should  be,  in  an  unguarded  hour,  seduced, 
surprised,  and  led  captive  of  the  devil ! From 
gazing  he  proceeds  to  adultery,  from  adultery 
to  murder,  and  at  length  sinks  into  such  a 
stupid  frame  of  mind,  that  an  express  mes- 
sage from  God  was  needful  to  convince  him 
of  his  sin.  And  in  this  circumstance  we  far- 
ther see  the  riches  of  divine  grace  and  mercy, 
how  tenderly  the  Lord  watches  over  his  sheep, 
how  carefully  he  brings  them  back  when 
wandering  from  him,  and  with  what  rich 
goodness  he  heals  their  backslidings,  and  loves 
them  freely.  David  was  fallen,  but  not  lost. 
“ The  things  which  he  had  done  displeased 
the  Lord,”  (2  Sam.  xi.  27,)  yet  his  loving- 
kindness and  faithfulness  were  unalterable. 
He  was  interested  in  that  covenant,  “ which 
is  well  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure (2 
Sam.  xxiii.  5 ;)  and  therefore,  when  he  con- 
fessed his  sin,  the  Lord  assured  him,  by  his 
servant  Nathan,  that  “ he  had  put  away  his 
sin,  and  he  should  not  die  for  it,”  2 Sam.  xii.  13. 

However,  though  the  Lord  is  thus  gracious 
in  passing  by  the  iniquity  of  his  children,  yet 
he  will  let  them  know,  by  sorrowful  experi- 
ence, that  “ it  is  an  evil  and  a bitter  thing  to 
sin  against  him,”  Jer.  ii.  19.  Though  he 
will  not  cast  off,  he  will  chasten ; he  will 
withdraw  his  presence,  and  suspend  his  gra- 
cious influences ; and  this  to  a sensible  heart 
is  a heavy  punishment.  Though  David  was 
delivered  from  the  fear  of  death  and  hell,  he 
penned  his  psalm  in  the  bitterness  of  his  soul. 
He  did  not  consider  the  Lord  as  his  enemy, 
but  as  a Friend  and  a father,  whom  he  had 
greatly  offended.  He  longed  to  be  recon- 
ciled ; but  could  not  as  yet  recover  his  former 
confidence.  He  hoped,  indeed,  that  a time 
of  refreshment  would  come  from  his  pre- 
sence ; and  therefore  he  continued  waiting ; 
but  for  the  present  he  made  heavy  complaints, 
that  his  bones  were  broken,  and  his  mouth 
stopped.  He  had  lost  his  strength  and  life, 
and  found  he  could  not  restore  himself.  He 
was  struck  dumb  by  his  late  fall ; and  there- 
fore he  breathes  out  this  prayer,  “ O Lord, 
open  thou  my  lips,  and  my  mouth  shall  show 
forth  thy  praise.” 

From  these  words  I propose  to  consider 
that  mournful  case,  which  too  often  happens 


[skr.  XIX. 

in  the  Christian  life,  when  the  believer’s 
mouth  is  stopped,  and  his  lips  closed,  so  that 
he  cannot  show  forth  the  praises  of  his  God. 
And  in  this  view, 

1.  I shall  point  out  to  you  the  persons  who 
have  reason  to  make  this  complaint. 

2.  Explain  what  is  implied  in  their  lips 
being  thus  shut  up. 

3.  Show  you  by  what  means  the  Lord  opens 
the  closed  lips.  And, 

4.  I shall  observe,  that  when  a person’s 
lips  are  thus  opened,  his  mouth,  and  all  that 
is  within  him,  will  certainly  show  forth  the 
Lord’s  praise.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  apply 
the  word,  and  command  a blessing  upon  the 
whole  ! 

I.  This  petition  especially  suits  two  sorts 
of  persons : 

1.  The  backsliding  believer ; one  who  has 
formerly  known  the  goodness  of  God;  has 
rested  in  his  love,  and  rejoiced  in  his  salva- 
tion ; “has  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,” 
(1  Pet.  ii.  3,)  and  walked  with  comfort  in 
the  way  of  his  commandment ; but  at  length, 
by  an  unguarded  conduct,  or  by  building 
wood,  hay,  and  stubble  upon  the  Lord’s  foun- 
dation, (1  Cor.  iii.  11 — 13,)  has  grieved  the 
good  Spirit  of  God,  and  he  is  withdrawn. 
The  comforter  and  instructor  of  his  soul  is 
far  from  him,  and  therefore  he  sits  in  dark- 
ness and  silence,  Lam.  i.  16.  He  only  retains 
a sense  of  his  loss,  and  can  do  no  more  than 
sigh  out  this  prayer : “ O Lord,  open  thou  my 
lips.” 

2.  The  doubting  believer;  the  unbelieving 
believer  (if  I may  be  allowed  the  expression :) 
— I mean  one  who  has  been  deeply  convinced 
of  sin,  and  taught  by  the  Spirit  of  God  that 
there  is  no  salvation  but  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ; one  who  loves  the  word,  and  ways, 
and  people  of  God,  who  is  careful  to  the  ut- 
most of  his  power  to  abstain  from  the  evil  that 
is  in  the  world,  and  esteems  “ the  loving- 
kindness of  the  Lord  to  be  better  than  life;” 
(Psal.  lxiii.  3 ;)  one  at  whom  the  enemy  has 
often  thrust  sore  that  he  might  fall,  (Psal. 
cxviii.  13,)  but  the  Lord  has  secretly  upheld 
him  through  many  a bitter  hour,  and  he  finds 
he  is  not  cut  off  yet,  though  he  perhaps  ex- 
pects it  every  day.  Such  as  these  have  in- 
deed sufficient  ground  to  say,  “ If  the  Lord 
was  not  on  my  side,  I had  been  swallowed  up 
long  ago,”  Psal.  cxxiv.  3.  They  have  reason 
to  conclude  with  David,  “ By  this,  if  by  no- 
thing else,  I know  that  thou  favourest  me, 
seeing  my  enemies,  who  have  assaulted  me 
so  continually,  have  not  yet  prevailed  against 
me,”  Psal.  xli.  11.  But  yet,  through  a sense 
of  past  guilt,  a sight  of  present  corruptions, 
the  prevalence  of  unbelief,  the  workings  of  a 
legal  spirit,  the  want  of  a clear  apprehension 
of  the  Lord’s  way  of  justifying  the  ungodly, 
and  from  the  force  of  Satan’s  temptations, 
who  is  exceeding  busy  to  press  all  these  things 
upon  the  heart,  their  mouths  are  stopped 


GUILT  REMOVED, 


AND  PEACE  RESTORED. 


477 


SER.  XIX.] 

likewise.  They  cannot  believe,  and  there- 
fore they  cannot  speak.  However,  there  are 
seasons  and  intervals  when  they  obtain  a 
little  glimpse  of  hope,  and  then  the  whole 
desire  of  their  souls  is  expressed  in  words  of 
my  text,  “ O Lord,  open  thou  my  lips,  and 
my  mouth  shall  show  forth  thy  praise.” 

II.  I proceed  to  consider  what  may  be  in- 
cluded in  this  case,  what  it  is  to  have  the 
mouth  stopped.  The  persons  I have  men- 
tioned have  the  same  liberty  of  speech  in 
common  affairs  as  others;  but  because  they 
cannot  converse  freely  with  him,  who,  not- 
withstanding all  their  doubts  and  fears,  and 
follies,  still  maintains  a secret  hold  of  their 
souls,  they  account  themselves  no  better  than 
dumb.  They  cannot  speak  to  the  Lord,  nor 
of  him,  nor  for  him,  as  they  wish  and  ought 
to  do.  These  are  the  three  heads  of  their 
complaint,  and  therefore  they  sigh  and  say, 
“ O Lord,  open  thou  my  lips  !” 

1.  Alas ! says  the  believer  that  has  sinned, 
and  lost  his  strength,  “ O that  it  was  with  me 
as  in  times  past !”  Job  xxix.  2.  I well  remem- 
ber when  I had  freedom  of  access,  and  found 
it  good  to  draw  near  to  my  God,  when  I 
could  pour  out  all  my  complaints  and  cares 
before  him,  and  leave  them  with  him.  I re- 
member the  time  when  my  heart  was  over- 
whelmed within  me,  and  my  spirit  was  bur- 
dened, Psal.  cxlii.  3.  I saw  myself  a wretch- 
ed, helpless  sinner.  Innumerable  evils  took 
hold  of  me.  I thought  I was  marked  out  for 
destruction.  I found  Satan  at  my  right  hand, 
waiting  for  a permission  to  seize  my  soul,  and 
make  me  his  prey  for  ever,  Zech.  iii.  1.  I 
looked  around,  but  saw  no  way  to  escape,  and 
gave  up  all  for  lost.  But,  O ! I remember, 
when  none  in  heaven  or  earth  could  help  me, 
how  the  Lord  drew  “ near  to  me  in  the  day 
of  my  distress,  and  said  unto  my  soul,  Fear 
not,  I am  thy  salvation,”  Lam.  iii.  57.  He 
revealed  himself  as  an  almighty,  suitable 
Saviour.  He  said,  “Deliver  from  going 
dawn  to  the  pit,  I have  found  a ransom,”  Job 
xxxiii.  24.  “ He  brought  me  out  of  the  hor- 

rible pit  and  miry  clay,  and  set  my  feet  upon 
a rock,”  Psal.  xl.  2.  “He  brought  me  into 
his  banqucting-house,  and  his  banner  over 
me  was  love.  I sat  under  his  shadow  with 
great  delight,  and  his  fruit  was  sweet  unto 
my  taste,”  Cant.  it.  3, 4.  This  was  the  begin- 
ning, but  it  was  not  all ; many  a gracious 
visit  he  favoured  me  with  afterwards.  O the 
sweet  hours  of  secret  prayer ! O the  happy 
communion  in  which  I walked  with  him  all 
the  day  long ! “ Then  in  the  multitude  of 
thoughts  within  me,  his  comforts  refreshed 
my  soul,”  Psal.  xciv.  19.  Then  I could  smile 
at  Satan’s  rage,  and  face  a frowning  world. 
Every  blessing  of  common  providence  was 
doubly  welcome,  for  I could  read  his  name 
of  love  written  upon  it ; and  every  affliction 
Drought,  resignation  and  peace,  because  I saw 
my  Father’s  hand  in  it,  and  found  at  a throne 


of  grace  renewed  strength  a j ways  suited  to 
my  need.  Happy  were  those  times ; but,  alas  * 
they  are  gone.  I could  hardly  then  persuade 
myself  that  I should  be  moved  any  more.  1 
little  thought  there  was  such  desperate  wick- 
edness in  my  heart,  that,  after  so  much  ex- 
perience of  his  goodness,  I should  foolishly 
wander  from  him  again.  But,  O ! what  a 
change  have  I lived  to  see  ! I have  grieved 
that  good  Spirit  of  God  by  which  I was  seal- 
ed, and  now  I find  myself  in  the  hands  of  my 
enemies.  The  Lord  hides  himself  and  stands 
afar  off,  and  I have  lost  the  power  of  prayer. 
Those  precious  promises  which  once  were 
the  joy  of  my  soul,  which  I could  boldly  plead 
at  the  throne  of  grace,  and  say,  All  these  are 
mine,  have  no  longer  any  power  or  sweet- 
ness ; I read  tljem,  but  I cannot  feel  them, 
and  my  trials  and  sins,  which  once  I could 
cast  upon  my  Saviour,  and  find  instant  re- 
lief, are  now  a heavy  burden,  too  great  for 
me  to  bear.  Mercies  have  lost  their  relish, 
and  afflictions  have  lost  their  usefulness,  since 
neither  the  one  nor  the  other  are  of  force  to 
stir  up  my  soul  to  prayer.  “ O Lord,  open 
thou  my  lips.” 

I remember  likewise,  when  I had  this  free- 
dom in  speaking  with  God,  how  pleasing  it 
was  to  me  to  speak  of  him.  My  heart  was 
full,  and  running  over  with  a sense  of  his 
goodness,  so  that  it  was  my  meat  and  drink 
to  say,  “ Come  unto  me,  all  you  that  lear 
God,  and  I will  tell  you  what  he  hath  done 
for  my  soul,”  Psal.  lxvi.  16.  Then  the  com- 
pany of  his  people  was  delightful  indeed. 
The  meanest  of  his  children  that  would  sit 
and  and  hear  me  speak  of  his  loving-kindness, 
was  precious  to  me ; I esteemed  them  the 
excellent  of  the  earth  in  whom  was  all  my 
delight,  Psal.  xvi.  3,  and  lv.  14.  We  took 
sweet  counsel  together,  and  walked  to  the 
house  of  God  in  company.  And  I thank  God 
I love  them  still ; but  I can  neither  help  them, 
nor  be  helped  by  them,  as  in  times  past.  In 
vain  they  say  unto  me,  Come,  sing  us  one 
of  the  songs  of  Zion.  Alas  ! how  can  I sing 
the  songs  of  the  Lord  in  a strange  land  1 My 
harp  is  hung  upon  the  willows,  my  tongue 
cleaveth  to  the  roof  of  my  mouth,  Psal. 
cxxxvii.  3 — 5.  I dwell  in  darkness  and  si- 
lence, as  those  who  have  been  long  dead.  “O 
Lord,  open  thou  my  lips.” 

And  when  I could  thus  speak  to  God,  and 
of  him,  I had  likewise  liberty  to  speak  for 
him.  I was  then  very  jealous  for  the  Lord 
of  hosts,  1 Kings  xix.  10.  It  wounded  my 
soul  to  hear  his  name  profaned,  to  see  his 
commandments  broken,  and  his  gospel  slight- 
ed. I had  a tender  concern  for  poor  sinners; 
I could  not  but  wish,  that,  if  possible,  every 
person  I met  might  know  what  I knew,  and 
feel  what  I felt.  And  especially  where  I had 
friendship  and  influence,  I was  ready  to  im- 
prove it  to  the  best  purpose.  The  love  of 
Christ  constrained  me  to  lay  myself  out  lbr' 


478 

his  service,  2 Cor.  v.  14.  I could  not  but  op- 
pose sin  and  self-righteousness,  and  plead  the 
cause  of  my  Saviour  upon  every  occasion.  I 
was  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  for  I 
felt  it  to  be  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation 
in  my  own  soul,  (Rom.  i.  16,)  and  durst  re- 
commend it  to  every  one,  as  the  only  balm 
for  sin  and  sorrow.  But  now  the  crown  is 
fallen  from  my  head : woo  unto  me  that  I 
have  sinned,  Lam.  v.  16.  I am  shut  out  from 
the  fountain,  and  all  my  streams  are  dried  up. 
My  comforts  and  my  usefulness  are  declined 
together.  “ O Lord,  open  thou  my  lips,  and 
my  mouth  shall  show  forth  thy  praise.” 

Such  is  the  complaint  of  the  backslider  in 
heart,  when  he  is  filled  with  his  own  ways. 
And, 

2.  This,  with  a little  variation,  will  suit  the 
doubting  tempted  .soul  too.  These  will  con- 
fess, that  the  experience  I have  described  is 
the  desire  of  their  hearts.  Such  communi- 
cation with  God,  such  a freedom  in  his  ways, 
such  a zeal  for  his  service,  is  the  very  thing 
they  mean,  when  they  entreat  the  Lord  to 
open  their  lips.  And  indeed  they  cannot, 
they  dare  not  deny,  but  they  have  at  times 
had  some  little  tastes  of  them,  otherwise  they 
would  not  know  what  I mean.  For  these 
things  are  to  the  natural  man  the  merest 
folly5 imaginable ; he  understands  them  not, 
therefore0 he  despises  them;  nay,  he  hates 
them  with  a perfect  hatred,  and  opposes 
them  with  all  his  heart.  But  still  they  com- 
plain under  a present  burden.  One  dark 
hour  of  temptation  blots  out  all  the  traces  of 
comfort  they  have  known,  and  they  refuse 
consolation.  They  will  insist  on  it,  I have 
neither  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter  ; I cannot 
get  near  him,  and  I fear  I never  shall.  When 
I attempt  to  pray,  a sense  of  my  sins  and  sin- 
fulness stops  my  mouth.  I see  the  Lord, 
not  upon  the  golden  mercy-seat,  but  upon  the 
fiery  throne  of  justice,  and  I am  ready  to 
call  upon  the  rocks  and  mountains  to  hide  me 
from  his  presence.  When  I would  commune 
with  his  people,  I am  silenced  by  that  dread- 
ful word,  “ What  hast  thou  to  do  to  declare 
my  statutes,  or  to  take  my  covenant  into  thy 
mouth  1”  Psal.  1.  16.  When  I would  bear 
my  feeble  testimony  for  him  in  the  world, 
conscience  alarms  me,  and  says,  “ Thou  that 
teachest  others,  teachest  thou  not  thyself! ” 
Rom.  ii.  21.  And  then  “ the  enemy  comes 
in  like  a flood,”  (Isaiah  lix.  19,)  with  “ God 
has  forsaken  him ; persecute  and  take  him, 
for  there  is  none  to  deliver  him,”  Psal.  lxxi. 
11.  Thus  I “spend  my  days  in  groaning, 
and  water  my  couch  with  tears,”  Psal.  vi.  6. 

This  is  a heavy  case  indeed ; and  would  be 
insupportable,  but  that  the  faithful  Shepherd, 
in  a secret  unseen  way,  affords  timely  suc- 
cour, and  sets  bounds  to  the  raging  enemy, 
beyond  whicn  he  cannot  pass.  “Hitherto 
ehalt  thou  come (Job  xxxviii.  11 ;)  thus  far 
thou  art  permitted  to  vex,  and  wound,  and 


[ser.  xix. 

tear,  “ but  no  farther.”  The  Lord  knows  our 
frame,  and  has  promised  with  every  tempta- 
tion to  provide  either  strength  to  endure,  or 
a way  to  escape,  1 Cor.  x.  13.  Two  things 
are  proper  to  be  mentioned  for  the  encou- 
ragement of  such  souls  to  wait  on,  and  expect 
deliverance. 

The  first  is,  The  examples  of  the  saints. 
Think  not  your  lot  strange,  as  though  some 
new  and  unheard-of  thing  had  befallen  you. 
Thousands,  and  ten  thousands,  now  in  glory, 
have  tasted,  yea  drank  deeply  of  this  cup  be- 
fore you.  And  many  yet  upon  earth,  who  are 
now  rejoicing  in  the  light  of  God’s  counte- 
nance, have  said  in  times  past,  as  you  say 
now,  “ I shall  one  day  perish  by  the  hand  of 
these  enemies ; (1  Sam.  xxvii.  1 ;)  the  Lord 
hath  cast  me  quite  olf,  and  I shall  never  live 
to  see  his  goodness  in  the  land  of  the  living,” 
Psalm  lxxiv.  1.  Or  if  you  choose  scripture- 
proofs,  you  need  only  read  the  book  of  Job, 
the  Psalms,  and  the  Lamentations  of  Jere- 
miah, to  be  convinced  that  some  whom  you 
number  amongst  the  Lord’s  most  eminent  and 
highly-favoured  servants  have  been  reduced 
to  use  such  expressions  as  suit  your  case,  no 
less  than  if  they  had  been  wrote  for  you  alone. 
Do  not  they  say,  “ That  they  were  broken 
with  breach  upon  breach ; (Job  xvi.  14 ;)  that 
the  arrows  of  God  stuck  fast  in  them ; (Psalm 
xxxviii.  2 ;)  that  the  Lord  wrote  bitter  things 
against  them,  and  counted  them  his  enemies ; 
(Job  xiii.  26,  and  xxxii.  10 ;)  that  he  had  shut 
them  up  within  stone  walls,  and  covered  him- 
self with  a cloud,  that  their  prayers  might 
not  pass  through!”  Lam.  iii.  9,  44.  These 
are  but  a small  part  of  their  complaints ; and 
what  can  you  say  more  than  this ! 

Again,  consider  the  precious  promises  of 
the  word.  Are  they  not  expressly  directed 
to  you ! Do  you  account  yourself  a backsli- 
der ! “ Return  unto  me,  ye  backsliding  chil- 
dren, and  I will  receive  you,  saith  the  Lord,” 
Jer.  iii.  14,  22.  Do  you  think  yourself  a sin- 
ner of  uncommon  size ! yet,  saith  the  Lord, 
« Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall 
be  white  as  snow;  though  they  be  red  like 
crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool,”  Isa.  i.  18. 
Do  you  say  your  neck  is  as  an  iron  sinew, 
and  your  brow  brass ! yet  hear  the  word  of 
the  Lord,  “ Hearken  unto  me,  ye  stout-heart- 
ed, that  are  far  from  righteousness.  I bring 
near  my  righteousness ; it  shall  not  be  far 
off,”  Isa.  xlvi.  12,  13.  Is  there  something 
peculiarly  dreadful  in  your  case,  something 
that  you  could  hardly  be  prevailed  on  to  in- 
trust to  your  dearest  friend ! yet  be  not  afraid ; 
for  Truth  has  said,  “All  manner  of  sin  and 
blasphemy  shall  be  forgiven  unto  men,” 
Matth.  xii.  31.  “Let  the  wicked  forsake 
his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man  his 
thoughts : and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord, 
and  he  will  have  mercy  upon  him ; and  to 
our  God  for  he  will  abundantly  pardon,”  Isa. 
i lv.  7 But  still,  when  we  have  said  all,  we 


GUILT  REMOVED, 


AND  PEACE  RESTORED. 


479 


SER.  XIX.] 

are  but  miserable  comforters.  Even  with 
the  word  of  God  in  onr  mouths,  we  speak  too 
often  in  vain.  It  is  the  Lord  alone  that  can 
open  the  lips.  And,  O ! that  this  may  be  the 
happy  opportunity  of  his  gracious  appearance 
in  favour  of  all  here  present,  that  our  wounds 
may  be  healed,  and  our  tongues  unloosed  to 
proclaim  his  praise ! Lift  up  your  hearts  to 
him,  while  I endeavour  to  show  you  by  what 
means,  or  in  what  manner,  the  Lord  is  pleased 
to  open  the  lips  that  have  been  long  closed. 
This  is  the  third  particular  I proposed  to  con- 
sider from  my  text. 

III.  I say  then,  that  when  the  Lord  is  about 
to  open  the  lips,  he  proceeds  by  the  following 
steps : 

1.  “He  opens  the  eyes.”  We  are  often  in 
a similar  case  with  Hagar  in  the  wilderness. 
The  water  was  spent  in  the  bottle,  and  she 
sat  down  in  despair.  There  was  a well  or 
fountain  close  to  her,  sufficient  to  have  sup- 
plied her  w ith  water  to  her  life’s  end ; but  she 
saw  it  not  till  God  opened  her  eyes,  Gen.  xxi. 
15 — 19.  Just  so,  many  a poor  soul  is  distress- 
ed, and  says,  My  stock  is  spent ; I had  but 
little  grace  at  the  best,  and,  alas  ! that  little 
is  gone.  And  now,  if  the  Lord  should  ask 
some  hard  thing,  would  you  not  do  it  to  ob- 
tain a supply  1 You  would  willingly  take  a 
long  journey,  or  part  with  all  your  wealth  to 
have  grace  abounding  in  your  hearts;  but 
you  know  you  cannot  expect  help  in  this 
way.  It  is  true,  all  contrivances  of  our  own 
will  have  no  effect ; but,  blessed  be  God,  they 
are  as  needless  as  they  would  be  useless. 
We  need  not  dig  in  the  earth,  nor  climb  the 
skies,  nor  cross  the  seas ; our  remedy  is  near, 
Rom.  x.  6 — 8.  W e need  no  costly  offerings 
of  silver  or  gold ; our  remedy  is  cheap.  Come, 
pore  no  longer  upon  your  empty  bottle,  but 
look  to  the  fountain,  the  river,  the  ocean  of 
all  grace.  May  the  Lord  open  your  eyes,  as 
he  did  the  eyes  of  Elisha’s  servant,  (2  Kings 
vi.  17,)  and  I will  undertake  to  point  you  to  an 
object  that  shall  answer  all  your  wants.  Look 
unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; look  unto  him 
as  he  hung  naked,  wounded,  bleeding,  dead, 
and  forsaken  upon  the  cross.  Look  unto  him 
again  as  he  now  reigns  in  glory,  possessed 
of  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  with 
thousands  of  thousands  of  saints  and  angels 
worshipping  before  him,  and  ten  thousand 
times  ten  thousand  ministering  unto  him ; 
and  then  compare  your  sins  with  his  blood, 
your  wants  with  his  fulness,  your  unbelief 
with  his  faithfulness,  your  weakness  with  his 
strength,  your  inconstancy  with  his  ever- 
lasting love.  If  the  Lord  opens  the  eyes  of 
your  understanding,  you  would  be  astonished 
at  the  comparison.  Would  you  compare  a 
email  grain  of  sand  upon  the  shore  with  the 
massy  mountains  which  hide  their  heads  in 
the  clouds,  and  spread  their  roots  form  sea  to 
sea  1 or  the  spark  of  a glow-worm  with  the 
noon-day’s  sun  1 yet  there  is  less  disproportion 


between  these,  than  between  the  utmost  ca- 
pacity of  your  desires  and  wants,  and  the 
immense  resources  provided  for  you,  in  the 
righteousness,  compassion,  and  power  of  our 
dear  Redeemer.  “ He  is  able  to  save  to  Ihe 
uttermost;”  (Heb.  vii.  25;)  and  all  our 
trouble  arises  chiefly  from  this,  that  our  eyes 
are  holden,  so  that  we  do  not  know  him,  Luke 
xxiv.  16.  Therefore  the  first  step  towards 
opening  the  lips  is  to  open  our  eyes,  that  v/e 
may  see  him,  and  look  upon  him  by  such  *a 
sight  as  unloosed  the  tongue  of  unbelieving 
Thomas,  and  constrained  him  to  cry  out, 
“ My  Lord,  and  my  God !”  John  xx.  28. 

2.  When  the  eyes  are  thus  opened,  the 

Lord,  in  the  next  place,  and  by  that  as  a 
means,  “ opens  the  ear.”  When  Christ  is 
out  of  sight,  we  are  deaf  to  all  the  calls,  in- 
vitations, and  promises  of  the  scripture.  But 
a believing  view  of  him  who  died  that  we 
might  live,  rouses  the  attention,  and  makes 
us  willing  and  able  to  hear  what  the  Lord 
will  speak  to  his  people,  Psal.  lxxxv.  8.  And 
what  does  he  say  from  the  cross  7 “ Look 

unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,”  Isaiah  xiv.  22. 
“ If  I be  lifted  up,  I will  draw  all  men  to 
me,”  John  xii.  32.  “ Behold  my  hands,  my 

feet,  my  pierced  side ; all  this  I bore  for  you*” 
John  xx.  27.  “ Be  not  afraid,  only  believe,” 

Mark  v.  36.  “ O thou  of  little  faith,  where- 

fore dost  thou  doubt  7”  Matth.  xiv.  31.  “ See, 
sinner,  how  I have  loved  thee,  I have  trodden 
the  wine-press  alone,”  Isaiah  Ixiii.  3.  “ I 

have  destroyed  death,  and  him  that  had  the 
power  of  death,”  Heb.  ii.  14.  “There  is 
henceforth  no  condemnation  to  them  that  be- 
lieve in  me,”  Rom.  viii.  1.  And  what  does 
he  say  from  his  kingdom!  “ I have  prayed 
for  thee  that  thy  faith  fail  not,”  Luke  xxii.  32. 
“ For  a season  you  have  sorrow  ; but  I will 
see  you  again,  and  your  heart  shall  rejoice,” 
John  xvi.  22.  Him  that  cometh  to  me,  I will 
in  no  wise  cast  out,”  John  vi.  37.  “ I am  the 
first  and  the  last; — that  was  dead  and  am 
alive.  I keep  the  keys  of  death  and  hell, 
and  save  whom  I will,”  Rev.  i.  17,  18. 
“Cast  thy  burden  upon  me,  I will  sustain 
thee,”  Psal.  lv.  22.  “I  will  take  away  thy 
iniquity,”  Micah  vii.  19.  “ Be  of  good  cheer, 

thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee,”  Matth.  ix.  2. 
“ Go  in  peace,  and  sin  no  more,”  John  viii. 
11.  My  sacrifice , my  God , what  words  are 
these ! 

3.  By  opening  the  eye  to  see  his  excellence 
and  power,  and  the  ear  to  hear  his  gracious 
words,  he,  in  the  next  place,  “opens  the 
heart.”  He  breaks  the  prison  doors,  forces 
for  himself  an  entrance,  and  sets  the  prisoner 
at  liberty.  He  touches  the  rock,  and  the 
waters  flow,  Psal.  lxxviii.  20.  Now  a true 
and  filial  repentance  takes  place ; now  sin  ap- 
pears exceedingly  sinful  indeed.  There  was 
a sorrow  before,  but  it  was  fruitless  and  in- 
effectual ; but  the  sight  of  him  who  was  pierc- 
ed for  our  sins,  and  the  welcome  sound  of 


4S0 


GUILT  REMOVED,  &c.  [ser.  xrx. 


pardon  proclaimed  in  the  conscience,  produce 
a sorrow  after  a godly  sort,  a repentance 
never  to  be  repented  of.  Thus  it  was  with 
the  woman  who  washed  our  Lord’s  feet  (Luke 
vii.  39,  47 ;)  she  had  been  a great  sinner, 
much  was  forgiven  her,  and  therefore  she 
loved  much.  Thus  it  was  with  Peter : he 
had  been  a grievous  backslider : he  had  been 
with  Jesus  upon  the  mount,  and  saw  the  ex- 
cellent glory ; he  was  stout  in  his  protesta- 
tion, “ Though  all  men  deny  thee,  yet  will 
not  I but  he  shrunk  at  the  voice  of  a girl, 
and  said,  “ I know  not  the  man.”  When  the 
servants  spoke  to  him,  he  cursed  and  swore; 
but  when  Jesus  looked  upon  him,  he  wept, 
Luke  xxii.  61,  62.  Do  you  think  our  Lord 
looked  upon  him  with  disdain  and  indigna- 
tion! rather  with  a look  of  love;  a look  that 
at  once  convinced  him  of  his  sin,  and  gave 
him  to  understand  that  the  Lord  pitied  and 
forgave  him.  This  look  broke  his  heart  in 
pieces.  He  went  out  and  wept  bitterly. 
And  afterwards,  though  greatly  humbled  as 
to  confidence  in  himself,  yet,  when  asked 
the  question,  he  could  boldly  appeal  to  the 
Searcher  of  hearts,  “ Lord,  thou  knowest  all 
things,  thou  knowest  that  I love  thee,”  John 
Xxi.  17. 

And  when  the  eyes,  the  ears,  the  heart, 
are  thus  opened  ; when  the  understanding  is 
enlightened,  the  will  engaged,  and  the  affec- 
tions inflamed,  the  cure  is  wrought.  Then 
the  lips  will  open  of  course,  and  the  mouth 
be  filled  with  thanksgiving  and  praise.  O 
that  it  would  please  the  Lord  to  give  to  me, 
and  to  each  of  you,  a clearer  knowledge  of  this 
blessed  change  from  heart-felt  experience, 
than  is  in  the  power  of  words  (of  my  poor 
words  especially)  to  describe : “ Come,  my 
friends,  let  us  return  unto  the  Lord : for  he 
hath  wounded,  and  he  will  heal  us ; he  hath 
smitten,  and  he  will  bind  us  up,”  Hosea  vi. 

1.  Verily  we  are  all  guilty  in  this  matter ; 
we  have  all  provoked  him  by  unbelief,  and 
wandered  from  his  good  way ; and  therefore 
we  live  so  far  below  oui*  privileges,  and  are 
so  often  heavy  and  sorrowful,  when  we  have 
in  him  grounds  of  continual  joy.  Now,  let 
us  unite  in  this  prayer,  “ O Lord,  open  thou 
our  lips,  display  thy  power  in  the  midst  of 
us,  heal  all  our  breaches,  rend  the  vail  of  our 
unbelief,  blot  out  the  thick  clouds  of  our  sins, 
cleanse  us  from  all  our  iniquities  and  idols, 
and  teach  our  stammering  tongues,  and  bar- 
ren hearts,  to  show  forth  the  praise  of  thy 
abundant  goodness.” 

I proceed  to  observe  in  the  last  place, 

IV.  That  if  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  answer 
our  desire,  and  to  open  your  lips  in  this  man- 
ner, then  you  will  surely  praise  him.  You 
will  praise  him  with  your  mouths,  and  in 
your  lives ; you  will  thankfully  acknowledge 
his  mercy,  his  power,  and  his  wisdom. 

1.  You  will  praise  his  mercy.  Is  the  cool- 
ing stream  welcome  to  the  thirsty  soul!  is  a 


reprieve  acceptable  to  a poor  condemned 
malefactor ! Still  more  welcome  is  a sense 
of  pardoning  love  to  a soul  that  has  felt  the 
evil  and  effects  of  sin.  What ! to  be  taken 
from  the  dung-hill,  (1  Sam.  ii.  8,)  and  made 
a companion  with  princes ! to  have  all  our 
guilt  and  complaints  removed  at  once  ! to  be 
snatched  as  it  were  from  the  brink  of  hell,  and 
placed  in  the  very  suburbs  of  heaven  ! to  be 
able  to  say,  “O  Lord,  thou  wast  [justly]  an- 
gry with  me  [and  I went  mourning  under  a 
sense  of  thy  displeasue;]  but  [now]  thine 
anger  is  turned  away,  and  thou  comfortedst 
me !”  (Isa.  xii.  1;)  is  not  this  a mercy ! espe- 
cially considering  how  undeserving  we  are 
of  the  smallest  favour!  And  farther,  the 
way  in  which  it  was  conveyed!  that  the 
pardon,  though  free  to  us,  is  a pardon 
“ bought  with  blood :”  that  it  cost  the  Lord 
Jesus  his  life,  his  soul,  to  effect  that  blessed 
reconciliation  in  winch  we  are  beginning  to 
rejoice!  still  more,  that  all  we  can  now  re- 
ceive of  his  love  is  but  a taste,  a small  thing, 
in  comparison  of  what  he  has  reserved  for 
us ! O what  mercy  is  here ! O what  thanks 
does  it  call  for ! “ O Lord,  open  thou  our  lips, 
and  our  mouth  shall  show7  forth  thy  praise.” 

2.  You  will  praise  his  pow’er.  I thought, 

says  the  poor  soul  at  such  a time,  I was 
fallen  so  low  that  there  was  no  help.  The 
more  I toiled  and  laboured  in  my  own 
strength,  the  farther  the  blessing  seemed 
from  me.  I know  from  experience,  that 
none  but  an  almighty  arrn  could  relieve  me. 
Creatures,  means,  and  contrivances,  I had 
tried,  and  tried  again,  but  found  them  all 
physicians  of  no  value.  But  now,  “The 
right  hand  of  the  Lord  has  done  wonderfully, 
the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  has  brought 
mighty  things  to  pass,”  Psalm  cxviii.  15,  16. 
What  shall  I say ! “ He  hath  both  spoken 

himself,  and  also  hath  done  it,”  Isa.  xxxviii. 
15.  The  work  is  his;  to  him  be  all  the 
glory.  I got  not  this  victory  by  my  own 
bow7,  (Psalm  xliv.  6,)  neither  did  my  owTn 
arm  save  me ; “ but  the  Lord  himself  has 
been  pleased  to  show  the  exceeding  great- 
ness of  his  mighty  powTer  in  my  behalf,” 
Eph.  i.  19.  Therefore,  “not  unto  us,  but 
unto  thy  name,  O Lord,  be  the  glory  and  the 
praise,”  Psalm  cxv.  1. 

3.  You  will  praise  his  wisdom.  “ What  I 
do  (said  our  Lord  to  Peter,)  thou  knowost 
not  now,  but  thou  shaft  know  hereafter,” 
John  xiii.  7.  The  mourning  soul  often  asks 
the  question  with  David,  “I  will  say  unto 
God  my  rock,  Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me ! 
why  go  I mourning  because  of  the  enemy  V* 
Psalm  xlii.  9.  When  the  Lord  turns  your 
mourning  into  joy,  you  shall  know  why. 
You  will  then  see  that  there  wras  a need 
(1  Pet.  i.  6)  of  all  these  things.  It  is  to 
show  you  what  is  in  your  hearts,  to  mortify 
the  spirit  of  self-righteousness,  “ to  teach 
you,  that  without  him  you  can  do  nothing," 


OF  THE  ASSURANCE  OF  FAITH. 


SER.  XX.] 

(John  xv.  5,)  to  make  you  wise  and  ex- 
perienced against  Satan’s  devices;  to  give 
you  a tender  sympathy  and  fellow-feeling  in 
the  sufferings  and  infirmities  of  your  bre- 
thren, and  to  enable  you  to  encourage  and 
comfort  others,  (2  Cor.  i.  4,)  who  shall  be 
hereafter  in  your  case,  by  relating  what  you 
have  seen  and  known  yourself  in  your  va- 
rious conflicts  and  strivings  against  sin. 
These  are  some  of  the  reasons  why  the  Lord 
suffers  his  dear  children  to  groan  being  bur- 
dened, and  sometimes  permits  their  enemies 
to  gain  a short  advantage  over  them,  that  he 
may  humble  and  prove  them,  (Deut.  viii. 
2 — 16,)  in  order  to  do  them  good  in  their 
latter  end.  And,  O ! with  what  wisdom  is 
all  this  appointed ! A little  of  it  we  may 
see  at  present,  but  we  shall  not  have  a com- 
plete view  till  we  get  safe  home.  Then  to 
look  back  upon  the  way  by  which  he  led  us 
through  this  wilderness,  will  furnish  matter 
for  eternal  praise. 

Farther,  not  only  your  mouths,  but  your 
lives  shall  praise  him.  What  is  the  language 
of  a believing  heart,  when  the  Lord  pardons 
his  sins,  and  binds  up  his  wounds  1 It  is  this, 
“ Now  Lord,  I am  thine,  thy  vows  are  upon 
me,  for  thou  hast  redeemed  me,  O Lord  God 
of  truth,”  Psalm  cxvi.  14,  16,  and  xxxi.  5. 
“ Shall  I continue  in  sin  because  grace  has 
abounded  1 God  forbid  !”  Rom.  vi.  1.  “ I 

am  crucified  with  Christ,  crucified  to  the 
world,  and  the  world  to  me,”  Gal.  ii.  20,  and 
vi.  14.  “ The  love  of  Christ  constrains  me,” 

2 Cor.  v.  14.  “ The  time  past  is  sufficient  to 
have  lived  in  vanity;  henceforth  I am  the 
Lord’s,”  1 Pet.  iv.  3.  “Has  he  bound  me  by 
his  tender  mercies,  to  present  myself,  body 
and  soul  to  his  service  1 (Rom.  xii.  1;)  here, 

0 Lord,  I offer  my  whole  self,  all  that  I am, 
and  all  that  I have,  a living  sacrifice,  holy 
and  acceptable  to  thee.  O let  me  never, 
never,  wander  from  thee  again,  but  walk  in 
the  light,  as  thou  art  in  the  light,  and  have 
communion  with  thee  here  below,  till  thou 
shalt  remove  me  out  of  the  reach  of  sin  and 
sorrow  for  ever,”  1 John  i.  7. 

If  there  are  any  here  who  have  neither 
known  the  loving-kindness  of  the  Lord,  nor 
mourned  under  the  sense  of  his  displeasure, 

1 am  sure  your  lips  are  closed  to  this  hour. 
And  should  you  die  thus  incapable  of  prais- 
ing the  God  who  made  you,  and  the  grace 
which  has  brought  the  sound  of  the  gospel  to 
your  ears,  it  were  better  for  you  that  you  had 
never  been  born,  Matt.  xxvi.  24.  You  have 
much  reason  to  cry  out,  “ O Lord,  open  thou 
my  lips.”  Open  my  eyes  to  see  my  danger, 
to  see  the  evil  of  my  nature  and  life.  Open 
my  lips  to  confess  my  wickedness.  Open  my 
heart  to  receive  thy  word,  that  I likewise  may 
Dear  a part  in  the  praises  thy  people  pay 
thee,  and  not  perish  (as  without  thy  mercy  I 
must  do)  with  a lie  in  my  right  hand,  Isa. 
xiiv.  20.  Consider,  the  time  is  short;  (1  Cor. 


481 

vii.  29 ;)  death  is  near,  and  may  be  sudden. 
May  the  Lord  enable  you  to  consider  the 
things  belonging  to  your  peace,  before  they 
are  hid  from  your  eyes  ! Luke  xix.  42. 

And  you,  my  friends,  who  at  present  en- 
joy the  light  of  God’s  countenance,  who  know 
your  sins  are  forgiven  (1  John  ii.  12)  for 
his  name’s  sake,  and  have  a happy  freedom 
of  access  at  a throne  of  grace,  O be  mindful 
of  your  privileges;  beware  of  sin,  beware  of 
self,  beware  of  Satan.  Your  enemy  envies 
you  your  liberty ; he  watches  you  with  sub- 
tilty  and  malice ; he  spreads  snares  for  your 
feet ; he  desires  to  have  advantage  of  you, 
“ that  he  may  sift  you  as  wheat,”  Luke  xxii. 
31.  Therefore  be  upon  your  guard,  be  hum- 
ble, make  much  of  secret  prayer,  keep  close 
to  the  scriptures  of  God : by  the  words  of  his 
lips  you  shall  be  preserved  from  the  paths  of 
the  destroyer,  Psalm  xvii.  4.  Attend  dili- 
gently upon  the  ordinances,  and  sr«?ak  often 
one  to  another,  (Mai.  iii.  16,)  in  Awe  and 
faithfulness,  of  what  the  Lord  has  done  and 
prepared  for  you,  and  of  what  manner  of  per- 
sons you  ought  to  be,  in  all  holy  conversa- 
tion and  godliness,  2 Pet.  iii.  11.  Thus  you 
shall  be  kept  safe  from  evil.  Jesus  has  prayed 
for  you,  that  your  faith  may  not  fail,  Luke 
xxii.  32.  Fix  your  eye  (Heb.  xii.  2)  and 
your  heart  upon  him,  as  he  that  must  do  all 
for  you,  all  in  you,  and  all  by  you.  And  he 
has  said,  “Yet  a little  while,  and  behold  I 
come  quickly,”  Rev.  iii.  11.  Hold  fast  that 
which  thou  hast.  “ Be  thou  faithful  unto 
death,  and  I will  give  thee  a crown  of  life. 
Amen.  Even  so,  come,  Lord  Jesus,”  Rev. 
ii.  10,  and  xxii.  20. 


SERMON  XX. 

OF  THE  ASSURANCE  OF  FAITH. 

And  we  know  that  we  are  of  God. 

1 John  v.  19. 

A well-grounded  and  abiding  persuasion,, 
not  only  that  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  are 
true  in  themselves,  but  that  we,  through 
grace,  are  surely  and  unchangeably  inter- 
ested in  them,  is  highly  desirable.  If  we 
may  be  safe,  we  cannot  be  happy  and  com- 
fortable without  it,  when  once  we  have  re- 
ceived an  experimental  knowledge  of  the 
deceitfulness  of  our  own  hearts,  and  the  va- 
riety, subtilty,  and  force  of  Satan’s  tempta- 
tions: and  he  who  knows  our  frame  and 
situation  has,  in  his  holy  word,  made  a full 
provision  for  us  in  this  respect,  and  declared 
it  to  be  his  intention,  that  those  who  flee  for 
refuge  to  the  hope  he  has  set  before  them, 
might  have  strong  consolation ; (Heb.  vi.  18 ;) 
not  be  left  at  an  uncertainty  in  a concern 
of  the  highest  importance,  but  be  rooted, 
grounded,  established,  and  settled  in  the 
knowledge  of  his  love,  and  be  enabled  to 


482 


OF  THE  ASSURANCE  OF  FAITH. 


maintain  it  as  an  unshaken  principle  through 
every  change  of  dispensation  and  frame,  “ that 
he  who  hath  begun  a good  work  in  them 
will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ,” 
Phil.  i.  6. 

This  animating  confidence,  so  well  suited, 
and  so  necessary  to  render  the  soul  superior 
to  all  the  trials  of  life,  to  inspire  a noble  dis- 
dain of  the  sinful  pleasures  and  vain  pursuits 
of  the  present  evil  world,  and  to  engage  the 
grateful  exertion  of  every  faculty  and  power 
in  the  service  of  God,  is  generally  expressed 
by  the  word  Assurance.  But  though  the 
word  is  in  frequent  use,  the  thing  itself  has 
been,  and  still  is,  a subject  of  much  dispute 
and  controversy  amongst  professors  of  the 
gospel.  Many  not  being  conscious  of  such  a 
cheering  persuasion  in  themselves,  and  too 
hasty  in  supposing  their  attainments  must  be 
a standard  to  others,  have  ventured  to  deny 
the  possibility  of  such  an  assurance,  and 
treated  every  claim  to  it  as  visionary  and  en- 
thusiastic. On  the  other  hand,  some  have 
maintained  the  opposite  extreme,  and  held 
assurance  so  essential  to  faith,  that  without 
it  no  person  has  a scriptural  warrant  even  to 
hope  that  a work  of  grace  is  begun  in  his 
heart.  This  sentiment,  especially  when  as- 
serted by  persons  of  undoubted  character 
for  gifts,  graces,  and  usefulness,  has  greatly 
startled  and  discouraged  weak  and  feeble- 
minded souls,  and  been  too  often  an  occasion 
of  adding  to  the  distress  of  those  who  rather 
ought  to  have  been  comforted. 

Great  differences  of  judgment  have  like- 
wise obtained  concerning  the  means  where- 
by, the  manner  in  which,  ancl  the  persons  to 
whom,  this  assurance  is  communicated,  sup- 
posing it  attainable.  It  is  not  needful  to  in- 
sist on  particulars.  Perhaps  the  best  way  to 
prevent  or  remove  mistakes,  is  to  propose 
the  truth  simply,  which,  so  far  as  it  takes 
place,  will  necessarily  prevent  the  entertain- 
ment of  error.  I only  mention  in  general, 
that  there  is  a variety  of  sentiments  on  this 
point,  and  the  most  of  them  supported  by  re- 
spectable names,  in  order  to  caution  you 
against  paying  too  great  a deference  to  hu- 
man authority,  and  to  urge  you  to  praise 
God  for  your  Bibles,  and  to  be  diligent  in 
the  perusal  of  them.  If  you  search  the 
scriptures,  and  pray  for  the  Spirit,  you  may 
arrive  to  a clear  satisfaction  for  yourselves, 
no  less  than  if  all  the  learned  were  of  one 
mind,  and  all  of  your  side. 

My  text  assures  us  that  this  assurance  was 
possessed  in  the  first  ages  of  the  church. 
There  were  some  who  could  say  without 
hesitation,  “ We  know  that  we  are  of  God 
and  though  they  are  an  apostle’s  words,  he 
uses  them  not  exclusively  as  an  apostle,  but 
generally  as  a believer.  The  greatest  part 
of  the  chapter,  and  indeed  of  the  epistle, 
shows  that  he  considers  those  to  whom  he 
was  writing  as  partakers  with  him  in  the 


[ser.  xx. 

common  privileges  of  Christians.  So  like  wise 
St.  Paul  joins  the  believing  Corinthians  with 
himself,  when  he  says,  “We  know,  that  if 
our  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  were  dis- 
solved, we  have  a building  of  God,  a house 
not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens,” 
2 Cor.  v.  1.  And  elsewhere  he  takes  it  for 
granted,  that  they  (some  of  them  at  least) 
had  this  assurance,  and  presses  them  to  a 
lively  discharge  of  their  duty  upon  that  con- 
sideration : “ for  as  much  as  ye  know  that 
your  labour  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord,”  1 Cor. 
xv.  58. 

And  we  need  make  no  scruple  of  affirming 
from  the  fullest  evidence,  that  this  precious 
privilege  was  not  confined  or  designed  by  God 
to  be  so,  to  the  first  ages  of  the  gospel.  There 
have  been  in  all  periods  of  the  church,  where 
the  word  and  ordinances  of  Christ  have  been 
faithfully  administered,  many  who  could  say, 
“We  know  that  we  are  of  God;”  and  we 
trust  there  are  more  than  a few  who  can  say 
so,  and  give  a solid  scriptural  evidence  of  the 
hope  that  is  in  them,  even  in  this  degenerate 
day.  But  because  arguments  from  facts, 
which  must  depend  upon  persons’  testimony 
in  their  own  cases,  are  not  allowed  to  be  fully 
conclusive ; and  because  the  greater  part  of 
those  who  we  hope  sincerely  love  the  Lord 
Jesus,  live  far  below  their  just  right  and  pri- 
vilege, and  are  perplexed  with  doubts  and 
fears,  which  dishonour  their  profession,  weak- 
en their  hands,  and  make  their  lives  uncom- 
fortable ; I shall  endeavour  at  this  time  to 
state  and  explain  the  nature  of  assurance,  to 
prove  that  it  is  attainable,  to  point  out  the 
means  by  which  we  are  to  expect  it,  and  to 
take  notice  of  the  hinderances  which  keep  so 
many  who  are  interested  in  the  gospel-salva- 
tion from  enjoying  their  privilege,  and  make 
them  unwilling  or  afraid  to  say,  “ We  know 
that  we  are  of  God.”  What  I have  to  offer 
on  these  particulars,  will  occur  under  one  or 
other  of  the  following  propositions : 

I.  Assurance  is  not  essential  to  the  being 
of  faith.  It  is  a strong  faith,  but  we  read  like- 
wise of  a weak  faith,  (Rom.  xiv.  1,)  a little 
faith,  (Matth.  iv.  31,)  and  faith  like  a grain 
of  mustard-seed,  Matth.  xvii.  20.  True  sav- 
ing faith  in  Jesus  Christ  is  only  distinguish- 
able by  its  different  degrees ; but  in  every  de- 
gree, and  in  every  subject,  it  is  universally 
of  the  same  kind,  and  produces  (according  to 
its  degree)  the  same  uniform  effects.  It  puri- 
fies the  heart  from  the  love  and  practice  of 
sin  ; (Acts  xv.  9 ;)  it  w'orks  by  love  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  his  ordinances,  ways,  and  peo- 
ple ; (Gal.  v.  6 ;)  and  it  enables  the  possessor 
to  overcome  the  world,  (1  John  v.  4,)  to  stand 
fast  against  its  frowns,  and  to  resist  the  more 
pleasing,  but  not  less  dangerous,  influence  of 
its  smiles.  Each  of  these  effects  is  beyond 
the  power,  and  contrary  to  the  inclination  of 
the  natural  man.  “ No  man  can  say  that  Je- 
sus Christ  is  the  Lord,”  (1  Cor.  xii.  3,)  that 


OF  THE  ASSURANCE  OF  FAITH. 


483 


SER.  XX. 


is,  can  give  him  the  honour  due  to  his  name, 
renounce  every  other  hope  of  salvation,  and 
count  all  things  but  loss  and  dung  that  he 
may  win  Christ,  (Phil.  iii.  8,)  “but  by  the 
Holy  Ghost”  Yet  thus  far  many  have  un- 
doubtedly attained,  who  have  not  assurance  ; 
but  while  they  give  sufficient  evidence  by 
their  conduct  that  they  have  received  pre- 
cious faith  in  their  hearts,  they  go  mourning 
all  the  day  long,  and  almost  pass  sentence 
against  themselves  as  unbelievers.  Now, 
what  these  mourners  want,  in  order  to  their 
establishment  and  assurance,  is  not  some  new 
principle,  which  they  have  not  yet  received, 
but  only  a stronger  degree  of  that  faith  which 
they  already  possess.  Some  good  writers 
speak  of  a faith  of  reliance,  a faith  of  adhe- 
rence, a faith  of  assurance,  and  of  the  direct 
and  reflex  acts  of  faith,  &c. ; but  these  are  not 
scriptural  modes  of  expression,  nor  do  they 
appear  to  me  to  throw  light  upon  the  subject, 
but  rather  to  increase  the  perplexity  of  plain 
people,  who  are  apt  to  imagine  these  are  so 
many  different  kinds  of  faith.  The  scriptures 
mention  only  two  kinds,  a living  and  a dead 
faith,  James  ii.  17.  True  faith  is  faint  and 
weak  in  its  beginnings,  like  the  life  of  a new- 
born infant,  but  is  growing  up  to  maturity, 
and  shall  increase  with  the  increase  of  God, 
“unto  a perfect  man,  unto  the  measure  of 
the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ,”  Eph.  iv. 
13.  From  thence  it  follows, 

II.  The  grounds  and  principles  of  faith  and 
assurance  are  exactly  the  same.  The  first 
and  lowest  act  of  saving  faith  necessarily 
includes  three  things : 

1.  An  apprehension  of  the  sufficiency  and 
authority  of  Christ  to  save.  Men  that  live  in 
their  sins  will  rest  upon  a slender  hope  ! but 
a conscience  truly  awakened  must  have  sure 
grounds  to  go  upon,  and,  without  the  disco- 
very of  such  a Saviour  as  is  revealed  in  the 
gospel,  would  sink  into  despair.  It  is  afraid 
of  being  deceived,  and  is  so  far  enlightened 
that  it  cannot  be  easily  imposed  upon ; a sense 
of  the  sinfulness  of  sin,  an  impression  of  the 
majesty  of  God,  will  not  suffer  it  to  rest  in  any 
thing  short  of  a perfect  atonement  and  a per- 
fect righteousness.  But  when  the  eyes  of  the 
mind  are  opened,  and  Jesus  is  seen  as  re- 
vealed by  the  word  and  Spirit  of  God,  all 
scruples  of  this  sort  are  silenced,  and  the  soul 
perceives  and  feels,  that  he  is  fully  equal  to 
the  mighty  undertaking. 

2.  An  application  to  him.  This  of  course 
follows  a persuasion  of  his  ability  to  save : 
for  who  will  sit  down  and  perish,  when  there 
is  a possibility  of  relief?  There  is,  perhaps, 
a great  questioning  of  Christ’s  willingness  ; 
but  still,  since  there  is  a peradventure,  a sense 
of  distress  on  the  one  hand,  and  a view  of  his 
power  and  grace  on  the  other,  will  extort  a 
cry,  “ Lord,  save  me,  or  I perish,”  Matth. 
viii.  25,  and  xiv.  30. 

3.  From  hence  there  arises  a hope  in  his 


mercy,  which  is  fainter  or  stronger  according 
as  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  is  more  or  less  dis- 
tinct, and  the  surrender  unto  him  more  or  less 
simple  and  unreserved,  and  therefore,  in  ge- 
neral, it  is  very  faint  at  first ; for  the  knew* 
ledge  of  Christ  in  a measure  depends  upon 
our  knowledge  of  the  scriptures,  which  testify 
of  him,  and  on  the  proofs  we  have  had  of  his 
wisdom,  grace,  and  love  to  ourselves  ; but  the 
young  convert,  in  whom  the  seed  of  faith  is 
but  lately  sown,  has  but  little  acquaintance 
with  the  word ; for  he  has  but  just  begun  to 
know  the  value  of  it,  and  he  has  but  little 
experience  ; though  his  eyes  are  opened,  his 
sight  is  not  yet  confirmed,  nor  his  spiritual 
senses  exercised. 

Farther,  though  he  was  sincerely  convinced 
of  his  need  of  a Saviour,  there  is  still  much 
of  a legal  bias,  and  a principle  of  self-righte- 
ousness in  his  heart,  which,  so  far  from  being 
removed,  is  not  yet  discovered  to  himself; 
and  while  he  thinks  he  looks  to  Christ  alone, 
he  is  looking  in  himself  for  qualifications  to 
recommend  him,  and  afraid  to  draw  near  with 
confidence,  because  he  cannot  find  them. 
These  things  discourage  his  hopes,  and  de- 
monstrate his  faith  to  be  but  weak. 

But  the  strongest  and  most  lively  assurance 
that  we  can  conceive  attainable  in  the  presen* 
life,  is  wrought  and  maintained  by  the  very 
same  principles  which  have  so  faint  an  influ- 
ence in  the  infancy  of  faith.  Let  us  hear  the 
great  champion  St.  Paul,  in  the  close  of  an 
exemplary,  laborious  life,  giving  an  accoui.l 
to  a dear  and  intimate  friend  of  the  hope  that 
was  in  him.  He  had  been  honoured  and  dis- 
tinguished for  grace,  gifts,  and  usefulness,  in 
a peculiar  manner ; he  had  laboured  more 
abundantly  than  all  the  apostles ; he  had  fully 
preached  the  gospel,  and  gathered  churches 
throughout  a very  large  part  of  the  Roman 
empire;  (1  Cor.  xv.  10;  Rom.  xv.  19;)  his 
first  call  was  extraordinary,  by  the  Lord’s  ap- 
pearing to  him  in  glory ; and  some  of  his  suc- 
ceeding experiences  had  been  no  less  singular, 
for  he  had  been  caught  up  into  the  third  hea- 
vens : (Cor.  xii.  2 :)  finally,  his  suffering  for 
the  gospel  had  been  as  great  and  remarkable 
as  his  services.  But  when  he  expresses  his 
assurance  of  support  and  salvation,  he  says 
not  a syllable  of  these  things,  but  rests  the 
whole  upon  such  points  as  were  common  to 
him  with  all  believers : “ I know  whom  I 
have  been  believed,  and  I am  persuaded  that 
he  is  able  to  keep  that  which  I have  commit- 
ted unto  him  against  that  day,”  2 Tim.  i.  12. 
We  see  there  St.  Paul’s  assurance  was 
founded  on,  1st,  A knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  object  of  his  faith  ; 2dly,  A consciousness 
of  transactions  which  had  passed  between  him 
and  his  Saviour, — he  had  committed  some- 
thing to  him,  that  was,  his  soul  with  all  his 
interests ; 3dly,  A persuasion  of  his  ability 
willingness,  and  faithfulness,  to  secure  and 
preserve  what  he  had  taken  charge  of.  And 


484 


OF  THE  ASSURANCE  OF  FAITH. 


these  are  the  very  same  principles  which  are 
necessary  to  the  first  act  of  weak  faith,  only 
here  they  exert  themselves  with  their  proper 
power  and  efficacy.  From  hence, 

III.  Assurance  is  equally  open  to  all  be- 
lievers. It  is  not  the  exclusive  privilege  of 
great  services  or  sufferings ; it  is  not  confined 
to  apostles,  ministers,  or  martyrs,  but  is  a 
prize  set  before  all  who  love  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  sincerity,  being  no  other  than  the 
growth  and  establishment  of  that  faith  which 
they  have  already  received.  The  reasons  why 
all  who  believe  are  not  happy  in  the  assur- 
ance of  hope,  are  to  be  sought,  not  in  the  will 
of  God,  who  hath  made  abundant  provision 
for  our  comfort,  but  in  the  perverseness,  ig- 
norance, and  misapprehensions  of  our  own 
hearts,  and  from  inattention  to  his  revealed 
word.  We  are  not  straitened  in  him,  but  in 
ourselves.  It  is  not  easy  to  enumerate  the 
many  ways  in  which  our  depravity  works  to 
keep  this  good  thing  from  us.  A few  of  the 
principal  are  these  : — 

1.  Insincerity.  Where  grace  is  really  im- 
planted by  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  will  surely  pre- 
vail at  length,  and  subdue  the  whole  soul  to 
the  obedience  of  faith.  But  in  too  many  there 
is,  for  a long  time,  not  only  a great  opposi- 
tion from  indwelling  corruption,  but  a secret 
cleaving  of  the  will  to  evil ; a double-minded- 
ness, (James  i.  8,)  a kind  of  halting  between 
two  opinions,  (1  Kings  xviii.  21,)  so  that, 
while  the  desire  and  prayer  of  the  soul  seems 
expressed  against  all  sin  universally,  (Prov. 
xxiii.  26,)  there  is  still  an  allowed  reserve  of 
something  inconsistent  with  light  received, 
Psal.  ix.  1.  An  habitual  indulgence  of  known 
or  suspected  evil,  or  an  habitual  neglect  of 
any  known  duty,  will  certainly  prevent  the 
growth  of  grace  and  consolation.  For  the 
Lord  claims  (what  is  his  just  due)  the  whole 
heart,  and  will  not  afford  the  strengthening 
light  of  his  countenance,  while  any  idol  is 
deliberately  set"  up  in  his  presence.  “ Then,” 
says  David  (and  not  till  then)  “ shall  I not  be 
ashamed,  when  I have  respect  unto  all  thy 
commandments,”  Psalm  cxix.  6.  And  our 
Lord  Jesus,  when  asked,  “How  wilt  thou 
manifest  thyself  unto  us?”  answered,  “ If  a 
man  love  me,  he  will  keep  my  words,  and 
my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we  will  come 
unto  him,  and  make  our  abode  with  him,” 
John  xiv.  22,  23.  Till  the  pride  and  naughti- 
ness of  our  spirits  are  conquered,  and  we  are 
made  willing  to  give  up  all,  to  renounce 
whatever  is  contrary  to  his  precepts,  though 
pleasing  as  a right  eye,  and  seemingly  neces- 
sary as  a right  hand,  it  is  in  vain  to  expect 
a full  and  abiding  assurance  of  his  love. 

2 Indolence.  With  respect  to  this  va- 
luable blessing,  it  may  be  often  said,  “Ye 
receive  not,  because  ye  ask  not,”  James 
iv.  2.  It  is  too  common  for  those  who  were 
earnest  in  crying  for  mercy,  while  they 
thought  themselves  under  the  curse  and 


power  of  the  law,  to  grow  slack  a»nd  remiss 
in  prayer  soon  after  they  obtain  some  hope 
of  salvation  from  the  gospel,  and  particularly 
they  do  not  “give  all  diligence  to  make 
their  calling  and  election  sure,”  (2  Pet.  i. 
10,)  in  the  careful  use  of  every  means  ap- 
pointed for  their  establishment  in  the  truth 
as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Therefore  that  word  is 
fulfilled  in  them,  “ The  slothful  soul  desireth, 
and  hath  nothing,”  Prov.  xiii.  4.  They  go 
on  for  months  or  years  in  a complaining,  un- 
settled state,  and  deservedly,  because  they 
are  not  earnest  in  seeking,  asking,  waiting, 
knocking  at  the  gate  of  wisdom,  and  at  the 
throne  of  grace,  for  that  blessing  which  the 
Lord  has  promised  to  those  who  persevere  in 
wrestling  prayer,  and  will  take  no  denial. 

3.  Misapprehensions.  These  arise  from  a 
neglect  of  examining  the  scriptures,  and  an 
undue  deference  to  the  decisions  of  men.  If 
assurance  is  supposed  unattainable,  it  will 
consequently  not  be  sought  after.  If  it  is  ex- 
pected as  an  instantaneous  impression  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  upon  the  mind,  independent  of 
his  word,  or  to  arise  from  some  sudden, 
powerful  application  of  a particular  text  of 
scripture,  this  persuasion  will  end  in  disap- 
pointment. For,  though  it  must  be  allowed 
that  the  Lord  does  at  times  favour  his  people 
with  peculiar  manifestations  of  his  goodness, 
and  perhaps  seal  some  promise  especially 
suited  to  their  present  circumstances,  with  a 
remarkable  sweetness  and  evidence  upon 
their  minds,  yet  these  do  rarely  produce  the 
assurance  we  are  speaking  of.  These  are 
but  visits  seldom  vouchsafed,  and  quickly 
suspended ; and  those  who  depend  chiefly  on 
such  impressions,  instead  of  endeavouring  to 
grow  in  the  scriptural  knowledge  of  Christ, 
are  generally  as  changeable  in  their  hopes 
as  in  their  frame.  While  their  affections 
are  thus  engaged,  “their  mountain  stands 
strong,  and  they  think  they  shall  never  be 
moved ; (Psalm  xxx.  7 ;)  but  when  the 
cause  is  withdrawn,  the  effect  ceases,  and 
they  presently  relapse  into  their  former  fears 
and  inquietudes : not  to  say  that  expectations 
of  this  sort  have  a tendency  to  great  inconve- 
niences, and  often  open  a door  to  the  delu- 
sions of  enthusiasm  and  dangerous  imposi- 
tions ; for  Satan,  when  permitted,  knows  how 
to  transform  himself  into  an  angel  of  light, 
2 Cor.  xi.  14.  If  inherent  sanctification,  or 
a considerable  increase  of  it,  is  considered  as 
the  proper  ground  of  assurance,  those  who 
are  most  humble,  sincere,  and  desirous  of  be- 
ing conformed  to  the  will  of  God,  will  be 
the  most  perplexed  and  discouraged  in  their 
search  after  it.  For  they  of  all  others  will 
be  the  least  satisfied  wfith  themselves,  and 
have  the  quickest  sense  of  the  innumerable 
defilements  and  defects  which  the  scriptures 
assure  us  are  inseparable  from  our  best  tem- 
pers and  best  actions.  These  mistakes,  with 
others  that  might  be  mentioned,  prevent 


OF  THE  ASSURANCE  OF  FAITH. 


485 


8ER.  XX.] 

many  from  seeking  after  assurance  at  all, 
and  bewilder  many  more,  by  putting  them 
upon  a wrong  pursuit.  But  what  then  is 
assurance  1 and  how  is  it  to  be  attained ! I 
shall  attempt  an  answer  to  these  questions 
together  in  the  next  proposition. 

IV.  “ Assurance  is  the  result  of  a compe- 
tent spiritual  knowledge  of  the  person  and 
work  of  Christ  as  re  vealed  in  the  gospel,  and 
a consciousness  of  dependence  on  him  and 
his  work  alone  for  salvation.”  What  I ap- 
prehend necessary  to  make  my  meaning  plain, 
will  occur  from  a brief  explanation  of  the  terms 
I have  made  use  of  in  this  description. 

1.  By  the  term  spiritual  knowledge.,  I 
would  ascribe  it  to  the  influence  and  teach- 
ing of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  and  distin- 
guish it  both  from  that  speculative  know- 
ledge of  divine  things  which  natural  men 
may  acquire  from  books  and  human  instruc- 
tion, and  likewise  from  that  knowledge 
which  a real  believer  may  obtain  in  the 
same  way,  beyond  the  limits  of  his  present 
experience.  Those  who  are  favoured  with 
great  outward  advantages,  particularly  the 
light  of  a clear  gospel-ministry,  may  very 
soon  arrive  to  a notional  apprehension  of 
the  most  important  truths  ; but  with  respect 
to  the  spiritual  and  abiding  perception  of 
those  truths,  there  is  no  effectual  teacher 
but  the  Spirit  of  God;  and  we  often  find, 
that  what  we  think  we  have  learned  of  men, 
we  have  occasion  to  be  taught  again  by  the 
Lord  the  Spirit,  for  our  acquisitions  fail  us 
when  we  have  most  need  of  them,  and  will 
not  stand  the  trial  of  an  hour  of  temptation. 
But,  so  far  as  we  have  received  our  views  of 
Jesus,  his  person,  offices,  mediation,  and  pro- 
mises, from  him,  we  possess  them,  and  should 
be  able  to  defy  an  angel,  if  he  were  to  pro- 
pose to  us  any  other  doctrine  than  that  which 
we  have  surely  known  and  believed,  Gal.  i.  8. 

2.  I use  the  word  competent , because  there 
is  not,  that  I know  of,  any  determinate  stan- 
dard where  to  fix.  When  our  knowledge  is 
so  far  increased  as  to  overpower  the  objec- 
tions arising  from  inward  corruptions,  de- 
fects of  obedience,  unbelieving  fears,  and  the 
temptations  of  Satan;  when  we  can  cut 
them  short  with  that  question  of  the  apostle, 
“ Who  is  he  that  condemneth  1 it  is  Christ 
that  died,”  (Rom.  viii.  34,)  assurance  follows 
of  course.  For  I do  not  understand  assur- 
ance in  the  strictest  sense  for  the  highest 
degree  of  certainty  imaginable.  Assurance 
itself  is  capable  of  increase ; and  will  be  so 
continually,  while  there  is  any  darkness  in 
our  understandings,  or  any  remaining  pro- 
pensity to  a self-righteous  spirit.  Then  only 
will  our  assurance  be  perfect,  when  we  shall 
see  Jesus  as  he  is,  and  be  completely  freed 
from  all  our  infirmities.  For  these,  in  what- 
ever degree  they  prevail,  will  so  far  affect 
the  strength  and  steadiness  of  our  confidence 
in  God. 


3.  This  knowledge  is  wrought  in  us  by  the 
Spirit,  through  the  medium  of  the  written 
word.  He  teaches  no  unrevealed  truths.  We 
are  not  to  expect  that  he  will  assure  us  by  a 
voice  from  heaven,  or  by  a sudden  impulse 
upon  our  hearts,  that  our  names  in  particular 
are  written  in  the  book  of  life;  but  he  opens 
our  understandings  to  understand  the  scrip- 
tures, (Luke  xxiv.  45,)  to  assent  to,  and  feel, 
that  we  are  such  sinners  as  are  there  de- 
scribed, to  see  the  dignity  and  sufficiency  of 
Christ  Jesus,  as  God-man,  the  mediator,  the 
suitableness  of  his  offices,  the  value  of  his 
atonement  and  righteousness,  and  the  har- 
mony and  glory  of  the  divine  attributes,  in 
the  adorable  methods  of  redeeming  love, 
which  renders  it  just,  righteous,  and  worthy 
of  God  to  justify  and  save  the  believing  sin- 
ner, Rom.  iii.  26.  He  likewise  gives  us  to 
understand  the  freedom  and  security  of  the 
gospel-promises  confirmed  by  the  oath  of 
God,  and  sealed  with  the  blood  of  his  Son. 
He  shows  us  the  establishment  and  immuta- 
bility of  the  covenant  of  grace;  convinces 
us  that  there  is  a fulness  of  wisdom,  grace, 
life,  and  strength,  treasured  up  in  Clwist,  for 
the  use  and  support  of  those  who  in  them- 
selves are  poor,  miserable,  and  helpless,  and 
to  be  freely  communicated  in  measure  and 
season,  as  he  sees  necessary  to  support, 
nourish,  and  revive  the  believing  soul,  and 
to  lead  him  in  the  path  of  perseverance  to 
everlasting  life.  Such  a discovery  of  al- 
mighty power,  and  unchangeable  love,  en- 
gaged for  the  infallible  salvation  of  every 
believer,  which  they  cannot  lose  by  their 
own  unworthiness,  nor  be  deprived  of  by  all 
the  opposition  which  earth  or  hell  can  raise 
against  them,  (John  x.  28,)  produces  a suit- 
able assurance  in  the  soul  that  receives  it. 
And  we  can  confidently  say,  “We  know 
that  we  are  of  God,”  when  we  can  in  this 
manner  know  in  whom  we  have  believed. 

4.  Such  discoveries  of  the  person  and 
grace  of  Christ  are  connected  with  a heart- 
felt consciousness,  that  the  believer’s  de- 
pendence for  all  the  great  hopes  and  ends  of 
salvation  are  fixed  on  him  and  his  work 
alone.  They  draw  forth  acts  of  surrender 
and  trust,  and  keep  the  mind  from  forming 
any  vain  scheme  of  hope  or  refuge,  either  in 
whole  or  in  part,  from  any  other  quarter. 
Indeed,  from  the  very  first  dawnings  of  faith, 
as  I have  observed,  the  soul  is  led  to  commit 
itself  into  the  hands  of  Jesus;  but  while 
knowledge  was  weak,  and  the  heart  very 
imperfectly  humbled,  there  was  a secret, 
though  unallowed,  dependence  upon  selfi 
upon  resolutions,  frames,  and  duties.  But 
as  Jesus  rises  more  glorious  in  the  eye  of 
faith,  self  is  in  the  same  degree  depressed 
and  renounced ; and  when  we  certainly  see 
that  there  is  no  safety  or  stability  but  in  ms 
name,  we  as  certainly  feel  that  we  expect 
them  from  him,  and  from  him  only.  And 


486 


OF  THE  ASSURANCE  OF  FAITH. 


the  Holy  Spirit  assists  here  likewise,  bears 
a comfortable  witness  with  our  spirits,  (Rom. 
viii.  15,  16,)  by  drawing  us  to  a throne  of 
grace,  pleading  in  us  as  a spirit  of  adoption, 
and  prompting  us  to  renew  the  renunciation 
of  ourselves,  and  to  glory  in  Jesus,  as  made 
unto  us,  of  God,  wisdom,  righteousness, 
sanctification,  and  redemption,  (1  Cor.  i.  30,) 
from  day  to  day.  And  from  hence  arises  a 
solid,  permanent  assurance.  The  believer, 
though  weak  and  unstable  as  water  in  him- 
self, and  though  continually  assaulted  by  a 
powerful  combination  against  his  peace,  can 
look  through  all  to  Jesus,  and  say,  “ I am 
persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor 
angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor 
things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height, 
nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able 
to  separate  me  from  the  love  of  God  which  is 
m Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,”  Rom.  viii.  38,  39. 

What  remains  then,  but  to  animate  and 
press  every  sincere  believer  to  strive,  in  God’s 
appointed  way,  for  a comfortable  assurance, 
that  they  are  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  passed 
from  death  unto  life,  and  infallibly  freed  from 
all  condemnation.  Though  this  knowledge 
is  not  absolutely  necessary  to  our  safety,  it  is 
exceeding  useful  to  make  us  unwearied, 
cheerful,  and  evangelical,  in  a course  of  holy 
obedience,  to  the  exertion  of  all  our  powers 
and  faculties  in  the  service  of  him  who  has 
loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his 
own  blood,  and  to  give  us  courage  to  endure 
and  surmount  the  many  difficulties  and  op- 
positions which  we  are  sure  to  meet  with  in 
the  course  of  our  profession.  Unbelief  and 
distrust  weaken  our  hands,  “ and  make  our 
knees  feeble,”  Heb.  xii.  12.  The  more 
steadily  we  confide  in  God,  the  better  we 
shall  serve  him ; we  shall  be  enabled  to  cast 
all  our  cares  upon  him,  to  rely  on  his  promise, 
that  he  will  make  our  strength  equal  to  our 
day  ; and  having  a well-grounded  expectation 
of  receiving  the  end  of  our  hope,  even  the 
salvation  of  our  souls,  we  shall  stand  fast  in 
the  evil  day,  and  say,  “ None  of  these  things 
move  me ; neither  count  I my  life  dear,  so 
that  I may  finish  my, course  with  joy.”  Acts 
xx.  24.  I would  only  subjoin  two  cautions 
to  those  who  are  thus  minded. 

1.  Remember  that  the  . progress  of  faith  to 
assurance  is  gradual.  Expect  it  not  sud- 
denly, but  wait  upon  the  Lord  for  it  in  the 
ways  of  his  appointment.  As  it  depends  up- 
on the  manifestation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  let 
this  engage  you  to  constancy  and  earnestness 
in  prayer  ; and  as  it  arises  from  a knowledge 
of  Jesus,  be  assiduous  in  searching  the  scrip- 
tures, which  testify  of  him.  The  blessing 
of  the  Lord  and  the  hand  of  the  diligent  con- 
cur in  the  attainment  of  this  benefit,  Prov.  x. 
4,  22.  If  you  persevere  in  this  path,  you 
will  be  helped  forward  by  the  experience  of 
every  day ; and  every  dispensation  of  pro- 
vidence, as  well  as  every  exercise  and  frame 

END  OI 


[SER.  XX. 

of  mind  you  pass  through,  will  be  sancti- 
fied, to  give  you  an  increasing  conviction,  that 
you  are  nothing,  and  that  Jesus  is  all  in  all. 

2.  As  you  cannot  see  or  maintain  a sight 
of  your  interest  in  the  covenant,  but  by  the 
light  of  the  Spirit,  beware  of  grieving  him, 
Ephes.  iv.  30.  If  you  indulge  a careless, 
trifling  disposition,  or  venture  upon  known 
sin,  you  will  find  dark  clouds  raised  be- 
tween the  Sun  of  righteousness  and  your 
souls.  Assurance  is  not  so  invariable,  but  that 
it  may  be  affected,  weakened,  and  perhaps 
for  a season  quite  suspended,  by  unfaithful- 
ness and  backsliding  on  our  part.  If  you  have 
a persuasion  of  your  interest  in  the  love  of 
God,  that  remains  always  the  same,  though 
prayer  is  restrained,  the  ordinances  slighted, 
and  watchfulness  intermitted ; take  heed,  lest 
this,  instead  of  assurance,  should  be  vain  confi- 
dence and  presumption.  The  hope  that  maketh 
not  ashamed,  endears  every  precept  and  or- 
dinance to  the  soul,  weans  the  affections  from 
low  and  trivial  pursuits,  and  strengthens  the 
exercise  of  every  gracious  principle. 

As  it  is  thus  possible  and  desirable  for  a 
believer  to  “ know  that  he  is  of  God  ;”  so  a 
concern  for  many  here  present  will  not  suffer 
me  to  close,  without  desiring  you  to  consider 
if  you  have  not  cause  to  conclude,  from  scrip- 
ture-testimony, that  you  are  not  of  God.  See 
the  cause  determined  by  an  apostle : “Who- 
soever doeth  not  righteousness,  is  not  of  God,” 

1 John  iii.  10.  And  again,  by  another,  “ If 
any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is 
none  of  his,”  Rom.  viii.  9.  Are  not  these 
decisions  plain  and  absolute  1 If  your  love 
and  dependence  are  not  fixed  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  if  your  tempers  and  practice 
are  not  governed  by  his  commands,  you  are 
not  of  God.  Who,  then,  do  you  belong  to  1 
The  whole  world  is  divided  between  two 
masters,  and  ranged  under  opposite  banners. 
A neutrality  is  impossible.  If  you  are  not  of 
God,  you  belong  at  present  to  Satan  ; you 
are  his  captives ; (2  Tim.  ii.  26 ;)  he  leads 
you  blindfold ; and  he  meditates  your  destruc- 
tion, when  you  shall  have  worn  out  your 
lives  in  his  miserable  service.  And  will  you 
continue  fond  of  your  bondage,  and  follow 
him  like  an  ox  to  the  slaughter  1 There  is 
a redemption-price  paid,  there  is  an  arm  of 
power  revealed  in  favour  of  such  helpless 
perishing  prisoners.  Jesus,  whom  we  preach, 
“is  able  to  take  the  prey  out  of  the  hand  of 
the  mighty,  and  to  deliver  the  lawful  cap- 
tive,” Isaiah  xlix.  24.  The  Lord  help  you 
to  apply  to  him  before  iniquity  is  your  ruin. 
O may  he  incline  you  to  believe  and  be 
saved  ! Acts  xvi.  81.  If  you  reject  him,  you 
seal  yourself  to  an  aggravated  condemnation, 
and  must  perish  without  mercy : but  if  you 
hear  his  voice,  and  call  upon  his  name,  he  is 
able  to  save  to  the  uttermost,  and  to  bless 
you,  in  turning  every  one  of  you  from  your 
iniquities,”  Heb.  vii.  25 ; Acts  iii.  26. 

VOL.  I. 


THE 


j 


WORKS 


OF  TIIE 


REV.  JOHN  NEWTON, 

LATE  PASTOR  OF  THE  UNITED  PARISHES  OF  ST.  MARY  WOOLNOTH  AND  ST.  MARY  WOOL 
CHURCH-HAW,  LOMBARD  STREET,  LONDON. 


CONTAINING, 


AN  AUTHENTIC  NARRATIVE,  ETC.  LETTERS  ON  RELIGIOUS  SUBJECTS,  CARDIPIIONIA,  DISCOURSI’S 
INTENDED  FOR  THE  PULPIT,  SERMONS  PREACHED  IN  THE  PARISH  CHURCH  OF  OLNEY, 

A REVIEW  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY,  OLNEY  HYMNS,  POEMS,  MESSIAH, 
OCCASIONAL  SERMONS,  AND  TRACTS. 


TO  WHICH  ARE  PREFIXED, 


MEMOIRS  OF  HIS  LIFE,  &c 

BY  THE  REV.  RICHARD  CECIL,  A.  M. 


COMPLETE  IN  TWO  VOLUMES. 
VOL.  II. 


NEW  YORK: 

ROBE  R T 0 A R T E R & BRO  T HERS, 

No.  2 R 5 BROADWAY. 

1851. 


CONTENTS  OF  THE  SECOND  VOLUME. 


A REVIEW  OF  ECCLESIASTICAL 
HISTORY. 

Page 

introduction 125 

BOOK  I.— OF  THE  FIRST  PERIOD  OF  CHRIS- 
TIANITY. 

Chap. 

j.  The  general  State  of  the  Heathens  and  Jews  be- 
fore and  at  the  Time  of  our  Lord’s  incarnation  17 

2.  The  Character  and  Genius  of  the  Gospel,  as 

taught  and  exemplified  by  Christ  . . . • . 21 

3.  The  true  Grounds  of  the  Opposition  he  met  with 

in  the  Course  of  his  Ministry,  and  the  Objec- 
tions and  Artifices  his  Enemies  employed  to 
prejudice  the  people  against  him,  and  prevent 
the  Reception  of  his  Doctrine 27 

4.  On  the  Calling  and  Characters  of  the  Apostles 

and  Disciples  previous  to  our  Lord’s  Ascension  32 


BOOK  11.— OF  THE  SECOND  PERIOD  OF  CHRIS- 
TIANITY. 

1.  Of  the  Progress  of  the  Gospel  from  our  Lord’s 

Ascension  to  the  Close  of  the  first  Century  . . 40 

2.  Of  the  Life  and  Character  of  St.  Paul,  considered 

as  an  Exemplar  or  Pattern  of  a Minister  of  Je- 
sus Christ 82 

3.  Of  the  Irregularities  and  Offences  which  appear- 

ed in  the  Apostolical  Churches 94 

4.  Of  the  Heresies  propagated  by  false  Teachers  in 

the  Apostles’  days 100 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 

BOOK  I.— ON  SELECT  PASSAGES  OF  SCRIPTURE. 

Hymn  GENESIS.  Chap.  Page 

1.  Adam 3 ...  ill 

2.  Cain  and  Abel 4 . . . ib. 

4'  | Walking  with  God  ......  5 . . . 112 

5.  Lot  in  Sodom 13  . . . ib. 

6.  ) Jehovah  Jireh;  or,  The  Lord  will 

7.  \ provide 22  . . 112-13 

8.  Esau 25  . . . ib. 

9.  Jacob's  Ladder 28  . . . 114 

JO.  My  name  is  Jacob 32  . . . ib. 

11.  Plenty  in  Dearth  41  . . . ib. 

12.  Joseph  made  known  to  his  Brethren  45  . . . ib. 

EXODUS. 

13.  The  bitter  Waters 15  . . . 115 


Healer  . . . 

15  . . 

. ib. 

15.  Manna  . . . 

16.  Manna  hoarded 

17.  Jehovah  Nissi ; or,  The  Lord  my  Ban- 
ner   „ . . . 

17  . . 

. ib. 

18.  The  Golden  Calf 

19.  The  true  Aaron 

LEVITICUS. 

8 . . 

. 117 

20.  Balaam’s  Wish 

NUMBERS. 

21.  Gibeon  . . . 

JOSHUA. 

JUDGES. 

22.  Jehovah  Shallom ; or,  The  Lord  is 
Peace  

Hymn  Chap  Page 

23.  Gideon’s  Fleece 6 ...  118 

24.  Sampson’s  Lion 14  . . . ib. 


I SAMUEL. 

25.  Hannah  ; or,  The  Throne  of  Grace  . 1 . . .118 

26.  Dagon  before  the  Ark 5 ...  119 

27.  Milch  Kine  drawing  the  Ark  ...  5 ...  ib. 

28.  Saul’s  Armour 17  . . . ib. 


II.  SAMUEL. 

29.  David’s  Fall 12  ...  120 

30.  Is  this  thy  Kindness  to  thy  Friend  ? 16  . . . ib. 

I.  KINGS. 

31.  j f ib. 

32.  }-Ask  what  I shall  give  you  . . . . 3 . . < 121 

33.  J ib. 

34.  The  Queen  of  Sheba 10  . . . ib. 

35.  Elijah  fed  by  Ravens 17  ...  122 

36.  The  Meal  and  Cruse  of  Oil  . . . . 17  . . . ib. 

II.  KINGS. 

37.  Jericho ; or,  The  Waters  healed  . .2.  . . ib 

38.  Naainan  5 . . . 123 

39.  The  borrowed  Axe 6 . . . ib. 

40.  More  with  us  than  with  them  ...  6 ...  ib. 

I.  CHRONICLES. 

41.  Faith's  Review  and  Expectation  . . 17  . . . ib. 


NEHEMIAH. 

42.  The  Joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  Strength  9 

JOB. 

43.  O that  I were  as  in  months  past  29 

44.  The  Change 29 


PSALMS. 

45.  Pleading  for  Mercy 6 

46.  None  upon  earth  besides  thee  ...  73 

4^'  | The  Believer’s  Safety 91 

49.  He  led  them  by  a right  Way  . . 107 

50.  What  shall  I render,  &c 116 

51.  Dwelling  in  Meshech 120 

PROVERBS. 

52.  Wisdom 8 

53.  A Friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a 

Brother 18 


124 


125 
ib. 
ib. 
ib. 

126 
ib. 
ib. 


127 


ECCLESIASTES. 

54.  Vanity  of  Life 1 

55.  Vanity  of  the  World 1 

56.  Vanity  of  Creatures  sanctified  ...  1 


ib. 

ib. 

128 


SOLOMON’S  SONG. 
57.  The  Name  of  Jesus 


ISAIAH. 

58  O J,ord,  I will  praise  thee  ....  12 

59.  The  River,  Refuge,  and  Rock  of  the 

Church 32 

60.  Zion,  or  the  City  of  God 33 

61.  Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved  . . 45 

62.  The  Good  Physician 45 

63.  To  the  afflicted,  &c 54 

64.  The  contrite  Heart 57 

65.  The  future  Peace  and  Glory  of  the 

Church ...  60 


ib. 


ib. 

129 
ib. 
ib. 

130 
ib. 


JEREMIAH. 

66.  Trust  of  the  Righteous  and  Wicked  17 

67.  Jehovah  Tsidkenu ; or,  the  Lord  our 

righteousness 23 

68.  Ephraim  repenting 31 

3 


ib. 


ib. 


131 

ib 


4 


CONTENTS. 


Hymn  LAMENTATIONS. 

69.  The  Lord  is  my  Portion  .... 

Chap. 

Page 

. 3 . . 

EZEKIEL. 

70.  Humbled  and  silenced  by  Mercy  . 

. 16  . . 

. ib. 

71.  The  Covenant 

72.  Jehovah  Shammali ; or,  The  Lord  is 

there  

. 18  . 

. ib. 

DANIEL. 

73.  The  Power  and  Triumph  of  Faith 

3,  6 . . 

. . ib. 

74.  Belshazzar 

. 5 . . 

. . 133 

JONAH. 

75.  The  Gourd 

. 4 . . 

, . ib. 

ZECHARIAH. 

76.  Prayer  for  the  Lord’s  Presence  . 

. 2 . 

. . ib. 

77.  A Brand  plucked  out  of  the  Fire  . 

. 3 . 

. . ib. 

78.  On  one  Stone  shall  be  seven  Eyes 

. 3 . 

. . 134 

79.  Praise  for  the  Fountain  opened  . 

. 13  . 

. . ib. 

MALACHI. 

80.  They  shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord 

. 3 . 

. . ib. 

MATTHEW. 

81.  The  Beggar 

. 7 . 

. . 135 

82.  The  Leper 

. 8 . 

. . ib. 

83.  A sick  Soul 

. 9 . 

84.  Satan  returning 

. 12  . 

85.  The  Sower 

. . ib. 

86.  Wheat  and  Tares 

. 13  . 

. . ib. 

87.  Peter  walking  on  the  Waters  . . 

. 14  . 

. . ib. 

88.  The  Woman  of  Canaan  .... 

. 15  . 

. . 137 

89.  What  think  ye  of  Christ  . . . 

. 22  . 

. . ib. 

90.  The  foolish  Virgins 

. 25  . 

. . ib. 

91.  Peter  sinning  and  repenting  . . 

. 26  . 

. . 138 

MARK. 

92.  Legion  dispossessed 

. 5 . 

. . ib. 

93.  The  Ruler’s  Daughter  raised  . . 

. 5 . 

. . ib. 

94.  But  one  Loaf 

. 8 . 

95  Bartimeus 

. 10  . 

. . ib. 

96.  The  House  of  Prayer 

. 11  . 

. . ib. 

97.  The  blasted  Fig-tree 

. 11  . 

LUKE. 

98.  The  two  Debtors 

. 7 . 

. . 140 

99.  The  good  Samaritan 

. 10  . 

. . ib. 

100.  Martha  and  Mary 

. 10  . 

. . ib. 

101.  The  Heart  taken 

. 11 . 

. . 141 

102.  The  Worldling 

. 12  . 

. . ib. 

i03.  The  barren  Fig-tree 

. 13  . 

. . ib. 

104.  The  Prodigal 

. 15  . 

. . 142 

105.  The  Rich  Man  and  Lazarus  . . 

. 16  . 

. . ib. 

106.  The  importunate  Widow  . . . 

. 18  . 

. . ib. 

107.  Zaccheus 

. 19  . 

. . 143 

108.  The  Believer’s  Danger  and  Safety 

. 22  . 

. . ib. 

10).  Father,  forgive  them 

. 23  . 

. . ib. 

110.  The  two  Malefactors 

. 23  . 

. . ib. 

JOHN. 

111.  The  Woman  of  Samaria  . . . 

. 4 . 

. . 144 

jjg'  | The  Pool  of  Bethesda  .... 

lib. 

114.  The  Disciples  at  Sea 

. 6 . 

. .145 

115.  Will  ye  also  go  away 

. 6 . 

. . ib. 

116.  The  Resurrection  and  the  Life  . 

. 11  . 

. . ib. 

117.  Weeping  Mary 

] jy'  | Lovest  thou  me 

1 146 
• | ib. 

ACTS. 

120.  The  Death  of  Stephen  .... 

. 7 . 

. . ib. 

121.  The  Rebel’s  Surrender  to  Grace  . 

. 9 . 

. . 147 

122.  Peter  released  from  Prison  . . . 

12  . 

. . ib. 

123.  The  trembling  Gaoler  .... 

. 16  . 

. . ib. 

124.  The  Exorcist 

. 19  . 

. 148 

125.  Paul’s  Voyage 

ROMANS. 

126.  The  good  that  I would,  I do  not . 

. 7 . 

. . ib. 

127.  Salvation  drawing  nearer  . . . 

. 13  . 

. . ib. 

I.  CORINTHIANS. 

128.  The  Rock  was  Christ  .... 

II  CORINTHIANS. 

129.  My  Grace  is  sufficient  for  thee  . 

. 12  . 

. . ib. 

GALATIANS. 

130.  The  inward  Warfare 

Hymn  PHILIPPIANS.  Chap.  Page 

131.  Contentment 4 ...  150 

HEBREWS. 

132.  Old  Testament  Gospel 4 . . . ib. 

133.  The  Word  quick  and  powerful  . . 4 . . . ib. 

134.  Looking  unto  Jesus 12  . . .151 

135.  Love  Tokens 12  . . . ib. 


REVELATION. 

136.  Ephesus 2 . . . ib. 

137.  Smyrna 2 . . . ib. 

138.  Sardis 3 ...  152 

139.  Philadelphia 3 . . . ib. 

140.  Laodicea  . . . 3 . . . ib. 

141.  The  Little  Book 10  ....  ib. 


BOOK  II.— ON  OCCASIONAL  SUBJECTS. 

1.  SEASONS. 

New-  Year  Hymns. 

1.  Time  how  swift 153 

2.  Time  how  short ib. 

3.  Uncertainty  of  Life ib. 

4.  A New-year's  Thought  arul  Prayer ib. 

5.  Death  and  War 154 

6.  Earthly  Prospects  deceitful ib. 


Before  Annual  Sermons. 

Prayer  for  a Blessing 155 

Another ib. 

Another ib. 

Casting  the  Gospel-net ib. 

Pleading  for  and  with  Youth 155 

Prayer  for  Children ib. 

The  Shunamite ib. 

Elijah's  Prayer . ib. 

Preaching  to  the  dry  Bones ib. 

The  Rod  of  Moses 157 

God  Speaking  from  Mount  Zion ib. 

Prayer  for  Power  on  the  Means ib. 

Elijah’s  Mantle 158 

After  Annual  Sermons. 

David’s  Charge  to  Solomon »b. 

The  Lord’s  Call  to  his  Children ib. 

The  Prayer  of  Jabez ib. 

Waiting  at  Wisdom’s  Gates 159 

Asking  the  Way  to  Zion ib. 

We  were  Pharaoh’s  Bondmen ib. 

Travailing  in  Birth  for  Souls ib. 

We  are  Ambassadors  for  Christ 160 

Paul’s  farewell  Charge ib. 

How  shall  I put  thee  among  the  Children  . . ib. 

Winter 16 1 

Waiting  for  Spring ib. 

Spring jb. 

Another ib- 

Summer  Storms 162 

Hay-Time ib. 

Harvest ib. 


Christmas. 

37.  Praise  for  the  Incarnation 163 

38.  Jehovah  Jesus ib. 

39.  Man  honoured  above  Angels ib. 

40.  Saturday  Evening ib- 

41.  Close  of  the  Year,  Ebenezer 164 

42.  Another ib. 

II.  ORDINANCES. 

43.  Opening  a Place  for  social  Prayer ib- 

44.  Another 165 

45.  The  Lord's  Day ib. 

46.  Gospel-privileges ,b. 

47.  Another 166 

48.  Praise  for  their  Continuance ib. 

49.  A Famine  of  the  Word jb- 

50.  Prayers  for  Ministers Jb- 

51.  Prayer  for  a Revival 167 

52.  Hoping  for  a Revival ib. 

Sacramental  Hymns. 

53.  Welcome  to  the  Table ib* 

54.  Christ  crucified ib 

55.  Jesus  hasting  to  suffer 168 

56.  It  is  good  to  be  here ib 

57.  Looking  at  the  Cross ib. 

58.  Supplies  in  the  Wilderness ib 


CONTENTS. 


5 


Hymn  Page 

59.  Communion  with  Saints  m Glory 1(59 

Prayer . 

60.  Exhortation  to  Prayer ib. 

61.  Power  of  Prayer ib. 

Scripture. 

62.  Light  and  Glory  of  the  Word ib. 

63.  Word  more  precious  than  Gold 170 

III.  PROVIDENCES. 

64.  On  the  Commencement  of  Hostilities  . . . ib. 

Fast-Day  Hymns. 

6.5.  Confession  and  Prayer ib. 

66.  Moses  and  Ainalek 171 

67.  The  Hiding  Place ib. 

68.  On  the  Earthquake,  1775  ib. 

69.  Fire  at  Olney,  1777 ib. 

70.  Welcome  to  Christian  Friends 172 

71.  At  Parting ib. 

Funeral  Hymns. 

72.  On  the  Death  of  a Believer ib. 

73.  Death  of  a Minister 173 

74.  The  Tolling  Bell ib. 

75.  Hope  beyond  the  Grave ib. 

76.  There  the  weary  are  at  rest ib. 

77.  The  Day  of  Judgment ib. 

78.  The  Day  of  the  Lord 174 

79.  The  Great  Tribunal ib. 

IV.  CREATION. 

FO.  The  old  and  New  Creation ib 

81.  Book  of  Creation 175 

82.  The  Rainbow ib. 

83.  Thunder ib. 

84.  Lightning  in  the  Night ib. 

85.  Eclipse  of  the  Moon,  1776  176 

.86.  Moon-Light ib. 

87.  The  Sea ib. 

B8.  The  Flood 177 

89.  The  Thaw ib. 

93.  The  Loadstone ib. 

91.  The  Spider  and  Bee ib. 

92.  The  Bee  saved  from  the  Spider 178 

93.  The  tamed  Lion ib. 

94.  Sheep ib. 

95.  The  Garden ib. 

96.  For  a Garden-Seat,  or  Summer-House  ....  179 

S/7.  Creatures  in  the  Lord’s  Hands ib. 

98.  On  Dreaming ib. 

99.  The  World 180 

300.  The  Enchantment  dissolved ib. 


BOOK  III.— ON  THE  RISE,  PROGRESS,  CHANGES, 
AND  COMFORTS  OF  THE  SPIRITUAL  LIFE. 

I.  SOLEMN  ADDRESSES  TO  SINNERS. 


1.  Expostulation 180 

2.  Alarm 181 

3.  We  were  once  as  you  are ib. 

4.  Prepare  to  meet  God ib. 

5.  Invitation 182 

II.  SEEKING,  PLEADING,  AND  HOPING. 

6.  The  burdened  Sinner ib. 

7.  Behold  I am  vile 183 

8.  The  shining  Light ib. 

9.  Encouragement • . ib. 

10.  The  waiting  Soul 184 

11,  12.  The  Effort ib. 

13.  Seeking  the  Beloved ib. 

14.  Rest  for  weary  Souls 185 

III.  CONFLICT. 

15.  Light  shining  out  of  Darkness ib. 

16.  Welcome  Cross ib. 

17.  Afflictions  sanctified  by  the  Word ib. 

18.  Temptation 186 

19.  Looking  Upwards  in  a Storm ib. 

20.  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death  ......  ib. 

21.  The  Storm  Hushed ib. 

22.  Help  in  Time  of  Need 187 


Hymn  Page 

23.  Peace  after  a Storm 187 

24.  Mourning  and  Longing ib. 

25.  Rejoice  the  Soul  of  thy  Servant ib. 

26.  Self-acquaintance 188 

27.  Bitter  and  Sweet ib. 

28.  Prayer  for  Patience ib 

23.  Submission 189 

30.  Why  should  I complain ib. 

31.  Return,  O Lord!  how  long ib. 

32.  Cast  down,  but  not  destroyed ib. 

33.  The  benighted  Traveller 190 

34.  The  Prisoner ib. 

35.  Perplexity  relieved . ib. 

36.  Prayer  answered  by  Crosses ib. 

37.  I will  trust  and  not  be  afraid 191 

38.  Questions  to  Unbelief ib. 

39.  Great  Effects  by  small  Means • 192 

40.  Why  art  thou  cast  down  ? &c ib. 

41.  The  Way  of  Access ib. 

42.  The  Pilgrim’s  Song ib. 

IV.  COMFORT. 

43.  Faith  a new  Sense * . . 193 

44.  The  happy  Change ib. 

45.  Retirement ib. 

46.  Jesus  my  All ib. 

47.  The  hidden  Life 194 

48.  Joy  and  Peace  in  Believing ib. 

49.  True  Pleasure ib. 

50.  The  Christian ib. 

51.  Lively  Hope  and  gracious  Fear 195 

52.  Confidence ib. 

-53.  Peace  restored ib. 

54.  Hear  what  he  has  done ib. 

55.  Freedom  from  Care 196 

56.  Humiliation  and  Praise ib. 

57.  For  the  Poor ib 

58.  Home  in  View 197 

V.  DEDICATION  AND  SURRENDER. 

59.  Old  things  passed  away ib. 

60.  Power  of  Grace ib. 

61.  My  Soul  thirsteth  for  God ib. 

62.  Love  constraining  to  Obedience 198 

63.  The  Heart  healed  and  changed  by  Mercy  . . . ib. 

64.  Hatred  of  Sin ib. 

65.  The  Child ib. 

69.  True  Happiness  . . ib. 

67.  The  happy  Debtor 199 

VI.  CAUTIONS. 

68.  The  new  Convert ib. 

69.  True  and  False  Comforts ib. 

70.  True  and  False  Zeal ib. 

71-  Living  and  Dead  Faith 200 

72.  Abuse  of  the  Gospel ib. 

73.  The  Narrow  Way ib. 

74.  Dependence ib. 

75.  Not  of  Works 201 

76.  Sin’s  Deceit ib. 

77.  Are  there  few  saved ib. 

78.  The  Sluffgard ib. 

79.  Not  in  Word  but  in  Power 202 

VII.  PRAISE. 

80.  Praise  for  Faith jb. 

81.  Grace  and  Providence ib. 

82.  Praise  for  Redeeming  Love ib. 

83.  I will  praise  the  Lord  at  all  times 203 

84.  Perseverance ib. 

85.  Salvation ib. 

86.  Reigning  Grace ib. 

87.  Praise  to  the  Redeemer 204 

88.  Man  by  Nature,  Grace  and  Glory ib. 

VIII.  SHORT  HYMNS. 

89—95.  Before  Sermon 204-5 

96—103.  After  Sermon 205-6 

104—107.  Gloria  Patri 107 


POEMS. 


The  Paper  Kite ; or,  Pride  must  have  a Fall  . . . 207 

A Thought  on  the  Sea  shore ib. 

The  Spider  and  the  Toad b 


6 


CONTEXTS. 


A TABLE 

BY  WHICH  TO  FIND  ANY  HYMN  FROM  THE 
FIRST  LINE. 


A Page 

A Believer  free  from  care 147 

Afflictions  do  not  come  alone 151 

Afflictions,  though  they  seem  severe 142 

A garden  contemplation  suits 178 

A glance  from  heav  m.  with  sweet  effect  ....  175 

A shelter  from  the  -laor  wind 179 

Ah!  what  can  I do 182 

Alas!  Elisha’s  servant  cried 123 

Alas!  by  nature  how  depraved 160 

A lion,  though  by  nature  wild 178 

Almighty  King!  whose  wondrous  hand  . . . . 202 

Although  on  massy  pillars  built 171 

Amazing  grace!  (how  sweet  the  sound !)  ....  123 

Approach,  my  soul,  the  mercy -seat 184 

As  birds  their  infant  brood  protect 132 

As  needles  point  towards  the  pole 177 

As  once  for  Jonah,  so  the  Lord 133 

As  parched  in  the  barren  sands 130 

As  some  tall  rock  amidst  the  waves 146 

As  the  serpent  raised  by  Moses 129 

As  the  sun  s enlivening  eye 172 

As  when  the  weary  traveller  gains 197 

A word  from  Jesus  calms  the  sea 135 

A worlding  spent  each  day 142 

B 

Before  Elisha's  gate 123 

Begone,  unbelief 191 

Behold  the  throne  of  grace 121 

Beneath  the  tyrant  Satan's  yoke 159 

Beside  the  gospel-pool 144 

Bestow,  dear  Lord,  upon  our  youth 155 

Be  still,  my  heart ! these  anxious  cares 192 

Bitter,  indeed,  the  waters  are 115 

Bleak  winter  is  subdued  at  length 161 

Blinded  in  yo  uth  by  Satan’s  arts 180 

Breathe  from  the  gentle  south.  O Lord 184 

P»y  various  maxims,  forms,  and  rules 151 

By  faith  in  Christ,  I walk  with  God 112 

By  the  poor  widow's  oil  and  meal 122 

By  whom  was  David  taught 116 

C 

Cheer  up.  my  soul,  there  is  a mercy-seat  ....  184 

Chief  shepherd  of  thy  chosen  sheep 166 

Come,  my  soul,  thy  suit  prepare 120 

Confirm  the  hop.?  thv  word  allows 204 

Constrained  by  their  Lord  to  embark 145 

Could  the  creatures  help  or  ease  us 138 

Courage,  my  soul ! behold  the  prize 173 

D 

Darkness  overspreads  us  here 148 

Day  of  Judgment,  day  of  wonders 173 

Dear  Lord!  accept  a sinful  heart 188 

Destruction's  dangerous  road 201 

Does  it  not  grief  and  wonder  move 156 

Does  the  gospel  word  proclaim 185 

E 

Elijah’s  example  declares 122 

Elisha,  struck  with  grief  and  awe 158 

Encourag'd  by  thy  word 135 

Ensnared  too  long  my  heart  has  been 159 

Ere  God  had  built  the  mountains 126 

F 

Far  from  the  world,  O Lord,  I flee 193 

Father,  forgive  the  Saviour  saidi 143 

Father  of  angels  and  of  men 206 

Fervent  persevering  prayers 147 

Fierce  passions  discompose  the  mind 150 

Fix  my  heart  and  eyes  on  thine 198 

Forest  beasts,  that  live  by  prey 190 

For  mercies  countless  as  the  sands 126 

From  Egypt  lately  freed 192 

From  pole  to  pole  let  others  roam 131 

From  Sheba  a distant  report 121 

G 

Gladness  was  spread  through  Israel’s  host  . . . 166 

Glorious  things  of  thee  are  spoken 129 

Glory  to  God  the  Father's  name 206 

God  gives  His  mercies  to  be  spent 127 


Pugg 

God,  with  one  piercing  glance,  looks  through  . . 174 

God  moves  in  a mysterious  way 185 

God  of  my  life,  to  thee  I call 180 

Grace  triumphant  in  the  throne 201 

Gracious  Lord,  our  children  see 156 

H 

Happy  are  they,  to  whom  the  Lord 166 

Hark,  my  soul!  it  is  the  Lord 346 

Hark!  how  time's  wide-sounding  bell 154 

Happy  the  birth  where  grace  presides 197 

Heal  us,  Emmanuel,  here  we  are 115 

Hear  w hat  God  the  Lord  hath  spoken 130 

Hear  what  the  Lord,  the  great  Amen 152 

He  w ho  on  earth  as  man  was  known 128 

Here  at  Bethesda's  pool,  the  poor 144 

His  master  taken  from  his  head 173 

Holy  Lord  God ! I love  thy  truth 138 

Honour  and  happiness  unite 194 

Honey  though  the  bee  prepares 123 

How  blest  the  righteous  are 117 

How  blest  thy  creature  is,  O Lord 193 

How  David,  when  by  sin  deceived 120 

How  hurtful  was  the  choice  of  Lot 112 

How  kind  the  good  Samaritan 140 

How  lost  was  my  condition 129 

How  soon  the  Saviour’s  gracious  call 2tr2 

How  sweet  the  name  of  Jesus  sounds 128 

How  tedious  and  tasteless  the  hours 125 

How  welcome  to  the  saints  when  pressed  ....  165 
Hungry,  and  faint,  and  poor 205 


I am.  saith  Christ,  your  glorious  head 345 

I ask'd  the  Lord  that  I might  grow 190 

If  for  a time  the  air  be  calm 176 

If  Paul  in  Caesar's  court  must  stand 148 

If  Solomon  for  w isdom  prayed 121 

If  the  Lord  our  leader  be 314 

If  to  Jesus  for  relief 191 

Incarnate  God ! the  soul  that  knows 125 

In  evil  long  I took  delight 16S 

In  mercy,  not  in  wrath,  rebuke 125 

In  themselves,  as  weak  as  worms 109 

In  vain  my  fa  :cy  strives  to  paint 172 

Israel  in  ancient  days 150 

I thirst,  but  not  as  once  I did 197 

I was  a grovelling  creature  once 195 

I will  praise  thee  every  day 128 

I would,  but  cannot  sing 348 

J 

Jesus  Christ,  the  Lord's  anointed 134 

Jesus,  to  what  didst  thou  submit 144 

Jesus,  who  bought  us  with  his  blood 358 

Jesus,  whose  blood  so  freely  streamed  . .117 

Jesus,  where’er  thy  people  meet 165 

Jesus  is  mine ! I’m  now  prepared 205 

John,  in  a vision,  saw  the  day 174 

Joy  is  a fruit  that  will  not  grow 124 

K 

Kindle,  Saviour,  in  my  heart 183 

Kindred  in  Christ,  for  his  dear  sake 172 

L 

Legion  was  my  name  by  nature 138 

Let  hearts  and  tongues  unite  ...  ...  3t>4 

Let  us  adore  the  grace  that  seeks 158 

Let  me  dwell  on  Golgotha 168 

Let  us  love,  and  sing,  and  wonder 292 

Let  worldly  minds  the  world  pursue 197 

Lord,  my  soul  with  pleasure  springs 14 

Lord,  thou  hast  won,  at  length  I yield 147 

Lord,  who  hast  suffer'd  all  for  me Jv* 

Lord,  what  is  man ! extremes  how  wide  ....  204 

M 

Manna  to  Israel  well  supplied ‘315 

Martha  her  love  and  joy  expressed 349 

Mary  to  her  Saviour's  tomb 145 

May  the  grace  of  Christ  our  Saviour 296 

Mercy,  O thou  Son  of  David 139 

My  barns  are  full,  my  stores  increase 141 

My  former  hopes  are  fled 1KI 

My  God!  how  perfect  are  thy  ways J31 

My  God!  till  I received  thy  stroke ib 

My  harp  untuned,  and  laid  aside 17 

My  song  shall  bless  the  Lord  of  all 1 .1 

My  soul  mce  had  its  plenteous  years 114 


CONTENTS. 


7 


My  soul  this  curious  house  of  clay  . . . . 

My  soul  is  beset 

My  soul  is  sad  and  much  dismayed  .... 

N 

Nay,  I cannot  let  thee  go 

No  strength  of  nature  can  suffice 

No  words  can  declare 

Not  to  Sinai’s  dreadful  blaze 

Now,  gracious  Lord,  thine  arm  reveal  . . . 
Now  let  us  join  with  hearts  and  tongues  . . 

Now  may  fervent  prayer  arise 

Now  may  the  Lord  reveal  his  face  .... 
Now,  Lord,  inspire  the  preacher’s  heart  . . 
Now  may  he  \\ffio  from  the  dead 

O 

Of  all  the  gifts  thine  hand  bestows  .... 

Often  thy  public  means  of  grace 

Oft  as  the  bell,  with  solemn  toll 

Oft  as  the  leper’s  case  I read 

Oft  in  vain  the  voice  of  truth 

O God,  whose  favourable  eye 

O David's  Son,  and  David’s  Lord 

O Lord,  our  languid  souls  inspire 

O Lord,  how  vile  am  I 

O Lord,  my  best  desire  fulfil 

O thou,  at  whose  almighty  word 

O happy  they  who  know  the  Lord 

O speak  that  gracious  word  again  .... 

Oh ! for  a closer  walk  with  God 

Oh ! may  the  power  which  melts  the  rock  . . 

O how  I love  thy  holy  word 

Once  a woman  silent  stood 

Once  perishing  in  blood  I lay 

Once,  while  we  aimed  at  Zion’s  songs  . . . 

On  man,  in  his  own  image  made 

On  the  same  flower  we  often  see 

One  awful  word  which  Jesus  spoke  .... 
One  glance  of  thine,  eternal  Lord  .... 

One  there  is  above  all  others 

Oppress’d  with  unbelief  and  sin 

Our  Lord,  who  knows  full  well 

P 

Pensive,  doubting,  fearful  heart 

Physician  of  my  sin-sick  soul 

Pleasing  spring  again  is  here 

Poor  Esau  repented  too  late  

Poor  sinners!  little  do  they  think 

Poor,  weak,  and  worthless  though  I am  . . 

Prayer  an  answer  will  obtain 

Preachers  may,  from  Ezekiel’s  case  .... 

Precious  Bible!  what  a treasure 

Prepare  a thankful  song 


a 

Quiet,  Lord,  my  fro  ward  heart 

R 

Refresh’d  by  the  bread  and  wine 

Rejoice,  believer,  in  the  Lord 

Remember  us,  we  pray  thee,  Lord 

Return  to  bless  my  waiting  eyes 

S 

Safely  through  another  week 

Salvation ! what  a glorious  plan 

Saved  by  blood,  I live  to  tell 

Saviour,  shine,  and  cheer  my  soul  .... 

Saviour,  visit  thy  plantation 

See  Aaron,  God's  anointed  priest 

See ! another  year  is  gone 

See!  how  rude  winter’s  icy  hand 

See!  the  corn  again  in  ear 

See  the  gloomy  gathering  cloud 

See  the  world  for  youth  prepares 

Shall  men  pretend  to  pleasure 

Sight,  hearing,  feeling,  taste  and  smell  . . . 

Simon,  beware!  the  Saviour  said 

Sin,  when  viewed  by  scripture-light  .... 

Sinner,  art  thou  still  secure 

Sinners,  hear  the  Saviour’s  call 

Sin  enslaved  me  many  years 

Sin  has  undone  our  wretched  race  .... 

Sometimes  a light  surprises 

Son  of  God ! thy  people  shield 

Sovereign  grace  has  power  alone 

Stop,  poor  sinner!  stop  and  think  . . . . 


Pape 
. 173 
. 183 
. K6 


Strange  and  mysterious  is  my  life 

Supported  by  the  word 

Sweet  was  the  time  when  first  I felt 
Sweeter  sounds  than  music  knows 


Pal7t 


149 

132 


124 

103 


114 

198 

180 

205 

155 

163 

155 


205 

200 


202 

205 

173 

135 

154 

199 

158 

164 
183 
189 
157 

165 
195 
112 
170 
185 
140 
131 

166 
111 
177 

139 
192 
127 

140 
142 


130 

135 

161 

113 

133 

120 

137 

156 

170 

204 


. 198 


169 

203 

205 

189 


163 

203 


T 

Ten  thousand  talents  once  I owed  .... 
That  was  a wonder-working  word  .... 
That  man  no  guard  or  weapons  needs  . . 

The  church  a garden  is 

The  God  who  once  to  Israel  spoke  .... 
The  grass  and  flowers  which  clothe  the  field 
The  Lord,  our  salvation  and  light  .... 
The  Spirit  breathes  upon  the  word  .... 
The  gathering  clouds  with  aspect  dark  . . . 

The  book  of  nature  open  lies 

The  moon  in  silver  glory  shone 

The  moon  has  but  a borrowed  light  .... 

The  ice  and  snow  we  lately  saw 

The  subtle  spider  often  weaves 

The  Saviour  calls  his  people  sheep  .... 
The  water  stood  like  walls  of  brass  .... 
The  billows  swell,  the  winds  are  high  . . . 

The  Saviour  hides  his  face 

The  new-born  child  of  gospel-grace  .... 
The  Lord  receives  his  highest  praise  .... 
The  wishes  that  the  sluggard  frames  . . . 
The  saints  Emmanuel’s  portion  are  .... 
The  peace  which  God  alone  reveals  .... 

The  Father  we  adore 

The  castle  of  the  human  heart 

The  evils  that  beset  our  path 

The  kine  unguided  went 

The  Lord  will  happiness  divine 

The  Lord  proclaims  his  grace  abroad  . . . 

The  lion  that  on  Samson  roared 

The  manna,  favoured  Israel's  meat  .... 

The  message  first  to  Smyrna  sent 

The  prophets’  sons,  in  times  of  old  .... 

The  Saviour!  what  a noble  flame 

The  saints  should  never  be  dismayed  . . . 
The  Shunamite  oppressed  with  grief  . . . 
The  signs  which  God  to  Gideon  gave  . . . 

The  word  of  Christ  our  Lord 

There  is  a fountain  filled  with  blood  . . . 
This  is  the  feast  of  heavenly  wine  .... 

Though  Jericho  pleasantly  stood 

Though  in  the  outward  church  below  . . . 
Though  cloudy  skies,  and  northern  blasts  . . 

Though  troubles  assail 

Though  the  morn  may  be  serene 

Though  small  the  drops  of  falling  rain  . . . 
Though  sore  beset  with  guilt  and  fear  . . . 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  to  Ephesus 

Thus  saith  the  Holy  One  and  true  .... 
Thy  mansion  is  the  Christian’s  heart  . . . 
Thy  message,  by  the  preacher,  seal  .... 
Thy  promise,  Lord,  and  thy  command  . . . 
Time,  with  an  unwearied  hand  . ... 

Time,  by  moments,  steals  away  .... 
’Tis  a point  I long  to  know  . . .... 

’Tis  my  happiness  below 

’Tis  past, — the  dreadful  stormy  night  . . . 

To  keep  the  lamp  alive 

To  tell  the  Saviour  all  my  wants 

To  thee  our  wants  are  known 

To  those  who  know  the  Lord  1 speak  . . . 
Too  many,  Lord,  abuse  thy  grace 


195 

124 

167 

117 

153 

161 

162 

171 

180 

181 

193 
143 
201 
181 
182 
198 
156 

194 
133 
143 
181 


U 

Unbelief  the  soul  dismays 

Uncertain  how  the  way  to  find  .... 
Unless  the  Lord  had  been  my  stay  . . . 

W 

Wearied  by  day  with  toils  and  cares  . . 
We  seek  a rest  beyond  the  skies  .... 

What  a mournful  life  is  mine 

What  contradictions  meet 

What  thousands  never  knew  the  road  . . 
What  think  you  of  Christ?  is  the  test  . . 
What  various  hindrances  we  meet  . . . 
When  Adam  fell  he  quickly  lost  . . . . 
When  first  to  make  my  heart  his  own  . . 

When  first  my  soul  enlisted 

When  Hannah,  pressed  with  grief  . . . 
When  Jesus  claims  the  sinner’s  heart  . . 
When  Joseph  his  brethren  beheld  .... 
When  Israel,  by  divine  command  .... 


. . 199 
. . 174 
. . 125 
. . 141 
. . 157 
. . 162 
. . 164 
. . 169 
. . 170 
. . 175 
. . 176 
. . ib. 

. . 177 
. . 178 
. . ib. 

. . 179 
. . l>-’6 
. • 187 
. . 199 
. . 200 
. . 201 
. . 206 
. . ib 
. . ib. 

. . Ill 
. . 127 
. . 119 
. . 130 
. . 132 
. . 118 
. . 116 
. . 151 
. . 123 
. . 168 
. 112 
. . 156 
. . 118 
. . 150 
. . 134 
. . 167 
. . 122 
. . 136 
. . 161 
. . 113 
. . 162 
. . 177 
. . 189 
. . 151 
. . 152 
. . 139 
. . 1!0 
. . 205 
. . 153 
. . ib. 
. . 146 
. . 185 
. . 186 
. . 200 
. . 194 
. . 206 
. . 184 
. . 200 


192 

190 

187 


171 

205 

126 

159 

200 

137 

169 

111 

119 

ib 

118 

136 

114 

168 


8 


CONTENTS. 


Page 


When  Israel’s  tribes  were  parch’d  with  thirst  . . 149 

When  Israel  heard  the  fiery  law 116 

When  Israel  was  from  Egypt  freed 126 

When  Joshua,  by  God’s  command 117 

When  Peter  boasted,  soon  he  fell 138 

When  sinners  utter  boasting  words 134 

When  the  disciples  crossed  the  lake 139 

When  the  apostles  wonders  wrought 148 

When  descending  from  the  sky 137 

When  any  turn  from  Zion’s  way 145 

When  the  beloved  disciple  took 152 

When  Peter  through  the  tedious  night 155 

When  Moses  waved  his  mystic  rod 157 

When  Paul  was  parted  from  his  friends  ....  160 

When  on  the  cross  my  Lord  I see 167 

When  the  sun  with  cheerful  beams  ....:.  175 

When  a olack  o’erspreading  cloud ib. 

When  slumber  seals  our  weary  eyes 179 

When  darkness  long  has  veiled  my  mind  ....  187 
When  my  prayers  are  a burden  and  task  . . . . ib. 
Whan  my  Saviour,  my  Shepherd,  is  near  ....  189 

When  the  poor  prisoner  through  a gate 190 

When  the  wounded  spirit  hears 196 

When  Hagar  found  the  bottle  spent ib. 

While  with  ceaseless  course  the  sun 153 

While  Joshua  led  the  armed  bands 171 

While  I lived  without  the  Lord 196 

Why  should  I fear  the  darkest  hour 193 

Winter  has  a joy  for  me 203 

With  Satan,  my  accuser  near 133 

With  Israel's  God  who  can  compare 205 

Write  to  Sardis,  saith  the  Lord 152 

Y 

Ye  saints  on  earth,  ascribe  with  heaven's  high  host  206 

Ye  sons  of  earth,  prepare  the  plough 136 

Yesl  since  God  himself  has  said  it 195 

Z 

Zaccheus  climbed  the  tree 143 

Zeal  is  that  pure  and  heavenly  flame 199 

Zion ! the  city  of  our  God 159 


MESSIAH,  &c. 

PART  I. 

SERMON  I — The  Consolation. — “ Comfort  ye, 
comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your  God.  Speak 
ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem,  and  cry  unto  her, 
that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  that  her  iniqui- 
ty is  pardoned:  for  she  bath  received  at  the 
Lord's  hand  double  for  all  her  sins,”  Isaiah  xl. 

1,  2 213 

SERMON  II. — The  Harbinger. — “The  voice  of 
him  that  crieth  in  the  wilderness,  Prepare  ye  the 
way  of  the  Lord,  make  straight  in  the  desert  a 
highway  for  our  God.  Every  valley  shall  be  ex- 
alted, and  every  mountain  and  hill  shall  be  made 
low,  and  the  crooked  shall  be  made  straight,  and 
the  rough  places  plain.  And  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  shall  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh  shall  see  it 
together,  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  spoken 
it,”  Isaiah  xl.  3 — 5 217 

SERMON  III. — The  Shaking  of  the  Heavens  and 
Earth.— “ Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  Yet  once, 
it  is  a little  while,  and  I will  shake  the  heavens 
and  the  earth,  and  the  sea,  and  the  dry  land: 

And  I will  shake  all  nations,  and  the  desire  of 
all  nations  shall  come,  and  I will  fill  this  house 
with  glory,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,”  Haggai,  fl. 

6,  7 222 

SERMON  IV. — The  Lord  coming  to  his  Temple. — 

“ The  Lord  whom  ye  seek,  shall  suddenly  come 
to  his  temple;  even  the  messenger  of  the  cove- 
nant in  whom  ye  delight:  Behold,  he  shall  come 
saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.  But  who  may  abide  the 
day  of  his  coming?  and  who  shall  stand  when  he 
appeareth?  for  he  is  like  a refiner’s  fire,  and  like 
fuller’s  soap— and  he  shall  purify  the  sons  of  Le- 
vi— that  they  may  offer  unto  the  Lord  an  offering 
in  righteousness,”  Malachi,  iii.  1—3 225 

SERMON  V .—Immanuel.— “ Behold  a virgin  shall 


Page 

conceive,  and  bear  a son,  and  shall  call  his  name 
Immanuel”  ( Ood  with  us,)  Isaiah  vii.  14.  . . . 230 

SERMON  VI. — Salvation  published  from  the  Moun- 
tains— “ O Zion,  that  bringest  good  tidings,  get 
thee  up  into  the  high  mountains.  O Jerusalem, 
.that  bringest  good  tidings,  lift  up  thy  voice  with 
strength,  lift  it  up,  be  not  afraid:  say  unto  the 
cities  of  Judah,  Behold  your  God !”  Isaiah  xi.  9.  234 

SERMON  VII. — The  Morning  Light.. — “ Arise, 
shine,  for  thy  light  is  come,  and  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  is  risen  upon  thee.  For  behold,  the  dark- 
ness shall  cover  the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the 
people;  but  the  Lord  shall  arise  upon  thee,  and 
his  glory  shall  be  seen  upon  thee,  and  the  Gen- 
tiles shall  come  to  thy  light,  and  kings  to  the 
brightness  of  thy  rising,”  Isaiah  lx.  1—3.  . . . 237 

SERMON  VIII. — The  Sun  rising  upon  a dark 
World. — “The  people  that  walked  in  darkness 
have  seen  a great  light;  they  that  dwell  in  the 
land  of  the  shadow  of  death,  upon  them  hath  the 
light  shined,”  Isaiah  ix.  2 240 

SERMON  IX. — Characters  and  Names  of  Messiah. — 

.“  For  unto  us  a child  is  born,  unto  us  a child  is 
given ; and  the  government  shall  be  upon  his 
shoulder  : and  his  name  shall  be  called  Wonder- 
ful, Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God,  the  Everlasting 
Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace.”  Isaiah  ix.  6. . . . 244 

SERMON  X. — The  Angel's  Message  and  Song. — 

“ There  were  in  the  same  country  shepherds,  abid- 
ing in  the  field,  keeping  watch  over  their  flocks 
by  night.  And  lo,  the  angel  of  the  Lord  came 
upon  them,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shone  round 
about  them,  and  they  were  sore  afraid.  And  the 
angel  said  unto  them,  Fear  not:  for  behold  I 
bring  unto  you  good  tidings  of  great  joy,  which 
shall  be  unto  all  people.  For  unto  you  is  born 
this  day,  in  the  city  of  David,  a Saviour,  which 
is  Christ  the  Lord.  And  this  shall  be  a sign  unto 
you  : ye  shall  find  the  babe  wrapped  in  swaddling- 
clothes,  lying  in  a manger.  And  suddenly  there 
was  with  the  angel  a multitude  of  the  heavenly 
host,  praising  God,  and  saying,  Glory  be  to  God  in 
the  highest,  on  earth  peace,  good-will  towards 
men,”  Luke  ii.  8 — 14 248 

SERMON  XI. — Messiah's  Entrance  into  Jerusalem. 

— “ Rejoice  greatly,  O daughter  of  Zion ! shout,  O 
daughter  of  Jerusalem,  behold  thy  king  cometh 
unto  thee : he  is  just  and  having  salvation,  lowly 
and  riding  upon  an  ass,  and  upon  a colt  the  foal 
of  an  ass. — And  he  shall  speak  peace  unto  the 
heathen,”  Zech.  ix.  9,  10 251 

SERMON  XU  — Effects  of  Messiah's  Appearance. — 

“ Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened,  and 
the  ears  of  the  deaf  shall  be  unstopped:  Then 
shall  the  lame  man  leap  as  an  hart,  and  the 
tongue  of  the  dumb  sing,”  Isaiah  xxxv.  5,  6.  . . 2 oo 

SERMON  XIII. — The  Great  Shepherd.—' “He  shall 
feed  his  flock  like  a shepherd  ; he  shall  gather  the 
lambs  in  his  arm,  and  carry  them  in  his  bosom ; 
and  shall  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young,” 


Isaiah  xl.  11 258 

SERMON  XIV. — Rest  for  the  Weary. — “ Come  unto 
me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and 
I will  give  you  rest,”  Matt.  xi.  28 262 

SERMON  XV. — Messiah's  easy  yoke. — “ Take  my 
yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me,  for  I am  meek 
and  lowly  in  heart ; and  ye  shall  find  rest  to  your 
souls.  For  my  yoke  is  easy,  and  my  burden  is 
light,”  Matt  xi.  29,  30 205 


PART  IL 

SERMON  XVI. — The  Lamb  of  God,  the  Great 
Atonement. — “ Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  which 
taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world ! John  i.  29.  . 269 

SERMON  XVII. — “ Messiah  despised  and  rejected 
of  Men. — “ He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men  : a 


CONTENTS. 


9 


Page 


man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief,”  Isa. 
liii.  3 273 

SERMON  XVIII. — Voluntary  Suffering. — “I  gave 
inv  back  to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheeks  to  them 
that  plucked  off  the  hair : I hid  not  my  face  from 
shame  and  spitting,”  Isaiah  1.  6 276 


SERMON  XIX. — Messiah  suffering  and  wounded 
fo •>  us. — ’'Surely  he  hath  borne  our  grief  and  ear- 
th d our  sorrows. — He  was  wounded  forour  trans- 
gressions, he  was  bruised  for  our  iniquities  ; the 
chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him,  and 
with  his  stripes  we  are  healed,”  Isaiah  liii.  4,  5.  279 

SERMON  XX. — Sin  charged  upon  the  Surety. — 
“All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray:  we  have 
turned  every  one  to  his  <Tivn  way,  and  the  Lord 
hath  laid  upon  him  the  iniquity  of  us  all,”  Isaiah 
liii.  6 282 

SERMON  XXI. — Messiah  derided  upon  the  Cross. 

— “ All  they  that  see  me,  laugh  me  to  scorn ; they 
shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  head,  saying,  He 
trusted  in  the  Lord  that  he  would  deliver  him; 
let  him  deliver  him,  seeing  he  delighted  in  him,” 
Psalm  xxii.  7,  8 286 

SERMON  XXII  — Messiah  unpitied  and  without 
Comforter. — “ Reproach  ( rebuke ) hath  broken  my 
heart,  and  I am  full  of  heaviness:  and  I looked 
for  some  to  take  pity,  but  there  was  none;  and 
for  comforters,  but  I found  none,”  Psal.  Ixix.  20.  288 

SERMON  XXIII — JV*o  Sorrow  like  Messiah's  Sor - 
row. — “ Is  it  nothing  to  you,  all  ye  that  pass  by  ? 
Behold,  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto 
my  sorrow,”  Lam.  i.  12 232 

SERMON  XXIV.— Messiah's  Innocence  vindicated. 

— “ He  was  taken  from  prison  and  from  judgment, 
and  who  shall  declare  his  generation  ? For  he 
was  cut  off  out  of  the  land  of  the  living ; for  the 
transgression  of  my  people  was  he  stricken,”  Isa. 


liii.  8 295 

SERMON  XXV. — Messiah  rising  from  the  Dead  — 

“ For  thou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell,  nei- 
ther wilt  thou  suffer  thine  Holy  One  to  see  cor- 
ruption,” Psalm  xvi.  10 298 


SERMON  XXVI. — The  Ascension  of  Messiah  to 
Glory. — “ Lift  up  your  heads,  O ye  gates,  and  be 
ye  lifted  up,  ye  everlasting  doors,  and  the  King 
of  Glory  shall  come  in.  Who  is  this  king  of 
Glory  ? The  Lord  strong  and  mighty,  the  Lord 
mighty  in  battle.  Lift  up  your  heads,  O ye  gates, 
even  lift  up,  ye  everlasting  doors,  and  the  King 
of  Glory  shall  come  in.  Who  is  this  King  of 
Glory?  The  Lord  of  hosts,  he  is  the  King  of 


Glory,”  Psalm  xxiv.  7 — 10 301 

SERMON  XXVII. — Messiah  the  Son  of  God. — “For 
unto  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any  time, 
Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I begotten  thee  ?” 

Heb.  i.  5 304 

SERMON  XXVIII. — Messiah  worshipped  by  An- 
gels.— ‘Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him,” 

Heb.  i.  6 308 


SERMON  XXIX  — Gifts  received  for  the  rebel- 
lious.— “ Thou  hast  ascended  on  high,  thou  hast 
led  captivity  captive:  Thou  hast  received  gifts 
for  men : yea,  for  the  rebellious  also,  that  the 
Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them,”  Psalm 


Ixviii.  18 311 

SERMOIVT  XXX. — The  Publication  of  the  Gospel. 

— “ The  Lord  gave  the  word,  groat  was  the  com- 
pany of  those  that  published  it,”  (or  of  the 
preachers ,)  Psalm  Ixviii.  11 314 


SERMON  XXXI. — The  Gospel  Message,  glad  Tub 
ings. — [As  it  is  written,]  “How  beautiful  are 
the  feet  of  them  that  preach  the  gospel  of  peace, 
and  bring  glad  tidings  of  good  things!”  Rom.  x. 

15 318 

SERMON  XXXII. — The  Progress  of  the  Gospel.— 

Vol.  II.  B 


Page 

“ Their  sound  went  into  all  the  earth,  and  their 
words  unto  the  end  of  the  world,”  Rom.  x.  18.  . 32* 

SERMON  XXXIII. — Opposition  to  Messiah  unrea- 
sonable.— “ Why  do  the  heathen  rage,  and  the 
people  imagine  a vain  thing?  The  kings  of  the 
earth  set  themselves,  and  the  rulers  take  coun- 
sel together,  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his 
Anointed ; saying,  Let  us  break  their  bands  asun- 
der, and  cast  away  their  cords  from  us,”  Psalm  ii. 
1—3.  . 324 

SERMON  XXXIV. — Opposition  to  Messiah  in  vain. 
—“He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh: 
the  Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision,”  Psalm  ii.  4.  328 

SERMON  XXXV. — Opposition  to  Messiah  ruin- 
ous.— “ Thou  slialt  break  them  with  a rod  of  iron, 
thou  shalt  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a potter’s  ves- 


sel,” Psalm  ii.  9 331 

SERMON  XXXVI. — The  Lord  reigneth. — “Halle- 
lujah, for  the  Lord  God  Omnipotent  reigneth,” 
Rev.  xix.  6 334 

SERMON  XXXVII. — The  Extent  of  Messiah's  Spi- 
ritual Kingdom. — “The  kingdoms  of  this  world 
are  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  of  his 
Christ,  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever,”  Rev. 
xi.  15 337 


SERMON  XXXVIII.— King  of  Kings  and  Lord  of 
Lords— [And  he  hath  on  his  vesture,  and  on  his 
thigh,  a name  written,  [ “ King  of  Kings  and  Lord 
of  Lords,”  Rev.  xix.  16 34J 


PART  III. 

SERMON  XXXIX. — Job's  Faith  and  Expectation. 

— “I  know  that  my  Redeemer liveth,  and  that  he 
shall  stand  in  the  latter  day  upon  the  earth.  And 
though  after  my  skin,  worms  destroy  this  body, 
yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I see  God,”  Job  xix.  25,  26.  344 

SERMON  XL. — The  Lord  is  risen  indeed. — “But 
now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become 
the  first  fruits  of  them  that  slept,”  1 Cor.  xv.  20.  348 

3%ERMON  XLI. — Death  by  Adam , Life  by  Christ. — 

“ For  since  by  man  came  death,  by  man  came 
also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  For  as  in  Adam 
all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive,” 

1 Cor.  xv.  21,22 351 

SERMON  XLII. — The  General  Resurrection. — 

“ Behold,  I show  you  a mystery.  We  shall  not 
all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  changed.  In  a mo- 
ment, in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye, at  the  last  trump, 
for  the  trumpet  shall  sound,  and  the  dead  shall  be 
raised  incorruptible,  and  we  shall  be  changed.  For 
this  corruptible  must  put  on  incorruption,  and 
this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality,”  1 Cor.  xv. 

51,  52 354 

SERMON  XLIII. — Death  swallowed  up  in  Victory. 

— “ Then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  saying  that 
is  written,  Death  is  swallowed  up  in  victory!” 

1 Cor.  xv.  54 358 

SERMON  XLIV. — Triumph  over  Death  and  the 
Grave. — “ O death,  where  is  thy  sting  ? O grave, 
where  is  thy  victory  ? The  sting  of  death  is  sin  ; 
and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law.  But  thanks 
be  to  God,  which  giveth  us  the  victory,  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,”  1 Cor.  xv.  55 — 57.  . . * . 361 

SERMON  XLV. — Divine  Support  and  Protection. 

— “ What  shall  we  say  then  to  these  things  ? If 
God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us?”  Rom. 
viii.  31 365 

SERMON  XLVT. — Accusers  challenged. — “ Who 
shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of  God’s  elect? 

It  is  God  that  justifieth,”  Rom.  viii.  33 308 

SERMON  XLV  II. — The  Intercession  of  Christ. — 

“ Who  is  he  that  condemneth?  It  is  Christ  that 
died,  yea,  rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who  is  even 


10 


CONTENTS. 


at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketli  inter- 
cession for  us,”  Rom.  viii.  34 372 

SERMON  XLVIII. — The  Song  of  the  Redeemed.— 
“Thou— hast  redeemed  us  to  God,  by  thy  blood” 

[out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people, 
and  nation,]  Rev.  v.  9 376 


SERMON  XLIX. — The  Chorus  of  Angels.— Wor- 
thy is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  to  receive  power, 
and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  ho- 
nour, and  glory,  and  blessing !”  Rev.  v.  12. . . . 381 

SERMON  L.— 7%e  Universal  Chorus. — [And  every 
creature  which  is  in  heaven,  and  on  the  earth, 
and  under  the  earth,  and  such  as  are  in  the  sea, 
and  all  that  are  in  them,  heard  I,  saying,]  “ Bless- 
ing, and  honour,  and  glory,  and  power,  be  unto 
him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the 
Lamb  for  ever  and  ever,”  Rev.  v.  13 385 


OCCASIONAL  SERMONS. 


7 Vie  Subject  and  Temper  of  the  Gospel  Ministry. — 


Ephesians  iv.  15 300 

The  Guilt  and  Danger  of  such  a Nation  as  this. — 

“ Shall  I not  visit  for  these  things,  saith  the 
Lord  ? And  shall  not  my  soul  be  avenged  on  such 
a nation  as  this  ?”  Jeremiah  v.  29 393 


On  the  Death  of  Dr.  Conyers.—"  So  being  affection- 
ately desirous  of  you,  we  were  willing  to  have 
imparted  unto  you,  not  the  gospel  of  God  only 
but  also  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were  dear  unto 
us,”  1 Thess.  ii.  8.  . 402 


Pogt 

The  Best  Wisdom.—"  He  that  winneth  souls  is 
wise,”  Proverbs  xi.  30 409 

The  Great  Advent. — “ For  the  Lord  himself  shall 
descend  from  heaven  with  a shout,  with  the  voice 
of  the  archangel,  and  with  the  trump  of  God : and 
the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first:  then  we  which 
are  alive  and  remain,  shall  be  caught  up  together 
in  the  clouds,  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air ; and  so 
shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord,”  1 Thess.  iv.  16, 17.  419 

The  imminent  Danger , and  only  sure  Resource  of 
this  Nation. — “Who  can  tell  if  God  will  turn 
and  repent,  and  turn  away  from  his  fierce  anger, 
that  we  perish  not?”  Jonah  iii.  9 426 

Motives  to  Humiliation  and  Praise. — “How  shall  I 
give  thee  up,  Ephraim?  How  shall  1 deliver 
thee  Israel  ? How  shall  1 make  thee  as  Admah  ? 

How  shall  I set  thee  as  Zeboim?  My  heart  is 
turned  within  me,  my  repentings  are  kindled  to 
gether.  I will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  mine 
anger,  I will  not  return  to  destroy  Ephraim ; for 
I am  God,  and  not  man,  the  Holy  One  in  the 
midst  of  thee,”  Hosea  xi.  8, 9 433 


TRACTS. 


Apologia ; or  four  Letters  to  a Minister,  &e.  . . . 442 

A Plan  of  Academical  Preparation  for  the  Ministry,  460 

A Monument  to  the  Lord’s  Goodness,  and  to  the 
Memory  of  Miss  Eliza  Cunningham.  .....  413 


A 


REVIEW 

OF 


ECCLESIASTICAL,  HISTORY. 


INTRODUCTION. 

I^ough  the  actions  of  mankind  appear  greatly  diversified  from  the  influence 
of  particular  circumstances,  human  nature  has  been  always  the  same.  The  his- 
tory of  all  ages  and  countries  uniformly  confirms  the  scriptural  doctrine,  that  man 
is  a depraved  and  fallen  creature  ; and  that  some  selfish  temper,  ambition,  avarice, 
pride,  revenge,  and  the  like,  are,  in  effect,  the  main  springs  and  motives  of  his 
conduct,  unless  so  far,  and  in  such  instances,  as  they  are  corrected  and  subdued 
by  divine  grace. 

Therefore,  when  St.  Paul  speaks  of  the  most  dreadful  degree  of  impiety  that 
can  be  imagined,  enmity  against  God,  he  does  not  consider  it  as  the  fault  of  the 
particular  time  in  which  he  lived,  or  impute  it  singly  either  to  the  idolatrous 
Heathens,  or  the  obstinate  Jews,  but  he  affirms  universally,  that  the  carnal  mind 
(to  Qgov/jpx  r yjg  trstgjcog,  ) the  wisdom,  the  most  spiritual  and  discerning  faculty  of  man, 
is  enmity  against  God.  Men  differ  considerably  in  capacity,  rank,  education,  and 
attainments  ; they  jar  in  sentiments  and  interests  ; they  mutually  revile,  hate,  and 
destroy  one  another : but  in  this  point  they  all  agree  ; whether  Greeks  or  Barba- 
rians, wise  or  ignorant,  bond  or  free,  the  bent  and  disposition  of  their  minds,  while 
unrenewed  by  grace,  is  black  and  implacable  enmity  against  the  blessed  God. 

To  those  who  acknowledge  the  authority  of  scripture,  St.  Paul’s  express  asser- 
tion should  be  sufficient  proof  of  this  point,  if  we  could  produce  no  other;  but  be- 
sides the  many  other  passages  in  the  book  of  God  to  the  same  effect,  it  may  be 
demonstrated  by  the  most  obvious  proofs,  experience  and  matter  of  fact.  The 
history  of  the  Old  Testament  from  the  death  of  Abel,  the  nature  and  grounds  of 
the  opposition  which  Jesus  and  his  apostles  met  with,  and  the  treatment  of  the 
most  exemplary  Christians  that  have  lived  in  succeeding  ages,  are  indisputable 
evidences  of  this  offensive  truth  ; for  what  can  be  stronger  marks  of  enmity  against 
God,  than  to  despise  his  word,  to  scorn  his  favour,  to  oppose  his  will,  to  caress  his 
enemies,  and  to  insult  and  abuse  his  servants,  for  no  other  offence  than  their  at- 
tachment to  his  service  1 

But  when,  from  these  premises,  the  apostle  infers,  “ so  then  they  that  are  in  the 
flesh  cannot  please  God,”  though  the  consequence  is  evident,  it  may  seem  at  first, 
view  unnecessary ; for  can  it  be  supposed  that  the  carnal  mind,  which  breathes  a 
spirit  of  defiance  and  enmity  against  God,  will  have  any  desire  or  thought  of 
pleasing  him  ? Yet  thus  it  is. — The  carnal  mind  is  not  only  desperately  wicked, 
but  deeply  deceitful ; it  deceives  others,  and  often  it  deceives  itself.  As  the  ma- 
gicians of  Egypt,  though  enemies  to  Moses,  attempted  to  counterfeit  his  miracles, 
and  as  Balaam  could  say,  “ The  Lord  my  God,”  though  he  was  wickedly  en- 
gaged against  the  Lord’s  people ; so  it  has  been  usual  with  many  who  have  hated 


12 


INTRODUCTION. 


and  denied  the  power  of  godliness,  to  value  themselves  highly  upon  the  form  of  it, 
and  while  they  are  alienated  from  the  life  of  God,  through  the  ignorance  that  is  in 
them,  they  affect  to  be  thought  his  best  servants,  and  make  the  most  confident 
claims  to  his  favour. 

The  pure  religion  of  Jesus  cannot  but  be  despised  and  rejected  by  the  carnal 
mind : the  natural  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  God ; they  are  beyond  his 
sphere  ; he  does  not  apprehend  them,  and  therefore  cannot  approve  them  ; nay,  he 
is  averse  and  unwilling  to  meddle  with  them,  and  therefore  it  is  impossible  he 
should  understand  them.  But  the  fiercest  opposition  arises  from  the  complication 
of  presumption  and  hypocrisy  we  have  spoken  of;  when  men,  destitute  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  from  a vain  conceit  of  their  own  wisdom  and  goodness,  arrogate  to 
themselves  an  authoritative  decision  in  religious  concerns,  and  would  reduce  the 
judgment  and  practice  of  others  to  their  own  corrupt  standard. 

Such  was  eminently  the  character  of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  who,  with  un- 
wearied malice,  persecuted  our  Lord  to  the  death  of  the  cross  ; and  he  forewarned 
his  disciples  to  expect  the  like  treatment;  he  sent  them  forth  as  lambs  in  the 
midst  of  wolves,  and  assured  them  that  their  attachment  to  him  would  draw  on 
them  the  hatred  of  mankind,  so  far  as  even  to  deprive  them  of  the  rights  of  civil 
society,  and  the  pleasures  of  relative  life.  A man’s  foes  shall  be  those  of  his  own 
household  : his  parents  shall  forget  their  affection,  his  children  their  duty,  his  ser- 
vants their  reverence,  and  even  the  wife  of  his  bosom  shall  despise  him,  when  he 
boldly  professes  the  gospel ; nay,  the  most  amiable  qualities,  joined  to  the  most 
endearing  connections,  are  not  sufficient  wholly  to  suppress  the  enmity  which  fills 
the  hearts  of  the  unregenerate,  against  those  in  whom  they  discern  the  image  of 
Christ ; and  that  this  enmity  would  sometimes  assume  a religious  form,  and  under 
that  appearance,  proceed  to  the  greatest  extremities,  he  informed  them,  in  another 
place : “ The  time  cometh,  that  whosoever  killeth  you,  will  think  that  he  doeth 
God  service.” 

If  a faith  and  practice,  agreeable  to  the  New  Testament,  were  not  always  at- 
tended with  a measure  of  this  opposition,  we  should  want  one  considerable  evidence 
that  the  gospel  is  true ; and  infidels  would  be  possessed  of  one  solid  objection 
against  it,  namely,  That  our  Lord  was  mistaken  when  he  predicted  the  reception 
his  doctrine  would  meet  with.  But  the  scriptures  cannot  be  broken  : the  word  of 
Christ  is  fulfilling  every  day,  and  especially  in  this  particular.  Many,  perhaps,  will 
be  ready  to  object  here,  and  to  maintain,  that,  in  our  nation,  and  at  this  present  time, 
the  charge  is  invidious  and  false.  It  will  be  pleaded,  that  when  Christianity  had  to 
struggle  with  Jews  and  Pagans,  it  could  not  but  be  opposed ; but  that  with  us, 
under  the  guard  of  a national  establishment,  an  opposition  to  Christianity  (unless  by 
the  feeble  efforts  of  Deists  and  Libertines)  is  impracticable  and  inconsistent  by  the 
very  terms  ; and  that  if  the  delusions  of  a few  visionary  enthusiasts  are  treated  with 
that  contempt  and  indignation  which  they  justly  deserve,  this  should  not  be  styled 
an  opposition  to  Christianity,  but  rather  a warrantable  concern  for  its  vindication, 
especially  as  no  coercive  methods  are  used ; for  though  some  attempts  have  been 
made  to  restrain  the  leaders  from  poisoning  the  minds  of  the  people,  yet  no  person 
is  injured,  either  in  life  or  property,  on  account  of  his  opinions,  how  extravagant 
soever  they  may  be. 

To  this  extenuation  it  may  be  replied, 

1.  I do  not  assert  that  persecution  and  reproach  must  necessarily  attend  the 
name  of  a Christian,  or  that  it  is  not  possible  to  make  a high  profession  of  religion 
under  that  name,  and  at  the  same  time  preserve  or  acquire  a large  share  of  the 
honours,  riches,  and  friendship  of  the  world ; but  I maintain  with  the  apostle,  that 
“ all  who  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  shall  suffer  persecution.”  The  distinc- 
tion he  makes  in  these  words,  is  observable  : — So  much  godliness  as  may  be  pro- 
fessed without  a peculiar  relation  to  Jesus,  the  world  will  bear;  sobriety  and 
benevolence  they  will  applaud ; nay,  even  prayers,  fastings,  and  other  external 
acts,  may  be  commended  : — but,  to  live  go:lly  in  Christ  Jesus, — so  as  to  profess  our 
whole  dependence  upon  his  free  salvation  ; to  seek  all  our  strength  from  his  grace  • 


INTRODUCTION. 


13 


to  do  all  expressly  for  his  sake ; and  then  to  renounce  all  trust  or  confidence  in 
what  we  have  done,  and  to  make  mention  of  his  righteousness  only : — this  the 
world  cannot  bear ; this  will  surely  provoke  the  contempt  or  hatred  of  all  who 
have  not  the  same  spirit,  whether  accounted  Christians  or  Infidels,  Papists  or  Pro- 
testants. That  nothing  less  than  what  I have  mentioned  can  be  the  import  of  liv- 
ing godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  I shall  in  due  time  prove  by  a cloud  of  witnesses. 

2.  I acknowledge,  with  thankfulness  to  God,  and  to  those  whom  he  has  placed 
in  just  authority  over  us,  that  the  interposition  of  stripes,  imprisonment,  tortures, 
ind  death,  in  matters  pertaining  to  conscience,  has  no  place  in  our  happy  land  : 

jacet  (semperque  jaceat!) 

Divini  imago  zeli  et  pestis. 

The  spirit  of  persecution  is  repressed  by  the  wisdom  of  our  laws  and  the  clemency 
of  our  princes,  but  we  have  no  ground  to  believe  it  is  extinct,  or  rather  we  have 
sufficient  evidence  of  the  contrary.  Not  to  mention  some  recent  instances  in 
which  power  has  been  strained  to  its  full  extent,  it  is  notorious  that  scorn,  invective, 
md  calumny  (which  can  act  unrestrained  by  human  laws,)  are  employed  for  the 
same  ends  and  purposes,  which,  in  other  countries,  are  more  speedily  effected  by 
mathemas  and  sanguinary  edicts. 

3.  The  opposition  I am  speaking  of  is  not  primarily  between  men  and  men,  sim- 
ply considered,  but  between  the  spirit  of  the  world  and  the  Spirit  that  is  of  God, 
and  therefore  the  manifestation  of  each  will  be  in  mutual  proportion.  The  Lord 
Jesus  himself  sustained  the  fiercest  contradiction  of  sinners,  because  his  character 
was  superlatively  excellent:  his  apostles,  though  far  inferior  to  their  Lord,  ex- 
pressed so  much  of  his  temper  and  conduct,  that  they  were  counted  worthy  to  suf- 
fer shame  in  the  next  degree  to  him : As  he  was,  so  were  they  in  the  world.  St. 
Paul,  who  laboured  more  abundantly  than  his  brethren,  experienced  a larger  share 
of  dishonour  and  ill  treatment.  Though  educated  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  and  no 
stranger  to  Grecian  literature,  when  he  showed  himself  determined  to  know  nothing 
but  Jesus,  and  to  glory  only  in  his  cross,  he  was  accounted  by  Jew  and  Gentile,  as 
the  filth  and  off-scouring  of  all  things  ; and  thus  it  will  hold  universally.  If,  there- 
fore, any  who  sincerely  espouse  the  gospel,  meet  w ith  little  disturbance  or  censure^ 
it  is  not  because  the  carnal  mind  is  better  reconciled  to  the  truth  than  formerly  in 
the  apostle’s  days,  but  because  our  zeal,  faith,  and  activity  are  so  much  inferior  to 
theirs,  and  our  conduct  more  conformable  to  the  prevailing  taste  around  us. 

4.  I confess,  that  (as  our  Saviour  has  taught  us  to  expect  by  the  parable  of  the 
tares)  revivals  of  religion  have  been  generally  attended  with  some  incidental 
offences,  and  counterfeited  by  many  false  appearances.  It  has  been  so  in  times 
past ; it  is  so  at  present;  and  we  are  far  from  justifying  every  thing,  and  in  every 
degree,  what  the  world  is  ready  to  condemn.  However,  we  cannot  but  complain 
of  a want  of  candour  and  ingenuousness  in  this  respect  also.  Many  who  bring  loud 
charges  against  what  is  irregular  and  blameable,  are  evidently  glad  of  the  oppor- 
tunity to  prejudice  and  alarm  weak  minds.  They  do  not  confine  their  reproof  to 
what  is  erroneous  and  unscriptural,  but  endeavour,  by  ambiguous  expressions,  in- 
vidious names,  and  indiscriminate  censures,  to  obscure  the  state  of  the  question, 
and  to  brand  error  and  truth  with  the  same  mark  of  infamy : they  either  cannot,  or 
will  not  distinguish  between  evangelical  principles  and  the  abuse  of  them ; and 
when  the  distinction  has  been  pointed  out  to  them  again  and  again,  they  refuse  at- 
tention, and  repeat  the  same  stale  misrepresentations  which  they  know  have  been 
often  refuted : they  will  not  allow  a grain  for  infirmity  or  inadvertence  in  those 
whom  they  oppose,  while  they  demand  the  largest  concessions  for  themselves  and 
their  adherents  : they  expect  strict  demonstrations  from  others,  while,  in  their  own 
cause,  they  are  not  ashamed  to  produce  slanders  for  proofs,  and  jests  for  argu- 
ments : — tnus  they  triumph  without  a victory,  and  decide  ex  cathedra , without  so 
much  as  entering  upon  the  merits  of  the  cause.  These  methods,  however  success- 
ful, are  not  new  inventions : by  such  arts  and  arms  as  these,  Christianity  was  op- 


14 


INTRODUCTION. 


posed  from  its  first  appearance : In  this  way  Lucian,  Celsus,  and  Julian  employed 
their  talents,  and  made  themselves  famous  to  future  times. 

I judge  it  therefore  a seasonable  undertaking  to  attempt  the  apology  of  Evan- 
gelical Christianity,  and  to  obviate  the  sophistry  and  calumnies  which  have  been 
published  against  it ; and  this  I hope  to  do,  without  engaging  in  any  controversy, 
by  a plain  enumeration  of  facts.  I propose  to  give  a brief  delineation  of  Eccle- 
siastical History  from  our  Saviour’s  time ; and,  that  the  reader  may  know  what  to 
expect,  I shall  here  subjoin  the  principal  points  I have  in  view. 

1.  I shall  consider  the  genius  and  characteristic  marks  of  the  gospel  which 
Jesus  taught,  and  show  that,  so  long  as  this  gospel  was  maintained  in  its  purity,  it 
neither  admitted  or  found  a neutrality,  but  that  all  who  were  not  partakers  of  its 
benefits  were  exceedingly  enraged  against  it.  I shall  make  it  appear,  that  the 
same  objections  which  have  attended  any  reformations  in  later  ages,  were  equally 
strong  against  Christianity,  as  taught  by  Christ  and  his  first  disciples  ; and  that  the 
offences  and  irregularities  which  have  been  known  to  attend  a revival  of  evangeli- 
cal doctrine  in  our  time,  were  prevalent,  to  a considerable  degree,  under  the 
preaching  and  inspection  of  the  apostles. 

2.  When  I come  to  the  lives  and  conduct  of  those  called  the  Fathers , whose 
names  are  held  in  ignorant  admiration  by  thousands,  I shall  prove,  on  the  one 
hand,  that  the  doctrines  for  which  the  fathers  were  truly  commendable,  and  by 
which  many  were  enabled  to  seal  their  profession  with  their  blood,  were  the  same 
which  are  now  branded  with  the  epithets  of  absurd  and  enthusiastic  ; and,  on  the 
other  hand,  that  the  fathers,  however  venerable,  were  men  like  ourselves,  subject 
to  mistakes  and  infirmities,  and  began  very  soon  to  depart  from  the  purity  and  sim- 
plicity of  the  gospel. 

3.  The  progress  of  our  history  will  manifest  that  the  accession  of  wealth  and 
power  to  the  Christian  profession  proved  greatly  detrimental  to  the  faith,  discipline, 
and  manners  of  the  churches ; so  that,  after  the  emperors  publicly  espoused  the 
cause  of  Christ,  the  power  and  beauty  of  the  gospel  was  gradually  eclipsed.  Yet, 
in  the  most  degenerate  times,  God  had  a spiritual  people,  who,  though  partaking 
in  some  degree  of  the  general  declension,  retained  so  much  of  the  primitive  truth 
and  practice  as  to  incur  the  hatred  and  persecution  of  (what  is  called)  the  Chris- 
tian world. 

4.  I shall  treat  of  the  means  and  instruments  by  which  the  Lord  supported  and 
revived  his  declining  cause  during  several  centuries: — 1.  In  the  valleys  of  Pied- 
mont, Provence,  &c.  by  Berangarius,  Waldo,  and  others.  2.  In  England,  by 
WicklifF  and  his  followers.  3.  In  Bohemia,  by  John  IIuss  and  Jerome  of  Prague. 
4.  In  Germany,  by  Luther.  Here  I shall  take  occasion  to  observe,  (1.)  That  these 
successive  reformations  were  all  projected  and  executed,  so  far  as  God  was  pleased 
to  give  success,  upon  the  same  principles  which  are  now  so  industriously  exploded 
by  many  who  would  be  thought  champions  of  the  Protestant  faith ; and  (2.)  That 
Luther’s  reformation,  the  most  extensive  and  successful,  and  of  which  we  have  the 
best  accounts,  was  soon  followed  by  errors,  heresies,  and  a numerous  train  of  abo- 
minations (as  had  been  the  case  with  primitive  Christianity)  which  the  Romanists, 
in  imitation  of  their  Pagan  predecessors,  joyfully  laid  to  the  charge  of  the  doctrine 
which  Luther  preached. 

5.  As  it  was  not  long  before  the  reformed  countries  needed  a second  reforma- 
mation,  I shall  give  some  account  of  the  endeavours  of  many  good  men  in  Germa- 
ny and  other  places,  in  this  view  ; their  principles,  success,  and  the  treatment  they 
met  with  from  those  who  ought  to  have  supported  them,  and  then  I shall  briefly 
take  notice  of  the  similar  occurrences  in  our  own  country,  from  the  end  of  Queen 
Mary’s  reign  to  the  present  time,  together  with  what  has  been  most  remarkable  in 
the  history  of  the  gospel  in  our  American  settlements. 

6.  I shall  occasionally  consider  the  character  and  conduct  of  those  persons  whom 
God  has  honoured  with  eminent  usefulness,  in  the  different  periods  of  his  church, 
point  out  the  defects  of  their  plan,  and  the  mistakes  which,  through  infirmity,  in 
some  degree  blemished  their  undertakings. 


INTRODUCTION. 


15 


7.  Finally,  to  make  it  evident  that  the  spiritual  worshippers  of  God  have  al- 
ways been  a sect  every  where  spoken  against,  I shall  enumerate  some  of  the  re- 
proachful names  that  have  been  successively  fixed  on  them,  as  the  mark  of  gene- 
ral contempt  and  abhorrence,  such  as  Patarienes,  Lollards,  Huguenots,  Gospellers, 
Puritans,  Pietists,  <Scc. 

These  particulars  will  be  illustrated  in  the  course  of  our  history,  not  exactly  in 
the  order  here  laid  down,  but  as  the  series  of  the  narration  shall  require  or  suggest. 

I shall  not  confine  myself  to  a nice  uniformity  of  method,  or  a dry  detail  of  facts, 
but  shall  endeavour  to  illustrate  and  apply  the  several  incidents  to  the  use  and 
edification  of  common  readers,  and  with  a view  to  my  primary  design,  which  is, 
(as  I have  already  said)  to  vindicate  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation,  or  in  other 
words,  the  main  doctrines  taught  in  the  Articles  and  Homilies  of  the  Church  of 
England,  from  those  unjust  and  disingenuous  invectives,  which  are  every  day  cast 
upon  them,  by  not  a few  who  owe  all  their  distinction  and  authority  to  their  hav- 
ing solemnly  engaged  to  defend  them. 

Whoever  considers  the  intricacy  and  variety  of  ecclesiastical  history,  and  that 
the  best  collections  of  that  sort  have  swelled  to  a number  of  folios,  will  not  expect 
to  find  every  thing  that  might  have  deserved  a place.  The  life  of  man  would 
hardly  suffice  to  furnish  a work  of  this  sort  in  its  just  extent. 

I must  content  myself  with  selecting  a competent  number  of  the  most  authentic 
and  interesting  topics,  from  the  voluminous  materials  already  published,  but  which, 
cither  from  the  size  or  scarceness  of  the  books,  or  the  languages  in  which  they  are 
written,  are  little  more  known  to  the  generality  of  readers,  than  if  they  had  never 
appeared  in  print. 

I shall  avoid,  as  far  as  possible,  interfering  in  the  controversies  on  church- 
government  ; reserving  to  myself,  and  willingly  leaving  to  others,  the  rights  of 
private  judgment,  the  just  privilege  of  Christians,  Protestants,  and  Britons. 

It  must  be  confessed,  that  the  bulk  of  ecclesiastical  history,  as  it  is  generally 
understood,  is  little  more  than  a history  of  what  the  passions,  prejudices,  and  inter- 
ested views  of  men,  have  prompted  them  to  perpetrate,  under  the  pretext  and  sanc- 
tion of  religion.  Enough  has  been  written  in  this  way ; curiosity,  nay,  malice 
itself,  need  desire  no  more.  I propose  to  open  a more  pleasing  prospect ; to  point 
out,  by  a long  succession  of  witnesses,  the  native  tendency,  and  proper  influence 
of  the  religion  of  Jesus ; to  produce  the  concurring  suffrage  of  different  ages,  peo- 
ple, and  languages,  in  favour  of  what  the  wisdom  of  the  world  rejects  and  reviles  ; 
to  bring  unanswerable  proofs,  that  the  doctrine  of  grace  is  a doctrine  according  to 
godliness  ; that  the  constraining  love  of  Christ  is  the  most  powerful  motive  to  obe- 
dience ; that  it  is  the  property  of  true  faith  to  overcome  the  world ; and  that  the 
true  church  and  people  of  Christ  have  endured  his  cross  in  every  age.  The 
enemy  has  thrust  sore  at  them  that  they  might  fall,  but  the  Lord  has  been  their 
refuge  and  support;  they  are  placed  upon  a rock  that  cannot  be  shaken;  they  are 
kept  (-p^oueo^s.o.,)  guarded  and  garrisoned  by  the  power  of  God ; and  therefore  the 
gates  of  hell  have  not,  cannot,  shall  not,  prevail  against  them. 

Per  damna,  per  caedes,  ab  ipso 
Ducit  opes  animumque  ferro. 

Olncy , November , 1769. 


A review  of  Ecclesiastical  History,  upon  the  plan  proposed 
in  this  Introduction,  was  a subject  the  Author  had  very  much  at 
heart ; so  much  so,  that  he  had  begun  to  prepare  materials,  and  en- 
tered some  little  way  upon  it,  several  years  before  his  admission  into 


16 


INTRODUCTION. 


the  ministry.  From  the  extent,  however,  ancl  unforeseen  difficulties 
of  the  undertaking,  as  well  as  from  the  many  interruptions  he  met 
with  in  the  discharge  of  his  professional  duties,  and  the  occasional 
occurrences  of  every  day,  he  had  proceeded  only  the  length  of  the 
two  first  Books,  when  he  relinquished  his  design,  and  afterwards 
laid  it  entirely  aside.  However  much  the  prosecution  of  this  subject 
might  have  been  wished,  either  by  his  friends  or  the  public  at  large, 
it  is  presumed  the  omission  will  be  the  more  readily  excused,  when 
it  is  considered,  that  the  observations  made  with  respect  to  the  first 
century,  seem  to  have  been  originally  intended,  and  with  very  little 
variation  will  be  found,  to  apply  to  every  succeeding  period. 

2 


A 

REVIEW 

OF 


ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY. 


BOOK  I. 

ON  THE  FIRST  PERIOD  OF  CHRISTIANITY. 


CHAPTER  1. 

The  Wisdom  and  Goodness  of  God  conspi- 
cuous in  the  Period  assigned  for  Christ's 
Appearance.  Illustrated  by  a Summary 
View  of  the  State  of  Mankind , before  and 
at  the  time  of  his  birth . 

When  the  first  man  had  fallen  from  the 
happiness  and  perfection  of  his  creation,  had 
rendered  himself  corrupt  and  miserable,  and 
was  only  capable  of  transmitting-  depravity 
and  misery  to  his  posterity,  the  goodness  of 
God  immediately  revealed  a remedy  adequate 
to  his  distressed  situation.  The  Lord  Jesus 
was  promised  under  the  character  of  the  seed 
of  the  woman,  as  the  great  deliverer,  who 
should  repair  the  breach  of  sin,  and  retrieve 
the  ruin  of  human  nature.  From  that  hour 
he  became  the  object  of  faith,  and  the  author 
of  salvation,  to  every  soul  that  aspired  to 
communion  with  God,  and  earnestly  sought 
deliverance  from  guilt  and  wrath.  This  dis- 
covery of  a Saviour  was,  in  the  first  ages, 
veiled  under  types  and  shadows ; and,  like 
the  advancing  day,  became  brighter  and 
brighter,  as  the  time  of  his  manifestation 
drew  near:  but  it  was  always  sufficient  to 
sustain  the  hopes,  and  to  purify  the  hearts  of 
She  true  worshippers  of  God.  That  the  patri- 
archs and  prophets  of  old  were,  in  this  sense, 
Christians,  that  is  to  say,  that  their  joy  and 
trust  centred  in  the  promised  Messiah,  and 
that  the  faith,  whereby  they  overcame  the 
world,  was  the  same  faith  in  the  same  Lord 
with  ours,  is  unanswerably  proved  by  St.  Paul 
in  several  passages  (Rom.  iv. ; Gal.  iii.  16, 
17;)  particularly  in  Hob.  xi.,  where  he  at 
large  insists  on  the  characters  of  Abel,  Enoch, 
VOL.  II.  C 


Noah,  Abraham,  and  Moses,  to  illustrate  this 
very  point. 

At  length,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  as  the 
apostle  speaks,  (Gal.  iv.  4,)  the  time  marked 
out  by  the  ancient  prophecies,  the  time  to 
which  all  the  previous  dispensations  of  Divine 
Providence  had  an  express  reference  and  sub- 
ordination, and  which  was  peculiarly  suited 
to  place  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God,  and  the 
truths  of  divine  revelation,  in  the  clearest 
light;  the  long-expected  Messiah  appeared 
as  the  surety  and  Saviour  of  sinners,  to  ac- 
complish the  great  work  of  redemption.  For 
these  purposes,  he  was  born  of  a virgin  of 
the  family  of  David,  at  the  town  of  Bethle- 
hem, as  the  prophets  had  foretold.  This  great 
event  took  place  in  the  twenty-seventh  year 
of  the  reign  of  Augustus  Caesar,  computing 
from  the  battle  of  Actium  ; and,  according  to 
the  most  received  authorities,*  almost  1920 
years  from  the  calling  of  Abraham,  and  about 
4000  from  the  creation. 

The  pride  and  vanity  of  man,  which  prompt 
him  to  cavil  with  his  Maker,  and  to  dispute 
when  he  ought  to  obey,  have  often  objected 
to  the  expedience  and  propriety  of  this  ap- 
pointment. It  has  been  asked,  If  Christ’s 
appearance  was  so  absolutely  necessary,  why 
was  it  so  long  deferred  1 Or,  if  mankind  could 
do  without  him  for  so  many  thousand  years, 
why  not  longer,  or  for  ever?  In  attempting 
a solution  of  this  difficulty,  some  well-mean- 
ing persons,  from  a too  earnest  desire  to 
render  the  counsels  of  God  more  acceptable 
to  the  narrow  apprehensions  of  unsanctified 
reason,  have  given  up  the  ground  they  ought 
to  have  maintained,  and  made  such  conces- 


* Bossuet,  Univ.  Hist.  Prideaux,  Connect. 

17 


19 


STATE  OF  MANKIND 


siona,  as  (if  extended  to  their  just  conse- 
quence) would  amount  to  all  that  the  most 
hardened  infidel  can  desire.  The  most  direct 
and  proper  answer  is  suggested  by  St.  Paul 
(Rom.  ix.  20,)  on  a similar  occasion,  Who 
art  thou,  O man,  that  repliest  against  God  1* * * § 
That  the  will  and  wisdom  of  the  Creator 
should  direct  and  limit  the  inquiries  of  his 
rational  creatures,  is  a principle  highly  con- 
sonant to  right  reason  itself.  And  there  can 
hardly  be  a stronger  proof  of  human  depra- 
vity, than  that  this  argument  is  so  generally 
esteemed  inconclusive.  But  waving  this,  a 
sufficient  answer  may  be  made  from  the  pre- 
mises already  advanced. 

God  was  not  a debtor  to  sinful  men.  He 
might  have  left  them  all  to  perish,  as  he  left 
the  sinning  angels,  without  the  least  im- 
peachment of  his  goodness ; but  his  mercy 
interposed,  and  he  spared  not  his  own  Son, 
that  sinners  might  be  saved  in  a way  con- 
sistent with  his  perfections.  But  though,  in 
compassion  to  us,  he  provided  the  means  of 
salvation,  we  cannot  wonder  that,  in  justice 
to  himself,  he  laid  the  plan  in  such  a manner 
as  might  most  clearly  illustrate  the  riches  of 
his  own  grace,  and  most  effectually  humble 
and  silence  the  pardoned  offenders,  to  prevent 
their  boasting  and  trusting  in  themselves, 
and  to  give  them  the  most  affecting  views 
of  his  unmerited  goodness.  We  may  there- 
fore humbly  conceive  one  reason  why  Christ 
was  no  sooner  manifested  in  the  flesh,  to  have 
been,  that  the  nature,  effects,  and  inveteracy 
of  sin,  might  be  more  evidently  known,  and 
the  insufficiency  of  every  other  means  of 
relief  demonstrated  by  the  universal  expe- 
rience of  many  ages. 

What  is  the  history  of  mankind  but  a dif- 
fusive exemplification  of  the  scripture-doc- 
trines concerning  the  dreadful  nature  and 
effects  of  sin,  and  the  desperate  wickedness 
of  the  heart  of  man  ? W e are  accustomed 
from  our  infancy  to  call  evil  good  and  good 
evil.  We  acquire  an  earl)7  prejudice  in  favour 
of  heroes,  conquerors,  and  philosophers.  But 
if  we  consider  the  facts  recorded  in  the  annals 
of  antiquity,  divested  from  the  false  glare  and 
studied  ornaments  with  which  the  vanity  of 
writers  has  disguised  them,  they  will  afford 
but  a dark  and  melancholy  review.  The  spi- 
rit of  the  first-born  Cain  appears  to  have  in- 
fluenced the  whole  human  race.  The  peace 
of  nations,  cities,  and  families  has  been  con- 
tinually disturbed  by  the  bitter  effects  of  am- 
bition, avarice,  revenge,  cruelty,  and  lust. 
The  general  know  ledge  of  God  was  soon  lost 


* It  is  observable  in  this  passage,  that  the  apostle  fore- 
*ees  and  states  the  great  objection  which  would  be  made 
to  his  doctrine,  but  does  not  attempt  to  answer  it  any 
farther,  than  by  referring  all  to  the  will  of  him  who 
formed  the  whole  mass,  and  has  a right  to  dispose  of  it. 
Had  succeeding  writers  and  teachers  imitated  his  exam- 
ple, declared  the  plain  truth  in  plain  words,  and  avoid- 
ed vain  and  endless  reasonings,  how  many  offences 
would  have  been  prevented ! 


[book  I. 

out  of  the  world ; and  w hen  his  fear  wus  set 
aside,  the  restraints,  dictated  by  the  interests 
of  civil  society,  wrere  always  too  w eak  to  pre- 
vent the  most  horrid  evils.  In  a word,  the 
character  of  all  ages  and  countries  before  the 
coming  of  Christ  (a  few  excepted,  w’here  the 
light  of  revelation  was  afforded)  is  strongly, 
though  briefly,  drawn  by  St.  Paul : — Foolish 
and  infatuated  to  the  highest  degree,  disobe- 
dient to  the  plainest  dictates  of  nature,  rea- 
son, and  conscience,  enslaved*  to  divers  dis- 
honourable lusts  and  pleasures , living  in 
malice  and  envy , hateful  and  abominable  in 
themselves,  and  incessantly  hating  and  wor- 
rying one  another,  Titus  iii.  3. 

It  wrould  be  more  easy  than  pleasant  to 
make  out  this  charge  by  a long  induction  of 
particulars , and,  without  having  recourse  to 
the  most  savage  and  uncultivated,  the  proof 
might  be  rested  on  the  character  of  the  tw  o 
most  celebrated  and  civilized  nations,  and  at 
the  time  of  their  greatest  refinement,  the 
Greeks  and  the  Romans.  St.  Paul  (Rom.  i. 
21 — 32,)  has  given  us  the  result  of  their 
boasted  improvements  in  arts  and  sciences, 
in  w7ar  and  commerce,  in  philosophy  and  lite- 
rature ; and  he  says  no  more  than  is  abundant- 
ly confirmed  by  their  own  poets  and  histori- 
ans.f  Notwithstanding  the  marks  and  fruits 
of  fine  taste  and  exalted  genius  w7hich  were 
found  amongst  them,  they  were  habitually 
abandoned  to  the  grossest  vices.  Devoted  to 
the  most  stupid  idolatry , they  worshipped  the 
works  of  their  own  hands,  nay,  erected  altars 
to  their  follies  and  passions.  Their  moral 
characters  wore  answerable  to  their  princi- 
ples. Without  natural  affection , they  fre- 
quently exposed  their  helpless  infants  to 
perish.  They  burned  with  lusts,  not  to  be 
named  without  horror,  and  this  not  the 
meaner  sort  only,  or  in  secret,  but  some  of 
their  finest  spirits  and  most  admired  writers^ 
were  sunk  so  low  as  to  glory  in  their  shame, 
and  openly  avow7  themselves  the  disgrace  of 
humanity.  In  their  public  concerns,  not- 
withstanding their  specious  pretences,  they 
wTere  covenant-breakers,  implacable,  unmer- 
ciful, and  unjust.  Guilty  of  the  severest 
oppression,  while  they  boasted  highly  of 
equity  and  moderation,  § as  wras  particularly 
manifested  on  the  destruction  of  Carthage 


* Enslaved.  So  the  original  term  may  be  emphati 
cally  rendered — At  thecontroul  of  various  and  opposite 
passions,  hurried  about  by  them  all  in  their  turns,  and 
incapable  of  resisting  or  refusing  the  motions  of  any. 

f An  affecting  comment  on  this  passage  might  be  col- 
lected from  Horace,  Juvenal,  Sallust,  and  Suetonius. 

{ See  Virgil,  Eclog.  2. 

§ See  Acts  xxvii.  42.  The  soldiers  would  have  killed 
all  the  prisoners,  right  or  wrong,  rather  than  one  of 
their,  should  have  a possibility  of  escaping;  and  in  this, 
without  doubt,  they  consulted  their  own  safety,  and  the 
spirit  of  their  laws.  Why,  then,  were  the  Romans  so 
much  admired?  Could  there  be  a greater  proof  of 
cruelty  and  injustice  found  amongst  the  most  barbarous 
nations,  than  to  leave  prisoners,  who  might  possibly  be 
innocent,  exposed  to  the  wanton  caprice  of  their  keep 
ers? 


AT  THE  INCARNATION. 


19 


CHVP.I.] 


and  Corinth ; two  memorable  instances  of 
the  spirit  of  a government  so  undeservedly 
admired  in  after  times.  And  as  the  Roman 
power,  so  the  Grecian  eloquence,  was  per- 
verted to  the  worst  purposes, — to  palliate 
crimes,  to  consecrate  folly,  and  to  recom- 
mend falsehood  under  the  guise  and  sem- 
blance of  truth. 

Such  was  the  character  of  the  people  re- 
puted the  wisest  and  the  best  of  the  heathens, 
and  particularly  so  at  the  birth  of  Christ, 
when  the  Roman  empire  was  at  the  summit 
of  authority  and  splendour.  A long  expe- 
rience had  shown  the  general  depravity  to  be 
not  only  inveterate,  but  incurable.  For 
during  several  preceding  ages,  a reformation 
had  been  desired  and  attempted.  The  prin- 
cipal leaders  in  this  commendable  design 
were  called  philosophers,  and  many  of  their 
writings  are  still  extant.  It  must  be  ac- 
knowledged that  some  of  them  had  a faint 
view  of  several  important  truths ; but  as  they 
neither  knew  the  cause  and  extent  of  the 
disorder,  nor  the  only  effectual  remedy,  they 
met  with  little  success.  Their  schemes  were 
various,  inconsistent,  and  even  opposite,  and 
each  party  more  successful  in  opposing  the 
faldacy  of  other  sects  than  in  maintaining 
their  own.  Those  who  came  nearest  the 
truth,  and  were  in  earnest  to  promote  it,  were 
very  few.  Even  these  were  ignorant  of  some 
things  absolutely  necessary  to  the  attainment 
of  the  desired  end.  The  best  of  them  were 
restrained  by  the  fear  of  men  and  a regard 
to  established  customs.  What  they  could 
and  did  propound,  they  had  no  sufficient 
authority  or  influence  to  impress  upon  the 
consciences  of  men.  And  if,  in  a few  instan- 
ces, they  seemed  to  succeed,  the  advantage 
was  only  imaginary.  Where  they  prevailed 
on  any  to  relinquish  intemperance,  they  made 
them  full  amends  by  gratifying  their  pride. 
The  business  passed  from  hand  to  hand,  from 
sect  to  sect,  but  all  to  no  purpose.  After 
innumerable  disputations,  and  volumes  con- 
cerning the  supreme  good,  the  beauty  of 
virtue,  the  fitness  of  things,  and  other  high- 
sounding  topics,  they  left  matters  as  bad  or 
worse  than  they  found  them.  They  could 
not  effectually  inculcate  their  doctrine  upon 
a single  village  or  family.  Nay,  they  were 
but  half  persuaded  themselves,  and  could 
not  act  up  to  their  own  principles,*  when 
they  most  needed  their  support. 

A still  more  affecting  view  of  the  degene- 
racy of  human  nature  we  have  in  the  history 
of  the  Israelites,  whom  God  was  pleased  to 
set  apart  from  the  rest  of  mankind,  for  several 
important  purposes.  He  revealed  himself  to 
this  people  when  they  were  groaning  under 
a heavy  bondage  in  Egypt,  from  which  they 
had  neither  spirit  nor  power  to  deliver  them- 


* Witness  the  prevarication  of  Socrates,  and  the  ir- 
resolution of  Cicero,  towards  the  close  of  their  lives. 


selves ; he  freed  them  from  their  captivity  by 
a series  of  illustrious  miracles ; he  led  them 
through  the  sea  and  the  desert ; he  honoured 
them  with  the  symbols  of  his  immediate 
presence;  was  a wall  of  fire  round  about 
them,  and  a glory  in  the  midst  of  them ; he 
spoke  to  them  with  an  audible  voice,  and  fed 
them  with  manna  from  heaven ; he  put  them 
in  possession  of  a good  land,  and  fought 
against  all  their  enemies.  Might  it  not  have 
been  expected  that  a people  so  highly  favour- 
ed and  honoured,  should  have  been  obedient 
and  thankful  1 Some  of  them  were  so ; his 
grace  always  preserved  a spiritual  people 
amongst  them,  whose  faith  in  the  Messiah 
taught  them  the  true  meaning  of  the  Levi- 
tical  law,  and  inspired  them  with  zeal  and 
sincerity  in  the  service  of  God.  But  the  bulk 
of  the  nation  was  always  refractory  and  dis- 
obedient. While  in  the  wilderness  they 
murmured  against  the  Lord  upon  every  new 
difficulty.  Within  a few  days  after  the  law 
had  been  delivered  in  flames  and  thunder 
from  the  tcp  of  Sinai,  they  formed  a molten 
calf  to  worship,  and  would  have  made  a 
captain  who  might  lead  them  back  to  Egypt. 
They  despised  the  good  land,  therefore  their 
carcases  fell*  in  the  wilderness,  1 Cor.  x.  5. 
Their  posterity  retained  the  same  spirit; 
they  learned  the  ways  of  the  Heathen,  whom 
the  Lord  cast  out  before  them ; they  adopted 
every  idolatrous  practice  ; they  transgressed 
every  divine  command.  During  a long  suc- 
cession of  warnings,  chastisements,  and  de- 
liverances, they  became  worse  and  worse,  so 
that,  in  Jeremiah’s  time,  they  equalled  or 
exceeded  the  Heathens  around  them  in  igno- 
rance and  wickedness.  They  mocked  the 
messengers  of  God,  despised  his  words,  and 
misused  his  prophets,  till  his  wrath  rose 
against  them,  and  there  was  no  remedy.  At 
length  their  land  was  laid  waste,  Jerusalem 
burnt,  the  greater  part  of  the  people  des- 
troyed, and  the  remainder  carried  captives 
into  Chaldea. 

Upon  their  return  from  captivity,  they 
seemed  for  a little  while  to  retain  a sense  of 
their  duty  and  of  the  judgments  they  had 
suffered.  But  all  was  soon  forgot.  Their 
wickedness  now  put  on  a new  form,  and  dis- 
covered the  evil  of  the  heart  of  man  in  a new 
point  of  view.  They  were  no  longer  prone 
to  idolatry.  They  avoided  the  most  distant 
appearance  of  it  with  scrupulous  exactness, 
and  professed  the  highest  attachment  to  God. 
They  boasted  themselves  in  his  law;  and, 


* They  were  overthrown  (x:*Ts<rTfto6>i<j-*v,)  they  fell  in 
heaps,  like  grass  before  the  scythe,  in  the  wilderness; 
and  this,  iifter  all  the  great  things  they  had  seen  and 
been  partakers  of.  Of  the  many  hundred  thousands 
who  were  above  twenty  years  old  when  they  were  deli- 
vered from  Egypt,  only  two  persons  were  spared  to  en- 
ter the  promised  land;  a striking  admonition  to  us  not 
to  rest  in  the  participation  of  external  privileges  of  any 
kind,  for  these  people  had  seen  the  Lord's  wonders  at 
the  Red-Sea,  had  rejoiced  in  the  destruction  of  the  Egyp. 
tians,  and  been  fed  with  manna  from  heaven. 


20 


STATE  OF  MANKIND,  &c. 


from  a presumption  that  they  were  his  pe- 
culiar people,  they  despised  and  hated  the 
rest  of  mankind.  It  is  not  our  present  concern 
closely  to  follow  their  history.  Let  it  suffice 
to  say  that,  by  substituting  a regard  to  the 
letter  of  the  law  in  the  place  of  spiritual  obe- 
dience, and  by  presuming  to  multiply  their 
own  inventions  and  traditions,*  and  to  hold 
them  no  less  binding  than  the  positive  com- 
mands of  God;  they,  by  degrees,  attained 
to  a pitch  of  impiety  unknown  to  former 
times,  and  which  was  so  much  the  more  of- 
fensive and  abominable,  as  it  was  covered 
with  the  mask  of  religion,  and  accompanied 
with  a claim  to  superior  sanctity. 

Pride,  hypocrisy,  and  interest,  divided  them 
into  sects ; and  the  contests  of  each  party  for 
superiority  threw  the  state  into  frequent  com- 
motions. Their  intrigues  at  length  brought 
upon  them  the  Roman  power.  The  city  was 
taken  by  Pompey;  and  though  they  after- 
wards retained  a shadow  of  liberty,  their  go- 
vernment was  determined  from  that  time  by 
the  will  of  the  conquerors.  At  length  He- 
rod, a foreigner,  obtained  it.  In  his  reign 
Christ  was  born. 

Thus  the  state  of  mankind,  before  the 
coming  of  Christ,  proved,  with  the  fullest 
evidence,  the  necessity  of  his  interposition. 
And,  in  the  mean  time,  the  world  had  not 
been  left  utterly  helpless  and  hopeless.  His 
future  advent  had  been  revealed  from  the 
beginning;  and  by  faith  in  that  revelation 
a remnant  had  subsisted  in  every  age,  who 
had  triumphed  over  the  general  evil,  and 
maintained  the  cause  of  God  and  truth.  It 
was  not  necessary  to  the  salvation  of  these, 
that  he  should  have  been  manifested  sooner ; 
for  they  beheld  his  day  afar  off,  and  rejoiced 
in  his  name.  With  respect  to  others,  desti- 
tute of  divine  faith,  his  incarnation  would 
have  had  the  same  effect  at  any  period  as  it 
had  on  multitudes  who  actually  saw  him  in 
the  flesh,  but,  offended  with  the  meanness  of 
his  circumstances,  and  the  great  honours  he 
vindicated  to  himself,  rejected  him  with  dis- 
dain. 

But  farther,  the  late  appearance  of  Christ 
in  the  world  gave  room  for  the  full  accom- 
plishment of  the  prophecies  concerning  him, 
which  had  been  repeated  at  different  times, 
with  increasing  clearness  and  precision ; inso- 
much that  the  time,  place,  and  every  circum- 
stance of  his  birth,  life,  and  death,  had  been 
distinctly  foretold.  Thus  the  truth  and  au- 


* See  one  instance,  Matt.  xv.  5.  The  expression  is 
rather  obscure,  but  the  sense  is:  “ WLiat  vou  might  ex- 
pect from  me  for  your  support,  I have  put  out  of  my 
own  power;  it  is  devoted  to  the  service  of  God  and  the 
temple.”  And  teachers  allowed  this  to  be  a legal  ex- 
emption. Any  man  who  would  pay  handsomely  to  the 
priests  and  the  temple,  might  treat  his  parents  as  he 
pleased.  Thus  they  set  aside  the  express  command  of 
God,  by  their  own  authority,  and  for  their  own  advan- 
tage. The  same  dispensing,  commuting,  engrossing 
«p;rit  has  too  often  appeared  in  the  Christian  church. 


[book  1. 

thority  of  the  Old  Testament  were  confirmed, 
and  the  wisdom,  power,  and  providence  of 
God,  overruling  and  directing  the  contingen- 
cies of  human  affairs,  to  produce  this  grand 
event  in  its  determinate  period,  were  display- 
ed to  the  highest  advantage.  And  as  the 
state  of  the  moral  world  made  his  presence 
highly  necessary,  so  God,  in  due  time,  dis- 
posed the  political  state  of  mankind  in  such 
a manner  as  to  prepare  the  way  for  a speedy 
and  genera]  publication  of  the  gospel  through 
the  world. 

It  would  be  pleasing  to  consider  how  the 
rise  and  fall  and  change  of  empires  were 
made  successively  subservient  to  introduce 
the  kingdom  of  Jesus.  But  this  would  lead 
me  beyond  my  present  bounds.  I can  only 
just  hint  at  two  or  three  events,  which  had  a 
more  general  influence.  The  first  is,  The 
rapid  progress  of  Alexander,  whose  exten- 
sive conquests,  divided  amongst  his  succes- 
sors, laid  the  foundation  of  four  powerful 
monarchies,  and  opened  an  intercourse  be- 
tween countries  till  then  unknown  to  each 
other.  By  this  means  the  Greek  tongue  be- 
came familiar  and  common  to  many  nations ; 
and,  soon  after,  the  Hebrew  scriptures  were 
translated  into  that  language,  and  the  pro- 
phecies concerning  the  Messiah  were  laid 
open  to  the  Gentiles.  To  this  may  be  added 
the  several  dispersions  of  the  Jews,  who, 
upon  various  occasions,  had  been  settled  in 
almost  every  considerable  city  under  the 
heathen  governments.  By  their  tradition? 
and  prophecies,  imperfectly  understood  a 
general  expectation  had  been  raised  of  sui  le 
extraordinary  deliverer,  who  would  shortly 
appear.  Lastly,  by  the  growth  of  the  Roman 
empire,  many  nations  and  people,  who  were 
before  acquainted  by  means  of  one  common 
language,  became  more  closely  united  under 
one  dominion.  Every  province  had  a neces- 
sary connection  with  Rome,  and  Rome  was 
the  centre  and  resort  of  the  greatest  part  of 
the  then  habitable  world. 

As  to  the  Jews,  many  things  concurred  to 
animate  their  wishes  and  expectations  of  the 
Messiah’s  approach.  The  prophecies  were 
in  their  hands.  Many  of  their  wise  men 
were  apprised,  that  the  term  of  seventy 
weeks,  spoken  of  by  Daniel,  was  drawing  to 
a period.  The  sceptre  seemed  departing 
from  Judah : they  groaned  under  a foreign 
yoke,  from  which  they  vainly  imagined  the 
Messiah  would  set  them  free,  and  give  them, 
in  their  turn,  a temporal  dominion  over  the 
nations  of  the  earth.  Though  this  mistake 
prompted  them  to  reject  Christ,  when  he 
preached  a deliverance  unsuitable  to  their 
worldly  notions,  yet  it  made  them  solicitous 
and  eager  for  the  appearance  of  the  person 
on  whom  their  hopes  were  fixed.  A few 
amongst  them,  however,  better  instructed  in 
the  true  meaning  of  the  prophecies,  were 
secretly  waiting  in  the  exercises  of  faith  and 


chap,  ii.]  CHARACTER  OF 

prayer  for  the  consolation  of  Israel,  Luke 
ii.  3. 

From  this  general  view  of  the  moral  and 
political  state  of  mankind,  and  the  leading 
designs  of  divine  revelation  and  providence, 
previous  to  the  birth  of  Christ,  we  may  con- 
clude, that  the  time  fixed  on  from  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world,  for  his  actual  exhi- 
bition amongst  men,  was  not  an  arbitrary, 
but  a wise  and  gracious  appointment;  a de- 
termination admirably  suited  to  place  the 
most  important  truths  in  the  strongest  light. 
In  this  way  the  depravity,  misery,  and  help- 
lessness of  man,  the  mercy  of  God,  and  the 
truth  of  the  scriptures,  were  unquestionably 
proved  to  all  succeeding  times.  The  neces- 
sity of  a Saviour  was  felt  and  acknowledged ; 
and  the  suitableness,  all-sufficiency,  and  con- 
descension of  Jesus,  when  he  undertook  and 
accomplished  the  great  designs  in  which  his 
love  engaged  him,  were  more  strongly  illus- 
trated by  the  preceding  contrast.  He  knew 
the  whole  human  race  were  sinners,  rebels, 
enemies  against  God.  He  knew  the  terms, 
the  price  of  our  redemption,  that  he  must 
obey,  suffer,  weep,  and  die.  Yet  he  came. 
He  emptied  himself  of  his  glory  and  honour, 
and  took  on  him  the  form  of  a servant,  to 
bring  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  men.  In 
effect,  the  gospel  of  Christ  soon  appeared  to 
be  the  great  desideratum , and  completely  re- 
dressed the  evils  which  philosophy  had  given 
up  as  desperate.  The  genius  and  character- 
istic marks  of  this  gospel  will  be  considered 
in  the  following  chapter. 


CHAPTER  II. 

The  Character  and  Genius  of  the  Gospel, 
as  taught  and  exemplified  by  Christ. 

A succinct  history  of  the  life  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  is  no  part  of  our  plan.  This  the 
inspired  evangelists  have  performed  with  the 
highest  advantage  and  authority ; and  their 
writings  (through  the  mercy  of  God)  are  ge- 
nerally known  and  read  in  our  own  tongue. 
It  will  be  sufficient  for  me  to  select  a few 
passages  from  them,  to  explain  and  confirm 
the  several  points  I have  proposed  to  treat  of 
in  this  book,  as  principles  whereon  to  ground 
our  observations  on  the  spirit  and  conduct  of 
aftertimes. 

At  present  I propose  to  state  the  true  cha- 
racter and  genius  of  his  doctrine.  This  may 
seem  a digression  from  my  main  design.  But 
as  I shall  often  have  occasion  to  speak  of  the 
gospel,  and  the  opposition  it  has  met  with,  it 
will  not  be  improper,  in  the  first  place,  to  ex- 
hibit a general  idea  of  what  we  mean  by  the 
gospel,  especially  as  the  professed  followers 
of  Christ  have  been,  and  still  are,  not  a little 
divided  noon  the  point. 


THE  GOSPEL,  &c.  ?1 

We  may  describe  the  gospel  to  be — “ A 
divine  revelation  in  the  person  of  Jesus 
Christ,  discovering  the  misery  of  fallen  man 
by  sin,  and  the  means  of  his  complete  reco- 
very by  the  free  grace  of  God,  through  faith, 
unto  holiness  and  happiness.”  The  explana- 
tion and  proof  of  these  particulars,  from  our 
Lord’s  express  declarations,  and  the  tenor  of 
his  conduct,  will  sufficiently  point  out  the 
principal  marks  and  characters  of  his  gospel. 
But,  before  we  enter  upon  this,  two  things 
may  be  premised. 

1.  Though  I confine  myself  to  the  writings 
of  the  evangelists  in  this  disquisition,  yet  it 
should  be  remembered,  that  whilst  our  Lord 
was  visibly  conversant  with  men,  he  did  not 
ordinarily  discover  the  whole  system  of  his 
doctrine  in  express  terms.  He  spoke  to  the 
multitude,  for  the  most  part,  in  parables, 
(Matt.  xiii.  10,  11,)  and  was  not  forward  to 
proclaim  himself  the  Messiah  upon  every 
occasion,  Matt.  xvi.  20.  And  even  in  his 
more  intimate  discourses  with  his  disciples 
(John  xvi.  12 — 25,)  he  taught  them  with  a 
wise  and  gracious  accommodation  to  their 
circumstances  and  weakness.*  The  full  ex- 
planation of  many  things  he  referred  to  the 
time  when,  having  accomplished  his  wish, 
and  returned  victorious  and  triumphant  into 
heaven,  he  should  send  down,  according  to 
his  promise,  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  enlighten 
and  comfort  his  people.  Then,  and  not  be- 
fore, they  fully  understood  the  meaning  of 
all  they  had  seen  and  heard  while  he  was 
with  them,  Mark  ix.  10 ; John  ii.  22. 

2.  The  doctrine  of  the  gospel  is  not  like  a 
mathematical  problem,  which  conveys  pre- 
cisely the  same  degree  of  truth  and  certainty 
to  every  one  that  understands  the  terms.  If 
so,  all  believers  would  be  equally  enlight- 
ened, who  enjoy  the  common  privilege  of 
the  written  word.  But  there  is,  in  fact,  an 
amazing  variety  in  this  respect.  Where  this 
doctrine  is  truly  understood,  though  in  the 
lowest  degree,  it  inspires  the  soul  with  a 
supreme  love  to  Jesus,  and  a trust  in  him  for 
salvation.  And  those  who  understand  it  best, 
have  not  yet  received  all  the  evidence,  com- 
fort, and  influence  from  it,  which  it  is  capable 
of  affording.  The  riches  of  grace  and  wis- 
dom in  this  dispensation  are  unsearchable 
(Eph.  iii.  8,)  and  immense,  imparted  in  dif- 
ferent measures,  and  increased  from  time  to 
time,  according  to  the  good  pleasure  (1  Cor, 
xii.  11,)  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  furnishes 
his  people  with  light  and  strength  propor- 


* Our  Lord  taught  hisdisciples  gradually ; their  know 
ledge  advanced  as  the  light,  or  according  to  his  own 
beautiful  simile)  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear;  first  green 
corn,  then  fully  ripe.  He  considered  their  difficulties, 
he  made  allowances  for  their  infirmities.  It  is  to  be 
wished  his  example  was  followed  by  all  who  teach  in 
his  name.  0 une  are  so  hasty,  they  expect  to  teach  to 
others,  in  one  discourse  or  interview,  all  that  they  have 
attained  themselves  by  the  study  and  experience  of 
many  years. 


22 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


tioned  to  their  exigences,  situation,  and  the 
services  or  trials  he  calls  them  to ; not  with- 
out respect  to  the  degree  of  their  diligence, 
obedience,  and  simplicity,  in  waiting  upon 
him.  For  these  reasons,  it  is  not  to  be  expect- 
ed, that  every  one  who  serves  God  with  his 
spirit  in  the  gospel  of  his  Son,  should  have  ex- 
actly the  same  views  of  this  sublime  subject. 
Neither  do  I presume  to  think  myself  capa- 
ble of  displaying  it  in  its  full  light  and  beauty. 
I desire,  therefore,  to  write  with  candour, 
and  entreat  a candid  perusal,  as  conscious  of 
my  infirmities,  and  the  imperfections  neces- 
sarily attending  the  human  mind,  in  this 
present  state  of  things.  Yet  I am  not  afraid 
to  express  my  just  confidence,  that  I shall 
advance  no  principle,  as  a part  of  the  gospel- 
doctrine,  which  does  not  assuredly  belong 
to  it. 

I now  proceed  to  explain  and  confirm  the 
definition  I have  given  of  the  gospel. 

1.  It  is  a divine  revelation,  a discovery  of 
truths,  which,  though  of  the  highest  moment, 
could  have  been  known  no  other  way.  That 
God  will  forgive  sin,  is  beyond  the  power  of 
unassisted  reason  to  prove.  The  prevailing 
custom  of  sacrifices,  is  indeed  founded  upon 
such  a hope ; but  this  practice  was,  without 
doubt,  derived  from  revelation,  for  reason 
could  not  have  suggested  such  an  expedient. 
And  those  among  the  Heathens,  whether 
priests  or  philosophers,  who  spoke  of  forgive- 
ness of  sin,  knew  but  little  what  sin  was. 
Revelation  was  needful  to  discover  sin,  in  its 
true  nature  and  demerit ; and  where  this  is 
known,  the  awakened  and  wounded  con- 
science is  not  easily  persuaded,  that  a just 
and  holy  God  will  pardon  iniquity ; so  like- 
wise the  immortality  of  the  soul,  after  all  the 
fine  things  said  upon  the  subject,  remained 
a problematical  point  among  the  Heathens. 
Their  best  arguments,  though  conclusive  to 
us,  were  not  so  to  themselves.  When  they 
laid  aside  their  books,  and  returned  to  the 
common  affairs  of  life,  they  forgot  the  force 
of  their  own  demonstrations.*  But  the  gospel 
of  Christ  is  an  express,  complete,  and  infal- 
lible revelation,  as  he  himself  often  assured 
his  hearers,  John  vii.  16,  and  viii.  26. 

And  as  the  subject-matter  of  the  gospel 
contained  in  the  New  Testament  is  a revela- 
tion from  God,  so  it  is  only  by  a divine  reve- 
lation, that  what  is  there  read  or  heard,  can 
be  truly  understood.  This  is  an  offensive 
assertion,  but  must  not  be  omitted  when  the 
question  is  concerning  the  marks  and  charac- 
ters of  Christ's  doctrine.  Thus  when  Peter 
made  that  noble  confession,  “ Thou  art  Christ, 
the  Son  of  the  living  God,”  our  Lord  an- 
swers, “Blessed  art  thou  Simon,  for  flesh 
and  blood  hath  not  revealed  this  to  thee,  but 


* Cicero  frankly  confesses  this:  “Nescio  quomodo, 
dum  lego,  assentior;  cum  posui  librum,  et  mecum  ipse 
de  immortalitale  animorum  ccepi  cogitare,  assentio  om- 
nis  ilia  elabiture.”  Tusc.  Qacst.  lib.  1. 


[book  I. 

my  Father  which  is  in  heaven,”  Matt,  xvi 
16,  17.  If  Peter  could  read,  and  had  the 
scriptures  to  peruse,  these  were  advantages 
derived  from  flesh  and  blood,  from  his  birth, 
parents,  and  teachers ; advantages  which  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  our  Lord’s  most  inve- 
terate enemies,  enjoyed  in  common  with  him. 
The  difference  lay  in  a revelation  of  the  truth 
to  his  heart.  As  it  is  said  in  another  place, 
“ Thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise 
and  prudent,  and  revealed  them  unto  babes.”* 
2.  It  is  a revelation  in  the  person  of  Jesus 
Christ.  As  a revelation,  it  stands  distinguish- 
ed from  all  false  religions ; and  as  revealed  in 
the  person  of  Jesus,  it  is  distinguished  from 
all  former  dispensations  of  the  true  God, 
who,  in  time  past,  had  spoken  by  the  pro- 
phets, but  was  pleased  in  those  last  days  to 
speak  unto  us  by  his  Son.  The  law  was 
given  by  Moses,  both  to  enforce  the  necessity 
of  a universal  sinless  obedience,  and  to  point 
out  the  efficacy  of  a better  Mediator;  but 
grace  and  truth,  grace  answerable  to  the  sin- 
ner’s guilt  and  misery,  and  truth,  and  the 
full  accomplishment  of  all  its  typical  services, 
came  by  Jesus  Christ.  All  the  grand  pecu- 
liarities of  the  gospel,  centre  in  this  point,  the 
constitution  of  the  person  of  Christ,  Col.  ii. 
3,  9;  John  xvii.  3.  In  the  knowledge  of 
him  standeth  our  eternal  life.  And  though 
our  Lord,  on  some  occasions,  refused  to  an- 
swer the  captious  questions  of  his  enemies, 
and  expressed  himself  so  as  to  leave  his  hear- 
ers in  suspense,  yet  at  other  times,  he  clearly 
asserted  his  own  just  rights  and  honours,  and 
proposed  himself  as  the  supreme  object  of 
love,  trust,  and  worship,  the  fountain  of  grace 
and  power,  the  resurrection,  life,  and  happi- 
ness of  all  believers. 

That  he  vindicated  to  himself  those  charac- 
ters and  prerogatives  which  incommunicably 
belong  to  God,  is  evident  from  the  texts  re- 
ferred to.  He  was  a judge  of  the  thoughts 
and  intents  of  the  heart,  (Matt.  ix.  2,  3;) 
he  forgave  sins ; he  adopted  the  style  of  Su- 
preme Majesty  :f  his  wonderful  works  were 
proof  of  an  almighty  power;  he  restored 
sig-ht,  health,  and  life,  with  a word ; (Matt, 
viii.  3,  9,  30;  John  iv.  53;)  he  controlled 
the  elements,  (Matt.  xiv.  25;  Mark  iv.  39,) 
and  showed  himself  Lord  of  quick  and  dead, 
angels,  and  devils,  (John  xi.  25,  44;  Luke 


* That  babes  should  be  admitted  to  this  knowledge, 
and  express  a certainty,  where  the  wise  are  all  per- 
plexity and  darkness,  is  extremely  mortifying  to  hu- 
man pride.  But  are  not  these  the  words  of  Christ  ? How 
arrogant,  how  dangerous,  must  it  be  to  be  displeased 
with  that  dispensation  at  which  lie  rejoiced! 

t John  viii.  38;  xiv.  9.  “He  that  hath  seen  me 
hath  seen  my  Father.”  Which  of  all  the  creatures  of 
God  dare  use  these  words?  God,  in  the  strict  sense,  is 
invisible  and  inaccessible;  but  he  communicates  with 
his  creatures,  through  Christ  his  Son.  without  whom 
he  cannot  be  seen,  or  known  at  all.  We  cannot  enjoy 
any  spiritual,  clear,  and  comfortable  views  of  God.  un- 
less our  thoughts  fix  upon  the  Man  Christ  Jesus;  he  is 
the  door  and  the  vail  to  the  holy  of  holies;  and  there  is 
no  coining  to  the  Father  by  any  other  way. 


AS  TAUGHT  BY  OUR  LORD. 


23 


CHAP.  II.] 

iv.  34;  Matt.  iv.  11,  26,  53;)  and  both 
his  enemies  and  his  friends  understood  his 
claim.  The  Jews  attempted  to  stone  him  for 
making  himself  equal  to  God  (John  v.  18; 
x.  33 ;)  and  he  received  from  Thomas  the 
most  express  and  solemn  ascription  of  deity 
that  can  be  offered  from  a creature  to  his 
Creator,  John  xx.  28. 

Yet  all  this  glory  was  veiled.  The  Word 
was  made  flesh : he  assumed  the  human  na- 
ture, and  shared  in  all  its  infirmities,  sin  ex- 
cepted. He  was  born  of  a woman ; he  pass- 
ed through  the  states  of  infancy,  childhood, 
and  youth,  and  gradually  increased  in  wis- 
dom and  stature,  Luke  ii.  52.  He  was  often, 
yea,  always  afflicted;  he  endured  hunger, 
thirst,  and  weariness;  (Markxi.  12;  John  iv. 
6,  7 ;)  he  sighed,  he  wept,  he  groaned,  he 
bled,  he  died ; (Mark  vii.  34 ; John  xi.  35,  38 ; 
Luke  xxii.  44 ;)  but,  amidst  all,  he  was  spot- 
less and  undefiled.  He  repelled  the  tempta- 
tions of  Satan,  (Matt.  iv.  1,  10 ;)  he  appealed 
to  his  most  watchful  enemies  for  his  integ- 
rity ; he  rendered  universal,  unceasing  obe- 
dience to  the  will  of  God,  and  completely 
fulfilled  the  whole  law,  John  viii.  46 ; xiv. 
30 ; xvii.  4.  In  him  the  perfection  of  wisdom 
and  goodness  shined  forth.  He  burned  with 
love  to  God,  with  compassion  to  men ; a com- 
passion which  he  freely  extended  to  the  most 
necessitous,  and  the  most  unworthy.  He 
returned  good  for  evil,  wept  for  his  enemies, 
(Luke  xix.  41,)  prayed  for  his  murderers, 
Luke  xxiii.  34.  Such  was  his  character,  a 
divine  person  in  the  human  nature,  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh,  1 Tim.  iii.  16.  And 
from  this  union,  all  he  did,  and  all  he  said, 
derived  a dignity,  authority,  and  efficacy, 
which  rendered  him  every  way  worthy  to  be 
the  Teacher,  Exemplar,  Lord,  and  Saviour 
of  mankind. 

3.  In  the  person  and  sufferings  of  Christ, 
there  is  at  once  a discovery  of  the  misery  of 
fallen  man,  and  the  means  of  his  complete 
recovery.  It  has  already  been  observed,  that 
the  full  explication  of  these  truths  was  defer- 
red till  after  his  resurrection ; and  the  subse- 
quent writings  of  his  apostles  are  useful  to 
give  us  a complete  view  of  the  cause,  design, 
and  benefits  of  his  passion.  At  present  we 
confine  ourselves  to  his  own  words.  He  fre- 
quently taught  the  necessity  and  certainty 
of  his  sufferings,  (Matt.  xvi.  21 ; xx.  28 ;)  he 
spoke  of  them  as  the  great  design  of  his  in- 
carnation, that  it  was  by  this  means  he  should 
draw  all  unto  himself,  (John  xii.  32 ; x.  17 ;) 
that  he  was,  on  this  account,  especially,  the 
object  of  his  Father’s  complacency,  because 
he  voluntarily  substituted  himself  to  die  for 
his  people.  He  enforced  the  necessity  of 
believing  on  him  in  this  view,  (John  iii. 
14 — 18 ;)  and  applied  to  himself  the  prophe- 
cies of  the  Old  Testament,  (Luke  xxiv.  25 — 
27 ; Isa.  liii.)  which  speak  to  the  same  pur- 
pose. Isaiah  had  foretold,  that  the  Lord 


would  lay  upon  him  the  iniquities  of  us  all ; 
that  he  was  to  be  wounded  for  our  transgres- 
sions, and  by  his  stripes  we  should  be  healed. 
Here  then  we  see  the  manifold  wisdom  of 
God ; his  inexpressible  love  to  us  commend- 
ed, his  mercy  exalted,  in  the  salvation  of  sin- 
ners ; his  truth  and  justice  vindicated,  in  the 
full  satisfaction  for  sin  exacted  from  the 
Surety ; his  glorious  holiness,  and  opposition 
to  all  evil ; and  his  invariable  faithfulness  to 
his  threatenings  and  his  promises.  Consi- 
dered in  this  light,  our  Saviour's  passion  is 
the  most  momentous,  instructive,  and  com- 
fortable theme  that  can  affect  the  heart  of 
man.  But  if  his  substitution  and  proper 
atonement  are  denied,  the  whole  is  unintel- 
ligible. We  can  assign  no  sufficient  reason 
why  a person  of  his  excellence  was  abandoned 
to  such  miseries  and  indignities : nor  can  we 
account  for  that  agony  and  distress  which 
seized  him  at  the  prospect  of  what  was 
coming  upon  him.  It  would  be  highly  in- 
jurious to  his  character  to  suppose  he  was 
thus  terrified  by  the  apprehension  of  death  or 
bodily  pain,  when  so  many  frail  and  sinful 
men  have  encountered  death,  armed  with 
the  severest  tortures,  with  far  less  emotion. 

Here,  as  in  a glass,  we  see  the  evil  of  sin, 
and  the  misery  of  man.  The  greatness  of 
the  disorder  may  be  rationally  inferred  from 
the  greatness  of  the  means  necessary  to  re- 
move it.  Would  we  learn  the  depth  of  the 
fall  of  man,  let  us  consider  the  depth  of  the 
humiliation  of  Jesus  to  restore  him.  Behold 
the  beloved  of  God,  perfectly  spotless  and 
holy,  yet  made  an  example  of  the  severest 
vengeance;  prostrate  and  agonizing  in  the 
garden;  enduring  the  vilest  insults  from 
wicked  men;  torn  with  whips,  and  nails, 
and  thorns ; suspended  naked,  wounded,  and 
bleeding  upon  the  cross,  and  there  heavily 
complaining  that  God  had,  for  a season,  for- 
saken him.  Sin  was  the  cause  of  all  his 
anguish.  He  stood  in  the  place  of  sinners ; 
and  therefore  was  not  spared.  Not  any,  or 
all  the  evils  which  the  world  has  known, 
afford  such  proof  of  the  dreadful  effects,  and 
detestable  nature  of  sin,  as  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  crucified.  Sin  had  rendered  the 
case  of  mankind  so  utterly  desperate,  that 
nothing  less  than  the  blood  and  death  of 
Jesus  could  retrieve  it.  If  any  other  expe- 
dient could  have  sufficed,  his  prayer,  that 
the  bitter  cup  might  pass  from  him,  would 
surely  have  been  answered.  But  what  his 
enemies  intended  as  the  keenest  reproach, 
his  redeemed  people  will  for  ever  repeat  as 
the  expression  of  his  highest  praise : “ He 
saved  others,  himself  he  cannot  save,”  Luke 
xxiii.  35.  Justice  would  admit  no  inferior 
atonement : love  would  not  give  up  the  cause 
of  fallen  ruined  man.  Being  therefore  deter- 
mined to  save  others,  he  could  not,  consistent- 
ly with  this  gracious  design  and  undertak- 
ing, deliver  himself. 


24 


CHARACTER  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


Again,  the  means  and  certainty  of  a salva- 
tion proportioned  to  the  guilt  and  misery  of 
sinners,  and  a happiness  answerable  to  the 
utmost  capacity  of  the  soul  of  man,  are  reveal- 
ed in  the  same  astonishing  dispensation  of  di- 
vine love.  When  Jesus  was  baptized,  he  was 
pointed  out  by  a voice  from  heaven : “ This 
is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  (or  for  whose 
sake)  I am  well  pleased,”  Matt.  iii.  17.  He 
afterwards  proclaimed  his  own  authority  and 
sufficiency,  that  all  things  were  delivered  in- 
to his  hands,  and  invited  every  weary,  heavy- 
laden  soul  to  seek  to  him  for  refreshment 
and  peace,  Matt.  xi.  27 — 29.  He  gave  the 
most  express  assurances  that  whoever  applied 
to  him  should  in  no  case  be  rejected,  John  vi. 
37.  He  mentioned  his  death  and  sufferings 
(John  xii.  32,  33,)  as  the  principal  circum- 
stance that  should  engage  the  hearts,  and 
confirm  the  hopes  of  sinners.  He  gave  re- 
peated promises,  that  those  who  believe  in 
him  shall  never  perish,  (John  x.  38 ;)  that 
neither  force  nor  fraud  should  frustrate  his 
intentions  in  their  favour ; that  after  his  as- 
cension, he  would  send  the  Holy  Spirit  (John 
xvi.  7,  13, 14,)  to  supply  his  bodily  presence ; 
and  that  his  power,  grace,  and  providence, 
should  be  with  his  people  to  the  end  of  the 
world,  (Matt,  xxviii.  20:)  finally,  that  he 
would  manage  their  concerns  in  heaven, 
(John  xiv.  3,  13,  14,)  and  at  length  return 
to  take  them  to  himself,  that  they  might  be 
with  him  for  ever,  to  behold,  and  to  share  his 
glory. 

4.  In  this  revelation,  God  has  illustriously 
displayed  the  glory  of  his  free  grace.  The 
miserable  and  guilty,  wTho  find  themselves 
without  either  plea  or  hope,  but  wrhat  the 
gospel  proclaims  by  Christ,  are  invited  with- 
out exception,  and  received  without  condi- 
tion. Though  they  have  been  the  vilest  of- 
fenders, they  are  freely  accepted  in  the  Be- 
loved ; and  none  of  their  iniquities  shall  be 
remembered  any  more ; on  the  contrary,  the 
most  respectable  characters  amongst  men  are 
declared  to  be  of  no  avail  in  point  of  accept- 
ance with  God ; but,  in  this  respect,  all  the 
race  of  Adam  are  upon  equal  terms,  and 
must  be  involved  in  the  same  ruin,  without 
an  absolute  dependence  on  the  great  Media- 
tor. This  is  an  illustrious  peculiarity  of  the 
gospel,  which  the  proud  fallen  nature  of  man 
cannot  but  resist  and  find  fault  with,  till  the 
conscience  is  truly  affected  with  the  guilt 
and  demerit  of  sin.  The  whole  tenor  of  our 
Saviour’s  ministry  was  suited  to  depreciate 
the  most  specious  attainments  of  those  who 
trusted  in  themselves  that  they  were  righte- 
ous, and  to  encourage  all  who  felt  and  con- 
fessed themselves  to  be  miserable  sinners : 
Parcere  subjectis,  et  dcballnre  superbos. 
This  was  a chief  cause  of  the  opposition  he 
met  with  in  his  own  person,  and  has  awaken- 
ed the  hatred  and  dislike  of  the  bulk  of 
mankind  against  his  doctrine  ever  since.  It 


[book  i. 

: is  necessary,  therefore,  to  confirm  it  by  proofs 
. which  cannot  be  evaded  by  any  who  profess 
to  acknowledge  him  to  be  a teacher  sent 
| from  God. 

He  was  daily  conversant  with  many  who 
| were  wise  and  righteous  in  their  own  eyes; 
and  we  find  he  omits  no  opportunity  to  expose 
and  condemn  their  pretensions.  He  spake 
one  parable  purposely  to  persons  of  this 
stamp,  (Luke  xviii.  9 — 14,)  and  describes  a 
Pharisee  boasting  of  his  observance  of  the  law : 
He  paid  tithes,  he  fasted,  he  prayed ; he  was 
not  chargeable  with  adultery  or  extortion ; 
he  could  say  more  for  himself  than  many 
can  who  affect  to  be  thought  religious  ; but 
the  poor  publican  (though  despicable  in  hi3 
sight,)  who,  conscious  of  his  unworthiness, 
durst  not  lift  up  his  eyes  to  heaven,  but  smote 
upon  his  breast,  and  cried  for  mercy,  was  in 
a happier  and  safer  condition  than  the  other 
with  all  his  boasted  obedience. 

Another  remarkable  instance  is  that  of  the 
ruler  (Matt.  xix.  16,  Luke  xviii.  18,)  who 
accosted  our  Lord  in  a respectful  manner, 
asking  him,  What  he  should  do  to  inherit 
eternal  life  1 His  address  was  becoming : his 
inquiry  seemed  sincere ; and  the  character  he 
gave  of  himself  was  such  as  men,  wTho  see 
not  the  heart,  might  have  judged  exemplary 
and  praise- worthy.  When  our  Lord  refer- 
red him  to  the  precepts  of  the  law,  he  answer- 
ed that  he  had  kept  them  all  from  his  youth. 
Yet  one  thing,  we  read,  was  wanting.  What 
could  this  one  thing  be,  which  rendered  so 
fair  a character  of  no  value  1 W e may  collect 
it  from  the  event.  He  wanted  a deep  sense 
of  his  need  of  a Saviour,  if  he  had  been 
possessed  of  this  one  thing,  he  would  willing- 
ly have  relinquished  all  to  follow  Jesus.  But. 
ignorant  of  the  spirituality  of  the  law,  he 
trusted  to  a defective  obedience : and  the  love 
of  the  world  prevailing  in  his  heart,  he  chose 
rather  to  part  with  Christ  than  with  his  pos- 
sessions. 

On  the  other  hand,  how  readily  our  Lord 
received  sinners,  notorious  sinners,  who  were 
vile  to  a proverb,  appears  from  the  remarka- 
ble account  given  by  St.  Luke  (chap.  vii.  37,) 
of  a woman  whose  character  had  been  so  in- 
famous, that  the  Pharisee  wondered  that 
Jesus  could  permit  her  to  touch  him.  But 
though  a great  sinner,  she  found  great  for- 
giveness; therefore  she  loved  much,  and  wept 
much.*  She  had  nothing  to  say  lor  herself; 
but  Jesus  espoused  her  cause,  and  pronounced 
her  pardon.  He  likewise  silenced  the  proud 
caviller  by  a parable,  that  sweetly  illustrates 
the  freeness  and  genuine  effect  of  the  grace 
of  God,  which  can  only  be  possessed  or  prized 
by  those  who  see  they  must  perish  without  it 


* She  washed  his  feet  with  tears;  yiet»r^  she 

began  to  rain  tears  upon  his  feet:  her  head  was  waters, 
and  her  eyes  fountains : to  receive  a free  pardon  of  many 
sins,  a pardon  bought  with  blood, — it  is  this  causes  the 
heart  to  melt,  and  the  eyes  to  flow. 


CH\P.  II.  J 


AS  TAUGHT  BY  OUR  LORD. 


25 


And  this  was  the  general  effect  of  his 
preaching.  Publicans  and  sinners  thronged 
to  hear  him,  received  his  doctrine,  and  found 
rest  for  their  souls.  As  this  discrimination 
gave  a.  general  offence,  he  took  occasion  to 
deliver  the  parable  of  the  prodigal,  (Luke  xv. 
11  ;)  in  the  former  part  of  which  he  gives  a 
most  endearing  view  of  the  grace  of  God,  in 
pardoning  and  accepting  the  most  undeserv- 
ing. He  afterwards,  in  the  close,  shows  the 
pride,  stubbornness,  and  enmity  of  the  self- 
righteous  Pharisees,  under  the  character  of 
the  elder  brother.*  Whilp  his  language  and 
deportment  discovered  the  disobedience  and 
malice  of  his  heart,  he  pretended  that  he  had 
never  broke  his  father’s  commands.  The  self- 
condemned  sinner,  when  he  first  receives 
hope  of  pardon,  experiences  a joy  and  peace 
in  believing.  This  is  represented  by  the 
feast  and  fatted  calf.  But  the  religious  order- 
ly brother  had  never  received  so  much  as  a 
kid : he  had  found  no  true  comfort  in  all  his 
formal  round  of  duties ; and  therefore  was  , 
exceedingly  angry  that  the  prodigal  should 
at  once  obtain  those  marks  of  favour  which 
he,  who  had  remained  with  his  father,  had  al- 
ways been  a stranger  to. 

But  the  capital  exemplification  of  this,  and 
indeed  of  every  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  is  con- 
tained in  the  account  given  of  the  thief  upon 
the  cross,  (Luke  xxiii.  39 — 42 ;)  a passage 
which  has  perhaps  been  more  mistaken  and 
misrepresented  by  commentators,  than  any 
other  in  the  New  Testament.  The  grace  of 
God  has  shone  so  bright  in  this  instance,  that 
it  nas  dazzled  the  eyes  even  of  good  men.  ! 
They  have  attempted  to  palliate  the  offender’s 
crime,  or  at  least  to  suppose  that  this  was  the  : 
first  fault  of  the  kind  he  had  committed;  that , 
perhaps  he  had  been  surprised  into  it,  and  j 
might,  in  other  respects,  have  been  of  a 
fairer  character.  They  conjecture,  that  this 
was  the  first  time  he  had  heard  of  Jesus ; and 
that  there  was  not.  only  some  sort  of  merit 
in  his  faith  and  confession  under  these  cir- 
cumstances, but  that  the  death  of  Jesus  hap- 
pily coinciding  with  his  own,  afforded  him 
an  advantage  peculiar  to  himself;  and  that, 
therefore,  this  was  an  exempt  case,  and  not 
to  be  drawn  into  a precedent  to  after  times. 

If  it  was  my  professed  design  to  comment 
upon  this  malefactor’s  case,  I should  consider 
it  in  a different  light.  The  nature  of  his  pun- 
ishment, which  was  seldom  inflicted  but  on 
those  who  were  judged  the  most  atrocious 
criminals,  makes  it  more  than  probable  that 


he  did  not  suffer  for  a first  offence.  Nor  was 
he  simply  a thief.  The  history  of  those  times 
abounds  with  the  mischiefs  committed  by  pub- 
lic robbers,  who  used  to  join  in  considerable 
bands,  for  rapine  and  murder,  and  commit 
the  greatest  excesses.  In  all  likelihood,  the 
malefactors  crucified  with  Jesus  were  of  this 
sort,  accomplices  and  equals  in  guilt ; and 
therefore  judged  to  die  together,  receiving 
(as  appears  by  the  criminal’s  own  confession 
on  the  cross)  the  just  reward  of  their  deeds.* 
Here  was  indeed  a fair  occasion  to  show  the 
sovereignty  and  triumph  of  grace,  contrasted 
with  the  most  desperate  pitch  of  obdurate 
wickedness.  To  show,  on  the  one  hand,  that 
the  compassion  and  the  power  of  Christ  were 
not  diminished  when  his  sufferings  were  at 
the  height,  and  he  seemed  abandoned  to  his 
enemies ; and,  on  the  other,  the  insufficiency 
of  any  means  to  change  a sinner’s  heart, 
without  the  powerful  efficacy  of  divine  grace. 
The  one  malefactor,  brought  at  length  to 
deserved  punishment,  far  from  repenting  of 
his  crimes,  regardless  of  his  immediate  ap- 
pearance before  God,  thought  it  some  relaxa- 
tion of  his  torments,  to  join  with  the  barbarous 
multitude  in  reviling  Jesus,  who  hung  upon 
a cross  by  his  side.  lie  was  not  ignorant  that 
Jesus  was  put  to  death  for  professing  himself 
the  Messiah  ; but  he  upbraided  him  with  his 
character,  and  treated  him  as  an  impostor. 
In  this  man  we  see  the  progress,  wages,  and 
effects  of  sin.  His  wickedness  brought  him 
to  a terrible  end,  and  sealed  him  up  under  a 
fatal  hardness  of  heart;  so  that  he  died  des- 
perate, though  Jesus  Christ  was  crucified  be 
fore  his  eyes.f  But  his  companion  was  im- 
pressed by  what  he  saw ; his  heart  relented ; 
he  observed  the  patience  of  the  divine  suf- 
ferer; he  heard  him  pray  for  his  murderers; 
he  felt  himself  miserable,  and  feared  the  God 
with  whom  he  had  to  do.  In  this  distress  he 
received  faith  to  apply  to  Jesus;  and  his 
prayer  was  granted,  and  exceeded.  He  who 
sent  the  fair-spoken  ruler  away  sorrowful, 
answered  the  first  desire  of  a malefactor  at 
the  point  of  death:  “To-day  shalt  thou  be 
with  me  in  paradise.”  This  certainly  was 
an  instance  of  free  distinguishing  grace. 
Here  was  salvation  bestowed  upon  one  of  the 
vilest  sinners,  through  faith  in  Jesus,  without 
previous  works,  or  a possibility  of  performing 
any.  And  as  such,  it  is  recorded  for  the  en- 


* It  may  be  objected  to  this  interpretation,  That  the 
father  speaks  to  the  elder  brother  in  terms  of  compla- 
cence : “ Son,  thou  art  ever  with  me,  and  all  that  I 
have  is  thi  rie.  But  this  is  not  the  only  place  where  our 
Lord  addresses  the  Pharisees  in  their  own  style,  accord-  \ 
in?  to  the  opinion  they  conceived  of  themselves.  Thus 
(Matt,  viii  12,)  he  says,  “The  children  of  the  kingdom 
6hall  be  cast  out  into  outer  darkness.— He  does  not 
mean  those  who  were  truly  the  children  of  the  kingdom,  j 
but  those  who  pretended  to  be  so. 

Vol.  II.  D 


* It  seems  probable,  from  history,  that  these  were  of 
Barabbas’s  gang.  They  had  made  an  insurrection,  com- 
mitted murder,  and  were,  with  their  ringleader,  con- 
victed and  condemned.  He,  in  dishonour  to  Jesus,  was 
spared,  whilst  these,  his  accomplices,  were  executed  with 
him. 

t Compare  Matt,  xxvii.  39.  How  can  it  be  expected 
that  no  more  than  a constant  repetition  of  Christ’s 
death  should  be  an  invincible  means  of  changing  the 
heart,  when  the  actual  sightof  his  sufferings  was  attend- 
ed with  so  little  effect!  Sin  must  be  felt  as  the  disease 
and  ruin  of  the  soul,  and  the  sufferings  of  Jesus  ac- 
knowledged as  the  only  possible  remedy,  before  we  can 
truly  sympathize  with  him,  and  say,  “ I am  crucified 
with  Christ.” 


•26 


CHARACTER  OF 

encouragement  of  all  who  see  themselves 
destitute  of  righteousness  and  strength,  and 
that,  like  the  thief  on  the  cross,  they  have 
no  refuge  or  hope,  but  in  the  free  mercy  of 
God  through  Christ. 

5.  The  medium  by  which  the  gospel  be- 
comes the  power  of  God  unto  salvation,  is 
faith.  By  faith  we  do  not  mean  a bare  as- 
sent. founded  upon  testimony  and  rational 
evidence,  that  the  facts  recorded  in  the  New 
Testament  are  true.  A faith  of  this  sort  ex- 
perience proves  to  be  consistent  with  a wick- 
ed life ; whereas  the  gospel-faith  purifies  the 
heart,  and  overcomes  the  world.  Neither  do 
we  mean  a confidence  of  the  forgiveness  of 
sin,  impressed  upon  the  mind  in  a sudden 
and  instantaneous  manner.  Faith  is  indeed 
founded  upon  the  strongest  evidence,  and 
may  often  be  confirmed  by  ineffable  mani- 
festations from  the  fountain  of  light  and 
comfort ; but  the  discriminating  property  of 
true  faith  is,  “ a reliance  upon  Jesus  Christ  for 
all  tlie  ends  and  purposes  for  which  the  gospel 
reveals  him such  as  the  pardon  of  sin, 
peace  of  conscience,  strength  for  obedience, 
and  eternal  life.  It  is  wrought  by  the  opera- 
tion of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  presupposes  a 
knowledge  of  him,  and  of  ourselves ; of  our 
indigence,  and  his  fulness;  our  unworthi- 
ness, and  his  merits ; our  weakness,  and  his 
power.  The  true  believer  builds  upon  the 
person  and  word  of  Christ  (Matt.  vii.  24; 
xvi.  18)  as  the  foundation  of  his  hope.  He 
enters  by  him  as  the  only  door  (John  x.  9) 
to  the  knowledge,  communion,  and  love  of 
God : he  feeds  upon  him  by  faith  in  his 
heart,  with  thanksgiving,  as  the  bread  of 
life  (John  vi.  54 — 57 ;)  he  embraces  his  righ- 
teousness as  the  wedding-garment  (Matt, 
xxii.  11 ; Rom.  xiii.  14)  whereby  alone  he 
expects  admission  to  the  marriage-feast  of 
heaven:  he  derives  all  his  strength  and 
comfort  from  his  influence,  as  the  branch 
from  the  root  (John  xv.  4,  5 :)  he  entrusts 
himself  to  his  care,  as  the  wise  and  good 
shepherd  of  his  soul,  John  x.  14.  Sensible 
of  his  own  ignorance,  defects,  and  his  many 
enemies,  he  receives  Christ  as  his  teacher, 
priest,  and  king  (John  vi.  68;)  obeys  his 
preceptor,  confides  in  his  mediation,  expects 
and  enjoys  his  powerful  protection.  In  a 
word,  he  renounces  all  confidence  in  the  flesh 
(Phil.  iii.  3,)  and  rejoices  in  Christ  Jesus  as 
his  Saviour ; and  thus  he  attains  to  worship 
God  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  is  supported 
through  all  the  conflicts  and  trials  of  life, 
possesses  a stable  peace  in  the  midst  of  a 
changing  world,  goes  on  from  strength  to 
strength,  and  is  at  length  made  more  than 
conqueror,  through  him  that  has  loved  him. 
This  is  the  life  of  faith.  The  degree  and  ex- 
ercise of  it  is  various  in  different  persons, 
and  in  the  same  person  at  different  times,  as 
has  been  already  hinted ; but  the  principle 
itself  is  universal,  permanent,  and  effica- 


THE  GOSPEL,  &c.  [book  i. 

cious  in  all  that  truly  believe ; and  nothing 
less  than  this  faith  is  sufficient  to  give  any 
man  a right  to  the  name  of  a Christian. 

6.  The  final  cause  or  great  ends  of  the 
gospel,  respecting  man,  are  holiness  and 
happiness  (Matt.  i.  21 ; xxv.  34 ; John  xvii. 
24 ;)  the  complete  restoration  of  the  soul  to 
the  favour  and  image  of  God,  or  eternal  life 
begun  here,  to  be  consummated  in  glory. 
What  has  been  already  said  renders  it  need- 
less to  enlarge  upon  this  head ; nor  shall  we 
concern  ourselves  here  to  vindicate  the  doc- 
trine we  have  laid  down  from  the  charge  of 
licentiousness : because  it  is  our  professed 
design,  in  the  progress  of  this  work,  to  prove, 
from  the  history  of  the  church,  not  only  that 
these  principles,  when  rightly  understood, 
will  infallibly  produce  obedience  and  submis- 
sion to  the  whole  will  of  God,  but  that  these 
only  can  do  it.  Wherever  and  whenever 
the  doctrines  of  free  grace  and  justification 
by  faith  have  prevailed  in  the  Christian 
church;  and  according  to  the  degree  of 
clearness  with  which  they  have  been  en- 
forced, the  practical  duties  of  Christianity 
have  flourished  in  the  same  proportion. 
Wfrerever  they  have  declined,  or  been  tem- 
pered with  the  reasonings  and  expedients  of 
men,  either  from  a well  meant,  though  mis- 
taken fear,  lest  they  should  be  abused,  or 
from  a desire  to  accommodate  the  gospel, 
and  render  it  more  palatable  to  the  depraved 
taste  of  the  world,  the  consequence  has  al 
ways  been,  an  equal  declension  in  practice. 
So  long  as  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  maintain- 
ed without  adulteration,  it  is  found  sufficient 
for  every  valuable  purpose ; but  when  the 
wisdom  of  man  is  permitted  to  add  to  the 
perfect  work  of  God,  a wide  door  is  opened 
for  innumerable  mischiefs : — the  divine  com- 
mands are  made  void,  new  inventions  are 
continually  taking  place,  zeal  is  diverted 
into  a wrong  channel,  and  the  greatest  stress 
laid  upon  things  either  unnecessary  or  un- 
warrantable. Hence  perpetual  occasion  is 
given  for  strife,  debates,  and  divisions,  till  at 
length  the  spirit  of  Christianity  is  forgot,  and 
the  power  of  godliness  lost,  amidst  fierce 
contentions  for  the  form. 

To  sum  up  this  inquiry  in  a few  words: 
the  gospel  is  a wise  and  gracious  dispensa- 
tion, equally  suited  to  the  necessities  of  man, 
and  to  the  perfections  of  God : it  proclaims 
relief  to  the  miserable,  and  excludes  none 
but  those  who  exclude  themselves : it  con- 
vinces a sinner,  that  he  is  unworthy  of  the 
smallest  mercy,  at  the  same  time  that  i* 
gives  him  a confidence  to  expect  the  great- 
est ; it  cuts  off  all  pretence  of  glorying  in 
the  flesh,  but  it  enables  a guilty  sinner  U 
glory  in  God : to  them  that  have  no  might 
it  increases  strength;  it  gives  eyes  to  th« 
blind,  and  feet  to  the  lame  ; subdues  the  en* 
mity  of  the  heart ; shows  the  nature  of  sin, 
the  spirituality  and  sanction  of  the  law,  with 


chap,  in.!  GROUNDS  OF  THE  OPPOSITION  TO,  &c.  27 


the  fullest  evidence;  and,  by  exhibiting 
Jesus,  as  made  of  God,  wisdom,  righteous- 
ness, sanctification,  and  redemption,  to  all 
who  believe,  it  makes  obedience  practicable, 
easy,  and  delightful.  The  constraining  love 
of  Christ  engages  the  heart,  and  every  fa- 
culty in  his  service.  His  example  illustrates 
and  recommends  his  precepts ; his  presence 
inspires  courage  and  activity  under  every 
pressure ; and  the  prospect  of  the  glory  to 
be  revealed  is  a continual  source  of  joy  and 
peace,  which  passeth  the  understanding  of 
the  natural  man.  Thus  the  gospel  filleth  the 
hungry  with  good  things ; but  it  sendeth  the 
rich  and  self-sufficient  empty  away,  and 
leaves  the  impenitent  and  believing  in  a 
state  of  aggravated  guilt  and  condemnation. 


CHAPTER  III. 

Concerning  the  true  grounds  of  the  opposi- 
tion our  Lord  met  with  in  the  course  of 
his  ministry : and  the  objections  and 
artifices  his  enemies  employed  to  preju- 
dice the  people  against  him , and  prevent 
the  reception  of  his  doctrine . 

If  our  knowledge  of  the  history  of  Jesus 
was  confined  to  the  excellence  of  his  cha- 
racter, and  the  diffusive  goodness  that  shone 
forth  in  all  his  actions,  we  should  hardly  con- 
ceive it  possible,  that  any  people  could  be 
so  lost  to  gratitude  and  humanity  as  to  op- 
pose him.  He  went  about  doing  good : he 
raised  the  dead,  healed  every  disease,  and 
relieved  the  distresses  of  all  who  applied  to 
him,  without  any  difference  of  cases,  cha- 
racters, or  parties,  as  the  sun,  with  a rich 
and  unwearied  profusion,  fills  every  eye 
with  his  light.  Wisdom  flowed  from  his  lips, 
and  his  whole  conduct  was  perfect  and  in- 
culpable. How  natural  is  it  to  expect,  that 
a person  so  amiable  and  benevolent,  so  blame- 
less and  exemplary,  should  have  been  uni- 
versally revered.* 

But  we  find  in  fact  it  was  far  otherwise. 
Instead  of  the  honours  he  justly  deserved,  the 
returns  he  met  with  were  reproach,  persecu- 
tion, and  death.  The  wonders  of  his  power 
and  goodness  were  maliciously  ascribed  to 

* The  Heathen  moralists  have  supposed  that  there  is 
somethin"  so  amiable  in  virtue,  that  could  it  be  visible, 
it  would  necessarily  attract  the  love  and  admiration  of 
all  beholders.  This  sentiment  has  been  generally  ad- 
mired; and  we  need  not  wonder,  since  it  flatters  the 
pride  of  man  without  thwarting  his  passions.  In  the 
Lord  Jesus  this  great  desideratum  was  vouchsafed  ; vir- 
tue and  goodness  were  pleased  to  become  visible,  were 
manifest  in  the  flesh.  But  did  the  experiment  answer 
to  the  ideas  of  the  philosophers  ? Alas ! to  the  reproach 
of  mankind,  Jews  and  Gentiles  conspired  to  treat  him 
with  the  utmost  contempt.  'I' hey  loved  darkness,  and 
therefore  could  not  bear  the  light.  They  had  m re  com- 
passion and  affection  for  the  most  infamous  malefactor; 
therefore,  when  the  alternative  was  proposed  to  them, 
they  released  Barabbas,  a robber  and  a murderer,  and 
nailed  Jesus  and  virtue  to  X'm  cross. 


Satan ; he  was  branded  as  an  impostor,  mad- 
man, and  demoniac ; he  was  made  the  sport 
of  servants  and  soldiers;  and,  at  length, 
publicly  executed  with  every  possible  cir- 
cumstance of  ignominy  and  torture,  as  a 
malefactor  of  the  worst  sort. 

What  could  be  the  cause  and  motives  of 
such  injurious  treatment  1 This  is  the  sub- 
ject of  our  present  inquiry.  It  might  indeed 
be  answered  very  briefly,  as  it  has  been,  by 
ascribing  it  to  the  peculiar  wickedness  and 
perverseness  of  the  Jews.  There  is  not  a 
fallacy  more  frequent  or  pleasing  to  the 
minds  of  men,  than,  while  they  act  contrary 
to  present  duty,  to  please  themselves  with 
imagining  how  well  they  would  have  be- 
haved in  another  situation,  or  a different 
age.  They  think  it  a mark  of  virtue  to  con- 
demn the  wickedness  of  former  times,  not 
aware  that  they  themselves  are  governed  by 
the  same  spirit.  Thus  these  very  Jews 
spoke  highly  of  the  persons  of  the  prophets, 
while  they  rejected  their  testimony,  and 
blamed  their  forefathers  for  shedding  inno- 
cent blood,  at  the  time  they  were  thirsting 
for  the  blood  of  Jesus,  Matt,  xxiii.  29,  30. 
It  is  equally  easy  at  present  to  condemn  the 
treachery  of  Judas,  the  cowardice  of  Pilate, 
the  blindness  of  the  people,  and  the  malice 
of  the  priests,  who  were  all  personally  con- 
cerned in  the  death  of  Christ.  It  is  easy  to 
think,  that  if  we  had  seen  his  works,  and 
heard  his  words,  we  would  not  have  joined 
with  the  multitude  in  crying,  Crucify  him ; 
though,  it  is  to  be  feared,  many  who  thus 
flatter  themselves  have  little  less  enmity 
against  his  person  and  doctrine  than  his 
actual  murderers.  On  this  account,  I shall 
give  a detail  of  the  true  reasons  why  Christ 
was  opposed  in  the  flesh,  and  of  the  measures 
employed  against  him,  in  order  to  show,  that 
the  same  grounds  of  opposition  are  deeply 
rooted  in  the  fallen  human  nature ; and  how 
probable  it  is,  that  if  he  was  to  appear  again 
in  the  same  obscure  manner,  in  any  country 
now  called  by  his  name,  he  would  meet  with 
little  better  treatment,  unless  when  the  con- 
stitution and  laws  of  a civil  government 
might  interpose  to  prevent  it. 

But  it  may  be  proper,  in  the  first  place, 
briefly  to  delineate  the  characters  of  the  sects 
or  parties  mentioned  by  the  evangelists, 
whose  leaders,  jointly  and  separately,  both 
from  common  and  distinct  motives,  opposed 
our  Saviour’s  ministry,  and  cavilled  at  his 
doctrine.  These  were  the  Pharisees,  Sad- 
ducees,  and  Herodians.f 

The  Pharisees , including  the  Scribes  (who 
were  chiefly  of  this  sect,)  were  professedly 
the  guardians  of  the  law,  and  public  teachers 
of  the  people.  They  were  held  in  high  vene- 
ration by  the  common  people,  for  the  aus- 


tSee  Matt  xxiii;  Mark  vii.  13;  and  Lusts  xviik. 
9-14. 


29 

ter 1 tv  of  their  deportment,  the  frequency  of 
the  ir  devotions,  and  their  exactness  in  the 
less  essential  parts  of  the  law.  They  ob- 
served the  traditions  of  the  elders,  were  still 
adding  to  them ; and  the  consequence  was 
(as  it  will  always  be  in  such  a case,)  that 
they  were  so  pleased  with  their  own  inven- 
tions, as  to  prefer  them  to  the  positive  com- 
mands of  God;  and  their  studious  punc- 
tuality in  trifles,  withdrew  their  regard 
from  the  most  important  duties.  Their  spe- 
cious show  of  piety  was  a fair  outside,  under 
which  the  grossest  abominations  were  con- 
cealed and  indulged.  They  were  full  of 
pride,  and  a high  conceit  of  their  own  good- 
ness : they  fasted  and  prayed  to  be  seen  and  ! 
esteemed  of  men ; they  expected  reverence 
and  homage  from  all,  and  challenged  the 
highest  titles  of  respect,  to  be  saluted  as 
doctors  and  masters,  and  to  be  honoured 
with  the  principal  seats  in  all  assemblies. 
Many  of  them  made  their  solemn  exterior  a 
cloak  for  extortion  and  oppression  ; and  the 
rest,  if  not  hypocrites  in  the  very  worst 
sense,  yet  deceived  both  themselves,  and 
others,  by  a form  of  godliness,  when  they 
were  in  effect  enslaved  by  their  passions, 
and  lived  according  to  the  corrupt  rule  of 
their  own  imaginations. 

The  Sadducees,  their  antagonists  and  ri- 
vals, were  equally,  though  differently,  remote 
from  the  true  knowledge  and  worship  of 
God.  They  not  only  rejected  the  tradition 
of  the  elders,  but  a great  part  of  the  scrip- 
tures likewise ; and  admitted  only  the  five 
onoks  of  Moses  as  of  divine  authority.  From 
this  circumstance,  together  with  the  dif- 
ficulty (Matt.  xxii.  23)  they  proposed  to  our 
Lord,  and  the  answers  he  gave  them,  it 
appears,  that  they  were  persons,  who,  pro- 
fessing in  general  terms  to  acknowledge  a 
revelation  from  God,  yet  made  their  own 
prejudices  and  mistakes,  under  the  dignified 
name  of  reason,  the  standard  to  determine 
what  books  should  be  received  as  authentic, 
and  in  what  sense  they  should  be  under- 
stood. The  doctrine  of  a resurrection  did 
not  accord  with  their  notions ; therefore  they 
rejected  it  (Acts  xxiiL  8,)  together*  with 
those  parts  of  scripture  which  asserted  it 
most  expressly.  Their  question  concerning 
the  seven  brethren  seems  to  have  been  a 
trite  objection,  which  they  had  often  made, 
and  which  had  never  been  answered  to  satis- 
faction till  our  Lord  resolved  it.  But  the 
whole  difficulty  was  founded  upon  false  prin- 
ciples ; and  when  these  were  removed,  all  fell 


* That  the  Sadducees  received  only  the  law  of  Moses, 
is  the  general  opinion  ; though  I do  not  say  that  it  has 
been  either  indubitably  proved,  or  universally  held. 
That  they  put  their  own  sense  upon  the  scriptures 
(whether  in  whole  or  in  part,)  which  they  did  profess  to 
receive,  is  manifest,  from  their  asserting  that  there  is 
no  resurrection,  neither  angel  nor  spirit.  A tenet  which 
contradicts  not  one  or  a few  texts,  but  the  whole  strain 
and  tenor  both  of  the  law  and  the  prophets. 


[book  / 

to  the  ground  at  once.  From  this,  however, 
we  may  learn  their  characteristic ; the-1* 
were  the  cautious  reasoners  of  those  times, 
who  valued  themselves  on  examining  every 
thing  closely,  refusing  to  be  influenced  by 
the  plausible  sounds  of  antiquity  and  au- 
thority. 

The  Herodians  (Matt.  xxii.  16 ; Mark  iii. 
6)  were  those  who  endeavoured  to  ingratiate 
themselves  with  Herod.  It  is  most  probable 
that  they  received  their  name  and  distinc- 
tion, not  so  much  from  any  peculiar  senti- 
ments, as  from  attempting  to  accommodate 
their  religion  to  the  circumstances  of  the 
times.  The  Pharisees,  boasting  of  their 
i privileges  as  the  children  of  Abraham,  could 
hardly  brook  a foreign  yoke ; but  the  Hero- 
dians, from  motives  of  interest,  were  advo- 
cates for  Herod  and  the  Roman  power.  Thus 
they  were  opposite  to  the  Pharisees  in  politi- 
cal matters,  as  the  Sadducees  were  in  points 
of  doctrine ; and  therefore  the  question  con- 
cerning tribute  was  proposed  to  our  Lord 
jointly  by  the  Pharisees  and  Herodians,  the 
former  designing  to  render  him  obnoxious  to 
the  people,  if  he  allowed  of  tribute,  the  latter 
to  accuse  him  to  the  government,  if  he  re- 
fused it. 

From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  evident  the 
leading  principles  of  these  sects  were  not 
peculiar  to  themselves.  They  may  rather 
be  considered  universally  as  specimens  of 
the  different  appearances  a religious  profes- 
sion assumes  where  the  heart  is  not  divinely 
enlightened  and  converted  to  the  love  of  the 
truth.  In  all  such  persons,  however  high  the 
pretence  of  religion  may  be  carried,  it  can- 
not proceed  from  a nobler  principle,  cr  aim 
at  a nobler  object  than  self.  These  disposi- 
tions have  appeared  in  every  age  and  form 
of  the  Christian  church,  and  are  always  ac- 
tive to  oppose  the  self-denying  doctrines  of 
the  gospel  upon  different  pretences.  The 
man,  who,  fond  of  his  fancied  attainments 
and  scrupulous  exactness  in  externals,  des- 
pises all  who  will  not  conform  to  his  rules, 
and  challenges  peculiar  respect  on  account 
of  his  superior  goodness,  is  a proud  Phari- 
see. His  zeal  is  dark,  envious,  and  bitter; 
his  obedience  partial  and  self-willed ; and 
while  he  boasts  of  the  knowledge  of  God, 
his  heart  rises  with  enmity  at  the  grace  of 
the  gospel,  which  he  boldly  charges  with 
opening  a door  to  licentiousness.  The  mo- 
dern Sadducee  (like  those  of  old)  admits  of 
a revelation,  but  then,  full  of  his  own  wis- 
dom and  importance,  he  arraigns  even  the 
revelation  he  seems  to  allow  at  the  bar  of 
his  narrow  judgment;  and  as  the  sublime 
doctrines  of  truth  pass  under  his  review,  he 
affixes  without  hesitation,  the  epithets  of 
absurd,  inconsistent,  and  blasphemous  to 
whatever  thwarts  his  pride,  prejudice,  and 
ignorance,  and  those  parts  of  scripture  which 
cannot  be  warped  to  speak  his  sense,  lie  dis- 


GROUNDS  OF  THE  OPPOSITION  TO, 


AND  OFFENCES  AGAINST  OUR  LORD. 


29 


CHAP.  III.J 

cards  from  his  canon  as  interpolated  and 
supposititious.  The  Herodian  is  the  man, 
however  denominated  or  dignified,  who  is 
governed  by  interest,  as  the  others  by  pride, 
and  vainly  endeavours  to  reconcile  the  in- 
compatible services  of  God  and  the  world, 
Christ  and  Belial.  He  avoids  the  excesses 
of  religious  parties,  speaks  in  terms  of  mo- 
deration, and  is  not  unwilling  to  be  account- 
ed the  pattern  arid  friend  of  sobriety  and 
religion.  He  stands  fair  with  all  who  would 
be  religious  upon  cheap  terms,  and  fair  in  his 
own  esteem,  having  numbers  and  authority 
on  his  side.  Thus  he  almost  persuades  him- 
self he  has  carried  his  point,  and  that  it  is 
not  so  impossible  to  serve  two  masters  as 
our  Lord’s  words  seem  to  import ; but  the 
preaching  of  the  pure  gospel,  which  enforces 
the  one  thing  needful,  and  will  admit  of  no 
compliances  with  worldly  interests,  inter- 
feres with  his  plan,  and  incurs  his  resent- 
ment likewise,  though,  perhaps,  he  will 
show  his  displeasure  by  more  refined  and 
specious  methods  than  the  clamorous  rage 
of  hot  bigotry  has  patience  to  wait  for. 

We  now  proceed. — The  first  great  cause 
why  Jesus  was  rejected  by  those  to  whom  he 
appealed,  may  be  deduced  from  the  tenor  of 
his  doctrine,  a summary  of  which  has  been 
given  in  the  former  chapter.  It  offended  the 
pride  of  the  Pharisees,  was  repugnant  to  the 
wise  infidelity  of  the  Sadducees,  and  con- 
demned the  pliant  temper  of  the  Herodians. 
The  doctrines  of  free  grace,  faith,  and  spi- 
ritual obedience  were  diametrically  opposite 
to  their  inclinations.  They  must  have  parted 
with  all  they  admired  and  loved  if  they  had 
complied  with  him ; but  this  is  a sacrifice  too 
great  for  any  to  make  who  had  not  deeply 
felt  and  known  their  need  of  a Saviour. 
These,  on  the  contrary,  were  the  whole,  who 
saw  no  want  of  a physician,  and  therefore 
treated  his  offers  with  contempt. 

Besides,  their  dislike  to  his  doctrine  was 
increased  by  his  manner  of  enforcing  it.  He 
spoke  with  authority,  and  sharply  rebuked  the 
hypocrisy,  ignorance,  ambition,  and  avarice 
of  those  persons  who  were  accounted  the 
wise  and  the  good,  who  sat  in  Moses’s  chair, 
and  had  hitherto  been  heard  and  obeyed  with 
reverence.  But  Jesus  exposed  their  true 
characters:  he  spoke  of  them  as  blind  guides; 
he  compared  them  to  painted  sepulchres,* 
and  cautioned  the  people  against  them,  as 
dangerous  deceivers,  Matth.  xxiii.  27.  It  is 
no  wonder,  therefore,  that  on  this  account 
they  hated  him  with  a perfect  hatred. 


* Nothin®  is  more  loathsome  to  our  senses  than  a 
corpse  in  the  state  of  putrefaction,  or  a more  striking 
contrast  to  the  outside  of  a sumptuous  ornamented 
monument.  Perhaps  the  visible  creation  does  not  affml 
any  other  image  that  would  so  strongly  express  the 
true  character  of  hypocrisy,  and  how  hateful  it  appears 
in  th?  sight  of  God,  who  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold 
iniquity,  and  before  whom  all  things  are  naked  and 
open. 


Again,  they  were  exceedingly  offendea 
with  the  high  character  he  assumed  as  the 
Son  of  God,  and  the  Messiah.  On  this  ac- 
count, they  condemned  him  to  die  for  blas- 
phemy. They  expected  a Messiah  indeed, 
who  they  professed  was  spoken  of  in  the 
scriptures ; but  they  understood  not  what  the 
scriptures  had  revealed,  either  concerning 
his  divine  nature  or  his  voluntary  humilia- 
tion, tha-t  he  was  to  be  the  Son  and  Lord  of 
David,  yet  a man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted 
with  grief.  They  denied  his  divinity,  and 
themselves  unwittingly  fulfilled  the  prophe- 
cies that  spoke  of  his  sufferings;  affording, 
by  their  conduct,  a memorable  proof  how 
fatally  persons  may  mistake  the  sense  of  the 
word  of  God,  while  they  profess  highly  to 
esteem  it. 

What  farther  increased  their  contempt  of 
his  claims,  and  contributed  to  harden  theii 
hearts  more  implacably  against  him,  was  the 
obscurity  and  poverty  of  his  state.  While 
they  were  governed  by  worldly  wisdom,  and 
sought  not  the  teaching  of  God’s  Spirit,  they 
could  not  but  suppose  an  utter  repugnance 
between  the  meanness  of  his  condition  and 
the  honours  he  vindicated  to  himself.  They 
expected  a Messiah  to  come  in  pomp  and 
power,  to  deliver  them  from  the  Roman  yoke. 
For  a person  truly  divine,  who  made  himself 
equal  with  God,  to  be  encompassed  with 
poverty  and  distress,  seemed  such  profane 
contradiction,  as  might  justify  every  mark 
of  indignity  they  could  offer  him.  And  this 
difficulty  must  equally  affect  every  unen- 
lightened mind.  If  man  had  been  left  to  de- 
vise in  what  manner  the  Lord  of  the  universe 
would  probably  descend  to  dwell  awhile  with 
poor  mortals  in  a visible  form,  they  would 
undoubtedly  have  imagined  such  a scene,  if 
their  thoughts  could  have  reached  it,  as  is 
described  by  the  prophets  on  other  occasions : 
the  heavens  bowing,  the  earth  shaking,  the 
mountains  ready  to  start  from  their  places, 
and  all  nature  labouring  to  do  homage  to  her 
Creator.  Or,  if  he  came  in  a milder  way, 
they  would  at  least  have  contrived  an  assem- 
blage of  all  that  we  conceive  magnificent, — 
a pomp  and  splendour  surpassing  all  the 
world  ever  saw.  Expecting  nations  crowding 
to  welcome  his  arrival,  and  thrones  of  gold, 
and  palaces  of  ivory,  would  have  been  judged 
too  mean  to  accommodate  so  glorious  a guest. 
But  the  Lord’s  thoughts  and  ways  are  dif- 
ferent from  man’s.  The  beloved  Son  of  God, 
by  whom  all  things  were  made,  was  born  in 
a stable,  and  grew  up  in  an  obscure  and  mean 
condition.  He  came  to  suffer  and  to  die  for 
sin,  to  sanctify  poverty  and  affliction  to  his 
people,  to  set  a perfect  example  of  patience 
and  submission;  therefore  he  made  himself 
of  no  reputation,  but  took  upon  him  the  form 
and  offices  of  a servant.  This  was  the  ap- 
pointment of  divine  wisdom ; but  so  incredi- 
ble in  the  judgment  of  blinded  mortals,  that 


30 


GROUNDS  OF  THE  OPPOSITION  TO, 


the  apostle  assures  us,  “ no  man  can  say  that 
Jesus  is  the  Lord”  (1  Cor.  xii.  3,)  can  per- 
ceive and  acknowledge  his  inherent  excel- 
lence and  authority,  through  the  disgraceful 
circumstances  of  his  humiliation,  “ but  by  the 
Holy  Ghost.”  His  enemies,  therefore,  thought 
they  sufficiently  refuted  his  assertions  by  re- 
ferring to  his  supposed  parents,  and  the  re- 
puted place  of  hi  > nativity. 

Their  envy  and  hatred  were  still  more 
inflamed,  by  observing  the  character  of  his 
followers.  These  were  chiefly  poor  and 
illiterate  persons,  and  many  of  them  had  been 
notoriously  wicked,  or  accounted  so;,  publi- 
cans and  sinners,  whose  names  and  profes- 
sions were  vile  to  a proverb.  And  for  such 
as  these,  and  almost  these  only,  to  acknow- 
ledge the  person  whom  they  refused,  and  by 
professing  themselves  his  disciples  (John  vii. 
49;  ix.  34,)  to  set  up  for  being  wiser  than 
their  teachers;  this  was  a mortification  to 
their  pride,  which  they  could  not  bear, 
especially  when  they  found  their  number 
daily  to  increase,  and  therefore  could  not  but 
fear  their  own  influence  would  proportion- 
ably  decline. 

Once  more:  Mistaking  the  nature  of  his 
kingdom,  which  he  often  spoke  of,  they  op- 
posed him  from  reasons  of  state.  They  feared, 
or  pretended  to  fear,  that  if  they  suffered  him 
to  go  on,  the  increase  of  his  disciples  would 
give  umbrage  to  the  Romans,  who  would 
come  and  take  away  both  their  places  and 
their  nation,  John  xi.  49.  Some  perhaps 
really  had  this  apprehension ; but  it  was  more 
generally  a pretence,  which  the  leaders  made 
use  of  to  alarm  the  ignorant.  They  were  in 
truth  impatient  of  the  Roman  yoke,  prone  to 
tumults,  and  ready  to  listen  to  every  de- 
ceiver who  promised  them  deliverance,  under 
pretence  of  being  their  expected  Messiah. 
But  from  enmity  and  opposition  to  Jesus, 
they  became  loyal  at  once.  So  they  might 
accomplish  their  designs  against  him,  they 
were  content  to  forget  other  grievances,  and 
openly  professed,  they  would  have  no  other 
king  but  Caesar. 

These  were  some  of  the  chief  motives 
which  united  the  opposite  interests,  and  jar- 
ring sentiments  of  the  Jewish  sects  against 
our  blessed  Lord.  We  are  next  to  consider 
the  methods  they  employed  to  prejudice  the 
multitudes  against  him.  The  bulk  of  the 
common  people  seldom  think  for  themselves 
in  religious  concerns,  but  judge  it  sufficient 
to  give  up  their  understandings  and  con- 
sciences to  their  professed  teachers*  They 
are,  however,  for  the  most  part,  more  un- 
prejudiced and  open  to  conviction  than  their 


* This  is  much  to  be  lamented  ; for  if  the  blind  lead 
the  blind,  shall  they  not  both  fall  into  the  ditch?  Matth. 
xv.  14.  When  the  blind  lead  the  blind,  how  indeed  can 
it  be  otherwise,  if  the  former  imaeine  they  see,  and  the 
latter  are  content  to  be  led!  Alas  for  the  people  that  are 
in  such  a case  1 alas  for  their  guides 


[book  I. 

guides,  whose  reputation  and  interest  are 
more  nearly  concerned  to  maintain  every 
established  error,  and  to  stop  up  every  ave- 
nue by  which  truth  and  reformation  might 
enter.  The  Jewish  people,  uninfluenced  by 
the  proud  and  selfish  views  of  the  priests  and 
rulers,  readily  honoured  the  ministry  of 
Christ,  and  attended  him  in  great  multitudes. 
If  they  did  not  enter  into  the  grand  design 
of  his  mission,  they  at  least  gave  him  testi- 
monies of  respect.  When  Jesus  caused 
(Matth  xv.  31 ; Luke  vii.  16)  the  dumb  to 
speak  the  maimed  to  be  whole,  the  lame  to 
walk,  and  the  blind  to  see,  they  glorified  the 
God  of  Israel,  saying,  “ A great  prophet  is 
risen  up  amongst  us,  God  has  visited  his 
people.”  Now,  what  was  to  be  done  in  this 
case  1 would  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  stand 
unconcerned  1 No ; it  is  said  in  several  places, 
they  were  filled  with  indignation,!  and  es- 
sayed every  means  to  bring  his  person  and 
miracles  into  disrepute.  The  methods  they 
used  are  worthy  of  notice,  having  been  often 
repeated  since  (as  to  their  substance)  against 
the  servants  of  Christ. 

1.  They  availed  themselves  of  a popular 
mistake  concerning  his  birth.  Jesus  was  born 
in  Bethlehem,  according  to  the  scriptures; 
but  being  removed  from  thence  in  his  infancy 
to  avoid  Herod’s  cruelty,  and  his  parents 
afterwards  living  at  Nazareth  in  Galilee,  he 
was  supposed  by  many,  to  have  been  born 
there.  Even  Nathaniel  was  prejudiced  by 
this  mistake,  but  happily  yielded  to  Philip’s 
advice  to  examine  for  himself.  But  it  pre- 
vented many  from  inquiring  much  about 
Jesus,  and  therefore  his  enemies  made  the 
most  of  it,  and  confidently  appealed  to  the 
scripture,  when  it  seemed  to  decide  in  their 
favour.  Search  and  look  (John  vii.  42.  52) 
for  out  of  Galilee  ariseth  no  prophet.  It  is 
probable  many  were  staggered  with  this  ob- 
jection, and  thought  it  sufficient  to  invalidate 
all  his  discourses  and  miracles;  since,  let 
him  say  and  do  what  he  would,  he  could  not 
possibly  be  the  Messiah,  if  he  was  born  in 
Galilee. 

2.  They  urged,  that  he  could  not  be  of 
God,  because  he  infringed  the  law  of  Moses, 
and  broke  the  Sabbath,  John  ix.  16.  This, 
though  it  may  seem  a groundless  objection 
to  us,  was  not  so  to  many  at  that  time,  who 
knew  not  the  spiritual  design  and  meaning 
of  the  law,  and  perhaps  had  not  the  oppor- 
tunity to  hear  our  Lord  vindicate  himself 
They  urged  this  vehemently  against  the  force 
of  a notorious  miracle,  and  not  without  some 
colour,  from  the  words  of  Moses  himself 
(Deut.  xiii.  2)  who  had  warned  them  to  be- 
ware of  false  teachers,  though  they  should 
confirm  their  doctrine  by  signs  and  wonders. 

3.  They  reproached  the  freedom  of  his 


t It  is  a strong  symptom  of  hypocrisy  and  enmity  tc 
the  gospel,  to  be  offended  with  any  new  and  remarkahl* 
displays  of  divine  grace. 


AND  OFFENCES  AGAINST  OUR  LORD. 


31 


CHAP.  III.] 

conversation.  Jesus  was  of  easy  access,  and 
condescended  to  converse  and  eat  with  any 
who  invited  him.  He  neither  practised  nor 
enjoined  the  austerities,  which  carry  the  air 
of  superior  sanctity  in  the  judgment  of  weak 
and  superstitious  minds.  They  therefore 
styled  him  a glutton  and  wine-bibber  (Luke 
vii.  34,)  a friend  of  publicans  and  sinners; 
that  is,  as  they  intended  it,  a companion  with 
them,  and  a conniver  at  their  wickedness. 
Nothing  could  be  more  false  and  slanderous 
than  this  charge,  or  more  easily  refuted,  if 
the  people  would  examine  closely.  But  as  it 
came  from  teachers  who  were  highly  re- 
verenced for  mortification,  and  as  Jesus  was 
usually  attended  by  many  with  whom  it  was 
thought  infamous  to  associate,  it  could  not 
but  have  great  weight  with  the  credulous 
and  indolent. 

4.  They  laid  much  stress  upon  the  mean 
condition  of  his  followers.  They  were  mostly 
Galileans,  a people  of  small  estimation,  and 
of  the  lowest  rank,  fishermen,  or  publicans ; 
while,  on  the  other  hand,  few  or  none  of  the 
rulers  or  Pharisees,  who  were  presumed  to 
be  best  qualified  (John  vii.  48)  to  judge  of 
his  pretensions,  had  believed  on  him.  Those 
who  are  acquainted  with  human  nature,  can- 
not but  know  how  strongly  this  appeal  to  the 
judgment  of  persons  eminent  for  their  learn- 
ing or  station,  operates  upon  minds  who  have 
no  better  criterion  of  truth.  How  could  a 
Jew,  who  had  been  from  his  infancy  super- 
stitiously  attached  to  the  Pharisees,  suppose, 
that  these  eminently  devout  men,  who  spent 
their  lives  in  the  study  of  the  law,  would 
have  rejected  Jesus,  if  he  had  been  a good 
man  1 

5.  When,  notwithstanding  all  their  sur- 
mises, multitudes  still  professed  high  thoughts 
of  Jesus,  beholding  his  wonderful  works, 
they  proceeded  with  the  most  blasphemous 
effrontery  to  defame  the  miracles  they  could 
not  deny,  and  maliciously  ascribed  them  to 
the  agency  of  the  devil,  Matth.  xii.  14.  This 
pertinacious  resistance  to  the  conviction, 
both  of  their  senses  and  consciences,  was  the 
highest  stage  of  impiety,  and  constituted 
their  sin,  as  our  Lord  assured  them,  unpar- 
donable. Not  that  any  sin,  considered  in 
itself,  is  too  great  for  the  blood  of  Jesus  to 
expiate ; but  as  they  utterly  renounced  and 
scorned  his  mediation,  there  remained  no 
other  sacrifice,  but  they  were  judicially  given 
up  to  incurable  impenitence  and  hardness  of 
heart.  Yet  it  is  probable,  that  even  this  black 
assertion  w7as  not  without  influence  upon 
some,  who  were  wedded  to  their  sins,  and 
therefore  glad  of  any  pretext,  how  unrea- 
sonable soever,  to  refuse  the  testimony  of 
truth. 

6.  Another  means  they  made  use  of,  the 
last  we  shall  enumerate,  and  not  the  least 
effectual  to  intimidate  the  minds  of  the  peo- 
ple from  acknowledging  Jesus,  was  the  con- 


vincing argument  of  violence  and  ill  treat- 
ment. Having  the  power  in  their  hands  they 
employed  it  against  his  followers,  and  made 
an  agreement,  that  whoever  confessed  he 
was  Christ,  should  be  put  out  of  the  syna- 
gogue (John  ix.  22,)  that  is,  excommunicated. 
This  decree  seems  to  have  been  made  by  the 
Sanhedrim,  or  great  council,  and  to  imply, 
not  merely  an  exclusion  from  the  rights  of 
public  worship,  but  likewise  a positive  pu- 
nishment equivalent  to  an  outlawry  with  us. 
The  fear  of  incurring  this  penalty  (John  xii. 
42)  restrained  the  parents  of  the  man  born 
blind,  and  prevented  many  others  who  were 
in  their  hearts  convinced  that  he  was  the 
Messiah,  from  owning  hiip  as  such.  They 
loved  the  world ; they  preferred  the  praise  of 
men  to  the  praise  of  God ; and  therefore  re- 
mained silent  and  neuter. 

From  such  motives,  and  by  such  methods, 
our  Lord  was  resisted  and  opposed  by  the 
heads  of  the  Jewish  nation.  The  scribes  and 
teachers,  to  whom  the  key  of  knowledge  was 
by  authority  committed,  disdained  to  use  it 
themselves,  and  those  who  were  willing  they 
hindered.  Had  they  been  wise  and  faithful, 
they  would  have  directed  the  people  to  Christ ; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  they  darkened  the 
plainest  scriptures,  and  perverted  the  clearest 
facts,  to  prevent,  if  possible,  his  reception. 
In  vain  he  spoke  as  never  man  spoke,  and 
multiplied  the  wonders  of  his  power  and  love 
in  their  presence.  In  vain  to  them. — They 
pursued  him  with  unwearied  subtlety  and 
malice,*  traduced  him  to  the  people  and  to 
the  government,  and  would  be  satisfied  with 
nothing-  less  than  his  death ; so  obstinate  and 
wicked  is  the  heart  of  man,  so  fatal  are  the 
prejudices  of  pride  and  worldly  interest.  For 
as  we  observed  before,  these  tempers  were 
not  peculiar  to  the  Jews;  they  are  essential 
to  depraved  nature,  and  operate  universally, 
where  the  grace  of  God  does  not  make  a dif- 
ference. To  this  hour  the  gospel  of  Christ  is 
opposed  upon  the  same  grounds,  and  by  the 
like  artifices,  as  were  once  employed  against 
his  person. 

The  doctrines  which  his  faithful  ministers 
deduce  and  enforce  from  the  written  word, 
are  no  other  than  what  he  himself  taught, 
namely,  a declaration  of  his  personal  honours 
and  authority,  of  the  insufficiency  of  formal 
worship,  in  which  the  heart  is  not  concerned, 
of  the  extent  and  spirituality  of  the  law  of 
God,  and  of  salvation,  freely  proclaimed  to 
the  miserable,  through  faith  in  his  name. 
The  self-righteous,  the  self-wise,  and  all  who 
are  devoted  to  the  pleasures  and  honours  of 
the  world,  have  each  their  particular  excep- 


* Mark  xii.  13.  They  sent  unto  him  certain  of  the 
Pharisees  to  catch  him.  A y expresses  the  art  and 

assiduity  of  sportsmen,  in  the  various  methods  they  use 
to  ensnare,  entangle,  or  destroy  their  game.  It  well 
suits  the  spirit  and  design  of  our  Lord’s  enemies  in  the 
question  proposed,  and  is  finely  contrasted  by  the  mees 
ness  and  wisdom  of  his  answer. 


32 


STATE  OF  THE  CHURCH 


[book  t. 


tions  to  these  truths.  The  wisdom  of  God 
they  account  foolishness;  and  the  language 
of  their  hearts  is,  We  will  not  have  this  man 
to  reign  over  us.  And  the  success  of  these 
doctrines,  which  is  chiefly  visible  among  such 
as  they  have-  been  accustomed  to  despise,  is 
equally  offensive ; yet  so  inconsistent  are 
they,  that  if  here  and  there  a few  persons, 
who  were  before  eminent  for  their  rank, 
attainments,  or  morality,  are  prevailed  on  to 
account  all  things  but  loss  and  dung,  for  the 
excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus 
their  Lord,  this,  instead  of  removing  their 
first  objection,  excites  their  rage  and  con- 
tempt still  more. 

And  as  the  motives  of  their  hatred,  so  their 
methods  of  expressing  it,  are  the  same.  They 
are  not  ashamed  to  adopt  and  exaggerate  the 
most  vulgar  misconceptions;  they  set  the 
scripture  at  variance  with  itself ; and  while 
they  pass  over  the  plainest  and  most  im- 
portant passages  unnoticed,  they  dwell  upon 
a few  texts  of  more  dubious  import,  and 
therefore  more  easily  accommodated  to  their 
sense.  With  these  they  flourish  and  triumph, 
and  affect  a high  zeal  in  defence  of  the  word 
of  God.  They  reproach  the  pure  gospel  as 
licentious,  because  it  exposes  the  vanity  of 
their  singularities  and  will-worship,  and  are 
desirous  to  bind  heavier  burdens  upon  men’s 
shoulders,  which  few  of  themselves  will 
touch  with  one  of  their  fingers.  They  en- 
large on  the  weakness  and  ignorance  of  those 
who  mostly  receive  the  new  doctrine,  and 
entrench  themselves  under  the  sanction  of 
learned  and  dignified  names.  They  even 
venture  to  explode  and  vilify  the  evident 
effects  of  God’s  grace,  and  ascribe  the  agency 
of  his  Spirit  to  enthusiasm,  infatuation,  and 
madness,  if  not  expressly  to  diabolical  in- 
fluence. And,  lastly,  so  far  as  Divine  Provi- 
dence permits,  they  show  themselves  actuated 
by  the  primitive  spirit  of  oppression  and  vio- 
lence, in  pursuing  the  faithful  followers  of 
the  truth  with  censures  and  penalties. 

But  let  who  will  rage  and  imagine  vain 
things,  Jesus  is  the  King  in  Zion.  He  is  the 
same,  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  There 
were  a happy  few  in  the  days  of  his  flesh, 
who  beheld  his  glory,  trusted  on  him  for  sal- 
vation, and  attended  him  amidst  the  many 
reproaches  and  sufferings  he  endured  from 
shiners.  Of  these  his  first  witnesses,  we  are 
to  speak  in  the  following  chapter.  His  gos- 
pel likewise,  though  opposed  by  many,  "and 
slighted  by  more,  is  never  preached  in  vain. 
To  some  it  will  always  be  the  power  and 
wisdom  of  God;  they  know  in  whom  they 
have  believed,  and  therefore  are  not  ashamed 
to  appear  in  his  cause  against  all  disadvan- 
tages. Supported  and  encouraged  by  his 
Spirit,  they  go  on  from  strength  to  strength, 
and  are  successively  made  more  than  con- 
querors, by  his  blood  and  the  word  of  his 
testimony. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Observations  on  the  calling  and  character 

of  our  Lord's  apostles  and  disciples  previ- 
ous to  his  ascension. 

From  what  has  been  observed  in  the  pre- 
ceding chapters,  it  is  evident,  that  those  who 
assert  a principle  of  free-will  in  man,  suf- 
ficiently enabling  him  to  choose  and  deter- 
mine for  himself,  when  the  truths  of  the 
gospel  are  plainly  laid  before  him,  do  thereby 
(as  far  as  in  them  lies)  render  the  salvation 
of  mankind  highly  precarious,  if  not  utterly 
hopeless  and  impracticable.  Notwithstanding 
God  was  pleased  to  send  his  own  Son  with  a 
gracious  message ; notwithstanding  his  whole 
life  was  a series  of  wonders,  and  all  his  ac- 
tions discovered  a wisdom,  power,  and  good- 
ness answerable  to  his  high  character ; not- 
withstanding the  time,  manner,  and  design 
of  his  appearance  and  sufferings  had  been 
clearly  foretold;  yet,  so  far  as  a judgment 
can  be  made  from  the  event,  he  would  cer- 
tainly have  lived  and  died  in  vain,  without 
influence  or  honour,  without  leaving  a single 
disciple,  if  the  same  grace  that  provided  the 
means  of  redemption,  had  not  engaged  to 
make  them  effectual,  by  preparing  and  dis- 
posing the  hearts  of  sinners  to  receive  him. 

In  the  account  given  us  by  the  evangelists 
of  those  who  professed  themselves  his  disci- 
ples, wre  may  discern,  as  in  miniature,  the 
general  methods  of  his  grace ; and,  comparing 
his  personal  ministry  with  the  effects  of  his 
gospel  in  all  succeeding  times,  w7e  may  be 
assured  that  the  work  and  the  power  are 
still  the  same.  The  choice  he  made  of  his 
disciples,  the  manner  of  their  calling,  their 
characters,  and  even  their  defects,  and  fail- 
ings ; in  a word,  all  that  is  recorded  concern- 
ing them,  is  written  for  our  instruction,  and 
is  particularly  useful  to  teach  us  the  true 
meaning  of  what  passes  within  our  own  ob- 
servation. 

1.  Several  things  are  worthy  our  notice, 
in  this  view,  with  respect  to  the  choice  of 
his  disciples. 

1st,  They  wrere  comparatively  very  few. 
He  was,  indeed,  usually  attended  by  multi- 
tudes in  the  different  places  w- here  he  preach- 
ed, because  he  spoke  with  a power  they  had 
never  met  with  before,  and  because  he  healed 
the  sick,  fed  the  hungry,  and  did  good  to  all. 
But  he  had  very  few  constant  followers. 
Those  wTho  assembled  at  Jerusalem  after  his 
ascension,  are  said  to  have  been  but  about 
one  hundred  and  twTenty  (Acts  i.  15;)  and 
when  he  appointed  his  disciples  a solemn 
meeting  in  Galilee,  informing  them  before- 
hand of  the  time  and  place  where  he  would 
come  to  them,  the  number  that  then  met 
here  is  expressed  by  the  apostle  to  have  been 
more  than  five  hundred,  1 Cor.  xv.  6.*  We 

* The  word  brethren  here  used  does  not  prove  that 
none  but  men  were  present  at  that  time,  any  more  than 


IMMEDIATELY  BEFORE  THE  ASCENSION. 


33 


CHAP.  IV.] 

can  hardly  suppose,  that  any  who  loved  him, 
and  were  able  to  travel,  would  have  been 
absent  upon  so  interesting  an  occasion ; but 
how  small  a company  was  this,  compared 
with  the  many  thousands  among  whom  he 
had  conversed  in  all  the  cities  and  villages 
through  which  he  had  passed,  preaching  the 
gospel,  and  performing  innumerable  miracles, 
for  more  than  three  years ! Well  might  the 
prophet  say,  foreseeing  the  small  success  he 
would  meet  with,  “ Who  hath  believed  our 
report,  and  to  whom  hath  the  arm  of  the 
Lord  been  revealed  1”  But  since  he,  in  whom 
the  fulness  of  grace  resided,  had  so  few  dis- 
ciples, it  may  lessen  our  surprise,  that  his 
gospel,  though  in  itself  the  power  and  wis- 
dom of  God,  should  meet  with  so  cold  a re- 
ception amongst  men,  as  it  has  in  fact  always 
done. 

2dly,  Of  those  few  who  professed  a more 
entire  attachment  to  his  person,  a consider- 
able part,  after  attending  him  for  some  time, 
went  back,  and  walked  no  more  with  him. 
They  were  but  superficially  convinced,  and 
rather  struck  with  the  power  of  his  words 
and  works,  than  deeply  sensible  of  their  own 
need  of  him.  When,  therefore,  upon  a cer- 
tain occasion,  he  spake  of  the  more  inward 
and  experimental  part  of  religion,  the  life  of 
faith,  and  the  necessity  of  eating  his  flesh, 
and  drinking  his  blood,  so  many  were  offended 
at  his  doctrine,  and  forsook  him  (John  vi. 
66v  67,)  that  he  said  unto  the  twelve,  “ Will 
ye  also  go  away?”  which  seems  to  imply,  that 
there  were  few  but  these  remaining.  There- 
fore, though  we  see  at  present  that  where 
the  sound  of  the  gospel  brings  multitudes 
together,  many,  who  for  a season  appeared 
in  earnest,  gradually  decline  in  their  pro- 
fession, and  at  length  wholly  return  to  their 
former  ways,  we  have  the  less  reason  to 
wonder  or  be  discouraged,  remembering  that 
it  was  thus  from  the  beginning. 

3dly,  Those  who  believed  in  Christ  then, 
were  chiefly  (as  we  had  occasion  to  observe 
before)  persons  of  low  condition,  and  many 
of  them  had  been  formerly  vile  and  obnoxious 
in  their  conduct.  While  the  wise  and  learn- 
ed rejected  him,  his  more  immediate  follow- 
ers were  Galileans,  fishermen,  publicans,  and 
sinners.  This  was  observed,  and  urged  to 
his  reproach  and  theirs ; and  the  like  offence 
has  always  attended  his  gospel.  But  what 
enraged  his  enemies,  fills  the  hearts  and 
mouths  of  his  poor  people  with  praise.  They 
adore  his  condescension  (Luke  i.  52,  53)  in 
taking  notice  of  the  most  unworthy,  and  ad- 
mire the  efficacy  of  his  grace  in  making 
those  who  were  once  wretched  slaves  to 
Satan,  a free  and  willing  people  in  the  day 
of  his  power. 

that,  because  the  apostles,  in  their  public  preaching, 
addressed  their  hearers  as  men  and  brethren,  there  were 
therefore  no  women  amongst  them,  or  that  the  women 
were  not  considered  as  having  any  interest  or  concern 
in  the  gospel-ministry 

VOL.  II. 


4thly,  But  this  was  not  universally  the 
case.  Though  not  many  wise,  rich,  or  no- 
ble were  called,  there  were  some  even  of 
these.  His  grace  triumphed  over  every  cir- 
cumstance of  life.  Zaccheus  was  a rich 
man,*  Nicodemus  a ruler  of  the  Jews,  Jo- 
seph an  honourable  counsellor.  We  also 
read  of  a nobleman  or  courtier,  who  believed, 
with  all  his  house.  In  every  age,  likewise, 
there  have  been  some  persons  of  distinguish- 
ed eminence  for  birth,  honours,  and  abilities, 
who  have  cheerfully  engaged  in  the  profes- 
sion of  a despised  gospel,  though  they  have 
thereby  incurred  a double  share  of  opposition 
from  the  men  of  the  world,  especially  from 
those  of  their  own  rank.  The  number  of 
these  has  been  always  sufficient  to  confute 
those  who  would  insinuate  that  the  gospel  is 
only  suited  to  the  taste  of  the  vulgar  and  ig- 
norant ; yet  it  has  always  been  so  small  as  to 
make  it  evident,  that  the  truth  is  not  sup- 
ported by  the  wisdom  or  influence  of  men, 
but  by  the  power  and  providence  of  God. 

5thly,  It  was  farther  observable,  that  se- 
veral of  our  Lord’s  few  disciples  were  under 
previous  connections  amongst  themselves. 
Peter  and  Andrew  were  brothers  (John  i. 
40,)  as  likewise  James  and  John ; and  these, 
together  with  Philip,  and  perhaps  Nathaniel, 
seem  to  have  been  all  of  one  town.f  The 
other  James  and  Jude  were  also  brethren. 
So  it  is  said,  Jesus  loved  Mary,  and  her  sis- 
ter, and  Lazarus,  three  in  one  house,  when 
perhaps  the  whole  place  hardly  afforded  a 
fourth;  and  more  in  a single  village  than 
were  to  be  found  in  many  larger  cities  taken 
together.  This  circumstance  more  strongly 
marked  the  discrimination  of  his  grace,  in 
making  the  means  effectual  where  and  to 
whom  he  pleased.  Such  has  been  the  usual 
event  of  his  gospel  since.  It  is  proclaimed 
to  all,  but  accepted  by  few ; and  of  these 
several  are  often  found  in  one  family,  while 
their  next-door  neighbours  account  it  a bur- 
den and  offence.  It  flourishes  here  and  there 
in  a few  places  (Amos  iv.  7,)  while  those  of 
the  adjacent  country  are  buried  in  more 
than  Egyptian  darkness,  and  resist  the  en- 
deavours of  those  who  would  invite  them  to 


* Zaccheus  was  a chief  or  principal  publican,  t<i 
whom  the  rest  were  accountable;  a commissioner  of 
the  public  revenue.  And  he  was  rich.  The  Greek  is 
more  expressive,  Aj id  this  was  a rich  man , Luke  xix.  2, 
perhaps  alluding  to  what  had  passed  a little  before, 
chap,  xviii.  25  This  remark  is  added,  to  remind  us, 
that  what  is  impossible  with  men,  is  easy  to  him  who 
can  speak  to  the  hearr,  and  turn  it  as  he  will. 

t Compare  Mark  i.  16,  Luke  v.  10,  w'ith  John  i.  44. 
45.  These  six,  and  more  than  these,  were  fishermen 
(John  xxi.  2,)  and  such  they  continued,  only  their  net- 
success  and  capture  were  so  much  changed,  that  it  be- 
came a new  calling  : he  made  them  fishers  of  men.  In 
the  fishermen’s  calling  there  is  required  a certain  dex- 
terity, much  patience,  and  a readiness  to  bear  hard- 
>hips.  Perhaps  many  observations  they  made  in  their 
former  business  were  useful  to  them  afterwards.  And 
the  Lord  still  brings  up  his  servants  so,  that  the  re- 
membrance of  former  years  (the  years  of  ignorance) 
becomes  a rule  and  encouragement  in  future  and  differ- 
ent scenes  of  life. 


E 


34 


STATE  OF  THE  CHURCH 


partake  of  the  same  benefits.  Thus  the  Lord 
is  pleased  tc  display  his  own  sovereignty,  in 
raising  and  sending  forth  his  ministers,  when 
and  where  he  sees  fit,  and  in  determining 
the  subjects  and  measure  of  their  success.  If 
others  dispute  and  cavil  against  this  pro- 
cedure,* those  who  believe  have  cause  to 
adore  his  goodness  to  themselves.  And  a day 
is  at  hand,  when  every  mouth  shall  be  stop- 
ped that  would  contend  with  the  just  Judge 
of  all  the  earth.  The  impenitent  and  unbe- 
lieving will  not  then  dare  to  charge  him  with 
injustice  for  dealing  with  them  according  to 
their  own  counsels  and  desires,  inasmuch  as 
when  the  light  of  truth  was  ready  to  break 
upon  them,  they  chose  darkness  rather  than 
light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil. 

2.  In  the  calling  of  our  Lord’s  disciples, 
and  the  manner  in  which  they  were  brought 
to  know  and  serve  him,  we  may  discover  the 
same  variety  as  at  this  day  appears  in  the 
conversion  of  sinners  by  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel. 

Some,  from  a religious  education,  an  early 
acquaintance  with  the  scriptures,  and  the  se- 
cret influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  upon  their 
hearts,  are  gradually  prepared  for  the  recep- 
tion of  the  truth.  They  read,  and  strive,  and 
pray ; they  feel  an  uneasiness,  and  a want, 
which  they  know  not  how  to  remedy ; they 
are  sincerely  desirous  to  know  and  do  the 
will  of  God ; and  yet,  through  misapprehen- 
sion, and  the  influence  of  popular  prejudice, 
they  are.  for  a season,  withheld  from  the 
means  that  would  relieve  them.  But  at  length 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  explains  to  them 
the  meaning  of  their  former  exercises,  ex- 
actly answers  to  the  state  of  their  minds,  and 
thereby  brings  its  own  evidence.  Similar  to 
this  was  the  case  of  Nathaniel.  When  our 
Lord  referred  him  to  what  had  passed  under 
the  fig-tree,  where  he  had  thought  himself 
alone  and  unobserved,  his  doubts  and  scruples 
vanished  in  an  instant.  There  is  little  doubt 
but  Nathaniel  had  been  praying  under  the 
fig-tree,  and  probably  desiring  a farther 
knowledge  of  the  prophecies,  and  their  ac- 
complishment in  the  Messiah.  He  had  heard 
of  Jesus,  but  could  not  fully  clear  up  the  ob- 
jections made  against  him ; but  now  he  was 
convinced  and  satisfied  in  a moment. 

* See  Ilom.  xi.  23.  There  are  but  few  who  dispute 
upon  the  subject  of  the  divine  decrees  with  that  rever- 
ence and  caution  St.  Paul  expresses.  In  chap.  ix.  when 
an  objection  was  started,  he  cuts  it  short  with,  li  But 
who  art  thou,  O man,  that  repliest  against  God  ?” 
And  here  he  breaks  off  abruptly,  with  “ O the  depth !” 
fee.  He  seems  to  have  followed  the  narrow  winding 
streams  of  human  reasoning,  till  he  finds  himself  un- 
awares upon  the  brink  of  an  ocean  that  has  neither 
hounds  nor  bottom.  And  every  word  expresses  the  re- 
verence and  astonishment  with  which  his  mind  was 
filled;  the  wisdom  of  the  divine  councils  in  their  first 
plan  : the  knowledge  of  their  extensive  consequences  in 
this  world,  in  all  worlds,  in  time,  and  in  eternity  ; the 
riches  of  that  wisdom  and  knowledge ; the  depth  of 
those  riches;  his  counsels  inaccessible,  his  proceedings 
untraceable  : all  is  wonderful  in  St.  Paul’s  view.  How 
different  this  from  the  trifling  arrogant  spirit  of  too 
many  upon  this  topic  1 


[book  I 

The  attention  of  some  is  drawn  by  what 
they  see  and  hear  around  them.  They  form 
a favourable  opinion  of  the  gospel  from  the 
remarkable  effects  it  produces ; but  their  first 
inquiries  are  damped  by  difficulties  which 
they  cannot  easily  get  over,  and  they  are 
ready  to  say,  How  can  these  things  be ? Their 
interests  and  connections  in  life  are  a farther 
hinderance ; the  fear  of  man,  which  bringeth 
a snare,  is  a great  restraint  upon  their  in- 
quiries; but  now  and  then  when  they  can 
venture  without  being  noticed,  they  seek 
farther  instruction.  Now,  though  this  hesi- 
tating spirit,  which  pays  so  much  deference 
to  worldly  regards  in  the  search  of  truth,  is 
highly  blameable  ; yet  the  Lord  who  is  rich 
in  mercy,  is  often  pleased  to  produce  a happy 
and  abiding  change  from  such  imperfect  be- 
ginnings. As  they  increase  in  knowledge, 
they  gain  more  courage,  and  in  time  arrive 
to  a comfortable  experience  and  open  profes- 
sion of  the  truth.  Thus  it  was  with  Nicode- 
mus : he  was  at  first  ignorant  and  fearful ; 
but  his  interview  with  Jesus  by  night,  had 
a good  effect.  He  afterwards  ventured  to 
speak  more  publicly  (John  vii.  50)  in  his 
favour,  though  still  he  did  not  join  himself  to 
the  disciples ; but  the  circumstances  of 
Christ’s  death  freed  him  from  all  fear,  and 
inspired  him  to  attempt  the  most  obnoxious 
service,  when  the  apostles  themselves  were 
afraid  to  be  seen,  John  xix.  39. 

Others  are  first  prompted  to  hear  the  gos- 
pel from  no  higher  motive  than  curiosity; 
but  going  as  mere  spectators,  they  find  them- 
selves retained  as  parties  unawares.  The 
word  of  God,  powerful  and  penetrating  as  a 
two-edged  sword,  discovers  the  thoughts  and 
intents  of  their  hearts,  presses  upon  their 
consciences,  and  seems  addressed  to  them- 
selves alone.  The  sentiments  they  carry 
away  with  them  are  far  different  from  those 
they  brought ; and  a change  in  their  whole 
deportment  immediately  . takes  place.  Such 
was  the  case  of  Zaccheus  (Luke  xix.  5 :)  he 
had  heard  much  of  Jesus,  and  desired  to  see 
him ; for  this  end,  he  ran  before,  and  climbed 
a tree,  from  whence  he  purposed  to  behold 
him  unobserved.  But  how  great  must  his 
surprise  and  emotion  have  been,  when  Jesus, 
whom  he  had  considered  as  a stranger,  looked 
up,  called  him  by  his  name,  and  invited  him- 
self to  his  house. 

Some  are  drawn  by  the  report  of  others, 
freely  declaring  what  the  Lord  has  done  for 
their  souls.  The  relation  awakens  in  them 
desires  after  him  which  are  not  disappointed ; 
for  he  is  rich  enough  to  satisfy  all  who  seek 
to  him.  So  the  Samaritans,  whose  expecta- 
tions were  first  raised  by  the  woman’s  de- 
claration, “ Come  and  see  a man  which  told 
me  all  things  that  ever  I did  ; is  not  this  the 
Christ1?”  (John  iv.  43)  had  soon  a more  con- 
vincing testimony,  and  could  say,  “ Now  we 
believe,  not  because  of  thy  word,  but  we 


IMMEDIATELY  BEFORE  THE  ASCENSION. 


35 


CHAP.  IV.] 

have  heard  him  ourselves;  and  know  that 
this  is  indeed  the  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  the 
world.” 

To  a few  the  first  impulses  of  divine  grace 
come  suddenly  and  unthought  of,  when  their 
hearts  and  hands  are  engaged  quite  another 
way ; as  Saul,  who  was  seeking  his  father’s 
asses,  received  the  unexpected  news  of  a 
kingdom.  A ray  of  truth  pierces  their  minds 
like  lightning,  and  disposes  them  to  leave 
their  schemes  unfinished,  to  seek  the  king- 
dom of  God  and  his  righteousness  only. 
Thus  our  Lord  passed  by  the  sons  of  Zebe- 
dee  when  mending  their  nets  (Mark  i.  16. 
19,)  and  Matthew  while  busied  at  the  receipt 
of  custom,  Mark  ii.  14.  He  only  said,  Fol- 
low me  ; he  used  no  arguments,  he  proposed 
no  rewards;  but  he  spoke  to  their  hearts, 
and,  by  the  constraining  power  of  his  love, 
engaged  them  to  a cheerful  and  immediate 
obedience. 

Afflictions  likewise  are  now,  no  less  than 
formerly,  a happy  means  to  bring  many  to 
Jesus.  He  prepares  them  for  heavenly  bless- 
ings, by  embittering  or  removing  their  crea- 
ture-comforts. Had  they  continued  in  pros- 
perity, they  would  not  have  thought  of  him ; 
but  the  loss  of  health,  or  friends,  or  sub- 
stance, disappointments  in  life,  or  a near 
prospect  of  death,  constrain  them  in  good 
earnest  to  seek  for  one  able  to  deliver  them. 
In  the  time  of  their  distress,  they  say,  Arise, 
and  save  us;  not  that  afflictions  in  them- 
selves can  produce  this  turn  of  thought. 
Too  many,  in  such  circumstances,  toss  like 
a wild  bull  in  a net ; but  when  he  sends  af- 
flictions for  this  purpose,  they  accomplish 
that  which  he  pleases.  Thus,  when  he  was 
upon  earth,  many  who  came,  or  were  brought 
(Mark  ii.  9)  to  him  for  the  relief  of  bodily 
disorders,  experienced  a double  cure.  He 
healed  (John  ix.  7.  36.  38)  their  diseases, 
and  pardoned  their  sins.  At  the  same  time 
that  he  restored  the  blind  to  sight  (John  iv. 
53,)  he  opened  the  eyes  of  their  minds.  He 
sometimes  made  the  afflictions  of  one  the 
means  to  bring  a whole  family  to  the  know- 
ledge of  his  grace.  A considerable  part  of 
his  followers  were  such  as  these,  whom  he 
had  graciously  relieved  from  distresses  in- 
curable by  any  hand  but  his.  Some  had  been 
long  and  grievously  tormented ; had  assayed 
every  means,  but  found  themselves  worse 
and  worse,  till  they  applied  to  him ; and  hav- 
ing known  the  happy  effects  of  his  power  and 
compassion,  they  would  leave  him  no  more. 

Lastly,  We  sometimes  meet  with  instances 
of  his  mercy  and  ability  to  save  even  to  the 
uttermost,  in  the  unhoped-for  conversion  of 
desperate  and  hardened  sinners,  who  have 
gone  on  witli  a high  hand,  regardless  of  mer- 
cies, warnings,  and  judgments,  till  they 
seemed  past  conviction,  and  given  up  to  a 
reprobate  mind.  Their  state  resembles  that 
of  the  demoniac,  Luke  viii.  They  are  so 


entirely  under  the  power  of  the  devil  (though 
perhaps  they  vainly  boast  of  freedom,)  that 
no  arguments,  no  motives,  no  resolutions,  can 
restrain  them  within  bounds ; but  they  break 
through  every  tie  of  nature,  conscience,  and 
reason,  and  are  restless  drudges  in  the  ser- 
vice of  sin,  though  they  feel  themselves 
miserable  at  present,  and  see  inevitable  ruin 
before  their  eyes.  Yet  even  this  case  is  not 
too  hard  for  him  on  whom  the  sinner’s  help 
is  laid.  He  can  dispossess  the  legion  with  a 
word ; he  can  take  the  prey  from  the  might}7, 
and  deliver  the  lawful  captive,  bind  the 
strong  one  armed,  and  divide  his  spoil.  Happy 
change ! when  the  power  of  grace  not  only 
sets  the  soul  at  liberty  from  sin  and  Satan, 
but  puts  it  in  possession  of  what  were  lately 
the  instruments  of  its  slavery ! when  all  the 
powers  and  faculties  of  body  and  mind  are 
redeemed  to  the  Lord’s  use,  and  the  experi- 
ence of  past  evil  is  made  conducive  to  future 
comfort  and  advantage!  Such  an  instance 
was  that  great  sinner,  that  penitent,  believ- 
ing, happy  soul,  of  whom  it  is  emphatically 
remarked,  “ She  loved  much,  because  much 
had  been  forgiven  her,”  Luke  vii.  47.  Some- 
times the  deliverance  is  deferred  till  near 
the  period  of  life.  The  poor  wretch,  labour- 
ing under  the  pangs  or  dread  of  death,  and 
trembling  at  the  apprehension  of  falling  into 
the  hands  of  the  living  God,  is  snatched  as  a 
brand  out  of  the  fire ; he  receives  faith  in  a 
suffering  Saviour,  and  feels  the  power  of 
atoning  blood ; his  terrors  cease,  and  joy  suc- 
ceeds, a joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory. 
Thus  the  expiring  malefactor  wag  converted 
upon  the  cross  (Luke  xxiii.  43,)  and  received 
an  infallible  assurance  of  salvation. 

3.  The  characters  of  our  Lord’s  disciples, 
with  the  account  wTe  have  of  their  defects 
and  failings,  may  farther  illustrate  the  history 
of  his  church  and  gospel,  and  afford  an  apology 
for  the  blemishes,  which,  through  human  in- 
firmity, do  more  or  less  attend  the  prevalence 
of  his  doctrines. 

The  grace  of  God  has  a real  influence  upon 
the  whole  man.  It  enlightens  the  under- 
standing, directs  the  will,  purifies  the  affec- 
tions, regulates  the  passions,  and  corrects  the 
different  excesses  to  which  different  persons 
are  by  constitution  or  habit  inclined,  yet  it 
seldom  wfflolly  changes  the  complexion  or 
temper  of  the  animal  frame.  It  does  not  im- 
part any  new  natural  powers,  though  it 
teaches  the  use  and  improvement  of  those 
we  have  received.  It  will  dispose  us  to  seek 
instruction,  make  us  open  to  conviction,  and 
willing  to  part  with  our  prejudices,  so  far 
and  so  soon  as  we  discover  them,  but  it  will 
not  totally  and  instantaneously  remove  them. 
Hence  there  are  a great  variety  of  characters 
in  the  Christian  life;  and  the  several  graces 
of  the  Spirit,  as  zeal,  love,  meekness,  faith, 
appear  with  peculiar  advantage  in  different 
subjects,  yet  so  that  every  commendable  pro- 


36 


STATE  OF  THE  CHURCH 


perty  is  subject  to  its  particular  inconve- 
nience. Perfection  cannot  be  found  in  fallen 
man.  The  best  are  sometimes  blameable,  and 
the  wisest  often  mistaken.  Warm  and  active 
tempers,  though  influenced  in  the  main  by 
the  noble  ambition  of  pleasing  God  in  all 
things,  are  apt  to  overshoot  themselves,  and  to 
discover  a resentment  and  keenness  of  spirit 
which  cannot  be  wholly  justified.  Others  of 
a more  fixed  and  sedate  temper,  though  less 
subject  to  this  extreme,  are  prone  to  its  op- 
posite ; their  gentleness  degenerates  into  in- 
dolence, their  caution  into  cowardice.  The 
principle  of  self,  likewise,  which,  though  sub- 
dued, is  not  eradicated,  will  in  some  instances 
appear.  Add  to  this  the  unknown  access  and 
influence  which  the  evil  spirits  have  upon 
our  minds,  the  sudden  and  new  emergencies 
which  surprise  us  into  action  before  we  have 
had  time  to  deliberate,  with  many  other  con- 
siderations of  a like  nature ; and  it  will  be  no 
wonder  that  some  things  are  always  amiss* 
in  the  best  and  most  successfu  attempts  to 
promote  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of 
souls.  And  it  is  farther  to  be  noted,  that  some 
individuals  will  be  found  who,  though  seem- 
ingly engaged  in  the  same  good  wrork,  and 
for  a time  pretending  to  much  zeal,  are  es- 
sentially defective  in  their  hearts  and  views ; 
and  when  at  length  their  true  characters  are 
exposed,  the  world,  who  either  cannot,  or 
will  not  distinguish,  charge  the  faults  of  a 
few  upon  a whole  profession,  as,  in  the  former 
case,  they  wound  the  character  of  a good 
man  for  unavoidable  and  involuntary  mis- 
takes. We  shall  therefore  show,  that  either 
the  exceptions  made,  and  so  loudly  rever- 
berated in  our  ears,  against  the  gospel  doc- 
trine, on  these  accounts,  are  unjust,  or  that 
there  was  sufficient  cause  to  reject  and  con- 
demn our  Lord  and  his  apostles  for  the  same 
reasons. 

The  character  of  Peter  is  marked  with  ad- 
mirable propriety  and  consistency  by  the 
evangelists.  He  every  where  appears  like 
himself.  Earnestly  devoted  to  his  Master’s 
person,  and  breathing  an  honest  warmth  for 
his  service,  he  was  in  a manner  the  eye,  the 
hand,  the  mouth  of  the  apostles : he  was  the 
first  to  ask,  to  answer,  to  propose,  and  to 
execute:  he  made  a noble  confession,  for 
which  our  Lord  honoured  him  with  a peculiar 
commendation : he  waited  but  for  a command 
to  walk  to  him  upon  the  water : he  was  not 
afraid  to  expose  himself  in  his  Lord’s  defence, 
when  he  was  surrounded  and  apprehended 
by  his  enemies : and  though,  in  this  last  in- 
stance, his  affection  was  ill  expressed,  yet 


* A lukewarm,  cautious  spirit  can  easily  avoid,  and 
readily  censure  the  mistakes  and  faults  of  those  who, 
fired  with  an  honest  warmth  for  the  honour  of  God  and 
the  good  of  souls,  are  sometimes  transported  beyond  the 
bounds  of  strict  prudence.  But  though  the  best  inten- 
tion cannot  make  that  right  which  is  wrong  in  itself, 
yet  the  zeal,  diligence,  and  disinterested  aim  of  such 
persons  are  worthy  of  our  esteem. 


[BOOK  I. 

his  motive  was  undoubtedly  praise-worthy. 
His  heart  flamed  with  zeal  and  love,  and 
therefore  he  was  always  forward  to  distin- 
guish himself. 

But  the  warmth  of  Peter’s  temper  often 
betrayed  him  into  great  difficulties,  and 
showed  that  the  grace  he  had  received  was 
consistent  with  many  imperfections.  Though 
he  sincerely  loved  Christ,  and  had  forsaken 
all  for  him,  he  was  at  one  time  so  ignorant 
of  the  true  design  of  his  incarnation,  that  he 
was  angry  and  impatient  to  hear  him  speak 
of  his  sufferings,  and  brought  upon  himself  a 
most  severe  rebuke.  Not  content  with  the 
ordinary  services  allotted  to  him,  he  offered 
himself  to  unnecessary  trials,  as  in  the  above 
instance,  when  he  pressed  to  walk  upon  the 
water.  The  event  showed  him  his  own 
weakness  and  insufficiency,  yet  his  self-con- 
fidence revived  and  continued.  When  our 
Lord  warned  him  again  and  again  of  his  ap- 
proaching fall,  he  thought,  and  boldly  affirmed 
that  it  was  impossible.  He  was  sincere  in  his 
protestation ; but  the  actual  experiment  was 
necessary  to  convince  and  humble  him.  Ac- 
cordingly, when  left  to  himself,  he  fell  before 
the  first  temptation.  And  here  the  im 
petuosity  of  his  temper  was  still  manifest. 
He  did  not  stop  at  a simple  denial  of  Jesus, 
he  confirmed  it  by  an  oath,f  and  at  length 
proceeded  to  utter  bitter  imprecations  against 
himself,  if  he  so  much  as  knew  him,  whom 
he  had  seen  transfigured  in  glory  upon  the 
mount,  and  prostrate  in  an  agony  in  the  gar- 
den. Such  was  the  weakness  and  incon- 
sistency of  this  prince  of  the  apostles. 

None  of  these  excesses  appeared  in  the 
conduct  of  the  traitor  Judas.  He  was  so  cir- 
cumspect and  reserved,  that  we  do  not  find 
any  of  the  disciples  had  the  least  suspicion 
of  him.  But,  whilst  his  heart  was  full  of 
wickedness,  he  could  find  fault  with  others, 
and  charge  their  best  expressions  of  love 
with  indiscretion.  When  Mary  anointed  our 
Lord’s  feet  with  ointment  (John  xii.  5,  6,)  he 
was  displeased  at  the  waste,  and  professed  a 
warm  concern  for  the  poor ; but  we  are  told 
the  true  reason  of  his  economy : It  was  not 
because  he  cared  for  the  poor,  but  because  he 
was  a thief,  and  had  the  bag  which  contained 
the  common  stock  entrusted  to  him.  The 
charge  of  the  bag  is  an  office  full  of  tempta- 
tion, and  an  attachment  to  the  bag  has  been 
often  at  the  bottom  of  many  censures  and 
misrepresentations  which  have  been  thrown 
out  against  the  people  of  God.  It  has  been, 
and  it  will  be  so ; but  the  Lord  has  appointed 
that  wherever  the  gospel  should  be  preached, 
to  the  end  of  the  world,  this  action  of  Mary, 
with  the  observation  of  Judas  upon  it,  and 

t Mark  xiv.  71.  “ He  began  to  curse  and  swear.” — 
To  imprecate  the  most  dreadful  curses  upon  himself, 
and  call  solemnly  on  God  to  execute  them.  This  was 
indeed  the  most  probable  method  to  free  himself  from 
the  suspicion  of  being  a disciple  of  Jesus,  for  no  such 
language  had  been  till  then  heard  airong  hie  followers. 


IMMEDIATELY  BEFORE  THE  ASCENSION. 


37 


CHAP.  IV.] 

the  motive  from  which  he  made  it,  should  be 
handed  down  together,  that  we  may  not  be 
discouraged  at  things  of  the  same  kind.  With- 
out doubt,  the  treason  of  Judas,  and  his  un- 
happy end,  after  having  maintained  a fair 
character  so  long,  and  shared  with  the  rest  in 
the  honours  of  the  apostleship,  were  to  them 
an  occasion  of  grief,  and  afforded  their  ene- 
mies a subject  of  reproach  and  triumph.  But 
we  may  believe  one  reason  why  our  Lord 
chose  Judas,  and  continued  him  so  long  with 
his  disciples,  to  have  been,  that  we  might 
learn  by  this  awful  instance  not  to  be  sur- 
prised if  some,  who  have  made  a show  in  the 
church,  been  chosen  to  important  offices,  and 
furnished  with  excellent  gifts,  do  in  the  end 
prove  hypocrites  and  traitors:  “ Let  him  that 
thinketh  he  standeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall.” 

A desire  of  pre-eminence  and  distinction  is 
very  unsuitable  to  the  followers  of  Jesus, 
who  made  himself  the  servant  of  all ; very 
unbecoming  the  best  of  the  children  of  men, 
who  owe  their  breath  to  the  mercy  of  God, 
have  nothing  that  they  can  call  their  own, 
and  have  been  unfaithful  in  the  improvement 
of  every  talent.  We  allow  that  every  ap- 
pearance of  this  is  a blemish  in  the  Christian 
character,  and  especially  in  a Christian  mi- 
nister ; but  if,  on  some  occasions,  and  in  some 
degree,  human  infirmity  has  wrought  this 
way,  though  no  example  can  justify  it,  yet 
those  who,  through  ignorance  of  their  own 
hearts,  are  too  rigid  censurers  of  others,  may 
be  reminded  that  this  evil  frequently  dis- 
covered itself  in  the  apostles.  They  often 
disputed  who  should  be  the  greatest;  and, 
when  our  Lord  was  speaking  of  his  approach- 
ing sufferings,  two  of  them  chose  that  un- 
seasonable time  to  preclude  the  rest,  and 
petitioned  that  they  might  have  the  chief 
seats  in  his  kingdom.  The  first  offence  was 
theirs ; but  when  the  ten  heard  it,  they  were 
all  moved  with  indignation,  and  showed 
themselves  equally  desirous  of  superiority. 
It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  unless  the  apostles 
were  hypocrites  and  mercenaries,  some  tran- 
sient escapes  of  this  sort  (though  confessedly 
criminal  and  indecent)  are  no  sure  proofs 
that  such  a person  is  not  in  the  main  sincere, 
disinterested,  and  truly  devoted  to  the  ser- 
vice of  God  and  his  gospel. 

No  less  contrary  to  the  meek  and  gracious 
spirit  of  Jesus  is  an  angry  zeal,  expressing 
itself  in  terms  of  ill-will  and  bitterness  to 
those  who  oppose  or  injure  us.  One  of  the 
highest  attainments  and  brightest  evidences 
of  true  grace,  is,  from  a sense  of  the  love 
and  example  of  Christ,  to  show  bowels  of 
mercy  and  long-suffering  to  all  men,  and  by 
perseverance  in  well-doing  to  overcome  evil 
with  good.  And  a contrary  behaviour  (if 
frequent  and  notorious)  will,  like  a dead  fly 
in  precious  ointment,  destroy  the  savour,  if 
not  the  efficacy  of  all  we  can  attempt  for  the 
service  of  God  in  the  wprld.  However,  if 


repeated  falsehoods,  and  studied  provoca- 
tions do  sometimes,  in  an  unguarded  mo- 
ment, extort  from  the  disciples  of  Christ 
such  expressions  and  marks  of  displeasure 
as  in  their  cooler  hours  they  willingly  retract 
and  sincerely  repent  of  before  God,  this 
ought  not  to  be  exaggerated  beyond  bounds, 
as  an  offence  inconsistent  with  their  profes- 
sion, at  least  not  by  any  who  would  be  afraid 
to  speak  dishonourably  of  the  apostles  James 
and  John,  who  once  went  so  far  in  their  an- 
ger* as  to  demand  that  fire  might  be  sent 
from  heaven  to  devour  their  adversaries, 
Luke  ix.  54. 

We  might  proceed  to  other  particulars; 
but  enough  has  been  said  to  show  the  gene- 
ral resemblance  which  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel  in  latter  times  bears  to  our  Lord’s 
personal  ministry : the  doctrine  is  the  same, 
the  effects  the  same.  It  was,  and  it  is  to  many, 
“ a stone  of  stumbling,  and  a rock  of  offence.” 
The  opposition  it  has  met  with  has  been  al- 
ways owing  to  the  same  evil  principle  of 
pride,  and  the  love  of  sin,  which  are  latent  in 
every  unrenewed  heart:  though  the  pre- 
texts are  various,  they  may  be  reduced  to  a 
few  leading  motives  which  are  always  at 
work.  The  professors  of  this  gospel  have  at 
no  time  been  very  numerous,  if  compared 
with  those  who  have  rejected  it;  and  of 
these,  too  many  have  dishonoured  or  forsaken 
it.  Neither  have  those  who  have  received 
it  most  cordially,  and  been  most  desirous  to 
adorn  and  promote  it,  been  wholly  exempt 
from  mistakes  and  imperfections.  The  tenor 
of  their  conduct  has  proved  them  partakers 
of  a more  excellent  spirit  than  others ; their 
faith  in  Jesus  has  not  been  an  empty  notion, 
but  fruitful  of  good  works,  such  as  no  man 
could  do  except  God  was  with  him.  They 
have  been  governed  by  higher  motives,  and 
devoted  to  nobler  aims,  than  the  world  can 
either  understand  or  bear; — yet  they  are 
deeply  conscious  of  inherent  infirmity,  and 
sometimes  (to  their  great  grief)  they  give 
too  visible  proofs  of  it,  which  their  watchful 
adversaries  are  glad  to  aggravate  and  charge 
upon  them  as  consequences  of  their  doctrine. 
This  should  induce  all  who  love  the  Lord 
Jesus  to  redouble  their  guard,  and  to  pray 
with  David  that  they  may  be  led  in  the  right 
way  because  of  their  observers.  If  the  ques- 
tion is  concerning  the  infirmities,  or  even 


* They  thought  they  were  influenced  by  a commend- 
able -eal  for  their  Master,  and  that  their  proposal  was 
, warranted  by  an  authorized  precedent.  We  do  not  find 
| that  they  ever  wished  for  fire  to  consume  the  Scribes 
and  Pharisees,  who  were  Christ’s  most  inveterate  ene- 
mies. But  when  the  Samaritans  rejected  him,  the  vile 
Samaritans,  whom  they,  upon  a national  prejudice,  had 
been  accustomed  to  hate,  then  their  hearts  deceivet 
them,  and  they  indulged  their  own  corrupt  passions, 
while  they  supposed  they  were  animated  by  a zeal  f 
Christ.  Are  we  not  often  deceived  in  the  same  way 
Can  we  not  silently  bear,  or  ingenuously  extenuate  the 
faults  and  mistakes  of  our  own  party,  while  we  are  al 
zeal  and  emotion  to  expose,  censure,  and  condemn 
what  is  amiss  in  others. 


38 


STATE  OF  THE  CHURCH 


the  vices  of  others,  almost  every  one  is  ready 
to  plead  in  their  behalf;  allowances  are 
freely  and  largely  made  for  human  frailty, 
and  none  are  willing  to  be  thought  harsh  or 
censorious.  But  the  believer  in  Jesus  must 
look  for  no  abatement  or  extenuation ; even 
the  professed  admirers  of  candour  and  cha- 
rity will  not  hesitate  to  put  the  worst  con- 
struction upon  all  he  says  or  does ; for  they 
are  seeking  occasion  to  wound  the  gospel 
through  his  misconduct.  They  are  sensible 
that  he  is  generally  above  them ; and  there- 
fore rejoice  to  find  or  pretend  a flaw,  on 
which  they  may  expatiate,  to  reduce  him  as 
near  as  possible  to  their  own  level ; though, 
if  their  censures  are  extended  to  their  just 
consequence,  they  will  (as  we  have  seen) 
fall  hard  upon  the  apostles  themselves. 

I hope,  that  what  I have  said  upon  this 
subject  will  neither  be  misunderstood  nor 
perverted.  We  do  not  defend  even  the  in- 
firmities of  the  best  men ; much  less  would 
we  provide  a plea  for  persecution  or  ambi- 
tion. Let  not  the  man,  who  supposes  gain  to 
be  godliness,  who  makes  the  gospel  a ladder, 
whereby  to  climb  the  heights  of  worldly  pre- 
ferment, whose  heart,  like  the  insatiable  fire, 
is  craving  more,  and  practising  every  art  to 
accumulate  wealth  and  honour  in  the  church ; 
let  not  the  proud  man,  who  would  lord  it  over 
conscience,  and  though  unable  to  command 
fire  from  heaven,  would  gladly  prepare  fire 
and  slaughter  upon  earth  for  all  who  will 
not  venture  their  souls  upon  his  faith ; let 
not  these  avail  themselves  of  the  examples 
of  James  and  John : but  rather  let  them 
tremble  at  the  reflection,  that  while  they 
manifest  no  part  of  the  apostles’  graces,  they 
are  entirely  possessed  of  those  tempers,  the 
smallest  traces  of  which  our  Lord  so  severely 
rebuked  in  his  disciples. 

The  first  believers,  though  not  faultless, 
were  sincere : the  natural  disposition  of  their 
hearts  was  changed;  they  believed  in  Jesus; 
they  loved  him  ; they  devoted  themselves  to 
his  service ; they  submitted  to  his  instruc- 
tions, shared  in  his  reproach,  and  could  not 
be  either  enticed  or  intimidated  to  leave  him. 
Their  gracious  Master  was  their  guide  and 
guard,  their  advocate  and  counsellor ; when 
they  were  in  want,  in  danger,  in  trouble,  or 
in  doubt,  they  applied  to  him,  and  found  re- 
lief; hence  they  learned  by  degrees  to  cast 
all  their  .care  upon  him.  He  corrected  every 
wrong  disposition ; he  pardoned  their  fail- 
ings, and  enabled  them  to  do  better.  His 
precepts  taught  them  true  wisdom ; and  his 
own  example,  which,  to  those  who  loved  him, 
had  the  force  of  a thousand  precepts,  was  at 
once  the  model  and  the  motive  of  their  obe- 
dience. To  make  them  ashamed  of  aspiring 
to  be  chief,  he  himself,  though  Lord  of  all,  con- 
versed among  them  as  a servant,  and  conde- 
scended to  wash  their  feet;  to  teach  them 
forbearance  and  gentleness  to  their  opposers, 


[book  i. 

they  saw  him  weep  over  his  bitterest  ene 
mies,  and  heard  him  pray  for  his  actual  mur- 
derers. 

Thus  they  gradually  advanced  in  faitn 
love,  and  holiness,  as  the  experience  of  ever} 
day  disclosed  to  them  some  new  discovery  of 
the  treasures  of  wisdom,  grace,  and  power, 
residing  in  their  Lord  and  Saviour : he  ex- 
plained to  them  in  private  the  difficulties 
which  occurred  in  his  more  public  discourses ; 
by  his  observations  on  the  common  occur- 
rences of  life  he  opened  to  them  the  myste- 
rious volumes  of  creation  and  providence, 
which  none  but  those  whom  he  vouchsafes 
to  teach  can  understand  aright : he  prayed 
for  them,  and  with  them,  and  taught  them  te 
pray  for  themselves  : he  revealed  unto  them 
the  unseen  realities  of  the  eternal  world,  and 
supported  them  under  the  prospect  of  ap- 
proaching trials;  particularly  of  his  depar- 
ture from  them,  by  assuring  them  that  he 
was  going  on  their  behalf  to  prepare  them  a 
place  in  his  kingdom,  and  that  in  a little 
time  he  would  return  to  receive  them  tc 
himself,  that  they  might  dwell  with  him  foi 
ever. 

What  he  personally  spoke  to  them,  and 
acted  in  their  presence,  was  recorded  by  his 
direction,  and  has  been  preserved  by  his 
providence  for  the  use  and  comfort  of  his 
church.  Though  his  enemies  have  raged 
horribly,  they  have  not  been  able  to  sup- 
press the  divine  volume ; and,  though  invisi- 
ble to  mortal  eyes,  he  is  still  near  to  all  that 
seek  him ; and  so  supplies  the  want  of  his 
bodily  presence  by  the  secret  communica- 
tions of  his  Spirit,  that  his  people  have  no 
reason  to  complain  of  any  disadvantage : 
though  they  see  him  not,  they  believe,  love, 
rejoice,  and  obey;  their  attention  and  de- 
pendence are  fixed  upon  him ; they  intrust 
him  with  all  their  concerns ; they  rely  upon 
his  promises;  they  behold  him  as  their  High- 
priest,  Advocate,  and  Shepherd;  they  live 
upon  his  fulness,  and  plead  his  righteous- 
ness ; and  they  find  and  feel  that  their  reliance 
is  not  in  vain. 

The  disciples  were  content  for  his  sake  to 
bear  the  scorn  and  injurious  treatment  of  the 
world : they  expected  no  better  usage,  nor 
desired  a higher  honour,  than  to  be  fellow- 
sufferers  with  their  Lord.  When  he  propos- 
ed returning  to  Judea,  at  a time  they  thought 
dangerous,  and  they  could  not  alter  his  pur- 
pose, they  did  not  wish  to  be  left  behind : 
“ Let  us  go  (says  one  of  them  to  the  rest,) 
that  we  may  die  with  him.”  It  is  true, 
when  he  was  actually  apprehended,  the  first 
shock  of  the  trial  was  too  strong : they  for- 
sook him  and  fled.  He  permitted  this,  both 
to  exempt  them  from  danger,  and  to  let  them 
know  that  of  themselves  they  could  do  no- 
thing. But  it  seems  they  did  not  go  far. 
When  Thomas  afterwards  said.  “Except  I 
shall  see  in  his  hands  the  print  of  the  nails, 


CHAP.  IV.  j 


IMMEDIATELY  BEFORE  THE  ASCENSION. 


and  put  my  finger  into  the  print  of  the  nails, 
and  thrust  my  hand  into  his  side,  I will  not 
oelieve,”  he  spoke  like  one  who  had  been  an 
eye-witness  to  his  sufferings,  and  expresses 
an  earnestness  as  if  he  still  saw  him  wounded 
and  bleeding.  This  catastrophe  indeed  al- 
most disconcerted  them ; they  had  trusted  it 
was  he  that  should  deliver  Israel ; but  they 
saw  him  oppressed  and  slain  by  wicked  men. 
From  that  time  to  his  resurrection  was  a 
a mournful  interval,  the  darkest  and  most 
distressing  period  his  church  ever  knew. 

But  the  third  day  dispelled  their  grief : he 
returned  victorious  from  the  grave,  proclaim- 
ing peace  by  the  blood  of  the  cross ; he  de- 
clared, and  his  appearance  proved  it,  that  the 
ransom  was  paid  and  accepted ; and  that  hav- 
ing now  overcome  the  sharpness  of  death,  he 
had  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  be- 
lievers. Then  he  spoke  peace  to  their  hearts  : 
he  opened  their  understandings  to  know  the 
scriptures,  and  breathed  upon  them  his  Holy 
Spirit : he  conversed  frequently  with  them 
during  forty  days ; gave  them  a large  com- 
mission to  preach  his  gospel,  and  an  invalu- 
able promise  of  his  presence  with  them  to  the 
end  of  the  world. 

When  he  had  thus  confirmed  them  by 
those  instructions  and  assurances,  which  his 
wisdom  saw  necessary,  he  was  received  up 
to  heaven.  They  followed  him  with  their 
hearts  and  eyes  a while,  and  then  returned 
to  Jerusalem  rejoicing.  They  were  not 
ashamed  of  their  crucified  Lord,  or  unwilling 
to  bear  the  contemptuous  names  of  Galileans 
or  Nazarenes  for  his  sake.  They  were  not 
afraid,  as  if  left  like  sheep  without  a shep- 
herd in  the  midst  of  their  enemies:  they 
knew,  that  though  they  could  see  him  no 
more,  his  eye  would  be  always  upon  them, 
and  his  ear  open  to  their  prayer : they  wait- 
ed, according  to  his  command,  for  a farther 
supply  of  his  Spirit,  to  qualify  them  for  the 
important  and  difficult  services  which  were 
before  them.  Nor  did  they  wait  long  ; a few 
days  after  his  ascension,  while  they  were 
praying  with  one  heart  and  mind,  the  place 
where  they  were  assembled  was  shaken  as 
with  a mighty  wind ; the  Spirit  of  power 
and  wisdom  was  abundantly  communicated 
to  them  ; they  spoke  with  new  tongues,  and 
immediately  began  to  preach  boldly,  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

With  this  solemn  and  memorable  event,  I 
shall  open  the  second  book,  and  take  up  the 


thread  of  the  gospel  history  from  that  glorious 
day  of  divine  power.  The  contents  of  this 
first  book,  namely,  a brief  view  of  the  neces- 
sity and  nature  of  the  gospel-dispensation, — 
the  causes  why  it  is  and  has  jeen  opposed, — 
and  the  circumstances  of  the  first  believers, 
— I have  premised,  as  general  principles,  for 
my  own  and  the  reader’s  assistance  in  the 
progress  of  the  work. 

It  is  much  to  be  wished,  that  every  reader 
might  be  impressed  with  the  importance  of 
our  subject.  It  is  not  a point  of  curiosity,  but 
of  universal  concern,  and  that  in  the  highest 
and  most  interesting  sense.  Most  of  the 
researches  and  disquisitions  which  employ 
the  time  and  talents  of  men,  are  of  a trivia! 
or  indifferent  nature.  W e may  range  on  dif- 
ferent sides  concerning  them ; we  may  give 
or  refuse,  or  retract  our  assent,  when  and  as 
often  as  we  please ; we  may  be  totally  igno- 
rant of  them  without  loss,  or  be  skilled  in 
them  all  without  deriving  any  solid  comfort 
or  advantage  from  them : but  the  gospel  of 
Christ  is  not  like  the  dry  uninteresting  theo- 
ries of  human  wisdom ; it  will  either  wound 
or  heal,  be  a savour  of  life  or  of  death,  a 
source  of  endless  comfort,  or  the  occasion  of 
aggravated  condemnation,  to  all  that  hear  of 
it.  To  receive  it,  is  to  receive  the  earnest 
and  assurance  of  eternal  happiness ; to  reject 
it,  or  remain  wilfully  ignorant  of  its  charac- 
ters and  properties,  will  leave  the  soul  op- 
pressed with  guilt,  and  exposed  to  the  wrath 
of  God  for  ever.  It  highly  concerns  us,  there- 
fore, to  inquire,  Whether  we  believe  the 
gospel  or  no,  whether  what  we  call  the  gos- 
pel is  the  same  that  Christ  and  his  apostles 
taught,  and  whether  it  has  had  the  same  or 
similar  effects  upon  our  hearts?  We  live 
where  the  gospel  is  generally  professed,  and 
we  are  reputed  Christians  from  our  cradles ; 
but  the  word  of  God  cautions  us  to  take  heed, 
lest  we  be  deceived.  We  see  Christianity 
divided  into  innumerable  sects  and  parties., 
each  supported  by  names,  arguments,  and 
books,  and  fighting  for  the  credit  of  a de- 
nomination : but  how  many  forget,  that  in  a 
little  time  all  these  divisions  and  subdivisions 
will  be  reduced  to  two;  the  only  real  and 
proper  distribution  by  which  mankind,  as  to 
their  religious  character,  ever  was  or  will  be 
distinguished,  and  according  to  which  their 
final  states  will  be  speedily  decided, — The 
children  of  God,  and  the  children  of  the 
wicked  one. 


BOOK  II. 


OF  THE  SECOND  PERIOD  OF  CHRISTIANITY. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Of  the  progress  of  the  gospel  from  our 

Lord's  ascension  to  the  close  of  the  first 

century. 

The  natural  weakness  of  man  is  conspicu- 
ous in  his  most  important  undertakings: 
having  no  fund  of  sufficiency  in  himself,  he 
is  forced  to  collect  all  from  without;  and  if 
the  greatness  of  his  preparations  are  not 
answerable  to  the  extent  of  his  designs,  he 
has  little  hopes  of  success.  Farther,  when 
he  has  planned  and  provided  to  the  utmost 
of  his  power,  he  is  still  subject  to  innumer- 
able contingencies,  which  he  can  neither 
foresee  nor  prevent;  and  has  often  the  mor- 
tification to  see  his  fairest  prospects  blasted, 
and  the  whole  apparatus  of  his  labour  and 
care  only  contribute  to  make  his  disappoint- 
ment more  conspicuous  and  painful. 

The  reverse  of  this  is  the  character  of  the 
wonder-working  God.  To  his  power  every 
thing  is  easy : he  knows  how  to  employ  every 
creature  and  contingency,  as  a means  to  ac- 
complish his  designs ; not  a seeming  difficulty 
can  intervene  but  by  his  permission ; and  he 
.only  permits  it  to  illustrate  his  own  wisdom 
and  agency,  in  making  it  subservient  to  his 
will.  Thus,  having  all  hearts  and  events  in 
his  hands,  he  fulfils  his  own  counsels  with 
the  utmost  ease  and  certainty ; and  to  show 
that  the  work  is  his  own,  he  often  proceeds 
by  such  methods  as  vain  men  account  weak 
and  insignificant;  producing  the  most  exten- 
sive and  glorious  consequences  from  small 
and  inconsiderable  beginnings.  Thus  the 
Lord  of  hosts  hath  purposed  to  stain  the  pride 
of  all  human  glory. 

This  observation  might  be  confirmed  by 
innumerable  examples  taken  from  the  com- 
mon history  and  experience  of  mankind ; but 
the  subject  of  our  present  undertaking  ex- 
hibits the  most  illustrious  proof.  When  the 
Jews  had  seen  Jesus  crucified,  dead,  and 
buried,  they  expected  to  hear  no  more  of 
him:  his  disciples  were  few,  men  of  no  au- 
thority, learning,  or  influence;  and  since 
their  master,  who  had  made  them  such  large 
promises,  was  at  last  unable  to  save  himself 
from  death,  it  was  probably  expected,  that 
nis  followers  would  disperse  of  course,  for- 
sake their  supposed  delusions,  and  return  to 
their  fishing,  and  other  employments  suited  j 
to  their  capacities  and  talents.  I 

40 


They  knew  not  that  Jesus  had  arisen  from 
the  dead,  and  had  frequently  shown  himself 
to  his  servants,  to  comfort  and  confirm  their 
hearts.  They  little  thought  that  he,  whom 
they  had  seen  expire  on  the  cross,  was  im- 
moveably  seated  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
possessed  of  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth ; 
but  his  disciples  knew  this,  and  therefore 
continued  to  assemble  in  his  name.  We  do 
not  find  that  there  was  much  notice  taken  of 
them  till  the  feast  of  Pentecost,  which  was 
about  ten  days  after  his  ascension.  At  this 
season,*  by  the  Jewish  law,  the  first  fruits  of 
the  earth  were  presented  at  the  temple.  An 
appointment,  typical  of  those  more  sublime 
first  fruits  of  spiritual  gifts  and  graces  with 
which  the  Lord  on  this  day  enriched  his  dis- 
ciples, according  to  his  promise,  enabling 
them  to  preach  his  gospel,  and  make  his  word 
effectual  to  the  conversion  of  a large  multi- 
tude ; as  an  earnest  of  that  divine  power,  by 
which  he  would  support  and  extend  his 
church  and  ministry  to  the  end  of  the  world. 

When  the  hearts  of  God’s  people  are  united 
in  love,  and  pleading  his  promises  in  the  fer- 
vent exercise  of  faith  and  prayer,  great  things 
may  be  expected.  Such  was  the  happy  state 
of  the  disciples  on  this  solemn  day:  they 
were  assembled  with  one  accord ; no  jars  or 
divisions  had  as  yet  taken  place  among  them ; 
they  were  animated  with  one  desire,  and 
praying  with  one  mind.  Suddenly  and  won- 
derfully they  obtained  an  answer : the  place 
they  were  in  was  shaken  as  by  a mighty 
wind  (Acts  ii ;)  their  hearts  were  filled  with 
the  powerful  energy  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
they  were  instantaneously  enabled  to  speak 
languages  which  till  then  they  were  unac- 
quainted with.  These  inward  powers  were 
accompanied  with  the  visible  symbols  of  fiery 
tongues,  which  sat  upon  each  of  their  heads : 
a fit  emblem  both  of  the  new  faculties  they 
had  received,  and  of  the  conquering,  assimi- 
lating efficacy  of  the  Spirit  by  whom  they 
spoke;  whose  operations,  like  the  fire,  are 
vehement,  penetrating,  transforming,  and 
diffusive ; spreading  from  heart  to  heart,  from 
place  to  place,  till  the  flame,  which  was  now 
confined  within  a few  breasts,  was  com- 


* [Tiberius,  A.  D.  33.]  In  fixing  the  dates  of  uur 
history,  I shall  conform  to  what  I think  the  most  pro- 
bable and  authorised  opinion,  without  perplexing  ei 
ther  myself  or  my  readers  with  the  niceties  of  critical 
1 chronology. 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL,  &c. 


41 


CHAP.  I.] 

inunicated  to  many  nations,  people,  and  lan- 
guages. 

The  effects  of  this  divine  communication 
were  immediately  manifest;  they  were  filled 
with  love,  joy,  and  faith,  and  began  boldly 
and  publicly  to  praise  God.  Their  emotion 
and  zeal  could  not  be  long  unnoticed : those 
who  first  observed  it,  spoke  of  it  to  others,  and 
a rumour  was  spread  abroad.  Jerusalem  was 
at  that  time  the  occasional  resort  of  the  Jews 
and  Jewish  proselytes,  who  were  dispersed 
throughout  the  known  world,  and  multitudes 
had  come  from  different  countries  to  celebrate 
the  feast.  The  promiscuous  throng,  who 
assembled  upon  the  report,  and  had  been  ac- 
customed to  different  languages,  were  there- 
fore greatly  astonished  to  hear  of  the  won- 
derful works  of  God,  every  man  in  his  own 
tongue.  While  some  expressed  their  sur- 
prise at  this,  others  ascribed  it  to  the  effects 
of  wine,  and  showed  their  scorn  and  despite 
to  the  Spirit  of  grace,  by  reviling  the  apos- 
tles as  drunkards.  Thus  they  no  sooner  en- 
tered upon  their  public  service,  than  they 
began  to  find  the  same  treatment  whicli  their 
Lord  had  met  with,  and  were,  for  his  sake, 
the  subjects  of  calumny  and  derision.  This 
is  a remarkable  instance  of  the  sagacity  and 
temper  which  the  men  of  the  world  discover 
in  the  judgment  they  form  of  a work  of  God ; 
nor  is  it  probable,  that  our  modern  reasoners 
would  have  judged  more  favourably,  if  they 
could  have  been  present  at  such  a scene, 
where  several  persons  were  speaking  loud  at 
the  same  time,  and  each  in  a different  lan- 
guage : since  they  account  the  operations  of 
the  same  Spirit,  madness,  and  folly,  even 
where  they  are  not  attended  with  such  extra- 
ordinary cireumstances. 

This  weak  and  perverse  slander  was  im- 
mediately refuted  by  the  apostle  Peter,  who 
addressed  the  people  in  a grave  and  solemn 
discourse;  and,  having  in  few  words  ex- 
plained the  nature  of  the  fact,  and  shown 
that  it  was  an  accomplishment  of  ancient 
prophecies,  he  proceeded  to  apply  himself 
more  closely  to  their  consciences.  He  as- 
sured them  that  what  they  saw  and  heard 
was  wrought  by  the  power  of  Jesus  of  Naza- 
reth, whom  they  had  rejected  before  Pilate. 
He  informed  them  of  that  honour  and  glory 
which  he  now  possessed,  and  charged  them 
as  accomplices  in  the  murder  of  a person 
whose  character  and  dignity  God  had  vindi- 
cated by  raising  him  from  the  dead.  Though 
our  Saviour  had  but  few  disciples  during  his 
personal  ministry,  he  had  doubtless  left  a 
deep  impression  of  his  words  and  works  in 
the  hearts  of  many.  This  discourse  of  Peter 
would  naturally  recall  him  to  the  remem- 
brance of  those  who  had  seen  him  in  the 
flesh,  and  led  him  to  reflect  how  earnestly 
and  unjustly  they  had,  at  the  instigation  of 
their  priests,  compelled  Pilate  to  put  him  to 
death.  These  reflections  the  closeness  of 
Vol.  H.  F 


Peter’s  address,  and  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  concurred  to  give  them  a deep  con- 
viction of  their  sin ; they  were  pierced  to  the 
heart,  they  no  longer  wondered  as  curious 
spectators,  but  were  solicitous  for  themselves, 
and  cried  out,  Brethren,  what  shall  we  do? 
Peter  then  proceeded  to  open  the  treasure  of 
gospel-grace,  and  to  direct  them  to  Jesus, 
whom  they  had  crucified,  for  salvation.  The 
effect  of  this  day’s  preaching  (for  though  only 
Peter  is  named,  it  is  probable,  there  were 
more  than  one  preacher  or  one  discourse) 
was  signally  happy.  Three  thousand  souls 
were  converted,  and,  professing  their  faith 
and  repentance,  were  by  baptism  publicly 
joined  to  the  church. 

A further  addition  was  soon  after  made : 
Peter  and  John  having  recovered  a man  from 
incurable  lameness  by  faith  in  the  name  of 
Jesus,  the  report  of  the  miracle  brought  a 
great  concourse  of  people  together  a second 
time,  Acts  iii.  Peter  improved  the  occasion 
to  preach  to  them  at  the  temple  gate,  to  the 
purport  of  his  former  discourse.  He  had  an 
attentive  auditory,  and  his  word  was  made 
effectual  to  the  conversion  of  many.  But  by 
this  time  the  enemies  of  Jesus  were  greatly 
alarmed  at  the  progress  of  his  doctrine  (Acts 
iv.  16,  47 ;)  and  having*  notice  of  what  had 
passed,  the  priests  and  Sadducees  violently 
apprehended  Peter,  with  John,  and  put  them 
in  prison.  He  had  not  finished  his  discourse ; 
but  he  had  said  enough  to  be  remembered ; 
and  this  interruption,  with  the  boldness  of 
his  following  defence,  made  his  words  more 
regarded.  The  next  day  they  were  brought 
before  the  high-priest,  rulers,  and  elders; 
and  being  asked  concerning  the  late  miracle, 
Peter,  who  once  had  trembled  at  the  voice  of 
a girl,  was  not  afraid  to  use  the  utmost  free- 
dom and  plainness  with  the  council  and  heads 
of  the  Jewish  nation.  He  confessed  the  name 
and  cause  of  Jesus,  reminded  them  of  their 
wickedness  in  causing  him  to  be  crucified, 
and  in  direct  answer  to  their  question,  as- 
sured them  that  the  miracle  was  wrought  in 
his  name,  and  by  his  power.  Though  the 
council  were  highly  offended  with  this  lan- 
guage, and  the  more  so,  as  they  observed  the 
persons  who  spoke  were  private  and  unlet- 
tered men;  yet,  being  unable  to  deny  the 
fact,  for  the  man  who  had  been  lame  stood 
before  them,  and  unwilling  to  incur  the  odium 
of  punishing  an  action  they  were  ashamed  to 
disapprove,  they  dissembled  their  rage,  and 
forbidding  the  apostles  to  speak  any  more  to 
the  people,  they  dismissed  them ; yet  they  did 

* Marty  consultations  have  been  held,  and  devices 
framed,  to  stop  the  progress  of  the  gospel,  as  if  it  were 
a dangerous  infection  But  all  such  attempts  are  vain: 
they  may  as  easily  restrain  the  dawning  of  the  day  as 
suppress  the  spreading  erf  the  gospel.  When  the  Lord  is 
pleased  to  raise  up  fit  instruments  to  promote  it,  and  1o 
vouchsafe  a season  of  refreshment  from  his  presence, 
then  k ‘3  nfluence  cannot  be  restrained ; a spark  be- 
comes a flame,  a little  one  a multitude,  and  opposition 
only  makes  the  effects  more  visible  ar.d  noticed. 


42 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


not  depart  until  they  had  protested  against 
this  inhibition,  and  declared  their  resolution 
to  obey  God  rather  than  men. 

The  believers  though  numerous,  amount- 
ing to  many  thousands,  lived  in  harmony  and 
love,  as  children  of  one  family.  The  greater 
part  of  them  were  poor ; those  therefore  who 
had  estates,  or  money,  willingly  put  their  all 
into  a common  stock  for  the  use  of  the  whole, 
which  was  entrusted  to  the  care  of  the  apos- 
tles. This  is  recorded  as  an  instance  of  the 
benevolent  and  disinterested  spirit  with  which 
the  gospel  inspired  them,  but  it  is  not  en- 
joined as  a precedent  to  be  universally  ob- 
served, since  we  have  many  proofs,  that  the 
lsual  distinctions  in  civil  life  were  retained 
in  other  churches  planted  by  the  apostles; 
and  it  soon  gave  occasion  to  discover,  that  in 
the  best  societies  there  may  be  found  some 
unworthy  intruders,  and  that  very  specious 
actions  may  be  performed  from  base  and  dis- 
honourable motives.  Even  under  this  richest 
dispensation  of  grace,  there  were  some  pro- 
fessors influenced  by  no  higher  motives  than 
hypocrisy  and  vain  glory.  Ananias  (Acts  v,) 
with  his  wife  Sapphira,  attempted  to  impose 
on  the  apostles  by  a concerted  lie,  and  would 
have  had  the  praise  of  giving  their  whole 
substance,  when  their  avarice  would  only 
permit  them  to  spare  a part.  As  a warning 
to  all  pretenders,  who  seek  to  join  or  serve 
the  church  from  sordid  or  selfish  views, 
Peter,  by  the  direction  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
denounced  a severe  sentence  against  this 
unhappy  pair,  and  they  both  fell  dead  at  his 
feet.*  The  cause  and  suddenness  of  their 
death  was  a vindication  of  the  apostles’  in- 
tegrity and  authority,  and  a seasonable  ad- 
monition to  others,  to  deter  any  from  attempt- 
ing to  associate  with  the  disciples,  who  were 
not  in  heart  devoted  to  the  Lord. 

The  numbers  of  the  believers  still  in- 
creased, and  the  report  of  the  apostles’  doc- 
trine and  miracles  extended  from  Jerusalem 
to  the  adjacent  parts.  The  priests  and  Sad- 
ducees  therefore  soon  renewed  their  efforts 
to  suppress  them : they  apprehended  the  apos- 
tles again,  and  put  them  in  the  common 
prison  as  malefactors;  but  the  Lord,  to  con- 
firm the  faith  and  courage  of  his  people,  and 
to  show  how  easily  he  can  protect  those  who 
serve  him,  delivered  them  the  same  night  by 
his  angel.  In  the  morning,  when  their  ene- 
mies were  met,  and  commanded  them  to  be 
brought  to  their  tribunal,  they  were  sur- 
prised to  hear  that  the  prison-doors  were 
found  secure,  and  the  prisoners  all  escaped. 
They  were,  however,  soon  informed  that 
they  were  not  gone  far,  but  were  preaching1 
boldly  to  the  people,  as  the  angel  had  directed 
them,  regardless  of  their  adversaries’  designs 
against  them.  They  were  alarmed  at  this 


* The  apostolic  censures  were  not  like  the  papal  ana- 
themas, bruta  fulmina,  words  without  effect ; they  were 
accomplished  in  an  instant  — See  Acts  xiii.  12. 


[BOOK  II. 

I notice,  and  began  to  be  apprehensive  of  the 
event;f  yet,  hurried  on  by  their  enmity  to 
Jesus  and  his  gospel,  they  once  more  sent 
their  officers  to  take  them,  which  they  at- 
tempted in  the  mildest  manner  possible ; for, 
as  the  prosecution  was  groundless  and  ma- 
licious, they  were  not  without  fear  lest  the 
multitude  should  interpose : but  they  had  to 
do  with  the  followers  of  Jesus,  who  would 
countenance  no  tumult  in  their  own  favour, 
and  were  neither  afraid  nor  ashamed  to  con- 
fess his  name  in  the  face  of  danger.  The 
apostles,  therefore,  peaceably  yielded  them- 
selves, and  being  brought  before  the  council, 
were  severely  questioned  for  disregarding 
the  late  prohibition  they  had  received.  Peter 
and  the  rest  answered  with  their  usual  firm- 
ness ; they  avowed  the  fact,  and  their  deter- 
mination to  persevere,!  and  charged  them  as 
betrayers  and  murderers  of  Jesus  in  stronger 
terms  than  before.  The  majority  of  the 
council  Wjere  exceedingly  enraged  at  their 
boldness:  they  were  cut  to  the  heart,  and 
consulted  to  put  them  to  death.  But  the 
more  moderate  advice  of  Gamaliel  prevailed. 
He  showed  them,  from  some  recent  instances, 
that  if  this  new  sect  was  no  more  than  a hu- 
man institution,  they  need  not  give  them- 
selves trouble  to  suppress  it,  for  it  would  soon 
sink  and  disappear  of  itself;  but  if  it  was  in- 
deed of  God,  their  opposition  would  be  not 
only  in  vain,  but  in  effect  a rebellion  against 
God  himself:  he  therefore  recommended 
milder  methods;  and  having  considerable 
repute  among  them  for  his  wisdom,  the  rest 
assented  to  him.  In  this  manner  the  Lord, 
who  has  the  hearts  of  all  in  his  power,  de- 
livered the  apostles  a third  time  by  raising 
them  an  advocate  from  amongst  their  ene- 
mies; yet,  to  save  appearances,  and  that  it 
might  not  be  thought  the  council  had  pro- 
ceeded so  far  without  good  cause,  they  were 
not  dismissed  till  they  had  been  scourged, 
and  again  enjoined  silence.  They  departed, 
rejoicing  that  they  had  the  honour  to  suffer 
disgrace  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  § and  re- 


t Acts  v.  24.  It  is  not  only  a fruitless,  but  a very  un- 
easy undertaking  to  fight  against  the  truth,  and  those 
who  profess  it.  The  boldest  and  wisest  champions  in 
this  desperate  cause  are  often  brought  to  their  wits  end, 
and  to  foresee  their  own  disappointment. 

X Peter  and  the  apostles  answered,  “We  ought  to 
obey  God  rather  than  men.”  It  should  seem  that  this  (if 
any)  may  be  called  a natural  maxim,  and  that  the  rudest 
savage,  or  the  least  child  that  can  be  made  to  under- 
stand the  terms,  must  assent  to  the  truth  of  the  pro- 
position, as  readily  as  they  perceive  that  two  and  two 
make  four:  how  strange  then  is  it,  that  men  of  the 
greatest  parts  and  penetration  in  other  things  so  seldom 
receive  it!  There  are  few’  periods  to  be  found,  even  in 
the  Christian  church,  in  which  those  who  steadily  acted 
upon  this  principle  were  not  considered  as  heretics  of 
the  worst  sort. 

§ Here  were  faith  and  love  in  exercise : to  suffer  re- 
proach for  Christ  was  in  their  esteem  an  honour  and 
privilege.  It  is  mournful  to  observe  how  little  of  this 
spirit  is  to  be  found  amongst  us  How  soon  are  we 
offended  and  troubled  when  our  names  are  reproached! 
how  uneasy  to  lie  under  contempt!  how  impatient  to 
justify  ourselves,  and  to  be  thought  well  of  by  all  per- 
sons! Far  from  accounting  it  an  honour  to  l>e  made 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


43 


CHAP.  I.] 

turned  to  encourage  their  companions ; con- 
tinuing still  publicly,  and  from  house  to 
house,  to  teach  and  preach  in  the  name  of 
Jesus. 

These  were  happy  times  (Acts  vi,)  when 
the  whole  company  of  the  faithful  were  of 
one  heart  and  mind,  firmly  united  in  affec- 
tion, sentiment,  ordinance,  and  practice. 
Their  adversaries,  though  angry,  and  desir- 
ous to  injure  them,  were  powerfully  restrain- 
ed by  the  Divine  Providence : so  that  they 
enjoyed  peace  in  the  midst  of  war,  and  were 
favoured  with  much  grace  in  their  hearts, 
and  a daily  increase  in  their  numbers.  Yet 
it  was  not  long  before  an  occasion  arose 
which  might  have  had  unhappy  effects,  if 
the  wisdom  and  authority  of  the  apostles  had 
not  provided  an  early  remedy.  The  church, 
as  yet,  consisted  only  of  Jewish  believers; 
but  these  were  distinguished  into  Jews  pro- 
perly so  called,  that  is,  natives  and  inha- 
bitants of  Judea,  and  Hellenists  or  Grecians, 
the  name  given  to  those  of  the  Jewish  race 
and  profession  who  had  been  dispersed  and 
settled  in  the  Heathen  countries.  Many  of 
these,  as  has  been  observed,  were  at  that 
time  in  Jerusalem,  and  among  the  first  con- 
verts of  the  gospel.  As  the  multitude  who 
were  supplied  out  of  the  common  stock  was 
very  great,  it  is  no  wonder  if  a few  indivi- 
duals were  overlooked:  some  unavoidable 
instances  of  this  sort  gave  rise  to  a com- 
plaint, not  only  of  negligence,  but  partiality, 
in  the  distribution  of  the  money;  and  the 
Hellenists,  or  strangers,  thought  the  others 
had  an  undue  preference  shown  them.  The 
apostles,  though  upright  and  impartial,  were 
unable  to  do  every  thing  themselves;  and 
therefore  to  prevent  such  mistakes  and  sus- 
picions, and  that  they  might  devote  their 
whole  time  and  attention  to  the  more  import- 
ant services  of  the  ministry,  they  entirely  di- 
vested themselves  of  the  pecuniary  charge ; 
and,  by  their  advice  seven  men  were  chosen, 
on  whom,  by  prayer  and  imposition  of  hands, 
they  solemnly  devolved  this  trust.  Thus  the 
office  of  deacons  was  instituted.  They  were 
men  full  of  wisdom  and  the  Holy  Ghost : and 
to  them  the  care  of  the  public  money,  and  the 
support  of  the  poor,  was  peculiarly  confided. 
Some  of  them,  perhaps  all,  were  occasionally 
preachers ; but  this  was  no  part  of  their  office 
as  deacons.  By  this  expedient,  the  cause  of 
murmuring  was  taken  away,  and  the  peace 
of  the  church  confirmed. 

Tiberius,  a.  d.  34.]  Thus  the  gospel 
flourished  in  defiance  of  opposition.  The 
Jews,  provoked  more  and  more,  began  to  lose 
all  patience ; the  mild  counsels  of  Gamaliel 
could  no  longer  restrain  them,  but  their 

conformable  to  Jesus  in  this  respect,  vve  feel  it  a burden 
which  we  are  restless  to  shake  off:  yet  it  must  be  borne, 
or  we  must  give  up  profession  and  all ; for  neither  are 
Kir  characters  more  respectable  than  the  first  Christians, 
nor  is  the  world  better  reconciled  to  the  things  of  God 
now  than  it  was  then. 


blinded  passions  hurried  them  to  the  last  ex- 
tremities. Stephen,  one  of  the  seven  dea- 
cons newly  elected,  was  the  first  who  receiv- 
ed the  honour  and  crown  of  martyrdom.  His 
zeal  for  the  truth  did  not  begin  with  his  new 
office,  though  it  is  probable  his  undertaking 
that  charge  might  place  him  more  in  view, 
and  expose  him  more  immediately  to  perse- 
cution. Promotions  in  the  world  are  attend- 
ed with  wTorldly  advantages ; but  such  pro- 
motions in  the  church  as  are  agreeable  to  the 
Spirit  of  God,  will  rather  entitle  a man  to  a 
larger  share  of  labours  and  sufferings,  and 
the  painful  pre-eminence  of  standing  in  the 
forefront  of  the  battle,  to  sustain  the  hottest 
brunt  of  every  storm.  Stephen  was  no  sooner 
a public  person  than  he  became  the  mark  of 
public  opposition.  At  first  they  pretended  to 
dispute  with  him,  but  when  they  were  un- 
able to  resist  the  wisdom  and  spirit  by  which 
he  spake,  they  had  recourse  to  more  effec- 
tual methods  to  silence  him ; they  suborned 
false  witnesses,  a main  instrument  of  perse- 
cution, against  him ; and  having  framed  such 
an  accusation  as  was  most  likely  to  alarm 
the  prejudice,  and  inflame  the  rage  of  the 
people,  they  brought  him  before  the  council, 
and  charged  him,  that  he  had  spoken  blas- 
phemous words  against  Moses  and  against 
God.  Stephen,  though  alone,  and  unsup- 
ported in  the  midst  of  furious  enemies,  ap- 
peared firm  and  unmoved  as  a rock  in  the 
midst  of  the  waves : he  was  not  only  devoid 
of  fear,  but  filled  with  joy  (Acts  vii ;)  the  tes- 
timony of  a good  conscience,  the  honour  of 
suffering  for  his  Lord,  and  a sense  of  the 
love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  his  heart,  not  only 
preserved  his  soul  in  peace,  but  spread  a lus- 
tre and  glory  upon  his  countenance,  so  that 
all  who  sat  in  the  council,  looking  upon  him, 
saw  his  face  as  it  had  been  the  face  of  an 
angel.  In  such  a disposition,  he  thought  it 
not  worth  while  to  attempt  his  own  defence, 
but  employed  the  whole  time  allotted  him  in 
behalf  of  his  adversaries,  that,  if  possible,  by 
a distinct  view  of  God’s  dealing  with  their 
nation,  and  their  behaviour  towards  him,  he 
might  engage  them  to  consider  their  ways, 
to  repent,  and  believe  the  gospel.  While  he 
spake  of  the  things  that  had  been  long  since 
transacted,  and  kept  within  the  bounds  of 
Moses,  David,  and  Solomon,  they  had  pa- 
tience to  hear  him ; but  when  he  began  to 
make  application  to  themselves,  with  that 
warmth  and  plainness  which  the  case  re- 
quired, they  could  bear  no  more : his  words 
cut  them  to  the  heart:  they  no  longer  pre- 
served the  exterior  gravity  of  their  stations 
and  characters,  but  gnashed  at  him  with 
their  teeth,  as  though  they  would  have  de- 
voured him  alive. 

But  vain  are  the  attempts  of  men  to  inti- 
midate those  whom  the  Lord  is  pleased  to 
comfort.  He  is  always  near  to  support  his 
faithful  servants,  and  can  manifest  himself  in 


44 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


a way  which  the  world  knows  nothing  of. 
Such  a seasonable  and  sufficient  discovery 
he  made  of  himself  to  Stephen.  As  he  looked 
steadfastly  up  to  heaven,  silently  appealing 
from  the  injustice  of  his  judges,  he  saw  the 
heavens  opened,  and  Jesus  standing  in  glory 
at  the  right  hand  of  God,  as  attending  to  all 
that  passed,  and  ready  to  receive  him  to  him- 
self. Transported  with  this  divine  assurance, 
he  was  not  at  leisure  to  drop  a single  word  to 
soften  his  incensed  enemies ; he  endeavour- 
ed to  communicate  the  glorious  idea  with 
which  his  soul  was  filled,  and,  without  re- 
garding the  sure  consequence  of  such  a de- 
claration, he  told  them  plainly  what  he  saw. 
This  determined  their  resolves.  Hitherto  they 
had  been  willing  to  preserve  the  form  at  least 
of  a judicial  process ; but  now,  renouncing 
every  restraint,  and  unmindful  of  their  late 
acknowledgment  to  Pilate,  that  it  was  not 
lawful  for  them  to  put  any  man  to  death, 
they  stopped  their  ears  to  shut  out  any  re- 
monstrance that  might  be  offered,  dragged 
him  violently  out  of  the  city,  and  stoned  him 
to  death.  His  dying  deportment,  which 
showed  how  eminently  he  was  filled  with 
the  Spirit  of  Jesus,  whom  he  saw,  is  record- 
ed as  a fit  pattern  for  the  imitation  of  all  who 
should  be  called  to  suffer  for  the  truth  in 
succeeding  times.  He  kneeled  down  with 
the  sweetest  composure,  and,  having  com- 
mitted his  departing  soul  into  his  Redeemer’s 
hands,  his  only  remaining  concern  was  for 
his  murderers,  and  his  last  breath  was  a 
prayer  that  this  sin  might  not  be  laid  to  their 
charge.  Such  resolution  in  the  defence  of 
truth,  such  calmness  under  sufferings,  such 
tenderness  and  compassion  towards  those 
who  oppose,  are  the  surest  marks  of  a high 
attainment  in  Christianity. 

The  death  of  Stephen,  far  from  satiating 
the  rage  of  the  rulers  (Acts  viii,)  rather  ani- 
mated and  excited  them  to  new  mischief. 
They  observed  no  farther  measures,  but  gave 
full  vent  to  their  cruelty,  and  raised  a gene- 
ral persecution  against  the  church.  A young 
man  named  Saul,  whom  the  Lord,  from  before 
his  birth,  had  designed  for  a nobler  service, 
was  at  this  time  one  of  their  most  zealous 
and  active  instruments ; he  had  been  a con- 
senting spectator  of  Stephen’s  death,  and 
kept  the  raiment  of  those  that  slew  him. 
Encouraged  by  their  example,  he  soon  enter- 
ed upon  action  himself,  and  made  havoc  of  the 
church,  forcibly  entering  into  their  houses, 
and  dragging  many  to  prison,  both  men  and 
women.  The  disciples,  therefore,  according 
vO  their  Lord’s  direction  (Matt.  x.  23,)  gave 
way  to  the  storm,  and  dispersed  themselves 
throughout  Judea  and  Samaria,  spreading 
the  knowledge  of  the  gospel  wherever  they 
went.  Thus  the  methods  taken  to  suppress 
the  truth  proved  (as  they  often  have  since) 
the  means  of  promoting  its  progress ; yet  the 
Lord,  who  appoints  limits  beyond  which  the 


[book  ii. 

fiercest  attempts  of  men  cannot  pass,  pre- 
served the  apostles  in  safety  at  Jerusalem, 
where  he  had  farther  occasion  for  their  ser- 
vice. Amongst  the  many  who  left  the  city 
was  Philip,  another  of  the  deacons:  he 
preached  Christ  and  his  gospel  in  Samaria, 
performed  many  cures  and  miracles  among 
the  people,  and  a great  number  received  faith 
and  were  baptized.  Here  the  gospel  tri- 
umphed over  the  illusions  of  Simon,  surnam- 
ed  Magus,  or  the  Sorcerer,  who,  by  his  vain 
arts  and  arrogant  pretensions,  had  long  held 
the  people  in  subjection  and  astonishment. 
But  the  superior  power  of  truth  dispelled 
the  charm ; his  votaries  forsook  him  ; and 
even  the  impostor  himself  was  so  far  con- 
vinced that  Philip  acted  by  that  divine  power 
and  authority  to  which  he  had  only  pretend- 
ed, that  he  professed  himself  a believer  like- 
wise, and  behaved  so  fairly,  that  Philip  ad- 
mitted him  to  baptism  without  suspicion : 
but  when,  soon  after,  Peter*  and  John  came 
to  Samaria  to  communicate  the  gifts  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  to  the  new  disciples  by  imposi- 
tion of  hands,  Simon  discovered  his  true 
character : he  offered  money  for  a power  to 
impart  the  same  gifts;  a proposal  which 
showed  his  ignorance,  wickedness,  and  am- 
bition in  the  strongest  light,  and  proved  him 
an  entire  stranger  to  the  grace  of  God. 
From  him  the  hateful  practice  of  merchan- 
dizing in  spiritual  concerns  has  derived  the 
name  of  Simony;  a crime  which,  though 
condemned  by  the  laws  of  every  Christian 
country,  as  highly  injurious  and  reproach- 
ful! f°  the  gospel  of  Christ,  no  laws  or  obli- 
gations have  hitherto  been  able  to  suppress. 
Peter  severely  rebuked  his  hypocrisy,  yet 
exhorted  him  to  repentance  and  prayer.  His 
words  seemed  to  have  some  weight  with 
Simon  for  the  present ; but  we  hear  no  more 
of  him  among  the  believers  : on  the  contrary, 
he  is  recorded  in  history  as  an  inveterate 
enemy  to  the  faith  and  purity  of  the  gospel, 
and  the  author  of  those  wild,  absurd,  and  im- 


* Acts  viii.  14.  “ They  sent  Peter  and  John.”  We 
find  nothing  in  this  book  to  countenance  the  pre-emi- 
nence which  the  Papists  ascribe  to  Peter.  He  and  John 
were  deputed  by  all  the  apostles,  and  went  upon  equal 
terms.  Peter  did  not  send  John,  nor  go  himself,  with- 
out the  advice  and  direction  of  the  rest.  John  had  once 
desired  to  call  for  fire  from  heaven  upon  the  Samari- 
tans; but  he  was  now  better  instructed,  and  gladly 
went  to  impart  to  them  the  best  gifts  he  could  bestow. 
If  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  make  any  partakers  of  the 
same  precious  faith  with  ourselves,  though  they  were 
once  enemies,  we  should  gladly  forget  all  that  is  past, 
and  receive  them  as  dear  brethren  and  intimate  friends. 

f In  these  abuses  the  church  of  Rome  seems  to  de- 
rive rather  from  Simon  Magus  than  from  Simon  Peter  ; 
yet  it  is  to  be  wished  such  practices  were  confined  to 
the  church  of  Rome  only.  Our  laws  have  guarded 
against  them  by  a very  solemn  and  circumstantial 
oath  ; but  that  this  oath,  if  not  literally  broken,  is  often 
scandalously  evaded,  we  need  no  other  proof  than  the 
shameful  advertisements  which  frequently  appear  in 
our  public  papers  ; not  to  say,  that  though  there  is  no 
money  in  the  case,  yet  all  presentations,  exchanges, 
and  advancements  that  are  transacted  upon  interested 
views,  are  so  far  simoniacal  in  the  sight  of  him  wh* 
judges  the  heart. 


chap,  i.]  AFTER  THE 

pure  heresies  which  disturbed  the  first  ages 
of  the  church. 

About  this  time  an  eunuch,  or  great  of- 
ficer of  Candace,  Queen  of  Ethiopia,  who 
had  been  worshipping  at  Jerusalem  (which 
makes  it  probable  that  he  was  a proselyte  to 
the  faith  of  the  God  of  Israel)  was  returning 
homeward.  Though  this  nobleman  had  been 
at  Jerusalem,  he  had  either  not  heard  of  the 
apostles  and  their  new  doctrines,  or,  being 
influenced  by  the  priests  and  rulers,  had  not 
thought  them  worthy  his  notice.  He  was 
going  home  ignorant  as  he  came ; but  the 
Lord,  who  is  mindful  of  his  people  when 
they  think  not  of  him,  appoints  the  time  and 
the  means  of  bringing  them  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  truth ; and  these  are  often  seemingly 
precarious  and  contingent,  that  the  work 
may  more  clearly  be  known  to  be  his,  and 
the  praise  ascribed  to  his  power  and  provi- 
dence. Philip,  by  the  direction  of  an  angel, 
intercepted  the  Ethiopian  upon  the  road : he 
found  him  well  employed,  reading  the  prophet 
Isaiah  as  he  sat  in  his  chariot : he  had  a very 
confused  idea  of  the  passage  he  was  reading, 
but  he  knew  it  contained  an  important  mean- 
ing, and  was  desirous  to  discover  it.  Those 
who  have  a just  sense  of  the  excellence  of  the 
scripture,  and  peruse  it  as  he  did  with  a sin- 
cere intention  to  be  instructed  by  it,  may  be 
encouraged  from  this  instance  to  persevere, 
though  they  find  it  at  present  hard  to  be  un- 
derstood : he  who  gave  them  the  desire  will 
in  due  time  provide  them  a teacher,  and 
make  dark  things  plain  to  them.  When  Phi- 
lip drew  near,  and  asked  him,  without  cere- 
mony, if  he  understood  what  he  read,  he  was 
not  offended  with  the  abruptness  of  his  ad- 
dress, but  courteously  invited  him  to  sit  with 
him,  confessing  his  ignorance  and  the  need 
he  had  of  assistance.  The  passage  which 
had  perplexed  him  afforded  Philip  a fair  op- 
portunity of  preaching  Jesus:  the  eunuch 
believed,  and  was  baptized  in  a water  they 
were  passing  by.  In  this  case  there  seems 
to  have  been  no  exertion  of  an  outward  mira- 
cle to  confirm  the  word.  Nor  was  it  neces- 
sary : the  manner  of  Philip’s  meeting  with 
him,  the  suitableness  of  the  question  to  the 
dubious  state  of  his  mind,  and  the  discovery 
he  obtained,  that  the  prophetical  marks  of 
the  Messiah  exactly  coincided  with  the  his- 
tory of  Jesus,  afforded  him  sufficient  evi- 
dence. The  only  extraordinary  circumstance 
was  the  sudden  disappearing  of  Philip,  who, 
having  performed  his  service,  was  removed 
by  the  power  of  the  Spirit  to  Azotus,  a place 
thirty  miles  distant ; from  whence,  proceed- 
ing along  the  sea-coast,  he  preached  at  Joppa, 
Lydda,  and  all  the  intermediate  places,  till 
he  came  to  Caesarea.  In  the  mean  time  the 
eunuch,  rejoicing  in  the  Lord’s  goodness, 
pursued  his  journey  to  Ethiopia.  We  have 
no  farther  account  of  him  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment; but  some  ancient  writers  assure  us 


ASCENSION.  45 

that  he  was  the  means  of  propagating  the 
faith  which  he  had  received,  first  in  his  own 
country,  and  afterwards  in  places  still  more 
remote. 

Tiberius,  a.  d.  35.]  The  church  having 
suffered  much  from  the  violence  of  the  perse- 
cution, the  Lord  was  pleased  to  afford  them 
intermission,  and  to  give  a remarkable  proof 
of  the  power  of  his  grace  (Acts  ix,)  by  the 
conversion  of  Saul,  one  of  their  fiercest  op- 
posers.  He  had  been  educated  a Pharisee, 
in  a zealous  attachment  to  the  law,  and,  from 
a mistaken  principle  of  conscience,  thought  it 
his  duty  to  suppress  the  followers  of  Jesus. 
The  warmth  of  his  temper  prompted  him  to 
uncommon  earnestness  against  them ; and  as 
he  was  a young  man,  he  was  probably  farther 
instigated  by  a desire  to  ingratiate  himself 
with  the  Jewish  rulers.  Not  content  witli 
the  mischief  he  had  done  at  Jerusalem,  he 
still  breathed  out  threatenings  and  slaughter 
against  them,  and  meditated  their  destruction 
even  in  distant  places.  With  this  view  he 
obtained  letters  of  authority  from  the  chief 
priests,  and  set  out  for  Damascus,  that  if  he 
found  any  disciples  there,  he  might  bring 
them  bound  with  him  to  Jerusalem.  Little 
was  he  aware  of  the  event  of  his  journey ! 
Little  did  the  believers  imagine,  that  the 
man  who  now  thirsted  for  their  blood,  would 
soon  be  their  companion  and  leader ! The 
Lord  often  permits  those  to  whom  he  shows 
mercy,  to  run  great  previous  lengths  in  their 
obstinacy  and  ignorance:  their  subsequent 
change  is  hereby  more  noticed,  the  riches  of 
his  grace  are  more  remarkably  exemplified 
for  the  encouragement  of  others ; and  such 
persons,  from  a lively  sense  of  their  past 
wickedness,  and  the  undeserved  favour  they 
have  received,  are  usually  more  strongly  im- 
pressed with  a sense  of  divine  love,  and  more 
warmly  devoted  to  his  service.  Some  such 
there  have  been  in  every  period  of  the 
church,  and  especially  whenever  there  has 
been  a remarkable  revival  of  the  power  of 
godliness.  When  Saul  was  drawing  near  to 
Damascus,  perhaps  within  sight  of  the  city, 
anticipating  his  bloody  designs,  and  exult- 
ing in  thought  over  the  defenceless  sheep  of 
Christ,  whom  he  had  been  taught  to  consider 
as  schismatics  and  heretics,  who  deserved  to 
be  extirpated  from  the  face  of  the  earth,  he 
was  suddenly  surrounded  by  a glorious  light, 
exceeding  the  brightness  of  the  mid-day  sun, 
and  heard  a voice,  not  of  uncertain  applica- 
tion, but  expostulating  with  him  by  name, 
“ Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me  ?”  If 
he  was  alarmed  at  the  question,  he  was  much 
more  so,  when,  upon  asking,  “ Who  art  thou, 
Lord  1”  he  was  answered,  “ I am  Jesus  the 
Nazarene,*  whom  thou  persecutest.”  So 
nearly  is  the  Lord  interested  in  his  people. 


* This  is  the  exact  import  of  the  Greek,  I»j<r8{ « Nt»£» 
Acts  xxii.  8. 


43 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


[book  n. 


and  so  dangerous  is  it  to  injure  them : he  ac- 
counts their  cause,  their  sufferings,  their 
enemies,  his  own.  The  Nazarene  was  an 
epithet  of  contempt  affixed  to  the  name  of 
Jesus  by  those  who  hated  him  ;*  and  it  is  pro- 
bable that  Saul  had  often  spoke  of  him  in 
these  terms ; but  now  he  found  himself  in 
the  Nazarene’s  power,  and  unable  either  to 
• •scape  or  to  plead ; he  fell  to  the  earth  trem- 
bling and  astonished  beyond  expression ; he 
net  only  heard  his  voice,  but  saw  his  person 
(Acts  ix.  27 ; 1 Cor.  xv.  9 ;)  an  interview 
which  he  could  not  have  sustained  a moment, 
if  the  glory  of  Jesus  had  not  been  tempered 
with  the  milder  beams  of  grace  and  love. 
The  Lord  spared  him,  accepted  his  feeble 
surrender  of  himself,  moderated  his  fears, 
and  dismissed  him  to  Damascus  as  a willing 
trophy  of  his  victorious  grace,  and  a singular 
instance  how  easily  he  can  subdue  the  hard- 
est hearts  to  himself.  The  brightness  of  the 
vision  had  overpowered  his  bodily  eyes,  so 
that  he  was  led  by  the  hand ; but  the  eyes  of 
his  mind  were  opened ; his  heart,  his  aims 
were  changed ; he  was  become  a new  man, 
and,  instead  of  threatenings  and  slaughter, 
he  now  breathed  prayer  and  devotion  to 
Jesus,  and  love  to  his  people.  He  remained 
at  Damascus  three  days  without  sight  or 
food : but  the  Lord  remembered  his  distress, 
and  sent  to  him  a disciple  named  Ananias, 
who,  from  the  character  he  had  heard  of  him, 
was  at  first  greatly  surprised  at  the  com- 
mand he  received  to  go  to  such  a person ; 
but  the  Lord  condescended  to  acquaint  him, 
that  Saul  was  a chosen  instrument,  whom 
he  had  appointed  to  do  and  suffer  great  things 
for  his  sake.  When  Ananias  laid  his  hands 
on  him,  a thick  film,  resembling  scales,  fell 
from  his  eyes;  his  sight  was  restored,  his 
mind  composed,  and  he  was  immediately 
baptized.  Saul  had  several  companions  with 
him  in  his  journey,  who  saw  the  dazzling 
light,  heard  the  sound  of  the  voice  which 
spoke  to  him,  and  fell  to  the  ground  with  sur- 
prise as  he  did ; they  knew  enough  of  the 
circumstances  of  the  case  to  witness  for  him, 
that  he  neither  imposed  upon  others  nor  him- 
self; but  we  have  no  account  that  any  of 
them  were  converted,  the  most  extraordi- 
nary occurrences  being  insufficient  to  change 
the  heart,  without  the  interposition  of  divine 
grace. 

Thus  the  late  persecuting  Saul  was  num- 
bered with  the  disciples,  and  soon  distin- 
guished himself  amongst  them : he  now 
knew  by  experience  the  wickedness  and 
danger  of  opposing  the  gospel,  and  was  de- 
sirous to  repair  the  mischief  of  his  former 
'age  and  ill  example.  A sense  of  the  mercy 
le  had  received,  and  compassion  for  the 
souls  of  others,  made  him  seek  every  oppor- 


tunity to  persuade  and  convince  the  Jews, 
his  former  companions  and  brethren ; but  he 
soon  found  the  same  treatment  from  them, 
which  he  himself  had  often  offered  to  the  dis- 
ciples. They  opposed  and  vilified  him  as  an 
apostate,  and  at  length  consulted  to  kill  him : 
his  former  zeal  in  their  cause  was  forgot,  or, 
if  remembered,  it  was  an  argument  suited  to 
inflame  their  resentment.  But  no  counsel 
can  prevail  against  those  whom  the  Lord 
protects.  Saul  had  timely  notice  of  their 
designs,  and  because  they  watched  the  gates 
of  the  city  incessantly,  he  was  let  down  by  a 
basket  over  the  wall;f  for  though  he  nei- 
ther distrusted  his  cause  nor  his  protector, 
he  was  not  unmindful  to  employ  prudent 
means  for  his  preservation.  But  before  this 
he  had  made  some  excursions  from  Damas- 
cus, and  visited  Arabia ; for  his  own  words 
assure  us,  that  it  was  not  till  the  third  year 
after  his  conversion  that  he  returned  to  Je- 
rusalem. In  this  interval  the  Lord,  who  had 
appeared  to  him  in  the  way,  by  subsequent 
revelations,  fully  instructed  him  in  tiie 
knowledge  of  his  will,  and  qualified  him  fer 
the  apostolical  office ; so  that  he  could  after- 
wards say,  that  he  received  neither  his  au- 
thority nor  his  information  from  men.  When 
he  came  to  Jerusalem  he  would  have  joined 
himself  to  the  disciples;  but  they,  remem- 
bering his  former  conduct,  and  not  clearly 
informed  of  the  manner  and  reality  of  his 
change,  were  at  first  afraid  of  him.  They 
had  a right  to  be  satisfied  of  his  sincerity. 
But  being  soon  afterwards  introduced  by 
Barnabas,  he  related  to  them  the  means  of 
his  conversion,  and  the  occasion  of  his  leav- 
ing Damascus.  He  continued  for  some 
time  in  Jerusalem  and  the  neighbourhood, 
preaching  and  disputing  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  The  Jews,  who  hated  all  the  ser- 
vants of  Christ,  could  not  but  be  particularly 
enraged  at  him,  who  had  forsaken  their 
party;  against  him,  therefore,  they  chiefly 
set  themselves,  and  making  repeated  at- 
tempts to  kill  him,  he  withdrew  again  from 
Judea,  and  went  through  Syria  to  Tarsus,  in 
Cilicia,  his  native  place. 

Caligula,  a.  d.  38.]  Upon  his  recess  the 
churches  in  Judea,  Samaria,  and  Galilee,  had 
an  interval  of  rest.J  The  Jews,  about  this 


f 2 Cor.  xi.  33.  “ Through  a window  in  a basket  was 
I let  down  by  the  wall.”  The  Lord  often  confounds  the 
pride  of  his  enemies  by  the  manner  in  which  he  delivers 
his  servants  . he  permits  violent  oppositions,  and  great 
preparations  to  be  made  against  them,  and  then  discon- 
certs the  combinations  of  the  many  and  the  mighty,  by 
feeble  and  unthought-of  means. 

t The  churches  had  rest,  and  walked  in  the  fear  of 
the  Lord,  and  in  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
were  edified  and  multiplied,  Acts  ix.  31.  Some  well- 
meaning  persons  seem  to  forget  this  passage,  when 
they  take  it  for  granted,  that  the  work  of  God  cannot 
flourish,  except  there  is  a violent  outward  opposition 
against  it.  The  world  will  dislike  the  gospel ; but  it  is 
possible  in  some  measure  to  put  to  silence  the  ignorance 
of  foolish  men  by  well-doing ; and  the  Lord  can,  and 
often  does,  favour  his  people  with  peace,  and  put  their 
enemies  under  restraint. 


* And  for  this  reason  inserted  in  the  title  which  Pi- 
late put  over  his  cross. 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


47 


CHAP.  I.] 

dme,  were  taken  up  with  their  own  affairs. 
Caligula,  who  had  lately  succeeded  Tiberius 
in  the  empire,  presumed  to  arrogate  divine 
worsmp  to  himself,  and  commanded  altars 
and  temples  to  be  erected  to  his  honour ; he 
was  readily  obeyed  in  many  places:  but 
when  he  required  his  statue  to  be  put  up  in 
the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  the  Jewish  nation 
engaged  as  one  man  to  prevent  it.*  They 
had  rejected  the  Holy  One  and  the  true,  and 
the  troubles  were  now  beginning  to  take 
place,  which  ended  at  length  in  their  total 
ruin  and  extirpation.  Against  this  first  af- 
front and  profanation  intended  to  their  tem- 
ple, they  united  in  earnest  supplications  to 
Petronius,  the  governor  of  Syria,  and  with 
much  entreaty  obtained  permission  to  send 
their  deputies  to  the  Emperor,  who  was, 
though  with  great  difficulty,  prevailed  on  to 
desist  from  his  purpose  as  to  the  temple ; but 
at  the  same  time  he  forbade  them,  under  the 
severest  penalties,  to  oppose  the  erection  or 
dedication  of  temples  to  him,  in  any  place 
without  the  city  of  Jerusalem.  This  injunc- 
tion encouraged  their  enemies  to  affront 
their  religion  wherever  they  pleased,  and 
laid  a foundation  for  innumerable  disturb- 
ances and  dissensions,  in  which  the  Jews, 
whether  aggressors  or  not,  were  always  the 
greatest  sufferers.  While  they  were  thus 
distracted  among  themselves,  the  believers 
enjoyed  a favourable  respite,  and  walking  in 
the  fear  of  the  Lord,  and  in  the  comforts  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  were  edified  and  increased. 

a.  d.  39.]  As  Peter  had  formerly  seconded 
the  labours  of  Philip,  the  deacon,  at  Samaria, 
he  now  visited  those  places  where  he  had 
preached  on  his  way  to  Caesarea,  and  strength- 
ened the  disciples  he  found  there,  by  his  doc- 
trine and  miracles.  At  Lyddaf  he  restored  a 
man  to  immediate  health,  who  had  been 
many  years  ill  of  a dropsy.  Being  afterwards 
invited  to  Joppa,  he  raised  Tabitha,  or  Dor- 
cas, to  life,  to  the  great  joy  of  the  poor  and 
the  widows,  whom  she  had  assisted  by  her 
alms  and  labours.  While  he  made  some  stay 
here,  his  commission  was  enlarged,  and  he 
received  direction  from  the  Lord  to  com- 
municate the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles,  which 
had  hitherto  been  restrained  to  the  Jews, 
except  in  the  case  of  the  eunuch,  for  which 
Philip  had  been  authorised  by  the  express 
command  of  an  angel. 


* Josephus,  de  Bell.  Jud.  lib.  2. 
t Acts  ix.  32.  l'  He  came  to  the  saints  at  Lydda.” 
The  scriptures  do  not  use  the  word  saint  in  the  narrow 
and  appropriate  sense  of  some,  or  with  that  improper 
extent  which  others  have  given  to  i t in  after  times ; it  is 
neither  peculiar  to  apostles  and  fathers,  nor  applicable 
to  nil  who  bear  it  in  the  Roman  calendar,  but  it  is  the 
common  appellation  of  all  who  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  are  saved  from  sin  and  condemnation  by 
his  grace.  There  have  been  saints  in  all  ages,  but  real 
saints  (while  living)  have  usually  been  branded  with 
opprobrious  names.  The  world,  which  knows  not  Christ, 
cannot  distinguish  his  people,  but  will  rather  give  the 
.itle  of  saints  to  many  who  have  hated  and  persecuted 
he  gospel. 


When  our  Lord  sent  forth  the  apostles  to 
preach  while  he  was  yet  upon  earth,  lie  ex- 
pressly confined  their  mission  to  the  house  of 
Israel ; and  though,  after  his  resurrection,  he 
commanded  them  to  disciple  all  nations, 
they  did  not  immediately  understand  the  ex- 
tent of  his  meaning;  though  they  were  under 
an  infallible  guidance,  they  were  not  fully  in- 
structed at  once,  but  received  intimations  of 
their  duty  from  time  to  time,  as  circum- 
stances varied,  and  as  the  designs  of  Divine 
Providence  wTere  successively  opening.  The 
great  Shepherd  and  Head  of  the  church  has 
an  appointed  time  and  manner  for  the  ac- 
complishment of  all  his  purposes;  nothing 
can  be  effectually  done  but  when  and  where 
he  pleases : but  when  his  hour  is  come,  then 
hard  things  become  easy,  and  crooked  things 
straight;  his  word,  Spirit,  and  providence, 
then  will  all  concur  to  make  the  path  of  duty 
plain  to  those  who  serve  him,  though  per- 
haps, till  this  knowledge  is  necessary,  he 
permits  them  to  remain  ignorant  of  what  he 
has  designed  them  for.  By  this  discipline 
they  are  taught  to  depend  entirely  upon  him, 
and  are  afterwards  more  fully  assured  that 
he  has  sent  and  succeeded  them.  Peter  was 
not  yet  freed  from  the  Jewish  prejudice,  that 
all  intercourse  with  the  Heathens  was  un- 
lawful ; or  if  he  had  been  so  himself,  he  could 
not  have  easily  convinced  the  many  thou- 
sands of  his  brethren  who  laboured  under  the 
same  mistake.  This  service  was  therefore 
pointed  out  to  him  by  means  which  left  no 
room  for  doubt  in  his  own  mind,  and  enabled 
him  fully  to  vindicate  his  conduct  to  others. 

Cornelius  (Acts  x,)  a Roman  centurion,  or 
captain,  with  his  family  and  dependants,  were 
the  first  fruits  of  the  Gentile  converts.  He 
lived  at  Csesarea,  a city  not  far  from  Joppa, 
and  which  was  the  ordinary  residence  of  the 
Roman  governors;  and  therefore  promiscu- 
ously inhabited  by  Gentiles  and  Jews.  It  is 
not  probable  that  he  had  never  heard  of 
Christ,  or  the  new  institution  that  was  spread- 
ing under  his  name;  but,  without  doubt, 
what  he  knew  of  it  was  only  from  public 
rumour,  in  which  the  misrepresentations  of 
malice,  and  the  surmises  of  ignorance,  usually 
so  far  prevail,  that  persons  of  the  best  dispo- 
sitions are  often  deterred  from  making  those 
inquiries  which  the  importance  of  truth  de- 
serves. But  the  Lord,  whom  he  knew  not, 
had  been  gradually  preparing  him  for  the 
reception  of  the  Gospel ; he  was  already  re- 
claimed from  idolatry ; he  was  a devout  wor- 
shipper of  God,  exemplary  in  his  family,  just 
in  his  dealings,  and  charitable  to  the  poor. 
How  few  of  those  now  called  Christians  can 
equal  his  character  while  a stranger  to  the 
gospel,  we  may  collect  from  daily  observa- 
tion ; yet  those  who  plead  for  the  sufficiency 
of  what  they  style  natural  religion,  would 
do  well  to  observe,  that  though  he  was  in 
many  respects  a good  man,  and  his  sincerity 


48 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


was  approved  by  God  himself:  yet  he  lacked 
one  thing.  But  none  who  are  made  sincerely 
desirous  to  know  the  will  of  God,  shall  be 
left  finally  destitute : he  will  find  a way  to 
give  them  necessary  information.  Cornelius, 
who  had  often  waited  upon  God  by  fasting 
and  prayer,  and  had,  doubtless,  at  times,  felt 
that  suspense  and  anxiety  which  can  only  be 
entirely  removed  by  a clear  knowledge  of 
the  gospel-covenant,  obtained  at  length  an 
illustrious  answer;  an  angel  appeared  to 
him,  assured  him  that  his  prayer  was  heard, 
and  directed  him  to  send  for  Peter,  who 
should  inform  him  more  fully  of  bis  duty. 

It  is  observable,  that  though  the  angel  was 
so  minutely  exact  in  his  directions,  as  to 
mention  the  street  and  the  very  house  where 
Peter  resided,  he  said  not  a word  of  the  gos- 
pel to  Cornelius,  but  referred  him  wholly  to 
Peter.  The  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  is 
pleased  to  make  his  people  instrumental  in 
teaching  each  other.  This  not  only  secures 
the  honour  of  the  success  to  him  alone,  but 
it  conduces  to  their  comfort  and  advantage. 
An  angel  could  only  speak  historically,  that 
the  thing  is  so ; but  it  comes  nearer  to  our 
level  when  delivered  by  men  who  have  been 
in  the  very  case  of  others,  and  can  say  ex- 
perimentally, that  they  have  found  it  so. 
Who  so  fit  to  commend  the  physician’s  skill 
and  tenderness  as  those  who  have  been  them- 
selves cured  by  him  of  a desperate  disease! 
Peter  had  himself  tasted  that  the  Lord  was 
gracious ; he  had  greatly  sinned,  yet  had  been 
freely  forgiven;  he  had  seen  his  excellent 
glory  upon  the  mount,  and  had  received  an 
express  commission  from  his  mouth.  In  these 
and  other  respects,  he  was  a proper  person  to 
proclaim  him  to  others,  more  so  than  an  an- 
gel from  heaven.  We  may  therefore  safely 
infer,  a fortiori,  that  no  man,  however  great 
his  talents  may  otherwise  be,  can  be  qualified 
or  fit  to  preach  the  gospel,  until  he  has  known 
the  evil  of  sin  himself,  and  been  a partaker 
of  the  pardoning  grace  of  God  through  a 
crucified  Redeemer. 

Cornelius  was  not  disobedient  to  the  hea- 
venly vision:  his  example  and  instructions 
had  been  a blessing  to  his  household,  so  that 
he  had  servants  about  him  to  whom  he  could 
communicate  this  extraordinary  event,  and 
depend  on  their  fidelity.  Having  related  his 
vision  to  them,  he  sent  them  to  Joppa  to  in- 
vite Peter  to  his  house. 

When  they  departed  from  Caesarea,  Peter 
was  under  the  influence  of  the  national  pre- 
judice, which  would  hardly  have  permitted 
him  to  have  gone  with  them ; but,  while  they 
were  on  the  journey,  the  Lord  prepared  his 
mind  to  comply.  The  time  was  now  come,* 


* In  the  Lord's  dispensations  in  favour  of  his  people, 
there  is  often  a counterpart,  resembling  that  which  is 
related  in  this  chapter.  The  minds  of  two  or  more  per- 
sons are  inclined,  by  different  means,  to  concur  in  the 
same  design,  though  perhaps  they  are  far  asunder,  and 


[book  II. 

when  it  was  necessary  he  should  know  the 
extensive  designs  of  God  in  favour  of  sinners 
of  all  nations,  people,  and  languages;  and 
that  the  partition  wall  between  Jews  and 
Gentiles  was  broken  down  and  taken  away 
by  the  death  of  Christ.  He  received  this 
intimation  by  a vision,  which  exactly  cor- 
responded in  its  circumstances  with  the  case 
in  hand.  About  noon  the  following  day,  when 
the  messengers  were  near  to  Jopna,’he  was 
retired  to  the  top  of  the  house,  for  the  con. 
venient  exercise  of  secret  prayer ; and  having 
an  appetite  for  food,  he  saw,  as  it  were,  a 
large  sheet  or  wrapper  let  down  from  hea- 
ven, suspended  by  the  four  corners,  contain- 
ing all  sorts  of  beasts,  birds,  and  reptiles, 
without  any  regard  to  the  ceremonial  distinc- 
tion of  clean  and  unclean;  this  appearance 
was  accompanied  with  a voice  directing  him, 
To  slay  and  eat.  When  he  answered,  Tha* 
he  had  never  yet  transgressed  the  law,  by 
eating  unclean  food ; the  voice  replied,  What 
God  hath  cleansed,  that  call  not  thou  common 
or  unclean.  To  impress  the  whole  upon  his 
mind,  and  to  convince  him  that  the  vision 
was  real  and  significant,  it  was  repeated 
three  times.  When  it  was  finally  withdrawn, 
and  while  he  was  thinking  what  it  might  im- 
port,f the  men  sent  by  Cornelius  were  in- 
quiring for  him  at  the  door  below:  of  which, 
receiving  previous  notice  by  the  secret  sug- 
gestion of  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  being  directed 
to  go  with  them  without  hesitation,  he  went 
down  and  spoke  to  them  before  they  had 
time  to  send  him  word  of  their  arrival  by  the 
people  of  the  house.  When  he  had  heard 
their  business,  and  compared  the  vision  of 
Cornelius  with  his  own,  he  scrupled  no 
longer;  but  lodging  the  strangers  that  night, 
he  accompanied  them  the  next  day,  taking 
with  him  five  of  the  brethren  from  Joppa,  to 
be  witnesses  of  what  the  Lord  intended  to 
do.  Cornelius,  who  earnestly  expected  his 
arrival,  had  assembled  his  friends  and  de- 
pendants against  his  coming;  he  received 
Peter  before  them  all  with  the  greatest  re- 
spect and  cordiality,  and  gave  him  a particu- 
lar account  of  what  had  passed,  professing 
that  both  he  and  his  friends  were  ready  to 
receive  and  obey  his  instructions.  Peter  now- 
perceived  and  acknowledged  the  great  truth 
the  Lord  had  pointed  out  by  so  many  har- 
monising circumstances,  that  the  blessings  of 
the  gospel  were  no  longer  to  be  confined  tc 
the  Jews,  but  that  Jesus  was  appointed  tc 


know  nothing  of  each  other’s  intentions:  in  time,  cir- 
cumstances fall  out  which  connect  their  views,  and 
prove  that  the  whole  was  from  the  Lord. 

t Peter  was  faithful  to  the  light  he  had  already  re- 
ceived, and  did  not  hastily  follow  the  first  impulse  upon 
his  mind;  though  the  liberty  seemed  to  be  authorised 
by  a voice  from  heaven,  he  did  not  accept  it  without 
consideration.  His  example  should  be  considered  by 
those  who  give  themselves  up  to  the  influence  of  every 
sudden  impression,  without  taking  time  to  consider  its 
nature  and  tendency,  and  how  far  it  is  consistent  with 
the  revealed  will  of  God. 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


49 


CHAP.  I.] 

be  a light  to  enlighten  the  Gentiles  also, 
Acts  x.  84.*  In  his  discourse  to  them,  he 
declared  the  person,  character  and  offices  of 
Jesus,  who  had  been  lately  crucified,  affirm- 
ing himself  to  have  been  an  eye-witness  of 
what  he  related ; he  asserted  his  honour  and 
authority  as  the  Lord  of  all,  the  sovereign 
judge  of  the  living  and  the  dead;  that  he 
was  the  divine  Saviour  spoken  of  by  the  pro- 
phets, and  that  all  who  believed  in  his  name 
should  receive  the  remission  of  sin.  Here 
we  see  the  apostle’s  doctrine  to  the  Gentiles 
was  the  same  that  he  had  preached  at  Jeru- 
salem upon  and  after  the  day  of  Pentecost, 
and  the  same  with  what  our  Lord  had  de- 
clared concerning  himself,  a free  and  com- 
plete salvation  by  faith.  He  did  not  in  the 
least  attempt  to  accommodate  his  subject  to 
any  supposed  prejudices  of  his  new  hearers, 
but  faithfully  acquitted  himself  of  his  mes- 
sage, and  left  the  event  to  God.  The  mys- 
tery of  Christ  crucified,  which  was  a stum- 
bling-block to  the  Jews,  was  by  many  of  the 
Gentiles  accounted  foolishness  and  absurdity; 
but  the  apostles  proposed  it  simply  and  in- 
differently to  all.  In  the  present  case,  the 
success  was  (what  has  perhaps  seldom  hap- 
pened) universal;  the  whole  company  be- 
lieved, and  received  the  Holy  Ghost  imme- 
diately, previous  to  baptism,  and  without  the 
usual  imposition  of  the  apostle’s  hands.  This 
signal  attestation,  with  which  the  Lord  ho- 
noured their  faith,  unanswerably  removing 
every  doubt  concerning  their  fitness,  Peter 
immediately  directed  them  to  be  baptized  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  through  whom 
they  had  already  received  that  inward  and 
spiritual  grace,  of  which  baptism  was  the 
outward  and  visible  sign. 

When  this  affair  was  reported  in  Judea,  it 
was  not  at  first  agreeable  to  those  who  knew 
not  the  warrant  and  grounds  on  which  Peter 
hod  proceeded;  so  that  when  he  returned  to 
Jerusalem,  he  found  himself  under  a neces- 
sity of  vindicating  (Acts  xi)  his  conduct  to 
the  Jewish  converts;  a full  proof  that  they 


* Few  passages  of  scripture  seem  to  have  been  more 
misunderstood  and  misrepresented  than  this  and  the 
following  verse.  As  some  have  presumed,  thatSt.  Paul’s 
doctrine  of  justification  is  corrected  if  not  confuted,  by 
St  James;  so  the  apostle  Peter  has  been  supposed  to 
contradict  both  St  Paul  and  himself  (see  1 Pet.  i.  1,  2) 
in  another  important  truth  of  the  gospel.  This  mistake 
is  more  excusable  in  those  who  do  not  understand  the 
original;  but  those  who  do,  ought  not  to  avail  them- 
selves of  an  ambiguous  word.  The  Greek  n-eca-Mn-o^ 
from  whence  is  derived,  does  not  con- 

vey the  same  idea  that  an  English  reader  receives  from 
the  word  p rson ; it  does  not  properly  signify  a personal 
identity,  but  the  outward  appearance  and  circumstance 
of  a person  or  thing.  Thus  it  is  sometimes  rendered 
face,  as  Matth.  vi.  16.  and  many  other  places;  and  is 
applied  to  the  sky  or  air,  Matth.  xvj.  3;  countenance, 
Tiiike  ix.  23;  presence,  2 Cor.  x.  1;  fashion , James  i.  11. 
The  meaning  here  is  the  same  as  in  Coloss.  iii.  25.  The 
Lord  is  not  moved  by  the  outward  distinctions  and  dif- 
ferences amongst  men,  to  which  we  often  pay  regard: 
tompare  1 Sam.  xvi.  7.  lie  neither  receives  or  rejects 
ary  for  being  Jew  or  Gentile,  rich  or  poor,  bond  or  free, 
male  or  female,  but  is  rich  in  mercy  to  all  who  call 
up  on  him. 

VOL.  II. 


did  not  think  him  infallible,  or  possessed  of 
that  superiority  over  the  whole  church  which 
designing  men,  for  promoting  their  own  ends, 
have  since  ascribed  to  him.  But  though  he 
was  an  apostle,  and  had  acted  by  the  express 
command  of  God,  and  though  their  expostula- 
tion seems  to  have  been  hasty  and  rough, 
yet  he  did  not  think  it  beneath  him  to  give 
an  orderly  and  circumstantial  account  of  the 
whole  business:  they,  on  the  other  hand, 
were  open  to  conviction ; and,  when  they  had 
heard  his  relation,  they  instantly  acquiesced, 
and  glorified  God  for  his  grace  given  to  the 
Gentiles.  This  mutual  condescension  and  in- 
genuousness preserved  the  first  Christians  in 
peace,  though  they  were  not  always  ex- 
empted from  mistakes  and  wrong  impressions. 

By  this  time  the  believers  who  had  been 
dispersed  by  persecution  had  spread  the  gos- 
pel beyond  the  bounds  of  Judea  and  Galilee 
into  Cyprus  and  Syria,  and  probably  to  more 
distant  parts,  particularly  to  Rome,  which, 
being  the  centre  and  conflux  of  the  empire, 
would  hardly  be  long  unvisited;  however, 
in  all  places,  the  preaching  of  the  word  was 
confined  to  the  Jews  till  Peter’s  mission  to 
Cornelius  afforded  an  authorised  precedent 
for  imparting  it  to  the  Heathens. 

a.  d.  40.]  It  was  soon  after  publicly 
preached  in  Antioch,  the  capital  of  Syria, 
and  no  less  eminent  for  luxury  and  depravity 
of  manners;  yet,  amongst  these  dissolute  and 
enslaved  people,  the  gospel  of  Christ,  accom- 
panied with  a divine  power,  was  suddenly 
and  remarkably  prevalent  to  turn  a great 
multitude  from  darkness  to  light,  and  from 
the  power  of  Satan  to  God.  The  means  of 
this  happy  change  are  expressly  mentioned : 
What  the  philosophers  had  long  attempted 
in  vain,  by  cold  encomiums  on  the  beauty  of 
virtue,  was  speedily  effected  by  those  who 
simply  preached  the  Lord  Jesus  as  the  au- 
thor, finisher,  and  fountain  of  salvation. 
When  the  news  of  this  good  beginning  was 
brought  to  Jerusalem,  the  apostles  sent  Bar- 
nabas to  Antioch;  who,  being  a good  man, 
and  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  himself,  was 
greatly  rejoiced  when  he  saw  the  numbers 
and  sincerity  of  the  converts,  and  animated 
them  by  his  exhortations  to  cleave  to  the 
Lord  with  steady  resolution;  for  he  was 
sensible  of  what  they  perhaps  were  little 
aware  of  as  yet,  how  many  arts  the  enemy 
of  souls  employs  to  discourage  those  who  are 
beginning  to  walk  in  Wisdom’s  ways.  He 
afterwards  went  to  Saul,  and  prevailed  on 
him  to  leave  Tarsus,  and  join  with  him  in 
the  service  of  the  gospel  at  Antioch.  By  the 
Lord’s  blessing  on  the  endeavours  of  these 
faithful  labourers,  the  church  was  so  greatly 
increased,  that  the  believers  there  first  re- 
ceived the  general  denomination  of  Chris- 
tians; a significant  and  instructive  appella- 
tion, strongly  importing  their  duty  and 
relation  to  Christ,  and  to  each  other,  and 


G 


50 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


has  therefore  universally  obtained,  and  will 
probably  subsist  to  the  end  of  time.  But 
though  this  name  be  accounted  honourable 
with  us,  and  has  always  been  deemed,  by 
fhose  who  truly  deserve  it,  the  noblest  title, 
the  highest  style  of  man,  it  had  not  the  same 
general  estimation  when  first  imposed:  in 
the  mouth  of  unbelievers,  whether  Jews  or 
Heathens,  it  was  a term  of  infamy  and  re- 
proach, and  expressive  of  the  highest  con- 
tempt,* and  may  be  therefore  ranked  among 
the  many  opprobrious  epithets  by  which  the 
Lord’s  faithful  followers  have  been  marked 
out  to  the  rage  and  scorn  of  the  world. 

Caligula  having  rendered  himself  univer- 
sally odious  by  his  inhumanity  and  caprice, 
was  assassinated  in  his  palace,  in  the  fourth 
year  of  his  reign.f 

Claudius,  a.  d.  41.]  He  was  succeeded  by 
Claudius,  who,  soon  after  his  entrance  on  the 
government,  bestowed  the  kingdom  of  Judea 
on  Herod  Agrippa,  a grandson  of  Herod, 
styled  the  Great  (mentioned  Matth.  ii,)  and 
nephew  to  Herod  the  Tetrarch,  who  put 
John  the  Baptist  to  death.  This  prince  ex- 
perienced much  of  that  vicissitude  which 
usually  attends  ambition:  he  had  been  de- 
tained in  prison  and  chains  by  Tiberius, 
greatly  favoured  and  advanced  by  Caligula, 
and  now  seemed  to  have  attained  the  summit 
of  his  wishes ; but,  employing  his  power  to 
persecute  the  church  (Acts  xii.)  he  was  sud- 
denly cut  off  in  the  height  of  his  prosperity ; 
for  who  can  harden  himself  against  the  Lord 
and  prosper?  Herod  was  a professed  zealot 
for  the  law  of  Moses  and  the  Jewish  institu- 
tions, and  studied  by  every  means  to  ingra- 
tiate himself  with  the  people.  He  first  ex- 
pended vast  sums  in  the  defence  and  ornament 
of  the  city ; but  it  was  in  his  power  to  attempt 
a still  more  acceptable  service,  by  exerting 
his  authority  against  the  people  of  Christ; 
and  the  motives  of  vanity  and  popularity,  by 
which  he  was  governed,  prompted  him  to 
embrace  the  occasion.  He  began  by  appre- 
hending the  apostle  James,  the  son  of  Zebe- 
dee,  whom  he  hastily  put  to  death:  and,  find- 
ing that  the  Jews  were  highly  pleased  with 
this  step,  he  proceeded  to  imprison  Peter, 
intending  to  delay  his  execution  till  after  the 
Passover  [a.  d.  44,]  that  his  zeal  against 
these  innovators  might  be  applauded  by  a 
greater  number  of  spectators.  This  stroke, 
though  very  afflictive  to  the  church,  was 
wisely  permitted,  to  illustrate  the  courage 
and  fidelity  of  the  apostles : it  showed  that 
their  miraculous  powers,  and  high  office, 
afforded  them  no  sure  exemption  from  per- 
secution, but  that  they  ventured  and  acted 
upon  the  same  principles  of  faith  and  love  to 


* duos  por  flagitia  invisos  vulgus  Christianog 

appsllabat:  auctor  nominis  ejns  Christus.  qni,  Tiberio 
imp  rante.  per  procuratorem  Pontinm  Pilatum  sup- 
piiciis  affectus  erat.—  Tacitus,  Ann.  15. 
f Josephus,  Ant.  lib.  x. 


[book  II. 

Jesus,  in  common  with  other  believers.  Thus 
James  finished  his  course,  and  received  the 
crown  the  first  of  the  apostles.  But  Peter, 
being  designed  for  farther  services,  vras  still 
safe,  though  to  an  eye  of  sense  he  seemed 
marked  out  for  a speedy  sacrifice : incessant 
prayer  was  made  on  his  behalf  by  the  disci- 
ples; and  the  united  prayers  of  God’s  people 
have  an  efficacy  which  can  be  withstood  by 
no  human  power : when  he  inclines  them  to 
join  with  earnestness  and  perseverance  in 
prayer,  it  is  because  he  has  already  deter- 
mined to  grant  their  petition.  In  this  case 
the  answer  was  signal,  though  not  immediate. 
The  night  before  Peter  was  to  have  been 
brought  forth  to  suffer,  he  was  sleeping  be- 
tween his  keepers  with  that  serenity  which 
is  peculiar  to  those  who  have  a good  cause, 
a good  conscience,  and  a steady  faith  in  God. 
Neither  the  inconveniences  of  a prison,  nor 
the  expectation  of  death,  could  discompose 
him,  for  he  knew  in  whom  he  had  believed; 
but  he  was  awakened  by  an  angel,  who  freed 
him  from  his  chains,  opened  the  prison-doors, 
and  brought  him  into  the  street,  unperceived 
by  the  guards.  After  the  angel  had  thus  set 
him  at  liberty,  and  was  departed,  Peter  went 
to  the  house  where  his  friends  were  at  that 
instant  praying  for  his  deliverance.  Thus 
they  had  a remarkable  proof,  that  the  Lord  is 
indeed  a God  that  heareth  prayer;  and  it  is 
recorded  for  our  encouragement. 

In  the  morning,  Herod  found  himself  dis 
appointed  of  his  prey.  The  guards,  upon 
examination,!  being  unable  to  give  an  ac- 
count of  their  prisoner,  he  commanded  them 
to  be  put  to  death.  It  is  probable  that  Herod, 
or  his  advisers,  might  suspect  a miraculous 
interposition  (as  the  apostles  had  been  de- 
livered the  same  way  a few  years  before:) 
but  to  punish  the  keepers,  as  if  they  had  been 
guilty  of  conniving  at  his  escape,  was  the 
most  likely  method  to  stop  farther  inquiry, 
and  prevent  the  people  from  supposing  any 
thing  extraordinary  in  the  affair. 

Herod  did  not  long  survive  this  event.  He 
lived  and  died  a monument  of  the  instability 
of  human  greatness.  He  was  much  devoted 
to  his  Roman  masters,  and  had  a taste  for 
their  magnificence.  This  induced  him  to 
celebrate  games  and  shows  at  Caesarea,  in 
honour  of  the  emperor:  here  he  laboured  to 
display  the  utmost  of  his  grandeur.  His  pride 
was  farther  flattered  by  the  arrival  of  an  em- 
bassy from  Tyre  and  Sidon.  These  cities  had 
incurred  his  displeasure;  but  as  they  chiefly 
drew  their  subsistence  from  his  dominions, 
they  were  compelled  to  supplicate  peace, 


J Herod  examined  them  himself.  It  is  probable  he 
found  strong  reason  to  think  Pe;?r  had  been  mira- 
culously delivered ; but,  like  a wise  politician,  he  dis- 
sembled his  conviction,  and,  to  stitle  all  suspicion, 
wreaked  his  resentment  upon  the  soldiers.  They,  with- 
out doubt,  believed  there  was  something  extraordinary 
in  the  case,  and  might  have  said  so  if  they  had  lived 
but  dead  men  tell  no  talcs. 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


51 


<5RkT.  I,] 

which,  thoug’h  they  had  highly  offended  him, 
they  obtained  by  their  interest  with  Blastus 
his  chamberlain.  The  king  appointed  a day 
to  receive  their  submission,  when  he  appeared 
with  a splendour  that  dazzled  the  eyes  of  the 
spectators:  he  addressed  himself  to  the  am- 
bassadors in  a pompous  oration,  suited,  we 
may  suppose,  to  give  them  the  highest  idea 
both  of  his.power  and  his  clemency.  When 
he  had  ended,  he  heard  his  praises  resound 
from  every  quarter : the  multitude  shouted, 
It  is  the  voice  of  a God,  not  of  a man.  His 
vain  heart  was  elated  with  this  impious  com- 
pliment, which  indeed  was  no  more  than  had 
often  been  used  upon  such  occasions  among 
the  Heathens ; but  when  it  was  now  adopted 
by  those  who  professed  a knowledge  of  the 
true  God,  the  proud  worm,  who  durst  be 
pleased  with  it,  was  made  a sudden  and  awful 
example  of  the  divine  displeasure : the  aveng- 
ing angel  of  the  Lord  smote  him  with  an  ir- 
resistible, though  invisible  stroke ; and,  while 
surrounded  with  the  fancied  insignia  of  ma- 
jesty, and  in  the  midst  of  their  idolatrous  ac- 
clamations, he  found  and  confessed  himself  a 
mortal.  He  was  seized  with  excruciating 
pains,  and  expired  in  a few  days,  being  in  a 
manner  devoured  by  vermin  bred  from  his 
bowels.  With  his  death  the  persecution 
ceased.  He  perished,  and  was  quickly  forgot ; 
but  the  word  of  God,  which  he  had  attempted 
to  suppress,  grew  and  multiplied  a.s  before. 

The  church  of  Antioch  during  this  time 
greatly  increased,  and  enjoyed  the  benefit  of 
many  excellent  teachers,  some  of  whom 
were  endued  with  a prophetical  spirit,  by 
which  the  Lord  intimated  his  will  to  them 
in  particular  cases.  In  this  way  they  had 
been  informed  of  an  approaching  dearth,  and, 
as  seasons  of  scarcity  would  severely  affect 
the  disciples  in  Judea,  who  laboured  under 
peculiar  difficulties,  they  cheerfully  contri- 
buted to  their  relief,  and  sent  the  collection 
to  Jerusalem  by  Saul  and  Barnabas,  who, 
having  fulfilled  their  commission,  returned 
to  Antioch  about  this  time.  [a.  d.  45.]  These 
two  were  soon  afterwards  (Acts  xiii.)  ap- 
pointed by  an  express  revelation  to  propa- 
gate the  knowledge  of  the  gospel  in  other 
countries : they  were  set  apart  to  this  ser- 
vice by  the  solemn  prayers  of  the  church, 
and  attended  by  John,  surnamed  Mark,  who 
had  accompanied  them  from  Jerusalem. 
Thus  they  went  forth,  like  Abraham,  uncer- 
tain whither  they  were  to  go,  but  assured  of 
an  infallible  guidance  and  power  to  direct 
and  prepare  the  way. 

It  is  generally  believed  that,  nearly  about 
the  same  time,  the  apostles  at  Jerusalem 
likewise  separated  to  preach  the  gospel  in 
the  districts  respectively  allotted  them  by 
the  direction  of  the  Holy  Spirit ; and  we 
have  some  account  from  antiquity  of  their 
several  provinces,  according  to  which  they 
divided  among  them  the  greatest  part  of  the 


known  world,  from  India  to  Barbary,  and 
from  Abyssinia  to  Scythia.  Indeed  there  is 
no  doubt  but  they  executed  their  commis- 
sion as  apostles,  and  spread  the  gospel  far 
and  wide;  but  the  particulars  recorded  of 
their  labours,  sufferings,  and  circuits  are  not 
transmitted  with  such  authenticity  and  clear- 
ness as  to  give  entire  satisfaction.  The  only 
certain  history  we  have  of  the  apostolic  age, 
is  that  of  Luke,  which  we  call  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles ; and  this,  from  the  period  we 
are  now  come  to,  is  confined  to  those  events 
in  which  Paul  was  personally  concerned,  and 
does  not  even  carry  on  his  history  to  the  end 
of  his  life.  The  wisdom  of  God  having  given 
us,  both  in  the  life  of  Jesus  and  of  his  first 
servants,  rather  a specimen  sufficient  for  our 
instruction  than  a complete  history  to  gra- 
tify our  curiosity,  to  this  plan  we  shall  con. 
form ; and  while  we  have  the  light  of  ar 
inspired  writer,  we  shall  not  wander  after 
the  glimmerings  of  tradition.  I shall  there- 
fore, in  the  progress  of  this  chapter,  confine 
myself  to  the  Evangelist’s  narration,  so  far 
as  it  goes,  and,  when  he  leaves  us,  it  will  be 
sufficient  to  comprise,  in  a very  narrow  com- 
pass, the  most  certain  or  most  probable  in- 
cidents which  we  can  recover  to  complete 
the  records  of  the  first  century. 

Saul  and  Barnabas  embarked  at  Seleucia, 
a sea-port  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Antioch, 
and  sailed  to  Cyprus : they  landed  at  Sala- 
mis,  on  the  east  side,  and  proceeded  through 
the  island  to  Paphos,  in  the  west,  making 
the  first  tender  of  the  gospel  in  every  place 
to  the  Jews.  At  Paphos  the  Roman  go- 
vernor, Sergius  Paulus,  was  desirous  to  hear 
the  apostles’  doctrine : he  was  attended 
by  Elymas,  a pretended  magician  and  pro- 
phet, who  fearing  the  discovery  of  his  im- 
postures, laboured  to  divert  the  governor 
from  his  purpose,  and  to  prejudice  him 
against  them.  But  Saul  sharply  rebuked 
his  wickedness,  and,  by  the  impulse  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,*  denounced  a sentence  against 
him,  suitable  to  his  crime ; he  who  endea- 
voured to  detain  others  in  darkness  and  ig- 
norance, was  suddenly  struck  blind  himself! 
This  punishment,  which  he  could  neither 
foresee  nor  avoid,  discovered  the  vanity  of 
his  claims,  and  convinced  the  governor,  that 
the  preachers  spoke  by  an  authority  superior 
to  their  own;  he  therefore  attended  more 
carefully  to  their  words,  and  became  soon  a 
partaker  of  their  faith. 

From  Cyprus  they  sailed  to  Perga,  in 


* It  is  expressly  said,  that  Saul  or  Paul  was  filled 
with  the  Holy  Ghost;  therefore  the  severe  expressions 
in  his  reprimand  were  not  the  effects  of  intemperate 
anger,  but  a solemn  declaration  of  the  sorcerer's  true 
character:  yet  it  is  safer  to  imitate  the  apostle  in  his 
patience  and  humility,  than  in  this  singular  instance. 
The  power  of  God,  which  accompanied  his  words, 
proved  by  what  impulse  and  authority  he  spoke.  We, 
who  are  not  apostles,  and  who  make  no  claim  to  apo9 
tolic  power,  shall  act  more  in  character  to  conform  to 
the  general  rule  St.  Paul  has  given  us,  2 Tim.  ii.  24,  2$ 


52 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


[book  n. 


Pamphylia;  where  their  attendant  Mark, 
either  already  wearied  with  fatigue,  or  ap- 
prehensive of  greater  difficulties,  or  from  a 
fickleness  and  levity  of  temper,  would  pro- 
ceed no  farther  with  them,  but  returned  to 
Jerusalem.  By  this  indiscretion  he  not  only 
lost  many  valuable  opportunities,  which  he 
afterwards  regretted,  but  in  the  end  gave 
occasion  to  a great  difference  between  Bar- 
nabas and  Paul.  Such  is  the  state  of  hu- 
manity, that  those  persons  in  a society  who 
Cannot  do  much  good,  are  often,  by  their 
imprudence,  the  cause  of  much  harm,  even 
where  they  intend  otherwise.  From  Perga 
they  proceeded  to  Antioch,  in  Pisidia,  and 
entered  into  the  synagogue,  [a.  d.  46.] 
Their  habit  and  manners  bespoke  them 
Jews ; but,  perhaps,  the  rulers  of  the  syna- 
gogue were  not  apprised  of  their  character. 
When  the  ordinary  service  wras  finished, 
they  were  desired  to  propound  their  senti- 
ments. Paul,  who  was  usually  the  speaker, 
addressed  them  in  a long  discourse,  a valu- 
able abstract  of  which  is  preserved  to  us.  In 
his  introduction,  he  reminded  them  of  their 
ancient  history  and  prophecies ; but  the  sum 
and  substance  of  his  sermon  was  Jesus.  He 
proved  from  the  scripture  that  he  was  the 
Messiah,  in  whom  the  promises  centred,  and 
proposed  him  to  all  as  the  great  object  of 
faith  through  whom,  and  by  whom  alone,  for- 
giveness of  sin  was  to  be  obtained,  and  a free 
justification  from  those  offences  for  which 
the  law  of  Moses  had  made  no  provision.  In 
the  close  he  solemnly  warned  them  of  the 
danger  of  rejecting  this  Saviour  and  his  gos- 
pel. His  discourse  made  no  great  impres- 
sion upon  the  Jews ; but  some  of  the  Hea- 
thens who  had  been  occasionally  present, 
desired  to  hear  the  matter  farther  explained. 
Accordingly,  on  the  next  Sabbath,  almost  the 
whole  city  was  collected  to  hear  the  gospel, 
which  exceedingly  offended  the  Jews,  and 
prompted  them  to  interpose  with  cavil  and 
abuse.  The  apostles  then  told  them,  in  plain 
terms,  that  though  their  message  was  first 
to  them,  yet,  since  they  refused  to  receive  it, 
they  would  henceforth  freely  proclaim  it  to 
the  Heathens,  from  whom  they  expected  a 
more  favourable  hearing ; nor  were  they  dis- 
appointed in  their  hope,  for  many  of  the  lat- 
ter received  the  word  with  joy,  both  in  the 
city  and  adjacent  country.*  The  Jews,  far- 
ther exasperated  by  this  success,  so  wrought 
upon  the  passions  and  prejudices  of  some 
persons  of  influence,  both  men  and  women, 
who  were  probably  proselytes,  and  supersti- 


* When  the  Jews  saw  the  multitudes,  they  were 
filled  with  envy.  Among  the  clamours  raised  against 
persons  and  doctrines  in  our  own  time,  some  have  not 
been  ashamed  to  allege  the  great  concourse  of  people 
usually  attending,  as  a sufficient  objection,  forgetting 
(as  it  should  seem.)  that  this  was  one  circumstance 
that  provoked  and  instigated  the  enemies  of  Chiis- 
tianity  from  the  beginning,  John  vii.  40,  4S.  and  xi.  4d, 
and  xii.  9. 


tiously  devoted  to  their  new  profession,  that 
Paul  and  Barnabas  wTere  violently  compelled 
to  depart ; but  they  left  behind  them  disci- 
ples, the  fruits  of  their  ministry,  w ho  were 
filled  with  joy  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
thereby  enabled  to  maintain  the  faith,  though 
their  teachers  wrere  forced  from  them. 

The  apostles,  shaking  off  thb  dust  of  their 
feet  (as  our  Lord  had  commanded,)  for  a tes- 
timony against  the  obstinate  infidelity  of  the 
Jews,  wrent  from  thence  to  Iconium,  the 
chief  city  of  Lycaonia,  where  they  made 
many  converts,  both  Jews  and  Gentiles.  But 
the  Jews  wffio  believed  not,  actuated  by  the 
same  spirit  in  every  place,  opposed  "them 
earnestly  ;*  yet  they  staid  so  long,  and  met 
with  such  success,  that  the  city  was  divided, 
a part  holding  wTith  them,  and  a part  in- 
fluenced by  their  enemies,  wTho  from  thence 
took  occasion  to  represent  them  to  the  magis- 
trates as  disturbers  of  the  public  peace ; a 
charge  which  has  often  been  falsely  urged 
against  the  ministers  of  the  gospel.  At  length 
' their  adversaries  prevailed,  and  violent  mea- 
sures were  resolved  on ; but  they,  having 
notice  of  it,  withdrew  in  time  to  Lyst'a,  in 
the  same  province,  where  they  pursued  their 
ministry  with  their  usual  zeal  and  firmness, 
without  being  deterred  by  the  opposition  they 
had  already  met  with,  or  were  likely  to  meet 
in  every  place.  Among  their  hearers  at 
Lystra,  there  was  one  wffio  had  been  a crip- 
ple from  his  birth.  Paul,  observing  his  atten- 
tion, and  some  indications  of  faith  in  his 
behaviour,  was  directed  to  confirm  the  doc- 
trine of  Jesus  by  a signal  miracle.  He  com- 
manded the  lame  man  to  stand  upright  upon 
his  feet ; and  his  word  wras  accompanied  with 
immediate  power  : the  man,  w ho  had  never 
walked,  instantly  sprang  up,  and  possessed 
the  perfect  use  of  his  limbs.  It  appeared,  from 
this  instance,  that  though  miracles  have  a 
tendency  to  rouse  the  attention,  and  are  a 
proof  of  a power  beyond  the  ordinary  course 
of  things,  yet  they  cannot,  of  themselves,  in- 
form or  convince  the  mind  of  truth : for  the 
ignorant  multitude,  though  greatly  struck 
with  what  they  sawr,  wTere  so  far  from  be- 
lieving the  apostle’s  doctrine, on  the  evidence 
of  this  miracle,  that  they  endeavoured  to  ac- 
count for  it  on  their  own  idolatrous  princi- 
ples : they  forgot  all  they  had  heard  of  Jesus, 
and  cried  out,  The  gods  are  come  down  to  us 
in  the  likeness  of  men.  Agreeable  to  their 
blinded  notions,  they  called  Barnabas,  Jupi- 
ter, and  Paul,  Mercury ; imagining  some- 
thing in  them  peculiarly  characteristic  or 
those  fabulous  deities.  In  the  warmth  of 


* Acts  xiv.  2 “The  Jews  stirred  up  the  people.” 
There  is  a natural  enmity  in  the  hearts  of  some  men, 
but  in  many  it  is  dormant  ; they  are  engaged  in  busi- 
ness and  pleasure,  and  would  be  content  to  let  the  peo 
pie  of  God  alone,  as  unworthy  their  notice;  tnese  must 
be  stirred  up  by  the  more  zealous  to  join  in  the  com- 
mon cause  ; and  accordingly  no  pains  or  misrcpiesenia 
lions  are  spared  to  rouse  them  from  their  indolence. 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


53 


CHAP.  I.] 

their  superstition,  they  assembled  with  their 
high  priest  and  victims,*  and  would  have  of- 
fered sacrifices  to  the  men  who  came  to  turn 
them  from  dumb  idols  to  serve  the  living  God. 
Rut  nothing  gives  the  faithful  ministers  of 
Christ  greater  pain,  than  to  have  any  part 
of  that  honour  or  dependence  addressed  to 
themselves,  which  they  are  desirous  wholly 
io  engage  for  their  Lord  and  Master.  Paul 
and  Barnabas,  who  had  suffered  persecution 
and  ill-treatment  with  patience,  were  trans- 
ported beyond  their  usual  bounds  at  these 
marks  of  ignorant  applause ; they  rushed  in 
among  the  people,  confessed  their  own  in- 
firmities, boldly  reproved  their  blind  idola- 
try, and  directed  them  where  alone  their 
thanks  and  worship  were  due ; yet  with  all 
they  could  say,  they  hardly  prevailed  on 
them  to  desist.  It  was  happy  for  them  that 
they  sought  not  their  own  glory,  and  could 
not  be  elated  with  the  applause  of  men. 
Poor  and  precarious  is  the  reward  of  those 
who  aim  no  higher  than  this;  for,  as  the 
tide,  after  running  a while  violently  one 
way,  soon  afterwards  by  degrees  reverts  to 
the  contrary  extreme ; so  inconstant  is  the 
praise  and  regard  of  the  unthinking  many, 
who  are  governed  by  appearances,  and  sus- 
ceptive of  every  new  impression.  Some  of 
the  restless  Jews  followed  the  apostles  from 
lconium,  and,  by  their  insinuations,  pre- 
vailed on  the  same  people  to  treat  those  as 
malefactors,  whom  a little  before  they  had 
revered  as  deities:  they  tumultuously  as- 
saulted Paul  (who,  being  the  chief  speaker, 
was  usually  the  chief  sufferer,)  stoned  him, 
md  dragged  him  out  of  the  city,  supposing 
they  had  killed  him ; but  the  Lord,  to  whom 
the  issues  of  life  and  death  belong,  restored 
him,  and  healed  his  bruises,  so  that  he  rose 
up  while  the  disciples  were  sorrowfully 
standing  round  him ; and  having  entered 
into  the  city,  to  show  that  he  was  neither 
dead  nor  intimidated,  he  was  enabled  to  ac- 
company Barnabas  the  next  day  to  Derbe. 

Here  they  continued  some  time,  and 
taught  many  ; and  this  was  the  boundary  of 
their  present  progress.  From  hence  they 
returned,  regardless  of  their  enemies,  to  the 
places  they  had  been  at  before,  to  Lystra, 
lconium,  Antioch,  and  Perga,  confirming 
the  believers,  forming  them  into  societies, 
and  constituting  elders  and  pastors,  from 
amongst  themselves,  in  every  church.  In 
all  places  they  took  care  to  instruct  the  be- 
lievers in  the  nature  of  their  profession,  and 
reminded  them  of  an  unalterable  necessity, 


* The  high  priest  was  probably  willing  to  avail  him- 
self of  the  superstition  of  the  people,  and  thought  it  a 
favourable  occasion  to  establish  the  belief  of  a peculiar 
sanctity  and  virtue  in  the  temple  at  Lystra,  which 
might  increase  the  number  of  votaries,  and  promote 
his  own  wealth  and  influence,  just  as  a legendary  re- 
port of  the  appearance  or  miracles  of  some  saint,  or 
angel,  has  been  improved  to  procure  a veneration  for 
particular  cities  or  temples  in  Christian  countries. 


in  the  present  constitution  of  things,  that 
through  much  tribulation  we  must  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  God,f  Acts  xiv.  22. 
After  this,  recommending  the  new  converts 
to  the  grace  and  care  of  the  Lord,  in  whom 
they  had  believed,  they  again  took  shipping, 
and  returned  to  Antioch  in  Syria.  Upon 
their  arrival,  they  assembled  the  whole 
church,  and  gave  them  a particular  account 
of  all  that  the  Lord  had  done  for  them,  and 
by  them,  in  their  late  circuit,  [a.  d.  47.] 
This  is  the  news  which  believers  delight  to 
relate  and  hear : the  traverses  of  policy,  or 
the  events  of  war,  the  usual  topics  of  con- 
versation, afford  them  but  little  entertain- 
ment; but  it  rejoices  tneir  hearts  to  be 
informed  of  new  accessions  to  the  Redeemer’s 
kingdom,  and  to  see  how  his  wisdom  and 
grace  triumph  over  all  opposition. 

Hitherto  the  church  had  only  to  struggle 
with  outward  difficulties ; but  as  human  na- 
ture is  always  the  same,  and  the  apostolical 
times  were  to  transmit  instruction  to  the 
people  of  God  in  every  succeeding  period, 
mistakes,  disputes,  and  divisions  were,  by 
degrees,  permitted  to  take  place  among  pro- 
fessed believers.  If  it  had  not  been  so,  we 
might  not  only  have  been  discouraged  by  the 
great  disparity  between  the  first  Christians, 
and  those  who  have  lived  since;  but  for 
want  of  rules  and  precedents  of  sufficient 
authority,  we  should  have  been  continually 
at  a loss  how  to  oppose  and  confute  the  va- 
rious errors  which  have  appeared  and  been 
revived  during  so  many  centuries : the  Di- 
vine Wisdom  therefore  thought  fit  to  suffer 
every  false  and  dangerous  notion,  whereby 
the  enemy  of  souls  would  at  any  time  at- 
tempt to  corrupt  the  simplicity  of  the  faith, 
to  make  its  first  entrance  while  the  apos- 
tles were  yet  living,  that  we  might  have 
their  instructions  and  examples  to  guide  us 
in  every  emergency.  However  paradoxical 
it  may  seem,  we  hope,  m a proper  place,  to 
show,  that  no  new  opinion,  either  right  or 
wrong,  respecting  the  faith  in  Christ,  has 
been  started  since  the  close  of  the  scriptural 
canon.  As  the  gospel,  that  good  and  per- 
fect gift,  came  down  from  the  Father  of 


tThat  this  was  the  case  in  the  primitive  times  is  ge- 
rally  allowed;  but  we  have  been  told  by  some,  that 
things  are  now  greatly  altered  in  this  respect ; they 
would  persuade  us,  that  our  Lord’s  words  (Matt.  vii.  13.) 
are  no  longer  in  force;  that  the  way  to  the  kingdom, 
in  our  happy  days,  is  broad,  spacious,  smooth,  and 
thronged  by  multitudes, — the  very  characters  he  lias 
given  us  of  the  road  to  destruction.  Such  teachers  and 
writers  are  little  aware  how  they  proclaim  their  own 
ignorance.  If  they  knew  the  spirit  of  enmity  which 
the  world  bears  to  true  Christianity, — the  trials  with 
which  the  Lord  visits  his  people,  to  prove  and  exercise 
their  faith,— the  assaults  and  temptations  they  endure 
from  the  powers  of  darkness,— the  griefs  they  feel  from 
a sense  of  their  own  unfaithfulness  and  unfruitfulness, 
—the  fightings  without,  and  fears  within,  which  are 
more  or  less  experienced  in  the  Christian  life— if  they 
knew  these  things,  they  would  speak  otherwise.  The 
beaten  way  to  honours  and  preferments  is,  perhaps, 
free  from  these  tribulations:  but  not  so  the  way  that 
will  lead  to  the  kingdom  of  God. 


54 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


lights  complete,  and  has  received  no  amend- 
ment from  the  hands  through  which  it  has 
successively  passed, — so,  on  the  other  hand, 
the  grand  deceiver  exerted  all  his  force 
against  it,  and  availed  himself  of  all  his  in- 
fluence on  the  ignorance  and  wickedness  of 
men  from  the  very  beginning,  and.  has  no 
subtle  devices  in  reserve  now,  having  tried 
his  utmost  resources  over  and  over.  It  is 
true,  length  of  time,  and  change  of  circum- 
stances, have  afforded  him  opportunities  of 
placing  his  delusions  in  various  lights,  and 
have  given  some  of  his  schemes  a seeming 
strength  and  establishment  which  they  had 
not  at  first ; but  as  a man  attained  to  his  full 
stature  and  vigour,  is  the  same  individual 
person  that  was  once  an  infant,  unable  to 
stand  alone,  so  there  neither  is,  nor  has 
been,  any  erroneous  principle,  however  au- 
thorised or  recommended,  or  perhaps  ap- 
plauded as  a new  discovery,  by  those  who 
are  ignorant  of  scripture  and  antiquity,  but 
we  can,  from  express  passages  in  the  apos- 
tles’ writings,  show  that  the  same  existed  in 
their  time,  though  in  a more  feeble  and  in- 
fantile state.  This  point  we  are  to  illus- 
trate more  at  large  hereafter ; at  present  I 
am  only  concerned  to  take  notice  of  a dis- 
sension that  arose  among  the  believers  at 
Antioch,  not  long  after  the  return  of  Saul 
and  Barnabas,  which  made  their  presence 
there  particularly  useful.  This  was  occa- 
sioned by  some  Judaising  professors,  who 
came  down  from  J udea,  and  taught  the  Gen- 
tile converts,  that  except  they  were  circum- 
cised, and  kept  the  law  of  Moses,  they  could 
not  be  saved.  This  dangerous  position, 
arising  from  a misapprehension  of  the  righ- 
teousness of  Christ,  as  the  only  ground  of  a 
sinner’s  acceptance  with  God,  and  tending 
to  substitute  a quicksand  for  the  foundation 
of  hope,  instead  of  the  immoveable  rock 
which  God  has  laid  in  Zion,  was  warmly 
opposed  by  these  apostles  of  the  Gentiles ; 
they  had  a double  conviction  of  its  falsehood, 
both  from  the  nature  of  the  faith  they  had 
received  themselves,  and  the  effects  of  the 
gospel  they  had  imparted  to  others;  but 
many  weaker  minds,  having  less  experience 
of  the  work  of  grace  in  their  own  hearts, 
and  less  acquaintance  with  what  the  Lord 
had  wrought  in  others,  were  staggered. 
When,  therefore,  after  many  debates,  the 
point  was  not  settled  to  satisfaction,  it  was 
resolved  to  depute  Paul  and  Barnabas  to 
consult  the  apostles  and  elders  at  Jerusa- 
lem. [a.  d.  49.]  If  this,  as  seems  probable, 
was  the  journey  St.  Paul  refers  to  in  Gal.  ii. 
they  were  directed  to  take  this  step  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  ; since  he  there  says,  that  he 
went  up  to  Jerusalem  by,  or  in  consequence 
of,  a revelation.  They  were  accompanied  by 
some  brethren ; and  in  every  place  where 
they  found  believers,  they  comforted  them 
with  the  account  of  their  late  progress.  At 


[book  II. 

Jerusalem  they  were  cordially  received  ; and 
having  declared  the  happy  fruits  of  their 
preaching  to  the  Heathens,  though  they  had 
not  attempted  to  bind  them  to  tlw  Mosaic 
law,  they  proceeded  to  declare  tt  e tenet 
which  had  been  lately  advanced,  and  their 
motives  for  opposing  it.  They  soon  found 
persons  of  the  same  legal  spirit,  who  justi- 
fied and  repeated  the  obligation  of  the 
ceremonial  law  upon  all  who  embraced  the 
gospel.  Upon  this,  a particular  day  was 
named  for  the  whole  assembty  to  meet,  and 
discuss  the  question.  In  this  convention 
there  was  the  highest  room  to  expect,  that 
the  Spirit  of  God  would  influence  their  re- 
solves, and  guard  them  from  giving  their 
sanction  to  an  error;  and  he  did  so;  yet  not 
by  an  audible  voice  or  instantaneous  im- 
pulse, but  by  presiding  over  their  debates, 
and  enabling  them,  in  the  conclusion,  to  col- 
lect and  pronounce  the  true  state  of  the 
question  with  infallible  evidence  and*  cer- 
tainty. Here  again  it  is  plain,  that  Peter 
little  thought  himself  entitled  to  that  su- 
preme prerogative,  as  the  immediate  vicar 
of  Jesus  Christ,  which  his  pretended  suc- 
cessors falsely  ascribe  to  him ; nor  did  his 
brethren  remind  him  of  his  privilege,  other- 
wise there  could  have  been  no  debate,  for 
his  declaration  would  have  been  decisive; 
but  waving  the  claim  of  authority,  he  argued 
the  insignificance  of  the  Jewish  rites  as  to 
salvation,  from  the  Lord’s  conduct  to  vards 
Cornelius  ahd  his  friends,  by  his  ministry. 
These  were  the  first  Gentile  converts ; and 
in  this  instance,  he  said,  the  Lord  had  fully 
declared  his  mind,  making  no  difference 
between  Jew  and  Gentile,  purifying  their 
hearts  by  faith  in  his  blood,  and  imparting  to 
them  those  substantial  blessings,  of  which 
the  ceremonial  law  exhibited  no  more  than 
the  shadow;  and  which,  in  comparison  of 
the  liberty  of  the  gospel,  he  termed  an  un- 
necessary yoke , too  heavy  to  be  borne.  The 
assembly  then  kept  silence,  while  Paul  and 
Barnabas  related  more  at  large  the  fruits  of 
their  late  mission  among  the  Heathens. 
The  conference  was  closed,  and  the  determi- 
nation given,  not  by  Peter,  but  by  James, 
who  asserted  the  Gentiles’  freedom  from  the 
Jewish  yoke,  and  enjoined  them  only  to  ab- 
stain from  fornication,  from  things  offered  to 
idols,  and  from  blood.  The  two  latter  points 
were  necessary  to  preserve  a friendly  inter- 
course between  the  Gentile  and  Jewish  con- 
verts, so  long  as  these  were  indulged  in  ob- 
serving the  Levitical  institutions ; and  the 
prohibition  from  fornication,  though  imme- 
diately belonging  to  the  moral  law,  which 
was  of  universal  obligation,  was  added,  to 
give  the  Gentiles  a deeper  sense  of  t le 
guilt  and  evil  of  a practice,  which  the  most 
civilized  and  virtuous  Heathens  considered 
as  almost,  if  not  wholly,  innocent. 

This  sentence  was  generally  embraced 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


55 


CHAP.  I.] 

and  a letter  to  the  same  effect  was  written 
to  the  believers  at  Antioch,  confirming-  them 
in  their  Christian  liberty.  In  this  they 
thought  it  a sufficient  condemnation  of  the 
opposite  opinion  to  say,  They  had  given  no 
such  commandment : a protestation  the  apos- 
tles might  have  often  repeated  had  they 
lived  to  this  day : but  since  their  genuine 
writings  still  subsist,  we  may,  by  parity  of 
reason,  still  infer,  that  we  need  not  be  afraid 
of  rejecting  any  thing  that  is  enjoined  as 
binding  upon  the  conscience,  if  we  can  be 
sure  that  the  apostles,  who  were  divinely 
inspired  to  explain  the  Christian  faith  and 
practice,  have  given  us  no  precept  in  its  fa- 
vour. They  likewise  took  care  to  assert 
their  firm  persuasion,  that  their  decision  was 
agreeable  to  the  dictates  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
This  convocation  has  generally  been  styled 
the  first  Christian  council ; but  indeed,  when 
we  compare  it  with  those  which  bore  the 
same  name  afterwards,  and  were  professedly 
formed  upon  this  precedent,  we  shall  be  al- 
most tempted  to  say,  that  it  was  not  only  the 
first,  but  the  last.  Here  were  no  intrigues 
practised,  no  temporal  interests  consulted, 
no  fierce  and  bloody  anathemas  issued,  to 
give  a sanction  to  persecution,  no  uncer- 
tainty or  animosity  in  the  issue ; but  the 
affair  was  conducted  with  freedom  and  mo- 
deration, and  the  conclusion  made  by  general 
consent,  and  to  the  satisfaction  of  both  par  - 
ties. How  different  in  these  respects  from 
the  spirit  of  after  times  ! But  though  this 
answered  the  end  in  the  present  case,  the 
judgment  of  the  apostles  was  not  entirely 
obeyed,  even  while  they  lived.  This  debate 
was  revived  in  other  places,  and  proved  a 
frequent  impediment  to  the  peace  of  the 
church,  so  long  at  least  as  the  temple  and 
worship  of  Jerusalem  continued,  and  gave 
St.  Paul  occasion  to  write  his  epistle  to  the 
Galatians  expressly  on  this  subject ; nay,  it 
seems  the  mistake  still  subsisted  in  Judea, 
though  none  publicly  ventured  to  contradict 
the  decree  when  it  was  made;  for  when, 
some  time  after,  Peter  went  to  Antioch,  and 
conversed  (Gal.  ii.  11,)  freely  with  the  Gen- 
tile converts,  living  after  their  manner  for  a 
season,  yet,  when  some  brethren  came  down 
from  Jerusalem,  he  was  so  fearful  to  offend 
them  in  this  matter,  that  he  separated  him- 
self again,  and,  by  his  influence,  prevailed 
on  Barnabas  likewise  to  dissemble  in  favour 
of  those  of  the  circumcision.  For  this  weak 
compliance,  whereby  he  seemed  to  over- 
throw what  he  had  before  established,  St. 
Paul  withstood  him  to  his  face : he  did  not 
detract  from  his  character  by  insinuations  to 
his  prejudice  behind  his  back,  nor  did  he 
content  himself  wfth  reproving  him  in  se- 
cret; but  as  the  offence  was  public,  tending 
to  confirm  the  Jews  in  their  bigotry,  and  to 
offend  the  weak  on  both  sides,  he  boldly  and 
publicly  rebuked  him  before  them  all.  Strange 


weakness,  incident  to  the  best  of  men  ! that 
Peter,  who  had  first  laid  aside  his  prejudices, 
who  had  visited  the  Gentiles  by  divine  direc- 
tion, had  seen  the  happy  effects  of  his  com- 
pliance, and  vindicated  his  own  conduct  so 
unanswerably  upon  a late  occasion,  should 
now  shrink  and  trifle,  expose  himself,  and 
grieve  his  brethren,  through  fear  of  those 
who  came  from  Jerusalem  ! To  be  deliver- 
ed from  the  fear  of  man  is  a deliverance  in- 
deed ! It  was  happy  for  Peter  that  he  had, 
in  his  brother  Paul,  a faithful  friend,  who, 
by  a few  well-timed  words,  broke  the  chain, 
and  set  him  at  liberty.  It  is  surprising  that 
any  who  have  read  this  passage  should 
dream  of  fixing  on  Peter,  above  any  other  of 
the  apostles,  to  be  the  supreme  and  infallible 
head  of  the  Christian  church. 

Justus  and  Silas,  two  of  the  brethren,  were 
sent  with  Barnabas  and  Paul  to  accompany 
the  letter,  and  to  declare  the  purport  of  it 
more  at  large.  They  were  gladly  received  at 
Antioch,  and  not  only  confirmed  the  peace  of 
the  church,  but  were  further  helpful  to  their 
faith,  by  the  singular  gifts  with  which  the 
Lord  had  honoured  them.  In  a little  time 
Justus  returned  to  Jerusalem,  but  Silas  chose 
to  continue  longer,  and  was  afterwards  the 
constant  companion  of  St.  Paul  in  his  travels. 

a.  d.  50.]  This  obstacle  being  removed, 
the  gospel  flourished  greatly  at  Antioch. 
But,  amidst  all  their  services  and  success 
there,  Paul  and  Barnabas  could  not  forget 
the  converts  they  had  left  in  Cyprus  and  Asia 
Minor.  They  proposed  therefore  to  make 
them  a second  visit,  to  comfort  them,  and  to 
see  how  the  work  had  prospered  in  their  ab- 
sence : but  a difficulty  was  started  concerning 
John,  surnamed  Mark,  who  had  formerly  left 
them  at  Perga ; and  having  probably  repented 
of  his  irresolution,  was  now  desirous  to  pro- 
ceed with  them  again.  Paul  warmly  opposed 
this,  thinking  him  highly  culpable  for  his  in- 
constancy, and  perhaps  too  much  influenced 
against  him  by  a spirit  of  resentment  not 
wholly  excusable.  On  the  other  hand,  Bar- 
nabas undertook  his  apology;  in  which,  be- 
sides his  tenderness  to  his  fault,  he  seems  to 
have  been  moved  by  considerations  which 
ought  to  have  no  place  where  the  service  of 
God  is  concerned.  John  was  his  sister’s  son ; 
and  this  led  him  to  consider  his  conduct  in 
the  most  favourable  light.  Thus  they  were 
both  a little  partial  in  the  cause ; but  much 
more  wrong  in  the  issue ; for  the  contention 
became  so  sharp  between  them,  that  it  broke 
their  harmony.  They  determined  to  part. 
Accordingly,  Barnabas  took  Mark,  whose 
company  he  had  dearly  purchased  by  the  loss 
of  Paul’s,  and  sailed  to  Cyprus,  his  native 
place;  and  Paul,  choosing  Silas  in  his  room, 
went  through  Syria  and  Cilicia,  being  recom- 
mended to  the  Lord  by  the  prayers  of  the 
brethren.  So  that  their  former  work  was  now 
divided  between  them. 


56 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


I must  venture  to  digress  here  a little  for 
the  sake  of  two  remarks,  of  which  the  course 
of  our  history  may  often  remind  the  reader. 
1.  How  small  an  occasion  will  discover  hu- 
man infirmity  even  in  the  brightest  charac- 
ters ! Not  all  the  graces  of  Paul  and  Barna- 
bas, nor  the  remembrance  of  the  services  and 
difficulties  they  had  jointly  experienced,  nor 
the  importance  of  the  common  cause  in  which 
they  wTere  engaged,  nor  the  fear  of  giving 
offence  to  the  world  and  to  the  church,  could 
restrain  these  dear  friends,  fellow-labourers, 
and  fellow-sufferers,  from  contending  and 
separating  about  a trifle.  2.  How  wise  is  the 
over-ruling  providence  of  God,  permitting 
such  things  for  the  trial  of  some,  the  instruc- 
tion of  others,  and  the  better  carrying  on  his 
own  designs ! In  succeeding  revivals  of  re- 
ligion, the  like  differences*  have  sometimes 
taken  place  among  the  main  instruments,  and 
from  as  trivial  causes ; and  though  they  ha  ve 
not  obtained  without  fault  in  some,  and  in- 
convenience to  many;  yet  the  event  has 
proved  them  no  hinderance  upon  the  whole. 
The  work  has  become  more  diffusive,  and 
more  incontestible,  when  persons  of  different 
tempers,  sentiments,  and  talents,  who  seemed 
to  superficial  observers  as  the  heads  of  dif- 
ferent parties,  have  laboured  with  equal  zeal 
and  success  in  advancing  the  one  great  de- 
sign of  the  gospel.  As  a skilful  gardener 
raises  many  plants  in  a little  spot  of  ground, 
and  removes  them  afterwards  to  places  where 
they  will  have  more  room  to  grow  and 
flourish;  so  they  who  are  designed  for  ex- 
tensive usefulness,  are  often  first  reared 
within  a little  compass,  within  the  sight  and 
knowledge  of  each  other,  where  they  are 
sheltered  and  strengthened,  while  tender,  by 
their  mutual  advices,  prayers,  and  examples, 
and  seem  to  have  only  one  heart  and  one 
mind.  But  were  they  always  to  continue 
thus  closely  connected,  no  one  would  have 
room  to  expand  according  to  the  measure  of 
gifts  and  services  which  the  Lord  has  ap- 
pointed them ; therefore  they  are  thinned  and 
transplanted:  either  persecutions  from  with- 
out, or  weaknesses,  mistakes,  or  jealousies 
among  themselves,  scatter  them  afar,  to 
places  and  undertakings  they  had  no  thoughts 
of,  and  which  would  not  have  been  otherwise 
attempted. 

The  apostle  Paul,  with  his  companion  Silas 
(Acts  xvi,)  proceeded,  as  has  been  mentioned, 
through  Syria  and  Cilicia,  to  the  parts  he 
had  formerly  visited.  When  he  came  to 
Lystra,  he  chose  Timothy  for  his  associate 
and  companion  in  his  journey,  vTho  it  is  pro- 


* To  mention  only  one  by  anticipation, — the  unhappy 
dispute  between  Luther  and  Zmmrlius.  and  their  re- 
spective followers,  concernins  the  words,  “This  is  my 
body.”  The  difference  between  them  was  little  more 
than  imaginary;  but  the  mischiefs  it  occasioned  wore 
real,  important,  and  numerous,  and  would  probably 
have  stifled  the  Retormation  in  its  birth,  if  it  had  not 
been  so  remarkably  under  an  almighty  protection. 


[book  II. 

bable  had  been  converted  by  his  ministry, 
and  a witness  to  his  sufferings  for  the  gospel 
when  he  was  there  before.  Timothy  was  of 
Jewish  extract  by  the  mother’s  side,  and 
carefully  educated  from  his  infancy  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  scriptures ; but  his  fathei 
was  a Greek.  This  circumstance  being  gene- 
rally known  to  the  Jew7s,  and  likely  to  ren- 
der him  less  acceptable  among  them,  Paul, 
to  obviate  their  prejudices,  directed  him  to 
be  circumcised ; thus  showing  his  readiness 
to  become  all  things  to  all  men,  so  far  as  was 
consistent  with  a good  conscience,  and  con- 
ducive to  edification:  for  though,  w'hen  the 
observance  of  the  Mosaic  law  was  insisted  on 
as  necessary  to  salvation,  he  steadily  opposed 
it,  and  wTould  not  admit  the  least  addition  to 
the  doctrine  of  free  justification  by  the  blood 
of  Christ,  he  was  willing  to  permit  it  to  the 
Jewish  converts  in  their  present  situation, 
and  to  accommodate  himself  to  their  weak- 
ness, for  their  advantage.  He  had  before 
withstood  the  circumcision  of  Titus,  wiio  was 
a Gentile,  when  it  was  urged  as  a necessary 
point;  but  now  that  debate  was  settled  in 
favour  of  gospel-liberty : he  proposed  the  cir- 
cumcision of  Timothy  himself.  The  seeming 
inconsistence  of  his  conduct  vanishes,  if  the 
difference  of  the  two  cases  is  rightly  under- 
stood ; but  those  who  act  from  the  most  en- 
larged principles,  w7ho  know  w7hen  and  in 
wThat  points  resolution  is  necessary,  and  wdien 
and  how  far  it  is  expedient  to  yield  to  others, 
will  always  be  thought  inconstant  and  incon- 
sistent by  the  zealots  of  parties.  In  the 
course  of  his  progress,  he  delivered  in  every 
city,  the  decree  lately  determined  at  Jerusa- 
lem, wrhich,  though  primarily  directed  to 
Antioch,  w7as  of  equal  force,  as  a rule  and 
bond  of  peace,  in  all  places  where  there  w7ere 
both  Jewish  and  Gentile  converts.  Thus, 
having  watered  his  former  planting,  he  pro- 
ceeded to  preach  in  Phrygia  and  Galatia. 
The  route  of  the  gospel  wras  directed  by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  who  restrained  the  apostle 
! from  entering  the  province  which  is  called, 
by  way  of  distinction,  the  Proconsular  Asia, 
of  which  Ephesus  was  the  capital : not  that 
this  country  was  to  be  excluded  from  the 
knowledge  of  Christ;  for  St.  Paul  preached 
in  many  parts  of  it  afterwards  with  great 
success~(Acts  xix.  10 ;)  but  the  proper  season 
was  not  yet  come,  the  Lord  having  an  im- 
portant service  for  them  first  in  anothoj 
place.  For  the  same  reason,  and  by  the  same 
influence,  they  were  prevented  going  into 
Bithynia,  which  they  had  some  thoughts  of 
attempting.  Thus,  in  a manner  undetermined 
where  they  were  to  labour,  they  came  to 
Troas,  a sea-port  in  the  Archipelago;  and 
! when  their  journey  was  now  bounded  by  the 
sea,  they  received  a further  intimation  of  the 
Lord’s  will,  and  found  that  he  had  bee  l lead- 
ing them  in  the  right  way;  for  they  were 
brought  to  a port  proper  for  embarking  to  the 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


57 


chap,  i.] 

place  where  the  Lord  had  designed  to  send 
them. 

a.  d.  51.]  Here  St.  Paul  had  a vision  by 
night,  of  a man  standing  by  him,  whose  garb 
and  expression  intimated  his  country,  and 
entreating  him,  saying,  “Come  over  into 
Macedonia,  and  help  us.”  This  vision  was 
attended  with  such  circumstances  as  left  no 
room  to  doubt  either  its  origin  or  meaning ; 
so  that,  when  he  had  communicated  it  to  his 
companions,  they  assuredly  collected,  that  the 
Lord  called  them  into  Macedonia.  Accord- 
ingly they  took  shipping,  and  having  a fa- 
vourable wind,  they  soon  arrived  at  Neapolis; 
' nm  whence  they  proceeded  by  land  to  Phi- 
nppi,  a place  of  note,  and  a Roman  colony. 
Their  preaching  and  continuance  in  this  city, 
which,  in  time,  became  the  seat  of  a flourish- 
ing church,  was  productive  of  certain  in- 
teresting and  important  events. 

On  the  Sabbath-day  they  went  out  of  the 
city  to  a place  by  the  river  side  (a  usual  re- 
sort of  the  Jews  for  the  exercise  of  public 
prayer,)  where,  meeting  with  some  women, 
as  it  should  seem,  before  the  rest  were  as- 
sembled, they  spake  freely  of  the  great  sub- 
ject which  was  always  uppermost  in  their 
hearts  and  mouths.  One  of  them,  named 
Lydia,  a native  of  Thyatira,  and  then  resident 
at  Philippi,  gave  a peculiar  attention  to  St. 
Paul’s  discourse : the  reason  is  assigned,  the 
Lord  opened  her  heart.  The  rest  heard  the 
same  words;  but  the  hearts  of  all  are  dull, 
contracted,  and  averse  to  spiritual  truths,  so 
that,  without  a divine  interposition,  the  most 
powerful  speakers  speak  in  vain.  Lydia  heard 
to  good  purpose : she  believed,  and  was  im- 
mediately baptized,  with  her  family,  and 
gladly  received  the  messengers  of  gospel- 
grace  into  her  house. 

Continuing  to  preach  in  this  place  so  long 
as  they  remained  at  Philippi,  they  were  often 
met  by  a young  woman  under  the  influence 
of  an  evil  spirit,  who,  as  they  passed  by,  cried 
after  them,  These  men  are  the  servants  of 
the  Most  High  God,  who  declare  unto  us  the 
way  of  salvation,  in  like  manner  as  the  de- 
moniacs had  sometimes  confessed  our  Sa- 
viour’s authority  and  mission.  It  may  seem 
strange  that  an  evil  spirit  should  testify  in 
favour  of  the  preachers  of  the  gospel;  but 
perhaps  it  was  either  to  make  them  suspected 
of  a confederacy,  or  to  draw  them  into  a 
snare.  However,  when  this  had  been  often 
repeated,  St.  Paul,  who  could  not  bear  to  be 
spoken  well  of  by  a spirit  which  was  not  of 
God,  commanded  him,  in  the  name  of  Jesus, 
uo  quit  his  possession.  The  spirit,  compelled 
to  obey,  left  the  woman  instantly.  But  this 
opened  a way  to  give  them  disturbance  in 
another  manner.  Her  masters,  to  whom  she 
had  formerly  brought  great  profit  by  her 
divining  talent,  finding  she  was  no  longer 
willing  or  able  to  procure  them  advantage 
by  that  means,  apprehended  Paul  and  Silas, 
Vol.  II.  H 


as  the  chief  instruments  of  their  loss,  and 
brought  them  before  the  magistrates  with  the 
heavy  charge  (which  is  usually  revived  when 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel  interferes  with 
the  views  of  interest,)  that  they  exceedingly 1 
disturbed  the  peace  of  the  city,  by  attempt- 
ing innovations  contrary  to  the  established 
religion:  they  styled  them  Jews  to  the  Ro- 
mans, on  account  of  their  open  abhorrence 
of  idol-worship,  which  was  carefully  sup- 
ported by  the  Roman  laws  and  customs.  The 
unthinking  multitude  soon  joined  in  the 
alarm,  and  the  magistrates,  easily  prejudiced 
by  the  terms  of  the  accusation,  instead  of 
acting  as  impartial  judges,  declared  them- 
selves parties  in  the  affair.  Without  examin- 
ing into  particulars,  they  violently  tore  off 
the  clothes  of  Paul  and  Silas;  and,  having 
caused  them  to  be  beat  with  many  stripes, 
they  cast  them  into  prison,  giving  the  jailor 
a particular  charge  to  keep  them  safely.  This 
command  was  executed  with  severity.  He 
thrust  them  into  the  inner  prison,  and  fas- 
tened their  feet  in  the  stocks.  But  no  walls 
or  dungeons  can  exclude  those  comforts  of 
God’s  Spirit  which  are  promised  to  those 
who  suffer  for  righteousness  sake,  and  which 
are  able  to  overpower  the  sense  of  every  in- 
convenience. Paul  and  Silas  were  so  little 
discomposed  by  this  cruel  treatment,  that 
they  joyfully  sung  hymns  of  praise  to  God, 
and  were  heard  by  the  other  prisoners,  who 
probably  were  surprised  at  the  cheerfulness 
they  expressed  in  such  circumstances.  But 
they  were  surprised  much  more  at  the  testi- 
mony the  Lord  immediately  gave  in  behalf 
of  his  servants;  for,  while  they  were  thus 
engaged,  on  a sudden  the  earth  trembled; 
the  very  foundations  of  the  prison  were 
shaken,  so  that  all  the  doors  flew  open,  and 
every  one’s  fetters  and  bonds  were  instantly 
loosed.  The  noise  awakened  the  jailor,  who, 
supposing  the  prisoners  were  all  escaped, 
and  dreading  the  consequences,  in  the  first 
transports  of  his  terror,  drew  his  sword  to 
slay  himself;  for  so  the  false  wisdom  of  the 
Heathens,  ignorant  of  the  awful  realities  be- 
yond the  grave,  taught  men  to  avoid  the 
pressure  of  present  troubles  by  desperately 
plunging  themselves  into  an  unknown  eter- 
nity. But  St.  Paul,  though  in  another  part 
of  the  prison,  and  in  the  dark,  was  made  ac- 
quainted with  his  purpose,  and  called  out  to 
him  with  a loud  voice,  “ Do  thyself  no  harm ; 
we  are  all  here.”  It  increased  his  surprise 
to  find  that  his  design  was  made  known  to 
them,  and  that  those  whom  he  had  treated  so 
hardly  should  forget  all  their  wrongs  and 
interest  themselves  in  his  preservation.  Such 
an  instance  of  forgiveness  and  tenderness  to 
an  enemy,  deeply  affected  him,  and  convinced 
him  of  the  wrong  he  had  done  them,  more 
forcibly  than  the  sharpest  expostulations 
could  have  done.  This  is  indeed  the  peculiar 
triumph  of  a Christian,  to  overcome  evil  with 


58 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


good.  He  immediately  called  for  a light,  and, 
in  an  agony  of  guilt  and  terror,  sprung  in, 
and  cast  himself  at  the  feet  of  those  over 
whom  he  had  so  lately  tyrannized.  After 
this  expression  of  his  respect,  and  compunc- 
tion for  the  injury  he  had  done  them,  he 
brought  them  out,  and  addressed  them  with 
that  question,  of  the  last  importance  to  every 
awakened  soul,  “ Sirs,  what  must  I do  to  be 
saved)”  Paul  and  Silas,  who  had  but  one 
answer  to  this  question,  suited  to  every  rank 
of  life,  and  to  sinners  of  every  degree,  direct- 
ed him  to  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as 
the  only  and  infallible  means  of  salvation. 
This  faith  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  give;  so 
that,  when  he  had  brought  them  to  his  house, 
and  heard  them  explain  the  doctrine  more  at 
large,  he  believed,  and  was  baptized  with  all 
his  family.  Upon  this  his  sorrow  was  turned 
into  permanent  joy,  and  now  it  appeared  why 
the  Lord  had  permitted  his  servants  to  be 
thus  rudely  handled.  Amongst  other  reasons, 
it  was  on  the  account  of  this  jailor,  who  would 
otherwise  have  remained  a stranger  to  the 
gospel,  if  the  Lord,  in  the  unsearchable  riches 
of  his  mercy,  had  not  thus  sent  it  to  him,  and, 
by  the  concurrent  dispensations  of  his  provi- 
dence, disposed  him  to  receive  it  with  thank- 
fulness, as  life  from  the  dead.  It  likewise 
proved  the  vanity  of  all  attempts  to  suppress 
the  truth.  The  magistrates  and  people  abused 
the  preachers,  and  put  them  in  prison;  but 
the  effect  was  quite  contrary  to  their  inten- 
tions, for  by  this  means  the  jailor,  the  instru- 
ment of  their  cruelty,  with  his  household, 
were  converted,  and  thus  the  apostle’s  ene- 
mies, through  the  over-ruling  hand  of  God, 
became  subservient  to  his  design,  and  helped 
him  to  some  of  the  first  members  of  this  new 
church. 

The  jailor,  thus  made  partaker  of  the  faith, 
expressed  his  gratitude  to  his  prisoners:  he 
washed  their  stripes,  and  set  meat  before 
them,  and  was  soon  freed  from  anjr  suspense 
on  their  account;  for,  in  the  morning,  the 
magistrates  sent  him  orders  to  dismiss  them 
from  confinement.  But  St.  Paul  was  willing 
to  let  them  know  that  they  had  failed  in  their 
duty,  and  acted  against  those  very  laws  and 
customs,  of  which,  as  Romans,  they  professed 
to  be  so  tenacious.  A citizen  of  Rome  was 
not  liable  to  bonds  or  scourging,  and  a subject 
of  Rome,  though  not  a citizen,  could  not  be 
legally  punished  till  he  had  been  permitted 
to  answer  his  accusers  face  to  face,  Acts  xxv. 
16.  The  apostle  was  injured  in  both  these 
respects;  they  had  punished  him  without 
trial,  and  they  had  bound  and  beat  him, 
though  he  was  a Roman:  he  therefore  as- 
serted his  privilege.  He  might  have  insisted 
on  satisfaction;  but  he  was  a Christian,  a 
willing  disciple  of  a suffering  Saviour:  he 
had  been  once  a persecutor  himself,  and  had 
obtained  forgiveness:  therefore  he  found  it 
easy  to  forgive.  His  remonstrance  made  the 


[tiook  Jr. 

magistrates  willing  to  submit  to  his  terms; 
they  came  themselves,  and  honourably  dis- 
missed their  prisoners,  entreating  them,  that, 
to  prevent  farther  inconveniencies,  they 
would  withdraw  from  the  city ; which  they 
did,  after  they  had  taken  leave  of  Lydia  and 
the  other  disciples. 

a.  d.  52.]  From  hence,  passing  through 
Amphipolis  and  Apollonia,  they  came  to 
Thessalonica,  the  residence  of  the  Roman 
governor.  Here  Paul,  according  to  his  usua 
custom,  applying  himself  first  to  the  Jev 
discoursed  and  reasoned  with  them  in  Hr 
synagogues  three  successive  Sabbaths, 
of  their  own  scriptures,  opening*  the  tr  •*. 
sense  of  the  prophecies  concerning  the  Mes- 
siah, and  then  showing  their  accomplishment 
in  the  person  of  Jesus.  His  labour  was  not 
wholly  in  vain;  some  of  them  believed,  and 
became  disciples;  but  the  rest,  and  the 
greater  part,  discovered  the  indignation  and 
enmity  of  their  hearts  against  the  truth. 
Under  such  leaders,  the  unthinking  rabble 
are  easily  instigated  to  do  mischief;  so  that 
they  found  no  difficulty  to  raise  a tumultuous 
mob,  who  assaulted  the  house  of  Jason,  where 
Paul  and  Silas  resided ; but  not  finding  them 
there,  they  forced  away  Jason,  and  some  of 
the  new  believers,  before  the  magistrates. 
The  accusation  was,  that  the  preachers  of 
the  gospel,  who,  from  the  effect  of  their  doc- 
trine in  disturbing  the  false  peacef  of  sin, 
began  to  be  sufficiently  described,  whe:i 
spoken  of  as  men  who  turned  the  world  up- 
side down,  and  threw  all  into  confusion 
wherever  they  appeared,  were  come  thither 
also;  that  Jason  had  received  and  counte- 
nanced them;  and  that  their  fundamental 
tenets  were  inconsistent  with  obedience  to 
government,  since  they  professed  and  incul- 
cated subjection  to  one  Jesus,  whom  they 
styled  their  King.  By  such  misrepresenta- 
tions, the  enemies  of  the  gospel-doctrine 
have  often  aimed  to  render  it  obnoxious  to 
the  civil  powers.  The  rulers  were  alarmed 
at  this  accusation;  but  being  unwilling  to 
proceed  to  extremities,  though  obliged  to 

* Acts  xvii.  3.  Opening  and  alleging;  first  explaining 
the  true  sense  of  the  passage,  and  then  laying  down 
plain  and  undeniable  deductions  from  it.  applicable  to 
the  case  in  hand.  Thus  much  is  implied  in  the  Greek 
words  ftxvotyw  xxt  n-xexTidiftivag.  A proper  model  for 
preachers  and  writers  in  divinity.  How  many  contro- 
versies would  cease,  how  much  lime  would  be  redeem- 
ed, how  many  offences  would  be  avoided,  if  it  was  uni- 
versally followed,  if  the  scriptures  were  explained  in 
their  true  sense  and  connection,  and  nothing  advanced 
but  what  could  be  fairly  deduced  from  such  an  explana- 
tion 

t It  is  still  thought  a sufficient  and  unanswerable  ol 
jection  against  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  to  say. 
These  opinions  cause  divisions  and  separations,  and 
break  the  peace  of  families  and  communities.  We  may 
bring  the  point  to  a short  issue:  Did  our  Lord  foretell 
this  as  one  sure  and  perpetual  consequence  that  would 
attend  the  prevalence  of  his  gospel,  or  did  he  not?  If  he 
did  not,  what  is  the  meaning  of  Matth.  xii.  34 — 36?  If 
he  did.  then  by  what  name  are  we  to  call  that  manner 
of  preaching,  which  has  either  no  tendency,  or  no 
power,  to  disturb  the  false  and  dangerous  peace  of  a 
wicked  world? 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


59 


CHAP.  I.] 

take  some  notice  of  what  seemed  to  affect 
the  interest  of  Caesar,  they  took  sufficient 
security  of  Jason  and  the  rest  for  their  good 
behaviour,  and  dismissed  (hem  without  far- 
ther trouble.  In  the  mean  time,  Paul  and 
Silas,  against  whom  the  violence  had  been 
chiefly  intended,  were  sent  safely  away  by 
the  brethren  to  Berea,  where,  regardless  of 
their  past  dangers  and  sufferings,  they  pur- 
sued their  endeavours  to  recommend  the 
gospel  to  the  Jews;  and,  in  this  place,  they 
met  with  a friendly  reception.  It  is  said  the 
Bereans  were  more  noble  than  those  of  Thes- 
salonica;  for  to  be  open  to  conviction  and 
'nformation  is  the  mark  of  a noble  mind : they 
were  of  a more  free  and  ingenuous  temper, 
not  slaves  to  the  fear  of  man,  or  the  power 
of  prejudice : they  heard  with  candour,  and 
examined  the  scriptures  themselves  to  find 
the  truth.  The  gospel  of  Christ  is  suited  to 
give  the  fullest  satisfaction  to  inquirers  of 
this  spirit.  Accordingly,  many  of  them  be- 
lieved. But  when  the  Jews  of  Thessalonica 
were  informed  of  this,  they  followed  Paul 
thither,  with  a view  to  repeat  the  part  they 
had  acted  in  their  own  city ; but  they  came 
too  late : Paul  had  already  planted  the  gos- 
pel; and,  leaving  Silas  and  Timothy,  who 
were  less  obnoxious,  to  remain  a little  longer 
with  the  brethren,  he  was  conducted  first  to- 
wards the  sea,  to  elude  the  attempts  of  his 
enemies,  and  afterwards  to  Athens,  a city 
which,  for  its  eminence  in  literature  and  all 
the  polite  arts,  was  styled,  by  general  con- 
sent, the  seat  of  the  Muses. 

While  the  apostle  waited  at  Athens  for  the 
arrival  of  Silas  and  Timothy,  his  spirit  was 
inflamed  with  a lively  concern  for  the  honour 
of  God,  and  the  welfare  of  souls:  it  grieved 
him  to  see  a city,  so  famed  for  refinement 
and  philosophy,  wholly  given  to  idolatry, 
and,  with  respect  to  the  most  important  con- 
cerns of  life,  quite  upon  a level  with  the  most 
ignorant  barbarians.  St.  Paul  is  generally 
allowed,  by  those  who  will  allow  him  little 
else,  to  have  been  a man  of  taste  and  letters. 
He  was  now  at  Athens,  the  school  of  philoso- 
phy, and  centre  of  the  fine  arts:  painting, 
statuary,  architecture,  and  elegance  appeared 
in  every  quarter : but  the  affecting  observa- 
tion he  had  made  of  the  state  of  the  inhabit- 
ants, so  filled  his  mind,  that  he  could  take 
little  notice  of  any  thing  else.  To  those  who 
understand  the  nearness  and  importance  of 
an  eternal  state,  the  highest  improvements 
of  unsanctified  reason  afford  little  more  en- 
tertainment than  the  trivial  sports  of  children, 
or  the  more  wretched  amusements  of  lunatics. 
He  was  so  struck  with  the  ignorance,  super- 
stition, and  wickedness  of  the  people,  that 
he  could  relish  none  of  the  beauties  of  the 
place;  but,  full  of  a different  emotion,  com- 
passionately laboured  to  inspire  them  with 
true  wisdom.  He  was  soon  encountered  by 
the  Epicurean  and  Stoic  philosophers,  the 


respectable  advocates  for  those  principles  of 
pleasure  and  pride,  to  one  or  the  other  of 
which  all  men  are  enslaved  till  the  gospel 
sets  them  free.  Here,  in  some  measure  ac- 
commodating himself  to  the  prevailing  taste, 
he  reasoned  with  the  reasoners,  and  silenced 
the  wise  men  of  the  world,  in  their  own  way, 
by  dint  of  argument ; but  the  contest  was  un- 
equal; their  syllogisms  soon  failed  them;  and 
they  were  forced  to  retreat  to  their  last  re- 
fuge, an  affected  wit  and  raillery.  Unable  to 
answer  the  force  of  his  discourses,  they 
triumphed  without  a victory,  and  expressed 
their  contempt  of  him  and  his  doctrine  by  a 
word  of  the  lowest  and  most  despicable  sig- 
nification, which  our  version  not  improperly 
renders  a babbler;  but  perhaps  no  term  in  our 
language  can  sufficiently  express  the  poign- 
ancy of  the  original.  Others  so  entirely  mis- 
took the  state  of  the  question,  that  they 
thought  he  was  a publisher  or  setter  forth  of 
strange  gods;  they  thought  that  Jesus  and 
the  Resurrection  were  deities  they  had  not 
before  heard  of;  and  his  discourse  always 
turning  upon  these  topics,  they  concluded, 
indeed  with  reason,  that  his  only  business 
and  desire  was  to  proclaim  to  all  the  divinity 
whom  he  worshipped.  And  it  is  no  wonder 
that,  from  a half-attention  to  his  words,  they 
should  be  induced  to  personify  the  Resur- 
rection as  a deity,  since  the  Heathens  had 
altars  erected,  not  only  to  Honour,  Virtue, 
and  Liberty,  but  to  the  vices  and  disorders 
of  human  nature,  such  as  Fear,  Shame,  Fa- 
mine, and  Fevers. 

This  weak  mistake  gave  occasion  to  sum- 
mon him  before  the  council,  who  bore  the 
name  of  Areopagus,  or  the  Hill  of  Mars, 
from  the  place  where  they  met,  an  assembly 
in  high  estimation  for  authority  and  wisdom, 
and  whose  particular  office  it  was  to  super- 
intend the  public  religion,  and  preserve  it 
from  innovation.  It  does  not  appear,  how- 
ever, that  he  underwent  a formal  trial  before 
them.  His  opponents  seemed  rather  disposed 
to  gratify  their  curiosity  than  their  malice : 
their  politeness,  perhaps,  made  them  some- 
thing averse  to  the  severer  forms  of  prose- 
cution, and  content  with  the  less  invidious, 
though  to  many  not  less  formidable  methods, 
of  scorn  and  ridicule.  Their  prevailing*pas- 
sion  was  the  love  of  novelty ; they  spent 
their  time  in  telling  or  hearing  some  new, 
or,  as  the  Greek  expresses  it,  some  newer 
thing.  The  expected  news  lost  its  relish 
the  moment  it  was  known : and  they  were 
always  in  search  for  something  newer  still ; 
therefore  the  gospel,  though  the  strongest, 
as  well  as  the  most  important  news  they  had 
ever  met  with,  could  not  engage  such  vola- 
tile minds : while  it  was  the  newer  thing, 
the  freshest  news,  they  were  content  to 
listen : but  as  soon  as  they  were  satisfied 
what  it  was,  they  wanted  to  hear  something 
else.  The  apostle  no  where  met  with  so 


60 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


little  success  as  amongst  this  polite,  learned, 
ignorant  people;  and  wherever  this  Athe- 
nian spirit  prevails,  it  retards  the  success  of 
the  gospel  more  than  all  the  arts  and  violence 
of  persecution. 

The  discourse  of  the  apostle  on  this  occa- 
sion is  equally  a standard  of  fine  address  and 
of  just  reasoning.  He  had  observed  their 
religious  rites  and  worship  with  attention, 
and  had  selected  from  among  their  numerous 
altars  the  one  which  was  most  fit  for  his  pur- 
pose. The  beauty  of  his  exordium  is  ob- 
scured by  the  expression,  too  superstitious , 
in  our  version : the  Greek  word  to  which  it 
answers  is  ambiguous,  and  suited  to  bespeak 
a favourable  hearing,  rather  than  importing 
an  abrupt  reproof ; q.  d.  “ I perceive,  indeed, 
Athenians,  that  you  are  observant  of  the  in- 
visible powers  in  an  unusual  manner ; for, 
besides  the  variety  of  temples  and  altars 
which  you  have  in  common  with  other  cities 
of  Greece,  I observed  one  with  a peculiar 
inscription,  to  the  unknown  god.  This 
God,  as  yet  unknown  to  you,  is  he  whom  I 
serve ; and  the  new  doctrine,  of  which  you 
ask  me,  relates  to  his  will  and  worship.” 
This  was  the  most  happy  and  pertinent  me- 
dium to  enlarge  from  that  could  be  imagin- 
ed. The  Athenians,  always  eager  to  hear 
some  newer  thing,  expected  an  account  of 
new  deities,  but  Paul  referred  them  to  an 
altar  and  inscription  among  themselves, 
which,  merely  by  being  obvious,  had  escaped 
their  reflection.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  this 
observation  and  inscription  may  suit  the  de- 
votions of  many  who  think  themselves  Chris- 
tians. The  same  address  is  visible  in  his 
whole  argument.  To  the  Jews  he  quoted 
the  books  of  the  holy  scriptures ; but  with 
these  Heathens  he  appealed  to  the  volume 
of  creation,  and  argued  from  the  impresses 
of  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  everywhere 
displayed  before  their  eyes,  the  excellence 
and  independence  of  their  great  Author,  how 
little  he  stood  in  need  of  men,  and  how  un- 
worthy of  his  divine  majesty  all  their  labo- 
rious inventions  were,  while  they  thought 
to  honour  him  by  worshipping  the  works  of 
their  own  hands : he  asserted  the  providence 
and  omnipresence  of  God,  that  he  was  the 
fountain  of  life  and  all  its  comforts,  the  su- 
preme disposer  of  all  events,  and  the  common 
Father  of  mankind,  confirming  this  part  of 
his  doctrine  by  a quotation  from  Aratus,  one 
of  their  own  poets.  He  afterwards  proceed- 
ed to  the  topics  of  revelation,  a resurrection 
to  future  life,  and  a final  judgment  by  the 
man  Christ  Jesus.  It  would  require  too 
much  room  to  point  out  particularly  the 
spirit,  propriety,  and  evidence  of  this  short 
sermon.  But  no  oratory  or  reasoning  can 
change  the  heart.  The  effect  was  the  same, 
as  may  be  observed  amongst  ourselves,  when 
much ’inferior  instruments  declare  the  truths 
of  God:  some  mocked,  and  accounted  this 


[book  ii. 

wisdom  the  merest  folly ; others,  pleased 
with  his  manner,  and  perhaps  affected  with 
some  transient  emotions  of  mind,  expressed 
a willingness  to  hear  him  again ; and  a few, 
a very  few,  believed,  among  whom  was  Dio- 
nysius, one  of  the  Areopagite  judges. 

Having  so  little  encouragement  to  pro- 
long his  stay  at  Athens,  the  apostle  pro- 
ceeded to  Corinth,  at  that  time  accounted 
the  chief  city  of  Greece.  Here  he  unex- 
pectedly found  companions  prepared  for  him 
(Acts  xviii.)  Aquila,  a native  of  Pontus,  by 
birth  a Jew,  with  Priscilla,  his  wife,  had  re- 
ceived the  faith  of  the  gospel  in  Italy,  from 
whence  they  had  lately  been  constrained  to 
remove  by  an  edict  of  the  emperor,  enjoining 
all  Jews  to  depart  from  Rome.  Whether 
the  Christians  were  particularly  aimed  at  by 
the  name  of  Jews  in  this  decree  is  uncer- 
tain : but  as  their  Lord  and  Master  had  lived 
in  Judea,  and  the  first  preachers  and  con- 
verts were  generally  of  that  nation,  perhaps, 
likewise,  because  they  asserted  and  proved 
their  doctrines  from  those  books  for  which 
the  Jews  professed  the  highest  veneration, 
the  Christians  were  for  some  time  consider- 
ed as  Jews  by  most  of  the  Heathens.  This 
happy  pair,  partners  in  faith  and  affection, 
were  led  by  that  Divine  Providence  which 
certainly,  though  secretly,  guides  the  steps 
of  his  servants,  to  seek  a retreat  in  Corinth, 
about  the  time  St.  Paul  arrived  there. 
They  soon  became  acquainted,  and,  of  course, 
intimate.  He  often  mentions  them  in  his 
writings,  as  having,  upon  many  occasions, 
afforded  him  help  and  comfort;  for,  as  in  na- 
ture so  in  grace,  none  are  so  sufficient  to 
themselves  but  they  may  be  glad  of  assist- 
ance from  others,  even  from  such  as  are  in 
many  respects  their  inferiors.  They  abode 
and  wrought  together,  being  of  the  same 
business;  for  though  St.  Paul  well  under- 
stood his  liberty,  and  that,  as  a preacher  of 
the  gospel,  he  had  a right  to  expect  a main- 
tenance from  those  to  whom  he  ministered, 
yet  he  condescended  to  work  as  a common 
handicraft,  at  the  employment  of  making 
tents.  One  reason  of  his  submitting  to  this, 
he  informs  us  himself,  was  a prudent  pre- 
caution to  obviate  any  insinuations  that 
might  be  raised  or  received  against  him  of  a 
design  to  make  gain  of  godliness,  or  to  abuse 
his  influence  to  mercenary  purposes.  But  his 
example  may  farther  teach  us  that  secular 
employments  are  not  in  themselves  incom- 
patible with  a faithful  and  regular  discharge 
of  the  gospel-ministry,  when  the  circum- 
stances of  the  times  may  so  require.  Bu'. 
his  main  and  proper  business,  to  which  he 
always  attended,  in  season  and  out  of  sea- 
son,* was  preaching  the  gospel  of  Christ. 

* 2 Tim.  iv.  2.  Be  instant  in  season  and  out  of  sea- 
son ; not  unseasonably,  as  supposing  a time  in  which 
it  would  be  better  to  forbear,  but  in  season,  at  set  and 
stated  times,  and  out  of  season,  that  is  occasionally. 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


61 


CHAP.  I.] 

To  this  he  addressed  himself  at  Corinth,  first 
(as  usual)  to  the  Jews,  being-  pressed  in 
spirit,  borne  on  by  a constraining-  sense  of 
the  love  of  Christ  and  the  worth  of  souls, 
and  probably  more  confirmed  and  warmed 
by  the  accounts  brought  him  by  Silas  and 
Timothy,  who  rejoined  him  here  from  Mace- 
donia. Animated,  rather  than  discouraged, 
by  the  opposition  he  had  formerly  met  with, 
he  strenuously  urged  to  the  Jews,  from  their 
own  scriptures,  the  proofs  that  Jesus  was 
the  Messiah,  with  such  evidence  as  must 
have  gained  their  assent,  had  they  not  been 
hardened  and  obstinate ; but  when  they 
persisted  in  returning  contradiction  and  de- 
spite to  his  repeated  labours  of  love,  he  at 
length  gave  them  up,  and  told  them,  that 
having  discharged  his  duty  and  his  con- 
science, their  blood  would  be  upon  their  own 
heads ; that  their  guilt  was  most  aggravated, 
and  their  destruction  approaching : and  that, 
for  the  future,  he  would  frequent  their  syna- 
gogues no  more,  but  address  himself  to  the 
Gentiles.  He  accordingly  preached  in  the 
house  of  one  Justus,  near  the  synagogue, 
and  though  most  of  the  Jews  were  hardened 
beyond  the  reach  of  conviction,  yet  the  Lord 
had  a small  remnant  amongst  them  here 
likewise.  Crispus,  a chief  ruler,  or  presi- 
dent of  the  synagogue,  believed  with  all  his 
house;  and  of  the  Heathens,  many  were 
converted  and  baptized. 

If  Corinth  was  less  celebrated  than  Athens 
for  philosophy  and  science,  it  was  more  so 
for  riches  and  luxury,  which  are  no  less 
powerful  hinderances  to  the  reception  of  the 
truth.  This  consideration,  joined  to  the  vio- 
lent spirit  of  his  opposers,  might  perhaps 
have  prompted  him  to  a speedy  departure ; 
but  the  Lord,  whom  he  served,  appeared  to 
him  in  a vision,  and  bid  him  not  be  afraid  or 
discouraged,  but  continue  to  preach,  assur- 
ing him  his  labour  should  not  be  in  vain ; for, 
though  present  appearances  might  promise 
but  little  success,  [a.  d.  53]  he  had  many 
people  known  to  himself  in  that  proud,  sen- 
sual, idolatrous  city.  It  signifies  but  little 
what  enemies  or  difficulties  a faithful  minis- 
ter may  be  threatened  with,  if  the  Lord  has 
many  people  in  that  place  ; he  who  sent  him 
to  call  them  out  of  darkness  into  his  marvel- 
lous light,  will  support  and  defend  him,  so 
that  either  none  shall  rise  against  him,  or  at 
least  none  be  able  to  prevail  to  his  real  harm. 
That  the  people,  whom  the  Lord  here  spoke 


Improve  every  opportunity  that  offers,  not  on  the  Lord's 
day  only,  but  on  any  other;  not  only  in  a soemn  and 
full  discourse,  but  let  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  good  of 
souls,  be  your  scope  in  every  conversation.  It  answers 
to  the  account  the  apostle  gives  of  his  own  conduct. 
He  preached  publicly,  and  from  house  to  house,  bv  night 
and  by  day,  Acts  xx.  20.  31.  As  a physician,  beside-  his 
ordinary  round  of  practice,  is  ready  to  afford  his  help 
upon  every  sudden  application,  this  should  be  the  aim 
of  a gospel-minister : he  should  be  constant  to  all  his 
stated  appointments,  and  willing  to  make  the  most  of 
every  unexpected  call  to  service. 


of  as  his  own,  were  no  better,  either  by  na- 
ture or  practice,  than  others,  is  plain  from 
what  the  apostle  reminds  them  of  after  their 
conversion,  1 Cor.  vi.  9 — 11.  We  learn 
from  the  same  epistle  (chap.  ii.  3,)  that  his 
conflicts  and  exercises  at  this  time  were 
very  great.  Supported,  however,  by  such  a 
seasonable  and  gracious  encouragement,  ho 
remained  there  a year  and  a half ; and  all 
the  efforts  of  his  enemies  were  insufficient 
either  to  damp  his  zeal  and  activity,  or  to 
prevent  the  success  of  his  labours,  though 
the  Lord  permitted  them  to  try  what  they 
could  do,  and  thereby  more  clearly  showed 
that  the  safety  of  his  servants  depends  on 
himself. 

When  Gallio  was  proconsul  of  Achaia 
(who,  as  it  seems  by  Luke’s  expression,  en- 
tered upon  his  government  during  the  apos- 
tle’s abode  at  Corinth,)  the  Jews  appeared 
tumultuously  before  the  tribunal,  with  the 
old  accusation,  that  he  subverted  the  laws 
of  Moses.  Gallio  prevented  Paul’s  intended 
defence,  and  refused  to  interfere  in  points 
foreign  to  the  Roman  laws : he  said,  that  if 
their  charge  had  been  laid  for  any  trespass 
or  immorality,  he  would  readily  have  taken 
cognizance  of  the  affair,  but  should  leave 
them  to  settle  their  religious  disputes  be- 
tween themselves.  With  this  reprimand  he 
dismissed,  or  ratlpr  drove  them  from  his 
presence.  The  conduct  of  Gallio,  in  this  af- 
fair has  been  considered  in  different  lights, 
and  praised  or  censured  accordingly.  His- 
tory gives  him  a fair  character  for  equity 
and  moderation ; and  it  must  be  allowed  he 
judged  right,  in  refusing  to  interpose  the 
civil  authority  to  give  sanction  to  persecu- 
tion : yet  he  seems,  upon  this  occasion^  to 
have  discovered  that  political  indifference 
which  has  prompted  so  many  great  and  wise 
men,  in  the  world’s  estimation,  to  treat  the 
gospel  as  a trivial  scheme  unworthy  their 
notice.  He  rather  showed  contempt  than 
impartiality : he  would  not  hear  either  party, 
because  he  despised  both,  and  therefore 
drove  them  away  with  scorn.  In  fine,  the 
Jews  not  only  failed  in  their  design,  but 
were  themselves  assaulted  by  some  of  the 
inhabitants,  who  beat  Sosthenes,  the  chief 
ruler  of  the  synagogue,  even  in  the  open 
court,  and  Gallio,  though  he  saw  it,  cared 
for  none  of  these  things  ; which  is  a further 
proof  that  he  was  influenced  by  some  other 
motives  than  impartiality  and  a regard  to 
justice,  or  he  would  not  have  suffered  his 
authority  to  be  insulted,  and  a person  (upon 
his  own  principles  innocent)  abused  before 
his  face.  I suppose  (though  it  is  a contro- 
verted point)  that  the  Sosthenes  here  men- 
tioned was  at  that  time  an  enemy  to  Paul, 
and  joined  in  the  prosecution  attempted 
against  him.  Perhaps  he  was  afterwards 
converted,  and  accompanied  the  aoostle  in 
his  travels,  as  this  name  is  prefix*'  with 


62 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


his  own,  to  his  first  epistle  to  the  Corin- 
thians. 

Nero,  a.  d.  54.]  St.  Paul,  after  about 
two  years  stay  in  Greece,  from  his  first  land- 
ing at  Macedonia,  embarked  at  Cenchrea, 
the  port  of  Corinth,  intending-  for  Syria.  In 
this  voyage  they  touched  at  Ephesus,  the 
chief  city  of  the  Proper  or  Proconsular  Asia. 
Here,  as  in  other  places,  he  entered  into  the 
Jews’  synagogues,  desirous,  if  possible,  to 
lead  them  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Messiah. 
At  this  city  he  left  his  dear  companions 
Aquila  and  Priscilla,  who  would  willingly 
have  detained  him  longer;  but  St.  Paul 
having  formed  the  plan  of  his  progress  in 
such  a manner  as  he  judged  most  suitable  to 
his  main  design,  readily  sacrificed  the  dic- 
tates of  affection  to  the  calls  of  duty,  and 
persisted  in  his  purpose  to  be  at  Jerusalem 
on  the  approaching  passover : he  took  leave 
of  them  therefore,  with  a promise  of  return- 
ing at  a proper  time,  and  proceeding  on  his 
voyage,  landed  at  Caesarea,  from  whence  he 
went  to  Jerusalem.  His  stay  here  was  not 
long:  having  answered  the  design  of  his 
journey,  and  conversed  with  the  brethren, 
he  revisited  the  places  where  he  had  for- 
merly preached,  and  went  first  to  Antioch, 
and  from  thence  through  the  provinces  of 
Galatia  and  Phrygia.  In  this  circuit  he  lost 
no  time,  but  published  the  glad  tidings  of 
salvation,  and  confirmed  fhe  hearts  of  the 
disciples  wherever  he  came. 

While  he  was  on  this  service,  there  came 
to  Ephesus  a Jew  of  Alexander,  named 
Apollos : he  had  been  as  yet  only  instructed 
in  the  rudiments  of  the  faith,  so  far  as  was 
communicated  by  the  teaching  and  baptism 
of  John ; but  though  his  knowledge  was  not 
extensive,  his  zeal  was  lively  and  fervent, 
and  having  a prompt  elocution,  and  great 
readiness  in  the  scriptures,  he  preached  con- 
cerning Christ  with  much  freedom  and  earn- 
estness, according  to  the  measure  of  light 
he  had  received.  Aquila  and  Priscilla  were 
amongst  his  hearers ; and  having  more  ex- 
perience and  knowledge  than  himself,  they 
easily  perceived  wherein  he  was  deficient, 
and,  with  candour  and  tenderness,  instructed 
him  farther.  This  passage  is  worthy  the 
notice  both  of  preachers  and  hearers.  What 
Apollos  had  learned,  he  willingly  communi- 
cated ; what  he  was  yet  ignorant  of,  he  as 
willingly  received  when  proposed  to  him; 
his  zeal  and  humility  went  hand  in  hand. 
This  is  an  amiable  and  thriving  character. 
The  man  who  is  faithful  to  present  light,  and 
open  to  farther  conviction,  will  soon  be  wise 
and  successful ; the  Lord  will  provide  him 
both  teachers  and  hearers;  he  shall  profit 
others,  and  be  profited  himself  every  day. 
The  prudence  and  moderation  of  Aquila  and 
Priscilla  are  no  less  commendable  ; they  did 
not  acquiesce  in  all  he  said,  because  he  was 
eloquent  and  mighty  in  the  scriptures  ; nei- 


[book  ii. 

ther  did  they  reject  and  disdain  him  because 
they  knew  more  than  he,  much  less  expose 
and  revile  him  as  a low  ignorant  preacher, 
but  they  spoke  to  him  in  private : they  ap- 
proved what  was  right,  and  showed  him 
mildly  and  faithfully  wherein  he  was  defec- 
tive ; they  commended  his  zeal,  and  improv- 
ed his  knowledge.  With  these  advantages, 
and  letters  of  recommendation  to  the  bre- 
thren, he  w^ent  from  thence  to  Corinth, 
where  he  was  highly  serviceable  to  the 
church,  publicly  maintaining  and  proving 
against  the  Jews,  with  great  earnestness  of 
spirit  and  strength  of  argument,  that  Jesus 
was  the  Messiah. 

Not  long  after  his  departure  (Acts  xix,) 
Paul  having  completed  his  progress  through 
the  upper  or  interior  parts  of  Asia  Minor, 
returned,  according  to  his  promise,  to  Ephe- 
sus. Here  he  found  some  more  disciples, 
who,  like  Apollos,  though  acquainted  with 
the  doctrine  and  baptism  of  John,  were 
hitherto  strangers  to  those  peculiar  gifts, 
graces,  and  comforts,  which,  as  the  fruits  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  were  bestowed  on  the  be- 
lievers in  Jesus;  but  by  the  imposition  of 
the  apostle’s  hands,  they  wTere  immediately 
made  partakers  of  the  same  benefits. 

a.  d.  55.]  The  apostle,  unwilling  to  give 
up  his  own  people,  the  Jews,  continued  his 
labours  of  love  among  them  for  three  months, 
if,  by  any  means,  he  might  bring  them  to  the 
acknowledgment  of  the  truth  ; but  at  length 
perceiving,  that,  instead  of  yielding,  they 
hardened  themselves  still  more,  and  obsti- 
nately laboured  to  traduce  and  defame  the 
author  and  way  of  salvation  before  the  peo- 
ple, he  finally  desisted,  and  selecting  those 
who  had  received  the  gospel  from  the  many 
who  might  hinder  and  confuse  them,  he 
formed  them  into  a society  among  them- 
selves. He  continued  daily  to  preach  and 
defend  the  gospel,  for  two  years  afterwards, 
in  a public  school,  with  indefatigable  zeal 
and  diligence,  seconding  his  more  stated 
services  with  occasional  and  pressing  exhort- 
ations from  house  to  house,  and  watering 
the  seed  with  many  prayers  and  tears.  His 
labours  were  not  in  vain ; he  had  great  suc- 
cess, not  only  in  the  city  of  Ephesus,  but 
amongst  many,  who,  resorting  thither  from 
other  parts,  and  with  different  views,  were 
providentially  led  to  hear  him,  and  being 
divinely  convinced  themselves,  carried  home 
the  joyful  tidings  with  them:  so  that  the 
knowledge  of  the  gospel  wTas  generally 
spread  throughout  the  province.  The  atten- 
tion of  the  people  was  still  farther  excited, 
and  their  prejudices  softened,  by  the  nume- 
rous displays  and  visible  tendency  of  that 
divine  power  by  which  the  Lord  confirmed 
the  words  of  his  servant.  Many  striking 
miracles,  emblematical  of  the  healing  efficacy 
of  gospel-grace,  were  wrought  by  the  most 
inconsiderable  means;  so  that  persons  af- 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


63 


CHAP.  I.] 

flicted  with  various  maladies,  or  possessed  by- 
evil  spirits,  were  perfectly  restored  to  health, 
by  the  application  of  handkerchiefs  or  aprons 
that  had  touched  his  body. 

Among-  the  various  methods  by  which  the 
gospel  has  been  opposed,  one  is  by  a feeble 
imitation  and  a pretended  acknowledgment 
of  some  of  its  principles,  while  the  heart  is 
unacquainted  or  unaffected  with  the  design 
and  scope  of  the  whole  doctrine.  Enmity, 
or,  at  best,  interest,  is  often  the  spring  of 
many  attempts  that  are  veiled  under  a fair 
profession  of  good  words  ; but  such  attempts 
will  always  issue  in  the  disappointment  or 
confusion  of  those  who  venture  on  them.  An 
instance  of  this  kind  happened  at  Ephesus : 
some  vagrant  Jews,  who  made  claim  to  a 
power  of  exorcising  or  dispossessing  evil 
spirits,  struck  with  the  miracles  wrought  in 
the  name  of  Jesus,  presumed  to  adopt  this 
sacred  name  into  the  number  of  their  pro- 
fessed mysteries;  and  meeting  with  a fit 
subject  for  the  exercise  of  their  art,  they 
undertook  to  adjure  the  evil  spirit  to  depart 
from  a man,  by  the  name  of  Jesus  whom 
Paul  preached.  But  the  man  under  the  in- 
fluence of  the  evil  spirit,  insulted  and  ex- 
posed them ; he  acknowledged  the  authority 
of  Jesus,  and  the  fidelity  of  Paul ; but,  de- 
manding farther,  who  they  were  that  durst 
make  free  with  these  names  1 far  from  obey- 
ing their  summons,  he  fiercely  assaulted 
them,  and  forced  them,  though  seven  in 
number,  to  flee  for  their  lives,  naked,  wound- 
ed, and  terrified.  Great  indeed  is  the  power 
of  the  name  of  Jesus;  but  when  not  pro- 
nounced by  faith,  it  is  spoken  in  vain : Satan 
laughs  at  such  vain  pretenders,  and  prevails 
against  them.  So,  when  those  who  are  des- 
titute of  faith,  undertake  to  write  or  preach 
concerning  Jesus,  it  will  seldom  prove  to 
more  purpose  than  if  they  attempted  to  ex- 
orcise the  people;  instead  of  delivering 
others  from  the  power  of  Satan,  they  are 
more  and  more  subjected  to  him  themselves ; 
and,  unless  the  grace  of  God  interposes  to 
teach  them  better,  their  latter  end  is  usually 
worse  than  their  beginning. 

This  public  defeat  of  the  enemy  added  to 
the  triumph  of  the  gospel  and  the  honour  of 
the  apostle,  and  produced  a reverence  and 
awe  in  the  hearts  of  many,  convincing  them 
of  the  power  of  evil  spirits  when  not  re- 
strained, and  the  danger  of  trifling  with  the 
name  or  ministry  of  Christ ; and  many  who 
had  been  addicted  to  the  magic  arts  (for 
which  Ephesus  was  peculiarly  infamous)  re- 
nounced their  delusions,  confessed  their  folly 
and  wickedness  to  the  apostle,  made  a pub- 
lic profession  of  the  gospel,  and,  in  proof  that 
their  faith  and  repentance  were  sincere, 
brought  the  books  containing  the  secrets  and 
principles  of  their  pretended  skill,  and  pub- 
licly committed  them  to  the  flames.  These 
were  either  so  numerous  or  so  dear,  that  the 


value  was  computed  at  fifty  thousand  pieces 
of  silver.  What  this  sum  might  be  in  our 
money,  the  learned  are  not  agreed ; the  low- 
est calculations  fix  it  at  about  fifteen  hundred 
pounds,  while  some  compute  it  at  more  than 
seven  thousand.  We  are  not,  however,  sure 
they  were  all  on  the  subject  of  magic ; a va- 
riety of  other  disquisitions  might  possibly  con- 
tribute to  enlarge  the  pile.  Curious  books  and 
curious  arts  had  been  multiplied  ; but  the  one 
book  of  truth  now  made  the  rest  useless  and 
tasteless ; they  had  now  found  the  pearl  of 
great  price,  and  willingly  parted  with  their 
once  admired  pebbles:  and  we  may  believe, 
that  if  the  worth  and  power  of  the  holy  scrip- 
tures were  once  generally  known,  many 
curious  libraries  in  our  days,  if  they  escaped 
unburnt,  would  at  least  remain  unread  and 
unnoticed.  When  the  wise  thus  renounced 
their  wisdom,  and  the  artful  their  gain,  burnt 
their  books  with  their  own  hands,  and  de- 
voted themselves  to  the  study  of  the  scrip- 
tures alone,  it  is  once  more  observed,  so 
mightily  grew  the  word  of  God  and  pre- 
vailed ! 

a.  d.  57.]  The  apostle,  of  whom  it  may 
be  said  with  more  propriety  than  of  Ccesar, 
that  he  accounted  nothing  done  while  any 
thing  remained  to  do,  in  the  midst  of  his  im- 
portant engagements  at  Ephesus,  was  still 
meditating  new  services ; he  retained  a warm 
affection  and  care  for  his  friends  in  different, 
distant,  and  opposite  quarters ; he  had  thoughts 
of  revisiting  Macedonia  and  Greece,  and, 
from  thence,  once  more  to  go  to  Jerusalem; 
and,  not  content  with  reviewing  his  past  la- 
bours, he  longed  to  preach  in  places  he  had 
not  yet  seen, — saying,  After  I have  been 
there,  I must  also  see  Rome : nor  was  Rome 
the  boundary  of  his  views;  for  from  thence 
he  proposed  to  proceed  to  Spain,  Rom.  xv. 
24.  We  are  taught  from  our  infancy  to  ad- 
mire those,  who,  in  the  language  of  the  world, 
are  styled  great  captains  and  conquerors,  be- 
cause they  burned  with  a desire  to  carry 
slaughter  and  terror  into  every  part  of  the 
globe,  and  to  aggrandize  their  names  by  the 
depopulation  of  countries,  and  the  destruc- 
tion of  their  species,  while  this  generous 
spirit  of  St.  Paul  is  almost  totally  overlooked : 
unwearied  by  difficulties,  undismayed  by  dan- 
gers, unsatisfied  with  the  greatest  success, 
unaffected  with  the  justest  applause,  he 
seemed  to  lay  his  benevolent  schemes  wide 
as  the  human  race : he  reaped  no  profit,  he 
sought  no  praise;  he  rejected  the  alluremaits 
of  pleasure,  to  which  the  greatest  conquerors 
have  often  been  irresolute  slaves;  he  endured 
the  reproach  and  contempt  of  the  people, 
which  no  hero,  but  the  true  Christian,  was 
ever  strong  enough  to  bear  with  patience; 
and  all  this  only  to  make  others  partakers 
of  the  happiness  which  he  enjoyed  himself. 
However,  finding  it  necessary  to  continue 
some  time  longer  where  he  was,  he  despatched 


64 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


his  bf.oved  Ti  jothy  to  Macedonia,  to  ap- 
prize his  friends  of  his  intention,  and  to  pre- 
pare them  for  his  visit,  when  a proper  op- 
portunity should  permit. 

In  the  mean  time  (Acts  xix.  23,)  an  inci- 
dent fell  out  which  well  illustrates  the  causes 
and  genius  of  that  opposition  and  outcry 
which  is  usually  made  when  the  power  of 
gospel-truth  interferes  with  the  passions  and 
interests  of  designing  men.  St.  Paul’s  great 
success  and  the  additions  daily  made  to  the 
church  of  Christ,  had  a visible  tendency  to 
’essen  the  estimation  and  gain  of  those  whose 
chief  resource  was  in  the  ignorance  and  wick- 
edness of  the  people.  These  were  not  back- 
ward to  take  the  alarm,  and  had  been  waiting 
an  opportunity,  to  show  their  resentment. 
The  Lord,  who  holds  all  hearts  in  his  own 
hands,  had  restrained  them  hitherto,  that  his 
work  of  grace  might  not  be  disturbed;  but 
when  the  apostle  was  upon  the  point  of  de- 
parture, this  restraint  was  in  some  measure 
taken  off.  The  temple  of  Diana,  at  Ephesus, 
was  celebrated  for  its  magnificence  far  and 
near ; so  that  many  shrines  or  models  of  it 
were  made  for  sale,  and  in  much  demand. 
This  branch  of  business  brought  in  consider- 
able gain  to  the  silversmiths,  and  other  me- 
chanics ; but  if  the  gospel  of  Christ  continued 
to  spread,  it  was  highly  probable  that  these, 
with  many  other  such  toys,  w7ould  be  little 
inquired  after.  Demetrius,  a leading  man 
amongst  them,  convening  his  brethren  and 
dependants,  and  as  many  as  he  could,  whose 
interest  seemed  more  immediately  affected 
by  this  novel  doctrine,  harangued  them  with 
much  address  and  influence  on  a point  in 
which  they  had  so  near  and  mutual  a con- 
cern ; he  reminded  them,  with  a seasonable 
frankness,  that  their  gain  was  at  stake  :* *  this 
was  the  main  argument;  yet,  as  one  not 
wholly  governed  by  mercenary  views,  he 
expressed  a very  tender  concern  for  the 
honour  of  Diana,  lest  her  worship,  and  their 
advantage,  should  cease  together,  as  they 
certainly  would,  if  this  Paul  should  be  peace- 
ably suffered  to  persuade  the  people,  that 
they  can  be  no  gods  which  are  made  with 
hands.  An  appeal  to  the  two  prevailing  pas- 
sions of  mankind,  interest  and  superstition, 
is  seldom  made  in  vain.  The  arguments  of 
Demetrius  have  been  employed  a thousand 
times  over  against  the  gospel,  though  all  op- 
posers  have  not  had  his  honesty  in  avowing 
their  leading  motive.  The  doctrine  which 
discountenances  folly  and  wickedness,  will 
certainly  be  defamed  and  resisted  by  all  who 
find  their  account  in  promoting  them;  but  as 


* This  is  the  main  objection  against  the  gospel,  though 
pretexts  are  industriously  sought  to  hide  it;  it  alarms 
those  who  thrive  by  the  ignorance  or  wickedness  of  the 
times;  gain  is  the  motive,  the  honour  of  Diana  the. 
plea  But  it  may  be  easily  proved,  that  such  occupa- 
tions as  are  endangered  by  the  success  of  the  gospel,  are 

*u  themselves  injurious  to  the  peace  and  good  order  of 
uvil  society. 


[book  II. 

this  motive  is  rather  invidious,  if  insisted  on 
alone,  they  express  likewise  an  earnest  zeal 
for  whatever  tenets  have  the  sanction  of  au- 
thority, antiquity,  or  custom,  wTith  wThich  their 
private  interest  is  inseparably  connected.  He 
had  said  enough  to  inflame  his  hearers;  and 
these  were  sufficiently  numerous  to  stimulate 
the  unthinking  rabble,  who,  though  quiet  till 
they  are  headed  by  artful  leaders,  are  easily 
roused  to  rage  and  tumult  wThen  thus  in- 
fluenced, as  the  sea  that  has  been  long  calm 
obeys  the  impulse  of  the  rising  gale.  The 
outcry  began  by  Demetrius,  and  his  com- 
panions; Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians, 
was  soon  resounded  through  the  city;  and 
the  multitude,  being  informed  that  their 
established  religion,  their  stately  temple,  and 
costly  rites,  were  all  in  danger,  rushed  from 
all  parts  tumultuously  into  the  public  theatre, 
dragging  tw  o of  St.  Paul’s  dear  companions. 
Gaius  and  Aristarchus,  along  with  them,  per- 
haps with  a design  to  throw  them  to  the  wild 
beasts,  which  were  kept  for  the  barbarous 
diversion  of  the  people  at  their  public  games. 
The  apostle,  warmly  concerned  for  his  friends' 
safety,  and  confiding  in  the  goodness  of  his 
cause,  and  the  providence  of  his  God,  was  no* 
intimidated  by  this  violent  uproar,  but  pro- 
posed to  face  the  enraged  mob ; but  the  ear- 
nest solicitations  of  the  disciples,  who  could 
not  but  be  anxious  for  the  event,  restrained 
him : and  even  some  who  had  not  received 
his  doctrine,  from  a regard  to  what  they 
knew  of  his  character  and  conduct,  employed 
their  endeavours  to  preserve  him.  These,  in 
the  text,  are  styled  Asiarchs,  persons  of  note 
who  presided  in  the  regulation  of  the  games. 
Some  of  them  sent  to  inform  him,  that  in  the 
present  confusion,  it  was  not  in  their  powder 
to  protect  him  from  violence,  and  therefore 
desired  he  wrould  keep  in  safety.  Though 
his  resolution  was  not  shaken,  yet  judging 
this  might  be  a providential  intimation,  that 
it  was  not  his  duty  at  that  time  to  expose 
himself,  he  desisted.  The  mob,  thus  disap- 
pointed with  respect  to  him,  and  secretly  re- 
strained from  hurting  the  others,  continued 
in  the  utmost  confusion,  though  few  knew 
why  they  were  assembled,  unless  it  was  to 
join  in  the  cry,  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephe- 
sians, which  they  repeated  without  intermis- 
sion for  two  hours.  When  they  had  thus 
exhausted  themselves,  and  their  passions, 
through  weariness,  began  to  subside,  a public 
officer  of  the  city  seized  the  favourable  mo- 
ment to  expostulate  with  them  concerning 
their  behaviour;  he  spoke  with  freedom  and 
address,  but  with  that  indifference  which  the 
wise  men  of  the  world  so  frequently  discover 
in  religious  concerns.  Many  deserve  com- 
mendation for  their  readiness  to  allow  others 
the  peaceable  possession  of  their  own  senti- 
ments, who,  at  the  same  time,  deserve  our 
pity,  that  they  have  no  inclination  or  leisure 
to  inquire  for  themselves.  Hfe  allowed,  in 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


65 


CHAP.  I.] 

general  terms,  the  honours  of  Diana,  and 
pleaded,  in  behalf  of  the  men,  that  they  had 
not  spoken  against  Diana  in  particular,  or 
intermeddled  with  her  temple,*  Acts  xix.  37. 
This  was  probably  true  in  fact:  St.  Paul  de- 
clared the  folly  of  idolatry  in  general,  but  did 
not  enter  into  direct  confutation  of  any  de- 
tached part  of  the  Heathen  mythology:  he 
proposed  the  plain  truth  of  the  gospel ; and 
when  this  was  received,  the  whole  system  of 
idol-worship  fell  to  the  ground  of  itself.  He 
farther  reminded  them,  that  if  they  had  any 
just  cause  of  complaint,  they  ought  to  seek 
redress  in  a course  of  law;f  and  then  hinting 
at  the  consequences  they  were  liable  to,  if 
called  to  a strict  account];  for  their  riot,  he 
prevailed  on  them  to  separate  and  depart 
quietly.  Thus  the  apostle,  though  threatened 
with  a most  imminent  and  formidable  danger, 
was  preserved  unhurt,  and  suffered  neither 
in  his  person  nor  character.  An  encouraging 
proof  that  those  who  act  in  the  path  of  duty, 
and  depend  on  the  power  of  God,  are  equally 
safe  in  all  times  and  circumstances ; no  less 
safe  when  surrounded  by  enraged  enemies, 
than  when  encircled  by  kind  and  assiduous 
friends. 

He  did  not  continue  long  at  Ephesus  after 
this  tumult;  but  taking  leave  of  the  disciples, 
went  to  Troas,  and  from  thence  (as  he  had 
purposed)  to  Macedonia,  Actsxx.  We  have 
but  little  account  of  this  progress  in  the 
history  of  the  Acts ; but  from  some  passages 
of  his  epistles  (2  Cor.  ii.  12,  13,  and  vii.  5,) 
written  about  that  time,  we  are  informed, 
that  his  exercises  and  trials,  both  inward  and 
outward,  were  very  great.  His  solicitous 
affection  for  the  churches  was  far  from  being 
the  smallest  source  of  his  troubles,  and  cost 
him  many  a pang.§  He  loved  them  in  the 
bowels  of  Jesus  Christ;  he  could  willingly 
have  devoted  his  labours  and  life  to  each  of 
them,  but  he  could  not  be  with  them  all ; and 


* The  words  robbers  of  churches,  should  rather  be  ren- 
% dered  robbers  of  temples;  for  though  the  word  church  is 
now  expressive  of  some  particular  places  of  worship,  it 
is  never  in  the  New  Testament  applied  to  buildings,  but 
to  persons  only. 

t The  servants  of  Christ  will  sejdom  be  compelled  to 
answer  for  themselves  in  a course  of  law,  except  in 
those  places  where  sanguinary  laws  are  contrived  pur- 
posely against  them.  In  default  of  these,  their  adversa- 
ries will  often  stoop  to  appeal  from  the  magistrate  to 
the  mob. 

| It  seems,  however,  there  was  no  more  said  of  it.  It 
had  been  a notorious  breach  of  the  peace,  but  then  it 
had  been  against  St.  Paul  and  his  companions,  who  had 
sufficient  favour  shown  them  if  they  came  off  with 
their  lives.  In  any  other  case,  such  a tumult  would 
have  been  deemed  a high  offence. 

§ 2Cor.  xi.  28.  “That  which  cometh  on  me  daily.” 
The  word  is  ss-irur rao-i?, — and  gives  the  idea  of  a camp 
or  castle  hard  beset  with  continual  onsets  and  assaults  : 
or  of  a man  who  has  his  way  to  force  through  a great 
crowd  that  are  coming  to  meet  him;  so  that  he  must 
not  only  be  much  encumbered  and  hindered,  but  unless 
be  exerts  himself  to  the  utmost,  is  in  danger  of  being 
trampled  under  their  feet.  By  this  lively  figure,  the 
apostle  describes  the  part  he  took  in  the  welfare  of  all 
the  churches.  Ilis  caies  on  their  behalf  were  so  numer- 
ous, urgent,  and  continual,  that  they  found  full  em- 
ployment for  his  prayers,  his  thoughts,  and  his  time. 

VOL.  II.  I 


knowing  the  weakness  of  the  heart,  the  sub- 
tlety of  Satan,  and  the  obvious  temptations 
arising  from  the  fear  of  man,  the  love  of  the 
world,  and  the  arts  of  false  teachers,  he  was 
jealous  over  those  from  whom  he  was  absent 
with  a godly  jealousy,  2 Cor.  xi.  2.  At  Troas 
he  expected  to  have  met  with  Titus,  on  his 
return  from  Macedonia;  but  missing  him, 
though  he  had  favourable  opportunities  of 
preaching  the  gospel  at  Troas  (2  Cor.  ii.  12, 
13,)  his  mind  was  not  at  liberty  to  improve 
them ; but  he  hasted  to  be  in  Macedonia,  that 
he  might  the  sooner  be  satisfied.  There,  he 
tells  us  himself,  he  had  no  rest,  but  was 
troubled  on  every  side;  without  were  fight- 
ings, within  were  fears ; but  he  speaks  of  it 
as  a seasonable  and  gracious  interposition  of 
that  God,  whose  character  and  prerogative  it 
is  to  be  a comforter  of  those  that  are  cast 
down  (2  Cor.  vii.  6,)  that,  in  these  circum- 
stances, he  was  comforted  by  the  coming  of 
Titus,  who  relieved  his  fears  by  the  favour- 
able account  he  brought  him  from  Corinth. 

a.  d.  58.]  How  long  he  staid  in  these 
parts  we  are  not  told ; but,  in  general,  that 
he  spent  some  time,  and  visited  many  places ; 
and  it  seems  to  have  been  in  this  circuit  that 
he  preached  in  Illyricum,  a part  of  which 
country  borders  upon  Macedonia.  He  after- 
wards proceeded  to  Greece,  where  he  staid 
three  months  ; he  intended  to  have  embarked 
from  thence  at  some  port,  and  to  have  pro- 
ceeded immediately  to  Syria  by  sea ; but,  upon 
information  that  his  restless  enemies,  the 
Jews,  were  plotting  to  intercept  and  kill  him, 
he  determined  to  return  through  Macedonia. 
Several  of  his  friends  offered  to  accompany 
him  through  Asia,  who,  embarking  before 
him,  waited  for  him  at  Troas,  where  he,  at  a 
convenient  time,  joined  them  from  Philippi, 
and  remained  there  seven  days. 

On  the  first  day  of  the  week,  they  had  a 
solemn  assembly ; and  St.  Paul,  who  was  to 
take  a long  and  last  farewell  of  the  disciples 
there  the  next  morning,  indulged  his  own  and 
their  affections,  by  protracting  his  discourses 
and  advices  beyond  the  usual  bounds ; he 
spent  the  whole  day,  even  till  midnight,  in 
expatiating  upon  the  pleasing  topics  of  re- 
deeming love.  This  does  not,  indeed,  appear 
to  have  been  his  usual  practice;  but  should  a 
company  of  believers  now  spend  a night  to- 
gether in  the  exercises  they  best  love,  though 
it  were  but  once,  and  when  they  had  no  ex- 
pectation of  meeting  again  till  they  should 
meet  in  glory,  it  would  be  sufficient  to  open 
the  mouths  of  prejudice  and  slander  amongst 
them,  as  regardless  of  the  order  of  families, 
and  the  duties  of  common  life.  Particular 
notice  is  taken,  that  they  had  many  lights  in 
the  upper  chamber,  where  they  were  met, 
perhaps  to  remind  us,  that  the  first  Christiana 
were  careful  to  conduct  their  assemblies  with 
order  and  propriety,  so  as  to  give  no  just 
cause  of  offence ; yet  their  enemies  quickly' 


66 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


began  to  charge  them  with  meeting  in  the 
dark,  and  invented  many  false  and  wicked 
slanders  upon  that  supposition.  The  like 
falsehoods  have  been  often  repeated.  A young 
man  of  the  company,  either  less  attentive,  or 
less  warmly  engaged  than  the  rest,  dropped 
asleep,  and  not  only  lost  much  of  an  invalu- 
able opportunity,  but  fell  out  of  a window, 
in  which  he  was  seated,  from  the  third  story, 
and  was  taken  up  to  appearance  dead ; an 
incident  which  might  have  given  those  who 
hated  the  apostle  a farther  occasion  to  cla- 
mour, and  to  revile  his  unseasonable  zeal; 
but  he  went  down  in  the  spirit  of  faith  and 
prayer,  and  embracing  the  young  man,  re- 
stored him  to  his  friends  alive.  After  they 
were  recovered  from  the  hurry  of  this  event, 
and  had  taken  some  refreshment,  he  resumed 
his  discourse,  and  continued  in  conference 
with  them  till  the  break  of  day,*  when  he 
Dade  them  farewell. 

His  companions  went  along  the  coast  by 
snipping  at  Assos,  a place  not  very  distant, 
and  to  which  the  apostle  chose  to  go  by  land, 
and  on  foot.  Some  think  he  did  this  by  way 
of  self-denial;  but  it  is  not  likely  that  he, 
who  was  the  great  asserter  of  evangelical 
and  filial  liberty,  would  lay  any  stress  upon 
such  singularities.  Self  may  readily  submit  to 
many  things  of  this  sort,  and  derive  food, 
complacence,  and  strength  from  them.  It  is 
more  probable  he  chose  to  walk,  either  that 
he  might  embrace  occasions  of  service  by  the 
way,  or  for  the  advantage  of  leisure  and  re- 
tirement ; for  Christians  engaged  in  a very 
public  sphere  of  life  (as  he  w7as)  are  glad  to 
redeem  opportunities  of  being  alone,  at  the 
price  of  some  inconveniences.  But  this  cir- 
cumstance is  mentioned  as  characterising  the 
simplicity  of  his  spirit ; though  greatly  ho- 
noured, and  greatly  beloved,  he  thought  it  not 
beneath  him  to  walk  from  place  to  place,  like 
an  obscure  person. 

Embarking  at  Assos,  and  having  touched 
at  Mitylene  and  Samos,  intermediate  places, 
they  arrived  in  a few  days  at  Miletus.  St. 
Paul  purposely  passed  Ephesus,  that  he  might 
not  be  detained  or  grieved  by  the  many  dear 
friends  he  had  in  that  city ; for  he  was  re- 
solved, if  possible,  to  be  at  Jerusalem  on  the 
approaching  day  of  Pentecost;  but  from  Mi- 
letus he  sent  for  the  elders  or  bishops  of  the 
church  of  Ephesus,  to  receive  his  final  charge 
and  benediction.  When  they  came,  he  ad- 
dressed them  in  a solemn  and  affectionate 
discourse.  The  substance  of  it,  which  is  re- 
corded for  our  instruction,  if  considered  only 
as  a piece  of  oratory,  has  been  often  admired 

* This,  as  wo  have  observed,  was  upon  a particular 
occasion  ; they  expected  to  see  each  other  no  more,  and 
hardly  knew  how  to  part.  The  like  circumstances  might 
justify  such  protracted  meetings  of  Christian  friends 
still;  but,  in  general,  they  are  to  be  avoided.  If  fre- 
quently indulged, they  would  break  in  upon  other  things, 
indiopcre  those  who  attend  for  the  ordinary  duties  of 
their  stations,  be  prejudicial  to  health,  and,  for  these 
and  other  reasons,  prove  a cause  of  offence. 


[book  ri. 

and  celebrated  by  critics;  but  there  are 
strokes  in  it,  the  force  and  beauty  of  which 
no  critic  can  truly  relish,  except  he  has 
tasted  of  the  same  spirit  which  filled  and  ani- 
mated the  apostle’s  heart  when  he  spoke  it. 

He  began  with  an  appeal  to  themselves: 
concerning  his  conduct  while  resident  among 
them,  and  reminded  them  of  the  diligence, 
fidelity,  and  tenderness  which  he  had  mani- 
fested in  the  course  of  his  ministry,  how  he 
had  seconded  his  public  instructions  with  pri- 
vate and  repeated  exhortations,  watering  them 
both  With  many  prayers  and  tears;  he  inform- 
ed them  of  the  object  and  service  of  his  present 
journey,  and  how  uncertain  he  was  what  the 
issue  might  prove  to  himself.  But  though  he 
had  general  intimations  from  the  Spirit  of 
God,  to  expect  afflictions  and  bonds  in  every 
place,  his  determination  was  fixed ; he  had 
counted  the  cost,  and  saw  that  nothing  he 
could  meet  with  was  wortli  his  serious 
thought,  so  that  he  might  be  able  to  fulfil  his 
ministry  with  honour,  and  to  finish  his  course 
with  joy  ;f  but  this  he  said,  he  was  assured  of, 
that  the  pleasing  opportunities  he  had  enjoy- 
ed with  the  believers  at  Ephesus,  and  in  that 
neighbourhood,  were  ended ; and  that  they 
now  saw  and  heard  him  for  the  last  time. 
Only  those  who  know  the  endeared  affection 
that  subsists  between  a minister  of  Christ  and 
those  to  whom  God  has  made  him  the  in- 
strument of  saving  their  souls,  can  judge  of 
the  emotion  with  which  he  spoke,  and  his 
friends  heard,  this  part  of  his  discourse.  When 
he  had  thus  touched  and  engaged  their  ten- 
derest  passions,  and  prepared  them  to  receive 
his  parting  solemn  charge  with  a due  atten- 
tion, he  exhorted  them,  in  the  most  animated 
terms,  to  follow  his  example,  in  performing 
the  part  of  faithful  overseers,  or  bisnops,  in 
the  church  which  he  now  committed  to  their 
care ; suggesting  two  most  powerful  motives, 
the  consideration  that  they  were  appointed  to 
this  office  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  that  the 
souls  entrusted  to  them  were  the  church  of 
God,  which  he  had  purchased  with  his  own 
blood.  He  likewise  warned  them,  that  the 
utmost  circumspection  would  be  needful ; (hr 
that  he  foresaw,  that,  after  his  departure, 
grievous  wolves  would  enter  amongst  them, 
not  sparing  the  flock ; and  also,  that  out  of 
their  own  number  of  professed  disciples,  men 
should  arise,  speaking  perverse  things.  This 
double  danger  of  false  teachers  from  without, 
and  a restless  curious  spirit  within  the  fold, 


t The  st!.ie  of  obedience  and  service  which  we  owe  to 
him  who  died  for  us,  and  rose  again,  is  often  compared 
to  a race  or  course;  by  which  is  intimated,  the  assiduity 
with  which  we  ought  to  pursue  our  calling,  the  brevity 
of  our  labours  and  sufferings,  the  little  attention  we 
should  pay  to  objects  around  us,  and  that  our  eye  and 
aim  should  be  constantly  directed  to  the  prize  set  be- 
fore us.  Every  step  in  this  race  is  attended  with  trouble: 
but  the  end  will  be  unspeakable  joy.  Those  to  whom 
the  King  shall  say,  “ Well  done,  good  and  faithful 
servant,  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord,”  will  not 
then  complain  of  the  difficulties  they  met  by  the  way. 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


67 


CHAP.  I.] 

all  societies  of  Christians  are  exposed  to;  and 
it  is  a strong’  call  to  ministers  in  all  ag’es,  to 
be  mindful  of  the  apostle’s  charge,  and  to 
take  heed  to  the  flock  over  which  the  Holy 
Ghost  has  made  them  overseers.  He  again 
put  them  in  remembrance  of  his  own  conduct, 
his  assiduity  and  disinterestedness  ; that  he 
had  not  sought  his  own  advantage,  but  had 
rather  wrought  with  his  own  hands,  that  he 
might  not  be  chargeable  to  them : finally, 
commending  them  to  God,  and  the  word  of 
his  grace,  he  closed  his  discourse,  with  pro- 
posing to  their  consideration  an  aphorism  of 
our  Lord  Jesus,  and  illustrated  by  the  whole 
tenor  of  his  life,  “ It  is  more  blessed  to  give 
than  to  receive.”  This  sentiment,  so  highly 
expressive  of  the  spirit  of  the  divine  author, 
which  had  been  hitherto  preserved  in  the 
hearts  and  mouths  of  his  disciples,  was  upon 
this  occasion  inserted  into  the  written  word, 
and  is  the  only  authentic  tradition  concern- 
ing him  which  has  been  transmitted  to  the 
church.  Having  finished  his  pathetic  address, 
he  kneeled  down,  and  prayed  with  them. 
The  final  farewell  was  very  affecting ; for  how 
could  those  who  owed  him  their  souls,  who 
had  been  so  often  comforted  and  edified  by 
his  instructions  and  example,  consider  that 
they  were  to  see  him  no  more  in  this  world, 
without  being  greatly  moved.  They  accom- 
panied him  to  the  ship,  and  then  returned. 
The  word  which  Luke,  the  historian,  makes 
use  of  upon  this  occasion,  intimates  that  the 
concern  was  mutual : it  signifies  to  draw 
asunder  by  force,  to  separate  things  closely 
joined  together : “ When  we  had  gotten  from 
them,”  or,  as  it  might  be  rendered,  “ When 
we  had  torn  ourselves  from  them,”  well  ex- 
presses the  close  union  of  their  affections,  and 
the  sorrow  and  reluctance  which  both  sides 
felt  at  parting. 

When  this  struggle  was  over,  St.  Paul  and 
his  company  put  to  sea  with  a favourable 
gale  (Acts  xxi ;)  and,  having  touched  at  Coos 
and  Rhodes,  two  islands  of  note  in  the  vEgean 
sea,  continued  their  course  to  Patara  in 
Ly  cia,  where  they  seasonably  met  with  a ship 
upon  the  point  of  departure  for  Phoenicia ; and 
embarking  in  her,  they  passed  on  the  south 
side  of  Cyprus,  and  had  a safe  voyage  to  Tyre, 
where,  that  being  the  destined  port  of  the 
vessel,  they  landed.  As  he  was  not  now  very 
far  distant  from  Jerusalem,  and  had  finished 
that  part  of  his  voyage  in  which  he  was  most 
exposed  to  unavoidable  delays  by  the  occur- 
rences of  winds  and  weather,  so  that  he  had  a 
fair  probability  of  reaching  Jerusalem  within 
his  prescribed  time,  he  consented  to  stay  seven 
days  with  some  disciples*  he  found  there, 


* Ai'su(ioi/ri?  rovg  /uxfyrx;  might  be  rendered,  finding 
out  the  disciples.  There  seems  no  reason  for  suppress- 
ing the  article,  and  the  verb  is  used  for  finding  out, 
inconsequence  of  some  description  or  inquiry,  Lukeii. 
16.  We  readily  suppose,  from  the  apostle's  character, 
that  his  first  inquiry,  upon  coming  to  any  place  where 


Acts  xxi.  4.  From  some  of  these  he  received 
an  intimation,  by  a prophetic  impulse,  of  the 
dangers  he  would  be  exposed  to  if  he  went 
to  Jerusalem ; but  he  knew  whopi  he  had  be- 
lieved, and,  being  convinced  that  his  duty 
called  him  to  persevere,  he  wTas  not  intimi- 
dated by  a prospect  of  suffering.  At  the  ap- 
pointed time  he  embarked  again,  the  disciples, 
with  their  families,  accompanying  him  to  the 
water  side,  where  he  took  leave  of  them  in  an 
affectionate  prayer  upon  the  sea-shore.f  He 
landed  next  at  Ptolemais,  a city  of  Palestine, 
and  staid  one  day  with  the  brethren  there. 
The  next  day  he  proceeded  to  Caesarea,  and 
lodged  at  the  house  of  Philip,  the  deacon, 
who  had  four  daughters  endued  with  the 
spirit  of  prophecy. 

During  his  stay  at  Caesarea,  a prophet, 
named  Agabus,  came  down  from  Jerusalem ; 
and,  agreeable  to  the  manner  of  the  ancient 
prophets,  who  frequently  enforced  their  de- 
clarations by  expressive  signs  and  actions,  he 
bound  his  own  hands  and  feet  with  the  apos- 
tle’s girdle,  assuring  them  in  the  name  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  that  in  the  same  manner  the 
Jews  would  bind  the  hands  and  feet  of  the 
man  to  whom  that  girdle  belonged,  and  de- 
liver him  up  as  a criminal  to  the  Roman 
power.  Upon  these  repeated  premonitions  of 
what  he  was  to  expect,  not  only  the  disciples 
of  Caesarea,  but  those  who  had  come  with 
him,  earnestly  entreated  him  to  desist  from 
his  purpose.  We  may  learn  from  this  passage 
that  the  clearest  intelligence  of  approaching 
danger  is  not  always  a sufficient  warrant  to 
decline  it,  even  when,  in  the  judgment  of 
our  brethren,  we  might  decline  it  without 
sin.  St.  Paul  was  satisfied  that,  all  circum- 
stances considered,  it  was  right  for  him  to 
proceed : he  had  taken  his  determination  upon 
good  grounds,  was  brought  so  far  on  his  way 
in  safety ; and  to  be  told  (though  from  an  in- 
fallible authority)  that  his  views  of  service 
could  not  be  completed  without  great  risk 
and  trouble  to  himself,  did  not  discourage 
him  in  the  least.  He  was  less  affected  by  the 
prospect  of  sufferings  from  the  Jews  than  by 
the  solicitations  of  his  friends,  and  told  them, 
that  though  they  could  not  shake  his  resolu- 
tion, their  concern  and  importunity  exceed- 
ingly distressed  him.  “ What  mean  you  to 
weep,  and  to  break  my  heart!  I am  ready, 
not  to  be  bound  only,  but  also  to  die  for  the 
sake  of  the  Lord  Jesus.”  In  this  short  speech 
we  may  discern  a spirit  which  is  indeed  the 
honour  of  human  nature.  Inflexibly  firm  to 
his  character  and  duty,  yet  expressing  the 
most  tender  feelings  for  his  friends,  while  he 
contemplated  the  severest  trials  that  might 
affect  himself  unmoved,  he  was  almost,  over- 


the  gospel  had  been  preached,  related  to  those  who  loved 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  how  they  were  to  be  met  with. 

f Could  many  persons  now  living  have  seen  this, 
without  doubt  they  would  have  said,  they  had  seen  a 
strange  company  of  enthusiasts  and  fanatics. 


68 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


[book  n. 


powered  by  what  he  felt  for  others.  But  I 
when  they  saw  that  he  was  not  to  be  dis- 1 
suaded,  they  desisted  from  their  suit,  and 
acquiesced  in  the  will  of  the  Lord. 

a.  d.  60.]  Having  staid  some  time  at  Cae- 
sarea, he  proceeded  to  Jerusalem,  his  friends, 
who  had  crossed  the  sea  with  him,  resolving 
to  expose  themselves  to  a share  of  the  dan- 
gers from  which  they  could  not  divert  him. 
They  were  accompanied  likewise  by  an  old 
disciple,  named  Mnason.  of  Cyprus,  who  re- 
sided at  Jerusalem,  and  had  offered  his  house 
for  their  accommodation.  Their  arrival  wTas 
welcome  to  the  brethren ; and  the  next  day 
St.  Paul  introduced  his  friends  to  St,  James 
and  the  elders,  who  seem  to  have  met  to- 
gether on  purpose  to  receive  him.  To  them 
he  gave  a succinct  account  of  the  success 
with  wrhich  God  had  honoured  his  ministry 
among  the  Gentiles;  which,  when  they  had 
heard,  they  unanimously  glorified  God  on  his 
behalf,  and  rejoiced  to  hear  of  the  accession 
of  such  numbers  to  the  Christian  faith,  Acts 
xxi.  But  at  the  same  time  they  gave  him  to  j 
understand  that  the  bulk  of  the  Jewish  con- 1 
verts  had  received  no  small  prejudice  against 1 
him ; that  there  were  even  many  thousands 
who  had  heard  and  believed  hard  things  of 
him,  as  one  who  taught  the  Jews  to  apostatize 
from  the  law  of  Moses,  and  forbade  them  to 
practise  circumcision,  and  the  other  rites  and 
customs  of  their  forefathers.  In  order  to  show 
them  that  this  charge  was  groundless,  they 
advised  him  to  join  himself  publicly  with  four 
men  wTho  wrere  under  a vow,  and  to  attend 
with  them  the  prescribed  course  of  purifica- 
tion in  the  temple. 

From  this  passage  we  are  led  to  remark, 
that,  through  the  weakness  of  human  nature, 
the  prejudices  of  education,  and  the  arts  of 
Satan,  many  thousands  of  professed  Chris- 
tians, in  the  first  and  purest  period  of  the 
primitive  church,  while  imder  the  care  of  the 
apostles,  had  imbibed  from  hear-say,  a degree 
of  coldness  and  dislike  towards  one  of  the 
Lord’s  most  faithful  and  most  favoured  ser- 
vants. How  far  the  methods  St.  Paul  was 
advised  to  pursue,  for  the  removal  of  this 
misapprehension,  was  suited  to  his  character 
and  known  integrity,  is  a question  not  easily 
determined.  The  apostles,  considered  in  one 
light,  as  the  penmen  of  a large  part  of  the 
sacred  canon  of  faith  and  practice,  which  the 
Lord  was  pleased  by  them  to  communicate  to 
his  church,  were,  doubtless,  so  far  under  the 
full  direction  and  inspiration  of  his  Holy 
Spirit;  but  we  have  no  reason  to  believe, 
that  in  every  part  of  their  own  personal  con- 
duct they  were  strictly  infallible;  nay,  we 
have  good  warrant  to  conclude  the  contrary, 
as  St.  Paul  himself  assures  us,  that,  upon  a 
certain  occasion,  already  mentioned,  he  with- 
stood Peter  to  his  face,  because  he  was  to  be 
blamed.  It  is  therefore  no  way  derogatory 
from  the  character  and  authority  of  St.  Paui, 


to  inquire,  whether,  upon  this  occasion,  the 
tenderness  of  his  spirit  towards  weak  be- 
lievers, and  his  desire  of  becoming  all  things 
to  all  men,  when  the  foundation-truths  of  the 
gospel  were  not  affected,  might  not  carry 
him  too  far:  for  though  a reserve  was  made 
by  James,  in  favour  of  the  Gentile  converts, 
that  they  should  not  be  burdened  with  the 
observance  of  Jewish  rites;  yet  the  express 
end  and  design  for  wrhich  this  step  was  pro- 
posed to  him,  and  for  which  he  seems  to  have 
undertaken  it,  was  that  all  might  know  or 
believe,  not  only  that  he  was  not  against 
others  adhering  to  the  Jewish  ceremonies, 
but  that  he  likewise  orderly  and  statedly  prac- 
tised them  himself.  A circumstance  which 
is  far  from  being  clear,  or  indeed  probable, 
if  we  consider  the  strain  of  his  epistle  to  the 
Galatians:  which,  though  the  addition  at  the 
close  of  our  copies,  mentions  as  sent  from 
Rome,  is  generally  allowed  to  have  been 
written  during  his  stay  at  Ephesus  at  the 
latest,  if  not  sooner;  and  further,  that,  for 
some  time  past,  his  converse  had  been  almost 
wholly  confined  to  the  Gentile  believers,  or 
to  those  churches  of  which  they  formed  the 
largest  part.  If  he  became  as  a Jew’  amongst 
the  Jews,  it  was,  as  he  says  himself  (1  Cor. 
ix.  20,)  only  with  the  hope  of  gaining  the 
Jews:  which  motive  could  no  longer" take 
place  when  he  had  finally  withdrawn  from 
their  synagogues.  Those,  therefore,  who 
suppose  that,  in  this  instance,  he  w’as  over 
persuaded  to  deviate  from  that  openness  of 
conduct  which  he  generally  maintained, 
seem  to  have  some  ground  for  their  suspicion. 
This,  however,  is  certain,  his  temporising 
did  not  answ’er  the  proposed  end;  but,  im 
stead  of  rendering  him  more  acceptable,  in- 
volved him  in  the  greatest  danger : for  when 
the  seven  days  w’ere  almost  fulfilled,  some 
Jews  of  Asia,  seeing  him  in  the  temple, 
pointed  him  out  to  the  multitude  as  the  dan- 
gerous man  W’ho  had  apostatized  from  his 
religion,  and  was  using  his  endeavours, 

! wherever  he  wrent,  to  draw  people  from  the 
i worship  of  God  according  to  the  law  of 
Moses.  To  this  they  added,  that  he  had  pro- 
faned the  holy  place,  by  bringing  Gentiles 
wdth  him  into  the  temple.  This  they  con- 
i jectured  from  having  seen  Trophymus,  an 
Ephesian,  w'ith  him  in  the  city.  This  part  of 
the  charge  was  wholly  false:  he  had  not 
brought  his  Gentile  friends  into  the  temple ; 
but  he  appeared  so  publicly  with  them  upon 
other  occasions,  as  to  give  some  room  for  a 
surmise  of  this  sort.  If  he  submitted  to  the 
proposal  of  the  elders,  and  attended  in  the 
temple  himself,  for  the  satisfaction  of  the 
Jewish  converts,  he  would  not  go  so  far  as  to 
be  ashamed  of  his  friends,  to  make  himself 
more  acceptable  to  his  enemies.  It  is  our 
duty  to  avoid  giving  just  offence;  but  if  we 
boldly  and  honestly  avow  the  Lord’s  people 
! upon  all  proper  occasions,  w’ithout  regard  to 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


G9 


CHAP.  /.] 

names  and  parties,  we  must  expect  to  suffer 
from  the  zealots  of  all  sides. 

Those  who  first  laid  hands  on  him  were 
soon  assisted  by  great  numbers ; for  the  whole 
city  was  moved,  and  the  people  ran  together 
from  all  quarters.  They  dragged  him  out  of 
the  temple,  and  were  upon  the  point  of  kill- 
ing him,  without  giving  him  time  or  leave  to 
speak  a word  for  himself : they  thought  him 
absolutely  in  their  power ; but  they  were  pre- 
vented by  the  appearance  of  Lysias,  a Roman 
officer,  who  had  a post  near  the  temple  to 
prevent  or  suppress  insurrections.  Upon  the 
first  notice  he  received  of  this  disturbance, 
he  came  down  with  a party  of  soldiers.  The 
evangelist  observes,  that  when  the  Jews  ran 
to  kill  Paul,  the  Romans  ran  to  save  him. 
Thus  the  succour  the  Lord  provides  for  his 
people  is  always  proportioned  to  the  case,  and 
effectual  to  the  end.  When  danger  is  press- 
ing, relief  is  speedy.  Lysias,  though  ignorant 
of  the  c^use  of  this  tumult,  judging,  by  its 
violence,  that  the  apostle  must  have  been 
some  great  malefactor,  commanded  him  to  be 
bound  with  two  chains ; and  when  he  could 
obtain  no  satisfactory  information  from  the 
people,  had  him  removed  to  the  castle,  or  Ro- 
man station.  But  such  was  the  violence  of 
the  incensed  unmeaning  multitude,  that  the 
soldiers  were  constrained  to  carry  him  in 
their  arms  up  the  steps,  or  stairs,  which  led 
thither  from  the  temple.  Here  Paul  obtained 
leave  to  speak  for  himself,  the  tribune  inclin- 
ing rather  to  a more  favourable  opinion  of 
him,  when  he  found  he  could  speak  Greek; 
and  the  people  attended  with  some  composure, 
when  they  heard  him  address  them  in  the 
Hebrew,  or  Syriac  language. 

In  his  discourse  (Acts  xxii)  he  told  them, 
that  he  had  been  brought  up  amongst  them- 
selves, and  appealing  to  the  high-priest  and 
elders  concerning  the  zeal  and  earnestness 
with  which  he  had  formerly  served  their 
party,  he  related  the  extraordinary  dispensa- 
tion by  which  the  Lord  Jesus  had  conquered 
his  heart.  This  was  St.  Paul’s  usual  method 
of  defence,  and  though  no  means  are  sufficient 
to  reach  the  heart  without  a divine  influence, 
yet  humanly  speaking,  a simple  and  faithful 
declaration  of  what  God  has  done  for  our 
souls,  seems  most  likely  to  convince,  or  at 
least  to  soften  and  silence,  those  who  oppose. 
Enraged  as  the  Jews  had  been,  they  listened 
with  patience  to  his  relation,  till  he  proceeded 
to  intimate  the  Lord’s  designs  in  favour  of 
the  Gentiles,  and  that  he  was  appointed  an 
apostle  to  them.  Accustomed  to  despise  the 
rest  of  mankind,  and  to  deem  themselves  the 
only  people  of  God,  they  could  not  bear  this ; 
they  interrupted  him  instantly,  and,  with  one 
voice,  declared  it  was  not  fit  such  a fellow 
should  live  upon  the  earth : they  cast  off  their 
clothes,  threw  dust  in  the  air,  and  their  fury 
seemed  to  deprive  them  of  their  reason. 
Lysias,  the  tribune,  secured  him  from  their  i 


violence,  but  commanded  him  to  be  examined 
by  scourging,  that  he  might  know  his  crime 
from  his  own  mouth,  according  to  a barbarous 
custom  of  putting  those  to  torture  against 
whom  there  was  no  sufficient  evidence,  that 
their  own  extorted  confession  might  furnish 
some  grounds  of  proceeding  against  them : a 
custom  still  prevalent  in  most  countries  called 
Christian,  though  contrary  to  religion,  to  rea- 
son, and  to  the  common  sentiments  of  hu- 
manity. Our  Lord  Jesus  was  examined  in 
this  manner  before  Pilate ; and  though  the 
apostle  was  ready  to  follow  the  steps  of  his 
master  in  suffering,  yet,  upon  this  occasion, 
he  pleaded  his  right  of  exemption  from  such 
treatment,  as  being  a native  of  Tarsus,  a city 
honoured  with  the  freedom  of  Rome.  A Ro- 
man citizen  was  not  legally  liable  either  to 
be  bound  or  scourged:  therefore,  when  the 
tribune  understood  his  privilege,  he  stopped 
farther  proceedings,  and  was  something  ap- 
prehensive for  himself,  that  he  had  in  part 
violated  them  already,  by  ordering  hhn  to  be 
bound;*  but,  being  still  desirous  to  know 
what  was  laid  to  his  charge,  he  convened  the 
chief  priests,  and  the  members  of  the  San- 
hedrim on  the  next  day;  and  brought  him 
again  before  them. 

The  apostle,  fixing  his  eyes  upon  the  high- 
priest  and  council,  as  one  who  was  neither 
ashamed  or  afraid  to  appear  at  their  tribunal, 
began  (Acts  xxiii)  with  a declaration,  that 
he  had  lived  to  that  day  in  the  exercise  of  a 
good  conscience ; but  Ananias,  the  high- 
priest,  forgetting  his  character  as  a judge, 
commanded  those  who  stood  near  to  strike 
him  on  the  face.  The  apostle  severely  re- 
buked his  partiality,  in  perverting  the  cause 
of  justice,  and  warned  him  of  the  righteous 
judgment  of  God,  the  supreme  Judge,  who 
would  surely  punish  his  hypocrisy. f His  re- 
ply to  those  who  reproved  him  for  speaking 
in  such  terms  to  the  high-priest,  seems  to 
intimate,  that  the  injurious  treatment  he  had 
received  had  raised  an  undue  warmth  in  his 
spirit,  though  it  may  be  supposed  that  he 
denounced  his  future  doom  under  a superior 
and  prophetic  impulse;  but  knowing  that 
the  council  was  composed  of  Pharisees  and 
Sadducees,  who  were  at  variance  amongst 
themselves  about  several  weighty  points, 
particularly  the  doctrine  of  a resurrection, 
he  declared  himself  a Pharisee,  and  that  the 
opposition  he  met  with  from  the  Sadducees, 
was  owing  to  his  belief  and  hope  in  that  doc- 
trine. The  Pharisees  immediately  suspended 
their  present  resentment,  to  embrace  the 
occasion  offered  of  opposing  their  o.j3  antago- 


* A Roman  citizen  might  be  bound  with  a chain,  but 
not  tied  with  thongs,  or  beaten  with  rods:  “ Facinus  est 
vincere  civem  Romanuin.  scelus  verberari  ” — Cicero. 

t Thou  whited  wall!— A clay  wall,  glossed  over  with 
white,  is  an  apt  emblem  of  a man  who  carries  on  a ma- 
licious design  under  the  pretence  and  forms  of  justice 
Hateful  is  the  character  and  dreadfully  dangerous  th« 
condition  of  such. 


70 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


fiistS,  and,  upon  this  issue,  espoused  his 
cause,  declaring  him  innocent;  and  said, 
that  if  a spirit  or  angel  (the  existence  of 
both  which  the  Sadducees  denied)  had 
spoken  to  him,  they  ought  not  to  fight 
against  God  by  refusing  to  hear  him.  Upon 
this  a great  dissension  took  place,  and  Ly- 
sias, fearing  that  Paul  would  be  torn  in 
pieces  between  the  contending  parties,  put 
an  end  to  the  conference,  and  ordered  the 
soldiers  to  take  him  by  force,  and  secure  him 
in  the  castle.  It  is  indeed  often  well  for 
believers,  that  the  people  of  the  world, 
though  agreed  in  one  point,  namely,  to  op- 
pose the  gospel,  are  divided  and  subdivided 
in  other  respects ; so  that,  for  the  sake  of  a 
favourite  passion,  or  to  cross  an  opposite  in- 
terest, they  will  sometimes  protect  those 
whom  they  would  otherwise  willingly  de- 
stroy. 

The  next  night  he  received  full  amends 
for  all  he  had  suffered,  and  was  confirmed 
against  the  utmost  efforts  of  his  enemies’ 
malice ; for  the  Lord  Jesus,  whom  he  served, 
vouchsafed  to  appear  to  him  in  a vision, 
commanded  him  to  be  of  good  cheer,  owned 
his  gracious  acceptance  of  his  late  testimony 
in  Jerusalem,  and  promised  that  none  should 
hinder  him  the  honour  of  bearing  witness  to 
his  truth  at  Rome  likewise.  The  world  has 
been  sometimes  surprised  at  the  confidence 
which  the  faithful  servants  of  Christ  have 
shown  in  the  midst  of  dangers,  and  in  the 
face  of  death;  but  if  their  supports  were 
known,  the  wonder  would  cease.  If  the 


| 


Lord  speaks,  his  word  is  effectual ; and  when  | 
he  says,  Be  of  good  courage,  and  fear  not ! 
his  people,  out  of  weakness,  are  made  strong. 

Little  were  the  incredulous  JewTs  aware 
of  what  a powder  and  vigilance  were  engaged 
in  his  preservation;  and,  therefore,  impa- 
tient of  delays,  they  resolved  to  destroy  him 
immediately.  To  manifest  their  resolution, 
and  to  quicken  their  diligence,  more  than 
forty  of  them  bound  themselves,  under  the 
penalty  of  the  great  curse,  or  anathema,  not  I 
to  eat  or  drink  till  they  had  killed  him.  | 
They  acquainted  the  priests  and  rulers  with  ! 
their  engagement,  and  proposed  that  they ! 
should  request  Lysias  to  order  him  once  j 
more  to  appear  before  them  in  the  council, ! 
and  that  then  those  who  had  combined  in  ! 
this  oath  would  be  ready  to  assassinate  him.  I 
But  no  counsel  or  device  can  stand  against 1 
the  Lord  ! This  black  design  was,  by  some 
means,  providentially  made  known  to  a 
young  man,  who*  wras  Paul’s  sister’s  son, 
who  gave  notice  of  it  first  to  him,  and  then, 
by  his  desire,  to  Lysias,  who,  finding  the 
Jews  implacably  bent  against  Paul’s  life,  de- 
termined to  place  him  farther  out  of  their 
reach,  and  accordingly  sent  him  away,  that 
same  night,  under  a strong  guard,  who  con- 
ducted him  to  Csesarea,  and  delivered  him  to 
Felix  the  Roman  governor,  together  with  a 


[book  n. 

letter  from  Lysias,  importing  his  care  to  pre- 
serve the  prisoner,  because  he  understood 
him  to  be  a Roman  citizen,  and  that  he  had 
commanded  his  accusers  to  follow.  Thus  the 
conspiracy  which  his  enemies  had  formed  to 
destroy  him,  proved  the  occasion  of  his  deli- 
verance out  of  their  hands. 

In  about  five  days  afterwards,  Ananias  the 
high-priest,  with  the  elders  of  the  council, 
appeared  before  Felix  against  Paul,  Acts 
xxiv.  The  charge  was  opened  by  Tertullus, 
a venal  orator,  or  advocate,  whom  they  had 
retained  for  this  purpose : who  began  with  a 
commendation  of  the  governor,  in  terms 
which  might  have  suited  the  illustrious  ac- 
tions and  wise  measures  of  princes  studious 
of  the  public  good,  but  were  ill  applied  to 
Felix  (who  was  infamous  for  his  cruelty  and 
oppression,)  and  in  the  name  of  the  Jews 
who  hated  him.  But  enmity  to  the  gospel 
will  make  men  stoop  to  the  meanest  flattery 
and  servility,  if  by  that  means  they  have 
hope  of  gaining  their  point ! The  sum  of 
the  accusation  was,  that  Paul  was  an  enemy 
to  church  and  state,  a disturber  of  the  esta- 
blished religion,  and  a mover  of  sedition 
against  the  government ; to  which  was  add- 
ed, as  a popular  proof  of  the  charge,  that  he 
was  a ringleader  of  the  sect  or  heresy  of  the 
Nazarenes,  so  called  from  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
who  was  crucified  by  a former  governor  for 
asserting  himself  to  be  a king.  'Thus  much 
seems  implied  in  the  term  Nazarene,  as  the 
Jews  used  it.  The  apostle  began  his  defence 
with  a protestation  of  his  innocence,  as  to 
any  design  of  moving  sedition  or  tumult, 
which  he  said  his  enemies  were  unable  to 
prove  by  a single  fact : he  proceeded  to  in 
form  the  governor  of  the  true  motives  of  theft 
enmity  against  him,  and  acknowledged  that 
he  worshipped  God  in  a way  which  they 
stigmatized  with  the  name  of  heresy  or  divi- 
sion ; for  the  proper*  meaning  of  heresy  is 
no  more  than  sect  or  party.  By  farther  de- 
claring, that  he  worshipped  the  God  of  his 
fathers,  and  believed  all  things  written  in  the 
law  and  the  prophets,  he  proved,  from  the  ob- 
ject and  the  manner  of  his  worship,  that  he 
was  not  guilty  of  any  blameable  innovations ; 
he  professed  the  hope  of  a resurrection, 
which  his  enemies  could  not  but  allow,  and 
that  it  was  his  constant  studyf  (Acts  xxiv. 


* As  the  apostle  only  cautions  Titus  to  reject  or  avoid 
a heretic.  Tit.  iii.  10.  but  has  not  defined  him  expressly, 
many  writers  and  teachers  have  had  a fair  field  to  ex- 
ercise their  skill  or  their  passions  upon  the  subject;  yet 
the  question  is  far  from  determined  to  this  day.  Some 
would  treat  all  those  as  heretics,  who  differ  from  them 
either  in  judgment  or  practice ; others  explain  the  word 
quite  away,  as  though  the  admonition  to  avoid  a here- 
tic, was  wholly  unnecessary.  Perhaps  the  advice  to 
Titus,  is  nearly,  if  not  exactly,  equivalent  to  Rom.  xvi 
17.  The  spirit  of  truth  produces  unity:  the  spirit  ol 
division  is  heresy.  And  the  man  who  fiercely  stickles 
for  opinions  of  his  own.  who  acts  contrary  to  the  peace- 
able. forbearing,  humble  spirit  of  the  gospel,  who  affects 
to  form  a party,  and  to  be  thought  considerable  in  it,  is 
so  far  a heretic. 

t The  Greek  word  (xc-xiv)  here  used,  denotes  tk* 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


71 


CHAP.  I.] 

16,)  and  endeavour  to  maintain  a con- 
science void  of  offence ; and,  added,  that  it 
was  not  he,  but  the  Jews  themselves,  who 
had  raised  the  tumult,  by  assaulting  him, 
when  he  was  peaceably  attending  in  the 
temple,  according  to  the  prescribed  rules. 
He  observed,  that  his  first  accusers  were  not 
present,  as  they  ought  to  have  been;  and 
challenged  any  who  were  within  hearing  to 
prove  their  allegations  in  any  one  instance. 

Felix,  having  perhaps  a favourable  opinion 
of  the  Christian  profession,  which  had  been 
settled  some  time  at  Caesarea,  and  being 
likewise  desirous  of  further  information,  de- 
ferred the  full  discussion  of  the  affair  till  the 
arrival  of  Lysias,  and  committed  Paul,  in  the 
mean  time,  to  the  care  of  a centurion,  as  a 
prisoner  at  large,  allowing  him  to  go  abroad 
in  the  city,  and  giving  his  friends  liberty  to 
visit  him  at  home.  And  thus  he  was  provi- 
dentially delivered  from  the  blood-thirsty 
Jews,  and  found  an  asylum  in  the  Roman 
power,  which  they  had  endeavoured  to  en- 
gage for  his  destruction. 

a.  d.  59.]  He  was  sent  for  not  long  after, 
by  Felix,  and  discoursed  before  him  and  his 
wife  Drusilla  concerning  the  faith  of  Christ. 
Curiosity  was  the  governor’s  motive ; but  the 
apostle,  who  knew  his  character,  was  faithful 
to  him,  and  would  not  speak  of  the  faith  of 
Christ  only,  to  one  who  could  not  understand 
it,  but  made  a home  application  by  enlarging 
on  righteousness,  temperance,  and  the  im- 
portant consequences  of  a future  judgment. 
These  were  fit  topics  to  press  upon  an  unjust 
and  rapacious  governor,  who  lived  in  adul- 
tery, Drusilla  (his  reputed  wife,)  having  for- 
saken a lawful  husband  to  live  with  him. 
She  was  by  birth  a Jewess,  daughter  of  the 
Herod  whose  death  we  have  already  men- 
tioned ; and  having  renounced  her  religion 
and  her  husband,  for  Felix,  was,  by  the  judg- 
ment of  God,  given  up  to  hardness  of  heart ; 
so  that  it  does  not  appear  that  the  apostle’s 
discourse  made  any  impression  upon  her.  It 
was  otherwise  with  Felix,  who,  though  a 
wicked  man,  had  sinned  against  less  light : 
he  trembled  at  wThat  he  heard,  and  not  able 
to' conceal  his  concern,  he  cut  short  the  in- 
terview, with  a promise  to  send  for  him 
again,  at  a convenient  season.  So  great 
sometimes  is  the  power  of  truth,  when  faith- 
fully enforced ! With  this  only  advantage 
on  his  side,  Paul  the  prisoner  triumphs  over 
a haughty  governor,  and  makes  him  tremble. 


study,  diligence,  and  proficiency  of  a person  who  is  de- 
sirous to  excel  and  be  eminent  in  any  particular  art; 
as  a painter,  for  instance,  he  searches  out  the  best  mas- 
ters and  the  best  pieces,  he  studies  and  copies  the  beau- 
ties of  others’  works,  and  is  continually  retouching  and 
improving  upon  his  own  ; his  acquaintance,  reflections, 
and  recreations,  are  all  accommodated  to  his  main  pur- 
pose; and  though  his  pencil  is  sometimes  at  rest,  his 
imagination  is  seldom  idle.  Similar  to  this  is  the  exer- 
cise of  a good  conscience  formed  upon  the  model  of  the 
scriptures,  and  improved  by  diligence,  meditation,  ex- 
amination, and  experience. 


Great  likewise  is  the  power  of  sin!  Felix 
trembled  at  the  review  of  the  past,  and  the 
prospect  of  the  future ; but  he  could  not 
stop;  he  found  some  avocation  for  his  pre- 
sent relief,  and  put  off  his  most  important 
concerns  to  a future  opportunity,  which  it  is 
probable  never  came.  He  saw  and  heard 
Paul  afterwards ; but  the  same  man  had  no 
more  the  same  influence ; the  accompanying 
force  of  the  Spirit  was  withheld;  and  then 
he  had  no  farther  view  in  conversing  with 
him,  but  the  hope  of  receiving  money  for 
his  enlargement.  When  the  apostle  had 
continued  in  this  situation  about  two  years, 
Felix  was  recalled  from  his  government.  He 
had  governed  the  Jews  with  severity  and  in- 
justice, and  had  reason  to  fear  they  would 
accuse  him  to  the  emperor : therefore,  to  in- 
gratiate himself  with  them,  he  left  Paul  in 
his  confinement,  thinking  that  the  detention 
of  the  person  they  hated  might  make  them 
more  readily  excuse  what  was  past ; or  at 
least,  he  durst  not  provoke  them  farther  by 
releasing  him. 

a.  d.  60.]  When  Festus,  who  succeeded 
Felix  in  the  government,  went  up  to  Jeru- 
salem (Acts  xxv,)  the  high-priest  and  elders 
applied  to  him,  and  requested  that  Paul  might 
be  sent  thither  to  be  tried  before  the  council ; 
and  they  appointed  proper  instruments  to 
assault  and  murder  him  in  the  journey.  It 
seems  they  expected  this  favour  would  be 
easily  granted,  as  it  is  usual  for  governors,  at 
their  first  coming  among  a people,  to  do  some 
popular  act;  but  Festus  refused,  and  com- 
manded them  to  follow  him  to  Caesarea,  where 
he  himself  would  judge  in  the  cause.  The 
Jews  accordingly  exerted  themselves  in  one 
more  effort,  and  when  Festus  was  returned 
to  Caesarea,  presented  themselves  before  him 
on  an  appointed  day ; and  Paul  being  brought 
into  the  court,  they  accused  him  heavily,  as 
they  had  done  before,  and  to  as  little  effect, 
not  being  able  to  prove  any  thing  against  him, 
or  to  invalidate  his  protestation  that  he  had 
committed  no  offence,  either  against  the  law, 
or  the  temple,  or  the  Roman  government. 
Festus,  who  had  refused  to  send  him  to  Je- 
rusalem before,  was  now  willing  to  oblige 
them,  perceiving  the  controversy  was  of  a re- 
ligious kind,  and  what  he  had  little  knowledge 
of;  he  therefore  asked  Paul  if  he  was  willing 
to  be  tried,  in  his  presence,  before  the  council 
at  Jerusalem.  The  apostle,  who  knew  what 
treatment  he  might  expect  from  the  Jews, 
answered,  That  he  was  then  at  Caesar’s  judg- 
ment-seat, where  he  ought  to  be  tried,  and 
that,  if  found  guilty,  he  was  not  unwilling 
to  suffer;  but  that,  against  the  proposal  of 
being  delivered  up  to  those  who  thirsted  for 
his  blood,  he  appealed  to  Caesar.  This  was 
one  privilege  of  a Roman  citizen,  that,  when 
he  thought  himself  aggrieved  in  an  inferior 
court,  he  might,  by  entering  such  an  appeal, 
put  a stop  to  proceedings,  and  refer  the  cause 


72 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


to  the  immediate  determination  of  the  em- 
peror. From  the  example  of  St.  Paul,  who 
counted  not  his  life  dear,  but  was  willing,  not 
only  to  be  bound,  but  to  die  for  the  Lord 
Jesus,  we  learn  that  it  is  very  allowable  for  a 
Christian  to  avail  himself  of  the  laws  and  pri- 
vileges of  his  country,  when  unjustly  perse- 
cuted for  righteousness  sake;  and  perhaps, 
in  some  cases,  it  would  be  blameable  to  omit 
it.  Civil  liberty  is  a depositum  with  which 
we  are  entrusted  for  posterity,  and,  by  all 
lawful  means,  should  be  carefully  preserved. 
Festus,  after  having  consulted  with  his  coun- 
cil and  lawyers  upon  this  unexpected  turn, 
admitted  the  appeal,  and  determined  he  should 
be  sent  to  Rome.  Paul  had  long  had  a desire 
to  visit  the  believers  in  that  city,  and  had 
formed  some  plans  concerning  it.  But  it  is 
not  in  man  that  walketh  to  direct  his  steps. 
His  way  was  now  opened  in  a manner  he 
had  not  thought  of,  but  in  such  a manner  as 
made  it  more  evident  that  his  bonds  proved 
to  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel. 

Soon  after  this,  Agrippa,  son  of  the  late 
Herod,  who  had  large  territories,  and  the 
title  of  king,  under  the  Romans,  came  with 
his  sister  Bernice,  to  congratulate  Festus 
upon  his  accession  to  his  government : he  was 
a man  of  a fair  character,  a professed  Jew, 
but  possessed  of  moderation  and  prudence. 
During  their  stay,  Festus  informed  them  of 
what  had  lately  happened  concerning  Paul. 
The  whole  that  he  understood  of  the  affair 
was,  that  he  had  not  been  guilty  of  any  crime, 
but  that  his  accusers  had  certain  questions 
against  him,  of  their  own  superstitions,  and 
concerning  one  Jesus,  who  was  dead,  and 
whom  Paul  affirmed  to  be  alive.  To  him  the 
life  and  the  death  of  Jesus  were  points  of 
equal  indifference ; not  so  to  those  who  be- 
lieve he  died  for  them,  and  who  expect  that, 
because  he  lives,  they  shall  live  also.  This 
imperfect  account  made  Agrippa  desirous  to 
hear  Paul  himself ; and  accordingly,  the  next 
day,  Agrippa,  Bernice,  and  Festus,  being 
seated  in  court,*  attended  by  their  officers 
and  train,  and  a number  of  the  principal  peo- 
ple, Paul  was  once  more  brought  forth  to 
speak  in  public  for  himself,  Acts  xxvi.  On 
this  occasion  he  addressed  himself  particu- 
larly to  Agrippa ; and,  having  expressed  his 
satisfaction  that  he  was  permitted  to  speak 
before  one  who  was  so  well  acquainted  with 
the  laws  and  customs  of  the  Jews,  he  related 
the  cause  of  his  present  confinement : he  pro- 
fessed his  faith  and  hope  in  the  scriptures; 
and  then,  as  he  had  done  before,  he  gave  him 
an  account  of  the  extraordinary  means  by 
which  he  had  been  changed-}-  from  a perse- 


* The  apology  St.  Paul  made  for  himself  was  not  his 
trial.  He  had  already  stopped  all  proceedings  at  law  by 
his  appeal  to  Caesar;  nor  was  Festus  then  as  a judge 
upon  his  tribunal. 

t Speaking  of  his  past  conduct  towards  the  disciples, 
he  calls  it  madness —being  exceedingly , or  (as  we  ex- 
press it,)  i aging  mad  against  them.  A man  in  this  state 


[book  II. 

cutor  to  a follower  of  Jesus,  in  his  journey  to 
Damascus.  His  defence,  therefore  (as  has 
been  formerly  observed,)  was  rather  experi- 
mental than  argumentative,  and  made  very 
different  impressions  upon  his  hearers.  Fes- 
tus, who  seems  to  have  had  a good  opinion 
of  his  sincerity  and  intention,  yet,  supposing 
no  man  in  his  sober  senses  could  believe  such 
a strange  story,  interrupted  him  in  his  nar- 
ration, and,  with  an  air  rather  of  pity  than 
indignation,  said,  “ Paul,  thou  art  beside  thy- 
self; much  learning  hath  made  thee  mad.”! 
A similar  judgment  is  passed  by  too  many 
upon  all  who  profess  an  acquaintance  with 
the  life  of  faith  in  an  unseen  Jesus;  but  or- 
dinarily, now,  the  effect  is  not  ascribed  to 
the  excess  of  learning,  but  to  the  want  of  it, 
as,  on  the  other  hand,  a man  who  maintains 
the  wildest  absurdities,  puts  his  judgment 
and  understanding  to  little  hazard  in  the 
world’s  esteem,  if  his  chimeras  are  set  off 
with  a competent  apparatus  of  literature. 
Agrippa,  however,  was  differently  affected, 
especially  when  Paul  made  a bold  appeal  to 
himself,  concerning  the  notoriety  of  the  facts 
which  had  lately  happened,  and  the  truth  of 
the  prophecies  with  which  they  were  con- 
nected. Here  the  power  of  truth  triumphed 
again,  and  Agrippa  was  so  struck,  that,  with- 
out regarding  the  numerous  assembly,  or  the 
displeasure  such  a declaration  might  give 
both  to  the  Jews  and  Romans,  particularly 
to  Festus,  who  had  expressed  his  sentiment 
just  before,  he  gave  way  to  the  emotions  of 
his  mind,  and  said  aloud,  “ Almost  thou  per- 
suadest  me  to  be  a Christian.”  Yet  this  was 
but  an  involuntary  conviction;  it  did  honour 
to  the  apostle,  but  was  of  no  benefit  to  him- 
self. And  the  concession,  which,  at  first  view, 
seems  to  proceed  from  an  ingenuous  spirit, 
when  closely  examined,  amounts  but  to  this, 
that  though  Agrippa  was  indeed  convinced 
of  the  truth,  his  heart  was  so  attached  to  the 
present  evil  world,  that  he  had  neither  cou- 
rage nor  will  to  follow  it;  as  when  we  say 
of  a picture,  It  looks  almost  alive,  we  do  not 
mean  strictly  that  there  is  any  more  life  in 
the  painting  than  in  the  canvass  on  which  it 
is  drawn,  but  only  that  the  resemblance  is 
strong:  so  the  almost  Christian,  however 
specious  in  his  professions,  is  still  destitute 
of  that  living  principle  which  alone  can  en- 
able him  to  make  them  good,  and  is,  in  reality, 
an  utter  stranger  to  true  Christianity.  In  the 


will  attack  any  person  he  meets ; he  waits  for  no  provo- 
cation, listens  to  no  entreaty,  regards  no  consequences. 
Thus  the  apostle  judged  of  himself  when  a persecutor 
of  the  church;  and  the  spirit  of  persecution  in  every  age 
has  been  the  same.  May  God  restore  those  to  their  right 
minds  who  are  governed  by  it! 

| His  answer  to  Festus  is  expressed  with  much  accu- 
racy and  precision.  “ I am  not  mad,  most  noble  Fes- 
tus ; but  speak  forth  {xn-o<poi-yyoy.xi)  the  words  of  truth 
and  soberness.”  Madness  discovers  itself  either  in  the 
apprehension  of  a false  object,  or  in  the  false  apprehen 
sion  of  a true  one.  The  things  he  spoke  of  were  true 
in  themselves,  and  his  ideas  of  them  just  and  propor- 
tionate. 


chap,  i.]  AFTER  THE 

graceful  return  the  apostle  made  to  the  king’s 
acknowledgment  he  hinted  at  this  defect, 
wishing  that  both  Agrippa,  and  all  who  heard 
him,  were  not  only  almost,  but  altogether,  as 
he  was  himself,  with  an  exception  to  the 
chains  he  wore  for  the  cause  of  the  gospel. 
This  answer  discovers,  in  one  view,  the  con- 
fidence he  had  in  his  cause,  the  happy  frame 
of  his  mind,  the  engaging  turn  of  his  address, 
and  his  unbounded  benevolence:  he  couJd 
wish  nothing  better  than  what  he  himself 
felt,  to  his  dearest  friends,  and  he  wished  no- 
thing worse  to  his  greatest  enemies;  nay,  he 
wished  that  his  enemies  might,  if  possible, 
experience  all  his  comforts,  without  any  of 
his  trials.  When  Festus  and  Agrippa  were 
withdrawn,  they  agreed,  in  their  opinion, 
that  he  had  done  nothing  deserving  of  death, 
or  even  of  imprisonment,  and  that  he  might 
have  been  released,  if  he  had  not  himself  pre- 
vented it  by  appealing  to  Caesar. 

In  consequence  of  the  determination  to 
send  him  to  Rome  (Acts  xxvii,)  he  was  com- 
mitted to  the  custody  of  a centurion  named 
Julius,  with  whom  he  embarked  in  a vessel 
that  was  on  a trading  voyage  to  several  parts 
of  the  Lesser  Asia.  Aristarchus,  and  some 
other  of  his  friends,  went  with  him,  and  par- 
ticularly the  evangelist  Luke,  who  seems  to 
have  been  the  inseparable  companion  of  his 
travels  from  the  first  time  he  was  at  Troas. 
They  touched  the  following  day  at  Sidon, 
where  the  centurion  gave  him  liberty  to  re- 
fresh himself  and  visit  his  friends.  At  their 
next  port,  Myria  in  Lycia,  a vessel  offering 
which  was  bound  directly  for  Italy,  they 
went  on  board  her.  In  the  beginning  of  this 
passage  they  were  retarded  by  contrary 
winds.  At  length  they  reached  the  island  of 
Crete  (now  called  Candia;)  and  having  put 
into  a port,  called  the  Fair-havens,  Paul 
would  have  persuaded  them  to  have  staid 
there,  intimating  that,  as  the  winter  was  now 
advancing,  they  would  meet  with  many  in- 
conveniences and  dangers  if  they  ventured 
to  proceed  any  further.  Long  voyages  were 
seldom  attempted  during  the  winter  in  those 
days,  or,  for  many  ages  after,  till  the  know- 
ledge of  the  compass  made  way  for  those 
great  improvements  in  navigation  which  now 
embolden  the  mariner  to  sail  indifferently  at 
any  season  of  the  year.  But  it  is  probable  the 
apostle’s  precaution  was  not  merely  founded 
upon  the  obvious  disadvantages  of  the  season, 
but  rather  upon  an  extraordinary  pre-intima- 
tion of  what  was  soon  'to  happen.  But  his 
remonstrance  was  over-ruled,  the  centurion 
preferring  the  judgment  of  the  master  of  the 
ship,  who  thought  it  best,  if  possible,  to  reach 
another  haven  at  the  west  end  of  the  island, 
which  was  thought  to  be  more  commodious 
and  safe  than  the  place  Paul  proposed.  A 
favourable  wind  springing  from  the  south, 
determined  their  resolve,  and  they  set  sail 
Vol.  II.  K 


ASCENSION.  73 

wTith  a good  confidence  of  soon  reaching  their 
desired  port. 

There  is  little  doubt  but  Paul’s  case  and 
character  had  by  this  time  engaged  the  notice 
of  many  of  his  fellow-passengers  in  the  ship. 
Upon  a superficial  inquiry,  they  would  learn, 
that  he  was  the  follower  of  one  Jesus,  who 
had  been  crucified;  that  he  was  esteemed  a 
setter-forth  of  strange  gods,  and  charged  with 
having  disturbed  the  public  peace  wherever 
he  came.  He  probably  took  frequent  occa- 
sions to  speak  of  his  Lord  and  Master  to  those 
about  him;  and  as  he  had  several  compa- 
nions, the  manner  of  their  social  worship  could 
hardly  pass  unobserved ; but  no  emergency 
had  as  yet  occurred  to  manifest  the  solidity 
and  force  of  his  principles  to  full  advantage, 
and  to  make  it  evident  to  all  with  whom  he 
sailed,  that  his  God  was  far  unlike  the  idols 
of  the  Heathens ; and  that  the  religion  which 
prompted  him  to  do  and  suffer  so  much  for 
the  sake  of  Jesus,  was  founded,  not  in  the 
imaginations  and  inventions  of  men,  but  in 
reality  and  truth.  In  prosperous  circum- 
stances, most  people  are  easily  satisfied  with 
their  own  principles,  and  are  ready  to  take 
it  for  granted,  that  even  the  notions  received 
from  no  better  source  than  tradition  or  cus- 
tom, cannot  be  wrong,  or  at  least  will  not  be 
dangerous:  but  it  is  in  a season  of  common 
distress  that  the  truth  and  efficacy  of  vital 
religion  appear  with  the  most  incontestible 
authority.  The  God  who  alone  can  deliver 
when  all  hope  of  safety  is  taken  away,  and 
the  religion  which  can  inspire  a man  with 
confidence  and  peace,  when  there  is  nothing 
but  dismay  and  confusion  around  him,  will 
then  extort  some  acknowledgment,  even  from 
those  who  had  before  thought  of  them  with 
indifference.  From  these  considerations,  we 
may  collect  one  general  reason  why  the  Lord, 
who,  by  his  divine  providence,  adjusts  the 
time  and  circumstances  of  every  event,  and 
without  whose  permission  not  a sparrow  can 
fall  to  the  ground,  permits  his  faithful  people 
to  be  so  often  exercised  with  severe  trials : 
it  is,  to  manifest  that  their  hopes  are  well- 
grounded  ; that  they  have  not  taken  up  with 
words  and  notions,  but  have  a real  and  sure 
support,  and  can  hope  and  rejoice  in  God 
under  those  pressures  which  deprive  others 
of  all  their  patience,  and  all  their  courage ; 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  evince  that  his 
power  and  faithfulness  are  surely  engaged 
on  their  behalf;  that  he  puts  an  honour  upon 
their  prayers,  is  near  to  help  them  in  the 
time  of  trouble,  and  can  deliver  them  out  ot 
their  greatest  extremities.  We  are  not,  then, 
to  wonder  that  this  favoured  servant  of  the 
Lord,  after  having  endured  so  many  suffer 
ings  and  hardships  upon  the  land,  was  ex 
posed,  in  the  course  of  this  voyage,  to  equa» 
dangers  and  difficulties  upon  the  sea;  foi 
they  had  not  long  quitted  their  last  port,  be- 


74 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


fore  their  hopes  of  gaining-  a better  were 
blasted:  they  were  overtaken  by  a sudden 
and  violent  storm.  The  name  given  it  by  the 
historian,  Euroclydon,  expresses  its  direction 
to  have  been  from  the  eastern  quarter,  and 
its  energy  upon  the  waves.  The  tempest 
irresistibly  overpowered  the  mariners,  and 
rendered  their  art  impracticable  and  vain: 
they  were  compelled  to  abandon  the  ship  to 
the  direction  of  the  wind,  and  were  hurried 
away,  they  knew  not  where.  Mention  is 
made  of  the  difficulty  they  had  to  secure  the 
ship's  boat,  as  the  only  probable  means  of 
escaping,  if  they  should  be  wrecked,  which 
yet,  in  the  event,  was  wholly  useless  to  them ; 
lik  iwise  of  their  endeavours  to  strengthen 
the  sliip  by  girding  her  with  ropes,  and  of 
their  throwing  a considerable  part  of  the 
lading  and  tackling  into  the  sea.  In  this  dis- 
tressed situation,  expecting  every  hour  to  be 
either  swallowed  up  by  the  waves,  or  dashed 
to  pieces  against  unknown  rocks  or  shores, 
they  continued  fourteen  days. — When  they 
were  almost  worn  out  with  hardship  and 
anxiety,  and  there  was  no  human  probability 
of  deliverance,  the  Lord  manifested  the  care 
he  had  of  his  servants.  The  seamen  had  not 
seen  sun  or  stars  for  many  days ; but  his  eye 
had  been  upon  Paul  and  his  companions  every 
moment.  Xo  one  on  board  could  even  con- 
jecture into  what  part  of  the  sea  the  ship 
was  driven;  but  the  Lord  knew,  and  his  an- 
gels knew : and  now  one  was  commanded  to 
appear,  to  comfort  the  apostle,  and  to  give 
him  a word  of  comfort  for  all  on  board.  Upon 
this  he  addressed  the  people  in  the  sliip,  ex- 
horting them  to  take  some  food,  and  to  be  of 
good  courage ; for  that  the  God  to  whom  he 
belonged,  and  whom  he  served,  had  given 
him  assurance,  by  an  angel,  not  only  of  his 
own  safety,  but  that  the  lives  of  all  on  board 
should  be  preserved  for  his  sake;  that  the 
ship  would  be  cast  upon  a certain  island ; but 
he  fully  relied  on  the  promise,  that  not  one 
of  them  should  be  lost.  He  had  been  told, 
that  he  must  stand  before  Ceesar,  which  was 
a sufficient  earnest  of  his  preservation ; for 
who,  or  what,  can  disappoint  the  purpose  of 
God ! Amidst  all  these  threatening  appear- 
ances, Paul  was,  in  reality,  as  safe  in  the 
storm  as  Caesar  could  be  thought  upon  the 
throne.  And  thus  all  his  servants  are  in- 
violably preserved  by  his  watchful  providence; 
so  that  neither  elements  nor  enemies  can 
hurt  them,  till  the  work  he  has  appointed 
them  is  accomplished. 

At  length  the  seamen  perceived  indications 
that  they  were  drawing  near  to  land : and 
when  they  were  driven  into  a convenient 
depth  of  water,  they  cast  anchor,  and  waited 
for  the  approach  of  day.  In  this  interval  the 
people  were  encouraged  by  Paul's  advice 
and  example,  to  eat  a hearty  meal,  by  which 
their  strength  and  spirits  were  recruited  to 
sustain  the"  fatigue  they  were  yet  to  under- 


[book  ii. 

j go.  In  the  morning  they  saw  an  island ; but 
; knew  it  not.  The  mariners,  regarding  their 
own  safety  only,  were  about  to  make  their 
escape  in  the  boat ; but  Paul,  informing  the 
soldiers  that  they  could  not  be  saved  unless 
the  seamen  remained  in  the  ship,  they  paid 
so  much  regard  to  his  judgment  as  immedi- 
| ately  to  cut  the  ropes  by  which  the  boat  was 
| fastened,  and  give  her  up  to  the  sea. 

Their  only  remaining  resource  was,  to 
j force  the  ship  upon  the  shore,  in  a place  where 
| landing  would  be  most  practicable  ; and  of 
this  the  mariners  were  the  most  proper  judges. 

| If  this  island, as  is  generally  supposed,  was  that 
j which  we  now  call  Malta,  we  know  that  it  is 
almost  environed  with  rocks.  They  having 
therefore  discovered  an  open  bay,  with  a 
beach  of  sand  or  pebbles,1*  * endeavoured  to  run 
the  ship  there ; but  had  the  management  of 
this  business  been  left  to  the  soldiers  and  pas- 
sengers, who  were  unexperienced  in  sea- 
affairs,  they  might  probably  have  let  her  drive 
at  random  against  the  rocks  where  an  escape 
would,  humanly  speaking,  have  been  impos- 
sible. In  this  view,  we  may  observe,  that  the 
apostle’s  firm  confidence  in  the  promise  he 
had  received  was  connected  with  prudent 
attention  to  the  means  in  their  power,  from 
which  the  promise  received  was  so  far  from 
' dispensing  them,  that  it  was  their  cliief  en- 
couragement to  be  diligent  in  employing  them. 
This  incident  may  be  applied  to  points  of 
: more  general  importance  : and,  if  carefully 
: attended  to,  might  have  determined  or  pre- 
; vented  many  unnecessary  and  perplexing 
! disputes  concerning  the  divine  decrees,  and 
| their  influence  on  the  contingencies  of  hu- 
I man  life.  What  God  has  appointed  shall 
I surely  come  to  pass:  but  in  such  a manner, 
that  all  the  means  and  secondary  causes,  by 
which  he  has  determined  to  fulfil  his  de- 
signs, shall  have  their  proper  place  and  sub- 
serviency. Accordingly  they  made  the  best 
of  their  way  to  the  shore : but  before  they 
quite  reached  it,  the  ship  was  stopped  by  a 
point  or  bank,f  where  her  fore-part  stuck 
fast,  and  remained  immoveable ; but  her  stern 
or  hinder  part,  was  presently  broken  bv  the 
violence  of  the  surges.  In  the  general  con- 
fusion, the  soldiers,  unmindful  how  much  they 
were  indebted  to  Paul,  proposed  that  all  the 
prisoners  should  be  killed  without  distinction, 

! lest  they  should  be  accountable  if  any  of  them 
I escaped  ; but  the  centurion,  who  interested 

j * “They  discovered  a certain  creek  with  a shore." 

1 But  there  was  a shore  afi  round  the  island.  AiyixKo; 

| does  not  express  the  spa-coast  in  general,  or  a rocky 
1 craggy  shore,  but  the  skirts  of  an  open  bay,  convenient 
fur  launching,  landing,  or  drawing  a net  for  fish.  See 
; Matth.  xiii  2.  48;  John  xxi.  4.  A mariner  who  under- 
j stood  Greek  would  perhaps  render  the  sentence  thus 

• Th?v  observed  a certain  bay,  with  a beach."  And  thi> 
th  v chose  as  the  most  likely  place  to  get  safe  to  land. 

| t T:-:u  itixKxmv  is  rendered  in  ourversion,  cplaC'. 

where  two  seas  met;  but  there  is  nothing  answerable  to 
j the  word  met.  Probably  it  means  what  the  mariner 
j call  a spit,  or  point  of  sand  running  off  from  the  shore 
I and  which  had  a sufficient  depth  of  water  on  either  side. 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


75 


CHAP.  I.] 


himself  in  his  preservation,  rejected  the  mo- 
tion, and  commanded  every  one  to  do  what 
they  could  for  their  own  safety.  Many  who 
could  swim  cast  themselves  into  the  sea ; the 
rest  availed  themselves  of  planks  and  broken 
pieces  of  the  ship ; and  the  merciful  provi- 
dence of  the  Lord  gave  their  endeavours  suc- 
cess ; so  that  the  whole  company,  consisting 
of  two  hundred  and  seventy-six  persons,  came 
safe  to  land. 

The  inhabitants  (Acts  xxviii,)  though  call- 
ed barbarians,  received  and  accommodated 
them  with  great  humanity,  and  manifested  a 
tenderness  too  rarely  found  upon  such  occa- 
sions amongst  those  who  bear  the  name  of 
Christians  : they  brought  them  under  cover, 
and  kindled  fires  to  warm  and  dry  them.  The 
apostle,  who  cheerfully  suited  himself  to  all 
circumstances,  assisted  in  supplying  the  fire 
with  fuel ; but  having  gathered  a parcel  of 
sticks,  a viper,  which  was  unperceived  in 
the  midst  of  them,  fastened  itself  upon  his 
hand.  He  had  just  escaped  from  storm  and 
shipwreck,  and  was  exposed  to  as  great  a 
danger  of  another  kind.  Such  is  the  nature 
of  our  present  state  ; and  it  is  a proof  of  our 
pride  and  ignorance,  that  we  are  seldom 
greatly  apprehensive  for  ourselves,  but  when 
some  formidable  appearance  is  before  our 
eyes.  A tempest,  pestilence,  or  earthquake, 
alarms  us,  and  not  without  reason ; but  alas  ! 
we  are  not  such  mighty  creatures,  as  to  have 
nothing  to  fear  but  from  such  powerful 
agents.  A tyle,  a fly,  a hair,  or  a grain  of 
sand,  are  sufficient  instruments,  in  the  hand 
of  God,  to  remove  a king  from  the  throne  to 
the  grave,  or  to  cut  off  the  conqueror  at  the 
head  of  his  victorious  armies.  On  the  other 
hand,  those  who  serve  the  Lord,  and  trust  in 
him,  are  equally  safe  under  all  events;  nei- 
ther storms,  nor  flood,  nor  flames,  nor  the 
many  unthought-of  evils  which  lurk  around 
in  the  smoothest  scenes  of  life,  have  permis- 
sion to  hurt  them  till  their  race  is  finished, 
and  then  it  little  signifies  by  what  means 
they  are  removed  into  their  Master’s  joy. 
The  apostle  in  the  strength  of  divine  faith, 
shook  off  the  venomous  creature  into  the  fire, 
and  remained  unmoved  and  unhurt.  The 
islanders,  -who  saw  what  had  passed,  judged 
at  first  (from  those  faint  apprehensions  of  a 
superior  power  inflicting  punishment  on  the 
wicked,  which  seem  to  remain  in  the  darkest 
and  most  ignorant  nations,)  that  he  was  cer- 
tainly a murderer,  who,  though  he  had  escaped 
the  seas,  was  pursued  by  vengeance,  and 
marked  out  for  destruction  ; but  when,  after 
expecting  for  some  time  to  see  him  drop 
down  dead,  they  found  that  he  had  received 
no  harm,  they  retracted  their  censure,  and 
conceived  him  to  be  a god,  or  something 
more  than  man.  This  event  probably  pre- 
pared them  to  hear  him  with  attention. 

The  apostle  and  his  friends  were  courte- 1 
ously  entertained  three  days  by  Publius,  the  | 


chief  person  of  the  island,  who  resided  near 
the  place  of  their  landing : He  requited  the 
kindness  of  his  host,  by  restoring  to  health  his 
father,  who  had  been  some  time  ill  of  a fever 
and  dysentery.  In  the  same  manner  he  laid 
his  hands  on  many  sick  persons,  who  were 
healed  in  answer  to  his  prayers.  These  ac- 
ceptable services  procured  him  much  favour 
from  the  inhabitants ; and  when,  after  three 
months  stay,  he  was  about  to  depart,  they 
furnished  him  liberally  with  necessary  pro- 
visions for  his  voyage. 

a.  d.  61.]  They  sailed  from  thence  in  a 
ship  of  Alexandria  that  had  wintered  in  the 
island  ; and  stopping  three  days  at  Syracuse 
in  Sicily  soon  after  arrived  at  Rhegium,  and 
from  thence  in  two  days,  at  Puteoli,  near 
Naples,  where  they  disembarked,  and  con- 
tinued a week,  at  the  request  of  the  Chris- 
tians of  the  place.  From  Puteoli  to  Rome 
their  journey  lay  about  one  hundred  miles  by 
land. 

The  disciples  at  Rome  having  heard  of 
Paul’s  approach,  several  of  them  met  him  at 
a place  called  Appii  Forum,  and  another 
party  at  the  Three  Taverns;  the  former 
place  being  about  fifty,  and  the  other  thirty 
miles  from  the  city.  At  the  sight  of  these 
believers,  whom  he  had  loved  unseen,  we 
are  told  he  thanked  God,  and  took  courage. 
Even  the  apostle  Paul,  though  habitually 
flaming  with  zeal  and  love,  was  not  always 
in  the  same  frame.  We  learn  from  his  own 
account  of  himself,  that  he  had  sometimes 
sharp  exercises  of  mind ; and  perhaps  this 
was  such  a time  when  his  thoughts  were 
much  engaged  on  what  awaited  him  upon 
his  arrival  at  Rome,  and  his  appearance  be- 
fore the  cruel  and  capricious  Nero.  The 
Lord  has  so  constituted  his  body,  the  church, 
that  the  different  members  are  needful  and 
helpful  to  each  other,  and  the  stronger  are 
often  indebted  to  the  weaker.  St.  Paul  him- 
self was  revived  and  animated  at  this  junc- 
ture by  the  sight  of  those  who  were  in  every 
respect  inferior  to  him;  it  rejoiced  him  to 
see  that  Christ  his  Lord  was  worshipped  at 
Rome  also;  and  being  in  the  presence  of 
those  with  whom  he  could  open  his  mind, 
and  freely  confer  upon  the  glorious  truths 
that  filled  his  heart,  he  forgot  at  once  the 
fatigue  he  had  lately  suffered,  and  the  future 
difficulties  he  had  reason  to  expect. 

Upon  their  arrival  at  Rome,  the  centurion 
delivered  up  the  prisoners  to  the  proper  of- 
ficer ; but  Paul  had  the  favour  allowed  him 
to  live  in  a house  which  he  hired,  under  the 
guard  of  one  soldier.  Here  he  immediately 
discovered  his  usual  activity  of  spirit  in  his 
Master’s  cause ; and,  without  losing  time, 
sent  on  the  third  day  for  the  principal  per- 
sons of  the  Jews  (according  to  his  general 
custom  of  making  the  first  declarations  of  the 
gospel  to  them,)  and  acquainted  them  with 
the  cause  of  his  prosecution  and  appeal ; he 


76 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


assured  them  that  he  had  no  intention,  in 
vindicating  himsolf,  to  lay  any  thing  to  the 
charge  of  his  own  people  ; adding,  that,  not 
for  any  singularities  of  his  own,  or  for  any 
offence  against  the  law  of  Moses,  but  for  the 
hope  of  Israel,  he  was  bound  with  the  chain* 
he  then  wore.  They  answered  that  they  had 
eceived  no  information  concerning  him  from 
Judea;  but  that  they  understood  the  sect  to 
which  he  professed  an  attachment  was  every 
where  spoken  against ; they  therefore  desired 
to  hear  his  sentiments,  and  appointed  a day 
for  the  purpose,  when  many  of  them  came  to 
him,  and  he  spent  the  whole  day,  from  morn- 
ing till  evening,  in  proving,  confirming,  and 
explaining,  the  nature  and  necessity  of  the 
gospel  and  kingdom  of  Christ,  from  the  books 
of  Moses  and  the  prophets.  His  discourse 
had  good  effect  upon  some,  but  others  be- 
lieved not,  and  they  departed  with  consider- 
able disagreement  among  themselves;  the 
apostle  taking  leave  of  them  with  that  so- 
lemn warning,  which  our  Lord  had  often 
used  in  the  course  of  his  ministry,  from  the 
prophecy  of  Isaiah  (chap.  i.  9,  10,)  de- 
nouncing incurable  and  judicial  blindness 
and  hardness  of  heart  upon  those  who  wil- 
fully rejected  the  proposal  of  the  truth. 

He  remained  a prisoner  in  his  own  hired 
house  for  the  space  of  two  years,  having  an 
unrestrained  liberty  to  receive  all  who  came 
to  him,  and  to  preach  the  glad  tidings  of  sal- 
vation by  Christ ; which  we  learn  from  his 
epistles  (Philip  i.  12,)  he  did  with  so  much 
success,  that  his  imprisonment  evidently 
contributed  to  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel, 
enlarged  the  number  of  believers,  and  ani- 
mated. the  zeal  and  confidence  of  those  who 
had  already  received  faith  and  grace. 

a.  n.  63.]  The  history  of  St.  Luke  ends 
here,  which  I have  followed  more  closely 
than  I at  first  designed,  partly  because  the 
facts  he  has  recorded  suggests  many  reflec- 
tions which  have  more  or  less  a reference  to 
our  main  design,  and  partly  from  a reluc- 
tance to  leave  the  only  sure  and  incontestible 
history  by  which  our  researches  into  the 
establishment  and  state  of  the  primitive 
church  can  be  guided ; for  though  some 
monuments  of  the  early  ages  of  Christianity, 
which  are  still  extant,  have  a great  share  of 
merit,  and  will  afford  us  materials  to  make 
good  our  plan,  yet  they  must  be  selected 
with  caution,  for  it  would  be  a want  of  in- 
genuousness not  to  acknowledge,  that  there 
are  great  mixtures  and  blemishes  to  be 
found  in  the  writings  of  those  who  lived 
nearest  to  the  apostles’  times;  and  in  the 
most  ancient  historical  remains  several  things 
have  a place,  which  show,  that  a spirit  of 

* Among  the  Romans,  the  prisoner  was  always  chain- 
ed to  the  soldier  or  soldiers  who  guarded  him.  St.  Paul 
speaks  of  his  chain  both  to  friends  and  enemies,  with 
an  indifference  that  shows  how  well  content  he  was  to 
wear  it  for  his  Master’s  sake.  See  Ephes.  vi-  20;  9 Tim. 
i.  l(i 


[book  II. 

credulity  and  superstition  had  very  early 
and  extensive  influence  ; the  evident  traces 
of  which  have  given  too  fair  an  occasion  to 
some  persons  of  more  learning  than  candour, 
to  attempt  to  bring  the  whole  of  those  re- 
cords into  disrepute.  But  where  the  cha- 
racteristic genius  and  native  tendency  of  the 
gospel  are  rightly  understood,  and  carefully 
attended  to,  a mind,  not  under  the  power  of 
bias  and  prejudice,  will  be  furnished  with 
sufficient  data , whereby  to  distinguish  what 
is  genuine  and  worthy  of  credit  from  the 
spurious  and  uncertain  additions  which  have 
been  incautiously  received. 

I shall  be  brief  in  deducing  our  history 
from  this  period  to  the  close  of  the  first  cen- 
tury. St.  Paul,  after  more  than  two  years 
confinement  at  Rome,  having  not  yet  finish- 
ed his  appointed  measure  of  service,  was 
providentially  preserved  from  the  designs 
of  all  his  enemies,  and  set  at  liberty.  We 
are  told  by  some,  that  in  pursuance  of  the 
design  he  had  long  before  expressed,  he 
went  into  Spain,  and  from  thence  to  Gaul, 
now  called  France;  nor  have  endeavours 
been  wanting  to  prove,  that  he  preached 
the  gospel  even  in  the  British  isles.  That 
he,  at  some  time,  accomplished  his  desire  of 
visiting  Spain,  is  not  improbable ; but  we 
have  no  certain  evidence  that  he  did  so: 
much  less  is  there  any  ground  for  supposing 
that  he  was  either  in  France  or  Britain. 
From  his  own  writings,  however,  we  have 
good  reason  to  believe,  that,  upon  his  dis- 
mission from  Rome,  he  revisited  the  churches 
of  Syria,  and  some  other  parts  of  Asia ; for, 
in  his  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  he  mentions 
his  purpose  of  seeing  them,  in  company  with 
his  beloved  Timothy ; and  writing  to  Phile- 
mon, who  lived  at  Colosse,  he  requests  him 
to  prepare  him  a lodging,  for  that  he  hoped 
to  be  with  him  shortly.  And  it  was  probably 
in  this  progress  that  he  preached  in  Crete, 
and  committed  the  churches  he  gathered 
there  to  the  care  of  Titus ; for  we  have  no 
account  in  the  Acts,  of  his  having  visited 
that  island  before,  except  the  little  time  he 
touched  there  in  his  passage  to  Rome,  which 
seems  not  to  have  been  sufficient  for  so  great 
a work.  How  he  was  employed  afterwards 
we  know  not;  but  it  is  generally  agreed, 
that,  towards  the  latter  part  of  Nero’s  reign, 
he  returned  to  Rome,  and  there  received  the 
crown  of  martyrdom. 

In  the  accounts  preserved  of  the  rest  of  the 
apostles,  we  likewise  meet  with  great  uncer- 
tainty ; nor  can  any  thing  be  determined  to 
satisfaction,  concerning  either  the  seat  of 
their  labours,  or  the  time  and  manner  of  their 
deaths.  I shall  therefore  wave  a detail  of 
what  is  not  supported  by  sufficient  proof.  I 
only  observe  concerning  St.  Peter,  that  the 
assertion  of  his  having  been  bishop  of  Rome, 
on  which  (and  not  on  the  true  rock)  the 
whole  system  of  the  Papacy  is  built,  is  not 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


77 


CHAP.  I.] 

only  inconsistent  with  what  is  recorded  of 
him  in  the  Acts,  and  the  silence  of  St.  Paul 
concerning  him,  in  the  epistles  he  wrote 
from  thence,  but  it  is  so  far  without  founda- 
tion in  ecclesiastical  history,  that  it  still  re- 
mains a point  of  dubious  controversy,  whe- 
ther he  ever  saw  Rome  in  his  life : if  he 
did,  it  was  probably  towards  the  close  of  it ; 
and  the  most  received  opinion  is,  that  he  suf- 
fered martyrdom  there  at  the  same  time  with 
St.  Paul : that  Peter  was  crucified,  and  that 
Paul  had  the  favour  of  being  beheaded,  in 
consideration  that  he  was  a Roman  citizen. 

The  Christians,  though  generally  despised, 
and  often  insulted  for  their  profession,  had 
not  hitherto  been  subject  to  a direct  and  ca- 
pital persecution ; but  Nero,  who,  intoxicated 
with  power,  had,  in  a few  years,  arrived  at  a 
pitch  of  wickedness  and  cruelty  till  then  un- 
heard of,  at  length  directed  his  rage  against 
the  servants  of  Christ. 

a.  d.  64.]  In  his  tenth  year  the  city  of 
Rome  was  set  on  fire,  and  a very  considerable 
part  of  it  consumed.  This  calamity  was  ge- 
nerally imputed  to  him  as  the  author,  and  it 
seems  not  without  justice.  Mischief,  and  the 
misery  of  others,  were  the  study  of  his  life ; 
and  he  is  reported  to  have  expressed  great 
pleasure  at  the  spectacle,  and  to  have  sung 
the  burning  of  Troy  while  Rome  was  in 
flames.  Though  he  afterwards  did  many 
popular  things,  and  spared  no  expense  in  re- 
lieving the  people  and  rebuilding  the  city, 
he  could  not  clear  himself  from  the  suspicion 
of  the  fact,  any  otherwise  than  by  charging 
it  upon  the  Christians.  The  heathen  historian 
Tacitus,  in  his  account  of  this  event,  enables 
us  so  well  to  judge  of  the  character  which 
the  Christians  bore  in  his  time,  that  I shall 
subjoin  a translation  of  it  for  the  information 
of  the  unlearned. 

“ But  neither  the  emperor’s  donations,  nor 
the  atonements  offered  to  the  gods,  could  re- 
move the  scandal  of  this  report ; but  it  was 
still  believed  that  the  city  had  been  burnt  by 
his  instigation.  Nero,  therefore,  to  put  a stop 
to  the  rumour,  charged  the  fact,  and  inflicted 
the  severest  punishment  for  it  upon  the 
Christians,  as  they  were  commonly  called,  a 
people  detestable  for  their  crimes.  The  au- 
thor of  this  sect  was  Christ;  who,  in  the 
reign  of  Tiberius,  was  put  to  death  by 
Pontius  Pilate.  The  destructive  supersti- 
tion, which  was  by  this  means  suppressed 
for  the  present,  soon  broke  out  again,  and 
not  only  overspread  Judea,  where  it  first 
arose,  but  reached  even  to  Rome,  where  all 
abominations,  from  every  quarter,  are  sure 
to  meet  and  to  find  acceptance.  Some  who 
confessed  themselves  Christians  were  first 
apprehended,  and  a vast  multitude  after- 
wards, upon  their  impeachment,  who  were 
condemned,  not  so  much  for  burning-  the 
city,  as  for  being  the  objects  of  universal 
hatred.  Their  sufferings  and  torments  were 


heightened  by  mockery  and  derision.  Some 
were  inclosed  in  the  skins  of  wild  beasts, 
that  they  might  be  torn  in  pieces  by  dogs; 
others  were  crucified ; and  others,  being  co- 
vered with  inflammable  matter,  were  lighted 
up  as  torches  at  the  close  of  day.  These 
spectacles  were  exhibited  in  Nero’s  gardens; 
where  he  held  a kind  of  Circensian  show, 
either  mixing  with  the  populace  in  the  habit 
of  a charioteer,  or  himself  contending  in  the 
race.  Hence  it  came  to  pass,  that,  criminal 
and  undeserving  of  mercy  as  they  were,  yet 
they  were  pitied,  as  being  destroyed  merely 
to  gratify  his  savage  and  cruel  disposition, 
and  not  with  any  view  to  the  public  good.” 

From  this  quotation  it  appears  that  the 
Christians  were  considered  by  the  heathens 
as  a sect  that  had  been  almost  crushed  by 
the  death  of  their  Master,  but  suddenly  re- 
covered strength,  and  spread  far  and  near 
soon  afterwards;  that  they  were  so  ex- 
tremely odious,  on  account  of  the  supposed 
absurdity  and  wickedness  of  their  principles, 
as  to  be  thought  capable  of  committing  the 
worst  crimes,  when  no  sufficient  proof  could 
be  found  of  their  having  committed  any; 
that  they  were  treated  as  the  professed  ene- 
mies of  mankind,  and  therefore,  upon  the 
first  occasion  that  offered,  were  promis- 
cuously destroyed,  with  the  most  unrelent- 
ing cruelty;  that  they  did  not  suffer  as 
common  malefactors,  who,  when  under  the 
actual  punishment  of  their  crimes,  are 
usually  beheld  with  some  commiseration, 
but  that  insult  and  derision  were  added  to 
the  most  exquisite  inventions  of  torture ; 
and,  lastly,  that,  if  these  violent  proceedings 
were  blamed  by  any,  it  proceeded  rather 
from  the  hatred  they  bore  to  Nero,  than 
from  a suspicion  that  the  Christians  met 
with  any  thing  more  than  their  just  desert. 
These  things  are  carefully  to  be  observed, 
if  we  would  form  a right  judgment  of  the 
primitive  church.  It  is  possible  many  per- 
sons suppose  that  St.  Paul’s  epistles  to  the 
Romans,  Corinthians,  and  Ephesians  were 
(like  the  pastoral  letters  of  bishops  in  our 
own  times)  addressed  to  the  bulk  of  the  in- 
habitants in  those  places ; but  the  case  was 
far  otherwise.  The  Romans,  to  whom  St. 
Paul  wrote,  were  inconsiderable  for  their 
number,  most  of  them  contemptible  in  the 
sight  of  the  world  on  account  of  their  poverty 
and  low  rank  in  life,  and  (as  the  above  ex- 
tract from  Tacitus  proves)  the  objects  of  pub- 
lic detestation,  for  their  attachment  to  the 
name  and  doctrines  of  Jesus. 

Whether  this  persecution  was  confined  to 
Rome,  or  carried  on  by  public  authority 
through  all  the  provinces  where  Christians 
were  to  be  found,  is  not  absolutely  certain, 
though  the  latter  seems  most  probable ; for  it 
is  hardly  to  be  supposed  that  Nero  would 
rage  against  them  in  the  capital,  and  suffei 
them  to  live  in  peace  every  where  else 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


78 

Tertulliar  expressly  asserts  that  Nero  en- 
joined their  destruction  by  public  edicts  in 
the  several  provinces;  and  his  testimony 
seems  worthy  of  credit,  as  he  mentions  it  in 
his  Apology,  which,  though  written  more 
than  a century  afterwards,  was  not  at  so 
great  a distance  of  time  but  he  might  easily 
have  been  contradicted,  if  he  had  advanced 
an  untruth.  Besides,  the  example  of  Nero, 
without  his  express  injunctions,  seems  to  have 
been  sufficient  to  awaken  persecution  against 
a people  so  generally  hated  as  the  Christians 
were.  Multitudes  upon  this  occasion  had 
the  honour  to  seal  their  profession  with  their 
blood ; but  the  cause  for  which  they  suffered 
triumphed  over  all  opposition,  and  the  mar- 
tyrs’ places  in  the  church  were  supplied  by 
an  accession  of  fresh  converts. 

This  storm,  though  sharp,  was  not  of  very 
long  continuance  ; it  terminated  with  the  life 
of  Nero,  who  was  compelled,  though  with  ex- 
treme reluctance,  to  destroy  himself  with  his 
own  hands,  that  he  might  escape  the  most 
ignominious  punishment,  he  having  been,  by 
a decree  of  the  senate,  justly  and  solemnly 
branded  with  the  character  which  malice  and 
ignorance  wTould  have  fixed  upon  the  Chris- 
tian name,  and  condemned  to  be  whipped  to 
death  as  an  enemy  of  the  human  race. 

a.  d.  68,  69.]  After  him,  Galba,  Otho,  and 
Vitellius  were  successively  acknowledged 
emperors;  but  their  reigns  were  short,  and 
their  deaths  violent.  The  Jewish  wTar,  which 
ended  in  the  final  catastrophe  and  dispersion 
of  that  nation,  was  at  this  time  carried  on 
under  the  command  of  Vespasian,  who,  while 
engaged  in  that  service,  was  saluted  emperor 
by  his  army. 

a.  d.  70.]  Upon  this,  leaving  the  conduct 
of  the  war  to  his  son  Titus,  he  returned  to 
Italy,  and,  soon  after  the  death  of  Vitellius, 
was  peaceably  established  on  the  government. 
Titus  having  a secret  commission  from  God 
(whom  he  knew  not,)  to  execute  his  fierce 
displeasure  against  the  Jews,  upon  whom 
wrath  was  now  come  to  the  uttermost,  after 
destroying  the  whole  country  of  Judea  with 
tire  and  sword,  laid  siege  to  Jerusalem  ; and, 
having  taken  it  at  the  end  of  five  months, 
with  an  incredible  slaughter  of  the  Jews,  and 
the  destruction  of  the  temple,  he  burnt  the 
city  and  pulled  down  the  very  walls.  More 
than  a million  of  people,  who  had  trusted  in 
lying  words,  and  boasted  themselves  of  an 
empty  profession,  perished  in  this  war ; and 
those  who  survived  were  reduced  to  slavery, 
sold  and  dispersed  into  all  parts,  at  the  will 
of  the  conquerors.  Thus  ended  the  Jewish 
economy ; and  the  law  of  Moses  having  re- 
ceived the  accomplishment  of  all  its  types, 
ceremonies,  and  precepts,  in  the  person,  life, 
and  death  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  was  irre- 
vocably abrogated  as  to  its  observance,  which 
was  rendered  utterly  impracticable,  by  the 


[book  ii. 

destruction  of  the  temple,  and  the  cessation 
of  the  priesthood. 

a.  d.  79.]  Under  Vespasian,  and  Titus, 
who  succeeded  him,  the  Christian  church  en- 
joyed considerable  peace  and  liberty,  though 
upon  many  occasions  they  suffered  from  the 
ill-will  of  their  adversaries.  Few,  however, 
were  put  to  death  publicly  and  professedly 
for  their  religion,  till  Domitian,  who  came  to 
the  empire  after  his  brother  Titus  [a.  d.  81,] 
and  who  too  much  resembled  Nero  in  his 
temper  and  conduct,  imitated  him  likewise 
in  his  employing  his  power  against  the  fol- 
lowers of  Christ,  [a.  d.  94.]  Several  are 
mentioned  in  history,  who  suffered  in  his 
time  ; but  as  little  of  moment,  or  that  can  be 
fully  depended  on,  is  recorded  concerning 
them,  I wave  a recital  of  bare  names.  It  is 
generally  believed  that  St.  John  was  banish- 
ed to  the  isle  of  Patinos  by  this  emperor, 
where  he  wrote  his  Epistles  to  the  churches 
of  Asia,  and  the  Revelation  of  future  events 
which  he  had  received  from  the  Lord. 
Some  there  are  who  place  these  events  much 
earlier,  under  the  reign  of  Claudius ; but  the 
former  opinion  seems  most  probable,  and  best 
supported  by  the  testimony  of  the  ancients. 
But  the  story  of  his  having  been  cast  into  a 
cauldron  of  boiling  oil,  in  the  presence  (as 
some  add)  of  the  Roman  senate,  does  not 
seem  supported  by  any  tolerable  evidence. 
It  is  believed  that  he  gained  his  liberty  from 
banishment,  and  returned  to  Ephesus  or  the 
neighbouring  parts ; that  he  afterwards 
wrote  his  Gospel  a little  before  his  death, 
which  is  supposed  to  have  happened  about 
the  last  year  of  the  century.  If  so,  he  was 
probably  about  a hundred  years  of  age,  and 
survived  the  rest  of  the  apostles  a consider- 
able space. 

Domitian,  having  made  the  earth  groan 
under  his  cruelties  and  excesses,  was  assas- 
sinated in  the  sixteenth  year  of  his  reign. 
[a.  d.  96.]  Nerva  succeeded  (a  man  of  much 
fairer  character,)  who  repealed  the  sanguin- 
ary edicts  of  his  predecessor ; and  it  does  not 
appear  that  the  Christians  were  generally  per- 
secuted during  his  short  government.  Before 
his  death  (for  he  did  not  live  two  years,)  he 
adopted  Trajan  for  his  successor,  who  came 
to  the  empire  [a.  d.  98]  with  a general  ap- 
probation, and  is  still  reputed  one  of  the  best 
and  wisest  princes  that  Rome  was  favoured 
with.  From  his  conduct  and  that  of  some  of 
the  following  emperors,  it  appears,  that  the 
gospel  of  Christ  was  not  only  hated  by  such 
persons  as  Nero  and  Domitian,  who  seemed 
professed  enemies  to  every  thing  that  was 
good  and  praise- worthy,  but  that  men  who 
desired  to  be  thought  the  patrons  of  virtue, 
and  to  act  upon  the  most  benevolent  princi- 
ples, had  objections  equally  strong  against  it; 
for  if  Trajan  did  not  issue  edicts  expressly 
against  the  Christians,  there  was  a very  sharp 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


79 


CHAP.  I.] 

persecution  carried  on  against  them  in  his 
reign;  and  when  Pliny  (in  an  epistle  still 
extant)  represented  to  him  the  greatness  of 
their  sufferings,  and  the  multitude  and  inno- 
cence of  the  sufferers,  the  emperor  inter- 
posed no  farther  by  his  answer,  than  to  for- 
bid informations  against  them,  upon  suspicion, 
to  be  encouraged,  but  directed,  that  such  as 
were  proved  to  be  Christians,  and  refused  to 
join  in  the  Heathen  sacrifices,  should  suffer 
death : and  when  he  visited  Asia,  Ignatius, 
who  was  bishop  of  Antioch,  being  brought 
before  him,  he  condemned  him,  with  his  own 
mouth,  to  be  sent  to  Rome  to  be  devoured  by- 
wild  beasts.  But  we  shall  resume  the  ac- 
count of  what  happened  under  his  reign 
hereafter,  his  second  or  third  year  [a.  d. 
100]  coinciding,  according  to  the  generally- 
received  computation,  with  the  end  of  the 
first  century,  which  I have  fixed  as  the  limit 
of  our  researches  in  the  present  volume.* 

But  before  I conclude  the  chapter,  it  may 
be  useful  to  inquire,  what  might  be  the  mo- 
tives which  influenced  the  Heathens  so  ea- 
gerly to  embrace  every  occasion  of  showing 
their  displeasure  against  the  professors  of 
Christianity. 

The  original  and  proper  cause  of  the  inju- 
rious treatment  the  first  Christians  met  with 
from  the  Heathens,  and  particularly  from  the 
Roman  government,  which  usually  tolerated 
every  kind  of  religious  worship  that  did  not 
interfere  with  the  public  tranquillity  and  the 
obedience  due  to  the  state,  was  one  that  is  of 
an  abiding  and  universal  influence,  namely, 
that  enmity  of  the  carnal  heart,  which  cannot 
be  brought  to  submit  to  the  wisdom  and  will 
of  God.  This  has  been  the  secret  source  of 
all  the  persecution  which  has  been  the  lot  of 
the  true  disciples  of  Christ  in  every  age.  The 
sublime  doctrines  of  the  gospel  were  offensive 
to  the  pretended  wisdom  of  men,  and  the  spi- 
rituality of  its  precepts  no  less  thwarted  their 
passions.  Men,  if  only  left  to  themselves, 
cannot  but  oppose  a system,  which  at  the 
same  time,  that  it  reduces  all  their  boasted 
distinctions  of  character  to  a perfect  level,  in 
point  of  acceptance  with  God,  enjoins  a life 
and  conversation  absolutely  inconsistent  with 
the  customs  and  pursuits  which  universally 
prevail,  and  brands  many  of  the  most  allowed 
and  authorised  practices  with  the  hard  names 
of  wickedness  and  folly.  But  they  are  not 
left  to  themselves,  but  are  in  a degree  they 
are  little  aware  of,  under  the  influence  of 
Satan,  who,  for  the  power  he  maintains  and’ 
exerts  over  them,  is  styled  in  scripture,  the 
God  of  this  World.  Since  their  own  evil  dis- 
positions are  thus  instigated  by  the  great 
enemy  of  God  and  goodness,  it  is  entirely 
owing  to  the  powerful  restraints  of  the  pro- 
vidence of  the  Most  High,  that  his  servants 
can  at  any  time,  or  in  any  place,  enjoy  an 


interval  of  rest ; and  though  he  has  always 
made  good  his  promise  in  favour  of  his 
church,  that  the  gates  of  hell  shall  not  pre- 
vail against  it : though  they  who  oppose  it, 
successively  perish,  and  leave  their  scnemes 
unfinished,  while  the  interest  against  which 
they  rage,  triumphs  over  all  their  attacks, 
and  subsists,  revives,  and  flourishes,  amidst 
the  changes  which  sweep  away  almost  the 
remembrance  of  the  most  prosperous  human 
establishments ; yet  he  is  pleased,  for  wise 
reasons,  to  permit  them  to  try  what  they  can 
do.  Hereby  the  faith  and  patience  of  his 
people  are  strengthened  and  displayed,  his 
care  over  them  illustrated,  and  those  v/ho  are 
sincerely  devoted  to  him  are  evidently  dis- 
tinguished from  hypocrites  and  pretenders, 
who  join  in  an  outward  attachment  to  his  gos- 
pel in  times  of  prosperity,  but  are  presently 
wearied  and  disgusted  when  storms  and  trou- 
bles arise. 

Amongst  the  more  particular  reasons  why 
Christianity  was  obnoxious  to  the  Heathens 
not  only  to  persons  of  vile  character,  as  Nero 
but  to  such  as  Trajan  and  Marcus  Aurelius 
who  are,  even  to  this  day,  highly  extolled  foi 
their  probity  and  discernment,  we  may  men 
tion  these  that  follow  : and  more  than  one  ol 
them  may  be  easily  accommodated  to  similar 
events,  which  stand  upon  the  records  of  his 
tory  down  to  our  own  times ; and  their  ef- 
fect will  probably  be  felt  by  many  w7ho  are 
yet  unborn. 

1.  The  doctrine  of  the  cross  was,  and  per- 
haps always  will  be,  the  capital  offence.  The 
Christians  professed  to  place  all  their  hopes 
on  the  actions  and  sufferings  of  one,  who  died, 
to  all  appearance,  like  a common  malefactor. 
This,  considered  in  one  view,  was  thought 
such  a kind  and  degree  of  infatuation,  as  pro- 
voked the  most  sovereign  and  universal  con- 
tempt ; and,  in  another  view,  it  raised  a grave 
concern  for  the  interests  of  morality  and  vir- 
tue, in  those  whose  pride  was  flattered  by 
their  own  ‘empty  declamations  on  those 
sounding  topics.  Every  thing  that  was  evil, 
they  thought,  might  be  expected  from  men 
who  openly  declared,  that  they  hoped  for 
eternal  happiness,  not  for  their  own  works, 
which  in  this  connexion  they  depreciated  and 
renounced,  but  on  account  of  the  righteous- 
ness and  mediation  of  another.  If  it  was 
possible  that  Christians  could  maintain  that 
course  of  conduct  which  the  gospel  requires, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  conceal  the  principles 
and  motives  on  which  they  act,  they  might 
perhaps  come  off  more  easily  with  the  world; 
for  the  justice,  temperance,  goodness,  and 
truth,  which  become  their  high  calling,  are 
suited  to  conciliate  peace  with  all  men.  But 
their  principles  must  not,  cannot,  be  con- 
cealed. Those  who  know  and  love  Jesus,  and 
are  sensible  of  their  immense  obligations  to 
him,  will  glory  in  him,  and  in  him  only ; they 
will  avow,  that  it  is  not  by  their  own  power 


* See  Introduction,  note. 


80 


PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL 


or  holiness  that  they  escape  the  pollutions 
of  the  world,  but  that  they  derive  all  their 
strength  from  faith  in  his  blood,  and  from  the 
supports  of  his  grace.  They  dare  not  conceal 
this,  nor  do  they  desire  it,  though  they  are 
sensible  that  the  world,  whether  it  bears  the 
name  of  Heathen  or  Christian,  will  hate  and 
despise  them  for  it. 

2.  The  Romans,  though  attached  to  their 
old  system  of  idolatry,  were  not  averse  to 
the  admission  of  new  divinities,  upon  the 
ground  of  what  a modern  writer  calls  a spirit 
of  intercommunity  ; that  is,  every  one  had  a 
liberty  to  adopt  what  worship  he  pleased, 
provided  due  honour  was  given  to  the  an- 
cient establishments.  The  votaries  of  the 
Egyptian,  Roman,  and  Syrian  deities,  while 
they  paid  some  peculiar  regard  to  their 
own  favourites,  indulged  each  other  in  a mu- 
tual acknowledgment  of  the  rest : but  the 
religion  of  Jesus  was  absolutely  incompatible 
with  them  all,  would  admit  of  no  competition; 
and  his  followers  could  not  avoid  declaring, 
upon  all  occasions,  that  they  were  no  gods 
that  were  made  with  hands.  On  this  account 
they  were  considered  as  a most  uncharitable, 
proud,  and  narrow-hearted  sect,  as  the  Jews, 
for  the  same  reason,  had  been  before  them. 
And  thus  it  will  always  be.  Nothing  will 
more  effectually  secure  a man  in  the  peace- 
ful possession  of  his  own  errors,  than  his 
pleading  for  the  indifference  of  error  in  ge- 
neral, and  allowing  those  who  most  widely 
differ  from  him  to  be  all  right  in  their  own 
way ; and  this  lukewarm  comprehension, 
which  is  a principal  part  of  that  pretended 
candour  and  charity  for  which  our  own  times 
are  so  remarkable,  preserves  a sort  of  inter- 
course or  confederacy  amongst  multitudes, 
who  are  hardly  agreed  in  any  one  thing  but 
their  joint  opposition  to  the  spirit  and  design 
of  the  gospel.  But  they  who  love  the  truth 
cannot  but  declare  against  every  deviation 
from  it ; they  are  obliged  to  decline  the  pro- 
posed intercommunity,  and  to  vindicate  the 
commands  and  institutions  of  God  from  the 
inventions  and  traditions  of  men  : they  not 
only  build  for  themselves  upon  the  foundation 
which  God  has  laid  in  Zion,  but  they  are  free 
to  profess  their  belief,  that  other  foundation 
can  no  man  lay ; that  there  is  no  other  name 
given  under  heaven  by  which  a sinner  can 
be  saved ; and  that  none  can  have  an  interest 
in  this  name  but  by  that  faith  which  purifies 
the  heart,  works  by  love,  and  overcomes  the 
world ; therefore  they  always  have  been,  and 
always  will  be,  hated,  as  uncharitable  and 
censorious,  and  are  sure  to  be  treated  accord- 
ingly, so  far  as  opportunity  and  circumstances 
will  permit  those,  who  think  themselves  ag- 
grieved, to  discover  their  resentment. 

3.  The  wisest  and  most  respectable  charac- 
ters among  the  Heathen  rulers,  either  for 
reasons  of  state,  or  from  their  own  supersti- 
tion, were  generally  the  most  solicitous  to 


[book  i, 

preserve  the  old  religion  from  innovationa 
The  history  of  mankind  furnishes  us  with  fre- 
quent proofs,  that  persons,  in  other  respects 
of  the  greatest  penetration  and  genius,  have 
often  been  as  blindly  devoted  to  the  absurdi- 
ties of  a false  religion  as  the  weakest  among 
the  vulgar  ; or,  if  they  have  seen  the  folly  of 
many  things  that  have  the  sanctions  of  anti- 
quity and  custom  ; yet  the  maxims  of  a false 
policy,  and  that  supposed  connexion  and  al- 
liance between  the  established  religion  and 
the  welfare  of  the  state,  which  has  been  in- 
stilled into  them  from  their  infancy,  induce 
them  to  think  it  their  interest,  if  not  their 
duty,  to  keep  up  the  same  exterior,  and  to 
leave  things  as  they  found  them.  Trajan 
seems  to  have  been  influenced  by  these  consi- 
derations ; he  was  zealous  for  the  Heathen 
system,  in  which  he  had  been  educated,  and 
regarded  it,  as  the  Romans  were  accustomed 
to  do,  as  the  basis,  or  at  least  the  chief  se- 
curity, of  the  government.  The  Christians, 
therefore,  were  to  be  punished,  not  only  for 
their  obstinacy  in  maintaining  their  own  opi- 
nions, but  as  being  eventually  enemies  to  the 
state ; for  though  their  conduct  was  peace- 
able, and  they  paid  a cheerful  obedience  to 
laws  and  governors,  while  they  did  not  in- 
terfere with  that  obedience  they  owed  to 
Christ,  their  supreme  Lord,  yet  their  doc- 
trines, which  struck  at  the  very  root  of  idol- 
atry, made  them  accounted  dangerous  to  so- 
ciety, and  deserving  to  be  exterminated 
from  it. 

4.  These  suspicions  wrere  strengthened  by 
the  great  success  and  spread  the  gospel 
obtained  in  this  first  century : within  the  com- 
pass of  a few  years,  it  had  extended  to  almost 
every  part  of  the  Roman  empire.  In  this 
view  it  appeared  formidable,  and  called  for  a 
speedy  and  vigorous  suppression  before  it 
should  become  quite  insuperable,  by  the  ac- 
cession of  fresh  strength  and  numbers.  But 
the  event  did  not  answer  their  expectation  : 
believers  grew  and  multiplied,  in  defiance  of 
all  the  cruelties  exercised  upon  them ; the 
numbers  and  constancy  of  the  sufferers,  and 
the  gentle  spirit  of  meekness,  forgiveness,  and 
love,  which  they  discovered,  often  made  last- 
ing impressions  upon  the  people,  sometimes 
upon  their  tormentors  and  judges  ; and,  by 
the  blessing  of  God  upon  their  doctrine,  thus 
powerfully  recommended  by  their  conduct, 
and  sealed  by  their  blood,  new  converts  were 
continually  added  to  the  church. 

5.  When  it  was  thus  determined  to  extir- 
pate, if  possible,  these  odious  and  dangerous 
people,  pretexts  and  occasions  were  always 
ready : slanderous  reports  concerning  their 
tenets  and  assemblies  were  industriously 
promoted,  and  willingly  believed.  Some  of 
these  took  their  rise  from  misapprehension  ; 
some  were  probably  invented  by  those  who 
apostatized  from  the  church,  who,  to  justify 
themselves,  as  well  as  to  evince  their  sin- 


AFTER  THE  ASCENSION. 


81 


CHAP.  I.] 

cerity,  pretended  to  make  discoveries  of  horrid 
evils  that  prevailed  amongst  them,  under  the 
disguise  of  religion.  Many,  who  would  not 
have  invented  such  stories  themselves,  were, 
how  ever,  well  pleased  to  circulate  what  they 
had  heard,  and  took  it  for  granted,  that  every 
thing  was  true,  which  confirmed  the  opinion 
they  had  before  entertained  of  this  pestilen- 
tial and  despicable  sect.  But  neither  violence 
nor  calumny  could  prevail  against  the  cause 
and  people  of  God  and  his  Christ.  They  were 
supported  by  an  almighty  arm  : and  though 
many  had  the  honour  to  lay  down  their  lives 
in  this  glorious  cause,  many  more  were  pre- 
served, by  his  providence,  in  the  most  dan- 
gerous circumstances. 

The  gospel  of  Christ,  though  contradictory 
to  the  received  opinions,  laws,  customs,  and 
pursuits,  of  every  place  where  it  appeared, 
though  unsupported  either  by  arts  or  a rms, 
though  opposed  by  power  and  policy  on  every 
side,  in  a space  of  about  sixty-six  years  from 
our  IiOrd’s  ascension,  according  to  the  pro- 
mise he  gave  his  disciples,  had  spread  suc- 
cessively from  Jerusalem,  through  Judea  and 
Samaria,  even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  Chris- 
tians were  to  be  found  in  ever}?-  province 
where  the  Roman  power  ruled,  and  in  most 
of  their  principal  cities ; and  though  not 
many  noble,  mighty,  or  wise,  were  called, 
yet  some  there  were  ; and  the  power  of  the 
grace  of  Jesus  was  displayed  in  every  rank 
of  life.  Courtiers,  senators,  and  commanders, 
notwithstanding  the  difficulty  of  their  situa- 
tion, were  not  ashamed  of  his  cross ; and  some 
of  the  learned  obtained  that  peace  and  hap- 
piness, by  embracing  his  gospel,  which  they 
had  sought  to  no  purpose  in  the  vain  intrica- 
cies of  a false  philosophy.  Nor  was  the  suc- 
cess of  the  gospel  confined  within  the  limits 
of  the  Roman  empire,  but  extended  eastward 
to  Parthia  and  Babylon,  where  the  Roman 
eagles  were  not  acknowledged.  We  are  not 
sure,  however,  that  there  were  many  collect- 
ed societies  of  Christians  in  every  province, 
or  that  those  societies  were  in  general  very 
numerous.  Those  parts  of  Asia  and  Greece 
which  had  been  the  scene  of  St.  Paul’s  la- 
bours, seem  to  have  had  the  greatest  number 
of  settled  churches,  in  proportion  to  their  ex- 
tent ; and  their  largest  assemblies  were  pro- 
bably in  their  principal  cities,  such  as  An- 
tioch, Alexandria,  and  Rome.  But  we  have 
reason  to  believe,  from  our  Lord’s  own  decla- 
rations, that  real  Christians,  in  the  most 
flourishing  times  of  the  church,  have  been 
very  few,  in  comparison  with  the  many  who 
choose  the  broad  and  beaten  road  which  leads 
to  destruction  (Matt.  vii.  13, 14 :)  but  these 
few  are  under  his  conduct  and  blessing,  as 
the  salt  of  the  earth,  and  are  therefore  scat- 
tered far  and  wide,  according  to  the  disposal 
of  his  wise  providence,  who  appoints  the  time 
of  their  birth,  and  the  bounds  of  their  habita- 
tion. 

Vol.  II.  L 


If  by  the  epithet  primitive  we  mean  that 
period  during  which  the  professed  churches 
of  Christ  preserved  their  faith  and  practice 
remarkably  pure,  and  uninfluenced  by  the 
spirit  and  maxims  of  the  world,  we  cannot 
extend  it  far  beyond  the  first  century.  We  are 
sure  that  a mournful  declension  prevailed 
very  early,  and  quickly  spread,  like  a conta- 
gion, far  and  wide ; and,  indeed,  the  seeds  of 
those  evils  which  afterwards  produced  such 
a plentiful  harvest  of  scandals  and  mischiefs, 
were  already  sown,  and  began  to  spring  up, 
while  the  apostles  were  yet  living.  And  wo 
shall  show  hereafter,  that  the  first  and  purest 
age  of  the  church  was  not  free  from  such 
blemishes  as  have  been  observable  in  all  suc- 
ceeding revivals  of  true  religion.  These 
things  are  to  be  guarded  against  with  tho 
utmost  attention ; but  they  will  more  or  less 
appear  while  human  nature  continues  in  its 
present  state  of  infirmity.  While  the  pro- 
fessors of  Christianity  were  few  in  comparison 
of  their  opponents,  while  they  were  chiefly 
poor  and  obscure  persons,  and  had  sharp  per- 
secutions to  grapple  with,  so  long  they  pre- 
served the  integrity  and  purity  of  their  pro- 
fession in  general ; and  the  disorders  which 
appeared  among  them  were  faithfully  and 
successfully  opposed  and  corrected ; afflictions 
and  sufferings  kept  them  firmly  united  in  3 
love  to  the  truth,  and  to  each  other : but  when 
they  were  favoured  with  intervals  of  peace, 
and  the  increase  of  numbers  and  riches 
seemed  to  give  them  a more  fixed  establish- 
ment in  the  world,  they  were  soon  corrupted; 
and  that  beautiful  simplicity  which  is  the 
characteristic  of  genuine  Christianity,  was  ob- 
scured by  will-worship  and  vain  reasonings. 
Amongst  the  multitudes  who  abandoned  idola- 
try, and  embraced  the  Christian  faith,  there 
were  several  who  had  borne  the  specious 
name  of  philosophers.  Some  of  these,  on  the 
one  hand,  laboured  to  retain  as  many  of  then- 
favourite  sentiments  as  they  could  by  any 
means  reconcile  to  the  views  they  had  formed 
of  the  gospel  ; and,  on  the  other  hand,  they 
endeavoured,  if  possible,  to  accommodate  the 
Christian  scheme  to  the  taste  and  prejudices 
of  the  times,  in  hopes  thereby  to  make  it 
more  generally  acceptable.  Thus  the  doc- 
trines of  the  scriptures  were  adulterated  by 
those  within  the  church,  and  misrepresented 
to  those  without.  Perhaps  the  first  altera- 
tions of  this  kind  were  not  attempted  with  a 
bad  intention,  or  extended  to  the  most  import- 
ant points;  but  the  precedent  was  dangerous ; 
for  the  progress  of  error,  like  that  of  sin,  is 
from  small  beginnings  to  awful  and  un- 
thought-of  consequences.  Gospel-truth,  like 
a bank  opposed  to  a torrent,  must  be  pre- 
served entire,  to  be  useful ; if  a breach  is 
once  made,  though  it  may  seem  at  first  to  be 
small,  none  but  he  who  says  to  the  sea. 
Hitherto  shall  thou  come,  but  no  farther,  can 
set  bounds  to  the  threatening  inundation  that 


82 


ST.  PAUL  AN  EXEMPLAR 


will  quickly  follow.  In  effect,  a very  consi- 
derable deviation  from  the  plan  of  the  apostles 
had  taken  place  in  the  churches  before  the  de- 
cease of  some  who  had  personally  conversed 
with  them. 

We  have  no  ecclesiastical  book  of  this  age 
extant  worthy  of  notice,  except  that  called, 
the  first  of  the  two  epistles  to  the  Corinthians, 
which  are  ascribed  to  Clement,  bishop  of 
Rome,  who  is  supposed  to  be  the  Clement 
'mentioned  by  St.  Paul,  in  his  epistle  to  the 
Romans.  This  epistle  is  not  unsuitable  to 
the  character  of  the  time  when  it  was  written, 
and  contains  many  useful  things;  yet  it  is 
aot,  as  we  have  it,  free  from  fault,  and  at  the 
nest  deserves  no  higher  commendation,  than 
is  a pious  well-meant  performance : it  stands 
first,  both  in  point  of  time  and  merit,  in  the 
list  of  those  writings  which  bear  the  name  of 
the  apostolical  fathers ; for  the  rest  of  them, 
if  the  genuine  productions  of  the  persons 
whose  names  they  bear,  were  composed  in 
the  second  century:  for  as  to  the  epistle 
ascribed  to  Barnabas,  St.  Paul’s  companion, 
those  who  are  strangers  to  the  arguments  by 
which  many  learned  men  have  demonstrated 
it  to  be  spurious,  may  be  convinced,  only  by 
reading  it,  if  they  are  in  any  measure  ac- 
quainted with  the  true  spirit  of  the  apostle’s 
writings.  We  are  indeed  assured,  that  both 
the  epistles  of  Clement,  this  which  bears  the 
name  of  Barnabas,  several  said  to  have  been 
written  by  Ignatius,  the  authenticity  of  which 
has  likewise  been  disputed,  one  by  Polycarp, 
and  the  book  called  the  Shepherd  of  Hermas, 
which  is  filled  with  visionary  fables,  were  all 
in  high  esteem  in  the  first  ages  of  the  church, 
were  read  in  their  public  assemblies,  and 
considered  as  little  inferior  to  the  canonical 
writings ; which  may  be  pleaded  as  one  proof 
of  what  I have  advanced  concerning  that  de- 
clension of  spiritual  taste  and  discernment 
which  soon  prevailed : for  I think  I may  ven- 
ture to  say,  there  are  few,  if  any  of  the  pro- 
testant  churches,  but  have  furnished  authors 
whose  writings  (I  mean  the  writings  of  some 
one  author)  have  far  surpassed  all  the  apos- 
tolical fathers  taken  together;  and  that  not 
only  in  point  of  method  and  accuracy,  but  in 
scriptural  knowledge,  solid  judgment,  and  a 
just  application  of  evangelical  doctrine  to 
the  purposes  of  edification  and  obedience. 

But  though  the  first  Christians  were  men 
subject  to  passions  and  infirmities,  like  our- 
selves, and  were  far  from  deserving,  or  de- 
siring that  distinguishing  admiration,  and 
implicit  submission,  to  all  their  sentiments, 
which  were  paid  them  by  the  ignorance  and 
superstition  of  after  times;  yet  they  were 
eminent  for  faith,  love,  self-denial,  and  a just 
contempt  of  the  world ; multitudes  of  them 
cheerfully  witnessed  to  the  truth  with  their 
blood,  and,  by  their  steadfastness  and  patience, 
under  trials,  and  their  harmony  among  them- 
selves often  extorted  honourable  testimonies, 


[book  ii. 

even  from  their  opposers.  Could  they  have 
transmitted  their  spirit,  together  with  their 
name,  to  succeeding  generations,  the  face  of 
ecclesiastical  history  would  have  been  very 
different  from  what  it  now  bears;  but,  by 
degrees,  the  love  of  novelty,  and  the  thirst 
of  power,  a relaxed  attention  to  the  precepts 
of  Christ,  and  an  undue  regard  to  the  names, 
authority,  and  pretensions  of  men,  introduced 
those  confusions,  contentions,  and  enormities, 
which  at  length  issued  in  an  almost  universal 
apostacy  from  that  faith  and  course  of  prac- 
tice which  alone  are  worthy  the  name  of 
Christianity.  The  prosecution  of  this  subject, 
more  especially  writh  a view  to  the  history 
of  the  favoured  few  who  were  preserved  from 
the  general  contagion,  and  of  the  treatment 
they  met  with,  who  had  the  courage  to  cen- 
sure or  withstand  the  abuses  of  the  times 
they  lived  in,  will  be  attempted  in  the  fol- 
lowing volumes  of  this  work,*  if  God,  in 
whose  hands  our  times  are,  is  pleased  to 
afford  opportunity,  and  if  the  specimen  pre- 
sented to  the  public,  in  this  volume,  should  so 
far  meet  the  approbation  of  competent  judges, 
as  to  encourage  the  author  to  proceed. 

Some  particulars  which  may  conduce  to 
render  the  state  of  the  church  in  the  first 
century  more  evident  to  the  reader,  as  well 
as  to  give  light  into  the  true  state  of  religion 
amongst  ourselves,  and  which  could  not  be 
well  introduced  in  the  course  of  our  narra- 
tion, without  making  too  frequent  and  too 
long  digressions,  I have,  for  that  reason, 
treated  of  separately  in  the  chapters  that 
follow. 


CHAPTER  II. 

An  essay  on  the  character  of  St.  Paul,  con- 
sidered as  an  exemplar  or  pattern  cf  a 
minister  of  Jesus  Christ. 

The  success  with  which  the  first  promul- 
gation of  the  gospel  was  attended,  is  to  be 
ultimately  ascribed  to  the  blessing  and  opera- 
tion of  the  Holy  Spirit;  and  the  great  means 
which  the  Spirit  of  God  is  pleased  to  accom- 
pany with  an  efficacious  power  upon  the  souls 
of  men,  is  the  subject-matter  of  the  gospel 
itself.  He  concurs  with  no  other  doctrine  but 
that  of  the  scripture.  The  most  laboured 
endeavours  to  produce  a moral  change  of 
heart  and  conduct,  will  always  prove  inef- 
fectual, unless  accommodated  to  the  princi- 
ples of  revelation  respecting  the  ruin  of 
human  nature  by  sin,  and  the  only  possible 
method  of  its  recovery  by  Jesus  Christ. 

And  as  the  Holy  Spirit  bears  witness  t%  no 
other  doctrine,  so  he  ordinarily  restrains  his 
blessing  to  those  ministers  who  have  them- 


* See  Introduction,  note. 


OF  A MINISTER  OF  CHRIST. 


CHAP.  II.] 

selves  experienced  the  power  of  the  truths 
which  they  deliver  to  others.  A man  may 
be  systematically  right,  and  strenuous  in  the 
delivery  and  defence  of  orthodox  notions ; yet 
if  he  is  not  in  some  degree  possessed  of  the 
dispositions  and  motives  which  become  a mi- 
nister of  the  New  Testament,  he  will  seldom 
be  honoured  with  much  success  or  accept- 
ance : the  want  of  that  disinterested  and  de- 
pendent frame  of  mind  which  the  gospel 
inculcates  on  all  who  profess  it,  will  render 
his  labours  insignificant;  for  the  Holy  Spirit, 
on  whose  influence  success  entirely  depends, 
will  seldom  co-operate  with  any  but  those 
who  are  sincerely  governed  by  his  precepts. 

A great  stress  therefore  is  laid  in  the  New 
Testament,  upon  the  principles,  tempers,  and 
conduct,  which  ought  to  distinguish  the  men 
who  have  the  honour  to  be  intrusted  with  the 
important  charge  of  preaching  the  gospel  of 
Christ.  To  delineate  their  proper  character, 
and  to  form  their  manners  suitable  to  their 
high  calling,  is  the  principal  scope  of  the 
epistles  to  Timothy  and  Titus:  and  when  we 
consider  what  we  read  there,  in  connexion 
with  many  passages  to  the  same  purpose, 
which  occur  occasionally  in  the  inspired 
writings,  we  may  well  adopt  the  apostle’s 
words,  “ Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  1” 
A Christian,  even  in  private  life,  is  exposed 
to  innumerable  snares  and  dangers,  from  his 
situation  in  an  evil  world,  the  powder  and 
subtlety  of  his  spiritual  enemies,  and  the  in- 
fluence of  the  body  of  sin  in  himself,  which, 
though  weakened  and  despoiled  of  dominion, 
is  not  yet  destroyed.  A minister  of  the  gos- 
pel, besides  these  trials  in  common  with  other 
Christians,  has  many  peculiar  to  himself:  His 
services  are  more  difficult,  his  temptations 
more  various,  his  conduct  more  noticed; 
many  eyes  are  upon  him, — some  enviously 
watching  for  his  halting,  and  some  perhaps 
too  readily  proposing  him  as  a pattern,  and 
content  to  adopt  whatever  has  the  sanction 
of  his  example:  if  encouraged  and  accept- 
able, he  is  in  danger  of  being  greatly  hurt  by 
popularity  and  the  favour  of  friends;  if  op- 
posed and  ill-treated  (and  this  he  must  ex- 
pect in  some  instances  if  he  is  faithful,)  he  is 
liable  either  to  be  surprised  into  anger  and 
impatience,  or  to  sink  into  dejection  and  fear. 
Tt  is  therefore  a great  encouragement  to  find 
from  scripture  (and  not  from  scripture  only,) 
how  the  grace  of  God  has  enabled  others,  in 
equal  circumstances  of  danger  and  tempta- 
tion, to  rise  superior  to  all  impediments,  and 
to  maintain  such  a course  of  conduct,  that 
they  stand  proposed  as  proper  patterns  for  our 
imitation,  and  call  upon  us  to  be  followers  of 
them,  as  they  were  of  Christ. 

Amongst  these  the  character  of  St.  Paul 
shines  with  a superior  lustre;  he  stands  dis- 
tinguished by  the  eminence  of  his  knowledge, 
grace,  labours,  and  success,  as  a noble  and 
animating  exemplar  of  a minister  of  Jesus 


83 

Christ.  And  if  it  should  be  thought  a digres- 
sion from  the  design  of  an  Ecclesiastical 
History,  to  allot  a few  pages  to  the  considera- 
tion of  his  principles,  and  the  uniform  tenor 
of  his  life,  yet  I hope  the  digression  will  not 
be  unprofitable  in  itself,  or  judged  unsuitable 
to  my  general  plan;  for  I proposed  not  to 
confine  myself  to  a dry  detail  of  facts,  but  to 
point  out  the  genuine  tendency  of  the  gospel 
where  it  is  truly  received,  and  the  spirit  by 
which  it  is  opposed,  and  to  show  the  impos- 
sibility of  reviving  practical  godliness  by 
any  other  means  than  those  which  were  so 
signally  successful  in  the  first  age  of  the 
church. 

Were  I to  exhibit  any  recent  character 
with  these  views,  the  exceptions  of  partiality 
and  prejudice  would  not  be  so  easily  obviated ; 
the  merits  of  such  a character,  however  com- 
mendable upon  the  whole,  would  be  objected 
to,  and  the  incidental  infirmities  and  indis- 
cretions of  the  person  (for  the  best  are  nGt 
wholly  free  from  blemish)  would  be  studi- 
ously collected  and  exaggerated  as  a suffi- 
cient contrast  to  all  that  could  be  said  in  his 
praise.  But  modesty  forbids  the  same  open 
disingenuous  treatment  of  one  who  was  an 
apostle  of  Christ:  besides,  he  lived,  and  died 
long  ago:  and  as  some  learned  men  have 
found,  or  pretended  to  find,  a way  to  recon- 
cile his  writings  with  the  prevailing  taste  of 
the  times,  he  is  commended  in  general  terms, 
and  claimed  as  a patron  by  all  parties  of  the 
religious  world ; therefore  I am  warranted  to 
take  it  for  granted,  that  none  who  profess  the 
name  of  Christians  will  be  angry  with  me  for 
attempting  to  place  his  spirit  and  conduct  in 
as  full  a light  as  I can,  or  for  proposing  him 
as  a proper  criterion,  whereby  to  judge  of  the 
merits  and  pretensions  of  all  who  account 
themselves  ministers  of  Christ. 

Many  things  worthy  our  notice  and  imita- 
tion have  occurred  concerning  this  apostle, 
whilst  we  were  tracing  that  part  of  his  his- 
tory which  St.  Luke  has  given  us  in  the 
Acts ; but  I would  now  attempt  a more  exact 
delineation  of  character,  as  it  is  farther  ex- 
emplified in  his  own  epistles,  or  may  be  il- 
lustrated from  a review  of  what  has  been 
occasionally  mentioned  before. 

We  may  observe  much  of  the  wisdom  of 
God  in  disposing  the  circumstances  in  which 
his  people  are  placed  previous  to  their  con- 
version : they  only  begin  to  know  him  when 
he  is  pleased  to  reveal  himself  to  them  by 
his  grace ; but  he  knew  them  long  before : 
he  determines  the  hour  of  their  birth,  their 
situation  in  life,  and  their  earliest  connex- 
ions: he  watches  over  their  childhood  and 
youth,  and  preserves  them  from  innumerable 
evils  and  dangers  into  which  their  follies, 
while  in  a state  of  ignorance  and  sin,  might 
plunge  them ; and  he  permits  their  inclina- 
tions to  take  such  a course,  that,  when  he  is 
pleased  to  call  them  to  the  knowledge  of  his 


84 


ST.  PAUL  AN  EXEMPLAR 


truth,  many  consequences  of  their  past  con- 
duct, and  the  reflections  they  make  upon 
them,  may  concur,  upon  the  whole,  in  a sub- 
serviency to  fit  them  for  the  services  into 
which  he  designs  to  lead  them  afterwards. 
Thus  he  leads  the  blind  by  a way  that  they 
knew  not,  and  often  for  the  manifestation  of 
his  wisdom,  power,  and  grace,  in  bringing 
good  out  of  evil,  he,  for  a season,  gives  them 
up  so  far  to  the  effects  of  their  own  depravity, 
that,  in  the  judgment  of  men,  none  seem 
more  unlikely  to  be  the  subjects  of  his  grace, 
than  some  of  those  whom  he  has  purposed 
not  only  to  save  from  ruin,  but  to  make  in- 
strumental to  the  salvation  of  others.  I 
doubt  not  but  some  of  my  readers,  who  are 
acquainted  with  their  own  hearts,  will 
easily  apply  this  observation  to  themselves ; 
but  there  are  instances  in  which  the  contrast 
is  so  striking  and  strong,  that  it  will  be 
made  for  them  by  those  who  know  them.  It 
is,  however,  peculiarly  exemplified  in  the 
case  of  St.  Paul : he  was  set  apart  from  the 
womb,  as  he  himself  tells  us  (Gal.  i.  15,)  tc 
be  a chosen  instrument  of  preaching  among 
the  Gentiles  the  unsearchable  riches  of 
Christ.  The  frame  of  his  heart,  and  the 
manner  of  his  life,  the  profession  he  had 
made,  and  the  services  in  which  he  was  en- 
gaged before  his  conversion,  were  evidently 
suited  to  render  him  an  unsuspected,  as  well 
as  a zealous  witness  to  the  truth  and  power 
of  the  gospel,  after  he  had  embraced  it. 
The  Lord’s  purpose  was  to  show  the  insuf- 
ficiency of  all  legal  appointments  and  human 
attainments,  the  power  of  his  grace  in  sub- 
duing the  strongest  prejudices,  and  the  riches 
of  his  mercy  in  pardoning  the  most  violent 
attempts  against  his  gospel.  We  know  not 
how  this  purpose  could  have  been  more  ef- 
fectually answered,  in  a single  instance, 
than  by  making  choice  of  our  apostle,  who 
had  been  possessed  of  every  advantage  that 
can  be  imagined  exclusive  of  the  gospel,  and, 
in  consequence  of  these  advantages,  had 
made  the  most  pertinacious  efforts  to  sup- 
press it:  he  was  born  a Jew,  bred  up  under 
Gamaliel,  a chief  of  the  Pharisees  (Phil,  iii,) 
the  sect  which  professed  the  most  peculiar 
attachment  to  the  law  of  Moses:  his  conduct 
before  he  became  a Christian  was  undoubt- 
edly moral,  if  we  understand  morality  in  that 
lean  and  confined  sense  which  it  too  fre- 
quently bears  among  ourselves,  as  signifying 
no  more  than  an  exemption  from  gross  vices, 
together  with  a round  of  outward  duties  per- 
formed in  a mercenary,  servile  spirit,  to 
soothe  conscience,  and  purchase  the  favour 
of  God.  While  he  was  thus  busied  in  ob- 
serving the  letter  of  the  law,  he  tells  us, 
he  was  alive, — that  is,  he  pleased  himself  in 
his  own  attainments,  doubted  not  of  his 
ability  to  please  God,  and  that  his  state  was 
safe  and  good.  Upon  these  principles  (which 
act  uniformly  upon  all  who  are  governed  by 


[book  II. 

them)  his  heart  was  filled  with  enmity 
against  the  doctrines  and  people  of  Jesus, 
and  his  blinded  conscience  taught  him  that 
it  was  his  duty  to  oppose  them.  He  was  a 
willing  witness  at  the  death  of  Stephen 
(Acts  xxii.  20,)  and,  from  a spectator,  soon 
became  a distinguished  actor  in  the  like  tra- 
gedies. Such  is  the  unavoidable  gradation, 
in  a state  of  nature,  from  bad  to  worse.  The 
excess  and  effects  of  his  rage  are  described 
by  St.  Luke  in  very  lively  colours  ; and  he 
often  acknowledges  it  in  his  epistles;  for, 
though  the  Lord  forgave  him,  he  knew  not 
how  to  forgive  himself  for  having  persecuted 
and  wasted  the  church  of  God  (Gal.  i.  18; 
1 Cor.  xv.  9 :)  he  made  havoc  of  the  disci- 
ples like  a lion  or  a w'olf  amongst  a flock  of 
sheep, — pressing  into  their  houses,  sparing 
none,  not  even  women.  Thus  he  was  filled 
with  the  hateful  spirit  of  persecution,  which 
is  undistinguishing  and  unrelenting.  The 
mischiefs  he  could  do  in  Jerusalem,  not  be- 
ing sufficient  to  gratify  his  insatiable  cruelty 
and  thirst  of  blood,  he  obtained  (as  has  been 
formerly  observed)  a commission  from  the 
high-priest  to  harass  the  disciples  at  Da- 
mascus. In  this  journey,  when  he  was  near 
the  city,  he  was  suddenly  struck  to  the 
ground  by  the  voice  and  appearance  of  the 
Lord  Jesus.  From  that  hour  a memorable 
change  took  place  in  his  heart  and  views ; 
and,  having  been  baptized  by  Ananias,  and 
received  a free  pardon  of  all  his  wickedness, 
with  a commission  to  the  apostolic  office, 
he  began  to  preach  that  faith  which  before 
he  had  so  industriously  laboured  to  destroy. 
In  this  new  light  we  are  now  to  consider 
him ; and  whatever  may  be  reasonably  ex- 
pected from  a sense  of  such  a display  of  grace 
and  mercy  in  his  behalf,  we  shall  find  mani- 
fested in  the  subsequent  course  of  his  life. 
Happy  are  those  who  come  the  nearest  to 
such  an  exemplary  pattern. 

I.  The  characteristic  excellence  of  St. 
Paul,  which  was  as  the  spring  or  source  of 
every  other  grace,  was  the  ardency  of  the 
supreme  love  he  bore  to  his  Lord  and  Sa- 
viour: it  would  not  be  easy  to  find  many 
periods  throughout  his  epistles  which  do  not 
evidence  the  fulness  of  his  heart  in  this  re- 
spect: he  seems  delighted  even  with  the 
sound  of  the  name  of  Jesus,  so  that,  regard- 
less of  the  cold  rules  of  studied  composition, 
we  find  him  repeating  it  ten  times  in  the 
compass  of  ten  successive  verses,  ICor.i. 
1 — 10.  He  was  so  struck  with  the  just  claim 
the  Saviour  had  to  every  heart,  that  he  ac- 
counted a want  of  love  to  him  the  highest 
pitch  of  ingratitude  and  wickedness,  and  de- 
serving the  utmost  severity  of  wrath  and 
ruin,  1 Cor.  xvi.  22.  When  he  was  con- 
scious that,  for  his  unwearied  application  to 
the  service  of  the  gospel,  in  defiance  of  the 
many  dangers  and  deaths  which  awaited  him 
in  every  place,  he  appeared  to  many  as  one 


OF  A MINISTER  OF  CHRIST. 


85 


CHAP.  II.] 

beside  himself,  and  transported  beyond  the 
bounds  of  sober  reason,  he  thought  it  a suffi- 
cient  apology  to  say,  “The  love  of. Christ 
constrains  us”  (2  Cor.  v.  14 ;)  we  are  content 
to  be  fools  for  his  sake,  to  be  despised,  so  he 
may  be  honoured,  to  be  nothing  in  ourselves, 
that  he  may  be  all  in  all:  he  had  such  a 
sense  of  the  glorious,  invaluable  excellence 
of  the  person  of  Christ,  of  his  adorable  con- 
descension in  taking  the  nature  and  curse 
of  sinners  upon  himself,  and  his  complete 
suitableness  and  sufficiency,  as  the  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption 
of  his  people,  that  he  often  seems  at  a loss 
for  words  answerable  to  the  emotions  of  his 
heart ; and  when  he  has  exhausted  the  powers 
of  language,  and  astonished  his  readers  with 
his  inimitable  energy,  he  intimates  a convic- 
tion of  his  inability  to  do  justice  to  a subject, 
the  height,  and  depth,  and  length,  and  breadth 
of  which  are  too  great  for  our  feeble  capaci- 
ties to  grasp.  But  besides  these  general 
views,  he  was  particularly  affected  with  the 
exceeding  abundant  love  and  grace  of  Christ 
to  himself  when  he  reflected  on  the  circum- 
stances in  which  the  Lord  had  found  him, 
and  the  great  things  he  had  done  for  him. 
That  he  who  had  before  been  a persecutor, 
a blasphemer,  and  injurious,  should  be  for- 
given, accepted  as  a child  of  God,  intrusted 
with  the  ministry  of  the  gospel,  and  ap- 
pointed to  everlasting  salvation,  was  indeed 
an  instance  of  wonderful  grace.  So  it  ap- 
peared to  himself ; and  at  the  thought  of  it  he 
often  seems  to  forget  his  present  subject,  and 
breaks  forth  into  inimitable  digressions  to  the 
praise  of  him  who  had  loved  him,  and  given 
himself  for  him.  Happily  convinced  of  the 
tendency  and  efficacy  of  this  principle  in 
himself,  he  proposes  it  to  others,  instead  of  a 
thousand  arguments,  whenever  he  would  in- 
culcate the  most  unreserved  obedience  to  the 
whole  will  of  God,  or  stir  up  believers  to  a 
holy  diligence  in  adorning  the  doctrine  of 
their  God  and  Saviour  in  all  things ; and  his 
exhortations  to  the  conscientious  discharge 
of  the  various  duties  of  relative  life  are  gene- 
rally enforced  by  this  grand  motive.  In  a 
word,  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  the  ha- 
bitual and  favourite  subject  that  employed 
his  thoughts,  his  tongue,  and  his  pen,  was  the 
love  of  Christ. 

Supported  and  animated  by  this  love,  he 
exerted  himself  to  the  utmost  in  promoting 
the  knowledge  of  him  whom  he  loved,  and 
bearing  testimony  to  his  power  and  grace : 
nothing  could  dishearten,  or  terrify,  or  bribe 
him  from  his  duty ; and  this  must,  and  will, 
be  universally  the  leading  principle  of  a 
faithful  minister.  Should  a man  possess  the 
tongue  of  men  and  angels,  the  finest  genius, 
and  the  most  admired  accomplishments,  if  he 
is  not  constrained,  and  directed  by  the  love  of 
Christ,  he  will  either  do  nothing,  or  nothing 
to  the  purpose  : he  will  be  unable  to  support 


either  the  frowns  or  the  smiles  of  the  world ; 
his  studies  and  endeavours  will  certainly  be 
influenced  by  low  and  selfish  views : interest, 
or  a desire  of  applause,  may  stimulate  him  to 
shine  as  a scholar,  a critic,  or  a philosopher ; 
but  till  the  love  of  Christ  rules  in  his  heart, 
he  will  neither  have  inclination  nor  power 
to  exert  himself  for  the  glory  of  God,  or  the 
good  of  souls. 

II.  The  inseparable  effect,  and  one  of  the 
surest  evidences  of  love  to  Christ,  is  a love 
to  his  people.  Of  this  likewise  our  apostle 
exhibits  an  instructive  and  affecting  example ; 
the  warmth  and  cordiality  of  his  love  to  those 
who  loved  his  Lord  and  Master,  appear  in 
every  page  of  his  writings ; he  so  rejoiced  in 
their  prosperity,  that,  to  hear  of  it  at  any 
time,  made  him  in  a manner  forget  his  own 
sorrows,*  when  encompassed  with  troubles 
on  every  side ; and  though  in  many  instances, 
he  did  not  meet  that  grateful  return  he  had 
reason  to  expect,^  yet  he  could  not  be  dis- 
couraged ; but  when  he  had  occasion  to  ex- 
postulate with  some  upon  this  account,  he 
adds,  I will  still  gladly  spend  and  be  spent  for 
you,  though  the  more  I love  you,  the  less  I 
am  loved,  2 Cor.  xii.  5.  Of  sudh  a generous 
temper  as  this,  the  world,  would  they  observe 
it,  must  acknowledge  (as  the  magician  in 
Egypt,)  this  is  the  finger  of  God ; for  nothing 
but  his  grace  can  produce  a conduct  so  con- 
trary to  the  natural  inclination  of  man,  as  to 
persevere  and  increase  in  kindness  and  affec- 
tion to  those  who  persevere  in  requiting  it 
with  coldness  and  ingratitude.  His  i pieties 
to  the  Thessalonians  abound  in  such  expres- 
sions and  strains  of  tenderness  as  would  doubt- 
less be  generally  admired  (especially  by  those 
who  can  read  them  in  the  original,)  were  they 
not  overlooked,  through  the  unhappy  disre- 
gard which  too  many  show  to  that  best  oi 
books  in  which  they  are  contained.  When 
he  is  appealing  to  themselves  concerning  the 
sincerity  of  his  conduct,  and  how  far  he  had 
been  from  abusing  his  authority,  he  says,  We 
were  gentle  among  you,  even  as  a nurse 
(or  mother)  cherisheth  her  children;  who, 
by  her  tender  and  assiduous  offices,  supplies 
their  inability  to  take  care  of  themselves, 
1 Thess.  ii.  7,  8.  It  would  be  well  if  all  who 
have  aimed  to  derive  a plenitude  of  power 
from  the  example  of  the  apostle,  were  equally 
desirous  to  imitate  him  in  the  use  of  it.  Pe 
then  adds,  So,  being  affectionately  desirous  ' ’ 
you,  we  were  willing  to  have  imparted  xina 
you,  not  the  gospel  of  God  only,  but  also  cu 
own  souls,  because  ye  were  dear  unto  us. 

* 2 Cor.  vii.  7,  13;  see  likewise  Phil.  ii.  28,  which 
finely  intimates  his  tenderness  and  affection.  Ho  was 
oppressed  with  sorrow  upon  sorrow  ; yet  he  felt  more 
for  the  Philippians  than  for  himself.  He  mourned  over 
Epaphroditus,  when  sick  for  their  sakes ; and  sent  him 
away  for  their  comfort  when  recovered:  and  this  he  did 
as  the  most  effectual  means  to  lessen  his  own  burden, 
by  sympathizing  in  that  .icy  his  friends  would  have  in 
the  interview,  though  he  could  not  directly  partake  with 
them. 


86 


ST.  PAUL  AN  EXEMPLAR 


No  comment  can  do  justice  to  the  spirit  of 
this  sentiment,  or  to  the  force  of  the  expres- 
sion in  the  Greek.  In  another  passage,  which 
is  rendered  in  our  version,  ‘ W e being  taken 
from  you,’  the  original  term*  has  an  emphasis 
which  no  single  word  in  our  language  can 
answer;  it  imports  such  a state  of  separation 
as  is  made  between  a parent  and  a child  by 
the  death  of  either,  when  the  child  is  left  a 
helpless  and  exposed  orphan,  or  the  parent  is 
bereaved  of  the  staff  and  comfort  of  his  age ; 
it  beautifully  intimates  the  endearing  affec- 
tion which  subsisted  between  the  apostle  and 
the  persons  he  was  writing  to ; and  demon- 
strates the  greatest  tenderness,  simplicity, 
and  condescension.  But  his  regard  went  be- 
yond words,  and  wTas  evidenced  by  the  whole 
course  of  his  actions.  Nor  was  it  confined  to 
those  who  had  enjoyed  the  benefits  of  his 
personal  ministry : his  heart  was  charged  with 
the  care  and  welfare  of  all  the  churches ; and 
those  who  had  not  seen  his  face  in  the  flesh, 
had  an  unceasing  share  in  his  solicitude  and 
prayers  (Col.  ii.  1 :)  nay,  so  strong  was  his 
love  to  the  churches,  that  it  balanced  his  ha- 
bitual desire  to  be  with  Christ ; he  could  not. 
determine  which  was  most  eligible,  to  suffer 
with  the  members  upon  earth  (so  that  he 
might  be  serviceable  to  them,)  or  to  reign 
with  the  Head  in  heaven,  Phil.  i.  23,  24.  In 
the  passage  referred  to,  we  see  the  happy 
centripetal  and  centrifugal  forces  which  car- 
ried him  on  through  the  circle  of  duty,  he 
constantly  tended  and  gravitated  to  his  centre 
of  rest : but  successive  opportunities  of  use- 
fulness and  service  drew  him  off,  and  made 
him  willing  to  wait  yet  longer. 

In  this  part  of  his  character  we  are  not  to 
consider  him  exclusively  as  an  apostle.  All 
who  have  truly  known  the  gospel  to  be  the 
power  of  God  unto  salvation,  are  partakers 
of  the  same  spirit,  according  to  the  measure 
of  their  faith.  That  person  is  unworthy  the 
name  of  a Christian,  who  does  not  feel  a con- 
cern and  affection  for  his  brethren  who  are  in 
the  world.  It  must  be  allowed,  that  preju- 
dices and  misapprehensions  too  often  prevent 
the-  Lord’s  people  from  knowing  each  other ; 
but,  so  far  as  they  believe  a person  to  be  a 
child  of  God  through  faith,  they  cannot  but 
love  him.  This  is  the  immutable  criterion 
which  our  Lord  himself  has  given,  whereby 
his  real  disciples  are  to  be  known  and  ac- 
knowledged, John  xiii.  35.  He  has  not 
directed  us  to  judge  by  their  discourses,  their 
knowledge,  or  even  their  zeal,  bu‘  by  the 
evidence  they  give  of  mutud.  love;  and  we 
may  as  easily  conceive  of  a sun  without  light, 
or  a cause  without  an  effect,  as  of  a person 
duly  affected  with  a sense  of  the  glory  of 
God,  and  the  love  of  Christ,  and  not  propor- 
tionably  filled  with  a spirit  of  love  to  all  who 
are  like  minded.  But  especially  this  disposi- 


[book  II. 

j tion  is  essential  to  a minister  of  the  gospel ; 
j and  the  apostle  assures  us,  that  all  imagin- 
able qualifications  are  of  no  avail  without  it; 
though  we  could  possess  the  powers  of  a pro- 
phet, or  an  angel,  or  the  zeal  of  a martyr,  if 
we  are  destitute  of  this  love,  we  are,  in  the 
sight  of  God,  but  as  sounding  brass, f or  a 
tinkling  cymbal. 

III.  St.  Paul’s  inflexible  attachment  to  the 
great  doctrines  of  the  gospel  is  another  part 
of  his  character  which  deserves  our  attention  * 
he  knew  their  worth,  experienced  their  power 
in  his  own  soul,  and  saw,  that  though  the> 
were  unacceptable  to  the  wisdom"  of  the 
world,  they  bore  the  impress  of  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  God.  He  takes  notice  that,  in 
those  early  days,  there  were  many  who  cor 
rupted  the  word  of  God.J  The  word  properly 
signifies  to  adulterate,  to  imitate  the  practice 
of  dishonest  vintners,  who  mix  an ' sophisti- 
cate their  liquors,  so  that,  though  the  colour 
is  preserved  and  the  taste  perhaps  nearly 
counterfeited,  the  quality  and  properties  are 
quite  altered  and  depraved.  But  he  says,  W e 
are  not  as  they : he  preached  the  gospel  in  its 
purity  and  simplicity,  the  sincere  genuine 
milk§  of  the  word,  neither  weakened  by 
water,  nor  disguised  by  any  artful  sweeten- 
ing to  render  it  more  palatable:  he  added 
nothing  of  his  own,  nor  employed  any  art  or 
gloss  to  palliate  the  truth,  that  it  might  be 
mor3  acceptable  to  men  of  carnal  minds;  as 
he  was  not  ashamed  of  it,  neither  was  he 
afraid  lest  it  should  fall  without  success  to 
the  ground,  if  not  supported  and  assisted  by 
inventions  of  his  own ; he  knew  whose  word 
it  was,  and  therefore  cheerfully  ventured  the 
issue  with  him  who  alone  could  procure  it  a 
welcome  reception;  and  as  he  disdained  the 
thought  of  deviating  a tittle  himself  from  the 
plain  and  full  declaration  of  the  truth,  neither 
could  he  bear,  no  not  for  an  hour,  with  those 
who  presumed  to  do  so,  Gal.  ii.  5.  I doubt  not 
but  the  warmth  of  his  zeal,  in  this  respect, 
has  disgusted  many  in  the  present  day, 
wherein  a seeming  candour  and  forbearance 
is  pleaded  for  and  extended  to  almost  every 
sentiment,  except  the  truths  in  which  St. 
Paul  gloried.  There  is  little  doubt  but  many, 
if  they  had  the  courage  and  honesty  to  speak 
out,  would  add  St.  Pam  himself  to  "the  list  of 
those  whom  they  despise  as  uncharitable  and 
hot-brained  bigots ; for  who  has  offended  more 
than  he  against  the  rules  of  that  indifference 
to  error,  which  is  at  present  miscalled  charity. 
The  Galatians,  in  a short  time  after  he  left 
them,  had  ventured  to  admit  some  alteration 


t Soundivg  brass,  without  meaning,  and  without  life. 
Such  are  the  most  specious  gifts  and  performances,  if 
unaccompanied  by  a spirit  of  love:  they  may  perhaps 
he  useful  to  others,  as  t lie  sound  of  a bell  gives  notice, 
and  brings  people  together,  but  the  possessor  himself  is 
a lifeless  instrument ; ho  designs  no  good,  and  will  re 
ceive  no  reward. 

I 2 Cor.  ii.  17. 

§ 4:^ov  > *>.*,  1 Pet.  ii.  2. 


* AzroQffxvHTiivT:;,  1 Thess.  ii.  17 


OF  A MINISTER  OF  CHRIST. 


87 


CHAP  II.] 

m the  doctrine  they  had  received  from  him ; 
it  was  chiefly  in  one  point:  they  had  been 
persuaded  into  an  undue  regard  for  the  law 
of  Moses.  This,  some  may  think,  was  little 
more  than  a circumstantial : that  it  could  not 
have  any  great  or  direct  influence  upon  their 
moral  practice ; and  that  they  might  be  very 
good  men,  and  good  Christians,  though,  in 
this  one  thing,  they  could  not  see  exactly 
with  their  teacher’s  eyes.  But  how  different 
was  the  apostle’s  judgment ! If  the  Galatians 
had  returned  to  the  practice  of  idolatry,  or 
broken  out  into  the  most  scandalous  im- 
moralities, he  could  hardly  have  expressed 
his  surprise  and  grief  in  stronger  terms;  he 
changes  his  usual  manner  of  address,  and 
speaks  to  them  as  a senseless  people  (Gal.  iii. 
1,)  under  the  power  of  some  unaccountable 
fascination ; he  tells  them,  that,  by  admitting 
such  an  addition  (Gal.  i.  6 — 9,)  small  and 
inconsiderable  as  they  might  think  it,  they 
had,  in  effect,  received  another  gospel,  which 
was,  however,  so  enervated  and  despoiled  of 
efficacy,  that  it  was,  more  properly  speaking, 
become  no  gospel  at  all,  utterly  unworthy 
the  least  pretence  to  the  name.  Further,  he 
denounces  an  anathema  (the  highest  curse) 
upon  any  person  who  should  dare  to  preach 
any  such  pretended  gospel,  even  though,  if 
such  a thing  were  possible,  it  should  be  him- 
self, or  an  angel  from  heaven ; and  this  de- 
nunciation he  immediately  repeats,  lest  it 
should  be  thought  that  he  spoke  rather  from 
warmth  of  temper  than  from  a just  sense  of 
the  importance  of  the  case.  What  would 
some  of  my  readers  think  of  a man  who 
should,  at  this  time,  express  himself  in  terms 
like  these!  But  let  it  be  remembered,  that 
our  apostle,  who  was  so  ready  with  an  ana- 
thema upon  this  occasion,  and  who,  in  an- 
other place  (1  Cor.  xvi.  22,)  passes  the  same 
severe  judgment  upon  any  man  who  does  not 
love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  was  far  from 
speaking  thus  from  emotions  of  anger  and 
ill-will ; the  disposition  of  his  own  mind,  the 
tender  concern  with  which  he  viewed  the 
worst  of  sinners  may  be  judged  of  from  his 
willingness  to  be  made  an  anathema  himself 
(Rom.  ix.  3,)  after  the  manner  of  Christ,  if, 
by  all  he  could  suffer,  he  might  be  a means 
of  saving  the  Jews,  who  were  his  wTorst  ene- 
mies, and  from  whom  he  had  constantly  re- 
ceived the  most  unjust  and  cruel  treatment; 
but,  when  the  cause  of  the  gospel  and  the 
honour  of  Christ  were  in  question,  he  could 
not,  he  durst  not,  consult  with  the  feelings 
of  flesh  and  blood : but  as  the  minister  and 
messenger  of  the  Lord,  he  solemnly  declared 
what  must,  and  will  be,  the  awful  conse- 
quence of  neglecting  or  corrupting  the  word 
of  life. 

Every  faithful  minister  of  the  gospel  is 
possessed  of  a degree  of  the  same  attention 
to  the  purity  of  the  truth  and  faith  once  de- 
livered to  the  saints;  they  must  not  deviate 


from  their  instructions,  nor  can  they  behold 
with  indifference  the  specious  attempts  of 
others  to  mislead  the  unwary;  they  know 
what  censures  they  must  expect  upon  this 
account.  It  is  sufficient  for  them  that  they 
can  appeal  to  the  searcher  of  hearts,  that 
though,  as  the  servants  of  Christ,  they  dare 
not  aim  to  please  men  by  speaking  smooth 
things,  yet  they  act  from  principles  of  be- 
nevolence and  love,  and  would  rejoice  in  the 
salvation  of  their  greatest  opposers.  The 
world  perhaps  would  judge  more  favourably 
of  them  if  they  knew  all;  if  they  wrere  wit- 
nesses to  the  prayers  and  tears  which  they 
pour  out  for  them  in  secret,  and  the  emotions 
of  mind  they  feel  wThen  they  are  constrained 
to  declare  the  more  awful  parts  of  their  mes- 
sage; but  as  ministers,  and  in  their  public 
work,  they  cannot  avoid  pointing  out  the 
danger  of  those  who  venture  their  souls  and 
eternal  hopes  upon  any  other  doctrine  than 
that  which  St.  Paul  preached. 

IV.  But  though  St.  1 wul  w7as  so  tenacious 
of  the  great  foundation  truths  of  the  gospel, 
and  wrould  not  admit  or  connive  at  any  doc- 
trine that  interfered  vv  k a them,  he  exercised, 
upon  all  occasions,  a great  tenderness  to 
weak  consciences,  in  matters  that  were  not 
essential  to  the  faith,  and  when  the  scruples 
were  owing  rather  to  a want  of  clear  light 
than  to  obstinacy.  This  wras  evident  in  his 
conduct  with  regard  to  the  great  controversy 
that  soon  took  place  between  the  Jewish  and 
Gentile  converts,  about  the  distinction  of 
meats,  and  drinks,  and  other  rituals  enjoined 
by  the  law  of  Moses;  the  obligation  (Rom. 
xiv.)  of  which,  many  who  had  been  educated 
in  the  practice  of  those  observances,  did  not 
immediately  see  was  superseded  by  the  gos- 
pel of  Christ:  He  knew  and  asserted  his  own 
liberty;  yet,  in  condescension  to  the  weak- 
ness of  others,  he  often  abridged  himself  ot 
it,  and  declared  that,  rather  than  grieve  01- 
cause  offence  to  a weak  brother,  he  would 
eat  no  meat  while  the  world  stood.  His  prac- 
tice herein  will  probably  be  of  general  ap- 
plication, mutatis  mutandis , so  long  as  the 
present  state  of  human  infirmity  subsists.  A 
defect  in  knowledge,  the  prejudices  of  educa- 
tion and  custom,  the  remains  of  a legal  spirit, 
the  influence  of  great  names,  and  other  causes 
of  a like  nature,  will  probably  always  ope- 
rate, so  far  as  to  keep  up  lesser  differences  in 
judgment  and  practice  amongst  those  who 
agree  in  the  great  and  fundamental  truths. 
The  enemy  gains  too  much  advantage  from 
these  things,  not  to  improve  such  differences 
into  divisions.  Self  is  too  prevalent  in  the 
best  men,  and  the  tendency  of  self  is,  to  exact 
submission,  to  hurry  to  extremes,  to  exag- 
gerate trifles  into  points  of  great  consequence, 
and  to  render  us  averse  to  the  healing  ex- 
pedients of  peace.  From  these  sources,  dis- 
cords and  evils  innumerable  have  been  mul- 
tiplied and  perpetuated  among  the  various 


63 


ST.  PAUL  AN  EXEMPLAR 


denominations  under  which  the  Lord’s  people 
have  been  ranged,  which  have  greatly  hin- 
dered the  welfare  and  progress  of  the  common 
cause,  and  exposed  each  contending  party  to 
the  scorn  of  their  real  enemies.  But  were 
the  spirit  and  conduct  of  our  apostle  more 
adopted,  many  debates  would  entirely  cease; 
and  in  those  things  where  a difference  of 
judgment  would  still  subsist,  the  exercise  of 
patience,  gentleness,  and  mutual  forbearance, 
would  perhaps  afford  fairer  occasion  for  the 
display  of  the  Christian  character,  than  if  we 
were  all  exactly  of  a mind;  then  the  strong 
would  bear  the  infirmities  of  the  weak,  the 
one  would  not  censure,  nor  the  other  despise ; 
nor  would  those  whose  minds  have  been  en- 
larged by  a variety  of  experience  and  observa- 
tion, think  it  at  all  strange,  much  less  would 
they  be  angry,  if  others  who  have  not  had  the 
same  advantages  cannot  immediately  enter 
into  all  their  sentiments.  St.  Paul,  in  know- 
ledge, abilities,  and  usefulness,  was  eminently 
superior  to  all  those  among  whom  he  chiefly 
conversed,  and,  as  an  apostle,  he  had  a 
stronger  right  than  any  man  since  the  apos- 
tle’s day  could  have  to  exact  an  implicit 
deference  and  submission;  but  he  had  drunk 
deeply  of  the  spirit  of  his  Master,  and  we  are 
concerned  to  follow  him,  as  he  followed 
Christ,  in  the  exercise  of  tenderness  to  the 
weakest  of  the  flock. 

It  is  not  my  present  business  to  define  what 
are  properly  essentials  in  the  Christian  reli- 
gion, and  to  separate  them  clearly  from  the 
less  important  points,  which,  for  that  reason, 
and  in  contradistinction  to  the  other,  are 
called  circumstantials.  This  would  lead  me 
too  far,  though  perhaps  it  would  not  be  so 
difficult  as  a person  might  at  first  expect, 
who  should  be  told  of  all  that  has  been  writ- 
ten (with  little  satisfaction)  upon  the  subject. 
I foresee  a future  period  in  our  history,  when 
a disquisition  of  this  kind  will  be  almost  ne- 
cessary ; and  if  I am  spared  to  reach  so  far, 
I shall  probably  embrace  the  occasion.  In 
the  mean  time  I would  just  hint  an  observa- 
tion or  two  upon  this  head,  which  the  intelli- 
gent reader  (if  he  thinks  them  just)  may  ap- 
ply as  he  sees  proper. 

1.  Circumstantials  and  essentials  in  reli- 
gion (if  we  speak  with  propriety)  are  derived 
from  the  same  source,  and  resolved  into  the 
same  authority.  To  consider  the  commands 
of  God  as  essentials,  and  the  inventions  and 
traditions  of  men  superadded  thereto  as  cir- 
cumstantials, would  be  a very  improper,  and 
indeed  a very  false  division  of  the  subject. 
Nothing  but  what  is  prescribed  by  the  word 
of  God,  or  may  be  fairly  deduced  from  it,  is 
worthy  the  name  even  of  circumstantial  in 
true  religion.  Human  appointments,  if  not 
repugnant  to  scripture  and  the  light  of  con- 
science, may  be  submitted  to  for  the  sake  of 
peace,  or  when  the  general  purpose  of  edifi- 
cation cannot  be  attained  without  them ; but 


[book  ii. 

they  seem  not  to  deserve  a place  even  among 
the  circumstantials  of  a religion  which  is  of 
divine  institution.  All  the  laboured  argu- 
ments, whether  for  or  against  the  colour  of  a 
garment,  the  shape  of  a building,  and  a mul- 
titude of  other  things  equally  insignificant, 
seem  to  have  occasioned  a Heedless  loss  of 
time  and  temper,  chiefly  by  a mistake  of  the 
question  on  both  sides. 

2.  Essentials  in  Christianity  are  those  things 
without  which  no  man  can  be  a Christian  in 
the  sight  of  God,  and  by  the  decision  of  his 
word ; and,  on  the  other  hand,  those  things 
only  are  essential  which  whoever  possesses,  is 
by  scripture-declaration,  in  a state  of  favour 
with  God  through  Christ.  These  might  be 
branched  out  into  many  particulars ; but  they 
are  fully  and  surely  comprised  in  two,  Faith 
and  Holiness.  These  are  essential  to  the  being 
of  a Christian,  are  only  to  be  found  in  a Chris- 
tian, are  infallible  tokens  that  the  possessor 
is  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  and  whoever  dies 
without  them  must  assuredly  perish  : These 
are  essentials,  because  they  are  absolutely 
necessary ; for  it  is  written,  “ He  that  be- 
lieveth  not  shall  be  damned”  (Mark  xvi.  16,) 
and  “ Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the 
Lord”  (Heb.  xii.  14 :)  and  they  are  essential 
likewise,  because  they  demonstrate  an  inter- 
est in  the  promise  of  everlasting  life.  Thus 
our  Lord  declares,  “He  that  heareth  my 
words,  and  believeth  on  him  that  sent  me, 
hath  everlasting  life,  and  shall  not  come  into 
condemnation,  but  is  passed  from  death  unto 
life”  (John  v.  24 ;)  and  the  apostle,  writing 
to  the  believing  Romans,  tells  them,  “Now, 
being  made  free  from  sin,  and  become  the 
servants  of  God,  you  have  your  fruit  unto 
holiness,  and  the  end  everlasting  life,”  Rom. 
vi.  22.  These  then  are  the  essentials  of  re- 
ligion : and  though  they  are  produced  by  the 
same  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  derived 
from  a knowledge  of  the  same  truths,  and 
therefore  cannot  be  separated,  they  may 
properly  be  distinguished  for  the  conviction 
of  those  who  pretend  to  one  without  the 
other.  The  most  specious  appearances  of 
holiness,  which  are  not  accompanied  with 
faith  in  Christ,  may  be  safely  rejected  as 
counterfeits.  On  the  other  hand,  a profession 
of  faith  which  is  not  evidenced  by  the  fruits 
of  holiness,  by  gracious  tempers,  and  a tenor 
of  life  becoming  the  gospel,  is  dead,  delusory, 
and  destructive. 

If  the  question  is  removed  another  step, 
and  it  should  be  asked,  Which,  or  how  many, 
of  the  doctrines  of  scripture  are  necessary  to 
produce  the  faith  and  holiness  supposed  re- 
quisite 1 it  may  suffice  to  say,  That,  in  the 
nature  of  things,  no  person  can  be  expected 
to  believe  in  Christ,  till  convinced  of  his 
need  of  him,  and  of  his  ability,  as  a Saviour, 
fully  to  answer  his  expectations : and  as  a 
supreme  love  to  God,  and  a hatred  of  all  sin, 
are  evidently  included  in  the  idea  of  holiness, 


OF  A MINISTER  OF  CHRIST. 


99 


CHAP.  II.] 

it  supposes  a disposition  of  mind,  which  every 
man’s  experience  proves  to  be  beyond  the 
power  of  fallen  nature  ; and  therefore  a com- 
petent knowledge  and  cordial  acceptance  of 
what  the  scriptures  teach  concerning  the  na- 
ture and  desert  of  sin,  the  person  and  media- 
tory acts  of  Christ,  the  causes,  ends,  and 
effects  of  his  mediation,  together  with  the 
necessity  of  that  change  of  heart  which  is 
expressed  by  a being  born  again,  appear  to 
be  essentially  necessary  to  that  faith  and 
holiness  which  are  described  in  the  gospel. 

3.  The  circumstantials  of  religion  include 
all  those  particulars  of  revelation,  which  a 
person  possessed  of  the  above-mentioned  es- 
sentials may  as  yet  be  unacquainted  with,  or 
unable  to  judge  of  with  certainty.  A care- 
ful application  to  the  scriptures,  a diligent 
waiting  upon  God  in  prayer,  and  an  improve- 
ment of  the  means  of  grace,  will  (by  the  di- 
vine blessing,  which  is  promised  to  those  who 
seek  in  this  manner)  increase  our  light,  com- 
prehension, and  certainty,  with  regard  to 
these  points,  which  though  not  essentially 
necessary  to  the  being  of  a Christian,  are  ex- 
ceedingly conducive  to  his  well-being,  to  his 
growth  and  establishment  in  the  truth. 

This  subject  may  be  perhaps  illustrated 
from  the  animal  frame,  in  which  what  we  call 
the  vital  parts  may  be  considered  as  essential 
to  life,  because  there  can  be  no  life  without 
them.  We  may  easily  conceive,  that  a man 
may  live  without  an  arm  or  leg,  or  several 
members  and  organs,  which,  though  highly 
valuable  for  use  and  comfort,  are  not  neces- 
sarily connected  with  life ; but  if  we  conceive 
of  him  as  deprived  of  his  head,  heart,  or  lungs, 
we  can  no  longer  consider  him  as  living ; yet 
it  is  desirable  to  have  a body  not  only  ani- 
mated, but  organized.  So  likewise  in  reli- 
gion, those  who  are  truly  partakers  of  it  will 
not  too  curiously  inquire,  how  much  know- 
ledge, or  what  degree  of  practice  is  barely 
consistent  with  a possibility  of  life,  but  they 
will  earnestly  desire  to  be  acquainted  with 
the  whole  will  of  God,  and  that  every  part  of 
it  may  have  a suitable  influence  upon  their 
practice : But,  in  the  mean  time,  a consola- 
tion is  provided,  in  the  promises  of  God,  made 
to  those  who  have  received  the  seeds  of  faith 
and  true  holiness,  against  the  fears,  doubts, 
and  involuntary  mistakes,  which,  from  re- 
maining ignorance,  they  are  yet  subject  to  : 
He  will  supply  what  is  wanting,  pardon  what 
is  amiss,  and  lead  them  on  from  strength  to 
strength ; they  are  to  walk  by  the  light  al- 
ready afforded,  to  wait  on  him  for  an  in- 
crease, to  be  diffident  of  themselves,  and 
gentle  to  others,  and  things  which  as  yet 
they  know  not,  God  will,  in  his  due  time, 
reveal  to  them.,  But  to  return  from  this 
digression : 

V.  Every  part  of  St.  Paul’s  history  and 
writings  demonstrates  a disinterested  spirit, 
and  that  his  uncommon  labours  were  directed 

Vol.  II.  M 


to  no  other  ends  than  the  glory  of  God  and 
the  good  of  men.  No  man  had  probably  so 
great  an  influence  over  his  hearers,  or  could 
have  a juster  claim,  from  the  nature  and 
number  of  his  services,  to  a suitable  provision 
for  himself;  but  he  could  say  with  truth,  We 
seek  not  yours,  but  you.  To  cut  off  all  oc- 
casions of  misapprehension  on  this  head,  he 
usually  submitted  to  work  with  his  own 
hands,  rather  than  be  chargeable  to  his 
friends.*  It  is  true,  he  does  not  propose  him- 
self to  us  a pattern  in  this  respect ; for  he  tells 
us  (1  Cor.  ix.  14,)  that  the  labourer  is  wor- 
thy of  his  hire ; and  that  the  Lord  had  ordain- 
ed, that  those  who  preach  the  gospel  should 
live  by  the  gospel ; and  when  he  saw  it  ex- 
pedient, he  did  not  refuse  to  be  himself  as- 
sisted by  others.  He  showed,  by  accepting 
such  assistance  from  some,  that  he  under- 
stood his  liberty,  and  did  not  act  from  a spirit 
of  pride  or  singularity  when  he  declined  it ; 
and,  by  his  more  general  practice,  he  evi- 
denced that  he  was  superior  to  all  selfish 
and  mercenary  motives,  and,  upon  the  whole, 
he  was  content  to  appear  and  live  as  a poor 
man ; and  though  he  had  learned,  in  tire 
school  of  Christ,  how  to  abound  as  well  as  to 
suffer  want,  the  latter  seems  to  have  been 
more  frequently  his  lot  (Phil.  iv.  12 :)  he 
saw  too  many  false  teachers,  who,  under  the 
sanction  of  a sacred  character,  made  mer- 
chandize of  souls ; and  he  not  only  severally 
censured  them,  but,  by  this  self-denial,  which 
they  were  unable  to  imitate,  he  manifested 
the  vanity  of  their  pretences  in  setting  them- 
selves forth  as  the  apostles  of  Christ.  This 
seems  to  have  been  the  chief  design  in  it, 
and  the  reason  of  his  repeating,  with  so  much 
earnestness,  his  determination  to  take  nothing 
from  the  Corinthians,  who  were  too  much  in- 
clined to  listen  to  some  of  these  teachers,  to 
his  disadvantage.  But  whatever  parade  they 
might  make  of  gifts  or  zeal,  or  however  they 
might  presume  to  equal  themselves  to  him 
in  other  respects,  he  knew  they  would  not 
attempt  to  share  with  him  in  the  glory  of 
preaching  the  gospel  freely,  which  was  dia- 
metrically inconsistent  with  their  whole  de- 
sign. The  circumstances  with  us  are  so  far 
different,  that,  in  proposing  St.  Paul  as  a 
pattern  of  disinterestedness,  we  do  not  lay  a 
stress  upon  his  preaching  the  gospel  without 
expense  to  his  hearers  ; yet,  in  his  noble  con- 
tempt of  worldly  andvantages,  and  making 
every  thing  stoop  to  the  great  ends  of  his 
mission,  he  stands  as  a precedent  to  all  Chris- 
tian ministers  in  succeeding  times.  In  those 

* 1 Cor.  ix.  18.  That  \ may  make  the  gospel  of  Christ 
without  charge. — ASuttxvcv  5- no-ou,  that  I may  set  it 
before  you  gratis , or  a free  gospel.  The  messengers  of 
good  news  are  usually  gratified  with  a reward  ; but  the 
apostle,  though  he  brought  the  most  welcome  and  im- 
portant tidings  that  ever  rejoiced  the  hearts  of  men, 
would  not  encumber  or  disgrace  the  news,  by  receiving 
any  thing  for  it.  The  truth  is,  he  took  as  much  plea- 
sure in  delivering  his  message  as  they  could  in  hearing 
it  and  found  his  reward  in  his  employment. 


90 


ST.  PAUL  AN  EXEMPLAR 


passages  of  his  epistles  to  Timothy  and  Titus, 
where  the  negative  part  of  a minister’s  cha- 
racter, whether  bishop  or  deacon,  is  given, 
this  is  constantly  one  branch  of  it,  that  he  must 
not  be  influenced  by  a love  of  gain  ; and  as 
constantly  the  word  is  compounded  with  the 
epithet  filthy  : “ Not  given  to  filthy  lucre 
to  intimate,  that  nothing  can  be  more  dis- 
honest or  dishonourable  than  to  make  a traffic 
of  this  service.  Nor  is  this  the  judgment  of 
scripture  only,  but  the  general  voice  of  man- 
kind. Nothing  is  a greater  bar  to  a minis- 
ter’s usefulness,  or  renders  his  person  and 
labours  more  contemptible,  than  a known  at- 
tachment to  money,  a gripping  fist,  and  a 
hard  heart.  They  who  enter  into  the  priest’s 
office  for  a piece  of  bread,  who  are  less  con- 
cerned for  the  flock  than  the  fleece,  who  em- 
ploy all  their  arts  and  influence  to  exchange 
a less  emolument  for  a greater,  or  to  super- 
add one  to  another,  may  have  the  reward  they 
seek.  But  of  all  the  methods  of  acquiring 
wealth,  which  do  not  directly  expose  a man 
to  the  lash  of  human  laws,  this  is  the  most  to 
be  lamented  and  avoided.  If  the  scriptures 
are  true,  if  St.  Paul  was  a servant  of  Christ, 
and  if  the  authority  of  his  precepts  and  ex- 
ample is  still  binding,  a day  will  come  when 
mercenary  preachers  will  wish  they  had  beg- 
ged their  bread  from  door  to  door,  or  been 
chained  to  the  oar  of  a galley  for  life,  rather 
than  have  presumed  to  intrude  into  the  church 
upon  such  base  and  unworthy  views.  It  is 
to  be  feared,  that  too  many  read  the  awful 
denunciations  upon  this  head  in  the  prophets 
Jeremiah  (chap,  xxiii.)  and  Ezekiel  (chap, 
xiii.  and  xxxiv,)  with  indifference,  as  sup- 
posing they  only  relate  to  the  Jews  who 
lived  at  that  time  ; but  they  are  equally  ap- 
plicable to  all  who  prostitute  the  word  and 
worship  of  God  to  the  purposes  of  ambition 
and  avarice. 

VI.  From  the  foregoing  particulars  we 
may  collect  the  idea  of  true  Christian  zeal,  as 
e .amplified  in  our  apostle.  Hardly  any  word 
in  our  language  is  more  misunderstood,  or 
abused  than  zeal.*  It  is  used  in  the  New 
Testament  indifferently  in  a good  or  bad 
sense ; and  it  is  considered  as  a vice  or  vir- 
tue, according  to  its  object  and  principle.  It 
sometimes  denotes  envy,f  indignation,  or  dis- 
dain, an  obstinate  and  ignorant  opposition  to 

* All  religious  parties  profess  a great  regard  to  the 
precept.  Jude  3.  “Contend  earnestly  for  the  faith.” 
And  if  noisy  anger,  bold  assertions,  harsh  censures,  and 
bitter  persecuting  zeal  can  singly  or  jointly  answer  the 
apostle's  design,  there  is  hardly  a party  but  may  glory 
in  their  obedience.  But  if  the  weapons  of  our  warfare 
are  not  carnal: — if  the  wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the 
righteousness  of  God:— if  the  true  Christian  contention 
can  only  be  maintained  by  scripture  arguments,  meek- 
ness. patience,  prayer,  and  an  exemplary  conversation ; 
—if  this  is  the  true  state  of  the  case,  where  is  the  church 
or  party  (may  I not  say,  where  is  the  person?)  that  has 
not  still  much  to  learn  and  to  practise  on  this  point? 

t Compare  Acts  v.  17:  Rom.  xiii.  I'd.  x.  2;  Phil,  iii.6; 
Ga  . i.  14;  Acts  xvi  20;  James  iii.  16;  in  all  which 
pla^-:  he  word  is  the  same  that  is  rendered  zeal  in 
1 . ix  2;  Col.  iv.  13;  John  ii.  17. 


[book  II. 

the  truth,  a misguided  warmth  in  unneces- 
sary things,  and  a contentious,  disputatious 
temper.  A zeal  replete  with  these  characters 
has  too  frequently  been  the  bane  and  oppro- 
brium of  the  Christian  church ; but  it  is  good 
to  be  zealously  affected  in  a good  thing ; and 
then  it  is  sinful  to  be  otherwise.  Our  passions 
were  not  given  us  in  vain.  When  the  judg- 
ment is  well  informed,  and  the  understanding 
duly  enlightened  by  the  word  of  God,  the 
more  warmth  the  better ; but  this  earnestness 
in  an  ignorant  or  prejudiced  person  is  dan- 
gerous, and  hurtful  to  himself  and  others ; it 
is  like  haste  in  a man  in  the  dark,  who  knows 
not  where  he  is  going,  nor  what  mischiefs  he 
may  suffer  or  occasion.  False  zeal  spends  its 
strength  in  defence  of  names  and  forms,  the 
externals  of  religion,  or  the  inventions  of 
men;  it  enforces  its  edicts  by  compulsion  and 
severity : it  would  willingly  call  for  fire  from 
heaven,  but,  unable  to  do  this,  it  kindles  the 
flame  of  persecution,  and,  if  not  providentially 
restrained,  wages  war  with  the  peace,  com- 
fort, and  liberty  of  all  who  disdain  to  wear  its 
chains,  and  breathes  threatening,  slaughter 
and  destruction  with  an  unrelenting  spirit. 
Its  mildest  weapons  (which  it  never  employs 
alone,  except  where  it  is  checked  by  a supe- 
rior power)  are  calumny,  contempt  and  hatred; 
and  the  objects  it  seeks  to  worry  are  gene- 
rally the  quiet  in  the  land,  and  those  who 
worship  God  in  spirit  and  in  truth : in  a word, 
it  resembles  the  craft  by  which  it  works,  and 
is  earthly,  sensual,  devilish.  But  the  true 
Christian  zeal  is  a heavenly,  gentle  flame : it 
shines  and  warms,  but  knows  not  to  destroy : 
it  is  the  spirit  of  Christ,  infused,  with  a sense 
of  his  love,  into  the  heart : it  is  a generous 
philanthropy  and  benevolence,  which,  like 
the  light  of  the  sun,  diffuses  itself  to  e\  ery 
object,  and  longs  to  be  the  instrument  of 
good,  if  possible,  to  the  whole  race  of  man- 
kind. A sense  of  the  worth  of  souls,  the  im- 
portance of  unseen  things,  and  the  awful 
condition  of  unawakened  sinners,  makes  it 
indeed  earnest  and  importunate,  but  this  it 
shows  not  by  bitterness  and  constraint,  but 
by  an  unwearied  perseverance  in  attempting 
to  overcomej  evil  with  good : it  returns  bless- 
ings for  curses,  prayers  for  ill  treatment; 
and,  though  often  reviled  and  affronted,  can- 
not be  discouraged  from  renewed  efforts  to 
make  others  partakers  of  the  happiness  itself 
possesses : it  knows  how  to  express  a becom- 
ing indignation  against  the  errors  and  follies 
of  men ; but  towards  their  persons  it  is  all 


\ See  Romans  xxii  20,  21.  This  practice  the  apostle 
recommends  bv  the  metaphor  of  lieaping  coals  of  fire  on 
an  enemy’s  head.  As  metals  that  endure  a moderate 
warmth  without  alteration  are  melted  down  and  quite 
dissolved  by  an  intense  heat,  so  the  hard  heart,  even  of 
an  enemy,  may  lie  sometimes  softened  by  a series,  and 
indefatigable  heaping  up  of  favours  and  obligations. 
This  is  a noble  piece  of  chemistry,  but  almost  as  much 
out  of  repute  and  practice  as  the  search  after  the  philo- 
sopher's stone. 


OF  A MINISTER  OF  CHRIST. 


91 


CHAP.  II.] 

gentleness  and  compassion:*  it  weeps  (and 
would,  if  possible,  weep  tears  of  blood)  over 
those  who  will  not  be  persuaded ; but,  while 
it  plainly  represents  the  consequences  of 
their  obstinacy,  it  trembles  at  its  own  de- 
clarations,f and  feels  for  them  who  cannot 
feel  for  themselves,  it  is  often  grieved,  but 
cannot  be  provoked.  The  zealous  Christian 
is  strictly  observant  of  his  own  failings,  can- 
did and  tender  to  the  faults  of  others : he 
knows  what  allowances  are  due  to  the  frailty 
of  huma ft  nature,  and  the  temptations  of  the 
prc-ST-nt  tfts-te,  and  willingly  makes  all  the 
allowances  possible ; and  though  he  dare  not 
call  evil  good,  cannot  but  judge  according  to 
the  rule  of  thfe  scripture,  yet  he  will  conceal 
the  infirmfcies  of  men  as  much  as  he  can, 
will  not  speak  of  them  without  just  cause, 
ranch  less  will  he  aggravate  the  case,  or 
ooast  himself  over  them.  Such  was  the  zeal 
of  ouf  apostle.  Bold  and  intrepid  in  the  cause 
of  God  and  truth,  unwearied  in  service,  in- 
flexible ui  danger,  when  duty  called,  he  was 
not  to  be  ’•estramed,  either  by  the  threats  of 
enemies,  the  solicitations  of  friends,  or  the 
prospect  ot  any  hardships  to  which  he  might 
be  exposed:  he  cheerfully  endured  hunger 
and  thirst,  watching  and  weariness,  poverty 
and  contempt,  and  counted  not  his  life  dear, 
so  that  he  might  fulfil  the  great  purposes  of 
the  ministry  which  he  had  received  of  the 
Lord.  But  at  the  same  time,  in  all  his  inter- 
course with  men,  he  was  gentle,  mild,  and 
compassionate ; he  studied  the  peace,  and  ac- 
commodated himself  to  the  weakness  of  all 
about  him : when  he  might  command,  he  used 
entreaties;  when  he  met  with  hard  and  in- 
jurious treatment,  he  bore  it  patiently,  and, 
if  opportunity  offered,  requited  it  with  kind- 
ness. Thus  as  he  had  drunk  of  the  spirit,  so 
he  walked  in  the  steps  of  his  Lord  and 
Master. 

All  who  bear  the  name  of  ministers  of 
Christ  would  do  well  to  examine  how  far 
their  tempers  and  conduct  are  conformable 
to  St.  Paul’s.  Are  there  not  too  many  who 
widely  differ  from  him  I Where  he  was  im- 


* Whan  Pt.  Paul,  speaking  of  the  Judaizing  false 
teachers,  and  their  adherents,  says,  “ I would  they  were 
even  cut  off  which  trouble  you,”  he  seems  to  allude  to 
the  circumcision  they  so  strenuously  enforced,  Gal.  v. 
1C;  compare  Phil.  iii.  2.  Ilis  wish  concerning  these 
s >ctarie-  has  been  often  perverted,  to  give  sanction  to 
the  rase  of  persecutors ; but  he  does  not  mean  to  cut 
them  off  with  fire  and  sword,  or  to  cut  them  off  from 
fire  and  water,  but  to  have  them  excluded  from  com- 
munion and  converse  with  true  believers. 

f How  awful  to  declare,  to  denounce  the  terrors  of 
the  Lord!  those  terrors  which  are  represented  to  us  by 
fire  unquenchable,  with  the  additional  idea  of  eternity, 
Mattli.  iii.  13;  Mark  ix.  43.— As  such  descriptions  shock 
and  alarm  a guilty  conscience,  there  are  two  different 
methods  by  which  the  removal  of  this  alarm  is  attempt- 
ed: some  seek  and  find  peace  and  security  from  the 
blood  of  Jesus;  and  some,  who  are  not  pleased  with 
this  method,  satisfy  themselves  and  their  friends  with 
criticisms  upon  the  terms,  and  tell  us  that  the  phrase 
” for  ever  and  ever,”  signifies  a limited  space,  and  that 
1 tire  tha:  cannot  be  quenched,”  denotes  fire  that  goes 
out  of  itself. 


moveable  as  an  iron  pillar,  they  are  flexible 
and  yielding  as  a reed  waving  in  the  wind, 
suiting  their  doctrines  and  practice  to  the 
depraved  state  of  the  world,  and  prostituting 
their  talents  and  calling  to  the  unworthy 
pursuit  of  ambition  and  applause.  On  the 
other  hand,  in  things  less  essential,  or  not 
commanded,  they  invade  the  rights  of  private 
judgment,  and  attempt  to  bind  heavy  yokesj 
and  impositions  upon  those  whom  Christ  has 
made  free ; and  while  they  readily  tolerate,  if 
not  countenance,  scepticism,  and  immorality, 
they  exert  all  their  strength  and  subtlety  to 
disquiet  or  suppress  those  who  differ  from 
them  in  the  slightest  circumstance,  if  they 
profess  to  differ  for  conscience  sake.  But 
Jesus  has  no  such  ministers:  their  claim  is 
utterly  vain ; none  but  those  who  are  igno- 
rant of  the  plainest  truths  can  allow  them 
this  character : their  tempers,  their  behaviour, 
the  tenor  of  their  professed  instructions,  and 
the  total  want  of  efficacy  and  influence  in 
their  ministrations,  plainly  demonstrate  that 
he  neither  sent  them  nor  owns  them. 

VII.  Having  considered  the  subject-mat- 
ter, and  the  leading  views  of  the  apostle’s 
ministry,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  take  some 
notice  of  his  manner  as  a preacher.  This  he 
reminds  the  Corinthians  of.  They  were  re- 
puted a polite  and  ingenuous  people.  St. 
Paul  was  aware  of  their  character,  and  ex- 
presses himself  as  if  he  had  been  deliberating 
before  he  saw  them  in  what  way  he  should 
address  them  with  the  fairest  probability  of 
success.  He  tells  them  (1  Cor.  ii.  2—4,) 
that  he  determined  to  know  nothing  among 
them  but  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified, 
including  in  this  one  comprehensive  expres- 
sion, the  whole  scheme  of  gospel-doctrine. 
And  as  to  the  manner  in  which  he  delivered 
this  doctrine,  he  says,  “ My  speech  and  my 
preaching  was  not  with  enticing  words  of 
man’s  wisdom,  but  in  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit,  and  with  power.”  We  are  sure  that 
he  did  not  renounce  justness  of  reasoning, 
or  propriety  of  expression ; in  these  respects 
he  exceeded  their  most  admired  orators,  as 
may  appear  to  any  who  have  skill  and  can- 
dour to  compare  his  epistles  and  discourses, 
in  the  original,  with  the  best  performances  of 
the  Greek  writers;  but  he  renounced  the  en- 
ticing or  plausible  words  of  man’s  wisdom. 
In  the  term  man’s  wisdom,  I apprehend,  may 
be  included  whatever  the  natural  faculties  of 
man  are  capable  of  discovering  or  receiving, 
independent  of  the  peculiar  teaching  of  tlie 
Spirit  of  God,  which  is  promised  and  re- 

| Mattli  xxiii.  4.  “They  bind  heavy  burdens  and 
grievous  to  be  borne,”  a weight  of  traditions  and  ob- 
servances. “and  lay  them  upon  men’s  shoulders;  but 
they  themselves  will  not  move  them  with  one  of  the: p 
fingers.”  There  is  a double  opposition  in  this  passaire, 
between  to  be  borne  and  to  move , and  between  the 
shoulders  and  a finger.  It  has  been  often  found  since, 
that  those  who  are  most  impatient  of  restraint  them- 
selves are  most  earnest  in  pressing  yokes  and  bands 
upon  others. 


ST.  PAUL  AN  EXEMPLAR 


S2 

strained  to  those  who,  sensible  of  their  own 
foolishness,  are  brought  to  believe  in  Jesus 
Christ,  the  wisdom  of  God ; and  the  enticing 
words  of  man’s  wisdom  may  include  all  those 
ways  and  arts  which  the  wise  men  of  the 
world  have  used  or  approved,  as  most  effectual 
to  express,  adorn,*  or  defend  their  own  wise 
sentiments  and  discoveries.  These,  and  the 
methods  of  setting  them  off  to  advantage, 
have  been  divided  into  many  branches,  and 
dignified  with  sounding  names;  but  all  the 
efforts  of  man’s  wisdom,  considered  as  en- 
gaged in  the  subjects  of  religion  and  morals, 
may  be  summed  up  in  three  particulars:  1. 
A vain  inquiry  into  things  which  lie  wholly 
beyond  the  capacity  of  mail  in  his  present 
state,  and  which  can  only  be  discovered  by 
supernatural  revelation;  2.  A vain  attempt 
to  account  for  every  thing  according  to  the 
light  and  principles  of  depraved  reason;  3. 
A studious  exactness  in  language,  either  an 
easy  flow  of  words  to  please  and  amuse  the 
ear,  or  a torrent  of  strong  and  figurative  ex- 
pressions to  engage  the  passions,  according  as 
a different  taste  or  fashion  happens  to  prevail. 
It  would  be  too  dry  a task  to  illustrate  these 
points  by  adducing  specimens  of  each  from 
the  wrorks  of  the  ancient  and  modern  philo- 
sophers ; but  if  we  had  not  other  employment 
in  hand,  it  would  be  easy  to  show  that  man’s 
wisdom,  in  the  first  sense,  is  uncertainty,  in 
the  second,  prejudice,  in  the  third,  imposition 
and  artifice.  It  is  sufficient  for  my  present 
purpose  that  the  apostle  renounced  them  all. 
Instead  of  vainf  conjectures,  he  spoke  from 
certain  experience ; he  could  say,  I received 
of  the  Lord  that  which  I also  delivered  to  you. 
Instead  of  accommodating  his  doctrine  to  the 
taste  and  judgment  of  his  hearers,  he  spoke 
with  authority,  in  the  name  of  God  whom  he 
served : instead  of  losing  time  in  measuring- 
words  and  syllables,  that  he  might  obtain  the 
character  of  a fine  speaker,  he  spoke,  from 
the  feeling  and  fulness  of  his  heart,  the  words 
simplicity  and  truth.  The  success  of  his 
preaching  did  not  at  all  depend  upon  the  soft- 
ness and  harmony  of  his  periods,  and  there- 

* jn  1 Cor.  xiv.  9.  St.  Paul  recommends  “words 
3asy  to  be  understood.”  His  reasonin'?  in  that  chapter 
is  levelled,  not  only  against  the  absurdity  of  speaking  in 
an  unknown  tongue,  but  against  She  use  of  any  terms, 
or  ihe  treating  upon  any  subjects  which  are  not  adapted 
to  the  level  of  the  auditory.  Many  discourses  that  are 
expressed  in  Engl.sh  phrases,  are  as  useless  to  the  bulk 
of  the  people  as  if  they  were  delivered  in  Greek;  for 
what  have  the  people  to  do  with  scholastic  or  metaphy- 
sical niceties,  or  curious  researches  into  antiquity,  or 
elegant  dissertations  upon  the  fitness  of  things?  They 
cannnt  understand  them;  and  if  they  could,  they  would 
find  them  nothing  to  their  purpose. 

t Though  the  apostle  disclaimed  the  light  sophistry 
which  obtained  in  the  schools,  the  tenor  of  his  preach- 
ing was  founded  upon  the  clearest  principles,  and  con- 
tained a chain  of  the  justest  consequences.  He  did  not 
only  assert,  but  prove  and  demonstiate  the  truth  of  his 
doctrines,  by  ancient  prophecies,  hv  recent  facts,  and  by 
a present  incontestible  efficacy.  Yet  it  is  called  “the 
demonstration  of  the  Spirit,”  to  intimate  that  the 
strongest  and  best  adapted  evidence  is  insufficient  to 
the  purposes  of  salvation  unless  accompanied  with  a 
divine  power. 


[book  Ii. 

1 fore  he  disdained  an  attention  to  those  petty 
ornaments  of  speech,  which  were  quite  neces- 
sary to  help  out  the  poverty  of  man’s  wisdom ; 
he  sought  something  else,  which  those  who 
preach  themselves  rather  than  Christ  Jesus 
the  Lord,  have  little  reason  to  expect ;}  I 
mean  the  power  and  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit:  he  knew  that  this  alone  could  give 
hirn  success;  and  ministers  may  learn  from 
him  what  to  avoid,  and  what  to  seek  for,  if 
they  would  be  useful  to  their  hearers.  Men 
can  but  declare  the  truths  of  the  gospel ; it  is 
the  Spirit  of  God  who  alone  can  reveal  them : 
nothing  less  than  a divine  power  can  present 
them  to  the  mind  in  their  just  importance, 
and  throw  light  into  the  soul,  by  which  they 
may  be  perceived:  nothing  less  than  this 
power  can  subdue  the  will,  and  open  the 
heart  to  receive  the  truth  in  the  love  of  it : 
without  this  concurring  agency,  even  St. 
Paul  would  have  preached  in  vain.  From 
what  has  been  said,  we  may  remark  two  ob- 
vious reasons,  amongst  others,  why  we  have 
so  much  unsuccessful  preaching  in  our  days, 
either  the  gospel-truths  are  given  up,  or  the 
gospel-simplicity  departed  from.  Where 
either  of  these  is  the  case,  the  Lord  refuses 
his  power  and  blessing. 

VIII.  Another  observable  part  of  St.  Paul’s 
character,  is  his  unaffected  humility.  In  the 
midst  of  his  eminent  and  extensive  services, 
he  retained  a deep  sense  of  the  part  he  once 
acted  against  the  Lord.  He  speaks  of  him- 
self, on  this  account,  in  the  most  abasing  lan- 
guage, as  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  strongly 
expresses  his  unworthiness  of  the  grace  and 
apostleship  he  had  received,  by  comparing 
himself  to  an  untimely  birth  ;§  and  though 
his  insight  into  the  mysteries  of  the  gospel, 
the  communion  he  maintained  with  God,  by 
faith  in  his  Son,  and  the  beauty  of  holiness 
which  shone  in  his  conversation,  were  all 
beyond  the  common  measure ; yet  having,  in 
the  same  proportion,  a clearer  sense  of  his 
obligations,  and  of  the  extent  and  purity  of 
the  divine  precepts,  he  thought  nothing  of  his 
present  attainments,  in  comparison  of  those 
greater  degrees  of  grace  he  was  still  pressing 


{ A man  who  has  languages  and  sciences  in  his  head, 
but  does  not  know  or  relish  the  gospel  of  Christ,  is  an 
ignorant,  indeed  a stupid  person,  unaffected  with  the 
grandest  view  of  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness  that  ever 
was  or  can  be  displayed;  and  whoever  truly  knows  and 
embraces  this  mystery  of  godliness  is  a wise  man,  a 
person  of  an  excellent  understanding,  though  he  may 
not  be  much  acquainted  with  those  uncertain,  unsatis 
tying  systems  which  men  have  agreed  to  honour  with 
the  name  of  knowledge.  See  Ps  cxi.  10. 

§ 1 Cor.  xv.  8.  “ As  one  born  out  of  due  time.” 
The  original  word  is  ;*tf  ry.x,  that  is.  an  aburlion.  He 
speaks  of  himself  under  this  despicable  image  (the  true 
sense  of  which  is  not  easily  perceived  by  an  English 
reader,)  to  show  the  deep  and  humbling  sense  he  re- 
tained of  the  part  he  once  acted  against  the  church  of 
Christ:  he  considered  himself  as  unworthy  and  con 
temptible  to  the  last  degree,  as  one  of  whom  no  good 
hope  could  be  justly  formed  at  that  time,  much  less 
that  he  should  be  honoured  with  a sight  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  from  heaven,  and  with  a call  to  the  apostolic 
office. 


OF  A MINISTER  OF  CHRIST. 


CHAP.  II.] 

after.*  While,  in  the  eyes  of  others,  he  ap- 
peared not  only  exemplary,  but  unequalled, 
he  esteemed  himself  less  than  the  least  of  all 
saints  (Ephes.  iii.  9;)  and  his  patience  and 
condescension  towards  others,  and  his  acqui- 
escence under  all  the  trying  dispensations  of 
providence  with  which  he  was  exercised, 
were  a proof  that  this  was  not  an  affected 
manner  of  expression,  but  the  genuine  dic- 
tate of  his  heart.  To  speak  of  one’s  self  in 
abasing  terms  is  easy ; and  such  language  is 
often  a thin  veil,  through  which  the  motions 
of  pride  may  be  easily  discerned : but  though 
the  language  of  humility  may  be  counter- 
feited, its  real  fruits  and  actings  are  inimita- 
ble. Here  again  he  is  a pattern  for  Christians. 
An  humble  frame  of  mind  is  the  strength 
and  ornament  of  every  other  grace,  and  the 
proper  soil  wherein  they  grow.  A proud 
Christian,  that  is,  one  who  has  a high  con- 
ceit of  his  own  abilities  and  attainments,  is 
no  less  a contradiction  than  a sober  drunkard, 
or  a generous  miser.  All  other  seeming 
excellencies  are  of  no  real  value,  unless  ac- 
companied with  this;  and  though  a person 
should  appear  to  have  little  more  than  a 
consciousness  of  his  own  insufficiency,  and.  a 
teachable  dependent  spirit,  and  is  waiting 
upon  the  Lord,  in  his  appointed  way,  for 
instruction  and  a blessing,  he  will  infallibly 
thrive,  as  a tree  planted  by  the  water-side; 
for  God,  who  resisteth  the  proud,  has  pro- 
mised to  give  grace  to  the  humble,  James 
iv.  6.  But,  in  an  especial  manner,  humility 
is  necessary  and  beautiful  in  a minister ; the 
greatest  abilities,  and  most  unwearied  dili- 
gence, will  not  insure  success  without  it ; a 
secret  (if  allowed,)  apprehension  of  his  own 
importance,  will  deprive  him  of  that  assist- 
ance without  which  he  can  do  nothing ; his 
arm  will  be  dried  up,  and  his  right  eye  will 
be  darkened  (Zech.  xi.  17 :)  for  the  Lord  of 
hosts  hath  purposed  to  stain  the  pride  of  all 
human  glory,  and  will  honour  none  but  those 
who  abase  themselves,  and  are  willing  to 
give  all  the  praise  to  him  alone.  If  any  man 
hath  ground  to  set  a value  upon  his  know- 
ledge, gifts,  and  services,  St.  Paul  might 
justly  claim  the  pre-eminence:  but  though 
he  was  an  apostle,  and  an  inspired  writer ; 
though  he  had  planted  churches  through  a 
considerable  part  of  the  known  world ; though 
he  was  received  as  an  angel  by  many  to 
whom  he  preached,  and,  by  a peculiar  favour, 
had  been  caught  up  into  the  third  heaven ; 
yet  he  was,  by  grace,  preserved  from  being 
exalted  above  measure,  or  from  assuming  an 
undue  superiority  over  his  brethren.  The 
authority  with  which  he  was  entrusted  he 
employed  solely  to  their  advantage,  and  ac- 

* Phil.  iii.  13.  “ Forgetting  the  things  that  are  be- 
hind.” As  a traveller  upon  urgent  business  posts  from 
place  to  place,  forgets  the  distance  and  inconveniences 
behind  him,  and  has  all  his  thoughts  taken  up  with  the 
place  he  would  be  at,  and  the  remainder  of  the  road  that 
leads  to  it. 


93 

counted  himself  the  least  of  all,  and  the  ser- 
vant of  all.  How  very  opposite  has  been  the 
conduct  of  many  since  his  time,  who  have 
aimed  to  appropriate  the  name  of  ministers 
of  Christ  exclusively  to  themselves. 

Such  was  our  apostle ; and  the  same  spirit 
(though  in  an  inferior  degree,)  will  be  found 
in  all  the  faithful  ministers  of  the  Lord  Jesus : 
they  love  his  name;  it  is  the  pleasing  theme 
of  their  ministry ; and  to  render  it  glorious  in 
the  eyes  of  sinners  is  the  great  study  of  their 
lives;  for  his  sake  they  love  all  who  love  him; 
and  are  their  willing  servants  to  promote  the 
comfort  and  edification  of  their  souls : They 
love  his  gospel,  faithfully  proclaim  it  without 
disguise  or  alteration,  and  shun  not  to  de- 
clare the  whole  counsel  of  God,  so  far  as  they 
are  themselves  acquainted  with  it : they  con- 
tend earnestly  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to 
the  saints,  and  are  desirous  to  preserve  and 
maintain  the  truth  in  its  power  and  purity. 
The  knowledge  of  their  own  weakness  and 
fallibility  makes  them  tender  to  the  weakness 
of  others ; and  though  they  dare  not  lay,  or 
allow,  any  other  foundation  than  that  which 
God  has  laid  in  Zion,  yet,  knowing  that  the 
kingdom  of  God  does  not  consist  in  meats 
and  drinks,  but  in  righteousness,  peace,  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost,  they  guard  against 
the  influence  of  a party-spirit;  and,  if  their 
labours  are  confined  to  Christians  of  one  de- 
nomination, their  love  and  prayers  are  not 
limited  within  such  narrow  bounds,  but  ex- 
tend to  all  who  love  and  serve  their  Master : 
they  have  entered  upon  the  ministry,  not  for 
low  and  sordid  ends,  for  popular  applause  or 
filthy  lucre,  but  from  a constraining  sense  of 
the  love  of  Jesus,  and  a just  regard  to  the 
worth  and  danger  of  immortal  souls : their 
zeal  is  conducted  and  modelled  by  the  ex- 
ample and  precepts  of  their  Lord ; their  de- 
sire is  not  to  destroy,  but  to  save,  and  they 
wish  their  greatest  enemies  a participation  in 
their  choicest  blessings.  In  the  subject-mat- 
ter and  manner  of  their  preaching,  they  show 
that  they  seek  not  to  be  men-pleasers,  but  to 
commend  the  truth  to  every  man’s  conscience 
in  the  sight  of  God ; and  when  they  have 
done  their  utmost,  and  when  God  has  blessed 
their  labours,  and  given  them  acceptance  and 
success  beyond  their  hopes,  they  are  conscious 
of  the  defects  and  evils  attending  their  best 
endeavours,  of  the  weak  influence  the  truths 
they  preach  to  others  have  upon  their  own 
hearts,  that  their  sufficiency  of  every  kind  is 
of  God,  and  not  of  themselves;  and  therefore 
they  sit  down  ashamed,  as  unprofitable  ser- 
vants, and  can  rejoice  or  glory  in  nothing, 
but  in  him  who  came  into  the  world  to  save 
the  chief  ©f  sinners. 

It  might  be  expected  that  a spirit  and  con- 
duct, thus  uniformly  benevolent  and  disinte- 
rested and  witnessed  to,  in  a greater  or  less 
degree,  by  the  good  effect  of  their  ministry 
and  example  anurigst  their  hearers,  would 


94 


IRREGULARITIES  AND  OFFENCES 


secure  them  the  good-will  of  mankind,  and  \ 
entitle  them  to  peace,  if  not  to  respect,  j 
But,  on  the  contrary,  these  are  the  very  j 
people  who  are  represented  as  deceivers  of 
Fouls,  and  disturbers  of  society : they  are  j 
not  permitted  to  live  in  some  places ; and  it ; 
is  owing  to  a concurrence  of  favourable  cir-  j 
cumstances,  if  they  are  permitted  to  speak 
in  any : The  eyes  of  many  are  upon  them, 
watching  for  their  halting ; their  infirmities  ! 
are  aggravated,  their  expressions  wrested,  [ 
their  endeavours  counteracted,  and  their  per- 
sons despised.  The  design  of  our  history  is, 
to  show,  in  the  course  of  every  period  of  | 
the  church,  that  those  who  have  approached  j 
nearest  to  the  character  I have  attempted  to  j 
ielineate  from  St.  Paul,*  have  always  met  i 
with  such  treatment ; and  from  his  declara- 
tion, that  all  who  will  live  godly  in  Christ 
lesus  shall  suffer  persecution  (2  Tim.  iii. 
12, ) we  may  expect  it  will  always  be  so, 
while  human  nature  and  the  state  of  the  world 
remain  as  they  are.  However,  it  may  be  a 
consolation  to  those  who  suffer  for  righteous- 
ness sake,  to  reflect,  that  the  apostles  were 
treated  thus  before  them,  particularly  St. 
Paul,  who,  as  he  laboured,  so  he  suffered  more 
abundantly  than  the  rest;  his  person  was 
treated  with  contempt  and  despite,  his  cha- 
racter traduced,  his  doctrine  misrepresented ; 
and  though  his  natural  and  acquired  abilities 
were  great,  and  he  spoke  with  power  and 
the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit,  yet  he  was 
esteemed  the  filth  and  off-scouring  of  all 
things,  a babbler,  and  a madman, f Acts  xvii. 
18. 


CHAPTER  III. 

Of  the  irregularities  and  offences  which  ap- 
peared in  the  apostolic  churches. 

There  are  few  things  in  which  the  various 
divisions  of  professing  Christians  are  so  gene- 
rally agreed,  as  in  speaking  highly  and  ho- 
nourably of  primitive  Christianity.  In  many 

* Our  Lord’s  declaration,  “ Behold,  I send  you  forth 
as  lambs  in  the  midst  of  wolves,”  is  applicable  to  all  his 
servants.  The  sight  of  a lamb  is  sufficient  to  provoke 
the  rage  and  appetite  of  a wolf:  Thus  the  spirit  of  the 
gospel  awakens  the  rage  and  opposition  of  the  world; 
they  have  an  antipathy  to  jt,  and  owe  it  a grudge 
wherever  they  see  it. 

f 2 Cor.  v.'  13.  See  likewise  Mark  iii.  21.  “And 
when  his  friends  heard  it,  they  went  out  to  lay  hold  of 
him,  for  they  said,  Ha  is  beside  himself:”  That  is  to 
say,  his  attention  to  the  office  he  has  undertaken  has 
transported  him  beyond  the  bounds  of  reason,  and  made 
him  forget  his  station,  his  friends,  and  his  safety;  there- 
fore, out  of  pure  affection  and  prudence,  thev  would 
have  confined  him:  !Vor  is  it  any  wonder  that  our 
Lord’s  friends  and  relatives  should  thus  think  and  speak 
of  him,  since  we  are  assured  that  even  his  brethren  did 
not  believe  on  him,  John  vii.  3.  And  there  seems  to 
have  been  no  possible  medium.  All  who  were  conver- 
sant with  him,  must  either  receive  him  as  the  Messiah, 
or  pity,  if  not  despise  him  as  a madman.  This  was  the 
mildest  judgment  they  could  form;  the  Pharisees  in- 
deed went  farther,  and  pronounced  him  an  impostor 
and  a devil.  Such  was  the  treatment  our  Lord  and 


[book  If. 

persons  this  is  no  more  than  an  ig  lorant  ad- 
miration, not  capable  of  distinguishing  what  is 
truly  praise-worthy,  but  disposed  to  applaud 
every  thing  in  the  gross  that  has  the  sanction 
of  antiquity  to  recommend  it.  The  primitive 
Christians  have  been  looked  upon,  by  some, 
as  if  they  were  not  men  of  the  same  nature 
and  infirmities  with  ourselves,  but  nearly  in- 
fallible and  perfect.  This  is  often  taken  for 
granted  in  general ; and  when  particulars  are 
insisted  on,  it  is  observable  that  they  are 
seldom  taken  from  the  records  of  the  New 
Testament,  and  the  churches  which  flourished 
in  the  apostles’  times ; but  rather  from  those 
who  lived  in  and  after  the  second  century, 
when  a considerable  deviation  in  doctrine, 
spirit,  and  conduct,  from  those  which  were 
indeed  the  primitive  churches,  had  already 
taken  place,  and  there  were  evident  appear- 
ances of  that  curiosity,  ambition,  and  will- 
worship,  which  increased  by  a swift  progress, 
till  at  length  professed  Christianity  degene- 
rated into  little  more  than  an  empty  name. 

If  Christians  of  the  early  ages  are  supposed 
to  have  been  more  exemplary  than  in  after 
periods,  chiefly  because  they  lived  nearer  to 
the  times  of  our  Lord  and  his  apostles,  it  will 
follow  of  course,  that  the  earlier  the  better. 
We  may  then  expect  to  find  most  of  the 
Christian  spirit  among  those  who  were  con- 
verted and  edified  by  the  apostles’  personal 
ministry : and  though  we  cannot  al!o\V  the 
assumption,  (for  the  power  of  godliness  de- 
pends not  upon  dates,  periods,  or  instruments, 
but  upon  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,) 
yet  we  are  content  to  join  issue  upon  the 
conclusion,  and  are  willing  that  all  claims  to 
a revival  of  religion,  and  a real  reformation 
of  manners,  shall  be  admitted  or  rejected,  as 
they  accord  or  disagree  with  the  accounts  we 
have  of  the  churches  planted  by  the  apostles, 
and  during  the  time  that  these  authorised 
ministers  of  Christ  presided  over  them.  We 
can  find  no  other  period  in  which  we  can, 
to  so  much  advantage,  propose  the  visible 
churches  of  Christ  as  a pattern  and  specimen 
of  what  his  grace  and  gospel  may  be  expected 
to  produce  in  the  present  state  of  human 
nature ; for  the  apostles  were  furnished,  in  an 
extraordinary  manner,  with  zeal,  wisdom, 
and  authority  for  their  work,  and  God  was 
remarkably  present  with  them,  by  the  power 
of  his  Spirit  . Besides,  as  all  the  information 
we  have  concerning  this  period  is  derived 
from  the  inspired  writings,  we  have  that  cer- 
tainty of  facts  to  ground  our  observations 
upon  which  no  other  history  can  afford. 

We  have  a pleasing  description  of  the 
first  of  these  churches,  which  was  formed  at 
Jerusalem  soon  after  our  Lord’s  ascension. 


Master  found.  Let  not,  then,  his  disciples  and  servants 
be  surprised  or  grieved  that  they  are  misrepresented 
and  misunderstood,  on  account  of  cheir  attachment  to 
him  ; but  let  them  comfort  themselves  with  his  gracious 
words,  John  xv.  18—21. 


IN  THE  APOSTOLIC  CHURCHES. 


95 


CHaP.  III.] 

On  the  day  of  Pentecost,  many  who  had 
personally  consented  to  the  death  of  Jesus, 
eceived  power  to  believe  in  his  name,  and 
'»'iblicly  joined  themselves  to  his  disciples ; 
•>  sense  of  his  love  and  grace  to  each  united 
19  whole  body  so  closely  together,  that, 
hough  they  were  a multitude  of  several 
thousands,  it  is  said  (Acts  iv.  32,)  they  were 
of  one  heart  and  of  one  soul : neither  said  any 
of  them,  that  aught  of  the  things  which  he 
possessed  was  his  own,  but  they  had  all 
things  common;  and  they  continued  stead- 
fastly in  the  apostles’  doctrine  and  fellowship, 
and  in  breaking  of  bread,  and  in  prayers. 
These  were  happy  times  indeed ! No  inter- 
fering interests  or  jarring  sentiments,  no 
subtle  or  factious  spirits,  no  remissness  in 
the  means  of  grace,  no  instances  of  a con- 
duct in  any  respect  unbecoming  the  gospel, 
were  to  be  found  among  them ; it  seemed  as 
if  the  powerful  sense  of  divine  truths,  which 
they  had  received,  had  overborne,  if  not  ex- 
tirpated, every  evil  disposition  in  so  large  an 
assembly;  yet,  even  this  (the  difference  of 
numbers  excepted,)  is  no  peculiar  case.  The 
like  has  been  observable  again  and  again, 
when  God  has  been  pleased  to  honour  mi- 
nisters, far  inferior  to  the  apostles,  with  a 
sudden  and  signal  influence,  in  places  where 
the  power  of  the  gospel  had  been  little  known 
before.  In  such  circumstances,  the  truth 
has  been  often  impressed  and  received  with 
astonishing  effects ; many,  who  before  were 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  having  been,  like 
those  of  old,  pierced  to  the  heart,  and  then 
filled  with  comfort,  from  a believing  know- 
ledge of  him  on  whom  their  sins  were  laid, 
find  themselves,  as  it  were,  in  a new  world ; 
old  things  are  past  away ; the  objects  of  time 
and  sense  appear  hardly  worth  their  notice : 
the  love  of  Christ  constrains  them,  and  they 
burn  in  love  to  all  who  will  join  them  in 
praising  the  Saviour.  Here  indeed  is  a strik- 
ing change  wrought : yet  the  infirmities  in- 
separable from  human  nature,  though  for  the 
present  overpowered,  will,  as  occasions  arise, 
discover  themselves  again,  so  far  as  to  prove 
two  things  universally : 1.  That  the  best  of 
men  are  still  liable  to  mistakes  and  weak- 
nesses, for  which  they  will  have  cause  to 
mourn  to  the  end  of  their  lives.  2.  That  in 
the  best  times  there  will  be  some  intruders, 
who  for  a season  may  make  a profession,  and 
yet  in  the  end  appear  to  have  neither  part 
nor  lot  in  the  matter.  Thus  it  was  in  the 
church  of  Jerusalem : the  pleasing  state  of 
things  mentioned  above  did  not  continue  very 
long ; an  Ananias  and  a Sapphira  were  soon 
found  amongst  them,  who  sought  the  praise 
of  men,  and  made  their  profession  a cloak  for 
covetousness  and  hypocrisy  (Acts  v ;)  grudg- 
ings  and  murmurings  arose  in  a little  time 
between  the  Jews  and  the  Hellenists  (Acts 
vi;)  and  it  was  not  long  before  they  were 
thrown  into  strong  debates,  and  in  danger  of 


divisions,  upon  account  of  the  question  first 
started  at  Antioch,  Whether  the  law  of  Moses 
was  still  in  force  to  believers  or  not ) Acts  xv. 

In  these  latter  times,  when  it  has  been  at- 
tempted to  vindicate  and  illustrate  a revival 
of  religion,  by  appealing  to  the  writings  of 
St.  Paul,  and  the  delineation  he  has  given 
us  of  the  faith  and  practice  of  a Christian,  the 
attempt  has  often  excited  disdain : it  has  been 
thought  a sufficient  answer,  to  enumerate 
and  exaggerate  the  faults,  mistakes,  and  in- 
consistencies (or  what  the  world  is  pleased 
to  account  such,)  that  are  charged  upon  the 
persons  concerned  in  such  an  appeal,  as  ne- 
cessarily proving,  that  where  these  blemishes 
are  found,  there  can  be  no  resemblance  to 
the  first  Christians.  If  the  frequency  did  not 
lessen  the  wonder,  it  might  seem  very  unac- 
countable that  any  person  who  has  read  the 
New  Testament  should  venture  upon  this 
method  in  a Protestant  country,  where  the 
people  have  the  scriptures  in  their  hands, 
and  are  at  liberty  to  judge  for  themselves.  But 
as  there  are  not  a few,  even  among  Protest- 
ants, who  seem  to  expect  their  assertions 
will  pass  for  proofs,  I propose,  in  this  chapter, 
to  point  out  several  things,  which,  though 
undoubtedly  wrong,  had  a considerable  pre- 
valence among  the  first  Christians,  leaving 
the  application  to  the  judicious  reader.  I ac- 
knowledge my  firm  persuasion,  that  a certain 
system  of  doctrine,  revived  of  late  years,  is 
the  doctrine  of  the  Reformation,  and  of  the 
New  Testament;  which,  though  not  suited 
to  the  general  and  prevailing  taste,  is  at- 
tended, more  or  less,  with  the  blessing  and 
power  of  God,  in  turning  sinners  from  dark- 
ness to  light : I confess,  that  both  ministers 
and  people  who  espouse  this  despised  cause, 
have  sufficient  ground  for  humiliation : we 
have  seen,  we  still  see,  many  things  amongst 
us  which  we  cannot  approve;  we  fear  that 
too  many  are  a real  discredit  to  the  cause 
they  profess;  and  we  are  conscious,  that  the 
best  of  us  fall  mournfully  short  of  what  might 
be  expected  from  the  sublime  principles 
which,  by  the  grace  of  God,  we  have  been 
taught  from  his  word : we  desire  to  be  open 
to  conviction,  not  to  contend  for  errors,  or 
even  to  vindicate  any  thing  that  can  be  proved 
contrary  to  the  scripture;  but  if  some  things 
not  justifiable,  which  we  must  own  have  ac- 
companied what  we  verily  believe  to  be  n 
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  (as  some 
would  represent  them,)  sufficient  to  discredit 
this  work,  to  impeach  the  truth  of  the  doc- 
trines, or  the  sincerity  of  the  instruments  in 
the  gross ; then  we  are  sure  it  will  follow 
upon  the  same  principles,  that  the  Jews  and 
Heathens  had  just  ground  and  warrant  to 
reject  the  doctrine  of  the  apostles,  and  to 
treat  their  persons  with  contempt. 

A competent  knowledge  and  consideration 
of  the  present  state  of  man,  in  himself,  and 
of  the  circumstances  in  which  he  is  placed. 


9G 


IRREGU L ATION S AND  OFFENCES 


are  necessary  to  preserve  us  from  being  of-  j 
fended  with  the  gospel  of  Christ,  on  account  I 
<?f  the  imperfections  that  may  be  found  in  the  j 
conduct  of  those  who  have  sincerely  received 
it ; due  allowances  must  be  made  for  the  re-  j 
mains  of  ignorance  and  prejudice,  the  power 
of  habit,  temper,  and  constitution,  in  different  | 
persons.  The  various  combinations  of  these, ! 
and  other  particulars,  make  each  individual  j 
character,  though  agreeing  in  one  common  j 
nature,  and  influenced  by  the  same  general 
principles,  in  some  respects  an  original.  The 
power  and  subtlety  of  Satan,  and  his  address 
in  suiting  his  temptations  to  the  peculiar  in- 
clinations and  situation  of  every  person,  must  j 
be  taken  into  the  account : and  likewise  the  | 
immense  variety  of  occasions  arising  from 
without,  such  as,  the  provocations  and  arts  of 
enemies,  the  influence  of  mistaken  friends,  | 
the  necessary  engagements,  connexions,  and  J 
relations  of  common  life,  the  artifices  of  j 
seducers,  and  the  scandals  of  false  professors. 
These  things,  and  others  which  might  be  j 
named,  concur  to  make  the  path  of  duty  ex- ! 
eeeding  difficult,  especially  to  young  begin- 
ners, who,  so  soon  as  they  become  sincerely  de- 
sirous to  serve  the  Lord,  find  themselves 
immediately  in  the  midst  of  scenes,  in  which 
they  can  only  be  fitted  to  act  their  parts 
aright  by  a gradual  and  painful  experience. 
They,  whose  intentions  are  right,  usually 
set  out  with  warm  hearts  and  sanguine  ex-  j 
pectations,  little  aware  of  the  difficulties  that  j 
are  before  them : they  have  indeed  a sure  j 
rule  to  act  by  in  the  scriptures,  and  they  have  j 
a sure  promise,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  will 
be  their  guide  and  teacher ; but  at  first  they  j 
have  but  little  acquaintance  with  the  scrip- 
lures,  and  until  they  are  humbled,  by  being  | 
left  to  commit  many  mortifying  mistakes, ! 
they  are  too  prone  to  lean  to  their  own  un- ! 
derstandings ; every  day  brings  them  into  ■ 
some  new  difficulty,  wherein  they  can  get 
I ittle  direction  from  what  they  have  passed 
through  before,  and  often  emergencies  are 
so  pressing  as  hardly  to  leave  room  for  deli- 
beration : in  short,  it  seems  to  be  the  Lord’s 
pleasure,  not  so  much  to  preserve  them  from  j 
mistakes  and  indiscretions  at  first,  as  to  take  j 
occasion  to  humble  them  upon  this  account, ! 
and  to  show  them  how  to  correct  them  when  ! 
made.  Thus  they  are  more  confirmed  in  a | 
anise  of  their  own  weakness,  and  of  his  good-  j 
:iess,  and  are  trained  up,  by  time,  observa- 
lion,  and  repeated  trials,  to  a more  perfect 
•zeroise  of  every  branch  of  Christian  wisdom ; j 
h degrees  their  judgments  are  formed  to 
greater  maturity ; they  are  more  jealous  of  j 
themselves,  more  acquainted  with  Satan’s 
devices,  more  capable  of  distinguishing  the 
spirit  and  conduct  of  mankind,  and  especially 
more  simply  dependent  upon  God  for  his 
teaching  and  direction ; and  thus  they  grow 1 
into  a participation  of  the  spirit  of  the  gospel, 
and  are  enabled  to  act  and  speak  as  becomes 


[book  ii. 

the  servants  of  Christ.  When  his  gospel  is 
faithfully  preached  and  cordially  received, 
there  always  will  be  some  who  are  able,  by 
the  grace  of  God,  to  put  to  silence  the  igno- 
rance of  foolish  men,  and  to  demean  them- 
selves so,  that  if  any  will  speak  evil  of  them, 
the  shame  is  retorted  upon  themselves ; but 
among  the  numbers  who  are  forming  in  the 
same  school,  there  will  likewise  be  some  (for 
the  reasons  I have  suggested)  whose  conduct 
will,  in  some  respects,  be  liable  to  censure, 
though  their  hearts  are  sincere  ; and  there 
will  frequently  be  others,  who  (like  the  hear- 
ers compared  by  our  Lord  to  seed  sown  upon 
rocky  ground)  will  thrust  themselves  amongst 
professors,  be  called  by  the  same  name,  and 
accounted  by  the  world  the  same  people,  who 
at  length  discover  themselves  to  be  mere 
hypocrites:  these  indeed  will  furnish  occa- 
sion enough  for  exception ; and  they  who 
are  glad  to  have  it  so,  will  readily  suppose 
or  pretend  that  they  are  all  alike.  It  re- 
mains to  show,  that  in  this  sense  there  is  no 
new  thing  under  the  sun.  It  was  so  from  the 
beginning. 

The  apostle  Paul  bears  an  honourable  tes- 
timony to  the  sincerity,  zeal,  and  grace  of  the 
believers  amongst  whom  he  had  preached, 
and  to  whom  he  had  written ; he  commends 
their  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love;  he 
styles  them  his  joy,  his  glory,  and  his  crown, 
and  expresses  his  confidence,  that  the  Lord, 
who  had  begun  a good  work  in  them,  would 
assuredly  complete  it : but  though  he  knew 
there  were  many  persons  among  them  who 
were  well  established  in  the  truth,  and  judi- 
cious in  their  conduct,  his  admonitions  upon 
several  occasions  show  there  were  others, 
whose  judgments  were  weak  and  their  be- 
haviour unwarrantable. 

He  speaks  of  the  Corinthians  (2  Cor.  i.  5,) 
as  a people  enriched  in  the  knowledge  of 
Christ,  and  honoured  with  the  eminency  of 
gifts;  yet  he  takes  notice  of  many  things 
blameable  in  them ; insomuch  that  if  the  peo- 
ple who  now  censure  appearances  of  a reli- 
gious kind,  because  they  are  not  wholly  free 
from  imperfection,  could  have  had  opportu- 
nity to  judge  of  the  Christians  at  Corinth  in 
the  same  spirit,  it  is  probable  they  would 
have  despised  and  condemned  those  whom 
the  apostle  loved,  as  much  as  they  can  possi- 
bly do  any  set  of  people  now. 

They  had  first  received  the  gospel  from  St. 
Paul,  but  it  had  been  confirmed  to  them  af- 
terwards by  other  ministers.  The  servants  of 
Christ  all  preach  the  same  truths ; but  the 
Holy  Spirit,  who  furnishes  them  all  for  the 
work  he  appoints  them  to,  distributes  to  each 
one  severally,  according  to  his  own  will ; he 
communicates  a diversity  of  gifts,  not  all  to 
one  person,  but  each  has  a talent  given  him 
to  profit  withal ; one  is  favoured  with  a pecu- 
liar insight  into  the  mysteries  of  the  gospel ; 
another  has  a power  and  pathos  of  expres- 


IN  THE  APOSTOLIC  CHURCHES. 


97 


CTIAP.  III.] 

sion ; and  another  is  happy  in  a facility  of 
applying  to  distressed  and  wounded  con- 
sciences. It  is  the  duty  and  privilege  of 
Christians  to  avail  themselves  of  these  differ- 
ent talents ; to  profit  by  each,  to  be  thankful 
for  all,  and  to  esteem  every  faithful  minister 
very  highly  for  his  work’s  sake.  But  the  Co- 
rinthians were  unduly  influenced  by  personal 
attachments,  as  their  several  inclinations  led 
them ; they  formed  imprudent  comparisons 
and  preferences,  were  divided  into  parties, 
and  drawn  into  contentions  upon  this  ac- 
count ; one  saying  I am  of  Paul ; another, 
I am  of  Apollos,  or,  I of  Cephas  (I  Cor.  i. 
12 ; and  iii.  4 :)  they  thought  it  a mark  of 
zeal  to  be  strenuous  for  their  respective  fa- 
vourites ; but  St.  Paul  assured  them,  that  it 
was  a sign  they  were  weak  and  low  in  the 
Christian  life,  and  a means  to  keep  them  so. 
Disputes  and  prepossessions  of  this  kind  draw 
the  mind  away  from  its  proper  nourishment, 
and  afford  occasion  for  the  various  workings 
of  our  selfish  passions.  Wherever  the  Lord 
is  pleased  to  raise  up,  in  or  near  the  same 
place,  ministers  who  are  of  eminence  in  their 
different  gifts,  the  effects  of  this  spirit  will 
be  more  or  less  observable ; and  it  is  eagerly 
observed  by  the  world,  and  amplified  to  the 
utmost,  as  a weighty  objection : the  ministers 
are  represented  to  be  artful,  designing  men ; 
who,  under  the  sacred  names  of  Christ,  and 
the  gospel,  are  aiming  chiefly  or  solely  to 
form  a party  of  dependants  upon  themselves ; 
^nd  the  people  are  accounted  silly  sheep, 
carried  away  captive  by  the  influence  of  their 
popular  leaders,  insomuch  that  they  cannot, 
or  dare  not,  receive  the  doctrines  they  profess 
to  love  from  any  but  their  own  favourites. 
The  disposition  is  certainly  wrong ; but  let  it 
be  censured  with  candour,  not  as  the  pecu- 
liarity of  this  or  that  party,  but  as  a fault 
which  human  nature  is  always  prone  to  in 
similar  circumstances:  it  showed  a want  of 
solid  judgment  in  the  Corinthians,  but  was 
no  impeachment  of  their  sincerity:  much 
less  did  it  prove  that  Paul,  Apollos,  or  Cephas 
were  mercenary,  ambitious  men,  who  prosti- 
tuted their  talents  and  influence  to  gain  dis- 
ciples to  themselves,  rather  than  to  Christ. 
The  same  premises  will  admit  of  no  stronger 
conclusion  now  than  in  the  apostles’  days. 

The  proper  design  and  tendency  of  the  re- 
ligion of  Jesus  is,  to  wean  the  affections  from 
the  world,  to  mortify  the  dictates  of  self-love, 
and  to  teach  us  (by  his  example)  to  be  gentle, 
forbearing,  benevolent,  and  disinterested. 
This  the  world  is  aware  of;  and  though  they 
declare  their  dislike  to  the  principles  which 
alone  can  produce  such  a spirit,  they  always 
expect  it  from  the  people  who  profess  them  ; 
and  therefore  when,  amongst  the  numbers  of 
these,  they  can  find  a few  instances  of  persons 
too  much  actuated  by  selfish,  worldly  or  angry 
tempers,  it  is  eagerly  objected  : These  are 
excellent  people,  if  you  would  judge  of  them  | 
Vol.  IT.  N 


by  the  length  and  frequency  of  their  devo- 
tions, and  by  what  they  have  to  say  of  their 
persuasion  of  God’s  love  to  them ; but  touch 
them  in  their  property,  and  they  show  them- 
selves as  unwilling  to  forego,  and  as  anxious 
to  grasp,  the  good  things  of  this  world,  as  if 
they  had  no  better  claim  to  heaven  than  our- 
selves. It  is  much  to  be  lamented,  that  such 
occasions  of  reproach  are  afforded  to  those 
who  seek  them.  But  what  would  they  have 
said  of  the  Corinthians,  whom  the  apostle  re- 
proves in  the  following  terms  : “Now  there- 
fore there  is  utterly  a fault  among  you,  be- 
cause you  go  to  law  one  with  another ; why 
do  you  not  rather  take  wrong  1 why  do  you 
not  rather  suffer  yourselves  to  be  defrauded  1 
Nay,  you  do  wrong  and  defraud,  and  that 
your  brethren,”  1 Cor.  vi.  7,  8.  And,  in  the 
preceding  chapter,  he  speaks  of  an  enormity 
among  them,  hardly  to  be  heard  of  among 
the  Heathens,  which,  though  the  fault  of  one 
person,  brought  dishonour  upon  them  all,  be- 
cause they  had  not  explicitly  disowned  it, 
and  proceeded  against  the  offender.  This  is 
not  to  be  wondered  at ; for  we  have  often 
seen,  in  our  own  time,  that  though  evil  prac- 
tices have  been  censured  in  the  strongest 
terms  of  disallowance,  and  the  offenders  pub- 
licly and  notoriously  disclaimed,  yet  many 
will  still  be  so  destitute  of  candour  and  equity 
as  to  insist  on  it,  they  are  all  alike. 

The  irregularities  in  the  public  worship  at 
Corinth  were  such,  as  if  practised  amongst 
ourselves,  would  excite  a greater  clamour 
than  any  thing  of  that  nature  which  has  been 
hitherto  complained  of.  It  appears  that,  far 
from  conducting  their  assemblies  with  de- 
cency and  order,  they  were  sometimes  in  the 
greatest  confusion  : different  persons  had  a 
psalm,  a doctrine,  a tongue,  a revelation,  an 
interpretation,  many  speaking  together,  and 
sometimes  in  different  languages ; so  that  the 
apostle  thought  it  very  probable,  that,  if  an 
unbeliever  came  in  amongst  them,  he  would 
of  course  say,  they  were  mad,  1 Cor.  xiv.  23. 
And  this  want  of  decorum  extended  to  their 
celebration  of  the  Lord’s  supper ; where,  says 
the  apostle,  Every  one  taketh  before  another; 
and  one  is  hungry,  and  another  is  drunken, 
1 Cor.  xi.  21.  I apprehend  that  these  instances 
of  disorder  cannot  be  paralleled  by  the  most 
irregular  proceedings  in  our  time,  amongst 
any  people  that  hold  the  principles  which  I 
am  at  present  engaged  to  vindicate. 

Many  of  the  Corinthians,  as  well  as  the 
Galatians,*  had  discovered  great  unsteadiness 
towards  St.  Paul,  and  had  been  subdued  by 

* Yet  ho  says  of  the  Galatians, that  when  he  first  went 
among  them,  they  received  him  as  an  angel  of  God,  and, 
if  possible,  would  have  plucked  out  their  own  eyes  to 
have  given  them  to  him.  Gal.  iv.  15.  Great  is  the  power 
of  the  gospel ; it  subdues  and  possesses  the  heart,  and 
conciliates  a tenderness  and  relation  between  ministers 
and  people,  nearer  and  dearer  than  the  ties  of  flesh  and 
blood.  But  alas!  how  great  likewise  is  the  inconstancy 
of  mortals!  the  apostle  experienced  it  to  his  grief;  and 
where  he  had  the  greatest  prospect,  he  was  most  disap 


93 


IRREGULARITIES  AND  OFFENCES 


false  teachers  and  pretended  apostles.  Inex- 
perienced minds  are  very  liable  to  such  de- 
ceptions : meaning  well  themselves,  they  are 
too  apt  to  listen  to  the  fair  words  and  line 
speeches  of  those  who  lie  in  wait  to  deceive. 
The  love  of  Christ,  and  the  love  of  holiness, 
are  the  leading  properties  of  a gracious  heart, 
and  such  a one,  till  experience  has  made  him 
wise,  conceives  a good  opinion  of  all  who  pro- 
fess a regard  for  Jesus,  or  for  sanctification  : 
he  is  not  aware,  at  first,  that  there  are  those 
in  the  world  who  attempt  to  divide  what  God 
has  joined  together.  When  the  blood  and 
righteousness  of  Christ  are  recommended,  not 
as  the  source,  but  as  a substitute  for  vital 
experimental  religion : or  when  some  other 
spirit  is  preached  than  that  whose  office  it  is 
to  testify  of  Jesus  ; in  either  case  the  food  of 
.he  soul  is  poisoned,  and  the  evil  begins  to 
operate  before  it  is  perceived.  Faithful  mi- 
nisters are  accounted  too  low  or  too  high,  too 
strict  or  too  remiss,  according  to  the  scheme 
newly  adapted;  they  are  first  disregarded, 
and  at  length  considered  as  enemies,  because 
they  persist  in  the  truth,  and  refuse  to  suit 
themselves  to  the  new  taste  of  their  hearers. 
Thus  error,  once  admitted,  makes  an  alarming 
progress : and  no  power  but  that  of  God  can 
stop  it.  Hence  proceed  divisions,  subdivi- 
sions, distinctions,  refinements,  bitterness, 
strife,* *  envyings,  and  by  degrees  enthusiasm, 
in  the  worst  sense  of  the  word : an  evil  to  be 
dreaded  and  guarded  against  no  less  earnestly 
than  the  beginning  of  a fire  or  a pestilence. 
Such  trying  circumstances  will  demonstrate 
who  are  indeed  upon  the  right  foundation ; 
for  others,  having  once  begun,  depart  from 
the  truth,  grow  worse  and  worse,  deceiving 
and  being  deceived ; and  many  who  are  built 
upon  the  rock,  and  therefore  cannot  be  totally 
or  finally  drawn  away,  yet  suffer  unspeakable 
loss ; the  wood,  hay,  and  stubble  (1  Cor.  iii. 
10 — 15,)  the  unadvised  additions  they  have 
made  to  the  scriptural  truths  they  once  re- 
ceived, are  burnt  up  in  the  time  of  tempta- 
tion; they  lose  much  of  their  comfort  and 
stability,  and  have  in  a manner  all  to  begin 
again.  The  world,  that  knows  not  the  weak- 
ness of  man,  or  the  power  and  devices  of 
Satan,  laughs  at  those  things,  and  expects  to 
see  them  issue  in  universal  confusion,  like 
that  of  Babel.  In  the  same  light,  it  is  most 
probable,  the  Heathens  beheld  and  derided 
the  primitive  Christians:  for  they  likewise 

pointed : those  who  once  would  have  plucked  out  their 
own  eyes  for  his  service,  afterwards  accounted  him 
their  enemy,  for  telling  them  the  truth  We  need  not 
therefore  wonder  if  there  are  instances  of  this  kind  at 
present. 

* That  bitterness  and  strife  were  too  frequent  in  the 
primitive  churches,  appears  from  James  iii.  14:  Gal. 
v.  15;  and  other  texts.  Our  Lord’s  admonition.  Matth. 
vii.  3—5.  has  always  been  too  little  regarded  ; and  few 
are  yet  sufficiently  convinced  of  the  folly  and  absurdity 
of  pointing  out,  and  in  an  angry  spirit  condemning,  the 
mistakes  and  faults  of  others,  while  we  indulge  greater 
in  ourselves.  Reformation  (like  modern  charity)  should 
begin  at  home! 


[book  n. 

had  their  shaking  and  shifting  times ; many 
amongst  them,  who  seemed  to  begin  in  the 
spirit,  were  stopped  short  in  their  course  by 
the  arts  of  false  teachers,  to  their  great  hin- 
derance,  and  some  to  their  final  overthrow. 

St.  Paul  addresses  no  one  church  in  terms 
of  greater  tenderness  and  approbation  than 
the  Thessalonians ; he  commends  their  work 
of  faith,  and  labour  of  love,  and  patience  of 
hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus;  and  mentions  them 
as  a pattern  to  the  other  churches  in  Mace- 
donia and  Greece.  Yet  even  among  these  he 
understood  there  were  some  who  walked  dis- 
orderly, and  were  busybedies,  not  working 
at  all ; he  strongly  disapproved  their  conduct, 
declaring,  that  if  any  would  not  work,  nei- 
ther should  he  eat,  2 Thess.  iii.  10, 11.  When 
persons  are  newly  awakened  to  a concern  for 
their  souls,  and  deeply  impressed  with  the 
importance  of  eternity,  it  is  no  wonder  (con- 
sidering the  animal  frame)  if  their  attention 
is  so  engaged  and  engrossed  for  a season,  that 
they  cannot  attend  to  the  affairs  of  common 
life  with  their  usual  alacrity  and  freedom  :f 
if  their  concern  is  of  a right  kind,  they  are 
gradually  brought  to  peace  and  hope  in  be- 
lieving; they  recover  their  spirits,  and  their 
civil  callings  being  now  sanctified  by  a de- 
sire to  glorify  God  in  them,  their  diligence  is 
not  less,  but  frequently  greater  than  before ; 
for  now  they  act  not  to  please  men,  or  to 
please  themselves,  but  what  they  do,  they  do 
heartily  as  to  the  Lord.  However,  amongst 
a number  of  people,  natural  temper,  indiscre- 
tion, or  inadvertance,  may  cause  some  to 
deviate  from  the  general  rule;  and  though 
we  cannot  justify  any  who  are  remiss  in  the 
discharge  of  the  relative  duties  of  society,  we 
may  justify  the  doctrines  and  principles  they 
acknowledge,  from  the  charge  of  leading 
them  into  this  mistake,  unless  it  can  be 
proved  that  St.  Paul’s  preaching  was  justly 
chargeable  with  the  same  fault. 

But  these  are  small  things  compared  to 
what  he  says  in  another  place.  He  complains 
to  the  Philippians  in  this  affecting  language 
(Phil.  iii.  IS,  19:)  “Many  walk  (not  some 
only,  but  many,)  of  whom  I have  told  you 
often,  and  now  tell  you  even  weeping,  that 
they  are  enemies  to  the  cross  of  Christ, | 


t See  James  iv.  9.  The  word  xxtx.'ux  rendered  heavi- 
ness, answers  nearest  to  dejection;  the  derivation  im- 
portins  a downcast  countenance  ; and  it  e'presses  that 
kind  of  sorrow  which  sinks  the  spirits,  and  fixes  the  eye 
upon  the  earth.  Something  of  this  is  usually  discern- 
able  when  a real  conviction  of  sin  takes  place  in  the 
heart.  The  inspired  apostle  recommends  this  temper 
and  demeanour  as  most  suitable  to  the  case  of  sinners 
i who  are  destitute  of  faith  and  love,  and  cannot  there- 
fore  rejoice  upon  good  grounds;  and  yet  when  any  per- 
son begins  to  he  impressed  in  this  manner,  and  to  see 
the  propriety  of  the  apostle's  advice,  it  frequently  hap- 
pens, that  all  who  know  him,  both  friends  and  enemies, 
will  agree  to  pronounce  him  disordered  in  his  senses. 
So  different,  so  opposite,  are  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  the 
spirit  of  the  world ! 

J What  disagreeable  things  the  apostle  was  apprehen- 
sive of  meeting,  when  he  should  revisit  Corinth,  we 
may  learn  from" 2 Cor.  xii.  20,  21. 


IN  THE  APOSTOLIC  CHURCHES. 


99 


CHAP.  III.] 

whose  end  is  destruction,  whose  God  is  their 
belly,  who  mind  earthly  things.”  St.  Paul 
had  occasion  to  express  himself  thus,  and  that 
again  and  again,  even  in  the  golden  days  of 
primitive  Christianity.  Could  their  worst  ene- 
mies have  given  them  a worse  character  ! 
Can  even  malice  itself  desire  to  fix  a harsher 
imputation  upon  any  denomination  of  people 
now  subsisting!  Yet  these  are  the  words  of 
truth  and  soberness,  the  words  of  an  inspired 
apostle,  the  words  not  of  resentment  but  of 
grief:  he  spoke  of  it  weeping;  he  would 
willingly  have  hoped  better  things;  but  he 
knew  what  tempers  and  practices  were  in- 
consistent with  a sincere  acceptance  of  the 
gospel ; and,  unless  he  would  shut  his  eyes, 
and  stop  his  ears,  he  could  not  but  be  sensible 
that  many  who  were  reputed  Christians  dis- 
honoured the  name  of  Christianity,  and  caused 
the  ways  of  truth  to  be  evil  spoken  of.  Now, 
what  is  the  consequence!  Shall  the  apostle 
bear  the  blame  of  the  evils  and  abominations 
ne  lamented!*  for,  if  he  had  not  preached, 
these  evils  would  not  have  appeared  under 
the  Christian  name.  Shall  the  wickedness  of 
his  pretended  followers  be  charged  as  the 
necessary  effect  of  that  pure  and  heavenly 
doctrine  which  he  had  delivered!  By  no 

eans.  The  grace  of  God,  which  he  preach- 
ed , taught,  and  enabled  those  who  received  it 
in  their  hearts  to  deny  all  ungodliness  and 
worldly  lusts,  and  to  live  soberly,  righteously, 
and  godly  in  the  present  world.  If  inquiry 
was  made  concerning  the  tendency  of  his 
doctrine,  he  could  appeal  to  the  tempers  and 
lives  of  multitudes  (1  Cor.  iii.  2,  3,)  who  had 
been  thereby  delivered  from  the  love  and 
power  of  sin,  and  filled  with  the  fruits  of 
righteousness  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ,  to 
the  glory  and  praise  of  God.  But  it  was  like- 
wise true  that  they  were  still  encumbered 
with  a depraved  nature:  they  were  in  a 
world  full  of  temptations  and  snares ; and  as 
their  numbers  were  very  great,  some  in- 
stances had  occurred  of  persons  sincerely 
well  disposed,  v/ho  had  too  visibly  declined 
from  the  rule  by  which  they  professed  and 
desired  to  walk.  Against  their  mistakes  and 
faults  he  watchfully  directed  his  exhortations 
and  admonitions,  as  occasions  offered;  and 
they  were  generally  attended  with  a good 
effect,  to  convince,  humble,  and  restore  the 
offenders  (2  Cor.  vii.  9,)  and  to  increase  their 
circumspection  for  the  time  to  come.  It  was 
true  likewise  that  there  were  some  gathered 

* The  apostle  knew  that  some  did,  or  would  presume 
to  infer  a liberty  to  sin  from  the  doctrine  which  he 
preached  (ftom.  vi  l,'!  yet  he  would  not  suppress  or  dis- 
guise the  truths  of  God  to  prevent  such  a poor  disin- 
genuous perversion : he  knew  likewise  that  no  one  who 
had  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  can  either  form 
such  a conclusion  himself,  or  listen  to  it  if  proposed  by 
others;  therefore  he  thought  it  unnecessary  to  refute  it 
at  large.  Shall  we  continue  in  sin  that  grace  may 
abound?  God  forbid!  This  is  a sufficient  answer.  Thus 
absurd  blasphemy  exposes  and  confutes  itself : the  terms 
are  inconsistent,  impossible,  and  contradictory  in  the 
highest  degree. 


by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  into  the  num- 
ber of  professors,  who  were  not  effectually 
called  and  changed  by  the  Spirit  of  God. 
These,  though  for  a time  they  had  a name  to 
live,  were  no  better  than  dead ; and  one  rea- 
son why  the  Lord  permitted  the  offences  and 
divisions  we  have  mentioned  to  take  place 
was  that,  by  the  means  of  such  heresies,  those 
that  were  approved  might  be  made  manifest, 
and  the  chaff  separated  from  the  wheat;  foi 
though  the  ignorant  world  would  call  even 
those  persons  Christians,  whose  conduct 
proved  them  enemies  to  the  cross  of  Christ, 
yet  time,  the  test  of  truth,  unanswerably 
evinced  the  difference.  Thus  St.  John,  who 
lived  some  years  after  the  rest  of  the  apos- 
tles, and  saw  many  turn  their  backs  upon  the 
teachers  and  doctrines  they  had  once  owned, 
has  observed  to  this  purpose : — “ They  went 
out  from  us,  but  they  were  not  of  us:  for  if 
they  had  been  of  us,  they  would  no  doubt  have 
continued  with  us:  but  they  went  out,  that 
they  might  be  made  manifest  that  they  were 
not  all  of  us,”  1 John  ii.  19.  In  a word,  there 
were  too  many  pretenders ; some  things  amiss 
where  the  heart  and  views  were  right  in  the 
main,  and  imperfections  in  the  best:  the 
scorners  and  cavillers,  who  hated  the  light 
of  the  gospel,  and  were  always  in  search  of 
something  to  confirm  their  prejudices  against 
it,  met  with  much  answerable  to  their  wishes, 
even  in  the  first  and  best  churches;  but  to 
men  of  candour,  who  were  ingenuous  seekers 
of  the  truth,  the  spirituality,  humility,  and 
brotherly  love  that  prevailed  among  the  Chris- 
tians, and  the  powerful  effects  of  their  public 
ordinances,  demonstrated  that  the  truth  was 
on  their  side,  and  that  God  was  assuredly 
with  them. 

We  offer  the  same  apology,  the  same  train 
of  reasoning  in  behalf  of  what  is  now  so  ge- 
nerally deemed  the  foolishness  of  preaching. 
The  doctrines  we  defend,  which  some  (who 
cannot  do  it  ignorantly)  have  the  effrontery 
to  misrepresent  as  novel  opinions,  are,  we 
doubt  not,  the  doctrines  of  Christ  and  his 
apostles;  and  in  substance  the  doctrines 
taught  from  the  word  of  God  by  Wickliffe, 
Luther,  and  the  venerable  reformers  of  our 
own  church.  We  preach  Christ  crucified, 
Christ  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness, 
and  the  power  of  God  for  sanctification  to 
every  one  that  believeth ; we  preach  salva- 
tion by  grace  through  faith  in  his  blood ; and 
wc  are  sure  that  they  who  receive  this  doc- 
trine unfeignedly  will,  by  their  lives  and 
conversations,  demonstrate  it  to  be  a doctrine 
according  to  godliness:  they  are  not  indeed 
delivered  from  infirmities,  they  are  liable  to 
mistakes  and  indiscretions,  and  see  more 
amiss  in  themselves  than  their  worst  enemies 
can  charge  them  with;  but  sin  is  their  bur- 
den; they  sigh  to  be  delivered  from  it,  and 
they  expect  a complete  redemption.  We 
cannot  indeed  say  so  much  for  all  who  out- 


100 


OF  THE  HERESIES  PROPAGATED 


wardly  avow  a belief  of  this  doctrine : there 
are  pretenders  who,  while  they  profess  to 
believe  in  God,  in  works  they  deny  him. 
But  it  has  been  so  from  the  beginning1.  The 
miscarriages  of  such  persons  are  charged 
indiscriminately  upon  the  societies  among 
whom  they  are  mixed,  and  upon  the  truths 
which  they  seem  to  approve ; but  there  is  a 
righteous  God,  who  in  due  time  will  vindi- 
cate his  own  gospel,  and  his  own  people  from 
all  aspersions.  St.  Paul  observed  such  things 
in  his  day,  and  he  spoke  of  them  likewise,  but 
he  spoke  of  them  weeping.  The  true  state 
of  the  mind  may  be  determined  from  the 
temper  with  which  the  miscarriages  of  pro- 
fessors are  observed.  The  profane  expatiate 
on  them  with  delight,  the  self-righteous  with 
disdain ; but  they  who  know  themselves,  and 
love  the  Lord,  cannot  speak  of  them  without 
the  sincerest  emotions  of  grief : they  are  con- 
cerned for  the  honour  of  the  gospel,  which 
is  defamed  under  this  pretence;  they  are 
grieved  for  the  unhappy  and  dangerous  state 
of  those  by  whom  such  offences  come,  and 
they  fear  for  themselves,  lest  the  enemy 
should  gain  an  advantage  over  them  like- 
wise, for  they  know  they  have  no  strength 
nor  goodness  of  their  own ; therefore,  avoid- 
ing unnecessary  reflections  on  others,  they 
endeavour  to  maintain  a watchful  jealousy 
over  themselves,  and  to  fix  their  hearts  and 
hopes  upon  Christ  Jesus  their  Lord,  who, 
they  are  persuaded,  is  able  to  keep  them 
from  falling,  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost, 
and  at  length  to  present  them  faultless  before 
the  presence  of  his  glory,  with  exceeding  joy. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Of  the  heresies  propagated  by  false  teachers 
in  the  apostles'  days. 

The  parables  in  the  13th  chapter  of  St. 
Matthew  are  prophetical  of  the  reception  and 
event  of  the  gospel  in  succeeding  ages.  In 
this  view  our  Lord  himself  has  explained 
them.  Wherever  it  is  preached,  the  hearers 
may  be  classed  according  to  the  distribution 
in  the  parable  of  the  sower : some  hear  with- 
out understanding  or  reflection ; in  some  it 
excites  a hasty  emotion  in  the  natural  affec- 
tions, and  produces  an  observable  and  sudden 
change  in  their  conduct,  resembling  the  ef- 
fects of  a real  conversion  to  God ; but  the 
truth  not  being  rooted  in  the  heart,  nor  the 
soul  united  to  Christ  by  a living  faith,  these 
hopeful  appearances  are  sooner  or  later  blast- 
ed, and  come  to  nothing : others  are  really 
convinced  in  their  judgment  of  the  truth  and 
importance  of  what  they  hear,  but  their  hearts 
cleave  to  the  dust,  and  the  love  of  this  world, 
the  care  of  what  they  have,  the  desire  of 
v/hat  they  have  not,  the  calls  of  business,  or 


[book  ii. 

the  solicitations  of  pleasure,  choke  the  word 
which  they  seem  to  receive,  so  that  it  brings 
forth  no  fruit  to  perfection : a part,  however, 
(usually  the  smallest  part,)  who  are  compared 
to  the  good  ground,  are  disposed  and  en- 
abled, by  divine  grace,  to  receive  it  thank- 
fully, as  life  from  the  dead.  And  though 
they  meet  with  many  difficulties,  and,  like 
the  corn  upon  the  ground,  pass  through  a 
succession  of  trying  and  changing  seasons, 
yet,  having  the  love,  promise,  and  power  of 
God  engaged  in  their  behalf,  in  defiance  of 
frosts,  and  blasts,  and  storms,  they  are  brought 
to  maturity,  and,  when  fully  ripe,  are  safely 
gathered  into  his  garner,  Matth.  iii.  12.  This 
is  an  epitome  of  the  ecclesiastical  history  of 
every  nation,  and  of  every  parish,  to  which 
this  word  of  salvation  is  sent. 

But  the  parable  of  the  tares  (Matth.  xiii. 
12,)  teaches  us  farther  to  expect,  that  besides 
the  general  influence  which  Satan,  as  the  God 
of  this  world,  will  exert  to  blind  the  eyes  of 
mankind,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel 
should  shine  upon  them  (2  Cor.  iv.  4,)  he 
will  take  occasion,  from  the  knowledge  of  the 
truth,  to  insinuate  a variety  of  errors.  His 
first  attempts  in  this  way  are  often  so  specious 
and  unsuspected,  that  they  are  compared  to 
a man’s  sowing  seed  by  stealth,  and  in  the 
night,  but,  as  the  corn  grew,  a large  crop  of 
tares  springing  up  with  it,  demonstrated  that 
an  enemy  had  been  there.  This,  in  fact,  has 
been  universally  the  case,  in  every  country 
and  age  where  the  gospel  has  been  received ; 
and  we  may  remark,  that  the  sowing  the 
good  seed  was  the  occasion  of  the  tares  being 
cast  into  the  same  ground.  When  a people 
are  involved  in  gross  darkness  and  ignorance, 
sleeping  in  a false  peace,  and  buried  in  the 
pleasures  and  pursuits  of  the  world,  they  have 
neither  leisure,  nor  inclination,  to  invent  or 
attend  to  novelties  in  religion ; each  one  is 
satisfied  with  that  form  (if  even  the  form  of 
godliness  is  retained,)  which  he  has  received 
from  his  parents,  and  neither  pretends  nor 
desires  to  be  wiser  than  those  who  went  before 
him : but  when  the  truth  has  shone  forth  and 
been  received,  and  seems  to  bid  fair  for  far- 
ther success,  Satan  employs  all  his  power 
and  subtlety,  either  to  suppress  or  counterfeit 
it,  or  both.  Much  has  been  done  in  the  former 
way ; he  has  prevailed  so  far  as  to  enkindle 
the  fiercest  animosities  against  the  nearest 
relatives,  and  persuaded  men  that  they  might 
do  acceptable  service  to  God,  by  punishing 
his  faithful  servants  with  torture,  fire,  and 
sword  (John  xvi.  2:)  and  no  less  industrious 
and  successful  has  he  been  in  practising 
upon  the  passions  and  prejudices  of  mankind 
to  admit  and  propagate,  instead  of  the  gospel 
of  Christ,  and  under  that  name,  an  endless 
diversity  of  opinions,  utterly  incompatible 
with  it.  Of  these  some  are  ingenious  and 
artful,  adapted  to  gratify  the  pride  of  those 
who  are  wise  in  their  own  conceits ; others 


IN  THE  APOSTLES’  DAYS. 


101 


CHAP.  IV.] 

more  gross  and  extravagant,  suited  to  inflame 
the  imaginations,  or  to  gratify  the  appetites 
of  such  persons  as  have  not  a turn  for  specu- 
lation and  refinement. 

As  these  appearances  have  always  accom- 
panied the  gospel,  so  they  have  always  been 
a stumbling-block  and  offence  to  the  world, 
and  have  furnished  those  who  hated  the  light 
with  a pretext  for  rejecting  it : and  the  doc- 
trines of  truth  have  been  charged  as  the 
source  and  cause  of  those  errors  which  have 
only  sprung  from  their  abuse  and  perver- 
sion. When  Popery,  for  a series  of  ages,  de- 
tained mankind  in  darkness  and  bondage, 
and  deprived  them  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
holy  scriptures,  the  tide  of  error  ran  uni- 
formly in  one  great  channel ; when  dead 
works  were  substituted  in  the  place  of  living 
faith ; and  the  worship  and  trust  which  is 
only  due  to  Jesus  the  great  Mediator,  was 
blasphemously  directed  to  subordinate  inter- 
cessors, to  angels  and  to  saints,  whether  real 
or  pretended  ; when  forgiveness  of  sin  was 
expected,  not  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  but  by 
penances,  pilgrimages,  masses,  and  human 
absolutions,  by  the  repetition  of  many  prayers, 
or  the  payment  of  sums  of  money;  while 
things  continued  thus,  the  world  was  gene- 
rally in  that  state  of  stupidity  and  blind  se- 
curity which  is  miscalled  religious  peace 
and  uniformity  ; and  the  controversies  of  the 
times  were  chiefly  confined  to  those  points 
which  immediately  affected  the  power,  wealth, 
or  pre-eminence  of  the  several  religious  or- 
ders by  whom  the  people  were  implicitly 
led.  Some  differences  of  opinion  were  indeed 
known ; but  the  charge  of  heresy  and  dange- 
rous innovations  was  seldom  so  much  as  pre- 
tended against  any,  but  the  few  who  refused 
to  wear  the  mark  of  the  beast  upon  their 
right  hands  and  foreheads,  and  who,  by  the 
mercy  of  God,  retained  and  professed  the 
main  truths  of  Christianity  in  some  degree  of 
power  and  purity.  But  when  it  pleased  God 
to  revive  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel,  by 
the  ministry  of  Luther  and  his  associates,  and 
many  were  turned  from  darkness  to  light, 
the  enemy  of  mankind  presently  changed 
his  methods,  and,  by  his  influence,  the  sow- 
ing of  the  good  seed  was  followed  by  tares 
in  abundance.  In  the  course  of  a few  years, 
the  glory  of  the  Reformation  was  darkened, 
and  its  progress  obstructed,  by  the  enthusiasm 
and  infatuation  of  men,  who,  under  a pre- 
tence of  improving  upon  Luther’s  plan,  pro- 
pagated the  wildest,  most  extravagant,  and 
blasphemous  opinions,  and  perpetrated,  under 
the  mask  of  religion,  such  acts  of  cruelty, 
villany,  and  licentiousness,  as  have  been  sel- 
dom heard  of  in  the  world.  The  papists 
beheld  these  excesses  with  pleasure:  many 
of  them  could  not  but  know  that  Luther,  and 
the  heads  of  the  Reformation,  did  all  that 
could  be  expected  from  them,  to  show  the 
folly  and  iniquity  of  such  proceedings ; but, 


against  the  light  of  truth  and  fact,  they  la- 
boured to  persuade  the  world,  that  these 
were  the  necessary  consequences  of  Luther’s 
doctrine;  and  that  no  better  issue  could  be 
justly  hoped  for  when  men  presumed  to  de- 
part from  the  authorised  standards  of  popes 
and  councils,  and  to  read  and  examine  the 
scriptures  for  themselves. 

This  religious  madness,  was,  however,  of 
no  long  duration : the  people  who  held  tenets 
inconsistent  with  the  peace  of  society,  were 
deservedly  treated  as  rebels  and  incendiaries 
by  the  governing  powers;  the  ringleaders 
wrere  punished,  and  the  multitudes  dispersed; 
their  most  obnoxious  errors  were  gradually 
abandoned,  and  are  now  in  a manner  forgot. 
After  the  peace  of  Passau,  the  Reformation 
acquired  an  establishment  in  Germany,  and 
other  places;  and  since  that  time  error  has 
assumed  a milder  form,  and  has  been  sup- 
ported by  softer  methods,  and  more  respecta- 
ble names. 

In  our  own  country,  the  same  spirit  of 
enthusiasm  and  disorder  has  appeared  at  dif- 
ferent times,  though  it  has  been  restrained 
by  the  providence  of  God,  from  proceeding 
to  the  same  extremities,  and  has  been  most 
notorious,  when,  or  soon  after,  the  power  of 
gospel-truth  has  been  more  eminently  re- 
vived ; for,  as  I have  already  observed,  when 
religion  is  upon  the  decline,  and  only  so  much 
of  a profession  retained  as  is  consistent  with 
the  love  of  the  present  world,  and  a confor- 
mity to  the  maxims  and  practices  of  the  many, 
we  seldom  hear  of  any  errors  prevailing,  but 
such  as  will  find  a favourable  toleration,  and 
may  be  avowed  without  exciting  very  strong 
and  general  expressions  of  contempt  and  ill- 
will  against  those  who  maintain  them.  But 
whenever  real  religion,  as  a life  of  faith  in  the 
Son  of  God,  is  set  forth  upon  the  principles  of 
scripture,  and,  by  the  operation  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  witnesses  are  raised  up,  who  by  their 
conduct  demonstrate  that  they  are  crucified 
with  Christ,  to  the  law,  to  sin,  and  to  the 
world,  then  is  the  time  for  Satan  to  discredit 
this  work,  by  imposing  a variety  of  false 
views  and  appearances  upon  the  minds  of  the 
ignorant  and  unwary ; and  he  is  seldom  at  a 
loss  for  fit  instruments  to  promote  his  designs. 
Since  the  late  revival  of  the  Reformation 
doctrines  amongst  us,  we  have  perhaps  fewer 
things  of  this  kind  to  apologize  for,  than  have 
been  observable  on  any  similar  occasion ; and 
the  best  apology  we  can  offer  for  what  has 
been  really  blameable,  is,  to  show  that  it  was 
even  thus  in  the  apostles’  days ; and  that,  if 
any  arguments  taken  from  these  blemishes 
are  conclusive  against  what  some  choose  to 
call  the  novel  doctrines  now,  they  would, 
with  equal  reason,  conclude  against  the  va- 
lidity of  the  New  Testament. 

And  not  to  confine  myself  to  such  things 
as  the  world  is  most  prone  to  except  against, 

I shall  endeavour  to  show,  that  the  seeds  of 


102 


OF  THE  HERESIES  PROPAGATED 


all  errors  and  heresies,  the  fashionable  as  well 
as  those  which  are  more  generally  despised, 
were  sown  in  the  first  age,  and  appeared  so 
early  as  to  give  occasion  for  the  apostles’ 
censures  against  them.  I do  not  mean  by 
this  to  parallel  every  name  and  every  singu- 
larity that  a subtle  head  or  a warm  imagina- 
tion may  have  started ; but  to  assign,  in 
general,  the  principles  to  which  all  these  de- 
lusions may  be  reduced,  the  sources  to  which 
these  inebriating  and  dangerous  streams  may 
be  traced  : for,  indeed,  the  operations  of  the 
human  mind  seem  to  be  much  more  simple 
and  limited  than  we  are  ordinarily  aware. 
As  there  can  be  no  new  truths,  though  every 
truth  appears  new  to  us  which  we  have  not 
known  before,  so  it  is  probable,  that  there 
can  be  now  no  new  errors ; at  least  it  is  cer- 
tain, that  a competent  knowledge  of  anti- 
quity, or  even  a careful  perusal  of  the  apos- 
tles’ writings,  will  furnish  sufficient  evidence, 
that  some  modern  authors  and  teachers  are 
by  no  means  the  inventors  of  the  ingenious 
schemes  they  have  presented  to  the  public. 
Truth,  like  the  sun,  maintains  a constant 
course ; every  tiling  would  stagnate  and  die 
if  we  were  deprived  of  it  for  a single  day ; 
but  errors  are  like  comets;  which,  though 
too  eccentric  to  be  subject  exactly  to  our 
computations,  yet  have  their  periods  of  ap- 
proach and  recess,  and  some  of  them  have 
appeared  and  been  admired,  have  been  with- 
drawn and  forgot,  over  and  over  again. 

Error,  in  the  simplest  form,  is  a misappre- 
hension of  the  truth.  Some  part  of  the  gos- 
pel must  be  known  before  any  erroneous  con- 
ceptions of  it  can  take  place.  Thus  we  read 
(Actsviii.  9 — 22,)  that  Simon  Magus  was 
struck  with  Philip’s  preaching,  and  the  ef- 
fects which  attended  it : he  was  so  far  im- 
pressed, that  it  is  said  he  believed ; that  is, 
lie  made  a profession  of  faith ; he  was  con- 
vinced there  was  something  extraordinary  in 
the  doctrine,  but  he  understood  it  not : and 
the  event  showed  he  had  no  part  nor  lot  in 
the  matter.  He  is  thought  by  the  ancients 
to  have  been  the  founder  of  that  capital  sect, 
which  is  known  in  general  by  the  name  of 
Gnostics,  and  which,  like  a gangrene,  spread 
far  and  wide,  in  various  branches  and  subdi- 
visions, each  successive  head  refining  upon 
the  system  of  the  preceding.  In  Sir  Peter 
King’s  History  of  the  Apostles’  Creed,  and 
Mosheim’s  Ecclesiastical  History,  the  Eng- 
lish reader  may  see  the  substance  of  the  fig- 
ments which  these  unhappy  men,  wise  in  their 
own  conceit,  vented  under  the  name  of  the 
Christian  religion. 

The  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  of  him 
crucified,  which  St.  Paul  preached,  and  in 
which  he  gloried,  is  the  pillar  and  ground  of 
truth,  the  rock  upon  which  the  church  is 
built,  and  against  which  the  gates  of  hell 
shall  never  prevail,  1 Cor.  ii.  2;  Gal.  vi.  14; 
l Tim.  iii.  15 ; Matth.  xvi.  18.  Mistakes  in 


[book  II. 

this  point  are  fundamental,  dangerous,  and 
if  persisted  in,  destructive;  for  as  such  a 
knowledge  of  God  as  is  connected  with  his 
favour  and  communion  is  eternal  life,  so  none 
can  come  to  the  Father  but  by  the  Son  (John 
xvii.  3 ; and  xiv.  6,)  nor  can  any  know  him, 
but  those  to  whom  the  Son  will  reveal  him, 
Matth.  xi.  27.  On  this  account  Satan’s  great 
endeavour  (and  on  his  success  herein  the 
strength  of  his  kingdom  depends)  is  to  dark- 
en and  pervert  the  minds  of  men,  lest  they 
should  acknowledge  and  understand  what  the 
scriptures  declare  of  his  person,  character, 
and  offices,  as  well  knowing,  that  if  these 
are  set  aside,  whatever  else  is  left  of  religion 
will  be  utterly  unavailing.  Jesus  Christ  is 
revealed  in  the  scriptures,  and  was  preached 
by  his  first  disciples,  as  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh,  a divine  person  in  the  human  nature, 
who,  by  submitting  to  ignominy,  pain,  and 
death,  made  a full  and  proper  atonement  for 
sin,  and  wrought  out  an  everlasting  righte- 
ousness in  favour  of  all  who  should  believe  in 
his  name  ; and  he  is  set  forth  in  that  nature 
in  which  he  suffered,  as  the  object  of  our  su- 
preme love,  trust,  and  adoration.  Other  im- 
portant doctrines,  largely  insisted  on  in  the 
word  of  God,  such  as  the  demerit  of  sin,  the 
obnoxiousness  of  sinners  to  punishment,  and 
the  miserjr  and  incapacity  of  man  in  his  fallen 
state,  are  closely  connected  with  this,  and 
cannot  be  satisfactorily  explained  without  it. 
The  necessary  method  of  our  recovery  exhi- 
bits the  most  striking  view  of  the  ruin  in 
which  sin  has  involved  us,  and  is  the  only 
adequate  standard  whereby  to  estimate  the 
unspeakable  love  of  God  manifested  in  cur 
redemption.  On  the  other  hand,  a know- 
ledge of  the  true  state  of  mankind,  in  conse- 
quence of  the  fall,  is  necessary  to  obviate  the 
prejudices  of  our  minds  against  a procedure, 
which,  though  in  itself  the  triumph  of  divine 
wisdom,  is  in  many  respects  contradictory  to 
our  natural,  and  therefore  false,  notions  of 
the  fitness  of  things.  St.  Paul  declares,  that 
the  natural  man  reeeiveth  not  the  things  of 
the  Spirit  of  God,  neither  can  he  discern  them 
(1  Cor.  ii.  14;)  and  in  another  place,  that 
no  man  can  say  (that  is,  sincerely,  and  upon 
solid  conviction)  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord,  but 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  1 Cor.  xii.  3.  To  wor- 
ship him  who  had  been  hanged  on  a cross, 
and  to  expect  eternal  happiness  from  his 
death,  was  to  the  Jews  a stumbling-block  ; it 
offended  their  notions  of  the  unity  of  the 
godhead,  and  opposed  their  high  esteem  of 
their  own  righteousness  ; and  to  the  Greeks, 
or  Heathens,  it  appeared  the  greatest  folly 
and  absurdity  imaginable.  For  these  rea- 
sons the  gospel  was  rejected  by  multitudes  as 
soon  as  proposed,  and  those  who  preached  it 
were  accounted  babblers  and  madmen,  not 
because  they  were  at  a loss  for  propriety  of 
expression,  or  discovered  any  thing  ridiculous 
i in  their  conduct,  but  because  they  enforced 


IN  THE  APOSTLES’  DAYS. 


103 


CHAP.  IV.] 

tenets  which  were  adjudged  inconsistent  with 
the  common  sense  of  mankind. 

But,  notwithstanding-  these  prejudices,  the 
energy  of  their  preaching,  and  the  miracu- 
lous powers  with  which  it  was  accompanied, 
made  an  impression  upon  many  persons,  so 
far  as  to  induce  them  to  profess  the  name  of 
Jesus,  though  they  were  not  spiritually  en- 
lightened into  the  mj^steries  of  his  religion, 
nor  their  hearts  thoroughly  subdued  to  the 
obedience  of  the  faith.  There  are  other  points 
within  the  compass  of  the  gospel-ministry 
more  adapted  to  affect  the  minds  of  men  in 
their  natural  state.  Few  are  so  hardened, 
but  they  have  a conscience  of  sin,  some  fears 
with  respect  to  its  consequences,  and  a pre- 
intimation of  immortality.  Such  are  capable 
of  being  greatly  affected  and  moved  by  a pa- 
thetic declaration  of  the  terrors  of  the  Lord, 
the  solemnities  of  a future  judgment,  the  joys 
of  heaven,  or  the  torments  of  hell.  We  can- 
not doubt  that  these  topics,  when  insisted  on 
with  that  strength  of  argument  and  warmth 
of  spirit,  of  which  the  apostles  were  capable, 
would  engage  the  attention  of  many  who 
were  not  partakers  of  that  divine  light,  by 
which  alone  the  whole  scheme  of  truth,  in 
its  harmony  and  beauty,  can  be  perceived. 
The  seed  sown  upon  the  rock  sprang  up  im- 
mediately, the  quickness  of  its  growth,  and 
the  suddenness  of  its  decay,  proceeding  from 
the  same  cause,  a want  of  depth  in  the  soil. 
Not  a few  of  these  hasty  believers  presently 
renounced  the  faith  altogether,  and  others, 
who  went  not  so  far  as  to  disown  the  name, 
endeavoured  to  accommodate  the  doctrine  to 
their  prepossessions,  and  to  explain  or  reject 
what  they  could  not  understand,  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  form  a system  upon  the  whole 
agreeable  to  their  own  wills.  Men  of  corrupt 
and  prejudiced  minds  thus  tampered  with  the 
truth ; and  their  inventions,  when  made 
known,  were  adopted  by  others  of  the  same 
cast  of  thought : as  they  were  differently  in- 
clined, they  directed  their  inquiries  to  dif- 
ferent points,  and  each  found  partizans  and 
adherents  in  their  respective  ways.  Thus 
errors,  and  in  consequence,  sects  and  divi- 
sions, were  multiplied ; for  when  men  depart 
from  the  unerring  guidance  of  God’s  word, 
there  is  no  end  of  their  imaginations ; one 
singularity  produces  another,  and  every  new 
leader  is  stimulated  to  carry  his  discoveries 
farther  than  those  who  have  gone  before  him. 
Farther,  as  human  nature  is  universally  the 
same,  we  may  judge  from  what  we  have 
seen,  that  there  always  have  been  persons 
inclined  to  join  in  a religious  profession,  from 
the  unworthy  motives  of  worldly  interest, 
and  a desire  to  stand  fair  with  their  fellow- 
creatures.  Temptations  to  this  were  not  so 
strong  indeed  at  first,  nor  so  general,  as  they 
have  often  been  since ; yet  the  force  of  friend- 
ship, relation,  (and  when  Christianity  had 
been  of  some  jmars  standing,)  education, 


custom,  and  human  authority,  is  very  consi- 
derable : nor  is  even  persecution  a sufficient 
bar  against  hypocrites  and  intruders.  They 
who  suffer  for  the  gospel,  though  despised  by 
the  world,  are  highly  esteemed  and  consider- 
ed by  their  own  side ; it  procures  them  an 
attention  which  they  would  not  have  other- 
wise obtained ; it  may  give  them  an  import- 
ance in  their  own  eyes,  furnish  them  with 
something  to  talk  of,  and  make  them  talked 
of  by  others.  There  are  people  who,  for  the 
sake  of  these  advantages,  will,  for  a season, 
venture  upon  many  hardships,  though,  when 
the  trial  comes  very  close,  they  will  not  en- 
dure to  the  end.  In  a word,  there  is  no  rea- 
son to  doubt  but  that,  amongst  the  numbers 
who  professed  the  gospel  at  first,  there  would 
be  found  the  same  variety  of  tempers,  cir- 
cumstances, views,  and  motives,  as  have 
ordinarily  appeared  amongst  a great  number 
of  people,  suddenly  formed  in  any  other  pe- 
riod of  time ; and  the  apostles’  writings  prove 
that  it  was  really  so.  From  these  general 
principles,  we  may  easily  account  for  the 
early  introduction  and  increase  of  errors  and 
heresies,  and  that  they  should  be  in  a manner 
the  same  as  they  have  sprung  up  with,  or 
followed  succeeding  revivals  of  the  truth.  Nor 
is  it  just  cause  of  surprise,  if  sincere  Chris- 
tians have  been,  in  some  instances,  entan- 
gled in  the  prevailing  errors  of  the  times: 
designing  no  harm  themselves,  they  suspect 
none,  and  are  therefore  liable  to  be  imposed 
on  by  those  who  lie  in  wait  to  deceive, 
Ephes.  iv.  14. 

When  Christianity  first  appeared,  the  Hea- 
then wisdom,  known  by  the  name  of  Philo- 
sophy, was  in  the  highest  repute : it  had  two 
principal  branches,  the  Grecian  and  the  East- 
ern. The  former  admitted  (at  least  did  not 
condemn)  a multiplicity  and  subordination  of 
deities ; amongst  whom,  as  agents  and  medi- 
ators between  their  supreme  Jupiter  and  mor- 
tals, the  care  and  concerns  of  mankind  were 
subdivided,  to  each  of  which  homage  and  sa- 
crifices were  due : their  mythology,  or  the 
pretended  history  of  their  divinities,  was 
puerile  and  absurd,  and  many  of  their  reli- 
gious rites  inconsistent  with  the  practice  of 
public  decorum  and  good  morals.  Some  of 
the  philosophers  endeavoured  to  guard  against 
the  worst  abuses,  and  to  form  a system  of 
religion  and  morality,  in  which  they  seem  to 
have  proceeded  as  far  as  could  be  expected 
from  men  who  were  totally  ignorant  of  the 
true  God,  and  of  their  own  state  : some  truths 
they  were  acquainted  with,  truths  in  theory, 
but  utterly  impracticable  upon  any  principles 
but  those  of  revelation.  Amongst  a vast 
number  of  opinions  concerning  the  chief 
of  man,  a few  held,  that  man’s  honour  ana 
happiness  must  consist  in  conformity  to,  and 
communion  with,  God;  but  how  to  attain 
these  desirable  ends,  they  were  entirely  ig 
norant. 


104 


OF  THE  HERESIES  PROPAGATED 


The  eastern  philosophy  was  solemn  and 
mysterious,  and  not  less  fabulous  than  the 
other ; but  the  fables  were  of  a graver  cast.  It 
seemed  to  mourn  under  the  sense  of  moral 
evil,  and  laboured  in  vain  to  account  for  its 
entrance;  its  precepts  were  gloomy  and  se- 
vere ; and  a perfect  course  of  bodily  mortifi- 
cation was  recommended  as  the  great  expe- 
dient to  purify  the  soul  from  all  its  defilements, 
and  to  re-unite  it,  by  degrees,  to  its  great 
Author. 

St.  Paul,  in  several  passages  (Col.  ii.  8; 

1 Tim.  vi.  20,)  cautions  the  Christians  against 
corrupting  the  simplicity  of  their  faith,  by 
admitting  the  reasoning  and  inventions  of 
vain  men.  In  some  places  (1  Tim.  i.  4;  2 Tim. 
iii.  9)  he  seems  to  speak  more  directly  of  the 
Gnostics,  whose  heresies  were  little  more 
than  the  fables  of  the  eastern  philosophy,  in 
a new  dress,  with  an  acknowledgment  of 
Jesus  Christ  as  an  extraordinary  person,  yet 
so  as  utterly  to  exclude  and  deny  all  the  im- 
portant truths  revealed  in  the  scriptures  con- 
cerning him.  They  dignified  their  scheme 
with  the  name  of  Gnosis,  or  Science;  but  it 
was  falsely  so  called,  and  stood  in  direct  op- 
position to  the  gospel.  On  other  occasions 
(Rom.  i.  21 — 23;  1 Cor.  i.  20 — 23,)  he  ap- 
pears to  have  had  the  Grecian  philosophy 
chiefly  in  view.  But,  notwithstanding  his 
admonitions,  it  was  not  long  before  the  errors 
of  philosophy  had  an  ill  influence  upon  the 
professors  of  the  Christian  faith;  and  even 
several  of  the  fathers  darkened  the  glory  of 
the  truth,  by  endeavouring  to  accommodate 
it  to  the  taste  and  genius  of  that  Heathen 
wisdom  which  they  had  before  admired,  and 
still  thought  might  be  useful  to  embellish 
-and  recommend  the  gospel. 

But  to  confine  myself  to  the  apostles’  times, 
it  is  plain,  from  the  epistles  of  St.  Paul,  John, 
Jude,  and  Peter  (Tit.  i.  10;  1 John  iv.  1; 

2 Pet.  ii.  18,  19;  Jude  4,)  that  many  false 
prophets  and  teachers  had,  in  their  days,  crept 
in,  who  propagated  damnable  heresies,  even 
denying  the  Lord  who  bought  them,  turning 
the  grace  of  God  into  licentiousness,  speak- 
ing great  swelling  words  of  vanity,  boasting 
themselves  of  freedom,  while  they  were  in 
bondage  to  their  own  lusts.  And  in  the  epis- 
tle to  the  church  of  Ephesus  (Rev.  ii.  6,)  our 
Lord  himself  mentions  a sect,  who  bore  the 
name  of  Nicolaitans,  and  expresses  his  dis- 
approbation of  them  in  these  awful  terms: 
“ Whom  I also  hate !”  The  peculiar  tenets 
of  the  people  condemned  in  these  passages  of 
scripture  are  not  expressly  mentioned;  but 
from  these  sources  were  most  probably  de- 
rived the  sects  which,  in  the  second  century, 
were  known  by  the  names  of  their  several 
leaders,  Cerinthus,  Saturninus,  Cerdo,  Mar- 
cion,  Basilides,  Valentinus,  and  others:  who 
all,  building  upon  the  common  foundation  of 
the  e/st- rn  philosophy,  or  Gnosis,  superadded 
their  own  peculiarities,  and  were  differently, 


[book  II. 

though  equally,  remote  from  the  truth.  The 
one  thing  in  which  they  all  agreed  was,  in 
perverting  and  opposing  the  scripture-doc- 
trine concerning  the  person  of  Christ.  On 
this  point  their  opinions  were  as  discordant 
as  absurd : some  denied  that  Christ  was  come 
in  the  flesh;  they  pretended  that  Christ  was 
sent  from  heaven  by  the  supreme  God,  and 
united  himself  to  Jesus,  the  son  of  Joseph 
and  Mary,  at  his  baptism;  and  that,  when 
the  Jews  apprehended  the  man  Jesus,  and 
nailed  him  to  the  cross,  Christ  returned  to 
heaven,  and  left  him  to  suffer  by  himself. 
Others  ascribed  a heavenly  derivation  to  his 
body,  affirming  that  it  passed  through  the 
Virgin  Mary,  without  any  participation  of  her 
substance;  while  others  asserted,  that  he  had 
no  substantial  flesh ; but  that  his  body  was  a 
mere  phantom,  or  apparition,  which  was  nei- 
ther really  born,  nor  did  or  could  truly  suffer. 
Again,  there  were  others  who  held  the  reality 
of  his  human  nature,  yet  maintained,  that 
Christ  did  not  suffer  at  all,  but  that  Simon  of 
Cyrene,  the  bearer  of  his  cross,  being  taken 
by  the  Jews  for  him,  was  crucified  in  his 
stead,  while  he  stood  by,  and  laughed  at  their 
mistake.  A brief  recital  of  these  extrava- 
gancies is  sufficient  for  my  present  purpose: 
for  a more  particular  account,  I refer  the 
reader  to  Sir  Peter  King’s  History  of  the 
Creed,  already  mentioned.  Many  passages  in 
the  apostles’  writings  are  directed  against 
these  dangerous  errors ; for  they  strike  at  the 
root  of  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  gospel,  and 
are  subversive  of  the  whole  tenor  both  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament.  It  was  believed  by 
the  ancients,  that  St.  John  wrote  his  gospel 
with  some  view  to  these  heresies ; and  it  is 
certain  that,  in  his  first,  epistle,  where,  put- 
ting the  disciples  upon  their  guard  against 
the  many  false  prophets  who  were  gone  out 
into  the  world,  he  observes,  that  the  common 
point,  in  which  all  their  divers  opinions 
agreed,  was  a denial  that  Jesus  Christ  was 
come  in  the  flesh,  1 John  ii.  22,  and  iv.  3. 
He  reminds  them,  that  as  they  had  heard 
Antichrist  must  come,  even  so  now  there 
were  many  Antichrists;  and  that  the  name 
was  applicable  to  all  who  denied  that  Jesus 
is  the  Christ.  He  admits  that  these  false 
teachers  went  out  from  amongst  themselves, 
that  is,  they  had  borne  the  Christian  name; 
but  he  refers  to  the  doctrines  they  taught,  as 
a sufficient  proof  that  they  had  never  been  of 
the  number  of  true  Christians;  for  if  they  had 
been  of  us,  no  doubt  they  would  have  con- 
tinued with  us,  1 John  ii.  19.  If  opinions, 
equally  wild  and  extravagant,  were  at  this 
time  maintained  and  propagated  by  persons 
who,  for  a season,  had  been  warm  for  truth 
and  reformation,  we  are  not  afraid  that  they 
would  prejudice  our  cause  with  any  who  will 
allow  due  weight  to  the  reasoning  of  St. 
John;  for  if  they  had  been  really  of  us  once, 
they  would  have  still  continued  with  us. 


IN  THE  APOSTLES’  DAYS. 


15 


CHAP.  IV.] 

Bat  the  truth  is,  the  teachers  in  our  time, 
whose  leading  tenets  most  nearly  symbolize 
with  these  ancient  heresies,  are  not  charged, 
or  even  suspected  of  having  had  any  attach- 
ment to  the  doctrines  which  I am  concerned 
to  vindicate ; nor  is  an  apology  expected  from 
them,  for  they  gave  but  little  offence.  Since 
the  fabulous  disguise,  under  which  the  Gnos- 
tics of  old  veiled  their  opinions,  has  been  laid 
aside,  their  opposition  to  the  deity  and  atone- 
ment of  Christ  has  been  adopted  by  so  many 
who  are  applauded  for  ingenuity,  fine  reason- 
ing, and  great  learning,  that  it  bids  fair  to 
be  the  fashionable  divinity  of  the  age;  and 
though  the  sufferings  of  Jesus  are  not  denied, 
yet  their  proper  causes  and  ends  are  openly 
exploded;  and  the  attempt  has  often  proved 
an  easy  path  to  acceptance,  wealth,  and 
dignity. 

The  attachment  of  the  Jewish  converts  to 
the  law  of  Moses  was  another  source  of 
error,  which  occasioned  daily  disputes  in  the 
churches,  and  gave  rise,  in  the  issue,  to  dan- 
gerous heresies,  subversive  of  the  true  faith. 
Even  those  of  them  who  had  sincerely  re- 
ceived the  gospel,  could  not  easily  be  per- 
suaded, that  a law  given  to  Moses  by  God 
himself,  with  so  much  solemnity,  from  Mount 
Sinai,  was  to  be  entirely  abrogated ; and  that 
their  obligation  to  it  was,  ipso  facto , vacated 
the  moment  they  believed  in  Jesus,  who,  by 
his  obedience  unto  death,  had  accomplished 
all  its  types  and  ceremonies,  and  wrought 
out  for  his  people  an  everlasting  righteous- 
ness commensurate  to  its  utmost  require- 
ments. The  apostles,  who,  after  the  pattern 
of  their  Lord,  were  gentle  and  tender  to  the 
weak  of  the  flock,  bore  with  their  infirmities 
(Rom.  xiv.  2.  6,)  and  allowed  them  to  retain 
a distinction  of  meats,  and  days,  and  other 
observances,  provided  they  did  not  consider 
these  things  in  such  a point  of  view  as  to 
interfere  with  God’s  appointed  method  of 
justification  by  faith  in  his  Son.  But  the 
matter  was  carried  much  farther;  for  no 
sooner  was  there  a church  formed  at  Antioch, 
than  they  were  troubled  with  perverse 
teachers  (Acts  xv.  1)  who  told  them,  that 
except  they  were  circumcised,  and  kept  the 
law  of  Moses,  they  could  not  be  saved.  The 
Galatians  were  greatly  hurt  by  teachers  of 
this  sort  (Gal.  v.  4;)  and  as  the  Jews  were 
dispersed  through  all  the  provinces,  the 
peace  of  the  church  was  more  or  less  affected 
by  their  attempts  to  enforce  the  observance 
of  the  law,  in  almost  every  place,  till  after 
the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  was  received,  and 
obedience  to  the  Levitical  law  rendered  im- 
practicable by  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
and  the  temple,  Col.  ii.  16.  Tit.  i.  10.  Phil, 
iii.  2.  1 Tim.  i.  7.  From  that  period,  it  is 
probable,  the  distinction  of  Jew  and  Gentile 
believers  ceased,  and  both  parties  were  firmly 
incorporated  into  one  body:  but  a great  num- 
ber of  the  zealots  for  the  law  separated  them- 

Vol.  II  O 


selves,  and  were  known  in  the  following  age 
by  the  name  of  Ebionites,  adopting  for  their 
rule  a mixture  of  law  and  gospel,  so  very 
different  from  the  gospel  St.  Paul  preached, 
that  they  openly  expressed  an ' abhorrence 
both  of  his  person  and  writings. 

VV e have  an  account  likewise  of  some  pf  e- 
tended  teachers,  who  opposed  the  important 
doctrine  of  the  resurrection.  Some  expressly 
maintained,  that  there  was  no  resurrection, 
whom  St.  Paul  confutes  at  large,  in  the  15th 
chap,  of  his  first  epistle  to  the  Corinthians. 
Others  affirmed  that  the  resurrection  was 
past  already,  2 Tim.  18.  Perhaps  they  pre- 
tended that  a moral  change  was  designed  by 
the  metaphorical  expression  of  a resurrection. 
The  philosophers  had  used  the  word  in  this 
sense:  and  this  would  be  sufficient  to  gain  it 
admittance  with  some,  who  would  willingly 
reconcile  their  profession  to  the  wisdom  of 
the  world.  In  either  way  the  very  founda- 
tions of  hope  were  removed.  If  this  point  is 
denied,  the  whole  system  of  Christian  doctrine 
falls  to  the  ground ; and  that  dreadful  train  of 
consequences  must  be  admitted,  which  the 
apostle  enumerates  in  1 Cor.  xv.  14.  18.  “ If 
there  be  no  resurrection  of  the  dead,  then  is 
Christ  not  risen,  then  is  our  preaching  vain, 
and  your  faith  also  vain,  ye  are  yet  in  your 
sins ; then  they  also  who  are  fallen  asleep  in 
Christ  are  perished.”  Since  the  fertile  resur- 
rection of  ancient  mistakes,  which  is  the  sin 
and  scandal  of  the  present  age,  we  have  been 
gravely  told,  that  the  word  signifies  no  more 
than  the  soul’s  awaking  from  the  long  sleep 
into  which  they  suppose  the  period  we  call 
death  will  plunge  it;  and  that  the  body  has 
no  share  in  the  revival,  but  dies  without 
hope:  but  we  may  thank  God  for  the  scrip- 
tures, which  brings  comfort  where  philosophy 
gives  up  the  cause  as  desperate.  Faith  in 
Christ  is  so  closely  connected  with  the  doc- 
trine of  a resurrection,  that  it  is  common  with 
those  who  oppose  the  former  to  use  all  their 
address  to  explain  the  latter  quite  away ; and 
whether  they  say,  it  is  past  already,  or,  that 
it  will  never  come,  their  motives,  their  de- 
sign, and  their  manner  of  reasoning,  are  the 
same. 

That  there  were  persons  who  abused  the 
doctrines  of  grace,  as  an  encouragement  to 
continue  in  the  practice  of  sin,  may  be  infer- 
red from  the  epistle  of  St.  James,  and  several 
passages  of  the  other  apostles.  Such,  in  our 
modern  phrase,  are  styled  Antinomians;  a 
name,  it  must  be  confessed,  of  very  indeter- 
minate application:  it  is  an  epithet,  which 
many  would  fix,  indiscriminately,  upon  all 
who  preach  a free  salvation  by  faith  in  the 
blood  of  Jesus.  If  it  is  all  of  grace,  and  we 
can  do  nothing  of  ourselves;  if  it  is  not  of 
him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth, 
but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy ; then  we  may 
live  as  we  please,  endeavours  are  useless, 
and  obedience  unnecessary,  Rom.  xi.  6,  and 


106 


OF  THE  HERESIES  PROPAGATED 


ix.  IS;  2 Cor.  iii.  5.  These  are  the  inferences 
which  the  unenlightened  heart  charges  as 
unavoidable  consequences  from  the  gospel- 
doctrine;  and  from  hence  we  obtain  a cor- 
roborating proof,  that  we  do  not  mistake  St. 
Paul’s  sense,  or  preach  a gospel  different 
from  his,  because  he  foresaw  that  the  same 
objections  would  seem  to  lie  against  himself 
(Rom.  iii.  7,  and  ix.  19;)  and  he  guards  and 
protests  against  such  a perversion,  “ Shall 
we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound? 
God  forbid,”  Rom.  vi.  1.  It  seems  to  have 
been  upon  this  account  that  he  was  slandered, 
and  by  some  affirmed  to  have  taught,  “Let 
us  do  evil,  that  good  may  come”  (Rom.  iii. 
8;)  that  is,  in  modern  language  (and  such 
things  are  not  spoken  in  corners  amongst  us,) 
If  any  man  would  be  a proper  subject  of  what 
they  call  grace,  let  him  become  still  more 
vile,  and  plunge  into  the  most*  atrocious 
wickedness;  for  the  greater  the  sinner,  the 
better  qualified  for  mercy.  Wo  are  content 
to  be  reproached,  as  St.  Paul  was  in  his  time, 
for  the  truth’s  sake ; and  we  would  be  chiefly 
concerned  for  the  unhappy  scoffers,  who,  un- 
less God  is  pleased  to  give  them  repentance 
unto  life,  will  one  day  wish  they  had  been 
idiots,  or  lunatics,  rather  than  have  vented 
their  malicious  wit  against  the  grace  and 
gospel  of  the  Lord  Christ.  But  it  must  be 
allowed,  we  have  seen  Antinomians  in  the 
worst  sense  of  the  word,  men  who  have 
pleaded  for  sin,  and  while  they  have  laid 
claim  to  faith,  have  renounced  and  blas- 
phemed that  holiness,  without  which,  no  man 
shall  see  the  Lord.  We  cannot  wonder,  that 
even  candid  and  well-meaning  persons  have 
been  greatly  prejudiced  and  discouraged  in 
their  inquiries  after  truth,  by  the  presumption 
and  wickedness  of  such  pretended  Christians. 
But  no  period  of  the  church,  in  which  the 
pel-doctrine  was  known  and  preached,  has 
n free  from  offences  of  this  sort.  It  was  so 
in  the  apostles’  days.  There  were  then  many 
unruly  and  vain  talkers,  and  deceivers,  who 
subverted  whole  houses,  teaching  things 
which  they  ought  not  (Tit.  i.  10,  11;)  who 
professed  that  they  knew  God,  but  in  works 
denied  him,  being  abominable,  and  disobe- 
dient, and  to  every  good  work  reprobate  (Tit. 
i.  13;)  who  pretended  to  faith,  but  were  des- 
titute of  those  fruits  which  true  faith  always 
produces,  James  ii.  14.  These  are  described 
(Jude  12,  13,)  as  clouds  without  water,  car- 
ried about  of  winds;  trees  whose  fruit 
withereth,  twice  dead,  plucked  up  by  the 
root;  raging  waves  of  the  sea,  foaming  out 
their  own  shame;  wandering  stars,  to  whom 
is  reserved  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever; 
sporting  themselves  with  their  own  deceiv- 
ing*, and  beguiling  unstable  souls,  2 Pet.  ii. 
13, 14.  In  opposition  to  such  deceivers,  it  is 
written,  If  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship 
with  him,  and  walk  in  darkness,  we  lie,  and 
do  not  the  truth,  1 John  i.  0.  lie  that  saith, 


[book  II. 

I know  him  and  keepeth  not  his  command- 
ments, is  a liar,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  him, 
1 John  ii.  4.  For  every  man  that  hath  this 
hope  in  him,  purifieth  himself  even  as  he  is 
pure,  1 John  iii.  3.  The  foundation  of  God 
standeth  sure,  having  this  seal,  The  Lord 
knoweth  them  that  are  his;  and,  Let  every 
one  that  nameth  the  name  of  Christ  depart 
from  iniquity,  2 Tim.  ii.  19. 

St.  Paul,  writing  to  the  Thessalonians  con- 
cerning the  man  of  sin  (2  Thess.  ii.  3 — 10,) 
who  was  to  be  fully  revealed  in  the  follow- 
ing ages,  reminds  them,  that  the  mystery  of 
iniquity,  though  at  that  time  restrained  from 
a full  manifestation,  did  already  work;  teach- 
ing us,  that  the  seeds  of  that  grand  a.postacy, 
which  at  length  overspread  the  whole  pro- 
fessing church,  were  sown,  and  springing  up, 
at  the  time  of  his  writing.  And  he  mentions 
several  particulars  in  his  epistle  to  the  Colos- 
sians  (chap.  ii.  18 — 23 ;)  such  as  a voluntary 
or  self-devised  humility,  in  worshipping  an- 
gels as  mediators  or  intercessors ; a dogmatic 
inhibition  of  things  which  God  had  left  free ; 
and  a specious  scheme  of  will-worship  and 
mortification,  which,  under  pretence  of  self- 
denial,  did  really  gratify  pride,  vanity,  and 
self-righteousness.  The  progress  of  our  his- 
tory will  show  what  a harvest  of  dreadful  and 
wide-spreading  evils  were  produced  from 
these  principles,  until  at  length  the  gospel 
of  Christ  was  wholly  obscured,  and  the  lives 
and  consciences  of  men  were  given  up  to  the 
power  of  Antichrist,  who,  as  God,  inso-ently 
sat  down  in  the  temple  of  God,  and  exalted 
himself  above  all  laws,  human  and  divine. 
It  is  sufficient  to  my  purpose  at  present,  to 
take  notice,  that  the  beginnings  of  that  spiri- 
tual infatuation,  which  so  long  detained  the 
world  in  chains,  and  darkness,  and  slavery, 
under  the  tyranny  of  the  church  of  Rome, 
were  observable  in  St.  Paul’s  time,  and  there- 
fore deserve  a place  in  the  list  of  those  pesti- 
lent heresies  by  wffiich  the  enemy  of  souls 
attempted  to  defile  the  faith,  and  disturb  the 
peace  of  the  primitive  church. 

Many  other  things  are  alluded  to,  which, 
for  want  of  authentic  records  of  the  first  cen- 
tury, we  cannot  with  certainty  explain.  Be- 
sides the  doctrine  of  the  Nicolaitans,  already 
mentioned,  we  read  of  the  blasphemy  of  them 
who  said  they  were  Jews  but  were  not,  but  of 
the  synagogue  of  Satan  (Rev.  iii.  9 ;)  of  them 
who  held  the  doctrine  of  Balaam,  and  of  the 
woman  Jezebel,  who  called  herself  a pro- 
phetess, Rev.  ii.  14.  20.  These  wrere  cer- 
tainly heretics:  for  our  Lord  severely  rebukes 
the  churches  for  not  opposing  them  to  the  ut- 
most; and,  as  he  gives  different  names,  they 
probably  differed  from  each  other,  though 
their  ultimate  tendency  was  the  same,  to  per- 
vert the  faith  of  the  hearers,  and  to  introduce 
licentiousness  of  practice.  The  gospel-truth 
is  a doctrine  according  to  godliness,  and  has 
a sanctifying  influence;  for  the  grace  of  God 


IN  THE  APOSTLES’  DAYS; 


107 


CHAP.  IV.] 

teaches  all  who  are  partakers  of  it,  to  forsake 
all  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts,  and  to  live 
soberly,  righteously,  and  godly,  in  the  pre- 
sent world,  Titus  ii.  11,  12.  But  errors  and 
heresies,  in  whatever  degree  they  prevail, 
have  poisonous  effects  upon  those  who  admit 
them ; some  are  calculated  to  set  aside  the 
whole  frame  of  obedience  which  we  owe  to 
our  God  and  Saviour,  and  the  most  refined 
and  plausible  will  deliver  the  soul  into  the 
power  of  some  easy,  besetting,  and  beloved 
sin,  and  furnish  arms  and  arguments  to  main- 
tain it.  And  this  explains  what  would  other- 
wise seem  a very  strange  phenomenon.  When 
the  truth  is  proposed  with  the  greatest  clear- 
ness, and  the  greatest  advantages,  its  votaries, 
at  all  times,  and  in  all  places,  have  been  but 
few;  but  whoever  will  stand  up  on  the  side 
of  error,  however  wild  and  absurd  his  opi- 
nions and  conduct  may  be,  will  hardly  fail 
of  obtaining  adherents.  It  is  because  error 
will  tolerate  those  lusts  and  follies  which 
truth  will  not  endure;  and  in  the  present 
state  of  human  depravity,  more  people  will 
be  found  willing  to  give  up  their  understand- 
ings than  to  part  with  their  sins. 

We  may  likewise  collect  from  several  texts 
in  the  epistles,  that  there  were  those  of  old 
who  denied  what  the  scriptures  teach  con- 
cerning the  depravity  of  human  nature,  the 
real  guilt  of  sin  (1  John  i.  8.  10 ;)  the  influ- 
ences of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Jude  19,)  and  the 
terrors  of  a future  judgment  (2  Pet.  iii.  9,) 
though  we  cannot  be  sure  that  these  doc- 
trines were  opposed  so  openly  and  so  strenu- 
ously as  they  are  in  our  own  days.  But  I have 
enumerated  enough  to  answer  my  purpose 
by  way  of  apology  for  the  evangelical  doc- 
trine, the  modern  opposers  of  the  last  men- 
tioned points  not  being  under  any  suspicion 
or  charge  of  what  is  called  enthusiasm ; and 
all  who  are  despised  or  persecuted  for  rest- 
ing the  hope  of  their  salvation  solely  on  the 
mediation  of  Jesus'  and  his  obedience  unto 
death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross,  are  known 
to  acknowledge  them  as  essential  truths ; in- 
deed, they  stand  inseparably  connected  with 
what  they  believe  of  his  person,  offices,  power, 
and  grace.  A conscience  impressed  with  the 
majesty,  holiness,  and  justice  of  the  great 
God,  and  that  trembles  at  the  denunciations 
of  his  law  against  every  transgression,  dares 
not  hope  for  peace  without  the  discovery  of 
an  adequate  atonement  for  sin,  nor  venture  its 
eternal  concerns  upon  the  interposition  of  a 
creature.  To  such  a one,  all  that  is  revealed 
of  the  love  and  sufferings  of  Jesus,  would 
afford  no  solid  ground  of  consolation,  if  the 
infinite  dignity  of  his  divine  nature,  and  his 
voluntary  substitution  in  the  place,  and  on 
the  behalf  of  sinners,  were  not  revealed  with 
equal  clearness ; and  a conviction  of  that  total 
insufficiency  for  every  good  work  (2  Cor. 
iii.  5,)  and  the  prevalence  of  indwelling  sin 
(Rom.  vii.  18 — 34,)  which  the  scriptures  so 


expressly  declare  to  be  the  condition  of  every 
child  of  Adam,  would  plunge  an  awakened 
mind  into  hopeless  despair,  if  it  was  not  re- 
lieved by  the  gracious  promise  of  the  infalli- 
ble Spirit  (John  xiv.  26,  and  xvi.  7.  13,) 
whose  office  is  to  teach,  guide,  comfort,  and 
seal  the  children  of  God  unto  the  day  of  com- 
l plete  redemption  (Ephes.  iv.  30;)  but  having 
such  a great  high  priest  (Heb.  vii.  1,  and  ix. 
24,  and  x.  19,)  who,  by  his  own  blood,  has 
entered  into  the  holy  place,  to  appear  in  the 
presence  of  God  for  us,  and  having,  in  the 
promise  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  16.  26, 
27,)  a source  of  succour  and  comfort  answer- 
able  to  all  our  ignorance,  weakness,  neces- 
sities, and  temptations,  we  are  enabled  in  t he 
midst  of  fightings  and  fears  (2  Cor.  vii.  5,)  to 
maintain  a humble  confidence  that  we  shall 
not  be  ashamed  before  him  at  his  coming*,  but 
have  boldness  in  the  day  of  judgment,  the 
great  and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord,  1 John 
ii.  28,  and  iv.  17.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  no 
wonder  that  Ihose,  who  dp  not  acknowledge 
■ the  deity  of  the  Saviour  (not  finding  any 
other  basis  whereon  to  rest  the  validity  of 
an  atonement  for  sin,)  should  embrace  every 
shadow  of  an  argument  against  its  necessity, 
and  be  willing  to  think  as  highly  as  possible 
of  their  own  righteousness  and  abilities;  or, 
that  being  thus  persuaded  that  they  can  please 
God,  without  the  influence  of  his  Spirit, 
themselves,  they  should  treat  all  claims  tc 
this  assistance  in  others  as  enthusiasm  and 
folly.  Nor  can  we  be  surprised,  that  many 
who  reject  the  scripture-testimony  concern- 
ing Christ  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  should  use 
all  their  address  to  prove,  that  the  soul  sinks 
into  sleep  and  inactivity  at  death,  that  the 
resurrection  of  the  flesh  is  improbable,  and 
that  it  is  injurious  to  the  goodness  of  God,  to 
suppose  he  will  inflict  eternal  punishment 
for  sins  committed  within  the  compass  of  a 
short  life.  Such  reasonings  may  be  expected 
from  men  who  presume  upon  the  sufficiency 
of  their  own  wisdom,  who  neither  expect  nor 
desire  divine  teaching,  and  who  find  a little 
relief  in  these  sentiments,  against  the  fears 
and  forebodings  which  will  sometimes  force 
themselves  upon  their  minds. 

It  appears,  however,  from  the  indisputable 
evidence  of  the  New  Testament,  that,  in  the 
first  age  of  the  church,  the  enemy  sowed  the 
tares  of  error  and  heresy  in  great  abundance, 
and  that  the  figments  published  in  that  pe- 
riod by  men  who  professed  some  regard  to 
the  name  of  Christ,  have  not  been  surpassed, 
either  as  to  absurdity  or  wickedness,  by  any 
attempts  of  the  same  kind,  in  any  age  or 
country  since.  It  is  true  the  vigilance  and 
authority  of  the  apostles  restrained  these  ex- 
cesses from  rising  to  that  height  to  which  they 
afterwards  attained ; but  if  the  people  who 
now  object  to  the  variety  of  names,  sects,  and 
sentiments,  which  have  gradually  prevailed 
amongst  us  within  these  thirty  years  past. 


103 


OF  THE  HERESIES 

aad  lived  in  the  primitive  church,  they  would 
nave  had  at  least  equal  cause  for  making  the 
like  objections.  If,  upon  these  accounts,  they 
now  think  themselves  at  liberty  to  reject  all 
parties  alike,  without  examination,  as  empty 
pretenders  to  the  truth,  purity,  and  power  of 
religion,  there  is  little  doubt  but  they  would 
have  done  the  same  then.  The  apostles  were 
personally  present  with  the  first  churches: 
their  writings  were  appointed  to  be  the  rule 
of  succeeding  times,  and,  through  the  mercy 
of  God  are  in  our  hands.  Whoever  is  sin- 
cerely desirous  to  know  the  will  of  God,  by 
attending  to  these  lively  oracles  will  be  en- 
abled to  discern  the  path  of  truth  and  peace, 
through  the  midst  of  that  maze  of  opinions 
wherein  so  many  are  bewildered  and  lost ; 
but  whoever  is  too  wise  or  too  indolent  to 
search  the  scriptures  humbly  and  diligently 
for  himself,  would  have  paid  as  little  regard 
to  the  authority  of  the  apostles,  if  he  could 
have  conversed  with  them : nay,  the  advan- 
tage is  on  our  side ; for,  as  the  scriptures  are 
held  in  professed  veneration,  we  run  no  im- 
mediate risk  of  character  or  interest  by  con- 
sulting them ; or  they  may  be  perused  in  re- 
tirement, unobserved  by  our  nearest  friends : 
whereas  the  apostles,  though  highly  spoken 
of  amongst  us,  were  accounted  while  they 
lived,  the  filth  and  off-scouring  of  all  things ; 
they  were  despised  for  their  poverty  and  the 
meanness  of  their  appearance,  and  detested 
as  bigots  and  enthusiasts ; so  that  it  required 
some  degree  of  faith  and  grace  not  to  be 
ashamed  of  them. 

Let  not  the  reader  be  offended,  if  I close 
this  book,  as  I did  the  former,  with  entreating 
him  to  reflect  on  the  importance  of  having 
right  views  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  and  of 
the  spirit  of  Christianity.  These  are  topics  of 
universal  concern.  A believer  in  Jesus,  how- 
ever obscure,  unnoticed,  or  oppressed  in  the 
present  life,  is  happy : he  is  a child  of  God, 
the  charge  of  angels,  and  heir  of  glory  (Rom. 
viii.  14.  17;)  he  has  meat  to  eat  that  the  world 
knows  not  of ; and  from  the  knowledge  of 
his  union  and  relation  to  his  Redeemer  (Phil, 
iv.  7,)  he  derives  a peace  which  passes  under- 
standing, and  a power  suited  to  every  service 
and  circumstance  of  life : though  weak  in  him- 
self, he  is  strong  in  the  grace  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  the  Lord  (2  Cor.  xii.  9 ; 2 Tim.  ii.  1,) 
upon  whom  he  relies,  as  his  wisdom,  righte- 
ousness, sanctification,  and  expects  from  him, 
in  due  time,  a complete  redemption  from  every 
evil  (1  Cor.  i.  30:)  his  faith  is  not  merely 
speculative,  like  the  cold  assent  which  we 
give  to  a mathematical  truth,  nor  is  it  the 
blind  impulse  of  a warm  imagination,  but  it 
is  the  effect  of  an  apprehension  of  the  wis- 
dom, power,  and  love  displayed  in  the  re- 
demption of  sinners  by  Jesus  Christ;  it  is  a 
constraining  principle  (Gal.  v.  6 ; Acts  xv.  9 ; 

1 John  v.  4 ; Heb.  xi.  1 ; 2 Cor.  iii.  18,)  that 
works  by  love,  purifies  the  heart,  and  over- 


PROPAGi^TED,  &c.  [book  ii. 

comes  the  world ; it  gives  the  foretaste  and 
evidence  of  things  invisible  to  mortal  eyes, 
and,  transforming  the  soul  into  the  resem- 
blance of  what  it  beholds,  fills  the  heart  with 
benevolence,  gentleness,  and  patience,  and 
directs  every  action  to  the  sublimest  ends, 
the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  mankind. 

But  whatever  is  styled  religion,  that  is  not 
thus  pure,  thus  peaceable,  thus  operative,  or 
at  least  that  does  not  lead  the  soul  to  desire 
the  graces  of  the  Spirit,  and  to  seek  them  in 
God’s  appointed  way,  by  faith  in  his  Son,  is 
unworthy  of  the  name.  If  you  have  not  the 
Spirit  of  Christ,  you  are  none  of  his  (Rom. 
viii.  9 ;)  whatever  else  you  may  have,  you 
have  no  interest  in  the  promised  blessings  of 
the  gospel ; whatever  else  you  can  do,  you 
cannot  please  God,  Heb.  xi.  6.  If  you  do  not 
count  all  things  loss,  and  of  no  value  (Phil, 
iii.  8,)  in  comparison  of  the  excellency  of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  you  cer- 
tainly do  not  understand  the  word  gospel  in 
St.  Paul’s  sense ; if  you  did,  you  would  be  of 
his  mind : and  are  you  not  in  danger  of  incur- 
ring that  anathema  which,  under  the  influence 
of  the  Spirit  of  God,  he  denounces  (1  Cor. 

xvi.  22)  against  all  who  love  not  the  Lord 
Jesus  1 Search  the  scriptures,  if  you  really 
think  that  in  them  you  have  eternal  life,  John 
v.  39.  If,  indeed,  you  could  prove  them  to 
be  cunningly-devised  fables,  you  might  ne- 
glect them  without  danger  (2  Pet.  i.  16 ;) 
but,  if  the  scriptures  are  true,  there  is  a day 
coming  when  God  shall  judge  the  world,  Acts 

xvii.  31.  I need  not  appeal  to  scripture  to 
convince  you  that,  whatever  your  situation  in 
life  is  you  must  leave  it,  and  experience  a 
moment  when  the  pleasures  or  honours  of  this 
world  will  afford  you  no  comfort ; but,  if  the 
scriptures  are  true,  you  must  then  appear  be- 
fore the  judgment-seat  of  Christ ; you  must 
stand  either  at  the  right  hand  or  the  left, 
2 Cor.  v.  10.  Important  alternative  ! For  to 
those  on  the  left  hand  the  King  will  say, 
“Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,”  Matth.  xxv. 
41.  If  hitherto,  while  you  have  professed 
his  name,  you  have  had  your  heart  filled  with 
enmity  against  his  doctrine  and  his  people; 
if  you  have  accounted  his  wisdom  foolishness, 
and  reproached  the  operations  of  his  Spirit  as 
enthusiasm  and  madness, — it  is  to  be  hoped 
you  have  done  it  through  ignorance;  you 
knew  not  what  you  did  (1  Tim.  i.  15  ; Luke 
xxiii.  34 :)  there  is,  then,  forgiveness  with 
him ; as  yet  he  is  upon  a throne  of  grace. 
May  the  Spirit  of  God  lead  you  to  him  be- 
fore he  takes  his  seat  upon  the  throne  of 
judgment ! otherwise  you  are  lost  for  ever. 
My  heart’s  desire  and  prayer  to  God.  for  my 
readers  will  be,  that  not  one  of  them  may 
fall  under  that  awful  sentence,  Behold,  ye 
despisers,  and  wonder,  and  perish;  for  I work 
a work  in  your  days,  which  you  shall  in  nc 
wise  believe,  though  a man  declare  it  untt 
you  Acts  xiii.  41. 


OLNEY  HYMNS, 

IN 

THREE  BOOKS. 


— © ftw-  ■ 


Cantabitis,  Arcades,  inquit, 

Montibus  hiec  vestris,  soli  cantare  poriti 

Arcades.  O mihi  turn  quatn  molliter  ossa  quiescant, 

Vestra  meos  olim  si  fistula  dicat  amores! — Virgil,  Ed.  x 31. 

And  they  sung  as  it  were  a new  song  before  the  throne; and  no  man  could  learn  that  song,  but  thtf — 

redeemed  from  the  earth—  Rev.  xiv.  3. 

As  sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing. 2 Cor.  vi.  10. 


PREFACE. 

Copies  of  a few  of  these  Hymns  have  already  appeared  in  periodical  publications,  and  in 
some  recent  collections.  I have  observed  one  or  two  of  them  attributed  to  persons  who 
certainly  had  no  concern  in  them,  but  as  transcribers.  All  that  have  been  at  different  times 
parted  with  in  manuscript  are  included  in  the  present  volume ; and  (if  the  information 
were  of  any  great  importance)  the  public  may  be  assured,  that  the  whole  number  were 
composed  by  two  persons  only.  The  origami  design  would  not  admit  of  any  other  associa- 
tion. A desire  of  promoting  the  faith  and  comfort  of  sincere  Christians,  though  the  principal, 
was  not  the  only  motive  to  this  undertaking.  It  was  likewise  intended  as  a monument  to 
perpetuate  the  remembrance  of  an  intimate  and  endeared  friendship.  With  this  pleasing 
view,  I entered  upon  my  part,  which  would  have  been  smaller  than  it  is,  and  the  book 
would  have  appeared  much  sooner,  and  in  a very  different  form,  if  the  wise,  though  mys- 
terious providence  of  God,  had  not  seen  fit  to  cross  my  wishes.  We  had  not  proceeded  far 
upon  our  proposed  plan,  before  my  dear  friend  was  prevented,  by  a long  and  affecting  indis- 
position, from  affording  me  any  farther  assistance.  My  grief  and  disappointment  were 
great;  I hung  my  harp  upon  the  willows,  and  for  some  time  thought  myself  determined  to 
proceed  no  farther  without  him.  Yet  my  mind  was  afterwards  led  to  resume  the  service. 
My  progress  in  it,  amidst  a variety  of  other  engagements,  has  been  slow;  yet,  in  a course 
of  years,  the  Hymns  amounted  to  a considerable  number;  and  my  deference  to  the  judg- 
ment and  desires  of  others,  has  at  length  overcome  the  reluctance  I long  felt  to  see  them 
in  print,  while  I had  so  few  of  my  friend’s  Hymns  to  insert  in  the  collection.  Though  it  is 
possible  a good  judge  of  composition  might  be  able  to  distinguish  those  which  are  his,  1 
have  thought  it  proper  to  preclude  a misapplication,  by  subjoining  the  letter  C*  to  each  of 
them.  For  the  rest  I must  be  responsible. 

There  is  a style  and  manner  suited  to  the  composition  of  Hymns,  which  may  be  more 
successfully,  or  at  least  more  easily,  attained  by  a versifier  than  by  a poet.  They  should  be 
Hymns,  not  Odes,  if  designed  for  public  worship,  and  for  the  use  of  plain  people.  Per- 
spicuity, simplicity,  and  ease,  should  be  chiefly  attended  to;  and  the  imagery  and  colouring 
of  poetry,  if  admitted  at  all,  should  be  indulged  very  sparingly,  and  with  great  judgment. 
The  late  Dr.  Watts,  many  of  whose  Hymns  are  admirable  patterns  in  this  species  of  writ- 
ing, might,  as  a poet,  have  a right  to  say,  That  it  cost  him  some  labour  to  restrain  his  fire 


109 


* Cowper 


110 


PREFACE. 


and  to  accommodate  himself  to  the  capacities  of  common  readers.  But  it  would  not  become 
me  to  make  such  a declaration.  It  behoved  me  to  do  my  best.  But  though  I would  not 
offend  readers  of  taste  by  a wilful  coarseness  and  negligence,  I do  not  write  professedly  for 
them.  If  the  Lord,  whom  I serve,  has  been  pleased  to  favour  me  with  that  mediocrity  of 
talent,  which  may  qualify  me  for  usefulness  to  the  weak  and  the  poor  of  his  flock,  without 
quite  disgusting  persons  of  superior  discernment,  I have  reason  to  be  satisfied. 

As  the  workings  of  the  heart  of  man,  and  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  are  in  general  the  same  in 
all  who  are  the  subjects  of  grace,  I hope  most  of  these  Hymns,  being  the  fruit  and  expres- 
sion of  my  own  i\perience,  will  coincide  with  the  views  of  real  Christians  of  all  denomina- 
tions. But  I e iunot  expect  that  every  sentiment  I have  advanced  will  be  universally 
approved.  However,  I am  not  conscious  of  having  written  a single  line,  with  an  intention 
either  to  flatter  or  to  offend  any  party  or  person  upon  earth.  I have  simply  declared  my 
own  views  and  feelings,  as  I might  have  done  if  I had  composed  Hymns  in  some  of  the 
newly-discovered  islands  in  the  South  Sea,  where  no  person  had  any  knowledge  of  the  name 
of  Jesus  but  myself.  I am  a friend  of  peace ; and  being  deeply  convinced,  that  no  one  can 
profitably  understand  the  great  truths  and  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  any  farther  than  he  is 
taught  of  God,  I have  not  a wish  to  obtrude  my  own  tenets  upon  others,  in  a way  of  contro- 
versy: yet  I do  not  think  myself  bound  to  conceal  them.  Many  gracious  persons  (for  many 
such  I am  persuaded  there  are,)  who  differ  from  me,  more  or  less,  in  those  points  which  are 
called  Calvinistic,  appear  desirous  that  the  Calvinists  should,  for  their  sakes,  studiously 
avoid  every  expression  which  they  cannot  approve.  Yet  few  of  them.  I believe,  impose  a 
like  restraint  upon  themselves,  but  think  the  importance  of  what  they  deem  to  be  truth, 
justifies  them  in  speaking  their  sentiments  plainly  and  strongly.  May  I not  plead  for  an 
equal  liberty  1 The  views  I have  received  of  the  doctrines  of  grace  are  essential  to  my 
peace ; I could  not  live  comfortably  a day  or  an  hour  without  them.  I likewise  believe,  yea, 
so  far  as  my  poor  attainments  warrant  me  to  speak,  I know  them  to  be  friendly  to  holiness, 
and  to  have  a direct  influence  in  producing  and  maintaining  a gospel-conversation;  and 
therefore  I must  not  be  ashamed  of  them. 

The  Hymns  are  distributed  into  three  Books.  In  the  first,  I have  classed  those  which 
ara  formed  upon  select  passages  of  scripture,  and  placed  them  in  the  order  of  the  books  of 
the  Old  and  New  Testament.  The  second  contains  occasional  Hymns,  suited  to  narticular 
seasons,  or  suggested  by  particular  events  or  subjects.  The  third  book  is  miscellaneous, 
comprising  a variety  of  subjects  relative  to  a life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  which  have  no 
express  reference  either  to  a single  text  of  scripture,  or  to  any  determinate  season  or  inci- 
dent. These  are  farther  subdivided  into  distinct  heads.  This  arrangement  is  not  so  accurate, 
but  that  several  of  the  Hymns  might  have  been  differently  disposed.  Some  attention  to 
method  may  be  found  convenient,  though  a logical  exactness  was  hardly  practicable.  As 
some  subjects  in  the  several  books  are  nearly  coincident,  I have,  under  the  divisions  in  the 
third  Book,  pointed  out  those  which  are  similar  in  the  two  former.  And  I have  likewise, 
here  and  there,  in  the  first  and  second,  made  a reference  to  Hymns  of  a like  import  in 
the  third. 

This  Publication,  which,  with  my  humble  prayer  to  the  Lord  for  his  blessing  upon  it,  f 
offer  to  the  service  and  acceptance  of  all  who  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity,  of 
every  name  and  in  every  place,  into  whose  hands  it  may  come,  I more  particularly  dedicate 
to  my  dear  friends  in  the  parish  and  neighbourhood  of  Olney,  for  whose  use  the  Hymns  were 
originally  composed ; as  a testimony  of  the  sincere  love  I bear  them,  and  as  a token  of  mv 
gratitude  to  the  Lord,  and  to  them,  for  the  comfort  and  satisfaction  with  which  the  discharge 
of  my  ministry  among  them  has  been  attended. 

The  hour  is  approaching,  and,  at  my  time  of  life,  cannot  be  very  distant,  when  my  heart, 
my  pen,  and  my  tongue,  will  no  longer  be  able  to  move  in  their  service.  But  I trust,  while 
my  heart  continues  to  beat,  it  will  feel  a warm  desire  for  the  prosperity  of  their  souls ; and 
while  my  hand  can  write,  and  my  tongue  speak,  it  will  be  the  business  and  the  pleasure  of 
my  life,  to  aim  at  promoting  their  growth  and  establishment  in  the  grace  of  cur  God  and 
Saviour.  To  this  precious  grace  I commend  them,  and  earnestly  entreat  them,  and  all  who 
love  his  name,  to  strive  mightily  with  their  prayers  to  God  for  me,  that  I may  be  preserved 
faithful  to  the  end,  and  enabled  at  last  to  finish  my  course  with  joy. 

JOHN  NEWTON. 


Olney , Bucks , Feb.  15 th  1779 


OLNEY  HYMNS 


BOOK  I. 

ON  SELECT  PASSAGES  OP  SCRIPTURE. 


GENESIS. 


HYMN  I. 

Adam.  Chap.  iii. 

1 On  man,  in  his  own  image  made, 

IIow  much  did  God  bestow ! 

The  whole  creation  homage  paid, 

And  own’d  him  Lord  below. 

2 He  dwelt  in  Eden’s  garden,  stor’d 

With  sweets  for  every  sense; 

And  there,  with  his  descending  Lord, 
He  walk’d  in  confidence. 

3 But  oh ! by  sin  how  quickly  chang'd ! 

His  honour  forfeited, 

His  heart  from  God  and  truth  estrang’d, 
His  conscience  fill’d  with  dread ! 

4 Now  from  his  Maker’s  voice  he  flees, 

Which  was  before  his  joy, 

And  thinks  to  hide,  amidst  the  trees, 
From  an  all-seeing  eye. 

5 Compcll’d  to  answer  to  his  name, 

With  stubbornness  and  pride, 

He  cast  on  God  himself  the  blame, 

Nor  once  for  mercy  cried. 

0  But  grace,  unask’d,  his  heart  subdu’d, 
And  all  his  guilt  forgave ; 

By  faith  the  promis’d  Seed  he  view’d, 
And  felt  his  power  to  save. 

7 Thus  we  ourselves  would  justify, 

Though  we  the  law  transgress; 

Like  him,  unable  to  deny, 

Unwilling  to  confess. 

8 But  when,  by  faith,  the  sinner  sees 

A pardon,  bought  with  blood, 

Then  he  forsakes  his  foolish  pleas, 

And  gladly  turns  to  God. 


HYMN  H. 

Cain  and  Abel.  Chap.  iv.  3 — 8. 

1 When  Adam  fell,  he  quickly  lost 
God’s  image,  which  he  once  possess’d : 
See  all  our  nature  since  could  boast, 

In  Cain,  his  first-born  son,  express’d ! 

2 The  sacrifice  the  Lord  ordain’d, 

In  type  of  the  Redeemer’s  blood, 
Self-righteous  reas’ning  Cain  disdain’d. 
And  thought  his  own  first-fruits  as  good 

3 Yet  rage  and  envy  fill’d  his  mind, 

When,  with  a sullen  downcast  look, 

He  saw  his  brother  favour  find, 

Who  God’s  appointed  method  took. 

4 By  Cain’s  own  hand  good  Abel  died, 
Because  the  Lord  approv’d  his  faith ; 

And  when  his  blood  for  vengeance  cried 
He  vainly  thought  to  hide  his  death. 

5 Such  was  the  wicked  murd'rer  Cain; 

And  such  by  nature  still  are  we, 

Until  by  grace  we  ’re  born  again, 
Malicious,  blind,  and  proud  as  he. 

6 Like  him,  the  way  of  grace  we  slight.  • 
And  in  our  own  devices  trust; 

Call  evil  good,  and  darkness  light, 

And  hate  and  persecute  the  just. 

7 The  saints  in  ev’ry  age  and  place, 

Have  found  his  history  fulfill’d ; 

The  numbers  all  our  thoughts  surpass, 

Of  Abels  whom  the  Cains  have  kill’d.* 

8 Thus  Jesus  fell — but,  oh ! his  blood 
For  better  things  than  Abel’s  cries  ;f 
Obtains  his  murd’rers  peace  with  God, 
And  gains  them  mansions  in  the  skies. 


Ill 


* Rom.  viii.  36. 


t Heb.  xii.  24. 


112 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  i. 


HYMN  III. 

Walking  with  God.  Chap.  v.  24. 

1 Oh  ! for  a closer  walk  with  God* 

A calm  and  heavenly  frame ; 

A lig-ht  to  shine  upon  the  road 
That  leads  me  to  the  Lamb ! 

2 Where  is  the  blessedness  I knew, 

When  first  I saw  the  Lord! 

Where  is  the  soul-refreshing  view 
Of  Jesus  and  his  word? 

3 What  peaceful  hours  I once  enjoyed ! 

How  sweet  their  mem’ry  still ! 

But  they  have  left  an  aching  void, 

The  world  can  never  fill. 

4 Return,  O holy  Dove,  return, 

Sweet  messenger  of  rest; 

I  hate  the  sins  that  made  thee  mourn, 
And  drove  thee  from  my  breast : 

5 The  dearest  idol  I have  known, 

Whate’er  that  idol  be, 

Help  me  to  tear  it  from  thy  throne, 

And  worship  only  thee. 

6 So  shall  my  walk  be  close  with  God, 

Calm  and  serene  my  frame ; 

So  purer  light  shall  mark  the  road, 

That  leads  me  to  the  Lamb.  C. 


HYMN  IV. 

ANOTHER. 

1 By  faith  in  Christ  I walk  with  God, 

With  heaven,  my  journey’s  end,  in  view; 
Supported  by  his  staff  and  rod,* 

My  road  is  safe  and  pleasant  too. 

2 I travel  through  a desert  wide, 

Where  many  round  me  blindly  stray; 

But  he  vouchsafes  to  be  my  guide, f 
And  will  not  let  me  miss  my  way. 

3 Though  snares  and  dangers  throng  my  path, 
And  earth  and  hell  my  course  withstand, 

I  triumph  over  all  by  faith,  f 
Guarded  by  his  almighty  hand. 

4 The  wilderness  affords  no  food, 

But  God  for  my  support  prepares; 
Provides  me  every  needful  good, 

And  frees  my  soul  from  wants  and  cares. 

5 With  him  sweet  converse  I maintain, 
Great  as  he  is,  I dare  be  free ; 

Tell  him  all  my  grief  and  pain, 

And  he  reveals  his  love  to  me. 

G Some  cordial  from  his  word  he  brings, 
Whenever  my  feeble  spirit  faints; 

At  once  my  soul  revives  and  sings, 

And  yields  no  more  to  sad  complaints. 

7  I pity  all  that  worldlings  talk 
Of  pleasures  that  will  quickly  end : 

Be  this  my  choice,  O Lord,  to  walk 
With  thee,  my  guide,  my  guard,  my  friend ! 


HYMN  V. 

Lot  in  Sodom.  Chap.  xiii.  10. 

1 How  hurtful  was  the  choice  of  Lot, 

Who  took  up  his  abode 
(Because  it  was  a fruitful  spot) 

With  them  who  fear’d  not  God  ! 

2 A pris’ner  he  was  quickly  made, 

Bereav’d  of  all  his  store ; 

And,  but  for  Abram’s  timely  aid, 

He  had  return’d  no  more. 

3 Yet  still  he  seem’d  resolv’d  to  stay, 

As  if  it  were  his  rest ; 

Although  their  sins  from  day  to  day§ 
His  righteous  soul  distress’d. 

4 A while  he  stayed,  with  anxious  mind, 

Expos’d  to  scorn  and  strife ; 

At  last  he  left  his  all  behind, 

And  fled  to  save  his  life. 

5 In  vain  his  sons-in-law  he  warn’d, 

They  thought  he  told  hut  dreams ; 
His  daughters,  too,  of  them  had  learn’d, 
And  perish’d  in  the  flames. 

6 His  wife  escap’d  a little  way, 

But  died  for  looking  back: 

Does  not  her  case  to  pilgrims  say, 

“ Beware  of  growing  slack!” 

7 Yea,  Lot  himself  could  ling’ring  stand, 

Though  vengeance  was  in  view ; 
’Twas  mercy  pluck’d  him  by  the  hand, 
Or  he  had  perish’d  too. 

8 The  doom  of  Sodom  will  be  ours, 

If  to  the  earth  we  cleave: 

Lord,  quicken  all  our  drowsy  powers, 
To  flee  to  thee,  and  live. 


HYMN  VI. 

Jehovah-Jireh  ; or,  the  Lord  will  provide. 
Chap.  xxii.  14. 

1 The  saints  should  never  be  dismayed, 

Nor  sink  in  hopeless  fear : 

For  when  they  least  expect  his  aid, 

The  Saviour  will  appear. 

2 This  Abram  found — he  rais’d  the  knife, 

God  saw,  and  said,  “ Forbear : 

Yon  ram  shall  yield  his  meaner  life; 
Behold  the  victim  there  !” 

3 Once  David  seem’d  Saul’s  certain  prey ; 

But  hark ! the  foe’s  at  hand  ;|| 

Saul  turns  his  arms  another  way, 

To  save  the  invaded  land. 

4 When  Jonah  sunk  beneath  the  wave, 

He  thought  to  rise  no  more;1F 
But  God  prepar’d  a fish  to  save, 

And  bear  him  to  the  shore. 


* Peal.  Mill.  4.  t Psal.  cvii. 


J Psal.  xxvii.  1,2. 


§ 2 Pet.  ii.  8.  ||  1 Sam.  xxiii.  7 


IT  Jonah  i.  17 


GENESIS. 


113 


HYMN  YIII.] 

5  Bless’d  proofs  of  power  and  grace  divine, 
That  meet  us  in  his  word  ! 

May  ev’ry  deep-felt  care  of  mine 
Be  trusted  with  the  Lord. 

0  Wait  for  his  seasonable  aid, 

And  though  it  tarry,  wait ; 

The  promise  may  be  long  delayed, 

But  cannot  come  too  late.  C. 


HYMN  VIL 

ANOTHER. 

1 Though  troubles  assail, 

And  dangers  affright, 

Though  friends  should  all  fail, 
And  foes  all  unite ; 

Yet  one  thing  secures  us, 
Whatever  betide, 

The  scripture  assures  us, 

The  Lord  will  provide. 

2 The  birds  without  barn 
Or  storehouse  are  fed ; 

From  them  let  us  learn 
To  trust  for  our  bread : 

His  saints,  what  is  fitting, 
Shall  ne’er  be  denied, 

So  long  as  ’tis  written, 

The  Lord  will  provide. 

3 We  may,  like  the  ships, 

By  tempests  be  tossed, 

On  perilous  deeps, 

But  cannot  be  lost : 

Though  Satan  enrages 
The  wind  and  the  tide, 

The  promise  engages, 

The  Lord  will  provide. 

4 His  call  we  obey, 

Like  Abram  of  old, 

Not  knowing  our  way, 

But  faith  makes  us  bold ; 

For  though  we  are  strangers, 
We  have  a good  guide, 

And  trust  in  all  dangers, 

The  Lord  will  provide. 

5 When  Satan  appears 
To  stop  up  our  path, 

And  fill  us  with  fears, 

We  triumph  by  faith ; 

He  cannot  take  from  us, 
Though  oft  he  has  tried, 

This  heart-cheering  promise, 
The  Lord  will  provide. 

6 He  tells  us  we’re  weak, 

Our  hope  is  in  vain, 

The  good  that  we  seek 
W e ne’er  shall  obtain  ; 

But  when  such  suggestions 
Our  spirits  have  plied, 

This  answers  ail  questions, 
The  Lord  will  provide. 

VOL.  II.  P 


7 No  strength  of  our  own, 
Or  goodness  we  claim ; 
Yet  since  we  have  known 
The  Saviour’s  great  name 
In  this  our  strong  tower 
For  safety  we  hide, 

The  Lord  is  our  power, 
The  Lord  will  provide. 

8 When  life  sinks  apace, 
And  death  is  in  view, 

This  word  of  his  grace 
Shall  comfort  us  through ; 
No  fearing  or  doubting, 
With  Christ  on  our  side, 
We  hope  to  die  shouting, 
The  Lord  will  provide. 


HYMN  VIII. 

Esau.  Chap.  xxv.  34.  Heb.  xii.  10. 

1 Poor  Esau  repented  too  late, 

That  once  he  his  birth-right  despis’d, 
And  sold  for  a morsel  of  meat, 

What  could  not  too  highly  be  priz’d : 
How  great  was  his  anguish  when  told. 
The  blessing  he  sought  to  obtain, 

Was  gone  with  the  birth-right  he  sold. 
And  none  could  recall  it  again ! 

2 He  stands  as  a warning  to  all, 
Wherever  the  gospel  shall  come ; 

O hasten  and  yield  to  the  call, 

While  yet  for  repentance  there’s  room! 
Your  season  will  quickly  be  past; 

Then  hear  and  obey  it  to-day, 

Lest  when  you  seek  mercy  at  last, 

The  Saviour  should  frown  you  away 

3 What  is  it  the  world  can  propose 1 
A morsel  of  meat  at  the  best ! 

For  this  are  you  willing  to  lose 

A share  in  the  joys  of  the  blest  1 
Its  pleasures  will  speedily  end, 

Its  favour  and  praise  are  but  breath ; 
And  what  can  its  profits  befriend 
Your  soul  in  the  moment  of  death  1 

4 If  Jesus,  for  these,  you  despise, 

And  sin  to  the  Saviour  prefer ; 

In  vain  your  entreaties  and  cries, 

When  summoned  to  stand  at  his  bar : 
How  will  you  his  presence  abide  ? 
What  anguish  will  torture  your  heart ! 
The  saints  all  enthron’d  by  his  side. 
And  you  be  compell’d  to  depart. 

5 Too  often,  dear  Saviour,  have  I 
Prefa’-r’d  some  poor  trifle  to  thee ; 

How  is  it  thou  dost  not  deny 

The  blessing  and  birth-right  to  me? 

No  better  than  Esau  I am, 

Though  pardon  and  heaven  be  mine 
To  me  belongs  nothing  but  shame ; 

The  praise  and  the  glory  be  thine. 


114 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  l 


HYMN  IX. 

Jacob’s  Ladder.  Chap,  xxviii.  12. 

1 If  the  Lord  our  leader  be, 

We  may  follow  without  fear ; 

East  or  west,  by  land  or  sea, 

Home  with  him,  is  ev’ry  where. 
When  from  Esau  Jacob  fled, 
Though  his  pillow  was  of  stone, 

And  the  ground  his  humble  bed, 

Yet  he  was  not  left  alone. 

2 Kings  are  often  waking  kept, 
Rack’d  with  cares  on  beds  of  state ; 
Never  king  like  Jacob  slept, 

For  he  lay  at  heaven’s  gate ; 

Lo ! he  saw  a ladder  rear’d 
Reaching  to  the  heavenly  throne ; 
At  the  top  the  Lord  appear’d, 

Spake,  and  claim’d  him  for  his  own. 

3 “ Fear  not,  Jacob,  thou  art  mine, 
And  my  presence  with  thee  goes : 
On  thy  heart  my  love  shall  shine, 
And  my  arm  subdue  thy  foes : 

From  my  promise  comfort  take. 

For  my  help  in  trouble  call ; 

Never  will  I thee  forsake, 

Till  I have  accomplish’d  all.” 

I  Well  does  Jacob’s  ladder  suit, 

To  the  gospel-throne  of  grace; 

We  are  at  the  ladder’s  foot, 

Ev’ry  hour,  in  ev’ry^place  : 

By  assuming  flesh  and  blood, 

Jesus  heaven  and  earth  unites; 

We  by  faith  ascend  to  God,* 

God  to  dwell  with  us  delights. 

They  who  know  the  Saviour’s  name, 
Are  for  all  events  prepar’d ; . 

What  can  changes  do  to  them, 

Who  have  such  a guide  and  guard  1 
Should  they  traverse  earth  around, 
To  the  ladder  still  they  come ; 

Ev’ry  spot  is  holy  ground, 

God  is  there — and  he ’s  their  home. 


HYMN  X. 

My  name  is  Jacob.  Chap,  xxxii.  27. 

1 Nay,  I cannot  let  thee  go, 

Till  a blessing  thou  bestow ; 

Do  not  turn  away  thy  face, 

Mine ’s  an  urgent  pressing  case. 

2 Dost  thou  ask  me  who  I am  1 

Ah ! my  Lord,  thou  know’st  my  name ; 
Yet  the  question  gives  a plea, 

To  support  my  suit  with  thee. 

3 Thou  didst  once  a wretch  behold, 

In  rebellion  blindly  bold, 

Scorn  thy  grace,  thy  power  defy  ; 
That  poor  rebel,  Lord,  was  I. 


* 2 Cor.  vi.  16. 


4 Once  a sinner  near  despair, 

Sought  thy  mercy-seat  by  prayer ; 
Mercy  heard  and  set  him  free ; 

Lord  that  mercy  came  to  me. 

5 Many  years  have  pass’d  since  then.. 
Many  changes  I have  seen, 

Yet  have  been  upheld  till  now: 

Who  could  hold  me  up  but  thou  1 

6 Thou  hast  help’d  in  ev’ry  need  ; 

This  emboldens  me  to  plead : 

After  so  much  mercy  past, 

Canst  thou  let  me  sink  at  last  1 

7 No — I must  maintain  my  hold  ; 

’Tis  thy  goodness  makes  me  bold ; 

I can  no  denial  take, 

When  I plead  for  Jesus’  sake. 

HYMN  XI. 

Plenty  in  the  Time  of  Dearth.  Chap.  xli.  56. 

1 My  soul  once  had  its  plenteous  years. 

And  throve,  with  peace  and  comfort  fill’d 
Like  the  fat  kine  and  ripen’d  ears, 

Which  Pharaoh  in  his  dream  beheld. 

2 With  pleasing  frames  and  grace  receiv’d, 
With  means  and  ordinances  fed, 

How  happy  for  a while  I liv’d, 

And  little  fear’d  the  want  of  bread. 

3 But  famine  came,  and  left  no  sign 
Of  all  the  plenty  I had  seen ; 

Like  the  dry  ears  and  half-starv’d  kine, 

I then  look’d  wither’d,  faint,  and  lean. 

4 To  Joseph  the  Egyptians  went ; 

To  Jesus  I made  known  my  case ; 

He,  when  my  little  stock  was  spent, 
Open’d  his  magazine  of  grace. 

5 For  he  the  time  of  dearth  foresaw, 

And  made  provision  long  before  : 

That  famish’d  souls,  like  me,  might  drav, 
Supplies  from  his  unbounded  store. 

6 Now  on  his  bounty  I depend, 

And  live  from  fear  of  dearth  secure ; 
Maintain’d  by  such  a mighty  friend, 

I cannot  want  till  he  is  poor. 

7 O sinners,  hear  his  gracious  call ! 

His  mercy’s  door  stands  open  wide; 

He  has  enough  to  feed  you  all, 

And  none  who  come  shall  be  denied. 

HYMN  XII. 

Joseph  made  known  to  his  Brethreri 
Chap.  xlv.  3,  4. 

1 When  Joseph  his  brethren  beheld 
Afflicted,  and  trembling  with  fear, 

His  heart  with  compassion  was  fill’d, 

From  weeping  he  could  not  forbear. 

A while  his  behaviour  was  rough, 

To  bring  their  past  sin  to  their  mind  ; 

But  when  they  were  humbled  enough. 

He  hastened  to  show  himself  kind. 


EXODUS. 


115 


HYMN  XV.] 

2 How  little  they  thought  it  was  he, 
Whom  they  had  ill-treated  and  sold  ! 
How  great  their  confusion  must  be, 

As  soon  as  his  name  he  had  told  ! 

“ I ’m  Joseph  your  brother,”  he  said, 

“ And  still  to  my  heart  you  are  dear ; 
You  sold  me,  and  thought  I was  dead, 
But  God,  for  your  sakes,  sent  me  here.” 

3 Though  greatly  distressed  before, 

When  charg’d  with  purloining  the  cup, 
They  now  were  confounded  much  more, 
Not  one  of  them  durst  to  look  up. 

“ Can  Joseph,  whom  we  would  have  slain, 
Forgive  us  the  evil  we  did  1 
And  will  he  our  household  maintain  1 
O,  this  is  a brother  indeed !” 

4 Thus  dragg’d  by  my  conscience,  I came, 
And  laden  with  guilt,  to  the  Lord, 
Surrounded  with  terror  and  shame, 
Unable  to  utter  a word. 

At  first  he  look’d  stern  and  severe, 

What  anguish  then  pierced  my  heart ! 
Expecting  each  moment  to  hear 
The  sentence  “ Thou  cursed  depart !” 

:i  But,  oh ! what  surprise  when  he  spoke, 
While  tenderness  beam’d  in  his  face ; 

My  heart  then  to  pieces  was  broke, 
O’erwhelmed  and  confounded  by  grace : 

“ Poor  sinner,  I know  thee  full  well, 

By  thee  I was  sold  and  was  slain ; 

But  I died  to  redeem  thee  from  hell, 

And  raise  thee  in  glory  to  reign. 

6 “ I ’m  Jesus,  whom  thou  hast  blasphem’d, 
And  crucified  often  afresh  ; 

But  let  me  henceforth  be  esteem’d 
Thy  brother,  thy  bone,  and  thy  flesh : 

My  pardon  I freely  bestow, 

Thy  wants  I will  fully  supply ; 

I  ’ll  guide  thee  and  guard  thee  below, 
And  soon  will  remove  thee  on  high. 

7 “ Go,  publish  to  sinners  around, 

That  they  may  be  willing  to  come, 

The  mercy  which  now  you  have  found, 
And  tell  them  that  yet  there  is  room.” 

O  sinners ! the  message  obey, 

No  more  vain  excuses  pretend ; 

But  come  without  further  delay, 

To  Jesus  our  brother  and  friend. 

EXODUS. 


HYMN  XIH. 

The  Utter  Waters.  Chap.  xv.  23.  25. 

1 Bitter,  indeed,  the  waters  are, 

Which  in  this  desert  flow ; 

Though  to  the  eye  they  promise  fair, 
They  taste  of  sin  and  woe. 

2 Of  pleasing  draughts  I once  could  dream, 

But  now  awake,  I find 
That  sin  has  poison’d  ev’ry  stream, 

And  left  a curse  behind. 


3 But  there ’s  a wonder-working  wood, 

I ’ve  heard  believers  say, 

Can  make  these  bitter  waters  good, 

And  take  the  curse  away. 

4 The  virtues  of  this  healing  tree 

Are  known  and  priz’d  by  few ; 

Reveal  this  secret,  Lord,  to  me, 

That  I may  prize  it  too. 

5 The  cross  on  which  the  Saviour  died, 

And  conquer’d  for  his  saints ; 

This  is  the  tree,  by  faith  applied, 

Which  sweetens  all  complaints. 

6 Thousands  have  found  the  bless’d  effect, 

No  longer  mourn  their  lot : 

While  on  his  sorrows  they  reflect, 

Their  own  are  all  forgot. 

7 When  they,  by  faith,  behold  the  cross, 

Though  many  griefs  they  meet ; 

They  draw  again  from  ev’ry  loss, 

And  find  the  bitter  sweet. 

HYMN  XIV. 

Jehovah-Rophi ; or,  the  Lord  my  Healer 
Chap.  xv.  26. 

1 Heal  us,  Emmanuel,  here  we  are, 

Waiting  to  feel  thy  touch ; 
Deep-wounded  souls  to  thee  repair, 

And  Saviour  we  are  such. 

2 Our  faith  is  feeble,  we  confess, 

We  faintly  trust  thy  word; 

But  wilt  thou  pity  us  the  less  1 
Be  that  far  from  thee,  Lord  ! 

3 Remember  him  who  once  applied 

With  trembling  for  relief ; 

“ Lord,  I believe,”  with  tears  he  cried,* 

“ O help  my  unbelief!” 

4 She  too  who  touch’d  thee  in  the  press, 

And  healing  virtue  stole, 

Was  answered,  “ Daughter  go  in  peace, 
Thy  faith  hath  made  the  whole.  ”f 

5 Conceal’d  amid  the  gathering  throng. 

She  would  have  shunn’d  thy  view ; 

And  if  her  faith  was  firm  and  strong, 

Had  strong  misgivings  too. 

6 Like  her,  with  hopes  and  fears,  we  come, 

To  touch  thee  if  we  may ; 

Oh ! send  us  not  despairing  home, 

Send  none  unheal’d  away  ! C. 

HYMN  XV. 

Manna.  Chap.  xvi.  18. 

1 Manna  to  Israel  well  supplied 

The  want  of  other  bread ; 

While  God  is  able  to  provide, 

His  people  shall  be  fed. 

2 Thus,  though  the  corn  and  wine  should  fail, 

And  creature-streams  be  dry, 

The  prayer  of  faith  will  still  prevail, 

For  blessings  from  on  high. 


* Mark  ix.  24. 


t Mark  v.  34. 


116 

3 Of  this  kind  care  how  sweet  a proof! 

It  suited  ev’ry  taste ; 

Who  gather’d  most  had  just  enough, 
Enough  who  gather’d  least. 

4 ’Tis  thus  our  gracious  Lord  divides 

Our  comforts  and  our  cares ; 

His  own  unerring  hand  provides, 

And  gives  us  each  our  shares. 

5 He  knows  how  much  the  weak  can  bear, 

And  helps  them  when  they  cry ; 

The  strongest  have  no  strength  to  spare, 
For  such  he  ’ll  strongly  try. 

6 Daily  they  saw  the  manna  come, 

And  cover  all  the  ground ; 

But  what  they  tried  to  keep  at  home, 
Corrupted  soon  was  found. 

7 Vain  their  attempt  to  store  it  up, 

This  was  to  tempt  the  Lord  ; 

Israel  must  live  by  faith  and  hope, 

And  not  upon  a hoard. 

HYMN  XVI. 

Manna  Hoarded.  Chap.  xvi.  20. 

1 The  manna,  favour’d  Israel’s  meat, 

Was  gather’d  day  by  day ; 

When  all  the  host  was  serv’d,  the  heat 
Melted  the  rest  away. 

2 In  vain  to  hoard  it  up  they  tried, 

Against  to-morrow  came ; 

It  then  bred  worms  and  putrified, 

And  prov’d  their  sin  and  shame. 

3 ’Twas  daily  bread,  and  would  not  keep, 

But  must  be  still  renew’d ; 

Faith  should  not  want  a hoard  or  heap, 

But  trust  the  Lord  for  food. 

4 The  truths  by  which  the  soul  is  fed, 

Must  thus  be  had  afresh ; 

For  notions  resting  in  the  head 
Will  only  feed  the  flesh. 

5 However  true  they  have  no  life 

Or  unction  to  impart ; 

They  breed  the  worms  of  pride  and  strife, 
But  cannot  cheer  the  heart. 

6 Nor  can  the  best  experience  past 

The  life  of  faith  maintain ; 

The  brightest  hope  will  faint  a»t  ’ast, 

Unl  ss  supplied  again. 

7 Dear  Lord,  while  we  in  prayer  are  found, 

Do  thou  the  manna  give ; 

Oh ! let  it  fall  on  all  around, 

That  we  may  eat  and  live  ! 


HYMN  XVH. 

Jehovah- Nissi ; or,  the  Lord  my  Banner. 
Chap.  xvii.  15. 

1  By  whom  was  David  taught 
To  aim  the  dreadful  blow, 

When  he  Goiiah  fought, 

And  laid  the  Gittite  low  ? 


[book  l 

No  sword  nor  spear  the  stripling  took, 

B ut  chose  a pebble  from  the  brook. 

2 ’Twas  Israel’s  God  and  King 

Who  sent  him  to  the  fight ; 

Who  gave  him  strength  to  sling, 

And  skill  to  aim  aright. 

Ye  feeble  saints,  your  strength  endures. 
Because  young  David’s  God  is  yours. 

3 Who  order’d  Gideon  forth 

To  storm  the  invader’s  camp,* 

With  arms  of  little  worth, 

A pitcher  and  a lamp  1 
The  trumpets  made  his  coming  known, 

And  all  the  host  was  overthrown. 

4 Oh  ! I have  seen  the  day, 

When  with  a single  word, 

God  helping  me  to  say, 

My  trust  is  in  the  Lord, 

My  soul  has  quell’d  a thousand  foes. 
Fearless  of  all  that  could  oppose. 

5 But  unbelief,  self-will, 

Self-righteousness,  and  pride, 

How  often  do  they  steal 
My  weapon  from  my  side  ? 

Yet  David’s  Lord,  and  Gideon’s  friend, 
Will  help  his  servant  to  the  end.  C. 


HYMN  XVm. 

The  golden  Calf.  Chap,  xxxii.  4.  21. 

1 When  Israel  heard  the  fiery  law 

From  Sinai’s  top  proclaim’d, 

Their  hearts  seem’d  full  of  holy  awe, 
Their  stubborn  spirits  tam’d. 

2 Yet,  as  forgetting  all  they  knew, 

Ere  forty  days  were  past, 

With  blazing  Sinai  still  in  view, 

A molten  calf  they  cast. 

3 Yea,  Aaron,  God’s  anointed  priest, 

Who  on  the  mount  had  been, 

He  durst  prepare  the  idol  beast, 

And  lead  them  on  to  sin. 

4 Lord,  what  is  man,  and  what  are  we,. 

To  recompense  thee  thus ! 

In  their  offence  our  own  we  see, 

Their  story  points  at  us. 

5 From  Sinai’s  top  we  heard  thee  speak, 

And  from  mount  Calv’ry  too ; 

And  yet  to  idols  oft  we  seek, 

While  thou  art  in  our  view. 

6 Some  golden  calf,  or  golden  dream, 

Some  fancied  creature  good, 
Presumes  to  share  the  heart  with  him 
Who  bought  the  whole  with  blood. 

7 Lord,  save  us  from  our  golden  calves, 

Our  sin  with  grief  we  own ; 

We  would  no  more  be  thine  by  halves 
But  live  to  thee  alone. 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


Judges  vii.  20. 


HYMN  XXII.] 


JUDGES. 


117 


LEVITICUS. 

HYMN  XIX. 

The  true  Aaron.  Chap.  viii.  7 — 9. 

1 See  Aaron,  God’s  anointed  priest. 

Within  the  vail  appear, 

In  robes  of  mystic  meaning  drest, 
Presenting  Israel’s  prayer. 

2 The  plate  of  gold  which  crowns  his  brows 

His  holiness  describes ; 

His  breast  displays,  in  shining  rows, 

The  names  of  all  the  tribes. 

:3  With  the  atoning  blood  he  stands 
Before  the  mercy-seat; 

And  clouds  of  incense  from  his  hands 
Arise  with  odour  sweet. 

4 Urim  and  Thummim  near  his  heart, 

In  rich  engravings  worn, 

The  sacred  light  of  truth  impart, 

To  teach  and  to  adorn. 

5 Through  him  the  eye  of  faith  descries 

A greater  priest  than  he : 

Thus  Jesus  pleads  above  the  skies, 

For  you,  my  friends,  and  me. 

*5  He  bears  the  names  of  all  his  saints 
Deep  on  his  heart  engrav’d ; 

Attentive  to  the  state  and  wants 
Of  all  his  love  has  saved. 

7 In  him  a holiness  complete, 

Light  and  perfections  shine, 

And  wisdom,  grace,  and  glory  meet ; 

A Saviour  all  divine  ! 

$ The  blood,  which  as  a priest  he  bears 
For  sinners,  is  his  own : 

The  incense  of  his  prayers  and  tears 
Perfume  the  holy  throne. 

9 In  him  my  weary  soul  has  rest, 

Though  I am  weak  and  vile, 

I  read  my  name  upon  his  breast, 

And  see  the  Father  smile. 


NUMBERS. 

HYMN  XX. 

Balaam’s  Wish*  Chap,  xxiii.  10. 

1 How  bless’d  the  righteous  are, 

When  they  resign  their  breath ; 

No  wonder  Balaam  wish’d  to  share 
In  such  a happy  death. 

2 “ Oh  ! let  me  die,”  said  he, 

“ The  death  the  righteous  do ; 

When  life  is  ended,  let  me  be 
Found  with  the  faithful  few.” 

3 The  force  of  truth,  how  great ! 

When  enemies  confess, 

None  but  the  righteous,  whom  they  ha.e, 
A solid  hope  possess. 


4 But  Balaam’s  wish  was  vain, 

His  heart  was  insincere ; 

He  thirsted  for  unrighteous  gain, 

And  sought  a portion  here. 

5 He  seem’d  the  Lord  to  know, 

And  to  offend  him  loth ; 

But  Mammon  prov’d  his  overthrow ; “ 

For  none  can  serve  them  both. 

6 May  you,  my  friends,  and  I, 

Warning  from  hence  receive ; 

If  like  the  righteous  we  would  die, 

To  choose  the  life  they  live. 

JOSHUA. 

HYMN  XXI. 

Gibeon.  Chap.  x.  6. 

1 When  Joshua,  by  God’s  command, 
Invaded  Canaan’s  guilty  land, 

Gibeon,  unlike  the  nations  round, 
Submission  made,  and  mercy  found. 

2 Their  stubborn  neighbours,  who,  enrag’d, 
United  war  against  them  wag’d, 

By  Joshua  soon  were  overthrown, 

For  Gibeon’s  cause  was  now  his  own. 

3 He  from  whose  arm  they  ruin  fear’d, 
Their  leader  and  ally  appear’d ; 

An  emblem  of  the  Saviour’s  grace, 

To  those  who  humbly  seek  his  face. 

4 The  men  of  Gibeon  wore  disguise, 

And  gain’d  their  peace  by  framing  lies ; 
For  Joshua  had  no  power  to  spare, 

If  he  had  known  from  whence  they  were. 

5 But  Jesus  invitation  sends, 

Treating  with  rebels  as  his  friends ; 

And  holds  the  promise  forth  in  view, 

To  all  who  for  his  mercy  sue. 

6 Too  long  his  goodness  I disdain’d, 

Yet  went  at  last,  and  peace  obtained ; 

But  soon  the  noise  of  war  I heard, 

And  former  friends  in  arms  appear'd. 

7 Weak  in  myself,  for  help  I cried, 

Lord,  I am  press’d  on  every  side ; 

The  cause  is  thine,  they  fight  with  me, 
But  every  blow  is  aimed  at  thee. 

8 With  speed  to  my  relief  he  came, 

And  put  my  enemies  to  shame  : 

Thus  sav’d  by  grace,  I live  to  sing 
The  love  and  triumphs  of  my  King. 

JUDGES. 

HYMN  XXII. 

Jehovah- Shalom ; or,  the  Lord  is  Peace . 
Chap.  vi.  24. 

1 Jesus,  whose  blood  so  freely  strea.  - 3 
To  satisfy  the  law’s  demand, 

By  thee  from  guilt  and  wrath  redeem’d, 
Before  the  Father’s  face  I stand. 


* Bv>ok  III.  Hymn  Ixxi. 


118 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


2 To  reconcile  offending  man, 

Make  Justice  drop  her  angry  rod  ; 

What  creature  could  have  form’d  the  plan, 
Or  who  fulfil  it,  but  a God  ] 

3 No  drop  remains  of  all  the  curse, 

For  wretches  who  deserv'd  the  whole ; 

No  arrows  dipt  in  wrath  to  pierce 
The  guilty,  but  returning  soul. 

4 Peace  by  such  means  so  dearly  bought, 
What  rebel  could  have  hop’d  to  see  1 
Peace,  by  his  injur’d  Sovereign  wrought, 
His  Sovereign  fastened  to  the  tree. 

5 Now,  Lord,  thy  feeble  worm  prepare ! 

For  strife  with  earth  and  hell  begins; 
Confirm  and  gird  me  for  the  war, 

They  hate  the  soul  that  hates  his  sms. 

6 Let  them  in  horrid  league  agree  ! 

They  may  assault,  they  may  distress ; 

But  cannot  quench  thy  love  to  me, 

Nor  rob  me  of  the  Lord,  my  peace.  C. 

HYMN  XXIII. 

Gideon's  Fleece.  Chap.  vi.  37 — 40. 

I  The  signs  which  God  to  Gideon  gave 
His  holy  sovereignty  made  known, 

That  he  alone  has  power  to  save, 

And  claims  the  glory  as  his  own. 

& The  dew  which  first  the  fleece  had  fill’d, 
When  all  the  earth  was  dry  around, 

Was  from  it  afterwards  withheld, 

And  only  fell  upon  the  ground. 

3 To  Israel  thus  the  heavenly  dew 
Of  saving  truth  was  long  restrain’d ; 

Of  which  the  Gentiles  nothing  knew, 

But  dry  and  desolate  remain’d. 

4 But  now  the  Gentiles  have  receiv’d 
The  balmy  dew  of  gospel-peace ; 

And  Israel,  who  his  Spirit  griev’d, 

Is  left  a dry  and  empty  fleece. 

5 This  dew  still  falls  at  his  command, 

To  keep  his  chosen  plants  alive ; 

They  shall,  though  in  a thirsty  land, 

“ Like  willows  by  the  waters  thrive.”* 

6 But  chiefly  when  his  people  meet, 

To  hear  his  word  and  seek  his  face, 

The  gentle  dew,  with  influence  sweet, 
Descends,  and  nourishes  their  grace. 

7 But,  ah ! what  numbers  still  are  dead, 
Though  under  means  of  grace  they  lie ! 
The  dew  still  falling  round  their  head, 
And  yet  their  heart  untouch’d  and  dry. 

8 Dear  Saviour ! hear  us  when  we  call, ' 

To  wrestling  prayer  an  answer  give ; 
Pour  down  thy  dew  upon  us  all, 

That  all  may  feel,  and  all  may  live. 

HYMN  XXIV. 

Samson's  Lion.  Chap.  xiv.  8. 

I  The  lion  that  on  Samson  roar’d, 

And  thirsted  for  his  blood, 


[book  l 

With  honey  afterwards  was  stor'd, 

And  furnish’d  him  with  food. 

2 Believers,  as  they  pass  along, 

With  many  lions  meet, 

But  gather  sweetness  from  the  strong, 
And  from  the  eater  meat. 

3 The  lions  rage  and  roar  in  vain, 

For  Jesus  is  their  shield ; 

Their  losses  prove  a certain  gain, 

Their  troubles  comfort  yield. 

4 The  world  and  Satan  join  their  strength 

To  fill  their  souls  with  fears ; 

But  crops  of  Joy  they  reap  at  length, 
From  what  they  sow  in  tears. 

5 Afflictions  make  them  love  the  word. 

Stir  up  their  hearts  to  prayer, 

And  many  precious  fruits  afford 
Of  their  Redeemer’s  care. 

6 The  lions  roar,  but  cannot  kill ; 

Then  fear  them  not,  my  friends, 

They  bring  us,  though  against  their  will, 
The  honey  Jesus  sends. 


I.  SAMUEL. 

HYMN  XXV. 

Hannah;  or,  The  Throne  of  Grace. 
Chap.  i.  18. 

1 When  Hannah,  press’d  with  grief. 

Pour’d  forth  her  soul  in  prayer, 
She  quickly  found  relief, 

And  left  her  burden  there : 

Like  her,  in  ev’ry  trying  case, 

Let  us  approach  the  throne  of  grace. 

2 When  she  began  to  pray, 

Her  heart  was  pain’d  and  sad ; 
But  ere  she  went  away, 

Was  comforted  and  glad : 

In  trouble  what  a resting-place 

Have  they  who  know  the  throne  of  grace ; 

3 Though  men  and  devils  rage, 

And  threaten  to  devour, 

The  saints,  from  age  to  age, 

Are  safe  from  all  their  power; 
Fresh  strength  they  gain  to  run  their  race, 
By  waiting  at  the  throne  of  grace. 

4 Eli  her  case  mistook ; 

How  was  her  spirit  mov’d 
By  his  unkind  rebuke ! 

But  God  her  cause  approv’d. 

We  need  not  fear  a creature’s  face, 

While  welcome  at  a throne  of  grace. 

5 She  was  not  fill’d  with  wine, 

As  Eli  rashly  thought ; 

But  with  a faith  divine, 

And  found  the  help  she  sought : 
Though  men  despise  and  call  us  base, 

Still  let  us  ply  the  throne  of  grace. 

6 Men  have  not  power  or  skill 

With  troubled  souls  to  bear; 


* Isa.  xliv.  4. 


I.  SAMUEL. 


119 


HYMN  XXVIII.] 

TJ  lough  they  express  good-will, 

Poor  comforters  they  are : 

But  swelling  sorrows  sink  apace, 

When  we  approach  the  throne  of  grace. 

7 Numbers  before  have  tried, 

And  found  the  promise  true ; 

Nor  yet  one  been  denied, 

Then  why  should  I or  you  1 
Let  us  by  faith  their  footsteps  trace, 

And  hasten  to  the  throne  of  grace. 

8 As  fogs  obscure  the  light, 

And  taint  the  morning  air, 

But  soon  are  put  to  flight, 

If  the  bright  sun  appear : 

Thus  Jesus  will  our  troubles  chase, 

By  shining  from  the  throne  of  grace.* 

HYMN  XXVI. 

Dagon  before  the  Ark.  Chap.  v.  4,  5. 

1 When  first  to  make  my  heart  his  own, 
The  Lord  reveal’d  his  mighty  grace; 

Self  reigned  like  Dagon  on  the  throne, 
But  could  not  long  maintain  its  place. 

2 It  fell,  and  own’d  the  power  divine, 

(Grace  can  with  ease  the  victory  gain) 
But  soon  this  wretched  heart  of  mine 
Contriv’d  to  set  it  up  again. 

3 Again  the  Lord  his  name?  proclaimed, 

And  brought  the  hateftu  idol  low ; 

Then  self,  like  Dagon,  broken,  maimed, 
Seemed  to  receive  a mortal  blow. 

4 Yet  self  is  not  of  life  bereft, 

Nor  ceases  to  oppose  his  will ; 

Though  but  a maimed  stump  be  left 
’Tis  Dagon,  ’tis  an  idol  still. 

5 Lord,  must  I always  guilty  prove, 

And  idols  in  my  heart  have  room  If 
Oh ! let  the  fire  of  heavenly  love 
The  very  stump  of  self  consume ! 

HYMN  XXVII. 

The  Milch-kine  Drawing  the  Ark : — Faith's 
Surrender  of  all.  Chap.  vi.  12. 

1 The  kine  unguided  went 

By  the  directest  road, 

When  the  Philistines  homeward  sent 
The  ark  of  Israel’s  God. 

2 Lowing  they  passed  along, 

And  left  their  calves  shut  up ; 

They  felt  an  instinct  for  their  young 
But  would  not  turn  or  stop. 

3 Shall  brutes,  devoid  of  thought, 

Their  Maker’s  will  obey, 

And  we  who  by  his  grace  are  taught, 
More  stubborn  prove  than  they! 

4 He  shed  his  precious  blood, 

To  make  us  his  alone ; 

If  wash’d  in  that  atoning  flood, 

We  are  no  more  our  own. 


5 If  he  his  will  reveal, 

Let  us  obey  his  call ; 

And  think,  whate’er  the  flesh  may  fee., 
His  love  deserves  our  all. 

6 We  should  maintain  in  view 

His  glory,  as  our  end ; 

Too  much  we  cannot  bear  or  do, 

For  such  a matchless  friend. 

7 His  saints  should  stand  prepared 

In  duty’s  path  to  run; 

Nor  count  their  greatest  trials  hard, 

So  that  his  will  be  done. 

8 With  Jesus  for  our  guide, 

The  path  is  safe,  though  rough ; 

The  promise  says,  “ I will  provide,” 
And  faith  replies,  “ Enough.” 

HYMN  XXVIII. 

Saul's  Armour.  Chap.  xvii.  38 — 40. 

1 When  first  my  soul  enlisted 

My  Saviour’s  foes  to  fight, 
Mistaken  friends  insisted 
I was  not  arm’d  aright. 

So  Saul  advised  David, 

He  certainly  would  fail, 

Nor  could  his  life  be  saved, 

Without  a coat  of  mail. 

2 But  David,  though  he  yielded 

To  put  the  armour  on, 

Soon  found  he  could  not  wield  it, 
And  ventur’d  forth  with  none. 
With  only  sling  and  pebble, 

He  fought  the  fight  of  faith; 

The  weapons  seem’d  but  feeble, 

Yet  prov’d  Goliah’s  death. 

3 Had  I by  him  been  guided, 

And  quickly  thrown  away 
The  armour  men  provided, 

I might  have  gain’d  the  day : 

But  arm’d  as  they  advis’d  me, 

My  expectations  fail’d'; 

My  enemy  surpris’d  me, 

And  had  almost  prevail’d. 

4 Furnish’d  with  books  and  notions, 

And  arguments  and  pride, 

I practis’d  all  my  motions, 

And  Satan’s  pow’r  defied ; 

But  soon  perceiv’d  with  trouble, 
That  these  would  do  no  good ; 

Iron  to  him  is  stubble, { 

And  brass  like  rotten  wood. 

5 I triumph’d  at  a distance, 

While  he  was  out  of  sight ; 

But  faint  was  my  resistance, 

When  forc’d  to  join  in  fight : 

Pie  broke  my  sword  in  shivers, 

And  pierc’d  my  boasted  shield ; 
Laugh’d  at  my  vain  endeavours, 

And  drove  me  from  the  field. 


* Book  IT.  Hymn  lxi. 


t Hosea  xiv.  8. 


} Job  xli.  27. 


120  OLNEY  HYMNS.  [book  i. 


6  Satan  will  not  be  braved 
By  such  a worm  as  I ; 

Then  let  me  learn,  with  David, 
To  trust  in  the  Most  High ; 

To  plead  the  name  of  Jesus, 

And  use  the  sling  of  prayer; 
Thus  arm’d,  when  Satan  sees  us, 
He  ’ll  tremble  and  despair. 


II.  SAMUEL. 


HYMN  XXIX. 

David's  Fall.  Chap.  xi.  27. 

1  How  David,  when  by  sin  deceiv’d, 

From  bad  to  worse  went  on ! 

For  when  the  Holy  Spirit ’s  griev’d, 

Our  strength  and  guard  are  gone. 

$ His  eye  on  Bathsheba  once  fix’d, 

With  poison  fill’d  his  soul ; 

He  ventur’d  on  adult’ry  next, 

And  murder  crown’d  the  whole. 

3 So  from  a spark  of  fire  at  first, 

That  has  not  been  descried, 

A dreadful  flame  has  often  burst, 

And  ravag’d  far  and  wide. 

4 When  sin  deceives,  it  hardens  too, 

For  though  he  vainly  sought 
To  hide  his  crimes  from  public  view, 

Of  God  he  little  thought. 

5 He  neither  would  nor  could  repent, 

No  true  compunction  felt ; 

Till  God  in  mercy  Nathan  sent, 

His  stubborn  heart  to  melt. 

(5  The  parable  held  forth  a fact, 

Design’d  his  case  to  show ; 

But  though  the  picture  was  exact, 
Himself  he  did  not  know. 

7 “ Thou  art  the  man,”  the  prophet  said, 

That  word  his  slumber  broke ; 

And  when  he  own’d  his  sin,  and  prayed, 
The  Lord  forgiveness  spoke. 

8 Let  those  who  think  they  stand  beware, 

For  David  stood  before ; 

Nor  let  the  fallen  soul  despair, 

For  mercy  can  restore. 

HYMN  XXX. 

Is  this  thy  Kindness  to  thy  Friend  ? 
Chap.  xvi.  17. 

1 Poor,  weak,  and  worthless  though  I am, 
I have  a rich  almighty  Friend ; 

Jesus,  the  Saviour,  is  his  name ; 

He  freely  loves,  and  without  end. 

2 He  ransom’d  me  from  hell  with  blood, 
And  by  his  power  my  foes  control’d ; 

He  found  me,  wand’ring  far  from  God, 
And  brought  me  to  his  chosen  fold. 


3 He  cheers  my  heart,  my  want  supplies, 
And  says  that  I shall  shortly  be 
Enthron’d  with  him  above  the  skies, 

Oh ! what  a friend  is  Christ  to  me, 

4 But,  ah ! my  inmost  spirit  mourns, 

And  well  my  eyes  with  tears  may  swim, 
To  think  of  my  perverse  returns; 

I ’ve  been  a faithless  friend  to  him. 

5 Often  my  gracious  Friend  I grieve, 
Neglect,  distrust,  and  disobey, 

And  often  Satan’s  lies  believe, 

Sooner  than  all  my  Friend  can  say. 

6 He  bids  me  always  freely  come, 

And  promises  whate’er  I ask ; 

But  I am  straiten’d,  cold,  and  dumb, 

And  count  my  privilege  a task. 

7 Before  the  world,  that  hates  his  cause, 

My  treach’rous  heart  has  throbb’d  witl 

shame; 

Loth  to  forego  the  world’s  applause, 

I hardly  dare  avow  his  name. 

8 Sure,  were  not  I most  vile  and  base, 

I could  not  thus  my  Friend  requite ! 

And  were  not  he  the  God  of  grace, 

He’d  frown,  and  spurn  me  from  his  sight. 

KINGS. 

HYMN  XXXI. 

Ask  what  I shall  give  Thee.  Chap.  iii.  5. 

1 Come,  my  soul,  thy  suit  prepare, 

Jesus  loves  to  answer  prayer ; 

He  himself  has  bid  thee  pray, 

Therefore  will  not  say  thee  nay. 

2 Thou  art  coming  to  a King,* 

Large  petitions  with  thee  bring ; 

For  his  grace  and  power  are  such, 

None  can  ever  ask  too  much. 

3 With  my  burden  I begin, 

Lord,  remove  this  load  of  sin ! 

Let  thy  blood,  for  sinners  spilt, 

Set  my  conscience  free  from  guilt. 

4 Lord,  I come  to  thee  for  rest, 

Take  possession  of  my  breast ; 

There  thy  blood-bought  fight  maintain, 
And  without  a rival  reign. 

5 As  the  image  in  the  glass 
Answers  the  beholder’s  face ; 

Thus  unto  my  heart  appear, 

Print  thine  own  resemblance  there. 

6 While  I am  a pilgrim  here, 

Let  thy  love  my  spirit  cheer ; 

As  my  Guide,  my  Guard,  my  Friend, 
Lead  me  to  my  journey’s  end. 

7 Show  me  what  I have  to  do, 

Ev’ry  hour  my  strength  renew; 

Let  me  live  a life  of  faith, 

Let  me  die  thy  people’s  death. 


* Psalm  lxxxi.  10. 


L KINGS. 


121 


HYMN  XXXIV.] 

HYMN  XXXII. 

ANOTHER. 

1 If  Solomon  for  wisdom  prayed, 

The  Lord  before  had  made  him  wise, 

Else  he  another  choice  had  made, 

And  ask’d  for  what  the  worldlings  prize. 

2 Thus  he  invites  his  people  still ; 

He  first  instructs  them  how  to  choose, 
Then  bids  them  ask  whate’er  they  will, 
Assur’d  that  he  will  not  refuse. 

3 Our  wishes  would  our  ruin  prove, 

Could  we  our  wretched  choice  obtain, 
Before  we  feel  the  Saviour’s  love 
Kindle  our  love  to  him  again. 

4 But  when  our  hearts  perceive  his  worth, 
Desires,  till  then  unknown,  take  place  ; 
Our  spirits  cleave  no  more  to  earth, 

But  pant  for  holiness  and  grace. 

5 And  dost  thou  say,  “ Ask  what  thou  wilt  1” 
Lord,  I would  seize  the  golden  hour ; 

I  pray  to  be  releas’d  from  guilt, 

And  freed  from  sin  and  Satan’s  power. 

6 More  of  thy  presence,  Lord,  impart, 

More  of  thine  image  let  me  bear ; 

Erect  thy  throne  within  my  heart, 

And  reign  without  a rival  there. 

7 Give  me  to  read  my  pardon  seal’d, 

And  from  thy  joy  to  draw  my  strength ; 
To  have  thy  boundless  love  reveal’d, 

In  all  its  height,  and  breadth,  and  length. 

6 Grant  these  requests,  I ask  no  more, 

But  to  thy  care  the  rest  resign ; 

Sick,  or  in  health,  or  rich,  or  poor, 

All  shall  be  well  if  thou  art  mine. 


HYMN  XXXIH. 

ANOTHER. 

1 Behold  the  throne  of  grace ! 
The  promise  calls  me  near ; 

There  Jesus  shows  a smiling  face, 
And  waits  to  answer  prayer. 

2 That  rich  atoning  blood, 

Which  sprinkled  round  I see, 

Provides  for  those  who  come  to  God, 
An  all-prevailing  plea. 

3 My  soul,  ask  what  thou  wilt, 
Thou  canst  not  be  too  bold  ; 

Since  his  own  blood  for  thee  he  spilt, 
What  else  can  he  withhold! 

4 Beyond  thy  utmost  wants, 

His  love  and  power  can  bless : 

To  praying  souls  he  always  grants 
More  than  they  can  express. 

5 Since  ’tis  the  Lord’s  command, 
My  mouth  I open  wide  ; 

Lord,  open  thou  thy  bounteous  hand, 
That  I may  be  supplied. 

6 Thine  image,  Lord,  bestow, 
Thy  presence  and  thy  love , 

Vol.  II.  Q 


I ask  to  serve  thee  here  below, 

And  reign  with  thee  above. 

7 Teach  me  to  live  by  faith, 

Conform  my  will  to  thine  ; 

Let  me  victorious  be  in  death, 

And  then  in  glory  shine. 

8 If  thou  these  blessings  give, 

And  wilt  my  portion  be, 

Cheerful  the  world’s  poor  toys  I leave 
To  them  who  know  not  thee. 

HYMN  XXXIV. 

The  Queen  of  Skeba.  Chap.  x.  1 — 9. 

1 From  Sheba  a distant  report, 

Of  Solomon’s  glory  and  fame, 

Invited  the  queen  to  his  court, 

But  all  was  outdone  when  she  came ; 

She  cried,  with  a pleasing  surprise, 

When  first  she  before  him  appear’d, 
“How  much  what  I see  with  my  eyes, 
Surpasses  the  rumour  I heard !” 

2 When  once  to  Jerusalem  come, 

The  treasure  and  train  she  had  brought. 
The  wealth  she  possessed  at  home, 

No  longer  had  place  in  her  thought ; 

His  house,  his  attendants,  his  throne, 

All  struck  her  with  wonder  and  awe : 

The  glory  of  Solomon  shone 
In  every  object  she  saw. 

3 But  Solomon  most  she  admir’d, 

Whose  spirit  conducted  the  whole  ; 

His  wisdom,  which  God  had  inspir’d, 

His  bounty  and  greatness  of  soul ; 

Of  all  the  hard  questions  she  put, 

A ready  solution  he  showed  ; 

Exceeded  her  wish  and  her  suit, 

And  more  than  she  ask’d  him  bestowed. 

4 Thus  I,  when  the  gospel  proclaim’d 
The  Saviour’s  great  name  in  my  ears, 
The  wisdom  for  which  he  is  fam’d, 

The  love  which  to  sinners  he  bears ; 

I long’d,  and  I was  not  denied, 

That  I in  his  presence  might  bow ; 

“ I saw,  and  transported  I cried, 

“ A greater  than  Solomon  thou !” 

5 My  conscience  no  comfort  could  find, 

By  doubts  and  hard  questions  opposed ; 
But  he  restor’d  peace  to  my  mind, 

And  answer’d  each  doubt  I proposed, 
Beholding  me  poor  and  distress’d, 

His  bounty  supplied  all  my  wants ; 

My  prayer  could  have  never  express’d 
So  much  as  this  Solomon  grants. 

6 I heard,  and  was  slow  to  believe, 

But  now  with  my  eyes  I behold, 

Much  more  than  my  heart  could  conceive 
Or  language  could  ever  have  told  . 

How  happy  thy  servants  must  be, 

Who  always  before  thee  appear  ! 
Vouchsafe,  Lord,  this  blessing  to  me, 

I find  it  is  good  to  be  here. 


122 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


HYMN  XXXY. 

Elijah  fed  by  Ravens*  Chap.  xvii.  6. 

’ Elijah’s  example  declares, 

Whatever  distress  may  betide, 

The  saints  may  commit  all  their  cares 
To  him  who  will  surely  provide : 

When  rain  long  withheld  from  the  earth, 
Occasioned  a famine  of  bread, 

The  prophet,  secur’d  from  the  dearth, 

By  ravens  was  constantly  fed. 

2 More  likely  to  rob  than  to  feed, 

Were  ravens  who  live  upon  prey : 

But  when  the  Lord’s  people  have  need, 
His  goodness  will  find  out  a way. 

This  instance  to  those  may  seem  strange, 
Who  know  not  how  faith  can  prevail ; 

But  sooner  all  nature  shall  change, 

Than  one  of  God’s  promises  fail. 

3 Nor  is  it  a singular  case, 

The  wonder  is  often  renew’d ; 

And  many  can  say  to  his  praise, 

He  sends  them  by  ravens  their  food  : 

Thus  worldlings,  though  ravens  indeed, 
Though  greedy  and  selfish  their  mind, 

If  God  has  a servant  to  feed, 

Against  their  own  wills  can  be  kind. 

I  Thus  Satan,  that  raven  unclean, 

Who  croaks  in  the  ears  of  the  saints, 
Compell’d  by  a power  unseen, 
x\d ministers  oft  to  their  wants  ; 

God  teaches  them  how  to  find  food, 

From  all  the  temptations  they  feel : 

This  raven  who  thirsts  for  my  blood, 

Has  help’d  me  to  many  a meal. 

5 How  safe  and  how  happy  are  they, 

Who  on  the  good  Shepherd  rely ! 

He  gives  them  out  strength  for  their  day, 
Their  wants  he  will  surely  supply ; 

He  ravens  and  lions  can  tame, 

All  creatures  obey  his  command  : 

Then  let  me  rejoice  in  his  name, 

And  leave  all  my  cares  in  his  hand. 

HYMN  XXXVI. 

The  Meal  and  Cruise  of  Oil.  Chap.  xvii.  16. 

1 By  the  poor  widow’s  oil  and  meal 

Elijah  was  sustain’d  ; 

Though  small  the  stock,  it  lasted  well, 
For  God  the  store  maintain’d. 

2 It  seem’d  as  if  from  day  to  day, 

They  were  to  eat  and  die ; 

But  still,  though  in  a secret  way, 

He  sent  a fresh  supply. 

3 Thus  to  his  poor  he  still  will  give 

Just  for  the  present  hour: 

But  for  to-morrow  they  must  live 
Upon  his  word  and  power. 

4 No  barn  or  store-house  they  possess, 

On  which  they  can  depend ; 


[book  i. 

Yet  ha'  e no  cause  to  fear  distress, 

For  Jesus  is  their  friend. 

5 Then  let  no  doubt  your  mind  assail : 

Remember  God  has  said, 

“ The  cruise  and  barrel  shall  not  fail. 

My  people  shall  be  fed.” 

6 And  thus,  though  faint,  it  often  seems. 

He  keeps  their  grace  alive; 

Supplied  by  his  refreshing  streams, 
Their  dying  hopes  revive. 

7 Though  in  ourselves  we  have  no  stock, 

The  Lord  is  nigh  to  save  : 

His  door  flies  open  when  we  knock, 

And  ’tis  but  ask  and  have. 

II.  KINGS. 

HYMN  XXXVII. 

Jericho ; or , the  Waters  healed. 
Chap.  ii.  19 — 22. 

1 Though  Jericho  pleasantly  stood, 

And  look’d  like  a promising  soil; 

The  harvest  produc’d  little  food, 

To  answer  the  husbandman’s  toil. 

The  water  some  property  had, 

Which  poisonous  prov’d  to  the  ground  ; 
The  springs  were  corrupted  and  bad, 
The  streams  spread  a barrenness  round. 

2 But  soon  by  the  cruise  and  the  salt, 
Prepar’d  by  Elijah’s  command, 

The  water  was  cur’d  of  its  fault, 

And  plenty  enriched  the  land : 

An  emblem  sure  this  of  the  grace, 

On  fruitless  dead  sinners  bestow’d ; 

For  man  is  in  Jericho’s  case, 

Till  cured  by  the  mercy  of  God. 

3 How  noble  a creature  he  seems ! 

What  knowledge,  invention,  and  skill ! 
How  large  and  extensive  his  schemes ! 
How  much  can  he  do  if  he  will ! 

His  zeal  to  be  learned  and  wise 
Will  yield  to  no  limits  and  bars  ; 

He  measures  the  earth  and  the  skies, 
And  numbers  and  marshals  the  stars. 

4 Yet  still  he  is  barren  of  good ; 

In  vain  are  his  talents  and  art ; 

For  sin  has  infected  his  blood, 

And  poison’d  the  springs  of  his  heart : 
Though  cockatrice  eggs  he  can  hatch,* 
Or,  spider-like,  cobwebs  can  weave ; 

’Tis  madness  to  labour  and  watch 
For  what  will  destroy  or  deceive. 

5 But  grace,  like  the  salt  in  the  cruise, 
When  cast  in  the  spring  of  the  soul, 

A wonderful  change  will  produce, 
Diffusing  new  life  through  the  whole ; 
The  wilderness  blooms  like  a rose, 

The  heart  whicli  was  vile  and  abhorr’d. 
Now  fruitful  and  beautifi  1 grows, 

The  garden  and  joy  of  the  Lord. 


* Book  III.  Hymn  xlvii. 


* Isa.  lix.  5. 


HYMN  XLI.J 


I.  CHRONICLES 


123 


HYMN  XXXVIII. 

Naaman.  Chap.  v.  14. 

1 Before  Elisha’s  gate 

The  Syrian  leper  stood ; 

But  could  not  brook  to  wait, 

He  deem’d  himself  too  good : 

He  thought  the  prophet  would  attend, 

And  not  to  him  a message  send. 

2 Have  I this  journey  come, 

And  will  he  not  be  seen] 

I  were  as  well  at  home, 

Would  washing  make  me  clean ; 
Why  must  I wash  in  Jordan’s  flood  ] 
Damascus’  rivers  are  as  good. 

3 Thus,  by  his  foolish  pride, 

He  almost  miss’d  a cure ; 

Howe’er  at  length  he  tried, 

And  found  the  method  sure : 

Soon  as  his  pride  was  brought  to  yield, 

The  leprosy  was  quickly  heal’d. 

4 Leprous  and  proud  as  he, 

To  Jesus  thus  I came, 

From  sin  he  set  me  free, 

When  first  I heard  his  fame ; 

Surely,  thought  I,  my  pompous  train 
Of  vows  and  tears  will  notice  gain. 

5 My  heart  devis’d  the  way 

Which  I suppos’d  he’d  take, 

And  when  I found  delay, 

Was  ready  to  go  back ; 

Had  he  some  painful  task  enjoin’d, 

I  to  performance  seem’d  inclin’d. 

6 When  by  his  word  he  spake, 

“That  fountain  opened  see; 

’Twas  opened  for  thy  sake, 

Go  wash,  and  thou  art  free.” 

Oh ! how  did  my  proud  heart  gainsay ; 

I  fear’d  to  trust  this  simple  way. 

7 At  length  I trial  made, 

When  I had  much  endur’d ; 

The  message  I obeyed, 

I wash’d,  and  I was  cur’d : 

Sinners,  this  healing  fountain  try, 

Which  cleans’d  a wretch  so  vile  as  I. 

HYMN  XXXIX. 

The  borrowed  Axe.  Chap.  vi.  5,  6. 

1 The  prophet’s  sons,  in  times  of  old, 

Though  to  appearance  poor, 

Were  rich,  without  possessing  gold, 

And  honoured,  though  obscure. 

2 In  peace  their  daily  bread  they  ate, 

By  honest  labour  earned ; 

While  daily  at  Elisha’s  feet, 

They  grace  and  wisdom  learned. 

3 The  prophet’s  presence  cheer’d  their  toil, 

They  watch’d  the  words  he  spoke  » 
Whether  they  turn’d  the  furrow’d  soil, 

Or  fell’d  the  spreading  oak. 

4 Once  as  they  listened  to  his  theme, 

Their  conference  was  stopped ; 


For  one  beneath  the  yielding  stream, 

A borrowed  axe  had  dropped. 

5 “ Alas ! it  was  not  mine  (he  said,) 

How  shall  I make  it  good  I” 

Elisha  heard,  and  when  he  prayed, 

The  iron  swam  like  wood. 

6 If  God,  in  such  a small  affair, 

A miracle  performs ; 

It  shows  his  condescending  care 
Of  poor  unworthy  worms. 

7 Though  kings  and  nations,  in  his  view 

Are  but  as  motes  and  dust; 

His  eye  and  ear  are  fixed  on  you, 

Who  in  his  mercy  trust. 

8 Not  one  concern  of  ours  is  small, 

If  we  belong  to  him  ; 

To  teach  us  this,  the  Lord  of  all 
Once  made  the  iron  swim. 

HYMN  XL. 

More  with  us  than  with  them.  Chap.  vi.  10. 

1 Alas  ! Elisha’s  servant  cried, 

When  he  the  Syrian  army  spied ; 

But  he  was  soon  released  from  care, 

In  answer  to  the  prophet’s  prayer. 

2 Straightway  he  saw,  with  other  eyes, 

A greater  army  from  the  skies, 

A fiery  guard  around  the  hill: — 

Thus  are  the  saints  preserved  still. 

3 When  Satan  and  his  host  appear, 

Like  him  of  old,  I faint  and  fear ; 

Like  him,  by  faith,  with  joy  I see, 

A greater  host  engaged  for  me. 

4 The  saints  espouse  my  cause  by  prayer, 
The  angels  make  my  soul  their  care ; 
Mine  is  the  promise  sealed  with  blood, 
And  Jesus  lives  to  make  it  good. 

I.  CHRONICLES 

HYMN  XLI. 

Faith’s  Revieiv  and  Expectation. 
Chap.  xvii.  18,  17. 

1 Amazing  grace  ! (how  sweet  the  sound) 

That  sav’d  a wretch  like  me ! 

I once  was  lost,  but  now  am  found, 

Was  blind,  but  now  I see. 

2 ’Twas  grace  that  taught  my  heart  to  fear 

And  grace  my  fears  reliev’d ; 

How  precious  did  that  grace  appear, 

The  hour  I first  believ’d. 

3 Through  many  dangers,  toils,  and  snares, 

I have  already  come ; 

’Tis  grace  has  brought  me  safe  thus  far. 
And  grace  will  lead  me  home. 

4 The  Lord  has  promis’d  good  to  me, 

His  word  my  hope  secures  ; 

He  will  my  shield  and  portion  be, 

As  long  as  life  endures. 


124 

5 Yea,  when  this  heart  and  flesh  shall  fail, 

And  mortal  life  shall  cease ; 

I  shall  possess,  within  the  vail, 

A life  of  joy  and  peace. 

6 The  earth  shall  soon  dissolve  like  snow, 

The  sun  forbear  to  shine ; 

But  God,  who  call’d  me  here  below, 

Will  be  for  ever  mine. 


NEHEMIAH. 

HYMN  XLH. 

The  Joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  Strength. 
Chap.  viii.  10. 

1 Joy  is  a fruit  that  will  not  grow 

In  nature’s  barren  soil ; 

All  we  can  boast,  till  Christ  we  know, 
Is  vanity  and  toil. 

2 But  where  the  Lord  has  planted  grace, 

And  made  his  glories  known ; 

There  fruits  of  heavenly  joy  and  peace 
Are  found,  and  there  alone. 

3 A bleeding  Saviour,  seen  by  faith, 

A sense  of  pard’ning  love, 

A hope  that  triumphs  over  death, 

Give  joys  like  those  above. 

4 To  take  a glimpse  within  the  vail, 

To  know  that  God  is  mine, 

Are  springs  of  joy  that  never  fail, 
Unspeakable  ! divine ! 

5 These  are  the  joys  which  satisfy, 

And  sanctify  the  mind ; 

Which  make  the  spirit  mount  on  high, 
And  leave  the  world  behind. 

6 No  more,  believers,  mourn  your  lot, 

But  if  you  are  the  Lord’s, 

Resign  to  them  that  know  him  not 
Such  joys  as  earth  affords. 

JOB. 

HYMN  XLIII. 

Oh  that  I were  as  in  Months  past. 
Chap.  xxix.  2. 

1 Sweet  was  the  time  when  first  I felt 

The  Saviour’s  pard’ning  blood 
Applied  to  cleanse  my  soul  from  guilt, 
And  bring  me  home  to  God. 

2 Soon  as  the  morn  the  light  reveal’d, 

His  praises  tuned  my  tongue; 

And  when  the  ev’ning  shades  prevail’d, 
His  love  was  all  my  song. 

3 In  vain  the  tempter  spread  his  wiles, 

The  world  no  more  could  charm ; 

I lived  upon  my  Saviour’s  smiles, 

And  lean’d  upon  his  arm. 

4 In  prayer  my  soul  drew  near  the  Lord, 

And  saw  his  glory  shine; 


[book  i 

And  when  I read  his  holy  word, 

I call’d  each  promise  mine. 

5 Then  to  his  saints  I often  spoke 

Of  what  his  love  had  done ; 

But  now  my  heart  is  almost  broke, 

For  all  my  joys  are  gone. 

6 Now,  when  the  ev’ning  shade  prevails, 

My  soul  in  darkness  mourns ; 

And  when  the  morn  the  light  reveals, 

No  light  to  me  returns. 

7 My  prayers  are  now  a chatt’ring  noise, 

For  Jesus  hides  his  face  ; 

I read, — the  promise  meets  my  eyes, 

But  will  not  reach  my  case. 

8 Now  Satan  threatens  to  prevail, 

And  make  my  soul  his  prey ; 

Yet,  Lord,  thy  mercies  cannot  fail, 

O come  without  delay ! 

HYMN  XLIV. 

The  Change  * Ibid. 

1 Saviour,  shine,  and  cheer  my  soul, 

Bid  my  dying  hopes  revive ; 

Make  my  wrounded  spirit  whole, 

Far  away  the  tempter  drive ; 

Speak  the  word,  and  set  me  free, 

Let  me  live  alone  to  thee. 

2 Shall  I sigh  and  pray  in  vain, 

Wilt  thou  still  refuse  to  hear; 

Wilt  thou  not  return  again, 

Must  I yield  to  black  despair  1 
Thou  hast  taught  my  heart  to  pray, 

Canst  thou  turn  thy  face  away  1 

3 Once  I thought  my  mountain  strong, 

Firmly  fix’d,  no  more  to  move ; 

Then  thy  grace  was  all  my  song, 

Then  my  soul  was  fill’d  with  love  ; 
Those  were  happy  golden  days, 

Sweetly  spent  in  prayer  and  praise. 

4 When  my  friends  have  said,  “ Beware, 

Soon  or  late  you  ’ll  find  a change,” 

I could  see  no  cause  for  fear, 

Vain  their  caution  seem’d,  and  strange 
Not  a cloud  obscur’d  my  sky, 

Could  I think  a tempest  nigh  1 

5 Little,  then,  myself  I knew, 

Little  thought  of  Satan’s  power ; 

Now  I find  their  words  were  true, 

Now  I feel  the  stormy  hour ! 

Sin  has  put  my  joys  to  flight, 

Sin  has  chang’d  my  day  to  night. 

6 Satan  asks,  and  mocks  my  woe, 

“Boaster,  where  is  now  your  God;” 
Silence,  Lord,  this  cruel  foe, 

Let  him  know  I ’m  bought  with  blood : 
Tell  him,  since  I know  thy  name, 

Though  I change,  thou  art  the  same. 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


* Book  II.  Hymn  xxxiv.  and  Book  III.  Hymn  xxiyi. 


HYMN  XLVIII.] 


PSALMS. 


125 


PSALMS. 

HYMN  XLV. 

Pleading  for  Mercy.  Psalm  vi. 

1 In  mercy,  not  in  wrath,  rebuke 

Thy  feeble  worm,  my  God  ! 

My  spirit  dreads  thine  angry  look, 

And  trembles  at  thy  rod. 

2 Have  mercy,  Lord,  for  I am  weak, 

Regard  my  heavy  groans ; 

O,  let  thy  voice  of  comfort  speak, 

And  heal  my  broken  bones. 

3 By  day,  my  busy  beating  head 

Is  fill’d  with  anxious  fears ; 

By  night,  upon  my  restless  bed, 

I  weep  a flood  of  tears. 

4 Thus  I sit  desolate  and  mournt 

Mine  eyes  grow  dull  with  grief; 

How  long,  my  Lord,  ere  thou  return, 

And  bring  my  soul  relief! 

5 O,  come  and  show  thy  power  to  save, 

And  spare  my  fainting  breath  ; 

For  who  can  praise  thee  in  the  grave, 

Or  sing  thy  name  in  death  ? 

6 Satan,  my  cruel  envious  tee, 

Insults  me  in  my  pain  ; 

He  smiles  to  see  me  brought  so  low, 

And  tells  me  hope  is  vam. 

7 But  hence  thou  enemy,  depart ! 

Nor  tempt  me  to  despair ; 

My  Saviour  comes  to  cheer  my  heart, 

The  Lord  has  heard  my  prayer. 

HYMN  XLVI. 

None  upon  Earth  I desire  besides  Thee. 
Psalm  lxxiii.  25. 

1 How  tedious  and  tasteless  the  hours, 

When  Jesus  no  longer  I see; 

Sweet  prospects,  sweet  birds,  and  sweet 
flowers, 

Have  lost  all  their  sweetness  with  me ; 
The  midsummer  sun  shines  but  dim, 

The  fields  strive  in  vain  to  look  gay  ; 
But  when  I am  happy  in  him, 

December ’s  as  pleasant  as  May. 

2 His  name  yields  the  richest  perfume, 

And  sweeter  than  music  his  voice  ; 

His  presence  disperses  my  gloom, 

And  makes  all  within  me  rejoice : 

I should,  were  he  always  thus  nigh, 

Have  nothing  to  wish  or  to  fear ; 

No  mortal  so  happy  as  I, 

My  summer  would  last  all  the  year. 

3 Content  with  beholding  Jm  face, 

My  all  to  his  pleasure  resign’d, 

No  changes  of  season  or  place, 

Would  make  any  change  in  my  mind  : 
While  bless’d  with  a sense  of  his  love, 

A palace,  a toy  would  appear ; 

And  prisons  would  palaces  prove, 

If  Jesus  would  dwell  with  me  there. 


Dear  Lord,  if  indeed  I am  thine, 

If  thou  art  my  sun  and  my  song ; 

Say  why  do  I languish  and  pine, 

And  why  are  my  winters  so  long ! 

O drive  these  dark  clouds  from  my  sky. 
Thy  soul-cheering  presence  restore ; 

Or  take  me  unto  thee  on  high, 

Where  winter  and  clouds  are  no  more. 

HYMN  XLVII. 

The  Believer's  Safety.  Psalm  xci. 
Incarnate  God  ! the  soul  that  knows 
Thy  name’s  mysterious  power, 

Shall  dwell  in  undisturb’d  repose, 

Nor  fear  the  trying  hour. 

Thy  wisdom,  faithfulness,  and  love, 

To  feeble  helpless  worms, 

A buckler  and  a refuge  prove 
From  enemies  and  storms. 

In  vain  the  fowler  spreads  his  net, 

To  draw  them  from  thy  care ; 

Thy  timely  call  instructs  their  feet 
To  shun  their  artful  snare. 

When  like  a baneful  pestilence, 

Sin  mows  its  thousands  down 
On  ev’ry  side,  without  defence, 

Thy  grace  secures  thine  own. 

No  midnight  terrors  haunt  their  bed, 

No  arrow  wounds  by  day ; 

Unhurt  on  serpents  they  shall  tread, 

If  found  in  duty’s  way. 

Angels,  unseen,  attend  the  saints, 

And  bear  them  in  their  arms, 

To  cheer  their  spirit  when  it  faints, 

And  guard  their  life  from  harms. 

The  angels’  Lord  himself  is  nigh 
To  them  that  love  his  name ; 

Ready  to  save  them  when  they  cry, 

And  put  their  foes  to  shame. 

Crosses  and  charges  are  their  lot, 

Long  as  they  sojourn  here ; 

But  since  their  Saviour  changes  not. 
What  have  the  saints  to  fear! 

HYMN  XLVIII. 

ANOTHER. 

That  man  no  guard  or  weapon  needs, 
Whose  heart  the  blood  of  Jesus  knows; 
But  safe  may  pass,  if  duty  leads, 

Through  burning  sands  or  mountain-snows 
Releas’d  from  guilt,  he  feels  no  fear; 
Redemption  is  his  shield  and  tower: 

He  sees  his  Saviour  always  near, 

To  help  in  ev’ry  trying  hour. 

Though  I am  weak,  and  Satan  strong, 
And  often  to  assault  me  tries ; 

When  Jesus  is  my  shield  and  sung, 
Abash'd,  the  wolf  before  me  flies. 

His  love  possessing  I am  blest, 

Secure  whatever  change  may  come; 
Whether  I go  to  east  or  west, 

With  him  I still  shall  be  at  home. 


4 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

1 

2 

3 

4 


126 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


5 If  plac’d  beneath  the  northern  pole, 
Though  winter  reigns  with  rigour  there, 
His  gracious  beams  would  cheer  my  soul, 
And  make  a spring  throughout  the  year : 

6 Or  if  the  desert’s  sun-burnt  soil, 

My  lonely  dwelling  e’er  should  prove ; 
His  presence  would  support  my  toil, 
Whose  smile  is  life,  whose  voice  is  love. 

HYMN  NLIX. 

He  led  them  by  a right  way.  Psalm  cvii.  7. 

1 When  Israel  was  from  Egypt  freed, 

The  IiOrd,  who  brought  them  out, 
Help’d  them  in  ev’ry  time  of  need, 

But  led  them  round  about.* 

2 To  enter  Canaan  soon  they  hop’d, 

But  quickly  chang’d  their  mind, 

When  the  Red  Sea  their  passage  stopp’d, 
And  Pharaoh  march’d  behind. 

3 The  desert  fill’d  them  with  alarms, 

For  water  and  for  food ; 

And  Amalek,  by  force  of  arms, 

Tc  check  their  progress  stood, 
i They  often  murmur’d  by  the  way, 

Because  they  judg’d  by  sight; 

But  were  at  length  constrain’d  to  say, 

The  Lord  had  led  them  right. 

5 In  the  Red  Sea,  that  stopp’d  them  first, 

Their  enemies  were  drown’d ; 

The  rocks  gave  water  for  their  thirst, 

And  manna  spread  the  ground. 

6 By  fire  and  cloud  their  way  was  shown 

Across  the  pathless  sands; 

And  Amalek  was  overthrown 
By  Moses’s  lifted  hands. 

7 The  way  was  right  their  hearts  to  prove, 

To  make  God’s  glory  known ; 

And  show  his  wisdom,  power,  and  love, 
Engag’d  to  save  his  own. 

8 Just  so,  the  true  believer’s  path, 

Through  many  dangers  lies ; 

Though  dark  to  sense,  ’tis  right  to  faith, 
And  leads  us  to  the  skies. 

HYMN  L. 

What  shall  I render  ?f  Psalm  cxvi.  12, 13. 

1 For  mercies,  countless  as  the  sands, 

Which  daily  I receive 
From  Jesus  my  Redeemer’s  hands, 

My  soul,  what  canst  thou  give  1 

2 Alas ! from  such  a heart  as  mine, 

What  can  I bring  him  forth  1 
My  best  is  stain’d  and  dyed  with  sin, 

My  all  is  nothing  worth. 

3 Yet  this  acknowledgment  I ’ll  make 

For  all  he  has  bestowed, 

Salvation’s  sacred  cup  I ’ll  take, 

And  call  upon  my  God. 


* Exod.  xiii.  17.  t Book  IU.  Hymn  lxvii. 


[BOOK  L 

The  best  returns  for  one  like  me, 

So  wretched  and  so  poor, 

Is  from  his  gifts  to  draw  a plea, 

And  ask  him  still  for  more. 

I cannot  serve  him  as  I ought, 

No  works  have  I to  boast ; 

Yet  would  I glory  in  the  thought, 

That  I shall  owe  him  most. 

HYMN  LI. 

Dwelling  in  Mesech.  Psalm  cxx.  5 — 7 
What  a mournful  life  is  mine, 

Fill’d  with  crosses,  pains,  and  cares ! 
Ev’ry  work  defiled  with  sin, 

Ev’ry  step  beset  with  snares ! 

If  alone  I pensive  sit, 

I myself  can  hardly  bear ; 

If  I pass  along  the  street, 

Sin  and  riot  triumph  there. 

Jesus ! how  my  heart  is  pain’d, 

How  it  mourns  for  souls  deceiv’d ! 

When  I hear  thy  name  profan’d, 

When  I see  thy  Spirit  griev’d. 

When  thy  children’s  griefs  I view, 

Their  distress  becomes  my  own ; 

All  I hear,  or  see,  or  do, 

Makes  me  tremble,  weep,  and  groan. 
Mourning  thus  I long  had  been, 

When  I heard  my  Saviour’s  voice : 

“ Thou  hast  cause  to  mourn  for  sin, 

But  in  me  thou  may’st  rejoice.” 

This  kind  word  dispell’d  my  grief, 

Put  to  silence  my  complaints : 

Though  of  sinners  I am  chief, 

He  has  rank’d  me  with  his  saints. 
Though  constrain’d  to  dwell  a whLe 
Where  the  wicked  strive  and  brawl, 

Let  them  frown,  so  he  but  smile, 

Heaven  will  make  amends  for  all. 

There,  believers,  we  shall  rest, 

Free  from  sorrow,  sin,  and  fears; 
Nothing  shall  our  peace  molest, 

Through  eternal  rounds  of  years. 

Let  us  then  the  fight  endure, 

See  our  Captain  looking  down ; 

He  will  make  the  conquest  sure, 

And  bestow  the  promis’d  crown. 

PROVERBS. 

HYMN  LH. 

Wisdom.  Chap.  viii.  22 — 31. 

Ere  God  had  built  the  mountains, 

Or  rais’d  the  fruitful  hills ; 

Before  he  fill’d  the  fountains 
That  feed  the  running  rills ; 

In  me,  from  everlasting, 

The  wonderful  i am, 

Found  pleasures  never  wasting, 

And  Wisdom  is  my  name. 


4 

5 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

1 


HYMN  LY. 


ECCLESIASTES. 


127 


2  When,  like  a tent  to  dwell  in, 

He  spread  the  skies  abroad, 

And  swath’d  about  the  swelling1 
Of  ocean’s  mighty  flood ; 

He  wrought  by  weight  and  measure, 

And  I was  with  him  then ; 

Myself  the  Father’s  pleasure, 

And  mine  the  sons  of  men. 

8 Thus  Wisdom’s  words  discover 
Thy  glory  and  thy  grace, 

Thou  everlasting  lover 
Of  our  unworthy  race ! 

Thy  gracious  eye  surveyed  us, 

Ere  stars  were  seen  above ; 

In  wisdom  thou  hast  made  us, 

And  died  for  us  in  love. 

4  And  couldst  thou  be  delighted 
With  creatures  such  as  we ! 

Who,  when  we  saw  thee,  slighted, 

And  nail’d  thee  to  a tree  1 
Unfathomable  wonder, 

And  mystery  divine ! 

The  voice  that  speaks  in  thunder, 

Says,  “ Sinner,  I am  thine !”  C. 

hymn” Lm. 

A Friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a Brother . 
Chap,  xviii.  24. 

1 One  there  is,  above  all  others, 

Well  deserves  the  name  of  Friend ; 

His  is  love  beyond  a brother’s, 

Costly,  free,  and  knows  no  end : 

They  who  once  his  kindness  prove, 
Find  it  everlasting  love. 

2 Which  of  all  our  friends  to  save  us, 

Could  or  would  have  shed  their  blood ! 
But  our  Jesus  died  to  have  us 
Reconcil’d  to  him  in  God : 

This  was  boundless  love  indeed ! 

Jesus  is  a friend  in  need. 

3 Men,  when  rais’d  to  lofty  stations, 

Often  know  their  friends  no  more ; 

Slight  and  scorn  their  poor  relations, 
Though  they  valued  them  before ; 

But  our  Saviour  always  owns 
Those  whom  he  redeem’d  with  groans. 

4 When  he  liv’d  on  earth  abased, 

Friend  of  sinners  was  his  name ; 

Now  above  all  glory  raised, 

He  rejoices  in  the  same : 

Still  he  calls  them  brethren,  friends, 
And  to  all  their  wants  attends. 

5 Could  we  bear  from  one  another 
What  he  daily  bears  from  us ; 

Yet  this  glorious  Friend  and  Brother 
Loves  us  though  we  treat  him  thus : 
Though  for  good  we  render  ill, 

He  accounts  us  brethren  still. 

6 O for  grace  our  hearts  to  soften ! 

Teach  us,  Lord,  at  length  to  love ; 

We,  alas ! forget  too  often, 

What  a friend  we  have  above : 

But  when  home  our  souls  are  brought, 
We  will  love  thee  as  we  ought 


ECCLESIASTES. 

HYMN  LIV. 

Vanity  of  Life  * Chap.  i.  2. 

1 The  evils  that  beset  our  path, 

Who  can  prevent  or  cure  1 
We  stand  upon  the  brink  of  death 
When  most  we  seem  secure. 

2 If  we  to-day  sweet  peace  possess, 

It  soon  may  be  withdrawn ; 

Some  change  may  plunge  us  in  distress 
Before  to-morrow’s  dawn. 

3 Disease  and  pain  invade  our  health, 

And  find  an  easy  prey ; 

And  oft,  when  least  expected,  wealth 
Takes  wings  and  flies  away. 

4 A fever  or  a blow  can  shake 

Our  wisdom’s  boasted  rule, 

And  of  the  brightest  genius  make 
A madman  or  a fool. 

5 The  gourds  from  which  we  look  for  fruit, 

Produce  us  only  pain ; 

A worm  unseen  attacks  the  root, 

And  all  our  hopes  are  vain. 

6 I pity  those  who  seek  no  more 

Than  such  a world  can  give ; 
Wretched  they  are,  and  blind,  and  poor, 
And  dying  while  they  live. 

7 Since  sin  has  fill’d  the  earth  with  woe, 

And  creatures  fade  and  die ; 

Lord,  wean  our  hearts  from  things  below 
And  fix  our  hopes  on  high. 

HYMN  LY. 

Vanity  of  the  World.  Ibid. 

1 God  gives  his  mercies  to  be  spent ; 

Your  hoard  will  do  your  soul  no  good ; 
Gold  is  a blessing  only  lent, 

Repaid  by  giving  others  food. 

2 The  world’s  esteem  is  but  a bribe  ; 

To  buy  their  peace  you  sell  your  own : 
The  slave  of  a vain-glorious  tribe, 

Who  hate  you  while  they  make  you  known 

3 The  joy  that  vain  amusements  give, 

Oh  ! sad  conclusion  that  it  brings ! 

The  honey  of  a crowded  hive, 

Defended  by  a thousand  stings. 

4 ’Tis  thus  the  world  rewards  the  fools 
That  live  upon  her  treacherous  smiles ; 
She  leads  them  blindfold  by  her  rules, 
And  ruins  all  whom  she  beguiles. 

5 God  knows  the  thousands  who  go  down 
From  pleasure  into  endless  woe ; 

And  with  a long  despairing  groan, 
Blaspheme  their  Maker  as  they  go. 

6 O fearful  thought ! be  timely  wise  ; 
Delight  but  in  a Saviour’s  charms ; 

And  God  shall  take  you  to  the  skies, 
Embrac’d  in  everlasting  arms.  C. 


* Book  II.  Hymn  vi. 


128 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  i. 


HYMN  LVI. 

Vanity  of  the  Creature  Sanctified.  Ibid. 

1 Honey  though  the  bee  prepares, 

An  envenom’d  sting  it  wears ; 

Piercing  thorns  a guard  compose 
Round  the  fragrant  blooming  rose. 

2 Where  we  think  to  find  a sweet, 

Oft  a painful  sting  we  meet; 

When  the  rose  invites  our  eye, 

We  forget  the  thorn  is  nigh. 

3 Why  are  thus  our  hopes  beguil’d  1 
Why  are  all  our  pleasures  spoil’d  1 
Why  do  agony  and  woe 

From  our  choicest  comforts  grow  1 

4 Sin  has  been  the  cause  of  all ! 

’Twas  not  thus  before  the  fall ; 

What  but  pain,  and  thorn,  and  sting, 
From  the  root  of  sin  can  spring  1 

5 Now  with  every  good  we  find 
Vanity  and  grief  entwined ; 

What  we  feel,  or  what  we  fear, 

All  our  joys  embitter  here. 

6 Yet,  through  the  Redeemer’s  love, 

These  afflictions  blessings  prove ; 

He  the  wounding  stings  and  thorns 
Into  healing  med’cines  turns. 

7 From  the  earth  our  hearts  they  wean, 
Teach  us  on  his  arm  to  lean, 

Urge  us  to  a throne  of  grace, 

Make  us  seek  a resting-place. 

9 In  the  mansions  of  our  King, 

Sweets  abound  without  a sting; 

Thornless  there  the  roses  blow, 

And  the  joys  unmingled  flow. 

SOLOMON’S  SONG. 

HYMN  LVII. 

The  Name  of  Jesus.  Chap.  i.  3. 

1 How  sweet  the  name  of  Jesus  sounds 

In  a believer’s  ear ! 

It  sooths  his  sorrows,  heels  his  wounds, 
And  drives  away  his  fear. 

2 It  makes  the  wounded  spirit  whole, 

And  calms  the  troubled  breast ; 

’Tis  manna  to  the  hungry  soul, 

And  to  the  weary  rest. 

3 Dear  name ! the  rock  on  which  I build, 

My  shield  and  hiding-place : 

My  never-failing  treasury,  fill’d 
With  boundless  stores  of  grace. 

4 By  thee  my  prayers  acceptance  gain, 

Although  with  sin  defil’d ; 

Satan  accuses  me  in  vain, 

And  I am  own’d  a child. 

5 Jesus ! my  Shepherd,  Husband,  Friend, 

My  Prophet,  Priest,  and  King ! 

My  Lord,  my  Life,  my  Way,  my  End  ! 
Accept  the  praise  I bring. 


6 Weak  is  the  effort  of  my  heart, 

And  cold  my  warmest  thought ; 

But  when  I see  thee  as  thou  art, 

I  ’ll  praise  thee  as  I ought. 

7 Till  then  I would  thy  love  proclaim 

With  ev’ry  fleeting  breath ; 

And  may  the  music  of  thy  name 
Refresh  my  soul  in  death  ! 

ISAIAH. 

HYMN  LVIII, 

O  Lord,  I will  praise  Thee ! Chap.  xh. 

1 I will  praise  thee  ev’ry  day, 

Now  thine  anger’s  turn’d  away  ! 
Comfortable  thoughts  arise 
From  the  bleeding  sacrifice. 

2 Here,  in  the  fair  gospel-field, 

Wells  of  free  salvation  yield 
Streams  of  life  a plenteous  store, 

And  my  soul  shall  thirst  no  more. 

3 Jesus  is  become  at  length 

My  salvation  and  my  strength  ; 

And  his  praises  shall  prolong, 

While  I live,  my  pleasant  song. 

4 Praise  ye,  then,  his  glorious  name, 
Publish  his  exalted  fame  ! 

Still  his  worth  your  praise  exceeds. 
Excellent  are  all  his  deeds. 

5 Raise  again  the  joyful  sound, 

Let  the  nations  roll  it  round  ! 

Zion  shout,  for  this  is  he  : 

God,  the  Saviour,  dwells  in  thee.  C. 

HYMN  LIX. 

The  Refuge , River,  and  Rock  of  the  Chunk. 
Chap,  xxxii.  2. 

1 He  who  on  earth  as  man  was  known, 

And  bore  our  sins  and  pains, 

Now  seated  on  the  eternal  throne, 

The  God  of  glory  reigns. 

2 His  hands  the  wheels  of  nature  guide, 

With  an  unerring  skill ; 

And  countless  worlds,  extended  wide, 
Obey  his  sovereign  will. 

3 While  harps  unnumber’d  sound  his  praise. 

In  yonder  world  above ; 

His  saints  on  earth  admire  his  ways, 

And  glory  in  his  love. 

4 His  righteousness  to  faith  reveal’d, 

Wrought  out  for  guilty  worms, 

Affords  a hiding-place  and  shield 
From  enemies  and  storms. 

5 This  land,  through  which  his  pilgrims  go, 

Is  desolate  and  dry  ; 

But  streams  of  grace  from  him  o’erflow, 
Their  thirst  to  satisfy. 

6 When  troubles,  like  a burning  sun, 

Beat  heavy  on  their  head, 

To  this  almighty  Rock  they  run, 

And  find  a pleasing  shade. 


ISAIAH. 


129 


HYMN  LXII.] 

7 How  glorious  he,  how  happy  they 
In  such  a glorious  Friend  ! 

Whose  love  secures  them  all  the  way 
And  crowns  them  at  the  end. 

HYMN  LX. 

Zion , or  the  City  of  God  * 

Chap,  xxxiii.  20,  21. 

1 Glorious  things  of  thee  are  spoken, f 
Zion,  city  of  our  God  ! 

He,  whose  word  cannot  be  broken, 
Form’d  thee  for  his  own  abode 
On  the  Rock  of  ages  founded, 5 
What  can  shake  thy  sure  repose  1 
With  salvation’s  walls  surrounded,  || 
Thou  may’st  smile  at  all  thy  foes. 

2 See  ! the  streams  of  living  waters, 
Springing  from  eternal  love, IT 
Well  supply  thy  sons  and  daughters, 
And  all  fear  of  want  remove. 

Who  can  faint  when  such  a river, 

Ever  flows  their  thirst  to  assuage  1 
Grace,  which,  like  the  Lord,  the  giver, 
Never  fails  from  age  to  age. 

3 Round  each  habitation  hov’ring, 

See  the  cloud  and  fire  appear  !** 

For  a glory  and  a cov’ring, 

Showing  that  the  Lord  is  near ; 

Thus  deriving,  from  their  banner, 

Light  by  night,  and  shade  by  day  : 

Safe  they  feed  upon  the  manna 
Which  he  gives  them  when  they  pray. 

4 Bless’d  inhabitants  of  Zion, 

Wash’d  in  the  Redeemer’s  blood ! 

Jesus,  whom  their  souls  rely  on, 

Makes  them  kings  and  priests  to  God.ff 
’Tis  his  love  his  people  raises 

Over  self  to  reign  as  kings, 

And  as  priests,  his  solemn  praises 
Each  for  a thank-ofFring  brings. 

5 Saviour,  if  of  Zion’s  city 

I  through  grace  a member  am, 

Let  the  world  deride  or  pity, 

I  will  glory  in  thy  name : 

Fading  is  the  worldling’s  pleasure, 

All  his  boasted  pomp  and  show : 

Solid  joys  and  lasting  treasure, 

None  but  Zion’s  children  know. 

HYMN  LXI. 

Look  unto  me , and  he  ye  saved. 
Chap.  xlv.  22. 

I As  the  serpent  raised  by  MosesJJ 
Healed  the  burning  serpent’s  bite : 
Jesus  thus  himself  discloses 
To  the  wounded  sinner’s  sight : 

Hear  his  gracious  invitation, 

“ I have  life  and  peace  to  give, 


* Book  II.  Ilymn  xxiv.  f Psal.  lxxxvii.  3. 

i Psal.  cxxxii.  14.  § Matth.  xvi.  18. 

||  Isaiah  xxvi.  1.  IT  Psal.  xlvi.4. 

**  Isaiah  iv.  5,  6.  tt  Rev.  i.  6. 

tl  Numbers  xxi.  9. 

VOL.  II. 


I have  wrought  out  full  salvation ; 

Sinner,  look  to  me,  and  live. 

2 “ Pore  upon  your  sins  no  longer, 

Well  I know  their  mighty  guilt; 

But  my  love  than  death  is  stronger 
I my  blood  have  freely  spilt : 

Though  your  heart  has  long  been  harden’d. 
Look  on  me, — it  soft  shall  grow ; 

Past  transgressions  shall  be  pardon’d, 

And  I ’ll  wash  you  white  as  snow. 

3 “ I have  seen  what  you  were  doing, 
Though  you  little  thought  of  me ; 

You  were  madly  bent  on  ruin, 

But  I said, — It  shall  not  be : 

You  had  been  for  ever  wretched, 

Had  not  I espous’d  your  part ; 

Now  behold  my  arms  outstretched 
To  receive  you  to  my  heart. 

4 “Well  may  shame,  and  joy,  and  wonder, 
All  your  inward  passions  move : 

I could  crush  thee  with  my  thunder 
But  I speak  to  thee  in  love : 

See ! your  sins  are  all  forgiven, 

I have  paid  the  countless  sum ; 

Now  my  death  has  open’d  heaven, 

Thither  you  shall  shortly  come.” 

5 Dearest  Saviour,  we  adore  thee 
For  thy  precious  life  and  death  ; 

Melt  each  stubborn  heart  before  thee, 
Give  us  all  the  eye  of  faith  : 

From  the  law’s  condemning*  sentence, 

To  thy  mercy  we  appeal ; 

Thou  alone  canst  give  repentance, 

Thou  alone  our  souls  canst  heal. 

HYMN  LXII. 

The  good  Physician. 

1 How  lost  was  my  condition, 

Till  Jesus  made  me  whole ! 

There  is  but  one  Physician 
Can  cure  a sin-sick  soul. 

Next  door  to  death  he  found  me, 

And  snatch’d  me  from  the  grave  • 

To  tell  to  all  around  me, 

His  wondrous  power  to  save. 

2 The  worst  of  all  diseases 
Is  light  compar’d  with  sin ; 

On  every  part  it  seizes, 

But  rages  most  within : 

’Tis  palsy,  plague,  and  fever, 

And  madness, — all  combin’d ; 

And  none  but  a believer, 

The  least  relief  can  find. 

3 From  men  great  skill  professing 
I thought  a cure  to  gain ; 

But  this  proved  more  distressing 
And  added  to  my  pain. 

Some  said  that  nothing  ail’d  me. 

Some  gave  me  up  for  lost : 

Thus  every  refuge  fail’d  me, 

And  all  my  hopes  were  cross’d. 


R 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[eook  i. 


130 

4 At  length  this  great  Physician, 

How  matchless  is  his  grace, 

Accepted  my  petition, 

And  undertook  my  case : 

First  gave  me  sight  to  view  him, 

For  sin  my  eyes  had  seal’d, 

Then  bid  me  look  unto  him  ; 

I look’d,  and  I was  heal’d. 

5 A dying,  risen,  Jesus, 

Seen  by  the  eye  of  faith, 

At  once  from  danger  frees  us, 

And  saves  the  soul  from  death. 

Come,  then,  to  this  Physician, 

His  help  he  ’ll  freely  give : 

He  makes  no  hard  condition, 

’Tis  only — look  and  live. 

HYMN  LXm. 

To  the  Afflicted,  tossed  with  Tempests,  and 
not  comforted.  Chap.  liv.  5—11. 

1 Pensive,  doubting,  fearful  heart, 

Hear  what  Christ  the  Saviour  says 
Every  word  shou_d  joy  impart, 

Change  tby  mourning  into  praise  : 

Yes,  he  speaks,  and  speaks  to  thee. 

May  he  help  thee  to  believe ! 

Then  thou  presently  wilt  see 
Thou  hast  little  cause  to  grieve. 

2 “ Fear  thou  not,  nor  be  asham’d, 

All  thy  sorrows  soon  shall  end : 

I who  heaven  and  earth  have  fram’d, 

Am  thy  husband  and  thy  friend : 

I the  High  and  Holy  One, 

Israel’s  God,  by  all  ador’d, 

As  thy  Saviour  will  be  known, 

Thy  Redeemer  and  thy  Lord. 

3 “ For  a moment  I withdrew, 

And  thy  heart  was  fill’d  with  pain ; 

But  my  mercies  I ’ll  renew, 

Thou  shalt  soon  rejoice  again  : 

Though  I seem  to  hide  my  face, 

Very  soon  my  wrath  shall  cease; 

’Tis  but  for  a moment’s  space, 

Ending  in  eternal  peace. 

4 “ When  my  peaceful  bow  appears,* 
Painted  on  the  wat’ry  cloud, 

’Tis  to  dissipate  thy  fears, 

Lest  the  earth  should  be  o’erflow’d : 

’Tis  an  emblem  too  of  grace, 

Of  my  cov’nant-love  a sign  ; 

Though  the  mountains  leave  their  place, 
Thou  shalt  be  for  ever  mine. 

5 “ Though  afflicted,  tempest-toss’d, 
Comfortless  a while  thou  art, 

Do  not  think  thou  canst  be  lost, 

Thou  art  graven  on  my  heart: 

All  thy  wastes  I will  repair, 

Thou  shalt  be  rebuilt  anew ; 

And  in  thee  it  shall  appear 
What  a God  of  love  can  do.” 


I 


HYMN  LXIV. 

The  contrite  Heart.  Chap.  lvii.  15. 

1 The  Lord  will  happiness  divine 

On  contrite  hearts  bestow ; 

Then  tell  me,  gracious  God,  is  mine 
A contrite  heart  or  no  1 

2 I hear,  but  seem  to  hear  in  vain, 

Insensible  as  steel ; 

If  aught  is  felt,  ’tis  only  pain, 

To  find  I cannot  feel. 

3 I sometimes  think  myself  inclined 

To  love  thee  if  I could, 

But  often  feel  another  mind, 

Averse  to  all  that ’s  good. 

1 4 My  best  desires  are  faint  and  few, 

I  fain  would  strive  for  more ; 

But  when  I cry,  “ My  strength  renew.” 
Seem  weaker  than  before. 

5 Thy  saints  are  comforted,  I know, 

And  love  thy  house  of  prayer ; 

I therefore  go  where  others  go, 

But  find  no  comfort  there. 

6 O make  this  heart  rejoice  or  ache ! 

Decide  this  doubt  for  me ; 

! And  if  it  be  not  broken,  break, 

And  heal  it,  if  it  be.  C. 

HYMN  LXV. 

The  future  Peace  and  Glory  of  the  Church 
Chap.  lx.  15—20. 

1 Hear  what  God  the  Lord  hath  spoken, 

O my  people,  faint  and  few, 

Comfortless,  afflicted,  broken, 

Fair  abodes  I build  for  you ; 

Themes  of  heart-felt  tribulation 
Shall  no  more  perplex  your  ways ; 

You  shall  name  your  walls  Salvation, 
And  your  gates  shall  all  be  Praise. 

2 There,  like  streams  that  feed  the  garden, 
Pleasures  without  end  shall  flow ; 

For  the  Lord,  your  faith  rewarding, 

All  his  bounty  shall  bestow : 

Still  in  undisturb’d  possession, 

Peace  and  righteousness  shall  reign ; 
Never  shall  you  feel  oppression, 

Hear  the  voice  of  war  again. 

3 Ye  no  more  your  suns  descending, 
Waning  moons  no  more  shall  see; 

But,  your  griefs  for  ever  ending, 

Find  eternal  noon  in  me ; 

God  shall  rise,  and  shining  o’er  you, 
Change  to  day  the  gloom  of  night ; 

He  the  Lord  shall  be  your  glory, 

God  your  everlasting  light.  C. 

JEREMIAH. 

HYMN  LXVI. 

Trust  of  the  Wicked  and  the  Righteous 
compared.  Chap.  xvii.  5 — 8. 

! 1 As  parched  in  the  barren  sands, 

Beneath  a burning  sky, 


* Gen.  ix.  13, 14. 


EZEKIEL. 


131 


HYMN  LXX.] 

The  worthless  bramble  with’ring  stands, 
And  only  grows  to  die  : 

2 Such  is  the  sinner’s  awful  case, 

Who  makes  the  world  his  trust, 

And  dares  his  confidence  to  place 
In  vanity  and  dust. 

3 A secret  curse  destroys  his  root, 

And  dries  his  moisture  up ; 

He  lives  a while  but  bears  no  fruit, 

Then  dies  without  a hope. 

4 But  happy  he  whose  hopes  depend 

Upon  the  Lord  alone ; 

The  soul  that  trusts  in  such  a friend 
Can  ne’er  be  overthrown. 
b Though  gourds  should  wither,  cisterns 
break, 

And  creature-comforts  die, 

No  change  his  solid  hope  can  shake, 

Or  stop  his  sure  supply. 

6 So  thrives  and  blooms  the  tree  whose  roots 

By  constant  streams  are  fed ; 

Arrayed  in  green,  and  rich  in  fruits, 

It  rears  its  branching  head. 

7 It  thrives  though  rain  should  be  denied, 

And  drought  around  prevail ; 

’Tis  planted  by  a river’s  side, 

Whose  waters  cannot  fail. 

HYMN  LXVII. 

Jehovah-  Tsidkenu ; or , the  Lord  our  righ- 
teousness. Chap,  xxiii.  6. 

1 My  God,  how  perfect  are  thy  ways ! 

But  mine  polluted  are ; 

Sin  twines  itself  about  my  praise, 

And  slides  into  my  prayer. 

2 When  I would  speak  what  thou  hast  done 

To  save  me  from  my  sin, 

I cannot  make  thy  mercies  known, 

But  self-applause  creeps  in. 

3 Divine  desire,  that  holy  flame 

Thy  grace  creates  in  me, 

Alas ! impatience  is  its  name, 

When  it  returns  to  thee. 

4 This  heart  a fountain  of  vile  thoughts, 

How  does  it  overflow ! 

While  self  upon  the  surface  floats, 

Still  bubbling  from  below. 

5 Let  others  in  the  gaudy  dress, 

Of  fancied  merit  shine, 

The  Lord  shall  be  my  righteousness, 

The  Lord  for  ever  mine.  C. 

HYMN  LXVIII. 

Ephraim  repenting.  Chap.  xxxi.  18 — 20. 

1 My  God,  till  I receiv’d  thy  stroke, 

How  like  a beast  was  I ! 

So  unaccustom’d  to  the  yoke, 

So  backward  to  comply. 

2 With  grief  my  just  reproach  I bear, 

Shame  fills  me  at  the  thought ; 


How  frequent  my  rebellions  were ! 
What  wickedness  I wrought ! 

Thy  merciful  restraint  I scorn’d, 

And  left  the  pleasant  road ; 

Yet  turn  me,  and  I shall  be  turn’d, 

Thou  art  the  Lord  my  God. 

Is  Ephraim  banish’d  from  my  thoughts 
Or  vile  in  my  esteem  1 

No,  saith  the  Lord,  with  all  his  faults, 

I still  remember  him. 

Is  he  a dear  and  pleasant  child  1 
Yes,  dear  and  pleasant  still ; 

Though  sin  his  foolish  heart  beguil’d, 
And  he  withstood  my  will. 

My  sharp  rebuke  has  laid  him  low, 

He  seeks  my  face  again ; 

My  pity  kindles  at  his  woe, 

He  shall  not  seek  in  vain.  C 

LAMENTATIONS. 

HYMN  LXIX. 

The  Lord  is  my  Portion.  Chap.  iii.  24. 

From  pole  to  pole  let  others  roam, 

And  search  in  vain  for  bliss ; 

My  soul  is  satisfied  at  home, 

The  Lord  my  portion  is. 

Jesus,  who  on  his  glorious  throne 
Rules  heaven,  and  earth,  and  sea, 

Is  pleas’d  to  claim  me  for  his  own, 

And  give  himself  to  me. 

His  person  fixes  all  my  love, 

His  blood  removes  my  fear ; 

And  while  he  pleads  for  me  above, 

His  arm  preserves  me  here. 

His  word  of  promise  is  my  food, 

His  Spirit  is  my  guide : 

Thus  daily  is  my  strength  renew’d, 

And  all  my  wants  supplied.* 

For  him  I count  as  gain  each  loss, 
Disgrace,  for  him,  renown ; 

Well  may  I glory  in  my  cross, 

While  he  prepares  my  crown ! 

Let  worldlings  then  indulge  their  boast. 
How  much  they  gain  or  spend : 

Their  joys  must  soon  give  up  the  ghost. 
But  mine  shall  know  no  end. 

EZEKIEL. 

HYMN  LXX. 

Humbled  and  silenced  by  Mercy. 

Chap.  xvi.  63. 

Once  perishing  in  blood  I lay, 

Creatures  no  help  could  give ; 

But  Jesus  pass’d  me  in  the  way, 

He  saw,  and  bid  me  live. 


* Book  III.  Hymn  Iix. 


3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 


132 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  I. 


2 Though  Satan  still  his  rule  maintain’d, 

And  all  his  arts  employed ; 

That  mighty  word  his  rage  restrain’d, 

I  could  not  be  destroyed. 

3 At  length  the  time  of  love  arriv’d, 

When  I my  Lord  should  know ; 

Then  Satan,  of  his  power  depriv’d, 

Was  forc’d  to  let  me  go. 

4 O can  I e’er  that  day  forget, 

When  Jesus  kindly  spoke  ! 

“ Poor  soul ! my  blood  has  paid  thy  debt, 
And  now  I break  thy  yoke. 

5 “ Henceforth  I take  thee  for  my  own, 

And  give  myself  to  thee ; 

Forsake  the  idols  thou  hast  known, 

And  yield  thyself  to  me.” 

6 Ah,  worthless  heart ! it  promis’d  fair, 

And  said  it  would  be  thine ; 

, I little  thought  it  e’er  would  dare 
Again  with  idols  join. 

7 Lord,  dost  thou  such  backslidings  heal, 

And  pardon  all  that’s  past? 

Sure,  if  I am  not  made  of  steel, 

Thou  hast  prevail’d  at  last. 

3  My  tongue  which  rashly  spoke  before, 
This  mercy  will  restrain ; 

Surely  I now  shall  boast  no  more, 

Nor  censure,  nor  complain. 

HYMN  LXXI. 

The  Covenant.  Chap,  xxxvi.  25 — 28. 

1 The  Lord  proclaims  his  grace  abroad ! 
Behold  I change  your  hearts  of  stone ; 
Each  shall  renounce  his  idol-god, 

And  serve,  henceforth,  the  Lord  alone. 

2 My  grace,  a flowing  stream,  proceeds 
To  wash  your  filthiness  away ; 

Ye  shall  abhor  your  former  deeds, 

And  learn  my  statutes  to  obey. 

3 My  truth  the  great  design  ensures, 

I  give  myself  away  to  you  ; 

You  shall  be  mine,  I will  be  yours, 

Your  God  unalterably  true. 

4 Yet  not  unsought,  or  unimplor’d, 

The  plenteous  grace  shall  I confer;* 

No — your  whole  heart  shall  seek  the  Lord, 
_ I ’ll  put  a praying  spirit  there. 

5 From  the  first  breath  of  life  divine, 

Down  to  the  last  expiring  hour, 

The  gracious  work  shall 'all  be  mine, 
Begun  and  ended  in  my  power.  C. 

HYMN  LXXII. 

Jehovah- Shammah ; or , the  Lord  is  there. 
Chap,  xlviii.  35. 

1 “ As  birds  their  infant  brood  protect,! 

And  spread  their  wings  to  shelter  them,” 
Thus  saith  the  Lord  to  his  elect, 

“Thus  will  I guard  Jerusalem.” 


2 And  what  then  is  Jerusalem, 

This  darling  object  of  his  care  7 
Where  is  its  worth  in  God’s  esteem  7 
Who  built  it  7 who  inhabits  there  ! 

3 Jehovah  founded  it  in  blood, 

The  blood  of  his  incarnate  Son ; 

There  dwell  the  saints,  once  foes  to  God, 
The  sinners  whom  he  calls  his  own. 

4 There,  though  besieg’d  on  every  side. 
Yet  much  belov’d  and  guarded  well, 
From  age  to  age  they  have  defied 
The  utmost  force  of  earth  and  hell. 

5 Let  earth  repent,  and  hell  despair, 

This  city  has  a sure  defence ; 

Her  name  is  call’d,  The  I>nrd  is  there, 
And  who  has  power  to  drive  nim  thence f 

C. 


DANIEL. 


HYMN  LXXIII. 

The  Power  and  Triumph  of  Faith. 
Chap.  iii.  6. 

1 Supported  by  the  word, 

Though  in  himself  a worm, 

The  servant  of  the  Lord 
Can  wondrous  acts  perform : 

Without  dismay  he  boldly  treads 
Where’er  the  path  of  duty  leads. 

2 The  haughty  king  in  vain, 

With  fury  on  his  brow, 

Believers  would  constrain 
To  golden  gods  to  bow ; 

The  furnace  could  not  make  them  fear. 
Because  they  knew  the  Lord  was  near. 

3 As  vain  was  the  decree 

Which  charg’d  them  not  to  pray ; 
Daniel  still  bow’d  his  knee, 

And  worshipp’d  thrice  a-day : 

Trusting  in  God,  he  fear’d  not  men, 
Though  threaten’d  with  the  lions’  den. 

4 Secure  they  might  refuse 
Compliance  with  such  laws ; 

For  what  had  they  to  lose, 

When  God  espous’d  their  cause  7 

He  made  the  hungry  lions  crouch, 

Nor  durst  the  fire  his  children  touch. 

5 The  Lord  is  still  the  same, 

A mighty  shield  and  tower, 

And  they  who  trust  his  name 
Are  guarded  by  his  power ; 

He  can  the  rage  of  lions  tame, 

And  bear  them  harmless  through  the  flame. 

6 Yet  we  too  often  shrink 
When  trials  are  in  view ; 

Expecting  we  must  sink, 

And  never  can  get  through : 

But  could  we  once  believe  indeed, 

From  all  these  fears  we  should  be  freed. 


* Ver.  37. 


f Isaiah  xxi.  5. 


ZECHARIAII. 


im 


HYMN  LXXVII.] 

HYMN  LXXIV. 

Belshazzar.  Chap.  v.  5,  6. 

1 Poor  sinners  ! little  do  they  think 

With  whom  they  have  to  do  ! 

But  stand  securely  on  the  brink 
Of  everlasting  woe. 

2 Belshazzar  thus,  profanely  bold. 

The  Lord  of  hosts  defied  ; 

But  vengeance  soon  his  boasts  control’d, 
And  humbled  all  his  pride. 

3 He  saw  a hand  upon  the  wall, 

(And  trembled  on  his  throne) 

Which  wrote  his  sudden  dreadful  fall 
In  characters  unknown. 

4 Why  should  he  tremble  at  the  view 

Of  what  he  could  not  read  1 
Foreboding  conscience  quickly  knew 
His  ruin  was  decreed. 

See  him  o’erwhelm’d  with  deep  distress ! 

His  eyes  with  anguish  roll ; 

His  looks  and  loosen’d  joints  express 
The  terrors  of  his  soul. 

£5  His  pomp  and  music,  guests  and  wine, 

No  more  delight  afford ; 

O  sinner  ! ere  this  case  be  thine, 

Begin  to  seek  the  Lord. 

7 The  law,  like  this  hand-writing  stands, 
And  speaks  the  wrath  of  God  ;* 

But  Jesus  answers  its  demands, 

And  cancels  it  with  blood. 

JONAH. 

HYMN  LXXV. 

The  Gourd.  Chap.  iv.  7. 

1 As  once  for  Jonah,  so  the  Lord, 

To  soothe  and  cheer  my  mournful  hours, 
Prepar’d  for  me  a pleasing  gourd  : 

Cool  was  its  shade,  and  sweet  its  flowers. 

2 To  prize  his  gift  was  surely  right; 

But  through  the  folly  of  my  heart, 

It  hid  the  giver  from  my  sight, 

And  soon  my  joy  was  turn’d  to  smart. 

3 While  I admir’d  its  beauteous  form, 

Its  pleasant  shade  and  grateful  fruit, 

The  Lord  displeas’d  sent  forth  a worm 
Unseen  to  prey  upon  the  root. 

4 I trembled  when  I saw  it  fade, 

But  guilt  restrain’d  the  murm’ring  word ; 
My  folly  I confess’d  and  pray’d, 

Forgive  my  sin,  and  spare  my  gourd. 

5 His  wondrous  love  can  ne’er  be  told : 

He  heard  me,  and  reliev’d  my  pain ; 

His  word  the  threatening  wrorm  control’d, 
And  bid  my  gourd  revive  again. 

0  Now,  Lord,  my  gourd  is  mine  no  more, 
’Tis  thine,  who  only  could’st  it  raise ; 

The  idol  of  my  heart  before, 

Henceforth  shall  flourish  to  thy  praise. 


ZECHARIAH. 

HYMN  LXXVI. 

Prayer  for  the  Lord's  promised  Presence. 
Chap.  ii.  10. 

1 Son  of  God,  thy  people  shield  ! 

Must  we  still  thine  absence  mourn  1 
Let  thy  promise  be  fulfill’d, 

Thou  hast  said,  “ I will  return.” 

2 Gracious  Leader,  now  appear  ! 

Shine  upon  us  with  thy  light ! 

Like  the  spring,  when  thou  art  near, 
Days  and  suns  are  doubly  bright. 

3 As  a mother  counts  the  days 
Till  her  absent  son  she  see, 

Longs  and  watches,  weeps  and  prays, 

So  our  spirits  long  for  thee. 

4 Come,  and  let  us  feel  thee  nigh, 

Then  thy  sheep  shall  feed  in  peace, 
Plenty  bless  us  from  on  high, 

Evil  from  amongst  us  cease. 

5 With  thy  love,  and  voice,  and  aid, 

Thou  canst  every  care  assuage  ; 

Then  wTe  shall  not  be  afraid 
Though  the  world  and  Satan  rage. 

6 Thus  each  day  for  thee  we  ’ll  spend, 
While  our  callings  we  pursue, 

And  the  thoughts  of  such  a friend, 

Shall  each  night  our  joy  renew. 

7 Let  thy  light  be  ne’er  withdrawn ; 
Golden  days  afford  us  long ; 

Thus  we  pray  at  early  dawn, 

This  shall  be  our  evening  song. 

HYMN  LXXVII. 

A Brand  plucked  out  of  the  Fire. 
Chap.  iii.  1 — 5. 

1 With  Satan,  my  accuser,  near, 

My  spirit  trembled  when  I saw 
The  Lord  in  majesty  appear, 

And  heard  the  language  of  his  law. 

2 In  Vain  I wish’d  and  strove  to  hide 
The  tatter’d  filthy  rags  I wore, 

While  my  fierce  foe  insulting  cried, 

“ See  what  you  trusted  in  before !” 

3 Struck  dumb,  and  left  without  a plea, 

I heard  my  gracious  Saviour  say, 

“ Know,  Satan,  I this  sinner  free, 

I died  to  take  his  sins  away. 

4 “ This  is  a band  which  I,  in  love, 

To  save  from  wrath  and  sin  design  : 

In  vain  thy  accusations  prove, 

I answer  all,  and  claim  him  mine.” 

5 At  his  rebuke  the  tempter  fled  ; 

Then  he  removed  my  filthy  dress ; 

“ Poor  sinner,  take  this  robe,”  he  said, 

“ It  is  thy  Saviour’s  righteousness. 

6 “ And  see  a crown  of  life  prepared : 

That  I might  thus  thy  head  adorn, 

I thought  no  shame  or  suffering  hard, 

But  wore  for  thee  a crown  of  thorn.” 


* Co  . ii.  14. 


134 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  l 


7 O how  I heard  these  gracious  words ! 
They  broke  and  heal’d  ray  heart  at  once, 
Constrain’d  me  to  become  the  Lord’s, 

And  all  my  idol-gods  renounce. 

8 Now,  Satan,  thou  hast  lost  thy  aim, 
Against  this  brand  thy  threats  are  vain ; 
Jesus  has  pluck’d  it  from  the  flame, 

And  who  shall  put  it  in  again  1 

HYMN  LXXVIH. 

On  one  Stone  shall  he  seven  Eyes. 
Chap.  iii.  9. 

1 Jesus  Christ,  the  Lord’s  anointed, 

Who  his  blood  for  sinners  spilt, 

Is  the  stone  by  God  appointed, 

And  the  church  is  on  him  built : [guilt. 

He  delivers  all  who  trust  in  him  from  their 

2 Many  eyes  at  once  are  fixed 
On  a person  so  divine : 

Love,  with  awful  justice  mixed, 

In  his  great  redemption  shine : [mine ! 

Mighty  Jesus,  give  me  leave  to  call  thee 

3 By  the  Father’s  eye  approved, 

Lo,  a voice  is  heard  from  heaven,* 

“ Sinners,  this  is  my  beloved, 

For  your  ransom  freely  given, 

All  offences  for  his  sake  shall  be  forgiven.” 

4 Angels  with  their  eyes  pursued  him,f 
When  he  left  his  glorious  throne  ; 

With  astonishment  they  viewed  him 
Put  the  form  of  servant  on : [known. 

Angels  worshipp’d  him  who  was  on  earth  un- 

5 Satan  and  his  host  amazed, 

Saw  this  stone  in  Zion  laid  ; 

Jesus,  though  to  death  abased, 

Bruis’d  the  subtle  serpent’s  head,!  [shed. 
When,  to  save  us,  on  the  cross  his  blood  he 

6 When  a guilty  sinner  sees  him, 

While  he  looks  his  soul  is  heal’d : 

Soon  this  sight  from  anguish  frees  him, 
And  imparts  a pardon  seal’d  :§  [veal’d. 

May  this  Saviour  be  to  all  our  hearts  re- 

7 With  desire  and  admiration, 

All  his  blood-bought  flock  behold : 

Him  who  wrought  out  their  salvation, 

And  enclos’d  them  in  his  fold  ;||  [cold. 
Yet  their  warmest  love  and  praises  are  too 

8 By  the  eye  of  carnal  reason, 

Many  view  him  with  disdain  ;1T 
How  will  they  abide  the  season, 

When  he  ’ll  come  with  all  his  train  1 [vain. 
To  escape  him  then  they  ’ll  wish,  but  wish  in 

9 How  their  hearts  will  melt  and  tremble 
When  they  hear  his  awful  voice  ;** 

But  his  saints  he  ’ll  then  assemble, 

As  his  portion  and  his  choice, 

And  receive  them  to  his  everlasting  joys. 


* Matth.  iii.  17  1 1 Tim  iii.  16. 

t John  xii.  31.  § John  iii.  15. 

^ 1 Pet.  ii.  7.  IT  Psal.  cxviii.  22. 

*■»  Rev.  i.  7. 


HYMN  LXXIX. 

Praise  for  the  Fountain  opened. 

There  is  a fountain  fill’d  with  blood 
Drawn  from  Emmanuel’s  veins ; 

And  sinners  plung’d  beneath  that  flood, 
Lose  all  their  guilty  stains. 

The  dying  thief  rejoic’d  to  see 
That  fountain  in  his  day ; 

And  there  have  I,  as  vile  as  he, 

Wash’d  all  my  sins  away. 

Dear  dying  Lamb,  thy  precious  blood 
Shall  never  lose  its  power, 

Till  all  the  ransom’d  church  of  God 
Be  sav’d  to  sin  no  more. 

E’er  since,  by  faith,  I saw  the  stream 
Thy  flowing  wounds  supply, 

Redeeming  love  has  been  my  theme, 

And  shall  be  till  I die. 

Then  in  a nobler,  sweeter  song, 

I ’ll  sing  thy  power  to  save ; 

When  this  poor  lisping  stamm’ring  tongue 
Lies  silent  in  the  grave. 

Lord,  I believe  thou  hast  prepar’d 
(Unworthy  though  I be) 

For  me  a blood-bought  free  reward, 

A golden  harp  for  me ! 

’Tis  strung,  and  tuned,  for  endless  years. 
And  form’d  by  power  divine ; 

To  sound  in  God  the  Father’s  ears 
No  other  name  but  thine.  C. 

MALACHI. 

HYMN  LXXX. 

They  shall  be  mine,  saith  the  Lord. 

Chap.  iii.  16 — 18. 

When  sinners  utter  boasting  words, 

And  glory  in  their  shame ; 

The  Lord,  well  pleas’d,  an  ear  affords 
To  those  who  fear  his  name. 

They  often  meet  to  seek  his  face, 

And  what  they  do,  or  say, 

Is  noted  in  his  book  of  grace 
Against  another  day, 

For  they  by  faith  a day  descry, 

And  joyfully  expect, 

When  he,  descending  from  the  sky, 

His  jewels  will  collect : 

Unnotic’d  now,  because  unknown, 

A poor  and  suffering  few ; 

He  comes  to  claim  them  for  his  own, 

And  bring  them  forth  to  view. 

With  transport  then  their  Saviour’s  care 
And  favour  they  shall  prove ; 

As  tender  parents  guard  and  spare 
The  children  of  their  love. 

Assembled  worlds  will  then  discern 
The  saints  alone  are  blest ; 

When  wrath  shall  like  an  oven  burn. 

And  vengeance  strike  the  rest. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 


MATTHEW. 


1135 


HYMN  LX XXIII.] 

MATTHEW. 

HYMN  LXXXI. 

The  Beggar.  Chap.  vii.  7,  8. 

1 Encourag’d  by  thy  word 
Of  promise  to  the  poor, 

Behold,  a beggar,  Lord, 

Waits  at  thy  mercy’s  door! 

Nc  hand,  no  heart,  O Lord,  but  thine, 

Ca  i help  or  pity  wants  like  mine. 

2 The  beggar’s  usual  plea, 

Relief  from  men  to  gain, 

If  offer’d  unto  thee, 

I know  thou  would’st  disdain ; 

And  pleas  which  move  thy  gracious  ear, 
Are  such  as  men  would  scorn  to  hear. 

3 I have  no  right  to  say, 

That  though  I now  am  poor, 

Yet  once  there  was  a day 
When  I possessed  more ; 

Thou  know’st  that,  from  my  very  birth, 

I ’ve  been  the  poorest  wretch  on  earth. 

4 Nor  can  I dare  profess, 

As  beggars  often  do, 

Though  great  is  my  distress, 

My  wants  have  been  but  few; 

If  thou  should’st  leave  my  soul  to  starve, 
It  would  be  what  I well  deserve. 

5 ’Twere  folly  to  pretend 
I never  begg’d  before ; 

Or  if  thou  now  befriend, 

I ’ll  trouble  thee  no  more : 

Thou  often  hast  reliev’d  my  pain, 

And  often  I must  come  again. 

6 Though  crumbs  are  much  too  good 
For  such  a dog  as  I, 

No  less  than  children’s  food 
My  soul  can  satisfy: 

0 do  not  frown  and  bid  me  go, 

1 must  have  all  thou  canst  bestow. 

7 Nor  can  I willing  be 
Thy  bounty  to  conceal 
From  others  who,  like  me, 

Their  wants  and  hunger  feel : 

I ’ll  tell  them  of  thy  mercy’s  store, 

And  try  to  send  a thousand  more. 

8 Thy  thoughts,  thou  only  wise ! 

Our  thoughts  and  ways  transcend, 
Far  as  the  arched  skies 

Above  the  earth  extend  :* 

Such  pleas  as  mine  men  would  not  hear, 
But  God  receives  a beggar’s  prayer. 

HYMN  LXXXII. 

The  Leper.  Chap.  viii.  2,  3. 

1 Oft  as  the  leper’s  case  I read, 

My  own  describ’d  I feel ; 

Sin  is  a leprosy  indeed, 

Which  none  but  Christ  can  heal. 


* Isaiah  lv.  8.  9. 


A while  I would  have  pass’d  for  well, 

And  strove  my  spots  to  hide : 

Till  it  broke  out  incurable, 

Too  plain  to  be  denied. 

Then  from  the  saints  I thought  to  flee, 
And  dreaded  to  be  seen : 

I thought  they  all  would  point  at  me, 

And  cry,  “ Unclean,  unclean !” 

What  anguish  did  my  soul  endure 
Till  hope  and  patience  ceas’d ! 

The  more  I strove  myself  to  cure, 

The  more  the  plague  increas’d. 

While  thus  I lay  distress’d,  I saw 
The  Saviour  passing  by ; 

To  him,  though  fill’d  with  shame  and  awe, 
I rais’d  my  mournful  cry. 

Lord,  thou  canst  heal  me  if  thou  wilt, 

For  thou  canst  all  things  do ; 

0 cleanse  my  leprous  soul  from  guilt, 

My  filthy  heart  renew ! 

He  heard,  and,  with  a gracious  look, 
Pronounc’d  the  healing  word  ; 

“ I will, — be  clean and  while  he  spoke, 
I felt  my  health  restor’d. 

Come,  lepers,  seize  the  present  hour, 

The  Saviour’s  grace  to  prove ; 

He  can  relieve,  for  he  is  power ; 

He  will,  for  he  is  love. 

HYMN  LXXXIII. 

A sick  Soul.  Chap.  ix.  12. 

Physician  of  my  sin-sick  soul, 

To  thee  I bring  my  case ; 

My  raging  malady  control, 

And  heal  me  by  thy  grace. 

Pity  the  anguish  I endure, 

See  how  I mourn  and  pine ; 

For  never  can  I hope  a cure 
From  any  hand  but  thine. 

1 would  disclose  my  whole  complaint, 

But  where  shall  I begin  1 

No  words  of  mine  can  fully  paint 
That  worst  distemper,  sin. 

It  lies  not  in  a single  part, 

But  through  my  frame  is  spread, 

A burning  fever  in  my  heart, 

A palsy  in  my  head. 

It  makes  me  deaf,  and  dumb,  and  blind, 
And  impotent  and  lame ; 

And  overclouds,  and  fills  my  mind 
With  folly,  fear,  and  shame. 

A thousand  evil  thoughts  intrude, 
Tumultuous,  in  my  breast; 

Which  indispose  me  for  my  food, 

And  rob  me  of  my  rest. 

Lord,  I am  sick,  regard  my  cry, 

And  set  my  spirit  free ; 

Say,  canst  thou  let  a sinner  die, 

Who  longs  to  live  to  thee  1 


2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 


136 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


HYMN  LXXXIV. 

Satan  returning.  Chap.  xii.  43 — 45. 

1 When  Jesus  claims  the  sinner’s  heart, 

Where  Satan  ruled  before; 

The  evil  spirit  must  depart, 

And  dares  return  no  more. 

2 But  when  he  goes  without  constraint, 

And  wanders  from  his  home, 

Although  withdrawn,  ’tis  but  a feint, 

He  means  again  to  come. 

3 Some  outward  change  perhaps  is  seen, 

If  Satan  quit  the  place ; 

But  though  the  house  seem  swept  and  clean, 
’Tis  destitute  of  grace. 

4 Except  the  Saviour  dwell  and  reign 

Within  the  sinner’s  mind, 

Satan,  when  he  returns  again, 

Will  easy  entrance  find. 

0 With  rage,  and  malice  seven-fold, 

He  then  resumes  his  sway, 

No  more  by  checks  to  be  control’d, 

No  more  to  go  away. 

6 The  sinner’s  former  state  was  bad, 

But  worse  the  latter  far : 

He  lives  possessed,  blind,  and  mad, 

And  dies  in  dark  despair. 

7 Lord  save  me  from  this  dreadful  end, 

And  from  this  heart  of  mine ! 

O drive  and  keep  away  the  fiend, 

Who  fears  no  voice  but  thine ! 

HYMN  LXXXV. 

The  Sower.  Chap.  xiii.  3. 

1 Ye  sons  of  earth,  prepare  the  plough, 

Break  up  your  fallow-ground : 

The  sower  is  gone  forth  to  sow, 

And  scatter  blessings  round. 

2 The  seed  that  finds  a stony  soil 

Shoots  forth  a hasty  blade. 

But  ill  repays  the  sower’s  toil, 

Soon  wither’d,  scorch’d,  and  dead. 

3 The  thorny  ground  is  sure  to  baulk 

All  hopes  of  harvest  there : 

We  find  a tall  and  sickly  stalk, 

But  not  the  fruitful  ear. 

4 The  beaten  path  and  high-way  side 

Receive  the  trust  in  vain ; 

The  watchful  birds  the  spoil  divide, 

And  pick  up  all  the  grain. 

5 But  where  the  Lord  of  grace  and  power 

Has  bless’d  the  happy  field, 

How  plenteous  is  the  golden  store 
The  deep-wrought  furrows  yield. 

6 Father  of  mercies,  we  have  need 

Of  thy  preparing  grace : 

Let  the  same  hand  that  gives  the  seed 
Provide  a fruitful  place.  C. 

HYMN  LXXXVL 

The  Wheat  and  Tares.  Chap.  xiii.  37—42. 
I Though  in  the  outward  church  below 
The  wheat  and  tares  together  grow, 


[book  l 

Jesus  ere  long  will  weed  the  crop, 

And  pluck  the  tares  in  anger  up. 

Will  it  relieve  their  horrors  there, 

To  recollect  their  stations  here  1 
How  much  they  heard,  how  much  they 
knew, 

How  long  amongst  the  wheat  they  grew  ! 

0 this  will  aggravate  their  case, 

They  perish’d  under  means  of  grace : 

To  them  the  word  of  life  and  faith 
Became  an  instrument  of  death. 

We  seem  alike  when  thus  we  meet, 
Strangers  might  think  we  all  are  wheat ; 
But  to  the  Lord’s  all-searching  eyes, 

Each  heart  appears  without  disguise. 

The  tares  are  spar’d  for  various  ends , 
Some  for  the  sake  of  praying  friends ; 
Others  the  Lord,  against  their  will, 
Employs  his  counsels  to  fulfil. 

But  though  they  grow  so  tall  and  strong. 
His  plan  will  not  require  them  long : 

In  harvest,  when  he  saves  his  own, 

The  tares  shall  into  hell  be  thrown. 

HYMN  LXXXVII. 

Peter  walking  upon  the  Water . 

Chap.  xiv.  28 — 31. 

A word  from  Jesus  calms  the  sea. 

The  stormy  wind  controls, 

And  gives  repose  and  liberty 
To  tempest-tossed  souls. 

To  Peter  on  the  waves  he  came, 

And  gave  him  instant  peace : 

Thus  he  to  me  reveal’d  his  name, 

And  bid  my  sorrows  cease. 

Then,  fill’d  with  wonder,  joy,  and  love, 
Peter’s  request  was  mine : 

Lord,  call  me  down,  I long  to  prove 
That  I am  wholly  thine. 

Unmov’d  at  all  I have  to  meet 
On  life’s  tempestuous  sea, 

Hard  shall  be  easy,  bitter  sweet, 

So  I may  follow  thee. 

He  heard  and  smil’d,  and  bid  me  try : 

I eagerly  obeyed ; 

But  when  from  him  I turn’d  my  eye, 

How  was  my  soul  dismayed. 

The  storm  increas’d  on  ev’ry  side, 

I felt  my  spirit  shrink, 

And  soon,  with  Peter,  loud  I cried, 

“ Lord,  save  me  or  I sink  !” 

Kindly  he  caught  me  by  the  hand, 

And  said,  “Why dost  thou  fear? 

Since  thou  art  come  to  my  command. 

And  I am  always  near. 

“ Upon  my  promise  rest  thy  hope, 

And  keep  my  love  in  view : 

1 stand  engag’d  to  hold  thee  up, 

And  guide  thee  safely  through." 


2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 


HYMN  XC.] 


MATTHEW. 


137 


HYMN  LXXXVIII. 

Woman  of  Canaan.  Chap.  xv.  22 — 28. 

1 Prayer  an  answer  will  obtain, 

Though  the  Lord  a while  delay : 

None  shall  seek  his  face  in  vain, 

None  be  empty  sent  away. 

2 When  the  woman  came  from  Tyre, 

And  for  help  to  Jesus  sought, 

Though  he  granted  her  desire, 

Yet  at  first  he  answer’d  not. 

3 Could  she  guess  at  his  intent, 

When  he  to  his  followers  said, 

“ I to  Israel’s  sheep  am  sent, 

Dogs  must  not  have  children’s  bread.” 

4 She  was  not  of  Israel’s  seed, 

But  of  Canaan’s  wretched  race, 

Thought  herself  a dog  indeed : 

Was  not  this  a hopeless  case  1 

5 Yet  although  from  Canaan  sprung, 
Though  a dog  herself  she  styl’d, 

She  l°ad  Israel’s  faith  and  tongue, 

And  was  own’d  for  Abrah’m’s  child. 

6 From  his  words  she  draws  a plea : 

“ Though  unworthy  children’s  bread, 

’Tis  enough  for  one  like  me 
If  with  crumbs  I may  be  fed.” 

7 Jesus  then  his  heart  reveal’d : 

“ Woman,  canst  thou  thus  believe? 

I  to  thy  petition  yield ; 

All  that  thou  canst  wish,  receive.” 

8 ’Tis  a pattern  set  for  us, 

How  we  ought  to  wait  and  pray : 

None  who  plead  and  wrestle  thus, 

Shall  be  empty  sent  away. 

HYMN  LXXXIX. 

What  think  ye  of  Christ  ? Chap.  xxii.  42. 

1 What  think  ye  of  Christ?  is  the  test 
To  try  both  your  state  and  your  scheme, 
You  cannot  be  right  in  the  rest, 

Unless  you  think  rightly  of  him. 

As  Jesus  appears  in  your  view, 

As  he  is  beloved  or  not ; 

So  God  is  disposed  to  you, 

And  mercy  or  wrath  is  your  lot. 

2 Some  take  him  a creature  to  be, 

A man,  or  an  angel  at  most; 

Sure  these  have  not  feelings  like  me, 
Nor  know  themselves  wretched  and  lost : 
So  guilty,  so  helpless  am  I, 

I durst  not  confide  in  his  blood, 

Nor  on  his  protection  rely, 

Unless  I were  sure  he  is  God. 

3 Some  call  him  a Saviour,  in  word, 

But  mix  their  own  works  with  his  plan, 
And  hope  he  his  help  will  afford, 

When  they  have  done  all  that  they  can. 
If  doings  prove  rather  too  light 
(A  little,  they  own,  they  may  fail,) 

Vol.  II.  S 


They  purpose  to  make  up  full  weight, 

By  casting  his  name  in  the  scale. 

4 Some  style  him  the  Pearl  of  great  price, 
And  say  he ’s  the  fountain  of  joys ; 

Yet  feed  upon  folly  and  vice, 

And  cleave  to  the  world  and  its  toys: 
Like  Judas,  the  Saviour  they  kiss, 

And,  while  they  salute  him,  betray ; 

Ah ! what  will  profession  like  this 
Avail  in  the  terrible  day  ? 

5 If  ask’d,  what  of  Jesus  I think  ? 

Though  still  my  best  thoughts  are  but  poor, 
I say,  He’s  my  meat  and  my  drink, 

My  life,  and  my  strength,  and  my  store; 
My  shepherd,  my  husband,  my  friend, 

My  Saviour  from  sin  and  from  thrall ; 

My  hope  from  beginning  to  end, 

My  portion,  my  Lord,  and  my  all. 

HYMN  XC. 

The  foolish  Virgins  * Chap.  xxv.  1. 

1 When,  descending  from  the  sky, 

The  Bridegroom  shall  appear, 

And  the  solemn  midnight  cry 
Shall  call  professors  near, 

How  the  sound  our  hearts  will  damp  ’ 
How  will  shame  o’erspread  each  fac  ' 5 
If  we  only  have  a lamp, 

Without  the  oil  of  grace. 

2 Foolish  virgins  then  will  wake, 

And  seek  for  a supply ; 

But  in  vain  the  pains  they  take, 

To  borrow  or  to  buy. 

Then  with  those  they  now  despise, 
Earnestly  they  wish  to  share ; 

But  the  best  among  the  wise 
Will  have  no  oil  to  spare. 

3 Wise  they  are,  and  truly  blest, 

Who  then  shall  ready  be  ! 

But  despair  will  seize  the  rest, 

And  dreadful  misery ; 

Once  they  ’ll  cry,  we  scorn  to  doubt, 
Though  in  lies  our  trust  we  put ; 

Now  our  lamp  of  hope  is  out, 

The  door  of  mercy  shut. 

4 If  they  then  presume  to  plead, 

“ Lord,  open  to  us  now  ; 

We  on  earth  have  heard  and  prayed, 

And  with  thy  saints  did  bow 
He  will  answer  from  his  throne, 

“ Though  you  with  my  people  mix’d, 

Yet  to  me  ye  ne’er  were  known ; 

Depart,  your  doom  is  fix’d.” 

5 O that  none  who  worship  here 

May  hear  that  word,  “ Depart,” 

Lord,  impress  a godly  fear 
On  each  professor’s  heart : 

Help  us,  Lord,  to  search  the  camp, 

Let  us  not  ourselves  beguile ; 

Trusting  to  a dying  lamp, 

Without  a stock  of  oil. 


* Book  III.  Hymn  lxxii. 


13S  OLNEY 

HYMN  XCI. 

Peter  sinning  and  repenting. 

Chap.  xxvi.  73. 

1 When  Peter  boasted,  soon  he  fell, 

Yet  was  by  grace  restor’d ; 

His  case  should  be  regarded  well 
By  all  who  fear  the  Lord. 

2 A voice  it  has,  and  helping  hand, 

Backsliders  to  recall ; 

And  cautions  those  who  think  they  stand, 
Lest  suddenly  they  fall. 

3 He  said,  “ Whatever  others  do, 

With  Jesus  I ’ll  abide 
Yet  soon,  amidst  a murd’rous  crevr, 

His  suffering  Lord  denied. 

4 He  who  had  been  so  bold  before, 

Now  trembled  like  a leaf ; 

Not  only  lied,  but  curs’d  and  swore, 

To  gain  the  more  belief. 

')  When  he  blasphem’d,  he  heard  the  cock, 
And  Jesus  look’d  in  love; 

At  once,  as  if  by  lightning  struck, 

His  tongue  forebore  to  move. 

6 Deliver’d  thus  from  Satan’s  snare, 

He  starts  as  from  a sleep  ; 

His  Saviour’s  look  he  could  not  bear, 

But  hasted  forth  to  weep. 

7 But  sure  the  faithful  cock  had  crow’d 

A hundred  times  in  vain, 

Had  not  the  Lord  that  look  bestow’d, 

The  meaning  to  explain. 

8 As  I,  like  Peter,  vows  have  made, 

Yet  acted  Peter’s  part ; 

So  conscience,  like  the  cock,  upbraids 
My  base,  ungrateful  heart. 

9 J.,ord  Jesus,  hear  a sinner’s  cry, 

My  broken  peace  renew; 

And  grant  one  pitying  look,  that  I 
May  weep  with  Peter  too. 

MARK. 

HYMN  XCIT. 

The  Legion  dispossessed.  Chap.  v.  18,  19. 

1 Legion  was  my  name  by  nature, 

Satan  rag’d  within  my  breast ; 

Never  misery  was  greater, 

Never  sinner  more  possess’d : 

Mischievous  to  all  around  me, 

To  myself  the  greatest  foe ; 

Thus  I was  when  Jesus  found  me, 

Fill’d  with  madness,  sin,  and  woe. 

2 Yet  in  this  forlorn  condition, 

When  he  came  to  set  me  free, 

I  replied  to  my  Physician, 

“ What  have  I to  do  with  thee  1” 

But  he  would  not  be  prevented, 

Rescu’d  me  against  my  will ; 

Had  he  staid  till  I consented, 

I had  been  a captive  still. 


HYMNS.  [book  i. 

3 “ Satan,  though  thou  fain  wouldst  have  it. 
Know  this  soul  is  none  of  thine ; 

I have  shed  my  blood  to  save  it, 

Now  I challenge  it  for  mine  :* 

Though  it  long  has  thee  resembled, 
Henceforth  it  shall  me  obey.” 

Thus  he  spoke,  while  Satan  trembled, 
Gnash’d  his  teeth,  and  fled  away. 

4 Thus  my  frantic  soul  he  healed, 

Bid  my  sins  and  sorrow  cease ; 

“ Take,”  said  he,  my  pardon  sealed, 

I have  sav’d  thee,  go  in  peace 
Rather  take  me,  Lord,  to  heaven, 

Now  thy  love  and  grace  I know ; 

Since  thou  hast  my  sins  forgiven, 

Why  should  I remain  below  ! 

5 “ Love,”  he  said,  “ will  sweeten  labours 
Thou  hast  something  yet  to  do ; 

Go  and  tell  your  friends  and  neighbours 
What  my  love  has  done  for  you  : 

Live  to  manifest  my  glory, 

Wait  for  heaven  a little  space ; 

Sinners,  when  they  hear  thy  story, 

Will  repent,  and  seek  my  face.” 

HYMN  XCIII. 

The  Ruler's  Daughter  raised. 

Chap.  v.  39—42. 

1 Could  the  creatures  help  or  ease  Uo, 
Seldom  should  we  think  of  prayer ; 

Few,  if  any,  come  to  Jesus, 

Till  reduc’d  to  self-despair ; 

Long  we  either  slight  or  doubt  him . 

But  when  all  the  means  we  try 
Prove  we  cannot  do  without  him, 

Then  at  last  to  him  we  cry. 

2 Thus  the  ruler,  when  his  daughter 
Suffer’d  much,  though  Christ  was  nigh 
Still  deferr’d  it  till  he  thought  her 

At  the  very  point  to  die : 

Though  he  mourn’d  for  her  condition, 

He  did  not  entreat  the  Lord, 

Till  he  found  that  no  physician 
But  himself  could  help  afford. 

3 Jesus  did  not  once  upbraid  him, 

That  he  had  no  sooner  come  ; 

But  a gracious  answer  made  him, 

And  went  straightway  with  him  home . 
Yet  his  faith  was  put  to  trial, 

When  his  servants  came,  and  said, 

“ Though  he  gave  thee  no  denial. 

’Tis  too  late,  the  child  is  dead.” 

4 Jesus,  to  prevent  his  grieving, 

Kindly  spoke,  and  eas’d  his  pain  ; 

“ Be  not  fearful,  but  believing, 

Thou  shalt  see  her  live  again.” 

When  he  found  the  people  weeping, 

“ Cease,”  he  said ; “ no  longer  mourn  , 
For  she  is  not  dead,  but  sleeping:” 

Then  they  laughed  him  to  scorn. 


Book  III.  Hymn  liv. 


MARK. 


139 


HYMN  XCVII.] 

5  O thou  meek  and  lowly  Saviour, 

How  determin’d  is  thy  love  ! 

Not  this  rude  unkind  behaviour 
Could  thy  gracious  purpose  move ; 

Soon  as  he  the  room  had  enter’d, 

Spoke,  and  took  her  by  the  hand ; 

Heath  at  once  his  prey  surrender’d, 

And  she  liv’d  at  his  command. 

0 Fear  not,  then,  distress’d  believer, 
Venture  on  his  mighty  name  ; 

He  is  able  to  deliver, 

And  his  love  is  still  the  same : 

Can  his  pity  or  his  power 
Suffer  thee  to  pray  in  vain! 

Wait  but  his  appointed  hour, 

And  thy  suit  thou  shalt  obtain. 

HYMN  XCIV. 

But  one  Loaf*  Chap.  viii.  14. 

1 When  the  disciples  crossed  the  lake 

With  but  one  loaf  on  board, 

How  strangely  did  their  hearts  mistake 
The  caution  of  their  Lord ! 

2 “ The  leaven  of  the  Pharisees 

Beware,”  the  Saviour  said  : 

They  thought,  it  is  because  he  sees 
We  have  forgotten  bread. 

3 It  seems  they  had  forgotten  too, 

What  their  own  eyes  had  view’d ; 
How  with  what  scarce  suffic’d  for  few, 
He  fed  a multitude. 

4 If  five  small  loaves,  by  his  command, 

Could  many  thousands  serve ; 

Might  they  not  trust  his  gracious  hand, 
That  they  should  never  starve ! 

5 They  oft  his  power  and  love  had  known, 

And  doubtless  were  to  blame ; 

But  we  have  reason  good  to  own, 

That  we  are  just  the  same. 

6 How  often  has  he  brought  relief, 

And  every  want  supplied  ! 

Yet  soon,  again,  our  unbelief 
Says,  “ Can  the  Lord  provide  !” 

7 Be  thankful  for  one  loaf  to-day, 

Though  that  be  all  your  store ; 
To-morrow,  if  you  trust  and  pray, 

Shall  timely  bring  you  more. 

HYMN  XCV. 

Bartimeus.  Chap.  x.  47,  48. 

1 “ Mercy,  O thou  Son  of  David  !” 

Thus  blind  Bartimeus  prayed ; 

“ Others  by  this  word  are  saved, 

Now  to  me  afford  thine  aid.” 

Many  for  his  crying  chid  him, 

But  he  called  the  louder  still ; 

Till  the  gracious  Saviour  bid  him, 

“ Come,  and  ask  me  what  you  will.” 

2 Money  was  not  what  he  wanted, 
Though  by  begging  us’d  to  live  ; 

* Book  III.  Hymn  Ivii. 


But  he  ask’d,  and  Jesus  granted, 

Alms  which  none  but  he  could  give : 

“ Lord  remove  this  grievous  blindness 
Let  my  eyes  behold  the  day 
Strait  he  saw,  and,  won  by  kindness, 
Follow’d  Jesus  in  the  way. 

Oh  ! methinks  I hear  him  praising, 
Publishing  to  all  around, 

“ Friends,  is  not  my  case  amazing ! 

What  a Saviour  I have  found : 

O that  all  the  blind  but  knew  him, 

And  would  be  advis’d  by  me  ! 

Surely  would  they  hasten  to  him, 

He  would  cause  them  all  to  see.” 

HYMN  XCVI. 

The  House  of  Prayer.  Chap.  xi.  17. 
Thy  mansion  is  the  Christian’s  heart, 

0 Lord,  thy  dwelling-place  secure ! 

Bid  the  unruly  throng  depart, 

And  leave  the  consecrated  door. 

Devoted  as  it  is  to  thee, 

A thievish  swarm  frequents  this  place ; 
They  steal  away  my  joys  from  me, 

And  rob  my  Saviour  of  his  praise. 

There,  too,  a sharp  designing  trade, 

Sin,  Satan,  and  the  world  maintain  ; 

Nor  cease  to  press  me,  and  persuade 
To  part  with  ease,  and  purchase  pain. 

1 know  them,  and  I hate  their  din, 

Am  weary  of  the  bustling  crowd  ; 

But  while  their  voice  is  heard  within, 

I cannot  serve  thee  as  I would. 

Oh  ! for  the  joy  thy  presence  gives, 

What  peace  shall  reign  when  thou  art  here 
Thy  presence  makes  this  den  of  thieves 
A calm  delightful  house  of  prayer. 

And  if  thou  make  thy  temple  shine, 

Yet,  self-abas’d,  will  I adore ; 

The  gold  and  silver  are  not  mine, 

I give  thee  what  was  thine  before.  C. 

HYMN  XCVII. 

The  blasted  Fig-Tree.  Chap.  xi.  20. 

One  awful  word  which  Jesus  spoke 
Against  the  tree  which  bore  no  fruit, 
More  piercing  than  the  lightning’s  stroke 
Blasted  and  dried  it  to  the  root. 

But  could  a tree  the  Lord  offend 
To  make  him  show  his  anger  thus! 

He  surely  had  a farther  end, 

To  be  a warning  word  to  us. 

The  fig-tree  by  its  leaves  was  known ; 
But  having  not  a fig  to  show, 

It  brought  a heavy  sentence  down, 

“ Let  none  hereafter  on  thee  grow.” 

Too  many,  who  the  gospel  hear, 

Whom  Satan  blinds,  and  sin  deceives, 

W e to  this  fig-tree  may  compare, 

They  yield  no  fruit,  but  only  leaves. 


3 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 


140 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  i. 


5  Knowledge,  and  zeal,  and  gifts,  and  talk, 
Unless  combin’d  with  faith  and  love, 

And  witness’d  by  a gospel-walk, 

Will  not  a true  profession  prove. 

G Without  the  fruit  the  Lord  expects, 
Knowledge  will  make  our  state  the  worse ; 
The  barren  trees  he  still  rejects, 

And  soon  will  blast  them  with  his  curse. 

7 O Lord,  unite  our  hearts  in  prayer  ! 

On  each  of  us  thy  Spirit  send, 

That  we  the  fruits  of  grace  may  bear, 

And  find  acceptance  in  the  end. 

LUKE. 

HYMN  XCVIII. 

The  two  Debtors.  Chap.  viii.  47. 

1 Once  a woman  silent  stood, 

While  Jesus  sat  at  meat; 

From  her  eyes  she  pour’d  a flood, 

To  wash  his  sacred  feet ; 

Shame  and  wonder,  joy  and  love, 

All  at  once  possess’d  her  mind, 

That  she  e’er  so  vile  could  prove, 

Yet  now  forgiveness  find. 

2 “ How  came  this  vile  woman  here  1 

Will  Jesus  notice  such? 

Sure,  if  he  a prophet  were, 

He  would  disdain  her  touch !” 

Simon  thus,  with  scornful  heart, 

Slighted  one  whom  Jesus  lov’d  ; 

But  her  Saviour  took  her  part, 

And  thus  his  pride  reprov’d : 

3 “ If  two  men  in  debt  were  bound, 

One  less,  the  other  more, 

Fifty,  or  five  hundred  pound, 

And  both  alike  were  poor : 

Should  the  lender  both  forgive, 

When  he  saw  them  both  distress’d, 
Which  of  them  would  you  believe 
Engag’d  to  love  him  best  V1 

4 “ Surely  he  who  most  did  owe,” 

The  Pharisee  replied : 

Then  our  Lord,  “By  judging  so, 

Thou  dost  for  her  decide ; 

Simon,  if,  like  her,  you  knew 
How  much  you  forgiveness  need ; 

You  like  her  had  acted  too, 

And  welcom’d  me  indeed. 

5 “ When  the  load  of  sin  is  felt, 

And  much  forgiveness  known, 

Then  the  heart  of  course  will  melt, 
Though  hard  before  as  stone : 

Blame  not  then  her  love  and  tears, 
Greatly  she  in  debt  has  been ; 

But  I have  remov’d  her  fears, 

And  pardon’d  all  her  sin.” 

6 When  I read  this  woman’s  case, 

Her  love  and  humble  zeal, 

I  confess,  with  shame  of  face, 

My  heart  is  made  of  steel. 


Much  has  been  forgiven  to  me, 

Jesus  paid  my  heavy  score  ; 

What  a creature  must  I be, 

That  I can  love  no  more  ! 

HYMN  XCIX. 

The  good  Samaritan.  Chap.  x.  33 — 35. 

1 How  kind  the  good  Samaritan 

To  him  who  fell  among  the  thieves  ! 

Thus  Jesus  pities  fallen  man, 

And  heels  the  wounds  the  soul  receives. 

2 Oh ! I remember  well  the  day, 

When  sorely  wounded,  nearly  slain, 

Like  that  poor  man  I bleeding  lay, 

And  groan’d  for  help,  but  groan’d  in  vain. 

3 Men  saw  me  in  this  helpless  case, 

And  pass’d  without  compassion  by ; 

Each  neighbour  turn’d  away  his  face, 
Unmoved  by  my  mournful  cry. 

4 But  he  whose  name  had  been  my  scorn, 
(As  Jews  Samaritans  despise) 

Came,  when  he  saw  me  thus  forlorn, 
With  love  and  pity  in  his  eyes. 

5 Gently  he  rais’d  me  from  the  ground, 
Press’d  me  to  lean  upon  his  arm, 

And  into  every  gaping  wound, 

He  pour’d  his  own  all-healing  balm. 

6 Into  his  church  my  steps  he  led, 

The  house  prepar’d  for  sinners  lost, 

Gave  charge  I should  be  cloth’d  and  fed, 
And  took  upon  him  all  the  cost. 

7 Thus  sav’d  from  death,  from  want  secur’d 
I wait  till  he  again  shall  come, 

(When  I shall  be  completely  cur’d) 

And  take  me  to  his  heavenly  home. 

8 There,  through  eternal  boundless  days, 
When  nature’s  wheel  no  longer  rolls, 
How  shall  I love,  adore,  and  praise, 

This  good  Samaritan  to  souls ! 

HYMN  C. 

Martha  and  Mary.  Chap.  x.  38 — 42. 

1 Martha  her  love  and  joy  express’d, 

By  care  to  entertain  her  guest ; 

While  Mary  sat  to  hear  her  Lord. 

And  could  not  bear  to  lose  a word. 

2 The  principle,  in  both  the  same, 

Produc’d  in  each  a different  aim  ; 

The  one  to  feast  the  Lord  was  led, 

The  other  waited  to  be  fed. 

3 But  Mary  chose  the  better  part, 

The  Saviour’s  words  refresh’d  her  heart ; 
While  busy  Martha  angry  grew, 

And  lost  her  time  and  temper  too. 

4 With  warmth  she  to  her  sister  spoke, 

But  brought  upon  herself  rebuke  : 

“ One  thing  is  needful,  and  but  one, 

Why  do  thy  thoughts  on  many  run  V* 


LUKE. 


141 


HYMN  CIII.] 

5 How  oft  are  we,  like  Martha,  vex’d, 
Encumber’d,  hurried,  and  perplex’d  1 
While  trifles  so  engross  our  thought 
The  one  thing  needful  is  forgot. 

6 Lord,  teach  us  this  one  thing  to  choose, 
Which  they  who  gain  can  never  lose ; 
Sufficient  in  itself  alone, 

And  needful,  were  the  world  our  own. 

7 Let  grov’iling  hearts  the  world  admire, 
Thy  love  is  all  that  I require : 

Gladly  I may  the  rest  resign, 

If  the  one  needful  thing  be  mine  ! 

HYMN  CI. 

The  Heart  taken.  Chap.  xi.  21,  22. 

1 The  castle  of  the  human  heart, 

Strong  in  its  native  sin, 

Is  guarded  well  in  every  part, 

By  him  who  dwells  within. 

2 For  Satan  there  in  arms  resides, 

And  calls  the  place  his  own : 

With  care  against  assaults  provides, 

And  rules  as  on  a throne. 

3 Each  traitor  thought,  on  him  as  chief, 

In  blind  obedience  waits ; 

And  pride,  self-will,  and  unbelief, 

Are  posted  at  the  gates. 

4 Thus  Satan  for  a season  reigns, 

And  keeps  his  goods  in  peace ; 

The  soul  is  pleas’d  to  wear  his  chains, 
Nor  wishes  a release. 

5 But  Jesus,  stronger  far  than  he, 

In  his  appointed  hour, 

Appears  to  set  his  people  free 
From  the  usurper’s  power. 

6 “ This  heart  I bought  with  blood,”  he  says, 

“ And  now  it  shall  be  mine 
His  voice  the  strong  one  arm’d  dismays, 
He  knows  he  must  resign. 

7 In  spite  of  unbelief  and  pride, 

And  self  and  Satan’s  art, 

The  gates  of  brass  fly  open  wide, 

And  Jesus  wins  the  heart. 

8 The  rebel  soul  that  once  withstood 

The  Saviour’s  kindest  call, 

Rejoices  now,  by  grace  subdued, 

To  serve  him  with  her  all. 

HYMN  CH. 

The  Worldling.  Chap.  xii.  16 — 21. 

1 “ My  barns  are  full,  my  stores  increase, 

And  now,  for  many  years, 

Soul,  eat  and  drink,  and  take  thine  ease, 
Secure  from  wants  and  fears.” 

2 Thus  while  a worldling  boasted  once, 

As  many  now  presume, 

He  heard  the  Lord  himself  pronounce 
His  sudden,  awful  doom. 

3 “ This  night,  vain  fool,  thy  soul  must  pass 

Into  a world  unknown ; 


And  who  shall  then  the  stores  possess. 
Which  thou  hast  call’d  thine  own!” 

4 Thus  blinded  mortals  fondly  scheme 

For  happiness  below; 

Till  death  disturbs  the  pleasing  dream, 
And  they  awake  to  woe. 

5 Ah ! who  can  speak  the  vast  dismay 

That  fills  the  sinner’s  mind, 

When,  torn  by  death’s  strong  hand  away 
He  leaves  his  all  behind  i 

6 Wretches,  who  cleave  to  earthly  things, 

But  are  not  rich  to  God, 

Their  dying  hour  is  full  of  stings, 

And  hell  their  dark  abode. 

7 Dear  Saviour,  make  us  timely  wise, 

Thy  gospel  to  attend, 

That  we  may  live  above  the  skies, 

When  this  poor  life  shall  end. 

HYMN  CIII. 

The  barren  Fig-Tree.  Chap.  xiii.  6 — 9. 

1 The  church  a garden  is, 

In  which  believers  stand, 

Like  ornamental  trees 
Planted  by  God’s  own  hand ; 

His  Spirit  waters  all  their  roots, 

And  ev’ry  branch  abounds  with  fruits. 

2 But  other  trees  there  are, 

In  this  in  closure  grow, 

Which,  though  they  promise  fair, 
Have  only  leaves  to  show ; 

No  fruits  of  grace  are  on  them  found, 

They  stand  but  cumb’rers  of  the  ground 

3 The  under  gard’ner  grieves, 

In  vain  his  strength  he  spends, 

For  heaps  of  useless  leaves 
Afford  him  small  amends: 

He  hears  the  Lord  his  will  make  known 
To  cut  the  barren  fig-trees  down. 

4 How  difficult  his  post, 

What  pangs  his  bowels  move, 

To  find  his  wishes  cross’d, 

His  labours  useless  prove ! 

His  last  relief,  his  earnest  prayer, 

“ Lord,  spare  them  yet  another  year : 

5 Spare  them,  and  let  me  try, 

What  farther  means  may  do ; 

I ’ll  fresh  manure  apply, 

My  digging  I ’ll  renew ; 

Who  knows  but  yet  they  fruit  may  yield ! 
If  not — ’tis  just  they  must  be  fell’d.” 

6 If  under  means  of  grace 
No  gracious  fruits  appear, 

It  is  a dreadful  case ; 

Though  God  may  long  forbear, 

At  length  he  ’ll  strike  the  threaten’d  blow,* 
And  lay  the  barren  fig-tree  low. 


* Boot  IT.  Hymn  xxvi. 


142 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  I. 


HYMN  CIV. 

The  Prodigal  Son.  Chap.  xv.  11 — 24. 

1 Afflictions,  though  they  seem  severe, 

In  mercy  oft  are  sent ; 

They  stopp’d  the  prodigal’s  career, 

And  forc’d  him  to  repent. 

2 Although  he  no  relentings  felt, 

Till  he  had  spent  his  store ; 

His  stubborn  heart  began  to  melt 
When  famine  pinch’d  him  sore. 

3 “ What  have  I gain’d  by  sin  (he  said,) 

But  hunger,  shame,  and  fear  ? 

My  father’s  house  abounds  with  bread, 
While  I am  starving  here. 

4 “ I ’ll  go  and  tell  him  all  I ’ve  done, 

And  fall  before  his  face ; 

Unworthy  to  be  call’d  his  son, 

I  ’ll  seek  a servant’s  place.” 

5 His  father  saw  him  coming  back, 

He  saw,  and  ran,  and  smiled ; 

And  threw  his  arms  around  the  neck 
Of  his  rebellious  child. 

H “Father,  I ’ve  sinn’d — but,  O forgive!” 
“ I ’ve  heard  enough,”  he  said; 

“ Rejoice,  my  house,  my  son’s  alive, 

For  whom  I mourn’d  as  dead : 

7 Now  let  the  fatted  calf  be  slain, 

And  spread  the  news  around ; 

My  son  was  dead,  but  lives  again, 

Was  lost,  but  now  is  found.” 

8 ’Tis  thus  the  Lord  his  love  reveals, 

To  call  poor  sinners  home ; 

More  than  a father’s  love  he  feels, 

And  welcomes  all  that  come. 

HYMN  CV. 

The  Rich  Man  and  Lazarus. 

Chap.  xvi.  19 — 25. 

1 A worldling  spent  each  day 
In  luxury  and  state, 

While  a believer  lay 
A beggar  at  his  gate  : 

Think  not  the  Lord’s  appointment  strange, 
Death  made  a great  and  lasting  change. 

2 Death  brought  the  saint  release 
From  want,  disease,  and  scorn ; 

And  to  the  land  of  peace, 

His  soul,  by  angels  borne, 

In  Abrah’m’s  bosom  safely  placed, 

Enjoys  an  everlasting  feast. 

3 The  rich  man  also  died, 

And  in  a moment  fell 
From  all  his  pomp  and  pride 
Into  the  flames  of  hell; 

The  beggar’s  bliss  from  far  beheld, 

His  soul  with  double  anguish  fill’d. 

4 “ O Abrah’m,  send,”  he  cries, 

(But  his  request  was  vain) 

“ The  beggar  from  the  skies, 

To  mitigate  my  pain ! 


One  drop  of  water  I entreat, 

To  soothe  my  tongue’s  tormenting  heat.” 

5 Let  all  who  worldly  pelf 
And  worldly  spirits  have, 

Observe,  each  for  himself, 

The  answer  Abrah’m  gave : 

“ Remember  thou  wast  fill’d  with  good. 
While  the  poor  beggar  pin’d  for  food. 

6 “ Neglected  at  thy  door, 

With  tears  he  begg’d  his  bread  : 

But  now  he  weeps  no  more, 

His  griefs  and  pains  are  fled ; 

His  joys  eternally  will  flow, 

While  thine  expire  in  endless  woe.” 

7 Lord,  make  us  truly  wise, 

To  choose  thy  people’s  lot, 

And  earthly  joys  despise, 

. Which  soon  will  be  forgot : 

The  greatest  evil  we  can  fear, 

Is  to  possess  our  portion  here ! 

HYMN  CVI. 

The  importunate  Widow  * Chap,  xviii.  1—7. 

1 Our  Lord,  who  knows  full  well 

The  heart  of  every  saint, 

Invites  us  by  a parable, 

To  pray  and  never  faint. 

2 He  bows  his  gracious  ear, 

We  never  plead  in  vain; 

Yet  we  must  wait  till  he  appear, 

And  pray,  and  pray  again. 

3 Though  unbelief  suggest, 

Why  should  we  longer  wait? 

He  bids  us  never  give  him  rest. 

But  be  importunate. 

4 ’Twas  thus  a widow  poor, 

Without  support  or  friend, 

Beset  the  unjust  judge’s  door, 

And  gain’d  at  last  her  end. 

5 For  her  he  little  car’d, 

As  little  for  the  laws ; 

Nor  God  nor  man  did  he  regard, 

Yet  he  espous’d  her  cause. 

6 She  urg’d  him  day  and  night, 

Would  no  denial  take ; 

At  length  he  said,  64 1 ’ll  do  her  right, 

For  my  own  quiet’s  sake.” 

7 And  shall  not  Jesus  hear 

His  chosen  when  they  cry? 

Yes,  though  he  may  a while  forbear, 

He  ’ll  help  them  from  on  high. 

8 ’Tis  nature,  truth,  and  love, 

Engage  him  on  their  side ; 

When  they  are  griev’d,  his  bowels  move. 
And  can  they  be  denied  ? 

9 Then  let  us  earnest  be, 

And  never  faint  in  prayer ; 

He  loves  our  importunity, 

And  makes  our  cause  his  care. 


* Book  II.  Hymn  lx. 


HYMN  OX.] 


LUKE. 


143 


HYMN  CVII. 

Zaccheus.  Chap.  xix.  1 — 6. 

1 Zaccheus  climb’d  the  tree, 

And  thought  himself  unknown ; 

But  how  surpris’d  was  he, 

When  Jesus  call’d  him  down ! 

The  Lord  beheld  him,  though  conceal’d, 
And  by  a word  his  power  reveal’d. 

2 Wonder  and  joy  at  once 
Were  painted  in  his  face: 

“ Does  he  my  name  pronounce. 

And  does  he  know  my  case  7 
Will  Jesus  deign  with  me  to  dine  7 
Lord,  I,  with  all  I have,  am  thine.” 

3 Thus  where  the  gospel’s  preach’d, 

And  sinners  come  to  hear, 

The  hearts  of  some  are  reach’d 
Before  they  are  aware  : 

The  word  directly  speaks  to  them, 

And  seems  to  point  them  out  by  name. 

4 ’Tis  curiosity 

Oft  brings  them  in  the  way, 

Only  the  man  to  see, 

And  hear  what  he  can  say : 

But  how  the  sinner  starts  to  find, 

The  preacher  knows  his  inmost  mind. 

5 His  long  forgotten  faults 
Are  brought  again  in  view, 

And  all  his  secret  thoughts 
Reveal’d  in  public  too ; 

Though  compass’d  with  a crowd  about, 

The  searching  word  has  found  him  out. 

6 While  thus  distressing  pain 
And  sorrow  fills  his  heart: 

He  hears  a voice  again, 

That  bids  his  fears  depart. 

Then,  like  Zaccheus,  he  is  blest, 

And  Jesus  deigns  to  be  his  guest. 

HYMN  CVIII. 

The  Believer's  Danger , Safety , and  Duty. 
Chap.  xxii.  31,  32. 

1 “ Simon,  beware !”  the  Saviour  said, 

“ Satan,  your  subtle  foe, 

Already  has  his  measures  laid, 

Your  soul  to  overthrow. 

2 “ He  wants  to  sift  you  all  as  wheat, 

And  thinks  his  victory  sure ; 

But  I his  malice  will  defeat, 

My  prayer  shall  faith  secure.” 

3 Believers,  tremble  and  rejoice, 

Your  help  and  danger  view; 

This  warning  has  to  you  a voice, 

This  promise  speaks  to  you. 

4 Satan  beholds,  with  jealous  eye, 

Your  privilege  and  joy ; 

He ’s  always  watchful,  always  nigh, 

To  tear  and  to  destroy. 

5 But  Jesus  lives  to  intercede, 

That  faith  may  still  prevail ; 

He  will  support  m time  of  need, 

And  Satan’s  art  shall  fail. 


6 Yet  let  us  not  the  warning  slight, 

But  watchful  still  be  found ; 

Though  faith  cannot  be  slain  in  fight, 

It  may  receive  a wound. 

7 While  Satan  watches,  dare  we  sleep  7 

We  must  our  guard  maintain ; 

But,  Lord,  do  thou  the  city  keep, 

Or  else  we  watch  in  vain.* 

HYMN  CIX. 

Father  forgive  them.  Chap,  xxiii.  34. 

1 “ Father,  forgive,”  the  Saviour  said, 

“ They  know  not  what  they  do 
His  heart  was  mov’d  when  thus  he  prayed 
For  me,  my  friends,  and  you. 

2 He  saw  that,  as  the  Jews  abus’d 

And  crucified  his  flesh, 

So  he  by  us  would  be  refus’d, 

And  crucified  afresh. 

3 Through  love  of  sin,  we  long  were  prone 

To  act  as  Satan  bid ; 

But  now,  with  grief  and  shame  we  own 
We  knew  not  what  we  did. 

4 We  knew  not  the  desert  of  sin, 

Nor  whom  we  thus  defied  ; 

Nor  where  our  guilty  souls  had  been, 

If  Jesus  had  not  died. 

5 We  knew  not  what  a law  we  broke, 

How  holy,  just,  and  pure ! 

Nor  what  a God  we  durst  provoke, 

But  thought  ourselves  secure. 

6 But  Jesus  all  our  guilt  foresaw, 

And  shed  his  precious  blood, 

To  satisfy  the  holy  law, 

And  make  our  peace  with  God. 

7 My  sin,  dear  Saviour,  made  thee  bleed, 

Yet  didst  thou  pray  for  me  ! 

I  knew  not  what  I did  indeed, 

When  ignorant  of  thee. 

HYMN  CX. 

The  two  Malefactors.  Chap,  xxiii.  39 — 43. 

1 Sovereign  grace  has  power  alone 
To  subdue  a heart  of  stone  ; 

And  the  moment  grace  is  felt, 

Then  the  hardest  heart  will  melt. 

2 When  the  Lord  was  crucified, 

Two  transgressors  with  him  died  ; 

One  with  vile  blaspheming  tongue, 

Scoff’d  at  Jesus  as  he  hung. 

3 Thus  he  spent  his  wicked  breath, 

In  the  very  jaws  of  death ; 

Perish’d  as  too  many  do, 

With  the  Saviour  in  his  view. 

4 But  the  other,  touch’d  with  grace, 

Saw  the  danger  of  his  case ; 

Faith  receiv’d  to  own  the  Lord, 

Whom  the  scribes  and  priests  abhorr’d. 


* Psalm  cxxvii.  1. 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


114 

5 “ Lord,”  he  prayed,  “ remember  me, 

When  in  glory  thou  shalt  be.” 

“ Soon  with  me,”  the  Lord  replies, 

“ Thou  shalt  rest  in  Paradise.” 

6 This  was  wondrous  grace  indeed, 

Grace  vouchsaf’d  in  time  of  need ; 

Sinners,  trust  in  Jesus’  name, 

You  shall  find  him  still  the  same. 

7 But  beware  of  unbelief, 

Think  upon  the  harden’d  thief ; 

If  the  gospel  you  disdain, 

Christ,  to  you,  will  die  in  vain. 

JOHN. 

HYMN  CXI. 

The  Woman  of  Samaria.  Chap.  iv.  28. 

1 Jesus,  to  what  didst  thou  submit, 

To  save  thy  dear-bought  flock  from  hell ! ; 
Like  a poor  traveller,  see  him  sit, 

Athirst  and  weary,  by  the  well. 

2 The  woman  who  for  water  came, 

(What  great  events  on  small  depend !) 
Then  learnt  the  glory  of  his  name, 

The  well  of  life,  the  sinner’s  friend. 

3 Taught  from  her  birth  to  hate  the  Jews, 
And  fill’d  with  party-pride,  at  first 
Her  zeal  induc’d  her  to  refuse 

Water  to  quench  the  Saviour’s  thirst.  * 

4 But  soon  she  knew  the  gift  of  God ; 

And  Jesus,  whom  she  scorn’d  before, 
Unask’d,  that  drink  on  her  bestowed, 
Which  whoso  tastes  shall  thirst  no  more. 

5 His  words  her  prejudice  remov’d, 

Her  sin  she  felt,  relief  she  found  ; 

She  saw  and  heard,  believ’d  and  lov’d,  j 
And  ran  to  tell  her  neighbours  round. 

6 O come,  this  wondrous  man  behold, 

The  promis’d  Saviour  ! this  is  he 
Whom  ancient  prophecies  foretold, 

Born,  from  our  guilt  to  set  us  free. 

7 Like  her,  in  ignorance  content, 

I worshipp’d  long  I knew  not  what; 

Like  her,  on  other  thing# intent, 

I found  him  when  I sought  him  not 

8 He  told  me  all  that  e’er  I did, 

And  told  me  all  was  pardon’d  too ; 

And  now,  like  her,  as  he  has  bid, 

I live  to  point  him  out  to  you. 

HYMN  CXII. 

The  Pool  of  Bethesda.*  Chap.  v.  2 — 4. 

1 Beside  the  gospel-pool 
Appointed  for  the  poor, 

From  year  to  year  my  helpless  soul 
Has  waited  for  a cure. 

2 How  often  have  I seen 
The  healing  waters  move, 

* Book  III.  Hymn  vii.  I 


[BOOK  I. 

And  others,  round  me,  stepping  in, 

Their  efficacy  prove ! 

But  my  complaints  remain ; 

I feel  the  very  same, 

As  full  of  guilt,  and  fear,  and  pain, 

As  when  at  first  I came. 

0 would  the  Lord  appear, 

My  malady  to  heal ; 

He  knows  how  long  I ’ve  languish’d  here, 
And  what  distress  I feel. 

How  often  have  I thought, 

Why  should  I longer  lie  1 
Surely  the  mercy  I have  sought 
Is  not  for  such  as  I. 

But  whither  can  I go! 

There  is  no  other  pool 
Where  streams  of  sovereign  virtue  flow 
To  make  a sinner  whole. 

Here  then,  from  day  to  day, 

1 ’ll  wait,  and  hope,  and  try : 

Can  Jesus  hear  a sinner  pray, 

Yet  suffer  him  to  die  1 
No  : he  is  full  of  grace ; 

He  never  will  permit 
A soul  that  fain  would  see  his  face, 

To  perish  at  his  feet. 

HYMN  CXIII. 

ANOTHER. 

Here  at  Bethesda’s  pool,  the  poor, 

The  wither’d,  halt,  and  blind, 

With  waiting  hearts  expect  a cure, 

And  free  admittance  find. 

Here  streams  of  wondrous  virtue  flow, 

To  heal  a sin-sick  soul ; 

To  wash  the  filthy  white  as  snow 
And  make  the  wounded  whole. 

The  dumb  break  forth  in  songs  of  praise 
The  blind  their  sight  receive, 

The  cripple  run  in  wisdom’s  ways, 

The  dead  revive  and  live. 

Restrain’d  to  no  one  case  or  time, 

These  waters  always  move ; 

Sinners  in  ev’ry  age  and  clime 
Their  vital  influence  prove. 

Yet  numbers  daily  near  them  lia. 

Who  meet  with  no  relief ; 

With  life  in  view,  they  pine  and  die, 

In  hopeless  unbelief. 

’Tis  strange  they  should  refuse  to  bathe, 
And  yet  frequent  the  pool : 

But  none  can  even  wish  for  faitn 
While  love  of  sin  bears  rule. 

Satan  their  consciences  has  seal’d, 

And  stupified  their  thought, 

For,  were  they  willing  to  be  heal’d, 

The  cure  would  soon  be  wrought. 

Do  thou,  dear  Saviour,  interpose, 

Their  stubborn  will  constrain ; 

Or  else  to  them  the  water  flows 
And  grace  is  preach’d  in  vain. 


3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 


HYMN  CX  VII.] 


JOHN. 


m 


HYMN  CXIV. 

The  Disciples  at  Sea  * Chap.  vi.  16 — 21. 

1 Constrain’d  by  their  Lord  to  embark, 
And  venture  without  him  to  sea, 

The  season  tempestuous  and  dark, 

How  griev’d  the  disciples  must  be ! 

But  though  he  remain’d  on  the  shore, 

He  spent  the  night  for  them  in  prayer ; 
They  still  were  as  safe  as  before, 

And  equally  under  his  care. 

2 They  strove,  though  in  vain,  for  a while, 
The  force  of  the  waves  to  withstand ; 

But  when  they  were  wearied  with  toil, 
They  saw  their  dear  Saviour  at  hand. 
They  gladly  received  him  on  board, 

His  presence  their  spirits  reviv’d, 

The  sea  became  calm  at  his  word, 

And  soon  at  their  port  they  arriv’d. 

3 We,  like  the  disciples,  are  toss’d 
By  storms  on  a perilous  deep, 

But  cannot  be  possibly  lost, 

For  Jesus  has  charge  of  the  ship. 

Though  billows  and  winds  are  enrag’d, 
And  threaten  to  make  us  their  sport, 

This  pilot  his  word  has  engag’d 
To  bring  us  in  safety  to  port. 

4 If  sometimes  we  struggle  alone, 

And  he  is  withdrawn  from  our  view, 

It  makes  us  more  willing  to  own 
We  nothing  without  him  can  do : 

Then  Satan  our  hopes  would  assail, 

But  Jesus  is  still  within  call ; 

And  when  our  poor  efforts  quite  fail, 

He  comes  in  good  time,  and  does  all. 

5 Yet,  Lord,  we  are  ready  to  shrink, 

Unless  we  thy  presence  perceive  ; 

0 save  us,  we  cry,  or  we  sink, 

We  would,  but  we  cannot  believe. 

The  night  has  been  long  and  severe, 

The  winds  ,and  the  seas  are  still  high ; 
Dear  Saviour,  this  moment  appear, 

And  say  to  our  souls,  “ It  is  I !”f 

HYMN  CXV. 

Will  ye  also  go  away  ? Chap.  vi.  67 — 69. 

1 When  any  turn  from  Zion’s  way, 

(Alas ! what  numbers  do !) 

Methinks  I hear  my  Saviour  say, 

“ Wilt  thou  forsake  me  too  ?” 

2 Ah  ! Lord,  with  such  a heart  as  mine, 

Unless  thou  hold  me  fast, 

1 feel  I must,  I shall  decline, 

And  prove  like  them  at  last. 

3 Yet  thou  alone  hast  power,  I know, 

To  save  a wretch  like  me : 

To  whom,  or  whither  could  I go, 

If  I should  turn  from  thee  ? 
i Beyond  a doubt  I rest  assur’d, 

Thou  art  the  Christ  of  God, 


* Book  II.  Hymn  Ixxxvii. 
t Book  IIJ  Hymn  xviii. 

Vol  II.  T 


Who  hast  eternal  life  secur’d 
By  promise  and  by  blood. 

5 The  help  of  men  and  angels  join’d 

Could  never  reach  my  case, 

Nor  can  I hope  relief  to  find 
But  in  thy  boundless  grace. 

6 No  voice  but  thine  can  give  me  rest, 

And  bid  my  fears  depart, 

No  love  but  thine  can  make  me  blest. 

And  satisfy  my  heart. 

7 What  anguish  has  that  question  stirr’d 

If  I will  also  go? 

Yet,  Lord,  relying  on  thy  word, 

I  humbly  answer,  No. 

HYMN  CXVI. 

The  Resurrection  and  the  Life.  Chap.  xi.  25. 

1 “ I am,”  saith  Christ,  “ your  glorious  Head, 

(May  we  attention  give  !) 

The  resurrection  of  the  dead, 

The  life  of  all  that  live. 

2 “ By  faith  in  me  the  soul  receives 

New  life,  though  dead  before  ; 

And  he  that  in  my  name  believes, 

Shall  live,  to  die  no  more. 

3 “ The  sinner,  sleeping  in  his  grave. 

Shall  at  my  voice  awake ; 

And  when  I once  begin  to  save, 

My  work  I ne’er  forsake.” 

4 Fulfil  thy  promise,  gracious  Lord, 

On  us  assembled  here ; 

Put  forth  thy  Spirit  with  the  word. 

And  cause  the  dead  to  hear. 

5 Preserve  the  power  of  faith  alive 

In  those  who  love  thy  name ; 

For  sin  and  Satan  daily  strive 
To  quench  the  sacred  flame. 

6 Thy  power  and  mercy  first  prevail’d. 

From  death  to  set  us  free  ; 

And  often  since  our  life  had  fail’d. 

If  not  renew’d  by  thee. 

7 To  thee  we  look,  to  thee  we  bow. 

To  thee  for  help  we  call ; 

Our  life  and  resurrection  thou. 

Our  hope,  our  joy,  our  all. 

HYMN  CXVII. 

Weeping  Mary.  Chap.  xx.  11 — 16. 

1 Mary  to  her  Saviour’s  tomb 
Hasted  at  the  early  dawn ; 

Spice  she  brought,  and  sweet  perfume 
But  the  Lord  she  lov’d  was  gone. 

For  a while  she  weeping  stood, 

Struck  with  sorrow  and  surprise, 

Shedding  tears,  a plenteous  flood, 

For  her  heart  supplied  her  eyes. 

2 Jesus,  who  is  always  near, 

Though  too  often  unperceiv’d, 

Came,  his  drooping  child  to  cheer, 

Kindly  asking  why  she  griev’d? 


146 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[boos  l 


Though  at  first  she  knew  him  not, 
When  he  call’d  her  by  her  name, 
Then  her  griefs  were  all  forgot, 

For  she  found  he  was  the  same. 

3 Grief  and  sighing  quickly  fled, 

When  she  heard  his  welcome  voice ; 
Just  before  she  thought  him  dead, 
Now  he  bids  her  heart  rejoice. 

What  a change  his  word  can  make, 
Turning  darkness  into  day ! 

You  who  weep  for  Jesu’s  sake, 

He  will  wipe  your  tears  away. 

4 He  who  came  to  comfort  her, 

When  she  thought  her  all  was  lost, 
Will  for  you  relief  appear, 

Though  you  now  are  tempest-toss’d, 
On  his  word  your  burden  cast, 

On  his  love  your  thoughts  employ ; 
Weeping  for  a while  may  last, 

But  the  morning  brings  the  joy. 


HYMN  CXVin. 

Lovest  thou  me  ? Chap.  xxi.  16. 

1 Harr,  my  soul ! it  is  the  Lord, 

’Tis  thy  Saviour,  hear  his  word  ; 

Jesus  speaks,  and  speaks  to  thee, 

“ Say,  poor  sinner,  lov’st  thou  me  1 

2 “ I deliver’d  thee  when  bound, 

And,  when  wounded,  heal’d  thy  wound : 
Sought  thee  wand’ring,  set  thee  right, 
Turn’d  thy  darkness  into  light. 

3 “ Can  a woman’s  tender  care 
Cease  towards  the  child  she  bare  1 
Yes,  she  may  forgetful  be, 

Yet  will  I remember  thee. 

4 “ Mine  is  an  unchanging  love, 

Higher  than  the  heights  above, 

Deeper  than  the  depths  beneath, 

Free  and  faithful,  strong  as  death, 

5 “ Thou  shalt  see  my  glory  soon, 

When  the  work  of  grace  is  done, 

Partner  of  my  throne  shalt  be, 

Say,  poor  sinner,  lov’st  thou  me  1” 

6 Lord,  it  is  my  chief  complaint, 

That  my  love  is  weak  and  faint ; 

Yet  I love  thee  and  adore : 

O  for  grace  to  love  thee  more ! C. 

HYMN  CXIX. 

ANOTHER. 

1 ’Tis  a point  I long  to  know, 

Oft  it  causes  anxious  thought. 

Do  I love  the  Lord  or  no  1 
Ami  his,  or  am  I not  1 

2 If  I love,  why  am  I thus  1 

Why  this  dull  and  lifeless  frame  7 
Hardly,  sure,  can  they  be  worse, 

Who  have  never  heard  his  name. 


3 Could  my  heart  so  hard  remain, 
Prayer  a task  and  burden  prove, 
Ev’ry  trifle  give  me  pain, 

If  I knew  a Saviour’s  love  1 

4 When  I turn  my  eyes  within, 

All  is  dark,  and  vain,  and  wild ; 
Fill’d  with  unbelief  and  sin, 

Can  I deem  myself  a child ! 

5 If  I pray,  or  hear,  or  read, 

Sin  is  mix’d  with  all  I do ; 

You  that  love  the  Lord  indeed, 
Tell  me,  is  it  thus  with  you! 

6 Yet  I mourn  my  stubborn  will, 
Find  my  sin  a grief  and  thrall : 
Should  I grieve  for  what  I feel, 

If  I did  not  love  at  all  1 

7 Could  I joy  his  saints  to  meet, 
Choose  the  ways  I once  abhorr’d. 
Find  at  times  the  promise  sweet. 
If  I did  not  love  the  Lord  1 

8 Lord,  decide  the  doubtful  case : 
Thou,  who  art  thy  people’s  sun, 
Shine  upon  thy  work  of  grace, 

If  it  be  indeed  begun. 

9 Let  me  love  thee  more  and  more, 
If  I love  at  all,  I pray ; 

If  I have  not  lov’d  before, 

Help  me  to  begin  to-day. 


ACTS. 


HYMN  CXX. 

The  Death  of  Stephen.  Chap.  vii.  54 — 66 

1 As  some  tall  rock  amidst  the  waves, 

The  fury  of  the  tempest  braves, 

While  the  fierce  billows,  tossing  hign. 
Break  at  its  foot,  and,  murm’ring,  die : 

2 Thus  they  who  in  the  Lord  confide, 
Though  foes  assault  on  ev’ry  side, 

Cannot  be  mov’d  or  overthrown, 

For  Jesus  makes  their  cause  his  own. 

3 So  faithful  Stephen,  undismayed, 

The  malice  of  the  Jews  surveyed: 

The  holy  joy  which  fill’d  his  breast 
A lustre  on  his  face  impress’d. 

4 “ Behold  !”  he  said,  “ the  world  of  light 
Is  open’d  to  my  strengthen’d  sight ; 

My  glorious  Lord  appears  in  view, 

That  Jesus  whom  ye  lately  slew.” 

5 With  such  a friend  and  witness  near, 

No  form  of  death  could  make  him  fear; 
Calm,  amidst  showers  of  stones,  he  kneels, 
And  only  for  his  murd’rers  feels. 

6 May  we,  by  faith,  perceive  thee  thus, 
Dear  Saviour,  ever  near  to  us ! 

This  sight  our  peace  through  life  shall  keep, 
And  death  be  fear’d  no  more  than  sleep. 


ACTS. 


147 


HYMN  CXXIII.] 

HYMN  CXXI. 

The  Rebel's  Surrender  to  Grace.  Lord , 
what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ? Chap.  ix.  6. 

1 Lord,  thou  hast  won,  at  length  I yield  ; 
My  heart,  by  mighty  grace  compell’d, 

Surrenders  all  to  thee ; 

Against  thy  terrors  long  I strove, 

But  who  can  stand  against  thy  love  1 
Love  conquers  even  me. 

2 All  that  a wretch  could  do  I tried, 

Thy  patience  scorn’d,  thy  power  defied, 

And  trampled  on  thy  laws ; 

Scarcely  thy  martyrs  at  the  stake, 

Could  stand  more  steadfast  for  thy  sake, 
Than  I in  Satan’s  cause. 

3 But  since  thou  hast  thy  love  reveal’d 
And  shown  my  soul  a pardon  seal’d, 

I  can  resist  no  more ; 

Couldst  thou  for  such  a sinner  bleed ! 
Canst  thou  for  such  a rebel  plead  ] 

I wonder  and  adore  ! 

4 If  thou  had’st  bid  thy  thunders  roll, 

And  lightnings  flash,  to  blast  my  soul, 

I still  had  stubborn  been : 

But  mercy  has  my  heart  subdu’d, 

A bleeding  Saviour  I have  view’d, 

And  now  I hate  my  sin. 

5 Now,  Lord,  I would  be  thine  alone, 

Come,  take  possession  of  thine  own, 

For  thou  hast  set  me  free ; 

Releas’d  from  Satan’s  hard  command, 

See  all  my  powers  waiting  stand, 

To  be  employed  by  thee. 

6 My  will  conform’d  to  thine  would  move ; 
On  thee  my  hope,  desire,  and  love, 

In  fix’d  attention  join ; 

My  hands,  my  eyes,  my  ears,  my  tongue, 
Have  Satan’s  servants  been  too  long, 

But  now  they  shall  be  thine. 

7 And  can  I be  the  very  same, 

Who  lately  durst  blaspheme  thy  name, 
And  on  thy  gospel  tread  1 
Surely  each  one  who  hears  my  case, 

Will  praise  thee,  and  confess  thy  grace 
Invincible  indeed ! 

HYMN  CXXII. 

Peter  released  from  Prison. 

Chap.  xii.  5 — 8. 

I Fervent  persevering  prayers 
Are  faith’s  assur’d  resource ; 

Brazen  gates  and  iron  bars 
In  vain  withstand  their  force. 

Peter,  when  in  prison  cast, 

Though  by  soldiers  kept  with  care, 
Though  the  doors  were  bolted  fast, 

Was  soon  releas’d  by  prayer. 

. While  he  slept,  an  angel  came, 

And  spread  a light  around, 

Touch’d,  and  call’d  him  by  his  name, 

And  rais’d  him  from  the  ground. 


All  his  chains  and  fetters  burst, 

Ev’ry  door  wide  open  flew: 

Peter  thought  he  dream’d  at  first, 

But  found  the  vision  true. 

3 Thus  the  Lord  can  make  a way 

To  bring  his  saints  relief ; 

Theirs  it  is  to  wait  and  pray, 

In  spite  of  unbelief. 

He  can  break  through  walls  of  stone,  ■ 
Sink  the  mountain  to  a plain ; 

They  to  whom  his  name  is  known, 

Can  never  pray  in  vain. 

4 Thus,  in  chains  of  guilt  and  sin, 

Poor  sinners  sleeping  lie ; 

No  alarm  is  felt  within, 

Although  condemn’d  to  die ; 

Till,  descending  from  above, 

(Mercy  smiling  in  his  eyes) 

Jesus,  with  a voice  of  love, 

Awakes,  and  bids  them  rise. 

5 Glad  the  summons  they  obey, 

And  liberty  desire ; 

Straight  their  fetters  melt  away, 

Like  wax  before  the  fire : 

By  the  word  of  him  who  died, 

Guilty  prisoners  to  release, 

Every  door  flies  open  wide, 

And  they  depart  in  peace. 

HYMN  CXXIII. 

The  trembling  Gaoler.  Chap.  xvi.  29 — 31 

1 A believer  free  from  care, 

May  in  chains  or  dungeons  sing, 

If  the  Lord  be  with  him  there, 

And  be  happier  than  a king : 

Paul  and  Silas  thus  confin’d, 

Though  their  backs  were  torn  by  whips, 
Yet,  possessing  peace  of  mind, 

Sung  his  praise  with  joyful  lips. 

2 Suddenly  the  prison  shook, 

Open  flew  the  iron  doors ; 

And  the  gaoler,  terror-struck, 

Now  his  captives, help  implores : 
Trembling  at  their  feet  he  fell, 

“ Tell  me,  Sirs,  what  must  I do, 

To  be  saved  from  guilt  and  hell  I 
None  can  tell  me  this  but  you.” 

3 “ Look  to  Jesus,”  they  replied ; 

“ If  on  him  thou  canst  believe, 

By  the  death  which  he  hath  died, 

Thou  salvation  shalt  receive.” 

While  the  living  word  he  heard. 

Faith  sprang  up  within  his  heart ; 

And,  releas’d  from  all  he  fear’d, 

In  their  joy  his  soul  had  part. 

4 Sinners,  Christ  is  still  the  same, 

O that  you  could  likewise  fear ! 

Then  the  mention  of  his  name 
Would  be  music  to  your  ear : 

Jesus  rescues  Satan’s  slaves, 

His  dear  wounds  still  plead,  “ Fcrgive  1** 
Jesus  to  the  utmost  saves ; 

Sinners,  look  to  him  and  live. 


1.48 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


HYMN  CXXIY. 

The  Exorcists.  Chap.  xix.  13 — 16. 

1 When  the  apostle  wonders  wrought, 
And  heal’d  the  sick  in  Jesu’s  name, 

The  sons  of  Sceva  vainly  thought 
That  they  had  power  to  do  the  same. 

2 On  one  possess’d  they  tried  their  art, 
And,  naming  Jesus  preached  by  Paul, 
They  charg’d  the  spirit  to  depart, 
Expecting  he’d  obey  their  call. 

3 The  spirit  answered  with  a mock, 

“ Jesus  I know,  and  Paul  I know ; 

I  must  have  gone  if  Paul  had  spoke : 

But  who  are  ye  that  bid  me  go  1 

4 With  fury  then  the  man  he  fill’d, 

Who  on  the  poor  pretenders  flew ; 

Naked  and  wounded,  almost  kill’d, 

They  fled  in  all  the  people’s  view. 

5 Jesus ! that  name  pronounc’d  by  faith, 

Is  full  of  wonder-working  power ; 

It  conquers  Satan,  sin,  and  death, 

And  cheers  in  trouble’s  darkest  hour. 

6 But  they  who  are  not  born  again, 

Know  nothing  of  it  but  the  sound ; 

They  do  not  take  his  name  in  vain, 
When  most  their  zeal  and  pains  abound. 

7 Satan  their  vain  attempts  derides, 
Whether  they  talk,  or  pray,  or  preach ; 
Long  as  the  love  of  sin  abides, 

His  power  is  safe  beyond  their  reach. 

8 But  you,  believers,  may  rejoice, 

Satan  well  knows  your  mighty  Friend ; 
He  trembles  at  your  Saviour’s  voice, 
And  owns  he  cannot  gain  his  end. 

HYMN  CXXV. 

Paul's  Voyage.  Chap,  xxvii. 

1 If  Paul  in  Caesar’s  court  must  stand, 

He  need  not  fear  the  sea ; 

Secur’d  from  harm  on  every  hand 
By  the  divine  decree. 

2 Although  the  ship  in  which  he  sail’d 

By  dreadful  storms  was  toss’d ; 

The  promise  over  all  prevail’d, 

And  not  a life  was  lost. 

3 Jesus,  the  God  whom  Paul  ador’d, 

Who  saves  in  time  of  need, 

Was  then  confess’d,  by  all  on  board, 

A present  help  indeed ! 

4 Though  neither  sun  nor  stars  were  seen. 

Paul  knew  the  Lord  was  near ! 

And  faith  preserv’d  his  soul  serene, 
When  others  shook  for  fear. 

5 Believers  thus  are  toss’d  about, 

On  life’s  tempestuous  main ; 

But  grace  assures,  beyond  a doubt 
They  shall  their  port  attain. 

6 They  must,  they  shall  appear  one  day, 

Before  their  Saviour’s  throne ; 

The  storms  they  meet  with  by  the  way, 
But  make  his  power  known. 


[book  i. 

Their  passage  lies  across  the  brink 
Of  many  a threatening  wave ; 

The  world  expects  to  see  them  sink, 

But  Jesus  lives  to  save. 

Lord,  though  we  are  but  feeble  worms, 
Yet  since  thy  word  is  past, 

We  ’ll  venture  through  a thousand  storms, 
To  see  thy  face  at  last. 

ROMANS. 

HYMN  CXXYI. 

The  good  that  I would , I do  not. 

Chap.  vii.  19. 

I would,  but  cannot  sing, 

Guilt  has  untun’d  my  voice ; 

The  serpent’s  sin-envenom’d  sting 
Has  poison’d  all  my  joys. 

I know  the  Lord  is  nigh, 

And  would,  but  cannot  pray ; 

For  Satan  meets  me  when  I try, 

And  frights  my  soul  away. 

I would,  but  can’t  repent, 

Though  I endeavour  oft ; 

This  stony  heart  can  ne’er  relent, 

Till  Jesus  make  it  soft. 

I would,  but  cannot  love, 

Though  wooed  by  love  divine ; 

No  arguments  have  power  to  move 
A soul  so  base  as  mine. 

I would,  but  cannot  rest, 

In  God’s  most  holy  will ; 

I know  what  he  appoints  is  best. 

Yet  murmur  at  it  still. 

Oh  could  I but  believe ! 

Then  all  would  easy  be : 

I would,  but  cannot, — Lord,  relieve ; 

My  help  must  come  from  thee ! 

But  if  indeed  I would, 

Though  I can  nothing  do ; 

Yet  the  desire  is  something  good, 

For  which  my  praise  is  due. 

By  nature  prone  to  ill, 

Till  thine  appointed  hour, 

I was  as  destitute  of  will, 

As  now  I am  of  power. 

Wilt  thou  not  crown  at  length 
The  work  thou  hast  begun  1 
And  with  a will,  afford  me  strength, 

In  all  thy  ways  to  run  1 

HYMN  CXXVII. 

Salvation  drawing  nearer.  Chap.  xiH. 
Darkness  overspreads  us  here, 

But  the  night  wears  fast  away ; 

Jacob’s  Star  will  soon  appear, 

Leading  on  eternal  day ! 

Now  ’tis  time  to  rouse  from  sleep, 

Trim  our  lamps,  and  stand  prepar’d 
For  our  Lord  strict  watch  to  keep, 

Lest  he  find  us  off  our  guard. 


7 

8 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

1 


HYMN  CXXX.] 

2  Let  his  people  courage  take, 

Bear  with  a submissive  mind 
All  they  suffer  for  his  sake, 

Rich  amends  they  soon  will  find : 

He  will  wipe  away  their  tears, 

Near  himself  appoint  their  lot ; 

All  their  sorrows,  pains,  and  fears, 
Quickly  then  will  be  forgot. 

$ Though  already  sav’d  by  grace, 

From  the  hour  we  first  believ’d ; 

Yet  while  sin  and  war  have  place. 

We  have  but  a part  receiv’d ; 

Still  we  for  salvation  wait, 

Every  hour  it  nearer  comes ! 

Death  will  break  the  prison  gate, 

And  admit  us  to  our  homes. 
i Sinners,  what  can  you  expect  ? 

You  who  now  the  Saviour  dare, 

Break  his  laws,  his  grace  reject, 

You  must  stand  before  his  bar  1 
Tremble,  lest  he  say,  Depart ! 

Oh  the  horrors  of  that  sound ! 

Lord,  make  every  careless  heart 
Seek  thee  while  thou  may’st  be  found. 

I.  CORINTHIANS. 

HYMN  CXXVIII. 

That  Rock  was  Christ.  Chap.  x.  4. 

1 When  Israel’s  tribes  were  parch’d  with 

thirst, 

Forth  from  the  rock  the  waters  burst, 

And  all  their  future  journey  through 
Yielded  them  drink,  and  gospel  too ! 

2 In  Moses’  rod  a type  they  saw 
Of  his  severe  and  fiery  law ; 

The  smitten  rock  prefigur’d  him  [stream. 
From  whose  pierc’d  side  all  blessings 

3 But,  ah,  the  types  were  all  too  faint, 

His  sorrows  or  his  worth  to  paint ; 

Slight  was  the  stroke  of  Moses’  rod, 

But  he  endur’d  the  wrath  of  God. 

4 Their  outward  rock  could  feel  no  pain, 
But  ours  was  wounded,  torn,  and  slain ; 
The  rock  gave  but  a watery  flood, 

But  Jesus  pour’d  forth  streams  of  blood. 

5 The  earth  is  like  their  wilderness, 

A land  of  drought  and  sore  distress ; 
Without  one  stream  from  pole  to  pole, 

To  satisfy  a thirsty  soul. 

6 But  let  the  Saviour’s  praise  resound ; 

In  him  refreshing  streams  are  found ; 
Which  pardon,  strength,  and  comfort  give, 
And  thirsty  sinners  drink  and  live. 

II.  CORINTHIANS. 

HYMN  CXXIX. 

My  Grace  is  sufficient  for  thee.  Chap.  xii.  9. 
1 Oppress’d  with  unbelief  and  sin, 
Fightings  without,  and  fears  within ; 


149 

While  earth  and  hell,  with  force  combin’d, 
Assault  and  terrify  my  mind : 

2 What  strength  have  I against  such  foes, 
Such  hosts  and  legions  to  oppose  1 
Alas ! I tremble,  faint,  and  fall ; 

Lord,  save  me,  or  I give  up  all. 

3 Thus  sorely  press’d  I sought  the  Lord, 

To  give  me  some  sweet  cheering  word ; 
Again  I sought,  and  yet  again ; 

I waited  long  but  not  in  vain. 

4 Oh ! ’twas  a cheering  word  indeed  ! 
Exactly  suited  to  my  need  ; 

“ Sufficient  for  thee  is  my  grace ; 

Thy  weakness  my  great  power  displays.” 

5 Now  I despond  and  mourn  no  more, 

I welcome  all  I fear’d  before; 

Though  weak,  I’m  strong,  though  troubled, 
blest, 

For  Christ’s  own  power  shall  on  me  rest. 

6 My  grace  would  soon  exhausted  be. 

But  his  is  boundless  as  the  sea ; 

Then  let  me  boast,  with  holy  Paul, 

That  I am  nothing,  Christ  is  all. 


GALATIANS. 

HYMN  CXXX. 

The  inward  Warfare.  Chap.  v.  17. 

1 Strange  and  mysterious  is  my  life, 

What  opposites  I feel  within ! 

A stable  peace,  a constant  strife ; 

The  rule  of  grace,  the  power  of  sin : 

Too  often  I am  captive  led, 

Yet  daily  triumph  in  my  Head. 

2 I prize  the  privilege  of  prayer, 

But  oh ! what  backwardness  to  pray  ! 
Though  on  the  Lord  I cast  my  care, 

I feel  its  burden  every  day ; 

I seek  his  will  in  all  I do, 

Yet  find  my  own  is  working  too. 

3 I call  the  promises  my  own, 

And  prize  them  more  than  mines  of  gold; 
Yet  though  their  sweetness  I have  known, 
They  leave  me  unimpress’d  and  cold : 

One  hour  upon  the  truth  I feed, 

The  next  I know  not  what  I read. 

4 I love  the  holy  day  of  rest, 

When  Jesus  meets  his  gather’d  saints : 
Sweet  day,  of  all  the  week  the  best ! 

For  its  return  my  spirit  pants ; 

Yet  often,  through  my  unbelief, 

It  proves  a day  of  guilt  and  grief. 

5 While  on  my  Saviour  I rely, 

I know  my  foes  shall  lose  their  aim, 

And  therefore  dare  their  power  defy, 
Assur'd  of  conquest  through  his  name ; 
But  soon  my  confidence  is  slain, 

And  all  my  fears  return  again. 

6 Thus  different  powers  within  me  strive. 
And  grace  and  sin  by  turns  prevail ; 


GALATIANS. 


150 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  i. 


I  grieve,  rejoice,  decline,  revive, 

And  victory  hangs  in  doubtful  scale : 

But  Jesus  has  his  promise  past, 

That  grace  shall  overcome  at  last 

PHILIPPI  ANS. 

HYMN  CXXXI. 
Contentment.*  Chap.  iv.  11. 

1 Fierce  passions  discompose  the  mind, 

As  tempests  vex  the  sea ; 

But  calm  content  and  peace  we  find, 
When,  Lord,  we  turn  to  thee. 

2 In  vain  by  reason  and  by  rule 

We  try  to  bend  the  will ; 

For  none  but  in  the  Saviour’s  school 
Can  learn  the  heavenly  skill. 

3 Since  at  his  feet  my  soul  has  sat 

His  gracious  words  to  hear, 

Contented  with  my  present  state, 

I cast  on  him  my  care. 

4 “ Art  thou  a sinner,  soul  1”  he  said, 

“ Then  how  canst  thou  complain  1 
How  light  thy  troubles  here,  if  weigh’d 
With  everlasting  pain ! 

5 “ If  thou  of  murm’ring  wouldst  be  cur’d, 

Compare  thy  griefs  with  mine ; 

Think  what  my  love  for  thee  endur’d, 
And  thou  wilt  not  repine. 

6 “’Tis  I appoint  thy  daily  lot, 

And  I do  all  things  well ; 

Thou  soon  shalt  leave  this  wretched  spot, 
And  rise  with  me  to  dwell. 

7 “ In  life  my  grace  shall  strength  supply, 

Proportion’d  to  thy  day 
At  death  thou  still  shalt  find  me  nigh 
To  wipe  thy  tears  away.” 

8 Thus  I,  who  once  my  wretched  days 

In  vain  repinings  spent, 

Taught  in  my  Saviour’s  school  of  grace, 
Have  learn’d  to  be  content.  C. 

HEBREWS. 

HYMN  CXXXII. 

Old  Testament  Gospel.  Chap.  iv.  2. 

1 Israel,  in  ancient  days, 

Not  only  had  a view 
Of  Sinai  in  a blaze, 

But  learn’d  the  gospel  too : 

The  types  and  figures  were  a glass, 

In  which  they  saw  the  Saviour’s  face. 

2 The  paschal  sacrifice, 

And  blood-besprinkled  door,f 
Seen  with  enlighten’d  eyes, 

And  once  applied  with  power, 

Would  teach  the  need  of  other  blood, 

To  reconcile  an  angry  God. 


* Book  III.  Hymn  lv.  | Exodus  xii.  13. 


The  lamb,  the  dove,  set  forth 
His  perfect  innocence,* 

Whose  blood  of  matchless  worth. 
Should  be  the  soul’s  defence ; 

For  he  who  can  for  sin  atone, 

Must  have  no  failings  of  his  own. 

The  scape-goat  on  his  headf 
The  people’s  trespass  bore, 
x\nd  to  the  desert  led, 

Was  to  be  seen  no  more: 

In  him  our  Surety  seem’d  to  say, 

“ Behold,  I bear  your  sins  away.” 

Dipt  in  his  fellow’s  blood, 

The  living  bird  went  free 
The  type,  well  understood, 

Express’d  the  sinner’s  plea ; 
Describ’d  a guilty  soul  enlarg’d, 

And  by  a Saviour’s  death  discharg’d. 

Jesus,  I love  to  trace, 

Throughout  the  sacred  page, 

The  footsteps  of  thy  grace, 

The  same  in  ev’ry  age. 

O grant  that  I may  faithful  be 
To  clearer  light  vouchsaf’d  to  me ! C. 


HYMN  CXXXIII. 

The  Word  quick  and  powerful. 

Chap.  iv.  12, 13. 

The  word  of  Christ,  our  Lord, 

With  whom  we  have  to  do, 

Is  sharper  than  a two-edg’d  sword, 

To  pierce  the  sinner  through  : 

Swift  as  the  lightning’s  blaze, 

When  awful  thunders  roll, 

It  fills  the  conscience  with  amaze, 

And  penetrates  the  soul. 

No  heart  can  be  conceal’d 
From  his  all-piercing  eyes ; 

Each  thought  and  purpose  stands  reveal’d. 
Naked,  without  disguise. 

He  sees  his  people’s  fears, 

He  notes  their  mournful  cry, 

He  counts  their  sighs  and  falling  tears, 
And  helps  them  from  on  high. 

Though  feeble  is  their  good, 

It  has  its  kind  regard ; 

Yea,  all  they  would  do  if  they  could, § 

Shall  find  a sure  reward. 

He  sees  the  wicked  too, 

And  will  repay  them  soon, 

For  all  the  evil  deeds  they  do, 

And  all  they  would  have  done.|| 

Since  all  our  secret  ways 
Are  mark’d  and  known  by  thee, 

Afford  us,  Lord,  thy  light  of  grace. 

That  we  ourselves  may  see. 


* Lev.  xii.  6.  t Lev.  xvi.  21.  t Lev.  xiv.  .51 — 53. 
§ 1 Kings  viii.  18.  ||  Matth.  v.  28. 


3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 


REVELATION. 


151 


HYMN  CXXXVII.] 

HYMN  CXXXIV. 

Looking  unto  Jesus.  Chap.  xii.  2. 

1 By  various  maxims,  forms,  and  rules, 
That  pass  for  wisdom  in  the  schools, 

I strove  my  passion  to  restrain, 

But  all  my  efforts  prov’d  in  vain. 

2 But  since  the  Saviour  I have  known, 
My  rules  are  all  reduc’d  to  one, 

To  keep  my  Lord,  by  faith,  in  view ; 
This  strength  supplies,  and  motives  too. 
13  I see  him  lead  a suff’ring  life, 

Patient  amidst  reproach  and  strife ; 

And  from  his  pattern  courage  take, 

To  bear  and  suffer  for  his  sake. 

4 Upon  the  cross  I see  him  bleed, 

And  by  the  sight  from  guilt  am  freed ; 
This  sight  destroys  the  life  of  sin, 

And  quickens  heavenly  life  within. 

5 To  look  to  Jesus  as  he  rose, 

Confirms  my  faith,  disarms  my  foes ; 
Satan  I shame  and  overcome, 

By  pointing  to  my  Saviour’s  tomb. 

6 Exalted  on  his  glorious  throne, 

I see  him  make  my  cause  his  own  ; 
Then  all  my  anxious  cares  subside, 

For  Jesus  lives,  and  will  provide. 

7 I see  him  look  with  pity  down, 

And  hold  in  view  the  conq’ror’s  crown ; 
If  press’d  with  griefs  and  cares  before, 
My  soul  revives,  nor  asks  for  more. 

8 By  faith  I see  the  hour  at  hand, 

When  in  his  presence  I shall  stand ; 
Then  it  will  be  my  endless  bliss, 

To  see  him  where,  and  as  he  is. 


HYMN  CXXXV. 
Love-tokens.  Chap.  xii.  5 — 11. 

1 Afflictions  do  not  come  alone, 

A voice  attends  the  rod ; 

By  both  he  to  his  saints  is  known, 

A Father  and  a God  ! 

2 “ Let  not  my  children  slight  the  stroke 

I for  chastisement  send, 

Nor  faint  beneath  my  kind  rebuke, 

For  still  I am  their  friend. 

3 “ The  wicked  I perhaps  may  leave 

A while,  and  not  reprove ; 

But  all  the  children  I receive, 

I scourge,  because  I love. 

4 “ If,  therefore,  you  are  left  without 

This  needful  discipline, 

You  might  with  cause  admit  a doubt, 

If  you,  indeed,  were  tnine. 

5 “ Shall  earthly  parents  then  expect 

Their  children  to  submit  1 
And  will  not  you,  when  I correct, 

Be  humbled  at  my  feet! 

6 “ To  please  themselves  they  oft  chastise, 

And  put  their  sons  to  pain ; 


But  you  are  precious  in  my  eyes, 

And  shall  not  smart  in  vain. 

“ I see  your  hearts  at  present  fill’d 
With  grief  and  deep  distress; 

But  soon  these  bitter  seeds  shall  yield 
The  fruits  of  righteousness.” 

Break  through  the  clouds,  dear  Lord,  and 
Let  us  perceive  thee  nigh  ! [shine, 
And  to  each  mourning  child  of  thine 
These  gracious  words  apply. 


REVELATION. 


HYMN  CXXXVI. 

Ephesus.  Chap.  ii.  1 — 7. 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  to  Ephesus, 

And  thus  he  speaks  to  some  of  us : — 

“ Amidst  my  churches,  lo,  I stand, 

And  hold  the  pastors  in  my  hand: 

“ Thy  works  to  me  are  fully  known, 

Thy  patience  and  thy  toil  I own ; 

Thy  views  of  gospel-truth  are  clear, 

Nor  canst  thou  other  doctrine  bear. 

“ Yet  I must  blame  while  I approve  ; 
Where  is  thy  first,  thy  fervent  love  ! 

Dost  thou  forget  my  love  to  thee  ! 

That  thine  is  grown  so  faint  to  me ! 

“ Recall  to  mind  the  happy  days, 

When  thou  wast  fill’d  with  joy  and  , 
Repent,  thy  former  works  renew, 

Then  I ’ll  restore  thy  comforts  too. 

“ Return  at  once,  when  I reprove, 

Lest  I thy  candlestick  remove  ; 

And  thou,  too  late,  thy  loss  lament, 

I warn  before  I strike, — Repent." 
Hearken  to  what  the  Spirit  saith, 

To  him  that  overcomes  by  faith, 

“ The  fruit  of  life’s  unfading  tree, 

In  paradise  his  food  shall  be.” 

HYMN  CXXXVII. 

Smyrna.  Chap.  ii.  11. 

The  message  first  to  Smyrna  sent, 

A message  full  of  grace, 

To  all  the  Saviour’s  flock  is  meant, 

In  ev’ry  age  and  place. 

Thus  to  his  church,  his  chosen  bride 
Saith  the  great  First  and  Last, 

Who  ever  lives,  though  once  he  died, 

“ Hold  thy  profession  fast. 

“ Thy  works  and  sorrow  well  I know 
Perform’d  and  borne  for  me ; 

Poor  though  thou  art,  despis’d  and  lor 
Yet  who  is  rich  like  thee! 

“ I know  thy  foes,  and  what  they  say. 
How  long  they  have  blasphem’d ; 

The  synagogue  of  Satan  they, 

Though  they  would  Jews  be  deem'd 


7 

8 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 


152  OLNEY  HYMNS.  [book  i 


5 “ Though  Satan  for  a season  rage, 

And  prisons  be  your  lot, 

I  am  your  friend,  and  I engage 
You  shall  not  be  forgot. 

6 “ Be  faithful  unto  death,  nor  fear 

A few  short  days  of  strife ; 

Behold  ! the  prize  you  soon  shall  wear, 

A crown  of  endless  life !” 

7 Hear  what  the  Holy  Spirit  saith 

Of  all  who  overcome ; 

‘ They  shall  escape  the  second  death, 

The  sinner’s  awful  doom  !” 

HYMN  CXXXVIII. 

Sardis.  Chap.  iii.  1 — 6. 

1 “ Write  to  Sardis,”  saith  the  Lord, 

And  write  what  he  declares, 

He  whose  Spirit,  and  whose  Word, 
Uphold  the  seven  stars : 

“ All  thy  works  and  ways  I search, 

Find  thy  zeal  and  love  decayed ; 

Thou  art  call’d  a living  church, 

But  thou  art  cold  and  dead. 

2 “ Watch,  remember,  seek,  and  strive, 

Exert  thy  former  pains  ; 

Let  thy  timely  care  revive 
And  strengthen  what  remains ; 

Cleanse  thine  heart,  thy  works  amend, 
Former  times  to  mind  recall, 

Lest  my  sudden  stroke  descend, 

And  smite  thee  once  for  all. 

3 “ Yet  I number  now  in  thee 

A few  that  are  upright; 

These  my  Father’s  face  shall  see, 

And  walk  with  me  in  white : 

When  in  judgment  I appear, 

They  for  mine  shall  be  confess’d : 

Let  my  faithful  servants  hear, 

And  woe  be  to  the  rest !”  C. 

HYMN  CXXXIX. 
Philadelphia.  Chap.  iii.  7 — 13. 

1 Thus  saith  the  holy  One  and  true, 

To  his  beloved  faithful  few, 

“ Of  heaven  and  hell  I hold  the  keys, 

To  sliut,  or  open,  as  I please. 

2 “ I know  thy  works,  and  I approve ; 
Though  small  thy  strength,  sincere  thy  love, 
Go  on,  my  word  and  name  to  own, 

For  none  shall  rob  thee  of  thy  crown. 

3 “ Before  thee  see  my  mercy’s  door 
Stands  open  wide,  to  shut  no  more ; 

Fear  not  temptation’s  fiery  day, 

For  I will  be  thy  strength  and  stay. 

4 “ Thou  hast  my  promise,  hold  it  fast, 

The  trying  hour  will  soon  be  past ; 
Rejoice,  for,  lo ! I quickly  come, 

To  take  thee  to  my  heavenly  home. 

5 “ A pillar  there,  no  mere  to  move, 
Inscrib’d  with  all  ray  names  of  love 
A monument  of  mighty  grace, 

Thou  shalt  for  ever  have  a place.” 


6  Such  is  the  conqueror’s  reward. 

Prepar’d  and  promis’d  by  the  Lord ! 

Let  him  that  hath  the  ear  of  faith, 
Attend  to  what  the  Spirit  saith. 

HYMN  CXL. 

Laodicea.  Chap.  iii.  14 — 20. 

1 Hear  what  the  Lord,  the  great  Amen, 
The  true  and  faithful  witness  says! 

He  form’d  the  vast  creation’s  plan, 

And  searches  all  our  hearts  and  ways. 

2 To  some  he  speaks,  as  once  of  old, 

“ I know  thee,  thy  profession’s  vain : 
Since  thou  art  neither  hot  nor  cold, 

I ’ll  spit  thee  from  me  with  disdain. 

3 “ Thou  boasted,  ‘ I am  wise  and  rich, 
Increas’d  in  goods,  and  nothing  need ; 
And  dost  not  know  thou  art  a wretch, 
Naked,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  dead. 

4 “ Yet  while  I thus  rebuke,  I love, 

My  message  is  in  mercy  sent ; 

That  thou  may’st,  my  compassion  prove 
I can  forgive  if  thou  repent. 

5 “ Wouldst  thou  be  truly  rich  and  wise ! 
Come,  buy  my  gold  in  fire  well  tried, 
My  ointment  to  anoint  thine  eyes, 

My  robe  thy  nakedness  to  hide. 

6 “ See  at  thy  door  I stand  and  knock ! 
Poor  sinner,  shall  I wait  in  vain  1 
Quickly  thy  stubborn  heart  unlock, 

That  I may  enter  with  my  train. 

7 “ Thou  canst  not  entertain  a king, 
Unworthy  thou  of  such  a guest, 

But  I my  own  provisions  bring, 

To  make  thy  soul  a heavenly  feast.” 

HYMN  CXLI 
The  Little  Book*  Chap.  x. 

1 When  the  belov’d  disciple  took 
The  angel’s  little  open  book, 

Which,  by  the  Lord’s  command,  he  ate, 
It  tasted  bitter  after  sweet. 

2 Thus  when  the  gospel  is  embrac’d, 

At  first  ’tis  sweeter  to  the  taste 
Than  honey,  or  the  honey-comb, 

But  there ’s  a bitterness  to  come. 

3 What  sweetness  does  the  promise  yield, 
When  by  the  Spirit’s  power  seal’d  ! 

The  longing  soul  is  fill’d  with  good, 

Nor  feels  a wish  for  other  food. 

4 By  these  inviting  tastes  allur’d 
We  pass  to  what  must  be  endur’d  ; 

For  soon  we  find  it  is  decreed, 

That  bitter  must  to  sweet  succeed. 

5 When  sin  revives,  and  shows  its  power, 
When  Satan  threatens  to  devour, 

When  God  afflicts,  and  men  revile, 

We  draw  our  steps  with  pain  and  toil. 


* Book  III.  Hymn  xxvii. 


SEASONS. 


158 


HYMN  IV.] 

6 When  thus  deserted,  tempest-toss’d, 

The  sense  of  former  sweetness  lost, 

We  tremble  lest  we  were  deceiv’d, 

In  thinking  that  we  once  believ’d. 

7 The  Lord  first  makes  the  sweetness  known, 
To  win  and  fix  us  for  his  own ; 

And  though  we  now  some  bitter  meet, 
We  hope  for  everlasting  sweet. 


BOOK  II. 

ON  OCCASIONAL  SUBJECTS. 


I.  SEASONS. 

NEW-YEAR  HYMNS. 

HYMN  I. 

Time  how  swift. 

1 While  with  ceaseless  course  the  sun 
Hasted  through  the  former  year, 
Many  souls  their  race  have  run, 
Never  more  to  meet  us  here: 

Fix’d  in  an  eternal  state, 

They  have  done  with  all  below ; 

We  a little  longer  wait, 

But  how  little  none  can  know. 

2 As  the  winged  arrow  flies, 

Speedily  the  mark  to  find ; 

As  the  lightning  from  the  skies 
Darts,  and  leaves  no  trace  behind : 
Swiftly  thus  our  fleeting  days 
Bear  us  down  life’s  rapid  stream ; 
Upwards,  Lord,  our  spirits  raise, 

All  below  is  but  a dream. 

3 Thanks  for  mercies  past  receive, 
Pardon  of  our  sins  renew ; 

Teach  us  henceforth  how  to  live, 
With  eternity  in  view : 

Bless  thy  word  to  young  and  old, 

Fill  us  with  a Saviour’s  love ; 

And  when  life’s  short  tale  is  told, 
May  we  dwell  with  thee  above. 

HYMN  II. 

Time  how  short. 

1 Time,  with  an  unwearied  hand, 
Pushes  round  the  seasons  past : 

And  in  life’s  frail  glass  the  sand 
Sinks  apace,  not  long  to  last ; 

Many  as  well  as  you  or  I, 

Who  last  year  assembled  thus, 

In  their  silent  graves  now  lie ; 

Graves  will  open  soon  for  us. 

2 Daily  sin,  and  care,  and  strife, 

While  the  Lord  prolongs  our  breath, 
Make  it  but  a dying  life, 

Or  a kind  of  living  death : 

Wretched  they,  and  most  forlorn, 
Who  no  better  portion  know ; 

Voi*  II.  U 


Better  ne’er  to  have  been  born 
Than  to  have  our  all  below. 

3 When  constrain’d  to  go  alone, 

Leaving  all  you  love  behind, 

Ent’ring  on  a world  unknown, 

What  will  then  support  your  mind  1 
When  the  Lord  his  summons  sends,* 
Earthly  comforts  lose  their  power ; 
Honour,  riches,  kindred,  friends, 
Cannot  cheer  a dying  hour. 

4 Happy  souls,  who  fear  the  Lord ; 

Time  is  not  too  swift  for  you ; 

When  your  Saviour  gives  the  word. 
Glad  you  ’ll  bid  the  world  adieu : 

Then  he  ’ll  wipe  away  your  tears, 

Near  himself  appoint  your  place ; 
Swifter  fly,  ye  rolling  years, 

Lord,  we  long  to  see  thy  face. 

HYMN  IH. 

Uncertainty  of  Life. 

1 See,  another  year  is  gone ! 

Quickly  have  the  seasons  pass’d  S 
This  we  enter  now  upon 

May  to  many  prove  their  last : 

Mercy  hitherto  has  spar’d, 

But  have  mercies  been  improv’d  I 
Let  us  ask,  Am  I prepar’d, 

Should  I be  this  yeai  remov’d  'l 

2 Some  we  now  no  longer  see, 

Who  their  mortal  race  have  run, 
Seem’d  as  fair  for  life  as  we, 

When  the  former  year  begun : 

Some,  but  who  God  only  knows, 

Who  are  here  assembled  now, 

Ere  the  present  year  shall  close, 

To  the  stroke  of  death  must  bow 

3 Life  a field  of  battle  is, 

Thousands  fall  within  our  view, 

And  the  next  death-bolt  that  flies, 

May  be  sent  tc  me  rr  you. 

While  we  preach  and  while  we  near, 
Help  us,  Lord,  each  one  to  think, 

Vast  eternity  is  near, 

I am  standing  on  the  brink. 

4 If,  from  guilt  and  sin  set  free, 

By  the  knowledge  of  thy  grace, 
Welcome,  then,  the  call  will  be, 

To  depart  and  see  thy  face. 

To  thy  saints,  while  here  below, 

With  new  years,  new  mercies  come  ; 
But  the  happiest  year  they  know, 

Is  their  last,  which  leads  them  home. 

HYMN  IV. 

A New-  Year's  Thought  and  Prayer. 
1 Time  by  moments  steals  away, 

First  the  hour,  and  then  the  day ; 

Small  the  daily  loss  appears, 

Yet  it  soon  amounts  to  years : 


Isaiah  x.  3. 


354 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  n. 


Thus  another  year  is  flown, 

Now  it  is  no  more  our  own, 

If  it  brought  or  promis’d  good, 

Than  the  years  before  the  flood. 

2 But  (may  none  of  us  forget) 

It  has  left  us  much  in  debt ; 

Favours  from  the  Lord  receiv’d, 

Sins  that  have  his  Spirit  griev’d, 

Mark’d  by  an  unerring  hand, 

In  his  book  recorded  stand : 

Who  can  tell  the  vast  amount 
Plac’d  to  each  of  our  account! 

3 Happy  the  believing  soul, 

Christ  for  you  has  paid  the  whole : 
While  you  own  the  debt  is  large, 

You  may  plead  a full  discharge  ; 

But,  poor  careless  sinner,  say, 

What  can  you  to  justice  pay ! 

Tremble,  lest  when  life  is  past, 

Into  prison  you  be  cast. 

4 Will  you  still  increase  the  score  ! 

Still  be  careless  as  before! 

O  forbid  it,  gracious  Lord  ! 

Touch  their  spirits  by  thy  word  ! 

Now  in  mercy  to  them  show 
What  a mighty  debt  they  owe ! 

All  their  unbelief  subdue, 

Let  them  find  forgiveness  too. 

5 Spar’d  to  see  another  year, 

Let  thy  blessing  meet  us  here : 

Come,  thy  dying  work  revive, 

Bid  thy  drooping  garden  thrive. 

Sun  of  righteousness,  arise ! 

Warm  our  hearts,  and  bless  our  eyes; 
Let  our  prayer  thy  bowels  move, 

Make  this  year  a time  of  love. 

HYMN  V. 

Death  and  War.  1778. 

1 Ha.rk,  how  time’s  wide-sounding  bell 
Strikes  on  each  attentive  ear ! 

Tolling  loud  the  solemn  knell 

Of  the  late  departed  year  ; 

Years,  like  mortals,  wear  away, 

Have  their  birth  and  dying  day, 

Youthful  spring,  and  wintry  age, 

Then  to  others  quit  the  stage. 

2 Sad  experience  may  relate 
What  a year  the  last  has  been ! 

Crops  of  sorrow  have  been  great, 

From  the  fruitful  seeds  of  sin ; 

Oh  ! what  numbers  gay  and  blythe, 

Fell  by  death’s  unsparing  scythe ! 

While  they  thought  the  world  their  own, 
Suddenly  he  mow’d  them  down. 

3 See,  how  war,  with  dreadful  stride, 
Marches  at  the  Lord’s  command, 
Spreading  desolation  wide, 

Through  a once  much  favour’d  land : 
War,  with  heart  and  arms  of  steel, 

Preys  on  thousands  at  a meal ; 


Daily  drinking  human  gore, 

Still  he  thirsts  and  calls  for  more. 

4 If  the  God  whom  we  provoke, 

Hither  should  his  way  direct 
What  a sin-avenging  stroke 
May  a land  like  this  expect ! 

They  who  now  securely  sleep, 
Quickly  then  would  wake  and  weep ; 
And  too  late  would  learn  to  fear, 
When  they  saw  the  danger  near. 

5 You  are  safe  who  know  his  love, 

He  will  all  his  truth  perform ; 

To  your  souls  a refuge  prove, 

From  the  rage  of  every  storm : 

But  we  tremble  for  the  youth ; 

Teach  them,  Lord,  thy  saving  truth ; 
Join  them  to  thy  faithful  few, 

Be  to  them  a refuge  too. 


HYMN  VI. 

Earthly  Prospects  deceitful. 

1 Oft  in  vain  the  voice  of  truth 
Solemnly  and  loudly  warns; 
Thoughtless,  unexperienc’d  youth, 
Though  it  hears,  the  warning  scorns. 
Youth  in  fancy’s  glass  surveys 

Life  prolong’d  to  distant  years, 

While  the  vast  imagin’d  space 
Fill’d  with  sweets  and  joys  appears. 

2 Awful  disappointment  soon 
Overclouds  the  prospect  gay ; 

Some  their  sun  goes  down  at  noon, 

Torn  by  death’s  strong  hand  away : 
Where  are  then  their  pleasing  schemes ! 
Where  the  joys  they  hope  to  find ! 

Gone  for  ever,  like  their  dreams, 

Leaving  not  a trace  behind. 

3 Others,  who  are  spar’d  a while, 

Live  to  weep  o’er  fancy’s  cheat; 

Find  distress,  and  pain,  and  toil, 

Bitter  things  instead  of  sweet : 

Sin  has  spread  a curse  around, 

Poison’d  all  things  here  below ; 

On  this  base  polluted  ground, 

Peace  and  joy  can  never  grow. 

4 Grace  alone  can  cure  our  ills, 

Sweeten  life  with  all  its  cares ; 

Regulate  our  stubborn  wills, 

Save  us  from  surrounding  snares. 
Though  you  oft  have  heard  in  vain, 
Former  years  in  folly  spent, 

Grace  invites  you  yet  again, 

Once  more  calls  you  to  repent. 

5 Call’d  again,  at  length,  beware, 

Hear  the  Saviour’s  voice,  and  live ; 

Lest  he  in  his  wrath  should  swear, 

He  no  more  will  warning  give. 

Pray  that  you  may  hear  and  feel, 

Ere  the  day  of  grace  be  past ; 

Lest  your  hearts  grow  hard  as  steel. 

Or  this  year  should  prove  your  last 


HYMN  X.] 


SEASONS. 


155 


HYMNS 

BEFORE  ANNUAL  SERMONS  TO  YOUNG  PEOPLE 
ON  NEW-YEAR  EVENINGS. 

HYMN  VII. 

Prayer  for  a Blessing. 

1 Now,  gracious  Lord,  thine  arm  reveal, 

And  make  thy  glory  known ; 

Now  let  us  all  thy  presence  feel, 

And  soften  hearts  of  stone  ! 

2 Help  us  to  venture  near  thy  throne, 

And  plead  a Saviour’s  name  ; . 

For  all  that  we  can  call  our  own, 

Is  vanity  and  shame. 

3 From  all  the  guilt  of  former  sin 

May  mercy  set  us  free ; 

And  let  the  year  we  now  begin, 

Begin  and  end  with  thee. 

4 Send  down  thy  Spirit  from  above, 

That  saints  may  love  thee  more, 

And  sinners  now  may  learn  to  love, 

Who  never  lov’d  before. 

5 And  when  before  thee  we  appear 

In  our  eternal  home, 

May  growing  numbers  worship  here, 
And  praise  thee  in  our  room. 

HYMN  VIII. 

ANOTHER. 

1 Bestow,  dear  Lord,  upon  our  youth, 

The  gift  of  saving  grace ; 

And  let  the  seed  of  sacred  truth 
Fall  in  a fruitful  place. 

2 Grace  is  a plant,  where’er  it  grows, 

Of  pure  and  heavenly  root; 

But  fairest  in  the  youngest  shows, 

And  yields  the  sweetest  fruit. 

3 Ye  careless  ones,  O hear  betimes 

The  Voice  of  sovereign  love ! 

Your  youth  is  stain’d  with  many  crimes, 
But  mercy  reigns  above. 

4 True,  you  are  young,  but  there ’s  a stone 

Within  the  youngest  breast, 

Or  half  the  crimes  which  you  have  done, 
Would  rob  you  of  your  rest. 

5 For  you  the  public  prayer  is  made, 

Oh!  join  the  public  prayer! 

For  you  the  sacred  tear  is  shed, 

O shed  yourselves  a tear  ! 

6 We  pray  that  you  may  early  prove 

The  Spirit’s  power  to  teach ; 

You  cannot  be  too  young  to  love 

That  Jesus  whom  we  preach.  C. 

HYMN  IX. 

ANOTHER. 

Now  may  fervent  prayer  arise, 

Wing’d  with  faith  and  pierce  the  skies; 
Fervent  prayer  shall  bring  us  down 
Gracious  answers  from  the  throne. 


Bless,  O Lord,  the  op’ning  year, 

To  each  soul  assembled  here; 

Clothe  thy  word  with  power  divine, 

Make  us  willing  to  be  thine. 

Shepherd  of  thy  blood-bought  sheep ! 
Teach  the  stony  heart  to  weep : 

Let  the  blind  have  eyes  to  see, 

See  themselves  and  look  on  thee  ! 

Let  the  minds  of  all  our  youth 
Feel  the  force  of  sacred  truth ; 

While  the  gospel-call  they  hear, 

May  they  learn  to  love  and  fear. 

Show  them  what  their  ways  have  been, 
Show  them  the  desert  of  sin ; 

Then  thy  dying  love  reveal, 

This  shall  melt  a heart  of  steel. 

Where  thou  hast  thy  work  begun, 

Give  new  strength  the  race  to  run ; 
Scatter  darkness,  doubts,  and  fears. 

Wipe  away  the  mourner’s  tears. 

Bless  us  all,  both  old  and  young ; 

Call  forth  praise  from  every  tongue ; 

Let  the  whole  assembly  prove 
All  thy  power,  and  all  thy  love. 

HYMN  X. 

Casting  the  Gospel-Net. 

When  Peter,  through  the  tedious  night,1" 
Had  often  cast  his  net  in  vain, 

Soon  as  the  Lord  appear’d  in  sight, 

He  gladly  let  it  down  again. 

Once  more  the  gospel-net  we  cast, 

Do  thou,  O Lord,  the  effort  own ; 

We  learn  from  disappointments  past, 

To  rest  our  hope  on  thee  alone. 

Upheld  by  thy  supporting  hand, 

We  enter  on  another  year; 

And  now  we  meet  at  thy  command, 

To  seek  thy  gracious  presence  here. 

May  this  be  a much-favour’d  hour 
To  souls  in  Satan’s  bondage  led ; 

O clothe  thy  word  with  sovereign  power 
To  break  the  rocks,  and  raise  the  dead  ! 
Have  mercy  on  our  num’rous  youth, 

Who,  young  in  years,  are  old  in  sin  : 

And  by  thy  Spirit,  and  thy  truth, 

Show  them  the  state  their  souls  are  in. 
Then  by  a Saviour’s  dying  love, 

To  every  wounded  heart  reveal’d, 
Temptations,  fears,  and  guilt  remove, 

And  be  their  sun,  and  strength,  and  shield. 
To  mourners  speak  a cheering  word, 

On  seeking  souls  vouchsafe  to  shine ; 

Let  poor  backsliders  be  restor’d, 

And  all  thy  saints  in  praises  join. 

O hear  our  prayer,  and  give  us  hope, 

That  when  thy  voice  shall  call  us  home. 
Thou  still  wilt  raise  a people  up, 

To  love  and  praise  thee  in  our  room. 

+ Luke  v.  4. 


2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 


156 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  n. 


HYMN  XI. 

Pleading  for  and  with  Youth. 

1 Sin  has  undone  our  wretched  race, 

But  Jesus  has  restor’d, 

And  brought  the  sinner  face  to  face 
With  his  forgiving  Lord. 

2 This  we  repeat,  from  year  to  year, 

And  press  upon  our  youth ; 

Lord,  give  them  an  attentive  ear 
Lord,  save  them  by  thy  truth. 

3 Blessings  upon  the  rising  race ! 

Make  this  a happy  hour, 

According  to  thy  richest  grace, 

And  thine  almighty  power. 

4 We  feel  for  your  unhappy  state, 

(May  you  regard  it  too) 

And  would  a while  ourselves  forget, 

To  pour  out  prayer  for  you. 

5 We  see,  though  you  perceive  it  not, 

The  approaching,  awful  doom ; 

O  tremble  at  the  solemn  thought, 

And  flee  the  wrath  to  come. 

6 Hear  Saviour,  let  this  new-born  year 

Spread  an  alarm  abroad ; 

And  cry,  in  every  careless  ear, 

“ Prepare  to  meet  thy  God !”  C. 

HYMN  XII. 

Prayer  for  Children. 

1 Gracious  Lord,  our  children  see, 

By  thy  mercy  we  are  free  ; 

But  shall  these,  alas ! remain, 

Subjects  still  of  Satan’s  reign ; 

Israel’s  young  ones,  when  of  old 
Pharaoh  threaten’d  to  withhold ; 

Then  thy  messenger  said,  “ No, 

Let  the  children  also  go.”* 

2 When  the  angel  of  the  Lord, 

Drawing  forth  his  dreadful  sword, 

Slew,  with  an  avenging  hand, 

All  the  first-born  of  the  land  ;f 
Then  thy  people’s  doors  he  pass’d, 
Where  the  bloody  sign  was  placed : 
Hear  us  now,  upon  our  knees, 

Plead  the  blood  of  Christ  for  these ! 

3 Lord,  we  tremble,  for  we  know 
How  the  fierce  malicious  foe, 

Wheeling  round  his  watchful  flight, 
Keeps  them  ever  in  his  sight : 

Spread  thy  pinions,  King  of  kings! 

Hide  them  safe  beneath  thy  wings ; 

Lest  the  rav’nous  bird  of  prey 

Stoop,  and  bear  the  brood  away.  C. 

HYMN  Xm. 

The  Shunamite.\ 

l The  Shunamite,  oppress’d  with  grief, 
When  she  nad  lost  the  son  she  lov’d, 
Went  to  Elisha  for  relief, 

Nor  vain  her  application  prov’d. 

* Exod.  x.  9.  t Exod.  ***• 13*  1 2 Kings  iv.  31. 


He  sent  his  servant  on  before. 

To  lay  a staff  upon  his  head ; 

This  he  could  do,  but  do  no  more ; 

He  left  him,  as  he  found  him — dead. 

But  when  the  Lord’s  almighty  power 
Wrought  with  the  prophet’s  prayer  and 
The  mother  saw  a joyful  hour,  [faith, 
She  saw  her  child  restor’d  from  death. 
Thus,  like  the  weeping  Shunamite, 

For  many  dead  in  sin  wTe  grieve ; 

Now,  Lord,  display  thine  arm  of  might, 
Cause  them  to  hear  thy  voice  and  live. 
Thy  preachers  hear  the  staff  in  vain, 
Though  at  thine  own  command  we  go ; 
Lord,  we  have  tried  and  tried  again, 

We  find  them  dead,  and  leave  them  so. 
Come  then  thyself— to  ev’ry  heart 
The  glory  of  thy  name  make  known ; 
The  means  are  our  appointed  part, 

The  power  and  grace  are  thine  alone. 

HYMN  XIV. 

Elijah’s  Prayer .* 

Does  it  not  grief  and  wonder  move, 

To  think  of  Israel’s  shameful  fall! 

Who  needed  miracles  to  prove 
Whether  the  Lord  was  God  or  Baal ! 
Methinks  I see  Elijah  stand, 

His  features  glow  with  love  and  zeal : 

In  faith  and  prayer  he  lifts  his  hand, 

And  makes  to  heaven  his  great  appea*. 

“ O God,  if  I thy  servant  am, 

If  ’tis  thy  message  fills  my  heart, 

Now  glorify  thy  holy  name, 

And  show  this  people  who  thou  art !” 

He  spake,  and,  lo ! a sudden  flame 
Consum’d  the  wood,  the  dust,  the  stone ; 
The  people  struck,  at  once  proclaim, 

“ The  Lord  is  God,  the  Lord  alone.” 

Like  him,  we  mourn,  an  awful  day, 
When  more  for  Baal  than  God  appear ; 
Like  him,  believers,  let  us  pray, 

And  may  the  God  of  Israel  hear ! 

Lord,  if  thy  servant  speak  thy  truth, 

If  he  indeed  is  sent  by  thee, 

Confirm  the  word  to  all  our  youth, 

And  let  them  thy  salvation  see. 

Now  may  thy  Spirit’s  holy  fire 
Pierce  every  heart  that  hears  thy  word, 
Consume  each  hurtful  vain  desire, 

And  make  them  know  thou  art  the  Lord. 

HYMN  XV. 

Preaching  to  the  Dry  Bones,  f 

Preachers  may,  from  Ezekiel’s  case, 
Draw  hope  in  this  declining  day ; 

A proof,  like  this,  of  sovereign  grace, 
Should  chase  our  unbelief  away. 


* 1 Kings  xviii.  t Ezek.  xxxvii. 


2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

1 


SEASONS. 


157 


HYMN  XVIII.] 

2 When  sent  to  preach  to  mould’ring  bones, 
Who  could  have  thought  he  would  succeed, 
But  well  he  knew  the  Lord  from  stones 
Could  raise  up  Abrah’m’s  chosen  seed. 

3 Can  these  be  made  a num’rous  host, 

And  such  dry  bones  new  life  receive  1 
The  prophet  answer’d,  “ Lord,  thou  know’st 
They  shall,  if  thou  commandment  give.” 

4 Like  him,  around  I cast  my  eye, 

And,  oh ! what  heaps  of  bones  appear ; 
Like  him,  by  Jesus  sent,  I ’ll  try, 

For  he  can  cause  the  dead  to  hear. 

5 Hear,  ye  dry  bones,  the  Saviour’s  word  ! 
He,  who,  when  dying,  gasp’d,  “Forgive,” 
That  gracious  sinner-loving  Lord 

Says,  “ Look  to  me,  dry  bones,  and  live.” 

6 Thou  heavenly  wind,  awake  and  blow, 

In  answer  to  the  prayer  of  faith ; 

Now  thine  almighty  influence  show, 

And  fill  dry  bones  with  living  breath. 

7 O make  them  hear,  and  feel,  and  shake, 
And  at  thy  call  obedient  move ; 

The  bonds  of  death  and  Satan  break, 

And  bone  to  bone  unite  in  love. 

HYMN  XVI. 

The  Rod  of  Moses. 

1 When  Moses  wav’d  his  mystic  rod, 

What  wonders  follow’d  while  he  spoke  ! 
Firm  as  a wall  the  waters  stood,* 

Or  gush’d  in  rivers  from  the  rock  !f 

2 At  his  command  the  thunders  roll’d, 
Lightning  and  hail  his  voice  obeyed, | 

And  Pharaoh  trembled  to  behold 
His  land  in  desolation  laid. 

3 But  what  could  Moses’  rod  have  done, 

Had  he  not  been  divinely  sent  1 

The  power  was  from  the  Lord  alone, 

And  Moses  but  the  instrument. 

4 O Lord,  regard  thy  people’s  prayers ! 
Assist  a worm  to  preach  aright ; 

And  since  thy  gospel-rod  he  bears, 

Display  thy  wonders  in  our  sight. 

5 Proclaim  the  thunders  of  thy  law, 

Like  lightning  let  thine  arrows  fly, 

That  careless  sinners,  struck  with  awe, 
For  refuge  may  to  Jesus  cry ! 

6 Make  streams  of  godly  sorrow  flow 
From  rocky  hearts,  unus’d  to  feel ; 

And  let  the  poor  in  spirit  know, 

That  thou  art  near,  their  griefs  to  heal. 

7 But  chiefly,  we  would  now  look  up 
To  ask  a blessing  for  our  youth, 

The  rising  generation’s  hope, 

That  they  may  know  and  love  thy  truth. 

8 Arise,  O Lord,  afford  a sign, 

Now  shall  our  prayers  success  obtain ; 
Since  both  the  means  and  power  are  thine, 
How  can  the  rod  be  rais’d  in  vain ! 


HYMN  XVII. 

God  speaking  from  Mount  Zion. 

1 The  God  who  once  to  Israel  spoke 
From  Sinai’s  top,  in  fire  and  smoke, 

In  gentler  strains  of  gospel-grace 
Invites  us  now  to  seek  his  face. 

2 He  wears  no  terrors  on  his  brow, 

He  speaks  in  love  from  Zion  now ; 

It  is  the  voice  of  Jesu’s  blood, 

Calling  poor  wand’rers  home  to  God. 

3 The  holy  Moses  quak’d  and  fear’d, 

When  Sinai's  thund’ring  law  he  heard ; 
But  reigning  grace,  with  accents  mild, 
Speaks  to  the  sinner  as  a child. 

4 Hark ! how  from  Calvary  it  sounds, 

From  the  Redeemer’s  bleeding  wounds ! 

“ Pardon  and  grace  I freely  give, 

Poor  sinner,  look  to  me,  and  live.” 

5 What  other  arguments  can  move 

The  heart  that  slights  a Saviour’s  love ! 
Yet,  till  almighty  power  constrain, 

This  matchless  love  is  preach’d  in  vain. 

6 O Saviour,  let  thy  power  be  felt, 

And  cause  each  stony  heart  to  melt ! 
Deeply  impress  upon  our  youth, 

The  light  and  force  of  gospel-truth. 

7 With  this  new  year  may  they  begin 
To  live  to  thee,  and  die  to  sin  ; 

To  enter  by  the  narrow  way, 

Which  leads  to  everlasting  day. 

8 How  will  they  else  thy  presence  bear, 
When,  as  a judge,  thou  shalt  appear ! 
When  slighted  love  to  wrath  shall  turn, 
And  the  whole  earth  like  Sinai  burnl 

HYMN  XVIII. 

A Prayer  for  Power  on  the  means  of  Grace. 

1 O thou,  at  whose  almighty  word 

The  glorious  light  from  darkness  sprung, 
Thy  quick’ning  influence  afford, 

And  clothe  with  power  the  preacher’s 
tongue. 

2 Though  ’tis  thy  truth  he  hopes  to  speak, 
He  cannot  give  the  hearing  ear ; 

’Tis  thine  the  stubborn  heart  to  break, 
And  make  the  careless  sinner  fear. 

3 As  when  of  old  the  water  flow’d 
Forth  from  the  rock  at  thy  command,* 
Moses  in  vain  had  wav’d  his  rod, 

Without  thy  wonder-working  hand. 

4 As  when  the  walls  of  Jericho, f 
Down  to  the  earth  at  once  were  cast, 

It  was  thy  power  that  brought  them  low, 
And  not  the  trumpet’s  feeble  blast. 

5 Thus  we  would  in  the  means  be  found, 
And  thus  on  thee  alone  depend, 

To  make  the  gospel’s  joyful  sound 
Effectual  to  the  promis’d  end. 


Exod.  xiv.  22.  t Numb.  xx.  11.  J Exod.  ix.  23. 


* Numb.  xx.  11. 


t Joshua  vi  20 


15S 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


0 Now,  while  we  hear  thy  word  of  grace, 
Let  self  and  pride  before  it  fall ; 

And  rocky  hearts  dissolve  apace, 

In  streams  of  sorrow  at  thy  call. 

7 On  all  our  youth  assembled  here, 

The  unction  of  thy  Spirit  pour ; 

Nor  let  them  lose  another  year, 

Lest  thou  shouldst  strive  and  call  no  more. 

HYMN  XIX. 

Elijah's  Mantle.  2 Kings  ii.  11 — 14. 

1 Elisha,  struck  with  grief  and  awe, 

Cried,  “Ah  ! where  now  is  Israel’s  stay!” 
When  he  his  honour’d  master  saw 
Borne  by  a fiery  car  away. 

2 But  while  he  look’d  a last  adieu, 

His  mantle,  as  it  fell,  he  caught: 

The  Spirit  rested  on  him  too, 

And  equal  miracles  he  wrought. 

3 “ Where  is  Elijah’s  God  V ’ he  cried, 

And  with  the  mantle  smote  the  flood ; 

His  word  control’d  the  swelling  tide, 

The  obedient  waters  upright  stood. 

4 The  wonder-working  gospel,  thus 
From  hand  to  hand  has  been  conveyed ; 
We  have  the  mantle  stil.  with  us, 

But  where,  O where,  the  Spirit’s  aid  1 

5 When  Peter  first  his  mantle  wav’d,* 

How  soon  it  melted  hearts  of  steel ! 
Sinners  by  thousands  then  were  sav’d, 

But  now  how  few  its  virtues  feel  I 

6 Where  is  Elijah’s  God,  the  Lord, 

Thine  Israel’s  hope,  and  joy,  and  boast  1 
Reveal  thine  arm,  confirm  thy  word, 

Give  us  another  Pentecost ! 

7 Assist  thy  messenger  to  speak, 

And  while  he  aims  to  lisp  thy  truth, 

The  bonds  of  sin  and  Satan  break, 

And  pour  thy  blessing  on  our  youth. 

8 For  them  we  now  approach  thy  throne, 
Teach  them  to  know  and  love  thy  name ; 
Then  shall  thy  thankful  people  own 
Elijah’s  God  is  still  the  same. 

HYMNS 

AFTER  SERMONS  TO  YOUNG  PEOPLE  ON  NEW- 
YEAR  EVENINGS,  SUITED  TO  THE  SUBJECTS. 

HYMN  XX. 

David's  Charge  to  Solomon. 

1  Chron.  xxviii.  9. 

1 O David’s  Son,  and  David’s  Lord ! 

From  age  to  age  thou  art  the  same ; 

Thy  gracious  presence  now  afford, 

And  teach  our  youth  to  know  thy  name. 

2 Thy  people,  Lord,  though  oft  distress’d 
Upheld  by  thee,  thus  far  are  come ; 

And  now  we  long  to  see  thy  rest, 

And  wait  thy  word  to  call  us  home. 


[book  ii. 

3 Like  David,  when  this  life  shall  end, 

We  trust  in  thee,  sure  peace  to  find ; 

Like  him,  to  thee  we  now  commend 
The  children  we  must  leave  behind. 

4 Ere  long  we  hope  to  be  where  care. 

And  sin,  and  sorrow,  never  come ; 

But,  oh ! accept  our  humble  prayer, 

That  these  may  praise  thee  in  our  room. 

5 Show  them  how  vile  they  are  by  sin, 

And  wash  them  in  thy  cleansing  blood ; 
Oh ! make  them  willing  to  be  thine, 

And  be  to  them  a covenant-God. 

6 Long  may  thy  light  and  truth  remain, 

To  bless  this  place  when  we  are  gone , 
And  numbers  here  be  born  again, 

To  dwell  for  ever  near  thy  throne. 

HYMN  XXI. 

The  Lord's  Call  to  his  Children . 

2  Cor.  vi.  17,  18. 

1 Let  us  adore  the  grace  that  seeks 

To  draw  our  hearts  above ! 

Attend,  ’tis  God  the  Saviour  speaks, 

And  every  word  is  love. 

2 Though,  fill’d  with  awe,  before  his  throne 

Each  angel  veils  his  face ; 

He  claims  a people  for  his  own 
Amongst  our  sinful  race. 

3 Careless,  a while,  they  live  in  sin, 

Enslav’d  to  Satan’s  power ; 

But  they  obey  the  call  divine, 

In  his  appointed  hour. 

4 “ Come  forth  (he  says,)  no  more  pursue 

The  paths  that  lead  to  death : 

Look  up,  a bleeding  Saviour  view ; 

Look,  and  be  sav’d  by  faith. 

5 “ My  sons  and  daughters  you  shall  be, 

Through  the  atoning  blood ; 

And  you  shall  claim,  and  find  in  me, 

A Father  and  a God.” 

6 Lord,  speak  these  words  to  ev’ry  heart, 

By  thine  all-powerful  voice ; 

That  we  may  now  from  sin  depart, 

And  make  thy  love  our  choice. 

7 If  now  we  learn  to  seek  thy  face 

By  Christ  the  living  way, 

We  ’ll  praise  thee  for  this  hour  of  grace 
Through  an  eternal  day. 

HYMN  XXII. 

The  Prayer  of  Jabez.  1 Chron.  iv.  9,  10 

1 Jesus,  who  bought  us  with  his  blood, 

And  makes  our  souls  his  care, 

Was  known  of  old  as  Israel’s  God, 

And  answer’d  Jabez’  prayer. 

2 Jabez!  a child  of  grief!  the  name 

Befits  poor  sinners  well ; 

For  Jesus  bore  the  cross  and  shame, 

To  save  our  souls  from  hell. 


* Acts. 


SEASONS. 


159 


HYMN  XXVI.] 

3 Teach  us,  O Lord,  like  him  to  plead 

For  mercies  from  above ; 

O  come,  and  bless  our  souls  indeed. 

With  light,  and  joy,  and  love. 

4 The  gospel’s  promis’d  land  is  wide, 

We  fain  would  enter  in ; 

But  we  are  press’d  on  ev’ry  side 
With  unbelief  and  sin. 

5 Arise,  O Lord,  enlarge  our  coast, 

Let  us  possess  the  whole, 

That  Satan  may  no  longer  boast, 

He  can  thy  work  control. 

6 Oh ! may  thy  hand  be  with  us  still, 

Our  guide  and  guardian  be, 

To  keep  us  safe  from  ev’ry  ill, 

Till  death  shall  set  us  free. 

7 Help  us  on  thee  to  cast  our  care, 

And  on  thy  word  to  rest, 

That  Israel’s  God,  who  heareth  prayer, 
Will  grant  us  our  request. 

HYMN  XXm. 

Waiting  at  Wisdom’s  Gates . 

Prov.  viii.  34,  35. 

1 Ensnar’d  too  long  my  heart  has  been 

In  Folly’s  hurtful  ways ; 

Oh ! may  I now,  at  length,  begin 
To  hear  what  Wisdom  says! 

2 ’Tis  Jesus,  from  the  mercy-seat, 

Invites  me  to  his  rest ; 

He  calls  poor  sinners  to  his  feet, 

To  make  them  truly  bless’d. 

3 Approach,  my  soul,  to  Wisdom’s  gates, 

While  it  is  call’d  to-day ; 

No  one  who  watches  there,  and  waits, 
Shall  e’er  be  turn’d  away. 

4 He  will  not  let  me  seek  in  vain, 

For  all  who  trust  his  word 
Shall  everlasting  life  obtain, 

And  favour  from  the  Lord. 

5 Lord,  I have  hated  thee  too  long, 

And  dar’d  thee  to  thy  face ; 

I ’ve  done  my  soul  exceeding  wrong 
In  slighting  all  thy  grace. 

6 Now  I would  break  my  league  with  death, 

And  live  to  thee  alone  ; 

Oh ! let  thy  Spirit’s  seal  of  faith 
Secure  me  for  thine  own. 

7 Let  all  the  saints  assembled  here, 

Yea,  let  all  heaven  rejoice, 

That  I begin  with  this  new  year 
To  make  the  Lord  my  choice. 

HYMN  XXIV. 

Asking  the  way  to  Zion.  Jer.  1.  5. 

1  Zion,  the  city  of  our  God, 

How  glorious  is  the  place ! 

The  Saviour  there  has  his  abode, 

And  sinners  see  his  face ! 


2 Firm  against  every  adverse  shock, 

Its  mighty  bulwarks  prove ; 

’Tis  built  upon  the  living  Rock, 

And  wall’d  around  with  love. 

3 There  all  the  fruits  of  glory  grow, 

And  joys  that  never  die ; 

And  streams  of  grace  and  knowledge  flow 
The  soul  to  satisfy. 

4 Come,  set  your  faces  Zion-ward, 

The  sacred  road  inquire ; 

And  let  a union  to  the  Lord 
Be  henceforth  your  desire. 

5 The  gospel  shines  to  give  you  light, 

No  longer,  then,  delay ; 

The  Spirit  waits  to  guide  you  right, 

And  Jesus  is  the  way. 

6 O Lord,  regard  thy  people’s  prayer, 

Thy  promise  now  fulfil ; 

And  young  and  old  by  grace  prepare 
To  dwell  on  Zion’s  hill. 

HYMN  XXV. 

We  were  Pharaoh’s  Bondmen. 

Deut.  vi.  20 — 23. 

1 Beneath  the  tyrant  Satan’s  yoke, 

Our  souls  were  long  oppress’d : 

Till  grace  our  galling  fetters  broke, 

And  gave  the  weary  rest. 

2 Jesus,  in  that  important  hour, 

His  mighty  arm  made  known : 

He  ransom’d  us  by  price  and  power, 

And  claim’d  us  for  his  own. 

3 Now,  freed  from  bondage,  sin,  and  death. 

We  walk  in  wisdom’s  ways; 

And  wish  to  spend  our  ev’ry  breath 
In  wonder,  love,  and  praise. 

4 Ere  long,  we  hope  with  him  to  dwell 

In  yonder  world  above ; 

And  now  we  only  live  to  tell 
The  riches  of  his  love. 

5 O might  we,  ere  we  hence  remove, 

Prevail  upon  our  youth 
To  seek,  that  they  may  likewise  prove 
His  mercy  and  his  truth. 

6 Like  Simeon,  we  shall  gladly  go,* 

When  Jesus  calls  us  home ; 

If  they  are  left  a seed  below, 

To  serve  him  in  our  room. 

7 Lord,  hear  our  prayer,  indulge  our  hope, 

On  these  thy  Spirit  pour, 

That  they  may  take  our  story  up, 

When  we  can  speak  no  more. 

HYMN  XXVI. 

Travelling  in  Birth  for  Souls.  Gal.  iv.  19 
1 What  contradictions  meet 
In  ministers  employ ! 

It  is  a bitter  sweet, 

A sorrow  full  of  joy : 


♦Luke  ii.  29 


160 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


No  other  post  affords  a place, 

For  equal  honour  or  disgrace  ! 

2 Who  can  describe  the  pain 
Which  faithful  preachers  feel, 
Constrain’d  to  speak  in  vain, 

To  hearts  as  hard  as  steel ! 

Or  who  can  tell  the  pleasures  felt, 

When  stubborn  hearts  begin  to  melt 

3 The  Saviour's  dying  love, 

The  soul’s  amazing  worth, 

Their  utmost  efforts  move, 

And  draw  their  bowels  forth: 

They  pray,  and  strive,  their  rest  departs, 
Till  Christbe  form’d  in  sinners’  hearts. 

4 If  some  small  hope  appear, 

They  still  are  not  content ; 

But,  with  a jealous  fear, 

They  watch  for  the  event : 

Too  oft  they  find  their  hopes  deceiv’d, 
Then  how  their  inmost  souls  are  griev’d ! 

5 But  when  their  pains  succeed, 

And  from  the  tender  blade 
The  ripening  ears  proceed, 

Their  toils  are  overpaid : 

No  harvest-joy  can  equal  theirs. 

To  find  the  fruit  of  all  their  cares. 

6 On  what  has  now  been  sown, 

Thy  blessing,  Lord,  bestow ; 

The  power  is  thine  alone, 

To  rnaue  it  spring  and  grow : 

Do  thou  the  gracious  harvest  raise, 

And  thou  alone  shalt  have  the  praise. 


HYMN  XXVII. 

We  are  Ambassadors  for  Christ. 
2 Cor.  v.  20. 

1 Thy  message  by  the  preacher  seal, 

And  let  thy  power  be  known, 

That  every  sinner  here  may  feel 
The  word  is  not  his  own. 

2 Amongst  the  foremost  of  the  throng, 

Who  dare  thee  to  thy  face, 

He  in  rebellion  stood  too  long, 

And  fought  against  thy  grace. 

3 But  grace  prevail’d,  he  mercy  found, 

And  now  by  thee  is  sent, 

To  tell  his  fellow-rebels  round, 

And  call  them  to  repent. 

4 In  Jesus  God  is  reconcil’d, 

The  worst  may  be  forgiv’n ; 

Come  and  he  ’ll  own  you  as  a child, 
And  make  you  heirs  of  heaven. 

5 O may  the  word  of  gospel-truth 

Your  chief  desires  engage  I 
And  Jesus  be  your  guide  in  youth, 
Your  joy  in  hoary  age. 

6 Perhaps  the  year  that ’s  now  begun 

May  prove  to  some  their  last : 

The  sands  of  life  may  soon  be  run, 
The  day  of  grace  be  past 


[book  n. 

7  Think,  if  you  slight  this  embassy, 

And  will  not  warning  take, 

When  Jesus  in  the  clouds  you  see, 

"What  answer  will  you  make! 

HYMN  XXVm. 

PauFs  Fareicell  Charge.  Acts  xx.  26,  27. 
j 1 When  Paul  was  parted  from  his  friends. 
It  was  a weeping  day, 

But  Jesus  made  them  all  amends, 

And  wip’d  their  tears  away. 

2 Ere  long  they  met  again  with  joy, 

(Secure  no  more  to  part) 

Where  praises  every  tongue  employ, 

And  pleasure  fills  each  heart. 

3 Thus  all  the  preachers  of  his  grace 

Their  children  soon  shall  meet ; 
Together  see  their  Saviour’s  face, 

And  worship  at  his  feet. 

4 But  they  who  heard  the  word  in  vain, 

Though  oft  and  plainly  warn’d, 

Will  tremble  when  they  meet  again 
The  ministers  they  scorn’d. 

5 On  your  own  heads  your  blood  will  fall, 

If  any  perish  here ; 

The  preachers  who  have  told  you  all. 
Shall  stand  approv’d  and  clear. 

6 Yet,  Lord,  to  save  themselves  alone 

Is  not  their  utmost  view ; 

Oh ! hear  their  prayer,  thy  message  own. 
And  save  their  hearers  too. 


HYMN  XXIX. 

How  shall  I put  thee  among  the  Children 1 2 3 4 5 6  7 
Jer.  iii.  19. 

1 Alas  ! by  nature  how  deprav’d, 

How  prone  to  ev’ry  ill ! 

Our  lives  to  Satan  how  enslav’d, 

How  obstinate  our  will ! 

2 And  can  such  sinners  be  restor’d, 

Such  rebels  reconcil’d  1 
Can  grace  itself  the  means  afford, 

To  make  a foe  a child  1 

3 Yes,  grace  has  found  the  wondrous  means 

Which  shall  effectual  prove, 

To  cleanse  us  from  our  countless  sins, 
And  teach  our  hearts  to  love. 

4 Jesus  for  sinners  undertakes, 

And  died  that  we  may  live ; 

His  blood  a full  atonement  makes, 

And  cries  aloud,  “Forgive.” 

5 Yet  one  thing  more  must  grace  provide 

To  bring  us  home  to  God, 

Or  we  shall  slight  the  Lord  who  died, 

And  trample  on  his  blood. 

6 The  Holy  Spirit  must  reveal 

The  Saviour’s  work  and  worth  ; 

Then  the  hard  heart  begins  to  feel 
A new  and  heavenly  birth. 


SEASONS. 


161 


IIYMN  XXXIII.] 

7 Thus  bought  with  blood,  and  born  again, 
Redeem’d  and  sav’d  by  grace, 

Rebels  in  God's  own  house  obtain 
A son’s  and  daughter’s  place. 

HYMN  XXX. 

Winter.* 

1 See  how  rude  Winter’s  icy  hand 

Has  strip’d  the  trees,  and  seal’d  the  ground  ! 
But  Spring  shall  soon  his  rage  withstand, 
And  spread  new  beauties  all  around. 

2 My  soul  a sharper  winter  mourns, 

Barren  and  fruitless  I remain ; 

When  will  the  gentle  spring  return, 

And  bid  my  graces  grow  again  1 

3 Jesus,  my  glorious  Sun,  arise ! 

’Tis  thine  the  frozen  heart  to  move ; 

Oh  ! hush  these  storms,  and  clear  my  skies, 
And  let  me  feel  thy  vital  love ! 

4 Dear  Lord,  regard  my  feeble  cry, 

I  faint  and  droop  till  thou  appear ; 

Wilt  thou  permit  thy  plant  to  die? 

Must  it  be  winter  all  the  year  1 

5 Be  still,  my  soul,  and  wait  his  hour. 

With  humble  prayer  and  patient  faith  ; 
Till  he  reveals  his  gracious  power, 

Repose  on  what  his  promise  saith. 

6 He,  by  whose  all-commanding  wordf 
Seasons  their  changing  course  maintain, 
In  every  change  a pledge  affords, 

That  none  shall  seek  his  face  in  vain. 

HYMN  XXXI. 

Waiting  for  Spring. 

1 Though  cloudy  skies  and  northern  blasts 
Retard  the  gentle  spring  a while, 

The  sun  will  conqueror  prove  at  last, 

And  nature  wear  a vernal  smile. 

2 The  promise,  which  from  age  to  age, 

Has  brought  the  changing  seasons  round, 
Again  shall  calm  the  winter’s  rage, 
Perfume  the  air,  and  paint  the  ground. 

3 The  virtue  of  that  first  command, 

I know  still  does  and  will  prevail, 

That  while  the  earth  itself  shall  stand, 
The  spring  and  summer  shall  not  fail. 

4 Such  changes  are  for  us  decreed : 
Believers  have  their  winters  too ; 

But  spring  shall  certainly  succeed, 

And  all  their  former  life  renew. 

5 Winter  and  spring  have  each  their  use, 
And  each,  in  turn,  his  people  know ; 

One  kills  the  weeds  their  hearts  produce, 
The  other  makes  their  graces  grow. 

6 Though  like  dead  trees  a while  they  seem, 
Yet,  having  life  within  their  root, 

The  welcome  spring’s  reviving  beam 
Draws  forth  their  blossoms,  leaves,  and  fruit. 


* Book  III.  Hymn  xxxi.  t Gen.  viii.  22 

VOL.  II.  X 


But  if  the  tree  indeed  be  dead, 

It  feels  no  change,  though  spring  return : 
Its  leafless,  naked,  barren  head, 

Proclaims  it  only  fit  to  burn. 

Dear  Lord,  afford  our  souls  a spring, 

Thou  know’st  our  winter  has  been  long ; 
Shine  forth,  and  warm  our  hearts  to  sing, 
And  thy  rich  grace  shall  be  our  song. 

HYMN  XXXII. 

Spring. 

Bleak  winter  is  subdu’d  at  length, 

And  forc’d  to  yield  the  day ; 

The  sun  has  wasted  all  his  strength, 

And  driven  him  away. 

And  now  long  wish’d  for  spring  is  come, 
How  alter’d  is  the  scene ! 

The  trees  and  shrubs  are  dress’d  in  bloom, 
The  earth  arrayed  in  green. 

Where’er  we  tread,  beneath  our  feet, 

The  clust’ring  flowers  spring ; 

The  artless  birds,  in  concert  sweet, 

Invite  our  hearts  to  sing. 

But,  ah  ! in  vain  I strive  to  join, 
Oppress’d  with  sin  and  doubt ; 

I feel  ’tis  winter  still  within, 

Though  all  is  spring  without. 

Oh ! would  my  Saviour  from  on  high 
Break  through  these  clouds  and  shine  ’ 
No  creature  then  more  bless’d  than  I, 

No  song  more  loud  than  mine. 

Till  then  no  softly-warbling  thrush, 

Nor  cowslip’s  sweet  perfume, 

Nor  beauties  of  each  painted  bush, 

Can  dissipate  my  gloom. 

To  Adam,  soon  as  he  transgress’d, 

Thus  Eden  bloom’d  in  vain ; 

Not  paradise  could  give  him  rest, 

Or  soothe  his  heart-felt  pain. 

Yet  here  an  emblem  I perceive 
Of  what  the  Lord  can  do ; 

Dear  Saviour,  help  me  to  believe, 

That  I may  flourish  too. 

Thy  word  can  soon  my  hopes  revive, 

Can  overcome  my  foes, 

And  make  my  languid  graces  thrive, 

And  blossom  like  the  rose. 

HYMN  XXXIH. 

ANOTHER. 

Pleasing  spring  again  is  here ! 

Trees  and  fields  in  bloom  appear ! 

Hark ! the  birds,  with  artless  lays, 

Warble  their  Creator’s  praise ! 

Where,  in  winter,  all  was  snow, 

Now  the  flowers  in  clusters  grow : 

And  the  corn  in  green  array, 

Promises  a harvest-day. 

What  a change  has  taken  place ! 

Emblem  of  the  spring  of  grace  ; 

How  the  soul,  in  winter,  mourns, 

Till  the  Lord,  the  Sun,  returns ; 


7 

8 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

1 

2 


162 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  n. 


Till  the  Spirits  gentle  rain 
Bids  the  heart  revive  again ; 

Then  the  stone  is  turn’d  to  flesh, 

And  each  grace  springs  forth  afresh. 

3 Lord,  afford  a spring  to  me ! 

Let  me  feel  like  what  I see ; 

Ah ! my  winter  has  been  long. 

Chill’d  my  hopes,  and  stopp’d  my  scing  ! 
Winter  threaten’d  to  destroy 

Faith,  and  love,  and  every  joy ; 

If  thy  life  was  in  the  root, 

Still  I could  not  yield  thee  fruit. 

4 Speak,  and  by  thy  gracious  voice 
Make  my  drooping  soul  rejoice ; 

O,  beloved  Saviour ! haste, 

Tell  me  all  the  storms  are  past ; 

On  thy  garden  deign  to  smile, 

Raise  the  plants,  enrich  the  soil ; 

Soon  thy  presence  will  restore 
Life  to  what  seem’d  dead  before. 

5 Lord,  I long  to  be  at  home. 

Where  these  changes. never  come ! 
Where  the  saints  no  winter  fear, 
Where  ’tis  spring  throughout  the  year, 
How  unlike  this  state  below! 

There  the  flowers  unwithering  blow ; 
There  no  chilling  blasts  annoy , 

All  is  love,  and  bloom,  and  joy. 

HYMN  XXXIV. 

Summer  Storms.* 

1 Though  the  morn  may  be  serene. 

Not  a threat’ning  cloud  be  seen, 

Who  can  undertake  to  say, 

’Twill  be  pleasant  all  the  day  1 
Tempests  suddenly  may  rise, 

Darkness  overspread  the  skies, 
Lightnings  flash,  and  thunders  roar, 

Ere  a short-liv’d  day  be  o’er. 

2 Often  thus  the  child  of  grace 
Enters  on  his  Christian  race ; 

Guilt  and  fear  are  overborne, 

’Tis  with  him  a summer’s  morn : 

While  his  new-felt  joys  abound, 

All  things  seem  to  smile  around ; 

And  he  hopes  it  will  be  fair, 

All  the  day,  and  all  the  year. 

3 Should  we  warn  him  of  a change, 

He  would  think  the  caution  strange ; 
He  no  change  or  trouble  fears, 

Till  the  gathering  storm  appears  ;i 
Till  dark  clouds  his  sun  conceal, 

Till  temptation’s  power  he  feel ; 

Then  he  trembles  and  looks  pale, 

All  his  hopes  and  courage  fail. 

4 But  the  wonder-working  Lord 
Soothes  the  tempest  by  his  word  ; 

Stills  the  thunder,  stops  the  rain, 

And  his  sun  breaks  forth  again : 

Soon  the  cloud  again  returns, 

Now  he  joys,  and  now  he  mourns ; 


Oft  his  sky  is  overcast, 

Ere  the  day  of  life  be  past. 

Tried  believers  too  can  say, 

In  the  course  of  one  short  day, 

Though  the  morning  has  been  fair, 

Prov’d  a golden  hour  of  prayer, 

Sin  and  Satan,  long  ere  night, 

Have  their  comforts  put  to  flight : 

Ah  ! what  heart-felt  peace  and  joy 
Unexpected  storms  destroy. 

Dearest  Saviour ! call  us  soon 
To  thine  high  eternal  noon ; 

Never  there  shall  tempest  rise, 

To  conceal  thee  from  our  eyes ; 

Satan  shall  no  more  deceive, 

We  no  more  thy  Spirit  grieve. 

But  through  cloudless,  endless  days, 
Sound,  to  golden  harps,  thy  praise. 

HYMN  XXXV. 

Hay-time. 

The  grass  and  flowers  which  clothe  the 
And  look  so  green  and  gay,  [field, 
Touch’d  by  the  scythe,  defenceless  yield, 
And  fall,  and  fade  away. 

Fit  emblem  of  our  mortal  state ! 

Thus,  in  the  scripture-glass, 

The  young,  the  strong,  the  wise,  the  great, 
May  see  themselves  but  grass.* 

Ah  ! trust  not  to  your  fleeting  breath, 

Nor  call  your  time  your  own  \ 

Around  you  see  the  scythe  of  death 
Is  mowing  thousands  down. 

And  you,  who  hitherto  are  spar’d, 

Must  shortly  yield  your  lives ; 

Your  wisdom  is,  to  be  prepar’d 
Before  the  stroke  arrives. 

The  grass,  when  dead,  revives  no  more ; 

You  die  to  live  again ; 

But  oh ! if  death  should  prove  the  door, 

To  everlasting  pain ! 

Lord,  help  us  to  obey  thy  call, 

That,  from  our  sins  set  free. 

When,  like  the  grass,  our  bodies  fall, 

Our  souls  may  spring  to  thee. 

HYMN  XXXVI. 

Harvest. 

See  the  corn  again  in  ear ! 

How  the  fields  and  vallies  smile ! 

Harvest  now  is  drawing  near, 

To  repay  the  farmer’s  toil : 

Gracious  Lord  secure  the  crop, 

Satisfy  the  poor  with  food ; 

In  thy  mercy  is  our  hope, 

We  have  sinn’d,  but  thou  art  good. 

While  I view  the  plenteous  grain 
As  it  ripens  on  the  stalk, 

May  I not  instruction  gain, 

Helpful  to  my  daily  walk! 


5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 


• Book  III.  Hymn  lxviii.  t Book  I-  Hymn  xliv. 


* Isaiali  xl.  7. 


SEASONS. 


163 


HYMN  XL.] 

All  this  plenty  of  the  field 
Was  produc’d  from  foreign  seeds, 

For  the  earth  itself  would  yield 
Only  crops  of  useless  weeds. 

3 Though,  when  newly  sown,  it  lay 
Hid  a while  beneath  the  ground, 

(Some  might  think  it  thrown  away,) 

Yet  a large  increase  is  found : 

Though  conceal’d,  it  was  not  lost, 
Though  it  died,  it  lives  again  ; 

Eastern  storms  and  nipping  frosts 
Have  oppos’d  its  growth  in  vain. 

4 Let  the  praise  be  all  the  Lord’s, 

As  the  benefit  is  ours : 

He  in  season  still  affords 
Kindly  heat  and  gentle  showers : 

By  his  care  the  produce  thrives, 

Waving  o’er  the  furrow’d  lands, 

And,  when  harvest-time  arrives, 

Ready  for  the  reaper  stands. 

L Thus  in  barren  hearts  he  sows, 

Precious  seeds  of  heavenly  joy  ;* 

Sin  and  hell  in  vain  oppose, 

None  can  grace’s  crop  destroy : 
Threaten’d  oft,  yet  still  it  blooms, 

After  many  changes  past, 

Death,  the  reaper,  when  he  comes, 

Finds  it  fully  ripe  at  last. 

CHRISTMAS. 

HYMN  XXXVII. 

Praise  for  the  Incarnation. 

1 Sweeter  sounds  than  music  knows, 

Charm  me  in  Emmanuel’s  name ; 

All  her  hopes  my  spirit  owes 
To  his  birth,  and  cross,  and  shame. 

2 When  he  came  the  angels  sung, 

“ Glory  be  to  God  on  high !” 

Lord,  unloose  my  stamm’ring  tongue, 
Who  should  louder  sing  than  1 1 

3 Did  the  Lord  a man  become 

That  he  might  the  law  fulfil, 

Bleed  and  suffer  in  my  room, 

And  canst  thou,  my  tongue,  be  still  1 

4 No,  I must  my  praises  bring, 

Though  they  worthless  are  and  weak ; 
For,  should  I refuse  to  sing, 

Sure  the  very  stones  would  speak. 

5 O my  Saviour,  Shield,  and  Sun, 

Shepherd,  Brother,  Husband,  Friend, 
Ev’ry  precious  name  in  one, 

I  will  love  thee  without  end. 

HYMN  XXXVIII. 

Jehovah- Jesns. 

v My  song  shall  bless  the  Lord  of  all, 

My  praise  shall  climb  to  his  abode ; 


Thee,  Saviour,  by  that  name  I call, 

The  great,  supreme,  the  mighty  God. 

2 Without  beginning  or  decline, 

Object  of  faith  and  not  of  sense ; 

Eternal  ages  saw  him  shine, 

He  shines  eternal  ages  hence. 

3 As  much,  when  in  the  manger  laid, 
Almighty  ruler  of  the  sky, 

As  when  the  six  days’  work  he  made 
Fill’d  all  the  morning-stars  with  joy. 

4 Of  all  the  crowns  Jehovah  bears, 

Salvation  is  his  dearest  claim, 

That  gracious  sound  well-pleas’d  he  hears, 
And  owns  Emmanuel  for  his  name. 

5 A cheerful  confidence  I feel, 

My  well-plac’d  hopes  with  joy  I see ; 

My  bosom  glows  with  heavenly  zeal, 

To  worship  him  who  died  for  me. 

6 As  man,  he  pities  my  complaint, 

His  power  and  truth  are  all  divine ; 

He  will  not  fail,  he  cannot  faint, 
Salvation’s  sure,  and  must  be  mine.  C. 

HYMN  XXXIX. 

Man  honoured  above  Angels. 

1 Now  ’et  us  join  with  hearts  and  tongues, 
And  emulate  the  angels’  songs  ; 

Yea,  sinners  may  address  their  King 
In  songs  that  angels  cannot  sing. 

2 They  praise  the  Iamb  who  once  was  slain , 
But  we  can  add  a higher  strain,* 

Not  only  say  “ He  suffer’d  thus,” 

But  that  “ He  suffer’d  all  for  us.” 

3 When  angels  by  transgression  fell, 

Justice  consign’d  them  all  to  hell ; 

But  mercy  form’d  a wonderous  plan, 

To  save  and  honour  fallen  man. 

4 Jesus,  who  pass’d  the  angels  by,f 
Assum’d  our  flesh  to  bleed  and  die ; 

And  still  he  makes  it  his  abode, 

As  man,  he  fills  the  throne  of  God. 

5 Our  next  of  kin,  our  brother  now, 

Is  he  to  whom  the  angels  bow ; 

They  join  with  us  to  praise  his  name, 

But  we  the  nearest  interest  claim. 

6 But  ah  ! how  faint  our  praises  rise ! 

Sure,  ’tis  the  wonder  of  the  skies, 

That  we,  who  share  his  richest  love, 

So  cold  and  unconcern’d  should  prove. 

7 O glorious  hour,  it  comes  with  speed, 
When  we,  from  sin  and  darkness  freed, 
Shall  see  the  God  who  died  for  man, 

And  praise  him  more  than  angels  can.f 

HYMN  XL. 

Saturday  Evening. 

1 Safely  through  another  week, 

God  has  brought  us  on  our  way ; 

* Rev.  v.  t Heb.  ii.  16. 

t Book  III.  Hymn  lxxxviii. 


* Hosea  xiv.  7 ; Mark  iv.  26—29. 


164 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


Let  us  now  a blessing1  seek 
On  the  approaching1  Sabbath  day, 

Day  of  all  the  week  the  best, 

Emblem  of  eternal  rest ! 

2 Mercies  multiplied  each  hour 
Through  the  week  our  praise  demand ; 
Guarded  by  almighty  power, 

Fed  and  guided  by  his  hand, 

Though  ungrateful  we  have  been, 

Only  made  returns  of  sin. 

3 While  we  pray  for  pard’ning  grace, 
Through  the  dear  Redeemer’s  name, 

Show  thy  reconciled  face, 

Shine  away  our  sin  and  shame ; 

From  our  worldly  care  set  free, 

May  we  rest  this  night  with  thee ! 

4 When  the  morn  shall  bid  us  rise, 

May  we  feel  thy  presence  near ! 

May  thy  glory  meet  our  eyes 
When  we  in  thy  house  appear ! 

There  afford  us,  Lord,  a taste 
Of  our  everlasting  feast. 

5 May  thy  gospel’s  joyful  sound 
Conquer  sinners,  comfort  saints ; 

Make  the  fruits  of  grace  abound, 

Bring  relief  for  all  complaints : 

Thus  may  all  our  Sabbaths  prove 
Till  we  join  the  church  above ! 

THE  CLOSE  OF  THE  YEAR. 

HYMN  XU. 

Ebenezer* 

1 The  Lord,  our  salvation  and  light, 

The  guide  and  the  strength  of  our  days. 
Has  brought  us  together  to-night, 

A new  Ebenezer  to  raise : 

The  year  we  have  now  passed  through, 
His  goodness  with  blessings  has  crown’d ; 
Each  morning  his  mercies  were  new; 
Then  let  our  thanksgivings  abound. 

2 Encompass’d  with  dangers  and  snares, 
Temptations,  and  fears,  and  complaints, 
His  ear  he  inclin’d  to  our  prayers, 

His  hand  open’d  wide  to  our  wants ; 

We  never  besought  him  in  vain ; 

When  burden’d  with  sorrow  or  sin, 

He  help’d  us  again  and  again, 

Or  where  before  now  had  we  been  1 

3 His  gospel,  throughout  the  long  year, 
From  Sabbath  to  Sabbath  he  gave ; 

How  oft  has  he  met  with  us  here, 

And  shown  himself  mighty  to  save  1 
His  candlestick  has  been  remov’d 
From  churches  once  privileg’d  thus ; 

But  though  we  unworthy  have  prov’d, 

It  still  is  continued  to  us. 

4 For  so  many  mercies  receiv’d, 

Alas ! what  returns  have  we  made  1 


1 Sam.  vii. 


[book  ii. 

His  Spirit  we  often  have  griev’d, 

And  evil  for  good  have  repaid : 

How  well  it  becomes  us  to  cry, 

“ O,  who  is  a God  like  to  thee 
Who  passeth  iniquities  by, 

And  plungest  them  deep  in  the  sea !” 

To  Jesus,  who  sits  on  the  throne, 

Our  best  hallelujahs  we  bring ; 

To  thee  it  is  owing  alone 
That  we  are  permitted  to  sing : 

Assist  us,  we  pray,  to  lament 
The  sins  of  the  year  that  is  past, 

And  grant  that  the  next  may  be  spent 
Far  more  to  thy  praise  than  the  last. 

HYMN  XLII. 

ANOTHER. 

Let  hearts  and  tongues  unite, 

And  loud  thanksgivings  raise ; 

’Tis  duty,  mingled  with  delight, 

To  sing  the  Saviour’s  praise. 

To  him  we  owe  our  breath, 

He  took  us  from  the  womb, 

Which  else  had  shut  us  up  in  death, 
And  prov’d  an  early  tomb. 

When  on  the  breast  we  hung 
Our  help  was  in  the  Lord ; 

’Twas  he  first  taught  our  infant  tongue 
To  form  the  lisping  word. 

When  in  our  blood  we  lay, 

He  would  not  let  us  die, 

Because  his  love  had  fixed  a day 
To  bring  salvation  nigh. 

In  childhood  and  in  youth, 

His  eye  was  on  us  still ; 

Though  strangers  to  his  love  and  truth, 
And  prone  to  cross  his  will. 

And  since  his  name  we  knew, 

How  gracious  has  he  been ; 

What  dangers  has  he  led  us  through, 
What  mercies  have  we  seen! 

Now  through  another  year, 

Supported  by  his  care : 

We  raise  our  Ebenezer  here, 

“ The  Lord  has  help’d  thus  far.” 

Our  lot  in  future  years 
Unable  to  foresee, 

He  kindly,  to  prevent  our  fears, 

Says,  “ Leave  it  all  to  me.” 

Yea,  Lord,  we  wish  to  cast 
Our  cares  upon  thy  breast; 

Help  us  to  praise  thee  for  the  past, 

And  trust  thee  for  the  rest. 

II.  ORDINANCES. 

HYMN  XLin. 

On  opening  a Place  for  social  Prayer. 
O Lord,  our  languid  souls  inspire, 

For  here  we  trust  thou  art: 


5 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

1 


ORDINANCES. 


165 


HYMN  XLVI.] 

Send  down  a coal  of  heavenly  fire, 

To  warm  each  waiting  heart. 

2 Dear  Shepherd  of  thy  people,  hear, 

Thy  presence  now  display  ; 

As  thou  hast  given  a place  for  prayer, 

So  give  us  hearts  to  pray. 

3 Show  us  some  tokens  of  thy  love, 

Our  fainting  hope  to  raise  ; 

And  pour  thy  blessings  from  above, 

That  we  may  render  praise. 

4 Within  these  walls  let  holy  peace, 

And  love  and  concord  dwell ; 

Here  give  the  troubled  conscience  ease, 
The  wounded  spirit  heal. 

5 The  feeling  heart,  the  melting  eye, 

The  humbled  mind  bestow ; 

And  shine  upon  us  from  on  high, 

To  make  our  graces  grow. 

6 May  we  in  faith  receive  thy  word, 

In  faith  present  our  prayers  ; 

And,  in  the  presence  of  our  Lord, 
Unbosom  all  our  cares. 

7 And  may  the  gospel’s  joyful  sound, 

Enforc’d  by  mighty  grace, 

Awaken  many  sinners  round, 

To  come  and  fill  the  place. 

HYMN  XLIV. 

ANOTHER. 

1 Jesus,  where’er  thy  people  meet, 

There  they  behold  thy  mercy-seat ; 
Where’er  they  seek  thee,  thou  art  found, 
And  every  place  is  hallow’d  ground. 

2 For  thou,  within  no  walls  confin’d, 
Inhabitest  the  humble  mind ; 

Such  ever  bring  thee  where  they  come, 
And  going,  take  thee  to  their  home. 

3 Dear  Shepherd  of  thy  chosen  few, 

Thy  former  mercies  here  renew  ; 

Here  to  our  waiting  hearts  proclaim 
The  sweetness  of  thy  saving  name. 

4 Here  may  we  prove  the  power  of  prayer 
To  strengthen  faith,  and  sweeten  care ; 

To  teach  our  faint  desires  to  rise, 

And  bring  all  heaven  before  our  eyes. 

5 Behold,  at  thy  commanding  word, 

We  stretch  the  curtain  and  the  cord  ;* 
Come  thou,  and  fill  this  wider  space, 

And  bless  us  with  a large  increase. 

6 Lord,  we  are  few,  but  thou  art  near ; 

Nor  short  thine  arm,  nor  deaf  thine  ear : 

O rend  the  heavens,  come  quickly  down, 
And  make  a thousand  hearts  thine  own ! 

C. 

HYMN  XLV. 

The  Lord's  day. 

1 How  welcome  to  the  saints,  when  press’d 
With  six.  days’  noise,  and  care,  and  toil, 

* Isaiah  liv.  2. 


Is  the  return iug  day  of  rest, 

Which  hides  them  from  the  world  a while ! 
Now,  from  the  throng  withdrawn  away, 
They  seem  to  breathe  a different  air ; 
Compos’d  and  soften’d  by  the  day, 

All  things  another  aspect  wear. 

How  happy  if  their  lot  is  cast, 

Where  statedly  the  gospel  sounds ! 

The  word  is  honey  to  their  taste,  [wounds. 
Renews  their  strength  and  heals  their 
Though  pinch’d  with  poverty  at  home, 
With  sharp  afflictions  daily  fed, 

It  makes  amends,  if  they  can  come 
To  God’s  own  house  for  heavenly  bread. 
With  joy  they  hasten  to  the  place 
Where  they  their  Saviour  oft  have  met, 
And  while  they  feast  upon  his  grace, 
Their  burdens  and  their  griefs  forget. 

This  favour’d  lot,  my  friends,  is  ours ; 
May  we  the  privilege  improve, 

And  find  these  consecrated  hours 
Sweet  earnests  of  the  joys  above ! 

We  thank  thee  for  thy  day,  O Lord ; 

Here  we  thy  promis’d  presence  seek ; 
Open  thine  hand,  with  blessings  stor’d, 
And  give  us  manna  for  the  week. 

HYMN  XLYI. 

Gospel-Privileges. 

O happy  they  who  know  the  Lord, 

With  whom  he  deigns  to  dwell ! 

He  feeds  and  cheers  them  by  his  word, 
His  arm  supports  them  well. 

To  them  in  each  distressing  hour, 

His  throne  of  grace  is  near : 

And  when  they  plead  his  love  and  power 
He  stands  engag’d  to  hear. 

He  help’d  his  saints  in  ancient  days, 

Who  trusted  in  his  name ; 

And  we  can  witness  to  his  praise, 

His  love  is  still  the  same. 

Wand’ring  in  sin,  our  souls  he  found, 

And  bid  us  seek  his  face ; 

Gave  us  to  hear  the  gospel -sound, 

And  taste  the  gospel-grace. 

Oft  in  his  house  his  glory  shines, 

Before  our  wond’ring  eyes ; 

We  wish  not  then  for  golden  mines, 

Or  aught  beneath  the  skies. 

His  presence  sweetens  all  our  cares, 

And  makes  our  burdens  light; 

A word  from  him  dispels  our  fears, 

And  gilds  the  gloom  of  night. 

Lord,  we  expect  to  suffer  here, 

Nor  would  we  dare  repine ; 

But  give  us  still  to  find  thee  r ear, 

And  own  us  still  for  thine. 

Let  us  enjoy  and  highly  prize 
These  tokens  of  thy  love, 

Till  thou  shalt  bid  our  spirits  rise, 

To  worship  thee  above. 


2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 


166 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


HYMN  XLVH. 

ANOTHER. 

1 Happy  are  they  to  whom  the  Lord 

His  gracious  name  makes  known ; 

And  by  his  Spirit,  and  his  word, 

Adopts  them  for  his  own. 

2 He  calls  them  to  his  mercy-seat, 

And  hears  their  humble  prayer ; 

And  when  within  his  house  they  meet, 
They  find  his  presence  near. 

3 The  force  of  their  united  cries 

No  power  can  long  withstand ; 

For  Jesus  helps  them  from  the  skies, 

By  his  almighty  hand. 

4 Then  mountains  sink  at  once  to  plains, 

And  light  from  darkness  springs ; 

Each  seeming  loss  improves  their  gains. 
Each  trouble  comfort  brings. 

5 Though  men  despise  them,  or  revile, 

They  count  the  trial  small ; 

Whoever  frowns,  if  Jesus  smile, 

It  makes  amends  for  all. 

6 Though  meanly  clad,  and  coarsely  fed, 

And  like  their  Saviour,  poor, 

They  would  not  change  their  gospel-bread 
For  all  the  worldling’s  store. 

7 When  cheer’d  with  faith’s  sublimer  joys, 

They  mount  on  eagles’  wings, 

They  can  disdain,  as  children’s  toys, 

The  pride  and  pomp  of  kings. 

8 Dear  Lord,  assist  our  souls  to  pay 

The  debt  of  praise  we  owe, 

That  we  enjoy  a gospel-day, 

And  heaven  begun  below. 

HYMN  XLVIII. 

Praise  for  the  Continuance  of  the  Gospel* 

1 Once,  while  we  aim’d  at  Zion’s  songs, 

A sudden  mourning  check’d  our  tongues ! 
Then  we  were  call’d  to  sow  in  tears, 

The  seeds  of  joy  for  future  years. 

2 Oft  as  that  memorable  hour 

The  changing  year  brings  round  again, 

W e meet  to  praise  the  love  and  power 
Which  heard  our  cries  and  eased  our  pain.. 

3 Come,  ye  who  trembled  for  the  ark, 

Unite  in  praise  for  answer’d  prayer ! 

Did  not  the  Lord  our  sorrows  mark  \ 

Did  not  our  sighing  reach  his  earl 

4 Then  smaller  griefs  were  laid  aside, 

And  all  our  cares  summ’d  up  in  one : 

“ Let  us  but  have  thy  word,”  we  cried, 

“ In  other  things  thy  will  be  done.” 

5 Since  he  has  granted  our  request, 

And  we  still  hear  the  gospel-voice. 
Although  by  many  trials  prest, 

In  this  we  can  and  will  rejoice. 


* Wherever  a separation  is  threatened  between  a 
minister  and  people  who  dearly  love  each  other,  this 
Hymn  may  be  as  seasonable  as  it  was  once  in  Otney. 


[book  II. 

Though  to  our  lot  temptations  fall, 
Though  pain,  and  want,  and  cares  annoy. 
The  precious  gospel  sweetens  all, 

And  yields  us  med’cine,  food,  and  joy. 

HYMN  XLIX. 

A Famine  of  the  Word. 

Gladness  was  spread  through  Israel’s  host 
When  first  they  manna  viewed ; 

They  labour’d  who  should  gather  most, 
And  thought  it  pleasant  food. 

But  when  they  had  it  long  enjoyed. 

From  day  to  day  the  same, 

Their  hearts  were  by  the  plenty  cloyed, 
Although  from  heaven  it  came. 

Thus  gospel-bread  at  first  is  priz’d, 

And  makes  a people  glad ; 

But  afterwards  too  much  despis’d, 

When  easy  to  be  had. 

But  should  the  Lord,  displeas’d,  withhold 
The  bread  his  mercy  sends, 

To  have  our  houses  fill’d  with  gold, 

Would  make  but  poor  amends. 

How  tedious  would  the  week  appear. 
How  dull  the  Sabbath  prove, 

Could  we  no  longer  meet  to  hear 
The  precious  truths  we  love ! 

How  would  believing  parents  bear, 

To  leave  their  heedless  youth 
Expos’d  to  every  fatal  snare, 

Without  the  light  of  truth ! 

The  gospel,  and  a praying  few, 

Our  bulwark  long  have  prov’d ; 

But  Olney  sure  the  day  will  rue 
When  these  shall  be  remov’d. 

Then  sin,  in  this  once-favour’d  town, 

Will  triumph  unrestrain’d ; 

And  wrath  and  vengeance  hasten  down. 
No  more  by  prayer  detain’d. 

Preserve  us  from  this  judgment,  Lord, 
For  Jesus’  sake  we  plead ; 

A famine  of  the  gospel-word 
Would  be  a stroke  indeed  1 

HYMN  L. 

Prayer  for  Min  isters. 

Chief  Shepherd  of  thy  chosen  sheep. 
From  death  and  sin  set  free ! 

May  ev’ry  under-shepherd  keep 
His  eye  intent  on  thee ! 

With  plenteous  grace  their  hearts  prepare 
To  execute  thy  will ; 

Compassion,  patience,  love,  and  care. 

And  faithfulness,  and  skill. 

Inflame  their  minds  with  holy  zeal, 

Their  flocks  to  feed  and  teach ; 

And  let  them  live,  and  let  them  feel 
The  sacred  truths  they  preach. 

Oh ! never  let  the  sheep  complain. 

That  toys,  which  fools  amuse. 


6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

1 

2 

3 

4 


SACRAMENTAL  HYMNS. 


167 


HYMN  LIV.] 

Ambition,  pleasure,  praise,  or  gain, 
Debase  the  shepherd’s  views. 

5 He  that  for  these  forbears  to  feed 

The  souls  whom  Jesus  loves, 

Whate’er  he  may  profess  or  plead, 

An  idol  shepherd  proves.* 

6 The  sword  of  God  shall  break  his  arm, 

A blast  shall  blind  his  eye ; 

His  word  shall  have  no  power  to  warm, 
His  gifts  shall  all  grow  dry. 

7 O Lord,  avert  this  heavy  woe, 

Let  all  thy  shepherds  say ! 

And  grace,  and  strength,  on  each  bestow, 
To  labour  while  ’tis  day. 


HYMN  LI. 

Prayer  for  a Revival. 

1 Saviour,  visit  thy  plantation, 

Grant  us,  Lord,  a gracious  rain ! 

All  will  come  to  desolation, 

Unless  thou  return  again : 

Keep  no  longer  at  a distance, 

Shine  upon  us  from  on  high ; 

Lest,  for  want  of  thine  assistance, 

Ev’ry  plant  should  droop  and  die. 

2 Surely  once  thy  garden  flourish’d, 

Ev’ry  part  look’d  gay  and  green : 

Then  thy  word  our  spirits  nourish’d, 
Happy  seasons  we  have  seen. 

But  a drought  has  since  succeeded, 

And  a sad  decline  we  see : 

Lord,  thy  help  is  greatly  needed  ; 

Help  can  only  come  from  thee. 

3 Where  are  those  we  counted  leaders, 

Fill’d  with  zeal,  and  love,  and  truth  1 
Old  professors,  tall  as  cedars, 

Bright  examples  to  our  youth ! 

Some,  in  whom  we  once  delighted, 

We  shall  meet  no  more  below  ; 

Some,  alas ! we  fear  are  blighted, 

Scarce  a single  leaf  they  show. 

4 Younger  plants — the  sight  how  pleasant — 

Cover’d  thick  with  blossoms  stood ; 

But  they  cause  us  grief  at  present, 

Frosts  have  nipp’d  them  in  the  bud  ! 
Dearest  Saviour,  hasten  thither, 

Thou  canst  make  them  bloom  again ; 
Oh  ! permit  them  not  to  wither, 

Let  not  all  our  hopes  be  vain ! 

5 Let  our  mutual  love  be  fervent, 

Make  us  prevalent  in  prayers : 

Let  each  one  esteem’d  thy  servant 
Shun  the  world’s  bewitching  snares : 
Break  the  tempter’s  fatal  power, 

Turn  the  stony  heart  to  flesh , 

And  begin  from  this  good  hour, 

To  revive  thy  work  afresh. 


HYMN  HI. 

Hoping  for  a Revival. 

My  harp  untun’d  and  laid  aside, 

(To  cheerful  hours  the  harp  belongs) 

My  cruel  foes  insulting  cried, 

“ Come,  sing  us  one  of  Zion’s  songs.” 
Alas ! when  sinners,  blindly  bold, 

At  Zion  scoff*,  and  Zion’s  King ; 

When  zeal  declines,  and  love  grows  cold. 
Is  this  a day  for  me  to  sing  1 
Time  was,  whene’er  the  saints  I met, 
With  joy  and  praise  my  bosom  glow’d; 
But  now,  like  Eli,  sad  I sit, 

And  tremble  for  the  ark  of  God. 

While  thus  to  grief  my  soul  gave  way, 

To  see  the  work  of  God  decline ; 
Methought  I heard  my  Saviour  say, 

“ Dismiss  thy  fears,  the  ark  is  mine. 

“ Though  for  a time  I hide  my  face, 

Rely  upon  my  love  and  power ; 

Still  wrestle  at  a throne  of  grace, 

And  wait  for  a reviving  hour. 

“ Take  down  thy  long-neglected  harp, 

I ’ve  seen  thy  tears,  and  heard  thy  prayer, 
The  winter-season  has  been  sharp, 

But  spring  shall  all  its  wastes  repair.” 

Lord,  I obey ; my  hopes  revive ; 

Come,  join  with  me,  )>3  saints,  and  sing ; 
Our  foes  in  vain  against  us  strive, 

For  God  will  help  and  healing  bring. 

SACRAMENTAL  HYMNS. 

HYMN  LIIL 
Welcome  to  the  Table. 

This  is  the  feast  of  heavenly  wine, 

And  God  invites  to  sup ; 

The  juices  of  the  living  vine 
Were  press’d  to  fill  the  cup. 

Oh  ! bless  the  Saviour,  ye  that  eat, 

With  royal  dainties  fed ; 

Not  heaven  affords  a costlier  treat. 

For  Jesus  is  the  bread. 

The  vile,  the  lost,  he  calls  to  them, 

Ye  trembling  souls,  appear! 

The  righteous  in  their  own  esteem 
Have  no  acceptance  here. 

Approach,  ye  poor,  nor  dare  refuse 
The  banquet  spread  for  you ; 

Dear  Saviour,  this  is  welcome  news, 

Then  I may  venture  too. 

If  guilt  and  sin  afford  a plea, 

And  may  obtain  a place, 

Surely  the  Lord  will  welcome  me 
And  I shall  see  his  face.  C. 

HYMN  LIV. 

Christ  Crucified. 

When  on  the  cross  my  Lord  I see, 
Bleeding  to  death  for  wretched  me, 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

1 


* Zech.  xi.  17. 


168 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  II. 


Satan  and  sin  no  more  can  move, 

For  I am  all  transform’d  to  love. 

2 His  thorns  and  nails  pierce  thro’  my  heart, 
In  every  groan  I bear  a part ; 

I  view  his  wounds  with  streaming  eyes ; 
But,  see ! he  bows  his  head,  and  dies ! 

3 Come,  sinners,  'view  the  Lamb  of  God, 
Wounded,  and  dead,  and  bath’d  in  blood ! 
Behold  his  side,  and  venture  near, 

The  well  of  endless  life  is  here. 

4 Here  I forget  my  cares  and  pams ; 

I  drink,  yet  still  my  thirst  remains ; 

Only  the  fountain-head  above 
Can  satisfy  the  thirst  of  love. 

5 O that  I thus  could  always  feel ! 

Lord,  more  and  more  thy  love  reveal ! 
Then  my  glad  tongue  shall  loud  proclaim 
The  grace  and  glory  of  thy  name. 

6 Thy  name  dispels  my  guilt  and  fear, 
Revives  my  heart  and  charms  my  ear : 
Affords  a balm  for  ev’ry  wound, 

And  Satan  trembles  at  the  sound. 

HYMN  LY. 

Jesus  hasting  to  Suffer, 

1 The  Saviour,  what  a noble  flame 

Was  kindled  in  his  breast, 

When,  hasting  to  Jerusalem, 

He  march’d  before  the  rest ! 

2 Good-will  to  men,  and  zeal  for  God, 

His  ev’ry  thought  engross ; 

He  longs  to  be  baptiz’d  with  blood,* 

He  pants  to  reach  the  cross. 

3 With  all  his  sufferings  full  in  view, 

And  woes  to  us  unknown, 

Forth  to  the  task  his  spirit  flew, 

’Twas  love  that  urg’d  him  on. 

4 Lord,  we  return  thee  what  we  can ; 

Our  hearts  shall  sound  abroad, 

Salvation  to  the  dying  man, 

And  to  the  rising  God  ! 

5 And  while  thy  bleeding  glories  here, 

Engage  our  wond'ring  eyes, 

We  learn  our  lighter  cross  to  bear, 

And  hasten  to  the  skies.  C. 

HYMN  LVI. 

It  is  good  to  be  here. 

1 Let  me  dwell  on  Golgotha, 

Weep  and  love  my  life  away : 

While  I see  him  on  the  tree, 

Weep,  and  bleed,  and  die  for  me. 

2 That  dear  blood,  for  sinners  spilt, 

Shows  my  sin  in  all  its  guilt: 

Ah ! my  soul,  he  bore  thy  load ; 

Thou  hast  slain  the  Lamb  of  God. 

3 Hark ! his  dying  word,  “ Forgive, 

Father,  let  the  sinner  live ; 


* Luke  xii.  50. 


Sinner,  wipe  thy  tears  away, 

I thy  ransom  freely  pay.” 

While  I hear  this  grace  reveal’d, 

And  obtain  a pardon  seal’d, 

All  my  soft  affections  move, 

Weaken’d  by  the  force  of  love. 

Farewell,  world  ! thy  gold  is  dross, 

Now  I see  the  bleeding  cross ; 

Jesus  died  to  set  me  free 
From  the  law,  and  sin,  and  thee ! 

He  has  dearly  bought  my  soul ; 

Lord,  accept,  and  claim  the  whole ! 

To  thy  will  I all  resign, 

Now  no  more  my  own,  but  thine. 

HYMN  LVII. 

Looking  at  the  Cross. 

In  evil  long  I took  delight, 

Unaw’d  by  shame  or  fear, 

Till  a new  object  struck  my  sight, 

And  stopp’d  my  wild  career. 

I saw  one  hanging  on  a tree, 

In  agonies  and  blood, 

Who  fix’d  his  languid  eyes  on  me, 

As  near  his  cross  I stood. 

Sure  never  till  my  latest  breath 
Can  I forget  that  look ; 

It  seem’d  to  charge  me  with  his  death, 
Though  not  a word  he  spoke. 

My  conscience  felt,  and  own’d  the  guilt, 
And  plung’d  me  in  despair ; 

I saw  my  sins  his  blood  had  spilt, 

And  help’d  to  nail  him  there. 

Alas ! I knew  not  what  I did ; 

But  now  my  tears  are  vain ; 

Where  shall  my  trembling  soul  be  hid, 
For  I the  Lord  have  slain. 

Another  look  he  gave,  which  said, 

“ I freely  all  forgive ; 

This  blood  is  for  thy  ransom  paid, 

I die,  that  thou  may’st  live.” 

Thus,  while  his  death  my  sin  displays, 
In  all  its  blackest  hue, 

(Such  is  the  mystery  of  grace,) 

It  seals  my  pardon  too. 

With  pleasing  grief,  and  mournful  joy, 
My  spirit  now  is  fill’d, 

That  I should  such  a life  destroy, 

Yet  live  by  him  I kill’d. 

HYMN  LVIII. 

Supplies  in  the  Wilderness. 

When  Israel,  by  divine  command, 

The  pathless  desert  trod, 

They  found,  though  ’twas  a barren  land, 
A sure  resource  in  God. 

A cloudy  pillar  mark’d  their  road, 

And  screen’d  them  from  the  heat ; 
From  the  hard  rocks  the  water  flow’d, 
And  manna  was  their  meat. 


4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

1 

2 


HYMN  LXII.] 

3 Like  them,  we  have  a rest  in  view, 

Secure  from  adverse  powers ; 

Like  them,  we  pass  a desert  too; 

But  Israel’s  God  is  ours. 

4 Yes,  in  this  barren  wilderness, 

He  is  to  us  the  same, 

By  his  appointed  means  of  grace, 

As  once  he  was  to  them. 

5 His  word  a light  before  us  spreads, 

By  which  our  path  we  see ; 

His  love  a banner  o’er  our  heads, 

From  harm  preserves  us  free. 

6 Jesus,  the  bread  of  life,  is  given 

To  be  our  daily  food  : 

We  drink  a wond’rous  stream  from  heaven, 
’Tis  water,  wine,  and  blood. 

7 Lord,  ’tis  enough,  I ask  no  more, 

These  blessings  are  divine ; 

I  envy  not  the  worldling’s  store, 

If  Christ  and  heaven  are  mine. 

HYMN  LIX. 

Communion  with  the  Saints  in  Glory. 

1 Refreshed  by  the  bread  and  wine, 

The  pledges  of  our  Saviour’s  love : 

Now  let  our  hearts  and  voices  join 
In  songs  of  praise  with  those  above. 

2 Do  they  sing,  “ Worthy  is  the  Lamb!” 
Although  we  cannot  reach  their  strains, 
Yet  we,  through  grace,  can  sing  the  same, 
For  us  he  died,  for  us  he  reigns. 

3 If  they  behold  him  face  to  face, 

While  we  a glimpse  can  only  see ; 

Yet  equal  debtors  to  his  grace, 

As  safe  and  as  belov’d  are  we. 

4 They  had,  like  us,  a suffering  time, 

Our  cares,  and  fears,  and  griefs  they  knew; 
But  they  have  conquer’d  all  through  him, 
And  we  ere  long  shall  conquer  too. 

5 Though  all  the  songs  of  saints  in  light 
Are  far  beneath  his  matchless  worth, 

His  grace  is  such,  he  will  not  slight 
The  poor  attempts  of  worms  on  earth. 

ON  PRAYER. 

HYMN  LX. 

Exhortation  to  Prayer. 

1 What  various  hindrances  we  meet 
In  coming  to  a mercy-seat ! 

Yet  who  that  knows  the  worth  of  prayer, 
But  wishes  to  be  often  there. 

2 Prayer  makes  the  darken’d  cloud  withdraw, 
Prayer  climbs  the  ladder  Jacob  saw, 

Gives  exercise  to  faith  and  love, 

Brings  ev’ry  blessing  from  above. 

3 Restraining  prayer,  we  cease  to  fight ; 
Prayer  makes  the  Christian’s  armour  bright ; 
And  Satan  trembles  when  he  sees 

The  weakest  saint  upon  his  knees. 

Vol.  II.  Y 


169 

4 While  Moses  stood  with  arms  spread  wide. 
Success  was  found  on  Israel’s  side  ;* 

But  when  through  weariness  they  fail’d, 
That  moment  Amalek  prevail’d. 

5 Have  you  no  words  ? ah ! think  again, 
Words  flow  apace  when  you  complain, 
And  fill  your  fellow-creature's  ear, 

With  the  sad  tale  of  all  your  care. 

6 Were  half  the  breath  thus  vainly  spent. 
To  heaven  in  supplication  sent, 

Your  cheerful  song  would  oft’ner  he, 

“ Hear  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  me.” 

C. 

HYMN  LXI. 

Power  of  Prayer. 

1 In  themselves,  as  weak  as  worms, 

How  can  poor  believers  stand, 

When  temptations,  foes,  and  storms, 
Press  them  close  on  ev’ry  hand ! 

2 Weak,  indeed,  they  feel  they  are, 

But  they  know  the  throne  of  grace ; 

And  the  God  who  answers  prayer, 

Helps  them  when  they  seek  his  face. 

3 Though  the  Lord  a while  delay, 

Succour  they  at  length  obtain ; 

He  who  taught  their  hearts  to  pray, 

Will  not  let  them  cry  in  vain. 

4 Wrestling  prayer  can  wonders  do, 

Bring  relief  in  deepest  straits ; 

Prayer  can  force  a passage  through 
Iron  bars  and  brazen  gates. 

5 Hezekiah  on  his  knees 
Proud  Assyria’s  host  subdued; 

And  when  smitten  with  disease, 

Had  his  life  by  prayer  renewed. 

6 Peter,  though  confin’d  and  chain’d, 
Prayer  prevail’d  and  brought  him  out; 
When  Elijah  prayed,  it  rain’d, 

After  three  long  years  of  drought. 

7 We  can  likewise  witness  bear, 

That  the  Lord  is  still  the  same ; 

Though  we  fear’d  he  would  not  hear, 
Suddenly  deliverance  came. 

8 For  the  wonders  he  has  wrought, 

Let  us  now  our  praises  give ; 

And  by  sweet  experience  taught, 

Call  upon  him  while  we  live. 

ON  THE  SCRIPTURES. 


HYMN  LXII. 

The  Light  and  Glory  of  the  World. 
1 The  Spirit  breathes  upon  the  word, 
And  brings  the  truth  to  sight ; 
Precepts  and  promises  afford 
A sanctifying  light. 


ORDINANCES. 


* Exod.  xvii.  11. 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  n. 


170 

2  A glory  gilds  the  sacred  page, 

Majestic  like  the  sun ; 

It  gives  a light  to  every  age, 

It  gives,  but  borrows  none. 

8 The  hand  that  gave  it  still  supplies 
The  gracious  light  and  heat ; 

His  truths  upon  the  nations  rise, 

They  rise,  but  never  set. 

4 Let  everlasting  thanks  be  thine, 

For  such  a bright  display, 

As  makes  a world  of  darkness  shine 
With  beams  of  heavenly  day. 

5 My  soul  rejoices  to  pursue 

The  steps  of  him  I love ; 

Till  glory  breaks  upon  my  view 

In  brighter  worlds  above.  C. 

HYMN  LXIII. 

The  Word  more  Precious  than  Gold. 

1 Precious  Bible ! what  a treasure 
Does  the  word  of  God  afford ! 

All  I want  for  life  or  pleasure, 

Food  and  med’cine,  shield  and  sword : 

Let  the  world  account  me  poor, 
Having  this  I need  no  more. 

2 Food  to  which  the  world ’s  a stranger, 
Here  my  hungry  soul  enjoys ; 

Of  excess  there  is  no  danger, 

Though  it  fills,  it  never  cloys : 

On  a dying  Christ  I feed, 

He  is  meat  and  drink  indeed ! 

3 When  my  faith  is  faint  and  sickly, 

Or  when  Satan  wounds  my  mind, 
Cordials  to  revive  me  quickly, 

Healing  med’cines  here  I find  : 

To  the  promises  I flee, 

Each  affords  a remedy. 

4 In  the  hour  of  dark  temptation, 

Satan  cannot  make  me  yield ; 

For  the  word  of  consolation 

Is  to  me  a mighty  shield : 

While  the  scripture-truths  are  sure, 
From  his  malice  I ’m  secure. 

5 Vain  his  threats  to  overcome  me, 

When  I take  the  spirit’s  sword; 

Then,  with  ease,  I drive  him  from  me, 
Satan  trembles  at  the  word : 

’Tis  a sword  for  conquest  made, 

Keen  the  edge,  and  strong  the  blade. 

6 Shall  I envy,  then,  the  miser, 

Doating  on  his  golden  store  1 
Sure  I am,  or  should  be  wiser; 

I am  rich,  ’tis  he  is  poor : 

Jesus  gives  me  in  his  word, 

Food  and  med’cine,  shield  and  sword. 

III.  PROVIDENCES. 

HYMN  LXIV. 

On  the  Commencement  of  Hostilities  in 
America. 

1 The  gath’ring  clouds,  with  aspect  dark, 
A rising  storm  presage ; 


Oh ! to  be  hid  within  the  ark, 

And  shelter’d  from  its  rage. 

See  the  commission’d  angel  frown  !* 

That  vial  in  his  hand, 

Fill’d  with  fierce  wrath,  is  pouring  down 
Upon  our  guilty  land ! 

Ye  saints,  unite  in  wrestling  prayer, 

If  yet  there  may  be  hope ; 

Who  knows  but  mercy  yet  may  spare, 

And  bid  the  angel  stop  If 
Already  is  the  plague  begun, \ 

And  fired  with  hostile  rage, 

Brethren,  by  blood  and  interest  one, 

With  brethren  now  engage. 

Peace  spreads  her  wings,  prepar’d  for  flight. 
And  war,  with  flaming  sword, 

And  hasty  strides,  draws  nigh  to  fight 
The  battles  of  the  Lord. 

The  first  alarm,  alas ! how  few, 

While  distant,  seem  to  hear ! 

But  they  will  hear,  and  tremble  too, 

When  God  shall  send  it  near. 

So  thunder  o’er  the  distant  hills 
Gives  but  a murm’ring  sound ; 

But  as  the  tempest  spreads,  it  fills, 

And  shakes  the  welkin  5 round. 

May  we  at  least,  with  one  consent, 

Fall  low  before  the  throne ; 

With  tears  the  nation’s  sins  lament, 

The  church’s  and  our  own. 

The  humble  souls  who  mourn  and  pray, 
The  Lord  approves  and  knows ; 

His  mark  secures  them  in  the  day 
When  vengeance  strikes  his  foes. 

FAST-DAY  HYMNS. 

HYMN  LXV. 

Confession  and  Prayer.  Dec.  13,  1776. 
Oh  ! may  the  power  which  melts  the  rock, 
Be  felt  by  all  assembled  here ! 

Or  else  our  service  will  but  mock 
The  God  whom  we  profess  to  fear ! 

Lord,  while  thy  judgments  shake  the  land. 
Thy  people’s  eyes  are  fixed  on  thee ! 

We  own  thy  just  uplifted  hand, 

Which  thousands  cannot,  will  not  see. 
How  long  hast  thou  bestow’d  thy  care 
On  this  indulg’d  ungrateful  spot; 

While  other  nations,  far  and  near, 

Have  envied  and  admir’d  our  lot. 

Here  peace  and  liberty  have  dwelt, 

The  glorious  gospel  brightly  shone ; 

And  oft  our  enemies  have  felt 
That  God  has  made  our  cause  his  own. 
But,  ah  ! both  heaven  and  earth  have  heard 
Our  vile  requital  of  his  love  ! 

We,  whom  like  children  he  has  rear’d, 
Rebels  against  his  goodness  prove.  || 

* Rev.  xvi.  1.  t 1 Sam.  xxiv.  16.  1 Numb.  xvi.  46. 

§ Firmament  or  atmosphere.  ]|  Isaiah  i.  2. 


2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 


PROVIDENCES. 


171 


HYMN  LXIX.] 

6 His  grace  despis’d,  his  power  defied 
And  legions  of  the  blackest  crimes, 
Profaneness,  riot,  lust,  and  pride, 

Are  signs  that  mark  the  present  times. 

7 The  Lord,  displeas’d,  has  rais’d  his  rod  ; 
Ah,  where  are  now  the  faithful  few, 

Who  tremble  for  the  ark  of  God, 

And  know  what  Israel  ought  to  do 

8 Lord,  hear  thy  people  ev’rywhere, 

Who  meet  to  mourn,  confess,  and  pray ; 
The  nation  and  thy  churches  spare, 

And  let  thy  wrath  be  turn’d  away. 

HYMN  LXVI. 

Moses  and  Amalek.\  Feb.  27,  1778. 

1 While  Joshua  led  the  armed  bands 

Of  Israel  forth  to  war ; 

Moses  apart,  with  lifted  hands, 

Engag’d  in  humble  prayer. 

2 The  armed  hands  had  quickly  fail’d, 

And  perish’d  in  the  fight, 

If  Moses’  prayer  had  not  prevail’d 
To  put  the  foes  to  flight. 

3 When  Moses’  hands  through  weakness 

The  warriors  fainted  too;  [dropp’d, 
Israel’s  success  at  once  was  stopp’d, 

And  Am’lek  bolder  grew. 

4 A people,  always  prone  to  boast, 

Were  taught  by  this  suspense, 

That  not  a num’rous  armed  host, 

But  God,  was  their  defence. 

5 We  now  of  fleets  and  armies  vaunt, 

And  ships  and  men  prepare ; 

But  men  like  Moses  most  we  want 
To  save  the  state  by  prayer. 

6 Yet,  Lord,  we  hope  thou  hast  prepar’d 

A hidden  few  to-day 

(The  nation’s  secret  strength  and  guard) 
To  weep,  and  mourn,  and  pray. 

7 0 hear  their  prayers,  and  grant  us  aid ! 

Bid  war  and  discord  cease ; 

Heal  the  sad  breach  which  sin  has  made, 
And  bless  us  all  with  peace. 

HYMN  LXVII. 

The  Hiding-place.  Feb.  10,  1779. 

1 See  the  gloomy  gathering  cloud 
Hanging  o’er  a sinful  land ! 

Sure  the  Lord  proclaims  aloud 
Times  of  trouble  are  at  hand. 

Happy  they  who  love  his  name ; 

They  shall  always  find  him  near ; 

Though  the  earth  were  wrapt  :n  flame, 
They  have  no  just  cause  for  fear. 

2 Hark,  his  voice  in  accents  mild, 

(O  how  comforting  and  sweet!) 

Speaks  to  every  humble  child, 

Pointing  out  a sure  retreat ! 


“ Come,  and  in  my  chambers  hide,5" 

Tc  my  saints  of  old  well  known ; 

There  you  safely  may  abide, 

Till  the  storm  be  overblown. 

“You  have  only  to  repose 
On  my  wisdom,  love,  and  care ; 

When  my  wrath  consumes  my  foes, 
Mercy  shall  my  children  spare : 

While  they  perish  in  the  flood, 

You  that  bear  mv  holy  mark,f 
Sprinkled  with  atoning  blood, 

Shall  be  safe  within  the  ark.” 

Sinners,  see  the  ark  prepar’d ! 

Haste  to  enter  while  there ’s  room ; 
Though  the  Lord  his  arm  has  bar’d 
Mercy  still  retards  your  doom : 

Seek  him  while  there  yet  is  hope, 

Ere  the  day  of  grace  be  past, 

Lest  in  wrath  he  give  you  up, 

And  this  call  should  prove  your  last.’ 

HYMN  LXVIII. 

On  the  Earthquake.  Sept.  8,  1775. 
Although  on  massy  pillars  built, 

The  earth  has  lately  shook ; 

It  trembles  under  Britain’s  guilt, 

Before  its  Maker’s  look. 

Swift  as  the  shock  amazement  spreads, 
And  sinners  tremble  too ; 

What  flight  can  screen  their  guilty  heads. 
If  earth  itself  pursue  1 
But  mercy  spar’d  us  while  it  warn’d, 

The  shock  is  felt  no  more ; 

And  mercy  now,  alas ! is  scorn’d 
By  sinners,  as  before. 

But  if  these  warnings  prove  in  vain, 

Say,  sinner,  canst  thou  tell, 

How  soon  the  earth  may  quake  again, 
And  open  wide  to  hell  1 
Repent  before  the  Judge  draws  nigh. 

Or  else  when  he  comes  down, 

Thou  wilt  in  vain  for  earthquakes  cry 
To  hide  thee  from  his  frown.J 
But  happy  they  who  love  the  Lord, 

And  his  salvation  know ; 

The  hope  that ’s  founded  on  his  word, 

No  change  can  overthrow. 

Should  the  deep-rooted  hills  be  hurl’d, 
And  plung’d  beneath  the  seas, 

And  strong  convulsions  shake  the  world, 
Your  hearts  may  rest  in  peace. 

Jesus,  your  Shepherd,  Lord,  and  Chiefs 
Shall  shelter  you  from  ill ; 

And  not  a worm  or  shaking  leaf 
Can  move,  but  at  his  will. 

HYMN  LXIX. 

On  the  Fire  at  Olney.  Sept.  22,  1777. 
Wearied  by  day  with  toils  and  cares, 
How  welcome  is  the  peaceful  night ! 


3 

4 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

1 


* IChron.  xii.  32. 


t Exod.  xvii.  9. 


* Isaiah  xxvi.  20.  f Ezek.  ix-  t Rev-  vi  ie 


172 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book 


Sweet  sleep  our  wasted  strength  repairs, 
And  fits  us  for  returning  light. 

2 Yet  when  our  eyes  in  sleep  are  clos’d, 
Our  rest  may  break  ere  well  begun ; 

To  dangers  ev’ry  hour  expos’d, 

We  neither  can  foresee  nor  shun. 

3 ’Tis  of  the  Lord  that  we  can  sleep 
A single  night  without  alarms ; 

His  eye  alone  our  lives  can  keep 
Secure  amidst  a thousand  harms. 

4 For  months  and  years  of  safety  past, 
Ungrateful  we,  alas ! have  been ; 

Though  patient  long,  he  spoke  at  last, 
And  bid  the  fire  rebuke  our  sin. 

5 The  shout  of — Fire  ! a dreadful  cry, 
Impress’d  each  heart  with  deep  dismay, 
While  the  fierce  blaze  and  redd’ning  sky 
Made  midnight  wear  the  face  of  day. 

6 The  throng  and  terror  who  can  speak  1 
The  various  sounds  that  fill’d  the  air — 
The  infant’s  wail,  the  mother's  shriek, 
The  voice  of  blasphemy  and  prayer. 

7 But  prayer  prevail’d  and  sav’d  the  town : 
The  few  who  lov’d  the  Saviour’s  name 
Were  heard,  and  mercy  hasted  down 
To  change  the  wind  and  stop  the  flame. 

8 O may  that  night  be  ne’er  forgot ! 

Lord,  still  increase  thy  praying  few ! 
Were  Olney  left  without  a Lot, 

Ruin  like  Sodom’s  would  ensue. 

HYMN  LXX. 

A Welcome  to  Christian  Friends. 

1 Kindred  in  Christ,  for  his  dear  sake, 

A hearty  welcome  here  receive ; 

May  we  together  now  partake 

The  joys  which  only  he  can  give ! 

2 To  you  and  us  by  grace  ’tis  given 

To  know  the  Saviour’s  precious  name, 
And  shortly  we  shall  meet  in  heaven, 

Our  hope,  our  way,  our  end  the  same. 

3 May  he,  by  whose  kind  care  we  meet, 
Send  his  good  Spirit  from  above, 

Make  our  communications  sweet, 

And  cause  our  hearts  to  burn  with  love ! 

4 Forgotten  be  each  worldly  theme, 

When  Christians  see  each  other  thus ; 

We  only  wish  to  speak  of  him 

Who  liv’d  and  died,  and  reigns  for  us. 

5 We  ’ll  talk  of  all  he  did  and  said, 

And  suffer’d  for  us  here  below ; 

The  path  he  mark’d  for  us  to  tread, 

And  what  he ’s  doing  for  us  now. 

6 Thus,  as  the  moments  pass  away, 

We  ’ll  love,  and  wonder,  and  adore, 

And  hasten  on  the  glorious  day, 

When  we  shall  meet  to  part  no  more. 


HYMN  LXXI. 

At  Parting. 

1 As  the  sun’s  enliv’ning  eye 
Shines  on  ev’ry  place  the  same ; 

So  the  Lord  is  always  nigh 

To  the  souls  that  love  his  name. 

2 When  they  move  at  duty’s  call, 

He  is  with  them  by  the  way : 

He  is  ever  with  them  all, 

Those  who  go  and  those  who  stay. 

3 From  his  holy  mercy-seat 
Nothing  can  their  souls  confine ; 
Still  in  spirit  they  may  meet, 

And  in  sweet  communion  join. 

4 For  a season  call’d  to  part, 

Let  us  then  ourselves  commend 
To  the  gracious  eye  and  heart 
Of  our  ever-present  Friend. 

5 Jesus,  hear  our  humble  prayer ! 
Tender  Shepherd  of  thy  sheep ! 

Let  thy  mercy  and  thy  care 
All  our  souls  in  safety  keep. 

6 In  thy  strength  may  we  be  strong, 
Sweeten  ev’ry  cross  and  pain ; 

Give  us,  if  we  live,  ere  long 
Here  to  meet  in  peace  again. 

7 Then,  if  thou  thy  help  afford, 
Ebenezers  shall  be  rear’d, 

And  our  souls  shall  praise  the  Lord, 
Who  our  poor  petitions  heard. 

FUNERAL  HYMNS. 


HYMN  LXXII. 

On  the  Death  of  a Believer. 

1 In  vain  my  fancy  strives  to  paint 

The  moment  after  death, 

The  glories  that  surround  the  saints 
When  yielding  up  their  breath. 

2 One  gentle  sigh  their  fetters  breaks ; 

We  scarce  can  say,  “ They  ’re  gone ! 
Before  the  willing  spirit  takes 
Her  mansion  near  the  throne. 

3 Faith  strives,  but  all  its  efforts  fail, 

To  trace  her  in  her  flight ; 

No  eyes  can  pierce  within  the  vail, 
Which  hides  that  world  of  light. 

4 Thus  much  (and  this  is  all)  we  know, 

They  are  completely  blest, 

Have  done  with  sin,  and  care,  and  woe, 
And  with  their  Saviour  rest. 

5 On  harps  of  gold  they  praise  his  name, 

His  face  they  always  view ; 

Then  let  us  follow’rs  be  of  them 
That  we  may  praise  him  too. 

6 Their  faith  and  patience,  love  and  zeal, 

Should  make  their  mem’ry  dear; 

And,  Lord,  do  thou  the  prayers  fulfil 
They  offer’d  for  us  here ! 


PROVIDENCES. 


173 


HYMN  LXXVI.] 

7 While  they  have  gain’d,  we  losers  are, 

We  miss  them  day  by  day ; 

But  thou  canst  ev’ry  breach  repair, 

And  wipe  our  tears  away. 

8 We  pray,  as  in  Elisha’s  case, 

When  great  Elijah  went, 

May  double  portions  of  thy  grace, 

To  us  who  stay  be  sent. 


HYMN  LXXIII. 

On  the  Death  of  a Minister . 

L His  master  taken  from  his  head, 

Elisha  saw  him  go, 

And,  in  desponding  accents  said, 

“ Ah ! what  must  Israel  do  1” 

2 But  he  forgot  the  Lord  who  lifts 

The  beggar  to  the  throne, 

Nor  knew  that  all  Elijah’s  gifts 
Would  soon  be  made  his  own. 

3 What ! when  a Paul  has  run  his  course, 

Or  when  Apollos  dies, 

Is  Israel  left  without  resource  1 
And  have  we  no  supplies  1 

4 Yes ! while  the  dear  Redeemer  lives, 

We  have  a boundless  store, 

And  shall  be  fed  with  what  he  gives, 
Who  lives  for  evermore.  C. 

HYMN  LXXIV. 

The  Tolling  Bell. 

1 Oft  as  the  bell,  with  solemn  toll, 

Speaks  the  departure  of  a soul, 

Let  each  one  ask  himseif  “ Am  I 
Prepar’d,  should  I be  call’d  to  die  1” 

2 Only  this  frail  and  fleeting  breath 
Preserves  me  from  the  jaws  of  death : 
Soon  as  it  fails,  at  once  I ’m  gone, 

And  plung’d  into  a world  unknown. 

3 Then  leaving  all  I lov’d  below, 

To  God’s  tribunal  I must  go ; 

Must  hear  the  Judge  pronounce  my  fate, 
And  fix  my  everlasting  state. 

4 But  could  I bear  to  hear  him  say, 

“ Depart,  accursed,  far  away ! 

With  Satan  in  the  lowest  hell, 

Thou  art  for  ever  doom’d  to  dwell.” 

5 Lord  Jesus ! help  me  now  to  flee, 

And  seek  my  hope  alone  in  thee  ; 

Apply  thy  blood,  thy  Spirit  give. 

Subdue  my  sin,  and  let  me  live. 

6 Then,  when  the  solemn  bell  I hear, 

If  sav’d  from  guilt,  I need  not  fear; 

Nor  would  the  thought  distressing  be, 
Perhaps  it  next  may  toll  for  me. 

7 Rather  my  spirit  would  rejoice, 

And  long,  and  wish  to  hear  thy  voice, 
Glad  when  it  bids  me  earth  resign, 
Secure  of  heaven,  if  thou  art  mine. 


HYMN  LXXV. 

Hope  beyond  the  Grave. 

My  soul,  this  curious  house  of  clay, 

Thy  present  frail  abode, 

Must  quickly  fail  to  worms  a prey, 

And  thou  return  to  God. 

Canst  thou,  by  faith,  survey  with  joy 
The  change  before  it  come  1 
And  say,  “ Let  death  this  house  destroy 
I have  a heavenly  home ! 

“ The  Saviour  whom  I then  shall  see 
With  new-admiring  eyes, 

Already  has  prepar’d  for  me 
A mansion  in  the  skies.”* 

I feel  this  mud-wall’d  cottage  shake, 
And  long  to  see  it  fall ; 

That  I my  willing  flight  may  take 
To  him  who  is  my  all. 

Burden’d  and  groaning  then  no  more, 
My  rescu’d  soul  shall  sing, 

As  up  the  shining  path  I soar, 

“ Death  thou  hast  lost  thy  sting.” 
Dear  Saviour  help  us  now  to  seek 
And  know  thy  grace’s  power, 

That  we  may  all  this  language  speak, 
Before  the  dying  hour. 

HYMN  LXXVI. 

There  the  Weary  are  at  Rest. 
Courage,  my  soul ! behold  the  prize 
The  Saviour’s  love  provides — 
Eternal  life  beyond  the  skies 
For  all  whom  here  he  guides. 

The  wicked  cease  from  troubling  there. 

The  weary  are  at  rest  ;f 
Sorrow,  and  sin,  and  pain,  and  care, 

No  more  approach  the  blest. 

A wicked  world,  and  wicked  heart, 
With  Satan  now  are  join’d  ; 

Each  acts  a too  successful  part 
In  harassing  my  mind. 

In  conflict  with  this  threefold  troop, 
How  weary,  Lord,  am  I ! 

Did  not  thy  promise  bear  me  up, 

My  soul  must  faint  and  die. 

But  fighting  in  my  Saviour’s  strength, 
Though  mighty  are  my  foes, 

I shall  a conq’ror  be  at  length 
O’er  all  that  can  oppose. 

Then  why,  my  soul,  complain  or  fear  1 
The  crown  of  glory  see ! 

The  more  I toil  and  suffer  here, 

The  sweeter  rest  will  be. 

HYMN  LXXVII. 

The  Day  of  Judgment. 

Day  of  judgment,  day  of  wonders ! 
Hark ! the  trumpet’s  awful  sound, 


* 2 Cor.  v.  1. 


1 

2 - 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 


t Job  iii.  17 


174 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


Louder  than  a thousand  thunders, 

Shakes  the  vast  creation  round ! [confound ! 
How  the  summons  will  the  sinner’s  heart 

2 See  the  Judge  our  nature  wearing, 

Cloth’d  in  majesty  divine  ! 

You  who  long  for  his  appearing, 

Then  shall  say,  This  God  is  mine ! [thine  ! 
Gracious  Saviour,  own  me  in  that  day  for 

3 At  his  call  the  dead  awaken, 

Rise  to  life  from  earth  and  sea: 

All  the  powers  of  nature  shaken, 

By  his  looks  prepare  to  flee  ; [thee  7 

Careless  sinner ! what  will  then  become  of 

4 Horrors  past  imagination 

Will  surprise  your  trembling  heart, 
When  you  hear  your  condemnation, 

“ Hence,  accursed  wretch,  depart ! [part !” 
Thou  with  Satan  and  his  angels  have  thy 

5 Satan,  who  now  tries  to  please  you, 

Lest  you  timely  warning  take, 

When  that  word  is  past,  will  seize  you, 
Plunge  you  in  the  burning  lake : 

Think,  poor  sinner,  thy  eternal  all ’s  at  stake. 

6 But  to  those  who  have  confessed, 

Lov’d  and  serv’d  the  Lord  below, 

He  will  say,  “ Come  near,  ye  blessed, 

See  the  kingdom  I bestow : 

You  for  ever  shall  my  love  and  glory  know.” 

7 Under  sorrows  and  reproaches, 

May  this  thought  your  courage  raise  ! 
Swiftly  God’s  great  day  approaches, 

Sighs  shall  then  be  chang’d  to  praise : 

We  shall  triumph  when  the  world ’s  in  a blaze. 

HYMN  LXXVIII. 

The  Day  of  the  Lord  * 

1 God,  with  one  piercing  glance  looks  thro’ 
Creation’s  wide  extended  frame ; 

The  past  and  future  in  his  view, 

And  days  and  ages  are  the  same.f 

2 Sinners  who  dare  provoke  his  face, 

Who  on  his  patience  long  presume, 

And  trifle  out  his  day  of  grace, 

Will  find  he  has  a day  of  doom. 

3 As  pangs  the  lab’ring  woman  feels, 

Or  as  the  thief,  in  midnight  sleep ; 

So  comes  that  day,  for  which  the  wheels 
Of  time  their  ceaseless  motion  keep ! 

4 Hark ! from  the  sky  the  trump  proclaims 
Jesus  the  Judge  approaching  nigh ! 

See,  the  creation  wrapt  in  flames, 

First  kindled  by  his  vengeful  eye  ! 

5 When  thus  the  mountains  melt  like  wax ; 
When  earth,  and  air,  and  sea,  shall  burn ; 
When  all  the  frame  of  nature  breaks, 

Poor  sinner,  whither  wilt  thou  turn  1 

6 The  puny  works  which  feeble  men 
Now  boast,  or  covet,  or  admire  ; 

Their  pomp  and  arts,  and  treasures,  then 
Shall  perish  in  one  common  fire. 


[book  ii. 

7  Lord,  fix  our  hearts  and  hopes  above ! 
Since  all  below  to  ruin  tends ; 

Here  may  we  trust,  obey,  and  love, 

And  there  be  found  amongst  thy  friends. 

HYMN  LXXIX. 

The  great  Tribunal .* 

1 John,  in  vision,  saw  the  day 
When  the  Judge  will  hasten  down ; 
Heaven  and  earth  shall  flee  away 
From  the  terror  of  his  frown ; 

Dead  and  living,  small  and  great, 

Raised  from  the  earth  and  sea, 

At  his  bar  shall  hear  their  fate — 

What  will  then  become  of  me  1 

2 Can  I bear  his  awful  looks  7 
Shall  I stand  in  judgment  then, 

When  I see  the  open’d  books, 

Written  by  the  Almighty’s  pen  7 
If  he  to  remembrance  bring, 

And  expose  to  public  view, 

Ev’ry  work  and  secret  thing, 

Ah  ! my  soul,  what  canst  thou  do  7 

3 When  the  list  shall  be  produc’d 
Of  the  talents  I enjoyed  ; 

Means  and  mercies,  how  abus’d  ! 

Time  and  strength,  how  misemployed . 
Conscience  then,  compell’d  to  read, 

Must  allow  the  charge  is  true ; 

Say,  my  soul,  what  canst  thou  plead  7 
In  that  hour,  what  wilt  thou  do  7 

4 But  the  book  of  life  I see, 

May  my  name  be  written  there  ! 

Then  from  gilt  and  danger  free, 

Glad  I ’ll  meet  him  in  the  air : 

That ’s  the  book  I hope  to  plead, 

’Tis  the  gospel  open’d  wide ; 

Lord,  I am  a wretch  indeed ! 

I have  sinn’d,  but  thou  hast  died.f 

5 Now  my  soul  knows  what  to  do ; 

Thus  I shall  with  boldness  stand, 
Number’d  with  the  faithful  few, 

Own’d  and  sav’d  at  thy  right-hand : 

If  thou  help  a feeble  worm 

To  believe  thy  promise  now, 

Justice  will  at  last  confirm 
What  thy  mercy  wrought  below. 

IV.  CREATION. 

HYMN  LXXX. 

The  Old  and  New  Creation. 

1 That  was  a wonder-working  word 
Which  could  the  vast  creation  raise  7 
Angels,  attendant  on  their  Lord,} 
Admir’d  the  plan,  and  sung  his  praise 

2 From  what  a dark  and  shapeless  mass. 
All  nature  sprung  at  his  command ! 

Let  there  be  light,  and  light  there  was, 
And  sun,  and  stars,  and  sea,  and  land. 


* Book  III.  Hymn  iv 


♦ 2 Pet.  iii.  8—10. 


* Rev.  xx.  11, 12.  f Rom.  viii.  34.  J Job  xxxviii.  ? 


CREATION. 


175 


HVMN  LXXXIV.] 

3 With  equal  speed  the  earth  and  seas 
Their  mighty  Maker’s  voice  obeyed ; 

He  spake,  and  straight  the  plants  and  trees, 
And  birds,  and  beasts,  and  men  were  made. 

4 But  man,  the  lord  and  crown  of  all, 

By  sin  his  honour  soon  defac’d ; 

His  heart  (how  alter’d  since  the  fall !) 

Is  dark,  deform’d,  and  void,  and  waste. 

5 The  new  creation  of  the  soul 

Does  now  no  less  his  power  display,* 
Than  when  he  form’d  the  mighty  whole, 
And  kindled  darkness  into  day. 

6 Though,  self-destroyed,  O Lord,  we  are, 
Yet  let  us  feel  what  thou  canst  do; 

Thy  word  the  ruin  can  repair, 

And  all  our  hearts  create  anew. 

HYMN  LXXXI. 

The  Book  of  Creation. 

1 The  book  of  nature  open  lies, 

With  much  instruction  stor’d; 

But  till  the  Lord  anoints  our  eyes, 

We  cannot  read  a word. 

2 Philosophers  have  por’d  in  vain, 

And  guess’d  from  age  to  age  : 

For  reason’s  eye  could  ne’er  attain 
To  understand  a page. 

3 Though  to  each  star  they  give  a name, 

Its  size  and  motions  teach ; 

The  truths  which  all  the  stars  proclaim, 
Their  wisdom  cannot  reach. 

4 With  skill  to  measure  earth  and  sea, 

And  weigh  the  subtile  air; 

They  cannot,  Lord,  discover  thee, 

Though  present  ev’rywhere. 

5 The  knowledge  of  the  saints  excels 

The  wisdom  of  the  schools; 

To  them  his  secrets  God  reveals, 

Though  men  account  them  fools. 

6 To  them  the  sun  and  stars  on  high, 

The  flowers  that  paint  the  field, f 
And  all  the  artless  birds  that  fly, 

Divine  instruction  yield. 

7 The  creatures  on  their  senses  press, 

As  witnesses  to  prove 
Their  Saviour’s  power  and  faithfulness, 
His  providence  and  love. 

8 Thus  may  we  study  nature’s  book, 

To  make  us  wise  indeed ! 

And  pity  those  who  only  look 
At  what  they  cannot  read.f 

HYMN  LXXXII. 

The  Rainbow. 

1  When  the  sun,  with  cheerful  beams, 
Smiles  upon  a low’ring  sky, 

Soon  its  aspect  soften’d  seems, 

And  a rainbow  meets  the  eye  : 

While  the  sky  remains  serene, 

This  bright  arch  is  never  seen. 

* 2 Cor.  iv.  6.  t Matth.  vi,  26—28.  J Rom.  i.  20. 


2 Thus  the  Lord’s  supporting  power 
Brightest  to  his  saints  appears, 

When  affliction’s  threat’ning  hour 
Fills  the  sky  with  clouds  and  fears, 

He  can  wonders  then  perform, 
Paint  a rainbow  on  the  storm.* 

3 AH  their  graces  doubly  shine, 

When  their  troubles  press  them  sore : 
And  the  promises  divine 

Give  them  joys  unknown  before : 

As  the  colours  of  the  bow 

To  the  cloud  their  brightness  owe. 

4 Favour’d  John  a rainbow  saw,f 
Circling  round  the  throne  above ; 
Hence  the  saints  a pledge  may  draw 
Of  unchanging  cov’nant  love  : 

Clouds  a while  may  intervene, 

But  the  bow  will  still  be  seen. 

HYMN  LXXX1II. 
Thunder. 


1 When  a black  o’erspreading  cloud 

Has  darken’d  all  the  air, 

And  peals  of  thunder,  roaring  loud, 
Proclaim  the  tempest  near ; 

2 Then  guilt  and  fear,  the  fruits  of  sin, 

The  sinner  oft  pursue : 

A louder  storm  is  heard  within, 

And  conscience  thunders  too. 

3 The  law  a fiery  language  speaks, 

His  danger  he  perceives ; 

Like  Satan,  who  his  ruin  seeks, 

He  trembles  and  believes. 

4 But  when  the  sky  serene  appears, 

And  thunders  roll  no  more, 

He  soon  forgets  his  vows  and  fears, 

Just  as  he  did  before. 

5 But  whither  shall  the  sinner  flee, 

When  nature’s  mighty  frame, 

The  pond’rous  earth,  and  air,  and  sea,| 
Shall  all  dissolve  in  flame  1 

6 Amazing  day ! it  comes  apace ; 

The  Judge  is  hasting  down : 

Will  sinners  bear  to  see  his  face, 

Or  stand  before  his  frown  1 

7 Lord,  let  thy  mercy  find  a way 

To  touch  each  stubborn  heart; 

That  they  may  never  hear  thee  say, 

“Ye  cursed  ones,  depart.” 

8 Believers,  you  may  well  rejoice  ! 

The  thunder’s  loudest  strains 
Should  be  to  you  a welcome  voice, 

That  tells  you,  “ Jesus  reigns.” 

HYMN  LXXXIV. 

Lightning  in  the  Night. 

1 A glance  from  heaven  with  sweet  effect 
Sometimes  my  pensive  spirit  cheers; 

But  ere  I can  my  thoughts  collect, 

As  suddenly  it  disappears. 

* Gen.  ix.  14.  | Rev.  iv.  3.  {2  Pet.  iii.  10. 


176 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  ii. 


2 So  lightning  in  the  gloom  of  night 
Affords  a momentary  day  ; 

Disclosing  objects  full  in  sight. 

Which,  soon  as  seen,  are  snatch’d  away. 

3 Ah  ! what  avail  these  pleasing  scenes'? 
They  do  but  aggravate  my  pain  ; 

While  darkness  quickly  intervenes, 

And  swallows  up  my  joys  again. 

4 But  shall  I murmur  at  relief? 

Though  short,  it  was  a precious  view 
Sent  to  control  my  unbelief, 

And  prove  that  what  I read  is  true. 

5 The  lightning's  flash  did  not  create 
The  op’ning  prospect  it  reveal’d ; 

But  only  show’d  the  real  state 

Of  what  the  darkness  had  conceal’d. 

6 Just  so,  we  by  a glimpse  discern 
The  glorious  things  within  the  vail ; 

That,  when  in  darkness,  we  may  learn 
To  live  by  faith,  till  light  prevail. 

7 The  Lord’s  great  day  will  soon  advance, 
Dispersing  all  the  shades  of  night ; 

Tnen  we  no  more  shall  need  a glance, 
But  see  by  an  eternal  light. 

HYMN  LXXXY. 

On  the  Eclipse  of  the  Moon,  July  30,  1776. 

1 The  moon  in  silver  glory  shone, 

And  not  a cloud  in  sight, 

When  suddenly  a shade  begun 
To  intercept  her  light. 

2 How  fast  across  her  orb  it  spread, 

How  fast  her  light  withdrew ! 

A circle,  ting’d  with  languid  red, 

Was  all  appear’d  in  view. 

3 While  many  with  unmeaning  eye, 

Gaze  on  thy  works  in  vain, 

Assist  me,  Lord,  that  I may  try 
Instruction  to  obtain. 

4 Fain  would  my  thankful  heart  and  lips 

Unite  in  praise  to  thee, 

And  meditate  on  thy  eclipse 
In  sad  Gethsemane. 

5 Thy  people’s  guilt,  a heavy  load, 

(When  standing  in  their  room) 

Depriv’d  thee  of  the  light  of  God, 

And  fill’d  thy  soul  with  gloom. 

6 How  punctually  eclipses  move, 

Obedient  to  thy  will ! 

Thus  shall  thy  faithfulness  and  love 
Thy  promises  fulfil. 

7 Dark  like  the  moon  without  the  sun, 

I mourn  thine  absence,  Lord  ! 

For  light  or  comfort  I have  none, 

But  what  thy  beams  afford. 

8 But  lo ! the  hour  draws  near  apace, 

When  changes  shall  be  o’er, 

Then  I shall  see  thee  face  to  face, 

And  be  eclips’d  no  more. 


HYMN  LXXXVL 

Moon-Light. 

The  moon  has  but  a borrow’d  light, 

A faint  and  feeble  ray  ; 

She  owes  her  beauty  to  the  night, 

And  hides  herself  by  day. 

No  cheering  warmth  her  beam  conveys, 
Though  pleasing  to  behold  ; 

We  might  upon  her  brightness  gaze 
Till  we  were  starv’d  with  cold. 

Just  such  is  all  the  light  to  man 
Which  reason  can  impart ; 

It  cannot  show  one  object  plain, 

Nor  warm  the  frozen  heart. 

Thus  moon-light  views  of  truths  divine 
To  many  fatal  prove, 

For  what  avail  in  gifts  to  shine,* 

Without  a spark  of  love  ? 

The  gospel,  like  the  sun  at  noon, 

Affords  a glorious  light ; 

Then  fallen  reason’s  boasted  moon 
Appears  no  longer  bright. 

And  grace  not  light  alone  bestows, 

But  adds  a quick’ning  power ; 

The  desert  blossoms  like  the  rose,f 
And  sin  prevails  no  more. 

HYMN  LXXXVII. 

The  Seaf 

If,  for  a time,  the  air  be  calm, 

Serene  and  smooth  the  sea  appears, 

And  shows  no  danger  to  alarm 
The  unexperienc'd  landsman’s  fears . 

But  if  the  tempest  once  arise, 

The  faithless  water  swells  and  raves; 

Its  billows,  foaming  to  the  skies, 

Disclose  a thousand  threat’ning  graves. 
My  untried  heart  thus  seem’d  to  me 
(So  little  of  myself  I knew) 

Smooth  as  the  calm  unruffled  sea, 

But,  ah  ! it  prov’d  as  treach’rous  too ! 

The  peace  of  which  I had  a taste, 

When  Jesus  first  his  love  reveal’d, 

I fondly  hop’d,  would  always  last, 

Because  my  foes  were  then  conceal’d. 

But  when  I felt  the  tempest’s  power 
Rouse  my  corruptions  from  their  sleep, 

I trembled  at  the  stormy  hour, 

And  saw  the  horrors  of  the  deep. 

Now  on  presumption’s  billows  borne, 

My  spirit  seem’d  the  Lord  to  dare ; 

Now,  quick  as  thought,  a sudden  turn 
Plung’d  me  in  gulfs  of  black  despair. 

Lord,  save  me,  or  I sink,  I prayed, 
lie  heard,  and  bid  the  tempest  cease ; 

The  angry  waves  his  word  obeyed, 

And  all  my  fears  were  hush’d  to  peace. 
The  peace  is  his,  and  not  my  own, 

My  heart  (no  better  than  before) 

* 1 Cor.  xiii.  1.  | Isa.  xxxv.  1.  J Book  I.  Hymn  cxv. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 


CREATION. 


177 


HYMN  XCI.] 

Is  still  to  dreadful  changes  prone, 

Then  let  me  never  trust  it  more. 

HYMN  LXXXVIII. 

The  Flood. 

1 Though  small  the  drops  of  falling  rain, 

If  one  be  singly  view’d ; 

Collected  they  o’erspread  the  plain, 

And  form  a mighty  flood. 

2 The  house  it  meets  within  its  course 

Should  not  be  built  on  clay, 

Lest,  with  a wild  resistless  force, 

It  sweep  the  whole  away. 

3 Though  for  a while  it  seemed  secure, 

It  will  not  bear  the  shock, 

Unless  it  has  foundations  sure, 

And  stands  upon  a rock. 

4 Thus  sinners  think  their  evil  deeds, 

Like  drops  of  rain,  are  small ; 

But  it  the  power  of  thought  exceeds, 

To  count  the  sum  of  all. 

5 One  sin  can  raise,  though  small  it  seems, 

A flood  to  drown  the  soul ; 

What  then,  when  countless  million  streams 
Shall  join  to  swell  the  whole! 

6 Yet,  while  they  think  the  weather  fair, 

If  warn’d,  they  smile  or  frown  ; 

But  they  will  tremble  and  despair, 

When  the  fierce  flood  comes  down. 

7 Oh!  then,  on  Jesus  ground  your  hope, 

That  stone  in  Zion  laid  ;* 

Lest  your  poor  building  quickly  drop, 
With  ruin  on  your  head. 

HYMN  LXXXIX. 

The  Thaw. 

1 The  ice  and  snow  we  lately  saw, 

Which  cover’d  all  the  ground, 

Are  melted  soon  before  the  thaw, 

And  can  no  more  be  found. 

2 Could  all  the  art  of  man  suffice 

To  move  away  the  snow, 

To  clear  the  rivers  from  the  ice, 

Or  make  the  waters  flow ! 

3 No,  ’tis  the  work  of  God  alone ; 

An  emblem  of  the  power 
By  which  he  melts  the  heart  of  stone 
In  his  appointed  hour. 

4 All  outward  means,  till  he  appears, 

Will  ineffectual  prove ; 

Though  much  the  sinner  sees  and  hears 
He  cannot  learn  to  love. 

5 But  let  the  stoutest  sinner  feel 

The  soft’ning  warmth  of  grace, 

Though  hard  as  ice,  or  rocks,  or  steel, 

His  heart  dissolves  apace. 

6 Seeing  the  blood  which  Jesus  spilt. 

To  save  his  soul  from  woe, 

His  hatred,  unbelief,  and  guilt, 

All  melt  away  like  snow. 


Jesus,  we  in  thy  name  entreat, 

Reveal  thy  gracious  arm ; 

And  grant  thy  Spirit’s  kindly  heat, 

Our  frozen  hearts  to  warm. 

HYMN  XC. 

The  Loadstone. 

As  needles  point  towards  the  pole, 

When  touch’d  by  the  magnetic  stone ; 

So  faith  in  Jesus  gives  the  soul 
A tendency  before  unknown. 

Till  then,  by  blinded  passions  led, 

In  search  of  fancied  good  we  range ; 

The  paths  of  disappointment  tread, 

To  nothing  fix’d,  but  love  of  change. 

But  when  the  Holy  Ghost  imparts 
A knowledge  of  the  Saviour’s  love, 

Our  wand’ring,  weary,  restless  hearts, 
Are  fix’d  at  once,  no  more  to  move. 

Now  a new  principle  takes  place, 

Which  guides  and  animates  the  will ; 
This  love,  another  name  for  grace, 
Constrains  to  good,  and  bars  from  ill. 

By  love’s  pure  light  we  soon  perceive 
Our  noblest  bliss  and  proper  end ; 

And  gladly  ev’ry  idol  leave, 

To  love  and  serve  our  Lord  and  Friend. 
Thus  borne  along  by  faith  and  hope, 

We  feel  the  Saviour’s  words  are  true; 

“ And  I,  if  I be  lifted  up, 

Will  draw  the  sinner  upward  too.”* 

HYMN  XCI. 

The  Spider  and  the  Bee. 

On  the  same  flower  we  often  see 
The  loathsome  spider  and  the  bee  ; 

But  what  they  get  by  working  there, 

Is  different  as  their  natures  are. 

The  bee  a sweet  reward  obtains, 

And  honey  well  repays  his  pains ; 

Home  to  the  hive  he  bears  the  store, 

And  then  returns  in  quest  of  more. 

But  no  sweet  flowers  that  grace  the  field 
Can  honey  to  the  spider  yield ; 

A cobweb  all  that  he  can  spin, 

And  poison  all  he  stores  within. 

Thus  in  that  sacred  field,  the  word, 

With  flowers  of  God’s  own  planting  stor’d. 
Like  bees  his  children  feed  and  thrive, 
And  bring  home  honey  to  the  hive. 

There,  spider-like,  the  wicked  come, 

And  seem  to  taste  the  sweet  perfume : 

But  the  vile  venom  of  their  hearts 
To  poison  all  their  food  converts. 

From  the  same  truths  believers  prize, 
They  weave  vain  refuges  of  lies ; 

And  from  the  promise  license  draw, 

To  trifle  with  the  holy  law. 

Lord,  shall  thy  word  of  life  and  love 
The  means  of  death  to  numbers  prove! 


7 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 


* Matt.  vii.  24;  1 Peter  ii.  6. 

Vol.  II.  Z 


* John  xu.  32. 


178 

Unless  thy  grace  our  hearts  renew,* 

We  sink  to  hell,  with  heaven  in  view. 

HYMN  XCII. 

The  Bee  saved  from  the  Spider. 

1 The  subtle  spider  often  weaves 

His  unsuspected  snares 
Among  the  balmy  flowers  and  leaves, 

To  which  the  bee  repairs. 

2 When  in  his  web  he  sees  one  hang, 

With  a malicious  joy, 

He  darts  upon  it  with  his  fang, 

To  poison  and  destroy. 

3 How  welcome  then  some  pitying  friend, 

To  save  the  threaten’d  bee : 

The  spider’s  treach’rous  web  to  rend, 
And  set  the  captive  free  ! 

4 My  soul  has  been  in  such  a case ; 

When  first  I knew  the  Lord, 

I  hasted  to  the  means  of  grace, 

Where  sweets  I knew  were  stor’d, 

5 Little  I thought  of  danger  near, 

That  soon  my  joys  would  ebb : 

But  ah ! I met  a spider  there, 

Who  caught  me  in  his  web. 

6 Then  Satan  rais’d  his  pois’nous  sting, 

And  aim’d  his  blows  at  me ; 

While  I,  poor  helpless  trembling  thing, 
Could  neither  fight  nor  flee. 

7 But,  oh ! the  Saviour’s  pitying  eye 

Relieved  me  from  despair ; 

He  saw  me  at  the  point  to  die, 

And  broke  the  fatal  snare. 

8 My  case  his  heedless  saints  should  warn, 

Or  cheer  them  if  afraid ; 

May  you  from  me  your  danger  learn, 
And  where  to  look  for  aid. 

HYMN  XCIII. 

The  tamed  Lion. 

1 A lion,  though  by  nature  wild, 

The  art  of  man  can  tame ; 

He  stands  before  his  keeper  mild, 

And  gentle  as  a lamb. 

2 He  watches,  with  submissive  eye, 

The  hand  that  gives  him  food, 

As  if  he  meant  to  testify 
A sense  of  gratitude. 

3 But  man  himself,  who  thus  subdues 

The  fiercest  beasts  of  prey, 

And  nature  more  unfeeling  shows, 

And  far  more  fierce  than  they. 

4 Though  by  the  Lord  preserv’d  and  fed, 

He  proves  rebellious  still : 

And  while  he  eats  his  Maker’s  bread, 
Resists  his  holy  will. 

5 Alike  in  vain  of  grace  that  saves, 

Or  threat’ning  law  he  hears ; 


[book  ii. 

The  savage  scorns,  blasphemes,  and  ravevS, 
But  neither  loves  nor  fears. 

6 O Saviour ! how  thy  wond’rous  power 

By  angels  is  proclaim’d ! 

When  in  their  own  appointed  hour, 

They  see  this  lion  tam’d. 

7 The  love  thy  bleeding  cross  displays, 

The  hardest  heart  subdues ; 

Here  furious  lions,  while  they  gaze, 

Their  rage  and  fierceness  lose.* 

8 Yet  we  are  but  renew’d  in  part, 

The  lion  still  remains ; 

Lord,  drive  him  wholly  from  my  heart. 

Or  keep  him  fast  in  chains. 

HYMN  XCIV. 

Sheep. 

1 The  Saviour  calls  his  people  sheep, 

And  bids  them  on  his  love  rely ; 

For  he  alone  their  souls  can  keep, 

And  he  alone  their  wants  supply. 

2 The  bull  can  fight,  the  hare  can  flee, 

The  ant  in  summer  food  prepare  ; 

But  helpless  sheep,  and  such  are  we, 
Depend  upon  the  Shepherd’s  care. 

3 Jehovah  is  our  Shepherd’s  name,f 

Then  what  have  we,  though  weak,  to  fear ; 
Our  sin  and  folly  we  proclaim, 

If  we  despond  while  he  is  near. 

4 When  Satan  threatens  to  devour, 

When  troubles  press  on  every  side, 

Think  of  our  Shepherd’s  care  and  power, 
He  can  defend,  he  will  provide. 

5 See  the  rich  pastures  of  his  grace, 

Where,  in  full  streams,  salvation  flows  i 
There  he  appoints  our  resting  place, 

And  we  may  feed,  secure  from  fees. 

6 There,  ’midst  the  flock,  the  Shepherd 
The  sheep  around  in  safety  lie ; [dwells. 
The  wolf  in  vain  with  malice  swells, 

For  he  protects  them  with  his  eye.J 

7 Dear  Lord,  if  I am  one  of  thine, 

From  anxious  thoughts  I would  be  free, 
To  trust,  and  love,  and  praise,  is  mine, 
The  care  of  all  belongs  to  thee. 

HYMN  XCV. 

The  Garden. 

1 A garden  contemplation  suits, 

And  may  instruction  yield, 

Sweeter  than  all  the  flowers  and  fruits 
With  which  the  spot  is  fill’d. 

2 Eden  was  Adam’s  dwelling-place, 

While  bless’d  with  innocence ; 

But  sin  o’erwhelm’d  him  with  disgrace, 
And  drove  the  rebel  thence. 

3 Oft  as  the  garden-walk  we  tread 

We  should  bemoan  his  fall : 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


* Book  III.  Hymn  Ixxi. 


* Isaiah  xi.  6.  t Psalm  xxiii.  1.  | Micafc  v.  4, 


CREATION. 


179 


HYMN  XCVIII.J 

The  trespass  of  our  legal  head 
In  ruin  plung’d  us  all. 

4 The  garden  of  Gethsemane, 

The  second  Adam  saw, 

Oppress’d  with  woe,  to  set  us  free 
From  the  avenging  law. 

5 How  stupid  we,  who  can  forget, 

With  gardens  in  our  sight, 

His  agonies  and  bloody  sweat 
In  that  tremendous  night. 

6 His  church  as  a fair  garden  stands, 

Which  walls  of  love  inclose, 

Each  tree  is  planted  by  his  hands,* 

And  by  his  blessing  grows. 

7 Believing  hearts  are  gardens  too, 

For  grace  has  sown  its  seeds, 

Where  once,  by  nature,  nothing  grew 
But  thorns  and  worthless  weeds. 

6 Such  themes,  to  those  who  Jesus  love, 
May  constant  joys  afford, 

And  make  a barren  desert  prove 
The  garden  of  the  Lord. 

HYMN  #CVI. 

For  a Garden- Seat  or  Summer-House. 

1 A shelter  from  the  rain  or  wind,f 

A shade  from  scorching  heat, 

A resting-place  you  here  may  find 
To  ease  your  weary  feet. 

2 Enter,  but  with  a serious  thought 

Consider  who  is  near : 

This  is  a consecrated  spot, 

The  Lord  is  present  here. 

3 A question  of  the  utmost  weight, 

While  reading,  meets  your  eye ; 

May  conscience  witness  to  your  state, 
And  give  a true  reply ! 

4 Is  Jesus  to  your  heart  reveal’d, 

As  full  of  truth  and  grace  1 
And  is  his  name  your  hope  and  shield, 
Your  rest  and  hiding-place  1 

5 If  so,  for  all  events  prepar’d 

Whatever  storms  may  rise, 

He  whom  you  love  will  safely  guard, 
And  guide  you  to  the  skies. 

6 No  burning  sun,  or  storm,  or  rain, 

Will  there  your  peace  annoy ; 

No  sin,  temptation,  grief  or  pain, 
Intrude  to  damp  your  joy. 

7 But  if  his  name  you  have  not  known, 

O seek  him  while  you  may ! 

Lest  you  should  meet  his  awful  frown 
In  that  approaching  day. 

8 When  the  avenging  Judge  you  see, 

With  terrors  on  his  brow, 

Where  can  you  hide,  or  whither  flee, 

If  you  reject  him  now  1 


HYMN  XCVn. 

The  Creatures  in  the  Lord's  Hands. 

The  water  stood  like  walls  of  brass, 

To  let  the  sons  of  Israel  pass,* 

And  from  the  rock  in  rivers  burst, 

At  Moses’  prayer, f to  quench  their  thirst. 
The  fire,  restrain’d  by  God’s  commands, 
Could  only  burn  his  people’s  bands 
Too  faint,  when  he  was  with  them  there, 
To  singe  their  garments  or  their  hair. 

At  Daniel’s  feet  the  lions  lay,§ 

Like  harmless  lambs,  nor  touch’d  their  prey; 
And  ravens,  which  on  carron  fed, 

Procur’d  Elijah  flesh  and  bread.  || 

Thus  creatures  only  can  fulfil 
Their  great  Creator’s  holy  will ; 

And  when  his  servants  need  their  aid 
His  purposes  must  be  obeyed. 

So  if  his  blessing  he  refuse, 

Their  power  to  help  they  quickly  lose ; 
Sure  as  on  creatures  we  depend, 

Our  hopes  in  disappointment  end. 

Then  let  us  trust  the  Lord  alone, 

And  creature-confidence  disown ; 

Nor,  if  they  threaten,  need  we  fear ; 

They  cannot  hurt  if  he  be  near. 

If  instruments  of  pain  they  prove, 

Still  they  are  guided  by  his  love, 

As  lancets  by  the  surgeon’s  skill, 

Which  wound  to  cure  and  not  to  kill 

HYMN  XCVIII. 

On  Dreaming. 

When  slumber  seals  our  weary  eyes, 

The  busy  fancy  wakeful  keeps ; 

The  scenes  which  then  before  us  rise, 
Prove  something  in  us  never  sleeps. 

As  in  another  world  we  seem, 

A new  creation  of  our  own ; 

All  appears  real,  though  a dream, 

And  all  familiar,  though  unknown. 
Sometimes  the  mind  beholds  again 
The  past  day’s  bus’ness  in  review, 
Resumes  the  pleasure  or  the  pain, 

And  sometimes  all  we  meet  is  new. 

What  schemes  we  form!  what  pains  we 
We  fight,  we  run,  we  fly,  we  fall ; [take, 
But  all  is  ended  when  we  wake, 

We  scarcely  then  a trace  recall. 

But  though  our  dreams  are  often  wild, 
Like  clouds  before  the  driving  storm, 

Yet  some  important  may  be  styl’d, 

Sent  to  admonish  or  inform. 

What  mighty  agents  have  access, 

What  friends  from  heaven  or  foes  from  hell, 
Our  minds  to  comfort  or  distress, 

When  we  are  sleeping,  who  can  tell  1 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 


* Isa.  Izi.  3. 


t Isa.  xxxii.  2. 


* Exod.  xiv.  22.  tNumb.xx.il.  J Dan.  iii.  27 
§ Dan.  vi.  23.  |j  1 Kings  xvii.  6. 


180 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


7 One  thing  at  least,  and  ’tis  enough, 
We  learn  from  this  surprising  fact, 
Our  dreams  afford  sufficient  proof, 
The  soul  without  the  flesh  can  act. 

8 This  life,  which  mortals  so  esteem, 
That  many  choose  it  for  their  all, 
They  will  confess,  was  but  a dream,* 
When  wakened  by  death’s  awful  call. 

HYMN  XCIX. 

The  World. 

1 See,  the  world  for  youth  prepares, 
Harlot-like,  her  gaudy  snares ! 
Pleasures  round  her  seem  to  wait, 

But  ’tis  all  a painted  cheat. 

2 Rash  and  unsuspecting  youth 
Thinks  to  find  thee  always  smooth, 
Always  kind,  till  better  taught, 

By  experience  dearly  bought. 

3 So  the  calm,  but  faithless  sea, 

(Lively  emblem,  world,  of  thee,) 
Tempts  the  shepherd  from  the  shore, 
Foreign  regions  to  explore. 

4 While  no  wrinkled  wave  is  seen, 
While  the  sky  remains  serene, 

Fill’d  with  hopes  and  golden  schemes, 
Of  a storm  he  little  dreams. 

5 But  ere  long  the  tempest  raves, 

Then  he  trembles  at  the  waves ; 
Wishes  then  he  had  been  wise, 

But  too  late  he  sinks  and  dies. 

6 Hapless  thus  are  they,  vain  world, 
Soon  on  rocks  of  ruin  hurl’d, 

Who  admiring  thee,  untried, 

Court  thy  pleasure,  wealth,  or  pride. 

7 Such  a shipwreck  had  been  mine. 

Had  not  Jesus  (name  divine !) 

Sav’d  me  with  a mighty  hand, 

And  restor’d  my  soul  to  land. 

8 Now,  with  gratitude  I raise 
Ebenezers  to  his  praise; 

Now  my  rash  pursuits  are  o’er, 

I  can  trust  thee,  world,  no  more. 

HYMN  C. 

The  Enchantment  dissolved. 

1 Blinded  in  youth  by  Satan’s  arts, 

The  world  to  our  unpractis’d  hearts, 

A flatt’ring  prospect  shows  ; 

Our  fancy  forms  a thousand  schemes 
Our  gay  delights  and  golden  dreams, 
And  undisturb’d  repose. 

2 So  in  the  desert’s  dreary  waste, 

By  magic  power  produc’d  in  haste, 

(As  ancient  fables  say) 

Castles,  and  groves,  and  music  sweet, 
The  senses  of  the  trav’ller  meet, 

And  stop  him  in  his  way. 


[book  in. 

3 But  while  he  listens  with  surprise, 

The  charm  dissolves,  the  vision  dies, 

’Twas  but  enchanted  ground: 

Thus,  if  the  Lord  our  spirit  touch, 

The  world,  which  promis’d  us  so  much, 
A wilderness  is  found. 

4 At  first  we  start,  and  feel  distress’d, 
Convinc’d  we  never  can  have  rest 

In  such  a wretched  place ; 

But  he  whose  mercy  breaks  the  charm, 
Reveals  his  own  almighty  arm, 

And  bids  us  seek  his  face. 

5 Then  we  begin  to  live  indeed, 

When  from  our  sin  and  bondage  freed 

By  this  beloved  Friend ; 

We  follow  him  from  day  to  day, 

Assur’d  of  grace  through  all  the  way, 
And  glory  at  the  end. 


BOOK  III. 

ON  THE  RISE,  PROGRESS,  CHANGES,  AND  COM- 
FORTS OF  THE  SPIRITUAL  LIFE. 

r~ — 

I.  SOLEMN  ADDRESSES  TO 
SINNERS 

HYMN  L 
Expostulation. 

1 No  words  can  declare, 

No  fancy  can  paint, 

What  rage  and  despair, 

What  hopeless  complaint, 

Fill  Satan’s  dark  dwelling, 

The  prison  beneath 
What  weeping,  and  yelling, 

And  gnashing  of  teeth ! 

2 Yet  sinners  will  choose 
This  dreadful  abode ; 

Each  madly  pursues 
The  dangerous  road ; 

Though  God  give  them  warning 
They  onward  will  go, 

They  answer  with  scorning, 

And  rush  upon  woe. 

3 How  sad  to  behold 
The  rich  and  the  poor, 

The  young  and  the  old, 

All  blindly  secure ! 

All  posting  to  ruin, 

Refusing  to  stop ! 

Ah ! think  what  you  ’re  doing 
While  yet  there  is  hope. 

4 How  weak  is  your  hand, 

To  fight  with  the  Lord  ! 

How  can  you  withstand 
The  edge  of  his  sword  1 
What  hope  of  escaping 
For  those  who  oppose, 

When  hell  is  wide  gaping 
To  swallow  his  foes ! 


* Isaiah  xxix.  3. 


TO  SINNERS. 


181 


HYMN  IY.J 

5 How  oft  have  you  dar’d 
The  Lord  to  his  face ! 

Yet  still  you  are  spar’d 
To  hear  of  his  grace  ; 

Oh ! pray  for  repentance 
And  life-giving  faith, 

Before  the  just  sentence 
Consign  you  to  death. 

6 It  is  not  too  late 
To  Jesus  to  flee, 

His  mercy  is  great, 

His  pardon  is  free ; 

His  blood  has  such  virtue 
For  all  that  believe, 

That  nothing  can  hurt  you, 

If  him  you  receive. 

HYMN  II. 

Alarm. 

1 Stop,  poor  sinner ! stop,  and  think, 

Before  you  farther  go ! 

Will  you  sport  upon  the  brink 
Of  everlasting  woe  1 
Once  again,  I charge  you,  stop  ! 

For,  unless  you  warning  take, 

Ere  you  are  aware,  you  drop 
Into  the  burning  lake ! 

2 Say,  have  you  an  arm  like  God, 

That  you  his  will  oppose  ? 

Fear  you  not  that  iron  rod 

With  which  he  breaks  his  foes'? 
Can  you  stand  in  that  dread  day, 
When  he  judgment  shall  proclaim, 
And  the  earth  shall  melt  away, 

Like  wax  before  the  flame  I 

3 Pale-fac’d  death  will  quickly  come, 

To  drag  you  to  his  bar ; 

Then  to  hear  your  awful  doom 
Will  fill  you  with  despair : 

All  your  sins  will  round  you  crowd, 
Sins  of  a blood-crimson  dye ; 

Each  for  vengeance  crying  loud, 

And  what  can  you  reply  ? 

4 Though  your  heart  be  made  of  steel, 

Your  forehead  lin’d  with  brass, 

God  at  length  will  make  you  feel, 

He  will  not  let  you  pass : 

Sinners  then  in  vain  will  call, 
(Though  they  now  despise  his  grace) 
Rocks  and  mountains  on  us  fall,* 

And  hide  us  from  his  face. 

5 But  as  yet  there  is  a hope 

You  may  his  mercy  know, 

Though  his  arm  is  lifted  up, 

He  still  forbears  the  blow : 

’Twas  for  sinners  Jesus  died, 

Sinners  he  invites  to  come ; 

None  who  come  shall  be  denied, 

He  says,  “ There  still  is  room.”  j- 


HYMN  III. 

We  were  once  as  you  are. 

1 Shall  men  pretend  to  pleasure, 

Who  never  knew  the  Lord, 

Can  all  the  worldling’s  treasure 
True  peace  of  mind  afford? 

They  shall  obtain  this  jewel 
In  what  their  hearts  desire, 
When  they  by  adding  fuel 
Can  quench  the  flame  of  fire. 

2 Till  you  can  bid  the  ocean, 

When  furious  tempests  roar,* 
Forget  its  wonted  motion, 

And  rage  and  swell  no  more ; 

In  vain  your  expectation 
To  find  content  in  sin, 

Or  freedom  from  vexation, 

While  passions  reign  within. 

3 Come  turn  your  thoughts  to  Jesus, 

If  you  would  good  possess; 

’Tis  he  alone  that  frees  us 
From  guilt  and  from  distress : 
When  he  by  faith  is  present, 

The  sinner’s  troubles  cease ; 

His  ways  are  truly  pleasant, 

And  all  his  paths  are  peace,  f 

4 Our  time  in  sin  we  wasted, 

And  fed  upon  the  wind ; 

Until  his  love  we  tasted, 

No  comfort  could  we  find : 

But  now  we  stand  to  witness 
His  power  and  grace  to  you; 
May  you  perceive  its  fitness, 

And  call  upon  him  too ! 

5 Our  pleasure  and  our  duty, 

Though  opposite  before, 

Since  we  have  seen  his  beauty, 

Are  join’d  to  part  no  more : 

It  is  our  highest  pleasure, 

No  less  than  duty’s  call, 

To  love  him  beyond  measure, 

And  serve  him  with  our  all. 

HYMN  IV. 

Prepare  to  meet  God . 

1 Sinner,  art  thou  still  secure  ? 

Wilt  thou  still  refuse  to  pray  ? 

Can  thy  heart  or  hands  endure 
In  the  Lord’s  avenging  day  ? 

See,  his  mighty  arm  is  bar’d ! 

Awful  terrors  clothe  his  brow ! 

For  his  judgment  stand  prepar’d, 
Thou  must  either  break  or  bow. 

2 At  his  presence  nature  shakes, 
Earth  affrighted  hastes  to  flee, 

Solid  mountains  melt  like  wax ; 
What  will  then  become  of  thee 
Who  his  advent  may  abide  ? 

You  that  glory  in  your  shame, 

Will  you  find  a place  to  hide 
When  the  world  is  wrapt  in  flame? 


* Rev.  vi.  16. 


t Luke  xiv.  22. 


* Isa.  lvii.  20,  21. 


t Prov.  iii.  17. 


182 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


3 Then  the  rich,  the  great,  the  wise, 
Trembling,  guilty,  self-condemn’d, 
Must  behold  the  wrathful  eyes 

Of  the  Judge  they  once  blasphem’d : 
Where  are  now  their  haughty  looks'? 
Oh  their  horror  and  despair ! 

When  they  see  the  open’d  books, 

And  their  dreadful  sentence  hear ! 

4 Lord,  prepare  us  by  thy  grace  ! 

Soon  we  must  resign  our  breath ; 

And  our  souls  be  call’d  to  pass 
Through  the  iron  gate  of  death : 

Let  us  now  our  day  improve, 

Listen  to  the  gospel- voice ; 

Seek  the  things  that  are  above, 

Scorn  the  world’s  pretended  joys. 

5 Oh!  when  flesh  and  heart  shall  fail, 
Let  thy  love  our  spirits  cheer ; 
Strengthen’d  thus,  we  shall  prevail 
Over  Satan,  sin,  and  fear : 

Trusting  in  thy  precious  name, 

May  we  thus  our  journey  end ; 

Then  our  foes  shall  lose  their  aim, 
And  the  Judge  will  be  our  friend. 

HYMN  V. 

Invitation. 

1 Sinners,  hear  the  Saviour’s  call, 

He  now  is  passing  by ; 

He  has  seen  thy  grievous  thrall, 

And  heard  thy  mournful  cry, 

He  has  pardons  to  impart, 

Grace  to  save  thee  from  thy  fears ; 

See  the  love  that  fills  his  heart, 

And  wipe  away  thy  tears. 

2 Why  art  thou  afraid  to  come, 

And  tell  him  all  thy  case  ? 

He  will  not  pronounce  thy  doom, 

Nor  frown  thee  from  his  face : 

Wilt  thou  fear  Emmanuel  ? 

Wilt  thou  dread  the  Lamb  of  God, 
Who,  to  save  thy  soul  from  hell, 

Has  shed  his  precious  blood  ? 

3 Think  how  on  the  cross  he  hung, 

Pierc’d  with  a thousand  wounds ! 
Hark,  from  each,  as  with  a tongue, 
The  voice  of  pardon  sounds  ! 

See,  from  all  his  bursting  veins, 

Blood  of  wondrous  virtue  flow ! 

Shed  to  wash  away  thy  stains, 

And  ransom  thee  from  woe. 

4 Though  his  majesty  be  great, 

His  mercy  is  no  less  ; 

Though  he  thy  transgressions  hate, 
He  feels  for  thy  distress : 

By  himself  the  Lord  hath  sworn, 

He  delights  not  in  thy  death,* 

But  invites  thee  to  return, 

That  thou  may’st  live  by  faith. 

5 Raise  thy  downcast  eyes,  and  see 

What  throngs  his  throne  surround ! 


[book  III. 

These,  though  sinners  once  like  thee. 
Have  full  salvation  found : 

Yield  not  then  to  unbelief! 

While  he  says,  “ There  yet  is  room,” 
Though  of  sinners  thou  art  chief, 

Since  Jesus  calls  thee,  come. 


SIMILAR  HYMNS. 

Book  I.  Hymn  75,  91. 

Book  n.  Hymn  1,  2,  3,  4,  6,  35,  77,  78,  83. 


II.  SEEKING,  PLEADING,  AND 
HOPING. 

HYMN  VI. 

The  burdened  Sinner. 

1 Ah  ! what  can  I do, 

Or  where  be  secure ! 

If  justice  pursue, 

What  heart  can  endure  ? 

The  heart  breaks  asunder, 

Though  hard  as  a stone, 

When  God  speaks  in  thunder. 

And  makes  himself  known. 

2 With  terror  I read 
My  sins’  heavy  score, 

The  numbers  exceed 
The  sands  on  the  shore ; 

Guilt  makes  me  unable 
To  stand  or  to  flee  ; 

So  Cain  murder’d  Abel 
And  trembled  like  me. 

3 Each  sin,  like  his  blood, 

With  a terrible  cry, 

Calls  loudly  on  God 
To  strike  from  on  high : 

Nor  can  my  repentance, 

Extorted  by  fear, 

Reverse  the  just  sentence, 

’Tis  just,  though  severe. 

4 The  case  is  too  plain, 

I have  my  own  choice ; 

Again,  and  again, 

I slighted  his  voice, 

His  warnings  neglected, 

His  patience  abus’d, 

His  gospel  rejected, 

His  mercy  refus’d. 

5 And  must  I then  go, 

For  ever  to  dwell 

In  torments  and  woe, 

With  devils  in  hell  ? 

Oh ! where  is  the  Saviour 
I scorn’d  in  times  past? 

His  word  in  my  favour 
Would  save  me  at  last. 

6 Lord  Jesus  on  thee 
I venture  to  call, 

Oh  look  upon  me, 

The  vilest  of  all ! 


* Ezek.  xxxiii.  11. 


HYMN  IX.] 

For  whom  didst  thou  languish, 
And  bleed  on  the  tree  7 
O pity  my  anguish, 

And  say,  “ ’Twas  for  thee.” 

7  A case  such  as  mine 
Will  honour  thy  power; 

All  hell  will  repine, 

All  heaven  will  adore  ; 

If  in  condemnation 
Strict  justice  takes  place, 

It  shines  in  salvation, 

More  glorious  through  grace. 

HYMN  VII. 

Behold , I am  Vile  ! 

1 O Lord,  how  vile  am  I, 

Unholy  and  unclean ! 

How  can  I dare  to  venture  nigh 
With  such  a load  of  sin! 

2 Is  this  polluted  heart 

A dwelling  fit  for  thee  7 
Swarming,  alas!  in  ev’ry  part, 

What  evils  do  I see ! 

3 If  I attempt  to  pray, 

And  lisp  thy  holy  name, 

My  thoughts  are  hurried  soon  away, 

I  know  not  where  lam. 

4 If  in  thy  word  I look, 

Such  darkness  fills  my  mind, 

I  only  read  a sealed  book, 

But  no  relief  can  find. 

5 Thy  gospel  oft  I hear, 

But  hear  it  still  in  vain ; 

Without  desire,  or  love,  or  fear, 

I like  a stone  remain. 

6 Myself  can  hardly  bear 

This  wretched  heart  of  mine ; 

How  hateful,  then,  must  it  appear 
To  those  pure  eyes  of  thine  7 

7 And  must  I then  indeed 
Sink  in  despair  and  die! 

Fain  would  I hope  that  thou  didst  bleed 
For  such  a wretch  as  I. 

8 That  blood  which  thou  hast  spilt, 
That  grace  which  is  thine  own, 

Can  cleanse  the  vilest  sinner’s  guilt, 
And  soften  hearts  of  stone. 

9 Low  at  thy  feet  I bow, 

0 pity  and  forgive ! 

Here  will  I lie,  and  wait  till  thou 
Shalt  bid  me  rise  and  live. 

HYMN  VIII. 

The  shining  Light. 

1 My  former  hopes  are  fled, 

My  terror  now  begins ; 

1 feel,  alas ! that  I am  dead 
In  trespasses  and  sins. 

2 Ah ! whither  shall  I fly  7 

1 hear  the  thunder  roar ; 


183 

The  law  proclaims  destruction  nigh, 

And  vengeance  at  the  door. 

3 When  I review  my  ways, 

• I dread  impending  doom ; 

But  sure  a friendly  whisper  says, 

“ Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.” 

4 I see,  or  think  I see, 

A glimm’ring  from  afar ; 

A beam  of  day  that  shines  for  me, 

To  save  me  from  despair. 

5 Forerunner  of  the  sun,* 

It  marks  the  pilgrim’s  way ; 

I ’ll  gaze  upon  it  while  I run, 

And  watch  the  rising  day.  C. 

HYMN  IX. 
Encouragement. 

1 My  soul  is  beset 
With  grief  and  dismay, 

I owe  a vast  debt, 

And  nothing  can  pay : 

I must  go  to  prison, 

Unless  that  dear  Lord, 

Who  died  and  is  risen, 

His  pity  afford. 

2 The  death  that  he  died, 

The  blood  that  he  spilt, 

To  sinners  applied, 

Discharge  from  all  guilt : 

This  great  intercessor 
Can  give,  if  he  please, 

The  vilest  transgressor 
Immediate  release. 

3 When  nail’d  to  the  tree, 

He  answer’d  the  prayer 
Of  one  who,  like  me, 

Was  nigh  to  despair  ;f 
He  did  not  upbraid  him 
With  all  he  had  done, 

But  instantly  made  him 
A saint  and  a son. 

4 The  jailor,  I read, 

A pardon  receiv’d :f 
And  how  was  he  freed  7 
He  only  believ’d : 

His  case  mine  resembled, 

Like  me  he  was  foul, 

Like  me  too  he  trembled, 

But  faith  made  him  whole. 

5 Though  Saul  in  his  youth, 

To  madness  enrag’d, 

Against  the  Lord’s  truth 
And  people  engag’d ; 

Yet  Jesus,  the  Saviour, 

Whom  long  he  revil’d, $ 

Receiv’d  him  to  favour, 

And  made  him  a child. 

6 A foe  to  all  good, 

In  wickedness  skill’d, 


SEEKING,  &c. 


* Psalm  cxxx.  6. 
J Acts  xvi.  13. 


t Luke  xxiii.  43. 
§ 1 Tim.  i.  16. 


184 


OLNEY  HYMNS, 


Manasseh  with  blood 
Jerusalem  fill’d  ;* 

In  evil  long  harden’d 
The  Lord  he  defied ; 

Yet  he  too  was  pardon’d 
When  mercy  he  cried. 

7 Of  sinners  the  chief, 

And  viler  than  all, 

The  jailor  or  thief, 

Manasseh  or  Saul ; 

Since  they  were  forgiven, 

Why  should  I despair, 

While  Christ  is  in  heaven, 

And  still  answers  prayer. 

HYMN  X. 

The  Waiting  Soul. 

1 Breathe  from  the  gentle  south,  O Lord, 

And  cheer  me  from  the  north ; 

Blow  on  the  treasures  of  thy  word, 

And  call  the  spices  forth ! 

2 I wish,  thou  know’st,  to  be  resign’d, 

And  wait  with  patient  hope ; 

But  hope  delayed  fatigues  the  mind, 

And  drinks  the  spirits  up. 

3 Help  me  to  reach  the  distant  goal, 

Confirm  my  feeble  knee, 

Pity  the  sickness  of  a soul 
That  faints  for  love  of  thee. 

4 Cold  as  I feel  this  heart  of  mine, 

Yet  since  I feel  it  so 
It  yields  some  hope  of  life  divine, 

Within,  however  low. 

5 I seem  forsaken  and  alone, 

I  hear  the  lion  roar, 

And  ev’ry  door  is  shut  but  one, 

And  that  is  mercy’s  door. 

6 There,  till  the  dear  Deliv’rer  come, 

I ’ll  wait  with  humble  prayer ; 

And  when  he  calls  his  exile  home, 

The  Lord  shall  find  him  there. 

HYMN  XI. 

The  Effort. 

1 Cheer  up,  my  soul,  there  is  a mercy-seat 
Sprinkled  with  blood,  where  Jesus  answers 

prayer ; 

There  humbly  cast  thyself  beneath  his  feet, 
For  never  needy  sinner  perish’d  there. 

2 Lord,  I am  come  ! thy  promise  is  my  plea, 
Without  thy  word  I durst  not  venture  nigh ; 
But  thou  hast  call’d  the  burden’d  soul  to 

thee, 

A weary,  burden’d  soul,  O Lord,  am  I ! 

3 Bow’d  down  beneath  a heavy  load  of  sin, 
By  Satan’s  fierce  temptations  sorely  prest, 
Beset  without,  and  full  of  fears  within, 
Trembling  and  faint,  I come  to  thee  for  rest. 


* 2 Cbron.  xxxiii.  12, 13. 


[book  hi. 

Be  thou  my  refuge,  Lord,  my  hiding-place, 
I know  no  force  can  tear  me  from  thy  side ; 
Unmov’d  I then  may  all  accusers  face, 

And  answer  ev’ry  charge  with  “Jesus 
died.” 

Yes,  thou  didst  weep,  and  bleed,  and  groan, 
and  die, 

Well  hast  thou  known  what  fierce  tempta- 
tions mean ; 

Such  was  thy  love ; and  now,  enthron’d  on 
high, 

The  same  compassions  in  thy  bosom  reign. 
Lord,  give  me  faith: — he  hears:  what 
grace  is  this ! 

Dry  up  thy  tears,  my  soul,  and  cease  to 
grieve ; 

He  shows  me  what  he  did,  and  who  he  is, 
I must,  I will,  I can,  I do  believe. 

HYMN  XII. 

ANOTHER. 

Approach,  my  soul,  the  mercy-seat 
Where  Jesus  answers  prayer, 

There  humbly  fall  before  his  feet, 

For  none  can  perish  there. 

Thy  promise  is  my  only  plea, 

With  this  I venture  nigh ; 

Thou  callest  burden’d  souls  to  thee, 

And,  such,  O Lord,  am  I. 

Bow’d  down  beneath  a load  of  sin, 

By  Satan  sorely  press’d, 

By  wars  without,  and  fears  within, 

I come  to  thee  for  rest. 

Be  thou  my  shield  and  hiding-place  ! 

That,  shelter’d  near  thy  side, 

I may  my  fierce  accuser  face, 

And  tell  him,  “ Thou  hast  died.” 

O wond’rous  love  ! to  bleed  and  die, 

To  bear  the  cross  and  shame, 

That  guilty  sinners,  such  as  I, 

Might  plead  thy  gracious  name. 

“ Poor  tempest-tossed  soul,  be  still, 

My  promis’d  grace  receive  :” 

’Tis  Jesus  speaks — I must,  I will, 

I can,  I do  believe. 

HYMN  Xm. 

Seeking  the  Beloved. 

To  those  who  know  the  Lord,  I speak, 

Is  my  beloved  near  ? 

The  bridegroom  of  my  soul  I seek, 

O when  will  he  appear  ! 

Though  once  a man  of  grief  and  shame, 
Yet  now  he  fills  a throne, 

And  bears  the  greatest,  sweetest  name, 
That  earth  or  heaven  have  known. 
Grace  flies  before,  and  love  attends 
His  steps  where’er  he  goes ; 

Though  none  can  see  him  but  his  friends, 
And  they  were  once  his  foes. 


4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 


CONFLICT. 


185 


HYMN  XVII.] 

4 He  speaks — obedient  to  his  call 

Our  warm  affections  move  ; 

Did  he  but  shine  alike  on  all, 

Then  all  alike  would  love. 

5 Then  love  in  every  heart  would  reign, 

And  war  would  cease  to  roar  ; 

And  cruel  and  blood-thirsty  men 
Would  thirst  for  blood  no  more. 

6 Such  Jesus  is,  and  such  his  grace, 

0 may  he  shine  on  you  !* 

And  tell  him,  when  you  see  his  face, 

1 long  to  see  him  too.  C. 

HYMN  XIV. 

Rest  for  Weary  Souls. 

1 Does  the  gospel- word  proclaim 
Rest  for  those  who  weary  be  If 
Then,  my  soul,  put  in  thy  claim, 

Sure  that  promise  speaks  to  thee  ; 
Marks  of  grace  I cannot  show, 

All  polluted  is  my  best ; 

Yet  I weary  am,  I know, 

And  the  weary  long  for  rest. 

2 Burden’d  with  a load  of  sin, 

Harass’d  with  tormenting  doubt, 

Hourly  conflicts  from  within, 

Hourly  crosses  from  without : 

All  my  little  strength  is  gone, 

Sink  I must  without  supply ; 

Sure  upon  the  earth  is  none 
Can  more  weary  be  than  I. 

3 In  the  ark  the  weary  dove]: 

Found  a welcome  resting-place ; 

Thus  my  spirit  longs  to  prove 
Rest  in  Christ,  the  ark  of  grace. 
Tempest-toss’d  I long  have  been, 

And  the  flood  increases  fast ; 

Open,  Lord,  and  take  me  in, 

Till  the  storm  be  overpast. 

4 Safely  lodg’d  within  thy  breast, 

What  a wondrous  change  I find  ! 

Now  I know  thy  promised  rest 
Can  compose  a troubled  mind  : 

You  that  weary  are,  like  me, 

Hearken  to  the  gospel  call ; 

To  the  ark  for  refuge  flee, 

Jesus  will  receive  you  all ! 


SIMILAR  HYMNS. 

Book  I.  Hymn  45,  69,  82,  83,  84,  96. 

Book  II.  Hymn  29. 

III.  CONFLICT. 

HYMN  XV. 

Light  shining  out  of  Darkness. 

1 God  moves  in  a mysterious  way, 

His  wonders  to  perform ; 

He  plants  his  footsteps  in  the  sea, 

And  rides  upon  the  storm. 

•*  Cant.  v.  8.  t Matt.  xi.  28.  X Gen.  viii.  9. 

Vol.  II.  2 A 


Deep  in  unfathomable  mines 
Of  never-failing  skill, 

He  treasures  up  his  bright  designs, 

And  works  his  sovereign  will. 

Ye  fearful  saints,  fresh  courage  take, 

The  clouds  ye  so  much  dread, 

Are  big  with  mercy,  and  shall  break 
In  blessings  on  your  head. 

Judge  not  the  Lord  by  feeble  sense, 

But  trust  him  for  his  grace ; 

Behind  a frowning  providence, 

He  hides  a smiling  face. 

His  purposes  will  ripen  fast, 

Unfolding  every  hour ; 

The  bud  may  have  a bitter  taste, 

But  sweet  will  be  the  flower. 

Blind  unbelief  is  sure  to  err,* 

And  scan  his  work  in  vain ; 

God  is  his  own  interpreter. 

And  he  will  make  it  plain. 

HYMN  XVI. 

Welcome  Cross. 

’Tis  my  happiness  below, 

Not  to  live  without  the  cross, 

But  the  Saviour’s  power  to  know, 
Sanctifying  every  loss : 

Trials  must  and  will  befall ; 

But  with  humble  faith  to  see 
Love  inscribed  upon  them  all, 

This  is  happiness  to  me. 

God,  in  Israel,  sows  the  seeds 
Of  affliction,  pain,  and  toil ; 

These  spring  up  and  choke  the  weeds 
Which  would  else  o’erspread  the  soil : 
Trials  make  the  promise  sweet, 

Trials  give  new  life  to  prayer ; 

Trials  bring  me  to  his  feet, 

Lay  me  low,  and  keep  me  there. 

Did  I meet  no  trials  here, 

No  chastisement  by  the  way ; 

Might  I not  with  reason  fear, 

I should  prove  a cast-away, 

Bastards  may  escape  the  rod,f 
Sunk  in  earthly,  vain  delight; 

But  the  true-born  child  of  God 
Must  not,  would  not,  if  he  might.  C. 

HYMN  XVII. 

A fflictions  sanctified  by  the  Word. 

0 how  I love  thy  holy  word, 

Thy  gracious  covenant,  O Lord  ! 

It  guides  me  in  the  peaceful  way, 

1 think  upon  it  all  the  day. 

What  are  the  mines  of  shining  wealth, 
The  strength  of  youth,  the  bloom  of  health  ’ 
What  are  all  joys  compar’d  with  those 
Thine  everlasting  word  bestows. 

Long  unafflicted,  undismayed, 

In  pleasure’s  path  secure  I strayed ; 

* John  xiii.  7,  t Heb.  xii.  8. 


2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

1 

2 

3 


136 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


Thou  raad’st  me  feel  thy  chast’ning  rod,* 
And  straight  I turn’d  unto  my  God. 

4 What  though  it  pierc’d  my  fainting  heart, 
I bless  thine  hand  that  caus’d  the  smart ; 
It  taught  my  tears  a while  to  flow, 

But  sav’d  me  from  eternal  woe. 

5 Oh  ! had’st  thou  left  me  unchastis’d, 

Thy  precepts  I had  still  despis’d ; 

And  still  the  snare  in  secret  laid, 

Had  my  unwary  feet  betrayed. 

6 I love  thee,  therefore,  O my  God ! 

And  breathe  towards  thy  dear  abode, 
Where  in  thy  presence  fully  blest, 

Thy  chosen  saints  for  ever  rest.  C. 

HYMN  XVIII. 

Temptation. 

1 The  billows  swell,  the  winds  are  high, 
Clouds  overcast  my  wintry  sky; 

Out  of  the  depths  to  thee  I call, 

My  fears  are  great,  my  strength  is  small. 

2 O Lord ! the  pilot’s  part  perform, 

And  guide  and  guard  me  thro’  the  storm  ; 
Defend  me  from  each  threat’ning  ill, 
Control  the  waves,  say,  “ Peace  be  still.” 

3 Amidst  the  roaring  of  the  sea, 

My  soul  still  hangs  her  hope  on  thee  ; 

Thy  constant  love,  thy  faithful  care 
Is  all  that  saves  me  from  despair. 

4 Dangers  of  every  shape  and  name 
Attend  the  followers  of  the  Lamb, 

Who  leave  the  world’s  deceitful  shore, 
And  leave  it  to  return  no  more. 

5 Though  tempest-toss’d,  and  half  a wreck, 
My  Saviour  through  the  floods  I seek ; 

Let  neither,  winds  nor  stormy  main 
Force  back  my  shatter’d  bark  again.  C. 

HYMN  XIX. 

Looking  upwards  in  a Storm. 

1 God  of  my  life,  to  thee  I call, 

Afflicted  at  thy  feet  I fall  ;f 

When  the  great  water-floods  prevail, 
Leave  not  my  trembling  heart  to  fail ! 

2 Friend  of  the  friendless  and  the  faint! 
Where  should  I lodge  my  deep  complaint  1 
"Where  but  with  thee,  whose  open  door 
Invites  the  helpless  and  the  poor. 

3 Did  ever  mourner  plead  with  thee, 

And  thou  refuse  that  mourner’s  plea  1 
Does  not  the  word  still  fix’d  remain, 

That  none  shall  seek  thy  face  in  vain  1 

4 That  were  a grief  I could  not  bear, 

Didst  thou  not  hear  and  answer  prayer; 
But  a prayer-hearing,  answ’ring  God, 
Supports  me  under  every  load. 

5 Fair  is  the  lot  that ’s  cast  for  me ; 

I have  an  advocate  with  thee ; 


[book  in. 

They  whom  the  world  caresses  most, 
Have  no  such  privilege  to  boast. 

Poor,  though  I am,  despis'd,  forgot,* 

Yet  God,  my  God,  forgets  me  not; 

And  he  is  safe,  and  must  succeed, 

For  whom  the  Lord  vouchsafes  to  plead, 

C. 

HYMN  XX. 

The  Valley  of  the  Shadow  of  Death. 

My  soul  is  sad  and  much  dismayed ; 

See,  Lord,  what  legions  of  my  foes, 
With  fierce  Apollyon  at  their  head, 

My  heavenly  pilgrimage  oppose ! 

See,  from  the  ever-burning  lake, 

How  like  a smoky  cloud  they  rise ! 

With  horrid  blasts  my  soul  they  shake, 
With  storms  of  blasphemies  and  lies. 
Their  fiery  arrows  reach  the  mark,f 
My  throbbing  heart  with  anguish  tear ; 
Each  lights  upon  a kindred  spark, 

And  finds  abundant  fuel  there. 

I hate  the  thought  that  wrongs  the  Lord 
Oh ! I would  drive  it  from  my  breast, 
With  my  own  sharp  two-edged  sword, 
Far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west. 

Come,  then,  and  chase  the  cruel  host. 
Heal  the  deep  wounds  I have  receiv’d ! 
Nor  let  the  powers  of  darkness  boast, 
That  I am  foifd,  and  thou  art  griev’d. 

C. 

HYMN  XXI. 

The  Storm  hushed. 

’Tis  past — the  dreadful  stormy  night 
Is  gone,  with  all  its  fears ! 

And  now  I see  returning  light, 

The  Lord,  my  Sun,  appears. 

The  tempter,  who  but  lately  said, 

I soon  should  be  his  prey, 

Has  heard  my  Saviour’s  voice,  and  fled 
With  shame  and  grief  away. 

Ah ! Lord,  since  thou  didst  hide  thy  face, 
What  has  my  soul  endur’d  1 
But  now  ’tis  past, — I feel  thy  grace, 

And  all  my  wounds  are  cur’d! 

0 wondrous  change ! but  just  before, 
Despair  beset  me  round, 

1 heard  the  lion’s  horrid  roar, 

And  trembled  at  the  sound. 

Before  corruption,  guilt  and  fear, 

My  comforts  blasted  fell ; 

And  unbelief  discover’d  near 
The  dreadful  depths  of  hell. 

But  Jesus  pitied  my  distress, 

He  heard  my  feeble  cry, 

Reveal’d  his  blood  and  righteousness 
And  brought  salvation  nigh. 


6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 


Psal.  cxix.  71. 


t Psal.  lxix.  15. 


* Psal.  xl.  17. 


t Eph.  vi.  16. 


CONFLICT. 


187 


HYMN  XXV.] 

7 Beneath  the  banner  of  his  love 

I  now  secure  remain ; 

The  tempter  frets,  but  dares  not  move, 

To  break  my  peace  again. 

8 Lord,  since  thou  thus  hast  broke  my  bands, 

And  set  the  captive  free, 

I  would  devote  my  tongue,  my  hands, 

My  heart,  my  all,  to  thee. 

HYMN  XXII. 

Help  in  Time  of  Need. 

1 Unless  the  Lord  had  been  my  stay, 

With  trembling  joy  my  soul  may  say, 

My  cruel  foe  had  gain’d  his  end: 

But  he  appear’d  for  my  relief, 

And  Satan  sees  with  shame  and  grief, 
That  I have  an  almighty  Friend. 

2 Oh  ! ’twas  a dark  and  trying  hour, 

When,  harass’d  by  the  tempter’s  power, 

I felt  my  strongest  hopes  decline  ! 

You  only  who  have  known  his  arts, 

You  only  who  have  felt  his  darts, 

Can  pity  such  a case  as  mine. 

3 Loud  in  my  ears  a charge  he  read, 

(My  conscience  witness’d  all  he  said,) 

My  long  black  list  of  outward  sin  ; 

Then  bringing  forth  my  heart  to  view, 

Too  well  what ’s  hidden  there  he  knew, 
He  show’d  me  ten  times  worse  within. 

4 ’Twas  all  too  true,  my  soul  replied, 

But  I remember  Jesus  died, 

And  now  he  fills  a throne  of  grace : 

I ’ll  go  as  I have  done  before, 

His  mercy  I may  still  implore, 

I have  his  promise,  “ Seek  my  face.” 

5 But,  as  when  sudden  fogs  arise, 

The  trees,  and  hills,  the  sun  and  skies, 

Are  all  at  once  conceal’d  from  view : 

So  clouds  of  horror,  black  as  night, 

By  Satan  rais’d,  hid  from  my  sight 
The  throne  of  grace  and  promise  too. 

6 Then,  while  beset  with  guilt  and  fear, 

He  tried  to  urge  me  to  despair, 

He  tried,  and  he  almost  prevail’d ; 

But  Jesus,  by  a heavenly  ray, 

Drove  clouds,  and  guilt,  and  fear  away, 
And  all  the  tempter’s  malice  fail’d. 

HYMN  XXIII. 

Peace  after  a Storm. 

X When  darkness  long  has  veil’d  my  mind, 
And  smiling  day  once  more  appears, 

Then,  my  Redeemer,  then  I find 
The  folly  of  my  doubts  and  fears. 

2 Straight  I upbraid  my  wand’ring  heart, 
And  blush  that  I should  ever  be 
Thus  prone  to  act  so  base  a part, 

Or  harbour  one  hard  thought  of  thee ! 

3 Oh ! let  me  then  at  length  be  taught, 

What  I am  still  so  slow  to  learn, 

That  God  is  love,  and  changes  not, 

Nor  knows  the  shadow  of  a turn. 


4 Sweet  truth,  and  easy  to  repeat ! 

But  when  my  faith  is  sharply  tried, 

I find  myself  a learner  yet, 

Unskilful,  weak,  and  apt  to  slide. 

5 But,  O my  Lord,  one  look  from  thee 
Subdues  the  disobedient  will, 

Drives  doubt  and  discontent  away, 

And  thy  rebellious  worm  is  still. 

6 Thou  art  as  ready  to  forgive, 

As  I am  ready  to  repine ; 

Thou,  therefore,  all  the  praise  receive, 
Be  shame  and  self-abhorrence  mine.  C. 

HYMN  XXIV. 

Mourning  and  Longing. 

1 The  Saviour  hides  his  face ! 

My  spirit  thirsts  to  prove 

Renew’d  supplies  of  pard’ning  grace, 
And  never-fading  love. 

2 The  favour’d  souls  who  know 
What  glories  shine  in  him, 

Pant  for  his  presence,  as  the  roe 
Pants  for  the  living  stream. 

3 What  trifles  tease  me  now  ! 

They  swarm  like  summer-flies, 

They  cleave  to  every  thing  I do, 

And  swim  before  my  eyes. 

4 How  dull  the  Sabbath-day, 

Without  the  Sabbath’s  Lord  ! 

How  toilsome  then  to  sing  and  pray 
And  wait  upon  the  word  ! 

5 Of  all  the  truths  I hear, 

How  few  delight  my  taste  ! 

I glean  a berry  here  and  there, 

But  mourn  the  vintage  past. 

6 Yet  let  me  (as  I ought) 

Still  hope  to  be  supplied ; 

No  pleasure  else  is  worth  a thought, 

Nor  shall  I be  denied. 

7 Though  I am  but  a worm, 

Unworthy  of  his  care, 

The  Lord  will  my  desire  perform, 

And  grant  me  all  my  prayer.  C 

HYMN  XXV. 

Rejoice  the  Soul  of  thy  Servant. 

1 When  my  prayers  are  a burden  and  task 
No  wonder  I little  receive ; 

0 Lord ! make  me  willing  to  ask, 

Since  thou  art  so  ready  to  give : 

Although  I am  bought  with  thy  blood, 
And  all  thy  salvation  is  mine, 

At  a distance  from  thee  my  chief  good 

1 wander,  and  languish,  and  pine. 

2 Of  thy  goodness  of  old  when  I read, 

To  those  who  were  sinners  like  me, 

Why  may  I not  wrestle  and  plead, 

With  them  a partaker  to  be  ? 

Thine  arm  is  not  short’ned  since  then. 
And  those  who  believe  in  thy  name, 

Ever  find  thou  art  Yea  and  Amen, 
Through  all  generations  the  same. 


188 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  III 


3 While  my  spirit  within  me  is  press’d 
With  sorrow,  temptation,  and  fear, 

Like  John,  I would  flee  to  thy  breast,* 
And  pour  my  complaints  in  thine  ear: 
How  happy  and  favour’d  was  he, 

Who  could  on  thy  bosom  repose  ! 

Might  this  favour  be  granted  to  me, 

I ’d  smile  at  the  rage  of  my  foes. 

4 I have  heard  of  thy  wonderful  name, 

How  great  and  exalted  thou  art ; 

But  ah ! I confess  to  my  shame, 

It  faintly  impresses  my  heart : 

The  beams  of  thy  glory  display, 

As  Peter  once  saw  thee  appear ; 

That,  transported  like  him,  I may  say, 

“ It  is  good  for  my  soul  to  be  here.”f 

5 What  a sorrow  and  weight  didst  thou  feel, 
When  nail’d,  for  my  sake,  to  the  tree ! 

My  heart  sure  is  harder  than  steel, 

To  feel  no  more  sorrow  for  thee ; 

Oh  ! let  me  with  Thomas  descry 
The  wounds  in  thy  hands  and  thy  side, 
And  have  feelings  like  his,  when  I cry, 

“ My  God  and  my  Saviour  has  died !”{ 

6 But  if  thou  hast  appointed  me  still 
To  wrestle,  and  suffer,  and  fight ; 

O  make  me  resign  to  thy  will, 

For  all  thine  appointments  are  right : 

This  mercy,  at  least,  I entreat, 

That,  knowing  how  vile  I have  been, 

I,  with  Mary,  may  wait  at  thy  feet,§ 

And  weep  o’er  the  pardon  of  sin. 

HYMN  XXVI. 
Self-acquaintance. 

1 Dear  Lord ! accept  a sinful  heart, 

Which  of  itself  complains, 

And  mourns,  with  much  and  frequent  smart, 
The  evil  it  contains. 

2 There  fiery  seeds  of  anger  lurk, 

Which  often  hurt  my  frame ; 

And  wait  but  for  the  tempter’s  work, 

To  fan  them  to  a flame. 

3 Legality  holds  out  a bribe 

To  purchase  life  from  thee ; 

And  discontent  would  fain  prescribe 
How  thou  shalt  deal  with  me. 

4 While  unbelief  withstands  thy  grace, 

And  puts  the  mercy  by, 

Presumption,  with  a brow  of  brass, 

Says,  “ Give  me,  or  I die.” 

5 How  eager  are  my  thoughts  to  roam 

In  quest  of  what  they  love ; 

But,  ah ! when  duty  calls  them  home, 

How  heavily  they  move ! 

6 0 cleanse  me  in  a Saviour’s  blood  ! 

Transform  me  by  thy  power ; 

And  make  me  thy  belov’d  abode, 

And  let  me  rove  no  more.  C. 


HYMN  XXVn. 

Bitter  and  Sweet. 

1 Kindle,  Saviour,  in  my  heart 

A flame  of  love  divine : 

Hear,  for  mine  I trust  thou  art. 

And  sure  I would  be  thine : 

If  my  soul  has  felt  thy  grace, 

If  to  me  thy  name  is  known, 

Why  should  trifles  fill  the  place 
Due  to  thyself  alone  1 

2 ’Tis  a strange  mysterious  life 

I  live  from  day  to  day ; 

Light  and  darkness,  peace  and  strife, 

Bear  an  alternate  sway : 

When  I think  the  battle  won, 

I have  to  fight  it  o’er  again ; 

When  I say  I ’m  overthrown, 

Relief  I soon  obtain. 

3 Often  at  the  mercy-seat, 

While  calling  on  thy  name. 

Swarms  of  evil  thoughts  I meet, 

Which  fill  my  soul  with  shame : 
Agitated  in  my  mind, 

Like  a feather  in  the  air, 

Can  I thus  a blessing  find  1 
My  soul,  can  this  be  prayer  1 

4 But  when  Christ,  my  Lord  and  Friend, 

Is  pleas’d  to  show  his  power ; 

All  at  once  my  troubles  end, 

And  I ’ve  a golden  hour : 

Then  I see  his  smiling  face, 

Feel  the  pledge  of  joys  to  come ; 

Often,  Lord,  repeat  this  grace, 

Till  thou  shalt  call  me  home. 

HYMN  XXVIII. 

Prayer  for  Patience. 

1 Lord,  who  hast  suffer’d  all  for  me, 

My  peace  and  pardon  to  procure, 

The  lighter  cross  I bear  for  thee 
Help  me  with  patience  to  endure. 

2 The  storm  of  loud  repining  hush; 

I would  in  humble  silence  mourn ; [bush 
Why  should  the  unburnt,  though  burning 
Be  angry,  as  the  crackling  thorn? 

3 Man  should  not  faint  at  thy  rebuke, 

Like  Joshua  falling  on  his  face,* 

When  the  curs’d  thing  that  Achan  took 
Brought  Israel  into  just  disgrace. 

4 Perhaps  some  golden  wedge  suppress’d, 
Some  secret  sin  offends  my  God ; 

Perhaps  that  Babylonish  vest, 
Self-righteousness,  provokes  the  rod. 

5 Ah ! were  I buffeted  all  day, 

Mock’d,  crown’d  with  thorns,  and  spit  upon, 
I yet  should  have  no  right  to  say, 

My  great  distress  is  mine  alone. 

6 Let  me  not  angrily  declare, 

No  pain  was  ever  sharp  like  mine, 


* John  xiii.  25. 
I John  xx.  23. 


t Matth.  xvii.  16. 
§ Luke  vii.  33. 


* Joshua  vii.  10,  1L 


CONFLICT. 


189 


HYMN  XXXII.] 

Nor  murmur  at  the  cross  I bear, 

But  rather  weep,  rememb’ring  thine.  C. 

HYMN  XXIX. 

Submission. 

1 O Lord,  my  best  desire  fulfil, 

And  help  me  to  resign 
Life,  health,  and  comfort  to  thy  will, 

And  make  thy  pleasure  mine. 

2 Why  should  I shrink  at  thy  command, 

Whose  love  forbids  my  fears, 

Or  tremble  at  the  gracious  hand 
That  wipes  away  my  tears  1 

3 No,  let  me  rather  freely  yield 

What  most  I prize  to  thee ; 

Who  never  hast  a good  withheld, 

Or  wilt  withhold  from  me. 

4 Thy  favour  all  my  journey  through 

Thou  art  engag’d  to  grant ; 

What  else  I want,  or  think  I do, 

’Tis  better  still  to  want. 

5 Wisdom  and  mercy  guide  my  way, 

Shall  I resist  them  both  1 
A poor  blind  creature  of  a day, 

And  crush’d  before  the  moth ! 

6 But,  ah  ! my  inward  spirit  cries, 

Still  bind  me  to  thy  sway ; 

Else  the  next  cloud  that  vails  my  skies 
Drives  all  these  thoughts  away.  C. 

HYMN  XXX. 

Why  should  I complain  ? 

1 When  my  Saviour,  my  Shepherd  is  near, 
How  quickly  my  sorrows  depart ! 

New  beauties  around  me  appear, 

New  spirits  enliven  my  heart: 

His  presence  gives  peace  to  my  soul, 

And  Satan  assaults  me  in  vain ; 

While  my  Shepherd  his  power  controls, 

I  think  I no  more  shall  complain. 

2 But,  alas ! what  a change  do  I find,  [sight ! 
When  my  Shepherd  withdraws  from  my 
My  fears  all  return  to  my  mind, 

My  day  is  soon  chang’d  into  night : 

Then  Satan  his  efforts  renews 
To  vex  and  ensnare  me  again ; 

All  my  pleasing  enjoyments  I lose, 

And  can  only  lament  and  complain. 

3 By  these  changes  I often  pass  through, 

I am  taught  my  own  weakness  to  know ; 

I am  taught  what  my  Shepherd  can  do, 
And  how  much  to  his  mercy  I owe : 

It  is  he  that  supports  me  through  all ; 
When  I faint,  he  revives  me  again ; 

He  attends  to  my  prayer  when  I call, 

And  bids  me  no  longer  complain. 

4 Wherefore  then  should  I murmur  and 

grieve, 

Since  my  Shepherd  is  always  the  same, 


And  has  promis’d  he  never  will  leave* 
The  soul  that  confides  in  his  name  1 
To  relieve  me  from  all  that  I fear, 

He  was  buffeted,  tempted,  and  slain ; 

And  at  length  he  will  surely  appear, 
Though  he  leaves  me  a while  to  complain. 
5 While  I dwell  in  an  enemy’s  land, 

Can  I hope  to  be  always  in  peace  ! 

’Tis  enough  that  my  Shepherd’s  at  hand. 
And  that  shortly  this  warfare  will  cease ; 
For  ere  long  he  will  bid  me  removef 
From  this  region  of  sorrow  and  pain, 

To  abide  in  his  presence  above, 

And  then  I no  more  shall  complain. 

HYMN  XXXI. 

Return , O Lord,  how  long  ! 

1 Return  to  bless  my  waiting  eyes, 

And  cheer  my  mourning  heart,  O Lord ! 
Without  thee,  all  beneath  the  skies 
No  real  pleasure  can  afford. 

2 When  thy  lov’d  presence  meets  my  sight, 
It  softens  care  and  sweetens  toil ; 

The  sun  shines  forth  with  double  light, 
The  whole  creation  wears  a smile. 

3 Upon  thine  arm  of  love  I rest, 

Thy  gracious  voice  forbids  my  fear; 

No  storms  disturb  my  peaceful  breast, 

No  foes  assault  when  thou  art  near. 

4 But  ah  ! since  thou  hast  been  away, 
Nothing  but  trouble  have  I known; 

And  Satan  marks  me  for  his  prey 
Because  he  sees  me  left  alone.  / 

5 My  sun  is  hid,  my  comforts  lost, 

My  graces  droop,  my  sins  revive ; 
Distress’d,  dismayed,  and  tempest-toss’d. 
My  soul  is  only  just  alive. 

6 Lord,  hear  my  cry,  and  come  again ! 

Put  all  mine  enemies  to  shame, 

And  let  them  see  ’tis  not  in  vain 
That  I have  trusted  in  thy  name. 

HYMN  XXXII. 

Cast  down , but  not  Destroyed. 

1 Though  sore  beset  with  guilt  and  fear, 

I cannot,  dare  not  quite  despair ; 

If  I must  perish,  would  the  Lord 
Have  taught  my  heart  to  love  his  word  ? 
Would  he  have  given  me  eyes  to  see|  m 
My  danger  and  my  remedy, 

Reveal’d  his  name,  and  bid  me  pray, 

Had  he  resolv’d  to  say  me  nay  1 

2 No — though  cast  down,  I am  not  slain ; 

I fall,  but  I shall  rise  again  ;§ 

The  present,  Satan,  is  thy  hour, 

But  Jesus  shall  control  thy  power; 

His  love  will  plead  for  my  relief, 

He  hears  my  groans,  he  feels  my  grief; 


* Jer.  i.  19.  t Rev.  ii.  JO. 

J Judges  xiii.  23.  § Micah  vii.  8. 


190  OLNEY 

Nor  will  he  suffer  thee  to  boast 
A soul  that  thought  his  help  was  lost. 

3 ’Tis  true,  I have  unfaithful  been, 

And  griev’d  his  Spirit  by  my  sin ; 

Yet  still  his  mercy  he  ’]]  reveal, 

And  all  my  wounds  and  follies  heal : 
Abounding  sin  I must  confess,* 

But  more  abounding  is  his  grace ; 

He  once  vouchsaf’d  for  me  to  bleed, 

And  now  he  lives  my  cause  to  plead. 

4 I ’ll  cast  myself  before  his  feet, 

I  see  him  on  his  mercy-seat, 

(’Tis  sprinkled  with  atoning  blood) 

There  sinners  find  access  to  God : 

Ye  burden’d  souls,  approach  with  me, 
And  make  the  Saviour’s  name  your  plea ; 
Jesus  will  pardon  all  who  come, 

And  strike  your  fierce  accuser  dumb. 

HYMN  XXXIII. 

The  Benighted  Traveller . 

1 Forest  beasts,  that  live  by  prey, 

Seldom  show  themselves  by  day  ; 

But  when  day-light  is. withdrawn, f 
Then  they  rove  and  roar  till  dawn. 

2 Who  can  tell  the  traveler’s  fears, 

When  their  horrid  yells  he  hears  1 
Terror  almost  stops  his  breath, 

While  each  step  he  looks  for  death. 

3 Thus,  when  Jesus  is  in  view, 

Cheerful  I my  way  pursue ; 

Walking  by  my  Saviour’s  light, 

Nothing  can  my  soul  affright. 

4 But  when  he  forbears  to  shine, 

Soon  the  traveller’s  case  is  mine ; 

IiOst,  benighted,  struck  with  dread, 

What  a painful  path  I tread  ! 

5 Then  my  soul  with  terror  hears, 

Worse  than  lions,  wolves,  or  bears, 
Roaring  loud  in  ev’ry  part, 

Through  the  forest  of  my  heart. 

6 Wrath,  impatience,  envy,  pride, 

Satan  and  his  host  beside, 

Press  around  me  to  devour ; 

How  can  I escape  their  power! 

7 Gracious  Lord,  afford  me  light, 

Put  these  beasts  of  prey  to  flight ; 

Let  thy  power  and  love  be  shown  ;J 
Save  me,  for  I am  thine  own. 

HYMN  XXXIV. 

The  Prisoner. 

1 When  the  poor  pris’ner  through  a gate 

Sees  others  walk  at  large, 

How  does  he  mourn  his  lonely  state, 

And  long  for  a discharge ! 

2 Thus  I,  confin’d  in  unbelief, 

My  loss  of  freedom  mourn, 

And  spend  my  hours  in  fruitless  grief, 
Until  my  Lord  return. 


HYMNS.  [book  hi. 

3 The  beam  of  day,  which  pierces  through 

The  gloom  in  which  I dwell, 

Only  discloses  to  my  view 
The  horrors  of  my  cell. 

4 Ah ! how  my  pensive  spirit  faints, 

To  think  of  former  days  ! 

When  I could  triumph  with  the  saints, 
And  join  their  songs  of  praise ! 

5 But  now  my  joys  are  all  cut  off, 

In  prison  I am  cast, 

And  Satan,  with  a cruel  scoff,* 

Says,  “ Where ’s  your  God  at  last1” 

6 Dear  Saviour,  for  thy  mercy’s  sake, 

My  strong,  my  only  plea, 

These  gates  and  bars  in  pieces  break, | 
And  set  the  pris’ner  free ! 

7 Surely  my  soul  shall  sing  to  thee, 

For  liberty  restor’d ; 

And  all  thy  saints  admire  to  see 
The  mercies  of  the  Lord. 

HYMN  XXXV. 

Perplexity  relieved. 

1 Uncertain  how  the  way  to  find 

Which  to  salvation  led, 

I listen’d  long,  with  anxious  mind, 

To  hear  what  others  said. 

2 When  some  of  joys  and  comforts  told, 

I fear’d  that  i was  wrong ; 

For  I was  stupid,  dead,  and  cold, 

Had  neither  joy  nor  song. 

3 The  Lord  my  lab’ring  heart  reliev’d, 

And  made  my  burden  light ; 

Then  for  a moment  I believ’d, 

Supposing  all  was  right. 

4 Of  fierce  temptations  others  talk’d, 

Of  anguish  and  dismay, 

Through  what  distress  they  had  walk’d 
Before  they  found  the  way. 

5 Ah  ! then  I thought  my  hopes  were  vain. 

For  I had  liv’d  at  ease  ; 

I wish’d  for  all  my  fears  again 
To  make  me  more  like  these. 

6 I had  my  wish ; the  Lord  disclos’d 

The  evils  of  my  heart, 

And  left  my  naked  soul  expos’d 
To  Satan’s  fiery  dart. 

7 Alas ! “ I now  must  give  it  up,” 

I cried  in  deep  despair : 

How  could  I dream  of  drawing  hope 
From  what  I cannot  bear! 

8 Again  my  Saviour  brought  me  aid, 

And  when  he  set  me  free, 

“ Trust  simply  on  my  word,”  he  said, 

“ And  leave  the  rest  to  me.” 

HYMN  XXXVI. 

Prayer  answered  by  Crosses. 

1 I ask’d  the  Lord,  that  I might  grow 
In  faith,  and  love,  and  ev’ry  grace ; 


Rom.  v.  20.  t Psal.  civ.  20.  1 Psal. cxix. 


* Psal.  cxv.  2. 


t Psal  cxlii.  7. 


CONFLICT. 


HYMN  XXXVIII.] 

Might  more  of  his  salvation  know, 

And  seek  more  earnestly  his  face. 

2  ’Twas  he  who  taught  me  thus  to  pray, 
And  he,  I trust,  has  answer’d  prayer ; 
But  it  has  been  in  such  a way, 

As  almost  drove  me  to  despair. 

8 I hop’d  that  in  some  favour’d  hour, 

At  once  he ’d  answer  my  request, 

And  by  his  love’s  constraining  power 
Subdue  my  sins,  and  give  me  rest. 

4 Instead  of  this,  he  made  me  feel 
The  hidden  evils  of  my  heart ; 

And  let  the  angry  powers  of  hell 
Assault  my  soul  in  ev’ry  part. 

5 Yea  more,  with  his  own  hand  he  seem’d 
Intent  to  aggravate  my  woe  ; 

Cross’d  all  the  fair  designs  I schem’d, 
Blasted  my  gourds,  and  laid  me  low. 

6 Lord,  why  is  this  1 I trembling  cried, 
Wilt  thou  pursue  thy  worm  to  death  ? 

“ ’Tis  in  this  way,”  the  Lord  replied, 

“ I answer  prayer  for  grace  and  faith. 

7 “ These  inward  trials  I employ, 

From  self  and  pride  to  set  thee  free ; 
And  break  thy  schemes  of  earthly  joy, 
That  thou  may’st  seek  thy  all  in  me.” 

HYMN  XXXVII. 

I  will  Trust,  and  not  be  Afraid. 

1 Begone,  unbelief! 

My  Saviour  is  near, 

And  for  my  relief 
Will  surely  appear : 

By  prayer  let  me  wrestle, 

And  he  will  perform  ; 

With  Christ  in  the  vessel, 

I smile  at  the  storm. 

2 Though  dark  be  my  way, 

Since  he  is  my  guide, 

’Tis  mine  to  obey, 

’Tis  his  to  provide  ; 

Though  cisterns  be  broken, 

And  creatures  all  fail, 

The  word  he  has  spoken 
Shall  surely  pyavail. 

3 His  love  in  time  past 
Forbids  me  to  think 
He  ’ll  leave  me  at  last 
In  trouble  to  sink : 

Each  sweet  Ebenezer 
I have  in  review, 

Confirms  his  good  pleasure 
To  help  me  quite  through. 

4 Determin’d  to  save, 

He  watch’d  o’er  my  path, 

When,  Satan’s  blind  slave, 

I sported  with  death  ; 

And  can  he  have  taught  me 
To  trust  in  his  name, 

And  thus  far  have  brought  me, 

To  put  me  to  shame  1 


5 Why  should  I complain 
Of  want  or  distress, 

Temptation  or  pain  ? 

He  told  me  no  less : 

The  heirs  of  salvation, 

I know  from  his  word, 

Through  much  tribulation 
Must  follow  their  Lord.* 

6 How  bitter  that  cup, 

No  heart  can  conceive, 

Which  he  drank  quite  up, 

That  sinners  might  live ! 

His  way  was  much  roughei 
And  darker  than  mine ; 

Did  Jesus  thus  suffer, 

And  shall  I repine  1 

7 Since  all  that  I meet 
Shall  work  for  my  good, 

The  bitter  is  sweet, 

The  med’cine  is  food  ; 

Though  painful  at  present, 
’Twill  cease  before  long, 

And  then,  O how  pleasant, 

The  conqueror’s  song  !f 

HYMN  XXXVIII. 

Questions  to  Unbelief. 

1 If  to  Jesus  for  relief 

My  soul  has  fled  by  prayer, 

Why  should  I give  way  to  grief, 

Or  heart-consuming  care ? 

Are  not  all  things  in  his  hands'? 

Has  he  not  his  promise  pass’d  ? 

Will  he  then  regardless  stand, 

And  let  me  sink  at  last  ? 

2 While  I know  his  providence 

Disposes  each  event, 

Shall  k judge  by  feeble  sense, 

And  yield  to  discontent  ? 

If  he  worms  and  sparrows  feed, 
Clothe  the  grass  in  rich  array,  J 
Can  he  see  a child  in  need, 

And  turn  his  eye  away  ? 

3 When  his  name  was  quite  unknown, 

And  sin  my  life  employed, 

Then  he  watch’d  me  as  his  own, 

Or  I had  been  destroyed ; 

Now  his  mercy-seat  I know, 

Now  by  grace  am  reconcil’d 
Would  he  spare  me  while  a foe, 5 
To  leave  me  when  a child? 

4 If  he  all  my  wants  supplied, 

When  I disdain’d  to  pray, 

Now  his  Spirit  is  my  guide, 

How  can  he  say  me  nay  ? 

If  he  would  not  give  me  up, 

When  my  soul  against  him  fought, 
Will  he  disappoint  the  hope 
Which  he  himself  has  wrought. 


* Acts  xiv.  22.  t Rom.  viii.  37. 

J Matt.  vi.  20.  § Rom.  v.  10. 


191 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


192 

5  If  he  shed  his  precious  blood 
To  bring1  me  to  his  fold, 

Can  I think  that  meaner  good* 

He  ever  will  withhold ! 

Satan,  vain  is  thy  device  ! 

Here  my  hope  rest*  well  assur’d, 

In  that  great  redemption-price, 

I  see  the  whole  secur’d. 

HYMN  XXXIX. 

Cheat  Effects  by  Weak  Means. 

1 Unbelief  the  soul  dismays, 

What  objections  will  it  raise ; 

But  true  faith  securely  leans 
On  the  promise,  in  the  means. 

2 If  to  faith  it  once  be  known, 

God  has  said,  “ It  shall  be  done, 

And  in  this  appointed  way 
Faith  has  then  no  more  to  say. 

3 Moses'  rod,  by  faith  up-rear’d,f 
Through  the  sea  a path  prepar’d ; 
Jericho’s  devoted  wallj 

At  the  trumpet’s  sound  must  fall. 

4 With  a pitcher  and  a lamp,§ 

Gideon  overthrew  a camp ; 

And  a stone,  wTell  aim’d  by  faith, || 

Prov’d  the  arm’d  Philistine’s  death. 

5 Thus  the  Lord  is  pleas’d  to  try 
Those  who  on  his  help  rely ; 

By  the  means  he  makes  it  known, 

That  the  power  is  all  his  own. 

6 Yet  the  means  are  not  in  vain, 

If  the  end  we  would  obtain  ; 

Though  the  breath  of  prayer  be  w^eak, 
None  shall  find  but  they  who  seek. 

7 God  alone  the  heart  can  reach, 

Yet  the  ministers  must  preach; 

’Tis  their  part  the  seed  to  sow,  • 

And  ’tis  his  to  make  it  grow. 

HYMN  XL. 

Why  art  thou  cast  down  ? 

1 Be  still,  my  heart ! these  anxious  cares 
To  thee  are  burdens,  thorns,  and  snares ; 
They  cast  dishonour  on  thy  Lord, 

And  contradict  his  gracious  word. 

2 Brought  safely  by  his  hand  thus  far, 
Why  wilt  thou  now  give  place  to  fear  ? 
How  canst  thou  want  if  he  provide, 

Or  lose  thy  way  with  such  a guide  1 

3 When  first  before  his  mercy-seat, 

Thou  didst  to  him  thy  all  commit ; 

He  gave  thee  warrant,  from  that  hour, 
To  trust  his  wisdom,  love,  and  power. 

4 Did  ever  trouble  yet  befall, 

And  he  refuse  to  hear  thy  call  1 
And  has  he  not  his  promise  past, 

That  thou  shalt  overcome  at  last  1 


* Rom.  viii.  32.  t Exod.  xiv.  21.  t Josh.  vi.  20. 
$ Judges  vii.  22.  f 1 Sam.  xvii.  42. 


[book  IIL 

Like  David,  thou  may’st  comfort  draw. 
Sav’d  from  the  bear’s  and  lion’s  paw ; 
Goliah’s  rage  I may  defy, 

For  God,  my  Saviour,  still  is  nigh. 

He  wTho  has  helped  me  hitherto, 

Will  help  me  all  my  journey  through, 
And  give  me  daily  cause  to  raise 
New  Ebenezers  to  his  praise. 

Though  rough  and  thorny  be  the  road, 

It  leads  me  home,  apace,  to  God ; 

Then  count  thy  present  trials  small, 

For  heaven  will  make  amends  for  all. 

HYMN  XLI. 

The  Way  of  Access. 

One  glance  of  thine,  eternal  Lord ! 

Pierces  all  nature  through ; 

Nor  heaven,  nor  earth,  nor  hell  afford 
A shelter  from  thy  view. 

The  mighty  whole,  each  smaller  part, 
At  once  "before  thee  lies ; 

And  every  thought  of  every  heart 
Is  open  to  thine  eyes. 

Though  greatly  from  myself  conceal’d, 
Thou  see’st  my  inward  frame ; 

To  thee  I always  stand  reveal’d, 

Exactly  as  I am. 

Since,  therefore,  I can  hardly  bear 
What  in  myself  I see ; 

How  vile  and  black  must  I appear, 

Most  holy  God,  to  thee  1 
But  since  my  Saviour  stands  between, 

In  garments  dyed  in  blood, 

’Tis  he,  instead  of  me,  is  seen, 

When  I approach  to  God. 

Thus,  though  a sinner,  I am  safe ; 

He  pleads  before  the  throne, 

His  life  and  death  in  my  behalf, 

And  calls  my  .sins  his  own. 

What  wondrous  love,  what  mysteries, 

In  this  appointment  shine  ! 

My  breaches  of  the  law  are  his,* 

And  his  obedience  mine. 

HYMN  XLII. 

The  Pilgrim’s  Song. 

From  Egypt  lately  freed 
By  the  Redeemer’s  grace, 

A rough  and  thorny  path  we  tread, 

In  hopes  to  see  his  face. 

The  flesh  dislikes  the  way, 

But  faith  approves  it  well ; 

Thi»ionly  leads  to  endless  day. 

All  others  lead  to  hell. 

The  promis’d  land  of  peace 
Faith  keeps  in  constant  view ; 

How  diff’rent  from  the  wilderness 
We  now  are  passing  through. 


*2  Cor.  v.  21 


5 

6 

7 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

1 

2 

3 


HYMN  XLVI.j 

4 Here  often  from  our  eyes 
Clouds  hide  the  light  divine ; 

There  we  shall  have  unclouded  skies, 
Our  Sun  will  always  shine. 

5 Here  griefs,  and  cares,  and  pains, 
And  fears,  distress  us  sore  ; 

But  there  eternal  pleasure  reigns, 
And  wo  shall  weep  no  more. 

6 Lord,  pardon  our  complaints, 

We  follow  at  thy  call ; 

The  joy  prepar’d  for  sutf ’ring  saints 
Will  make  amends  for  all. 


SIMILAR  HYMNS. 

Book  I.  Hymn  10,  13,  21,  22,  24,  27,  40,  43, 
44,  51,  56,  63,  76,  88,  107,  115,  126,  130, 
131,  136,  142. 

Book  II.  Hymn  30,  31,  84,  87,  92. 

IV.  COMFORT. 

HYMN  XLIII. 

Faith  a Neio  and  Comprehensive  Sense. 

1 Sight,  hearing,  feeling,  taste,  and  smell, 

Are  gifts  we  highly  prize ; 

But  faith  does  singly  each  excel, 

And  all  the  five  comprise. 

2 More  piercing  than  the  eagle’s  sight, 

It  views  the  world  unknown, 

Surveys  the  glorious  realms  of  light, 

And  Jesus  on  the  throne. 

3 It  hears  the  mighty  voice  of  God, 

And  ponders  what  he  saith; 

His  word  and  works,  his  gifts  and  rod, 
Have  each  a voice  to  faith. 

4 It  feels  the  touch  of  heavenly  power,* 

And  from  that  boundless  source, 

Derives  fresh  vigour  every  hour 
To  run  its  daily  course. 

5 The  truth  and  goodness  of  the  Lord 

Are  suited  to  its  taste  ;f 
Mean  is  the  worldling’s  pamper’d  board, 
To  faith’s  perpetual  feast. 

6 It  smells  the  dear  Redeemer’s  name 

Like  ointment  poured  forth 
Faith  only  knows,  or  can  proclaim, 

Its  savour  or  its  worth. 

7 Till  saving  faith  possess  the  mind, 

In  vain  of  sense  we  boast; 

We  are  but  senseless,  tasteless,  blind, 

And  deaf,  and  dead,  and  lost. 

HYMN  XLTV. 

The  Ifappy  Change. 

I  How  bless’d  thy  creature  is,  O Lord, 
When,  with  a single  eye, 

He  views  the  lustre  of  thy  word, 

The  day-spring  from  on  high  ! 


• Luke  viii.  4(3.  t Psalm  cxix.  103. 

t Solomon’s  Song,  i.  3. 

Vol.  II  2 B 


193 

2 Through  all  the  storms  that  veil  the  skies, 

And  frown  on  earthly  things, 

The  Sun  of  righteousness  he  eyes, 

With  healing  on  his  wings. 

3 Struck  by  that  light,  the  human  heart,* 

A barren  soil  no  more, 

Sends  the  sweet  smell  of  grace  abroad, 
Where  serpents  lurk’d  before. 

4 The  soul,  a dreary  province  once 

Of  Satan’s  dark  domain, 

Feels  a new  empire  form’d  within, 

And  owns  a heavenly  reign. 

5 The  glorious  orb,  whose  golden  beams 

The  fruitful  year  control, 

Since  first,  obedient  to  thy  word, 

He  started  from  the  goal, 

6 Has  cheer’d  the  nations  with  the  joys 

His  orient  rays  impart ; 

But,  Jesus,  ’tis  thy  light  alone 

Can  shine  upon  the  heart.  C. 

HYMN  XLV. 

Retirement. 

1 Far  from  the  world,  O Lord*  I flee, 

From  strife  and  tumult  far^ 

From  scenes  where  Satan  wc^jes  still 
His  most  successful  war. 

2 The  calm  retreat,  the  snent  shade, 

With  prayer  and  praise  agree, 

And  seem  by  thy  sweet  bounty  made, 

For  those  who  follow  thee. 

3 There  if  thy  Spirit  touch  the  soul, 

And  grace  her  mean  abode, 

Oh ! with  what  peace,  and  joy,  and  love,. 
She  communes  with  her  God. 

4 There,  like  the  nightingale,  she  pours 

Her  solitary  lays, 

Nor  asks  a witness  of  her  song, 

Nor  thirsts  for  human  praise. 

5 Author  and  guardian  of  my  life, 

Sweet  source  of  light  divine, 

And  (all  harmonious  names  in  one) 

My  Saviour,  thou  art  mine. 

6 What  thanks  I owe  thee,  and  what  love, 

A boundless,  endless  store, 

Shall  echo  through  the  realms  above, 
When  time  shall  be  no  more.  C. 

HYMN  XLYI. 

Jesus  my  All. 

1 Why  should  I fear  the  darkest  hour, 

Or  tremble  at  the  tempter’s  power  1 
Jesus  vouchsafes  to  be  my  tower. 

2 Though  hot  the  fight,  why  quit  the  field  ? 
Why  must  I either  flee  or  yield, 

Since  Jesus  is  my  mighty  shield  1 

3 When  creature-comforts  fade  and  die, 
Worldlings  may  weep,  but  why  should  I? 
Jesus  still  lives,  and  still  is  nigh. 


COMFORT. 


* Isa.  xxxv.  7. 


104 


OLNEY  HYMNS 


4 Though  all  the  flocks  and  herds  were  dead, 
My  soul  a famine  need  not  dread, 

For  Jesus  is  my  living  bread. 

5 I know  not  what  may  soon  betide, 

Or  how  my  wants  shall  be  supplied ; 

But  Jesus  knows  and  will  provide. 

6 Though  sin  would  fill  me  with  distress. 
The  throne  of  grace  I dare  address, 

For  Jesus  is  my  righteousness. 

7 Though  faint  my  prayers,  and  cold  my  love, 
My  steadfast  hope  shall  not  remove, 

While  Jesus  intercedes  above. 

8 Against  me  earth  and  hell  combine, 

But  on  my  side  is  power  divine ; 

Jesus  is  all,  and  he  is  mine. 

HYMN  XLVII. 

The  Hidden  Life. 

1 To  tell  the  Saviour  all  my  wants, 

How  pleasing  is  the  task ! 

Nor  less  to  praise  him  when  he  grants 
Beyond  what  I can  ask. 

2 My  lab’ring  spirit  vainly  seeks 

"To  tell  but  half  the  joy ; 

With  how  much  tenderness  he  speaks, 
And  helps  me  to  reply. 

3 Nor  were  it  wise,  nor  should  I choose, 

Such  secrets  to  declare ; 

Like  precious  wines,  their  taste  they  lose, 
Expos’d  to  open  air. 

4 But  this,  with  boldness,  I proclaim, 

Nor  care  if  thousands  hear, 

Sweet  is  the  ointment  of  his  name, 

Not  life  is  half  so  dear. 

5 And  cari  you  frown,  my  former  friends, 

Who  knew  what  once  I was, 

And  blame  the  song  that  thus  commends 
The  Man  who  bore  the  cross  1 

6 Trust  me,  I draw  the  likeness  true, 

And  not  as  fancy  paints : 

Such  honour  may  he  give  to  you, 

For  such  have  all  his  saints.  C. 

HYMN  XLYIII. 

Joy  and  Peace  in  Believing. 

1 Sometimes  a light  surprises 

The  Christian  while  he  sings; 

It  is  the  Lord  who  rises 
With  healing  in  his  wings; 

When  comforts  are  declining, 

He  grants  the  soul  again, 

A season  of  clear  shining, 

To  cheer  it  after  rain. 

2 In  holy  contemplation, 

We  sweetly  then  pursue 
The  theme  of  God’s  salvation, 

And  find  it  ever  new : 

Set  free  from  present  sorrow, 

We  cheerfully  can  say, 


[book  III 

E’en  let  the  unknown  to-morrow* 

Bring  with  it  what  it  may. 

3 It  can  bring  with  it  nothing, 

But  he  will  bear  us  through ; 

Who  gives  the  lilies  clothing, 

Will  clothe  his  people  too : 

Beneath  the  spreading  heavens, 

No  creature  but  is  fed ; 

And  he  who  feeds  the  ravens, 

Will  give  his  children  bread. 

4 Though  vine  nor  fig-tree  neither 

Their  wonted  fruit  shall  bear,f 
Though  all  the  field  should  wither, 

Nor  flocks  nor  herds  be  there  ; 

Yet  God  the  same  abiding, 

His  praise  shall  tune  my  voice ; 

For  while  in  him  confiding 
I cannot  but  rejoice. 

HYMN  XLIX. 

True  Pleasures. 

1 Lord,  my  soul  with  pleasure  springs. 

When  Jesus’  name  I hear, 

And  when  God  the  Spirit  brings 
The  word  of  promise  near : 

Beauties,  too,  in  holiness, 

Still  delighted  I perceive ; 

Nor  have  words  that  can  express 
The  joys  thy  precepts  give. 

2 Cloth’d  in  sanctity  and  grace, 

How  sweet  it  is  to  see 
Those  who  love  thee  as  they  pass 
Or  when  they  wait  on  thee ! 

Pleasant  too,  to  sit  and  tell, 

What  we  owe  to  love  divine, 

Till  our  bosoms  grateful  swell, 

And  eyes  begin  to  shine. 

3 Those  the  comforts  I possess, 

Which  God  shall  still  increase ; 

All  his  ways  are  pleasantness,! 

And  all  his  paths  are  peace. 

Nothing  Jesus  did  or  spoke, 

Hencefortli  let  me  ever  slight ; 

For  I love  his  easy  yoke,§ 

And  find  his  burden  light.  C 

HYMN  L. 

The  Christian. 

1 Honour  and  happiness  unite, 

To  make  the  Christian’s  name  a praise : 
How  fair  the  scene,  how  clear  the  light. 
That  fills  the  remnant  of  his  days ! 

2 A kingly  character  he  bears, 

No  change  his  priestly  office  knows; 
Unfading  is  the  crown  he  wears, 

His  joys  can  never  reach  a close. 

3 Adorn’d  with  glory  from  on  high, 
Salvation  shines  upon  his  face ; 

His  robe  is  of  the  ethereal  dye, 

His  steps  are  dignity  and  grace. 


* Matth.  vi.  34. 
I Prov.  iii.  17. 


t Hab.  iii.  17,  IS. 
§ Matth  zi.  30. 


COMFORT. 


195 


HYMN  LIV. 


4 Inferior  honours  he  disdains. 

Nor  stoops  to  take  applause  from  earth, 
The  King-  of  kings  himself  maintains 
The  expenses  of  his  heavenly  birth. 

5 The  noblest  creature  seen  below, 

Ordain’d  to  fill  a throne  above ; 

God  gives  him  all  he  can  bestow, 

His  kingdom  of  eternal  love ! 

6 My  soul  is  ravish’d  at  the  thought ! 
Methinks  from  earth  I see  him  rise  ! 
Angels  congratulate  his  lot, 

And  shout  him  welcome  to  the  skies ! C. 

HYMN  LI. 

Lively  Hope  and  Gracious  Fear. 

1 I was  a grov’lling  creature  once, 

And  basely  cleav’d  to  earth ; 

I  wanted  spirit  to  renounce 
The  clod  that  gave  me  birth. 

2 But  God  has  breath’d  upon  a worm. 

And  sent  me,  from  above, 

Wings,  such  as  clothe  an  angel’s  form, 
The  wings  of  joy  and  love. 

3 With  these  to  Pisgah’s  top  I fly, 

And  there  delighted  stand. 

To  view  beyond  a shining  sky 
The  spacious  promis’d  land. 

4 The  Lord  of  all  the  vast  domain 

Has  promis’d  it  to  me ; 

The  length  and  breadth  of  all  the  plain, 

As  far  as  faith  can  see. 

5 How  glorious  is  my  privilege  ! 

To  thee  for  help  I call ; 

I stand  upon  a mountain’s  edge, 

O  save  me,  lest  I fall ! 
xi  Though  much  exalted  in  the  Lord, 

My  strength  is  not  my  own ; 

Then  let  me  tremble  at  his  word, 

And  none  shall  cast  me  down.  C. 

HYMN  LII. 

Confidence. 

1 Yes’  since  God  himself  has  said  it, 

On  the  promise  I rely ; 

His  good  word  demands  my  credit, 

What  can  unbelief  reply  ? 

He  is  strong,  and  can  fulfil, 

He  is  truth,  and  therefore  will. 

2 As  to  all  the  doubts  and  questions 
Which  my  spirit  often  grieve, 

These  are  Satan’s  sly  suggestions, 

And  I need  no  answer  give ; 

He  would  fain  destroy  my  hope, 

But  the  promise  bears  it  up. 

8 Sure  the  Lord  thus  far  has  brought  me, 

By  his  watchful  tender  care  ; 

Sure  ’tis  he  himself  has  taught  me 
How  to  seek  his  face  by  prayer : 

After  so  much  mercy  past, 

Will  he  give  me  up  at  last ! 


4 True,  I ’ve  been  a foolish  creature. 

And  have  sinn’d  against  his  grace, 

But  forgiveness  is  his  nature, 

Though  he  justly  hides  his  face : 

Ere  he  called  me,  well  he  knew* 
What  a heart  like  mine  would  do 

5 In  my  Saviour’s  intercession 
Therefore  I will  still  confide  ! 

Lord,  accept  my  free  confession, 

I have  sinn’d,  but  thou  hast  died  :f 
This  is  all  I have  to  plead, 

This  is  all  the  plea  I need. 

HYMN  LIII. 

Peace  Restored. 

1 Oh  ! speak  that  gracious  word  again, 

And  cheer  my  drooping  heart ! 

No  voice  but  thine  can  soothe  my  pain, 
Or  bid  my  fears  depart. 

2 And  canst  thou  still  vouchsafe  to  own 

A wretch  so  vile  as  1 1 
And  may  I still  approach  thy  throne, 

And  Abba,  Father,  cry  1 

3 O,  then,  let  saints  and  angels  join, 

And  help  me  to  proclaim 
The  grace  that  heal’d  a breach  .ike  mine, 
And  put  my  foes  to  shame ! 

4 How  oft  did  Satan’s  cruel  boast 

My  troubled  soul  affright ! 

He  told  me  I was  surely  lost, 

And,  God  had  left  me  quite.}: 

5 Guilt  made  me  fear,  lest  all  were  true 

The  lying  tempter  said ; 

But  now  the  Lord  appears  in  view, 

My  enemy  is  fled. 

6 My  Saviour,  by  his  powerful  word, 

Has  turn’d  my  night  to  day ; 

And  his  salvation’s  joy ’s  restored, 

Which  I had  sinn’d  away. 

7 Dear  Lord,  I wonder  and  adore ! 

Thy  grace  is  all  divine  ! 

O keep  me,  that  I sin  no  more 
Against  such  love  as  thine ! 

HYMN  LIV. 

Hear  what  he  has  done  for  my  Soul. 

1 Sav’d  by  blood,  I live  to  tell 
What  the  love  of  Christ  hath  done ; 

He  redeem’d  my  soul  from  hell, 

Of  a rebel  made  a son : 

Oh  ! I tremble  still,  to  think 
How  secure  I liv’d  in  sin ; 

Sporting  on  destruction’s  brink, 

Yet  preserv’d  from  falling  in. 

2 In  his  own  appointed  hour, 

To  my  heart  the  Saviour  spoke ; 

Touch’d  me  by  his  Spirit’s  power, 

And  my  dang’rous  slumber  broke, 

Then  I saw  and  own’d  my  guilt, 

Soon  my  gracious  Lord  replied : 

* Isa.  xlviii.  8.  t Rom.  viii.  34.  t P6alm  Ixzi.  II. 


196 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


“ Fear  not,  I my  blood  have  spilt, 
’Twas  for  such  as  thee  I died.” 

3 Shame  and  wonder,  joy  and  love, 

All  at  once  possess’d  my  heart ; 

Can  I hope  thy  grace  to  prove 
After  acting  such  a part  1 

“ Thou  hast  greatly  sinn’d,”  he  said, 
“ But  I freely  all  forgive ; 

I myself  thy  debt  have  paid, 

Now  I bid  thee  rise  and  live.” 

4 Come,  my  fellow-sinners,  try, 

Jesus’  heart  is  full  of  love ! 

0 that  you,  as  well  as  I, 

May  his  wondrous  mercy  prove. 

He  has  sent  me  to  declare, 

All  is  ready,  all  is  free : 

Why  should  any  soul  despair, 

When  he  sav’d  a wretch  like  me 1 

HYMN  LV. 

Freedom  from  Care. 

1 While  I liv’d  without  the  Lord, 

(If  I might  be  said  to  live,) 

Nothing  could  relief  afford, 

Nothing  satisfaction  give. 

3 Empty  hopes  and  groundless  fear 
Mov’d  by  turns  my  anxious  mind ; 
Like  a feather  in  the  air, 

Made  the  sport  of  every  wind. 

3 Now,  I see,  whate’er  betide, 

All  is  well  if  Christ  be  mine ; 

He  lias  promis’d  to  provide, 

1 have  only  to  resign. 

4 When  a sense  of  sin  and  thrall 
Forc’d  me  to  the  sinner’s  Friend, 

He  engaged  to  manage  all, 

By  the  way  and  to  the  end. 

6  “ Cast,”  he  said,  “ on  me  thy  care,* 
’Tis  enough  that  I am  nigh ; 

I will  all  thy  burdens  bear, 

I will  all  thy  wants  supply. 

6 “ Simply  follow  as  I lead, 

Do  not  reason,  but  believe ; 

Call  on  me  in  time  of  need, 

Thou  shalt  surely  help  receive.” 

7 Lord,  I would,  I do  submit, 

Gladly  yield  my  all  to  thee ; 

What  thy  wisdom  sees  most  fit, 
Must  be  surely  best  for  me. 

8 Only,  when  the  way  is  rough, 

And  the  coward  flesh  would  start, 
Let  thy  promise  and  thy  love 
Cheer  and  animate  my  heart 

HYMN  LVI. 
Humiliation  and  Praise. 
(Imitated  from  the  German.) 

1 When  the  wounded  spirit  hears 
The  voice  of  Jesus’  blood, 


* Psalm  hr  22.  1 Peter  v.  7. 


[book  III 

How  the  message  stops  the  tears 
Which  else  in  vain  had  flowed  : 

Pardon,  grace,  and  peace  proclaim’d, 

And  the  sinner  call’d  a child ; 

Then  the  stubborn  heart  is  tam’d, 
Renew’d  and  reconcil’d. 

Oh ! ’twas  grace  indeed  to  spare 
And  save  a wretch  like  me ! 

Men  or  angels  could  not  bear 
What  I have  offer’d  thee : 

Were  thy  bolts  at  their  command, 

Hell  ere  now  had  been  my  place ; 

Thou  alone  could’st  silent  stand, 

And  wait  to  show  thy  grace. 

If,  in  one  created  mind, 

The  tenderness  and  love 
Of  thy  saints  on  earth  were  join’d, 

With  all  the  hosts  above ; 

Still  that  love  were  weak  and  poor. 

If  compar’d,  my  Lord,  with  thine ; 

Far  too  scanty  to  endure 
A heart  so  vile  as  mine. 

Wondrous  mercy  I have  found, 

But,  ah ! how  faint  my  praise  ! 

Must  I be  a cumber-ground, 

Unfruitful  all  my  days'? 

Do  I in  thy  garden  grow, 

Yet  produce  thee  only  leaves ! 

Lord,  forbid  it  should  be  so ! 

The  thought  my  spirit  grieves. 

Heavy  charges  Satan  brings, 

To  fill  me  with  distress ; 

Let  me  hide  beneath  thy  wings, 

And  plead  thy  righteousness. 

Lord,  to  thee  for  help  I call, 

’Tis  thy  promise  bids  me  come : 

Tell  him  thou  hast  paid  for  all, 

And  that  shall  strike  him  dumb. 

HYMN  LVII. 

For  the  Poor. 

When  Hagar  found  the  bottle  spent,* 
And  wept  o’er  Ishmael, 

A message  from  the  Lord  was  sent 
To  guide  her  to  a well. 

Should  not  Elijah’s  cake  and  cruisef 
Convince  us  at  this  day, 

A gracious  God  will  not  refuse 
Provisions  by  the  way  ? 

His  saints  and  servants  shall  be  fed, 

The  promise  is  secure ; 

“ Bread  shall  be  given  them,”  as  he  said, 
“ Their  water  shall  be  sure.”| 

Repasts  far  richer  they  shall  prove, 

Than  all  earth’s  dainties  are ; 

’Tis  sweet  to  taste  a Saviour’s  love, 
Though  in  the  meanest  fare. 

To  Jesus,  then,  your  trouble  bring, 

Nor  murmur  at  your  lot ; 

While  you  are  poor,  and  he  is  King, 

You  shall  not  be  forgot.  C. 

* Gen.  xxi.  19.  ? 1 Kings  xvii.  14.  { Isa.  xxxiii.  19 


2 

3 

4 

5 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 


HYMN  LXI.J 

HYMN  LVIII. 

Home  in  View. 

1 As  when  the  weary  traveler  gains 
The  height  of  some  o’erlooking  hill, 

His  heart  revives,  if  cross  the  plains 
He  eyes  his  home,  though  distant  still. 

2 While  he  surveys  the  much-lov’d  spot, 
He  slights  the  space  that  lies  between; 
His  past  fatigues  are  now  forgot, 
Because  his  journey’s  end  is  seen. 

3 Thus,  when  the  Christian  pilgrim  views, 
By  faith,  his  mansion  in  the  skies, 

The  sight  his  fainting  strength  renews, 
And  wings  his  speed  to  reach  the  prize : 

4 The  thought  of  home  his  spirit  cheers, 
No  more  he  grieves  for  troubles  past ; 
Nor  any  future  trial  fears,* 

So  he  may  safe  arrive  at  last. 

5 ’Tis  there,  he  says,  I am  to  dwell 
With  Jesus,  in  the  realms  of  day ; 

Then  I shall  bid  my  cares  farewell, 

And  he  will  wipe  my  tears  away. 

6 Jesus,  on  thee  our  hope  depends, 

To  lead  us  on  to  thine  abode : 

Assur’d  our  home  will  make  amends 
For  all  our  toil  while  on  the  road. 


SIMILAR  HYMNS. 

Book  I.  Hymn  4,  7,  9, 11,  25,  35,  36,  39,  41, 
46,  47,  48,  70,  95, 128,  132. 

Book  II.  Hymn  45,  46,  47. 


V.  DEDICATION  AND  SURRENDER. 


HYMN  LIX. 

Old  Things  are  passed  away. 

1 Let  worldly  minds  the  world  pursue, 

It  has  no  charms  for  me  ; 

Once  I admir’d  its  trifles  too, 

But  grace  has  set  me  free. 

2 Its  pleasures  now  no  longer  please, 

No  more  content  afford ; 

Far  from  my  heart  be  joys  like  these, 
Now  I have  seen  the  Lord. 

3 As  by  the  light  of  op’ning  day 

The  stars  are  all  conceal’d  ; 

So  earthly  pleasures  fade  away, 

When  Jesus  is  reveal’d. 

4 Creatures  no  more  divide  my  choice, 

I  bid  them  all  depart; 

His  name,  and  love,  and  gracious  voice, 
Have  fix’d  my  roving  heart. 

5 Now,  Lord,  I would  be  thine  alone, 

And  wholly  live  to  thee ; 

But  may  I hope  that  thou  wilt  own 
A worthless  worm  like  me  1 


197 

6  Yes ! though  of  sinners  I ’m  the  worst, 

I  cannot  doubt  thy  wili; 

For  if  thou  hadst  not  lov’d  me  first, 

I had  refus’d  thee  still.* 

HYMN  LX. 

The  Power  of  Grace. 

1 Hatty  the  birth  where  grace  presides, 

To  form  the  future  life ; 

In  wisdom’s  paths  the  soul  she  guides, 
Remote  from  noise  and  strife. 

2 Since  I have  known  the  Saviour’s  name, 

And  what  for  me  he  bore, 

No  more  I toil  for  empty  fame, 

I thirst  for  gold  no  more. 

3 Plac’d  by  his  hand  in  this  retreat, 

I make  his  love  my  theme ; 

And  see  that  all  the  world  calls  great, 

Is  but  a waking  dream. 

4 Since  he  has  rank’d  my  worthless  name 

Amongst  his  favour’d  few, 

Let  the  mad  world  who  scoff  at  them, 
Revile  and  hate  me  too. 

5 O thou,  whose  voice  the  dead  can  raise, 

And  soften  hearts  of  stone, 

And  teach  the  dumb  to  sing  thy  praise  ! 
This  work  is  all  thine  own. 

6 Thy  wond’ring  saints  rejoice  to  see 

A wretch  like  me  restor’d ; 

And  point,  and  say,  “ How  chang’d  is  he, 
Who  once  defied  the  Lord !” 

7 Grace  bid  me  live,  and  taught  my  tongue 

To  aim  at  notes  divine  ; 

And  grace  accepts  my  feeble  song ; 

The  glory,  Lord,  be  thine ! 

HYMN  LXI. 

My  Soul  thirsteth  for  God. 

1 I thirst,  but  not  as  once  I did, 

The  vain  delights  of  earth  to  share  ; 

Thy  wounds,  Emmanuel,  all  forbid 
That  I should  seek  my  pleasures  there. 

2 It  was  the  sight  of  thy  dear  cross, 

First  wean’d  my  soul  from  earthly  things ; 
And  taught  me  to  esteem  as  dross 
The  mirth  of  fools  and  pomp  of  kings. 

3 I want  that  grace  that  springs  from  thee, 
That  quickens  all  things  where  it  flows, 
And  makes  a wretched  thorn  like  me,  . 
Bloom  as  the  myrtle,  or  the  rose. 

4 Dear  fountain  of  delight  unknown  ! , 

No  longer  sink  below  the  brim ; 

But  overflow,  and  pour  me  down 
A living  and  life-giving  stream  ! 

5 For  sure,  of  all  the  plants  that  share 
The  notice  of  thy  Father’s  eye, 

None  proves  less  grateful  to  his  care, 

Or  yields  him  meaner  fruit  than  I.  C. 


DEDICATION  AND  SURRENDER. 


* Acts  xx.  24. 


* Jer.  xxxi.  3. 


103 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


HYMN  LXIL 

Lore  constraining  to  Obedience. 

1 No  strength  of  nature  can  suffice 

To  serve  the  Lord  aright ; 

And  what  she  has,  she  misapplies, 

For  want  of  clearer  light. 

2 How  long  beneath  the  law  I lay 

In  bondage  and  distress  ! 

I  toil’d  the  precept  to  obey, 

But  toil’d  without  success. 

3 Then,  to  abstain  from  outward  sin 

Was  more  than  I could  do ; 

Now,  I feel  its  power  within, 

I  feel  I hate  it  too. 

4 Then  all  my  servile  works  were  done, 

A righteousness  to  raise  ; 

Now,  freely  chosen  in  the  Son, 

I  freely  choose  his  ways. 

5 What  shall  I do,  was  then  the  word, 

That  I may  worthier  grow  1 
What  shall  I render  to  the  Lord  1 
Is  my  inquiry  now. 

6 To  see  the  law  by  Christ  fulfill’d, 

And  hear  his  pard’ning  voice, 

Changes  a slave  into  a child,* 

And  duty  into  choice.  C. 

HYMN  LXIII. 

The  Heart  healed  and  changed  by  Mercy. 

1 Sin  enslav’d  me  many  years, 

And  led  me  bound  and  blind  ; 

Till  at  length  a thousand  fears 
Came  swarming  o’er  my  mind. 
Where,  I said  in  deep  distress, 

Will  these  sinful  pleasures  end? 

How  shall  I secure  my  peace, 

And  make  the  Lord  my  friend  1 

2 Friends  and  ministers  said  much 

The  gospel  to  enforce  ; 

But  my  blindness  still  was  such, 

I chose  a legal  course : 

Much  I fasted,  watch’d,  and  strove, 
Scarce  would  show  my  face  abroad; 
Fear’d,  almost,  to  speak  or  move, 

A stranger  still  to  God. 

3 Thus,  afraid  to  trust  his  grace, 

Long  time  did  I rebel ; 

Till,  despairing  of  my  case, 

Down  at  his  feet  I fell : 

Then  my  stubborn  heart  he  broke. 

And  subdued  me  to  his  sway, 

By  a simple  word  he  spoke, 

“ Thy  sins  are  done  away.”  C. 

HYMN  LXIV. 

Hatred  of  Sin. 

1 Holy  Lord  God  ! I love  thy  truth, 

Nor  dare  thy  least  commandment  slight, 


[book  III. 

Yet  pierc’d  by  sin,  the  serpent’s  tooth, 

I mourn  the  anguish  of  the  bite. 

2 But  though  the  poison  lurks  within, 

Hope  bids  me  still  with  patience  wait. 

Till  death  shall  set  me  free  from  sin, 

Free  from  the  only  thing  I hate. 

3 Had  I a throne  above  the  rest, 

Where  angels  and  archangels  dwell, 

One  sin,  unslain,  within  my  breast, 
Would  make  that  heaven  as  dark  as  hell. 

4 The  pris’ner,  sent  to  breathe  fresh  air, 
And  bless’d  with  liberty  again, 

Would  mourn,  were  he  condemn’d  to  wear 
One  link  of  all  his  former  chain. 

5 But,  oh ! no  foe  invades  the  bliss, 

When  glory  crowns  the  Christian’s  head ; 
One  view  of  Jesus  as  he  is, 

Will  strike  all  sin  for  ever  dead.  C. 

HYMN  LXV. 

The  Child.* 

1 Quiet,  Lord,  my  froward  heart. 

Make  me  teachable  and  mild, 

Upright,  simple,  free  from  art, 

Make  me  as  a weaned  child : 

From  distrust  and  envy  free, 

Pleas’d  with  all  that  pleases  thee. 

2 What  thou  shalt  to-day  provide, 

Let  me  as  a child  receive ; 

What  to-morrow  may  betide, 

Calmly  to  thy  wisdom  leave : 

’Tis  enough  that  thou  wilt  care, 

Why  should  I the  burden  bear  1 

3 As  a little  child  relies 

On  a care  beyond  his  own  ; 

Knows  he ’s  neither  strong  nor  wise ; 
Fears  to  stir  a step  alone : 

Let  me  thus  with  thee  abide, 

As  my  Father,  guard,  and  guide. 

4 Thus  preserv’d  from  Satan’s  wiles. 

Safe  from  dangers,  free  from  fears. 

May  I live  upon  thy  smiles, 

Till  the  promis’d  hour  appears, 

When  the  sons  of  God  shall  prove 
All  their  Father’s  boundless  love. 


HYMN  LXYI. 

True  Happiness. 

1 Fix  my  heart  and  eyes  on  thine ! 
What  are  other  objects  worth"? 
But  to  see  thy  glory  shine 
Is  a heaven  begun  on  earth : 
Trifles  can  no  longer  move ; 

Oh ! I tread  on  all  beside, 

When  I feel  my  Saviour’s  love, 
And  remember  how  he  died  ! 


« Rom.  iii.  31. 


* Tsai,  cxxxi.  S;  Matt,  xviii.  3,  4 


CAUTIONS. 


199 


HYMN  LXX.] 

2 Now  my  search  is  at  an  end, 

Now  my  wishes  rove  no  more ! 

Thus  my  moments  I would  spend, 

Love,  and  wonder,  and  adore : 

Jesus,  source  of  excellence ! 

All  thy  glorious  love  reveal ! 

Kingdoms  shall  not  bribe  me  hence, 
While  this  happiness  I feel. 

3 Take  my  heart,  ’tis  all  thine  own, 

To  thy  will  my  spirit  frame ; 

Thou  shalt  reign,  and  thou  alone, 

Over  all  I have  or  am  : 

If  a foolish  thought  shall  dare 
To  rebel  against  thy  word, 

Slay  it,  Lord,  and  do  not  spare, 

■ Let  it  feel  thy  Spirit’s  sword ! 

4 Making  thus  the  Lord  my  choice, 

I  have  nothing  more  to  choose, 

But  to  listen  to  thy  voice, 

And  my  will  in  thine  to  lose : 

Thus  whatever  may  betide, 

I shall  safe  and  happy  be, 

Still  content  and  satisfied, 

Having  all  in  having  thee. 

HYMN  LXVII. 

The  Happy  Debtor. 

1 Ten  thousand  talents  once  I owed, 

And  nothing  had  to  pay, 

But  Jesus  freed  me  from  the  load, 

And  wash’d  my  debt  away. 

2 Yet  since  the  Lord  forgave  my  sin, 

And  blotted  out  my  score, 

Much  more  indebted  I have  been 
Than  e’er  I was  before. 

3 My  guilt  is  cancell’d  quite,  I know, 

And  satisfaction  made; 

But  the  vast  debt  of  love  I owe 
Can  never  be  repaid. 

4 The  love  I owe  for  sin  forgiven, 

For  power  to  believe, 

For  present  peace  and  promis’d  heaven, 
No  angel  can  conceive. 

5 That  love  of  thine,  thou  sinner’s  Friend ! 

Witness  thy  bleeding  heart ! 

My  little  all  can  ne’er  extend 
To  pay  a thousandth  part. 

6 Nay  more,  the  poor  returns  I make, 

I first  from  thee  obtain  ;* 

And  ’tis  of  grace,  that  thou  wilt  take 
Such  poor  returns  again. 

7 ’Tis  well,  it  shall  my  glory  be 

(Let  who  will  boast  their  store) 

In  time  and  to  eternity, 

To  owe  thee  more  and  more. 


SIMILAR  HYMNS. 

Book  I.  Hymn  27,  50,  70,  93,  122. 
Book  II.  Hymn  23,  90. 


VI.  CAUTIONS. 

HYMN  LXVIII. 

The  New  Convert. 

The  new-born  child  of  gospel-grace, 

Like  some  fair  tree  when  summer ’s  nigh, 
Beneath  Emmanuel’s  shining  face, 

Lifts  up  his  blooming  branch  on  high. 

No  fears  he  feels,  he  sees  no  foes, 

No  conflict  yet  his  faith  employs, 

Nor  has  he  learnt  to  whom  he  owes 
The  strength  and  peace  his  soul  enjoys. 
But  sin  soon  darts  its  cruel  sting, 

And  comforts  sinking  day  by  day, 

What  seem’d  his  own,  a self-fed  spring, 
Proves  but  a brook  that  glides  away. 
When  Gideon  arm’d  his  num’rous  host, 
The  Lord  soon  made  his  numbers  less ; 
And  said,  lest  Israel  vainly  boast,* 

“ My  arm  procur’d  me  thus  success.” 
Thus  will  he  bring  our  spirits  down, 

And  draw  our  ebbing  comforts  low, 

That,  sav’d  by  grace,  but  not  our  own, 
We  may  not  claim  the  praise  we  owe. 

C. 

HYMN  LXIX. 

True  and  False  Comforts. 

O God,  whose  favourable  eye 
The  sin-sick  soul  revives, 

Holy  and  heavenly  is  the  joy 
Thy  shining  presence  gives : 

Not  such  as  hypocrites  suppose, 

Who  with  a graceless  heart, 

Taste  not  of  thee,  but  drink  a dose, 
Prepar’d  by  Satan’s  art. 

Intoxicating  joys  are  theirs, 

Who,  while  they  boast  their  light, 

And  seem  to  soar  above  the  stars, 

Are  plunging  into  night. 

Lull’d  in  a soft  and  fatal  sleep, 

They  sin,  and  yet  rejoice  ; 

Were  they  indeed  the  Saviour’s  sheep, 
Would  they  not  hear  his  voice! 

Be  mine  the  comforts  that  reclaim 
The  soul  from  Satan’s  power. 

That  make  me  blush  for  what  I am, 

And  hate  my  sin  the  more. 

’Tis  joy  enough,  my  All  in  AH, 

At  thy  dear  feet  to  lie ; 

Thou  wilt  not  let  me  lower  fall, 

And  none  can  higher  fly.  C. 

HYMN  LXX. 

True  and  False  Zeal. 

Zeal  is  that  pure  and  heavenly  flame 
The  fire  of  love  supplies ; 

While  that  which  often  bears  the  name 
Is  self  in  a disguise. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 


* 1 Chron.  xxix . 14. 


* Judges  vii. 


200 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


2 True  zeal  is  merciful  and  mild, 

Can  pity  and  forbear ; 

The  false  is  headstrong-,  fierce,  and  wild, 
And  breathes  revenge  and  war. 

3 While  zeal  for  truth  the  Christian  warms, 

He  knows  the  worth  of  peace ; 

But  self  contends  for  names  and  forms, 

Its  party  to  increase. 

4 Zeal  has  attain’d  its  highest  aim, 

Its  end  is  satisfied, 

If  sinners  love  the  Saviour’s  name, 

Nor  seeks  it  aught  beside. 

5 But  self,  however  well  employed, 

Has  its  own  ends  in  view, 

And  says,  as  boasting  Jehu  cried,* 

“ Come,  see  what  I can  do.” 

6 Self  may  its  poor  reward  obtain, 

And  be  applauded  here, 

But  zeal  the  best  applause  will  gain 
When  Jesus  shall  appear. 

7 Dear  Lord,  the  idol  self  dethrone, 

And  from  our  hearts  remove, 

And  let  no  zeal  by  us  be  shown 
But  that  which  springs  from  love. 

HYMN  LXXI. 

A Living  and  a Dead  Faith. 

1 The  Lord  receives  his  highest  praise 
From  humble  minds  and  hearts  sincere, 
While  all  the  loud  professor  says 
Offends  the  righteous  Judge’s  ear. 

2 To  walk  as  children  of  the  day, 

To  mark  the  precepts’  holy  light, 

To  wage  the  warfare,  watch  and  pray, 
Show  who  are  pleasing  in  his  sight. 

3 Not  words  alone  it  cost  the  Lord, 

To  purchase  pardon  for  his  own ; 

Nor  will  a soul,  by  grace  restor’d, 

Return  the  Saviour  words  alone. 

4 With  golden  bells,  the  priestly  vest,f 
And  rich  pomegranates  border’d  round, 
The  need  of  holiness  express’d, 

And  call’d  for  fruit  as  well  as  sound. 

5 Easy,  indeed,  it  were  to  reach 
A mansion  in  the  courts  above, 

If  swelling  words  and  fluent  speech 
Might  serve  instead  of  faith  and  love. 

6 But  none  shall  gain  the  blissful  place, 

Or  God’s  unclouded  glory  see, 

Who  talks  of  free  and  sovereign  grace, 
Unless  that  grace  has  made  him  free.  C. 

HYMN  LXXII. 

Abuse  of  the  Gospel. 

1 Too  many,  Lord,  abuse  thy  grace, 

In  this  licentious  day ; 

And  while  they  boast  they  see  thy  face. 
They  turn  their  own  away. 


* 2 Kings  x.  16.  t Exod.  xxviii.  33. 


[book  in. 

Thy  book  displays  a gracious  light. 

That  can  the  blind  restore ; 

But  these  are  dazzled  by  the  sight, 

And  blinded  still  the  more. 

The  pardon  such  presume  upon 
They  do  not  beg,  but  steal ; 

And  when  they  plead  it  at  thy  throne, 

Oh ! where ’s  the  Spirit’s  seal  1 
Was  it  for  this,  ye  lawless  tribe, 

The  dear  Redeemer  bled  1 
Is  this  the  grace  the  saints  imbibe 
From  Christ  the  living  Head  J 
Ah ! Lord,  we  know  thy  chosen  few 
Are  fed  with  heavenly  fare ; 

But  these,  the  wretched  husks  they  chew, 
Proclaim  them  what  they  are. 

The  liberty  our  hearts  implore, 

Is  not  to  live  in  sin, 

But  still  to  wait  at  Wisdom’s  door, 

Till  Mercy  calls  us  in.  C. 

HYMN  LXXIII. 

The  Narrow  Way. 

What  thousands  never  knew  the  road  l 
What  thousands  hate  it  when  ’tis  known  I 
None  but  the  chosen  tribes  of  God 
Will  seek  or  choose  it  for  their  own. 

A thousand  ways  in  ruin  end, 

One  only  leads  to  joys  on  high ; 

By  that  my  willing  steps  ascend, 

Pleas’d  with  a journey  to  the  sky. 

No  more  I ask,  or  hope  to  find 
Delight  or  happiness  below ; 

Sorrow  may  as  well  possess  the  mind 
That  feeds  where  thorns  and  thistles  grow 
The  joy  that  fades  is  not  for  me, 

I seek  immortal  joys  above : 

There  glory  without  end  shall  be 
The  bright  reward  of  faith  and  love. 
Cleave  to  the  world,  ye  sordid  worms ! 
Contented  lick  your  native  dust ; 

But  God  shall  fight,  with  all  his  storms, 
Against  the  idol  of  your  trust.  C. 

HYMN  LXXIV. 

Dependence. 

To  keep  the  lamp  alive, 

With  oil  we  fill  the  bowl ; 

’Tis  water  makes  the  willow  thrive, 

And  grace  that  feeds  the  soul. 

The  Lord’s  unsparing  hand 
Supplies  the  living  stream, 

It  is  not  at  our  own  command, 

But  still  deriv’d  from  him. 

Beware  of  Peter’s  word,* 

Nor  confidently  say, 

“ I never  will  deny  thee,  Lord,” 

But  grant  I never  may. 


* Matth.  xxvi.  33. 


2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

1 

2 

3 


CAUTIONS. 


201 


HYMN  LXXVIII.] 

4 Man’s  wisdom  is  to  seek 
His  strength  in  God  alone ; 

And  e’en  an  angel  would  be  weak, 

Who  trusted  in  his  own. 

5 Retreat  beneath  his  wings, 

And  in  his  grace  confide ; 

This  more  exalts  the  King  of  kings,* 
Than  all  your  works  beside. 

6 In  Jesus  is  our  store, 

Grace  issues  from  his  throne ; 
Whoever  says,  “ I want  no  more,” 
Confesses  he  has  none.  C. 

HYMN  LXXV. 

Not  of  Works. 

1 Grace,  triumphant  in  the  throne, 
Scorns  a rival,  reigns  alone ! 

Come,  and  bow  beneath  her  sway, 

Cast  your  idol-works  away. 

Works  of  man,  when  made  his  plea, 
Never  shall  accepted  be ; 

Fruits  of  pride  (vain-glorious  worm !) 
Are  the  best  he  can  perform. 

2 Self,  the  god  his  soul  adores, 

Influences  all  his  powers ; 

Jesus  is  a slighted  name, 
Self-advancement  all  his  aim, 

But  when  God  the  Judge  shall  come, 

To  pronounce  the  final  doom, 

Then  for  rocks  and  hills  to  hide 
All  his  works  and  all  his  pride ! 

3 Still  the  boasting  heart  replies, 

What ! the  worthy  and  the  wise, 
Friends  to  temperance  and  peace, 

Have  not  these  a righteousness] 

Banish  ev’ry  vain  pretence 
Built  on  human  excellence ; 

Perish  ev’ry  thing  in  man, 

But  the  grace  that  never  can.  C. 

HYMN  LXXVI. 

Sin's  Deceit . 

1 Sin,  when  view’d  by  scripture-light, 

Is  a horrid,  hateful  sight ; 

But  when  seen  in  Satan’s  glass, 

Then  it  wears  a pleasing  face. 

2 When  the  gospel-trumpet  sounds 
When  I think  how  grace  abounds, 
When  I feel  sweet  peace  within, 

Then  I ’d  rather  die  than  sin. 

3 When  the  cross  I view  by  faith, 

Sin  is  madness,  poison,  death ; 

Tempt  me  not,  ’tis  all  in  vain, 

Sure  I ne’er  can  yield  again. 

4 Satan,  for  a while  debarr’d, 

When  he  finds  me  off  my  guard, 

Puts  his  glass  before  my  eyes, 

Quickly  other  thoughts  arise. 


What  before  excited  fears. 

Rather  pleasing  now  appears ; 

If  a sin,  it  seems  so  small, 

Or,  perhaps,  no  sin  at  all. 

Often  thus,  through  sin’s  deceit, 

Grief,  and  shame,  and  loss  I meet ; 

Like  a fish,  my  soul  mistook, 

Saw  the  bait,  but  not  the  hook. 

O my  Lord  ! what  shall  I say  ] 

How  can  I presume  to  pray  ] 

Not  a word  have  I to  plead, 

Sins  like  mine  are  black  indeed  ! 

Made  by  past  experience  wise, 

Let  me  learn  thy  word  to  prize ; 

Taught  by  what  I ’ve  felt  before, 

Let  me  Satan’s  glass  abhor. 

HYMN  LXXVII. 

Are  there  Few  that  shall  he  Saved  ? 

Destruction’s  dang’rous  road, 

What  multitudes  pursue ! 

While  that  which  leads  the  soul  to  God 
Is  known  or  sought  by  few. 

Believers  enter  in 
By  Christ,  the  living  gate : 

But  they  who  will  not  leave  their  sin, 
Complain  it  is  too  strait. 

If  self  must  be  denied, 

And  sin  forsaken  quite, 

They  rather  choose  the  way  that ’s  wide. 
And  strive  to  think  it  right. 
Encompass’d  by  a throng, 

On  numbers  they  depend ; 

So  many  surely  can’t  be  wrong, 

And  miss  a happy  end. 

But  numbers  are  no  mark 
That  men  will  right  be  found, 

A few  were  sav’d  in  Noah’s  ark,* 

For  many  millions  drown'd. 

Obey  the  gospel-call, 

And  enter  while  you  may ! 

The  flock  of  Christ  is  always  small,! 

And  none  are  safe  but  they. 

Lord,  open  sinners’  eyes, 

Their  awful  state  to  see ; 

And  make  them,  ere  the  storm  arise, 

To  thee  for  safety  flee. 

HYMN  LXXVIII. 

The  Sluggard. 

The  wishes  that  the  sluggard  frames,! 

Of  course  must  fruitless  prove ; 

With  folded  arms  he  stands  and  dreams, 
But  has  no  heart  to  move. 

His  field  from  others  may  be  known, 

The  fence  is  broken  through ; 

The  ground  with  weeds  is  overgrown, 
And  no  good  crop  in  view. 


* 1 Peter  iii.  20.  t Luke  xii.  32. 

% Prov.  vi.  JO ; xx.  4 ; xxii.  13;  xxiv.  3D. 


5 

6 

7 

8 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

1 

o 


Von  XL 


* John  vi.  29. 
O n 


202 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book.  III. 


3 No  hardship  he,  nor  toil,  can  bear, 

No  difficulty  meet; 

He  wastes  his  hours  at  home,  for  fear 
Of  lions  in  the  street. 

4 What  wonder,  then,  if  sloth  and  sleep 

Distress  and  famine  bring ! 

Could  he  in  harvest  hope  to  reap, 

Who  would  not  sow  in  spring  1 

5 ’Tis  often  thus  in  soul-concerns : 

We  gospel-sluggards  see, 

Who,  if  a wish  would  serve  their  turns, 
Might  true  believers  be. 

0  But  when  the  preacher  bids  them  watch, 
And  seek,  and  strive,  and  pray,* 

At  ev’ry  poor  excuse  they  catch, 

A lion  in  the  way ! 

7 To  use  the  means  of  grace,  how  loth! 

We  call  them  still  in  vain; 

They  yield  to  their  beloved  sloth, 

And  fold  their  arms  again. 

S Dear  Saviour,  let  thy  power  appear, 

The  outward  call  to  aid ; 

These  drowsy  souls  can  only  hear 
The  voice  that  wakes  the  dead. 

HYMN  LXXIX. 

Not  in  Word , but  in  Power. 

t How  soon  the  Saviour’s  gracious  call, 
Disarm’d  the  rage  of  bloody  Saul  !f 
Jesus,  the  knowledge  of  thy  name, 
Changes  the  lion  to  a lamb ! 

2 Zaccheus,  when  he  knew  the  Lord,J 
What  he  had  gain’d  by  wrong,  restor’d ; 
And  of  the  wealth  he  priz’d  before, 

He  gave  the  half  to  feed  the  poor. 

3 The  woman  who  so  vile  had  been,$ 

When  brought  to  weep  o’er  pardon’d  sin, 
Was  from  her  evil  ways  estrang’d, 

And  show’d  that  grace  her  heart  had  chang’d. 

4 And  can  we  think  the  power  of  grace 
Is  lost,  by  change  of  time  and  place  1 
Then  it  was  mighty,  all  allow, 

And  is  it  but  a notion  now  1 

5 Can  they  whom  pride  and  fashion  sway, 
Who  Mammon  and  the  world  obey, 

In  envy  or  contention  live, 

Presume  that  they  indeed  believe  1 

6 True  faith  unites  to  Christ  the  root, 

By  him  producing  holy  fruit ; 

And  they  who  no  such  fruit  can  show, 

Still  on  the  stock  of  nature  grow. 

7 IiOrd,  let  thy  word  effectual  prove, 

To  work  in  us  obedient  love ! 

And  may  each  one  who  hears  it,  dread 
A name  to  live,  and  yet  be  dead.|| 


* 1 Cor.  ix.  24 ; Luke  xiii.  24.  t Acts  ix.  6. 

1 Luke  xix.  8.  § Luke  vii.  47.  [ Rev.  iii.  1. 


SIMILAR  HYMNS 

Book  ..  Hymn  8,  20,  85,  87,  91,  104,  125 
139,  141. 

Book  II.  Hymn  34,  49,  86,  91,  99. 

VII.  PRAISE. 

HYMN  LXXX. 

Praise  for  Faith. 

1 Of  all  the  gifts  thine  hand  bestows, 

Thou  giver  of  all  good ! 

Not  heaven  itself  a richer  knows, 

Than  my  Redeemer’s  blood. 

2 Faith,  too,  the  blood-receiving  grace, 

From  the  same  hand  we  gain ; 

Else,  sweetly  as  it  suits  our  case, 

That  gift  had  been  in  vain. 

3 Till  thou  thy  teaching  power  apply, 

Our  hearts  refuse  to  see, 

And  weak,  as  a distemper’d  eye, 

Shut  out  the  view  of  thee. 

4 Blind  to  the  merits  of  thy  Son, 

What  misery  we  endure  ! 

Yet  fly  that  hand,  from  which  alone 
We  could  expect  a cure. 

5 We  praise  thee,  and  would  praise  thee  more 

To  thee  our  all  we  owe ; 

The  precious  Saviour  and  the  power 
That  makes  him  precious  too.  C. 

HYMN  LXXXI. 

Grace  and  Providence. 

1 Almighty  King ! whose  wondrous  hand 
Supports  the  weight  of  sea  and  land, 
Whose  grace  is  such  a boundless  store, 
No  heart  shall  break  that  sighs  for  more. 

2 Thy  providence  supplies  my  food, 

And  ’tis  thy  blessing  makes  it  good ; 

My  soul  is  nourish’d  by  thy  word, 

Let  soul  and  body  praise  the  Lord. 

3 My  streams  of  outward  comfort  came 
From  him,  who  built  this  earthly  frame ; 
Whate’er  I want  his  bounty  gives, 

By  whom  my  soul  for  ever  lives. 

4 Either  his  hand  preserves  from  pain, 

Or,  if  I feel  it,  heals  again ; 

From  Satan’s  malice  shields  my  breast, 

Or  over-rules  it  for  the  best. 

5 Forgive  the  song  that  falls  so  low 
Beneath  the  gratitude  I owe ! 

It  means  thy  praise,  however  poor, 

An  angel’s  song  can  do  no  more.  C. 

HYMN  LXXXII. 

Praise  for  Redeeming  Love. 

1 Let  us  love,  and  sing  and  wonder, 

Let  us  praise  the  Saviour’s  name ! 

He  has  hush’d  the  law’s  loud  thunder, 

He  has  quench’d  Mount  Sinai’s  flame : 


PRAISE. 


203 


fTYMN  LXXXVI.] 

He  has  wash’d  us  with  his  blood, 

He  has  brought  us  nigh  to  God. 

2 Let  us  love — the  Lord  who  bought  us, 
Pitied  us  when  enemies, 

Call'd  us  by  his  grace,  and  taught  us, 
Gave  us  ears,  and  gave  us  eyes : 

He  has  wash’d  us  with  his  blood, 

He  presents  our  souls  to  God. 

3 Let  us  sing, — though  fierce  temptations 
Threaten  hard  to  bear  us  down ; 

For  the  Lord,  our  strong  salvation, 

Holds  in  view  the  conq’ror’s  crown  :* 

He  who  wash’d  us  with  his  blood, 

Soon  will  bring  us  home  to  God. 

4 Let  us  wonder, — grace  and  justice 
Join,  and  point  to  mercy’s  store  ! 

When  through  grace  in  Christ  our  trust  is, 
Justice  smiles,  and  asks  no  more : 

He  who  wash’d  us  with  his  blood, 

Has  secur’d  our  way  to  God. 

5 Let  us  praise, — and  join  the  chorus 
Of  the  saints  enthron’d  on  high ; 

Here  they  trusted  him  before  us, 

Now  their  praises  fill  the  sky 

“ Thou  hast  wash’d  us  with  thy  blood ; 
Thou  art  worthy,  Lamb  of  God !” 

6 Hark,  the  name  of  Jesus  sounded 
Loud  from  golden  harps  above ! 

Lord,  we  blush,  and  are  confounded, 

Faint  our  praises,  cold  our  love  ! 

Wash  our  souls  and  songs  with  blood, 
For  by  thee  we  come  to  God. 

HYMN  LXXXIII. 

I  will  Praise  the  Lord  at  all  Times. 

1 Winter  has  a joy  for  me, 

While  the  Saviour’s  charms  I read, 
Lowly,  meek,  from  blemish  free, 

In  the  snow-drop’s  pensive  head. 

2 Spring  returns,  and  brings  along 
Life-invigorating  suns ; 

Hark ! the  turtle’s  plaintive  song, 

Seems  to  speak  his  dying  groans ! 

3 Summer  has  a thousand  charms, 

All  expressive  of  his  worth ; 

’Tis  his  sun  that  lights  and  warms, 

Ilis  the  air  that  cools  the  earth. 

4 What ! has  autumn  left  to  say 
Nothing  of  a Saviour’s  grace] 

' Yes,  the  beams  of  milder  day 
Tell  me  of  his  smiling  face. 

5 Light  appears  with  early  dawn ; 

While  the  sun  makes  haste  to  rise, 

See  his  bleeding  beauties  drawn 
On  the  blushes  of  the  skies. 

6 Evening,  with  a silent  pace, 

Slowly  moving  in  the  west, 

Shows  an  emblem  of  his  grace, 

Points  to  an  eternal  rest.  C. 


HYMN  LXXXIV. 

Perseverance. 

Rejoice,  believer,  in  the  Lord, 

Who  makes  your  cause  his  own ; 

The  hope  that ’s  built  upon  his  word 
Can  ne’er  be  overthrown. 

Though  many  foes  beset  your  road, 

And  feeble  is  your  arm ; 

Your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God,* 
Beyond  the  reach  of  harm. 

Weak  as  you  are,  you  shall  not  faint, 

Or,  fainting,  shall  not  die, 

Jesus,  the  strength  of  ev’ry  saint, f 
Will  aid  you  from  on  high. 

Though  sometimes  unperceiv’d  by  sense, 
Faith  sees  him  always  near, 

A guide,  a glory,  a defence ; 

Then  what  have  you  to  fear  I 

As  surely  as  he  overcame, 

And  triumph’d  once  for  you, 

So  surely  you  that  love  his  name, 

Shall  triumph  in  him  too. 

HYMN  LXXXV. 

Salvation. 

Salvation  ! what  a glorious  plan, 

How  suited  to  our  need  ! 

The  grace  that  raises  fallen  man 
Is  wonderful  indeed ! 

’Twas  wisdom  form’d  the  vast  design, 

To  ransom  us  when  lost ; 

And  love’s  unfathomable  mine 
Provided  all  the  cost. 

Strict  Justice,  with  approving  look, 

The  holy  covenant  seal’d ; 

And  Truth  and  Power  undertook 
The  whole  should  be  fulfill’d. 

Truth,  Wisdom,  Justice,  Power,  and  Love, 
In  all  their  glory  shone, 

When  Jesus  left  the  courts  above, 

And  died  to  save  his  own. 

Truth,  Wisdom,  Justice,  Power,  and  Love, 
Are  equally  displayed ; 

Now  Jesus  reigns  enthron’d  above, 

Our  Advocate  and  Head. 

Now  sin  appears  deserving  death, 

Most  hateful  and  abhorr’d ; 

And  yet  the  sinner  lives  by  faith, 

And  dares  approach  the  Lord. 

HYMN  LXXXVI. 

Reigning  Grace. 

Now,  may  the  Lord  reveal  his  face, 

And  teach  our  stamm’ring  tongues 

To  make  his  sovereign,  reigning  grace, { 
The  subject  of  our  songs ! 

No  sweeter  subject  can  invite 
A sinner’s  heart  to  sing, 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

1 


• Rev.  ii.  10. 


t Rev.  v.  9. 


* Col.  iii.  3. 


t Isa.  xl.  29. 


t Rom.  v.  21. 


204 

Or  more  display  the  glorious  right 
Of  our  exalted  King. 

2 This  subject  fills  the  starry  plains 

With  wonder,  joy,  and  love; 

And  furnishes  the  noblest  strains 
For  all  the  harps  above : 

While  the  redeem’d  in  praise  combine 
To  grace  upon  the  throne,* 

Angels  in  solemn  chorus  join, 

And  make  the  theme  their  own. 

3 Grace  reigns  to  pardon  crimson  sins, 

To  melt  the  hardest  hearts; 

And  from  the  word  it  once  begins, f 
It  never  more  departs. 

The  world  and  Satan  strive  in  vain 
Against  the  chosen  few 
Secur’d  by  grace’s  conqu’ring  reign, 

They  all  shall  conquer  too. 

4 Grace  tills  the  soil,  and  sows  the  seeds, 

Provides  the  sun  and  rain ; 

Till  from  the  tender  blade  proceeds 
The  ripen’d  harvest-grain. 

’Twas  grace  that  call’d  our  souls  at  first ; 

By  grace  thus  far  we  ’re  come ; 

And  grace  will  help  us  through  the  worst, 
And  lead  us  safely  home. 

5 Lord,  when  this  changing  life  is  past, 

If  we  may  see  thy  face, 

How  shall  we  praise  and  love  at  last, 

And  sing  the  reign  of  grace  !$ 

Yet  let  us  aim,  while  here  below, 

Thy  mercy  to  display ; 

And  own,  at  least,  the  debt  we  owe, 
Although  we  cannot  pay. 

HYMN  LXXXVII. 

Praise  to  the  Redeemer. 

1 Prepare  a thankful  song 
To  the  Redeemer’s  name  ! 

His  praises  should  employ  each  tongue, 
And  ev’ry  heart  inflame ! 

2 He  laid  his  glory  by, 

And  dreadful  pains  endur’d, 

That  rebels,  such  as  you  and  I, 

From  wrath  might  be  secur’d. 

3 Upon  the  cross  he  died, 

Our  debt  of  sin  to  pay ; 

The  blood  and  water  from  his  side 
Wash  guilt  and  filth  away. 

4 And  now  he  pleading  stands, 

For  us,  before  the  throne, 

And  answers  all  the  law’s  demands 
With  what  himself  hath  done. 

5 He  sees  us,  willing  slaves, 

To  sin,  and  Satan’s  power ; 

But,  with  an  outstretch’d  arm,  he  saves, 
In  his  appointed  hour. 


[book  III 

6 The  Holy  Ghost  he  sends, 

Our  stubborn  souls  to  move, 

To  make  his  enemies  his  friends, 

And  conquer  them  by  love. 

7 The  love  of  sin  departs, 

The  life  of  grace  takes  place, 

Soon  as  his  voice  invites  our  hearts 
To  rise  and  seek  his  face. 

8 The  world  and  Satan  rage, 

But  he  their  power  controls ; 

His  wisdom,  love,  and  truth,  engage 
Protection  for  our  souls. 

9 Though  press’d,  we  will  not  yield, 

But  shall  prevail  at  length : 

For  Jesus  is  our  sun  and  shield, 

Our  righteousness  and  strength. 

10  Assur’d  that  Christ,  our  King, 

Will  put  our  foes  to  flight, 

We  on  the  field  of  battle  sing, 

And  triumph  while  we  fight. 

HYMN  LXXXVIII. 

Mim,  by  Nature , Grace , and  Glory. 

1 Lord,  what  is  man  ! extremes  how  wide 
In  this  mysterious  nature  join  ! 

The  flesh,  to  worms  and  dust  allied, 

The  soul,  immortal  and  divine ! 

2 Divine  at  first,  a holy  flame, 

Kindled  by  the  Almighty’s  breath ; 

Till,  stain’d  by  sin,  it  soon  became 
The  seat  of  darkness,  strife,  and  death. 

3 But  Jesus,  oh  ! amazing  grace ! 

Assum’d  our  nature  as  his  own, 

Obeyed  and  suffer’d  in  our  place. 

Then  took  it  with  him  to  his  throne. 

4 Now,  what  is  man,  when  grace  reveals 
The  virtue  of  a Saviour’s  blood ! 

Again  a life  divine  he  feels, 

Despises  earth,  and  walks  with  God. 

5 And  what,  in  yonder  realms  above, 

Is  ransom’d  man  ordain’d  to  be ! 

With  honour,  holiness,  and  love, 

No  seraph  more  adorn’d  than  he. 

6 Nearest  the  throne,  and  first  in  song, 

Man  shall  his  hallelujahs  raise ; 

While  wond’ring  angels  round  him  throng, 
And  swell  the  chorus  of  his  praise. 


similar  hymns. 

Book  I.  Hymn  57,  58,  59,  79,  80. 

Book  II.  Hymn  37,  38,  39,  41,  42. 

VIII.  SHORT  HYMNS. 

BEFORE  SERMON. 

HYMN  LXXXIX. 
Confirm  the  hope  thy  word  allows, 
Behold  us  waiting  to  be  fed ; 

Bless  the  provision  of  thy  house, 
And  satisfy  thy  poor  with  bread : 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


* Rev.  v.  9.  12. 

I Rom.  viii.  35—39. 


t Phil.  i.  6. 

§ Peal.  cxv.  1. 


SHORT  HYMNS. 


205 


HYMN  XCVIII.] 

Drawn  by  thine  invitation,  Lord, 

Athirst  and  hungry  we  are  come ; 

Now,  from  the  fulness  of  thy  word, 
Feast  us,  and  send  us  thankful  home. 

HYMN  XC. 

1 Now,  Lord,  inspire  the  preacher’s  heart, 

And  teach  his  tongue  to  speak ; 

Food  to  the  hungry  soul  impart, 

And  cordials  to  the  weak. 

2 Furnish  us  all  with  light  and  powers 

To  walk  in  Wisdom’s  ways; 

So  shall  the  benefit  be  ours, 

And  thou  shalt  have  the  praise. 

HYMN  XCI. 

1 Thy  promise,  Lord,  and  thy  command, 

Have  brought  us  here  to-day ; 

And  now,  we  humbly  waiting  stand, 

To  hear  what  thou  wilt  say.* 

2 Meet  us,  we  pray,  with  words  of  peace, 

And  fill  our  hearts  with  love; 

That  from  our  follies  we  may  cease, 

And  henceforth  faithful  prove. 

HYMN  XCII. 

1 Hungry,  and  faint,  and  poor, 

Behold  us,  Lord,  again 

Assembled  at  thy  mercy’s  door, 

Thy  bounty  to  obtain. 

2 Thy  word  invites  us  nigh, 

Or  we  must  starve  indeed ; 

For  we  no  money  have  to  buy, 

No  righteousness  to  plead. 

3 The  food  our  spirits  want 
Thy  hand  alone  can  give ; 

Oh  ! hear  the  prayer  of  faith,  and  grant 
That  we  may  eat  and  live. 

HYMN  XCIII. 

Psalm  cvi.  4,  5. 

1 Remember  us,  we  pray  thee,  Lord, 

With  those  who  love  thy  gracious  name, 
And  to  our  souls  that  good  afford, 

Thy  promise  has  prepar’d  for  them. 

2 To  us  thy  great  salvation  show, 

Give  us  a taste  of  love  divine, 

That  we  thy  people’s  joy  may  know 
And  in  their  holy  triumph  join. 

HYMN  XCIV. 

1 Not  to  Sinai’s  dreadful  blaze, f 
But  to  Zion’s  throne  of  grace, 

By  a way  mark’d  out  with  blood, 

Sinners  now  approach  to  God. 

2 Not  to  hear  the  fiery  law, 

But  with  humble  joy  to  draw 
Water,  by  that  well  supplied,}: 

Jesus  open’d  when  he  died. 


3  Lord,  there  are  no  streams  but  thine 
Can  assuage  a thirst  like  mine : 

’Tis  a thirst  thyself  didst  give, 

Let  me,  therefore,  drink  and  live. 

HYMN  XCV. 

1 Often  thy  public  means  of  grace, 

Thy  thirsty  people’s  wat’ring  place, 

The  archers  have  beset:* 

Attack’d  them  in  thy  house  of  prayer, 
To  prison  dragg’d,  or  to  the  bar, 

When  thus  together  met. 

2 But  we  from  such  assaults  are  freed, 
Can  pray,  and  sing,  and  hear,  and  read, 

And  meet,  and  part,  in  peace: 

May  we  our  privileges  prize, 

In  their  improvement  make  us  wise, 
And  bless  us  with  increase. 

3 Unless  thy  presence  thou  afford, 

Unless  thy  blessing  clothe  the  word, 

In  vain  our  liberty ! 

What  would  it  profit  to  maintain 
A name  for  life,  should  we  remain 
Formal  and  dead  to  thee  1 


AFTER  SERMON. 

HYMN  XCVI. 

Deut.  xxxiii.  26.  29. 

1 With  Israel’s  God  who  can  compare? 

Or  who  like  Israel  happy  are  ? 

O people,  saved  by  the  Lord, 

He  is  thy  shield  and  great  reward ! 

2 Upheld  by  everlasting  arms, 

Thou  art  secur’d  from  foes  and  harms : 

In  vain  their  plots,  and  false  their  boasts, 
Our  refuge  is  the  Lord  of  hosts. 

HYMN  XCVII. 

Habakkuk  iii.  17, 18. 

Jesus  is  mine ! I ’m  now  prepar’d 
To  meet  with  what  1 thought  most  hard . 
Yes,  let  the  winds  of  trouble  blow, 

And  comforts  melt  away  like  snow ; 

No  blasted  trees  or  failing  crops, 

Can  hinder  my  eternal  hopes;  [same; 
Tho’  creatures  change,  the  Lord ’s  the 
Then  let  me  triumph  in  his  name. 

HYMN  XCVIII. 

We  seek  a rest  beyond  the  skies, 

In  everlasting  day ; 

Through  floods  and  flames  the  passage  lies. 
But  Jesus  guards  the  way : 

The  swelling  flood,  and  raging  flame, 

Hear  and  obey  his  word ; 

Then  let  us  triumph  in  his  name, 

Our  Saviour  is  the  Lord. 


* Psal.  Ixxxv.  8.  t Heb. xii* 18-  22.  t Isa.  xii.  3. 


* Judges  v.  II. 


206 


OLNEY  HYMNS. 


[book  iil 


HYMN  XCIX. 

Deut.  xxxii.  9, 10. 

1 The  saints  Emmanuel’s  portion  are, 
Redeem’d  by  price,  reclaim’d  by  power ; 
His  special  choice,  and  tender  care, 
Owns  them  and  guards  them  ev’ry  hour. 

2 He  finds  them  in  a barren  land, 

Beset  with  sins,  and  fears,  and  woes ; 

He  leads  and  guides  them  by  his  hand, 
And  bears  them  safe  from  all  their  foes. 

HYMN  C. 

Heb.  xiii.  20 — 24. 

1 Now  may  he  who  from  the  dead 
Brought  the  Shepherd  of  the  sheep, 

Jesus  Christ,  our  King  and  Head, 

All  our  souls  in  safety  keep ! 

2 May  he  teach  us  to  fulfil 
What  is  pleasing  in  his  sight; 

Perfect  us  in  all  his  will, 

And  preserve  us  day  and  night ! 

3 To  that  dear  Redeemer’s  praise, 

Who  the  covenant  seal’d  with  blood, 

Let  our  hearts  and  voices  raise 
Loud  thanksgivings  to  our  God. 

HYMN  CL 
2 Cor.  xiii.  14. 

May  the  grace  of  Christ  our  Saviour, 
And  the  Father’s  boundless  love, 

With  the  Holy  Spirit’s  favour, 

Rest  upon  us  from  above ! 

Thus  may  we  abide  in  union 
With  each  other  and  the  Lord; 

And  possess,  in  sweet  communion, 

Joys  which  earth  cannot  afford. 

HYMN  CD. 

The  peace  which  God  alone  reveals, 

And  by  his  word  of  grace  imparts, 

Which  only  the  believer  feels,* 

Direct  and  keep,  and  cheer  your  hearts : 
And  may  the  Holy  Three  in  one, 

The  Father,  Word,  and  Comforter, 

Pour  an  abundant  blessing  down 
On  ev’ry  soul  assembled  here ! 

HYMN  CIII. 

1 To  thee  our  wants  are  known, 

From  thee  are  all  our  powers ; 


Accept  what  is  thine  own, 

And  pardon  what  is  ours : 

Our  praises,  Lord,  and  prayers  receive, 
And  to  thy  word  a blessing  give. 

2 O grant  that  each  of  us 
Now  met  before  thee  here, 

May  meet  together  thus, 

When  thou  and  thine  appear ! 

And  follow  thee  to  heaven  our  home, 
E’en  so,  Amen ! Lord  Jesus,  come  !* 


GLORIA  PATRI. 

HYMN  CIV. 

1 The  Father  we  adore, 

And  everlasting  Son, 

The  Spirit  of  his  love  and  power, 

The  glorious  Three  in  One. 

2 At  the  creation’s  birth 
This  song  was  sung  on  high, 

Shall  sound,  through  ev’ry  age,  on  earth. 
And  through  eternity. 

HYMN  CV. 

1 Father  of  angels  and  of  men, 

Saviour,  who  hast  us  bought, 

Spirit,  by  whom  we  ’re  born  again, 

And  sanctified  and  taught ! 

2 Thy  glory,  holy  Three  in  One, 

Thy  people’s  song  shall  be ; 

Long  as  the  wheels  of  time  shall  run, 

And  to  eternity. 

HYMN  CVI. 

1 Glory  to  God  the  Father’s  name, 

To  Jesus,  who  for  sinners  died ; 

The  Holy  Spirit  claims  the  same, 

By  whom  our  souls  are  sanctified. 

2 Thy  praise  was  sung,  when  time  began, 
By  angels,  through  the  starry  spheres ; 
And  shall,  as  now,  be  sung  by  man, 
Through  vast  eternity’s  long  years. 

HYMN  CVII. 

Ye  saints  on  earth,  ascribe,  with  heaven’s 
high  host, 

Glory  and  honour  to'  the  One  in  Three : 

To  God  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost, 

As  was,  and  is,  and  evermore  shall  be. 


* Phil.  iv.  7. 


* Rev.  v.  20. 


POEMS 


THE  KITE ; OR,  PRIDE  MUST  HAVE 
A FALL. 

My  waking  dreams  are  best  conceal’d, 
Much  folly,  little  good,  they  yield  ; 

But  now  and  then  I gain,  when  sleeping, 
A friendly  hint  that ’s  worth  the  keeping. 
Lately  f dreamt  of  one  who  cried, 

“ Beware  of  self,  beware  of  pride ; 

When  you  are  prone  to  build  a Babel, 
Recall  to  mind  this  little  fable.’* 

Once  on  a time  a paper  kite 
Was  mounted  to  a wond’rous  height, 
Where,  giddy  with  its  elevation, 

It  thus  express’d  self-admiration : 

“ See  how  yon  crowds  of  gazing  people 
Admire  my  flight  above  the  steeple : 

How  would  they  wonder  if  they  knew 
All  that  a kite  like  me  can  do ! 

Were  I but  free,  I ’d  take  a flight, 

And  pierce  the  clouds  beyond  their  sight ; 
But,  ah  ! like  a poor  pris’ner  bound, 

My  string  confines  me  near  the  ground : 

I ’d  brave  the  eagle’s  towering  wing, 
Might  I but  fly  without  a string.” 

It  tugg’d  and  pull’d,  while  thus  it  spoke, 
To  break  the  string : — at  last  it  broke. 

Depriv’d  at  once  of  all  its  stay, 

In  vain  it  tried  to  soar  away ; 

Unable  its  own  weight  to  bear, 

It  flutter’d  downward  through  the  air ; 
Unable  its  own  course  to  guide, 

The  winds  soon  plung’d  it  in  the  tide. 

Ah  ! foolish  kite,  thou  hadst  no  wing, 

How  could  st  thou  fly  without  a string  1 
My  heart  replied,  “ O Lord,  I see 
How  much  this  kite  resembles  me ! 
Forgetful  that  by  thee  I stand, 

Impatient  of  thy  ruling  hand  ; 

How  oft  I ’ve  wish’d  to  break  the  lines 
Thy  wisdom  for  my  lot  assigns  1 
How  oft  indulg’d  a vain  desire, 

For  something  more  or  something  higher  1 
And,  but  for  grace  and  love  divine, 

A fall  thus  dreadful  had  been  mine.” 


A THOUGHT  ON  THE  SEA-SHORE. 
In  ev’ry  object  here  I see 
Something,  O Lord,  that  leads  to  thee : 
Firm  as  the  rocks  thy  promise  stands, 
Thy  mercies  countless  as  the  sands, 


Thy  love  a sea  immensely  wide, 

Thy  grace  an  ever-flowing  tide. 

In  ev’ry  object  here  I see 
Something,  my  heart,  that  points  at  thee 
Hard  as  the  rocks  that  bound  the  strand, 
Unfruitful  as  the  barren  sand, 

Deep  and  deceitful  as  the  ocean, 

And,  like  the  tide,  in  constant  motion. 


THE  SPIDER  AND  THE  TOAD 

Some  author  (no  great  matter  who, 
Provided  what  he  says  be  true) 

Relates  he  saw,  with  hostile  rage, 

A spider  and  a toad  engage ; 

For  though  with  poison  both  are  stor’d, 
Each  by  the  other  is  abhorr’d : 

It  seems  as  if  their  common  venom 
Provok’d  an  enmity  between  ’em. 
Implacable,  malicious,  cruel, 

Like  modern  hero  in  a duel, 

The  spider  darted  on  his  foe, 

Infixing  death  at  ev’ry  blow. 

The  toad,  by  ready  instinct  taught, 

An  antidote,  when  wounded,  sought, 
From  the  herb  plantain,  growing  near, 
Well-known  to  toads,  its  virtues  rare 
The  spider’s  poison  to  repel ; 

It  cropp’d  the  leaf  and  soon  was  well. 
This  remedy  it  often  tried, 

And  all  the  spider’s  rage  defied. 

The  person  who  the  contest  viewed, 
While  yet  the  battle  doubtful  stood, 
Remov’d  the  healing  plant  away, 

And  thus  the  spider  gain’d  the  day ; 
For  when  the  toad  returned  once  more. 
Wounded,  as  it  had  done  before, 

To  seek  relief,  and  found  it  not, 

It  swell’d  and  died  upon  the  spot. 

In  ev’ry  circumstance  but  one 
(Could  that  hold  too,  I were  undone !) 
No  glass  can  represent  my  face 
More  justly  than  this  tale  my  case. 

The  toad ’s  an  emblem  of  my  heart, 
And  Satan  acts  the  spider’s  part. 
Envenom’d  by  his  poison,  I 
Am  often  at  the  point  to  die ; 

But  he  who  hung  upon  the  tree, 

From  guilt  and  woe  to  set  me  free, 

Is  like  the  plantain  leaf  to  me. 

207 


208 


POEMS. 


To  him  my  wounded  soul  repairs, 

He  knows  my  pain  and  hears  my  prayers; 
From  him  I virtue  draw  by  faith, 

Which  saves  me  from  the  jaws  of  death : 
From  him  fresh  life  and  strength  I gain, 
And  Satan  spends  his  rage  in  vain. 

No  secret  arts  or  open  force 
Can  rob  me  of  this  sure  resource : 

Though  banish’d  to  some  distant  land, 

My  med’cine  would  be  still  at  hand ; 
Though  foolish  men  its  worth  deny, 
Experience  gives  them  all  the  lie ; 
Though  Deists  and  Socinians  join, 

Jesus  still  lives,  and  still  is  mine. 


’Tis  here  the  happy  difference  lies, 

My  Saviour  reigns  above  the  skies, 

Yet  to  my  soul  is  always  near, 

For  he  is  God  and  everywhere. 

His  blood  a sovereign  balm  is  found 
For  ev’ry  grief  and  ev’ry  wound ; 

And  sooner  all  the  hills  shall  flee 
And  hide  themselves  beneath  the  sea, 

Or  ocean,  starting  from  its  bed, 

Rush  o’er  the  cloud-topt  mountains’  head, 
The  sun,  exhausted  of  its  light, 

Become  the  source  of  endless  night. 

And  ruin  spread  from  pole  to  pole, 

Than  Jesus  fail  the  tempted  soul 


MESSIAH 


OR 

FIFTY  EXPOSITORY  DISCOURSES 

ON  THE 

SERIES  OF  SCRIPTURAL  PASSAGES  WHICH  FORM  THE  SUBJECT  OF  HANDEL’S 
CELEBRATED  ORATORIO  OF  THAT  NAME. 

Preached  in  the  Years  1784  and  1785,  in  the  Parish  Church  of  St.  Mary  Woolnoth , 
Lombard  Street , London 


Ah! 

Tantamne  rem,  tam  negligenter.  agere!— Ter. 

Oh,  that  they  were  wise,  that  they  understood  this!— Deut.  xxxii.  29. 


TO  THE  PARISHIONERS  OF  ST.  MARY  WOOLNOTH,  AND  ST.  MARY 
WOOLCHURCII  HAW,  LONDON, 

These  Sermons  on  the  Messiah,  are  affectionately  inscribed  by 
the  Author,  to  remain  as  a testimony  of  his  respect  for  their  per- 
sons, and  his  solicitude  for  their  welfare,  when  his  present  relation 
to  them,  as  their  minister,  shall  be  dissolved. 


PREFACE. 

The  following  Sermons,  as  to  the  substance  (for  most  of  them  are  considerably 
abridged,)  were  preached  to  a public  and  numerous  assembly;  and  therefore  an 
accurate  and  logical  discussion  of  the  several  subjects  was  not  aimed  at.  They 
are  rather  popular  discourses,  in  which  the  author,  though  he  wished  not  to  treat 
the  politer  part  of  his  auditory  with  disrespect,  thought  it  likewise  his  duty  so  to 
adapt  his  manner  to  the  occasion,  as  to  be  intelligible  to  persons  of  weak  capaci- 
ties and  in  the  lower  ranks  of  life.  He  conceives  himself  to  be  a debtor  to  every 
class  of  his  hearers,  and  that  he  ought  to  endeavour  to  please  all  men,  with  a view 
to  their  edification ; but,  farther  than  this,  not  to  be  greatly  affected,  either  by 
their  approbation  or  by  their  censure. 

Many  of  the  subjects  are  so  nearly  coincident,  that  repetitions  could  not  be 
always  avoided,  without  the  appearance  of  affectation.  Besides,  as  it  may  be  ex* 
pccted  that,  in  a large  congregation,  there  are  always  some  persons  present  for 
the  first  time, — with  respect  to  these,  an  observation  may  be  new,  though  perhaps 
the  more  stated  hearers  may  recollect  its  having  been  mentioned  before.  For  a 
similar  reason,  such  repetitions  are  not  improper  in  print.  Many  persons  read 
part  of  a book,  who  may  not  have  opportunity  or  inclination  to  read  the  whole. 
Should  any  one,  by  opening  these  sermons  at  a venture,  meet  with  a passage 
Vol.  II.  ' 2D  209 


210 


PREFACE. 


which,  by  a divine  blessing  may  either  awaken  a careless,  or  heal  a wounded 
spirit.,  that  passage  will  be  exactly  in  the  right  page,  even  though  the  purport  of 
it  should  be  expressed  in  several  other  places.  Farther,  since  we  do  not  always 
so  much  stand  in  need  of  new  information,  as  to  have  what  we  already  know  more 
effectually  impressed  upon  the  mind,  there  are  truths  which  can  scarcely  be  in 
culcated  too  often,  at  least  until  the  design  for  which  they  were  mentioned  once 
be  effectually  answered.  Thus,  when  the  strokes  of  a hammer  are  often  repeated, 
not  one  of  them  can  be  deemed  superfluous ; the  last,  which  drives  the  nail  to  the 
head,  being  no  less  necessary  than  any  of  those  which  preceded  it. 

From  those  readers,  whose  habits  of  thinking  on  religious  subjects  are  formed 
by  a close  attachment  to  particular  systems  of  divinity,  the  Author  requests  a can- 
did construction  of  what  he  advances,  if  he  ventures  in  some  instances  to  deviate 
a little  from  the  more  beaten  track.  If  he  is  sometimes  constrained  to  differ  from 
the  judgment  of  wise  and  good  men,  who  have  deserved  well  of  the  church  of 
God,  he  would  do  it  with  modesty : far  from  depreciating  their  labours,  he  would 
be  thankful  for  the  benefit  which  he  hopes  lie  has  received  from  them.  It.  is  a 
great  satisfaction  to  him,  that  in  all  doctrinal  points  of  primary  importance,  his 
views  are  confirmed  by  the  suffrage  of  writers  and  ministers  eminent  for  genuine 
piety  and  sound  learning,  who  assisted  him  in  his  early  inquiries  after  truth,  and 
at  whose  feet  he  is  still  willing  to  sit.  Yet,  remembering  that  he  is  authorised 
and  commanded  to  call  no  man  Master,  so  as  to  yield  an  implicit  and  unqualified 
submission  to  human  teachers,  while  he  gladly  borrows  every  help  he  can  from 
others,  he  ventures  likewise  to  think  for  himself.  His  leading  sentiments  con- 
cerning the  grand  peculiarities  of  the  gospel  were  formed  many  years  since,  when 
he  was  in  a state  of  almost  enure  seclusion  from  society, — when  he  had  scarcely 
any  religious  book  but  the  Bible  within  his  reach,  and  had  no  knowledge,  eithei 
of  the  various  names,  parties,  and  opinions  by  which  Christians  were  distinguished 
and  divided,  or  the  controversies  which  subsisted  among  them.  He  is  not  cm- 
scious  that  any  material  difference  has  taken  place  in  his  sentiments  since  he  first 
became  acquainted  with  the  religious  world;  but,  after  a long  course  of  expe- 
rience and  observation,  he  seems  to  possess  them  in  a different  manner.  Ti  * 
difficulties  which  for  a season  perplexed  him  on  some  points,  are  either  removed 
or  considerably  abated.  On  the  other  hand,  he  now  perceives  difficulties  that 
constrain  him  to  lay  his  hand  upon  his  mouth,  in  subjects  which  once  appeared  to 
him  obvious  and  plain.  Thus,  if  he  mistakes  not  himself,  he  is  less  troubled  with 
scepticism,  and  at  the  same  time  less  disposed  to  be  dogmatical,  than  he  formerly 
was.  He  feels  himself  unable  to  draw  the  line  with  precision  between  those 
essential  points  which  ought  to  be  earnestly  contended  for  (in  a spirit  of  meek- 
ness,) as  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints,  and  certain  secondary  positions, 
concerning  which  good  men  may  safely  differ;  and  wherein,  perhaps,  w7e  cannot 
reasonably  expect  them  to  be  unanimous  during  the  present  state  of  imperfection 
But  if  the  exact  boundary  cannot  be  marked  with  certainty,  he  thinks  it  both  de- 
sirable and  possible  to  avoid  the  extremes  into  which  men  of  warm  tempers  have 
often  been  led. 

Not  that  the  Author  can  be  an  advocate  for  that  indifference  to  truth,  which, 
under  the  specious  semblance  of  moderation  and  candour,  offers  a comprehension, 
from  which  none  are  excluded  but  those  who  profess  and  aim  to  worship  God  in 
the  spirit,  to  rejoice  in  Christ.  Jesus,  and  to  renounce  ali  confidence  in  the  flesh. 
Moderation  is  a Christian  grace;  it  differs  much  from  that  tame,  unfeeling  neu- 
trality between  truth  arid  error  which  is  so  prevalent  in  the  present  day.  As  the 
different  rays  of  light,  which,  w hen  separated  by  a prism,  exhibit  the  various  colours 
of  the  rainbow,  form,  in  i heir  combination,  a perfect  and  resplendent  white,  in 
which  every  colour  is  incorporated,  so,  if  the  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit  w7ere  com- 
lete  in  us,  the  result  of  their  combined  effect  would  be  a truly  candid,  moderate, 
md  liberal  spirit  towards  our  brethren.  The  Christian,  especially  he  who  is  ad- 
vanced and  established  in  the  life  of  faith,  has  a fervent  zeal  for  God,  for  the 
nonour  of  his  name,  his  law,  and  his  gospel.  The  honest  warmth  which  he  feels 


PREFACE. 


211 


WMen  such  a law  is  broken,  such  a gospel  is  despised,  and  when  the  great  and 
glorious  name  of  the  Lord  his  God  is  profaned,  would,  by  the  occasion  of  his  in- 
firmities, often  degenerate  into  anger  or  contempt  towards  those  who  oppose  them- 
selves, if  he  was  under  the  influence  of  zeal  only.  But  his  zeal  is  blended  with 
benevolence  and  humility  ; it  is  softened  by  a consciousness  of  his  own  frailty  and 
fallibility.  He  is  aware  that  his  knowledge  is  very  limited  in  itself,  and  very  faint 
in  its  efficacy ; that  his  attainments  are  weak  and  few  compared  with  his  de- 
ficiencies; that  his  gratitude  is  very  disproportionate  to  his  obligations,  and  his 
obedience  unspeakably  short  of  conformity  to  his  prescribed  rule;  that  he  has  no- 
thing but  what  he  has  received,  and  has  received  nothing  but  what,  in  a greater 
or  less  degree,  he  has  misapplied  and  misimproved.  He  is  therefore  a debtor  to 
the  mercy  of  God,  and  lives  upon  his  multiplied  forgiveness;  and  he  makes  the 
gracious  conduct  of  the  Lord  towards  himself  a pattern  for  his  own  conduct  to- 
wards his  fellow- creatures.  He  cannot  boast,  nor  is  he  forward  to  censure.  He 
considers  himself,  lest  he  also  be  tempted,  (Gal.  vi.  1 ;)  and  thus  he  learns  tender- 
ness and  compassion  to  others,  and  to  bear  patiently  with  those  mistakes,  preju- 
dices, and  prepossessions  in  them,  which  once  belonged  to  his  own  character,  and 
from  which,  as  yet,  he  is  but  imperfectly  freed.  But  then,  the  same  considerations 
which  inspire  him  with  meekness  and  gentleness  towards  those  who  oppose  the 
truth,  strengthen  his  regard  for  the  truth  itself,  and  his  conviction  of  its  import- 
ance. For  the  sake  of  peace,  which  he  loves  and  cultivates,  he  accommodates 
himself,  as  far  as  he  lawfully  can,  to  the  weakness  and  misapprehensions  of  those 
who  mean  well,  though  he  is  thereby  exposed  to  the  censure  of  bigots  of  all  parties, 
who  deem  him  flexible  and  wavering,  like  a reed  shaken  with  the  wind.  But  there 
are  other  points  nearly  connected  with  the  honour  of  God,  and  essential  to  the  life 
of  faith,  which  are  the  foundations  of  his  hope  and  the  sources  of  his  joy.  For  his 
firm  attachment  to  these,  he  is  content  to  be  treated  as  a bigot  himself ; for  here 
he  is  immoveable  as  an  iron  pillar ; nor  can  either  the  fear  or  the  favour  of  man 
prevail  on  him  to  give  place,  no  not  for  an  hour,  Gal.  ii.  5.  Here  his  judgment 
is  fixed,  and  he  expresses  it  in  simple  and  unequivocal  language,  so  as  not  to 
leave  either  friends  or  enemies  in  suspense  concerning  the  side  he  has  chosen,  or 
the  cause  which  is  nearest  to  his  heart. 

The  minister  who  possesses  a candour  thus  enlightened,  and  thus  qualified, 
will  neither  degrade  himself  to  be  the  instrument,  nor  aspire  to  be  the  head  of  a 
party.  He  will  not  servilely  tread  in  the  paths  prescribed  him  by  men,  however 
respectable.  He  will  not  multiply  contentions,  in  defence  either  of  the  shibbo- 
leths of  others,  or  of  any  nostrum  of  his  own,  under  a pretence  that  he  is  pleading 
for  the  cause  of  God  and  truth.  His  attention  will  not  be  restrained  to  the  credit 
or  interest  of  any  detached  denomination  of  Christians,  but  extended  to  all  who 
love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity.  On  the  other  hand,  knowing  that  the 
gospel  is  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God,  and  the  only  possible  mean  by  which 
fallen  man  can  obtain  either  peace  or  rectitude,  he  most  cordially  embraces  and 
avows  it.  Far  from  being  ashamed  of  it,  he  esteems  it  his  glory.  He  preaches 
Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  and  him  crucified.  He  dares  not  sophisticate  (2  Cor.  iv.  2,) 
disguise,  or  soften  the  great  doctrines  of  the  grace  of  God,  to  render  them  more 
palatable  to  the  depraved  taste  of  the  times.  He  disdains  the  thought;  and  he 
will  no  more  encounter  the  prejudices,  and  corrupt  maxims,  and  practices  of  the 
world  with  any  weapon  but  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus  (Eph.  iv.  21,)  than  he  would 
venture  to  fight  an  enraged  enemy  with  a wooden  sword. 

Such  is  the  disposition  which  the  Author  wishes  for  himself,  and  which  he  would 
endeavour  to  cultivate  in  others.  He  hopes  that  nothing  of  a contrary  tendency 
will  be  found  in  the  volumes*  now  presented  to  the  public.  Messiah,  the  great 
subject  of  the  Oratorio,  is  the  leading  and  principal  subject  of  every  sermon.  His 
person,  grace,  and  glory ; his  matchless  love  to  sinners  ; his  humiliation,  suffer- 
ings, and  death;  his  ability  and  willingness  lo  save  to  the  uttermost;  his  king* 


These  Sermons  were  originally  printed  in  two  volumes 


212 


PREFACE. 


dom,  and  the  present  and  future  happiness  of  his  willing  people  are  severally  con- 
sidered, according  to  the  order  suggested  by  the  series  of  texts.  Nearly  connected 
with  these  topics  are  the  doctrines  of  the  fall  and  depravity  of  man,  the  agency  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  nature  and  necessity  of  regeneration,  and  of  that  holiness 
without  which  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord.  On  these  subjects  the  Author  is  not 
afraid  of  contradiction  from  those  who  are  taught  of  God. 

With  respect  to  some  other  points  which  incidentally  occur,  he  has  endeavoured 
so  to  treat  them  as  to  avoid  administering  fuel  to  the  flame  of  angry  controversy. 
He  is  persuaded  himself,  and  shall  be  happy  to  persuade  his  readers,  that  the  re- 
maining differences  of  opinion  among  those  who  truly  understand  and  cordially 
believe  the  declarations  of  scripture  on  the  preceding  articles,  are  neither  so 
wide  nor  so  important  as  they  have  been  sometimes  represented.  Many  of  these 
differences  are  nearly  verbal,  and  would  cease,  if  due  allowance  was  made  for  the 
imperfection  of  human  language,  and  the  effects  of  an  accustomed  phraseology, 
which  often  lead  people  to  affix  different  ideas  to  the  same  expressions,  or  to  ex- 
press the  same  ideas  in  different  words.  And  if,  in  some  things,  we  cannot  exactly 
agree,  since  we  confess  that  we  are  all  weak  and  fallible,  mutual  patience  and 
forbearance  would  be  equally  becoming  the  acknowledgments  we  make,  and  the 
gospel  which  we  profess.  We  should  thereby  act  in  character,  as  the  followers  of 
Him  who  was  compassionate  to  the  infirmities  and  mistakes  of  his  disciples,  and 
taught  them  not  every  thing  at  once,  but  gradually,  as  they  were  able  to  bear. 

The  Author  ought  not  to  be  very  solicitous  upon  his  own  account,  what  recep- 
tion his  performance  may  meet  with.  The  fashion  of  this  world  is  passing  away. 
The  voice,  both  of  applause  and  of  censure,  will  soon  be  stifled  in  the  dust.  It  is 
therefore  but  a small  thing  to  be  judged  of  man’s  judgment,  1 Cor.  iv.  y.  But  con- 
scious of  the  vast  importance  of  the  subject  which  he  thus  puts  into  the  reader’s 
hands,  he  cannot  take  leave  of  him  without  earnestly  entreating  his  serious  atten- 
tion. The  one  principle  which  he  assumes  for  granted,  and  which  he  is  certain 
cannot  be  disproved,  is,  That  the  Bible  is  a revelation  from  God.  By  this  standard 
he  is  willing  that  whatever  he  has  advanced  may  be  tried.  If  the  Bible  be  true, 
we  must  all  give  an  account,  each  one  of  himself,  to  the  great  and  final  Judge. 
That,  when  we  shall  appear  before  his  awful  tribunal,  we  may  be  found  at  his  right 
hand,  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  is  the  Author’s  fervent  prayer,  both  for  his  readers 
and  for  himself. 

London,  1 5th  April , 1786. 


MESSIAH,  &c 


SERMON  I. 

THE  CONSOLATION. 


Comfori  ye , comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your  God.  Speak  ye  comfortably  to  Jerusalem , 
and  cry  unto  her , that  her  warfare  is  accomplished,  that  her  iniquity  is  pardoned : for 
shs  hath  received  at  the  Lord's  hand  double  for  all  her  sins. — Isaiah  xl.  I,  2. 


The  particulars  of  the  great  mystery  of 
godliness,  as  enumerated  by  the  apostle  Paul, 
constitute  the  grand  and  inexhaustible  theme 
of  the  gospel  ministry : “ God  manifest  in  the 
flesh,  justified  in  the  Spirit,  seen  of  angels, 
preached  unto  the  Gentiles,  believed  on  in 
the  world,  received  up  into  glory,”  1 Tim.  iii. 
16.  It  is  my  wish  and  purpose  to  know  no- 
thing among  you  but  this  subject ; to  preach 
nothing  to  you  but  what  has  a real  connexion 
with  the  doctrine  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  him 
crucified,  and  with  the  causes  and  effects  of 
his  obedience  unto  death,  even  the  death  of 
the  cross.  But  a regard  to  the  satisfaction 
and  advantage  of  my  stated  hearers,  has  often 
made  me  desirous  of  adopting  some  plan, 
which  might  lead  me  to  exhibit  the  principal 
outlines  of  the  Saviour’s  character  and  media- 
tion in  a regular  series  of  discourses,  so  as  to 
form,  if  not  a picture,  at  least  a slight  sketch, 
of  those  features  of  his  glory  and  of  his  grace 
which  endear  him  to  the  hearts  of  his  people. 
Such  a plan  has  lately,  and  rather  unexpect- 
edly, occurred  to  me.  Conversation  in  almost 
every  company,  for  some  time  past,  has 
much  turned  upon  the  commemoration  of 
Handel ; the  grand  musical  entertainments, 
and  particularly  his  Oratorio  of  the  Messiah, 
which  have  been  repeatedly  performed  on  that 
occasion  in  Westminster  Abbey.  If  it  could 
be  reasonably  hoped,  that  the  performers  and 
the  company  assembled  to  hear  the  music,  or 
the  greater  part,  or  even  a considerable  part 
of  them,  were  capable  of  entering  into  the 
spirit  of  the  subject,  I will  readily  allow  that 
the  Messiah,  executed  in  so  masterly  a man- 
ner, by  persons  whose  hearts,  as  well  as  their 
voices  and  instruments,  were  tuned  to  the 
Redeemer’s  praise;  accompanied  with  the 
grateful  emotions  of  an  audience  duly  affect- 
ed with  a sense  of  their  obligations  to  his  love ; 
might  afford  one  of  the  highest  and  noblest 
gratifications  of  which  we  are  capable  in  the 


present  life.  But  they  who  love  the  Re- 
deemer, and  therefore  delight  to  join  in  his 
praise,  if  they  did  not  find  ft  convenient,  or 
think  it  expedient,  to  hear  the  Messiah  at 
Westminster,  may  comfort  themselves  with 
the  thought,  that,  in  a little  time,  they  shall 
be  still  more  abundantly  gratified.  Ere  long 
death  shall  rend  the  vail  which  hides  eternal 
things  from  their  view,  and  introduce  them 
to  that  unceasing  song  and  universal  chorus, 
which  are  even  now  performing  before  the 
throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb.  Till  then,  I 
apprehend,  that  true  Christians,  without  the 
assistance  of  either  vocal  or  instrumental 
music,  may  find  greater  pleasure  in  a humble 
contemplation  on  the  words  of  the  Messiah, 
than  they  can  derive  from  the  utmost  efforts 
of  musical  genius.  This,  therefore,  is  the  plan 
I spoke  of.  I mean  to  lead  your  meditations 
to  the  language  of  the  Oratorio,  and  to  con- 
sider in  their  order  (if  the  Lord,  on  whom 
our  breath  depends,  shall  be  pleased  to  afford 
life,  ability,  and  opportunity)  the  several  sub- 
lime and  interesting  passages  of  scripture 
which  are  the  basis  of  that  admired  compo- 
sition. 

If  he  shall  condescend  to  smile  upon  the 
attempt,  pleasure  and  profit  will  go  hand  in 
hand.  There  is  no  harmony  to  a heaven- 
born  soul  like  that  which  is  the  result  of  the 
combination  and  coincidence  of  all  the  divine 
attributes  and  perfections,  manifested  in  the 
work  of  redemption ; mercy  and  truth  meet- 
ing together,  inflexible  righteousness  corres- 
ponding with  the  peace  of  offenders,  God 
glorious,  and  sinners  saved.  There  is  no 
melody  upon  earth  to  be  Compared  with  the 
voice  of  the  blood  of  Jesus,  speaking  peace  to 
a guilty  conscience,  or  with  the  voice  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  applying  the  promises  to  the 
heart,  and  sweetly  inspiring  a temper  of  con- 
fidence and  adoption.  These  are  joys  which 
the  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away, 
213 


214 


THE  CONSOLATION. 


which  never  pall  upon  the  mind  by  continu- 
ance or  repetition ; the  sense  of  them  is  al- 
ways new,  the  recollection  of  them  is  always 
pleasant.  Nor  do  they  only  satisfy,  but 
sanctify  the  soul.  They  strengthen  faith, 
animate  hope,  add  fervency  to  love,  and  both 
dispose  and  enable  the  Christian  to  run  in  all 
the  paths  of  holy  obedience  with  an  enlarged 
heart. 

The  Messiah  of  Handel  consists  of  three 
parts.  The  first  contains  prophecies  of  his 
advent,  and  the  happy  consequences,  together 
with  the  angel’s  message  to  the  shepherds, 
informing  them  of  his  birth,  as  related  by  St 
Luke.  The  second  part  describes  his  pas- 
sion, death,  resurrection,  and  ascension ; his 
taking  possession  of  his  kingdom  of  glory,  the 
commencement  of  his  kingdom  of  grace  upon 
earth,  and  the  certain  disappointment  and 
ruin  of  all  who  persist  in  opposition  to  his 
will.  The  third  part  expresses  the  blessed 
fruits  and  consummation  of  his  undertaking, 
in  the  deliverance  of  his  people  from  sin,  sor- 
row, and  death,  and  in  making  them  finally 
victorious  over  all  their  enemies.  The  tri- 
umphant song  of  the  redeemed,  to  the  praise 
of  the  Lamb,  who  bought  them  with  his  own 
blood,  closes  the  whole.  The  arrangement 
or  series  of  these  passages  is  so  judiciously 
disposed,  so  well  connected,  and  so  fully  com- 
prehends all  the  principal  truths  of  the  gos- 
pel, that  I shall  not  attempt  either  to  alter  or 
to  enlarge  it.  The  exordium  or  introduction, 
which  I have  read  to  you  from  the  prophecy 
of  Isaiah,  is  very  happily  chosen. 

If,  as  some  eminent  commentators  sup- 
pose, the  prophet  had  any  reference,  in  this 
passage,  to  the  return  of  Israel  from  Babylon 
into  their  own  land,  his  principal  object  was 
undoubtedly  of  much  greater  importance.  In- 
deed, their  deliverance  from  captivity,  and 
their  state  afterwards  as  a nation,  do  not  ap- 
pear to  correspond  with  the  magnificent 
images  employed  in  the  following  verses ; for 
though  they  rebuilt  their  city  and  temple, 
they  met  with  many  insults  and  much  op- 
position, and  continued  to  be  a tributary  and 
dependent  people.  I shall  therefore  wave 
the  consideration  of  this  sense. 

The  eye  of  the  prophet’s  mind  seems  to  be 
chiefly  fixed  upon  one  august  personage,  who 
was  approaching  to  enlighten  and  bless  a 
miserable  world ; and  before  he  describes  the 
circumstances  of  his  appearance,  he  is  direct- 
ed to  comfort  the  mourners  in  Zion,  with  an 
assurance,  that  this  great  event  would  fully 
compensate  them  for  all  their  sorrows.  The 
state  of  Jerusalem,  the  representative  name 
of  the  people  of  God,  was  very  low  in  Isaiah’s  j 
time.  The  people,  who,  in  the  days  of  Solo- 
mon, were  attached  to  the  service  of  God, 
honoured  with  signal  tokens  of  his  presence 
and  favour,  and  raised  to  the  highest  pitch  of 
temporal  prosperity,  were  now  degenerated ; 
the  gold  was  become  dim,  and  the  fine  gold 


[ser.  i. 

changed.  Iniquity  abounded,  judgments  were 
impending,  yet  insensibility  and  security  pre- 
vailed, and  the  words  of  many  were  stout 
against  the  Lord.  But  there  were  a few  who 
feared  the  Lord,  whose  eyes  affected  their 
hearts,  and  who  mourned  tor  the  evils  which 
they  could  not  prevent.  These,  and  these 
only,  were,  in  strictness  of  speech,  the  peo- 
ple of  the  Lord,  and  to  these  the  message  of 
comfort  is  addressed.  Speak  to  Jerusalem 
comfortably,  speak  to  her  heart  (as  the  He- 
brew word  is,)  to  her  very  case,  and  tell  her 
that  there  is  a balm  for  all  her  wounds,  a cor- 
dial for  all  her  griefs,  in  this  one  considera- 
tion, Messiah  is  at  hand.  In  the  prophetic 
style,  things  future  are  described  as  present, 
and  that  which  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath 
spoken  of  as  sure  to  take  place,  is  considered 
as  already  done.  Thus  the  prophet,  “ rapt 
into  future  times,”  contemplates  the  manifest- 
ation of  Messiah,  the  accomplishment  of  his 
great  undertaking,  and  all  the  happy  conse- 
quences of  his  obedience  unto  death  tor  men, 
as  though  he  stood  upon  the  spot,  and  uTitk 
John,  the  harbingerof  our  Lord  (whose  appear- 
ance he  immediately  describes,)  wTas  point- 
ing with  his  finger  to  the  Lamb  of  God,  that 
taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world. 

This  comfortable  message  consists  of  two 
parts.  First,  the  removal  of  evil, — “Her 
warfare  is  accomplished,  her  iniquity  is  par- 
doned.” Secondly,  a promise  of  good,  more 
than  equivalent  to  all  her  afflictions, — “ She 
hath  received  at  the  Lord’s  hand  double  for 
all  her  sins.” 

I.  Two  ideas  are  included  in  the  original 
term,  translated  “warfare:” 

1.  A state  of  service,  connected  with  hard- 
ship, like  that  of  the  military  life.  Numb.  i.  3. 

2.  An  appointed  time,  as  it  is  rendered  in 
Job  vii.  1,  and  xiv.  14. 

These  ideas  equally  apply  to  the  Mosaic 
dispensation.  The  spirit  of  that  institution 
wTas  comparatively  a spirit  of  bondage,  dis- 
tance, and  fear ; and  the  state  of  the  church, 
while  under  the  law,  is  resembled  by  the 
apostle  to  that  of  a minor,  who,  though  he  be 
an  heir,  is  under  tutors  and  governors,  and 
differeth  but  little  from  a servant,  until  the 
time  appointed  of  the  Father,  Gal.  iv.  1 — 4. 
The  ceremonial  law,  with  respect  to  its  inef- 
ficacy, is  styled  weak,  and  with  respect  to 
the  long  train  of  its  multiplied,  expensive, 
difficult,  and  repeated  appointments,  a yoke 
and  burden.  But  it  was  only  for  a prescribed 
time.  The  gospel  was  designed  to  supersede 
it,  and  to  introduce  a state  of  life,  power, 
liberty,  and  confidence.  The  blackness  and 
darkness,  the  fire  and  tempest,  and  other  cir 
cumstances  of  terror  attendant  on  the  pro- 
mulgation of  the  law  at  Mount  Sinai,  (Heb. 
xii.  18—22,)  which  not  only  struck  the  peo- 
ple with  dismay,  but  caused  even  Moses  him- 
self to  say,  “ I exceedingly  fear  and  quake,” 
were  expressive  of  its  design ; wliich  was  not 


THE  CONSOLATION. 


215 


SER.  I.] 

to  lead  the  people  of  Israel  to  expect  peace 
and  hope  from  their  best  obedience  to  that 
covenant,  but  rather  to  convince  them  of  the 
necessity  of  a better  covenant,  established 
upon  better  promises,  and  to  direct  their 
hopes  to  Messiah,  who  was  prefigured  by  all 
their  sacrifices,  and  who,  In  the  fulness  of 
time,  was  to  make  a complete  atonement  for 
sin,  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself.  Then  their 
legal  figurative  constitution  would  cease,  the 
shadows  give  place  to  the  substance,  and  the 
true  worshippers  of  God  would  be  instructed, 
enabled,  and  encouraged,  to  worship  him  in 
spirit  and  in  truth ; no  more  as  servants,  but 
in  the  temper  of  adoption,  as  the  children  of 
God,  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  his  love. 

There  is  a considerable  analogy  to  this  dif- 
ference between  the  law  and  the  gospel,  as 
contradistinguished  from  each  other,  in  the 
previous  distress  of  a sinner,  when  he  is  made 
sensible  of  his  guilt  and  danger  as  a trans- 
gressor of  the  law  of  God,  and  the  subsequent 
peace  which  he  obtains  by  believing  the  gos- 
pel. The  good  seed  of  the  word  of  grace  can 
only  take  root  and  flourish  in  a soil  duly  pre- 
pared. And  this  preparation  of  the  heart, 
(Prov.  xvi.  1,)  without  which,  all  that  is  read 
or  heard  concerning  Messiah  produces  no  per- 
manent good  effect,  is  wholly  from  the  Lord. 
The  first  good  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon 
the  heart  of  fallen  man,  is  to  convince  of  sin, 
John  xvi.  9.  He  gives  some  due  impressions 
of  the  majesty  and  holiness  of  the  God  with 
whom  we  have  to  do,  of  our  dependence  up- 
on him,  of  our  obligations  to  him  as  our  Crea- 
tor, Lawgiver,  and  Benefactor ; then  we  be- 
gin to  form  our  estimate  of  duty,  of  sin,  and 
its  desert,  not  from  the  prevalent  maxims 
and  judgment  of  mankind  around  us,  but  from 
the  unerring  standard  of  scripture.  Thence 
new  and  painful  apprehensions  arise — the 
lofty  looks  of  man  are  humbled,  his  haughti- 
ness is  brought  low,  his  mouth  stopped,  or 
only  opened  to  confess  his  guilt  and  vileness, 
and  to  cry  for  mercy.  He  now  feels  himself 
under  the  law ; it  condemns  him,  and  he  can- 
not reply;  it  commands  him,  and  he  cannot 
obey.  lie  has  neither  righteousness  nor 
strength,  and  must  sink  into  despair,  were  it 
not  that  he  is  now  qualified  to  hearken  to  the 
gospel  with  other  ears,  and  to  read  the  scrip- 
tures with  other  eyes  (if  I may  so  speak.) 
than  he  once  did.  He  now  knows  he  is  sick, 
and  therefore  knows  his  need  of  a physician. 
This  state  of  anxiety,  conflict,  and  fear, 
which  keeps  comfort  from  his  heart,  and  per- 
haps slumber  from  his  eyes,  is  often  of  long 
continuance.  There  is  no  common  standard 
whereby  to  determine  either  the  degree  or 
the  duration.  Both  differ  in  different  persons; 
and  as  the  body  and  the  mind  have  a strong 
and  reciprocal  influence  upon  each  other,  it 
is  probable  the  difference  observable  in  such 
cases  may  in  part  depend  upon  constitutional 
causes.  However  the  time  is  a prescribed 


time,  and  though  not  subject  to  any  rules  or 
reasonings  of  ours,  is  limited  and  regulated 
by  the  wisdom  of  God.  He  wounds  and  he 
heals,  in  his  own  appointed  moment.  None 
that  continue  waiting  upon  him,  and  seeking 
salvation,  in  the  means  which  he  has  direct- 
ed, shall  be  finally  disappointed.  Sooner  or 
later  he  gives  them,  according  to  his  promise, 
beauty  for  ashes,  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning, 
and  the  garment  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of 
heaviness,  Isa.  Ixi.  3.  This  warfare  is  ac- 
complished, when  they  rightly  understand 
and  cordially  believe  the  following  clause : 

Her  iniquity  is  pardoned. — Though  the 
sacrifices  under  the  law  had  an  immediate  and 
direct  effect  to  restore  the  offender,  for  whom 
they  were  offered,  to  the  privileges  pertaining 
to  the  people  of  Israel,  considered  as  a nation 
or  commonwealth,  they  could  not,  of  them- 
selves, cleanse  the  conscience  from  guilt.  It 
is  a dictate  of  right  reason,  no  less  than  of 
revelation,  that  it  is  not  possible  that  the  blood 
of  bulls  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sin, 
Heb.  x.  4.  For  this  purpose,  the  blood  of 
Christ  had  a retrospective  efficacy,  and  was 
the  only  ground  of  consolation  for  a convinced 
sinner  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.  He 
was  proposed  to  our  first  parents  as  the  seed 
of  the  woman,  who  should  bruise  the  serpent’s 
head,  Gen.  iii.  15.  In  this  seed  Abraham 
believed,  and  was  justified,  and  all  of  every 
age  who  were  justified,  were  partakers  of 
Abraham's  faith.  Therefore  the  apostle 
teaches  us,  that  when  God  set  him  forth  as  a 
propitiation,  through  faith  in  his  blood,  he 
declared  his  righteousness  in  the  remission  of 
sins  that  were  past,  Rom.  iii.  25.  For  though 
we  may  suppose  God  would  have  declared  his 
mercy  in  forgiving  sin  upon  any  terms,  no 
consideration  but  the  death  of  his  Son  could 
have  exhibited  his  righteousness ; that  is,  his 
holiness,  justice,  and  truth,  in  the  pardon  of 
sin.  True  penitents  and  believers  were  par- 
doned and  saved  under  the  law,  but  not  by 
the  law.  Their  faith  looked  through  all  the 
legal  institutions  to  him  who  was  represented 
and  typified  by  them.  But  the  types  which 
revealed  him,  in  a sense  concealed  him  like- 
wise ; so  that,  though  Abraham  saw  his  day, 
and  rejoiced,  and  a succession  of  the  servants 
of  God  foresaw  his  glory  and  his  sufferings, 
and  spake  of  him  ; yet,  in  general,  the  church 
of  the  Old  Testament  rather  desired  and 
longed  for,  than  actually  possessed,  that  ful- 
ness of  light  and  knowledge  concerning  the 
person,  offices,  love,  and  victory  of  Messiah, 
which  is  the  privilege  of  those  who  enjoy  and 
believe  the  gospel,  Ileb.  xi.  39, 40.  Yet  great 
discoveries  of  these  things  were  vouchsafed 
to  some  of  the  prophets,  particularly  to 
Isaiah,  who,  on  account  of  the  clearness  of 
his  views  of  the  Redeemer  and  his  kingdom, 
has  been  sometimes  styled  the  fifth  evangel- 
ist. The  most  evangelical  part  of  his  pro- 
phecy, or  at  least  that  part  in  which  he 


216 


THE  CONSOLATION.  [stsr.  i. 


prosecutes  the  subject  with  the  least  inter- 
ruption, begins  with  this  chanter  and  with 
this  verse.  And  he  proposes  it  for  the  com- 
fort of  the  mourners  in  Zion  in  his  day.  We 
know  that  the  Son  of  God,  of  whom  Moses 
and  the  prophets  spake,  is  actually  come; 
(1  John  v.  20;)  that  the  atonement  for  sin  is 
made, the  ransom  for  sinners  paid  and  accept- 
ed. Now  the  shadows  are  past,  the  veil  re- 
moved, the  night  is  ended,  the  dawn,  the  day, 
is  arrived,  yea  the  Sun  of  righteousness  is 
arisen,  with  healing  in  his  wings,  Mai.  iv.  2. 
God  is  reconciled  in  his  Son,  and  the  minis- 
ters of  the  gospel  are  now  authorised  to 
preach  comfort  to  all  who  mourn  under  a 
sense  of  sin;  to  tell  them,  all  manner  of 
sin  is  forgiven,  for  the  Redeemer’s  sake, 
and  that  the  iniquity  of  those  who  be- 
lieve in  him  is  freely  and  adundantly  par- 
doned. 

II.  Though  the  last  clause  of  the  verse  does 
not  belong  to  the  passage,  as  selected  for  the 
Oratorio,  it  is  so  closely  connected  with  the 
subject,  that  I am  not  willing  to  omit  it.  “ She 
has  received  at  the  Lord’s  hand  double  for  all 
her  sin.”  The  meaning  here  cannot  be,  that 
her  afflictions  had  already  been  more  and 
greater,  than  her  sins  had  deserved.  The  just 
desert  of  sin  cannot  be  received  in  the  present 
life,  for  the  wages  of  sin  is  death  and  the 
curse  of  the  law,  or,  in  the  apostle’s  words, 
everlasting  destruction  from  the  presence  of 
the  Lord  and  the  glory  of  his  power,  2 Thess. 
i.  9.  Therefore  a living  man  can  have  no 
reason  to  complain  under  the  heaviest  suffer- 
ings. If  we  acknowledge  ourselves  to  be 
sinners,  we  have  likewise  cause  to  acknow- 
ledge, that  he  hath  not  dealt  with  us  accord- 
ing to  our  iniquities.  Nor  can  the  words  be 
so  applied  to  Messiah,  as  to  intimate,  that 
even  his  sufferings  were  more  than  necessary, 
or  greater  than  the  exigence  of  the  case  re- 
quired. The  efficacy  of  his  atonement  is  in- 
deed greater  than  the  actual  application,  and 
sufficient  to  save  the  whole  race  of  mankind 
ifthey  truly  believe  in  the  Son  of  God.  We 
read,  that  he  groaned  and  bled  upon  the  cross, 
till  he  could  say,  It  is  finished,  but  no  longer. 
It  becomes  us  to  refer  to  infinite  wisdom  the 
reasons  why  his  sufferings  were  prolonged 
for  such  a precise  time  ; but  I think  we  may 
take  it  for  granted,  that  they  did  not  endure 
an  hour  or  a minute  longer  than  was  strictly 
necessary.  The  expression  seems  to  be  ellip- 
tical, and  I apprehend  the  true  sense  is,  that 
Jerusalem  should  receive  blessings,  double, 
much  greater  than  all  the  afflictions  which 
sin  had  brought  upon  her ; ansi  in  general  to 
us,  to  every  believing  sinner,  that  the  bless- 
ings of  the  gospel  are  an  unspeakably  great 
compensation,  and  over-balance,  for  all  afflic- 
tions of  every  kind  with  which  we  have  been, 
or  can  be  exercised.  Afflictions  are  the  fruit 
of  sin,  and  because  our  sins  have  been  many, 
our  afflictions  may  be  many.  “ But  where  sin 


has  abounded,  grace  has  much  more  abound- 
ed,” Rom.  v.  20. 

Before  our  Lord  healed  the  paralytic  man 
who  was  brought  to  him,  he  said,  “ Be  of 
good  cheer,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee,”  Mark 
ii.  5.  His  outward  malady  rendered  him  an 
object  of  compassion  to  those  who  brought 
him : but  he  appears  to  have  been  sensible  of 
an  inward  malady,  which  only  Jesus  could 
discern,  or  pity,  or  relieve.  I doubt  not  but 
his  conscience  was  burdened  with  guilt.  An 
assurance  therefore  that  his  sins  were  for- 
given, was  sufficient  to  make  him  be  of  good 
cheer,  whether  his  palsy  were  removed  or 
not.  To  this  purpose  the  psalmist  speaks 
absolutely  and  without  exception.  “ Blessed 
is  the  man,  (however  circumstanced,)  whose 
transgression  is  forgiven,  whose  iniquity  is 
covered,”  Psalm  xxxii.  1.  Though  he  be 
poor,  afflicted,  diseased,  neglected  or  despised, 
if  the  Lord  imputeth  not  his  iniquity  to  him, 
he  is  a blessed  man.  There  is  no  situation 
in  human  life  so  deplorable,  but  a sense  of 
the  pardoning  love  of  God  can  support  and 
comfort  the  sufferer  under  it,  compose  his 
spirit,  yea,  make  him  exceedingly  joyful  in 
all  his  tribulations.  For  he  who  feels  the 
power  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  cleansing  his 
conscience  from  guilt,  and  giving  him  access 
by  faith  to  the  throne  of  grace,  with  liberty 
to  say,  Abba,  Father ; he  knows  that  all  his 
trials  are  under  the  direction  of  wisdom  and 
love,  are  all  working  together  for  his  good, 
and  that  the  heaviest  of  them  are  light,  and 
the  longest  momentary,  in  comparison  of  that 
far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory  which  is  reserved  for  him  in  a better 
world,  2 Cor.  iv.  16,  17.  Even  at  present  in 
the  midst  of  his  sufferings,  having  commu- 
nion with  God,  and  a gracious  submission  to 
his  will,  he  possesses  a peace  that  passeth 
understanding,  and  which  the  world  can 
neither  give  nor  take  away. 

I shall  close  this  preliminary  discourse 
with  a few  observations  by  way  of  improve- 
ment. 

1.  How  justly  may  we  adopt  the  prophet’s 
words,  “ Who  is  a God  like  unto  thee !” 
Micah  vii.  18.  Behold  and  admire  his  good- 
ness ! Infinitely  happy  and  glorious  in  him- 
self, he  has  provided  for  the  comfort  of  those 
who  were  rebels  against  his  government,  and 
transgressors  of  his  holy  law.  What  was 
degenerate  Israel,  and  what  are  we,  that  he 
should  thus  prevent  us  with  his  mercy,  re- 
member us  in  our  low  estate,  and  redeem  us 
from  misery,  in  such  a way,  and  at  such  a 
price!  Salvation  is  wholly  of  grace;  (Ephes. 
ii.  5;)  not  only  undeserved,  but  undesired  by 
us,  till  he  is  pleased  to  awaken  us  to  a sense 
of  our  need  of  it.  And  then  we  find  every 
thing  prepared  that  our  wants  require,  or  our 
wishes  can  conceive ; yea,  that  he  has  done 
exceedingly  beyond  what  we  could  either  ask 
or  ihink.  Salvation  is  wholly  of  the  Lord, 


THE  HARBINGER. 


217 


(Psalm  iii.  8,)  and  bears  those  signatures  of 
infinite  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness,  which 
distinguish  all  his  works  from  the  puny  imi- 
tations of  men.  It  is  every  way  worthy  of 
himself;  a great,  a free,  a full,  a sure  salva- 
tion. It  is  great, — whether  we  consider  the 
objects,  miserable  and  hell-deserving  sinners ; 
the  end,  the  restoration  of  such  alienated 
creatures  to  his  image  and  favour,  to  immor- 
tal life  and  happiness;  or  the  means,  the 
incarnation,  humiliation,  sufferings  and  death 
of  his  beloved  Son.  It  is  free, — without  ex- 
ception of  persons  or  cases,  without  any  con- 
ditions or  qualifications,  but  such  as  he  him- 
self performs  in  them,  and  bestows  upon 
them.  It  is  full, — including  every  desirable 
blessing;  pardon,  peace,  adoption,  protection 
and  guidance  through  this  world,  and  in  the 
world  to  come  eternal  life  and  happiness,  in 
the  unclouded,  uninterrupted  enjoyment  of 
the  favour  and  love  of  God,  with  the  perfect 
and  perpetual  exclusion  of  every  evil. 

2.  When  the  Lord  God,  who  knows  the 
human  heart,  would  speak  comfort  to  it,  he 
proposes  one  object,  and  only  one,  as  the 
necessary  and  all-sufficient  source  of  consola- 
tion. This  is  Messiah.  Jesus  in  his  person 
and  offices,  known  and  received  by  faith,  af- 
fords a balm  for  every  wound,  a cordial  for 
every  care.  If  we  admit  that  they  who  live 
in  the  spirit  of  the  world,  can  make  a poor 
shift  to  amuse  themselves,  and  be  tolerably 
satisfied  in  a state  of  prosperity,  while  every 
thing  goes  on  according  to  their  wish ; while 
we  make  this  concession  (which  however  is 
more  than  we  need  allow  them,  for  we  know 
that  no  state  of  life  is  free  from  anxiety,  dis- 
appointment, weariness,  and  disgust,)  yet  we 
must  consider  them  as  objects  of  compassion. 
It  is  a proof  of  the  weakness  and  disorder  of 
their  minds,  that  they  are  capable  of  being 
satisfied  with  such  trifles.  Thus  if  a lunatic 
conceives  his  cell  to  be  a palace,  that  his  chains 
are  ornaments  of  gold,  if  he  calls  a wreath  of 
his  straw  a crown,  puts  it  on  his  head,  and 
affects  the  language  of  majesty — we  do  not 
suppose  the  poor  creature  to  be  happy,  be- 
cause he  tells  us  that  he  is  so ; but  we  rather 
consider  his  complacence  in  his  situation,  as 
an  effect  and  proof  of  his  malady.  We  pity 
him,  and,  if  we  were  able,  would  gladly  re- 
store him  to  his  senses,  though  we  know  a 
cure  would  immediately  put  an  end  to  his 
pleasing  delusions.  But,  I say,  supposing  or 
admitting  the  world  could  make  its  votaries 
happy  in  a state  of  prosperity,  it  will,  it  must, 
leave  them  without  resource  in  the  day  of 
trouble.  And  they  are  to  be  pitied  indeed, 
who,  when  their  gourds  are  withered,  when 
the  desire  of  their  eyes  is  taken  from  them 
with  a stroke,  or  the  evil  which  they  most 
feared  touches  them,  or  when  death  looks 
them  closely  in  the  face,  have  no  acquaint- 
ance with  God,  no  access  to  the  throne  of 
grace,  but  being  without  Christ,  are  without 
Vol.  II.  2 E 


a solid  hope  of  good  hereafter,  though  they 
are  forced  to  feel  the  vanity  and  inconstancy 
of  every  thing  here.  But  they  who  know 
Messiah,  who  believe  in  him,  and  partake  of 
his  spirit,  cannot  be  comfortless.  They  recol- 
lect what  he  suffered  for  them,  they  know 
that  every  circumstance  and  event  of  life  is 
under  his  direction,  and  designed  to  work  for 
their  good  : that  though  they  sow  in  tears, 
they  shall  soon  reap  in  joy : and  therefore 
they  possess  their  souls  in  patience,  and  are 
cheerful,  yea  comfortable,  under  those  trying 
dispensations  of  providence,  which  when  they 
affect  the  lovers  of  pleasure,  too  often  either 
excite  in  them  a spirit  of  presumptuous  mur- 
muring against  the  will  of  God  ; or  sink  them 
into  despondency,  and  all  the  melancholy 
train  of  evils  attendant  on  those  who  languish 
and  pine  away  under  that  depression  of 
spirits,  emphatically  styled  a broken  heart. 

3.  To  be  capable  of  the  comfort  my  text 
proposes,  the  mind  must  be  in  a suitable  dis- 
position. A free  pardon  is  a comfort  to  a 
malefactor,  but  it  implies  guilt ; and  therefore 
they  who  have  no  apprehension  that  they 
have  broken  the  laws,  would  be  rather  of- 
fended than  comforted,  by  an  offer  of  pardon. 
This  is  one  principal  cause  of  that  neglect, 
yea  contempt,  which  the  gospel  of  the  grace 
of  God  meets  with  from  the  world.  If  we 
could  suppose  that  a company  of  people  who 
were  all  trembling  under  an  apprehension 
of  his  displeasure,  constrained  to  confess  the 
justice  of  the  sentence,  but  not  as  yet  in- 
formed of  any  way  to  escape,  were  to  hear 
this  message  for  the  first  time,  and  to  be 
fully  assured  of  its  truth  and  authority,  they 
would  receive  it  as  life  from  the  dead.  But 
it  is  to  be  feared,  that  for  want  of  knowing 
themselves,  and  their  real  state  in  the  sight 
of  him  with  whom  they  have  to  do,  many 
persons,  who  have  received  pleasure  from 
the  music  of  the  Messiah,  have  neither  found, 
nor  expected,  nor  desired  to  find,  any  com- 
fort from  the  words. 


SERMON  II. 

THE  HARBINGER. 

The  voice  of  him  that  crieth  in  the  wilder 
ness,  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord , 
make  straight  in  the  desert  a highioay 
for  our  God.  Every  valley  shall  be  ex- 
alted, and  every  mountain  and  hill  shall 
be  made  low;  and  the  crooked  shall  be 
made  straight,  and  the  rough  places  plain. 
And  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  re- 
vealed, and  all  flesh  shall  see  it  together . 
for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath  sjioken  it. 
— Isaiah  xl.  3 — 5. 

The  general  style  of  the  prophecies  is 
poetical.  The  inimitable  simplicity  which 
characterizes  every  part  of  divine  revelation, 


218 


THE  HARBINGER. 


is  diversified  according1  to  the  nature  of  the 
subject;  and  the  magnificence  and  variety  of 
imagery  which  constitute  the  life  and  spirit 
of  poetry,  evidently  distinguish  the  style  of 
the  Psalms,  or  Isaiah,  and  the  other  poetical 
books,  from  that  of  the  historical,  even  in  the 
common  versions.  The  various  rules  and 
properties  of  Hebrew  poetry  are  not,  at  this 
distance  of  time,  certainly  known.  But  the  j 
present.  Bishop  of  London,*  in  his  elegant  and  ' 
instructive  lectures  on  the  subject,  and  in  the  j 
discourse  prefixed  to  his  translation  of  Isaiah,  j 
has  fully  demonstrated  one  property.  It : 
usually  consists  either  of  parallel,  or  con-  j 
trusted  sentences.  The  parallel  expressions  i 
(excepting  in  the  book  of  Proverbs)  are  most 
prevalent.  In  these  the  same  thought,  for  j 
substance,  expressed  in  the  first  member,  is  j 
repeated,  with  some  difference  of  phrase,  in  ' 
the  following ; which,  if  it  enlarges  or  con- j 
firms  the  import  of  what  went  before,  seldom  ; 
varies  the  idea.  Almost  any  passage  I first 
cast  my  eye  upon,  will  sufficiently  explain  j 
Riy  meaning.  For  instance,  in  the  fifty-ninth 
chapter  of  Isaiah : 

Ver.  1.  Behold  the  Lord’s  hand  is  not  short- 
ened, that  it  cannot  save ; 

Neither  is  his  ear  heavy,  that  it  cannot 
hear. 

9.  Therefore  is  judgment  far  from  us, 

Neither  doth  justice  overtake  us : 

We  wait  for  light,  but  behold  obscurity; 

For  brightness,  but  we  walk  in  darkness. 
So  in  chap.  lv.  2. 

Wherefore  do  ye  spend  money  for  that 
which  is  not  bread  ? 

And  your  labour  for  that  which  satisfieth  | 
not  1 

Hearken  diligently  unto  me,  and  eat  ye  j 
that  which  is  good, 

And  let  your  soul  delight  itself  in  fatness. 
So  likewise  in  the  second  Psalm : 

Ver.  4.  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall 
laugh  ; 

The  Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision. 

5.  Then  shall  he  speak  unto  them  in  his  ‘ 
w'rath, 

And  vex  them  in  his  sore  displeasure. 

These  specimens  may  suffice  for  my  pre- 
sent purpose.  The  knowledge  of  this  pecu- 
liarity of  the  poetical  idiom,  may  often  save 
us  the  trouble  of  inquiring  minutely  into  the 
meaning  of  every  single  word,  when  one 
plain  and  comprehensive  sense  arises  from  a 
view  of  the  whole  passage  taken  together. 
This  observation  applies  to  the  first  of  the 
verses  in  my  text.  Though  it  be  true  that 
John  the  Baptist  lived  for  a season  retired 
and  unnoticed  in  a wilderness,  and  began  to 
preach  in  the  wilderness  of  Judea,  the  ex- 
pression, The  voice  of  him  that  crirth  in  the 
wilderness,  does  not  merely  foretell  that  cir- 


cumstance. The  verse  consists  of  two  paral- 
lels. The  prophet,  “ rapt  into  future  times,” 
hears  a voice  proclaiming  the  approach  of 
Messiah,  and  this  is  the  majestic  language : 

In  the  wilderness  prepare  ye  the  wray  of 
the  Lord, 

Make  straight  in  the  desert  a highway  foi 
our  God. 

The  wilderness  and  the  desert  are  the 
same  here,  as  likewise  in  chap.  xxxv.  1, 
where  the  happy,  the  sudden,  the  unexpected 
effects  of  his  appearance  are  described : — 

The  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  shall 
be  glad  for  them ; 

And  the  desert  shall  rejoice  and  blossom 
as  the  rose. 

Now\  to  see,  by  the  eye  of  faith,  the  glory 
of  the  Redeemer  in  his  appearance ; to  see 
power  divine  preparing  the  way  before  him; 
to  enter  into  the  gracious  and  wonderful  de- 
sign of  his  salvation  ; to  acknowledge,  admire, 
and  adore  him  as  the  Lord,  and  humbly  to 
claim  him  as  our  God,  must  afford  a pleasure 
very  different  from  that  which  the  most  ex- 
cellent music,  however  wrell  adapted  to  the 
wrords,  can  possibly  give.  The  latter  may  be 
relished  by  a worldly  mind ; the  former  is 
appropriate,  and  can  only  be  enjoyed  by  those 
wrho  are  taught  of  God. 

When  the  eastern  monarchs  travelled,  har- 
bingers went  before  to  give  notice  that  the 
King  w?as  upon  the  road,  and  likewise  proper 
persons  to  prepare  his  way  and  to  remove 
obstacles.  Some  of  them  (if  we  may  depend 
upon  history,)  in  the  affectation  of  displaying 
their  pomp  and  pow’er,  effected  extraordinary 
things  upon  such  occasions.  For  man,  though 
vain,  wrould  appear  wise;  though  a sinful 
wrorm,  he  wTould  fain  be  accounted  great. 
We  read  of  their  having  actually  filled  up 
valleys,  and  levelled  hills,  to  make  a com- 
modious road,  for  themselves  or  their  armies, 
through  places  otherwise  impassable.  The 
prophet  thus  illustrates  great  things  by  small, 
and  accommodates  the  language  and  usages 
of  men  to  divine  truth.  Messiah  is  about  to 
visit  a wilderness  world,  and  those  parts  of 
which  he  blesses  with  his  presence,  shall 
become  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  Till  then  it 
is  all  desolate,  rocky,  and  wild.  But  his  way 
shall  be  prepared.  Mountainous  difficulties 
shall  sink  dowm  before  him  into  plains.  In 
defiance  of  all  obstacles,  his  glory  shall  be 
revealed  in  the  wilderness,  and  all  flesh 
shall  see  it,  for  the  mouth  of  tfce  Lord  hath 
spoken  it. 

The  leading  ideas  respecting  Messiah’s 
appearance  suggested  by  this  sublime  repre- 
sentation, are, 

I.  The  state  of  the  world  at  his  coming — 
“ A wilderness.” 

II.  The  preparation  of  his  way — “Every 
valley  shall  be  exalted,  and  every  mountain 
and  hill  shall  be  made  low  ” 


* Dr  Lowtfo. 


THE  HARBINGER. 


219 


8ER.  II.] 

III.  The  manner  and  effects  of  his  mani- 
festation— “ And  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall 
be  revealed,  and  all  flesh  shall  see  it.” 

I.  The  word  “ wilderness,”  I suppose,  ge- 
nerally excites  the  idea  of  an  intricate,  soli- 
tary, uncultivated,  dangerous  place.  Such 
is  the  description  Jeremiah  gives  of  that  wil- 
derness through  which  the  Lord  led  Israel, 
when  he  had  delivered  them  from  Egypt : “ A 
land  of  deserts  and  of  pits,  a land  of  drought 
and  of  the  shadow  of  death,  a land  that  no  man 
passeth  through,  and  where  no  man  dwelt,” 
Jer.  ii.  6.  The  world,  in  which  we  sojourn 
for  a season,  does  not  appear  to  us  in  this 
unpleasing  view  at  first.  The  spirit,  and  the 
things  of  it,  are  congenial  to  our  depraved 
inclinations  ; and  especially  in  early  life,  our 
unexperienced  hearts  form  high  expectations 
from  it ; and  we  rather  hope  to  find  it  a pa- 
radise than  a wilderness.  But  when  the  con- 
vincing power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  opens  the 
eyes  of  the  understanding,  we  awake  as  from 
a dream ; the  enchantment  by  which  we  were 
deluded  is  broken,  and  we  then  begin  to  judge 
rightly  of  the  world : that  it  is  a wearisome 
wilderness  indeed,  and  that  our  only  import- 
ant concern  with  it  is  to  get  happily  out  of 
it.  In  a spiritual  view,  a wilderness  is  a sig- 
nificant emblem  of  the  state  of  mankind,  both 
Jews  and  Heathens,  at  that  period  which  the 
apostle  calls  the  fulness  of  time,  when  God 
sent  forth  his  Son,  Gal.  iv.  4. 

Israel,  once  the  beloved  people  of  God,  was 
at  that  time  so  extremely  degenerated,  that, 
a few  individuals  excepted,  the  vineyard  of 
the  Lord,  so  highly  cultivated,  so  signally 
protected,  yielded  only  wild  grapes,  Isa.  v.  4. 
Though  they  were  not  addicted  to  imitate 
the  idolatry  of  the  Heathens,  as  their  fore- 
fathers had  been,  they  were  no  less  alienated 
from  the  true  God ; and  their  wickedness 
was  the  more  aggravated,  for  being  practised 
under  a professed  attachment  to  the  forms  of 
his  law.  They  drew  nigh  to  God  with  their 
lips,  but  their  hearts  were  far  from  him, 
Mark  vii.  6.  Their  very  worship  profaned  the 
temple  in  which  they  gloried,  and  the  holy 
house  of  prayer,  through  their  abominations, 
was  become  a den  of  thieves.  They  owned 
the  divine  authority  of  the  scriptures,  and 
read  them  with  seeming  attention,  but  ren- 
dered them  of  none  effect,  through  the  greater 
attention  they  paid  to  the  corrupt  traditions 
of  their  elders.  They  boasted  in  their  rela- 
tion to  Abraham  as  their  father,  but  proved 
themselves  to  be  indeed  the  children  of  those 
who  had  persecuted  and  murdered  the  pro- 
phets, Matt,  xxiii.  39,  31.  The  Scribes  and 
Pharisees,  wrho  sat  in  the  chair  of  Moses,  and 
were  the  public  teachers  of  the  people,  under 
an  exterior  garb  of  sanctity,  of  prayer,  and 
fasting,  were  guilty  of  oppression,  fraud,  and 
uncleanness ; and  while  they  trusted  in  them- 
selves that  they  were  righteous,  and  despised 
others,  their  real  character  was  a combina- 


tion of  pride  and  hypocrisy.  Therefore  he 
who  knew  their  hearts,  and  saw  through  all 
their  disguises,  compared  them  to  painted 
sepulchres,  fair  to  outward  appearance,  but 
within  full  of  filth  and  impurity,  Matt,  xxiii. 
27.  From  the  spirit  of  these  blind  guides, 
we  may  judge  of  the  spirit  of  the  blind 
people  who  held  them  in  admiration,  and 
were  willingly  directed  and  led  by  them. 
Thus  was  the  faithful  city  become  a harlot : 
it  wras  once  full  of  judgment,  righteousness 
lodged  in  it,  but  now  murderers,  Isa.  i.  21. 
Such  a wilderness  was  Judea  when  Messiah 
condescended  to  visit  it. 

Among  the  Heathens,  ignorance,  idolatry, 
sensuality,  and  cruelty  universally  prevailed. 
Their  pretended  wise  men  had  indeed  talked 
of  wisdom  and  morality  from  age  to  age,  but 
their  speculations  were  no  more  than  swell- 
ing words  of  vanity,  cold,  trifling,  uncertain, 
and  without  any  valuable  influence  either 
upon  themselves  or  upon  others.  They  had 
philosophers,  poets,  orators,  musicians,  and 
artists,  eminent  in  their  way  ; but  the  nations 
reputed  the  most  civilized  were  overwhelmed 
with  abominable  wickedness  equally  with  the 
rest.  The  shocking  effect  of  their  idolatry 
upon  their  moral  principles  and  conduct,  not- 
withstanding their  attainments  in  arts  and 
science,  is  described  by  the  apostle  in  the 
close  of  the  first  chapter  of  his  epistle  to  the 
Romans.  With  great  propriety,  therefore, 
the  state  of  the  world,  both  Jew  and  Gentile, 
considered  in  a moral  view,  is  compared  by 
the  prophet  to  a wilderness — a barren  and 
dreary  waste.  The  pursuits  and  practices 
of  the  world  were  diametrically  opposite  to 
the  spirit  and  design  of  that  kingdom  which 
Messiah  was  about  to  set  up,  and  therefore, 
as  the  event  proved,  directly  disposed  to  with- 
stand his  progress.  But, 

II.  Before  his  appearance  a way  was  pre- 
pared for  him  in  the  wilderness. 

The  providence  of  God,  by  a gradual  train 
of  dispensations,  disposed  the  political  state 
of  mankind  in  a subserviency  to  this  great 
event.  All  the  commotions  and  revolutions 
which  take  place  in  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth 
are  so  many  detached  parts  of  a complicated 
but  wisely-determined  plan,  of  which  the 
establishment  of  Messiah’s  kingdom  is  the 
final  cause.  The  kings  and  politicians  of  the 
world  are  not  aw  are  of  this.  God  is  not  in 
their  thoughts.  But  while  they  pursue  their 
own  ends,  and  make  havoc  of  the  peace  of 
mankind,  to  gratify  their  own  interests  and 
ambition,  and  look  no  higher,  they  are  igno- 
rantly, and  without  intention,  acting  as  in- 
struments of  the  will  of  God.  The  wrath  of 
man  is  over-ruled  to  his  praise  and  his  pur- 
pose, (Psalm  lxxvi.  10,)  and  succeeds  so  far 
as  it  is  instrumental  to  the  accomplishment 
of  his  designs,  and  no  farther.  While  they 
move  in  this  line,  their  schemes,  however  in- 
judiciously laid,  and  whatever  disproportion 


220 


THE  HARBINGER. 


fsER.  IL 


there  may  seem  between  the  means  they  are 
possessed  of  and  the  vast  objects  they  aim  at, 
prosper  beyond  their  own  expectations;  but 
the  remainder  of  their  wrath  he  will  restrain. 
Their  best  projected  and  best  supported  en- 
terprises issue  in  shame  and  disappointment, 
if  they  are  not  necessary  parts  of  that  chain 
of  causes  and  events  which  the  Lord  of  all 
has  appointed.  Thus  Sennacherib,  when 
sent  by  the  God  whom  he  knew  not  to  exe- 
cute his  displeasure  against  the  kingdom  of 
Judah,  had,  for  a time,  a rapid  and  uninter- 
rupted series  of  conquests  ; (Isa.  xxxvii.  26— 
29;)  but  his  attempt  upon  Jerusalem  was  be- 
yond the  limits  of  his  commission,  and  there- 
fore failed. 

Among  the  principal  instruments  who  were 
appointed  to  prepare  a way  in  the  wilderness 
for  Messiah,  and  to  facilitate  the  future  spread 
of  his  kingdom,  we  may  take  notice  of  Alex- 
ander; and  this  designation  secured  his  suc- 
cess, though  the  extravagancies,  excesses, 
and  rashness  which  marked  his  character, 
were  sufficient  to  have  rendered  his  under- 
takings abortive,  had  he  not  been  in  the  hand 
of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  as  an  axe  or  a saw  in 
the  hand  of  the  workman.  By  his  conquests 
the  knowledge  of  the  Greek  language  was 
diffused  among  many  nations ; and  the  He- 
brew scriptures  being  soon  afterwards  trans- 
lated into  that  language,  an  expectation  of 
some  great  deliverer  was  raised  far  and  wide, 
before  Messiah  appeared.  When  this  service 
was  fulfilled,  the  haughty  presumptuous 
worm  who  had  been  employed  in  it,  was  no 
'onger  necessary,  and  therefore  was  soon 
laid  aside : and  all  his  proud  designs,  for  the 
establishment  of  his  own  family  and  dominion, 
perished  with  him.  His  empire  was  divided 
towards  the  four  winds  of  heaven,  and  this 
division  likewise  contributed  to  bring  for- 
ward the  purpose  of  God,  Dan.  viii.  8.  For 
each  of  the  four  kingdoms  established  by  his 
successors,  being  thus  separated,  became  a 
more  easy  prey  to  the  Roman  power.  This 
power,  which  "had  been  gradually  increasing 
and  extending  in  the  course  of  several  hun- 
dred years,  was  at  its  height  about  the  time 
of  our  Lord’s  birth.  The  greatest  part  of  the 
habitable  earth  which  was  at  that  time  dis- 
tinctly known  was  united  under  one  empire, 
composed  of  various  kingdoms  and  govern- 
ments, which,  though  once  independent  and 
considerable,  wrere  then  no  more  than  Ro- 
man provinces ; and  as  all  the  provinces  had 
an  immediate  connexion  with  Rome,  a way 
was  thus  prepared,  and  an  intercourse  open- 
ed on  every  side,  for  the  promulgation  of  the 
gospel. 

Among  the  Jews,  the  professing  people  of 
God,  a way  was  prepared  for  Messiah  by  the 
ministry  of  his  harbinger,  John  the  Baptist, 
who  came  in  the  spirit  and  powrer  of  Elijah 
(as  had  been  foretold  of  him  by  the  prophets, 
particularly  by  the  last  of  the  prophets,  Ma- 


lachi,)  preaching  the  baptism  of  repentance 
for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  proclaiming 
that  the  Saviour  and  his  kingdom  were  at 
hand.  He  w7ho  sent  him  accompanied  his 
mission  with  a divine  power.  A multitude 
of  persons,  of  various  descriptions,  were  im- 
pressed by  his  message,  insomuch  that  John 
himself  seems  to  have  been  astonished  at  the 
numbers  and  characters  of  those  who  came 
to  his  baptism. 

When  the  ministry  of  John  had  thus  pre- 
viously disposed  the  minds  of  many  for  the 
reception  of  Messiah,  and  engaged  the  atten- 
tion of  the  people  at  large,  Messiah  himself 
entered  upon  his  public  office,  on  the  same 
scene  and  among  the  same  people.  As  he 
increased,  John  willingly  decreased.  So  the 
morning  star  ceases  to  be  seen  as  the  sun  ad- 
vances above  the  horizon.  This  distinguished 
servant  of  God  having  finished  his  w ork,  was 
removed  to  a better  world.  Not  in  the  tri- 
umphant manner  in  which  Elijah  was  trans- 
lated, but  as  he  came  to  announce  a new  dis- 
pensation, under  which  believers  were  to 
expect  opposition  and  ill-treatment,  to  walk 
by  faith,  and  frequently  to  be  called  to  seal 
their  testimony  with  their  blood,  he  wTas  per- 
mitted to  fall  a sacrifice  to  the  revenge  of  a 
wTanton  woman  ; and  though  we  are  assured 
that  none  of  the  race  of  Adam  was  greater  in 
the  estimation  of  God  than  he,  his  death  was 
asked  and  procured  as  the  reward  of  an  idle 
dance,  Matth.  xi.  11 ; xiv.  8 — 11. 

III.  The  latter  part  of  my  text  describes 
the  manner  and  immediate  effects  of  Mes- 
siah’s appearance  during  his  personal  minis- 
try, with  an  intimation  of  its  future  and  more 
extensive  consequences. 

The  valleys  shall  be  exalted. — x\  valley  is 
an  emblem  of  a lowT  condition.  Such  was  the 
condition  of  most  of  our  Lord’s  followers; 
but  his  notice  and  favour  exalted  them  highly. 
He  came  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  poor,  to 
fill  the  hungry  with  good  things,  to  save  the 
chief  of  sinners,  to  open  a door  of  hope  and 
salvation  to  persons  of  the  vilest  and  most 
despicable  characters  in  human  estimation. 
Such,  for  instance,  was  the  woman  mention- 
ed by  the  evangelist  Luke,  chap.  vii.  37,  38. 
The  Pharisee  thought  our  Lord  dishonoured 
himself,  by  permitting  such  a one  to  touch 
him,  nor  had  she  a word  to  say  in  her  own 
behalf.  But  the  compassionate  Saviour  high- 
ly exalted  her,  when  he  vouchsafed  to  plead 
her  cause,  to  express  his  gracious  acceptance 
of  her  tears  and  love,  and  to  assure  her  that 
her  sins,  though  many,  were  all  forgiven. 
Very  low  likewise  was  the  state  of. the  male- 
factor on  the  cross : he  had  committed  great 
crimes,  was  suffering  grievous  torments,  and 
in  the  very  jaws  of  death,  Luke  xxiii.  42.  But 
grace  visited  his  heart ; he  was  plucked  as  a 
brand  out  of  the  fire,  and  exalted  to  paradise 
and  glory.  The  world  accounts  the  proud 
happy,  and  honours  the  covetous  if  they  be 


THE  HARBINGER. 


221 


SER.  II.] 

prosperous.  But  true  honour  cometh  from 
God.  They  who  are  partakers  of  the  faith 
and  hope  of  the  gospel,  and  have  interest  in 
the  precious  promises,  are  indeed  the  rich, 
the  happy,  the  excellent  of  the  earth,  how- 
ever they  may  be  unnoticed  or  despised  by 
their  fellow-creatures.  The  honour  of  places 
likewise  is  to  be  considered  in  this  light. 
Bethlehem,  though  but  of  little  note  among 
the  thousands  of  Judah,  was  rendered  more 
illustrious  by  the  birth  of  Messiah  than  Baby- 
lon or  Rome.  The  Galileans  were  held  in 
contempt  by  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  as 
a mean  and  provincial  people ; but  the  places 
in  Galilee  which  our  Lord  frequently  visited, 
or  where  he  sometimes  resided,  are  spoken 
of  as  exalted  unto  heaven,  by  the  honour  and 
privilege  of  his  presence,  though  some  of 
them  were  no  more  than  fishing-towns.  And 
so  at  this  day,  if  we  have  spiritual  discern- 
ment, we  shall  judge  that  a little  village, 
where  the  gospel  is  known,  prized,  and 
idorned  by  a suitable  conversation,  has  a 
dignity  and  importance  far  preferable  to  all 
the  parade  of  a wealthy  metropolis,  if  desti- 
tute of  the  like  privileges. 

On  the  contrary,  every  mountain  and  hill 
shall  be  brought  low. — Messiah  came  to  pour 
contempt  on  all  human  glory.  He  detected 
the  wickedness  and  confounded  the  pride  of 
the  Scribes,  and  Pharisees,  and  rulers,  and 
made  it  appear  that  what  is  highly  esteemed 
among  men,  the  T0  or  summit  of  their 

boasted  excellency,  is  worthless,  yea,  abomi- 
nation in  the  sight  of  God,  Luke  xvi.  15. 
And  by  living  himself  in  a state  of  poverty, 
and  associating  chiefly  with  poor  people,  he 
placed  the  vanity  of  the  distinctions  and  af- 
fluence which  mankind  generally  admire  and 
envy,  in  the  most  striking  and  humiliating 
light.  Such  likewise  was  and  will  be  the 
effect  of  his  gospel.  When  faithfully  preach- 
ed, it  is  found  mighty,  through  God,  to  the 
pulling  down  of  strong-holds,  high  thoughts, 
and  every  species  of  self-exaltation.  When 
the  convincing  word  touches  the  heart,  it  has 
an  effect  like  the  hand-writing  which  Bel- 
shazzar saw  upon  the  wall,  Dan.  v.  6.  In 
that  day  the  lofty  looks  of  man  are  humbled, 
and  his  haughtiness  bowed  down ; (Isa.  ii.  11 ;) 
he  dares  no  longer  plead  the  goodness  of  his 
heart,  or  trust  to  the  work  of  his  hands.  A 
sense  of  forgiveness  and  acceptance  through 
the  Beloved,  received  by  faith  in  his  atone- 
ment, lays  him  still  lower : he  now  renounces 
as  loss,  -for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  all  that  he  once 
esteemed  as  gain,  and  is  glad  that  he  has  no- 
thing to  trust  or  glory  in  but  the  cross,  Phil, 
iii.  7,  8.  Farther,  every  mountain  that  op- 
poses the  kingdom  of  Messiah,  in  due  time 
must  sink  into  a plain,  Zech.  iv.  7.  Though 


the  nations  rage,  and  the  rulers  take  counsel 
together,  he  who  sitteth  in  the  heavens  will 
support  and  maintain  his  own  work,  and  all 
their  power  and  policy  shall  fall  before  it. 

The  crooked  shall  be  made  straight,  and 
the  rough  places  plain. — He  came  to  rectify 
the  perverse  disposition  of  the  hearts  of  men, 
to  soften  and  subdue  their  obstinate  spirits, 
and  to  form  to  himself  a willing  people  in  the 
day  of  his  power.  The  Jewish  teachers,  by 
their  traditions  and  will-worship  had  given 
an  apparent  obliquity  to  the  straight  and  per- 
fect rule  of  the  law  of  God,  and  deformed  the 
beauties  of  holiness,  binding  heavy  burdens, 
and  grievous  to  be  borne,  upon  the  con- 
science ; but  he  vindicated  the  law  from 
their  corrupt  glosses,  and  made  the  path  of 
obedience  plain,  practicable,  and  pleasant. 

Thus,  the  glory  of  the  Lord  was  revealed. 
— Not  to  every  eye : many,  prejudiced  by  his 
outward  appearance,  and  by  the  low  mistaken 
views  the  Jews  indulged  of  the  office  and 
kingdom  of  Messiah,  whom  they  expected, 
could  see  no  form  or  excellence  in  him  that 
they  should  desire  him ; but  his  disciples 
could  say,  “We  beheld  his  glory,”  John  i. 
14.  He  spake  with  authority.  His  word  was 
power.  He  controlled  the  elements,  he  raised 
the  dead.  He  knew,  and  revealed,  and  judged 
the  thoughts  of  men’s  hearts.  He  forgave 
sin,  and  thus  exercised  the  rights  and  dis- 
played the  perfections  of  divine  sovereignty 
in  his  own  person.  But  the  prophecy  looks 
forward  to  future  times.  After  his  ascension 
he  filled  his  apostles  and  disciples  with  light 
and  power,  and  sent  them  forth  in  all  direc- 
tions to  proclaim  his  love  and  grace  to  a sin- 
ful world.  Then  the  glory  of  the  Lord  was 
revealed,  and  spread  from  one  kingdom  to 
another  people.  We  still  wait  for  the  full 
accomplishment  of  this  promise,  and  expect  a 
time  when  the  whole  earth  shall  be  filled 
with  his  glory : For  the  mouth  of  the  Lord 
hath  spoken  it.  It  is  to  the  power  of  his  word 
that  we  owe  the  continuance  of  day  and 
night,  and  the  regular  return  of  the  seasons 
of  the  year.  But  these  appointments  are 
only  for  a limited  term ; the  hour  is  coming, 
when  the  frame  of  nature  shall  be  dissolved. 
Heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away ; but  not  a 
jot  or  tittle  of  what  he  hath  declared  con- 
cerning his  kingdom  of  grace  shall  fail,  till 
the  whole  be  fulfilled. 

Those  of  you  who  have  heard  the  Messiah 
will  do  well  to  recollect,  whether  you  were 
affected  by  such  thoughts  as  these  while  this 
passage  was  performed ; or  whether  you  were 
only  captivated  by  the  music,  and  paid  no 
more  regard  to  the  words  than  if  they  had 
no  meaning.  They  are,  however,  the  great 
truths  of  God.  May  they  engage  your  serious 
attention,  now  they  are  thus  set  before  you  ! 


222 


THE  SHAKING  OF  THE 


SERMON  HI. 

THE  SHAKING  OF  THE  HEAVENS  AND  THE 
EARTH. 

Thus  saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts , Yet  once , it 
is  a little  while , and  I will  shake  the  hea- 
vens, and  the  earth , and  the  sea,  and  the 
dry  land:  And  I will  shake  all  nations, 
and  the  Desire  of  all  nations  shall  come ; 
and  I will  fit  this  house  with  glory,  saith 
the  Lord  of  Hosts. — Haggai  ii.  6,  7. 

God  shook  the  earth  when  he  proclaimed 
his  law  to  Israel  from  Sinai.  The  descrip- 
tion, though  very  simple,  presents  to  our 
thoughts  a scene  unspeakably  majestic,  grand, 
and  awful.  The  mountain  was  in  flames  at 
the  top,  and  trembled  to  its  basis,  Exod.  xix. 
16 — 19.  Dark  clouds,  thunderings  and  light- 
nings filled  the  air.  The  hearts  of  the  peo- 
ple, of  the  whole  people,  trembled  likewise ; 
and  even  Moses  himself  said,  “ I exceedingly 
fear  and  quake.”  Then,  as  the  apostle,  re- 
ferring to  this  passage,  observes,  the  voice 
of  the  Lord  shook  the  earth,  Heb.  xii.  26. 
But  the  prophet  here  speaks  of  another,  a 
greater,  a more  important,  and  extensive 
concussion.  Yet  once,  it  is  a little  while, 
and  I will  shake  not  the  earth  only,  but  also 
the  heavens. 

If  we  really  believe  that  the  scriptures  are 
true,  that  the  prophecies  were  delivered  by 
holy  men,  who  spake  as  they  were  moved  by 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  that  they  shall  all  be 
certainly  fulfilled, — how  studious  should  we 
be  to  attain  a right  understanding  of  passages 
and  events,  in  which  we  are  so  nearly  in- 
terested, that  our  hearts  may  be  duly  affected 
by  them  ! But,  alas ! experience  and  observa- 
tion strongly  confirm  the  remark  of  the  poet, 
Men  are  but  children  of  a larger  growth. 

If  you  put  a telescope  into  the  hands  of  a 
child,  he  will  probably  admire  the  outside, 
especially  if  it  be  finely  ornamented.  But  the 
use  of  it,  in  giving  a more  distinct  view  of 
distant  objects,  is  what  the  child  has  no  con- 
ception of.  The  music  of  the  Messiah  is  but 
an  ornament  of  the  words,  which  have  a very 
weighty  sense.  This  sense  no  music  can  ex- 
plain, and  when  rightly  understood,  will  have 
such  an  effect  as  no  music  can  produce.  That 
the  music  of  the  Messiah  has  a great  effect 
in  its  own  kind,  I can  easily  believe.  The 
ancients,  to  describe  the  power  of  the  music 
of  Orpheus,  pretend,  that  when  he  played 
upon  his  harp,  the  wild  beasts  thronged 
around  him  to  listen,  and  seemed  to  forget 
their  natural  fierceness.  Such  expressions 
are  figurative,  and  designed  to  intimate,  that, 
by  his  address  and  instructions,  he  civilized 
men  of  fierce  and  savage  dispositions.  But 
if  we  were  to  allow  the  account  to  be  true  in 
the  literal  sense,  I should  still  suppose  that 
Ihe  wild  beasts  were  affected  by  his  music 


[SER.  IIL 

only  while  they  heard  it,  and  that  it  did  not 
actually  change  their  natures,  and  render 
lions  and  tigers  gentle  as  lambs,  from  that 
time  forward.  Thus  I can  allow,  that  they 
who  heard  the  Messiah  might  be  greatly  im- 
pressed during  the  performance ; but  when  it 
was  ended,  I suppose  they  would  retain  the 
very  same  dispositions  they  had  before  it 
began.  And  many,  I fear,  were  no  more  af- 
fected by  this  sublime  declaration  of  the 
Lord’s  design  to  shake  the  heavens  and  the 
earth,  than  they  would  have  been,  if  the  same 
music  had  been  set  to  the  words  of  a common 
ballad. 

The  Jews,  when  they  returned  from  cap- 
tivity, and  undertook  to  rebuild  the  temple  of 
the  Lord,  met  with  many  discouragements. 
They  were  disturbed  by  the  opposition  and 
arts  of  their  enemies,  who  at  one  time  so  far 
prevailed,  as  to  compel  them,  for  a season,  to 
intermit  the  work.  And  when  the  founda- 
tion of  the  temple  was  laid,  the  joy  of  those 
who  hoped  soon  to  see  the  solemn  worship  of 
God  restored,  was  damped  by  the  grief  of 
others,  who  remembered  the  magnificence  of 
the  first  temple,  and  wept  to  think  how  far 
the  second  temple  wTould  come  short  of  it, 
Hag.  ii.  3.  In  these  circumstances,  the  pro- 
phets Haggai  and  Zechariah  were  sent  to 
animate  the  people  by  a promise,  that,  in- 
ferior as  the  second  temple  might  appear, 
compared  with  that  which  Solomon  built,  the 
glory  of  the  latter  house  should  be  greater 
than  the  glory  of  the  former,  Ezra  iii.  12, 13. 
Had  this  depended  upon  a profusion  of  silver 
and  gold,  the  Lord  could  have  provided  it: 
for  “the  silver  is  mine,  and  the  gold  is  mine, 
saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.”  But  the  glory 
spoken  of  was  of  a different  kind.  The  pre- 
sence of  Messiah  in  the  second  temple  would 
render  it  far  more  honourable  and  glorious, 
though  less  pompous,  than  the  temple  of 
Solomon ; and  would  be  attended  with  greater 
consequences  than  even  the  manifestation  of 
the  God  of  Israel  on  Mount  Sinai.  Then  he 
only  shook  the  earth ; but  under  the  second 
temple  he  wTould  shake  the  heavens  and  the 
earth,  the  sea  and  the  dry  land,  to  introduce 
the  kingdom  of  Messiah. 

We  may  consider  from  the  words, 

I.  A character  of  Messiah, — “ The  Desire 
of  all  nations.” 

II.  The  effects  of  his  appearance, — “ Shak- 
ing the  heavens  and  the  earth.” 

III.  His  “ filling  the  house  with  glory.” 
This  clause  of  ver.  7,  is  not  in  the  passage  set 
to  music  ; but  as  it  is  an  eminent  part  of  the 
prophecy,  I shall  not  exclude  it. 

I.  Messiah  is  here  styled,  “ The  Desire  of 
all  nations.”  The  propriety  of  this  title  may 
be  illustrated  by  two  considerations. 

1.  Before  he  came  into  the  world  to  save 
sinners,  an  expectation  prevailed  in  many  na- 
tions, that  a great  deliverer  and  friend  of 
mankind  was  at  hand.  This  was,  perhaps. 


HEAVENS  AND  THE  EARTH. 


223 


SER.  HI.] 

partly  the  effect  of  some  ancient  traditions, 
founded  on  the  promises  of  God  respecting* 
the  seed  of  the  woman,  the  traces  of  which, 
thoug-h  much  corrupted  by  the  addition  of 
fables,  were  not  worn  out — but  might  be 
chiefly  owing  to  several  dispersions  of  the 
people  of  Israel,  and  imperfect  notices,  de- 
rived from  the  scriptures  in  their  hands.  The 
sense  of  many  prophecies  concerning  Mes- 
siah, though  misapplied,  is  remarkably  ex- 
pressed in  a short  poem  of  Virgil,*  written  a 
few  years  before  our  Saviour’s  birth.  This 
eclogue,  of  which  we  have  a beautiful  imita- 
tion in  our  own  language  by  Mr.  Pope,  af- 
fords a sufficient  proof  that  the  Heathens  had 
an  idea  of  some  illustrious  personage,  who 
would  shortly  appear,  and  restore  peace,  pros- 
perity, and  all  the  blessings  of  their  imaginary 
golden  age  to  mankind.  The  miseries  and 
evils,  with  which  the  world  was  filled,  made 
the  interposition  of  such  a deliverer  highly 
desirable.  There  were  even  a few  among 
the  Heathens,  such  as  Socrates  and  his  im- 
mediate disciples,  who  seem  to  have  felt  the 
necessity  of  a divine  teacher ; and  to  be  sen- 
sible that  man,  in  a state  of  nature,  was  too 
depraved,  and  too  ignorant,  to  be  either  able 
or  disposed  to  worship  God  acceptably  with- 
out one.  There  is  reason  to  believe,  that  the 
revelation  which  we  enjoy,  though  despised 
by  too  many  who  affect  to  be  called  philoso- 
phers in  modern  times,  would  have  been 
highly  prized  by  the  wisest  and  best  of  the 
philosophers  of  antiquity.  Socrates  thought 
men  were  not  capable  of  knowing  and  ex- 
pressing their  own  wants,  nor  of  asking  what 
was  good  for  themselves,  unless  it  should 
please  God  to  send  them  an  instructor  from 
heaven,  to  teach  them  how  to  pray.  And 
therefore, 

2.  The  need  that  ail  nations  had  of  such  a 
Saviour,  is  sufficient  to  establish  his  right  to 
this  title,  admitting  they  had  no  knowledge 
or  expectation  of  him.  If  we  could  suppose 
a nation  involved  for  ages  in  the  darkness  of 
night,  though  they  had  no  previous  notion  of 
light,  yet  light  might  be  said  to  be  their  de- 
sire, because  the  light,  whenever  they  should 
enjoy  it,  would  put  an  end  to  their  calamity, 
would  answer  their  wants,  and,  in  that  sense 
accomplish  their  wishes ; for  if  they  could  not 
directly  wish  for  light,  they  would  naturally 
wish  for  relief.  The  Heathens  were  misera- 
bly bewildered.  They  had  a thirst  for  hap- 
piness, which  could  not  be  satisfied  by  any, 
or  all  the  expedients  and  pursuits  within  their 
reach.  They  had  fears  and  forebodings  of 
conscience,  for  which  they  knew  no  remedy. 
They  were  so  sensible,  both  of  their  guilt  and 
their  weakness,  that,  being  ignorant  of  the 
character  of  the  true  God,  and  of  that  forgive- 
ness which  is  with  him,  in  times  of  extremity 
they  frequently  offered  the  most  expensive 


sacrifices  to  the  objects  of  their  idolatrous 
superstition,  even  the  blood  and  lives  of  their 
children,  Micah  vi.  6.  When  Messiah  ap- 
peared, as  he  was  the  glory  of  Israel,  so  he 
was  a light  to  the  Gentiles,  as  we  shall  have 
opportunity  of  observing  more  at  large  here- 
after. He,  therefore,  who  came  purposely  to 
bless  the  nations,  by  turning  them  from  dark- 
ness to  light,  and  from  the  worship  of  dumb 
idols  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God,  may 
justly  be  called  their  desire,  though  in  the 
time  of  their  ignorance,  they  could  form  no 
suitable  conception  of  him. 

II.  “ I will  shake  the  heavens  and  the 
earth.” — This  part  of  the  prophecy  has  been, 
in  a measure,  literally  fulfilled.  At  his  birth, 
a new  star  appeared.  At  his  death,  the  sun 
withdrew  his  shining,  the  earth  quaked,  the 
rocks  rent,  and  the  dead  arose.  During  his 
life,  he  often  suspended  and  over-ruled  the 
stated  laws  of  nature,  and  exercised  supreme 
power  over  the  visible  and  invisible  worlds. 
He  shook  the  kingdom  of  darkness,  spoiled 
principalities  and  powers,  triumphing  over 
them  by  his  cross.  He  shook  the  kingdoms 
of  the  earth ; the  idols  trembled  and  disap- 
peared before  his  gospel,  till  at  length  the 
Roman  empire  renounced  Heathenism,  and 
embraced  the  Christian  name. 

But  the  language  of  prophecy  is  highly 
figurative.  Mountains  and  trees,  land  and 
water,  sun  and  moon,  heaven  and  earth,  often 
signify  nations,  people,  and  governments; 
and  particularly,  heaven  and  earth  are  used 
to  denote  the  religious  and  political  establish- 
ment of  Israel ; or,  as  we  say,  their  constitu- 
tion in  church  and  state.  This,  without  doubt, 
is  the  primary  sense  here.  The  appearance 
of  Messiah  shall  be  connected  with  the  total 
dissolution  of  tne  Jewish  economy.  The 
whole  of  their  Levitical  institution  was  ful- 
filled, superseded,  and  abrogated  by  Messiah, 
which  was  solemnly  signified  by  the  rending 
of  the  vail  of  the  temple  from  the  top  to  the 
bottom  at  his  death.  And  a few  years  after- 
wards the  temple  itself  was  destroyed,  by 
which  event,  the  worship  of  God  according  to 
the  law,  of  which  the  temple-service  was  an 
essential  part,  was  rendered  utterly  imprac- 
ticable. Their  civil  state  likewise  was  dis- 
solved; they  were  extirpated  from  the  pro- 
mised land,  and  dispersed  far  and  wide 
among  the  nations  of  the  earth.  Though,  in 
one  sense,  they  are  preserved,  by  the  won- 
derful providence  of  God,  as  a distinct  people, 
unaffected  by  the  changes  and  customs 
around  them ; in  another  sense,  they  are  not 
a people,  having  neither  settlement  nor 
government,  but  living  as  strangers  and 
foreigners  in  every  country  where  their  lot 
has  been  cast,  Hos.  iii.  4.  Nothing  like  this 
can  be  found  in  the  history  of  mankind.  It 
is  an  obvious,  striking,  and  perpetual  proof 
of  the  truth  of  the  scriptures.  What  was 
foretold  concerning  them  by  Moses  and  the 


* Virg.  Eel.  IV. 


224 


THE  SHAKING  OF  THE  HEAVENS,  &c.  [ser.  iii. 


succeeding  prophets,  is  accomplished  to  a de- 
monstration before  our  eyes.  How  unlikely 
was  it  once  that  it  should  be  thus  ! yet  thus  it 
must  be,  because  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath 
spoken  it.  And  all  that  he  has  spoken  is 
equally  sure.  He  will  yet  again  shake  the 
heavens  and  the  earth,  dissolve  the  frame  of 
nature,  and  execute  his  threatened  judgments 
upon  all  those  who  do  not  receive  and  obey 
his  gospel. 

III.  “He  shall  fill  this  house  with  glory.” 
He  did  so,  when  he  condescended  to  visit  it 
in  person.  The  blind  and  the  lame  came 
thither  to  him,  and  he  healed  them,  Matth. 
xxi.  13 — 18.  Children  felt  his  power,  and 
sung  hosannah  to  the  son  of  David,  a title 
appropriate  to  Messiah;  and  when  the  Pha- 
risees rebuked  them,  he  said,  “ If  these  should 
hold  their  peace,  the  stones  would  cry  out,” 
Luke  xix.  40.  As  the  Lord  in  his  own  house, 
he  purged  the  temple,  and  drove  out  those 
who  profaned  it,  and  not  one  of  his  enemies 
durst  offer  the  least  resistance  to  his  will. 
And  when  he  left  it  the  last  time,  with 
sovereign  authority,  he  denounced  that  aw- 
ful sentence,  which  was  soon  afterwards  exe- 
cuted by  the  Romans,  both  upon  the  temple 
and  the  nation,  Matth.  xxiii.  37.  His  glory 
filled  the  temple  when  he  was  an  infant,  so 
that  Simeon  and  Anna  then  acknowledged 
his  character,  and  spake  of  him  to  those  who 
were  waiting  for  the  consolation  of  Israel, 
Luke  ii.  25,  3S.  Especially  his  glory  was 
manifested,  when  he  proclaimed  himself  the 
fountain  of  life,  and  invited  every  thirsty 
weary  sinner  to  come  to  him,  to  drink  and 
live  for  ever,  John  vii.  37. 

The  temple  of  Jerusalem  has  been  long 
since  destroyed.  But  he  has  still  a house,  a 
house  not  made  with  hands.  This  is  his 
church,  comprising  all  the  members  of  his 
mystical  body.  He  dwells  in  each  of  them 
individually ; he  dwells  in  and  among  them 
collectively.  Where  two  or  three  are  met 
in  his  name,  where  his  ordinances  are  ad- 
ministered and  prized,  where  his  gospel  is 
faithfully  preached  and  cordially  received, 
there  he  is  present  in  the  midst  of  them : 
There  his  glory  is  seen,  his  voice  heard,  his 
power  felt,  his  goodness  tasted,  and  the  sa- 
vour of  his  name  is  diffused  as  a precious 
ointment,  which  refreshes  the  heart  of  his 
people,  renews  their  strength,  and  comforts 
them  under  all  their  sorrows  and  cares.  The 
glory  and  magnificence  of  the  temple-wor- 
ship, even  in  the  days  of  Solomon,  was  faint 
compared  with  the  glory  displayed  to  the 
hearts  of  believers  wdio  worship  him  in  spirit 
and  in  truth,  under  the  New  Testament  dis- 
pensation. But  it  can  only  be  perceived  by 
an  enlightened  and  spiritual  mind.  To  out- 
ward appearance  all  may  be  low  and  humilia- 
ting. The  malice  of  their  enemies  has  often 
constrained  his  people  to  assemble  in  woods 
and  on  mountains,  in  places  underground  or 


in  the  dead  of  the  night,  to  secrete  themselves 
from  informers.  But  vaulted  roofs  and  costly 
garments,  the  solemn  parade  of  processions, 
music  and  choristers,  and  the  presence  of  no- 
bles and  dignitaries,  are  not  necessary  to  con- 
stitute the  glory  of  gospel- worship.  It  is 
enough  that  he,  in  whose  name  they  meet, 
condescends  to  visit  them  with  the  power  and 
influence  of  his  Spirit,  to  animate  and  hear 
their  prayers,  to  feed  them  with  the  good 
word  of  his  grace,  and  to  fill  them  with  joy 
and  peace  in  believing.  If  they  have  these 
blessings,  they  desire  no  more,  they  are  com- 
pensated for  all  their  difficulties  and  hard- 
ships; and,  however  unnoticed  and  despised 
by  the  world,  they  can  say,  “ This  is  none 
other  than  the  house  of  God,  this  is  the  gate 
of  heaven,”  Gen.  xxviii.  7.  For  they  ap- 
proach by  faith  to  the  city  of  the  living  God, 
the  Jerusalem  which  is  above,  to  the  worship 
which  is  carried  on  day  without  night,  by  the 
innumerable  company  of  angels,  and  the 
spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  Heb.  xii.  22. 

But  every  member  of  this  mystical  temple, 
j being  by  nature  afar  off  from  God,  experi- 
| ences  a previous  change,  wThich  may  be  not 
| unfitly  described  by  the  terms  of  my  text.. 
5 Before  the  Lord  takes  possession  of  his  peo- 
ple, and  in  order  to  it,  he  shakes  the  heavens 
; and  the  earth.  Their  former  views  of  God 
' and  of  themselves  are  altered  by  a light 
! which  penetrates  the  soul.  All  that  they 
have  been  building  in  religion  till  then  is 
i shaken  and  overturned.  Their  vain  hopes 
[ are  shaken  to  the  foundation.  This  concus- 
j sion  makes  way  for  the  perception  of  his 
! glory  as  a Saviour.  In  this  day  of  his  power 
i they  are  made  willing  to  throw  open  the 
gates  of  their  hearts,  that  the  King  of  glory 
may  enter. 

But  as  I do  not  stand  here  to  amuse  you 
with  a declamation  on  a subject  in  which  you 
are  not  immediately  interested,  and  as  my 
office  as  a preacher  both  warrants  and  re- 
quires me  to  address  myself  not  only  to  youj 
understandings  but  likewise  to  your  con- 
sciences, I must  be  allowed,  before  I conclude 
to  propose  this  question  to  your  consideration 
Is  Messiah,  the  desire  of  all  nations,  the  ob 
Iject  of  your  chief  desire  1 How  much  da- 
; pends  upon  the  answer!  Do  you  wish  to 
know  your  present  state  in  the  sight  of  God  ? 
If  you  are  faithful  to  yourselves  you  may  be 
| satisfied,  provided  you  will  abide  by  the  deci- 
I sion  of  scripture.  God  is  weh-pleased  in  his 
j Son  ; if  you  are  well-pleased  with  him,  if  he 
1 is  precious  to  you,  and  the  desire  of  your  soul 
1 is  supremely  directed  to  him,  then  you  as- 
I suredly  possess  the  beginning,  the  foretaste, 

; and  the  earnest  of  eternal  life.  If  you  so  en- 
| ter  into  the  descriptions  given  in  the  Bible 
i of  his  person,  love,  office,  and  glory,  as  to 
J place  your  whole  dependence  upon  him,  to 
| devote  yourselves  simply  to  him,  and  to  place 
I your  nappmess  in  his  favour,  then  you  arc 


THE  LORD  COMING  TO  HIS  TEMPLE. 


225 


SER.  IV.] 

happy  indeed ! happy  even  at  present,  though 
not  exempted  from  a share  in  the  afflictions 
incident  to  this  mortal  state.  For  your  sins 
are  pardoned,  your  persons  are  accepted  in 
the  Beloved  : to  you  belong  the  promises  of 
guidance,  protection,  and  supply  through  life, 
victory  over  death,  and  then  a crown  of  glory 
which  fadeth  not  away.  To  say  all  in  a few 
words,  God  is  your  Father,  and  heaven  is 
your  home. 

But  on  the  other  hand,  if  you  trust  in 
yourselves  that  you  are  righteous  and  good, 
at  least  comparatively  so ; if  your  attachment 
to  the  business  or  the  pleasures  of  the  world 
engrosses  your  thoughts  and  application,  so 
that  you  have  no  leisure  to  attend  to  the 
record  which  God  has  given  of  his  Son,  or  no 
relish  for  the  subject,  you  have  been  hitherto 
guilty  of  treating  the  most  glorious  display 
of  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  with  con- 
tempt. Many  persons  thus  employed  and 
thus  disposed,  bear  respectable  characters  in 
civil  life,  from  which  I do  not  wish  to  detract. 
But  however  amiable  you  may  be  in  the 
judgment  of  your  fellow-creatures,  you  are 
a sinner  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  will  be 
treated  by  him  as  an  enemy  to  his  govern- 
ment and  glory,  if  you  finally  persist  in  a 
rejection  of  his  gospel.  The  great  point 
which  will  determine  your  state  for  eternity, 
will  be  this,  What  think  you  of  Christ  1 For 
it  is  written,  “ If  any  man  love  not  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  Anathema  Mara- 
natha,”  1 Cor.  xvi.  22.  He  must  and  will  fall 
under  the  curse  and  condemnation  of  the 
law,  and  be  punished  with  everlasting  de- 
struction from  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and 
from  the  glory  of  his  power.  To-day,  there- 
fore, while  it  is  called  to-day  (for  to-morrow 
is  not  ours,)  may  you  hear  his  voice,  and  flee 
for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  you ! 


SERMON  IY. 

THE  LORD  COMING  TO  HIS  TEMPLE. 

The  Lord , whom  ye  seek , shall  suddenly 
come  to  his  temple , even  the  Messenger 
of  the  covenant  in  whom  ye  delight : be- 
hold, he  shall  come , saith  the  Lord  of 
Hosts.  But  who  may  abide  the  day  of  his 
coming  l and  ivho  shall  stand  when  he 
appeareth  1 for  he  is  like  a refiner's  fire , 
and  like  fuller's  soap. — And  he  shall 
purify  the  sons  of  Levi — that  they  may 
offer  unto  the  Lord  an  offering  in  righ- 
teousness.— Malachi  iii.  1 — 3. 

“ W hereunto  shall  we  liken  the  people  of 
this  generation,  and  to  what  are  they  like?” 
Luke  vii.  31.  I represent  to  myself  a number 
of  persons  of  various  characters,  involved  in 
one  common  charge  of  high  treason.  They 
Vol.  II.  2 F 


are  already  in  a state  of  confinement,  but  not 
yet  brought  to  their  trial.  The  facts,  how- 
ever, are  so  plain,  and  the  evidence  against 
them  so  strong  and  pointed,  that  there  is  not 
the  least  doubt  of  their  guilt  being  fully 
proved,  and  that  nothing  but  a pardon  can 
preserve  them  from  punishment.  In  this 
situation,  it  should  seem  their  wisdom  to 
avail  themselves  of  every  expedient  in  their 
power  for  obtaining  mercy.  But  they  are 
entirely  regardless  of  their  danger,  and 
wholly  taken  up  with  contriving  methods  of 
amusing  themselves,  that  they  may  pass 
away  the  term  of  their  imprisonment  with  as 
much  cheerfulness  as  possible.  Among  other 
resources  they  call  in  the  assistance  of  music. 
And  amidst  a great  variety  of  subjects  in  this 
way,  they  are  particularly  pleased  with  one. 
They  choose  to  make  the  solemnities  of  their 
impending  trial,  the  character  of  their  judge, 
the  methods  of  his  procedure,  and  the  awful 
sentence  to  which  they  are  exposed,  the 
ground-work  of  a musical  entertainment. 
And,  as  if  they  were  quite  unconcerned  in 
the  event,  their  attention  is  chiefly  fixed 
upon  the  skill  of  the  composer,  in  adapting 
the  style  of  his  music  to  the  very  solemn 
language  and  subject  with  which  they  are 
trifling.  The  King,  however,  out  of  his  great 
clemency  and  compassion  towards  those  who 
have  no  pity  for  themselves,  prevents  them 
with  his  goodness.  Undesired  by  them,  he 
sends  them  a gracious  message.  He  assures 
them  that  he  is  unwilling  they  should  suffer: 
he  requires,  yea,  he  entreats  them  to  submit. 
He  points  out  a way  in  which  their  confession 
and  submission  shall  be  certainly  accepted ; 
and  in  this  way,  which  he  condescends  to 
prescribe,  he  offers  them  a free  and  a full 
pardon.  But  instead  of  taking  a single  step 
towards  a compliance  with  his  goodness,  they 
set  his  message  likewise  to  music ; and  this, 
together  with  a description  of  their  present 
state,  and  of  the  fearful  doom  awaiting  them 
if  they  continue  obstinate,  is  sung  for  their 
diversion,  accompanied  with  the  sound  of 
cornet,  flute,  harp,  sackbut,  psaltery,  dul- 
cimer, and  all  kinds  of  instruments,  Dan.  iii. 
5.  Surely,  if  such  a case  as  I have  supposed 
could  be  found  in  real  life,  though  I might 
admire  the  musical  taste  of  these  people,  I 
should  commiserate  their  insensibility  ! 

But  is  not  this  case  more  than  a supposi- 
tion 1 Is  it  not,  in  the  most  serious  sense, 
actually  realized  amongst  ourselves?  I should 
insult  your  understandings  if  I judged  a long 
application  necessary.  I know  my  supposi- 
tion must  have  already  led  your  thoughts  to 
the  subject  of  the  Messiah,  and  to  the  spirit 
and  temper  of  at  least  the  greater  part  of  the 
performers,  and  of  the  audiences.  The  holy 
scripture  concludes  all  mankind  under  sin, 
Rom.  iii.  9.  It  charges  them  all  with  treason 
and  rebellion  against  the  great  sovereign 
Lawgiver  and  Benefactor,  and  declares  the 


226 


THE  LORD  COMING  TO  HIS  TEMPLE. 


misery  to  which,  as  sinners,  we  are  obnox-  j 
ious.  But  God  is  long-suffering1,  and  waits  to 
oe  gracious.  The  stroke  of  death,  which 
would  instantly  place  us  before  his  awful 
tribunal,  is  still  suspended.  In  the  mean  time 
he  affords  us  his  gospel,  by  which  he  assures 
us  there  is  forgiveness  with  him.  He  informs 
us  of  a Saviour,  and  that,  of  his  great  love  to 
sinners,  he  has  given  his  only  Son  to  be  an 
atonement  and  mediator  in  favour  of  all  who 
shall  sue  for  mercy  in  his  name.  The  cha- 
racter of  this  Saviour,  his  unspeakable  love, 
his  dreadful  sufferings,  the  agonies  he  en- 
dured in  Gethsemane,  and  upon  the  cross, 
are  made  known  to  us.  And  as  his  past 
humiliation,  so  his  present  glory,  and  his 
invitation  to  come  to  him  for  pardon  and 
eternal  life,  are  largely  declared.  These  are 
the  principal  points  expressed  in  the  passages 
of  the  Messiah.  Mr.  Handel,  who  set  them  to 
music,  has  been  commemorated  and  praised, 
many  years  after  his  death,  in  a place  pro- 
fessedly devoted  to  the  praise  and  worship  of 
God;  yea,  (if  I am  not  misinformed,)  the 
stated  worship  of  God  in  that  place  was  sus- 
pended for  a considerable  time,  that  it  might 
be  duly  prepared  for  the  commemoration  of 
Mr.  Handel.  But,  alas ! how  few  are  disposed 
to  praise  and  commemorate  Messiah  himself! 
The  same  great  truths,  divested  of  the  music, 
when  delivered  from  the  pulpit,  are  heard  by 
many  admirers  of  the  oratorio  with  indiffer- 
ence, too  often  with  contempt. 

Having  thus,  as  I conceived  myself  bound 
in  duty,  plainly  and  publicly  delivered  my 
sentiments,  of  the  great  impropriety  of  making 
the  fundamental  truths  of  Christianity  the  sub- 
ject of  a public  amusement,  I leave  what  I 
have  said  to  your  serious  reflections,  hoping 
it  will  not  be  forgotten ; for  I do  not  mean  to 
trouble  you  often  with  a repetition  of  it.  Let 
us  now  consider  the  passage  before  us.  If 
you  read  it  with  attention,  and  consider  the 
great  ideas  it  suggests,  and  the  emphatical 
language  with  which  they  are  clothed,  you 
will  not,  perhaps,  think  the  manner  of  my 
introducing  it  wholly  improper. 

Malachi  confirms  and  unites  the  prophecies 
of  Isaiah  and  Haggai,  which  were  the  sub- 
ject of  our  two  last  discourses.  John  is  the 
messenger,  spoken  of  in  the  beginning  of  the 
first  verse,  sent  to  prepare  the  way  of  the 
Lord.  Then  the  Lord  himself  shall  come  sud- 
denly to  his  temple,  that  is,  immediately 
after  the  appearance  of  his  forerunner,  and 
with  regard  to  the  people  in  general,  un- 
expectedly. 

The  question,  “ Who  may  abide  the  day  of 
his  coming  1”  intimates  the  greatness  and 
solemnity  of  the  event.  If  we  take  his  coming 
in  an  extensive  sense  to  denote  the  whole  of 
his  sojourning  upon  earth,  from  his  incarna- 
tion to  his  ascension,  it  is  unspeakably  the 
greatest  of  all  events  recorded  in  the  annals 
of  mankind ; and  though  he  lived  in  the  form 


[ser.  IV. 

of  a servant,  and  died  the  death  of  a malefac- 
tor, the  vast  consequences  which  depend  upon 
his  appearance  under  these  humiliating  cir- 
cumstances, rendered  it  a manner  of  coming 
every  way  worthy  of  himself.  It  afforded  a 
more  awful  discovery  of  the  majesty,  glory, 
and  holiness  of  God,  than  was  displayed  upon 
Mount  Sinai,  and  proved  a closer  and  more 
searching  appeal  to  the  hearts  and  con- 
sciences of  men.  To  enter  more  into  the 
spirit  and  meaning  of  the  question  here  pro- 
posed, we  shall  briefly  take  notice  of  the  fol- 
lowing points,  which  the  words  offer  to  our 
serious  meditation.  May  the  Holy  Spirit, 
whose  office  it  is  to  glorify  the  Saviour,  en- 
lighten our  hearts  to  understand  them,  with 
application  to  ourselves ! 

I.  The  names  which  are  here  ascribed  to 
Messiah. 

II.  The  suddenness  of  his  coming. 

III.  The  searching  power  of  it  in  general, 
expressed  by  “ a refiner’s  fire,”  and  by  “ ful- 
ler’s soap.” 

IV.  Its  purifying  power  on  the  sons  of 
Levi,  the  priesthood  in  particular. 

I.  The  names  ascribed  to  Messiah. 

The  Lord. — It  is  a general  rule  with  our 
translators  to  express  Lord  in  capital  letters, 
where  it  answers  to  Jehovah  in  the  Hebrew, 
and  there  only.  The  word  here  is  not  Jeho- 
vah, but  Adonai.  It  is  however  a name  of 
God,  though  not  incommunicable  like  the 
other,  being  frequently  applied  to  kings  and 
superiors.  It  properly  implies  authority  and 
rule,  as  we  say,  A Lord  and  Master.  In  this 
connexion  it  is  undoubtedly  a divine  name. 
The  Lord  is  said  to  come  to  his  temple,  to 
his  own  temple.  It  was  a house  consecrated 
to  the  God  of  Israel.  The  first  temple  he 
honoured  with  tokens  of  his  presence : the 
second  he  visited  in  person ; on  which  ac- 
count it  exceeded  the  first  in  glory.  Messiah, 
therefore,  who  appeared  in  our  nature,  and 
was  known  amongst  men  as  a man,  and  who 
is  now  worshipped  both  in  heaven  and  upon 
earth,  is  the  God  of  Israel.  He  came  to  his 
own.  This  doctrine  of  God  manifest  in  the 
flesh,  is  the  pillar  and  ground  of  truth : the 
only  foundation  on  which  a sinner,  who 
knows  the  just  desert  of  his  sin,  can  build  a 
solid  hope  of  salvation,  is,  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  true  God  and  eternal  life,  1 John  v.  20. 
Unless  this  be  admitted,  the  whole  tenor  both 
of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  is  unintel- 
ligible. To  say  that  this  doctrine  approves 
itself  to  human  reason  in  its  present  fallen 
depraved  state,  would  be  to  contradict  the 
apostle,  who  asserts,  that  no  man  can  say  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  but  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
1 Cor.  xii.  3.  But  it  is  highly  reasonable  to 
those  who  see  that  they  must  perish,  without 
such  an  atonement  as  shall  declare  the  righ- 
teousness of  God,  no  less  than  his  mercy,  in 
the  forgiveness  of  sin ; who  feel  the  necessity 
of  holiness  in  order  to  happiness ; and  are  ac- 


THE  LORD  COMING  TO  HIS  TEMPLE. 


227 


SER.  IV.] 

quamted  with  the  nature  and  variety  of  the 
snares,  temptations,  and  enemies  to  which 
they  are  exposed.  Such  persons  cannot  ven- 
ture their  eternal  concerns  upon  the  dignity, 
or  care,  or  power,  or  patience  of  a mere 
creature,  however  exalted  and  excellent ; 
they  must  be  assured  that  their  Saviour  is 
almighty,  or  they  dare  not  trust  in  him ; nor 
would  they  dare  to  honour  the  Son  as  they 
honour  the  Father,  to  love  him  with  all  their 
heart,  and  soul,  and  strength,  to  devote  them- 
selves absolutely  to  his  service,  and  to  expect 
their  supreme  happiness  from  his  favour  and 
approbation,  if  they  did  not  know  that  he  is 
over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever. 

With  respect  to  the  inferior  character  he 
sustains  in  our  nature,  and  for  our  sakes,  as 
the  Father’s  servant,  he  is  styled,  The  Mes- 
senger of  the  covenant.  He  is  the  gift,  pro- 
mise, head,  and  substance  of  the  everlasting 
covenant  And  he  came  himself  to  establish 
the  covenant,  and  to  declare  and  bestow  the 
blessings  it  contained.  God,  who  had  before 
spoken  at  divers  times  and  in  sundry  manners 
by  his  prophets,  spoke  in  the  fulness  of  time 
by  his  Son  ; (Heb.  i.  1 ;)  testifying  to  him  by 
a voice  from  heaven,  This  is  my  beloved  Son, 
hear  him ; in  him  I am  well  pleased,  Mat. 
iii.  17.  To  the  same  purpose  our  Lord  spake 
of  himself.  He  prefaced  his  gracious  invi- 
tation to  all,  without  exception,  who  are  weary 
and  heavy  laden,  to  come  to  him  for  rest, 
(Mat.  xi.  27,)  with  a declaration  of  his  com- 
mission and  authority,  saying,  “All  things 
are  delivered  unto  me  of  my  Father,  and  no 
one  (ouSsis)  knoweth  the  Son  but  the  Father, 
neither  knoweth  any  one  the  Father,  save 
the  Son,  and  he  to  whom  the  Son  will  reveal 
him.”  The  law  was  given  by  Moses ; (John 
i.  17 ;)  the  moral  law,  to  discover  the  extent 
and  abounding  of  sin;  the  ceremonial  law, 
to  point  out,  by  typical  sacrifices  and  ablu- 
tions, the  way  in  which  forgiveness  was  to 
be  sought  and  obtained ; — but  grace  to  re- 
lieve us  from  the  condemnation  of  the  one, 
and  truth  answerable  to  the  types  and  shadow's 
of  the  other,  came  by  Jesus  Christ. 

It  is  farther  said,  “ The  Lord  whom  ye  seek, 
and  the  messenger  in  whom  ye  delight.” — 
Messiah  was  the  hope  and  desire  of  the  true 
Israel  of  God,  from  the  earliest  times ; and 
when  he  was  born  into  the  wTorld,  there  was  a 
prepared  people  waiting  and  longing  for  him, 
as  their  consolation.  The  people  at  large 
likewise  professed  to  expect  great  things  from 
the  coming  of  Messiah.  But  their  expecta- 
tions were  low  and  earthly.  They  supposed 
that  he  would  deliver  them  from  the  Roman 
yoke,  and  give  them  victory  and  powder  over 
the  heathen  nations.  The  more  grievous 
bondage  of  sin  under  which  they  were  en- 
slaved, they  were  not  sensible  of,  nor  had 
they  a disposition  suited  to  the  privileges  and 
honours  of  the  kingdom  which  he  designed 
to  establish;  and  therefore,  their  understand- 


ings being  darkened  by  prejudice  and  prepos- 
session, they  could  not  discern  his  character. 
The  prophecies  which  wore  read  in  their 
synagogues  every  sabbath,  marked  out  the 
time  and  circumstances  of  Messiah’s  appear- 
ance, the  places  which  he  should  principally 
visit,  the  doctrine  he  should  teach,  and  the 
works  which  he  should  perform : but  though 
all  these  particulars  exactly  applied  to  Jesus, 
they  obstinately  rejected  him,  and  proceeded 
to  fulfil  wThat  was  farther  foretold  of  his  suf- 
ferings and  death,  with  such  a minute  punc- 
tuality, as  if  they  had  designedly  taken  the 
prophecies  for  the  rule  of  their  conduct. 
Thus,  by  giving  neither  more  nor  less  than 
thirty  pieces  of  silver  to  his  betrayer,  by  buy- 
ing the  potter’s  field,  and  no  other,  with  the 
money  afterwards;  by  casting  lots  for  one 
of  his  garments,  and  making  a distribution 
of  the  rest ; by  piercing  his  side  contrary  to 
the  custom  in  such  punishments,  and  by 
omitting  to  break  his  legs,  which,  from  their 
treatment  of  the  malefactors  who  suffered 
with  him,  seems  to  have  been  usual,,  in  these 
and  several  other  instances,  they  acted, 
though  unwittingly,  as  if  it  had  been  their 
design  and  study  to  accomplish  the  scrip- 
tures to  their  own  confusion  and  condemna- 
tion. 

II.  This  was  the  reason  why  his  coming 
to  his  temple  was  to  them  sudden.  Though 
long  foretold  and  long  expected,  and  though 
the  precise  time  of  his  advent,  and  the  ac- 
companying signs,  were  accurately  defined 
and  described,  yet  when  the  season  arrived, 
he  came  suddenly,  unlooked  for,  and  un- 
known. He  came  upon  them  in  an  hour  that 
they  thought  not  of,  and  in  a manner  of 
which  they  were  not  aware.  When  he  stood 
in  the  midst  of  them,  they  knew  not  that  it 
was  he.  How  dreadfully  does  sin  harden 
and  infatuate  the  hearts  of  men  ! The  Jews, 
in  our  Saviour’s  time,  furnish  us  with  a strik- 
ing instance,  that  it  is  possible  for  people 
fatally  to  miscarry  with  the  greatest  advan- 
tages and  means  for  information  in  their 
possession.  They  accounted  themselves  the 
people  of  God,  made  their  boast  of  his  law, 
and  their  relation  to  Abraham.  But  they 
hated  Messiah,  and  crucified  him,  who  was 
the  object  of  Abraham’s  faith.  The  opposi- 
tion of  their  leaders  and  teachers  was  the 
most  malicious,  for  many  of  them  acted  against 
the  light  of  their  minds,  and  were  often  con- 
victed in  their  consciences,  though  they  re- 
fused to  be  convinced.  But  an  ignorant 
attachment  to  these  blind  guides  was  ruinous 
to  their  blind  followers,  who,  though  they 
sometimes,  from  a view  of  his  mighty  works, 
were  struck  with  astonishment,  and  con- 
strained to  say,  “ Is  not  this  the  son  of 
David!”  were  at  length  influenced  by  their 
priests  to  prefer  a murderer  to  him,  and,  with 
a clamorous  importunity,  to  compel  Pilate 
to  put  him  to  death.  The  like  misapprehen- 


228 


THE  LORD  COMING  TO  HIS  TEMPLE. 


sions  produce  the  like  effects  among  profess- 
ed Christians  at  this  day.  We  likewise  have 
the  scriptures : but  how  many  who  admit  their 
authority  in  words,  live  willingly  ignorant  of 
their  contents,  and  act  in  direct  contradiction 
to  their  tenor ! The  power  of  the  Saviour  is 
likewise  displayed  among  us,  his  preached 
gospel  is  daily  made  effectual  to  the  great 
purposes  for  which  it  is  vouchsafed;  yet 
multitudes  reject  it  with  no  less  pertinacity 
than  the  Jews  rejected  him  in  person.  At 
length  death  surprises  them,  and  they  sink 
into  darkness  beyond  recall.  • To  them  the 
Lord  may  be  said  to  come  suddenly,  for  they 
think  not  of  him  till  they  actually  find  them- 
selves at  his  tribunal.  And  this  not  only 
when  they  are  cut  off  by  a sudden  stroke, 
but  often  when  their  dissolution  is  most  gra- 
dual, and  every  one  about  them  can  perceive 
its  approach  by  their  countenances;  they 
themselves,  though  wasting  with  disease, 
and  worn  out  with  pain,  still  flatter  them- 
selves with  hopes  of  amendment  and  recovery 
to  their  last  gasp ; and  a lingering  death  is 
to  them  no  less  sudden  than  if  they  were 
killed  by  a flash  of  lightning. 

III.  It  is  asked,  “ Who  may  abide  the  day 
of  his  coming  1”  The  effect  is  compared  to  a 
refiner’s  fire,  and  to  fuller’s  soap.  The  re- 
finer’s fire  penetrates  the  metal,  and  thereby 
searches,  discovers,  and  consumes  the  dross. 
The  fuller’s  soap  also,  though  it  does  not 
destroy  the  texture  of  the  cloth,  cleanses  it, 
by  removing,  and  as  it  were  consuming  the 
spots  and  defilement  which  are  found  in  it. 
The  idea  conveyed  by  these  illustrations  is 
the  same.  The  day  of  his  coming  is  a day 
of  trial,  a trial  which  issues  in  the  purification 
of  the  work  of  God  in  his  church,  and  in  the 
detection  and  destruction  of  every  thing  in 
it  which  is  contrary  to  his  will. 

The  coming  of  Messiah  may  be  taken  in 
several  senses. 

To  the  Jews,  according  to  the  promise  of 
God  repeated  from  age  to  age,  he  came  in 
person.  The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and 
dwelt  among  them,  John  i.  12.  The  term  in 
the  original  alludes  to  the  visible  symbol  of 
the  divine  presence,  which  resided  in  the 
tabernacle  and  temple.  Thus  for  a season 
he  resided  among  them,  in  a temple  not  made 
with  hands,  but  formed,  by  the  immediate 
agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  the  womb  of  a 
virgin.  This  was  a happy  time  to  those  who 
received  and  acknowledged  him.  But  the 
bulk  of  the  nation  could  not  abide  the  trial 
which  his  appearance  exposed  them  to,  they 
were  proved  by  it  to  be  but  reprobate  and 
counterfeit  silver.  The  thoughts  of  many 
hearts  were  revealed,  Luke  ii.  35.  Many 
specious  characters  were  detected.  The  pre- 
tended sanctity  and  outward  strictness  of  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  was  evidenced  to  be 
mere  hypocrisy.  He  exposed  them  in  their 


[ser.  iv. 

| true  colours,  and  upon  many  occasions  put 
, them  to  shame  and  to  silence.  And  where 
his  word  did  not  cleanse  like  soap,  it  burnt 
like  fire,  and  the  persons  and  places  that  re- 
jected him  were  rendered  inexcusable.  Their 
great  privilege  of  seeing  his  wonderful  works, 
and  hearing  his  gracious  words,  being  abused, 
aggravated  their  guilt  and  condemnation,  and 
made  their  doom  heavier  than  that  of  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah.  To  them  the  day  of  the  Lord, 
which  in  their  own  sense  they  professed  to 
desire  was  darkness,  and  not  light,  Amos  v. 
18.  If  he  had  not  come  and  spoken  to  them 
himself,  they  had  not  had  sin,  John  xv.  22. 
That  is,  comparatively,  he  found  them  great 
sinners,  and  they  would  have  been  such  if 
he  had  not  visited  them.  But  after  he  had 
spoken  to  them,  and  spoken  in  vain,  they  had 
no  cloak  for  their  sin.  From  that  time  they 
were  deprived  of  every  shadow  of  plea,  ex- 
cuse, or  extenuation.  And  all  their  former 
wickedness  was  light,  compared  with  the 
enormous  crime  they  were  guilty  of  in  re- 
jecting and  crucifying  the  Son  of  God.  By 
refusing  him,  they  rendered  their  case  help- 
less and  hopeless,  because  there  is  no  other 
name  but  his,  given  among  men,  whereby 
they  may  be  saved.  But  he  cleansed  those 
who  received  him,  he  removed  their  guilt, 
their  fears,  their  ignorance.  He  gave  them 
a clean  heart  and  a new  spirit.  Yet  to  these 
also  he  was  as  a refiner’s  fire,  and  as  fuller’s 
soap.  They  likewise  had  prejudices  and 
selfish  tempers,  which  were  not  at  once  re- 
moved. He  called  them  to  a state  of  suffer- 
ing and  self-denial,  to  forsake  all,  and  to  take 
up  their  cross  daily  for  his  sake. 

In  another  sense,  his  coming  is  not  re- 
strained to  a particular  time.  Wherever  his 
gospel  is  preached,  the  Lord  is  come.  It  is 
by  the  gospel  he  rides  forth  prosperously, 
conquering  and  to  conquer,  Psalm  xlv.  4. 
Thus  he  has  promised  to  be  present  with  his 
ministers,  and  wherever  two  or  three  are 
met  in  his  name,  to  the  end  of  the  world. 
Thus  he  is  come  to  us.  And  the  effects  are 
the  same  as  when  he  was  personally  upon 
earth.  His  gospel  still  discovers  the  thoughts 
of  many  hearts.  Many  persons  who  till  then 
were  reputed  religious,  by  the  contempt  they 
cast  upon  this  wonderful  expedient  of  infinite 
wisdom  and  love  to  save  sinners,  manifest 
their  ignorance  and  hatred  of  the  law  and 
holiness  of  God,  and  that  the  religion  they 
pretend  to  is  an  empty  lifeless  form,  destitute 
of  love  and  power.  To  them,  though  in  itself 
a savour  of  life,  it  proves  a savour  of  death. 
It  provokes  their  enmity,  increases  their  ob- 
duracy, and  leaves  them  without  excuse. 
But  it  is  life  indeed  to  those  who  receive  it. 
They  are  raised  by  it  from  a death  of  sin, 
unto  a life  of  righteousness  and  peace.  Their 
tempers,  desires,  pursuits,  and  hopes  are 
changed  and  elevated.  Old  things  pass  away, 


THE  LORD  COMING  TO  HIS  TEMPLE. 


229 


SER.  IV.  J 

and  all  things  become  new  to  them,  accord- 
ing as  it  is  written,  “ If  any  man  be  in  Christ 
Jesus,  he  is  a new  creature,”  2 Cor.  v.  17. 

He  comes  to  individuals  by  the  power  of 
his  Spirit.  This  makes  the  word  of  his  gos- 
pel effectual.  For  the  kingdom  of  God  is  not 
in  word  only,  but  in  power.  When  he  thus 
visits  the  hearts  of  sinners,  his  word  is  like 
fire  and  soap  ; “quick  and  powerful,  sharper 
than  a two-edged  sword,”  Heb.  iv.  12.  Then 
they  feel  and  tremble,  and  cry  out  with  the 
prophet,  “Wo  is  me,  I am  undone  !”  But  in 
this  way  their  dross  is  consumed,  their  de- 
filement removed.  When  he  thus  wounds, 
he  likewise  heals.  He  gives  them  faith ; by 
faith  they  look  unto  him,  and  are  enlightened 
and  saved. 

We  surely  expect  that  he  will  come  again. 
Not  as  he  once  came,  in  a state  of  humilia- 
tion. The  Babe  of  Bethlehem,  the  Man  of 
sorrows,  who  hung,  and  bled,  and  died  upon 
the  cross  for  our  sins,  will  return  in  glory. 
“ Behold,  he  cometh  in  the  clouds,  and  every 
eye  shall  see  him,”  Rev.  i.  7.  Concerning 
this  day,  emphatically  called  the  day  of  the 
Lord,  we  may  well  say,  “ Who  may  abide 
it  ?”  To  those  who  have  not  been  the  sub- 
jects of  his  refining  operations  here,  he  will 
then  be  a consuming  fire.  That  great  day 
(for  which  all  other  days  were  made,)  “ when 
the  Lord  shall  descend  with  the  voice  of  the 
archangel  and  the  trump  of  God,  will  burn 
like  an  oven,  and  all  the  proud,  and  all  that 
do  wickedly,  shall  be  as  stubble,  and  the  day 
that  cometh  shall  burn  them  up,”  Mai.  iv.  1. 
Where,  then,  shall  the  impenitent  ungodly 
sinner  appear  1 But  it  will  be  a joyful  day  to 
them  that  love  his  appearing.  He  will  arise 
upon  them,  as  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  with 
healing  in  his  wings;  he  will  wipe  away 
their  tears,  vindicate  their  characters,  ac- 
knowledge them  before  an  assembled  world, 
and  say  unto  them,  “ Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for 
you,”  Matth.  xxv.  34. 

IV.  It  is  particularly  said,  “He  will  purify 
the  sons  of  Levi, — that  they  may  offer  unto 
the  Lord  an  offering  in  righteousness.”  The 
sons  of  Levi,  the  priests,  the  officiating  min- 
isters of  God,  were  gone  out  of  the  way,  and 
had  corrupted  the  covenant  of  the  Lord,  and 
thereby  had  caused  many  to  stumble,  Mai. 
ii.  8,  9.  They  dishonoured  their  office,  and 
became  themselves  vile  and  contemptible. 
Thus  they  went  on  from  bad  to  worse,  till 
the  men  of  that  generation  filled  up  the  mea- 
sure of  the  iniquity  of  their  forefathers,  by 
the  rejection  of  Messiah.  He  also  rejected 
them.  The  blasted  barren  fig-tree,  (Matth. 
xxi.  19,)  which  withered  to  the  very  root  at 
his  word,  was  an  emblem  of  their  condition. 
In  a little  time,  wrath  came  upon  them  to 
the  uttermost ; they  saw  the  temple  in  which 
they  had  trusted,  and  which  they  had  profaned, 


destroyed  by  fire,  and  the  greater  part  of 
them  perished.  But  a remnant  of  them  was 
purified.  We  read,  that  after  his  ascension, 
a great  company  of  the  priests  were  obedient 
to  the  faith,  Acts  vi.  7.  And  his  apostles 
and  disciples  were  sent  forth  with  a new 
spirit,  and  a new  character,  to  offer  and  to 
serve  in  righteousness.  The  purport  of  this 
passage  has  been  repeatedly  exemplified  un- 
der the  Christian  dispensation.  A declension 
from  the  simplicity  and  purity  of  worship, 
principles,  and  morals,  was  visible  very  early 
in  the  church.  The  progress  of  it  was  rapid, 
especially  from  the  time  of  Constantine. 
When  persecution  ceased,  and  a tide  of 
wealth  and  worldly  honours  flowed  in  upon 
those  who,  by  their  profession,  were  bound  to 
be  patterns  of  humility  and  self-denial  to 
others;  from  that  period,  till  the  Reformation, 
ecclesiastical  history  affords  us  little  more 
than  a detail  of  such  instances  of  pride,  in- 
trigue, oppression,  and  cruelty,  under  the 
pretext  of  religion,  as  had  not  been  known 
among  the  heathens.  And  the  nations  which 
were  relieved  from  the  chains  and  darkness 
of  Popery  at  the  Reformation,  did  not  long 
preserve  much  more  than  a name  and  a form 
to  distinguish  them.  In  most  countries,  the 
state  became  the  idol  of  the  church,  and  the 
church  the  creature  of  the  state.  How  it  is 
with  us  in  this  nation,  I need  not  say.  Facts 
speak  for  themselves.  It  is  a mournful  fact, 
that  the  ministry  is  become  contemptible; 
nor  is  it  difficult  to  assign  the  cause.  But 
we  are  favoured  with  the  gospel,  and  are  eye- 
witnesses of  its  purifying  power.  It  still 
produces  the  effects  which  marked  its  pro- 
gress when  it  was  preached  by  the  apostles. 
It  enlightens  the  dark  mind,  softens  the  hard 
heart,  heals  the  wounded  spirit;  and  many 
persons  who  before  were  burdensome  to 
society,  are  rendered  by  it  ornamental  and 
useful.  When  every  other  argument  and 
motive  has  failed  of  success,  the  considera- 
tion of  the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ,  revealed 
by  the  gospel,  constrains  the  believing  sinner 
to  present  himself  a living,  willing,  holy  sa- 
crifice unto  God.  Thus,  being  purified  by  the 
blood  of  Jesus,  he  offers  to  the  Lord  a sacri- 
fice in  righteousness.  Such  principles  and 
aims  are  essential  to  a Christian  minister. 
He  knows  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  and  has 
tasted  of  his  goodness.  He  is  constrained 
by  love,  the  love  of  Christ,  and  the  love  of 
souls.  He  preaches,  as  the  apostle  did,  Jesus 
Christ,  and  him  crucified ; a subject  which, 
though  despised  and  reproached  by  the  for- 
mal Jew  and  the  sceptical  Greek,  is  evidenced 
by  its  efficacy  to  be  the  wisdom  and  power 
of  God.  Such  ministers  may  be,  and  fre- 
quently are,  depreciated  and  disregarded ; but 
they  cannot  be  contemptible,  until  integrity, 
benevolence,  and  usefulness,  are  the  proper 
objects  of  contempt. 


230 


IMMANUEL. 


SERMON  V. 


IMMANUEL. 


I 

I 


Behold  a virgin  shall  conceive , and  bear  a 
son,  and  shall  call  his  name  Immanuel, 
God  with  us. — Isaiah  vii.  14. 


There  is  a signature  of  wisdom  and  power 
impressed  upon  the  works  of  God,  which  evi- 
dently distinguishes  them  from  the  feeble 
imitations  of  men.  Not  only  the  splendour 
of  the  sun,  but  the  glimmering  light  of  the 
glow-worm,  proclaims  his  glory.  The  struc- 
ture and  growth  of  a blade  of  grass  are  the 
effects  of  the  same  power  which  produced 
the  fabric  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  In 
his  word  likewise  he  is  inimitable.  He  has 
a style  and  manner  peculiarly  his  own.  What 
he  is  pleased  to  declare  of  himself  by  the 
prophet,  may  be  prefixed  as  a proper  motto 
to  the  whole  revelation  of  his  will  in  the 
Bible.  “ My  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts, 
neither  are  your  ways  my  ways,  saith  the 
Lord.  For  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than 
the  earth,  so  are  my  ways  higher  than  your 
ways,  and  my  thoughts  than  your  thoughts,” 
Isa.  lv.  8,  9.  This  superiority  of  his  thoughts 
to  ours,  causes  a proportionable  difference  in 
his  manner  of  operation.  His  ways  are  above 
our  conceptions,  and  often  contrary  to  them. 
He  sometimes  produces  great  effects  by 
means  which,  to  us,  appear  unsuitable  and 
weak.  Thus  he  gave  Gideon  a complete 
victory,  not  by  providing  him  an  army  equal 
to  that  of  the  enemy,  but  by  three  hundred 
men  furnished  with  earthen  pitchers  and 
lamps,  Judges  vii.  19,  20.  At  other  times 
the  greatness  of  his  preparations  intimates 
that  there  are  difficulties  in  the  case,  insu- 
perable to  any  power  but  his  own,  where  our 
narrow  apprehensions,  until  enlightened  and 
enlarged  by  his  teaching,  can  scarcely  per- 
ceive any  difficulty.  It  is  eminently  so  with 
respect  to  the  restoration  of  fallen  man  to  his 
favour.  We  have  but  slight  thoughts  of  his 
holiness,  and  therefore  are  but  slightly  affect- 
ed by  the  evil  of  sin.  But  though  he  be  rich 
in  mercy,  no  wisdom  but  his  own  could  have 
proposed  an  expedient  whereby  the  exercise 
of  his  mercy  towards  sinners  might  be  made 
to  correspond  with  his  justice  and  truth,  and 
with  the  honour  of  his  moral  government. 
His  gospel  reveals  this  expedient,  and  points 
out  a way  in  which  mercy  and  truth  meet 
together ; and  his  inflexible  righteousness  is 
displayed  in  perfect  harmony  with  the  peace 
of  sinners  who  submit  to  his  appointment ; 
and  thus  God  appears  not  only  gracious  but 
just,  in  receiving  them  to  favour.  This  is 
the  greatest  of  all  his  works,  and  exhibits 
the  most  glorious  discovery  of  his  character 
and  perfections.  The  means  are  answerable 
to  the  grandeur  of  the  design,  and  are  sum- 
marily expressed  in  my  text. 


[ssa.  v. 


I shall  not  take  up  your  time  in  attempt- 
ing to  clear  the  difficulties  which  have  been 
observed  in  the  context.  It  may  suffice  for 
my  purpose  to  affirm,  that  this  passage  ex- 
pressly and  exclusively  refers  to  the  Messiah, 
for  which  my  warrant  is  the  authority  of  the 
evangelists  Matthew  and  Luke ; (Matt.  i.  23 ; 
Luke  i.  31,  32 ;)  who  directly  apply  it  to  him, 
and  assure  us  that  it  was  accomplished  in 
him.  If  sinners  are  to  be  saved,  without  in- 
jury to  the  honour  of  his  law  and  government 
(and  otherwise  they  must  perish,)  two  things 
are  necessary. 

I.  That  a virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bring 
forth  a son. 

II.  That  this  son  of  the  virgin  shall  have 
a just  right  to  be  called  Immanuel,  God  with 


I.  A virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bring  forth 
a son.  The  Mediator,  the  surety  for  sinful 
men,  must  himself  be  a man.  Because  those 
whom  he  came  to  redeem  were  partakers  of 
flesh  and  blood,  he  therefore  took  part  of  the 
same.  Had  not  Messiah  engaged  for  us,  and 
appeared  in  our  nature,  a case  would  have 
occurred  which  I think  we  may  warrantably 
deem  incongruous  to  the  divine  wisdom.  I 
mean,  that  while  fire  and  hail,  snow  and 
vapour,  and  the  stormy  wind,  fulfil  the  will 
of  God,  -while  the  brutes  are  faithful  to  the 
instincts  implanted  in  them  by  their  Maker, 
a whole  species  of  intelligent  beings  would 
have  fallen  short  of  the  original  law  and  de- 
sign of  their  creation,  and  indeed  have  acted 
in  direct  and  continual  opposition  to  it.  For 
the  duty  of  man  to  love,  serve,  and  trust  God 
with  all  his  heart  and  mind,  and  to  love  his 
neighbour  as  himself,  is  founded  in  the  very 
nature  and  constitution  of  things,  and  neces- 
sarily results  from  his  relation  to  God,  and 
his  absolute  dependence  on  him  as  a creature. 
Such  a disposition  must  undoubtedly  have 
been  as  natural  to  man  before  his  fall,  as  it 
is  for  a bird  to  fly,  or  a fish  to  swim.  The 
prohibitory  form  of  the  law  delivered  to  Is- 
rael from  Mount  Sinai,  is  a sufficient  intima- 
tion that  it  was  designed  for  sinners.  Surely 
our  first  parents,  while  in  a state  of  inno- 
cence, could  not  stand  in  need  of  warnings 
and  threatening  to  restrain  them  from  wor- 
shipping idols,  or  profaning  the  name  of  the 
great  God  whom  they  loved.  Nor  would  it 
have  been  necessary  to  forbid  murder,  adul- 
tery, or  injustice,  if  his  posterity  had  con- 
tinued under  the  law  of  their  creation,  the 
law  of  love.  But  the  first  act  of  disobedience 
degraded  and  disabled  man,  detached  him 
from  his  proper  centre,  if  I may  so  speak, 
and  incapacitated  him  both  for  his  duty  and 
his  happiness.  After  his  fa.l,  it  became  im- 
possible for  either  Adam  or  his  posterity  to 
obey  the  law  of  God.  But  Messiah  fulfilled 
it  exactly,  as  a man,  and  tne  principles  of  it 
are  renewed,  by  the  power  of  his  grace,  in  all 
who  believe  on  him.  And  though  their  best 


IMMANUEL. 


231 


BER.  Y.] 

endeavours  fall  short,  his  obedience  to  it  is 
accepted  on  their  behalf,  and  he  will  at 
length  perfectly  restore  them  to  their  primi- 
tive order  and  honour.  When  they  shall 
see  him  as  he  is,  they  will  be  like  him,  and 
all  their  powers  and  faculties  will  be  per- 
fectly conformed  to  his  image. 

Again,  Messiah  must  not  only  be  a man, 
but  a partaker  of  our  very  nature.  It  had 
been  equally  easy  to  the  power  of  God  to  have 
formed  the  body  of  the  second  Adam,  as  he 
formed  the  first,  out  of  the  dust  of  the  earth. 
But  though,  in  this  way,  he  would  have  been 
a true  and  perfect  man,  he  would  not  have 
been  more  nearly  related  to  us  than  to  the 
angels.  Therefore,  when  God  sent  forth  his 
Son  to  be  made  under  the  law,  to  redeem  us 
from  the  curse  of  the  law,  that  we  might  re- 
ceive the  adoption  of  children,  (Gal.  iv.  4,  5,) 
and  be  re-admitted  into  his  happy  family,  he 
was  made  of  a woman.  Thus  he  became  our 
Goel,  our  near  kinsman,  with  whom  the 
right  of  redemption  lay. 

But  farther,  if  he  had  derived  his  human 
nature  altogether  in  the  ordinary  way,  from 
sinful  parents,  we  see  not  how  he  could  have 
avoided  a participation  in  that  defilement 
and  depravity  which  the  fall  of  Adam  had 
entailed  upon  all  his  posterity.  But  his  body, 
that  holy  thing,  conceived  and  born  of  a vir- 
gin, was  the  immediate  production  of  God. 
Therefore  he  was  perfectly  pure  and  spotless, 
and  qualified  to  be  such  a high  priest  as 
became  us,  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and 
separate  from  sinners ; (Heb.  vii.  26 ;)  who 
needed  not,  as  the  typical  high-priests  of 
Israel,  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for  his  own 
sin,  and  then  for  the  sins  of  the  people,  Heb. 
vii.  27.  These  difficulties  were  obviated  by  a 
virgin’s  conceiving  and  bearing  a son.  His 
obedience  was  without  defect,  his  nature 
without  blemish,  and,  having  no  sin  of  his 
own,  when  he  voluntarily  offered  himself  to 
make  an  atonement  for  the  sins  of  his  people, 
his  sacrifice  was,  so  far,  answerable  to  the 
strict  and  extensive  demands  of  the  law  and 
justice  of  God. 

Let  us  make  a solemn  pause,  and  call  upon 
our  souls  to  admire  and  adore  the  wisdom  and 
power  of  God  in  this  appointment.  Thus 
the  Lord  created  a new  thing  upon  the 
earth ! 

II.  But  surely  our  admiration  and  gratitude 
will  be  raised  still  higher,  if  we  rightly  un- 
derstand the  latter  part  of  my  text.  This  son 
of  the  virgin  shall  be  called  Immanuel,  God 
with  us.  Though  the  human  nature  of  Christ 
was  absolutely  perfect,  his  obedience  com- 
mensurate to  the  utmost  extent  of  the  law, 
and  his  substitution  and  sufferings  for  sinners 
voluntary,  yet,  had  he  been  no  more  than  a 
man,  he  would  not  have  been  equal  to  the 
great  undertaking  of  saving  sinners.  A due 
consideration  of  the  majesty,  holiness,  au- 
thority, and  goodness  of  God  will  make  sin 


appear  to  be,  as  the  apostle  expresses  it,  ex- 
ceedingly sinful,  Rom.  vii.  13.  Whoever  has 
a right  sense  of  the  nature  and  effects  of  that 
rebellion  against  the  Most  High,  which  the 
scripture  intends  by  the  term  sin,  will  no4 
need  many  arguments  to  convince  him  that 
the  Mediator  between  God  and  man  must  be 
possessed  of  such  dignity  and  power  as  can- 
not be  attributed  to  a creature  without  de- 
stroying the  idea  of  a created  and  dependent 
being,  by  ascribing  to  him  those  perfections 
which  are  incommunicably  divine. 

If  Messiah  had  been  a sinless  and  perfect 
man,  and  no  more,  he  might  have  yielded  a 
complete  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  but  it 
could  have  been  only  for  himself.  The  most 
excellent  and  exalted  creature  cannot  exceed 
the  law  of  his  creation.  As  a creature,  he  is 
bound  to  serve  God  with  his  all,  and  his  obli- 
gations will  always  be  equal  to  his  ability. 
But  an  obedience  acceptable  and  available 
for  others,  for  thousands  and  millions,  for  all 
who  are  willing  to  plead  it,  must  be  con- 
nected with  a nature  which  is  not  thus  ne- 
cessarily bound.  A sinner,  truly  convinced 
of  his  obnoxiousness  to  the  displeasure  of 
God,  must  sink  into  despair,  notwithstanding 
the  intimation  of  a Saviour,  if  he  were  not 
assured  by  the  scripture  that  it  was  a divine 
person  in  the  human  nature  who  engaged  for 
us.  It  is  this  alone  affords  a solid  ground  for 
hope,  to  know  that  he  who  was  before  all,  by 
whom  all  things  were  made,  and  by  whom 
they  consist,  assumed  the  nature  of  man; 
that  the  great  Lawgiver  himself  submitted 
to  be  under  his  own  law.  This  wonderful 
condescension  gave  an  immense  value  and 
dignity  to  all  that  he  did,  to  all  that  he  suf- 
fered : thus  he  not  only  satisfied  but  honoured 
the  law.  So  that  we  may,  without  hesitation, 
affirm,  that  the  law  of  God  was  more  honoured 
by  Messiah,  in  his  obedience  to  it,  during  the 
few  years  of  his  residence  upon  earth,  and 
terminated  by  his  last  and  highest  act  of 
obedience  in  submitting  to  the  death  of  the 
cross,  than  it  could  have  been  by  the  unsin- 
ning obedience  of  all  mankind  to  the  end  of 
time. 

But  Messiah  was  not  only  to  obey  the  law 
for  us,  but  he  was  likewise  to  expiate,  to  sus- 
tain, and  to  exhaust  the  curse  due  to  sin, 
Gal.  iii.  13.  In  this  attempt,  no  mere  crea- 
ture could  have  endured.  Nor  could  the  suf- 
ferings of  a creature  have  been  proposed  to 
the  universe,  to  angels,  and  men,  as  a con- 
sideration sufficient  to  vindicate  the  righ- 
teousness and  truth  of  God  in  the  remission 
of  sin,  after  he  had  determined  and  solemnly 
declared  that  the  wages  of  sin  is  death.  The 
apostle  assures  us  that  it  is  impossible  for  the 
blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  to  take  away  sin, 
Heb.  x.  4.  They  who  differ  from  the  apostle 
in  their  judgment,  who  think  it  very  possible 
for  God,  if  he  pleased,  to  forgive  the  sinner 
who  should  offer  a bull  or  a goat,  or  even 


232 

without  any  offering1,  by  tne  sovereign  exer- 
cise of  his  mercy,  may  be  reminded  that  the 
question  is  not  simply  what  God  can  do,  but 
what  it  becomes  him  to  do,  agreeable  to  his 
perfections,  and  to  his  character  as  governor 
of  the  world.  Of  this  his  infinite  wisdom  is 
the  only  competent  judge ; and  we  learn 
from  his  word,  that  it  is  impossible  any  blood, 
but  that  of  his  own  Son,  can  cleanse  us  from 
guilt,  or  save  us  from  misery.  The  blood  of  a 
bull  or  a goat,  of  a man  or  an  angel,  (if  an- 
gels could  bleed,)  are  all  equally  insufficient 
to  the  great  purpose  of  declaring  his  righ- 
teousness, of  manifesting  to  all  intelligent 
creatures  his  inflexible  displeasure  against 
sin,  in  the  very  act  of  affording  mercy  to  sin- 
ners. But  since  the  atoning  blood  is  the  blood 
of  Immanuel,  of  him  who  is  God  with  us ; the 
sinner  who  makes  it  his  plea,  builds  his  hope 
upon  a rock  which  cannot  be  removed ; and 
obtaining  forgiveness  in  this  way,  he  likewise 
obtains  by  it  such  a knowledge  of  the  hein- 
ousness of  sin,  as  disposes  him  from  that  hour 
to  fear,  hate,  and  forsake  it. 

But  though  forgiveness  be  an  essential 
part  of  salvation,  it  is  not  the  whole.  We 
cannot  be  happy,  except  the  power  of  sin  be 
likewise  destroyed.  A well-grounded  hope 
in  the  mercy  of  God,  is  connected  with  a 
thirst  for  sanctification,  and  a conformity  to 
his  image.  But  neither  this  hope  nor  this 
desire  is  natural  to  us.  Our  case  requires  the 
help  of  an  almighty  arm,  of  the  power  which 
can  cause  the  blind  to  see,  the  deaf  to  hear, 
the  dead  to  arise ; wffiich  can  take  away  the 
heart  of  stone,  and  create  a heart  of  flesh.  So 
likewise  the  difficulties  attendant  on  our 
Christian  profession,  arising  from  the  spirit 
of  the  world  around  us,  the  snares  to  which 
we  are  exposed  in  every  situation,  our  weak- 
ness, the  deceitfulness  of  our  hearts,  the 
subtilty,  vigilance,  and  power  of  our  spi- 
ritual enemies,  are  so  many  and  great,  that 
unless  he,  on  whom  we  depend  for  salvation, 
be  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost,  we  can  have 
no  security,  either  for  our  progress,  or  our 
perseverance,  in  the  grace  of  God.  Unless 
the  Saviour  of  sinners  be  omnipresent,  omni- 
scient, unchangeable,  “the  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever;”  that  is,  unless  he  be 
God,  how  can  he  answer  the  prayers,  satisfy 
the  wants,  and  relieve  the  distresses  of  all 
who  trust  in  him  in  every  age,  and  of  all  who 
in  every  place  equally  need  his  support  at 
the  same  moment!  Or  how  can  he  engage 
to  give  rest  to  every  weary  soul,  to  secure 
them  from  perishing,  and  to  bestow  upon 
them  eternal  life!  David  comfortably  con- 
cluded, that  because  the  Lord  was  his  shep- 
herd, he  should  not  want,  and  had  no  reason 
to  fear,  (Psalm  xxiii.  1,  4,)  not  even  when 
passing  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death.  To  us  Jesus  is  made  known  as  the 
great  shepherd  of  the  sheep;  but  how  can  we 
place  the  like  confidence  in  him,  unless  we 


[ser.  v. 

likewise  are  assured  that  our  shepherd  is  the 
Lord ! 

I shall  not  attempt  to  vindicate  this  doc- 
trine largely  from  the  exceptions  of  those 
who  call  themselves  men  of  reason.  It  is  a 
point  of  revelation,  and  it  is  expressly  re- 
vealed. It  demands  our  assent  upon  the  au- 
thority of  God,  who  requires  us  to  receive 
this  record  which  he  has  given  us  of  his  Son. 
Thus  far  it  approves  itself  to  our  reason,  that 
however  difficult  it  may  be  to  our  concep- 
tions, yet  thus  it  must  be,  upon  a supposition 
that  sinners  can  be  saved  without  prejudice 
to  the  honour  of  the  divine  government.  If 
we  affirm,  that  he  who  was  born  in  a stable, 
and  suffered  as  a malefactor  upon  Mount 
Calvary,  is  the  true  God  and  eternal  life, 
many  will  think  it  a hard  saying.  But  it  is 
the  doctrine  of  scripture,  the  very  pillar  and 
ground  of  truth  ; the  only  foundation  of  hope 
for  an  awakened  conscience,  the  only  standard 
by  which  we  can  properly  estimate  the  evil 
of  sin,  the  worth  of  the  soul,  and  the  love  of 
God.  We  do  not,  however,  say,  that  the  hu- 
man nature  of  Christ,  considered  in  itself, 
possesses  the  attributes  of  Deity,  or  is  the 
proper  object  of  worship ; nor  do  we  suppose 
that  God  could  suffer,  bleed,  or  die.  But  we 
say  with  the  apostle,  “ that  God  was  in  Christ 
reconciling  the  world  unto  himself,”  2 Cor. 
v.  19.  We  believe  that  the  human  nature 
was  so  intimately  and  indissolubly  united  to 
the  divine,  that  the  properties  and  actings  of 
each  nature  are  justly  ascribed  to  the  one 
person  of  Christ,  God-man,  Immanuel,  God 
with  us.  Thus  we  read  that  the  final  judg- 
ment of  the  world  is  committed  to  a man, 
and  that  God  hath  purchased  his  church  with 
his  own  blood , Acts  xvii.  31 ; xx.  28. 

Behold  then  the  character  of  Messiah  in 
this  prophecy ! a man ! a God  ! a divine  per- 
son in  the  human  nature  ! God  manifested  in 
the  flesh  ! Immanuel,  God  with  us ! 

As  fallen  creatures,  we  had  lost  the  true 
knowledge  of  God,  and  were  unable  to  form 
such  conceptions  of  his  greatness  and  good- 
ness, as  are  necessary  to  inspire  us  with 
reverence,  to  engage  our  confidence,  or  pro- 
duce obedience  to  his  will.  His  glory  shines 
in  the  heavens  and  fills  the  earth ; we  are 
surrounded  by  the  tokens  of  his  power  and 
presence ; yet,  till  we  are  instructed  by  his 
word,  and  enlightened  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  he 
is  to  us  an  unknown  God.  The  prevalence 
of  idolatry  was  early,  and  (with  an  exception 
to  the  people  of  Israel)  soon  became  univer- 
sal. Men  who  boasted  of  their  reason,  wor- 
shipped the  sun  and  moon,  yea,  the  works  of 
their  own  hands,  instead  of  the  Creator.  And 
even  where  revelation  is  vouchsafed,  the  bulk 
of  mankind  live  without  God  in  the  world. 
But  he  is  known,  trusted,  and  served,  by 
those  who  know  Messiah.  To  them  his  glory 
is  displayed  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ, 
2 Cor.  iv.  6.  His  agency  is  perceived  in  the 


IMMANUEL. 


IMMANUEL. 


233 


SER.  V.] 


creation,  his  providence  is  acknowledged,  and 
his  presence  felt  as  God  with  us. 

As  fallen  creatures,  God  is  against  us,  and 
we  are  against  him.  The  alienation  of  our 
hearts  is  the  great  cause  of  our  ignorance 
of  him.  We  are  willingly  ignorant.  The 
thoughts  of  him  are  unwelcome  to  us,  and  we 
do  not  like  to  retain  him  in  our  knowledge. 
Guilt  is  the  parent  of  atheism.  A secret  fore- 
boding, that  if  there  be  a God,  we  are  obnox- 
ious to  his  displeasure ; and  that  if  he  takes 
cognizance  of  our  conduct,  we  have  nothing 
to  hope,  but  every  thing  to  fear  from  him, 
constrains  many  persons  to  try  to  persuade 
themselves  that  there  is  no  God ; and  many 
more  to  think,  or  at  least  to  wish,  that  if 
there  be  a God,  he  does  not  concern  himself 
with  human  affairs.  What  a proof  is  this  of 
the  enmity  of  the  heart  of  man  against  him  ; 
that  so  many  persons  who  would  tremble  at 
the  thought  of  being  in  a ship,  driven  by  the 
winds  and  waves,  without  compass  or  pilot, 
should  yet  think  it  desirable,  if  it  were  pos- 
sible, to  be  assured,  that  in  a world  like  this, 
so  full  of  uncertainty,  trouble,  and  change,  all 
things  were  left  at  random,  without  the  in- 
terference of  a supreme  governor  ! But  this 
enmity,  these  dark  apprehensions,  are  re- 
moved, when  the  gospel  is  received  by  faith. 
For  it  brings  us  the  welcome  news,  that 
there  is  forgiveness  with  him ; that  God  is 
reconciled  in  his  Son  to  all  who  seek  his 
mercy.  In  this  sense,  likewise,  Messiah  is 
Immanuel,  God  with  us,  on  our  side,  no  longer 
the  avenger  of  sin,  but  the  author  of  salvation. 

Immanuel  is  God  with  us,  God  in  our 
nature  still.  He  suffered  as  a man,  and  as  a 
man  he  now  reigns  on  the  throne  of  glory  ; 
exercising  all  power  and  authority,  and  re- 
ceiving all  spiritual  worship  both  in  heaven 
and  upon  earth.  He  is  the  head  of  all  princi- 
palities and  powers,  thrones  and  dominions. 
Thus  man  is  not  only  saved,  but  unspeakably 
honoured  and  ennobled.  He  is  brought  into 
the  nearest  relation  to  him,  who  is  over  all 
blessed  for  ever.  The  angels  adore  him; 
only  redeemed  sinners  can  say,  “ He  loved 
us,  and  gave  himself  for  us ; he  has  washed 
us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood (Gal.  ii. 
20 ; Rev.  i.  5 ;)  he  is  our  Saviour,  our  shep- 
herd, our  Immanuel,  God  with  us. 

I shall  conclude  with  a few  obvious  reflec- 
tions which  offer  from  this  important  subject. 

1.  What  a cold  assent  is  paid  to  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Godhead  of  Christ  by  many  who 
profess  and  receive  it  as  a truth  ! They  have 
received  from  education,  from  books  or  mi- 
nisters, what  is  called  an  orthodox  scheme  of 
religious  sentiments,  and  with  this  they  are 
contented.  They  have  not  been  accustomed 
to  doubt  of  it,  and  therefore  take  it  for  granted 
that  they  really  believe  it.  But  as  I have 
already  hinted,  it  is  so  contrary  to  our  natu- 
ral apprehensions,  that  no  man  can,  from  his 
heart,  say  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  unless  he 
Vol.  II.  2 G 


be  taught  of  God.  And  a cordial  belief  of 
this  point  will  and  must  produce  great  and 
abiding  effects.  They  who  know  the  Sa- 
viour’s name,  will  so  trust  in  him,  as  to  re- 
nounce every  other  ground  of  confidence. 
They  will  love  him  supremely,  and  forsake 
every  thing  that  stands  in.  competition  with 
his  favour.  They  will  glory  in  his  cross,  they 
will  espouse  his  cause,  and  devote  themselves 
to  his  service.  They  will  make  continual  ap- 
plication to  him,  that  they  may  receive  out 
of  his  fulness  grace  according  to  their  need. 
They  will  obey  his  precepts,  and  walk  in  his 
Spirit.  Happy  were  it,  indeed,  if  all  who 
join  in  repeating  the  Creed,  and  who  bow 
their  knee  at  the  mention  of  his  name,  were 
thus  minded.  But  the  lives,  tempers,  and 
pursuits  of  thousands,  give  too  sure  an  evi- 
dence, that  when  they  express  their  assent 
with  their  lips,  they  neither  know  what  they 
say,  nor  whereof  they  affirm.  Their  acknow- 
ledgment of  his  character,  has  no  more  salu- 
tary influence,  than  that  of  the  evil  spirits 
when  he  was  upon  earth,  who  said,  and  per- 
haps with  a much  fuller  conviction,  “We 
know  thee  who  thou  art,  the  holy  one  of 
God,”  Mark  i.  24. 

2.  What  a strong  foundation  does  this  doc- 
trine afford  for  the  faith  and  hope  of  those 
who  indeed  know  Messiah,  and  have  put 
their  trust  in  him!  This  truth  is  the  rock 
upon  which  the  church  is  built,  and  the  gates 
of  hell  shall  not  prevail  against  it.  “ If  God 
be  for  ns,  who  shall  be  against  us  V’  The 
difficulties  of  our  warfare  are  great,  the  ene- 
mies of  our  peace  are  many.  The  world  may 
frown,  and  Satan  will  rage,  but  Jesus  has 
overcome  the  world,  and  is  greater  than  all 
our  foes.  He  will  guide  his  people  with  his 
unerring  wisdom,  support  them  with  his 
almighty  arm,  supply  them  out  of  the  inex- 
haustible riches  of  his  grace,  revive  them 
when  fainting,  heal  them  when  wounded, 
plead  for  them  above  as  their  great  high  priest, 
manage  for  them  upon  earth  as  their  great 
shepherd,  and  at  last  make  them  more  than 
conquerors,  and  give  them  a crown  of  life. 

3.  On  the  contrary,  how  dreadful  must  be 
the  state  of  those  who  finally  reject  him,  and 
say  in  their  hearts,  “We  will  not  have  this 
man  to  rule  over  us !”  He  is  now  proposed 
as  a Saviour,  he  invites  sinners  to  come  to 
him,  that  they  may  have  life,  and  assures  us, 
“ that  him  that  cometh  he  will  in  nowise  cast 
out,”  John  vi.  37.  Happy  are  they  who  hear 
and  obey  his  voice  to-day,  while  it  is  called 
to-day.  To-morrow  is  uncertain.  Death  may 
be  at  the  door,  and  at  death  our  state  will  be 
determined  for  eternity.  They  who  refuse 
him  now,  in  the  character  of  a Saviour,  must 
then  appear  at  his  tribunal,  and  stand  before 
him  as  their  Judge;  and  must  answer,  in 
their  own  persons,  for  all  their  transgressions 
of  the  holy  law,  and  for  their  contempt  of  the 
gospel  of  the  grace  of  God. 


234 


SALVATION  PUBLISHED 


SERMON  VI. 

SALVATION  PUBLISHED  FROM  THE  MOUNTAINS. 

0 Zion,  that  hr  ingest  good  tidings,  get  thee 
up  into  the  high  mountains : O Jerusa- 
lem, that  bring est  good  tidings,  lift  up 
thy  voice  with  strength,  lift  it  up,  be  not 
afraid : say  unto  the  cities  of  Judah,  Be- 
hold your  God ! — Isaiah  xl.  9. 

It  would  be  improper  to  propose  an  Altera- 
tion, though  a slight  one,  in  the  reading  of  a 
text,  without  bearing  my  testimony  to  the 
great  value  of  our  English  version,  which  I 
believe,  in  point  of  simplicity,  strength,  and 
fidelity  is  not  likely  to  he  excelled  by  a new 

1 ranslation  of  the  whole  scriptures.  But  there 
are  undoubtedly  particular  passages  where  a 
small  change  in  the  expression  might  render 
the  sense  clearer,  and  be  equally  answerable 
to  the  original  Hebrew  or  Greek.  The  ad- 
dress of  this  verse  as  it  stands  in  the  Messiah 
is,  “ O thou  that  tellest  good  tidings,”  &c.  as 
the  Bishop  of  London  has  lately  translated  it. 
Zion  and  Jerusalem  are  considered  by  the 
prophet,  not  as  bringing,  but  as  receiving 
good  tidings ; and  the  publisher  of  these  good 
tidings  is  written  with  a feminine  construc- 
tion. The  sense  may  be  thus  expressed, 
“ Let  her  that  bringeth  good  tidings  to  Jeru- 
salem and  Zion,  get  up  into  the  high  moun- 
tains and  lift  up  her  voice.”  But  the  apostro- 
phe is  more  animated.  That  it  was  the 
custom  in  Israel  for  the  women  to  publish 
and  celebrate  good  news  with  songs  and  in- 
struments is  well  known.  We  have  an  early 
instance  in  the  book  of  Exodus.  When  the 
Lord  had  delivered  them  from  the  power  of 
Pharaoh,  and  they  saw  their  enemies,  who 
had  so  lately  threatened  them,  dead  upon  the 
sea  shore,  Miriam,  the  sister  of  Aaron,  took 
a timbrel  in  her  hand,  and  all  the  women 
went  out  after  her  with  timbrels  and  with 
dances;  and  Miriam  answered  them,  “Sing 
ye  to  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  triumphed  glori- 
ously : the  horse  and  his  rider  hath  he  thrown 
into  the  sea,”  Exod.  xv.  20,  21.  So  after- 
wards, when  David  returned  from  the  slaugh- 
ter of  the  Philistines,  the  women  came  out 
to  meet  him  and  Saul,  with  tabrets  and  in- 
struments of  music ; and  they  answered  one 
another  as  they  played,  “ Saul  hath  slain  his 
thousands,  and  David  his  ten  thousands,” 
1 Sam.  xviii.  6,  7.  Thus  likewise  Deborah, 
in  her  sublime  song,  represents  the  mother 
of  Sisera  (Judges  v.  28,  29)  and  her  women 
singing  alternately,  from  a confident,  though 
vain  expectation,  that  Sisera  would  return  a 
conqueror.  In  my  text,  the  prophet,  in  pros- 
pect of  Messiah’s  appearance,  speaks  of  it  as 
an  event  suited  to  excite  a general  joy.  The 
gospel  (as  the  word  imports)  is  good’  news, 
glad  tidings  indeed  ! the  best  news  that  ever 
reached  the  ears,  or  cheered  the  heart  of 


[ser.  vi. 

man.  The  women  are  therefore  called  upon 
to  proclaim  his  approach,  on  the  tops  of  the 
hills  and  mountains,  from  whence  they  may 
be  seen  and  heard  to  the  greatest  advantage, 
for  the  spreading  of  the  tidings  throughout 
the  whole  country.  Zion  is  as  a besieged 
city,  but  let  her  know  that  relief  is  at  hand ; 
say  unto  her,  “ Behold  your  God !”  The 
Lord  God  will  come  with  a strong  hand,  or 
against  the  strong  one,  and  his  people  shall 
know  him  as  their  shepherd,  full  of  care, 
kindness,  and  power. 

The  promise  of  Immanuel,  God  with  us,  is 
now  to  be  spread  like  the  morning  from  the 
tops  of  the  mountains.  The  day  is  breaking, 
and  this  passage  prepares  for  the  following, 
“ Arise,  shme,  for  thy  light  is  come !”  The 
welcome  news  is  to  be  dispersed  from  Jeru- 
salem to  Samaria,  from  Jew  to  Gentile,  from 
one  kingdom  to  another  people,  till  all  the 
nations  and  ends  of  the  earth  shall  see  the 
salvation  of  God,  Psalm  xcviii.  3. 

The  cause  of  this  exultation  arises  from  the 
character  of  Messiah,  compared  with  the  de- 
sign of  his  appearance,  and  this  is  answerable 
to  the  condition  in  which  he  finds  mankind. 

The  deplorable  state  of  fallen  man  by  na- 
ture is  largely  described  both  in  the  Old  Tes- 
tament and  in  the  New.  It  may  suffice  to 
take  notice  of  three  principal  features  which 
characterise  our  whole  species,  and  apply  to 
every  individual  of  the  race  of  Adam,  until 
the  grace  of  God,  which  bringeth  salvation, 
affords  relief.  These  are  guilt,  alienation  of 
heart,  and  misery. 

1.  Guilt. — All  have  sinned.  We  are  the 
creatures  of  God.  He  made  us,  and  he  pre- 
serves us.  Our  life,  faculties,  and  comforts 
are  all  from  him.  He  is  therefore  our  great 
Lord,  our  supreme  benefactor.  Of  course  we 
belong  to  him.  His  we  are,  and  not  our  own. 
It  follows,  that  dependence,  gratitude,  sub- 
mission, and  obedience  are  incumbent  on  us, 
as  they  must  be  upon  all  intelligent  crea- 
tures, from  the  very  nature  of  things.  The 
relation  which  subsists  between  an  infinitely 
wise  and  good  Creator  and  his  creatures,  if 
capable  of  knowing  him,  necessarily  implies 
this  subjection ; and  the  obligation  is  indis- 
soluble. But  we  have  evidently  broken  this 
law  of  our  creation.  We  have  violated  the 
order  of  God’s  government.  We  have  im- 
plicitly, if  not  formally,  renounced  our  alle- 
giance, disowned  his  right  over  us,  and  set 
up  for  ourselves.  A dependent  creature  af- 
fecting independence;  a worm  presuming 
upon  its  own  power,  making  itself  its  own 
end ; a rebel  against  the  divine  government, 
boasting  of  morality  and  goodness,  and  trust- 
ing to  his  own  conduct  to  recommend  him  to 
the  favour  of  his  Maker ; a being  formed  for 
immortality,  proposing  his  whole  happiness 
in  things  which  he  feels  to  be  unsatisfying, 
knows  to  be  uncertain,  and  from  which  he  is 
conscious  he  must,  in  a few  years  at  most,  be 


FROM  THE  MOUNTAINS. 


235 


SER.  VI.] 

finally  removed : these  are  solecisms  which 
strongly  prove  the  depravity,  degeneracy, 
and  demerit  of  man.  It  is  possible  that,  had 
we  been  wholly  left  to  ourselves,  we  should 
never  have  been  aware,  while  in  this  world, 
of  the  just  and  inevitable  consequences  of  our 
rebellion.  Having  lost  all  right  thoughts  of 
God,  and  conceiving  of  him,  as  if  he  were 
altogether  like  ourselves,  we  might  have  felt 
neither  fear  nor  remorse.  But  there  is  a re- 
velation, by  which  we  are  informed  of  his 
determined  purpose  to  avenge  disobedience, 
and  to  vindicate  the  honour  of  his  govern- 
ment ; and  we  are  assured  that  he  is  not  an 
indifferent  spectator  of  our  opposition  to  his 
established  order.  His  justice  and  truth  are 
engaged  to  punish  transgressors,  and  our  ob- 
noxiousness to  punishment  is  what  we  mean 
by  guilt.  If  the  scripture  be  true  there  is  no 
way  of  escape,  unless  he  himself  be  pleased 
to  appoint  one.  This  he  has  done,  and  the 
declaration  of  this  appointment  is  a part  of 
the  good  tidings  contained  in  my  text.  Pro- 
claim it  from  the  tops  of  the  mountains  that 
there  is  forgiveness  with  him.  Say  unto  Jeru- 
salem, Behold  Messiah ! Behold  your  God  ! 
He  comes  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of 
himself,  Heb.  ix.  26.  He  can  do  it,  for  he  is 
God ; and  he  will  do  it,  for  he  has  taken  on 
him  our  nature  for  this  very  purpose,  2 Cor. 
v.  21.  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  who  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world  ! 

2.  Alienation  of  mind. — Not  only  is  it  true 
that  we  have  sinned  against  the  Lord,  but  a 
principle  of  aversion  from  him  is  deeply  root- 
ed in  our  hearts.  Therefore  one  part  of  our 
natural  character  is,  haters  of  God,  Rom.  i. 
30.  This  is  thought  a hard  saying.  Many 
who  will  admit  that  their  conduct  is  blame- 
able,  and  that  they  are  not  altogether  what 
they  ought  to  be,  will  by  no  means  plead 
guilty  to  this  charge.  If  they  fall  short  of 
their  duty,  and  in  some  instances  transgress 
his  commandments,  they  say  it  is  their  infir- 
mity, they  are  sorry,  and  hope  to  do  better 
some  time  or  other.  However,  they  are 
willing  to  think  that  their  hearts  are  tolera- 
bly good,  they  mean  well,  and  are  shocked  at 
the  idea  of  hating  God.  They  rather  presume 
that  they  love  him,  though  they  are  not  so 
careful  to  please  him  as  they  should  be.  I 
do  not  assert  that  we  hate  God  under  that 
character  which  our  vain  imaginations  form 
of  him.  If  we  can  persuade  ourselves,  in 
direct  contradiction  to  the  testimony  of 
scripture,  that  he  is  not  strict  to  mark  what 
is  amiss;  that  he  will  dispen%  with  the 
strictness  of  his  law ; that  he  will  surely 
have  mercy  upon  us,  because  we  are  not 
openly  abandoned  and  profligate  in  our  con- 
duct; that  he  will  accept  of  lip- worship,  in 
which  the  heart  has  no  concern,  reward  us 
for  actions  in  which  we  had  no  intention  of 
pleasing  him,  permit  us  to  love  and  serve 
the  world  with  all  our  mind,  and  soul,  and 


strength,  while  we  live,  and  make  us  happy 
in  another  world,  when  we  can  live  m this 
no  longer.  If  we  form  such  an  image  of  God, 
it  is  too  much  like  our  own  to  provoke  our 
enmity,  for  it  is  destitute  of  holiness,  justice, 
and  truth.  But  the  carnal  mind  is  and  must 
be  enmity  against  God,  (Rom.  viii.  7,)  accord- 
ing to  the  character  he  has  given  of  himself 
in  his  word.  We  have  an  inbred  dislike  to 
all  his  moral  attributes,  to  the  rule  of  his 
government,  and  to  the  methods  of  his  grace. 
We  cannot,  that  is,  we  will  not  propose  either 
his  glory  as  our  chief  end,  or  his  favour  as 
our  chief  good.  The  proof  is  plain.  The 
ends  which  we  actually  pursue  and  the  sup- 
posed good  which  we  deliberately  prefer,  are 
utterly  inconsistent  with  the  plan  which  he 
has  prescribed  for  us.  His  ways,  though 
truly  pleasant  in  themselves,  appear  unpleas- 
ing to  us,  and  we  think  we  can  plan  better 
for  ourselves.  We  do  not  like  to  retain  God 
in  our  thoughts,  (Rom.  i.  28,)  which  is  a sure 
sign  of  enmity.  Nay,  this  enmity  is  so  strong 
in  us  naturally  that  we  cannot  bear  others 
should  think  more  highly  of  God  than  we  do, 
or  be  more  attached  to  him  than  we  are.  This 
was  the  ground  of  the  first  murder.  Abel 
loved  God,  and  God  was  pleased  to  testify  his 
approbation  of  Abel,  and  therefore  Cain 
killed  him,  1 John  iii.  12.  This  has  been  the 
great  cause  of  the  opposition  and  ill-treat- 
ment which  the  servants  of  God  have  met 
with  from  the  men  of  the  world  in  all  suc- 
ceeding ages;  a cause  which  still  subsists, 
and  will  continue  to  operate  upon  posterity 
yet  unborn.  Can  we  show  a stronger  mark 
of  dislike  to  a person  than  by  hating  all  who 
profess  a regard  to  him,  and  when  that  is  the 
only  cause  of  our  resentment  1 Such  is  the 
prevailing  enmity  against  God.  For  how 
often  do  we  see,  that,  when  his  grace  enables 
a sinner  to  forsake  the  spirit  and  practice  of 
the  world,  his  former  friends  are  immediately 
offended,  and  perhaps  those  of  his  own  house- 
hold become  his  inveterate  enemies'? 

But,  O thou  that  bringest  good  tidings  lift 
up  thy  voice  ! Say  to  poor  sinners,  Behold 
your  God ! He  comes  to  take  this  enmity 
away  ! The  cross  of  Christ  subdues  it,  when 
every  other  expedient  has  been  found  ineffec- 
tual. The  heart,  too  hard  to  be  softened  by 
a profusion  of  temporal  benefits,  and  too  stout 
to  be  subdued  by  afflictions,  is  melted  by  the 
dying  love  of  a Saviour,  and  by  that  discovery 
of  the  divine  perfections  which  is  exhibited 
in  redemption.  We  have  a striking  instance 
of  this  effect,  in  the  case  of  Saul  of  Tarsus, 
Acts  ix.  1 — 20.  His  misguided  conscience, 
under  the  influence  of  prejudice,  persuaded 
him,  that  he  ought  to  do  many  things  against 
Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Instigated  with  rage, 
and  not  satisfied  with  the  injuries  he  had 
offered  to  his  disciples  at  Jerusalem,  but  still 
breathing  out  threatenings  and  slaughter,  lie 
journeyed  towards  Damascus,  designing  to 


236 


SALVATION  PUBLISHED,  &c. 


harass  and  persecute  them  wherever  he  found 
them.  In  this  temper  of  mind,  he  was  sud- 
denly arrested  on  his  way,  by  a light,  and  a 
voice  from  heaven.  He  fell  to  the  ground. 
But  Jesus,  whom  he  had  ignorantly  perse- 
cuted, instructed  him  in  the  knowledge  of 
his  person  and  love,  pardoned  his  sin,  and 
commissioned  him  to  preach  the  faith  he  had 
laboured  to  destroy.  How  sudden,  how  evi- 
dent, how  abiding  was  the  change  which 
then  took  place  in  his  heart  and  in  his  con- 
duct! From  that  moment  he  accounted  “all 
things  loss  and  dung,  for  the  excellency  of 
the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord,” 
Phil.  iii.  8.  Unwearied  by  labour  and  hard- 
ship, undismayed  by  opposition  and  danger, 
he  spent  the  remainder  of  his  life  in  the 
cause  of  his  Master ; and  like  Caesar,  account- 
ing nothing  done  while  any  thing  remained 
to  do,  his  active  and  intrepid  spirit  was  con- 
tinually meditating  new  services,  Acts  xix. 
21.  And,  though  he  knew  that  bonds  and 
afflictions  awaited  him  in  every  place,  he 
was  always  upon  the  wing  to  publish  to  his 
fellow-sinners  the  grace  and  glory  of  him 
whom  he  had  so  long  opposed,  only  because  he 
knew  him  not.  And  although  the  circum- 
stances attending  the  apostle’s  case  were 
extraordinary,  the  case  itself,  as  to  the  sub- 
stance, is  not  singular.  I trust  many  persons 
in  this  assembly  have  been  the  subjects  of 
a like  change.  The  doctrine  which  Paul 
preached,  has  enlightened  your  understand- 
ings, has  inspired  you  with  hopes  and  desires 
to  which  you  were  once  strangers,  and  given 
a new  direction  to  the  conduct  and  aims  of 
your  life.  You  were  once  afar  off  from  God, 
but  you  are  now  brought  nigh  by  the  blood 
of  Christ.  You  once  lived  to  yourselves,  but 
now  you  feel  that  you  are  no  longer  your 
own,  and  have  devoted  yourselves  to  him 
who  died  to  save  you  from  the  present  evil 
world,  and  from  the  wrath  to  come. 

3.  Misery. — If  we  are  guilty  in  the  sight 
of  God,  and  alienated  from  him  in  our  hearts, 
we  must  be  miserable.  Guilt  entails  a bur- 
den, and  a foreboding  of  evil  upon  the  con- 
science. And  our  alienation  from  the  fountain 
of  living  waters,  (Jer.  ii.  13,)  compels  us  (for 
we  are  insufficient  to  our  own  happiness)  to 
seek  our  resources  from  broken  cisterns,  and 
pits  which  will  hold  no  water.  Farther,  sin 
has  filled  the  world  with  woe.  The  whole 
creation  travails  and  groans ; and  natural  evil 
is  inseparable  from  moral,  as  the  shadow  from 
the  body.  Though  the  earth  be  filled  with 
tokens  of  the  goodness,  patience,  and  forbear- 
ance of  God,  it  likewise  abounds  with  marks 
of  his  displeasure.  I think  we  have  sufficient 
reason  to  attribute  earthquakes,  hurricanes, 
famine,  and  pestilence,  to  sin  as  their  original 
and  proper  cause.  We  can  hardly  conceive, 
that  if  mankind  had  continued  in  that  happy 
state  of  love  and  obedience  to  God,  in  which 
our  first  parents  were  created,  they  would 


[ses.  VI. 

have  been  exposed  to  such  calamities.  When 
God  at  the  beginning,  surveyed  every  thing 
that  he  had  made,  “ behold  it  was  very  good,” 
Gen.  i.  31.  All  was  beauty  and  harmony, 
till  sin  introduced  disorder  and  a curse.  But 
far  worse  than  what  we  suffer  immediately 
from  the  providence  of  God,  are  the  evils 
which  we  bring  upon  ourselves  and  upon 
each  other.  The  dreadful  consequences  of 
war,  rapine,  discord,  hatred,  ambition,  ava- 
rice, and  intemperance,  furnish  part  of  every 
page  in  the  mournful  history  of  human  life, 
and  are  felt  in  every  nation,  city,  village,  and 
family.  Want,  cares,  and  diseases,  prey  upon 
individuals.  Disappointment,  dissatisfaction, 
vanity,  and  vexation  of  spirit,  are  experi- 
enced by  persons  of  every  rank,  and  in  every 
stage  of  human  life.  How  much  more  desir- 
able would  it  be,  were  it  not  for  the  hope  of 
the  gospel,  to  share  with  the  brute  creation, 
than  to  bear  the  name  of  man  in  his  fallen 
state  ! The  brutes  have  few  wants ; their 
propensities  and  the  means  of  gratifying 
them,  are  suited  to  their  natures,  adapted  to 
their  powers,  and  conducive  to  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  species.  They  neither  regret  the 
past,  nor  tremble  under  apprehensions  of  the 
future.  It  is  far  otherwise  with  man.  His 
boasted  pleasures  end  with  a sting,  and  often 
he  cannot  bear  his  own  reflections  on  them. 
He  suffers  almost  as  much  from  imaginary 
fears,  as  from  real  afflictions.  The  more  he 
possesses,  the  more  are  the  sources  of  his 
anxieties  multiplied  and  enlarged.  And  after 
having  been  long  wearied  with  a train  of 
mortifications,  pains,  and  inquietudes,  he 
must  at  last,  however  unwilling,  yield  to 
that  stroke  of  death,  the  thought  of  which, 
when  strongly  realized  to  his  mind,  was 
always  sufficient  to  embitter  the  happiest 
hours  of  his  life. 

But  publish  the  glad  tidings  from  the 
mountains,  and  let  the  joyful  sound  diffuse 
over  the  plain.  Your  God  cometh ! Mes- 
siah establishes  a new,  a spiritual  kingdom 
upon  the  earth,  and  his  happy  subjects  are 
freed  from  the  misery  in  which  they  were 
involved.  They  commit  all  their  concerns  to 
him,  and  he  manages  for  them.  Their  fears 
are  removed,  their  irregular  desires  correct- 
ed, and  all  that  is  really  good  for  them,  is 
secured  to  them  by  his  love,  promise,  and 
care.  Afflictions  still  await  them,  but  they 
are  sanctified.  To  them  the  nature  of  afflic- 
tion is  changed.  They  are  appointments 
graciously  designed  for  their  advantage. 
Their  crosfts,  no  less  than  their  comforts, 
are  tokens  of  God’s  favour ; (Heb.  xii.  6,  7 :) 
they  have  them  only  because  their  present 
situation  requires  discipline,  and  they  could 
not  be  so  well  without  them.  They  are  as- 
sured of  support  under  them,  (2  Cor.  xii.  9,) 
and  a final  deliverance  out  of  them  all : for 
there  is  a happy  hour  approaching,  when  all 
their  troubles  shall  cease,  and  they  shall  enter 


THE  MORNING  LIGHT. 


237 


SER.  VII.] 


upon  a state  of  eternal,  uninterrupted,  incon- 
ceivable joy,  Isa.  lx.  20 ; Rev.  xxi.  4. 

For  these  purposes  the  Son  of  God  was  re- 
vealed. The  prophets  saw  his  day  afar  off, 
and  proclaimed  his  approach. — Thy  God 
cometh ! Though  truly  a man,  he  is  truly 
God.  Neither  man  nor  angel  could  remove 
our  guilt,  communicate  to  us  a spiritual  life, 
relieve  us  from  misery,  and  give  us  stable 
peace  in  a changing  world,  hope  and  triumph 
in  death,  and  eternal  life  beyond  it.  But  his 
wisdom  and  power  are  infinite,  and  his  pur- 
pose unchangeable.  He  would  not  have  in- 
vited the  weary  and  heavy  laden  to  come  to 
him,  if  he  was  not  able  and  determined  to 
give  them  rest.  None  that  seek  him  are  dis- 
appointed, or  sent  empty  away : a sufficient 
proof  that  his  compassion,  his  bounty,  his 
fulness  are  properly  divine.  Therefore  the 
apostle,  speaking  of  the  riches  of  his  grace, 
uses  the  epithet,  “ unsearchable,”  Ephes.  iii. 
S.  His  treasury  of  life  and.  salvation  is  inex- 
laustible,  like  a boundless,  shoreless,  bot- 
tomless ocean ; like  the  sun,  which  having 
cheered  the  successive  generations  of  man- 
kind with  his  beams,  still  shines  with  undi- 
minished lustre,  is  still  the  fountain  of  light, 
and  has  always  a sufficiency  to  fill  innumer- 
able millions  of  eyes  in  the  same  instant. 

Does  the  language  of  my  text  cause  joy  to 
spring  up  in  your  hearts  1 or  is  it  nothing  to 
you  1 If  you  heard  the  Messiah,  you  were, 
perhaps,  affected  by  the  music  of  the  passage ; 
hew  much  are  you  to  be  pitied,  if  you  were 
hitherto  unaffected  by  the  sentiment ! Yet 
once  more,  hear, — Thy  God  cometh  ! He  did 
come  in  the  fulness  of  time,  according  to  the 
prophecy,  and  the  word  of  prophecy  assures 
us  that  he  will  come  again.  “ Behold  he 
cometh  in  the  clouds : and  every  eye  shall  see 
him,  and  they  also  that  pierced  him,”  Rev.  i. 
7. — Prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  Amos  iv.  12. 


SERMON  VII. 

THE  MORNING  LIGHT. 

Arise,  shine,  for  thy  light  is  come,  and  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon  thee.  For, 
behold,  darkness  shall  cover  the  earth,  and 
gross  darkness  the  people ; but  the  Lord 
shall  arise  upon  thee,  and  his  glory  shall 
be  seen  upon  thee  : and  the  Gentiles  shall 
come  to  thy  light  and  kings  to  the  bright- 
ness of  thy  rising. — Isaiah  lx.  1 — 3. 

One  strong  internal  proof  that  the  Bible  is 
a divine  revelation,  may  be  drawn  from  the 
subject-matter,  and  particularly  that  it  is  the 
book,  and  the  only  hook,  which  teaches  us  to 
think  highly  and  honourably  of  God.  I say, 
the  only  book,  for  there  is  no  right  knowledge 
of  God  where  the  Bible  is  not  known.  What 


is  the  Jupiter  of  Homer,  compared  with  the 
God  of  Israel,  as  he  is  represented  to  us  by 
his  servants  the  prophets  1 And  if  the  hea- 
then philosophers,  in  some  detached  passages, 
have  sentiments  not  altogether  unworthy  of 
him,  history  honestly  tells  us  how  they  ob- 
tained them.  They  travelled,  and  they  are 
generally  said  to  have  travelled  into  Phoenicia 
or  Egypt,  to  the  confines  of  that  people  who 
alone  thought  rightly  of  God,  because  to  them 
only  he  had  made  himself  known  by  a revela- 
tion. If  such  a description  as  we  have  in  the 
fortieth  chapter  of  Isaiah,  from  the  twelfth 
verse  to  the  end,  had  been  known  only  of 
late  years,  recovered,  we  will  suppose,  out 
of  the  ruins  of  Herculaneum,  there  is  little 
doubt  but  it  would  have  engaged  the  atten- 
tion and  admiration  of  the  learned  world. 
For  the  most  admired  writings  of  antiquity, 
upon  a candid  comparison,  are  unspeakably 
inferior  to  it.  The  inimitable  sublimity  of  the 
prophets  is  natural,  just,  and  unforced,  and 
flows  from  the  grandeur  of  their  subjects,  be- 
cause they  were  influenced  by  him  who  alone 
can  speak  worthily  of  himself. 

A song  so  vast,  a theme  so  high. 

Calls  for  the  voice  that  tuned  the  sky. 

With  them,  the  whole  compass  of  the  crea- 
tion is  but  as  dust  upon  the  balance,  in  re- 
spect of  the  great  Creator.  His  purpose  is 
fate,  his  voice  is  power.  He  speaks  and  it  is 
done.  Thus  he  called  the  universe  into  being; 
and  thus,  as  the  great  Lord  and  proprietor  of 
all,  he  still  maintains  and  governs  it,  direct- 
ing the  frame  of  nature,  and  every  particular 
event  and  contingence,  to  the  promoting  of 
his  own  glory,  the  last  and  highest  end  of  all 
his  works. 

The  principal  of  these  is,  the  exhibition  of 
his  perfections  in  the  person  of  his  Son.  The 
prophecies  we  have  already  considered  an- 
nounce this  event,  with  a gradual  increase 
of  clearness  and  precision,  as  the  period  of 
accomplishment  is  supposed  to  draw  nigh. 
We  lately  heard  the  command  to  proclaim 
his  approach  from  the  hills  and  the  tops  of 
the  mountains.  Here  the  prophet  begins  to 
contemplate  the  effects  of  his  actual  appear- 
ance. The  earth  is  considered  as  involved  in 
a state  of  gross  darkness,  but  the  sun,  the 
Sun  of  righteousness  is  about  to  arise,  and  to 
fill  it  by  his  beams,  with  light,  life,  and  glory. 
These  effects,  indeed,  will  not  extend  to  all, 
for  many  will  love  darkness  rather  than  light. 
But  he  will  not  shine  in  vain.  There  will  be 
a people  prepared  to  receive  him,  and  to  re- 
joice in  his  light.  They  shall  arise  as  from 
sleep,  as  from  the  grave,  and  his  light  re- 
flected upon  them  shall  cause  them  to  shine 
likewise.  Darkness  shall  still  cover  those 
who  reject  him  ; yea,  their  darkness  will  be 
increased.  But  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be 
seen  upon  all  who  believe,  and  their  num- 
bers, from  age  to  age,  shall  be  enlarged. 
Nations  shall  come  to  him,  and  kings  shall 


238 


THE  MORNING  LIGHT. 


be  subservient  to  the  spreading  of  his  king- 
dom. Such  is  the  scope  of  the  passage  before 
us.  I shah  briefly  consider  a few  of  the  lead- 
ing particulars  contained  in  it. 

I.  As  the  sun  is  the  source  of  light  to  the 
natural  world,  so  is  Messiah  to  the  moral  and 
spiritual  world.  Light,  and  its  opposite,  dark- 
ness, are  figuratively  used  in  scripture.  The 
latter  is  applied  to  a state  of  ignorance,  sin, 
and  misery,  as  in  the  following  texts.  “He 
that  walketh  in  darkness,  knoweth  not  whi- 
ther he  goeth,”  John  xii.  35.  “ If  we  say  that 
we  have  fellowship  with  him,  and  walk  in 
darkness,  we  lie,  and  do  not  the  truth,”  1 
John  i.  6.  “ Cast  ye  the  unprofitable  servant 
into  outer  darkness  : there  shall  be  weeping 
and  gnashing  of  teeth,”  Matth.  xxv.  30.  The 
former,  therefore,  signifies  true  knowledge, 
holiness,  and  happiness.  “ Ye  were  sometime 
darkness,  but  now  are  ye  light  in  the  Lord : 
walk  as  children  of  the  light,”  Eph.  v.  8. 
“ When  I sit  in  darkness,  the  Lord  shall  be 
a light  unto  me,”  Micah  vii.  8.  “ Light  is 
sown  for  the  righteous,  and  joy  for  the  up- 
right in  heart,”  Psalm  xcvii.  11.  I select  but 
one  instance  of  each  kind ; an  attentive  reader 
of  the  scriptures  will  meet  with  many  ex- 
pressions of  a like  import.  But  there  is  like- 
wise an  intermediate  state ; light  advancing 
from  the  early  dawn  to  the  perfect  day.  This 
twilight,  no  less  than  day-light  is  from  the 
sun.  Such  was  the  state  of  the  Old  Testa- 
ment church.  Messiah  was  the  source  of 
their  knowledge,  hope,  and  joy ; but  he  was 
(if  I may  so  speak)  below  the  horizon  as  to 
them.  Though  believers  under  that  dispen- 
sation were  a people  saved  of  the  Lord,  they 
were  trained  up  under  types  and  shadows, 
were  influenced  by  a spirit  of  comparative 
bondage  and  distance,  like  children  under 
age,  and  rather  longed  for  than  actually  pos- 
sessed the  gracious  liberty  which  the  children 
of  God  enjoy  under  the  gospel.  But  the  sun 
arose,  and  the  shadows  vanished,  when  the 
Son  of  God  incarnate  dwelt  and  conversed 
with  men,  honoured  his  temple  with  his  per- 
sonal presence,  and  superseded  all  the  Leviti- 
cal  sacrifices,  by  the  one  offering  of  himself 
upon  the  cross.  “The  law  was  given  by 
Moses,  but  grace  and  truth  came  by  Jesus 
Christ.”  But  more  especially  we  date  the 
beginning  of  his  visible  kingdom  from  the 
day  of  Pentecost,  which  followed  his  ascen- 
sion. Then  he  signally  bestowed  the  gifts 
which,  as  mediator,  he  had  received  for  men, 
and,  by  the  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  au- 
thorized and  qualified  his  servants  to  go  forth 
and  preach  salvation  in  his  name.  Then  the 
partition-wall  between  Jew  and  Gentile  was 
taken  away,  and  his  righteousness  was  openly 
shown  in  the  sight  of  the  Heathen.  Abra- 
ham, Moses,  Elijah,  and  other  servants  of 
God,  had  been  highly  favoured  and  highly 
honoured ; but  we  are  assured  by  our  Lord 
himself,  that  none  bom  of  woman  had  been 


[ser.  VII. 

greater  than  John  his  forerunner — and  yet 
he  added,  “ the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  hea- 
ven,” that  is,  in  the  New  Testament  or  gos- 
pel-church, “ is  greater  than  he,”  Matth.  xi. 
11.  The  apostles  were  happy  in  the  peculiar 
privilege  of  attending  on  his  person,  yet  he 
told  them,  “ it  is  expedient  for  you  that  I go 
away,”  John  xvi.  7.  There  were  still  greater 
privileges  depending  upon  the  influence  of 
the  promised  Comforter,  who  was  to  abide 
with  the  church  for  ever.  By  the  power  of 
his  Holy  Spirit,  the  Lord  is  now  present  with 
all  his  ministers  and  people  in  every  place, 
whether  retired  in  secret  from  the  view  of 
men,  or  assembled  together  in  his  name ; 
(Matth.  vi.  6,  xviii.  20,  xxviii.  20;)  and 
though  the  great  events  upon  which  their 
hopes  are  founded,  his  life,  passion,  death, 
resurrection,  and  ascension  took  place  long 
ago,  he  so  realizes  the  declaration  of  them  in 
his  word  to  their  hearts,  that  they  are  no  less 
assured  of  what  they  read  than  the  apostles, 
who  saw  him  with  their  own  eyes.  Thus  the 
gospel-state  is  a dispensation  of  light.  The 
Sun  is  risen  with  life  and  healing  in  his 
beams,  and  they  who  have  the  eyes  of  their 
understanding  opened,  enjoy  a bright  and 
marvellous  day.  They  see,  admire,  adore, 
rejoice,  and  love. 

II.  The  subjects  of  Messiah’s  kingdom,  the 
living  members  of  his  church,  are  so  irradi- 
ated by  him  that  they  shine  likewise,  as  the 
moon  shines,  but  with  a borrowed  light  de- 
rived from  the  sun.  Beholding,  in  this  glass, 
the  glory  of  the  Lord,  they  are  changed  into 
the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory,  (2  Cor. 
iii.  18,)  according  to  the  measure  and  growth 
of  their  faith.  Two  points  may  be  observed 
under  this  head. 

1.  The  fact  that  they  do  thus  shine.  Though 
they  were  once  darkness,  they  are  now  light, 
Eph.  v.  8.  A dark,  ignorant,  wicked,  selfish 
Christian  is  a contradiction  in  terms.  There 
maybe  such,  there  are  too  many  such,  amongst 
those  who  make  a profession  of  the  name  t)f 
Christ;  but  they  who  truly  know  him  walk 
in  the  light,  as  he  is  in  the  light.  They  have 
knowledge,  a good  understanding,  Psalm  cxi. 
10.  Perhaps  the  greater  part  of  real  Chris- 
tians have  little  acquaintance  with  the  litera- 
ture and  science  of  the  world : their  moral 
capacities  may  be  weak,  and  not  improved  by 
education;  they  may  be  in  the  esteem  of 
men,  as  they  are  in  their  own,  but  babes ; 
yet  they  know  more  than  the  wisest  philoso- 
phers who  are  destitute  of  the  grace  of  God. 
They  know  themselves,  they  know  the  Lord, 
they  know  the  evil  of  sin,  and  the  way  of 
salvation ; what  their  proper  happiness  con- 
sists in,  and  how  it  is  to  be  obtained.  They 
have  learned  to  endure  affliction,  to  forgive 
injuries,  and  to  overcome  evil  with  good. 
They  have  attained  a just  sense  of  the  vanity 
of  the  world  and  the  importance  of  eternity. 
They  are  instructed  to  be  contented  and  use 


THE  MORNING  LIGHT. 


239 


SER.  VII.  I 

ful  in  their  stations,  to  discharge  their  duties 
in  relative  life  with  propriety,  and  to  meet 
death  with  comfort.  In  all  these  particulars, 
many  who  have  dazzling  talents,  and  are 
celebrated  for  abilities  and  endowments,  are 
miserably  at  a loss.  True  believers  are  con- 
formed to  the  spirit  and  temper  of  their  Sa- 
viour, and  therefore  are  different  and  dis- 
tinguished from  the  world  around  them.  And 
they  have,  at  least,  the  beginnings  of  true 
peace  and  solid  happiness,  in  communion 
with  him  whom  they  serve. 

2.  The  cause. — They  shine  wholly  by  his 
light.  If  their  own  words  may  be  taken,  the 
proof  of  this  is  easy.  They  are  free  to  con- 
fess that  they  are  wise  only  by  his  wisdom, 
strong  by  his  power  working  in  them,  and 
that  without  him  they  have  not  sufficiency 
to  think  a good  thought,  2 Cor.  iii.  5.  Ex- 
perience has  taught  them  that  they  cannot 
stand  unless  he  upholds  them,  nor  watch 
unless  he  watcheth  with  them,  nor  be  safe 
or  happy  a single  day  without  fresh  commu- 
nications from  him.  But  this  their  experi- 
ence and  acknowledgment  is  the  express 
and  current  doctrine  of  scripture.  There  is 
a real,  though  mystical  union  between  Christ 
and  his  people.  He  is  the  vine,  (John  xv.  1,) 
they  the  branches  : he  is  their  head,  they 
the  members  of  his  body.  They  dwell  in 
him  by  faith,  he  dwells  in  them  by  his  Spirit. 
He  is  their  root  and  their  life;  all  their 
springs  are  in  him,  and  it  is  out  of  his  fulness 
that  they  receive,  John  i.  16.  Therefore  the 
apostle  says,  “ I live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ 
liveth  in  me (Gal.  ii.  20 ;)  “ I can  do  all 
things  through  Christ  strengthening  me,”  2 
Cor.  xii.  9.  And  our  Lord  himself,  who  com- 
forted Paul  with  that  promise,  “ My  grace 
is  sufficient  for  thee,”  apprised  all  his  fol- 
lowers of  their  entire  dependence  upon  him, 
by  saying,  “ Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing,” 
John  xv.  5.  The  language  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament is  to  the  same  purport.  “ They  look- 
ed unto  him  and  were  enlightened,”  Psalm 
xxxiv.  5.  “In  the  Lord  Jehovah  I have 
righteousness  and  strength,”  Isaiah  xlv.  24. 

“ He  giveth  power  to  the  faint,  and  to  them 
that  have  no  might  he  increaseth  strength,” 
Isaiah  xl.  29.  Thus  things  are  constituted 
and  conducted,  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in 
his  presence,  but  that  he  who  glorieth  may 
glory  in  the  Lord,  1 Cor.  i.  29 — 31. 

III.  They  who  wilfully  refuse  and  turn 
from  this  light,  do  thereby  involve  themselves 
in  double  darkness,  and  become  more  infatu- 
ated and  wicked  than  those  to  whom  the 
light  has  not  been  proposed.  Their  evils, 
likewise,  are  more  aggravated  than  they 
would  have  been  if  the  light  had  not  visited 
them.  Thus  our  Lord  Messiah  speaks  of  the 
Jews,  “ If  I had  not  come  and  spoken  unto 
them,  they  had  not  had  sin ; but  now  they 
have  no  cloak  for  their  sin,”  John  xv.  22. 
And  again,  “ For  judgment  I am  come  into 


this  world,  that  they  which  see  not  might 
see,  and  they  which  see  might  be  made 
blind,”  John  ix.  39.  He  came  to  make  the 
ignorant  wise  unto  salvation  ; but  they  who, 
from  a proud  conceit  of  their  own  wisdom 
and  sufficiency,  disdain  his  instruction,  being 
left  to  themselves,  give  abundant  evidence 
that  the  light  they  boast  of  is  but  gross  and 
palpable  darkness.  The  grossest  errors,  the 
greatest  obduracy  of  heart,  the  most  extreme 
profaneness  of  spirit,  and  the  most  abominable 
wickedness  in  practice,  may  be  expected, 
and  will  certainly  be  found  where  the  gospel 
is  despised. 

It  is  evident,  that  the  morality  which  is  so 
highly  admired  by  the  Christian  world,  and 
set  in  opposition  to  the  gospel  of  Christ,  is 
much  leaner  and  more  scanty  than  the  mora- 
lity of  the  Heathens.  I speak  of  the  idea 
only  ; for  neither  have  the  Heathens  of  old, 
nor  of  the  present  day,  acted  up  to  their  own 
rules.  But  I do  not  hesitate  to  affirm,  that  none 
of  our  modern  moralists  who  have  disowned 
the  gospel  revelation,  have  given  us  a sys- 
tem of  morality  equal  to  that  of  Tully  the 
Pagan.  Many  of  the  Heathens  acknow- 
ledged the  desirableness  and  necessity  of  re- 
velation ; though  infidels,  born  in  a Christian 
land,  think  it  a high  mark  of  their  wisdom  to 
despise  it ; and  avowed  atheists,  that  is,  men 
who  deny  either  the  being  or  the  providence 
of  God,  or  the  obligations  mankind  are  under 
to  obey  him,  are  seldom  to  be  met  with  but 
in  countries  where  the  Bible  is  known.  The 
heart  must  have  obstinately  and  repeatedly 
resisted  light  and  conviction,  before  it  can 
ordinarily  proceed  to  these  dreadful  lengths. 
But  while  the  blind  stumble  in  the  noon  of 
day,  Messiah’s  people  shall  walk  in  confi- 
dence and  peace,  (Psalm  Ixxxix.  15, 16,)  and 
shine  as  lights  in  the  midst  of  a crooked  and 
perverse  generation,  Phil.  ii.  15. 

IV.  The  third  verse  of  this  chapter  fore- 
tells, and  therefore  secures,  the  conversion 
of  the  Gentiles  or  Heathens.  The  times  and 
the  seasons  are  in  the  disposal  of  God,  but 
the  scriptures  must  be  fulfilled.  Much  was 
done  in  the  first  age  of  Christianity.  A single 
instrument,  the  apostle  Paul,  as  he  himself 
informs  us,  preached  the  faith,  which  he  for- 
merly laboured  to  destroy,  “ from  Jerusalem 
round  about  to  Illyricum,”  (Rom.  xv.  19,) 
and  probably  much  farther  afterwards.  And 
the  Lord,  who  appointed  him  to  this  service, 
accompanied  his  message  with  his  own  power; 
so  that  he  had  signal  success,  in  turning  men 
from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  worship 
of  dumb  idols,  to  serve  the  living  and  true 
God ; and  in  planting  the  gospel,  and  gather- 
ing churches  in  every  province.  The  gospel 
found  an  early  reception  at  Rome,  which  fa- 
cilitated its  spread  into  the  different  parts  of 
the  Roman  empire.  And  we  have  reason  to 
believe  it  was  introduced  into  our  island  in  a 
few  years  after  our  Lord’s  ascension.  And 


240 


THE  SUN  RISING 


though  what  was  called  the  conversion  of 
heathen  nations  in  some  following  ages,  went 
little  farther  than  to  prevail  on  them  to  as- 
sume the  name  of  Christians,  and  left  them 
considered  as  nations,  as  destitute  of  the 
spirit  and  blessings  of  Christianity  as  it  found 
them  ; yet  I cannot  doubt,  that  wherever  the 
New  Testament,  and  the  sufferings  of  Mes- 
siah were  known,  some  individuals  at  least 
experienced  a real  and  saying  change.  And 
we  are  warranted  to  hope  for  still  greater 
things;  for  a time  when  the  gross  darkness, 
which  as  yet  covers  a great  part  of  the  world, 
shall  be  dispelled  ; and  the  Redeemer's  king- 
dom, spoken  of  by  Daniel  the  prophet,  as  a 
stone  cut  out  without  hands,  shall  become  a 
great  mountain,  and  fill  the  whole  earth,  Dan. 
ii.  35.  But  this  pleasing  subject  will  come  more 
directly  under  our  consideration  hereafter. 

V.  The  call  in  my  text  may  be  taken  in 
a general  sense,  like  that  of  the  apostle, 
“ Awake,  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from 
the  dead,  and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light,” 
Eph.  v.  14.  Natural  light  requires  eyes  to 
perceive  it.  It  would  be  absurd  to  point  out 
the  beauties  of  an  extensive  prospect  to  a 
blind  man.  To  him  the  face  of  nature  pre- 
sents only  a universal  blank.  But  the  light 
of  the  gospel  not  only  discovers  the  most  im- 
portant objects  to  those  who  can  see,  but  has 
a marvellous  efficacy  to  open  the  eyes  of 
the  blind.  It  is  the  appointed  instrument  of 
divine  power  for  this  purpose.  In  vain  would 
be  the  labour  and  expectation  of  the  husband- 
man, if  God  did  not  afford  the  rain,  and  the 
snow,  to  water  the  earth,  and  the  enlivening 
influences  of  the  sun,  to  draw  forth  the  ten- 
der blade,  and  to  ripen  the  corn.  Equally 
unsuccessful  would  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel  prove  to  sinful  men,  though  in  itself 
it  be  eminently  the  truth  and  wisdom  of  God, 
exactly  suited  to  their  state,  and  of  the 
highest  importance  to  their  welfare,  if  he  had 
not  promised  that  his  word,  where  simply 
and  faithfully  delivered  in  dependence  upon 
his  blessing,  shall  not  be  spoken  in  vain,  but 
shall  certainly  accomplish  the  end  for  which 
he  has  sent  it,  Is.  lv.  10,  11.  This  promise, 
together  with  the  experience  of  its  truth  in 
our  own  case,  and  our  knowledge  of  its  uni- 
form effects  in  every  age  and  country  where 
the  doctrine  of  the  cross  has  been  preached, 
encourages  ministers  to  persevere  in  publish- 
ing the  glad  tidings,  in  defiance  of  all  the 
opposition  and  disappointments  we  meet  with. 
We  lament,  but  cannot  wonder,  that  the 
gospel  is  so  generally  neglected.  As  a dis- 
pensation of  grace,  it  offends  the  pride  of  man, 
as  a dispensation  of  holiness,  it  contradicts 
his  desires  and  passions.  His  spirit  is  de- 
graded, his  heart  is  pre-engaged,  he  loves 
the  present  world,  and  has  no  more  taste  or 
inclination  for  a life  of  communion  with  God 
here,  and  such  a heaven  as  the  scriptures 
propose  hereafter,  than  the  beasts  of  the  field. 


[ser.  VIII. 

But  the  Lord  has  said,  “ I will  work,  and 
who  shall  let  it  1”  Is.  xliii.  13.  When  he  is 
pleased  to  clothe  the  word  preached  with  the 
influences  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  and  to  apply  it 
to  the  conscience,  it  is  quick,  powerful,  pene- 
trating, and  irresistible  as  lightning;  it  con- 
veys a voice,  which  the  deaf,  yea,  the  dead, 
must  hear : it  forces  a light  upon  the  mind 
which  cannot  be  evaded.  Then  things  are 
seen  as  they  are.  The  nature  and  desert  of 
sin  is  apprehended,  and  then  the  gospel  is 
found  to  be  the  only  balm  for  a distressed  and 
wounded  conscience.  Therefore,  ^having  the 
Lord’s  command  and  promise,  we  are  not  to 
be  discouraged  by  the  carelessness  or  obsti- 
nacy of  those  who  know  not  what  they  do. 
We  are  aware  of  the  difficulty,  yea,  the  im- 
possibility of  succeeding  in  our  endeavour  to 
save  the  souls  of  our  hearers,  if  we  had  only 
to  depend  upon  our  own  arguments  or  ear- 
nestness. We  are  not  to  reason,  but  to  obey. 
Our  business  is  to  deliver  our  message,  and 
in  our  happier  moments  to  water  it  with  our 
prayers  and  tears.  When  we  have  done  this 
we  can  do  no  more.  The  event  must  be  left 
with  him  in  whose  name  we  speak.  We 
must  not  suppress  nor  disguise  what  we  are 
commanded  to  declare  ; nor  wilfully  make 
any  additions  of  our  own,  to  accommodate  it 
to  the  taste  or  prejudice  of  our  hearers, 
2 Cor.  iv.  2.  Let  those  preach  smooth  things 
who  will  venture  to  answer  at  the  great  tri- 
bunal, for  the  souls  that  have  miscarried 
under  their  ministry ; we  dare  not.  Let 
those  be  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ, 
(Rom.  i.  16,)  who  feel  no  obligations  to  him 
for  his  dying  love ; we  cannot,  and  by  the 
grace  of  God,  we  will  not;  we  will  glory  in 
it.  God  forbid  that  we  should  glory  in  any 
thing  else  ! (Gal.  vi.  14.)  Like  Ezekiel,  we 
are  commanded  to  preach  and  prophesy  to 
dry  bones,  and  he  who  sends  us  can  cause 
the  dry  bones  to  live.  “ O ye  dry  bones, 
hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  !”  Ezek.  xxxvii.  4. 
The  word  of  his  salvation  is  sent  to  you. 
The  Lord  is  risen  indeed  ! Arise,  shine,  for 
your  light  is  come ! In  his  name  we  pro- 
claim pardon  and  peace  to  all  who  will  seek 
him.  But  seek  him  to-day,  while  it  is  called 
to-day ; to-morrow  is  not  yours.  Seek  him 
now,  while  he  may  be  found.  Harden  not 
your  hearts.  Tremble,  lest  a promise  being 
left  us  of  entering  into  his  rest,  any  of  you 
should  finally  come  short  of  it,  Heb.  iv.  1. 


SERMON  VIII. 

TI1E  SUN  RISING  UPON  A DARK  WORLD. 

The  people  that  walked  in  darkness  have 
seen  a great  Light ; they  that  dioell  in  the 
land  of  the  shadow  of  death , upon  them 
hath  the  light  shined. — Isaiah  ix.  2. 

1 Contrasts  are  suited  to  illustrate  and 
| strengthen  the  impression  of  each  other.  The 


UPON  A DARK  WORLD. 


241 


SER.  VIII.] 


happiness  of  those,  who,  by  faith  in  Messiah, 
are  brought  into  a state  of  peace,  liberty,  and 
comfort,  is  greatly  enhanced  and  heightened 
by  the  consideration  of  that  previous  state  of 
misery  in  which  they  once  lived,  and  of  the 
greater  misery  to  which  they  were  justly  ex- 
posed. They  are  not  only  made  meet  to  be 
partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light,  (Col.  i.  12, 13,)  but  they  have  been  de- 
livered from  the  powers  of  darkness.  Thus, 
while  they  have  communion  with  God  as  a 
father,  they  contemplate  their  privilege  with 
a greater  pleasure,  than  they  probably  could 
do  if  they  had  never  known  a difference. 
They  remember  a time  when  they  were  afar 
off,  without  hope,  and  without  God  in  the 
world ; and  they  remember  how  carelessly 
they  then  trifled  upon  the  brink  of  destruc- 
tion. In  this  deplorable  and  dangerous  situa- 
tion they  were  found  of  the  Lord,  when  they 
sought  him  not,  Isa.  lxv.  1.  He  convinced, 
humbled,  and  pardoned  them,  and  brought 
them  near  to  himself,  into  a state  of  adoption 
and  communion  by  the  blood  of  Jesus.  The 
admiration,  gratitude,  and  love,  which  they 
feel  for  this  undeserved  grace,  gives  them  a 
more  lively  sense  of  the  blessings  they  enjoy. 
Yea,  the  thought  of  what  they  have  been  re- 
deemed from  (of  which  they  will  then  have 
a much  clearer  perception  than  at  present) 
will  add  to  their  joys  in  heaven,  and  inspire 
such  a song  of  praise  as  will  be  peculiar  to 
themselves,  and  in  which  the  holy  angels, 
who  never  felt  the  stings  of  guilt,  nor  tasted 
the  sweetness  of  pardoning  mercy,  will  not 
be  able  to  join  them.  They  are  accordingly 
represented,  in  the  prophetical  vision,  as 
standing  nearest  to  the  throne,  and  uniting 
in  the  noblest  strains  of  praise  to  him  who 
sitteth  upon  it,  (Rev.  v.  9 — 21,)  while  the 
surrounding  angels  can  only  take  part  in  the 
chorus,  and  admire  and  adore,  when  they 
behold  the  brightest  displays  of  the  glory  of 
the  wonder-working  God,  manifested  in  his 
love  to  worthless,  helpless  sinners. 

These  opposite  ideas  are  joined  in  my  text. 
The  people  who  are  spoken  of  as  rejoicing  in 
a great  light,  were,  till  this  light  arose  and 
shone  upon  them,  in  darkness;  walking,  sit- 
ting, living  in  darkness,  and  in  the  land  of 
the  shadow  of  death.  That  this  passage  refers 
to  Messiah,  we  have  a direct  proof.  The 
evangelist  refers  it  expressly  to  him,  and 
points  out  the  time  and  manner  of  its  literal 
accomplishment,  Matth.  iv.  15,  16.  I shall 
first  consider  the  literal  sense  and  completion 
of  the  prophecy,  and  then  show  how  fitly  it 
applies  to  the  state  of  mankind  at  large,  and 
to  the  happy  effects  of  the  gospel  of  salvation ; 
which,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  has  been  the 
instrument  of  bringing  multitudes  of  many 
nations,  peoples,  and  languages,  out  of  a 
state  of  gross  darkness,  into  marvellous  light, 

1 Pet.  ii.  9. 

I.  Hebrew  words  (like  many  in  our  own 

Vol.  II.  2 H 


language)  have  often  more  than  one  significa- 
tion. But  only  one  sense  can  be  expressed, 
in  a version.  And  therefore  interpreters  and 
translators  frequently  differ.  Which  of  the 
different  words,  used  to  express  the  meaning 
of  the  same  original  term,  is  most  happily 
chosen,  may  be  sometimes  decided  by  the 
context.  The  two  words,  in  the  first  verse 
of  this  chapter,  rendered  lightly  afflicted  and 
grievously  afflicted , signify  likewise,  the  one 
to  think  lightly  of,  to  account  vile ; and  the 
other,  to  honour,  to  render  honourable,  and 
glorious.  Both  these  words  occur  in  one 
verse,  and  are  used  in  these  senses,  in  the 
Lord’s  message  to  Eli,  “Them  that  honour 
me  I will  honour,  and  they  that  despise  me 
shall  be  lightly  esteemed,”  1 Sam.  ii.  30. 
Had  the  same  words  been  thus  rendered  in 
the  passage  before  us,  the  sense  of  both 
verses  would,  I think,  have  been  more  plain, 
connected,  and  consistent  to  the  following 
purport,  agreeable  to  the  translation  given  by 
Vitringa,  and  the  present  Bishop  of  London. 
“ Nevertheless  there  shall  not  be  dimness  [or 
darkness]  as  in  the  time  of  her  vexation  or 
distress.  He  formerly  debased  [made  light 
or  vile]  the  land  of  Zebulon  and  Naphtali, 
but  in  the  latter  time  he  hath  made  it  glori- 
ous, even  [the  land]  by  the  way  of  the  sea, 
beyond  Jordan,  Galilee  of  the  Gentiles.  [For] 
the  people  that  walked  in  darkness  have  seen 
a great  light,”  &c. — Such  was  the  afflicted 
and  low  state  of  Galilee  previous  to  the  com- 
ing of  Messiah  ; such  was  the  exaltation  and 
honour  it  derived  from  his  appearance. 

1.  The  land  allotted  to  the  tribes  of  Issa- 
char,  Zebulon,  and  Naphtali,  was  chiefly 
included  in  the  province,  which,  upon  a sub- 
sequent division  of  the  country,  obtained  the 
name  of  Galilee.  The  northern  part  of  it,  the 
inheritance  of  Naphtali,  was  the  boundary  or 
frontier  towards  Syria,  and  had  been  fre- 
quently vexed  and  afflicted,  when  the  sins 
of  Israel  brought  the  armies  of  their  enemies 
upon  them,  as  frontier  countries  usually  suf- 
fer most  in  times  of  invasion  and  war.  Par- 
ticularly this  part  of  the  land,  called  Galilee 
of  the  Gentiles,  was  the  first,  and  most  im- 
mediately exposed  to  the  ravages  of  Tiglath- 
Pileser  and  Sennacherib.  And  as  the  peo- 
ple there  were  likewise  more  mixed  with 
foreigners,  and  at  the  greatest  distance  from 
the  capital,  Jerusalem,  on  these  accounts 
Galilee  was  lightly  esteemed  by  the  Jews 
themselves.  They  thought  that  no  prophet 
could  arise  in  Galilee,  John  vii.  52.  It  even 
prejudiced  Nathaniel  against  the  first  report 
he  received  of  Jesus  as  Messiah,  that  he 
lived,  and  was  generally  supposed  (by  those 
who  were  content  to  be  governed  by  popular 
rumour,  without  inquiring  attentively  for 
themselves)  to  have  been  born  in  Galilee. 
He  asked  with  an  appearance  of  surprise, 

“ Can  any  good  thing  come  out  of  Nazareth  1” 
John  i.  46.  They  were  accounted  a rude.,  un  * 


242 


THE  SUN  RISING 


polished,  provincial  people.  And  therefore, 
when  Peter  would  have  denied  any  acquaint- 
ance with  his  Lord,  he  was  discovered  to  be 
a Galilean,  (Mark  xiv.  70,)  by  his  dialect  and 
manner  of  speech. 

2.  This  despised  and  least  valued  part  of 
the  land  of  Israel  was  the  principal  scene  of 
Messiah’s  life  and  ministry,  insomuch  that, 
as  I have  observed,  he  was  supposed  to  have 
been  born  there,  a mistake  which  his  enemies 
industriously  supported  and  made  the  most 
of ; for  those  who  could  persuade  themselves 
that  it  was  so  in  fact,  would  think  themselves 
justified  in  rejecting’  his  claim,  it  being  one 
undeniable  mark  of  Messiah,  given  by  the 
prophet  Micah,  that  he  was  to  be  born  in 
Bethlehem  of  Judah,  Micah  v.  2.  He  was, 
however,  brought  up  at  Nazareth,  and  lived 
for  a time  in  Capernaum,  towns  in  Galilee, 
but  both  of  so  little  repute,  that,  had  they  not 
been  connected  with  his  history,  it  is  not 
probable  that  their  names  would  have  been 
transmitted  to  posterity. 

3.  But  by  his  residence  there,  Galilee  was 
honoured  and  ennobled.  He  himself  declared, 
that  on  this  account,  Chorazin,  Bethsaida,  and 
Capernaum  (though  probably  none  of  them 
were  more  than  inconsiderable  fishing-towns) 
were  exalted  even  to  heaven,  Matth.  xi.  21 
— 23.  Those  were  highly  privileged  places 
which  our  Lord  condescended  to  visit  in  per- 
son ; so  likewise  are  those  places  where  he  is 
pleased  to  send  his  gospel.  I have  observed 
formerly,  and  I make  no  apology  for  repeat- 
ing a truth  so  very  important  and  so  little 
attended  to,  that  the  glorious  gospel  of  the 
blessed  God,  when  faithfully  preached,  and 
thankfully  received  and  improved,  renders  an 
obscure  village  more  honourable,  and  of  more 
real  consequence,  than  the  metropolis  of  a 
great  empire,  where  this  light  shineth  not. 
For  what  are  the  dark  places  of  the  earth, 
howrever  celebrated  for  numbers  and  opu- 
lence, for  the  monuments  of  ambition  and 
arts,  but  habitations  of  cruelty,  infatuation, 
and  misery  ! 

4.  Though  Galilee  was  favoured  with  the 
scriptures,  and  with  synagogue-worship,  and 
the  inhabitants  were  a people  who  professed 
to  know  the  God  of  Israel,  it  was  a land  of 
darkness  at  the  time  of  Messiah’s  appearance. 
Though  they  were  not  idolaters,  ignorance 
prevailed  among  them.  The  law  and  the  pro- 
phets were  read  in  their  synagogues,  but  we 
may  believe  to  little  good  purpose,  while  they 
were  under  the  direction  of  perverse  teachers, 
who  substituted  the  traditions  of  men  for  the 
commands  of  God.  The  single  circumstance 
of  keeping  herds  of  swine,  as  the  Gadarenes 
did,  seems  a proof  that  the  la  w of  Moses  wTas 
but  little  regarded  by  them.  They,  as  well  as 
the  people  of  Judea,  were  under  the  guidance 
of  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  in  their  religious 
concerns,  who  were,  if  I may  use  a modern 
phrase,  the  clergy  of  that  time ; and  these,  we 


[ser.  Till. 

are  assured  by  him  who  knew  their  hearts, 
were  generally  corrupted,  blind  leaders  of 
the  blind.  Yet  they  were  held  in  ignorant 
admiration,  and  implicitly  submitted  to.  From 
the  character  of  the  public  ministers  of  reli- 
gion, we  may,  without  great  danger  of  mis- 
take, infer  the  character  of  the  people  wrho 
are  pleased  and  satisfied  with  their  ministra- 
tions. As  the  disciple  cannot,  ordinarily,  bo 
expected  to  be  superior  to  his  master,  (Luke 
vi.  40,)  the  religion  of  the  scribes  may  be 
taken  as  a standard  of  that  of  the  Galileans, 
who  were  instructed  by  them : yet  these  were 
the  people  among  whom  Messiah  chiefly  con- 
versed ; so  that  his  enemies  styled  him  a 
Galilean  and  a Nazarene,  as  a mark  of  re- 
proach and  contempt.  Many  of  his  apostles, 
perhaps  the  most  of  them,  were  Galileans 
likewise.  He  seeth  not  as  man  seeth,  1 Sam. 
xvi.  7.  The  most  of  his  immediate  followers 
while  upon  earth  were  such  as  men  despised, 
on  account  of  their  situation,  rank,  or  call- 
ings; publicans  and  sinners,  fishermen  and 
Galileans.  This  was,  among  other  reasons, 
for  the  encouragement  of  the  poor,  the  desti- 
tute, the  despised,  the  miserable,  and  the 
guilty,  in  succeeding  ages,  who  should  desire 
to  put  their  trust  in  his  name  and  to  implore 
his  mercy.  To  those  who  received  him  he 
was  the  light,  the  true  light ; he  relieved 
them  from  the  ignorance,  wickedness,  and 
distress  in  which  he  found  them.  They,  on 
their  parts,  bore  testimony  to  him.  They  saw 
and  acknowledged  his  glory.  They  felt  his 
powdr,  and  devoted  themselves  to  his  service. 
Thus  much  for  the  literal  sense. 

II.  But  this  prophecy  is  not  to  be  restrained 
to  the  first  and  more  immediate  season  of  ita 
accomplishment.  The  Lord  speaks  thus  of 
Messiah  in  another  place : “ It  is  a light  thing 
that  thou  shouldest  be  my  servant,  to  raise 
up  the  tribes  of  Jacob,  and  to  restore  the  pre- 
served of  Israel : I will  also  give  thee  for  a 
light  to  the  Gentiles,  that  thou  mayest  be  my 
salvation  to  the  ends  of  the  earth,”  Isaiah 
xlix.  6.  And  there  are  many  declarations  of 
a like  import.  He  is  still  the  light  of  the 
world,  (John  viii.  12,)  though  no  longer  visi- 
ble and  conversant  with  men.  By  the  in- 
fluence and  power  of  his  Spirit,  he  is  still 
present  wherever  his  gospel  is  known.  This 
his  word  of  grace  and  truth  he  sends  where 
, he  pleases,  and  with  a discrimination  not  un- 
like that  wThich  he  observed  when  he  was 
upon  earth.  The  gospel  is  preached  to  the 
poor.  Courts  and  palaces  are  seldom  favoured 
with  it.  While  he  passes  by  many  great 
cities,  many  habitations  of  the  wise  and 
wealthy,  he  is  known  in  villages  and  cot- 
tages. His  condescension  and  favour  to  those 
who  are  unnoticed  by  the  world,  cannot  be 
too  highly  extolled.  That  the  others  are  ex- 
cluded from  the  same  benefits  is  more  pro- 
perly to  be  ascribed  to  their  obstinacy  than 
to  his  will.  They  exclude  themselves.  He 


UPON  A DARK  WORLD. 


243 


SER.  VJU.] 

stands  at  the  door  and  knocks,  Rev.  iii.  20. 
His  word  is  within  their  reach ; his  ministers 
are  within  their  call.  They  might  easily  en- 
joy every  mean  and  help  which  the  gospel 
provides  for  sinners  if  they  pleased,  but  they 
do  not  please.  They  are  either  engaged  in  a 
round  of  sensual  pleasure,  or  engrossed  by 
studies  and  pursuits  which  possess  their 
hearts  and  fill  up  their  thoughts  and  time,  so 
that  they  have  neither  leisure  nor  inclination 
to  attend  to  the  things  which  pertain  to  their 
peace.  Instead  of  inviting  his  gospel  to  them, 
they  too  frequently  employ  their  power  and 
influence  to  discountenance,  and,  if  possible, 
to  suppress  it.  They  have  their  choice.  The 
great  and  the  gay  will  not  receive  his  mes- 
sage ; it  is  therefore  sent  to  the  poor  and  to 
the  wretched,  and  they  will  hear  it.  Yet  as 
he  visited  Jerusalem  in  person,  and  taught 
there,  so  London  likewise  is  favoured  with 
the  light  of  his  gospel.  But  alas ! how  few 
believe  the  report ! They  who  do,  experience 
the  change  described  in  my  text.  Their  dark- 
ness is  changed  into  marvellous  light. 

Mankind,  till  enlightened  by  the  word  and 
Spirit  of  grace,  are  truly  in  a state  of  dark- 
ness. Thick  darkness  is  a vail  which  conceals 
from  us,  not  only  distant,  but  the  nearest  ob- 
jects. A man  in  the  dark  cannot  perceive 
either  friend  or  enemy ; he  may  be  in  great 
danger,  yet  think  himself  in  safety ; or,  if  he 
thinks  himself  in  danger,  be  unable  to  take 
any  step  for  his  preservation,  from  a want  of 
light.  Thus,  though  God  be  our  maker  and 
preserver,  though  in  him  we  live,  move,  and 
have  our  being,  though  we  are  surrounded 
with  his  presence,  and  proofs  of  his  wisdom 
and  goodness  are  before  us  wherever  we  turn 
our  eyes,  yet  we  live  without  him  in  the 
world.  Equally  ignorant  are  we  of  ourselves, 
of  the  proper  happiness  of  our  nature,  or  how 
it  is  to  be  attained.  We  know  neither  the 
cause,  nor  the  cure,  nor  the  consequences  of 
our  proneness  to  cleave  to  the  dust,  and  of 
placing  our  affection  on  inadequate  and.  un- 
satisfying objects. 

And  if  we  suppose  a person  awakened  to 
a conviction  of  the  evil  of  sin,  and  to  under- 
stand that  nothing  less  than  the  favour  of 
God  can  make  a rational  and  immortal  crea- 
ture happy,  still,  without  the  gospel,  he 
would  be  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of 
death.  His  case  may  be  compared  to  that  of 
a person  shipwrecked  upon  some  desert,  in- 
hospitable coast,  suffering  great  horrors  and 
anxiety,  from  his  exposedness  to  perish,  by 
hunger,  by  enemies,  or  wild  beasts — who,  if 
he  saw,  at  no  very  great  distance,  an  island, 
and  was,  by  some  means,  informed  and  as- 
sured, that  that  island  was  the  seat  of  safety, 
plenty,  and  pleasure ; and  that,  if  he  was 
once  there,  his  dangers  would  all  cease,  and 
his  utmost  wishes  be  satisfied ; still,  if  there 
were  neither  bridge,  nor  boat,  nor  any  means 
by  which  he  might  arrive  thither,  to  know 


that  happiness  was  so  near  him,  yet  inac- 
cessible to  him,  would  but  aggravate  his 
misery,  and  make  his  despair  more  emphati- 
cally pungent.  Miserable  indeed  must  we 
be,  if  we  clearly  perceived  that  only  he, 
whose  creatures  we  are,  can  make  us  happy ; 
and  that,  as  sinners,  we  have  forfeited  his 
favour,  and  are  utterly  incapable  of  regaining 
it,  if  we  were  left  under  these  views,  without 
any  hope  of  relief.  Such  must  have  been  our 
situation  sooner  or  later,  if  God,  who  is  rich 
in  mercy,  had  not  himself  provided  the  means 
of  reconciliation.  For  though  a hope  of  par- 
don is  easily  taken  up  by  those  who  are  igno- 
rant of  the  holiness  of  God,  and  the  malignity 
of  sin,  yet  nothing  but  a declaration  from 
himself,  that  there  is  forgiveness  with  him, 
can  give  peace  to  a truly  awakened  con- 
science. But  Jesus  dispels  this  darkness,  and 
brings  life  and  immortality  to  light  by  the 
gospel.  For, 

1.  The  office  and  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
so  absolutely  necessary  to  make  us  duly  sen- 
sible, either  of  our  danger,  or  of  the  possi- 
bility of  escaping  it,  is  entirely  the  effect  of 
his  mediation.  The  soul  of  man,  originally 
formed  to  be  the  temple  of  the  living  God, 
when  defiled  by  sin,  was  justly  forsaken  by 
its  great  inhabitant;  and,  since  the  fall, 
answers  the  prophetical  description  given  of 
Babylon : “ It  is  become  the  habitation  of 
devils,  the  hold  of  every  foul  spirit,  and  a 
cage  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  bird,” 
Rev.  xviii.  2.  If  we  ask,  as  with  good  reason 
we  may,  How  can  the  wise  and  holy  God, 
who  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity, 
and  with  whom  evil  cannot  dwell,  return  to 
his  sanctuary,  thus  polluted  and  profaned! 
an  answer  is  afforded  in  that  gracious  pro- 
mise, “ I will  sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you, 
and  you  shall  be  clean : from  all  your  filthi- 
ness, and  from  all  your  idols,  will  I cleanse 
you : and  I will  take  away  the  stony  heart, 
and  I will  give  you  a heart  of  flesh,  and,”  in 
order  to  this,  “ I will  put  my  Spirit  within 
you,”  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25,  26.  But  the  source  of 
this  mercy  is  his  sovereign  love  and  purpose, 
to  give  the  seed  of  the  woman,  his  only  Son, 
to  be  the  mediator  of  sinners.  By  his  atone- 
ment, to  be  manifested  in  due  time,  but  which 
had  a virtual  influence  from  the  beginning, 
the  Holy  Spirit  returned  to  dwell  with  men. 

2.  His  obedience  unto  death,  when  re- 
vealed by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  the  enlightened 
conscience,  affords  a clear  and  satisfactory 
discovery  of  reconciliation  with  God : it 
shows,  that  on  his  part,  every  hinderance  to 
the  free  exercise  of  mercy  is  thereby  re- 
moved, the  honour  of  his  law  vindicated,  and 
the  demands  of  his  justice  answered.  On  our 
parts,  by  opening  a door  of  hope,  it  removes 
that  enmity  and  obduracy  of  heart,  which  are 
nourished  by  consciousness  of  guilt,  and  a 
secret  foreboding  of  deserved  punishment 
But  when  the  dignity  of  the  Redeemer’s 


244 


CHARACTERS  AND  NAMES  OF  MESSIAH. 


person,  the  causes,  nature,  and  design  of  his 
sufferings  are  understood,  emotions  of  admi- 
ration, love,  and  gratitude,  till  then  unknown, 
are  felt,  and  obstinate  sinners  are  made  a 
willing  people  in  this  day  of  divine  power. 

3.  The  doctrine  of  the  cross  pours  a light 
upon  every  subject  and  circumstance  in  which 
we  are  concerned.  It  enlarges  the  mind,  and 
forms  the  judgment  and  taste,  agreeable  to 
the  standard  of  truth,  and  the  real  nature  of 
things.  It  rectifies  those  prejudices  and  pre- 
possessions which  dispose  us  to  mistake  good 
for  evil,  and  evil  for  good,  (Isa.  v.  20,)  to 
pursue  trifles  with  earnestness,  and  to  trifle 
with  things  of  the  greatest  importance.  In 
Jesus  Christ  crucified,  all  the  treasures  of 
wisdom  and  knowledge  are  at  once  both  hid- 
den and  exhibited.  This  object  the  holy  an- 
gels, whose  knowledge  of  the  wonders  in 
creation,  without  doubt,  greatly  surpasses  our 
conceptions,  incessantly  contemplate  with  de- 
light, as  affording  the  brightest  displays  of 
the  manifold  wisdom  of  God,  Eph.  iii.  10.  It 
is  especially  the  fountain  of  wisdom  to  sin- 
ners. They  look  unto  him,  and  are  enlight- 
ened. The  slight  and  partial  thoughts  they 
once  entertained  of  the  great  God,  the  mis- 
taken judgment  they  formed  of  themselves, 
of  their  state  and  their  conduct,  are  corrected 
by  their  knowledge  of  the  cross : from  thence 
they  derive  a solid  hope,  a humble  spirit,  just 
views  of  their  duty  and  obligations,  and  mo- 
tives and  prospects  which  animate  them  in  a 
course  of  cheerful,  persevering  obedience  to 
the  will  of  God. 

4.  In  this  way,  God,  as  revealed  in  Christ, 
is  apprehended  and  chosen,  as  the  chief  and 
proper  good  of  the  soul.  Thus  the  poor  are 
enriched  with  the  pearl  of  great  price,  and 
the  weary  obtain  rest.  The  mind,  no  longer 
burdened  with  anxiety,  nor  mortified  with  a 
succession  of  disappointments,  which  attend- 
ed the  vain  pursuit  of  happiness  in  earthly 
things,  possesses  present  peace,  and  rejoices 
in  the  expectation  of  future  glory.  It  is  re- 
leased from  the  slavery  of  hewing  out  broken 
cisterns,  and  introduced  to  the  fountain  of 
living  waters.  Or,  to  close  with  the  beautiful 
image  in  my  text,  The  people  who  once 
walked  in  darkness,  and  the  region  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  are  translated  into  the  king- 
dom of  life  and  salvation,  Col.  i.  13. 

How  greatly  are  they  to  be  pitied  who  re- 
ject the  light  of  the  gospel ! It  is  true,  they 
cannot  see  it ; but  it  is  equally  true,  they  will 
not.  But  may  I not  hope  that  this  is  a day 
of  divine  power,  in  which  some  of  you  shall 
be  made  a willing  people1?  Do  not  reason 
against  your  own  life,  but  repent,  and  believe 
the  gospel.  The  light  shines  around  you, 
whether  you  perceive  it  or  not ; and  it  has  an 
efficacy  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind.  Where 
the  gospel  is  preached,  the  Lord  is  present. 
If  you  call  upon  him,  he  will  hear,  and  you 
shall  receive  your  sight.  If  the  grace  and  the 


[ser.  IX, 

glory  of  the  Saviour  have  hitherto  made  no 
impression  upon  your  heart,  you  are  spi- 
ritually blind.  Could  you  be  sensible  of  your 
disorder,  the  remedy  is  at  hand.  If  now,  at 
last,  you  are  willing  to  seek  him,  he  will  be 
found  of  you.  But  if  you  deliberately  prefer 
darkness,  your  state  is  awfully  dangerous; 
and  if  you  persist  in  your  obstinacy,  your 
ruin  is  unavoidable.  God  is  gracious  and 
long-suffering,  but  he  will  not  be  mocked, 
Gal.  vi.  7.  Humble  yourselves  at  once,  and 
implore  his  mercy,  or  else  prepare  to  meet 
him  in  judgment.  But  be  assured  he  will 
not  meet  you  as  a man.  You  must  either 
bend  or  break.  The  Lord  forbid  that  he 
should  say  to  any  of  you,  in  the  great  day  of 
his  appearance,  “ Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed, 
into  everlasting  fire !” 


SERMON  IX. 

CHARACTERS  AND  NAMES  OF  MESSIAH. 

For  unto  us  a child  is  born , unto  us  a son  is 
given ; and  the  government  shall  be  upon 
his  shoulder : and  his  name  shall  be  called , 
Wonderful , Counsellor , the  Mighty  God , 
the  Everlasting  Father , the  Prince  of 
Peace. — Isaiah  ix.  6. 

Such  was  the  triumphant  exultation  of  the 
Old  Testament  church ! Their  noblest  hopes 
were  founded  upon  the  promise  of  Messiah ; 
their  sublimest  songs  were  derived  from  the 
prospect  of  his  advent.  By  faith,  which  is 
the  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  they  con- 
sidered the  gracious  declarations  of  the  faith- 
ful unchangeable  God  as  already  accomplish- 
ed, though  the  actual  performance  respected 
a period,  as  yet  future  and  distant ; especially 
as  believers,  under  that  dispensation,  already 
felt  the  influence  of  the  redemption  which 
Messiah  was  to  consummate  in  the  fulness  of 
time.  It  was  the  knowledge  of  his  engage- 
ment on  the  behalf  of  sinners  that  gave  life 
and  significancy  to  all  the  institutions  of  the 
ceremonial  law,  which  otherwise,  though  of 
divine  appointment,  would  have  been  a heavy 
and  burdensome  yoke,  Acts  xv.  10.  Isaiah, 
therefore,  prepares  this  joyful  song  for  the 
true  servants  of  God,  who  lived  in  his  time ; 
and  though  it  was  a day  of  trial  and  rebuke, 
they  were  provided  with  a sufficient  com- 
pensation for  all  their  sufferings,  in  being 
warranted  to  say,  “ Unto  us  a child  is  born, 
unto  us  a son  is  given ; and  the  government 
shall  be  upon  his  shoulder,”  &c. 

This  ancient  song  is  still  new.  It  has  been, 
and  will  be  taken  up  from  age  to  age,  by  the 
New  Testament  church,  with  superior  ad- 
vantage. I trust  many  of  you  understand  it 
well,  and  rejoice  in  it  daily.  Men  naturally 
look  for  something  wherein  to  rejoice  and 


CHARACTERS  AND  NAMES  OF  MESSIAH. 


245 


SER.  IX.] 

glory.  Little  reason  have  the  wise  to  glory 
in  their  supposed  wisdom,  (Jer.  ix.  23,)  or 
the  strong  in  their  fading  strength,  or  the 
rich  in  their  transitory  wealth  ; but  this  is  a 
just  and  unfailing  ground  of  glory  to  true 
Christians,  that,  “Unto  us  a child  is  born, 
unto  us  a son  is  given,”  &c. 

When  a sinner  is  enlightened  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  to  understand  the  character  and  offices 
of  Messiah,  his  ability  and  willingness  to  save 
those  who  are  ready  to  perish,  and  the  hap- 
piness of  all  who  are  brought  into  subjection 
to  his  gracious  government,  and  when  he 
begins  to  feel  the  cheering  effects  of  faith  in 
his  name,  then  this  song  becomes  his  own, 
and  exactly  suits  the  emotions  and  gratitude 
of  his  heart.  But  many  persons  will  despise 
and  pity  him  as  a weak  enthusiast.  And  yet, 
perhaps,  they  do  not  think  so  unfavourably 
of  the  rapture  of  Archimedes,  of  whom  it  is 
related,  that  having  suddenly  discovered  the 
solution  of  a difficult  problem  while  he  was 
bathing,  he  was  so  transported  with  joy,  that 
he  forgot  his  situation,  sprang  instantly  from 
the  bath,  and  ran  through  the  city,  crying, 
“ I have  found  it,  I have  found  it !”  He  is 
not  usually  charged  with  madness  on  this  ac- 
count, though  the  expression  of  his  joy  was 
certainly  over-proportioned  to  the  cause.  The 
truth  is,  the  world  will  allow  of  a vehemence 
approaching  to  ecstacy,  on  almost  any  oc- 
casion, but  on  that  alone,  which,  above  all 
others,  will  justify  it.  A person  who  would 
be  thought  destitute  of  taste,  if  he  was  unaf- 
fected by  the  music  to  which  this  passage  is 
set,  would,  at  the  same  time,  hazard  his  repu- 
tation for  good  sense,  with  some  judges,  if 
he  owned  himself  affected  by  the  plain  mean- 
ing of  the  words.  Incompetent  judges  surely ! 
who  are  pleased  to  approve  of  warmth  and 
emotion  of  spirit,  provided  the  object  be  tri- 
vial, and  only  condemn  it  in  concerns  of 
the  greatest  importance ! But  I trust  the 
character  of  my  auditory  is  very  different, 
and  that  the  most  of  you  desire  to  enter  into 
the  spirit  of  this  passage,  and  to  have  a more 
lively  sense  of  your  own  interests  in  it.  May 
the  Lord  grant  your  desire,  and  accompany 
our  meditations  upon  it  with  his  power  and 
blessing ! 

Every  clause  in  this  passage  might  furnish 
subject  for  a long  discourse;  but  my  plan 
will  only  permit  me  briefly  to  touch  upon  the 
several  particulars,  which  will  lead  to  a re- 
capitulation or  summary  of  what  has  been  al- 
ready considered  more  largely  concerning  the 
person , offices,  and  glory  of  Messiah.  W e have, 

1.  His  incarnation. — “ Unto  us  a child  is 
born in  our  ^nature,  born  of  a woman : 
“ Unto  us  a son  is  given not  merely  a man 
child,  but,  emphatically,  a son,  the  Son  of 
God.  This  was  the  most  precious  gift,  the 
highest  proof  and  testimony  of  divine  love. 
The  distinction  and  union  of  these  widely 
distant  natures,  which  constitute  the  person 


of  Christ,  the  God-man,  the  Mediator,  is,  in 
the  judgment  and  language  of  the  apostle, 
the  great  mystery  of  godliness,  (1  Tim.  iii. 
16,)  the  pillar  and  ground  of  truth.  I shall 
not  repeat  what  I have  already  offered  on 
this  point  in  the  fifth  sermon.  It  is  the  cen- 
tral truth  of  revelation,  which,  like  the  sun, 
diffuses  a light  upon  the  whole  system,  no 
part  of  which  can  be  Tightly  understood  with- 
out it.  Thus  the  Lord  of  all  humbled  himself, 
to  appear  in  the  form  of  a servant  for  the 
sake  of  sinners. 

II.  His  exaltation. — “The  government 
shall  be  upon  his  shoulder.”  In  our  nature 
he  suffered,  and  in  the  same  nature  he  reigns. 
When  lie  had  overcome  the  sharpness,  the 
sting  of  death,  he  took  possession  of  the  king- 
dom of  glory  as  his  own,  and  opened  it  to  all 
who  believe  in  him.  Now  we  can  say,  He 
who  governs  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  and 
whom  all  things  obey,  is  the  child  who  was 
born,  the  son  who  was  given  for  us.  Some 
subsequent  passages  will  lead  us  hereafter  to 
contemplate  more  directly  the  glory  of  the 
Redeemer’s  administration  in  the  kingdoms 
of  providence  and  grace.  At  present,  there- 
fore, I shall  only  observe,  that  the  exaltation 
of  the  Redeemer  infers  the  dignity  and  secu- 
rity of  the  people  who  are  united  to  him  by 
faith.  They  have,  in  one  respect,  an  appro- 
priate honour,  in  which  the  angels  cannot 
share.  Their  best  friend,  related  to  them  in 
the  same  nature,  is  seated  upon  the  throne 
of  glory.  Since  he  is  for  them,  who  can  be 
against  them  1 What  may  they  not  expect, 
when  he,  who  has  so  loved  them  as  to  redeem 
them  with  his  own  blood,  has  all  power  com- 
mitted unto  him,  both  in  heaven  and  on  earth! 
For, 

III.  The  names  and  characters  here  ascrib- 
ed to  him,  are  not  only  expressive  of  what 
he  is  in  himself,  but  of  what  he  has  engaged 
to  be  to  them. 

1.  His  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful. — 
In  another  place  the  word  is  rendered  Secret, 
Judges  xiii.  18.  It  is  true  of  him  in  both 
senses.  He  is  Wonderful  in  his  person,  obe- 
dience, and  sufferings ; in  his  grace,  govern- 
ment, and  glory.  So  far  as  we  understand 
his  name,  the  revelation  by  which,  as  by  a 
name,  he  is  made  known,  we  may,  we  must 
believe,  admire,  and  adore.  But  how  limited 
and  defective  is  our  knowledge  ! His  name  is 
Secret.  Who  can  by  searching  find  him  out! 
Job.  xi.  7.  His  greatness  is  incomprehensible, 
his  wisdom  untraceable,  his  fullness  inex- 
haustible, his  power  infinite.  No  one  know- 
eth  the  Son  but  the  Father.  But  they  have 
a true,  though  not  an  adequate  knowledge  of 
him,  who  trust,  love,  and  serve  him  ; and  in 
their  view  he  is  Wonderful ! The  apostle  ex- 
presses the  sentiment  of  their  hearts,  when 
he  says,  “Yea,  doubtless,  I count  all  things 
but  loss  and  dung  for  the  excellency  of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord.” 


246 


CHARACTERS  AND  NAMES  OF  MESSIAH. 


2.  Another  of  his  names  is  Counsellor. — 
The  great  councils  of  redemption,  in  which 
every  concern  respecting  the  glory  of  God 
and  the  salvation  of  sinners  was  adjusted, 
were  established  with  him,  and  in  him,  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world.  And  he  is  our 
Counsellor  or  Advocate  with  the  Father, 
who  pleads  our  cause,  and  manages  all  our 
affairs  in  perfect  righteousness,  and  with  in- 
fallible success ; so  that  no  suit  can  possibly 
miscarry  which  he  is  pleased  to  undertake. 
To  him  likewise  we  must  apply  (and  we  shall 
not  apply  in  vain)  for  wisdom  and  direction, 
in  all  that  belongs  to  our  duty,  and  the  ho- 
nour of  our  profession  in  the  present  life.  In 
all  our  difficulties,  dangers,  and  cares,  we 
must  look  to  him  for  guidance  and  support. 
This  is  to  be  wise  unto  salvation.  His  secret 
is  with  them  that  consult  him ; so  that  though 
the  world  may  deem  them  weak  and  ignorant 
as  babes  (and  he  teaches  them  to  think  thus 
of  themselves,)  they  have  a cheering  and 
practical  knowledge  of  many  important  sub- 
jects, which  are  entirely  hidden  from  those 
who  are  wise  and  prudent  in  their  own  eyes. 

*3.  He  is  the  Mighty  God. — Though  in  the 
office  of  mediator,  he  acts  in  the  character  of 
a servant,  his  perfections  and  attributes  are 
truly  divine.  Only  the  mighty  God  could 
make  a provision  capable  of  answering  the 
demands  of  the  holy  law,  which  we  had  trans- 
gressed. Only  the  mighty  God  could  be  a 
suitable  Shepherd  to  lead  millions  of  weak 
helpless  creatures  to  glory,  through  the  many 
difficulties,  dangers,  and  enemies,  they  are 
exposed  to  in  their  passage.  Add  to  this,  the 
honour,  dependence,  and  obedience,  which 
this  great  Shepherd  claims  from  his  sheep, 
are  absolute  and  supreme  ; and  they  would 
be  guilty  of  idolatry,  if  they  did  not  know 
that  he  is  the  mighty  God.  Though  real 
Christians,  who  are  enlightened  and  taught 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  may,  and  do  differ  in 
their  views  and  explanations  of  some  reveal- 
ed truths,  I conceive  they  must  be  all  agreed 
in  this  point.  It  is  not  only  necessary  to  be 
known  as  the  only  solid  foundation  of  a sin-  , 
ner’s  hope,  but  it  immediately  respects  the 
object  of  divine  worship.  For  if  the  Redeem-  J 
er  is  not  possessed  of  the  incommunicable 
perfections  of  Deity,  the  New  Testament, 
in  its  most  obvious  and  literal  signification, 
would  be  chargeable,  not  only  with  counte- 
nancing, but  with  expressly  teaching  and  en- 
joining idolatry. 

4.  Farther,  he  shall  be  called  the  Everlast- 
ing Father. — He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them 
brethren,  (Heb.  ii.  11,)  having  condescended 
to  assume  their  human  nature.  But  they 
are  also  his  children.  They  are  born  into 
his  family  by  the  efficacy  of  his  own  word 
and  Spirit.  From  him  they  derive  their  spi- 1 
ritual  life,  being  united  to  him  by  faith,  and 
receiving  from  first  to  last  out  of  his  fullness. 
And  he  is  an  everlasting  Father.  Our  fa- , 


[ser.  IX. 

thers  according  to  the  flesh  are  subject  to 
death.  But  his  relation  to  them  subsists  un- 
changeably, and  therefore  they  cannot  be 
destitute  : and  he  is  thus  equally  to  them  all. 
They  live  upon  the  earth,  and  are  removed 
from  it,  in  a long  succession  of  ages ; but  he 
is  the  Father  of  the  everlasting  age,  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  All 
generations  shall  call  him  blessed.  To  him, 
therefore,  the  apostle  teaches  us  to  apply 
that  sublime  passage  of  the  Psalmist : “ Thou, 
Lord,  in  the  beginning  hast  laid  the  founda- 
tion of  the  earth,  and  the  heavens  are  the 
work  of  thy  hands.  They  shall  perish,  but 
thou  remainest ; and  they  all  shall  wax  old 
as  doth  a garment ; and  as  a vesture  shalt 
thou  fold  them  up,  and  they  shall  be  changed  ; 
but  thou  art  the  same,  and  thy  years  shall 
not  fail,”  Psalm  cii.  25 — 27 ; Heb.  i.  10 — 12, 
5.  Lastly,  he  shall  be  called  the  Prince  of 
Peace, — whose  sovereign  prerogative  it  is  to 
speak  peace  to  his  people ; (Psalm  Ixxxv.  8 ;) 
and  there  is  no  peace,  deserving  the  name, 
but  that  which  he  bestows.  The  scripture 
expressly  declares,  that  there  is  no  peace 
to  the  wicked,  Is.  Ivii.  21.  By  whatever 
name  we  call  that  thoughtless  security  and 
insensibility,  in  which  mankind  generally 
live  while  ignorant  of  God  and  of  themselves, 
we  cannot  allow  it  to  be  peace.  It  is  the 
effect  of  blindness  and  hardness  of  heart ; it 
will  neither  bear  reflection  nor  examination. 
Can  they  be  said  to  possess  peace,  however 
fatally  regardless  they  may  be  of  futurity, 
who  are  at  present  under  the  dominion  of 
restless,  insatiable,  and  inconsistent  passions 
and  appetites'?  But  the  kingdom  of  Messiah 
is  a kingdom  of  peace,  and  in  him  his 
happy  subjects  enjoy  a peace  which  passeth 
all  understanding,  (Phil.  iv.  7,)  such  as  the 
world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away.  He 
has  made  peace  by  the  blood  of  his  cross, 
(Col.  i.  20,)  for  all  that  come  unto  God  by  him. 
Until  they  are  in  trouble  and  distress,  until 
they  feel  the  bitterness  and  fear  the  conse- 
quences of  their  sins,  and  see  the  impossi- 
bility of  helping  themselves,  they  will  not 
apply  to  him;  but  whenever  they  do  seek 
him,  thus  weary  and  heavy-laden,  he  hears 
their  prayer.  Their  minds,  for  a season,  are 
like  the  sea  in  a storm,  they  are  distressed 
with  guilt,  fears,  and  temptations ; but  when 
he  reveals  his  mighty  name  and  boundless- 
grace  to  their  hearts,  and  says,  Peace,  be  still, 
(Mark  iv.  39,)  then  there  is  a great  <calm. 
Being  justified  by  faith,  they  have  peace  with 
God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He 
gives  them  peace  likewise  in  a changing 
troublesome  world,  by  inviting  and  enabling 
them  to  cast  all  their  cares  upon  him,  and  to 
trust  all  their  concerns  in  his  hands,  upon  the 
assurance  his  word  gives  them,  that  he  careth 
for  them,  and  will  manage  and  overrule 
every  thing  for  their  good.  In  proportion  as 
their  faith  realizes  his  promises,  they  feel  i 


CHARACTERS  AND  NAMES  OF  MESSIAH. 


247 


SER.  IX.] 

composure  and  satisfaction.  Knowing  that 
the  hairs  of  their  head  are  numbered,  that 
their  afflictions,  no  less  than  their  comforts, 
are  tokens  of  his  love,  that  he  will  give  them 
strength  according  to  their  day,  that  he  will 
be  their  guide  and  their  guard  even  unto 
death ; they  are  not  greatly  moved  by  any 
events,  or  disturbed  by  apprehensions,  be- 
cause their  hearts  are  fixed,  (Psalm  cxii.  7,) 
trusting  in  the  Lord.  Farther,  he  teaches 
them  (what  can  only  be  learnt  of  him)  how 
to  seek  and  maintain  peace  among  men.  His 
love  subdues  the  power  of  self,  and  forms 
them  to  a spirit  of  philanthropy  and  benevo- 
lence, which  has  often  such  an  effect,  that 
they  who  dislike  them  for  their  attachment  to 
him  and  to  his  precepts,  and  would  willingly 
speak  evil  of  them,  are  ashamed,  and  put  to 
silence,  by  their  perseverance  in  well-doing. 
Thus  their  peace  increases  as  a river,  which 
runs  with  a deeper  and  a broader  stream  as  it 
approaches  the  ocean.  For  their  peace  is  then 
strongest  and  most  unshaken,  when  they 
draw  near  to  death,  and  are  upon  the  point 
of  resigning  their  souls  into  his  hands.  This 
is  the  time,  when,  if  not  before,  the  false 
peace  of  the  worldling,  will  give  way  to  ter- 
ror and  dismay.  But  “ mark  the  perfect  man, 
and  behold  the  upright,  for  the  end  of  that 
man  is  peace,”  Psalm  xxxvii.  37.  It  must  be 
allowed,  that  many  of  his  people,  through  the 
power  of  temptation  and  remaining  unbelief, 
have,  at  some  seasons,  uncomfortable  fears 
concerning  a dying  hour ; but  when  the  time 
of  their  dismission  actually  arrives,  we  sel- 
dom see  them  afraid  of  the  summons.  There 
is  a strength  necessary  to  support  the  soul  at 
the  approach  of  death,  which  is  usually  with- 
held till  the  time  of  need.  But  then  it  is 
vouchsafed.  They  who  have  frequently  ac- 
cess to  the  beds  of  dying  believers,  can  bear 
testimony,  as  eye-witnesses,  to  the  faithful- 
ness of  their  Lord.  How  often  have  we  seen 
them  triumphing  hi  the  prospect  of  immor- 
tality ! as  happy,  in  defiance  of  pain  and  sick- 
ness, as  we  can  well  conceive  it  possible  to 
be  while  in  the  body,  and  as  sure  of  heaven, 
as  if  they  were  already  before  the  throne. 

Such  is  the  character  of  Messiah ! This  is 
the  God  whom  we  adore ; our  almighty,  un- 
changeable Friend  ! His  greatness  and  good- 
ness, his  glory  and  his  grace,  when  once 
known,  fix  the  heart,  no  more  to  rove,  and 
fill  it  with  admiration,  gratitude,  and  desire. 
From  hence  spring  a cheerful,  unreserved 
obedience  to  his  commands,  and  a deliberate 
voluntary  submission  to  his  holy  will.  For 
his  people  do  not  serve  him  or  yield  to  him 
by  constraint ; at  least  it  is  only  the  pleasing 
constraint  of  love,  which  makes  their  duty 
tl  eir  delight,  and  their  burden  and  grief  is 
that  they  can  serve  him  no  better. 

May  we  be  all  thus  minded ! I dare  not 
hope  it  is  so  with  us  all  at  present.  But  this 
is  the  day  of  his  grace.  For  this  cause  he 


came  into  the  world,  that  he  might  draw 
many  hearts  to  himself,  John  xii.  32.  And 
for  this  purpose  he  favours  us  with  his  gospel, 
by  which  he  still  says,  “ Look  unto  me,  and 
be  ye  saved,”  Isaiah  xlv.  22.  “ Come  unto 

me,  and  I will  give  you  rest,”  Matth.  xi.  28. 
To  be  found  among  his  faithful  followers,  in 
the  great  day  when  he  shall  come  to  judge 
the  world,  is  the  one  thing  which,  above  all 
others,  deserves  our  solicitude. 

Hear  then  his  voice  to-day.  Perhaps  you 
are  apprised  of  the  necessity  of  a change  of 
heart  and  life,  at  some  future  period,  in  order 
to  die  safely.  Such  a change  is  equally  ne- 
cessary if  you  wish  to  live  comfortably. 
While  you  are  unfit  to  die,  you  can  have  no 
true  enjoyment  of  life.  It  were  easy  to  prove 
at  large  that  procrastination  is  highly  dan- 
gerous. Admitting  that,  according  to  your 
present  feelings,  you  really  think  yourself 
determined  to  seek  the  Lord  at  some  future 
time,  do  you  consider  how  many  uncertainties 
you  presume  upon!  Are  you  sure  that  you 
shall  not  be  suddenly  cut  off  by  an  unexpect- 
ed and  unthought-of  stroke,  or  visited  by  a 
fever  which  may  quickly  bring  you  into  a 
state  of  delirium  or  stupefaction,  and  render 
your  projected  repentance  impracticable! 
Yea,  it  will  in  any  circumstances  be  imprac- 
ticable, unless  God  is  pleased  to  influence 
your  mind  by  his  good  Spirit.  If  you  grieve 
this  Spirit  now,  by  resisting  his  operations, 
what  reason  have  you  to  expect  that  he  will 
then  return  ! Do  we  not  see  many  instances 
of  what  the  poet,  with  great  propriety,  calls, 
“ A slow  sudden  death !”  How  many  people, 
while  pining  away  under  the  power  of  some 
incurable  disease,  amuse  themselves  with  the 
hope  of  recovery  to  the  last  gasp ; and  though 
their  acquaintance  read  death  in  their  coun- 
tenance for  weeks  or  months,  in  defiance  of 
such  repeated  and  long-continued  warnings, 
they  die  as  suddenly,  with  respect  to  their 
own  apprehensions,  as  if  killed  by  lightning. 
Tremble,  lest  such  be  your  last  end,  if  you 
trifle  with  God,  who  now  calls  you  by  his 
gospel,  to  seek  him  to-day,  while  it  is  called 
to-day. 

But  I would  lead  you  to  consider  your  de- 
lay not  only  as  dangerous  but  as  unreason- 
able. Why  are  you  afraid  of  being  happy  too 
soon ! What  strange  and  hard  thoughts  have 
you  of  God,  if  you  suppose  you  can  find  more 
pleasure  in  living  according  to  your  own 
wills  than  in  obedience  to  his  commands! 
Can  the  world  give  you  such  peace  and  satis- 
faction as  I have  attempted  to  describe 1 Do 
you  think  a real  persuasion  that  God  is  your 
friend,  and  that  heaven  will  be  your  home, 
will  spoil  the  relish  of  your  earthly  enjoy- 
ments, or  make  your  lives  uncomfortable! 
What  hard  thing  does  the  Lord  require  of 
you,  that  you  are  so  unwilling  to  comply ! 
If  we  set  aside,  for  a moment,  the  considera- 
tion of  a future  state  and  a final  judgment, 


248 


THE  ANGEL’S  MESSAGE  AND  SONG. 


yet  even  in  a temporal  view  you  would  be 
great  gainers,  if  your  spirit  and  your  conduct 
were  regulated  by  the  gospel.  What  heart- 
breaking troubles,  what  losses,  contests,  pains 
of  body,  ani  remorse  of  conscience,  would 
some  of  you  have  avoided,  if  you  had  believed 
and  obeyed  the  word  of  God  ! What  distresses 
may  your  headstrong  passions  soon  plunge 
you  into,  if  you  presume  to  go  on  in  your 
sins ! For  that  the  way  of  transgressors  is 
hard,  is  not  only  declared  in  scripture,  but 
proved  by  the  history  and  observation  of 
every  day.  Forsake  the  foolish,  therefore, 
and  live.  And  while  the  door  of  mercy  is 
still  open  before  you,  pray  to  him  who  is  able 
to  bless  you  indeed,  by  delivering  you  from 
the  guilt  and  from  the  power  of  your  iniqui- 
ties; lest,  if  being  often  reproved,  (Prov. 
xxix.  1,)  and  still  hardening  your  hearts,  you 
should  suddenly  be  destroyed,  and  that  with- 
out remedy. 


SERMON  X. 

THE  ANGEL’S  MESSAGE  AND  SONG. 

There  were  in  the  same  country  shepherds 
abiding  in  the  field,  keeping  watch  over 
their  flock  by  night.  And  lo , the  angel  of 
the  Lord  came  upon  them , and  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  shone  round  about  them : and 
they  were  sore  afraid.  And  the  angel  of 
the  Lord  said  unto  them , Fear  not;  for , 
behold,  I bring  unto  you  good  tidings  of 
great  joy,  which  shall  be  to  all  people. 
For  unto  you  is  born  this  day , in  the  city 
of  David,  a Saviour,  which  is  Christ  the 
Lord.  And  this  shall  be  a sign  unto  you ; 
Ye  shall  find  the  babe  wrapped  in  swad- 
dling-clothes, lying  in  a manger.  And 
suddenly  there  was  with  the  angel  a mul- 
titude of  the  heavenly  host,  praising  God, 
and  saying,  Glory  to  God  in  the  highest, 
on  earth  peace,  good-will  towards  men. — 
Luke  ii.  8 — 14. 

The  gratification  of  the  great,  the  wealthy, 
and  the  gav  was  chiefly  consulted  in  the  late 
exhibitions  in  Westminster- Abbey.  But  not- 
withstanding the  expense  of  the  preparations, 
and  the  splendid  appearance  of  the  auditory, 
I may  take  it  for  granted  that  the  shepherds 
who  were  honoured  with  the  first  information 
of  the  birth  of  Messiah,  enjoyed,  at  free  cost, 
a much  more  sublime  and  delightful  enter- 
tainment How  poor  and  trivial  is  the  most 
studied  magnificence  and  brilliancy  of  an 
earthly  court  compared  with  that  effulgence 
of  glory  which  surrounded  the  shepherds! 
The  performers  of  this  Oratorio,  if  I may  be 
allowed  the  expression,  were  a multitude  of 
the  heavenly  host  And  though  I do  not  sup- 
pose that  the  angel  delivered  his  message  in 


[ser.  x. 

the  cadence  which  we  call  recitative,  I have 
no  doubt  but  the  chorus  was  a song,  sweetly 
melodious  as  from  blest  voices ; a song  which 
the  redeemed  and  the  angels  of  the  Lord  are 
still  singing  before  the  throne ; a new  song, 
(Rev.  v.  9,)  a song  which  will  be  always  new. 
We  are  made  acquainted  with  the  subject, 
yea,  with  the  very  words  of  this  song.  May 
our  hearts  be  suitably  affected  by  the  con- 
sideration of  them  to-day  ! The  melody  and 
harmony  of  heaven  are  far  above  our  concep- 
tions. The  music  of  that  happy  land  has  no 
dependence  upon  the  vibrations  of  the  air,  or 
the  admirable  structure  of  the  human  ear. 
But  we  have  reason  to  believe  there  is,  in 
the  world  of  light  and  love,  something  analo- 
gous to  what  we  call  music,  though  different 
in  kind,  and  vastly  superior  in  effect  to  any 
strains  that  can  be  produced  by  the  most  ex- 
quisite voices  or  instruments  upon  earth ; as 
we  readily  judge  the  glory  of  an  angel  to  be 
unspeakably  more  excellent,  both  in  kind  and 
in  degree,  than  any  thing  that  is  deemed 
glorious  among  mortals. 

To  consider  this  passage  at  large  would 
require  many  discourses.  I shall  confine 
myself  at  present  to  a few  brief  reflections 
on  the  circumstances  of  this  heavenly  vision, 
the  message  of  the  angel,  and  the  concluding 
chorus  or  song. 

I.  The  circumstances. 

1.  Lo,  an  angel  came  upon  them,  &c. — 
Suddenly,  when  they  had  no  expectation  of 
such  a visit,  without  any  thing  that  might 
previously  engage  their  attention,  all  at  once, 
like  a flash  of  lightning,  a glory  shone  around 
them,  and  an  angel  appeared.  We  do  not 
wonder  that  they  were  impressed  with  fear. 
We  live  near,  perhaps  in  the  midst  of,  an  in- 
visible world,  full  of  great  and  wonderful 
realities,  which  yet,  by  too  many  persons,  are 
considered  and  treated  as  nonentities,  be- 
cause they  are  not  perceived  by  our  bodily 
senses.  But  the  scripture  assures  us  of  the 
fact ; and  to  reject  this  testimony,  because  it 
is  not  confirmed  by  our  senses,  is  no  less 
irrational  and  unphilosophical  than  impious. 
A man  born  blind  can  have  no  more  concep- 
tion of  light  and  colours,  than  we  have  of 
what  passes  in  the  world  of  spirits.  And  a 
nation  of  blind  men,  if  there  were  such  a na- 
tion, would  probably  treat  a seeing  person  as 
a visionary  madman,  if  he  spoke  to  them  of 
what  he  saw.  But  he  would  be  sure  of  his 
own  perceptions,  though  he  could  not  satisfy 
the  inquiries  and  cavils  of  the  blind.  Our 
senses  are  accommodated  to  our  present 
state ; but  there  may  be  a multitude  of  ob- 
jects, as  real  in  themselves,  and  as  near  to 
us,  as  any  that  we  behold  with  oui  eyes,  of 
which  we,  for  want  of  suitable  faculties,  ran 
have  no  idea.  To  deny  this,  and  to  make  our 
senses  the  criteria  of  the  existence  of  things 
which  are  not  within  their  reach,  is  exactly 
such  an  absurdity  as  a blind  man  would  be 


THE  ANGEL’S  MESSAGE  AND  SONG. 


249 


SER.  X.] 

guilty  of,  who  should  deny  the  possibility  of 
a rainbow,  because  he  never  heard  it  or  felt 
it.  However,  faith  is  the  evidence  of  things 
not  seen.  And  they  who  believe  the  word  of 
God  cannot  doubt  of  the  existence  of  an  in- 
visible state  and  invisible  agents.  The  bar- 
rier between  the  inhabitants  of  that  state  and 
us  is  too  strong  to  be  passed,  for  the  will  of 
the  great  Creator  seems  to  be  the  barrier. 
Otherwise  it  is  probable  they  could  easily 
surprise  us,  since,  upon  special  occasions, 
they  have  been  permitted  to  discover  them- 
selves. We  have  a natural  dread  of  such 
visitants  even  though  they  should  appear  to 
us,  as  they  did  to  the  shepherds,  as  messen- 
gers of  peace  and  mercy  from  God.  Yet  we 
must  shortly  mingle  with  them.  Death  will 
introduce  us  into  the  world  of  spirits,  and 
what  we  shall  then  meet  with,  what  beings 
will  be  ready  to  accost  us  upon  our  first 
entrance  into  that  unknown,  unchangeable 
state,  who  can  say  1 It  deserves  our  serious 
thought.  We  are  now  encompassed  by  the 
objects  of  sense,  but  we  must  be  soon  sepa- 
rated from  them  all.  We  live  in  a crowd,  but 
we  must  die  alone.  Happy  are  they,  who,  like 
Stephen,  shall  be  able  to  commend  their  de- 
parting spirits  into  the  hands  of  Jesus ! He 
is  Lord  of  all  worlds,  and  has  the  keys  of 
hades,  of  the  invisible  state. 

2.  The  angel  spoke — The  gospel  was 
preached  by  an  angel  to  Zacharias,  to  the 
virgin  mother  of  Messiah,  now  to  the  shep- 
herds ; and,  perhaps,  to  none  but  these.  The 
angel,  who  appeared  to  Cornelius,  said  no- 
thing to  him  of  Jesus,  but  only  directed  him 
to  send  for  Peter,  Acts  x.  4,  5.  The  glorious 
gospel  of  the  blessed  God,  with  respect  to  its 
dignity,  depth,  and  importance,  may  seem  a 
fitter  theme  for  the  tongue  of  an  angel  than 
of  a man;  but,  angels  never  sinned,  and 
though  they  might  proclaim  its  excellency, 
they  could  not,  from  experience,  speak  of  its 
efficacy.  In  this  respect  sinful  worms  are 
better  qualified  to  preach  to  others,  concern- 
ing him  by  whom  they  have  themselves  been 
healed  and  saved.  Their  weakness,  likewise, 
is  better  suited  to  show  that  the  influence  and 
success  of  the  gospel  is  wholly  owing  to  the 
power  of  God.  It  has  therefore  pleased  God 
to  put  this  treasure  into  earthen  vessels,  and 
to  commit  the  ministry  of  his  word,  not  to 
angels,  but  to  men.  They  whom  he  is  pleased 
to  employ  in  this  office,  however  weak  and 
unworthy  in  themselves,  derive  an  honour 
and  importance  from  the  message  entrusted 
to  them,  and  are  so  far  worthy  of  the  same 
attention,  as  if  an  angel  from  heaven  spoke. 
They  are  sinful  men,  and  have  reason  to  think 
humbly  of  themselves:  nor  should  they,  as 
the  servants  of  a suffering,  crucified  Master, 
either  wonder  or  complain  if  they  meet  with 
unkindness  from  those  whom  they  wish  to 
serve;  but  they  may  magnify  their  office, 
(Rom.  xi.  13,)  and  it  is  at  the  peril  of  their 
Vol.  II.  2 I 


hearers  to  despise  it.  What  the  world  ac- 
counts in  us  the  foolishness  of  preaching,  is 
made  to  those  who  simply  receive  it,  the 
wisdom  and  power  of  God.  To  others,  even 
angels  would  preach  in  vain.  They  who  hear 
not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  who  submit  not 
to  the  ordinary  methods  and  means  of  grace 
which  God  has  appointed,  would  not  be  per- 
suaded, though  one  should  rise  from  the  dead. 

3.  The  angel  was  sent  with  the  most  in- 
teresting news  that  could  be  made  known  to 
mankind ; not  to  Caesar,  or  to  Herod,  or  to 
the  High  Priest,  but  to  obscure  and  lowly 
shepherds.  The  Lord  seeth  not  as  man  seeth ; 
the  petty  distinctions  that  obtain  among  men 
are  not  regarded  by  him.  He  is  equally  near 
to  them  that  fear  him  in  every  situation  of 
life,  as  the  sun  shines,  as  freely  and  fully,  up- 
on a cottage  as  upon  a palace.  These  shep- 
herds were,  doubtless,  of  the  number  of  the 
happy  few,  who,  in  that  time  of  degeneracy, 
were  waiting  and  longing  for  the  consolation 
of  Israel.  The  heads  of  the  Jewish  people 
found  their  consolation  in  their  rank,  and 
wealth,  and  in  the  respect  paid  them  by  the 
vulgar.  These  things  usually  add  to  the  idea 
of  self-importance,  and  feed  those  tempers 
which  are  most  displeasing  to  the  Lord,  and 
which  indispose  the  mind  to  the  reception  of 
the  gospel,  or  to  any  due  inquiry  concerning 
it.  And  thus,  in  fact  from  age  to  age,  it  has 
generally  been  hidden  from  the  wise  and  the 
great,  and  revealed  unto  babes.  The  magi, 
or  wise  men  who  lived  in  the  east,  where  the 
knowledge  of  astronomy  obtained,  but  where 
the  scripture  was  not  known,  were  guided  to 
Messiah  by  the  appearance  of  a new  star  or 
meteor.  The  shepherds,  who  were  acquaint- 
ed with  the  prophecies  concerning  Messiah, 
were  informed  of  their  accomplishment  by  an 
angel.  Thus  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  suit 
the  different  manner  of  making  known  his 
will,  to  the  previous  situation  of  the  persons. 

II.  The  message  of  the  angei,  though 
concise,  was  comprehensive  and  full.  It  con- 
tained the  Fact,  “ Unto  you  is  born  this  day” 
— the  Place,  “ In  the  city  of  David,”  that  is, 
in  Bethlehem,  so  called,  because  David  like- 
wise had  been  born  there  ; (Luke  ii.  4;) — the 
Office  of  Messiah,  “ A Saviour” — his  Name, 
Honour,  and  Character,  “Christ,”  or  the 
Anointed ; “ the  Lord,”  the  head  and  king 
of  Israel,  and  of  the  church,  the  Lord  of  all. 

I do  but  recite  these  particulars  now,  as  they 
will  repeatedly  offer  to  our  consideration  in 
the  series  of  subjects  before  me.  The  de- 
scription of  the  state  in  which  they  would  find 
him,  was  such,  as  could  only  be  reconciled  to 
his  titles  and  honours,  by  that  simple  faith, 
which,  without  vain  reasoning,  acquiesces  in 
the  declarations  of  God.  For  how  unlikely 
would  it  seem  to  a merely  human  judgment, 
that  the  Saviour  of  sinners,  the  promised  Mes- 
siah, the  Lord  of  all,  should  be  a babe  wrap- 
ped inswaddling-clothes,  and  lying  in  a man- 


250 


THE  ANGEL’S  MESSAGE  AND  SONG. 


ger.  Yet  thus  it  was.  Though  rich  in  him- 
self, he  became  poor  for  our  sakes,  2 Cor. 
viii.  9.  On  this  account,  as  the  scriptures 
had  foretold,  he  was  despised  and  rejected  of 
men.  Though  he  came  to  his  own,  as  a Lord 
or  Master  to  his  own  house ; yet,  coming  in 
this  manner,  his  own  professed  servants,  who 
pretended  that  they  were  longing  and  waiting 
for  him,  slighted  and  opposed  him  ; preferred 
a notorious  malefactor  to  him,  and  put  him  to 
death  as  an  impostor  and  blasphemer.  But 
the  shepherds  reasoned  not  through  unbelief, 
and  therefore  they  were  not  staggered  : they 
obeyed  the  message,  they  went,  they  saw, 
they  believed. 

The  seeming  repugnance  between  the 
greatness  of  Messiah’s  claims,  and  the  state 
of  humiliation  in  which  he  appeared  when 
upon  earth,  was  the  great  stumbling-block 
then,  and  continues  to  be  so  at  this  day.  Be- 
cause he  stooped  so  low,  and  made  himself 
of  no  reputation,  too  many  still  refuse  to  ac- 
knowledge his  divine  character.  But  they 
who  are  willing  to  be  taught  by  the  word  and 
Spirit  of  God,  see  a beauty  and  propriety  in 
his  submitting  to  be  born  in  a stable,  and  to 
live  as  a poor  man,  destitute  of  house  or  pro- 
perty. Hereby  he  poured  contempt  upon 
worldly  pomp  and  vanity,  sanctified  the  state 
of  poverty  to  his  followers,  and  set  them  an 
encouraging  example  to  endure  it  with  cheer- 
fulness. They,  like  the  shepherds  and  his 
first  disciples,  are  delivered  from  their  natural 
prejudices,  and  are  enabled  to  behold  his  glory, 
through  the  vail  of  his  outward  humiliation, 
as  the  glory  of  the  only  begotten  of  the  Fa- 
ther. And  his  condescension  in  becoming  poor 
for  their  sakes,  that  they  through  his  poverty 
might  be  made  rich,  affects  their  hearts  with 
admiration  and  gratitude. 

But  though  too  many,  who  are  governed  by 
the  spirit  and  maxims  of  this  world,  are  far 
from  admiring  his  love,  in  assuming  our  na- 
ure  under  those  circumstances,  which,  from 
iis  infancy  to  his  death,  exposed  him  to  the 
contempt  of  his  enemies,  it  is  otherwise 
thought  of  in  yonder  world  of  light.  For  we 
read,  that  when  the  angel  had  declared  to  the 
shepherds  the  glad  tidings,  a multitude  of  the 
heavenly  host  expressed  their  joy  by  a song, 
which  is  the  next  subject  that  offers  to  our 
consideration. 

III.  Their  highest  praise  was  excited  by  a 
view  of  the  effects  which  this  unexampled 
love  would  produce. 

1.  “ Glory  to  God  in  the  highest.”  In  the 
highest  heaven,  in  the  highest  degree,  for 
this  highest  instance  of  his  mercy.  At  the 
creation  these  morning-stars  sung  for  joy,  Job 
xxxviii.  7.  But  redemption  was  a greater 
work  than  they  had  yet  seen,  and  a work  by 
which  his  goodness,  wisdom,  and  power, 
would  be  still  more  abundantly  magnified. 
The  glory  of  God,  the  exhibition  of  his  ador- 
able perfections,  to  the  view  of  intelligent 


[ser.  x. 

creatures,  is  the  last  and  highest  end  of  all 
his  works.  Nor  would  it  be  worthy  of  the 
infinite  eternal  God,  in  comparison  with 
whose  immensity,  the  aggregate  of  all  creat- 
ed good  is  no  more  than  a point  compared 
with  the  universe,  or  a single  ray  of  light 
compared  with  the  sun,  to  propose  any  thing 
short  of  his  own  glory,  as  the  ultimate,  final 
cause  of  his  designs.  And  in  proportion  as 
any  finite  intelligences  are  conformed  to  the 
will  of  their  Creator,  and  impressed  with  a 
sense  of  his  pre-eminence,  their  highest  end 
and  aim  will  be  the  same  with  his.  If,  there- 
fore, we  compare  the  glory  of  God,  and  the 
good  of  his  creatures  together,  we  may  refer 
to  them  what  our  Lord  was  pleased  to  declare 
of  the  two  great  commandments.  The  former 
is  incomparably  the  first  and  greatest  of  his 
ends;  the  second,  in  its  proper  place  and 
subordination,  is  like  unto  it,  and  inseparably 
connected  with  it,  or  rather  derived  from  it. 
The  former  is,  if  I may  so  speak,  the  essen- 
tial difference  of  the  divine  operations ; the 
latter,  so  far  as  consistent  with  it,  is  the  result 
of  a glorious  and  efficacious  property  of  his  con- 
summate excellence.  In  the  redemption  of 
fallen  man,  both  are  displayed  to  the  highest 
advantage.  “ Glory  to  God  in  the  highest, 
and  on  earth  peace,  good-will  towards  men.” 

The  glory  of  his  goodness: — this  shines 
bright  in  the  capacities  and  happiness  he  has 
communicated  to  angels ; but  it  shines  with 
greater  brightness  in  the  mercy  afforded  to 
mankind ; whether  we  consider  the  objects, 
who  are  sinners,  rebels,  and  enemies ; or  his 
purpose  in  their  favour,  not  only  to  restore 
the  life  they  had  forfeited,  but  to  bestow  it 
more  abundantly,  (John  x.  10,)  with  respect 
to  title,  security,  and  honour ; or  lastly,  and 
principally,  the  mean  by  which  their  deliver- 
ance from  everlasting  misery,  and  their  pos- 
session of  everlasting  happiness,  is  procured; 
and  which  could  only  be  procured  by  the  hu- 
miliation and  death  of  the  Son  of  his  love. 

The  glory  of  his  wisdom,  in  adjusting  the 
demands  of  his  holiness,  justice,  and  truth, 
with  the  purposes  of  his  mercy  ; — in  provid- 
ing such  a method  for  the  exercise  of  his 
mercy,  as  renders  his  displeasure  against  sin 
more  conspicuous  by  pardoning,  than  by  pu- 
nishing it ; — in  abasing  the  sinner's  pride, 
by  the  very  considerations  which  inspire  his 
hope  and  confidence ; so  that  while  he  con- 
fesses himself  unworthy  of  the  very  air  that 
he  breathes,  he  is  encouraged  and  warranted 
to  claim  a participation  in  all  the  blessings 
of  grace  and  glory : — and  finally,  in  proposing 
motives,  which,  when  rightly  understood,  are 
always  found  sufficient  to  influence  the  heart, 
even  though  it  has  been  habitually  hardened 
in  sin,  long  deaf  to  the  voice  of  reason,  con- 
science, and  interest,  and  equally  unafi'ected 
by  the  judgments  or  the  mercies  of  God,  till 
enlightened  to  perceive  the  excellency  of  the 
1 gospel. 


MESSIAH’S  ENTRANCE  INTO  JERUSALEM. 


251 


SER.  XI.] 

The  glory  of  his  power,  in  making  all  the 
acts  of  free  agents,  through  a long  succession 
of  ages,  subservient  to  this  great  purpose, 
not  excepting  those  who  most  laboured  to 
obstruct  it ; — in  changing  the  disposition  of 
the  sinner,  however  obstinate  ; — and  in  car- 
rying on  his  work  of  grace,  when  once  be- 
gun, in  such  feeble  inconsistent  creatures  as 
men  are,  in  defiance  of  all  difficulties  and 
opposition  arising  from  within  or  without. 

These  are  subjects  which  the  angels  de- 
sire to  look  into,  (1  Pet.  i.  12,)  which  fill  the 
most  exalted  intelligences  with  admiration. 
The  glory  of  God  was  manifested,  was  cele- 
brated in  the  highest  heavens,  When  Messiah 
was  born  of  a woman. 

2.  The  great  design  and  effect  of  his  ap- 
pearance with  regard  to  mankind,  is  peace. 
“ On  earth  peace.”  Man,  as  a fallen  crea- 
ture, is  in  a state  of  war  and  rebellion  against 
his  Maker.  He  has  renounced  his  allegiance 
and  dependence,  is  become  his  own  end.  He 
is  now  against  God,  disobedient  to  his  laws, 
and  disaffected  to  his  government.  And  his 
conscience,  if  not  stupified  and  cauterized  by 
frequent  resistance  of  conviction,  suggests 
that  God  is  against  him.  He  feels  he  is  not 
happy  here,  he  fears  he  shall  be  miserable 
hereafter.  This  apprehension  strengthens 
his  aversion  from  God.  And,  indeed,  with- 
out an  express  assurance  from  the  Lord  him- 
self, whom  he  has  offended,  that  there  is 
forgiveness  with  him,  he  would  not  only  fear, 
but  sink  into  despair,  if  he  rightly  understood 
the  horrid  enormity  of  a state  of  alienation 
from  the  blessed  God.  But  infinite  wisdom 
and  mercy  have  provided,  and  propounded  a 
method,  by  which  the  honour  of  the  divine 
perfections  and  government  are  secured,  and 
pardon  and  peace  vouchsafed  to  rebels.  God 
was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  unto 
himself.  The  knowledge  of  this  mercy, 
when  revealed  to  the  sinner’s  heart,  sub- 
dues his  enmity,  constrains  him  to  throw 
down  his  arms,  and  to  make  an  unreserved 
submission  and  surrender  of  himself ; forms 
him  to  a temper  of  love  and  confidence,  and 
disposes  him  to  habitual  and  cheerful  obe- 
dience. Now  mercy  and  truth  are  met 
together,  righteousness  and  peace  have  kiss- 
ed each  other,  (Psal.  lxxxv.  10 ;)  and  God  is 
glorified  in  the  highest,  for  peace  proclaimed 
upon  the  earth. 

The  expression  of  “ good  will  towards 
men,”  seems  to  rise  upon  the  former.  Not 
only  peace,  but  acceptance  and  adoption  in 
the  Beloved.  Sinners  who  believe  in  the  Son 
of  God,  are  not  merely  delivered  from  the 
condemnation  they  have  deserved,  but  are 
united  to  their  Saviour ; considered  as  one 
with  him,  his  children,  the  members  of  his 
body,  and  made  partakers  of  his  life,  and  his 
glory.  God  is  their  portion,  and  heaven  is 
their  home.  The  Lord’s  satisfaction  in  this, 
as  the  greatest  of  all  his  works,  is  expressed 


by  the  prophet  in  such  astonishing  terms  or 
condescension,  as  surpass  our  utmost  concep- 
tions ; and  we  can  only  say,  Lord  what  is 
man  that  thou  art  thus  mindful  of  him  ! We 
believe,  admire,  and  adore.  “ The  Lord  thy 
God  in  the  midst  of  thee  is  mighty  : Pie  will 
save,  he  will  rejoice  over  thee  with  joy,  he 
will  rest  in  his  love,  he  will  rejoice  over  thee 
with  singing,”  Zeph.  iii.  17. 

Assuredly  this  song  of  the  heavenly  host 
is  not  the  language  of  our  hearts  by  nature. 
We  once  sought  our  pleasure  and  happiness 
in  a very  different  way.  We  were  indiffer- 
ent to  the  g'lory  of  God,  and  strangers  to  his 
peace.  And  some  of  us  are  still  blind  to  the 
excellencies  of  the  gospel,  and  deaf  to  its  gra- 
cious invitations.  But  we  must  not  expect  to 
sing  with  the  great  company  of  the  redeemed 
hereafter,  before  the  throne  of  glory,  unless 
we  learn,  and  love  their  song  while  we  are 
here,  Rev.  xiv.  3.  They  who  attain  to  the 
inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light,  are  first 
made  meet  for  it  in  the  present  life,  and  in 
this  way.  They  believe  the  testimony  of  the 
scripture  respecting  their  own  guilt,  unwor- 
thiness, and  helplessness  ; then  they  receive 
the  record  which  God  has  given  of  his  Son. 
They  renounce  all  confidence  in  the  flesh ; 
(Phil.  iii.  3;)  they  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus, 
and  from  his  fulness  they  derive  grace  to 
worship  God  in  the  Spirit.  A sense  of  their 
obligations  to  the  Saviour,  disposes  them  to 
praise  him  now  as  they  can  ; and  they  rejoice 
in  hope  of  seeing  him  ere  long  as  he  is,  and 
that  then  they  shall  praise  him  as  they  ought. 
For  heaven  itself,  as  described  in  the  word 
of  God,  could  not  be  a state  of  happiness  to  us, 
unless  we  are  like-minded  with  the  apostle, 
to  account  all  things  loss  and  dung  for  the 
excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus 
our  Lord. 


SERMON  XI. 

Messiah’s  entrance  into  Jerusalem. 

Rejoice  greatly , O daughter  of  Zion ; shout , 
O daughter  of  Jerusalem : behold  thy 
King  cometh  unto  thee : he  is  just , and 
having  salvation  ; lowly,  and  riding  upon 
an  ass,  and  upon  a colt  the  foal  of  an  ass. 
— And  he  shall  speak  peace  unto  the  Hea- 
then.— Zech.  ix.  9,  10. 

The  narrowness  and  littleness  of  the  mind 
of  fallen  man  are  sufficiently  conspicuous  in 
the  idea  he  forms  of  magnificence  and  gran- 
deur. The  pageantry  and  parade  of  a Roman 
triumph,  or  of  an  eastern  monarch,  as  de- 
scribed in  history,  exhibit  him  to  us  in  what 
he  himself  accounts  his  best  estate.  If  you 
suppose  him  seated  in  an  imperial  carriage, 
arrayed  in  splendid  apparel,  wearing  a crown 


252 


MESSIAH’S  ENTRANCE 


or  tiara  ornamented  with  jewels,  preceded 
and  followed  by  a long-  train  of  guards  and 
attendants,  surrounded  by  the  unmeaning 
acclamations  of  ignorant  multitudes,  you  see 
the  poor  worm  at  the  summit  of  his  happiness. 
He  has  no  conception  of  any  thing  greater 
than  this.  And  the  spectators  are  generally 
of  the  same  mind.  They  admire,  and  they 
envy,  his  lot;  and  there  is  hardly  a person  in 
the;  crowds  around  him,  but  would  be  very 
glad  to  take  his  place,  were  it  practicable. 
Yet  this  great  little  creature  would  surely  be 
mortified,  if  in  the  height  of  his  self-compla- 
cence, he  could  consider  that  he  had  the 
very  same  regard  for  a pre-eminence  in 
finery,  the  same  desire  to  be  admired  and 
envied,  and  felt  the  same  kind  of  satisfaction 
in  distinction  above  his  fellows,  when  he  was 
a child  of  ten  years  old.  He  is  in  effect  a 
child  still,  only  he  has  changed  his  play- 
things, and  now  acts  upon  a larger  scale, 
but  with  the  same  trifling  and  contracted 
views. 

How  different  was  Messiah’s  entry  into  Je- 
rusalem foretold  in  this  prophecy,  the  accom- 
plishment of  which  we  read  in  the  evangel- 
ists ! And  how  differently  was  he  affected  by 
the  objects  around  him ! He  poured  contempt 
upon  the  phantom  of  human  glory.  This 
King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  was  meek 
and  lowly,  riding  upon  an  ass’s  colt,  Luke 
xix.  35 — 33.  And  though  a secret  divine 
influence  constrained  the  multitude  to  ac- 
knowledge his  character,  and,  with  some  ac- 
commodation to  the  customs  of  the  times,  to 
ftrew  their  garments  in  the  way,  as  they  pro- 
claimed the  King  who  came  in  the  name  of 
Jehovah  ; yet  he  appeared  unmoved  by  their 
applause.  Had  the  history  of  Jesus,  like 
those  which  we  have  of  Socrates  or  Cyrus, 
been  merely  the  work  of  a human  writer, 
ambitious  to  adorn  a favourite  character  with 
the  most  splendid  qualities  of  a philosopher 
or  a hero,  we  should  never  have  known  how 
his  mind  was  engaged  in  this  situation.  The 
Saviour  must  be  divine,  his  historian  must  be 
inspired,  the  fact  must  be  true ; for  man 
could  not  have  invented  such  a circumstance, 
that  this  meek  and  lowly  Saviour  took  no 
notice  of  the  zeal  and  homage  of  his  friends, 
because  his  heart  was  filled  with  compassion 
for  his  enemies,  who  were  thirsting  for  his 
blood.  For  it  was  then,  amidst  the  acclama- 
tion of  his  disciples,  that  he  beheld  the  city 
and  wept  over  it,  while  he  foretold  the  evils 
which  the  rejection  of  him  would  bring  upon 
it.  “ Oh  that  thou  hadst  known,  even  thou, 
at  least  in  this  thy  day,  the  things  belonging 
to  thy  peace ! But  now  they  are  hidden  from 
thine  eyes.” 

An  angel  proclaimed  his  birth  to  the  shep- 
herds ; and  wise  men  from  the  east  paid  such 
attention  to  the  new-born  Saviour,  that  the 
jealousy  of  Herod  was  excited,  and  attempts 
made  to  destroy  him.  But  this  wonderful  in- 


[ser.  XI. 

fant  was  brought  up  in  a state  of  obscurity,  in 
a place  of  no  repute,  and  known  by  no  higher 
description  than  that  of  the  carpenter’s  son. 
In  the  course  of  his  ministry  he  appeared  and 
was  treated  as  a poor  man,  he  had  no  certain 
dwelling-place,  he  submitted  to  receive  sup- 
plies for  his  support  from  the  contributions 
of  a few  of  his  followers,  for  the  most  of 
them  were  poor  like  himself.  And  though 
he  wrought  many  wonderful  works  for  the 
relief  of  the  necessitous  and  miserable,  he  ad- 
mitted no  alteration  in  his  own  external  state, 
but  was  content  to  be  poor  and  despised,  for 
our  sakes,  to  the  end  of  his  life.  I think  the 
only  occasion  on  which  he  permitted  a public 
acknowledgment  of  his  person  and  character, 
was  when  he  fulfilled  this  prophecy.  And 
still  he  was  the  same  meek  and  lowly  Sa- 
viour. As  his  kingdom  was  not  of  this  world, 
neither  were  there  any  marks  of  human 
grandeur  in  his  procession.  He  approached 
Jerusalem,  attended,  indeed,  by  a concourse 
of  people,  but  riding  upon  an  ass,  and  weep- 
ing for  his  enemies. 

The  passage  of  the  Messiah  which  follows 
the  chorus  of  the  heavenly  host,  is  taken  from 
these  verses.  It  does  not  include  the  whole 
of  them.  In  one  clause  there  is  a small  al- 
teration in  the  expression,  but  it  does  not  af- 
fect the  sense.  Instead  of,  “ He  is  just, 
having  salvation,”  it  is,  “ He  is  a righteous 
Saviour.” 

We  may  notice, 

I.  The  prophet’s  address, — “ O daughter 
of  Zion  and  Jerusalem.” 

II.  The  exhortation  to  joy, — “ Rejoice  and 
shout.” 

III.  The  cause  assigned  for  this  joy, — 
“ Thy  King  cometh.” 

IV.  The  characters  of  the  King, — “A 
righteous  Saviour.” 

V.  His  great  design, — “ To  speak  peace 
to  the  heathen.” 

I.  The  address, — “ O daughter  of  Zion 
and  Jerusalem.”  Zion  and  Jerusalem  are  in- 
differently used  as  emblems  of  the  church,  or 
professing  people  of  God.  When  they  occur 
together,  as  here,  contradistinguished  from 
each  other,  Zion,  the  city  of  David,  the  seat 
of  government,  and  of  the  temple-worship, 
may  denote  the  principal  persons  of  the 
ecclesiastical  and  civil  state;  and  Jerusalem 
may  be  expressive  of  the  people  at  large,  the 
daughters  of  a place  signifying,  according  to 
the  Hebrew  idiom,  the  inhabitants.  They 
boasted  that  they  were  the  Lord’s  peculiar 
people ; they  had  the  prophecies  and  promises 
concerning  Messiah  in  their  hands,  and  were 
professedly  expecting  and  waiting  for  his  ap- 
pearance. They  are,  therefore,  called  upon  to 
rejoice  in  it.  But  when  he  actually  came, 
though  he  came  to  his  own,  to  his  own  na- 
tion, city,  and  temple ; his  own  people,  to 
whose  affection  and  allegiance  he  had  the 
justest  claim,  received  him  not,  John  i.  11. 


INTO  JERUSALEM. 


253 


8ER.  XI.] 

There  were  a few,  however,  who  truly  wait- 
ed for  him  as  the  hope  and  consolation  of 
Israel,  at  the  time  of  his  birth;  and  many 
more  were  afterwards  convinced  by  his  gra- 
cious words  and  works,  that  he  only  had  the 
words  of  eternal  life,  and  became  his  follow- 
ers. By  their  acknowledged  principles,  they 
were  all  bound  to  acknowledge  that  prophet 
whom  Moses  had  foretold  God  would  ra  ise  up 
among  them  like  unto  himself,  (Deut.  xviii. 
15 — 19  ; Acts  vii.  37,)  that  is,  to  be,  as  he 
had  been,  a lawgiver,  to  institute  a new  dis- 
pensation of  the  true  religion ; and  their  re- 
fusal involved  them,  as  a nation,  in  the  pu- 
nishment, which  Moses  had  likewise  de- 
nounced against  those  who  should  refuse  to 
hearken  to  him.  Thus  their  peculiar  advan- 
tage in  possessing  a divine  revelation,  while 
the  rest  of  mankind  were  left  ignorant  of  the 
will  of  God,  proved  an  aggravation  of  their 
guilt,  and  rendered  their  obstinacy  more  in- 
excusable, and  their  condemnation  more 
severe.  I am  bound  to  take  every  opportu- 
nity of  noticing  the  striking  parallel,  in  this 
respect,  between  the  Jewish  nation  in  our 
Saviour’s  time,  and  the  nations,  who,  since 
that  period,  have  admitted  the  New  Testa- 
ment as  a revelation  from  God.  By  assum- 
ing the  Christian  name,  and  so  far  calling 
the  Saviour  Lord,  while  they  reject  the  spirit 
and  design  of  the  gospel,  and  treat  the  mi- 
nisters of  it  with  neglect  or  contempt,  they 
tread  in  the  steps,  and  share  in  the  guilt,  of 
those  who  pretended  to  expect  Messiah,  and 
yet  crucified  him  when  he  appeared  among 
them.  In  person  he  could  be  crucified  but 
once ; but  the  scripture  speaks  of  those  who 
crucify  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  put  him 
to  open  shame.  How  far  this  is  the  case  of 
the  persons  who  can  bear  to  hear  of  his  pas- 
sion and  his  kingdom,  when  made  the  subject 
of  a musical  entertainment,  but  upon  no  other 
occasion,  deserves  their  serious  consideration. 

II.  The  exhortation  can  only  be  complied 
with  by  those  who  are  sensible  of  their  need 
of  a Saviour,  and  his  authority  and  ability  to 
save.  To  these  the  prophet  brings  a joyful 
message,  and  they  will  rejoice  and  shout. 
The  joy  of  harvest,  (Isa.  ix.  3,)  and  of  the 
victors  in  war,  when  dividing  the  spoil  of 
the  vanquished,  is  celebrated  with  shouting. 
But  sinners  who  by  the  knowledge  of  Mes- 
siah, are  delivered  from  goingdown  into  the 
pit,  from  the  dominion  of  the  powers  of 
darkness,  and  are  translated  into  the  kingdom 
of  God,  experience  a joy  far  superior,  in  kind 
and  degree,  to  any  satisfaction  that  temporal 
things  can  afford.  It  is  a joy  unspeakable, 
and  full  of  glory,  1 Pet.  i.  8.  Jesus,  when 
known  and  received  by  faith,  is,  in  the  high- 
est sense,  light  to  those  who  sit  in  darkness, 
health  to  the  sick,  food  to  the  hungry,  and 
rest  to  the  weary  soul.  Thus  many  rejoiced 
in  his  goodness  when  he  was  upon  earth ; 
and  he  still  has  a people,  and  will  have  to  the 


end  of  time,  who  do  and  shall  rejoice  in  him 
upon  these  accounts,  though  every  spring  of 
temporal  joy  should  be  dried  up.  They  who 
know  his  name,  and  put  their  trust  in  him, 
are  warranted  to  appropriate  those  strong  ex- 
pressions of  another  prophet : “ Although  the 
fig-tree  shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit 
be  in  the  vine,  the  labour  of  the  olive  shall 
fail,  and  the  fields  shall  yield  no  meat,  the 
flock  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold,  and  there 
shall  be  no  herd  in  the  stalls ; yet  I will  re- 
joice in  the  Lord,  I will  joy  in  the  God  of  my 
salvation,”  Hab.  iii.  17,  18. 

III.  The  ground  and  cause  of  this  joy  is 
assigned, — “ Thy  King  cometh.”  Messiah  is 
a king.  This  title  he  avowed  to  Pilate, 
(Mark  xv.  2,)  by  whose  order  it  was  affixed 
over  him  upon  his  cross.  That  this  was  not 
a slight  and  arbitrary  circumstance,  but  pro- 
vidential and  important,  we  may,  I think,  in- 
fer from  the  care  taken  by  the  evangelists  to 
preserve  the  remembrance  of  it,  for  it  is  re- 
corded by  them  all.  He  is,  indeed,  King  of 
kings,  King  and  Lord  of  nations,  King  of 
worlds ; but  he  is  here  spoken  of  as  King  of 
Zion.  The  kingdom  he  came  to  establish 
upon  earth  is  not  of  this  world,  nor  like  the 
kingdoms  of  the  world.  The  maxims,  lan- 
guage, interests,  and  aims  of  it,  are  peculiar 
to  itself.  His  power  and  providence  rule 
over  all ; but  he  is  only  known,  admired,  and 
willingly  obeyed  by  the  subjects  of  his  spirit- 
ual kingdom,  who,  though  they  are  in  the 
world,  are  not  of  it,  but  strangers  and  pil- 
grims upon  the  earth.  Their  ^o^.reu^*,  0r 
true  citizenship,  is  in  heaven,  Phil.  ii.  20. 
These  are  his  peculiar  people.  And  though 
they  partake  with  others  in  the  changes  and 
trials  incident  to  this  mortal  life,  and  have 
their  several  departments  and  duties  assigned 
them  according  to  his  will,  as  members  of  so- 
ciety, and  it  does  not  yet  appear  what  they 
shall  be ; (1  John  iii.  2 ;)  they  are  even  now 
the  children  and  servants  of  the  Lord,  and  he 
manifests  himself  to  them  as  he  does  not  to 
others.  Happy  are  these  his  subjects  who 
dwell  under  his  shadow.  He  rules  them,  not 
with  that  rod  of  iron  by  which  he  bruises  and 
breaks  the  power  of  his  enemies,  but  with  his 
golden  sceptre  of  love.  He  reigns  by  his 
own  right,  and  by  their  full  and  free  consent, 
in  their  hearts.  He  reigns  upon  a throne  of 
grace,  to  which  they  have  at  all  times  access; 
and  from  whence  they  receive,  in  answer  to 
their  prayers,  mercy  and  peace,  the  pardon 
of  all  their  sins,  grace  to  help  in  every  time 
of  need,  and  a renewed  supply  answerable  to 
all  their  wants,  cares,  services,  and  conflicts. 
So  that,  though  they  are  surrounded  with 
snares,  and  fiercely  opposed  by  many  ene- 
mies, they  cannot  be  overpowered,  for  the 
Lord  himself  is  their  king  and  their  Saviour 
We  have, 

IV.  Two  characters  of  this  King, — “ He  is 
just,  having  salvation,”  or,  as  it  is  in  the  pas- 


254 


MESSIAH’S  ENTRANCE  INTO  JERUSALEM. 


sage  of  the  Messiah,  “ He  is  a righteous  Sa- 
viour.” 

1.  He  is  righteous. — His  kingdom  is  found- 
ed in  righteousness.  It  is  the  effect  and  re- 
ward of  his  obedience  unto  death,  by  which 
he  made  an  end  of  sin,  and  brought  in  an 
everlasting  righteousness.  As  his  people  re- 
ceive and  expect  all  from  his  hand,  so  like- 
wise for  his  sake.  Such  is  his  command,  and 
such  is  his  promise.  “ If  ye  shall  ask  any 
thing  in  my  name,  I will  do  it,”  John  xiv.  14. 
In  pleading  their  cause,  and  managing  their 
concerns,  he  is  their  righteous  advocate. 
And  therefore,  because  his  intercession  is 
founded  upon  a righteous  stipulation,  which 
he  has  completely  fulfilled,  he  does  not  say, 
“Father,”  I ask,  but  “I  will,  that  those 
whom  thou  hast  given  me,  be  with  me  where 
I am,  that  they  may  behold  my  glory,”  John 
xvii.  24. 

2.  He  is  a Saviour. — Having  salvation  in 
himself ; yea,  he  is  their  salvation,  Isa.  xii.  2. 
His  wisdom,  power,  compassion,  and  deter- 
mined purpose,  are  all  engaged  to  save  them 
fully,  freely,  and  for  ever ; to  save  them  from 
guilt,  from  Satan,  and  from  sin,  through  all 
the  dangers  and  trials  of  this  life ; to  save 
them  to  the  uttermost,  till  he  fixes  them  final- 
ly out  of  the  reach  of  all  evil,  and  puts  them 
in  possession  of  all  the  happiness  of  which 
their  natures  are  capable,  in  a conformity  to 
his  own  image,  and  the  enjoyment  of  un- 
clouded, uninterrupted  communion  with  God. 

V.  His  great  design  was  not  confined  to 
Israel  after  the  flesh;  “he  shall  speak  peace 
to  the  Heathen”  also.  His  kingdom  com- 
prises, besides  the  believing  posterity  of  Abra- 
ham, Isaac,  and  Jacob,  a great  multitude 
gathered  from  amidst  all  nations,  people,  and 
languages,  from  the  east  and  the  west,  from 
the  north  and  the  south,  Luke  xiii.  28,  29. 
Though  the  Heathen  were  universally  alien- 
ated from  God,  by  evil  works  and  an  evil  con- 
science, he  has  undertaken  to  reconcile  them, 
and  to  bring  those  near  who  were  once  afar 
off.  By  their  knowledge  of  him,  their  prisons 
shall  be  opened,  their  chains  broken,  (Isa.  xlv. 
14,)  their  condemnation  reversed,  and  they 
shall  be  renewed,  and  accepted  in  the  Be- 
loved, as  the  true  children  of  Abraham.  He 
shall  likewise  conciliate  peace  between  Jew 
and  Gentile,  make  of  both  one  people,  (Eph. 
ii.  13 — 16,)  pulling  down  the  walls  of  se- 
paration and  prejudice,  that  with  one  heart 
and  mind  they  may  love,  serve,  and  praise 
him.  For  where  faith  in  him  obtains,  all  dis- 
tinctions are  lost  and  superseded.  There  is 
then,  neither  Greek  nor  Jew,  circumcision 
nor  uncircumcision,  barbarian,  Scythian, 
bond  nor  free,  but  Christ  is  all,  and  in  all, 
Col.  iii.  11. 

Much  has  been  already  done  by  the  gospel. 
Multitudes  have  been  turned  from  darkness 
to  light,  and  from  the  worship  of  dumb  idols 
to  serve  the  living  and  true  God.  And  we 


[ser.  XI. 

expect  a time  when  this  promise  will  be 
more  extensively  and  literally  fulfilled ; when 
the  kingdom  shall  be  the  Lord’s  to  the  end 
of  the  earth ; when  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles 
shall  come  in,  all  Israel  shall  be  saved,  and 
the  nations  shall  learn  war  no  more. 

From  these  characters  of  the  Saviour,  we 
may  collect  the  character  of  his  people. 
For  they  beholding  his  glory,  are  changed 
(according  to  the  measure  of  their  faith)  into 
the  same  image.  The  incommunicable  per- 
fections of  God,  such  as  his  sovereignty,  and 
all-sufficiency,  can  only  produce  in  his  people 
correspondent  impressions  of  reverence,  sub- 
mission, and  dependence ; an  attempt  to  be 
like  him  in  these  respects  would  be  highly 
impious,  and  was  indeed  the  original  source 
of  our  apostacy  from  him.  Man,  by  indulging 
a desire  of  being  like  God,  rebelled  against 
him,  aspired  at  independence,  and  preferred 
the  gratification  of  his  own  will  to  the  righte- 
ous and  equitable  commands  of  his  Maker. 
The  unavoidable  consequence  of  this  madness 
is  misery.  It  is  not  possible  that  he  should 
be  happy,  till  he  be  reduced  to  his  proper 
state  of  subordination.  But  that  light  of  the 
glory  of  God  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ, 
which  is  revealed  to  the  renewed  heart  by 
the  gospel,  has  a transforming  effect  upor 
those  who  receive  it;  they  are  made  par- 
takers of  a divine  nature,  and  resemble  him, 
whose  they  are,  and  whom  they  serve,  in 
righteousness,  goodness,  and  truth,  Eph.‘  v.  9. 

They  are  righteous  as  he  is  righteous.  I 
speak  not  of  their  relative  state,  as  they  are 
accepted  and  accounted  righteous  in  the  Be- 
loved, but  of  their  real  character.  They  learn 
of  him  to  love  righteousness  and  hate  iniquity, 
Psalm  xlv.  7.  Their  principles  are  right, 
drawn  from  the  revealed  truths  of  God.  They 
comport  themselves  as  becomes  weak  and 
unworthy  sinners,  and  ascribe  the  glory  of 
their  salvation  to  the  Lord  alone ; and  there- 
fore the  general  tenor  of  their  conduct  is 
governed  by  the  righteous  rules  of  his  pre- 
cepts ; of  which  they  have  the  most  endear- 
ing and  animating  exemplification  in  the 
conduct  of  their  Saviour;  from  him  they 
learn  to  frame  their  tempers,  desires,  and 
hopes,  and  thus  give  evidence  that  they  are, 
in  deed  and  in  truth,  a saved  people.  His 
love,  in  proportion  as  it  is  realized  in  their 
hearts  by  faith,  teaches  them  likewise  to  love 
one  another,  and  to  exercise  benevolence  to 
all  men.  When  they  understand  the  true 
nature  of  his  spiritual  kingdom,  which  con- 
sisted not  in  external  distinctions  and  forms, 
but  in  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghost;  (Rom.  xiv.  17;)  and  that  it  is 
his  great  design  to  form  to  himself  a people 
from  amongst  the  nations  of  the  earth,  who 
shall  be  one  body,  enlivened  by  one  and  the 
same  spirit,  they  acquire  a large  and  com- 
prehensive mind.  They  rise  above  the  in- 
fluence of  names,  parties,  and  divisions ; are 


EFFECTS  OF  MESSIAH’S  APPEARANCE. 


255 


SER.  XII.] 

freed  from  the  narrow  views  and  interests  of 
self;  and  put  on,  as  the  elect  of  God,  bowels 
of  mercies,  kindness,  humility,  meekness, 
long-suffering,  forbearance,  and  forgiveness, 
(Col.  iii.  12,)  in  conformity  to  the  pattern  and 
will  of  their  great  exemplar.  Thus  he  speaks 
peace  to  them,  and  hushes  all  their  angry 
tumultuous  passions  into  a calm. 

Such  is  the  spirit  and  tendency  of  the  gos- 
pel. Let  us  try  ourselves  by  this  touchstone, 
measure  ourselves  by  this  rule,  and  weigh 
ourselves  in  these  balances  of  the  sanctuary. 
They  that  are  Christ’s  have  crucified  the 
flesh,  have  put  off  the  old  man,  and  are  re- 
newed in  the  spirit  of  their  minds.  If  he  be 
indeed  your  King,  your  consciences  will  bear 
you  witness  that  you  revere,  imitate,  and  obey 
him.  If  he  be  your  Saviour,  you  certainly 
must  be  sensible  yourselves,  and  others  must 
observe  that  you  are  different  from  what  you 
once  were. 

And  if  any  of  you  should  be  convinced, 
that  hitherto  you  have  been  a Christian  only 
in  name  and  in  form,  but  destitute  of  that 
which  constitutes  the  life  and  power  of  real 
godliness,  this  will  be  a good  beginning.  For 
though  it  be  high  time  that  you  should  in 
good  earnest  attend  to  these  things,  blessed 
be  God  it  is  not  yet  too  late.  He  is  a righ- 
teous and  a gracious  Saviour;  seek  him  as 
such,  and  he  will  speak  peace  to  you  also. 
His  sure  promise  is  recorded  for  your  encou- 
ragement, “ Him  that  cometh  unto  me  I will 
in  no  wise  cast  out,”  John  vi..  37. 


SERMON  XII. 

EFFECTS  OF  MESSIAH’S  APPEARANCE. 

Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened , 
and  the  ears  of  the  deaf  shall  be  unstop- 
ped: Then  shall  the  lame  man  leap  as  a 
hart , and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing. — 
Is.  xxxv.  5,  6. 

How  beautiful  and  magnificent  is  the  ima- 
gery by  which  the  prophet,  in  this  chapter, 
represents  the  effects  of  Messiah’s  appear- 
ance ! The  scene,  proposed  to  our  view,  is 
a barren  and  desolate  wilderness.  But  when 
he,  who  in  the  beginning  said  “ Let  there  be 
light,  and  there  was  light,”  condescends  to 
visit  this  wilderness,  the  face  of  nature  is 
suddenly  changed  by  his  presence.  Foun- 
tains and  streams  of  water  burst  forth  in  the 
burning  desert,  the  soil  becomes  fruitful, 
• clothed  with  verdure,  and  adorned  with 
flowers.  The  towering  cedars,  which  were 
the  glory  of  Lebanon,  and  the  richest  pas- 
tures, which  were  the  excellency  of  Carmel, 
present  themselves  to  the  eye,  where,  a little 
before,  all  was  uncomfortable  and  dreary. 
How  is  it,  that  so  few  of  those  who  value 
themse.ves  upon  their  taste,  and  who  profess 
to  be  admirers  of  pastoral  poetry  in  particular, 


are  struck  with  the  elegance  and  beauty  of 
this  description  1 Alas,  we  can  only  ascribe 
their  indifference  to  the  depravity  of  the 
human  heart.  They  would,  surely,  have 
admired  this  picture,  could  they  have  met 
with  it  in  any  of  their  favourite  authors  ; but 
descriptive  paintings  in  this  style,  so  exqui- 
sitely combining  grandeur  with  simplicity, 
are  only  to  be  found  in  the  Bible,  a book 
which  their  unhappy  prejudices  and  passions 
too  often  lead  them  to  depreciate  and  neglect. 
But  they  who  have  a scriptural  and  spiritual 
taste,  not  only  admire  this  passage  as  a de- 
scription of  a pleasing  change  in  outward 
nature,  but  consider  it  as  a just  and  expres- 
sive representation  of  a more  important,  a 
moral  change,  of  which  they  have  themselves 
been,  in  a measure,  the  happy  subjects.  The 
barren  wilderness  reminds  them  of  the  state 
of  mankind  by  the  fall,  and  of  their  own 
hearts,  before  Messiah,  the  Sun  of  righteous- 
ness, arose  upon  them  with  healing,  with  light, 
power,  and  comfort,  in  his  beams.  In  that 
memorable  hour,  old  things  passed  away,  and 
all  things  became  new.  The  Lord,  by  shin- 
ing into  their  hearts,  and  showing  them  his 
glory  in  the  person  of  Christ,  has  created  for 
them  a new  heaven  and  a new  earth.  The 
works  of  God  around  them  in  his  creation 
and  providence  assume  a different  appearance. 
Before,  they  lived  without  him  in  the  world , 
but  now,  they  see  his  hand  wherever  they 
look,  they  hear  his  voice  in  every  event ; for 
now  the  principles  of  his  grace  are  planted  in 
their  souls,  and  they  are  no  longer  barren  nor 
unfruitful,  but  are  filled  with  the  fruits  of 
righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ  to 
his  praise,  Phil.  i.  11. 

The  verses  which  I have  read  exhibit  the 
effects  of  Messiah’s  power  and  goodness,  by 
another  image  equally  pleasing.  Not  only 
the  wilderness,  but  the  inhabitants  of  the  wil- 
derness partake  of  the  virtue  of  the  great  Re- 
deemer. He  finds  them  in  circumstances  of 
distress,  which  he  only  can  relieve.  But 
when  he  comes  the  blind  receive  their  sight, 
the  deaf  hear,  the  lame  walk,  and  the  dumb 
have  voices  given  them  to  resound  his  praise. 
These  mighty  works,  in  their  literal  sense, 
marked  his  character,  and  confirmed  his  claims 
when  he  was  upon  earth ; and  to  these  he 
himself  appealed  in  proof  of  his  being  the 
promised  Saviour  whom  the  prophets  had 
foretold,  and  that  no  other  was  to  be  expect- 
ed, Matt.  xi.  3 — 6. 

But  the  words  have  a still  more  sublime 
and  important  sense.  As  the  great  Physician, 
he  cured  all  manner  of  bodily  diseases  and  in- 
firmities. But  this  was  not  the  principal  de- 
sign for  which  he  came  into  the  world.  The 
maladies  to  which  sin  lias  subjected  the  body, 
are  but  emblems  of  the  more  dreadful  evils 
which  it  has  brought  upon  the  soul.  He 
came  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  mind ; to  make 
the  obstinate  will  attentive  and  obedient  to 


256 


EFFECTS  OF  MESSIAH'S  APPEARANCE. 


the  voice  of  God ; to  invigorate  our  benumbed 
and  paralytic  faculties,  that  we  may  be  active 
and  cheerful  in  his  service ; and  to  open  our 
lips,  that  our  mouths  may  show  forth  his 
praise.  I have  a good  hope  that  I may  war- 
rantably  say,  “ This  day  is  this  scripture  ful- 
filled in  your  ears,”  Luke  iv.  21.  Some  of 
you  who  were  once  darkness,  are  now  light 
in  the  Lord. 

These  different  effects  are  produced  by  one 
simple,  but  powerful  operation.  While  La- 
zarus lay  in  the  grave,  all  his  natural  powers 
were  inactive.  But  when  the  voice  of  the 
Son  of  God  restored  him  to  life,  (John  xi.  43,) 
he  was,  of  course,  immediately  enabled  to  see, 
to  hear,  to  move,  and  to  speak.  Thus,  while 
we  were  spiritually  dead,  we  were  necessari- 
ly blind,  deaf,  dumb,  and  motionless,  with  re- 
spect to  all  the  objects  and  faculties  of  that 
life  of  God  in  the  soul,  which  is  the  perfec- 
tion and  honour  of  our  nature.  When  we 
are  made  partakers  of  this  life,  by  a new  and 
heavenly  birth,  then  our  spiritual  senses  are 
brought  into  exercise,  then  the  eyes  of  the 
blind  are  opened,  to  see  the  beauty  and  glory 
of  divine  truths : we  hear  the  voice  of  God, 
we  feel  a liberty  to  walk  and  act  in  his  ser- 
vice, and  our  tongues  are  taught  to  praise 
him.  Here  are  four  chief  effects  of  a work 
of  grace  upon  the  heart,  which  distinguish 
believers  from  the  rest  of  mankind. 

And  these  effects  are  all  to  be  ascribed  to 
Messiah.  For  they  are  all  wrought  by  the 
agency  of  his  Holy  Spirit.  The  gifts  and 
graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  are  abso- 
lutely necessary,  as  well  for  the  perpetuating 
of  his  gospel  from  age  to  age,  as  for  making 
it  efficacious  and  successful,  are  bestowed 
upon  sinners  wholly  upon  the  account  of  his 
mediation.  It  was,  when  he  ascended  on 
high  and  led  captivity  captive,  that  he  pro- 
cured these  blessings  for  rebellious  men,  that 
the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them,  Psal. 
ixviii.  18.  And  it  was  only  for  his  sake,  and 
on  the  account  of  what  he  has  to  accomplish 
in  the  fulness  of  time,  as  intimated  in  the 
promise  of  the  seed  of  the  woman  appointed 
to  bruise  the  serpent’s  head,  that  there  were 
any  gracious  communications  afforded  to  fal- 
len man,  from  the  first  entrance  of  sin  into 
the  world.  But  now  the  Redeemer’s  great 
work  is  fulfilled,  his  salvation  is  more  openly 
revealed  and  applied  by  the  publication  of  the 
gospel,  with  the  Holy  Ghost  sent  down  from 
Heaven,  and  sinners  hear  the  voice  of  God 
and  live.  Then  all  the  changes  prefigured 
and  predicted  in  my  text  take  place,  and  the 
wilderness  becomes  a fruitful  field. 

1.  They  were  once  blind,  but  now  they  see. 
The  religion  of  true  believers  is  not  the  effect 
of  imagination  and  blind  impulse,  but  is  de- 
rived from  a solid  knowledge,  which  will  bear 
the  strictest  scrutiny,  and  is  the  reasonable 
service  of  an  enlightened  understanding. 
They  see  God ; their  apprehensions  of  him 


are,  in  some  measure,  answerable  to  his 
greatness  and  his  goodness,  and  inspire  them 
with  reverence  and  love.  Their  conceptions 
of  other  things,  in  which  they  are  most  near- 
ly interested,  are  agreeable  to  the  truth.  Sin 
appears  to  them  hateful  in  itself,  as  well  as 
mischievous  in  its  consequences;  and  holi- 
ness, not  only  necessary  by  the  ordination  of 
God,  but  desirable  for  its  own  sake,  as  essen- 
tially belonging  to  the  true  dignity  and  hap- 
piness of  man.  They  know  themselves ; they 
see  and  feel  that  they  are  such  creatures  as 
the  Bible  describes  them  to  be,  weak,  de- 
praved, and  vilfe.  Of  course,  they  see  the 
folly  of  attempting  to  recommend  themselves 
to  God,  and  can  no  longer  place  any  depend- 
ence on  what  they  once  accounted  their  wis- 
dom, power,  or  righteousness ; and  therefore 
they  see  the  absolute  necessity  of  a Saviour. 
They  see,  likewise,  and  approve  the  method 
of  salvation  proposed  by  the  gospel,  as  worthy 
of  the  wisdom  and  justice  of  God,  and  every 
way  adapted  to  the  exigencies  of  their  sins, 
wants,  and  fears.  They  see  and  admire  the 
excellence,  dignity,  and  sufficiency  of  him,  on 
whom  their  help  is  laid.  His  power  and  au- 
thority engage  their  confidence,  his  love  cap- 
tivates and  fixes  their  hearts.  They  see  the 
vanity  of  the  present  state,  and  the  vast  im- 
portance of  eternity.  In  these  respects  they 
have  all  of  them  a good  understanding,  how- 
ever inferior  in  natural  capacity  or  acquired 
knowledge  to  the  wise  men  of  the  world. 

2.  Their  knowledge,  so  far  as  they  have 
attained,  is  not  merely  speculative,  cold,  and 
indistinct,  like  the  light  of  the  moon.  The 
Sun  of  righteousness  has  shined  into  their 
hearts.  The  light  they  enjoy  is  vital,  cheer- 
ing, and  effective.  Because  they  thus  see, 
they  hear  likewise.  They  were  once  deaf  to 
the  voice  of  God,  whether  he  spoke  by  his 
word  or  his  providence,  whether  in  the  lan- 
guage of  mercy  or  judgment.  But  now  their 
deaf  ears  are  unstopped.  They  are  now  at- 
tentive, submissive,  and  willing  to  receive 
his  instructions,  and  to  obey  his  commands. 
With  them,  one  “Thus  saith  the  Lord,”  has 
the  force  of  a thousand  arguments.  They 
desire  no  farther  proof  of  a doctrine,  no  other 
warrant  for  their  practice,  no  other  reason  tor 
any  dispensation,  than  Thus  the  Lord  has 
said,  This  he  requires,  and  This  is  his  ap- 
pointment. Thus  their  wills  are  brought 
into  subjection ; and  they  so  understand,  as 
to  believe  and  obey. 

3.  Farther,  with  their  sight  and  hearing 
they  receive  power  and  activity.  Once  they 
were  tied  a nd  bound  in  the  chain  of  their  sins, 
or  like  a man  benumbed  with  a dead  palsy, 
unable  to  move.  If  they  sometimes  seemed 
to  express  desires  that  might  be  called  good 
with  respect  to  their  object,  they  were  faint 
and  ineffectual.  But  now  their  fetters  are 
broken,  the  health  and  strength  of  their  souls 
are  restored,  and  God  has  wrought  in  them  not 


257 


ser.  xii.]  EFFECTS  OF  MESSIAH’S  APPEARANCE. 


only  to  will  but  also  to  do  according  to  his 
good  pleasure,  Phil.  ii.  13.  It  is  not  more 
wonderful  that  a cripple  should  suddenly  re- 
cover the  use  of  his  limbs,  than  that  a person 
who  has  long  been  fettered  in  sinful  habits 
should  be  enabled  to  move  and  act  with  ala- 
crity in  the  service  of  God.  But  in  the  day 
of  divine  power  sinners  are  made  both  willing 
and  able.  How  burdensome  was  that  which 
they  once  accounted  their  religion  ! how  lit- 
tle comfort  did  it  yield  them  ! how  little  did 
it  assist  them  against  their  passions  or  against 
their  fears ! But  all  things  are  become  new, 
since  they  have  attained  to  ajlife  of  faith  in 
the  Son  of  God.  Their  religious  service  is 
now  pleasant,  and  their  warfare  against  sin 
and  the  world  victorious.  Their  obligations, 
motives,  resources,  encouragements, and  pros- 
pects inspire  them  with  a holy  vigour  to  run, 
with  patience  and  perseverance,  the  race 
that  is  set  before  them. 

4.  Having  their  sight  and  hearing  thus  re- 
stored, and  their  hearts  enlarged  to  walk  at  li- 
berty in  the  ways  of  wisdom,  they  are  no 
longer  dumb,  silent,  and  sullen,  but,  out  of 
the  abundance  of  their  hearts,  their  mouths  , 
speak  the  language  of  gratitude,  praise,  and 
joy.  For  though  most  people  have  the  fa- 
culty of  speech,  and  can  use,  or  rather  abuse 
their  tongues  fluently  ; though  we  are  suffi- 
ciently expert  from  our  childhood,  in  the  dia- 
lects of  falsehood,  profaneness,  and  folly  ; yet, 
by  nature,  we  are  dumb  with  respect  to  the 
language  that  becomes  us,  as  the  creatures  of 
God,  and  as  those  who  have  sinned  against 
him,  and  yet  are  invited  to  seek  his  mercy. 
But  when  grace  teaches  the  heart,  then  the 
heart  teaches  the  mouth,  Prov.  xvi.  23.  When 
we  believe,  then  we  speak,  yea,  we  sing  and 
greatly  rejoice ; as  it  is  written,  “ In  that  day 
I will  praise  thee ; though  thou  wast  angry, 
thine  anger  is  turned  away,”  Isa.  xii.  1.  And 
again,  “ The  voice  of  joy  and  thanksgiving  is 
in  the  tabernacles  of  the  righteous,”  Psal. 
cxviii.  15.  “ Let  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord 

say,  That  he  is  good,  and  his  mercy  endureth 
for  ever,  Psal.”  cvii.  1,  2 

It  is  of  great  importance  to  examine  our- 
selves by  this  test,  and  not  to  be  satisfied 
with  our  knowledge  of  the  gospel,  any  farther 
than  our  consciences  bear  us  witness,  that  it 
has  produced  a real  moral  change  in  our  tem- 
pers, conduct,  and  pursuits.  For  there  is  a 
knowledge  which  is  falsely  so  called.  It  puffeth 
up,  but  edifieth  not.  Our  Lord’s  declaration 
deserves  our  most  serious  attention : “ For 
judgment  I am  come  into  this  world,  that 
they  which  see  not  may  see,  and  that  they 
which  see,  might  be  made  blind,”  John  ix. 
39.  It  is  very  possible,  yea,  very  easy,  by 
the  help  of  books,  sermons,  and  converse,  to 
acquire  an  orderly  and  systematic  knowledge 
of  divine  truths ; it  may  be  learnt  thus,  like 
any  other  branch  of  human  science,  and  the 
head  be  well  stored  with  orthodox  sentiments;  | 
Vol.  II.  2 K 


and  there  may  be  an  ability  to  prove  and  de- 
fend them,  in  a way  of  argumentation,  while 
the  heart  is  utterly  a stranger  to  their  salu- 
tary influence.  Such  characters  are  too  com- 
mon. None  make  a greater  parade  and  boast 
of  seeing’  than  these  persons.  None  are  more 
fatally  blinded.  They  smile  with  disdain 
when  they  speak  of  a self-righteousness 
founded  upon  prayers,  alms-deeds,  and  sacra- 
ments, but  are  not  aware  that  they  them- 
selves live  in  the  very  spirit  of  the  Pharisees, 
(Luke  xviii.  2,)  so  clearly  described  and  so 
expressly  condemned  in  the  New  Testament. 
Their  supposed  knowledge  of  the  doctrines 
which  they  misunderstand  and  abuse,  is  the 
righteousness  on  which  they  build  their 
hopes ; and  trusting  to  this,  they  despise  all 
those  who  are  stricter  in  practice  than  them- 
selves, as  ignorant  and  legal,  and  discover  al- 
most as  great  dislike  to  close  and  faithful 
preaching  as  they  could  do  to  poison.  Though 
the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  when  rightly  re- 
ceived, are  productive  of  godliness,  it  is  to  be 
feared  there  are  people  who  espouse  and 
plead  for  them  to  quiet  their  consciences,  by 
furnishing  them  with  excuses  for  the  sins 
they  are  unwilling  to  forsake.  It  is  not  sur- 
prising that  they  who  are  displeased  with 
the  yoke  of  our  Lord’s  precepts  should  seem 
friendly  to  the  idea  of  salvation  without  the 
works  of  the  law.  The  notion  of  the  final 
perseverance  of  believers  may  afford  a pillow 
for  those  to  rest  on,  who,  being  at  present 
destitute  of  all  feeling  of  spiritual  life,  labour 
to  persuade  themselves,  that  they  are  Chris- 
tians, because  they  had  some  serious  thoughts, 
and  made  some  profession  of  the  truth,  many 
years  ago.  So  likewise,  in  what  the  scrip- 
tures teach  of  the  total  inability  of  fallen 
man,  they  think  they  have  a plea  to  justify 
their  negligence  and  sloth,  and  therefore  are 
not  d isposed  to  contradict  the  testimony.  The 
invitation  and  command  to  wait,  and  watch, 
and  strive  in  the  ways  and  means  of  the 
Lord’s  appointment,  they  evade,  as  they 
think,  with  impunity,  by  confessing  the 
charge,  and  saying-,  I am  a poor  creature  in- 
deed, I can  do  nothing  of  myself  aright,  and 
therefore  to  what  purpose  should  I attempt 
to  do  any  thing!  A minister  may  preach 
upon  these  points,  in  general  terms,  and  ob- 
tain their  good  word.  But  if  he  speaks  plain- 
ly and  faithfully  to  conscience ; if  he  bears 
testimony  not  only  against  dead  works,  but 
against  a dead  faith, — against  spiritual  pride, 
evil  tempers,  evil  speaking,  love  of  the  world, 
and  sinful  compliances;  if  he  insists  that  the 
branches  of  the  true  vine  should  bear  grapes, 
and  not  the  same  fruit  as  the  bramble  ; hear 
ers  of  this  stamp  will  think  they  do  God  ser- 
vice hy  censuring  all  he  can  say  as  low  and 
legal  trash.  How  awful ! that  people  should 
be  blinded  by  the  very  truths  which  they  pro- 
fess to  believe  ! Yet  I fear  such  casr  s are  too 
frequent.  God  grant  a delusion  of  this  kind 


258 


THE  GREAT  SHEPHERD. 


may  never  be  found  amongst  us ! For  if  the 
salt  itself  should  lose  its  savour,  wherewith 
shall  it  be  salted  1 Matt.  v.  13.  May  we 
come  simply  to  the  light,  with  a desire  of  see- 
ing more  of  ourselves,  and  more  of  our  Sa- 
viour, that  we  may  be  more  humble  and  spi- 
ritual, more  afraid  of  sin,  more  watchful  and 
successful  in  striving  against  it,  and,  in  our 
whole  conversation,  more  conformable  to  our 
glorious  Head ! 

But  to  return  : — From  what  has  been  of- 
fered upon  this  subject  we  may  observe, 

1.  That  true  Christianity  is  friendly  to  so- 
ciety, and  to  the  common  interests  of  man- 
kind. It  is  the  source  of  peace,  tenderness, 
benevolence,  and  every  humane  temper.  It 
is  calculated  to  soothe  the  fierce  disposition, 
to  enlarge  the  selfish  spirit,  and  to  transform 
the  lion  into  the  lamb.  What  then  must  we 
think  of  those  pretended  friends  to  liberty  and 
free  inquiry,  whose  unhappy  zeal  is  employed 
to  rob  us  of  the  only  light  and  balm  of  life  ! 
who,  by  their  misrepresentations  and  cavils, 
endeavour  to  persuade  others,  though  they 
cannot  effectually  persuade  themselves,  that 
the  gospel,  a scheme  so  wise  in  its  constitu- 
tion, so  salutary  in  its  design,  so  powerful  in 
its  effects,  is  no  better  than  an  imposition,  the 
contrivance  of  superstitious  or  artful  men ! 
Why  should  they  attempt  to  take  away  the 
foundation  of  our  hope  and  the  spring  of  our 
comfort,  (if  they  were  able,)  when  they  know 
they  have  nothing  to  substitute  in  their  place ! 
Let  us  think  of  them  with  that  compassion 
which  their  state  calls  for,  and  pray  for  them, 
if  peradventure  God  will  give  them  repent- 
ance to  the  acknowledgment  of  the  truth, 
2 Tim.  ii.  25. 

2.  The  change  thus  wrought  is  great,  mar- 
vellous, and,  if  not  so  frequent,  might  be 
styled  miraculous.  It  is  more  than  educa- 
tion, example,  persuasion,  or  resolution  can 
perform.  It  is  the  work  of  God  alone  to 
open  the  blind  eyes,  to  change  the  heart  of 
stone  into  flesh,  and  to  raise  the  dead. 

This  thought  should  exclude  boasting.  The 
happy  subjects  of  this  change  were  no  better 
by  nature  or  practice  than  others.  They  have 
nothing  but  what  they  have  received.  The 
glory  and  praise  is  due  to  the  Lord  alone. 
It  should  likewise  soften  their  censure  of 
those  who  are  still  in  a state  of  alienation 
from  God,  or  at  least  prevent  the  emotions  of 
anger  and  resentment  towards  them.  They 
know  not  what  they  do.  Their  danger  should 
excite  our  pity  and  our  friendly  endeavours 
to  recover  them  from  the  error  of  their  way. 
And,  especially,  we  should  be  careful  so  to 
regulate  our  behaviour,  that,  if  they  obey  not 
the  word,  they  may  without  the  word  be  con- 
vinced and  won  (T  Pet.  iii.  1)  by  the  force  of 
our  example.  If  the  Lord  be  pleased  to  do 
that  for  them  which  he  has  done  for  us,  their 
dislike  of  us,  and  their  opposition  to  us,  will 
be  quickly  at  an  end  ; arid  though  they  set 


[ser.  XIII. 

out  after  us,  they  may  possible  make  a swifter 
progress  in  the  Christian  life  than  we  have 
done.  Thus,  though  Saul  of  Tarsus  approach- 
ed Damascus  as  an  enemy  and  a persecutor, 
when  the  scales  fell  from  his  eyes,  he  not 
only  immediately  joined  the  disciples,  but  in 
a little  time  became  a pattern  to  them. 

That  the  change  is  the  work  of  God,  should 
likewise  be  considered  by  those  who,  from  a 
sense  of  the  greatness  of  their  sins,  and  the 
strength  of  their  sinful  habits,  are  ready  to 
sink  into  despair.  Whatever  apparent  diffi- 
culty there  may  be  in  your  case,  it  is  easy  to 
divine  power.  # All  things  are  possible  with 
God,  (Mark  x.  27,)  and  all  things,  likewise, 
are  possible  to  him  that  believeth,  Mark  ix. 
23.  The  promises  invite  you  to  apply  to  him 
who  is  the  author  and  finisher  of  faith,  and 
who  has  said  for  your  encouragement,  “ Him 
that  cometh  unto  me,  I will  in  nowise  cast 
out.” 


SERMON  XIII. 

THE  GREAT  SHEPHERD. 

He  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a shepherd ; he 
shall  gather  the  lambs  icith  his  arm , and 
carry  them  in  his  bosom , and  shall  gently 
lead  those  that  are  with  young. — Isa.  xl.  11 

It  is  not  easy  for  those  whose  habits  of  life 
are  insensibly  formed  by  the  customs  of  mo- 
dern times,  to  conceive  any  adequate  idea  of 
the  pastoral  life,  as  it  obtained  in  the  eastern 
countries,  before  that  simplicity  of  manners, 
which  characterized  the  early  ages,  was  cor- 
rupted by  the  artificial  and  false  refinements 
of  luxury.  Wealth,  in  those  days,  consisted 
principally  in  flocks  and  herds,  and  Abraham, 
Isaac,  Jacob,  and  others,  who  were,  to  speak 
in  modern  language,  persons  of  high  distinc- 
tion, were  likewise  shepherds.  The  book  of 
Genesis,  which  is  an  authentic  and  infallible 
history  of  the  most  ancient  times,  exhibits  a 
manner  of  living  so  different  from  our  own, 
that,  perhaps,  few  persons  are  qualified  to  en- 
ter fully  into  the  spirit  of  the  description. 
The  poets  seem  to  have  derived  their  idea  of 
the  golden  age  from  some  imperfect  tradition 
of  this  primitive  state ; and,  if  we  compare  it 
with  the  state  of  things  around  us,  methinks 
we  have  reason  to  say,  “ How  is  the  gold  be- 
come dim,  and  the  fine  gold  changed  !”  Lam. 
iv.  1.  The  opulence  of  Jacob  may  be  cofs 
jectured  from  the  present  he  sent  to  his  bro- 
ther Esau,  Gen.  xxxii.  14,  15.  Yet  Jacob 
attended  his  flocks  himself,  in  the  drought  by 
day,  and  in  the  frost  by  night,  Gen.  xxxi.  40. 
The  vigilance,  the  providence,  the  tender- 
ness, necessary  to  the  due  discharge  of  the 
shepherd’s  office,  have  been  frequently  ap- 
plied in  describing  the  nature  and  ends  ol 


THE  GREAT  SHEPHERD. 


259 


SER.  XIII.] 

government : and  it  has  been  esteemed  a high 
encomium  of  a good  king,  to  style  him  the 
shepherd  of  his  people.  This  character  Mes- 
siah, the  Saviour,  condescends  to  bear ; and 
happy  are  they,  who,  with  a pleasing  con- 
sciousness, can  say,  “ We  are  his  people  and 
the  sheep  of  his  pasture,”  Psal.  c.  3. 

The  passage  will  lead  me  to  speak  of  the 
shepherd,  the  flock,  and  his  care  and  tender- 
ness over  them. 

I.  Our  Lord  expressly  styles  himself  the 
Shepherd , the  good  Shepherd  of  the  Sheep , 
(John  x.  11,  14,)  and  the  apostle  Peter  styles 
him  the  chief  Shepherd , 1 Peter  v.  4.  His 
faithful  ministers  have  the  honour  to  be  un- 
der-shepherds; he  appoints,  and  qualifies 
them  to  feed  his  flock.  They  are  the  mes- 
sengers of  his  will,  but  they  can  do  nothing 
without  him ; they  can  only  communicate 
what  they  receive,  and  cannot  watch  over 
the  flock,  unless  they  are  themselves  watched 
over  by  him,  Psal.  cxxvii.  1.  For,  with  re- 
spect to  efficacy,  he  is  the  chief,  and,  indeed, 
the  sole  Shepherd.  The  eyes  of  all  are  upon 
him,  and  his  eye  is  upon,  and  over  all  his 
flock.  The  Old-Testament  church  had  a 
shepherd,  and  their  shepherd  was  Jehovah, 
Psal.  xxiii.  1.  Unless,  therefore,  the  Shepherd 
and  Bishop  of  our  souls  likewise  be  Jehovah, 
we  fall  unspeakably  short  of  the  privilege  of 
ancient  Israel,  if  their  Shepherd  was  almigh- 
ty, and  if  ours  could  be  but  a creature.  Surely 
we  could  not  then  say,  what  yet  the  apostle 
affirms,  that  we  have  a better  covenant,  es- 
tablished upon  better  promises ; (Heb.  viii. 
6 ;)  since  Messiah  himself  is  expressly  de- 
clared to  be  the  surety  and  the  mediator  of 
this  covenant.  But  would  it  not  be  better, 
upon  this  supposition,  with  David,  who  could 
say,  “ Jehovah  is  my  Shepherd,”  than  with 
us,  who  are  entrusted  to  the  care  of  a dele- 
gated and  inferior  keeper,  if  Jesus  be  not  Je- 
hovah 1 Besides,  who  but  Jehovah  can  relieve 
the  necessities  of  multitudes  in  all  places,  in 
the  same  moment,  and  be  equally  near  and 
attentive  to  them  in  every  age  1 The  sinner, 
who  is  enlightened  to  know  himself,  his 
wants,  enemies,  and  dangers,  will  not  dare  to 
confide  in  any  thing  short  of  an  almighty 
arm ; he  needs  a shepherd,  who  is  full  of 
wisdom,  full  of  care,  full  of  power;  able,  like 
the  sun,  to  shine  upon  millions  at  once,  and 
possessed  of  those  incommunicable  attri- 
brutes  of  Deity,  omniscience  and  omnipre- 
sence. Such  is  our  great  Shepherd  ; and  he 
is  eminently  the  good  Shepherd  also,  for  he 
laid  down  his  life  for  the  sheep,  and  has  re- 
deemed them  to  God  by  his  own  blood. 

II.  A shepherd  is  a relative  name ; it  has 
reference  to  a flock.  This  great  and  good 
Shepherd  has  a flock,  whom  he  loved  from 
everlasting,  and  whom,  having  loved,  he  will 
love  to  the  end,  John  xiii.  1. 

Formosi  pecoris  custos,  formosior  ipse  ! 

He  humbled  himself  for  their  sakes,  submit- 


ted to  partake  of  their  nature  and  their  sor- 
rows, took  upon  him  the  form  of  a servant, 
and  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh. 
He  died  for  his  sheep,  the  just  for  the  unjust, 
(1  Pet.  iii.  18,)  to  redeem  them  from  the  curse 
of  the  law,  from  the  guilt  and  dominion  of 
sin,  from  the  power  of  Satan,  and  to  bring 
them  to  God.  They,  by  nature,  are  all  gone 
astray,  every  one  to  his  own  way ; (Isa.  liii. 
6 ;)  but  having  thus  bought  them  with  his 
blood,  in  his  own  appointed  time,  he  seeks, 
finds,  and  restores  his  sheep.  By  the  power 
of  his  word  and  Spirit,  he  makes  himself 
known  to  their  hearts,  causes  them  to  hear 
and  understand  his  voice,  and  guides  them 
into  his  fold.  Then  they  become  his  sheep 
in  the  sense  of  my  text.  They  are  under  his 
immediate  protection  and  government. 

Considered  as  individuals,  they  are  fitly 
described  by  the  name  of  sheep.  A sheep  is 
a weak,  defenceless,  improvident  creature ; 
prone  to  wander,  and  if  once  astray,  is  seldom 
known  to  return  of  its  own  accord.  A sheep 
has  neither  strength  to  fight  with  the  wolf, 
nor  speed  to  escape  from  him  ; nor  has  it  the 
foresight  of  the  ant,  to  provide  its  own  suste- 
nance. Such  is  our  character,  and  our  situa- 
tion. Unable  to  take  care  of  ourselves,  prone 
to  wander  from  our  resting  place,  exposed  to 
enemies  which  we  can  neither  withstand  nor 
avoid,  without  resource  in  ourselves,  and 
taught  by  daily  experience,  the  insufficiency 
of  every  thing  around  us  : yet,  if  this  Shep- 
herd be  our  Shepherd,  weak  and  helpless  as 
we  are,  we  may  be  of  good  courage.  If  we 
can  say  with  David,  “ The  Lord  is  my  Shep- 
herd,” we  may  make  the  same  inferences 
which  he  did,  “ Therefore  I shall  not  want 
therefore  I need  not  fear. 

Collectively  they  are  a flock.  They  are 
not,  indeed,  in  one  place.  They  are  scatter- 
ed abroad,  dispersed  through  different  ages 
and  countries,  separated  by  seas  and  moun- 
tains, and,  too  often,  by  misapprehensions  and 
prejudices,  by  names  and  forms  ; and  only  ? 
very  small  part  of  the  flock  are  known  to  each 
other.  But  they  are  all  equally  known  fo 
him,  and  equally  under  his  eye.  In  his  view 
they  are  one  flock,  one  body ; they  are  ani- 
mated by  one  and  the  same  spirit ; their  views, 
hopes,  and  aims  are  the  same  ; and,  yet  a lit- 
tle while,  they  shall  be  all  brought  together, 
a number  without  number,  to  rejoice  and  to 
join  in  worship,  before  his  throne  of  glory. 
For  they  have  an  inheritance  reserved  for 
them  in  heaven  ; (1  Pet.  i.  4,  5 :)  and  they 
shall  be  safely  kept,  while  they  are  sojourners 
upon  earth,  for  the  Shepherd  of  Israel  is  their 
keeper. 

III.  He  shall  feed  his  flock  like  a shep- 
herd. The  word  is  not  restrained  to  feeding. 
It  includes  all  the  branches  of  the  shepherd’s 
office.  He  shall  act  the  part  of  a shepherd  to 
his  flock.  We  have  a beautiful  miniature 
description  of  what  he  has  engaged  to  do,  and 


260 


THE  GREAT  SHEPHERD. 


what  he  actually  does,  for  his  people,  as  their 
Shepherd,  in  the  twenty-third  Psalm.  And 
the  subject  is  more  largely  illustrated  in  the 
thirty-fourth  chapter  of  Ezekiel’s  prophecy. 
His  sheep,  from  age  to  age,  have  been  wit- 
nesses to  the  truth  of  his  promises.  He  has 
a flock  at  present  who  rejoice  in  his  care,  and 
greater  multitudes,  as  yet  unborn,  shall  suc- 
cessively arise  in  their  appointed  seasons,  and 
call  him  blessed,  Psal.  lxxii.  17.  For  he  is 
the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever. 

He  feeds  them. — He  leads  them  into  green 
and  pleasant  pastures.  These  pastures  are 
his  word  and  ordinances,  by  which  he  com- 
municates to  them  of  his  own  fulness;  for  in 
strict  propriety  of  speech,  he  himself  is  their 
food.  They  eat  his  flesh  and  drink  his  blood, 
John  vi.  54.  This  was  once  thought  a hard 
saying,  (John  vi.  58,)  by  some  of  his  professed 
followers,  and  is  still  thought  so  by  too  many. 
But  it  is  his  own  saying,  and  therefore  I am 
not  concerned  either  to  confirm  or  to  vindi- 
cate it.  The  knowledge  they  receive  by  faith, 
of  his  incarnation  and  sufferings  unto  death, 
of  the  names  he  bears,  and  of  the  offices  and 
relations  in  which  he  is  pleased  to  act  for 
them,  is  the  life  and  food  of  their  souls.  The 
expression  of  feeding  them,  is  agreeable  to 
the  analogy  he  has  been  pleased  to  establish 
between  the  natural  and  the  spiritual  life. 
As  the  strength  of  the  body  is  maintained  and 
renewed  by  eating  and  drinking;  so  they 
who,  in  this  sense,  feed  upon  him  in  their 
hearts  by  faith  with  thanksgiving,  even  they 
live  (John  vi.  57)  by  him ; for  his  flesh  is 
meat  indeed,  and  his  blood  is  drink  indeed. 

He  guides  them. — First,  by  his  example. 
He  has  trodden  the  path  of  duty  and  trial  be- 
fore them ; and  they  perceive  and  follow  his 
footsteps.  Again,  by  his  word  and  Spirit  he 
teaches  them  the  way  in  which  they  should 
go  ; and  both  inclines  and  enables  them  to 
walk  in  it,  Is.  xxx.  21.  He  guides  them,  like- 
wise, by  his  providence;  he  appoints  the 
bounds  of  their  habitations,  the  line  and  call- 
ing in  which  they  are  to  serve  him,  and  orders 
and  adjusts  the  circumstances  of  their  lives 
according  to  his  infinite  wisdom,  so  as  finally 
to  accomplish  his  gracious  designs  in  their 
favour. 

He  guards  them. — It  is  written  concerning 
him,  “He  shall  stand  and  feed  in  the  strength 
of  the  Lord,  in  the  majesty  of  the  name  of 
the  Lord  his  God,”  Micah  v.  4.  If  we  con- 
ceive of  a flock  of  sheep  feeding  in  the  midst 
of  wolves,  who  are  restrained  from  breaking 
in  upon  them,  not  by  any  visible  inclosure, 
but  merely  by  the  power  of  the  shepherd’s 
eye,  which  keeps  them  in  awe  and  at  a dis- 
tance, it  will  give  us  some  idea  of  the  situa- 
tion of  his  people.  He  provides  them  food 
in  the  midst  of  many  and  mighty  enemies, 
(Psal.  xxiii.  5,)  who  envy  them  their  privi- 
lege, but  cannot  prevent  it.  If  he  should 
withdraw  his  attention  from  the  flock  for  a 


[SER.  XIIT. 

single  minute,  they  would  be  worried.  But 
he  has  promised  to  keep  them  night  and  day, 
(Is.  xxvii.  3,)  and  every  moment ; therefore 
their  enemies  plot  and  rage  in  vain.  Their 
visible  foes  are  numerous;  but  if  we  could 
look  into  the  invisible  world,  and  take  a view 
of  the  subtilty,  malice,  machinations  and  assi- 
duity of  the  powers  of  darkness,  who  are 
incessantly  watching  for  opportunities  of  an- 
noying them,  we  should  have  a most  striking 
conviction,  that  a flock  so  defenceless  and 
feeble  in  themselves,  and  against  which  such 
a combination  is  formed,  can  only  be  kept  by 
the  power  of  God. 

He  heals  them. — A good  shepherd  will  ex- 
amine the  state  of  his  flock.  But  there  is  no 
attention  worthy  of  being  compared  with  his. 
Not  the  slightest  circumstance  in  their  con- 
cerns escapes  his  notice.  When  they  are 
ready  to  faint,  borne  down  with  heavy  exer- 
cises of  mind,  wearied  with  temptations,  dry 
and  disconsolate  in  their  spirits,  he  seasona- 
bly revives  them.  Nor  are  they  in  heaviness 
without  a need-be  for  it.  All  his  dispensa- 
tions towards  them  are  medicinal,  designed 
to  correct,  or  to  restrain,  or  to  cure,  the  mala- 
dies of  their  souls.  And  they  are  adjusted, 
by  his  wisdom  and  tenderness,  to  what  they 
can  bear,  and  to  what  their  case  requires.  It 
is  he  likewise,  who  heals  their  bodily  sick- 
ness, and  gives  them  help  in  all  their  tempo- 
ral troubles.  He  is  represented  to  us  as 
counting  their  sighs,  (Psal.  Ivi.  8,)  puttimj 
their  tears  into  his  bottle,  recording  their  sor- 
rows in  his  book  of  remembrance  ; and  even 
as  being  himself  touched  with  a feeling  of 
their  infirmities,  (Heb.  iv.  15,)  as  the  head 
feels  for  the  members  of  the  body. 

He  restores  them. — The  power  and  sub- 
tilty of  their  enemies  are  employed  to  force 
or  entice  them  from  his  rule,  and  too  often 
prevail  for  a season.  The  sheep  turn  aside 
into  forbidden  paths  ; and  whenever  they  do. 
they  would  wander  farther  and  farther,  till 
they  were  quite  lost  again,  if  he  were  not 
their  Shepherd.  If  he  permits  them  to  de- 
viate, he  has  a time  to  convince  them,  that  it 
was  an  evil  and  a bitter  thing  to  forsake  the 
Lord  their  Shepherd,  (Jer.  ii.  19,)  and  to 
humble  them,  and  to  bring  them  back.  Thus 
they  become  more  sensible  of  their  own 
weakness,  and  of  their  obligations  to  his  gra- 
cious care ; for  he  will  not  suffer  their  ene- 
mies to  triumph  over  them.  He  will  not 
lose  one  of  his  true  flock ; not  one  convinced 
sinner,  who  has,  in  deed  and  in  truth,  sur- 
rendered and  entrusted  his  all  to  him.  They 
must,  and  they  shall  smart  and  mourn  for 
their  folly;  but  he  will,  in  due  season,  break 
their  snares,  and  lead  them  again  into  the 
paths  of  peace,  for  his  own  name’s  sake. 

The  flock  are  not  all  sheep.  There  are 
among  them  lambs.  These  are  especially 
mentioned,  and  for  these  he  expresses  a pe- 
culiar tenderness.  He  will  gather  them  in 


SER.  XIII.] 

his  arm,  and  carry  them  in  his  bosom. 
Though  they  are  weakling's,  they  shall  not 
be  left  behind.  This  is  a beautiful  and  pa- 
thetic image.  If  a poor  lamb  is  weary,  and 
unable  to  keep  up  with  the  flock,  it  shall  be 
carried.  This  clause  affords  encouragement, 

1.  To  young  people. — Early  serious  im- 
pressions are  often  made  upon  the  hearts  of 
children,  which  we  are  to  cherish,  by  direct- 
ing their  thoughts  to  the  compassion  of  the 
good  Shepherd,  who  has  said,  “ Suffer  little 
children  to  come  unto  me,  and  forbid  them 
not,  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God,” 
Mark  x.  14.  This  high  and  holy  one,  who 
humbles  himself  to  notice  the  worship  of  the 
heavenly  host,  hears  the  prayers  of  worms 
upon  the  earth ; and  his  ear  is  open  to  the 
prayers  of  a child,  no  less  so,  than  to  the 
prayer  of  a king. 

2.  To  young  converts. — These,  at  what- 
ever age,  are  children  in  the  Lord’s  family, 
lambs  in  his  flock.  They  are,  as  yet,  weak, 
unsettled,  and  unexperienced.  Almost  every 
day  brings  them  into  a new  and  untried 
situation.  They  often  meet  with  opposition 
and  discouragement,  where  they  have  pro- 
mised themselves  hel  p and  countenance.  Per- 
haps their  nearest  friends  are  displeased  with 
them.  They  are  liable,  likewise,  while  they 
are  inquiring  the  way  to  Zion,  to  be  per- 
plexed by  the  various  opinions  and  angry 
contentions  prevailing  among  the  different 
religious  persons  or  parties  to  whom  they 
may  address  themselves.  They  are  frequent- 
ly discouraged  by  the  falls  and  miscarriages 
of  professors,  some  of  whom,  it  is  possible, 
they  may  have  admired,  and  looked  up  to,  as 
patterns  for  their  own  imitation.  Add  to 
these  things,  what  they  suffer  from  new  and 
unexpected  discoveries  of  the  evil  and  deceit- 
fulness of  their  hearts ; the  mistakes  they 
commit,  in  judgment  and  practice,  for  want 
of  a more  solid  and  extensive  knowledge  of 
the  scriptures ; and  the  advantage  the  great 
enemy  of  their  souls  derives  from  these 
their  various  difficulties  to  assault  their  peace 
and  obstruct  their  progress.  What  would 
become  of  them  in  such  circumstances,  if 
their  faithful  Shepherd  had  not  promised  to 
lead,  and  uphold  them,  with  the  arm  of  his 
power ! 

There  is,  likewise,  particular  mention  made 
of  “ those  who  are  with  young.”  These  he 
will  gently  lead.  If  we  take  the  word  ac- 
cording to  our  version,  it  may  signify  a state 
of  conviction  or  trouble.  Many  are  the  af- 
flictions of  the  righteous,  (Psal.  xxxiv.  19,) 
by  which  they  are  often  wearied  and  heavy 
laden.  But  when  their  spirits  are  over- 
whelmed within  them,  he  knoweth  their 
path.  Jacob  would  not  permit  his  cattle  that 
were  with  young  to  be  over-driven  for  one 
day,  lest  they  should  die,  Gen.  xxxiii.  13. 
Much  less  will  this  good  Shepherd  suffer  the 
burdened  among  his  flock  to  be  hurried  and 


2G1 

tempted  beyond  what  they  are  able,  or  what 
he  will  enable  them  to  bear. 

But  the  word  signifies,  those  that  have 
young,  rather  than  those  that  are  with  young. 
Two  sorts  of  persons  in  the  Lord’s  flock,  who 
come  under  this  description,  feel  an  especial 
need  of  his  compassion,  tenderness,  and  pa- 
tience. 

1.  He  only  knows  the  feelings  of  the  hearts 
of  parents ; what  solicitude  and  anxiety  they 
have  for  their  young  ones,  the  sucklings,  if  I 
may  so  speak,  of  the  flock,  which  mingle 
with  all  their  endeavours,  to  manage  rightly 
the  important  charge  committed  to  them, 
and  to  bring  their  children  up  in  the  nurture 
and  admonition  of  the  Lord. 

2.  Ministers,  likewise,  have  painful  exer- 
cises of  mind.  The  apostle  Paul  speaks  of 
travailing  in  birth  again,  till  Christ  be  form- 
ed in  our  hearers,  Gal.  iv.  19.  When  we 
know  of  any  newly  awakened,  and  beginning 
to  seek  his  salvation,  how  solicitous  is  our 
care  to  bring  them  forward,  to  comfort  them, 
to  warn  them  against  the  devices  of  their 
hearts,  and  of  their  enemies  ! And  how 
piercing  our  grief  and  disappointment,  if  they 
miscarry ! How  much  is  felt  in  sympathy 
for  the  trials  of  the  flock ! What  wisdom, 
faithfulness,  courage,  meekness,  and  unction 
from  on  high,  are  necessary  to  the  due  dis- 
charge of  what  we  owe  to  the  flocks  of  which 
we  have  the  oversight ! Who  is  sufficient 
for  these  things ! And  when  we  have  done 
our  best,  our  all,  what  defects  and  defile- 
ments have  we  to  mourn  over ! But  this  is 
our  great  consolation,  that  he  who  knows  us, 
and  leads  us,  considers  our  frame,  and  re- 
members that  we  are  but  dust. 

In  this  delineation  of  the  character  and 
conduct  of  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep, 
(Heb.  xiii.  20,)  we  have  an  affecting  exem- 
plar and  pattern,  for  the  imitation  of  those 
who  act  in  the  honourable  office  of  under- 
shepherds, and  are  called,  by  their  profession 
and  engagement,  to  feed  his  sheep  and  lambs. 
Whether  there  be  any  ministers  in  our  as- 
sembly, or  not,  you  will  at  least  permit  me 
to  speak  a word  to  my  own  heart;  which  may, 
I hope,  at  the  same  time,  impress  your  minds 
with  a sense  of  our  great  need  of  your  pray- 
ers. Brethren,  pray  for  us ! (1  Thes.  v.  25 ;) 
and  pray  to  the  Lord  of  the  harvest,  that  he 
may  send  forth  more  faithful  labourers  into 
his  harvest,  Matt.  ix.  38.  For  it  is  his  work 
alone.  It  is  not  necessary,  that  a minister 
of  the  gospel  should  be  in  the  first  line  of 
those  who  are  admired  for  their  abilities  or 
literature;  much  less  that  he  should  be  dis- 
tinguished by  such  titles,  honours,  and  emo- 
luments as  this  world  can  give.  But  it  i,g 
necessary,  and  of  the  last  importance  to  his 
character  and  usefulness  here,  and  to  his  ac- 
ceptance in  the  great  day  of  the  Lord,  that 
he  should  have  a shepherd’s  eye  and  a shep- 
herd’s heart.  He  must  serve  the  flock,  no 


THE  GREAT  SHEPHERD. 


262 


REST  FOR  THE  WEARY. 


for  filthy  lucre,  or  by  constraint  (that  con- 
straint, which  the  apostle  attributes  to  the 
love  of  Christ,  only  excepted,)  but  willingly, 
and  with  a view  to  their  edification,  1 Pet.  v. 
2,  3.  And  he  must,  indeed,  serve  them,  not 
acting  as  a lord  over  God’s  heritage,  but  as 
an  example  to  the  flock  ; not  preaching  him- 
self, (2  Cor.  iv.  5,)  perverting  his  sacred  office 
to  the  purposes  of  ambition  or  vain  glory,  or 
the  acquisition  of  wealth ; but  preaching 
Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  and  employing  all  his 
powers  to  turn  sinners  from  the  error  of  their 
ways.  He  who  winneth  souls  is  wise,  Prov. 
xi.  3').  If  it  be  wisdom  to  propose  the  no- 
blest end,  the  faithful  minister  is  wise ; the 
end  at  which  he  aims,  in  subordination  to  the 
will  and  glory  of  God,  is  the  salvation  of 
souls;  and  the  recovery  of  one  immortal 
soul  to  the  favour  and  image  of  God,  is,  and 
will  at  length  be  found,  a greater  and  more 
important  event,  than  the  deliverance  of  a 
whole  kingdom  from  slavery  or  temporal  ruin. 
If  it  be  wisdom  to  pursue  a right  end  by  the 
fittest  means,  he  is  wise  ; he  knows  the  gos- 
pel of  Christ  to  be  the  power  of  God,  the  ap- 
pointed,the  effectual,  the  only  sufficient  mean 
for  his  accomplishing  his  great  purpose;  there- 
fore, however  unfashionable  it  may  be,  he  is 
not  ashamed  of  it ; he  preaches  it,  and  he  glo- 
ries in  it.  If  it  be  an  effect  of  wisdom,  not  to 
be  deterred  from  the  prosecution  of  a great 
and  noble  design,  by  the  censure  and  dislike 
of  weak  and  incompetent  judges,  the  faithful 
minister  is  truly  wise.  He  loves  his  fellow 
creatures,  and  would  willingly  please  them 
for  their  good,  but  he  cannot  fear  them,  be- 
cause he  fears  and  serves  the  Lord.  He 
looks  forward,  with  desire,  to  the  day  of  that 
solemn  and  general  visitation,  when  the  Shep- 
herd and  Bishop  of  souls  shall  himself  appear, 
1 Pet.  ii.  25;  v.  4.  And  if  he  may  then 
stand  among  those  who  are  pardoned  and  ac- 
cepted in  the  Beloved,  and  receive  the  crown 
of  life,  which  his  Lord  has  promised  to  them 
that  love  him  (2  Tim.  iv.  8,) — this  thought 
fully  reconciles  him  to  the  trials  of  his  situa- 
tion ; and  however  depreciated,  misrepresent- 
ed, opposed  or  ill-treated  here,  he  can  say, 
“None  of  these  things  move  me,  neither 
count  I my  life  dear  to  myself,  so  that  I may 
finish  my  course  with  joy,  and  the  ministry 
which  I have  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  to 
testify  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,”  Acts 
xx.  24. 

There  is  a counter-part  to  this  character 
described  in  strong  and  glowinglanguage  by 
the  prophets.  There  are  idol-shepherds,  who 
feed  not  the  flock,  but  themselves ; (Ezek. 
xxxiv.  2 ;)  who  neither  attempt  to  heal  the 
sick,  to  strengthen  the  feeble,  to  bind  up  that 
which  is  broken,  nor  to  recover  that  which 
has  been  driven  away ; shepherds  (Isa.  lvi.  10, 
11,)  who  cannot  understand,  greedy,  lovers  of 
gain — and  who,  by  a change  of  metaphor,  are 
compared  to  slumbering  watchmen,  and  dumb 


[ser.  xir. 

dogs  that  cannot  bark.  The  New  Testament 
teaches  us  to  expect  that  such  persons,  under 
the  name  of  ministers,  will  be  found  likewise 
in  the  visible  church  of  Christ : men  of  cor- 
rupt minds  (1  Tim.  vi.  5;  Rom.  xvi.  18,)  des- 
titute of  the  truth,  who  serve  not  the  Lord 
Jesus,  but  their  own  belly  ; men  who  are  of 
the  world  (1  John  iv.  5,)  and  speak  of  the 
world ; and  therefore  the  world  heareth  and 
favoureth  them.  But,  alas ! — neither  the 
wretched  slave  who  toils  at  the  galley -oar,  nor 
he  that  is  doomed  to  labour  in  a deep  mine, 
where  the  light  of  the  sun  never  reaches  him, 
nor  the  lunatic  who  howls  in  a chain,  are  such 
emphatical  objects  of  our  compassion,  as  the 
unhappy  man  who  prostitutes  the  name  and 
function  of  a minister  of  Christ  to  the  gratifi- 
cation of  his  pride  and  avarice ; and  whose 
object  is  not  the  welfare  of  the  flock,  but  the 
possession  of  the  fleece,  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  7,  8 ;) 
who  intrudes  into  the  post  of  a watchman, 
but  gives  no  alarm  of  the  impending  danger. 
If  the  scriptures  be  true  ; if  the  gospel  be  not 
indeed,  as  Pope  Leo  X.  profanely  styled  it. 
a lucrative  fable  ; the  more  he  accumulates 
riches,  the  more  he  rises  in  dignity,  the  more 
his  influence  extends,  the  more  he  is  to  be 
commiserated.  He  may  have  the  reward  he 
seeks  ; he  may  be  admired  and  flattered ; lie 
may  for  a season  be  permitted  to  withstand 
and  discountenance  the  efforts  of  the  Lord’s 
faithful  servants;  he  may  shine  in  the  ac- 
complishments of  a scholar  or  a courtier  : but 
nothing  less  than  repentance,  and  faith  in  the 
Redeemer,  whose  name  and  cause  he  has 
dishonoured,  can  finally  screen  him  from  the 
full  effect  of  that  terrible  denunciation — 
“Wo  to  the  idol-shepherd  that  forsaketh  (or 
neglecteth)  the  flock : The  sword  shall  be 
upon  his  arm,  and  upon  his  right  eye : His 
arm  shall  be  clean  dried  up,  and  his  right  eye 
shall  be  utterly  darkened,  Zech.  xi.  17. 


SERMON  XIV. 

REST  FOR  THE  WEARY. 

Come  unto  me , all  ye  that  labour  and  are 
heavy  laden , and  I will  give  you  rest. 
Matt.  xi.  28. 

Which  shall  we  admire  most,  the  majesty, 
or  the  grace,  conspicuous  in  this  invitation  ? 
How  soon  would  the  greatest  earthly  monarch 
be  impoverished,  and  his  treasures  utterly 
exhausted,  if  all  that  are  poor  and  miserable 
had  encouragement  to  apply  freely  to  him, 
with  a promise  of  relief  fully  answerable  to 
their  wants  and  wishes ! But  the  riches  of 
Christ  are  unsearchable  and  inexhaustible. 
If  millions  of  millions  of  distressed  sinners 
seek  to  him  for  relief,  he  has  a sufficiency  for 
them  all.  His  mercy  is  infinite  to  pardon  all 


REST  FOR  THE  WEARY. 


263 


3ER  XIV. 


their  sins ; his  grace  is  infinite  to  answer  and 
exceed  their  utmost  desires;  his  power  is 
infinite,  to  help  them  in  all  their  difficulties. 
A number  without  number  have  been  thus 
waiting  upon  him,  from  age  to  age ; and  not 
one  of  them  has  been  sent  away  disappointed 
and  empty.  And  the  streams  of  his  bounty 
are  still  flowing,  and  still  full.  Thus  the  sun, 
his  brightest  material  image,  has  been  the 
source  of  light  to  the  earth,  and  to  all  its  in- 
habitants, from  the  creation ; and  will  be 
equally  so  to  all  succeeding  generations,  till 
time  shall  be  no  more.  There  is,  indeed,  an 
appointed  hour  when  the  sun  shall  cease  to 
shine,  and  the  course  of  nature  shall  fail.  But 
the  true  Sun,  the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  has 
no  variableness  or  shadow  cf  turning;  (Mai. 
iv.  2;  James  i.  17;)  and  they  who  depend 
upon  him  while  in  this  world,  shall  rejoice  in 
his  light  for  ever.  Can  we  hesitate  to  accept 
of  these  words,  as  affording  a full  proof  of  the 
divine  character,  the  proper  Godhead  of  our 
Lord  and  Saviour;  supposing  only,  that  he 
meant  what  he  said,  and  that  he  is  able  to 
make  his  promise  good  1 Can  a creature, 
however  excellent  and  glorious,  use  this 
language  ? Can  a creature  discharge  the 
debts,  soothe  the  distresses,  and  satisfy  the 
desires  of  every  individual  who  looks  to  him'? 
Who,  but  the  Lord  God  (Psal.  cxlvi.  8 ; Isa. 
Ixi.  2,)  can  raise  up  all  thg.t  are  bowed  down, 
and  comfort  all  that  mourn ! 

Again,  as  is  his  majesty,  so  is  his  mercy.  In 
acts  of  grace  amongst  men  there  are  always 
some  limitations.  If  a king  proclaims  a par- 
don to  a rebellious  nation,  there  are  still  ex- 
ceptions. Some  ringleaders  are  excluded. 
Either  their  crimes  were  too  great  to  be  for- 
given, or  their  obstinacy  or  influence  are 
supposed  to  be  too  great  to  render  their 
safety  consistent  with  the  safety  of  the  state. 
But  the  Saviour  excludes  none  but  those  who 
wilfully  exclude  themselves.  As  no  case  is 
too  hard  for  his  power,  so  no  person  who  ap- 
plies to  him  is  shut  out  from  his  compassion. 
Him  that  cometh  to  him,  whatever  his  former 
character  or  conduct  may  have  been,  he  will 
in  no  wise  cast  out,  John  vi.  37.  This  glo- 
rious exercise  of  sovereign  mercy  is  no  less  a 
divine  attribute,  than  the  power  by  which  he 
created  the  heavens  and  the  earth.  It  is  the 
consideration  of  his  mercy  in  pardoning  sin, 
and  in  saving  sinners,  which  causes  that  ad- 
miring exclamation  of  the  prophet,  “Who  is 
a God  like  unto  thee!”  Micah  vii.  18. 

This  passage  (including  the  two  following 
verses)  closes  the  first  part  of  the  Oratorio. 
In  tracing  the  series  of  the  scriptures  thus 
far,  we  have  considered  several  signal  pro- 
phecies which  foretold  his  appearance;  we 
have  seen  their  accomplishment  in  his  birth, 
and  have  (I  hope)  joined  with  the  heavenly 
host,  in  ascribing  glory  to  God  in  the  highest, 
for  this  unspeakable  gift  and  effect  of  his 
love.  We  have  learnt  from  the  prophets,  his 


characters,  as  the  great  Restorer,  and  the 
great  Shepherd.  The  evangelist  proposes 
him  to  our  meditation  here,  in  a gracious 
and  inviting  attitude,  as  opening  his  high 
commission,  proclaiming  his  own  sovereign 
authority  and  power,  and  declaring  his  com- 
passionate purpose,  and  readiness  to  give  re- 
freshment and  rest  to  the  weary  and  heavy 
laden. 

The  two  principal  points  in  the  text  arc, 
the  invitation  and  the  promise. 

I.  The  invitation  is  expressed  in  very  ge- 
neral terms  : “ Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  la- 
bour and  are  heavy  laden.”  There  is  no  quali- 
fying or  restraining  clause,  to  discourage  any 
person  who  is  willing  to  accept  it.  Whoever 
hath  an  ear  to  hear,  let  him  hear.  “ Let  him 
that  is  athirst  come,  and  wdiosoever  will,  let 
him  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely,”  Rev. 
xxii.  17.  I cannot  doubt  but  these  words 
authorise  me  to  address  myself  to  every  per- 
son in  this  assembly.  I speak  first  to  you  who 
are  spending  your  money  for  that  which 
satisfieth  not,  (Isa.  lv.  2;)  who  are  wearied  in 
seeking  happiness  where  it  is  not  to  be  found, 
and  in  digging  pits,  and  hewing  out  cisterns 
for  yourselves,  which  can  hold  no  water, 
(Jer.  ii.  13,)  and  have  hitherto  been  regard- 
less of  the  fountain  of  living  waters,  which 
is  always  near  you.  While  you  are  pursuing 
the  wealth  or  honours  of  this  world,  or  wast- 
ing  your  time  and  strength  in  the  indulgence 
of  sensual  appetites,  and  look  no  higher,  are 
you  indeed  happy  and  satisfied?  Do  you  find 
the  paths  in  which  you  are  led,  or  rather  hur- 
ried and  driven  on,  to  be  the  paths  of  plea- 
santness and  peace?  Prov.  iii.  7.  With  what 
face  can  you  charge  the  professors  of  re 
ligion  with  hypocrisy,  if  you  pretend  to  satis- 
faction in  these  ways?  We  have  trodden 
them  far  enough  ourselves,  to  be  assured  that 
there  are  feelings  in  your  heart  which  con- 
tradict your  assertion.  You  know  that  you 
are  not  happy,  and  wTe  know  it  likewise.  Are 
you  quite  strangers  to  a secret  wish  that  you 
had  never  been  born?  or  that  you  could 
change  condition  with  some  of  the  brute  crea- 
tion ? Are  you  not  heavy  laden,  burdened 
with  guilt,  and  fears,  and  forebodings,  harassed 
with  crosses,  disappointments,  and  mortifica- 
tions? Are  you  not  often,  at  least  sometimes, 
like  children  in  the  dark,  afraid  of  being 
alone,  unable  to  support  the  reflections  that 
are  forced  upon  you  in  a solitary  hour,  when 
you  have  nothing  to  amuse  you?  And  while 
you  seem  so  alert  and  upon  the  wing  after 
every  kind  of  dissipation  within  your  reach,  is 
not  a chief  motive  that  impels  you,  a desire, 
if  possible,  of  hiding  yourselves  from  your- 
selves, and  of  calling  off  your  attention  from 
those  thoughts  which,  like  vultures,  are  ready 
to  seize  you,  and  prey  upon  you,  the  moment 
they  find  you  unemployed  1 And  how  often 
do  your  poor  expedients  fail  you,  especially 
in  time  of  trouble,  or  on  a sick-bed  ? What 


264 


REST  FOR  THE  WEARY. 


comfort  does  the  world  afford  you  then? 
What  relief  do  you  then  derive  from  the 
companions  of  your  vain  and  gay  hours?  Most 
probably,  at  such  a season,  they  stand  aloof 
from  you  ; the  house  of  mourning,  or  the 
chamber  of  sickness,  is  no  less  unpleasing  to 
them  than  to  yourself.  They  do  not  choose  the 
pain  of  being  reminded,  by  a sight  of  your 
distress,  how  soon  the  case  may  be  their  own. 
Or,  if  they  visit  you,  you  find  them  miserable 
comforters.  But  I have  to  speak  to  you  of 
one  who  is  able  to  comfort  you  in  all  seasons, 
and  under  all  circumstances ; whose  favour  is 
better  than  life.  And  will  you  still  refuse  to 
hear  his  voice  ? What  hard  thing  does  the 
Lord  require  of  you  ? Only  to  come  to  him 
for  that  peace  and  rest  to  which  you  have 
hitherto  been  strangers.  But  tiiough  you 
are  invited,  I know  that  of  yourselves  you 
will  not  come ; you  will  not,  and  therefore 
you  cannot.  Be  assured,  however,  the  invi- 
tation does  not  mock  you,  and,  if  you  finally 
refuse  it,  the  fault  will  lie  at  your  own  doors. 
But  may  I not  hope  you  will  refuse  no 
longer  ? The  preaching  of  the  gospel  is  his 
appointment,  and  has  a great  effect,  wdien 
accompanied  with  the  energy  of  his  Holy 
Spirit,  to  make  a willing  people  in  the  day 
of  his  power. 

There  are  others,  however,  to  whom  this 
invitation  speaks  more  directly.  The  con- 
vinced sinner  is  heavy  laden  with  the  guilt 
of  sin,  and  wearied  with  ineffectual  strivings 
against  it.  He  is  weary  of  the  yoke  and 
burden  of  the  law,  when  he  can  neither  an- 
swer its  commands  with  cheerful  and  accept- 
able obedience,  nor  see  any  way  of  escaping 
the  penalty  which  is  due  to  transgressors.  He 
sighs  earnestly  and  anxiously  for  pardon  and 
liberty.  If  he  has  an  interval  of  comparative 
Deace  and  hope,  it  is  more  derived  from  seme 
occasional  fervour  and  liveliness  in  the  frame 
of  his  spirit,  than  from  the  exercise  of  faith ; 
and  therefore,  as  that  fervour  abates  (and  it 
will  not  always  remain  at  the  same  height,) 
his  fears  return.  If  in  such  a favoured  mo- 
ment he  feels  little  solicitation  or  trouble 
from  the  evil  propensities  of  his  heart,  he  is 
willing  to  hope  they  are  subdued,  and  that 
they  will  trouble  him  no  more ; but  his 
triumph  is  short,  the  next  return  of  tempta- 
tion revives  all  his  difficulties,  and  he  is  again 
brought  into  bondage.  For  nothing  but  the 
knowledge  of  the  Saviour,  and  the  supplies 
of  his  Spirit,  can  give  stable  peace  to  the 
mind,  or  victory  over  sin.  A repetition  of 
these  disappointments  and  changes  fixes  a 
heavy  burden  and  distress  upon  the  mind. 
But  here  is  help  provided  exactly  suitable  to 
the  case.  Comply  with  this  invitation,  come 
,to  him  and  he  will  surely  give  you  rest. 

But  what  is  it  to  come  to  Christ ! It  is  to 
believe  in  him,  to  apply  to  him,  to  make  his 
invitation  and  promise  our  ground  and  war- 
rant for  putting  our  trust  in  him.  On  an- 


[sun.  XIV. 

other  occasion,  he  said,  • He  that  cometh  to 
me  shall  never  hunger,  and  he  that  believeth 
in  me  shall  never  thirst,”  John  vi.  35.  The 
expressions  are  of  the  same  import.  When 
he  was  upon  earth,  many  who  came  to  him, 
and  even  followed  him  for  a season,  received 
no  saving  benefit  from  him.  Some  came  to 
him  from  motives  of  malice  and  ill-will,  to 
ensnare  or  insult  him.  Some  followed  him 
for  loaves  and  fishes;  and  of  others,  who  were 
frequently  near  him,  he  complained,  “ Ye 
will  not  come  unto  me,  that  ye  may  have  life,” 
John  v.  40.  But  they  who  were  distressed, 
and  came  to  him  for  relief,  were  not  disap- 
pointed. To  come  to  him,  therefore,  implies 
a knowledge  of  his  power  and  an  application 
for  his  help.  To  us  he  is  not  visible,  but  he 
is  always  near  us ; and  as  he  appointed  his 
disciples  to  meet  him  in  Galilee  (Matthew, 
xxviii.  16,)  previous  to  his  ascension,  so  he 
has  promised  to  be  found  of  those  who  seek 
him,  and  wait  for  him,  in  certain  means  of 
his  own  institution.  He  is  seated  upon  a 
throne  of  grace ; he  is  to  be  sought  in  his 
word,  and  where  his  people  assemble  in  his 
name ; for  he  has  said,  There  will  I be  in  the 
midst  of  them,  Matt,  xviii.  20.  They  there- 
fore who  read  his  word,  frequent  his  ordi- 
nances, and  pray  unto  him,  with  a desire  that 
they  may  know  him,  and  be  remembered  with 
the  favour  which  he  beareth  to  his  own  peo- 
ple (Psal.  cvi.  4,)  answer  the  design  of  my 
text.  They  come  to  him,  and  he  assures 
them,  that  whoever  they  are,  he  will  in  no- 
wise cast  them  out.  If  they  thus  come  to 
him,  they  will  of  course  come  out  from  the 
world  and  be  separate,  2 Cor.  vi.  17.  If  they 
apply  to  him  for  refuge,  they  will  renounce 
all  other  refuge  and  dependence,  and  trust 
in  him  alone,  according  to  the  words  of  the 
prophet,  “ Ashur  shall  not  save  us,  we  will  not 
ride  upon  horses,  neither  will  we  say  any 
more  to  the  works  of  our  hands,  Ye  are  our 
gods,  for  in  thee  the  fatherless  (the  helpless 
and  comfortless)  findeth  mercy,”  Hosea  xiv.  3. 

II.  The  promise  is,  “ I will  give  you  rest.” 
The  word  signifies  both  rest  and  refreshment. 
He  gives  a relief  and  cessation  from  former 
labour  and  bondage,  and  superadds  a peace, 
a joy,  a comfort,  which  revives  the  weary 
spirit,  and  proves  itself  to  be  that  very  satis- 
faction which  the  soul  had  been  ignorantly, 
and  in  vain,  seeking  amongst  the  creatures 
and  the  objects  of  sense. 

This  rest  includes  a freedom  from  the  fore- 
bodings and  distressing  accusations  of  a guilty 
conscience  ; from  the  long  and  fruitless  strug- 
gle between  the  will  and  the  judgment;  from 
the  condemning  power  of  the  law ; from  the 
tyranny  of  irregular  and  inconsistent  appe- 
tites ; and  from  the  dominion  of  pride  and 
self,  which  make  us  unhappy  in  ourselves, 
and  hated  and  despised  by  others.  A freedom 
likewise  from  the  cares  and  anxieties  which, 
in  such  an  uncertain  world  as  this,  disquiet 


MESSIAH’S  EASY  YOKE. 


SER.  XV.] 

the  minds  of  those  who  have  no  solid  scriptu- 
ral dependence  upon  God,  and  especially  a 
freedom  from  the  dread  of  death,  and  of  the 
things  which  are  beyond  it.  In  these  and 
other  respects,  the  believer  in  Jesus  enters 
into  a present  rest.  He  is  under  the  guidance 
of  infinite  wisdom  and  the  protection  of  al- 
mighty power ; he  is  permitted  to  cast  all  his 
cares  upon  the  Lord,  (1  Pet.  v.  7,)  and  is 
assured  that  the  Lord  careth  for  him.  So  far 
as  he  possesses  by  faith  the  spirit  and  liberty 
of  his  high  calling,  he  is  in  perfect  peace. 
The  prophet  Jeremiah  has  given  a beautiful 
description  and  illustration  of  this  rest  of  a 
believer ; (Jer.  xvii.  5 — 8 ;)  which  is  rendered 
more  striking  by  being  contrasted  with  the 
miserable  state  of  those  who  live  without  God 
in  the  world.  “ Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Cursed 
is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh 
flesh  his  arm  and  whose  heart  departeth  from 
the  Lord.  For  he  shall  be  like  the  heath  in 
the  desert,  and  shall  not  see  when  good 
cometh,  but  shall  inhabit  the  parched  places 
of  the  wilderness,  in  a salt  land  not  inhabited. 
But  blessed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in  the 
Lord,  and  whose  hope  the  Lord  is ; for  he 
shall  be  as  a tree  planted  by  the  waters,  and 
that  spreadeth  out  her  roots  by  the  river,  and 
shall  not  see  when  the  heat  cometh ; but  her 
leaf  shall  be  green,  and  shall  not  be  careful 
in  the  year  of  drought,  neither  shall  cease 
from  yielding  fruit.” 

But  besides  rest,  there  is  refreshment. 
There  are  pleasures  and  consolations  in  that 
intercourse  and  communion  with  God  to 
which  we  are  invited  by  the  gospel,  which, 
both  in  kind  and  degree,  are  unspeakably  su- 
perior to  all  that  the  world  can  bestow,  and 
such  as  the  world  cannot  deprive  us  of ; for  they 
have  no  necessary  dependence  upon  outward 
situation  or  circumstances ; they  are  com- 
patible with  poverty,  sickness,  and  sufferings. 
They  are  often  most  sensibly  sweet  and  lively 
when  the  streams  of  creature-comfort  are  at 
the  lowest  ebb.  Many  have  been  able  to  say 
with  the  apostle,  “ As  the  sufferings  of  Christ 
(those  which  we  endure  for  his  sake,  or  sub- 
mit to  from  his  hand)  abound  in  us,  so  our 
consolation  in  Christ  also  aboundeth,”  1 Cor. 
i.  5.  The  all-sufficient  God  can  increase 
these  communications  of  comfort  from  him- 
self to  a degree  beyond  our  ordinary  concep- 
tions, so  as  not  only  to  support  his  people 
under  the  most  exquisite  pains,  but  even  to 
suspend  and  overpower  all  sense  of  pain,  when 
the  torment  would  otherwise  be  extreme. 
And  he  has  sometimes  been  pleased  to  honour 
the  fidelity  of  his  servants,  and  to  manifest 
his  own  faithfulness  to  them  by  such  an  in- 
terposition. One  well-attested  instance  our 
own  martyrology  affords,  that  of  Mr.  Bain- 
ham,  who  suffered  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Mary. 
When  he  was  in  the  fire,  he  addressed  him- 
self to  his  persecutors  to  this  effect:  “You 
call  for  miracles  in  the  proof  of  our  doctrine  ; 
Vol.  II.  2 L 


265 

now  behold  one ; I feel  no  more  pain  from 
these  flames  than  if  I was  laid  upon  a bed  of 
roses.”  But  in  ordinary  cases,  and  in  all 
cases,  they  who  taste  how  good  the  Lord  is  to 
them  that  seek  him,  how  he  cheers  them  with 
the  light  of  his  countenance,  and  what  sup- 
ports he  affords  them  in  the  hour  of  need,  can 
without  regret  part  with  the  poor  perishing 
pleasures  of  sin,  and  encounter  all  the  diffi- 
culties they  meet  with  in  the  path  of  duty. 
Whatever  their  profession  of  his  name,  and 
their  attachment  to  his  cause  may  have  cost 
them,  they  will  acknowledge  that  it  has 
made  them  ample  amends. 

Come,  therefore,  unto  him,  venture  upon 
his  gracious  word,  and  you  shall  find  rest  lor 
your  souls.  Can  the  world  outbid  this  gra- 
cious offer  '!  Can  the  world  promise  to  give 
you  rest  when  you  are  burdened  with  trouble  ! 
when  your  cisterns  fail,  and  your  gourds  wi- 
ther! or  when  you  are  terrified  with  the  ap- 
proach of  death,  when  your  pulse  intermits, 
when  you  are  about  to  take  a final  farewell 
of  all  you  ever  saw  with  your  eyes,  and  an 
awful,  unknown,  untried,  unchangeable  eter- 
nity is  opening  upon  your  view  ! Such  a mo- 
ment most  certainly  awaits  you  ; and  when  it 
arrives,  if  you  die  in  your  senses,  and  are  not 
judicially  given  up  to  hardness  and  blindness 
of  heart,  you  will  assuredly  tremble,  if  you 
never  trembled  before.  O ! be  persuaded  ! 
May  the  Lord  himself  persuade  you  to  be 
timely  wise,  to  seek  him  now  while  he  may 
be  found,  to  call  upon  him  while  he  is  yet 
near,  lest  that  dreadful  threatening  should  be 
your  portion ; “ Because  I have  called,  and 
ye  refused,  I have  stretched  out  my  hand  and 
no  man  regarded  ; I also  will  laugh  at  your 
calamity,  I will  mock  when  your  fear  cometh,” 
Prov.  i.  24,  26. 


SERMON  XV. 

Messiah’s  easy  yoke. 

Take  my  yoke  upon  you , and  learn  of  me , 
for  I am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart  ; and  ye 
shall  find  rest  to  your  souls.  For  my  yoke 
is  easy , and  my  burden  is  light.  Matth. 
xi.  29,  30. 

Though  the  influence  of  education  and  ex- 
ample may  dispose  us  to  acknowledge  the 
gospel  to  be  a revelation  from  God,  it  can 
only  be  rightly  understood,  or  duly  prized,  by 
those  persons  who  feel  themselves  in  the  cir- 
cumstances of  distress  which  it  is  designed 
to  relieve.  No  Israelite  would  think  of  flee- 
ing to  a city  of  refuge,  till,  by  having  unwit- 
tingly slain  a man,  he  was  exposed  to  the  re- 
sentment of  the  next  of  kin,  the  legal  aven 
ger  of  blood ; but  then,  a sense  of  his  danger 
would  induce  him  readily  to  avail  himself  of 


266 


MESSIAH’S  EASY  YOKE. 


the  appointed  method  of  safety.  The  skill  of 
a physician  may  be  acknowledged,  in  general 
terms,  by  many  : but  he  is  applied  to  only  by 
the  sick,  Matt.  ix.  12.  Thus  our  Saviour’s 
gracious  invitation  to  come  to  him  for  rest, 
will  be  little  regarded,  till  we  really  feel  our- 
selves weary  and  heavy  laden.  This  is  a 
principal  reason  why  the  gospel  is  heard 
with  so  much  indifference.  For  though  sin 
be  a grievous  illness,  and  a hard  bondage,  yet 
one  effect  of  it  is,  a strange  stupidity  and  in- 
fatuation, which  renders  us  (like  a person  in 
a delirium)  insensible  of  our  true  state.  It 
is  a happy  time  when  the  Holy  Spirit,  by 
his  convincing  power,  removes  that  stupor, 
which,  while  it  prevents  us  from  fully  per- 
ceiving our  misery,  renders  us  likewise  in- 
different to  the  only  mean  of  deliverance. 
Such  a conviction  of  the  guilt  and  desert  of 
sin,  is  the  first  hopeful  symptom  in  a sinner’s 
case;  but  it  is  necessarily  painful  and  dis- 
tressing. It  is  not  pleasant  to  be  weary  and 
heavy-laden;  but  it  awakens  our  attention 
to  him  who  says,  Come  unto  me,  and  I will 
give  you  rest,  and  makes  us  willing  to  take 
his  yoke  upon  us. 

Oxen  are  yoked  to  labour.  From  hence 
the  yoke  is  a figurative  expression  to  denote 
servitude.  Our  Lord  seems  to  use  it  here, 
both  to  intimate  our  natural  prejudices  against 
his  service,  and  to  obviate  them.  Though  he 
submitted  to  sufferings,  reproach,  and  death 
for  our  sakes;  though  he  invites  us,  not  be- 
cause he  has  need  of  us,  but  because  we  have 
need  of  him,  and  cannot  be  happy  without 
him;  yet  our  ungrateful  hearts  think  unkindly 
of  him.  We  conceive  of  him  as  a hard  mas- 
ter ; and  suppose  that  if  we  engage  ourselves 
to  him,  we  must  bid  farewell  to  pleasure,  and 
live  under  a continual  restraint.  His  rule  is 
deemed  too  strict,  his  laws  too  severe ; and 
we  imagine,  that  we  could  be  more  happy 
upon  our  own  plans,  than  by  acceding  to  his. 
Such  unjust,  unfriendly,  and  dishonourable 
thoughts  of  him,  whose  heart  is  full  of  tender- 
ness, whose  bowels  melt  with  love,  are  strong 
proofs  of  our  baseness,  blindness,  and  depravi- 
ty ; yet  still  he  continues  his  invitation, 
“ Come  unto  me.” — As  if  he  had  said,  “ Be 
not  afraid  of  me.  Only  make  the  experiment, 
and  you  shall  find,  that  what  you  have  ac- 
counted my  yoke,  is  true  liberty ; and  that  in 
my  service  which  you  have  avoided  as  bur- 
densome, there  is  no  burden  at  all;  for  my 
ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,  and  all  my 
paths  are  peace.”  I have  a good  hope,  that 
many  of  my  hearers  can  testify,  from  their 
own  happy  experience,  that  (according  to  the 
beautiful  expression  in  our  liturgy)  his  ser- 
vice is  perfect  freedom. 

If  we  are  really  Christians,  Jesus  is  our 
Master,  our  Lord,  and  we  are  his  servants. 
It  is  in  vain  to  call  him  Lord,  Lord,  (Luke  vi. 
46,)  unless  we  keep  his  commandments. 
They  who  know  him  will  love  him  ; and  they 


[sER.  XV. 

who  love  him  will  desire  to  please  him,  no 
by  a course  of  service  of  their  own  devising 
but  by  accepting  his  revealed  will  as  the 
standard  and  rule,  to  every  part  of  which  they 
endeavour  to  conform  in  their  tempers  and  in 
their  conduct.  He  is  likewise  our  Master  in 
another  sense, that  is,  he  is  our  great  Teacher ; 
if  we  submit  to  him  as  such,  we  are  his  dis- 
ciples or  scholars.  We  cannot  serve  him  ac- 
ceptably, unless  we  are  taught  by  him.  The 
philosophers  of  old  had  their  disciples,  who 
imbibed  their  sentiments,  and  were  therefore 
called  after  their  names,  as  the  Pythagoreans 
and  Platonists,  from  Pythagoras  and  Plato. 
The  general  name  of  Christians,  which  was 
first  assumed  by  the  believers  at  Antioch 
(possibly  by  divine  direction)  intimates  that 
they  are  the  professed  disciples  of  Christ,  Acts 
xi.  26.  If  we  wish  to  be  truly  wise,-  to  be 
wise  unto  salvation,  we  must  apply  to  him. 
For  in  this  sense,  the  disciple  or  scholar  can- 
not be  above  his  Master,  Luke  vi.  40.  We 
can  learn  of  men  no  more  than  they  can  teach 
us.  But  he  says,  “ Learn  of  me and  he 
cautions  us  against  calling  any  one  Master 
upon  earth.  He  does,  indeed,  instruct  his 
people  by  ministers  and  instruments ; but  un- 
less he  is  pleased  to  superadd  his  influence, 
w’hat  we  seem  to  learn  from  them  only,  will 
profit  us  but  little.  Nor  are  the  best  of  them 
so  thoroughly  furnished,  nor  so  free  from  mis- 
take, as  to  deserve  our  implicit  confidence. 
But  they  whom  he  condescends  to  teach,  shall 
learn,  what  no  instruction,  merely  human, 
can  impart.  Let  us  consider  the  peculiar,  the 
unspeakable  advantages  of  being  his  scholars. 

1.  In  the  first  place,  this  great  Teacher 
can  give  the  capacity  requisite  to  the  recep- 
tion of  his  sublime  instructions.  There  is  no 
prospect  of  excelling  in  human  arts  and 
sciences,  without  a previous  natural  ability, 
suited  to  the  subject.  For  instance,  if  a per- 
son has  not  an  ear  and  taste  for  music,  he 
will  make  but  small  proficiency  under  the 
best  masters.  It  will  be  the  same  with  respect 
to  the  mathematics,  or  any  branch  of  science. 
A skilful  master  may  improve  and  inform  the 
scholar  if  he  be  rightly  disposed  to  learn,  but 
he  cannot  communicate  the  disposition.  But 
Jesus  can  open  and  enliven  the  dullest  mind ; 
he  teaches  the  blind  to  see,  and  the  deaf  to 
hear.  By  nature  we  are  untractable,  and  in- 
capable of  relishing  divine  truth,  however  ad- 
vantageously proposed  to  us  by  men  like  our- 
selves. But  happy  are  his  scholars  ! he  ena- 
bles them  to  surmount  all  difficulties.  He 
takes  away  the  heart  of  stone,  subdues  the 
most  obstinate  prejudices,  enlightens  the  dark 
understanding,  and  inspires  a genius  and  a 
taste  for  the  sublime  and  interesting  lessons 
he  proposes  to  them.  In  this  respect,  as  in 
every  other,  there  is  none  who  teacheth  like 
him,  Job  xxxvi.  26. 

2.  He  teacheth  the  most  important  things. 
The  subjects  of  human  science  are  compara- 


MESSIAH’S  EASY  YOKE. 


267 


SER.  XV.] 

tively  trivial  and  insignificant.  We  may  be 
safely  ignorant  of  them  all.  And  we  may 
acquire  the  knowledge  of  them  all,  without 
being  wiser  or  better,  with  respect  to  the 
concernments  of  our  true  happiness.  Expe- 
rience and  observation  abundantly  confirm 
the  remark  of  Solomon,  That  he  who  in- 
creaseth  knowledge  increase th  sorrow.  The 
eye  is  not  satisfied  with  seeing,  nor  the  ear 
with  hearing,  Eccles.  i.  8,  18.  Unless  the 
heart  be  seasoned  and  sanctified  by  grace, 
the  sum-total  of  all  other  acquisitions  is  but 
vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit,  Eccles.  ii.  17. 
Human  learning  will  neither  support  the 
mind  under  trouble,  nor  weaken  its  attach- 
ment to  worldly  things,  nor  control  its  im- 
petuous passions,  nor  overcome  the  fear  of 
death.  The  confession  of  the  learned  Gro- 
tius,  towards  the  close  of  a life  spent  in  lite- 
rary pursuits,  is  much  more  generally  known 
than  properly  attended  to.  He  had  deservedly 
a great  name  and  reputation  as  a scholar; 
but  his  own  reflection  upon  the  results  of  his 
labours  expresses  what  he  learnt,  not  from 
his  books  and  ordinary  course  of  studies,  but 
from  the  Teacher  I am  commending  to  you. 
He  lived  to  leave  this  testimony  for  the  ad- 
monition of  the  learned,  or  to  this  effect: 
A h,  vitum  prorsus  perdidi  nihil  agendo 
laboriose ! “ Alas ! I have  wasted  my  whole 
life  in  taking  much  pains  to  no  purpose.”  But 
Jesus  makes  his  scholars  wise  unto  eternal 
life,  and  reveals  that  knowledge  to  babes,  to 
persons  of  weak  and  confined  abilities,  of 
which  the  wisdom  of  the  world  can  form  no  idea. 

3.  Other  teachers,  as  I have  already  hinted, 
can  only  inform  the  head ; but  his  instruc- 
tions influence  the  heart.  Moral  philoso- 
phers, as  they  are  called,  abound  in  fine  words 
and  plausible  speeches,  concerning  the  beauty 
of  virtue,  the  fitness  of  things,  temperance, 
benevolence,  and  equity ; and  their  scholars 
learn  to  talk  after  them.  But  their  fine  and 
admired  sentiments  are  mere  empty  notions, 
destitute  of  life  and  efficacy,  and  frequently 
leave  them  as  much  under  the  tyranny  of 
pride,  passion,  sensuality,  envy,  and  malice, 
as  any  of  the  vulgar  whom  they  despise  for 
their  ignorance,  ft  is  well  known,  to  the  dis- 
grace of  the  morality  which  the  world  ap- 
plauds, that  some  of  their  most  admired  sen- 
timental writers  and  teachers  have  deserved 
to  be  numbered  among  the  most  abandoned 
and  despicable  of  mankind.  They  have  been 
slaves  to  the  basest  and  most  degrading  appe- 
tites, and  the  tenor  of  their  lives  has  been  a 
marked  contradiction  to  their  fine-spun  theo- 
ries. But  Jesus  Christ  effectually  teaches 
his  disciples  to  forsake  and  abhor  whatever  is 
contrary  to  rectitude  or  purity;  and  inspires 
them  with  love,  power,  and  a sound  mind. 
And  if  they  do  not  talk  of  great  things,  they 
are  enabled  to  perform  them.  Their  lives 
are  exemplary  and  useful,  their  deaths  com- 
fortable, and  their  memory  is  precious. 


4.  The  disciples  of  Jesus  are,  or  may  be 
always  learning.  His  providence  and  wis- 
dom have  so  disposed  things,  in  subserviency 
to  the  purposes  of  his  grace,  that  the  whole 
world  around  them  is  as  a great  school,  and 
the  events  of  every  day,  with  which  they  are 
connected,  have  a tendency  and  suitableness, 
if  rightly  improved,  to  promote  their  instruc- 
tion. Heavenly  lessons  are  taught  and  illus- 
trated by  earthly  objects ; nor  are  we  capa- 
ble of  understanding  them  at  present,  unless 
the  mode  of  instruction  be  thus  accommo- 
dated to  our  situation  and  weakness.  The 
scripture  (John  iii.  12,)  points  out  to  us  a 
wonderful  and  beautiful  analogy  between  the 
outward  visible  world  of  nature,  and  that 
spiritual  state  which  is  called  the  kingdom 
of  God ; the  former  is  like  a book  written  in 
cypher,  to  which  the  scripture*  is  the  key, 
which,  when  we  obtain,  we  have  the  other 
opened  to  us.  Thus,  wherever  they  look, 
some  object  presents  itself,  which  is  adapted, 
either  to  lead  their  thoughts  directly  to  Jesus, 
or  to  explain  or  confirm  some  passage  in  his 
word.  So  likewise,  the  incidents  of  human 
life;  the  characters  we  know,  the  conversa- 
tion we  hear,  the  vicissitudes  which  take 
place  in  families,  cities,  and  nations;  in  a 
word,  the  occurrences  which  furnish  the  his- 
tory of  every  day,  afford  a perpetual  com- 
mentary on  what  the  scriptures  teach  con- 
cerning the  heart  of  man  and  the  state  of  the 
world,  as  subject  to  vanity,  and  lying  in  wick- 
edness; and  thereby  the  great  truths  which 
it  behoves  us  to  understand  and  remember, 
are  more  repeatedly  and  forcibly  exhibited 
before  our  eyes,  and  brought  home  to  our  bo- 
soms. It  is  the  peculiar  advantage  of  the  dis- 
ciples of  Christ,  that  their  lessons  are  always 
before  them,  and  their  Master  always  with 
them. 

5.  Men  who  are  otherwise  competently 
qualified  for  teaching  in  the  branches  of 
science  they  profess,  often  discourage  and  in- 
timidate their  scholars,  by  the  impatience, 
austerity,  and  distance  of  their  manner.  They 
fail  in  that  condescension  and  gentleness 
which  are  necessary  to  engage  the  attention 
and  affection  of  the  timid  and  the  volatile,  or 
gradually  to  soften  and  to  shame  the  per- 
verse. Even  Moses,  though  eminent  for  his 
forbearance  towards  the  obstinate  people 
committed  to  his  care,  and  though  he  loved 
them,  and  longed  for  their  welfare,  was,  at 
times,  almost  wearied  by  them,  Numb.  xi. 
11,  12.  But  Jesus,  who  knows  before-hand 
the  weakness,  the  dulness,  and  the  refracto- 
riness of  those  whom  he  deigns  to  teach,  to 
prevent  their  fears  is  pleased  to  say,  “ Learn 
of  me,  for  I am  meek  and  lowly.”  With 
what  meekness  did  lie  converse  among  his 
disciples,  while  he  was  with  them  upon 
earth  ? He  allowed  them  at  all  times  a gra- 
cious freedom  of  access.  He  bore  with  their 
mistakes,  reproved  and  corrected  them  with 


268 


MESSIAH’S  EASY  YOKE. 


the  greatest  mildness,  and  taught  them  as 
they  were  able  to  hear,  with  a kind  accom- 
modation to  their  prejudices;  leading  them 
on  step  by  step,  and  waiting  for  the  proper 
season  of  unfolding  to  them  those  more  dif- 
ficult points,  which,  for  a time,  appeared  to 
them  to  be  hard  sayings.  And  though  he  be 
now  exalted  upon  his  glorious  throne  and 
clothed  with  majesty,  still  his  heart  is  made 
of  tenderness,  and  his  compassions  still 
abound.  We  are  still  directed  to  think  of 
him,  not  as  one  who  cannot  be  touched  with 
a feeling  of  our  infirmities,  but  as  exercising 
the  same  patience  and  sympathy  towards  his 
disciples  now,  which  so  signally  marked  his 
character  during  his  state  of  humiliation. 
The  compliment  of  the  orator  to  a Roman 
emperor,  though  excessive  and  absurd  when 
addressed  to  a sinful  worm,  that  they  who 
durst  speak  to  him  were  ignorant  of  his 
greatness,  and  they  who  durst  not  were 
equally  ignorant  of  his  goodness,  is  a just  and 
literal  truth,  if  applied  to  our  meek  and  gra- 
cious Saviour.  If  we  duly  consider  his  great- 
ness alone,  it  seems  almost  presumption  in 
such  creatures  as  we  are,  to  dare  to  take  his 
holy  name  upon  our  polluted  lips ; but  then, 
if  we  have  a proportionable  sense  of  his  un- 
bounded goodness  and  grace,  every  difficulty 
is  overruled,  and  we  feel  a liberty  of  drawing 
near  to  him,  though  with  reverence,  yet  with 
the  confidence  of  children  when  they  speak 
to  an  affectionate  parent. 

A person  may  be  meek,  though  in  an  ele- 
vated situation  of  life ; but  Jesus  was  like- 
wise lowly.  There  was  nothing  in  his  ex- 
ternal appearance  to  intimidate  the  poor  and 
the  miserable  from  coming  to  him.  He  was 
lowly  or  humble.  Custom,  which  fixes  the 
force  and  acceptation  of  words,  will  not 
readily  allow  us  to  speak  of  humility  as  ap- 
plicable to  the  great  God.  Yet  it  i«  said,  He 
humbleth  himself  to  behold  the  things  that 
are  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  Psal.  cxiii.  6- 
Humility,  in  strictness  of  speech,  is  an  at- 
tribute of  magnanimity ; an  indifference  to 
the  little  distinctions  by  which  w’eak  and 
vulgar  minds  are  affected.  In  the  view  of 
the  high  and  holy  One  who  inhabiteth  eter- 
nity (Is.  lvii.  15,)  all  distinctions  that  can 
obtain  among  creatures  vanish;  and  he  hum- 
bles himself  no  less  to  notice  the  worship  of 
an  angel,  than  the  fall  of  a sparrow  to  the 
ground.  But  we  more  usually  express  this 
idea  by  the  term  condescension.  Such  was 
the  mind  that  was  in  Christ,  Phil.  ii.  5.  It 
belonged  to  his  dignity,  as  Lord  of  all,  to 
look  with  an  equal  eye  upon  all  his  crea- 
tures. None  could  recommend  themselves 
to  him  by  their  rank,  wealth,  or  abilities,  the 
gifts  of  his  own  bounty;  none  were  excluded 
from  his  regard,  by  the  want  of  those  things 
which  are  in  estimation  among  men.  And 


[ser.  xv. 

to  stain  the  pride  of  human  glory,  he  was 
pleased  to  assume  an  humble  state.  Though 
he  was  rich,  he  made  himself  poor  (2  Cor. 
viii.  9,)  for  the  sake  of  those  whom  he  came 
into  the  world  to  save.  In  this  respect  he 
teaches  us  by  his  example.  He  took  upon 
him  the  form  of  a servant  (Phil.  ii.  7,)  a poor 
and  obscure  man,  to  abase  our  pride,  to  cure  us 
of  selfishness,  and  to  reconcile  us  to  the  cross. 

The  happy  effect  of  his  instructions  upon 
those  who  receive  them,  is,  rest  to  their 
souls.  This  has  been  spoken  to  before ; but 
as  it  is  repeated  in  the  text,  I shall  not  en- 
tirely pass  it  over  here.  He  gives  rest  to  our 
souls, — by  restoring  us  to  our  proper  state 
of  dependence  upon  God ; as  a state  of  recon- 
ciliation and  peace,  and  deliverance  from 
guilt  and  fear;  a state  of  subjection;  for  till 
our  wills  are  duly  subjected  to  the  will  of 
God,  we  can  have  no  rest — by  showing  us 
the  vanity  of  the  world,  and  thereby  putting 
an  end  to  our  wearisome  desires  and  pursuits 
after  things  uncertain,  frequently  unattain- 
able, always  unsatisfying — by  a communica- 
tion of  sublimer  pleasures  and  hopes  than  the 
present  state  of  things  can  possibly  afford — 
and  lastly,  by  furnishing  us  with  those  aids, 
motives,  and  encouragements,  which  make 
our  duty  desirable,  practicable,  and  pleasant. 

How  truly  then  may  it  be  said,  that  his 
yoke  is  easy,  and  his  burden  light ! such  a 
burden  as  wings  are  to  a bird,  raising  the 
soul  above  the  low  and  grovelling  attach- 
ments to  which  it  was  once  confined.  They 
only  can  rightly  judge  of  the  value  of  this 
rest,  who  are  capable  of  contrasting  it  with 
the  distractions  and  miseries,  the  remorse 
and  forebodings,  of  those  who  live  without 
God  in  the  world. 

But  we  are  all,  by  profession,  his  scholars. 
Ought  we  not  seriously  to  inquire,  what  we 
have  actually  learned  from  him?  Surely  the 
proud,  the  haughty,  the  voluptuous,  and  the 
worldly,  though  they  have  heard  of  his  name, 
and  may  have  attended  on  his  institutions, 
have  not  hitherto  sat  at  his  feet,  or  drank  of 
his  Spirit.  It  requires  no  long  train  of  exami- 
nation to  determine,  whether  you  have  en- 
tered into  his  rest,  or  not;  or,  if  you  have  not 
yet  attained  it,  whether  you  are  seeking  it 
in  the  ways  of  his  appointment.  It  is  a rest 
for  the  soul,  it  is  a spiritual  blessing,  and 
therefore  does  not  necessarily  depend  upon 
external  circumstances.  Without  this  rest, 
you  must  be  restless  and  comfortless  in  a 
palace.  If  you  have  it,  you  may  be,  at  least 
comparatively,  happy  in  a dungeon.  To-day, 
if  not  before  to-day,  while  it  is  called  to-day, 
hear  his  voice;  and  while  he  says  to  you  by 
his  word,  “ Come  unto  me,  and  learn  of  me,” 
let  your  hearts  answer,  “Behold,  we  come 
unto  thee,  for  thou  art  the  Lord  our  God,” 
Jer.  iii.  22. 


SER.  XVI.] 


269 


THE  LAMB  OF  GOD,  &c. 


SERMON  XYI. 

THE  LAMB  OF  GOD,  THE  GREAT  ATONEMENT. 

Behold  the  Lamb  of  God , which  taketh  away 

the  sin  of  the  world ! — John  i.  29. 

Great  and  marvellous  are  the  works  of 
the  Lord  God  Almighty!  We  live  in  the 
midst  of  them,  and  the  little  impression  they 
make  upon  us  sufficiently  proves  our  depra- 
vity. He  is  great  in  the  very  smallest ; and 
there  is  not  a plant,  flower,  or  insect,  but 
bears  the  signature  of  infinite  wisdom  and 
power.  How  sensibly  then  should  we  be 
affected  by  the  consideration  of  the  whole, 
if  sin  had  not  blinded  our  understandings,  and 
hardened  our  hearts!  In  the  beginning,  when 
all  was  dark,  unformed,  and  waste,  his  pow- 
erful word  produced  light,  life,  beauty,  and 
order.  He  commanded  the  sun  to  shine,  and 
the  planets  to  roll.  The  immensity  of  crea- 
tion is  far  beyond  the  reach  of  our  concep- 
tions. The  innumerable  stars,  the  worlds, 
which,  however  large  in  themselves,  are, 
from  their  remoteness,  but  barely  visible,  to 
us  are  of  little  more  immediate  and  known 
use,  than  to  enlarge  our  idea  of  the  great- 
ness of  their  Author.  Small,  indeed,  is  the 
knowledge  we  have  of  our  own  system ; but 
we  know  enough  to  render  our  indifference  in- 
excusable. The  glory  of  the  sun  must  strike 
every  eye ; and  in  this  enlightened  age,  there 
are  few  persons  but  have  some  ideas  of  the 
magnitude  of  the  planets,  and  the  rapidity 
and  regularity  of  their  motions.  Farther, 
the  rich  variety  which  adorns  this  lower 
creation,  the  dependence  and  relation  of  the 
several  parts  and  their  general  subserviency 
to  the  accommodation  of  man,  the  principal 
inhabitant,  together  with  the  preservation  of 
individuals,  and  the  continuance  of  every 
species  of  animals,  are  subjects  not  above  the 
reach  of  common  capacities,  and  which  afford 
almost  endless  and  infinite  scope  for  reflec- 
tion and  admiration.  But  the  bulk  of  man- 
kind regard  them  not.  The  vicissitudes  of 
day  and  night,  and  of  the  revolving  seasons, 
are  to  them  matters  of  course,  as  if  they  fol- 
lowed each  other  without  either  cause  or  de- 
sign. And  though  the  philosophers,  who  pro- 
fessedly attach  themselves  to  the  study  of 
the  works  of  nature,  are  overwhelmed  by  the 
traces  of  a wisdom  and  arrangement  which 
they  are  unable  to  comprehend  ; yet  few  of 
them  are  led  to  reverential  thoughts  of  God, 
by  their  boasted  knowledge  of  his  creatures. 
Thus  men  live  without  God  in  the  world, 
though  they  live,  and  move,  and  have  their 
being  in  him,  and  are  incessantly  surrounded 
by  the  most  striking  proofs  of  his  presence 
and  energy.  Perhaps  an  earthquake,  or  a 
hurricane,  by  awakening  their  fears,  may 
force  upon  their  minds  a conviction  of  his 
power  over  them  and  excite  an  occasional 


momentary  application  to  him ; but  when 
they  think  the  danger  over,  they  relapse  into 
their  former  stupidity. 

What  can  engage  the  attention,  or  soften 
the  obduracy  of  such  creatures!  Behold  one 
wonder  more,  greater  than  all  the  former  ; 
the  last,  the  highest  effect  of  divine  good- 
ness ! God  has  so  loved  rebellious,  ungrateful 
sinners,  as  to  appoint  them  a Saviour  in  the 
person  of  his  only  Son.  The  prophets  fore- 
saw his  manifestation  in  the  flesh,  and  fore- 
told the  happy  consequences — that  his  pre- 
sence would  change  the  wilderness  into  a 
fruitful  field,  that  he  was  coming  to  give  sight 
to  the  blind,  and  life  to  the  dead  ; to  set  the 
captive  at  liberty  ; to  unloose  the  heavy  bur- 
den ; and  to  bless  the  weary  with  rest.  But 
this  change  was  not  to  be  wrought  merely  by 
a word  of  power,  as  when  he  said,  “ Let  there 
be  light,  and  there  was  light,”  Gen.  i.  3.  It 
was  great,  to  speak  the  world  from  nothing ; 
but  far  greater,  to  redeem  sinners  from  mise- 
ry. The  salvation,  of  which  he  is  the  Author, 
though  free  to  us,  must  cost  him  dear.  Be- 
fore the  mercy  of  God  can  be  actually  dis- 
pensed to  such  offenders,  the  rights  of  his  jus- 
tice, the  demands  of  his  law,  and  the  honour 
of  his  government  must  be  provided  for.  The 
early  institution  and  long  continued  use  of 
sacrifices,  had  clearly  pointed  out  the  neces- 
sity of  an  atonement ; but  the  real  and  pro- 
per atonement  could  only  be  made  by  Mes- 
siah. The  blood  of  slaughtered  animals  could 
not  take  away  sin,  nor  display  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  in  pardoning  it.  This  was  the 
appointed  covenanted  work  of  Messiah,  and 
he  alone  could  perform  it.  With  this  view 
he  had  said,  “ Lo,  I come,”  Psal.  xl.  7.  And 
it  was  in  this  view,  when  John  saw  him,  that 
he  pointed  him  cut  to  his  disciples,  saying, 
“ Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  !” 

Three  points  offer  to  our  consideration  : 

I.  The  title  here  given  to  Messiah, — The 
Lamb  of  God. 

II.  The  efficacy  of  his  sacrifice, — He  taketh 
away  sin. 

III.  The  extent  of  it, — The  sin  of  the 
world. 

1.  He  is  the  Lamb  of  God. — The  paschal 
lamb,  and  the  lambs  which  were  daily  offered, 
morning  and  evening,  according  to  the  law 
of  Moses,  were  of  God’s  appointment ; but 
this  Lamb  was  likewise  of  his  providing.  The 
others  were  but  types.  Though  many,  they 
were  all  insufficient  (Heb.  x.  10)  to  cleanse 
the  consciences  of  the  offerers  from  guilt;  and 
they  were  all  superseded,  when  Messiah,  by 
the  one  offering  of  himself,  once  for  all,  made 
an  end  of  sin,  and  brought  in  an  everlasting 
righteousness,  in  favour  of  all  who  believe  in 
his  name. 

This  title,  therefore,  the  Lamb  of  God,  re- 
fers to  his  voluntary  substitution  for  sinners, 
that  by  his  sufferings  and  death  they  w7ho 
deserved  to  die  might  obtain  eternal  life 


270 


THE  LAMB  OF  GOD, 


through  him,  and  for  his  sake.  Mankind  were 
universally  chargeable  with  transgression  of 
the  law  of  God,  and  were  in  a state  of  aliena- 
tion from  him.  A penalty  in  case  of  diso- 
bedience, was  annexed  to  the  law  they  had 
broken ; to  which  they,  as  offenders,  were 
therefore  obnoxious.  Though  it  would  be 
presumptuous  in  such  worms  as  we  are,  to 
determine,  up  » • principles  of  our  own,  whe- 
ther the  sovereign  Judge  of  the  universe 
could,  consistently  with  his  own  glory,  remit 
this  penalty  without  satisfaction,  or  not,  yet, 
since  he  has  favoured  us  with  a revelation 
of  his  will  upon  the  point,  we  may  speak 
more  confidently,  and  affirm,  that  it  was  not 
consistent  with  his  truth  and  holiness,  and 
the  honour  of  his  moral  government,  to  do  it ; 
because  this  is  his  own  declaration.  We  may 
now  be  assured,  that  the  forgiveness  of  one 
sinner,  and,  indeed,  of  one  sin,  by  an  act  of 
mere  mere}'’,  and  without  any  interposing 
consideration,  was  incompatible  with  the  in- 
flexibility of  the  law,  and  the  truth  and  justice 
of  the  Lawgiver.  But  mercy  designed  the  for- 
giveness of  innumerable  sinners,  each  of  them 
chargeable  with  innumerable  sins ; and  the 
declaration,  that  God  is  thus  merciful,  was  to 
be  recorded,  and  publicly  known  through  a 
long  succession  of  ages,  and  to  extend  to  sins 
not  yet  committed.  An  act  of  grace  so  gene- 
ral and  unreserved,  might  lead  men  (not  to 
speak  of  superior  intelligences)  to  disparaging 
thoughts  of  the  holiness  of  God,  and  might 
even  encourage  them  to  sin  with  hope  of  im- 
punity, if  not  connected  with  some  provision, 
which  might  show  that  the  exercise  of  his 
mercy  was  in  full  harmony  with  the  honour 
of  all  his  perfections.  How  God  could  be 
just,  and  yet  justify  those  (Rom.  iii.  26) 
whom  his  own  righteous  constitution  con- 
demned, was  a difficulty  too  great  for  finite 
understandings  to  solve.  But  herein  is  God 
glorious.  His  wisdom  propounded,  and  his 
love  afforded,  the  adequate,  the  only  possible 
expedient.  He  revealed  to  our  first  parents 
his  purpose,  which  in  the  fulness  of  time  he 
accomplished,  of  sending  forth  his  Son,  made 
of  a woman,  made  under  the  law,  to  redeem 
sinners  from  the  curse  of  the  lawT,  (Gal.  iv.  4,) 
by  sustaining  it  for  them.  Considering  the 
dignity  of  his  person  and  the  perfection  of  his 
obedience,  his  sufferings  and  death  for  sins 
not  his  own,  displayed  the  heinousness  of  sin, 
and  the  severe  displeasure  of  God  against  it, 
in  a much  stronger  light  than  the  execution 
of  the  sentence  upon  the  offenders  could  pos- 
sioly  do.  It  displays  likewise  the  justice  of 
this  sentence,  since  neither  the  dignity  nor 
the  holiness  of  the  surety  could  exempt  him 
from  suffering ; and  that,  though  he  was  the 
beloved  of  God,  he  was  not  spared.  This  is 
what  I understand  by  atonement  and  satisfac- 
tion for  sin. 

II.  The  efficacy  of  this  atonement  is  com- 
plete. The  Lamb  of  God,  thus  slain,  taketh 


[S.Eli.  xvi. 

away  sin,  both  with  respect  to  its  guilt  and  its 
defilement.  The  Israelites,  by  looking  to  the 
brazen  serpent  .(Numb.  xxi.  9,)  were  saved 
from  death,  and  nealed  of  their  wounds.  The 
Lamb  of  God  is  an  object,  proposed,  not  to 
our  bodily  sight,  but  to  the  eye  of  the  mind, 
which  indeed  in  fallen  man  is  naturally  blind ; 
but  the  gospel-message,  enlivened  by  the 
powerful  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  ap- 
pointed to  open  it.  He  who  thus  seeth  the 
Son,  and  believeth  on  him,  (John  vi.  40.)  is 
delivered  from  guilt  and  condemnation,  is 
justified  from  all  sin.  He  is  warranted  to  plead 
the  sufferings  of  the  Lamb  of  God  in  bar  of 
his  own ; the  whole  of  the  Saviour’s  obedience 
unto  death,  as  the  ground  and  title  of  his  ac- 
ceptance unto  life.  Guilt  or  obnoxiousness 
to  punishment  being  removed,  the  soul  has  an 
open  way  of  access  to  God,  and  is  prepared  to 
receive  blessings  from  him.  For  as  the  sun, 
the  fountain  of  light,  fills  the  eye  that  was 
before  blind,  the  instant  it  receives  sight ; so 
God,  who  is  the  fountain  of  goodness,  en- 
lightens all  his  intelligent  creatures  accord- 
ing to  their  capacity,  unless  they  are  by  sin 
blinded,  and  rendered  incapable  of  communion 
with  him.  The  Saviour  is  now  received  and 
enthroned  in  the  heart,  and  from  his  fulness 
the  life  of  grace  is  derived  and  maintained. 
Thus  not  only  the  guilt,  but  the  love  of  sin, 
and  its  dominion,  are  taken  away,  subdued  by 
grace,  and  cordially  renounced  by  the  believ- 
ing pardoned  sinner.  The  blood  which  frees 
him  from  distress,  preserves  a remembrance 
of  the  great  danger  and  misery  from  which 
he  has  been  delivered  warm  upon  his  heart, 
inspires  him  with  gratitude  to  his  Deliverer, 
and  furnishes  him  with  an  abiding  and  con- 
straining motive  for  cheerful  and  universal 
obedience. 

III.  The  designed  extent  of  this  gratuitous 
removal  of  sin,  by  the  oblation  of  the  Lamb 
of  God,  is  expressed  in  a large  and  indefinite 
manner : He  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world. 
Many  of  my  hearers  need  not  to  be  told,  what 
fierce  and  voluminous  disputes  have  been 
maintained  concerning  the  extent  of  the 
death  of  Christ.  I am  afraid  the  advantages 
of  such  controversies  have  not  been  answer- 
able  to  the  zeal  of  the  disputants.  For  myself, 
I wish  to  be  known  by  no  name  but  that  of  a 
Christian,  and  implicitly  to  adopt  no  system 
but  the  Bible.  I usually  endeavour  to  preach 
to  the  heart  and  the  conscience,  and  to  wave, 
as  much  as  I can,  all  controversial  points. 
But  as  the  subject  now  lies  directly  before 
me,  I shall  embrace  the  occasion,  and  simply 
and  honestly  open  to  you  the  sentiments  of 
my  heart  concerning  it. 

If  because  the  death  of  Christ  is  here  said 
to  take  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  or,  (as  this 
evangelist  expresses  it  in  another  place.)  the 
whole  world,  (1  John  ii.  2,)  it  be  inferred, 
that  he  actually  designed  and  intended  the 
salvation  of  all  men,  such  an  inference  would 


THE  GREAT  ATONEMENT. 


271 


SEIt.  XVI.] 

be  contradicted  by  fact.  For  it  is  certain  that 
all  men  will  not  be  saved,  Matt.  vii.  13,  14. 
It  is  to  be  feared,  that  the  greater  part  of  those 
to  whom  the  word  of  his  salvation  is  sent 
perish  in  their  sins.  If  therefore  he  cannot 
be  disappointed  of  his  purpose,  since  many 
do  perish,  it  could  not  be  his  fixed  design 
that  all  men  should  be  finally  and  absolutely 
saved. 

The  exceeding  great  number,  once  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins,  who  shall  be  found  on  his 
right  hand  at  the  great  day  of  his  appearance, 
are  frequently  spoken  of  in  appropriate  and 
peculiar  language.  They  are  styled  his  sheep, 
(John  x.  11,  18,)  for  whom  he  laid  down  his 
life ; his  elect,  (Mark  xiii.  27,)  his  own ; (John 
xiii.  1 ;)  those  to  whom  it  is  given  to  believe 
in  his  name,  (Phil.  i.  29,)  and  concerning 
whom  it  was  the  Father’s  good  pleasure  to 
predestinate  them  to  the  adoption  of  children, 
Eph.  v.  5.  By  nature  they  are  children  of 
wrath,  even  as  others,  (Eph.  ii.  3,)  and  no 
more  disposed  in  themselves  to  receive  the 
truth  than  those  who  obstinately  and  finally 
reject  it.  Whenever  they  become  willing, 
they  are  made  so  in  a day  of  divine  power, 
(Psal.  cx.  3,)  and  wherein  they  differ,  it  is 
grace  that  makes  them  to  differ,  1 Cor.  iv.  7. 
Passages  in  the  scripture  to  this  purpose  are 
innumerable;  and  though  much  ingenuity 
has  been  employed  to  soften  them,  and  to 
make  them  speak  the  language  of  an  hypo- 
thesis, they  are  so  plain  in  themselves  that  he 
who  runs  may  read.  It  is  not  the  language 
of  conjecture,  but  of  inspiration,  that  they 
whom  the  Lord  God  did  foreknow  he  also  did 
predestinate  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of 
his  Son,  Rom.  viii.  29.  And  though  some 
serious  persons  perplex  themselves  with  need- 
less and  painful  reasonings,  with  respect  to 
the  sovereignty  of  God  in  his  conduct  towards 
mankind,  they  all,  if  truly  spiritual  and  en- 
lightened, stand  upon  this  very  ground,  in 
their  own  experience.  Many,  who  seem  to 
differ  from  us  in  the  way  of  argumentation, 
perfectly  accord  with  us,  when  they  simply 
speak  of  what  God  has  done  for  their  souls. 
They  know  and  acknowledge  as  readily  as 
we,  that  they  were  first  found  of  him  when 
they  sought  him  not;  and  that  otherwise  they 
neither  should  nor  could  have  sought  him  at 
all;  nor  can  they  give  any  better  reason  than 
this  why  they  are  saved  out  of  the  world, 
That  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  make  them  his 
people,  1 Sam.  xii.  22. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  I cannot  think  the 
sense  of  the  expression  is  sufficiently  explain- 
ed, by  saying,  That  the  world,  and  the  whole 
world  is  spoken  of,  to  teach  us  that  the  sacri- 
fice of  the  Lamb  of  God  was  not  confined, 
like  to  Levitical  offerings,  to  the  nation  of 
Israel  only ; but  that  it  is  available  for  the 
sins  of  a determined  number  of  persons,  call- 
ed the  Elect,  who  are  scattered  among  many 
nations,  and  found  under  a great  variety  of 


states  and  circumstances  in  human  life.  This 
is  undoubtedly  the  truth,  so  far  as  it  goes ; 
but  not,  I apprehend,  fully  agreeable  to  the 
scriptural  manner  of  representation.  That 
there  is  an  election  of  grace,  we  are  plainly 
taught ; yet  it  is  not  said,  that  Jesus  Christ 
came  into  the  world  to  save  the  elect,  but 
that  he  came  to  save  sinners,  to  seek  and  to 
save  them  that  are  lost,  1 Tim.  i.  15 ; Luke 
xix.  10.  Upon  this  ground  I conceive  that 
ministers  have  a warrant  to  preach  the  gospel 
to  every  human  creature,  and  to  address  the 
conscience  of  every  man  in  the  sight  of  God; 
and  that  every  person  who  hears  this  gospel 
has  thereby  a warrant,  an  encouragement, 
yea,  a command,  to  apply  to  Jesus  Christ  for 
salvation.  And  that  they  who  refuse,  thereby 
exclude  themselves,  and  perish,  not  because 
they  never  had,  nor  possibly  could  have  any 
interest  in  his  atonement,  but  simply  because 
they  will  not  come  unto  him  that  they  may 
have  life.  I know  something  of  the  cavils 
and  curious  reasonings  which  obtain  upon 
this  subject,  and  I know  I may  be  pressed 
with  difficulties,  which  I cannot  resolve  to  the 
full  satisfaction  of  inquiring  and  speculative 
spirits.  I am  not  disheartened  by  meeting 
with  some  things  beyond  the  grasp  of  my 
scanty  powers,  in  a book  which  I believe  to 
be  inspired  by  him  whose  ways  and  thoughts 
are  higher  than  ours,  as  the  heavens  are 
higher  than  the  earth,  Isa.  lv.  S,  9.  But  I be- 
lieve, that  vain  reasonings,  self-will,  an  at- 
tachment to  names  and  parties,  and  a dispo- 
sition to  draw  our  sentiments  from  human 
systems,  rather  than  to  form  them  by  a close 
and  humble  study  of  the  Bible,  with  prayer 
for  divine  teaching,  are  the  chief  sources  of 
our  perplexities  and  disputes. 

The  extent  of  the  atonement  is  frequently 
represented,  as  if  a calculation  had  been 
made  how  much  suffering  was  necessary  for 
the  surety  to  endure,  in  order  exactly  to  ex- 
piate the  aggregate  number  of  all  the  sins  of 
all  the  elect;  that  so  much  he  suffered  pre- 
cisely, and  no  more  ; and  that  when  this  re- 
quisition was  completely  answered,  he  said, 
It  is  finished,  bowed  his  head,  and  gave  up 
the  ghost,  John  xix.  30.  But  this  nicety  of 
computation  does  not  seem  analogous  to  that 
unbounded  magnificence  and  grandeur  which 
overwhelm  the  attentive  mind  in  the  con- 
templation of  the  divine  conduct  in  the  na- 
tural world.  When  God  waters  the  earth, 
he  waters  it  abundantly,  Psal.  Ixv.  10.  He 
does  not  restrain  the  rain  to  cultivated  or  im- 
provable spots,  but  with  a profusion  of  bounty 
worthy  of  himself,  his  clouds  pour  down  water 
with  equal  abundance  upon  the  barren  moun- 
tain, the  lonely  desert,  and  the  pathless  ocean. 
Why  may  we  not  say  with  the  scriptures,  that 
Christ  died  to  declare  the  righteousness  of 
God,  (Rom.  iii.  25,  28,)  to  manifest  that  he 
is  just  in  justifying  the  ungodly  who  believe 
in  Jesus?  And  for  any  thing  we  know  to 


272 


THE  LAMB  OF  GOD,  &c. 


[SER.  XVI, 


the  contrary,  the  very  same  display  of  the 
evil  and  demerit  of  sin,  by  the  Redeemer’s 
agonies  and  death,  might  have  been  equally 
necessary,  though  the  number  of  the  elect 
were  much  smaller  than  it  will  appear  to  be 
when  they  shall  all  meet  before  the  throne  of 
glory.  If  God  had  formed  this  earth  for  the 
residence  of  one  man  only ; had  it  been  his 
pleasure  to  afford  him  the  same  kind  and  de- 
gree of  light  which  we  enjoy,  the  same  glo- 
rious sun,  which  is  now  sufficient  to  enlighten 
and  comfort  the  millions  of  mankind,  would 


such  excuses  to  their  Maker  as  they  would 
not  accept  in  their  own  concerns.  If  you  say 
of  a man,  he  is  such  a liar  that  he  cannot 
speak  a word  of  truth ; so  profane  that  he 
cannot  speak  without  an  oath  ; so  dishonest 
that  he  cannot  omit  one  opportunity  of  cheat- 
ing or  stealing  ; do  you  speak  of  this  disabi- 
lity to  good,  as  an  extenuation,  and  because 
you  think  it  renders  him  free  from  blame  1 
Surely  you  think,  the  more  he  is  disinclined 
to  do  good,  and  habituated  to  evil,  the  worse 
he  is.  A man  that  can  speak  lies  and  perjury, 
have  been  necessary  for  the  accommodation  | that  can  deceive  and  rob,  but  is  such  an  enemy 
of  that  one  person.  So,  perhaps,  had  it  been  to  truth  and  goodness  that  he  can  do  nothing 
his  pleasure  to  save  but  one  sinner,  in  a way  that  is  kind  or  upright,  must  be  a shocking 
that  should  give  the  highest  possible  discove-  character  indeed  ! Judge  not  more  favourably 
ry  of  his  justice  and  of  his  mercy,  this  could  of  yourself  if  you  can  love  the  world  and  sen- 
have  been  done  by  no  other  method  than  that  sual  pleasure,  but  cannot  love  God ; if  you  can 
which  he  has  chosen  for  the  salvation  of  the  fear  a worm  like  yourself,  but  live  without 
innumerable  multitudes  who  will  in  the  great  the  fear  of  God  ; if  you  can  boldly  trample 
day  unite  in  the  song  of  praise  to  the  Lamb  upon  his  laws,  but  will  not,  and  there- 
who  loved  them,  and  washed  them  from  their  fore  cannot  humble  yourself  before  him,  and 
sins  in  his  own  blood.  As  the  sun  hasasuf-  seek  his  mercy,  in  the  way  of  his  appoint- 
ficiency  of  light  for  eyes  (if  there  were  so  ment. 

many  capable  of  beholding  it)  equal  in  num- 1 We  cannot  ascribe  too  much  to  the  grace 
ber  to  the  leaves  upon  the  trees,  and  the  blades  of  God ; but  we  should  be  careful,  that  under 
of  grass  that  grow  upon  the  earth ; so  in  Jesus,  a semblance  of  exalting  his  grace,  we  do  not 
the  Sun  of  righteousness,  there  is  plenteous  furnish  the  slothful  and  unfaithful  (Matt, 
redemption;  he  is  rich  in  mercy  to  all  that  call  xxv.  16)  with  excuses  for  their  wilfulness 
upon  him;  (Psal.  cxxx.  7;  Rom.  x.  12;)  and  and  wickedness.  God  is  gracious;  but  let 
he  invites  sinners,  without  exception,  to  man  be  justly  responsible  for  his  own  evil, 
whom  the  word  of  his  salvation  is  sent,  even  and  not  presume  to  state  his  case  so,  as 
to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  to  look  unto  him,  would,  by  just  consequence,  represent  the 
that  they  may  be  saved,  Isa.  xiv.  22.  j holy  God  as  being  the  cause  of  the  sin,  which 

Under  the  gospel-dispensation,  and  by  it,  he  hates  and  forbids. 

God  commands  all  men,  every  where,  to  re- 1 The  w’hole  may  be  summed  up  in  two 
pent,  Acts  xvii.  30.  All  men,  therefore,  j points,  which  I commend  to  your  serious  at- 
every  where,  are  encouraged  to  hope  for  for-  j tention;  which  it  must  be  the  business  of  my 
giveness,  according  to  the  constitution  pre-  [ life  to  enforce ; and  which,  I trust,  I shall 
scribed  by  the  gospel ; otherwise  repentance  ! not  repent  of  having  enforced,  either  at  the 
w’ould  be  both  impracticable  and  unavailing,  i hour  of  death,  or  in  the  day  of  judgment, 
And  therefore  the  command  to  repent,  im-  j when  I must  give  an  account  of  my  preach- 
plies  a warrant  to  believe  in  the  name  of ! ing,  and  you  of  what  you  have  heard  in  this 
Jesus  as  taking  away  the  sin  of  the  world.  I place. 

Let  it  not  be  said,  that  to  call  upon  men  to  | 1.  That  salvation  is,  indeed,  wholly  of 

believe,  which  is  an  act  beyond  their  natural  j grace.  The  gift  of  a Saviour,  the  first  dawn 
power,  is  to  mock  them.  There  is  prescribed  of  light  into  the  heart,  all  the  supports  and 


means  for  the  obtaining  of  faith,  which  it  is 
not  beyond  their  natural  power  to  comply 
with,  if  they  are  not  wilfully  obstinate.  We 
have  the  word  of  God  for  our  authority.  God 
cannot  be  mocked,  (Gal.  vi.  7,)  neither  doth 
he  mock  his  creatures.  Our  Lord  did  not 
mock  the  young  ruler,  when  he  told  him  that 
if  he  would  sell  his  possessions  upon  earth, 
and  follow  him,  he  should  have  treasure  in 
heaven,  Luke  xviii.  22.  Had  this  ruler  no 
power  to  sell  his  possessions]  I doubt  not 
but  that  he  himself  thought  he  had  power  to 
sell  them  if  he  pleased.  But  while  he  loved 
his  money  better  than  he  loved  Christ,  and 
preferred  earthly  treasures  to  heavenly,  he 
had  no  will  to  part  with  them.  And  a want  of 
will  in  a moral  agent,  is  a want  of  power  in  the 
strongest  sense.  Let  none  presume  to  offer 


supplies  needful  for  carrying  on  the  work 
from  the  foundation  to  the  top-stone,  all  is  of 
free  grace. 

2.  "That  now  the  Lamb  of  God  is  preached 
to  you  as  taking  away  the  sin  of  the  world,  if 
you  reject  him,  (which  may  the  Lord  forbid  !) 
I say,  if  you  reject  him,  your  blood  will  be 
upon  your  own  head.  You  are  warned,  you 
are  invited.  Dare  not  to  say,  Why  doth  he 
yet  find  fault,  for  who  hath  resisted  his  w ill? 
Rom.  ix.  19.  If  he  will  save  me,  I shall  be 
saved  : if  not,  what  can  I dol  God  is  merci- 
ful, but  he  is  also  holy  and  just;  he  is  al- 
mighty, but  his  infinite  power  is  combined 
with  wisdom,  and  is  regulated  by  the  great 
designs  of  his  government.  He  can  do  in- 
numerable things  which  he  will  not  do. 
What  he  will  do  (so  far  as  we  are  concerned) 


273 


MESSIAH  DESPISED,  &c. 


SER.  XVII.] 

his  word  informs  us,  and  not  one  jot  or  tittle 
thereof  shall  fail,  Matt.  v.  18. 


SERMON  XVII. 

MESSIAH  DESPISED  AND  REJECTED  OF  MEN. 

He  is  despised  and  rejected  of  men , a man 

of  sorrows , and  acquainted  with  grief. 
— Isaiah  liii.  3. 

The  heathen  moralists,  ignorant  of  the  cha- 
racter and  perfections  of  God,  the  true  digni- 
ty and  immortality  of  the  soul,  and  the  root 
and  extent  of  human  depravity,  had  no  better 
foundation  for  what  they  called  virtue,  than 
pride ; no  higher  aim  in  their  regulations, 
than  the  interests  of  society  and  the  conduct 
of  civil  life.  They  expressed,  indeed,  occa- 
sionally, some  sentiments  of  a superior  kind  ; 
but  these,  however  just  and  valuable  upon  the 
principles  of  revelation,  were  delusive  and  im- 
practicable upon  their  own.  And  Brutus, 
one  of  the  most  admired  characters  of  anti- 
quity, confessed,  just  before  he  put  an  end  to 
his  own  life,  that  having  long  been  enamour- 
ed of  virtue  as  a real  good,  he  found  it,  at 
last,  to  be  but  an  empty  name.  But  though 
they  had  so  little  satisfaction,  or  success,  in 
the  pursuit  of  virtue,  they  were  so  pleased 
with  the  idea  they  formed  of  it,  as  generally 
to  suppose,  that  if  virtue  should  become  visi- 
ble, it  would  necessarily  engage  the  esteem 
and  admiration  of  mankind. 

There  was,  however,  one  remarkable  ex- 
ception to  this  opinion.  The  wisdom  of  Socra- 
tes seems  to  have  been,  in  many  respects,  dif- 
ferent from  that  of  the  bulk  of  their  philoso- 
phers. Socrates  having  expressed  his  idea  of 
a perfect  character,  a truly  virtuous  man,  ven- 
tured to  predict  the  reception  such  a person, 
if  such  a one  could  ever  be  found,  would 
meet  with  from  the  world.  And  he  thought, 
that  his  practice  would  be  so  dissimilar  to  that 
of  other  men,  his  testimony  against  their 
wickedness  so  strong,  and  his  endeavours  to 
reform  them  so  importunate  and  unwelcome, 
that  instead  of  being  universally  admired,  he 
would  be  disliked  and  hated  ; that  mankind 
were  too  degenerate  and  too  obstinate,  to  bear 
either  the  example  or  the  reproof  of  such  a 
person,  and  would  most  probably  revile  and 
persecute  him,  and  put  him  to  death  as  an 
enemy  to  their  peace. 

In  this  instance,  the  judgment  of  Socrates 
accords  with  the  language  of  the  Old,  and 
with  the  history  of  the  New  Testament. 
Messiah  was  this  perfect  character.  As  such 
Isaiah  describes  him.  He  likewise  foresaw 
how  he  would  be  treated,  and  foretold  that  he 
would  be  numbered  with  transgressors,  des- 
pised and  rejected,  by  the  very  people  who 
were  eve- witnesses  of  his  upright  and  be- 
Vol.  II.  2 M 


nevolent  conduct.  And  thus,  in  fact,  it 
proved.  When  Jesus  was  upon  earth,  true 
virtue  and  goodness  were  visibly  displayed, 
and  thereby  the  wickedness  of  man  became 
signally  conspicuous.  For  they  among  whom 
he  was  conversant,  preferred  a robber  and  a 
murderer  to  him,  John  xviii.  40.  They  pre- 
served Barabbas,  who  had  been  justly  doomed 
to  die  for  enormous  crimes,  and  they  nailed 
Jesus,  in  his  stead,  to  the  cross. 

When  Messiah  appeared,  the  Jews  pro- 
fessed to  blame  the  wickedness  of  their  fore- 
fathers, who  had  opposed  and  slain  the  pro- 
phets. If  they  regretted  the  ill-treatment 
the  servants  of  God  had  formerly  received, 
might  it  not  be  hoped  that  they  would  reve- 
rence his  son!  (Matt.  xxi.  47,)  concerning 
whom,  under  his  character  of  Messiah,  their 
expectations  were  raised  by  the  scriptures, 
which  were  read  in  their  synagogues  every 
sabbath-day. 

But  he  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men. 
Angels  sung  praises  at  his  birth,  but  men  de- 
spised him.  He  took  not  upon  him  the  na- 
ture of  angels,  but  of  man ; yet  men  rejected 
him.  Sinful,  helpless  men  rejected  and 
despised  the  only  Saviour.  He  came  to  his 
own,  but  his  own  received  him  not.  How 
lamentable  and  fatal  was  their  obstinacy  ! 
Pretended  Messiahs  were  eagerly  regarded 
and  followed  by  them,  (John  v.  43,)  but  the 
true  Messiah  was  despised  and  rejected  of 
men ! 

Let  us  consider  the  clauses  of  the  text 
separately,  in  the  order  in  which  we  read 
them. 

I.  He  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men. — 
It  would  be  a great  mistake  to  imagine  that 
the  Jews  were  the  only  people  capable  of  this 
ingratitude  and  obstinacy.  If  any  person 
here  thinks,  surely  I would  not  have  despised 
him,  had  I seen  his  wonderful  works,  and 
heard  him  speak  as  never  man  spake : possi- 
bly that  thought  may  prove  you  to  be  of  the 
very  same  spirit  with  those  who,  while  they 
thirsted  for  his  blood,  ignorantly  presumed, 
that  if  they  had  lived  in  the  days  of  their 
forefathers,  they  would  not  have  joined  with 
them  in  persecuting  the  prophets,  Matt, 
xxiii.  31.  The  prejudices  which  operated  so 
strongly  against  our  Lord’s  mission  and  minis- 
try, were  not  peculiar  to  the  people  of  one 
age  or  country,  but  such  as  are  deeply  rooted 
in  the  nature  of  fallen  man.  The  same  prin- 
ciples which  influenced  the  Jews  to  oppose 
and  despise  his  person,  still  influence  mul- 
titudes to  slight  and  oppose  the  doctrine 
which  he  taught,  and  which  he  commanded 
his  disciples  to  preach  and  perpetuate  to  the 
end  of  the  world.  In  proof  of  this,  it  will  be 
sufficient  to  assign  some  of  the  principal  causes 
of  the  contempt  and  hatred  which  he  met 
with  from  the  men  of  that  generation. 

1.  They  despised  him  for  what  they  ac- 
counted the  meanness  of  his  appearance. 


274 


MESSIAH  DESPISED 


Though  rich  in  himself,  he  became  poor  for 
our  sakes,  and  his  poverty  made  him  con- 
temptible in  their  eyes.  They  expected  Mes- 
siah would  appear  with  external  pomp  and 
power.  But  when  they  saw  him,  they  scorned 
him,  saying,  “Is  not  this  the  carpenter’s 
son  !”  Matt.  xiii.  55.  He  who  had  not 
money  to  pay  the  tribute  demanded  of  him 
(Matt.  xvii.  27,)  nor  a house  wherein  to  lay 
his  head,  was  of  small  esteem  with  those 
who  were  covetous,  proud  of  worldly  distinc- 
tions, and  fond  of  the  praise  and  admiration 
of  men. 

2.  Their  contempt  was  heightened,  when 
this  poor  man  publicly  asserted  his  proper 
character  and  claim,  demanded  their  atten- 
tion and  homage,  and  styled  himself  in  a pe- 
culiar sense  the  Son  of  God,  the  resurrection 
and  the  life,  John  v.  18 ; xi.  25.  For  this 
seeming  inconsistence  between  the  appear- 
ance he  made  and  the  honours  he  assumed, 
they  treated  him  as  a demoniac  and  a mad  man, 
John  x.  20.  Their  language  strongly  ex- 
pressed their  sentiments  of  him,  when  they 
asked  him  with  disdain,  “ Art  thou  greater 
than  our  father  Abraham  ? Whom  makest 
thou  thyself  ?”  John  viii.  53. 

3.  They  objected  to  him  the  low  state  and 
former  characters  of  his  followers.  Some  of 
them  were  of  low  rank  in  life.  The  most  of 
those  who  constantly  attended  him  were  poor 
fishermen.  Others  had  been  of  bad  repute, 
publicans,  and  open  sinners.  For  this  they 
reproached  him,  and  thought  they  were  fully 
justified  in  their  contempt,  while  they  could 
say,  “ Have  any  of  the  rulers  or  Pharisees 
believed  on  him  ?”  John  vii.  48. 

4.  They  were  further  exasperated  against 
him,  by  the  authority  and  severity  with  which 
he  taught.  It  is  true,  he  was  gentle  and 
meek  to  all  who  felt  their  need  of  his  help,  or 
sincerely  desired  his  instruction.  He  received 
them  without  exception,  and  treated  them 
with  the  greatest  tenderness.  But  he  vindi- 
cated the  honour  of  the  law  of  God,  from  the 
corrupt  doctrine  and  tradition  of  their  pro- 
fessed teachers.  He  exposed  and  unmasked 
the  hypocrisy  of  their  most  admired  charac- 
ters, and  compared  the  men  who  were  in  the 
highest  reputation  for  wisdom  and  sanctity, 
to  whited  sepulchres,  warning  the  people 
against  them  as  blind  guides  and  deceivers. 

5.  These  blind  guides  strengthened  the 
prejudices  of  their  blind  followers  against 
him,  by  misrepresentation.  They  attempted 
to  avail  themselves  of  the  scripture,  when 
they  thought  it  would  answer  their  purpose. 
They  eagerly  made  the  most  of  a prevailing 
mistake,  that  Jesus  was  born  in  Galilee,  be- 
cause he  was  brought  up  in  Nazareth  from 
his  infancy.  This  they  urged  as  a proof  that 
he  could  not  be  Messiah,  who  the  prophets 
had  declared  was  to  be  born  at  Bethlehem  in 
Judea.  When  he  healed  diseases  on  the  sab- 
bath-day,  they  represented  the  effects  of  his 


[seb.  XVII. 

compassion  as  a breach  of  that  strict  observ- 
ance of  the  Sabbath  which  was  enjoined  by 
the  law  of  Moses,  and  that  therefore  he  could 
not  be  of  God,  John  ix.  16.  And  when  they 
were  not  able  to  deny  the  reality  of  his  won- 
derful works,  they  ascribed  them  to  the 
agency  of  Satan,  Matt.  xii.  24.  We  at  this 
distance  of  time,  can  easily  perceive  the 
folly  and  madness  of  their  attempts.  But 
the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  were  the  public 
authorized  doctors  and  teachers  of  the  people, 
and  were  supported  by  the  ecclesiastical  and 
civil  power ; or,  as  we  should  now  express  it, 
by  church  and  state.  The  people  were  not 
apt  to  suspect  their  leaders,  whom  they 
thought  wiser  and  better  than  themselves ; 
or,  if  sometimes  they  hesitated,  were  im- 
pressed by  the  majesty  of  his  words,  or  the 
evidence  of  his  miraculous  works,  and  con- 
strained to  say,  “ Is  not  this  the  son  of  Da- 
vid ?”  (Matt.  xii.  23.)  They  were  soon  intimi- 
dated and  silenced  by  canons  and  laws ; for 
it  was  carefully  enacted,  in  order  to  keep 
them  in  subjection,  that  whoever  acknow- 
ledged him  should  be  put  out  of  the  syna- 
gogues ; (John  ix.  22 ; xii.  48 ;)  that  is,  ac- 
cording to  our  modern  language,  excommu- 
nicated. This  among  the  Jews,  as  it  has  often 
since  been  among  Christians,  was  a punish- 
ment which  drew  after  it  terrible  consequen- 
ces. A man  must  be  in  good  earnest,  or 
rather  taught  and  supported  by  the  grace  of 
God,  who  could  resist  such  arguments  as 
these. 

These  things  are  easily  applicable  to  the 
church-history  of  succeeding  times.  The  gos- 
pel of  Christ  has  often  been,  and  is  to  this  day, 
rejected  and  despised  upon  similar  grounds. 
Its  simplicity  and  plainness,  and  the  manner 
of  its  proposal,  adapted  to  the  use  and  capa- 
city of  the  vulgar,  offend  those  who  are  wise 
in  their  own  conceit,  and  proud  of  their  un- 
derstanding and  taste.  At  the  same  time 
they  are  equally  disgusted  by  the  sublimity 
of  its  doctrines,  which  will  not  submit  to  the 
test  of  their  vain  reasonings,  and  can  only  be 
received  by  humble  faith.  The  faithfulness 
and  freedom  which  its  ministers  are  enjoined 
to  use,  give  great  offence  likewise.  And  be- 
cause they  cannot  comply  with  the  humours 
of  those  who  wish  them  to  prophesy  smooth 
things  and  deceits,  they  are  accounted  censo- 
rious, uncharitable,  and  disturbers  of  the  pub- 
lic peace.  Again,  the  dislike  and  opposition 
it  frequently  meets  with  from  persons  of 
great  titles  and  high  stations,  deter  multi- 
tudes from  pursuing  those  inquiries,  which 
some  conviction  of  the  truth  would  prompt 
them  to,  were  they  not  discouraged  by  the 
fear  of  consequences.  How  often  has  a 
dread  of  the  displeasure  of  doctors,  bishops, 
universities,  councils,  and  popes,  or  an  igno- 
rant, slavish  deference  to  their  judgment  or 
decisions,  prevented  people  from  following 
that  light  which  had  begun  to  force  itself 


AND  REJECTED  OF  MEN. 


275 


SER.  XVII.] 

upon  their  consciences?  How  few  among1 
those  of  reputation  for  wisdom  and  learning, 
how  few  of  the  great  and  opulent,  have  en- 
couraged or  espoused  the  doctrine  of  the 
cross?  It  is,  therefore,  more  properly  a sub- 
ject for  lamentation  than  for  wonder,  that  this 
way  is  despised,  and  almost  everywhere  spo- 
ken against,  Acts  xxviii.  22.  Farther,  as  the 
bulk  of  those  who  embrace  it  are  of  low  con- 
dition, so  many  of  them  are  as  free  to  confess 
to  the  praise  of  the  grace  of  God,  as  others 
can  be  to  urge  it  to  their  reproach,  that  till  they 
knew  and  received  this  despised  gospel,  their 
characters  and  practices  were  vile.  Lastly, 
what  unhappy  subtilty  has  been  employed,  in 
a way  of  reason  and  argument,  with  an  ap- 
peal to  detached  and  perverted  passages  of 
scripture,  to  misrepresent  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  as  folly,  hypocrisy,  or  enthusiasm, 
and  even  to  charge  the  gospel  itself  with 
giving  encouragement  to  a licentious  con- 
duct ! In  short,  the  spirit  of  the  world,  the 
arts  and  influence  of  designing  men,  are  so 
powerful,  that  what  our  Lord  said  in  Judea, 
holds  equally  true  in  Christendom,  “ Blessed 
is  he  who  is  not  offended  in  me !”  Matt.  xi.  6. 

I have  reserved  to  a distinct  paragraph  the 
mention  of  one  cause  why  the  gospel  is  fre- 
quently despised  and  reproached.  Because, 
though  it  be  no  less  unjust  and  unreason- 
able than  those  which  I have  recited,  it  is 
more  immediately  incumbent  upon  all  who 
name  the  name  of  Christ,  to  prevent  it  as 
much  as  possible ; I mean,  the  scandal  which 
arises  from  the  miscarriages  of  those  who  pro- 
fess it.  Offences  of  this  kind  must  come,  but 
woe  to  them  by  whom  they  come,  Matt,  xviii. 
7.  There  were  pretended  Christians,  even  in 
the  apostles  times,  who  were  enemies  to  the 
cross  of  Christ,  (Phil.  iii.  18,)  and  by  their 
evil  conduct  caused  the  ways  of  truth  to  be 
evil  spoken  of;  and  therefore  we  cannot  be 
surprised  that  there  are  such  persons  now. 
But  you  that  love  the  Lord,  hate  evil,  Psal. 
xcii.  10.  There  are  many  who  watch  for 
your  halting,  and  are  ready  to  say,  There  ! 
there  ! so  we  would  have  it.  It  would  be  in 
vain  for  ministers  to  declare  that  the  doc- 
trines of  grace  are  doctrines  according  to  god- 
liness, unless  our  testimony  is  supported  by 
the  tempers  and  conduct  of  our  people : the 
world  will  probably  judge,  rather  by  what 
they  see  in  you,  than  by  what  they  hear  from 
us.  Nor  will  it  suffice  that  they  cannot  say 
you  are  an  adulterer,  a drunkard,  a miser,  or 
a cheat.  If  you  espouse  our  doctrine,  they 
will  expect  you  to  be  humble,  meek,  patient 
and  benevolent ; to  find  integrity  in  all  your 
dealings,  and  a punctual  discharge  of  your 
duty  in  every  branch  of  a relative  life.  What 
must  the  world  think  of  our  principles,  if  they 
who  avow  them  are  fretful,  envious,  censo- 
rious, discontented,  slothful,  or  unfaithful ; 
or  if  they  are  niggardly  and  hard-hearted,  or 
voluptuous  and  dissolute,  or  implacable  and 


revengeful ! they  who  thus  lay  stumbling- 
blocks  before  the  blind,  and  confirm  the  pre- 
judices of  the  ignorant,  will  have  much  to 
answer  for. 

II.  It  is  further  said,  he  was  a man  of  sor- 
rows and  acquainted  with  grief. — He  was 
surrounded  with  sorrows  on  every  side,  and 
grief  was  his  intimate,  inseparable  companion. 
Surely  this  consideration,  if  any,  will  animate 
us  to  endure  the  cross,  and  to  despise  the 
shame,  we  may  be  exposed  to  for  his  sake. 
The  illustration  of  this  subject  will  offer  more 
fully  in  the  sequel.  It  shall  suffice,  at  pre- 
sent, to  assign  three  causes  for  his  continual 
sorrows. 

1.  The  outward  course  of  life  to  which  he 
submitted,  for  the  sake  of  sinners,  exposed 
him  to  want,  weariness,  contempt,  and  oppo- 
sition. And  though  his  resignation  and  pa- 
tience were  perfect,  yet  he  was  truly  a man, 
and  partaker  of  our  nature,  with  all  its  affec- 
tions and  sensibilities  which  do  not  imply 
sin.  His  feelings  therefore,  were  human, 
similar  to  our  own  in  similar  circumstances; 
and  they  were  often  painfully  exercised. 
Once  and  again  we  read  that  he  was  hungry 
and  had  no  food  ; he  was  thirsty,  (Matt.  iv.  9 ; 
xxi.  18 ; John  iv.  2,)  and  was  nearly  refused 
a little  water  to  drink,  when  wearied  with  his 
journeying  in  the  heat  of  the  day.  His  cha- 
racter was  aspersed,  his  person  despised,  his 
words  insidiously  wrested,  and  his  actions 
misrepresented.  He  was  misunderstood  even 
by  his  friends,  betrayed  by  one  disciple,  de- 
nied by  another,  and  forsaken  by  the  rest, 
John  vii.  5.  It  is  hardly  possible  for  his  fol- 
lowers to  meet  with  any  outward  trial,  which 
may  not  remind  them  of  some  part  of  the  his- 
tory of  their  Lord  and  master,  who  left  them 
an  example  of  suffering,  that  they  should 
cheerfully  follow  his  steps,  1 Pet.  ii.  21. 

2.  His  perfect  knowledge  and  foresight  of 
those  sufferings  which  we  emphatically  call 
his  Passion.  How  often  does  he  speak  of 
them,  and  describe  the  circumstances  as  if 
they  were  actually  present  ? Futurity  is,  in 
mercy,  concealed  from  us.  It  would  often 
bereave  us  of  all  present  comfort,  if  we  knew 
what  the  next  year,  or  perhaps,  what  the 
next  day  would  bring  forth.  If  some  of  you 
could  have  foreseen,  many  years  ago,  what 
you  have  since  been  brought  through,  you 
would  probably  have  sunk  under  the  appre- 
hension ; or  the  stoutest  of  us  might  sink  now, 
if  we  were  certainly  to  know  what  may  be 
yet  before  us.  But  Jesus,  long  before  he 
made  atonement  for  our  sins,  had  counted  the 
cost.  And  though  his  love  determined  him 
to  save  us,  the  prospect,  which  was  continu- 
ally present  to  his  view,  of  the  approaching 
unutterable  agonies  of  his  soul,  of  all  that  he 
must  endure  from  God,  from  the  powers  of 
darkness,  and  from  wicked  men,  when  he 
should  be  made  a curse  for  us,  to  redeem  us 
from  the  curse  of  the  law,  (Gal.  iii.  13 ;)  I 


27  6 


VOLUNTARY  SUFFERING. 


say,  this  tremendous  prospect  was,  doubtless, 
a perpetual  source  of  sorrow. 

3.  The  frame  of  his  spirit.  Whoever  has 
a measure  of  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ, 
must  be  proportionally  burdened  and  grieved, 
like  righteous  Lot  in  Sodom,  (2  Pet.  ii.  8,) 
with  the  wickedness  around  him,  if  he  lives 
in  society.  Who  that  has  any  regard  for  the 
honour  of  God,  or  the  souls  of  men,  can  hear 
and  see  what  passes  every  hour  ; how  the  au- 
thority of  God  is  affronted,  his  goodness 
abused,  and  his  mercy  despised,  without 
emotions  of  grief  and  compassion  1 If  we  are 
spiritually-minded,  we  must  be  thus  affected  ; 
and  we  should  be  more  so,  if  we  were  more 
spiritual.  But  the  holiness  of  Messiah,  and, 
consequently,  his  hatred  of  sin,  was  absolute- 
ly perfect.  His  view  of  the  guilt  and  misery 
of  sinners,  was  likewise  comprehensive  and 
clear.  How  must  he  be  therefore  grieved  by 
the  wickedness  and  insensibility  of  those  with 
whom  he  daily  conversed ! especially  as  he 
not  only  observed  the  outward  conduct  of 
men,  but  had  an  intimate  knowledge  of  the 
evil  heart,  which  is  hidden  from  us.  In  this 
sense  his  sufferings  and  sorrows  began  with 
early  years,  and  continued  throughout  the 
whole  of  his  life.  He  undoubtedly  could 
say,  with  an  emphasis  peculiar  to  himself, 
“ I beheld  the  transgressors,  and  was  grieved  ; 
rivers  of  waters  run  down  my  eyes,  because 
men  keep  not  thy  law.”  Psal.  cxix.156, 158. 

We  call  ourselves  the  followers  and  ser- 
vants of  him,  who  was  despised  of  men,  and 
encompassed  with  sorrows.  And  shall  we 
then  seek  great  things  for  ourselves  (Jer.  xlv. 
5,)  as  if  we  belonged  to  the  present  world, 
and  expected  no  portion  beyond  it  1 Or  shall 
we  be  tremblingly  alive  to  the  opinion  of  our 
fellow-creatures,  and  think  it  a great  hard- 
ship, if  it  be  our  lot  to  suffer  shame  for  his 
sake,  who  endured  the  cross,  and  despised  the 
shame  for  us  1 Rather  may  we  account  such 
disgrace  our  glory,  and  every  loss  and  suffer- 
ing that  we  may  endure  for  him,  a gain ; 
while  on  the  other  hand  we  learn,  with  the 
apostle  Paul,  to  esteem  every  gain  and 
honour  this  world  can  afford,  to  be  but  loss 
and  dung  in  comparison  of  the  excellency  of 
the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord, 
Phil.  iii.  8. 


SERMON  XVIII. 

VOLUNTARY  SUFFERING. 

I gave  my  back  to  the  smiters , and  my  cheeks 
to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair ; I hid 
not  my  face  from  shame  and  spitting . 
Isaiah  1.  6. 

That  which  often  passes  amongst  men  for 
resolution,  and  the  proof  of  a noble,  courage- 


[ser.  XVIII. 

ous  spirit,  is,  in  reality,  the  effect  and  mark 
of  a weak  and  little  mind.  At  least,  it  is 
chiefly  owing  to  the  presence  of  certain  cir- 
cumstances, which  have  a greater  influence 
upon  the  conduct  than  any  inherent  prin- 
ciple. Thus  many  persons  who  appear  to  set 
death  and  danger  at  defiance  in  the  hour  of 
battle,  while  they  are  animated  by  the  exam- 
ples of  those  around  them,  and  instigated  by 
a fear  of  the  punishment  or  shame  they  would 
incur  if  they  deserted  their  post ; upon  a 
change  of  situation,  as,  for  instance,  on  a bed 
of  sickness,  discover  no  traces  of  the  heroism 
for  which  they  were  before  applauded,  but 
tremble  at  the  leisurely  approach  of  death, 
though  they  were  thought  to  despise  it  under 
a different  form.  It  was  not  true  fortitude, 
it  was  rather  a contemptible  pusillanimity, 
that  determined  the  celebrated  Cato  to  de- 
stroy himself.  He  was  afraid  of  Caesar  ; his 
dread  of  him,  after  his  victories,  was  so  great, 
that  he  durst  not  look  him  in  the  face ; and 
therefore  he  killed  himself  to  avoid  him.  To 
the  same  meanness  of  sentiment  we  may  con- 
fidently ascribe  the  pretended  gallantry  of 
modern  duellists.  They  fight,  not  because 
they  are  not  afraid  of  death,  but  because  they 
are  impelled  by  another  fear,  which  makes  a 
greater  impression  upon  a feeble  irresolute 
mind.  They  live  upon  the  opinion  of  their 
fellow-creatures,  and  feel  themselves  too 
weak  to  bear  the  contempt  they  should  meet 
with  from  the  circle  of  their  acquaintance, 
if  they  should  decline  acting  upon  the 
false  principles  of  honour  which  pride  and 
folly  have  established.  They  have  not  reso- 
lution sufficient  to  act  the  part  which  con- 
science and  reason  would  dictate,  and  there- 
fore hazard  life,  and  every  thing  that  is  dear 
to  them  as  men,  rather  than  dare  to  withstand 
the  prevalence  of  an  absurd  and  brutal  cus- 
tom. 

A patient  enduring  of  affliction,  and  espe- 
cially of  disgrace  and  contempt,  to  which  the 
characters  the  world  most  admire  are  confess- 
edly unequal,  is  a much  surer  proof  of  true 
fortitude,  than  any  of  those  actions  which  the 
love  of  praise,  the  fear  of  man,  or  even  a mer- 
cenary attachment  to  lucre,  are  capable  of 
producing.  True  magnanimity  is  evidenced 
by  the  real  importance  of  the  end  it  proposes, 
and  by  the  steadiness  with  which  it  pursues 
the  proper  means  of  obtaining  that  end  ; un- 
disturbed and  unwearied  by  difficulty,  dan- 
ger, or  pain,  and  equally  indifferent  to  the 
censure  or  scorn  of  incompetent  judges.  This 
greatness  of  mind  is  essential  and  peculiar  to 
the  character  of  the  Christian,  I mean  the 
Christian  who  deserves  the  name.  His  ends 
are  great  and  sublime  ; to  glorify  God,  to  ob- 
tain nearer  communion  with  him,  and  to  ad- 
vance in  conformity  to  his  holy  will.  To 
attain  these  ends,  he  employs  the  means  pro- 
scribed by  the  Lord  : he  waits  at  Wisdom’s 
gates,  (Prov.  viii.  34,)  and  walks  in  the  paths 


ser.  xviu. ] VOLUNTARY 

of  dependence  and  obedience.  He  therefore 
cannot  conform  to  the  prevailing-  maxims  and 
pursuits  of  the  many,  and  is  liable  to  be 
hated  and  scorned  for  his  singularity.  But 
he  neither  courts  the  smiles  of  men,  nor 
shrinks  at  the  thought  of  their  displeasure. 
He  loves  his  fellow-creatures,  and  is  ready  to 
do  them  every  kind  office  in  his  power;  but 
he  cannot  fear  them,  because  he  fears  the 
Lord  God. 

But  this  life  the  Christian  lives  by  faith  in 
the  Son  of  God,  Gal.  ii.  20.  Jesus  is  the 
source  of  his  wisdom  and  strength.  He  like- 
wise is  his  exemplar.  He  is  crucified  to  the 
world  by  the  cross  of  Christ : and  a principal 
reason  of  his  indifference  to  the  opinion  of  the 
world,  is  the  consideration  of  the  manner  in 
which  his  Lord  was  treated  by  it.  He  is  the 
follower  of  him  who  said,  “ I gave  my  back 
to  the  smiters,  and  my  cheeks  to  them  that 
plucked  off  the  hair : I hid  not  my  face  from 
shame  and  spitting.” 

We  may  observe,  from  the  words,  that  the 
humiliation  of  Messiah  was  voluntary , and 
that  it  was  extreme. 

I.  With  respect  to  his  engagement,  as  the 
Mediator  between  God  and  sinners,  a great 
work  was  given  him  to  do,  and  he  became 
responsible ; and  therefore,  in  this  sense, 
bound,  and  under  obligation.  But  this  com- 
pliance was  likewise  voluntary;  for  he  gave 
himself  up  freely  to  suffer,  the  just  for  the 
unjust.  Could  he  have  relinquished  our  cause, 
and  left  us  to  the  deserved  consequence  of 
our  sins,  in  the  trying  hour  when  his  enemies 
seized  upon  him,  legions  of  angels,  (Matt, 
xxvi.  53,)  had  they  been  wanted,  would  have 
appeared  for  his  rescue.  But  if  he  was  de- 
termined to  save  others,  then  his  own  suffer- 
ings were  unavoidable.  Men  in  the  prose- 
cution of  their  designs,  often  meet  with  un- 
expected difficulties  in  their  way,  which, 
though  they  encounter  with  some  cheerful- 
ness, in  hope  of  surmounting  them,  and 
carrying  their  point  at  last,  are  considered  as 
impediments ; but  the  sufferings  of  Messiah 
were  essentially  necessary  to  the  accom- 
plishment of  his  great  designs,  precisely  de- 
termined, and  present  to  his  view  beforehand, 
so  that  (as  I lately  observed)  there  was  not 
a single  circumstance  that  happened  to  him 
unawares.  He  knew  that  no  blood  but  his 
own  could  make  atonement  for  sin,  that  no- 
thing less  than  his  humiliation  could  expiate 
our  pride  ; that  if  he  did  not  thus  suffer,  sin- 
ners must  inevitably  perish;  and  therefore 
(such  was  his  love  !)  he  cheerfully  and  volun- 
tarily gave  his  back  to  the  smiters,  and  his 
cheeks  to  them  that  plucked  off  the  hair. 
Two  designs  of  vast  importance  filled  his 
mind  ; the  completion  of  them  was  that  joy 
set  before  him,  for  the  sake  of  which  he 
made  himself  of  no  reputation,  endured  the 
cross,  and  despised  the  shame.  These  were. 


SUFFERING.  277 

the  glory  of  God,  and  the  salvation  of  sin- 
ners. 

1.  The  highest  end  of  his  mediation  was 
to  display  the  glory  of  the  divine  character  in 
the  strongest  light,,  to  afford  to  all  intelligent 
creatures  (Eph.  iii.  10)  the  brightest  mani- 
festation they  are  capable  of  receiving,  of  the 
manifold  wisdom  of  God,  his  holiness,  justice, 
truth,  and  love,  the  stability  and  excellence 
of  his  moral  government,  all  mutually  illus- 
trating each  other,  as  combined  and  shining 
forth  in  his  person,  and  in  his  mediatorial 
work.  Much  of  the  glory  of  God  may  be 
seen,  by  an  enlightened  eye,  in  creation, 
much  in  his  providential  rule  and  care  over 
his  creatures;  but  the  brightness  of  his  glory, 
(John  i.  18,)  the  express  and  full  discovery  of 
his  perfections,  can  only  be  known  bv  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  revelation  which  God  has 
given  of  himself  to  the  world  by  him.  And, 
accordingly,  we  are  assured,  that  the  angels, 
whose  knowledge  of  the  natural  world  is 
doubtless  vastly  superior  to  ours,  desire  to 
look  into  these  things  ; and  that  the  manifold 
wisdom  of  God  is  supereminently  made 
known  to  principalities  and  powers,  in 
heaven,  by  the  dispensation  of  his  grace  to 
the  church  redeemed  from  the  earth. 

2.  Subordinate  to  this  great  design,  closely 
connected  with  it,  and  the  principal  effect  for 
which  it  will  be  admired  and  magnified  to 
eternity,  is  the  complete  and  everlasting  sal- 
vation of  that  multitude  of  miserable  sinners, 
who,  according  to  the  purpose  of  God,  and  by 
the  working  of  his  mighty  power,  shall  be- 
lieve in  this  Saviour ; and  who,  renouncing 
every  other  hope,  shall  put  their  trust  in  him, 
upon  the  warrant  of  the  promise  and  com- 
mand of  God,  and  yield  themselves  to  be  his 
willing  and  devoted  people.  Many  are  their 
tribulations  in  the  present  life,  but  they  shall 
be  delivered  out  of  them  all ; they  shall  over- 
come, they  shall  be  more  than  conquerors,  by 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  the  word  of  his 
testimony ; (Rev.  xii.  11 ;)  and  then  they  shall 
shine,  like  the  sun,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
The  consummation  of  their  happiness,  is  a 
branch  of  the  joy  which  was  set  before  him. 
For  their  sakes,  that  they  might  be  happy, 
that  he  may  be  admired  in  them,  and  by 
them,  to  the  glory  of  God,  who  is  all  in  all, 
he  voluntarily  substituted  himself  to  suffer- 
ings and  death.  He  endured  the  cross,  and 
he  despised  the  shame.  He  gave  his  back  to 
the  smiters,  his  cheeks  to  them  that  plucked 
off  the  hair,  he  hid  not  his  face  from  shame 
and  spitting. 

II.  But  are  we  reading  a prophecy,  or  the 
history  of  his  extreme  humiliation  1 It  is  a 
prophecy ; how  literally  and  exactly  it  was 
fulfilled,  we  learn  from  his  history  by  the 
evangelists.  With  what  cruelty,  with  what 
contempt  was  he  treated,  first  by  the  servants 
in  the  hall  of  the  High  Priest,  afterwards  by 


278 


VOLUNTARY  SUFFERING. 


the  Roman  soldiers!  Let  us  consider  him, 
who  endured  the  contradiction  of  sinners 
against  himself,  Heb.  xii.  3.  These  words  of 
the  apostle  suggest  some  preliminary  obser- 
vations, to  prepare  our  minds  for  receiving  a 
due  impression  from  the  several  particulars 
here  mentioned. 

When  the  apostle  would  dispose  believers 
by  an  argument  or  motive,  (which,  if  we  fully 
understood  it,  would  render  all  other  argu- 
ments unnecessary,)  to  endure  sufferings  and 
crosses  patiently,  he  says  “ Consider  him” — 
he  uses  a word  which  is  properly  a mathe- 
matical term,  denoting  the  ratio  or  propor- 
tion between  different  numbers  or  figures; 
q.  d.  “ Compare  yourselves  with  him,  and  his 
sufferings  with  your  own.  Consider  who  he 
is,  no  less  than  what  he  endured.” 

In  the  apprehensions  of  men,  insults  are 
aggravated  in  proportion  to  the  disparity  be- 
tween the  person  who  receives,  and  who 
offers  them.  A blow  from  an  equal  is  an  of- 
fence, but  would  be  still  more  deeply  resented 
from  an  inferior.  But  if  a subject,  a servant, 
a slave,  should  presume  to  strike  a king,  it 
would  justly  be  deemed  an  enormous  crime. 
But  Jesus,  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of 
lords,  whom  all  the  angels  of  God  worship, 
made  himself  so  entirely  of  no  reputation, 
that  the  basest  of  the  people,  the  servants, 
the  common  soldiers,  were  not  afraid  to  make 
him  the  object  of  their  derision,  and  to  ex- 
press their  hatred  in  the  most  sarcastic  and 
contemptuous  manner.  It  is  said,  that  he 
endured  the  contradiction  of  sinners.  So, 
perhaps,  do  we ; but  we  are  sinners  likewise, 
and  deserve  much  more  than  we  suffer,  if  not 
immediately  from  the  instruments  of  our 
grief,  yet  from  the  Lord,  who  has  a right  to 
employ  what  instruments  he  pleases  to  afflict 
us  for  our  sins.  This  thought  quieted  the 
spirit  of  David,  when  his  own  son  rose  up 
against  his  life,  and  his  own  servant  cursed 
him  to  his  face,  2 Sam.  xvi.  11.  But  Jesus 
was  holy,  harmless,  and  undefiled,  he  had 
done  nothing  amiss ; yet  the  usage  he  met 
with  was  such  as  has  seldom  been  offered  to 
the  vilest  malefactor.  Their  cruel  and  scorn- 
ful contradiction  was  likewise  expressly  and 
directly  against  himself ; whereas  his  people 
only  suffer  from  unreasonable  and  wicked 
men,  for  his  sake,  and  for  their  professed  at- 
tachment to  him.  In  the  most  violent  perse- 
cutions, they  who  could  be  prevailed  on  to 
renounce  his  name  and  his  cause  usually 
escaped  punishment,  and  were  frequently 
favoured  and  rewarded.  And  this  is  still  the 
ground  of  the  world’s  displeasure ; fierce  and 
bitter  as  their  opposition  may  seem,  the  way 
to  reconciliation  is  always  open ; they  are  not 
angry  with  us  farther  than  we  avow  a de- 
pendence upon  him,  and  show  ourselves  de- 
termined to  obey  him  rather  than  men.  If 


we  could  forsake  him,  their  resentment , 


[SER.  XVIII. 

would  be  disarmed,  for  they  mean  no  more 
than  to  intimidate  us  from  his  service.  I do 
not  think  that  they  who  make  peace  with 
the  world  upon  these  terms,  are  esteemed  by 
them  for  their  compliance,  but  they  are  sel- 
dom disturbed  any  longer.  It  is  plain,  there- 
fore, that  if  we  suffer  as  Christians,  it  is  for 
his  sake.  He  likewise  suffered  for  our  sakes ; 
but  how  wide  is  the  difference  between  him 
and  us)  We,  when  the  trial  is  sharp,  are  in 
danger  of  flinching  from  the  cause  of  our  best 
Friend  and  benefactor,  to  whom  our  obliga- 
tions are  so  innumerable,  and  so  immense  ; 
whereas  he  gave  himself  up  to  endure  such 
things  for  us,  when  we  were  strangers  and 
enemies!  He  was  not  only  treated  with 
cruelty,  but  with  every  mark  of  the  utmost 
detestation  and  scorn,  which  wanton,  unfeel- 
ing, unrestrained  barbarity  could  suggest. 

1.  They  began  to  spit  upon  him  in  the 
High  Priest’s  hall.  The  Roman  soldiers  like- 
wise did  spit  upon  him,  when  they  had  con- 
temptuously arrayed  him  in  a scarlet  robe, 
and  bowed  the  knee  before  him,  in  mockery 
of  his  title  of  King.  Great  as  an  insult  of 
this  kind  would  be  deemed  amongst  us,  it  was 
considered  as  still  greater,  according  to  the 
customs  prevalent  in  eastern  countries. 
There,  to  spit,  even  in  the  presence  of  a per- 
son, though  it  were  only  upon  the  ground, 
conveyed  the  idea  of  disdain  and  abhorrence. 
But  the  lowest  of  the  people  spit  in  the  face 
of  the  Son  of  God.  No  comparison  can  fully 
illustrate  this  indignity.  There  is  some  pro- 
portion between  the  greatest  earthly  monarch 
and  the  most  abject  slave.  They  did  not  spit 
upon  Alexander,  or  Csesar,  but  upon  the  Lord 
of  glory. 

2.  They  buffeted  and  beat  him  on  the  face, 
and  when  he  meekly  offered  his  cheek  to 
their  blows,  they  plucked  off  the  hair.  The 
beard  was  in  those  times  accounted  honoura- 
ble : and  when  David’s  servants  were  shaved 
by  the  command  of  Hanun,  (2  Sam.  x.  5,) 
they  were  ashamed  to  be  seen.  But  Jesus 
was  not  shaven.  With  savage  violence  they 
tore  off  the  hair  of  his  beard ; while  he,  like 
a sheep  before  the  shearers,  was  dumb,  and 
quietly  yielded  himself  to  their  outrages. 

3.  His  back  they  tore  with  scourges,  as 
was  foretold  by  the  psalmist : “ The  plowers 
plowed  upon  my  back,  they  made  long  their 
furrows,”  Psal.  cxxix.  3.  The  Jewish  council 
condemned  him  to  death  for  blasphemy,  be- 
cause he  said  he  was  the  Son  of  God.  Ston- 
ing was  the  punishment  prescribed  by  the  law 
of  Moses,  in  such  cases,  Lev.  xiv.  16.  But 
this  death  was  not  sufficiently  lingering  and 
tormenting  to  gratify  their  malice.  To  glut 
their  insatiable  cruelty,  they  were  therefore 
willing  to  own  their  subjection  to  the  Roman 
power  to  be  so  absolute,  that  it  was  not  law- 
ful for  them  to  put  any  one  to  death,  (John 
xvii.  31,)  according  to  their  own  judicial  law  ; 


279 


MESSIAH  SUFFERING,  &c. 


SER.  XIX.] 

and  thus  wilfully,  though  unwittingly,  they 
fulfilled  the  prophecies.  They  preferred  the 
punishment  which  the  Romans  appropriated 
to  slaves  who  were  guilty  of  flagitious  crimes, 
and  therefore  insisted  that  he  should  be  cru- 
cified. According  to  the  Roman  custom, 
those  who  were  crucified  were  previously 
scourged.  Thus,  when  they  had  mocked 
him,  and  made  him  their  sport,  by  putting 
a crown  of  thorns  on  his  head,  and  a reed 
in  his  hand  for  a sceptre,  in  derision  of  his 
kingly  office,  he  was  stripped  and  scourg- 
ed. It  was  not  unfrequent  for  the  sufferers 
to  expire  under  the  severity  and  torture  of 
scourging.  And  we  may  be  certain  that 
Jesus  experienced  no  lenity  from  their  mer- 
ciless hands.  The  plowers  plowed  his  back. 
But  more  and  greater  tortures  were  befare 
him.  He  was  engaged  to  make  a full  atone- 
ment for  sin  by  his  sufferings ; and  as  he  had 
power  over  his  own  life,  he  would  not  dis- 
miss his  spirit,  till  lie  could  say,  “It  is 
finished.” 

And  now,  to  use  the  words  of  Pila  te,  “ Be- 
hold the  man  !”  John  xix.  5.  Oh  ! for  a 
realizing  impression  of  this  his  extreme  hu- 
miliation and  suffering,  that  we  may  be 
duly  affected  with  a sense  of  his  love  to  sin- 
ners, and  of  the  evil  of  our  sins,  which  ren- 
dered it  necessary  that  the  surety  should 
thus  suffer!  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God, 
mocked,  blindfolded,  spit  upon,  and  scourged  ! 
Let  us  add  to  all  this  the  consideration  of 
his  praying  for  his  tormentors,  (Luke  xxiii. 
34,)  and  we  have  an  example  of  perfect  mag- 
nanimity. 

Shall  we  then  refuse  to  suffer  shame  for  his 
sake,  and  be  intimidated  by  the  frowns  or 
contempt  of  men,  from  avowing  our  attach- 
ment to  him  ! Ah ! Lord,  we  are,  indeed, 
capable  of  this  baseness  and  ingratitude.  But 
if  thou  art  pleased  to  strengthen  us  with  the 
power  of  thy  Spirit,  we  will  account  such  dis- 
grace our  glory.  Then  we  will  not  hang 
down  our  heads  and  despond,  but  will  rather 
rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad,  if  the  world 
revile  us,  and  persecute  us,  and  speak  all 
manner  of  evil  against  us,  provided  it  be 
falsely,  (Matt.  v.  11,)  and  provided  it  be  for 
thy  sake ! 

Shall  we  continue  in  sin,  (Rom.  vi.  1,) 
after  we  know  what  it  cost  him  to  expiate  our 
sins  ? God  forbid ! When  Mark  Antony  ad- 
dressed the  citizens  of  Rome,  to  animate 
them  to  revenue  the  death  of  Caesar,  he  en- 
larged upon  Caesar’s  character,  his  great  ac- 
tions, his  love  to  the  Roman  people,  and  the 
evidence  he  had  given  of  it,  in  the  donations 
and  bequests  he  had  appointed  them  by  his 
will,  the  particulars  of  which  he  specified. 
When  he  had  thus  engaged  their  admiration 
and  gratitude,  and  they  discovered  emotions 
of  regret  and  sensibility,  that  Caesar,  the 
greatest  character  in  Rome,  who  had  fought 
and  triumphed  for  them,  and  had  remember- 


ed them  in  his  will,  should  be  slain,  Antony 
threw  aside  a cloth,  and  showed  them  his 
dead  body  covered  with  wounds  and  blood. 
This  sight  rendered  it  needless  to  say  more. 
The  whole  assembly  united  as  one  man,  to 
search  out,  and  to  destroy  his  murderers. 
The  application  is  obvious. — May  our  hearts, 
from  this  hour,  be  filled  with  a determined, 
invariable  resentment  against  sin,  the  pro- 
curing cause  of  the  humiliation  and  death  of 
our  best  Friend  and  benefactor ! 


SERMON  XIX. 

MESSIAH  SUFFERING  AND  WOUNDED  FOR  US. 

Surely  he  hath  borne  our  grief  and  carried 
our  sorrows. — He  was  wounded  for  our 
transgressions , he  was  bruised  for  our  ini- 
quities ; the  chastisement  of  our  peace 
was  upon  him , and  with  his  stripes  we  are 
healed. — Isaiah  liii.  4,  5. 

When  our  Lord  was  transfigured,  Moses 
and  Elijah  appeared  in  glory  and  conversed 
with  him.  Had  we  been  informed  of  the  in- 
terview only,  we  should  probably  have  desir- 
ed to  know  the  subject  of  their  conversation, 
as  we  might  reasonably  suppose  it  turned 
upon  very  interesting  and  important  topics. 
The  scripture  makes  little  provision  for  the 
indulgence  of  our  curiosity,  but  omits  nothing 
that  is  necessary  for  our  instruction ; and  we 
learn  thus  much  from  it,  that  they  discoursed, 
not  upon  the  trifling  things  which  the  world 
accounts  great,  such  as  the  rise  and  fall  of 
empires ; but  they  spake  of  the  sufferings  of 
Jesus,  and  of  the  decease  which  he  should 
accomplish  at  Jerusalem,  Luke  ix.  31.  They 
spake  of  his  Exodus,  (as  the  Greek  word  is,) 
his  departure  out  of  this  life,  the  issue  and 
completion  of  his  engagement  for  sinners ; 
that  is,  his  crucifixion  and  death.  This  is 
the  grand  theme  of  heaven  and  heaven-born 
souls.  We  lately  considered  the  cruel  in- 
sults Messiah  submitted  to,  from  the  servants 
in  the  High  Priest’s  hall,  and  from  the  Ro- 
man soldiers.  The  passage  I have  now  read 
leads  our  meditations  to  the  foot  of  the  cross. 
May  the  Holy  Spirit  realize  the  scene  to  our 
hearts ! The  cross  of  Christ  displays  the  di- 
vine perfections  with  peculiar  glory.  Here 
the  name  of  God  is  revealed,  as  a just  God 
and  a Saviour.  Here  the  believer  contem- 
plates in  one  view,  the  unspeakable  evil  of 
sin,  and  the  unsearchable  riches  of  mercy. 
This  gives  him  the  most  affecting  sense  of 
the  misery  which  he  has  deserved,  while  at 
the  same  time  he  receives  the  fullest  assur- 
ance that  there  is  forgiveness  with  God,  and 
discovers  a sure  foundation  whereon  he  may 
build  his  hope  of  eternal  life,  without  fear  of 
disappointment.  From  the  moment  the  apos- 


280 


MESSIAH  SUFFERING,  &c. 


tie  Paul  was  enlightened  to  understand  this 
mystery  of  redeeming  love,  he  accounted  his 
former  gain  but  loss;  his  former  supposed 
wisdom  no  better  than  folly ; and  became  de- 
termined to  know  nothing,  (1  Cor.  ii.  2 ; Gal. 
vi.  14,)  to  depend  upon  nothing,  to  glory  in 
nothing,  but  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified. 

A representation  of  the  Redeemer’s  suffer- 
ings, capable  of  exciting  tears  and  moving 
tfie  passions,  may  be  made  by  the  powers  of 
oratory ; and  similar  emotions  have  often 
been  produced  by  a romance  or  a tragedy, 
though  the  subject  is  known  beforehand  to  be 
entirely  a fiction.  But  light  in  the  under- 
standing is  necessary  to  convince  and  influ- 
ence the  heart.  Unless  the  mind  be  deeply 
penetrated  with  the  causes  which  rendered 
Messiah’s  death  necessary,  the  most  pathetic 
description  of  the  fact  will  leave  the  will  and 
affections  unchanged.  I hope  many  of  my 
auditory  can  assign  these  causes.  You  have 
felt  yourselves  personally  concerned  in  an 
event  which  took  place  long  before  your 
birth;  and  if  you  are  asked,  Why  was  Jesus 
mocked,  buffeted,  and  spit  upon!  and  why 
were  his  enemies  permitted  to  nail  him  to  the 
cross]  You  can  answer,  “Surely  he  hath 
borne  our  griefs,  and  carried  our  sorrows,” — 
and  you  can  likewise  say  “ By  his  stripes  we 
are  healed.” 

The  words  lead  us  to  consider  the  cause 
and  the  effect. 

1.  The  cause  of  the  Redeemer’s  sufferings, 
implied  in  the  word  our.  He  bore  the  griefs 
and  sorrows  which  were  our  desert.  Such  is 
the  language,  the  confession,  the  grateful 
acknowledgment  of  all  who  believe  in  his 
name.  They  who  are  delivered  by  grace 
from  the  spirit  and  power  of  this  evil  world, 
and  who  live  by  his  death,  and  likewise  they 
who  see  they  must  perish  unless  saved  by 
him,  are  authorized  to  consider  him  as  mind- 
ful of  them,  and  making  provision  for  them 
in  the  day  of  his  trouble.  They  who  were 
actually  healed  by  looking  at  the  brazen  ser- 
pent, according  to  God’s  appointment,  had  a 
sufficient  proof  in  themselves,  that  it  was 
erected  and  placed  in  view  of  the  camp 
(Num.  xxi.  9)  on  their  account.  He  bore 
our  griefs. — It  does  not  follow  that  sinners 
must  have  been  crucified,  if  the  Saviour  had 
not  been  crucified  on  their  behalf.  But  as 
this  was  a painful  and  terrible  punishment,  it 
may  teach  us,  that  without  his  interposition 
we  were  justly  liable  to  extremity  of  misery 
in  the  present  life.  That  we  who  have  of- 
fended God  should  enjoy  health,  peace,  or 
satisfaction  for  a single  hour;  that  we  do  not 
draw  every  breath  in  the  most  excruciating 
pain ; that  we  derive  any  comfort  from  crea- 
tures ; that  we  are  not  a burden  and  a terror 
to  ourselves,  and  mutually  to  each  other; 
that  our  state  while  upon  earth,  is,  in  any 
respect,  better  than  an  image  of  hell, — must 
wholly  be  ascribed  to  him.  A sinner,  as  such, 


[ser.  xix. 

is  under  the  curse  of  the  law ; and  this  curse 
includes  every  species  of  misery  that  can  af- 
fect us,  either  in  mind,  body,  or  estate.  But 
he  was  appointed  from  the  beginning,  to  sus- 
tain and  exhaust  the  curse  for  us.  And 
therefore  the  earth,  though  so  long  inhabited 
by  wretches  in  a state  of  bold  rebellion 
against  their  Maker,  is  filled  with  the  fruits 
and  evidences  of  his  long-suffering  patience 
and  mercy.  Therefore  he  still  affords  us  rain 
and  fruitful  seasons,  (Acts  xiv.  17,)  indulges 
us  with  a variety  of  temporal  blessings,  and 
gives  us  power  to  take  comfort  in  them.  This 
consideration  greatly  enhances  the  value  of 
temporal  good  things  to  his  people.  They 
receive  them  as  from  his  hand,  as  tokens  of 
his  love,  and  pledges  of  his  favour,  sanctified 
to  their  use  by  his  blood  and  promise.  Cheer- 
ed by  such  thoughts  as  these,  his  poor  people 
often  enjoy  their  plain  fare  with  a pleasure, 
of  which  the  expensive  and  dissipated  sen- 
sualist has  no  conception.  And  how  does  it 
add  to  the  relish  of  all  earthly  comforts,  to 
think,  while  we  are  using  them,  that 

There’s  not  a g'ift  his  hand  bestows. 

But  cost  his  heart  a groan ! 

So,  likewise,  the  remembrance  of  what  he 
bore  for  them  alleviates  the  pressure  of  all 
their  sufferings,  and  affords  them  a ground 
whereon  they  may  rejoice,  yea  glory,  in  tribu- 
lation also,  Rom.  v.  3. 

But  his  crucifixion,  and  the  whole  of  his 
sufferings  from  wicked  men,  cannot  give  us 
a just  idea  of  what  he  endured  for  us.  Griev- 
ous as  they  were,  considered  in  themselves, 
they  were  light,  if  compared  with  the  agonies 
of  his  soul.  These  extorted  the  blood  from 
his  body,  (Luke  xxiii.  44,)  before  the  hand  of 
man  touched  him.  And  when  he  uttered  his 
most  dolorous  cry  upon  the  cross,  it  was  not 
for  the  anguish  of  his  bodily  wounds,  but  his 
soul  felt  for  a season  a separation  from  the 
presence  and  comforts  of  God.  Therefore  he 
said,  “ Why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  I”  Matt, 
xxvii.  46.  It  is  true  his  holy  nature  was  not 
capable  of  some  part  of  the  impenitent  sin- 
ner’s portion.  Remorse  of  conscience,  the 
stings  of  the  never-dying  worm,  and  the 
horrors  and  rage  of  despair,  could  not  touch 
him,  who  had  no  personal  sin,  and  whose 
love  and  faith  were  always  perfect.  But  a 
sword  pierced  his  soul : and  it  pleased  the 
Father  not  only  to  permit  him  to  be  bruised 
by  the  cruelty  of  his  enemies,  but  to  bruise 
him  himself,  Is.  liii.  10. 

The  ground  of  all  this  was  laid  in  his 
voluntary  substitution  of  himself  from  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world,  to  obey  and  suf- 
fer in  behalf  of  his  people.  This  point  will 
offer  more  directly  from  the  passage  we  are 
next  to  consider.  At  present  let  us  briefly 
notice  the  expressions  before  us. 

1.  He  was  wounded. — This  word  which 
signifies  pierced  or  stabbed , refers  to  this  cru- 


AND  WOUNDED  FOR  US. 


AER.  XIX.] 

cifixion.  This  punishment  being1  unknown 
to  the  Jews,  till  they  wore  brought  under  the 
Roman  power,  they  had,  therefore,  no  express 
name  for,  in  their  language.  Yet  it  is  plain- 
ly described  by  the  psalmist,  who,  speaking, 
by  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  in  the  person  of 
Messiah,  says,  “ They  pierced  my  hands  and 
my  feet,”  Psal.  xxii.  16.  And  it  was  typified 
under  the  law  of  Moses,  (Deut.  xxi.  23;  Gal. 
iii.  13 ; 1 Cor.  v.  7 ; John  iii.  14,)  by  the  curse 
annexed  to  hanging  upon  a tree,  which  was 
the  nearest  death  to  this ; by  the  paschal 
lamb,  which  was  roasted ; and  by  the  brazen 
serpent.  It  was  a fit  death  for  a sinner,  pain- 
ful and  ignominious.  How  circumstantial 
were  the  prophecies,  how  apposite  the  types, 
how  exactly  was  all  fulfilled,  and  how  won- 
derful was  it  that  the  Jews  should  be  led  to 
depart  from  their  own  customs  and  purposes, 
in  order  to  their  accomplishment,  though 
they  intended  nothing  less ! But  it  was  the 
determined  counsel  and  appointment  of  God, 
(Acts.  ii.  23,)  who  over-rules  all  the  designs 
of  men,  and  all  that  to  us  appears  contingent, 
to  the  purposes  of  his  own  will  and  glory. 

2.  He  was  bruised. — If  we  distinguish 
wounded  from  bruised,  the  latter  may  be  re- 
ferred to  the  sorrows  of  his  soul,  for  it  is  ex- 
pressly said,  “ It  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise 
him that  distress  broke  his  heart,  filled  him 
with  dismay,  caused  him  to  be  sore  amazed 
and  very  heavy,  and  to  say  to  his  disciples, 
“My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto 
death,”  Matt.  xxvi.  38.  No  words  can  be 
more  selected  and  emphatical,  than  those 
which  the  evangelists  use  in  describing  his 
consternation  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane. 
How  can  this  his  dejection  and  terror  be  ac- 
counted for  by  those  who  deny  that  his  suffer- 
ings and  death  were  a proper  atonement  of 
sin ; and  who  suppose,  that  when  he  had 
given  to  men  a perfect  rule  of  life,  and  com- 
mended it  to  them  by  his  own  example,  he 
died,  merely  to  confirm  the  truth  of  his  doc- 
trine, and  to  encourage  his  followers  to  faith- 
fulness under  sufferings  ! Many  of  his  fol- 
lowers, who  were  thus  witnesses  for  the  truth, 
and  patterns  of  faithfulness  to  us,  have  met 
death  in  its  most  terrible  forms  with  com- 
posure, yea,  with  pleasure,  yea,  with  trans- 
ports of  joy.  But  is  the  disciple  above  his 
Lord  1 If  Christians  have  triumphed  in  such 
circumstances,  why  did  Christ  tremble  ? Not 
surely  because  their  courage  and  constancy 
were  greater  than  his.  The  causes  were 
entirely  different.  The  martyrs  were  given 
up  to  them  who  only  could  kill  the  body  ; but 
Jesus  suffered  immediately  from  the  hand  of 
God.  One  stroke  of  his  mighty  hand  can 
bruise  the  spirit  of  man  more  sensibly  than 
the  united  power  of  all  creatures.  Jesus 
died.  They  that  believe  in  him,  are  said  to 
sleep  in  him,  1 Thess.  iv.  14.  To  them  death 
comes  disarmed  of  its  sting,  wearing  a friend- 
ly aspect,  and  bringing  a welcome  message 
Vol.  II.  2 N 


281 

of  dismission  from  every  evil.  But  the  death 
of  Jesus  was  death  indeed,  death  in  all  its 
horrors,  the  death  which  sinners  had  deserved 
to  suffer  as  transgressors  of  the  law. 

3.  The  chastisement  or  the  punishment  of 
our  peace  was  upon  him,  that  chastisement  or 
punishment  on  the  account  of  which  sinners 
obtain  peace  with  God. — It  properly  signifies 
here,  a punishment  for  instruction  or  example. 
Punishments  are  inflicted,  either  for  the  cor- 
rection of  an  offender,  or  for  the  prevention 
of  evil,  or  for  example  to  others.  The  two 
former  reasons  could  not  apply  to  our  Lord. 
He  had  committed  no  evil,  he  was  perfect 
before,  and  in  suffering.  But  standing  in  the 
place  of  sinners,  and  engaged  to  expiate  their 
offences,  he  was  made  a public  example  of 
the  misery  and  distress  which  sin  demerited. 
Thus  justice  was  vindicated  in  the  exercise 
of  mercy,  and  sinners  believing  in  his  name, 
are  exempted  from  punishment,  for  his  sake, 
in  a way  which  affords  not  the  least  encou- 
ragement or  extenuation  to  sin.  And  thus 
our  peace  is  procured. 

II.  The  effect  of  his  sufferings  for  sins  not 
his  own.  He  bore  our  griefs,  and  carried  our 
sorrows ; he  was  wounded  and  bruised  for  us, 
the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon  him, 
that  by  his  stripes  we  may  be  healed.  The 
Hebrew  word  here,  and  the  Greek  word 
which  the  apostle  Peter  uses  in  his  quotation 
of  this  passage,  (1  Pet.  iii.  24,)  which  we  ren- 
der stripes , is  properly  the  mark  which  stripes 
or  wounds  leave  upon  the  body,  or  as  we  say, 
scars.  The  scars  in  his  hands,  feet,  and  side, 
and  perhaps  other  marks  of  his  many  wounds, 
remained  after  his  resurrection.  And  John 
saw  him  in  vision,  before  the  throne,  as  a lamb 
that  had  been  slain.  All  these  expressions 
and  representations,  I apprehend,  are  design- 
ed to  intimate  to  us,  that  though  the  death  of 
Messiah  is  an  event  long  since  past,  yet  the 
effects  and  benefits  are  ever  new,  and  to  the 
eye  of  faith  are  ever  present.  How  admirable 
is  this  expedient,  that  the  wounds  of  one,  yea, 
of  millions,  should  be  healed,  by  beholding 
the  wounds  of  another  ! Yet  this  is  the  lan- 
guage of  the  gospel,  Look  and  live.  “ Look 
unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved.”  Three  great 
wounds  are  ours,  guilt,  sin,  and  sorrow ; but 
by  contemplating  his  weals,  or  scars  with  an 
enlightened  eye,  and  by  rightly  understand- 
ing who  was  thus  wounded,  and  why,  all 
these  wounds  are  healed. 

You  who  live  by  this  medicine  speak  wel.. 
of  it.  Tell  to  others,  as  you  have  an  oppor- 
tunity, what  a Saviour  you  have  found.  It 
is  usual  for  those  who  have  been  relieved,  in 
dangerous  and  complicated  diseases,  by  a skil- 
ful physician,  to  commend  him  to  others  who 
are  labouring  under  the  like  maladies.  We 
often  see  public  acknowledgements  to  this 
purpose.  If  all  the  persons  who  have  felt  the 
efficacy  of  a dying  Saviour’s  wounds  appre- 
hended by  faith,  were  to  publish  their  cases, 


282 


SIN  CHARGED  UPON  THE  SURETY. 


how  greatly  would  his  power  and  grace  be 
displayed ! They  are  all  upon  record,  and  will 
all  be  known  in  the  great  day  of  his  appear- 
ing. Some  of  them  are  occasionally  publish- 
ed, and  may  be  read  in  our  own  tongue. 
And  though  they  are  not  all  related  with 
equal  judgment,  nor  attended  with  circum- 
stances equally  striking,  yet  there  is  a suffi- 
ciency, in  this  way,  to  leave  the  world  with- 
out excuse.  Not  to  mention  modern  accounts 
of  this  kind  (though  many  might  be  mention- 
ed which  are  indisputably  true,  and  superior 
to  the  cavils  of  gainsayers,)  the  Confessions 
of  Augustin  may  be  appealed  to,  as  a proof 
that  the  gospel  is  not  a system  of  notions  only, 
but  has  a mighty  power  to  enlighten  the  be- 
wildered mind,  to  subdue  the  obstinate  will, 
to  weaken  the  force  of  long  confirmed  habits 
kffevil-  to  relieve  from  distressing  fears,  and 
to  effect  a real,  universal,  permanent,  and 
beneficial  change  of  sentiment  and  conduct, 
such  as  no  similar  instance  can  be  found,  in 
the  history  of  mankind,  to  have  been  pro- 
duced by  any  other  principles.  But  if  you  are 
a true  Christian,  in  the  circle  of  your  connec- 
tions you  will  sometimes  have  a fair  oppor- 
tunity of  giving  a reason  of  the  hope  that  is 
in  you.  Pray  for  grace  and  wisdom  to  im- 
prove such  seasons;  and  if  you  speak  the 
truth  in  simplicity  and  love,  you  know  not 
but  the  Lord  may  give  his  blessing  to  your 
testimony,  and  honour  you  as  an  instru- 
ment of  good.  And  to  convert  one  sinner 
from  the  error  of  his  way,  is  an  event  of 
greater  importance,  than  the  deliverance  of 
a whole  kingdom  from  temporal  evil. 

Yet  remember,  if  you  espouse  this  cause,  a 
certain  consistency  of  character  will  be  ex- 
pected from  you,  without  which  you  had 
better  be  silent,  than  speak  in  its  defence,  or 
profess  yourself  a sharer  in  the  privileges  of 
the  gospel.  There  are  too  many  persons  who 
treat  the  great  truths  we  profess  as  mere 
opinions,  points  of  speculation,  which  form 
the  shibboleth  of  a party  : there  are  others, 
who  think  an  attachment  to  them  the  sure  sign 
of  an  enthusiastic  deluded  imagination : and 
there  are  others,  again,  who  misrepresent 
them  as  unfavourable  to  morality,  and  afford- 
ing a cloak  and  an  encouragement  to  licen- 
tiousness. Beware,  lest,  by  an  improper  con- 
duct, you  lay  stumbling-blocks  in  the  way  of 
the  blind,  strengthen  the  prejudices  of  the 
ignorant,  and  give  weight  to  the  calumnies 
of  the  malicious.  The  people  of  the  world 
are  quick-sighted  to  the  faults  of  religious 
professors ; and  though  they  affect  to  despise 
their  principles,  they  are  tolerable  judges 
what  that  conversation  is  which  only  these 
principles  can  produce,  and  always  expect 
it  from  those  who  avow  them.  They  will 
make  allowances  for  others,  and  admit  human 
infirmity  as  a plea  for  their  faults,  but  they 
will  not  extend  their  candour  to  you.  If 
your  zeal  for  the  truth,  and  your  regular  at- 


[sER.  XX. 

tendance  upon  the  ministers  who  preach  it, 
are  not  accompanied  with  a spirit  of  humility, 
integrity,  and  benevolence ; if  you  are  pas- 
sionate, peevish,  discontented,  censorious,  or 
proud ; if  they  observe  that  you  are  greedy 
of  gain,  penurious,  close-fisted,  or  hard-heart- 
ed ; or  even  if  you  comply  with  their  cus- 
toms and  spirit,  mingle  with  them  in  their 
amusements,  and  do  not  maintain  a noble 
singularity  by  avoiding  every  appearance  of 
evil ; they  will  not  only  despise  you  in  their 
hearts,  but  they  will  take  the  occasion  of 
despising  and  speaking  evil  of  the  truth  itself 
on  your  account.  But  if  you  are  all  of  a 
piece,  and  are  truly  solicitous  to  adorn  your 
; profession,  by  walking  agreeably  to  the  rules 
J of  the  gospel,  and  filling  up  your  relations  in 
j life  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  good  of  your 
fellow-creatures;  by  thus  well-doing,  you 
will  put  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish 
men,  (1  Pet.  ii.  15,)  and  in  a great  measure 
stop  their  mouths  if  you  cannot  change  their 
j hearts.  And  though  they  may  affect  to  rail  at 
you,  or  to  ridicule  you,  they  will  be  con 
strained  to  feel  a secret  reverence  for  you  in 
their  consciences. 

But  are  there  any  hearts  of  stone  amongst 
us,  who  are  still  unaffected  by  the  love  and 
sufferings  of  the  Son  of  God ; who  are  still 
crucifying  him  afresh,  and  living  in  sin, 
though  they  hear  and  know  what  it  cost  him 
I to  make  an  atonement  for  sin  1 Yet  now  hear 
1 — now  look — Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  ! The 
Lord  in  mercy  open  the  eyes  of  your  mind. 
I address  you  once  more.  I once  more  con- 
jure you,  by  his  agony  and  bloody  sweat,  by 
his  passion,  cross  and  death,  to  seek  to  him 
j that  your  souls  may  live.  Can  you  be  proof 
! against  these  arguments  1 Nay,  then,  should 
you  live  and  die  thus  obstinate,  you  must 
! perish  indeed ! 


SERMON  XX. 

SIN  CHARGED  UPON  THE  SURETY. 

All  we  like  sheep  have  gone  astray ; we  have 
turned  every  one  to  his  own  ivay,  and  the 
Lord  hath  laid  upon  him  the  iniquity  of 
us  all. — Isaiah  liii.  6. 

Comparisons,  in  the  scripturt,  are  fre 
quently  to  be  understood  with  great  limitation, 
perhaps  out  of  many  circumstances,  one  only 
justly  applicable  to  the  case.  Thus,  when 
our  Lord  says,  “ Behold  I come  as  a thief,” 
(Rev.  xvi.  15,)  common  sense  will  fix  the 
resemblance  to  a single  point,  that  he  will 
come  suddenly  and  unexpected.  So  when 
wandering  sinners  are  compared  to  wander- 
ing sheep,  we  have  a striking  image  of  the 
danger  of  their  state,  and  of  their  inability  to 
recover  themselves.  Sheep  wandering  with- 


SIN  CHARGED  UPON  THE  SURETY. 


283 


SER.  XX.] 

out  a shepherd,  are  exposed,  a defenceless 
and  easy  prey,  to  wild  beasts  and  enemies, 
and  liable  to  perish  for  want  of  pasture ; 
for  they  are  not  able  either  to  provide  for 
themselves,  or  to  find  the  way  back  to  the 
place  from  whence  they  strayed.  Whatever 
they  suffer,  they  continue  to  wander,  and  if 
not  sought  out,  will  be  lost.  Thus  far  the 
allusion  holds.  But  sheep  in  such  a situation 
are  not  the  subjects  of  blame.  They  would 
be  highly  blamable,  if  we  could  suppose  them 
rational  creatures ; if  they  had  been  under 
the  eye  of  a careful  and  provident  shepherd, 
had  been  capable  of  knowing  him,  had  wil- 
fully and  obstinately  renounced  his  protection 
and  guidance,  and  voluntarily  chosen  to 
plunge  themselves  into  danger,  rather  than 
to  remain  with  him  any  longer.  Thus  it  is 
with  man.  His  wandering  is  rebellious. 
God  made  him  upright,  but  he  has  sought 
out  to  himself  many  inventions,  Eccl.  vii.  29. 
God  has  appointed  for  all  mankind  a safe 
and  pleasant  path,  by  walking  in  which,  they 
shall  find  rest  to  their  souls ; but  they  say, 
We  will  not  walk  therein,  Jer.  vi.  16.  They 
were  capable  of  knowing  the  consequences 
of  going  astray,  were  repeatedly  warned  of 
them,  were  fenced  in  by  wise  and  good  laws, 
which  they  presumptuously  broke  through. 
And  when  they  had  wandered  from  him, 
they  were  again  and  again  invited  to  return 
to  him,  but  they  refused.  They  mocked  his 
messages  and  his  messengers,  and  preferred 
the  misery  they  had  brought  upon  them- 
selves, to  the  happiness  of  being  under  his 
direction  and  care.  Surely  he  emphatically 
deserves  the  name  of  the  good  Shepherd, 
who  freely  laid  down  his  life  to  restore  sheep 
of  this  character ! 

My  text  therefore  expresses  the  sentiment 
of  those,  and  of  those  only,  who  are  acquaint- 
ed with  the  misery  of  our  fallen  state,  feel 
their  own  concern  in  it,  and  approve  of  the 
method  which  God  has  provided  for  their  de- 
liverance and  recovery.  It  contains  a con- 
fession of  their  own  guilt,  and  an  acknow- 
ledgment of  his  mercy. 

I.  A confession  of  guilt  and  wretched- 
ness.— Sin  has  deprived  us  both  of  the  know- 
ledge and  presence  of  God.  In  consequence 
of  this,  we  wander,  every  one  to  his  own 
way.  All  are  under  the  power  of  sin,  and 
all  equally  strangers  to  the  paths  of  peace 
and  safety.  The  paths  which  sinners  choose 
for  themselves  are  diverse  from  each  other, 
as  inclination  or  circumstances  vary ; but 
however  different  in  appearance,  if  persisted 
in,  they  terminate  at  last  in  the  same  point. 
They  all  lead  to  destruction.  We  may  ob- 
serve on  this  head, 

1.  It  is  a sufficient  proof  of  our  depravity, 
that  we  prefer  our  own  ways  to  the  Lord’s  ; 
nor  can  he  inflict  a heavier  judgment  upon  us 
in  this  life,  than  to  give  us  up  entirely  to  the 


way  of  our  own  hearts.  He  made  us  to  be 
happy ; but  as  he  made  us  for  himself,  and 
gave  us  a capacity,  and  a vastness  of  desire, 
which  only  he  himself  can  satisfy,  the  very 
constitution  and  frame  of  our  nature,  render 
happiness  impossible  to  us,  unless  in  a way 
of  dependence  upon  him,  and  obedience  to  his 
laws.  The  lamb  that  grazes  in  the  meadow, 
and  the  fish  that  swims  in  the  stream,  are 
each  in  their  proper  element.  If  you  suppose 
them  to  change  places,  they  must  both  perish. 
But  the  brute  creation  have  no  propensity  to 
such  changes  as  would  destroy  them.  The 
instincts  implanted  in  them  by  their  great 
Creator  are  conducive  to  their  welfare ; and 
to  these  instincts  they  are  uniformly  faithful. 
If  you  can  conceive  of  beasts  impatient  to 
leave  the  shore  and  improve  their  situation 
by  rushing  into  the  ocean ; and  the  fishes 
equally  earnest  to  forsake  the  waters  in  quest 
of  new  and  greater  advantages  upon  the  dry 
land ; it  may  illustrate  the  folly  of  fallen  man, 
who,  turned  aside  by  a deceived  heart,  refuses 
life,  and  seeks  death  in  the  error  of  his  ways. 
For  the  will  of  God  (if  I may  so  speak)  is  our 
proper  element ; and  if  we  depart  from  it,  our 
sin  unavoidably  involves  our  punishment.  We 
naturally  indulge  hard  thoughts  of  God,  and 
think  the  rule  he  has  enjoined  us  too  strict 
and  severe,  intended  to  restrain  us  from  real 
good,  and  propose  to  ourselves  some  unknown 
advantages  by  transgressing  it.  Thus  Satan 
persuaded  Eve,  and  we  derive  from  her : and 
though  we  know  that  she  only  gained  misery 
by  the  experiment,  we  rashly  repeat  it  for 
ourselves.  The  Scripture  assures  us  that 
the  ways  of  God  are  pleasant ; but  we  will  not 
be  persuaded.  Experience  proves  that  the 
way  of  transgressors  is  hard,  but  we  resist 
the  conviction,  and  hurry  on  in  a round  of 
continual  disappointment.  Are  the  proud, 
the  covetuous,  the  voluptuous,  or  the  ambi- 
tious, happy  1 I appeal  to  conscience. 

2.  There  is  only  one  right  way,  but  a 
thousand  ways  of  being  wrong.  If  you  are 
not  following  him,  who  has  said,  “ I am  the 
way,  the  truth,  and  the  life,”  (John  xiv.  6,) 
you  are  wandering,  you  are  far  from  God ; 
for  none  can  come  to  the  Father  but  by  him  : 
and  far  from  peace,  for  there  can  be  no  true 
peace  in  the  mind  unless  he  bestows  and 
maintains  it.  The  profane  and  the  self-righ- 
teous, the  open  sinner  and  the  hypocrite,  the 
lover  of  pleasure  and  the  lover  of  gold,  the 
formal  Papist  and  the  formal  Protestant* 
though  they  seem  to  travel  different  roads, 
though  they  pity  or  censure  each  other,  will 
meetat  last  (unless  the  grace  of  God  prevent) 
in  the  same  state  of  final  and  hopeless  misery. 
It  is  grievous  to  a spiritual  and  benevolent 
mind,  to  see  those  who  are  all  wrong-disputing 
among  themselves  which  of  them  is  rig’ht. 
Each  one  is  ready  to  think  himself  wise,  if 
the  folly  in  which  he  allows  himself  be  not 


284 


SIN  CHARGED  UPON  THE  SURETY. 


precisely  of  the  same  kind  with  that  which 
he  condemns  in  his  neighbour.  But  the 
scripture  is  the  invariable  rule,  to  which  it  is 
your  duty  and  interest  to  be  conformed  now  ; 
for  it  is  given  by  the  inspiration  and  authority 
of  God,  and  is  the  standard  by  which  you 
must  be  judged  at  last.  Whatever  character 
you  bear  amongst  men,  if  you  have  not  faith 
and  holiness,  you  certainly  are  not  in  the  way 
of  life.  For  it  is  written,  “ He  that  believeth 
not,  shall  be  damned;”  (Mark  xvi.  16;)  and 
again,  it  is  written,  “ Without  holiness,  no 
man  shall  see  the  Lord,”  Heb.  xii.  14. 

3.  As  wandering  sheep  are  liable  to  in- 
numerable dangers  which  they  can  neither 
foresee  nor  prevent,  such  is  our  condition, 
until,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  spirit,  we  are 
stopped,  and  turned,  and  brought  into  the  fold 
of  the  good  Shepherd.  Oh  ! the  misery  of 
man  while  living  without  God  in  the  world ! 
He  is  exposed  every  hour  to  the  stroke  of 
death,  which  would  at  once  separate  him 
from  all  that  he  loves,  and  plunge  him  into 
the  pit,  from  whence  there  is  no  redemption. 
And  at  present  he  is  perpetually  harassed 
with  cares  and  fears,  with  wants  and  woes, 
without  guidance  or  refuge ; and  yet  so 
blinded  as  to  think  himself  safe,  and  that  his 
crooked  wandering  ways  will  lead  him  to 
happiness ! 

II.  An  acknowledgment  of  mercy. — 
Where  sin  abounded,  grace  has  much  more 
abounded.  Man  sinned,  and  Messiah  suffer- 
ed. The  Lord  hath  laid,  or  caused  to  meet 
upon  him,  the  iniquity  of  us  all,  that  is,  the 
punishment  due  to  them.  The  evils  we  had 
deserved  were  in  pursuit  of  us,  but  Jesus  in- 
terposed, and  they  all  seized  upon  him,  and 
he  endured  them,  that  we  might  be  spared. 
Do  we  ask  upon  what  grounds  I It  was  on 
the  grounds  of  his  voluntary  substitution  for 
sinners,  as  their  covenant  head  and  repre- 
sentative. 

So  much  correspondent  to  this  appoint- 
ment obtains  amongst  men,  as  may  show  that 
the  idea  accords  with  our  notion  of  justice. 
If  a man  be  unable  to  pay  a debt,  and  the 
creditor  should  exact  the  payment  from  a 
third  person  who  was  no  way  concerned,  it 
would,  with  reason,  be  deemed  a very  op- 
pressive action.  But  if  it  be  known  that  this 
person  became  freely  bound  and  responsible 
for  the  debtor,  he  is  allowed  to  be  justly  lia- 
ble. But  in  the  present  case  I make  no  ap- 
peal to  human  customs.  It  is  a divine  ap- 
pointment, and  therefore  is  and  must  be 
light.  It  was  a great  design,  the  triumph  of 
infinite  wisdom,  the  highest  effect  of  the  love 
of  God.  It  is  revealed,  not  to  be  submitted 
to  our  discussion,  or  that  we  may  sit  in  judg- 
ment upon  the  propriety  of  the  measure,  but 
it  demands  our  highest  admiration  and  praise, 
and,  like  the  sun,  brings  with  it  that  light 
by  which  the  whole  system  of  our  knowledge 


[ser.  xx. 

is  illuminated.  For  till  we  know  this  great 
truth,  and  are  able  to  see  its  influence  upon 
every  thing  we  are  related  to,  whatever  at- 
tainments we  may  boast,  we  are  in  fact  en- 
compassed with  thick  darkness,  with  dark- 
ness which  may  be  felt.  For  the  accomplish- 
ment of  this  design,  the  Son  of  God  was  so 
manifested  in  the  nature  of  man,  that  he,  and 
they  who  believe  in  him,  participate  in  a real, 
though  mystical  union,  and  are  considered  as 
one  : he  their  living  head,  they  his  body,  con- 
sisting of  many  members ; each  of  them  re- 
presented by  him,  accepted  in  him,  and  de- 
riving from  his  fulness  their  life,  their  light, 
their  strength  and  their  joy. 

1.  He  was  thus  appointed  and  constituted 
before  the  world  began,  according  to  the  holy 
counsel  and  covenant  settled  from  everlasting, 
(Prov.  viii.  31 ; Tit.  i.  2,)  for  the  redemption 
of  sinners.  For  the  fall  of  man,  which  ren- 
dered his  interposition  necessary,  was  not  an 
unexpected  contingency,  but  was  foreseen 
and  provided  for  before  man  was  created  upon 
the  earth,  yea  before  the  foundations  of  the 
earth  were  laid. 

2.  After  man  had  sinned,  this  glorious 
Head  and  Surety  made  known  the  certainty 
and  benefit  of  his  mediation,  and  engagement 
on  the  behalf  of  sinners,  according  to  the  good 
pleasure  of  his  wisdom,  and  as  the  case  re- 
quired ; otherwise,  upon  the  entrance  of  sin, 
the  full  execution  of  the  sentence  of  the  law 
denounced  against  the  offenders,  might  per- 
haps have  immediately  followed  : but  he  re- 
vealed himself.  He  showed  mercy  to  Adam, 
covenanted  with  Noah,  walked  with  Abra- 
ham, conversed  with  Moses,  dwelt  with  his 
church  in  the  wilderness,  and  was  known  by 
the  name  of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  Isa.  liv. 
5.  David  ascribes  (Psal.  xxiii.  1)  to  the 
Shepherd  of  Israel  the  name  of  Jehovah,  and 
Isaiah  declares  that  the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  the 
Husband  of  the  church.  These  characters 
of  Shepherd,  and  Bridegroom,  and  Husband, 
are  appropriated  to  Messiah  in  the  New 
Testament.  He  therefore  is  Jehovah,  the 
Lord  of  Hosts,  whom  Abraham,  David,  and 
Isaiah  worshipped,  or  his  appearance  upon 
earth  would  be  evidently  to  the  disadvantage 
of  those  who  believe  in  him.  If  he  were  not 
God,  he  would  be  a creature ; for  there  is  no 
medium ; and  consequently  our  Shepherd 
would  be  infinitely  inferior  to  that  Almighty 
Shepherd  who  was  the  refuge,  the  trust,  and 
the  salvation  of  his  people,  before  Messiah 
was  manifested  in  the  flesh. 

3.  In  the  fulness  of  time  he  veiled  his 
glory.  He  who  was  in  the  form  of  God,  and 
thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God, 
took  upon  him  the  form  of  a servant,  and  w7as 
made  of  a woman,  made  under  the  law,  Phil, 
ii.  6,  7 ; Gal.  iv.  4.  Then  the  union  between 
him  and  the  people  whom  he  came  into  the 
world  to  save,  was  completed ; because  the 


SER.  xx. J SIN  CHARGED  UPON  THE  SURETY.  285 


children  were  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood, 
he  likewise  took  part  of  the  same,  Heb.  ii.  14. 
The  Word,  who  in  the  beginning  was  God, 
and  was  with  God,  was  made  flesh,  John  i.  1. 
And  in  our  nature,  though  he  knew  no  sin, 
he  was  treated  as  a sinner  for  us,  to  declare 
the  righteousness  of  God,  in  his  forbearance 
and  goodness  to  all  who  had  been  saved  in 
former  ages,  and  in  the  forgiveness  and  sal- 
vation of  all  who  should  trust  in  him  to  the 
end  of  time.  He  suffered  once,  once  for  all, 
the  just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God. 
And  now  God  is  revealed,  not  only  as  merci- 
ful, but  as  just,  in  justifying  him  which  be- 
lieveth  in  Jesus.  God  is  well  pleased  in  him, 
and,  for  his  sake,  with  all  who  accept  him. 
Their  sins  are  expiated  by  his  sufferings; 
(Rom.  iv.  6;  Jer.  xxiii.  6;)  and  his  perfect 
righteousness,  the  whole  of  his  obedience 
unto  death,  is  the  consideration  or  ground  on 
which  they  are  accounted  righteous. 

By  virtue  of  this  union  likewise  he  is  their 
life.  They  receive  out  of  his  fulness,  as  the 
branches  (John  xv.  1)  derive  their  life  and 
fruitfulness  from  the  tree  whereon  they 
grow ; therefore  the  apostle  said,  “ I live,  yet 
not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me,”  Gal.  ii.  20. 
This  is  the  great  mystery  of  Christianity, 
which  words  alone  cannot  explain:  it  is  a di- 
vine appointment,  hidden  from  those  who  are 
wise  and  prudent  in  their  own  sight,  but  re- 
vealed to  all  who,  with  the  simplicity  of  chil- 
dren, are  desirous  of  being  taught  of  God, 
and  wait  patiently  upon  him,  in  the  use  of 
his  prescribed  means,  for  the  light  and  in- 
fluence of  his  Holy  Spirit. 

From  the  subject,  the  substitution  of  Mes- 
siah for  sinners,  we  may  learn, 

1.  How  to  estimate  the  evil  of  sin.  That 
sin  is  a great  evil,  is  evident  by  its  effects.  It 
deprived  Adam  of  the  life  and  presence  of 
God,  and  brought  death  and  all  natural  evil 
into  the  world.  It  caused  the  destruction  of 
the  old  world  by  water.  It  is  the  source  of 
all  the  misery  with  which  the  earth  is  now 
filled  ; it  will  kindle  the  last  great  conflagra- 
tion; yea,  it  has  already  kindled  that  fire 
which  shall  never  be  quenched.  But  in  no 
view  does  the  sinfulness  of  sin  appear  so 
striking  as  in  this  wonderful  effect — the 
suffering  and  death  of  Messiah:  that  not- 
withstanding the  dignity  of  his  person,  and 
the  perfection  of  his  obedience  to  the  law, 
and  that  though  he  prayed  in  his  agonies, 
that  if  it  were  possible  the  cup  might  pass 
from  him,  (Luke  xxiii.  42,)  yet,  if  sinners 
were  to  be  saved,  it  was  indispensably  neces- 
sary that  he  should  drink  it.  This  shows  the 
evil  of  sin  in  the  strongest  light ; and  in  this 
light  it  is  viewed  by  all  who  derive  life  from 
his  death,  and  healing  from  his  wounds.  We 
may  be  afraid  of  the  consequence  of  sin  from 
other  considerations,  but  it  is  only  by  look- 
ing to  him  who  was  pierced  (Zech.  xii.  10) 


for  our  transgressions,  that  we  can  learn  to 
hate  it. 

2.  The  complete  justification  of  those  who 
believe  in  him.  They  are  delivered  from  all 
condemnation,  Rom.  viii.  1.  Every  charge 
against  them  is  over-ruled  by  this  plea,  that 
Christ  has  died,  and  risen  on  their  behalf, 
and  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them. 
And  though  they  are  still  in  a state  of  disci- 
pline, for  the  mortification  of  sin  yet  remain- 
ing in  them,  and  though,  for  the  trial,  exercise, 
and  growth  of  their  faith,  it  is  still  needful 
that  they  pass  through  many  tribulations  ; yet 
none  of  these  are  strictly  and  properly  penal. 
They  are  not  the  tokens  of  God’s  displeasure, 
but  fatherly  chastisements  and  tokens  of  his 
love,  designed  to  promote  the  work  of  grace 
in  their  hearts,  and  to  make  them  partakers 
of  his  holiness,  Heb.  xii.  6 — 11.  Though  ne- 
cessary at  present,  they  will  not  be  necessary 
long,  and  therefore  the  hour  is  at  hand  when 
all  tears  shall  be  wiped  away  from  their  eyes, 
and  they  shall  weep  no  more.  His  true  ser- 
vants, in  the  midst  of  the  storms  by  which 
they  are  tossed  on  the  tempestuous  sea  of 
this  life,  are  no  less  safe,  and,  notwithstanding 
their  imperfections,  are  no  less  beloved,  than 
those  who  have  already  escaped  out  of  the 
reach  of  every  evil,  and  are  now  before  the 
throne. 

3.  The  reason  why  believers  are  not  wea- 
ried, nor  overpowered,  by  all  the  difficulties  of 
their  service,  nor  by  all  the  arts  and  efforts 
of  their  enemies.  They  are  one  with  Christ. 
He  who  has  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth 
is  engaged  for  their  support.  When  they 
faint,  he  revives  them;  when  they  are 
wounded,  he  heals  them ; when  their  foot 
slippeth,  he  uphold eth  them.  He  has  said, 
“ because  I live,  ye  shall  live  also.”  There- 
fore, who  can  prevail  against  them,  when 
their  life  is  hidden  with  Christ  in  God  ? And 
farther,  the  knowledge  of  their  Saviour’s 
love,  and  of  the  holy,  awful,  yet  amiable  and 
endearing  character  of  God  displayed  in  his 
mediation,  is  the  source  of  their  love,  grati- 
tude, and  cheerful  obedience.  It  is  this 
makes  hard  things  easy,  and  bitter  things 
sweet.  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  them, 
2 Cor.  v.  14.  They  look  to  him  and  are  en- 
lightened. And  when  they  consider  who  he 
is,  in  what  way,  and  at  what  a price  he  re- 
deemed them,  and  what  he  has  prepared  for 
them;  when  they  attend  to  his  gracious 
word,  “ Fear  none  of  those  things  which  thou 
shalt  suffer : be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and 
I will  give  thee  a crown  of  life ;”  Rev.  ii.  10  ;) 
— they  out  of  weakness,  are  made  strong , 
they  are  inspired  with  fresh  courage  ; they 
take  up  their  cross  with  cheerfulness,  and 
can  adopt  the  language  of  the  apostle,  “ None 
of  these  things  move  me,  neither  count  I my 
life  dear,  so  that  I may  finish  my  course  with 
joy  ” Acts  xx.  24. 


MESSIAH  DERIDED  UPON  THE  CROSS. 


236 


[SER.  XXL 


SERMON  XXI. 

MESSIAH  DERIDED  UPON  THE  CROSS. 

All  they  that  see  me,  laugh  me  to  scorn : 
they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  head, 
saying,  He  trusted  in  the  Lord,  that  he 
would  deliver  him:  let  him  deliver  him, 
seeing  he  deli  ghted  in  him.  Psalm  xxii. 
7,  8. 

Fallen  man,  though  alienated  from  the 
ife  of  God,  and  degraded,  with  respect  to 
many  of  his  propensities  and  pursuits,  to  a 
level  with  the  beasts  that  perish,  is  not  whol- 
ly destitute  of  kind  and  compassionate  feel- 
ings towards  his  fellow-creatures.  While 
self-interest  does  not  interfere,  and  the  bitter 
passions  of  envy,  hatred,  malice,  and  re- 
venge, are  not  roused  into  exercise,  he  has 
a degree  of  instinctive  sympathy  with  them 
in  their  sufferings,  and  a disposition  to  assist 
them,  if  he  can  do  it  without  much  detriment 
to  himself.  The  source  of  these  social  feel- 
ings we  express  by  the  term  humanity ; 
which  seems  to  imply  a consciousness  that 
they  properly  belong  to  our  nature,  and  that 
we  ought,  at  least,  to  be  always,  and  uni- 
versally affected  in  this  manner,  when  occa- 
sions offer.  But  while  the  heart  is  under 
the  government  . of  self,  our  humanity  is  very 
partial  and  limited  ; and  it  is  to  be  ascribed 
to  the  goodness  of  God,  rather  than  to  any 
real  goodness  in  man,  that  it  is  not  wholly 
extinguished.  Were  this  the  case,  and  were 
the  native  evils  of  the  heart  left  to  exert 
themselves  in  their  full  strength  and  without 
control,  earth  would  be  the  very  image  of 
hell,  and  there  could  be  no  such  thing  as  so- 
ciety. But  to  prevent  things  from  running 
into  utter  confusion,  God  mercifully  preserves 
in  mankind  some  social  dispositions.  They 
are,  however,  so  weak  in  themselves,  so  pow- 
erfully counteracted  by  the  stronger  princi- 
ples of  our  depravity,  and  so  frequently  sup- 
pressed by  obstinate  habits  of  wickedness, 
that  in  the  present  state  of  things,  we  may 
almost  as  justly  define  man,  (whatever  impro- 
priety there  may  seem  in  the  expression,)  by 
saying,  “He  is  an  inhuman  creature,”  as  by 
ascribing  to  him  the  benevolent  properties  of 
humanity. 

The  rage,  cruelty,  and  savage  insensibility, 
with  which  sin  and  Satan  have  poisoned  our 
nature,  never  appear  in  so  strong  a light,  as 
when  they  assume  a religious  form ; when 
ignorance,  bigotry,  and  blind  zeal,  oppose  the 
will  and  grace  of  God,  under  a pretence  of 
doing  him  service.  By  this  infatuation,  every 
hateful  passion  is  sanctified,  and  every  feel- 
ing of  humanity  stifled.  Thus,  though  the 
sufferings  of  the  most  atrocious  malefactors 
usually  excite  pity  in  the  spectators,  and  often 
draw  tears  from  their  eyes,  yet  the  agonies 
of  God’s  persecuted  servants,  under  the  most 


j exquisite  tortures  which  malice  could  invent, 

| have  frequently  raised  no  other  emotions  than 
those  of  derision  and  scorn.  My  text  leads 
us  to  consider  the  highest  instance  of  this 
kind.  The  twenty-second  psalm  undoubtedly 
refers  to  Messiah.  It  begins  with  the  very 
words  which  he  uttered  upon  the  cross;  nor 
could  David  speak  of  himself,  when  he  said, 
“ They  pierced  my  hands  and  my  feet.”  He 
was  God’s  servant  in  the  most  eminent  sense ; 
and  the  service  he  performed,  was  an  uninter- 
rupted course  of  benevolence  to  the  souls  and 
bodies  of  men.  He  spent  his  life  in  going 
about  doing  good ; (Acts  i.  38 ;)  nor  could 
his  enemies  fix  a single  stain  upon  his  con- 
duct. Yet  they  thirsted  for  his  blood  ; and, 
because  he  came  into  the  world  to  save  sin- 
ners, they  accomplished  their  cruel  designs. 
We  have  already  seen  how  he  was  treated  by 
the  servants  and  by  the  soldiers,  when  con- 
demned by  the  Jewish  council,  and  by  the 
Roman  governor.  This  prophecy  was  ful- 
filled when  he  hung  upon  the  cross.  There 
have  been  persons  in  our  own  days,  whose 
crimes  have  excited  such  detestation,  that  the 
populace  would  probably  have  torn  them  in 
pieces,  before,  and  even  after  their  trial,  if 
they  could  have  had  them  in  their  power. 
Yet  when  these  very  obnoxious  persons  have 
been  executed  according  to  their  sentence, 
if,  perhaps,  there  was  not  one  spectator  who 
wished  them  to  escape,  yet  neither  was  one 
found  so  lost  to  sensibility,  as  to  insult  them 
in  their  dying  moments.  But  when  Jesus 
suffers,  all  that  see  him,  laugh  him  to  scorn  ; 
they  shoot  out  the  lip,  they  shake  the  head  ; 
they  insult  his  character  and  his  hope.  The 
evangelists  furnish  us  with  an  affecting  com- 
ment upon  this  passage.  They  inform  us  by 
whom  he  was  thus  scorned  and  derided;  they 
mention  some  circumstances,  which  strongly 
mark  the  peculiar  and  excessive  contempt 
with  which  he  was  treated ; and  they  take 
notice  of  the  special  scope  and  object  of  their 
insults,  namely,  the  gracious  purpose  he  had 
often  expressed  towards  sinners,  and  the 
strong  confidence  he  had  vowed  in  God  his 
Father. 

I.  The  persons  who  scorned  and  derided 
him  were  various,  and  of  different  characters. 

1.  The  chief  priests,  elders,  and  rulers  of 
the  people.  When  these,  who  were  held  in 
ignorant  admiration  by  the  multitude,  set  the 
example,  we  do  not  wonder  that  it  was  gene- 
rally followed.  They  had  been  his  most, 
avowed  and  determined  enemies,  they  had 
long  conspired  to  take  away  his  life,  and  in 
the  appointed  hour  their  plots  were  permit- 
ted to  succeed.  They  now  rejoiced  in  their 
success.  By  their  office  as  teachers  and  ex- 
pounders of  the  law,  they  ought  to  have 
pointed  him  out  to  the  people  as  the  object 
of  their  reverence  and  hope ; but  having  re- 
jected him  themselves,  Ihey  employed  all 
their  authority  and  influence  to  make  him 


MESSIAH  DERIDED  UPON  THE  CROSS. 


287 


SER.  XXI.] 

the  object  of  general  contempt  And  lest 
the  extremity  of  his  torments  should  awaken 
sentiments  of  commiseration  in  the  multitude, 
they  were  the  first,  and  the  loudest,  in  revil- 
ing him,  as  he  hung  upon  the  cross. 

2.  The  populace  derided  him.  They  had 
been  instigated  by  the  priests  to  demand  his 
death  of  Pilate,  when  he  was  desirous  of  dis- 
missing him,  and  rather  to  insist  that  Barab- 
bas  should  be  spared,  Matt,  xxvii.  20.  The 
populace,  though  no  less  ignorant,  were  less 
malicious  than  their  leaders.  At  different 
times,  when  they  heard  his  public  discourses, 
and  saw  his  wonderful  works,  they  had  been 
staggered,  and  constrained  to  say,  “ Is  not  this 
the  Son  of  David  I”  and  not  many  days  be- 
fore, the  popular  cry  had  been  strongly  in  his 
favour;  (Matt.  xxi.  10,  11;)  though  quickly 
after,  it  was,  “ Crucify  him,  crucify  him,” 
Luke  xxiii.  21.  As  the  sea,  though  some- 
times smooth,  is  always  disposed  to  obey  the 
impulse  of  the  wind,  so  the  common  people, 
though  easily  roused  to  oppose  the  truth, 
would  perhaps  be  quiet,  if  they  were  left  to 
themselves;  but  there  are  seldom  wanting 
artful  and  designing  men,  who,  by  a pretend- 
ed regard  for  religion,  and  by  misrepresenta- 
tions, work  upon  their  passions  and  preju- 
dices, and  stir  them  up  to  a compliance  with 
their  purposes.  The  priests  by  degrees 
wrought  the  populace  up,  first  to  reject  the 
Messiah,  and  then  to  join  their  leaders  in 
mocking  and  deriding  him. 

3.  The  Roman  soldiers,  who  had  con- 
temptuously clothed  him  with  a scarlot  robe, 
and  bowed  the  knee  before  him  in  derision, 
continued  to  mock  him  when  hanging  upon 
the  cross.  The  Romans,  to  whom  many 
monarchies  were  become  subject  and  tributa- 
ry, affected  to  despise  the  name  of  king ; and 
they  held  the  Jewish  nation  in  peculiar 
contempt.  The  title,  therefore,  of  king  of 
the  Jews,  affixed  to  his  cross,  afforded  them 
a subject  for  the  keenest  sarcasm. 

4.  Yea,  such  is  the  hardness  of  the  human 
heart,  that  one  of  the  malefactors,  (Luke 
xxiii.  39,)  who  was  crucified  by  his  side,  un- 
affected with  his  own  guilt,  and  insensible  of 
the  just  judgment  of  God,  and  of  the  account 
he  wTas  soon  to  render  at  his  awful  tribunal, 
seemed  to  seek  some  relief  in  the  midst  of 
his  agonies,  by  joining  with  the  priests  and 
people,  in  railing  on  the  innocent  Jesus,  who 
was  suffering  before  his  eyes.  Thus  he  was 
the  object  of  universal  derision.  They  who 
were  at  the  greatest  distance  in  character 
?nd  sentiment,  who  differed  from,  despised, 
and  hated  each  other,  on  other  accounts, 
united  as  one  man,  in  expressing  every  pos- 
sible mark  of  hatred  and  scorn  against  him, 
who  had  done  nothing  amiss. 

II.  They  showed  their  scorn  in  the  most 
pointed  and  cruel  manner.  Not  only  they 
who  had  clamoured  for  his  death  derided  him, 
but  others  who  were  only  passing  by  upon 


their  ordinary  occasions,  could  not  pass  on  till 
they  had  stopped  a while  to  insult  him.  wag- 
ging their  heads,  and  reminding  him  or  what 
he  had  formerly  said,  and  charging  him  with 
the  supposed  folly  and  arrogance  of  his  claims. 
They  jested  upon  his  wants ; when  he  said, 
“I  thirst,”  they  gave  him  vinegar  to  drink, 
mingled  with  gall.  They  jested  upon  his 
words ; when  he  uttered  his  dolorous  com- 
plaint, “ Eli,  Eli,  lama  sabachthani,  My  God, 
my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  V’  some 
of  them,  with  a malicious  turn,  (which  possi- 
bly was  applauded  for  wit  by  others,)  from 
the  sound  of  the  beginning  of  the  sentence, 
took  occasion  to  suggest,  that  by  saying,  Eli, 
Eli,  he  called  for  Elias  the  prophet,  to  come 
to  his  assistance.  Alas ! of  what  dreadful 
malignity  and  obduracy  is  the  heart  of  man 
capable!  How  may  we  conceive  the  heavenly 
hosts  to  have  been  affected  with  this  scene, 
when  they  beheld  their  Lord,  the  object  of 
their  worship  and  supreme  love,  thus  treated 
by  sinners ! But  it  behoved  him  thus  to  suf- 
fer, (Luke  xxiv.  26,)  for  he  had  undertaken 
to  expiate  the  sins  of  many  of  his  murderers, 
and  to  offer  such  satisfaction  to  the  justice 
and  law  of  God,  as  might  render  it  consistent 
with  his  holiness  and  truth  to  pardon  the 
vilest  offenders,  who  should  trust  in  his  name, 
in  all  future  ages.  Therefore  there  was  no 
voice,  arrest,  or  interposition  from  the  hea- 
venly world — thus  he  must  be  tormented, 
thus  he  must  be  Scorned,  and  suspended  as  a 
spectacle  to  angels  and  to  men,  till  he  had 
paid  the  full  price  of  redemption,  and  could 
say,  “ It  is  finished.”  Then,  and  not  till  then, 
he  bowed  his  head,  and  breathed  out  his  spirit 
into  his  Father’s  hands.  There  were,  how- 
ever, attestations  to  his  dignity,  in  this  his 
lowest  state.  He  showed,  by  his  gracious 
answer  to  the  penitent  malefactor,  that  he  had 
still  authority  upon  earth  to  forgive  sin,  and 
to  save  to  the  uttermost ; and  the  sun  with- 
drew his  light,  and  the  rocks  rent,  though 
daring  sinners  derided  and  mocked. 

III.  The  bulk  of  the  people  bore  their  part 
in  this  tragedy  through  precipitation  and  ig- 
norance. In  his  prayer  for  their  forgiveness, 
(a  prayer  which  was  signally  answered  after 
his  ascension,)  he  mentioned  the  only  extenu- 
ation their  wickedness  could  possibly  admit. 
They  knew  not  what  they  did.  It  was  other- 
wise with  those  who  were  principally  con- 
cerned in  procuring  his  death.  Long  before, 
when  they  could  not  deny  the  reality  of  his 
miracles,  they  ascribed  them  to  the  agency 
of  Beelzebub.  By  this  malicious,  wfilful  op- 
position to  the  strongest  evidence  of  fact, 
against  the  conviction  of  their  own  minds, 
and  by  their  violent,  determined  rejection  of 
his  mission,  they  committed  the  unpardon- 
able sin.  They  spoke  and  sinned  against  the 
Holy  Spirit.  This  sin  no  one  can  have  com- 
mitted, while  he  is  fearful  lest  he  has  com- 
mitted it ; for  it  essentially  consists  in  a de- 


288  MESSIAH 

liberate  and  wilful  refusal  of  the  only  means 
of  salvation.  It  is  the  sign  of  final  absolute 
impenitence.  They  who  had  thus  ascribed 
his  miracles  to  Beelzebub,  expressed  the  same 
height  of  enlightened  malice  against  him  in 
his  dying  agonies,  and  there  was  a poignancy 
in  their  insults,  of  which  the  ignorant  multi- 
tude were  not  capable. 

1.  They  reproached  his  great  design,  for 
which  he  came  into  the  world,  “ He  saved 
others,  himself  he  cannot  save,”  Matt,  xxvii. 
42.  How  different  is  the  force  of  the  same 
words,  according  to  the  intention  of  the 
speaker ! When  they  said  “His  blood  be  upon 
us,  and  upon  our  children,”  (ver.  25,)  they 
spoke  the  very  language  of  the  hearts  of 
those  who  love  him,  and  who  derive  all  their 
hopes  and  all  their  happiness  from  the  appli- 
cation of  his  blood  to  their  consciences.  But, 
to  themselves,  it  proved  the  most  dreadful  im- 
precation. So,  it  will  be  the  grateful  acknow- 
ledgment of  his  people  in  time,  and  to  eter- 
nity, that  when  he  was  resolved  to  save  them, 
the  difficulties  in  the  way  were  so  great,  that 
neither  his  prayers,  nor  his  tears,  nor  his  un- 
spotted innocence,  could  prevail  to  save  him- 
self. But  for  this  his  love  to  sinners,  his 
enemies  reviled  him.  Nor  would  they  have 
offered  to  believe  if  he  would  come  down 
from  the  cross,  had  they  supposed  there  was 
the  least  probability  of  such  an  event,  for 
they  had  often  rejected  evidence  equal  to 
what  they  now  demanded. 

2.  They  reproached  him  for  his  trust  and 
confidence  in  God.  He  had  said  that  God 
was  his  own  Father ; (John  v.  18 ;)  and 
they  understood  him  to  use  the  expression  in 
so  high  a sense,  as  thereby  to  make  himself 
equal  with  God.  Had  they  misunderstood 
him,  had  he  not  really  intended  what  they 
laid  to  his  charge,  surely  he  would  have  ex- 
plained himself.  This  was  the  very  ground 
of  their  proceeding  against  him  before  the 
council,  and  the  formal  reason  of  the  sen- 
tence of  death  they  pronounced  against  him. 
How  often  did  he  appeal  to  the  testimony  of 
the  scriptures,  and  of  John,  whom  they  durst 
not  but  acknowledge  to  have  been  a prophet, 
and  to  his  own  mighty  works,  in  support  of 
his  claim  1 But  having  fastened  him  upon 
the  cross,  they  triumphed,  and  unwittingly 
expressed  their  exultation,  in  the  very  words 
which  David  had  foretold  should  be  used  to 
Messiah.  So  exactly  were  the  scriptures 
fulfilled,  by  those  who  use  their  utmost  en- 
deavours to  evade  them,  and  to  prevent  their 
accomplishment. 

But  what  is  all  this  to  usl  It  is  very  much 
to  us.  Christ  could  suffer  but  once,  yet  we 
read  of  those  who  crucify  him  afresh.  His 
gospel  represents  his  personal  ministry,  de- 
clares his  character,  reveals  his  love,  pro- 
duces the  same  effects  in  those  who  receive 
it,  and  they  who  oppose  it  are  considered  as 
opposing  him,  and  are  influenced  by  the  same 


UNPITIED,  [ser.  xxn 

spirit  which  instigated  the  unbelieving  Jews. 
It  is  to  be  hoped  that  many  reject  and  scorn 
it,  as  the  multitude  did  of  old,  through  igno- 
rance ; and  that  the  intercession  of  him  who 
prayed  for  those  that  knew  not  what  they  did, 
will  prevail  for  their  conversion.  Whenever 
their  eyes  are  opened,  they  will  be  pricked  to 
the  heart,  (Acts  ii.  37,)  and  will  then  gladly 
inquire  of  those  whom  they  now  despise, 
What  they  must  do  to  be  saved  ] But  it  is 
to  be  feared,  there  are  in  Christian  countries 
many  persons  who  too  nearly  resemble  the 
spirit  and  conduct  of  the  Jewish  rulers,  whose 
opposition  proceeds  from  rooted  enmity  to 
the  truth,  persisted  in  against  light  that  has 
sometimes  forced  upon  their  minds,  and  who, 
though  convinced,  will  not  be  persuaded. 
They  who  despise,  calumniate,  and  scorn  the 
believers  of  the  gospel,  would  certainly  offer 
the  like  treatment  to  the  Author  of  it,  if  he 
was  within  their  reach.  They  are  ill-treated 
for  his  sake,  and  he  considers  it  as  an  affront 
to  himself.  Thus  he  said  to  Saul  of  Tarsus, 
when  breathing  out  threatenings  against  his 
disciples,  “ Why  persecutest  thou  me  l”  They 
who  reject  his  ministers,  reject  him,  Luke  x. 
16.  They  who  speak  disdainfully  of  his  dy- 
ing himself  to  save  others ; they  who  reproach 
or  ridicule  the  humble  confidence  of  his  peo- 
ple; who  censure  and  revile  their  hopes  and 
comforts  derived  from  his  good  word,  as  en- 
thusiasm or  hypocrisy ; who  have  no  compas- 
sion for  their  distresses,  but  rather  wound 
them  as  with  a sword  in  their  bones,  saying 
unto  them,  Where  is  now  your  God  1 (Psal. 
cxv.  2,)  are  certainly  treading,  if  not  altoge- 
ther with  equal  vehemence,  in  the  footsteps 
of  the  Jewish  rulers. — May  the  Lord  in  mer- 
cy show  them  the  danger  of  their  path,  and 
give  them  a timely  apprehension  of  the  de- 
struction to  which  it  leads  ! That  they  may 
humble  themselves  to  his  will,  implore  his 
pardon,  espouse  his  cause,  and  experience  the 
comforts  and  privileges  of  that  gospel  which 
they  have  hitherto  reviled  and  scorned. 


SERMON  XXII. 

MESSIAH  UNPITIED,  AND  WITHOUT  COM- 
FORTER. 

Reproach  [rebuke]  hath  broken  my  heart , 
and  I am  full  of  heaviness  ; and  I looked 
for  some  to  take  pity , but  there  was  none , 
and  for  comforters , but  I found  none. — 
Psalm  xix.  20. 

The  greatness  of  suffering  cannot  be  cer- 
tainly estimated  by  the  single  consideration 
of  the  immediate  apparent  cause  ; the  impres- 
sion it  actually  makes  upon  the  mind  of  the 
sufferer  must  likewise  be  taken  into  the  ac- 


SER.  XXII.  J 

count.  That  which  is  a heavy  trial  to  one 
person,  may  to  another  be  much  lighter,  and 
perhaps  no  trial  at  all ; and  a state  of  outward 
prosperity,  in  which  the  eye  of  a bystander 
can  see  nothing1  wanting  to  happiness,  may 
be,  and  I doubt  not  often  is,  a state  of  tor- 
ment to  the  possessor.  On  the  other  hand, 
we  know  that  the  consolations  with  which  it 
has  sometimes  pleased  God  to  cheer  his  suf- 
fering servants,  have  enabled  them  to  rejoice 
in  the  greatest  extremities.  They  have 
triumphed  upon  the  rack,  and  while  their 
flesh  was  consuming  by  the  fire.  The  Lord 
has  had  many  followers,  who,  for  his  sake, 
have  endured  scourgings,  and  tortures,  and 
terrible  deaths,  not  only  without  reluctance 
or  dismay,  but  without  a groan.  But  he  him- 
self was  terrified,  amazed,  and  filled  with 
anguish:  when  he  suffered  for  us.  Shall  we 
say,  The  disciples,  in  such  cases,  have  been 
superior  to  their  Master,  when  yet  they  ac- 
knowledged that  they  derived  all  their 
strength  and  resolution  from  him  1 This  dif- 
ference cannot  be  well  accounted  for  by  those 
who  deny  that  his  sufferings  were  a proper 
atonement  for  sin,  and  who  can  see  no  other 
reason  for  his  death,  than  that  by  dying  he 
was  to  seal  the  truth  of  his  doctrine,  and  to 
propose  himself  to  us  as  an  example  of  con- 
stancy and  patience.  But  the  great  aggra- 
vation of  Messiah’s  sufferings  was  the  sus- 
pension of  those  divine  supports  which  ena- 
ble his  people  to  endure  the  severest  afflic- 
tions to  which  he  calls  them.  Perhaps  some 
persons  who  acknowledge  our  Lord’s  true 
character,  may,  upon  that  ground,  think  his 
agonies  less  insupportable,  since  he  was  not 
a mere  man,  but  God  in  the  human  nature. 
It  was  indeed  the  dignity  of  his  person  that 
gave  influence  and  efficacy  to  all  that  he  did 
and  suffered  for  sinners.  It  is  likewise  true 
that  the  weight  laid  upon  him  was  more 
than  any  mere  creature  could  sustain.  I 
would  speak  with  reverence  and  reserve 
upon  a point  which  is  too  high  for  our  weak 
minds  fully  to  comprehend  ; but  in  whatever 
way  the  nature  of  man,  which  he  assumed, 
was  upheld  by  his  eternal  power  and  God- 
head, we  may  venture  to  affirm  that  he  de- 
rived no  sensible  comfort  from  it.  For  we 
have  his  own  testimony,  that  in  this  sense 
God  had  forsaken  him.  The  divine  nature 
could  neither  bleed  nor  suffer.  He  was  truly 
and  properly  a man  ; and  as  a man  he  suffer- 
ed, and  he  suffered  alone.  Many  of  his  ser- 
vants have  rejoiced  while  they  were  tor- 
mented, because  God  overbalanced  all  they 
felt  with  the  light  of  his  countenance;  but 
the  Saviour  himself,  deprived  of  this  light, 
experienced  to  the  uttermost,  all  that  sin 
deserved,  that  was  not  inconsistent  with  the 
perfection  of  his  character.  My  text  expresses, 
so  far  as  human  words  and  ideas  can  reach, 
his  exquisite  distress,  when  he  bore  our  sins 
in  his  own  body,  upon  the  tree.  Reproach 
Vol.  II.  2 O 


280 

broke  his  heart,  and  when  he  looked  for  pity 
and  comfort,  he  found  none. 

I.  Reproach  hath  broken  my  heart. — We 
must  not  confine  our  thoughts  here  to  the 
reproach  of  his  enemies.  The  passage  in  the 
Messiah  expresses  it  agreeably  to  the  version 
of  the  Psalms  used  in  our  liturgy,  Thy  rebuke. 
Though  he  knew  no  sin,  he  was  made  sin  for 
us.  He  was  accounted  and  treated  as  a sin- 
ner. Now  a sinner  is  deservedly  the  greatest 
object  of  contempt  in  the  universe,  and  in- 
deed the  only  object  of  deserved  contempt. 
Thus  he  incurred  the  reproach  of  the  law  and 
justice  of  God.  The  Holy  Father,  viewing 
the  Son  of  his  love  in  this  light,  as  charged 
with  the  sins  of  his  people,  forsook  him. 
God  infinitely  hates  sin,  and  will  have  no 
fellowship  with  it ; and  of  this  he  gave  the 
most  awful  proof,  by  forsaking  his  beloved 
Son,  when  he  took  upon  him  to  answer  for 
the  sins  of  men.  Then  the  sword  of  the  Al- 
mighty awoke  against  him,  and  he  spared 
him  not,  Zech.  xiii.  7. 

This  rebuke  broke  his  heart.  Let  broken- 
hearted sinners  look  by  faith  upon  a broken- 
hearted Saviour.  The  phrase  denotes  woe 
and  dejection  inconceivable,  with  a failure  of 
all  resource.  Any  thing  may  be  borne  while 
the  spirit,  the  heart  remains  firm,  but  if  the 
heart  itself  be  broken,  who  can  endure?  “A 
wounded  spirit  who  can  bear  ?”  Proverbs, 
xviii.  14. 

It  is  not  therefore,  surprising,  that  he  says, 
“ I am  full  of  heaviness.”  In  the  evangelists 
we  read,  that  “ he  began  to  be  sore  amazed 
and  very  heavy (Matt.  xxvi.  37,  38  ; Mark 
xiv.  33  ;)  and  he  said  to  his  disciples,  “ My 
soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death.” 
The  most  emphatical  words  are  used  to  de- 
scribe his  sensation  of  the  bitter  conflict  of 
his  soul  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  when 
as  yet  the  hand  of  man  had  not  touched  him. 
He  began  (s*3*/*Sr*<r5*i)  to  be  amazed  or  asto- 
nished. It  properly  signifies,  to  be  struck 
with  terror  and  surprise  by  some  supernatu- 
ral power,  such  as  Belshazzar  felt  when  he 
suddenly  saw  the  handwriting  against  him 
upon  the  wall;  (Dan.  v.  6 ;)  and  (a^oi/E.v)  to  be 
very  heavy,  sated  with  grief,  full,  so  as  to  be 
incapable  of  more.  Some  critics  explain  the 
word,  as  importing  such  an  oppression  of 
mind  as  quite  unfits  a person  for  converse  or 
society.  [Compare  Job  xxx.  29.]  He  said 
“ My  soul  is  (ircf  exceeding  sorrowful,” 
— surrounded,  encompassed  with  sorrows. 
It  is  added,  he  was  in  ( an  9/^ony  j 

(Luke  xxii.  44;)  a consternation  of  mind, 
such  as  arises  from  the  prospect  of  some  im- 
pending, unavoidable  evil,  like  the  suspense 
of  mariners  upon  the  point  of  shipwreck,  who 
tremble  equally  at  the  view  of  the  raging 
waves  behind  them,  and  the  rocky  shore  be- 
fore their  eyes,  on  which  they  expect  in  a 
few  moments  to  be  dashed.  The  evils  he 
was  to  bear  and  to  expiate  were  now  collect- 


AND  WITHOUT  COMFORTER. 


290  MESSIAH 

ing  to  a point,  and  formed  a dark  and  tremen- 
dous storm,  just  ready  to  break  upon  his  de- 
voted head,  and  the  prospect  filled  his  soul 
with  unutterable  horror,  so  that  his  sweat 
was,  as  it  were,  great  drops  of  blood  falling 
down  to  the  ground.  Many  have  sweat  un- 
der extremity  of  pain  or  terror,  but  his  ago- 
nies, and  the  effect  of  them,  were  peculiar 
to  himself : His  sweat  was  blood. 

This  is  not  a subject  for  declamation.  It 
rather  becomes  us  to  adore  in  humble  silence 
the  manifestation  of  the  goodness  and  severity 
of  God  (Rom.  xi.  22)  in  the  Redeemer’s 
sufferings,  than  to  indulge  conjecture  and  the 
flights  of  imagination.  What  is  expressly  re- 
vealed we  may  assert,  contemplate,  and  ad- 
mire. His  soul  was  made  an  offering  for  sin, 
Isa.  liii.  10.  We  know  but  little  of  the  ex- 
treme malignity  of  sin,  because  we  have  but 
faint  views  of  the  majesty,  holiness,  and  good- 
ness of  God,  against  whom  it  is  committed. 
Yet  a single  sin,  if  clothed  with  all  its  aggra- 
vations, and  the  guilt  of  it  brought  home  with 
power  to  the  heart,  is  sufficient  to  make  the 
sinner  a terror  to  himself.  Adam  had  sinned 
but  once  when  he  lost  all  comfort  and  confi- 
dence in  God,  and  sought  to  hide  himself. 
We  have  but  slight  thoughts  of  the  extent 
of  sin.  Not  only  positive  disobedience,  but 
want  of  conformity  to  the  law  of  God,  is  sin- 
ful. Every  rising*  thought  which  does  not 
comport  with  that  reverence,  dependence,  and 
love  which  is  due  to  God  from  creatures  con- 
stituted, furnished,  and  indebted  as  we  are, 
is  sinful.  The  sins  of  one  person  in  thought, 
word,  and  deed,  sins  of  omission  and  com- 
mission. are  innumerable.  What  then  is  con- 
tained in  the  collective  idea,  in  what  the 
scripture  calls  the  sin  of  the  world  1 What 
then  must  be  the  atonement,  the  considera- 
tion on  the  account  of  which  the  great  God 
is  no  less  righteous  than  merciful,  in  forgiv- 
ing the  sins,  which  his  inviolable  truth,  and 
the  honour  of  his  government,  engage  him  to 
punish.  And  they  are  punished,  though  for- 
given. They  were  charged  upon  Jesus  ; they 
exposed  him  to  a rebuke  which  broke  his 
heart.  They  filled  him  with  heaviness. 
When,  therefore,  we  are  assured  that  the 
justice  of  God  is  satisfied,  with  respect  to 
every  sinner  of  the  race  of  mankind,  who,  in 
obedience  to  the  divine  command,  makes  the 
sufferings  of  the  Saviour  his  plea  for  pardon, 
and  trusts  in  him  for  salvation,  and  that  upon 
this  one  ground  they  are  freed  from  all  con- 
demnation, and  accepted  as  children  ; when 
we  are  told  that  the  glory  of  the  divine  per- 
fections is  displayed  in  the  highest,  by  this 
method  of  saving  millions  who  deserved  to 
perish,  we  safely  infer  the  greatness  of  the 
cause  from  the  greatness  of  the  effect.  The 
sufferings  of  Christ,  which  free  a multitude 
of  sinners  from  the  guilt  of  innumerable 
sins,  must  have  been  inconceivably  great  in- 
deed : 


UNPITIED,  [see.  xxii. 

II.  Under  this  accumulated  distress,  though 
his  will  was  perfectly  submissive  to  the  will 
of  God,  and  his  determination  fixed  to  en- 
dure all  that  the  case  required.;  vet  as  he 
was  truly  a man,  he  felt  like  a man.  His  for- 
titude was  very  different  from  a stoical  hard- 
ness of  spirit.  All  the  affections  of  pure  hu- 
manity, whatever  does  not  imply  sin,  such  as 
impatience  under  suffering,  and  an  undue, 
premature  desire  of  deliverance,  operated  in 
him,  as  they  might  do  in  one  of  us.  It  was 
no  impeachment  of  his  innocence,  or  of  his 
willingness,  that  he  wished,  if  it  were  possi- 
ble, for  some  relief  or  alleviation  of  his  mise- 
ry. He  looked,  as  we  do  when  we  are  in  hea- 
viness, for  some  to  have  pity  on  him,  and  to 
comfort  him,  but  there  was  none.  Though 
the  pity  of  our  friends  is  often  ineffectual, 
and  can  afford  us  no  real  assistance,  yet  it 
gives  a little  relief  to  have  those  about  us  to 
whom  we  can  open  our  minds,  who  will  sym- 
pathize with  us,  and  compassionately  attend 
to  our  complaints,  if  they  can  do  no  more. 
And  to  be  neglected  and  forsaken  in  ex- 
tremity, especially  by  those  who  have  pro- 
fessed great  friendship,  or  are  under  great 
obligations  to  us,  will  be  felt  as  an  aggrava- 
tion of  the  most  distressing  case  that  can  be 
imagined.  But  thus  it  was  with  Messiah. 
He  had  to  complain,  not  only  of  the  cruelty 
of  his  enemies,  but  of  the  insensibility  and 
inconstancy  of  those  who  had  professed  the 
most  cordial  attachment  to  him.  The  im- 
pression thus  made  upon  him  as  a man  was 
such,  that  it  is  distinctly  specified  in  the  pro- 
phetical enumeration  of  the  ingredients  which 
composed  the  bitter  cup  of  his  sufferings. 

He  was  not  only  apprehended  by  cruel 
men,  but  betrayed  into  their  hands  by  one 
whom  he  had  admitted  into  the  number  of  his 
select  apostles,  who  had  been  employed  in  bis 
service,  favoured  with  access  to  him  in  hia 
more  retired  hours,  and  was  present,  with 
the  rest,  when  he  kept  his  last  passover,  and 
took  his  solemn  and  affectionate  leave  of 
them  before  he  entered  upon  his  passion.  It 
was  not  an  avowed  enemy,  but  one  of  the 
twelve  who  dipped  with  him  in  the  dish,  that 
was  guilty  of  this  enormous  ingratitude  and 
treachery.  How  keen  are  our  resentments, 
if  those  to  whom  we  have  shown  great  kind- 
ness are  discovered  to  have  studied  our  ruin 
while  they  wore  the  mask  of  friendship  ? 
Though  Messiah  was  incapable  of  any  sinful 
perturbation  of  mind,  he  was  very  capable  of 
being  painfully  affected  by  the  conduct  of 
Judas : he  had  reason  to  look  for  pity  from 
him,  but  he  found  none. 

When  he  entered  the  garden  of  Gethse- 
mane,  he  commanded,  may  I not  say,  he  en- 
treated, his  disciples  to  tarry  there  and  watch 
with  him.  And  to  engage  their  utmost  at- 
tention, he  spoke  plainly  to  them  of  his  dis- 
tress, saying,  “ My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrow- 
ful even  unto  death.”  Yet  when  he  returned 


AND  WITHOUT  COMFORTER. 


291 


8ER.  XXII.] 

unto  them,  the  first,  the  second,  yea,  the 
third  time,  he  found  them  sleeping1.  How 
tender,  yet  how  forcible  was  his  expostula- 
tion ! “ Could  ye  not  watch  one  hour  !” 
Matt,  xxvii.  40.  What ! could  they  know 
that  their  Lord  was  in  an  agony,  wrestling 
with  strong  cries  and  tears,  and  yet  sleep  ! 
as  regardless  of  his  sorrows  as  of  their  own 
approaching  danger!  Were  our  dearest 
friends  to  show  themselves  equally  insensible 
when  we  were  in  extreme  anguish,  would 
not  their  indifference  wound  our  spirits]  He 
also  was  a man ; and  we  may  conceive  it  some 
addition  to  his  grief,  that  when  he  looked  to 
them  for  pity  and  comfort,  he  found  none. 

When  he  was  apprehended,  notwithstand- 
ing their  former  protestation  of  zeal  and  love, 
they  all  forsook  him  and  fled,  Matt.  xxvi.  56. 
They  sought  their  own  safety,  and  left  him  in 
the  hands  of  his  enemies.  The  apostle  Paul 
was  thus  deserted,  and  his  expressions  inti- 
mate that  he  felt  it.  “ At  my  first  answer, 
no  man  stood  by  me,  all  men  forsook  me,” 
2 Tim.  iv.  16.  He  had  imbibed  likewise  the 
spirit  of  his  master,  and  prayed  that  it  might 
not  be  laid  to  their  charge.  And  though  the 
Lord  Jesus  pitied  and  excused  the  weakness 
of  his  disciples,  and  permitted  them  to  take 
care  of  themselves,  it  was  in  them  an  in- 
stance how  little  he  could  depend  upon  those 
who  were  under  the  strongest  obligations  to 
him. 

But  Peter  followed  his  Lord  to  the  hall  of 
the  High  Priest,  and  there  saw  him,  with  his 
own  eyes,  insulted,  arraigned,  and  unjustly 
condemned.  Might  he  not  expect  that  Peter, 
the  most  active  and  earnest  of  all  his  follow- 
ers, would  have  pitied  him,  at  least  at  such 
a time.  Alas ! instead  of  pitying  him,  Peter 
denied  him  ; he  denied,  with  oaths  and  im- 
precations, that  he  had  any  knowledge  of  him, 
whom  he  had  seen  transfigured  upon  the 
mount,  and  agonizing  in  the  garden.  We 
read  that  the  Lord  turned  and  looked  upon 
Peter,  Luke  xxiv.  61.  Who  can  conceive 
the  energy  of  that  look  ! It  was  full  of  mean- 
ing, and  Peter  well  understood  it.  Surely, 
though  a look  of  tenderness  and  compassion, 
it  conveyed  the  expostulation  of  an  injured 
benefactor,  no  less  forcibly,  than  if  all  who 
were  present  had  heard  him  say,  “ Peter,  is 
this  the  pity  I am  to  expect  from  thee  I” 

When  he  was  nailed  to  the  cross,  he  was 
surrounded  only  by  enemies.  These,  as  we 
have  seen,  far  from  pitying,  or  attempting  to 
comfort  him,  derided  and  mocked  him.  How 
have  some  of  us  felt  for  our  friends  in  their 
dying  hours,  though  we  have  seen  every  pos- 
sible attention  paid  to  them,  and  every  thing 
provided  and  done  for  them  that  could  ad” 
minister  to  their  relief  and  comfort ' But  they 
who  have  the  faith  which  realizes  unseen 
things,  have  beheld  their  best  Friend  expiring 
in  tortures,  and  insulted  by  his  murderers  in 
bis  last  moments. 


But  had  all  his  disciples  been  near  him, 
and  had  all  his  enemies  been  his  friends,  still, 
in  his  situation,  he  would  have  been  alone. 
The  loss  of  the  light  of  God’s  countenance 
will,  to  the  soul  that  has  enjoyed  it,  create  a 
universal  solitude,  and  render  every  earthly 
good  tasteless,  in  proportion  as  that  soul  is 
united  to  him  in  love  ; and  still  more,  if  there 
be  superadded  a sense  of  his  displeasure. 
They  who  have  never  tasted  that  the  Lord  is 
good,  not  having  known  the  difference,  can 
have  no  conception  of  this  subject.  Their 
minds  are  at  present  occupied  with  earthly 
things;  and  while  they  are  thus  engaged  with 
trifles,  they  cannot  believe,  though  they  are 
repeatedly  told  it,  that  to  an  immortal  spirit, 
a separation  from  the  favour  of  God  involves 
in  it  the  very  essence  of  misery.  But  should 
death  surprise  them  in  their  sins,  tear  them 
from  all  that  they  have  seen  and  loved,  and 
plunge  them  into  an  unknown,  unchangeable 
world,  then  (alas ! too  late  !)  they  will  be  sen- 
sible of  their  immense,  irreparable  loss,  in  b£- 
ing  cut  off  from  the  fountain  of  life  and  com- 
fort. A suspension  of  this  divine  presence, 
with  an  awful  sense  and  feeling  of  what  those 
for  whom  he  made  himself  responsible  de- 
served, was  the  most  dreadful  part  of  the  Re- 
deemer’s sufferings.  He  was  perfectly  united 
to  the  will  and  love  of  his  heavenly  Father, 
and,  by  the  perfect  holiness  of  his  nature,  in- 
capable of  tasting  satisfaction  in  any  thing 
else,  if  his  presence  were  withdrawn.  But 
when  he  endured  the  curse  of  the  law  for  us, 
he  looked  to  God  for  pity  and  comfort,  but 
he  found  none. 

In  this  glass  we  are  to  contemplate  the  de- 
merit of  sin.  But  there  are  some  sufferings 
due  to  the  impenitent  sinner,  of  which  Mes- 
siah was  not  capable.  I mean  the  conscious- 
ness of  personal  guilt,  the  gnawings  of  a re- 
morseful conscience,  and  the  rage  of  despair. 
If  we  add  the  idea  of  eternity  to  the  whole, 
we  may  form  some  faint  judgment  of  what 
they  are  delivered  from  who  believe  in  him, 
and  what  misery  awaits  those  who  presume 
to  reject  hitn.  Awful  thought ! to  reject  the 
only  Saviour.  If  they  refuse  his  mediation, 
they  must  answer  in  their  own  persons. 
Then  they  will  find  no  pity,  no  comforter ! 
For  who,  or  what,  can  comfort,  when  the 
Lord  God  Omnipotent  arises  to  punish  ? 
What  will  your  pleasures,  your  wealth,  or 
friends,  do  for  you,  when  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  shall  touch  you  to  the  quick?  What 
smile  can  you  expect  will  support  you  against 
the  terror  of  his  frown! 

Should  any  of  you  hear  the  Messiah  per- 
formed again,  then  and  there,  if  not  before, 
may  God  impress  upon  your  heart  the  sense 
of  this  passage.  Then  you  will  understand, 
that  the  sufferings  of  the  Son  of  God  are  by 
no  means  a proper  subject  for  the  amusement 
of  a vacant  hour. 


292 


NO  SORROW  LIKE  MESSIAH’S  SORROW. 


SERMON  XXIII. 

NO  SORROW  LIKE  MESSIAH’S  SORROW. 

Is  it  nothing  to  you , all  ye  that  pass  by  l 

Behold , and  see , if  there  be  any  sorrow 

like  unto  my  sorrow  ! — Lament,  i.  12. 

Although  the  scriptures  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament, the  law  of  Moses,  the  Psalms,  and  the 
prophecies,  (Luke  xxiv.  44.)  bear  a harmoni- 
ous testimony  to  Messiah,  it  is  not  necessary 
to  suppose,  that  every  single  passage  has  an 
immediate  and  direct  relation  to  him.  A 
method  of  exposition  has  frequently  obtained, 
of  a fanciful  and  allegorical  cast,  under  the 
pretext  of  spiritualizing  the  word  of  God. 
Ingenious  men,  and  sometimes  men  not  very 
ingenious,  have  endeavoured  to  discover  types 
and  mysteries  in  the  plainest  historical  parts, 
where  vve  have  no  sufficient  evidence  that 
tne  Holy  Spirit  intended  to  teach  them.  And 
upon  very  slight  grounds  a proof  has  been  at- 
tempted of  the  great  doctrines  of  the  gospel, 
which  may  be  proved,  much  more  safely  and 
solidly,  from  the  passages  of  scripture  in  which 
they  are  plainly  and  expressly  revealed.  But 
by  taking  this  course,  instead  of  throwing  real 
light  upon  the  places  they  have  in  this  man- 
ner attempted  to  explain,  they  have  perplexed 
their  hearers  and  readers,  and  led  them  to 
question,  whether  there  be  any  fixed  and  de- 
terminate sense  of  scripture  that  may  be  fully 
depended  upon.  It  is  true,  when  we  have  the 
authority  of  an  inspired  expositor  to  lead  us, 
we  may  follow  him  without  fear;  but  this 
will  not  warrant  us  to  strike  out  a path  for 
ourselves,  and  trust  to  our  conjectures,  where 
we  have  not  such  an  infallible  guide.  The 
epistle  to  the  Hebrews  is  a key  to  explain  to 
us  many  passages  in  a higher  sense  than  per- 
haps we  should  have  otherwise  understood 
them.  But  it  is  best  for  us  to  keep  within 
safe  bounds,  and  to  propose  our  own  senti- 
ments, when  not  supported  by  New  Testa- 
ment authority,  with  great  modesty,  lest  we 
should  incur  the  censure  of  being  wise  above 
what  is  written.  I may,  without  scruple, 
affirm,  that  the  history  of  Sarah  and  Hagar  is 
an  allegory  referring  to  the  two  covenants, 
because  the  apostle  Paul  (Gal.  iv.  24)  has 
affirmed  it  before  me ; but  if  I attempted  to 
spiritualize  the  history  of  Leah  and  Rachel 
likewise,  you  would  not  be  bound  to  believe 
me  without  proof.  I may  preach  the  gospel 
of  Christ  from  a text  which  mentions  the 
manna  or  the  brazen  serpent,  (John  iii.  14 ; 
vi.  31,  35,)  because  our  Lord  has  expounded 
these  things  as  typical  of  himself ; but  I 
must  not  be  confident  that  every  resemblance 
which  I think  I can  trace  is  the  true  sense 
of  the  place ; because  I may  imagine  many 
resemblances  and  types  which  the  scripture 
does  not  authorize. 

There  is,  however,  a useful  way  of  preach- 


[ser.  XXIII. 

ing,  by  accommodation,  that  is,  when  the 
literal  sense  is  first  clearly  stated,  to  apply 
the  passage,  not  directly  to  prove  a doctrine 
as  if  really  contained  in  it,  but  only  to  illus- 
trate tbe  doctrine  expressly  taught  in  other 
parts  of  the  scripture.  Thus,  for  instance,  if 
the  question  of  Jonadab  to  Amnon  (2  Sam. 
xiii.  4)  were  chosen  for  the  subject  of  a dis- 
course, “ Why  art  thou,  being  a king’s  son, 
lean  from  day  to  day  3”  the  history  of  the 
context  directly  proves  the  malignity  of  sin- 
ful inordinate  desire,  and  the  misery  of  those 
who  are  under  its  dominion  ; that  it  poisons 
every  situation  in  life,  and  renders  the  sinner 
incapable  of  satisfaction,  though  he  were  a 
king’s  son.  The  form  of  the  question  might 
then  lead  to  observe,  That  believers  are  king’s 
sons,  to  show  what  are  the  great  privileges  of 
their  adoption  ; and  to  enquire  how  it  comes 
to  pass,  that  many  persons  so  highly  privileged 
are  lean,  that  is  uncomfortable,  weak  and 
languishing  in  their  profession  3 These  points 
might  not  improperly  be  introduced  by  way 
of  accommodation,  though  they  are  not  di- 
rectly deducible  from  the  literal  sense  of  the 
question. 

The  text  I have  just  read  to  you  has  led 
me  into  this  digression.  I find  it  in  the  series 
of  the  passages  in  the  Messiah  ; but  I am  not 
sure,  that  in  the  literal  sense  it  immediately 
refers  to  him.  It  is  a pathetic  exclamation, 
by  which  the  prophet  Jeremiah  expresses  his 
grief,  or  rather  the  grief  of  Jerusalem,  when 
the  sins  of  the  people  had  given  success  to 
the  Chaldean  army,  and  the  temple  and  the 
city  were  destroyed.  Jerusalem  is  poetically 
considered  as  a woman,  lately  reigning  a 
queen  among  the  nations,  but  now  a captive, 
dishonoured,  spoiled,  and  sitting  upon  the 
ground.  She  intreats  the  commiseration  of 
those  who  pass  by,  and  asks,  if  there  be  any 
sorrow  like  unto  her  sorrow  3 Such  a question 
has  often  been  in  the  heart  and  in  the  mouth 
of  the  afflicted,  especially  in  an  hour  of  impa- 
tience. We  are  all,  in  our  turns,  disposed  to 
think  our  own  trials  peculiarly  heavy,  and 
our  own  cases  singular.  But  to  them  who  ask 
this  question,  we  may  answer,  Yes — there  has 
been  a sorrow  greater  than  yours,  greater 
than  the  sorrow  of  Jeremiah,  or  of  Jerusalem. 
They  who  have  heard  of  the  sorrows  of  Jesus, 
will  surely,  upon  the  hearing  of  this  question, 
be  reminded  of  him,  whether  it  was  the  in- 
tention of  the  prophet  to  personate  him  or  not. 
If  we  conceive  of  him  hanging  upon  the 
cross,  and  speaking  in  this  language  to  us, 
“ Was  ever  any  sorrow  like  my  sorrow  3” 
must  not  we  reply  with  admiration  and  gra- 
titude,“ No,  Lord,  never  was  love,  never  was 
grief,  like  thine.” 

The  expostulation  and  the  question  arc 
equally  applicable  to  the  sufferings  of  Mes- 
siah. The  former  indeed  is  not  inserted  in 
the  Oratorio,  but  I am  not  willing  to  leave  it 
out.  The  highest  wonder  ever  exhibited  to 


NO  SORROW  LIKE  MESSIAH’S  SORROW. 


293 


SER.  XXIII.] 

the  world,  to  angels,  and  men,  is  the  Son  of 
God  suffering  and  dying  for  sinners.  Next 
to  this,  hardly  any  thing  is  more  astonishing 
to  an  enlightened  mind — than  the  gross  and 
stupid  insensibility  with  which  the  sufferings 
of  the  Saviour  are  treated,  and  the  indiffer- 
ence with  which  this  wonderful  event  is  re- 
garded by  creatures  who  are  so  nearly  con- 
cerned in  it.  If  they  believe  in  him,  they 
will  be  healed  by  his  wounds,  and  live  by  his 
death.  If  they  finally  reject  him,  they  must 
perish ; and  their  guilt  and  misery  will  be 
greatly  aggravated  by  what  they  have  heard 
of  him  ! But  sin  has  so  blinded  our  under- 
standings and  hardened  our  hearts,  that  we 
have  naturally  no  feeling  either  for  him  or 
for  ourselves. 

I.  Is  the  expostulation  suited  to  any  person 
herel  Can  I,  with  propriety,  say  to  some 
who  are  now  present,  Has  this  subject  been 
hitherto  nothing  to  you  1 Then,  surely,  you 
have  not  heard  of  it  before ; and,  therefore, 
now  you  do  hear  of  it,  you  will,  you  must  be 
affected.  If  you  were  to  read  in  the  common 
newspapers,  that  a benevolent  and  excellent 
person  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  murderers, 
who  had  put  him  to  death  in  the  most  cruel 
manner,  would  it  not  be  something  to  you  1 
Could  you  avoid  impressions  of  surprise,  in- 
dignation, and  grief!  Surely,  if  this  transac- 
tion were  news  to  you,  it  would  engross  your 
thoughts.  But  alas  ! you  have  rather  heard 
of  it  too  often,  till  it  has  become  to  you  as  a 
worn-out  tale.  I am  willing  to  take  it  for 
granted  that  you  allow  the  fact.  You  believe 
that  Jesus  Christ  suffered  under  Pontius 
Pilate,  was  condemned  by  the  Jews,  and 
crucified  by  the  Romans.  And  is  it  possible 
this  should  be  nothingto  you!  Is  it  too  insig- 
nificant to  engage  or  deserve  your  attention  ! 
And  yet,  perhaps,  you  have  wept  at  a repre- 
sentation or  a narrative  which  you  know  was 
wholly  founded  in  fiction.  How  strange ! 
What ! the  sorrow  of  Jesus  nothing  to  you  ! 
when  you  admit  that  he  suffered  for  sinners, 
and  will  probably  admit  that  you  are  a sin- 
ner. No  longer  then  boast  of  yopr  sensi- 
bility ! your  heart  must  be  a heart  of  stone. 
Yet  thus  it  is  with  too  many ; your  tempers, 
your  conduct,  give  evidence  that  hitherto  the 
death  of  Jesus  has  been  nothing  to  you.  You 
would  not  have  acted  otherwise,  at  least  you 
would  not  have  acted  worse,  if  you  had  never 
heard  of  his  name.  Were  his  sufferings  any 
thing  to  you,  is  it  possible,  that  you  would 
live  in  the  practice  of  those  sins,  for  which 
no  atonement  could  suffice  but  his  blood  ! 
Were  you  duly  affected  by  the  thought  of  his 
crucifixion,  is  it  possible  that  you  could  cru- 
cify him  afresh,  and  put  him  to  open  shame, 
by  bearing  the  name  of  a Christian,  and  yet 
living  in  a course  unsuitable  to  the  spirit  and 
precepts  of  his  gospel  ! But  if  you  are  indif- 
ferent to  his  grief,  is  it  nothing  to  you  on 
your  ov  n account ! What ! is  it  nothing  to 


you  whether  you  are  saved  or  perish ; whether 
you  are  found  at  his  right,  or  his  left  hand, 
in  the  great  day  of  his  appearance  ; or  whe- 
ther he  shall  then  say  to  you,  “ Come,  ye 
blessed,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for 
you or,  “ Depart,  ye  cursed,  into  everlast- 
ing fire !”  Matt.  xxvi.  34,  41.  There  is  no 
medium,  no  alternative.  If  you  refuse  this, 
there  remaineth  no  other  sacrifice  for  sin. 
This  lamentable  indifference  to  the  Redeem- 
er’s sorrows,  is  a full  proof  of  the  baseness 
and  wickedness  of  the  human  heart ; and  it  is 
felt  as  such,  when  the  Holy  Spirit  convinces 
of  sin.  Natural  conscience  may  excite  a 
painful  conviction  of  the  sinfulness  of  many 
actions.  But  this  stupid  unbelief  of  the  heart 
is,  if  I may  so  speak,  the  sin  of  sins,  it  is  the 
root  and  source  of  every  evil,  and  yet  so  con- 
genial to  our  very  frame,  as  we  are  depraved 
creatures,  that  God  alone  can  make  the  sin- 
ner feel  it ; (John  xvi.  9 ;)  and  when  he  does 
feel  it,  the  sense  of  it  wounds  and  grieves 
him  more  than  all  his  other  sins. 

II.  With  respect  to  the  question,  if  we 
rightly  understand  what  has  been  observed 
from  the  scripture-history,  in  the  six  preced- 
ing sermons,  concerning  the  particulars  of 
his  passion,  we  may  answer  without  hesita- 
tion, Never  was  suffering,  or  sorrow,  like 
that  which  Messiah  endured  in  the  day  of 
the  Lord’s  fierce  anger.  It  is  possible  that 
history,  which  is  little  more  than  a detail  of 
the  cruelty  and  wickedness  of  mankind,  may 
furnish  us  with  instances  of  many  persons 
who  have  suffered  excruciating  torments,  and 
have  even  been  mocked  and  insulted  in  their 
agonies : But, 

1.  Was  there  ever  a character  of  his  dig- 
nity and  excellence  treated  in  such  a man- 
ner! Job  considered  his  former  state  as  a 
great  aggravation  of  his  sufferings.  He  en- 
larges upon  the  respect  which  had  been 
shown  him  in  his  prosperity.  “ When  I 
went  out  to  the  gate,  through  the  city,  the 
young  men  saw  me  and  hid  themselves,  the 
aged  arose  and  stood  up.  When  the  ear 
heard  me,  then  it  blessed  me ; and  when  the 
eye  saw  me,  it  gave  witness  to  me,”  Job 
xxix.  8,  11.  But  afterwards,  speaking  of 
fools,  of  base  men,  of  the  vilest  of  the  earth, 
he  adds,  “Now  am  I their  song,  yea,  their 
by-word.  They  abhor  me,  and  spare  not  to 
spit  in  my  face.  They  mar  my  path,  they 
set  forward  my  calamity,  they  come  upon  me 
as  a wide  breaking  in  of  waters,”  chap.  xxx. 

8 — 14.  But  Jesus  was  the  Lord  of  glory. 
He  whom  all  the  angels  of  God  worshipped, 
was  buffeted  and  spit  upon  by  the  lowest 
rabble.  If  a great  king  was  degraded  from 
his  throne,  and  exposed  to  the  derision  of 
slaves,  this  would  be  a small  thing  compared 
with  the  humiliation  of  him,  who,  in  his  own 
right,  was  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords. 

2.  Was  there  ever  so  innocent  a sufferer! 
When  Aaron  lost  his  two  sons,  he  held  his 


294 


NO  SORROW  LIKE  MESSIAH’S  SORROW. 


peace,  Lev.  x.  3.  A little  before  he  had 
been  guilty  of  making  the  golden  calf.  The 
remembrance  of  this  offence  composed  his 
mind  under  his  great  trial.  He  saw  that  he 
deserved  a still  heavier  punishment,  and  was 
silent.  In  like  manner,  David,  when  his  re- 
bellious son  Absalom  conspired  against  his 
life,  was  patient;  he  remembered  the  adul- 
tery and  murder  he  had  committed ; and, 
though  he  mourned  under  his  afflictions,  he 
durst  not  complain,  2 Sam.  xvi.  11.  The 
malefactor  upon  the  cross  submitted  to  his 
sentence,  because  he  was  a malefactor,  say- 
ing, - And  we  indeed  justly,”  Luke  xxiv.  41. 
It  is  thus  with  all  who  know  themselves. 
Under  their  severest  afflictions,  they  admit 
the  propriety  of  the  prophet’s  question,  “ Why 
should  a living  man  complain  ?”  Lam.  iii.  39. 
And  they  acknowledge,  that  it  is  of  the 
Lord’s  great  mercy  they  are  not  utterly  con- 
sumed. But  Jesus  was  holy,  harmless,  and 
undefiled  ; he  had  fulfilled  the  whole  law, 
and  had  done  nothing  amiss ; yet  he  yielded 
himself  as  a lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a 
sheep  before  her  shearers  is  dumb,  so  he 
opened  not  his  mouth,  Is.  liii,.  7. 

3.  Did  ever  any  other  sufferer  experience 
in  an  equal  degree  the  day  of  God’s  fierce 
anger  1 In  the  greatest  of  our  sufferings,  in 
those  which  bear  the  strongest  marks  of  the 
Lord’s  displeasure,  there  is  always  some 
mitigation,  some  mixture  of  mercy.  At  the 
worst,  we  have  still  reason  to  acknowledge, 
that  he  hath  not  dealt  with  us  after  our  sins, 
nor  according  to  the  full  desert  of  our  iniqui- 
ties, Psal.  ciii.  10.  If  we  are  in  pain,  we  do 
not  feel  every  kind  of  pain  at  once,  yet  we 
can  give  no  sufficient  reason  why  we  should 
not.  If  we  are  exercised  with  poverty  and 
losses,  yet  something  worth  the  keeping,  and 
more  than  we  can  justly  claim,  is  still  left  to 
us,  at  least  our  lives  are  spared,  though  for- 
feited by  sin.  If  we  are  in  distress  of  soul, 
tossed  with  tempest  and  not  comforted,  we 
are  not  quite  out  of  the  reach  of  hope.  Even 
if  sickness,  pain,  loss,  and  despair,  should  all 
overtake  us  in  the  same  moment,  all  is  still 
less  than  we  deserve.  Our  proper  desert  is 
hell,  an  exclusion  from  God,  and  confinement 
with  Satan  and  his  angels,  where  the  worm 
dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not  quenched.  Every 
thing  short  of  this  is  a mercy.  But  Jesus, 
though  he  had  no  sin  of  his  own,  bore  the  sins 
of  many.  His  sufferings  were  indeed  tem- 
porary, limited  in  their  duration,  but  other- 
wise extreme.  Witness  the  effects : his  hea- 
viness unto  death,  his  consternation,  his 
bloody  sweat,  his  eclipse  upon  the  cross,  when 
deprived  of  that  presence,  which  was  his  only, 
and  his  exceeding  joy.  On  these  accounts, 
no  sorrow  was  like  unto  his  sorrow  ! 

The  unknown  sorrows  of  the  Redeemer 
are  a continual  source  of  support  and  consol- 
ation to  his  believing  people.  In  his  suffer- 
ings they  contemplate  his  atonement,  his 


[ser.  XXI II 

love,  and  his  example,  and  they  are  animated 
by  the  bright  and  glorious  issue.  For  he 
passed  from  death  to  life,  from  suffering  to 
glory. 

(1.)  His  atonement,  apprehended  by  faith, 
delivers  them  from  guilt  and  condemnation, 
gives  them  peace  with  God,  and  access  to 
him  with  liberty  as  children,  Rom.  v.  1,  2. 
Being  thus  delivered  from  their  heavy  bur- 
den, and  from  the  power  of  Satan,  and  having 
a way  open  for  receiving  supplies  of  strength, 
according  to  their  day,  they  are  prepared  to 
take  up  their  cross,  and  to  follow  him. 

(2.)  His  love,  in  submitting  to  such  sor- 
row's for  their  sakes,  attaches  their  hearts  to 
him.  Great  is  the  power  of  love  ! It  makes 
hard  things  easy,  and  bitter  sweet.  Some  of 
us  can  tell,  or  rather  we  cannot  easily  tell, 
how  much  we  w'ould  cheerfully  do,  or  bear, 
or  forbear,  for  the  sake  of  the  person  whom 
we  dearly  love.  But  this  noblest  principle  of 
the  soul  never  can  exert  itself  with  its  full 
strength,  till  it  is  supremely  fixed  upon  its 
proper  object.  The  love  of  Christ  has  a con- 
straining force  indeed  ! 2 Cor.  v.  14.  It  is 
stronger  than  death.  It  overcomes  the  world. 
And  we  thus  love  him  because  he  first  loved 
us ; because  he  loved  us  and  gave  himself  for 
us,  1 John  iv.  19 ; Gal.  ii.  20. 

(3.)  His  example.  The  thought  that  he 
suffered  for  them,  arms  them  with  the  like 
mind.  They  look  to  him  and  are  enlightened. 
By  his  cross  they  are  crucified  to  the  world, 
and  the  world  to  them.  They  no  longer 
court  its  favour,  nor  are  afraid  of  its  frown. 
They  know  what  they  must  expect,  if  they 
will  be  his  servants,  by  the  treatment  he  met 
with  ; and  they  are  content.  He  who  en- 
dured the  contradiction  of  sinners  against 
himself  for  them,  is  worthy  that  they  should 
suffer  likewise  for  him.  It  is  their  desire, 
neither  to  provoke  the  opposition  of  men  nor 
to  dread  it.  They  commit  themselves  to  him, 
and  are  sure  that  he  wall  not  expose  them  to 
such  sufferings  as  he  endured  for  them.  So, 
likewise,  under  all  the  trials  and  afflictions 
which  they  endure  more  immediately  from 
the  hand  of  the  Lord,  a lively  thought  of  his 
sorrows  reconciles  them  to  their  own.  Thus 
by  his  stripes  they  are  healed,  and  are  com- 
forted by  having  fellowship  with  him  in  his 
sufferings. 

(4.)  Lastly,  if  more  were  necessary,  (and, 
sometimes,  through  remaining  infirmity  and 
surrounding  temptation,  every  consideration 
is  no  more  than  necessary,)  they  know  that 
their  Lord  passed  through  sufferings  to  glory. 
And  they  know  (for  they  have  his  own  gra- 
cious promise)  that  if  they  suffer  with  him, 
they  shall  also  reign  with  him,  John  xii.  26 ; 
Rom.  viii.  18.  They  are  sure  that  the  suf- 
ferings of  the  present  life  are  not  worthy  to 
be  compared  with  the  joy  which  will  then  be 
revealed  ; and  that  when  Christ,  who  is  tneir 
life,  shall  appear,  they  also  shall  aopear  with 


MESSIAH’S  INNOCENCE  VINDICATED. 


295 


SER.  XXIV.J 

him  in  glory;  (Col.  iii.  4 ;)  and  therefore  they 
are  comforted  in  all  their  tribulation,  and  can 
„sav,  “ None  of  these  things  move  me,  neither 
count  I my  life  dear  unto  myself,  so  that  I 
may  finish  my  course  with  joy,”  Acts  xx.  24. 


SERMON  XXIV. 

Messiah’s  innocence  vindicated. 

He  was  taken  from  prison  and  from  judg- 
ment ; and  who  shall  declare  his  genera- 
tion ? For  he  was  cut  off  out  of  the  land 
of  the  living : for  the  transgression  of 
my  people  ivas  he  stricken. — Isaiah  liii.  8. 

Let  not  plain  Christians  be  stumbled,  be- 
nuse  there  are  difficulties  in  the  prophetical 
parts  of  the  scripture,  and  because  transla- 
tors and  expositors  sometimes  explain  them 
with  some  difference  as  to  the  sense.  What- 
ever directly  relates  to  ou.r  faith,  practice, 
and  comfort,  may  be  plainly  collected  from 
innumerable  passages,  in  which  all  the  ver- 
sions, and  all  sober  expositors,  are  agreed. 
That  there  are  some  differences,  will  not  ap- 
pear strange,  if  we  consider  the  annuity  of 
the  Hebrew  language,  and  that  the  Old  Tes- 
tament is  the  only  book  extant  that  was 
written  during  the  time  that  it  was  the  com- 
mon language  of  the  people.  For  this  reason 
we  meet  with  many  words  which  occur  but 
once;  and  others,  which  do  not  occur  fre- 
quently, are  evidently  used  in  more  than  one 
sense.  If  we  suppose  that  a time  should 
come  when  the  English  language  should  be 
no  longer  spoken,  and  no  more  than  a single 
volume  in  it  be  preserved,  we  may  well  con- 
ceive that  posterity  might  differ  as  to  the 
sense  of  many  expressions,  notwithstanding 
the  assistances  they  might  obtain  by  com- 
paring the  English  with  the  French*  Dutch, 
and  other  languages,  which  were  in  use  at 
the  same  period.  Such  assistance  we  derive 
from  the  Chaldee,  Syriac,  Greek,  and  other 
ancient  versions  of  the  Old  Testament,  suf- 
ficient to  confirm  us  in  the  true  sense  of  the 
whole,  and  to  throw  light  upon  many  pas- 
sages otherwise  dark  and  dubious;  and  yet 
there  will  remain  a number  of  places,  the 
sense  of  which  the  best  critics  have  not  been 
able  to  fix  with  certainty.  Farther,  the  pro- 
phecies are  usually  expressed  in  the  style  of 
poetry,  which,  in  all  languages,  is  remote 
from  the  common  forms  of  speaking.  The 
grand  evidence,  to  a humble  mind,  that  the 
holy  scripture  was  originally  given  by  inspi- 
ration of  God,  and  that  the  version  of  it  which 
by  his  good  providence  we  are  favoured  with 
is  authentic,  is  the  effect  it  has  upon  the 
heart  and  conscience  when  enlightened  by 
the  Holy  Spirit.  And  without  this  internal, 
experimental  evidence,  the  learned  are  no 
less  at  a loss  than  the  vulgar. 

An  acquaintance  with  the  Hebrew  will 


perhaps  suggest  a meaning  in  this  verse  (the 
latter  part  only  of  which  is  taken  into  the 
Messiah)  which  may  not  readily  occur  to  an 
English  reader.  But  the  purport  of  it  is 
plainly  expressed  in  many  other  passages. 
The  text  is  not  merely  a repetition  of  what 
was  spoken  before  concerning  the  Redeemer’s 
sufferings;  rather  the  declaration  of  what  was 
to  follow  them  begins  here.  It  is  the  open- 
ing of  a bright  and  glorious  subject.  He  was 
taken,  he  was  taken  up,  like  Enoch  and  Eli- 
jah, from  prison,  and  from  judgment,  and  who 
can  declare  his  generation!  or  (as  the  word 
properly  signifies)  his  age!  Who  can  declare 
his  state,  the  establishment  and  duration  of 
his  dignity,  influence,  and  government!  For 
though  he  was  cut  off,  made  an  excision  and 
a curse,  from  amongst  men,  it  was  not  upon 
his  own  account,  but  for  the  transgression  of 
my  people,  that  he  was  smitten. 

God  was  manifested  in  the  flesh,  (1  Tim. 
iii.  16,)  and  in  the  flesh  he  suffered  as  a ma- 
lefactor. Undoubtedly  the  divine  nature  is  in- 
capable of  suffering;  but  the  human  nature, 
which  did  suffer,  was  assumed  by  him  who  is 
over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever,  Rom.  ix.  5. 
But  he  was  justified  in  the  Spirit,  and  suffi- 
cient care  was  taken,  that  in  his  lowest  hu- 
miliation, though  he  was  condemned  and  re- 
viled, his  character  should  be  vindicated.  I 
shall  therefore  consider  at  present  the  testi- 
monies given  to  his  innocence.  Though  he 
was  cut  off  from  the  land  of  the  living,  it 
was  only  as  a substitute  for  others.  He  was 
stricken  for  the  transgressions  of  his  people. 

1.  The  first  attention,  and  which  of  itself 
is  fully  sufficient  to  establish  this  point,  is 
that  of  Judas.  He  was  one  of  the  twelve 
apostles  who  attended  our  Lord’s  person,  and 
who  were  admitted  to  a nearer  and  more  fre- 
quent intercourse  with  him  than  the  rest  of 
his  disciples.  Though  our  Lord  knew  that 
his  heart  was  corrupt,  and  that  he  would  prove 
a traitor,  he  does  not  appear  to  have  treated 
him  with  peculiar  reserve,  or  to  have  kept 
him  more  at  a distance  than  the  other  apos- 
tles; for  when  he  told  them,  “One  of  you 
shall  betray  me,”  they  had  no  particular  sus- 
picion of  Judas.  He  therefore  was  well  ac- 
quainted with  the  more  retired  hours  of  his 
Master’s  life.  He  had  been  often  with  him 
in  Gethsemane  before  he  went  thither  to  be- 
tray him  to  his  enemies.  When  he  had  acted 
this  treacherous  part,  if  he,  who  had  been  fre- 
quently present  when  Jesus  conversed  most 
freely  in  private  with  his  select  followers,  had 
' known  any  thing  amiss  in  his  conduct,  we 
may  be  sure  he  would  gladly  have  disclosed 
it,  for  his  own  justification.  Christian  socie- 
ties have  usually  been  reviled  and  slandered 
by  those  who  have  apostatized  from  them; 
their  mistakes,  if  they  were  justly  chargeable 
with  any,  have  been  eagerly  published  and 
aggravated,  and  many  things  often  laid  to 
their  charge  which  they  knew  not.  But  Ji> 


296 


MESSIAH’S  INNOCENCE  VINDICATED. 


das,  on  the  contrary,  was  compelled  by  his 
conscience,  to  return  his  ill-gotten  gain  to 
the  chief  priests  and  elders,  and  to  confess, 
“ I have  sinned,  in  that  I have  betrayed  the 
innocent  blood,”  Matt,  xxvii.  4.  Consider- 
ing the  time  of  making  this  declaration,  when 
he  saw  that  he  was  already  condemned,  and 
the  persons  to  whom  he  made  it,  even  to 
those  who  had  condemned  him,  it  cannot  be 
denied  that  he  was  an  unsuspected  and  com- 
petent witness  to  his  innocence.  And  the  an- 
swer of  the  chief  priests  implied,  that,  though 
their  malice  could  be  satisfied  with  nothing 
less  than  the  death  of  this  innocent  person, 
they  were  unable  to  contradict  the  traitor’s 
testimony. 

2.  Though  Pilate  likewise  condemned  Mes- 
siah to  death,  to  gratify  the  importunity  of 
the  Jews,  he  repeatedly  declared  his  firm  per- 
suasion of  his  innocence;  and  he  did  it  with 
great  solemnity.  “ He  took  water  and  wash- 
ed his  hands  (publicly)  before  the  multitude, 
saying,  I am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  this  just 
person,”  Matt,  xxvii.  24.  He  laboured  for 
his  release,  though  the  fear  of  man  prevailed 
upon  him  at  last,  as  it  has  upon  many,  to  act 
in  defiance  of  the  light  and  conviction  of  his 
conscience.  And  from  him  we  learn,  that 
Herod,  (Luke  xxiii.  15,)  notwithstanding  he 
mocked  him  and  set  him  at  nought,  consider- 
ed the  accusations  of  his  enemies  to  be  entire- 
ly groundless.  And  farther,  when  the  Jews 
proposed  such  an  alteration  of  the  title  af- 
fixed to  his  cross,  as  might  imply  that  the 
claims  our  Lord  had  made  were  unjust  and  cri- 
minal, Pilate  utterly  refused  to  comply  with 
their  demand. 

3.  The  thief  upon  the  cross,  with  his  dying 
breath,  said,  “This  man  hath  done  nothing 
amiss.”  If  his  competency  as  a witness  should 
be  disputed,  because  it  is  probable  he  had 
known  but  little  of  him,  I admit  the  objection. 
Be  it  so,  that  this  malefactor  had  little  per- 
sonal knowledge  of  our  Lord.  Then  his  opi- 
nion of  his  innocence  must  have  been  found- 
ed upon  public  report;  and,  therefore,  it  seems, 
he  spoke  not  for  himself  only ; but  his  words 
may  be  taken  as  a proof,  that  the  people  at 
large,  though  they  suffered  themselves  to  be 
influenced  by  the  chief  priests,  to  demand  his 
death,  and  to  prefer  Barabbas,  a robber  and  a j 
murderer,  to  him,  were  generally  conscious  j 
that  he  had  done  nothing  amiss.  Many  of ; 
those  who  now  said,  “ Crucify  him,  Crucify  | 
him,”  had,  not  long  before,  welcomed  him  ; 
with  acclamations  of  praise,  saying,  “Hosan- 
nah to  the  son  of  David.”  This  inconsistence  j 
and  inconstancy  is  not  altogether  surprising  | 
to  those  who  are  well  acquainted  with  the 
weakness  and  wickedness  of  human  nature  i 
in  its  present  state ; and  who  consider  the  j 
effects  which  the  misrepresentations  and  ar- 
tifice of  persons  of  great  name,  and  in  high 
office,  have  often  produced  in  the  minds  of  the 
ignorant  and  superstitious.  Thus,  at  Lystra, 


[ser.  XXIV, 

through  the  persuasion  of  the  Jews,  the  apos- 
tle Paul  was  stoned  and  left  for  dead,  (Acts 
xiv.  12, 19,)  by  the  very  people,  who,  a little 
before,  could  with  difficulty  be  restrained  from 
paying  him  divine  honours. 

4.  Though  the  salvation  of  men,  and  the 
honour  of  the  law  of  God  required,  that  when 
Messiah  undertook  to  make  an  atonement  for 
our  sins,  he  should  be  thus  given  up  to  the 
rage  and  cruelty  of  his  enemies,  suffer  all  the 
infamy  due  to  the  worst  and  vilest  transgres- 
sors, and  be  deserted  by  God  and  man;  yet 
his  heavenly  Father  bore  a signal  and  solemn 
testimony  to  his  character.  The  frame  of 
nature  sympathized  with  her  suffering  Lord. 
The  heavens  w?ere  clothed  with  sackcloth ; the 
sun  withdrew  his  shining;  the  sanctuary  was 
laid  open  by  the  rending  of  the  vail  of  the 
temple  from  the  top  to  the  bottom;  the  earth 
trembled  greatly ; the  rocks  were  rent ; the 
graves  opened,  and  the  dead  arose.  These 
events,  in  connexion  with  what  had  passed 
before,  extorted  an  acknowledgment  of  his  in- 
nocence from  the  Roman  centurion  who  was 
appointed  to  attend  his  execution. 

Thus,  it  appears,  that  Judas,  who  betrayed 
him;  the  Jewish  council,  wThich  could  not 
find  sufficient  ground,  even  though  they  em- 
ployed false  and  suborned  witnesses  to  pass 
sentence  upon  him ; Herod,  who  derided  him; 
Pilate,  who  condemned  him ; the  malefactor, 
w7ho  suffered  with  him;  and  the  commander 
of  the  soldiers  who  crucified  him,  all  com- 
bined in  a declaration  of  his  innocence:  God 
himself  confirming  their  wrord,  by  signs  and 
wonders  in  heaven  and  upon  earth. 

It  may  seem  quite  unnecessary  to  prove 
the  innocency  of  him,  who,  in  his  human  na- 
ture, was  absolutely  perfect,  and  in  whom  the 
presence  and  fulness  of  God  dwelt;  and  it  is 
indeed  unnecessary  to  those  who  believe  in 
his  name.  It  is,  howTever,  a pleasing  contem- 
plation to  them,  and  has  an  important  influ- 
ence upon  their  faith  and  hope.  In  this  they 
triumph,  that  he  who  knew  no  sin  himself, 
was  made  sin,  was  treated  as  a sinner  for 
them,  that  they  might  be  made  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  in  him.  The  High  Priest  of  our 
profession  needed  not,  as  those  who  typified 
his  office  of  old,  to  offer  up  sacrifice,  first  for 
his  own  sins,  and  then  for  the  sins  of  the  peo- 
ple; for  he  was  perfectly  holy,  harmless,  and 
undefiled.  And  had  he  not  been  a lamb  with- 
out spot  or  blemish,  he  could  not  have  been 
accepted  on  our  behalf.  It  was  the  perfection 
of  his  voluntary  obedience  to  the  law  of  our 
nature,  under  wduch  he  submitted  to  be  made, 
which,  conjoined  with  the  excellency  of  his 
character  as  the  Son  of  God,  made  him  meet, 
able,  and  worthy,  to  expiate  our  transgres- 
sions. By  the  one  offering  of  himself,  once 
offered,  he  has  made  an  end  of  sin,  brought 
in  an  everlasting  righteousness,  and  having 
appeared  with  his  own  blood  within  the  vail, 
in  the  presence  of  God  for  us,  and  ever  living 


MESSIAH’S  INNOCENCE  VINDICATED. 


*297 


SER.  XXIV.] 

to  make  intercession  for  all  who  come  unto 
God  by  him,  he  is  proposed  in  the  gospel  as 
the  author  of  eternal  salvation  to  all  who  obey 
him.  In  him,  all  the  seed  of  Israel  shall  be 
justified,  and  shall  glory,  Is.  xli.  17,  25.  In 
him  the  true  Israel,  the  partakers  of  the  faith 
of  Abraham,  shall  be  saved,  saved  to  the  ut- 
termost, saved  with  an  everlastingsalvation; 
they  shall  not  be  ashamed,  nor  confounded, 
world  without  end. 

But  who  that  knows  these  things  can  suf- 
ficiently commiserate  the  fatal  effects  of  that 
unbelief  which  blinds  and  hardens  the  hearts 
of  multitudes  ! especially  that  more  learned 
and  informed,  and  therefore  more  inexcusable 
unbelief,  which  characterizes  the  modern 
patrons  of  scepticism.  They  read  and  admire 
ancient  history.  There  is  no  old  story  so 
frivolous  or  improbable,  but  it  is  sufficient  to 
engage  their  attention,  and  to  exercise  their 
acumen,  if  it  be  found  in  Herodotus  or  Livy. 
They  spare  no  pains,  they  perplex  them- 
selves, and  weary  their  readers  with  their 
attempts  to  decypher  an  ancient  inscription, 
or  to  fix  the  date,  or  reconcile  the  circum- 
stances of  a supposed  event,  which,  after  all, 
perhaps  never  had  place  but  in  the  imagina- 
tion of  the  writer.  Their  implicit  deference 
to  such  uncertain  authorities  as  these,  often 
verges  upon  the  border  of  extreme  credulity. 
The  Bible  is  an  ancient  history  likewise ; and 
if  it  was  only  received  upon  the  footing  of 
the  rest,  as  merely  a human  composition,  the 
facts  which  it  relates,  and  the  manner  in 
which  they  are  related,  the  admirable  sim- 
plicity of  narration  in  some  parts,  the  un- 
rivalled sublimity  of  description  in  others; 
the  justness  and  discrimination  of  charac- 
ters; the  views  it  unfolds  of  the  workings  of 
the  human  heart,  and  the  springs  of  action,  so 
exactly  conformable  to  experience  and  ob- 
servation, might  surely  recommend  it  to  their 
notice.  And  possibly,  if  it  did  claim  no 
higher  authority  than  a human  composition, 
men  who  have  any  just  pretensions  to  taste, 
would  admire  it  no  less  than  they  now  un- 
dervalue it.  But  because  it  does  not  flatter 
their  pride,  nor  give  indulgence  to  their  cor- 
rupt propensities,  they  are  afraid  to  study  it, 
lest  the  internal  marks  of  its  divine  original 
should  force  unwelcome  convictions  upon 
their  minds.  Therefore  they  remain  wil- 
lingly ignorant  of  its  contents,  or  the  know- 
ledge they  discover  of  it  is  so  very  super- 
ficial, that  a well  instructed  child  of  ten 
years  of  age  may  smile  at  the  mistakes  of 
critics  and  philosophers.  That  such  a book 
:s  extant,  is  undeniable.  How  can  they  ac- 
count for  its  production!  A view  of  what 
they  actually  have  done,  will  warrant  us  to 
assert,  that  the  wisest  men  of  antiquity,  nei- 
ther would  have  written  such  a book  if  they 
could,  nor  were  they  able,  had  they  been 
ever  so  willing.  And  yet  we  have  as  good 
evidence,  that  the  New  Testament  was  writ- 
Vol.  II.  2 P 


ten  by  plain  and  unlearned  men,  as  we  have 
for  any  fact  recorded  in  history.  How  could 
such  men  invent  such  a book!  and  how 
should  they  without  seeming  directly  to  de- 
sign it,  but  incidently  as  it  were,  represent, 
that  persons  of  such  various  characters,  who 
concurred  in  putting  Jesus  to  death,  should 
all  equally  concur  in  establishing  the  tes- 
timony of  his  innocence. 

True  Christians,  when  they  suffer  unjustly, 
may  learn,  from  the  example  of  their  Lord, 
to  suffer  patiently.  The  apostle  presses  this 
argument  upon  servants,  (1  Pet.  ii.  18,  20,) 
who  in  those  days  were  chiefly  bond  ser- 
vants, or  slaves.  He,  therefore,  evidently 
supposes,  that  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel 
was  sufficient  to  qualify  people  in  the  lowest 
situations  of  human  life,  with  a fortitude  and 
magnanimity  of  spirit  of  which  philosophy 
could  scarcely  reach  the  conception.  In  ef- 
fect, to  be  much  taken  up  with  the  interests 
of  self,  to  live  upon  the  breath  of  others,  to 
be  full  of  resentment  for  every  injury,  and 
watchful  to  retaliate  it ; these  are  the  proper- 
ties and  tokens  of  a little  and  narrow  mind. 
It  requires  no  energy,  no  sacrifice,  no  resolu- 
tion, to  acquire  such  a disposition ; for  it  is 
natural  to  us,  and  powerful  and  habitual  in  the 
weakest  and  least  respectable  characters.  But 
to  act  uniformly  as  the  servants  of  God,  satis- 
fied with  his  approbation,  under  the  regulation 
of  his  will,  and  for  his  sake  cheerfully  to  bear 
whatever  hardships  a compliance  with  duty 
may  expose  us  to,  enduring  grief,  suffering 
wrongfully,  and  acting  in  the  spirit  of  benevo- 
lence and  meekness,  not  only  to  the  good,  but 
also  to  the  froward ; this  indicates  a true  noble- 
ness of  soul.  And  to  this  we  are  called  by  our 
profession:  for  thus  Christ  suffered.  He  did 
no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  his  mouth; 
yet  he  was  reviled,  but  he  reviled  not  again. 
He  suffered,  though  innocent ; but  he  threat- 
ened not.  He  was  crucified  by  wicked  men  : 
but  he  prayed  for  them  while  they  were 
nailing  him  to  the  cross.  This  was  an  emi- 
nent branch  of  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ ; 
and  it  ought  to  be  a distinguishing  feature  in 
the  character  of  his  people.  For,  is  the  dis- 
ciple above  his  Lord ! or  should  the  conduct 
of  the  disciple  contradict  that  of  his  Lord ! 
Undoubtedly,  so  far  as  we  are  partakers  in  the 
doctrine  of  his  sufferings,  and  have  real  fel- 
lowship with  him  in  his  death,  we  shall  re- 
semble him.  If  we  say  we  abide  in  him,  we 
ought  to  walk,  even  as  he  walked,  1 John  ii. 

6.  But  they,  who,  calling  themselves  Chris- 
tians, are  full  of  the  spirit  of  self-justifica- 
tion, contention,  and  complaint,  while  they 
profess  to  believe  in  him,  deny  him  by  their 
works.  The  apostles  Peter  and  John,  deeply 
affected  by  their  obligations  to  him,  and  by  the 
exquisite  pattern  of  meekness  and  tenderness 
which  he  had  set  before  them,  departed  from 
the  presence  of  the  council,  not  swelling1  with 
anger,  nor  hanging  down  their  heads  with 


233 


MESSIAH  RISING  FROM  THE  DEAD. 


grief,  but  rejoicing  that  they  were  counted 
worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  his  sake,  Acts  v. 
41.  And  he  deserves  no  less  from  us  than 
he  did  from  them.  It  was  for  us,  no  less 
than  for  them,  that  he  endured  reproach,  and 
was  content  to  die  as  a malefactor,  though 
he  was  innocent. 


SERMON  XXV. 


MESSIAH  RISING  FROM  THE  DEAD. 


For  tliou  wilt  not  leave  my  soul  in  hell : 
neither  wilt  thou  suffer  thy  Holy  One  to 
see  corruption. — Psalm  xvi.  10. 


That  the  gospel  is  a divine  revelation, 
may  be  summarily  proved  from  the  character 
of  its  Author.  If  an  infidel  was  so  far  divest- 
ed of  prejudice  and  prepossession,  as  to  read 
the  history  of  Jesus  Christ  recorded  by  the 
evangelists,  with  attention,  and  in  order  to 
form  his  judgment  of  it,  simply  and  candidly, 
as  evidence  should  appear,  I think  he  must 
observe  many  particulars  in  his  spirit  and 
conduct,  so  very  different  from  the  prevailing 
sentiments  of  mankind,  as  to  convince  him, 
that  man,  in  his  present  state,  could  not  pos- 
sibly have  conceived  the  idea  of  such  a cha- 
racter. Poets  and  historians  have  often  em- 
ployed their  powers  in  delineating  what  ap- 
peared to  them  the  great  and  the  excellent 
in  human  conduct.  But  how  different  are  the 
pictures  of  their  admired  heroes,  sages,  and 
legislators,  from  the  portrait  of  the  Saviour, 
as  it  is  drawn  with  the  utmost  simplicity  by 
plain  unlettered  men,  who,  without  art  or  af- 
fectation, only  describe  what  they  profess  to 
have  seen  and  heard.  I fix  at  present  upon 
a single  consideration,  which  perhaps  cannot 
be  expressed  more  properly  or  forcibly,  than 
in  the  words  of  an  ingenious  writer*  now 
fiving.  “ He  is  the  only  founder  of  a religion, 
in  the  history  of  mankind,  which  is  totally 
unconnected  with  all  human  policy  and  go- 
vernment, and  therefore  totally  unconducive 
to  any  worldly  purpose  whatever.  All  others, 
Mahomet,  Numa,  and  even  Moses  himself, 
blended  their  religious  institutions  with  their 
civil,  and  by  them  obtained  dominion  over 
their  respective  people.  But  Christ  neither 
aimed  at,  nor  would  accept  of,  any  such 
power.  He  rejected  (John  xviii.  36)  every 
object  which  all  other  men  pursue,  and  made 
choice  of  those  which  others  fly  from  and  are 
afraid  of.  He  refused  power,  riches,  honours, 


and  pleasure;  and  courted  poverty,  ignominy, 
tortures,  and  death.  Many  have  been  the 
enthusiasts  and  impostors,  who  have  endea- 
voured to  impose  on  the  world  pretended 


* Jetiyn's  Internal  Evidence  of  the  Christian  Re-  ! 
Ugion,  j).  33,  34.  edit.  3.  j 


[SER.  XXV. 

revelations;  and  some  of  them,  from  pride, 
obstinacy,  or  principle,  have  gone  so  far  as  to 
lay  down  their  lives  rather  than  retract : but 
I defy  history  to  show  one,  who  ever  made 
his  own  sufferings  and  death  (John  xii.  24, 
32,  33)  a necessary  part  of  his  original  plan, 
and  essential  to  his  mission.  This  Christ 
actually  did ; he  foresaw,  foretold,  declared 
their  necessity,  and  voluntarily  endured  them. 

The  death  of  our  Lord  was  indeed  essen- 
tial to  his  plan;  as  such,  it  was  constantly  in 
his  view,  and  he  often  spoke  of  it.  Probably 
it  was  the  whole  of  his  enemies’  plan ; and 
when  they  saw  him  dead,  buried,  and  the  se- 
pulchre sealed,  they  triumphed  in  their  suc- 
cess, and  expected  to  hear  of  him  no  more. 
But  the  scriptures,  which  were  read  in  their 
synagogues  every  sabhath-day,  foretold  his 
resurrection  from  the  dead.  The  text  before 
| us,  if  there  were  no  other,  is  a sufficient 
j proof  of  this,  to  those  who  acknowledge  the 
j authority  of  the  New  Testament,  since  it  is 
I expressly  applied  to  him  by  the  apostles  Pe- 
ter and  Paul. 

The  word  in  the  Hebrew  text  rendered, 
in  our  version,  soul , is  used  in  different 
senses.  According  to  the  connexion  in 
which  it  stands,  it  signifies  breath,  life,  soul, 
or  spirit,  and  sometimes  the  dead  body.  The 
corresponding  Greek  word,  where  the  apos- 
tle quotes  this  verse,  (Acts  ii.  27,)  has  like- 
wise various  significations.  And  the  original 
words  answering  to  hell,  signify  both  the  in- 
visible world,  or  the  state  of  the  dead,  and 
sometimes  the  grave.  Notwithstanding  this 
seeming  diversity,  we  are  at  no  loss  here  for 
the  precise  sense.  Scripture  is  the  best  in- 
terpreter of  itself.  It  is  evidently  the  apos- 
tle’s design  to  prove  that  the  psalmist  fore- 
saw, and  foretold,  the  resurrection  of  that 
body  which  was  taken  dowrn  dead  from  the 
cross,  and  laid  in  Joseph’s  tomb.  With  this 
body  our  Lord  arose  on  the  third  day,  ac- 
cording to  the  scriptures. 

Though  Messiah  was,  for  our  sakes,  treated 
as  a malefactor,  all  who  were  immediately 
concerned  in  his  death  wrere  constrained  (as 
we  have  seen)  to  declare  his  innocence.  But 
he  was  worthy  of  a more  solemn  and  autho- 
ritative justification.  Accordingly,  “He  was 
declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  with  power, 
by  his  resurrection  from  the  dead,”  Rom.  i.  4. 

The  apostle  expounds  “thine  Holy  One” 
by  the  word  flesh,  Acts  ii.  29.  The  human 
nature,  the  body  formed  by  the  immediate 
power  of  God,  and  born  of  a virgin,  was 
holy. — It  was  a “ holy  thing;”  (Luke  i.  35  ;) 
perfect  and  pure,  and  therefore  naturally  not 
mortal,  though  subject  to  death  for  us.  In 
this  nature  the  son  of  God  was  charged  with 
sins  not  his  own ; he  became  willingly  re- 
sponsible for  many,  Matt.  xx.  28.  What- 
ever was  necessary  on  the  behalf  of  sinners, 
to  render  their  forgiveness  consistent  with 
the  honour  of  the  law,  justice,  truth,  and  go- 


MESSIAH  RISING  FROM  THE  DEAD. 


299 


HER.  XXV.] 

vernment  of  God,  was  exacted  of  him,  and  he 
performed,  and  paid  to  the  utmost.  He  made 
a full  atonement  for  sin ; and  though  he  had 
power  over  his  life,  he  hung  hour  after  houi 
in  agonies  upon  the  cross,  till  he  said,  “ It  is 
finished.”  Then  he  resigned  his  spirit  into 
the  hands  of  his  heavenly  Father.  He  was 
afterwards  buried.  But  having  finished  his 
whole  undertaking,  destroyed  death,  and  him 
that  had  the  power  of  it,  and  opened  the  way 
to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  in  favour  of  all 
who  should  believe  in  him,  it  was  not  possi- 
ble that  he  should  be  detained  in  the  grave, 
Acts  ii.  24.  He  had  power  likewise  to  re- 
sume the  life  he  had  laid  down  for  his  sheep ; 
and  he  arose  the  third  day,  to  exercise  all 
power  and  authority  in  heaven  and  in  earth. 

His  resurrection,  therefore,  is  the  grand 
principal  fact  upon  which  the  truth  and  im- 
portance of  Christianity  rests.  For  though 
Christ  died,  if  he  had  not  risen  again,  your 
faith  and  our  preaching  would  be  in  vain. 
We  should  be  yet  in  our  sins,  1 Cor.  xv.  17. 
A»d  though  it  was  not  necessary  that  his 
resurrection  should  have  been  so  publicly 
known,  at  the  time,  as  his  crucifixion,  the 
evidence  for  it  is  strong  and  decisive.  No 
one  point  of  ancient  history  is  capable  of  such 
clear  accumulated  proof.  The  apostles  fre- 
quently saw  him,  conversed  with  him,  ate 
and  drank  with  him,  and  were  assured  that  it 
was  he  by  many  infallible  proofs.  They  could 
not  be  deceived  themselves,  nor  could  they 
have  any  temptation  to  deceive  others.  They 
declared  his  resurrection  to  the  very  people 
who  put  him  to  death ; and  they  confirmed  it 
by  many  indisputable  miracles,  which  they 
performed  in  his  name.  They  persevered  in 
this  testimony,  in  defiance  of  the  malice  of 
the  Jews  and  the  scorn  of  the  Heathens. 
And  by  this  doctrine  of  a crucified  risen  Sa- 
viour, though  unsupported  by  the  patronage 
of  human  power,  yea,  though  opposed  by  it  in 
every  place,  they  effected  that  change  in  the 
moral  world,  wherever  they  went,  which  the 
philosophers  had  not  been  able  to  produce,  by 
all  their  instructions,  in  a single  instance ; 
turning  men,  whom  they  found  under  the 
strongest  prejudices  of  education  and  habit, 
from  darkness  to  light,  and  from  the  worship 
of  dumb  idols,  to  serve  the  living  and  the 
true  God,  1 Thes.  i.  9. 

But  there  are  proofs  of  this  point  which 
depend  not  upon  arguments  or  history ; which 
require  neither  learning,  genius,  nor  study  to 
comprehend  ; but  are  equally  adapted  to  per- 
sons of  all  capacities,  and  in  all  circumstances. 
These  are  the  effects  which  this  doctrine  pro- 
duces on  the  hearts  of  those  who  truly  re- 
ceive it  upon  the  authority  of  scripture,  un- 
der the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose 
office  it  is  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  mind,  to 
take  of  the  things  of  Jesus,  (what  the  scripture 
reveals  of  his  person,  offices,  and  glory,)  and 
to  present  them,  with  infallible  light  and 


evidence,  to  those  who  humbly  yield  them- 
selves to  his  teaching.  These  are  made 
partakers  of  the  power  of  his  resurrection, 
Phil.  iii.  10.  It  delivers  them  from  guilt  and 
fear,  animates  them  with  confidence  towards 
God,  weans  them  from  the  love  and  spirit  of 
this  evil  world,  inspires  them  with  great  and 
glorious  hopes,  and  delivers  them  from  the 
fear  of  death.  They  are  risen  with  Christ, 
by  faith,  and  seek  the  things  which  are  above, 
(Col.  iii.  1,)  where  they  know  their  Lord  and 
Saviour  is  seated  in  glory. 

I do  but  touch  upon  these  particulars  at 
present,  because  the  subject  will  come  under 
our  consideration  again,  from  a subsequent, 
passage  in  the  Oratorio.  Yet  I would  not 
wholly  omit  leading  your  reflections  to  them, 
though  what  I briefly  offer  now,  may  make 
what  I shall  then  offer  (if  my  life  is  prolong- 
ed .to  proceed  so  far)  appear  under  the  disad- 
vantage of  a repetition  of  the  same  thoughts. 
Indeed,  I know  not  how  to  place  the  proof  of 
this  capital  doctrine  in  a light  entirely  new. 
The  most  satisfactory  proofs  are  the  most  ob- 
vious ; and  it  would  be  folly  to  substitute 
weaker  in  their  place  for  the  sake  of  novelty. 
But  if  I should  live  to  resume  the  subject, 
some  of  you  who  are  now  present  may  not 
live  to  hear  me.  So  far  as  concerns  the  fact, 
I may  hope  that  the  most,  or  all  of  you,  are 
believers,  and  that  you  are  already  persuaded 
in  your  minds  that  the  Lord  is  risen  indeed  ! 
Luke  xxiv.  34.  I am  not  preaching  to  Jews 
or  Mahometans,  but  to  professed  Christians. 
But  permit  me  to  ask,  What  influence  this 
truth  has  upon  your  hopes,  your  tempers,  and 
your  conduct?  The  powers  of  darkness  know 
that  Christ  is  risen.  They  believe,  they  feel, 
they  tremble.  I hope  none  of  you  will  be 
content  with  such  a faith  as  may  be  found  in 
the  fallen  angels.  As  surely  as  he  is  risen, 
he  will  at  length  return  to  judge  the  world. 
“ Behold  he  cometh  in  the  clouds,  and  every 
eye  shall  see  him  !”  They  who  are  prepared 
to  meet  him,  who  are  waiting  for  him,  and 
who  long  for  his  appearance,  have  reason  to 
rejoice  that  he  once  died,  and  rose  again. 

Many  are  the  advantages  which  true  Chris- 
tians derive  from  a spiritual  and  enlightened 
knowledge  of  this  doctrine.  I will  mention 
a few. 

1.  As  Messiah  was  delivered,  that  is  de- 
livered up,  as  a hostage  to  the  demands  of 
justice  for  our  offences ; so  they  know  tiiat 
he  was  raised  again  for  our  justification, 
Rom.  v.  25.  By  virtue  of  that  union  which 
subsists  between  Messiah,  as  the  head  of  his 
body  the  church,  and  all  his  members;  that 
is,  all  in  the  successive  ages  of  the  world, 
who  believe  in  him  by  a faith  of  divine  ope- 
ration ; he  is  their  legal  representative ; ho 
and  they  are  considered  as  one.  His  suffer- 
ings, his  whole  humiliation  and  obedience 
unto  death,  is  so  imputed  to  them,  that  they 
thereby  are  exempted  from  condemnation ; 


300 


MESSIAH  RISING  FROM  THE  DEAD. 


and  though  not  from  all  sufferings,  yet  from 
all  that  is  properly  penal,  or  strictly  a punish- 
ment. What  they  suffer  is  only  in  a way  of 
discipline  or  chastisement;  and  to  them  a 
token,  not  of  wrath,  but  of  love.  On  the 
other  hand,  as  he  by  his  resurrection  was 
vindicated,  justified  from  the  reproaches  of 
his  enemies,  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God, 
with  power,  and  raised  to  glory  ; they  have 
fellowship  with  him  herein.  God  exalted 
him  to  glory,  and  gave  him  a name  above 
every  name,  that  their  faith  and  hope  might 
be  in  God,  1 Pet.  i.  *21.  They  are  not  only 
pardoned,  but  accepted  in  the  Beloved.  And 
after  this  state  of  discipline  is  ended,  they 
shall  be  treated  as  if  they  had  never  sinned. 
For  if  their  sins  are  sought  for  in  that  day, 
they  shall  not  be  found.  If  any  charge  should 
be  brought  against  them,  it  shall  be  over- 
ruled— by  this  comprehensive  unanswerable 
plea — Christ  that  died,  yea,  rather  tliat 
is  risen  again,  appears  in  the  presence  of 
God,  acknowledges  them  as  his  own,  and 
makes  intercession  for  them,  Rom.  viii.  33, 
34.  Among  men,  a criminal  may  obtain  a 
pardon,  may  escape  the  sentence  he  has  de- 
served, and  yet  be  left  in  a destitute  and 
miserable  condition.  But  justification  is 
God’s  manner  of  pardoning  sinners,  accord- 
ing to  the  sovereignty  and  riches  of  his  grace, 
in  the  Son  of  his  love.  Those  whom  he  par- 
dons, he  also  justifies  ; and  whom  he  justifies, 
lie  also  glorifies.  And  even  now  in  this  life, 
though  it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  they  shall 
be,  though  their  present  privileges  are  far 
short  of  what  they  hope  for,  and  though  eye 
hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  hath  it  en- 
tered into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive  what 
God  hath  prepared  for  them,  (1  Cor.  ii.  9,) 
yet  even  now  are  they  the  children  of  God, 
1 John  iii.  2.  And  in  the  midst  of  their  trials 
and  infirmities,  though  conscious  of  much 
defect,  and  many  defilements,  in  their  best 
hours  and  services ; and  though  they  have 
not  forgotten  their  iniquities  and  provoca- 
tions, when  they  lived  without  God  in  the 
world ; yet,  according  to  the  measure  of  their 
faith,  exercised  upon  their  Saviour,  who  was 
raised  for  their  just  ification,  they  can  rejoice 
in  the  knowledge  of  their  acceptance,  and 
rely  upon  him  for  their  perseverance;  and 
they  dare  approach  the  great,  holy,  and  heart- 
searching God,  as  to  a Father,  and  pour  out 
their  hearts  before  him,  with  greater  freedom 
than  they  can  use  to  their  dearest  earthly 
friends.  And  while  they  feel  and  confess 
themselves  unworthy  of  the  smallest  of  his 
mercies,  they  are  not  afraid  to  ask  for  the 
greatest  blessings  his  bounty  can  bestow, 
even  to  be  set  as  a seal  upon  his  heart,  and 
upon  his  arm,  to  be  filled  with  all  his  com- 
municable fulness,  and  to  claim  him  as  their 
everlasting  portion. 

2.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  from  the 
dead  is  a pledge  and  specimen  of  that  almigh- 


jSER.  xx\ 

ty  power  which  is  engaged  on  their  behalf,  to 
overcome  all  the  obstacles,  difficulties,  and 
enemies  they  are  liable  to  meet  with  in  their 
pilgrimage,  which  threaten  to  disappoint  their 
hopes,  and  to  prevent  them  from  obtainmg 
their  heavenly  inheritance.  The  first  com- 
munication of  a principle  of  faith  and  spiri- 
tual life  to  their  hearts,  whereby  they  are 
delivered  from  the  dominion  of  sin,  and  from 
the  spirit  and  love  of  the  wTorld,  is  attributed 
to  the  exceeding  greatness  of  that  mighty 
power  (Eph.  i.  19 — 21)  which  raised  the 
dead  body  of  the  Lord  from  the  grave,  and 
set  him  at  his  own  right  hand,  far  above  all 
principality  and  might,  and  every  name  that  is 
named.  And  often  the  church,  collectively,  in 
its  militant  state,  and  the  individuals  which 
compose  it,  in  their  personal  concerns,  have 
been  brought,  to  outward  appearance,  exceed- 
ing low.  Their  enemies  have  seemed  upon 
the  point  of  triumphing,  and  saying,  Down 
with  them,  even  to  the  ground.  Such  was  the 
boast  of  the  Jewish  rulers,  wThen  they  had 
slain  the  Shepherd  and  dispersed  his  flock. 
But  it  was  a short-lived  boast.  He  arose, 'he 
ascended,  he  took  possession  of  his  kingdom 
for  himself  and  for  them.  He  poured  out 
his  Holy  Spirit  upon  them,  and  they  wrent 
forth  preaching  his  word,  which  spread  like 
the  light  of  advancing  day,  from  Judea  to 
Samaria,  and  to  the  distant  parts  of  the  earth. 
The  united  force  of  the  powers  of  hell  and 
earth  endeavoured  to  suppress  it,  but  in  vain. 
Many  nations  and  kingdoms  laboured  to  ex- 
tirpate the  very  name  of  Christianity  from 
among  men,  but  they  successively  perished 
in  the  attempt ; and  the  cause  against  which 
they  raged  is  still  preserved.  It  is  founded 
upon  a rock,  and  the  gates  of  hell  cannot 
prevail  against  it,  Matt.  xvi.  IS.  Nor  can 
any  weapon  prosper  that  is  formed  against 
the  weakest  and  meanest  of  those  who  sin- 
cerely espouse  this  cause.  He  to  whom  they 
have  devoted  and  entrusted  themselves,  has 
promised  that  none  shall  pluck  them  out  of 
his  hands,  John  x.  28.  And  while  he  re- 
mains faithful  to  his  word,  and  able  to  fulfil 
it,  they  shall  be  safe.  Yet  they  are  often 
pressed  above  measure,  beyond  strength,  in- 
somuch that  they  perhaps  despair  even  of  life. 
But  when  they  are  at  the  lowest,  the  Lord  is 
their  helper ; and  they  are  taught  by  the  exi- 
gencies they  pass  through,  to  trust,  not  in 
themselves,  but  in  God  who  raiseth  the  dead, 
2 Cor.  i.  9.  It  is  indeed,  the  Lord’s  usual 
method  of  training  up  his  people  to  an  habi- 
tual dependence  upon  himself.  When  he  has 
raised  their  expectations  by  his  promises,  he 
permits,  as  it  were,  a temporary  death  to 
overcloud  their  prospect;  and  that  which  he 
has  said  he  will  surely  do  for  them,  appears 
for  a season,  to  the  judgment  of  sense,  im- 
practicable and  hopeless.  We  might  illus- 
trate this  point  at  large  from  the  history  of 
Abraham,  of  Israel  in  Egypt,  of  David,  and 


301 


ser.  xxvi.]  THE  ASCENSION  OF 

of  the  rebuilding  of  the  second  temple ; and  I 
doubt  not  but  it  might  be  illustrated  from  the 
history  of  many  in  this  assembly.  If  you  have 
been  walking  with  God  for  any  considerable 
time,  you  have  met  with  turns  and  changes 
which  have  almost  put  you  to  a stand.  You 
have  been,  and  perhaps  now  are,  in  such  cir- 
cumstances, that  you  feel  you  have  no  re- 
source in  yourself,  and  you  are  sure  that  the 
help  of  man  cannot  relieve  you ; but  while 
your  help  is  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  who 
made  heaven  and  earth,  (Psal.  cxxiv.  8,)  and 
while  you  are  warranted  to  trust  in  him  who 
raiseth  the  dead,  you  have  no  just  reason  to 
despond.  It  was  a dark  season  with  the  dis- 
ciples, when  their  Lord,  whom  they  loved, 
and  in  whom  they  trusted,  that  it  had  been 
tie  who  should  have  redeemed  Israel,  (Luke 
Jcxiv.  20,  21,)  was  condemned,  and  put  to 
death.  But  the  appointed  third  day  relieved 
iheir  fears,  and  turned  their  mourning  into 

joy. 

3.  His  resurrection  is  the  pledge  and  pat- 
tern of  ours.  As  certainly  as  Christ,  the  first- 
fruits  is  risen,  so  certainly  shall  they  that  arc 
Christ’s  arise  at  his  coming.  And  each  of 
his  people  shall  arise  aliusque  et  idem  .*  Their 
bodies,  though  properly  their  own,  shall  be 
changed,  and  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious 
body,  Phil.  iii.  21.  This  corruptible  must 
put  on  incorruption ; and  the  body,  which  is 
sown  in  dishonour  and  weakness,  be  raised 
in  power  and  glory.  Flesh  and  blood,  in  its 
present  state,  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
God.  The  body,  in  this  life,  is  a clog  and 
a burden  to  those  who  place  their  chief  hap- 
piness in  the  service  of  God,  and  in  commu- 
nion with  him.  It  is  a vile  body,  defiled  by 
sin,  and  it  defiles  their  best  desires  and  no- 
blest efforts.  Even  the  grace  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  by  which  they  live,  though  perfectly 
pure  in  itself,  is  debased,  when  communi- 
cated to  them,  and  exercised  under  the  disad- 
vantages of  a sinful  nature,  as  the  best  wine 
will  receive  a taint  if  poured  into  a foul 
vessel.  The  body,  in  another  view,  is  a 
prison,  in  which  the  soul,  confined  and  pent 
up,  is  limited  in  its  operations,  and  impeded 
in  its  perceptions  of  divine  things.  Though 
we  are  probably  surrounded  by  the  glorious 
realities  of  the  spiritual  world,  only  short  and 
transient  glances  of  them  are  discoverable  by 
us ; we  see  but  by  reflection,  and  darkly ; 
(1  Cor.  xiii.  12;)  we  know  but  in  part,  and 
should  know  nothing  of  them,  but  for  the 
good  report  of  the  word  of  God.  Farther, 
the  body,  as  it  is  the  seat  of  innumerable  in- 
firmities, and  the  medium  which  connects  us 
with  the  calamities  incident  to  this  mortal 
state,  is  often  a great  hindrance  to  our  most 
desirable  enjoyments.  Pain  and  sickness  call 
off  the  attention,  and  indispose  our  faculties, 
when  we  wish  to  be  most  engaged  in  prayer, 


MESSIAH  TO  GLORY. 

detain  us  from  the  ordinances,  or  prevent  the 
pleasure  we  hope  for  in  waiting  upon  the 
Lord  in  them.  But  our  new,  spiritual,  and 
glorified  bodies  will  be  free  from  all  defile- 
ment or  defect.  They  will  be  completely 
qualified  to  answer  the  best  wishes,  and  most 
enlarged  activity  of  the  soul.  Then,  but  not 
till  then,  we  hope  to  be  all  eye,  all  ear,  al- 
ways upon  the  wing  in  his  service,  and  per- 
fectly conformed  to  his  image,  in  light,  holi- 
ness, and  love ; for  then  we  shall  see  him  as 
he  is,  without  any  interposing  veil  or  cloud, 
1 John  iii.  2. 


SERMON  XXVI. 

THE  ASCENSION  OF  MESSIAH  TO  GLORY. 

Lift  up  your  heads , O ye  gates , and  be  ye 
lift  up , ye  everlasting  doors , and  the  King 
of  glory  shall  come  in.  Who  is  this  King 
of  glory  l The  Lord  strong  and  mighty , 
the  Lord  mighty  in  battle.  Lift  up  your 
heads,  O ye  gates,  even  lift  up,  ye  ever- 
lasting doors,  and  the  King  of  glory  shall 
come  in.  Who  is  this  King  of  glory  1 
The  Lord  of  Hosts,  he  is  the  King  of 
glory. — Psalm  xxiv.  7 — 10. 

The  institutions  of  the  Levitical  law  were 
a shadow  or  sketch  of  good  things  to  come. 
They  exhibited  a faint  and  general  outline 
of  the  mediation  and  glory  of  Messiah.  They 
may  be  compared  to  the  delicate  engravings 
on  a seal,  the  beauty  and  proportions  of  which 
cannot  be  plainly  discerned  without  the  as- 
sistance of  a glass.  The  gospel  answers  to 
such  a glass.  Beheld  through  this  medium, 
the  miniature  delineations  of  the  law,  which 
to  the  eye  of  unassisted,  unhumbled  reason, 
appear  confused  and  insignificant,  display  a 
precision  of  arrangement  in  the  parts,  and  an 
importance  of  design  in  the  whole,  worthy  of 
the  wisdom  of  their  great  Author. 

From  the  similarity  of  the  subject  of  this 
psalm  and  the  sixty-eighth,  it  is  at  least  pro- 
bable that  they  were  both  composed  upon  the 
same  occasion,  the  removal  of  the  ark  of  the 
Lord  from  its  last  stationary  residence  to  its 
fixed  abode  in  Zion,  when  the  king,  the 
priests,  the  singers,  and  the  harpers,  all  as- 
sisted in  the  procession,  attended  by  a great 
concourse  of  the  people.  The  languageof 
the  latter  part  of  the  psalm  is  evidently  alter- 
nate. And  we  may  conceive,  that  when  the 
ark  approached  the  tabernacle,  the  priests 
and  Levites  who  accompanied  it,  demanded 
admittance  for  it  in  these  words,  “Lift  up 
your  heads.  O ye  gates,”  &c.  and  were  an- 
swered by  those  who  were  waiting  within  to 
receive  it,  “ Who  is  the  King  of  glory  V* 
To  which  question  the  proper  reply  is  made, 
“The  Lord  of  Hosts,  he  is  the  King  of  glory.” 

This,  if  taken  according  to  the  letter  of 
the  history,  was  a grand  and  solemn  transac- 


* Another  and  yet  the  same. 


302 


THE  ASCENSION  OF  MESSIAH  TO  GLORY. 


tion.  But  it  was  at  the  same  time  a type  of 
an  event  unspeakably  more  glorious.  They 
who  know  that  the  scriptures  of  the  Old  Tes- 
tament testify  of  Christ,  that  it  is  he  of  whom 
Moses  in  the  Law,  David  in  the  Psalms,  and 
all  the  succeeding  prophets,  did  write,  will,  I 
think,  agree  in  considering  this  passage  as 
referring  to  his  ascension,  in  the  nature  in 
which  he  suffer  ■ 1,  into  the  true  holy  place  in 
the  heavens,  as  the  representative  and  high- 
priest  of  his  people;  when,  after  having  by 
his  own  self  purged  our  sins,  he  sat  down  at 
the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high.  Then 
having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  he 
triumphed  over  them  openly,  though  not  in 
the  view  of  mortal  eyes.  He  lifted  up  his 
hands,  and  blessed  his  apostles,  and  while  in 
this  attitude  he  was  parted  from  them,  Luke 
xxiv.  51.  He  ascended  gently  and  gradually, 
and  they,  admiring  and  adoring,  beheld  him 
with  fixed  attention,  till  a cloud  concealed 
him  from  their  sight,  Acts  i.  9.  The  pomp 
and  triumph  of  his  ascension  were  displayed 
in  the  invisible  world.  But  this  description, 
accommodated  to  our  apprehensions,  is  given 
to  assist  the  faith  of  his  people,  that  their 
hearts  may  be  comforted,  their  meditations 
enlarged,  and  that  in  the  exercise  of  grateful 
love,  they  may  follow  him  in  their  thoughts, 
ascend  with  him  into  the  heavenly  places, 
and  rejoice  in  his  gflory. 

We  conceive  of  him,  therefore,  from  this 
sublime  passage,  as  ascending  to  his  Father 
and  our  Father,  to  his  God  and  our  God,  ac- 
companied with  a train  of  worshipping  an- 
gels, who  demand  admittance  for  Messiah, 
the  Saviour  and  friend  of  sinners,  as  the  King 
of  glory.  The  question  is  asked,  Who  is  he 
that  claims  this  honour  1 An  answer  is  given, 
asserting  his  character,  his  victories,  and  the 
justice  of  his  claims — “The  Lord  of  Hosts, 
the  Lord  strong  in  battle,  he  is  the  King  of 
glory.” 

The  principal  points  which  offer  to  our 
consideration  are, 

I.  His  title, — The  Lord  of  hosts. 

II.  His  victories,  implied  in  the  expression, 
— The  Lord  strong  and  mighty  in  battle. 

III.  His  mediatorial  title, — The  King  of 
glory. 

IV.  His  authoritative  entrance  into  the 
holy  place. 

I.  Messiah,  who  humbled  himself  to  the 
death  of  the  cross,  is  the  Lord  of  hosts.  He 
is  so,  if  the  scripture  be  true  ; I attempt  no 
jther  proof.  This  is  a point  not  referred  to 
the  discussion  of  our  fallen  reason,  but  pro- 
posed by  the  authority  of  God  in  his  word, 
as  the  foundation  of  our  faith  and  hope.  He 
is  the  husband  of  the  church,  and  the  husband 
of  the  church  is  the  Lord  of  hosts,  Isa.  liv.  5. 

It  was  the  Lord  of  hosts,  whom  Isaiah  saw, 
seated  upon  a throne,  high  and  lifted  up,  and 
his  train  filling  the  temple,  Isa.  vi.  1.  The 
vision  filled  him  with  astonishment,  and  he 


[sER-  XXVI. 

cried  out,  “Woe  is  me,  I am  undone; — for 
mine  eyes  have  seen  the  King,  the  Lord  of 
hosts.”  But  the  apostle  John  assures  us, 
that  when  Isaiah  said  these  things,  he  saw 
his  glory,  and  spake  of  him,  John  xii.  41.  This 
is  the  title  of  God  in  the  Old  Testament;  or, 
as  some  choose  to  speak,  of  the  Supreme 
Being.  And  it  is  ascribed  to  Messiah  in 
many  places.  Therefore,  if  he  were  not  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  the  scripture  would  be  charge- 
able with  authorizing,  yea  with  enjoining 
idolatry  Buthe  is  the  true  God,  and  eternal 
life ; (i  John  v.  20 ;)  and  they  who  give  him 
the  honour  due  to  his  name,  have  every  thing 
to  hope  and  nothing  to  fear. 

II.  He  is  the  Lord  strong  and  mighty  in 
battle.  It  was  in  his  human  nature  he  en- 
gaged in  battle  with  his  enemies  and  ours. 
But  the  battle  was  the  Lord’s.  Therefore, 
though  he  trod  the  wine-press  alone,  and  of 
the  people  there  was  none  with  him,  (Isaiah 
lxiii.  3,)  his  own  arm  brought  him  salvation. 
He  is  conqueror  of  sin,  Satan,  and  death. 
We  were  under  the  power  of  these;  there- 
fore, for  our  sakes,  he  engaged  in  conflict 
with  their  united  force.  He  fought,  he  bled, 
he  died  ; but  in  dying,  he  conquered.  The 
strength  of  sin  is  the  law ; this  strength,  he 
subdued,  by  obeying  the  precepts  of  the  law, 
and  sustaining  the  penalty  due  to  our  trans- 
gressions. He  destroyed  death,  and  disarmed 
it  of  its  sting.  He  destroyed  him  that  hath 
the  power  of  death,  Satan.  He  shook,  he 
overturned  the  foundations  of  his  kingdom, 
broke  open  his  prison-doors,  released  his  pri- 
soners, delivered  the  prey  out  of  the  hand  of 
the  mighty,  and  having  spoiled  principalities 
and  powers,  he  made  a show  of  them  openly, 
triumphing  over  them  in  it,  that  is,  in  his 
cross,  Col.  ii.  15.  The  apostle  alludes  to  the 
manner  of  a Roman  triumph,  in  which  the 
conqueror  was  drawn  in  a chariot  of  state, 
attended  by  his  officers  and  soldiers  ; the 
principal  prisoners  followed  in  chains,  and 
all  the  treasures  and  trophies  gained  from 
the  vanquished  enemy  were  displayed  to 
adorn  the  procession.  Thus  Messiah  subdued 
the  strength  and  policy  of  the  powers  of  dark- 
ness, in  the  hour  of  his  lowest  humiliation, 
when  he  hung  and  expired  upon  the  cross, 
and  triumphed  over  them,  gloriously  leading 
captivity  captive,  when  he  ascended  on  high, 
Ps.  lxviii.  18.  Satan,  though  still  an  enemy 
to  his  church  and  cause,  is  despoiled  of  his  do- 
minion ; his  power  is  only  permissive,  and  in 
his  fiercest  assaults  he  is  limited  by  bounds 
which  he  cannot  pass,  by  a chain  which  he 
cannot  break ; and  all  his  attempts  are  con- 
trolled and  over-ruled,  to  the  furtherance  of 
the  cause  which  he  would  suppress,  and  to 
the  good  of  the  persons  whom  lie  would 
worry  and  destroy.  They  are  made  ac- 
quainted with  his  devices,  furnished  with  ar- 
mour sufficient  to  repel  him,  and  they  fight 
under  encouragement  of  a sure  promise,  that 


see.  xxvi.]  THE  ASCENSION  OF  MESSIAH  TO  GLORY.  303 

the  God  of  peace  will  shortly  and  finally  of  his  glory,  in  the  perfections  of  holiness, 
bruise  Satan  under  their  feet.  As  Messiah,  justice,  truth,  and  mercy,  which  fallen  man 


their  King,  has  conquered  for  them,  so  they, 
in  due  time,  shall  be  made  more  than  con- 
querors, by  faith  in  his  blood,  and  in  the  word 
of  his  testimony. 

III.  The  title  of  King  of  glory,  I under- 
stand as  peculiarly  applicable  to  him  in  the 
character  of  Mediator.  The  glory  of  his  di- 
vine nature  is  essential  to  him.  But  in  con- 
sequence of  his  obedience  unto  death,  he  ob- 
tained, in  the  huir...n  nature,  a name  that  is 
above  every  name,  Phil.  ii.  9.  He  suffered 
as  a man,  yea,  as  a malefactor;  there  was  no 
appearance  of  glory  in  that  form  of  a servant 
which  he  assumed  for  our  sakes.  Though 
without  sin,  he  was  made  in  the  likeness  of 
sinful  flesh,  subject  to  poverty,  disgrace,  and 
death;  but  the  same  man  who  was  crucified, 
dead,  and  buried,  received  glory  and  autho- 
rity at  his  resurrection,  and  was  highly  ex- 
alted to  the  administration  of  all  dominion 
and  government.  Perhaps  the  word  glory  is 
not  easily  defined.  We  conceive  it  as  ex- 
pressing brightness  and  splendour.  The 
glory  of  Solomon  was  the  combined  effect  of 
his  wisdom,  power,  and  riches;  which  dis- 
tinguished him  in  his  character,  conduct,  and 
appearance,  from  other  men.  The  glory  of 
tiie  sun  is  his  effulgence  and  influence.  The 
word  glory , when  applied  to  the  blessed  God, 
seems  to  denote  that  manifestation  of  him- 
self, by  which  his  intelligent  creatures  are 
capable  of  knowing  him ; for  in  himself  he  is 
infinite,  inaccessible,  and  incomprehensible, 
and  dwelleth  in  that  light  which  no  man, 
which  no  creature,  can  approach  unto,  1 Tim. 
vi.  16.  Of  this  manifestation  there  are  va- 
rious degrees.  His  glory  shines  in  the  crea- 
tion. Not  only  do  the  heavens  declare  it  by 
their  immensity,  (Ps.  xix.  1,)  and  furnish  us 
with  an  idea  of  his  unspeakable  greatness, 
who  has  sent  forth  ten  thousand  worlds,  to 
tell  us  that  he  resides  above  them  all;  but 
the  smallest  of  his  works,  the  grass  and 
flowers  of  the  field,  and  the  insects  which 
creep  upon  the  ground,  (Ps.  civ.  24,  25,)  bear 
an  impression  of  his  wisdom  and  goodness, 
an  inimitable  criterion  of  his  wonder-working 
hand,  which  so  far  displays  his  glory.  To  an 
attentive  and  discerning  mind,  his  glory 
shines  in  his  providence ; in  his  preserving 
the  world  which  he  has  made ; in  supplying 
the  various  wants  of  his  creatures,  and  par- 
ticularly in  his  moral  government  of  man- 
kind. Here,  besides  his  wisdom,  power,  and 
general  goodness,  we  discover  some  traces 
of  his  character  as  the  righteous  Judge  of  the 
earth.  But  to  our  limited  capacities  and 
views  this  glory  is  obscured  by  many  difficul- 
ties. Though  righteousness  and  judgment 
are  the  habitation  of  his  throne,  yet  clouds 
and  darkness  are  round  about  him,  Psalm 
xcvii.  2.  By  his  holy  word,  his  revealed  will, 
we  are  favoured  with  a still  brighter  display 


is  unable  clearly  to  discover  in  his  works  of 
creation  and  providence.  But  chiefly  his 
Son  is  the  brightness  of  his  glory,  and  the 
express  image  of  his  person,  Heb.  i.  3.  No 
one  hath  seen  God  at  any  time,  but  the  only- 
begotten  Son,  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Fa- 
ther, (John  i.  18,)  intimately  acquainted  with 
his  counsels,  he  hath  declared  him.  This 
was  the  great  design  of  his  advent,  to  make 
God  known  to  man  : for  as  it  is  life  eternal 
to  know  the  only  true  God,  so  he  is  only  to 
be  known  in  and  by  Jesus  Christ,  whom  he 
hath  sent,  (John  xvii.  3,)  and  who  is  the  way 
and  the  door ; and  there  is  no  entrance  to  the 
knowledge  of  God  but  by  him.  In  the  person 
and  work  of  Messiah,  the  light  of  the  know- 
ledge of  the  glory  of  God,  the  brightness  and 
harmony  of  all  his  attributes,  is  transcendently 
revealed.  In  this  sense  he  is  the  Lord,  the 
King  of  glory.  When  we  are  enlightened  by 
the  Holy  Spirit,  to  conceive  of  him  according 
to  the  testimony  given  of  him  in  the  scrip- 
ture, we  see  the  glory  of  God.  Other  dis- 
coveries of  it  are  but  scattered  rays  and  ema- 
nations of  light ; but  in  Jesus  the  glory  of 
God  resides  in  its  source  and  fulness,  as  light 
in  the  sun.  He  is  therefore  the  King  of 
glory. 

IV.  As  the  acknowledged  King  of  glory, 
in  the  nature  of  man,  he  ascended  ; the  ever- 
lasting gates  unfolded  wide,  and  he  entered 
into  the  holy  place,  not  made  with  hands, 
there  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  his 
people : 

1.  As  their  representative.  The  glory  is 
properly  his  own,  the  benefit  redounds  to  his 
people.  Sin  had  excluded  them  from  the 
kingdom  ; but  he  claimed  and  took  possession 
in  their  name,  Heb.  vi.  20.  Hence  he  is 
styled  their  forerunner,  because  by  virtue  of 
their  relation  to  him,  and  their  interest  in 
him,  they  shall  surely  follow  him.  This  is 
the  encouragement  of  believers.  He  is  the 
head  of  his  body  the  church  : and  tl  ough  the 
church,  while  in  this  world,  is  in  a suffering 
perilous  state ; yet  as  the  body  of  a man  is 
not  in  danger  of  drowning  while  his  head  is 
out  of  the  water,  so  our  forerunner  and  head 
being  in  heaven  on  their  behalf,  he  will  as- 
suredly draw  all  his  living  members  to  him- 
self. He  has  said,  “ Because  1 live,  ye  shall 
shall  live  also,”  John  xiv.  19.  And  he  has 
stipulated  for  them,  that  they  shall,  each  in 
his  appointed  time,  be  with  him  where  he  is, 
to  behold  his  glory,  John  xvii.  24. 

2.  As  their  High-priest  and  Intercessor. 
He  presents  their- persons  and  their  prayers 
acceptable  to  God.  He  bears  the  iniquity  of 
their  holy  things.  With  this  encouragement, 
weak  and  unworthy  as  they  are  in  them- 
selves, and  though  their  best  services  are 
polluted,  they  find  a liberty  of  access;  and 
because  he  ever  liveth,  thus  to  make  inter- 


304 


MESSIAH  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 


cession  for  all  who  come  unto  God  by  him, 
(Heb.  vii.  25,)  they  know  that  he  is  able  to 
save  them  to  the  uttermost. 

3.  Though  the  heavens  must  receive  and 
contain  his  holy  human  nature  till  the  resti- 
tution of  all  things,  he  is  not  unmindful  of 
them  in  their  present  circumstances.  He  is 
seated  upon  the  throne  of  universal  dominion, 
and  he  exercises  his  authority  and  rule  with 
an  especial  view  to  their  welfare.  While  he 
pleads  for  them  on  high,  bv  the  power  of  his 
Spirit,  he  is  present  with  them  below.  He 
comforts  their  hearts,  enlivens  their  assem- 
blies, and  manages  their  concerns.  He  is 
their  Shepherd,  who  gives  them  food,  con- 
trols their  enemies,  revives  their  fainting 
spirits,  and  restores  their  wanderings,  Psalm 
xxiii.  His  ear  is  open  to  their  prayers,  his 
eye  is  upon  them  in  every  situation,  and  his 
arm  stretched  forth  for  their  relief.  There- 
fore, though  persecuted,  they  are  not  for- 
saken ; though  cast  down,  they  are  not  de- 
stroyed. And  he  has  promised  that  he  will 
not  leave  them,  until  he  has  done  all  that  for 
them  which  his  word  has  taught  them  to  hope 
for:  until  he  has  made  them  victorious  over 
all  their  enemies,  and  put  the  conqueror’s 
song  in  their  mouths,  and  a crown  of  life 
upon  their  heads. 

This  High  and  Holy  One,  this  King  of 
glory,  who  is  seated  on  the  throne  of  heaven, 
dwelleth  also  in  the  humble  and  lowly  spirit. 
He  thus  solemnly  claims  the  throne  of  the 
heart  of  each  of  his  people,  which,  in  a state 
of  nature,  is  usurped  by  self  and  Satan  : and 
he  is  thus  willingly  acknowledged  and  ad- 
mitted in  the  day  of  his  power.  Behold ! he 
stands  at  the  door,  and  knocks ; (Rev.  iii.  20 ;) 
and  because  he  is  as  yet  unknown,  he  is  for 
a while  rejected.  The  bolts  and  bars  of  pre- 
judice and  unbelief  withstand  his  entrance. 
But  when  he  comes  on  a purpose  of  grace,  he 
will  take  no  denial.  For  a season  he  waits  to 
be  gracious.  But  he  has  an  appointed  hour, 
when  he  reveals  his  great  name,  and  makes 
the  soul  sensible  who  he  is ! Then  the  gates 
of  brass  and  bars  of  iron  are  broken  before 
him.  His  greatness  and  his  goodness,  what 
he  is  in  himself,  and  what  he  has  done  and 
suffered  for  sinners,  are  motives  which  can- 
not be  resisted  when  they  are  truly  under- 
stood. Satan,  who,  as  the  strong  one  armed, 
long  laboured  to  hinder  him  from  his  right- 
ful possession,  is  himself  dispossessed.  The 
soul  laments  its  former  obstinacy,  throws 
down  its  arms,  throws  wide  open  its  doors, 
and  bids  the  King  of  glory  welcome.  Then 
old  things  pass  away,  and  all  things  become 
new  Such  was  the  change  the  poor  man 
experienced,  out  of  whom  Jesus  casta  legion 
of  evil  spirits.  At  first,  if  he  could,  he  would 
have  prevented  his  kind  purpose ; he  was 
afraid  of  his  deliverer,  and  said,  “ I beseech 
thee  torment  me  not.”  Mark  v.  7.  How 
wretched  was  his  state  then,  miserable  m 


[see.  xxvii. 

himself,  and  a terror  to  others ! But  what  a 
w onderful  and  happy  alteration,  when  he  sal 
quietly  at  his  Saviour’s  feet,  clothed  and  in 
his  right  mind ! 

I close  the  subject  with  the  apostle's  in- 
; ference,  “ Seeing  then  that  we  have  so  great 
a high-priest,  who  is  passed  into  the  heavens, 
Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  let  us  hold  last  our 
profession.”  Heb.  iv.  14.  Let  not  those  who 
know  him,  be  ashamed  of  their  attachment  to 
i him.  You  will  not  repent  in  a dying  hour, 

! that  you  once  thought  too  highly  of  him,  or 
expected  too  much  from  him,  or  devoted 
| yourselves  with  too  much  earnestness  to  his 
i service.  Nor  yield  to  unbelief  and  fear. 
Though  your  enemies  are  many  and  mighty, 
and  your  trials  great,  greater  is  he  that  is 
with  you.  If  the  Lord,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the 
Lord  strong  and  mighty  in  battle,  be  for  you, 
who  can  be  against  you,  so  as  effectually  to 
harm  you  1 Continue  instant  in  prayer,  per- 
severe in  well-doing.  Our  ascended  Lord 
will  one  day  return ; and  then  they  who  have 
loved  and  served,  and  trusted  him  here,  shall 
appear  with  him  in  glory,  Col.  iii.  4. 

Others,  if  they  can,  must  prepare  to  meet 
him.  But  alas  ! howr  shall  they  stand  before 
him  ? Or  whither  shall  they  flee  from  him 
whose  presence  filleth  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  1 Jer.  xxiii.  24.  Have  they  an  arm  like 
God  1 or  can  they  thunder  with  a voice  like 
his ! As  yet  he  is  proclaimed  by  the  gospel, 
a Saviour,  seated  upon  a throne  of  grace, 
stretching  forth  the  golden  sceptre  of  his  love, 
and  inviting  sinners  to  be  reconciled.  Now 
is  the  accepted  time.  Hereafter  he  will  be 
seen  upon  a throne  of  judgment,  to  take  ven- 
geance of  his  enemies. 


SERMON  XXVII. 

MESSIAH  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 

For  unto  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any 
time , Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  1 
begotten  thee  ? — Hebrews,  i.  5. 

Though  every  part  of  a revelation  from 
God  must  of  course  be  equally  true,  there 
may  he  a considerable  difference  even  among 
truths  proposed  by  the  same  autnority,  with 
respect  to  their  immediate  importance.  There 
are  fundamental  truths,  the  knowledge  of 
which  is  essentially  necessary  to  our  peace 
and  holiness : and  there  are  others  of  a se- 
condary nature,  which,  though  very  useful  in 
their  proper  connexion,  and  though  the  light 
apprehension  of  them  is  greatly  conducive  to 
the  comfort  and  establishment  of  a believer, 
are  not  so  necessary,  but  that  he  may  be  a 
true  believer  before  he  clearly  understands 
j them.  Thus  our  Lord  pronounced  Peter 
I blessed,  (Matt.  xvL  17,)  for  his  acknowledg- 


MESSIAH  THE  SON  OF  GOD. 


305 


8ER.  XXVI I.] 

nent  of  a 1 ruth,  which  had  been  revealed  to 
■fim,  not  by  flesh  and  blood,  but  from  above, 
though  he  was  at  that  time  very  deficient  in 
doctrinal  knowledge.  It  is  not  easy  to  draw 
the  line  here,  and  precisely  to  distinguish  be- 
tween fundamental  and  secondary  truths;  yet 
some  attention  to  this  distinction  is  expedient; 
and  th :=  want  of  such  attention  has  greatly 
contributed  to  foment  and  embitter  contro- 
versies in  the  Church  of  Christ ; while  fal- 
lible men,  from  a mistaken  zeal  for  the  faith 
once  delivered  to  the  saints,  have  laboured  to 
enforce  all  their  religious  sentiments  with  an 
equal  and  indiscriminate  vehemence.  It  is 
evident,  that  the  truths  essential  to  the  very 
being  of  a Christian  must  be  known  and  ex- 
perienced by  all,  of  every  nation,  people,  and 
language,  who  are  taught  of  God ; (Is.  liv.  13 ;) 
for  they,  and  they  only,  are  Christians  in- 
deed, who  are  thus  taught.  And  therefore  it 
seems  to  follow,  that  no  doctrine,  however 
true  in  itself,  which  humble  and  spiritual  per- 
sons, who  study  the  scriptures  with  prayer, 
and  really  depend  upon  divine  teaching,  are 
not  agreed  in,  can  be  strictly  fundamental. 
And  perhaps  the  chief  part  of  the  apparent 
diversity  of  their  sentiments  does  not  so 
often  respect  the  truth  itself,  as  the  different 
acceptation  they  put  upon  the  words  and 
phrases  by  which  they  endeavour  to  express 
their  meaning  to  each  other. 

However,  if  there  be  any  doctrine  funda- 
mental, and  necessary  to  be  rightly  under- 
stood, what  the  scriptures  teach  concerning 
the  person  of  Messiah  the  Redeemer,  must 
be  eminently  so.  Mistakes  upon  this  point 
must  necessarily  be  dangerous.  It  cannot  be 
a question  of  mere  speculation,  whether  the 
Saviour  be  God  or  a creature;  he  must 
either  be  the  one  or  the  other ; and  the  whole 
frame  of  our  religion  is  unavoidably  depend- 
ent upon  the  judgment  we  form  of  him.  If 
he  be  a man  only,  or  if  he  be  an  angel,  though 
of  the  highest  order,  and  possessed  of  excel- 
lencies peculiar  to  himself;  still,  upon  the 
supposition  that  he  is  but  a creature,  he  must 
be  infinitely  inferior  to  his  Maker,  in  com- 
parison of  whose  immensity  the  difference 
between  an  angel  and  a worm  is  anni- 
hilated. Then  all  they  who  pay  divine  wor- 
ship to  Jesus,  who  love  him  above  all,  trust 
him  with  all  their  concerns  for  time  and 
eternity,  and  address  him  in  the  language  of 
Thomas,  “ My  Lord,  and  my  God,”  (John 
xx.  28,)  are  involved  in  the  gross  and  heinous 
crime  of  idolatry,  by  ascribing  to  him  that 
glory  which  the  great  God  has  declared  he 
will  not  give  to  another,  Is.  xlii.  8.  On  the 
contrary,  if  he  be  God  over  all  blessed  for 
ever,  Jehovah,  the  Lord  of  hosts,  then  they 
who  refuse  him  the  honour  due  unto  his 
name,  worship  they  know’  not  what,  John  iv. 
22.  For  there  is  but  one  God ; and,  accord- 
ing to  this  plan,  they  who  know  him  not  in 
Vol.  II.  2 Q 


Christ,  know  him  not  at  all,  but  are  without 
God  in  the  world,  Ephes.  ii.  12.  The  judg- 
ment we  form  of  the  Saviour  demonstrates 
likewise  how  far  we  know  ourselves.  For 
it  may  be  fairly  presumed,  that  they  who 
think  a creature  capable  of  making  atone- 
ment for  their  sins,  or  of  sustaining  the  office 
of  Shepherd  and  bishop  of  their  souls,  have 
too  slight  thoughts,  both  of  the  evil  of  sin, 
and  of  the  weakness  and  wickedness  of  the 
human  heart. 

We  ascribe  it  therefore  to  the  wisdom  and 
goodness  of  God,  that  a doctrine  so  impor- 
tant, the  very  pillar  and  ground  of  truth,  is 
not  asserted  once,  or  in  a few  places  of  scrip- 
ture only.  It  does  not  depend  upon  texts 
which  require  a nice  skill  in  criticism,  or  a 
collation  of  ancient  manuscripts,  to  settle 
their  sense;  but,  like  the  blood  in  the  animal 
economy,  it  pervades  and  enlivens  the  whole 
system  of  revelation.  The  books  of  Moses, 
the  Psalms,  and  the  Prophets,  all  testify  of 
Him,  who  w7as  styled  the  Son  of  God  in  so 
peculiar  a sense,  that  the  apostle,  in  this 
passage,  considers  it  as  a sufficient  proof 
that  he  is  by  nature  superior  to  all  crea- 
tures. The  form  of  the  question  implies  the 
strongest  assertion  of  this  superiority ; as  if 
he  had  said,  Conceive  of  the  highest  and 
most  exalted  of  the  angels,  it  would  be  ab- 
surd to  suppose  that  God  would  say  to  him, 
“ Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I begot- 
ten thee.” 

The  verse  contains  three  terms  which  re- 
quire explanation,  My  Son — Begotten — This 
day.  But  who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?- 
If  I attempt  to  explain  them,  I wish  to  speak 
with  a caution  and  modesty  becoming  the 
sense  I ought  to  have  of  my  own  weakness, 
and  to  keep  upon  safe  ground ; lest,  instead 
of  elucidating  so  sublime  a subject,  I should 
darken  counsel  by  words  without  knowledge. 
And  I know  of  no  safe  ground  to  go  upon  in 
these  inquiries,  but  the  sure  testimony  of 
scripture.  It  would  be  to  the  last  degree 
improper  to  indulge  flights  of  imagination,  or 
a spirit  of  curiosity  or  conjecture  upon  this 
occasion.  These  are  the  deep  things  of  God, 
in  which,  if  we  have  not  the  guidance  of  his 
word  and  Spirit,  we  shall  certainly  bewilder 
ourselves.  Nor  would  I speak  in  a positive 
dogmatizing  strain  ; at  the  same  time  I trust 
the  scripture  will  afford  light  sufficient  to  pre- 
serve us  from  a cold  and  comfortless  uncer- 
tainty. 

The  gracious  design  of  God  in  affording  us 
his  holy  scripture,  is  to  make  us  wise  unto 
salvation,  2 Tim.  iii.  15.  His  manner  of 
teaching  is  therefore  accommodated  to  our 
circumstances.  He  instructs  us  in  heavenly 
things  by  earthly.  And  to  engage  our  confi- 
dence, to  excite  our  gradtaae,  to  animate  us 
to  our  duty  hv  ;ae  most  affecting  motives, 
and  tha:  tae  reverence  we  owe  to  his  great 


306 


MESSIAH  THE 

and  glorious  Majesty,  as  our  Creator  and  Le- 
gislator, may  be  combined  with  love  and 
cheerful  dependence,  he  is  pleased  to  reveal 
himself  by  those  names  which  express  the 
nearest  relation  and  endearment  amongst 
ourselves.  Thus  he  condescends  to  style 
himself  the  Father,  the  Husband,  and  the 
Friend  of  his  people.  But  though  in  this 
way  we  are  assisted  in  forming  our  concep- 
tions of  his  love,  compassion,  and  faithfulness, 
it  is  obvious  that  these  names,  when  applied 
to  him,  must  be  understood  in  a sense  agreea- 
ble to  the  perfections  of  his  nature,  and  in 
many  respects  different  from  the  meaning 
they  bear  amongst  men.  And  thus,  when  we 
are  informed  that  God  has  a Son,  an  only 
Son,  an  only  begotten  Son,  it  is  our  part  to 
receive  his  testimony,  to  admire  and  adore; 
and  for  an  explanation  adapted  to  our  profit 
and  comfort,  we  are  to  consult,  not  our  own 
preconceived  ideas,  but  the  further  declara- 
tions of  his  word,  comparing  spiritual  things 
with  spiritual,  attending  with  the  simplicity 
of  children  to  his  instructions,  and  avoiding, 
as  much  as  possible,  those  vain  reasonings, 
upon  points  above  our  comprehension,  which, 
though  flattering  to  the  pride  of  our  hearts, 
are  sure  to  indispose  us  for  the  reception  of 
divine  truth.  A distinction  in  the  divine  na- 
ture, inconceivable  by  us,  but  plainly  revealed 
in  terms,  must  be  admitted,  upon  the  testi- 
mony and  authority  of  him,  who  alone  can 
instruct  us  in  what  we  are  concerned  to  know 
of  his  adorable  essence.  “ There  are  three 
that  bear  record  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the 
Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  these  three 
are  one,”  1 John  v.  7.  To  each  of  these  three 
the  perfections  of  Deity  are  attributed  and 
ascribed  in  various  parts  of  scripture.  Each 
of  them  therefore  is  God ; and  yet  we  are 
sure,  both  from  scripture  and  reason,  there 
is,  there  can  be,  but  one  God.  Thus  far  we 
can  go  safely ; and  that  we  can  go  no  farther, 
that  our  thoughts  are  lost  and  overwhelmed, 
if  we  attempt  to  represent  to  ourselves  how 
or  in  what  manner  three  are  one,  and  one  are 
three,  may  be  easily  accounted  for,  if  any 
just  reason  can  be  given,  why  a worm  cannot 
comprehend  infinity.  Let  us  first,  if  we  can, 
account  for  the  nature,  essence,  and  proper- 
ties of  the  things  with  which,  as  to  their 
effects,  we  are  familiarly  acquainted.  Let 
us  explain  the  growth  of  a blade  of  grass,  or 
the  virtues  of  the  loadstone.  Till  we  are 
able  to  do  this,  it  becomes  us  to  lay  our  hands 
upon  our  mouths,  and  our  mouths  in  the  dust. 
Far  from  attempting  to  explain  the  doctrine 
of  the  Trinity  to  iny  hearers,  I rather  wish  to 
leave  an  impression  upon  your  minds,  that  it 
is  to  us  (and  perhaps  to  the  highest  created 
intelligence)  incomprehensible.  But  if  it  be 
contained  in  the  scripture  (which  I must 
leave  to  your  own  consciences  to  determine 
in  the  sight  of  God,)  ' t is  thereby  sufficiently 


SON  OF  GOD.  [ser.  xxvii. 

proved,  and  humble  faith  requires  no  other 
proof. 

Allow  me  to  confirm  my  own  sentiments, 
by  an  observation  of  a celebrated  French 
writer,*  to  the  following  purport: — “The 
whole  difference,  with  respect  to  this  subject, 
between  the  common  people  and  the  learned 
doctors,  is — that  while  they  are  both  equally 
ignorant,  the  ignorance  of  the  people  is  mo- 
dest and  ingenuous,  and  they  do  not  blush  for 
being  unable  to  see  what  God  has  thought  fit 
to  conceal.  Whereas  the  ignorance  of  their 
teachers  is  proud  and  affected : they  have  re- 
course to  scholastic  distinctions,  and  abstract 
reasonings,  that  they  may  not  be  thought 
upon  a level  with  the  vulgar.” 

The  form  of  baptism  prescribed  by  our 
Lord  for  the  use  of  his  church,  is  thus  ex- 
pressed, “Baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the 
Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,”  Man.  xxviii.  19.  It  is  evident,  by 
comparing  this  sentence  with  that  which  1 
before  recited  from  the  Epistle  of  John,  that 
the  Word  and  the  Son  are  synonymous  terms 
expressive  of  the  same  character.  They  are 
both  the  titles  of  Messiah.  Of  him  John 
spoke,  when  he  said,  “ The  Word  was  made 
flesh,  and  dwelt  among  us;”  and  of  him  God 
the  Father  said,  “ Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day 
have  I begotten  thee.”  Had  God  spoken 
thus  to  an  ar.gel,  it  would  have  been  in  effect 
saying,  Thou  art  the  Word,  which  in  the 
beginning  was  with  God,  and  was  God,  by 
whom  all  things  were  made.  But  to  which 
of  all  the  angels  would  the  great  God  use 
language  like  this  ? 

Our  Lord,  in  his  conference  with  Nic-ode- 
mus,  was  pleased  to  say,  “ God  so  loved  the 
world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,” 
&c.  John  iii.  16.  It  was  undoubtedly  his  de- 
sign, by  this  expression,  to  give  to  Nicode- 
inus,  and  to  us,  the  highest  idea  possible  of 
the  love  of  God  to  sinners.  He  so  loved  the 
world,  beyond  description  or  comparison,  that 
he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son.  Surely  then 
the  gift  spoken  of  must  not  be  limited  to  sig- 
nify the  human  nature  only.  This  was  not 
all  that  he  gave.  The  human  nature  was 
the  medium  of  the  acts  and  sufferings  of  Mes- 
siah : but  he  who  assumed  it  w7as  the  Word, 
who  was  before  all,  and  by  whom  all  things 
were  made.  It  is  true  the  human  nature 
was  given,  supernaturally  formed  by  divine 
power,  and  born  of  a virgin.  But  lie  who 
was  in  the  beginning,  God  with  God,  was 
given  to  appear,  obey,  and  suffer,  in  the  la- 
ture  of  man,  for  us,  and  for  our  salvation. 
And  to  him  are  ascribed  the  perfections  and 
attributes  of  Deity;  for  which  the  highest 
angels  are  no  more  capable  than  the  worms 
which  creep  upon  the  earth. 

I cannot,  therefore,  suppose,  that  the  title 


* Abbadie. 


ser.  xxvil]  MESSIAH  THE  SON  OF  GOD.  307 


of  Son  of  God  is  merely  a title  of  office,  or 
belonging  only  to  the  nature  which  he  as- 
sumed ; but  that  Messiah  is  the  Son  of  God, 
as  he  is  God  and  man  in  one  person.  If  the 
forming  a perfect  and  spotless  man,  like 
Adam  when  he  was  first  created,  could  have 
affected  our  salvation,  it  would  have  been  a 
great  and  undeserved  mercy  to  have  vouch- 
safed the  gift ; but  I think  it  would  not  have 
required  such  very  strong  language  as  the 
scripture  uses  in  describing  the  gift  of  the 
Son  of  God.  The  God-man  the  whole  per- 
son of  Christ,  was  sent,  came  forth  from  the 
Father.  The  manhood  was  the  offering; 
but  the  Word  of  God,  possessed  of  the  per- 
fections of  Deity,  was  the  altar  necessary  to 
sanctify  the  gift,  and  to  give  a value  and 
efficacy  to  the  atonement. 

The  term  begotten,  expresses,  wffth  us,  the 
ground  of  relation  between  father  and  son, 
and  upon  which  an  only  son  is  the  heir  of  a 
father.  I feel  and  confess  myself  at  a loss 
here.  I might  take  up  your  time,  and  per- 
haps conceal  my  own  ignorance,  by  borrow- 
ing from  the  writings  of  wiser  and  better 
men  than  myself,  a detail  of  what  have  been 
generally  reputed  the  more  prevailing  ortho- 
dox sentiments  on  this  subject.  But  I dare 
not  go  beyond  my  own  ideas.  I shall  not, 
therefore,  attempt  to  explain  the  phrase,  eter- 
nal generation , because  I must  acknowledge 
that  I do  not  clearly  understand  it  myself. 
Long  before  time  began,  the  purpose  of  con- 
stituting the  Mediator  between  God  and  sin- 
ners was  established  in  the  divine  counsels. 
With  reference  to  this,  he  himself  speaks,  in 
the  character  of  the  Wisdom  of  God ; “ The 
Lord  possessed  me  in  the  beginning  of  his 
way,  before  his  works  of  old.  I was  set  up 
from  everlasting,  from  the  beginning,  or  ever 
the  earth  was.  Then  I was  by  him,  as  one 
brought  up  with  him,  rejoicing  always  before 
him ; rejoicing  in  the  habitable  parts  of  the 
earth,  and  my  delights  were  with  the  sons  of 
men,”  Prov.  viii.  22,  31.  If  the  Word  of 
God  had  not  engaged,  according  to  an  ever- 
lasting and  sure  covenant,  to  assume  our  na- 
ture, and  to  accomplish  our  salvation,  before 
the  earth  was  formed,  he  would  not  have  ap- 
peared afterwards  ; for  we  cannot,  with  rea- 
son, conceive  of  any  new  determinations 
arising  in  the  mind  of  the  infinite  God,  to 
whom  what  we  call  the  past  and  the  future 
are  equally  present.  In  this  sense  (if  the 
expression  be  proper  to  convey  such  a sense,) 

I can  conceive  that  he  was  the  begotten  Son 
of  God  from  eternity  ; that  is,  set  up  and  ap- 
pointed from  eternity  for  the  office,  nature, 
and  work,  by  which,  in  the  fulness  of  time, 
he  was  manifested  to  men.  But  if  the  terms, 
begotten  or  eternal  generation,  be  used  to  de- 
note the  manner  of  his  eternal  existence  in 
Deity,  I must  be  silent.  I believe  him  to  be 
the  eternal  Son ; I believe  him  to  be  the  eter- 
nal God ; and  I wish  not  to  exercise  my 


thoughts  and  inquiries  more  than  is  needful, 
in  things  which  are  too  high  for  me. 

The  scripture,  in  different  places,  evi- 
dently applies  the  purport  of  this  phrase,  “ I 
have  begotten  thee,”  to  transactions  which 
took  place  in  time,  This  day,  and  particular- 
ly to  two  principal  events. 

1.  His  incarnation. — Thus  the  angel  to 
Mary,  “The  Holy  Ghost  shall  come  upon 
thee,  and  the  power  of  the  Highest  shall  over- 
shadow thee  ; therefore  also  the  holy  thing 
which  shall  be  born  of  thee,  shall  be  called 
the  Son  of  God,”  Luke  i.  35.  So  the  apostle, 
“ In  the  fulness  of  time  God  sent  forth  his 
Son  made  of  a woman,”  Gal.  iv.  4.  And  in 
the  passage  we  are  next  to  consider,  “ When 
he  bringeth  his  first  begotten  into  the  world, 
he  saith,  And  let  all  the  angels  of  God  wor- 
ship him.” 

2.  His  resurrection. — To  this  purpose  our 
text  is  quoted  from  the  second  Psalm.  “ The 
promise  which  was  made  unto  the  fathers, 
God  hath  fulfilled  the  same  to  the  children, 
in  that  he  hath  raised  up  Jesus  again  ; as  it  is 
also  written  in  the  second  Psalm,  Thou  art 
my  Son,  this  day  have  I begotten  thee,”  Acts 
xiii.  32,  33.  And  in  another  place  he  teaches 
us,  that  he  who  was  of  the  seed  of  David,  ac- 
cording to  the  flesh,  was  declared  to  be  the 
Son  of  God  with  power,  according  to  the 
Spirit  of  holiness,  by  the  resurrection  from 
the  dead,  Rom.  i.  4. 

After  all,  I would  remind  you,  that  the 
best  knowledge  of  the  doctrine  of  the  person 
of  Christ,  that  which  affords  life  and  comfort 
to  the  soul,  is  to  be  obtained,  not  so  much  by 
inquiry  and  study  on  our  part,  as  by  a gra- 
cious manifestation  on  his  part.  Prayer,  at- 
tention to  the  great  Teacher,  a humble  pe- 
rusal of  the  scripture,  and  a course  of  simple 
obedience  to  his  known  will,  are  the  me- 
thods which  he  has  prescribed  for  our  growth 
in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  himself. 
Thus  even  babes  are  made  wise  ; while  they 
who  are  wise  and  prudent  in  their  own  sight 
the  more  they  endeavour  to  investigate  and 
ascertain  the  sense  of  scripture,  are  frequent- 
ly involved  more  and  more  in  perplexity. 
He  has  given  a promise  and  direction,  for 
the  encouragement  of  those  who  sincerely 
seek  him.  “He  that  hath  my  command- 
ments and  keepetli  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth 
me ; and  he  that  loveth  me  shall  be  loved  of 
my  Father,  and  I will  love  him,  and  will 
manifest  myself  unto  him.”  John  xiv.  21. 

This  is  he  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  In 
and  by  this  Son  of  his  love,  we  have  access  by 
faith  unto  God.  Unworthy  and  helpless  in 
ourselves,  from  hence  we  derive  our  plea ; 
here  we  find  a refuge ; and  on  this  we  rest, 
and  build  our  hope,  that  God  hath  given  us 
eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son  ; who 
is  so  much  better  than  the  angels,  as  he  hath 
by  inheritance  obtained  a more  excellent 
name  than  they,  Heb.  i.  4. 


308  MESSIAH  WORSHIPPED  BY  ANGELS. 


SERMON  XXVIII. 

MESSIAH  WORSHIPPED  BY  ANGELS. 

Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him. 

Hebrews,  i.  6. 

Many  of  the  Lord’s  true  servants  have 
been  in  a situation  so  nearly  similar  to  that 
of  Elijah,  (1  Kings  xix.  10.)  that  like  him  they 
have  been  tempted  to  think  they  were  left  to 
serve  him  alone.  But  God  had  then  a faith- 
ful people,  and  he  has  so  in  every  age.  The 
preaching  of  the  gospel  may  be  compared  to 
a standard  erected,  to  which  they  repair,  and 
thereby  become  known  to  each  other,  and 
more  exposed  to  the  notice  and  observation 
of  the  world.  But  we  hope  there  are  always 
many,  who  are  enlightened  by  his  word  and 
Holy  Spirit,  and  training  up  in  the  life  of 
faith  and  holiness,  known  and  dear  to  God, 
though  they  have  little  advantage  from  pub- 
lic ordinances,  and  perhaps  no  opportunity  of 
conversing  with  those  who  are  like-minded 
with  themselves.  But  even  though  the  num- 
ber of  those  who  visibly  profess  the  gospel  of 
the  grace  of  God  were  much  smaller  than  it 
is,  we  need  not  be  disheartened.  If  our  sight 
could  pierce  into  the  invisible  world,  we 
should  be  satisfied  that  there  are  more  with 
us  than  against  us,  2 Kings  vi.  16.  And  such 
a power  is  attributed  to  faith.  It  is  the  evi- 
dence of  things  not  seen,  (Heb.  xi.  1,)  because 
it  receives  the  testimony  of  scripture,  and 
rests  upon  it,  as  a certainty,  and  a demonstra- 
tion ; requiring  no  other  proof,  either  of  doc- 
trines or  facts,  than  that  they  are  contained 
in  the  sure  word  of  God.  True  Christians 
therefore  are  comforted  by  the  assurance 
they  have  that  their  Saviour,  the  Lord  of 
their  hearts,  is  not  so  neglected  and  despised, 
nor  his  character  so  misunderstood  and  mis- 
represented in  yonder  land  of  light,  as  in  this 
dark  and  degenerate  world.  Though  too 
many  here,  like  Festus,  treat  it  as  a mat- 
ter of  great  indifference,  whether  Jesus  be 
dead  or  alive  ; (Acts  xxv.  19 ;)  and  ask  them 
with  a taunt,  What  is  your  Belovod  more 
than  another  beloved ) they  are  not  ashamed, 
for  they  know  whom  they  have  believed ; 
and  if  men  will  not  join  with  them  in  ad- 
miring and  praising  him,  they  are  sure  that 
they  have  the  concurrence  of  far  superior 
beings.  By  faith  they  behold  him  seated 
upon  a throne  of  glory,  adored  by  all  holy  and 
happy  intelligent  creatures,  whether  angels, 
principalities,  powers  or  dominions.  And 
when  he  was  upon  earth,  in  a state  of  humili- 
ation, though  despised  and  rejected  of  men, 
he  was  seen  and  acknowledged  by  angels. 
Their  warrant  and  ours  is  the  same.  He  is 
proposed  to  us  as  the  object  of  our  supreme 
love  and  dependence  ; and  as  we  are  enjoined 
to  kiss  the  Son  and  to  pay  him  homage,  so 
when  God  brought  him  into  the  world,  he 


[ser.  XXVIII. 

said,  “ Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship 
him.” 

Though  the  bringing  Messiah,  the  first  or 
only  begotten,  into  the  world,  may,  as  I have 
observed  already,  be  applied  to  his  incarna- 
tion, or  to  his  resurrection.  I apprehend  it 
rather  designs  the  whole  of  his  exhibition  in 
the  flesh.  At  his  ascension,  having  finished 
the  work  appointed  for  him  to  do,  he  was 
solemnly  invested  with  authority  and  glory, 
and  sat  down  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty 
on  high.  But  in  his  lowest,  no  less  than 
in  his  exalted  state,  the  dignity  of  his  divine 
person  is  the  same,  yesterday,  to-day,  and 
for  ever.  He  was  always  the  proper  object 
of  worship.  It  was  agreeable  to  right,  and 
to  the  nature  of  things,  and  a command  wor- 
thy of  God,  that  all  the  angels  of  God  should 
worship  him. 

The  holy  angels  that  excel  in  strength, 
(Psalm  ciii.  20,)  always  do  his  command- 
ments, hearkening  to  the  voice  of  his  word. 
We  might  be  certain,  therefore,  that  this 
highest  and  most  comprehensive  command  a 
creature  is  capable  of  receiving  from  his 
Creator,  is  fulfilled  by  them,  even  if  we  had 
no  express  information  of  the  fact.  But  we 
have  repeated  assurances  to  this  purpose. 
Thus  Isaiah,  when  he  saw  his  glory  and 
spake  of  him,  saw  the  seraphim  standing ; 
each  one  had  six  wings  ; with  twain  he  co- 
vered his  face,  and  with  twain  he  covered 
his  feet,  and  with  twain  he  did  fly.  And  one 
cried  unto  another,  saying,  Holy,  holy,  holy, 
is  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  whole  earth  is  full  of 
his  glory,”  Isa.  vi.  I see  not  how  the  force  of 
the  argument  arising  from  this  passage,  to 
prove  that  Messiah  is  the  proper  object  of  the 
most  solemn  adoration  which  creatures  can 
offer  to  the  Most  High,  can  be  evaded ; un- 
less any  were  hardy  enough  to  assert,  either 
that  the  prophet  was  himself  imposed  upon, 
or  has  imposed  upon  us,  by  a false  vision ; or 
else  that  the  apostle  John,  (chap.  xii.  41,)  was 
mistaken  when  he  applied  this  representation 
to  Jesus  Christ.  But  the  apostle  likewise  had 
a vision  to  the  same  effect,  in  which,  while 
his  people  redeemed  from  the  earth  by  his 
blood  cast  their  crowns  at  his  feet,  the  angels 
were  also  represented  as  joining  in  the  cho- 
rus of  their  praises,  saying  with  a loud  voice, 
“ Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  to  re- 
ceive power,  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and 
strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  bless- 
ing,” Rev.  v.  12.  In  brief,  he  is  the  Lord  of 
angels.  The  heavenly  host  waited  upon  him, 
and  sung  his  praises  at  his  birth.  Angels 
ministered  unto  him  in  the  wilderness.  Luke 
ii.  13,  14.  And  they  are  so  entirely  his  ser- 
vants, that,  at  his  command,  they  are  sent 
forth  to  minister  unto,  and  to  attend  upon  his 
believing  people.  Are  they  not  all  minister- 
ing ( Kunver1** , worshipping)  spirits,  adoring 
the  divine  Majesty,  yet  sent  forth  to  minister 
(t»;  Stxx oncer,  for  service)  to  the  heirs  of  salva- 


MESSIAH  WORSHIPPED  BY  ANGELS. 


309 


SER.  XXVIII.] 

tion  1 Heb.  i.  14.  He  is  likewise  the  head 
of  angels,  though  they  are  not  in  the  same 
near  relation  to  him  as  the  sinners  whom  he 
has  redeemed  with  his  blood;  for  he  took  not 
on  him  their  nature.  There  was  no  redemp- 
tion appointed  for  the  angels  who  kept  not 
their  first  habitation.  But  the  confirmation 
of  those  who  continue  in  holiness  and  happi- 
ness, is  in  and  through  him,  “ For  all  things 
both  which  are  in  heaven,  and  which  are  on 
earth,  are  gathered  together  in  one  ( 
A.a«oo<r*(r5ot»,  reduced  under  one  head  into  one 
body)  in  him,”  Ephes.  i.  10.  And  they  are 
therefore  styled,  in  contradistinction  from  the 
others,  the  elect  angels,  1 Tim.  v.  21.  He  is 
their  life,  and  strength,  and  joy,  as  he  is  ours, 
though  they  cannot  sing  the  whole  song  of 
his  people.  It  is  appropriate  to  the  saved 
from  amongst  men  to  say,  This  God  shines 
glorious  in  our  nature ! he  loved  us,  and  gave 
himself  for  us ! 

Here,  then,  as  I have  intimated,  is  a pat- 
tern and  encouragement  for  us.  The  angels, 
the  whole  host  of  heaven,  worship  him.  He 
is  Lord  of  all.  We  in  this  distant  world  have 
heard  the  report  of  his  glory,  have  felt  our 
need  of  such  a Saviour,  and  are,  in  some  de- 
gree, witnesses  and  proofs  of  his  ability  and 
willingness  to  save.  He  lived,  he  died,  he 
rose,  he  reigns  for  us.  Therefore,  humbly 
depending  upon  his  promised  grace,  without 
which  we  can  do  nothing,  we  are  resolved, 
that  whatever  others  do,  wTe  must,  we  will 
worship  him,  with  the  utmost  power  of  our 
souls.  It  is  our  determination  and  our  choice, 
not  only  to  praise  and  honour  him  with  our 
lips,  but  to  devote  ourselves  to  his  service,  to 
yield  ourselves  to  his  disposal,  to  entrust  our 
all  to  his  care,  and  to  place  our  whole  hap- 
piness in  his  favour.  I hope,  in  speaking 
thus,  I speak  the  language  of  many  of  your 
hearts. 

Some  reflections  easily  offer  from  this  sub- 
ject, with  which  I shall  close  it. 

1.  They  who  love  him,  may  rejoice  in  the 
thoughts  of  his  glory.  They  have  deeply 
sympathized  with  him,  when  reading  the  his- 
tory of  his  humiliation  and  passion.  It  has 
not  been  a light  concern  to  them  that  he  en- 
dured agonies,  that  he  was  rejected,  reviled, 
scourged,  and  slain.  He  who  suffered  these 
things  was  their  best  friend,  their  beloved 
Lord,  and  he  suffered  for  their  sakes.  In  the 
glass  of  his  word  and  by  the  light  of  his  Holy 
Spirit,  he  has  been  set  forth  as  crucified  be- 
fore their  eyes,  and  they  have  been  crucified 
with  him,  and  have  had  fellowship  with  him 
in  his  death.  From  hence  they  derive  their 
indignation  against  sin,  and  their  indifference 
to  the  world  which  treated  him  thus.  But 
now  he  is  no  more  a man  of  sorrows;  his 
head,  which  was  once  crowned  with  thorns, 
is  now  crowned  with  glory  ; his  face,  which 
was  defiled  with  spittle,  shines  like  the  sun  ; 
his  hands,  which  were  manacled,  wield  the 


sceptre  of  universal  government;  and,  instead 
of  being  surrounded  by  insulting  men,  he  is 
now  encircled  by  adoring  angels.  Therefore 
they  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable,  expecting 
soon  to  see  him  as  he  is,  and  to  be  with  him 
for  ever,  according  to  the  gracious  promise 
he  has  made  them,  and  the  tenor  of  his  pre- 
vailing intercession  for  them. 

2.  What  an  honour  does  his  exaltation 
and  glory  reflect  upon  his  faithful  followers'! 
The  world  that  rejected  him  pays  little  re- 
gard to  them  : they  are  slighted,  or  scorned, 
or  pitied,  and,  in  proportion  as  they  manifest 
his  spirit,  experience  a degree  of  the  treat- 
ment which  he  met  with ; they  are  accounted 
visionaries  and  hypocrites ; many  of  them  are 
great  sufferers,  and  few  of  them,  compara- 
tively, are  distinguished  among  men  by  abi- 
lities, influence,  or  wealth;  they  are  pilgrims 
and  strangers  upon  earth;  yet  this  God  is 
their  God.  He  who  is  worshipped  by  angels 
is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren,  Heb.  ii. 
11.  They  are  nearly  related  to  him  who  sit- 
teth  upon  the  throne ; and  he  is  pleased  to 
account  them  his  portion  and  his  jewels.  It 
doth  not  yet  appear  what  they  shall  be ; but 
the  day  is  coming  when  their  mourning  shall 
be  ended,  their  characters  vindicated,  and 
they  shall  shine  like  the  sun  in  the  king- 
dom of  their  Lord.  They  shall  stand  before 
him  with  confidence,  and  not  be  ashamed 
when  he  appears.  Then  shall  the  difference 
between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  be 
clearly  discerned.  In  that  day  the  righteous 
shall  say,  “ Lo,  this  is  our  God,  we  have 
waited  for  him,  and  he  will  save  us:  this  is 
the  Lord,  we  have  waited  for  him,  we  will 
be  glad  and  rejoice  in  his  salvation,”  (Isa. 
xxv.  9 :)  while  the  others,  however  once  ad- 
mired or  feared  by  mortals,  the  kings  of  the 
earth,  and  the  great  men,  and  the  rich  men, 
and  the  chief  captains,  and  the  mighty  men, 
no  less  than  those  of  inferior  rank,  shall 
tremble,  shall  wish  in  vain  to  conceal  them- 
selves, and  shall  say  to  the  mountains  and 
rocks,  “ Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face 
of  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  for  the 
great  day  of  his  wrath  is  come,”  Rev.  xvi. 
15,  16.  In  that  hour,  the  striking  descrip- 
tion in  the  book  of  Wisdom  (which,  though 
apocryphal,  is  in  this  passage  quite  consonant 
with  the  declarations  of  authentic  scripture) 
will  assuredly  be  realized.  “ Then  shall  the 
righteous  man  stand  in  great  boldness  before 
the  face  of  such  as  have  afflicted  him,  and 
made  no  account  of  his  labours.  When  they 
see  it,  they  shall  be  troubled  with  terrible 
fear,  and  shall  be  amazed  at  the  strangeness 
of  his  salvation,  so  far  beyond  all  that  they 
looked  for ; and  they,  repenting,  and  groan- 
ing for  anguish  of  spirit,  shall  say  within 
themselves,  This  was  he  whom  we  had  some- 
times in  derision,  and  a proverb  of  reproach. 
We  fools  counted  his  life  madness,  and  his 
end  to  be  without  honour.  How  is  he  num- 


310 


MESSIAH  WORSHIPPED  BY  ANGELS. 


bered  among  the  children  of  God,  and  his  lot 
is  among  the  saints!”  Wisdom,  v.  1 — 5. 

3.  We  may  well  admire  the  condescension 
of  this  great  King,  who  humbleth  himself 
even  to  notice  the  worship  of  heaven,  that 
he  should  look  upon  the  worship  of  sinful 
men  with  acceptance,  and  permit  such  worms 
as  we  are  to  take  his  holy  name  upon  our  pol- 
luted lips.  If  wre  know  ourselves,  we  must 
be  conscious  of  such  defects  and  defilement 
attending  our  best  services,  as  are  sufficient, 
to  affect  us  with  shame  and  humiliation. 
What  wanderings  of  imagination,  what 
risings  of  evil  thoughts,  what  unavoidable 
though  unhallowed  workings  of  self-compla- 
cence, mingle  with  our  prayers  and  praises, 
and  disturb  us  in  our  secret  retirements,  in 
the  public  assembly,  and  even  at  the  table  of 
the  Lord  ! I hope  we  know  enough  of  this,  to 
be  sensible  that  we  need  forgiveness,  not  only 
for  our  positive  transgressions  of  his  will,  but. 
for  our  sincerest,  warmest,  and  most  enlarged 
attempts  to  render  him  the  glory  due  to  his 
name ! Yet  we  are  incompetent  and  partial 
judges  of  ourselves ; we  know  but  little  of  the 
evil  of  our  own  hearts,  and  have  hut  a slight 
sense  of  the  malignity  of  that  evil  which  is 
within  our  observation.  But  the  Lord  searches 
‘he  heart  and  the  reins  ; to  him  all  things  are 
naked,  without  covering,  open,  without  con- 
cealment, Heb.  iv.  13.  He  understandeth 
our  thoughts  afar  of,  and  beholdeth  us  exactly 
as  we  are.  Our  dislike  of  sin  is  proportion- 
able  to  our  attainments  in  holiness,  which  are 
exceedingly  short  of  the  standard.  But  he  is 
infinitely  holy,  and  therefore  evil  is  unspeak- 
ably hateful  to  him.  How  vile  and  abominable 
therefore  must  our  sins  appear  in  his  view  ! 
Indeed,  if  he  were  strict  to  mark  what  is 
amiss,  we  could  not  stand  a moment  before 
liim,  nor  would  it  be  agreeable  to  his  majesty 
and  purity  to  accept  any  services  or  prayers 
at  our  hands,  if  we  presumed  to  offer  them  in 
our  own  name.  But  now  there  is  an  atone- 
ment provided,  and  a way  of  access  to  a 
throne  of  grace,  sprinkled  with  the  blood 
which  speaketh  better  things  than  the  blood 
of  Abel.  Now  that  we  have  an  Advocate, 
Intercessor,  and  High-Priest  to  bear  the  ini- 
quity of  our  holy  things,  we  are  accepted  in 
the  Beloved.  Now  the  great  and  holy  God 
vouchsafes  to  admit  such  sinners  into  com- 
munion with  himself.  He  invites  us  to  draw 
near  with  boldness;  and  because  of  ourselves 
we  know  not  how  to  pray  as  we  ought,  (Rom. 
viii.  26,)  he  favours  us  with  the  influence  of 
his  Holy  Spirit.  It  is  a great  instance  of  the 
power  of  faith,  that,  remembering  what  we 
have  been,  and  feeling  what  we  are,  and 
having  some  right  apprehension  of  him  with 
whom  we  have  to  do,  we  a^3  enabled  to  ap- 
proach him  with  confidence,  and  to  open  our 
hearts  to  him  with  greater  liberty  than  we 
can  use  to  our  dearest  earthly  friends.  His 
people  know,  by  many  infallible  proofs,  that 


[SER.  XXVIII. 

his  presence  is  with  them  in  their  secret  re- 
tirements, and  in  their  public  assemblies,  ac- 
cording to  his  promise.  He  hears  and  an- 
swers their  prayers,  he  revives  their  spirits, 
he  renews  their  strength ; he  gives  them 
reason  to  say,  that  a day  in  his  courts  is  bet- 
ter than  a thousand  of  the  world’s  days.  Such 
are  their  expectations,  and  such,  in  the  ex- 
ercise of  faith,  is  their  experience.  They 
worship  him  whom  the  angels  worship;  and 
they  know,  that,  unworthy  and  defective  as 
they  are,  their  worship  is  no  less  acceptable 
to  him,  than  that  of  the  angels  in  glory,  by 
virtue  of  their  relation  to  him,  who  is  Lord 
both  of  angels  and  men. 

4.  Hence  we  may  infer  the  necessity  of 
that  change  of  heart,  which  the  scripture  ex- 
presses by  a new  birth,  a new  life,  a new 
creation,  and  other  representations,  which 
denote  it  can  be  effected  only  by  divine 
power.  Till  we  are  the  subjects  of  this  ope- 
ration, we  are  incapable  of  enjoying,  or  even 
of  seeing  the  kingdom  of  God,  John  iii.  3. 
Though  to  outward  appearance  the  congre- 
gation before  me  seem  all  to  be  serious  and 
attentive,  as  if  engaged  in  the  same  design, 
and  animated  with  the  same  desire  and  hope, 
he  to  whom  our  hearts  are  known,  doubtless 
observes  a great  difference.  Some  of  you, 
though  custom,  or  a regard  to  your  connec- 
tions, brings  you  hither,  yet  must  be  sensible 
that  this  is  not  your  chosen  ground,  and  that 
these  are  not  the  subjects  which  give  you 
pleasure.  We  preach  Christ  Jesus  and  him 
crucified — Christ  Jesus  the  Lord.  The  Lord 
sees,  though  I cannot,  the  indisposition 
of  your  hearts  towards  him.  You  are  soon 
weary  and  uneasy ; and  you  wish  to  throw 
the  blame  of  your  uneasiness  upon  the 
preacher.  You  regard  his  method,  his  man- 
ner, his  expressions,  with  no  friendly  inten- 
tion, in  hopes  of  noticing  something  that  may 
seem  to  justify  your  dislike ; and  a sermon,  not 
very  long  in  itself,  is  to  you  very  tedious. 
We  wish  well  to  your  souls,  we  study  to  find 
out  acceptable  words ; for  though  we  dare  not 
trifle  wfith  or  flatter  you,  we  are  unwilling  to 
give  you  just  offence.  But  if  you  will  be 
faithful  to  yourselves,  you  may  perceive  that 
it  is  not  so  much  the  length  or  the  manner, 
as  the  subject  of  our  sermons,  that  disgusts 
you.  You  would,  perhaps,  hear  with  more 
attention  and  patience,  did  we  speak  less  of 
him  whom  the  angels  worship.  There  are 
assemblies  more  suited  to  your  taste,  and 
there  are  public  speakers  to  whom  you  can 
probably  afford  a willing  ear,  for  a much 
longer  time  than  we  detain  you ; because 
there  you  are  at  home.  You  are  of  the 
world,  and  you  love  the  world.  The  amuse- 
ments, the  business,  the  converse,  and  the 
customs  of  the  world,  suit  your  inclination. 
But  here  you  are  not,  if  I may  so  speak,  in 
your  proper  element:  and  yet  it  may  be, 
there  are  persons  in  the  same  seat  with  you. 


311 


GIFTS  RECEIVED  FOR  THE  REBELLIOUS. 


8ER.  XXIX.] 

who  think  themselves  happy  t,o  hear  what 
you  hear  with  indifference  or  disgust.  If* you 
knew  your  state  as  a sinner,  your  need  of  a 
Saviour,  and  the  excellency  and  glory  of  the 
Saviour  whom  we  preach  to  you,  you  like- 
wise would  be  pleased ; and  a preacher  of 
veijr  moderate  powers  would  fix  your  atten- 
tion, and  gain  your  esteem,  if  he  preached 
this  gospel.  But  what  ideas  do  you  form  of  a 
future  state?  Surely  you  cannot  suppose, 
that  in  the  eternal  world  you  will  meet  with 
any  of  the  poor  expedients  you  have  recourse 
to  now,  for  filling  up  your  time,  which  other- 
wise would  hang  heavy  upon  your  hands. 
To  attempt  a detail  of  the  round  of  vanities 
which  constitute  a worldly  life,  would  be  un- 
suitable to  the  dignity  of  the  pulpit.  Let  it 
suffice,  that  death  will  remove  you  from  them 
all.  If  they  are  now  necessary  to  what  you 
account  your  happiness,  must  you  not  of 
course  be  miserable  without  them?  If  you 
believe  you  shall  exist  hereafter,  do  you  not 
desire  heaven?  But  such  a heaven  as  the 
word  of  God  describes  could  not  afford  you 
happiness,  unless  your  mind  be  previously 
changed  and  disposed  to  relish  it.  Neither 
the  employment  nor  the  company  of  heaven 
would  be  pleasing  to  you.  It  is  a state  where 
all  the  inhabitants  unite  in  admiring  and 
adoring  him  who  died  upon  the  cross.  If 
this  subject  is  displeasing  to  you  here,  it 
would  be  much  more  so  there.  Heaven  itself 
would  be  a hell  to  an  unhumbled,  an  unholy 
soul.  Consider  this  seriously,  while  there  is 
time  to  seek  his  face;  and  tremble  at  the 
thoughts  of  being  cut  off  by  death  in  your 
present,  state,  insensible  as  you  are  of  who  he 
is,  and  what  he  has  done  for  sinners.  May 
he  enlighten  your  understanding,  and  enable 
you  to  see  the  things  pertaining  to  your  true 
peace,  before  they  are  for  ever  hidden  from 
your  eyes! 


SERMON  XXIX. 

GIFTS  RECEIVED  FOR  THE  REBELLIOUS. 

Thou  hast  ascended  on  high , thou  hast  led 
captivity  captive : thou  hast  received  gifts 
for  men ; yea , for  the  rebellious  also , that 
the  Lord  God  might  dwell  among  them. 
— Psalm  lxviii.  18. 

When  Joseph  exchanged  a prison  for  the 
chief  honour  and  government  of  Egypt,  (Gen. 
xlv.  4,  5,)  the  advantage  of  his  exaltation  was 
felt  «by  those  who  little  deserved  it.  His 
brethren  hated,  and  had  conspired  to  kill  him. 
And  though  he  was  preserved  from  death, 
they  were  permitted  to  sell  him  for  a bond- 
servant.  He  owed  his  servitude,  imprison- 
ment, and  sufferings  to  them  ; and  they  were 
afterwards  indebted  to  him  for  their  lives, 


subsistence,  honour,  and  comfort ; God  in  a 
wonderful  manner  over-ruling  their  evil  con- 
duct for  future  good  to  themselves.  Thus 
Jesus  was  despised,  rejected,  and  sold ; and  he 
was  actually  slain.  But  he  arose  and  as- 
cended. The  man  of  sorrows  took  possession 
of  the  throne  of  glory;  and  not  for  himself 
only.  His  honour  is  the  source  of  happiness 
to  those  who  were  once  his  enemies,  and  re- 
bellious against  him.  For  the  sake  of  such 
he  lived  and  died.  For  their  sakes  he  lives 
and  reigns.  He  fought,  conquered,  and  tri- 
umphed over  their  enemies.  As  their  repre- 
sentative, he  received  gifts  to  bestow  upon 
them : such  gifts  as  their  necessities  re- 
quired, derived  from  the  relation  he  was 
pleased  to  stand  in  to  them,  and  from  the 
value  and  dignity  of  his  engagements  on 
their  behalf:  such  gifts  as  he  alone  could 
communicate,  and  which  alone  could  restore 
them  to  the  favour  of  God,  and  revive  his 
image  in  their  hearts ; so  as  to  make  it  suit- 
able to  his  holiness  and  truth,  for  the  Lord 
God  to  return  to  his  polluted  temples,  and  to 
dwell  in  them  and  among  them. 

I observed,  in  a former  discourse,  that  this 
psalm  and  the  twenty -fourth  were  probably 
composed  and  first  published  on  the  memora- 
ble occasion,  when  David,  having  obtained 
the  victory  over  his  numerous  enemies,  and 
settled  his  kingdom  in  peace,  removed  the 
ark,  which  till  then  had  no  fixed  residence, 
into  Zion.  The  apostle’s  application  of  this 
passage,  (Eph.  iv.  8,)  authorises  us  to  con- 
sider that  transaction  as  typical  of  our  Lord’s 
ascension.  Jesus  is  the  true  ark.  The  holy 
law  of  God  was  in  his  heart ; his  obedience 
unto  death  was  fully  commensurate  to  the 
demands  of  the  law,  (Rom.  iii.  25,)  as  the 
mercy-seat,  or  propitiation,  which  covered 
the  ark,  was  exactly  equal  to  its  dimensions. 
He  who  had  thus  obeyed  on  earth,  ascended 
on  high,  the  everlasting  gates  unfolded,  and 
he  entered  into  the  holy  place  not  made  with 
hands,  there  to  appear  in  the  presence  of 
God  for  us,  Heb.  ix.  24.  In  this  state  he  is 
highly  exalted  upon  the  throne  of  glory,  and 
administers  all  power  in  heaven  and  in  earth. 
From  hence  is  the  honour,  safety,  and  hap- 
piness of  those  who  believe  in  him.  They 
have  nothing  to  plead  for  themselves.  But 
unworthy  as  they  are,  he  is  not  ashamed 
to  own  them ; and  he  assures  them,  that  all 
he  did,  and  that  all  he  has  received,  so  far  as 
they  are  capable  of  sharing  in  it,  is  for  them. 
The  clauses,  as  they  lie  in  the  text,  suggest 
a convenient  method  for  our  meditations,  and 
will  lead  me  briefly  to  consider  four  points — 

His  ascension — his  victories — the  gifts  he 
received  for  men — and  the  great  end  for 
which  he  bestows  them. 

I.  His  ascension — “Thou  hast  ascended 
on  high.” — God  formed  man  originally  for 
himself,  and  gave  him  an  answerable  capa- 
city, so  that  no  inferior  good  can  satisfy  and 


312 


GIFTS  RECEIVED  FOR  THE  REBELLIOUS. 


[ser.  xxrx. 


fill  his  mind.  Man  was  likewise,  by  the  con- 
stitution and  will  of  his  Maker,  immortal, 
provided  he  persevered  in  obedience.  But 
sin  degraded  and  ruined  him,  shut  the  gates 
of  paradise  and  the  gates  of  heaven  against 
him.  Man  destroyed  himself ; but  wisdom 
and  mercy  interposed  for  his  recovery.  A 
promise  was  given  of  the  seed  of  the  woman, 
who  should  bruise  the  serpent’s  head,  defeat 
his  policy,  destroy  his  power,  and  repair  the 
mischiefs  he  had  introduced  by  sin.  Mes- 
siah fulfilled  this  promise.  And  when  he  had 
finished  all  that  was  appointed  for  him  on 
earth,  as  the  second  Adam,  the  head  and  re- 
presentative of  his  people,  he  ascended  on 
high,  and  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to 
all  believers.  As  an  illustrious  proof  to  the 
universe,  that  God  is  reconciled  ; that  there 
is  forgiveness  with  him  for  sinners  who  im- 
plore his  mercy;  one  in  our  nature,  and  on 
our  behalf,  has  taken  possession  of  the  king- 
dom. The  series  of  texts  in  this  part  of  the 
Oratorio  recalls  this  subject  frequently  to  our 
thoughts ; nor  can  we  think  of  it  too  often. 
It  is  the  foundation  of  our  hopes,  the  source 
of  our  sublimest  joys,  and  the  sufficient  the 
only  sufficient  answer  to  all  the  f?-ggestions 
by  which  guilt,  fear,  •mhclief,  and  Satan, 
fight  against  our  peace.  Surrounded  as  we 
are  with  enemies  and  difficulties,  we  plead 
against  every  accusation  and  threatening, 
that  our  Head  is  in  heaven;  we  have  an  ad- 
vocate with  the  Father,  a High-Priest  upon 
the  throne,  who,  because  he  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession,  is  able  to  save  to  the  ut- 
termost. This  is  all  our  plea,  nor  do  we  de- 
sire any  other.  His  ascension  on  high,  is  a 
sure  pledge  that  his  servants  shall  follow 
him,  John  xii.  26.  And  even  at  present,  by 
faith  they  ascend  and  are  seated  with  him  in  j 
the  heavenly  places,  Eph.  ii.  6.  They  behold 
invisibles  with  the  eye  of  their  mind ; they 
realize  the  glorious  scene,  from  which  they  i 
are  separated  by  the  vail  of  flesh  and  blood. 
They  know  that,  even  now,  day  and  night,  ! 
day  without  night,  myriads  of  golden  harps  j 
and  happy  voices  resound  his  praise.  The  ! 
Babe  of  Bethlehem,  the  Man  who  once  hung  | 
dead  and  forsaken  upon  the  cross,  is  now  the 
Lord  of  glory.  Jn  the  thought  of  his  glory 
they  greatly  rejoice,  because  they  love  him, 
and  because  they  expect  shortly  to  be  with 
him. 

II.  His  victories — “Thou  hast  led  cap- 
tivity captive.”  The  expression  is  emphati- 
cal.  He  has  conquered  and  triumphed  over 
all  the  powers  which  held  us  in  captivity,  so 
that  captivity  itself  is  taken  captive.  The 
spirit  and  force  of  it  is  destroyed ; and  his 
people,  when  released  by  him,  and  walking 
in  his  ways,  have  no  more  to  apprehend  from 
those  whose  captives  they  were,  than  a con- 
queror has  to  fear  from  a prisoner  in  chains. 
The  energy  of  the  phrase  is  not  unlike  that 
if  the  apostle,  which  we  are  hereafter  to 


consider,  “ death  is  swallowed  up  in  vic- 
tory.” Man  by  nature  is  a captive,  in  a state 
of  confinement  and  bondage,  from  which  he 
cannot  escape  by  any  address  or  effort  of  his 
own. 

He  is  a captive  to  sin : a sinful  state  is  ? 
state  of  bondage;  and  this,  notwithstanding 
the  sinner  is  a willing  captive,  speaks  swell- 
ing words  of  vanity,  and  boasts  of  liberty, 
while  he  is  the  servant,  the  slave  of  corrup- 
tion. He  is  not  always,  and  in  every  sense, 
a willing  captive.  Conscience  sometimes 
remonstrates,  fills  him  with  fears  and  fore- 
bodings, which  make  him  struggle  to  be  free. 
And  there  are  many  sins,  which,  besides  be- 
ing offences  against  the  law  of  God,  are  di- 
rectly contrary  to  the  sinner’s  present  in- 
terest and  welfare;  and  would  be  so  upon 
his  own  plan,  and  if  he  was  wholly  his  own 
master,  and  had  no  account  to  render  of  his 
conduct.  Persons  enslaved  to  habits  of  lewd- 
ness, or  drunkenness,  need  not  be  told  from 
the  pulpit,  that  the  courses  they  pursue  are 
injurious  to  their  health,  their  business,  or 
substance,  their  reputation,  and  their  peace. 
They  know  it  and  feel  it,  without  a monitor. 
There  are  seasons,  when  the  ill  consequences 
they  bring  upon  themselves,  make  them  sick 
of  the  drudgery,  and  excite  some  efforts  to- 
wards a reform.  But  in  vain.  The  next  re- 
turn of  temptation  bears  down  all  their  re- 
| solutions  like  a torrent,  and,  after  every  at- 
1 tempt  to  amend,  they  usually  become  worse 
than  before.  For  none  can  escape,  unless 
the  Son  makes  them  free.  His  grace  can 
overcome  the  most  obstinate  habits  of  licen- 
tiousness, and  implant  the  contrary  habits 
of  purity  and  temperance.  But  they  who  are 
not  delivered  by  him  must  die  in  their  chains. 

III.  The  gifts  he  received  for  men — 
“ Thou  hast  received  gifts,  even  for  the  re- 
bellious.” To  bestow  gifts  upon  the  miser- 
able is  bounty ; but  to  bestow  them  upon 
rebels,  is  grace.  The  greatness  of  the  gifts 
contrasted  with  the  characters  of  those  who 
receive  them,  displays  the  exceeding  riches 
of  the  Redeemer’s  grace.  He  came  to  save, 
not  the  unhappy  only,  but  the  ungodly.  He 
gives  pardon,  peace,  and  eternal  life,  tc 
his  enemies;  whose  minds  are  so  entirely 
alienated  from  him,  that  until  he  makes 
them  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power,  their 
minds  are  determined  against  accepting  any 
favour  from  him.  They  live  long  in  con- 
tempt of  the  law  and  authority  of  God ; and 
though  justly  obnoxious  to  his  displeasure, 
while  left  to  themselves,  they  despise  and 
reject  the  proposals  of  his  mercy.  If  they 
sometimes  acknowledge  themselves  to  be 
sinners,  they  still  presume  that  they  are  able 
to  procure  his  favour  by  their  own  perform- 
ances. They  strangely  imagine  they  have  a 
sufficient  ground  of  hope,  so  long  as  it  ap- 
pears to  themselves  that  they  are  not  alto- 
gether so  bad  as  others.  And  when,  by  the 


GIFTS  RECEIVED  FOR  THE  REBELLIOUS. 


313 


SER.  XXIX.] 


gospel,  the  Lord  treats  them  as  sinners  al- 
ready justly  condemned  by  the  tenor  of  his 
holy  laws,  and  informs  them  of  the  exigency 
of  their  case ; that  nothing  less  than  the  re- 
sources of  his  infinite  wisdom,  and  the  most 
expensive  exertion  of  his  unspeakable  love, 
can  possibly  save  them  from  destruction ; the 
pride  of  their  hearts  rises  against  his  decla- 
rations. His  wisdom,  in  their  view,  is  folly ; 
and  his  love  provokes  their  enmity  and  scorn. 
He  says  of  Messiah,  “ This  is  my  beloved 
Son,  in  whom  I am  well  pleased,  hear  ye 
him but  the  language  of  their  heart  is, 
“We  will  not  have  him  to  reign  over  us,” 
Luke  xix.  14.  They  revile  and  oppose  the 
messengers  of  his  grace,  account  them  ene- 
mies, charge  them  as  troublers  of  their  peace, 
and  as  those  who  turn  the  world  upside 
down  : and,  when  not  restrained  by  the  pro- 
vidence of  God,  inflict  upon  them,  besides, 
reproaches,  stripes,  imprisonment,  tortures, 
and  death.  If  their  dearest  friends,  and  those 
who  are  connected  with  them  by  the  nearest 
ties  of  relation,  submit  to  the  testimony  of 
God,  and  yield  themselves  to  the  appointed 
Saviour,  they  are  treated  as  apostates  from 
the  general  opinion.  This  defection  from 
the  common  cause,  is  often  sufficient  to  can- 
cel the  strongest  obligations,  to  dissolve  the 
closest  intimacy,  to  raise  a person  foes  in  his 
own  household,  and  to  excite  envy,  hatred 
and  malice,  in  those  who  once  professed  es- 
teem and  love.  Can  the  spirit  of  rebellion 
rise  higher,  than  when  they  who  have  in- 
sulted the  authority,  defied  the  power,  and 
resisted  the  government  and  will  of  the 
great  God,  proceed  at  length  to  trample 
upon  his  tenders  of  reconciliation,  and  to  af- 
front him  in  that  concern  which,  of  all  others, 
is  dearest  to  him,  the  glory  of  his  grace  in  the 
person  of  his  Son?  Yet  this  is  no  exag- 
gerated representation.  Such  is  the  disposi- 
tion of  the  heart  of  man  towards  God  ; such 
were  some  of  us;  and  such,  I fear,  some  of 
us  are  to  this  hour.  I do  not  say,  that  this 
enmity  of  the  carnal  mind  acts,  in  every 
person  who  is  not  subject  to  the  grace  of 
God,  with  equal  rage  and  violence.  In  a land 
of  light,  liberty,  and  civilization,  like  ours,  a 
variety  of  circumstances  may  concur  to  set 
bounds  to  its  exercise ; education,  a natural 
gentleness  of  temper,  and  even  interest,  may 
keep  it  within  limits  of  decorum,  especially 
towards  some  individuals;  but  I affirm,  or 
rather  the  scriptures  declare,  that  enmity 
against  God,  a disaffection  to  his  gospel,  no 
less  than  to  his  law,  and  a dislike  to  those 
who  profess  and  obey  the  truth,  are  principles 
deeply  rooted  in  our  nature,  as  fallen ; and, 
however  they  may  seem  dormant  in  some 
persons  for  a season,  would  operate  vigor- 
ously, if  circumstances  were  so  to  alter  as  to 
afford  a fair  occasion.  For,  as  of  old,  he  that 
was  born  after  the  flesh  persecuted  him  that 
was  born  after  the  Spirit,  (Gal.  iv.  29,)  even 
Vol.  II.  2 R 


so  it  is  now.  And  it  is  still  as  true  as  in  the 
apostle’s  days,  that  all  who  will  live  godly  in 
Christ  Jesus,  (2  Tim.  iii.  12,)  shall,  in  one 
degree  or  form  or  other,  sutler  persecution 
from  those  who  will  not. 

Thus  men  are  characterized  in  the  word  of 
God — Rebels  and  enemies,  having  a neck  of' 
iron,  to  denote  their  obstinacy;  a brow  of 
brass,  (Isa.  xlviii.  4,)  to  express  their  in- 
solence and  presumption ; and  a heart  of 
stone,  (Ezekiel  xxxvi.  26,)  insensible  to  the 
softest  methods  of  persuasion,  incapable  of 
receiving  tender,  kind,  and  generous  impres- 
sions, though  they  are  wooed  and  besought 
by  the  consideration  of  the  mercies  of  God, 
of  the  dying  agonies  of  Messiah,  unless  that 
mighty  power  be  displayed  in  their  favour, 
which  brought  forth  streams  of  water  from 
the  rock  in  the  wilderness. 

Messiah  died,  arose,  and  ascended  on  high, 
that  he  might  receive  gifts  for  rebels  of  this 
spirit  and  disposition.  The  one  grand  gift  I 
shall  specify,  is,  indeed,  comprehensive  of 
every  other  good, — the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
He  said  to  his  sorrowing  disciples,  “ It  is  ex- 
pedient for  you  that  I go  away ; for  if  I go 
not  away,  the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto 
you ; but  if  I depart,  I will  send  him  unto 
you,”  John  xvi.  7.  Soon  after  his  ascension, 
this  promise  was  fulfilled.  The  disciples 
were  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit  (Acts  ii.  4. 
37,)  and  the  people  who  had  slain  the  Lord, 
were  pricked  to  the  heart,  repented  of  their 
sin,  received  faith  in  him  whom  they  had 
pierced,  and  experienced  joy  and  peace  in 
believing. 

That  the  gospel  is  preached  upon  earth  by 
a succession  of  ministers  called  and  furnished 
for  that  service,  and  that  the  gospel,  when 
preached,  is  not  rejected  by  all,  as  it  is  by 
many,  is  wholly  to  be  ascribed  to  the  agency 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  whose  office  and  covenant- 
engagement  it  is,  to  convince  the  world  of 
sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment  (John 
xvi.  9,  11,)  and  to  glorify  Messiah.  He  opens 
the  eyes  of  the  understanding,  subdues  the 
stubborn  will,  softens,  or  rather  removes  the 
heart  of  stone,  and  gives  a feeling,  tender 
heart,  a heart  of  flesh.  Then  the  rebels  re- 
lent and  sue  for  mercy;  then  they  obtain 
faith,  repentance,  remission,  a full  and  free 
salvation,  and  all  the  gifts  which  Messiah  has 
received  for  them. 

IV.  His  ultimate  design  in  favour  of  re- 
bellious men,  the  great  final  cause  of  his  me- 
diation, and  particularly  of  his  bestowung  on 
them  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  “ that  the 
Lord  God  may  dwell  among  them.”  Man 
was  created  in  the  image  of  God,  who  formed 
him  for  himself.  But  he  sinned  and  was  for- 
saken. God  withdrew  his  light  and  love  from 
him,  and  man  sunk  into  darkness  and  misery. 
Sin  and  Satan  took  possession  of  the  heart, 
wffiich  was  originally  designed  to  be  the  tem- 
ple of  the  living  God.  But  the  Lord  had  a 


314 


THE  PUBLICATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL. 


merciful  purpose,  to  return  in  a way  worthy  1 
of  his  perfections.  Without  him,  the  souls ! 
of  men,  and  the  whole  human  race,  as  to  j 
their  proper  happiness,  are  like  what  the 
earth  would  be  without  the  sun,  dark,  cold, 
fruitless,  and  comfortless.  But  the  know- 
ledge of  Messiah,  like  the  sun,  enlightens  the 
world  and  the  heart. 

When  in  the  day  of  his  power,  by  the  re- 
velation of  his  light  and  love,  he  destroys  the 
dominion  of  sin,  and  dispossesses  Satan,  he  | 
reclaims  his  own,  and  takes  possession  for  J 
himself.  The  heart,  sprinkled  with  the  blood  I 
of  Jesus,  and  anointed  with  the  holy  unction, ! 
becomes  a consecrated  temple  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  This  persuasion,  though  now  bv  many, 
who  have  not  renounced  the  name  of  chris-  j 
tian,  deemed  the  essence  of  enthusiasm,  was  j 
once  thought  essential  to  Christianity  ; so  that ! 
the  apostle  speaks  of  it  as  an  obvious  incon-  i 
trovertible  fact,  with  which  no  true  Christian  j 
could  be  unacquainted.  “ Know  ye  not  that  j 
your  body  is  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?”  j 
2 Cor.  vi.  19.  Again,  he  speaks  of  Christ 
dwelling  in  the  heart,  Eph.  iii.  17.  “ Christ 

in  you  the  hope  of  glory,”  Colos.  i.  27.  And 
in  another  place,  “ Ye  are  the  temple  of  the 
living  God,  as  God  hath  said,  I will  dwell  in 
them,  and  walk  in  them,”  (2  Cor.  vi.  16,) 
agreeably  to  his  promise  by  the  prophets.  He  j 
liveth  in  them,  as  the  principle  of  their  life, 
wisdom,  and  power ; therefore  the  apostle 
says,  “ I live,  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in 
me,”  Gal.  ii.  20.  There  is  a mutual  indwel- 
ling between  the  Lord  and  his  people. ; they 
in  him  as  the  branch  in  the  vine,  and  he  in 
them  as  the  sap  in  the  branch ; he  in  them  as 
in  his  temples,  they  in  him  as  in  their  strong 
tower  of  defence.  And  from  hence  we  infer 
the  duration  of  their  life  of  grace,  that  it  shall 
continue  and  spring  up  into  everlasting  life, 
since  it  is  properly  not  their  own,  but  his ; and 
since  he  has  said,  “ Because  I live,  ye  shall 
live  also.” 

He  dwells  likewise  among  his  people  in 
their  collective  capacity.  His  whole  church, 
comprising  all  the  members  of  his  mystical  j 
body,  built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apos-  j 
ties  and  prophets,  form  a building  fitly  framed  i 
together,  a palace,  a holy  temple  for  the  Lord, 
the  great  King.  He  dwelleth  likewise  in 
every  particular  society  who  walk  by  his 
rule,  and  adorn  the  profession  of  his  truth  by 
a conversation  becoming  the  gospel.  He  is 
a wall  of  fire  round  about  them,  and  a glory 
in  the  midst  of  them,  Zech.  ii.  5,  10.  When 
they  meet  together  in  his  name,  he  is  there. 
He  walks  in  the  midst  of  the  golden  candle- 
sticks. It  is  his  presence  that  gives  life  and 
efficacy  to  all  his  ordinances,  and  communi- 
cates a power  to  his  word,  by  which  the 
minds  of  his  worshipping  people  are  en- 
lghtened,  strengthened,  healed,  and  com- 
forted. Here  he  manifests  himself  to  them, 
as  he  does  not  unto  the  world,  and  they  can 


[ser.  xxx. 

adopt  the  words  of  the  psalmist,  “ A day  in 
thy  courts  is  better  than  a thousand.”  To 
his  presence  they  owe  their  peace  and  in- 
crease, their  union  and  protection.  And  if 
he  withdraws,  Ichabod  may  be  written  upon 
their  solemn  assemblies ; (1  Sam.  iv.  21 :)  for 
even  his  own  appointments  can  afford  them 
neither  profit  nor  pleasure,  unless  they  are 
animated  by  his  glory.  Their  graces  lan- 
guish, their  harmony  is  interrupted,  strifes 
and  dissensions  take  place,  evil  roots  of  bit- 
terness spring  up  to  trouble  and  defile  them ; 
(Hebrews  xii.  15;)  men  arise  from  among 
themselves,  speaking  perverse  things,  and 
fierce  wolves  break  in,  not  sparing  the  flock 
(Acts  xx.  29,  30,)  if  the  good  Shepherd  sus- 
pends his  influence  and  presence. 

I trust  he  dwells  and  walks  in  the  midst 
of  us.  He  is  here  as  an  observer,  and  as  a 
gracious  benefactor.  He  sees  who  draw  near 
him  with  their  lips,  while  their  hearts  are 
far  from  him ; and  he  likewise  takes  notice 
of  them  that  fear  and  love  him,  and  who  es- 
teem the  light  of  his  countenance  to  be  bet- 
ter than  life.  The  high  and  lofty  One  who 
inhabiteth  eternity,  who  dwelleth  in  the 
high  and  holy  place,  dwelleth  likewise  with 
those  that  are  of  a contrite  and  humble 
spirit,  to  revive  and  bless  them,  Isa.  lvii.  15. 


SERMON  XXX. 

THE  PUBLICATION  OF  TIIE  GOSPEL. 

The  Lord  gave  the  word,  great  was  the 
company  of  those  that  published  it,  (or  oj 
the  preachers.)  Psalm  ixviii.  11. 

Perhaps  no  one  psalm  has  given  greatei 
exercise  to  the  skill  and  the  patience  of  com- 
mentators and  critics  than  the  sixty-eighth. 
I suppose  the  difficulties  do  not  properly  be- 
long to  the  psalm,  but  arise  from  our  igno- 
rance of  various  circumstances  to  which  the 
psalmist  alludes,  which  probably  were  at 
that  time  generally  known  and  understood. 
The  first  verse  is  the  same  with  the  stated 
form  of  benediction  which  was  used  when- 
ever the  ark  of  the  Lord  set  forward  while 
Israel  sojourned  in  the  wilderness,  (Numb.  x. 
35,)  which  confirms  the  prevailing  opinion, 
that  the  psalm  was  primarily  designed  as  an 
act  of  thanksgiving,  to  accompany  the  re- 
moval of  the  ark  to  Zion,  by  David.  The 
seventh  and  eighth  verses  are  repeated,  with 
| little  variation,  from  the  song  of  Deborah, 

; Judges  v.  4,  5.  The  leading  scope  of  the 
whole  appears  to  be,  first  a recapitulation  of 
God’s  gracious  dealing  with  Israel,  and  of  the 
great  things  he  had  done  for  them,  from  th^ 
time  he  delivered  them  from  their  bondage 
in  Egypt,  and  then  a transition,  in  the  spirit 
of  prophecy,  to  the  far  greater  things  he 


THE  PUBLICATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL. 


315 


SER.  XXX.] 

would  do  for  his  people,  under  and  by  the 
gospel  dispensation,  in  consequence  of  Mes- 
siah’s exaltation  to  receive  gifts  for  rebel- 
lious men.  This  verse,  though  the  particular 
occasion  is  not  specified,  probably  refers  to 
some  season  of  deliverance  or  victory,  when 
the  women,  according  to  the  custom  of  the 
nation,  assembled  to  praise  the  Lord,  with 
timbrels,  songs,  and  dances,  Exod.  xv.  The 
songs  and  responses  of  Miriam  and  her  com- 
panions, and  of  the  women  who  welcomed 
Saul  and  David  after  the  defeat  of  the  Philis- 
tine, (1  Sam.  xviii.  6,  7,)  I have  formerly 
mentioned  as  instances.  The  word  which  is 
rendered,  Those  icho  published  or  preached , 
being  expressed  with  a feminine  termina- 
tion, leads  the  mind  to  this  sense.  But  we 
are  not  necessarily  confined  to  it ; for  the 
word  rendered  preacher  in  the  book  of  Ec- 
clesiastes, is  likewise  in  the  feminine  form, 
though  we  are  sure  the  person  intended  by 
it  was  Solomon. 

However,  this  passage  is  properly  intro- 
duced in  the  Messiah,  and  in  its  proper  place, 
immediately  after  the  view  given  of  our  Sa- 
viour’s triumphant  ascension,  as  it  leads  us 
to  consider  the  first  visible  effect  of  that  great 
event ; for  soon  afterwards,  when  the  day  of 
Pentecost  was  fully  come,  the  Lord  gave  the 
word,  Acts  ii.  1—4.  The  Holy  Spirit,  the 
precious  gift,  which  Jesus  had  received  for 
rebellious  men,  descended  with  visible  em- 
blems, and  a powerful  energy,  and  inspired 
and  qualified  his  disciples  for  the  great  work 
of  establishing  and  spreading  his  spiritual 
kingdom.  From  that  hour,  great  was  the 
number  of  the  preachers,  and  great  was  the 
success  and  efficacy  of  their  mission.  So  that 
in  a few  years  the  gospel  spread  like  the 
light,  from  Jerusalem,  through  all  Judea  and 
Samaria,  and  to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
earth.  And  he  who  said,  “ Lo,  I am  with 
you  always,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world,” 
(Matt,  xxviii.  20,)  has,  by  the  same  Spirit, 
perpetuated  his  word,  and  a succession  of 
preachers,  to  our  time,  and  has  promised  to 
perpetuate  and  work  by  the  same  means,  till 
time  shall  be  no  more. 

My  text,  therefore,  if  not  a direct  prophecy 
of  the  publication  of  the  gospel,  is  at  least  a 
fit  motto  to  a discourse  on  this  very  important 
subject.  We  may  consider  it  in  two  senses, 
which,  though  something  different,  are  equal- 
ly agreeable  to  the  words  before  us,  and  to 
the  general  tenor  of  the  scripture. 

I.  That  the  message  is  the  Lord’s. — He 
gave  the  word,  and  prescribed  to  his  servants 
the  subject  matter  of  their  preaching. 

JI.  That  the  messengers  employed  are 
called  and  sent  forth  by  him. — The  Lord 
gave  the  word  or  command ; in  consequence 
of  which  word,  the  number  of  preachers  was 
great,  as  when  in  the  beginning  he  said, 

“ Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light.” 

I.  The  Lord  gave  the  word  which  the  mul- 


titude of  preachers  went  forth  to  puolish. 
His  merciful  design  was  great, — to  deliver 
sinners  from  bondage,  misery  and  death  : and 
to  bless  them  with  liberty,  life,  and  peace. 
But  they  are  by  nature  rebellious  and  obsti- 
nate, and  must  be  made  willing.  He  only 
can  subdue  their  prejudices,  and  soften  their 
spirits;  and  he  has  promised  to  display  his 
power  in  their  favour  by  a certain  mean  of 
his  own  appointment,  and  we  cannot  expect 
that  he  will  do  it  in  any  other  way.  This  mean 
is  the  gospel, which,  for  its  admirable  suitable- 
ness and  efficacy,  is  commended  to  us  as  his 
wisdom  and  his  power,  1 Cor.  i.  23,  24.  He 
has  given  it  for  this  purpose,  and  his  blessing 
makes  it  successful.  He  has  said  concerning 
it,  “As  the  rain  cometh  down  and  the  snow 
from  heaven,  and  watereth  the  earth,  and 
maketh  it  bring  forth  and  bud,  that  it  may 
give  seed  to  the  sower,  and  bread  to  the 
eater ; so  shall  my  word  be,  that  goeth  forth 
out  of  my  mouth;  it  shall  not  return  unto 
me  void,  but  it  shall  accomplish  that  which  I 
please  ; it  shall  prosper  in  the  thing  whereto 
I sent  it,”  Is.  lv.  10,11.  It  has  been  con- 
firmed by  the  experience  of  ages,  that  no 
mean  but  this  can  produce  the  desirable  ef- 
fect. It  is  confirmed  by  observation  in  the 
present  day.  If  the  wisdom  of  man,  if  learn- 
ing, if  oratory,  if  animated  descriptions  of  the 
beauty  of  virtue,  and  pathetic  persuasions  to 
the  practice  of  it,  could  reform,  we  should  be 
a reformed  people.  But  alas  ! this  is  only  to 
oppose  a mound  of  sand  to  the  violence  of  a 
flood.  Notwithstanding  many  ingenious  ser- 
mons and  treatises  upon  this  plan  are  admired 
and  praised,  wickedness  prevails  and  tri- 
umphs. They  have  little  influence  upon  the 
conduct  of  civil  life ; and  I may  boldly  say, 
no  influence  to  inspire  the  heart  with  the 
love  and  peace  of  God,  and  to  bring  it  into  a 
habit  of  subjection  to  his  will  and  command. 
Nothing  will  do  this  but  the  gospel,  the  word 
which  the  Lord  has  given.  This  alone  shows 
the  evil  of  sin  in  its  true  light,  affords  a solid 
ground  for  the  hope  of  mercy,  and  furnishes 
those  motives  which  alone  are  sufficient  to 
break  the  force  of  the  temptations  and  dif- 
ficulties with  which  we  have  to  conflict. 
When  this  word  is  simply  and  cordially  re- 
ceived, an  immediate  and  wonderful  change 
takes  place.  The  sinner  abandons  his  false 
hopes  and  vain  pursuits,  is  freed  from  his 
former  slavery  to  the  love  of  the  world  and 
the  fear  of  man,  and  becomes  the  willing 
servant  of  him  who  redeemed  him  with  his 
own  blood. 

But  we  are  sometimes  asked,  .vhat  we  un- 
derstand by  the  gospel!  The  use  of  the  term 
in  a restrained  sense,  so  as  to  imply  there  are 
but  few  comparatively  who  preach  it,  is 
deemed  invidious  and  assuming;  and  it  is 
supposed  by  many,  that  a sermon,  if  delivered 
from  a pulpit,  and  if  the  text  be  taken  from 
the  Bible,  must  of  course  be  the  gospel.  It  is 


316 


THE  PUBLICATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL. 


undeniable,  however,  that  there  are  a variety 
of  different  and  opposite  sentiments  delivered 
from  pulpits ; and  surely  the  gospel  cannot 
be  opposite,  contrary,  yea  contradictory  to  it- 
self! It  is  a mournful  consideration,  that  mul- 
titudes of  people  are  not  qualified  to  judge  of 
this  point.  Not  properly  for  want  of  ability, 
for  many  of  them  are  persons  of  good  sense 
and  discernment,  and  can  judge  and  talk  well 
upon  other  subjects ; but  for  want  of  attention. 
Their  application  is  engrossed  by  the  de- 
mands of  business  or  pleasure,  and  they  have 
neither  leisure  nor  taste  for  a careful  perusal 
of  the  scriptures,  nor  for  the  examination  of 
religious  sentiments.  If  the  language  and 
elocution  of  the  preacher  be  good,  and  if 
there  be  no  close  and  painful  address  to  the 
conscience,  they  are  satisfied.  The  apostle 
Paul  undoubtedly  preached  the  gospel ; and 
he  tells  us  himself  that  he  preached  Christ 
crucified ; he  preached  Christ,  as  appointed 
of  God,  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification 
and  redemption,  1 Cor.  i.  30.  He  preached 
the  cross  of  Christ,  (Gal.  vi.  14,)  he  gloried 
in  it,  and  he  determined  to  glory  in  nothing 
else.  The  gospel  treats  all  mankind  as  al- 
ready in  a state  of  condemnation ; it  declares 
their  utter  inability  to  save  or  help  them- 
selves ; and  it  gives  assurance  of  pardon  and 
salvation  to  all  who  believe  in  the  Son  of 
God.  That  they  may  be  encouraged  and 
enabled  to  believe,  it  describes  the  dignity  of 
his  person,  the  necessity  and  greatness  of  his 
sufferings,  the  completeness  of  his  atonement, 
the  prevalence  of  his  intercession — his  love, 
authority,  power,  and  faithfulness.  These 
truths,  revealed  and  applied  to  a guilty  con- 
science, by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
produce  faith.  The  sinner  perceives  the 
sufficiency  and  excellency  of  such  a Saviour, 
commits  himself  to  his  compassion  and  care, 
and  renounces  every  other  hope  and  service. 
He  looks  to  the  Saviour  by  the  eye  of  his 
mind,  with  desire  and  admiration,  and  derives 
life  from  his  death,  healing  from  his  wounds, 
as  the  Israelites,  when  wounded,  were  healed 
by  looking  upon  the  brazen  serpent.  And  not 
only  is  the  conscience  relieved  by  this  know- 
ledge of  Christ  crucified — the  understanding 
is  likewise  enlightened,  the  judgment  is 
formed,  the  affections  regulated  and  directed 
by  it.  Then  old  things  pass  away,  all  be- 
comes new.  The  love  of  sin  departs,  and  the 
future  life  is  devoted  to  him,  who  therefore 
died  and  revived,  that  he  might  be  Lord  both 
of  the  dead  and  the  living,  Rom.  xiv.  9. 

There  is  likewise  a certain  energy  or 
power  which  accompanies  the  gospel  when  it 
is  truly  preached,  which  sufficiently  charac- 
terizes and  distinguishes  it  from  all  other  re- 
ligious schemes  and  systems.  Our  Lord, 
during  his  personal  ministry,  frequentlygave 
proofs’ that  he  knew  the  heart  of  man.  When 
Zaccheus  thought  himself  unknown  and  un- 
seen, he  called  him  by  his  name,  Luke  xix.  5. 


[ser.  xxx. 

He  reminded  Nathanael  of  what  had  passed 
in  secret  under  the  fig-tree;  (John  i.  48  ;)  and 
by  a few  words,  brought  to  the  remembrance 
of  the  woman  of  Samaria,  all  that  she  had 
done  in  her  life,  John  iv.  29.  A similar  effect 
accompanies  the  preaching  of  his  gospel  to 
this  day.  The  gospel  is  preached,  when 
they  who  are  present  find  the  secrets  of  their 
hearts  are  made  manifest;  when  the  preacher, 
who  perhaps  never  saw  them  before,  reminds 
them  of  what  they  have  done,  or  said,  or 
thought,  possibly  of  things  transacted  long 
ago,  and  almost  forgotten  by  themselves;  and 
likewise  describes  the  very  feelings  of  their 
hearts  while  he  is  speaking  to  them.  It  is 
usually  in  this  way  that  conviction  of  sin  first 
takes  place ; and  in  this  way,  that  a con- 
vinced burdened  sinner  meets  with  season- 
able support  and  direction,  so  exactly  suited 
to  his  case,  that  he  almost  thinks  the  preacher 
is  speaking  to  none  but  himself.  No  preachers 
but  those  who  speak  in  conformity  to  the  word 
which  the  Lord  gave,  have  this  power  over 
the  heart  and  conscience. 

II.  It  is  owing  to  the  word,  the  appointment, 
and  power  ofGod,  thatany  persons  are  induced 
or  enabled  to  preach  this  gospel.  Men  may, 
indeed,  assume  the  office  of  a preacher  upon 
other  grounds ; there  are  toe  many  who  do. 
But  though  they  speak  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  and  as  his  ministers,  if  he  has  not  sent 
them,  they  cannot  declare  his  message  in 
such  a manner  as  to  make  full  proof  of  their 
ministry,  2 Tim.  iv.  5.  They  may  profit 
themselves,  according  to  their  low  views, 
and  may  obtain  such  honours  and  emolu- 
ments as  the  world  can  give ; but  they  have 
not  the  honour  which  cometh  from  God  only. 
They  are  not  wise  to  win  souls,  Prov.  xi.  30. 
They  have  no  testimony  in  the  consciences 
of  their  hearers.  They  may  deliver  truths 
occasionally,  which  are  valuable  and  useful 
in  their  proper  places ; but  for  want  of  know- 
ing how  to  connect  them  with  what  the  apos- 
tle styles,  The  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,  (Eph. 
iv.  21,)  they  are  unable  either  to  break  tht 
hard  heart,  or  to  heal  the  wounded  spirit 
The  thoughtless  are  not  alarmed,  nor  4,he  ig- 
norant instructed.  The  wicked  go  on  in  their 
evil  ways— 

The  hungry  sheep  look  up,  but  are  not  fed. 

Nay,  we  see,  in  fact,  though  a few  persons 
may  still  be  found,  who  place  their  religion 
in  a dull,  unmeaning  attendance  upon  the 
form  of  public  worship,  upon  any  form  in 
which  it  was  their  lot  to  be  educated,  yet,  in 
many  places,  the  bulk  of  the  people,  by  their 
contempt  of  the  Lord’s  day,  and  by  their  cus- 
tomary manner  of  absenting  themselves  from 
their  appointed  teachers,  give  sufficient  proof 
that  they  have  neither  found,  nor  expect  to 
find,  so  much  benefit  or  pleasure,  as  to  make 
them  think  it  worth  their  while  to  attend 
them. 


THE  PUBLICATION  OF  THE  GOSPEL. 


317 


SER.  XXX. 


It  will  appear  to  competent  judges,  that 
faithful  preachers  are  called  and  prepared  for 
their  office  by  the  Lord,  the  head  of  the 
church,  and  not  by  human  institutions,  from 
the  following  considerations : — 

1.  That  the  gospel  cannot  be  rightly  un- 
derstood but  by  divine  teaching.  The  natural 
man,  however  distinguished  by  abilities  or 
literature,  cannot  receive  the  things  of  the 
Spirit  of  God ; (1  Cor.  ii.  14 ;)  nay,  he  cannot 
even  discern  them.  He  may,  indeed,  know 
something  of  the  gospel  system,  considered 
as  a matter  of  science ; he  may  know  how  to 
defend  the  outworks  of  Christianity,  and  be 
master  of  the  external  evidences  for  its  truth ; 
and  he  may  espouse  orthodox  opinions,  and 
be  a successful  champion  in  the  field  of  con- 
troversy. But  the  inward  power  and  life, 
that  which  constitutes  the  essential  difference 
of  true  religion,  is  no  less  remote  from  his 
apprehension,  than  the  idea  of  light  is  from  a 
person  born  blind.  This  he  can  only  learn 
by  experience.  The  first  lesson  received  and 
learnt  by  those  who  are  taught  of  God,  is  a 
conviction  of  guilt,  ignorance,  and  misery — 
and  then  they  begin  to  learn  the  importance, 
necessity,  and  design  of  the  gospel.  The  man 
who  is  thus  instructed,  if  the  Lord  be  pleased 
to  call  him  to  the  office  of  teaching  others, 
will  in  due  time  proceed  to  deliver  to  the 
people  what  he  has  himself  learnt ; not  with 
hesitation,  uncertainty,  or  indifference,  not 
what  he  has  acquired  by  hearsay  or  from 
books,  but  he  has  the  witness  in  himself, 
1 John  v.  10.  His  heart  teacheth  his  mouth, 
Prov.  xvi.  23.  He  believes,  therefore  he 
speaks.  He  simply  and  freely  declares  that 
which  he  himself  has  known,  and  seen,  and 
tasted  of  the  word  of  life.  And  speaking 
from  the  fulness  of  his  heart,  with  an  earnest- 
ness inspired  by  the  greatness  and  importance 
of  his  subject,  he  speaks  to  the  heart  and 
feelings  of  his  hearers,  and  impresses  a mani- 
festation of  the  truth  upon  their  minds. 

2.  That  the  desire  of  preaching  this  gos- 
pel, when  known,  if  it  be  a right  desire,  must 
likewise  be  given.  If  a man" should  attempt 
the  service,  without  counting  the  cost,  or  con- 
sidering the  consequences,  he  will  most  pro- 
bably be  disgusted  and  wearied.  And  if  he 
seriously  and  properly  considers  before-hand 
what  he  is  about  to  engage  in,  and  has  a due 
sense  of  his  own  weakness,  he  will  tremble 
at  the  prospect,  and  direct  his  thoughts  to 
some  other  employment,  unless  his  call  and 
support  be  from  on  high.  What  courage, 
wisdom,  meekness,  and  zeal,  appear  requisite, 
in  the  view  of  such  an  inquirer,  to  qualify  a 
man  for  preaching,  and  continuing  to  preach, 
a doctrine  so  unpleasing  to  the  world,  as  the 
doctrine  of  the  cross  has  in  all  ages  proved ! 
What  opposition,  and  snares,  and  difficulties, 
what  fightings  from  without,  what  fears  with- 
in, may  be  expected  ! Surely  he  will  be  ready 
to  shrink  back,  and  to  say,  Who  is  sufficient 


for  these  things'?  But  the  Lord,  by  the  con- 
straining sense  of  his  love,  and  by  giving  a 
deep  impression  of  the  worth  of  souls,  and  by 
exciting*  in  the  mind  a dependence  upon  his 
all-sufficiency,  can  and  does  encourage  those 
whom  he  calls  and  chooses,  to  serve  him  in 
the  gospel.  In  themselves  they  are  quite 
unequal  to  what  is  before  them,  but  they  obey 
his  voice;  they  trust  in  his  promises  for 
guidance  and  protection,  and  are  not  disap- 
pointed. W e are  therefore  directed  to  pray, 
that  the  Lord  of  the  harvest  would  send,  or 
rather  (according  to  the  force  of  the  Greek 
word)  thrust  forth  labourers  into  his  harvest, 
Matt.  ix.  38. 

3.  That  only  he  who  sends  forth  his  minis- 
ters can  enable  them  to  persevere.  It  is  a 
service  of  continual  exertion  and  expense, 
and  requires  a continual  supply.  The  oppo- 
sition of  the  world,  and  the  power  of  tempta- 
tion, acting  upon  the  weakness  and  depravity 
of  the  heart,  would  quickly  prevail  against 
the  best  ministers,  if  they  were  left  to  carry 
on  the  warfare  at  their  own  charges.  They 
are  at  times,  yea,  frequently,  in  situations  and 
circumstances  which  teach  them  feelingly 
the  meaning  of  the  apostle’s  words,  “ We 
were  pressed  out  of  measure,  above  strength, 
insomuch  that  we  despaired  even  of  life,” 
2 Cor  i.  8.  Besides  the  trials  incidental  to  the 
Christian  profession,  which  they  are  exposed 
to  in  common  with  others,  they  have  many 
which  are  peculiar  to  their  calling  as  preach- 
ers of  the  gospel.  Their  chief  pre-eminence 
over  Christians  in  private  life  is  a painful 
one;  they  have  the  honour  of  bearing  a dou- 
ble share  of  the  heat  and  burden  of  the  day, 
and  of  standing  in  the  foremost  ranks  of  the 
battle,  to  provoke  and  receive  the  fiercest 
assaults  of  the  enemy.  Their  only  resource 
and  hope  is  in  the  faithfulness  and  compas- 
sion of  their  Lord,  under  whose  banner  and 
eye  they  fight,  and  who  has  said,  “ Lo ! I 
am  with  you  always,  even  to  the  end  of  the 
world.” 

4.  That  the  Lord  only  can  give  success  to 
their  endeavours.  Paul  may  plant,  and  Apol- 
los  may  water,  but  there  is  no  increase  unless 
he  affords  a blessing,  1 Cor.  iii.  6.  It  is  at 
least  a presumptive  proof,  that  he  has  called 
a man  to  preach,  if  he  owns  his  labours,  since 
he  has  not  promised  to  own  any  but  those 
whom  he  sends. 

We  must  however  allow,  and  observe,  that 
to  preach  salvation  to  others,  and  even  to  be 
instrumental  in  saving  souls,  wall  not  abso- 
lutely prove  that  the  preacher  is  in  a state  of 
salvation  himself;  we  hope  it  is  generally  so ; 
but  there  are  exceptions  and  instances  which 
should  awaken  our  circumspection,  and  keep 
us  constantly  looking  to  the  Lord  in  a spirit 
of  humility  and  dependence.  There  was  a 
Judas  among  the  apostles ; and  we  are  assured 
that  at  the  last  day,  some,  yea,  many,  will 
plead  having  done  great  things  in  the  name 


318 


THE  GOSPEL-MESSAGE,  GLAD  TIDINGS. 


[SER.  XXXI. 


of  Christ,  whom  he  will  notwithstanding 
disown,  as  workers  of  iniquity,  Matt.  vii. 
22,  23.  Even  the  apostle  Paul  was  impress- 
ed by  this  thoug-ht,  and  he  has  recorded  the 
improvement  he  made  of  it  for  our  instruc- 
tion : “ I keep  under  my  body,  and  bring  it 
into  subjection,  lest  that  by  any  means,  after 
I have  preached  to  others,  I myself  should  be 
a cast-away,  1 Cor.  ix.  27. 


SERMON  XXXI. 

THE  GOSPEL-MESSAGE,  GLAD  TIDINGS. 

(As  it  is  written,')  How  beautiful  are  the  feet 

of  them  that  preach  the  gospel  of  peace , 

and  bring  glad  tidings  of  good  things  ! 

Romans,  x.  15. 

The  account  which  the  apostle  Paul  gives 
of  his  first  reception  among  the  Galatians, 
(Gal.  iv.  15,)  exemplifies  the  truth  of  this 
passage.  He  found  them  in  a state  of  ignorance 
and  misery;  alienated  from  God,  and  enslaved 
to  the  blind  and  comfortless  superstitions  of 
idolatry.  His  preaching,  accompanied  with 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  had  a great  and 
marvellous  effect.  His  principal  subject  was 
the  death  of  Jesus,  who  had  lately  suffered 
as  a malefactor  at  Jerusalem.  Though  the 
transaction  was  past,  and  the  scene  at  a con- 
siderable distance,  yet  by  the  manner  of  his 
representation,  the  fact  was  realized  to  their 
minds ; and  they  could  have  been  no  more 
affected,  had  they  been  actually  upon  the 
spot  at  the  time.  Jesus  Christ  was  exhibited 
to  them  as  crucified  before  their  eyes,  Gal. 
iii.  1.  By  the  same  divine  energy  they  were 
instructed  in  the  knowledge  of  his  character, 
who  he  was,  and  why  he  suffered  ; and  like- 
wise understood  their  own  need  of  such  a 
Saviour.  Thus  they  hearkened  to  him,  not 
with  the  indifference  of  the  Athenians,  but 
with  application  of  all  that  he  said  to  them- 
selves. They  heard,  they  believed,  and  they 
rejoiced.  The  apostle  reminds  them,  that 
they  had  not  received  a cold  speculative  doc- 
trine, but  such  a one  as  imparted  a blessed- 
ness to  them.  This,  indeed,  many  of  them 
afterwards  lost,  when  they  were  unhappily 
seduced  by  false  teachers.  But,  for  a time, 
the  knowledge  of  a Saviour  so  exactly  suited 
to  their  circumstances,  made  them  happy  ; 
and  while  they  were  so,  they  felt  very  strong 
emotions  of  gratitude  and  esteem  for  the 
messenger  who  brought  them  these  glad  ti- 
dings ; though  he  was  by  many  accounted  and 
treated  as  the  off-scouring  and  filth  of  all 
things,  the  Galatians  received  him  as  an  an- 
gel of  God,  and  attended  to  him,  as  if  the 
Lord,  who  sent  him,  had  spoken  to  them  in 
person.  And  although  he  had  till  then 
been  an  entire  stranger  to  them,  his  message 


opened  a way  to  their  hearts,  and  they  gave 
him  every  testimony  of  the  most  cordiai 
friendship ; insomuch  that,  had  it  been  pos- 
sible, they  would  have  plucked  out  their  own 
eyes,  and  have  given  them  to  him. 

Thus,  likewise,  when  Philip  preached  the 
gospel  in  Samaria,  the  consequence  was  great 
joy  in  that  city,  Acts  viii.  8.  But  when  the 
gospel  is  thus  gladly  received,  there  must  be 
a suitable  disposition  of  mind.  It  is  sent  to 
the  poor.  It  is  designed  to  heal  the  broken- 
hearted, to  deliver  the  captives,  and  to  give 
sight  to  the  blind,  Luke  iv.  18.  And  there- 
fore they  who  are  well  satisfied  with  them- 
selves, who  say,  we  see,  and  who  boast  of 
their  freedom,  cannot  possibly  judge  either 
of  the  truth  or  of  the  importance  of  the  gos- 
pel doctrine.  As  the  Lord  waters  the  earth 
with  a profusion  worthy  of  his  magnificence 
and  bounty,  and  does  not  confine  his  rain  to 
cultivated  soils  ; so  the  good  seed  of  his  word 
often  falls  upon  the  highway,  upon  the  rocks, 
and  among  thorns;  (Luke  viii.  13 — 15;)  but 
it  is  only  productive  upon  the  good  ground  of 
an  honest  and  good  heart.  Not  that  any  hu- 
man heart  is  truly  good  by  nature,  but  some 
are  prepared  for  the  reception  of  the  truth. 
And  this  preparation  is  the  first  effect  of  the 
word,  when  it  brings  forth  fruit  unto  life 
eternal.  It  undeceives  those  who  were  for  a 
time  deluded  with  vain  hopes,  and  convinces 
them  that  they  are  poor,  and  blind,  and 
wretched,  and  helpless.  Then  they  gladly 
accept  the  gospel  of  peace,  and  the  message 
is  to  them  as  life  from  the  dead. 

The  passage  in  the  prophet  Isaiah,  fro*n 
which  my  text  is  quoted,  is  very  animated 
and  descriptive.  “How  beautiful  upon  the 
mountains  are  the  feet  of  him  that  bringeth 
good  tidings!”  Isa.  Iii.  7.  Imagine  a dis- 
tressed people,  at  the  will  and  disposal  of  a 
conqueror,  who  was  justly  offended  with  them, 
and  under  an  anxious  trembling  uncertainty 
how  he  would  treat  them  : — if  an  authorized 
messenger  should  inform  them,  that,  instead 
of  the  punishment  they  deserved,  the  king 
vouchsafed  them  a free  pardon,  was  ready  to 
receive  them  with  favour,  and  to  bestow 
honours  and  possessions  upon  all  who  applied 
to  him,  without  excepting  the  most  guilty, 
even  the  ring-leaders  in  rebellion  : how  wel- 
come would  this  messenger  be  to  them  ! 
This,  indeed,  is  beyond  the  manner  of  men. 
No  earthly  monarch  has  either  magnanimity 
to  make,  or  power  to  make  good,  so  gracious 
and  unlimited  a proclamation  to  a whole  na- 
tion of  rebels.  But  this  is  the  manner  of  the 
great  God.  Such  an  act  of  grace  is  the  gos- 
pel. An  act  of  grace  to  sinners,  yet  founded 
in  righteousness,  and  displaying  the  glory  of 
his  justice  equally  with  the  riches  of  mercy. 
For  it  is  founded  on  the  mediation  of  the 
Son  of  his  love,  and  procured  by  his  blood. 
The  messengers  of  this  grace  are  thus  wel- 
comed and  honoured  by  those  who  believe 


SER.  XXXI.J 

Jieir  report,  and  are  esteemed  very  highly 
in  love  for  their  work’s  sake,  1 Thess.  v.  13. 
We  may  observe, 

I.  The  message  of  the  gospel  is  glad  ti- 
dings of  peace  and  good  things. 

II.  The  messengers,  or  preachers,  find 
ample  reward  in  their  success  and  accept- 
ance. 

I.  According  to  the  Hebrew  idiom  (which 
frequently  obtains  in  the  New  Testament,) 
all  good  things  are  comprised  in  the  term 
peace.  They  are  eminently  comprised  in  the 
peace  of  the  gospel ; for  it  is  the  peace  of 
God  which  passeth  understanding.  It  brings 
a blessed  assurance,  that  Messiah  has  made 
peace  by  the  blood  of  his  cross.  They  who 
believe  this  good  report,  derive  from  it  peace 
of  conscience ; and  are  enabled  to  say, 
Though  thou  wert  justly  angry,  thine  anger 
is  turned  away,  Isa.  xii.  1.  It  dispels  their 
fears  and  forebodings,  and  inspires  them  with 
liberty  to  come  to  God  as  children ; conse- 
quently, on  their  parts,  alienation  and  en- 
mity cease.  They  no  longer  conceive  of  him 
as  an  avenging  judge  or  a hard  master.  They 
no  longer  dispute  his  authority,  nor  repine 
at  his  appointments.  They  become  a willing 
people.  They  yield  themselves  to  him. 
They  cultivate  peace  in  all  their  connec- 
tions. The  forgiveness  and  bounty  they  have 
received,  teaches  them  likewise  to  forgive, 
and  be  kind  as  they  have  opportunity.  They 
possess  such  good  things  as  the  world  can 
neither  give  nor  take  away : communion 
with  God  ; grace,  wisdom,  and  power.  They 
serve  him  with  their  all,  and  are  supported 
by  his  good  Spirit  in  every  trying  circum- 
stance ; and  they  have  a good  hope,  which 
enables  them  to  rejoice  in  tribulation,  and  to 
smile  in  death. 

If  the  wickedness  and  obstinacy  of  man- 
kind were  not  so  strongly  described  and  ex- 
emplified in  the  Bible,  and  if  we  could  forget 
that  this  obstinate  perverseness  was  once  our 
own  character,  we  should  find  it  difficult  to 
conceive,  after  we  understand  the  nature  and 
design  of  the  gospel,  upon  what  grounds  a 
scheme  so  wisely  and  completely  adapted  to 
relieve  men  from  misery,  to  promote  their 
present  comfort,  and  to  secure  their  future 
happiness,  should,  instead  of  being  received 
with  thankfulness,  generally  excite  contempt 
and  opposition.  Can  the  world  afford  a peace 
which  shall  abide  and  cheer  the  heart  under 
al!  the  changing  circumstances  incident  to  us 
in  this  mortal  state!  Can  it  propose  any  good, 
any  honours,  profit,  or  pleasures,  worthy  of 
being  compared  with  the  honour  which 
cometh  from  God  only,  the  light  of  his  coun- 
tenance, and  the  riches  of  glory ! Can  the 
influence  of  the  world  preserve  us  from  trou- 
ble, or  support  us  under  it,  or  deliver  us  out 
of  it ! Has  it  any  charms  capable  of  soothing 
the  anguish  of  a wounded  conscience!  Can 
it  obviate  the  stroke,  or  overcome  the  fear  of 


319 

death ! Or  can  it  inspire  the  soul  with  con- 
fidence and  joy,  in  the  contemplation  of  that 
approaching  day,  when  we  must  all  appear 
before  the  tribunal  of  the  supreme  Judge  ? 
That  the  world,  if  we  possessed  the  whole  of 
it,  cannot  do  these  things  for  us,  is  acknow- 
ledged by  many,  and  felt  by  all.  The  gos- 
pel proposes  a cordial  for  every  care,  a balm 
for  every  wound ; and  none  who  make  the 
experiment  of  its  efficacy  are  disappointed. 
In  other  cases,  they  who  have  received  great 
obligations  may  speak  highly  of  their  bene- 
factor ; and  they  who,  beyond  hope,  have  been 
recovered  from  a dangerous  malady,  may 
commend  the  skill  and  care  of  their  physi- 
cian, to  those  who  are  labouring  under  the 
same  disease,  without  giving,  offence.  But 
if  they  who  have  obtained  life  and  peace  by 
believing  in  Jesus,  proclaim  his  goodness, 
and  point  him  out  to  their  fellow-sinners  as 
the  only  Physician  and  Saviour  of  souls,  their 
testimony  is  charged  with  folly,  and  their 
endeavours  rejected  with  scorn,  as  officious 
and  impertinent.  Men,  while  left  to  them- 
selves, will  not  come  to  him  that  they  may 
have  life.  The  god  of  this  world  so  works 
upon  their  prejudices,  pride,  and  passions, 
that  though  the  light  of  truth  shines  around 
them  like  the  light  of  the  sun,  the  eyes  of 
their  mind  are  blinded,  and  they  are  pleased 
with  their  darkness,  and  unwilling  to  see, 
2 Cor.  iv.  4.  Hence,  of  the  few,  compara- 
tively, who  are  favoured  with  a clear  and 
faithful  dispensation  of  the  gospel,  the  greater 
part,  it  is  to  be  feared,  reject  the  counsel  of 
God  against  themselves ; and  his  ministers  in 
all  ages,  have  had  cause  to  adopt  the  prophet’s 
complaint,  “ Lord,  who  hath  believed  our  re- 
port!”  Is.  liii.  1.  It  would  be  thus  univer- 
sally, if  the  Lord,  who  gave  the  word,  and 
who  sends  forth  the  preachers,  had  not  en- 
gaged his  promise,  that  they  shall  not  labour 
wholly  in  vain,  nor  spend  their  strength  for 
nought.  He  prepares  a people  to  serve  him, 
and  to  show  forth  his  praise.  And  while 
some  mock,  others  refuse  to  hear,  (Acts  xvii. 
32,)  and  others,  with  an  indolent  indifference, 
are  content  to  hear  again  and  again  ; there 
are  others  whose  hearts  are  opened  to  re- 
ceive the  truth  in  the  love  of  it.  They  hear 
and  believe  to  everlasting  life. 

II.  The  instruments  of  this  happy  change 
find  their  reward  in  their  work.  It  being 
owned  to  the  salvation  of  a few,  they  are 
compensated  for  all  the  opposition  they  meet 
with  from  the  many ; and  this  on  a twofold 
account : — 

First,  and  principally,  for  the  love  they 
bear  to  their  Lord,  and  to  souls  for  his  sake. 

To  see  his  name  made  precious  to  the 
hearts  of  sinners;  to  see  those  who  wereblind 
admiring  his  excellency ; to  see  those  who 
were  so  far  off  from  God  brought  so  nigh ; 
to  see  those  who  were  wretched  rejoicing  in 
his  goodness ; to  hear  those  whose  lips  were 


THE  GOSPEL-MESSAGE,  GLAD  TIDINGS. 


320 


THE  GOSPEL-MESSAGE,  GLAD  TIDINGS. 


filled  with  folly,  falsehood,  or  blasphemy, 
proclaiming'  his  praise  ; such  salutary  effects 
of  their  ministry  fill  them  likewise  with 
praise  and  joy : and  when  their  hearers  ex- 
press the  power  and  spirit  of  the  gospel  in 
their  tempers  and  conduct,  they  can  say, 
“ Now  we  live,  if  you  stand  fast  in  the  Lord,” 
1 Thess.  iii.  8. 

A secondary  satisfaction,  which  of  itself  is 
sufficient  to  make  them  full  amends  for  all 
the  scorn  of  an  unkind  world,  is  the  share 
they  have  in  the  affections  of  the  people  who 
are  thus  benefited  by  their  ministry.  This 
is  the  popularity  which  alone  is  desirable. 
It  would  be  a small  thing  toffie  able  merely  to 
hold  a multitude  by  the  ears : but  to  be  ap- 
proved and  loved  by  those  to  whom  the  Lord 
has  made  them  useful,  is  a high  honour,  and 
a source  of  sublime  pleasure.  When  Peter 
and  John  (Acts  iii.  11)  had  healed  the  lame 
man,  I doubt  not  but  they  were  more  affected 
by  the  simple  honest  testimony  of  his  grati- 
tude, than  by  the  unmeaning  wonder  of  all 
the  surrounding  multitude.  If  a true  servant 
of  the  Lord,  by  any  advantage  of  abilities  or 
elocution,  should  attach  a large  congregation 
to  a personal  regard  for  himself,  should  be 
admired  and  beloved  by  them,  and  yet  disco- 
ver no  attachment  in  them  to  the  Saviour 
whom  he  preaches,  their  partiality  to  him 
would  give  him  but  little  pleasure.  He 
would  be  more  ready  to  weep  over  them, 
than  to  rejoice  in  the  preference  they  gave 
him.  For  he  seeks  not  their  applause,  but 
their  edification ; and  he  aims  not  to  promote 
his  own  glory,  but  the  glory  of  him  who  sent 
him,  John  vi.  18.  He  is,  indeed,  glad  to  see 
them  attending  upon  the  means  which  God 
has  promised  to  bless.  But  the  faithfulness 
and  closeness  of  his  addresses  to  their  con- 
sciences, by  which  many  are  sooner  or  later 
disgusted  and  driven  away,  is  a proof  that 
he  does  not  want  them  merely  to  make  up 
a number  about  him.  They  who  make  the 
office  of  a preacher  an  occasion  whereby  to 
promote  their  own  interest  or  reputation, 
may,  perhaps,  obtain  the  reward  they  seek ; 
but  it  is  such  a reward  as  can  only  satisfy  a 
weak  and  mercenary  mind  ; and  from  him, 
whose  name  they  prostitute,  they  can  only 
expect  the  reward  assigned  to  hypocrites  and 
unbelievers. 

But  true  Christians  will,  and  do,  set  a high 
value  upon  the  ministers  who,  with  simplicity 
and  godly  sincerity,  preach  the  gospel  of 
peace,  in  such  a manner  as  to  evidence  that 
they  are  influenced  by  a regard  to  the  glory 
of  God,  and  to  the  good  of  souls ; and  they 
give  proof  of  their  affection  in  more  ways 
than  by  speaking  well  of  them. 

1.  By  the  satisfaction  with  which  they 
accept  a faithful  ministry,  as  a balance  to  the 
trials  they  meet  with  in  common  life.  There 
are  many  poor  and  many  afflicted  people, 
who  have  little  comfort  in  the  things  of  this 


[ser.  XXXI 

life,  and  in  their  own  houses.  ■'Some  are 
pinched  by  penury,  and  some  who  live  in 
opulence,  yet  dwell,  as  the  psalmist  expresses 
it,  (Psalm  lvii.  4,)  in  the  fire  and  among  lions. 
They  suffer  not  less  than  the  others,  though 
in  a different  way,  from  the  unkindness  and 
opposition  of  their  nearest  connections.  But 
in  the  house  of  God,  they  are  satisfied  and 
comforted.  And,  according  to  the  words  of 
the  prophet,  though  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  give 
them  the  bread  of  adversity,  and  the  water  of 
affliction,  (Is.  xxx.  20,)  yet  since  their  teachers 
are  not  moved  into  corners,  but  they  have 
free  access  to  the  preaching  of  his  word,  and 
can  attend  upon  a minister  who  careth  for 
their  souls,  and  meets  them,  when  they  are 
weary,  with  a word  in  season,  they  bear  their 
appointed  cross  with  cheerfulness.  Though 
they  have  much  bitterness  of  heart  at  home, 
known  only  to  themselves,  they  have  a plea- 
sure which  a stranger  intermeddleth  not 
with,  when  they  go  up  to  the  house  of  the 
Lord.  But  if  the  instrument  who  is  the 
messenger  of  Gcd  to  them  for  good,  be  re- 
moved, and  they  are  deprived  of  these  oppor- 
tunities, the  regard  they  bore  him  is  mani- 
fested by  their  sorrow  for  losing  him  ; which 
often  affects  them  more  sensibly  than  all  their 
other  griefs. 

2.  By  taking  kindly  and  in  good  part  his 
most  searching  discourses  in  public,  or  even 
his  reproofs  and  admonitions  in  private,  if 
needful.  For  they  know  that  he  watches 
over  their  souls,  as  one  who  must  give  an 
account,  Heb.  xiii.  17.  And  because  they 
love  him,  they  do  all  in  their  powTer  to  make 
the  service  a pleasure  and  not  a grief  to  him. 
They  do  not  wish  him  to  speak  smooth  things 
to  them,  or  to  entertain  them  with  the  dis- 
cussion of  points  in  which  they  have  little 
concern,  but  to  hear  that  which  is  suitable  tc 
their  own  case  and  circumstances.  And  if 
the  preacher  discovers  to  them,  that  through 
inadvertence,  they  have  allowed  themselves 
in  any  wrong  practice,  or  have  lived  in  the 
omission  of  any  duty,  instead  of  being  offend- 
ed with  his  plain  dealing,  they  love  him  the 
better  for  it. 

3.  By  their  tenderness  and  sympathy  with 
him  in  all  his  exercises ; and  by  their  care, 
according  to  their  ability,  to  make  his  situa- 
tion comfortable,  and  to  avoid  every  thing 
that  might  give  him  just  occasion  for  com- 
plaint or  grief.  The  trials  of  a faithful  min- 
ister are  neither  few  nor  small.  His  work  is 
great ; he  is  sure  to  meet  with  enemies  and 
discouragements.  He  travails  in  birth  for 
souls ; (Gal.  iv.  19 ;)  he  is  pained  by  the  op- 
position of  the  wicked,  the  inconstancy  of 
the  wavering,  and  the  inconsistency  of  many 
who  make  profession  of  the  truth.  He  feels 
many  anxieties  for  those  who  are  inquiring 
the  way  to  the  kingdom,  lest  they  should  be 
turned  aside  and  hindered  ; arid  too  often  the 
hopes  he  had  indulged,  of  some  who  disco- 


SER  . XXXII.] 

vered  a concern  for  religion,  are  disappoint- 
ed. His  inward  conflicts  are  many.  He  often 
walks  in  much  weakness,  fear,  and  trem- 
bling, 1 Cor.  ii.  3.  When  he  considers  what 
he  is,  what  he  ought  to  be,  and  what  he  has 
to  do,  he  is  often  distressed,  afraid,  and 
ashamed,  and  unable  to  speak.  His  path  is 
spread  with  snares,  his  heart  wounded  with 
temptations.  But  his  judicious  hearers  have 
some  knowledge  of  what  he  endures  for  their 
sakes  and  in  their  service ; they  love  him, 
pity  him,  and  pray  for  him,  and  their  kind 
attention  comforts  him  under  all  his  tribula- 
tions. 

Sometimes  their  regard  is  rather  impro- 
perly expressed ; as  when  they  not  only  value 
his  ministry,  but  hold  him  so  highly  a favour- 
ite, that  they  can  hardly  hear  another.  A 
preference  is  certainly  due  to  the  person  who 
is  made  especially  useful ; but  no  faithful 
preacher  should  be  slighted.  Though  gifts 
and  abilities  are  not  equal  in  all,  yet  they 
are  all  the  Lord’s  messengers,  and  entitled 
to  regard. 

Again,  it  is  an  improper  regard,  if  they 
yield  themselves  implicitly  to  him,  to  be 
governed  by  his  will.  So  far  as  we  speak 
agreeably  to  the  scripture,  which  is  the  rule 
and  standard  of  faith  and  practice  both  to  you 
and  to  us,  we  are  authorised  to  require  your 
attention  and  obedience;  but  you  are  not 
bound  to  receive  what  we  propose,  merely 
upon  our  own  authority.  There  are  those 
who  account  ignorance  the  mother  of  devo- 
tion, and  expect  an  implicit  compliance  with 
their  injunctions,  by  virtue  of  their  office  and 
personal  influence.  But  a true  minister  will 
account  it  his  honour  and  pleasure  to  preach 
to  an  enlightened  people  who  love  and  study 
the  Bible,  and,  like  the  Bereans,  search  the 
scriptures,  (Acts  xvii.  11,)  to  see  if  things  are 
so  as  represented.  We  have  no  dominion 
over  your  faith,  but  wish  to  be  helpers  of  your 
oy,  2 Cor.  i.  24.  Nor  do  we  pretend  to  do- 
minion over  your  purses,  though  we  are  to 
remind  you  of  the  apostle’s  charge,  “ To  do 
good,  and  to  communicate,  forget  not,”  He- 
brews xiii.  15. 

How  much  are  they  to  be  pitied,  who  ac- 
count that  word  of  grace  a burden,  which  to 
those  who  receive  it  with  thankfulness, 
proves  the  balm  and  cordial  of  life  ! Take 
heed  how  you  hear.  If  the  gospel  is  not 
made  to  you  a savour  of  life,  it  will  be  a sa- 
vour of  death.  It  will  aggravate  your  gu  ilt  and 
condemnation,  and  leave  you  utterly  hope- 
less and  inexcusable.  If  you  continue  im- 
penitent and  obstinate,  the  hour  is  coming 
when  you  will  wish  you  had  never  heard  of 
the  name  of  Jesus.  It  had  been  better  for  you 
never  to  have  been  born,  or  to  have  lived  and 
died  among  the  savage  Indians,  or  to  have 
been  an  idiot  or  a lunatic  to  the  end  of  your 
days,  than  to  have  lived  where  the  doctrine 
of  salvatior  was  i ublished  in  vour  hearing, 
Vol  II.  2 S 


321 

if  you  finally  reject  the  counsel  of  God  against 
yourselves ! 


SERMON  XXXII. 

THE  PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL. 

Their  sound  went  into  all  the  earth , 

and  their  words  unto  the  ends  of  the  world. 

Romans,  x.  18. 

The  heavens  declare  the  glory  of  God, 
Psalm  xix.  1.  The  grandeur  of  the  arch  over 
our  heads,  the  number  and  lustre  of  the  stars, 
the  beauty  of  the  light,  the  splendour  of  the 
sun,  the  regular  succession  of  day  and  night, 
and  of  the  seasons  of  the  year,  are  such  proofs 
of  infinite  wisdom  and  power,  that  the  scrip- 
ture attributes  to  them  a voice,  a universal 
language,  intelligible  to  all  mankind,  accom- 
modated to  every  capacity.  There  is  no 
speech  nor  language  where  their  voice  is 
not  heard.  The  combined  effect  of  the  visi- 
ble works  of  the  great  Architect,  presses  a 
declaration  upon  the  ear  of  reason — “The 
hand  that  made  us  is  divine.”  We  must, 
however,  understand  it  of  the  ear  of  right 
reason.  The  loudest  voice  is  unnoticed  by 
the  deaf.  Thus  it  ought  to  be,  and  thus  it 
would  be,  if  man  were  indeed  a rational 
creature,  as  he  proudly  boasts  himself. 
That  the  fact  in  general  is  otherwise  ; that 
the  bulk  of  mankind  are  no  more  affected  by 
the  works  of  God  than  the  beasts  of  the  field; 
that  the  philosophers  who  profess  to  study 
them,  so  faintly  discern,  so  frequently  deny 
the  great  First  Cause  of  all,  is  a proof  that 
sin  has  darkened  and  depraved  the  noblest 
powers  of  the  soul,  and  degraded  man  into 
the  state  of  an  inattentive  idiot.  However, 
the  evidence,  if  it  does  not  excite  his  admi- 
ration and  praise,  is  abundantly  sufficient  to 
convict  him  of  stupidity  and  ingratitude,  and 
to  leave  him  without  excuse,  Rom.  i.  20. 

This  passage,  taken  from  that  sublime  ode 
of  David,  the  nineteenth  psalm,  is  applied  by 
the  apostle  to  illustrate  the  character  and  the 
progress  of  the  still  more  wonderful  display 
of  the  divine  perfections,  which  God  has  made 
known  by  the  glorious  gospel.  A variety  of 
truths  shine  (like  stars  in  the  firmament)  in 
the  system  of  revelation.  But  principally 
Jesus,  the  Sun  of  truth  and  righteousness,  the 
source  of  spiritual  light  and  life,  answers  to 
the  description  there  given  of  the  material 
sun.  “ His  going  forth  is  from  the  end  of 
heaven,  and  his  circuit  unto  the  ends  of  it, 
and  there  is  nothing  hid  from  his  heat,” 
Psalm  xix.  6. 

But  the  fulfilment  of  the  promises  respect- 
ing Messiah’s  kingdom  is  progressive.  So 
far  as  this  prophecy  has  been  accomplished, 
the  arm  of  the  Lord  has  been  revealed.  I 


THE  PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL. 


322 


THE  PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL. 


[SER.  XXXII. 


is  his  doing1  and  may  justly  be  marvellous  in 
our  eyes.  The  truth  of  the  prophecy  will  be 
proved  by  its  final  completion,  which,  though 
not  likely  to  take  place  in  our  time,  we  may 
be  assured  that  it  cannot  fail,  for  the  Lord 
hath  spoken  it.  And  besides,  we  have  a suf- 
ficient pledge  and  security  for  the  whole,  in 
what  he  has  already  done.  It  was  not  neces- 
sary for  the  fulfilling  of  this  prophecy,  nor 
consistent  with  the  tenor  of  many  other  pro- 
phecies, that  the  spread  of  the  gospel  should 
be  instantaneous  and  universal  on  its  first 
publication.  Messiah  is  to  rule  in  the  midst 
of  his  enemies  till  the  appointed  season, 
when  all  enemies  shall  be  subdued  under  his 
feet.  The  gospel,  the  rod  of  his  power,  is  so 
admirably  adapted  to  the  necessities  of  man- 
kind, that  the  obstructions  it  has  met  with 
must  be  ascribed  to  their  wickedness  and  ob- 
stinacy. Not  that  they  could  resist  the  will 
of  God.  Had  he  intended  to  give  it  univer- 
sal success  from  the  beginning,  the  event 
would  have  been  answerable.  But  it  was  his 
pleasure  to  conduct  the  dispensation  of  it,  so 
as,  on  the  one  hand,  to  display  his  sovereignty, 
wisdom,  and  power,  and  on  the  other,  to  afford 
a full  proof  of  the  depravity  and  alienation  of 
the  heart  of  man.  This  point  is  so  much  mis- 
understood and  misrepresented,  that  though 
it  is  attended  with  great  difficulties,  especially 
if  we  give  way  to  vain  reasonings  upon  it,  I 
shall  venture,  in  the  present  discourse,  to  of- 
fer a few  thoughts  towards  clearing  the  sub- 
ject, and  vindicating  (if  the  very  attempt  be 
not  presumptuous)  the  ways  of  God  to  man. 

When  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  after  a 
long  night  of  darkness,  arose  upon  the  world, 
there  appeared  a strong  probability  that  the 
prophecies  concerning  the  extent  of  his  vital 
influence,  from  east  to  west,  from  pole  to  pole, 
would  soon  be  completely  realized.  In  a very 
short  space  he  was  known  and  adored  by 
multitudes,  through  the  greatest  part  of  the 
Roman  empire,  and  beyond  its  limits.  But, 
perhaps,  for  about  seventeen  hundred  years 
since  that  period,  the  boundaries  of  his  king- 
dom, though  they  have  been  altered,  have  not 
been  much  enlarged.  If  he  has  smce  in  some 
measure  enlighted  the  more  western  parts  of 
the  globe,  the  eastern  regions,  which  once 
rejoiced  in  his  light,  are  now  overwhelmed 
with  gross  Mahommedan  darkness.  And  if 
we  were  capable  of  investigating  the  state  of 
the  world  at  this  day,  we  should  probably  find, 
that  five  out  of  six  of  the  human  race  now 
living,  never  so  much  as  heard  of  the  name 
of  Jesus  as  a Saviour.  There  is  reason  to 
fear  likewise,  that  in  the  nations  who  profess- 
edly call  him  Lord,  and  are  not  unwilling  to 
be  themselves  called  Christians,  a greater 
proportion  than  five  out  of  six,  are  no  less 
strangers  to  his  power  and  grace,  than  the7 
Mahommedans  who  reject  him,  or  the 
Heathens  who  never  heard  of  him. 

There  is  not,  perhaps,  a darker  chapter  in 


the  book  of  divine  providence,  nor  a medita- 
tion which  calls  for  a more  absolute  subjec- 
tion and  submission  to  the  holy  will  and  un- 
searchable wisdom  of  God,  than  this.  The 
first  spread  of  the  gospel  proved  it  to  be  a di- 
vine expedient,  fully  capable  of  producing  all 
the  great  purposes  which  the  prophets  had 
foretold,  and  which  the  state  of  the  world  re- 
quired. It  reconciled  men  to  God,  to  them- 
selves, and  to  each  other.  It  subdued  their 
passions,  regulated  their  affections,  freed 
them  from  the  guilt  and  bondage  of  sin, 
from  the  love  of  the  world,  and  from  the  fear 
of  death.  Wherever  the  doctrine  of  the 
cross  was  preached,  it  produced  that  salu- 
tary change  of  conduct  which  philosophy  had 
long  attempted  in  vain  ; and  raised  men  to 
that  life  of  communion  with  God,  of  which 
philosophers  had  no  conception.  Such  was 
the  bright  morning  of  the  gospel-day.  But 
in  time,  yea,  in  a little  time,  dark  clouds  ob- 
scured its  light;  its  progress  was  impeded, 
and  in  a manner  stopped.  On  one  hand,  the 
profession  and  name  of  the  gospel  gave  oc- 
casion to  mischiefs  and  abominations  which 
had  been  unknown  among  the  Heathens;  so 
that  the  part  of  the  world  which  received  the 
name  of  Christendom,  was  little  distinguished 
from  the  rest,  in  a religious  view,  but  by  a 
fierce  and  rancorous  superstition,  which  ty- 
rannized over  the  consciences,  liberties,  and 
the  lives  of  men.  On  the  other  hand,  as  I 
have  observed,  the  very  name  of  Christianity 
was  restrained  to  a small  portion  of  the  earth  ; 
many  nations  have  not  heard  of  it  to  this  day ; 
and  many  who  once  professed  it,  have  re- 
nounced it  long  ago. 

Thus  the  fact  stands.  We  cannot  deny  it. 
But  how  shall  we  account  for  it  I Infidels  and 
petty  reasoners  think  they  here  find  an  in- 
vincible objection  against  the  truth.  They 
say,  “ If  the  gospel  you  speak  of  be  so  salu- 
tary and  necessary,  if  it  be  indeed  the  great- 
est effect  of  the  divine  goodness,  why  has 
not  God,  who  is  the  common  Father  of  man- 
kind, afforded  it  to  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth?  and  why  is  it  restrained  to  so  few?” 
But  I think  we  may  retort  the  .question,  and 
let  them  who  propose  it  give  such  an  answer 
(if  they  can)  as  shall  not  amount  to  a con- 
fession of  the  obstinacy  and  ungrateful  folly 
of  mankind.  When  the  world  saw  the  happy 
tendency  and  effects  of  this  gospel  in  the  age 
of'the  apostles,  why  did  they  not  universally 
receive  it!  We  know  that  when  the  use  of 
the  mariner’s  compass,  the  art  of  printing, 
and  many  other  inventions  that  might  be 
named,  were  discovered  in  one  country,  they 
were  presently  adopted  by  the  surrounding 
civilized  nations.  Even  the  recent  attempts 
to  venture  through  the  air  with  a balloon, 
hazardous  as  they  certainly  are,  and  insig- 
nificant with  respect  to  real  usefulness,  are 
likely  in  a little  time  not  only  to  engage  the 
notice,  but  to  excite  the  imitation  of  Europe. 


THE  PROGRESS  OF  THE  GOSPEL. 


323 


8ER.  XXXII.] 

Why  then  was  the  gospel,  the  most  bene- 
ficial and  important  discovery  the  world  has 
been  favoured  with,  the  only  one  that  has 
been  treated  with  general  contempt!  Cer- 
tainly our  Lord  has  assigned  the  true  reason, 
“Light  is  come  into  the  world,  but  men 
love  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their 
deeds  are  evil,”  John  iii.  19.  They  hate  the 
light,  they  will  not  come  to  it,  nor  will  they 
permit  it  to  come  to  them  if  they  can  possibly 
prevent  it.  This  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed 
God  has  been  and  still  is  shunned  and  dread- 
ed, and  every  human  precaution  and  exertion 
has  been  employed  to  withstand  and  suppress 
it,  as  though,  like  the  pestilence,  it  was  bane- 
ful to  the  welfare  of  society.  May  we  not 
say,  speaking  after  the  manner  of  men,  that 
the  Lord  has  done  enough  to  confirm  his  own 
express  and  solemn  declaration,  that  he  has 
no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  the  wicked,  but 
that  the  wicked  may  turn  from  his  way  and 
live!  Ezek.  xxxiii.  11.  He  has  raised  up  a 
succession  of  faithful  servants,  from  age  to 
age,  to  publish  these  glad  tidings.  The  re- 
ception they  have  met  with,  not  only  from  the 
Heathens,  but  from  nominal  Christians,  is  well 
known  to  those  who  are  acquainted  with  ec- 
clesiastical history,  which  contains  little  more 
than  a detail  of  the  arts  and  cruelties  by  which 
the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  powers  of  almost 
every  kingdom,  where  the  gospel  has  been 
known,  have  endeavoured  to  suppress  it. 

The  nation  of  Great  Britain,  in  particular, 
has  but  little  right  to  ask,  Why  the  gospel  of 
Christ  has  been  spread  no  farther  among  the 
Heathen ! The  providence  of  God  has  fa- 
voured us  with  peculiar  advantages  for  this 
service.  Our  arms  and  commerce  have  open- 
ed us  a way  to  the  most  distant  parts  of  the 
globe ; and  of  late  years,  the  enterprising 
spirit  of  our  navigators  has  added  almost  a 
new  world  to  the  discoveries  of  former  times. 
How  far  have  our  plans  been  formed  with  a 
subserviency  to  the  great  design  of  evan- 
gelizing the  Heathen  ! How  much  have  we 
done  to  promote  it  in  Asia,  where  our  in- 
fluence and  opportunities  have  been  the 
greatest!  What  impression  of  the  name  and 
spirit  of  Christianity  has  our  conduct  given 
to  the  inhabitants  of  India  ! But  I forbear — 
Facts  are  too  well  known  to  need  recital;  too 
glaring  to  need  a comment.  It  is  true,  we 
have  an  incorporated  society  for  propagating 
the  gospel  in  foreign  parts,  and  we  hear  of 
missionaries ; but  of  the  good  effects  of  their 
missions,  as  at  present  conducted,  we  neither 
hear,  nor  expect  to  hear.  While  America 
was  ours,  the  efforts  of  a few  individuals  from 
the  northern  provinces  in  the  last  and  present 
century,  were  not  without  success.  But  I 
fear  this  is  all  the  honour  we  can  claim.  Some 
good  has  been  done  by  the  Danish  mission  to 
Tranquebar;  but  I Believe  our  influence  in  it 
has  been  rather  nominal  than  effective.  The 
extent  and  effects  of  the  labours  of  the  Uni-  j 


tas  Fratrum ,*  compared  with  their  circum- 
stances and  resources,  must  not  be  omitted 
on  this  occasion.  They  doubtless  excite  ad- 
miration, and  thankfulness  to  God,  in  every 
serious  mind  acquainted  with  the  subject. 
But  excepting  in  these  instances,  I believe 
the  Heathens  have  derived  but  little  know- 
ledge of  the  Gospel  from  their  connexions 
with  Christendom  for  some  ages  past  And 
I think  none  of  the  commercial  nations  in 
Europe  have  had  the  propagation  of  Chris- 
tianity less  at  heart  than  the  English.  What 
obligations  the  natives  of  Africa  are  under  to 
us,  for  instruction  or  example,  may  be  es- 
timated, in  part,  by  a cursory  survey  of  the 
state  of  our  West-India  Islands! 

That  the  gospel  is  so  little  known  in  the 
world,  and  so  little  received  where  it  is 
known,  cannot  be  so  properly  ascribed  to  the 
will  of  God,  as  to  the  wickedness  and  wilful- 
ness of  men.  Undoubtedly,  he  to  whom  all 
things  are  possible,  who  has  absolute  power 
over  the  hearts  of  his  creatures,  could  make 
a way  for  the  universal  reception  of  it.  And 
we  trust  that  in  his  own  time  he  will  do  so. 
But  power  is  not  his  only  attribute.  It  would 
be  rash  and  absurd  to  suppose  that  the  great 
God  will  do  every  thing  that  he  can  do.  We 
are  sure  that  he  will  do  what  is  worthy  of 
himself;  but  of  this  his  own  infinite  wisdom 
is  the  only  competent  judge.  What  is  be- 
coming of  his  perfections  and  holy  govern- 
ment, we  can  know  no  farther  than  he  is 
pleased  to  inform  us.  But  it  certainly  be- 
comes us  to  lay  our  hands  upon  our  mouths, 
and  our  mouths  in  the  dust,  when  we  con- 
template his  conduct;  or,  if  we  do  speak,  to 
adopt  the  apostle’s  language,  “ Oh  the  depths 
of  the  riches,  both  of  the  wisdom  and  know- 
ledge of  God ! How  unsearchable  are  his  judg- 
ments, and  his  ways  past  finding  out!  For  of 
him,  and  through  him,  and  to  him  are  all  things. 
To  whom  be  glory  for  ever,”  Rom.  ix.  36. 

However,  my  text  is  fulfilling,  and  shall  be 
fulfilled.  This  joyful  sound  has  already  been 
spread  far  abroad,  in  defiance  of  all  attempts 
to  restrain  it.  Multitudes  from  age  to  age 
have  heard  it,  and  found  it  to  be  the  power  of 
God  unto  salvation.  And  it  would  be  easy 
to  prove,  if  it  belonged  to  m}'-  subject,  that 
the  superior  advantages  of  civilization  which 
Christendom  enjoys,  are  remotely  owing  to 
the  knowledge  of  revelation.  To  this  must 
be  chiefly  ascribed  the  different  state  of  this 
island  from  what  it  was  when  visited  by  Ju- 
lius Caesar.  Yea,  our  modern  philosophers 
would  make  but  a poor  figure,  were  they  de- 
spoiled of  all  the  plumes  they  have  borrowed 
form  the  book  they  affect  to  despise.  Farther, 
the  purpose  of  God  to  save  sinners  by  faith  in 
his  beloved  Son,  is  the  primary  ground  of  that 
patience  and  long-suffering  which  he  still  ex- 


* More  generally  known  amongst  us  by  the  name  of 
the  Brethren,  or  Moravians. 


324 


OPPOSITION  TO  MESSIAH  UNREASONABLE. 


ercises  toward  such  a world  as  this.  And 
some  imperfect  traces  of  this  design,  trans- 
mitted by  tradition,  are  probably  to  he  found, 
though  wofully  disfigured,  among  every  na- 
tion and  people  under  heaven  which  have  at 
least  preserved,  in  a degree,  the  notices  of 
right  and  wrong,  and  some  faint  warnings  of 
conscience,  in  the  most  savage  state  of  human 
nature.  But,  were  it  not  for  reasons  con- 
nected with  the  designs  of  his  mercy,  we  can 
scarcely  conceive  that  the  Holy  God  would 
have  perpetuated  the  race  of  mankind  in  a 
state  of  rebellion  and  enmity  against  his  go- 
vernment. Or  if  he  had  permitted  them  to 
multiply,  and  left  them  wholly  and  absolutely 
to  themselves,  without  interposing  some  re- 
straints upon  their  depravity,  I believe  the 
inhabitants  of  the  earth  would  have  been  no 
better  than  incarnate  fiends. 

The  prophecies,  both  of  the  Old  and  New 
Testament,  encourage  us  to  hope  for  a time, 
when  the  light  of  gospel-truth  will  break 
forth  with  meridian  brightness,  the  glory  of 
the  Lord  be  revealed,  and  all  flesh  shall  see 
his  salvation.  As  a pledge  of  this,  and  of 
the  truth  of  the  whole  scripture,  we  have 
what  may  be  called  a standing  miracle  con- 
tinually before  our  eyes ; I mean  the  state  of 
the  Jews,  who,  though  dispersed  far  and 
wide  among  many  nations,  are  every  where 
preserved  a distinct  and  separate  people. 
The  history  of  the  world  affords  no  other  in- 
stance of  the  like  kind.  The  great  monarchs, 
by  which  they  were  successively  conquered 
and  scattered,  have  successively  perished. 
Only  the  names  of  them  remain.  But  the 
people  whom  they  despised,  and  endeavoured 
to  exterminate,  subsist  to  this  day ; and 
though  sifted  like  corn  over  the  earth,  and 
apparently  forsaken  of  God,  are  still  pre- 
served by  his  wonderful  providence,  unaf- 
fected by  the  changes  and  customs  around 
them ; still  tenacious  of  the  law  of  Moses, 
though  the  observance  of  it  is  rendered  im- 
practicable. Many  days,  many  ages  they  have 
lived,  as  the  prophets  foretold  they  should, 
without  a temple,  without  sacrifice  or  priest, 
Hos.  iii.  4,  5.  As  yet,  many  heathen  nations 
are  permitted  to  walk  in  their  own  ways. 
But  at  length  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles 
shall  come  in,  and  all  Israel  shall  be  saved, 
Rom.  xi.  25,  26.  The  revolutions  and  corn- 
motions  in  kingdoms  and  nations,  which 
astonish  and  perplex  politicians,  are  all  bring- 
ing forward  this  great  event.  The  plan  of 
the  human  drama,  to  us,  who  only  see  a sin- 
gle scene,  is  dark  and  intricate  ; but  the  ca- 
tastrophe is  approaching  ; and  in  the  close  of 
the  w’hole,  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  will 
be  admired  and  adored,  and  all  holy  and 
happy  intelligences  will  acknowledge  with 
transport,  He  has  done  all  things  well. 

But  the  point  I am  chiefly  to  press  upon 
my  hearers,  is,  that  this  word  of  salvation  is 
sent  to  you,  Acts  xiii.  26.  How  the  great 


[ser.  xxxm. 

Judge  will  deal  with  the  Heathens,  who  were 
never  favoured  with  it,  he  has  not  seen  fit 
distinctly  to  inform  us.  But  thus  far  he  has 
assured  us,  that  it  will  be  more  tolerable  for 
Tyre  and  Sidon,  yea,  for  Sodom  and  Gomor- 
rah, than  for  those  who  have  the  privilege  of 
knowing  the  gospel,  if  they  reject  it,  Matt, 
xi.  20 — 24.  To  them  much  is  given,  and  of 
them  much  will  be  required.  Do  not  think 
ministers  assuming  if  they  magnify  their  office. 
We  have  no  reason  to  think  highly  of  our- 
selves. Nor  would  you  be  blameable  for  dis- 
regarding us  if  we  spoke  in  our  own  names. 
But  if  we  preach  the  truth  of  the  gospel  in 
simplicity  and  sincerity,  then  wTe  speak  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord,  and  demand  your  at- 
tention. Do  you  ask  for  our  authority  and  com- 
mission 1 Ask  your  own  consciences.  If,  like 
Felix,  when  you  mean  only  to  indulge  your 
curiosity  by  hearing  us,  you  are  constrained 
to  tremble  (Acts  xxiv.  25  ;)  if  we  force  upon 
your  mind  the  remembrance  of  what  you  have 
said  or  done ; if  our  message  makes  you  un- 
easy and  dissatisfied  with  yourselves  ; if  you 
cannot  avoid  feeling  at  some  times  the  truth 
of  our  principles,  and  the  necessity  of  the 
change  we  would  press  upon  you  ; if,  though 
you  have  been  repeatedly  displeased  and  of- 
fended with  what  you  hear,  and,  perhaps, 
have  gone  away  purposing  or  threatening 
that  you  would  hear  it  no  more,  you  still  ap- 
pear amongst  us — then  you  have  a sufficient 
proof,  that  the  ministers  are  sent  and  author- 
ized to  speak  to  you,  and  we  take  your  con- 
sciences to  witness  that  we  preach  the  truth. 


SERMON  XXXIII. 

OPPOSITION  TO  MESSIAH  UNREASONABLE. 

Why  do  the  Heathen  rage , and  the  people 
imagine  a vain  thing  ? The  kings  of  the 
earth  set  themselves , and  rulers  take  coun- 
sel together,  against  the  Lord,  and  against 
his  Anointed ; saying,  let  us  break  their 
bands  asunder,  and  cast  away  their  cords  - 
from  us.  Psalm,  ii.  1 — 3. 

It  is  generally  admitted,  that  the  institutes 
of  Christianity,  as  contained  in  the  New 
Testament,  do  at  least  exhibit  a beautiful  and 
salutary  system  of  morals;  and  that  a sin- 
cere compliance  with  the  precepts  of  our  Lord 
and  his  apostles  would  have  a good  effect 
upon  society.  Few  infidels  have  ventured  to 
contradict  the  common  sense  of  mankind  so 
far  as  to  deny  this.  Nor  can  it  be  denied, 
that  the  author  of  this  institution,  if  we 
judge  by  the  history  and  character  given  of 
him  by  the  evangelists,  exemplified,  in  the 
highest  perfection,  by  his  own  conduct,  the 
precepts  which  he  enjoined  to  his  followers. 
While  he  lived  as  a man  amongst  men,  the 
tenor  of  his  behaviour  was  such  as  became 


ser  xxxm.J  OPPOSITION  TO  MESSIAH  UNREASONABLE. 


the  friend  of  mankind.  Though  he  submitted 
to  a low  estate,  and  often  suffered  hunger, 
thirst,  and  weariness,  we  do  not  read  of  his 
having  wrought  a single  miracle  merely  for 
his  own  relief.  But  the  wants  and  calami- 
ties of  others  continually  excited  his  compas- 
sion and  engaged  his  assistance.  He  gave 
sight  to  the  blind,  health  to  the  sick,  and 
sometimes  wiped  away  the  tears  of  mourners, 
by  restoring  their  dead  to  life.  He  endured 
hunger  himself,  but  once  and  again  provided 
food  for  multitudes,  lest  they,  having  nothing 
to  eat,  should  have  fainted  by  the  way.  Nor 
did  he  confine  his  acts  of  benevolence  to  his 
followers,  but  was  easy  of  access,  and  granted 
the  request  of  all,  indiscriminately,  who  ap- 
plied to  him.  He  went  about  doing  good, 
(Acts  x.  33,)  -and  often  put  himself  in  the 
way  of  those  who  would  not  otherwise  have 
known  him.  And  though  he  was  opposed, 
calumniated,  and  laughed  to  scorn,  he  con- 
tinued unwearied  and  determined  in  the  same 
cau-se,  bestowing  benefits  on  all  around  him, 
as  occasions  offered,  and  returning  good  for 
evil.  May  we  not  with  reason  ask,  Why 
then  did  Jews  and  Heathens,  priests  and  peo- 
ple, scribes  and  Sadducees,  rage  so  furiously 
against  him,  who  did  nothing  amiss,  who  did 
all  things  well?-  Why  did  persons  of  the  most 
opposite  interests,  parties,  and  sentiments, 
who  could  agree  in  nothing  else,  so  cordially 
agree  in  opposing  Messiah  ? 

The  gospel  breathes  the  spirit  of  its  great 
Author,  and  has  a direct  tendency  to  make 
men  happy  and  useful.  Wherever  it  was  pub- 
lished, in  the  first  age,  among  the  Heathens, 
many  of  them  turned  from  the  worship  of 
dumb  idols  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God. 
It  taught  and  enabled  them  to  renounce  un- 
godliness and  worldly  lusts,  and  to  live  sober- 
ly, righteously,  and  godly ; (Titus  ii.  12;)  and 
it  still  produces  the  same  effects.  The  world 
now  bears  the  name  of  Christian  ; but  under 
this  new  and  honourable  name  it  retains  the 
same  spirit  as  formerly.  Many  who  are  called 
Christians,  are  no  less  under  the  power  of  evil 
tempers  and  evil  habits,  than  the  Heathens  to 
whom  the  apostles  preached.  But  where  the 
gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  reaches  the  heart, 
a real  and  observable  change  is  produced. 
The  profane  person  learns  to  fear  an  oath, 
the  libertine  is  reclaimed,  the  drunkard  be- 
comes sober,  and  the  miser  kind.  Wherever 
the  truth  of  the  gospel  is  known  and  received, 
instances  may  be  found  of  persons  who  were 
a terror  and  a burden  to  their  families,  being 
delivered  frbm  the  stings  of  a guilty  con- 
science, from  the  dominion  of  headstrong  pas- 
sions, from  the  slavery  of  habitual  wickedness, 
and  made  peaceful,  useful,  and  exemplary 
members  of  society,  by  what  the  apostle  calls 
the  preaching  of  the  cross.  And  we  challenge 
history  to  show  that  an  abiding,  consistent 
reformation  was  ever  effected  by  any  other 


325 

doctrine,  in  a single  province,  or  city,  or  vil- 
lage, or  even  in  a single  family. 

What  then  shall  we  say  of  that  zeal  which 
kindled  the  fire  of  persecution  against  our 
Lord  and  his  apostles,  and  his  followers, 
through  a succession  of  ages  1 What  is  the 
common  principle,  the  bond  of  union,  which 
at  this  day  connects  people  w'ho  differ  so 
widely  in  other  respects,  and  points  their  dis- 
pleasure from  all  sides  against  this  one  object? 
In  a former  discourse,*  l briefly  mentioned 
the  principal  grounds  of  that  dislike  which 
the  Jews  manifested  to  Messiah’s  personal 
, ministry,  and  I observed,  that  they  are  deep- 
ly rooted  in  the  nature  of  fallen  man,  and 
therefore  not  peculiar  to  any  one  age  or  na- 
tion. The  gospel  always  did,  and  always 
will  produce  the  same  happy  change  in  those 
who  receive  it,  and  provoke  the  same  oppo- 
sition and  resentment  in  those  who  do  not. 
The  actings  will  be  differentas  circumstances 
vary,  but  the  principle  is  universally  the 
same.  In  this  island,  which  the  good  pro- 
vidence of  God  has  distinguished  by  many 
signal  and  peculiar  favours,  the  spirit  of  our 
constitution  and  government  is  friendly  to 
liberty  of  conscience  and  the  rights  of  pri- 
vate judgment ; so  that  our  religious  profes- 
sion does  not  expose  us  to  the  penalties  of 
fire  and  sword,  stripes  or  tortures,  imprison- 
ment or  banishment.  Such  trials  have  been 
the  lot  of  our  forefathers,  when  the  servants 
of  God,  under  the  names  of  Gospellers  or  Puri- 
tans, were  treated  as  heretics  of  the  worst  sort. 
We  are  bound  to  acknowledge  with  thankful- 
ness the  blessings  of  religious  and  civil  liberty 
which  we  enjoy.  But  the  world  at  large 
around  us  is  not  more  favourably  disposed  to 
the  grace  and  rule  of  Messiah’s  kingdom,  than 
it  was  in  the  days  of  Heathen  and  Popish 
darkness.  The  tongue  at  least  is  unrestrain- 
ed, and  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart  the 
mouth  will  speak.  The  gospel  offends  the 
pride  of  men,  by  considering  them  all  on  a 
level,  as  sinners  in  the  sight  of  God;  and  by 
proposing  only  one  method  of  salvation,  with- 
out admitting  any  difference  of  plea  or  cha- 
racter. It  offends  them  likewise  by  its  strict- 
ness. Tiike  Herod,  they  might  perhaps  con- 
sent to  do  many  things,  (Mark  vi.  20,)  if  they 
were  left  at  liberty  to  please  themselves  in 
others,  in  which,  though  expressly  contrary 
to  the  will  of  God,  they  will  not  submit  to  be 
controlled ; and  therefore  they  are  much  dis- 
pleased with  the  gospel,  which,  by  affording 
no  allowance  or  connivance  to  the  least  known 
sin,  but  prescribing  a rule  of  universal  holi- 
ness, crosses  their  inclinations  and  favourite 
interests.  When  Paul  preached  at  Ephesus, 
Demetrius  and  his  companions  perceived  that 
their  craft  was  in  danger.  This  was  the  real 
cause  of  their  anger,  but  they  were  ashamed 


* Sermon,  xvii. 


326 


OPPOSITION  TO  MESSIAH  UNREASONABLE.  [ser.  xxxiii. 


to  avow  it;  and  therefore  their  ostensible 
reason  for  opposing  him  was  of  a religious 
kind,  (Acts  xix.  28,)  and  they  professed  a 
great  concern  for  the  honour  of  Diana.  Few 
perhaps  would  have  given  themselves  much 
trouble  to  promote  or  preserve  the  gain  of 
the  craftsmen ; but  a pretended  regard  for 
the  worship  which  had  been  long  established, 
was  a popular  topic,  which  wrought  power- 
fully upon  the  superstition  of  the  ignorant 
multitude,  and  thousands  were  presently  in- 
duced to  join  with  them  in  the  cry,  “ Great  is 
Diana  of  the  Ephesians.” 

The  like  arts  are  still  practised  with  the 
like  success.  The  same  secret  motives  are 
disguised  by  the  same  plausible  pretences. 
The  deceitfulness  and  wickedness  of  the  heart 
appears  in  no  one  instance  more  plainly  than 
in  the  cavils  which  are  repeated  and  multi- 
plied against  the  grace  of  the  gospel.  When 
we  preach  a free  salvation  by  faith  in  Jesus, 
and  propose  his  obedience  unto  death  as  the 
sure  and  only  ground  of  acceptance  with  God ; 
when  we  say,  in  the  words  of  the  apostle,  to 
the  vilest  of  sinners  who  feel  the  burden,  and 
fear  the  consequences  of  their  sins,  “ Believe 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved,”  (Acts  xvi.  31,)  an  alarm  is  raised, 
and  a concern  pretended  for  the  interests  of 
morality.  The  doctrine  of  salvation  by  faith 
only,  is  charged  writh  opening  a door,  a flood- 
gate for  licentiousness,  and  it  is  supposed, 
that  if  this  doctrine  be  true,  people  may  live 
as  they  please,  and  still  comfort  themselves 
writh  the  expectation  of  heaven  at  last.  Con- 
sidering our  natural  propensity  to  trust  in 
ourselves  that  we  are  righteous,  I do  not  won- 
der that  persons  wTho  are  comparatively  sober 
and  decent  should  speak  thus,  while  they  are 
ignorant  of  the  strictness  of  the  holy  law  of 
God,  and  the  depravity  of  their  own  hearts. 
But  I sometimes  wonder  that  they  are  not  a 
little  disconcerted  by  the  characters  of  many 
(so  different  from  what  they  suppose  their 
owrn  to  be)  who  join  with  them  in  the  objec- 
tions they  make.  For  in  this  point,  with  the 
sober  and  decent,  the  licentious  and  profligate 
readily  concur;  and  whoremongers,  adulte- 
rers, drunkards,  and  profane  swearers,  almost 
equal  them  in  gravely  expressing  their  ap- 
prehensions that  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by 
grace  wflll  prove  very  unfavourable  to  the 
practice  of  good  works.  How  very  remark- 
able is  this,  that  the  virtuous  and  the  vile,  the 
most  respectable  and  the  most  infamous  peo- 
ple, should  so  frequently  agree  in  sentiment, 
and  unite  in  opposing  the  gospel,  professedly 
from  the  same  motive.  But  thus  it  was  at 
the  commencement  of  Messiah’s  kingdom : 
kings,  rulers,  priests,  and  people,  all  conspired 
and  raged  against  him.  Herod  and  Pilate, 
the  Jewish  elders  and  the  Roman  soldiers, 
the  Pharisees  and  the  Sadducees  thus  differed, 
and  thus  agreed.  They  hated  each  other  till 


he  appeared ; but  their  greater  common  hatred 
to  him  made  them  act  in  concert,  and  they 
suspended  their  mutual  animosity,  that  they 
might  combine  to  destroy  him. 

I may  seem  to  have  digressed  from  the  im- 
mediate scope  of  my  text,  but  I judge  it  pro- 
per to  bring  the  subject  home  to  yourselves. 
If  I confined  myself  to  prove  that  the  enemies 
of  our  Lord,  when  he  was  upon  earth,  were 
very  unreasonable  and  unjust  in  treating  him 
as  they  did,  I should  have  an  easy  task,  and  I 
suppose,  the  ready  assent  of  all  my  hearers. 
But  there  may  be  persons  present,  who,  though 
they  little  suspect  themselves,  are  equally 
misled  by  prejudices ; and  under  a semblance 
of  zeal  for  a form  of  godliness,  oppose  the  truth 
and  power  of  it,  upon  the  same  principles  and 
in  the  same  spirit  as  the  Jews  and  Heathens 
did  of  old.  The  Jews  who  condemned  Mes- 
siah to  death,  blamed  their  forefathers  for 
persecuting  the  prophets  who  foretold  his  ap- 
pearance, (Matt,  xxiii.  30, 31 ;)  but  their  own 
conduct  towards  him  was  a proof,  that  hrad 
they  lived  in  the  days  of  the  prophets,  they 
would  have  acted  as  their  fathers  had  done. 
So  the  resentment  that  many,  who  bear  the 
Christian  name  in  this  day,  discover  against 
the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  and  against  the 
people  who  profess  them,  is  a proof  that  they 
would  have  concurred  with  those  who  cruci- 
fied the  Lord  of  glory,  had  they  lived  in  Je- 
rusalem at  that  time. 

In  this  prophecy,  David,  under  the  influ- 
ence of  the  Holy  Spirit,  speaks  of  the  future 
as  actually  present.  He  saw  the  resistance 
that  would  be  made  to  the  person  and  king- 
dom of  Messiah  by  the  powers  of  the  world ; 
that  they  would  employ  their  force  and  policy 
to  withstand  and  suppress  the  decree  and  ap- 
pointment of  God.  The  question,  Why  1 im- 
plies that  their  opposition  would  be  both 
groundless  and  ineffectual. 

1.  It  was  entirely  groundless  and  unrea- 
sonable. Messiah  was  indeed  a King,  and  he 
came  to  set  up  a kingdom  that  should  endure 
for  ever.  But  his  kingdom  is  not  of  this 
world  ; and,  if  rightly  understood,  would  give 
no  umbrage  to  human  governments.  It  does 
not  interfere  with  the  rights  of  princes.  His 
subjects  are  indeed  primarily  bound  by  the 
laws  of  their  immediate  King,  and  they  must 
obey  God  rather  than  man,  (Acts.  v.  39,)  if 
man  will  presume  to  enjoin  such  laws  as  con- 
tradict his  known  will.  But  with  this  excep- 
tion, it  is  a part  ofthe  duty  they  owe  to  their 
Lord,  to  obey  those  whom  he  has  placed,  by 
his  providence,  in  authority  over  them.  The 
kingdom  of  Messiah  has  little  to  do  with  what 
we  call  politics.  His  people  are  taught  to 
render  to  Caesar  the  things  that  are  Caesar’s, 
(Matt.  xxii.  21,)  and  to  yield  a peaceful  sub- 
jection to  the  powers  that  be,  under  whatever 
form  of  government  their  lot  may  be  cast. 
They  are  strangers  and  pilgrims  upon  earth, 


327 


ser.  xxxiii.]  OPPOSITION  TO  MESSIAH  UNREASONABLE. 


(I  Pet.  ii.  11,)  their  citizenship,  treasures,  and 
conversation,  are  in  heaven ; and  they  have 
no  more  direct  concern  with  the  intrigues  and 
parties  of  politicians,  than  a traveller  has  in 
the  feuds  and  disturbances  which  may  hap- 
pen in  a foreign  country  through  which  he 
is  passing.  They  are  to  obey  God,  they  are  to 
obey  kings  and  governors  in  subordination  to 
God ; they  are  to  render  to  all  their  dues;  tri- 
bute to  whom  tribute,  custom  to  whom  cus- 
tom, honour  to  whom  honour,  Rom.  xiii.  1 — 7. 
But  where  they  cannot  comply  with  the  laws 
of  government  without  breaking  the  laws  of 
God,  then  they  are  not  to  obey,  but  to  suffer 
patiently,  committing  their  cause  to  him 
whom  they  serve  ; well  knowing  that  he  is 
able  to  protect  or  relieve  them,  so  far  as  his 
wisdom  judges  it  fit,  and  to  make  them  abun- 
dant amends  for  all  they  can  suffer  for  his 
sake.  I am  not  a direct  advocate  for  the  doc- 
trines of  passive  obedience  and  non-resistance 
in  the  largest  sense.  I set  a great  value  upon 
the  blessings  of  civil  and  religious  liberty,  I 
reverence  the  constitutional  rights  of  nations, 
particularly  of  our  own.  But  they  are  all 
dependant  upon  the  will  of  our  Lord ; and  I 
know  not  by  what  means  they  can  be  pre- 
served to  a people,  when  their  sins  have  made 
them  ripe  for  judgment.  But  let  the  dead 
bury  their  dead,  Matt.  viii.  22.  God  will 
never  want  instruments,  when  it  is  his  plea- 
sure to  relieve  the  oppressed,  or  to  abase  the 
proud.  For  these  purposes,  he  over-rules  the 
councils  and  affairs  of  men,  pours  contempt 
upon  the  designs  of  princes,  and  takes  the 
wise  in  their  own  craftiness.  The  subjects  of 
his  spiritual  kingdom  have  only  to  commit 
their  cause  to  him,  to  wait  upon  him,  to  ob- 
serve and  to  admire  his  management.  Their 
best  interest  is  always  safe.  And  even  the 
troubles  they  meet  with,  are  appointed  for 
their  good.  But  if  they  so  far  conform  to 
the  world,  as  to  take  an  active  and  decided 
part  in  the  disputes  and  contentions  around 
them,  they  usually  dishonour  their  Christian 
character,  and  obstruct  their  own  peace  and 
comfort.  There  may  be  possibly  some  excep- 
tions. God  may  sometimes  place  a servant  of 
his,  by  the  leading  of  his  providence,  in  a post 
of  high  political  importance,  as  he  did  Joseph 
and  Daniel,  but  I believe  such  instances  are 
few  ; and  if  any  venture  of  their  own  accord 
beyond  the  proper  line  of  their  calling  as 
Christians,  the  event  is  usually  grief  and 
loss  to  them.  They  are  described  in  his 
word,  as  those  who  are  quiet  in  the  land, 
(Psalm  xxxv.  20,)  and  such  should  be  their 
deportment. 

We  are  sure  it  was  thus,  in  the  first  and 
golden  days  of  Christianity.  The  Roman  go- 
vernment was  then  absolute,  arbitrary,  and 
oppressive.  Tiberius,  Caligula,  Nero,  and 
.others  who  presided  over  it,  and  bore  the  name 
of  Roman  emperors,  were  beyond  measure 
vile  and  abominable : one  of  them  was,  by  a 


decree  of  the  Roman  senate,  sentenced  to 
death  as  a public  enemy  to  mankind  ; but  the 
Christians  neither  disputed  their  right,  nor 
disobeyed  their  authority.  Kings  and  rulers, 
therefore,  have  nothing  to  fear  from  the  gos- 
pel of  Christ.  The  maxims  of  sound  policy 
would  engage  all  their  influence  in  facilita- 
ting its  progress ; for  true  Christians  will  as- 
suredly be  good  subjects.  Impatience  of  sub- 
ordination, contempt  of  lawful  authority,  tu- 
mults, riots,  and  conspiracies,  are  evils  which 
would  have  no  place  if  the  gospel  was  gene- 
rally received.  But  princes  have  been  usually 
exposed  to  the  flattery  of  designing  men,  who, 
by  their  arts  and  misrepresentations,  have 
seduced  them  to  act  contrary  to  their  true 
interests.  Their  mistaken  efforts. to  suppress 
that  cause,  which,  if  maintained,  would  have 
been  the  best  security  of  their  thrones,  have 
often  stained  the  annals  of  their  reign  with 
innocent  blood,  and  filled  their  dominions 
with  misery.  History  furnishes  many  in- 
stances of  kings,  who  might  otherwise  have 
lived  beloved,  and  died  lamented,  that  have 
involved  themselves  and  their  families  in  the 
calamities  with  which  they  unjustly  punished 
those  who  deserved  their  protection.  For, 

2.  Opposition  to  Messiah  and  his  kingdom 
is  no  less  vain  and  ineffectual,  than  unreason- 
able and  groundless.  Nor  is  it  vain  only,  but 
ruinous  to  those  who  engage  in  it.  What  did 
the  Jews  build  when  they  rejected  the  founda- 
tion-stone which  God  had  laid  in  Zion  ] They 
acted,  as  they  thought,  with  precaution  and 
foresight.  They  said,  “ If  we  let  him  thus 
alone,  all  men  will  believe  on  him ; and  the 
Romans  shall  come  and  take  away  both  our 
place  and  our  nation,”  John  xi.  48.  Foolish 
politicians  ! Did  they  preserve  their  city  by 
crucifying  the  Son  of  God]  The  very  evil 
they  feared  came  upon  them.  Or  rather, 
being  abandoned  of  God  to  their  own  counsels, 
they  brought  it  upon  themselves.  In  a few 
years  the  Romans,  with  whom  they  appeared 
so  desirous  to  keep  upon  good  terms,  destroy- 
ed their  city  with  an  unheard-of  destruction, 
and  exterminated  them  from  the  land.  This 
was  an  emblem  of  the  inevitable,  total,  irre- 
parable ruin,  which  awaits  all  those  who  per- 
sist in  rejecting  the  rule  of  Messiah.  The 
nation,  the  individual,  that  willnotserve  him, 
must  surely  perish. 

Ah ! if  sinners  did  but  know  what  the 
bonds  and  cords  are,  which  they  are  so  deter- 
mined to  break ; if  they  knew  that  his  service 
is  perfect  freedom  ; if  they  were  aware  what 
more  dreadful  bonds  and  chains  they  are  ri- 
vetting  upon  themselves,  by  refusing  his  easy 
yoke,  they  would  throw  down  their  arms  and 
submit.  They  think,  if  they  yield  to  the 
gospel,  they  must  bid  adieu  to  pleasure.  But 
what  will  become  of  their  pleasure,  when, 
the  day  of  his  forbearance  being  expired,  he 
will  speak  to  them  in  his  wrath,  and  fill  them 
with  hopeless  horror  and  dismay] 


328 


OPPOSITION  TO  MESSIAH  IN  VAIN. 


Bless  the  Lord,  ye  favoured  few,  whose 
eyes  are  opened,  whose  hearts  are  softened, 
and  who  are  become  the  willing  people  of 
this  Saviour.  Yet  a little  while,  and  he  will 
appear  again,  and  then  you  also  shall  appear 
with  him  in  glory ! 


SERMON  XXXIV. 

OPPOSITION  TO  MESSIAH  IN  VAIN. 

He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh ; 

the  Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision. 
Psalm  ii.  4. 

The  extent  and  efficacy  of  the  depravity 
of  mankind,  cannot  be  fully  estimated  by  the 
conduct  of  Heathens  destitute  of  divine  reve- 
lation. We  may  say  of  the  gospel,  in  one 
sense,  what  the  apostle  says  of  the  law,  “ It 
entered  that  sin  might  abound,”  Rom.  v.  20. 
It  afforded  occasion  for  displaying  the  aliena- 
tion of  the  heart  of  man  from  the  blessed  God 
in  the  strongest  light.  The  sensuality,  op- 
pression, and  idolatry  which  have  prevailed 
in  all  ages,  sufficiently  prove  the  wickedness 
of  men  to  be  very  great.  But  the  opposition 
which  they  who  have  rebelled  against  the 
government  of  their  Creator,  make  to  the 
proposals  of  his  grace,  is  a proof  still  more 
striking.  If  sin  has  so  hardened  their  hearts, 
and  blinded  their  eyes,  that  of  themselves 
they  neither  can  nor  will  implore  his  mercy ; 
yet  it  might  be  thought  that  if  the  great  God, 
whom  they  have  so  heinously  offended,  should 
be  pleased,  of  his  own  goodness,  to  make  the 
first  overtures  of  reconciliation,  and  to  invite 
them  to  receive  pardon,  they  would  gladly 
attend  to  his  gracious  declaration  ; especially 
when  they  are  informed,  that  to  preserve 
them  from  perishing,  he  gave  up  his  only 
Son  to  sufferings  and  death.  But  when  they 
not  only  defy  his  power,  but  insult  his  good- 
ness; when  they  reject  and  blaspheme  the 
Saviour  whom  he  commends  to  them  ; when 
they  are  but  the  more  exasperated  by  his 
tenders  of  mercy ; when  they  scorn  his  mes- 
sage, and  persecute  his  messengers  by  whom 
he  intreats  them  to  be  reconciled ; this  mad 
and  ungrateful  carriage  shows  such  a rooted 
enmity  against  God  in  fallen  men,  as  even 
the  fallen  angels  are  not  capable  of  dis- 
covering. For  Messiah  took  not  on  him  the 
nature  of  angels,  nor  did  he  make  proposals 
of  mercy  to  them.  But  he  did  take  upon  him 
our  nature.  He  visited  us  in  person,  for  us 
he  lived  a sufferer,  and  died  that  we  might 
live.  The  prophets  foresaw  and  foretold  the 
reception  he  would  meet  with,  and  their  pre- 
dictions were  fulfilled.  The  Jews  who  pro- 
fessed to  expect  him,  and  the  Heathens  who 
had  not  heard  of  him,  united  their  utmost  ef- 
forts to  withstand  and  defeat  the  purposes  of 


[SER.  XXXIV. 

his  unexampled  love.  What  must  the  hol^ 
angels  think  of  the  baseness,  presumption, 
and  obstinacy  of  such  creatures  ! 

But  rebellion  against  God  is  not  only  wick- 
edness, but  folly  and  infatuation  in  the  ex- 
treme. “ Who  ever  hardened  himself  against 
the  Lord  and  prospered!”  Job  x.  4.  He 
whom  they  opposed,  and  against  whom  they 
thought  they  had  prevailed  when  they  saw  him 
dead  upon  the  cross,  soon  resumed  his  glory 
and  his  throne.  The  text  therefore  princi- 
pally respects  the  opposition  made  to  his  gos- 
pel and  to  his  kingdom  after  his  ascension, 
which  is  still  carrying  on,  but  which  always 
was,  and  always  will  be  in  vain.  The  words 
I have  read  offer  two  points  for  the  consola- 
tion of  those  who  love  him,  and  for  the  timely 
consideration  of  those  who  have  hitherto  dis- 
regarded him. 

I.  That  he  sitteth  in  the  heavens. 

II.  The  notice  he  taketh  of  his  enemies; 
he  smiles  at  their  rage,  and  treats  both  their 
power  and  their  policy  with  contempt. 

I.  He  whom  God  has  anointed,  (therefore 
called  Messiah,)  he  against  whom  kings  and 
rulers,  nations  and  the  people  rage,  sitteth  in 
the  heavens.  He  has  finished  his  great  work, 
and  entered  into  his  rest;  having  hy  himself 
purged  our  sins,  he  is  immovably  seated  on 
his  throne,  at  the  right  hand  of  the  majesty  on 
high,  Heb.  i.  3.  He  is  the  Head,  King,  and 
Lord  of  principalities,  dominions,  and  powers, 
possessed  of  all  authority,  unchangeably  fixed 
over  all,  God  blessed  for  evermore,  Rom.  ix. 
5.  In  this  character  he  is  the  Representative, 
High-Priest,  Advocate,  and  Shepherd  of  all 
who  put  their  trust  in  him.  He  is  ever  mind- 
ful of  them.  While  he  is  preparing  a place 
for  them  near  himself,  by  the  power  of  his 
Spirit,  he  maintains  an  intercourse  with  them, 
and  manifests  himself  to  them  as  he  does  not 
to  the  world.  By  his  providence,  which  ruleth 
over  all,  he  manages  their  concerns  upon 
earth,  supplies  their  wants,  and  gives  them 
present  and  effectual  help  and  support  in  their 
time  of  trouble.  To  him  their  eyes  and  hearta 
are  directed,  they  look  to  him  and  are  en- 
lightened, (Psal.  xxxiv.  5,)  strengthened,  and 
comforted.  And  under  his  protection  they  are 
safe.  He  having  taken  charge  of  them,  and 
engaged  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost,  no 
weapon  formed  against  them  can  prosper. 
Now  they  may  draw  nigh  to  God  with  bold- 
ness, for  they  have  one  who  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  them.  Now  they  may 
lay  aside  all  anxious,  uneasy  cares,  for  they 
have  a mighty  Friend  who  careth  for  them. 
Now  they  may  say,  each  one  for  himself,  “I 
will  trust  and  not  be  afraid,  for  the  Lord  Je- 
hovah is  my  strength,  and  my  song,  and  my 
salvation,”  Is.  xii.  2.  Whether  you  have  in- 
deed fled  to  him  for  refuge  as  the  hope  set  be- 
fore you,  committed  your  soul  to  him,  and  ac- 
cepted him  in  all  his  offices,  as  your  Prophet, 
Priest,  and  King,  is  a point  of  experience ; if 


OPPOSITION  TO  MESSIAH  IN  VAIN. 


329 


SER.  XXXIV.] 

you  have,  he  knows  it,  for  he  enabled  you  to 
do  it;  and  he  will  not  disappoint  the  hope  and 
expectation  which  he  himself  has  wrought  in 
you.  If  you  have,  methinks  you  must  know 
it  likewise.  Have  you  not  done  it  more  than 
once  I Do  you  not  daily  repeat  this  surrender 
of  yourself  to  him '!  It  is  certainly  possible  to 
assent  to  the  truths  of  the  gospel,  considered 
merely  as  doctrines  or  propositions,  yea,  to 
plead  and  dispute  for  them  with  much  seem- 
ing earnestness,  and  yet  to  be  entirely  a 
stranger  to  their  power.  But  I trust  that  they 
to  whom  I now  speak  will  understand  me. 
Our  Lord  reminded  Nathanael  of  what  had 
passed  under  the  fig-tree,  (John  i.  48,)  when 
he  thought  himself  alone.  Do  not  I remind 
you  of  seasons,  when  no  eye  but  the  eye  of 
Him  who  seeth  in  secret  was  upon  you  1 Did 
not  you  then  and  there,  once  and  again,  ac- 
cept him  as  your  Saviour  upon  the  warrant 
of  his  own  word,  devote  yourselves  to  his  ser- 
vice, resign  yourselves  to  his  disposal,  and 
entrust  yourselves  to  his  care  1 Then  fear 
not.  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  is  on 
your  side.  If  the  premises  be  well  grounded, 
the  inference  is  sure.  And  though  many  may 
rise  up  against  you,  they  shall  not  prevail ; for 
he  will  teach  your  hands  to  war,  and  your 
fingers  to  fight,  will  cover  vour  head  in  the 
day  of  battle,  and  in  the  end  make  you  more 
than  conquerors.  For  the  battle  is  not  yours, 
but  the  Lord’s.  Your  enemies  are  his,  and  his 
cause  is  yours.  They  who  associate  against 
him  shall  be  dashed  in  pieces,  as  the  billows 
break  and  die  upon  a rocky  shore. 

II.  The  feebleness  and  insignificance  of 
their  rage  against  Messiah,  is  intimated  by 
the  manner  in  which  he  notices  their  pro- 
ceedings; he  holds  them  in  derision,  he 
laughs  them  to  scorn.  He  has  them  per- 
fectly under  his  control,  holds  them  in  a 
chain  when  they  think  themselves  most  at 
liberty,  appoints  the  bounds  beyond  which 
they  cannot  pass,  and  can  in  a moment  check 
them,  and  make  them  feel  his  hook  and  bridle, 
when  in  the  height  of  their  career. 

It  is  the  Lord’s  pleasure  not  only  to  favour 
and  to  support  his  people,  but  to  do  it  in  such 
a way  that  it  may  appear  to  be  wholly  his 
own  work,  and  that  the  praise  belongs  to  him 
alone.  And  therefore  he  permits  their  ene- 
mies for  a season  to  try  if  they  can  prevent 
his  designs.  For  a season,  things  take  such 
a course  that  their  attempts  seem  to  prosper; 
they  threaten,  they  boast,  and  confidently  ex- 
pect to  carry  their  point.  But  the  contest 
always  issues  in  their  shame  and  confusion. 
He  not  only  disconcerts  their  schemes,  but 
makes  them  instrumental  to  the  promoting 
of  his  own  designs.  Thus  when  he  sent 
Moses  to  deliver  Israel  from  Egypt,  Pharaoh, 
instead  of  complying  with  his  command,  in- 
creased their  burdens,  added  to  the  rigour  of 
their  bondage,  and  though  rebuked  by  a suc- 
cession of  severe  judgments,  he  hardened 
Vol.  II.  2 T 


himself  the  more,  and  was  determined  to  de- 
tain them  if  he  could.  But  he  could  not  de- 
tain them  a day  or  an  hour  beyond  the  ap- 
pointed time  which  God  had  long  before 
made  known  to  Abraham,  Exod.  xii.  41,  42. 
Then  they  were  delivered,  and  Pharaoh  and 
his  host  overthrown  in  the  Red  Sea.  Hereby 
the  name  of  the  God  of  Israel  was  more 
known,  noticed,  and  magnified,  than  it  would 
have  been,  if  Pharaoh  had  dismissed  the  peo- 
ple without  reluctance  or  delay. 

In  like  manner,  when  Messiah  left  the 
earth,  his  followers  were  considered  as  sheep 
without  a shepherd.  The  world  conspired  to 
suppress  his  cause,  and  to  root  out  the  re- 
membrance of  his  people.  But  the  methods 
they  employed  counteracted  their  own  de- 
signs. They  who  were  dispersed  by  the  per 
secution  that  followed  the  death  of  Stephen, 
preached  the  word  wherever  they  went;  the 
gospel  spread  from  place  to  place,  and  the 
number  of  disciples  daily  increased.  So  that 
the  Jewish  rulers  soon  found  themselves  un- 
equal to  the  task,  and  foreboded  their  own 
disappointment,  doubting  whereunto  these 
things  would  grow,  Acts  v.  24.  In  some 
cases  the  Lord  signally  interposed,  and  show- 
ed how  entirely  the  lives  and  the  hearts  of 
his  adversaries  were  in  his  hands.  The 
haughty  Herod  was  suddenly  smitten  by  an 
invisible  hand,  with  a loathsome  and  mortal 
disease,  Acts  xii.  23.  He  fell,  devoured  by 
worms ; but  the  success  of  the  gospel,  which 
he  had  presumed  to  withstand,  greatly  in- 
creased and  spread.  The  furious  zeal  of  Saul 
of  Tarsus,  (Acts  ix.)  against  the  truth,  was 
silenced  in  a different  manner.  Jesus,  whom 
be  ignorantly  persecuted,  appeared  to  him  in 
the  way  to  Damascus,  when  he  was  breath- 
ing out  threat.enings  and  slaughter  against 
the  disciples,  disarmed  his  rage,  made  him  a 
monument  of  his  mercy,  and  an  earnest  and 
successful  preacher  of  the  faith  which  he  had 
laboured  to  destroy. 

From  the  Jews,  the  business  was  trans- 
ferred to  the  Heathens,  whose  opposition  was 
no  less  unavailing.  Though  they  sometimes 
affected  to  boast  that  they  had  suppressed  the 
Christian  name,  the  gospel  was  propagated 
in  defiance  of  their  attempts  to  prevent  it. 
The  worst  and  the  best  of  the  Roman  em- 
perors were  alike  industrious,  and  alike  un- 
successful, in  their  endeavours  to  stifle  the 
work  of  God.  At  length,  in  the  reign  of 
Constantine,  the  Christian  religion  obtained 
the  sanction  and  protection  of  imperial  au- 
thority. 

But  it  soon  appeared  that  the  religion  of 
the  New  Testament  gained  little  advantage 
by  this  revolution.  Though  the  worship  of 
heathen  idols  gradually  declined,  and  sunk 
into  disrepute,  the  bulk  of  the  people  of  all 
ranks  were  only  changed  in  name.  The 
world  still  lay  in  wickedness,  (I  John  v.  19,) 
and  true  Christianity  was  still  exposed  to 


330 


OPPOSITION  TO  MESSIAH  IN  VAIN. 


persecution.  When  the  name  of  Christian 
ceased  to  be  invidious  and  despicable,  new 
names  were  soon  invented  to  stigmatize  the 
real  servants  of  God ; and  ecclesiastical  power 
gradually  increased,  till  the  mystery  of  ini- 
quity reigned  for  ages  in  the  temple  of  God. 
The”  persecutions  of  Popery  equalled  and  ex- 
ceeded those  of  Paganism.  And  they  who 
aspired  to  be  Christians  indeed,  were  con- 
strained, like  the  worthies  of  old,  to  wander 
on  mountains  and  in  deserts,  to  hide  them- 
selves in  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  Heb. 
xi.  33.  Yet,  under  all  disadvantages,  there 
was  still  a remnant,  according  to  the  elec- 
tion of  grace,  who  could  not  be  compelled  to 
wear  the  mark  of  the  beast.  And  while  per- 
secutors, who  could  only  kill  the  body,  seem- 
ed to  weaken  the  church  militant,  they  in- 
creased the  number  and  the  songs  of  the 
church  triumphant. 

To  appearance  the  church  of  Christ  was 
often  brought  low.  It  was  very  low  at  the 
time  of  the  Reformation.  But  then  it  sud- 
denly was  revived,  and  broke  forth  like  the 
sun  from  behind  a dark  cloud  ; and  the  light 
of  the  gospel  was  diffused  far  and  wide,  al- 
most as  at  the  beginning,  in  the  apostles’ 
days.  But  Protestants  were  quickly  actuated 
by  the  same  spirit  as  their  Popish  and  Pagan 
predecessors  had  been.  The  form  of  Chris- 
tianity was  professed  and  protected,  and  the 
power  of  it  denied  and  opposed.  And  to  this 
day  it  remains  a truth  verified  by  experience, 
that  all  who  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus, 
must,  in  one  way  or  other,  suffer  persecution, 
1 Tim.  iii.  12. 

Of  late  years  the  sanguinary  spirit,  which, 
under  pretence  of  doing  God  service,  de- 
stroyed his  people  by  fire  and  tortures,  is 
much  subsided.  We  live  in  a time  when 
great  pretences  are  made  to  candour  and 
moderation.  We  have  reason  to  be  thankful 
for  our  religious  liberty,  to  the  good  pro- 
vidence of  God.  But  so  far  as  men  are  con- 
cerned, we  are  not  indebted  for  it,  to  a just 
sense  and  acknowledgment  of  the  right  of 
private  judgment,  but  to  the  prevalence  of 
sceptical  indifference  and  infidelity.  The  re- 
ligion of  the  gospel  was,  perhaps,  never  more 
despised  and  hated  than  at  present.  We 
seem  to  be  returning  apace  to  the  state  of 
the  primitive  ages,  when  there  were  but  two 
sorts  of  persons,  Christians  and  infidels.  But 
notwithstanding  all  the  arts  and  assaults  of 
men,  whether  open  enemies  or  pretended 
friends  the  Bible  is  still  extant,  the  gospel  is 
still  preached,  yea,  is  still  spreading.  The 
Lord  has  always  had  a people,  though  thev 
have  been  often  hidden  from  the  general  no- 
tice and  observation  of  men.  He  that  sitteth 
in  the  heavens  laughs  his  opposers  to  scorn, 
and  maintains  his  own  cause  in  defiance  of 
them  all. 

Surely  if  this  work  was  not  of  God,  the 
united  efforts  of  kings,  councils,  popes,  philo- 


[SER.  XXXIV. 

sophers,  the  great,  the  wise,  the  decent,  and 
the  profligate,  must  have  overthrown  it  long 
ago.  If  a miracle  be  demanded  in  proof  of 
Christianity,  behold  one ! Though  the  world 
has  been  raging  and  plotting  against  it,  from 
its  first  appearance ; though  it  has  been 
fiercely  assaulted  by  those  without,  and 
shamefully  betrayed  by  many  within,  it  still 
subsists,  it  still  flourishes.  And  subsist  it 
shall,  for  it  is  maintained  by  him  who  has 
the  hearts  of  all  men  in  his  hands,  and  can 
control  or  change  them  as  he  pleases.  He 
can,  and  he  will,  support  and  strengthen  his 
people  under  all  their  sufferings.  He  can 
disappoint  his  adversaries  by  unexpected 
events,  divide  them  among  themselves,  and 
so  manage  them  by  his  providence,  as  to 
make  them  protect  and  promote  the  very 
cause  which  they  hate.  And  whenever  he 
pleases,  he  can,  as  it  were,  from  the  stones, 
(Matth.  iii.  9,)  raise  up  instruments  to  carry 
on  his  work,  and  to  show  forth  his  praise. 
Therefore, 

1.  Let  not  his  people  tremble  for  the  ark. 
Our  eyes  indeed  should  affect  our  hearts.  It 
becomes  us  to  be  jealous  for  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  to  be  concerned  for  the  contempt  and 
dishonour  that  is  cast  upon  his  government 
and  grace,  to  be  grieved  for  the  abounding 
abominations  of  the  day,  and  to  pity  and  pray 
for  obstinate  sinners  who  know  not  what 
they  do.  But  we  need  not  fear  the  failure 
of  his  promise.  His  truth  and  honour  are 
engaged  for  the  success  of  his  gospel,  and 
they  must  stand  or  fall  together.  It  is  a cause 
dearer  to  him  than  it  can  be  to  us.  The 
manifestation  of  his  glory  in  the  salvation  of 
sinners,  by  the  doctrine  of  the  cross,  is  the 
one  great  concern,  for  which  the  succession 
of  day  and  night,  and  of  the  seasons  of  the 
year,  is  continued,  and  the  visible  frame  of 
nature  is  preserved.  He  will  work,  and  none 
shall  let  it.  The  kingdoms  of  the  earth  shall 
become  the  kingdoms  of  the  Lord  and  of  his 
Christ.  The  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  shall 
come  in,  and  the  dispersed  of  Israel  shall  re- 
turn to  the  Lord  their  God,  and  be  saved. 
These  great  events,  to  those  who  judge  by 
an  eye  of  sense,  and  according  to  the  present 
state  of  things,  may  appear  improbable  or  im- 
possible. But  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  purposed, 
and  who  shall  disannul  it  1 His  hand  is  stretch- 
ed out,  and  who  shall  turn  it  back  ? Is.  xiv.  27. 

2.  Think  it  neither  strange  nor  hard,  if 
any  of  you  are  called  to  suffer  for  the  sake  of 
the  truth.  Think  it  not  strange ; for  thus  it 
has  been  from  the  beginning.  Think  it  not 
hard ; for  our  sufferings  are  small,  if  com- 
pared with  the  lot  of  many  who  have  lived 
before  us.  We  are  not  called  to  resist  unto 
blood.  Many  prophets  and  righteous  men 
have  desired  to  see  such  days  of  liberty  as 
we  are  favoured  with,  but  have  not  seen 
them. 

3.  Consider  seriously,  Who  is  on  the  Lord’s 


OPPOSITION  TO  MESSIAH  RUINOUS. 


331 


SER.  XXXV.  1 

side?  His  is  the  strongest  side,  and  must 
prevail.  If  you  have  yielded  yourselves  to 
him,  and  taken  upon  you  his  yoke,  your  best 
intefests  are  safe,  your  final  happiness  is  se- 
cured. Nothing  can  separate  you  from  his 
love.  You  shall  be  kept  by  his  power  through 
faith,  and  no  weapon  formed  against  you  shall 
prosper.  But  if  you  are  against  him,  trem- 
ble, for  the  day  of  his  wrath  will  come ; “ it 
will  burn  like  an  oven,  and  all  the  proud,  and 
all  that  do  wickedly,  shall  be  as  stubble,  and 
the  day  that  cometh  shall  burn  them  up,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts,  and  shall  leave  them  nei- 
ther root  nor  branch,”  Mai.  iv.  1.  Turn 
therefore  in  time  from  your  evil  ways,  sub- 
mit yourselves  unto  him,  and  implore  his 
mercy  while  he  waiteth  to  be  gracious,  that 
iniquity  may  not  be  your  ruin. 


SERMON  XXXV. 

OPPOSITION  TO  MESSIAH  RUINOUS. 

Thou  shalt  break  them  with  a rod  of  iron , 
thou  shalt  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a pot- 
ter's vessel.  Psalm  ii.  9. 

There  is  a species  of  the  sublime  in 
writing,  which  seems  peculiar  to  the  scrip- 
ture, and  of  which,  properly,  no  subjects  but 
those  of  divine  revelation  are  capable.  With 
us,  things  inconsiderable  in  themselves  are 
elevated  by  splendid  images,  which  give 
them  an  apparent  importance  beyond  what 
they  can  justly  claim.  Thus  the  poet,  when 
describing  a battle  among  bees,  by  a judicious 
selection  of  epithets  and  figures,  excites  in  the 
minds  of  his  readers  the  idea  of  two  mighty 
armies  contending  for  empire.  But  the  works 
and  ways  of  God  are  too  great  in  themselves 
to  admit  of  any  heightening  representation. 
We  conceive  more  forcibly  of  small  things 
by  illustrations  borrowed  from  those  which 
are  greater ; but  the  scripture  frequently  il- 
lustrates great  things,  by  contrasting  them 
with  those  which  in  our  estimation  are  trivial 
and  feeble.  One  instance,  out  of  many  which 
might  be  mentioned,  is  that  truly  sublime 
passage  of  the  prophet : “ And  all  the  host  of 
heaven  shall  be  dissolved,  and  the  heavens 
shall  be  rolled  together  as  a scroll ; and  all 
their  host  shall  fall  down  as  the  leaf  falleth 
off  from  the  vine,  and  as  a falling  fig  from 
the  fig-tree,”  Isa.  xxxiv.  4.  The  apostle,  when 
favoured  with  a heavenly  vision,  introduces 
the  same  thought,  almost  in  the  same  words : 
“ And  the  stars  of  heaven  fell  unto  the  earth, 
even  as  a fig-tree  casteth  her  untimely  figs, 
when  she  is  shaken  of  a mighty  wind : and 
the  heavens  departed  as  a scroll  when  it  is 
rolled  together,”  Rev.  vi.  13, 14.  Such  forms 
of  expression  are  becoming  the  Majesty  of 
the  great  God,  before  whom  the  difference 


between  the  great  and  the  small  in  our  judg- 
ment, is  annihilated.  In  his  view,  the  eartb, 
with  all  its  inhabitants,  are  but  as  a drop 
which  falls  unnoticed  from  the  bucket,  or  as 
the  dust  which  cleaves  to  the  balance,  (Is. 
xl.  15,)  without  affecting  its  equilibrium.  At 
the  same  time,  the  simplicity  of  these  illus- 
trations, so  well  suited  to  confound  the  pride 
of  the  wise,  is  striking  and  obvious  to  the 
lowest  capacities.  If  Homer  or  Virgil  had 
been  to  describe  the  exertion  and  effect  of 
the  power  of  God,  in  subduing  and  punishing 
his  enemies,  they  would  probably  have  la- 
boured for  a simile  sufficiently  grand.  But  I 
much  question  if  they  would  have  thought  of 
the  image  in  my  text,  though  none  can  be 
more  expressive  of  utter  irreparable  ruin,  or 
of  the  ease  with  which  it  is  accomplished : 
He  shall  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a potter’s 
vessel. 

The  series  of  the  passages  we  have  lately 
considered  is  very  regular  and  beautiful. 
Messiah  ascended  on  high,  and  received  gifts 
for  men.  The  first  and  immediate  conse- 
quence of  his  exaltation  in  our  nature,  is  the 
publication  of  the  gospel.  Then  follows  the 
happy  and  beneficial  influence  of  the  gospel 
on  those  who  thankfully  receive  it.  How 
beautiful  are  the  feet  of  them  that  preach 
these  glad  tidings ! The  next  passage  secures 
and  describes  its  extensive  progress — the 
sound  went  forth  into  all  the  earth.  The 
opposition  awakened  by  it  is  then  described, 
First,  as  unreasonable — Why  do  the  Heathen 
rage?  Secondly,  as  ineffectual — the  Lord 
laughs  at  his  opposers  ; he  sits  upon  his  im- 
movable throne,  and  derides  their  attempts. 
Thirdly,  the  final  issue  of  their  mad  resist- 
ance, tiieir  confusion  and  ruin,  is  the  subject 
of  the  verse  I have  read,  which  prepares  for 
the  close  of  the  second  part  of  the  Oratorio. 
His  enemies  shall  perish,  his  kingdom  shall 
be  established  and  consummated.  And  then 
all  holy  intelligent  beings  shall  join  in  a song 
of  triumph,  “Hallelujah,  for  the  Lord  God 
Omnipotent  reigneth.” 

The  two  expressions,  of  breaking  with  a 
rod  of  iron,  and  dashing  in  pieces,  suggest 
nearly  the  same  idea.  But  as  elsewhere  he  is 
said  to  rule  his  enemies  with  a rod  of  iron, 
(Rev.  xix.  15,)  I shall  avail  myself  of  this  va- 
riation, in  order  to  give  you  a more  complete 
view  of  the  dreadful  state  of  those  who  oppose 
Messiah  and  his  kingdom.  He  rules  them  at 
present  with  a rod  of  iron,  and  hereafter  he 
will  dash  them  in  pieces  like  a potter’s  ves- 
sel. Let  us  therefore  consider, 

I.  How  the  Lord  Messiah  rules  over  im- 
penitent and  obstinate  sinners  in  the  present 
life.  They  attempt  (in  vain)  to  withdraw 
from  his  subjection;  they  oppose  his  holy 
will ; they  refuse  to  submit  to  his  golden 
sceptre : he  will  therefore  rule  them  with  a 
rod  of  iron.  For  though  they  boast  of  their 
liberty,  and  presume  to  say,  Who  is  Lord 


332' 


OPPOSITION  TO  MESSIAH  RUINOUS. 


over  us!  (Psalm  xii.  4,)  yet  in  the  thing 
wherein  they  speak  proudly,  he  is  above  them, 
(Exod.  xviii.  11.)  They  cannot  hide  them- 
selves from  his  notice,  nor  avoid  the  intima- 
tions of  his  displeasure. 

1.  One  branch  of  his  iron  rule  over  them, 
consists  in  that  certain  and  inseparable  con- 
nexion which  he  has  established  between  sin 
and  misery.  The  fruit  of  righteousness  is 
peace,  James  iii.  18.  They  who  live  in  the 
fear  of  the  Lord,  and  yield  a willing  obe- 
dience to  his  word,  not  only  possess  peace  of 
conscience,  and  a hope  which  can  look  with 
comfort  beyond  the  grave,  but  are  thereby 
preserved  from  innumerable  evils,  into  which 
they  who  attempt  to  cast  off  his  yoke  una- 
voidably plunge  themselves.  On  the  con- 
trary, the  way  of  transgressors  is  hard,  Prov. 
xiii.  15.  It  is  hard  in  itself,  if  we  set  aside 
for  a moment  the  consideration  of  the  dread- 
ful end  to  which  it  leads.  Could  you  see 
what  passes  within  the  breast  of  a man  who 
disdains  tc  be  governed  by  the  rule  of  God’s 
word,  y • A’ould  see  his  heart  torn  to  pieces 
by  he  clamorous,  insatiable  demands  of  the 
various,  violent,  inconsistent  appetites  and 
passions,  which,  like  so  many  wild  beasts,  are 
continually  preying  upon  him.  Not  one  of 
them  can  be  fully  gratified,  much  less  all,  for 
many  of  them  are  diametrically  opposite  to 
each  other.  The  boilings  of  anger,  the  gnaw- 
ings of  envy,  the  thirst  of  covetousness,  the 
anxieties  attendant  on  pride  and  ambition, 
must  make  the  mind  that  is  subject  to  them 
miserable.  There  is  no  peace  to  the  wicked ; 
there  can  be  none.  Farther,  their  evil  tem- 
pers and  irregular  desires  produce  outward 
and  visible  effects,  which  publicly  and  mani- 
festly prove,  that  the  service  of  sin  is  a hard 
drudgery,  and  that  whatever  pleasure  it  may 
seem  to  promise,  its  pay  is  misery  and  pain. 
“ Who  hath  woe,  contentions,  and  wounds 
without  cause?”  (Prov.  xxiii.  29.)  The 
drunkard.  Lewdness  and  drunkenness  are 
high  roads,  if  I may  so  speak,  leading  to  in- 
famy, disease,  penury,  and  death.  Such  per- 
sons do  not  live  out  half  the  days  which  their 
constitutions  might  have  afforded,  if  they  had 
not  sold  themselves  to  do  wickedly.  Again, 
look  into  their  houses.  Where  the  Lord  does 
not  dwell,  peace  will  not  inhabit.  How  fre- 
quently may  we  observe,  in  their  family-con- 
nexions, discord  and  enmity  between  man 
and  wife,  unkind  parents,  disobedient  chil- 
dren, tyrannical  masters,  and  treacherous 
servants?  Thus  they  live,  hateful  in  them- 
selves, and  hating  one  another,  Tit.  iii.  2.  If 
they  have  what  the  world  accounts  pros- 
perity, their  hard  master  Satan,  so  works 
upon  their  evil  dispositions,  that  they  can 
derive  no  real  comfort  from  it.  Every  day, 
almost  every  hour,  puts  some  new  bitterness 
into  their  cup.  And  in  trouble  they  have  no 
resource : having  no  access  to  God,  no  pro- 
mise to  support  them,  no  relief  from  him 


[SER.  XXXV. 

against  their  anxieties  and  fears,  they  either 
sink  down  in  sullen,  comfortless  despondency, 
or  in  a spirit  of  wild  rebellion,  blaspheme  him 
because  of  their  plagues,  Rev.  xvi.  21.  * In 
society  they  are  dreaded  and  avoided  by  the 
sober  and  serious,  and  can  only  associate  with 
such  as  themselves.  There  indeed,  they  will 
pretend  to  be  happy ; they  carouse,  and  make 
a noise,  and  assist  each  other  to  banish  re- 
flection; yet  frequently  the  drink,  or  the 
devil,  breaks  their  intimacies,  and  stirs  them 
up  to  quarrels,  broils,  and  mischief.  Such  is  a 
life  of  sin.  The  Lord  rules  them  with  a rod 
of  iron.  They  renounce  his  fear,  and  he  re- 
fuses them  his  blessing.  Nothing  more  is 
necessary  to  render  them  miserable  than  to 
leave  them  to  themselves. 

2.  He  rules  them  with  a rod  of  iron,  by 
his  power  over  conscience.  They  may  boast 
and  laugh,  but  we  know  the  gall  and  bitter- 
ness of  their  state ; for  we,  likewise,  were  in 
it,  until  the  Lord  delivered  us.  Let  them  say 
what  they  will,  we  are  sure  that  there  are  sea- 
sons, when,  like  him  whom  they  serve,  they 
believe  and  tremble,  James  ii.  19.  They  can- 
not always'  be  in  company,  they  cannot  al- 
ways be  intoxicated  ; though  this  is  the  very 
reason  why  many  intoxicate  themselves  so 
often,  because  they  cannot  bear  their  own 
thoughts  when  sober.  They  are  then  a bur- 
den and  a terror  to  themselves.  They  feel 
the  iron  rod.  How  awful  are  the  thoughts 
which  sometimes  awaken  them,  or  keep  them 
awake,  in  the  silent  hours  of  the  night ! What 
terrors  seize  them  in  sickness,  or  when  they 
are  compelled  to  think  of  death ! What  a 
death-warrant  do  they  often  receive  in  their 
souls,  under  the  preaching  of  that  word  of 
God  which  fills  his  people  with  joy  and  peace ! 
Many  will  not  hear  it.  But  why  not  ? They 
will  not,  because  they  dare  not.  I am  per- 
suaded there  are  more  than  a few  of  the  brave 
spirits  of  the  present  day,  who  would  wil- 
lingly change  conditions  with  a dog,  and  be 
glad  to  part  with  their  reason,  if  they  could  at 
the  same  time  get  rid  of  the  horrors  which 
hunt  their  consciences.  Is  there  one  such 
person  here?  Let  me  entreat  you  to  stop  and 
consider,  before  it  be  too  late.  There  is  yet 
forgiveness  with  God.  Your  case,  though 
dangerous,  is  not  desperate,  if  you  do  not 
make  it  so  yourself.  I would  direct  your 
thoughts  to  Jesus.  Look  to  him,  and  im- 
plore his  mercy  His  blood  can  cleanse 
from  all  sin.  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  ut- 
termost. 

It  is  possible  some  may  affect  to  contradict 
the  representation  I have  made,  and  be  ready 
to  say,  “ I find  nothing  of  all  this.  I take  a 
pleasure  in  my  way.  I have  a healthy  body, 
money  at  my  command,  and  I can  sleep 
soundly.  I feel  none  of  the  qualms  of  con- 
science you  speak  of;  and  though  the  saints 
and  good  folks  care  as  little  for  me  as  I do 
for  them,  yet  I am  very  well  and  happy  with 


OPPOSITION  TO  MESSIAH  RUINOUS. 


333 


SER.  XXXV.] 

such  acquaintance  as  I like  best.  As  to  an 
hereafter,  I do  not  think  of  it ; but  I am  de- 
termined to  live  now.”  In  answer  to  sen- 
timents of  this  kind,  which  I am  afraid  are 
too  common,  I observe, 

3.  That  the  amazing  hardness  and  blind-; 
ness  of  heart  to  which  some  sinners  are  given 
up,  is  another,  and  the  most  terrible  effect  of 
that  iron  rod  with  which  the  Lord  rules  his 
enemies.  Pharaoh  could  say  as  positively  as 
you,  “ Who  is  the  Lord,  that  I should  obey 
him!”  Exod.  v.  2.  But  because,  being  often 
rebuked,  he  persisted  in  his  obstinacy,  the 
contest  terminated,  in  his  destruction.  If 
you  are  obstinate  like  him  now,  I believe  you 
were  not  always  so.  You  must  have  laboured 
hard,  you  must,  have  resisted  the  light  of  truth, 
and  have  stifled  many  a conviction,  before 
you  could  arrive  to  this  pitch  of  obduracy. 
You  have  fought  against  the  Holy  Spirit; 
and  woe  unto  you,  if  he  be  gone,  gone  for 
ever,  and  will  strive  with  you  no  more. 
To  be  thus  given  up  of  God  to  a,  reprobate 
mind,  is  the  heaviest  judgment  that  a sinner 
can  be  visited  with  on  this  side  of  hell.  I am 
at  a loss  what  to  say  to  a person  thus  dis- 
posed, and  I hope  there  are  none  such  present. 
But  I would  warn  those,  who,  though  they 
have  sinned  with  a high  hand,  are  not  yet  al- 
together past  feeling, lest  you  fall  into  such  a 
state  of  confirmed  disobedience  and  unbelief. 
Take  heed  lest  you  be  hardened  through  the 
deceitfulness  of  sin,  Heb.  iii.  13.  If  under 
the  light  of  the  gospel  you  can  go  on  in  a 
course  of  wilful,  wanton,  deliberate  wicked- 
ness, you  are  upon  the  very  edge  of  the  un- 
pardonable sin,  of  that  state  from  which  it  is 
impossible  to  renew  you  to  repentance.  If 
the  Bible  be,  as  you  vainly  wish  it  may  prove, 
a cunningly-devised  fable,  you  may  trample 
upon  it  with  impunity,  and  laugh  on  securely 
to  the  end  of  life.  But  if  it  be  true,  remem- 
ber you  have  been  this  day  warned  of  the 
consequences  of  despising  it.  If  you  will 
perish,  I am  clear  of  your  blood. 

II.  I proceed  to  consider  the  final  issue  of 
this  unequal  contest  between  the  worms  of 
the  earth  and  their  Maker.  He  svill  dash 
them  in  pieces  like  a potter’s  vessel.  Such  a 
vessel  may  be  curiously  wrought,  and  appear 
beautiful  to  the  eye,  but  it  is  frail,  easily 
broken,  and,  when  once  broken  to  pieces,  it 
is  irreparable.  It  is  therefore  a fit  emblem 
of  mortal  man  in  his  best  estate.  We  are 
fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,  Psal.  cxxxix. 
14.  The  texture  of  the  human  frame  is  ad- 
mirable. The  natural  capacities  of  the  mind 
of  man,  the  powers  of  his  understanding,  will, 
and  affections,  the  rapidity  of  imagination,  the 
comprehension  of  memory,  especially  in  some 
instances,  are  so  many  proofs,  that,  considered 
as  a creature  of  God,  he  is  a noble  creature ; 
and  though  he  is  debased  and  degraded  by 
sin,  there  are  traces  of  his  original  excellence 
remaining,  sufficient  to  denominate  him  in 


the  words  of  the  poet,  “ majestic  though  in 
ruins.”  But  if  you  suppose  him  rich,  power- 
ful, wise,  in  the  common  sense  of  the  words, 
he  is  brittle  as  a potter’s  vessel,  and  while 
possessed  of  every  possible  advantage,  he  is 
but  like  the  grass  or  the  flower  of  the  field, 
which,  in  its  most  flourishing  state,  falls  in  a 
moment  at  the  stroke  of  the  scythe,  and 
withers,  and  dies.  A fever,  a fali,  a tile,  a 
grain  of  sand,  or  the  air  that  finds  its  way 
through  a crevice,  may  be  an  overmatch  for 
the  strongest  man,  and  bring  him  down 
hastily  to  the  grave.  By  a small  change  in 
the  brain,  or  some  part  of  the  nervous  system, 
he  who  now  prides  himself  in  his  intellectual 
abilities  may  soon  become  a lunatic  or  an 
idiot.  Disease  may  quickly  render  the  beauty 
loathsome,  and  the  robust  weak  as  infancy. 
There  are  earthen  or  china  vessels,  which 
might  possibly  endure  for  many  ages,  if  care- 
fully preserved  from  violence.  But  the  seeds 
of  decay  and  death  are  sown  in  our  very 
frame.  We  are  crushed  before  the  moth, 
and  moulder  away  untouched  under  the 
weight  of  time.  How  surely  and  inevitably, 
then,  must  they  whom  the  Lord  strikes  with 
his  iron  rod,  be  shattered  with  the  blow  ! 

Communities  and  collective  bodies  of  men, 
are,  in  his  hand,  no  less  frail  than  individuals. 
The  first-born  throughout  Egypt,  and  the  vast 
army  of  Sennacherib,  perished  in  a night.  The 
Romans  were  the  iron  rod  in  his  hand,  where- 
with he  dashed  the  Jewish  nation  to  pieces. 
Their  fragments  are  scattered  far  and  wide,  to 
this  day,  and  who  can  gather  them  up!  The 
Roman  empire  was  likewise  dashed  to  pieces 
in  its  turn;  and  such  has  been  the  end,  suc- 
cessively, of  many  powers,  and  of  many  per- 
sons who  have  presumed  to  oppose  his  de- 
signs. For  a while  they  were  permitted  to 
rage,  and  plot,  and  strive ; but  at  length  they 
stumbled  and  fell,  and  their  memory  is  pe- 
rished. 

But  it  is  proper  to  bring  the  consideration 
nearer  home.  I have  been  informed,  that  the 
music  to  which  this  passage  is  set,  is  so  well 
adapted  to  the  idea  that  it  expresses,  as  in  a 
manner  to  startle  those  who  hear  it.  They 
who  live  in  sinful  habits,  regardless  of  the 
gospel,  would  be  startled,  indeed,  if  they  were 
duly  sensible  how  directly  the  words  apply  to 
their  own  situation,  and  that  the  psalmist  de- 
scribes the  manner  in  which  God  will  treat 
them,  if  they  continue  impenitent.  If  we 
could  see  all  that  passes  upon  dying  beds,  we 
should  often  see  the  false  peace  and  vain  hopes 
of  sinners  dashed  to  pieces  when  eternity  is 
opening  upon  their  view.  We  shall  certainly 
see  the  solemnity  of  the  great  day : “For  we 
must  all  appear”  not  only  as  spectators,  but 
as  parties  nearly  interested  in  the  proceed- 
ings, “before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ.” 
“ Behold,  he  cometh  in  the  clouds,  and  every 
eye  shall  see  him,  and  they  also  who  pierced 
him !”  He  will  descend  with  a shout,  with 


334 


THE  LORD  REIGNETH. 


[sER.  XXXVL 


the  voice  of  the  archangel,  and  with  the 
trump  of  God,  and  before  him  shall  be  gather- 
ed all  nations.  Where  then  shall  the  sinner 
and  the  ungodly  appear?  What  will  then  be- 
come of  those  who  despise,  and  those  who 
abuse  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  ? The 
libertine,  the  infidel,  the  apostate,  the  hypo- 
crite, the  profan  * scoffer,  and  the  false  pro- 
fessor, how  will  they  stand,  or  whither  will 
they  flee,  when  the  great  Judge  shall  sit  up- 
on his  awful  throne,  and  the  books  shall  be 
opened,  and  every  secret  thing  shall  be  dis- 
closed ! Alas  for  them  that  are  full,  and  that 
laugh  now,  for  then  they  shall  pine  and 
mourn,  Luke  vi.  25.  Then  their  cavils  will 
be  silenced,  their  guilt,  with  all  its  aggrava- 
tions, be  charged  home  upon  them,  and  no 
plea,  no  advocate  be  found.  Can  their  hearts 
endure,  or  their  hands  be  strong,  when  he 
shall  speak  to  them  in  his  wrath,  and  say, 
“ Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlast- 
ing fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  an- 
gels ?” 

But  let  them  who  love  his  name  rejoice. 
You  have  fled  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  be- 
fore you.  To  you  his  appearance  will  be 
delightful,  and  his  voice  welcome.  You 
shall  not  be  ashamed.  This  awful  God  is 
yours.  He  will  then  own  and  accept  you  be- 
fore assembled  worlds,  and  will  say,  “ Come, 
ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  king- 
dom prepared  for  you.”  Then  the  days  of 
your  mourning  shall  be  ended,  and  your  sun 
shall  go  down  no  more,  Matt.  xxv.  34.  Is. 
lx.  20. 


SERMON  XXXVI. 

THE  LORD  REIGNETH. 

Hallelujah , for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent 
reigneth!  Rev.  xix.  6. 

The  book  of  the  Revelation,  being  chiefly 
prophetical,  will  not  perhaps  be  fully  under- 
stood, till  the  final  accomplishment  of  the 
events  shall  draw  near,  and  throw  a stronger 
light  upon  the  whole  series.  But  while  the 
learned  commentators  have  been  hitherto  di- 
vided and  perplexed  in  their  attempts  to  illus- 
trate many  parts  of  it,  there  are  other  parts 
well  adapted  for  the  instruction  and  refresh- 
ment of  plain  Christians  ; particularly  those 
passages  in  which  the  scenery  and  images 
seemed  designed  to  give  us  some  representa- 
tion of  the  happiness  and  worship  of  the  hea- 
venly state.  Thus  a plain  unlettered  believer, 
when  reading  with  attention  the  fourth  and 
fifth  chapters,  though  he  cannot  give  a reason 
why  the  elders  are  four-and-twenty,  the  living 
creatures  four,  and  the  number  of  their  wings 
neither  more  nor  less  than  six ; yet,  from  the 
whole  description  of  the  Lamb  upon  the 


throne,  the  songs  of  the  redeemed,  and  the 
chorus  of  the  angels,  he  receives  such  an  im- 
pression of  glory,  as  awakens  his  gratitude, 
desire,  and  joy,  and  excites  him  likewise  to 
take  up  the  same  song  of  praise,  to  him  who 
has  loved  him,  and  washed  him  from  his  sins 
in  his  own  blood.  He  is  content  to  leave  the 
discussion  of  hard  questions  to  learned  men, 
while  he  feeds  by  faith  upon  those  simple 
truths  which  can  only  be  relished  by  a 
spiritual  taste;  and  which,  where  there  is 
such  a taste,  make  their  way  to  the  heart, 
without  the  assistance  of  critical  disquisition. 

The  subject  of  the  preceding  chapter,  is 
the  destruction  of  mystical  Babylon,  the  head 
of  the  opposition  against  the  kingdom  of  the 
Lord  Christ.  But  Babylon  sinks  like  a mill- 
stone in  the  mighty  ocean,  and  is  no  more 
found.  So  must  all  his  enemies  perish.  The 
catastrophe  of  Babylon,  like  that  of  Pharaoh 
at  the  Red  Sea,  is  beheld  by  the  saints  and 
servants  of  the  Lord  with  admiration,  and  fur- 
nishes them  with  a theme  for  a song  of  tri- 
umph to  his  praise.  This  may  be  properly 
styled  sacred  music  indeed.  It  is  command- 
ed, inspired,  and  regulated,  by  the  Lord  him- 
self. The  performers  are  all  interested  in 
the  subject,  they  who  fear  God,  and  are  de- 
voted to  his  service  and  glory.  And  though 
persons  of  this  character  are  comparatively 
few  upon  earth,  hidden,  and  in  a manner  lost, 
among  the  crowd  of  mankind,  they  will  be, 
when  brought  together  at  last,  a very  large 
company.  Their  united  voices  are  here 
compared  to  the  voice  of  many  waters,  and 
of  mighty  thunders,  and  this  is  the  solemn 
close,  the  chorus  of  their  song,  “ Hallelujah, 
for  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth.” 

The  impression  which  the  performance  of 
this  passage  in  the  Oratorio  usually  makes 
upon  the  audience  is  well  known.  But  how 
ever  great  the  power  of  music  may  be,  should 
we  even  allow  the  flights  of  poetry  to  be  truth, 
that  it  can  soften  rocks,  and  bend  the  knotty 
oak,  one  thing  we  are  sure  it  cannot  do ; it 
cannot  soften  and  change  the  hard  heart,  it 
cannot  bend  the  obdurate  will  of  man.  If 
all  the  people  who  successively  hear  the  Mes- 
siah, who  are  struck  and  astonished,  for  the 
moment,  by  this  chorus  in  particular,  were  to 
bring  away  with  them  an  abiding  sense  of  the 
importance  of  the  sentiment  it  contains,  the 
nation  would  soon  wear  a new  face.  But  do 
the  professed  lovers  of  sacred  music,  in  this 
enlightened  age,  generally  live,  as  if  they 
really  believed  that  the  Lord  God  omnipotent 
reigneth?  Rather  do  not  the  greater  part  of 
them  live,  as  they  might  do  if  they  were  sure 
of  the  contrary  ? as  if  they  were  satisfied  to  a 
demonstration,  that  either  there  is  no  God,  or 
that  his  providence  is  not  concerned  in  human 
affairs  ? I appeal  to  conscience ; I appeal  to 
fact. 

I apprehend  that  this  passage,  taken  in  the 
strictest  sense,  refers  to  a period  not  yet  ar- 


THE  LORD  REIGNETH. 


SER.  XXXVI.] 

rived.  Babylon  is  not  yet  fallen.  The  ser- 
vants of  God  in  the  present  day,  will  most 
probably  fulfil  their  appointed  time  upon 
earth,  like  those  who  have  lived  before  them, 
in  a state  of  conflict.  They  must  endure  the 
cross,  and  sustain  opposition  for  his  sake.  The 
people  who  shall  live  when  the  kingdoms  of 
the  world  become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord 
and  his  Christ,  when  the  nations  shall  learn 
war  no  more,  are  yet  unborn.  But  even  now 
we  may  rejoice  that  the  Lord  God  omnipotent 
reigneth,  and  that  Jesus  is  King  of  kings,  and 
Lord  of  lords.  I must  consider  my  text  as 
referring  to  him.  Many  of  the  Heathens  be- 
lieved that  God  reigned.  The  Christian  doc- 
trine is,  that  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  exer- 
ciseth  his  dominion  and  government  in  the 
person  of  Christ.  “ The  Father  loveth  the 
Son,  and  hath  committed  all  things  into  his 
hands,”  John  iii.  35.  And  thus  our  Lord, 
after  his  resurrection,  assured  his  disciples, 
“ All  power  is  committed  unto  me  in  heaven 
and  in  earth,”  Matt,  xxviii.  18.  He  has  al- 
ready taken  to  himself  his  great  power  and 
reigneth.  His  right  of  reigning  over  all  is 
essential  to  his  divine  nature ; but  the  admi- 
nistration of  government  in  the  nature  of  man, 
is  the  effect  and  reward  of  his  obedience  unto 
death.  But  in  the  union  of  both  natures,  he 
is  one  person,  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord.  All 
the  riches  and  fulness  of  the  Godhead,  all  the 
peculiar  honours  of  the  Mediator,  centre  in 
him.  They  may  be  distinguished,  but  they 
are  inseparable. 

Happy  are  they  who  can,  upon  solid  and 
scriptural  grounds,  exult  in  the  thought  that 
the  Lord  reigneth,  and  can  make  his  govern- 
ment the  subject  of  their  hallelujahs  and 
praises ! Happy  they,  who  see,  acknowledge, 
and  admire,  his  management  in  the  kingdom 
of  providence,  and  are  the  willing  subjects  of 
his  kingdom  of  grace.  Let  us  take  a brief 
survey  of  his  reigning  glory  in  these  king- 
doms. 

I.  Great  and  marvellous  is  this  Lord  God 
omnipotent  in  his  kingdom  of  universal  pro- 
vidence ! His  mighty  arm  sustains  the  vast 
fabric  of  the  universe.  He  upholds  the  stars 
in  their  courses.  If  we  attentively  consider 
their  multitude,  their  magnitudes,  their  dis- 
tances from  us  and  from  each  other,  and  the 
amazing  swiftness,  variety,  and  regularity 
of  their  motions,  our  minds  are  overwhelmed, 
our  thoughts  confounded,  by  the  vastness  and 
the  wonders  of  the  scene.  But  he  spoke  them 
into  being,  and  they  are  preserved  in  their 
stations  and  revolutions  by  his  power  and 
agency.  If  we  fix  our  thoughts  upon  the  earth, 
though  in  comparison  of  the  immensity  of  his 
creation  it  is  but  as  a point  or  a grain  of  sand, 
it  is  the  object  of  his  incessant  care.  All  its 
various  inhabitants  derive  their  existence  and 
their  support  from  him.  He  provides  for  the 
young  ravens  when  unable  to  fly,  and  for  the 
young  lions  that  traverse  the  woods.  The 


33". 

instinct  of  animals,  whereby  they  are  unei- 
ringly  instructed  in  whatever  concerns  the 
welfare  and  preservation  of  their  species,  so 
vastly  exceeding  the  boasted  wisdom  of  man, 
that  he  can  neither  imitate  nor  comprehend 
it,  is  communicated  by  him.  He  teaches  the 
birds  to  build  their  nests,  the  spider  to  weave 
his  web,  and  instructs  the  communities  of 
bees,  and  insignificant  emmets,  to  form  their 
admirable  policies  and  government  among 
themselves.  If  we  speak  of  intelligent  be- 
ings, he  does  what  he  pleases  in  the  armies 
of  heaven,  and  among  the  inhabitants  of  the 
earth.  He  directs  and  overrules  the  coun- 
sels and  purposes  of  men,  so  that  though  they 
act  freely,  the  event  of  all  their  different  in- 
terfering schemes,  is  only  the  accomplish- 
ment of  his  purposes.  When  they  are  em- 
ployed as  his  instruments,  from  small  begin- 
nings, and  in  defiance  of  difficulties  apparently 
insuperable,  they  succeed  beyond  their  own 
expectations.  When  unhappily  engaged 
against  his  designs,  in  vain  they  rage  and 
plot.  He  takes  the  wise  in  their  own  crafti- 
ness, pours  contempt  upon  their  power  and 
policy,  and  all  their  great  preparations  melt 
like  a mist,  or  like  snow  before  the  sun,  and 
leave  no  trace  behind.  Still  more  wonder- 
ful, to  the  eye  of  faith,  is  his  control  over 
Satan  and  the  powers  of  darkness.  What- 
ever, for  wise  reasons,  though  unknown  to 
us,  he  may  permit  them  to  do,  they  cannot 
with  all  their  subtlety  or  strength,  detain  one 
soul  in  their  bondage  longer  than  till  his  ap- 
pointed time  of  release;  nor  recover  one  soul 
back  to  their  dominion,  of  which  he  is  pleased 
to  undertake  the  care.  On  the  contrary,  he 
breaks  the  heads  of  these  leviathans  in  pieces, 
turns  their  counsels  against  themselves,  and 
makes  them  instrumental  in  purifying  his 
people,  and  extending  his  church,  by  the 
means  they  employ  for  the  destruction  of 
both.  Thus  they  who  dwell  under  his  sha- 
dow are  safe ; for  all  things  are  in  his  pow- 
er, and  he  always  careth  for  them,  and  keep- 
eth  them,  as  the  pupil  of  his  eye;  and  there- 
fore, though  they  are  exercised  with  trials, 
and  suffer  many  things  for  their  good,  his  eye 
being  always  upon  them,  and  his  ear  open  to 
their  prayer,  they  are  supported,  supplied,  re- 
lieved, delivered,  and  at  last  made  more  than 
conquerors. 

II.  He  has  a peculiar  kingdom,  which  he 
has  established  distinct  from  the  kingdoms  of 
this  world,  though  diffused  and  extended 
among  them,  and  which,  in  due  time,  like 
leaven,  will  pervade  and  assimilate  them  all 
to  himself.  This  is  the  kingdom  of  the  gos- 
pel, his  church.  It  is  founded  upon  a rock, 
and  though  the  gates  of  hell  continually  war 
against  it,  they  cannot  prevail.  For  he  is  a 
wall  of  fire  round  about  it,  and  the  glory  in 
the  midst  of  it,  Zech.  ii.  5. 

Here  he  reigns  upon  a throne  of  grace.  He 
possesses  and  exercises  unlimited  authority 


336 


THE  LORD  REIGNETH. 


as  a sovereign,  to  save  whom  he  pleases,  to 
pardon  all  manner  of  sins  and  offences,  and 
to  admit  rebels  and  enemies,  when  they  sub- 
mit themselves  and  bow  to  hi»  golden  scep- 
tre, into  the  number  of  his  children  and  his 
friends.  Seldom  do  the  kings  of  the  earth 
publish  an  act  of  grace  in  favour  of  those  who 
have  been  guilty  of  rebellion,  without  clog- 
ging it  with  exceptions.  Either  they  feel  a 
resentment  against  some  of  the  delinquents, 
which  they  have  not  magnanimity  sufficient 
to  conquer,  or  they  dare  not  trust  them.  But 
his  mercy  is  infinite;  and  he  knows  how  to 
change  their  hearts  when  he  pardons  their 
sins. 

Perhaps  it  may  not  be  a digression  wholly 
unuseful  and  impertinent,  if  I take  this  oc- 
casion to  point  out  the  several  senses  in  which 
the  word  Church  may  be  understood,  agree- 
able to  the  scripture. 

1.  It  denotes  in  the  aggregate,  the  mystical 
church , the  whole  body  of  that  spiritual  king- 
dom, of  which  the  Redeemer  is  the  living  and 
life-giving  head,  Col.  i.  18.  A succession  of 
these  has  appeared  upon  earth  in  every  age, 
from  the  days  of  righteous  Abel,  whom  Cain 
slew ; and  we  have  reason  to  believe,  that  the 
far  greater  part  of  them  are  yet  unborn.  They 
will  all  be  assembled  together  before  the 
throne,  in  the  great  day  of  his  final  appear- 
ance, and  inherit  the  kingdom  of  glory  pre- 
pared for  them.  This  is  the  church  which 
God  hath  bought  with  his  own  blood,  Acts  xx. 
29.  Happy  are  they  who  belong  to  this  so- 
ciety of  the  redeemed,  whose  names  are  writ- 
ten in  heaven. 

2.  The  visible  church  contains  all  those 
who  bear  and  acknowledge  the  name  of 
Christians,  and  who  admit  and  enjoy  the  gos- 
pel-revelation. The  church,  in  this  sense, 
includes  many  nations.  But  it  is  a small 
thing  to  belong  only  to  the  visible  church,  for 
it  is  compared  to  a corn-floor,  (Matt.  iii.  12,) 
on  which  chaff  is  mingled  with  the  wheat ; 
to  a field  in  which  tares  grow  promiscuously 
with  the  good  seed ; to  a fisher’s  net  inclosing 
a great  multitude  of  fishes  both  good  and  bad, 
Matt.  xiii.  24,  47.  But  a time  of  discrimi- 
nation will  come.  The  chaff  and  the  tares, 
and  whatever  is  evil,  will  be  consumed.  Alas ! 
what  will  it  avail  at  last  to  say,  “ Lord,  we 
have  eaten  and  drank  in  thy  presence,”  at  thy 
table  with  thy  true  disciples,  and  “ thou  hast 
taught  in  our  streets,”  (Luke  xiii.  26,  27,) 
and  we  have  heard  in  our  own  language  of 
thy  wonderful  works,  if  you  can  say  no  more? 
My  heart  is  pained  with  the  apprehension, 
lest  some  of  you  have  joined  in  the  same 
public  worship  with  true  believers,  have  sat 
in  the  same  seat,  and  lived  in  the  same  fami- 
lies, should  at  last  see  them,  with  whom  you 
have  been  very  nearly  connected  in  this 
world,  received  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
and  you  yourselves  be  shut  out. 

3.  The  catholic  church  in  any  one  period, 


[ser.  xxxvi. 

is  that  part  of  the  visible  church  which  is 
united  to  the  Lord  by  a living  faith.  It  com- 
prises all  who  agree  in  the  profession  of  the 
fundamental  truths  of  the  gospel,  and  whose 
conversation  is  regulated  by  its  precepts;  or 
in  the  apostle’s  words,  “All  who  love  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity,”  Eph.  vi.  24 
This  catholic  church,  through  the  policy  of 
Satan,  and  the  deceitfulness  of  the  heart,  is 
too  much  divided  against  itself.  Prejudice, 
bigotry,  and  remaining  ignorance,  greatly 
prevent  that  desirable  union  amongst  true 
Christians,  which  would  promote  their  peace, 
comfort,  and  increase,  and  would  contri 
bute  more  than  a thousand  arguments  to  put 
their  adversaries  to  shame  and  to  silence. 
That  shameful  contention  for  denominations, 
parties,  and  favourite  preachers,  for  which 
the  apostle  reproved  the  Corinthians,  (1  Cor. 
iii.  4,)  is  still  greatly  to  be  lamented.  But 
though  they  are  too  backward  in  acknow- 
ledging and  assisting  each  other,  the  Lord  is 
merciful  to  their  weakness,  and  bears  with 
them  all.  And  as  they  grow  in  grace,  and 
drink  more  into  his  Spirit,  their  hearts  are 
enlarged,  and  they  approach  nearer  to  his 
pattern  of  long-suffering,  patience,  and  ten- 
derness. 

4.  The  word  church  is  applied  to  particular 
societies  of  Christians,  who  are  connected  by  a 
participation  in  the  same  ordinances  of  the 
gospel,  and  who  maintain  a scriptural  separa- 
tion from  the  sinful  spirit  and  customs  of  the 
world.  And  though  there  may  be  pretenders 
among  them,  as  there  were  among  the  apos- 
tolic churches,  they  are  denominated  by  the 
better  part.  They  belong  to  the  catholic 
church  by  their  profession  of  the  truth;  of 
course  they  are  a part  of  the  visible  church ; 
and  those  of  them  who  are  in  deed  and  truth 
what  they  profess  to  be,  are  living  members 
of  the  mystical  church,  to  which  all  the 
promises  are  made.  By  whatever  name  they 
are  known  or  distinguished  among  men,  they 
are  branches  of  the  true  vine,  they  have  their 
fruit  unto  holiness,  and  their  end,  everlasting 
life.  But  to  return, 

In  this  his  church,  or  spiritual  kingdom, 
he  rules  by  wise  and  gracious  laws  and  ordi- 
nances. He  releases  his  subjects  from  all  au- 
thority, in  point  of  conscience,  but  his  own,  and 
enjoins  them  to  call  no  one  master  but  him- 
self, Matt,  xxiii.  8 — 10.  If  they  stand  fast 
in  the  liberty  wherewith  he  has  made  them 
free,  (Gal.  v.  1,)  they  will  not  give  themselves 
up  implicitly  to  the  dictates  of  any  man,  nor 
follow  him  farther  than  he  follows  their  Lord. 
And  consequently,  if  they  are  influenced  bv 
his  royal  law  of  doing  to  others  as  they  would 
that  others  should  do  unto  them,  they  will  not 
attempt  to  exert  an  undue  authority,  or  wish 
to  be  called  masters  themselves,  so  as  to  as- 
sume a dogmatical  carriage,  or  to  expect  a 
universal  and  absolute  submission.  But  it 
must  be  owned  that  in  our  present  state  of 


337 


ser.  xxxvii.]  EXTENT  OF  MESSIAH’S  SPIRITUAL  KINGDOM. 


infirmity,  this  privilege  is  not  sufficiently 
prized,  nor  this  command  duly  complied  with, 
there  being  scarcely  a man  who  does  not 
either  arrogate  too  much  to  himself,  or  allow 
too  much  to  others.  A fault  in  the  one  or  the 
other  of  these  respects,  may  be  assigned  as  a 
principal  cause  of  most  of  the  evils  which 
deform  the  appearance,  or  injure  the  peace 
of  the  church.  But  the  design  of  his  gospel 
is  to  set  his  people  at  liberty  from  the  yoke 
of  men,  from  the  fetters  of  custom  and  tra- 
dition, of  superstition  and  will- worship;  that 
they  may  enjoy  in  his  service,  a state  of  per- 
fect freedom. 

For  it  is  the  principal  glory  of  his  kingdom, 
that  he  reigns  in  the  hearts  of  his  people. 
TV.^re  he  writes  his  precepts,  impresses  his 
image,  and  erects  his  throne;  ruling  them, 
not  merely  by  an  outward  law,  but  by  an  in- 
ward secret  influence,  breathing  his  own  life 
and  Spirit  into  them,  so  that  their  obedience 
becomes,  as  it  were,  natural,  pleasurable,  and 
its  own  reward.  By  the  discoveries  he  affords 
them  of  his  love,  he  wins  their  affections, 
captivates  their  wills,  and  enlightens  their 
understandings.  They  derive  from  him  the 
spirit  of  power,  of  love,  and  of  a sound  mind, 
(2  Tim.  i.  7,)  and  run  with  alacrity  in  the  way 
of  his  commandments. 

It  is  impossible  therefore  to  make  this  song 
our  own,  and  cordially  to  rejoice  that  the 
Lord  God  omnipotent  reigneth,  unless  we  are 
the  willing  subjects  of  his  government;  un- 
less we  are  really  pleased  with  his  appointed 
way  of  salvation,  approve  of  his  precepts,  and, 
from  a view  of  his  wisdom  and  goodness,  can 
cheerfully  submit  and  resign  ourselves  to  the 
disposal  of  his  providence.  In  all  these  re- 
spects we  are  by  nature  at  variance  with 
him.  We  are  too  proud  to  be  indebted  to  his 
grace,  too  wise  in  our  own  conceits  to  desire 
his  instruction,  too  obstinately  attached  to  the 
.ove  and  practice  of  sin,  to  be  capable  of  re- 
lishing the  beauty  and  spirituality  of  his  com- 
mandments. And  our  love  of  the  world,  and 
the  things  of  it,  is  too  strong  and  grasping, 
to  permit  us  to  be  satisfied  with  the  lot,  and 
with  the  dispensations  he  appoints  for  us. 
We  wish,  if  possible,  and  as  far  as  possible 
we  attempt,  to  be  our  own  carvers.  We  are 
unthankful  when  he  bestows,  impatient  if  he 
withholds,  and  if  he  sees  fit  to  resume  the 
gifts  of  which  we  are  unworthy,  we  repine 
and  rebel  against  his  will.  This  enmity  must 
be  subdued,  before  we  can  be  pleased  with 
his  government.  In  other  words,  we  must  be 
changed,  we  must  be  made  new  creatures. 
To  produce  this  change,  this  new  creation, 
the  gospel  is  the  only  expedient;  and  when 
revealed  and  applied  to  the  heart  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  miracle  is  wrought. 
The  sinner  who  is  first  convinced  of  his  guilt 
and  misery,  and  then  reconciled  to  God  by 
faith  in  the  great  atonement,  willingly  yields 
to  his  administration.  He  owns  and  feels  the 
Vol.  II.  2 U 


propriety  of  his  proceedings,  is  ready  to  ac- 
knowledge, in  his  sharpest  afflictions,  that  the 
IiOrd  is  gracious,  and  has  not  dealt  with  him 
according  to  the  desert  of  his  iniquities.  He 
considers  himself  as  no  longer  his  own,  but 
bought  with  a price,  and  brought  under  the 
strongest  obligations  to  live  no  longer  to  him- 
self, but  to  him  who  loved  him,  and  gave  him- 
self for  him.  And  what  was  before  his  dread 
and  dislike,  becomes  now  the  joy  of  his  heart, 
the  thought,  that  the  Lord  reigneth,  and  that 
all  his  concerns  are  in  the  hands  of  him  who 
doeth  all  things  well. 

Are  there  any  among  us,  who  say  in  their 
hearts,  We  will  not  have  this  Saviour  to  rule 
over  us?  The  thought  is  no  less  vain  than 
wicked.  He  must,  he  will  reign,  till  he  has 
subdued  all  enemies  under  his  feet.  You 
must  either  bend  or  break  before  him. 


SERMON  XXXVII. 

THE  EXTENT  OF  MESSIAH’S  SPIRITUAL 
KINGDOM. 

The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are  become  the 
kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  of  his  Christ , 
and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever. 
Rev.  xi.  15. 

The  kingdom  of  our  Lord  in  the  heart, 
and  in  the  world,  is  frequently  compared  to  a 
building  or  house,  of  which  he  himself  is  both 
the  foundation  and  the  architect,  Isa.  xxviii. 
16 ; liv.  11,  12.  A building  advances  by  de- 
grees, (1  Corinth,  iii.  9.  Ephes.  ii.  20 — 22,) 
and  while  it  is  in  an  unfinished  state,  a 
stranger  cannot,  by  viewing  its  present  ap- 
pearance, form  an  accurate  judgment  of  the 
design,  and  what  the  whole  will  be  when 
completed.  For  a time,  the  walls  are  of 
unequal  height,  it  is  disfigured  by  rubbish, 
which  at  the  proper  season  will  be  taken 
away  ; and  by  scaffolding,  which,  though  use- 
ful for  carrying  on  the  building,  does  not 
properly  belong  to  it,  but  will  likewise  be  re- 
moved when  the  present  temporary  service 
is  answered.  But  the  architect  himself  pro- 
ceeds according  to  a determinate  plan,  and 
his  idea  of  the  whole  work  is  perfect  from  the 
beginning.  It  is  thus  the  Lord  views  his 
people  in  the  present  life.  Lie  has  begun  a 
good  work  in  them,  but  as  yet  every  part  of 
it  is  imperfect  and  unfinished ; and  there  are 
not  only  defects  to  be  supplied,  but  deformi- 
ties and  incumbrances  that  must  be  removed. 
Many  of  the  dispensations  and  exercises 
which  contribute  to  form  their  religious 
character,  do  not  properly  belong  to  that 
work  which  is  to  abide,  though  they  have  a 
subserviency  to  promote  it.  When  that  which 
is  perfect  is  come,  the  rest  shall  be  don 
away. 


339 


THE  EXTENT  OF  MESSIAH’S 


[SER.  XXXVII. 


And  thus,  although  the  growth  and  extent 
of  his  kingdom  is  the  great  scope  and  object 
of  his  providence,  to  which  all  the  revolu- 
tions that  take  place  in  the  kingdoms  of  this 
world  shall  be  finally  subservient;  yet  the 
steps  by  which  he  is  carrying  forward  his  de- 
sign, are,  for  the  most  part,  remote  from  the 
common  apprehensions  of  mankind,  and  there- 
fore seldom  engage  their  attention.  His 
kingdom,  founded  upon  the  Rock  of  ages,  is 
building,  advancing,  and  the  gates  of  hell 
shall  not  be  able  to  withstand  its  progress. 
Only  detached  and  inconsiderable  parts  of  the 
plan  are  as  yet  visible,  and  the  beauties  are 
everywhere  obscured  by  attendant  blemishes; 
but  his  counsel  shall  stand,  and  he  will  do  all 
his  pleasure.  Princes  and  statesmen  seldom 
think  of  him,  are  seldom  aware,  that  in  prose- 
cuting their  own  schemes,  they  are  even- 
tually fulfilling  his  purposes,  and  preparing 
the  way  to  promote  the  cause  which  they 
despise,  and  often  endeavour  to  suppress.  But 
thus  it  is.  Sometimes  he  employs  them,  more 
directly,  as  his  instruments;  and  when  they 
are  thus  engaged  in  his  work,  their  success 
is  secured.  So  Cyrus,  whom  Isaiah  men- 
tioned by  name  (Is.  xlv.  1 — 5,)  long  before 
his  birth,  as  the  appointed  deliverer  of  Israel 
from  their  captivity,  prospered  in  his  enter- 
prises, being  guided  and  girded  by  him  whom 
he  knew  not,  and  established  his  own  power 
upon  the  ruins  of  the  Assyrian  monarchy. 
The  Roman  empire  likewise  increased  and 
prospered  from  small  beginnings,  that  a way 
might  be  opened,  in  the  proper  season,  for  the 
destruction  of  the'  Jewish  economy,  and  for 
facilitating  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  And 
posterity  will  see,  that  the  principal  events 
of  the  present  age,  in  Asia  and  America, 
have  ail  a tendency  to  bring  forward  the  ac- 
complishment of  my  text ; and  are  leading  to 
one  grand  point,  the  spreading  and  establish- 
ment of  the  church  and  kingdom  of  our  Lord. 
His  plan  is  unalterably  fixed.  He  has  said 
it,  and  it  shall  be  done.  Things  will  not  al- 
ways remain  in  their  present  disordered  state ; 
and  though  this  desirable  period  may  be  yet 
at  a distance,  and  appearances  very  dark  and 
unpromising,  the  word  of  the  Lord  shall  pre- 
vail over  all  discouragements  and  opposition. 

Prophecies  which  are  not  yet  fulfilled  will 
necessarily  be  obscure.  Many  learned  men 
have  laboured  to  explain  the  prophecies  in 
this  book,  to  ascertain  the  facts  which  are 
foretold,  and  to  fix  the  dates  when  they  may 
be  expected  to  take  place.  But  they  are  so 
divided  in  their  judgments,  and  with  regard 
to  several  of  the  most  eminent  who  thus  dif- 
fer, the  support  their  opinions  derive  from 
the  character  and  abilities  of  the  proposers  is 
so  nearly  equal,  that  those  who  consult  them 
are  more  likely  to  be  embarrassed  than  satis- 
fied. For  myself,  I think  it  becomes  me  to 
confess  my  ignorance,  and  my  inability,  either 
to  reconcile  the  conjectures  of  others,  or  to 


determine  which  is  the  more  probable,  or  to 
propose  better  of  my  own.  I do  not,  there- 
fore, undertake  to  give  the  precise  sense  of 
this  passage,  as  it  stands  connected  with  the 
rest  of  the  chapter.  Nor  should  I,  perhaps, 
have  attempted  to  preach  from  it,  but  upon 
this  occasion.  It  is  introduced,  with  great 
propriety,  in  the  Messiah,  as  a close  to  the 
second  part,  which  begins  with  a view  of  the 
Lamb  of  God  taking  awTay  the  sins  of  the 
world,  by  the  power  of  his  priestly  office;  and 
concludes  with  an  account  of  his  glorious 
success  as  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of 
lords. 

My  business  is  only  to  lead  you  to  some 
pleasing  and  profitable  reflections  upon  this 
subject,  now  it  comes  in  my  way.  There  are 
many  prophecies  in  the  Old  Testament,  that 
speak  in  magnificent  strains  of  a kingdom, 
which  God  would,  in  his  appointed  time,  es- 
tablish upon  the  earth ; the  sense  of  which 
is  greatly  weakened  and  narrowed,  if  re- 
strained, as  some  commentators  would  re- 
strain it,  to  the  restoration  of  Israel  to  their 
own  land,  from  their  captivity  in  Babylon. 
Yet  it  must  be  allowed,  that  the  highly  figu- 
rative language  in  which  many  of  these  pro- 
phecies are  expressed,  a great  part  of  which 
cannot  be  understood  literally,  renders  the 
interpretation  difficult. 

What  we  read  in  the  twentieth  chapter  of 
this  book,  of  a period  in  which  the  saints  shall 
reign  with  Christ  during  a thousand  years, 
has  given  occasion  to  almost  a thousand  con- 
jectures, concerning  a millennian'state.  Some 
persons  suppose,  that  the  present  frame  of  na- 
ture shall  be  dissolved  and  changed,  and  ex- 
pect a proper  resurrection  of  the  dead  ; after 
which,  the  Lord  will  personally  reign  with 
his  people  upon  the  earth,  when  purified  by 
fire,  and  restored  to  its  primitive  perfection 
and  beauty.  If  so,  earth  will  be  heaven  ; for 
the  state  of  happiness  believers  are  taught  to 
hope  for,  depends  not  upon  local  circum- 
stances, but  chiefly  consists  in  the  enjoyment 
of  his  unveiled  immediate  presence,  and  in 
beholding  his  glory.  Others  seem  to  con- 
ceive of  the  millennium,  nearly  in  the  same 
manner  as  the  Jews  formed  their  expecta- 
tions of  Messiah’s  kingdom.  They  think  that 
temporal  honours,  dominion,  prosperity,  and 
wealth,  will  then  be  the  portion  of  believers; 
the  very  portion  which  they  are  now  called 
upon  to  renounce  and  despise.  But,  as  I have 
hinted,  large  allowances  must  be  made  for 
the  metaphorical  language  of  prophecy.  We 
read,  that  the  streets  of  the  New  Jerusalem 
are  paved  with  gold,  and  that  the  twelve  gates 
are  twelve  pearls ; (Rev.  xxi.  15,  21 ;)  but  no 
person  of  sound  judgment  can  suppose,  that 
this  description  is  to  be  understood  strictly, 
according  to  the  letter.  The  personal  pre- 
sence of  Messiah  with  his  people,  is  not  ne- 
cessary to  such  degrees  of  happiness  as  are 
compatible  with  the  present  state  of  mortality 


SPIRITUAL  KINGDOM. 


339 


SER.  XXXVII.] 


and  imperfection.  It  is  sufficient,  ifhe  vouch- 
safes to  dwell  with  them  by  his  Spirit.  Much 
less  are  temporal  dominion  and  wealth  ne- 
cessary to  the  prosperity  and  honour  of  his 
spiritual  kingdom.  But  what  then  are  we 
encouraged  to  expect,  beyond  what  has  been 
hitherto  known,  with  regard  to  this  point! 
Let  us  consult  the  scriptures,  which  alone 
can  guide  and  determine  our  inquiry.  I will 
select  some  express  passages,  a few  out  of 
many  which  might  be  adduced,  but  sufficient, 
I hope,  by  the  rules  of  sober  interpretation,  to 
lead  us  to  a satisfactory  answer. 

The  glory  and  happiness  of  Messiah’s  king- 
dom, is  described  by  the  prophets  in  terms 
which  cannot  be  justly  applied  to  any  period 
of  the  church  already  past.  They  sometimes 
represent  it  by  a variety  of  beautiful  pastoral 
images,  and  sometimes  in  plainer  language. 
Thus  Isaiah : “ And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in 
the  last  days,  that  the  mountains  of  the  Lord’s 
house  shall  be  established  on  the  top  of  the 
mountains,  and  shall  be  exalted  above  the 
hills;  and  all  nations  shall  flow  unto  it.  And 
many  people  shall  go  and  say,  Come  ye,  and 
let  us  go  up  to  the  mountain  of  the  Lord, to 
the  house  of  the  God  of  Jacob,  and  he  will 
teach  us  of  his  ways,  and  we  will  walk  in  his 
paths ; for  out  of  Zion  shall  go  forth  the  law, 
and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem. 
And  he  shall  judge  among  the  nations,  and 
shall  rebuke  many  people;  and  they  shall 
beat  their  swords  into  ploughshares,  and  their 
spears  into  pruning  hooks  : Nation  shall  not 
lift  up  sword  against  nation,  neither  shall 
they  learn  war  any  more,”  Isa.  ii.  2 — 4. 
Again,  “ The  wolf  also  shall  dwell  with  the 
Lamb,  and  the  leopard  shall  lie  down  with  the 
kid ; and  the  calf,  and  the  young  lion,  and  the 
fatling  together,  and  a little  child  shall  lead 
them.  And  the  cow  and  the  bear  shall  feed, 
their  young  ones  shall  lie  down  together; 
and  the  lion  shall  eat  straw  like  the  ox.  And 
the  sucking  child  shall  play  on  the  hole  of 
the  asp,  and  the  weaned  child  shall  put  his 
hand  in  the  cockatrice  den.  They  shall  not 
hurt  nor  destroy  in  all  my  holy  mountain ; for 
the  earth  shall  be  full  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea,”  Isaiah, 
xi.  6 — 9.  I might  likewise  transcribe  the 
whole  of  the  sixtieth  chapter,  but  shall  only 
offer  you  the  latter  part  of  it.  “ Violence 
shall  no  more  be  heard  in  thy  land,  wasting 
nor  destruction  within  thy  borders ; but  thou 
shalt  call  thy  walls  Salvation,  and  thy  gates 
Praise.  The  sun  shall  be  no  more  thy  light 
by  day,  neither  for  brightness  shall  the  moon 
give  light  unto  thee : but  the  Lord  shall  be 
unto  thee  an  everlasting  light,  and  thy  God 
thy  glory.  The  sun  shall  no  more  go  down, 
neither  shall  thy  moon  withdraw  itself;  for 
the  Lord  shall  be  thine  everlasting  light,  and 
the  days  of  thy  mourning  shall  be  ended. 
Thy  people  also  shall  be  all  righteous,  they 
shall  inherit  the  land  for  ever,  the  branch  of 


my  planting,  the  work  of  my  hands,  that  I 
may  be  glorified.  A little  one  shall  become 
a thousand,  and  a small  one  a strong  nation  : 
I the  Lord  will  hasten  it  in  his  time,”  Isaiah, 
lx.  18 — 22.  To  the  same  purpose  the  pro- 
phet Ezekiel : “ And  I will  set  up  one  shep- 
herd over  them,  and  he1  shall  feed  them,  even 
my  servant  David ; he  shall  feed  them,  and 
he  shall  be  their  shepherd.  And  I the  Lord 
will  be  their  God,  and  my  servant  David  a 
prince  among  them ; I the  Lord  have  spoken 
it.  And  I will  make  with  them  a covenant 
of  peace,  and  will  cause  the  evil  beasts  to 
cease  out  of  the  land ; and  they  shall  dwell 
safely  in  the  wilderness,  and  sleep  in  the 
woods.  And  I will  make  them  and  the 
places  round  about  rqy  hill  a blessing,”  Eze- 
kiel, xxxiv.  23 — 26.  And  again,  “ Then  will 
I sprinkle  clean  water  upon  you,  and  you 
shall  be  clean ; from  all  your  filthiness  and 
from  all  your  idols  will  I cleanse  you.  A new 
heart  also  will  I give  you,  and  a new  spirit 
will  I put  within  you,  and  I will  take  away 
the  stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh,  and  I will 
give  you  a heart  of  flesh.  And  I will  put 
my  Spirit  within  you,  and  cause  you  to  walk 
in  my  statutes,  and  ye  shall  keep  my  judg- 
ments, and  do  them.  And  the  desolate  land 
shall  be  tilled,  whereas  it  lay  desolate  in  the 
sight  of  all  that  passed  by.  And  they  shall 
say,  This  land  that  was  desolate  is  become  like 
the  garden  of  Eden ; and  the  waste,  and  de- 
solate, and  ruined  cities,  are  become  fenced 
and  inhabited,”  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25 — 27,  34,  35. 
The  prophet  Zechariah  speaks  to  the  same 
effect:  “Sing  and  rejoice,  O daughter  of 
Zion ; for  lo,  I come,  and  I will  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  thee,  saith  the  Lord.  And  many 
nations  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord  in  that 
day,  and  shall  be  my  people;  and  I will  dwell 
in  the  midst  of  thee ; and  thou  shalt  know  that 
the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me  unto  thee. 
And  the  Lord  shall  be  king  over  all  the  earth ; 
in  that  day  shall  there  be  one  Lord,  and  his 
name  one,”  Zech.  ii.  10, 11;  xiv.  9. 

Though  the  promises  and  prophecies  of 
this  import  are  addressed  to  the  church  un- 
der the  names  of  Israel,  Jacob,  Zion,  or  Jeru- 
salem, we  are  certain  they  were  not  fulfilled 
to  the  nation  of  Israel  while  their  civil  go- 
vernment subsisted.  Their  national  pros- 
perity and  glory  were  greatly  diminished  be- 
fore any  of  these  prophecies  were  revealed. 
They  were  an  inconstant  and  a suffering 
people,  during  the  reigns  of  the  kings  of  Ju- 
dah and  Israel,  till  at  length  their  city  and 
temple  were  destroyed  by  the  Chaldeans. 
And  though  they  returned  from  their  capti- 
vity, and  their  city  and  temple  were  rebuilt, 
they  continued  tributary  and  dependent,  and 
were  successively  subject  to  the  Persian, 
Macedonian,  and  Roman  power.  Their  ob- 
stinate rejection  and  crucifixion  of  Messiah, 
filled  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquities,  and 
brought  wrath  upon  them  to  the  uttermost 


840 


THE  EXTENT  OF  MESSIAH’S 


[SER.  XXXVII. 


They  were  soon  afterwards  exterminated 
from  their  land,  their  constitution,  both  of 
church  and  state,  utterly  subverted ; and 
they  remain  to  this  day,  in  a dispersed  state, 
which  renders  their  observance  of  the  law 
impracticable. 

It  seems  equally  plain,  that  these  prophe- 
cies have  not  yet  been  fulfilled  to  the  Chris- 
tian church.  The  greater  part  of  the  earth, 
to  this  day,  is  unacquainted  with  the  name 
of  Jesus  And  the  general  face  of  Christen- 
dom, whether  in  Popish  or  in  Protestant 
countries,  exhibits  little  more  of  the  spirit 
and  character  of  the  gospel,  than  is  to  be 
found  among  the  Heathens.  If  Christianity 
be  compatible  with  pride  or  baseness,  with 
avarice  or  profusion,  with  malice  and  envy, 
with  scepticism  in  principle  and  licentious- 
ness of  conduct,  then  Christians  abound;  but 
if  humility,  integrity,  benevolence,  and  a 
spiritual  mind,  are  essential  to  a Christian ; 
if  we  judge  by  the  criterion  which  our  Lord 
himself  appointed,  and  account  only  those  his 
disciples  who  live  in  the  exercise  of  mutual 
love,  it  is  to  be  feared  that  they  are  but  few, 
even  in  the  places  which  are  most  favoured 
with  the  light  of  the  gospel.  But  can  the 
scriptures  be  broken  1 Can  the  promises  of 
the  Lord  fail!  By  no  means.  Heaven  and 
earth  shall  pass  away,  but  not  one  jot  or  tittle 
of  his  word  shall  fail  of  accomplishment. 

It  is  not  necessary  to  suppose  that  every 
individual  of  mankind  shall  be  savingly  con- 
verted to  the  Lord  in  this  future  day  of  his 
power ; but  I apprehend  the  current  language 
of  the  prophecies  warrants  us  to  hope,  that 
the  prayers  and  desires  of  the  church  shall, 
in  some  future  period,  be  signally  answered, 
in  the  following  respects. 

1.  That  the  gospel  shall  visit  the  nations 
which  are  at  present  involved  in  darkness. 
The  Heathen  are  given  to  Messiah  for  his  in- 
heritance, and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth 
for  his  possession.  At  present  (as  I have 
formerly  observed,  Ser.  xxxii.)  if  the  whole 
of  Christendom  were  inhabited  by  real  Chris- 
tians, they  would  bear  but  a small  proportion 
to'  the  rest  of  mankind.  Large  countries  in 
Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  where  the  gospel 
was  once  known,  have  been  for  many  ages 
involved  in  Mahommedan  darkness.  The 
scattered  remnants  of  the  Greek  church  in 
Turkey  are  so  miserably  depraved  and  igno- 
rant, that  they  scarcely  deserve  to  be  mention- 
ed as  an  exception.  The  rest  of  Asia  knows 
little  of  Christianity,  unless  they  have  learnt 
it  in  the  eastern  parts  from  the  cruelty  and 
tyranny  of  men  who  bear  the  name  of  Chris- 
tians. 1/  jz  like  may  be  said  of  America,  ex- 
cepting the  northern  provinces  of  our  late 
dominion  there.  For  the  zeal  of  the  Span- 
iards and  Portuguese  has  produced  few  other 
effects  than  rapine,  slavery,  and  deluges  of 
human  blood.  The  interior  parts,  both  of 
Africa  and  America  are  unknown.  The 


countries  and  islands  lately  discovered  in  the 
southren  hemisphere,  are  left,  as  they  were 
found,  in  gross  ignorance.  The  exertions  of 
our  navigators  to  supply  them  with  sheep 
and  cows,  and  useful  implements,  from  Eu- 
rope, were  humane  and  laudable.  But  it 
does  not  appear  that  the  least  attempt  was 
made  to  impart  to  them  the  knowledge  of 
our  holy  religion.  The  only  missionary  they 
have  from  us  (if  he  be  yet  living,)  is  the 
much-spoken-of  Omiah.  This  man  was 
brought  to  England,  almost  from  the  Anti- 
podes ; he  spent  some  time  amongst  us,  and 
was  then  sent  back  to  tell  his  countrymen 
what  he  had  seen  and  heard.  But  if  he  gave 
a faithful  account  of  our  customs,  morals,  and 
religion,  so  far  as  they  fell  within  the  circle 
of  his  own  observations,  the  relation  would 
certainly  be  little  to  our  honour,  and  I am 
afraid  much  to  their  hurt.  In  brief,  a large 
part  of  Europe,  almost  the  whole  of  the  other 
three  continents,  with  the  islands  in  the 
Eastern  and  Southern  Oceans,  are  destitute 
of  the  true  gospel.  But  there  is  a time  ap- 
proaching, called  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles, 
when  the  Redeemer’s  glory  shall  dawn  and 
shine  upon  all  nations.  And  though  we  can- 
not see  when  or  how  this  happy  change  shall 
be  effected,  yet  in  the  Lord's  hour,  moun- 
tains shall  sink  into  plains.  Nor  is  it  more 
improbable  to  us  now,  than  it  would  have 
seemed  to  an  inhabitant  of  Rome  in  the  time 
of  Julius  Caesar,  that  the  island  of  Great 
Britain  should  one  day  be  distinguished  by 
all  those  privileges  which  the  Providence  of 
God  has  since  bestowed  upon  it. 

2.  That  this  gospel  shall  prevail  not  in 
word  only,  but  in  power.  Even  where  the 
name  of  Christ  is  professed,  but  little  of  the 
power  of  it  is  at  present  known.  The  super- 
stition and  false  worship  generally  prevalent 
within  the  pale  of  the  Roman  and  Greek 
churches,  may  be  mentioned  without  offence 
to  Protestants.  But  the  bulk  of  the  Protest- 
ant countries  are  equally  overspread  with 
scepticism  and  wickedness.  Few  compara- 
tively, among  Protestants,  are  friendly  to 
that  gospel  which  the  apostles  preached; 
and  much  fewer  are  they  who  are  influenced 
by  it.  Perhaps  no  nation  is  favoured  with 
greater  advantages  for  knowing  the  truth 
than  our  nation,  nor  any  city  more  favoured 
than  this  city.  I doubt  not  but  there  are 
persons  now  living,  who  would  have  been 
thought  eminent  Christians,  if  they  had  lived 
in  the  first  and  happiest  age  of  the  church ; and 
I trust  their  number  is  greater  than  we  are 
aware  of.  The  Lord  has  a hidden  people, 
little  known  to  the  world  or  to  each  other. 
But  if  we  judge  by  the  standard  of  truth,  we 
must  acknowledge  that  the  power  of  religious 
profession  is  very  low’.  How  little  does  it 
appear  in  the  lives,  tempers,  and  pursuits  of 
the  most  who  hear  the  gospel ; but  the  time 
will  come  when  Christians  shall  again  be 


SPIRITUAL  KINGDOM. 


341 


SER.  XXXVIII.  1 

known  by  their  integrity,  spiritual-minded- 
ness,  and  benevolence,  and  by  all  the  fruits 
of  righteousness,  which  are,  by  Jesus  Christ, 
to  the  g'lory  and  praise  of  God.  The  fall  of 
mystical  Babylon,  and  of  Antichrist,  in  its  va- 
rious forms,  and  the  calling  of  the  Jews,  are 
events  which  are  positively  foretold,  and 
which,  when  they  come  to  pass,  will  have 
great  effects.  Zion,  as  yet,  is  only  building, 
but  it  shall  be  built. 

3.  That  the  animosities  and  disputes  which 
prevail  among  Christians  shall  cease.  The 
observations  of  a late  ingenious  writer,  which, 
it  is  to  be  feared,  he  was  confirmed  in  by  his 
own  experience,  is  too  much  founded  in 
truth: — “We  have  just  religion  enough  to 
make  us  hate  one  another.”  The  spirit  of 
party,  prejudice,  and  bigotry,  and  interest,  a 
zeal  for  systems,  forms,  modes,  and  denomi- 
nations furnish  men  with  plausible  pretences 
for  indulging  their  unsanctified  passions,  and 
deceive  them  into  an  opinion,  that  while  they 
are  gratifying  their  pride  and  self-will,  they 
are  only  labouring  to  promote  the  cause  of 
God  and  truth.  Hence  often  the  feuds  which 
obtain  among  religious  people  are  pursued 
with  greater  violence,  and  to  greater  lengths, 
aud  are  productive  of  more  mischievous  con- 
sequences, than  the  quarrels  of  drunkards. 
The  lovers  of  peace,  who  refuse  to  take  a part 
in  these  contentions,  but  rather  weep  over 
them  in  secret,  are  censured  and  despised  as 
neutrals  and  cowards,  by  the  angry  combat- 
ants on  all  sides,  while  the  world  despises 
and  laughs  at  them  all.  It  was  not  so  in  the 
beginning,  nor  will  it  be  so  always.  The 
hour  is  coming,  when  believers  shall  be  united 
in  love,  shall  agree  in  all  that  is  essential  to  a 
life  of  faith  and  holiness,  and  shall  live  in  the 
exercise  of  forbearance  and  tenderness  to- 
wards each  other,  if  in  some  points  of  smaller 
importance,  they  cannot  think  exactly  alike ; 
which  possibly  may  be  the  case  in  the 
best  times,  in  the  present  imperfect  state  of 
human  nature.  Ephraim  shall  then  no  more 
envy  Judah,  nor  Judah  vex  Ephraim,  Isa.  xi. 
13. 

4.  That  it  will  be  a time  of  general  peace. 
At  present  the  kingdoms,  which,  by  their 
profession,  should  be  subjects  of  the  Prince  of 
Peace,  are  perpetually  disturbing,  invading, 
and  destroying  each  other.  They  live  in 
habits  of  mutual  fear  and  jealousy,  and  main- 
tain great  armies  on  all  sides ; that  each  na- 
tion may  be  prepared,  if  occasion  offers,  to 
strike  the  first  blow.  War  is  followed  as  a 
trade,  and  cultivated  as  a science ; and  they 
who,  with  the  greatest  diligence  and  success, 
spread  devastation  and  ruin  far  and  wide,  and 
deluge  the  earth  with  human  blood,  acquire 
the  title  of  heroes  and  conquerors.  Can  there 
be  a stronger  confirmation  of  what  we  read  in 
scripture  concerning  the  depravity  of  man  1 
Can  we  conceive  an  employment  more  suited 
to  giatify  the  malignity  of  Satan  and  the 


powers  of  darkness,  if  they  were  permitted  to 
appear  and  act  amongst  us  in  human  shapes? 
Could  such  enormities  possibly  obtain,  if  the 
mild  and  merciful  spirit  of  the  gospel  gene- 
rally prevailed?  but  it  shall  prevail  at  last, 
and  then  the  nations  shall  learn  war  no  more, 
Isa.  ii.  4. 

How  transporting  the  thought ! that  a time 
shall  yet  arrive,  when  the  love  of  God  and 
man,  of  truth  and  righteousness,  shall  obtain 
through  the  earth.  The  evils  (and  these  are 
the  greatest  evils  of  human  life)  which  men 
bring  upon  themselves,  and  upon  each  other, 
by  their  wickedness,  shall  cease ; and  we 
may  believe  that  the  evils  in  the  natural 
world  will  be  greatly  abated.  Sin  will  no 
longer  call  down  the  tokens  of  God’s  dis- 
pleasure, by  such  public  calamities  as  hurri- 
canes, earthquakes,  pestilence  and  famine. 
And  if  some  natural  evils,  as  pain  and  sick- 
ness, should  remain,  submission  to  the  will 
of  God,  and  the  compassion  and  tenderness 
of  men  towards  the  afflicted,  will  render  them 
tolerable. 

If  this  prospect  be  desirable  to  us,  surely  it 
will  be  the  object  of  our  prayers.  The  Lord 
will  do  great  things,  but  he  will  be  inquired 
of  by  his  people  for  the  performance. 

But  to  many  persons  the  extension  of  do- 
minion and  commerce  appears  much  more 
desirable.  The  glory  and  extent  of  the  Bri- 
tish government  has  been  eagerly  pursued, 
and  the  late  diminution  of  our  national  gran- 
deur and  influence  has  been  much  laid  to 
heart;  while  the  glory  of  the  Redeemer’s 
kingdom,  and  the  conversion  of  the  Heathens, 
are  considered  by  the  politicians  and  mer- 
chants of  the  earth,  as  trivial  concerns,  un- 
worthy of  their  notice,  or  rather  as  obstacles 
to  the  views  of  ambition  and  avarice.  But  it 
is  said  of  Messiah,  and  of  his  church,  The 
nation  and  kingdom  that  will  not  serve  thee 
shall  perish,  Isa.  lx.  12.  The  word  of  God 
may  be  slighted,  but  it  cannot  be  annulled  ; 
and  it  is  more  a subject  for  lamentation  than 
wonder,  that  our  national  prosperity  should 
decline,  when  we  are  indifferent,  yea,  ad- 
verse to  that  cause  which  the  great  Governor 
of  the  world  has  engaged  to  promote  and  es- 
tablish. 


SERMON  XXXVIII. 

KING  OF  KINGS,  AND  LORD  OF  LORDS. 

(And  he  hath  on  his  vesture  and  on  his  thigh , 
a name  written ,)  King  of  kings,  jind 
Lord  of  lords.  Rev.  xix.  16. 

The  description  of  the  administration  and 
glory  of  the  Redeemer’s  kingdom,  in  de- 
fiance of  all  opposition,  concludes  the  second 
part  of  the  Messiah.  Three  different  pas- 
sages from  this  book  are  selected  to  form  a 


342 


KING  OF  KINGS,  AND  LORD  OF  LORDS.  [ser.  xxxviii. 


grand  chorus,  of  which  his  title  in  this  verse 
is  the  close;  a title  which  has  been  some- 
times vainly  usurped  by  proud  worms  of  the 
earth.  Eastern  monarchs,  in  particular,  have 
affected  to  style  themselves  King  of  kings, 
and  Lord  of  lords.  In  the  scriptural  lan- 
guage, men,  whether  high  or  low,  rich  or 
poor,  one  with  another,  are  compared  to 
worms  and  potsherds  of  the  earth ; but  they 
are  by  nature  so  strongly  affected  by  pride, 
that  they  cannot  invent  titles  of  honour  an- 
swerable to  the  idea  they  have  of  their  own 
importance,  without  intrenching  upon  the 
divine  prerogative.  Thus  sovereignty,  ma- 
jesty, holiness,  and  grace,  and  other  attributes 
which  properly  belong  to  God  alone,  are  par- 
celled out  among  the  great.  But  let  the 
great  and  the  mighty  know  that  wherein 
they  speak  proudly,  Messiah  is  above  them. 
The  whole  verse  (of  which  the  latter  clause 
only  is  in  the  Oratorio)  offers  two  points  to 
our  meditations. 

I.  How  he  is  represented  as  wearing  his 
title.  It  is  written,  or  inscribed,  upon  his 
vesture  dipped  in  blood,  and  upon  his  thigh; 
either  upon  that  part  of  his  vesture  which 
covers  his  thigh,  or  upon  the  upper  part  of 
his  vesture,  and  upon  his  thigh  likewise. 

II.  The  title  itself, — King  of  kings,  and 
Lord  of  lords.  Whatever  power  the  kings 
and  lords  among  mankind  possess,  is  derived 
from  him,  and  absolutely  subject  to  his  con- 
trol. 

I.  The  manner  in  which  he  wears  his 
name  or  title.  It  is  written  upon  his  vesture, 
and  upon  his  thigh. 

1.  This  name  being  written  upon  his  ves- 
ture, denotes  the  manifestation  and  the 
ground  of  his  authority.  It  is  written  upon 
his  outward  garment,  to  be  read,  known,  and 
acknowledged  by  all  beholders.  And  it  is 
upon  his  bloody  garment,  upon  the  vesture 
stained  with  his  own  blood,  and  the  blood  of 
his  enemies;  which  intimates  to  us,  that  his 
government  is  founded  upon  the  success  of 
his  great  undertaking.  In  the  passage  from 
whence  this  verse  is  selected,  there  are  three 
names  attributed  to  Messiah.  He  has  a name 
which  no  one  knows  but  himself  (ver.  12,) 
agreeable  to  what  he  declared  when  upon 
earth : “ No  man  (o«Se*s,  no  one,  neither  man 
nor  angel)  knoweth  the  Son,  but  the  Father;” 
this  refers  to  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead. 
A second  name,  The  Word  of  God,  (ver.  13,) 
denotes  the  mystery  of  the  divine  personality. 
The  name  in  my  text  imports  his  glory,  as 
the  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  in  our 
nature,  which,  when  he  resumed  it  from  the 
grave,  became  the  seat  of  all  power  and  au- 
thority ; which  power  we  are  now  taught  to 
consider,  not  merely  as  the  power  of  God,  to 
whom  it  essentially  belongs,  but  as  the  power 
of  God  exercised  in  and  by  that  Man  who  died 
upon  the  cross  for  our  sins.  In  consequence 
of  his  obedience  unto  death,  he  received  a 


name  which  is  above  every  name.  Phil.  ii.  9. 
This  inscription  his  own  people  read  by  the 
eye  of  faith  in  the  present  life,  and  it  inspires 
them  with  confidence  and  joy,  under  the 
many  tribulations  they  pass  through  in  the 
course  of  their  profession.  Hereafter  it  shall 
be  openly  known,  and  read  by  all  men. 
Every  eye  shall  see  it,  and  every  heart  must 
either  bow  or  break  before  him. 

2.  It  is  written  upon  his  thigh.  The  thigh 
is  the  emblem  of  power,  and  is  the  part  of  the 
body  on  which  the  sword  is  girded,  Ps.  xlv.  3. 
By  this  emblem  we  are  taught,  that  he  will 
assuredly  maintain  and  exercise  the  right 
which  he  has  acquired.  As  he  has  a just 
claim  to  the  title,  he  will  act  accordingly. 
Many  titles  among  men  are  merely  titular. 
So  the  King  of  Great  Britain  is  styled  like- 
wise King  of  France,  though  he  has  neither 
authority  nor  possession  in  that  kingdom. 
But  this  name  which  Messiah  bears  is  full  of 
life,  truth,  and  influence.  He  is  styled  King 
of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords,  because  he  really 
is  so ; because  he  actually  rules  and  reigns 
over  them,  and  does  according  to  his  own 
pleasure  in  the  armies  of  heaven,  and  among 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  with  an  absolute 
and  uncontrollable  sway,  so  that  none  can 
stay  his  hand,  or  say  unto  him,  What  doest 
thou  1 Dan.  iv.  35. 

II.  The  title  itself  is  King  of  kings,  and 
Lord  of  lords.  He  is  the  Prince  of  the  kings 
of  the  earth,  Rev.  i.  5.  Too  many  of  them 
imagine  a vain  thing.  They  take  counsel  to- 
gether, and  set  themselves  against  him,  (Ps. 
ii.  4,)  saying,  Let  us  break  his  bands  asunder. 
But  he  sitteth  in  the  heavens,  and  has  them 
in  derision.  He  has  his  hook  in  their  nose, 
and  his  bridle  in  their  lips,  and  the  result  of 
all  their  contrivances  is  neither  more  nor  less 
than  the  accomplishment  of  his  will. 

1.  The  rage  they  discover,  and  the  resist- 
ance they  make,  cannot  weaken  this  truth, 
but  rather  render  it  more  evident.  If  it  be 
asked,  Why  does  he  permit  them  to  resist! 
we  may  give  an  answer  in  point  from  the 
case  of  Pharaoh.  He  resisted  and  he  perished. 
He  was  often  warned  and  rebuked,  but  he 
still  hardened  his  neck,  and  continued  stub- 
born under  repeated  judgments,  till  at  length 
he  was  destroyed  without  remedy.  Thus  the 
God  of  Israel  was  more  magnified,  and  the 
people  of  Israel  were  more  honoured,  in  the 
view  of  the  surrounding  nations,  when  they 
were  brought  from  Egypt  with  a high  hand 
and  with  a stretched-out  arm,  and  when  Pha- 
raoh and  his  armies  were  overthrown  in  the 
Red  Sea,  than  the  nature  of  the  case  would 
have  admitted,  if  Pharaoh  had  made  no  op- 
position to  their  departure.  Yet  the  obstinacy 
of  Pharaoh  was  properly  his  own.  It  is  true, 
we  are  assured  that  God  hardened  his  heart; 
but  we  are  not  thereby  warranted  to  suppose 
that  God  is  the  author  of  the  sin,  which  he 
hates  and  forbids.  It  is  written  again,  that 


343 


ser.  xxxviii.]  KING  OF  KINGS,  AND  LORD  OF  LORDS. 


God  cannot  be  tempted  with  evil,  neither 
tempteth  he  any  man,  (James  i.  18,)  and  the 
scripture,  is  to  be  interpreted  consistently 
with  itself.  It  would  be  absurd  to  ascribe 
darkness  or  ice  to  the  agency  of  the  sun, 
though  both  inevitably  follow,  if  the  light  and 
heat  of  the  sun  be  withdrawn  to  a certain  de- 
gree. A degree  of  heat  is  necessary  to  keep 
water  in  that  state  of  fluidity  which  we  com- 
monly suppose  essential  to  its  nature ; but  it 
is  rather  essential  to  the  nature  of  water  to 
harden  into  ice,  if  it  be  deprived  of  the  heat 
which  is  necessary  to  preserve  it  in  a fluid 
state ; and  the  hardest  metals  will  melt  and 
flow  like  water,  if  heat  be  proportionably  in- 
creased. Thus  it  is  with  the  heart  of  fallen 
man.  In  whatever  degree  it  is  soft  and  im- 
pressive, capable  of  feeling  and  tenderness, 
we  must  attribute  it  to  the  secret  influence 
of  the  Father  and  Fountain  of  light ; and  if  he 
is  pleased  to  withdraw  his  influence,  nothing 
more  is  needful  to  its  complete  induration. 

2.  The  kings  of  the  earth  are  continually 
•disturbing  the  world  with  their  schemes  of 
ambition.  They  expect  to  carry  every  thing 
before  them,  and  have  seldom  any  higher  end 
in  view  than  the  gratification  of  their  own 
passions.  But  in  all  they  do  they  are  but  ser- 
vants of  this  great  King  and  Lord,  and  fulfil 
his  purposes,  as  the  instruments  he  employs 
to  inflict  prescribed  punishment  upon  trans- 
gressors against  him,  or  to  open  a way  for  the 
spread  of  his  gospel.  Thus,  under  the  Old- 
Testament  dispensation  (for  he  was  King 
from  everlasting,)  the  successes  of  Senna- 
cherib and  Nebuchadnezzar,  and  the  exalta- 
tion of  Cyrus  were  entirely  owing  to  their 
being  employed  by  him,  as  an  axe  or  a saw 
in  the  hand  of  the  workman,  Isa.  x.  15.  And 
they  acted  under  a limited  commission,  be- 
yond which  they  could  not  go.  They  had 
one  thing  in  view,  He  had  another;  and  when 
his  design  was  accomplished,  we  hear  of  them 
no  more.  Time  would  not  suffice,  were  1 to 
adduce  the  many  striking  instances  of  the 
like  kind  which  offer  to  observation  from  the 
perusal  of  modern  history.  It  is  well  known, 
with  respect  to  that  great  event,  the  Reforma- 
tion from  Popery  in  the  sixteenth  century, 
and  especially  in  our  own  land,  that  many  of 
the  principal  persons  who  contributed  to  its 
establishment  hated  it  in  their  hearts.  But 
their  ambition,  appetites,  and  worldly  policy 
engaged  them  in  such  measures,  as  the  King 
of  kings  over-ruled  to  produce  consequences 
which  they  neither  intended  nor  could  fore- 
see, and  which,  when  they  did  apprehend, 
they  would  have  prevented  if  they  could,  but 
it  was  too  late.  Future  writers,  I doubt  not, 
will  make  the  like  reflection  upon  the  Ame- 
rican war,  in  the  origin  and  progress  of  which 
there  was  such  an  evident  disproportion  be- 
tween the  apparent  causes  and  the  effects 
produced  by  them,  between  the  first  designs 
and  expectations  of  the  principal  actors  on 


both  sides  and  the  final  event,  that  I think 
they  who  do  not  perceive  a superintending 
Providence  conducting  the  whole  affair,  as  a 
preparation  to  still  greater  and  more  im- 
portant revolutions,  must  be  quite  at  a loss  to 
account  for  what  has  already  happened,  upon 
any  principles  of  human  policy  or  foresight. 

3.  That  he  is  King  of  kings,  and  Governor 
among  the  nations,  is  farther  evident  from 
the  preservation  of  his  people ; for  the  world 
is  against  them,  and  they  have  no  protector 
but  him.  The  wrath  of  man,  like  the  waves 
of  the  sea,  has  bounds  prescribed  to  it  which 
it  cannot  pass.  So  far  as  he  is  pleased  to 
over-rule  it  to  his  own  praise,  he  will  permit 
it  to  operate,  but  the  remainder,  that  is  not 
subservient  to  the  accomplishment  of  his 
purpose,  he  will  restrain,  Psalm  lxxvi.  10. 
But  he  works  so  secretly,  though  powerfully, 
by  the  agency  of  second  causes,  that  only  they 
who  are  enlightened  by  his  word  and  Spirit 
can  perceive  his  interference.  He  permitted 
Ahithophel  to  give  that  counsel  to  Absalom, 
which,  though  wicked,  was,  in  the  political 
sense  of  the  word,  prudent;  that  is,  it  was 
the  probable  method  of  putting  David  into  the 
power  of  his  rebellious  son.  David  had  prayed 
that  the  Lord  would  turn  Ahithophel’s  coun- 
sel into  foolishness,  2 Sam.  xv.  31.  Had  the 
Lord  instantly  deprived  Ahithophel  of  his  rea- 
son, this  prayer  would  have  been  more  visibly, 
but  not  more  effectually  answered,  than  by 
the  counter-advice  of  Hushai,  which  though 
rash  and  extravagant,  being  suited  to  gratify 
the  vanity  and  folly  of  Absalom,  (2  Sam.  xvii. 
14,)  rendered  the  other  abortive.  Sometimes 
the  enemies  of  his  church  divide  and  wrangle 
among  themselves,  and  then  one  party,  to 
mortify  and  oppose  the  other,  will  protect 
those  whom  otherwise  they  wish  to  destroy. 
Thus  Paul  escaped  from  t'he  malice  of  the 
Jewish  council,  by  the  sudden  disagreement 
which  arose  between  the  Pharisees  and 
Sadducees,  (Acts  xxiii.  7,)  though  they 
came  together  equally  determined  to  destroy 
him.  At  other  times,  kings  and  statesmen 
act  so  inconsistently  with  their  professed 
aims,  and  take  steps  so  directly  calculated  to 
prevent  what  they  wish  to  obtain,  or  to  bring 
upon  themselves  what  they  mean  to  avoid, 
that  we  can  only  say  they  are  infatuated.  A 
very  small  compliance  seemed  likely  to  have 
secured  the  affection  of  the  twelve  tribes  to 
Rehoboam.  We  are  ready  to  wonder  that  he 
could  not  be  prevailed  on  to  speak  mildly  to 
the  people  for  one  day,  with  a view  of  en- 
gaging them  to  be  his  servants  for  ever.  But 
when  we  read  that  the  cause  was  from  the 
Lord,  (1  Kings  xii.  15,)  and  that,  in  this  way, 
his  purpose  of  separating  the  kingdoms  of 
Israel  and  Judah  was  effected,  the  wonder 
ceases.  Very  observable,  likewise,  was  the 
coincidence  of  circumstances  which  preserved 
the  Jews  in  Persia  from  the  destructive  de- 
signs of  their  adversary  Haman.  If  the  king 


344 


JOB’S  FAITH  AND  EXPECTATION. 


[SER.  XXXIX. 


had  slept  that  night,  as  usual,  or  if  his  at- 
tendants had  read  to  him  in  any  book  but  the 
Chronicle  of  the  empire,  or  in  any  part  of  that 
Chronicle  but  the  very  passage  in  which  the 
service  of  Mordecai  had  been  recorded,  hu- 
manly speaking  Haman  would  have  carried 
his  point,  Esther  vi.  1.  In  this  manner,  by  a 
concurrence  of  circumstances,  each  of  them, 
if  considered  singly,  apparently  trivial,  and 
all  of  them  contingent  with  respect  to  any 
human  foresight  or  prevention,  the  Lord 
often  pours  contempt  upon  the  wise  and  the 
mighty,  and  defeats  their  deepest  laid  and 
best-concerted  schemes,  in  the  moment  when 
they  promise  themselves  success. 

Many  salutary  and  comfortable  inferences 
may  be  drawn  from  the  consideration  of  this 
subject.  Some  of  them  I may  perhaps  have 
formerly  mentioned,  but  they  will  well  bear  a 
repetition.  We  have  need  to  be  reminded  of 
what  we  already  know. 

1.  It  should  inspire  us  with  confidence.  If 
the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  Lord  of  lords,  be  for 
js,  what  weapon  or  counsel  can  prosper 
against  us  1 However  dark  and  threatening 
appearances  may  be,  we  need  not  tremble  for 
the  ark  of  God,  the  concernments  of  his 
church  are  in  safe  hands.  The  cause  so  dear 
to  us,  is  still  more  dear  to  him.  He  has 
power  to  support  it  when  it  is  opposed,  and 
grace  to  revive  it  when  it  is  drooping.  It  has 
often  been  brought  low,  but  never  has  been, 
never  shall  be  forsaken.  When  he  will  work 
none  can  hinder.  Nor  need  you  fear  for 
yourselves,  if  you  have  committed  yourselves 
and  your  all  to  him.  The  very  hairs  of  your 
head  are  numbered,  Matt.  x.  30.  There  is  a 
hedge  of  protection  around  you  (Job  i.  10,) 
which  none  can  break  through  without  his 
permission;  nor  will  he  permit  you  to  be 
touched,  except  when  he  designs  to  make  a 
temporary  and  seeming  evil  conducive  to 
your  real  and  permanent  advantage. 

2.  It  should  affect  us  with  an  admiring  and 
thankful  sense  of  his  condescension.  “ Lord, 
what  is  man  that  thou  shouldest  be  so  mind- 
ful of  him  1”  He  humbles  himself  to  behold 
the  things  that  are  in  heaven,  Psal.  cxiii.  6. 
But  he  stoops  still  lower.  He  affords  his  at- 
tention and  favour  to  sinful  men.  His  eye  is 
always  upon  his  people,  his  ear  open  to  their 
prayers.  Not  a sigh  or  failing  tear  escapes 
his  notice.  He  pities  them  as  a father  pities 
his  children ; he  proportions  their  trials  to 
their  strength,  or  their  strength  to  their  trials, 
and  so  adjusts  his  dispensations  to  their  state, 
that  they  never  suffer  unnecessarily,  nor  in 
vain. 

3.  How  great  is  the  dignity  and  privilege 
of  true  believers ! Is  the  man  congratulated 
or  envied  whom  the  king  delighteth  to  ho- 
nour 1 Believers  are  more  frequently  despised 
than  envied  in  this  world.  But  they  may 
congratulate  one  another.  The  King  of 
kings  is  their  friend.  They  have  honours 


and  pleasures  which  the  world  knows  nothing 
of.  Their  titles  are  high,  they  are  the  sons  and 
the  daughters  of  the  Lord  Almighty,  2 Cor. 
v.  13.  Their  possessions  are  great,  for  all 
things  are  theirs,  1 Cor.  iii.  21.  They  are 
assured  of  what  is  best  for  them  in  this  life, 
and  of  life  eternal  hereafter.  They  are  now 
nearly  related  to  the  King  of  kings,  and  shall 
ere  long  be  acknowledged  and  owned  by  him 
before  assembled  worlds.  They  who  now 
account  the  proud  happy,  will  be  astonished 
and  confounded  when  they  shall  see  the 
righteous,  whom  they  once  undervalued, 
shine  forth  like  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of 
God. 

4.  We  may  lastly  infer  the  extreme  folly 
and  danger  of  those  who  persist  in  their  re- 
bellion and  opposition  against  this  King  of 
! kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.  Though  he  exer- 
cises much  patience  and  long-suffering  to- 
wards them  for  a season,  the  hour  is  approach- 
ing when  his  wrath  will  burn  like  fire.  It  is 
written,  and  must  be  fulfilled,  “the  wficked 
| shall  be  turned  into  hell,  and  all  the  nations 
I that  forget  God,”  Psal.  ix.  17.  Oh  the  so- 
; lemnities  of  that  great  day,  when  the  frame 
! of  nature  shall  be  dissolved,  when  the  Judge 
! shall  appear,  the  books  be  opened,  and  all 
mankind  shall  be  summoned  to  his  tribunal ! 
I Will  not  you  tremble  and  bow  before  him,  ye 
careless  ones,  w7hile  he  is  seated  upon  a throne 
; of  grace,  and  while  the  door  of  grace  stands 
! open  1 Once  more  I call,  I warn,  I charge 
| you,  to  repent  and  believe  the  gospel.  If  to- 
; day  you  will  hear  his  voice  it  is  not  yet  too 
late.  But  who  can  answrer  for  to-morrow  1 
Perhaps  this  night  your  soul  may  be  required 
j of  you,  Luke  xii.  20.  Are  you  prepared  for 
i the  summons!  If  not,  seize  the  present  op- 
! portunity.  Attend  to  the  one  thing  needful. 
Seek  his  face,  that  your  soul  may  live.  If 
not,  remember  that  you  are  warned ; vour 
blood  will  be  upon  your  own  head.  We  have 
delivered  our  message,  and  if  you  finally  re- 
ject it  you  must  answer  for  yourselves  to  him. 
wrhose  message  it  is. 


SERMON  XXXIX. 

job’s  faith  and  expectation. 

I know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  he 
shall  stand  in  the  latter  day  upon  the  earth. 
And  though  after  my  skin,  worms  destroy 
this  body,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I see  God. 
Job  xix.  25,  26. 

Christianity,  that  is,  the  religion  of 
which  Messiah  is  the  author  and  object,  the 
foundation,  life,  and  glory,  though  not  alto- 
gether as  old  as  the  creation,  is  nearly  so. 
It  is  coeval  with  the  first  promise  and  inti- 
mation of  mercy  given  io  fallen  man.  When 


JOB'S  FAITH  AND  EXPECTATION. 


345 


SER.  XXXIX.] 

Adam  by  transgression  had  violated  the  order 
and  law  of  his  creation,  his  religion,  that  is, 
the  right  disposition  of  his  heart  towards 
God,  was  at  an  end.  Sin  deprived  him  at  once 
of  faith  and  hope,  of  love  and  joy.  He  no 
longer  desired,  he  no  longer  could  bear  the 
presence  of  his  offended  Maker.  He  vainly 
sought  to  avoid  it ; and  when  compelled  to 
I’THwer,  though  he  could  not  deny  his  guilt, 
instead  of  making  an  ingenuous  confession, 
he  attempted  to  fix  the  blame  upon  the  wo- 
man, or  rather  indeed  upon  the  Lord  himself, 
who  had  provided  her  for  him.  But  mercy, 
undeserved  and  undesired,  relieved  him  from 
a state  in  which  he  was  already  become  ob- 
durate and  desperate.  A promise  was  given 
him  of  the  seed  of  the  woman,  (Gen.  iii.  15,) 
which  virtually  contained,  as  the  seed  con- 
tains the  future  plant,  the  substance  of  all 
the  subsequent  promises  which  were  fulfilled 
by  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  by 
all  that  he  did,  or  suffered,  or  obtained  for 
sinners,  in  the  character  of  Mediator.  For 
a sinner  can  have  no  comfortable  intercourse 
with  the  holy  God,  but  through  a Mediator. 
Therefore  the  apostle  observes  of  the  patri- 
archs and  servants  of  God,  under  the  Old 
Testament,  “ These  all  died  in  faith,”  Heb. 
xi.  13.  We  can  say  nothing  higher  than 
this,  of  the  apostles  and  martyrs,  under  the 
New  Testament.  They  died,  not  trusting 
in  themselves  that  they  were  righteous,  not 
rejoicing  in  the  works  of  their  own  hands ; 
but  they  died,  like  the  thief  upon  the  cross, 
in  faith,  resting  all  their  hope  upon  him,  who, 
by  his  obedience  unto  death,  is  the  end  of  the 
law  for  righteousness  unto  every  one  that  be- 
lieveth,  Rom.  x.  4.  We  have  greater  advan- 
tages, in  point  of  light  and  liberty,  than  those 
of  old.  The  prophecies  concerning  Messiah, 
which,  at  the  time  of  delivery,  were  obscure, 
are  to  us  infallibly  interpreted  by  their  accom- 
plishment. And  we  know  that  the  great 
atonement,  typically  pointed  out  by  their  sa- 
crifices, has  been  actually  made ; that  the 
Lamb  of  God  has,  by  the  one  offering  of  him- 
self, put  away  sin.  But  as  to  the  ground  and 
substance,  their  faith  and  hope  were  the  same 
with  ours.  Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  the  day 
of  Christ,  (John  viii.  56;)  and  aged  Jacob, 
soon  after  he  had  said,  “I  have  waited  for 
thy  salvation,  O Lord,”  died  with  the  same 
composure  and  willingness  as  Simeon  did,  who 
saw  it  with  his  own  eyes.  Job,  who  was  per- 
haps contemporary  with  Jacob,  who  at  least  is, 
with  great  probability,  thought  to  have  lived 
before  Moses,  gives  us  in  this  passage  a strong 
and  clear  testimony  of  his  faith.  And  it  forms 
a beautiful  and  well  chosen  introduction  to 
the  third  part  of  the  Messiah,  the  principal 
subject  of  which  is,  the  present  privileges  and 
future  prospects  of  those  who  believe  in  the 
Saviour’s  name. 

The  learned  are  far  from  being  agreed 
either  in  the  translation,  or  in  the  explanation 
Vol.  II.  2 X 


of  this  text.  The  word  toGrms  and  body  being 
printed  in  Italics  in  our  version,  will  apprize 
the  attentive  English  reader,  that  there  are  no 
words  answerable  to  them  in  the  Hebrew.  If 
you  omit  these  words,  something  will  be  evi- 
dently wanting  to  make  a complete  sense. 
This  want  different  writers  have  supplied,  ac- 
cording to  their  different  judgments,  and  from 
hence  chiefly  has  arisen  the  variety  of  versions 
and  interpretations.  But  it  would  be  very 
improper  for  me,  in  this  place,  to  take  lip  your 
time,  and  to  draw  off  your  attention  from  the 
great  concerns  which  should  fill  our  minds 
when  we  meet  in  the  house  of  God,  by  giving 
you  a detail  of  controversies  and  criticisms, 
which  after  all  are  much  more  uncertain  than 
important.  We  need  not  dispute,  whether 
Job,  in  this  passage,  professes  his  assurance  of 
the  incarnation  of  Messiah,  or  of  his  resurrec- 
tion, or  of  his  final  appearance  to  judge  the 
world  ; or  whether  he  is  only  declaring  his 
own  personal  faith  and  hope  in  him.  These 
several  senses  are  not  so  discordant  that  if  we 
determine  for  one  we  must  exclude  the  rest. 
I shall  content  myself  with  the  words  as  I find 
them.  And  I hope,  that  if  we  should  miss 
some  of  the  precise  ideas  which  Job  might 
have  when  he  spoke,  we  shall  not  greatly 
mistake  his  general  meaning,  nor  wander  fai 
wide  from  the  scope  of  the  text. 

Four  things  are  observable  : 

I.  The  title  of  Redeemer. 

IL  The  appropriating  word  My. 

III.  His  standing  upon  the  earth. 

IV.  Job’s  expectation  of  seeing  him  in  his 
flesh. 

1.  The  title.  There  is  no  name  of  Mes- 
siah more  significant,  comprehensive,  or  en- 
dearing, than  the  name  Redeemer.  The  name 
of  Saviour  expresses  what  he  does  for  sinners. 
He  saves  them  from  guilt  and  wrath,  from 
sin,  from  the  present  evil  world,  from  the 
powers  of  darkness,  and  from  all  their  ene- 
mies. He  saves  them  with  an  everlasting 
salvation.  But  the  word  Redeemer,  intimates 
likewise  the  manner  in  which  he  saves  them. 
For  it  is  not  merely  by  the  word  of  his  power, 
as  he  saved  his  disciples  when  in  jeopardy 
upon  the  lake,  by  saying  to  the  winds  and  the 
seas,  “Peace,  be  still : and  there  was  a great 
calm ;”  (Mark  iv.  39 ;)  but  by  price,  by  pay- 
ing a ransom  for  them,  and  pouring  out  the 
blood  of  his  heart  as  an  atonement  for  their 
sins.  The  Hebrew  word  for  Redeemer, 
Goel,  primarily  signifies,  a near  kinsman,  or 
the  next  of  kin  ; he  with  whom  the  right  of 
redemption  lay,  (Numb.  xxxv.  19,  21.  Ruth 
iv.  1 — 3,)  and  who,  by  virtue  of  his  nearness 
of  relation,  was  the  legal  avenger  of  blood. 
Thus  Messiah  took  upon  him  our  nature, 
and  by  assuming  our  flesh  and  blood,  be- 
came nearly  related  to  us,  that  he  might 
redeem  our  forfeited  inheritance,  restore  us 
to  liberty,  and  avenge  our  cause  against 
Satan,  the  enemy  and  murderer  of  our  souls 


JOB’S  FAITH  AND  EXPECTATION. 


34G 

But  thus  he  made  himself  also  responsible 
lor  us,  to  pay  our  debts,  and  to  answer  the 
demands  of  the  justice  and  law  of  God  on 
our  behalf.  He  fulfilled  his  engagement. 
He  suffered,  and  he  died  on  this  account. 
But  our  Redeemer,  who  was  once  dead,  is 
now  alive,  and  liveth  for  evermore,  and  has 
the  keys  of  death,  and  of  hades,  Rev.  i.  18. 
This  is  he  of  whom  Job'saith,  I know  that  he 
liveth  (was  then  living,)  though  he  was  not 
to  stand  upon  the  earth,  until  the  latter  day. 
He  is  the  living  One,  having  life  in  himself, 
the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,  Ileb. 
xiii.  8.  Such  was  his  own  language  to  the 
Jews,  “ Before  Abraham  was,  I am,”  John 
viii.  58.  Therefore  the  Redeemer  is  mighty, 
and  his  redemption  is  sure.  He  is  able  to 
save  to  the  uttermost.  His  power  is  unlimit- 
ed, and  his  official  authority,  as  Mediator,  is 
founded  in  a covenant,  ratified  by  his  own 
blood,  and  by  the  oath  of  the  unchangeable 
God,  Ps.  cx.  4. 

II.  But  Job  uses  the  language  of  appro- 
priation. He  says,  My  Redeemer.  And  all 
that  we  know,  or  hear,  or  speak  of  him,  will 
avail  us  but  little,  unless  we  are  really  and 
personally  interested  in  him  as  our  Redeemer. 
A cold  speculative  knowledge  of  the  gospel, 
such  as  a lawyer  has  of  a will  or  a deed,  which 
he  reads  with  no  farther  design  than  to  un- 
derstand the  tenor  and  import  of  the  writing, 
will  neither  save  nor  comfort  the  soul.  The 
believer  reads  it,  as  the  will  is  read  by  the 
heir,  who  finds  his  own  name  in  it,  and  is 
warranted  by  it  to  call  the  estate  and  all  the 
particulars  specified  his  own.  He  appro- 
priates the  privileges  to  himself,  and  says,  the 
promises  are  mine;  the  pardon,  the  peace, 
the  heaven,  of  which  I read,  are  all  mine. 
This  is  the  will  and  testament  of  the  Re- 
deemer, of  my  Redeemer.  The  great  Testa- 
tor remembered  me  in  his  will,  which  is  con- 
firmed, and  rendered  valid  by  his  death, 
(Heb.  ix.  16,)  and  therefore  I humbly  claim, 
and  assuredly  expect,  the  benefit  of  all  that 
he  has  bequeathed.  But  how  shall  we  ob- 
tain this  comfortable  persuasion,  and  preserve 
it  against  all  the  cavils  of  our  enemies,  who 
will  endeavour  to  litigate  our  right!  I seem 
to  have  before  me  a proper  occasion  of  dis- 
cussing a point,  very  important,  and  by  too 
many  misunderstood  ; I mean  the  nature  of 
that  assurance  of  hope,  which  the  scripture 
speaks  of  as  attainable,  which  has  been  hap- 
pily experienced  by  many  believers,  and 
which  all  are  exhorted  and  encouraged  to 
seek  after,  in  the  methods  of  God’s  appoint- 
ment. But  my  plan  will  only  permit  me  to 
offer  a few  brief  hints  upon  the  subject. 

1.  Many  respectable  writers  and  preachers 
have  considered  this  assurance  as  essential  to 
true  faith.  But  we  have  the  scripture  in  our 
hands,  and  are  not  bound  to  abide  by  the  de- 
cisions of  any  man,  farther  than  as  they  agree 
with  this  standard.  The  most  eminent  pro- 


[ser.  xxxix. 

perties,  or  effects  ascribed  to  faith,  are,  that 
it  works  by  love,  (Gal.  v.  6,)  purifies  the 
heart,  (Acts  xv.  9,)  and  overcomes  the  world, 
1 John  v.  4.  I think  it  cannot  easily  be  de- 
nied, by  those  who  are  competent  judges  in 
the  case,  that  there  are  persons  to  be  found, 
who  give  these  evidences  that  they  are  be- 
lievers, and  yet  are  far  from  the  possession 
of  an  abiding  assurance.  They  hope  they 
love  the  Lord,  but  there  is  such  a dispropor- 
tion between  the  sensible  exercise  of  their 
love,  and  the  conviction  they  have  of  their 
obligations  to  him,  that  they  are  often  afraid 
they  do  not  love  him  supremely ; and  if  not, 
they  know  that  in  the  scriptural  sense  they 
do  not  love  him  at  all.  They  can  say  from 
their  hearts  that  they  desire  to  love  him,  but 
they  dare  not  go  farther.  But  there  is  a 
weak  and  a strong  faith ; they  differ  not  in 
kind,  but  only  in  degree.  Faith  is  compared 
to  a grain  of  mustard-seed,  (Matt.  xvii.  20,) 
which,  under  the  cultivation  of  the  heavenly 
Husbandman,  who  first  sows  the  seed  in  the 
heart,  grows  up  to  assurance.  But  in  its  in- 
fant and  weak  state  it  is  true  and  acceptable 
faith.  Far  from  breaking  the  bruised  reed, 
(Is.  xlii.  3,)  he  will  strengthen  it.  He  will 
not  quench  the  smoking  flax,  but  will  in  due 
time  fan  it  into  a flame. 

2.  I will  go  a step  farther.  Were  I to 
define  the  assurance  we  are  speaking  of,  I 
should  perhaps  say,  it  is,  in  our  present  state, 
the  combined  effect  of  faith  and  ignorance. 
That  assurance  which  does  not  spring  from 
true  faith  in  the  Son  of  God,  wrought  by  the 
operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  no  better  than 
presumption.  But  I believe  what  we  call 
assurance,  even  when  it  is  right,  is  not  en- 
tirely owing  to  the  strength  of  our  faith,  but 
in  a great  measure  to  our  having  such  faint 
and  slight  views  of  some  truths,  which,  if  we 
had  a more  powerful  impression  of  them,  un- 
less our  faith  was  likewise  proportionably 
strengthened  at  the  same  time,  might  possi- 
bly make  the  strongest  assurance  totter  and 
tremble.  I will  explain  myself.  Admitting 
that  I had  a right  to  tell  you,  that  I am  so  far 
assured  of  my  interest  in  the  gospel-salvation, 
as  to  have  no  perplexing  doubt  either  of  my 
acceptance  or  of  my  perseverance,  you  would 
much  over-rate  me,  if  you  should  suppose 
this  was  a proof  that  my  faith  is  very  strong. 
Alas!  I have  but  a very  slight  perception  of 
the  evil  of  sin,  of  the  deceitfulness  of  my  own 
heart,  of  the  force  and  subtlety  of  my  spiritual 
enemies,  of  the  strictness  and  spirituality  of 
the  holy  law,  or  of  the  awful  majesty  and  ho- 
liness of  the  great  God  with  whom  I have  to 
do.  If,  in  the  moment  while  lam  speaking 
to  you,  he  should  be  pleased  to  impress  these 
solemn  realities  upon  my  mind,  with  a con- 
viction and  evidence  tenfold  greater  than  I 
have  ever  known  hitherto  (which  I conceive 
would  still  be  vastly  short  of  the  truth,)  un- 
less my  faith  was  also  strengthened  by  a ten- 


JOB’S  FAITH  AND  EXPECTATION. 


347 


SER.  XXXIX.] 

fold  clearer  and  more  powerful  discovery  of 
the  grace  and  glory  of  the  Saviour,  you  would 
probably  see  my  countenance  change  and  my 
speech  falter.  The  Lord,  in  compassion  to 
our  weakness,  shows  us  these  things  by  little 
and  little,  as  we  are  able  to  bear  them;  and 
if,  as  we  advance  in  the  knowledge  of  our- 
se,ves  and  of  our  dangers,  our  knowledge  of 
the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ  advances 
equally,  we  may  rejoice  in  hope,  we  may 
even  possess  an  assured  hope.  But  let  not 
him  who  hath  put  on  his  harness,  boast  as 
though  he  had  put  it  off,  1 Kings  xx.  11. 
We  are  yet  in  an  enemy’s  land,  and  know 
not  what  changes  we  may  meet  with,  before 
our  warfare  is  finished. 

3.  How  far  our  assurance  is  solid,  may  be 
estimated  by  the  effects.  It  will  surely  make 
us  humble,  spiritual,  peaceful,  and  patient.  I 
pity  those  who  talk  confidently  of  their  hope, 
as  if  they  were  out  of  the  reach  of  doubts  and 
fears,  while  their  tempers  are  unsanctified, 
and  their  hearts  are  visibly  attached  to  the 
love  of  the  present  world.  I fear  they  know 
but  little  of  what  they  say.  1 am  better 
pleased  when  persons  of  this  character  com- 
plain of  doubts  and  darkness.  It  proves  at 
least  that  they  are  not  destitute  of  feeling, 
nor,  as  yet,  lulled  into  a spirit  of  careless  se- 
curity. And  there  are  professors,  whom,  in- 
stead of  endeavouring  to  comfort  in  their  pre- 
sent state,  I would  rather  wish  to  make  still 
more  suspicious  of  themselves  than  they  are ; 
till  they  are  convinced  of  the  impossibility  of 
enjoying  true  peace,  while  their  hearts  are 
divided  between  God  and  the  world.  For 
though  sanctification  is  not  the  ground  of  a 
good  hope,  it  is  the  certain  concomitant  of  it. 
If  it  be  true,  that  without  holiness  no  man 
shall  see  the  Lord,  (Heb.  xii.  14,)  it  must 
likewise  be  true,  that  without  holiness  no 
man  can  have  a scriptural  and  well-founded 
hope  of  seeing  him. 

4.  But  to  give  a direct  answer  to  the  in- 
quiry, How  shall  I know  that  he  is  my  Re- 
deemer! I may  use  the  prophet’s  words, 
“ Then  shall  ye  know,  if  you  follow  on  to 
know  the  Lord,”  Hos.  vi.  3.  Our  names  are 
not  actually  inserted  in  the  Bible,  but  our 
characters  are  described  there.  He  is  the 
Redeemer  of  all  who  put  their  trust  in  him. 
You  will  not  trust  in  him,  unless  you  feel 
your  need  of  him;  you  cannot,  unless  you 
know  him,  as  he  is  revealed  in  the  word ; you 
do  not  unless  you  love  him,  and  are  devoted 
to  his  cause  and  service.  If  you  know  your- 
self to  be  a sinner  deserving  to  perish,  if  you 
see  that  there  is  no  help  or  hope  for  you  but 
in  Jesus,  and  venture  yourself  upon  his  gra- 
cious invitation,  believing  that  he  is  able  to 
save  to  the  uttermost;  and  if  you  really  in- 
clude holiness  and  a deliverance  from  sin,  in 
the  idea  of  the  salvation  which  you  long  for, 
then  he  is  your  Redeemer.  If,  among  us,  an 
act  of  grace  was  published,  inviting  all 


criminals  to  surrender  themselves,  with  a 
promise  of  mercy  to  those  who  did  ; though 
no  one  was  mentioned  by  name  in  the  act, 
yet  every  one  who  complied  with  it,  and 
pleaded  it,  would  be  entitled  to  the  benefit. 
Such  an  act  of  grace  is  the  gospel.  The 
Lord  says,  “ This  is  my  beloved  Son,  hear 
him,”  Matt.  iii.  17.  If  you  approve  him,  he  is 
yours.  If  you  are  still  perplexed  with  doubts, 
they  are  owing  to  the  weakness  of  your  faith. 
But  there  are  means  appointed  for  the  growth 
of  faith.  Wait  patiently  upon  the  Lord  in  the 
use  of  those  means,  and  you  shall  find  he  has 
not  bid  you  seek  his  face  in  vain.  Have  no 
fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of  dark- 
ness. Live  not  in  the  omission  of  known  duty. 
Do  not  perplex  yourself  with  vain  reasonings, 
but  believe  and  obey,  and  the  Lord  shall  be 
with  you.  There  are  some  peculiar  cases. 
Allowances  must  be  made  for  the  effects  of 
constitution  and  temperament.  Some  sincere 
persons  are  beset  and  followed,  through  life, 
with  distressing  temptations.  But  in  general, 
simplicity  and  obedience  lead  to  assurance. 
And  they  who  hearken  to  the  Lord,  and  walk 
in  the  way  of  his  commandments,  go  on  from 
strength  to  strength,  (Isa.  xlviii.  18;)  their 
peace  and  hope  increase  like  a river,  which, 
from  small  beginnings,  runs  broader  and 
deeper,  till  it  falls  into  the  ocean.  But  to 
return  to  Job. — 

III.  Another  article  of  his  creed  concern- 
ing the  Redeemer,  is,  He  shall  stand  in  the 
latter  day  upon  the  earth.  The  latter  or  last 
days,  in  the  prophetical  style,  usually  denote 
the  Messiah’s  day,  the  times  of  the  gospel. 
To  this  time  Job  looked  forward.  He  beheld 
the  promises  afar  off.  Thus  Messiah  was  the 
consolation  of  his  people  of  old,  as  he  who 
was  come.  And  it  should  be  our  consolation 
to  know  that  he  is  come.  His  standing  upon 
the  earth  may  include  the  whole  of  his  ap- 
pearance in  the  flesh ; his  life,  passion,  and 
resurrection.  The  manner  of  expression  in- 
timates something  important  and  wonderful. 
Had  Job,  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  spoken  of 
any  individual  of  Adam’s  race,  of  Isaiah,  or 
Paul,  there  would  have  been  nothing  extra- 
ordinary predicted  by  saying  he  shall  stand 
upon  the  earth,  for  all  men  do  so  in  their  suc- 
cessive generations.  But  that  the  Redeemer, 
the  Lord  of  glory,  the  Maker  of  all  things, 
should  condescend  to  visit  his  creatures,  to 
dwell  with  men  for  a season,  to  stand  and 
walk  upon  the  earth  with  them,  clothed  in  a 
body  like  their  own,  is  an  event  which  never 
could  have  been  expected  if  it  had  not  beer 
revealed  from  heaven.  It  was  the  object  of 
Job’s  faith,  and  well  deserving  the  solemn 
preface  with  which  he  introduces  his  firm 
persuasion  of  it,  “ Oh  ! that  my  words  were 
graven  with  an  iron  pen  in  the  rock  for  ever !” 
When  Solomon  had  finished  the  temple  of 
the  Lord  of  Hosts,  instead  of  admiring  the 
magnificence  of  the  building,  he  was  struck 


THE  LORD  IS  RISEN  INDEED. 


[SER.  XL. 


with  Ihe  condescension  of  the  Lord,  who  : afforded  to  his  people  in  the  earliest  times, 


would  vouchsafe  to  notice  it,  and  honour  it 
with  a symbol  of  his  presence,  “ Will  God 
indeed  dwell  with  men  upon  the  earth?  Be- 
hold the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain 


and  consequently,  that  the  religion  of  the 
Old  Testament  and  of  the  New  is  substantially 
the  same. 

The  great  inquiry  this  subject  should  im- 


him,  how  much  less  this  house  which  I have  press  upon  us,  is,  are  we  thus  minded  ? What 
built !”  1 Kings  viii.  27.  But  what  was  the  think  you,  my  dear  friends,  of  Christ?  Have 
visible  glory  which  appeared  in  that  temple,  | you  accepted  him  as  your  Redeemer;  and 
if  compared  with  the  glory  of  the  only  be-  j have  you  a good  hope  that  you  shall  see  him 
gotten  Son  of  God,  when  he  tabernacled  in  to  your  comfort,  when  he  shall  return  to  judge 
our  flesh ! The  human  nature  of  Christ  is  that  j the  world  ? If  so,  you  may  rejoice.  Changes 
true  temple,  not  made  with  hands,  in  which  1 you  must  expect.  * You  must  die,  and  your 
God  is  manifested  upon  a throne  of  grace,  flesh  must  be  food  for  worms.  But  he’  has 
that  sinners  may  approach  him  without  dis-  promised  to  “change  our  vile  bodies,  that 
may,  and  receive,  out  of  his  fulness,  grace  they  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious 
for  grace.  To  him  all  the  prophets  gave  wit-  body,  according  to  the  mighty  power  whereby 
ness,  on  him  the  desire  and  hope  of  his  people,  he  is  able  to  subdue  all  things  unto  himself,” 
in  all  ages,  have  been  fixed.  He  was  to  stand  Phil.  iii.  21. 
upon  the  earth,  as  Mediator  between  God 
and  man.  And  in  the  same  office,  now  he  is 
upon  the  throne  of  glory,  he  is,  and  will  be, 
admired,  adored,  and  trusted  in,  by  all  his 
believing  people,  to  the  end  of  time. 

IV.  From  the  Redeemer’s  appearance  upon 
earth,  Job  infers  the  restoration  and  resurrec-  BlU  nolo  h christ  risen  from  the  deadt  ani 


SERMON  XL. 


THE  LORD  IS  RISEN  INDEED. 


tion  of  his  own  body.  His  trials  had  been 
great — bereaved  of  his  children  and  substance, 
afflicted  with  grievous  boils,  harassed  with 
temptations,  reproached  by  his  friends:  out  of 
ail  the  troubles  the  Lord'  his  Redeemer  de- 


become  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept. — 
1 Cor.  xv.  20. 

As,  in  the  animal  economy,  the  action  of  the 
heart  and  of  the  lungs,  though  verv  different. 


livered  him,  and  his  latter  days  were  more  are  equally  necessary  for  the  maintenance  of 
prosperous  than  his  beginning.  But  he  knew  life,  and  we  cannot  say  that  either  of  them  is 
that  he  must  go  the  way  of  all  the  earth,  that  more  essentially  requisite  than  the  other;  sc 
his  body  must  lie  in  the  grave,  and  return  to  in  the  system  of  divine  revelation,  there  are 
dust.  Bat  he  expected  a future  time  after  some  truths,  the  knowledge  and  belief  of 
his  dissolution,  when  in  the  flesh,  for  himself,  1 which  singly  considered,  are  fundamentals 
and  with  his  own  eyes,  he  should  see  God.  with  respect  to  the  salvation  of  a sinner.  And 
The  expressions  are  strong  and  repeated.  He  though  they  are  distinct  in  themselves,  we 
does  not  speak  the  language  of  hesitation  and  cannot  determine  which  of  them  is  of  most 
doubt,  but  of  confidence  and  certainty.  It  importance  to  us;  for  unless  we  know,  ap- 
likewise  appears  that  he  placed  his  ultimate  prove,  and  receive  them  all,  we  can  have  no 
happiness  in  seeing  God.  His  words  are  not , experience  of  a life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of  God. 
very  different  from  those  of  the  apostle,  Such,  for  instance,  is  the  scriptural  doctrine 
“ When  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  concerning  the  depravity  of  human  nature, 
him,  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is,”  1 John  This  is  a first  principle ; for  unless  we  under- 
iii.  2.  To  behold  the  glory  of  God,  as  our  j stand  what  our  state  is  in  the  sight  of  God,  the 
Redeemer,  to  be  in  a state  of  favour  and  ’ enormity  cf  our  transgressions,  and  our  inca- 
communion  with  him,  and  according  to  the  ! pacity  for  true  happiness,  until  our  hearts  are 
utmost  capacity  of  our  nature,  to  be  conform-  changed  by  the  power  of  his  grace,  we  cannot 
ed  to  him  in  holiness  and  love,  is  that  felicity  rightly  understand  a single  chapter  in  the 
which  Goa  has  promised  and  to  which  all  his  Bible.’  Such,  likewise,  is  the  doctrine  of  the 
servants  aspire.  Some  foretastes  of  it  they  atonement.  For,  if  we  could  know  how  to- 
enjoy  in  the  present  life,  which  cheer  them  I tally  we  are  lost,  without  knowing  the  gra- 
under  their  trials,  and  raise  them  above  the  i cious  method  which  God  has  appointed  for 
grovelling  pursuits  of  those  who  have  their  j our  recovery,  we  must  unavoidably  sink  into 
portion  only  in  this  world.  But  their  chief  despair.  Again,  if  we  were  sensible  of  our 
possession  is  in  hope.  They  look  forward  to  state  as  sinners,  and  even  if  we  trusted  in 
a brighter  period,  when  they  shall  awaken  Christ  for  salvation,  yet  the  apostle  observes 
from  the  sleep  of  death,  to  behold  his  face  in  in  this  chapter,  that  unless  he  be  indeed  risen 
righteousness,  Ps.  xvii.  15.  Then,  and  not ; from  the  dead,  our  faith  in  him  would  be  in 
till  then,  they  shall  be  completely  satisfied,  vain  and  we  should  still  be  in  our  sins.  The 
The  expectation  of  Job,  therefore,  affords  a ; resurrection  of  Christ,  therefore,  is  a doctrine 
sufficient  proof  that  the  doctrines  of  an  im-  absolutely  essential  to  our  hope  and  comfort; 
mortal  state,  and  of  a resurrection  unto  life,  and  it  is  likewise  a sure  pledge,  that  they  who 
were  included  in  the  revelations  which  God  j believe  in  him  shall  be  raised  from  the  dead 


RFiR.  XL.] 

also,  by  virtue  of  their  union  with  him,  and 
according*  to  his  pattern.  For  “now  is  Christ 
risen  from  the  dead,  and  is  become  the  first- 
fruits  of  them  that  slept.”  Let  us  at  present 
consider  his  resurrection. — The  sure  conse- 
quence of  it,  that  his  people  shall  be  raised 
from  the  dead,  will  offer  to  our  meditations 
from  the  following*  verses. 

The  resurrection  of  Christ,  being,  as  a fact, 
the  great  pillar  upon  which  the  weight  and 
importance  of  Christianity  rest,  it  has  pleased 
the  Lord  to  put  the  indubitable  proof  of  it 
within  our  power.  There  is  no  one  point  of 
ancient  uninspired  history  so  certainly  and  un- 
questionably authenticated.  It  may  seem  un- 
necessary to  prove  it,  and  to  many  of  you  it 
is  entirely  so.  Yet  I think  it  proper  to  take 
some  notice  of  it;  not  so  much  on  account  of 
the  weak  and  trifling  cavils  of  infidels,  as  for 
the  sake  of  persons  who  may  be  assaulted  with 
temptations.  For  many  plain  people,  who  are 
not  much  acquainted  with  the  subtilties  of 
sceptics,  are  sometimes  pestered  with  difficul- 
ties and  objections  in  their  own  minds,  per- 
haps more  shrewd  and  powerful  than  such  as 
are  commonly  found  in  books,  or  retailed  in 
coffee-houses.  For  unbelief  is  deeply  rooted 
m every  heart ; and  Satan,  our  great  enemy, 
can,  and  if  permitted,  will,  work,  powerfully 
upon  this  evil  disposition.  He  endeavours  to 
beat  us  off  from  the  belief  of  every  truth  of 
scripture,  and  of  this  among  the  rest.  And 
many  persons  who  have  been  so  well  con- 
vinced that  our  Lord  rose  from  the  dead,  as 
to  venture  their  souls  and  their  all  upon  it, 
have  found  themselves  at  a loss  how  to  an- 
swer the  enemy  in  an  hour  of  sharp  and  press- 
ing temptations. 

Let  us  suppose,  then,  that  we  had  lately 
received  the  news  of  some  extraordinary  and 
almost  incredible  event,  and  let  us  consider 
what  evidence  we  should  require  to  satisfy 
us  that  the  report  was  true,  and  apply  the 
same  kind  of  reasoning  to  the  point  in  hand. 
That  there  was,  a great  while  ago,  a person 
named  Jesus,  who  gathered  disciples,  and 
died  upon  a cross,  is  universally  acknow- 
ledged. Both  Jews  and  Heathens,  who  lived 
at  the  time,  and  afterwards,  not  only  admitted 
it,  but  urged  it  as  a reproach  against  his  fol- 
lowers. Many  testimonies  of  this  kind  are 
still  extant. 

The  turning  point  between  his  enemies  and 
his  friends,  is  his  resurrection.  This  has  been 
denied.  We  acknowledge  that  he  did  not  ap- 
pear publicly  after  he  arose,  as  he  did  before 
his  death,  but  only  to  a competent  number  of 
his  followers,  to  whom  he  showed  himself;  and 
satisfied  them,  by  many  infallible  proofs,  that 
he  was  alive,  and  that  he  was  the  same  person 
whom  they  had  seen  crucified.  They  reported 
what  they  saw,  and  we  believe  their  report. 
We  are  therefore  to  inquire,  Who  they  were  ? 
and  on  what  grounds  we  receive  and  rely 
upon  their  testimony  1 


349 

If  they  were  mistaken  themselves,  or  if 
they  were  engaged  and  agreed  in  a crafty 
design  of  imposing  upon  mankind,  we,  who 
depend  upon  their  relation,  may  be  involved 
in  their  mistake,  or  deceived  by  their  artifice. 
But  if  neither  of  these  suppositions  can  pos- 
sibly be  true,  if  they  were  competent  and  im- 
partial witnesses;  then  we  are  not  only  jus- 
tified in  giving  credit  to  their  testimony,  but 
it  must  be  unreasonable,  and  (in  a case  of  this 
importance)  presumptuous  and  dangerous  to 
reject  it. 

1.  That  they  were  competent  judges  of 
what  they  asserted,  is  evident, 

1.  From  their  numbers. — The  eye-witnesses 
of  this  fact  were  many.  “ He  was  seen  of 
Cephas,  then  of  the  twelve ; after  that  he  was 
seen  of  five  hundred  brethren  at  once  : after 
that  he  was  seen  of  James,  then  of  all  the 
apostles ; and  last  of  all,  he  was  seen  of  me 
also,”  1 Cor.  xv.  5 — S.  Thus  Paul  wrote 
when  multitudes  who  lived  at  the  time  were 
still  living,  and  would  readily  have  contra- 
dicted him,  if  he  had  declared  an  untruth. 
Five  hundred  concurring  witnesses  are  suf- 
ficient to  establish  the  credit  of  a fact,  which 
they  all  saw  with  their  own  eyes,  if  their 
word  may  be  depended  upon.  We  can  be 
certain  of  things  which  we  never  saw  no 
otherwise  than  by  the  testimony  of  others. 
And  certainty  may  be  attained  in  this  way. 
For  though  some  persons  would  appropriate 
the  word  demonstration  to  mathematical  evi- 
dence, yet  moral  evidence  may  be  in  many 
cases  equally  conclusive,  and  compel  assent 
with  equal  force.  I am  so  fully  satisfied  by 
the  report  of  others,  that  there  are  such  cities 
as  Paris  or  Rome,  though  I never  saw  them, 
that  1 am  not  more  able  seriously  to  question 
their  existence,  than  I am  to  doubt  the  truth 
of  a proposition  in  Euclid  which  I have  seen 
demonstrated. 

2.  From  the  nature  of  the  fact,  in  which  it 
was  not  possible  that  so  many  persons  could 
be  mistaken  or  deceived.  Some  of  them  saw 
him,  not  once  only,  but  frequently.  His  ap- 
pearance to  others  was  attended  with  peculiar 
striking  circumstances  and  effects.  His 
disciples  seem  not  to  have  expected  his  re- 
surrection, though  he  had  often  foretold  it 
previous  to  his  sufferings.  Nor  did  they 
hastily  credit  the  women  who  first  saw 
him  in  their  way  from  the  sepulchre.  Tho- 
mas refused  to  believe  the  report  of  all  his 
brethren,  to  whom  our  Lord  had  shown  him- 
self. He  would  see  for  himself ; he  required 
more  than  ocular  proof,  for  he  said,  “Except 
I put  my  finger  into  the  print  of  the  nails, 
and  thrust  my  hand  into  his  side,  I will  not 
believe,”  John  xx.  25.  It  is  no  wonder,  that, 
when  these  proofs  were  offered  him,  he  fully 
yielded  to  conviction,  and  with  gratitude 
and  joy  addressed  his  risen  Saviour  in  the 
language  of  adoration  and  love,  “ My  Lord, 
and  mv  God  f ’ But  his  former  conduci 


THE  LORD  IS  RISEN  INDEED. 


350 


THE  LORD  IS 

showed  that  he  was  not  credulous,  nor  dis- 
posed to  receive  the  report  as  a truth,  how- 
ever desirable,  without  sufficient  evidence. 

II.  As  they  were  competent  judges,  so 
they  were  upright  and  faithful  witnesses. 
There  is  no  more  room  to  suspect  that  they 
had  a design  to  deceive  others,  than  that 
they  were  mistaken  or  deceived  them- 
selves. For, 

1.  If  we  judire  of  them  by  their  writings, 
we  must  at  least  allow  them  to  have  been 
well-meaning  men.  They  profess  to  aim  at 
promoting  the  knowledge  and  honour  of  the 
true  God,  and  thereby  to  promote  the  mo- 
rality and  happiness  of  mankind.  Their  con- 
duct was  uniformly  consistent  with  their  pro- 
fession, and  their  doctrines  and  precepts  were 
evidently  suited  to  answer  their  design.  The 
penmen  of  the  New  Testament  were  con- 
fessedly men  in  private  life,  most  of  them 
destitute  of  literature,  and  engaged  in  low 
occupations,  till  they  became  the  disciples  of 
Jesus.  Is  it  probable  that  men,  who  speak  90 
honourably  of  God,  who  inculcate  upon  their 
fellow-creatures  such  an  entire  devotedness 
to  his  will  and  service,  should  be  impostors 
themselves  1 Is  it  at  all  credible,  that  a few 
men,  in  an  obscure  situation,  should  form  a 
consistent  and  well  concerted  plan,  sufficient 
to  withstand  and  overcome  the  prejudices, 
habits,  and  customs,  both  of  Jews  and 
Heathens ; to  institute  a new  religion,  and, 
without  the  assistance  of  interest  or  arms,  to 
spread  it  rapidily  and  successfully  in  a few 
years  throughout  the  greatest  part  of  the 
Roman  empire!  Or  is  it  possible  that  such 
men  could,  at  their  first  effort,  exhibit  a 
scheme  of  theology  and  morality,  so  vastly 
superior  to  the  united  endeavours  of  the  phi- 
losophers of  all  ages!  A learned  man  in 
France  attempted  to  prove  (for  what  will 
not  learned  men  attempt !)  that  most  of  the 
Latin  poems  which  are  attributed  to  those 
whom  we  call  the  classic  writers,  and  par- 
ticularly the  ^Eneid  of  Virgil,  were  not  the 
production  of  the  authors  whose  names  they 
bear,  but  gross  forgeries,  fabricated  by  monks 
in  the  dark  ages  of  ignorance,  and  success- 
fully obtruded  upon  the  world  as  genuine,  till 
he  arose  to  detect  the  imposture.  He  gained 
but  few  proselytes  to  his  absurd  paradox. 
Yet,  to  suppose  that  men  who  could  only  ex- 
press their  own  dull  sentiments  in  barbarous 
Latin,  were  capable  of  writing  with  the  fire 
and  elegance  of  Virgil,  when  they  undertook 
to  impose  upon  the  world ; or  to  affirm  that 
the  Principia  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton  was  in 
reality  written  by  an  ignorant  plowman,  and 
only  sent  abroad  under  the  sanction  of  a cele- 
brated name,  cannot  be  more  repugnant  to 
true  taste,  sound  judgment,  and  common 
sense,  than  to  imagine,  that  the  Evangelists 
and  Apostles  were,  from  their  own  resources, 
capable  of  writing  such  a book  as  the  New 
Testament ; the  whole  of  which  must  stand 


RISEN  INDEED.  [ser.  xx. 

or  fall  with  the  doctrine  of  our  Lord’s  resur- 
rection. 

2.  But  farther,  they  could  not  possibly  pro- 
pose any  advantage  to  themselves  in  their 
endeavours  to  propagate  the  Christian  re- 
ligion, if  they  had  not  been  assured  that  the 
crucified  Jesus,  whom  they  preached,  was 
risen  from  the  dead,  and  had  taken  possession 
of  his  kingdom.  Knowing  whom  they  had 
believed,  filled  with  a constraining  sense  of 
his  love,  and  depending  upon  his  promise  and 
power  to  support  them  in  the  service  to  which 
he  had  called  them,  they  were  neither  ashamed 
nor  afraid  to  proclaim  his  gospel,  and  to  invite 
and  enjoin  sinners  every  where  to  put  their 
trust  in  him ; otherwise  they  had  nothing  to 
expect  but  such  treatment  as  they  actually 
met  with,  for  professing  their  belief  of  his 
resurrection,  and  especially  for  the  pains  they 
took  to  publish  it,  first  among  the  people  who 
had  put  him  to  death,  and  afterwards  among 
the  Heathens.  It  required  no  great  sagacity 
to  foresee  that  this  doctrine  wrould  be  an 
offence  to  the  Jews,  and  foolishness  to  the 
Greeks,  1 Cor.  i.  23.  They  were  in  fact 
despised,  hated,  opposed,  and  persecuted, 
wherever  they  went ; and  those  who  espoused 
their  cause  were  immediately  exposed  to  a 
participation  in  their  sufferings.  Nor  was 
there  the  least  probability  that  the  event  could 
be  otherwise.  Impostures  there  have  been 
many ; but  we  cannot  conceive  that  any  set 
of  men  would  deliberately,  and  by  consent, 
contrive  an  imposture,  which,  in  the  nature 
of  the  thing,  could  procure  nothing  to  them 
or  to  their  followers,  but  contempt,  stripes, 
imprisonment,  and  death. 

3.  Even  if  we  could  for  a moment  suppose 
them  capable  of  so  wild  and  wicked  an  un- 
dertaking, as,  under  pretence  of  the  service 
of  God,  to  provoke  and  dare  the  hatred  of 
mankind,  by  asserting  and  propagating  an  of- 
fensive falsehood,  it  would  be  impossible  upon 
that  ground  to  account  for  the  success  which 
they  met  with.  If  this  counsel  and  cause  had 
not  been  of  God,  it  must  have  come  to  nought, 
Acts  v.  38.  But  by  preaching  Jesus  and  his 
resurrection,  in  defiance  of  all  the  arts  and 
rage  of  their  enemies,  they  mightily  prevailed 
over  the  established  customs  and  inveterate 
prejudices  of  mankind,  and  brought  multi- 
tudes into  the  belief  of  their  doctrine  against 
all  disadvantages.  The  Lord  confirmed  their 
word  with  signs  following.  The  miracles 
which  were  wrought  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
were  numerous,  notorious,  and  undeniable; 
and  the  moral  effects  of  their  preaching, 
though  too  frequent  and  universal  to  be 
styled  miraculous,  were  such  as  can  only  be 
with  reason  ascribed  to  a divine  power.  The 
pillars  of  Paganism,  the  superstitions  of  idol 
worship,  though  in  every  country  connected 
and  incorporated  with  the  frame  of  civil  gc* 
vernment,  and  guarded  for  ages,  not  more  by 
popular  veneration  than  for  reasons  of  state, 


351 


DEATH  BY  ADAM,  LIFE  BY  CHRIST. 


SER.  XLI.J 

were  very  soon  shaken,  and  in  no  great  space 
of  time  subverted.  Within  about  two  hun- 
dred years  after  Tacitus  had  described  the 
Christians  as  the  objects  of  universal  con- 
tempt and  hatred,  Christianity  became  the  es- 
tablished religion  of  the  empire.  And  in  a 
letter  of  Pliny  to  Trajan  on  the  subject,  we 
have  indisputable  evidence,  that  even  in  the 
time  of  Tacitus,  hated,  vilified,  and  perse- 
cuted, as  the  Christians  were,  their  religion 
so  greatly  prevailed,  that  in  many  places  the 
idol  temples  were  almost  deserted. 

4.  But  the  proof*  of  the  resurrection  of 
Christ,  which  is  the  most  important  and  satis- 
factory of  any,  does  not  depend  upon  argu- 
ments and  historical  evidence,  with  which 
multitudes  of  true  Christians  are  unacquaint- 
ed, but  is,  in  its  own  nature,  equally  con- 
vincing in  all  ages,  and  equally  level  to  all 
capacities.  They  who  have  found  the  gospel 
to  be  the  power  of  God  to  the  salvation  of 
their  souls,  have  the  witness  in  themselves ; 
and  are  very  sure  that  the  doctrine,  which 
enlightened  their  understandings,  awakened 
their  conscience,  delivered  them  from  the 
guilt  and  dominion  of  sin,  brought  them  into 
a state  of  peace  and  communion  with  God, 
and  inspired  them  with  a bright  and  glorious 
hope  of  eternal  life,  must  be  true.  They 
know  that  the  Lord  is  risen  indeed,  because 
they  are  made  partakers  of  the  power  of  his 
resurrection,  and  have  experienced  a change 
in  themselves,  which  could  only  be  wrought 
by  the  influence  of  that  Holy  Spirit  which 
Jesus  is  exalted  to  bestow.  And  many  be- 
lievers, though  not  qualified  to  dispute  with 
philosophers  and  sceptics  upon  their  own 
learned  ground,  can  put  them  to  shame  and 
to  silence,  by  the  integrity  and  purity  of  their 
conduct,  by  their  patience  and  cheerfulness 
under  afflictions;  and  would  especially  silence 
them,  if  they  were  eye-witnesses  of  the  com- 
posure and  elevation  of  spirit  with  which  true 
believers  in  a risen  Saviour  welcome  the  ap- 
proach of  death. 

This  is  the  evidence  which  I would  princi- 
pally recommend  to  my  hearers  to  seek  after. 
If  the  resurrection  of  Christ  be  a truth  and  a 
fact,  much  depends  upon  the  right  belief  of  it. 

I say  a right  belief ; for  though  I have  offered 
you  a brief  view  of  the  external  evidence  in 
proof  of  this  point,  I am  aware  that  I am  not 
preaching  to  Jews  or  Mahominedans.  If  I 
should  ask  you,  Believest  thou  the  resurrec- 
tion 1 Might  I not  answer  myself,  as  the 
apostle  did  on  another  occasion,  “ l know  that 
thou  believest?”  Acts  xxvi.  27.  But  so 
powerful  is  the  effect  of  our  depravity,  that  it 
is  possible,  yea,  very  common,  for  people  most 
certainly  to  believe  the  truth  of  a proposition, 
so  as  not  to  be  able  to  entertain  a doubt  of  it, 
and  yet  to  act  as  if  they  could  demonstrate  it 
to  be  false.  Let  me  ask  you,  for  instance, 
Do  you  believe  that  you  shall  die?  I know 
that  you  believe  it.  But  do  you  indeed  live, 


as  if  you  were  really  assured  of  the  certainty 
of  death,  and  (which  is  equally  undeniable) 
the  uncertainty  of  life?  So  in  the  present 
case — If  Christ  be  risen  from  the  dead  ac- 
cording to  the  scriptures,  then  all  that  the 
scripture  declares  of  the  necessity  and  design 
of  his  sufferings,  of  his  present  glory,  and  of 
his  future  advent,  must  be  true  likewise. 
What  a train  of  weighty  consequences  de- 
pend upon  his  resurrection  ! If  he  rose  from 
the  dead,  then  he  is  the  Lord  of  the  dead  and 
of  the  living — then  he  has  the  keys  of  death 
and  hades — then  he  will  return  to  judge  the 
world,  and  you  must  see  him  for  yourself,  and 
appear  at  his  tribunal — then,  it  is  he  with 
whom  you  have  to  do — and  then,  finally,  un- 
less you  really  love,  trust,  and  serve  him, 
unless  he  is  the  beloved  and  the  Lord  of  your 
heart,  your  present  state  is  awfully  danger- 
ous and  miserable. 

But  let  those  who  love  his  name  be  joyful 
in  him : your  Lord  who  was  dead,  is  alive, 
and  because  he  liveth,  you  shall  live  also.  If 
ye  be  risen  with  him,  seek  the  things  which 
are  above,  where  he  sitteth  on  the  right  hand 
of  God.  And,  when  he,  who  is  our  life,  shall 
appear,  then  shall  ye  also  appear  with  him  in 
glory. 


SERMON  XLI. 

DEATH  BY  ADAM,  LIFE  BY  CHRIST. 

For  since  by  man  came  death , by  man  came 
also  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  For  as 
in  Adam  all  die , even  so  in  Christ  shall 
all  be  made  alive.  1 Cor.  xv.  21,  22. 

From  Mr.  Handel’s  acknowledged  abilities 
as  a composer,  and  particularly  from  what  I 
have  heard  of  his  great  taste  and  success  in 
adapting  the  style  of  his  music  to  the  subject, 
I judge  that  this  passage  afforded  him  a fair 
occasion  of  displaying  his  genius  and  powers. 
Two  ideas,  vastly  important  in  themselves, 
are  here  represented  in  the  strongest  light, 
by  being  placed  in  contrast  to  each  other. 
Surely  the  most  solemn,  the  most  pathetic 
strains  must  be  employed,  if  they  accord  with 
the  awful  words,  “ By  man  came  death,” — 
“ In  Adam  all  die.”  Nor  can  even  the  high- 
est efforts  of  the  heavenly  harpers,  more  than 
answer  to  the  joy,  the  triumph,  and  the  praisa 
which  the  other  part  of  my  text  would  excite 
in  our  hearts,  if  we  are  interested  in  it,  pro- 
vided we  were  capable  of  comprehending  the 
full  force  and  meaning  of  the  expressions, 
“ By  man  came  also  the  resurrection,” — “In 
Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive.” 

By  one  man  came  death.  “ By  one  man 
sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin,” 
Rom.  v.  12.  Sin  opened  the  door  to  death. 
The  creation,  at  the  beginning,  was  full  of 


352 


DEATH  BY  ADAM,  LIFE  BY  CHRIST. 


order  and  beauty.  “ God  saw  every  thing 
that  he  had  made,  and  behold  it  was  very 
good,”  Gen.  i.  31.  Adam,  happy  in  the  image 
and  favour  of  his  maker,  breathed  the  air  of 
immortality  in  paradise.  While  moral  evil 
was  unknown,  natural  evils,  such  as  sick- 
ness, pain,  and  death  had  no  place.  How 
different  has  the  state  of  things  been  since  ! 
Would  you  account  for  the  change!  Charge 
it  upon  man.  He  sinned  against  his  Creator, 
Lawgiver,  and  Benefactor,  and  thus,  by  him, 
came  death.  The  fact  is  sure,  and  therefore 
our  reasonings  upon  it,  in  order  to  account 
for  it,  farther  than  we  are  enlightened  and 
taught  by  scripture,  are  unnecessary  and 
vain.  God  is  infinitely  wise,  and  therefore 
this  change  was  foreseen  by  him.  He  doubt- 
less could  have  prevented  it,  for  to  omnipo- 
tence every  thing  that  does  not  imply  a con- 
tradiction is  possible,  is  easy.  But  he  per- 
mitted it,  and  therefore  it  must  have  been 
agreeable  to  his  wisdom,  holiness,  and  good- 
ness to  permit  it.  He  can  over-rule  it  to  the 
purposes  of  his  own  glory,  and  to  ends  worthy 
of  himself,  and  he  has  assured  us  that  he  will 
do  so.  Thus  far  I can  go,  nor  do  I wish  to  go 
farther.  And  to  endeavour  to  vindicate  the 
ways  of  God  to  man,  to  fallen  man,  upon  the 
grounds  of  what  he  proudly  calls  his  reason, 
would  be  an  impracticable,  and,  in  my  view, 
a presumptuous  attempt.  Tn  proportion  as  his 
grace  enlightens  our  minds,  convinces  us  of 
our  ignorance,  and  humbles  our  pride,  we 
shall  be  satisfied,  that  in  whatever  he  ap- 
points or  permits,  he  acts  in  a manner  be- 
coming his  own  perfections.  Nor  can  we  be 
satisfied  in  any  other  way.  We  see,  we  feel 
that  evil  is  in  the  world.  Death  reigns.  It 
has  pleased  God  to  afford  us  a revelation,  to 
visit  us  with  the  light  of  his  gospel.  If,  in- 
stead of  reasoning,  we  believe  and  obey,  a 
way  is  set  before  us,  by  which  we  may  finally 
overcome  every  evil,  and  obtain  a happiness 
and  honour,  superior  to  what  belonged  to  man 
in  his  original  state.  They  who  refuse  his 
gospel  must  be  left  to  their  cavils  and  per- 
plexities, until  the  day  in  which  the  great 
Judge  and  Governor  of  all  shall  arise  to  plead 
his  own  cause,  and  to  vindicate  his  proceed- 
ings from  their  arrogant  exceptions.  Then 
every  mouth  will  be  stopped,  Job  xxxv.  5. 
Let  us  look  to  the  heavens,  which  are  higher 
than  we,  and  attend  to  what  we  may  learn 
from  sure  principles,  that  the  earth,  with  all 
its  inhabitants,  is  but  as  dust  upon  the  balance, 
if  compared  with  the  immensity  of  God’s  crea- 
tion. Unless  we  could  know  the  whole,  and 
the  relation  which  this  very  small  part  bears 
to  the  rest  of  his  government,  we  must  he  ut- 
terly incompetent  to  judge  how  it  becomes 
the  great  God  to  act.  We  are  infect'd  with 
the  sin,  and  we  are  subject  to  the  death,  with 
all  its  concomitant  evils,  which  came  into  the 
world  by  the  first  man.  But  we  are  likewise 
invited  to  a participation  of  all  the  blessings 


[SER.  XLf. 

which  the  second  Man  has  procured,  by  hia 
atonement  for  sin,  and  by  his  victory  over 
death.  “ For  as  by  man  came  death,  so  by 
man  came  also  the  resurrection  from  the 
dead.” 

Let  us  take  a survey,  first  of  the  malady 
and  then  of  the  remedy. 

I.  The  malady,  the  effect  and  wages  of  sin, 
is  death.  Many  ideas  are  included  in  this 
word,  taken  in  the  scriptural  sense. 

1.  The  sentence  annexed  to  the  transgres- 
sion of  that  commandment  which  was  given 
as  an  especial  test  of  Adam’s  obedience,  and 
which  affects  all  his  posterity,  is  thus  ex- 
pressed, “In  the  day  that  thou  eatest — thou 
shalt  surely  die,”  Gen.  ii.  17.  But  man  was 
not,  ordinarily,  to  die  by  a stroke  of  apoplexy, 
or  by  a flash  of  lightning.  The  sentence  in- 
cludes all  the  natural  evils,  all  the  variety  of 
woe  which  sin  has  brought  into  the  world. 
The  rebellious  tempers  and  appetites  which 
so  often  cut  short  the  life  of  man,  together 
with  the  sufferings  and  troubles,  which, 
sooner  or  later,  bring  him  down  with  sorrow 
to  the  grave,  being  the  consequences  of  sin, 
may  be  properly  considered  as  belonging  to 
that  death  in  which  they  terminate.  Even 
the  earth  and  the  elements  partook  in  the 
effects  of  man’s  disobedience.  Thorns  and 
thistles  were  not  the  produce  of  the  ground 
till  after  he  had  sinned,  Gen.  iii.  18.  Nor  can 
I suppose  that  hurricanes,  floods,  and  earth- 
quakes were  known  in  a state  of  innocence. 
But  had  the  whole  earth  been  a paradise,  man 
having  sinned  must  have  been  miserable.  It 
is  not  in  situation  to  make  that  heart  happy, 
which  is  the  seat  of  inordinate  passions,  rage, 
envy,  malice,  lust,  and  avarice.  And  were 
the  earth  a paradise  now,  it  would  be  stained 
with  blood,  and  filled  with  violence,  cruelty, 
and  misery,  while  it  is  inhabited  by  sinners. 
Many  persons  at  present,  who  dwell  in  stately 
houses,  and  have  every  thing  around  them 
that  is  suited  to  gratify  and  please  their 
senses,  know  by  painful  experience,  how  little 
happiness  these  external  advantages  afford, 
while  their  minds  are  tortured  with  disap- 
pointments and  anxiety  Thus  the  outward 
afflictions  which  every  where  surround  and 
assail  the  sinner,  and  the  malignant  passions, 
which,  like  vultures,  continually  gnaw  his 
heart,  all  combine  to  accelerate  the  execu- 
tion of  the  sentence  of  death. 

2.  Death,  in  a very  important  sense,  en- 
tered immediately  with  sin.  Besides  the  ra- 
tional life  which  still  distinguishes  man  from 
the  brute  creation,  he  originally  possessed  a 
spiritual  and  divine  life,  for  he  was  created  in 
the  image  of  God,  in  righteousness  and  true 
holiness.  He  was  capable  of  communion 
with  God,  of  rejoicing  in  his  favour,  and  of 
proposing  his  will  and  glory  as  the  great  end 
of  his  actions.  In  a word,  the  presence  and 
life  of  God  dwelt  in  him  as  in  a temple.  As 
the  soul  is  the  life  of  the  body,  which  becomes 


ser.  xli.]  DEATH  By  ADAM, 

a carcase,  a prey  to  worms  and  putrefaction, 
when  the  soul  has  forsaken  it,  so  God  is  the 
life  of  the  soul.  Sin  defaced  his  temple,  and 
he  forsook  it.  In  this  sense,  when  Adam  had 
transgressed  the  law,  he  died  instantly,  in  that 
very  day,  in  that  very  moment.  He  lost  his 
spiritual  life,  he  lost  all  desire  for  communion 
with  God,  he  no  longer  retained  any  love  for 
his  benefactor.  He  dreaded  his  presence,  he 
sought  to  hide  himself  from  him,  and  when 
obliged  to  appear  and  answer,  stood  self-con- 
demned before  him,  till  revived  and  restored 
by  the  promise  of  grace.  And  thus  his  pos- 
terity derive  from  him  what  may  be  called  a 
living  death.  They  are  dead  while  they  live, 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  (Eph.  ii.  1,)  till 
they  are  again  quickened  by  his  Holy  Spirit. 
This  is  not  a subject  of  common-place  decla- 
mation ; it  is  to  be  proved  by  the  tenor  of 
scripture,  the  nature  of  redemption,  and  the 
very  reason  of  things.  Unless  we  allow  that 
man  in  his  present  state  is  thus  fallen,  de- 
praved, and  dead,  we  must  be  reduced  to  the 
absurdity  of  supposing  that  God  made  him 
such  a creature  as  he  now  is ; that  when  he 
formed  him  for  himself,  and  endued  him  with 
a capacity  and  desires  which  nothing  short 
of  his  own  infinite  goodness  can  satisfy,  he 
should  at  the  same  time  create  him  with  a 
disposition  to  hate  his  Maker,  to  seek  his  sa- 
tisfaction in  sensuality  upon  a level  with  the 
brutes,  and  to  confine  his  views  and  pursuits 
within  the  limits  of  this  precarious  life,  while 
he  feels,  in  defiance  of  himself,  an  instinctive 
thirst  for  immortality.  Man,  considered  in 
this  view,  would  be  a solecism  in  the  crea- 
tion ; and  they  who  do  not  acquiesce  in  the 
cause  which  the  scripture  assigns  for  the  in- 
consistences and  contradictions  which  are 
found  in  his  character,  will  never  be  able  to 
assign  any  other  cause,  which  will  bear  the 
trial  of  sober  and  rational  examination.  What 
the  poet  says  of  Beelzebub,  “ majestic  though 
in  ruins,”  may  be  truly  affirmed  of  man.  His 
faculties  and  powers  are  proofs  of  his  original 
greatness  ; his  awful  misapplication  of  them 
equally  prove  that  he  is  a fallen  and  ruined 
creature.  He  has  lost  his  true  life,  he  is  dead 
in  sin;  and  unless  renewed  and  revived  by 
the  grace  of  God,  can  only,  in  a future  state, 
be  fit  for  the  company  of  the  fallen  angels. 

3.  Death,  as  the  wages  of  sin,  extends  still 
farther.  There  is  the  second  death,  the  final 
and  eternal  misery  of  soul  and  body  in  hell. 
This  we  know  is  the  dreadful  lot  of  the  im- 
penitent. We  need  no  other  proof  that  this 
was  included  in  the  sentence;  for  certainly, 
the  righteous  Judge  would  not  inflict  a 
greater  punishment  than  he  had  denounced. 
Indeed,  it  follows  of  course  in  the  very  na- 
ture of  things,  if  we  admit  the  soul  to  be  im- 
mortal, a resurrection  both  of  the  just  and 
the  unjust,  and  that  there  remain  no  other 
sacrifice  for  sin,  in  favour  of  those  who  reject 
the  gospel.  For  to  be  disowned  of  God  in 
Vol.  IT.  2 Y 


LIFE  BY  CHRIST.  353 

the  great  day,  to  be  separated  from  his 
favourable  presence,  and  conscious  of  his 
endless  displeasure;  to  be  abandoned  to  the 
unrestrained  rage  of  sinful  dispositions  and 
hopeless  despair;  to  be  incessantly  tormented 
by  the  stings  of  a remorseful  conscience,  must 
be,  upon  the  principles  of  scripture,  the  una- 
voidable consequences  of  being  cut  off  by 
death,  in  an  unhumbled,  unpardoned,  un- 
sanctified state. 

II.  But,  blessed  be  God,  the  gospel  reveals 
a relief  and  remedy  fully  adapted  to  the  com- 
plicated misery  in  which  sin  has  involved  us. 
“ As  by  man  came  death,  by  man  came  also 
the  resurrection  from  the  dead.”  Messiah 
has  made  an  end  of  sin,  and  destroyed  the 
power  of  death.  They  who  believe  in  him, 
though  they  were  dead  shall  live.  John  xi.  25. 
For  he  is  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  and  the 
life  of  the  living. 

1.  He  raises  the  soul  from  the  death  of  sin 
unto  a life  of  righteousness.  By  his  blood  he 
procures  a right  and  liberty,  and  by  his  Spirit 
he  communicates  a power,  that  those  who 
were  afar  off,  may  draw  nigh  to  God.  Thus, 
even  at  present,  believers  are  said  to  be  risen 
with  him,  Col.  iii.  1.  Their  spiritual  life  is 
renewed,  and  their  happiness  is  already  com- 
menced, though  it  be  as  yet  subject  to  abate- 
ments. 

(1.)  Though^when  they  are  made  partakers 
of  his  grace,  and  thereby  delivered  from  the 
condemning  power  of  the  law,  sin  has  no 
longer  dominion  over  them,  as  formerly;  yet 
it  still  wars  and  strives  within  them,  and  their 
life  is  a state  of  continual  warfare.  They  now 
approve  the  law  of  God,  as  holy,  just,  and 
good,  and  delight  in  it  after  the  inward  man, 
(Rom.  vii.  12 — 19,)  yet  they  are  renewed  but 
in  part.  They  feel  a law  in  their  members 
warring  against  the  law  of  their  minds.  They 
cannot  dothe  things  that  they  would,  nor  as 
they  would ; for  Avhen  they  would  do  good, 
evil  is  present  with  them.  They  are  con- 
scious of  a defect  and  a defilement  attending 
their  best  services.  Their  attainments  are 
unspeakably  short  of  the  desires  which  love 
to  the  Redeemer  has  raised  in  their  hearts. 
They  are  ashamed,  and  sometimes  almost 
discouraged.  They  adopt  the  apostle’s  lan- 
guage, “ Oh,  wretched  man  that  I am,  who 
shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  1 
But  with  him  they  can  likewise  say,  “I  thank 
God  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.”  They 
know  he  is  on  their  side,  and  expect  that  he 
will  at  last  make  them  more  than  conquer- 
ors : yet,  while  the  conflict  lasts,  they  have 
much  to  suffer,  and  much  to  lament. 

(2.)  They  are  subject,  like  other  people,  to 
the  various  calamities  and  distresses  incident 
to  this  state  of  mortality;  and  they  have, 
more  or  less,  troubles  peculiar  to  themselves, 
arising  from  the  nature  of  their  profession 
and  conduct  (if  they  are  faithful  to  their 
Lord)  while  they  live  in  a world  that  lieth  ift 


354 


THE  GENERAL  RESURRECTION. 


wickedness.  But  the  curse  and  sting-  is  taken 
out  of  their  afflictions,  and  they  are  so  mo- 
derated and  sanctified  by  the  wisdom  and 
grace  of  him  whom  they  serve,  that  in  the 
event  they  work  for  their  good.  But  though 
they  yield  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteous- 
ness, (Heb.  xii.  11,)  in  themselves,  and  at  the 
time,  they  are  not  joyous,  but  grievous. 

(3.)  They  are  still  subject  to  the  stroke  of 
death,  the  separation  of  soul  and  body.  But 
this  death  has  lost  its  sting  as  to  them.  And  ! 
therefore  they  are  said  not  to  die,  but  to  sleep  j 
in  Jesus.  Death  is  not  their  enemy,  but  their  ] 
friend.  To  them,  instead  of  being  an  evil,  it  j 
proves  a deliverance  from  all  evil,  and  an  en-  j 
trance  into  everlasting  life. 

2.  That  new  life  to  which  they  are  raised  I 
is  surely  connected  with  life  eternal ; the  life 
of  grace,  with  the  life  of  glory.  For  Christ 
liveth  in  them,  and  being  united  to  him  by 
faith,  they  shall  live  while  he  liveth.  They 
only  shut  their  eyes  upon  the  pains  and  sor- 
rows of  this  world,  to  open  them  immediately 
in  his  presence,  and  so  they  shall  be  for  ever 
with  the  Lord.  How  wonderful  and  happy 
is  the  transition ! From  disease  and  anguish, 
from  weeping  friends,  and  often  from  a state 
of  indigence  and  obscurity,  in  which  they 
have  no  friends  to  compassionate  them,  they 
remove  to  a state  of  glory,  honour,  and  im- 
mortality, to  a mansion  in  the  realms  of  light, 
to  a seat  near  the  throne  of  God.  In  the  lan- 
guage of  mortals,  this  ineffable  honour,  and 
happiness  is  shadowed  out  to  us,  by  the  em- 
blems of  a white  robe,  a golden  harp,  a palm- 
branch  (the  token  of  victory,)  and  a crown, 
r.ot  of  oak  or  laurel,  of  gold  or  diamonds,  but 
a crown  of  life.  Such  honour  have  all  the  i 
saints.  However  afflicted  or  neglected,  de- 
spised or  oppressed,  while  upon  earth,  soon  as 
their  willing  spirits  take  their  flight  from 
hence,  they  shine  like  the  sun  in  the  king- 
dom of  their  Father.  Thus  Lazarus  lay  for 
a time,  diseased,  necessitous,  and  slighted,  at  j 
the  rich  man’s  gate.  Yet  he  was  not  without 
attendants.  A guard  of  angels  waited  around  j 
him,  and  when  he  died  conveyed  his  spirit  j 
into  Abraham’s  bosom,  Luke  xvi.  22.  The ! 
Jews  thought  very  highly  of  Abraham,  the  j 
father  of  their  nation,  the  father  of  the  faith-  j 
ful.  Our  Lord  therefore  teaches  us  by  this  ! 
representation,  that  the  beggar  Lazarus  was  j 
not  only  happy  after  death,  but  highly  exalted  j 
by  him  who  seeth  not  as  man  seeth ; for  he  j 
was  placed  in  Abraham’s  bosom,  a situation  i 
which,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  Jews,  i 
was  a mark  of  peculiar  favour,  intimacy,  and  I 
distinction.  Thus  the  beloved  disciple  was  j 
seated  in  the  bosom  of  our  Lord,  when  he ! 
celebrated  his  last  passover  with  his  disci- 1 
pies,  John  xiii.  22 — 25. 

3.  Their  dead  bodies  shall  be  raised  at  the 
great  day,  not  in  their  former  state  of  weak- 
ness and  corruption,  but  that  which  was  sown 
in  weakness  shall  be  raised  in  power,  and  the 


[SER.  XLI2. 

mortal  shall  put  on  immortality.  He  shall 
change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned 
according  to  the  likeness  of  his  own  glorious 
body.  So  that  his  own  resurrection  is  both 
the  pledge  and  the  pattern  of  theirs.  I have 
only  farther  to  observe  upon  this  subject  at 
present,  that  as  Adam  is  the  root  and  head  of 
all  mankind,  from  whence  they  all  derive  a 
sinful  and  mortal  nature ; so  Jesus,  the 
second  Adam,  is  the  root  of  a people  who  are 
united  to  him,  planted  and  engrafted  in  him 
by  faith.  To  these  the  resurrection,  con- 
sidered as  a blessing,  is  to  be  restrained. 
There  will  be  a resurrection  of  the  wicked 
likewise,  (John  v.  29,)  but  to  condemnation, 
shame  and  everlasting  contempt,  Dan.  xii.  2. 
But  the  connexion  is  close  and  indissoluble 
between  Christ,  the  first-fruits,  and  them  that 
are  Christ’s  at  his  coming. 

May  we  be  happily  prepared  for  this  great 
event,  that  when  he  shall  appear  we  may 
have  confidence  in  him,  and  not  be  ashamed 
before  him,  1 John  ii.  28.  Happy  they  who 
shall  then  be  able  to  welcome  him  in  the 
language  of  the  prophet,  “Lo,  this  is  our 
God,  we  have  waited  for  him,  and  he  will 
save  us ; this  is  the  Lord,  we  have  wraited 
for  him,  we  will  be  glad,  and  rejoice  in  his 
salvation,  Isa.  xxv.  9.  But  how  awful  the 
contrast  of  those  (many  of  them  once  the 
great,  mighty,  and  honourable  of  the  earth) 
who  shall  behold  him  with  horror,  and  in  the 
anguish  of  their  souls  shall  call  (in  vain)  to 
the  rocks  and  mountains  to  fall  on  them  and 
hide  them  from  his  presence,  saying,  “The 
great  day  of  his  wrath  is  come,  and  who 
shall  be  able  to  stand  1”  Rev.  vi.  16,  17. 


SERMON  XLII. 

THE  GENERAL  RESURRECTION. 

Behold , I show  you  a mystery.  We  shall 
not  all  sleep , hut  we  shall  all  he  changed. 
In  a moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye, 
at  the  last  trump,  for  the  trumpet  shall 
sound,  and  the  dead  shall  he  raised  incor- 
ruptible, and  we  shall  he  changed.  Fcr 
this  corruptible  must  put  on  incorruption, 
and  this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality. 
1 Cor.  xv.  51,  52. 

An  object  in  itself  great,  and  which  we 
know  to  be  so,  will  appear  small  to  us  if  we 
view  it  from  a distance.  The  stars,  for  ex- 
ample, in  our  view,  are  but  as  little  specks 
or  points  of  light ; and  the  tip  of  a finger,  if 
held  very  near  to  the  eye,  is  sufficient  to  hide 
from  us  the  whole  body  of  the  sun.  Distance 
of  time  has  an  effect  upon  us,  in  its  kind, 
similar  to  distance  of  space.  It  diminishes 
in  our  mind  the  idea  of  what  we  are  assured 
is,  in  its  own  nature,  of  great  magnitude  and 


THE  GENERAL  RESURRECTION. 


355 


SER.  XLIf.] 


importance.  If  any  of  us  were  informed  that 
we  should  certainly  die  before  this  day  closes, 
what  a sudden  and  powerful  change  would 
take  place  in  our  thoughts!  That  we  all  must 
die,  is  a truth,  of  which  we  are  no  less  cer- 
tain, than  that  we  are  now  alive.  But  be- 
cause it  is  possible  that  we  may  not  die  to- 
day, or  to-morrow,  or  this  year,  or  for  several 
years  to  come,  we  are  often  little  more  affect- 
ed by  the  thoughts  of  death,  than  if  we  ex- 
pected to  live  here  for  ever.  In  like  manner, 
if  you  receive  the  scripture  as  a divine  reve- 
lation, I need  offer  you  no  other  proof,  that 
there  is  a day,  a great  day,  approaching, 
which  will  put  an  end  to  the  present  state  of 
things,  and  introduce  a state  unchangeable 
and  eternal.  Then  the  Lord  will  descend  with 
a shout,  with  the  voice  of  an  archangel,  and 
with  the  trump  of  God.  The  earth  and  all 
its  works  will  be  burnt  up.  The  great 
Judge  will  appear,  the  tribunal  be  fixed,  the 
books  opened,  and  all  the  human  race  must 
give  an  account  of  themselves  to  God,  and, 
according  to  his  righteous  award,  be  happy 
or  miserable  in  a degree  beyond  expression 
or  conception,  and  that  for  ever. 

If  we  were  infallibly  assured,  that  this 
tremendous  scene  would  open  upon  us  to- 
morrow; or  if,  while  I am  speaking,  we 
should  be  startled  with  the  signs  of  our  Lord’s 
coming  in  the  air,  what  confusion  and  alarm 
would  overspread  the  congregation  ? Yet,  if 
the  scripture  be  true,  the  hour  is  approaching, 
when  we  must  all  be  spectators  of  this  solemn 
event,  and  parties  nearly  interested  in  it.  But 
because  it  is  at  a distance,  we  can  hear  of  it, 
speak  of  it,  and  profess  to  expect  it,  with  a 
coolness  almost  equal  to  indifference.  May 
the  Lord  give  us  that  faith  which  is  the  evi- 
dence of  things  not  seen,  that  while  I aim  to 
lead  your  meditations  to  the  subject  of  my 
text,  we  may  be  duly  impressed  by  it : and 
that  we  may  carry  from  hence  such  a con- 
sideration of  our  latter  end,  as  may  incline 
our  hearts  to  that  which  is  our  true  wisdom  ! 

Many  curious  inquiries  and  speculations 
might  be  started  from  this  passage,  but  which, 
because  I judge  them  to  be  more  curious  than 
useful,  it  is  my  intention  to  wave.  I shall 
confine  myself  to  what  is  plainly  expressed, 
because  I wish  rather  to  profit  than  to  amuse 
my  hearers.  The  principal  subject  before  us 
is  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  in  the  most 
pleasing  view  of  it ; for  my  text  speaks  only 
of  those  who  shall  change  the  mortal  and  cor- 
ruptible, for  incorruption  and  immortality. 

I.  The  introduction, — “ Behold  I show  you 
a mystery.” 

II.  What  we  are  taught  to  expect, — 
“We  shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be 
changed.” 

III.  The  suddenness  of  the  event, — “ In  a 
moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.” 

IV.  The  grand  preceding  signal, — “ The 
trumpet  shall  sound.” 


I.  The  apostle  apprizes  the  Corinthians 
that  he  is  about  to  show  them  a mystery.  As 
the  word  mystery  has  been  treated  with  no 
small  contempt,  I shall  embrace  this  occasion 
of  offering  you  a short  explanation  of  it,  as  it 
is  used  in  the  scriptures.  We  are  allowed  to 
say,  that  there  are  mysteries  in  nature,  and 
perhaps  we  may  be  allowed  to  speak  of  mys- 
teries in  providence;  but  though  an  apostle 
assures  us,  that  great  is  the  mystery  of  god- 
liness, (1  Tim.  iii.  16,)  many  persons  will 
scarcely  bear  the  application  of  the  word  to 
religion.  And,  a late  ingenious  writer,  who 
has  many  admirers  in  the  present  day,  has 
ventured  to  affirm  in  print,  that  where  mys- 
tery begins,  religion  ends.  If  the  frequency 
of  the  case  did  not,  in  some  degree,  abate  our 
wonder,  this  might  seem  almost  a mystery, 
that  any  persons  who  profess  to  believe  the 
scripture,  should  so  openly  and  flatly  contra- 
dict what  the  scripture  expressly  and  re- 
peatedly declares : or  that  while,  as  men  of 
reason  and  philosophy,  they  are  forced  to 
acknowledge  a mystery  in  every  part  of 
creation,  and  must  confess  it  beyond  their 
ability  to  explain  the  growth  of  a blade  of 
grass ; they  should,  in  opposition  to  all  the 
rules  of  analogy,  conclude,  that  the  gospel, 
the  most  important  concern  of  man,  and 
which  is  commended  to  us  as  the  most  emi- 
nent display  of  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God, 
is  the  only  subject  so  level  to  our  apprehen- 
sions, as  to  be  obvious,  at  first  sight,  to  the 
most  careless  and  superficial  observers.  That 
great  numbers  of  people  are  very  far  from 
being  accurate  and  diligent  in  their  religious 
inquiries,  is  too  evident  to  be  denied.  How 
often  do  we  meet  with  persons  of  sense  who 
talk  with  propriety  on  philosophical,  political, 
or  commercial  subjects,  and  yet,  when  they 
speak  of  religion,  discover  such  gross  igno- 
rance, as  would  be  shameful  in  a child  of  ten 
years  old,  and  amounts  to  a full  proof  that 
they  have  not  thought  it  worth  their  while 
to  acquire  even  a slight  knowledge  of  its  first 
principles.  Can  we  even  conceive  the  pos- 
sibility of  a divine  revelation  that  should 
have  nothing  in  it  mysterious  to  persons  of 
this  character  1 

A mystery,  according  to  the  notation  of 
the  Greek  word,  signifies  a secret.  And  all 
the  peculiar  truths  of  the  gospel  may  justly 
be  styled  mysteries  or  secrets,  for  two  rea- 
sons. 

1.  Because  the  discovery  of  them  is  be- 
yond the  reach  of  fallen  man,  and  they  nei- 
ther would  nor  could  have  been  known  with- 
out a revelation  from  God.  This  is  eminently 
true  of  the  resurrection.  The  light  of  nature, 
which  we  often  hear  so  highly  commended, 
may  afford  some  faint  glimmeringsof  a future 
state,  but  gives  no  intimation  of  a resurrec- 
tion. The  men  of  wisdom  at  Athens,  the 
Stoic  and  Epicurean  philosophers,  who  dif- 
fered widely  in  most  parts  of  their  respective 


356 


THE  GENERAL 

schemes,  united  in  deriding  this  sentiment, 
and  contemptuously  styled  the  apostle  Paul  a 
babbler,  (Acts  xvii.  13,)  for  preaching  it.  But 
this  secret  is  to  us  made  known.  And  we  are 
assured,  not  only  that  the  Lord  will  receive 
to  himself  the  departing  spirits  of  his  people, 
but  that  he  will  give  commandment  concern- 
ing their  dust,  and,  in  due  time,  raise  their 
vile  bodies  to  a conformity  with  his  own  glo- 
rious body. 

2.  Because,  though  they  are  revealed  ex- 
pressly in  the  scripture,  such  is  the  grossness 
of  our  conceptions,  and  the  strength  of  our 
prejudices,  that  the  truths  of  revelation  are 
still  unintelligible  to  us,  without  a farther  re- 
velation of  their  true  sense  to  the  mind,  by 
the  influence  of  his  Holy  Spirit.  Otherwise, 
how  can  the  secret  of  the  Lord  be  restrained 
to  those  who  fear  him,  (Psal.  xxv.  14,)  when 
the  book  which  contains  it  is  open  to  all,  and 
the  literal  and  grammatical  meaning  of  the 
words  is  in  the  possession  of  many  who  fear 
him  not'.1 

Books  in  the  arts  and  sciences  may  be  said 
to  be  full  of  mysteries  to  those  who  have  not 
a suitable  capacity  and  taste  for  them:  or  who 
do  not  apply  themselves  to  study  them  with 
diligence,  and  patiently  submit  to  learn  gra- 
dually one  thing  after  another.  If  you  put  a 
treatise  on  mathematics,  or  a system  of  music, 
into  the  hands  of  a plowman  or  labourer,  you 
will  not  be  surprised  to  find  that  he  cannot 
understand  a single  page.  Shall  the  works 
of  a Sir  Isaac  Newton,  or  of  a Handel,  be 
thus  inexplicable  to  one  person,  while  another 
peruses  them  with  admiration  and  delight? 
Shall  these  require  a certain  turn  of  mind, 
and  a close  attention  ? and  can  it  be  reason- 
ably supposed,  that  the  Bible  is  the  only  book 
that  requires  no  peculiar  disposition,  or  de- 
gree of  application,  to  be  understood,  though 
it  is  designed  to  make  us  acquainted  with 
the  deep  things  of  God  ? 1 Cor.  ii.  10.  In 
one  respect,  indeed,  there  is  an  encouraging 
difference.  Divine  truths  lie  thus  far  equally 
open  to  all,  that  though  none  can  learn  them 
unless  they  are  taught  of  God,  yet  all  who 
are  sensible  of  their  own  weakness  may  ex- 
pect his  teaching,  if  they  humbly  seek  it  by 
prayer.  Many  people  are,  perhaps,  incapa- 
ble of  being  mathematicians.  They  have  not 
a genius  for  the  science.  But  there  is  none 
who  teacheth  like  God.  He  can  give  not 
only  light,  but  sight;  not  only  lessons,  but 
the  capacity  necessary  for  their  reception. 
And  while  his  mysteries  are  hidden  from  the 
wise  and  prudent,  who  are  too  proud  to  wait 
upon  him  for  instruction,  he  reveals  them 
unto  babes. 

It  may  perhaps  be  thought,  that  a belief  of 
the  doctrine  of  the  resurrrection  does  not  re- 
quire the  same  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
that  is  necessary  to  the  right  knowledge  of 
some  other  doctrines  of  the  gospel.  But  such 
a belief  as  may  affect  cheer,  and  animate  the 


RESURRECTION.  [ser.  xlii. 

heart  must  be  given  us  from  above,  for  we 
cannot  reason  ourselves  into  it.  Nay,  this 
divine  teaching  is  necessary  to  secure  the 
mind  from  the  vain  reasonings,  perplexities, 
and  imaginations  which  will  bewilder  our 
thoughts  upon  the  subject,  unless  we  learn 
to  yield,  in  simplicity  of  faith,  to  what  the 
scripture  has  plainly  revealed,  and  can  be 
content  to  know  no  farther  before  the  proper 
time. 

II.  What  we  are  here  taught  to  expect  is 
thus  expressed — “ We  shall  not  all  sleep,  but 
we  shall  all  be  changed.”  We  are  not  to 
suppose  that  the  whole  human  race  will  die, 
and  fail  from  the  earth,  before  the  resurrec- 
tion. Some  will  be  living  at  the  time,  and 
among  them  some  of  the  Lord’s  people.  Of 
the  living,  it  cannot  properly  be  said  that 
they  will  be  raised  from  the  dead  : but  they 
will  experience  a change,  which  will  put 
them  exactly  in  the  same  state  with  the 
others.  Their  mortality  shall  be  swallowed 
up  in  life.  Thus  we  conceive  it  to  have  been 
with  Enoch  and  Elijah.  They  did  not  die 
like  other  men  ; but  their  mortal  natures 
were  frail  and  sinful,  like  ours,  and  incapable 
of  sustaining  the  glories  of  heaven  without 
a preparation.  Flesh  and  blood  in  its  pre- 
sent state  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God, 
neither  can  corruption  inherit  incorruption ; 
but  the  dead  shall  arise,  and  the  living  shall 
be  changed.  Here  is  a wide  field  for  specu- 
lation, but  I mean  not  to  enter  it.  Curiosity 
would  be  glad  to  know  how  our  bodies,  when 
changed,  shall  still  be  the  same.  Let  us 
first  determine  how  that  body,  which  was 
once  an  infant,  is  the  very  same  when  it  be- 
comes a full  grown  man,  or  a man  in  ex- 
treme old  age.  Let  us  explain  the  transmu- 
tation of  a caterpillar  or  silk- worm,  which 
from  a reptile  becomes  a butterfly.  What  a 
wonderful  change  is  this  both  in  appearance 
and  in  powers?  Who  would  suppose  it  to 
be  the  same  creature?  Yet  who  can  deny 
it?  It  is  safest  and  most  comfortable  for  us, 
to  refer  to  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God  the 
accomplishment  of  his  own  word. 

III.  These  great  events  will  take  place 
unexpectedly  and  suddenly — “ In  a moment, 
in  the  twinkling  of  an  eve.”  We  have  rea- 
son to  believe,  that  a part  at  least  of  mankind 
will  be  employed  as  they  are  now,  and  as 
they  were  in  the  days  of  Noah  and  Lot, 
(Luke  xvii.  26 — 30,)  eating  and  drinking, 
buying  and  selling,  building,  and  planting ; 
having  nothing  less  in  their  thoughts  than 
the  calamity  and  destruction  which  shall 
overwhelm  them  without  warning.  For 
while  they  are  promising  themselves  peace, 
the  day  of  the  Lord  shall  come  upon  them 
like  a thief  in  the  night,  unlooked  for,  and 
like  the  pangs  of  a labouring  woman,  una- 
voidable. “ In  that  day  the  lofty  looks  of 
man  shall  be  humbled,  and  the  haughtiness  ot 
man  shall  be  bowed  down,  and  the  Lord 


THE  GENERAL  RESURRECTION 


357 


SER.  XLII.] 

alone  shall  be  exalted,”  .Isa.  ii.  6.  So  larg*e 
a part  of  divine  prophecy  remains  yet  to  be 
fulfilled,  that  I apprehend  it  is  not  probable 
that  any  of  us  shall  be  alive  when  this  great 
and  terrible  day  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed. 
But  are  not  some  of  us  exposed  to  a simi- 
lar dreadful  surprise ! If  you  die  in  your 
sins,  the  consequences  will  be  no  less  deplo- 
rable to  you,  than  if  you  saw  the  whole  frame 
of  nature  perishing-  with  you.  Alas,  what 
will  you  do,  whither  will  you  flee  for  help, 
or  where  will  you  leave  your  glory,  if,  while 
vou  are  engrossed  by  the  cares  or  pleasures 
of  this  world,  death  should  arrest  you,  and 
summon  you  to  judgment!  The  rich  man  in 
the  gospel  is  not  charged  with  any  crimes 
of  peculiar  enormity.  It  is  not  said  that  he 
ground  the  faces  of  the  poor,  or  that  he,  by 
fraud  or  oppression,  kept  back  the  hire  of  the 
labourers  who  had  reaped  his  harvest ; he 
only  rejoiced  in  his  wealth,  and  in  having 
much  goods  laid  up  for  many  years,  and  that 
therefore  he  might  securely  eat,  drink,  and 
be  merry.  But  God  said  unto  him,  “ Thou 
fool,  this  night  shall  thy  soul  be  required  of 
thee,”  Luke  xii.  20.  Awful  disappointment ! 
Thus  will  it  be,  sooner  or  later,  with  all 
whose  hearts  and  portions  are  in  this  world, 
but  not  rich  towards  God ! Consider  this, 
ou  that  are  like  minded  with  him.  Trem- 
le  at  the  thoug-ht  of  being  found  in  the  num- 
ber of  those  who  have  all  their  consolation 
here,  and  who,  when  they  die,  must  leave 
their  all  behind  them.  Now  is  the  accepta- 
ble time,  the  day  of  salvation.  Now,  if  you 
will  seek  the  Lord,  he  will  be  found  of  you. 
Now,  if  you  pray  for  grace  and  faith,  he  will 
answer  you.  But  when  once  the  Master  of 
the  house  shall  arise,  and  with  his  own  so- 
vereign authoritative  hand  shall  shut  the  door 
of  his  mercy,  it  will  then  be  in  vain,  and  too 
late  to  say,  “ Lord,  Lord,  open  unto  us,” 
Luke  xiii.  25. 

IV.  The  great  scene  will  be  introduced  by 
a signal — “ At  the  last  trump  ; for  the  trum- 
pet shall  sound.”  Thus  the  approach  of  a 
king  or  a judge  is  usually  announced  ; and 
the  scripture  frequently  borrows  images  from 
our  little  affairs  and  customs,  and,  in  conde- 
scension to  our  weakness,  illustrates  things  in 
themselves  too  great  for  our  conceptions,  by 
comparing  them  with  those  which  are  more 
familiar  to  us. 

It  will  indeed  be  comparing  great  things 
with  small,  if  I attempt  to  illustrate  this  sub- 
lime idea,  by  local  customs  which  obtain  in 
this  kingdom.  At  a time  of  assize,  when  the 
judges,  to  whom  the  administration  and 
guardianship  of  our  laws  are  entrusted,  are 
making  their  entrance,  expectation  is  awake, 
and  a kind  of  reverence  and  awe  is  felt,  even 
by  those  who  are  not  immediately  concerned 
in  their  inquest.  The  dignity  of  their  office, 
the  purpose  for  which  they  come,  the  con- 
course of  people,  the  order  of  the  procession. 


and  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  all  concur  in 
raising  an  emotion  in  the  hearts  of  the  spec- 
tators. Happy  are  they  then  upon  whom 
the  inflexible  law  has  no  demand ! But  who 
can  describe  the  terror  with  which  the  sound 
of  the  trumpet  is  heard  by  the  unhappy  cri- 
minal ; and  the  throbbings  of  his  heart,  if  he 
be  already  convicted  in  his  own  conscience, 
and  knows  or  fears,  that  there  is  sufficient 
evidence  at  hand  to  fix  the  fact  upon  him, 
and  to  prove  his  guilt!  For  SGon  the  judge 
will  take  his  seat,  the  books  will  be  opened, 
the  cause  tried,  and  the  criminal  sentenced 
Many  circumstances  of  this  kind  are  alluded 
to  in  the  scripture,  to  assist  us  in  forming 
some  conception  of  what  will  take  place, 
when  all  the  race  of  Adam,  small  and  great, 
shall  stand  before  the  sovereign  Judge,  the 
one  Lawgiver,  who  is  able  to  save  and  to 
destroy.  But  the  concourse,  the  solemnity, 
the  scrutiny,  the  event,  in  the  most  weighty 
causes  that  can  come  before  a human  judica- 
ture, are  mere  shadows,  and  trivial  as  the 
sports  of  children,  if  compared  with  the  busi- 
ness of  this  tremendous  tribunal.  “The 
Lord  himself  will  descend  with  the  voice  of 
the  archangel,  and  the  trump  of  God.”  What 
a trumpet  will  that  be,  whose  sound  shall 
dissolve  the  frame  of  nature,  and  awaken  the 
dead ! When  the  Lord  is  seated  upon  his 
great  white  throne,  (Rev.  xx.  11,)  the  heavens 
and  the  earth  shall  flee  from  his  presence ; 
but  the  whole  race  of  mankind  shall  be  as- 
sembled before  him,  each  one  to  give  an  ac- 
count of  himself,  to  him,  from  whose  pene- 
trating knowledge  no  secret  can  be  hidden, 
and  from  whose  unerring  inflexible  sentence 
there  can  be  no  appeal.  “ Where  then  shall 
the  wicked  and  the  ungodly  appear !” 

But  it  will  be  a joyful  day  to  believers : 
they  shall  be  separated  as  the  wheat  from  the 
tares,  and  arranged  at  his  right  hand.  When 
the  Lord  shall  come,  attended  by  his  holy 
angels,  his  redeemed  people  will  reassume 
their  bodies,  refined  and  freed  from  all  that 
was  corruptible;  and  those  of  them  who  shall 
be  then  living  will  be  changed,  and  caught  up 
to  meet  him  in  the  air.  He  will  then  own 
them,  approve  and  crown  them,  before  as- 
sembled worlds.  Every  charge  that  can  be 
brought  against  them  will  be  over-ruled,  and 
their  plea,  that  they  trusted  in  him  for  salva- 
tion, be  admitted  and  ratified.  They  will  be 
accepted  and  justified.  They  will  shine  like 
the  sun  in  his  full  train,  and  attend,  as  as- 
sessors with  him,  when  he  shall  pass  final 
judgment  upon  his  and  their  enemies.  Then 
he  will  be  admired  in  and  by  them  that  be- 
lieve. Their  tears  will  be  for  ever  wiped 
away,  when  he  shall  say  to  them,  “ Come,  ye 
blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom 
prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  cf  the 
world,”  Matt.  xxv.  34. 

Beloved,  if  these  things  are  so,  what  man- 
ner of  persons  ought  we  to  be  in  all  holy 


358 


DEATH  SWALLOWED  UP  IN  VICTORY. 


conversation  and  godliness?  2 Pet.  iii.  11. 
Should  we  not  give  all  diligence  to  make  our 
calling  and  election  sure,  that  we  may  be 
found  of  him  in  peace  ? He  Avho  will  then  be 
seated  upon  the  throne  of  judgment,  is  to  us 
made  known  as  seated  upon  a throne  of  grace. 
It  is  time,  it  is  high  time,  and  blessed  be  God 
it  is  not  yet  too  late,  to  seek  his  mercy.  Still 
the  gospel  invites  us  to  hear  his  voice,  and  to 
humble  ourselves  before  him.  Once  more 
you  are  invited,  some  of  you  perhaps  for  the 
last  time:  how  know  you  but  sickness  or 
death  may  be  at  the  very  door  ? Consider, 
Are  you  prepared  ? Examine  the  foundation 
of  your  hope, — and  do  it  quickly,  impartially, 
and  earnestly,  lest  you  should  be  cut  off  in 
an  hour  when  you  are  not  aware,  and  perish 
with  a lie  in  your  right  hand. 


SERMON  XLIII. 

DEATH  SWALLOWED  UP  IN  VICTORY. 

Then  shall  he  brought  to  pass  the  saying 
that  is  written , Death  is  swallowed  up  in 
victory. — 1 Cor.  xv.  54. 

Death,  simply  considered,  is  no  more  than 
a private  idea,  signifying  a cessation  of  life, 
or  that  what  was  once  living  lives  no  longer. 
But  it  has  been  the  general,  perhaps  the  uni- 
versal custom  of  mankind  to  personify  it. 
Imagination  gives  death  a formidable  appear- 
ance, arms  it  with  a dart,  sting,  or  scythe, 
and  represents  it  as  an  active,  inexorable, 
and  invincible  reality.  In  this  view  Death  is 
a great  devourer ; with  his  iron  tongue  he 
calls  for  thousands  at  a meal.  He  has  al- 
ready swallowed  up  all  the  preceding  genera- 
tions of  men ; all  who  are  now  living  are 
marked  as  his  inevitable  prey ; he  is  still  un- 
satisfied, and  will  go  on  devouring  till  the 
Lord  shall  come.  Then  this  destroyer  shall 
be  destroyed ; he  shall  swallow  no  more,  but 
be  swallowed  up  himself  in  victory.  Thus 
the  scripture  accommodates  itself  to  the  lan- 
guage and  apprehensions  of  mortals.  Farther, 
the  metaphorical  usage  of  the  word  swallow 
still  enlarges  and  aggrandizes  the  idea.  Thus 
the  earth  is  said  to  have  opened  her  mouth 
and  swallowed  up  Korah  and  his  accomplices. 
Numb.  xvi.  32.  And  thus  a pebble,  a mill- 
stone, or  a mountain,  if  cast  into  the  ocean, 
would  be  swallowed  up,  irrecoverably  lost 
and  gone,  as  though  they  had  never  been, 
Rev.  xviii.  21.  Such  shall  be  the  triumph- 
ant victory  of  Messiah  in  the  great  day 
of  the  consummation  of  all  things.  Death  in 
its  cause  and  in  its  effects,  shall  be  utterly 
destroyed.  Man  was  created  upright,  and 
lived  in  a paradise,  till,  by  sin,  he  brought 
death  into  the  world.  From  that  time  death 


[ser.  xi.in. 


i 


I 


has  reigned  by  sin,  and  evils  abound.  But 
Messiah  came  to  make  an  end  of  sin,  to  de- 
stroy death,  and  him  that  hath  the  power  of 
it,  to  repair  every  disorder,  and  to  remove 
every  misery ; and  he  will  so  fully,  so  glo- 
riously accomplish  his  great  undertaking  in 
the  final  issue,  that  every  thing  contrary  to 
holiness  and  happiness  shall  be  swallowed  up 
and  buried  beyond  the  possibility  of  a return, 
as  a stone  that  is  sunk  in  the  depths  of  the 
sea.  Thus  where  sin  hath  abounded,  grace 
will  much  more  abound. 

This  victory,  however,  being  the  Redeem- 
er’s work,  and  the  fruit  of  his  mediation,  the 
scripture  teaches  us  to  restrain  the  benefits 
of  it  to  the  subjects  of  his  church  and  king- 
dom. In  Adam  all  die.  A depraved  nature, 
guilt,  sorrow,  and  death,  extend  to  all  his 
posterity.  The  All,  who  in  Christ  shall  be 
made  alive,  are  those  who,  by  faith  in  him, 
ar.e  delivered  from  the  sting  of  death,  which 
is  sin,  and  are  made  partakers  of  a new 
nature.  There  is  a second  death,  which, 
though  it  shall  not  hurt  the  believers  in  Je- 
sus, (Rev.  ii.  11,)  will  finally  swallow  up  the 
impenitent  and  ungodly.  We  live  in  an  age 
when  there  is,  if  I may  so  speak,  a resurrec- 
tion of  many  old  and  exploded  errors,  which 
though  they  have  been  often  refuted  and  for- 
gotten, are  admired  and  embraced  by  some, 
persons  as  new  and  wonderful  discoveries. 
Of  this  stamp,  is  the  conceit  of  a universal 
restitution  to  a state  of  happiness  of  all  in- 
telligent creatures,  whether  angels  or  men, 
who  have  rebelled  against  the  will  and  go- 
vernment of  God.  This  sentiment  contradicts 
the  current  doctrine  of  scripture,  which  as- 
serts the  everlasting  misery  of  the  fin&lly 
impenitent,  in  as  strong  terms,  in  the  very 
same  terms,  as  the  eternal  happiness  of  the 
righteous,  and  sometimes  in  the  very  same 
verse,  Matt.  xxv.  46.  Nor  can  it  possibly  be 
true,  if  our  Lord  spake  the  truth  concerning 
Judas,  when  he  said,  “It  had  been  good  for 
that  man  if  he  had  never  been  born,”  Matt, 
xxvi.  24.  If  I could  consider  this  notion  as 
harmless  though  useless,  and  no  worse  than 
many  mistakes  which  men  of  upright  minds 
have  made,  through  inattention  and  weakness 
of  judgment,  I should  not  have  mentioned  it. 
But  I judge  it  to  be  little  less  pernicious  and 
poisonous,  than  false.  It  directly  tends  to 
abate  that  sense  of  the  evil  of  sin,  of  the  in- 
flexible justice  of  God,  and  the  truth  of  his 
threatenings,  which  is  but  too  weak  in  the 
best  of  men.  Let  us  abide  by  the  plain  de- 
clarations of  his  word,  which  assures  us,  that 
there  remaineth  no  other  sacrifice  for  sin, 
(Heb.  x.  26,  27,)  no  future  relief  against  it, 
for  those  who  now  refuse  the  gospel ; and 
that  they  who  cordially  receive  it  shall  be 
saved  with  an  everlasting  salvation,  and  shall 
one  day  sing,  c‘  Death  is  swallowed  up  in 
victory.” 


DEATH  SWALLOWED  UP  IN  VICTORY. 


SER.  XLIII.] 


I would  farther  observe,  that  many  prophe- 
cies have  a gradual  and  increasing  accom- 
plishment, and  may  be  applied  to  several  pe- 
riods ; though  their  full  completion  will  only 
be  at  the  resurrection  and  last  judgment. 
This  passage,  as  it  stands  in  the  prophecy  of 
Isaiah,  (chap.  xxv.  8,)  from  whence  the  apos- 
tle quotes  it,  appears  to  have  a reference  to 
the  comparatively  brighter  light  and  glory 
of  the  gospel-state  beyond  what  was  enjoyed 
bv  the  church  under  the  Levitical  dispensa- 
tion ; and  especially  to  the  privileges  of  those 
happy  days,  when  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles, 
and  the  remnant  of  Israel  shall  be  brought  in, 
and  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  shall  become 
the  kingdoms  of  the  Lord  and  of  his  Christ. 
I would  not  exclude  these  subordinate  senses; 
I have  already  considered  them.  But  my 
text  calls  our  attention  to  the  end  of  all  tilings. 
Then,  in  the  most  emphatical  sense,  Death 
will  be  swallowed  up  of  victory. 

Let  us  endeavour  to  realize  the  great  scene 
before  us,  to  contemplate  the  redeemed  of  the 
Lord  when  they  shall  return  with  him  to  ani- 
mate their  glorious  bodies.  Let  us  ask  the 
question  which  the  elder  proposed  to  John, 
“Who  are  these  clothed  with  white  robes, 
and  whence  came  they?”  Rev.  vii.  13.  They 
came  out  of  great  tribulation,  they  were  once 
under  the  power  of  death,  but  now  death,  as 
to  them,  is  swallowed  up  in  victory.  In  every 
sense  in  which  death  ruled  over  them  they 
are  now  completely  delivered. 

I.  They  were  once  dead  in  law.  They 
had  revolted  from  their  Maker.  They  had 
violated  the  holy  order  of  his  government, 
and  stood  exposed  to  his  righteous  displea- 
sure, and  to  the  heavy  penalty  annexed  to 
the  transgi  ession  of  his  commandments.  But 
mercy  interposed.  God  so  loved  them,  that 
he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son  to  make  an 
atonement  for  their  sins,  and  to  be  their  wis- 
dom, righteousness,  sanctification,  and  re- 
demption, 1 Cor.  i.  30.  They  received  grace 
to  believe  in  this  Saviour,  and  now  they  are 
delivered  from  condemnation.  They  are  ac- 
cepted in  the  Beloved.  They  are  considered 
as  one  with  him,  and  interested  in  all  that  he 
did,  and  in  all  that  he  suffered.  Now  they 
are  the  children  of  God,  and  heirs  of  his  king- 
dom. Though  they  were  afar  off,  they  are 
brought  nigh,  and  admitted  to  a nearer  re- 
lation than  the  holy  angels,  to  him  who  sit- 
teth  upon  the  throne.  For  he  took  upon  him, 
and  still  he  pleased  to  wear,  not  the  nature  of 
angels,  but  the  human  nature.  Their  former 
guilt  is  cancelled,  blotted  out,  and  swallowed 
up.  All  their  sins  are  covered.  Sunk  in  his 
precious  blood  as  in  a deep  sea,  so  that  even 
if  sought  for,  they  can  no  more  be  found. 
That  they  have  sinned,  will  always  be  a 
truth ; and  probably  they  will  never  lose  a 
consciousness  of  what  they  were  by  nature 
s.>:d  practice  while  in  this  world.  But  this, 


359 

so  far  from  abating  their  joy,  will  heighten 
their  gratitude  and  praise  to  him  who  loved 
them,  and  washed  them  from  their  sins  in  his 
own  blood,  Rev.  i.  5.  Their  happiness  prin- 
cipally consists  in  a perception  of  his  love  to 
them,  and  in  their  returns  of  grateful  love  to 
him.  And  they  love  him  much,- because  for 
his  sake,  much  has  been  forgiven  them, 
Luke  vii.  47. 

II.  Once  they  were  dead  in  sin.  They 
were  destitute  of  the  knowledge  and  love  of 
God.  They  were  foolish,  deceived,  and  dis- 
obedient, enslaved  to  divers  lusts,  (Titus  iii. 
3,)  to  inordinate,  sensual,  unsatisfying  plea- 
sures. They  lived  in  malice  and  envy  ; they 
were  hateful,  and  they  hated  one  another.  In 
a word,  they  were  dead  while  they  lived, 
1 Tim.  v.  6.  But  by  the  power  of  grace  they 
were  awakened  and  raised  from  this  death, 
and  made  partakers  of  a new,  a spiritual,  and 
divine  life.  Yet  the  principle  of  sin  and  death 
still  remained  in  them,  and  their  life  upon 
earth,  though  a life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of 
God,  was  a state  of  continual  warfare.  They 
had  many  a conflict,  and  were  often  greatly 
distressed.  They  sowed  in  tears,  to  the  end 
of  their  pilgrimage,  but  now  they  reap  in  joy, 
Psalm  cxxvi.  5.  This  death  is  also  swal- 
lowed up  in  victory.  They  are  now  entirely 
and  for  ever  freed  from  every  clog,  defect,  and 
defilement.  By  beholding  their  Lord  as  he 
is,  in  all  his  glory  and  love,  without  any  in- 
terposing veil  or  cloud,  they  are  made  like 
him,  and  to  the  utmost  measure  of  their  ca- 
pacity conformed  to  his  image.  Now  they 
are  absolutely  spotless  and  impeachable ; for 
though  mutability  seems  no  less  essential  to 
a creature  than  dependence,  yet  they  cannot 
change,  because  their  Lord  is  unchangeable, 
for  their  life  is  hidden  with  Christ  in  God, 
Col.  iii.  3.  They  cannot  fall  from  their  ho- 
liness or  happiness,  because  he  has  engaged 
to  uphold  and  maintain  them  by  his  almighty 
power. 

III.  One  branch  of  the  death  due  to  sin  is 
the  tyranny  and  power  of  Satan.  For  a time 
he  ruled  in  their  hearts,  as  in  his  own  strong- 
hold ; and  w’hile  they  wTere  blinded  by  his  in- 
fluence they  were  little  affected  with  their 
bondage.  Hard  as  his  service  was,  they  did 
not  often  complain  of  it.  They  were  led  by 
him  according  to  his  will  for  the  most  part 
without  resistance,  or,  if  they  attempted  to 
resist,  they  found  it  was  in  vain.  But  in  his 
own  hour  their  Lord,  w’ho  had  bought  them, 
dispossessed  their  strong  enemy,  and  claimed 
their  hearts  for  himself.  Yet  after'they  were 
thus  set  free  from  his  ruling  power,  this  ad- 
versary was  always  plotting  and  fighting 
against  them.  How  much  have  some  of  them 
suffered  from  his  subtle  wiles  and  his  fiery 
darts ! from  his  rage  as  a roaring-  lion,  from 
his  cunning  as  a serpent  lying  in  their  path, 
and  from  his  attempts  to  deceive  them  under 


360 


DEATH  SWALLOWED  UP  IN  VICTORY. 


the  semblance  of  an  angel  of  light ! 2 Cor.  xi. 
14.  But  now  they  are  placed  out  of  his  reach. 
Death  and  Satan  are  swallowed  up.  The 
victory  is  complete.  The  wicked  one  shall 
never  have  access  to  touch  or  disturb  them 
any  more.  Now  he  is  shut  up  in  his  own 
place,  and  the  door  sealed,  no  more  to  open. 
While  he  was  permitted  to  vex  and  worry 
them,  he  acted  under  a limited  commission 
which  he  could  not  exceed ; all  was  directed 
and  over-ruled  by  the  wisdom  and  love  of 
their  Lord  for  their  advantage.  Such  exer- 
cises were  necessary,  then,  to  discover  to 
them  more  of  the  weakness  and  vileness  of 
their  own  hearts,  to  make  them  more  sensible 
of  their  dependence  upon  their  Saviour,  and 
to  afford  them  affecting  proofs  of  his  power 
and  care  engaged  in  their  behalf.  But  they 
are  necessary  no  longer.  Their  warfare  is 
finished.  They  are  now  where  the  wicked 
cease  from  troubling,  and  where  the  weary 
are  at  rest,  Job  iii.  17. 

IV.  While  they  were  in  the  world,  they 
had  a share,  many  of  them  a very  large 
share,  of  the  woes  and  sufferings  incident  to 
this  mortal  state:  which,  as  they  are  the 
fruits  and  effects  of  sin,  and  greatly  contribute 
to  shorten  the  life  of  man,  and  hasten  his  re- 
turn to  dust,  are,  as  I formerly  observed,  pro- 
perly included  in  the  comprehensive  meaning 
of  the  original  sentence,  death.  They  belong 
to  its  train,  and  are  harbingers  of  its  approach. 
None  of  the  race  of  Adam  are  exempted 
from  these;  but  especially  the  servants  of 
God  have  no  exemption.  Their  gracious 
Lord,  who  frees  them  from  condemnation, 
and  gives  them  peace  in  himself,  assures 
them  that  in  this  world  they  shall  have  tri- 
bulation, John  xvi.  33.  This  is  so  inseparable 
from  their  calling,  that  it  is  mentioned  as  one 
special  mark  of  their  adoption  and  sonship, 
Ileb.  xii.  6 — 8.  If  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked 
sometimes  continues  for  a season  without  in- 
terruption, their  day  is  coming,  (Psal.  xxxvii. 
13  ;)  but  the  righteous  may  expect  chastise- 
ment and  discipline  daily.  Thus  their  graces 
are  refined,  strengthened,  and  displayed,  to 
the  praise  of  their  heavenly  Father.  There 
is  no  promise  in  the  Bible  that  secures  the 
most  eminent  and  exemplary  believer  from 
participating  in  the  heaviest  calamities  in 
common  with  others,  and  they  have  many 
trials  peculiar  to  themselves.  Thus,  while 
upon  earth,  they  endure  hardship  for  his  sake. 
Because  he  chose  them  out  of  the  world,  and 
they  would  no  longer  comply  with  its  sinful 
maxims  and  customs,  the  world  hated  them, 
John  xv.  19.  Many  of  them  were  the  mark 
of  public  scorn  and  malice,  accounted  the 
offscouring  of  all  things ; they  were  driven 
to  deserts,  and  mountains,  and  caves ; they 
suffered  stripes,  imprisonment,  and  death. 
Others  had  trials  of  pains,  sickness,  and 
poverty,  of  sharp  bereaving  dispensations. 


[ser.  XLIII. 

| Their  gourds  withered,  and  the  desire 
| of  their  eyes  was  taken  away  with  a 
i stroke.  They  had  fightings  without,  and 
fears  within.  So  that  if  their  pressures  and 
troubles  were  considered,  without  taking  into 
the  account  their  inward  supports  and  the 
consolation  they  derived  from  their  hopes  be- 
yond the  grave,  they  might  be  deemed  of  all 
men  the  most  miserable,  1 Cor.  xv.  19.  But 
they  were  supported  under  these  exercises, 
brought  safely  through  them,  and  now  their 
sorrows  are  swallowed  up  in  victory.  Now 
the  days  of  their  mourning  are  ended,  Is.  lx. 
17.  They  now’  confess,  that  their  longest  af- 
flictions were  momentary,  and  their  heaviest 
burdens  wTere  light,  in  comparison  of  that  far 
more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory, 
(2  Cor.  iv.  17,)  which  they  have  entered  upon. 
Sorrow7  and  sighing  have  taken  their  ever- 
lasting flight,  and  joy  and  gladness  have 
come  forth  to  meet  them,  and  to  dwell  with 
them  for  ever,  Is.  li.  11. 

V.  In  their  collective  capacity,  the  seeds 
of  sin  often  produced  bitter  fruits.  Through 
remaining  ignorance  and  prejudice,  they  often 
mistook  and  misunderstood  one  another.  They 
lost  much  good  which  they  might  otherwise 
: have  enjoyed,  and  brought  upon  themselves 
many  evils.  Through  their  intemperate  heats 
j and  unsanctified  zeal,  which  divided  them 
j into  little  parties  and  separate  interests,  the 
5 children  cf  the  same  family,  the  members  of 
! the  same  body,  were  too  often  at  variance,  or 
! at  least  cold  and  distant  in  their  regards  to 
j each  other.  Yea,  Satan  could  foment  discord 
and  jealousies  among  those  wrho  lived  in  the 
same  house,  or  met  at  the  same  table  of  the 
Lord.  But  now  grace  has  triumphed  over 
every  evil ; sin  and  death  are  swallowed  up 
in  victory.  Now  all  is  harmony,  love,  and 
joy.  They  have  one  heart  and  one  song, 
which  will  never  more  be  blemished  by  the 
harshness  of  a single  discordant  note. 

May  this  prospect  animate  our  hopes,  and 
awaken,  in  those  who  have  hitherto  been  afar 
off,  a desire  of  sharing  in  the  happiness  of  the 
redeemed ! Awful  will  be  the  contrast  to 
those  who  have  had  their  portion  in  this 
wmrld  ! Is  it  needful  to  address  any  in  this 
auditory,  in  the  language  which  our  Lord 
used  to  his  impenitent  hearers  1 “ Wo  unto 
you  that  are  rich ; for  you  have  received 
your  consolation.  Wo  unto  you  that  are  full ; 
for  ye  shall  hunger.  Wo  unto  you  that  laugh 
now;  for  ye  shall  mourn  and  weep!”  Luke 
vi.  24,  25.  When  the  rich  man,  w ho  had 
lived  in  honour  and  affluence  here,  was  torn 
from  all  that  he  loved,  and  lifted  up  his  eyes  in 
torment,  the  remembrance  of  his  former  state, 
that  he  once  had  his  good  things,  (Luke  xvi. 
25,)  but  that  they  were  gone,  for  ever  gone, 
could  only  be  a keen  aggravation  of  his 
j misery.  Dreadful  will  be  the  condition  of  all 
I who  die  in  their  sins:  but  the  case  of  those 


TRIUMPH  OVER  DEATH  AND  THE  GRAVE. 


361 


SER.  XLIV.] 

who  are  now  frequently  envied  by  the  ig- 
norant, in  the  view  of  a mind  enlightened  by 
the  truth,  must  appear  doubly  and  peculiarly 
pitiable.  They  have  the  most  to  lose,  they 
have  the  most  to  account  for.  Alas,  how 
terrible,  how  sudden  the  change  ! From  a 
state  of  honour  and  influence  amongst  men, 
to  fall  in  a moment  under  the  contempt  and 
displeasure  of  the  holy  God — to  pass,  from  a 
crowd  of  dependents  and  flatterers,  to  the 
company  of  Satan  and  his  angels;  from  gran- 
deur and  opulence,  to  a state  of  utter  dark- 
ness and  horror,  where  the  worm  dieth  not, 
and  the  fire  cannot  be  quenched,  Mark  ix. 
44,  46,  48.  These  are  sensible  images,  it  is 
true ; the  things  of  the  unseen  world  cannot 
be  described  to  us  as  they  are  in  themselves; 
but  we  may  be  certain  that  the  description 
falls  unspeakably  short  of  the  reality.  The 
malicious  insults  of  the  powers  of  darkness, 
the  mutual  recriminations  of  those  who, 
having  been  connected  in  sin  here,  will  be 
6ome  way  connected  in  misery  hereafter, 
(Matt.  xiii.  30,) — remorse,  rage,  despair,  a 
total  and  final  exclusion  from  God  the  foun- 
tain of  happiness,  with  an  abiding  sense  of 
his  indignation : — this  complicated  misery 
cannot  be  expressed  in  the  language  of  mor- 
tals— like  the  joy  of  the  blessed,  it  is  more 
than  eye  hath  seen,  or  ear  hath  heard,  or  can 
possibly  enter  into  the  heart  of  man  to  con- 
ceive, 1 Cor.  ii.  9.  Add  the.  ideas  of  un- 
changeable and  eternal  to  the  rest,  that  it 
will  be  a misery  admitting  of  no  intermission, 
abatement,  or  end ; and  then  seriously  con- 
sider, what  can  it  profit  a man  should  he 
gain  the  whole  world,  if  at  last  he  should 
thus  lose  his  soul  ? Matt.  xvi.  26.  No  longer 
make  a mock  at  sin:  it  is  not  a small  evil; 
it  is  a great  evil  in  itself,  and,  unless  par- 
doned and  forsaken,  will  be  productive  of  tre- 
mendous consequences.  No  longer  make 
light  of  the  gospel : it  points  out  to  you  the 
only  possible  method  of  escaping  the  damna- 
tion of  hell.  To  refuse  it,  is  to  rush  upon 
remediless  destruction.  No  longer  trust  in 
uncertain  riches : if  you  possess  them,  I need 
not  tell  you  they  do  not  make  you  happy  at 
present,  much  less  will  they  comfort  you  in 
the  hour  of  death,  or  profit  you  in  the  day  of 
wrath,  Prov.  xi.  4.  Waste  not  your  time  and 
talents  (which  must  be  accounted  for)  in  the 
pursuit  of  sensual  pleasure ; in  the  end  it 
will  bite  like  a serpent.  For  all  these  things 
God  will  assuredly  bring  you  into  judgment, 
unless  in  this  day  of  grace  you  humble  your- 
selves to  implore  that  mercy  which  is  still 
proposed  to  you,  if  you  will  seek  it  sincerely 
and  with  your  whole  heart;  and  which  I 
once  more  entreat,  charge,  and  adjure  you  to 
seek,  by  the  great  name  of  Messiah,  the  Sa- 
viour, by  his  agonies  and  bloody  sweat,  by  his 
cross  and  passion,  by  his  precious  death,  and 
by  the  consideration  of  his  future  glorious 
appearance,  to  subdue  all  things  to  himself. 
Vol.  II.  2 Z 


SERMON  XLIV. 

TRIUMPH  OVER  DEATH  AND  THE  GRAVE. 

Q death , where  is  thy  sting  ? O grave , where 
is  thy  victory  ? The  sting  of  death  is  sin  ; 
and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law.  But 
thanks  be  to  God , which  giveth  us  the 
victory , through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
1 Cor.'  xv.  55—57. 

The  Christian  soldier  may,  with  the  great- 
est propriety,  be  said  to  war  a good  warfare, 
1 Tim.  i.  18.  He  is  engaged  in  a good  cause; 
he  fights  under  the  eye  of  the  Captain  of  his 
salvation.  Though  he  be  weak  in  himself, 
and  though  his  enemies  are  many  and  mighty, 
he  may  do  that  which  in  other  soldiers  would 
be  presumption,  and  has  often  been  the  cause 
of  a defeat ; he  may  triumph  while  he  is  in 
the  heat  of  battle,  and  assure  himself  of  vic- 
tory before  the  conflict  is  actually  decided; 
for  the  Lord,  his  great  Commander,  fights  for 
him,  goes  before  him,  and  treads  his  enemies 
under  his  feet.  Such  a persuasion,  when 
solidly  grounded  upon  the  promises  and  en- 
gagement of  a faithful  unchangeable  God, 
is  sufficient,  it  should  seem,  to  make  a cow- 
ard bold.  True  Christians  are  not  cowards ; 
yet,  when  they  compare  themselves  with 
their  adversaries,  they  see  much  reason  for 
fear  and  suspicion  on  their  own  parts;  but 
when  they  look  to  their  Saviour,  they  are 
enlightened,  strengthened,  and  comforted. 
They  consider  who  he  is,  what  he  has  done  ; 
that  the  battle  is  not  so  much  theirs  as  his; 
that  he  is  their  strength  and  their  shield, 
and  that  his  honour  is  concerned  in  the  event 
of  the  war.  Thus  out  of  weakness  they  are 
made  strong;  and  however  pressed  and  op- 
posed, they  can  say,  “ Nay,  in  all  these  things 
we  are  more  than  conquerors,  through  him 
that  loved  us?”  Rom.  viii.  37.  The  whole 
power  of  the  opposition  against  them  is  sum- 
med up  in  the  words  Sin  and  Death  : but  these 
enemies  are  already  weakened  and  disarmed. 
It  is  sin  that  furnished  death  with  his  sting; 
a sting  sharpened  and  strengthened  by  the 
law.  But  Jesus,  by  his  obedience  unto  death, 
has  made  an  end  of  sin,  and  has  so  fulfilled 
and  satisfied  the  law  on  their  behalf,  that 
death  is  deprived  of  its  sting,  and  can  no 
longer  hurt  them.  They  may  therefore  meet 
it  with  confidence,  and  say,  “Thanks  be  to 
God  who  giveth  us  the  victory  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.” 

We  have  here  two  unspeakably  different 
views  to  take  of  the  same  subject, — Death 
armed  with  its  formidable  sting ; and  Death 
rendered  harmless,  and  its  aspect  softened, 
by  the  removal  of  the  sting. 

I.  The  first  is  a very  awful  subject : I en- 
treat your  attention.  I am  not  now  about  to 
speak  upon  a point  of  speculation.  It  is  a 


362 


TRIUMPH  OYER  DEATH  AND  THE  GRAVE.  [ser  xliv. 


personal,  a home  concern  to  us  all.  For  we 
must  all  die.  But  should  any  of  you  feel  not 
only  the  stroke,  but  the  sting  of  death  when 
you  leave  this  world,  it  were  better  for  you 
that  you  had  never  been  born. 

The  love  of  life,  and  consequently  a re- 
luctance to  that  dissolution  of  the  intimate 
union  between  soul  and  body,  which  we  call 
death,  seems  natural  to  man.  But,  if  there 
was  no  hereafter,  no  state  of  judgment  and 
retribution  to  be  expected ; if  there  was  no 
consciousness  of  guilt,  no  foreboding  of  con- 
sequences upon  the  mind ; if  we  only  con- 
sidered death  as  inevitable,  and  had  no 
apprehensions  beyond  it ; death  would  be  di- 
vested of  its  principal  terrors.  \Ve  see  that 
when  conscience  is  stupified,  or  when  the 
mind  is  poisoned  with  infidelity,  many  people, 
notwithstanding  the  natural  love  of  life,  are 
so  disgusted  with  its  disappointments,  that  a 
fit  of  impatience,  or  the  dread  of  contempt, 
often  prevails  on  them  to  rush  upon  death  by 
an  act  of  their  own  will ; or  to  hazard  it  in  a 
duel,  rather  than  be  suspected  of  wanting 
what  they  account  spirit.  But  death  has  a 
sting,  though  they  perceive  it  not  till  they 
feel  it,  till  they  are  stung  by  it  past  recovery. 

But  usually,  and  where  the  heart  is  not 
quite  hardened,  men  are  unwilling  and  afraid 
to  die.  They  have  some  apprehension  of  the 
sting.  Death  can  sting  at  a distance.  How 
often  and  how. greatly  does  the  fear  of  death 
poison  and  embitter  all  the  comforts  of  life, 
even  in  the  time  of  health ! Perhaps  some  of 
you  well  know  this  to  be  true.  But  in  health 
people  can  in  some  measure  run  away  from 
themselves,  if  I may  so  speak.  They  fly  to 
business,  company,  and  amusements,  to  hide 
themselves  from  their  own  reflections.  Their 
fears  are  transient,  occasional,  and  partial ; 
they  would  tremble  indeed,  if  they  knew  all ; 
or  if  they  were  steadfastly  and  deliberately  to 
contemplate  what  they  do  know.  How  sin  is 
the  sting  of  death,  is  best  discovered  when 
conscience  is  alarmed  in  a time  of  sickness ; 
when  the  things  of  the  world  can  no  longer 
amuse,  and  death  is  approaching  with  hasty 
strides.  These  scenes  are  mostly  kept  secret ; 
and  very  often  they  are  not  understood  by 
those  who  are  spectators  of  them.  Perhaps 
the  unhappy  terrified  sinner  is  considered  as 
delirious,  because  the  sting  of  death  in  his 
conscience  extorts  from  him  such  confessions 
and  complaints  as  he  never  made  before. 
What  was  once  slighted  as  a fable,  is  now 
seen  and  felt  as  a reality.  Such  cases,  I am 
afraid,  are  more  frequent  than  we  are  in 
general  aware  of.  But  they  are  suppressed, 
ascribed  to  the  violence  of  the  fever,  and  for- 
gotten as  soon  as  possible.  Yet  they  do 
sometimes  transpire.  I believe  there  is  no 
reason  to  doubt  the  truth  of  what  we  have 
heard,  of  one  who,  in  the  horrors  of  despair, 
vainly  offered  his  physicians  many  thousand 
pounis,  to  prolong  his  life  but  a single  day. 


The  relation  is  in  print,  of  another,  who 
pointing  to  the  fire  in  his  chamber,  said,  If 
he  were  only  to  lie  twenty  thousand  years  in 
such  a fire,  he  should  esteem  it  a mercy  com- 
pared with  what  he  felt,  and  with  what  he 
saw  awaiting  him.  It  is  not  always  thus. 
Many  persons  die  insensible  as  they  lived, 
and  can,  perhaps,  trifle  and  jest  in  their  last 
moments.  But  the  scripture  assures  us,  that 
when  they  who  die  in  their  sins  breathe  their 
last  in  this  world,  they  open  their  eyes  in  the 
other  world  in  torments.  For  th6  sting  of 
death,  the  desert  of  sin,  unless  timely  re- 
moved by  faith  in  Jesus,  will  fill  the  soul  with 
anguish  for  ever.  It  derives  a strength,  an 
efficacy,  and  a continuance  from  the  law. 

This  law,  which  gives  strength  to  sin  and 
sharpens  the  sting  of  death,  is  the  law  of  our 
creation,  as  connected  with  the  penalty  which 
God  has  annexed  to  the  breach  of  it.  Our 
relation  to  God,  as  we  are  his  creatures,  re- 
quires us,  according  to  the  very  nature  of 
things,  supremely  to  love,  serve,  trust,  and 
obey  him,  who  made  us,  and  in  whom  we 
live,  and  breathe,  and  have  our  being,  Acts 
xvii.  28.  And  our  revolting  from  him,  and 
living  to  ourselves  in  opposition  to  his  will, 
is  such  an  affront  to  his  wisdom,  power,  au- 
thority, and  goodness,  as  must  necessarily 
involve  misery  in  the  very  idea  of  it,  if  his 
perfections,  the  capacity  of  our  souls,  and  our 
absolute  dependence  upon  him,  be  attended 
to.  And  they  must  be  attended  to  sooner  oi 
later.  Though  he  keep  long  silence,  and  the 
sinner  presumes  upon  his  patience,  and  thinks 
him  such  a one  as  himself,  he  will  at  length 
reprove  him,  (Psalm  1.  21,)  and  set  his  sins  in 
order  before  him,  in  contrast  with  the  de- 
mands of  his  law.  The  nature,  authority, 
extent,  and  sanction  of  this  law,  all  combine 
to  give  efficacy  to  the  sting  of  death. 

1.  The  law,  to  which  our  tempers  and  con- 
duct ought  to  be  conformed,  is  not  an  arbi- 
trary appointment;  but  necessarily  results 
from  our  state  as  creatures,  and  the  capaci- 
ties and  powers  we  have  received  from  our 
Creator.  It  is  therefore  holy,  wise,  and  good  ; 
indispensable,  and  unchangeable.  To  love 
God  with  all  our  heart  and  strength,  to  de- 
pend upon  him,  to  conform  to  every  intima- 
tion of  his  will,  was  the  duty  of  man  from 
the  first  moment  of  his  existence ; was  the 
law  of  his  nature,  written  originally  in  his 
heart.  The  republication  of  it,  as  it  stands  in 
the  Bible,  by  precepts  and  prohibitions,  would 
not  have  been  necessary  had  he  continued 
in  that  state  of  rectitude  in  which  he  was 
created.  It  became  necessary  after  his  fall, 
to  restrain  him  from  evil,  and  to  convince  him 
of  sin ; but  could  not  properly  increase  his 
primitive  obligation  to  obedience. 

2.  We  are  bound  to  the  observance  of  this 
law  by  the  highest  authority.  It  is  the  law 
of  God  our  maker,  preserver,  and  benefactor, 
who  has  every  conceivable  right  to  govern 


TRIUMPH  OVER  DEATH  AND  THE  GRAVE. 


363 


SER.  XLIV.] 

us.  His  eye  is  always  upon  us,  and  we  are 
surrounded  by  his  power,  so  that  we  can  nei- 
ther avoid  his  notice  nor  escape  his  hand. 
Men  are  usually  tenacious  of  their  authority ; 
they  seldom  allow  their  dependants  to  dispute 
or  disobey  their  commands  with  impunity.  It 
is  expected  that  a son  should  honour  his  fa- 
ther, and  a servant  his  master,  Mai.  i.  6.  And 
when  men  have  power  to  execute  the  dic- 
tates of  their  pride,  they  frequently  punish 
disobedience  with  death.  But  how  will  these 
haughty  worms,  who  trample  upon  their  fel- 
low-worms, and  think  they  have  a right  to 
the  most  implicit  obedience  from  their  in- 
feriors; how  will  they  tremble  when  they 
shall  appear  before  God,  who  is  no  respecter 
of  persons,  to  answer  for  their  contempt  of 
the  authority  of  the  Sovereign  Lawgiver, 
who,  alone,  is  able  to  save  or  to  destroy  7 
That  we  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  man, 
(Acts  v.  29,)  will,  perhaps,  be  allowed  as  a 
speculative  truth ; but  whoever  will  uniformly 
make  it  the  rule  of  his  practice,  must  expect 
upon  many  occasions  to  be  deemed  a fool  or 
a madman  by  the  world  around  him.  But 
sovereignty,  majesty,  authority,  and  power 
belong  to  God.  He  is  the  Governor  of  the 
universe,  and  his  throne  is  established  in 
righteousness.  He  is  long-suffering,  and 
waits  to  be  gracious,  but  he  will  not  forego 
his  right.  Sin  is  the  sting  of  death  indeed, 
when  the  authority  of  him  against  whom  it 
was  committed  is  perceived  by  the  con- 
science. 

3.  The  extent  of  the  law  adds  to  the 
strength  by  which  sin  acts  as  the  sting  of 
death.  Human  laws  can  only  take  cogni- 
zance of  words  and  actions.  But  the  law  of 
God  reaches  to  the  thoughts  and  inward  re- 
cesses of  the  heart.  It  condemns  what  is 
most  specious  and  most  approved  amongst 
men,  if  not  proceeding  from  a right  intention, 
and  directed  to  the  right  end,  which  can  be 
no  other  than  the  will  and  glory  of  him  who 
made  us.  It  condemns  the  sinner  not  only 
for  the  evil  which  he  has  actually  committed, 
but  for  every  sinful  purpose  formed  in  his 
heart,  and  which  was  only  rendered  abortive 
for  want  of  opportunity,  Matt.  v.  28.  It  like- 
wise takes  exact  notice  of  every  aggravation 
of  sin  arising  from  circumstances,  from  the 
abuse  of  superior  light  and  advantages,  and 
from  the  long  train  of  consequences,  in- 
creasing in  proportion  to  the  influence  which 
the  rank,  wealth,  or  extensive  connexions  of 
the  offender  give  to  his  example. 

4.  The  sanction  of  the  law,  which  thus 
strengthens  the  malignity  of  sin,  is  the  very 
point,  if  I may  so  express  myself,  of  the  sting 
of  death.  This  is  the  displeasure  of  the  Al- 
mighty. His  holy,  inflexible  love  of  order 
will  exclude  those  who  violate  it  from  his 
favour.  They  must  be  miserable,  unless  they 
are  reconciled  and  renewed  by  the  grace  of 
the  gospel.  They  must  be  separated  from 


him,  and  they  cannot  be  happy  without  him. 
They  are  not  so  even  in  this  world,  which 
they  love.  How  miserable  then  must  they 
be,  when,  torn  from  all  their  attachments, 
pleasures,  and  possessions,  having  no  longer 
any  thing  to  divert  them  from  a fixed  atten- 
tion to  their  true  state,  they  shall  be  made 
keenly  sensible  of  what  is  implied  in  that 
sentence,  “ Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into 
everlasting  fire.”  We  cannot  now  conceive 
what  it  will  be  to  lose  the  only  good  which 
can  satisfy  a soul : to  be  shut  out  from  God, 
whose  favour  is  life,  and  in  whose  presence 
there  is  fulness  of  joy,  and  to  be  shut  up 
where  neither  peace  nor  hope  can  enter. 
The  images  of  fire  unquenchable,  and  a never- 
dying  worm,  are  but  faint  emblems  of  that 
despair  and  remorse  which  will  sting  the 
sinful  soul  in  a future  state.  This  is  the 
second  death : this  is  eternal  death ; for  the 
wicked,  and  all  they  who  forget  God,  when 
thrust  into  hell,  will  for  ever  desire  to  die, 
and  death  will  for  ever  flee  from  them, 
Rev.  ix.  6. 

II.  Let  us  turn  our  thoughts  to  a more 
pleasing  theme,  and  attempt  to  take  a view 
of  death  as  softened  into  a privilege  by  him 
who  has  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light. 
Jesus  died.  His  death  was  penal;  he  died 
for  sin,  though  not  for  his  own,  and  therefore 
suffered  the  penalty  due  to  sin,  the  curse  of 
the  broken  law.  The  torment  and  shame  of 
his  crucifixion  were  preceded  and  accom- 
panied by  unknown  agonies  and  conflicts, 
which  caused  him  to  sweat  blood,  and  to 
utter  strong  cries  and  groans.  Death  stung 
him  to  the  heart ; but  (as  it  is  said  of  the  en- 
raged bee)  he  lost  his  sting.  The  law  having 
been  honoured,  and  sin  expiated,  by  the 
obedience  and  sufferings  of  the  Son  of  God 
for  us,  and  in  our  nature,  death  has  no  longer 
power  to  sting  those  who  believe  in  him. 
They  do  not  properly  die — they  fall  asleep  in 
Jesus,  Acts  vii.  60;  1 Thessalonians  iv.  15. 
To  them  this  last  enemy  acts  a friendly  part. 
He  is  sent  to  put  an  end  to  all  their  sorrows, 
and  to  introduce  them  into  a state  of  endless 
life  and  joy. 

1.  Dying  believers  can  sing  this  song  be- 
fore their  departure  out  of  the  world.  We 
expect  it,  when  we  are  called  to  attend  them 
in  their  last  hours  ; and  if  their  illness  leaves 
them  in  possession  of  their  faculties  and 
speech,  we  are  seldom  disappointed.  Yet  I 
believe  a full  knowledge  of  this  subject  can- 
not be  collected  from  what  we  observe  of 
others,  or  hear  from  them,  when  they  are 
near  death.  We  must  be  in  similar  cir- 
cumstances ourselves,  before  we  can  see  as 
they  see,  or  possess  the  ideas  which  they  en- 
deavour to  describe,  and  which  seem  too 
great  for  the  language  of  mortals  to  convey. 

We  know,  by  the  evidence  of  ur  deniable 
testimony,  that  many  faithful  servants  of  God, 
when  called  to  suffer  for  his  sake,  have  not 


364 


TRIUMPH  OVER  DEATH  AND  THE  GRAVE. 


only  been  supported,  but  comforted,  and 
enabled  to  rejoice,  under  the  severest  tor- 
tures, and  even  in  the  midst  of  the  flames. 
We  suppose,  I think  with  reason,  that  such 
communications  of  light  and  power  as  raise 
a person,  in  such  situations,  above  the  ordi- 
nary feelings  of  humanity,  must,  either  in 
kind  or  degree,  be  superior  to  what  is  usually 
enjoyed  by  Christians  in  the  smoother  walks 
of  prosperity  and  outward  peace.  God,  who 
is  all-sufficient,  and  always  near,  has  pro- 
mised to  give  his  people  strength  according 
to  their  day,  and  in  the  time  of  trouble  they 
are  not  disappointed.  A measure  of  the  like 
extraordinary  discoveries  and  supports  is  often 
vouchsafed  to  dying  believers,  and  thus  the 
gloom  which  might  otherwise  hang  over 
their  dying  hours,  is  dispelled ; and  while 
they  contemplate  the  approach  of  . death,  a 
new  world  opens  upon  them.  Even  while 
they  are  yet  upon  earth,  they  stand  upon  the 
threshold  of  heaven.  It  seems,  in  many 
cases,  as  if  the  weakness  of  the  bodily  frame 
gave  occasion  to  the  awakening  of  some 
faculty,  till  then  dormant  in  the  soul,  by 
which  invisibles  are  not  only  believed,  but 
seen,  and  unutterables  are  heard  and  under- 
stood. 

The  soul’s  dark  cottage,  tattered  and  decayed, 

Lets  in  new  light  through  chinks. 

Instances  are  frequent  of  those  who  are 
thus  blessed  when  they  die  in  the  Lord ; and 
it  does  not  appear  that  old  age,  or  great  know- 
ledge, or  long  experience,  gives  any  consi- 
derable advantage  in  a dying  hour ; for  when 
the  heart  is  truly  humbled  for  sin,  and  the 
hope  solidly  fixed  upon  the  Saviour,  persons 
of  weak  capacities  and  small  attainments, 
yea,  novices,  and  children,  are  enabled  to 
meet  death  with  equal  fortitude  and  triumph. 
And  often  the  present  comforts  they  feel,  and 
their  lively  expectations  of  approaching  glory, 
inspire  them  with  a dignity  of  sentiment  and 
expression  far  beyond  what  could  be  expected 
from  them ; and  perhaps  their  deportment 
upon  the  whole  is  no  less  animating  and  en- 
couraging, than  that  of  the  most  established 
and  best  informed  believers.  Thus,  out  of  the 
mouths  of  babes  and  sucklings  the  Lord  or- 
dains strength,  and  perfects  his  praise,  Psalm 
viii.  2.  In  a few  hours,  under  the  influence 
of  his  immediate  teaching,  they  often  learn 
more  of  the  certainty  and  importance  of  di- 
vine things  than  can  be  derived  from  the  or- 
dinary methods  of  instruction  in  the  course 
of  many  years.  In  the  midst  of  agonies  and 
outward  distress,  we  hear  them  with  admira- 
tion declare  that  they  are  truly  happy,  and 
that  they  never  knew  pleasure  in  their  hap- 
piest days  of  health  equal  to  what  they  enjoy 
when  flesh  and  heart  are  fainting.  For  death 
has  lost  its  sting  as  to  them,  and  while  they 
are  able  to  speak,  they  continue  ascribing 
praise  to  him,  who  has  given  them  the  vic- 


[ser  xlit. 

tory,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Every 
word  in  this  doxology  is  emphatical. 

1st.  Thanks  be  to  God. — This  blessedness 
is  all  his  work.  The  means  are  of  his  gra- 
cious appointment.  The  application  is  by  his 
gracious  power.  He  gave  his  Son  for  them, 
he  sent  his  gospel  to  them.  It  was  the  agency 
of  his  Spirit  that  made  them  a willing  people. 
The  word  of  promise,  which  is  the  ground  of 
their  hope,  was  of  his  gratuitous  providing, 
and  it  was  he  who  constrained  and  enabled 
them  to  trust  in  it,  Psalm  cxix.  49. 

2d.  Who  giveth  us  the  victory. — This  is 
victory  indeed ; for  it  is  over  the  last  enemy ; 
and  after  the  last  enemy  is  vanquished,  there 
can  be  no  more  conflicts.  In  this  sense,  be- 
lievers are  more  than  conquerors.  In  other 
wars,  they  who  have  conquered  once  and 
again,  may  have  been  finally  defeated,  or  they 
may  have  died  (like  our  long-lamented  gene- 
ral Wolfe)  upon  the  field  of  battle,  and  have 
left  the  fruits  of  their  victory  to  be  enjoyed 
by  others.  But  the  Christian  soldier,  though 
he  may  occasionally  be  a loser  in  a skirmish, 
he  is  sure  to  conquer  in  the  last  great  de- 
ciding battle ; and  when  to  an  eye  of  sense, 
he  seems  to  fall,  he  is  instantly  translated  to 
receive  the  plaudit  of  his  Commander,  and 
the  crown  of  life  which  he  has  prepared  for 
them  that  love  him. 

3d.  This  victory  is  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. — They  gained  it  not  by  their  own 
sword,  neither  was  it  their  own  arm  that 
saved  them,  Psalm  lxiv.  3.  He  died  to  de- 
liver them,  who  would  otherwise,  through 
fear  of  death,  have  been  always  subject  to 
bondage.  And  it  is  he  who  teaches  their 
hands  to  war,  and  their  fingers  to  fight,  and 
covers  their  heads  in  the  day  of  battle. 
Therefore  they  gladly  say,  “Not  unto  us, 
O Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name,  be 
the  glory  and  the  praise,”  Psalm  cxv.  1. 
And  this  consideration  enhances  their  plea- 
sure; for  because  they  love  him  above  all, 
they  rejoice  not  only  in  the  victory  they  ob- 
tain, but  in  the  thought  that  they  are  in- 
debted to  him  for  it.  For  were  it  possible 
there  could  be  several  methods  of  salvation, 
and  they  were  left  to  their  own  choice,  they 
would,  most  gladly  and  deliberately,  choose 
that  method  which  should  bring  them  under 
the  greatest  obligations  to  him. 

2.  This  triumphant  song  will  be  sung  to 
the  highest  advantage,  when  the  whole  body 
of  the  redeemed  shall  be  collected  together 
to  sing  it  with  one  heart  and  voice  at  the 
great  resurrection-day.  Lot  was  undoubtedly 
thankful,  when  he  was  snatched  from  the 
impending  destruction  of  Sodom.  Yet  his 
lingering,  (Gen.  xix.  16,)  showed,  that  he 
had  but  an  imperfect  sense  of  the  greatness 
of  the  mercy  afforded  him.  His  feelings  were 
probably  stronger  afterwards,  when  he  stood 
in  safety  upon  the  mountain,  and  actually 
saw  the  smoke  rising,  like  the  smoke  of  a 


DIVINE  SUPPORT  AND  PROTECTION. 


365 


6ER.  XLV.] 

furnace,  from  the  place  where  he  had  lately 
dwelt.  At  present  we  have  but  very  faint 
ideas  of  the  misery  from  which  we  are  de- 
livered, of  the  happiness  reserved  in  heaven 
for  us;  or  of  the  sufferings  of  the  Redeemer; 
but  if  we  attain  to  the  heavenly  Zion,  and  see 
from  thence  the  smoke  of  that  bottomless  pit, 
which  might  justly  have  been  our  everlast- 
ing abode,  we  shall  then  more  fully  under- 
stand what  we  are  delivered  from,  the  means 
of  our  deliverance,  and  the  riches  of  the  in- 
heritance of  the  saints  in  light.  And  then  we 
shall  sing  in  more  exalted  strains  than  we 
can  at  present  even  conceive  of,  “ Thanks 
be  to  God,  who  hath  given  us  the  victory, 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.” 


SERMON  XLV. 

DIVINE  SUPPORT  AND  PROTECTION. 

( What,  shall  we  say  then  to  these  things  ?) 

If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ? 
Rom.  viii.  31. 

The  passions  of  joy  or  grief,  of  admiration 
or  gratitude,  are  moderate,  when  we  are  able 
to  find  words  which  fully  describe  their  emo- 
tions. When  they  rise  very  high,  language 
is  too  faint  to  express  them;  and  the  person 
is  either  lost  in  silence,  or  feels  something 
which,  after  his  most  laboured  efforts,  is  too 
big  for  utterance.  We  may  often  observe 
the  apostle  Paul  under  this  difficulty,  when 
attempting,  to  excite  in  others  such  sensa- 
tions as  filled  his  own  heart,  while  contem- 
plating the  glories  and  blessings  of  the  gospel. 
Little  verbal  critics,  who  are  not  animated  by 
his  fervour,  are  incapable  of  entering  into  the 
spirit  of  his  writings.  They  coldly  examine 
them  by  the  strictness  of  grammatical  rules, 
and  think  themselves  warranted  to  charge 
him  with  solecisms,  and  improprieties  of 
speech.  For  it  must  be  allowed,  that  he 
sometimes  departs  from  the  usual  forms  of 
expression ; invents  new  words,  or  at  least 
compounds  words  for  his  own  use,  and  heaps 
one  hyperbole  upon  another.  But  there  is  a 
beautiful  energy  in  his  manner  far  superior 
to  the  frigid  exactness  of  grammarians,  though 
the  taste  of  a mere  grammarian  is  unable  to 
admire  or  relish  it.  When  he  is  stating  the 
advantage  of  being  with  Christ,  as  beyond 
any  thing  that  can  be  enjoyed  in  the  present 
life,  he  is  not  content  with  saying,  as  his  ex- 
pression is  rendered  in  our  version,  “ It  is  far 
better,”  Phil.  i.  23.  In  the  Greek  another 
word  of  comparison  is  added,  which,  if  our 
language  would  bear  the  literal  translation, 
would  be,  “Far  more  better,”  or  “Much 
more  better.”  And  when  he  would  describe 
the  low  opinion  he  had  of  himself,  great  as 
his  attainments  were  in  our  view,  he  thinks 


it  not  sufficient  to  style  himself,  “ The  leas* 
of  all  saints,”  but  “Jess  than  the  least,” 
Eph.  iii.  8.  Such  phrases  do  not  imply  that 
he  was  ignorant  of  the  rules  of  good  writing, 
but  they  strongly  intimate  the  fulness  of  his 
heart.  In  the  course  of  the  chapter  before 
us,  having  taken  a rapid  survey  of  the  work 
of  grace,  carried  on  by  successive  steps  in 
the  hearts  of  believers,  till  at  length  consum- 
mated in  glory,  in  this  verse,  instead  of  study- 
ing for  words  answerable  to  his  views,  he 
seems  to  come  to  a full  stop,  as  sensible  that 
the  strongest  expressions  he  could  use  would 
be  too  faint.  He  makes  an  abrupt  transition 
from  describing  to  admiring.  He  has  said 
much,  but  not  enough ; and  therefore  sums 
up  all  with,  “What  shall  we  say  to  these 
things  ?”  Surely  they  who  can  read,  with  the 
utmost  coolness  and  indifference,  what  he 
could  not  write  without  rapture  and  astonish- 
ment, do  not  take  his  words  in  his  sense.  If 
the  apostle’s  phraseology  is  now  become  ob- 
solete, and  sounds  uncouth  in  the  ears  of  too 
many  who  would  be  thought  Christians,  is 
there  not  too  much  reason  to  fear  that  they 
are  Christians  only  in  name! 

Though  this  short  lively  question  is  omitted 
in  the  musical  composition,  I am  not  willing 
to  leave  it  out.  It  stands  well,  as  a sequel  to 
what  we  have  lately  considered.  The  sting 
of  death  is  taken  away.  Death  itself  is  swal- 
lowed up  in  victory.  Sinners,  who  were  once 
burdened  with  guilt,  and  exposed  to  condem- 
nation, obtain  a right  to  sing,  “ Thanks  be  to 
God,  who  giveth  us  the  victory,  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ” — “What  shall  we  say  to 
these  things'?” 

It  stands  well  likewise,  as  introducing  the 
following  question, — “If  God  be  for  us;”  if 
his  promises,  his  power,  his  wisdom,  and  his 
love,  be  all  engaged  on  our  behalf,  “ who  can 
be  against  us  ?”  What  shall  we,  or  can  we, 
or  need  we  say  more  than  this?  what  cause 
can  we  have  for  fear,  or  our  enemies  for 
triumph,  if  God  be  for  us? 

We  may  consider, 

I.  What  is  implied  in  the  supposition. 

II.  The  meaning  of  the  inference. 

I.  The  form  of  the  question  is  hypotheti- 
cal. If  the  assumption  be  right,  that  God  is 
for  us ; the  conclusion,  that  none  can  be  ef- 
fectually against  us,  is  infallibly  sure.  Many 
serious  persons  will  allow,  that  if  God  be  in- 
deed for  them,  all  must,  and  will  be  well  in 
the  end.  But  they  hesitate  at  the  if  and  are 
ready  to  ask,  How  shall  I know  that  God  is 
for  me?  I would  offer  you  a few  considera- 
tions towards  the  determining  of  this  point, 
in  the  first  place. 

Sin  has  made  an  awful  breach  and  separa- 
tion between  God  and  mankind.  They  are 
alienated  in  their  minds  from  him,  and  he  is 
justly  displeased  with  them.  The  intercourse 
and  communion  with  God,  which  constitute 
the  honour  and  happiness  of  the  human  na- 


366 


DIVINE  SUPPORT  AND  PROTECTION. 


ture,  were  no  longer  either  afforded  or  de- 
sired when  man  rebelled  against  his  Maker, 
except  to  the  few  who  understood  and  em- 
braced his  gracious  purpose  of  reconciliation, 
the  first  intimation  of  which  was  revealed  in 
the  promise  of  the  seed  of  the  woman,  who 
should  bruise  the  serpent’s  head,  Gen.  iii.  13. 
The  clear  and  full  discovery  of  this  recon- 
ciliation is  mad.  known  to  us  by  the  gospel. 
“God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world 
unto  himself,”  2 Cor.  v.  19.  God  is  already 
reconciled  in  this  sense,  that  having  provided 
and  accepted  a satisfaction  to  his  law  and 
justice,  he  can-  now,  in  a way  worthy  of  him- 
self, receive  and  pardon  the  returning-  sinner. 
And  he  accompanies  the  word  of  his  grace 
with  the  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  to  make 
sinners  willing  to  be  reconciled  to  him.  If 
we  be  for  God,  he  is  assuredly  for  us.  If  we 
seek  him,  he  has  been  beforehand  with  us : 
for,  in  the  first  instance,  he  is  always  found 
of  those  who  seek  him  not,  Is.  lxv.  1.  If  we 
love  him,  it  is  because  he  first  loved  us.  True 
believers  walk  with  God.  But  two  cannot 
walk  together,  with  confidence  and  comfort, 
unless  they  be  agreed,  Amos  iii.  3.  This 
agreement  is  chiefly  with  respect  to  three 
particulars  proposed  by  the  Lord  God  in  his 
word,  and  to  which  the  believing  sinner 
cheerfully  and  thankfully  accedes. 

1.  In  the  ground  of  the  agreement ; this  is 
Messiah,  the  Mediator  between  God  and 
man.  When  he  entered  upon  his  office,  a 
voice  from  heaven  commended  him  to  sin- 
ners. “This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I 
am  well  pleased,”  Matt.  iii.  17.  And  they 
who  are  enlightened  to  behold  the  glory  of 
God  in  his  person  and  engagement,  accept 
him  as  the  beloved  Saviour  in  whom  and 
with  whom  they  are  well  pleased.  Without 
this  acceptance  of  the  Mediator  there  can  be 
no  agreement.  Jesus  is  the  only  door,  the 
only  way  of  a sinner’s  access  to  the  know- 
ledge and  favour  of  God.  This  is  the  pre- 
cious and  sure  foundation  which  he  has  laid  in 
Zion,  (1  Pet.  ii.  6;)  and  to  presume  to  build 
our  hope  upon  any  other,  is  to  build  upon  a 
quicksand.  In  this  point  reason,  in  its  present 
distempered  state,  would  lead  us,  if  followed, 
directly  contrary  to  the  simplicity  of  faith. 
Reason  suggests,  that  if  we  have  acted  wTrong, 
we  must  repent  and  amend  ; and  what  can 
we  do  more  ! But  the  law  against  which  we 
have  sinned  makes  no  provision  for  repent- 
ance. Nor  is  such  a repentance  as  includes 
a change  of  heart,  (and  nothing  short  of  this 
deserves  the  name,)  in  our  own  power.  Re- 
pentance unto  life,  (Acts  xi.  18,)  is  the  gift 
of  God  ; and  Jesus,  who  is  exalted  to  be  a 
prince  and  a Saviour,  (Acts  v.  31,)  bestows 
it  upon  those  who  acknowledge  him,  and  im- 
plore it  of  him.  But  God  will  only  treat  with 
us  as  those  who  are  condemned  already,  who 
have  nothing  but  sin,  and  deserve  nothing 
but  misery.  When  we  feel  this  to  be  our 


[ser.  XLV 

proper  state,  we  are  referred  to  Jesus,  in 
whom  God  is  well  pleased,  and  for  whose 
sake  sins  are  pardoned,  and  sinners  accepted 
and  justified,  without  condition  and  without 
exception.  And  then  likewise  we  begin  to 
see  the  necessity,  propriety,  and  sufficiency 
of  this  appointment.  Herein  all  who  are 
taught  of  God  are  of  one  mind.  However 
they  may  differ  in  some  respects,  they  agree 
in  cordially  receiving  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord, 
(Col.  ii.  6,)  as  he  is  made  of  God  for  us  wis- 
dom, righteousness,  and  salvation. 

2.  They  agree  with  God  in  the  great  de- 
sign of  the  gospel,  which  is  to  purify  unto 
himself  a peculiar  people,  who,  being  deli- 
vered from  their  fears  and  their  enemies, 
shall  serve  him  with  an  unreserved  and  per- 
severing obedience,  Luke  i.  74,  75.  A de- 
liverance from  the  power  of  sin  and  Satan,  a 
devotedness  to  God,  and  a conformity  to  the 
mind  and  pattern  of  his  dear  Son,  are  included 
by  every  true  believer  in  the  idea  of  salva- 
tion. He  knows  that  he  can  be  happy  in  no 
other  way.  This  is  a turning  point.  There 
are  convictions  of  sin  excited  by  a dread  of 
punishment,  which,  though  distressing  to  the 
conscience,  leave  the  heart  and  affections 
unchanged.  They  who  are  thus  impressed, 
if  no  farther,  would  be  satisfied  with  an  as- 
surance of  pardon.  But  the  grace  of  God 
which  bringeth  salvation,  (Tit.  ii.  11,  12,) 
teaches  us  to  renounce,  to  abhor  all  ungodli- 
ness in  the  present  world;  to  give  ourselves 
unto  him  who  gave  himself  for  us,  that  he 
might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity ; and  to 
walk  worthy  of  God,  who  calls  us  to  his  king- 
dom and  glory,  1 Thess.  ii.  12.  This  is  the 
will  of  God,  even  our  sanctification.  And 
this  is  the  desire  of  his  people,  that  they  may 
be  sanctified  wholly ; that  their  whole  persons 
spirit,  soul,  and  body,  maybe  preserved  blame- 
less; that  they  may  be  filled  with  the  fruits 
of  righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ ; 
that  they  may  walk  as  the  sons  of  God  with- 
out rebuke,  and  shine  as  lights  in  the  world, 
Phil.  ii.  15.  Though  their  attainments  are 
imperfect,  in  their  judgment  and  desires, 
they  are  fully  agreed  with  God  as  to  their 
aim  and  design. 

3.  They  are  agreed  with  him  likewise  as 
to  the  ultimate  great  end,  the  final  cause  of 
their  redemption,  which  is  the  praise  of  the 
glory  of  his  grace,  Eph.  i.  6.  That  the  lofti- 
ness, high  looks,  and  proud  pretences  of  men 
may  be  abased,  and  the  Lord  alone  may  be 
exalted,  and  that  he  who  glorieth  may  glory 
only  in  the  Lord,  1 Corinthians,  i.  31.  Sal- 
vation is  of  the  Lord  in  every  sense;  the 
plan,  the  price,  the  power,  the  application,  the 
consummation.  He  is  the  Alpha  and  the 
Omega,  the  author  and  the  object  of  it.  The 
praise  therefore  is  wholly  due  to  him,  and  he 
claims  it.  To  this  claim  his  people  fully 
consent.  It  is  the  desire  of  their  souls,  that 
his  name,  which  alone  is  excellent,  may  alone 


DIVINE  SUPPORT  AND  PROTECTION. 


387 


SER.  XIV.] 

be  extolled  ; and  with  one  heart  and  voice 
they  say,  Not  unto  us,  O Lord,  not  unto  us, 
but  unto  thee  be  all  the  glory  and  all  the 
praise,  Psalm  cxv.  1. 

If  we  truly  understand  and  approve  these 
things,  then  we  are  certainly  engaged  for 
God,  and  of  course  he  is  for  us.  For  he  alone 
could  either  enable  us  to  see  them  in  their 
true  light,  or  incline  our  hearts  to  embrace 
them.  Who  then  can  be  against  us! 

II.  We  are  not  to  understand  the  ques- 
tion, “ Who  can  be  against  us  !”  as  designed 
to  encourage  us  to  expect  that  they  who  have 
the  Lord  on  their  side  will  meet  with  no  op- 
position, but  that  all  opposition  against  them 
will  be  in  vain. 

1.  They  whom  God  is  for,  will  on  that 
very  account  have  many  opposers. 

(1.)  The  men  of  the  world. — This  our 
Lord  expressly  teaches  us  to  expect.  “ If  ye 
were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  its 
own.  But  because  you  are  not  of  the  world, 
but  I have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world, 
therefore  the  world  hateth  you,”  John  xv.  19. 
And  his  apostle,  “ Marvel  not,  my  brethren, 
if  the  world  hate  you,”  1 John  iii.  14.  Till 
we  declare  for  him,  the  world  will  bear  with 
us,  but  no  longer,  as  the  Gibeonites  were  in 
a state  of  honour  and  friendship  with  the 
neighbouring  cities  till  they  submitted  to 
Joshua  ; (Josh.  x.  1 — 4 ;)  but  when  they  ob- 
tained peace  from  him,  they  were  imme- 
diately involved  in  war  with  their  former 
friends.  While  Saul  persecuted  the  church, 
the  world  smiled  upon  him,  and  he  seemed  to 
be,  as  we  say,  in  the  way  of  preferment. 
But  when  he  yielded  himself  to  the  service 
of  Christ,  and  his  defection  from  the  common 
cause  became  generally  known,  bonds  and 
afflictions  awaited  him  in  every  place ; and 
they  who  before  had  employed  and  caressed 
him  sought  his  life.  I do  not  mean  to  sound  a 
trumpet  of  defiance.  I believe  that  young 
converts,  by  their  warm  but  injudicious  zeal, 
often,  more  than  is  necessary,  provoke  the 
spirit  of  the  world,  and  thereby  increase  their 
own  difficulties.  The  gospel,  when  rightly 
understood,  inspires  a spirit  of  benevolence, 
and  directs  to  a conduct  which  is  suited  to 
conciliate  good-will  and  esteem.  And  when 
the  apostle  exhorts  us,  If  it  be  possible,  and 
as  much  as  in  us  lies,  to  live  peaceably  with 
all  men,  (Rom.  xii.  18,)  he  gives  us  hope  that 
much  may  be  done  to  soften  prejudices,  to 
put  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men, 
and  to  make  them  at  least  ashamed,  by  a pa- 
tient perseverance  in  well  doing.  A con- 
sistent Christian,  whose  integrity,  humility, 
and  philanthropy  mark  his  character  and 
adorn  his  profession,  will  in  time  command 
respect;  but  his  attachment  to  unfashionable 
truths,  and  of  his  separation  from  the  maxims 
and  pursuits  of  the  many,  will  render  him,  in 
their  eyes,  singular  and  precise,  weak  and 
enthusiastic.  If  they  say,  “He  is  a good 


sort  of  man,  but  has  some  strange  peculiari- 
ties,” it  is  the  most  favourable  judgment  he 
can  hope  for ; and  from  some  persons,  and  at 
some  times,  he  will  meet  with  tokens  of  a 
settled  dislike.  For  though  a religious  cha- 
racter may  be  formed,  which  even  the  world 
will  approve,  yet  all  who  will  live  godly  in 
Christ  Jesus  must  suffer  persecution,  2 Tim. 
iii.  12.  They  walk  in  the  midst  of  observers, 
who  watch  for  their  halting,  who  lay  snares 
for  their  feet,  and  will  endeavour  to  bribe  or 
intimidate  them  to  forsake  the  path  of  duty. 
It  is  difficult  to  stem  the  torrent,  or  to  avoid 
the  infection  of  the  world,  and  to  live  supe- 
rior to  the  fear  of  man,  as  becomes  us,  if  we 
know  whose  we  are,  and  whom  we  serve. 
But  tnough  difficult,  it  is  practicable  and  at- 
tainable, and  actually  attained  by  believers; 
for  this  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the 
world,  even  our  faith,  1 John  v.  4. 

(2.)  The  powers  of  darkness. — Satan  will 
not  ordinarily  trouble  while  he  bears  rule. 
He  is  indeed  an  enemy  to  his  own  servants, 
and  seeks  their  destruction,  both  soul  and 
body,  by  pushing  them  on  in  sin,  which  if 
persisted  in  will  prove  their  ruin ; but  while 
they  make  no  resistance,  he  gives  them  no 
disturbance.  It  is  otherwise  with  those  whom 
the  Lord  has  freed  from  his  bondage.  He 
will  pursue  them  like  a lion  seeking  his  prey, 
(1  Pet.  v.  8,)  and  lie  in  wait  for  them  like  a 
serpent  in  the  path.  This  is  one  cause  of  the 
world’s  hatred;  for  the  scripture  styles  him 
the  god  of  this  world,  (2  Cor.  iv.  4,)  and  he 
sets  all  that  he  can  influence,  tongues,  and 
pens,  and  swords,  against  those  who  are  on 
the  Lord’s  side.  Therefore  the  people  of  God 
may  be  known  by  two  marks.  Satan  by  him- 
self and  by  his  instruments  fights  against 
them,  and  they  also  fight  against  him.  The 
former  without  the  latter  is  not  conclusive. 
A mere  outward  profession  of  religion  may 
excite  opposition,  and  mere  pretenders  may 
take  pleasure  in  it  for  a time,  if  it  does  not 
come  too  close.  It  may  feed  their  vanity,  and 
give  them  a sort  of  consequence,  by  having 
sufferings  to  talk  of.  But  I would  entreat 
my  hearers  seriously  to  examine,  Is  your 
heart  really  against  sin,  which  is  the  strength 
of  Satan’s  kingdom  ! Are  you  against  his 
will  and  interest  in  the  world!  Have  you  re- 
nounced his  service!  If  so,  fear  not.  God  is 
for  you,  and  none  can  harm  you.  For, 

2.  No  opposition  can  prevail  against  us,  if 
God  be  for  us.  It  is  impossible  to  deny,  or 
even  to  doubt  this  truth,  upon  the  principles 
of  reason ; for  who,  or  what,  can  injure  those 
who  are  under  the  protection  of  Omnipo- 
tence! And  yet  it  is  not  always  easy  to 
maintain  the  persuasion  of  it  in  the  mind,  and 
to  abide  in  the  exercise  of  faith,  when  to  an 
eye  of  sense,  all  things  seem  against  us.  But 
though  we  believe  not,  he  continueth  faith- 
ful, and  will  not  forsake  those  whom  he  once 
enables  to  put  their  trust  in  him.  Job  was  a 


368 


ACCUSERS  CHALLENGED. 


faithful  and  approved  servant  of  God,  yet  for 
a season  his  trials  were  great,  and  his  con- 
fidence was  sometimes  shaken.  But  he  was 
supported,  and  at  length  delivered.  There 
are  many  instances  recorded  in  scripture  to 
confirm  our  faith,  and  to  teach  us,  that  God 
manifests  himself  to  be  for  his  people,  and  in 
different  ways  renders  them  superior  to  all 
their  difficulties  and  enemies. 

At  one  time  he  prevents  the  threatened 
danger.  They  only  see  it  or  expect  it,  for  he 
is  better  to  them  than  their  apprehensions 
and  fears.  Thus,  when  Sennacherib  was 
furious  against  Jerusalem,  and  supposed  he 
could  easily  prevail,  he  was  not  suffered  to 
come  near  it,  Isa.  xxxvii.  29,  33.  When  he 
thought  to  destroy  it,  he  felt  a hook  and  a 
bridle  which  he  could  not  resist,  and  was 
compelled  to  retire  disappointed  and  ashamed. 

At  another  time  the  enemies  go  a step 
farther.  His  people  are  brought  into  trouble, 
but  God  is  with  them,  and  they  escape  un- 
hurt. So  Daniel,  though  he  was  cast  into  the 
den  of  lions,  (Dan.  vi.  23,)  received  no  more 
harm  from  them  than  if  he  had  been  among 
a flock  of  sheep.  He  permitted  three  of  his 
servants  to  be  thrown  into  a furnace  of  fire, 
but  he  restrained  the  violence  of  the  flames, 
so  that  not  even  a hair  of  their  heads  was 
singed,  Dan.  iii.  27. 

The  most  that  opposers  can  do  is  to  kill 
the  body,  Luke  xii.  4.  If  God  permits  his 
people  to  be  thus  treated,  still  they  are  pot 
forsaken.  Their  death  is  precious  in  his 
sight,  Psalm  cxvi.  15.  They  who  die  in  the 
Lord  are  blessed.  They  are  highly  honoured 
who  are  called  and  enabled  to  die  for  him.  If 
he  is  pleased  to  comfort  them  with  his  pre- 
sence, and  then  to  take  them  home  to  him- 
self, they  can  desire  no  more.  Stephen, 
though  apparently  given  up  to  the  power  of 
his  adversaries,  and  cruelly  stoned  to  death, 
was  no  less  happy  than  those  who  die  in  com- 
posure upon  their  beds,  with  their  friends 
around  them.  Nor  was  he  less  composed ; 
for  the  heavens  were  opened  to  him,  and 
he  saw  his  Saviour  in  glory,  approving  his 
fidelity,  and  ready  to  receive  his  spirit,  Acts 
vii.  56—60 

In  brief,  whatever  men  or  devils  may  at- 
tempt against  us,  there  are  three  things  which, 
if  we  are  true  believers,  they  cannot  do.  They 
may  be  helpful  to  wean  us  from  the  world ; 
they  may  add  earnestness  to  our  prayers; 
they  may  press  us  to  greater  watchfulness 
and  dependence  ; they  may  afford  fair  occa- 
sions of  evidencing  our  sincerity,  the  good- 
ness of  our  cause,  and  the  power  of  that  God 
who  is  for  us. — Such  are  the  benefits  that 
the  Lord  teaches  his  people  to  derive  from 
their  sufferings,  for  he  will  not  let  them  suf- 
fer or  be  oppressed  in  vain.  But  no  enemy 
can  deprive  us  of  the  love  with  which  God 
favours  us,  or  the  grace  which  he  has  given 
us,  or  the  glory  which  he  has  prepared  for 


[ser.  XL vr. 

us.  Now  what  shall  we  say  to  these  things 
Alas!  there  are  too  many  who  say,  at  least 
in  their  hearts  (for  their  conduct  bewrays 
their  secret  thoughts,)  we  care  but  little 
about  them.  If  they  were  to  speak  out,  they 
might  adopt  the  language  of  the  rebellious 
Jews  to  the  prophet,  “ As  to  the  words  which 
thou  hast  spoken  to  us  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  we  will  not  hearken  unto  thee.  But 
we  will  certainly  do  whatsoever  thing  goeth 
forth  out  of  our  own  mouth,”  Jer.  xliv.  16, 17. 
And  there  are  others  who  plainly  say,  Let  us 
then  continue  in  sin  that  grace  may  abound. 
They  do  not  so  expressly  reject  the  gospel  as 
to  take  encouragement  from  it  to  goon  in  their 
wickedness.  The  case  of  the  former  is  very 
dangerous,  that  of  the  latter  is  still  worse. 
But  grace,  though  long  slighted,  though  often 
abused,  is  once  more  proclaimed  in  your  hear- 
ing. The  Lord  forbid  that  you  should  perish 
with  the  sound  of  salvation  in  your  ears. 

At  present,  and  while  you  persist  in  your 
impenitence  and  unbelief,  I may  reverse  the 
| words  of  my  text.  O consider,  I beseech  you, 

I before  it  be  too  late,  if  God  be  against  you, 
who  can  be  for  you?  Will  your  companions 
! comfort  you  in  a dying  hour  ? Will  your 
| riches  profit  you  in  the  day  of  wrath?  Will 
the  recollection  of  your  sinful  pleasures  give 
you  confidence  to  stand  before  this  great  and 
glorious  Lord  God,  when  you  shall  be  sum- 
moned to  appear  at  his  tribunal  ? May  you 
be  timely  wise,  and  flee  for  refuge  to  the 
hope  set  before  you ! 


SERMON  XL VI. 

ACCUSERS  CHALLENGED. 

Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of 

God's  elect  ? It  is  God  that  justifieth. 
Rom.  viii.  33. 

Though  the  collating  of  manuscripts  and 
various  readings,  has  undoubtedly  been  of 
use  in  rectifying  some  mistakes  which, 
j through  the  inadvertency  of  transcribers,  had 
crept  into  different  copies  of  the  New  Tes- 
I tament ; yet  such  supposed  corrections  of  the 
text  ought  to  be  admitted  with  caution,  and 
| not  unless  supported  by  strong  reasons  and 
good  authorities.  The  whole  scripture  is 
given  by  inspiration  of  God  ; and  they  who 
thankfully  receive  it  as  his  book,  will  not 
trifle  with  it  by  substituting  bold  conjectural 
alterations,  which,  though  they  may  deem  to 
be  amendments,  may  possibly  disguise  or  al- 
, ter  the  genuine  sense  of  the  passage.  Some 
j fancied  emendations  might  be  pointed  out, 

| suggested  by  very  learned  men,  which  do 
not  seem  to  afford  so  strong  a proof  of  the 
sound  judgment  of  the  proposers,  as  of  their 
I vanity  and  rashness.  Let  the  learned  be  aa 


ACCUSERS  CHALLENGED. 


369 


SER.  XLVI.] 

ingenious  as  they  please  in  correcting  and 
amending  the  text  of  Horace  or  Virgil,  for  it 
is  of  little  importance  to  us  whether  their 
criticisms  be  well  founded  or  not,  but  let 
them  treat  the  pages  of  divine  revelation 
with  reverence. 

But  the  pointing  of  the  New  Testament, 
though  it  has  a considerable  influence  upon 
the  sense,  is  of  inferior  authority.  It  is  a 
human  invention,  very  helpful,  and  for  the 
most  part,  I suppose,  well  executed.  But  in 
some  places  it  may  admit  of  real  amendment. 
The  most  ancient  manuscripts  are  without 
points,  and  some  of  them  are  even  without  a 
distinction  of  the  words.  With  the  pointing, 
therefore,  we  may  take  more  liberty  than 
with  the  text;  though  even  this  liberty 
should  b?  used  soberly.  A change  in  the 
pointing  of  this  verse  and  the  following,  will 
not  alter  the  received  sense,  but,  as  some 
critics  judge,  will  make  it  more  striking  and 
emphatical.  If  two  clauses  should  be  read 
with  an  interrogation  instead  of  a period,  the 
apostle’s  triumphant  challenge  may  be  ex- 
pressed in  the  following  brief  paraphrase. 

Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of 
God's  elect  ? Shall  God  himself]  So  far 
from  it,  it  is  he  who  justifieth.  Who  is  he 
that  condemneth  ? Shall  Christ  1 Nay,  he 
loves  them,  and  accepts  them.  Shall  he  who 
died  for  them,  yea,  rather  who  is  risen  again, 
who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  on 
their  behalf,  ivho  also  malceth  intercession 
for  them  ? There  is  not  the  least  ground  to 
fear,  that  he  who  has  promised  to  justify  them 
will  lay  any  thing  to  their  charge ; or  that  he 
will  condemn  them,  who  died  to  deliver  them 
from  condemnation,  nor  can  any  charge  of 
their  enemies  prevail  to  the  condemnation  of 
those  whom  God  is  pleased  to  justify,  and  for 
whom  Christ  died,  and  now  intercedes  before 
the  throne. 

The  death,  the  resurrection,  and  ascension 
of  Messiah,  we  have  already  considered.  I 
shall  speak  only  to  two  points  from  this  verse 

I.  The  title  here  given  to  believers. — 
God’s  elect. 

II.  Their  great  privilege,  they  are  jus- 
tified.— It  is  God  who  justifieth  them. 

I.  The  persons  whc  will  be  finally  justified 
by  God  are  here  styled  his  elect.  Very  near 
and  strong  is  the  connexion  between  peace 
and  truth.  Yet  a mistaken  zeal  for  truth  has 
produced  many  controversies,  which  have 
iiurt  the  peace  of  the  people  of  God  among 
themselves ; and  at  the  same  time  have  ex- 
posed them  to  the  scorn  and  derision  of  the 
world.  On  the  other  hand,  a pretended  or 
improper  regard  for  peace  has  often  been 
prejudicial  to  the  truth.  But  that  peace 
which  is  procured  at  the  expense  of  truth,  is 
too  dearly  purchased.  Every  branch  of  doc- 
trine, belonging  to  the  faith  once  delivered 
to  the  saints,  is  not  equally  plain  to  every 
believer.  Some  of  these  doctrines  the  apos- 
Vol.  II.  3 A 


tie  compares  to  milk,  the  proper  and  neces- 
sary food  for  babes,  (Heb.  v.  13,  14 ;)  others 
to  strong  meat,  adapted  to  a more  advanced 
state  in  the  spiritual  life,  when  experience  is 
more  enlarged,  and  the  judgment  more  esta- 
blished. The  Lord,  the  great  teacher,  leads 
his  children  on  gradually,  from  the  plainer  to 
the  more  difficult  truths,  as  they  are  able  to 
bear  them.  But  human  teachers  are  often 
too  hasty : they  do  not  attend  sufficiently  to 
the  weakness  of  young  converts,  but  expect 
them  to  learn  and  receive  every  thing  at 
once;  they  are  not  even  content  with  offer- 
ing strong  meat  prematurely  to  babes,  but 
force  upon  them  the  bones  of  subtilties,  dis- 
tinctions, and  disputations.  But  though  a 
judicious  minister  will  endeavour  to  accom- 
modate himself  to  the  state  of  his  hearers,  no 
gospel-truth  is  to  be  tamely  and  voluntarily 
suppressed  from  a fear  of  displeasing  men. 
In  fact,  however,  the  controversies  which 
have  obtained  among  real  Christians,  have 
not  sc  much  affected  the  truth  as  it  lies  in 
scripture,  as  the  different  explanations,  which 
fallible  men  of  warm  passions,  and  too  full  of 
their  own  sense,  have  given  of  it.  They  who 
professedly  hold  and  avow  the  doctrine  of  an 
election  of  grace,  are  now  called  Calvinists ; 
and  the  name  is  used  by  some  persons  as  a 
term  of  reproach.  They  would  insinuate 
that  Calvin  invented  the  doctrine ; or  at  least, 
that  he  borrowed  it  from  Austin,  who  accord- 
ing to  them,  was  the  first  of  the  Fathers  that 
held  it.  It  is  enough  for  me  that  I find  it  in 
the  New  Testament.  But  many  things  ad- 
vanced upon  the  subject  by  later  writers,  I 
confess,  I do  not  find  there.  If  any  persons 
advance  harsh  assertions  not  warranted  by 
the  word  of  God,  I am  not  bound  to  defend 
them.  But  as  the  doctrine  itself  is  plainly 
taught,  both  by  our  Lord  and  his  apostles,  and 
is  of  great  importance,  when  rightly  under- 
stood, to  promote  the  humiliation,  gratitude, 
and  comfort  of  believers,  I think  it  my  duty 
to  state  it  as  plainly  as  1 can.  I shall  offer 
my  view  of  it,  in  a series  of  propositions  so 
evidently  founded  (as  I conceive)  on  acknow- 
ledged principles  of  scripture,  that  they  can- 
not be  easily  controverted  by  any  persons  who 
have  a real  reverence  for  the  word  of  God, 
and  any  due  acquaintance  with  their  own 
hearts. 

1.  All  mankind  are  sinners,  (Rom.  iii.  23,) 
by  nature  and  practice.  Their  lives  are 
stained  with  transgressions,  their  hearts  are 
depraved,  their  minds  blinded,  and  alienated 
from  God.  So  that  they  are  not  sensible 
either  of  their  guilt  or  their  misery ; nor  so 
much  as  desirous  of  returning  to  God,  till  he 
prevents  them  with  his  mercy,  and  begins  to 
draw  their  hearts  towards  himself.  Were  I 
to  prove  this  at  large,  I might  transcribe  one 
half  of  the  Bible.  Nay,  it  is  fully  proved  by 
experience  and  observation.  The  Heathens 
felt  and  confessed  it.  My  present  subject 


370 


ACCUSERS  CHALLENGED. 


does  not  require  me  to  account  for  it,  or  to 
reason  upon  it.  That  it  is  so,  I appeal  to 
fact. 

2.  The  inestimable  gift  of  a Saviour,  to 
atone  for  sin  and  to  mediate  between  God 
and  man,  (John  iiL  16 ;)  that  there  might  be 
a way  opened  for  the  communication  of  mercy 
to  sinners,  without  prejudice  to  the  honour 
of  the  perfections  and  government  of  God — 
this  gift  was  the  effect  of  his  own  rich  grace 
and  love,  (Rom.  v.  6,  8,)  no  less  unthought 
of,  and  undesired,  than  undeserved  by  fallen 
man. 

3.  Wherever  this  love  of  God  to  man  is 
made  known  by  the  gospel,  there  is  encour- 
agement, and  a command  given  to  all  men 
everywhere  to  repent,  Acts  xvii.  30, 31.  The 
manifestation  of  the  eternal  Word  in  the  hu- 
man nature,  and  his  death  upon  the  cross,  are 
spoken  of  as  the  highest  display  of  the  wisdom 
and  goodness  of  God.  Designed  to  give  us, 
in  one  and  the  same  transaction,  the  most  af- 
fecting sense  of  the  evil  of  sin,  and  the  strong- 
est assurance  imaginable,  that  there  is  for- 
giveness with  God,  Rom.  iii.  24,  25. 

4.  Men,  while  blinded  by  pride  and  preju- 
dice, enslaved  to  sinful  passions,  and  under 
the  influence  of  this  present  evil  world,  nei- 
ther can  nor  will  receive  the  truth  in  the  love 
of  it,  2 Cor.  iv.  4;  John  v.  40 ; vi.  44.  They 
are  prepossessed  and  pre-engaged.  This,  at 
least,  is  evidently  the  case  with  many  people 
in  this  favoured  nation,  who,  when  the  gospel 
is  proposed  to  them  in  the  most  unexception- 
able manner,  not  only  disregard,  but  treat  it 
with  a pointed  contempt  and  indignation, 
Luke  iv.  28,  29 ; Acts  xvii.  18.  Such  was 
its  reception  at  the  beginning,  and  we  are 
not  to  wonder,  therefore,  that  it  is  so  at  this 
day. 

5.  As  all  mankind  spring  from  one  stock, 
there  are  not  two  different  sorts  of  men  by- 
nature  ; consequently  they  who  receive  the 
gospel  are  no  better  in  themselves,  (Eph.  ii. 
3,)  than  they  are  who  reject  it.  The  apostle 
writing  to  the  believers  at  Corinth,  having 
enumerated  a catalogue,  in  which  he  com- 
prises some  of  the  most  flagitious  and  infa- 
mous characters,  (1  Cor.  vi.  9 — 11,)  and 
allowed  to  be  so  by  the  common  consent  of 
mankind,  adds,  “such  were  some  of  you.” 
Surely  it  cannot  be  said,  that  they  who  had 
degraded  themselves  below  the  brutes,  by 
their  abominable  practices,  were  better  dis- 
posed than  others  to  receive  that  gospel, 
which  is  not  more  distinguished  by  the  sub- 
limity of  its  doctrine,  than  by  the  purity  and 
holiness  of  conversation  which  it  enjoins  ! 

6.  It  seems,  therefore,  at  least  highly  pro- 
bable, that  all  men  universally,  if  left  to  them- 
selves, would  act  as  the  majority  do  to  whom 
the  word  of  salvation  is  sent ; that  is,  they 
would  reject  and  despise  it.  And  it  is  unde- 
niable, that  some*  who  in  the  day  of  God’s 
power  have  cordially  received  the  gospel,  did 


[ser.  XLVI. 

for  a season  oppose  it  with  no  less  pertinacity 
than  any  of  those  who  have  continued  to  hate 
and  resist  it  to  the  end  of  life.  Saul  of  Tar- 
sus was  an  eminent  instance,  Acts  ix.  1.  He 
did  not  merely  slight  the  doctrine  of  a cruci- 
fied Saviour ; but,  according  to  his  mistaken 
views,  thought  himself  bound  in  conscience 
to  suppress  those  who  embraced  it.  He 
breathed  out  threatening,  and  slaughter,  and, 
as  he  expresses  it  himself,  was  exceedingly 
mad  against  them,  (Acts  xxvi.  11,)  and  made 
havoc  of  them.  His  mind  was  filled  with 
this  bitter  and  insatiable  rage,  at  the  moment 
when  the  Lord  Jesus  appeared  to  him  in  his 
way  to  Damascus.  Is  it  possible  that  a man 
thus  disposed  should  suddenly  become  a 
preacher  of  the  faith  which  he  had  long  la- 
boured to  destroy,  if  his  heart  and  views  had 
not  been  changed  by  a supernatural  agency  ! 
Or  that  the  like  prejudices  in  other  persons 
can  be  removed  in  any  other  manner  ! 

7.  If  all  men  had  heard  the  gospel  in  vain, 
then  Christ  would  have  died  in  vain.  But 
this  is  prevented  by  the  covenanted  office  and 
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  (John  xvi.  8,' 
who  accompanies  the  word  with  his  encrg> 
and  makes  it  the  power  of  God  to  the  salve- 
tion  of  those  who  believe.  He  prepares  th' 
minds  of  sinners,  and,  as  in  the  case  of  Ly 
dia,  (Acts  xvi.  14,)  opens  their  hearts  to  un 
derstand  and  receive  the  truth,  in  the  lovt 
of  it. 

8.  But  who  will  presume  to  say,  that  when 
God  was  pleased  to  make  a proposal  of  mercy 
to  a race  of  rebels,  he  was  likewise  bound  to 
overcome  the  obstinacy  of  men  in  every  case, 
and  to  compel  them  to  accept  it  by  an  act 
of  his  invincible  power.  If  he  does  thus  in- 
terpose in  favour  of  some,  it  is  an  act  of  free 
mercy  to  which  they  have  no  claim.  For  if 
we  had  a claim,  the  benefit  would  be  an  act 
of  justice,  rather  than  of  mercy.  May  not 
the  great  Sovereign  of  the  world  do  what 
he  will  with  his  own  1 Matt.  xx.  15.  And 
nothing  is  more  peculiarly  and  eminently  his 
own  than  his  mercy.  Yes,  we  are  assured, 
that  he  will  have  mercy  on  whom  he  will 
have  mercy;  (Rom.  ix.  18;)  and  whom  he 
will,  he  may  justly  leave  to  be  hardened  in 
their  impenitence  and  unbelief.  We  have 
all  deserved  to  be  so  left ; but  he,  as  the  pot- 
ter over  the  clay,  has  power  and  right  to  make 
a difference,  as  it  seemeth  good  in  his  sijrht. 
And  who  will  say  unto  him,  What  doe>t 
thou  ? Job  ix.  12. 

9.  When  sinners  are  effectually  called  by 
the  gospel,  then  they  are  visibly  chosen  out 
of  the  world,  (John  xv.  19,)  in  the  spirit  and 
tempers  of  which  they  before  lived,  disobe- 
dient and  deceived,  even  as  others.  Old 
things  pass  away,  and  all  things  become  new 
2 Cor.  v.  17.  Their  hopes  and  fears,  their 
companions  and  pleasures,  their  pursuits  and 
aims,  are  all  changed.  The  change  in  these 
respects  is  so  evident,  that  they  are  soon  no- 


ACCUSERS  CHALLENGED. 


371 


SER.  XLVI.] 

(iced  and  marked,  pitied  or  derided,  by  those 
from  whom  they  are  now  separated.  And  I 
think  they  who  really  experience  this  change 
will  willingly  ascribe  it  to  the  grace  of  God. 

10.  But  if  they  are  thus  chosen  in  time,  it 
follows  of  course  that  they  were  chosen  from 
everlasting.  Both  ffiese  expressions,  when 
applied  to  this  subject,  amount  to  the  same 
thing  ; and  the  seeming  difference  between 
them  is  chiefly  owing  to  our  weakness  and 
ignorance.  To  the  infinite  and  eternal  God 
our  little  distinctions  of  past,  present,  and  fu- 
ture, are  nothing.  We  think  unworthily  of 
the  unchangeable  Jehovah,  and  liken  him  too 
much  to  ourselves,  if  we  suppose  that  he  can 
form  a new  purpose.  If  it  be  his  pleasure  to 
convert  a sinner  to-day,  he  had  the  same 
gracious  design  in  favour  of  that  sinner  yes- 
terday, at  the  day  of  his  birth,  a thousand 
years  before  he  was  born,  and  a thousand  ages 
(to  speak  according  to  our  poor  conceptions) 
before  the  world  began.  For  that  mode  of 
duration  which  we  call  time,  has  no  respect 
to  him  who  inhabiteth  eternity,  Is.  lvii.  15. 

With  regard  to  those  who  reject  the  de- 
claration of  the  mercy  of  God,  who  though 
called  and  invited  by  the  gospel,  and  often 
touched  by  the  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  will 
not  come  to  the  Saviour  for  life,  but  persist 
in  their  determination  to  go  on  in  their  sins, 
their  ruin  is  not  only  unavoidable,  but  just  in 
the  highest  degree.  And  though,  like  the 
wicked  servant  in  the  parable,  (Matt.  xxv.  24,) 
they  cavil  against  the  Lord,  their  mouths  will 
be  stopped,  (Rom.  iii.  19,)  when  he  shall  at 
length  appear  to  plead  with  them  face  to  face. 
Then  their  cobweb  excuses  will  fail  them, 
and  the  proper  ground  of  their  condemnation 
will  be,  that  when  he  sent  them  light,  they 
turned  from  it,  and  chose  darkness  rather 
than  light,  because  their  deeds  were  evil, 
John  iii.  19. 

11.  The  great  privilege  of  the  elect,  com- 
prehensive of  every  blessing  is,  that  they  are 
justified,  finally  and  authoritatively  justified 
from  all  that  can  possibly  be  laid  to  their 
charge  ; for  it  is  God  himself  who  justifieth 
them. 

The  justification  of  a sinner  before  God, 
by  faith  in  the  obedience  and  atonement  of 
Christ,  is  considered  by  many  persons,  in 
these  days  of  refinement,  in  no  better  light 
than  as  a branch  of  scholastic  theology,  which 
is  now  exploded  as  uncouth  and  obsolete.  At 
the  Reformation,  it  was  the  turning  point  be- 
tween the  Protestants  and  Papists.  Luther 
deemed  it  the  criterion  of  a flourishing  or  a 
falling  church  ; that  is,  he  judged  the  church 
would  always  be  in  a thriving  or  a declining 
state,  in  proportion  as  the  importance  of  this 
doctrine  was  attended  to.  How  important  it 
appeared  to  our  English  reformers,  many  of 
whom  sealed  their  testimony  to  it  with  their 
blood,  may  be  known  by  the  writings  of  Cran- 
mer,  Latimer,  Philpot,  and  others : and  by 


the  articles  of  the  Church  of  England,  which 
are  still  of  so  much  authority  by  law,  that  no 
person  can  be  admitted  into  Holy  Orders 
amongst  us,  till  he  has  declared  and  sub- 
scribed his  assent  to  them.  But  T hope  never 
to  preach  a doctrine  to  my  hearers  which 
needs  the  names  and  authority  of  men,  how- 
ever respectable,  for  its  support.  Search  the 
scriptures,  (John  v.  39,)  and  judge  by  them 
of  the  importance  of  this  doctrine.  Judge 
of  it  by  the  text  now  before  us.  The  apostle 
speaks  of  it  as  sufficient  to  silence  every 
charge,  to  free  from  all  condemnation,  and 
inseparably  connected  with  eternal  life ; for 
those  whom  God  justifies  he  will  also  glorify, 
Rom.  viii.  30.  Though  volumes  have  been 
written  upon  the  subject,  I think  it  may  be 
explained  in  few  words.  Every  one  must 
give  an  account  of  himself  to  God ; and  the 
judgment  will  proceed  according  to  the  tenor 
of  his  holy  word.  By  the  law  no  flesh  can 
be  justified,  for  all  have  sinned  : (Rom.  iii.  19, 
20 :)  but  they  who  believe  the  gospel  will  be 
justified  from  all  things,  (Acts  xiii.  39,)  for 
which  the  law  would  otherwise  condemn 
them ; and  as  they  who  believe  not  are  con- 
demned already,  (John  iii.  18,)  so  believers 
are  already  justified  by  faith,  and  have  peace 
with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
(Rom.  v.  1,)  in  the  present  life.  They  plead 
guilty  to  the  charge  of  the  law  ; but  they  can 
likewise  plead,  that  they  renounce  all  hope 
and  righteousness  in  themselves,  and  upon 
the  warrant  of  the  word  of  promise,  put  their 
whole  trust  in  Jesus,  as  the  end  of  the  law 
for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth : 
(Rom.  x.  4 :)  and  this  plea  is  accepted.  “ To 
him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth  on  him 
that  justifieth  the  ungodly,  his  faith  is  coun- 
ted for  righteousness,”  (Rom.  iv.  5,)  and  his 
sins  are  no  more  remembered  against  him, 
Heb.  viii.  12. 

This  justification,  in  its  own  nature,  is  au- 
thoritative, complete,  and  final.  It  is  an  act 
of  God’s  mercy,  which,  because  founded  upon 
the  mediation  of  Jesus,  may,  with  no  less 
truth  be  styled  an  act  of  his  justice,  whereby 
the  believing  sinner  is  delivered  from  the 
curse  of  the  law,  from  the  guilt  and  power 
of  sin,  and  is  translated  into  the  kingdom  of 
his  dear  Son,  Col,  i.  13.  It  includes  the  par- 
don of  all  sm,  and  admission  to  the  state  of 
a child  of  God.  It  is  a passing  from  death 
unto  life,  John  v.  24.  By  faith  of  the  opera- 
tion of  God,  the  sinner,  once  afar  off,  is 
brought  nigh,  is  accepted  in  the  Beloved,  and 
becomes  one  with  him,  as  the  branch  is 
united  to  the  vine,  and  the  members  with  the 
head,  John  xv.  15.  The  sanctification  of  a 
believer  is  imperfect  and  gradual ; but  his 
justification,  in  this  sense,  from  the  moment 
when  he  begins  to  live  a life  of  faith  in  the 
Son  of  God,  is  perfect,  and  incapable  of  in- 
crease. The  principle  of  life  in  a new-born 
infant,  and  the  privileges  dependent  upon  his 


372 


THE  INTERCESSION  OF  CHRIST. 


birth,  (if  he  be  the  heir  of  a great  family,) 
are  the  same  from  the  first  hour,  as  at  any 
future  time.  He  is  stronger  as  he  grows  up 
to  the  stature  of  a man,  but  is  not  more  alive ; 
he  grows  up  likewise  more  into  the  know- 
ledge and  enjoyment  of  his  privileges,  but 
his  right  to  them  admits  of  no  augmentation  ; 
for  he  derives  it,  not  from  his  years,  or  his 
stature,  or  his  powers,  but  from  the  relation 
in  which  he  stands  as  a child  to  his  father. 
Thus  it  is  with  those  who  are  born  from 
above ; they  are  immediately  the  children  and 
heirs  of  God,  though  for  a time,  like  minors 
while  under  age,  they  may  seem  to  differ  but 
little  from  servants;  (Gal.  iv.  1,  2;)  and  it 
doth  not  yet  appear  what  they  shall  be. 

But  though  justification  in  the  sight  of  God 
be  connected  with  the  reality  of  faith,  the 
comfortable  perception  of  it  in  our  own  con- 
sciences is  proportionable  to  the  degree  of 
faith.  In  young  converts,  therefore,  it  is  usu- 
ally weak.  They  are  well  satisfied  that  Je- 
sus is  the  only  Saviour,  and  they  have  no 
doubt  of  his  ability  and  sufficiency  in  that 
character,  in  favour  of  those  who  put  their 
trust  in  him ; but  they  are  suspicious  and  jea- 
lous of  themselves ; they  are  apprehensive  of 
something  singular  in  their  own  case,  which 
may  justly  exclude  them  from  his  mercy,  or 
they  fear  that  they  do  not  believe  aright.  But 
the  weakest  believer  is  a child  of  God  ; and 
true  faith,  though  at  first  like  a grain  of  mus- 
tard-seed, is  interested  in  all  the  promises  of 
the  gospel.  If  it  be  true,  it  will  grow,  (Mark 
iv.  26,)  it  will  attain  to  a more  simple  depen- 
dence upon  its  great  object,  and  will  work  its 
way,  through  a thousand  doubts  and  fears, 
(which,  for  a season,  are  not  without  their 
use,)  till  at  length  the  weak  Christian  be- 
comes strong  in  faith,  strong  in  the  Lord,  and 
is  enabled  to  say,  “I  know  whom  I have  be- 
lieved,” 2 Tim.  i.  12.  Who  shall  lay  any 
thing  to  my  charge!  Who  shall  condemn!  ft 
is  God  who  justifieth.  It  is  Christ  who  died 
for  me  and  rose  again. 

But  especially  at  the  great  day,  the  Lord 
the  Judge  shall  ratify  their  justification  pub- 
licly before  assembled  worlds.  Then  every 
tongue  that  riseth  in  judgment  against  them 
(Is.  liv.  17,)  shall  be  put  to  silence.  Then 
Satan  will  be  utterly  confounded,  and  many 
who  despised  them  on  earth  will  be  astonish- 
ed and  say — “ These  are  they  whose  lives  we 
accounted  madness,  and  their  end  to  be  with- 
out honour.  How  are  they  numbered  among 
the  children  of  God!”  Wisdom,  v.  4,  5. 

The  right  knowledge  of  this  doctrine  is  a 
source  of  abiding  joy  ; it  likewise  animates 
love,  zeal,  gratitude,  and  all  the  noblest  pow- 
ers of  the  soul,  and  produces  a habit  of  cheer- 
ful and  successful  obedience  to  the  whole 
will  of  God.  But  it  may  be,  and  too  often  is, 
misunderstood  and  abused.  If  you  receive 
it  by  divine  teaching,  it  will  fill  you  with  those 
fruits  of  righteousness  which  arc  by  Jesus 


[SLRi  XLVII. 

Christ  to  the  glory  and  praise  of  God,  Phil, 
i.  11.  But  if  you  learn  it  only  from  men  and 
books,  if  you  are  content  with  the  notion  of 
it  in  your  head,  instead  of  the  powerful  expe- 
rience of  it  in  your  heart,  it  will  have  a con- 
trary effect.  Such  a lifeless  form,  even  of 
the  truth  itself,  will  probably  make  you  heady 
and  high  minded,  censorious  of  others,  trifling 
in  your  spirit,  and  unsettled  in  your  conduct. 
Oh!  be  afraid  of  resembling  the  foolish  vir- 
gins, (Matt.  xxv.  1 — 12,)  of  having  the  lamp 
of  your  profession  expire  in  darkness  for  want 
of  the  oil  of  grace  ; lest  when  the  bridegroom 
cometh,  you  should  find  the  door  shut  against 
you. 


SERMON  XLVII. 

THE  INTERCESSION  OF  CHRIST. 

Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ? It  is  Christ 
that  died , yea , rather , that  is  risen  again , 
who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God , who 
also  maketh  intercession  for  us.  Romans, 
viii.  34. 

The  redemption  of  the  soul  is  precious. 
Fools  make  a mock  of  sin,  Prov.  xvi.  9. 
But  they  will  not  think  lightly  of  it  who  duly 
consider  the  majesty,  authority,  and  goodness 
of  him  against  whom  it  is  committed : and 
who  are  taught  by  what  God  actually  has  done, 
what  sin  rendered  necessary  to  be  done,  be- 
fore a sinner  could  have  a well-grounded  hope 
of  forgiveness.  For  wisdom  does  nothing  in 
vain.  The  death  of  the  Son  of  God  would 
have  been  in  vain,  (Gal.  ii.  21,)  if  the  great  de- 
sign in  favour  of  sinful  men  could  have  been 
effected  by  inferior  means.  But  as  he,  in  the 
office  of  Mediator,  was  the  hope  of  mankind 
from  the  beginning;  so  the  great  work  he 
has  accomplished,  and  the  characters  he  sus- 
tains, when  made  known  to  the  conscience,  are 
in  fact,  sufficient  to  relieve  in  every  case,  to 
answer  every  charge,  and  to  satisfy  the  be- 
liever in  Jesus  that  there  is  now  no  condem- 
nation to  fear.  There  are  many  (as  we  have 
observed)  ready  to  accuse,  but  it  is  in  vain  ; 
the  charge  may  be  true,  but  it  is  overruled. 
Who  shall  dare  to  -condemn,  if  things  be  as 
the  apostle  states  them  in  this  passage ! Who- 
ever would  impeach  the  hope  of  a true  be- 
liever, must  prove,  (if  he  can,)  that  Christ  did 
not  die ; or  that  he  did  not  rise  from  the  dead ; 
or  that  he  was  not  admitted  into  the  presence 
of  God  on  our  behalf;  or  that  he  is  unmind- 
ful of  his  promise,  to  make  intercession  for 
all  who  come  unto  God  by  him.  For  if  these 
points  are  indubitable  and  sure,  it  is  impos- 
sible that  the  soul  which  has  trusted  in  Jesus, 
and  put  its  cause  into  his  hands,  can  miscarry. 

The  death  and  resurrection  of  our  Lord, 
his  appearance  in  our  nature,  clothed  with 


THE  INTERCESSION  OF  CHRIST. 


373 


SER.  XLVII.] 

glory,  seated  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majes- 
ty on  high,  as  the  High-Priest  of  our  profes- 
sion, can  scarcely  be  considered  too  often. 
These  old  truths  are  always  new  to  those  who 
love  him,  and  are  the  food  by  which  their  souls 
live.  Yet  I shall  not  at  present  repeat  what 
I have  offered  upon  them  from  former  passa- 
ges, but  shall  chiefly  confine  myself  to  the 
subject  of  his  intercession,  which  has  not,  until 
now,  expressly  occurred  to  our  meditations. 

The  word  the  apostle  uses  here,  and  in 
Heb.  vii.  25, — “ Seeing  he  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession,”  occurs  likewise  in  Acts 
xxv.  24,  where  Festus  speaks  of  the  process 
managed  by  the  Jews  against  Paul ; and  also 
in  Rom.  xi.  2,  of  Elijah’s  making  intercession 
to  God  against  Israel.  From  these  passages 
compared  together,  we  may  observe  that  the 
word  is  to  be  taken  in  a large  sense.  He 
pleads  our  cause,  he  manages  our  concerns, 
he  answers  our  enemies.  Who  then  shall 
condemn  those  for  whom  the  Lord  Jesus 
thus  employs  his  power  and  his  lore  J He  is 
our  advocate,  (1  John  ii.  1,)  he  takes  upon 
nim  our  whole  concern.  He  pleads  as  a 
Priest,  and  manages  as  a King,  for  those 
who  come  unto  God  by  him. 

I.  He  pleads  as  a Priest. — His  office  of  in- 
tercession has  a plain  reference  to  his  great 
instituted  type,  the  high  priest  under  the  Le- 
vitical  dispensation  ; who,  according  to  the 
appointment  of  God,  entered  within  the  vail, 
.o  present  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  before 
.he  mercy-seat,  Lev.  xvi.  We  have  a clear 
and  infallible  explanation  of  the  design  of  this 
nstitution.  “Now  when  these  things  were 
thus  ordained,  the  priests  went  always  into 
the  first  tabernacle,  accomplishing  the  ser- 
vice of  God.  But  into  the  second  went  the 
high  priest  alone  once  every  year,  not  with- 
out blood,  which  he  offered  for  himself  and 
for  the  errors  of  the  people.  The  Holy  Ghost 
this  signifying,  that  the  way  into  the  holiest 
of  all  was  not  yet  made  manifest,  while  as 
the  first  tabernacle  was  yet  standing.  Which 
was  a figure  for  the  time  then  present,  in 
which  were  offered  both  gifts  and  sacrifices, 
that  could  not  make  him  that  did  the  service 
perfect,  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience ; 
which  stood  only  in  meats  and  drinks,  and 
divers  washings,  and  carnal  ordinances,  im- 
posed on  them  until  the  time  of  reformation. 
But  Christ  being  come  an  High  Priest  of 
good  things  to  come,  by  a greater  and  more 
perfect  tabernacle,  not  made  with  hands, 
that  is  to  say,  not  of  this  building ; neither 
by  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves,  but  by  his 
own  blood,  he  entered  in  once  into  the  holy 
place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemption 
for  us,”  Heb.  ix.  6—12.  Thus  Jesus  is 
passed  into  the  heavens,  entered  into  the 
holy  of  holies  with  his  own  blood.  His  pre- 
sence there,  in  our  nature,  with  the  marks 
of  his  sufferings  for  us,  as  the  Lamb  that  has 
been  slain,  is  an  unceasing  virtual  interces- 


sion on  our  behalf.  I meddle  not  with  cu- 
rious questions  on  this  subject,  as  to  the  man- 
ner in  which  his  intercession  is  carried  on : 
it  is  sufficient  to  know  that  he  is  there,  and 
there  for  us,  as  our  representative.  This  con- 
sideration is  of  continual  use,  to  animate  and 
encourage  sinners  in  their  approach  to  God. 
There  are  three  cases  particularly,  in  which 
the  heart  that  knows  its  own  bitterness  must 
sink,  were  it  not  for  the  relieving  thought, 
that  there  is  an  advocate  with  the  Father,  a 
High  Priest,  who,  by  his  intercession,  is  able 
to  save  to  the  uttermost. 

1.  When  the  mind  is  burdened  with  guilt. 
Great  is  the  distress  of  an  awakened  con- 
science. The  sinner  now  is  sensible  of  wants 
which  God  alone  can  supply,  and  of  miseries 
from  which  he  cannot  be  extricated  but  by  an 
almighty  arm.  But  when  he  thinks  of  the 
majesty  and  holiness  of  God,  he  is  troubled 
and  adopts  the  language  of  the  prophet,  “ Wo 
is  me,  1 am  undone  !”  Isa.  vi.  5.  He  dares 
not  draw  near  to  God,  nor  does  he  dare  to 
keep  any  longer  at  a distance  from  him.  But 
when  such  a one  is  enabled  to  look  to  Jesus 
as  the  intercessor,  what  light  and  comfort 
does  he  receive  1 For  the  gospel  speaks  in- 
viting language.  Let  not  the  weary  and 
heavy-laden  sinner  fear  to  approach.  Your 
peace  is  already  made  in  the  court  above, 
and  your  advocate  is  waiting  to  introduce 
you.  Lift  up  your  heart  to  him  and  think 
you  hear  him  in  effect  saying,  “ Father, 
there  is  another  sinner  who  has  heard  of  my 
name,  and  desires  to  trust  in  me.  Father,  I 
will,  that  he  also  may  be  delivered  from  go- 
ing down  into  the  pit,  and  interested  in  the 
ransom  which  I have  provided.” 

2.  When  we  are  deeply  conscious  of  our 
defects  in  duty.  If  we  compare  our  best 
performances  with  the  demands  of  the  law, 
the  majesty  of  God,  and  the  unspeakable  ob- 
ligations we  are  under;  if  we  consider  our 
innumerable  sins  of  omission,  and  that  the 
little  we  can  do  is  polluted  and  defiled  by  the 
mixture  of  evil  thoughts,  and  the  working  of 
selfish  principles,  aims,  and  motives,  which 
though  we  disapprove,  we  are  unable  to  sup- 
press, we  have  great  reason  to  confess,  “ To 
us  belong  shame  and  confusion  of  face,”  Dan. 
ix.  7.  But  we  are  relieved  by  the  thought, 
that  Jesus  the  High  Priest  bears  the  iniquity 
of  our  holy  things,  perfumes  our  prayers 
with  the  incense  of  his  mediation,  and  washes 
our  tears  in  his  own  blood.  This  inspires  a 
confidence,  that  though  we  are  unworthy  of 
the  least  of  his  mercies,  we  may  humbly  hope 
for  a share  in  the  greatest  blessings  he  be- 
stows, because  we  are  heard  and  accepted, 
not  on  the  account  of  our  own  prayers  and 
services,  but  in  the  beloved  Son  of  God,  who 
maketh  intercession  for  us.  Thus  the  wisdom 
and  love  of  God  have  provided  a wonderful 
expedient,  which,  so  far  as  it  is  rightly  un- 
derstood, and  cordially  embraced,  while  it 


374 


THE  INTERCESSION  OF  CHRIST. 


lays  the  sinner  low  as  the  dust  in  point  of 
humiliation  and  self-abasement,  fills  him  at 
the  same  time  with  a hope  full  of  glory,  which, 
with  respect  to  its  foundation,  cannot  be 
shaken ; and  with  respect  to  its  object,  can 
be  satisfied  with  nothing  less  than  all  the  ful- 
ness of  God.  There  are  favoured  seasons  in 
which  the  believer,  having  a lively  impres- 
sion of  the  authority  and  love  of  the  Interces- 
sor, can  address  the  great  Jehovah  as  his  Fa- 
ther, with  no  less  confidence  than  if  he  was 
holy  and  spotless  as  the  angels  before  the 
throne,  at  the  very  moment  that  he  has  abun- 
dant cause  to  say,  “Behold  I am  vile  ! I ab- 
hor myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and  ashes !” 
Job  xl.  4 ; xlii.  6. 

3.  This  powerful  and  prevalent  intercession 
abundantly  compensates  for  the  poverty  and 
narrowness  of  our  prayers.  Experience  con- 
firms what  the  scripture  declares  of  our  in- 
sufficiency to  order  our  own  cause  before  the 
Lord,  to  specify  our  various  wants,  and  to  fill 
our  mouths  with  such  arguments,  as  may  en- 
gage the  attention,  and  enliven  the  affections 
of  our  hearts.  “We  know  not  how  to  pray  as 
we  ought,”  Rom.  viii.  26.  And  though  the 
Holy  Spirit  teaches  believers  to  form  peti- 
tions, which,  in  the  main,  are  agreeable  to  the 
will  of  God,  yet  we  often  mistake  and  ask 
amiss ; we  often  forget  what  we  ought  to  ask, 
and  we  are  too  often  cold,  negligent,  weary, 
distracted,  and  formal  in  prayer.  How  prone 
are  we  to  enter  by  prayer  into  the  Lord’s  pre- 
sence, as  the  thoughtless  horse  rushes  into 
the  battle ! (Jer.  viii.  6.)  to  speak  to  God  as 
if  we  were  only  speaking  into  the  air,  and  to 
have  our  thoughts  dissipated  and  wandering 
to  the  ends  of  the  earth,  while  his  holy  name 
is  upon  our  polluted  lips  ! It  is  well  for  us, 
that  God  is  both  able  and  gracious  to  do  more 
than  we  can  ask  or  think  ; but  that  he  actu- 
ally does  so,  for  such  unworthy  creatures,  is 
owing  to  our  Intercessor.  He  knows  all  our 
wants,  and  pleads  and  provides  accordingly. 
He  is  not  negligent,  though  we  too  frequently 
are.  He  prayed  for  Peter’s  safety  (Luke 
xxii.  31,  32,)  before  Peter  himself  was  aware 
of  his  danger.  Have  we  not  sometimes  been 
as  it  were  surprised  and  shamed  by  the  Lord’s 
goodness,  when  he  has  condescended  to  be- 
stow special  and  needful  mercies  upon  us,  be- 
fore we  thought  of  asking  for  them  1 These 
are  affecting  proofs  of  our  Intercessor’s  at- 
tention and  care,  and  that  he  is  always  mind- 
ful of  us.  But, 

II.  Jesus  the  High  Priest  is  upon  a throne. 
— He  is  a King,  King  of  saints,  and  King  of 
nations.  He  is  not  only  a righteous  advocate, 
but  he  possesses  all  authority  and  power.  And 
it  belongs  to  his  office  as  King,  effectually  to 
manage  for  those  in  whose  behalf  he  inter- 
cedes. I have  already  observed  that  the  ori- 
ginal word  includes  this  sense. 

1.  He  is  the  source  and  fountain  of  their 
supplies.  All  their  springs  are  in  him.  The 


[SER.  XL VII. 

fulness  of  wisdom,  grace,  and  consolation,  out 
of  which  they  are  invited  to  receive,  resides 
in  him.  And  therefore  he  says,  “ If  ye  ask 
any  thing  in  my  name,  I will  do  it,”  John  xiv. 
14.  Not  merely,  I will  present  your  petitions, 
but  I will  fulfil  them  myself.  For  all  things 
are  committed  into  his  hands,  and  it  is  he 
with  whom  we  have  to  do,  Heb.  iv.  13.  He 
therefore  enjoins  us,  if  we  believe  or  trust 
in  God,  to  believe  also  in  him,  John  xiv.  1. 
His  invitations,  “ If  any  man  thirst,  let  him 
come  unto  me  and  drink (John  vii.  37  ;)«- 
“ Whosoever  will,  let  him  take  of  the  water 
of  life  freely;”  (Rev,  xxii.  17 ;)  equally  ex- 
press his  sovereignty  and  his  munificence. 
On  him  the  eyes  of  all  who  know  him  wait 
from  age  to  age,  and  are  not  disappointed. 
He  opens  his  hand,  and  satisfies  them  with 
good,  Psal.  cxlv.  17.  Nor  is  the  store  of  his 
bounty  diminished  by  all  that  he  has  distribu- 
ted, for  it  is  unsearchable  and  inexhaustible, 
like  the  light  of  the  sun,  which  gladdens  the 
eyes  of  millions  at  once,  has  done  so  from  thc- 
beginning,  and  will  continue  to  do  so  to  the 
end  of  time. 

2.  He  appoints  and  adjusts  their  various 
dispensations,  with  an  unerring  suitableness 
to  their  several  states,  capacities,  and  circum- 
stances. If  a skilful  gardener  had  the  com- 
mand of  the  weather,  he  would  not  treat  all 
his  plants,  nor  the  same  plant  at  all  times,  ex- 
actly alike.  Continual  rain,  or  continual  sun- 
shine, wmuld  be  equally  unfavourable  to  their 
growth  and  fruitfulness.  In  his  kingdom  of 
providence,  he  so  proportions  the  rain  and  the 
sunshine  to  each  other,  that  the  corn  is  usual- 
ly brought  forward  from  the  seed  to  the  blade, 
the  ear,  and  the  full  ripe  ear.  And  1 believe 
it  would  be  always  so,  were  it  not  for  the  pre- 
valence of  sin,  which  sometimes  makes  the 
heavens  over  our  head  brass,  the  earth  un- 
der our  feet  iron,  (Deut.  xxviii.  23,)  and  turns 
a fruitful  land  into  barrenness.  So,  in  his 
kingdom  of  grace,  he  trains  his  people  up  by 
various  exercises.  He  delights  in  their  pros- 
perity, and  does  not  willingly  grieve  them. 
But  afflictions  in  their  present  state  are  ne- 
cessary, and  his  blessing  makes  them  saluta- 
tary.  But  this  is  their  great  privilege,  that 
their  comforts  and  their  crosses  are  equally 
from  his  hand,  are  equally  tokens  of  his  love, 
and  alike  directed  to  work  together  for  their 
good.  He  appoints  the  bounds  of  their  habi- 
tations, numbers  the  hairs  of  their  heads,  and 
is  their  guide  and  guard,  their  sun  and  shield, 
even  unto  death.  Here  they  meet  with  ma- 
ny changes,  but  none  that  are  unnoticed  by 
him,  none  that  can  separate  them  from  his 
love,  and  they  all  concur  in  leading  them  on 
to  a state  of  unchangeable  and  endless  ioy, 
2 Cor.  iv.  17. 

3.  He  is  the  Captain  of  their  salvation, 
Heb.  ii.  10.  They  are  his  soldiers,  and  fight 
under  his  eye ; yet  the  battle  is  not  theirs 
but  his.  Israel  of  old  were  to  muster  their 


SER.  xlvii.]  THE  INTERCESSION  OF  CHRIST.  375 


forces,  to  range  themselves  for  the  fight,  to 
use  every  precaution  and  endeavour,  as 
though  success  depended  entirely  upon  them- 
selves. Yet  they  obtained  not  the  victory  by 
their  own  sword,  but  it  was  the  Lord  who 
fought  for  them,  and  trod  down  their  enemies 
before  them ; and  they  had  little  more  to  do 
than  to  pursue  the  vanquished,  and  to  divide 
the  spoil.  And  thus  it  is  in  the  warfare 
which  true  Christians  maintain,  not  against 
flesh  and  blood  only,  but  against  principalities 
and  powers,  (Eph.  vi.  12,)  against  the  spirit 
of  the  world,  and  against  Satan  and  his  le- 
gions. They  fight  in  his  cause,  but  he  upholds 
them  and  conquers  for  them.  Their  enemies 
are  too  many  and  too  mighty  for  them  to 
grapple  with  in  their  own  strength ; but  he  re- 
bukes them,  and  pleads  the  cause  of  his  people. 
His  gracious  interposition  in  their  favour  is 
beautifully  set  forth,  together  with  its  effects, 
in  the  vision  which  the  prophet  saw,  when  he 
was  sent  to  encourage  the  rulers  and  people 
of  the  Jews  against  the  difficulties  they  met 
with  when  rebuilding  the  temple.  He  saw 
Joshua  the  high  priest,  who,  in  that  character, 
represented  the  collective  body  of  the  people, 
standing  before  the  Lord,  clothed  in  filthy  gar- 
ments, and  Satan  standing  at  his  right  hand  to 
resist  him,  Zech.  iii.  1 — 4.  Such  is  our  attire 
as  sinners,  all  our  righteousnesses  are  as  filthy 
rags ; and  such  are  the  attempts  of  our  enemy, 
to  deter  us  from  approaching  to  him  who  alone 
can  relieve  us,  or  to  distress  us  when  we  ap- 
pear before  him.  But  when  Joshua  could  not 
speak  for  himself,  the  Lord  spake  for  him, 
claimed  him  for  his  own,  as  a brand  plucked 
out  of  the  fire,  silenced  his  adversary,  clothed 
him  with  change  of  raiment,  and  set  a fair 
mitre  upon  his  head.  Thus  David  acknow- 
ledged the  Lord’s  goodness  in  providing  him 
a table  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies,  (Psal. 
xxiii.  5,)  who  saw  with  envy  his  privileges, 
but  were  not  able  to  prevent  his  enjoyment 
of  them.  Many  a time  the  Lord  thus  com- 
forts and  feeds  his  people,  while  waiting  on 
him  in  secret,  or  attending  his  public  ordi- 
nances ; and  were  our  eyes  opened,  like  the 
ejms  of  Elisha’s  servant,  to  behold  what  is 
very  near,  though  unseen,  we  should  feel  the 
force  of  the  psalmist’s  observation.  The 
powers  of  darkness  surround  us ; their  malice 
against  us  is  heightened  by  the  favour  of  our 
good  Shepherd  toward  us  ; they  rage,  but  in 
vain ; for  though  they  could  presently  de- 
prive us  of  peace,  and  fill  us  with  anguish, 
if  we  were  left  exposed  to  their  assaults,  they 
are  under  a restraint,  and  can  do  nothing 
without  his?  permission.  When  he  is  pleased 
to  give  quietness,  who  then  can  make  trou- 
ble ! Job  xxxiv.  29.  He  preserves  and  pro- 
vides for  his  sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves. 

We  may  close  this  part  of  our  subject  with 
two  or  three  reflections,  which,  though  as  to 
the  substance  of  them  I may  have  offered 
you  before,  are  always  seasonable  and  suita- 


ble, when  we  are  speaking  of  the  power  and 
grace  of  Messiah. 

1.  How  precious  is  this  Saviour ! How 
justly  is  he  entitled  to  the  chief  place  in  the 
hearts  of  those  who  know  him  ! In  the  work 
of  salvation,  from  the  first  step  to  the  last,  he 
is  all  in  all.  If  he  had  not  died  and  risen 
again,  we  must  have  died  for  ever.  If  he  had 
not  ascended  into  heaven,  there  to  appear  in 
the  presence  of  God  for  us,  we  must  have 
been  thrust  down  into  the  lowest  hell.  If  he 
did  not  plead  for  us,  we  would  not,  we  durst 
not  offer  a word  in  our  own  behalf.  If  he  was 
not,  on  our  part,  engaged  to  keep  us  night  and 
day,our  enemies  would  soon  be  too  hard  for  us. 
May  we  therefore  give  him  the  glory  due  to  his 
name  and  cleave  to  him, and  trust  in  him  alone. 

2.  How  safe  are  the  people  of  whom  he 
undertakes  the  care  ! While  his  eye  is  upon 
them,  his  ear  open  to  their  prayer,  and  his 
arm  of  power  stretched  out  for  their  protec- 
tion ; while  he  remembers  that  word  of  pro- 
mise upon  which  he  himself  has  caused  them 
to  hope ; wrhile  he  retains  that  faithfulness 
which  encouraged  them  to  commit  their  souls 
to  him,  it  is  impossible  that  any  weapon  or 
stratagem  formed  against  them  can  prevail. 
There  are  many,  it  is  true,  who  will  rise  up 
against  them ; but  God  is  for  them,  and  with 
them  a very  present  help  in  trouble,  Ps.  xlvi. 
1.  They  are  full  of  wants  and  fears,  and  in 
themselves  liable  to  many  charges;  but  since 
Jesus  is  their  head,  their  security,  their  inter- 
cessor, no  needful  good  shall  be  withheld 
from  them,  no  charge  admitted  against  them, 
none  shall  condemn  them,  for  it  is  God  him- 
self who  justifies  the  believer  in  Jesus. 

3.  If  these  things  be  so,  how  much  are  they 
to  be  pitied,  who  hear  of  them  without  being 
affected  or  influenced  by  them!  Will  you  al- 
ways be  content  with  hearing!  “Oh,  taste 
and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good  !”  Ps.  xxxiv.  8. 
Should  you  at  last  be  separated  from  those 
with  whom  you  now  join  in  public  worship ; 
should  you  see  them  admitted  into  the  king- 
dom of  God,  and  you  yourselves  be  thrust  out; 
your  present  advantages  wrould  then  prove  an 
aggravation  of  your  guilt  and  misery.  As 
yet  there  is  room.  Strive  to  enter  while  the 
gate  of  mercy  remains  open.  Think  of  the 
solemnities  of  that  great  day.  Many  will 
then  be  condemned,  though  they  who  believe 
in  the  Son  of  God  will  be  justified.  Consi- 
der who  will  condemn  them,  God  himself,  Ps. 

1.  6.  From  his  inquisition  there  can  be  no 
retreat ; from  his  sentence  there  can  be  no 
appeal.  And  consider  what  the  condemna- 
tion will  be;  a final  exclusion  from  his  fa- 
vour ; a never-ceasing  sene  of  his  awful 
displeasure  ; a state  of  eternal  horror  and 
despair,  without  mitigation,  without  the 
smallest  ray  of  hope  ! Can  you  deliberately 
give  up  all  claim  to  happiness,  and  determine 
to  rush  upon  the  thick  bosses  of  God’s  buck- 
ler, (Job  xv.  26,)  to  defy  his  power,  and  to 


376 


THE  SONG  OF  THE  REDEEMED. 


dare  his  threatening,  rather  than  forego  the 
transitory  and  delusive  pleasures  of  sin  f And 
can  you  do  this  with  the  gospel  sounding  in 
your  ears  1 May  the  Lord  prevent  it ! How- 
ever, observe  you  are  once  more  warned, 
once  more  invited.  If  now  at  last,  after  so 
many  delays,  so  much  perverseness  on  your 
part,  you  will  honestly  and  earnestly  seek 
him,  he  will  be  found  of  you.  But  if  you 
persist  in  your  obstinacy,  your  condemnation 
will  be  inevitable  and  sure. 


SERMON  XLVIII. 

THE  SONG  OF  THE  REDEEMED. 

— Thou — hast  redeemed  us  to  God,  by  thy 
blood  ( out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue, 
and  people,  and  nation.')  Rev.  v.  9. 

The  extent,  variety,  and  order  of  the  cre- 
ation, proclaim  the  glory  of  God.  He  is  like- 
wise maximus  in  minimis.  The  smallest  of 
his  works  that  we  are  capable  of  examining, 
such  for  instance  as  the  eye  or  the  wing  of 
a little  insect,  the  creature  of  a day,  are 
stamped  with  an  inimitable  impression  of  his 
wisdom  and  power.  Thus  in  his  written  word 
there  is  a greatness,  considering  it  as  a whole, 
and  a beauty  and  accuracy  in  the  smaller 
parts,  analogous  to  what  we  observe  in  the 
visible  creation,  and  answerable  to  what  an 
enlightened  and  humble  mind  may  expect  in 
a book  which  bears  the  character  of  a divine 
revelation.  A single  verse,  a single  clause, 
when  viewed  (if  I may  so  speak)  in  the  mi- 
croscope of  close  meditation,  is  often  found  to 
contain  a fulness,  a world  of  wonders.  And 
though  a connected  and  comprehensive  ac- 
quaintance with  the  whole  scripture  be  desi- 
rable and  useful,  and  is  no  less  the  privilege 
than  the  duty  of  those  who  have  capacity  and 
time  at  their  disposal  to  acquire  it ; yet  there 
is  a gracious  accommodation  to  the  weakness 
of  some  persons,  and  the  circumstances  of 
others.  So  that  in  many  parts  of  scripture, 
whatever  is  immediately  necessary  to  con- 
firm our  faith,  to  animate  or  regulate  our 
practice,  is  condensed  into  a small  compass, 
and  comprised  in  a few  verses ; yea,  some- 
times a single  sentence,  when  unfolded  and 
examined,  will  be  found  to  contain  all  the 
great  principles  of  duty  and  comfort.  Such 
is  the  sentence  which  I have  now  read  to  you. 
In  the  Messiah  it  is  inserted  in  the  grand 
chorus  taken  from  the  l*2th  and  13th  verses 
of  this  chapter.  And  as  it  may  lead  us  to  a 
compendious  recapitulation  of  the  whole  sub- 
ject, and  by  the  Lord’s  blessing,  may  prepare 
us  to  join  in  the  following  ascription  of  praise 
to  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  to  the 
Lamb ; I propose  to  consider  it  in  its  proper 
connection  as  a part  of  the  leading  song  of 


[ser.  XLVIII. 

the  redeemed  before  the  throne,  in  which  the 
angels  cannot  share,  though  from  their  love 
to  redeemed  sinners,  and  from  their  views  of 
the  manifold  wisdom  and  glory  of  God  in  vi- 
siting such  sinners  with  such  a salvation,  they 
cheerfully  take  a part  in  the  general  chorus. 

The  redemption  spoken  of,  is  suited  to  the 
various  cases  of  sinners  of  every  nation,  peo- 
ple, and  language.  And  many  sinners  of  di- 
vers descriptions,  and  from  distant  situations, 
scattered  abroad  into  all  lands,  through  a long 
succession  of  ages,  will,  by  the  efficacy  of 
this  redemption,  be  gathered  together  into 
one,  John  xi.  52.  They  will  constitute  one 
family,  united  in  one  great  Head,  Eph.  iii. 
14,  15.  When  they  shall  fully  attain  the  end 
of  their  hope,  and  encircle  the  throne,  day 
without  night,  rejoicing,  their  remembrance 
of  what  they  once  were,  their  sense  of  the 
happiness  they  are  raised  to,  and  of  the  great 
consideration  to  which  they  owe  their  deliver- 
ance and  their  exaltation,  will  excite  a per- 
petual joyful  acknowledgment  to  this  purport. 
They  were  once  lost,  but  could  contribute 
nothing  to  their  own  recovery.  Therefore 
they  ascribe  all  the  glory  to  their  Saviour. 
They  strike  their  golden  harps,  and  sing  in 
strains,  loud  as  from  numbers  without  num- 
ber, sweet  as  from  blest  voices,  “Thou  art 
worthy — for  thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeem 
ed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood,  out  of  every  kin- 
dred, and  tongue,  and  people,  and  nation.” 

But  though  this  song,  and  this  joy,  will 
only  be  consummated  in  heaven,  the  com- 
mencement takes  place  upon  earth.  Believ- 
ers, during  their  present  state  of  warfare, 
are  taught  to  sing  it ; in  feebler  strains  in- 
deed, but  the  subject  of  their  joy,  and  the 
object  of  their  praise,  are  the  same  which 
inspire  the  harps  and  songs  in  the  world  of 
light.  May  I not  say  that  this  life  is  the  time 
of  their  rehearsal  1 They  are  now  learning 
their  song,  and  advancing  in  meetness  to  join 
in  the  chorus  on  high,  which,  as  death  suc- 
cessively removes  them,  is  continually  in- 
creasing by  the  accession  of  fresh  voices.  All 
that  they  know,  or  desire  to  know,  all  they  pos- 
sess or  hope  for,  is  included  in  this  ascription. 

I take  the  last  clause  of  the  verse  into  the 
subject.  The  words  suggest  three  principal 
points  to  our  consideration : 

I.  The  benefit, — Redemption  to  God. 

II.  The  redemption  price, — By  thy  blood. 

III.  The  extent  of  the  benefit, — To  a peo- 
ple out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and 
nation. 

I.  Thou  hast  redeemed  us  to  God. — Re- 
demption or  ransom  is  applicable  *to  a state  of 
imprisonment  for  debt,  and  to  a state  of  bond- 
age or  slavery.  From  these  ideas  taken  to- 
gether, we  may  form  some  estimate  of  the 
misery  of  our  fallen  state;  a theme,  which, 
if  I cannot  insist  upon  at  large  in  every  dis- 
course, I would  never  wholly  omit.  For  we 
can  neither  understand  the  grace,  nor  enjoy 


THE  SONG  OF  THE  REDEEMED. 


377 


SER.  XL VIII. ] 

the  comfort  of  the  gospel,  but  in  proportion 
as  we  have  a heart-felt  and  abiding  conviction 
of  our  wretched  condition  as  sinners  without 
it.  They  who  think  themselves  whole,  know 
not  their  need  of  a physician,  (Matt.  ix.  12,) 
but  to  the  sick  he  is  welcome. 

If  a man,  shut  up  in  prison  for  a heavy 
debt,  which  he  is  utterly  incapable  of  dis- 
charging, should  obtain  his  liberty,  in  consi- 
deration of  payment  made  for  him  by  another, 
he  might  be  properly  said  to  be  redeemed  from 
imprisonment.  This  supposition  will  apply 
to  our  subject.  The  law  and  justice  of  God 
have  demands  upon  us  which  we  cannot  an- 
swer. We  are  therefore  shut  up,  under  the 
law,  in  unbelief,  helpless,  and  hopeless,  till 
we  know  and  can  plead  the  engagement  of  a 
surety  for  us.  For  a time,  like  Peter,  we  are 
sleeping  in  our  prison  (Acts  xii.  6 — 10,)  re- 
gardless of  danger.  The  first  sensible  effect 
of  the  grace  of  God,  is  to  awaken  us  from 
this  insensibility.  Then  we  begin  to  feel  the 
horrors  of  our  dungeon,  and  the  strength  of 
our  chains,  and  to  tremble  under  the  appre- 
hension of  an  impending  doom.  But  grace 
proceeds  to  reveal  the  Saviour  and  friend  of 
sinners,  and  to  encourage  our  application  to 
him.  In  a good  hour  the  chains  fall  off,  the 
bars  of  iron  and  brass  are  broken  asunder, 
and  the  prison  doors  fly  open.  The  prisoner 
understands  that  all  his  great  debt  is  forgiven, 
blesses  his  deliverer,  obtains  his  liberty,  and 
departs  in  peace. 

We  are  likewise  in  bondage,  the  servants, 
the  slaves  of  a harder  task-master  than  Pha- 
raoh was  to  Israel.  Satan,  though  not  by 
right,  yet  by  a righteous  permission,  tyran- 
nizes over  us,  till  Jesus  makes  us  free,  John 
viii.  34,  36.  The  way  of  transgressors  is 
hard,  Prov.  xiii.  15.  Though  the  solicitations 
and  commands  of  that  enemy  who  worketh  in 
the  children  of  disobedience  (Eph.  ii.  2,)  are 
in  some  respects  suited  to  our  depraved  incli- 
nations, yet  the  consequences  are  grievous. 
A burdened  conscience,  a wasted  constitution, 
a ruined  fortune  and  character,  swiftly  and 
closely  follow  the  habits  of  intemperance  and 
lewdness;  and  they  who  seem  to  walk  in  a 
smoother  path,  are  deceived,  mortified,  and 
disappointed  daily.  If  persons  who  live  open- 
ly and  habitually  in  a course  that  is  contrary 
to  the  rule  of  God’s  word,  speak  swelling 
words  of  vanity  (2  Pet.  ii.  18,  19,)  and  boast 
of  their  liberty,  believe  them  not.  We  are 
sure  they  carry  that  in  their  bosom  which 
hourly  contradicts  their  assertions.  Yea,  some- 
times their  slavery  is  so  galling,  that  they  at- 
tempt to  escape,  but  in  vain.  They  are  soon 
retaken,  and  their  bonds  made  stronger.  The 
issue  of  their  short-lived  reformations,  which 
they  defer  as  long  as  possible,  and  at  last  set 
about  with  reluctance,  usually  is,  that  their 
latter  end  proves  worse  than  their  beginning. 
At  most,  they  only  exchange  one  sinful  habit 
for  another,  sensuality  for  avarice,  or  prodi- 
Vol.  II.  3B 


gality  for  pride.  The  strong  one  armed  will 
maintain  his  dominion,  till  the  stronger  than 
he  interposes  and  says,  Loose  him,  and  let  him 
go,  for  I have  found  a ransom.  Then,  by  vir- 
tue of  the  redemption-price,  the  prey  is  taken 
from  the  mighty,  and  the  captive  is  delivered, 
Is.  xlix.  24,  25.  Then  the  enslaved  sinner, 
like  the  man  out  of  whom  the  legion  was  cast, 
sits  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  in  peace,  and  in  his 
right  mind,  Mark  v.  15.  He  becomes  the 
Lord’s  freed-man. 

For  he  is  not  only  delivered  from  guilt  and 
thrall,  he  is  redeemed  to  God.  He  is  now 
restored  to  his  original  state,  as  an  obedient 
and  dependent  creature,  devoted  to  his  Crea- 
tor, conformed  to  his  will  and  image,  and  ad- 
mitted to  communion  with  him  in  love.  These 
are  blessings  which  alone  can  satisfy  the 
soul,  and  without  which  it  is  impossible  for 
man  to  be  happy.  While  he  is  ignorant  of 
his  proper  good,  and  seeks  it  in  creatures,  he 
is  and  must  be  wretched.  Madness  is  in  his 
heart,  a deceived,  disordered  imagination 
turns  him  aside,  and  he  feeds  upon  ashes,  and 
upon  the  wind,  Is.  xlv.  20.  But  by  grace  he 
is  renewed  to  a sound  judgment,  his  mind  re- 
ceives a right  direction,  and  he  is  turned  from 
darkness  to  light,  from  the  power  of  Satan 
to  God,  Acts  xvi.  18. 

II.  What  unspeakably,  and  beyond  con- 
ception enhances  the  value  of  this  deliver- 
ance, is  the  consideration  of  the  means  by 
which  it  is  effected.  For  it  is  not  merely  a 
deliverance,  but  a redemption.  It  is  not  an 
act  of  mere  mercy,  but  of  mercy  harmonizing 
with  justice.  It  is  not  an  act  of  power  only, 
but  of  unexampled  and  expensive  love. — 
“ Thou  has  redeemed  us  by  thy  blood  !” 

The  sentence  denounced  by  the  law  against 
transgressors,  was  death.  And  therefore  when 
Messiah  became  our  surety,  to  satisfy  the  law 
for  us,  he  must  die.  The  expression  of  his 
blood,  is  often  used  figuratively  for  his  death, 
perhaps  to  remind  us  how  he  died.  His  was 
a bloody  death.  When  he  was  in  his  agony 
in  Gethsemane,  his  sweat  was  as  great  drops 
of  blood,  falling  down  to  the  ground,  Luke 
xxii.  44.  His  blood  flowed  when  he  gave 
his  back  to  the  smiters,  under  the  painful 
strokes  of  the  scourging  he  endured  previous 
to  his  crucifixion.  It  flowed  from  his  head, 
when  the  soldiers,  having  mocked  his  charac- 
ter of  King  by  crowning  him  with  thorns,  by 
their  rude  blows  forced  the  thorns  into  his 
temples.  His  blood  streamed  from  the 
wounds  made  by  the  spikes,  which  pierced 
his  hands  and  his  feet,  when  they  fastened 
him  to  the  cross.  When  he  hung  upon  the 
cross,  his  body  was  full  of  wounds,  and  cover 
ed  with  blood.  And,  after  his  death,  anothei 
large  wound  was  made  in  his  side,  from 
which  issued  blood  and  water.  Such  was 
the  redemption-price  he  paid  for  sinners,  his 
blood,  the  blood  of  his  heart.  Without  shed- 
ding of  blood  there  could  be  no  remission 


378 


THE  SONG  OF  THE  REDEEMED. 


Nor  could  any  blood  answer  the  great  design, 
but  his.  Not  any,  not  all  the  bloody  sacrifices 
appointed  by  the  law  of  Moses  could  take 
away  sin,  as  it  respects  the  conscience,  nor 
afford  a plea,  with  which  a sinner  could 
venture  to  come  before  the  most  high  God, 
Micah  vi.  6.  But  the  blood  of  Messiah,  in 
whom  were  united  the  perfections  of  the  di- 
vine nature,  and  the  real  properties  of  hu- 
manity, and  which  the  apostle  therefore  styles 
the  blood  of  God,  (Acts  xx.  28,)  this  precious 
blood  cleanses  from  all  sin.  It  is  exhibited  as 
a propitiation  of  perpetual  efficacy,  by  which 
God  declares  his  righteousness,  no  le^s  than 
his  mercy,  in  forgiving  iniquities,  (Rom.  iii. 
24,  28,)  and  shows  himself  just  to  the  de- 
mands of  his  holiness,  and  the  honour  of  his 
government,  when  he  accepts  and  justifies 
the  sinner  who  believes  in  Jesus. 

If  these  things  were  understood  and  at- 
tended to,  would  it  be  thought  wonderful  that 
this  Saviour  is  very  precious  to  those  who  be- 
lieve in  him,  and  who  obtain  redemption  by 
his  blood  1 How  can  it  possibly  be  otherwise  1 
Grace  like  this,  w7hen  known,  must  captivate 
and  fix  the  heart ! Not  only  to  save,  but  to 
die,  and  to  die  for  his  enemies ! Such  costly 
love,  productive  of  such  glorious  conse- 
quences, and  to  such  unworthy  creatures ! 
Surely  the  apostle’s  mind  was  filled  and  fired 
with  these  considerations,  wThen  authenti- 
cating an  epistle  with  his  own  hand,  he  sub- 
joined this  emphatical  close,  “If  any  man 
love  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be 
Anathema  Maranatha !”  1 Cor.  xvi.  22.  Do 
you  think,  my  brethren,  that  the  apostle  took 
pleasure  in  denouncing  so  severe  a sentence 
against  all  those  who  did  not  see  (as  we  say) 
with  his  eyes  I Had  he  so  little  affection  for 
sinners,  that  he  could  thus  consign  them  to 
destruction  by  multitudes,  for  differing  from 
him  in  what  some  persons  only  deem  an  opi- 
nion 1 Rather  consider  him,  not  as  breathing 
out  his  own  wishes,  but  as  speaking  in  the 
name  and  on  the  behalf  of  God.  He  knew 
it  must  be,  and  he  declared  it  would  be  so. 
It  was  no  pleasure  to  him  to  see  them  deter- 
mined to  perish.  On  the  contrary,  he  had 
great  grief  and  sorrow  of  heart  for  them, 
even  for  the  Jewrs,  who  had  treated  him  with 
the  greatest  cruelty.  Even  for  their  sakes, 
he  could  have  been  content  to  be  made  an 
anathema  himself  (Rom.  ix.  3,)  that  they 
might  be  saved.  But  upon  the  whole,  he  ac- 
quiesced in  the  will  of  God,  and  acknowledg- 
ed it  to  be  just,  right,  and  equal,  that  if  any 
man  would  not  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
after  all  that  he  had  done  and  suffered  for  sin- 
ners, he  should  be  accursed.  By  this  com- 
parison of  the  apostle’s  severe  language  with 
his  compassionate  temper,  I am  led  to  digress 
a little  farther.  It  suggests  an  apology  for 
ministers  of  the  gospel  in  general.  When 
we  declare  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  w'hen  we 
assure  you  that  there  is  but  one  solid  Ibunda- 


fSER.  XL VIII. 

tion  for  hope,  and  that,  unless  you  love  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  must  perish,  some  of 
our  hearers  account  us  bigoted,  uncharitable, 
and  bitter.  But  if  you  could  see  what  passes 
in  secret,  how  faithful  ministers  mourn  over 
those  who  reject  their  message,  how  their  dis- 
obedience cuts  them  to  the  heart,  and  abates 
the  comfort  they  would  otherwise  find  in  your 
service ; if  you  could  believe  us  when  we 
say  (I  trust  truly)  that  we  are  ready  to  im- 
part unto  you,  not  the  gospel  of  God  only, 
but  our  own  souls  also,  because  you  are  dear 
to  us,  (1  Thess.  ii.  8,)  and  we  long  for  your 
salvation;  then  you  would  think  more  fa- 
vourably of  us.  But  after  all  we  cannot,  we 
dare  not,  soften  our  message  to  please  men. 
What  we  find  in  the  word  of  God,  we  must 
declare.  It  would  be  at  the  peril  of  our  souls, 
to  speak  smooth  things,  to  prophesy  deceits 
(Is.  xxx.  10,)  to  you ; and,  so  far  as  we  preach 
the  truth,  it  will  be  at  the  peril  of  your  souls, 
if  we  are  disregarded. 

III.  The  benefits  of  this  redemption  extend 
to  a numerous  people,  who  are  said  to  be  re- 
deemed out  of  every  kindred,  tongue,  and  na- 
tion. I have,  upon  a former  occasion,*  of- 
fered you  my  sentiments  concerning  the  ex- 
tent of  the  virtue  of  that  blood  which  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world.  But  the  clause 
now  before  us  invites  me  to  make  a few  ad- 
ditional observations  upon  a subject  which,  I 
conceive,  it  much  concerns  us  rightly  to  jn- 
derstand. 

The  redeemed  of  the  Lord  are  those  who 
actually  experience  the  power  of  his  redemp- 
tion, who  are  delivered  from  the  dominion  of 
sin  and  Satan,  and  brought  into  a state  of 
liberty,  peace,  and  holiness.  That  the  people 
of  every  kindred,  nation,  and  tongue,  are  not 
redeemed  in  this  sense  universally,  is  as  cer- 
tain as  evidence  of  facts,  and  express  declara- 
tions of  scripture  can  make  it.  “ Without 
holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord.”  Multi- 
tudes, thus  disqualified,  will  be  found  trem- 
bling, on  the  left  hand  of  the  Judge,  at  the 
great  day.  But  a remnant  will  be  saved,  ac- 
cording to  the  election  of  grace.  For  they 
who  differ,  who  are  redeemed  to  the  service 
of  God,  while  others  live  and  die  in  the  love 
and  service  of  sin,  do  not  make  themselves  to 
differ,  1 Cor.  iv.  7.  It  becomes  the  potsherds 
of  the  earth  to  ascribe  to  their  Maker  the 
glory  of  his  sovereignty,  and  to  acknowledge, 
that,  if  they  have  a good  hope,  it  is  because 
it  pleased  the  Lord  to  make  them  his  people 
who  were  once  not  his  people,  Hos.  ii.  23. 
Yet  a way  of  conceiving  of  the  doctrines  of 
the  divine  sovereignty,  and  of  a personal  elec- 
tion unto  life,  has  often  obtained,  which  seems 
to  have  a tendency  to  render  the  mind  narrow7, 
selfish,  and  partial,  and  to  straiten  the  exer- 
cise of  that  philanthropy  which  the  genius 
and  spirit  of  the  gospel  powerfully  inculcate. 


* Sermon  xvi. 


SER.  XLVIII.1 


THE  SONG  OF  THE  REDEEMED. 


379 


The  best  of  us,  perhaps,  are  more  prone  than 
we  are  aware  of  to  assimilate  the  great  God 
to  ourselves,  and  to  frame  our  ideas  of  him 
too  much  according  to  our  own  image.  So 
that  often  much  of  a man’s  natural  disposition 
may  be  observed  in  the  views  he  forms  of  the 
divine  perfections  and  conduct;  as,  on  the 
other  hand,  his  conceptions  of  the  character 
of  God  strengthen  and  confirm  him  in  his 
own  tempers  and  habits.  There  are  persons, 
who  being  persuaded  in  their  own  minds  (we 
would  hope  upon  sure  grounds)  that  they 
themselves  are  of  the  elect,  appear  to  be  lit- 
tle concerned  what  may  become  of  others. 
Their  notions  of  God’s  sovereignty,  and  his 
right  to  do  what  he  will  with  his  own,  though 
often  insufficient  to  preserve  them  from  re- 
pining and  impatience  under  the  common 
events  of  human  life,  raise  them  above  all 
doubts  and  difficulties  on  a subject  which  the 
apostle  speaks  of  as  unsearchable  and  un- 
traceable ; where  he  acknowledges  depths 
which  he  was  unable  to  fathom,  (Rom.  xi.  33,) 
all  appears  to  them  quite  plain  and  easy ; 
where  he  admires  and  adores,  they  arrogant- 
ly dispute,  and  determine  ex  cathedra,  and 
harshly  censure  all  who  are  not  so  eagle- 
sighted  as  themselves.  Methinks  they  who 
know  the  worth  of  a soul,  from  its  vast  capa- 
city for  happiness  and  misery,  and  its  immor- 
tal duration,  cannot  justly  be  blamed  for  al- 
lowing no  limits  to  their  benevolent  wishes 
for  the  salvation  of  mankind,  but  the  will  of 
God,  as  it  is  plainly  made  known  to  us  in  his 
word.  To  this  we  are  to  submit,  not  as  of 
necessity  only,  but  cheerfully,  assured  that 
his  will  is  wise,  holy,  and  good;  that  the 
Judge  of  all  the  world  will  do  right;  and  to 
wait  for  the  day  when  he  will  condescend  to 
clear  up  every  difficulty,  and  give  us  that  sa- 
tisfaction which,  in  our  present  state  of  igno- 
rance and  weakness,  we  are  incapable  of  re- 
ceiving. Shall  mortal  man  be  more  just,  or 
can  he  be  more  merciful  than  God  1 It  is  a 
false  compassion,  founded  in  a blameable  dis- 
regard of  what  is  due  to  the  glory  of  his  great 
name,  that  prompts  us  to  form  a wish  that  his 
unerringly  wise  appointments  could  be  other- 
wise than  they  are.  Yet  it  is  a comfort  to 
think  that  his  mercy,  in  which  he  delights, 
in  which  he  is  peculiarly  said  to  be  rich,  and 
which  is  higher  than  the  heavens,  will,  in  its 
exercise,  far  exceed  the  bounds  which  some 
fallible  mortals  would  peremptorily  assign  to 
it.  We  must  not  indulge  conjecture  and  hy- 
pothesis farther  than  the  scripture  will  war- 
rant; but  while  we  humbly  depend  upon  this 
infallible  light,  we  need  not  be  afraid  to  fol- 
low it,  though  it  should  in  some  particulars, 
lead  us  a little  beyond  the  outlines  of  some 
long  received,  and  in  the  main  very  valuable 
human  systems  of  divinity. 

I have  repeatedly  expressed  my  belief,  that 
many  prophecies  respecting  the  spread  and 
glory  of  the  kingdom  of  Messiah  upon  earth 


have  not  yet  received  their  full  accomplish- 
ment, and  that  a time  is  coming  when  many 
(perhaps  the  greater  part  of  mankind)  of  all 
nations,  and  people,  and  languages,  shall  know 
the  joyful  sound  of  the  gospel,  and  walk  in 
the  light  of  the  Redeemer’s  countenance.  At 
present,  I would  confine  myself  to  consider 
what  ground  the  scripture  affords  us  to  hope 
that  there  are  many  of  every  nation,  people, 
and  tongue,  even  now,  singing  this  song  be- 
fore his  throne. 

The  revelations  vouchsafed  to  the  beloved 
disciple  in  Patmos,  exhibit  a succession  of 
great  events,  extending  (I  suppose)  from  the 
apostles’  days  to  the  end  of  time.  But  while 
only  the  learned  can  so  much  as  attempt  to 
ascertain  from  history  the  dates  and  facts  to 
which  the  prophecies  already  fulfilled  refer, 
or  to  offer  probable  conjectures  concerning 
the  events  as  yet  future  (in  which  the  most 
judicious  commentators  are  far  from  being 
agreed,)  there  are  passages  interspersed 
which  seem  designed  to  administer  consola- 
tion to  plain  believers,  by  representations  suit- 
ed to  raise  their  thoughts  to  the  state  of  the 
church  triumphant.  Though  they  are  unable 
to  explain  the  particulars  of  what  they  read, 
there  is  a glory  resulting  from  the  whole, 
which  animates  their  hope  and  awakens 
their  joy.  Of  this  kind  I think  is  that  vision, 
(Rev.  vii.  9,  ad  finem ,)  in  which  the  apostle 
saw  the  servants  of  God,  who  were  sealed  in 
their  foreheads,  in  number  a hundred  and 
forty-four  thousand ; and  besides  these  a greit 
multitude  which  no  man  could  number,  of  all 
nations  and  kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues, 
stood  before  the  throne,  and  before  the  Lamb, 
clothed  with  white  robes,  and  palms  in  their 
hands,  and  cried  with  a loud  voice,  saying, 
“Salvation  to  our  God,  which  sitteth  upon 
the  throne,  and  to  the  Lamb,”  &c.  I confess 
myself  unable  to  expound  this  sublime  pas- 
sage, and  to  give  the  full  or  even  the  prin- 
cipal sense  of  it  with  certainty.  But  that  it 
has  some  reference  to  what  is  now  passing 
within  the  vail,  which  hides  the  unseen  world 
from  our  view,  I cannot  doubt.  I propose  rny 
thoughts  upon  it  with  caution  and  diffidence. 

I dare  not  speak  with  that  certainty  which  I 
feel  myself  warranted  to  use,  when  I set  be- 
fore you  from  scripture  the  great  truths  which 
are  essential  to  a life  of  faith  in  the  Son  of 
God ; yet  I hope  to  advance  nothing  that  is 
contrary  to  scripture,  or  to  any  deductions 
fairly  and  justly  drawn  from  it. 

Having  premised  this  acknowledgment  of 
my  incompetence  to  decide  positively,  I ven- 
ture to  say,  that  by  the  hundred  and  forty- 
four  thousand  sealed  in  their  foreheads  (a  de- 
finite for  an  indefinite  number,  which  is  fre- 
quent in  scripture  language,)  I understand 
those,  who,  living  to  mature  age,  and  where 
the  gospel  is  afforded,  are  enabled  to  make  a 
public  and  visible  profession  of  religion,  and 
are  marked  as  it  were  in  their  foreheads,  and 


380 


THE  SONG  OF  THE  REDEEMED. 


know  to  whom  they  belong-,  by  their  open  and 
habitual  separation  from  the  spiritand  customs 
of  the  world  which  lieth  in  wickedness.  And 
the  exceeding  great  multitude,  contradistin- 
guished from  these,  I conceive  to  be  those  who 
are  elsewhere  styled  the  Lord’s  hidden  ones ; 
and  that  these  are  a great  multitude  indeed, 
gathered  by  him,  who  knows  them  that  are 
his,  out  of  all  nations,  and  kindreds,  and  peo- 
ple, and  tongues.  I may  distribute  them  into 
the  following  classes — 

1.  Infants. — I think  it  at  least  highly  pro- 
bable, that  when  our  Lord  says,  “ Sutfer  little 
children  to  come  unto  me,  and  forbid  them 
not,  for  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven,” 
(Matt.  xix.  14,)  he  does  not  only  intimate  the 
necessity  of  our  becoming  like  little  children 
in  simplicity,  as  a qualification  without  which 
(as  he  expressly  declares  in  other  places)  we 
cannot  enter  into  his  kingdom,  but  informs 
us  of  a fact,  that  the  number  of  infants  who 
are  effectually  redeemed  to  God  by  his  blood, 
so  greatly  exceeds  the  aggregate  number  of 
adult  believers,  that,  comparatively  speaking, 
his  kingdom  may  be  said  to  consist  of  little 
children.  The  apostle  speaks  of  them  as  not 
havi  ng  “ sinned  after  the  similitude  of  Adam’s 
transgression,”  (Rom.  v.  14,)  that  is,  with  the 
consent  of  their  understanding  and  will.  And 
when  he  says,  “We  must  all  appear  before 
the  judgment  seat  of  Christ,”  he  adds,  “that 
every  man  may  give  an  account  of  what  he 
has  done  in  the  body,  whether  it  be  good  or 
bad,”  2 Cor.  v.  10.  But  children  who  die  in 
their  infancy  have  not  done  any  thing  in  the 
body,  either  good  or  bad.  It  is  true,  they  are 
by  nature  evil,  and  must,  if  saved,  be  the 
subjects  of  a supernatural  change.  And 
though  we  cannot  conceive  how7  this  change 
is  to  be  wrought,  yet  I suppose  few  are  so 
rash  as  to  imagine  it  impossible  that  any  in- 
fants can  be  saved.  The  same  power  that 
produces  this  change  in  some,  can  produce  it 
in  all ; and  therefore  I am  willing  to  believe, 
till  the  scripture  forbids  me,  that  infants  of  all 
nations  and  kindreds,  without  exception,  w7ho 
die  before  they  are  capable  of  sinning  after 
the  similitude  of  Adam’s  transgression,  w7ho 
have  done  nothing  in  the  body  of  which  they 
can  give  an  account,  are  included  in  the  elec- 
tion of  grace.  They  are  born  for  a better 
world  than  this;  they  just  enter  this  state  of 
tribulation;  they  quickly  pass  through  it; 
their  robes  are  washed  white  in  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb,  and  they  are  admitted,  for  his  sake, 
before  the  throne.  Should  I be  asked  to  draw 
the  line,  to  assign  the  age  at  which  children 
begin  to  be  accountable  for  actual  sin,  it  would 
give  me  no  pain  to  confess  my  ignorance. — 
The  Lord  knoweth. 

2.  A people  hidden  among  the  most  de- 
generate communities,  civil  or  ecclesiastical, 
that  bear  the  name  of  Christian ; where  ig- 
norance and  superstition,  or  errors,  which, 
though  more  refined,  are  no  less  contrary  to 


[seu.  XLVIII. 

the  gospel,  have  a prevailing  dominion  and 
influence.  What  can  be  more  deplorable,  in 
the  view  of  an  enlightened  and  benevolent 
mind,  than  the  general  state  of  the  Roman 
and  Greek  churches!  where  the  traditions, 
inventions,  and  doctrines  of  men,  a train  of 
pompous  and  burdensome  ceremonies,  a de- 
pendence upon  masses,  penance,  and  pilgrim- 
ages, upon  legends  and  fictitious  saints, 
form  the  principal  features  of  the  public  re- 
ligion. Many  nations  are  involved  in  this 
gross  darkness,  but  they  are  not  wholly  des- 
titute of  the  scripture;  some  portions  of  it 
are  interwoven  w7ith  their  authorized  forms 
of  worship ; and  we  cannot  with  reason  doubt 
but  a succession  of  individuals  among  them 
have  been  acquainted  with  the  life  and  power 
of  true  godliness,  notwithstanding  the  disad- 
vantages and  prejudices  of  their  education. 
There  are  likewise  amongst  Protestants 
schemes  of  doctrines,  supported  by  learning 
and  by  numbers,  which  are  not  more  conform- 
able to  the  standard  of  the  New  Testament 
than  the  grossest  errors  of  Popery ; and  yet 
here  and  there  persons  may  be  met  with, 
who,  by  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  en- 
abling them  to  understand  the  scriptures,  are 
made  wiser  than  their  teachers;  and  who, 
though  still  fettered  by  some  mistakes  and 
prejudices,  give  evidence  in  the  main,  that 
their  hopes  are  fixed  upon  the  only  atone- 
ment, that  they  are  redeemed  to  God,  and 
are  partakers  of  that  faith  which  worketh  by 
love,  purifies  the  heart,  and  overcometh  the 
world. 

3.  I will  go  one  step  farther.  The  infer- 
ences that  have  been  made  by  some  persons 
from  the  apostle  Peter’s  words,  that  “God  is 
no  respecter  of  persons,  but  in  every  nation, 
he  that  feareth  him,  and  worketh  righteous- 
ness, is  accepted  with  him,”  (Acts  x.  34,  35,) 
are,  undoubtedly,  rash  and  unscriptural.  They 
would  conclude  from  thence,  that  it  is  of  lit- 
tle importance  what  people  believe,  provided 
they  are  sincere  in  their  way  ; that  the  idola- 
trous Heathens,  even  the  most  savage  of 
them,  whose  devotion  is  cruelty,  who  pollute 
their  worship  with  human  blood,  and  live  in 
the  practice  of  vices  disgraceful  to  humanity, 
are  in  a very  safe  state,  because  they  act,  as 
it  is  supposed,  according  to  their  light.  “ But 
if  the  light  which  is  in  them  be  darkness, 
how  great  is  that  darkness !”  Such  a lax 
candour  as  this  tends  to  make  the  gospel  un- 
necessary ; if  they  who  have  it  not  are  there- 
fore excusable,  though  they  neither  love  nor 
fear  God,  and  live  in  open  violation  of  the 
law  of  their  nature.  The  declaration,  that 
“ Without  holiness  no  man  shall  see  the 
Lord,”  (Heb.  xii.  14,)  holds  universally,  and 
without  a single  exception.  But  if  we  sup- 
pose a Heathen,  destitute  of  the  means  of 
grace,  by  which  conversion  is  usually  wrought, 
to  be  brought  to  a sense  of  his  misery,  of  the 
emptiness  and  vanity  of  worldly  things,  to  a 


THE  CHORUS  OF  ANGELS. 


381 


SFR.  XLIX.J 

conviction  that  he  cannot  be  happy  without 
the  favour  of  the  great  Lord  of  the  world,  to 
a feeling  of  guilt,  and  a desire  of  mercy;  and 
that  though  he  has  no  explicit  knowledge  of 
a Saviour,  he  directs  the  cry  of  his  heart  to 
the  unknown  Supreme  to  this  purport,  “ Ens 
entium,  miserere  mei,  Father  and  source  of 
beings,  have  mercy  upon  me !” — who  will 
prove  that  such  views  and  desires  can  arise 
in  the  heart  of  a sinner,  without  the  energy 
of  that  Spirit  which  Jesus  is  exalted  to  be- 
stow ! Who  will  take  upon  him  to  say,  that 
his  blood  has  not  sufficient  efficacy  to  redeem 
to  God  a sinner  who  is  thus  disposed,  though 
he  has  never  heard  of  his  name  ? Or  who  has 
a warrant  to  affirm,  that  the  supposition  I 
have  made  is,  in  the  nature  of  things,  impos- 
sible to  be  realized!  But  I stop — 1 do  not 
often  amuse  you  with  conjecture.  And 
though  for  want  of  express  warrant  from 
scripture,  I dare  not  give  the  sentiments  I 
have  now  offered,  a stronger  name  than  pro- 
bable, or  conjectural,  I hope  I do  not  propose 
them  for  your  amusement.  They  will  prove 
to  your  advantage  and  my  own,  if  they  are 
helpful  to  guard  us  against  a narrow,  harsh, 
and  dogmatical  spirit;  and  if,  without  abating 
our  reverend  submission  to  the  revealed  will 
of  God,  they  have  a tendency  to  confirm  our 
views  of  his  goodness,  and  the  power  and 
compassions  of  the  great  Redeemer. 


SERMON  XLIX. 

THE  CHORUS  OF  ANGELS. 

Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain , to  re- 
ceive power,  and  riches , and  wisdom,  and 
strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and 
blessing ! — Rev.  v.  12. 

It  was  a good  report  which  the  queen  of 
Sheba  heard,  in  her  own  land,  of  the  wisdom 
and  glory  of  Solomon.  It  lessened  her  at- 
tachment to  home,  and  prompted  her  to  un- 
dertake a long  journey  to  visit  this  greater 
king,  of  whom  she  had  heard  so  much.  She 
went,  and  she  was  not  disappointed.  Great 
as  the  expectations  were  which  she  had 
formed  from  the  relation  made  her  by  others, 
they  fell  short  of  what  she  saw  and  heard 
herself,  when  she  was  admitted  into  his 
presence.  Good,  likewise,  is  the  report  of 
the  gospel.  It  has  a powerful  effect  upon 
those  who  receive  it  by  faith.  It  is  abund- 
antly sufficient  to  convince  them  of  the  com- 
parative insignificance  of  all  that  they  most 
admired  and  esteemed  in  this  world.  From 
that  hour  they  become  strangers  and  pil- 
grims upon  earth.  They  set  out,  in  the  way 
which  God  has  prescribed,  in  hopes  of  seeing 
him  who  is  greater  than  Solomon  ; and  the 


report  they  have  heard  of  him  is  their  sub- 
ject, their  song,  and  their  joy,  while  they  are 
on  their  journey,  and  their  great  support, 
under  the  difficulties  they  meet  with  on  the 
road.  What  then  will  it  be  to  see  him  as  he 
is ! As  yet,  the  one  half  is  not  told  them.  Or 
at  least  they  are  not  yet  capable  of  conceiv- 
ing the  half,  or  the  thousandth  part,  of  what 
they  read  in  the  scripture,  concerning  his 
wisdom,  his  glory,  and  his  grace.  We  weak- 
en, rather  than  enlarge,  the  sense  of  such  a 
passage  as  this,  by  our  feeble  comments.  We 
must  die  before  we  can  understand  it.  To 
the  bulk  of  mankind,  “ Wait  the  great 
teacher  death,”  is  cold,  is  dangerous  advice. 
If  they  are  not  taught  by  the  gospel  while 
they  live,  the  teaching  of  death  will  be  too 
late.  Dreadful  will  be  the  condition  of  those 
who  cannot  be  convinced  of  their  mistakes, 
till  repentance  and  amendment  will  be  im- 
practicable. But  death  will  be  a great  teacher, 
indeed,  to  a believer;  he  will  then  know  more 
by  a glance,  and  in  a moment,  of  the  happi- 
ness he  is  now  expecting,  than  by  all  he 
could  collect  from  the  inquiry  and  experience 
of  a long  course  of  years  in  this  world. 

The  scenery  of  this  chapter,  if  attentively 
considered,  is  sufficient  to  snatch  our  thoughts 
from  the  little  concernments  of  time,  and  to 
give  us  some  anticipation  of  the  employments 
and  enjoyments  of  heaven.  Come,  all  ye  that 
are  wearied  and  burdened  with  afflictions  and 
temptations,  look  up,  and  for  a while,  at  least, 
forget  your  sorrows ! The  Lamb  is  upon  his 
throne,  surrounded  by  a multitude  of  his  re- 
deemed people,  who  once  were  afflicted  and 
burdened  like  yourselves ; but  now  all  tears 
are  wiped  from  their  eyes.  They  have  a song 
peculiarly  their  own,  and  are  represented  as 
taking  the  first  and  leading  part  in  worship 
and  praise.  The  angels  cannot  sing  their 
song,  they  were  not  redeemed  to  God  by  his 
blood ; but  they  are  interested  in  the  subject. 
Their  highest  views  of  the  manifold  wisdom 
of  God  are  derived  from  the  wonders  of  re- 
demption. Therefore  they  join  in  the  chorus, 
“ Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  to  re- 
ceive power,  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and 
strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  bless- 
ing.” If  you  have  a humble  hope  of  bearing 
a part  in  this  immortal  song,  will  you  hang 
down  your  heads  like  a bulrush,  because  you 
have  the  honour  of  following  your  Lord 
through  many  tribulations  to  his  kingdom ! 

The  number  of  the  angels  is  expressed 
indefinitely,  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand, 
and  thousands  of  thousands;  myriads,  and 
millions;  to  intimate  to  us,  that,  with  respect 
to  our  capacities  and  conceptions,  they  are 
innumerable.  Their  number  is  known  to  him 
who  telleth  the  number  of  the  stars  and  call- 
eth  them  all  by  their  names,  (Psalm  cxlvii. 
4,)  and  to  him  only.  The  scripture  intimates 
a diversity  of  ranks  and  orders  among  them, 
Thrones,  dominions,  principalities,  and  pow- 


THE  CHORUS  OF  ANGELS. 


382 

crs ; but  as  to  particulars,  there  is  little  said 
that  might  gratify  our  curiosity.  It  is  enough 
for  us  to  know,  that  the  highest  of  them,  and 
that  all  of  them,  worship  him  who  is  clothed 
in  our  nature.  My  text  expressly  informs  us, 
that  the  object  of  their  worship  is  the  Lamb 
that  was  slain.  Not  that  the  humanity  of 
Christ,  which  is  but  a creature,  is  simply  and 
formally,  the  object  of  their  worship;  but 
they  worship  hitn  who  has  assumed  the  hu- 
man nature  into  personal  union  with  him- 
self; God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  God  in 
Christ.  Though  the  world  censure  or  de- 
spise us  for  honouring  the  Son  as  we  honour 
the  Father,  (John  v.  23,)  we  have  here  a 
good  precedent,  as  we  have  in  many  places 
of  scripture,  the  warrant  of  an  express  com- 
mand. Whether  men  are  pleased  or  not,  w7e 
will,  we  must,  worship  the  Lamb  that  was 
slain.  To  animate  our  devotion,  let  us  thank- 
fully consider,  Why  he  was  slain,  and  How 
he  was  slain. 

I.  Why  he  was  slain. — The  redeemed  say, 
For  us.  “ He  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from 
our  sins  in  his  own  blood,”  Rev.  i.  5.  They 
were  sinners  and  enemies;  they  were  slaves 
to  sin  and  Satan ; yet  he  loved  them,  and 
died  to  redeem  them.  It  is  by  virtue  of  his 
blood  and  death  that  they  are  now  before  the 
throne.  Nothing  less  than  his  death  could 
have  made  them  duly  sensible  of  their  misery, 
nothing  less  could  have  relieved  them  from  it. 
He  was  lifted  up  upon  the  cross,  that  by  the 
powerful  magnetism  of  his  dying  love,  he 
might,  in  the  hour  of  his  grace,  draw  their 
hearts  to  himself,  John  xii.  32.  This  was  the 
design,  this  was  the  effect  of  his  sufferings.  A 
crucified  Saviour,  though  a stumbling-block  to 
the  self-righteous,  and  foolishness  to  vain  rea- 
soners,  was  to  them  the  power  and  the  wisdom 
of  God  for  salvation.  They  looked  unto  him, 
and  were  enlightened  ; they  trusted  in  him, 
and  were  not  ashamed.  By  faith  in  his  name, 
they  obtained  peace  with  God,  they  re- 
nounced the  ways  of  sin,  they  warred  the 
good  warfare,  they  overcame  the  world,  and 
were  at  length  made  more  than  conquerors. 
For  his  sake  they  endured  the  cross,  and  de- 
spised the  shame.  They  met  with  bad  treat- 
ment from  the  world,  but  it  was  from  the 
world  that  crucified  him.  While  they  were 
here  their  characters  were  obscured  by  their 
own  imperfections,  and  by  the  misrepresenta- 
tions and  reproaches  of  their  enemies.  But 
now  their  reproach  is  removed,  and  they 
shine,  each  one  like  the  sun,  in  the  kingdom 
of  their  Father,  Matt.  xiii.  43.  What  an  im- 
mense constellation  of  suns  ! This  their  full 
salvation  was  the  joy  set  before  him,  for  the 
sake  of  which  he  became  obedient  unto  death, 
even  the  death  of  the  cross.  And  now  they 
see  him  as  he  is,  they  ascribe  all  their  vic- 
tories and  honours  to  him,  and  unite  in  one 
song  of  endless  praise  to  the  Lamb  that  was 
slain. 


[ser.  XLIX. 

II.  Their  praises  are  heightened,  when 
they  consider,  How  he  was  slain.  He  did 
not  die  a natural  death.  He  was  slain.  Nor 
did  he  fall  like  a hero,  by  an  honourable  wound 
in  the  field  of  battle.  The  impression  which 
the  death  of  the  late  General  Wolfe  made 
upon  the  public,  is  not  yet  quite  forgotten. 
He  conquered  for  us,  but  it  cost  him  his  life. 
But  he  died  honourably,  and  was  lamented  by 
his  country.  Not  so  the  Lamb  of  God.  He 
died  the  death  of  a slave,  of  a malefactor. 
Cruelty,  malice,  and  contempt,  combined  to 
give  his  sufferings  every  possible  aggravation. 
And  after  he  was  slain,  very  few  laid  it  to 
heart.  The  world  went  on  as  it  did  before, 
as  though  nothing  extraordinary  had  happen- 
ed. But  on  this  dark  ground  the  perfections 
of  God  were  displayed  in  their  fullest  lustre ; 
and  they  are  the  perfections  of  the  great  Re- 
deemer, and  therefore  distinctly  ascribed  to 
him  by  the  angels  in  the  words  which  follow 
— “Power  and  wisdom,  and  riches,  and 
strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  bless- 
ing.” 

Though  each  of  these  words  have  a distinct 
sense,  a nicety  in  defining  them,  and  stating 
their  precise  meaning  is  of  less  importance 
than  to  feel  the  combined  efficacy  of  them  all, 
to  impress  our  hearts  with  sentiments  of  re- 
verence, confidence  and  love.  The  fulness 
of  expression  may  teach  us,  that  every  kind 
of  excellence  is  the  indubitable  right  and 
possession  of  the  Lamb  that  was  slain.  He 
is  worthy  to  have  them  all  attributed  to  him 
in  the  most  absolute  sense,  and  consequently 
worthy  of  our  adoration,  dependence,  and 
praise. 

1.  Power. — It  is  spoken  once,  yea,  twice 
we  have  heard  the  same,  that  power  belongeth 
unto  God,  Ps.  lxii.  11.  It  belongeth  to  him 
eminently  and  exclusively.  All  the  power 
of  creatures  is  derived  from  him.  Such  is 
the  power  of  the  Lamb.  He  styles  himself 
o nxvTOKuxTwe,  the  Omnipotent,  the  Upholder 
and  Possessor  of  all  things,  Rev.  i.  8,  11. 
He  exerciseth  this  power  in  the  human 
nature,  Matt,  xxviii.  18.  He  doth  what 
he  pleaseth  in  the  armies  of  heaven,  and 
among  the  inhabitants  cf  the  earth,  (Dan.  iv. 
35 ;)  and  none  can  stay  his  hand,  or  say  unto 
him,  What  doest  thou  1 He  has,  therefore, 
all  sufficiency,  and  uncontrollable  authority, 
for  the  discharge  of  his  office,  as  the  Mediator 
and  head  of  his  church.  The  divine  perfec- 
tions being  infinite,  are  not  distinct  in  them- 
selves, though  the  scripture,  in  condescension 
to  our  weakness,  authorizes  us  to  speak  of 
them  as  distinguishable.  God  is  one.  And 
the  power  which  can  preserve  and  govern 
the  world,  involves  in  the  idea  of  it  every 
other  excellence,  which  is  separately  men- 
tioned in  this  passage. 

2.  Wisdom. — He  is  the  only  wise  God,  and 
our  Saviour,  Jude  25.  His  knowledge  is  per- 
fect, his  plan  is  perfect.  In  himself  he  is 


THE  CHORUS  OF  ANGELS. 


383 


SER.  XLIX.] 

essentially  the  wisdom  of  God,  (Prov.  viii.  22,) 
and  he  is  our  wisdom,  1 Cor.  i.  30.  It  is  life 
eternal  to  know  the  only  true  God,  (John  xvii. 
3,)  and  therefore  it  is  life  eternal  to  know 
Jesus  Christ  whom  he  hath  sent.  For  he  is 
the  only  way,  and  the  only  door  to  this  know- 
ledge ; no  one  can  come  unto  God,  or  attain 
to  any  just  conceptions  of  him,  but  in  and  by 
the  Son  of  his  love,  who  so  perfectly  repre- 
sents God  to  us,  is  so  completely  the  bright- 
ness of  his  glory,  and  the  express  image  of 
his  person,  that  whoso  hath  seen  him,  hath 
seen  the  Father,  John  xiv.  9.  By  him  is 
opened  to  us  the  unsearchable  wisdom  of  the 
divine  counsels,  particularly  in  the  great 
work  of  redemption.  “No  one  hath  seen 
God  at  any  time ; the  only  begotten  Son,  who 
is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  reveal- 
ed him,”  John  i.  18.  It  is  by  wisdom  com- 
municated from  him,  that  his  people  are  made 
wise  unto  salvation.  Though  there  are  few 
scholars  and  philosophers  among  them,  and 
many  of  them  are  despised  for  their  igno- 
rance and  weakness,  yet  in  truth  they  have 
all  a good  understanding,  for  they  know  the 
Lord  and  his  will;  they  know  wherein  their 
proper  happiness  consists,  and  how  it  is  to  be 
obtained.  They  are  instructed  how  to  walk 
and  to  please  God,  how  to  bear  afflictions 
with  patience,  and  to  meet  death  with  com- 
posure. This  wisdom  is  far  superior  to  that 
of  the  schools.  But  he  bestows  and  maintains 
it.  The  eyes  of  their  mind  are  opened,  and 
they  see  by  his  light;  but  they  have  no 
light  of  their  own,  or  in  themselves.  They 
wait  upon  him  for  direction  in  every  diffi- 
culty, for  the  solution  of  every  hard  question 
which  perplexes  their  spirits ; and  he  makes 
the  crooked  straight,  teaches  them  to  avoid 
the  snares  that  are  laid  for  them,  or  extricates 
them  when  entangled.  Therefore  in  time, 
and  to  eternity,  they  will  admire  and  adore 
his  wisdom. 

3.  Riches. — All  the  stores  of  mercy,  grace, 
and  comfort,  are  in  him,  as  light  in  the  sun, 
or  water  in  the  ocean.  The  apostle,  speak- 
ing of  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ,  (Eph. 
iii.  8,)  gives  us  the  idea  of  a mine,  the  height, 
length,  depth,  and  breadth  of  which  cannot 
be  investigated,  nor  the  immense  wealth  it 
contains  exhausted.  Of  this  fulness  the  poor 
are  invited  to  receive  freely,  and  multitudes 
from  age  to  age  have  been  enriched,  and  the 
treasure  is  still  undiminished.  None  are  sent 
away  empty ; and  when  all  have  been  sup- 
plied, it  will  be  full  as  at  first. 

4.  Strength. — That  energy  and  efficacy  of 
his  power,  by  which  he  accomplishes  his  holy 
purposes.  Who  can  conceive  of  this  1 How 
just  is  the  psalmist’s  reasoning,  “ He  that 
formed  the  eye,  shall  not  he  seel  He  that 
planted  the  ear,  shall  not  he  hear  1”  Ps.  xciv. 
9.  So  we  may  say,  How  strong  is  he  from 
whom  all  created  strength  is  derived,  and  be- 
fore whom  the  strength  of  all  creatures,  if 


collected  into  one  effort,  would  be  as  chart* 
before  the  whirlwind  ! The  Lord  of  all  p >wer 
and  might  speaks,  and  it  is  done ; he  com- 
mandeth  and  it  standeth  fast.  Though  the 
waves  of  the  stormy  sea  toss  themselves,  they 
cannot  prevail ; (Ps.  xciii.  3,  4 ;)  he  checks 
them  in  the  height  of  their  rage,  setting 
bounds  to  their  violence  which  they  cannot 
pass,  saying,  “Hitherto  shalt  thou  come  and 
no  farther,  and  here  shall  thy  proud  billows 
be  stayed,”  Job  xxxviii.  10,  11.  With  equal 
sovereignty,  certainty,  and  ease,  he  rules  over 
moral  agents.  He  formed  the  heart  of  man, 
and  he  can  fill  it  with  terror  or  with  comfort 
in  a moment,  in  any  assignable  circumstances. 
He  can  make  it  happy  in  a dungeon,  (Acts 
xvi.  25,)  or  impress  it  with  dismay  and  de- 
spair upon  a throne,  Dan.  v.  5,  6.  All  hearts 
are  thus  incessantly  under  his  influence.  And 
the  hedge  of  his  promise  and  protection  sur- 
rounds those  who  trust  in  him,  as  with  moun- 
tains, and  walls  of  brass  and  fire,  impenetra- 
ble to  the  assaults  of  the  powers  of  darkness, 
unless  so  far  as  he,  for  wise  and  holy  ends,  is 
pleased  to  give  permission.  With  the  arm 
of  his  strength  he  upholdeth  them  that  are 
falling,  and  raiseth  up  them  that  are  bowed 
down,  (Ps.  cxlv.  14,)  and  is,  in  one  and  the 
same  instant,  a present  and  immediate  help 
in  trouble  to  all  who  call  upon  him,  Ps.  xlvi. 
1.  Therefore  they  that  abide  under  his 
shadow  are  safe ; they  pass  unhurt  through 
floods  and  flames,  because  their  Redeemer  is 
strong.  And  when,  in  defiance  of  all  their 
enemies  he  has  brought  them  together  in  his 
heavenly  kingdom,  they  will,  with  one  con- 
sent, ascribe  unto  the  Lord  glory  and  strength. 

5.  Honour. — He  is  the  fountain  of  it.  All 
the  honour  of  his  creatures,  and  of  his  people, 
is  from  him ; as  the  sun  beautifies  and  gilds 
the  objects  he  shines  upon,  which,  without 
him  are  opaque  and  obscure.  Because  his  peo- 
pie  are  precious  in  his  sight,  they  are  honour- 
able. He  clothes  them  with  the  garments 
of  salvation,  covers  them  with  a robe  of  righ- 
teousness as  a bridegroom  decketh  himself 
with  ornaments,  and  as  a bride  adorn eth  her- 
self with  jewels,  Is.  lxi.  10.  But  who  can 
speak  of  his  own  inherent  honour,  as  God- 
man  and  Mediator!  We  must  wait  till  we 
see  him,  without  a cloud  or  vail,  receiving 
the  homage  and  adoration  of  angels  and  men. 
For  as  yet  the  one-half  cannot  be  told  us. 
Then,  however,  it  will  be  universally  known, 
that  he  who  possesses  the  fulness  of  wisdom 
and  power,  riches  and  strength,  is  worthy  to 
receive  all  honour.  Ah!  how  different  will 
he  then  appear,  from  that  humble  form  he 
once  assumed,  when,  for  our  sakes,  he  was  a 
man  of  sorrows,  despised,  rejected,  and  nailed 
to  the  ignominious  cross! 

6.  Glory. — The  manifestation  of  God,  that 
by  which  he  is  known  and  magnified,  in  the 
view  of  finite  intelligences:  the  result,  the 
combined  effulgence  of  his  holiness,  grace 


384 


THE  CHORUS  OF  ANGELS. 


[SER.  XLIX. 


wisdom,  truth,  and  love:  this  is  his  glory, 
and  this  glory  is  revealed  and  displayed  in 
Christ.  He  is  glorious  in  his  works  of'  crea- 
tion and  providence,  but  these  do  not  fully  ex- 
hibit his  character.  But  in  the  Lamb  upon 
the  throne  shines  his  glory,  full-orbed.  And 
all  in  heaven,  and  all  in  earth,  who  behold  it, 
take  up  the  song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb, 
“Who  is  like  unto  thee,  O Lord?  Who  is 
like  unto  thee,  glorious  in  holiness,  fearful  in 
praises,  doing  wonders ! — Great  and  mar- 
vellous are  thy  works,  Lord  God  Almighty ! 
just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King  of 
saints !”  Exod.  xv.  11  ; Rev.  xv.  3. 

7.  Blessing. — He  is  the  author  of  all  bless- 
ings, of  all  the  happiness  and  good  which  his 
people  receive,  and  he  is  the  deserved  object 
of  their  universal  praise.  The  different  senses 
in  which  we  use  the  word  blessing,  taken  to- 
gether, may  express  that  intercourse  or  com- 
munion which  is  between  the  head  and  the 
mystical  members  of  his  body.  He  blesses 
them  effectually  with  the  light  of  his  counte- 
nance, with  liberty,  grace,  and  peace.  He 
blesses  them  daily.  His  mercies  are  renewed 
to  them  every  morning.  He  will  bless  them 
eternally.  Blessed  are  the  people  who  have 
this  Lord  for  their  God.  They  can  make 
him  no  suitable  returns,  yet  in  their  way  they 
bless  him.  They  admire,  adore,  and  praise 
him.  They  call  upon  all  the  powers  of  their 
souls  to  bless  him.  They  proclaim  his  good- 
ness, and  that  he  is  worthy  to  receive  the  as- 
cription of  power,  and  riches,  and  wisdom, 
and  strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and 
blessing.  In  proportion  to  their  attainments 
in  this  delightful  exercise  of  worship,  love, 
and  gratitude,  they  enjoy  a heaven  upon 
earth ; and  to  stand  before  him  continually, 
to  behold  his  glory,  to  live  under  the  uncloud- 
ed beams  of  his  favour,  and  to  be  able  to  bless 
and  praise  him  as  they  ought,  without  weari- 
ness, abatement,  interruption,  or  end,  is  what 
they  mean  when  they  speak  of  the  heaven 
they  hope  for  hereafter.  Such  is  the  blessed- 
ness of  those  who  have  already  died  in  the 
Lord.  They  see  his  face,  they  drink  of  the 
rivers  of  pleasure  which  are  at  his  right  hand, 
they  cast  down  their  crowns  before  him,  and 
say,  thou  art  worthy. — Let.  us  not  be  slothful, 
(Heb.  vi.  12,)  but  followers  of  them  who, 
through  faith  and  patience,  have  finished  their 
course,  and  are  entered  into  the  joy  of  their 
Lord. 

Of  all  this  glory  and  honour  the  scripture 
declares  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  be  wor- 
thy. Wisdom,  riches,  and  strength,  are  his. 
His  power  is  infinite,  his  authority  supreme. 
He  is  the  author  and  giver  of  all  good.  He 
has  life  in  himself,  and  he  is  the  life  of  all 
that  live;  the  Lord  and  Head  of  the  church 
and  of  the  universe.  Can  language  express, 
or  can  heart  conceive,  a higher  ascription 
and  acknowledgment  than  this!  Can  all  this 
be  due  to  a creature!  to  one  of  a derived 


and  dependent  character  ? Then  surely  the 
scripture  would  have  a direct  tendency  to 
promote  idolatry.  Far  be  the  thought  from 
us!  The  scripture  teaches  us  the  know- 
ledge of  the  true  God,  and  the  worship  due 
to  him.  Therefore  Messiah,  the  Lamb  that 
was  slain,  is  the  true  God,  the  proper  and 
immediate  object  of  the  worship  of  angels  and 
of  men. 

Let  us  therefore  take  up  a lamentation 
for  those  who  slight  the  glorious  Redeemer, 
and  refuse  him  the  honour  due  to  his  name. 
Their  mistake  should  excite,  not  our  anger 
or  scorn,  but  our  pity  and  prayers.  Are 
there  any  such  amongst  us  l Alas,  my  fel- 
low-sinners, you  know  not  what  you  do ! 
Alas ! you  know  him  not,  nor  do  you  know 
yourselves.  I am  well  aware  that  a thou- 
sand arguments  of  mine  will  not  persuade 
you ; but  I can  simply  tell  you  what  would 
soon  make  you  at  least  desirous  of  adopting 
our  sentiments  upon  this  subject.  If  he  who 
has  that  power  over  the  heart  which  I have 
been  speaking  of,  was  pleased  to  give  you 
this  moment  a sense  of  the  holiness  and  au- 
thority of  God,  and  of  your  conduct  towards 
him  as  his  creatures,  your  strongest  objec- 
tions to  the  high  honours  we  attribute  to  the 
Saviour  would  this  moment  fall  to  the 
ground,  and  you  would  be  immediately  con- 
vinced, that  either  Jesus  Christ  is  the  true 
God  and  eternal  life,  or  that  you  must  perish. 
You  would  no  longer  expect  mercy  but  in  a 
way  perfectly  consonant  with  the  righteous- 
ness and  truth  of  God  declared  in  his  word, 
and  with  the  honour  and  purity  of  his  moral 
government.  This  would  lead  you  to  per- 
ceive the  necessity  of  an  atonement,  and  the 
insufficiency  of  any  atonement  but  that  which 
the  Lamb  of  God  has  made  by  the  sacrifice  of 
himself,  (Heb.  ix.  26,)  and  that  the  efficacy 
even  of  his  mediation  depends  upon  his  di- 
vine character.  The  scriptural  doctrines  of 
the  depravity  of  man,  the  malignity  of  sin, 
the  eternal  power  and  Godhead  of  the  Sa- 
viour, the  necessity  and  efficacy  of  his  media- 
tion, and  the  inevitable,  extreme,  and  endless 
misery  of  those  who  finally  reject  him,  are  so 
closely  connected,  that  if  the  first  be  rightly 
understood,  it  will  open  the  mind  to  the  re- 
ception of  the  rest.  But  till  the  first  be 
known  and  felt,  the  importance  and  certainty 
of  the  others  will  be  suspected,  if  not  openly 
denied. 

Though  the  doctrines  I have  enumerated 
are,  in  these  sceptical  days,  too  generally  dis- 
puted and  contradicted,  I am  fully  confident 
that  it  is  impossible  to  demonstrate  them  to 
be  false.  Upon  the  lowest  supposition,  there- 
fore, they  possibly  may  be  true;  and  the 
consequences  depending  upon  them,  if  they 
should  be  found  true  at  last,  are  so  vastly  mo- 
mentous, that  even  the  peradventure,  the  pos- 
sibility of  their  truth,  renders  them  deserving 
of  your  most  serious  consideration.  Trific 


THE  UNIVERSAL  CHORUS. 


385 


SER.  L.] 

with  yourselves  no  longer.  If  they  be  truths, 
they  are  the  truths  of  God.  Upon  the  same 
authority  stands  the  truth  of  that  gracious  pro- 
mise that  he  will  give  his  Holy  Spirit  to  them 
that  ask  iim.  Let  me  entreat  you  to  make 
the  experiment.  This  is  the  proper  point  to 
begin  with.  Instead  of  indulging  reasonings 
and  speculations,  humble  yourselves  before 
the  Lord,  and  pray  for  the  light  and  influence 
which  he  has  said  he  will  afford  to  them  who 
are  willing  to  be  taught.  Read  the  scripture 
with  deliberation,  and  do  not  labour  to  fortify 
yourselves  against  conviction.  Break  off  from 
those  practices,  which  your  own  consciences 
admonish  you  cannot  be  pleasing  to  him  who 
is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity.  Then 
shall  you  know  if  you  will  sincerely  follow  on 
to  know  the  Lord,  Hos.  vi.  3.  But  if  not, 
if  you  will,  in  a spirit  of  levity,  presume  to 
decide  upon  points  which  you  will  not  allow 
yourselves  seriously  to  examine,  should  you 
at  last  perish  in  your  obstinacy  and  unbelief, 
your  ruin  will  be  of  yourselves.  You  have 
been  faithfully  warned,  and  we  shall  be  clear 
of  your  blood. 


SERMON  L. 

THE  UNIVERSAL  CHORUS. 

[And  every  creature  lohich  is  in  heaven , and 
on  thi  earth , and  under  the  earth , and 
such  as  are  in  the  sea , and  all  that  are  in 
them , heard  I,  saying ,)  Blessing , and  ho- 
nour, and  glory , and  power , he  unto  him 
that  sitteth  upon  the  throne , and  unto  the 
Lamb  for  ever  and  ever ! — Rev.  v.  13. 

Men  have  generally  agreed  to  dignify  their 
Presumptuous  and  arrogant  disquisitions  on 
,.ie  works  and  ways  of  God  with  the  name  of 
wisdom,  though  the  principles  upon  which 
they  proceed,  and  the  conclusions  which  they 
draw  from  them,  are  for  the  most  part  evident 
proofs  of  their  depravity  and  folly.  Instead 
ff  admiring  the  effects  of  his  wisdom  and 
power  in  the  creation,  they  have  rashly  en- 
deavoured to  investigate  the  manner  of  its 
production.  A variety  of  hypotheses  have 
been  invented  to  account  for  the  formation  of 
the  world,  and  to  state  the  laws  by  which  the 
frame  of  nature  is  governed ; and  these  dif- 
ferent and  inconsistent  accounts  have  been 
defended  with  a magisterial  tone  of  certain- 
ty, aicd  an  air  of  demonstration,  by  their  re- 
spective authors,  as  though  they  had  been 
bystanders  and  spectators  when  God  spoke 
all  things  into  being,  and  produced  order  out 
of  confusion  by  the  word  of  his  power. 
They  have,  however,  been  much  more  success- 
ful in  showing  the  absurdity  of  the  schemes 
proposed  by  others,  than  in  reconciling  their 
own  to  the  sober  dictates  of  plain  common 
sense. 

Vol.  II.  3 C 


But  if,  by  indulging  their  speculations  on 
the  creation  of  the  world,  the  causes  of  the 
deluge,  and  similar  subjects,  their  employ- 
ment has  been  no  better  than  weaving  spi- 
der’s webs,  the  result  of  their  reasoning  on 
morals  has  been  much  worse.  Here  they 
have  with  industry  hatched  cockatrice  eggs ; 
(Isa.  lix.  5;)  and  their  labours  have  been  not 
only  fallacious,  but  mischievous.  Their  me- 
taphysical researches,  while  they  refuse  the 
guidance  of  revelation,  if  pursued  to  their 
just  consequences,  will  always  lead  into  the 
labyrinths  of  scepticism,  weaken  the  sense  of 
moral  obligation,  rob  the  mind  of  the  most 
powerful  motives  of  right  conduct,  and  of  the 
only  consolations  which  can  afford  it  solid 
support  in  an  hour  of  trouble.  One  insuper- 
able difficulty  which  they  will  undertake  to, 
solve,  though  it  does  not  properly  lie  in  their 
way,  is  concerning  the  origin  of  evil.  That 
evil  is  in  the  world,  is  felt  and  confessed  uni- 
versally. The  gospel  points  out  an  effec- 
tual method  of  deliverance  from  it;  but  alas, 
the  simple  and  infallible  remedy  is  neglected, 
and  men  weary  themselves  with  vain  in- 
quiries, 

And  find  no  end,  in  wandering1  mazes  lost. 

The  more  they  reason,  the  more  they  involve 
themselves  in  uncertainty  and  error,  till  at 
last  they  make  lies  their  refuge,  and  adopt, 
with  implicit  credulity,  as  so  many  undoubted 
axioms,  opinions,  which  are  equally  dis- 
honourable to  God,  and  contradictory  to  truth 
and  experience,  2 Thess.  ii.  11.  Thus  much 
is  certain,  that  by  the  occasion  of  evil,  the 
character  of  God  is  manifested  with  superior 
glory  to  the  view  of  angels  and  men,  who  are 
in  a state  of  holiness  and  allegiance,  and  a 
higher  accent  is  thereby  given  to  their 
praises ; for  now  his  justice  and  his  mercy, 
which  could  not  have  been  otherwise  known, 
are  revealed  in  the  strongest  light ; and  the 
redemption  of  sinners  affords  the  brightest  dis- 
play of  his  wisdom  and  love. 

The  redeemed  are  represented  as  taking 
the  first  part  in  this  sublime  song,  verses  8 — 

10.  The  angels  join  in  the  chorus,  verses 

11,  12,  which  now  becomes  universal.  All 
the  angels,  all  the  saints  upon  the  earth,  in 
the  state  of  the  dead,  or  hades , whether 
their  bodies  are  buried  under  the  earth,  or  in 
the  sea,  with  one  heart,  aim  and  voice,  unite 
in  worship  and  praise.  In  the  preceding 
verse,  Blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and 
power,  are  ascribed  unto  the  Lamb ; but  here 
the  ascription  is  unto  Him  that  sitteth  upon 
the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb.  I shall  not 
add  to  what  I have  already  observed  to  you 
from  the  words  of  the  doxology.  A few  re- 
marks, which  offer  from  this  verse  taken  in 
connection  with  the  former,  will  bring  me  to 
a conclusion  of  the  whole  subject.  And  oh  i 
for  a coal  of  fire  from  the  heavenly  altar  to 
warm  your  hearts  and  mine,  that  our  love, 


330 


THE  UNIVERSAL  CHORUS. 


joy,  and  gratitude  may  be  awakened  into 
lively  exercise,  and  that  the  close  of  our  me- 
ditations on  the  Messiah  may  leave  us  deeply 
impressed  with  desires  and  well-grounded 
hopes  of  meeting  ere  long  before  the  throne, 
to  join  with  the  angels  and  the  redeemed  in 
singing  the  praise  of  God  and  the  Lamb ! 

I.  The  Lord  Jesus  is  not  only  the  Head  of 
the  church  redeemed  from  among  men,  but 
of  the  whole  intelligent  creation  that  is  in 
willing  subjection  to  God.  It  belonged  to 
his  great  design  to  gather  together  in  one, 
(to  reduce  under  one  head,  as  the  Greek  ex- 
pression is,)  even  in  himself,  all  things  that 
are  in  heaven  and  upon  earth,  Eph.  i.  10.  He 
is  the  Lord  and  the  life  both  of  angels  and  of 
men.  Mutability  and  dependence  are  essen- 
tial to  the  state  of  creatures,  however  exalted ; 
and  the  angels  in  glory  owe  their  preservation 
and  confirmation  in  holiness  and  happiness  to 
him.  Hence  they  are  styled  the  elect  angels 
(1  Tim.  v.  21,)  in  distinction  from  those  who 
left  their  first  habitation,  and  sunk  into  sin 
and  misery.  Angels  therefore  constitute  a 
branch  of  that  great  family  which  is  named  of 
him  in  heaven  and  earth.  And  having  made 
peace  by  the  blood  of  his  cross,  he  has  effected 
a reconciliation,  not  only  between  God  and 
sinners,  but  also  between  angels  and  men. 
How  those  inhabitants  of  light  are  disposed 
to  sinful  men,  considered  as  sinful,  we  may 
learn  from  many  passages  of  scripture.  They 
are  devoted  to  God,  filled  with  zeal  for  his 
honour,  and  wait  but  for  his  command  to  exe- 
cute vengeance  upon  his  enemies.  When 
Herod,  infatuated  by  his  pride,  and  bv  the 
flattery  of  the  multitude,  received  their  idola- 
trous compliment  with  complacence,  an  angel 
of  the  Lord  smote  him,  because  he  gave  not 
God  the  glory,  Acts  xii.  23.  The  pestilence 
which  destroyed  the  people  towards  the  end 
of  David’s  reign,  was  under  the  direction  of 
an  angel  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  16,  17,)  and  David 
saw  him  with  his  arm  stretched  out  against 
Jerusalem.  And  in  this  prophecy  angels  are 
spoken  of  as  employed  in  pouring  forth  the 
vials  of  wrath  upon  the  earth.  And  still  they 
are  ready,  we  may  believe,  to  avenge  their 
Maker’s  cause  upon  the  wicked  when  they  are 
commissioned.  And  if  the  history  of  modern 
times  was  written  by  an  inspired  pen,  and 
events,  as  in  the  scriptures,  were  assigned  to 
their  proper  causes,  perhaps  the  death  of  many 
a haughty  worm  would  be  recorded  in  words 
to  this  effect — “And  an  angel  of  the  Lord 
smote  him,  because  he  gave  not  God  the 
glory.”  But,  viewing  sinners  as  the  subjects 
of  redemption,  the  angels  copy  from  their 
Lord.  They  regard  them  with  benevolence, 
and  rejoice  over  every  one  that  repenteth,  Ileb. 
i.  14.  They  willingly  attend  on  them,  and 
assist  them,  in  ways  beyond  our  conception. 
They  esteem  believers  in  Jesus  as  their  fellow- 
servants,  Rev.  xxii.  9.  We  have  reason  to 
think  that  they  are  present  in  our  worship- 


[SER.  1m 

ping  assemblies ; and,  perhaps,  always  so  pre- 
sent, that  they  could  discover  themselves  to  us 
in  a moment,  were  it  consistent  with  the  rules 
of  the  divine  government  established  in  this 
lower  world,  suited  to  the  state  of  those  who 
are  to  walk  by  faith,  not  by  sight.  Thus  far 
however  differing  in  other  respects,  the  angels 
and  the  redeemed  are  united  and  related  in 
one  common  head,  and  have  fellowship  in 
worship  and  service.  When  sinners  are  en- 
abled by  grace  to  renounce  this  world,  they 
are  admitted  to  an  honourable  alliance  with  a 
better. 

II.  From  hence  we  may  form  some  judg- 
ment of  the  true  nature  and  high  honour  of 
that  spiritual  worship,  which  is  the  privilege 
and  glory  of  the  church  of  God  under  the 
gospel-dispensation.  When  we  meet  in  the 
name  of  Jesus,  as  his  people,  and  with  a due 
observance  of  his  institutions,  we  come  to  the 
innumerable  company  of  angels,  and  to  the 
! general  assembly  and  church  of  the  first  born, 

! (Heb.  xii.  22,  23,)  the  first-born  ones  (for  the 
expression  is  plural.)  We  draw  nigh  by  faith 
to  the  very  gate  of  heaven,  to  the  holiest  of 
all.  Men  unacquainted  with  spirituality,  are 
soon  weary  even  of  the  form  of  worship,  un- 
less their  minds  are  amused  by  a splendid 
ceremonial.  The  first  rise  and  subsequent  in- 
crease of  that  pomp  and  pageantry,  which  in 
some  countries  has  quite  obscured  the  simpli- 
city and  beauty  of  gospel-worship,  is  to  be  as- 
cribed to  this  indisposition  of  the  human  mind. 
Our  thoughts,  while  we  are  in  a natural  state, 
J are  too  weak  and  wavering,  and  too  gross  to 
! be  pleased  with  a worship,  in  which  there  is 
! nothing  suited  to  affect  the  imagination  by 
; sensible  objects.  And  therefore,  when  men 
' think  themselves  wise,  and  profess  to  despise 
j the  pageantry  which  captivates  the  vulgar, 
! their  wisdom  affords  them  no  real  advantage 
if  they  have  nothing  better  to  substitute  in  the 
room  of  what  they  reject  as  insignificant.  The 
very  appearance  of  devotion  will  languish 
they  will  grow  remiss,  and  neglect  the  sabbath 
and  public  assemblies,  for  want  of  something 
to  keep  up  their  attention.  We  have  abun- 
dant proof  of  this  in  our  own  land,  and  at 
this  time.  Protestants  pride  themselves  in 
not  being  Papists ; but,  when  the  Protestant 
religion  is  understood  to  mean  no  more  than 
a renunciation  of  the  superstitious  ceremonies 
of  the  church  of  Rome,  it  is,  with  respect  to 
individuals,  little,  if  at  all,  better  than  Popery 
itself.  Among  us  enlightened  Protestants,  no 
expedient  but  preaching  the  gospel  of  Christ 
will  be  found  sufficient  to  retain  people  in  a 
stated  observance  of  the  Lord’s  day.  But 
true  believers,  who  understand  and  love  the 
gospel,  do  indeed  draw  nigh  to  God ; and 
they  account  a day  in  his  courts  better  than 
a thousand,  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  10,)  because  they 
can  take  a part  in  the  songs  of  heaven,  and 
in  spirit  and  in  truth,  worship  him  that  sit- 
teth  upon  the  throne,  and  the  Lamb  who  re- 


THE  UNIVERSAL  CHORUS. 


387 


SER.  L.] 

deemed  them  to  God  by  his  blood.  They 
know  by  happy  experience,  that  his  promise, 
to  be  in  the  midst  of  those  who  assemble  in 
his  name,  is  truth.  Their  worship  is  not  a 
mere  bodily  service,  a lifeless  form,  a round 
of  observances,  which  neither  warm  the 
heart,  nor  influence  the  conduct;  but  they 
are  instructed,  comforted,  and  strengthened, 
by  waiting  upon  God.  Their  spiritual  senses 
are  exercised ; they  behold  his  glory  in  the 
glass  of  the  gospel,  they  hear  his  voice,  they 
feel  an  impression  of  his  power  and  presence, 
they  taste  his  goodness,  and  the  virtue  of 
that  name,  which  is  as  ointment  poured 
forth,  perfumes  their  tempers  and  conversa- 
tion. 

III.  Though  the  Lamb  is  worthy  of  all 
blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  power, 
there  is  a distinct  ascription  of  praise  to  Him 
that  sitteth  upon  the  throne. 

The  scripture,  which  alone  can  teach  us  to 
form  right  conceptions  of  God,  and  to  worship 
him  acceptably,  guides  us  in  a medium,  be- 
tween opposite  errors  and  mistakes.  Too 
many  persons,  ignorant  of  their  own  state  as 
sinners,  and  of  the  awful  majesty  and  holiness 
of  the  Most  High,  presume  to  think  of  him, 
to  speak  of  him,  and  in  their  way,  to  speak  to 
him,  without  being  aware  of  the  necessity  of 
a Mediator.  But  they  who  are  without  Christ, 
who  is  the  only  door  and  way  to  the  Father, 
are  without  God,  atheists  in  the  world,  Eph. 
ii.  12.  There  is  a mistake  likewise  on  the 
other  hand,  when,  though  the  Deity  of  the 
Saviour  be  acknowledged,  yet  what  we  are 
taught  of  the  ineffable  distinction  in  the  God- 
head is  not  duly  attended  to.  It  is  written, 
“In  the  beginning, — the  Word  was  God,” 
John  i.  1.  It  is  likewise  written,  “The  Word 
was  with  God.”  This  latter  expression  un- 
doubtedly has  a meaning  which  though  per- 
fectly consistent,  is  not  coincident  with  the 
former.  The  truth  contained  in  it  is  propos- 
ed, not  to  our  curiosity  as  a subject  of  specu- 
lation, but  to  our  faith.  I do  not  attempt  to 
explain  it.  But,  what  God  expressly  declares, 
we  are  bound,  upon  the  principles  of  right 
reason,  to  believe.  For  he  is  Truth,  and  can- 
not deceive  us.  “ There  are  three  that  bear 
record  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the  Word,  and 
the  Holy  Ghost,”  1 John  v.  7.  These  three 
ire  frequently  spoken  of  in  the  scripture — to 
each  of  them  a distinct  part  in  the  economy  of 
salvation  is  ascribed  ; to  each  of  them  the  per- 
rections  and  honours  of  Deity  are  attributed. 
Yet  there  arc  not  three  Gods,  but  one.  Con- 
sequently these  three  are  one  God.  This 
doctrine  may  be  above  our  comprehension, 
but  cannot  be  contrary  to  our  reason,  if  it  be 
contained  in  a revelation  from  God.  If  it  be 
simply  received  upon  the  authority  of  the  re- 
vealer,  it  approves  itself  to  be  true,  for  it  is 
found  to  be  a key  to  the  whole  scripture, 
which  renders  the  general  sense  and  scope 
everywhere  consistent  and  plain.  They  who 


proudly  reject  it,  and  yet  admit  the  Bible  to 
be  a divine  revelation,  are  involved  in  difficul- 
ties from  which  all  their  sagacity  and  learning 
cannot  free  them.  In  vain  they  labour  by 
singular  interpretations,  by  the  minutiae  of 
criticism,  and  by  an  appeal  to  various  readings 
and  ancient  versions,  which,  in  a few  passages, 
differ  from  the  copies  more  generally  received 
— in  vain  they  endeavour  by  these  refinements 
to  relieve  themselves,  when  pressed  by  the  ob- 
vious and  natural  sense  of  a thousand  texts, 
which  confirm  the  faith  and  hope  of  plain 
Christians.  The  gospel  is  designed  for  the 
poor.  But  the  poor  and  unlearned  would  be 
at  a great  disadvantage,  if  the  scripture  could 
not  be  rightly  understood  without  the  assist- 
ance of  such  learning  and  such  criticism  as 
we  often  see  pressed  into  the  service.  But 
the  Holy  Spirit  graciously  leads  those  who 
pray  for  his  teaching,  into  such  views  of  this 
high  subject  as  are  sufficient  to  comfort  their 
hearts,  and  to  animate  their  obedience.  The 
faith  of  those  who  are  taught  of  God,  is  ex- 
ercised in  their  approaches  to  him  under  two 
different  modifications.  Both  are  scriptural, 
and  therefore  both  are  safe,  and  witnessed  to 
by  his  gracious  acceptance  and  blessing. 

1.  They  come  to  God  by  Christ.  They 
have  access  through  him,  Eph.  ii.  18.  Un- 
worthy to  speak  for  themselves,  they  bow  their 
knees  in  his  name,  Phil.  ii.  10.  Christians 
are  sufficiently  distinguished  and  described  by 
saying,  They  come  to  God  by  him,  Heb.  vii. 
25.  They  come  to  God,  they  cannot  live 
without  him  in  the  world,  as  they  once  did. 
They  are  now  conscious  of  wants  and  desires, 
which  only  God  can  satisfy;  but  they  are  con- 
scious likewise  that  they  are  sinners,  and  there- 
fore they  durst  not  approach  him,  if  they  had 
not  the  invitation  of  his  promise,  and  an  as- 
surance of  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  1 
John  ii.  2. 

2.  They  come  to  God  in  Christ.  He  is 
the  great  Temple,  in  whom  all  fulness  dwells 
(Col.  i.  19;  ii.  9;)  and  they  are  not  afraid 
of  idolatry,  when  they  worship  and  honour 
the  Son  even  as  the  Father.  This  distinct 
application  to  God,  in  the  person  of  the  Son 
of  his  love,  perhaps  becomes  more  frequent 
and  familiar  as  they  advance  in  the  knowledge 
of  their  Lord  and  Saviour,  2 Peter  iii.  18. 
They  who  seek  to  him  for  deliverance  from 
sin  and  misery,  at  first,  I believe,  chiefly  con- 
sider him  as  the  Advocate  and  High  Priest, 
who,  by  the  virtue  of  his  atonement,  and  the 
prevalence  of  his  intercession,  is  able  to  save 
to  the  uttermost.  But  when  the  apostle  dis- 
tributes Christians,  according  to  their  growth 
in  grace,  into  the  state  of  babes,  young  men, 
and  fathers  (1  John  ii.  4,)  he  speaks  of  a more 
distinct  and  appropriate  knowledge  of  him 
who  is  from  the  beginning,  as  the  peculiar 
privilege  and  distinguishing  attainment  of 
the  fathers.  He  speaks  of  him  who  is  from 
the  beginning,  so  often  that  we  can  be  at  no 


083 


THE  UNIVERSAL  CHORUS. 


loss  to  determine  whom  he  intends  by  the 
expression.  He  applies  it  to  him  who  was  in 
the  beginning'  with  God  (John  i.  1,)  and  whom 
ne  and  the  other  apostles  had  heard,  had  seen 
with  their  eyes,  and  touched  with  their  hands, 
1 John  i.  1 — 3.  An  eminent  divine*  points 
out  some  special  seasons  in  the  Christian 
life,  in  which  he  thinks  the  peculiar  pres- 
sures of  the  soul  may  obtain  the  most  sensible 
and  immediate  relief,  by  direct  application  to 
the  Saviour.  But  there  are  some  believers 
who  find  themselves  almost  continually  in 
one  or  other  of  the  situations  which  he  marks 
as  occasional.  However  this  may  be,  I am 
ready  to  take  it  for  granted,  that  they  who 
really  and  cordially  believe  the  Deity  of 
Christ,  do  at  least  at  some  seasons,  and  upon 
some  occasions,  expressly  direct  their  prayers 
to  him.  If  precedents  be  required  to  war- 
rant this  practice,  the  New  Testament  will 
furnish  them  in  abundance.  I shall  select 
but  a few.  The  apostle  Paul  bowed  his 
knees  to  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord  Je- 
sus ; but  he  often  prayed  to  the  Lord  Jesus ; 
He  prayed  to  him  in  the  temple  (Acts  xxii. 
17 — 21,)  and  when  he  obtained  that  answer, 
“ My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee,”  2 Cor.  xii. 
9.  To  him  the  prayer  of  the  apostles  and 
disciples  was  addressed  previous  to  the  lot 
which  was  to  determine  a successor  to  Judas, 
Acts  i.  24.  And  to  him  Stephen  committed 
his  departing  spirit  (Acts  vii.  59,)  an  act  of 
trust  and  worship  of  the  highest  kind,  and  at 
the  most  solemn  season.  In  short,  it  is  a 
strange  inconsistence,  if  any,  who  acknow- 
ledge his  Deity,  question  the  propriety  of 
praying  to  him.  What  is  it,  more  or  less, 
than  to  question  the  propriety  of  praying  to 
God  1 

IV.  This  solemn  worship  and  praise  is  re- 
ferred ultimately  to  him  who  sitteth  upon  the 
throne — to  the  great  and  glorious  God,  thus 
known  and  manifested  in,  and  by,  and  with 
the  Lamb  that  was  slain. 

The  mediatorial  kingdom  of  Christ  will 
have  a period.  He  will  reign  as  Mediator, 
till  he  has  subdued  all  enemies  under  his  feet, 
and  perfected  his  whole  work.  Then  his 
kingdom  in  this  sense  will  cease ; he  will  de- 
liver it  up  to  the  Father,  that  God  may  be  all 
in  all,  1 Cor.  xv.  28.  This  passage  is  diffi- 
cult, that  is,  the  subject  is  too  great  for  our 
faculties  in  their  present  state  of  imperfec- 
tion fully  to  comprehend ; for  the  difficulties 
we  meet  with  in  scripture  are  more  properly 
to  be  ascribed  to  our  ignorance.  The  Son,  as 
man,  is  even  now  subject  to  the  Father : and 
God  is  undoubtedly  all  in  all,  at  present,  and 
from  everlasting  to  everlasting.  But  his  king- 
dom here  is  to  be  taken  figuratively  for  the 
subjects  of  his  kingdom,  his  people,  whom  he 
received  as  a trust  and  a treasure.  These 
he  will  deliver  up,  and  the  form  of  his  ad- 


[ser.  L. 

ministration  and  government  over  them  will 
be  changed.  They  will  then  have  no  more 
sins  to  confess ; there  will  be  no  more  dan- 
gers requiring  the  care  and  tenderness  of  a 
Shepherd,  no  enemies  to  be  controlled,  and 
the  ordinances  and  means  of  grace,  accommo- 
dated to  their  wants  and  weakness,  while  in 
this  world,  will  be  no  longer  necessary.  But 
Messiah,  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  will  ever  be 
the  head  and  Lord  of  the  creation,  the  me- 
dium of  communication  of  the  light  and  lovb 
of  God  to  his  people,  and  God  in  him,  the  ob- 
ject of  their  eternal  adoration  and  praise. 

Then  the  grand,  ultimate,  final  cause  of 
all  the  manifestations  of  God  will  be  com- 
pletely obtained.  The  glory  of  the  great 
Creator  and  Lawgiver,  the  splendour  of  all 
his  perfections  will  for  ever  shine,  without  a 
vail  or  cloud,  and  with  a brightness  which 
could  not  have  been  known  by  creatures,  had 
not  the  entrance  of  evil  given  occasion  for  a 
display  of  his  wisdom  and  love,  in  over-ruling 
it  to  the  praise  of  his  glorious  grace. 

Thus,  according  to  the  measure  of  my  abi- 
lity and  experience,  I have  endeavoured  to 
point  out  to  you  the  meaning  and  importance 
of  the  well  chosen  series  of  scriptural  pas- 
sages, which  are  set  to  music  in  the  Oratorio 
of  the  Messiah.  Great  is  the  Lord  Messiah, 
and  greatly  to  be  praised  ! I have  attempted 
to  set  before  you  a sketch  of  what  the  scrip- 
ture teaches  us  concerning  his  person,  under- 
takings, and  success, — the  misery  of  those 
whom  he  came  to  save,  the  happiness  to  which 
he  raises  them,  and  the  wonderful  plan  and 
progress  of  redeeming  love.  But  who  is 
sufficient  for  these  things  1 Alas ! how  small 
a portion  of  his  ways  are  we  able  to  trace ! 
But  I would  be  thankful,  that  the  desire  of 
attempting  this  great  subject  was  put  into 
my  heart,  and  that  having  obtained  help  of 
God,  I have  been  preserved  and  enabled  to 
finish  my  design.  Imperfect  as  my  execu- 
tion of  it  has  been,  I cannot  doubt  that  the 
various  topics  I have  been  led  to  insist  on  are 
the  great  truths  of  God.  For  what  is  pro- 
perly my  own,  the  defects  and  weaknesses 
which  mix  with  my  best  services,  I entreat 
his  forgiveness,  and  request  your  candour. 
But  I do  not  hesitate  to  say,  that  the  sub- 
stance of  what  I have  advanced  deserves  and 
demands  your  most  serious  attention. 

It  is  probable,  that  those  of  my  hearers  who 
admire  this  Oratorio,  and  are  often  present 
when  it  is  performed,  may  think  me  harsh 
and  singular  in  my  opinion,  that  of  all  our 
musical  compositions  this  is  the  most  impro- 
per for  a public  entertainment.  But  while 
it  continues  to  be  equally  acceptable  whether 
performed  in  a church  or  in  the  theatre,  and 
while  the  greater  part  of  the  performers  and 
of  the  audience  are  the  same  at  both  places, 

I can  rate  it  no  higher  than  as  one  of  the 
many  fashionable  amusements  which  mark 


* Dr.  Owen,  in  his  Christologia. 


8Eft.  L.] 

the  character  of  this  age  of  dissipation. 
Though  the  subject  be  serious  and  solemn  in 
the  highest  sense,  yea,  for  that  very  reason, 
and  though  the  music  is,  in  a striking  manner, 
adapted  to  the  subject,  yet,  if  the  &r  greater 
part  of  the  people  who  frequent  the  Oratorio, 
are  evidently  unaffected  by  the  Redeemer’s 
love,  and  uninfluenced  by  his  commands,  I 
am  afraid  it  is  no  better  than  a profanation  of 
the  name  and  truths  of  God,  a crucifying  the 
Son  of  God  afresh.  You  must  judge  for 
yourselves.  If  you  think  differently  from  me, 
you  will  act  accordingly. — Yet  permit  me  to 
hope  and  to  pray,  that  the  next  time  you  hear 
the  Messiah,  God  may  bring  something  that 
you  have  heard  in  the  course  of  these  ser- 
mons, nearly  connected  with  the  peace  and 
welfare  of  your  souls,  effectually  to  your  re- 
membrance. 

I would  humbly  hope,  that  some  persons, 
who  were  strangers  to  the  power  and  grace 
of  Messiah,  when  I entered  upon  this  service, 
are  now  desirous  of  seeking  him  with  their 
whole  hearts.  Yes,  I trust  I have  not  la- 
boured wholly  in  vain.  The  gospel  is  the  rod 
of  his  strength,  (Psal.  cx.  2,)  which,  when  ac- 
companied by  the  power  of  his  Spirit,  pro- 
duces greater  effects  than  the  wonder-work- 
ing rod  of  Moses.  It  causes  the  blind  to  see, 
the  deaf  to  hear,  and  the  dead  to  live.  A 
faithful  minister  will  account  a single  instance 
of  success  a rich  recompense  for  the  labour  of 
a life.  May  this  joy  be  mine  ! May  the  Lord 
encourage  you  to  go  on  seeking  him  ! Then 
he  will  surely  be  found  of  you.  An  open 
door  is  set  oefore  you,  (Rev.  iii.  8,)  and  if 


389 

you  are  truly  willing  to  enter,  none  shall  be 
able  to  shut  it. 

But  may  I not  fear,  that  I am  still  speak- 
ing to  others,  who,  to  this  hour,  have  no  cor- 
dial admiring  thoughts  of  the  great  Saviour  1 
Alas ! should  you  die  in  your  present  frame 
of  mind  ! let  me,  once  more,  entreat  you  to 
consider  what  your  situation  and  employment 
will  be,  when  all  his  redeemed  people,  and 
all  his  holy  angels,  shall  join  in  worshipping 
and  praising  him,  in  the  great  day  of  his  ap- 
pearance. 

Unless  you  repent,  lay  down  your  arms, 
and  submit  to  his  golden  sceptre,  your  doom 
is  already  pronounced.  Awful  are  the  words 
of  the  Lord,  by  the  prophet,  and  very  appli- 
cable to  your  case,  if  (which  may  his  mercy 
prevent !)  you  should  die  in  your  sins. 
“ Therefore,  thus  saith  the  Lord  God,  be- 
hold my  servants  shall  eat,  but  ye  shall  be 
hungry : behold  my  servants  shall  drink,  but 
ye  shall  be  thirsty ; behold  my  servants  shall 
rejoice,  but  ye  shall  be  ashamed  : behold  my 
servants  shall  sing  for  joy  of  heart,  but  ye 
shall  cry  for  sorrow  of  heart,  and  shall  howl 
for  vexation  of  spirit,”  Isa.  lxv.  13,  14.  If 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees  were  filled  with 
envy  and  grief  when  the  children  in  the  tem- 
ple sung  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David,  (Matt, 
xxi.  15,)  what  must  be  their  anguish  and  re- 
morse, their  rage  and  despair,  when  the 
whole  creation  shall  join  in  his  praise  J If 
your  thoughts  of  him  now  are  like  theirs, 
tremble  at  your  danger ; for  unless  you  re- 
pent, your  lot  must  be  with  them  hereafter. 


THE  UNIVERSAL  CHORUS. 


OCCASIONAL  SERMONS 


THE  SUBJECT  AND  TEMPER  OF  THE  GOSPEL-MINISTRY  : 

A SERMON 

PREACHED  IN  THE  PARISH  CHURCH  OF  ST.  MARY  WOOLNOTH. 

ON  SUNDAY,  DECEMBER,  19,  1779. 

WHEN  THE  AUTHOR  ENTERED  ON  HIS  FIRST  PUBLIC  SERVICE  IN  THAT  CHURCH. 


Speaking  the  truth 

The  words  in  the  original  have  a more 
comprehensive  sense  than  in  our  version, 
AKtfiuovrt;  £ v « They  extend  no  less  to 
conduct  than  to  speech,  and  comprise,  in  one 
short  sentence,  that  combination  of  integrity 
and  benevolence,  which  constitute  the  cha- 
racter of  a true  Christian.  But,  as  our  morn- 
ing service  has  been  already  much  prolonged, 
I mean  not  to  enlarge  at  present  upon  this 
important  subject.  I propose  my  text  rather 
as  a kind  of  motto,  to  introduce  a brief  account 
of  the  feelings,  desires,  and  purposes  of  my 
heart,  on  this  my  first  appearance  before  you. 
The  inhabitants  of  these  parishes,  to  whom  I 
more  immediately  address  myself,  have  a 
right  to  be  informed,  now  the  providence  of 
God  has  placed  me  in  this  city,  and  in  this 
church,  of  the  views  with  which  I have  un- 
dertaken the  important  trust  lately  committed 
to  me,  and  of  the  manner  and  spirit  in  which 
it  is  my  desire  to  discharge  it.  If  these  in- 
quiries be  upon  any  of  your  minds,  accept  my 
answer  in  the  words  I have  read : I came, 
and,  by  the  grace  of  God,  I hope  to  abide 
amongst  you,  “ speaking  the  truth  in  love.” 

I should  be  utterly  unworthy  your  atten- 
tion, I should  deserve  your  contempt  and  de- 
testation, if,  under  the  solemn  character  of  a 
minister  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  with  a professed 
regard  for  his  service  and  the  good  of  souls,  I 
should  presume  to  speak  any  thing  amongst 
you,  but  what  I verily  believe  in  my  con- 
science to  be  the  truth.  The  apostles  were 
ambassadors  for  Christ,  (2  Cor.  v.  24,)  and 
we,  however  inferior  in  other  respects,  are  so 
far  concerned  in  this  part  of  their  character, 
as  to  be  equally  bound  to  conform  to  the  in- 
structions of  our  liOrd  and  Master.  The 


in  love. — Ephesians,  iv.  15. 

Bible  is  the  grand  repository  of  the  truths 
which  it  will  be  the  business  and  the  pleasure 
of  my  life  to  set  before  you.  It  is  the  com- 
plete system  of  divine  truth,  to  which  nothing 
can  be  added,  and  from  which  nothing  can 
be  taken,  (Rev.  xxii.  18,  19,)  with  impunity. 
Every  attempt  to  disguise,  or  soften  any 
branch  of  this  truth,  in  order  to  accommodate 
it  to  the  prevailing  taste  around  us,  either  to 
avoid  the  displeasure,  or  to  court  the  favour 
of  our  fellow-mortals,  must  be  an  affront  to 
the  majesty  of  God,  and  an  act  of  treachery 
to  men.  My  conscience  bears  me  witness, 
that  I mean  to  speak  the  truth  among  you. 
May  the  grace  of  God  enable  me  always  to 
do  it.  The  principal  branches  of  the  truth  as 
it  is  in  Jesus,  according  to  St.  Paul’s  expres- 
sion, are  summarily  contained  in  the  Articles, 
which  I have  just  now  read  and  given  my 
solemn  assent  to  in  your  hearing.  These  I 
acknowledge  and  adopt  as  a standard  of  sound 
doctrine,  not  merely  because  they  are  the 
Articles  of  our  Church,  but  because,  upon 
mature  and  repeated  examination,  I am  per- 
suaded they  are  agreeable  to  the  scriptures. 
I am  to  enlarge  on  the  declaration  of  the 
scripture  and  of  the  Articles  concerning  the 
depravity  of  fallen  man,  the  evil  of  sin,  the 
method  of  salvation  by  grace  through  faith  in 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I am  to  bear  tes- 
timony to  the  dignity  and  excellency  of  the 
Redeemer’s  person  and  characters,  the  suit- 
ableness of  his  offices,  the  efficacy  of  his 
blood,  and  obedience  to  death  on  the  behalf 
of  sinners,  and  his  glory  as  Head  of  the 
Church,  and  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth.  I am 
to  set  before  you  the  characters,  obligations, 
and  privileges  of  those  who  believe  in  hit* 
390 


SUBJECT  AND  TEMPER  OF  THE  GOSPEL  MINISTRY. 


39: 


name ; and  to  prove  that  the  doctrines  of  the 
grace  of  God  are  doctrines  according-  to  god- 
liness, which,  though  they  may  be  abused  by 
men  of  corrupt  minds,  have  in  themselves, 
when  rightly  understood,  a direct  and  pow- 
erful tendency  to  enforce  universal  obedience 
to  the  commands  of  God,  and  to  promote  the 
peace  and  welfare  of  civil  society.  I am  like- 
wise to  warn  all  who  hear  me,  of  the  sin  and 
danger  of  rejecting  the  great  salvation  re- 
vealed by  the  gospel.  These  will  be  the  sub- 
jects of  my  ministry ; and  if  what  I shall  of- 
fer upon  these  heads  be  agreeable,  not  only 
to  the  Articles  which  I have  subscribed,  but 
to  the  scriptures,  which  we  all  profess  to  be- 
lieve, it  must  of  course  be  admitted  that  I 
shall  speak  the  truth. 

But  the  cause  of  truth  itself  may  be  dis- 
credited by  improper  management;  and  there- 
fore the  scripture,  which  furnishes  us  with 
subject-matter  of  our  ministry,  and  teaches 
us  what  we  are  to  say,  is  equally  explicit  as 
to  the  temper  and  spirit  in  which  we  are  to 
speak.  Though  I had  the  knowledge  of  all 
mysteries,  (1  Cor.  xiii.  1,)  and  the  tongue  of 
an  angel  to  declare  them,  I could  hope  for 
little  acceptance  or  usefulness,  unless  I was 
to  speak  in  love.  The  gospel  is  a declaration 
of  the  astonishing  love  of  God  to  mankind; 
it  exhibits  the  perfect  exemplar  of  love  in  the 
character  of  him,  who,  when  upon  earth  in 
the  form  of  a servant,  went  about  doing  good, 
(Acts  x.  38,)  and  exerted  the  most  unbounded 
benevolence  to  all  around  him.  The  servant 
of  the  Lord,  of  that  meek  and  merciful  Sa- 
viour, who  wept  over  his  avowed  enemies, 
and  prayed  for  his  actual  murderers  while 
nailing  him  to  the  cross,  learns  at  his  Sa- 
viour’s feet  to  bear  a cordial  love  to  all  man- 
kind. Man,  considered  as  the  creature  of 
God,  is  the  noblest  and  most  important  of  his 
works  in  the  visible  creation,  formed  by  him 
who  originally  made  him  for  himself,  with 
such  a vastness  of  desire,  such  a capacity  for 
happiness,  as  nothing  less  than  an  infinite 
good  can  satisfy  ; formed  to  exist  in  an  eter- 
nal unchangeable  state.  And  even  fallen 
man,  though  depraved  and  perverted,  guilty, 
and,  in  his  present  state,  obnoxious  to  eternal 
misery,  is  yet  capable  of  being  restored  to  the 
favour  of  God,  and  renewed  into  his  image, 
of  serving  him  here,  and  being  happy  with 
him  for  ever.  Whoever  therefore  has  tasted 
of  the  love  of  Christ,  and  has  known  by  his 
own  experience  the  need  and  the  worth  of 
redemption,  is  enabled,  yea,  he  is  constrained 
to  love  his  fellow-creatures.  He  loves  them 
at  first  sight : and,  if  the  providence  of  God 
commits  a dispensation  of  the  gospel  and  a 
care  of  souls  to  him,  he  will  feel  the  warmest 
emotions  of  friendship  and  tenderness,  while 
he  beseeches  them  by  the  tender  mercies  of 
God,  (Rom.  xii.  1,)  and  even  while  he  warns 
them  by  his  terrors,  2 Cor.  v.  11.  Surely  I 
durst  not  address  you  from  this  place,  if  I 


could  not  with  sincerity  at  least,  if  not  with 
equal  warmth,  adopt  the  apostle’s  words,  ana 
say,  “ Being  affectionately  desirous  of  you, 
we  are  willing  to  impart  unto  you,  not  the 
gospel  of  God  only,  but  our  own  souls  also 
(were  it  possible,)  because  ye  were  dear  unto 
us,”  1 Thess.  ii.  8. 

This  love  which  my  heart  bears,  I offer  as 
a plea  for  that  earnestness  and  importunity 
which  I must  use.  I came  not  to  amuse  you 
with  subjects  of  opinion  or  uncertainty,  or 
even  with  truths  of  a cold,  speculative,  unin- 
teresting nature,  which  you  might  receive 
without  benefit,  or  reject  without  detriment ; 
but  to  speak  the  truths  of  God,  truths  of  the 
utmost  importance  to  the  welfare  of  your 
souls  in  time  and  in  eternity.  If  I love  you, 
therefore,  I cannot  be  content  with  delivering 
my  message;  my  spirit  must,  and  will  be 
deeply  engaged  for  its  success.  I cannot  be 
content  with  the  emoluments  annexed  to  my 
office — I seek  not  yours,  but  you,  (2  Cor.  xii. 
14;)  that  you  may  know  the  love  of  Christ, 
which  passeth  knowledge,  (Ephes.  iii.  19;) 
that  you  may  be  delivered  from  the  power 
of  this  evil  world,  (Gal.  i.  4,)  and  that  I and 
you  may  at  length  stand  accepted  before  the 
throne  of  God ; in  a word,  that  by  a blessing 
from  on  high,  accompanying  my  poor  labours, 
I may  both  save  myself,  and  them  that  hear 
me,  1 Tim.  iv.  16.  These  are  the  aims  and 
ends  which  1 hope  always  to  have  in  view, 
and  therefore  love  will  prompt  me  to  be  faith- 
ful and  earnest. 

Too  often  the  due  reception  of  the  truth  is 
greatly  impeded  by  the  cares,  the  business, 
or  the  amusements  of  the  world.  We  find 
many  of  our  hearers,  alas ! too  happy,  or  too 
much  engrossed,  to  afford  us  that  attention 
we  have  a right  to  claim,  considering  the 
weight  of  our  message,  and  the  authority 
under  which  we  speak.  But  God,  in  mercy 
to  the  souls  of  men,  frequently  suits  the  ap- 
pointments of  his  providence,  in  subserviency 
to  the  purposes  of  his  grace.  He  prepares 
for  them  what  they  do  not  desire  for  them- 
selves, seasons  for  leisure,  retirement,  and 
reflection.  This  is  one  gracious  design  of 
the  various  afflictions  of  human  life.  When  he 
visits  with  sickness  or  pain,  crosses  and  disap- 
pointments— when  our  cisterns  are  broken, 
and  our  gourds  wither — when  the  desire  of 
our  eyes  is  taken  away  with  a stroke,  (Ezek. 
xxiv.  16,)  or  we  meet  with  a thorn  or  sting, 
where  our  fond  hearts  were  expecting  only 
pleasure — then  perhaps  the  truths  which 
were  heard  with  too  much  indifference  in 
the  hour  of  prosperity,  may  be  more  regard- 
ed. My  love  will  prompt  me  to  be  always 
near  you,  waiting  for  such  seasons,  and  ready 
upon  the  first  intimation  (for  I mean  not  to  in- 
trude myself,)  to  offer  my  sympathy,  my  pray- 
ers, my  best  advice.  Though  I shall  have  but 
little  time  for  visits  of  mere  ceremony ; to  visit 
you  as  a minister,  and  to  assist  you  to  the 


392 


SUBJECT  AND  TEMPER  OF  THE  GOSPEL  MINISTRY. 


utmost  of  my  power  in  making  a right  im- 
provement of  the  providences  of  God,  is  a 
service  which  I shall  always  owe  you  from 
a principle  of  duty,  and  which  I hope  always 
to  be  glad  to  render  from  a principle  of  love. 

If  the  grace  of  God,  without  which  I can 
do  nothing,  should  thus  enable  me  to  speak 
the  truth  in  love,  may  I not  hope  for  your  fa- 
vourable attention!  Would  it  not  imply  an 
unjust  reflection  upon  your  candour,  to  sup- 
pose that  any  of  you  will  be  angry  with  one 
who  only  wishes  to  speak  the  truth  in  love  1 
Certainly  I can  as  yet  have  no  particular  rea- 
son to  expect  an  unkind  return  from  any  in- 
dividual among  you,  because  I am  a stranger 
to  you  all.  But  the  scripture  teaches,  what 
experience  and  observation  abundantly  con- 
firm, that  the  doctrines  of  divine  truth  are  so 
mysterious  in  themselves,  and  so  opposite  and 
mortifying  to  the  opinion  mortals  are  prone  to 
entertain  of  their  own  wisdom  and  goodness, 
that  persons  of  very  amiable  characters  in 
common  life,  are  too  often  amongst  the  warm- 
est opposers  of  the  ministers  who  dare  faith- 
fully and  plainly  persevere  in  speaking  the 
truth.  Should  I have  this  trial  to  meet  with 
from  any  of  you,  still  I hope  to  speak  the  truth 
in  love,  and  to  remember  that  I am  a follower 
of  him  who  only  returned  kindness  for  hard 
usage.  I hope  to  consider,  that  if  any  oppose, 
it  is  because  they  know  not  what  they  do ; and 
to  bear  in  mind,  that  1 myself  was  once  ascorn- 
er  and  despiser  of  the  gospel  which  I now 
preach ; that  I stand  here  as  a pattern  of  the 
long  suffering  of  God ; and  that  having  ob- 
tained mercy  myself,  I have  encouragement, 


from  my  own  case,  to  hope  that  the  strongest 
prejudices  may  be  softened  by  the  power  of 
his  grace. 

Let  me  close  with  one  observation.  The 
transactions  of  this  day,  and  the  consequence 
of  it  will  not  be  soon  forgotten.  They  will 
be  registered  in  the  annals  of  eternity.  As 
surely  as  we  are  now  met  together,  so  surely 
we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat 
of  Christ,  2 Cor.  x.  10.  Then  1 must  give 
an  account  of  my  ministry,  and  you  of  the 
manner  in  which  you  received  it.  * If  I speak 
the  truth — it  is  at  the  peril  of  my  hearers  to 
treat  it  with  contempt,  or  even  with  neglect. 
But  I would  hope  better  things,  even  that  the 
Lord,  the  Holy  Spirit,  will  prepare  our  hearts 
to  receive  with  meekness  that  engrafted 
word,  which  is  able  to  save  our  souls,  James 
i.  11. 

I only  add  my  earnest  request  for  a fre- 
quent and  fervent  remembrance  in  your 
prayers,  that  the  Father  of  mercies,  the  God 
of  all  wisdom,  may  so  influence  my  spirit,  that 
no  part  of  my  conduct  may  be  unsuitable  to 
what  I have  at  this  time  professed.  That  speak- 
ing the  truth  in  love,  and  commending  it  by  a 
conversation  becoming  the  gospel,  (Phil.  i.  17,) 
my  labours  and  my  life  may  be  acceptable  and 
serviceable  among  you.  I trust  that  I,  on  my 
part,  shall  not  cease  to  pray,  that  his  blessing 
may  rest  upon  you,  upon  your  persons,  youi 
families,  and  upon  all  your  concerns;  and 
more  especially  for  the  welfare  and  comfort 
of  your  souls — that  he  may  guide  you  by  his 
counsel  through  this  life,  and  afterwards  re- 
ceive you  to  his  glory,  Psalm  lxxiii.  24. 


THE  GUILT  AND  DANGER  OF  SUCH  A NATION  AS  THIS , 


A SERMON 

PREACHED  IN  THE  PARISH  CHURCH  OF  ST.  MARY  WOOLNOTH, 
ON  WEDNESDAY,  FEBRUARY  21,  1781. 

THE  DAY  APPOINTED  FOR  A GENERAL  FAST. 


Shall  I not  visit  for  these  things,  saith  the  Lord  ? And  shall  not  my  soul  be  avenged  on  such 
a nation  as  this?— Jeremiah  v.  29. 


Three  times  (Jer.  v.  9 ; ix.  9,)  the  Lord  God 
repeats  by  his  prophet  this  alarming-  ques- 
tion. Their  ingratitude  and  obstinacy  were 
so  notorious,  their  sins  so  enormous  and  ag- 
gravated, the  sentence  denounced  against 
them,  however  severe,  was  so  undeniably 
just,  that  partial  as  they  were  to  themselves, 
God  is  pleased  to  appeal  to  their  own  con- 
sciences, and  to  make  them  judges  in  their 
own  cause ; inviting  or  rather  challenging 
them  to  offer  any  plea,  why  his  forbearance 
and  patience,  which  they  had  so  long  despised, 
should  be  still  afforded  them. 

But  the  form  of  the  question  will  not  per- 
mit us  to  confine  the  application  to  Israel  or 
Judah.  The  words  are  not,  “On  this  nation” 
particularly,  but  “ On  such  a nation  as  this.” 
The  Lord,  the  Governor  of  the  earth,  has  pro- 
vided in  the  history  of  one  nation,  a lesson  of 
instruction  and  warning  to  every  nation  under 
the  sun ; and  the  nearer  the  state  and  spirit 
of  any  people  resemble  the  state  and  character 
of  Judah,  when  Jeremiah  prophesied  among 
them,  the  more  reason  they  have  to  tremble 
under  the  apprehension  of  the  same  or  simi- 
lar judgments. 

God  brought  Israel  out  of  Egypt  with  an 
outstretched  arm,  divided  the  Red  Sea  before 
them,  led  them  into  the  wilderness  by  a 
cloud  and  pillar  of  fire,  fed  them  with  man- 
na, and  gave  them  water  from  the  rock. 
He  planted  them  in  a good  land,  and  though 
they  often  sinned  and  were  often  punished, 
they  were  distinguished  by  many  tokens  of 
his  presence  and  effects  of  his  goodness, 
above  any  other  nation.  In  the  time  of  Solo- 
mon they  possessed  the  height  of  human 
prosperity,  but  they  soon  rebelled  and  in- 
volved themselves  in  increasing  troubles. 
And,  though  the  efforts  and  examples  of 
Vol.  II.  3 D 


Hezekiah  and  Josiah  produced  a temporary 
reformation,  and  procured  a temporary  re- 
spite, they  went  on,  upon  the  whole,  from  bad 
to  worse,  till  the  measure  of  their  iniquity 
being  filled  up,  and  the  season  of  God’s  long 
suffering  at  an  end,  he  directed  the  march  of 
Nebuchadnezzar  against  them,  who,  because 
he  was  the  appointed  instrument  of  divine 
vengeance,  could  not  fail  of  success.  The 
temple  and  city  of  Jerusalem  were  burnt,  the 
land  desolated,  the  greater  part  of  the  inha- 
bitants destroyed,  and  the  survivors  led  cap- 
tives into  a far  distant  land. 

We  likewise  are  a highly  favoured  people, 
and  have  long  enjoyed  privileges  which  excite 
the  admiration  and  envy  of  surrounding  na- 
tions; and  we  are  a sinful,  ungrateful  people ; 
so  that  when  we  compare  the  blessings  and 
mercies  we  have  received  from  the  Lord, 
with  our  conduct  towards  him,  it  is  to  be 
feared  we  are  no  less  concerned  with  the 
question  in  my  text  than  Israel  was  of  old. 
This  is  the  point  I propose  to  illustrate,  as 
suitable  to  the  design  for  which  we  are  at 
this  time  professedly  assembled. 

Though  the  occasion  will  require  me  to 
take  some  notice  of  our  public  affairs,  I mean 
not  to  amuse  you  with  what  is  usually  called 
a political  discourse.  The  Bible  is  my  sys- 
tem of  politics.  There  I read,  that  the  Lord 
reigns;  (Psal.  xcvii.  1 ;)  that  he  doeth  what  he 
pleaseth  in  the  armies  of  heaven,  and  among 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth ; (Dan.  iv.  35 ;) 
that  no  wisdom,  understanding,  counsel,  or 
power,  can  prevail  without  his  blessing; 
(Prov.  xi.  30  ;)  that  as  righteousness  exalteth 
a nation,  so  sin  is  the  reproach,  and  will  even 
totally  be  the  ruin  of  any  people,  Prov.  xiv. 
34.  From  these  and  other  maxims  of  a like 
import,  I am  learning  to  be  still,  and  to  know 
393 


394 


THE  GUILT  AND  DANGER 


that  he  is  God.  My  part,  as  a minister  of  the 
gospel  of  peace,  is  not  to  inflame,  but,  if  pos- 
sible, to  soothe  and  sweeten  the  spirits  of  my 
hearers ; to  withdraw  their  attention  from  the 
instrumental  and  apparent  causes  of  the  ca- 
lamities we  feel  or  fear,  and  to  fix  it  upon  sin, 
as  the  original  and  proper  cause  of  every 
other  evil.  As  a peaceful  and  a loyal  subject, 
I profess  and  inculcate  obedience  to  the  laws 
of  my  country,  to  which  I conceive  myself 
bound  by  the  authority  of  God’s  command, 
and  by  gratitude  for  the  civil  and  religious 
liberty  I possess.  For  the  rest,  political  dis- 
quisitions, except  immediately  connected 
with  scriptural  principles,  appear  to  me  im- 
proper for  the  pulpit  at  all  times,  and  more 
especially  unseasonable  and  indecent  on  a 
day  of  public  humiliation.  I hope  we  are 
now  met,  not  to  accuse  others,  but  to  confess 
our  own  sins — not  to  justify  ourselves,  but 
to  plead  for  mercy. 

May  it  please  God,  therefore,  by  the  influ- 
ence of  his  Holy  Spirit,  to  impress  the  con- 
sciences of  all  present,  and  to  make  us  atten- 
tive to  our  own  immediate  concerns,  while  I 
endeavour, 

I.  Briefly  to  delineate  the  state  of  the  na- 
tion ; or  to  show  you  what  a nation  this  is. 

II.  To  consider  in  what  manner  the  righ- 
teous Judge  and  Governor  of  the  earth  might 
justly  avenge  himself  of  such  a nation  as  this. 

III.  To  inquire,  whether  there  be  any 
hope  that  such  a nation  as  this,  can  yet  escape 
the  impending  ruin  with  which  it  is  threaten- 
ed 1 and  if  there  be,  in  what  way  this  mercy 
is  to  be  sought  and  expected  1 

I.  In  order  to  estimate  the  state  of  the  na- 
tion, we  must  attend  to  two  views,  which, 
when  contrasted,  illustrate  each  other,  and  in 
their  combination  constitute  our  national  cha- 
racter, and  discriminate  it,  not  only  from  that 
of  every  nation  around  us,  but  from  all  the 
kingdoms  recorded  in  the  history  of  past  ages, 
— I mean  our  national  privileges,  and  our  na- 
tional sins. 

With  regard  to  the  first  head, — the  pecu- 
liar privileges  which,  by  the  favour  of  Divine 
Providence,  we  have  enjoyed  as  a people,  I 
must  be  brief.  A full  detail  of  them  would 
require  a volume.  Though  the  island  of 
Great  Britain  exhibits  but  a small  spot  upon 
a map  of  the  globe,  it  makes  a splendid  ap- 
pearance in  the  history  of  mankind,  and  has 
for  a long  space  of  time  been  signally  under 
the  protection  of  God,  and  the  seat  of  peace, 
liberty,  and  truth.  When  Christendom  had 
groaned  for  ages  under  the  night  of  Papal 
superstition,  the  first  light  of  Reformation 
dawned  amongst  us  by  the  preaching  and 
writings  of  Wickliff.  From  that  time  we 
have  possessed  the  knowledge  of  the  gospel, 
and  God  has  had  a succession  of  witnesses  in 
our  land ; they  have  been  at  different  periods 
exposed  to  suffering,  and  many  of  them  were 
called  to  seal  their  testimony  with  their  blood, 


but  they  could  neither  be  intimidated  nor  ex. 
tirpated.  In  Luther’s  time,  when  the  pillars 
of  Popery  were  more  publicly  and  generally 
shaken,  we  were  among  the  first  who  were 
animated  and  enabled  to  shake  off  the  yoke 
of  Rome ; and  God  has  often  since  remark- 
ably interposed  to  preserve  us  from  being 
brought  into  that  bondage  a second  time. 
The  spirit  of  persecution,  under  various  forms, 
has  again  and  again  attempted  to  resume  its 
power,  but  has  been  as  often  restrained  and 
defeated.  Civil  commotions  likewise  stand 
upon  record  in  our  annals,  and  our  forefathers 
have  felt  miseries  of  which  we  can  form  but 
a very  imperfect  idea.  But  they  suffered  and 
struggled  for  us.  The  event  of  every  contest 
and  revolution  contributed  gradually  to  estab- 
lish that  happy  basis  of  government  which 
we  call  The  British  Constitution ; and  to- 
gether with  these  advances  in  favour  of  li- 
berty, an  increase  of  commerce,  wealth,  and 
dominion,  has  been  afforded  us.  From  that 
distinguished  aera,  the  Revolution,  and  more 
especially  since  the  accession  of  the  present 
Royal  Family,  we  have  enjoyed  such  an  un- 
interrupted series  of  peace  and  prosperity, 
as  cannot  be  paralleled  in  the  history  of  any 
nation  we  have  heard  of,  not  excepting  even 
that  of  Israel.  I call  our  peace  uninterrupt- 
ed ; for  the  efforts  of  rebellion  in  the  reigns 
of  our  two  last  kings,  were  so  speedily  crush- 
ed, and  were  productive  of  so  few  calamities, 
except  to  the  unhappy  aggressors,  that  they 
are  chiefly  to  be  noticed  as  instances  of  the 
goodness  of  the  Lord,  who,  notwithstanding 
we  were  then  a sinful  people,  was  pleased  to 
fight  our  battles,  and  put  our  enemies  tc 
shame.  I call  it  uninterrupted,  for  though 
we  have  been  engaged  as  principals  in  sev- 
eral foreign  wars,  and  the  storm  fell  with 
dreadful  weight  upon  other  countries,  we  at 
home  knew  little  of  the  war  but  from  the  pub- 
lic prints,  which  usually,  after  the  first  or 
second  year  were  filled  with  accounts  of  the 
successes  and  victories  which  the  Lord  of 
hosts  (alas,  by  how  few  was  he  acknow- 
ledged !)  gave  to  our  fleets  and  armies. — 
When  the  last  war  terminated,  we  were  at 
the  height  of  national  honour  and  power. 
Our  arms  were  victorious,  and  our  flags  tri- 
umphant wherever  our  operations  had  been 
directed  in  the  most  distant  and  opposite  parts 
of  the  globe.  What  an  accession  of  empire 
and  riches  did  we  then  acquire,  while  we 
were  sitting  (if  I may  so  speak)  under  our 
vines  and  fig-trees  undisturbed : and  while 
a considerable  part  of  Germany,  rather  invol- 
ved, than  properly  interested  in  our  disputes, 
was  almost  desolated  by  fire  and  sword ! And 
notwithstanding  our  increasing  provocations, 
every  succeeding  year  has  afforded  signal 
proofs,  that  though  the  Lord  is  displeased 
with  us,  he  has  not  yet  forsaken  us.  If  in 
some  instances  he  has  justly  disappointed  our 
expectations,  he  has  in  others  appeared  no 


OF  SUCH  A NATION  AS  THIS. 


395 


less  remarkably  in  our  favour,  defeating-  the 
designs  of  our  enemies,  protecting  our  com- 
merce, and  affording  us  in  general  more  plen- 
tiful harvests  at  home,  since  the  war  has  ren- 
dered supplies  from  abroad  more  precarious 
and  difficult.  Add  to  our  internal  peace, 
wealth  and  plenty,  the  inviolable  immunity 
both  of  persons  and  property,  in  which  we 
are  preserved  by  the  spirit  and  administration 
of  our  laws ; and  that  unrestrained  liberty 
which  people  of  all  sentiments  and  denomi- 
nations possess  and  exercise,  of  worshipping 
God  in  the  way  they  think  most  agreeable  to 
his  will.  Must  not  a due  consideration  of 
these  things  constrain  us  to  say,  He  hath  not 
dealt  so  with  any  nation  ? 

What  could  the  Lord  have  done  more  for 
his  vineyard  1 Isa.  v.  4.  How  could  he  have 
laid  a people  under  stronger  obligations  to 
his  service]  What  returns  might  he  not 
expect  from  such  a nation  as  this  1 But  alas ! 
we  have  requited  him  evil  for  good ! Such  a 
nation  as  this  is  very  imperfectly  described 
by  an  enumeration  of  privileges.  I have  a 
more  painful  task  now  to  attend  to;  I should 
enumerate  (were  it  possible)  our  national  sins. 
It  is  but  a sketch  I can  offer  upon  this  immense 
and  awful  subject.  But  enough  is  obvious, 
and  at  hand,  to  make  us  tremble,  if  we  regard 
the  scripture,  and  do  in  our  hearts  believe 
that  there  is  a God  that  governs  the  earth, 
(Psal.  lviii.  11.)  I wish  you  to  keep  in  mind, 
as  I proceed,  the  slight  view  I have  given 
of  the  favours  God  has  bestowed  upon  us. 
The  recollection  of  his  mercies  is  necessary 
to  give  a proper  sense  of  the  colouring  and 
aggravation  of  our  sins.  It  is  often  pleaded, 
that,  sinful  as  we  are,  we  are  not  more  de- 
praved in  morals  and  practice  than  the  inhab- 
itants of  France  or  Italy,  or  the  other  nations 
of  Europe.  I much  question  the  truth  of  this 
plea.  I am  afraid  that,  in  some  instances  at 
least,  we  are  more  corrupt  and  profligate  than 
any  nation  now  existing.  But  admitting  that 
France  or  Italy  equal,  or  even  exceed  us  in 
open  and  positive  wickedness,  if  they  fall 
short  of  us  in  advantages  for  knowing  the  will 
of  God,  if  they  are  not  equally  enriched  by 
the  bounties  of  his  providence,  if  he  has  not 
so  signally  appeared  on  their  behalf  as  he  has 
on  ours,  their  sins,  however  enormous  or  nu- 
merous, are  not  attended  with  equal  aggra- 
vations; we  must  fix  upon  a nation  (if  such 
could  be  found)  that  is  upon  a par  with  us  in 
the  blessings  of  gospel-light,  of  civil  and  re- 
ligious liberty,  before  we  can  properly  form  a 
comparison,  or  have  any  just  reason  for  sup- 
posing that  our  sins  are  not  greater  than 
theirs. 

The  magnitude  of  our  national  debt  is  a 
frequent  topic  of  conversation.  We  have  in- 
deed but  an  indistinct  idea  of  a number  not 
very  far  short  of  two  hundred  millions,  yet  we 
car  form  some  conception  of  it.  But  our  na- 
tional debt  of  sin  is  beyond  all  the  rules  and 


powers  of  arithmetical  computation.  The 
holiness,  authority,  and  goodness  of  God 
(which  are  infinite)  afford  the  only  proper 
measures  by  which  to  judge  of  the  horrid  evil 
of  the  sins  committed  against  him. 

The  sin  of  a nation  is  properly  the  aggre- 
gate or  sum-total  of  all  the  sins  committed  by 
every  individual  residing  in  that  nation.  But 
those  may  be  emphatically  called  national 
sins  which,  by  their  notoriety,  frequency,  or 
circumstances,  contribute  to  mark  the  cha- 
racter of  one  nation,  as  distinct  from  another. 
It  is  to  be  hoped  that  some  species  of  sins 
amongst  us  have  not  yet  become  national. 
They  are  rather  exotics,  not  perfectly  fami- 
liarized to  the  soil,  or  prevalent  in  every  part 
of  the  land.  I shall  confine  myself  to  a few 
of  the  particulars  which  are  more  directly 
characteristic  of  this  nation,  and  at  this  time. 

1.  The  maxims  and  usage  generally  preva- 
lent among  a people,  if  contrary  to  the  rule 
of  God’s  word,  are  national  sins.  If  custom- 
ary, they  are  national ; if  inconsistent  with 
the  precepts  of  scripture,  they  must  be  sinful. 
A woe  is  denounced  (Isa.  v.  20,)  against  those 
who  call  evil  good,  and  good  evil ; but  this 
dreadful  abuse  of  language,  sentiment,  and 
conduct,  can  only  be  avoided  by  making  the 
inspired  writings  the  standard  of  our  judg- 
ment. In  a land  that  bears  the  name  of  Chris- 
tian, adultery  is  deemed  gallantry;  murder,  in 
some  cases,  is  a point  of  honour ; avarice  is 
prudence ; profuseness  wears  the  mask  of  gen- 
erosity ; and  dissipation  is  considered  as  inno- 
cent amusement.  On  the  other  hand,  meek- 
ness is  accounted  meanness  of  spirit,  and 
grace  is  branded  with  the  opprobrious  names 
of  melancholy  and  enthusiasm.  Habituated 
from  our  infancy  to  the  effects  of  these  pre- 
possessions, and  more  or  less  under  their  in- 
fluence, very  few  of  us  are  duly  sensible  how 
utterly  repugnant  the  spirit  and  temper  of 
the  world  around  us  is  to  the  genius  and 
spirit  of  the  Christianity  we  profess.  It  would, 
I think,  appear  in  a much  more  striking  light 
to  an  intelligent  and  unbiassed  observer,  who, 
upon  hearing  that  Great  Britain  was  favour- 
ed with  the  knowledge  of  the  true  religion, 
should  visit  us  from  some  very  remote  coun- 
try with  a view  of  sharing  in  our  advantage. 
If  I could  make  the  tour  of  the  kingdom  with 
such  a stranger,  and  show  him  what  is  trans- 
acting in  the  busy  and  in  the  gay  world,  in 
city,  court,  and  country ; if  I could  describe 
to  him  the  persons  he  would  see  at  our  thea- 
tres and  public  places,  at  Newmarket,  at  con- 
tested elections,  and  explain  the  motives  and 
aims  which  bring  them  together ; if  I could 
introduce  him  into  the  families  of  the  great, 
the  reputed  wise,  and  the  wealthy, — from 
these  data,  together  with  the  ignorance  and 
licentiousness  of  the  populace,  which  must 
unavoidably  engage  his  notice  wherever  he 
went,  I apprehend  he  would  not  be  long  at  a 
loss  to  form  a tolerable  judgment  of  our  na- 


396 


THE  GUILT  AND  DANGER 


tional  character.  And  if  after  this  survey, 
he  were  attentively  to  read  the  New  Testa- 
ment, I think  he  must  allow,  that,  admitting 
it  was  a revelation  from  God,  our  national 
character  was  neither  more  nor  less  than  the 
union  and  combination  of  our  national  sins. 
He  could  not  but  perceive,  that  infidelity, 
pride,  sensuality,  greediness  of  gain,  strangely 
coupled  with  thoughtless  profusion,  contempt 
of  God,  and  a daring  opposition  to  his  will, 
constitute  the  leading  features  of  our  portrait 
as  a nation. 

2.  If  there  he  sins,  which,  though  not  ex- 
pressly enjoined,  are  authorized,  and  to  peo- 
ple who  regard  man  more  than  God,  rendered 
in  a manner  necessary  by  the  sanction  of  the 
egislature,  these,  and  especially  in  a free 
country,  may  be  deemed  national  sins.  Here 
I feel  myself  embarrassed.  As  a private 
member  of  society,  full  of  respect  and  reve- 
rence for  the  authority  to  which,  by  the  pro- 
vidence and  will  of  God,  I owe  a willing  and 
thankful  subjection,  I could  wish  to  be  en- 
tirely silent.  But  I likewise  bear  another 
character.  As  a minister  of  the  gospel,  I 
stand  here  before  a higher  Master.  In  his 
service  I am  commanded  to  be  bold  and  faith- 
ful, and  I dare  not,  in  conscience,  especially 
at  such  a time  and  on  such  an  occasion  as 
this,  wholly  suppress  my  sentiments.  But  I 
wish  to  speak  with  all  the  tenderness  and 
delicacy  the  subject  will  admit. 

In  this  land  of  liberty  the  measures  of 
government  and  of  parliament  are  canvassed 
with  great  freedom,  often  indeed  with  a very 
offensive  intemperance  and  indecency.  It  is, 
however,  one  important  privilege  of  our  happy 
constitution,  that  British  subjects  have  a right 
of  presenting  respectful  petitions  either  to  the 
throne  or  to  the  senate,  when  such  measures 
are  in  contemplation  as  are  apprehended  may 
prove  detrimental  to  the  interests  of  the  na- 
tion or  of  individuals : a right,  which,  upon 
the  ground  of  real  or  pretended  grievances, 
has  been  abundantly  exercised  of  late  years. 
But  it  is  long  since  the  honour  of  God  and 
the  interests  of  true  religion  have  been  the 
objects  of  an  address  or  petition  from  any 
corporate  body  in  the  kingdom.  This  indif- 
ference of  all  parties  to  the  cause  of  God, 
when  all  are  so  attentive  and  feeling  in  cases 
where  they  think  their  own  temporal  con- 
cerns affected,  warrants  one  to  consider  the 
acts  of  the  legislature,  while  no  alteration  is 
desired  by  those  on  whom  they  are  binding, 
as  the  acts  of  the  whole  nation.  Even  the 
edicts  of  an  arbitrary  prince,  whose  will  sup- 
plies the  place  of  law,  might  involve  a nation 
in  guilt,  if  he  enjoined  what  was  contrary  to 
the  commands  of  God,  and  they  through  fear 
obeyed  him.  Much  more  then  may  laws,  made 
by  the  representatives  of  a free  people,  be 
considered  as  acts  of  the  community,  if  they 
excite  no  constitutional  endeavour  for  relief. 

I am  far  from  supposing  that  any  of  our 


j laws  now  in  force  were  formed  with  an  in- 
j tention  of  promoting  sin.  But  some  of  them, 
through  the  prevailing  depravation  of  morals 
j amongst  us,  do  it  eventually.  For  instance, 
the  Test  and  Corporation  acts,  which  require 
every  person  who  has  a post  under  govern- 
ment, or  a commission  in  the  army  or  navy, 
to  qualify  himself  for  his  office  by  receiving 
the  sacrament  of  the  Lord’s  supper,  would 
occasion  no  sin,  if  men  were  generally  in- 
fluenced by  the  fear  of  God,  or  even  by  a prin- 
ciple of  integrity.  They  would  then  rather 
decline  places  of  honour  or  profit,  than  ac- 
cept them  upon  such  terms,  if  they  were  con- 
scious that  their  sentiments  or  conduct  were 
repugnant  to  the  design  of  that  institution. 
But  as  the  case  stands  at  present,  while  gain 
is  preferred  to  godliness,  and  the  love  of  dis- 
tinction or  lucre  is  stronger  than  the  dictates 
of  conscience,  we  frequently  see  professed 
infidels  and  notorious  libertines  approach  the 
Lord’s  table  as  a matter  of  course,  and  pros- 
tituting the  most  solemn  ordinance  of  Chris- 
tianity to  their  ambition  or  interest.  The 
great  number  and  variety  of  appointments 
civil  and  military,  which  cannot  be  legally 
possessed  without  this  qualification,  render 
the  enormity  almost  as  common  as  it  is  hein- 
ous. If  the  Lord  be  a God  of  knowledge,  he 
cannot  be  deceived.  If  he  be  a God  cf  truth 
and  holiness,  he  will  not  be  mocked.  I am 
afraid  we  have  been  long  guilty  of  a con- 
temptuous profanation  of  the  body  and  blood 
of  Christ. 

The  multiplicity  of  oaths,  which  are  inter- 
woven into  almost  every  branch  of  public 
business,  involves  thousands  in  the  habitual 
guilt  of  perjury,  which  perhaps  may  emi- 
nently be  styled  our  national  sin.  Many  of 
them  it  is  true,  do  not  necessarily  lead  to  sin, 
because  honest  and  conscientious  men  may, 
and  do  strictly  observe  them ; but  it  is  to  be 
feared,  the  greater  number  deliberately  and 
customarily  violate  these  solemn  obligations, 
and  take  them  as  often  as  imposed,  without 
hesitation,  and  without  any  design  of  com- 
plying with  them.  Not  a few  of  these  oaths 
are  either  so  worded  or  so  circumstanced, 
that  it  is  morally  impossible  to  fulfil  them ; 
and  if  a person  was  even  to  attempt  it,  he 
would  be  thought  a busy-body  or  a fool.  Yet 
they  must  be  tendered,  and  must  be  taken  as 
a matter  of  form,  when  nothing  more  is  ex- 
pected or  purposed  on  either  side.  The  num- 
ber of  church-wardens  and  constables  who 
are  yearly  sworn,  is  very  great;  and  as  these 
offices  are  chiefly  held  by  rotation,  in  the 
course  of  a few  years,  they  take  in  a con- 
siderable part  of  the  middling  people  in  the 
kingdom.  How  many  or  how  few  of  them 
act  up  to  the  letter  and  the  spirit  of  the  oaths 
they  have  taken,  will  be  known  in  the  day 
when  the  secrets  of  all  hearts  shall  be  re- 
vealed. But  it  is  now  evident,  that,  while 
some,  like  sheep,  tread  without  thought  in 


OF  SUCH  A NATION  AS  THIS. 


897 


the  path  of  custom,  content  to  forswear  them- 
selves because  others  have  done  so  before 
them ; and  while  some  are  hardy  enough  to 
trifle  with  God  and  man  for  profit,  the  laws 
which  enjoin  and  multiply  oaths  do  thereby 
furnish  and  multiply  temptations  to  the  sin 
of  perjury.  To  this  source  we  may  ascribe 
much  of  that  profligacy  and  contempt  of  re- 
ligion, which  we  now  are  called  to  mourn 
over.  The  frequency  of  oaths,  the  irreverent 
manner  in  which  they  are  administered,  and 
the  impunity  with  which  they  are  broken, 
have  greatly  contributed  to  weaken  the  sense 
of  every  moral  obligation,  and  to  spread 
a dissolute  and  daring  spirit  through  the 
land. 

Where  the  laws  have  expressly  interposed 
to  enforce  the  commands  of  God,  if  they  are 
Buffered  by  general  consent  to  lie  dormant, 
and  are  not  carried  into  execution,  the  enor- 
mities which  flow  from  such  connivance, 
come  under  the  denomination  of  national  sins. 
The  profanation  of  the  Lord’s  day,  drunken- 
ness, profane  swearing,  are  contrary,  not  only 
to  the  precepts  of  scripture,  but  to  the  laws 
of  the  land ; and  yet  they  could  hardly  be 
more  prevalent  though  there  were  no  statutes 
in  force  against  them.  As  these  evils  are 
not  apparently  detrimental  to  the  revenue  or 
to  commerce,  they  are  seldom  taken  notice 
of,  except  when  connected  with  some  act  of 
trespass  or  injury  to  individuals.  Very  few 
magistrates  are  concerned  to  enforce  the  ob- 
servation of  these  laws ; and  if  private  per- 
sons sometimes  attempt  it  by  information, 
they  meet  but  little  success,  they  obtain  but 
little  thanks.  The  arts  of  pleading,  the  mi- 
nutiae and  niceties  of  forms  are  employed  to 
entangle  and  discourage  them,  and  to  screen 
offenders.  Their  endeavours  are  usually 
treated  as  officious  and  impertinent,  and  they 
are  stigmatized  with  the  invidious  name  of 
informers.  In  their  own  cause  they  are  al- 
lowed to  be  active  ; but  a man  must  have  a 
good  share  of  resolution,  or  rather  of  divine 
grace,  who  can  withstand  the  reproach  and 
scorn  he  will  bring  upon  himself,  if  he  dare 
to  be  active  in  the  cause  of  God. 

My  subject,  alas ! is  almost  boundless ! 
But  our  time  prescribes  limits  to  my  discourse. 

I must,  however,  hint  my  apprehension,  that 
acts  of  oppression  and  violence,  in  some  parts 
(at  least)  of  our  widely-extended  settlements, 
have  contributed  to  enhance  and  aggravate 
our  national  sin.  If  the  welfare  and  the  lives 
of  thousands  have  been  sacrificed  to  the  in- 
terest of  the  few ; if  the  ravages  of  cruelty 
and  avarice,  though  notorious  and  undeniable, 
have  met  with  no  public  censure  or  punish- 
ment, may  we  not  expect  that  God  himself 
will  avenge  the  oppressed,  and  plead  their 
cause,  not  only  against  their  actual  oppres- 
sors, but  against  the  community  that  refused 
to  hear  their  cries  and  redress  their  wrongs  1 
I am  pained  likewise  to  observe  how  little 


the  calamities  of  war  and  the  shedding  of 
blood  are  laid  to  heart.  War,  when  most  ne- 
cessary and  unavoidable,  is  a dreadful  evil ; 
one  of  the  most  severe  scourges  with  which 
the  great  God  visits  a sinful  world.  Brt,  be- 
cause we,  through  his  mercy,  know  no  more 
of  it  at  home  than  by  what  we  hear  of  the 
sufferings  of  others ; to  their  sufferings,  if  we 
account  them  enemies,  the  hearts  of  many  are 
unfeeling  as  a stone.  They  contemplate  with 
composure  and  apparent  satisfaction,  not  only 
the  horrors  of  a field  of  battle,  but  the  devas- 
tations, flames,  rapes,  and  murders,  which  too 
often  mark  the  progress  of  conquest,  or  the 
retreat  of  disappointed  rage.  May  the.  Lord 
God  keep  such  miseries  far  from  us  ! May  we 
never  have  to  say,  As  we  have  heard,  so  we 
have  seen.  But  there  is  a temper  and  spirit 
too  prevalent  among  us,  which  calls  for  hu- 
miliation— a thirst  of  revenge,  an  eagerness 
for  war,  as  affording  opportunity  for  pillage 
and  plunder,  and  an  indifference  to  the  dis- 
tresses of  our  fellow-creatures,  more  answer- 
able  to  the  idea  we  form  of  the  savages  in 
America,  than  to  that  of  a civilized  and  Chris- 
tian people. 

If  we  consider  the  nation  with  a more  par- 
ticular respect  to  the  profession  of  religion 
amongst  us,  the  prospect  is  equally  dark. 
Though  the  Articles  and  Liturgy,  which  are 
still  retained  as  a public  standard,  express  the 
doctrines  and  spirit  of  the  Reformation,  the 
truths  upon  which  they  are  founded  are  sunk 
into  disrepute.  They  are  heard  from  few  pul- 
pits, they  are  to  be  met  with  in  few  books  of 
modern  divinity.  The  ministers  who  have 
courage  to  preach  agreeably  to  their  required 
subscriptions  are  discountenanced  and  slight- 
ed, if  not  openly  opposed.  In  a word,  the 
gospel  of  Christ,  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus, 
is  little  known  amongst  us,  and  where  it  is 
published,  is  rejected  by  a great  majority  of 
every  rank.  Yet,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  it 
has  been  considerably  revived  and  spread 
amongst  us  of  late  years,  and  (I  hope)  is  still 
spreading.  There  is  a remnant  amongst  us 
who  sigh  and  mourn  for  the  abominations  of 
the  times,  and  have  an  humble  and  awful 
sense  of  the  judgments  of  God  declared 
against  sin.  They  see  black  clouds  gather- 
ing apace  around  us,  and  their  hearts  trem- 
ble at  the  apprehension  of  what  he  may  justly 
inflict  upon  such  a nation  as  this.  But  even 
among  the  people  of  different  denominations 
who  profess  the  truth,  there  is  much  to  be 
lamented.  Alas ! what  sinful  conformity  to 
the  world ! what  coldness  and  indifference 
where  we  ought  to  be  warm,  and  what  un- 
christian heat  and  fierceness  in  enforcing  or 
exploding  lesser  differences  in  sentiment  or 
in  modes  of  worship!  May  we  not  fear, 
lest,  for  the  abatement  of  Christian  love,  the 
violence  of  party  spirit,  and  the  abuse  of  re- 
ligious liberty,  the  Lord  should  visit  his  pro- 
fessing people  with  a rod,  even  though  he 


398 


THE  GUILT  AND  DANGER 


were  still  to  exercise  patience  towards  the 
nation  at  large  ? 

Let  us  then,  having  premised  this  brief, 
but  awful  delineation  of  our  present  state, 
proceed  to  consider, 

II.  What  we  have  just  reason  to  expect, 
if  the  Lord  should  speak  to  us  in  his  dis- 
pleasure, and  av  enge  himself  of  such  a na- 
tion as  this ! Two  obvious  topics  offer  them- 
selves to  assist  our  inquiries. 

1.  What  we  learn  from  scripture,  and  from 
general  history,  of  God's  usual  methods  in 
the  government  of  the  world.  He  avenged 
himself  on  the  old  world,  by  a deluge;  on 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  by  fire  from  heaven. 
Where  are  now  the  mighty  empires  which 
once  extended  over  a great  part  of  the  earth  1 
The  Assyrian,  Persian,  Macedonian,  and  Ro- 
man governments,  arose  and  perished  in  suc- 
cession. What  were  Cyrus,  Alexander,  and 
other  conquerors,  whose  victories  decided  the 
fate  of  nations,  but  instruments  of  divine 
vengeance!  The  sins  of  the  people  against 
whom  they  went,  and  a secret  commission 
from  the  Lord  of  hosts,  directed  their  march, 
and  insured  their  success.  He  has  appointed 
a day  when  he  will  judge  the  world  in  righ- 
teousness, but  the  award  of  that  final  tribunal 
will  be  personal  to  each  one  according  to  his 
works.  Communities,  as  such,  in  their  col- 
lective capacity,  are  visited  and  judged  in  the 
present  life.  And  in  this  respect,  the  scrip- 
ture considers  nations  as  individuals:  each 
having  an  infancy,  growth,  maturity,  and  de- 
clension. Every  succeeding  generation  ac- 
cumulates the  stock  of  national  sin,  and  there 
is  a measure  of  iniquity  which  determines 
the  period  of  kingdoms.  Till  this  measure  is 
filled  up,  the  patience  of  God  waits  for  them, 
but  then  patience  gives  way  to  vengeance. 

Such  has  been  his  uniform  procedure  from 
the  earliest  times,  of  which  either  sacred  or 
profane  history  affords  us  any  information : 
and  undoubtedly  a day  will  come  when  the 
prosperity  of  this  nation  will  cease.  May  it 
be  at  a yet  very  distant  period ! But  there 
are  alarming  symptoms  of  decay  already 
visible  upon  us.  When  God  is  exceedingly 
displeased  with  a people,  it  is  not  necessary, 
in  order  to  their  punishment,  that  he  should 
bury  them  alive  by  an  earthquake,  or  destroy 
them  by  lightning.  If  he  only  leave  them 
to  themselves,  withdraw  his  blessing  from 
their  counsels,  and  his  restraint  from  their 
passions,  their  ruin  follows  of  course ; accord- 
ing to  the  necessary  order  and  connection  of 
causes  and  effects.  The  destruction  of  Jeru- 
salem affords  a striking  proof  and  illustration 
of  this  remark.  Our  Saviour  foretold,  that 
the  calamities  of  that  siege  would  be  greater 
and  more  aggravated  than  had  ever  been 
known  from  the  creation ; and  infidels  must 
confess,  that  the  relation  of  Josephus,  who 
was  an  eye-witness  of  that  catastrophe,  ex- 
hibits such  scenes  of  distress  as  cannot  be 


paralleled  in  any  other  history.  Yet  the  Ro« 
man  armies,  which  were  led  on  by  an  invisi- 
ble hand  to  accomplish  the  prediction,  were 
not  headed  by  a Nero,  or  a Caligula,  whose 
savage  disposition  and  thirst  of  blood  might 
have  prompted  them  to  unrelenting  slaugh- 
ter ; but  by  Titus,  who,  for  his  singular  mo- 
deration and  clemency,  obtained  the  title  of 
Delicice  humani  generis , the  friend  and  de- 
light of  mankind.  He  desired  not  their  de- 
struction; he  entreated  them  to  have  pity  on 
themselves ; but  in  vain : they  were  judicial- 
ly infatuated,  and  devoted  to  ruin.  If  God 
gives  up  a people  to  the  way  of  their  own 
hearts,  they  will,  they  must  perish.  When 
a general  corruption  of  morals  takes  place, 
when  private  interest  extinguishes  all  sense 
of  public  virtue,  when  a profligate  and  venal 
spirit  has  infected  every  rank  and  order  of 
the  state,  when  presumptuous  security  and 
dissipation  increase  in  proportion  as  danger 
approaches  ; when,  after  repeated  disappoint- 
ments, contempt  of  God,  and  vain  confidence 
in  imagined  resources  of  their  own,  grow 
bolder  and  stronger, — then  there  is  reason  to 
fear,  that  the  sentence  is  already  gone  forth, 
and  that  the  execution  of  it  is  at  hand. 

2.  The  progress  of  our  public  affairs  for 
some  years  past,  too  evidently  confirms  these 
general  principles,  brings  the  application 
home  to  ourselves,  and  loudly  warns  us  what 
we  are  yet  to  expect,  if  we  persist  in  hard- 
ening ourselves  against  the  Lord.  How  ra- 
pid the  change  we  have  seen  ! From  w?hat 
small  beginnings  to  wdiat  extensive  conse- 
quences ! The  cloud  which  now  overspreads 
the  heavens  with  blackness,  was  not  long 
since  no  larger  than  a man’s  hand.  I sup- 
pose none  who  were  actively  concerned  in 
our  public  commotions  during  their  early 
stage,  had  the  least  apprehension  that  things 
would  have  proceeded  to  such  calamitous  and 
diffusive  extremities.  But  sin  abounded,  and 
the  Lord  was  displeased.  Thus  we  may 
easily  account  for  every  mistake  and  mis- 
carriage, for  the  first  rise,  and  the  long  con- 
tinuance of  the  war.  The  connection  be- 
tween us  and  the  Americans  wTas  too  nearly 
founded  in  relation,  too  closely  cemented  by 
mutual  interest,  to  be  so  suddenly  broken,  if 
their  sins  and  ours  had  not  concurred  in  ope- 
ration to  bring  distress  both  upon  them  and  us. 
After  a great  expense  of  treasure  and  blood, 
instead  of  the  re-union  we  hoped  for,  we  have 
been  successively  involved  in  war  with 
France,  Spain,  and  Holland.  And  it  is  pos- 
sible that  every  power  in  Europe,  either  is, 
or  soon  will  be,  openly  or  secretly  against  us. 
Nor  can  l omit,  upon  this  occasion,  the  un- 
precedented violence  of  the  late  dreadful 
hurricanes  in  the  West  Indies.  Though 
infidels  and  petty  reasoners  will  doubtless 
labour  to  persuade  themselves  that  they  pro- 
ceeded merely  from  natural  causes,  Chris- 
tians, I trust,  will  acknowledge  the  voice  of 


OF  SUCH  A NATION  AS  THIS. 


God  speaking1,  and  speaking  to  us  out  of  the 
whirlwind.  It  is  true,  he  spoke  by  them  to 
our  enemies  likewise,  for  they  likewise  are 
sinners.  May  both  they  and  we  be  humbled 
before  him,  and  learn,  that  as  sin  instigates 
and  arms  us  to  destroy  each  other,  so  when 
he  is  pleased  to  take  the  work  into  his  own 
hands,  he  can  strike  such  a blow,  as  shall  for 
the  time  suspend  our  feeble  hostilities,  and 
by  involving  us  in  a common  calamity,  make 
us,  notwithstanding  our  enmity,  the  objects 
of  mutual  commiseration.  “ The  Lord’s  hand 
is  lifted  up,”  Isa.  xxvi.  11.  This  part  of  an 
ancient  prophecy  is  fulfilled  in  our  view : the 
next  clause,  “ They  will  not  see,”  is,  alas ! 
fulfilled  likewise,  by  the  amazing  insensibil- 
ity and  infatuation  which  still  prevails  among 
us.  It  follows,  “ But  they  shall  see.”  What 
still  greater  evils  may  overtake  us,  before 
this  clause  also  is  accomplished  to  the  glory 
of  God,  and  our  due  humiliation,  who  can 
say  1 Alas  ! who  that  loves  his  country,  but 
must  tremble  at  the  prospects  of  the  judg- 
ments yet  impending  over  us,  if  he  should 
still  proceed  to  plead  his  own  cause,  till  he  is 
fully  avenged  on  such  a nation  as  this ! — 
To  relieve  my  thoughts,  I gladly  hasten  to 
inquire, 

III.  Whether  there  be  any  hope  that  such 
a nation  as  this  may  yet  escape  deserved 
ruin;  and  if  there  be,  in  what  way  this 
mercy  is  to  be  sought,  and  expected  1 I con- 
fess I have  little  hopes  of  it,  but  upon  one  or 
other  of  the  following  suppositions. 

1.  If  the  Lord  be  graciously  pleased  to 
succeed  the  professed  design  of  this  day’s 
service,  and  to  put  forth  that  power  which 
accompanied  his  message  by  Jonah  to  Ni- 
neveh, so  that  a general  spirit  of  repentance 
and  humiliation  may  spread  throughout  the 
land — If  he  bow  the  hearts  of  both  rulers  and 
people,  to  confess  and  forsake  those  sins 
which  have  awakened  his  displeasure — If  the 
laws  which  concern  his  honour,  will,  and 
worship,  be  speedily  and  impartially  enforced ; 
and  profaneness  and  immorality  discounte- 
nanced and  suppressed — If,  instead  of  trust- 
ing in  fleets  and  armies,  we  acknowledge  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  and  lock  up  to  him  for  a bless- 
ing— If  men  fearing  God  and  hating  covet- 
ousness, (Exodus  xviii.  21,)  are  raised  up  to 
assist  in  our  councils,  and  to  stand  forth  in 
their  country’s  cause ; men  who  will  rely  on 
his  guidance  and  protection,  and  disdain  the 
little  arts  and  intrigues  on  which  alone  short- 
sighted politicians  depend  for  the  success  of 
their  measures — should  T live  to  see  such  a 
happy  internal  change,  I should  hope,  that 
notwithstanding  our  great  provocations,  the 
Lord,  whose  mercies  are  infinite,  would  be 
yet  entreated  for  us ; that  he  would  turn  from 
the  fierceness  of  his  anger,  maintain  our 
tranquillity  at  home,  and,  by  his  wisdom  and 
his  influence  over  the  hearts  of  men,  put  an 


399 

honourable  and  satisfactory  end  to  the  un- 
happy war  in  which  we  are  engaged. 

2.  However  the  bulk  of  the  nation  may 
determine,  if  the  remnant  who  know  his 
name,  and  have  tasted  of  his  love,  should  be 
deeply  impressed  with  a concern  for  his  glory, 
and  forsaking  their  little  animosities  and 
party-interests,  should  unite  in  application  to 
the  throne  of  grace,  and  be  found  in  those 
duties  and  practices  which  their  profession  of 
the  gospel,  and  the  state  of  things  around 
them  require,  there  is  yet  hope.  For  the 
prayers  of  God’s  people  have  a powerful 
efficacy.  The  holy  and  benevolent  importu- 
nity of  Abraham  would  have  prevailed  in 
favour  even  of  Sodom,  if  ten  righteous  per- 
sons had  been  found  in  it,  Gen.  xviii.  When 
Sennacherib  invaded  Judea,  had  overrun  the 
greatest  part  of  the  country,  and  thought 
Jerusalem  would  be  an  easy  conquest,  Heze- 
kiah,  though  he  took  such  precautions  as  pru- 
dence suggested,  did  not  defeat  him  by  arms, 
(Isa.  xxxvii.)  but  by  prayer.  In  the  prayers 
of  true  believers  is  our  best  visible  resource. 
These  are  the  chariots  and  horsemen  of  Is- 
rael. United  prayer,  humiliation  of  heart, 
a mourning  for  sin  in  secret,  and  a faithful 
testimony  against  it  in  public,  will  more  es- 
sentially contribute  to  the  safety  and  welfare 
of  the  nation,  than  all  our  military  prepara- 
tions without  them.  We  boast  of  our  navy, 
and  it  has  often  proved,  by  the  blessing  of  God, 
our  bulwark;  but  how  easily  can  he  who 
walketh  upon  the  wings  of  the  wind,  dash  the 
best  appointed  fleet  to  pieces  against  the 
rocks,  or  sink  it  like  lead  in  the  mighty 
waters  ! We  boast  of  our  troops;  but  he  can 
easily  cut  them  off  with  sickness,  give  them  up 
to  a spirit  of  discord,  or  impress  them  with  a 
sudden  terror,  so  that  the  stoutest  heart  shall 
tremble,  and  the  mighty  warriors  turn  pale  and 
drop  their  weapons ! A thousand  unforeseen 
events  and  contingencies  are  always  at  his 
disposal,  to  blast  and  disappoint  the  best  con- 
certed enterprises ; for  that  the  race  is  not 
necessarily  sure  to  the  swift,  nor  the  battle 
to  the  strong,  is  not  only  asserted  in  the 
scripture,  but  confirmed  by  the  experience 
and  observation  of  all  ages,  Psalm  xxxiii. 
16,  17 ; Ecclesiastes  ix.  11.  But  his  people 
are  precious  in  his  sight,  and  their  prayers 
he  will  hear.  Unknown  and  unnoticed  as 
they  are  in  the  world,  he  highly  values  them. 
He  has  redeemed  them  by  his  blood.  He  in- 
habits them  by  his  Spirit.  He  has  prepared 
heaven  for  them,  and  the  earth  itself  is  con- 
tinued for  their  sakes,  and  shall  be  destroyed 
when  they  are  all  removed  from  it.  They 
are  the  light,  the  salt,  the  strength,  and  the 
safety  of  the  nations  among  which  they  are 
dispersed,  Matt.  v.  13,  14.  Except  the  Lord 
of  hosts  had  left  a small  remnant  of  these 
among  us,  we  should  long  ago  have  been  as 
Sodom,  and  made  like  unto  Gomorrah,  Isa.  i. 


400 


THE  GUILT  AND  DANGER 


9.  To  his  attention  to  their  prayers  and  con-  { 
cerns,  I doubt  not  the  preservation  of  this  | 
city  at  the  time  of  the  late  horrible  riots  may  } 
be  ascribed.  I wish  I could  now  recal  to  j 
your  minds  the  emotions  which  some  of  you  j 
then  felt,  when  your  countenances  bore  a i 
strong  impression  of  your  inward  anxiety,  j 
Those  terrors  came  upon  you  unexpectedly,  j 
and  though  they  are  forgotten  by  too  many, 
scenes  equally  distressing  may  present  them- 
selves before  you  are  aware.  O may  he  in  [ 
mercy  animate  this  remnant,  now7  to  stand  in  j 
the  breach  as  one  man,  and  to  wrestle  for  a ' 
sinful  land ! Then  w?e  may  at  least  arise  to 
the  hope  of  the  Ninevites,  Who  can  tell  but 
the  Lord  may  turn  from  his  fierce  anger,  that 
we  perish  not  1 Jonah,  iii.  9. 

Let  me  now  close  w7ith  an  address, 

1.  To  such  of  you  in  this  assembly  as  fear 
the  Lord.  A part  of  you  are  poor  and  afflict- 
ed people,  and  by  your  obscure  situation  in 
life,  are  precluded  from  a very  distinct 
knowledge  of  the  causes,  the  present  effects, 
and  possible  consequences  of  the  war.  You 
live  in  a happy  ignorance  of  what  passes  in 
the  w'orld,  and  take  no  part  in  the  disputes  j 
which,  in  many  places,  ensnare  and  embitter  t 
the  spirits  even  of  professors  of  the  gospel.  | 
Your  principles  inspire  you  with  sentiments  j 
of  duty  to  government,  with  the  love  of 
peace,  and  with  a just  sense  of  the  value  of  j 
your  privileges,  civil  and  religious.  But  | 
though  you  are  poor,  and  can  serve  your  I 
country  in  no  other  way,  you  may  serve  it 
effectually  by  your  prayers.  You  have  ac- 
cess to  the  throne  of  grace.  Intercede  there- 
fore for  a land  that  lieth  in  wickedness,  be 
concerned  for  the  honour  of  his  name,  for 
the  blindness  and  misery  around  you.  It  may 
be  the  Lord  will  be  entreated  of  you,  and  for 
your  sakes,  and  for  the  sake  of  such  as  you, 
command  the  destroying  angel  to  stay  his 
hand. 

Those  of  you  who  have  better  opportunity 
of  knowing  the  state  of  our  public  affairs,  ! 
have  likewise  a more  extensive  sphere  of  : 
service.  You  will,  I hope,  improve  your  in-  i 
fluence  in  your  families  and  connections,  and  ! 
by  your  advice  and  example,  endeavour  to  j 
awaken  all  w7ith  whom  you  converse  to  join  I 
in  promoting  the  design  of  this  day’s  service. 

I call  upon  all  who  have  ears  to  hear,  and  | 
eyes  to  see  the  voice  and  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  I 
the  rich  and  the  poor,  the  young  and  the 
aged,  to  be  faithful,  circumspect,  and  zealous  j 
in  your  several  stations. 

Should  w7rath  be  decreed,  and  there  be  no  ■ 
remedy,  at  least  you  shall  prevail  for  your- 
selves.  You  shall  know  that  the  Lord  w7hom  ' 
you  serve  is  a strong-hold  in  the  day  of  trou- j 
ble,  and  is  mindful  of  them  w ho  put  their  j 
trust  in  him.  You  can  hardly  be  too  much 
alarmed  for  the  nation,  but  for  yourselves  you  J 
have  no  just  cause  of  fear.  We  are  commis- 1 


sioned  to  say  to  the  righteous,  It  shall  be 
well  with  him,  Isa.  iii.  10.  The  Saviour,  to 
whom  you  have  fled  for  refuge  has  all  power 
in  heaven  and  earth.  He  will  keep  you  as 
the  apple  of  his  eye,  and  hide  you  under  the 
shadow  of  his  wings.  He  can  screen  you 
from  evil,  though  thousands  and  ten  thou- 
sands should  suffer  and  fall  around  you.  Or 
if  he  appoints  you  a share  in  suffering,  he 
will  be  with  you  to  support  and  comfort  you, 
and  to  sanctity  all  your  troubles.  His  w ord 
to  you  is,  When  you  hear  of  wars  and  ru- 
mours of  w’ars,  see  that  ye  be  not  troubled, 
Matthew  xxiv.  6.  Fear  not  them  who,  at 
the  most,  can  but  kill  the  body.  The  light 
of  his  countenance  is  sufficient  to  cheer  you 
in  the  darkest  hour,  and  your  best  interest, 
your  everlasting  inheritance  is  safe  beyond 
the  reach  of  enemies,  in  a kingdom,  (how 
unlike  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth !)  which 
cannot  be  shaken,  Hebrews  xii.  28.  Your 
life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God ; and  wrhen 
Christ,  who  is  our  life,  shall  appear,  then 
shall  you  also  appear  with  him  in  glory,  Col. 
iii.  3,  4.  Thither  neither  sin  nor  sorrow  shall 
be  able  to  follow  you.  Then  your  sun  shall 
go  dowm  no  more,  and  the  days  of  your 
mourning  shall  be  ended.  In  patience  there- 
fore possess  your  souls.  Be  not  moved  by 
appearances,  but  remember  all  your  concerns 
are  in  the  hands  of  him  who  loved  you,  and 
gave  himself  for  you.  Let  those  who  know 
him  not,  tremble  when  he  ariseth  to  judg- 
ment, and  to  shake  terribly  the  earth ; but  ff) 
you  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  your  hearts, 
make  him  your  fear  and  your  dread,  and  he 
shall  be  to  you  for  a sanctuary,  (Isaiah,  viii. 
13,  14;)  and  in  a little  time  he  will  come  to 
receive  you  to  himself,  and  to  wipe  all  tears 
from  your  eyes. 

2.  But  what  can  I say  to  the  rest  of  the 
congregation  1 Though  they  are  all  met  in  the 
same  place,  and  outwardly  engaged  in  the 
same  service,  so  that,  to  the  eye  of  man,  w^e 
may  appear  as  one  people,  animated  with  one 
and  the  same  desires,  the  eye  of  the  Searcher 
of  hearts  sees  and  notices  a real  and  im- 
portant distinction  amongst  us.  He  draws, 
w’ith  infallible  certainty,  the  line  of  separa- 
tion. He  knows  who  are  truly  on  his  side, 
whose  hearts  are  tender,  (2  Chron.  xxxiv. 
27,)  who  are  afraid  of  his  judgments,  and 
are  mourning  for  their  own  sins,  and  the 
sins  of  the  nation : and  he  knows  and  sees 
that  too  many  here  have  neither  his  fear  nor 
his  love  abiding  in  them.  You  may  comply 
with  an  outw’ard  form,  and  abstain  from  a 
meal,  but  you  neither  abstain  from  sin,  nor 
desire  to  do  so.  To-day  you  look  serious,  and 
by  your  presence  seem  to  assent  to  the  con- 
fessions which  have  been  made,  and  the 
prayers  which  have  been  offered  in  your 
hearing.  To-morrow,  I fear,  will  show  that 
all  your  semblance  of  seriousness  was  bnt 


OF  SUCH  A NATION  AS  THIS. 


401 


hypocrisy : and  that  though  you  drew  nigh 
to  God  with  your  lips,  (Mark  viii.  6,)  your 
hearts  were  far  from  him.  But  be  not  de- 
ceived, God  will  not  be  mocked.  You  have 
contributed  largely  to  swell  the  measure  of 
our  national  sin ; herein  you  have  been  hearty 
and  persevering.  Do  not  think  that  the  lip- 
service  of  a single  day  will  make  any  altera- 
tion either  in  your  state  or  in  your  guilt. 
Rather  that  pretended  humiliation,  by  which 
you  act  towards  God  as  if  you  thought  he 
was  altogether  such  a one  as  yourselves, 
(Ps.  1.  21,)  is  an  aggravation  of  your  wick- 
edness, and  no  better  than  affronting  him  to 
his  face.  Yet  I am  glad  of  an  opportunity 
of  speaking  to  you.  Oh,  that  I could  prevail 
on  you  to  seek  him  in  earnest  while  he  is  to 
be  found  ! You  cannot  serve,  or  love,  or  trust 
him,  unless  you  be  born  again.  But  Jesus 
is  exalted  to  produce  this  change  in  the  heart 
of  a sinner,  by  the  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit, 
and  to  give  faith,  repentance,  and  remission 
of  sins.  Could  I convince  you  of  this,  the 
rest  would  be  easy.  Then,  feeling  your 
wants  and  misery,  you  would  ask  mercy  of 
him  ; and  asking  you  would  surely  receive ; 
for  he  has  said,  Him  that  cometh  unto  me,  I 


will  in  nowise  cast  out,  John  vi.  37.  O Lord, 
do  thou  convince  them  by  thine  own  power ! 
Open  the  blind  eyes,  unstop  the  deaf  ears, 
and  turn  the  stony  heart  into  flesh. 

Till  this  be  done  you  are  neither  fit  to  live, 
nor  fit  to  die.  What  will  you  do  in  a day 
of  public  calamity,  should  you  live  to  see  it, 
if  you  should  be  despoiled  of  your  earthly 
comforts,  and  have  no  share  in  the  consolation 
of  the  gospel  1 But  should  the  Lord  answer 
prayer  and  prolong  our  national  prosperity, 
still  you  must  be  ruined  unless  you  are  saved 
by  grace.  For  what  will  you  do  in  the  hour 
of  death?  This  is  inevitable,  and  may,  for 
ought  you  know,  be  very  near.  If  I could 
assure  you  of  peace  and  wealth  for  the  term 
of  a long:  life,  still  without  the  peace  of  God, 
and  an  interest  in  the  unsearchable  riches 
of  Christ,  you  must  be  miserable  at  the  last, 
and  lie  down  in  sorrow. 

But  oh  that  we  may  rather  with  one  con- 
sent search  and  try  our  ways,  and  turn  to  the 
Lord  from  whom  we  have  so  greatly  revolt- 
ed ! To  us,  indeed,  belong  shame  and  con- 
fusion of  face,  but  to  the  Lord  our  God  belong 
mercies  and  forgiveness,  though  we  have  re- 
belled against  him. 


VOL.  II. 


3£ 


A SERMON 

PREACHED  IN  THE  PARISH  CHURCH  OF  ST.  PAUL’S,  DEPTFORD, 
ON  SUNDAY,  MAY  7,  1786, 

ON  THE  LAMENTED  OCCASION  OF  THE  DEATH  OF 

RICHARD  CONYERS,  L.  L.  D. 


LATE  RECTOR  OF  THAT  PARISH. 


So,  being  affectionately  desirous  of  you,  we  were  willing  to  have  imparted  unto  you , 
not  the  gospel  of  God  only,  but  also  our  own  souls,  because  ye  were  dear  unto  us. — 
1 Thess.  ii.  8. 


An  active  undaunted  zeal  in  the  service 
of  God,  and  a peculiar  tenderness  of  affection 
towards  his  people,  were  happily  and  emi- 
nently combined  in  the  character  of  St.  Paul. 
The  latter  appears  in  none  of  his  writing’s  to 
greater  advantage  than  in  this  Epistle,  and 
particularly  in  this  chapter.  He  had  been  | 
made  very  useful  to  the  Thessalonians,  and 
was  greatly  beloved  by  them.  Many  of  them 
had  received  the  gospel  w’hich  he  preached, 
not  in  word  only,  but  in  power;  and  were 
effectually  turned,  by  grace,  from  dead  idols, 
to  serve  the  living  and  the  true  God,  1 
Thess.  i.  5 — 9.  They  likewise  were  very 
dear  to  him;  and  being  now  at  a distance 
from  them,  he  writes  to  confirm  their  faith 
and  hope,  to  animate  and  direct  their  con- 
duct. And  he  takes  many  occasions  of  re- 
minding them,  of  the  peculiar  regard  he  had 
borne  them  from  the  first,  and  how  near  they 
still  were  to  his  heart;  that  his  love  for  them, 
which  had  sweetened  all  his  labours  and 
sufferings  when  he  was  among  them,  made 
him  still  solicitous  for  their  welfare,  and  en- 
abled him  to  rejoice  on  their  account,  while 
he  was  suffering  bonds  and  imprisonment  at 
Rome. 

The  verse  I have  read  is  one  passage,  out 
of  many  in  the  New  Testament,  where  our 
translation  does  not  fully  come  up  to  the  spi- 
rit and  beauty  of  the  original.  Not  that  it  is 
unfaithful  or  faulty;  it  is  chiefly  owing  to 
the  difference  of  the  languages.  I believe 
we  have  no  single  word  in  the  English 
tongue,  to  express  the  energy  of  the  Greek 
term  »iunt9  which  he  uses  in  the  begin- 


ning of  the  verse ; and  therefore  our  transla- 
tors have  employed  two,  “ Being  affection- 
ately desirous  of  you.”  It  denotes  a desire 
connected  with  the  finest  and  most  tender 
feelings  of  the  heart ; not  like  the  degrading 
selfish  desire  of  the  miser  for  gold ; but 
such  an  emotion  (according  to  his  own  beau- 
tiful illustration  in  the  preceding  verse)  as 
that  with  which  the  nurse,  the  mother  while 
a nurse,  contemplates  her  own  child.  Being 
thus  disposed  towards  you,  “ we  were  will- 
ing”— but  the  Greek  ivS***^*  is  more  em- 
phatical.  We  esteemed  it  our  pleasure,  our 
joy,  the  very  height  of  our  wishes,  “ to  im- 
part unto  you  the  gospel  of  God,”  to  put  you 
into  our  own  place,  to  communicate  to  you, 
by  the  gospel,  all  that  comfort  and  strength, 
and  joyful  hope,  which  we  have  received 
from  it  ourselves.  Yea,  further,  to  have 
imparted  to  you  our  own  souls  also ; that  is, 
to  devote  our  whole  strength,  time,  and 
study,  to  this  very  end,  to  spend  and  be 
spent  for  you,  and  to  be  ready  to  seal  our 
testimony  with  our  blood,  if  this  were  need- 
ful to  your  establishment,  “ because  ye  are 
dear”  (xyu^roi,)  exceedingly  dear  unto  us. 
The  same  word  is  used  (for  the  language  of 
mortals  will  not  afford  a stronger,)  Matt.  iii. 
17.  “ This  is  my  beloved  Son.” 

When  I thought  of  preaching  to  you  this 
day,  and  of  mingling  my  tears  with  yours,  the 
occasion  suggested  the  choice  I have  made 
of  a text;  and  the  countenances  of  many 
of  you  convince  me  that  I have  not  made 
an  improper  choice.  Another  congregation 
might  have  been  led,  from  what  I have  al- 
402 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  DR.  CONYERS. 


403 


ready  said,  to  sympathize  with  the  Thessa- 
lonians,  in  what  they  must  have  felt  when 
they  were  deprived  of  such  a minister  and 
friend ; but  your  minds  are  engaged  by  a sense 
of  your  own  loss.  You  have  reason.  You 
acknowledge  and  feel,  that  if  I wished  (as  I 
certainly  did)  to  select  a text  which  might, 
while  you  heard  it,  strongly  impress  your 
minds  with  the  idea  of  my  dear  friend,  your 
late  pastor,  and  recal  to  your  remembrance, 
his  principles,  actions,  motives,  and  aims, 
how  he  spoke,  and  how  he  lived  among  you, 
I could  hardly  have  found  a passage  in  the 
whole  scripture  more  directly  suited  to  my 
purpose.  I believe  no  minister  in  the  present 
age,  nor  perhaps  in  any  past  age,  since  the 
apostle’s  days,  could  have  a better  warrant 
than  Dr.  Conyers,  to  adopt  these  words  of 
St.  Paul  as  expressive  of  his  own  spirit  and 
character.  He  had  a very  tender  affection  for 
you  : it  was  his  earnest  desire,  and  his  great 
delight,  to  impart  unto  you  the  gospel  of  God, 
because  you  were  dear  to  him : and  it  may  be 
said  of  him  with  peculiar  propriety,  that  in 
this  service  of  love,  he  imparted  to  you  his 
own  soul,  or  life  also.  You  have  not  forgot- 
ten, surely  you  never  can  forget,  the  very 
solemn  and  affecting  manner  in  which  his 
ministry  among  you  closed.  Whether,  while 
he  was  reading  the  apostle’s  farewell  dis- 
course to  the  elders  of  the  church  of  Ephesus, 
(Acts  xx.  18 — 35,)  which  occurred  in  the  se- 
cond lesson  for  the  day,  he  had  a presage  that 
you  would  see  his  face  no  more,  we  know  not. 
Had  he  been  certain  of  it,  he  could  not  have 
taken  your  consciences  more  earnestly  to 
witness,  that  he  was  clear  of  your  blood,  and 
that  he  had  not  shunned  to  declare  unto  you 
the  whole  counsel  of  God.  However,  the 
event  proved,  that  you  then  saw  and  heard 
him  for  the  last  time.  His  strength  and  life 
were  prolonged  to  finish  his  discourse,  and 
to  pronounce  over  you  his  parting  blessing, 
which  he  had  scarcely  finished,  before  he  was 
called  home  to  his  Master’s  joy.  “ Blessed  is 
that  servant,  whom  his  Lord,  when  he  cometh, 
shall  find  so  doing,”  Luke  xii.  43. 

In  considering  the  grounds  of  the  apostle’s 
love  to  the  Thessalonians,  and  the  proofs 
which  he  gave  of  it,  the  subject  will  fre- 
quently lead  me  to  bear  a testimony  to  the 
grace  of  God,  vouchsafed  to  your  late  minis- 
ter, of  whom  we  may  truly  say,  he  was  a fol- 
lower of  St.  Paul,  as  Paul  also  was  of  Christ, 
1 Cor.  xi.  1. 

I.  The  first  ground,  the  original  cause  of 
the  apostle’s  love  to  the  brethren,  was  the 
love  of  Christ.  His  unwearied  endeavours, 
in  the  midst  of  the  hardships  and  dangers 
which  awaited  him  in  every  place,  to  pro- 
mote the  happiness  of  mankind,  made  him 
appear  to  many  who  were  unacquainted  with 
the  motives  of  his  conduct,  as  though  he  were 
beside  himself.  The  apology  he  offered  was, 
the  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us,  2 Cor.  v. 


14.  Till  he  knew  the  Lord,  he  acted  very 
differently.  While  he  was  under  the  power 
of  prejudice  and  ignorance,  he  verily  thought 
that  he  ought  to  do  many  things  against  the 
name  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  (Acts  ix.  1;  xxvi. 
9,)  and  therefore  breathed  out  threaten ings 
and  slaughter  against  his  people.  But  Jesus 
whom  he  persecuted  appeared  to  him  in  his 
way  to  Damascus,  convinced  him  of  his  sin, 
vouchsafed  him  pardon,  and  commissioned 
him  to  preach  the  faith  which  he  had  labour- 
ed to  destroy,  Gal.  i.  23.  From  that  time  he 
esteemed  himself  a chief  sinner,  (1  Tim.  i.  15, 
16,)  and  because  much  had  been  forgiven  him, 
he  loved  much.  He  devoted  his  whole  future 
life  to  proclaim  the  glory  and  grace  of  his  Sa- 
viour, and  to  propose  himself  as  a pattern  of 
his  long-suffering  and  mercy  to  all  around 
him,  that  they  likewise  might  believe  and  be 
saved.  He  was  conscious  of  his  Saviour’s 
just  right  to  reign  in  every  heart.  And  they 
who,  by  receiving  the  gospel  which  he 
preached,  entered  into  his  views,  and  loved 
the  Lord  whom  he  loved,  instantly  became 
dear  to  him  for  his  Lord’s  sake,  whether  they 
were  Jews  or  Gentiles,  rich  or  poor,  bond  or 
free.  It  is  probable,  that  all  who  are  con- 
vinced and  enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
having  a clearer  knowledge  of  the  nature, 
number,  and  aggravation  of  their  own  sins, 
than  they  can  possibly  have  of  those  of  any 
other  person,  account  themselves  among  the 
chief  of  sinners,  though  many  of  them  may 
have  been  preserved  from  gross  enormities. 
I never  heard  that  your  minister  was  in- 
fluenced, like  Saul  of  Tarsus,  by  a bitter 
persecuting  spirit ; and  I believe  his  beha- 
viour was  moral  and  exemplary  from  his 
youth.  When  he  entered  upon  his  ministry 
at  his  beloved  Helmsley,  in  Yorkshire,  he 
found  the  place  ignorant  and  dissolute  to  a 
proverb.  At  this  early  period  of  life,  he  feared 
God,  and  he  hated  wickedness.  With  much 
zeal  and  diligence  he  attempted  the  reforma- 
tion of  his  parish,  which  was  of  great  extent, 
and  divided  into  several  hamlets.  He  preach- 
ed frequently  in  them  all.  He  encouraged  his 
parishioners  to  come  to  his  house.  He  dis- 
tributed them  into  little  companies,  that  he 
might  instruct  them  with  more  convenience; 
he  met  them  in  rotation  by  appointment.  In 
this  manner,  long  before  he  fully  understood 
that  gospel  of  God  which  of  late  years  he  so 
successfully  imparted  to  you,  I have  been  as- 
sured that  he  often  preached  or  exhorted  pub- 
licly, or  more  privately,  twenty  times  in  a 
week.  These  labours  were  not  in  vain:  a 
great,  visible,  and  almost  universal  reforma- 
tion took  place.  About  the  time  I am  speak- 
ing of,  a clergyman  in  his  neighbourhood 
made  very  honourable  mention  of  Dr.  Con- 
yers, in  a letter  to  the  Society  for  Promoting 
Christian  Knowledge,  (which  I have  seen  in 
print,)  as  perhaps  the  most  exemplary,  in- 
defatigable, and  successful  parochial  minister 


404 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  DR.  CONYERS. 


in  the  kingdom ; yet  in  the  midst  of  applause 
and  apparent  success,  he  was  far  from  being 
satisfied  with  himself.  He  did  what  he  could  : 
he  did  more  than  most  others;  but  he  felt 
there  was  something  still  wanting,  though 
for  a time  he  knew  not  what;  but  he  was  de- 
sirous to  know : he  studied  the  scriptures,  and 
he  prayed  to  the  Father  of  lights.  They  who 
thus  seek  shall  surely  find.  Important  con- 
sequences often  follow  from  a sudden  involun- 
tary turn  of  thought.  One  day  an  expres- 
sion of  St.  Paul’s,  “ the  unsearchable  riches 
of  Christ,”  (Ephes.  iii.  8,)  engaged  his  atten- 
tion. He  had  often  read  the  passage,  but 
never  noticed  the  word  unsearchable  before. 
The  gospel,  in  his  view  of  it,  had  appeared 
plain,  and  within  his  comprehension ; but  the 
apostle  spoke  of  it  as  containing  something 
that  was  unsearchable.  A conclusion  there- 
fore forced  itself  upon  him,  that  the  idea  he 
had  hitherto  affixed  to  the  word  gospel,  could 
not  be  the  same  with  that  of  the  apostle. 
From  this  beginning  he  was  soon  led  to  per- 
ceive, that  his  whole  scheme  was  essentially 
defective,  that  his  people,  however  outwardly 
reformed,  were  not  converted. — He  now  felt 
himself  a sinner,  and  felt  his  need  of  faith  in 
a Saviour,  in  a manner  he  had  never  done 
before.  Thus  he  was  brought  with  the  apos- 
tle, to  account  his  former  gain  but  loss  : the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ  opened  to  his 
mind,  he  received  power  to  believe,  his  per- 
plexities were  removed,  and  he  rejoiced  with 
joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  He  pre- 
sently told  his  people,  with  that  amiable  sim- 
plicity which  so  strongly  marked  his  charac- 
ter, that  though  he  had  endeavoured  to  show 
them  the  way  of  salvation,  he  had  misled 
them  ; that  what  both  he  and  they  had  been 
building  was  not  upon  the  right  foundation. 
He  from  that  time  preached  Jesus  Christ,  and 
him  crucified,  (1  Cor.  ii.  2.  i.  30,)  as  the  only 
ground  of  hope  for  sinners,  and  the  only  source 
from  whence  they  could  derive  wisdom,  righ- 
teousness, sanctification,  and  redemption.  The 
Lord  so  blessed  his  word,  that  the  greater  part 
of  the  people  who  were  most  attached  to  him 
soon  adopted  his  views,  and  many  more  were 
successively  added  to  them.  This  change  in 
his  sentiments  and  manner  of  preaching, 
though  it  added  efficacy  to  his  moral  instruc- 
tions, and  endeared  him  to  his  people  at  home, 
lost  him  much  of  that  high  estimation  in  which 
he  had  been  held  abroad.  But  he  knew  the 
gospel  of  God  too  well  to  be  ashamed  of  it : 
whatever  disgrace  he  suffered  in  such  a cause, 
he  could  bear  with  patience.  He  loved  his 
people  and  was  beloved  by  them ; and  their 
advance  in  comfort  and  holiness  made  him 
ample  compensation  for  the  unkindness  of 
those  who  knew  not  what  they  did.  And 
thus,  when  the  providence  of  God  removed 
him  hither,  the  constraining  love  of  Christ, 
which  had  long  been  the  great  principle  of 
his  conduct,  disposed  him  to  love  you  before 


he  saw  you ; and  he  came  among  you  with 
an  earnest  desire  to  impart  unto  you  the  gos- 
pel of  God,  and  his  own  soul  also,  because 
from  the  moment  that  he  accepted  the  charge 
over  you,  he  was  affectionately  desirous  of 
you. 

The  regard  of  the  apostle  to  the  Thessalo- 
nians  was  undoubtedly  heightened  in  propor- 
tion as  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  give  him 
seals  to  his  ministry  among  them.  And  the 
like  cause  had  the  like  effect  here.  The  mu- 
tual affection  that  subsists  between  a faithful 
minister  and  those  to  whom  the  Lord  makes 
him  useful,  is  of  a peculiar  kind,  and  not 
easily  described.  I trust  he  looked  upon 
many  of  you  with  joy,  as  his  crown  and 
glory  in  the  day  of  Christ,  (1  Thess.  ii.  19; 
and  you,  I doubt  not,  looked  on  him  with 
respect  and  gratitude,  as  the  instrument  of 
God  in  saving  your  souls,  in  calling  you  out 
of  darkness  into  marvellous  light.  What  were 
some  of  you  doing,  and  whither  were  you  go- 
ing, when  God  sent  you,  by  him,  the  word  of 
salvation  1 And  what  a happy  change  have  you 
since  experienced]  You  were  then  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins,  without  Christ,  and  there- 
fore without  hope,  and  without  God  in  the 
world,  Ephes.  ii.  1, 12, 13.  But  now  you,  who 
were  some  time  afar  off,  are  made  nigh  by  the 
blood  of  Christ.  Now  being  freed  from  the 
slavery  of  sin,  you  have  your  fruit  unto  holi- 
ness, and  the  end  everlasting  life,  Rom.  vi. 
22.  You  have  now  access  to  God,  commu- 
nion with  him,  an  interest  in  his  promises, 
and  a good  hope  through  grace  that  though 
your  minister  be  taken  from  you,  he  who  by 
him  began  a good  work  in  you,  will  perform 
it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ,  Phil.  i.  0. 
Let  this  thought  moderate  your  grief.  You 
will  see  the  face  of  your  minister  no  more 
here ; but  you  will  meet  him  again,  ere  long, 
before  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb. 
Then  all  tears  will  be  for  ever  wiped  away. 

Again,  during  the  apostle’s  continuance 
with  the  Thessalonians,  he  and  they  had  en- 
joyed precious  seasons  of  worship  together, 
and  of  mutual  communion  with  God,  in  the 
ordinances  of  his  appointment.  Wherever 
two  or  three  are  met  in  the  Lord’s  name, 
(Matt,  xviii.  20,)  he  is  mindful  of  his  promise, 
and  does  manifest  himself  unto  them  as  he 
does  not  unto  the  world,  (John  xiv.  22 ;)  and 
these  tastes  of  his  loving  kindness  wonder- 
fully soften,  spiritualize,  and  enlarge  their 
affections,  and  knit  them  closer  and  closer 
together  in  love.  And  though  that  power  and 
unction  from  on  high,  which  makes  the  ordi- 
nances of  the  gospel  truly  delightful,  and  an 
hour  so  employed  preferable  to  a thousand 
of  the  world’s  hours,  (Psal.  lxxxiv.  10,)  does 
not  altogether  depend  upon  the  gifts,  or  even 
upon  the  grace  of  the  minister;  yet  it  is 
doubtless  a singular  and  high  privilege, 
to  be  under  the  care  of  a wise  and  tender 
shepherd,  of  one  who  in  the  school  of  expe- 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  DR.  CONYERS. 


405 


rience  has  acquired  the  tongue  of  the  learned, 
(Isa.  1.  4,)  who  knows  how  to  adapt  himself 
to  the  occasions  of  the  people,  to  give  every 
one  their  proper  portion,  to  obviate  their 
doubts,  relieve  their  fears,  point  out  their 
dangers,  and  to  speak  a word  in  season  to 
them  that  are  weary  Be  thankful  that  you 
were  long  favoured  with  such  an  able  minis- 
ter of  the  New  Testament.  As  a public 
preacher,  he  may  perhaps  have  left  some 
equals  behind  him.  But  he  had  at  Dept- 
ford, as  formerly  at  Helmsley,  stated  seasons, 
when  he  expounded  the  scriptures  to  a smal- 
ler auditory  in  his  house,  or  within  his  own 
premises.  He  supposed  that  on  these  occa- 
sions few  persons  were  present  but  those 
who  either  possessed  the  peace  of  the  gospel, 
or  were  sincerely  seeking  it.  The  simplicity 
and  meekness  of  wisdom  with  which,  as  a 
father  among  his  children,  he  exhorted,  com- 
forted, and  instructed  these  his  more  select 
hearers,  seemed  peculiar  to  himself.  In  this 
branch  of  his  ministerial  office  I always 
thought  him  unequalled  and  inimitable.  How 
often  have  many  of  you  had  reason  to  say, 
at  such  seasons,  “ Did  not  our  hearts  burn 
within  us,  while  he  talked  with  us,  and  while 
he  opened  to  us  the  scriptures?”  Luke  xxiv. 
32.  And  the  great  attention  with  which  he 
was  heard,  and  the  proofs  he  saw  that  his 
labours  were  not  in  vain,  rendered  him  still 
more  affectionately  desirous  towards  you. 

For,  lastly,  as  one  great  reason  why  the 
apostle  loved  the  Thessalonians  was,  that 
they  were  not  only  hearers,  but  doers  of  the 
word,  and  he  could  speak  of  them  with  plea- 
sure, and  propose  them  to  others  as  examples 
of  the  efficacy  and  tendency  of  the  gospel 
which  he  preached,  (1  Thess.  i.  8,  9 ;)  so  I 
trust,  yea  I know,  that  some  of  you  were  ex- 
ceedingly dear  to  your  late  minister  on  this 
account,  also.  He  could  say  of  you  and  to 
you,  “ Now  we  live,  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the 
Lord,”  1 Thess.  iii.  8.  He  had  no  greater 
joy  than  to  see  his  children  walk  in  the  truth, 
(3  John  4,)  and  demonstrate  by  their  conduct, 
that  the  gospel  which  they  professed  was  a 
doctrine  according  to  godliness.  Those  of  you 
who  gave  him  this  pleasure,  may,  now  he  is 
gone,  praise  God  for  the  grace  which  enabled 
you  to  administer  to  the  comfort  of  one  who 
so  tenderly  watched  over  your  souls.  He  was 
proportionably  affected  with  pungent  grief, 
when  any  whom  he  loved  acted  unsuitably  to 
their  profession,  though  they,  perhaps,  seldom 
knew  what  their  unfaithfulness  cost  him. 
In  his  preaching  he  bore  a strenuous  and 
faithful  testimony  against  every  evil,  not 
only  against  gross  sins,  but  against  every 
deviation,  whether  in  temper  or  practice, 
from  the  spirit  and  rule  of  the  gospel.  But 
there  was  something  in  his  natural  disposi- 
tion which  made  it  difficult  for  him  to  expos- 
tulate plainly  and  strongly  in  private. — In 
private,  he  could  not  easily  reprove.  But  he 


could  mourn,  he  could  wear  out  the  day  with- 
out pleasure,  and  the  night  without  rest,  in 
bemoaning  those  who  had  neither  compassion 
for  him  nor  for  themselves.  I can  affirm  this 
of  him,  from  instances  which  have  come  to 
my  own  knowledge.  Perhaps  some  person 
present  may  think,  Surely  the  preacher  has 
heard  of  me,  and  means  to  point  me  out  to 
the  notice  of  the  congregation.  No ; it  is  your 
own  conscience  points  you  out;  I know  you 
not.  But  is  it  so,  indeed,  that  you  broke  your 
minister’s  rest,  and  added  to  his  troubles 
by  your  miscarriages?  You  do  well  to  weep: 
may  God  give  you  repentance  not  to  be  re- 
pented of!  2 Cor.  vii.  10.  Will  not  his  la- 
mented and  sudden  death  recal  to  your  re- 
membrance how  earnestly  he  warned  you, 
and  pleaded  with  you,  while  he  was  living, 
and  rouse  you  from  that  dangerous  security 
into  which  you  have  been  seduced  by  the  de- 
ceitfulness of  sin  ? 

II.  I have,  in  a great  measure,  anticipated 
what  I purposed  to  mention  under  a second 
head — the  proofs  which  he  gave,  that  the  af- 
fection he  professed  for  his  people  was  cordial 
and  sincere.  But  the  subject  is  not  exhaust- 
ed : St.  Paul  evidenced  his  love  to  the  Thes- 
salonians by  imparting  to  them  the  gospel  of 
God,  and  by  his  unwearied  zeal  and  diligence 
in  their  service,  in  defiance  of  the  difficulties 
and  obstacles  which  always  attended  his  la- 
bours. By  the  strong  expression,  that  he  was 
ready  to  impart  unto  them  his  own  soul  also, 
he  intimates  both  the  energy  of  his  address, 
and  his  fixed  determination  to  venture  every 
consequence  in  their  service. 

In  another  place,  the  apostle,  speaking  of 
the  doctrine  which  he  preached,  says,  “ ac- 
cording to  my  gospel,”  Rom.  ii.  16.  It  was 
not  a point  of  speculation  with  him : he  pos- 
sessed it.  He  had  experienced  the  power  of 
it ; it  was  the  spring  of  his  conduct,  the  source 
of  his  comfort,  and  was  therefore  properly  his 
own.  Here  he  styles  it  the  “ gospel  of  God,” 
perhaps  to  distinguish  it  from  a pretended 
gospel,  such  as  the  Galatians  received  from 
false  teachers,  which  he  calls  “ another  gos- 
pel,” (Gal.  i.  6,  7,)  and  which  was  indeed  not 
the  gospel.  The  true  gospel  is  of  God.  It 
is  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God, 
1 Tim.  i.  11.  From  whence  we  infer  its 
certainty,  authority,  and  importance.  It  is 
worthy  of  all  acceptation  : it  is  able  to  make 
us  wise  unto  salvation,  if  cordially  embraced, 
(2  Tim.  iii.  15 ;)  and  to  neglect  it,  is  to  re- 
fuse life,  to  choose  death,  to  resolve  to  be 
miserable,  and  to  affront  the  wisdom  and 
goodness  of  God.  When  Paul  preached  this 
gospel  at  Thessalonica,  it  awakened  the  spi- 
rit of  envy,  opposition,  and  clamour,  in  many 
who  believed  not ; but  they  who  received  it, 
experienced  it  to  be  the  power  of  God,  to  the 
salvation  of  their  souls. 

This  gospel  your  late  minister  preached 
among  you,  and,  I trust,  effectually  imparted 


408 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  DR.  CONYERS. 


to  many  of  you,  as  an  instrument  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  He  owed  all  his  success,  and  you  de- 
rive all  the  light  and  comfort  you  obtained 
under  his  instruction,  to  the  doctrine  which 
he  delivered.  It  cannot  with  reason  be  ex- 
pected, that  God  will  afford  the  seal  of  his 
blessing  to  any  scheme  of  doctrine  but  his 
own  truth.  A preacher  may  be  of  a good 
character  in  civil  life,  and  diligent  in  his 
office,  and  he  m ay  have  some  success  in  sup- 
pressing outward  wickedness,  though  he  does 
not  preach  the  gospel  of  God ; but  he  will  not 
reach  the  hearts  of  his  people,  wean  them 
from  their  secret  sins,  and  win  them  to  the 
love  and  practice  of  universal  holiness,  unless 
he  preaches  St.  Paul’s  gospel.  I hope  this 
congregation  has  been  better  taught,  than  to 
receive  every  thing  indiscriminately  for 
truth  because  it  is  spoken  from  a pulpit. 
You  have  the  scriptures  in  your  hands,  and 
by  this  standard  you  are  warranted,  yea, 
commanded,  to  try  the  spirits,  (1  John  iv.  1,) 
because  many  false  prophets  and  pretended 
teachers  are  abroad  in  the  world  : however, 
I will  take  the  liberty  to  remind  you  of  some 
plain  and  sure  marks  by  which  you  will  be 
able  to  distinguish  a faithful  minister  of  the 
true  gospel. 

He  will  preach  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,  and 
propose  him  as  the  only  foundation  of  a sin- 
ner’s hope,  the  only  object  of  faith,  the  way, 
the  truth,  and  the  life.  He  will  endeavour  to 
convince  you  of  your  need  of  mercy,  and 
then  direct  your  thoughts  to  the  atonement 
which  Christ  made  for  sin,  by  his  bloody 
death  upon  the  cross.  He  will  give  you  no 
encouragement  to  think  you  can  do  any 
thing  well-pleasing  to  God  till  you  your- 
selves are  first  made  acceptable  in  the  be- 
loved ; nor  until  his  love  is  the  motive  of 
your  obedience,  and  your  dependance  is 
fixed  upon  the  promised  communications  of 
strength  and  grace  from  his  fulness. 

By  a manifestation  of  the  truth,  he  will 
commend  himself  to  your  consciences  in  the 
sight  of  God,  2 Cor.  iv.  2.  He  will  not  a- 
muse  you  with  the  discussion  of  some  cu- 
rious point,  in  which  you  have  little  imme- 
diate interest,  or  some  cold  general  com- 
mon-place subject.  Many  sermons,  ingeni- 
ous in  their  kind,  may  be  compared  to  a 
letter  put  into  the  post-office  without  a di- 
rection. It  is  addressed  to  nobody,  it  is  own- 
ed by  nobody ; and  if  a hundred  people  were 
to  read  it,  not  one  of  them  would  think  him- 
self concerned  in  the  contents.  But  the 
word  of  the  gospel,  when  faithfully  dispen- 
sed, searches  the  heart,  (Heb.  iv.  12,)  and 
tries  the  reins.  You  will  wonder  that  the 
preacher,  who  perhaps  is  a stranger  to  you, 
can  so  exactly  suit  himself  to  your  case. 
He  will  sometimes  bring  to  your  remem- 
brance what  you  have  done  or  said,  or  even 
what  you  have  only  thought,  and  which, 
possibly,  you  had  forgotten.  So  that  if  you 


are  going  on  in  your  sins,  or  are  vailed  under 
a cloak  of  hypocrisy,  you  will  be  ready  to 
start,  and  think  he  is  about  to  expose  you 
publicly.  Or  if  you  are  a mourner  in  Zion, 
distressed  with  fear  and  temptation,  beset 
with  trouble,  and  know  not  which  way  to 
turn,  that  tongue  of  the  learned,  which  he 
has  acquired  in  the  school  of  experience, 
will  frequently  lead  him,  while  speaking 
from  his  own  feelings,  to  meet  you  with  a 
word  in  season,  so  exactly  suited  to  your 
case,  that,  if  you  had  told  him  the  state  ot 
your  mind,  and  every  particular  of  your 
situation  beforehand,  he  could  not  have  de- 
scribed them  better.  Such  is  the  correspond- 
ence between  the  word  of  God  and  the  heart 
of  man;  and  such  is  the  similarity  of  the 
workings  of  the  human  heart  in  similar  cir- 
cumstances, that  the  preacher  who  is  enlight- 
ened by  the  scripture,  and  by  the  Holy  Spirit, 
while  he  does  little  more  than  relate  the 
exercises  of  his  own  mind,  appears  to  many 
of  his  hearers  to  express  their  hopes  and 
fears,  their  joys  and  sorrows,  better  than 
they  could  have  expressed  them  to  him. 
Thus  it  is  that  the  secrets  of  the  heart  are 
made  manifest  (1  Cor.  xiv.  25,)  by  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel.  All  other  preaching, 
compared  with  this,  is  lifeless,  distant,  and 
unaffecting,  little  more-  'than  declamation ; 
but  the  words  of  a scribe  (Matt.  xiii.  52,) 
well  instructed  in  the  mysteries  of  the  king- 
dom of  God,  come  home  to  our  own  business 
and  bosoms,  and  constrain  many  to  say,  writh 
the  woman  of  Samaria,  “Come  and  see  a man 
which  told  me  all  things  that  ever  I did,” 
John  iv.  29. 

A true  servant  of  God  in  the  gospel  may 
likewise  be  known,  at  least  in  the  place 
where  he  resides,  or  statedly  labours,  by  a 
certain  mixed  kind  of  character,  which  he 
will  receive  from  public  report.  The  general 
tenor  of  his  conduct  will  be  such,  that  the 
feeble  attempts  of  slander  to  vilify  him,  will 
be  gradually  suppressed,  and  they  who 
would  speak  evil  of  him,  be  put  to  shame 
and  to  silence,  by  his  good  conversation  in 
Christ,  1 Pet.  iii.  16.  But  though  his  be- 
haviour be  unimpeachable  and  exemplary, 
his  principles  will  be  misunderstood  and 
misrepresented ; and  by  different  person? 
(sometimes  by  the  same  persons,)  very  dif- 
ferent and  inconsistent  things  will  be  laid 
to  his  charge.  He  will  often  be  deemed  ri- 
gid, precise,  uncharitable,  enjoining  a strict- 
ness in  life  and  manners  to  the  extreme  ; so 
that,  to  adopt  his  views,  and  to  follow  his 
rules,  a person  must  bid  farewell  to  com- 
fort, and  almost  renounce  society;  while  in 
the  same  day,  and  almost  in  the  same  breath, 
he  will  be  represented  as  preaching  doc- 
trines which,  if  generally  received,  would 
be  unfavourable  to  good  morals,  and  promote 
licentiousness.  For  the  natural  heart  has 
a dislike  equally  to  the  grace  and  to  the 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  DR.  CONYERS. 


407 


holiness  of  the  gospel.  Salvation  by  faith 
in  the  blood  of  Jesus  is  thought  too  easy, 
and  affording  too  much  encouragement  to 
the  unworthy  ; and  the  simple  grateful  obe- 
dience which  characterizes  those  who  seek 
salvation  in  this  way,  and  in  no  other,  is 
thought  too  strict  and  scrupulous,  and  carry- 
ing of  things  a great  deal  too  far.  They 
who  are  of  the  world,  who  speak  to  the 
world,  and  whom  the  world  is  willing  to 
hear,  give  no  offence,  and  therefore  no  cla- 
mour is  excited  against  them;  but  a faith- 
ful minister  will  not  be  exposed  to  the  woe 
(Luke  vi.  26,)  denounced  against  those  of 
whom  all  men  speak  favourably.  His  in- 
firmities and  mistakes  (for  he  is  not  perfect) 
will  be  eagerly  noticed  and  exaggerated ; 
and  if  no  just  fault  can  be  found,  he  must 
at  least  expect  to  be  spoken  of  as  an  en- 
thusiast, or  branded  by  some  name  to  which 
ignorance  and  prejudice  have  affixed  a con- 
tumelious sense. 

Such  a one  was  your  late  minister.  Like 
the  apostle,  he  laboured  to  impart  to  his 
hearers  the  gospel  of  God : like  him,  he  was 
unmoved  by  the  opposition  of  those  who 
knew  not  what  they  did,  and  ready  to  en- 
dure all  things  for  the  elect’s  sake,  that 
they  might  be  saved,  2 Tim.  ii.  10.  He 
loved  you,  and  was  willing  to  impart  to  you 
his  own  soul  also.  His  spirit  was  willing; 
he  did  much,  and  wished  he  could  have 
done  more. 

It  was  indeed  a surprise  to  many  who 
were  not  intimately  acquainted  with  him, 
that  he  did  no  more.  And  it  may  be  thought 
by  some  persons,  that  as,  by  his  counte- 
nance, he  seemed  to  enjoy  a tolerable  share  of 
health,  his  public  services  were  hardly  an- 
swerable to  the  zeal  of  a man  who  was 
ready  to  pour  out  his  very  life  for  the  good 
of  souls.  He  preached  but  once  a week  in 
his  parish  church ; and  no  arguments,  per- 
suasions, or  entreaties,  could  prevail  on  him 
to  enter  any  pulpit  but  his  own.  Even  when 
he  has  been  expressly  nominated  by  his  dio- 
cesan to  preach  in  another  church,  he  has 
declined  the  service,  and  disappointed  crowd- 
ed auditories  who  wished  to  hear  him.  The 
benefits  of  his  singular  abilities  were  there- 
fore confined  to  his  own  congregations.  And 
it  was  with  the  greatest  difficulty,  and  but 
seldom,  that  his  most  intimate  friends  could 
engage  him  to  lead  in  family-worship,  where 
he  has  been  occasionally  present.  I have 
frequently  mentioned  to  him  my  concern 
that  the  sphere  of  his  usefulness  should  be 
so  much  limited ; and  he  lamented  it  himself ; 
but  his  hindrance  was  constitutional  and  in- 
vincible. He  had  a continued  hurry  and 
flutter  upon  his  spirits,  the  effects  of  which 
were  unaccountable  to  those  who  knew  not 
the  cause.  Taken  in  different  views,  he 
might  be  considered  as  very  happy  or  very 
uncomfortable  at  the  same  instant.  In  the 


most  important  sense,  he  was  a happy  man. 
He  had  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  enjoyed  much  of  the  light  of 
his  countenance,  and  had  no  perplexing 
doubts  respecting  either  his  acceptance  in 
the  Beloved,  or  his  perseverance  in  grace. 
Yet,  through  the  agitation  of  his  spirits,  he 
spent  his  days,  and  almost  every  hour,  hi 
trepidation  and  alarm.  The  slightest  inci- 
dents were  sufficient  to  fill  him  with  fears, 
which,  though  he  knew  to  be  groundless, 
he  could  not  overcome.  But  upon  no  oc- 
casions did  he  suffer  more  from  these  pain- 
ful feelings,  than  when  he  had  public  preach- 
ing in  prospect.  When  he  met  his  people 
at  home,  he  usually  found  pleasure  and 
liberty,  unless  he  observed  some  new  faces. 
But  the  sight  of  a stranger,  especially  if  he 
knew  or  suspected  him  to  be  a minister, 
would  sometimes  distress  him  greatly,  and 
almost  disable  him  from  speaking.  It  may 
seem  very  extraordinary,  that  a man  of  the 
first  abilities  as  a preacher,  highly  respect- 
ed, and  honoured  with  eminent  usefulness, 
should  be  intimidated  by  the  presence  of 
those  who  were  much  his  inferiors.  But 
such  was  his  burden,  which  neither  reflec- 
tion nor  resolution  could  remove.  What  he 
often  suffered  before  he  ascended  this  pulpit, 
and  when  he  looked  round  upon  a large  con- 
gregation, and  knew  not  how  many  such 
persons  as  he  was  afraid  of  might  be  among 
them,  gave  him  a right  to  say,  in  a singular 
sense,  that  in  imparting  the  gospel  of  God 
to  you,  he  imparted  his  own  soul  also.  Per- 
haps there  have  been  martyrs,  who  approach- 
ed the  rack  or  the  stake  with  less  distress- 
ing sensations,  than  he  has  frequently  felt 
when  about  to  enter  upon  his  otherwise  de- 
lightful work.  Yet,  because  you  were  the 
people  of  his  immediate  charge,  and  dear  to 
him,  he  seldom  declined  your  service  on  the 
forenoon  of  the  Lord’s  day,  if  he  was  well. 
But  this,  I believe,  was  the  reason,  that  at 
other  times,  instead  of  preaching  in  the 
church,  he  confined  himself  to  a place  where 
few,  comparatively,  could  attend  him.  I do 
not  know,  that  while  he  lived  at  Deptford, 
he  ever  preached  publicly  in  this  neighbour- 
hood, excepting  once,  when  he  accepted  an 
appointment  to  preach  at  the  archdeacons’ 
Visitation  at  Dartford.  But  he  kept  his  in- 
tention a secret  in  his  own  breast;  and  did 
not  mention  it  to  his  nearest  friends ; lest  a 
multitude  should  be  drawn  to  hear  him.  And 
he  told  me  himself,  that  from  the  hour  he 
stood  engaged,  which  was  several  weeks  be- 
fore the  time,  he  could  scarcely  think  of 
any  thing  else  ; and  that  when  the  day  ar- 
rived, his  spirits  were  so  greatly  agitated, 
that  for  some  minutes  after  he  was  in  the 
pulpit,  he  was  deprived  of  his  eye-sight. 
But  the  Lord  whom  he  served,  supported 
him ; and  he  was,  upon  the  whole,  carried 
comfortably  through  the  service. 


403 


ON  THE  DEATH  OF  DR.  CONYERS. 


If  we  speak  of  death  as  the  moment  of 
separation  between  soul  and  body,  he  was 
not  afraid  of  it ; for  he  knew  whom  he  be- 
lieved ; and  that  to  depart  and  be  with  his 
Lord,  was  >t?i.<r<rov)  unspeakably 

preferable  to  any  thin°f  that  could  be  enjoy- 
ed in  the  present  life,  Phil.  i.  23.  But 
though  not  afraid  of  death,  he  was  often  afraid 
of  dying.  His  apprehensions  of  the  possible 
forerunners  and  concomitants  of  a dying  hour, 
frquently  made  a painful  impression  upon  his 
spirits.  Upon  this  account,  they  who  loved 
him,  have  reason  to  be  reconciled  to  the 
suddenness  of  his  removal.  His  was  an  hon- 
ourable dismission  indeed  ! The  messenger 
that  called  him  home,  found  him  actually 
and  actively  employed  in  his  Master’s  ser- 
vice, with  his  loins  girded  up,  and  his  lamp 
burning,  Luke  xii.  35.  It  was  likewise  a 
gracious  condescension  to  his  infirmity,  and 
saved  him  from  an  experience  of  any  of  those 
conflicts,  which  he  could  seldom  think  of 
without  anxiety,  and  a degree  of  anguish. 

Upon  the  whole,  I may  say  of  Dr.  Conyers, 
without  just  fear  of  contradiction,  he  was  a 
burning  and  a shining  light,  John  v.  35. 
Many  of  you  rejoiced  in  his  light ; and  now, 
the  man  who  cared  for  your  souls,  who  was 
the  minister  of  God  to  you  for  good,  is  taken 
from  you,  your  sorrow  is  proportionable.  Yet, 
if  you  truly  entered  into  his  views,  you  are 
not  destitute.  The  Saviour  whom  he  preach- 
ed, and  in  whom  ye  have  believed,  is  still  with 
you.  The  stream  at  which  you  have  often 
drank,  and  found  refreshment,  is  dried  up ; 
but  the  fountain  of  living  waters,  from  whence 
it  was  derived,  is  always  full,  and  always  flow- 
ing. Whoever  dies,  Jesus  lives;  the  residue 
of  the  Spirit  is  with  him,  and  he  is  at  no  loss 
for  means  to  communicate  his  blessings  to 
those  who  wait  upon  him:  yea,  under  his 
management,  even  losses  prove  gains,  and 
apparent  hindrances  work  to  the  help  and 
furtherance  of  faith.  Be  thankful  that  you 


were  so  long  favoured  with  such  a minister  ■ 
and  rejoice  that  though  you  can  see  him  no 
more  in  this  world,  you  shall  meet  him  again 
in  the  world  of  light.  In  the  meantime  (need 
I say)  respect  and  honour  his  memory ; and 
the  most  effectual  manner  by  which  you  can 
show  your  regard  to  him,  will  be,  by  walking 
as  he  walked,  and  maintaining  a conversation 
becoming  the  gospel,  (Phil.  i.  27,)  which  ne 
so  affectionately  and  faithfully  imparted  to 
you. 

But  there  are,  I fear,  amongst  you,  those 
who  accounted  the  joyful  sound  of  the  gospel, 
which  he  proclaimed,  a burden ; have  been 
wearied  by  his  earnest  endeavours  to  pluck 
you  as  brands  from  the  burning,  and  have 
often  wished  to  be  freed  from  his  importunity. 
Now  you  have  your  wishes.  Your  faithful 
monitor  is  removed.  He  will  alarm  your 
consciences,  he  will  offend  your  pride  no 
more.  But  if,  after  slighting  his  labours  of 
love  while  he  lived,  you  remain  likewise  un- 
affected by  his  death,  you  are  much  more  to 
be  pitied  than  those  who  lament  his  removal. 
Alas  ! when  numbers  in  different  and  distant 
places,  who  never  saw  you,  are  concerned  for 
you,  will  you  not  yet  be  concerned  for  your- 
selves 1 Tremble,  lest  you  should  have  cause 
to  say,  “ the  harvest  is  past,  the  summer  is 
ended,  but  we  are  not  saved !”  Jer.  viii.  20. 
You  have  had  your  opportunity,  a day  of 
grace,  in  which  the  things  pertaining  to  your 
peace  have  been  set  before  you.  The  Lord 
forbid  that  the  following  words  should  be  ap- 
plicable to  you : “ but  now  they  are  hidden 
from  your  eyes !”  Luke  xix.  42.  The  Sa- 
viour, whom  you  have  too  long  slighted,  is 
now  once  more  preached  to  you.  He  is  still 
upon  a throne  of  grace,  able  and  willing  to 
save  to  the  uttermost  all  who  come  untc 
God  by  him.  But  hereafter  he  will  appear  on 
a throne  of  judgment,  taking  vengeance  or. 
them  that  know  not  God,  and  obey  not  his 
gospel,  2 Thess.  L 8. 


THE  BEST  WISDOM; 


A SERMON 

PREACHED  IN  THE  PARISH  CHURCH  OF  ST.  MARY  WOOLNOTH, 

ON  WEDNESDAY,  NOVEMBER  21,  1787, 

THE  DAY  OF  THE  ANNUAL  MEETING  OF  THE  SOCIETY  FOR  PROMOTING  RELIGIOUS 
KNOWLEDGE  AMONG  THE  POOR. 


■He  that  winneth  souls  is  wise. — Proverbs,  xi.  30. 


Only  he,  who  redeemed  the  soul  by  his 
blood,  is  able  effectually  to  win  it  to  himself. 
The  work  is  his,  and  they  who  know  him  will 
render  the  praise  to  him  alone.  But  in  this 
respect,  as  in  many  others,  there  is  an  ana- 
logy between  the  natural  and  the  moral  world. 
In  both,  lie  displays  his  power  and  executes 
his  purposes  by  an  instituted  course  of  means 
and  instruments.  In  both,  he  often  so  con- 
ceals his  operations  under  the  vail  of  second 
causes,  that  to  a common  and  inattentive  eye, 
he  seems  to  do  nothing,  when  in  reality  he 
does  all.  The  manna  with  which  he  fed  Is- 
rael in  the  wilderness,  though  more  imme- 
diately and  visibly,  was  not  more  certainly 
the  effect  and  proof  of  his  providence  and 
goodness,  than  the  bread  by  which  we  live. 
It  is  he  who  giveth  the  earth  virtue  to  pro- 
duce corn ; (Psalms  civ.  14 ;)  the  discretion 
of  the  husbandman  who  prepareth  the  ground 
and  soweth  the  seed  is  from  him ; (Is.  xxviii. 
24 — 29 ;)  and  the  influence  of  the  sun  and 
the  rain,  so  necessary  to  ripen  the  grain,  and 
to  clothe  the  fields  with  plenty  in  the  season 
of  harvest,  (Matt.  v.  43,)  is  the  influence  of 
him  who  worketh  all  in  all.  In  this  process, 
the  blessing  which  secures  the  desired  event, 
is  wholly  from  the  Lord,  though  the  labour  of 
man  and  the  use  of  means  are  indispensable, 
because  his  appointment  has  made  them  so. 

Thus  in  the  great  concern  of  winning  souls, 
though  God,  whose  thoughts  and  ways  are  as 
far  above  ours,  as  the  heavens  are  higher  than 
the  earth,  may,  sometimes,  as  in  the  instance 
of  the  apostle  Paul,  (Acts  ix.  6,)  affect  and 
win  the  heart  by  an  immediate  and  instanta- 
neous exertion  of  his  power;  yet  this  is  not 
his  ordinary  method.  Though  fallen,  we  are 
still  rational  creatures,  and  he  is  pleased  to 
treat  us  as  such  He  proposes  considera- 
Vol.  II.  3 F 


tions  and  motives  in  his  holy  word,  which 
though  ineffectual,  considered  merely  as 
means,  and  without  the  concurrence  of  his 
agency,  yet  have,  in  their  own  nature,  a mo- 
ral tendency  and  suitableness  to  awaken  our 
attention,  and  to  convince  us  of  our  sin  and 
misery,  and  to  recal  us  to  our  original  state 
of  dependence  upon  his  goodness,  and  obe- 
dience to  his  will.  For  the  proof  of  this  I may 
appeal  to  the  consciences  of  many  persons : 
the  force  of  truth  has  compelled  them  to 
tremble,  like  Felix,  and  perhaps,  like  Herod, 
to  do  many  things  ; and  though  their  depra- 
vity has  been  too  obstinate  to  yield  to  convic- 
tion, they  have  understood  and  felt  enough, 
to  leave  them  without  excuse. 

The  Lord  God  usually  employs  those  whom 
he  has  already  won  and  subdued  by  his  grace, 
as  instruments  of  winning  others ; and  there 
are  none  of  his  people,  however  weak  their 
capacities,  or  however  low  their  situations  in 
life,  but  may  hope  for  a share  in  this  honour, 
if  they  are  faithful  to  the  light  he  has  given 
them,  and  live  according  to  the  rule  of  his 
word. — But  he  has  instituted  the  office  of  the 
gospel-ministry  with  a more  especial  view  to 
this  important  service. 

The  proposition  in  the  text  is  simple  and 
plain  ; and  the  principal  division  of  my  sub- 
ject is  suggested  by  the  appearance  of  our 
present  assembly.  I never  had  an  opportunity 
before  of  preaching  to  so  many  of  my  brethren 
in  the  ministry,  and  perhaps  I never  may 
again.  And  at  my  time  of  life,  it  becomes 
me,  whenever  I stand  in  the  pulpit,  to  con- 
sider seriously,  that  it  is,  at  least,  possible,  it 
may  be  the  last  time,  and  that  you,  to  whom 
I am  now  about  to  speak,  may  see  my  face  no 
more.  Were  I even  sure  of  this,  how  could 
I more  properly  close  my  public  services, 
409 


410 


THE  BEST  WISDOM. 


than  by  aiming  with  my  latest  breath,  to  im- 
press upon  you,  my  friends  and  brethren,  this 
weighty  aphorism,  “ He  that  vvinneth  souls  is 
wise1?”  May  it  be  written  upon  my  own 
heart  while  I live ! may  it  be  written  upon 
all  our  hearts ! Let  the  scholar,  the  philoso- 
pher, the  politician,  settle  their  several  claims 
to  wisdom  among  themselves;  but  may  this 
wisdom  be  ours.  The  man  that  winneth  souls 
is  truly  and  emphatically  wise. 

I shall,  in  the  first  place,  point  out  the  prin- 
cipal acknowledged  characteristics  of  wisdom, 
and  show,  that  they  are  all  exemplified  in  the 
spirit  and  conduct  of  the  minister  who  is  duly 
qualified  for  the  service  of  winning  souls.  I 
do  not  say  that  all  faithful  ministers  are  in- 
fluenced by  this  wisdom  in  the  same  degree ; 
but  unless  it  has  an  habitual  and  prevailing 
influence  on  the  plans  and  practice  of  a pub- 
lic teacher,  we  need  not  wonder  if  he  be  nei- 
ther faithful  nor  useful.  My  chief  design  is 
to  elucidate  and  confirm  this  first  point;  but 
towards  the  close  of  my  discourse,  I shall,  se- 
condly, address  myself  to  private  Christians, 
and  remind  you  of  your  common  interest  with 
us  in  this  concern,  and  the  advantages  and 
opportunities  you  have  of  showing  yourselves 
wise,  by  contributing  your  endeavours  to  pro- 
mote the  great  design  of  winning  souls. 

I.  The  minister  who  winneth  souls  is 
wise. 

1.  Wisdom  is  discovered  in  the  choice  of 
a fit  and  valuable  end.  If  a man  has  great 
talents  and  abilities,  we  do  not  account  him 
wise,  unless  he  employs  them  properly ; a 
life  whiled  away  in  low  and  trivial  pursuits, 
implies  a want  of  wisdom.  But  he  who  aims 
at  winning  souls,  proposes  an  end  which  well 
deserves  his  application,  and  will,  so  far  as 
he  succeeds,  richly  compensate  him  for  all 
that  he  can  do  or  suffer  in  so  good  a cause.  The 
grand  object  of  his  life,  in  subordination  to 
the  will  and  glory  of  God,  is  the  recovery  of 
souls.  We  often  use  the  word  win,  in  a sense 
which  the  Hebrew  term  suggests ; as  to  win 
a battle  or  a fortress.  The  soul,  in  its  fallen 
state,  separated  and  alienated  from  God,  is, 
by  his  righteous  permission,  under  the  power 
of  Satan,  who  rules  in  it  as  a strong  one  armed 
in  his  own  house  or  castle,  Luke  xi.  21 ; Eph. 
ii.  2.  W ere  the  effects  of  this  bondage  con- 
fined to  the  present  life,  an  attempt  to  free 
the  soul  from  that  misery,  mischief,  and  mad- 
ness, with  which  the  world  is  filled,  would 
be  honourable  and  important.  But  God,  who 
formed  the  soul  originally  for  himself,  has 
given  it  such  a vast  capacity,  that  nothing 
short  of  himself  can  satisfy  its  desires ; and 
it  is  likewise,  by  his  constitution,  immortal. 
This  capacity  of  being  exquisitely  happy  or 
miserable,  and  that  for  ever,  renders  the  soul 
so  valuable  in  the  judgment  of  its  Creator, 
that  he  gave  the  Son  of  his  love  to  redeem  it 
from  sin  and  misery,  by  his  obedience  unto 
death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross.  By  this 


adorable  method  of  adjusting  the  demands  of 
his  justice  and  the  honour  of  his  government, 
to  the  purposes  of  his  mercy,  his  wisdom  and 
glory  are  more  eminently  discovered  to  his 
intelligent  creatures,  than  by  all  his  other 
works.  If  the  only  wise  God  commends  to  us 
his  gracious  design  of  recovering  souls  from 
the  dominion  of  Satan,  and  of  winning  them 
to  himself,  as  the  highest  instance  of  his  wis- 
dom and  goodness:  then,  certainly,  he  who 
proposes  it  as  the  great  end  of  his  life,  that 
by  serving  God  in  the  ministry,  he  may  be  an 
instrument  of  winning  souls,  is  truly  wise,  so 
far  as  concerns  his  leading  aim  and  object. 

2.  Wisdom  directs  us  likewise  to  a con- 
sideration and  choice  of  means  proper  to  the 
attainment  of  a proposed  end.  To  attempt 
what  is  impracticable,  however  desirable  it 
might  be  thought,  upon  a supposition  that  it 
could  be  accomplished,  is  a mark,  not  of  wis- 
dom, but  of  folly.  A man,  without  being 
chargeable  with  rashness,  may  undertake  to 
move  a stone  of  several  tons  weight,  and  even 
to  raise  it,  if  needful,  to  the  top  of  a ton  er ; 
or  to  force  open  the  strongest  gate  of  a castle ; 
but  then  the  application  of  mechanical  pow- 
ers would  be  necessary.  If  he  were  unac- 
quainted with  these,  or  disdained  to  employ 
them ; if,  without  estimating  or  considering 
the  resistance  to  be  overcome,  and  relying 
solely  on  his  personal  strength,  he  should  at- 
tempt to  move  the  enormous  stone  with  his 
hands,  or  to  burst  the  gates  of  brass  and  bars 
of  iron  asunder  with  his  feet,  his  utmost  ef- 
forts must  issue  in  weariness  and  disappoint- 
ment, and  no  one  would  think  him  wise.  The 
experience  of  ages  has  demonstrated  all  en- 
deavours to  win  souls,  to  free  them  from  pre- 
judice, to  reclaim  them  from  the  love  and 
practice  of  sin,  by  the  mere  force  of  human 
arguments  and  moral  suasion,  to  be  equally 
chimerical  and  unsuccessful.  The  heathen 
moralists  laboured  much  in  this  way,  but  they 
laboured  in  vain.  Some  of  them  felt  and  ac- 
knowledged that  human  nature  was  depraved ; 
but  not  knowing  the  root,  nor  the  extent,  nor 
the  proper  remedy  of  the  disorders  they  wish- 
ed to  cure,  their  best  sentiments,  however 
specious  in  theory,  made  little  more  impres- 
sion upon  the  hearts  of  their  admirers,  or  even 
upon  their  own,  than  the  falling  snow  makes 
upon  a rock.  If  the  ancient  sages  could  do 
but  little,  the  modern  philosophers,  as  they 
choose  to  be  called,  have  done,  if  possible,  still 
less.  What  a poet  observed  of  the  former, 
is,  at  least  equally,  applicable  to  the  latter : 
Virtus  laudatur  et  alget.  Virtue  is  defined, 
described,  recommended,  and  praised,  but 
wickedness  and  folly  rapidly  increase  under 
their  instructions ; and  while  in  their  pomp- 
ous declamations  they  propose  liberty  to 
others,  (1  Pet.  ii.  19,)  they  are  themselves 
the  servants,  the  slaves  of  corruption.  The 
gospel  of  Christ,  the  glorious  gospel  of  the 
blessed  God,  (1  Tim.  i.  11,)  is  the  only  ef- 


THE  BEST  WISDOM. 


411 


fectual  mean  for  reforming1  mankind.  To  the 
man  who  possesses,  and  knows  the  use  of  this 
gra/id,  this  wonderful  machine,  if  I may  be 
allowed  the  comparison,  what  is  otherwise 
impracticable  becomes  easy.  The  gospel 
removes  difficulties  insuperable  to  human 
power.  It  causes  the  blind  to  see,  the  deaf 
to  hear,  (Isa.  xxxv.  8 ; Matt.  xi.  5 ;)  it  softens 
the  heart  of  stone,  and  raises  the  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sin  to  a life  of  righteousness. 
No  force,  but  that  of  the  gospel,  is  sufficient 
to  remove  the  mountainous  load  of  guilt  from 
an  awakened  conscience,  to  calm  the  violence 
of  tumultuous  passions,  to  raise  an  earthly 
soul  from  grovelling  in  the  mire  of  sensuality 
or  avarice,  to  a spiritual  and  divine  life,  a life 
of  communion  with  God.  No  system  but  the 
gospel  can  communicate  motives,  encourage- 
ments, and  prospects,  sufficient  to  withstand 
and  counteract  all  the  snares  and  temptations 
with  which  the  spirit  of  this  world,  by  its 
frowns  or  its  smiles,  will  endeavour,  either 
to  intimidate  or  to  bribe  us  from  the  path  of 
duty.  But  the  gospel,  rightly  understood  and 
cordially  embraced,  will  inspire  the  slothful 
with  energy,  and  the  fearful  with  courage. 
It  will  make  the  miser  generous,  melt  the 
churl  into  kindness,  tame  the  raging  tiger  in 
the  breast,  and  in  a word,  expand  the  narrow 
selfish  heart,  and  fill  it  with  a spirit  of  love  to 
God,  cheerful  unreserved  obedience  to  his 
will  and  benevolence  to  mankind. 

I shall  not  trespass  upon  your  time,  by  de- 
lineating at  large  my  idea  of  the  gospel.  Yet 
it  may  be  proper  to  mention  three  points, 
vvhieh,  in  my  judgment,  are  essential  to  it. 

The  first  respects  the  character  of  Jesus 
the  Saviour : That  he  is  very  God,  and  very 
man,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh : that  in  the 
beginning  was  the  Word,  and  the  Word  was 
with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God : that  this 
divine  Word  assumed  our  nature  into  a per- 
sonal union  wfith  himself,  lived  and  died  in 
behalf  of  sinners,  and  now  reigns  upon  the 
throne  of  glory,  over  all,  God  blessed  for  ever, 
(1  Tim.  iii.  16  ; John  i.  1, 14  :)  that  he  is  the 
proper  object  of  our  worship,  supreme  love, 
trust  and  adoration : that  it  is  he  on  whom 
the  eyes  and  expectation  of  sinners,  sensible 
of  their  wants  and  miseries,  are  fixed,  and 
out  of  whose  fulness  they  all  receive  life, 
strength,  comfort,  and  grace,  to  help  in  time 
of  need,  Psalm  xxxiv.  5;  John  i.  16.  This 
doctrine  is  the  pillar  and  ground  of  truth, 
1 Tim.  iii.  15.  They  who  have  a right  sense 
of  the  guilt  and  power  of  sin,  of  the  holiness 
and  majesty  of  God,  and  of  the  hosts  of  ene- 
mies combined  against  their  peace,  must  sink 
into  despair,  unless  supported  by  the  know- 
ledge of  an  Almighty  Omnipresent  Saviour, 
who  is  always  near,  a very  present  help  in 
trouble,  and  who  can  discern  the  thoughts  of 
the  heart,  (Rev.  ii.  23 ;)  for  often  their  most 
trying  and  dangerous  exigences  are  beyond 
the  reach  of  a creature’s  eye.  Whatever 


they  thought  of  him  before,  when  they  know 
themselves,  they  cannot  entrust  their  souls  to 
the  power,  or  care,  or  compassion  of  a crea- 
ture ; and  therefore  rejoice  that  they  are  war- 
ranted and  encouraged  to  commend  them- 
selves to  him,  as  to  a faithful  creator,  1 Pet 
iv.  19. 

The  second  grand  peculiarity  of  the  gospel 
is  the  doctrine  of  an  atonement : That  Christ 
in  his  state  of  humiliation,  by  his  obedience 
unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross,  made 
a full,  proper,  and  perfect  satisfaction  for  sin 
(Phil.  ii.  8 ;)  that  is,  his  sufferings  unto  death, 
the  torments  which  he  endured  in  his  body, 
and  the  agonies  of  his  soul,  inconceivable  to 
us  but  by  their  effects  (his  bloody  sweat  in 
the  garden,  and  his  astonishing  complaint 
upon  the  cross,  that  God  had  forsaken  him,) 
exhibited  a striking  and  solemn  proof  to  the 
world,  to  the  universe,  no  less  to  angels  than 
to  men,  that  God,  in  affording  mercy  to  sin- 
ners, still  shows  his  inflexible  displeasure 
against  sin,  and  makes  no  relaxation  in  the 
awful  demands  of  his  holiness,  justice,  and 
truth.  A substitution  capable  of  manifesting 
the  justice  of  God  in  the  highest  exercise  of 
his  mercy,  that  he  might  appear  just  in  justi- 
fying the  ungodly,  (Rom.  iv.  5,)  was  of  such 
vast  importance  to  the  honour  of  God’s  cha- 
racter and  government,  that  if  it  could  have 
been  effected  by  any  inferior  means,  Christ 
died  in  vain,  Galat.  ii.  21.  The  interposition 
of  a mere  creature,  even  if  voluntary,  (but 
what  creature  would  dare  to  draw  upon  him- 
self the  displeasure  of  God  due  to  the  sins  of 
men  1)  could  not  have  displayed  the  full-orbed 
glory  of  all  the  divine  perfections,  as  it  now 
shines  forth  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ, 
2 Cor.  iv.  6.  None  in  heaven  or  in  earth  were 
able  or  worthy  to  interpose.  Therefore  the 
Son  said,  “ Lo  I come !”  He  himself,  his 
ownself,  bore  our  sins  in  his  own  body  upon 
the  tree,  (1  Pet.  ii.  24 :)  he  who  knew  no  sin, 
was  made  sin  for  us,  that  we  might  be  made 
the  righteousness  of  God  in  him,  2 Cor.  v.  21. 

There  is  a third  point,  which  is  peculiar  to 
the  religion  of  the  Bible,  and  which  discrimi- 
nates it  from  all  religious  systems  of  human 
institution.  There  are  few  of  these  but  con- 
tain some  important  truths.  In  general,  they 
inculcate  a degree  of  attention  to  the  practice 
of  social  virtues.  But  no  other  system  ever 
proposed  to  all  persons,  and  as  a general  truth, 
the  necessity  and  certainty  of  supernatural 
influence  and  agency ; an  agency,  which, 
from  the  greatness  of  its  effect,  and  the  uni- 
versality of  its  proposal  (being  promised  to  all 
without  exception  who  desire  it,)  must  be 
divine.  The  bodies  of  believers  are  the  tem- 
ples of  the  Holy  Ghost,  (1  Cor,  vi.  19,)  that 
God  dwelleth  in  them  by  his  Spirit,  that  they 
have  received  the  Spirit  of  God,  that  they  are 
led  by  the  Spirit,  walk  in  the  Spirit,  and  have 
communion  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  (Rom.  viii 
4 ; Galat.  v.  18,  25 ; 1 Cor.  xiii.  14  0 these 


412 


THE  BEST  WISDOM. 


truths  are  either  expressed  or  strongly  im- 
plied in  almost  every  page  of  the  New  Tes- 
tament. 

The  srospel  then  is  a message  from  God. 
It  stains  the  pride  of  human  glory,  and  with- 
out regarding  the  petty  distinctions  which 
obtain  amongst  men  with  respect  to  charac- 
ter or  rank,  it  treats  them  all  as  sinners  in 
the  sight  of  God,  and  under  the  power  of  de- 
pravity strengthened  by  habit.  As  such,  it 
points  them  to  a Saviour ; it  invites  and  en- 
joins them  to  apply  to  him,  to  submit  to  him, 
and  to  put  their  whole  trust  in  him ; to  re- 
nounce all  pleas  of  their  own,  and  to  plead 
his  name  and  his  atonement  for  their  pardon 
and  acceptance ; and  promises  to  all  who 
thus  plead,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God  will 
visit  them,  dwell  in  them,  and  abide  with 
them,  to  enable  them  by  his  gracious  in- 
fluence, both  to  will  and  to  do  according  to 
his  good  pleasure. 

I omit  other  particulars,  nor  shall  I at  pre- 
sent attempt  to  prove  these,  farther  than  by 
an  appeal  to  observation  and  experience.  I 
trust,  my  brethren,  we  all  desire  to  win  souls. 
It  is  a good  desire,  it  is  a noble,  a glorious 
ambition.  I hope  we  are  likewise  apprised 
of  the  nature  of  the  undertaking,  and  are  too 
wise  to  attempt  it,  or  to  expect  success,  by 
any  power  or  exertion  of  our  own,  unless  we 
faithfully  and  humbly  make  use  of  the  instru- 
ment which  God  has  appointed  for  the  pur- 
pose. This  instrument  is  the  gospel-message, 
the  principal  parts  of  which  I have  stated  to 
you.  This  is  the  rod  of  God’s  strength, 
which,  like  the  wonder-working  rod  of  Moses, 
when  held  up  in  his  name,  though  wielded 
by  a feeble  arm,  can  perform  miracles.  And 
I will  venture  to  affirm,  without  hesitation, 
and  without  exception,  that  no  man,  what- 
ever his  abilities  and  qualifications  rnay  be  in 
in  other  respects,  though  he  had  the  zeal  of 
a martyr  and  the  powers  of  an  angel,  will  be 
able  to  force  the  strong-holds  of  Satan,  to  cast 
down  the  lofty  imaginations  of  men,  and  win 
souls  to  holiness  and  happiness,  without  it. 
But  if  he  be  called  and  taught  of  God  to  preach 
this  gospel,  he  will  do  great  things ; he  will 
be  honoured  and  successful:  he  will  win 
souls ; he  will  be  numbered  among  the  wise. 

Let  us  appeal  to  facts.  The  apostle  Paul 
was  eminently  successful  in  winning  souls. 
He  planted  churches  in  many  different  and 
distant  parts  of  the  Roman  empire.  Where- 
ever  he  went,  power  from  on  high  accompa- 
nied his  word,  and  made  it  effectual,  accord- 
ing to  the  commission  he  had  received  from 
the  Lord,  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blinded 
Heathens,  to  turn  them  from  darkness  to 
light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God, 
Acts  xxvl  18.  Can  we  propose  a better  ex- 
ample for  our  imitation  1 Would  we  know  the 
subject-matter  of  that  preaching  which  pro- 
duced such  extensive  and  salutary  effects  1 
He  gives  us  full  information.  He  preached 


Christ  crucified ; Christ  the  wisdom  and  pow- 
er of  God,  (1  Cor.  i.  23,  24  ;)  the  unsearchable 
riches  of  Christ,  (Ephes.  iii.  8 ;)  Christ  the 
Man  who  shall  judge  the  quick  and  dead, 
(Acts  xvii.  31 ; xxvi.  28 ;)  Christ  as  God,  who 
purchased  the  church  with  his  own  blood.  As 
a wise  master-builder,  he  laid  this  foundation, 
and  declared,  that  other  foundation  can  no 
man  lay,  1 Cor.  iii.  10, 11.  He  preached  the 
atonement,  that  Christ  made  peace  by  the 
blood  of  his  cross,  died  for  us  while  sinners, 
and  that  we  are  justified  by  his  blood,  Col.  i. 
20.  He  preached  the  agency  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  as  absolutely  necessary  and  powerfully 
efficacious,  and  ascribes  that  operation  by 
which  Christ  in  his  true  character  is  re- 
vealed to  the  heart,  to  the  same  power 
which  commanded  light  to  shine  out  of  dark- 
ness, in  the  beginning,  2 Cor.  iv.  6.  These 
truths  were  the  weapons  of  his  warfare, 
2 Cor.  x.  4,  He  went  forth  conquering  and 
to  conquer,  not  by  the  enticing  words  of  man’s 
wisdom,  but  in  the  spirit  of  demonstration 
and  power. 

I need  not  tell  this  auditory  what  were  the 
doctrines  which  shook  the  pillars  and  founda- 
tions of  Popery  at  the  Reformation,  and  dif- 
fused a knowledge  and  practice  becoming  the 
profession  of  Christianity,  among  many  na- 
tions which  had  been  long  involved  in  tha 
darkness  of  ignorance,  superstition,  and  wick- 
edness. In  our  own  land,  it  was  not  very  long 
before  the  principles  of  the  Reformation  were 
severely  discountenanced.  Particularly  in 
the  reign  of  Charles  II.  they  were  opposed  by 
methods  which  the  good  providence  of  God 
at  length  effectually  restrained,  by  favouring 
us  with  a succession  of  Princes  of  the  House 
of  Hanover.  If  the  lives  and  conduct  of 
those  who  endured  fines,  stripes,  imprison- 
ment, and  death  for  conscience  sake,  be  com- 
pared with  the  spirit  and  temper  of  those  who 
inflicted  or  approved  them,  I think  a candid 
and  attentive  inquirer  will  be  at  no  loss  to 
determine  on  which  side  the  advantage  lay, 
in  point  of  real  religion  and  sound  morality. 

The  spirit  of  our  present  excellent  consti- 
tution and  government  allows  us  a degree  of 
religious  liberty  unknown  to  our  forefathers, 
for  which  we  cannot  be  sufficiently  thankful ; 
and  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation  and  of 
the  apostles  are  still  preached.  Nor  have  we 
reason  to  fear  that  sanguinary  laws,  and  the 
iron  hand  of  arbitrary  power,  will  be  em- 
ployed to  silence  us.  Yet  the  doctrines 
themselves  are  far  from  being  generally  ac- 
ceptable. The  spirit  of  opposition  is  awake, 
and  active  as  formerly,  though  the  method  of 
its  attack  is  varied.  But  great  is  the  truth, 
and  will  prevail.  It  has  triumphed  over  vio- 
lence and  rage;  it  is  equally  superior  to  the 
arts  of  subtilty  and  refinement.  We  are 
not  afraid  to  repeat  the  apostle’s  challenge : 
“ Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but 
he  ‘hat  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of 


THE  BEST  WISDOM. 


413 


God  ]”  1 John  v.  5.  Which  is  the  scheme 
of  religion  in  the  present  day,  which  produ- 
ces the  most  conscientious  reverence  to  the 
holy  name  of  the  Lord  our  God,  the  most 
habitual  and  devout  observance  of  his  holy 
day,  and  of  family- worship  1 What  kind  of 
preaching  evidences  itself  to  be  a doctrine  ac- 
cording to  godliness,  by  the  most  numerous 
and  notorious  instances  of  persons  reclaimed 
by  it  from  habits  of  gross  licentiousness,  and 
effectually  taught  to  fear  the  Lord  and  depart 
from  evil  ? What  are  those  principles,  which 
by  experience,  are  found  most  suitable  and 
most  powerful  to  support  the  soul  under  the 
pressure  of  great  afflictions,  or  upon  the  near 
approach  of  death  1 I know  there  are  peo- 
ple under  afflictions,  who,  like  Pharaoh, 
harden  themselves  yet  more;  who  value 
themselves  upon  a proud  stoical  resolution, 
and  deem  it  a weakness  to  complain. 
But  Christian  fortitude  is  a very  different 
thing.  It  is  the  temper  of  a humble  pardon- 
ed sinner,  who  has  entrusted  himself  and  his 
all  to  the  Saviour,  and,  believing  that  he  con- 
descends to  direct  all  his  concerns,  submits 
to  his  appointments,  not  by  constraint,  but 
willingly,  sensible  that  the  wisdom  and  love 
of  him  in  whom  he  confides  will  choose  bet- 
ter for  him  than  he  could  possibly  choose  for 
himself.  I know,  or  have  read,  that  the 
American  Indians,  when  put  to  death  by  their 
enemies,  in  the  midst  of  the  most  excruciat- 
ing tortures  that  cruelty  can  invent,  will 
sing  their  war-songs,  and  insult  their  tor- 
mentors, without  uttering  a groan  or  shed- 
ding a tear;  and  I have  likewise  read  of 
philosophers,  who,  to  confirm  their  admirers 
in  a persuasion  that  infidelity  had  freed  them 
from  all  fear  of  death  or  its  consequences, 
have  jested  in  their  dying  hours.  What  a 
contrast  to  these  is  the  relation  we  have  of 
the  death  of  Stephen,  who  with  the  utmost 
composure,  committed  his  departing  spirit 
into  the  hands  of  his  Saviour,  whom  he  saw 
ready  to  receive  him,  and  employed  his 
latest  breath  in  prayer  for  his  murderers! 
Acts  vii.  55 — 60.  When  a believer  in  Jesus 
is  about  to  die,  he  does  not  express  the  fiend- 
like phrenzy  of  a savage,  or  the  ill-timed 
levity  of  a buffoon ; he  is  serious  and  recol- 
lected. Conscious  of  his  unworthiness,  but 
knowing  whom  he  has  believed,  he  rejoices 
with  a joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory,  1 
Pet.  i.  8.  There  is  often  a dignity  and 
energy  in  the  language  of  plain  people  in 
dying  circumstances,  far  superior  to  what 
might  be  expected  from  their  former  habits 
of  life:  they  seem  to  have  new  ideas  and 
new  faculties ; heaven  opened  to  them,  and 
opened  in  them,  while  yet  in  the  body.  Ig- 
norant and  profane  persons,  who  are  some- 
times spectators  of  such  scenes,  have  been 
astonished  at  effects  which,  though  they  could 
not  account  for,  have  for  the  moment  secretly 
extorted  from  them  the  wish  of  Balaam, 


“ Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and 
let  my  last  end  be  like  his,”  Num.  xxiii.  10. 
By  these  effects  on  the  lives  and  deaths  of 
those  who  cordially  receive  it,  the  gospel 
which  we  prea.ch,  the  doctrine  of  the  cross, 
approves  itself  to  be  the  power  of  God  unto 
salvation,  the  sure  and  only  mean  of  winning 
souls  to  his  favour  and  image. 

If  I have  taken  up  too  much  of  your  time 
with  this  second  particular,  let  the  importance 
of  it,  and  the  state  of  religion  amongst  us, 
plead  my  excuse.  Thus  far  we  have  ad- 
vanced— If  it  be  wisdom  to  aim  at  a great 
design,  and  to  adopt  the  most  fit  and  proper 
means  for  the  accomplishment,  the  man  my 
text  speaks  of  is  wise.  His  end  is  great — to 
win  souls.  The  mean  he  employs  is  the  gos- 
pel, which  God  has  revealed  and  instituted 
for  this  very  purpose,  and  with  which  his 
power  and  blessing  are  surely  connected  by 
promise. 

3.  Yet  the  knowledge  of  a worthy  end,  and 
of  the  means  by  which  it  may  be  attained,  is 
not  sufficient  to  denominate  a man  wise.  If 
he  be  truly  wise,  and  his  object  of  great  im- 
portance, he  will  not  suffer  himself  to  be 
easily  diverted  from  it,  but  will  rather  hold 
and  manage  every  inferior  concernment  in  a 
due  subservience  and  subordination  to  his 
main  point.  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  when  a child, 
might  possibly  have  amused  himself,  as  ma- 
ny other  children  have  done,  by  blowing  up 
bubbles  in  soapy  water  with  a pipe.  But  it 
was  not  a childish  amusement  in  the  hands 
of  this  sublime  genius,  when  he  applied  it, 
among  other  experiments,  to  discover  ana 
establish  that  theory  of  light  and  colours,  by 
which,  in  his  admirable  System  of  Optics, 
he  enlightened  the  world.  But  if  we  speak 
strictly,  the  most  important  employments  and 
discoveries  of  which  mankind  are  capable,  if 
directed  no  higher  than  to  the  concerns  of 
the  present  life,  are  trivial  and  worthless  as 
the  sports  of  children,  or  the  wretched 
amusements  of  lunatics,  to  an  immortal,  who 
is  soon,  very  soon,  to  pass  unto  the  unseen 
world,  to  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of 
God,  and  to  be  fixed,  according  to  his  righ- 
teous award,  in  a state  of  endless  happiness 
or  misery.  The  desire  of  pleasing  God, 
and  of  doing  all  to  his  glory,  which  should 
be  the  ultimate  end  of  a rational  creature, 
and  will  be,  if  he  feels  his  dependence  and 
his  obligations,  this,  like  the  fabled  philoso- 
pher’s stone,  turns  every  thing  into  gold, 
sanctifies  the  most  common  actions  of  life 
which  belong  to  the  situation  in  which  Di- 
vine Providence  has  placed  us,  and  gives 
them  a sublimity  and  dignity.  Consecrated 
by  this  intention,  they  become  acts  of  devo- 
tion. They  have  a very  low  idea  of  religion 
who  confine  it  to  what  we  usually  mean  by 
devotional  exercises.  The  truly  religious 
man  does  indeed  bow  his  knees  in  secret  be- 
fore the  Most  High  God,  he  carefully  con- 


414 


THE  BEST  WISDOM. 


suits  his  holy  word,  he  waits  upon  him  in 
his  public  ordinances.  In  these  ways  he  de- 
rives fresh  supplies  from  the  fountain  of  wis- 
dom and  grace,  and  his  strength  is  renewed. 
But  he  does  not  leave  his  religion  in  the 
closet  or  the  church ; it  abideth  in  him,  is 
the  governing  spring  of  his  whole  conduct, 
and  according  to  the  degree  of  his  attainment 
in  faith  and  love,  and  allowing  for  the  un- 
avoidable abstractions  incidental  to  our 
frames  (which  are  too  weak  and  limited  to 
be  able  to  fix  our  attention  closely  upon 
many  things  at  once,)  whether  he  be  upon 
the  throne  or  the  bench,  upon  the  parade  or 
the  exchange ; whether  he  be  called  to  serve 
God  in  a public  capacity,  or  in  private  life, 
whether  he  be  in  a state  of  affluence,  or  earns 
his  honest  bread  by  sweeping  the  streets — in 
every  station  and  situation,  he  is  a servant  of 
God,  from  morning  to  night:  and  these  very 
different  services  are  all  equally  acceptable  to 
him,  who  seeth  not  as  man  seeth,  and  estimates 
them,  not  by  their  comparative  importance  in 
our  view,  but  according  to  the  principle  of 
love  by  which  they  are  performed,  and  the 
sublime  end  to  which  they  are  directed. 

But  we,  my  brethren,  who  are  ministers 
of  the  gospel,  have  this  great  advantage  (if 
indeed  we  improve  it,)  that  our  particular 
calling  as  members  of  society,  coincides  with 
our  general  calling  as  Christians.  The  per- 
son who  serves  God  in  a secular  calling,  may, 
as  I have  observed,  be  equally  acceptable  to 
God,  because  equally  devoted  to  his  will ; 
but  his  advantages  and  opportunities  for  win- 
ning souls  are  not  equal  to  ours.  It  is  our 
professed  and  appropriate  business:  and  we 
are  freed  from  the  incumbrances  of  worldly 
business,  that  we  may  give  our  whole  at- 
tention to  this  very  thing,  Acts  vi.  4 ; 1 Tim. 
iv.  15,  16.  If  we  are  wise,  we  shall  watch 
and  pray  against  being  impeded  by  any  stu- 
dies and  pursuits  which  have  not  an  evi- 
dent tendency  to  promote  our  success  in 
winning  souls.  You  have  probably  heard 
what  is  related  of  the  address  of  whale-fish- 
ers, when  the  whale,  irritated  by  the  wounds 
he  has  received,  attacks  their  boats.  It  is 
said  they  have  a tub  in  readiness  to  throw 
into  the  sea,  and  that  while  the  whale  furi- 
ously encounters  the  tub,  the  boat  has  time 
to  escape.  Whether  this  be  fact  or  not, 
methinks  it  may  suggest  a useful  lesson  to 
us : Many  things  not  criminal  in  themselves, 
will  prove  so  to  us,  if  we  suffer  them,  by 
engrossing  too  much  of  our  time  and  thoughts, 
to  divert  us  from  our  principal  object.  It 
may  be  wrong,  it  may  be  commendable,  for 
a minister  to  possess  some  general  know- 
ledge of  philosophy,  history,  criticism,  and 
other  branches  of  literature,  or  of  the  con- 
troversies which  have  disturbed  the  peace 
of  the  Church.  But  perimus  in  licitis.  An 
over-attachment  to  these  studies,  though  less 
scandalous,  may  prove  little  less  hurtful  to 


our  ministry  than  the  love  of  pleasure,  or 
the  love  of  money.  He  who  is  duly  sensible 
of  the  importance  and  difficulty  of  winning 
souls,  will  find  but  little  leisure  for  sorting 
shells  or  butterflies,  for  studying  grammati- 
cal niceties,  for  poring  over  manuscripts 
scarcely  legible,  for  decyphering  ancient  in- 
scriptions, or  entangling  himself  in  the  dry 
uninteresting  thickets  of  controversy.  He 
will  be  careful  lest  avocations  of  this  kind 
should  prove  like  the  tubs  I have  mentioned, 
amusements  to  divert  his  attention  from  the 
state  of  souls  around  him,  who  are  in  danger 
of  perishing  in  ignorance  and  sin.  We  are 
set  as  watchmen  to  sound  the  alarm,  to  warn 
the  wicked  of  their  evil  ways,  to  direct  in- 
quirers into  the  paths  of  peace,  to  point  out 
the  snares  and  temptations  to  which  they  are 
exposed,  to  exhort  and  charge  those  who  pro- 
fess the  truth,  that  they  walk  worthy  of  God 
who  has  called  them  to  his  kingdom  and 
glory ; in  a word,  to  use  our  best  endeavours 
publicly,  and  from  house  to  house,  (Acts  xx. 
10;  2 Tim.  iv.  2,)  in  season  and  out  of  season, 
to  build  up  our  hearers  in  their  most  holy 
faith.  We  are  to  give  an  account  of  the  ta- 
lents, opportunities,  and  souls  entrusted  to  us, 
and  we  should  tremble  at  the  thought  of  being 
then  obliged  to  confess,  “ while  thy  servant 
was  busy  here  and  there,  the  man  was  gone,” 
1 Kings  xx.  40.  If  such  an  eminent  man  of 
God  as  archbishop  Usher,  though  possessed 
of  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  gospel,  found 
cause,  when  reviewing  his  past  life  on  his 
dying  bed,  to  cry  out  repeatedly  and  earnest- 
ly, “ Lord,  forgive  my  sins  of  omission  1”  how 
jealous  ought  we  to  be  of  ourselves  ! It  be- 
hoves us  to  use  the  language  of  Nehemiah, 
to  many  proposals  and  pursuits  which  our  in- 
clinations may  plead  for,  “ I am  doing  a great 
work  so  that  I cannot  come  down.  Why 
should  the  work  cease,  while  I leave  it  and 
come  down  to  you!”  Neh.  vi.  3.  Seldom  is 
any  man  remarkably  successful  and  eminent 
in  arts  or  sciences,  in  the  acquisition  ot 
wealth  or  power,  who  does  not  resolutely 
deny  himself  in  other  respects,  and  make 
every  secondary  point  give  place,  so  far  as  it 
stands  in  competition  with  his  leading  and 
favourite  object.  Such  a determined  resolu- 
tion, to  follow  the  avowed  design  of  our  call- 
ing as  the  one  thing,  in  comparison  with 
which  every  thing  else  is  to  be  undervalued 
and  neglected,  if  likely  to  hinder  us,  is  essen- 
tial to  that  wisdom  which  alone  can  qualify 
us  for  winning  souls. 

4.  This  wisdom  implies  fortitude  also.  If 
we  engage  in  this  work  without  counting  the 
cost,  and  without  being  apprised  of  the  diffi- 
culties and  snares  to  which  it  may  expose  us ; 
or  if  we  cannot,  in  some  measure,  say  with 
the  apostle,  None  of  these  things  move  me 
(Acts  xx.  23,)  we  shall  probably  be  soon  dis- 
couraged. What  should  we  think  of  a states- 
man, who,  having  formed  a wise  and  noble 


THE  BEST  WISDOM. 


415 


plan  for  the  benefit  of  a kingdom,  and  having 
the  means  necessary  to  accomplish  it  within 
his  power,  should  be  deterred  from  carrying 
it  into  execution,  though  it  was  approved  by 
all  competent  judges,  merely  because  he 
could  not  bear  to  be  misunderstood,  or  misre- 
presented, by  the  very  lowest  of  the  people, 
or  by  the  children  who  play  in  the  street? 
His  want  of  spirit,  upon  such  a supposition, 
would  doubtless  be  esteemed  a want  of  wis- 
dom. But  this  is  a faint  representation  of  our 
folly,  if,  believing  ourselves  to  be  the  servants 
of  God,  being  convinced,  as  we  say,  of  the 
worth  and  danger  of  souls,  and  knowing  that 
the  gospel  of  God,  committed  to  our  trust 
(1  Thess.  ii.  4,)  is  the  only  possible  mean  of 
their  recovery  ; a regard  to  the  fear  or  favour 
of  men  should  prevail  on  us  to  suppress  or 
soften  our  message,  and  to  accommodate  our- 
selves to  their  taste,  instead  of  conforming  to 
our  instructions,  lest  we  should  displease 
them.  Would  an  earthly  king  bear  with  an 
ambassador  who  was  guilty  of  such  timid 
treachery  ? We  cannot,  my  brethren,  think 
too  humbly  of  ourselves,  but  we  may  magnify 
our  office,  and  we  ought.  In  this  sense  at 
least,  we  are  ambassadors  for  Christ,  (2  Cor. 
v.  20,)  that  the  message  we  are  to  deliver,  is 
not  ours,  but  his  by  whom  we  are  sent.  We 
are  not  answerable  for  the  success,  but  we  are 
under  the  strongest  obligations  to  be  faithful. 
And  he  whose  we  are,  and  whom  we  serve, 
is  well  able  to  support  us.  Let  us  not  fear  the 
reproach  of  men,  nor  be  afraid  of  their  re- 
vilings,  Isa.  li.  7.  In  the  sight  of  our  Lord 
God,  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  collected,  are 
less  than  nothing,  and  vanity,  inconsiderable 
as  the  drop  that  falls  unperceived  from  the 
bucket,  or  the  dust  (Isa.  xl.  15,)  which  cleaves 
to  the  scales  without  affecting  the  balance. 
The  apostles  were  wise  to  win  souls.  They 
tried  the  spirit  of  the  world  before  us,  and  were 
despised  and  insulted  by  it.  They  were  ac- 
counted the  offscouring  and  filth  of  all  things, 
and  suffered  much  shame  for  their  Lord’s 
sake;  (I  Cor.  iv.  18;  Acts  v.  41;)  but  they  es- 
teemed shame,  in  such  a cause,  their  highest 
honour.  Jesus  endured  the  cross,  and  des- 
pised the  shame  for  them  and  for  us.  He 
was  buffeted,  spit  on,  treated  as  a madman, 
a demoniac,  and  laughed  to  scorn.  Let  us 
go  forth  bearing  his  reproach,  in  meekness 
of  wisdom ; instructing  those  who  oppose,  not 
rendering  railing  for  railing,  but  pitying  and 
praying  for  them : but  let  us  be  firm  and  un- 
moved, and  not  hesitate  to  speak  the  truth 
in  love,  whether  they  will  hear,  or  whether 
they  will  forbear.  We  shall  not  speak  wholly 
in  vain ; and  to  be  instrumental  in  saving  one 
soul  from  death,  is  an  honour  sufficient  to 
compensate  for  all  the  slights  and  contempt 
we  can  meet  with  from  an  unkind  world.  It 
is,  indeed,  our  duty  to  study  to  find  out  ac- 
ceptable words,  to  endeavour  to  please  men 
for  their  edification,  and  to  be  careful  not  to , 


add  to  the  unavoidable  offence  of  the  gospel, 
by  debasing  our  zeal  with  the  unhallowed 
fire  of  an  angry  spirit : but  we  degrade  our 
character,  if  we  appear  too  solicitous  to  con- 
ciliate the  good  opinion  of  men,  or  to  depend 
upon  their  favour.  The  Lord  who  employs 
us,  will  take  care  of  us  ; and  to  live  in  a spirit 
of  unreserved  dependence  upon  him,  will 
raise  us  to  a noble  independence  with  respect 
to  creatures.  All  hearts  are  in  his  hands. 
He  will  protect  our  persons  and  characters, 
supply  our  wants,  control  our  enemies,  and 
raise  us  friends,  so  far  as  he  sees  it  needful, 
without  any  solicitude  on  our  parts,  if  we 
can  but  put  our  trust  in  him.  Such  are  the 
principles  of  Christian  fortitude.  He  who  is 
wise  to  win  souls,  loves  his  fellow-creatures, 
but  he  cannot  fear  them,  because  he  fears  the 
Lord.  He  will  neither  provoke  nor  dread 
their  frowns,  nor  will  he  meanly  court  their 
smiles.  He  knows  that  if  they  receive  his 
message,  they  will  love  him  for  the  truth’s 
sake,  and  he  neither  expects  nor  desires  their 
favour"  upon  other  terms.  By  the  cross  of 
Christ  he  is  crucified  to  the  world,  (Gal.  iv. 
14,)  and  the  world  to  him.  He  has  chosen 
his  side.  He  will  serve  the  Lord,  (Joshua 
xxiv.  25,)  and  he  will  use  his  utmost  influ- 
ence to  prevail  on  others  to  serve  him  like- 
wise; so  far  as  he  succeeds,  he  feels  a joy  su- 
perior to  the  joy  of  harvest,  or  of  those  who 
divide  the  spoil,  Isa.  ix.  3.  When  he  cannot 
succeed,  he  is  grieved,  but  not  disconcerted; 
and,  for  the  most  part,  his  calm  but  steadfast 
perseverance  in  well-doing,  will  gradually 
establish  his  character,  stop  the  mouth  of  ca- 
lumny, and  extort  a reverence  to  his  person, 
even  from  those  who  cannot  bear  his  doctrine. 

5.  I shall  mention  but  one  particular  more, 
which,  though  experience  shows  to  be  not  so 
absolutely  necessary  as  those  which  I have 
already  specified,  because,  in  fact,  it  has  been 
too  little  regarded  by  many  who  have  been 
wise  to  win  souls,  yet  is  certainly  a branch 
of  that  wisdom,  which,  as  ministers,  we  ought' 
incessantly  to  ask  of  God — I mean  a due  at- 
tention to  the  importance  of  union  among 
those  who  are  engaged  in  the  same  cause. 
A great  stress  has  indeed  been  often  laid 
upon  uniformity  of  sentiment  and  modes  of 
worship  ; but  this,  in  the  present  state  of  hu- 
man nature,  can  no  more  be  effected  either 
by  force  or  persuasion,  than  men  can  be  forced 
or  persuaded  to  a uniformity  of  stature  or 
complexion;  and  if  it  were  practicable,  it 
might  prove  of  little  value.  The  form  of 
religion  may  be  strenuously  contended  for  by 
those  who  are  strangers  to  the  power  of  it ; 
but  the  best  form  we  can  conceive,  if  destitute 
of  power,  is  lifeless,  like  the  body  without  the 
soul.  The  true  unity  of  spirit  is  derived  from 
the  things  in  which  those  who  are  taught  and 
born  of  God  agree,  and  should  not  be  affected 
by  those  in  which  they  differ.  The  church 
of  Christ,  collectively  considered,  is  an  army; 


416 


THE  BEST  WISDOM. 


they  serve  under  one  Prince,  have  one  com- 
mon interest,  and  are  opposed  by  the  same 
enemies.  This  army  is  kept  up,  and  the 
places  of  those  who  are  daily  removed  to  the 
church  triumphant,  supplied  entirely  by  those 
who  are  rescued  and  won  from  the  power  of 
the  enemy,  which  is  chiefly  effected  by  the 
gospel-ministry.  This  consideration  should 
remind  ministers,  that  it  is  highly  improper 
(I  might  use  a stronger  expression)  to  waste 
much  of  their  time  and  talents,  which  ought 
to  be  employed  against  the  common  foe,  in 
opposing  those,  who,  though  they  cannot  ex- 
actly agree  with  them  in  every  smaller  point, 
are  perfectly  agreed,  and  ready  to  concur 
with  them,  in  promoting  their  principal 
design.  A wise  statesman,  who  has  a point 
much  at  heart  which  he  cannot  carry  with- 
out assistance,  will  gladly  accept  of  help  from 
persons  of  all  parties  on  whom  he  can  prevail 
to  join  with  him,  and  will  not,  at  such  a crisis, 
preclude  himself  from  this  advantage,  by  an 
unseasonable  discussion  of  more  minute  con- 
cerns, in  which  he  knows  they  must,  and 
will  be  against  him.  When  I see  ministers 
of  acknowledged  piety,  and  respectable  abili- 
ties, very  busy  in  defending  or  confuting  the 
smaller  differences,  which  already  too  much 
separate  those  who  ought  to  be  of  one  heart 
and  one  mind,  though,  while  they  are  all  falli- 
ble, they  cannot  be  exactly  of  one  judgment; 
though  I give  them  credit  for  their  good  inten- 
tion, I cannot  but  lament  the  misapplication  of 
their  zeal,  which,  if  directed  into  another  chan- 
nel, would  probably  make  them  much  more 
successful  in  winning  souls.  Let  us  sound 
ai:  alarm  in  the  enemy’s  camp,  but  not  in  our 
own  ! I have  somewhere  met  with  a passage 
of  ancient  history,  the  substance  of  which, 
though  my  recollection  of  it  is  but  imperfect, 
I will  relate,  because  I think  it  very  appli- 
cable to  this  part  of  my  subject.  It  is  an  ac- 
count of  two  large  bodies  of  forces  which  fell 
in  with  each  other  in  a dark  night.  A battle 
immediately  ensued.  The  attack  and  resist- 
ance were  supported  with  equal  spirit.  The 
contest  was  fierce  and  bloody.  Great  was 
the  slaughter  on  both  sides,  and  on  both  sides 
they  were  on  the  point  of  claiming  the  vic- 
tory ; when  the  day  broke,  and  as  the  light 
advanced,  they  soon  perceived  to  their  asto- 
nishment and  grief,  that  owing  to  the  dark- 
ness of  the  night,  they  had  been  fighting,  not 
with  enemies,  as  they  had  supposed,  but  with 
friends  and  allies ; they  had  been  doing  their 
enemies’  work,  and  weakening  the  cause 
they  wished  to  support.  The  expectation  of 
each  party  to  conquer  the  other,  was  founded 
upon  the  losses  the  opponent  had  sustained ; 
and  this  was  what  proportionably  aggravated 
their  lamentation  and  distress,  when  they  had 
sufficient  light  to  show  them  the  mischief 
they  had  done.  Ah ! my  friends,  if  shame  be 
compatible  with  the  heavenly  state,  as  per- 
haps in  a sense  it  may  (for  believers,  when 


most  happy  here,  are  most  visibly  ashamed 
of  themselves,)  shall  we  not,  even  then,  be 
ashamed  to  think  how  often,  in  this  dark 
world,  we  mistook  our  friends  for  foes,  and 
that,  while  we  thought  we  were  fighting  for 
the  cause  of  God  and  truth,  we  were  wound- 
ing and  worrying  the  people  whom  he  loved, 
and  perhaps  indulging  our  own  narrow,  self- 
ish party  prejudices,  under  the  semblance  of 
zeal  for  his  glory  1 

II.  I hope  what  I have  hitherto  offered, 
though  more  directly  addressed  to  ministers, 
may  not  be  altogether  uninteresting  or  un- 
useful to  the  rest  of  my  auditory;  but  you 
who  are  not  in  the  ministry,  if  you  have  tasted 
that  the  Lord  is  gracious,  have  a desire,  in 
common  with  us,  to  win  souls.  And  there  is 
not  only  ample  room  and  scope  for  your  en- 
deavours, in  concert  with  ours,  but  without 
concurrence  on  your  parts,  we  can  expect  but 
little  success.  You,  likewise,  if  animated 
by  the  wisdom  which  is  from  above,  even 
those  of  you  who  are  in  the  most  confined 
situations,  may  be  greatly  instrumental  in 
winning  souls. 

1.  By  your  example. — If  you  walk  agree- 
ably to  your  profession,  blameless  and  harm- 
less as  the  children  of  God,  shining  as  lights 
in  the  world,  Phil.  ii.  15.  When  we  preach 
a free  salvation  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  they, 
who  know  no  better,  misrepresent  our  doc- 
trine, as  being  unfavourable  to  the  practice  of 
morality,  supposing  that  by  the  stress  we  lay 
upon  faith  in  his  atonement,  as  the  only  solid 
ground  of  hope  for  acceptance  with  God,  we 
encourage  men  to  expect  to  be  saved  at  last 
whether  they  obey  his  commandments  or  not. 
We  endeavour  to  convince  them  of  their  mis- 
take, and  to  prove,  that  as  without  faith  it  is 
impossible  to  please  God,  (Heb.  xi.  6,)  so  it 
is  no  less  impossible  for  any  person  to  possess 
true  faith,  without  earnestly  endeavouring  to 
please  and  obey  him  in  all  things,  from  prin- 
ciples of  love  and  gratitude.  The  proof  of 
this  is  easy  to  those  who  understand  the  scrip- 
tures, and  acknowledge  their  divine  authority. 
But  many,  yea,  most  people,  are  more  likely 
to  be  convinced  by  what  they  observe  of  you, 
than  by  what  they  hear  from  us.  We  assure 
them  that  our  gospel  teaches  those  who  receive 
it,  to  renounce  all  ungodliness  and  worldly 
lusts,  to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly; 
(Tit.  ii.  12 ;)  to  be  temperate  in  prosperity, 
patient  under  affliction ; to  fill  up  their  seve- 
ral relations  in  life,  with  integrity  and  dili- 
gence ; to  be  cheerfully  submissive  to  the 
will  of  God  under  all  changes ; to  be  meek, 
gentle,  and  benevolent,  forbearing  and  for- 
giving: in  a word,  to  do,  in  all  cases,  to 
others,  as  we  would  they  should  do  unto  us, 
Matt.  vii.  12.  Happy  for  us,  if  when  we 
look  round  upon  our  hearers,  we  can  with 
confidence  say,  “ Ye  are  our  epistles,  known 
and  read  of  all  men,”  2 Cor.  iii.  2.  If  any 
ask  us  concerning  the  tendency  of  our  doc- 


THE  BEST  WISDOM. 


417 


trines,  shall  we  send  them  to  you,  that  they 
may  notice,  not  only  your  serious  and  con- 
stant attendance  upon  public  worship,  but 
the  good  order  of  your  families,  your  be- 
haviour as  husbands  or  wives,  parents  or 
children,  masters  or  servants,  your  punctu- 
ality in  business,  and  to  all  your  engage- 
ments and  promises,  and  the  tenderness  you 
discover  to  the  characters  and  concerns  of 
your  neighbours]  Shall  we  send  them  to 
you,  when  you  are  in  trouble,  when  you  are 
visited  with  sickness  and  strong  pain,  or 
when  the  desire  of  your  eyes  is  taken  away 
with  a stroke  (Ezek.  xxiv.  16,)  that  they 
may  see  with  their  own  eyes  and  be  satisfied 
that  you  have  neither  followed  cunningly 
devised  fables,  nor  contented  yourselves  with 
mere  lifeless  notions  of  the  truth ; but  that 
your  religion  is  real  and  powerful,  and  not 
only  inspires  you  with  a good  hope  respect- 
ing a future  state,  but  is  the  source  of  your 
comfort,  and  the  spring  of  your  conduct  in 
the  present  life  ] may  we  venture,  my 
friends,  to  make  this  appeal  ] then  undoubt- 
edly you  are  wise  to  win  souls.  A pro- 
fession like  yours  cannot  be  without  an  in- 
fluence within  your  own  circle.  Do  any 
persons,  who  know  your  whole  deportment, 
affect  to  scorn  or  pity  you  ] if  they  treat  you 
as  hypocrites,  they  are  hypocrites  themselves, 
they  are  contradicted  by  their  own  conscien- 
ces. I will  not  say  they  love  you,  but  be  as- 
sured they  secretly  reverence  you.  It  is  only 
the  trifling  half-professor,  who  hears  the  gos- 
el  and  talks  about  it,  but  dishonours  it  by 
is  practice,  whom  the  world  really  despise. 
And  who  can  blame  them  for  despising  such 
characters  ] But  alas  for  those  who,  by  thus 
causing  the  ways  of  truth  to  be  evil  spoken 
of,  lay  stumbling-blocks  before  the  blind,  Lev. 
xix.  14. 

The  effects  of  a consistent  conversation 
becoming  the  gospel  in  those  who  profess  it, 
were  remarkably  exemplified  in  the  first 
Christian  church  at  Jerusalem.  They  were 
apparently  like  sheep  without  a shepherd, 
sheep  in  the  midst  of  wolves.  They  were 
surrounded  by  the  very  people  who  had 
lately  murdered  their  Lord.  But  the  holi- 
ness, love,  joy,  peace,  union  and  simplicity, 
which  animated  their  conduct,  impressed  an 
awe  upon  the  beholders,  so  that  no  poor  pre- 
tender durst  presume  to  join  them ; (Acts  v. 
13 ;)  and  though  divested  of  all  outward  ad- 
vantages and  support,  the  people  were  con- 
strained to  magnify  them.  Were  this  spirit 
more  general  amongst  us,  I believe  it  would 
be  more  effectual  to  stop  the  mouths  of  gain- 
sayers,  and  to  silence  the  cavils  of  infidels, 
than  all  our  books  and  sermons.  And  the 
twelve  apostles,  were  they  now  living 
amongst  us,  would  probably  preach  to  little 
purpose,  unless  a measure  of  this  spirit  were 
discoverable  in  their  professed  admirers. 

2.  By  your  prayers. — You  are  not  called 
Vol.  II.  3 G 


to  preach  the  gospel,  but  in  this  way,  you 
may  greatly  assist  those  who  are.  Brethren, 
pray  for  us.  Our  work  is  great;  the  diffi- 
culties we  have  to  surmount,  the  snares  and 
temptations  which  surround  us,  and  our  in- 
firmities, are  many.  Who  is  sufficient  for 
these  things]  The  apostle  Paul,  distin- 
guished as  he  was  by  the  eminence  of  his 
grace,  experience,  and  services,  set  a high 
value  upon  the  prayers  of  God’s  people. 
Hear  how  he  pleads  with  them,  with  an 
earnestness,  like  that  of  a needy  beggar  re- 
questing alms : “ I beseech  you  brethren,  for 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ’s  sake,  and  for  the 
love  of  the  Spirit,  that  you  s,trive  together  in 
your  prayers  to  God  for  me,”  Rom.  xv.  30. 
And  pray,  “That  the  word  of  the  Lord  may 
have  free  course,  may  run  and  be  glorified,” 
2 Thess.  iii.  1.  The  Lord  has  promised  to 
do  great  things  for  his  people,  but  he  has  said, 
that  he  will  be  inquired  of  by  them,  to  do  it 
for  them,  Ezek.  xxxvi.  37.  Prize,  and  im- 
prove, your  great  privilege  of  access  to  the 
throne  of  grace,  by  which  every  believer  in 
Jesus,  like  Israel  of  old,  has  power  with  God 
and  with  man.  In  answer  to  effectual  fer- 
vent prayer,  the  army  of  Sennacherib  was 
destroyed  in  a night,  (Isa.  xxxvii.  21,  36,) 
and  Peter  was  delivered  from  a strong  prison 
and  from  the  malice  of  Herod,  Acts  xii.  5* 
12.  The  efficacy  of  prayer  is  still  the  same. 
If  the  Lord  were  pleased  to  pour  out  a spirit 
of  prayer  and  supplication  upon  his  people, 
we  should  find  our  public  ordinances  more 
lively  and  more  fruitful.  We  should  then 
hope  to  be  more  successful  in  winning  souls, 
and  you  might  justly  claim  a principal  share 
in  the  comfort  and  honour  of  seeing  that 
good  work  prosper,  to  the  success  of  which, 
your  prayers  would  largely  contribute.  Next 
to  the  immediate  assistance  and  consolations 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,  nothing  encourages  a 
faithful  minister  so  much,  as  when  he  thinks 
he  can  perceive  that,  while  he  is  speaking, 
his  hearers  are  drawing  down  a blessing 
upon  his  words,  by  their  prayers:  it  adds 
wings  to  his  zeal,  gives  him  a double  im- 
pression upon  his  own  heart,  of  the  weight 
and  importance  of  the  truths  he  delivers;  and 
enables  him  to  dispense  them  with  a double 
impression,  of  demonstration  and  power,  upon 
the  hearts  of  others. 

3.  By  affording  your  countenance  and  as- 
sistance, according  to  the  ability  the  Lord 
has  given  you,  to  promote  every  prudent 
and  well  directed  scheme  which  is  set  on  foot 
for  the  more  effectual  spreading  of  that 
knowledge  which  is  necessary  in  order  to 
win  souls,  from  the  dominion  of  sin,  to  the 
service  of  God.  Among  these  there  are  few 
if  any,  which  I can  more  warrantably  com- 
mend to  your  attention,  than  the  laudable 
and  benevolent  object  of  the  Society  for  pro- 
moting Religious  Knowledge  among  the 
Poor, — an  institution,  which  it  has  pleased 


418 


THE  BEST  WISDOM. 


God  signally  to  prosper,  both  by  the  large  in- 
crease of  their  fund  from  year  to  year,  and 
the  many  instances  of  the  known  happy  ef- 
fects which  have  followed  the  perusal  of  the 
books  they  have  distributed.  Many  more 
instances,  as  yet  unknown  to  us,  we  trust 
will  be  manifested  in  the  great  day,  when 
the  Lord  shall  appear  in  glory.  Though 
the  beginning  of  this  Society  was  small, 
they  have,  since  the  year  1750,  when  it  was 
first  formed,  distributed  more  than  four  hun- 
dred thousand  books,  upwards  of  one  hundred 
and  five  thousand  of  which  were  Bibles  and 
New  Testaments ; the  rest  were  small  and 
plain  books,  well  adapted  to  the  capacities 
and  circumstances  of  those  who  have,  mostly, 
but  a confined  education,  and  who  have  not 
much  time  for  reading.  The  number  of  books 
bestowed  annually  has  been  on  the  increase 
from  year  to  year.  In  the  course  of  the  last 
year,  according  to  the  printed  account,  the 
number  of  all  the  different  books  was  fifteen 
thousand  five  hundred  and  eighty.  How 
much  these  donations  may  have  multiplied 
the  means  of  religious  knowledge  among 
people  otherwise  destitute,  in  these  king- 
doms, in  our  Plantations,  and  in  America, 
who  can  say,  who  can  even  conjecture  1 And 
we  hope,  by  the  benefactions  of  this  year,  the 
Society  will  be  able  to  do  more  the  following 
year  than  in  any  former. 

People  who  are  in  danger  of  perishing  for 
lack  of  knowledge,  are  still  very  numerous. 
The  much  which  has  been  done,  is  little  com- 
pared with  what  the  Society  might  yet  do 
were  their  resources  equal  to  their  wishes.  I 
trust  my  request,  that  you  will  strengthen 
their  hands  at  this  time,  will  not  be  in  vain ; 
and  that  the  brief  account  I have  given  you 
of  their  design  and  progress,  will  render  far- 
ther solicitation  needless.  To  bespeak  the 
benevolence  of  my  stated  congregation,  when 
a collection  is  proposed,  I seldom  do  more 
than  inform  them  of  the  occasion,  and  that  it 
has  my  good  wishes.  After  the  repeated 
proofs  I have  had  of  their  generosity,  I 
need  do  no  more.  Nor  will  I suppose  that  it 
is  necessary  to  use  any  farther  arguments  to 
prevail  with  you. 

There  may  be  some  persons  present,  who 
will  kindly  assist  us  in  procuring  the  means 
of  religious  knowledge  for  others,  who  are, 
hitherto,  unacquainted  with  the  power  and  the 
comforts  of  religion  themselves.  May  the 
good  Lord  now  awaken  their  desires  to  ob- 
tain the  one  thing  needful,  the  pearl  of  great 
price ! That  knowledge  which  is  necessary 
for  the  poor  is  equally  so  for  you,  whatever 
your  situation  in  life  may  be.  Will  you 
pity  others,  and  not  feel  a concern  for  your 
own  case  1 You  may  deserve  thanks  from  us 
for  your  ready  assistance  in  this  good  work, 


and  yet  your  heart  may  be  in  a state  of  aliena- 
tion from  God ; you  may  have  amiable  quali- 
fications, which  entitle  you  to  the  esteem  of 
your  fellow-creatures,  as  you  are  members 
of  society,  and  be  at  the  same  time  destitute 
of  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  gospel.  Per- 
mit me,  before  we  part,  to  offer  one  considera- 
tion to  your  serious  thoughts.  We  read  that 
eight  persons  only  were  saved  in  the  ark, 
(1  Pet.  iii.  20,)  and  only  four  of  these,  Noah 
and  his  three  sons,  were  men.  Considering 
the  large  dimensions  of  the  ark,  I think  we 
may  take  it  for  granted,  that  Noah  and  his 
sons  did  not  build  it  without  assistance ; and 
there  were  no  men  to  assist  them  in  escaping 
from  the  flood,  but  such  as  afterwards  perish- 
ed in  it.  What  an  awful  case ! To  afford  their 
help  to  build  an  ark  for  the  preservation  of 
others,  and  then  to  remain  out  of  the  ark 
themselves,  until  the  flood  came  and  swept 
them  all  away.  There  is  a day  of  wrath 
approaching.  It  will  burn  like  an  oven;  it 
will  ravage  like  a flood.  The  gospel  points 
out  a refuge.  The  believer  in  Jesus  Christ* 
like  Noah  in  the  ark,  is  in  perfect  safety ; 
he  is  already  delivered  from  condemnation, 
and  shall  stand  before  the  Lord  in  humble 
confidence,  when  he  shall  come  to  judge  the 
world.  Your  concurrence  in  this  charitable 
design  of  distributing  Bibles  among  the  poor, 
that  they  may  be  timely  warned  to  flee  from 
the  wrath  to  come  is  commendable: — thus 
you  assist  in  preparing  an  ark  for  them ; the 
very  book  or  books  which  your  money  will 
purchase,  may  be  blessed  to  the  saving  of 
souls,  and  consequently  you  may  be  the  in- 
strument. Can  you  bear  the  thought  of  be- 
ing instrumental  to  the  salvation  of  others, 
and  to  lose  your  own  soul,  and  be  yourself  a 
cast-away  at  last,  after  all  the  means  and  op- 
portunites  you  have  been  favoured  with,  af- 
ter all  the  warnings  and  calls  you  have  had, 
after  all  the  good  you  may  have  done  as  a mem- 
ber of  society  1 Alas ! is  it  possible  that  you 
can  believe  there  is  a flood  coming,  and  that 
an  ark  is  prepared,  and  not  flee,  instantly 
flee,  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  you  1 
O may  the  Lord  make  you  truly  wise,  and 
effectually  win  your  soul  to  himself ! 

Brethren,  the  wisdom  spoken  of  in  my  text 
is  very  different  from  the  wisdom  of  this 
world,  which  knows  not  God.  But  the 
scripture  cannot  be  broken ; let  us  therefore 
abide  by  the  sure  decision  of  that  word  which 
cannot  deceive  or  disappoint  us.  They  are 
truly  wise,  who  are  wise  to  win  souls ; and 
though  they  may  be  now  obscured  by  mis- 
representations and  reproaches,  they  shall 
shine,  ere  long,  as  the  brightness  of  the  fir- 
mament, and  they  that  turn  many  to  righ- 
teousness, as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever, 
Dan.  xii.  13. 


fHE  GREAT  ADVENT ; 


A SERMON 

PREACHED  IN  THE  PARISH  CHURCH  OF  ST.  MARY  WOOLNOTH, 


ON  THURSDAY,  APRIL  23,  1789. 

THE  DAY  OF  GENERAL  THANKSGIVING  FOR  THE  KING’S  HAPPY  RECOVERY. 


For  the  Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  heaven  with  a shout,  with  the  voice  of  the  arch- 
angel, and  with  the  trump  of  God : and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall  rise  first ; then  we 
which  are  alive  and  remain,  shall  he  caught  up  together  with  them  in  the  clouds,  to 
meet  the  Lord  in  the  air:  and  so  shall  we  ever  he  with  the  Lord. — 1 Thess.  iv.  16,  17. 


Our  beloved  king  is  now  on  his  way, 
amidst  the  acclamations  of  an  affectionate 
people,  to  St.  Paul’s  Cathedral : there  he 
will,  this  day,  make  his  public  acknowledg- 
ment to  God,  who  heard  his  prayer  in  the 
time  of  his  trouble.  It  will  be  a joyful  sight 
to  thousands;  and,  perhaps,  there  is  not  a 
person  in  this  assembly  who  has  not  felt  a 
desire  to  be  one  of  the  spectators.  But  I am 
glad  to  meet  you  here.  Many  of  you,  I 
doubt  not,  earnestly  and  repeatedly  prayed 
for  the  recovery  of  our  gracious  Sovereign ; 
and  you  judge  with  me,  that  the  most  pro- 
per expression  of  our  gratitude  and  joy,  is  to 
unite  in  rendering  praise  to  God  upon  the 
very  spot  where  we  have  often  presented  our 
united  prayers.  And  I infer,  from  the  large- 
ness of  the  congregation,  that  few  who  sta- 
tedly worship  with  us  are  now  absent,  those 
excepted,  who,  residing  in  or  near  the  line 
of  procession,  could  not  attend  with  proprie- 
ty, nov  perhaps  with  safety. 

If  he  in  whose  name  we  are  met  shall  be 
pleased  (as  his  word  encourages  us  to  hope) 
to  favour  us  with  the  influence  of  his  Holy 
Spirit,  and  to  enable  us,  in  the  exercise  of 
that  faith  which  gives  subsistence  and  evi- 
dence to  things  as  yet  future  and  unseen,  to 
realize  the  subject  of  my  text  to  our  minds, 
we  shall  have  no  reason  to  regret  our  coming 
together  upon  this  occasion. 

The  immediate  design  of  the  apostle,  in 
these  words,  is  to  comfort  believers  under  a 
trial,  which  some  of  you,  perhaps,  feel  at  this 
hour,  and  to  which  any  of  us  may  be  called 
6ooner  than  we  are  aware,  the  removal  of  our 
Christian  friends  or  relatives,  with  whom  we 
have  often  taken  sweet  counsel,  to  a better 
world.  Such  a stroke,  whenever  it  takes 


place,  will  awaken  painful  sensations,  which 
he  who  knows  our  frame  does  not  condemn. 
The  tendency  of  the  gospel  is  to  moderate  and 
regulate,  but  not  to  stifle  or  eradicate  the 
feelings  of  humanity.  We  may  sorrow,  but 
provision  is  made  that  we  should  not  sorrow 
like  those  who  have  no  hope ; “ Blessed  are 
the  dead  who  die  in  the  Lord,”  Rev.  xiv.  13. 
It  is  but  a temporary  separation;  we  shall  see 
them  again  to  unspeakable  advantage.  “ For 
if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again, 
even  so  they  also  that  sleep  in  Jesus  shall 
God  bring  with  him.”  The  change  of  ex- 
pression here  is  observable,  Jesus  died. 
Death  to  him,  was  death  indeed;  death  in  all 
its  horrors;  but  he  died  for  his  people,  to 
disarm  death  of  its  sting,  to  throw  a light 
upon  the  dark  passage  to  the  grave,  and  to 
open  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers. 
For  now  they  that  believe  in  him  shall  never 
die,  John  xi.  26.  He  so  dispels  their  fears, 
and  enlivens  their  hopes,  that  to  them  death 
is  no  more  than  a sleep ; they  sleep  in  Jesus 
and  are  blessed.  And  when  he  who  is  their 
life  shall  appear,  as  he  certainly  will,  and 
every  eye  shall  see  him,  they  also  shall  ap- 
pear with  him  in  glory,  Col.  iii.  4.  “For  the 
Lord  himself  shall  descend  from  heaven, 
with  the  voice  of  the  archangel  and  the 
trump  of  God : and  the  dead  in  Christ  shall 
rise  first.” 

But  I think  I am  warranted  to  consider 
the  text  in  a more  general  view,  and  to  ac- 
commodate it  to  the  happy  event  which  de- 
mands our  especial  thankfulness  and  praise 
on  this  day.  Let  our  thoughts  rise  from  the 
King’s  splendid,  though  solemn  procession 
to  St.  Paul’s,  to  contemplate  that  great  ad- 
vent of  the  King  of  kings,  the  idea  of  which 
419 


420 


THE  GREAT  ADVENT. 


filled  and  fired  the  apostle’s  thoughts,  Rev. 
i.  7.  Behold ! he  cometh  in  the  clouds  ! He 
cometh  in  his  own  glory,  in  the  glory  of  his 
Father,  with  all  his  angels,  and  with  all  bis 
saints ! Matt.  xxv.  31 ; 1 Thess.  iii.  12. 

If  I attempt  to  illustrate  the  procession  (so 
to  speak)  of  that  great  day,  for  which  all 
other  days  were  made,  by  the  most  striking 
circumstances  of  the  present  day,  it  will,  in- 
deed, be  comparing  great  things  with  small. 
In  some  respects  comparison  will  utterly  fail, 
and  I must  have  recourse  to  contrast.  For 
what  proportion  can  there  be  between  finite 
and  infinite,  between  the  most  important  con- 
cerns of  time,  and  those  of  eternity  ? 

Let  us,  however,  aim  to  fix  our  feeble  con- 
ceptions upon  the  Personage  whose  approach 
is  here  announced ; upon  the  manner  of  his 
coming;  upon  his  train  of  attendants,  and 
upon  the  final  event  of  his  appearance,  with 
which  the  scene  will  close. 

The  Lord  himself  shall  descend. — At  an- 
other time,  if  both  houses  of  parliament,  the 
judges,  the  foreign  ministers,  the  principal 
part  of  the  nobility,  and  persons  of  distinction 
in  the  nation,  were  to  assemble  in  St.  Paul’s, 
their  presence  would  form  a grand  and  affect- 
ing spectacle.  But  upon  this  occasion,  though 
they  should  be  all  there,  if  the  King  was  not 
seen  among  them,  it  is  probable  they  would  be 
all  in  a manner  overlooked,  and  disappoint- 
ment and  anxiety  would  mark  the  counte- 
nance of  every  beholder.  But  it  is  more  than 
probable,  it  is  absolutely  certain,  that  if  all 
the  glories  of  the  invisible  world  were  to  open 
upon  the  view  of  those  who  feel  their  obliga- 
tions to  the  great  Redeemer,  they  could  not  be 
completely  happy,  unless  they  were  permit- 
ted to  behold  his  glory.  He  has  stipulated  on 
their  behalf,  “ Father,  I will  that  they  whom 
thou  hast  given  me,  should  be  with  me  where 
I am (John  xvii.  24 ;)  and  by  his  grace,  he 
qualifies  them  for  their  high  privilege,  so  that 
even  now  they  can  say,  “ Whom  have  I in 
heaven  but  thee  ? and  there  is  none  on  earth 
that  I desire  besides  thee,”  Psalm  lxxiii.  25. 
Jesus  is  the  light,  the  life,  the  sun  of  the 
soul  that  know7s  him,  according  to  the  revela- 
tion given  in  the  scriptures  of  his  person, 
offices,  and  grace.  And,  as  the  most  magni- 
ficent palace  would  be  but  a dungeon,  if  it 
had  no  apertures  to  admit  the  light,  so  the 
whole  creation  would  be  dark  and  dreary  to 
his  people,  were  it  possible  that  they  could 
be  excluded  from  his  presence. 

In  this  life,  they  can  know  but  little  of  the 
particulars  of  that  happiness  which  God  has 
prepared  for  them  that  love  him ; but  in  ge- 
neral they  know,  and  this  suffices  them,  that 
they  shall  see  him  as  he  is,  (1  John  iii.  2,) 
and  shall  be  like  him,  and  with  him.  They 
love  him  unseen ; and,  while  he  is  yet  absent 
from  them,  the  expectation,  founded  upon 
his  own  gracious  promise,  that  he  will  short- 
ly descend  himself,  to  receive  them,  and  to 


avow  them  for  his  own,  before  the  assembled 
world,  is  the  food  and  joy  of  their  hearts, 
which  soothes  their  sorrows,  and  animates 
them  under  every  difficulty  they  are  exposed 
to,  at  present,  for  his  sake. 

Oh!  the  solemnity,  the  terrors,  and  the 
glories  of  that  approaching  day ! Then,  they 
who  have  slighted  his  mercy,  and  abused  his 
patience  and  forbearance,  will  tremble.  Then 
many  whom  the  w7orld  has  admired  or  envied ; 
many  of  “ the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  the 
great  men,  and  the  chief  captains  and  the 
mighty  men,  shall  call  (alas ! in  vain)  to  the 
rocks  and  mountains  to  fall  on  them,  and 
hide  them  from  his  presence,”  Rev.  vi.  15, 
16.  But  they  who  love  him,  and  long  for 
his  appearance,  will  say,  “ Lo ! this  is  our 
God,  we  have  waited  for  him;  we  will  be 
glad  and  rejoice  in  his  salvation,”  Isa.  xxv. 
9.  May  we,  my  brethren,  have  grace  “ to 
use  all  diligence,  that  we  may  be  found  of 
him  in  peace,  without  spot,  and  blameless,” 
2 Pet.  iii.  14. 

Should  we  be  asked,  Why  does  every  face 
express  an  air  of  satisfaction  to-day  1 Why 
is  the  feeling  of  our  own  personal  trials  in  a 
degree  suspended?  Why  does  the  public 
appearance  of  the  King  diffuse  so  general  a 
joy  among  his  loyal  subjects?  We  can  give 
a ready  answer;  We  love  our  King.  Few 
of  us,  indeed,  are  personally  known  to  him. 
The  blessing  of  being  under  a good  King, 
can  only  be  known  to  the  bulk  of  a nation, 
by  the  influence  of  his  administration  upon 
the  public  welfare.  This  influence  we  have 
felt.  It  is  true,  we  were  too  little  sensible 
of  it,  too  little  thankful  for  it,  until  an  alarm- 
ing dispensation  awakened  our  fears,  lest  we 
should  lose  the  privileges  we  had  not  suf- 
ficiently prized ; but  then  each  man  would 
remind  himself,  how  highly  favoured  we  had 
been,  as  a people,  for  many  years,  under  his 
government ; then,  we  understood  our  great 
obligations  to  the  King,  as  the  minister  of 
God  to  us  for  good.  We  were  sitting  peace- 
ably under  our  own  vines  and  fig-trees,  high- 
ly distinguished  among  the  nations  by  our 
civil  and  religious  liberty,  our  prosperity  at 
home,  and  our  reputation  abroad.  The  news 
of  the  King’s  illness,  therefore,  not  only 
awakened  our  apprehensions,  but  revived  our 
gratitude;  and  from  the  same  principle,  we 
now  rejoice  in  his  recovery. 

Again,  because  we  loved  him,  we  sympa- 
thized with  him.  We  were  afflicted  by  his 
affliction.  We  not  only  considered  him  as  a 
King,  but  we  felt  for  him  as  a man,  a hus- 
band, and  a father.  Such  an  instance  of  the 
dependent,  precarious  state  of  human  life; 
such  a proof,  that  no  rank  or  situation  is  ex- 
empted from  a share  in  the  calamities  which 
sin  has  brought  into  the  world,  impressed  us 
with  compassion,  blended  with  awe.  And 
not  our  compassion  only,  but  our  prayers 
were  engaged  for  the  King,  the  Queen,  and 


THE  GREAT  ADVENT. 


421 


Royal  Family.  I am  persuaded  many  per- 
sons could  scarcely  have  prayed  more  ear- 
nestly had  it  been  their  own  private  and 
domestic  concern.  Our  prayers  have  been 
heard,  and  signally  answered,  therefore  we 
rejoice  and  give  thanks  to-day.  We  wish 
not  to  detract  from  the  skill  of  physicians, 
they  have  been  employed,  and  owned  as  in- 
struments of  the  merciful  will  of  God;  but 
we  ascribe  the  praise  for  a recovery,  so  little 
hoped  for,  and  so  critically  seasonable,  to 
him  who  raiseth  the  dead,  who  speaks  and  it 
is  done. 

And  we  rejoice  in  expectation.  Indeed  in 
this  view  we  may,  and  should,  “rejoice  with 
trembling,”  Ps.  ii.  11.  How  much  may  de- 
pend upon  this  single,  this  precious  life,  we 
know  not;  neither  do  we  know  what  might 
have  been  the  consequences,  if  the  rumour, 
at  which  we  once  shuddered,  and  which,  for 
6ome  hours,  was  generally  believed,  that 
God  had  taken  him  from  us,  had  proved  true. 

Let  us  praise  God,  who  has  preserved  us 
from  knowing  them.  But  the  manner  in 
which  we  have  been  relieved  encourages  us 
both  to  pray  and  to  hope,  that  our  King  is  an 
object  of  God’s  especial  care,  and  that  he 
will  live  (long  may  he  live !)  to  communicate 
still  greater  benefits  to  the  nation,  as  the 
patron  of  true  religion,  the  guardian  of  our 
constitution,  and  an  exemplar  of  piety  and 
virtue  to  his  subjects.  That  God  may  give 
him  to  reign  in  the  hearts  of  an  enlightened, 
free,  and  affectionate  people,  and  not  to  per- 
mit any  device  or  weapon  formed  against 
him,  to  prosper. 

For  similar  reasons,  but  vastly  superior  in 
importance,  even  as  the  heavens  are  higher 
than  the  earth,  we  rejoice  in  the  assurance 
and  prospect,  that  the  Lord  himself  will  de- 
scend. He  is  the  good  Shepherd,  who  laid 
down  his  life  for  the  sheep,  (John  x.  11 ;)  and, 
therefore,  they  who  know  his  name,  and  trust 
in  him  for  salvation,  are  bound  to  him  by  the 
strongest  ties  of  attachment  and  gratitude. 
They  admire  his  condescension  and  his  love. 
To  his  mediation  and  care  they  are  indebted 
for  their  life  and  hopes.  They  remember 
what  they  were  doing,  and  how  carelessly 
they  were  sporting  in  the  path  that  leadeth 
to  destruction,  when  he  first  stopped  them, 
turned  them,  and  led  them  into  his  fold.  He 
is,  even  now,  their  sun  and  shield,  their  wis- 
dom and  strength;  on  him  they  cast  their 
cares,  from  him  they  receive  their  supplies ; 
therefore  they  love  him,  though  unseen,  (2 
Pet.  i.  8 ;)  and  rejoice  in  the  hope  of  his  ap- 
pearance. 

They  know  that  he  who  will  descend  to 
receive  them,  was  once  a man  of  sorrows, 
and  a companion  of  grief.  And  though  this 
too  little  affected  them  in  the  time  of  their 
ignorance,  it  has  been  otherwise  since  they 
nave  derived  life  from  his  death,  and  healing 
from  his  wounds.  They  have  sympathized 


with  him  in  the  agonies  which  he  endured 
in  Gethsemane,  and  upon  Mount  Golgotha. 
They  remember  that  his  face  was  defiled 
with  spitting,  his  head  crowned  with  thorns, 
his  back  torn  by  scourges,  his  hands  and  feet 
pierced  with  spikes;  that  he  made  his  soul 
an  offering  for  their  sins,  and  was  crucified 
for  their  sakes.  Thus  he  loved  them,  and 
gave  himself  for  them,  Gal.  ii.  10.  Thus  he 
delivered  them  from  approaching  wrath;  and 
this  love  has  won  their  hearts.  And  they 
are  waiting  for  his  return  from  heaven,  (1 
Thess.  i.  8 ;)  that  when  they  shall  see  him 
as  he  is,  with  all  his  angels,  and  with  all  his 
saints,  they  may  join  in  nobler  strains  than 
they  can  at  present  reach,  in  songs  of  praise 
to  him  who  redeemed  them  to  God  by  his 
own  blood. 

But  though  they  have  much  to  praise  him 
for  in  this  life,  they  have  much  more  to  ex- 
pect when  he  shall  descend.  Their  privi- 
leges are  great,  while  here.  They  are  already 
delivered  from  guilt  and  condemnation,  they 
have  access  by  him  to  a throne  of  grace,  they 
have  fellowship  with  him  by  faith,  and  joys 
which  a stranger  intermeddles  not  with — 
but  it  does  not  yet  appear  what  they  shall  be, 
1 John  iii.  2.  They  are  still  in  a state  of 
warfare  and  trial ; they  are  exposed  to  many 
troubles,  to  reproach,  opposition,  and  tempta- 
tion ; they  are  still  straitened  and  hindered, 
in  their  best  attempts  and  desires,  by  an  in- 
dwelling principle  of  evil.  They  are  sowing 
in  tears,  (Ps.  exxvi.  5,)  but  when  their  Lord 
shall  descend,  they  expect  to  reap  with  joy. 
He  is  coming  to  wipe  away  all  their  tears, 
and  then  they  are  assured  they  shall  weep  no 
more.  The  days  of  their  mourning  shall 
cease  for  ever.  He  has  prepared  for  them  a 
kingdom,  “ incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  that 
fadeth  not  away,”  1 Pet.  i.  4.  In  that  king- 
dom they  shall  shine  forth,  each  like  the  sun 
in  the  firmament  (Matt.  xiii.  43,)  an  immense 
constellation  of  suns ! 

The  manner  in  which  the  Lord  will  de- 
scend can  be  but  faintly  illustrated  by  any 
circumstances  borrowed  from  the  pomp  of 
this  day.  When  the  King  enters  St.  Paul’s, 
his  arrival  will  be  announced  by  the  voice  of 
the  multitude,  the  discharge  of  cannon,  and 
the  deep-mouthed  organ.  But  what  are  these 
when  compared  with  the  voice  of  the  Arch- 
angel, the  shout  of  all  who  love  his  appear- 
ance, and  that  trump  of  God,  which  will 
shake  the  creation,  and  raise  the  dead  ? Per- 
haps by  the  word  Archangel , in  this  connec- 
tion, we  may  understand,  the  Lord  of  angels, 
the  King  himself.  “He  shall  call  to  the 
heaven  from  above,  and  to  the  earth,  that  he 
may  judge  his  people,”  Ps.  1.  4.  The  hour 
cometh,  when  the  dead  shall  hear  the  voice 
of  the  Son  of  God,”  John  v.  25.  The  shout 
seems  a military  term.  By  a shout  soldiers 
encourage  each  other  in  the  onset  to  battle ; 
and  there  is  a triumphant  shout  of  victory 


422 


THE  GREAT  ADVENT. 


when  the  enemy  is  utterly  defeated.  Such 
will  be  the  shout  when  the  Lord  shall  de- 
scend— His  soldiers,  who,  fighting  in  his 
cause,  have  often  endured  hardship,  and  have 
sometimes  lost  a skirmish,  shall,  on  the  great 
day  of  decision,  in  the  final  event  of  the  war, 
stand  forth  more  than  conquerors,  through 
him  that  loved  them,  Rom.  viii.  37.  Their 
shout  shall  proclaim  his  praise : for  they  got 
not  the  victory  by  their  own  sword,  neither 
did  their  own  arm  save  them,  Ps.  xliv.  3. 
The  Lord  leads  them  on,  teaches  them  to 
fight,  clothes  them  with  complete  armour, 
and  supplies  them  with  strength.  He  him- 
self subdues  their  foes— and  when  he  shall 
descend  with  glory,  he  will  terminate  the 
contest.  His  people  will  then  utter  a univer- 
sal shout,  and  shall  hear  the  noise  of  war  no 
more. 

When  the  Lord  descended  upon  Mount 
Sinai,  the  trumpet  of  God  was  heard  ex- 
ceeding loud,  (Exod.  xix.  16 — 19 ;)  it  waxed 
loude:  and  louder,  the  people  trembled,  and 
Moses  spoke.  The  apostle  records  his  words. 
Even  Moses,  the  favoured  servant  of  God, 
said,  “ I exceedingly  fear  and  quake,”  Heb. 
xii.  21.  But  the  sound  of  the  last  trump, 
when  the  Lord  shall  descend  again,  will  be 
much  louder,  and  the  effects  much  more  im- 
portant and  extensive.  It  will  be  heard,  not 
only  in  the  neighbourhood  of  one  mountain, 
but  from  east  to  west,  from  pole  to  pole ; not 
only  by  the  living,  but  by  the  dead ; by  all 
who  ever  lived. 

Then,  at  his  great  command,  they  that 
dwell  in  the  dust  shall  awake,  Is.  xxvi.  19. 
The  earth  and  the  sea  shall  deliver  up  their 
dead.  There  will  be  a resurrection  both  of 
the  just  and  the  unjust.  Some  shall  arise 
“ to  everlasting  life,  and  some  to  shame  and 
everlasting  contempt,”  Dan.  xii.  2. 

The  joy,  this  day,  for  the  recovery  and  ap- 
pearance of  our  King,  is  general,  I hope 
universal.  I hope  there  are  few  persons  in 
the  kingdom  who  do  not  cordially  share  in  it. 
However,  if  contrary  sensations  do  exist,  they 
are  suppressed  and  concealed.  But  the  great 
King  has  borne  with  many  avowed  enemies, 
and  with  many  traitors  disguised  under  the 
profession  of  his  name  from  age  to  age.  He 
will  not  bear  with  them  always.  He  knows 
them  all,  and  not  one  of  them  can  escape  his 
notice.  To  them  the  languageof  the  trump 
will  be,  Arise,  and  come  to  judgment ! My 
heart  is  pained  to  think,  that  possibly,  some 
of  this  description  may  be  now  present  in 
our  assembly.  Yet  I am  glad  you  are  here, 
that  I may  warn  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath 
to  come.  What  a dreadful  day  will  it  be, 
when  you,  if  unhumbled,  unpardoned,  un- 
sanctified, as  you  now  are,  shall  be  compelled 
to  stand  before  his  tribunal ! For  we  are  as- 
sured, that  when  he  returns  to  bless  his  will- 
ing people,  he  will  summon  his  enemies,  who 
would  not  that  he  should  reign  over  them, 


Luke  xix.  27.  He  will  place  them  at  his 
left  hand,  and  denounce  that  awful  sentence 
upon  them,  “ Depart,  ye  cursed,  into  ever- 
lasting fire,”  Matt.  xxv.  41.  As  yet  he  is 
upon  a mercy-seat.  Oh ! seek  him  while  he 
may  be  found ; call  upon  him  while  he  is 
near ! Isa.  lv.  6.  There  is  forgiveness  with 
him.  Humble  yourselves  before  him,  and 
entreat  for  mercy.  Entreat  him  to  show  you 
who  he  is,  and  what  he  has  done  for  sinners ; 
that  you  may  believe  and  be  saved.  Other- 
wise you  must  stand  before  his  judgment- 
seat.  Then  his  wrath  will  burn  like  fire. 

But  it  is  of  the  dead  in  Christ,  I am  chiefly 
to  speak.  These  shall  rise  first,  and  together 
with  those  his  servants  Who  shall  be  living 
at  his  coming,  shall  be  caught  up  to  meet 
him  in  the  air.  There  are  expressions  in 
scripture  which  intimate,  that  the  servants 
of  the  Lord  Christ,  shall  have  the  honour  of 
being  in  some  manner  beyond  our  feeble  ap- 
prehension, assessors  with  their  Lord  in  the 
day  of  judgment,  Luke  xxii.  30 ; 1 Cor.  vi. 
3.  They  will  witness  and  approve  his  pro- 
ceedings. In  this  state  of  infirmity,  it  be- 
comes them,  and  is  their  duty,  to  pity  and 
pray  for  the  wicked ; and  to  use  all  their  in- 
fluence to  persuade  them  to  pity  themselves, 
to  forsake  their  evil  ways,  that  they  may 
live.  But  in  the  great  and  terrible  day,  when 
the  Wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  the 
righteous  will  be  so  perfectly  impressed  with 
the  justice  and  holiness  of  the  sentence  of 
condemnation,  that  they  will  not  hesitate  to 
say,  “ Amen — So  let  all  thine  enemies  perish, 
O Lord !”  Judges  v.  31. 

But  the  apostle,  using  the  language  of  pro- 
phecy, which  speaks  of  the  future  as  though 
it  were  actually  present,  says  farther,  “ Then 
we  that  are  alive,  and  remain,  shall  be  caught 
up  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air.”  Not,  as  I 
apprehend,  that  he  expected  to  be  living  when 
the  Lord  shall  descend  ; by  the  word  we , he 
expresses  his  joint  relation  with  the  many 
members,  which  constitute  the  one  body,  of 
which  the  Lord  Christ  is  the  head.  Of  these, 
there  will  be  some  living  when  he  shall  ap- 
pear. And  of  these  he  says  elsewhere,  “ We 
shall  not  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  chang- 
ed; in  a moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye, 
at  the  last  trump,”  1 Cor.  xv.  52. — They 
will  not  suffer  that  separation  of  soul  and 
body  which  we  call  death.  But  as  mortal 
flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom 
of  God,  he  will  change  their  vile  bodies,  ac- 
cording to  the  pattern  of  his  glorious  body, 
(Phil.  iii.  21,)  and  they,  like  Enoch  and 
Elijah  of  old,  shall  ascend,  together  with 
those  who  are  raised  from  the  dead,  to  meet 
him  in  the  air. 

These  will  constitute  his  train.  The  re- 
deemed from  the  earth ; they  who  lived  and 
died  in  the  faith  of  his  name,  through  a course 
of  successive  generations;  and  they  who 
shall  be  alive  at  his  coming,  shall  be  all  col 


THE  GREAT  ADVENT. 


423 


lected  together,  and  prepared  to  welcome 
him. 

Of  the  numbers  who  will  rejoice  to  see 
the  King  to  day,  many,  though  loyal  subjects, 
will  only  behold  him  at  a distance;  and  the 
far  greater  part  of  his  people  will  not  behold 
him  at  all.  Few  but  the  nobility  and  prin- 
cipal persons  can  gain  admission  into  the 
church ; though  the  crowds  in  the  street 
will  participate  in  the  general  satisfaction. 
Could  we  suppose,  that  instead  of  the  com- 
mon people,  the  streets  were  filled,  and  the 
windows  lined  by  the  great,  that  all  the 
sovereigns,  potentates,  and  illustrious  person- 
ages in  Europe,  were  assembled  to  be  spec- 
tators of  the  joyful  event  which  now  calls 
for  our  thanksgivings;  splendid  as  the  con- 
course might  appear  in  the  eyes  of  men,  they 
would  be  unspeakably  inferior,  in  rank  and 
dignity,  to  those  who  shall  meet  the  Lord. 
Not  one  of  his  people  will  be  absent ; and 
however  poor  and  unnoticed  many  of  them 
once  were,  they  will  then,  every  one,  be 
greater  than  the  kings  of  the  earth.  They 
will  all  claim  the  title,  and  the  claim  will  be 
allowed,  of  sons  and  daughters  of  the  Lord 
Almighty,  2 Cor.  vi.  18.  They  will  all  pos- 
sess that  honour  which  cometh  of  God  only, 
John  v.  44.  The  glorious  company  of  apos- 
tles, the  goodly  fellowship  of  prophets,  the 
noble  army  of  martyrs,  will  march  in  the 
procession ; and  besides  these,  an  exceeding 
great  multitude  which  no  man  can  number, 
whose  exultation  and  happiness  are  but  im- 
perfectly represented  to  us  by  images  bor- 
rowed from  the  things  which  are  deemed 
most  valuable  and  honourable  amongst  men. 
They  are  said  (Rev.  iv.  10 ; vii.  9,)  to  be 
clothed  with  white  robes,  to  have  crowns 
upon  their  heads,  to  be  furnished  with  harps, 
and  to  bear  palms  (the  emblem  of  victory)  in 
their  hands. 

“ Fear  not,  little  flock,  it  is  your  Father’s 
good  pleasure  to  give  you  the  kingdom,” 
Luke  xii.  32.  May  grace  preserve  you 
from  being  ashamed  of  your  Lord  now,  and 
ou  will  not  be  ashamed  of  him  nor  will  he 
e ashamed  of  you,  when  he  shall  come  to 
judge  the  world,  Matt.  x.  32;  Mark.  viii. 
38. 

When  all  mankind  shall  be  ranged  before 
this  great  Judge,  he  will  own  and  vindicate 
his  people  in  the  presence  of  assembled 
worlds,  and  pass  an  irrevocable  sentence  of 
exclusion  and  condemnation  upon  his  ene- 
mies ; and  then,  he  will  say  to  those  on  his 
right  hand,  “ Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Fa- 
ther, inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you,” 
(Matt.  xxv.  34,)  then,  he  will  present  them 
before  the  presence  of  his  glory,  with  exceed- 
ingjoy;  (Jude  24;)  then  time  shall  be  no 
more;  (Rev.  x.  6;)  they  will  no  longer  mea- 
sure their  existence  by  the  revolutions  of  the 
sun  and  the  moon  ; they  will  enter  upon  an 
eternal  state.  With  this  event  the  apostle 


closes  the  description  in  my  text.  Here  he 
stops ; the  rest  is  too  great  for  language  to 
express,  or  thought  to  conceive.  He  can 
only  say,  “ and  so  we  shall  for  ever  be  with 
the  Lord.”  Who  can  expound  this  sentence  1 
We  must  leave  this  world,  and  be  admitted 
into  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light,  be- 
fore we  can  fully  understand  the  import  of 
these  few  words. 

We  shall  be  with  the  Lord. — There  is  no 
doubt,  that  if  the  power  of  our  King  was 
equal  to  the  benevolence  of  his  heart,  he 
would  willingly  make  all  who  shall  see  him 
to-day,  yea,  all  his  subjects,  in  every  part  of 
his  dominions,  completely  happy.  But  can 
he  take  them  all  with  him  to  court!  Can  he 
treat  them  all  as  his  own  children  1 Can  he 
invest  them  all  with  dignities  and  possessions 
equal  to  the  largest  desires  of  their  hearts ! 
Could  we,  for  a moment,  conceive  it  possible 
for  an  earthly  king  to  do  thus,  still  it  would 
afford  but  a very  faint  illustration  of  our  sub- 
ject. The  highest  effects  of  his  favour  would 
be  precarious  and  transient,  confined  to  the 
term  of  a short  life,  and  in  their  nature,  in- 
capable of  answering  the  instinctive  appetite 
of  the  soul  of  man,  formed  for  immortality, 
and  endued  with  a capacity  for  good,  which 
nothing  less  than  being  with  the  Lord  can 
satisfy. 

When  Peter  saw  his  Saviour  transfigured 
upon  the  mount,  a glance  of  his  glory  instant- 
ly fixed  and  filled  his  mind.  He  forgot  all 
inferior  attachments,  and  said,  “ It  is  good  to 
be  here,”  Matt.  xvii.  4.  He  would  have 
been  glad  to  build  tabernacles  upon  the  mount, 
and  to  return  to  the  world  no  more.  He 
knew  not  indeed  what  he  said;  there  was 
much  for  him  yet  to  do  and  to  suffer  for  his 
Master : but  he  well  knew  why  he  said  it ; 
and  all  who  are  partakers  of  the  grace  of  God 
are  like  minded  with  Peter.  And  though  at 
present  they  walk  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight, 
(2  Cor.  v.  7,)  they  are  sometimes  favoured 
with  seasons  of  refreshment,  with  golden 
hours,  when  according  to  his  gracious  promise 
he  manifests  himself  unto  them,  as  he  does 
not  unto  the  world,  (John  xiv.  22,)  and  causes 
his  goodness  to  pass  before  them ; then,  for 
the  time,  they  are  raised  above  both  the  cares 
and  the  comforts  of  this  world,  and  could  be 
glad  to  remain  with  him.  But,  like  Peter, 
they  must  return  to  fill  up  the  duties  of  their 
situation  in  life,  till  his  appointed  hour  of 
dismission.  PJowever,  these  foretastes  con- 
vince them,  that  they  cannot  be  properly 
happy  till  they  are  with  him  in  his  kingdom, 
where  nothing  will  conceal  him  for  a moment 
from  their  view. 

Their  nearest  approaches  to  him  now,  are 
likewise  subject  to  abatements.  Something 
from  within  or  from  v/ithout  still  occurs  to 
interrupt,  and  too  often  to  suspend  their  joys. 
Their  communion  with  him  is  indistinct, 
through  the  medium  of  ordinances,  and  8 


424 


THE  GREAT  ADVENT. 


vail  of  flesh  and  blood.  This  vail  hinders 
them,  not  only  as  it  is  polluted,  but  as  it  is 
weak,  and  subject  to  many  infirmities.  We 
cannot  see  him,  as  yet,  and  live,  Exod.  xxxiii. 
20.  If  he  did  not  accommodate  the  disco- 
veries of  himself  to  the  frailty  of  our  nature, 
we  should  be  overpowered.  The  beloved 
disciple  had  often  conversed  familiarly  with 
his  Lord,  and  reclined  on  his  bosom,  during 
his  state  of  humiliation : but  when  he  ap- 
peared in  the  isle  of  Patmos,  though  his  ma- 
jesty was  attempered  with  mildness  and  love, 
and  his  design  was  to  honour  and  comfort 
him,  he  says,  “ When  I saw  him,  I fell  at  his 
feet  as  dead,”  Rev.  i.  17. 

Further,  pain,  indisposition,  and  trouble, 
often  distract  their  attention,  or  detain  them 
from  the  opportunities  in  which  he  has  pro- 
mised to  meet  his  people.  They  are  glad 
when  it  is  said  unto  them,  “ Let  us  go  up  to 
the  house  of  the  Lord (Ps.  cxxii.  1 ;)  but 
they  are  frequently  shut  up,  and  cannot 
come  forth ; (Ps.  lxxxviii.  8 ;)  and  though  he 
supports  them  under  all  their  afflictions,  yet 
it  is  no  small  trial  to  be  confined  from  his 
ordinances.  But  when  they  shall  meet  their 
Lord  in  the  air,  they  will  be  freed  from 
every  defect,  defilement,  and  impediment. 
They  will  see  him  as  he  is,  without  any  in- 
terposing vail  or  cloud.  They  will  be  out  of 
the  reach  of  sin,  temptation,  pain,  and  grief. 
They  are  blessed  now,  though  often  called 
to  mourn,  because  they  will  then  be  comfort- 
ed, Matt.  v.  8. 

Again,  we  shall  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord. 
— O that  word  for  ever ! even  to  be  with  the 
Lord,  and  to  possess  a happiness  commen- 
surate to  the  utmost  grasp  of  our  capacity;  if 
it  were  only  for  a month,  or  a year,  or  an  age, 
or  a thousand  ages — the  thought  that  this 
happiness  must  at  length  have  an  end,  how- 
ever distant  the  termination  might  be,  would 
cast  a damp  upon  the  whole  enjoyment. 
But  to  know  that  the  happiness  is  eternal, 
that  they  who  are  once  with  the  Lord  shall 
be  with  him  for  ever ; this  is,  if  I may  so 
speak,  the  Heaven  of  Heaven  itself.  Such 
honour  awaits  all  the  saints : for  thus  hath 
the  Amen,  the  faithful  and  true  Witness, 
already  declared:  “Him  that  overcometh, 
will  I make  a pillar  in  the  house  of  my  God, 
and  he  shall  go  no  more  out,”  Rev.  iii.  12. 

“ Thy  sun  shall  no  more  go  down,  neither 
shall  thy  moon  withdraw  itself;  for  the  Lord 
shall  be  thine  everlasting  light,  and  the  days 
of  thy  mourning  shall  be  ended,”  Isa.  lx.  20. 

I hope  I have  not  digressed  from  the  de- 
sign of  this  day,  by  attempting  to  lead  your 
thoughts  to  the  day  of  the  Lord.  I have 
availed  myself  of  every  occasion,  which  my 
views  of  the  text  have  suggested,  to  impress 
upon  your  hearts  and  my  own,  a sense  of  the 
very  great  mercy  which  God,  in  answer  to 
prayer,  has  bestowed  upon  us,  by  restoring 
health  to  the  King,  and  enabling  him  to  pay 


his  public  acknowledgment  to  the  Most  High, 
and  to  revisit  his  affectionate  people.  But 
never  are  our  temporal  mercies  so  sweet,  so 
valuable,  nor  so  likely  to  be  permanent,  as 
when  they  are  thankfully  contemplated  in 
immediate  connexion  with  the  hand  of  him 
by  whom  kings  reign,  and  who  doth  what 
pleaseth  him,  in  the  armies  of  heaven,  and 
among  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth,  Dan.  iv. 
25.  Nay,  to  us,  who  are  soon  to  pass  into 
an  eternal  state,  the  most  important  concerns 
of  nations  and  kingdoms  are  in  reality  trivial 
as  the  sports  of  children,  unless  we  can  ac- 
knowledge, trace,  approve,  and  admire,  the 
great  and  ultimate  designs  of  God,  to  which 
all  the  revolutions  that  take  place  in  human 
affairs  are  subordinate  and  subservient.  His 
wise,  and  holy  providence  ruleth  over  all ; 
and  every  movement  has  either  a more  re- 
mote or  a more  direct  tendency  to  bring  for- 
ward the  glories  of  that  day,  when  the  Lord 
himself  shall  descend  to  receive  his  own  peo- 
ple, and  to  execute  vengeance  upon  his  ad- 
versaries. 

Knowing  to  whom  I am  preaching,  I have 
not  thought  it  necessary  to  offer  proof,  that 
the  God  who  has  restored  health  to  the  King, 
and  happiness  to  the  kingdom,  is  he  to  whom 
my  text  refers : he  of  whom  we  say,  in  our 
public  Liturgy,  “We  believe  that  thou  shalt 
come  to  be  our  judge.”  It  is  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  the  eternal  Word,  the  Son  of  God,  tne 
Saviour  of  sinners.  We  rest  in  his  own  de- 
claration, unmoved  by  all  the  cavils  of  those 
who,  alas!  know  him  not,  that  all  things  are 
delivered  unto  him,  all  power  committed  tc 
him,  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  Matt.  xi.  27 ; 
xxviii.  18.  How  else  could  we  trust  to  him 
for  the  expiation  of  our  sins,  and  the  salvation 
of  our  souls ; guilty  and  helpless  as  we  are  in 
ourselves,  and  conscious  of  the  snares,  diffi- 
culties, dangers,  and  enemies  to  which  we  are 
exposed!  The  Lord  reigneth,  Ps.  xcix.  1. 
He  is  King  of  saints,  King  of  the  nations, 
King  and  Lord  of  the  universe.  The  govern- 
ment is  upon  his  shoulders,  Isa.  ix.  6.  This 
God  is  the  God  we  adore,  and  we  now  aim  to 
imitate  the  songs  of  those  with  whom  we 
shortly  hope  to  join ; “ Worthy  is  the  Lamb 
that  was  slain,  to  receive  power,  and  riches, 
and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour,  and 
glory,  and  blessing,”  Rev.  v.  12. 

While  I exhort  you  to  rejoice,  and  join 
with  you  in  rejoicing,  for  the  late  instance  of 
his  goodness  to  the  King,  to  the  nation,  and 
to  ourselves,  I feel  the  highest  pleasure  in  the 
thought,  that  I see  many  around  me,  (O 
that  I could  hope  the  same  of  you  all !)  to 
whom  I may  warrantably  say,  rejoice  on  these 
accounts,  but  rather,  especially,  and  above 
all,  “Rejoice  that  your  names  are  written  in 
heaven,”  (Luke  x.  20,)  and  that  the  Lord 
whom  you  love,  who  now  guides  you  by  his 
counsel,  will  shortly  descend  to  receive  you 
to  his  glory,  Ps.  lxxiii.  24, 


(425  ) 


A HYMN  OF  THANKSGIVING  FOR  THE  KING’S  HAPPY  RECOVERY. 


Man  can  seldom  prize  the  blessings 
Which  our  gracious  God  bestows, 

In  the  moment  of  possessing, 

Or  return  the  praise  he  owes  : 

But  with  other  eyes  he  views  them 
In  affliction’s  threat’ning  days ; 

When  he  fears  lest  he  should  lose  them, 
Then  he  trembles,  weeps  and  prays. 

II. 

Comets,  or  eclipses  wake  him, 

For  a moment  fix  his  eye, 

Hurricanes,  or  earthquakes  shake  him, 
And  extort  an  anxious  cry ; 

While  the  sun,  with  gentle  motion, 
Spreading  blessings  through  the  year, 
Causes  no  devout  emotion, 

Neither  gratitude  nor  fear. 

III. 

God  in  mercy  to  this  nation, 

Has  afforded  us  a King, 

Whose  benign  administration, 

Cheer’d  us  like  the  sun  in  spring. 


Truth  and  liberty  were  nourished, 

By  his  mild  auspicious  rays  : 

Thus  in  peace,  the  kingdom  flourished ; 
But  our  hearts  forgot  to  praise. 

IV. 

When  a dark  eclipse  succeeded, 

Fear  a thousand  ills  surmised ; 

Then  we  felt  how  much  we  needed 
What  W3  had  too  little  prized : 

Then  we  prayed,  and  since  have  proved, 
Fervent  prayer  is  not  in  vain : 

Prayer  the  dark  eclipse  removed, 

And  our  sun  shines  bright  again. 

V. 

Lord  ! to  thee,  the  great  Physician, 

We  our  hearts  and  voices  raise ! 

Thou  didst  answer  our  petition, 

Now  accept  our  humble  praise  ! 

Bless  our  King,  Almighty  Saviour ! 

May  he  long  the  sceptre  wield, 

For  our  good  and  with  thy  favour, 

Thou  his  Wisdom,  Strength,  and  Shield. 


Vol.  II 


3H 


THE  IMMINENT  DANGER  AND  ONLY  SURE  RESOURCE  OF  THIS  NATION  • 


A SERMON 

PREACHED  IN  THE  PARISH  CHURCH  OF  ST.  MARY  WOOLNOTH, 
ON  FRIDAY,  FEBRUARY  28,  1794. 

THE  DAY  APPOINTED  FOR  A GENERAL  FAST. 


Who  can  tell  if  God  will  turn  and  repent , and  turn  away  from  his  fierce  anger , that  we 

perish  not. — Jonah  iii.  9. 


How  great  is  the  power  of  God  over  the 
hearts  of  men  ! Nineveh  was  the  capital  of  a 
powerful  empire.  The  inhabitants  were  hea- 
thens. The  many  prophets  who,  during  a 
long  series  of  years,  had  spoken  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord  to  his  professed  people  of  Judah 
and  Israel,  had  spoken  almost  in  vain.  The 
messengers  were  often  mocked,  and  their 
message  despised.  The  inhabitants  of  Nine- 
veh, it  is  probable,  had  never  seen  a true 
prophet  till  Jonah  was  sent  to  them.  If  they 
had  reasoned  on  his  prediction,  they  might 
have  thought  it  very  improbable,  that  a great 
city,  the  head  of  a great  kingdom,  and  in  a 
time  of  peace,  could  be  in  danger  of  an  over- 
throw within  forty  days.  But  it  is  said,  in  verse 
5,  “ They  believed  God.”  The  awful  denun- 
ciation made  a general,  a universal  impres- 
sion. The  king  arose  from  his  throne,  laid 
aside  his  robes,  covered  himself  with  sack- 
cloth, and  sat  in  ashes.  A sudden  cessation, 
of  business  and  of  pleasure,  took  place ; he 
proclaimed  a strict  fast,  the  rigour  of  which 
was  extended  even  to  the  cattle.  His  sub- 
jects readily  complied,  and  unanimously  con- 
curred in  crying  for  mercy,  though  they 
had  no  encouragement  but  a peradventure : 
“ Who  can  tell  if  God  will  turn  and  repent, 
and  turn  away  from  his  fierce  anger,  that 
we  perish  not ?” 

It  appears  from  this,  and  other  passages  of 
scripture,  that  the  most  express  declarations 
of  God’s  displeasure  against  sinners,  still  af- 
ford ground  and  room  for  repentance.  Thus 
in  the  prophecy  of  Ezekiel;  (chap,  xxxiii.  14, 
15;)  “When  I say  unto  the  wicked,  Thou 
shalt  surely  die  ; if  he  turn  from  his  sin,  and 
do  that  which  is  lawful  and  right,  he  shall 
surely  live,  he  shall  not  die  and  again,  in 
the  prophecy  of  Jeremiah,  (chap,  xviii.  7,  8,) 


“ At  what  instant  I shall  speak  concerning  a 
nation,  and  concerning  a kingdom  to  destroy 
it ; if  that  nation  against  whom  I have  pro- 
nounced, turn  from  their  evil,  I will  repent 
of  the  evil  that  I thought  to  do  unto  them.” 
The  Lord  God  speaks  to  us  by  his  word,  in 
plain  and  popular  language.  He  condescends 
to  our  feeble  apprehensions.  God  cannot  re 
pent,  he  is  of  one  mind,  who  can  turn  him  ? 
Numb,  xxiii.  19;  Job  xxiii.  13.  Yet  wkrn 
afflictive  providences  lead  men  to  a sense  of 
their  sins,  to  an  acknowledgement  of  their 
demerits,  and  excite  a spirit  of  humiliation, 
repentance  and  prayer,  he  often  mercifully 
changes  his  dispensations,  and  averts  from 
them  the  impending  evil.  Such  was  the  ef- 
fect of  Jonah’s  message  to  the  Ninevites. 
The  people  humbled  themselves,  and  repen- 
ted of  their  wickedness ; and  God  suspended 
the  execution  of  the  sentence  which  he  had 
pronounced  against  them. 

My  brethren,  may  we  not  fear,  that  the 
men  of  Nineveh  will  rise  up  in  judgment 
against  us,  (Matt.  xii.  41,)  and  condemn  us, 
if  we  do  not  imitate  their  example,  and  hum- 
ble ourselves  before  God?  They  repented  at 
the  preaching  of  Jonah,  and  immediately,  on 
their  first  hearing  him  : and  they  sought  for 
mercy  upon  a peradventure,  when  they  could 
say  no  more  than,  Who  can  tell,  whether 
there  may  be  the  least  room  to  hope  for  it, 
after  what  the  prophet  has  so  solemnly  de- 
clared ? 

God  does  not  speak  to  us  by  the  audible 
voice  of  an  inspired  prophet,  nor  is  it  neces 
sary.  We  know,  or  may  know  from  his 
written  word,  that  it  shall  be  well  with  the 
righteous,  and  ill  with  the  wicked,  Is.  iii.  10, 
11.  The  appearance  of  an  angel  from  neaveri 
could  add  nothing  to  the  certainty  of  the  de 


427 


THE  IMMINENT  DANGER,  &c. 


clarations  he  has  already  put  into  our  hands. 
He  has  likewise  raised  up,  and  perpetuated 
a succession  of  his  ministers,  to  enforce  the 
warnings  he  has  given  us  in  the  scripture  ; 
to  remind  us  of  our  sins,  and  the  sure  and 
dreadful  consequences,  if  we  persist  in  them. 
Nor  are  we  le$  at  an  uncertainty  as  to  the 
event,  if  we  humbly  confess  them,  and  im- 
plore forgiveness,  in  the  way  which  he  has 
prescribed.  The  gospel,  the  glorious  gospel 
of  the  blessed  God,  is  preached  unto  us. 
Jesus  Christ,  as  crucified,  is  set  forth  among 
us,  Gal.  iii.  1.  His  blood  cleanseth  from  all 
sin ; (1  John  i.  7 ;)  and  they  who  believe  in 
him  are  freed  from  condemnation,  and  com- 
pletely justified,  Rom.  viii.  1 ; Acts  xiii.  39. 
They  have  also  free  access  to  a throne  of 
grace,  and  like  Israel  they  have  power  by 
prayer  to  prevail  with  God  and  with  man, 
Gen.  xxxii.  28.  And  shall  it  be  said  of  any 
of  us,  that  the  Lord  gave  us  space  to  repent, 
and  invited  us  to  repentance,  and  we  repented 
not  1 Rev.  ii.  21.  May  his  mercy  forbid  it ! 

He  now  speaks  to  us  by  his  providence. 
His  judgments  are  abroad  in  the  earth;  and 
it  behoves  us  to  learn  righteousness.  His 
hand  is  lifted  up,  and  if  any  are  so  careless, 
or  obstinate,  that  they  will  not  see,  yet  sooner 
or  later,  they  must,  they  shall  see,  Isa.  xxvi. 
9,  11.  The  great  God  has  a controversy 
with  the  potsherds  of  the  earth.  The  point 
to  be  decided  between  him,  and  many  abroad, 
and,  I fear,  too  many  at  home  is,  whether 
he  be  the  governor  of  the  earth  or  not  1 His 
own  people,  to  whom  his  name  and  glory  are 
dear,  will  hold  all  inferior  concernments  in 
subordination  to  this.  If  there  be  no  other 
alternative,  misery  and  havoc  must  spread, 
men  must  perish  by  millions,  yea,  the  frame 
of  nature  must  be  dissolved,  rather  than  God 
be  dishonoured  and  defied  with  impunity. 
But  he  will  surely  plead  and  gain  his  own 
cause ; and  either  in  a way  of  judgment  or 
of  mercy  all  men  shall  know,  that  he  is  the 
Lord.  I believe  there  is  no  expression  in  the 
Old  Testament  so  frequently  repeated  as 
this,  Ye,  or  They  shall  know  that  I am  the 
Lord,  “ Hath  he  said  it,  and  shall  he  not 
make  it  good  1”  Ezekiel  passim. 

The  rivers  of  human  blood,  and  all  the  ca- 
lamities and  horror  which  overspread  a great 
part  of  the  continent,  the  distant  report  of 
which  is  sufficient  to  make  our  ears  tingle, 
are  all  to  be  ascribed  to  this  cause.  God  is 
not  acknowledged,  yea,  in  some  places,  he 
has  been  formally  disowned  and  renounced. 
Therefore  men  are  left  to  themselves,  their 
furious  passions  are  unchained,  and  they  are 
given  up,  without  restraint,  to  the  way  of 
their  own  hearts.  A more  dreadful  judg- 
ment than  this  cannot  be  inflicted  on  this 
6ide  of  hell. 

And  though  we  are  still  favoured  with 
peace  at  home,  the  dreadful  storm  is  at  no 
great  distance ; it  seems  moving  our  way, 


and  we  have  reason  to  fear  it  may  burst  upon 
us.  But  I would  be  thankful  for  the  appoint- 
ment of  this  day ; for  I should  think  the  pros- 
pect dark  indeed,  if  I did  not  rely  on  the 
Lord’s  gracious  attention  to  the  united  pray- 
ers of  those  who  fear  and  trust  him,  and  who 
know  it  is  equally  easy  to  him  either  to  save 
or  to  destroy,  by  many  or  by  few,  1 Sam. 
xiv.  6.  Our  fleets  and  armies  may  be  well 
appointed  and  well  commanded  ; but  without 
his  blessing  upon  our  councils  and  enter- 
prises, they  will  be  unable  to  defend  u£.  He 
can  take  wisdom  from  the  wise,  and  courage 
from  the  bold,  in  the  moment  when  they  are 
most  needful.  He  can  disable  our  forces  by 
sickness  or  dissension.  And  by  his  mighty 
wind,  he  can  dash  our  ships  to  pieces  against 
the  rocks,  against  each  other,  or  sink  them 
as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters.  Who  is  he 
that  saith,  and  it  cometh  to  pass,  if  the  Lord 
commandeth  not  1 Lam.  iii.  37. 

Our  Lord  and  Saviour,  when  speaking  of 
the  eighteen  upon  whom  the  tower  of  Siloam 
fell  and  slew  them,  said  to  the  Jews,  “ Think 
ye  that  these  men  were  sinners  above  all 
that  dwelt  in  Jerusalem,  because  they  suf- 
fered such  things  1 I tell  you,  Nay : but  ex- 
cept you  repent  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish,” 
Luke  xiii.  4.  May  the  application  of  these 
words  sink  deeply  into  our  hearts ! It  will 
not  become  us  to  say,  either  to  God  or  man, 
that  we  have  indeed  sinned,  but  there  are 
greater  sinners  than  ourselves.  It  is  true 
the  French  Convention,  and  many  others  who 
are  infatuated  by  the  same  spirit,  have  ex- 
ceeded the  ordinary  standard  of  human  im- 
piety and  cruelty.  But  I hope  there  are  mul- 
titudes in  that  nation,  who,  though  they  are 
overawed  by  the  oppressors,  and  dare  not 
speak  their  sentiments,  yet  are  mourning  in 
secrecy  and  silence  for  the  abominations 
which  they  cannot  prevent.  But  the  French 
have  not  sinned  against  such  advantages  as 
we  possess.  They  were  long  the  slaves  of  ar- 
bitrary power,  and  the  dupes  of  superstition, 
and  of  late  they  have  been  the  dupes  of  mad- 
men, assuming  the  name  of  philosophers. 
We,  on  the  contrary,  were  born  and  educated 
in  a land  distinguished  from  all  the  nations  of 
the  earth  by  the  eminent  degree  in  which 
we  enjoy  civil  and  religious  liberty,  and  the 
light  of  gospel  truth.  These  privileges  ex- 
ceedingly aggravate  our  sins ; and  no  just 
comparison,  in  this  respect,  can  be  formed 
between  us  and  other  nations,  until  we  can 
find  a people  who  have  been  equally  favoured, 
and  for  an  equal  space  of  time,  by  the  provi- 
dence of  God,  and  have  likewise  equalled  us 
in  disobedience  and  ingratitude. 

The  most  dreadful  enormities  committed 
in  France,  are  no  more  than  specimens  of 
what  human  depravity  is  capable,  when  cir- 
cumstances admit  of  its  full  exertion,  and 
when  the  usual  boundaries  and  restrictions 
necessary  to  the  peace  and  welfare  of  civil 


428 


THE  IMMINENT  DANGER  AND  ONLY 


society  are  judicially  removed.  The  influ- 
ence of  daring  infidelity  and  profligate  exam- 
ple, aided  by  the  peculiar  state  of  their  public 
affairs,  have  broken,  in  many  instances,  the 
strongest  ties  of  social  and  relative  life,  and 
extinguished  the  common  feelings  of  hu- 
manity. 

Yet  the  unhappy  French,  though  our  in- 
veterate enemies,  are  not  the  proper  objects 
of  our  hatred  or  our  scorn,  but  rather  of  our 
pity.  They  know  not  what  they  do.  Let 
us  pray  for  them.  Who  can  tell  but  God,  to 
whom  all  things  are  possible,  and  whose 
mercies  are  higher  than  the  heavens,  may 
give  them  also  repentance  7 And  let  us  pray 
for  ourselves,  that  we  may  be  instructed  and 
warned  by  their  history  ; for  by  nature,  we 
are  no  better  than  they. 

I.  But  it  is  time  to  attend  more  immedi- 
ately to  our  own  concerns.  The  professed 
purpose  of  our  meeting  to-day,  is  to  humble 
ourselves  before  Almighty  God,  and  to  send 
up  our  prayers  and  supplications  to  the  Di- 
vine Majesty,  for  obtaining  pardon  of  our 
sins,  and  for  averting  those  heavy  judgments 
which  our  manifold  provocations  have  most 
justly  deserved,  and  imploring  his  blessing 
and  assistance  on  the  arms  of  his  Majesty  by 
sea  and  land,  and  for  restoring  and  perpetu- 
ating peace,  safety,  and  prosperity  to  himself 
and  to  his  kingdoms.*  I hope  these  expres- 
sions accord  with  the  language  and  desire 
of  our  hearts. 

And  now — O for  a glance  of  what  Isaiah 
saw,  and  has  described,  in  chap.  vi. ! O that 
we,  by  the  power  of  that  faith  which  is  the 
evidence  of  things  unseen,  could  behold  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  filling  this  house ; that  we 
could  realize  the  presence,  and  the  attitude 
of  their  attendant  angels  ! They  cover  their 
faces  and  their  feet  with  their  wings,  as 
overpowered  by  the  beams  of  his  majesty, 
and  conscious,  if  not  of  defilement  like  us, 
yet  of  unavoidable  inability  as  creatures,  to 
render  him  the  whole  of  that  praise  and 
homage  which  are  justly  due  to  him.  O that 
by  faith,  we  could  enter  into  the  spirit  of 
their  ascription,  Holy,  holy,  holy  is  the  Lord 
of  Hosts,  the  whole  earth  is  filled  with  his 
glory  ! If  we  were  all  thus  affected,  as  the 
prophet  was,  surely  each  one  for  himself 
would  adopt  the  prophet’s  language.  Or  if 
a comfortable  hope  in  the  gospel  prevented 
us  from  crying  out,  Wo  is  me,  I am  undone ! 
— we  should  at  least  say  (the  Hebrew  word 
might  be  so  rendered,)  I am  silenced,  I am 
struck  dumb  ! I am  overwhelmed  with  con- 
fusion and  shame  ; for  I am  a man  of  unclean 
lips  myself,  and  I dwell  in  the  midst  of  a 
people  of  unclean  lips,  for  mine  eyes  have 
seen  the  King,  the  Lord  of  hosts. 

If  we  have  a degree  of  this  impression,  we 
shall  not  be  at  leisure  to  perplex  ourselves 


* Title-page  of  the  appointed  form  of  prayer. 


concerning  men  or  measures,  the  second 
causes,  or  immediate  instruments  of  our  ca- 
lamities. The  evil  of  sin  contrasted  with  the 
holiness  and  glory  of  God,  will  engross  our 
thoughts.  And  we  shall  ascribe  all  the  trou- 
bles we  either  feel  or  fear,  to  our  own  sins, 
and  the  sins  of  those  among  whom  we  dwell. 

1.  Let  us  first  look  at  home.  I am  a man  of 
unclean  lips.  I am  a sinner.  This  confession 
suits  us  all,  and  is  readily  made  by  all  who 
know  themselves.  A person  approaching 
London  from  the  neighbouring  hills,  usually 
sees  it  obscured  by  a cloud  of  smoke.  This 
cloud  is  the  aggregate  of  the  smoke,  to  which 
every  house  furnishes  its  respective  quota. 
It  is  no  unfit  emblem  of  the  sin  and  the 
misery  which  abound  in  this  great  metropo- 
lis. The  Lord  said  of  the  Amorites,  at  a 
certain  period,  Their  iniquity  is  not  yet  full : 
(Gen.  xv.  16;)  I hope  the  measure  of  our 
iniquity  is  not  yet  full ; but  it  is  filling  every 
day,  and  we  are  all  daily  contributing  to  fill 
it.  True  believers,  though  by  grace  delivered 
from  the  reigning  power  of  sin,  (Rom.  vi.  14,) 
are  still  sinners.  In  many  things  we  offend 
all,  in  thought,  word,  and  deed.  We  are 
now  called  upon  to  humble  ourselves  before 
God,  for  the  sins  of  our  ignorance,  and  for 
the  more  aggravated  sins  we  have  committed 
against  light,  and  experience — for  those  per- 
sonal sins,  the  record  of  which  is  only  known 
to  God  and  our  own  consciences — for  the  de- 
fects and  defilements  of  our  best  services — 
for  our  great  and  manifold  failures  in  the 
discharge  of  our  relative  duties,  as  parents, 
children,  husbands,  wives,  masters,  or  ser- 
vants, and  as  members  of  the  community. 
Our  dulness  in  the  ways  of  God,  our  alertness 
in  the  pursuit  of  our  own  will  and  way  ; our 
indifference  to  what  concerns  his  glory,  com- 
pared with  the  quickness  of  our  apprehen- 
sions when  our  own  temporal  interests  are 
affected, — are  so  many  proofs  of  our  ingrati- 
tude and  depravity.  The  sins  of  the  Lord’s 
own  people  are  so  many,  and  so  heightened 
by  the  consideration  of  his  known  goodness, 
that  if  he  was  to  enter  into  judgment  with 
them  only,  they  could  offer  no  other  plea 
than  that  which  he  has  mercifully  provided 
for  them ; “ If  thou,  Lord,  shouldst  mark 
iniquity,  O Lord,  who  could  stand?  but  there 
is  forgiveness  with  thee,  that  thou  mayst  be 
feared,”  Ps.  exxx.  3,  4. 

2.  It  is  easy  to  declaim  against  the  wicked- 
ness of  the  times.  But  only  they  who  are 
duly  affected  with  the  multitude  and  ma*gni- 
tude  of  their  own  sins,  can  be  competent 
judges  of  what  the  prophet  meant,  or  felt, 
when  he  said,  I dwell  in  the  midst  of  a peo- 
ple of  unclean  lips.  We  ought  to  be  no  less 
concerned  (though  in  a different  manner)  for 
the  sins  of  those  among  whom  we  dwell,  than 
for  our  own.  We  shall  be  so,  if  with  the  eyes 
of  our  mind,  we  behold  the  King,  the  Lord 
of  hosts ; because  his  glory,  which  should  be 


SURE  RESOURCE  OF  THIS  NATION. 


429 


the  dearest  object  to  our  hearts,  is  dishon- 
oured by  them. 

I think  this  nation  may  be  considered  as  the 
Israel  of  the  New  Testament,  both  with  re- 
spect of  his  goodness  to  us,  and  our  perverse 
returns  to  him. — He  has  been  pleased  to  se- 
lect us,  as  a peculiar  people,  and  to  show 
amongst  us,  such  instances  of  his  protection, 
his  favour,  his  grace,  and  his  patience,  as  can- 
not be  paralleled  in  the  annals  of  any  other 
nation. 

We  have  no  certain  account  when  the 
name  of  Jesus  the  Saviour  was  first  known 
in  this  island;  it  was  probably  at  an  early 
period  of  the  Christian  sera.  But  we  do 
know,  that  after  the  long  dark  night  of 
superstition  and  lgnarrance  which  covered 
Christendom  for  many  ages,  the  dawn  of  re- 
turning gospel  light  was  first  seen  amongst 
us.  From  the  time  of  W'ickliff,  the  morning- 
sta-  of  the  Reformation,  the  true  gospel  has 
been  Known,  preached,  received,  and  per- 
petuated to  this  day.  There  have  been  times 
when  they  who  loved  this  gospel  have  suf- 
fered for  it.  They  were  preserved  faithful, 
in  defiance  of  stripes,  fines,  imprisonment, 
and  death  itself.  But  those  times  are  past. 
We  enjoy  not  only  light,  but  liberty,  and  the 
rights  of  conscience  and  private  judgment, 
in  a degree  till  of  late  unknown. 

We  have  likewise  been  long  favoured  with 
peace,  though  often  principals  in  wars,  which 
have  been  very  calamitous,  both  to  our  ene- 
mies, and  to  the  nations  which  have  taken 
part  in  our  affairs.  Our  intestine  broils  at 
different  times  have  contributed  to  form  and 
establish  our  present  happy  constitution.  We 
breathe  the  air  of  civil  liberty.  Our  insular 
situation,  and  naval  force,  by  the  blessing  of 
God,  have  preserved  us  from  foreign  inva- 
sions ; and  when  such  have  been  attempted, 
the  winds  and  seas  have  often  fought  our 
battles.  Our  wide-spreading  and  flourish- 
ing commerce  has  raised  us  to  a pitch  of 
opulence,  which  excites  the  admiration  and 
envy  of  other  nations. — Great  Britain  and 
Ireland  appear  but  as  small  spots  upon  a 
globe  or  map ; but  our  interests  and  influence 
extend,  in  every  direction,  to  the  uttermost 
parts  of  the  earth. 

Will  not  the  Lord's  words  to  Israel  apply 
with  equal  propriety  to  us  1 What  could  have 
been  done  to  my  vineyard,  that  I have  not 
done  1 Wherefore,  when  I looked  for  grapes, 
brought  it  forth  wild  grapes'?  Isa.  v.  4. 

How  is  the  blessed  gospel  improved  among 
us  ? This  would  be  a heavy  day  to  me,  if  I 
did  not  believe,  and  know,  that  there  are 
those  among  our  various  denominations,  who 
prize  and  adorn  it.  If  these  could  be  all  as- 
sembled in  one  place,  I hope  they  would  be 
found  a very  considerable  number : and  for 
their  sakes,  and  in  answer  to  their  prayers,  I 
humbly  trust  that  mercy  will  still  be  afforded 
to  us.  But  compared  with  the  multitudes 


who  reject,  despise,  or  dishonour  it,  I fear 
they  are  very  few.  Too  many  hate  it  with 
a bitter  hatred,  and  exert  all  their  influence 
to  oppose  and  suppress  it.  The  great  doc- 
trines of  the  Reformation  are  treated  with 
contempt ; and  both  they  who  preach,  and 
they  who  espouse  them,  are  considered  as 
visionaries  or  hypocrites,  knaves  or  fools. 
The  gospel  of  God  is  shunned  as  a pestilence, 
or  complained  of  as  a burden,  almost  where- 
ever  it  is  known. 

Wisdom  is  indeed  justified  of  all  her  chil- 
dren, Luke  vii.  35.  The  gospel  is  the  power 
of  God  to  the  salvation  of  them  that  believe, 
Rom.  i.  16.  It  recalls  them  from  error,  from 
wickedness,  and  from  misery,  guides  their 
feet  into  the  ways  of  peace,  and  teaches  them 
to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly  in 
the  world,  Titus  ii.  12.  But  in  the  number 
of  those  who  profess  to  receive  it,  there  are 
too  many  who  confirm  and  increase  the  pre- 
judices of  those  who  speak  against  what  they 
know  not. — Alas!  what  extravagant  opin- 
ions, what  fierce  dissensions,  what  loose  con- 
versations, what  open  offences,  may  be  found 
amongst  many  who  would  be  thought  profes- 
sors of  that  gospel  which  only  breathes  the 
spirit  of  holiness,  love,  and  peace! 

What  then  must  be  the  state  of  those  who 
avowedly  live  without  God  in  the  world  ? I 
need  not  enlarge  upon  this  painful  subject, 
which  forces  itself  upon  the  mind,  if  we  only 
walk  the  streets,  or  look  into  the  newspapers. 
It  is  not  necessary  to  inform  my  hearers  that 
infidelity, licentiousness,  perjury,  profaneness, 
the  neglect  and  contempt  of  God’s  sabbaths, 
and  worship,  abound.  The  laws  of  God,  and 
the  laws  of  the  land,  so  far  as  their  object  is 
to  enforce  the  observance  of  his  commands, 
are  openly  and  customarily  violated  in  every 
rank  of  life.  In  a day  when  the  Lord  of 
hosts  calls  to  weeping  and  mourning,  thought- 
less security,  dissipation,  and  riot,  are  the 
characteristics  of  our  national  spirit,  Is.  xxii. 
12,  13.  The  loss  of  public  spirit,  and  that 
impatience  of  subordination,  so  generally  ob- 
servable, so  widely  diffused,  which  are  the 
consequences  of  our  sins  against  God,  are,  in 
themselves,  moral  causes  sufficient  to  ruin 
the  nation,  unless  his  mercy  interposes  in  our 
behalf. 

I should  be  inexcusable,  considering  the 
share  I have  formerly  had  in  that  unKappy 
business,  if,  upon  this  occasion,  I should  omit 
to  mention  the  African  slave-trade.  I do  not 
rank  this  amongst  our  national  sins ; because 
I hope  and  believe,  a very  great  majority  of 
the  nation,  earnestly  long  for  its  suppression. 
But,  hitherto,  petty  and  partial  interests  pre- 
vail against  the  voice  of  justice,  humanity, 
and  truth.  This  enormity,  however,  is  not 
sufficiently  laid  to  heart.  If  you  are  justly 
shocked  by  what  you  hear  of  the  cruelties 
practised  in  France,  you  would  perhaps  be 
shocked  much  more,  if  you  could  fully  con- 


430 


THE  IMMINENT  DANGER  AND  ONLY 


ceive  of  the  evils  and  miseries  inseparable 
from  this  traffic,  which,  I apprehend,  not 
from  hearsay,  but  from  my  own  observation, 
are  equal  in  atrocity,  and  perhaps  superior 
in  number,  in  the  course  of  a single  year,  to 
any  or  all  the  worst  actions  which  have  been 
known  in  France  since  the  commencement 
of  their  revolution.  There  is  a cry  of  blood 
against  us ; a cry  accumulated  by  the  acces- 
sion of  fresh  victims,  of  thousands,  of  scores 
of  thousands,  I had  almost  said  of  hundreds 
of  thousands,  from  year  to  year. 

It  is  but  a brief  and  faint  outline  I have  at- 
tempted to  give  of  the  present  state  of  this 
nation,  in  the  sight  of  Almighty  God,  and  of 
the  sins  for  which  we  are  this  day  assembled 
to  humble  ourselves  before  him. 

II.  Have  we  not  therefore  cause  to  say, 
with  the  Ninevites,  Who  can  tell  1 — Is  it  not 
a perad venture!  Is  there  more  than  a possi- 
bility, that  we  may  yet  obtain  mercy ! 

If  our  sins  are  no  less  numerous,  no  less  of 
a scarlet  dye,  than  those  of  other  nations,  and 
exceedingly  aggravated  beyond  theirs,  by 
being  committed  against  clearer  light,  and 
the  distinguished  advantages  we  have  long 
enjoyed : if  we  have  not  only  transgressed  the 
laws  of  God  in  common  with  others,  but 
daringly  trampled  upon  the  gracious  tenders 
of  his  forgiveness,  which  he  has  long  con- 
tinued to  propose  to  us,  with  a frequency  and 
energy  almost  peculiar  to  ourselves : if  all 
the  day  long  he  has  stretched  out  his  hands 
to  a disobedient  and  gainsaying  people,  (Rom. 
x.  21.)  and,  hitherto,  almost  in  vain : if  nei- 
ther the  tokens  of  his  displeasure,  nor  the 
declarations  of  his  love,  have  made  a suita- 
ble impression  upon  our  minds, — who  can 
tell  if  he  will  yet  be  entreated]  May  we 
not  fear,  lest  he  should  say,  My  Spirit  shall 
strive  with  them  no  more : They  are  joined 
to  their  idols,  let  them  alone : Hosea,  iv.  17. 
When  you  spread  forth  your  hands,  I will 
hide  my  face  from  you ; when  you  make  many 
prayers,  I will  not  hear  ! Isa.  i.  15. 

Where  are  now  the  mighty  empires,  which 
were  once  thought  rooted  and  established  as 
the  everlasting  mountains ! They  have  dis- 
appeared like  the  mists  upon  the  mountain- 
tops.  Nothing  of  them  remains  but  their 
names.  They  perished,  and  their  memorials 
have  almost  perished  with  them,  Ps.  ix.  6. 
The  patience  of  God  bore  with  them  for  a 
time,  and  until  the  purposes  for  which  he 
raised  them  up  were  answered;  but  when 
the  measure  of  their  iniquity  was  full,  they 
passed  away,  and  were  dispersed,  like  foam 
upon  the  waters.  What  security  have  we 
from  such  a catastrophe  ! Or  what  could 
we  answer,  if  God  should  put  that  question 
to  us,  “ Shall  not  I visit  for  these  things ! 
Shall  not  my  soul  be  avenged  on  such  a na- 
tion as  this!”  Jer.  v.  9. 

Where  are  now  the  churches  which  once 
flourished  in  Greece,  and  in  the  Lesser  Asia ! 


When  the  apostle  Paul  wrote  to  the  former, 
and  when  our  Lord  indited  his  epistles  to  the 
latter,  most  of  them  were  in  a prosperous 
state.  If  there  ever  was  a time  when  the 
commendations  given  to  them  were  applica- 
ble to  professors  of  the  gospel  in  our  land,  1 
fear  we  can  hardly  claim  them  at  present. 
Can  it  be  justly  said  of  us,  that  our  faith  and 
love  are  every  where  spoken  of,  and  that  we 
are  examples  to  all  that  believe ! That  our 
works,  and  service,  and  faith,  and  patience, 
are  known,  and  the  last  to  be  more  than  the 
first!  Rom.  i.  8;  1 Thess.  i.  7;  Rev.  ii.  19. 
Or  rather,  may  it  not  be  said  of  too  many, 
that  while  they  profess  to  believe  in  God,  in 
works  they  deny  him ! Titus  i.  16. — That 
they  are  neither  hot  nor  cold — That  they 
have  a name  to  live,  and  are  dead — That 
they  have  at  least  forgotten  their  first  love  ! 
Rev.  iii.  1,  15 ; ii.  4.  When  these  defects 
and  declensions  began  to  prevail  in  the  first 
churches,  the  Lord  admonished  and  warned 
them ; but  instead  of  watching  and  repent- 
ing, they  gradually  became  more  and  more 
remiss.  At  length  their  glory  departed,  and 
their  candlesticks  were  removed  out  of  their 
places.  Many  regions  which  once  rejoiced 
in  the  light  of  the  gospel,  have  been  long 
overspread  with  Mahomedan  darkness ; and 
the  inhabitants  are  wretched,  ignorant  slaves. 

Let  us  not  trust  in  outward  privileges,  nor 
rest  in  a form  of  godliness  destitute  of  the 
power.  It  will  be  in  vain  to  say,  The  temple 
of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord  are  we, 
(Jer.  vii.  4,)  if  the  Lord  of  the  temple  should 
depart  from  us.  When  the  Israelites  were 
afraid  of  the  Philistines,  they  carried  the 
ark  of  the  Lord  with  them  to  battle.  But 
God  disappointed  their  vain  confidence.  He 
delivered  the  ark  of  his  glory  into  the  hands 
of  their  enemies;  (1  Sam.  iv.  5,  11;)  to 
teach  them,  and  to  teach  us,  that  formal  hy- 
pocritical worshippers  have  no  good  ground 
to  hope  for  his  protection. 

Alas ! then,  who  can  tell ! — Appearances 
are  very  dark  at  present.  Besides  what  we 
may  expect  or  fear  from  the  rage  and  mad- 
ness of  our  foreign  enemies,  we  have  much 
to  apprehend  at  home.  A spirit  of  discord 
has  gone  forth.  Jeshurun  has  waxed  fat, 
and  kicked,  Deut.  xxxiii.  15.  Many  Britons 
seem  weary  of  liberty,  peace,  and  order. 
Our  happy  constitution,  our  mild  government, 
our  many  privileges,  admired  by  other  na- 
tions, are  despised  and  depreciated  amongst 
ourselves : and  that  not  only  by  the  thought- 
less and  licentious,  by  those  who,  having 
little  to  lose,  may  promise  themselves  a pos- 
sibility of  gain,  in  a time  of  disturbance  and 
confusion ; but  they  are  abetted  and  instigated 
by  persons  of  sense,  character,  and  even  of 
religion.  I should  be  quite  at  a loss  to  account 
for  this,  if  I did  not  consider  it  as  a token  of 
the  Lord’s  displeasure.  When  he  withdraws 
his  blessing,  no  union  can  long  subsist. 


SURE  RESOURCE  OF  THIS  NATION.  431 


“ Because  thou  servedst  not  the  Lord  thy 
God,  with  joyfulness,  and  with  gladness  of 
heart,  for  the  abundance  of  all  things;  there- 
fore shalt  thou  serve  thine  enemies,  whom 
the  Lord  shall  send  against  thee,  in  hunger, 
and  in  thirst,  and  in  nakedness  and  in  the 
want  of  all  things,”  Deut.  xxviii.  47,  48. 
These  words  of  Moses  to  rebellious  Israel 
emphatically  describe  the  former  and  the  pre- 
sent state  of  many  of  the  French  nation, 
who  have  been  despoiled,  insulted,  and  glad 
if  they  could  escape  (great  numbers  could 
not  so  escape)  with  the  loss  of  their  all,  and 
at  the  peril  of  their  lives,  to  a more  hospita- 
ble shore.  May  their  sufferings  remind  us  of 
our  deserts  ! Who  can  tell  if  the  Lord  may 
yet  be  merciful  unto  us,  and  exempt  us  from 
similar  calamities ! 

III.  But  though  we  have  much  cause  to 
mourn  for  our  sins,  and  humbly  to  deprecate 
deserved  judgments,  let  us  not  despond.  The 
Lord  our  God  is  a merciful  God  ! Who  can 
tell  but  he  may  repent,  and  turn  from  the 
fierceness  of  his  anger,  that  we  perish  not  1 
If  the  professed  business  of  this  day  be  not 
confined  to  a day,  but  if,  by  his  blessing  it 
may  produce  repentance  not  to  be  repented 
of,  then  I am  warranted  to  tell  you,  from  his 
word,  that  there  is  yet  hope.  You  that  trem- 
ble for  the  ark,  for  the  cause  of  God,  whose 
eyes  affect  your  hearts,  who  grieve  for  sin, 
and  for  the  miseries  which  sin  has  multiplied 
upon  the  earth,  take  courage.  Let  the  hearts 
of  the  wicked  shake,  like  the  leaves  of  the 
trees  when  agitated  by  a storm ; (Isa.  vii.  2 ;) 
but  be  not  you  like  them.  The  Lord  God  is 
your  refuge  and  strength,  your  resting  place, 
and  your  hiding  place ; under  the  shadow  of 
his  wings  you  shall  be  safe,  Ps.  xlvi.  1 ; xc. 
1;  cxix.  114. 

1.  He  who  loved  you,  and  died  for  your 
sins,  is  the  Lord  of  glory.  All  power  in  hea- 
ven and  in  earth  is  committed  unto  him, 
Matt,  xxviii.  18.  The  Lord  reigneth,  let 
the  earth  be  never  so  unquiet.  Ps.  xcix.  1. 
All  creatures  are  instruments  of  his  will. 
The  wrath  of  man,  so  far  as  it  is  permitted 
to  act,  shall  praise  him,  shall  be  made  sub- 
servient to  the  accomplishment  of  his  great 
designs;  and  the  remainder  of  that  wrath, 
all  their  projected  violence,  which  does  not 
coincide  with  his  wise  and  comprehensive 
plan,  he  will  restrain,  Ps.  lxxvi.  10.  In  vain 
they  rage,  and  fret,  and  threaten.  They  act 
under  a secret  commission,  and  can  do  no 
more  than  he  permits  them.  If  they  attempt 
it,  he  has  a hook  and  a bridle  in  their  mouths, 
2 Kings  xix.  28.  When  the  enemies  would 
come  in  like  a flood,  he  can  lift  up  a standard 
against  them,  Is.  lix.  19.  As  he  has  set 
bounds  and  bars  to  the  tempestuous  sea,  be- 
yond which  it  cannot  pass,  saying,  Hitherto 
shalt  thou  come  and  no  farther,  and  here 
shall  thy  proud  waves  be  stayed ; (Job  xxxviii. 


10,  11 ;)  so,  with  equal  ease,  he  can  still  the 
madness  of  the  people,  Ps.  lxv.  7. 

You  do  well  to  mourn  for  the  sins  and 
miseries  of  those  who  know  hkn  not.  But  if 
you  make  him  your  fear  and  your  dread,  he 
will  be  a sanctuary  to  you,  and  keep  your 
hearts  in  peace,  though  the  earth  be  removed, 
and  the  mountains  cast  into  the  midst  of  the 
sea,  Is.  viii.  13, 14.  Ps.  xlvi.  2. 

2.  Your  part  and  mine,  is  to  watch  and 
pray. — Let  us  pray  for  ourselves,  that  we 
may  be  found  waiting,  with  our  loins  girded 
up,  and  our  lamps  burning,  (Mark  xiii.  35 ; 
xiv.  38,)  that  we  may  be  prepared  to  meet 
his  will  in  every  event.  Let  us  pray  for  the 
peace  of  Jerusalem,  for  his  church,  which  is 
dear  to  him,  as  the  pupil  of  his  eye,  for  the 
spread  of  his  gospel,  and  the  extension  of 
his  kingdom,  till  his  great  name  be  known 
and  adored  from  the  rising  to  the  setting  of 
the  sun,  and  the  whole  earth  shall  be  filled 
with  his  glory,  Mai.  i.  11.  Many  splendid 
prophecies  are  yet  unfulfilled : and  he  is 
now  bringing  forward  their  accomplishment. 
Light  would  undoubtedly  arise  out  of  this 
darkness.  Let  us  earnestly  pray  for  a bless- 
ing from  on  high,  upon  our  beloved  King  and 
his  family,  upon  the  counsels  of  government 
and  parliament,  and  upon  all  subordinate  au- 
thority in  church  and  state — that  we  may 
lead  quiet  and  peaceable  lives  in  all  godli- 
ness and  honesty,  that  religion  and  good  order 
may  be  established,  and  iniquity  be  put  to 
shame  and  silence.  Thus  we  may  nope  to 
be  secured,  by  the  sure,  though  secret  mark 
of  divine  protection,  Ezek.  ix.  4.  The  Lord 
will  be  our  shield,  though  many  should  sutler 
or  fall  around  us.  The  very  hairs  of  our 
heads  are  numbered,  Matt.  x.  30.  Or  if,  for 
the  manifestation  of  our  faith,  and  the  power 
of  his  grace,  he  should  permit  ds  to  share  in 
common  calamities,  we  may  rely  upon  him 
to  afford  us  strength  according  to  our  day, 
Deut.  xxxiii.  25.  He  is  always  near  to  his 
people,  a very  present  help  in  the  time  of 
trouble;  and  he  can  make  the  season  of  their 
greatest  tribulations,  the  season  of  their 
sweetest  consolations,  2 Cor.  i.  5. 

3.  And  let  us  pray  in  faith.  Let  us  re- 
member what  great  things  the  Lord  has  done 
in  answer  to  prayer.  When  sin  had  given 
Sennacherib  rapid  success  in  his  invasion  of 
Judah,  he  did  not  know  that  he  was  no  more 
than  an  axe  or  a saw  in  the  hand  of  God,  Lsa. 
x.  15;  xxxvii.  14 — 36.  He  ascribed  his  vic- 
tories to  his  own  prowess,  and  thought  him- 
self equally  sure  of  Jerusalem.  But  Heze- 
kiah  defeated  him  upon  his  knees.  He  spread 
his  blasphemous  letter  before  the  Lord  in  the 
temple,  and  prayed,  and  the  Assyrian  army 
melted  away  like  snow.  When  Peter  was 
shut  up,  and  chained  in  prison,  the  chains 
fell  from  his  hands,  the  locks  and  bolts  gave 
way,  and  the  iron  gate  opened,  while  the 


432 


THE  IMMINENT  DANGER,  &c. 


church  was  united  in  earnest  prayer  for  his 
deliverance,  Acts  xii.  5 — 13. 

And  as  we  have  heard,  so  have  we  seen. 
God  has  signally  answered  the  prayers  of  his 
people,  in  our  own  time.  Much  prayer,  both 
public  and  private,  was  offered  for  our  be- 
loved King,  during  his  late  illness ; and  how 
wonderful,  how  sudden,  how  seasonable  was 
his  recovery ! Surely  this  was  the  finger  of 
God  ! When  he  thus  renjoved  our  apprehen- 
sions, we  were  like  them  that  dream,  Psalm 
cxxvi.  1. 

I believe  prayer  was  no  less  efficacious,  to- 
wards the  end  of  the  year  1792.  I know 
many  people  treated  the  idea  of  danger  at 
that  time  as  chimerical,  because  the  Lord 
was  pleased  to  avert  it  But  I hope  we  have 
not  quite  forgotten  the  language  we  heard, 
and  the  persons  we  daily  met  with  in  the 
street  the  many  daring  cabals  which  were 
held  in  this  city,  and  the  threatenings  which 
were  written  in  large  characters  upon  the 
walls  of  our  houses,  at  almost  every  corner. 
But  the  hearts  of  men  were  turned  like  the 
tide  in  the  critical  moment.  Then  I think 
the  interposition  of  the  Lord  was  evident! 
Then  we  had  a repeated  proof  that  he  hears 
and  answers  prayer ! 

The  present  likewise  is  a very  important 
crisis.  All  that  is  dear  to  us  as  men,  as  Bri- 
tons, as  Christians,  is  threatened.  Our  ene- 
mies are  inveterate  and  enraged.  Our  sins 
testify  against  us.  But  if  we  humble  our- 
selves before  God,  forsake  our  sins,  and  unite 
in  supplications  for  mercy,  who  can  tell  but 
he  may  be  entreated  to  give  us  that  help 
which  it  would  be  in  vain  to  expect  from 
man  1 yea,  we  have  encouragement  to  hope 
that  he  will  be  for  us,  (Rom.  viii.  31,)  and 
then  none  can  prevail  against  us.  But  with- 
out his  blessing  our  most  powerful  efforts, 
and  best  concerted  undertakings  cannot  suc- 
ceed. 

You,  who  have  access  to  the  throne  of 
grace,  whose  hearts  are  concerned  for  the 
glory  of  God,  and  who  lament  not  only  the 
temporal  calamities  attendant  upon  war,  but 
the  many  thousands  of  souls  who  are  yearly 
precipitated  by  it  into  an  eternal,  unchange- 
able  state, — you,  I trust,  will  show  your-  j 


selves  true  friends  to  your  country,  by  bear 
ing  your  testimony,  and  exerting  your  in- 
fluence against  sin,  the  procuring  cause  of 
all  our  sorrows,  and,  by  standing  in  the 
breach,  and  pleading  with  God  for  mercy,  in 
behalf  of  yourselves,  and  of  the  nation.  If 
ten  persons,  thus  disposed,  had  been  found 
even  in  Sodom,  it  would  have  escaped  de- 
struction, Gen.  xviii.  32. 

IV.  There  may  be  some  persons  in  this 
assembly,  who  are  little  concerned  for  their 
own  sins,  and  are  of  course  incapable  of 
taking  a proper  part  in  the  service  of  the 
day.  Yet  I am  glad  that  you  are  here;  I 
pity  you,  I warn  you.  If  you  should  live  to 
see  a time  of  public  distress,  what  will  you 
do  1 To  whom  will  you  look,  or  whither  will 
you  flee  for  help1?  All  that  is  dear  to  you 
may  be  torn  from  you,  or  you  from  it. — -Or, 
if  it  please  God  to  prolong  our  tranquillity, 
you  are  liable  to  many  heavy  calamities  in 
private  life.  And  if  you  should  be  exempted 
from  these,  death  is  inevitable,  and  may  be 
near.  My  heart  wishes  you  the  possession 
of  those  principles  which  would  support  you 
in  all  the  changes  of  life,  and  make  your  dy- 
ing pillow  comfortable.  Are  you  unwilling 
to  be  happy  1 or  can  you  be  happy  too  soon  ? 
Many  persons  are  now  looking  upon  you, 
who  once  were  as  you  are  now.  And  I doubt 
not,  they  are  praying  that  you  may  be  as  they 
now  are.  Try  to  pray  for  yourself ; our  God 
is  assuredly  in  the  midst  of  us.  His  gracious 
ear  is  attentive  to  every  supplicant.  Seek 
him  while  he  is  to  be  found.  Jesus  died  foi 
sinners,  and  he  has  said,  Him  that  cometh  to 
me  I will  in  nowise  cast  out,  John  vi.  37. 
He  is  likewise  the  author  of  that  faith,  by 
which  alone  you  can  come  rightly  to  him. 
If  you  ask  it  of  him,  he  will  give  it  you ; if 
you  seek  it  in  the  means  of  his  appointment, 
you  shall  assuredly  find,  Matt.  vii.  7.  If 
you  refuse  this,  there  remaineth  no  other  sa- 
crifice for  sin,  Heb.  x.  22,  27.  If  you  are 
not  saved  by  faith  in  his  blood,  you  are  lost 
for  ever.  O kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry, 
and  you  perish  from  the  way,  if  his  wrath 
be  kindled,  yea  but  a little.  Blessed  are 
all  they  that  put  their  trust  in  him,  Psalm 
ii.  12. 


MOTIVES  TO  HUMILIATION  AND  PRAISE; 


A SERMON 

PREACHED  IN  THE  PARISH  CHURCH  OF  ST.  MARY  WOOLNC  Ih 
ON  TUESDAY,  DECEMBER  19,  1797. 


T1IE  DAY  OF  GENERAL  THANKSGIVING  TO  ALMIGHTY  GOD  FOR  OUR  LATE  NAVAL  VICTORIES. 


How  shall  I give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ? How  shall  I deliver  thee , Israel  ? How  shall  I make 
thee  as  Admah  ? How  shall  I set  thee  as  Zeboim  ? My  heart  is  turned  within  me,  my 
repentings  are  kindled  together.  I will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  mine  anger,  I will 
not  return  to  destroy  Ephraim ; for  I am  God,  and  not  man,  the  Holy  One  in  the  midst 
of  thee. — Hosea  xi.  8,  9. 


The  most  High  God,  in  the  revelation  of 
his  will  to  men,  adapts  his  language  to  the 
weakness  of  our  conceptions.  Heavenly 
truths  are  represented  by  images  taken  from 
earthly  things,  John  iii.  12.  The  metaphors 
of  eyes  and  hands  are  used  in  the  scriptures 
to  raise  our  thoughts  to  some  due  apprehen- 
sion of  his  infinite  knowledge,  his  omnipre- 
sence, and  his  almighty  power,  1 Pet.  iii.  12 ; 
Ps.  lxxxix.  13.  He  is  likewise  spoken  of,  as 
deliberating,  repenting,  rejoicing,  and  griev- 
ing; yet  we  are  sure  that  passions  like  those 
of  which  we  are  conscious  in  ourselves,  can- 
not in  strict  propriety  be  ascribed  to  the  holy 
and  blessed  God.  No  attentive  and  serious 
mind  can  be  misled  by  this  figurative  analo- 
gy. We  learn  from  the  same  scriptures  of 
truth,  that  God  is  sovereign  ; that  with  him 
there  is  no  variableness,  nor  shadow  of  turn- 
ing, (James  i.  17,)  that  his  counsel  shall 
stand,  and  he  will  do  all  his  pleasure,  (Is. 
xlvi.  10;)  and  that  all  his  works  are  perfect- 
ly known  to  him,  from  the  beginning  of  the 
world,  Acts  xv.  18.  The  more  familiar  modes 
of  expression  are  designed  to  teach  us,  not 
what  he  is  in  himself,  but  how  it  becomes  us 
6inful  creatures  to  be  affected  towards  him. 

Thus,  though  the  purpose  of  God  concern- 
ing Israel  was  fixed  and  unalterable,  yet,  to 
impress  us  with  a sense  of  his  inflexible  dis- 
pleasure against  sin,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
leave  open  the  door  of  hope  and  encourage- 
ment for  penitent  sinners,  we  read  of  a de- 
bate, as  it  were,  between  his  justice  and  his 
mercy.  Justice  demanded  that  Israel  should 
be  given  up,  delivered  up  to  vengeance,  to 
such  a destruction  as  that  by  which  God 
Von.  TT.  3 I 


overthrew  the  cities  in  the  plain  of  Jericho, 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  Admah  and  Zeboim, 
Deut.  xxix.  23.  But  Mercy  interposed,  plead- 
ed for  a respite,  and  prevailed.  O Ephraim, 
O Israel,  justice  calls  aloud  for  vengeance, 
but  how  shall  I,  how  can  I give  thee  up? 
No,  I cannot,  I will  not,  my  heart  is  turned 
within  me,  my  repentings  are  kindled. 

Two  reasons  are  assigned,  in  his  pathetic 
expostulation,  why  he  would  still  exercise 
long-suffering  towards  those  who  so  justly 
deserved  to  perish : 1.  I am  God,  and  not 
man.  The  patience  of  man,  or  of  any  mere 
creature,  would  have  been  orercome  long 
ago  by  the  perverseness  of  Israel;  but  he 
who  made  them,  and  he  only,  was  able  to 
bear  with  them  still.  2.  I am  the  Holy  One 
in  the  midst  of  thee.  In  tha-  dark  and  de- 
generate day,  when  the  bulk  of  the  nation 
was  in  a state  of  revolt  and  rebellion,  there 
were  a hidden  remnant  who  feared  and  wor- 
shipped the  Lord,  and  who  mourned  for  the 
abominations  which  they  could  not  prevent, 
Ezek.  ix.  4,  6.  Of  these  the  Lord  was  mind- 
ful, and  for  the  sake  of  these,  deserved  judg- 
ments were  suspended  from  falling  upon  the 
rest. 

The  people  of  Israel  were  for  a time  in  a 
state  of  hard  bondage,  and  were  severely  op- 
pressed in  Egypt.  The  Lord  brought  them 
out  from  thence  with  a mighty  hand,  and  a 
stretched-out  arm.  He  afterwards  drowned 
Pharaoh  and  his  host  in  the  Red  Sea  ; but  he 
led  Israel  safely  through  the  deep  as  upon 
dry  land.  In  the  barren  wilderness  he  fed 
them  with  manna,  and  bit  light  them  water 
out  of  the  rock.  In  the  pathless  wilderness 
433 


431 


MOTIVES  TO  HUMILIATION  AND  PRAISE. 


iie  guided  them,  by  a cloud  in  the  day,  and 
by  a fire  in  the  night.  He  fought  their  bat- 
tles, subdued  their  enemies,  and  put  them  in 
possession  of  the  land  he  had  promised  to 
their  forefathers.  They  were  a people  whom 
ihe  Most  High  selected  for  himself,  as  his 
peculiar  treasure,  Ps.  cxxxv.  4.  He  was 
their  God  and  their  King.  They  were  the 
only  people  who  were  at  that  time  favoured 
with  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  and 
how  to  worship  him  acceptably.  He  gave 
them  his  laws  and  ordinances.  He  resided 
among  them,  and  honoured  them  with  a visi- 
ble token  of  his  presence  in  the  tabernacle, 
and  afterwards  in  the  temple.  They  were 
likewise  under  an  especial  care  of  his  provi- 
dence. The  fruitfulness  of  their  land  did 
not  depend  upon  the  climate,  but  the  early  ! 
and  the  latter  rain  returned  regularly  at  the  ! 
stated  seasons,  by  his  appointment ; and 
when,  in  obedience  to  his  commands,  all  their  J 
males  from  the  most  distant  parts  went  up  ; 
three  times  in  a year  to  Jerusalem,  and  left  i 
their  borders  destitute  of  human  defence,  God 
so  impressed  the  surrounding  nations  with 
awe,  that,  though  hostile  in  their  dispositions, 
they  never  availed  themselves  of  that  seem- 
ingly favourable  opportunity  for  invading 
them,  Exod.  xxxiv.  24.  Under  the  reign  of 
Solomon,  they  enjoyed  peace,  plenty,  pros- 
perity, and  wealth,  in  a degree  till  then  un-  ! 
known  among  the  nations  of  the  earth. 

What  returns  did  Israel  make  to  the  Lord 
for  all  these  benefits  ? The  history  of  their 
conduct  is  little  more  than  the  recital  of  a 
long  series  of  ungrateful  murmurings,  diso- 
bedience, and  rebellion.  They  resisted  his 
will,  broke  his  commandments,  mingled  with 
the  heathen,  and  learned  their  ways.  They 
repeatedly  forsook  the  Lord  God  of  their 
fathers,  worshipped  dumb  idols,  and  practised 
all  the  abominations  of  the  nations  which  the 
Lord  had  cast  out  before  them.  Their  sins 
often  brought  calamities  upon  them.  The 
Lord  gave  them  up  unto  the  hands  of  their 
enemies ; they  suffered  by  the  sword,  by  pes- 
tilence and  by  famine.  When  he  slew  them, 
then  they  sought  him ; and  when  they  sought 
him,  he  was  entreated  of  them,  Ps.  lxxviii. 
34.  He  delivered  them  out  of  their  afflic- 
tions ; but  they  soon  forgot  his  goodness,  and 
returned  to  their  evil  ways.  He  sent  many  j 
of  his  servants  in  succession,  to  admonish 
and  warn  them  ; but  they  despised  his  words, 
they  mocked  his  messengers,  and  misused  his 
prophets,  2 Chron.  xxxvi.  16. 

Can  we  wonder,  if  justice  demanded  the 
utter  extirpation  and  ruin  of  a people  so  j 
highly  favoured,  so  well  instructed,  so  often 
chastised  and  delivered,  and  yet  so  incorrigi-  j 
bly  ungrateful,  daring,  and  obstinate ! Is  it  ■ 
not  rather  wonderful  to  hear  the  Lord  ex-  j 
pressing  a reluctance  to  execute  the  sentence 
so  justly  deserved,  and  saying  of  such  a peo-  ( 
pie,  How  shall  I give  thee  up  1 


But  can  we  read  the  history  of  Israel 
without  remarking  how  strongly  it  resembles 
our  own  ? Have  we  not  been  equally  distin- 
guished from  the  nations  around  us,  by  spi- 
ritual and  temporal  blessings,  and  by  our 
gross  misimprovement  of  them?  We  are 
assembled  this  day  to  join  in  public  thanks- 
givings for  public  mercies,  but  we  have  great 
cause  for  public  humiliation  likewise.  We 
have  much  reason  to  rejoice  in  the  goodness 
of  the  Lord ; but  we  have  reason  to  temper 
our  joy  with  trembling  (Ps.  ii.  11,)  when  we 
compare  the  state  of  things  around  us,  with 
that  of  Ephraim  and  Judah  in  the  days  of  the 
prophet  Hosea. 

While  too  many  persons  lose  their  time 
and  temper  in  political  and  party  disputes, 
and  refer  all  the  calamities  we  either  feel  or 
fear  to  instruments  and  second  causes,  let  us 
acknowledge  that  the  Lord  God  omnipotent 
reigneth  ! Rev.  xix.  6.  Let  us  consider  sin 
as  the  procuring  cause  of  all  our  troubles. 
Let  us  recognize  his  hand  in  them,  and  con- 
fess that,  in  all  the  distress  he  has  brought 
upon  us,  he  has  not  dealt  with  us  as  our  ini- 
quities deserve.  May  our  hearts  be  suitably 
affected,  while  I attempt  a brief  sketch  of  the 
abounding  evils  and  abominations  prevalent 
amongst  us,  which  might  justly  provoke  the 
Lord  to  sweep  this  land,  so  long  the  land  of 
peace  and  liberty,  with  the  besom  of  destruc- 
tion ! and  then  we  shall  be  prepared  to  praise 
him  for  those  merciful  and  signal  interposi- 
tions of  his  providence,  which  afford  us  some 
ground  to  hope,  that,  notwithstanding  all  our 
provocations,  he  will  not  yet  give  us  up. 

I.  Offences  of  the  same  kind  may  be 
heightened  and  aggravated  by  circumstances. 
Thus  an  insult  offered  to  a benefactor,  a pa- 
rent, or  a king,  is  deemed  more  grievous  than 
if  the  person  offended  was  in  all  respects  an 
equal.  In  this  sense,  I fear  the  sins  of  Great 
Britain  are  of  a deeper  dye  than  those  of  any 
nation  in  Europe  ; because  they  are  commit- 
ted against  greater  advantages  and  privileges 
than  any  other  people  have  enjoyed.  May 
not  the  Lord  appeal  to  ourselves,  as  to  Israel 
of  old,  What  could  have  been  done  more  to 
my  vineyard,  that  I have  not  done  ? Is.  v.  4. 
After  the  black  night  of  Popish  darkness,  in 
which  Christendom  had  been  for  ages  in- 
! volved,  Wickliff,  the  morning-star  and  har- 
binger of  the  Reformation,  arose  in  our  bor- 
ders. From  his  time,  we  have  been  favoured 
with  a succession  of  preachers  of  the  gospel, 
j and  of  witnesses  to  its  truth  and  power.  Not 
a few  of  these  sealed  their  profession  with 
; their  blood  ; and  a much  greater  number 
suffered  in  the  same  cause,  by  fines,  stripes, 
banishment,  and  imprisonment.  But  since 
j the  Revolution,  and  especially  since  the  ac- 
| cession  of  King  George  I.  to  the  throne,  the 
'spirit  of  persecution  has  been  greatly  re- 
: pressed  and  chained  up.  We  are  not  now 
j called  to  resist  unto  blood.  Nor  is  there  any 


MOTIVES  TO  HUMILIATION  AND  PRAISE. 


435 


Protestant  country  where  religious  liberty  is 
so  universally  enjoyed,  and  with  so  little  re- 
straint, as  in  the  dominions  of  Great  Britain. 

O fortunati  minium,  sua  si  bona  norint! 

Our  constitution,  the  basis  and  bulwark  of 
our  civil  liberty,  is  the  admiration  or  envy  of 
our  surrounding  neighbours.  It  cost  our 
forefathers  many  struggles  to  bring  forward 
and  establish  this  national  blessing ; but  we 
have  enjoyed  it  so  long,  and  so  quietly,  that 
we  seem  almost  to  forget  its  value,  how  it 
was  obtained,  or  how  only  it  can  be  pre- 
served 1 Wo  be  to  us,  if  God  should  succeed 
the  desires  and  endeavours  of  those  who  are 
disposed  to  exchange  it  for  licentiousness! 
Add  to  this  our  public  prosperity. — While 
we  have  been  principals  in  many  wars,  which 
have  spread  devastation  and  misery  far  and 
wide  abroad,  we  have  had  uninterrupted 
peace  at  home ; and  know  so  little  of  the  ca- 
lamities of  war,  that  were  it  not  for  the  in- 
crease of  taxes,  it  is  probable  we  should  not 
be  soon  weary  of  hearing  of  battles,  and  the 
slaughter  of  thousands,  provided  victory  de- 
clared on  our  side.  Our  arms  and  our  com- 
merce have,  almost  like  the  ocean,  encom- 
passed the  habitable  globe,  and  we  are  be- 
come the  grand  mart  and  emporium  of  the 
earth. 

But  what  have  been  our  returns  to  the 
IiOrd  for  all  his  goodness ! May  he  not  say  of 
us,  as  of  Israel,  I have  nourished  and  brought 
up  children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against 
me ! Isa.  i.  2.  I attempt  not  to  explain  the 
unfulfilled  prophecies  in  the  Apocalypse,  but 
the  first,  second,  and  third  chapters  of  the 
prophecy  of  Isaiah  are  so  obviously  applica- 
ble to  the  present  state  of  these  kingdoms, 
that  we  need  look  no  further  to  perceive 
both  our  sin  and  our  danger.  May  the  Lord 
soften  our  hearts  for  our  own  sins,  the  sins 
of  professors  of  the  gospel,  and  those  national 
sins  which  strongly  mark  our  character  as  a 
people ! 

1.  The  true  Christian  sees  much  cause  of 
humiliation  in  himself.  Though  he  cannot 
but  take  sorrowful  notice  of  what  passes 
around  him,  he  is  more  ready  to  scrutinize 
and  blame  his  own  misconduct,  than  that  of 
other  men.  He  confesses  that  his  best  is  de- 
fective and  defiled.  Though  he  exercises 
himself  to  maintain  a conscience  void  of  of- 
fence, and  dares  appeal  to  the  Lord  for  the 
sincerity  of  his  aims,  he  owns  that  in  every 
thing  he  comes  short.  His  obligations  to  the 
Redeemer  are  immense,  and  his  sensations 
of  gratitude,  and  exertions  in  his  service,  are 
vastly  disproportionate  to  them : yet  having 
accepted  the  atonement,  and  resting  his  hope 
of  salvation  upon  Jesus,  though  his  imperfec- 
tions humble  him,  they  do  not  discourage 
him.  But  he  acknowledges,  that  if  justice 
were  strict  to  mark  what  is  amiss,  his  own 
Bins  are  so  many  and  so  great,  that  he  could 


have  no  right  to  complain,  though  he  had  a 
large  share  of  the  heaviest  calamities  inci- 
dent to  this  mortal  life.  They  who  are  thus 
minded  are  the  chariots  and  horsemen  of  the 
land  in  which  they  live.  They  sigh  and 
mourn  for  their  own  sins,  and  the  evils  which 
they  cannot  prevent.  They  have  little  thank3 
from  the  blind,  careless,  ungodly  many  around 
them.  They  are  rather  scorned  and  de- 
spised for  their  singularity,  and  unfashionable 
preciseness  ; but  if  this  nation  be  spared  from 
destruction,  it  will  be  for  their  sakes,  and  for 
the  attention  with  which  God  regards  their 
prayers.  If  we  had  no  such  persons  amongst 
us,  our  fleets  and  armies  would  prove  but  a 
poor  and  precarious  defence.  But  I trust 
their  number  is  not  small.  They  are  dis- 
persed up  and  down  throughout  the  kingdom, 
and  are  the  salt  of  the  earth,  which  preserves 
us  from  total  putrefaction. 

2.  By  professors,  we  mean,  those  who  as- 
sent to  the  leading  doctrines  of  the  gospel, 
and  usually  attend  where  it  is  preached.  I 
know  this  distinction  is  deemed  invidious. 
We  are  sometimes  asked — Why  do  you  ap- 
propriate the  term  gospel  to  yourselves?  Do 
not  all  ministers  preach  the  gospel  ? Most 
certainly  not.  The  doctrines  from  many  pul- 
pits are  contrary,  yea,  contradictory.  They 
cannot  be  all  right.  Yea,  the  doctrines  from 
too  many  pulpits  in  our  established  church 
contradict  the  Articles  and  the  Liturgy, 
which  the  preachers  have  solemnly  sub- 
scribed. The  Articles  and  Liturgy  bear  ex- 
press testimony  to  the  universal  and  total 
depravity  of  human  nature,  the  Deity  and 
atonement  of  the  Saviour,  the  necessity  of 
regeneration,  a new  birth,  and  a new  life  of 
sanctification,  and  of  the  abiding  influences 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  to  awaken  sinners, 
to  produce  faith,  and  to  instruct,  comfort,  and 
establish  those  who  believe.  These  points 
are  essential  to  the  scheme  of  the  gospel,  as 
it  is  set  before  us  by  the  evangelists  and 
apostles.  They  who  espouse  them  are  called 
professors — a title  which  includes  all  those 
whom  I have  already  mentioned,  but  is  ex- 
tended to  many  more,  or  at  least  is  assumed 
by  them.  Happy  indeed  would  it  be,  if  all 
who  seem  to  agree  in  principles,  were  united 
in  love  among  themselves,  and  exhibited  in 
the  sight  of  men,  in  their  tempers,  practice, 
and  pursuits,  a conversation  becoming  the 
gospel  they  profess.  But  in  the  days  of  the 
apostles  there  were  those  who,  while  they 
professed  to  believe  in  God,  denied  him  by 
their  works,  who  were  enemies  to  the 
cross  of  Christ,  and  caused  the  good  way  to 
be  evil  spoken  of,  Phil.  iii.  13;  Titus  i.  16. 
We  lament,  more  than  wonder,  that  it  should 
be  so  now : for  human  nature  is  the  same  in 
all  ages ; and  even  among  those  of  whom  we 
hope  better — contentions,  divisions,  the  heat 
of  party-zeal,  the  coldness  of  brotherly  love, 
and  a blameable  conformity  to  the  spirit  and 


,36 


MOTIVES  TO  HUMILIATION  AND  PRAISE. 


eustoms  of  the  world,  are  but  too  visible. 
The  sins  of  professors  alone,  if  duly  consi- 
dered, might  make  us  apprehensive  that 
judgment  is  even  at  the  doors. 

3.  There  are  likewise  sins  so  generally 
prevalent,  so  familiar  and  habitual  in  every 
rank  of  life,  that  they  may  properly  be  called 
national ; because,  either  by  their  nature  or 
their  frequency,  they  mark  and  distinguish 
our  public  morals.  To  enumerate  these, 
would  be  a painful  and  arduous  task  : but 
my  subject  requires  me  to  notice  some  of  the 
most  prominent  and  notorious. 

(1.)  Infidelity. — Though  the  sophistry  and 
machinations  of  the  philosophers  in  France, 
and  of  those  who  style  themselves  the  Illu- 
minati in  Germany,  have  more  or  less  infect- 
ed the  whole  of  Christendom  with  their  scep- 
tical and  dangerous  sentiments,  so  that  we 
hold  them  in  common  with  many  other  na- 
tions, and  though  we  have  not  like  the  un- 
happy French,  openly  and  avowedly  re- 
nounced the  government  of  God;  yet  I fear 
that  the  worst  kind  of  infidelity  (which  is 
still  rapidly  spreading  through  the  land)  is 
already  become  one  of  our  national  sins. 
Formerly,  most  of  our  freethinkers  assumed 
the  more  modest  name  of  deists ; and  though 
they  rejected  the  scriptures,  they  professed 
a regard  to  what  they  called  natural  religion ; 
they  wrote  likewise  chiefly  for  men  like 
themselves,  of  a speculative  and  inquisitive 
turn,  and  did  not  appear  much  concerned  to 
proselyte  the  common  people : they  seemed 
*o  allow  that  the  principles  of  Christianity, 
though  not  necessary  to  persons  of  their  sa- 
gacity, might  be  useful  to  preserve  the  peace 
and  order  of  society,  and  to  keep  the  vulgar 
within  some  bounds  of  good  government  and 
subordination.  I have  myself  known  those 
who,  upon  this  ground,  regularly,  or  at  least 
frequently,  attended  public  worship ; not  that 
they  desired  or  expected  any  benefit  from  it, 
but  to  set  a good  example  to  their  wives, 
children,  and  servants,  whom  they  thought 
cither  not  competent  to  understand  their 
more  sublime  discoveries,  or  not  fit  to  be  en- 
trusted with  them.  These  champions  like- 
wise went  forth  singly  to  the  combat;  but 
now  there  is  a strong  compacted  confederacy 
against  all  religion,  both  name  and  thing. 
Neither  the  mortal  nor  the  immortal  deists 
are  much  thought  of  at  present.  Philoso- 
phers have  pushed  their  inquiries  far  beyond 
the  narrow  views  of  the  deists,  and  proclaim 
themselves  to  be  atheists.  They  tell  us,  that 
either  there  is  no  God,  or  that  he  does  not 
take  cognizance  of  human  affairs.  To  relieve 
the  consciences  of  men  from  those  foreboding 
fears  of  a future  judgment  which  are  not 
easily  separable  from  guilt,  they  boldly  affirm 
death  to  be  an  eternal  sleep.  Though  these 
and  similar  dreadful  tenets,  have  not  obtained 
the  publicity  and  authority  with  us  which 
thev  have  in  France  they  have  spread  like  a 


contagion  through  the  kingdom.  Multitudes 
in  every  degree  of  life,  from  the  noble  to  the 
peasant,  have  adopted  them. 

Not  that  I ascribe  the  progress  of  infidelity 
chiefly  to  Thomas  Paine,  or  to  writers  of  a 
superior  class  in  the  same  line ; but  they  have 
brought  it  more  into  view.  Long  before  the 
modern  philosophers  were  born,  the  fool  had 
said  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  God,  Ps.  xiv.  1. 
Infidelity  is  congenial  to  human  nature.  In- 
fidel writings,  like  the  touch  of  Ithuriel’s 
spear,  have  disclosed  what  for  a time,  was 
hidden  or  disguised.  The  spirits  of  many 
were  prepared.  They  were  infidels  before, 
though  for  want  of  attention  they  scarce- 
ly knew  it,  or  for  want  of  boldness  were 
afraid  to  own  it.  The  effects  are  evident. 
With  many  people  of  fashion,  infidelity  is 
fashionable.  Their  dependents  and  servants 
imbibe  their  sentiments,  and,  so  far  as  their 
ability  reaches,  imitate  their  practice.  Every 
class  of  society  downwards,  tradesmen,  por- 
ters, labourers,  and  hostlers,  are  no  less 
pleased  with  thinking  and  acting  without 
control,  than  their  superiors.  Thus  the 
bonds  of  society  are  weakened;  vice,  idle- 
ness, impatience,  murmuring,  and  insubordi- 
nation are  seen,  wherever  we  turn  our  eyes. 
When  will  these  things  end  1 When  men 
agree  to  cast  off  the  fear  of  God,  they  will 
seldom  long  accord  in  any  thing  else.  Man, 
in  his  natural  state,  is  a wild  creature ; but 
while  his  conscience  is  not  quite  hardened, 
while  he  acknowledges  a God,  and  expects  a 
future  state  and  a day  of  judgment,  though 
he  commits  many  evils,  he  is  restrained  from 
committing  many  more,  and  greater,  to  which 
his  corrupt  propensities  would  otherwise  in- 
cline him,  and  from  which  he  would  not  be 
deterred  by  mere  human  laws  and  penalties. 
Such  a sinner  may  be  compared  to  a lion  in 
the  Tower : but  an  infidel  is  a lion  in  the 
street. 

(2.)  The  great  neglect  of  the  obligations 
of  religion,  amongst  those  who  have  not  ex- 
plicitly cast  off  all  regard  to  it,  is  a national 
sin.  If  a stranger  from  some  remote  part  of 
the  world,  who  understood  our  language, 
was  to  see  and  hear  all  that  passes  at  a con- 
tested election,  at  our  cockpits,  gaming- 
houses, race-grounds,  boxing-matches,  and 
many  other  promiscuous  assemblies,  what 
judgment  could  he  form  of  our  religion  1 Or 
could  he  readily  believe  that  we  had  any  ! 
And  yet  we  could  not  tell  him  that  they  were 
all  infidels.  Many  who  live  in  the  habitual 
neglect  or  breach  of  the  precepts  of  scripture, 
would  still  be  thought  Christians,  though  they 
have  little,  but  the  avowal  of  the  name,  to  dis- 
tinguish them  from  the  most  determined  infi- 
dels. And  it  is  to  be  feared,  that  such  Chris- 
tians constitute  a very  great  majority  cf  the 
people  of  England. 

(3.)  The  contempt  of  the  gospel  of  Christ, 
will,  I fear,  be  found  a national  sin,  with  the 


MOTIVES  TO  HUMILIATION  AND  PRAISE. 


437 


exception  of  the  comparatively  few  who  cor- 
dially embrace  it.  I have  already  explained 
in  what  sense  I understand  the  word  Gospel. 
When  the  doctrines  of  our  established  church, 
which  in  the  main  are  conformable  to  the 
confessions  and  standards  of  all  the  protestant 
churches  in  Europe,  are  faithfully  preached, 
and  especially  when  first  introduced  into  a 
parish,  they  usually  cause  a general  alarm, 
they  excite  a general  opposition.  The  gos- 
pel is  shunned  and  dreaded  like  a pestilence, 
and  the  strongest  exertions  are  made  to  pre- 
vent its  entrance,  or  to  expel  it,  if  possible. 
The  ministers  who  preach  it  faithfully  are 
stigmatized  and  misrepresented.  We  learn 
from  Suetonius,  Tacitus,  and  Pliny,  that 
the  name  Christian  was  once  so  extremely 
odious,  that  whoever  dared  to  own  it  was 
suspected  as  capable  or  guilty  of  the  worst 
crimes,  though  no  proof  could  be  brought  of 
his  having  committed  any.  The  word  Me- 
thodist has  a degree  of  the  like  effect  in  our 
day.  It  is  not  now,  as  when  first  imposed, 
the  name  of  a particular  sect  or  body  of  peo- 
ple, but  is  applied  to  all  who  preach  and  ap- 
prove the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  if  they  are 
not  Dissenters.  And  it  operates  with  a kind 
of  magical  force  ; the  very  sound  of  the  word 
is  sufficient  to  fill  the  minds  of  many  people 
with  prejudices  against  the  truth.  Neither 
learning,  piety,  an  exemplary  conduct,  nor  a 
regular  compliance  \vith  the  rules  of  the  ru- 
bric, can  always,  or  often,  secure  a minister 
from  contempt,  if  the  giddy  world  think  pro- 
per to  call  him  a Methodist.  The  people 
prefer  those  who  will  prophesy  smooth  things, 
(Is.  xxx.  10 ;)  and  in  most  places  they  have 
their  wish.  Candour  itself  cannot  deny,  that 
there  are  in  many  parishes  of  this  kingdom 
official  shepherds,  who  have  neither  will  nor 
skill  to  teach  or  watch  over  their  flocks ; and 
multitudes  of  people  who,  for  want  of  proper 
instruction,  have  little  more  knowledge  of 
Christianity  than  the  Indians  in  America. 
Some  of  us  have  reason  to  be  thankful  to 
God  and  to  our  superiors  in  church  and  state, 
that  we  are  not  discountenanced  or  molested 
tn  the  exercise  of  our  ministry.  But  our 
path  is  not  the  ordinary  road  to  approbation 
or  preferment.  There  are  not  many  evan- 
gelical clergymen  who  have  benefices,  and 
these  have  been  chiefly  bestowed  by  private 
patronage.* 

(4.)  Because  of  swearing,  the  land  mourn- 
eth,  Jer.  xxiii.  10.  This  generally  prevail- 
ing enormity  has  two  branches — First,  Cus- 
tomary profane  swearing,  blasphemy,  and 
execration,  in  common  discourse.  We  can 


* Upon  the  death  of  the  late  Mr.  Romaine,  Rector  of 
St.  Andrew,  Wardrobe,  and  St.  Ann’s,  Blackfriars,  the 
inhabitants  united  in  a petition  to  the  Lord  Chancellor, 
in  favour  of  his  Curate,  whom  they  wished  to  succeed 
him  in  the  living:  and  the  Lord  Chancellor  was  pleased 
to  grant  their  request.  I mention  this  exception  with 
pleasure;  because  I think  it  is  much  to  the  honour  both 
of  his  Lordship,  and  of  the  parishioners. 


- seldom  walk  the  length  of  a street,  without 
having  our  ears  pained,  and  our  hearts  wound- 
ed, by  the  bitter  imprecations  which  thought- 
less creatures  utter  against  themselves,  or 
each  other.  It  might  be  expected  that  this 
horrid  wickedness  would  be  confined  to  the 
lowest  and  most  abandoned  of  the  common 
people.  But  it  is  far  otherwise.  Gentlemen 
and  noblemen  make  a point  of  distinguishing 
themselves  from  the  vulgar  by  their  houses, 
their  dress,  their  tables,  and  their  equipage ; 
but  many  of  them  in  their  language  take  a 
strange  pleasure  in  degrading  themselves  to 
a level  with  the  vilest  of  the  species ; so  that, 
were  it  not  for  their  exterior,  we  might  be 
led  to  think  that  they  had  spent  their  whole 
lives  among  stable-grooms  and  postilions; 
and  thus  by  their  own  proficiency  and  exam- 
ple they  harden  and  confirm  in  their  wicked- 
ness those  whom  they  imitate. 

The  insult  offered  to  the  majesty  and  holi- 
ness of  God  by  common  swearing,  contributes 
greatly  to  take  off  a sense  of  the  heinous  sin 
of  perjury,  or  false  swearing ; an  appeal  to 
the  God  of  truth  in  confirmation  of  a lie. 
This  is  the  other  branch  of  that  swrearing  for 
which  the  land  ought  to  mourn,  and,  sooner 
or  later,  must  mourn.  Perjury  is  emphati- 
cally one  of  our  national  sins.  “The  multi- 
plicity of  oaths,  which  are  interwoven  into 
almost  every  branch  of  public  business,  in- 
volves thousands  in  the  habitual  guilt  of  per- 
jury. Many  of  them,  it  is  true,  do  not  ne- 
cessarily lead  to  sin,  because  honest  and 
conscientious  men  may  and  do  strictly  ob- 
serve them ; but  it  is  to  be  feared,  a greater 
number  deliberately  and  customarily  violate 
these  solemn  obligations,  and  take  them  as 
often  as  imposed,  without  hesitation,  and 
without  any  desire  of  complying  with  them. 
Not  a few  of  these  oaths  are  either  so  word- 
ed or  so  circumstanced,  that  it  is  morally  im- 
possible to  fulfil  them ; and  if  a person  was 
even  to  attempt  it,  he  would  be  thought  a 
busy-body  or  a fool;  yet  they  must  be  tender- 
ed, and  must  be  taken  as  a matter  of  form, 
when  nothing  more  is  expected  or  purposed 
on  either  side.  The  number  of  church- 
wardens and  constables  who  are  annually 
sworn  is  very  great;  and  as  these  offices  are 
chiefly  held  by  rotation,  in  the  course  of  a few 
years  they  take  in  a considerable  part  of  the 
middling  people  in  the  kingdom.  How  many 
or  how  few  of  them  act  up  to  the  letter  and 
the  spirit  of  the  oaths  they  have  taken,  will 
be  known  in  the  day  when  the  secrets  of  all 
hearts  shall  be  revealed.  But  it  is  now  evi- 
dent, that  while  many,  like  sheep,  tread  with- 
out thought  in  the  path  of  custom,  content  to 
forswear  themselves  because  others  have  done 
so  before  them ; and  some  are  hardy  enough 
to  trifle  with  God  and  man  for  profit:  the 
laws  which  enjoin  and  multiply  oaths,  do 
thereby  furnish  and  multiply  temptations  to 
the  sin  of  perjury.  The  frequency  of  oaths, 


438 


MOTIVES  TO  HUMILIATION  AND  PRAISE 


che  irreverent  manner  in  which  they  are  of- 
ten administered,  and  the  impunity  with 
which  they  are  broken,  have  greatly  contri- 
buted to  weaken  the  sense  of  every  moral 
obligation,  and  to  spread  a dissolute  and 
daring  spirit  throughout  the  land.”* 

(5.)  Oppression  is  a national  sin,  if  the 
grievance  be  publicly  known,  and  no  consti- 
tutional measures  adopted  for  prevention  or 
relief.  Charges  of  this  nature  have  been 
brought  against  the  exercise  of  our  power, 
both  in  the  east  and  in  the  west.  I pretend 
not  to  say  how  far  they  are  founded  in  truth, 
or  exaggerated.  I confine  myself  to  a single 
instance,  of  which  my  own  experience  war- 
rants me  to  speak.  I have  more  than  once 
confessed  with  shame  in  this  pulpit,  the  con- 
cern I had  too  long  in  the  African  slave- 
trade.  This  trade,  marked  as  it  is  with  the 
epithet  infamous  by  a vote  of  the  House  of 
Commons,  is  still  carried  on,  and  under  the 
sanction  of  the  legislature.  Though  the  re- 
peated attempts  to  procure  the  abolition  of 
this  trade  have  not  succeeded,  they  have 
doubtless  contributed  to  meliorate  the  condi- 
tion of  the  blacks  who  are  in  a state  of  slavery 
in  our  West-India  islands.  The  mode  of 
their  transportation  thither  from  the  African 
coast  seems  to  be  less  tormenting  and  fatal 
than  formerly.  How  far  this  trade  may  have 
been  affected  by  the  present  wTar  I know  not. 
When  I was  engaged  in  it,  we  generally 
supposed,  for  an  accurate  palculation  was  not 
practicable,  that  there  were  not  less  than  a 
hundred  thousand  persons,  men,  women,  and 
children,  brought  off  the  coast,  by  the  Euro- 
pean vessels  of  all  nations,  and  that  an  equal 
number  lost  their  lives  annually,  by  the  wars 
and  other  calamities  occasioned  by  the  traffic, 
either  on  shore,  without  reaching  the  ship, 
or  on  shipboard  before  they  reached  the  places 
of  sale.  It  was  also  supposed  that  more  than 
one  half,  perhaps  three  fifths  of  the  trade  was 
in  the  hands  of  the  English.  If  the  trade  is 
at  present  carried  on  to  the  same  extent,  and 
nearly  in  the  same  manner,  while  we  are 
delaying  from  year  to  year  to  put  a stop  to 
our  part  of  it,  the  blood  of  many  thousands  of 
our  helpless,  much-injured  fellow-creatures, 
is  crying  against  us.  The  pitiable  state  of 
the  survivors  who  are  torn  from  their  nearest 
relatives,  connections,  and  their  native  land, 
must  be  taken  into  the  account. — Enough  of 
this  horrid  scene.  I fear  the  African  trade 
is  a national  sin,  for  the  enormities  which  ac- 
company it  are  now  generally  known ; and 
though  perhaps  the  greater  part  of  the  na- 
tion would  be  pleased  if  it  were  suppressed, 
yet  as  it  does  not  immediately  affect  their 
own  interest,  they  are  passive.  The  shop- 
tax,  a few  years  since,  touched  them  in  a 
more  sensible  and  tender  part,  and  there- 


fore petitions  and  remonstrances  were  pre- 
sented and  repeated,  till  the  tax  was  repealed. 
Can  we  wonder  that  the  calamities  of  the 
present  war  begin  to  be  felt  at  home,  when 
we  ourselves  wilfully  and  deliberately  in- 
flict much  greater  calamities  upon  the  na- 
tive Africans,  who  never  offended  us!  That 
is  an  awful  word,  “Woe  unto  thee  that 
sp^llest,  and  thou  wast  not  spoiled ; when 
thou  shalt  cease  to  spoil,  thou  shall  be  spoil- 
ed,” Isa.  xxxiii.  1. 

(6.)  A proud  boasting  spirit,  and  a vain 
confidence  in  our  strength  and  resources,  is 
a prominent  part  of  our  national  character. 
Though  infidelity,  irreligion,  contempt  both 
of  the  law  and  gospel  of  God,  profaneness, 
perjury,  and  oppression,  expose  us  to  his  ven- 
geance,— though  the  judgments  of  God  are 
abroad  in  the  earth,  and  have  fallen  heavily 
on  a great  part  of  Europe, — and  though  his 
hand  is  evidently  lifted  up  against  us,  yet 
few  will  see  and  acknowledge  it,  Isa.  xxvi. 
11.  Instead  of  such  a general  spirit  of  hu- 
miliation as  was  awakened  in  Nineveh  by 
the  preaching  of  Jonah,  so  well  becoming 
our  sins  and  our  situation,  we  still  boast  in 
our  fleets  and  armies.  Especially  the  Wood- 
en Walls  of  Old  England  are  spoken  of  as 
impregnable,  and  we  still  suppose  ourselves 
to  be  sovereign  lords  of  the  sea.  Some  late 
providential  dispensations  were  well  suited 
to  show  us,  not  only  the  sin  but  the  folly  of 
this  spirit:  but  the  impression,  if  any,  was 
transient ; it  soon  wore  off.  The  praise 
justly  due  to  our  admirals,  officers,  and  sea- 
men was  readily  offered;  but  unless  the  King 
had  called  us,  as  on  this  day,  to  unite  with 
him  in  ascribing  our  success  to  the  Lord  of 
Hosts,  who  alone  giveth  the  victory,  even  the 
verbal  offering  of  praise  to  God  would  have 
been  confined  to  a few.  And  still  we  boast. 
This  arrogant  spirit,  and  especially  at  such 
a time  as  this,  is  no  small  aggravation  of  all 
our  other  sins. 

I could  proceed  to  further  particulars,  but 
my  spirits  are  depressed,  and  I hope  the 
hearts  of  my  hearers  are  duly  affected  by 
what  I have  already  said.  Is  there  any  re- 
lief? Have  we  any  ground  to  hope  that  the 
Lord  will  yet  say  of  such  a nation  as  this, 
“ How  shall  I give  thee  up?”  I turn  with 
pleasure  to  this  more  comfortable  branch  of 
my  subject. 

II.  Yes,  though  we  have  many  causes  for 
trembling,  we  are  not  without  causes  for  a 
humble  joy  and  thankfulness. 

1.  I hope  the  occasion  of  our  present  as- 
sembling is  a token  for  good.  We  are  met 
in  consequence  of  a royal  proclamation,  to 
join  in  spirit  with  our  King,  who,  perhaps 
while  I am  speaking,  may  be  entering  St. 
Paul’s  Cathedral,  attended  by  the  royal  fa 
mily,  both  houses  of  parliament,  and  many 
of  the  nobility  and  principal  persons  of  the 
court.  He  goes  to  make  the  most  public  and 


* See  Sermon  on  the  guilt  and  danger  of  such  a nation 
as  this,  p.  393. 


MOTIVES  TO  HUMILIATION  AND  PRAISE. 


439 


solemn  acknowledgment  of  his  dependence 
on  the  providence  and  power  of  Almighty 
God,  and  to  ascribe  to  him  to  whom  it  most 
justly  belongs,  praise  and  thanksgiving  for 
the  many  interpositions  he  has  favoured  us 
with  as  a people,  in  this  season  of  danger  and 
distress;  particularly,  for  the  three  signal, 
critical,  and  decisive  victories  which  he  gave 
us  in  succession,  over  the  French,  Spanish, 
and  Dutch  fleets.  We  remember  with  what 
universal  joy  the  King’s  former  appearance 
at  St.  Paul’s, after  his  recovery  from  his  ill- 
ness, was  entertained  by  his  loyal  subjects ; 
and  though  the  introduction  of  French  prin- 
ciples and  French  politics,  since  that  period, 
has  not  been  without  mischievous  effects,  we 
trust  that  the  joy  upon  this  occasion  will  at 
least  be  general.* 

Though  I cannot  suppose  that  every  per- 
son in  the  procession,  or  among  the  many 
thousands  spectators,  felt  the  same  sentiments 
of  gratitude  to  God,  which  induced  the  King 
to  appoint  a day  of  thanksgiving — yet  I con- 
sider it  as  a public  and  national  act ; and  in 
this  view,  contrasted  with  the  atheistical 
rage  and  blasphemies  of  the  French  Direc- 
tory and  councils,  who  insult  and  defy,  not 
these  kingdoms  only,  but  the  God  whom  we 
worship,  I indulge  a hope,  that,  unworthy  as 
we  are  of  his  mercy,  the  Lord  will  put  a 
hook  and  a bridle  in  the  mouths  of  these  mo- 
dern Rabshakehs,  and  will  not  give  us  up  as 
a prey  to  their  merciless  rapacity  and  re- 
venge. 

2.  When  the  French  formed  the  design  of 
invading  Ireland,  they  thought  themselves 
sure  of  success.  They  probably  would  have 
found  encouragement  in  one  part  of  that 
kingdom,  if  they  could  have  reached  it ; and 
therefore  they  spoke  like  Pharaoh,  who  said, 
I will  pursue,  I will  overtake,  I will  divide 
the  spoil, — and  they  were  disconcerted  al- 
most in  the  same  manner.  The  Lord  blew 
with  his  w7ind,  and  scattered  them.  Some 
of  their  stoutest  ships,  and  many  of  their 
men,  sunk  as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters, 
Exod.  xv.  9,  10.  And  the  Lord  God  did  it 
himself.  We  had  a strong  fleet  to  watch 
and  oppose  them.  But  they  were  not  per- 
mitted to  come  near,  or  even  to  see  one  of 
their  ships.  Nor  had  our  boasted  naval  force 
the  opportunity  of  firing  a single  gun  in  our 
defence. 

3.  The  suppression  of  the  mutiny,  which 
like  an  infectious  disorder  pervaded  all  our 
fleets,  was  so  sudden,  so  unexpected,  and  at 
the  time  when  it  was  risen  to  such  an  alarm- 


*  I was  not  mistaken  in  my  expectation.  The  order 
and  regularity  with  which  the  procession  was  conduct- 
ed, the  peaceful  behaviour  of  the  immense  multitude  of 
spectators,  the  serenity  and  mildness  of  the  weather,  so 
unusual  with  us  in  the  depth  of  winter,  the  almost  to- 
tal exemption  from  what  are  commonly  called  accidents, 
and  the  quietness  with  which  the  evening  closed,  I con- 
sider collectively,  as  warranting  a hope  that  the  Lord 
was  pleased  to  smile  upon  the  day,  and  upon  the  design. 


ing  height  that  all  resistance  seemed  vain, 
that  it  can  only  be  ascribed  to  the  mercy  and 
power  of  God.  Then,  if  eve/,  was  the  time, 
when  the  proud  and  the  boasters  trembled. — 
And  while  we  were  thus  exposed  and  de- 
fenceless in  every  quarter,  the  providence  of 
God  laid  an  embargo  upon  the  fleets  of  our 
enemies,  so  that  they  could  not  attempt  any 
thing  against  us.  It  is  further  to  be  observ- 
ed, that  the  mutiny  at  the  Nore,  which  was 
the  most  formidable,  as  the  ships  had  the  full 
command  of  the  river,  so  that  nothing  could 
pass  or  repass  to  or  from  London ; this  threat- 
ening disaster,  which  painted  terror  and  dis- 
may in  the  countenance  of  almost  every  per- 
son we  met  in  the  streets,  in  the  event  led  to 
that  re-establishment  of  our  marine  disci- 
pline, without  which  the  strength  of  our  in- 
vincible navy  would  have  been  but  like  a 
rope  of  sand.  Well  may  we  say,  What  has 
God  wrought ! 

4.  In  the  close  of  the  year  1795,  we  felt  a 
scarcity,  and  feared  a famine.  Opportunity 
was  presented  and  greedily  seized  by  mono- 
polizers to  raise  the  corn  to  such  an  enormous 
price,  that  had  it  not  been  for  great  and  libe- 
ral exertions,  the  poor  in  many  places,  per- 
haps in  every  place,  must  have  been  abso- 
lutely destitute  of  bread.  What  must  the 
consequences  have  been  if  God  had  visited 
us  with  a scanty  or  a wet  harvest  the  follow- 
ing year!  For  our  resource  from  foreign 
supplies  was  cut  off1  in  many  parts,  and  ren- 
dered very  precarious  in  the  rest  by  the  war. 
But  he  is  a hearer  of  prayer.  In  1796,  the 
earth  brought  forth  by  handfuls,  Gen.  xli.  47. 
Such  an  abundant  harvest,  and  such  a re- 
markable fine  season  for  gathering  in  the  pre- 
cious fruits  of  the  earth,  have  been  seldom 
known. 

5.  Our  sins  have  involved  us  in  a calami- 
tous war  ; and  though  our  sufferings  are  not 
to  be  compared  with  those  of  the  countries 
on  the  continent  where  the  war  has  raged,  it 
has  brought  upon  us  much  real  distress. 
Many  widows  and  orphans  are  bemoaning  the 
effects.  The  decline  of  some  manufactures, 
the  increased  taxes,  the  advanced  price  of 
most  of  the  necessaries  of  life,  are  severely 
felt  by  the  industrious  poor,  and  by  many  fa- 
milies in  the  middling  and  lower  classes  of 
society.  It  is  well  known  that  there  is  a 
number  of  persons  who  unhappily  employ 
their  abilities  and  influence,  to  aggravate  the 
sense  of  these  difficulties,  to  inflame  the 
minds  of  the  sufferers,  to  work  upon  their 
passions,  to  alienate  them  from  the  govern- 
ment, and  to  make  them  long,  if  possible,  for 
such  liberty  and  equality  as  has  already  re- 
duced France  to  the  most  pitiable  state  of 
anarchy  and  misery.  That  such  attempts 
have  not  succeeded,  that  we  are  still  pre- 
served, not  only  from  foreign  invasion  but 
from  internal  commotions,  I ascribe  to  the 
power  of  the  great  God  over  the  hearts  of 


440 


MOTIVES  TO  HUMILIATION  AND  PRAISE. 


the  children  of  men  ; and  I consider  it  as  a 
farther  ground  of  hope  that  he  will  not  give 
us  up. 

III.  Why  would  he  not  give  up  degenerate 
Israel,  when  strict  justice  demanded  their 
destruction?  Two  reasons  are  assigned  in 
my  text  for  hia  forbearance,  which  are  well 
suited  to  encourage  the  prayers  and  hopes 
of  those  amongst  ourselves  who  love  and 
fear  him. 

1.  I am  God,  and  not  man. — If  we  had 
offended  men,  or  angels,  as  we  have  offended 
our  Creator  and  Redeemer,  and  they  had 
permission  and  power  to  punish  us,  our  case 
would  be  utterly  desperate.  Only  he  who 
made  us,  is  able  to  bear  with  us.  All  the 
attributes  (as  we  speak)  of  the  infinite  God, 
must  of  course  be  equally  infinite.  As  is  his 
majesty,  so  is  his  mercy,  Ecclesiasticus  ii.  18. 
What  is  the  puny  power  of  man,  compared 
with  that  almighty  power  which  formed  and 
upholds  the  immense  universe?  The  dis- 
proportion is  greater  than  that  between  a 
single  drop  of  water  and  the  boundless  ocean. 
Thus  his  thoughts  are  higher  than  ours,  as 
the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth.  Who 
can  set  bounds  to  the  exercise  of  patience  ? 
When  sentence  was  denounced  against  Nine- 
veh, they  humbled  themselves  before  him, 
and  he  suspended  the  execution.  There  is 
at  least  a peradventure  in  our  favour,  “ Who 
can  tell  if  God  will  turn  away  from  his  fierce 
anger  that  we  perish  not?”  He  has  said, 
“At  what  time  I shall  speak  concerning  a 
nation,  or  a kingdom,  to  pluck  up,  to  pull 
down,  or  to  destroy ; if  that  nation  turn  from 
their  evil,  I will  repent  of  the  evil  that  I 
thought  to  do  unto  them,”  .Ter.  xviii.  7,  8. 
We  do  not  suppose  that  all  the  inhabitants 
of  Nineveh  were  savingly  converted  ; but 
they  humbled  themselves  with  one  consent, 
they  cried  for  mercy,  and  they  were  spared. 
We  do  not  expect  a national  conversion,  and 
I fear  we  have  little  prospect  of  a national 
humiliation.  But, 

2.  I am  the  Holy  One  in  the  midst  of  thee, 
— Next  to  the  consideration  of  his  infinite 
mercy,  this  is  our  strongest  ground  for  con- 
solation. The  Holy  One  is  still  in  the  midst 
of  us  ? Degenerate  and  wicked  as  we  are, 
God  has  a people,  a remnant  amongst  us.  I 
have  spoken  of  these  already.  Their  num- 
ber is  small  if  compared  with  the  bulk  of  the 
nation ; but  if  they  could  be  collected  to- 
gether, they  would  form  a considerable  body 
(I  trust  it  is  an  increasing  body,)  who,  though 
distinguished  by  different  names,  and  dis- 
persed far  and  wide  into  different  parts  of 
the  land,  are  united,  by  a faith  of  divine 
operation,  to  one  head,  and  in  one  common 
interest  and  design. — They  belong  to  that 
kingdom  which  is  not  of  this  world,  and 
which  (unlike  all  other  kingdoms)  cannot  be 
shaken.  But  their  principles  lead  them  to 
seek  the  welfare  of  the  communities  in 


which  they  live.  These  are,  under  God, 
decus  et  tutamen , the  glory  and  the  defence 
of  Great  Britain.  They  are  lights  shining 
in  a dark  place.  They  are  believers,  and 
their  faith  worketh  by  love.  But  as  they 
follow  the  example  of  their  Lord  and  Master, 
the  world  knows  not  them,  because  it  knows 
not  him.  Here  and  there,  individuals,  by 
an  unblameable  consistent  conduct,  in  a course 
of  years,  if  they  cannot  change  the  hearts  of 
gainsayers,  are  enabled  to  stop  their  mouths, 
and  put  their  ignorance  to  silence  by  well- 
doing, 1 Pet.  ii.  15.  But  many  persons  de- 
spise them  in  the  gross,  and  affect  to  deem 
them  (perhaps  in  defiance  to  the  checks  of 
their  own  consciences,)  either  hypocrites  or 
visionaries,  credulous  fools,  or  designing 
knaves.  But  their  record  is  on  high.  They 
have  access  to  God,  and  communion  with 
him,  by  the  Son  of  his  love.  They  have  the 
spirit  of  prayer,  and  their  prayers  are  heard. 
The  ship  in  which  Paul  sailed  to  Italy,  was 
preserved  from  sinking,  though  apparently 
in  the  utmost  danger,  because  the  apostle 
was  on  board  her.  Not  only  was  this  ser- 
vant of  God  as  safe  in  a storm  at  sea  as  if 
he  had  been  on  shore,  but  for  his  sake  the 
Lord  preserved  the  lives  of  all  who  were  in 
the  vessel.  The  state  ship  of  this  nation  is 
now  in  jeopardy,  she  is  brought  into  deep 
waters,  tossed  with  tempests,  and  her  rowers 
(Ezek.  xxvii.  26,)  are  almost  at  their  wits 
end;  but  there  is  a precious  depositum  on 
board.  A people  dear  to  the  Lord  are  em- 
barked in  the  same  bottom  with  the  rest, 
and  we  hope  their  prayers  will  prevail  for 
the  safety  of  the  whole.  The  French,  who 
know  little  of  Christianity  but  as  they  have 
seen  it  through  the  corrupt  medium  of  po- 
pery, having  triumphed  over  and  melted 
down  the  golden  and  silver  images  of  their 
tutelary  saints,  promise  themselves  an  easy 
victory  over  us.  They  know  not  that  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel  is  in  the  midst  of  us,  and 
that  there  are  a people  here  who  are  under 
his  special  protection.  They  know  not  that 
like  Sennacherib,  their  success  is  wholly 
owing  to  their  being  instruments  of  his  will, 
like  saws  or  hammers  in  the  hand  of  the 
workman  ; and  that  when  they  have  accom- 
plished his  purpose,  he  can  and  he  will  say 
to  them,  Hitherto  thou  shalt  come,  and  no 
farther.  They  have  succeeded  beyond  their 
own  expectations,  far  and  wide  upon  the 
continent:  but  all  their  attempts  and  de- 
signs against  our  favoured  land  have  hitherto 
been  rendered  abortive.  We  hope  they  will 
prove  so. 

At  all  events,  it  shall  be  well  with  the 
righteous,  Isa.  iii.  12.  Rejoice,  believers,  in 
the  Lord.  You  may  be  assured  upon  the 
warrant  of  his  faithful  promise,  either  that 
he  will  preserve  you  from  the  evils  which 
our  sins  give  us  such  cause  to  apprehend ; 
or  if  he  should  appoint  you  to  share  in  a 


MOTIVES  TO  HUMILIATION  AND  PRAISE. 


441 


common  calamity,  he  will  make  your  strength 
equal  to  your  day,  and  will  prepare  your 
shoes  of  iron  and  brass,  (Deut.  xxxiii.  26,) 
when  any  part  of  the  road,  on  which  you 
travel  through  this  wilderness  towards  your 
heavenly  home,  shall  prove  very  difficult  and 
rugged.  Pray  for  grace  to  sit  loose  to  the 
world,  and  you  will  have  nothing  to  fear. 
The  first  Christians  rejoiced  in  the  spoiling 
of  their  goods ; and  so  shall  you,  if  the  Lord 
calls  you  to  the  trial.  You  have  the  same 
Saviour  to  support  you ; and  you  likewise  have 
treasures,  (Heb.  x.  34,)  far  better  and  more 
enduring,  out  of  the  reach  of  violence.  The 
Lord  teaches  us  to  consider  even  the  loss  of 
life  as  comparative'.y  of  small  importance, 
when  he  sajs,  Fear  not  them  that  can  kill 
the  body,  but  can  do  no  more.  They  cannot 
do  that  without  his  permission.  The  very 
hairs  of  your  head  are  numbered,  Luke  xii. 
4;  Matt.  x.  39.  And  most  of  those  who 
have  suffered  death  for  him  who  died  upon 
the  cross  for  them,  have  thought  the  honour 
of  dying  in  his  cause  more  to  be  valued  than 
a thousand  lives. 

My  feelings  are  painful  for  you  who  live 
without  God  in  the  world.  1 do  not  wonder 
if  your  hearts  tremble  like  the  leaves  of  a 
tree  when  agitated  by  a mighty  wind,  Is. 
vii.  2.  You  know  not  what  may  come  upon 
you,  but  you  forebode  the  worst : and  should 
it  prove  so,  you  have  no  resource,  no  hiding 
place,  no  Almighty  Friend  to  whom  you  may 


I with  confidence  apply  for  help  in  time  of 
I trouble.  Death,  at  least,  is  inevitable ; and 
will  you  dare  to  die  (yet  die  you  must)  if 
your  hearts  be  unhumbled,  and  your  sins 
unpardoned  1 We  preach  to  you  a gracious, 
powerful  Saviour,  who  invites  you  to  seek 
him,  and  has  said,  “Him  that  eometh  to  me 
I will  in  nowise  cast  out.”  Seek  him  then 
to-day — whilst  it  is  called  to-day.  Now  is 
the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day  of  salvation. 
To-morrow  is  not  your  own. 

But  let  believers  rejoice  and  be  glad.  The 
Lord  reigns — your  Lord  reigns,  Ps.  xcvii.  1. 
He  who  loved  you,  and  gave  himself  for  you, 
possesses  and  exercises  all  power  in  heaven 
and  earth,  Matt,  xxviii.  18.  Though  clouds 
and  darkness  are  about  his  throne,  and  his 
paths  are  untraceable  by  us,  we  are  sure 
that  he  is  carrying  on  his  great  designs,  for 
the  glory  of  his  great  name,  and  for  the  ex- 
tension and  establishment  of  his  church  in  a 
way  worthy  of  himself— worthy  of  infinite 
wisdom  and  goodness.  Make  his  name  your 
strong  tower  (Prov.  xviii.  10,)  of  refuge. 
Hold  out  faith  and  patience.  Yet  a little 
while,  and  we  hope  to  meet,  “where  the 
wicked  cease  from  troubling,  and  where  the 
weary  are  at  rest,”  Job  iii.  17  And  to  hear 
those  welcome  words,  “ Come,  ye  blessed  of 
my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for 
you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,”  Matt 
xxv.  34. 


VOL.  II. 


3 T 


TRACTS 


APOLOGIA; 

OR, 

FOUR  LETTERS  TO  A MINISTER  OF  AN  INDEPENDENT  CHURC11, 
BY  A MINISTER  OF  THE  CHURCH  OF  ENGLAND. 


Quid  me  alta  silentia  cogis 

Rumpere  ? Virg. 

Let  us  therefore  follow  after  the  things  which  make  for  peace,  and  things  wherewith  one  may  edify  another. 
For  in  Jesus  Christ,  neither  circumcision  availeth  any  thing,  nor  uncircumcision,  but  faith  which  worketh  by 
love.  Rom.  xiv.  19.  Gal.  v.  6. 


LETTER  I. 

My  Dear  Friend  and  Brother, — You 
have  more  than  once  gently  called  upon  me 
for  the  reasons  which  induced  me  to  exercise 
my  ministry  as  a Clergyman  of  the  Church 
of  England,  rather  than  among  the  Dissent- 
ers, where  my  first  religious  connections 
were  formed,  and  with  many  of  whom  I still 
maintain  a cordial  friendship.  Hitherto  I 
have  usually  waved  the  subject,  and  content- 
ed myself  with  assuring  you  in  general  terms, 
that  as  the  preference  I gave  to  the  establish- 
ment was  the  result  of  serious,  and,  I trust, 
impartial  inquiry ; so  I had  never  seen  rea- 
son to  repent  of  it,  no  not  for  a minute,  since 
the  day  of  my  ordination.  J^now  purpose  to 
give  you  a more  particular  answer.  And  as 
you  are  not  the  only  person  who  has  express- 
ed a friendly  surprise  at  my  choice,  I shall 
communicate  my  reasons  from  the  press,  that 
all  my  friends  who  have  been  at  a loss  to  ac- 
count for  my  conduct,  may  have  such  satis- 
faction as  it  is  in  my  power  to  give  them.  I 
shall,  however,  keep  you  particularly  in  my 
eye  while  I write,  that  a just  sense  of  the  can- 
dour and  affection  with  which  you  have 
always  treated  me,  may  regulate  my  pen, 
and  preserve  me  (if  possible)  from  that  harsh 
and  angry  spirit,  into  which  writers  upon 
controversial  points  are  too  often  betrayed. 

I confess,  that  as  in  this  business  my  con- 
science is  clear  in  the  sight  of  him  to  whom 
alone  I am  properly  accountable;  I could 
wish  still  to  continue  silent,  and  submit  to 


be  a little  misunderstood-  by  some  persons 
whose  good  opinion  I prize,  rather  than  trou- 
ble the  public  with  what  more  immediately 
relates  to  myself.  But  something  upon  this 
subject  seems  expedient  in  the  present  day , 
not  so  much  by  way  of  apology  for  one  or  a 
few  individuals,  as  with  a view  of  obviating 
prejudices,  and  preventing,  or  at  least  abat- 
ing, the  unhappy  effects  of  a party-spirit. 

There  was  a time  when  the  Non-conform- 
ists groaned  under  the  iron  rod  of  oppression, 
and  were  exposed  to  fines,  penalties,  and  im- 
prisonment, as  well  as  to  cruel  mockings, 
and  the  lawless  rage  of  a rabble,  for  wor- 
shipping God  according  to  the  light  of  their 
consciences.  Yet  I apprehend  their  non-con- 
formity was  rather  the  occasional  and  ostensi- 
ble, than  the  real  cause  of  the  hard  treatment 
they  met  with.  The  greater  part  of  the  Non- 
conformist ministers  of  that  day  were  the 
light  and  glory  of  the  land. — They  were 
men  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  pene- 
trated with  a deep  sense  of  the  Redeemer’s 
glory  and  love,  and  of  the  worth  of  souls. 
Their  ministrations  were  accompanied  with 
unction  and  power,  and  they  were  instru- 
mental in  turning  many  sinners  from  the 
evil  of  their  ways.  It  is  no  wonder  that  the 
world  hated  such  men;  that  snares  were 
spread  for  their  feet,  their  liberty  abridged, 
and  that  many  said,  Away  with  them,  they 
are  not  worthy  to  live  ! It  is  probable  that 
if  these  servants  of  the  Most  High  could 
have  enjoyed  that  freedom  for  their  persons 
1 and  assemblies,  which,  in  answer  to  their 
442 


APOLOGIA. 


443 


LET.  I.] 

prayers,  is  now  possessed  by  those  who  bear 
the  same  name,  they  would  have  been  well 
satisfied  that  the  Established  Church  should 
have  remained  in  peaceful  possession  of  its  ! 
own  order  and  ritual.  And  several  among 
them,  not  the  lowest  in  repute  for  wisdom 
and  piety,  continued  long-  to  worship  occa- 
sionally in  the  Parish  Churches,  after  they 
had  been  ejected  from  them  as  preachers. 
But  things  were  studiously  carried  against 
them  with  a high  hand.  The  exaction  of 
re-ordination,  and  the  little  time  allowed  for 
subscribing  the  book  of  Common  Prayer, 
which  many  of  the  ministers  had  not  been 
able  to  procure  when  the  law  called  for  their 
assent  to  it,  were  two  circumstances  which 
greatly  contributed  to  swell  the  Bartholo- 
mew-list.  It  was  well  known  to  some  of  the 
leaders  in  that  unhappy  business,  that  there 
were  among  the  Non-conformists  wise  and 
moderate  men,  who  were  not  disposed  to 
quit  their  parochial  cures,  unless  they  were 
constrained  by  the  harshest  and  most  violent 
measures ; such  therefore  were  the  measures 
they  adopted. 

It  is  our  mercy  to  live  in  more  quiet  times. 
W e are  on  all  sides  freed  from  restraints  in 
religious  concerns;  and  every  person  is  at 
liberty  to  profess,  preach,  worship,  or  print  as 
he  thinks  proper.  But  it  is  still  to  be  lamented 
that  they  who  are  united  upon  the  same 
foundations,  and  agree  in  the  same  important 
leading  principles,  should  lay  so  much  stress 
upon  their  circumstantial  differences  in  sen- 
timent, as  to  prevent  the  exercise  of  mutual 
love  and  forbearance,  and  that,  instead  of  la- 
bouring in  concert  within  their  respective 
departments  to  promote  the  common  cause, 
they  should  be  at  leisure  to  vex  and  worry 
each  other  with  needless  disputation  and  un- 
charitable censure.  I hope,  amongst  us,  the 
High-Church  principles  which  formerly  pro- 
duced unjustifiable  and  oppressive  effects, 
are  now  generally  exploded.  But  may  we 
not  lay  a claim  in  our  turn,  to  that  modera- 
tion, candour,  and  tenderness,  from  our  dis- 
senting brethren,  which  we  cheerfully  exer- 
cise towards  them!  But  as  we  (I  think)  are 
no  longer  the  aggressors,  so  they  seem  no 
longer  content  to  stand  upon  the  defensive. 
We  wish  to  join  them  with  heart  and  hand 
in  supporting  and  spreading  the  great  truths 
of  the  gospel ; and  such  as  you,  my  friend,  ap- 
prove our  aims,  and  rejoice  with  us,  if  God  is 
pjeased  to  give  us  success.  But  there  are 
those  among  you,  whose  persons  and  general 
conduct  we  respect,  from  whom  we  do  not 
find  equal  returns  of  good-will,  because  we 
cannot  join  with  them  in  the  support  of  a 
palladium  which  bears  the  name  of  the  Dis- 
senting Interest.  I know  not  whether  this 
phrase  was  in  use  a hundred  years  ago ; but 
were  I to  meet  with  it  as  referring  to  that 
period,  I should  understand  by  it  little  more 
or  less  than  the  interest  of  the  Redeemer’s 


kingdom.  At  present,  when  I consider  the 
various  names,  views,  and  sentiments,  which 
obtain  among  those  who  form  this  aggregate, 
! styled  the  Dissenting  Interest,  I am  at  a loss 
what  sense  to  put  upon  the  term.  May  1 
not  say  without  offence,  that  it  is,  at  least,  a 
very  heterogeneous  body  ? May  I not  hope, 
without  presumption,  that  though  you  and  I 
are  not  agreed  on  the  subject  of  Church  Go- 
vernment, yet  I am  related  to  you  by  a much 
nearer  and  stronger  tie  than  that  which  binds 
you  to  the  Dissenting  Interest?  I confess 
that  so  far  as  it  is  the  interest  of  those  who 
depreciate  the  person  and  blood  of  the  Sa- 
viour, and  deny  the  agency  and  influence  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  or  the  total  depravity  of  fall- 
en man,  so  far  I cannot  (in  a religious  view) 
be  a friend  to  it.  On  the  other  hand,  so  far 
as  it  regards  those  who  love,  avow,  and 
preach  the  doctrines,  experience,  and  prac- 
tice, which  both  you  and  I include  in  our 
idea  of  the  Gospel,  so  far  I can  truly  say, 
though  not  a Dissenter  myself,  the  Dissent- 
ing Interest  is  dear  to  my  heart,  and  has  a 
share  in  my  daily  prayers.  And  in  this  I am 
persuaded  I speak  the  sentiments  of  many 
both  ministers  and  laymen  in  the  Establish- 
ment. We  are  sorry,  therefore  (at  least  I am 
sorry,)  though  not  angry,  when  books  are 
written,  or  declarations*  (perhaps  in  the 
most  solemn  occasions  of  worship)  unseason- 
ably made,  which  seem  not  so  much  designed 
to  confirm  Dissenters  in  their  own  principles, 
as  to  place  those  who  cannot  accede  to  them 
in  an  unfavourable  light;  the  ministers  espe- 
cially, who,  according  to  some  representa- 
tions, must  be  supposed  to  be  almost  destitute 
of  common  sense,  or  else  of  common  honesty. 

When  I w’rite  a letter,  especially  to  a 
friend,  I think  myself  released  from  that  at- 
tention to  method  which  I might  observe  if 
I were  composing  a treatise.  As  my  heart 
dictates,  my  pen  moves.  I therefore  hope 
you  will  bear  with  me  if  I do  not  come  di- 
rectly to  what  I proposed;  which  was,  to 
give  you  some  account  of  the  motives  of  my 
own  conduct.  It  may  not  be  improper  to 
premise  a few  preliminary  observations.  I 
shall  not  weary  you  by  attempting  to  justify 
every  thing  that  obtains  in  our  way,  nor  call 
your  attention  to  all  the  minutisa  which 
might  furnish  subject  for  debate  to  those 
who  know  not  how  to  employ  their  time 
better.  It  would  be  mere  trifling  to  dispute 
for  or  against  a surplice  or  a band,  a gown  or 
a cloak,  or  to  inquire  whether  it  be  the  size, 
or  the  shape,  which  renders  some  of  these 
habiliments  more  or  less  suitable  for  a minis- 
ter, than  the  others.  But  perhaps  a few 
strictures  upon  establishments  and  liturgies 
may  not  be  wholly  impertinent  to  my  design. 

That  national  religious  establishments  un- 
der the  New  Testament  dispensation  are 


* Some  of  these  letters  were  written  in  the  year  1777. 


444 


APOLOGIA. 


neither  of  express  divine  appointment,  nor 
formed  in  all  points  upon  a scriptural  plan,  I 
readily  admit.  Whether  upon  this  account 
they  cannot  be  submitted  to  without  violating 
the  obedience  we  owe  to  the  Lord  Jesus  as 
head  and  lawgiver  of  his  church,  I shall  con- 
sider hereafter.  At  present  permit  me  only 
to  hope  (for  my  own  sake,)  that  such  submis- 
sion is  not  absolutely  sinful ; and  in  that  view 
to  offer  a word  in  favour  of  their  expedience. 
I plead  not  for  this  or  that  establishment,  or 
the  administration  of  one  preferably  to  ano- 
ther ; but  chiefly  for  that  circumstance  which 
I suppose  is  common  to  them  all : I mean,  the 
parcelling  out  a country,  the  government  of 
which  is  professedly  Christian,  and  certain 
districts,  analogous  to  what  we  call  parishes, 
and  fixing  in  each  of  those  districts,  a person 
with  a ministerial  character,  who  by  his  office 
is  engaged  to  promote  the  good  of  souls 
within  the  limits  of  his  own  boundary.  I 
think  the  number  of  parishes  in  England  and 
Wales  is  computed  to  be  not  much  fewer 
than  ten  thousand.  The  number  of  dissent- 
ing churches  and  congregations  in  England 
and  Wales  (if  those  whom  I have  consulted 
as  the  most  competent  judges  are  not  mis- 
taken,) will  not  be  found  greatly  to  exceed 
one  thousand.  In  how  many,  or  in  how  few 
of  these  the  old  Puritan  Gospel  (if  I may  so 
call  it)  is  preached  or  prized,  I deem  you  a 
better  judge  than  myself.  It  is  certain,  that 
the  number  of  Dissenting  ministers  who  are 
very  willing  it  should  be  publicly  known  that 
they  differ  widely  from  the  sentiments  of 
their  forefathers,  is  not  small.  However,  we 
will  take  them  all  into  the  estimate.  Now, 
let  us  for  a moment  suppose  the  establishment 
with  all  its  provisions  removed  and  annihi- 
lated. In  this  case,  some  of  the  Dissenting 
ministers  might  indeed  change  their  situa- 
tions, and  fix  in  places  where  they  might 
hope  for  more  extensive  influence ; but  as 
none  of  them  could  be  in  two  places  at  once, 
about  nine-tenths  of  the  kingdom  would  be 
deprived,  at  a stroke,  of  the  very  form  of 
public  religion,  and  reduced  in  a short  time 
(for  any  relief  the  Dissenting  interest  could 
afford)  to  a state  little  better  than  heathen- 
ism. That  there  is  any  regard  paid  to  the 
Lord’s  day  through  the  greater  part  of  the 
land,  that  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  publicly 
read  to  thousands  who  probably  would  other- 
wise know  no  more  of  the  Bible  than  they  do 
of  the  Koran,  are  good  effects  of  the  national 
establishment,  which  I think  can  hardly  be 
denied,  even  by  those  who  are  most  dis- 
pleased with  it.  For  this  reason,  if  I could 
not  conform  to  the  establishment  myself,  I 
think  I should  speak  respectfully  of  it,  and 
bless  God  for  it  Some  established  form  of 
religious  profession,  with  a full  and  free 
toleration  for  all  who  think  they  can  serve 
God  more  acceptably  upon  a different  plan, 
appears  to  me  the  most  desirable  and  pro- 


[let.  I. 

mising  constitution,  for  preserving  the  rights 
of  conscience,  and  for  promoting  the  welfare 
of  souls.  I believe,  therefore,  that  the  church 
of  England,  as  by  law  established  (for  it 
claims  no  higher  title,)  though  it  be  not  a 
perfect  institution,  and  notwithstanding  its 
real  or  supposed  defects,  and  the  faults  of 
individuals  within  its  community,  has  been 
upon  the  whole,  and  will  be,  a blessing  to  the 
nation  ; and  that  its  preservation  is  an  effect 
of  the  wise  and  gracious  providence  of  the 
great  Head  of  the  Church  universal. 

From  the  expediency  of  parochial  order,  I 
would  farther  deduce  the  expediency  of  a 
rubric  and  liturgy.  For  I cannot  conceive 
an  established  church,  without  including,  in 
my  idea,  some  determinate  rule  or  line  re- 
specting doctrine  and  worship,  by  which  it  is 
discriminated  from  other  churches  which  are 
not  so  established.  As  to  our  liturgy,  I am 
far  from  thinking  it  incapable  of  amendment; 
though,  when  I consider  the  temper  and  spi- 
rit of  the  present  times,  I dare  not  wish  that 
the  improvement  of  it  should  be  attempted, 
lest  the  intended  remedy  might  prove  worse 
than  the  disease.  As  I am  not  called  to  de- 
fend it,  I shall  only  say,  what  I believe  will 
be  allowed  by  many  candid  persons  on  your 
side,  that  the  general  strain  of  it  is  scriptural, 
evangelical,  and  experimental.  It  recognizes 
with  precision  the  one  great  object  of  wor- 
ship, in  his  personal  distinctions,  and  glorious 
attributes : the  honours  and  offices  of  the  Re- 
deemer, the  power  and  agency  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  the  evil  of  sin,  the  depravity  of  man, 
and  all  the  distinguishing  doctrines  of  the 
gospel.  As  to  the  composition,  I question  if 
any  thing  in  the  English  language,  (our  ver- 
sion of  the  Bible  excepted,)  is  worthy  of  be- 
ing compared  with  it,  for  simplicity,  perspi- 
cuity, energy,  and  comprehensive  fulness  of 
expression.  But  I suppose  the  objection  does 
not  lie  so  much  against  our  liturgy  in  parti- 
cular, as  in  general  against  the  use  of  litur- 
gies of  any  kind.  And  for  aught  I know,  if 
the  compilers  of  our  liturgy  could  have  ex- 
pected, that  all  the  parishes  in  the  kingdom, 
and  from  age  to  age,  would  be  supplied  with 
ministers  competently  acquainted  with  the 
mysteries  of  the  gospel,  and  possessed  of  the 
spirit  of  grace  and  supplication,  they  might 
have  left  them  under  less  restraint  in  con- 
ducting public  worship.  I believe  many  of 
the  Dissenters  take  it  for  granted,  that  a con- 
siderable part  of  our  clergy  are  not  only 
unable  to  pray  in  public  to  the  edification  of 
their  hearers  without  a form,  but  are  un- 
fit for  the  ministerial  office  in  every  view. 
Should  this  be  true,  it  is  a truth  which  I 
hope  would  excite  lamentation  rather  than 
ridicule  or  invective,  in  all  who  profess  a re- 
gard to  the  glory  of  God,  or  love  to  the  souls 
of  men.  But  upon  this  supposition  I should 
think  an  evangelical  liturgy  a great  blessing ; 
as  it  must  secure  the  people,  (that  is  the  bulk 


APOLOGIA. 


445 


LET.  I.] 


of  the  nation,)  from  being1  exposed  to  the 
same  uncertainty  and  disappointment  from 
the  reading-desk,  as  they  are  liable  to  from 
the  pulpit.  For  they  who  cannot,  or  do  not 
preach  the  gospel,  are  not  like  to  pray  agree- 
ably to  the  spirit  of  the  gospel,  if  that  part  of 
the  public  service  was  likewise  left  to  their 
own  management.  Or  shall  we  say,  it  is  an 
advantage  to  some  dissenting  congregations, 
that  their  ministers,  not  being  confined  to  a 
form  of  sound  words,*  there  is  little  more  of 
Christ  or  of  grace  to  be  found  in  their  prayers 
than  in  their  sermons]  Is  it  not  too  hastily 
taken  for  granted  by  many,  that  God  cannot 
he  worshipped  in  spirit  and  in  truth  by  those 
who  use  a form  of  prayer]  or  that  he  will  not 
afford  them  who  so  approach  him  any  testi- 
mony of  his  acceptance  ] If  the  words  of  a 
form  suit  and  express  the  desires  and  feelings 
of  my  mind,  the  prayer  is  as  much  my  own, 
as  if  I had  conceived  it  upon  the  spot.  On 
the  other  hand,  if  I have  the  greatest  readi- 
ness and  fluency  in  diversifying  expressions, 
so  that  my  prayer  should  always  appear  un- 
studied and  new,  yet  if  my  spirit,  or  the  spi- 
rits of  those  who  join  with  me,  be  not  en- 
gaged in  it,  though  I may  admire  my  own 
performance,  and  be  applauded  by  others,  it 
is  no  better  than  a mere  lifeless  form,  in  the 
sight  of  him  who  searcheth  the  heart.  Not 
to  say  that  many  who  profess  to  pray  extem- 
pore, that  is,  without  either  a printed  or  a 
written  form,  go  so  much  in  a beaten  path, 
that  they  who  hear  them,  frequently  can  tell 
with  tolerable  certainty,  how  they  will  begin, 
when  they  are  about  the  middle,  and  when 
they  are  drawing  towards  the  close  of  their 
prayer. 

It  is  said,  that  a prescribed  form  precludes 
the  exercise  of  a gift  in  prayer,  which  is 
true ; but  then,  as  I hinted  before,  it  in  some 
good  measure  supplies  the  want  of  such  a 
gift ; and  blessed  be  the  Lord,  there  are  many 
living  witnesses  who  can  declare  to  his  praise, 
that  a form  does  not  restrain,  much  less  pre- 
clude the  exercise  of  grace.  They  know  and 
are  sure  that  their  Lord  and  master  owns 
and  comforts  them  in  what  their  brethren 
hastily  condemn  them  for.  It  is  well  for  us 
that  he  seeth  not  as  man  seeth,  and  is  no 
more  a respecter  of  parties  than  of  persons. 

It  cannot  be  denied,  that  the  Lord  himself 
appointed  forms  of  prayer  and  praise  to  be 
used  in  the  Old  Testament  church.  When 
the  ark  set  forward,  and  when  it  rested, 
Moses  addressed  the  Lord,  not  according  to 
the  varied  emotions  of  his  own  spirit,  but 
statedly  in  the  same  determinate  expressions, 
Numb.  x.  35,  36.  So  likewise  in  the  solemn 
benediction  which  the  high  priest  was  to 
pronounce  upon  the  people,  Numb.  vi.  23, 27. 
Again,  at  the  presenting  of  the  first  fruits, 
though  the  heart  of  the  offerer  might  be  fill- 
ed with  gratitude,  he  was  not  to  express  it 
in  his  own  way,  but  the  Lord  himself  pre- 


scribed the  form  of  his  acknowledgment,  con- 
fession, and  prayer,  Deut.  xxvi.  12 — 15.  But 
it  may  be  said,  these  were  enjoined  under 
the  Levitical  institution,  which  is  now  abro- 
gated, and  that  we  live  under  a dispensation 
of  greater  light  and  liberty.  I wish  however, 
with  all  our  light  and  liberty,  we  could  more 
fully  come  up  to  the  spirit  of  some  of  the  de- 
votional parts  of  the  Old  Testament,  which 
were  recorded  for  our  instruction,  and  most 
certainly  are  not  abrogated.  The  book  of 
Psalms  especially,  contains  a rich  variety  of 
patterns  for  prayer,  if  we  may  not  call  them 
forms,  adapted  to  all  the  various  exercises  of 
the  life  of  faith.  And  if,  when  I read  or  re- 
peat such  Psalms  as  the  63d,  84th,  or  86th,  I 
could  feel,  in  the  manner  I wish,  the  force  of 
every  expression,  I should  think  I prayed  to 
good  purpose,  though  I were  not  to  intermin- 
gle a single  word  of  my  own.  So  likewise 
with  respect  to  that  summary  which  our 
Lord  condescended  to  teach  his  disciples; 
though  I believe  it  had  a peculiar  reference 
to  the  state  in  which  they  were  before  his 
passion,  and  while  he  was  still  with  them ; 
yet  agreeable  to  the  fulness  of  his  wisdom,  it 
is  so  comprehensive,  that  I apprehend  every 
part  of  a believer’s  intercourse  with  God  in 
prayer,  may  be  reduced,  without  forcing,  to 
one  or  the  other  of  the  heads  of  this  prayer. 
And  I should  esteem  it  a golden  hour  indeed, 
one  of  the  happiest  seasons  I ever  enjoyed  in 
prayer,  if  I could  repeat  it  with  a just  im- 
pression of  the  meaning  of  every  clause.  But 
alas ! such  are  the  effects  of  our  unhappy  dif- 
ferences, or  rather  of  a wrongness  of  spirit  in 
maintaining  them,  and  so  prone  are  we  to 
think  we  cannot  be  too  unlike  those  whom 
we  are  not  pleased  with,  that  even  the  words 
which  our  Lord  himself  has  taught  us,  are 
depreciated  and  disused  by  many,  I fear,  up- 
on no  better  ground  than  because  they  are  re- 
tained in  the  usage  of  the  Church  of  England. 
Though,  besides  giving  us  a pattern  to  pray 
after  that  manner,  he  has  at  least  permitted 
us  to  use  it  as  a form,  directing  us,  when  we 
pray,  to  say,  “ Our  Father,  which  art  in  hea- 
ven,” &c.  If  scriptural  warrant  be  required, 

I think  we  have  one  more  clear  and  express 
for  the  use  of  this  prayer,  than  can  be  found 
for  some  things  upon  which  no  small  stress 
is  laid  by  our  Dissenting  brethren. 

Some  persons  might  possibly  allege,  that 
if  the  use  of  scriptural  forms  of  prayer  were 
admitted,  it  would  plead  nothing  in  favour  of 
such  forms  as  are  of  human  composition. 
But  as  I believe  the  more  judicious  part  of 
the  Dissenters  would  not  make  this  distinc- 
tion, a few  words  may  suffice  for  an  answer. 
Most  of  us,  when  we  preach,  profess  to  preash 
the  word  of  God,  and  I think  we  are  suffi- 
ciently authorised  to  use  the  expression,  so 
far  as  our  sermons  are  explanatory  of  scrip- 
tural truths,  and  agreeable  to  them.  For 
though  the  system  of  truth  contained  in  the 


446 


APOLOGIA. 


[let.  II. 


holy  scriptures  has  a peculiar  authority,  as 
the  fountain  from  whence  we  are  to  derive 
our  public  discourses,  and  the  standard  by 
which  they  are  to  be  tried  ; yet  truth,  as  to 
its  nature,  does  not  admit  of  degrees,  but  all 
propositions,  if  they  be  true,  must  be  equally 
true,  and  every  conclusion  which  is  rightly 
inferred  from  scriptural  premises,  must  be, 
in  whatever  words  it  is  expressed,  (if  they 
are  precise  and  clear,)  as  true  as  the  premises 
from  which  it  is  drawn.  If  I give  a just  de- 
finition or  explication  of  a doctrine  of  the  Bi- 
ble in  my  own  words,  the  truth  or  importance 
of  that  doctrine  is  not  affected  or  weakened 
by  the  vehicle  in  which  I convey  it;  nor 
would  a hearer  have  a right  to  withhold  his 
attention  or  assent,  from  a pretence,  that 
though  the  proposition  itself  was  true,  he 
was  not  concerned  in  it,  because  I had  not 
expressed  it  in  scriptural  phrases.  It  is  only 
upon  this  ground  that  the  propriety  and  au- 
thority of  preaching  can  be  maintained  ; and 
the  like  reasoning  may  be  applied  to  prayer. 
A prayer  is  scriptural,  if  conformable  to  the 
promises,  patterns,  and  truths  of  scripture, 
though  it  should  not  contain  one  phrase  taken 
totidem  verbis  from  the  Bible. 

May  I not  here  appeal  to  the  practice  of 
the  Dissenters  themselves'!  I suppose  Dr. 
Watts’  Hymns,  and  his  imitation  of  David’s 
Psalms,  especially  the  latter,  are  used,  by  a 
large  majority  of  Dissenting  congregations, 
in  their  public  worship.  Many  of  these  pieces 
are  devotional,  that  is,  they  are  in  the  strain 
of  prayer,  or  praise.  They  are,  therefore, 
forms  of  prayer  or  praise ; and  when  the  first 
line  is  given  out,  it  is  probable  that  several 
persons  in  the  assembly  know  beforehand 
every  word  they  are  to  sing.  In  some  con- 
gregations the  psalm  or  hymn  is  delivered 
line  by  line,  and  in  most,  the  bulk  of  the  peo- 
ple are  provided  with  books.  Now  it  appears 
to  me,  that  when  a worshipper  who  attends 
to  what  is  going  forward,  and  is  not  content 
with  a mere  lip-service,  joins  in  singing 
verses,  which  express  the  desires  and  peti- 
tions of  his  heart  to  the  Lord,  he  prays  ; and 
if  he  uses  verses  with  which  he  was  before 
acquainted,  he  prays  by  a form  ; he  does  the 
very  thing  for  which  we  are  condemned ; 
unless  it  can  be  proved  that  the  fault  and 
evil  which  is  essential  to  a form  in  prose,  is 
entirely  removed  if  the  substance  of  the  ob- 
noxious form  be  expressed  in  metre  or  rhyme. 

Crito  freely  will  rehearse 

Forms  of  prayer  and  praise  in  verse  : 

Why  should  Crito  then  suppose 

Forms  are  sinful  when  in  prose? 

Must  my  form  be  deemed  a crime 

Merely  for  the  want  of  rhyme  ? 

I have  heard  of  a minister  who  used  to 
compose  hymns  in  the  pulpit  It  was  his  cus- 
tom to  give  out  one  line,  and  by  the  time  the 
congregation  had  sung  the  first,  he  had  a se- 
cond ready  for  them,  and  so  on,  so  long  as  he 


thought  proper  to  sing.  These  were  not 
forms,  they  were  composed  pro  re  nata.  Be- 
fore he  had  finished  a second  stanza,  the 
former  (as  to  the  verse  and  cadence)  was  in  a 
manner  forgotten ; and  the  same  hymn  was 
never  heard  twice.  I know  not  what  these 
unpremeditated  pieces  were  in  point  of  com- 
position ; but  were  I persuaded  of  the  unlaw- 
fulness of  forms  of  prayer,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  approved  of  the  practice  of  singing  in 
public  worship ; I should  extremely  covet  the 
talent  of  extempore  hymn-making,  as  one  of 
the  most  necessary  gifts  a minister  could  pos- 
sess in  order  to  maintain  a consistency  in  his 
whole  service. 

I here  close  what  I intended  by  way  of  in- 
troduction. In  my  subsequent  letters,  I pur- 
pose to  acquaint  you  more  directly  with  the 
reasons  which  determined  my  own  choice, 
and  which  still  satisfy  me,  that  in  receiving 
Episcopal  ordination,  and  exercising  my 
ministry  in  the  established  church,  I have 
not  acted  wrong.  At  present,  I shall  relieve 
your  attention,  by  subscribing  myself 

Your  affectionate  friend  and  brother. 


LETTER  II. 

Mr  Dear  Friend  and  Brother, — As 
such  I address  you ; as  such,  notwithstand- 
ing our  different  views  of  church-govern- 
ment, you  acknowledge  me.  You  have  con- 
firmed your  love  to  me  by  many  repeated 
proofs ; and  it  is  the  desire  of  my  heart  that 
nothing  may  take  place  on  either  side  to 
weaken  the  exercise  of  that  friendship,  which 
having  the  faith  and  hope  of  the  gospel  for 
its  basis,  is  calculated  to  subsist  and  flourish 
in  a better  world.  With  this  thought  upon 
my  mind,  it  is  impossible  that  I should  write 
a single  line  with  an  intention  of  grieving  or 
offending  you ; and  I am  persuaded,  the  same 
consideration  on  your  part  will  dispose  you 
to  a candid  perusal  of  what  I offer.  I had 
rather  be  silent  than  plead  even  for  truth  in 
an  angry,  contentious  spirit.  For  every  year 
of  my  life  strengthens  my  conviction  of  the 
importance  of  that  divine  aphorism,  “The 
wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  righteousness 
of  God.” 

How  far  what  I have  suggested  in  favour 
of  establishments  and  liturgies  may  appear 
Conclusive  to  you,  I know  not.  I depend 
much  upon  your  candour ; but  I make  allow- 
ances for  the  unavoidable  influence  of  educa- 
tion, connection,  and  habit,  both  in  you  and 
in  myself.  We  generally  ascribe  the  dissent 
of  those  who  differ  from  us,  in  part  at  least, 
to  prejudices  of  this  kind  ; but  as  it  is  very 
natural  to  think  favourably  of  ourselves,  we 
almost  take  it  for  granted  that  we  have  either 
escaped  or  outgrown  every  bias.  Though 
some  of  the  principles  we  maintain  have  been 


APOLOGIA. 


447 


LET.  II.") 

instilled  into  us  from  our  childhood,  and  we 
have  been  confirmed  in  what  we  say  is  right, 
by  the  instruction,  advice,  and  example  of 
friends,  exactly  as  others  have  been  confirm- 
ed in  what  we  call  wrong ; yet  that  positive- 
ness, which  in  them  is  the  effect  of  ignorant 
prejudice,  is  in  us  a very  different  thing;  a 
fust  attachment  to  truth,  and  the  result  of 
‘mpartial  examination  and  full  conviction. 
For  my  own  part,  I dare  not  say  that  I am 
free  from  all  bias  and  prepossession,  but  I de- 
sire and  endeavour  to  guard  against  their  in- 
fluence. 

But  though  I have  ventured  to  defend  the 
propriety  of  a national  establishment,  and  up- 
on that  ground,  the  expediency  of  a liturgy, 
I need  not  tell  you  that  I had  no  hand  in 
forming  either  the  one  or  the  other.  By  the 
allotment  of  Divine  Providence,  I was  born 
in  a nation  where  these  things  had  taken 
place  long  before  I came  into  the  world. 
Therefore,  when  the  Lord  gave  me  a desire 
to  preach  his  gospel,  and  it  became  necessary 
to  determine  under  what  character  I should 
exercise  my  ministry;  the  question  before 
me  was  not,  What  form  of  church-govern- 
ment I might  propose  as  the  most  scriptural, 
if  all  parties  amongst  us  were  willing  to  re- 
fer themselves  to  my  decision  ? But  my  in- 
quiry was  rather  directed  to  this  point,  What 
would  be  my  path  of  duty,  rebus  sic  stantibus, 
living,  as  I did,  in  the  island  of  Great  Britain, 
and  in  that  part  of  it  named  England  1 At  first, 
indeed,  I saw  but  little  room  for  deliberation. 
For,  about  six  years  after  I was  awakened  to ' 
some  concern  for  my  soul,  my  situation  in 
life  had  secluded  me  equally  from  every  reli- 
gious party.  During  this  period,  in  which  I 
walked  alone,  the  Lord  was  pleased  to  show ; 
me  the  way  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  to 
lead  me  to  study  and  prize  his  holy  word. 
By  his  blessing,  I made  some  advances  in, 
knowledge,  though  slowly,  under  such  dis- 
couragements and  disadvantages,  as  they, 
who  from  the  beginning  of  their  inquiries, 
are  favoured  with  public  ordinances,  and  the 
help  of  Christian  conference,  can  have  no 
proper  conception  of.  At  length  I became 
acquainted  with  some  of  his  people,  and  had 
frequent  opportunities  of  hearing  the  gospel. 
My  first  connections  of  this  sort  were  chiefly 
with  Dissenters,  and  brought  me,  as  it  were, 
into  a new  world.  For,  till  then,  I had  hard- 
ly an  idea  of  the  different  names  and  modes 
by  which  professing  Christians  were  distin- 
guished and  subdivided,  nor  of  the  animosity 
with  which  their  various  disputes  were  car- 
ried on.  But  as  I received  benefit  and  plea- 
sure from  my  intercourse  with  my  new 
friends,  it  is  no  wonder  that  while  my  heart 
was  warm,  and  my  experience  and  judgment 
unformed,  I should  enter  with  readiness  into 
all  their  views.  Thus,  together  with  the  real 
advantages  I obtained  among  them,  I imbibed 
at  the  same  time  a strong  prejudice  against 


the  established  church,  and  hastily  concluded, 
that  though  I might  occasionally  communi- 
cate with  it  as  a private  person,  it  would  be 
impossible  to  officiate  in  it  as  a minister  with- 
out violating  my  conscience.  Accordingly, 
my  first  overtures  were  to  the  Dissenters ; 
and  had  not  the  Providence  of  God  remarka- 
bly interposed  to  prevent  it,  I should  probably 
have  been  a brother  with  you  in  every  sense. 
But  my  designs  were  overruled.  A variety  of 
doors  by  which  I sought  entrance  (for  I did 
not  give  up  upon  the  first  disappointment) 
were  successively  shut  against  me.  These 
repeated  delays  afforded  me  more  time  to 
think  and  judge  for  myself ; and  the  more  I 
considered  the  point,  the  more  my  scruples 
against  conformity  gave  way.  Reasons  in- 
creased upon  me,  which  not  only  satisfied  me 
that  I might  conform  without  sin,  but  that 
the  preference  (as  to  my  own  concern)  was 
plainly  on  that  side.  Accordingly,  in  the 
Lord’s  due  time,  after  several  years  waiting 
to  know  his  will,  I sought  and  obtained  Epis- 
copal ordination.  And  I seriously  assure 
you,  that  though  I took  this  step  with  a firm 
persuasion  that  it  was  right,  I did  not  at  that 
time  see  so  many  reasons  to  justify  my 
choice,  nor  perhaps  any  one  reason  in  so 
strong  a light,  as  I have  since.  Far  from 
having  regretted  this  interesting  part  of  my 
conduct  for  a single  hour,  I have  been  more 
satisfied  with  it  from  year  to  year.  You  will 
please,  therefore,  to  accept  what  I am  about 
to  offer,  not  merely  as  an  account  of  the  mo- 
tives which  influenced  me  twenty  years  ago, 
but  rather  as  the  considerations  which  at  this 
minute  call  upon  me  to  be  heartily  thankful 
to  the  Lord,  for  leading  me  by  a way  which  I 
knew  not,  to  labour  in  that  part  of  his  vine- 
yard, which  experience  has  proved  to  be 
most  suitable  for  maintaining  my  personal 
peace  and  comfort,  and  (I  verily  believe  like- 
wise) for  promoting  my  usefulness  as  a 
minister. 

Some  of  our  Dissenting  brethren,  who  I 
hope  are  willing  to  think  as  well  of  the  awa- 
kened clergy  as  they  can,  kindly  allow  us  to 
be  well-meaning  people ; they  believe  we  de- 
sire to  be  useful,  and  think  it  not  impossible 
but  that  in  some  instances  we  may  be  so : but 
they  pity  us  either  for  not  having  more  light 
or  for  not  having  courage  to  follow  that  light, 
which  they  suppose  must  force  itself  upon  us, 
if  we  did  not  wilfully  shut  it  out.  From 
what  they  hear  of  us  they  are  staggered.. 
They  are  loth  to  deny  that  the  Lord  is  with 
us  at  all : but  then,  if  the  Lord  be  with  us  in- 
deed, why  are  we  thus]  It  js  almost  unac- 
countable to  them  upon  this  supposition  how 
we  can  remain  where  we  are.  They  are  ex- 
pecting from  day  to  day,  that  if  we  are  en- 
lightened, as  we  profess,  and  honest  men,  as 
they  wish  to  find  us,  we  shall  surely  come 
out  from  Babylon,  renounce  our  slavery  and 
will-worship,  and  openly  attach  ourselves  to 


448 


APOLOGIA. 


the  Dissenting  Interest.  Could  we  do  this, 
and  persuade  our  people  to  follow  us,  they 
would  probably  no  longer  doubt  whether  the 
Lord  had  wrought  by  our  ministry,  or  not. 

I could  wish  you  not  to  think  of  me  while 
you  read  the  paragraph  I am  now  beginning. 
You  know  many  of  our  ministers,  and  you 
know  that  there  are  amongst  them  men  of 
sound  sense,  solid  judgment,  and  extensive 
reading:  Men  whom  the  Lord  has  been 
pleased  to  favour  with  an  eminency  in  gifts 
and  spiritual  knowledge;  in  a wrord,  able 
ministers  of  the  New  Testament ; Men,  wTho 
though  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  they  lie  low 
in  the  dust,  conscious  of  inherent  defilement, 
and  that  theii  best  services  need  forgiveness ; 
yet  with  regard  to  their  fellow-creatures, 
can  in  the  integrity  of  their  hearts  appeal  to 
all  around  them,  that  their  conversation  is 
not  unbecoming  the  gospel  which  they  preach. 
Some  of  these  men,  at  least,  have  carefully 
studied  the  subject  matter  of  debate  between 
us  and  the  Dissenters,  have  read  the  books, 
and  considered  the  arguments,  which  are  sup- 
posed sufficient  to  convert  and  reform  us ; 
but  after  all  their  endeavours  to  obtain  in- 
formation, though  they  agree  with  the  evan- 
gelical Dissenters  in  their  views  of  the  gos- 
pel (which  yet  they  received  not  from  them, 
but  from  the  holy  scriptures)  they  are  still 
constrained  to  differ  on  the  question  of  church 
form  and  order.  Now  why  should  this  be 
imputed  to  their  ignorance  and  blindness  1 
Does  it  require  a sharper  eye  to  perceive  the 
precise  delineation  of  a gospel-church  in  the 
New  Testament,  if  it  be  really  there,  than 
to  apprehend  and  embrace  what  the  scripture 
teaches  concerning  the  person  and  characters 
of  the  Redeemer,  the  way  of  a sinner’s  ac- 
ceptance, or  the  nature  of  the  life  of  faith  ! 
These  things,  we  are  assured  by  the  apostle, 
the  natural  man,  however  qualified,  cannot 
discern.  Surely  the  external  form  of  a gos- 
pel-church cannot  be  equally  mysterious  with 
these  doctrines ; especially  as  it  is  professedly 
seen  with  the  glance  of  an  eye,  by  some  persons 
who  declare  themselves  enemies  to  mysteries 
of  any  kind.  Or  why  should  their  not  ac- 
ceding to  you  be  imputed  to  interested  mo- 
tives! There  are  with  us  men  whose  in- 
tegrity and  ingenuousness  are  in  every  other 
respect  unimpeachable ; and  it  is  hard,  that 
without  sufficient  evidence,  they  should  be 
charged  with  prevarication  in  a business 
which  concerns  the  honour  of  their  Saviour, 
and  the  uprightness  of  their  consciences  in 
his  sight  Besides,  what  can  be  the  power- 
ful motives  for  such  hypocrisy ! Do  they  by 
remaining  in  the  establishment  avoid  the  of- 
fence of  the  cross,  and  find  a shelter  from  that 
opprobrium  and  opposition  which  must  be 
their  lot  if  they  had  the  fortitude  to  unite 
with  the  Dissenters  1 Here  at  least,  how- 
ever, we  may  be  mistaken.  I apprehend  the 
Lord  has  assigned  to  us  the  post  of  honour ; 


[let.  n. 

and  that  in  the  treatment  we  meet  with  from 
an  unbelieving  world,  our  lot  rather  resem- 
bles that  of  the  Dissenters  of  the  last  century 
than  of  the  present.  It  is  true,  we  are  no 
more  exposed  to  fines  and  imprisonment  than 
you  are ; but  if  it  be  an  honour  to  suffer 
shame  for  his  name’s  sake,  I think  we  have 
the  pre-eminence.  As  to  money-matters,  I 
could  name  several  of  our  clergy  who  are  not 
so  plentifully  provided  for  in  the  establish- 
ment, but  that  if  they  were  to  leave  us,  and 
to  go  over  to  your  side,  it  is  very  probable 
the  manner  in  which  converts  of  such  cha- 
racters and  abilities  would  be  received 
amongst  you,  might  prove  considerably  to 
their  emolument.  Nor  can  it  upon  better 
grounds  be  ascribed  to  obstinate  prejudice 
and  incurable  bigotry,  that  your  arguments 
do  not  prevail.  For  it  is  well  known,  that 
many  of  our  ministers  show  a cordial  and  li- 
beral spirit  to  the  Dissenters,  receive  them 
gladly  into  their  houses,  attend  occasionally 
upon  their  preaching,  recommend  and  en- 
courage applications  for  the  support  of  their 
ministers,  or  places  of  worship,  and  are  ready 
to  concur  with  them  in  every  plan  for  useful- 
ness. And  I believe  this  disposition  would 
be  more  general,  had  not  experience  shown 
that  the  candour  of  some  clergymen  in  these 
respects,  has  been  too  often  improperly  re- 
quited by  ungenerous  attempts  to  prejudice 
and  perplex  our  people,  and  to  weaken  our 
hands. 

Yet  one  or  another,  or  all  these  charges 
must  be  insinuated  against  us,  rather  than 
fallible  men  will  suppose  themselves  any 
thing  less  than  infallible,  even  in  points  of  a 
circumstantial  nature;  and  though  others 
whom  they  have  no  reason  to  think  inferior 
to  themselves  either  in  judgment  or  inte- 
grity, are  compelled  to  differ  from  them. 

If  not  so  frequent,  would  not  this  be  strange  ? 

That  ’tis  so  frequent — this  is  stranger  still ! 

Be  assured,  dear  sir,  that  in  thus  apologiz- 
ing for  my  brethren,  I write  not  only  without 
their  desire,  but  without  their  knowledge. 
I think  I have  now  finished  all  my  pream- 
bles, and  I proceed  immediately  to  acquaint 
you  with  my  reasons  for  conforming  to  the 
Established  Church,  and  continuing  in  it. 

My  first,  and  principal  reason  is,  The  re- 
gard I owe  to  the  honour  and  authority  of 
the  Lord  Jems  Christ  as  Head  and  Law- 
giver of  his  Church.  I do  not  mean  that 
this  consideration  obliges  me  absolutely  to 
prefer  the  form  of  the  church  of  England  to 
any  other  form,  but  only  that  it  will  not  per- 
mit me  to  join  with  those  who  make  dissent- 
ing from  it  necessary  in  point  of  conscience. 

I cannot  suppose  that  any  true  Christian  in 
our  land  of  light  and  liberty,  will  hesitate  a 
moment  to  acknowledge  that  Christ  is  the 
one  infallible,  authoritative  legislator  and 
governor  of  his  church;  that  he  is  the  Lord, 


APOLOGIA. 


449 


LET.  II.] 

and  the  only  Lord  of  conscience,  and  that 
nothing  inconsistent  with  his  revealed  will 
Should  be  practised,  nothing  that  he  has  en- 
joined be  omitted,  by  those  who  profess  alle- 
giance to  him.  But  however  generally  ac- 
knowledged these  principles  are,  I believe 
the  .misconstruction  and  misapplication  of 
them  Jiave  contributed  more  to  divide  the 
people  of  God,  and  to  alienate  their  affections 
from  each  other,  than  any  other  cause  that 
can  be  assigned.  It  seems  reasonable  to  ex- 
pect that  .they  whose  hopes  are  built  upon 
the  same  foundation,  who  are  led  by  the  same 
spirit,  who  are  opposed  by  the  same  enemies, 
and  Interested  in  the  same  promises,  would 
look  upon  each  other  with  mutual  compla- 
cence, would  love  as  brethren,  would  bear 
each  other’s  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  their  Mas- 
ter’s law,  and  copy  his  example.  But  alas! 
a mistaken  zeal  for  his  honour  fills  them  on 
all  sides^with  animosity  against  their  fellow 
disciples,  splits  them  into  a thousand  parties, 
gives  rise  to  fierce  and  endless  contentions, 
and  makes  them  so  earnest  for  and  against 
their  respective  peculiarities,  that  the  love, 
which  is  the  disriminating  characteristic  of 
his  religion,  is  scarcely  to  be  found  amongst 
them  in  such  a degree  of  exercise,  as  to 
satisfy  even  candid  observers,  whether  they 
bear  his  mark  or  not. 

The  visible  church  of  Christ  comprises  all 
who  call  themselves  by  his  name,  and  who 
profess  to  receive  his  gospel  as  a divine  re- 
velation. It  is  a floor  on  which  the  grain 
and  the  chaff  are  promiscuously  mingled  ; a 
field  in  which  the  wheat  and  the  tares  grow 
together ; a net  inclosing  a multitude  of  fishes 
both  good  and  bad.  But  the  visible  church 
of  Christ,  taken  in  this  large  extent,  is  not 
the  proper  subject  of  his  government,  as  he 
is  the  King  of  saints.  For  his  kingdom  is  a 
spiritual  kingdom,  which  none  can  under- 
stand, and  his  rule  is  a spiritual  rule,  which 
none  can  receive  or  obey,  until  born  from 
above,  and  made  new  creatures  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  these  regenerated 
persons,  who,  it  is  to  be  feared,  are  seldom 
the  largest  number  in  any  denomination,  be 
considered  as  detached  from  the  visible 
church,  the  remainder  is  a mere  caput  mor- 
tuum , differenced  from  the  world  which  lies 
in  wickedness,  in  nothing  but  a name,  and 
in  the  privilege  of  having  the  oracles  of  God 
committed  to  it.  But  nominal  Christians, 
though  they  have,  or  may  have  in  their  hands 
the  scriptures,  which  are  able  to  make  sin- 
ners wise  unto  salvation,  are  no  less  distant 
and  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  (until  he 
is  pleased  to  reveal  his  power  in  their  hearts) 
than  Mahomedans  or  Heathens.  And  with 
respect  to  these,  the  honour  of  the  Lord  Je- 
sus Christ  is  but  little  concerned  with  the 
different  ways  in  which  they  may  think  pro- 
per to  constitute  themselves  into  national  or 
particular  churches,  and  please  themselves 
Vol.  II.  3 L 


with  a lifeless  form  of  worship,  while  their 
hearts  are  in  a state  of  enmity  to  his  grace. 
Admitting  that  a plan  of  a gospel-church  was 
described  with  the  same  precision  in  the 
New  Tjestament,  as  the  institutions  of  the 
Levitical  worship  in  the  Old,  and  punctually 
complied  with  to  the  minutest  circumstance, 
though  the  worshippers  might  applaud  and 
admire  their  own  exactness,  and  censure 
and  despise  all  who  differed  a hair’s  breadth 
from  them,  yet  if  they  did  not  serve  God  in 
spirit  and  in  truth,  their  boasted  church-order 
would  avail  them  nothing.  All  that  related 
to  the  worship  of  God  under  the  law,  was 
confessedly  of  divine  appointment ; and  the 
people  in  the  time  of  the  prophets  were  not 
so  much  charged  with  neglecting  the  pre- 
scribed forms,  as  with  resting  in  them. 
When  this  evil  became  general,  and  they 
thought  to  compensate  for  their  want  of  spirit- 
uality, by  their  feasts,  fasts,  and  sacrifices, 
the  Lord  expresses  himself  as  displeased 
with  his  own  institutions,  Isa.  i.  11 — 15. 
lxvi.  3,  4.  Jer.  vii.  8 — 14,  22,  23.  They 
could  plead  his  prescription  for  their  observ- 
ances ; but  in  vain  they  trusted  to  the  tem- 
ple, and  said,  “ The  temple  of  the  Lord,  the 
temple  of  the  Lord  are  we,”  when  the  Lord 
of  the  temple  was  departed  from  them.  And 
certainly  he  will  be  no  more  pleased  with 
a form  without  the  heart  now,  than  he  was 
then. 

I must,  therefore,  confine  my  inquiry  to  the 
church  of  Christ  in  a more  limited  and  proper 
sense,  as  expressive  of  his  mystical  body,  com- 
posed of  all  who  by  faith  are  united  to  him 
as  their  foundation  and  root,  of  all  to  whom 
he  is  the  head  of  vital  influence,  who  have 
fellowship  with  him  in  his  death,  and  are 
partakers  of  the  power  of  his  resurrection. 
These  are  infallibly  known  only  to  himself. 
They  are  scattered  far  and  wide,  separated 
from  each  other  by  seas  and  mountains ; they 
are  a people  of  many  nations  and  languages 
But  wherever  their  lot  is  cast,  they  hear  his 
voice,  are  under  his  gracious  eye,  and  the 
life  which  they  live  in  the  flesh  is  by  faith 
in  his  name.  They  have  not  all  equal  de- 
grees of  light  or  measures  of  grace,  nor  are 
they  all  favoured  with  equal  advantages  for 
knowing  or  enjoying  the  full  extent  of  the 
liberty  of  the  gospel.  But  they  are  all  ac- 
cepted in  the  Beloved,  and  approved  of  God. 
They  are  spiritual  worshippers,  joint  par- 
takers of  grace,  and  will  hereafter  appear 
together  at  their  Saviour’s  right  hand  in 
glory. 

At  present  they  are  in  an  imperfect  state. 
Though  created  anew  in  Christ  Jesus,  they 
are  not  freed  from  a principle  of  indwelling 
sin.  Their  knowledge  is  clouded  by  much 
remaining  ignorance,  and  their  zeal,  though 
right  in  its  aim,  is  often  warped  and  mis- 
guided by  the  corrupt  influence  of  self.  For 
they  still  have  many  corruptions,  and  ther 


450 


AP3LOGIA. 


live  in  a world  which  furnishes  frequent  oc- 
casions of  exciting  them ; and  Satan,  their 
subtle  and  powerful  enemy,  is  always  upon 
his  watch  to  mislead  and  nnsnare  them. 
They  are  born,  educated,  and  called  *nder  a 
great  variety  of  circumstances.  Habits  of 
life,  local  customs,  early  connections,  and 
even  bodily  constitution,  have  more  or  less 
influence  in  forming  their  characters,  and  in 
giving  a tincture  and  turn  to  their  manner 
of  thinking.  So  that  though,  in  whatever 
is  essential  to  their  peace  and  holiness,  they 
are  all  led  by  the  same  Spirit,  and  mind  the 
sa.me  things;  in  others  of  a secondary  nature, 
their  sentiments  may,  and  often  do  differ,  as 
much  as  the  features  of  their  faces.  A uni- 
formity of  judgment  among  them  is  not  to  be 
expected  while  the  wisest  are  defective  in 
knowledge,  the  best  are  defiled  with  sin,  and 
while  the  weaknesses  of  human  nature  which 
are  common  to  them  all,  are  so  differently 
affected  by  a thousand  impressions  which  are 
from  their  various  situations.  They  might, 
however,  maintain  a unity  of  spirit,  and  live 
in  the  exercise  of  mutual  love ; were  it  not 
that  every  party,  and  almost  every  indi- 
vidual, unhappily  conceives  that  they  are 
bound  in  conscience  to  prescribe  their  own 
line  of  conduct  as  a standard  to  which  all 
their  brethren  ought  to  conform.  They  are 
comparatively  but  few  who  consider  this  re- 
quisition to  be  as  unnecessary,  unreasonable, 
and  impracticable,  as  it  would  be  to  insist,  or 
expect  that  every  man’s  shoes  should  be  ex- 
actly of  one  size. 

Thus,  though  all  agree  in  asserting  the 
authority  and  right  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  as 
King  and  Head  of  his  Church,  the  various 
apprehensions  they  frame  of  the  rule  to 
which  he  requires  them  to  conform,  and  their, 
pertinacious  attachment  to  their  own  exposi- 
tions of  it,  separate  them  almost  as  much 
from  each  other,  as  if  they  were  not  united 
to  him  by  a principle  of  living  faith.  Their 
little  differences  form  them  into  so  many  se- 
parate interests ; and  the  heat  with  which 
they  defend  their  own  plans,  and  oppose  all 
who  cannot  agree  with  them  in  a tittle,  makes 
them  forget  that  they  are  children  in  the 
same  family,  and  servants  of  the  same  mas- 
ter. And  while  they  vex  and  worry  each 
other  with  disputations  and  censures,  the 
world  wonders  and  laughs  at  them  all.  The 
spirit  of  love  is  restrained,  offences  are  mul- 
tiplied, and  Satan  is  gratified  by  beholding 
the  extensive  effects  of  his  pernicious  and 
long  practised  maxim,  Divide  et  impera. 

1 am  far  from  supposing  that  all  the  va- 
rious modes  of  church-government  under 
which  spiritual  worshippers  are  cast,  are 
equally  agreeable  to  the  spirit  and  genius  of 
the  gospel,  or  equally  suited  to  the  purposes 
of  edification.  Perhaps  there  is  no  consider- 
able body  of  people  who  profess  themselves 
Christians,  however  erroneous  in  their  plans 


[let.  n. 

of  doctrine  or  worship,  among  whom  the  Sa- 
viour has  not  some  hidden  ones,  known  to 
himself,  though  lost  to  human  observation  in 
the  crowd  of  pretenders  which  surround 
them.  The  power  of  his  grace  can  break 
through  all  disadvantages,  and  make  a few 
individuals  wiser  than  their  teachers,  by  re- 
vealing his  truth  to  their  heart,  sooner  or 
later,  so  far  as  is  necessary  to  salvation.  But 
it  must  be  owned,  that  some  communities 
which  bear  the  name  of  Christian  have  depart- 
ed so  very  far  from  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel, 
that  if  we  reason  a priori , we  are  ready  to 
conclude  it  as  almost  impossible  for  a convert- 
ed person  to  continue  a single  day  in  such  a 
communion.  But  hypotheses  cannot  be  main- 
tained against  plain  facts.  Thus  the  Church 
of  Rome,  not  merely  by  adopting  an  unmean- 
ing burdensome  train  of  ceremonies,  but  by 
her  doctrines  of  Papal  infallibility,  invocation 
of  saints  and  angels,  purgatory,  absolution, 
the  mass,  and  others  of  the  like  stamp,  is  be- 
come so  exceedingly  adulterated,  that  pos- 
sibly some  persons  who  may  read  these 
letters  will  form  an  unfavourable  opinion  of 
me,  for  declaring  that  I have  not  the  least 
doubt  but  the  Lord  Jesus  has  had,  from  age 
to  age,  a succession  of  chosen  and  faithful 
witnesses  within  the  pale  of  that  corrupt 
church.  Yet  I should  hope  that  they,  who, 
having  themselves  tasted  that  the  Lord  is 
gracious,  know  the  language  of  a heart  under 
the  influence  of  his  Spirit,  would,  in  defiance 
of  Protestant  prejudices,  be  of  my  mind,  if 
they  had  opportunity  of  perusing  the  writings 
of  some  Papists.  If  such  persons  as  Fene- 
lon,  Pascal,  Quesnal,  and  Nicole,  (to  men- 
tion  no  more,)  were  not  true  Christians, 
where  shall  we  find  any  that  deserve  the 
name  1 In  the  writings  of  these  great  men, 
notwithstanding  incidental  errors,  I meet 
with  such  strains  of  experimental  godliness, 
such  deep  knowledge  of  the  workings  of  the 
Spirit  of  God,  and  of  the  heart  of  man,  and 
such  masterly  explications  of  many  important 
passages  of  scripture,  as  might  do  honour  to 
the  most  enlightened  Protestant.  And  yet 
these  men  lived  and  died  in  the  Popish  com- 
munion ; and,  to  their  latest  hours,  (for  any 
thing  that  appears  to  the  contrary,)  thought 
they  could  not  separate  from  it  without  sin. 
And,  though  I have  not  equal  means  of  in- 
formation, I can  as  little  doubt  that  the 
Lord  has  a people  likewise  in  the  Greek 
Church,  which,  as  to  its  external  frame,  seems 
to  be  little  less  unscriptural  than  the  Church 
of  Rome  itself. 

However,  I desire  to  be  thankful  that  I am 
not  a Papist.  I am  at  least  one  step  nearer 
to  the  true  and  acceptable  worship  of  God. 
For  I believe  the  most  rigid  of  our  Dissent- 
ing brethren  will  allow,  that  the  Church  of 
England,  if  almost,  yet  is  not  altogether  so 
depraved  and  corrupt  in  its  constitution  as 
i the  church  of  Rome.  1 am  now  in  m)  track 


APOLOGIA. 


451 


let.  hi.] 

and  shall  trouble  you  with  fewer  digressions 
in  the  sequel.  My  next  point  will  be  to  ex- 
amine the  different  claims  of  Protestant 
churches  to  the  honour  they  all  assume,  that 
their  respective  institutions  are  most  con- 
formable to  the  rules  the  apostles  have  laid 
down  on  the  subject  of  church-government, 
and  express  the  greatest  regard  to  the  autho- 
rity of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  undoubted 
Head  and  Lawgiver  of  his  Church.  And  to 
avoid  as  much  as  I can,  encumbering  what  I 
write  in  an  epistolary  way  to  a friend,  with 
the  stiffness  of  argumentation,  I shall  con- 
tent myself  with  giving  you  a simple  account 
of  what  occurred  to  me  upon  this  head,  when 
I made  the  inquiry  for  my  own  direction. 
But  it  is  time  to  conclude  this  letter  by  as- 
suring you  that  I am, 

Your  affectionate  friend. 


LETTER  III. 

My  Dear  Friend  and  Brother, — If  the 
authority  of  men  truly  respectable  for  learn- 
ing, judgment,  and  grace,  were  sufficient  to 
determine  the  question,  Which  of  the  va- 
rious forms  of  church-government  now  ob- 
taining among  Christians  is  most  agreeable 
to  the  letter  and  spirit  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment! a modest  inquirer,  who  wishes  for  the 
sanction  of  those  whom  he  esteems  wiser 
and  better  than  himself,  would  probably, 
without  hesitation,  join  himself  to  that  party 
to  which  he  might  be  first  led  to  apply  for 
direction.  For  whatever  difference  there 
may  be  in  the  merit  of  their  several  claims 
for  pre-eminence,  the  claim  itself  is  made 
with  an  equal  degree  of  confidence  by  them 
all.  At  a time  when  I was  very  sensible  of 
my  own  incompetency  to  decide  this  point 
for  myself,  I received  (as  I hope)  much  bene- 
fit from  the  writings  of  Bishop  Hall,  Rey- 
nolds, Davenant,  Mr.  Hooker,  and  other  di- 
vines of  the  Church  of  England.  I perceived 
they  were  persons  of  strong  sense,  extensive 
literature,  sound  in  the  faith ; and  from  such 
accounts  of  their  lives  as  I could  collect,  I 
judged  they  had  been  zealous  and  diligent  in 
their  callings,  and  burning  and  shining  lights 
in  the  world.  I could  not  perceive  that  any 
of  them  were  dissatisfied  with  the  Establish- 
ed Church  in  which  they  lived  and  died ; and 
some  of  them  I found  were  very  strenuous 
in  its  defence,  not  only  pleading  that  it  was 
lawful  to  maintain  communion  with  it,  but 
offering  many  arguments  to  prove  that  it  was 
even  sinful  to  separate  from  it,  and  that  it 
was  the  only  resemblance  of  the  primitive 
apostolical  church.  I own  to  you  that  I 
thought  some  of  their  assertions  upon  this 
head  were  too  strong,  and  some  of  their 
arguments  not  fully  conclusive.  Yet  I was 
a little  staggered,  and  it  gave  me  pain  to  be 
forced  to  differ  in  any  point  from  men  whom 


I believed  to  have  been  full  of  faith  and  of 
the  Holy  Ghost.  However,  some  general 
idea  I possessed  of  the  liberty  of  the  gospel, 
a conviction  that  the  Lord  had  a people  and 
a work  in  other  countries  where  the  form  of 
the  Church  of  England  could  not  take  place, 
and  the  previous  attachment  I had  to  the  Dis- 
senters, with  whom,  as  I have  said,  I was 
first  acquainted,  prevented  me  from  becoming 
what  is  called  a High-Church  man.  But  as 
for  these  reasons  I could  not  give  the  Church 
of  England  an  exclusive  preference,  or  think 
myself  authorized  to  brand  those  who  dis- 
sented from  it  with  the  hard  names  of  schis- 
matics and  fanatics,  so  on  the  other  hand,  I 
could  not  go  into  the  opposite  extreme,  or 
suppose  that  a church  in  which  the  Lord  em- 
ployed and  owned  such  valuable  rnen,  and 
had  a numerous  spiritual  people,  was  no  bet- 
ter than  a Babylon,  from  whence  all  who 
loved  his  name  and  salvation,  were  in  duty 
and  conscience  bound  to  withdraw. 

Many  books  likewise  came  in  my  way 
written  by  divines  of  the  Church  of  Scot- 
land. In  the  writings  of  Durham,  Fleming, 
Halyburton,  and  others,  I found  proofs  that 
they  were  not  inferior  in  light,  holiness,  and 
a sound  spiritual  judgment,  to  the  most 
eminent  luminaries  of  our  own  Church.  In 
what  concerned  the  life  and  power  of  reli- 
gion, I could  perceive  no  considerable  differ- 
ence between  them.  As  they  were  all  taught 
by  the  same  Spirit,  so  they  were  all  teachers 
of  the  same  truths.  But  in  their  sentiments 
upon  church-government  they  differed  v§ry 
widely.  Wherein  they  agreed,  I could  fully 
agree  with  them.  Wherein  they  differed,  I 
was  left  in  the  uncertainty  of  a traveller, 
who,  inquiring  his  way  of  two  persons,  is 
told  by  one  to  turn  to  the  right,  and  by  the 
other  directly  opposite,  to  the  left.  My 
English  guides  would  persuade  me  that  the 
form  of  the  church  from  the  apostles’  days 
was  Episcopal.  My  Scotch  guides  were  ra- 
ther more  positive  that  our  prelacy  was  al- 
most equally  with  the  papacy,  a branch  and 
a mark  of  Antichrist.  If  I compared  the  suf- 
ficiency of  each  to  decide  for  me,  I knew  not 
which  to  prefer.  On  both  sides  were  men 
of  wisdom  and  grace,  and  who  I believed 
would  not  wilfully  mislead  me;  on  both  sides 
they  confessed  themselves  in  general  to  be, 
like  myself,  fallible,  and  liable  to  mistake. 
Only  in  this  one  point  both  sides  appeared 
confident,  that  they  could  not  be  mistaken, 
and  yet  their  opinions  were  not  only  diverse, 
but  contradictory. 

The  suspense  in  which  I was  held  by 
these  incompatible  claimants,  sent  me  more 
readily  and  attentively  to  renew  my  inquiries 
amongst  my  former  friends  of  your  denomi- 
nation. By  these  I was  instructed,  that  I 
need  not  trouble  myself  with  weighing  and 
comparing  the  arguments  which  the  English 
and  Scotch  Churches  had  to  offer  in  favour 


452 


APOLOGIA. 


of  their  respective  constitutions,  for  they 
were  both  equally  destitute  of  any  founda- 
tion in  truth  or  scripture : That  I had  only 
to  read  the  New  Testament  for  myself,  and 
it  must  appear  very  plain,  that  the  Lord 
Christ  had  not  left  a concern  of  this  import- 
ance undetermined,  but  had  directed  his 
apostles  to  leave  in  their  writings  a pattern, 
according  to  which  it  was  his  pleasure  all 
his  churches  in  future  ages  should  be  formed : 
That  the  first  churches  were  Congregational 
or  Independent,  and  that  every  other  plan 
was  unscriptural,  and  a presumptuous  devia- 
tion from  the  declared  will  of  the  Lord.  As 
I had  been  a debtor  to  some  of  their  writers 
likewise,  and  was  personally  acquainted  with 
several  of  their  ministers,  their  representa- 
tion had  so  much  weight  with  me  as  to  in- 
crease my  embarrassment. 

My  difficulties  grew  upon  me,  when  I 
found,  by  consulting  different  Independent 
writers  who  had  professedly  treated  this  sub- 
ject, that  though  they  were  of  one  mind  in 
asserting  that  a plain  and  satisfactory  pattern 
for  this  Congregational  order  might  be  easily 
collected  and  stated  from  a perusal  of  the 
New  Testament;  yet  when  they  came  to 
delineate  and  describe  it  according  to  their 
own  idea,  they  were  far  from  being  agreed 
among  themselves  as  to  the  nature  and  num- 
ber of  the  officers,  powers,  and  acts  which  are 
requisite  to  the  constitution  and  administra- 
tion of  a regularly  organized  gospel-church. 
I formerly  employed  much  time  and  attention 
in  this  disquisition ; but  not  having  for  many 
years  past  reviewed  a controversy  which  I 
think  rather  dry  and  uninteresting,  I cannot 
from  memory  enter  into  a detail  of  particu- 
lars. Nor  is  it  needful.  Of  the  fact,  I think 
I may  be  confident,  that  there  is  not  such  an 
agreement  amongst  them  as  might  be  ex- 
pected, if  the  plan  from  which  they  all  pro- 
fess to  copy  was  clearly  and  expressly  re- 
vealed in  the  New  Testament  as  obligatory 
upon  all  Christians.  Here  I was  at  a loss 
again ; for,  if  I could  have  admitted  their 
principle,  That  every  circumstance  of  wor- 
ship and  government  in  a church  ought  to 
have  the  warrant  of  a precept  or  a precedent 
from  the  scripture,  still  I needed  help  to  di- 
gest and  put  together  the  several  regulations 
which  were  dispersed  in  so  many  different 
parts  of  the  Gospels  and  Epistles;  for  I 
found  myself  unable  to  frame  the  detached 
materials  into  one  orderly  structure  by  my 
own  skill.  But  when  they  who  professed  to 
have  the  light  which  I wanted  were  them- 
selves divided  upon  the  point,  I was  preclud- 
ed from  the  hope  of  any  certain  assistance  ; 
for  as  to  probabilities  and  conjectures,  I might 
as  well  depend  upon  my  own,  as  upon  those 
of  another. 

Nor  was  this  the  whole  of  my  difficulty, 
I was  honestly  advised  to  read  and  examine 
for  myself.  I did  so ; and  it  appeared  to  me, 


[let.  hi. 

by  comparing  what  I read  with  what  I saw, 
that  the  Independents  could  not,  at  least  did 
not,  keep  closely  to  their  own  principles.  I 
thought  I met  with  usages  in  the  churches 
planted  by  the  apostles  which  did  not  obtain 
in  any  of  the  Congregational  churches  I was 
acquainted  with ; and,  on  the  other  hand,  I 
noticed  some  usages  among  these  of  which  I 
could  find  no  traces  in  the  inspired  account 
we  have  of  the  primitive  churches.  Permit 
me,  by  way  of  specimen,  to  mention  one  in- 
stance in  each  kind.  If  it  was  necessary  1 
could  mention  several,  but  I wish  not  to  be 
tedious. 

The  apostle  Paul  addresses  the  Corinthians 
as  a church  of  Christ ; and  we  have  from  him 
a larger  and  more  particular  account  of  the 
practices  of  their  church  than  of  any  other. 
In  chap.  xiv.  of  his  first  epistle,  after  censuring 
and  correcting  some  improprieties  which  had 
obtained  in  their  public  assemblies,  he  gives 
them  this  direction : “ Let  the  prophets  speak 
two  or  three,  and  let  the  other  judge.  If  any 
thing  be  revealed  to  another  that  sitteth  by, 
let  the  first  hold  his  peace.  For  ye  may  all 
prophesy  one  by  one,  that  all  may  learn,  and 
all  may  be  comforted.”  The  general  practice 
of  the  Congregational  churches  in  our  time, 
seems  not  to  comply  with  this  apostolic  in 
junction.  I think,  my  friend,  in  your  assem 
blies,  especially  in  your  solemn  stated  wor- 
ship on  the  Lord’s  day,  there  is  seldom  more 
than  one  speaker.  The  same  minister  who 
preaches,  usually  begins  and  ends  the  service. 
Should  it  be  pleaded  that  the  apostle  speaks 
of  prophesying,  and  evidently  supposes  that 
the  church  of  Corinth  was  favoured  with  ex- 
traordinary gifts  and  revelations  which  are 
now  ceased,  and  that  therefore  the  rule  can- 
not in  that  respect  extend  to  us,  I have  two 
answers  to  make. 

In  the  first  place,  though  we  do  not  expect 
extraordinary  revelations,  we  have  encour- 
agement to  hope  for  the  presence  of  our  Sa- 
viour, and  the  gracious  influences  of  his  Spirit, 
when  we  meet  in  his  name,  sufficient  to  en- 
able us  to  speak  to  his  praise,  and  to  the  edifi- 
cation and  comfort  of  our  brethren,  if  not  in 
foreign  tongues,  at  least  in  our  own.  And  it 
is  probable  that  you  have  more  than  once  been 
a hearer  in  a public  assembly,  when  your 
heart  has  been  so  warmed  and  impressed  with 
the  truths  of  the  gospel,  that  you  would  not 
have  been  unwilling  to  have  ascended  the 
pulpit  yourself,  either  to  confirm  or  correct 
what  you  had  been  hearing,  or  to  indulge  the 
liberty  you  found  in  your  mind  upon  some 
other  important  subject.  Perhaps  something 
was  then  revealed  to  you,  which  might  have 
been  very  suitable  to  the  occasion,  and  to  the 
state  of  the  congregation.  Why  did  you  not 
then  declare  it ? Why  did  you  neglect  to  stir 
up  the  gift  of  God  that  was  in  you?  Would 
it  have  been  contrary  to  the  custom  of  your 
churches?  But  would  you  not,  upon  your 


APOLOGIA. 


453 


LET.  Iljf.j 

principles,  have  been  justified  by  the  custom 
of  a New-Testament  church,  and  the  injunc- 
tion of  an  apostle  1 

But,  secondly,  and  chiefly,  I answer,  if  it  be 
admitted,  that  because  the  primitive  churches 
had  extraordinary  gifts,  there  are  some  things 
in  their  practice  which  are  not  proper  for  our 
imitation,*  who  have  not  the  same  gifts ; 
then  I quite  give  up  the  hope  of  being  able  to 
determine  the  exact  and  invariable  form  of 
a church,  by  such  lights  as  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  and  their  Epistles  afford  me;  unless 
some  man  or  set  of  men  be  qualified  and  com- 
missioned to  draw  the  line  for  me,  and  to  show 
me  distinctly  how  far,  and  in  what  instances, 
the  state  of  the  first  Christians  is  limited  from 
being  a pattern  to  us,  by  the  extraordinary 
dispensations  of  that  age ; and  how  far,  and 
in  what  cases,  their  pattern  is  binding  upon 
us  still,  notwithstanding  those  dispensations 
have  long  since  ceased.  To  be  directed  to 
study  these  churches  as  a model,  and  to  be 
told  at  the  same  time,  that  some  parts  of  their 
practice  were  not  designed  for  the  imitation 
of  future  ages,  without  distinctly  specifying 
which  were,  and  which  were  not,  is  rather  the 
way  to  perplex  and  bewilder  an  inquirer,  than 
to  help  him  to  information.  Upon  this  ground, 
though  I might  refuse  to  trust  the  assumed 
infallibility  of  the  Pope,  t must  feel  the  need 
of  an  infallible  visible  guide  to  reside  some- 
where in  the  church  ; for  without  such  assist- 
ance I could  not  take  a single  step  with  cer- 
tainty, but  must  be  liable  to  stumble  at  the 
very  threshold  of  my  inquiry. 

I think  it  is  the  usual  practice  in  your 
churches,  to  require  from  all  persons  who 
wish  to  be  admitted  into  your  communion,  an 
account,  either  verbal  or  written,  of  what  is 
called  their  experience  ; in  which,  not  only  a 
declaration  of  their  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
their  purpose,  by  grace,  to  devote  themselves 
to  him,  is  expected,  but  likewise  a recital  of 
the  steps  by  which  they  were  led  to  a know- 
ledge and  profession  of  the  gospel.  I select 
this  as  one  instance  in  which  I conceive  you 
have  neither  precept  nor  precedent  in  the 
scripture  for  your  warrant.  A profession  of 
faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  of  acceptance 
of  him,  and  submission  to  him  in  his  offices 
and  characters,  supported  by  the  evidence  of 
a gospel-conversation,  should,  I apprehend, 
be  deemed  sufficient  to  entitle  a person  to 
church-membership  ; and  especially  by  those 
who  so  loudly  insist  upon  the  evil  of  super- 
adding any  regulations  to  those  which  are  al- 
ready provided  by  our  Lord  and  his  apostles. 
The  authority  which  makes  it  a pre-requisite 
for  admission,  that  a person  shall  relate  how 
and  when  he  was  awakened,  what  exercises 
of  mind  he  has  passed  through,  and  other  par- 


* See  Neale’s  History  of  the  Puritans.  Vol.  1.  p.  379. 
2d  e lit.  1732. 


ticulars  of  a like  nature,  appears  to  me  to  be 
as  merely  human,  as  the  authority  which  pre- 
scribes the  canons  of  an  established  church. 
If  the  practice  be  defensible,  it  must  be  on 
the  plea  of  expediency.  It  is  not  my  present 
business  to  inquire  how  far  it  may  be  expedi- 
ent for  young  converts,  for  young  persons, 
especially  for  young  women,  to  be  compelled 
to  speak  before  a public  assembly  ; or  n that 
be  dispensed  with  for  the  sake  of  other  inter- 
fering expediencies,  how  far  it  is  expedient 
to  trust  to  a written  experience  : otherwise  I 
could  say  a good  deal  upon  this  head.  But 
it  is  sufficient  for  my  purpose,  if  no  shadow 
of  this  practice  can  be  found  in  the  New-Tes- 
tament. On  the  contrary,  I read,  that  when 
Saul,  after  he  escaped  from  Damascus,  essay- 
ed to  join  himself  to  the  disciples,  it  was  Bar- 
nabas and  not  Saul*  himself,  who  in  formed 
them  both  of  his  conversion,  and  of  the  extra- 
ordinary manner  in  which  it  was  effected, 
subjoining  a testimony  of  his  conduct  from 
the  time  that  he  professed  a change.  But  if 
expediency  may  warrant  a measure  in  your 
churches  not  expressly  commanded,  why  not 
likewise  in  ours  1 Be  it  either  right  or  wrong 
in  one  case,  it  must  be  so  in  both.  And, 
therefore  my  remark  on  this  particular  will  at 
least  have  the  force  of  argumentum  ad  homi- 
nem. 

I am  afraid  I shall  weary  you  by  only  giv- 
ing a brief  account  of  the  long  and  intricate 
road  which  I travelled,  to  discover,  if  I could, 
the  best  constituted  church.  But  I must  en- 
treat your  patience  a little  longer,  till  I bring 
you  to  the  end  of  my  journey.  It  may  be  ne- 
cessary to  inform  some  of  my  readers,  though 
not  you,  that  a considerable  part  of  the  con- 
gregational churches  differ  from  the  rest,  with 
respect  to  the  mode  and  subjects  of  baptism. 
At  the  time  when  my  thoughts  were  most  en- 
gaged about  church-order,  I lived  in  intimate 
habits  of  friendship  with  several  Baptists,  who 
were  very  willing  to  assist  me  in  settling 
my  judgment.  These,  though  they  would 
have  been  pleased  to  see  me  yield  to  the  ar- 
guments of  their  Psedobaptist  brethren,  would 
not  be  satisfied  that  I should  stop  where  they 
stopped.  They  urged  scripture  precepts  and 
precedents  to  lead  me  farther  ; and  said,  that 
none  of  the  Congregationalchurches  but  their 
own  were  agreeable  to  the  mind  of  Christ. 
They  told  me,  that  though  I should  acknow- 
ledge and  embrace  the  Congregational  order, 
which  undoubtedly  was  the  only  one  counte- 
nanced by  scripture,  still  I could  not  be  right 
till  I had  renounced  what  I called  the  bap- 
tism I had  received  in  my  infancy,  and  sub- 
mitted (as  they  termed  it)  to  baptism  by  im- 
mersion, to  which  I was  bound  not  only  by 
the  practice  of  the  primitive  church,  but  by 
the  example  of  our  Lord  himself,  who  when  he 


* See  Dr.  Guyse  on  Acts  ix.  27. 


454 


APOLOGIA. 


was  baptized,  said  for  our  instruction,  “Thus 
it  becometh  us  to  fulfil  all  righteousness.” 

I own,  Sir,  that  if  I had  seen  it  my  duty  to 
accede  to  the  church-order  of  the  Indepen- 
dents, I know  not  but  their  principles  would 
have  led  me  from  them  again,  to  join  with  the 
Baptists.  How  they,  who,  maintaining  infant- 
baptism,  press  scripture  precedent  so  strongly 
upon  me,  answer  the  Baptists,  who  in  this 
point  press  it  as  strongly  upon  themselves,  is 
not  my  concern.  I did  not  stand  upon  the 
same  ground,  and  therefore  the  arguments 
of  the  Baptist  did  not  much  affect  me.  I 
thought  the  example  of  our  Lord  pleaded  as 
much  ior  circumcision  as  for  baptism.  I ques- 
tion whether  I,  a poor  sinner,  had  any  call  to 
imitate  him  in  those  things  which  it  became 
him  as  our  Surety  to  perform,  in  order  to  ful- 
fil all  righteousness.  It  appeared  to  me  that 
John’s  baptism  and  the  Christian  baptism  were 
different;  and  though  the  Baptists  assured 
me  that  they  were  the  same,  I was  not  con- 
vinced. I thought  they  were  plainly  distin- 
guished in  Acts  xix.  2 — 5.  And  I was  griev- 
ed by  the  attempts  of  some  wise  and  good  men 
to  wrest  a sense  from  that  passage,  so  contrary 
to  its  plain  and  obvious  meaning,  merely  to 
support  a favourite  scheme.  And  as  the 
form  of  Christian  baptism  is  laid  down  in 
express  words,  Matt,  xxviii.  19,  I must 
continue  to  think  it  different  from  the  bap- 
ti-m  of  John,  till  lean  have  sufficient  proof 
that  John  baptized  our  Saviour  in  the  name 
of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

I found  likewise  that  the  Baptists,  though 
unanimous  against  us,  and  even  against  those 
who  in  every  point  but  one  agree  with  them, 
were  divided  among  themselves.  Some  of 
them,  while  they  practise  what  they  think  a 
duty,  do  not  so  peremptorily  prescribe  it  to 
others,  as  to  make  it  an  indispensible  term  of 
communion  ; but  they  will  receive  a person 
as  a church-member  whom  they  judge  to  be 
sound  in  the  faith,  and  of  a good  conversation, 
though  they  consider  him,  in  strictness  of 
speech,  as  unbaptized.  But  others  are  much 
hurt  by  this  concession,  and  bear  testimony 
against  it  as  unscriptural  and  wrong.  Their 
views  are  so  strict  that  if  they  certainly  knew 
that  a person  who  wished  to  communicate 
with  them  was  the  most  eminent  Christian  in 
the  land,  unless  he  was  likewise  baptized  in 
their  manner,  they  could  not,  they  durst  not 
admit  him  to  the  Lord’s  table,  to  eat  of  that 
bread  and  to  drink  of  that  cup  which  is  by  his 
command  and  appointment,  the  privilege  and 
portion  of  all  believers.  This  difference  of 
judgment  between  them  has  been  thought  so 
important,  that  the  reasons  for  and  against, 
and  their  mutual  censures  of  each  other,  have 
been  laid  before  the  public,  by  good  men  on 
each  side  of  the  question. 

Now,  my  dear  friend,  upon  this  state  of  the 
case,  what  could  I do  1 I had  reviewed  and 


[let.  III. 

compared  the  sentiments  of  a number  of  re- 
spectable writers  and  ministers  of  different 
names.  In  essentials  I agreed  with  them  all. 
and  in  circumstantials  I differed  no  more  from 
any  of  them,  then  they  differed  among  them- 
selves. They  all  confessed  they  were  fallible, 
yet  they  all  decided  with  an  air  of  infallibility  : 
for  they  all  in  their  'turns  expected  me  to 
unite  with  them,  if  I had  any  regard  to  the 
authority  and  honour  of  the  Lord  Jesus  as 
Head  of  the  church.  But  the  very  consi- 
deration they  proposed  restrained  me  from 
uniting  with  any  of  them.  For  I cannot 
think  that  I should  honour  the  headship  and 
kingly  office  of  Christ,  by  acknowledging  him 
as  the  Head  of  a party  and  subdivision  of  his 
people  to  the  exclusion  of  the  rest.  Every 
party  uses  fair  sounding  words  of  liberty ; but 
when  an  explanation  is  made,  it  amounts  to 
little  more  than  this — that  they  will  give  me 
liberty  to  think  as  they  think,  and  to  act  as 
they  act ; which  to  me,  who  claim  the  same 
right  of  thinking  for  myself  and  of  acting  ac- 
cording to  the  dictates  of  my  own  conscience, 
is  no  liberty  at  all.  I therefore  came  to  such 
conclusions  as  these — that  I would  love  them 
all — that  I would  hold  a friendly  intercourse 
with  them  all,  so  far  as  they  should  providen- 
tially come  in  my  way  ; but  that  I would 
stand  fast  in  the  liberty  with  which  Christ  had 
made  me  free,  and  call  none  of  them  master 
— in  fine,  that  if  others  sought  to  honour  him 
by  laying  a great  stress  on  matters  of  doubtful 
disputation,  my  way  of  honouring  him  should 
be  by  endeavouring  to  show  that  his  kingdom 
is  not  of  this  world,  nor  consists  in  meats  and 
drinks,  in  pleading  for  forms  and  parties,  but 
in  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost ; and  that  neither  circumcision  is  any 
thing,  nor  uncircumcision,  but  a new  creature, 
and  the  faith  which  worketh  by  love.  There 
was  a time  when  I could  have  joined  with 
the  Dissenters,  if  the  providence  of  God  had 
opened  my  way  to  them  ; but  farther  experi- 
ence and  observation  have  so  far  altered 
my  judgment,  that  had  I my  choice  to  make 
again,  it  seems  to  me,  that  I could  no  more 
officiate  as  a minister  among  any  people  who 
insist  upon  other  terms  of  communion  than 
those  which  our  Lord  has  appointed,  faith  and 
holiness,  than  I could  subscribe  to  the  dogmas 
of  the  Council  of  Trent.  My  regard  to  his 
honour  will  not  allow  me  to  exclude  any 
whom  I believe  he  has  been  pleased  to  receive. 
Thus  much  for  the  first  reason  of  my  confor- 
mity. Yet  in  justice  to  the  non-conformists 
I must  add,  that  if  I wish  to  avail  myself  of 
the  sanction  of  great  names,  I could  mention 
some  among  them,  who,  if  they  were  now 
living,  I am  persuaded  would  not  blame  me 
for  conforming,  though  they  could  not  in 
conscience  do  it  themselves.  Particularly  I 
judge  thus  (from  many  of  his  writings)  of  the 
truly  great  Mr.  Howe,  whose  praise  is  in  aL 
the  churches.  I am  sincerely  yours,  &c 


LET.  IV.] 


APOLOGIA. 


455 


LETTER  IV. 

My  Dear  Friend  and  Brother, — I have 
given  you  the  chief  reason  why  I am  not  a 
Dissenter;  and  it  appears  to  me  a sufficient 
one,  though  I could  assign  no  other.  I 
have,  however,  two  or  three  more  to  offer 
you,  but  I hope  to  comprise  them  all  within 
the  compass  of  this  letter.  For  indeed  I be- 
gin to  be  weary  of  a subject  which  is  not  quite 
suitable  to  my  taste  and  inclination.  But  it 
seems  not  unseasonable,  and  I hope  may  not 
be  unuseful  to  show  you  that  the  preference 
I have  given  to  the  Church  of  England,  is 
not  the  effect  either  of  inconsideration  or 
prejudice. 

My  second  reason  for  not  being  a Dissen- 
ter is,  Because  I highly  value  the  right  of 
private  judgment,  and  my  liberty  as  a man 
and  as  a Christian.  Here  again  I think  we 
are  agreed  in  principle.  You  rejoice  in  the 
name  of  a Protestant  Dissenter,  as  setting  you 
free  from  the  shackles  and  impositions  of  men ; 
and  probably  think  of  me  and  my  brethren  in 
the  Establishment,  with  a degree  of  friendly 
pity ; taking  it  for  granted,  that  the  engage- 
ments we  are  under  hold  us  in  a painful  state 
of  subjection  and  bondage,  from  which  you 
charitably  wish  to  see  us  released. 

We  are  obliged  to  persons  of  your  candid 
disposition  for  your  sympathy  and  good 
wishes ; and  we  repay  you  in  kind.  As  we 
cannot  think  exactly  alike,  this  seems  the  best 
method  we  can  take.  Harsh  censures  and 
angry  disputations  would  be  unbecoming  our 
profession,  and  hurtful  to  our  spirits;  but  it 
can  do  us  no  harm  to  pity  and  pray  for  each 
other.  Perhaps  you  are  ready  to  say,  “You 
would  surely  pity  me  if  you  knew  all  my  in- 
ward and  outward  trials ; but  you  need  not 
pity  me  for  being  a Dissenter,  because  I ac- 
count it  my  great  privilege.”  1 may  say  the 
same,  with  the  alteration  of  one  word.  If 
you  knew  the  evils  which  I feel  within,  and 
the  snares  and  difficulties  which  beset  me 
from  without,  you  would  pity  me  indeed. 
But  that  I exercise  my  ministry  in  the  Church 
of  England,  appears  to  me,  as  things  stand, 
to  be  rather  a subject  for  congratulation  than 
compassion.  I cannot  become  a Dissenter 
till  I am  weary  of  my  liberty.  If  you  please 
we  will  compare  notes  upon  this  head. 

Let  me  first  speak  of  the  restraints  we  are 
under.  I am  bound,  by  my  subscription,  to 
the  forms  and  rubric  of  the  Common  Prayer; 
but  my  subscription  was  really  ex  animo.  I 
approve  the  service,  and  therefore  it  is  no 
burden  to  me  to  use  it.  1 do  not  consider  it 
as  faultless,  nor  can  I subscribe  to  any  book 
of  human  composition  in  the  same  absolute 
manner  as  I would  to  the  Bible.  But  by  as- 
senting to  our  church-ritual  I give  up  less  of 
my  own  private  judgment  for  the  sake  of 
peace,  than  I should  by  espousing  the  rules 


and  practices  of  any  Dissenting  churches  I am 
acquainted  with.  Again,  having  accepted  a de- 
signation to  the  cure  of  souls,  my  public  minis- 
try is  thereby  confined  to  parish  churches, 
and  I cannot,  consistently  with  what  I 
conceive  to  be  the  import  of  my  voluntary 
engagements,  preach  at  random,  and  in  all 
places  without  reserve.  But  this  is  no  re- 
straint upon  my  conscience.  While  I have 
the  example  of  our  Lord  and  his  apostles  in 
my  view,  I cannot  doubt  the  lawfulness  of 
preaching  on  mountains  or  plains,  in  market- 
places, or  on  the  sea-shore.  But  things  in 
themselves  lawful  are  not  always,  nor  to  all 
persons  expedient.  I approve  of  parochial 
order.  I interfere  not  with  the  conduct  of 
others;  but  believe  it  is,  upon  the  whole, 
best  for  me  to  confine  myself  to  the  duties  of 
my  own  charge,  and  to  such  opportunities  of 
preaching  in  parochial  pulpits  as  may  occa- 
sionally offer.  Between  the  one  and  the 
other  I have  sufficient  employment.  And 
though  the  Bishop  who  ordained  me  laid  me 
under  no  restrictions,  I would  not  have  ap- 
plied to  him  for  ordination,  if  I had  not  been 
previously  determined  to  submit  to  his  au- 
thority and  to  the  rules  of  the  church.  I 
thought,  and  still  think  it  my  duty  to  preserve 
a consistency  of  character ; for  I was  not 
ordained  to  be  an  apostle  or  evangelist,  to 
spread  the  gospel  throughout  a kingdom,  but 
to  take  care  of  the  particular  flock  committed 
to  my  charge.  But  I need  net  enlarge  upon 
this  point,  as  I think  the  Dissenters  do  not  in 
general  by  their  practice  countenance  what 
we  call  irregularity,  but  are  almost  as  seldom 
seen  preaching  in  the  fields,  or  by  the  way- 
sides,  as  the  most  regular  of  our  clergy; 
though  they  cannot  plead  our  reasons  for  not 
doing  it,  and  are  certainly  not  restrained 
either  by  the  precepts  or  precedents  of  the 
New  Testament. 

Nor  am  I under  any  disagreeable  constraint 
from  my  superiors  in  the  church.  The  Arch- 
deacon in  his  district,  and  the  Bishop  in  his 
diocese, hold  their  respective  visitations;  the 
former  annually,  the  latter  once  in  three 
years.  At  these  visitations  the  clergy  (espe- 
cially in  the  country)  are  expected  to  attend. 
On  these  occasions  we  answer  to  our  names, 
hear  a sermon  or  a charge,  and  usually  dine 
together.  There  is  nothing  painful  to  me  in 
paying  these  tokens  of  respect  to  my  acknow- 
ledged superiors,  and  receiving  marks  of 
civility  from  them.  At  all  other  times,  while 
we  keep  within  the  limits  which  I have  al- 
ready told  you,  I subscribed  and  consented 
to  ex  animo , we  scarcely  know,  at  least  we 
do  not  feel  that  we  have  any  superiors.  So 
far  as  I am  concerned,  I have  reason  to  ac- 
knowledge that  the  administration  of  our 
church-government  is  gentle  and  liberal.  I 
have  from  the  first  preached  my  sentiments 
with  the  greatest  freedom.  I always  acted  in 
the  parishes  which  I have  served,  according 


456 


APOLOGIA. 


to  my  own  judgment : and  I have  done  some 
things  which  have  not  the  sanction  of  general 
custom,  but  I never  met  with  the  smallest 
check,  interference,  or  mark  of  displeasure 
from  any  of  my  superiors  in  the  church,  to 
this  hour.  Such  are  my  restraints,  and  such 
is  my  liberty.  I am  bound  by  no  regulations 
but  what  I myself  approve  ; and  within  these 
boundaries  I do  as  I please,  no  man  forbidding 
or  controlling  me. 

Indeed  I have  often  thought  that  I have  as 
good  a right  to  the  name  of  Independent  as 
yourself.  Neither  you  nor  I would  assume 
it  to  the  prejudice  of  our  dependence  upon 
our  Lord  and  Saviour ; and,  with  respect  to 
the  influence  of  men,  perhaps  we  have  the 
advantage  of  you.  I think  we  are  more  de- 
pendent of  our  brethren,  and  more  indepen- 
dent of  our  people. 

Though  according  to  your  plan  every  par- 
ticular church  is  called  independent,  as  pos- 
sessing and  exercising  every  kind  of  church 
power  within  itself,  and  not  subjeet  to  the 
control  of  any  other  Christian  society ; yet, 
considering  you  as  a body,  or  (according  to 
the  modern  phrase)  an  interest,  there  is  a 
kind  of  union  and  association  among  your 
ministers,  which  has  a greater  effect  than 
some  people  are  aware  off  and  which  I ap- 
prehend may  in  some  instances  be  rather 
unfriendly  to  the  liberty  you  so  highly  prize. 
Some  of  your  ministers,  from  their  situation 
or  connection  have  more  influence  than 
others.  They  have  opportunities  of  assist- 
ing poorer  ministers,  and  are,  I suppose,  in 
many  cases,  the  judges  whether  they  shall 
be  assisted  or  not,  and  how  far.  They  who 
best  know  human  nature,  are  best  qualified 
to  judge  how  far  the  professed  independence 
of  your  churches  may  be  abated  by  this  in- 
fluence of  connection ; and  whether  the 
weight  of  a board  of  ministers  may  not  be 
occasionally  felt  by  those  who  pity  us  for 
being  subordinate  to  a bench  of  Bishops.  I 
own,  I have  upon  some  occasions  been  led  to 
compare  your  ministers  to  a company  of  sol- 
diers in  their  exercise,  where  every  one 
must  move  in  a prescribed  line,  keep  the 
same  pace,  and  make  the  like  motions  with 
the  rest,  on  pain  of  being  treated  as  refractory. 
Ministers  in  the  establishment  know  nothing 
of  these  restraints.  We  are  connected  in 
love,  but  not  upon  system.  We  profess  the 
same  leading  principles  and  aims,  but  each 
one  acts  singly  and  individually  for  himself. 

I think  we  are  likewise  more  independent 
of  our  people.  The  constitution  of  your 
churches,  which  you  suppose  the  only  one 
agreeable  to  the  scripture,  appears  to  me 
faulty,  in  giving  a greater  power  to  the  peo- 
ple fehan  the  scripture  authorizes.  There  is 
loubtless  a sense  in  which  ministers  are  not 
only  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  but,  for  his 
sake,  the  servants  of  the  churches ; but  it  is 
a service  which  implies  rule,  and  is  entitled 


[let.  . 7 

j to  respect.  Thus  the  apostle  says,  “ Obey 
j them  that  have  rule  over  you.”  Their  office 
j is  that  of  a steward,  who  is  neither  to  lord  it 
1 over  the  household,  nor  to  be  entirely  under 
subjection  to  it,  but  to  superintend  and  pro- 
vide for  the  family.  Scriptural  regulations 
are  wisely  and  graciously  adapted  to  our 
state  of  infirmity ; but  I think  the  power 
which  the  people  with  you  claim,  and  attempt 
to  exercise,  is  not  so.  Many  of  them,  though 
truly  gracious  persons,  may,  notwithstand- 
ing, from  their  situation  in  life,  their  want  of 
education,  and  the  narrowness  of  their  views, 
be  very  incapable  of  government ; yet  when 
a number  of  such  are  associated  according  to 
your  plan,  under  the  honourable  title  of  a 
Church  of  Christ,  they  acquire  a great  im- 
portance. Almost  every  individual  conceives 
himself  qualified  to  judge  and  to  guide  the 
minister;  to  sift  and  scrutinize  his  expres- 
sions, and  to  tell  him  how  and  what  he  ought 
to  preach.  But  the  poorer  part  of  your  flocks 
are  not  always  the  most  troublesome.  The 
rich  can  contribute  most  to  the  minister’s 
support,  who  is  often  entirely  dependent  up- 
on his  people  for  a maintenance  ; their  riches 
likewise  give  them  some  additional  weight 
and  influence  in  the  church  ; and  the  officers, 
whom  you  call  the  Deacons,  are  usually  cho- 
sen from  among  the  more  wealthy.  But  it 
is  not  always  found  that  the  most  wealthy 
church  members  are  the  most  eminent,  either 
for  grace  or  wisdom.  We  may  be  rather 
sure  that  riches,  if  the  possessors  are  not 
proportionably  humble  and  spiritual,  have  a 
direct  tendency  to  nourish  the  worms  of  self- 
conceit  and  self-will.  Such  persons  expect 
to  be  consulted,  and  that  their  judgment 
shall  be  followed.  The  preaching  must  be 
suited  to  their  taste  and  sentiment  ; and  if 
any  thing  is  either  enforced  or  censured 
which  bears  hard  upon  their  conduct,  they 
think  themselves  ill-treated.  Although  a 
faithful  minister,  in  his  better  hours,  disdains 
the  thought  of  complying  with  the  caprice  of 
his  hearers,  or  conniving  at  their  faults,  yet 
human  nature  is  weak,  and  it  must  be  al- 
lowed, that  in  such  circumstances,  he  stands 
in  a state  of  temptation.  And  if  he  has 
grace  to  maintain  his  integrity,  yet  it  is 
painful  and  difficult  to  be  obliged  frequently 
to  displease  those  on  whom  we  depend,  and 
who  in  some  other  respects  may  be  our  best 
friends  and  benefactors.  I can  truly  say, 
that  my  heart  has  been  grieved  for  the  oppo- 
sition, neglect,  and  unkindness,  which  some 
valuable  men  among  you  have  to  my  know- 
ledge met  with,  from  those  who  ought  to 
have  esteemed  them  very  highly  for  their 
work’s  sake.  The  effects  of  this  supreme 
power  lodged  in  the  people,  and  of  the  un- 
sanctified spirit  in  which  it  has  been  exer- 
cised, have  been  often  visible  in  the  divisions 
and  subdivisions  which  have  crumbled  large 
societies  into  separate  handfuls,  if  I may  so 


APOLOGIA. 


457 


LET.  IV.] 

speak.  And  to  this  I am  afraid,  rather  than 
to  the  spread  of  a work  of  grace,  may  be  as- 
cribed, in  many  instances,  the  great  increase 
of  the  number  of  your  churches  of  late  years. 
Now,  in  the  Establishment,  we  know  but 
little  of  these  difficulties : we  are  not  so 
much  at  the  mercy  of  our  hearers  for  our 
subsistence ; and  though  we  probably  preach 
to  some  who  are  wiser  and  better,  as  well  as 
richer  than  ourselves,  we  have  no  hearers 
who  assume  a right  to  direct  us,  or  whom 
we  should  stand  in  fear  of,  if  they  did.  For 
my  own  part,  I wish  to  have  a spirit  willing 
to  profit  by  a hint,  even  from  a child,  and  to 
pay  attention  to  the  advice  of  any  person 
who  speaks  to  me  in  love,  and  in  a right 
temper.  But  humble  loving  Christians  are 
more  disposed  to  find  fault  with  themselves 
than  with  their  minister,  and  to  receive  in- 
struction than  to  offer  it.  But  should  a con- 
formist to  the  world,  or  a zealot  for  a party, 
expect  me  to  accommodate  my  preaching  to 
his  practice,  or  to  his  Shibboleth,  I could  give 
him  an  answer  without  being  afraid  of  con- 
sequences. 

I may  add,  that  I apprehend  we  have  more 
liberty  with  respect  to  our  pulpits.  At  least 
I remember  to  have  heard  sermons  from  some 
of  your  pulpits,  the  strain  of  which  has  been 
so  very  different  from  the  professed  senti- 
ments of  the  proper  pastor  of  the  church,  that 
I have  thought  to  myself,  How  came  this  mi- 
nister to  preach  in  this  place  J Upon  inquiry 
I have  found  at  one  time,  that  the  gentleman 
belonged  to  the  connexion ; at  another,  that 
he  was  asked  to  preach  at  the  desire  of  a 
principal  person  in  the  church  or  congrega- 
tion, who  it  seems  approved  him,  though  I 
was  persuaded  the  pastor  did  not. 

I esteem  it  likewise  a branch  of  my  Chris- 
tian liberty,  that  I can  hear  whom  I please, 
and  form  what  acquaintance  1 please,  among 
the  various  denominations  of  Christians,  with- 
out being  called  to  account  for  it.  I hope 
the  Dissenters  are  likewise  growing  more 
into  this  liberty.  However,  as  I know  some 
among  your  people  who  would  willingly  hear 
us  occasionally,  were  they  not  afraid  of  their 
ministers;  so  I know  some  of  your  ministers 
who  would  be  willing  to  hear  us,  but  do  not, 
because  they  are  afraid  of  their  people. 

Thus  much  (though  more  might  be  said) 
by  way  of  comparing  our  advantages  in  point 
of  liberty.  I am  well  pleased  with  my  lot ; 
if  you  are  equally  pleased  with  yours,  I am 
glad  of  it.  I write  only  on  the  defensive,  I 
neither  expect  nor  wish  to  alter  your  views. 
Enjoy  your  liberty ; only  allow  me  to  enjoy 
and  be  thankful  for  mine. 

I have  now  acquainted  you  with  my  two 
principal  reasons  lor  not  being  a Dissenter. 
The  first  concerned  my  conscience.  For 
though  my  regard  to  the  authority  of  the 
great  Lord  and  Lawgiver  of  the  church  did 
not  directly  oblige  me  to  unite  with  the  Es- 
Vol.  II.  3 M 


tablishment,  it  discouraged  me  from  uniting 
with  any  of  the  parties,  who  pretended  an 
exclusive  right  from  him  to  enforce  their  own 
particular  church-forms.  When  conscience 
did  not  interfere,  my  second  reason  though 
rather  of  a prudential  kind,  was  of  consider- 
able weight  with  me.  I loved  liberty,  and 
therefore  gave  a preference  to  the  Church  of 
England,  believing  I might  in  that  situation 
exercise  my  ministry  with  the  most  freedom. 
I have  made  the  experiment,  and  have  no 
reason  to  repent  of  it.  These  points  being 
cleared,  my  way  was  open  to  attend  to  ano- 
ther consideration  which  had  a farther  in- 
fluence in  determining  my  mind.  This,  I 
am  about  to  offer  to  you  as  a third  reason  for 
my  being  where  I am — The  probability  of 
greater  usefulness.  This  probability,  as  to 
myself,  and  to  others  who  can  conform  with 
a good  conscience,  seemed  to  lie  on  the  side 
of  the  Establishment  upon  several  accounts 

1.  Great  multitudes  in  this  Christian  na- 
tion (so  called)  are  grossly  ignorant  of  the 
first  principles  of  religion,  inattentive  to  the 
worth  and  welfare  of  their  souls,  and  la- 
mentably destitute  of  the  proper  means  of 
instruction.  I hoped  for  opportunities  in  the 
Establishment  of  preaching  to  many  who 
could  not  hear  the  Dissenters.  The  children 
of  God,  known  to  himself,  are  scattered 
abroad  far  and  wide.  And  as  faith  more 
usually  comes  by  hearing,  I admire  his  con- 
descension and  goodness  in  permitting  his 
ministers  to  think  differently  on  some  exter- 
nal points,  that  they  may  with  an  upright 
heart  serve  him  in  the  different  departments 
of  his  vineyard.  They  who  are  Dissenters 
upon  principle,  would  act  against  their  judg- 
ments and  consciences,  were  they  to  conform 
for  the  sake  of  usefulness.  I am  well  con- 
tent that  they  should  remain  as  they  are. 
But  it  has  proved  a mercy  to  thousands,  that 
all  w7ho  are  called  and  qualified  to  preach  the 
gospel,  are  not  like-minded  in  this  respect. 

2.  The  spirit  of  bigotry  and  prejudice  is 
too  prevalent  on  all  sides.  As  there  are  Dis- 
senters who  would  think  it  sinful  to  be  seen 
within  the  walls  of  a church,  so  there  are 
other  persons  who  place  a principal  part  of 
their  religion  in  an  ignorant  attachment  to 
our  forms,  and  could  not  easily  be  prevailed 
upon  to  enter  within  the  doors  of  a meeting- 
house. But  their  prepossession  in  favour  of 
our  churches  gives  the  minister  who  can  con- 
scientiously meet  them  there  a great  advan- 
tage ad  hominem , by  confirming  the  truths 
of  the  gospel  (which  when  first  declared  are 
generally  disliked  and  opposed)  from  the 
tenor  of  our  liturgy  and  Articles,  to  which 
they  profess  some  regard.  A large  part  of 
our  auditories,  especially  in  places  where  the 
gospel  is  considered  as  a novelty,  consists  of 
persons  of  this  description.  But  the  Lord 
has  been  pleased  in  very  many  instances  to 
honour  our  service  amongst  them  with  his 


458 


APOLOGIA. 


blessing’.  By  the  power  of  his  spirit  the 
truth  is  made  manifest  to  their  hearts,  they 
are  turned  from  darkness  to  light,' and  from 
the  bondage  of  sin,  to  serve  the  living  God. 
Then  their  former  prejudices  subside ; inso- 
much that  many,  who  once  despised  and 
hated  the  Dissenters,  have  been  afterwards 
persuaded  to  join  with  them.  The  Dissent- 
ing interest  would  probably  have  been  much 
weaker  than  it  is  at  present,  if  it  had  not 
been  strengthened  by  the  accession  of  many 
church-members,  and  more  than  a few  of 
your  teachers  and  pastors,  who  had  no  incli- 
nation to  hear  your  ministers,  until  they  were 
first  awakened  under  ours.  The  words  of 
our  Lord  may  in  this  sense  be  applied  to 
many  of  your  churches : “ Other  men  la- 
boured, and  ye  have  entered  into  the  fruits 
of  their  labours.”  The  aim  of  my  ministry, 
I trust,  is  not  to  promote  the  interests  of  a 
party,  but  to  win  souls  to  Christ.  We  have, 
however,  the  comfort  to  find,  that  a number 
are  not  only  called,  but  edified  and  establish- 
ed by  the  blessing  of  God  on  our  preaching ; 
and  that  many  of  the  most  judicious  and  spi- 
ritual of  our  people,  are  proof  against  the  in- 
sinuations which  prevail  on  some  to  forsake 
the  Church  of  England  in  hopes  of  enjoying 
a purer  and  more  acceptable  worship  among 
the  Dissenters.  As  to  those  who  do  leave 
us,  if  they  are  truly  benefited,  if  they  really 
grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our 
Lord,  in  humility,  meekness,  benevolence, 
and  (leadness  to  the  world,  more  among  you, 
than  they  would  have  done  amongst  us,  I can 
sincerely  rejoice.  But  I think  your  brethren 
have  no  just  reason  to  be  either  displeased  or 
sorry,  that  God  has  raised  up  ministers  to 
preach  to  thousands  to  whom  they  would 
never  have  had  access. 

3.  I saw  likewise,  that  the  Lord  had  been 
pleased  of  late  years  to  return  by  the  power 
of  his  Spirit  to  the  Church  of  England,  which 
I believe  many  Dissenters  thought  he  had  so 
utterly  forsaken  that  he  would  return  no 
more.  This  leads  me  to  a tender  point,  and 
I wish  to  touch  upon  it  with  great  tenderness. 
We  have  none  of  us  any  thing  to  boast  of. 
Our  warmest  exertions  in  the  service  of  such 
a Master  are  far  too  cold  ; and  our  greatest 
success  falls  very  short  of  what  we  ought  to 
pray  for.  We  preach  no  other  gospel  than 
you  do.  We  love  and  respect  many  of  your 
ministers  for  their  knowledge,  piety,  and  ex- 
emplary conversation.  But  I believe  you 
will  allow,  that  the  general  state  of  your 
churches  at  present,  is  not  so  lively  and  flour- 
ishing as  it  was  in  the  days  of  the  old  non- 
conformists. I believe  the  best  of  your  peo- 
ple were  long  ago  sensible  of  a decline,  that 
they  sincerely  lamented  it,  and  earnestly 
prayed  for  a revival.  Their  prayers  were  at 
length  answered,  but  not  in  the  way  they  ex- 
pected. A great  and  spreading  revival  of 
religion  took  place,  but  the  instruments  were 


[let.  IV. 

not  Dissenters.  At  the  time  when  I was  or 
dained,  there  was  a considerable  number  of 
regular  parochial  ministers  who  preached  the 
doctrines  of  the  Reformation.  The  number 
has  been  greatly  increased  since,  and  is  still 
increasing.  I could  not  but  judge,  that  the 
Lord’s  presence  with  his  word  in  awakening 
sinners,  and  in  applying  it  with  power  to  the 
heart,  was  more  evident  and  striking  on  this 
side,  than  on  yours.  Not  because  we  are 
better  than  you  ; but  because  the  work  with 
us  is  rather  new,  whereas  amongst  you  it  is 
of  an  older  date.  The  history  of  the  Church 
of  God  and  of  human  nature  in  past  ages, 
teaches  us  to  expect  that  revivals  of  religion 
will  seldom  stand  long  at  their  primitive 
height,  but  will  gradually  subside  and  degen- 
erate, till  things  return  in  a course  of  time 
nearly  to  their  former  state ; though  a name, 
perhaps  first  imposed  as  a stigma  by  the 
world,  and  a form  which  owed  all  its  value  to 
the  spirit  that  once  enlivened  it,  may  still 
remain.  I wish  I could  affirm  that  none  who 
were  otherwise  competent  judges  of  a revi- 
val, have  been  prevented  by  their  preposses- 
sions from  rejoicing  in  what  God  has  wrought 
among  us.  But  I fear  it  has  been  otherwise, 
and  that  a spirit  of  prejudice  and  party  dis- 
covered itself  upon  the  occasion,  which 
proved  hurtful  to  some  good  men.  When  I 
think  of  the  abilities  and  characters  of  some 
Dissenting  ministers,  I cannot  but  ascribe 
the  little  visible  success  they  meet  with,  in 
some  measure,  to  their  unwillingness  to  ac- 
knowledge a work  of  God  in  which  they 
themselves  were  not  employed.  Their  ex- 
ceptions were  not  wholly  groundless : A 
lively  zeal  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  good 
of  souls,  in  persons  whose  judgments  were 
not  fully  ripened  by  observation  and  expe- 
rience, did  not  secure  them  from  incidental 
mistakes  and  blemishes.  These  were  easily 
seen  and  eagerly  noticed.  A desire  of  being 
free  from  the  least  suspicion  of  giving  coun- 
tenance to  the  unguarded,  though  well  meant 
sallies  of  active  spirits,  seems  to  have  led 
some  of  your  ministers  into  a contrary  ex- 
treme; and  their  public  discourses,  though 
solid  and  judicious  compositions,  lost  that 
animation  in  delivery,  which  is  in  some  de- 
gree necessary  to  engage  attention,  and  to 
keep  up  an  auditory.  Thus,  while  preachers 
much  inferior  to  them  for  learning  and  gene- 
ral knowledge  in  divinity  have  had  crowded 
assemblies,  the  pleasure  w ith  which  I have 
heard  some  of  your  most  eminent  ministers, 
has  been  often  abated  by  observing  that  the 
number  of  the  hearers  has  been  much  smaller 
than  the  number  of  pews  in  the  place.  I 
must  therefore  confess  that  one  consideration 
which  deterred  me  from  joining  the  Dissen- 
ters was,  a fear  lest  the  love  of  peace,  and  a 
temper  rather  compliant,  might  insensibly 
betray  me  into  an  over  cautious  spirit,  damp 
my  zeal,  or  divert  it  into  a wrong  channel, 


APOLOGIA. 


459 


LET.  IV.] 

and  thereby  prevent  the  success  at  which  I 
aimed.  I rather  chose  to  unite  with  those 
people  whom  I thought  the  most  likely  to 
maintain  and  encourage  what  little  fervour  I 
possessed;  and  where  I saw  the  most  evident 
tokens  of  a power  from  on  high  accompany- 
ing the  public  ministrations.  And  as  I had 
my  reasons  likewise  for  not  being  an  Itine- 
rant, a regular  and  stated  charge  in  the  Es- 
tablished church  engaged  my  preference. 

My  fourth  reason  (the  last  I think  it  ne- 
cessary to  mention)  being  rather  a point  of 
experience,  must  depend  chiefly  upon  my 
own  testimony,  and  therefore  I need  not  en- 
large much  upon  it.  Superadded,  however, 
to  those  which  I have  already  stated,  it  great- 
ly contributed  to  give  full  satisfaction  to  my 
mind : I mean,  the  proofs  I had,  that  the 
IiOrd,  by  the  openings  and  leadings  of  his 
providence,  pointed  out  to  me  the  situation 
in  which  I was  to  serve  him.  The  first  ex- 
plicit notice  I gave  of  my  desire  to  enter  the 
ministry,  was  to  an  intimate  friend  in  your 
denomination,  nearly  six  years  before  I was 
ordained.  In  the  course  of  this  interval  I 
made,  and  I received  a variety  of  applica- 
tions and  proposals;  but  every  thing  failed, 
and  every  door  by  which  I sought  admission 
remained  shut  against  me.  I have  already 
observed,  that  this  state  of  suspense  gave 
me  leisure  to  examine  the  subject  of  church 
government  more  closely,  and  that  the  re- 
sult of  my  disquisitions  was  the  gradual,  and 
at  length  the  complete  removal  of  the  diffi- 
culties and  exceptions  I had  at  first  hastily 
imbibed  against  the  Establishment.  At  length 
the  Lord’s  time  came;  then  obstacles  appa- 
rently unsurmountable  suddenly  and  unex- 
pectedly disappeared.  Then  I learnt  the 
reason  of  former  disappointments.  My  way 
had  been  mercifully  hedged  up  with  thorns, 
to  prevent  me  taking  a wrong  course,  and  to 
keep  me  waiting  until  the  place  and  service 
of  his  own  appointment  were  prepared  and 
ready  for  me.  The  coincidence  of  many  cir- 
cumstances which  I cannot  explain  to  ano- 
ther, gave  me  a very  comfortable  sense  of 
the  Lord’s  guidance.  I received  ordination 
in  the  Church  of  England  with  a *Kneovoei*, 
with  wind  and  tide  (if  I may  so  speak)  in 
my  favour,  with  the  most  pleasing  disposition 
of  outward  events,  and  the  most  assured  per- 
suasion in  my  own  mind,  that  I was  follow- 
ing the  call,  and  doing  the  will  of  God ; of 
which  I had  at  that  time  little  more  doubt 
than  if  an  angel  had  been  sent  from  hea- 
ven to  tell  me  so.  Nor  have  I hesitated 
upon  the  point  a single  hour  from  that  day  to 
this. 

I think  you  will  not  be  sorry  to  find  that 
I am  drawing  towards  a close.  Indeed  I 
should  be  ashamed  to  have  written  so  much 


merely  on  my  own  account.  I began  this 
ideal  correspondence  with  you  about  seven 
years  ago.  More  than  the  one  half  of  it  was 
then  written  in  a few7  weeks ; but  1 felt  a 
reluctance  to  proceed,  because  it  seemed  to 
be  so  much  my  own  affair;  but  I have  fre- 
quently thought  since,  that  something  upon 
the  subject,  written  in  a moderate  and  friend- 
ly spirit  (which  it  has  been  my  prayer  and 
endeavour  to  preserve)  might,  by  the  Lord’s 
blessing,  be  a mean  of  promoting  candour 
and  benevolence  among  those,  who,  whatever 
else  they  differ  in,  have  one  Lord,  one  faith, 
one  hope.  A desire  of  being  instrumental 
in  so  good  a work,  has  at  length  prevailed  on 
me,  to  revise  what  I had  begun,  to  add  what 
I thought  farther  necessary  for  completing  my 
design,  and  to  send  it  abroad.  I cannot  give 
you  particular  reasons  why  I have  not  done 
it  sooner,  or  why  I do  it  now.  Our  times, 
plans,  and  purposes  are  under  a superior 
guidance  and  direction,  which  it  is  our  duty 
and  our  privilege  always  to  acknowledge, 
though  we  cannot  always  distinctly  discern 
it.  I shall  be  happy  if  the  event  shall  prove 
that  I have  been  led  to  choose  the  fittest  time 
and  to  offer  a word  in  season.  They  who 
love  and  preach  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in 
sincerity,  whatever  name  they  bear  among 
men,  and  whatever  body  of  people  they  are 
united  to,  are  engaged  in  one  common  cause; 
they  are  opposed  by  the  same  enemies;  their 
severest  conflicts  and  their  sweetest  comforts 
are  derived  from  the  same  sources;  and  they 
will  ere  long  meet  in  the  same  kingdom  of 
glory,  and  join  in  the  same  songs  of  eternal 
praise,  to  him  who  sitteth  upon  the  throne, 
and  to  him  who  redeemed  us  to  God  by  his 
blood.  How  desirable  then  is  it,  that  while 
we  live  here,  we  should  be  at  peace  amongst 
ourselves,  and  live  in  the  spirit  of  that  love 
(the  only  infallible  mark  of  our  being  truly 
the  servants  of  Christ)  which  seeketh  not 
its  own,  is  not  easily  provoked,  thinketh  no 
evil,  but  beareth,  hopeth  and  believeth  all 
things. 

As  what  I write  to  you  is  to  appear  in 
print,  I think  it  proper  to  add,  for  my  own 
sake,  that  my  whole  intention  will  be  fulfilled 
by  the  publication.  I do  not  mean  to  enter 
into  controversy ; and  therefore  if  these  let- 
ters, contrary  to  my  wish,  should  raise  me 
an  opponent,  and  give  occasion  to  an  answer, 
I shall  not  think  myself  bound  to  reply,  un- 
less I could  be  convicted  of  such  a wilful  mis- 
representation, as  would  render  it  my  duty 
to  ask  pardon  of  God,  and  of  the  Public. 

I commend  you  and  yours  to  the  blessing 
of  our  Lord,  and  remain, 

Your  affectionate  friend. 


March  1,  1784. 


A PLAN 


OF 

ACADEMICAL  PREPARATION  FOR  THE  MINISTRY, 

IN  A 


LETTER  TO  A FRIEND. 


Quin  et  piorum  mentibus  mysteria, 

Conteinpta  pravis,  impie  sapientibus 
Occulta,  Dominus  luce  proferet  sua, 

Et  sacrosancti  fcederis  scientiam 

Docebit. Buch.  Ps.  xxv. 

The  wisdom  that  is  from  above,  is  first  pure,  then  peaceable. 

James  iii.  17. 


Dear  Sir, — I am  not  the  son  of  a prophet, 
nor  was  I bred  up  among  the  prophets.  I am 
quite  a stranger  to  what  passes  within  the 
walls  of  colleges  and  academies.  I was  as 
one  born  out  of  due  time,  and  led,  under  the 
secret  guidance  of  the  Lord,  by  very  unusual 
steps,  to  preach  the  faith  which  I once  la- 
boured to  destroy.  Since  you  know  all  this, 
how  could  you  think  of  applying  to  me  for 
the  plan  of  an  academical  institution  1 Yet 
I confess  the  design  you  mentioned  to  me,  in 
which  some  of  your  friends  have  thoughts  of 
engaging,  is  so  important  in  my  view,  that  I 
am  willing  to  come  as  near  to  your  wishes  as 
I can.  I must  not  pretend  to  dictate  a plan 
for  the  business  which  is  now  in  contempla- 
tion. But  if  you  will  allow  me  to  indulge  a 
sort  of  reverie,  and  suppose  myself  a person 
of  some  consequence  in  Utopia,  where  I 
could  have  the  modelling  of  every  thing  to 
my  own  mind ; and  that  I was  about  to  form 
an  academy  there,  for  the  sole  purpose  of 
educating  young  men  for  the  ministry  of  the 
gospel — in  this  way  I am  willing  to  offer  you 
my  thoughts  upon  the  subject  with  great 
simplicity  and  freedom.  And  if  any  of  the 
regulations  of  my  imaginary  academy  should 
be  judged  applicable  to  your  design,  you  and 
your  friends  will  be  heartily  welcome  to  them. 

I should  then,  suppositis  supponendis,  in 
the  first  place,  lay  down  two  or  three  im- 
portant maxims,  which  I would  hope  never  to 
lose  sight  of  in  the  conduct  of  the  affair : ex- 
pecting that,  if  I should  begin  without  them, 

I must  stumble  at  the  very  threshold ; and 


that  whenever  I should  neglect  them  after- 
wards, all  my  care  and  labour  and  expense 
would  be  from  that  time  thrown  away. 

My  first  maxim  is,  That  none  but  "he  who 
made  the  world  can  make  a minister  of  the 
gospel.  If  a young  man  has  capacity,  cul- 
ture and  application  may  majie  him  a scholar, 
a philosopher,  or  an  orator.  But  a true 
minister  must  have  certain  principles,  mo- 
tives, feelings,  and  aims  which  no  industry 
or  endeavours  of  men  can  either  acquire  or 
communicate.  They  must  be  given  from 
above,  or  they  cannot  be  received. 

I adopt  as  a second  maxim,  That  the  holy 
scriptures  are  both  comprehensively  and  ex- 
clusively the  grand  treasury  of  all  that  know- 
ledge which  is  requisite  and  sufficient,  to 
make  the  minister,  the  man  of  God,  thorough- 
ly furnished  for  every  branch  of  his  office. 
If  indeed  no  other  studies  were  of  subordi- 
nate importance,  in  order  to  a right  under- 
standing of  the  scriptures,  and  especially  to 
those  who  are  not  only  to  know  for  them- 
selves, but  are  appointed  to  teach  others  also; 
then  academical  instruction  wrould  be  need- 
less, and  I might  supply  my  young  men  with 
every  thing  at  once,  by  putting  the  Bible  in- 
to their  hands,  and  directing  them  to  read  it 
continually  with  attention  and  prayer.  But 
my  meaning  is,  that  though  there  is  such 
a concatenation  in  knowledge,  that  every 
branch  of  science  may,  by  a judicious  appli- 
cation, be  rendered  subservient  to  a minis- 
ter’s great  design;  yet  no  attainments  in 
philology,  philosophy,  or  in  any  or  all  the 


A PLAN  OF  ACADEMICAL  PREPARATION,  &c. 


461 


particulars  which  constitute  the  aggregate 
of  what  we  call  Learning,  can  in  the  least 
contribute  to  form  a minister  of  the  gospel, 
any  farther  than  he  is  taught  of  God  to  refer 
them  to,  and  to  regulate  them  by  the  scrip- 
tures as  a standard.  On  the  contrary,  the 
more  a man  is  furnished  with  this  kind  of  ap- 
paratus, unless  the  leading  truths  of  scripture 
reign  and  flourish  in  his  heart,  he  will  be  but 
the  more  qualified  to  perplex  himself,  and  to 
mislead  his  hearers. 

My  third  maxim  is  an  inference  from  the 
two  former : That  the  true  gospel-minister 
who  possesses  these  secondary  advantages, 
though  he  may  know  the  same  things,  and 
acquire  his  knowledge  by  the  like  methods, 
as  other  scholars  do,  yet  he  must  know  and 
possess  them  in  a manner  peculiar  to  himself. 
His  criticisms,  if  he  be  a critic,  will  discover 
something  which  the  greatest  skill  in  gram- 
matical niceties  cannot  of  itself  reach.  If  he 
be  an  orator,  he  will  not  speak  in  the  artifi- 
cial self-applauding  language  of  man’s  wis- 
dom, but  in  simplicity  and  with  authority; 
like  one  who  feels  the  ground  he  stands  upon, 
and  knows  to  whom  he  belongs,  and  whom 
he  serves.  If  he  mentions  a passage  of  his- 
tory, it  will  not  be  to  show  his  reading,  but 
to  illustrate  or  prove  his  point ; and  it  will  be 
evident  from  his  manner  of  speaking,  that 
though  he  may  have  taken  the  facts  from 
Tacitus  or  Robertson,  his  knowledge  of  the 
springs  of  human  action,  and  of  tne  superin- 
tendency of  a divine  providence,  is  derived 
from  the  word  of  God.  And  so  of  other  in- 
stances. 

In  a word,  if  a young  man  was  to  consult 
me  how  he  might  be  wise  and  learned  in  the 
usual  sense  of  the  words,  I might  advise  him 
to  repair  to  Oxford  or  Cambridge,  or  to  twenty 
other  places  which  I could  name.  But  if  I 
thought  him  really  desirous  of  becoming  wise 
to  win  souls,  I would  invite  him  to  my  new 
college  in  Utopia. 

From  these  general  observations  I proceed 
more  directly  to  my  subject.  You  are  then 
to  suppose  that  I have  taken  my  determina- 
tion, and  counted  the  cost,  and  am  now  sit- 
ting down  to  contrive  my  plan.  As  a little 
attention  to  method  may  not  be  amiss,  I shall 
endeavour  to  range  my  thoughts  under  four 
principal  heads,  concerning, 

1.  The  Place. 

2.  The  Tutor. 

3.  The  Pupils. 

4.  The  Course  of  Education. 

I.  And  first,  (as  preachers  sometimes  say,) 
of  the  first.  If  the  metropolis  of  Utopia 
should  be  any  thing  like  ours,  there  are  ob- 
vious reasons  to  forbid  my  fixing  upon  a spot 
very  near  it.  I think  not  nearer  than  a mo- 
derate day’s  journey.  Nor  would  I wish  it 
much  farther  distant.  Occasional  visits  to  a 
great  city,  where  there  are  many  considera- 
ble ministers  and  Christians,  should  not  be 


rendered  impracticable ; as  they  might  fur- 
nish my  young  men  with  opportunities  of 
forming  connections  and  making  observations 
that  might  contribute  to  their  usefulness  in 
future  life.  But  procul  ab  urbe  will  be  my 
maxim.  I should  not  only  fear  lest  they 
should  be  contaminated  by  the  vices  which 
too  generally  prevail  where  men  live  in  a 
throng:  if  they  escaped  these,  I should  still 
have  apprehensions,  lest  the  notice  that  might 
be  taken  of  them,  and  the  respect  shown 
them  by  well-meaning  friends,  should  imper- 
ceptibly seduce  them  into  a spirit  of  self-im- 
portance, give  them  a turn  for  dress  and 
company,  and  spoil  that  simplicity  and  de- 
pendence, without  which  I could  have  little 
hope  of  their  success.  I would  wish  it  may 
be  their  grand  aim  to  please  the  Lord,  and 
under  him  and  for  his  sake  to  please  their 
tutor.  They  have  as  yet  no  business  with 
other  people.  Their  tutor  must  be  to  them 
instar  omnium.  Him  they  must  love,  re- 
verence, and  obey,  and  accurately  watch  his 
looks,  and  every  intimation  of  his  will.  But 
to  secure  this  point,  or  even  to  have  a rea- 
sonable prospect  of  attaining  it,  methinks  it 
seems  necessary  to  say,  procul , procul  ab 
urbe  juvenes ! But  the  difference  between 
a rural  and  a town  situation  is  so  striking  at 
first  view,  that  I suppose  it  quite  needless  to 
say  more  upon  this  head.  I therefore  proceed, 

II.  To  the  choice  of  my  Tutor. — Whoever 
he  may  be,  when  I have  found  him,  and  fixed 
him,  I will  take  the  liberty  to  tell  him,  that 
he  is  called  to  the  most  honourable  and  im- 
portant office  that  man,  in  the  present  state 
of  things,  is  capable  of.  The  skilful  and 
faithful  tutor  is  not  only  useful  to  his  pupils 
considered  as  individuals,  but  he  is  remotely 
the  instrument  of  all  the  blessings  and  bene- 
fits which  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  communi- 
cate by  their  ministry,  in  the  course  of  their 
stated  and  occasional  labours  to  the  end  of 
life.  On  the  other  hand,  the  errors  and  pre- 
judices of  an  incompetent  tutor,  adopted  and 
perpetuated  by  his  disciples,  may  produce  a 
long  progression  of  evil  consequences,  which 
may  continue  to  operate  and  multiply  when 
he  and  they  are  dead  and  forgotten.  For  if 
the  streams  which  are  to  spread  far  and  wide 
throughout  a land  are  poisoned  in  the  very 
source,  who  can  foresee  how  far  the  mischief 
may  be  diffused.  Unless,  therefore,  I can 
procure  a proper  tutor,  I must  give  up  my 
design.  It  is  better  the  youth  should  remain 
untaught,  than  that  they  should  be  taught  to 
do  wrong. 

And  I seem  not  easily  satisfied  on  this 
head.  My  idea  of  the  person  to  whom  1 
could  cheerfully  entrust  the  care  of  my  aca- 
demy, is  not  of  an  ordinary  size.  He  seems 
to  be  one, 

Qualem  nequeo  monstrare,  ac  sentio  tan  turn. 

However,  since  we  are  upon  Utopian 


462 


A PLAN  OF  ACADEMICAL  PREPARATION 


ground,  where  we  may  imagine  as  largely 
as  we  please,  I will  attempt  to  delineate  him. 
And  were  I to  recommend  a tutor  to  your 
friends,  it  should  be  the  man  who  I thought 
came  the  nearest  to  the  character  I am  about 
to  describe. 

For  his  first  essential  indispensable  qualifi- 
cation, I require  a mind  deeply  penetrated 
with  a sense  of  the  grace,  glory,  and  efficacy 
of  the  gospel.  However  learned  and  able  in 
other  respects,  he  shall  not  have  a single  pu- 
pil from  me,  unless  I have  reason  to  believe, 
that  his  heart  is  attached  to  the  person  of 
the  Redeemer  as  God-man : that  as  a sinner 
his  whole  dependence  is  upon  the  Redeemer’s 
work  of  love,  his  obedience  unto  death,  his 
intercession  and  mediatorial  fulness.  His 
sentiments  must  be  clear  and  explicit  respect- 
ing the  depravity  of  human  nature,  and  the 
necessity  and  reality  of  the  agency  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  to  quicken,  enlighten,  sanctify, 
and  seal  those  who,  under  his  influence,  are 
led  to  Jesus  for  salvation.  With  respect  to 
the  different  schemes  or  systems  of  Divinity 
which  obtain  amongst  those  who  are  united 
in  the  acknowledgment  of  the  above  funda- 
mental truths,  I should  look  for  my  tutor 
amongst  those  who  are  called  Calvinists  ; but 
he  must  not  be  of  a curious,  metaphysical, 
disputatious  turn,  a mere  system-monger  or 
party-zealot.  I seek  for  one  who,  having 
been  himself  taught  the  deep  things  of  God 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  a gradual  experimental 
manner ; while  he  is  charmed  with  the  beau- 
tiful harmony  and  coincidence  of  all  the  doc- 
trines of  grace,  is  at  the  same  time  aware  of 
the  mysterious  depths  of  the  divine  counsels, 
and  the  impossibility  of  their  being  fully 
comprehended  by  our  feeble  understandings. 
Such  a man  will  be  patient  and  temperate  in 
explaining  the  peculiarities  of  the  gospel  to 
his  pupils,  and  will  wisely  adapt  himself  to 
their  several  states,  attainments,  and  capaci- 
ties. After  the  example  of  the  Great  Teacher, 
he  will  consider  what  they  can  bear,  and  aim 
to  lead  them  forward  step  by  step,  in  such  a 
manner,  that  the  sentiments  he  instils  into 
them  may  be  their  own,  and  not  taken  up 
merely  upon  the  authority  of  his  ipse  dixit. 
He  will  propose  the  scripture  to  them  as  a 
consistent  whole ; and  guard  them  against 
the  extremes  into  which  controversial  writers 
have  forced  themselves  and  each  other,  in 
support  of  a favourite  hypothesis,  so  as,  under 
pretence  of  honouring  some  parts  of  the  word 
of  God,  to  overlook,  if  not  to  contradict,  what 
is  taught  with  equal  clearness  in  other  parts. 

I wish  my  pupils  to  be  well  versed  in  use- 
ful learning,  and  therefore  my  tutor  must  be 
a learned  man.  He  must  not  only  be  able 
to  teach  them  whatever  is  needful  for  them 
to  learn,  but  should  be  possessed  of  such  a 
fund,  as  that  the  most  forward  and  most  pro- 
mising among  them  may  feel  he  has  a decided 
superiority  over  them  in  every  part  of  their 


studies.  Besides  an  accurate  skill  in  the 
school  classics,  he  should  be  well  acquainted 
with  books  at  large,  and  possessed  of  a gene- 
ral knowledge  of  the  state  of  literature  and 
religion,  and  the  memorable  events  of  histo- 
ry in  the  successive  ages  of  mankind.  Par- 
ticularly, he  should  be  well  versed  in  Eccle- 
siastical learning : for  though  it  be  true,  that 
the  bulk  of  it  is  little  worth  knowing  for  its 
own  sake,  yet  a man  of  genius  and  wisdom 
will  draw  from  the  whole  mass  a variety  of 
observations  suited  to  assist  young  minds 
in  forming  a right  judgment  of  human  na- 
ture, of  true  religion,  of  its  counterfeits,  and 
of  the  abuses  to  which  the  name  of  religion 
is  capable  of  being  perverted.  And  he  will 
likewise  be  able  to  select  for  their  use,  such 
authors  and  subjects  as  deserve  their  notice, 
from  the  surrounding  rubbish  in  which  they 
are  almost  buried. 

My  tutor  should  likewise  be  competently 
acquainted  with  the  lighter  accomplishments, 
which  are  usually  understood  by  the  term 
Belles  Lettres,  and  a proper  judge  of  them 
with  respect  both  to  their  intrinsic  and  their 
relative  value.  Their  intrinsic  value  to 
creatures  who  are  posting  to  eternity,  is  not 
great ; and  a wise  man  if  he  has  not  been 
tinctured  with  them  in  early  life,  will  seldom 
think  it  worth  his  while  to  attend  much  to 
them  afterwards.  Yet  in  such  an  age  as 
ours,  it  is  some  disadvantage  to  a man  in 
public  life,  if  he  is  quite  a stranger  to  them. 
To  a tutor  they  are  in  a manner  necessary. 
It  is  farther  desirable  that  he  should  have  a 
lively  imagination,  under  the  direction  of  a 
sound  judgment  and  a correct  and  cultivated 
taste.  Otherwise,  how  can  he  assist  and 
form  the  taste  and  judgment  of  his  pupils, 
or  direct  or  criticise  their  compositions] 

Natural  Philosophy  is  not  only  a noble 
science,  but  one  which  offers  the  most  inter- 
esting and  profitable  relaxations  from  the 
weight  of  severer  studies.  If  the  tutor  be 
not  possessed  of  this,  he  will  lose  a thousand 
opportunities  of  pointing  out  to  his  pupils  the 
signatures  of  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness, 
which  the  wonder-working  God  has  impress- 
ed upon  every  part  of  the  visible  creation. 
But  at  the  same  time,  he  should  know  where 
to  stop,  and  what  bound  to  set  to  their  in- 
quiries. It  is  not  necessary  that  either  he  or 
they  should  be  numbered  amongst  the  first 
astronomers  or  virtuosi  of  the  age.  A life 
devoted  to  the  service  of  God  and  souls,  will 
not  afford  leisure  for  this  diminutive  kind  of 
pre-eminence.  A general  knowledge  will 
suffice  even  in  the  tutor.  And  when  he  lec- 
tures upon  these  subjects,  he  will  caution 
them  against  spending  too  much  time  and 
thought  upon  those  branches  of  philosophy 
which  have  but  a very  remote  tendency  to 
qualify  them  for  preaching  the  gospel.  They 
are  sent  into  the  world  and  into  the  academy, 
not  to  collect  shells,  and  fossils,  and  butter- 


FOR  THE  MINISTRY. 


463 


flies,  cr  to  surprise  each  other  with  feats  of 
electricity,  but  to  win  souls  for  Christ. 

Perhaps  I have  said  enough  of  my  tutor’s 
knowledge,  and  may  now  consider  him  with 
regard  to  his  spirit,  his  methods  of  communi- 
cating what  he  knows  to  his  pupils,  and  his 
manner  of  living  with  them  as  a father  with 
his  children. 

He  must  be  didacticos , apt  to  teach.  A 
man  may  know  much,  yet  not  have  a facility 
of  imparting  his  ideas.  It  is  a talent  and  a 
gift  of  God,  and  therefore  will  always  be 
found  in  some  good  degree  in  the  person  who 
is  called  of  God  to  the  tutor’s  office. 

He  will  consider  himself  as  a teacher,  not 
only  in  the  lecture-room,  but  in  all  places, 
and  at  all  times,  whether  sitting  in  the  house, 
or  walking  by  the  way,  if  any  of  his  pupils 
are  with  him.  And  he  will  love  to  have 
them  always  about  him,  so  far  as  their  stu- 
dies and  his  own  necessary  avocations  will 
admit. 

Two  things  he  will  aim  to  secure  from 
them,  reverence  and  affection.  Without 
maintaining  a steady  authority,  he  can  do 
nothing;  and  unless  they  love  him,  every 
thing  will  go  on  heavily.  But  if  the  pupils 
are  properly  chosen,  such  a man  as  I have 
described  will  be  both  loved  and  feared. 
His  spiritual  and  exemplary  deportment,  his 
wisdom  and  abilities,  will  command  their 
respect.  His  condescension  and  gentleness, 
his  tenderness  for  their  personal  concerns, 
his  assiduity  in  promoting  their  comfort,  and 
doing  them  every  friendly  office  in  his  power, 
will  engage  their  love.  These  happy  effects 
will  be  farther  promoted  by  their  frequent  mu- 
tual intercourse  in  prayer,  by  his  expository 
lectures,  and  by  his  public  ministry,  if  he  be 
a preacher.  Having  his  eye  unto  the  Lord, 
and  his  heart  in  his  work,  a blessing  from  on 
high  shall  descend  upon  him  and  upon  his 
house. 

As  human  nature  is  the  same  in  all  places, 
it  is  probable  that  the  Christians  in  Utopia 
may  be  divided  among  themselves  with  re- 
spect to  rituals  and  modes  of  worship,  in  some 
such  manner  as  we  see  and  feel  amongst  11s. 
Now  here,  as  in  every  thing  else,  I would 
have  my  tutor  a sort  of  phoenix,  a man  of  a 
generous  enlarged  spirit,  a real  friend  of  that 
liberty  wherewith  Jesus  has  made  his  people 
free  from  the  shackles  and  impositions  of  men. 
One  who  uniformly  judges  and  acts  upon  that 
grand  principle  of  the  New  Testament,  which 
is  likewise  a plain  and  obvious  maxim  of  com- 
mon sense;  I mean,  that  the  Lord  of  all,  the 
Head  of  the  church,  is  the  alone  Lord  and 
Judge  of  conscience.  I suppose  my  tutor 
has  already  taken  his  side,  that  he  is  either 
in  the  Establishment  (if  there  be  one  in  Uto- 
pia) or  of  course  a Dissenter  from  it.  And, 
really,  as  to  my  scheme,  I am  indifferent 
which  side  he  has  taken ; we  shall  not  have 


a minute’s  debate  about  it,  provided  he  acts 
consistently  with  the  principles  which  I have 
assigned  him.  But  as  I myself,  living  in 
England,  am  of  the  Established  Church,  that 
you  may  not  suspect  me  of  partiality,  I will 
suppose,  and  am  ready  to  take  it  for  granted, 
that  he  will  be  found  to  be  a Utopian  Dis- 
senter. 

On  this  supposition,  my  imagination  takes 
a flight,  hastens  into  the  midst  of  things,  and 
anticipates  as  present  what  is  yet  future. 
Methinks  I see  the  tutor  indulging  his  scho- 
lars (as  at  proper  seasons  he  often  will)  with 
an  hour  of  free  conversation;  and  from  some 
question  proposed  to  him  concerning  the  com- 
parative excellence  or  authority  of  different 
forms  of  church  government,  taking  occa- 
sion to  open  his  mind  to  them,  something  in 
the  following  manner : 

“ My  dear  children,  you  may  have  observ- 
ed, that,  when  in  the  course  of  our  lectures, 
I have  been  led  to  touch  upon  this  subject,  it 
has  not  been  my  custom  to  speak  in  a dog- 
matical style.  I have  sometimes  intimated 
to  you,  that  though  every  part  of  the  Levi- 
tical  worship  was  of  positive  divine  institu- 
tion, yet  when  the  people  rested  and  trusted 
in  their  external  forms,  the  Lord  speaks  as 
abhorring  his  own  appointments.  I have  told 
you,  upon  the  apostle’s  authority,  that  the 
kingdom  of  God  consists  not  in  meats  and 
drinks,  in  names  and  forms,  but  in  righteous- 
ness, peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost. 
Amidst  the  many  divisions  and  subdivisions 
which  obtain  in  the  visible  Church,  there  are 
in  reality  but  two  sorts  of  people,  the  chil- 
dren of  God,  and  the  children  of  the  world. 
The  former  sort,  though  partakers  in  one 
life  and  in  one  hope,  yet  living  in  successive 
ages,  in  various  countries,  under  very  differ- 
ent modes  of  government,  education,  and 
customs,  it  seems  morally  impossible  that 
they  should  all  agree,  as  by  instinct,  in  one 
common  mode  of  social  worship.  It  is  in- 
deed said,  that  there  is  a plan  prescribed  in 
the  New  Testament  to  which  all  ought  to 
conform  as  nearly  as  possible.  All  parties 
say  this  in  favour  of  their  own  plans ; and 
men  eminent  for  wisdom  and  holiness  are  to 
be  found  among  the  advocates  for  each.  But 
is  it  not  strange,  that  if  the  Lord  has  appoint- 
ed such  a standard,  the  wisest  and  best  of 
his  people  should  differ  so  widely  in  their 
views  of  it,  and  deviate  so  far  from  each 
other  when  they  attempt  to  reduce  it  to  prac- 
tice! Let  others  dispute,  but  as  for  you  my 
children,  and  me,  let  us  rather  adore  the  wis- 
dom and  goodness  of  our  Lord.  He  who 
knew  the  heart  of  man,  the  almost  invincible 
power  of  local  prejudices,  and  what  innu- 
merable circumstances  in  different  periods 
and  places  would  render  it  impracticable  for 
his  people  to  tread  exactly  in  the  same  line, 
has  provided  accordingly.  The  rules  and 


464 


A PLAN  OF  ACADEMICAL  PREPARATION 


lights  he  has  afforded  us  respecting  the  out- 
ward administration  of  his  Church,  are  re- 
corded with  such  a latitude,  that  his  true 
worshippers  may  conscientiously  hope  they 
are  acceptable  to  him,  though  the  plans  which 
they  believe  to  be  consistent  with  his  reveal- 
ed will,  are  far  from  corresponding  with  each 
other.  It  is  sufficient  that  the  apostolical  ca- 
nons, Let  all  things  be  done  decently  and  in 
order,  to  edification  and  in  charity,  are  uni- 
versally binding;  and  were  these  on  all 
sides  attended  to,  smaller  differences  would 
be  very  supportable. 

“ I have  often  pointed  out  to  you  the  won- 
derful analogy  which  the  Lord  has  establish- 
ed in  many  instances,  between  his  works  in 
the  outward  creation,  and  in  his  kingdom  of 
grace.  Perhaps  the  variety  observable  in 
the  former  may  be  one  instance  of  this  kind. 
When  you  see  every  vegetable  arrayed  in 
green  exactly  of  the  same  shade,  or  all  tu- 
lips variegated  in  the  same  manner,  as  if 
painted  from  one  common  pattern,  then,  and 
not  before,  expect  to  find  true  believers 
agreed  in  their  views  and  practice  respect- 
ing the  modes  of  religion. 

“ Study  therefore  the  scriptures,  my  chil- 
dren, with  humble  prayer,  that  the  Lord  may 
give  you  such  views  of  these  concerns,  as 
may  fit  you  for  the  stations  and  services  to 
which  his  providence  may  lead  you.  See 
with  your  own  eyes,  and  judge  for  yourselves. 
This  is  your  right.  One  is  your  master,  even 
Christ,  and  you  need  not,  you  ought  not  to 
call  any  man  master  upon  earth.  But  be 
content  with  this.  Do  not  arrogate  to  your- 
selves the  power  of  judging  for  others.  Be 
willing  that  they  should  see  with  their  own 
eyes  likewise.  The  Papists,  upon  the  ground 
of  the  assumed  infallibility  of  their  church, 
are  at  least  consistent  with  themselves  in 
condemning  all  who  differ  from  them.  Pro- 
testants confess  themselves  fallible,  yet  speak 
the  same  peremptory  language. 

“ As  to  myself,  if  I had  thought  it  prefer- 
able upon  the  whole  to  be  a minister  in  our 
Established  Church,  I might  probably  have 
been  one ; but  I trust  I am  where  the  Lord 
would  have  me  to  be,  and  I am  satisfied.  My 
desire  for  you  is  to  see  you  able  ministers  of 
the  New  Testament.  As  to  the  part  of  the 
vineyard  in  which  you  are  to  labour,  wait 
simply  upon  the  Lord,  and  he  in  good  time 
will  point  it  out  to  you.  If  scripture  and 
conscience  lead  you  to  prefer  the  Dissenting 
line,  I shall  say,  It  is  well — provided  you 
embrace  it  with  a liberal  spirit,  and  have  a 
better  warrant  for  your  choice  than  merely 
the  example  of  your  tutor.  Should  you  de- 
termine otherwise,  I shall  still  say,  It  is  well 
— provided  I see  you  disinterested,  humble, 
and  faithful.  Your  being  educated  under  my 
roof  is  a circumstance  not  likely  to  facilitate 
your  admission  into  the  Establishment;  but 
if  the  Lord  in  his  providence  should  open  to 


any  of  you  a door  on  that  side,  and  incline 
you  to  enter,  I shall  not  dissuade  you  from  it, 
as  though  I thought  it  sinful.  I shall  only 
wish  you  to  attend  to  that  advice  which  can- 
not mislead  you : — “ Trust  in  the  Lord  with 
all  thine  heart,  and  lean  not  to  thine  own  un- 
derstanding ; in  all  thy  ways  acknowledge 
him,  and  he  shall  direct  thy  path.” 

Thus  far  my  tutor. — Or,  since  I am  in  a 
supposing  humour,  if  you  will  give  me  leave 
to  make  one  supposition  more,  that  it  is  pos- 
sible there  may  be  Methodists  and  Itinerants 
in  Utopia,  as  we  have  in  England  ; he  would 
then  perhaps  continue  his  discourse  a little 
longer  as  follows : 

“Though  the  pastoral  care  of  a single 
congregation  is  the  service  which  the  Lord 
has  allotted  me,  and  I have  not  seen  it  my 
duty  to  engage  in  any  thing  which  might 
lead  me  long  or  far  from  the  people  to  whom 
I am  related,  I am  no  enemy  to  itinerant 
preaching.  Mv  Lord  and  Saviour  himself, 
his  apostles  and  first  servants  were  all  Itine- 
rants; and  I believe  that  houses  and  ships, 
hills  and  plains,  the  side  of  a river,  or  the 
sea-shore,  are  all  fit  places  for  preaching  the 
gospel,  and  sufficiently  authorized  as  such  by 
the  highest  precedents.  I cannot  therefore 
censure,  much  less  condemn,  a practice  which 
the  scripture  warrants,  and  to  which  I doubt 
not  the  Lord  has  given  abundant  testimony 
in  our  own  times,  by  making  the  word  thus 
dispensed  effectual  to  the  conversion  and  con- 
solation of  many  souls.  I believe  indeed,  that 
some  persons  not  duly  acquainted  with  their 
own  hearts,  nor  with  what  is  requisite  to 
constitute  a preacher,  have  too  hastily  sup- 
posed themselves  called  to  preach  the  gospel ; 
when  the  event  has  proved  that  the  Lord  had 
neither  called  them  to  his  service  nor  fur- 
nished them  for  it.  And  I think,  if  it  should 
generally  be  allowed  that  young  men  are 
proper  judges  in  their  own  cause,  and  have  a 
right  to  commence  preachers  when  or  where 
or  how  they  please,  without  the  advice  or  ap- 
probation of  ministers  more  experienced  than 
themselves,  many  inconveniences  may  and 
must  follow.  I could  wish  every  young  man 
to  be  so  impressed  with  the  force  of  the  apos- 
tle’s question,  “ Who  is  sufficient  for  these 
things']”  that  he  should  rather  need  invita- 
tion and  encouragement  to  preach,  than  be 
disposed  to  run  hastily  into  the  work,  as  the 
horse  rusheth  into  the  battle.  But  I must  not 
expect  every  thing  will  be  managed  accord- 
ing to  my  wish.  I have  mourned  over  the 
miscarriages  of  some  Itinerant  preachers,  but 
I have  been  much  comforted  by  the  good 
conduct  and  success  of  others.  It  is  neither 
my  business  nor  my  intention  to  persuade 
you  to  this  course  ; but  if,  when  you  are  pro- 
perly instructed  and  qualified  for  the  ministry, 
I should  see  any  of  you  disposed  to  go  forth 
in  the  Itinerant  way,  should  I be  satisfied  of 
your  principles  and  motives,  and  have  reason 


FOR  THE  MINISTRY. 


465 


to  hope  your  zeal  was  tempered  with  humil- 
ity, I know  not  that  I durst  refuse  my  con- 
sent. For,  as  I have  often  told  you,  the  ho- 
nour of  my  Lord  and  Saviour,  and  the  wel- 
fare of  precious  souls,  are  far  dearer  to  me 
than  the  detached  interests  of  any  party ; 
and  if  Christ  be  faithfully  and  successfully 
preached,  in  whatever  way,  and  by  whatever 
instruments  he  is  pleased  to  work,  “ I do  re- 
joice, yea,  and  will  rejoice.” 

I think  what  I have  said  of  the  tutor,  and 
what  he  has  just  now  said  for  himself,  may 
suffice  to  give  you  an  idea  of  the  person  I 
would  choose,  and  that  it  is  now  time  to  con- 
sider, 

III.  The  choice  of  Pupils. — I would  have 
them  all  resident  with  the  tutor,  and  there- 
fore their  numDer  at  one  time  can  be  but 
small ; especially  as  I should  wish  him  to 
undertake  every  branch  of  their  education. 
He  might  have  an  assistant  to  teach  the  ru- 
diments of  the  languages,  a service  that 
would  otherwise  take  up  much  of  the  time 
which  he  could  better  employ,  but  he  must 
do  all  the  rest  himself.  I suppose  therefore 
that  ten,  or  at  the  most  twelve  pupils  will  be 
a sufficient  number  to  be  under  his  care  at 
once.  The  man  I have  described  would  not 
be  mercenary,  but  the  labourer  is  worthy  of 
his  reward.  As  I shall  find  him  work  enough 
to  take  up  his  whole  time,  his  pay  ought  to 
be  competent  and  liberal ; and,  as  I have  sup- 
posed myself  rich  enough  to  execute  my 
plan  in  what  manner  I please,  I hope  I shall 
not  starve  my  tutor,  nor  put  his  economical 
talents  on  the  stretch  to  contrive  how  to 
squeeze  and  save  a pittance  out  of  the  sum 
allotted  for  their  board.  I would  fix  the 
boarding  upon  equitable  and  moderate  terms 
distinct  from  his  salary,  which  should  be 
handsome,  and  always  the  same,  whether  he 
had  one  pupil  with  him,  or  ten,  or  twelve. 
It  would  be  my  part  to  keep  the  number  up ; 
but  if  I neglect  it,  he  should  be  no  loser ; 
nor  ought  he  to  be  dependent  upon  my  ca- 
price or  negligence,  but  he  should  stand  upon 
an  easy  and  settled  footing,  so  as  to  be  free, 
not  only  from  want,  but  from  anxious  care, 
that  he  might  be  able  to  attend  to  his  busi- 
ness without  distraction. 

And  now  my  house  is  ready,  where  shall  I 
find  young  men  to  fill  it  1 I must  look  around 
me,  and  request  my  friends  to  iook  out  for 
me.  When  I have  found  two  I will  send 
them,  and  the  rest  as  they  offer.  Perhaps  it 
would  be  one  of  the  chief  difficulties  attend- 
ing my  scheme,  to  collect  ten  or  twelve 
youths  worthy  of  such  a tutor. 

They  must  be  serious.  I mean  they  must 
have  an  awakened,  experimental  sense  of  the 
truth  and  goodness  of  the  gospel.  This  is  a 
point  not  easily  ascertained,  especially  in 
young  persons.  There  is  often  a something 
that  resembles  it,  which,  upon  trial,  does  not 
prove  satisfactory.  However,  my  part  will 
Vol.  II.  3 N 


be  to  look  to  the  Lord  for  guidance,  and  then 
judge  as  well  as  I can.  But  I hope  no  per- 
suasion or  recommendation,  no  desire  of 
pleasing  or  obliging  a friend,  would  prevail 
on  me  to  admit  one  who  I did  not  verily  be- 
lieve was  a subject  of  the  grace  of  God.  Whc 
would  undertake  to  teach  a parrot  algebra  I 
Yet  this  would  be  as  practicable  as  to  make 
those  able  and  faithful  preachers,  whom  the 
Lord  has  not  first  made  Christians. 

They  must  likewise  have  capacity.  It  is 
not  necessary  that  their  abilities  should  be  of 
the  first  rate  (perhaps  but  few  of  such  are 
called;)  but  some  tolerable  measure  of  na- 
tural abilities,  capable  of  being  opened  and 
improved  by  education,  seems  almost  neces- 
sary in  the  person  who  aims  to  be  a minister 
of  the  gospel.  At  least  it  will  be  necessary 
upon  my  plan ; for  as  my  tutor  cannot  take 
many,  I must  give  the  preference  to  such  as 
may  both  do  him  credit  by  their  proficiency 
under  his  care,  and  be  qualified  to  profit 
others  when  they  leave  him. 

Ex  quovis  ligno  Mercurius  non  fit. 

If  the  heart  be  changed  and  sanctified  by 
grace,  a person  of  the  weakest  natural  un- 
derstanding will  acquire,  under  divine  teach- 
ing, all  that  is  necessary  to  enable  him  to  fill 
up  his  station  in  private  life  with  propriety, 
to  overcome  the  world,  and  to  make  his  own 
calling  and  election  sure.  But  a preacher 
must  have  gifts  as  well  as  grace,  to  be  able 
to  divide  the  word  of  truth  as  a workman 
that  needeth  not  to  be  ashamed.  And  there- 
fore, though  the  Lord  was  once  pleased  by  a 
dumb  ass  to  rebuke  the  foolishness  of  a pro- 
phet, I am  not  forward  to  acknowledge  those 
as  ambassadors  sent  by  him  (however  well- 
meaning  they  may  be)  who  seem  either  to 
have  no  message  to  deliver,  or  no  ability  to 
deliver  it. 

I would  likewise  be  satisfied,  as  much  as 
possible,  concerning  the  views  and  motives 
which  make  them  desirous  of  devoting  them- 
selves to  the  ministry.  Some  desires  of  this 
kind  are  very  frequently  found  in  young  con- 
verts. When  a sense  of  eternal  things  is 
new  and  lively  upon  their  minds,  and  they 
look  round  upon  a world  lying  in  wickedness, 
they  are  much  affected.  The  obligations  they 
feel  to  the  Redeemer,  a grief  that  he  should 
be  so  little  known,  so  little  loved,  and  a com- 
passion for  their  fellow  sinners,  whom  they 
see  liable  to  perish  for  lack  of  knowledge, 
make  them  often  long  to  be  employed,  and 
sometimes  constrain  them  to  run  before  they 
are  sent.  But  if  they  are  not  really  designed 
by  the  Lord  for  this  service,  either  their  de- 
sires towards  it  gradually  subside,  and  they 
yield  themselves  to  his  appointment  in  other 
paths  of  life ; or,  if  they  unadvisedly  venture 
upon  it,  they  are  seldom  either  comfortable 
or  useful.  They  soon  feel  themselves  une- 
qual to  the  work;  or,  if  self-conceit  prevensl  y 


466 


A PLAN  OF  ACADEMICAL  PREPARATION 


them  from  feeling  it,  their  hearers  at  least 
are  very  sensible  of  it.  They  often  mistake 
error  for  truth.  They  retail  scraps  and  shreds 
of  sentiments  which  they  pick  up  from  others, 
and,  for  want  pf  judgment,  misapply  them. 
Thus  hypocrites  are  encouraged,  and  those 
whom  the  Lord  would  have  comforted  are 
made  sad.  They  think  that  preaching  with 
power  consists  in  vociferation  and  distorted 
attitudes;  and  that  to  utter  every  thing  that 
comes  upon  their  minds,  without  end  or  side 
(as  we  say,)  without  any  regard  to  text,  con- 
text, occasion,  or  connection,  is  to  preach  ex- 
tempore. Too  often  Satan  gains  open  ad- 
vantage over  them  : they  are  puffed  up  with 
pride,  taken  in  snares,  and  perhaps  fall  into 
such  woeful  miscarriages  as  at  length  ruin 
their  characters,  and  stop  their  mouths.  It 
is  therefore  of  great  importance  to  be  workers 
together  with  the  Lord  in  this  business ; to 
choose  those  whom  he  chooses,  to  bring  for- 
ward those  whom  he  is  preparing,  and,  if 
possible,  none  but  these.  We  cannot  indeed 
know  the  heart ; but  we  may  be  wary  and 
circumspect  in  judging  by  such  lights  as  we 
can  procure,  and  we  ought  to  be  so.  Per- 
haps, after  all,  we  may  be  mistaken  in  some 
instances ; but,  if  we  have  done  our  best,  we 
have  done  well,  and  shall  not  be  blamable 
for  such  consequences  as  we  could  not  possi- 
bly foresee  or  prevent.  If  a candidate  for 
the  academy  appears  to  be  of  a self-diffident 
and  humble  spirit,  to  have  some  acquaintance 
with  his  own  heart,  a tolerable  capacity,  a 
turn  for  application,  and  an  unblamable  cha- 
racter as  to  his  personal  conduct,  I shall  be 
disposed  to  admit  him.  Rut  I would  leave 
the  final  decision  of  his  fitness  to  the  tutor. 
For  which  purpose,  it  may  be  proper  that  he 
should  be  under  the  tutor’s  eye,  for  a limited 
time,  as  a probationer. 

IV.  The  next  point  I am  to  consider  is, 
the  Course  of  Study  they  should  pursue. — 
Though  I am  rather  inclined  to  give  this  up 
absolutely  and  without  reserve  to  the  tutor, 
who,  if  he  answers  my  description,  must  be 
the  most  proper  person  to  institute  a plan  for 
himself,  and  would  have  no  need  of  my 
assistance.  But  if  his  humility  and  good 
opinion  of  me  should  lead  him  to  desire  my 
advice,  he  shall  have  it.  I do  not  mean  as 
to  little  circumstantials,  but  1 would  submit 
to  him  in  a general  and  miscellaneous  way 
such  hints  as  may  occur  to  me  upon  the 
subject.  And  I submit  them  to  you  before- 
hand. 

A few  things  may  be  previously  noticed, 
which,  though  they  do  not  properly  belong 
to  their  academical  studies,  are  well  worthy 
of  attention. 

A minister  is  a soldier  of  Jesus  Christ,  and, 
as  such,  is  to  expect  and  endure  hardship. 
It  is  well  to  have  this  in  our  eye  in  the  edu- 
cation of  young  men.  They  are  not  called 
to  be  gentlemen,  but  soldiers ; not  to  live 


delicately,  but  to  prepare  for  hardship.  They 
should  therefore  be  advised  and  accustomed 
to  prefer  a plain  and  frugal  manner  of  life, 
and  to  avoid  multiplying  those  wants  which 
luxury  and  folly  would  prompt  us  to  multiply 
almost  ad  injinitum.  A propensity  to  indul- 
gence either  in  the  quantity  or  quality  of 
food,  is  a meanness  unworthy  of  a man,  still 
more  unsuitable  to  the  character  of  a Chris- 
tian, and  scandalous  in  a minister.  I am  no 
advocate  for  a monkish  austerity,  or  a scru- 
pulous, superstitious  self-denial,  which  will 
almost  starve  the  body  to  feed  the  pride  of 
the  heart.  It  is,  however,  very  desirable  to 
possess  in  early  life,  a habit  of  temperance, 
a mastery  over  appetite,  and  a resolute  guard 
against  every  thing  that  has  a tendency  to 
blunt  the  activity  of  the  spirits.  And  youth 
is  the  proper  season  for  gainingthis  mastery, 
which  if  the  golden  opportunity  be  then  lost, 
is  seldom  thoroughly  acquired  afterwards. 

A propriety  in  dress  should  also  be  consult- 
ed. Neatness  is  commendable ; but  a student 
of  divinity  should  keep  at  a distance  from  the 
air  and  appearance  of  a fop.  A finical  dispo- 
sition in  this  article  not  only  occasions  a 
waste  of  time  and  expense,  but  is  a token  of 
a trifling  turn  of  mind,  and  exposes  the  fine 
self-admiring  youth,  to  the  contempt  or  pity 
of  the  wise  and  good. 

Farther,  a habit  of  rising  early  should  be 
resolutely  formed.  It  redeems  much  time, 
and  chiefly  of  those  hours  which  are  most 
favourable  to  study  or  devotion.  It  likewise 
cuts  off  the  temptation  to  sitting  up  late,  a 
hurtful  and  preposterous  custom,  which  many 
students  unwarily  give  unto,  and  which  they 
cannot  so  easily  break,  when  the  bad  effects 
of  it  upon  their  health  convince  them  too  late 
of  their  imprudence. 

Let  them  be  guarded  against  the  snares 
attending  a large  acquaintance,  and  unneces- 
sary visiting.  The  tutor  will  doubtless  main- 
tain authority  and  good  discipline  in  his 
house,  and  not  suffer  any  of  his  pupils  to  be 
absent  from  family  worship,  nor  abroad  after 
a fixed  hour,  without  his  express  permission, 
which  should  not  be  given  but  for  solid  and 
just  reasons.  And  he  cannot  be  too  careful, 
both  by  advice  and  vigilance,  to  prevent  them 
from  forming  any  female  connections  while 
under  his  roof,  however  honourable  the  views 
or  deserving  the  person  may  be.  Love  and 
courtship  are  by  no  means  favourable  to 
study,  nor  indeed  to  devotion,  at  a time  when 
their  present  engagements,  and  the  uncer- 
tainty of  their  prospects  in  future  life,  render 
a settlement  by  marriage  improper,  if  not 
impracticable. 

Much  study  is  a weariness  to  the  flesh, 
and  the  body  and  the  mind  are  so  nearly  con- 
nected, that  what  affects  the  one  will  have 
an  influence  upon  the  other.  Relaxation  and 
exercise  are  therefore  necessary  at  proper 
seasons,  for  those  who  wish  to  preserve 


FOR  THE  MINISTRY. 


467 


'cheerfulness  and  strength  for  service,  and 
not  to  become  old  and  disabled,  through  low- 
ness of  spirits,  infirmities,  and  pains,  before 
old  age  actually  overtakes  them.  Riding  is 
a manly,  unexceptionable  exercise,  where  it 
can  be  conveniently  practised.  But  walking 
is,  I suppose,  equally  healthful,  and  requires 
neither  expense  nor  preparation.  That  the 
students  may  have  an  object  in  view  when 
they  go  from  home,  the  tutor  will  probably 
point  out  to  them  some  of  the  Lord’s  poor, 
who  live  at  convenient  distances,  whom  they 
may  visit,  and  comfort  with  their  sympathy, 
advice,  and  prayers,  as  well  as  administer  to 
the  relief  of  their  necessities,  according  to 
their  ability.  Thus  while  they  are  consult- 
ing their  own  health,  they  may  at  the  same 
time  imitate  Him,  who  went  about  doing 
good.  And  in  such  visits  they  may  meet 
with  many  hints  from  poor  believers,  concern- 
ing the  Lord’s  wisdom  and  faithfulness  in  his 
dealings  with  them,  and  of  the  power  of  true 
religion,  to  confirm  what  they  read  upon 
these  subjects,  and  probably  some  hints  which 
their  books  will  not  supply  them  with. — 
Farther,  if,  when  they  are  abroad  together, 
they  will  attempt  such  conversation  as  warm- 
ed the  hearts  of  the  disciples  when  walking 
to  Emmaus,  and  if,  when  alone,  they  adopt 
the  pattern  of  Isaac,  who  went  out  into  the 
fields  to  meditate,  then  all  the  time  they  can 
thus  employ  may  be  set  down  to  the  account 
of  their  studies;  for  few  of  their  hours  can  be 
more  profitably  improved. 

But  what,  and  how,  are  they  to  study? 
The  answer  to  this  question  depends  upon 
another : What  is  the  object  of  their  studies  ? 
It  is  to  make  them  not  merely  scholars,  but 
ministers,  thoroughly  furnished  for  their  of- 
fice. The  particulars  1 aim  at  in  placing 
them  with  my  tutor  are  such  as  follow : 

1.  An  orderly,  connected,  and  comprehen- 
sive knowledge  of  the  common  places  and 
topics  of  divinity,  considered  as  a whole  : a 
system  of  truth,  of  which  the  holy  scriptures 
is  the  sole  fountain,  treasury,  and  standard. 

2.  A competent  acquaintance  with  sacred 
literature,  by  which  I mean  such  writings, 
ancient  and  modern,  as  are  helpful  to  explain 
or  elucidate  difficulties  in  scripture,  arising 
from  the  phraseology,  from  allusion  to  cus- 
toms and  events  not  generally  known,  and 
from  similar  causes,  and  which  therefore 
cannot  be  well  understood  without  such  as- 
sistance. 

3.  Such  a general  knowledge  of  philoso- 
phy, history,  and  other  branches  of  polite 
literature,  as  may  increase  the  stock  of  their 
ideas,  afford  them  just  conceptions  of  the 
state  of  things  around  them,  furnish  them 
with  a fund  for  variety,  enlargement,  and 
illustration,  that  they  may  be  able  to  enliven 
and  diversify  their  discourses,  which,  without 
such  a fund,  will  be  soon  apt  to  run  in  a 
beaten  track,  and  to  contain  little  more  than 


a repetition  of  the  same  leading  thought^ 
without  originality  or  spirit. 

4.  An  ability  to  methodize,  combine,  dis« 
tinguish,  and  distribute  the  ideas  thus  col- 
lected by  study,  so  as  readily  to  know  what 
is  properly  adapted  to  the  several  subjects  to 
be  treated  of,  and  to  the  several  parts  of  the 
same  subject.  When  the  pupils  are  thus  far 
accomplished,  then  I shall  hope, 

5.  That  they  will  in  good  time  be  able  to 
preach  extempore.  I do  not  mean  without 
forethought  or  plan,  but  without  a book,  and 
without  the  excessive  labour  of  committing 
their  discourses  to  memory.  This  ability  of 
speaking  to  an  auditory  in  a pertinent  and 
collected  manner,  with  freedom  and  deco- 
rum, with  fidelity  and  tenderness,  looking  at 
them  instead  of  looking  at  a paper,  gives  a 
preacher  a considerable  advantage,  and  has 
a peculiar  tendency  to  command  and  engage 
the  attention.  It  likewise  saves  much  time, 
which  might  be  usefully  employed  in  visiting 
his  people.  It  is  undoubtedly  a gift  of  God, 
but  like  many  other  gifts,  to  be  sought,  not 
only  by  prayer,  but  in  the  use  of  means. 
The  first  essays  will  ordinarily  be  weak  and 
imperfect ; but  the  facility  increases,  till  at 
length  a habit  is  formed,  by  diligence  and 
perseverance.  I should  not  think  my  acade- 
my complete,  unless  my  tutor  was  attentive 
to  form  his  pupils  to  the  character  of  public 
speakers. 

General  rules  admit  of  exceptions.  I have 
myself  known  persons,  who,  with  plain  sense, 
true  humility,  and  a spirit  devoted  to  the 
Lord,  and  dependent  upon  him,  have,  with 
little  or  no  assistance  from  men,  proved  solid, 
exemplary,  and  useful  ministers.  Such  in- 
stances convince  me,  that  however  expedient 
learning  may  be,  it  is  not  indispensibly  ne- 
cessary for  a minister,  especially  for  one 
who  is  to  labour  in  a retired  situation,  and 
amongst  plain  unlettered  hearers.  I would 
not  therefore  preclude  my  tutor  from  all  op- 
portunity of  being  useful  to  persons  of  this 
description,  who  would  be  glad  of  such  helps 
from  him  as  they  might  receive  in  their 
mother  tongue,  when  the  time  of  life,  or 
particular  circumstances  might  render  the 
study  of  languages  and  science  inconvenient. 
And,  in  general,  as  the  capacities,  disposi- 
tions, and  prospects  of  a number  of  pupils 
would  of  course  be  different,  I should  leave 
it  to  his  discretion  to  conduct  them  to  the 
same  grand  ends  of  service,  by  such  differ- 
ence of  method  as  he  should  judge  most 
suitable  to  each  ; so  as  not  to  discourage  or 
over-burden  the  truly  deserving,  nor  to  per- 
mit (if  it  can  be  prevented)  the  more  studious 
and  successful,  to  set  too  high  a value  upon 
their  superior  accomplishments.  For  after 
all  it  must  be  owned,  and  ought  to  be  re- 
membered, that  grace  and  divine  wisdom 
are  of  unspeakably  greater  importance,  than 
scholastic  attainments  without  them.  Wa 


463 


A PLAN  OF  ACADEMICAL  PREPARATION 


are  sure,  that  though  a man  had  the  know- 
ledge of  all  mysteries,  the  gifts  of  tongues 
and  miracles,  and  the  powers  of  an  angel,  if 
he  has  not  likewise  humility,  spirituality, 
and  love,  he  is  in  the  sight  of  God  but  as 
sounding  brass  or  a noisy  cymbal.  He  may 
answer  the  purpose  of  a church  bell  to  call  a 
congregation  together,  but  has  little  prospect 
of  doing  them  good  when  they  are  assem- 
bled. 

But  to  return  to  my  professed  students,  and, 

First,  As  to  the  study  of  Theology. — How 
far  it  maybe  expedient  to  adopt  some  system 
or  body  of  Divinity  as  a text  or  ground 
whereon  to  proceed,  I am  not  quite  deter- 
mined ; and  which  of  these  learned  sum- 
maries is  the  best,  I shall  not  attempt  to 
decide  till  I have  read  them  all.  My  tutor 
will  have  more  of  this  knowledge ; I shall 
therefore  refer  the  choice,  if  it  be  necessary 
to  choose  one,  to  him.  Calvin,  Turretine, 
Witsius,  and  Ridgely,  are  those  with  which 
I have  formerly  been  most  acquainted.  But 
indeed,  of  these,  at  present,  I can  remember 
little  more  than  that  I have  read  them,  or  the 
greatest  part  of  them.  I recollect  just  enough 
to  say,  that  though  I approve  and  admire 
them  all,  I have  at  the  same  time  my  par- 
ticular objections  to  them  all,  as  to  this  use  of 
them.  The  Bible  is  my  body  of  Divinity ; and 
were  I a tutor  myself,  I believe  I should  prefer 
the  epistles  of  St.  Paul  as  a summary,  to  any 
human  systems  I have  seen,  especially  his 
epistles  to  the  Romans,  Galatians,  the  He- 
brews, and  Timothy.  There  are  few  unin- 
spired writings,  however  excellent  in  the 
main,  but  bear  some  marks  of  the  infirmities, 
attachments,  and  prepossessions,  wThich  in  a 
greater  or  less  degree  are  inseparable  from 
the  present  state  of  human  nature.  I would 
have  my  pupils  draw  their  knowledge  as  im- 
mediate from  the  fountain  head  as  possible. 
I care  not  how  extensive  and  various  their 
reading  of  good  authors  may  be  under  the 
tutor’s  eye : the  more  so  the  better.  He  will 
improve  the  differences  they  will  find  among 
learned  and  spiritual  men,  into  an  argument 
to  engage  them  to  study  the  scripture  more 
closely,  and  to  bring  every  debated  senti- 
ment to  be  tried  and  finally  determined  by 
that  unerring  standard.  He  will  teach  them 
to  collect  the  detached  portions  of  truth 
wherever  they  meet  with  them ; to  borrow 
from  all,  but  to  give  themselves  up  implicitly 
to  the  dictates  of  none.  For  I know  no 
author  who  is  worthy  the  honour  of  being 
followed  absolutely  and  without  reserve. 

I am  told,  (for  I know  nothing  of  acade- 
mies but  from  hearsay,)  that  it  is  customary 
for  pupils  to  write  after  the  tutor,  who  read's 
his  lecture.  If  I should  adopt  this  custom,  I 
would  not  confine  myself  to  it.  Such  writ- 
ten lectures,  if  well  executed,  must  be  good 
patterns  to  form  the  students  to  closeness  in 
method  and  style.  But  I should  likewise 


j wish  the  tutor  to  give  them  unpremeditated 
I lectures.  Great  masters  of  music  (it  is  said) 
frequently  feel  an  impetus  in  extempore  play- 
ing, which  enables  them  to  execute  offhand 
such  strains  as  they  wTish  to  repeat,  but  can- 
not ; their  taste  assuring  them,  that  they  are 
superior  in  kind  to  what  they  can  ordinarily 
attain  when  they  study  and  compose  by  rule. 
Thus  a tutor  who  thoroughly  understands  his 
subject,  and  speaks  from  the  fulness  of  his 
heart,  will,  now  and  then  at  least,  feel  a hap- 
py moment,  when  he  will  seem  to  possess 
new  powers.  His  thoughts  and  expressions 
at  such  a time  will  have  a peculiar  precision 
and  force,  and  will  possibly  illuminate  and 
affect  his  hearers  more  than  his  regular  and 
written  lectures.  When  he  has  done  speak- 
ing, let  the  pupils  retire  and  commit  to  wri- 
ting what  they  can  recollect  of  such  dis- 
courses, keeping  to  his  method,  but  using 
their  own  expressions.  These  exercises 
would  engage  their  attention,  employ  their 
invention  and  ingenuity,  accustom  them  to 
consider  the  same  subjects  in  different  lights, 
and  contribute  to  make  the  knowledge  they 
derive  from  him,  more  their  own,  than  by  be- 
ing always  confined  to  transcribe,  line  by  line, 
what  was  read  to  them. 

I would  not  have  the  pupils  put  upon  the 
needless  and  hurtful  attempt  of  proving  first 
principles.  May  not  a man  read  lectures 
upon  optics  without  previously  proving  the 
existence  of  the  sun?  My  tutor  will  not 
coldly  lay  before  his  students  the  arguments 
pro  and  con,  and  then  leave  them  to  decide 
as  evidence  to  them  appears,  whether  there 
be  a God,  or  whether  the  scriptures  be  of  di- 
vine inspiration  or  not.  So  likewise  with 
respect  to  the  different  sentiments  on  the 
primary  points  of  scripture,  as  whether  the 
Saviour  be  man  or  angel,  or  God  manifest  in 
the  flesh ; or,  concerning  the  different  ac- 
ceptations of  the  words  Depravity,  Guilt, 
Faith,  Grace,  Atonement,  and  the  like — he 
will  speak  with  a becoming  confidence  and 
certainty  on  which  side  the  truth  lies.  He 
will  indeed  furnish  them  with  solid  confuta- 
tions of  error  from  scripture  and  experience ; 
but  he  will  take  care  to  let  them  know  that 
these  things  are  already  settled  ; and  proposed 
to  them,  not  as  candidates  for  their  good 
opinion,  but  as  truths  which  demand  and  de- 
serve their  attention.  My  tutor  will  not  dog- 
matize, and  expect  them  to  adopt  his  opinions 
without  any  better  reason  than  because  they 
are  his.  He  will  endeavour  to  throw  every 
light  he  is  master  of  upon  the  subject,  but  at 
the  same  time  he  will  speak  as  a teacher, 
not  as  an  inquirer ; as  one  who  speaks  that 
which  he  has  known,  and  testifies  that  which 
he  has  seen. — He  will  not  attempt  to  fill 
their  head  with  a detail  of  all  the  cavils 
which  pride  and  sophistry  have  started 
against  the  truths  of  God ; nor  so  flatter  his 
pupils,  as  to  suppose  them  competent  judges 


FOR  THE  MINISTRY. 


469 


when  they  have  weighed  and  compared  the 
several  argumentations.  But  he  will  rather 
warn  them  of  their  natural  bias  to  the  erro- 
neous side,  and  guard  them  against  the  arts 
of  those,  who  with  fair  words  and  fine 
speeches  beguile  the  unprincipled  and  un- 
wary. A tutor  is  a guide,  and  if  worthy  of 
his  office,  must  be  able  to  say,  without  hesi- 
tation : “ This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it.” 
Should  he  be  seduced,  by  the  specious  sounds 
of  candour  and  freedom  of  inquiry,  to  take 
the  opposite  method,  and  think  it  his  duty  to 
puzzle  his  scholars  with  all  the  waking 
dreams,  objections,  and  evasions  by  which 
men  reputed  wise  have  opposed  the  simpli- 
city of  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints, 
I should  fear  they  would  be  more  likely  to 
turn  out  sceptics  than  ministers  of  the  gospel. 

Nor  should  he,  with  my  consent,  lay  down 
a scheme  of  what  is  commonly  called  Natural 
Religion,  as  a substratum  whereon  to  build  a 
Religion  of  Divine  Revelation.  It  is  needful 
that  he  should  give  his  pupils  a just  idea  of 
the  religion  of  fallen  nature ; but  he  will  re- 
mind them  that  the  few  valuable  sentiments 
occasionally  found  in  the  writings  of  the  hea- 
then philosophers  and  moralists  were  not 
their  own.  They  are  all  represented  as 
having  travelled  for  their  knowledge,  and  all 
in  the  same  route,  into  Phoenicia  or  Egypt, 
into  the  neighbourhood  of  the  only  people 
who  at  that  time  were  favoured  with  the 
oracles  of  God : and  may,  therefore,  be  justly 
supposed  to  have  derived  the  detached  parti- 
cles of  truth  they  acquired,  from  that  people, 
either  by  immediate  converse  with  them,  or 
from  their  inspired  books ; especially  from 
the  time  they  were  translated  into  the  Greek 
language.  Pie  will  point  out  to  them  the 
strong  probability  that  Epictetus  and  the  later 
philosophers  were  equally  or  more  indebted 
to  the  Christians  and  the  New  Testament. 
With  respect  to  the  sceptical  moralists  and 
reasoners  of  modern  times,  the  proof  wil1  be 
still  clearer  and  stronger,  that  their  best  no- 
tions are  borrowed  from  the  religion  they  at- 
tempt to  depreciate.  My  tutor,  in  order  to 
satisfy  them  how  far  the  powers  of  unassist- 
ed fallen  nature  can  proceed  in  the  investi- 
gation of  religious  and  moral  truths,  will  set 
before  them  the  progress  which  has  actually 
been  made  in  this  way  by  the  negroes  in 
Africa  or  the  American  Indians.  With  such 
a picture  of  natural  religion  in  their  view,  I 
should  hope  they  would  be  led  most  cordially 
to  praise  God  for  the  inestimable  gift  of  his 
Holy  Word,  without  the  help  of  which  the 
boasted  light  of  nature  is  darkness  that  may 
be  felt. 

In  my  academy  I would  have  no  formal 
disputations  upon  points  of  divinity.  If  it  be 
necessary  to  sharpen  or  exercise  their  wits 
by  disputing,  to  which  under  proper  regula- 
tions I should  not  object,  there  are  topics  in 
abundance  at  hand.  Let  them  dispute,  if 


they  please,  for  or  against  the  motion  of  the 
earth.  Let  them  determine  whether  Csesar 
or  Pompey  was  the  better  man  ; or,  in  what 
respects  Cato,  who  chose  to  die  rather  than 
venture  to  look  Csesar  in  the  face,  discovered 
more  fortitude  or  true  greatness  of  mind, 
than  the  slave  who  elopes  from  his  master 
for  fear  of  the  lash.  Let  them  contend  whe- 
ther learning  has  upon  the  whole  been  pro- 
ductive of  most  good,  or  of  most  mischieij  to 
mankind.  My  tutor  can  supply  them  with  a 
thousand  questions  of  this  kind.  But  to  set 
a young  man  to  put  his  ingenuity  to  the 
stretch,  either  to  maintain  a gross  error,  or 
to  oppose  a known  and  important  truth,  is, 
in  my  view  not  only  dangerous,  but  little  less 
than  a species  of  profaneness.  What  must 
the  holy  angels,  who  with  humble  admiration 
contemplate  the  wisdom  and  glory  of  God 
displayed  in  the  gospel,  what  must  they  think 
of  the  arrogance  of  sinful  worms,  who  pre- 
sume so  far  to  trifle  with  the  doctrines  and 
mysteries  he  has  revealed,  as  to  degrade 
them  into  subjects  for  school  exercise  and 
logical  prize-fighting  1 Can  it  be  possible  to 
maintain  a spirit  of  reverence  and  depend- 
ence amidst  the  noise  of  such  malapert  dis- 
cussions? And  if  the  youth  to  whom  the 
wrong  side  of  the  question  is  committed, 
should  by  superior  address  nonplus  and  si- 
lence his  antagonist ; my  heart  would  be  in 
pain  for  him,  lest  he  should  from  that  moment 
be  prejudiced  against  the  truth  which  he  had 
insulted  with  success ; and  think  it  really  in- 
defensible, because  the  other  was  not  able  to 
defend  it. 

Having  been  so  long  on  the  first  article,  I 
must  endeavour  to  be  more  brief  on  those 
which  follow. 

Secondly,  By  sacred  literature  I chiefly 
mean  Philology,  Criticism,  and  Antiquities, 
so  far  as  they  are  employed  in  the  illustration 
of  scripture.  In  these  studies,  if  there  be  a 
proper  application  in  the  pupils,  little  more 
will  be  needful  on  the  tutor’s  part,  than  to 
put  suitable  books  into  their  hands,  to  superin- 
tend their  progress,  and  to  obviate  difficulties 
they  may  meet  with.  I would  wish  them  not 
only  to  read  the  scriptures  in  the  Hebrew 
and  Greek  originals,  but  to  be  tolerable  mas- 
ters of  the  construction  in  both  languages. 
This  attainment  is  certainly  not  necessary  to 
a minister ; but  they  who  apply  themselves 
to  the  study  of  divinity  in  early  life,  will  have 
time  enough  to  acquire  it,  and  the  acquisition 
will  be  well  worth  their  labour.  If  not  ne- 
cessary, it  will  be  found  very  expedient  and 
useful,  and  when  the  difficulties  of  the  first 
entrance  and  rudiments  are  surmounted,  will 
be  very  pleasant.  The  tutor  will  then  enliven 
their  study  and  facilitate  their  advance,  by 
reading  a chapter  with  them  in  each  Testa- 
ment daily  or  frequently,  intermingling  cri- 
tical or  expository  strictures  as  he  goes  along. 
And  he  will  probably  furnish  those  students 


470 


A PLAN  OF  ACADEMICAL  PREPARATION 


who  have  taste,  with  Dr.  Lowth’s  Prcelec- 
tiones  de  Por.si  Hebrcea,  which  will  enable 
them  to  judge  of  the  style  and  idiom  of  the 
Hebrew  Bible,  and  particularly  of  the  style 
and  beauties  of  the  Hebrew  poetry.  Black- 
wall’s  Sacred  Classics  may  be  added  for  the 
Greek. 

Since  the  learned  have  of  late  years  con- 
descended to  lay  open  the  way  to  the  Hebrew 
and  Greek  Scriptures,  by  publishing  Lexi- 
cons, Grammars,  and  other  helps  in  the  Eng- 
lish tongue,  the  knowledge  of  the  Latin  is 
less  needful  to  a Bible  student  than  it  was 
formerly.  But  as  there  are  many  valuable 
books  in  Latin,  and  not  yet  translated,  I must 
wish  our  pupils  so  far  acquainted  with  the 
Latin  language  as  to  be  able  to  read  good 
authors  in  it.  But  as  they  are  not  to  preach 
in  Latin,  an  accurate  skill  is  hardly  worth 
attempting,  unless  they  have  had  a classical 
school  education  before  they  come  to  the  aca- 
demy. The  mind  is  incapable  of  too  many 
acquisitions : life  is  short,  and  more  impor- 
tant business  awaits  them,  in  subserviency  to 
which  every  thing  else  must  be  conducted. 

Books  of  criticism  and  on  scripture-anti- 
quities are  at  hand  in  plenty.  It  will  be  im- 
possible to  read  them  all.  The  selection  be- 
longs not  to  me,  but  to  the  tutor.  The  Syn- 
opsis Criticorum , Godwin  and  Jennings,  will 
perhaps  be  of  the  number  he  will  choose.  A 
good  Ecclesiastical  History  seems  to  be  still 
a desideratum.  A mass  of  materials,  so  far 
as  it  goes,  is  already  prepared  in  the  Magde- 
burg Centuriators,  which  affords  a striking 
monument  of  the  compiler’s  patience  : but  it 
would  likewise  require  some  patience  in  the 
reader  who  should  undertake  to  go  through 
it.  Mosheim  is  perhaps  the  best  book  we 
have  upon  the  subject,  if  the  reader  knows  so 
much  of  himself  and  of  the  work  of  grace,  as 
to  prevent  him  from  being  misled  by  him, 
when  treating  on  subjects  which  he  does  not 
appear  to  have  rightly  understood.  But  as  to 
facts,  I believe  he  is  in  general  worthy  of 
credit.  Bingham’s  Antiquities  may  deserve 
inspection,  if  it  be  only  to  show  how  soon  and 
how  generally  the  beautiful  simplicity  of  the 
gospel  was  corrupted  by  those  who  professed 
it.  Dupin  and  Dr.  Cave’s  Historia  Literaria 
Scriptorum  Ecclesiasticorum  are  still  more 
valuable;  but  the  characters  of  the  writers, 
and  their  strong  prepossessions  in  favour  of  an- 
tiquity, should  be  known  and  allowed  for. 

Thirdly,  Much  time  cannot  be  allowed  in 
our  academy  for  the  pursuit  of  polite  litera- 
ture. But  an  entrance  may  be  made,  and  a 
relish  for  it  acquired,  under  the  direction  and 
restraint  of  the  tutor,  which  may  provide  the 
students  with  a profitable  amusement  for  lei- 
sure hours  in  future  life;  for  in  this  know- 
ledge they  may  advance  from  year  to  year. 
A perusal  of  such  books  as  Rollin  on  the 
Belles  Lettres,  Bossuet’s  Universal  History, 
Derham  and  Ray  on  the  Creation,  and  a few 


i 


of  our  best  poets,  may  suffice  while  they  are 
students.  Other  books  will  occasionally  come 
in  their  way ; for  the  tutor  should  have  a 
well-chosen  library  for  the  accommodation  of 
his  pupils  ; but  he  will  guard  them  against 
spending  too  much  time  in  this  line  of  read- 
ing. For  though  it  has  its  subordinate  ad- 
vantages, it  may,  if  too  much  indulged,  divert 
them  from  the  main  point.  And  they  should 
be  taught  to  refer  every  thing  they  read  to 
the  principles  of  scripture,  to  the  knowledge 
of  the  heart  of  man,  and  the  works,  the  ways, 
the  wisdom,  and  providence  of  God,  other- 
wise reading  will  only  tend  to  make  them 
wise  in  their  own  conceit.  I make  short 
work  with  this  article,  and  hasten  to  con- 
sider, 

Fourthly,  What  may  be  helpful  (by  the 
divine  blessing)  to  enable  the  pupils  to  com- 
municate the  fruits  of  their  knowledge  to 
advantage  in  the  public  ministry,  that  they 
may  appear  workmen  that  need  not  be 
ashamed.  For  this,  as  I have  formerly  inti- 
mated, their  chief  and  immediate  dependence 
must  be  on  the  Lord.  He  alone  can  give 
them  a mouth  and  wisdom  for  his  service ; 
and  without  the  unction  from  on  high,  the 
study  of  divinity  and  every  thing  relative  to 
it,  will  be  but  like  learning  the  art  of  navi- 
gation on  shore,  which  is  very  different  from 
the  knowledge  necessary  to  the  mariner, 
who  is  actually  called  to  traverse  the  ocean. 
But  dependence  upon  the  Lord  should  be 
no  discouragement  to  the  use  of  means. 

I would  have  my  students  good  logicians. 
The  logic  of  the  schools  is  in  a great  measure 
a cramp,  forced,  and  formal  affair,  and  may 
possibly  have  made  almost  as  many  pedants 
and  sophists  as  good  reasoners.  But  Dr. 
Watts  has  furnished  us  with  a system  of 
logic  in  a more  intelligible  and  amiable  form, 
and  divested  it  of  the  solemn  impertinences 
with  which  it  was  encumbered.  As  the  rules 
of  grammar  are  themselves  drawn  from  the 
language  they  are  designed  to  regulate,  so 
good  logic  is  no  more  than  the  result  of  ob- 


servations upon  the  powers  of  the  human 
mind : and  thus  we  see,  that  many  people  of 
plain  sense  are  passable  logicians,  though 
they  never  saw  a book  upon  the  subject,  and 
perhaps  do  not  understand  the  meaning  of 
the  term.  But  they  may  be  much  assisted 
in  the  habits  of  thinking,  judging,  and  reason- 
ing, and  in  disposing  their  thoughts  in  an 
advantageous  method,  by  rules  judiciously 
formed  and  arranged.  In  this  view  I judge 
Dr.  Watts’s  logic,  with  his  subsequent  treatise 
on  the  Improvement  of  the  Mind,  to  be  very 
valuable.  And,  together  with  the  more 
scientific  part  of  the  subject,  he  will  provide 
my  pupils  with  a great  variety  of  hints  for 
their  conduct,  and  for  distinguishing  the 
principles  and  conduct  of  others.  These 
books  should  be  frequently  read,  and  closely 
studied,  and  will  afford  the  tutor  an  exten- 


FOR  THE  MINISTRY. 


471 


sive  scope  for  their  instruction.  Unless  a 
man  can  conceive  and  define  his  subject 
clearly,  distinguish  and  enumerate  the  seve- 
ral parts,  and  knows  how  to  cast  them  into  a 
convenient  order  and  dependence,  he  cannot 
be  a masterly  preacher.  And  though  a good 
understanding  may  supersede  the  necessity 
of  logical  rules,  it  will  likewise  derive  ad- 
vantage from  them. 

I have  not  so  much  to  say  in  favor  of  ano- 
ther branch  of  artificial  assistance,  though 
much  stress  has  been  sometimes  laid  upon  it. 
We  must  not,  however,  quite  omit  it : for  an 
academic  will  be  expected  to  know,  that  the 
learned  have  thought  proper  to  give  Greek 
names  to  certain  forms  and  figures  of  speech, 
m the  use  of  which  the  common  people,  with- 
out being  aware  of  their  skill  in  rhetoric, 
are  little  less  expert  than  the  learned  them- 
selves. When  he  can  repeat  these  hard 
names,  with  their  etymologies  and  significa- 
tions, rhetoric  can  do  but  little  more  for  him. 
The  rules  it  professes  to  teach  are  in  general 
needless  to  those  who  have  genius,  and  use- 
less to  those  who  have  none.  If  a youth  has 
not  a turn  for  eloquence,  stuffing  his  head 
with  the  names  of  tropes  and  figures  will  not 
give  it  him.  To  know  the  names  of  tools  in 
an  artificer’s  shop  is  one  thing,  but  to  have 
skill  to  use  them  as  a workman  is  something 
very  different.  Here  the  tutor  will  use  his 
discretion ; for  if  any  of  his  pupils  are  not 
likely  to  be  orators,  he  will  take  care  that,  if 
he  can  prevent  it,  they  shall  not  be  pedants, 
or  value  themselves  on  retailing  a list  of 
technical  terms,  of  which  they  know  neither 
the  use  nor  the  application.  At  the  best, 
too  much  attention  to  artificial  rules  will 
make  but  an  artificial  orator,  and  rather 
qualify  the  student  to  set  off  himself  than  his 
subject.  The  grand  characteristic  of  the 
gospel  orator  is  simplicity.  Many  years 
have  passed  since  I read  Fenelon’s  treatise 
on  Pulpit  Eloquence ; but  I hope  my  tutor 
will  put  it  into  the  hands  of  his  pupils.  It 
remains  to  inquire, 

Fifthly,  How  the  pupils  are  to  be  assisted 
and  directed,  that  they  may  be  able  to  preach 
extempore : An  ability  which  I suppose  to  be 
ordinarily  attainable  by  all  who  are  called  of 
God  to  preach  the  gospel,  if  they  will  dili- 
gently apply  themselves  to  attain  it,  in  the 
use  of  proper  means.  I do  not  expect  they 
will  succeed  in  this  way  to  my  wish,  without 
prayer,  study,  effort,  and  practice.  For  as  I 
have  already  hinted,  I mean  something  more 
by  it  than  speaking  at  random. 

A well-known  observation  of  Lord  Bacon 
is  much  to  my  present  purpose.  It  is  to  this 
effect : That  reading  makes  a full  man,  writ- 
ing an  exact  man,  and  speaking  a ready 
man.  The  approved  extempore  preacher 
must  have  a fund  of  knowledge  collected 
from  various  reading : and  it  would  not  be 
improper  to  read  some  books,  with  the  imme- 


diate design  of  comparing  his  style  and 
manner  with  approved  models.  It  might  be 
wished,  that  the  best  divines  were  always 
the  best  writers ; but  the  style  of  many  of 
them  is  quaint,  involved,  and  obscure.  Some 
books  that  are  well  written  have  little  else 
to  recommend  them,  yet  may  be  useful  for 
this  purpose ; and  the  periodical  writings  of 
Addison  and  Johnson  abound  with  judicious 
observations  on  men  and  manners,  besides 
being  specimens  of  easy  and  elegant  compo- 
sition. Among  writers  in  divinity  I would 
! recommend  Dr.  Watts  and  Dr.  Witherspoon 
as  good  models.  By  perusing  such  authors 
with  attention,  I hope  the  pupils  will  acquire 
a taste  for  good  writing,  and  be  judges  of  a 
good  style.  Perspicuity,  closeness,  energy 
and  ease,  are  the  chief  properties  of  such  a 
style.  On  the  contrary,  a style  that  is  either 
obscure,  redundant,  heavy,  or  affected,  can- 
not be  a good  one.  But  I cannot  advise  them 
to  copy  the  late  Mr.  Hervey.  His  dress, 
though  it  fits  him,  and  he  does  not  look  amiss 
in  it,  is  rather  too  gaudy  and  ornamented  for 
a divine.  He  had  a fine  imagination,  an 
elegant  taste,  and  shows  much  precision  and 
judgment  in  his  choice  of  words : but  though 
his  luxuriant  manner  of  writing  has  many 
of  the  excellencies  both  of  good  poetry  and 
good  prose,  it  is  in  reality  neither  the  one  nor 
the  other.  An  injudicious  imitation  of  him 
has  spoiled  some  persons  for  writers,  who,  if 
they  could  have  been  content  with  the  plain 
and  natural  mode  of  expression,  might  have 
succeeded  tolerably  well. 

The  pupil  likewise  must  write  as  well  as 
read,  and  he  should  write  frequently.  Let 
him  fill  one  common-place  book  after  ano- 
ther, with  extracts  from  good  authors ; this 
method,  while  it  tends  to  fix  the  passages  or 
their  import  in  his  mind,  will  also  lead  him 
to  make  such  observations  respecting  the 
order,  and  construction,  and  force  of  words, 
as  will  not  so  readily  occur  to  his  notice  by 
reading  only.  Then  let  him  try  his  own 
hand,  and  accustom  himself  to  write  his 
thoughts,  sometimes  in  notes  and  observations 
on  the  books  he  reads,  sometimes  in  the  form 
of  essays  or  sermons.  He  will  do  well  like- 
wise to  cultivate  a correspondence  with  a 
few  select  friends;  for  epistolary  writing 
seems  nearest  to  that  easiness  of  manner 
which  a public  speaker  should  aim  at. 

I would  not  have  his  first  attempt  to  speak 
publicly  be  in  the  preaching  way,  or  even 
upon  spiritual  subjects.  It  might  probably 
abate  the  reverence  due  to  divine  truth,  to 
employ  it  in  efforts  of  ingenuity.  Suppose 
the  tutor  should  read  to  them  a passage  of 
history,  and  require  them  to  repeat  the  rela- 
tion to  him  the  next  day,  in  their  own  man- 
ner. He  would  then  remark  to  them  if  they 
had  omitted  any  essential  part,  or  used  im- 
proper expressions.  Or  they  might  be  put 
upon  making  speeches  or  declamations  on 


472 


A PLAN  OF  ACADEMICAL  PREPARATION,  &c. 


such  occasions  or  incidents  as  he  should  pro- 
pose. By  degrees  such  of  them  as  are  judged 
to  be  truly  spiritual  and  humble,  might  begin 
to  speak  upon  a text  of  scripture,  in  the  pre- 
sence of  the  tutor  and  pupils;  and  I should 
hope  this  might,  in  due  time,  become  a part 
of  the  morning  or  evening  devotions  in  the 
family.  But  let  them  be  especially  cautioned 
not  to  trifle  with  holy  things,  nor  profane  the 
great  subjects  of  scripture,  by  making  them 
mere  exhibitions  and  trials  of  skill. 

Thus  by  combining  much  reading  and 
writing  with  their  attempts  to  speak,  and  all 
under  the  direction  of  a judicious  tutor,  I 
shall  have  a cheerful  hope  that  the  pupils 
will  gradually  attain  a readiness  and  pro- 
priety of  speech ; and  when  actually  sent 
out  to  preach,  will  approve  themselves  scribes 
well  instructed  in  the  mysteries  of  the  king- 
dom, qualified  to  bring  forth  from  the  trea- 
sury of  their  knowledge  and  experience, 
things  new  and  old  for  the  edification  of  their 
hearers. 

And  now  I may  draw  towards  a close. 
There  are  some  branches  of  science,  or  what 
is  so  called,  on  which  I lay  but  little  stress. 
I have  no  great  opinion  of  metaphysical  stu- 
dies. For  pneumatology  and  ethics  I would 
confine  my  pupils  to  the  Bible.  The  re- 
searches of  wise  men  in  this  way,  which 
have  not  been  governed  by  the  word  of  God, 
have  produced  little  but  uncertainty,  futility, 
or  falsehood.  My  tutor  will,  I hope,  think 
it  sufficient  to  show  the  pupils  how  success- 
fully these  wise  and  learned  reasoners  re- 
ciprocally refute  each  other’s  hypotheses. 
And  if  he  informs  them  more  in  detail  of  the 
extravagances  which  have  been  started  con- 
cerning the  nature  and  foundation  of  moral 
virtue ; or  of  the  dreams  of  philosophers, 
some  of  whom  would  exclude  matter;  and 
others  would  exclude  mind  out  of  the  uni- 
verse ; he  will  inform  them  likewise,  that  he 
does  not  thereby  mean  properly  to  add  to 
their  stock  of  knowledge,  (for  we  should  in 
reality  have  been  full  as  wise  if  these  sub- 
tilties  had  never  been  heard  of,)  but  only  to 
guard  them  against  being  led  into  the  mazes 
of  error  and  folly,  by  depending  too  much  on 
the  reveries  of  philosophers. 

After  this  delineation  of  my  plan,  it  will 
be  needless  to  inform  you,  that  I do  not  pro- 
pose my  academy  to  be  a spiritual  hot-bed,  in 
which  the  pupils  shall  be  raised,  and  ripened 
into  teachers,  almost  immediately  upon  their 
admission.  I have  allowed  for  a few  except- 
ed cases ; but  in  general  it  is  my  design,  that 
their  education  shall  be  comprehensive  and 
exact.  I would  have  them  learn  before  they 


undertake  to  teach ; and  their  sufficiency  to 
be  evidenced  by  a better  testimonial  than 
their  own  good  opinion  of  themselves.  A 
scribe  well  instructed,  a workman  that  need- 
eth  not  to  be  ashamed,  an  able  minister  of  the 
New  Testament,  are  scriptural  expressions, 
intimating  what  ought  to  be  the  qualifications 
of  those  who  undertake  the  office  of  a preacher 
or  pastor.  The  apostle  expressly  forbids  a 
novice  to  be  employed  in  these  services. 
And  though  in  the  present  day  this  caution 
is  very  much  disregarded  by  persons  who  un- 
doubtedly mean  well ; yet  I believe  the  ne- 
glect of  scriptural  rules  (which  are  not  arbi- 
trary, but  founded  in  a perfect  knowledge  of 
human  nature)  will  always  produce  great  in- 
conveniences. I shall  think  a young  man  of 
tolerable  abilities  makes  a very  good  improve- 
ment of  his  time,  if  the  tutor  finds  him  fit  for 
actual  service,  after  three  or  four  years  close 
attention  to  his  studies. 

But  what  have  I done  1 — in  compliance 
with  your  request,  I have  been  led  to  give 
such  an  undisguised  view  of  my  sentiments 
on  this  interesting  subject,  that  though  I feel 
myself  a cordial  friend  to  all  sides  and  par- 
ties who  hold  the  Head,  and  agree  in  the 
grand  principles  of  our  common  faith  ; I fear, 
lest  some  of  every  party  will  be  displeased 
with  me.  I rely  on  your  friendship  and  your 
knowledge  of  me  to  bear  witness  for  me,  that 
I would  not  willingly  offend  or  grieve  a sin- 
gle person.  And  you  can  likewise  testify, 
that  I did  not  set  myself  to  work — that  I was 
much  surprised  when  you  proposed  it  to  me ; 
and  that  you  have  reason  to  believe  my  re- 
gard for  you,  and  for  the  design  you  informed 
me  of,  were  the  only  motives  of  my  ven- 
turing upon  the  task  you  assigned  me. 

I have  by  no  means  exhausted  the  subject, 
though  I hope  I have  not  omitted  any  thing 
that  very  materially  relates  to  it.  If  I was 
really  in  Utopia,  and  to  carry  my  plan  into 
execution,  other  regulations  would  probably 
occur,  which  have  at  present  escaped  me. 

res,  Stas,  usus, 

Semper  aliquid  apportent  novi. 

What  I have  written  I submit  to  the  can- 
dour of  you  and  your  friends:  adding  my 
prayers,  that  the  great  Head  of  the  church, 
the  fountain  of  grace,  and  author  of  salvation, 
may  direct  your  deliberations,  and  bless  you 
with  wisdom,  unanimity,  and  success,  in 
whatever  you  may  attempt  for  the  honour  of 
his  name,  and  the  good  of  souls. 

I am,  dear  sir, 

Your  sincere  friend  and  servant, 
OMICRON. 


May  14, 1782. 


A MONUMENT 


TO 

THE  PRAISE  OF  THE  LORD’S  GOODNESS, 


AND  TO  THE  MEMORY  OF 

MISS  ELIZA  CUNNINGHAM, 

THE  LAST  SURVIVING  CHILD  OF  MR.  JAMES  CUNNINGHAM,  OF  PITTARTHIE,  FIFESHIRE. 


Jesus  amor  meus  est ; si  rideat,  omnia  rident. 
O Death,  where  is  thy  sting  ? 1 Cor.  xv.  55. 


PREFACE. 

When  the  following  narrative  was  drawn  up,  the  writer  was  aware  that  hi 3 
feelings  rendered  him  incompetent  to  judge,  how  much  of  a relation,  every  part 
of  which  was  interesting  to  himself,  might  be  fit  to  offer  to  the  Public.  Many 
little  circumstances  which  the  indulgence  of  a friend  could  bear  with,  might  to 
strangers  appear  trivial  and  impertinent.  He  therefore  wrote  only  for  his 
friends ; and  printed  no  more  copies  than  he  thought  would  be  sufficient  to  dis- 
tribute within  the  circle  of  his  personal  acquaintance.  But  as  the  paper  lias 
been  much  inquired  after,  and  many  of  his  friends  have  expressed  their  wish, 
that  it  might  be  more  extensively  circulated,  he  has  at  length  yielded  to  their 
judgment. 

It  is  to  be  lamented,  that  in  this  enlightened  age,  so  signalized  by  the  prevalence 
of  a spirit  of  investigation,  Religion  should,  by  many,  be  thought  the  only  sub- 
ject unworthy  of  a serious  inquiry ; and  that,  while  in  every  branch  of  science 
they  studiously  endeavour  to  trace  every  fact  to  its  proper  and  adequate  cause, 
and  are  cautious  of  admitting  any  theory  which  cannot  stand  the  test  of  experi- 
ment, they  treat  the  use  of  the  term  experimental,  when  applied  to  Religion, 
with  contempt.  Yet  there  are  many  things  connected  with  this  subject,  in 
which,  whether  we  are  willing  or  unwilling,  we  are,  and  must  be  nearly  interested. 
Death,  for  instance,  is  inevitable.  And  if  there  be  an  hereafter,  (and  it  is  im- 
possible to  prove  that  there  is  not,)  the  consequences  of  death  must  be  important. 
Many  persons  die,  as  they  live,  thoughtless  and  careless  what  consequences  may 
await  them.  Others,  whose  characters  and  conduct  do  not  appear  to  have  been 
worse  than  those  of  the  former,  cannot  die  so.  They  have  dark  and  painful  fore- 
bodings, and  leave  this  world  with  reluctance  and  terror.  And  there  are  others, 
who,  though  conscious  that  they  are  sinners,  and  sure  that  they  are  about  to  enter 
upon  an  unchangeable  and  endless  state  of  existence,  possess  peace,  composure, 
and  joy.  These  declare  that  they  owe  this  happy  state  of  mind  to  their  dependence 
upon  Jesus  the  Saviour,  on  whose  blood  and  mediation  they  have  built  their  hopes. 
And  who  can  possibly  disprove  their  words!  Such  an  instance  is  now  in  the 
Reader’s  hands.  The  fact  is  indubitable.  A child  under  the  age  of  fifteen  did 
thus  rejoice  in  the  midst  of  pains  and  agonies,  tc  the  admiration  of  ail  who  be- 
Vol.  II.  3 O 473 


474 


A MONUMENT,  &c. 

held  her.  She  was  willing  to  leave  all  her  friends  whom  she  dearly  loved,  and 
by  whom  she  was  tenderly  beloved ; for  she  knew  in  whom  she  believed,  and  that 
when  she  should  be  absent  from  the  body,  she  would  be  present  with  the  Lord. 
With  this  assurance,  she  triumphed  in  the  prospect  of  glory,  and  smiled  upon  the 
approach  of  death. 

It  may  be  presumed,  that  whoever  seriously  considers  this  case,  will  not  be  able 
to  satisfy  himself,  by  ascribing  such  remarkable  effects,  in  so  young  a subject,  to 
the  power  of  habit,  example,  or  system.  If  he  does  not  account  for  them  upon 
the  principles  of  the  gospel,  he  will  be  unable  to  assign  any  proportionable  cause. 
And  it  is  to  be  feared,  that  if  he  is  not  affected  by  a testimony  so  simple  and  so 
striking,  neither  wrould  he  be  persuaded  though  one  should  rise  from  the  dead. 
Hoxton,  Nov.  17,  1785. 


A MONUMENT,  &c. 


As  T write  not  for  the  eye  of  the  public,  but 
chiefly  to  put  a testimony  of  the  Lord’s  good- 
ness into  the  hands  of  my  dear  friends  who 
have  kindly  afforded  us  their  sympathy  and 
prayers  on  the  late  occasion  ; I do  not  mean 
either  to  restrain  the  emotions  of  my  heart, 
or  to  apologize  for  them.  I shall  write  simply 
and  freely,  as  I might  speak  to  a person,  to 
whose  intimacy  and  tenderness  I can  fully 
entrust  myself,  and  who  I know  will  bear 
with  all  my  weaknesses. 

In  May,  1782,  my  sister  Cunningham  was 
at  Edinburgh,  chiefly  on  the  account  of  her 
eldest  daughter,  then  in  the  fourteenth  year 
of  her  age,  who  was  very  ill  of  a consumption. 
She  had  already  buried  an  only  son,  at  the 
age  of  twelve  ; and  while  all  a mother’s  care 
and  feelings  were  engaged  by  the  rapid  de- 
cline of  a second  amiable  child,  she  was 
unexpectedly  and  suddenly  bereaved  of  an 
affectionate  and  excellent  husband.  Her 
trials  were  great,  but  the  Lord  had  prepared 
her  for  them.  She  was  a believer.  Her 
faith  was  strong,  her  graces  active,  and  her 
conduct  exemplary.  She  walked  with  God, 
and  he  supported  her.  And  though  she  was 
a tender  and  sympathizing  friend,  she  had  a 
happy  firmness  of  temper,  so  that  her  charac- 
ter as  a Christian,  and  the  propriety  of  her 
behaviour  in  every  branch  of  relative  life, 
appeared  with  peculiar  advantage  in  the 
season  of  affliction.  She  returned  to  An- 
strut.her  a widow,  with  her  sick  child,  who 
languished  till  October,  and  then  died. 

Though  my  sister  had  many  valuable  and 
pleasing  connections  in  Scotland,  yet  her 
strongest  tie  being  broken,  she  readily  ac- 
cepted my  invitation  to  come  and  live  with 
us.  She  was  not  only  dear  to  me  as  Mrs. 
Newton’s  sister,  but  we  had  lived  long  in  the 
habits  of  intimate  friendship.  I knew  her 
worth,  and  she  was  partial  to  me.  She  had 
yet  one  child  remaining,  her  dear  Eliza. 
We  already  had  a dear  orphan  niece,  whom 
we  had,  about  seven  years  before,  adopted  for 


our  own  daughter.  My  active  fond  imagi-. 
nation  anticipated  the  time  of  her  arrival, 
and  drew  a pleasing  picture  of  the  addition 
the  company  of  such  a sister,  such  a friend, 
would  make  to  the  happiness  of  our  family. 
The  children  likewise — there  was  no  great 
disparity  between  them  either  in  years  or  sta- 
ture. From  what  I had  heard  of  Eliza,  I was 
prepared  to  love  her  before  I saw  her ; though 
she  came  afterwards  into  my  hands  like  a 
heap  of  untold  gold,  which,  when  counted 
over,  proves  to  be  a larger  sum  than  was 
expected.  My  fancy  paired  and  united  these 
children;  I hoped  that  the  friendship  between 
us  and  my  sister  would  be  perpetuated  in 
them.  I seemed  to  see  them  like  twin 
sisters,  of  one  heart  and  mind,  habited 
nearly  alike,  always  together,  always  with 
us. — Such  was  my  plan — but  the  Lord’s  plan 
was  very  different,  and  therefore  mine  failed. 
It  is  happy  for  us,  poor  short-sighted  crea- 
tures, unable  as  we  are  to  foresee  the  conse- 
quences of  our  own  wishes,  that  if  we  know 
and  trust  him,  he  often  is  pleased  to  put  a 
merciful  negative  upon  our  purposes;  and 
condescends  to  choose  better  for  us  than  we 
can  for  ourselves.  What  might  have  been 
the  issue  of  my  plan,  could  it  hai  e taken 
place,  I know  not;  but  I can  now  praise  and 
adore  him  for  the  gracious  issue  of  his.  I 
praise  his  name,  that  I can  cheerfully  comply 
with  his  word,  which  says,  “Be  still,  and 
know  that  I am  God.”  I not  only  can  bow 
(as  it  becomes  a creature  and  a sinner  to  do) 
to  his  sovereignty  ; but  I admire  his  wisdom 
and  goodness,  and  can  say  from  my  heart, 
“ He  has  done  all  things  well.” 

My  sister  had  settled  her  affairs  previous 
to  her  removal,  and  nothing  remained  but  to 
take  leave  of  her  friends,  of  whom  she  had 
many,  not  only  in  Anstruther,  but  in  differ- 
ent parts  of  the  county.  In  February,  1783, 
I received  a letter  from  her,  which,  before  I 
opened  it,  I expected  was  to  inform  me  that  she 
was  upon  the  road  in  her  way  to  London 


475 


A MONUMENT,  &c. 


But  the  information  was,  that  in  a little 
journey  she  had  made  to  bid  a friend  farewell, 
she  had  caught  a violent  cold,  which  brought 
on  a fever  and  a cough,  with  other  symptoms, 
which,  though  she  described  them  as  gently 
as  possible,  that  we  might  not  be  alarmed, 
obliged  me  to  give  up  instantly  the  pleasing- 
hope  of  seeing  her.  Succeeding  letters  con- 
firmed my  apprehensions;  her  malady  in- 
creased, and  she  was  soon  confined  to  her 
bed.  Eliza  was  at  school  at  Musselburgh. 
Till  then  she  had  enjoyed  a perfect  state  of 
health ; but  while  her  dear  mother  was 
rapidly  declining,  she  likewise  caught  a 
great  cold,  and  her  life  likewise  was  soon 
thought  to  be  in  danger.  On  this  occasion, 
that  fortitude  and  resolution  which  so  strongly 
marked  my  sister’s  character,  was  remark- 
ably displayed.  She  knew  that  her  own 
race  was  almost  finished;  she  earnestly  de- 
sired that  Eliza  might  live  or  die  with  us. 
And  the  physicians  advised  a speedy  removal, 
into  the  south.  Accordingly,  to  save  time, 
and  to  save  Eliza  from  the  impressions  which 
the  sight  of  a dying  parent  might  probably 
make  upon  her  spirits,  and  possibly  appre- 
hensive that  the  interview  might  make  too 
great  an  impression  upon  her  own  ; she  sent 
this  her  only  beloved  child  from  Edinburgh 
directly  to  London,  without  letting  her  come 
home  to  take  a last  leave  of  her.  She  con- 
tented herself  with  committing  and  bequeath- 
ing her  child  to  our  care  and  love  in  a letter, 
which  I believe  was  the  last  she  was  able 
to  write. 

Thus  powerfully  recommended  by  the  pa- 
thetic charge  of  a dying  mother,  the  dearest 
friend  we  had  upon  earth,  and  by  that  plea 
for  coopassion  which  her  illness  might  have 
strongly  urged  even  upon  strangers,  we  re- 
ceived our  dear  Eliza  as  a trust,  and  as  a 
treasure,  on  the  15th  of  March.  My  sister 
lived  long  enough  to  have  the  comfort  of 
knowing,  not  only  that  she  was  safely  arrived, 
but  was  perfectly  pleased  with  her  new  situ- 
ation. She  was  now  freed  from  all  earthly 
cares.  She  suffered  much  in  the  remaining 
part  of  her  illness,  but  she  knew  whom  she 
believed  ; she  possessed  a peace  past  under- 
standing, and  a hope  full  of  glory.  She  en- 
tered into  the  joy  of  her  Lord  on  the  10th  of 
May,  1783,  respected  and  regretted  by  all 
who  knew  her. 

I soon  perceived  that  the  Lord  had  sent  me 
a treasure  indeed.  Eliza’s  person  was  agree- 
able. There  was  an  ease  and  elegance  in 
her  whole  address,  and  a gracefulness  in  her 
movements,  till  long  illness  and  great  weak- 
ness bowed  her  down.  Her  disposition  was 
lively,  her  genius  quick  and  inventive,  and 
if  she  had  enjoyed  health,  she  probably  would 
have  excelled  in  every  thing  she  attempted 
that  required  ingenuity.  Her  understanding, 
particularly  her  judgment,  and  her  sense  of 
propriety,  was  far  above  her  years.  There 


was  something  in  her  appearance  which 
usually  procured  her  favour  at  first  sight. 
She  was  honoured  by  the  notice  of  several 
persons  of  distinction,  which,  though  1 thank- 
fully attribute  in  part  to  their  kindness  to 
me,  I believe  was  a good  deal  owing  to  some- 
thing rather  uncommon  in  her  But  her 
principal  endearing  qualities,  which  could  be 
only  fully  known  to  us  who  lived  with  her, 
were  the  sweetness  of  her  temper,  and  a 
heart  formed  for  the  exercise  of  affection, 
gratitude,  and  friendship.  Whether,  when 
at  school,  she  might  have  heard  sorrowful 
tales  from  children,  who  having  lost  their 
parents,  met  with  a great  difference,  in  point 
of  tenderness,  when  they  came  under  tin? 
direction  of  uncles  and  aunts,  and  might 
think  that  all  uncles  and  aunts  were  alike,  I 
know  not ; but  I have  understood  since  from 
herself,  that  she  did  not  come  to  us  with  any 
highly  raised  expectations  of  the  treatment 
she  was  to  meet  with.  But  as  she  found  (the 
Lord  in  mercy  to  her  and  to  us  having  opened 
our  hearts  to  receive  her)  that  it  was  hardly 
possible  for  her  own  parents  to  have  treated 
her  more  tenderly,  and  that  it  was  from  that, 
time  the  business  and  the  pleasure  of  our  lives, 
to  study  how  to  oblige  her,  and  how  to  alle- 
viate the  afflictions  which  we  were  unable  to 
remove;  so  we  likewise  quickly  found,  that 
the  seeds  of  our  kindness  could  hardly  be 
sown  in  a more  promising  and  fruitful  soil. 
I know  not  that  either  her  aunt  or  I ever  saw 
a cloud  upon  her  countenance  during  the 
time  she  was  with  us.  It  is  true  we  did  not, 
we  could  not  unnecessarily  cross  her;  but  if 
we  thought  it  expedient  to  over-rule  any 
proposal  she  made,  she  acquiesced  with  a 
sweet  smile ; and  we  were  certain  that  we 
should  never  hear  of  that  proposal  again. 
Her  delicacy  however  was  quicker  than  our 
observation ; and  she  would  sometimes  say, 
when  we  could  not  perceive  the  least  reason 
for  it,  “ I am  afraid  I answered  you  peevishly; 
indeed  I did  not  intend  it ; if  I did  I ask  your 
pardon;  I should  be  very  ungrateful,  if  I 
thought  any  pleasure  equal  to  that  of  en- 
deavouring to  please  you.”  It  is  no  wonder 
that  we  dearly  loved  such  a child  ! 

Wonderful  is  the  frame  of  the  human 
heart. — The  Lord  claims  and  deserves  it  all ; 
yet  there  is  still  room  for  all  the  charities  of 
relative  life,  and  scope  for  their  full  play ; 
and  they  are  capable  of  yielding  the  sincerest 
pleasures  this  world  can  afford,  if  held  in 
subordination  to  what  is  supremely  due  to 
him.  The  marriage  relation,  when  cemented 
by  a divine  blessing,  is  truly  a union  of 
hearts,  and  the  love  resulting  from  it  will 
admit  of  no  competition  in  the  same  kind. 
Children  have  the  next  claim  ; and  whether 
there  be  one,  or  two,  or  many,  each  one 
seems  to  be  the  object  of  the  whole  of  the 
parent’s  love.  Perhaps  my  friends  who  have 
children,  may  think  that  I who  never  had 


476 


A MONUMENT.  &c. 


any,  can  only  talk  by  guess  upon  this  subject. 
I presume  not  to  dispute  the  point  with  them. 
But  when  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  put  my  dear 
Betsey  under  my  care,  I seemed  to  acquire 
a new  set  of  feelings,  if  not  exactly  those  of 
a parent,  yet,  as  I conceive,  not  altogether 
unlike  them.  And  I long  thought  it  was  not 
possible  for  me  to  love  any  child  as  I did  her. 
But  when  Eliza  came,  she,  without  being 
her  rival,  quickly  participated  with  her  in 
the  same  affection.  I found  I had  room 
enough  for  them  both,  without  prejudice  to 
either.  I loved  the  one  very  dearly,  and  the 
other  no  less  than  before  ; if  it  were  possible 
still  more,  when  I saw  that  she  entered  into 
ray  views,  received  and  behaved  to  her  cousin 
with  great  affection,  and  ascribed  many  little 
indulgences  and  attentions,  which  were 
shown  her,  to  their  proper  ground,  the  con- 
sideration of  her  ill  state  of  health,  and  not 
to  any  preference  that  could  operate  to  her 
disadvantage.  For  the  Lord  was  pleased  to 
answer  my  prayers  in  this  respect  so  gra- 
ciously, that  I could  not  perceive  that  any 
jealousy  or  suspicion  took  place  between  them 
on  either  side,  from  first  to  last. 

The  hectic  fever,  cough,  and  sweats,  which 
Eliza  brought  with  her  from  Scotland,  were 
subdued  in  the  course  of  the  summer,  and 
there  appeared  no  reason  to  apprehend  that 
she  would  be  taken  off  very  suddenly.  But 
still  there  was  a worm  preying  upon  the  root 
of  this  pretty  gourd.  She  had  seldom  any 
severe  pain  till  within  the  last  fortnight  of 
her  life,  and  usually  slept  well ; but  when 
awake  she  was  always  ill.  I believe  she 
knew  not  a single  hour  of  perfect  ease ; and 
they  who  intimately  knew  her  state,  could 
not  but  wonder  to  see  her  so  placid,  cheerful, 
attentive  when  in  company,  as  she  generally 
was.  Many  a time  when  the  tears  have 
silently  stolen  down  her  cheeks,  if  she  saw 
that  her  aunt  or  I observed  her,  she  would 
wipe  them  away,  come  to  us  with  a smile 
and  a kiss,  and  say,  “ Do  not  be  uneasy,  I 
am  not  very  ill,  I can  bear  it,  I shall  be  better 
presently,”  or  to  that  effect. 

Her  case  was  thought  beyond  the  reach  of 
medicine,  and  for  a time  no  medicine  was 
used.  She  had  air  and  exercise,  as  the 
weather  and  circumstances  would  permit. 
For  the  rest,  she  amused  herself  as  well  as 
she  could,  with  her  guitar  or  harpsichord, 
with  her  needle,  and  with  reading.  She  had 
a part  likewise,  when  able,  in  such  visits  as 
we  paid  or  received.  And  our  visits  were 
generally  regulated  by  a regard  to  what  she 
could  bear.  Her  aunt  especially,  seldom 
went  abroad,  but  at  such  times,  and  to  such 
places,  as  we  thought  agreeable  and  con- 
venient to  her.  For  we  could  perceive  that 
she  loved  home  best,  and  best  of  all  when  we 
were  at  home  with  her. 

In  April,  1784,  we  put  her  under  the  care 
of  my  dear  friend  Dr.  Benamor.  To  the 


blessing  of  the  Lord  on  his  skill  and  endea- 
vours, I ascribe  the  pleasure  of  having  her 
continued  with  us  so  long;  nor  can  I suffi- 
ciently express  my  gratitude  for  his  assiduous 
unwearied  attention,  nor  for  his  great  tender- 
ness. She  is  now  gone,  and  can  no  more 
repeat  what  she  has  often  spoken,  of  the 
great  comfort  it  was  to  her  to  have  so  affec- 
tionate and  sympathizing  a physician ; but 
while  I live,  I hope  it  will  always  be  my 
pleasure  to  acknowledge  our  great  obliga- 
tions to  him  on  her  account.  I should  be 
ungrateful,  likewise,  were  I to  omit  mention- 
ing the  kindness  of  Dr.  Allen,  of  Dulwich, 
who  attended  her  daily  during  her  last  stay 
at  Southampton.  He  was  so  obliging,  like- 
wise, as  to  visit  her,  and  to  meet  Dr.  Bena- 
mor upon  her  case,  after  her  return  to  Lon- 
don. Their  joint  prescriptions  were  carefully 
followed.  But  what  can  the  most  efficacious 
medicines,  or  the  best  physicians,  avail  to 
prolong  life,  when  the  hour  approaches,  in 
which  the  prayer  of  the  great  Intercessor 
must  be  accomplished,  “ Father,  I will  that 
they  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  may  be  with 
me  where  I am,  to  behold  my  glory.”  This 
was  the  proper  cause  of  my  dear  Eliza’s 
death.  The  Lord  sent  this  child  to  me  to  be 
brought  up  for  him ; he  owned  my  poor  en- 
deavours ; and  when  her  education  was  com- 
pleted, and  she  was  ripened  for  heaven,  he 
took  her  home  to  himself.  He  has  richly 
paid  me  my  wages,  in  the  employment  itself, 
and  in  the  happy  issue. 

Dr.  Benamor  advising  a trial  of  the  salt 
water,  we  passed  the  month  of  August,  1784, 
with  her,  partly  at  Mr.  Walter  Taylor’s,  at 
Southampton,  and  partly  at  Charles  Etty’s, 
Esq.  of  Priestlands,  near  Lvmington.  While 
she  was  with  these  kind  and  generous  friends, 
she  had  every  accommodation  and  assistance 
that  could  be  thought  of  or  wished  for.  And 
the  bathing  was  evidently  useful,  so  far  as  to 
give  some  additional  strength  to  her  very 
weak  and  relaxed  frame,  which  assisted  her 
in  going  more  comfortably  through  the  last 
winter.  We  were  therefore  encouraged  and 
advised  to  repeat  our  visit  to  Southampton 
this  autumn.  But  the  success  was  not  the 
same.  Her  feet  and  legs  had  already  begun 
to  swell,  and  the  evening  before  she  set  out 
she  caught  cold,  which  brought  on  a return 
of  the  fever  and  cough : and  though  Dr. 
Allen  was  successful  in  removing  these 
symptoms  in  about  a fortnight,  and  she 
bathed  a few  times,  she  could  not  persevere. 
However  the  advantages  of  situation,  air,  and 
exercise,  being  much  greater  than  she  could 
have  in  London,  and  as  we  were  with  friends 
whom  she,  as  well  as  we  dearly  loved,  she 
continued  at  Southampton  six  weeks.  But 
she  was  unable  to  proceed  to  Mr.  Etty’s,  who 
was  very  desirous  of  repeating  his  former 
kindness.  The  Lord  strengthened  her  to 
perform  her  journey  home  without  incon- 


A MONUMENT,  &c. 


477 


venience.  She  returned  the  16th  of  Septem- 
ber; then  she  entered  our  door  for  the  last 
time,  for  she  went  out  no  more,  till  she  was 
carried  out  to  be  put  into  the  hearse. 

I have  thus  got  together,  in  one  view,  a 
brief  account  of  what  relates  to  her  illness, 
till  within  the  last  three  weeks  of  her  pil- 
grimage. I now  come  to  what  is  much  more 
important  and  interesting.  Her  excellent 
parents  had  conscientiously  endeavoured  to 
bring  her  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition 
of  the  Lord,  and  the  principles  of  religion  had 
been  instilled  into  her  from  her  infancy. — 
Their  labours  were  thus  far  attended  with 
success,  that  no  child  could  be  more  obedient 
or  obliging,  or  more  remote  from  evil  habits, 
or  evil  tempers;  but  I could  not  perceive, 
when  she  first  came  to  us,  that  she  had  any 
heart- affecting  sense  of  divine  things.  But 
being  under  my  roof,  she  of  course,  when  her 
health  would  permit,  attended  on  my  minis- 
try, and  was  usually  present  when  I prayed 
and  expounded  the  scriptures,  morning  and 
evening,  in  the  family.  Friends  and  minis- 
ters were  likewise  frequently  with  us,  whose 
character  and  conversation  were  well  suited 
to  engage  her  notice,  and  to  help  her  to  form 
a right  idea  of  the  Christian  principles  and 
temper.  Knowing  that  she  was  of  a thinking 
turn,  I left  her  to  make  her  own  reflections 
upon  what  she  saw  and  heard,  committing 
her  to  the  Lord,  from  whom  I had  received 
her,  and  entreating  him  to  be  her  effectual 
teacher.  When  I did  attempt  to  talk  with 
her  upon  the  concerns  of  her  soul,  she  could 
give  me  no  answer  but  with  tears.  But  I 
soon  had  great  encouragement  to  hope  that 
the  Lord  had  both  enlightened  her  under- 
standing, and  had  drawn  the  desires  of  her 
heart  to  himself.  Great  was  her  delight  in 
the  ordinances,  exemplary  her  attention 
under  the  preaching.  To  be  debarred  from 
going  to  hear  at  our  stated  times,  was  a trial, 
which,  though  she  patiently  bore,  seemed  to 
affect  her  more  than  any  other ; and  she  did 
not  greatly  care  what  she  endured  in  the 
rest  of  the  week,  provided  she  was  well 
enough  to  attend  the  public  worship.  The 
judicious  observations  she  occasionally  made 
upon  what  had  passed  in  conversation,  upon 
incidents,  books,  and  sermons,  indicated  a 
sound  scriptural  judgment,  and  a spiritual 
taste. — And  my  hope  was  confirmed  by  her 
whole  deportment,  which  was  becoming  the 
gospel  of  Christ.  So  that  had  she  died  sud- 
denly, on  any  day  within  about  a year  and  a 
half  past,  I should  have  had  no  doubt  that  she 
had  passed  from  death  unto  life.  But  I could 
seldom  prevail  with  her  to  speak  of  herself ; 
if  she  did,  it  was  with  the  greatest  diffidence 
and  caution. 

Soon  after  her  return  from  Southampton, 
she  became  acquainted  with  acute  pain,  to 
which  she  had  till  then  been  much  a stranger. 
Her  gentle  spirit,  which  had  borne  up  under 


a long  and  languishing  illness,  was  not  so 
capable  of  supporting  pain.  It  did  not  occa- 
sion any  improper  temper  or  language,  but  it 
wore  her  away  apace.  Friday,  the  30th  of 
September,  she  was  down  stairs  for  the  last 
time,  and  then  she  was  brought  down  and 
carried  up  in  arms. 

It  now  became  very  desirable  to  hear  from 
herself  a more  explicit  account  of  the  hope 
that  was  in  her ; especially  as  upon  some 
symptoms  of  an  approaching  mortification, 
she  appeared  to  be  a little  alarmed,  and  of 
course  not  thoroughly  reconciled  to  the 
thoughts  of  death.  Her  aunt  waited  for  the 
first  convenient  opportunity  of  intimating  to 
her  the  probability  that  the  time  of  her  de- 
parture was  at  hand.  The  next  morning 
(Saturday  the  1st  of  October)  presented  one. 
She  found  herself  remarkably  better,  her 
pains  were  almost  gone,  her  spirits  revived, 
and  the  favourable  change  was  visible  in  her 
countenance.  Her  aunt  began  to  break  the 
subject  to  her  by  saying,  “My  dear,  were 
you  not  extremely  ill  last  night !”  She  said, 
“Indeed  I was.”  “Had  you  not  been  re- 
lieved I think  you  could  not  have  continued 
long.”  “ I believe  I could  not.”  “ My  dear,  I 
have  been  very  anxiously  concerned  for  your 
life.”  “ But  I hope,  my  dear  aunt,  you  are 
not  so  now.”  She  then  opened  her  mind 
and  spoke  freely.  I cannot  repeat  the  whole : 
the  substance  was  to  this  effect.  “ My  views 
of  things  have  been  for  some  time  very  dif- 
ferent from  what  they  were  when  I came  to 
you.  I have  seen  and  felt  the  vanity  of 
childhood  and  youth.”  Her  aunt  said,  “ I 
believe  you  have  long  made  conscience  of 
secret  prayer.”  She  answered,  “ Yes,  I 
have  long  and  earnestly  sought  the  Lord 
with  reference  to  the  change  which  is  now 
approaching.  I have  not  yet  that  full  assur- 
ance which  is  so  desirable,  but  I have  a hope, 
I trust  a good  hope,  and  I believe  the  Lord 
will  give  me  whatever  he  sees  necessary  for 
me,  before  he  takes  me  from  hence.  I have 
prayed  to  him  to  fit  me  for  himself,  and 
then,  whether  sooner  or  later,  it  signifies  but 
little.”  Here  was  a comfortable  point  gained. 
We  were  satisfied  that  she  had  given  up  all 
expectations  of  living,  and  could  sp*eak  of 
her  departure  without  being  distressed. 

It  will  not  be  expected  that  a child  at  her 
age  should  speak  systematically.  Nor  had 
she  learnt  her  religion  from  a system  or  form 
of  words,  however  sound.  The  Lord  himself 
was  her  teacher.  But  from  what  little  she 
had  at  different  times  said  to  me,  I was  well 
satisfied  that  she  had  received  a true  con- 
viction of  the  evil  of  sin,  and  of  her  own 
state  by  nature  as  a sinner.  When  she  spoke 
of  the  Lord,  she  meant  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Great  Shepherd,  who  gathers  such  lambs 
in  his  arm,  and  carries  them  in  his  bosom. 
She  believed  him  to  be  God  and  man  in  one 
person;  and  that  hope,  of  which  she  shall 


478 


A MONUMENT,  &c. 


never  be  ashamed,  was  founded  on  his  atone- 
ment, grace  and  power.  As  I do  not  intend 
to  put  words  into  her  mouth,  which  she 
never  spoke,  I mention  this,  lest  any  person 
should  be  disappointed  at  not  finding  a cer- 
tain phraseology,  which  they  may  have  been 
accustomed  to. 

Her  apparent:  revival  was  of  short  duration. 
In  tne  evening  of  the  same  day,  she  began  to 
complain  of  a sore  throat,  which  became 
worse,  and  before  Sunday  noon  threatened 
an  absolute  suffocation.  When  Dr.  Benamor, 
who  the  day  before  had  almost  entertained 
hopes  of  her  recovery,  found  her  so  suddenly 
and  greatly  altered,  he  could  not,  at  the  mo- 
ment, prevent  some  signs  of  his  concern  from 
appearing  in  his  countenance.  She  quickly 
perceived  it,  and  desired  he  would  plainly 
tell  her  his  sentiments.  When  he  had  re- 
covered himself  he  said,  “ You  are  not  so 
well  as  when  I saw  you  on  Saturday.”  She 
answered,  “ that  she  trusted  all  would  be 
well  soon.”  He  replied,  “ that  whether  she 
lived  or  died,  it  would  be  well,  and  to  the 
glory  of  God.”  He  told  me  that  he  had 
much  pleasing  conversation  with  her  that 
morning,  some  particulars  of  which  he  had 
committed  to  writing,  but  he  lost  the  paper. 
— From  that  time  she  may  be  said  to  have 
been  dying,  as  we  expected  her  departure 
from  one  hour  to  another. 

On  Monday,  the  3d,  she  was  almost  free 
from  any  complaint  in  her  throat,  but  there 
was  again  an  appearance  of  a mortification 
in  her  legs,  which  was  again  repelled  by  the 
means  which  Dr.  Benamor  prescribed.  I 
recollect  but  little  of  the  incidents  of  this 
day.  In  general  she  was  in  great  pain, 
sometimes  in  agonies,  unable  to  remain  many 
minutes  in  the  same  position.  But  her  mind 
was  peaceful ; she  possessed  a spirit  of  re- 
collection and  prayer:  and  her  chief  atten- 
tion to  earthly  things  seemed  confined  to  the 
concern  she  saw  in  those  who  were  around 
her.  That  she  might  not  increase  their 
feelings  for  her,  she  strove  to  conceal  the 
sense  of  her  own  sufferings.  It  pleased  the 
Lord  wonderfully  to  support  my  dear  Mrs. 
Newton,  and  she  had  a tolerable  night’s  rest, 
though  I did  not  expect  the  child  would  live 
till  morning.  On  Tuesday  the  4th,  about 
nine  in  the  morning,  we  all  thought  her 
dying,  and  waited  near  two  hours  by  her  bed 
side  for  her  last  breath.  She  was  much 
convulsed  and  in  great  agonies.  I said,  “My 
dear,  you  are  going  to  heaven,  and  I hope  by 
the  grace  of  God,  we  in  due  time  shall  follow 
you.”  She  could  not  speak,  but  let  us  know 
that  she  attended  to  what  I said  by  a gentle 
nod  of  her  head,  and  a sweet  smile.  I re- 
peated to  her  many  passages  of  scripture,  and 
verses  of  hymns,  to  each  of  which  she  made 
the  same  kind  of  answer.  Though  silent, 
her  looks  were  more  expressive  than  words. 
Towards  eleven  o’clock,  a great  puantity  of 


coagulated  phlegm,  which  she  had  not  the 
strength  to  bring  up,  made  her  rattle  violent- 
ly in  the  throat,  which  we  considered  as  a 
sign  that  death  was  at  hand : and  as  she 
seemed  unwilling  to  take  something  that 
was  offered  her,  we  were  loth  to  disturb  her 
in  her  last  moments  (as  we  supposed)  by 
pressing  her.  I think  she  must  have  died  in  a 
quarter  of  an  hour,  had  not  Dr.  Benamor  just 
then  come  into  the  room.  He  felt  her  pulse, 
and  observed  that  she  was  not  near  death  by 
her  pulse,  and  desired  something  might  be 
given  her.  She  was  perfectly  sensible, 
though  still  unable  to  speak,  but  expressed 
her  unwillingness  to  take  any  thing,  by  very 
strong  efforts.  However  she  yielded  to  en- 
treaty, and  a tea-spoonful  or  two  of  some 
liquid  soon  cleared  the  passage,  and  she 
revived.  Her  pain  however  was  extreme, 
and  her  disappointment  great.  I never  saw 
her  so  near  impatient  as  upon  this  occasion : 
as  soon  as  she  could  speak  she  cried,  “ Oh 
cruel,  cruel,  to  recall  me,  when  I was  so 
happy  and  so  near  gone ! I wish  you  had  not 
come ; I long  to  go  home.”  But  in  a few 
minutes  she  grew  composed,  assented  to 
what  the  Doctor  said,  of  her  duty  to  wait  the 
Lord’s  time;  and  from  that  hour,  though  her 
desires  to  depart  and  to  be  with  her  Saviour, 
were  stronger  and  stronger,  she  cheerfully 
took  whatever  was  offered  her,  and  frequently 
asked  for  something  of  her  own  accord. — 
How  often,  if  we  were  to  have  our  choice, 
should  we  counteract  our  own  prayers ! I 
had  entreated  the  Lord  to  prolong  her  life, 
till  she  could  leave  an  indisputable  testimony 
behind  her,  for  our  comfort.  Yet  when  I 
saw  her  agony,  and  heard  her  say,  “ Oh  ! 
how  cruel  to  stop  me  !”  I was  for  a moment 
almost  of  her  mind,  and  could  hardly  help 
wishing  that  the  Doctor  had  delayed  his  visit 
a little  longer.  But  if  she  had  died  then,  we 
should  have  been  deprived  of  what  we  saw 
and  heard  the  two  following  days,  the  re- 
membrance of  which  is  now  much  more  pre- 
cious to  me  than  silver  or  gold. 

When  the  Doctor  came  on  Wednesday, 
she  entreated  him  to  tell  her  how  long  he 
thought  she  might  live ; he  said,  “ Are  you 
in  earnest,  my  dear  1”  She  answered,  “ In- 
deed I am.”  At  that  time  there  were  great 
appearances  that  a mortification  was  actually 
begun.  He  therefore  told  her,  he  thought  it 
possible  she  might  hold  out  till  eight  in  the 
evening,  but  did  not  expect  she  could  survive 
midnight  at  farthest.  On  hearing  him  say 
so,  low  as  she  was,  her  eyes  seemed  to 
sparkle  with  their  former  vivacity,  and  fixing 
them  on  him  with  an  air  of  ineffable  satis- 
faction, she  said,  “Oh  that  is  good  news 
indeed !”  And  she  repeated  it  as  such  to  a 
person  who  came  soon  after  into  the  room, 
and  said  with  lively  emotions  of  joy,  “ The 
Doctor  tells  me  I shall  stay  here  but  a few 
hours  more.”  In  the  afternoon  she  noticed 


479 


A MONUMENT,  &c. 


and  counted  the  clock,  I believe,  every  time 
it  struck,  and  when  it  struck  seven,  she  said, 
“ Another  hour,  and  then.”  But  it  pleased 
the  Lord  to  spare  her  to  us  another  day. 

She  suffered  much  in  the  course  of  Wed- 
nesday night,  but  was  quite  resigned  and 
patient.  Our  kind  servants,  who  from  their 
love  to  her  and  to  us,  watched  her  night  and 
day  with  a solicitude  and  tenderness  which 
wealth  is  too  poor  to  purchase,  were  the  only 
witnesses  of  the  affectionate  and  grateful 
manner  in  which  she  repeatedly  thanked 
them  for  their  service  and  attention  to  her. 
Though  such  an  acknowledgement  was  no 
more  than  their  due,  yet  coming  from  herself, 
and  at  such  a time,  they  highly  valued  it. 
She  added  her  earnest  prayers  that  the  Lord 
would  reward  them.  To  her  prayers  my 
heart  says,  Amen.  May  they  be  comforted 
of  the  Lord  in  their  dying  hours,  as  she  was, 
and  meet  with  equal  kindness  from  those 
about  them ! 

I was  surprised  on  Thursday  morning  to 
find  her  not  only  alive,  but  in  some  respects 
better.  The  tokens  of  mortification  again 
disappeared.  This  was  her  last  day,  and  it 
was  a memorable  day  to  us.  When  Dr. 
Benamor  asked  her  how  she  was  1 She  ans- 
wered, “ Truly  happy,  and  if  this  be  dying, 
it  is  a pleasant  thing  to  die.”  [The  very 
expression  which  a dear  friend  of  mine  used 
upon  her  death  bed  a few  years  ago.]  She 
said  to  me  about  ten  o’clock,  “ My  dear 
uncle,  I would  not  change  conditions  with 
any  person  upon  earth.  Oh  how  gracious  is 
the  Lord  to  me  ! Oh  what  a change  is  be- 
fore me  !”  She  was  several  times  asked,  if 
she  could  wish  to  live,  provided  the  Lord 
should  restore  her  to  perfect  health ; her 
answer  was,  “ Not  for  all  the  world,”  and 
sometimes,  “Not  for  a thousand  worlds.”* 
“ Do  not  weep  for  me,  my  dear  aunt ; but 
rather  rejoice  and  praise  on  my  account.  I 
shall  now  have  the  advantage  of  my  dear 
Miss  Patty  Barham  (for  whom  she  had  a very 
tender  affection,  and  who  had  been  long  in  a 
languishing  state,)  for  I shall  go  before  her.” 
We  asked  her  if  she  would  chuse  a text  for 
her  own  funeral  sermon  1 She  readily  men- 
tioned, “ Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasten- 
eth.  That,”  said  she, “has  been  my  experience ; 
my  afflictions  have  been  many,  but  not  one 
too  many  ; nor  has  the  greatest  of  them  been 
too  great;  I praise  him  for  them  all.”  But 
after  a pause  she  said,  “ Stay,  I think  there 
is  another  text  which  may  do  better;  let  it 
be,  Blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord. 
That  is  my  experience  now.”  She  likewise 
chose  a hymn  to  be  sung  after  the  sermon. 
Olney  Hymns,  book  II.  hymn  72. 

But  I must  check  myself,  and  set  down 
but  a small  part  of  the  gracious  words  which 

* The  last  time  she  was  asked  this  question,  she  said 
(as  I have  since  been  informed,)  “ I desire  to  have  no 
choice.” 


the  Lord  enabled  her  to  speak  in  the  course 
of  the  day,  though  she  was  frequently  in- 
terrupted by  pains  and  agonies.  She  had 
something  to  say  either  in  the  way  of  ad- 
monition or  consolation,  as  she  thought  most 
suitable,  to  every  one  whom  she  saw.  To 
her  most  constant  attendant  she  said,  “ Be 
sure  you  continue  to  call  upon  the  Lord  ; and 
if  you  think  he  does  not  hear  you  now,  he 
will  at  last,  as  he  has  heard  me.”  She  spoke 
a great  deal  to  an  intimate  friend,  who  was 
with  her  every  day,  which  I hope  she  wili 
long  remember,  as  the  testimony  of  her  dying 
Eliza.  Amongst  other  things,  she  said,  “ See 
how  comfortable  the  Lord  can  make  a dying 
bed ! Do  you  think  that  you  shall  have  such 
an  assurance  when  you  come  to  die  I”  Being 
answered,  “ I hope  so,  my  dear,”  she  replied, 
“But  do  you  earnestly  and  with  all  your 
heart  pray  to  the  Lord  for  it  I If  you  seek 
him,  you  shall  surely  find  him.”  She  then 
prayed  affectionately  and  fervently  for  her 
friend,  afterwards  for  her  cousin,  and  then  for 
another  of  our  family  who  was  present.  Her 
prayer  was  not  long,  but  her  every  word  was 
weighty,  and  her  manner  very  affecting — the 
purport  was,  that  they  might  all  be  taught 
and  comforted  by  the  Lord.  About  five  in 
the  afternoon  she  desired  me  to  pray  with 
her  once  more.  Surely  I then  prayed  from 
my  heart.  When  I had  finished,  she  said, 
Amen.  I said,  “ My  dear  child,  have  I ex- 
pressed your  meaning  1”  she  answered,  “ Oh 
yes  !”  and  then  added,  “ I am  ready  to  say, 
Why  are  his  chariot  wheels  so  long  in  com- 
ing ! But  I hope  he  will  enable  me  to  wait 
his  hour  with  patience.”  These  were  the 
last  words  I heard  her  speak. 

Mrs.  Newton’s  heart  was  much,  perhaps 
too  much,  attached  to  this  dear  child;  which 
is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  considering  what  a 
child  she  was,  and  how  long  and  how  much 
she  had  suffered.  But  the  Lord  graciously 
supported  her  in  this  trying  season.  Indeed 
there  was  much  more  cause  for  joy  than  for 
grief:  yet  the  pain  of  separation  will  be  felt. 
Eliza  well  knew  her  feelings,  and  a concern 
for  her  was,  I believe,  the  last  anxiety  that 
remained  with  her.  She  said  to  those  about 
her,  “ Try  to  persuade  my  aunt  to  leave  the 
room;  I think  I shall' soon  go  to  sleep,  I 
shall  not  remain  with  you  till  the  morning.” 
Her  aunt,  however,  was  the  last  person  who 
heard  her  speak,  and  was  sitting  by  her  bed 
when  she  went  away.  A little  past  six, 
hearing  that  a relation  who  dearly  loved  hm-, 
and  was  beloved  by  her,  and  who  had  come 
daily  from  Westminster  to  see  her,  was  be- 
low stairs,  she  said,  “ Raise  me  up,  that  I 
may  speak  to  him  once  more.”  Her  aunt 
said,  “ My  dear,  you  are  nearly  exhausted,  I 
think  you  had  better  not  attempt  it.”  She 
smiled,  and  said,  “ It  is  very  well,  I will 
not.”  She  was  then  within  half  an  hour  of 
her  translation  to  glory,  but  the  love  of  our 


480 


A MONUMENT,  &c. 


dear  Lord  had  so  filled  her  with  benevolence, 
that  she  was  ready  to  exert  herself  to  her 
last  breath,  in  hopes  of  saying-  something 
that  might  be  useful  to  others  after  she  was 
gone. 

Towards  seven  o’clock,  1 was  Walking  in 
the  garden,  and  earnestly  engaged  in  prayer 
for  her,  when  a servant  came  to  me  and  said, 
“ She  is  gone.”  O Lord,  how  great  is  thy 
power!  how  great  is  thy  goodness  ! A few 
days  before,  had  it  been  practicable  and  law- 
ful, what  would  I not  have  given  to  procure 
her  recovery?  Yet  seldom  in  my  life  have  I 
known  a more  heart-felt  joy,  than  when  these 
words,  She  is  gone , sounded  in  my  ears.  1 
ran  up  stairs,  and  our  whole  little  family 
were  soon  around  her  bed. — Though  her 
aunt  and  another  person  were  sitting  with 
their  eyes  fixed  upon  her,  she  was  gone  per- 
haps a few  minutes  before  she  was  missed. 
She  lay  upon  her  left  side,  with  her  cheek 
gently  reclining  upon  her  hand,  as  if  in  a 
sweet  sleep.  And  I thought  there  was  a 
smile  upon  her  countenance.  Never  surely 
did  death  appear  in  a more  beautiful,  inviting 
form  ! We  fell  upon  our  knees,  and  I re- 
turned (I  think  I may  say)  my  most  unfeign- 
ed thanks  to  our  God  and  Saviour,  for  his 
abundant  goodness  to  her,  crowned  in  this 
last  instance,  by  giving  her  so  gentle  a dis- 
mission. Yes,  I am  satisfied.  I am  comfort- 
ed. And  if  one  of  the  many  involuntary  tears 
I have  shed,  could  have  recalled  her  to  life, 
to  health,  to  an  assemblage  of  all  that  this 
world  could  contribute  to  her  happiness,  I 
would  have  laboured  hard  to  suppress  it. 
Now  my  largest  desires  for  her  are  accom- 
plished. The  days  of  her  mourning  are 
ended.  She  is  landed  on  that  peaceful  shore, 
where  the  storms  of  trouble  never  blow. — 
She  is  for  ever  out  of  the  reach  of  sorrow, 
sin,  temptation,  and  snares.  Now  she  is 
before  the  throne ! she  sees  Him  whom  not 
having  seen  she  loved ; she  drinks  of  the 
rivers  of  pleasure  which  are  at  his  right  hand, 
and  shall  thirst  no  more. 

She  was  born  at  St.  Margaret’s,  Rochester, 
February  6,  1771.  Her  parents  settled  at 
Anstruther,  in  Fife,  in  1773.  She  returnee! 

to  us March  15,  1783.  She  breathed 

her  spirit  into  her  Redeemer’s  hands  a little 
before  seven  in  the  evening,  on  October  6, 
1785,  aged  fourteen  years  and  eight  months. 

I shall  be  glad  if  this  little  narrative  may 


prove  an  encouragement  to  my  friends  who 
have  children.  May  we  not  conceive  the 
Lord  saying  to  us,  as  Pharaoh’s  daughter  said 
to  the  mother  of  Moses,  “Take  this  child, 
and  bring  it  up  for  me,  and  I will  pay  thee 
thy  wages?”  How  solemn  the  trust!  How 
important  and  difficult  the  discharge  of  it! 
but  how  rich  the  reward  if  our  endeavours 
are  crowned  with  success ! And  we  have 
every  thing  to  hope  from  his  power  and 
goodness,  if,  in  dependence  upon  his  blessing, 
we  can  fully  and  diligently  aim  at  fulfilling 
his  will.  Happy  they  who  will  say  at  the 
last  day,  “Behold, here  am  I,  and  the  children 
which  thou  hast  given  me.” 

The  children  of  my  friends  will  likewise 
see  my  narrative.  May  it  convince  them 
that  it  is  practicable,  and  good,  to  seek  the 
Lord  betimes!  My  dear  Eliza’s  state  of 
languor  prevented  her  from  associating  with 
young  people  of  her  own  age,  so  frequently 
and  freely  as  she  might  otherwise  have  done. 
But  these  papers  will  come  into  the  hands  of 
some  such,  whom  she  knew  and  whom  she 
loved.  To  them,  I particularly  commend  and 
dedicate  this  relation.  O my  dear  young 
friends,  had  you  seen  with  what  dignity  of 
spirit  she  filled  up  the  last  scene  of  her  life, 
you  must  have  been  affected  by  it ! Let  not 
the  liveliness  of  your  spirits,  and  the  gaiety 
of  the  prospect  around  you,  prevent  you  from 
considering,  that  to  you  likewise,  days  will 
certainly  come  (unless  you  are  suddenly 
snatched  out  of  life)  when  you  will  say  and 
feel,  that  the  world,  and  all  in  it,  can  afford 
you  no  pleasure.  But  there  is  a Saviour,  and 
a mighty  One,  always  near,  always  gracious 
to  those  who  seek  Him.  May  you,  like  her, 
be  enabled  to  choose  Him,  as  the  Guide  of 
your  youth,  and  the  Lord  of  your  hearts. 
Then  like  her,  you  will  find  support  and 
comfort  under  affliction,  wisdom  to  direct 
your  conduct,  a good  hope  in  death,  and  by 
death  a happy  translation  to  everlasting 
life. 

I have  only  to  add  my  prayers,  that  a 
blessing  from  on  high  may  descend  upon  the 
persons  and  families  of  all  my  friends,  and 
upon  all  into  whose  hands  this  paper  may 
providentially  come. 

JOHN  NEWTON. 

Charles's  Square,  Hoxton, 

Oct.  13,  1785. 


THE  END. 


VALUABLE  BOOKS 

PUBLISHED  BY 

ROBERT  CARTER  & BROTHERS,  285  BROADWAY. 

NEW  YORK. 


A heel’s  (Rev.  David)  Life.  By  his  Nephew,  $ 50 
Abercrombie’s  Contest  and  The  Armor.  32ino.  25 
Adam’s  Three  Divine  Sisters— Faith,  Hope,  &c.  60 

Advice  to  a Young  Christian.  By  a Village 
Pastor.  With  an  Introduction  by  Rev.  Dr. 
Alexander.  18mo.  . . . .30 

Alleine’s  Gospel  Promises.  18mo.  ...  30 

-Life  and  Letters.  12mo.  ...  60 

Alexander’s  Counsels  to  the  Young.  32mo.  gilt,  25 
Ancient  History  of  the  Egyptians,  Assyrians, 
Chaldeans,  Medes,  Lydians,  Carthaginians, 

V Persians,  Macedonians,  &c.  4 vols.  12mo.  2 00 
Anderson— The  Annals  of  the  English  Bible. 

By  Christopher  Anderson.  Revised,  abridg- 
ed, and  continued  by  Rev.  S.  I.  Prime.  8vo.  1 75 

The  Family  Book  ; or,  The  Genius  and 

Design  of  the  Domestic  Constitution.  12mo.  75 

Australia,  the  Loss  of  the  Brig,  by  Fire.  18mo.  25 

Bagster— The  Genuineness,  Authenticity,  and 
Inspiration  of  the  Sacred  Volume.  I2mo.  . 60 


Baxter’s  Saint’s  Rest.  Large  type.  12mo.  . 60 

Call  to  the  Unconverted.  18mo.  . . 30 

Choice  Works.  I2mo 60 

Bible  Expositor.  18mo.  . . . , .50 
Bickersteth’s  Treatise  on  Prayer.  18mo.  . 40 


Treatise  on  the  Lord’s  Supper.  18mo.  30 

Blunt’s  Undesigned  Coincidences  in  the  Writ- 
ings both  of  the  Old  and  New  Testaments, 
an  Argument  of  their  Veracity.  8vo.  . . 1 25 

Bogatzky’s  Golden  Treasury.  18mo.  . . 50 

Bolton  (Miss)  Memoir,  or  the  Lighted  Valley,  75 
Bonar’s  Night  of  Weeping.  18mo.  . . 30 

Story  of  Grace.  18mo 30 

Morning  of  Joy, 40 

Bonnet’s  Family  of  Bethany.  19mo.  . . 40 

Meditations  on  the  Lord’s  Prayer,  . 40 

Borrow’s  Bible  and  Gypsies  of  Spain.  8vo.  75 
Boston’s  Four-fold  State.  18mo.  ...  50 

Crook  in  the  Lot.  18mo.  ...  30 

Brown’s  Explication  of  the  Assem.  Catechism,  60 
Bridges  on  the  Christian  Ministry.  8vo.  . ] 50 

I • On  the  Proverbs.  8vo 2 00 

j On  the  cxix.  Psalm.  New  ed.  8vo.  . 1 00 

* Memoir  of  Mary  Jane  Graham.  8vo.  . 1 00 

| Works.  3 vols.,  containing  the  above,  5 00 

j Brown’s  Concordance.  New  and  neat  ed.  24mo.  20 

Do.  gilt  edge,  30 

Buchanan’s  Comfort  in  Affliction.  l8mo.  . 40 

On  the  Holy  Spirit.  18  mo.  2d  ed.  . 50 

J Bunbury’s  Glory,  and  other  Narratives,  . . 25 

I Bunyan’s  Pilgrim’s  Progress.  Fine  edition, 


large  type,  with  eight  illustrations  by  How- 
land. 12mo 1 00 

Do.  do.  gilt,  1 50 

Do.  do.  close  type,  18mo.  50 

Jerusalem  Sinner  Saved.  18mo.  . 50 


; Greatness  of  the  Soul.  18mo.  . . 50 


Butler’s  Complete  Works.  8vo.  . . $1 

Sermons,  alone.  8vo.  . . . . 1 

Analogy,  alone.  8vo.  . . . 

and  Wilson’s  Analogy.  8vo.  . . 1 

Burn’s  Christian  Fragments.  18mo. 

Caivin  on  Secret  Providence.  18mo. 

Cameron's  Farmer’s  Daughter.  18mo.  . 
Catechisms — The  Assembly’s.  Per  hundred,  l 

Do.  with  Proofs 3 

Brown’s  Short  Catechism.  Per  hund.  . 1 

Smyth’s  Ecclesiastical  Catechism.  18mo. 

Willison’s  Communicant’s.  18mo. 

Key  to  the  Assembly  s Catechism.  18mo. 

Cecil’s  Works  ; comprising  his  Sermons,  Origi- 
nal Thoughts  on  Scripture.  Miscellanies,  and 
Remains.  3 vols.  12mo.  with  portrait,  .3 

Original  Thoughts  on  Scripture,  separate,  1 

Charnock’s  Choice  Works.  12mo. 

Chalmers’  Sermons,  enlarged  by  the  addition 
of  his  Posthumous  Sermons.  2 vols.  8vo. 

with  a fine  Portrait, 3 

Lectures  on  Romans.  8vo.  . . .1 

Miscellanies.  8vo.  . . . . 1 

Select  Works;  comprising  the  above. 

4 vols.  8vo.  with  portrait 6 

Evidences  of  Christian  Revelation.  2v.  1 


Natural  Theology.  2 vols.  . . .1 

Moral  Philosophy,  .... 

Commercial  Discourses,  . . 

Astronomical  Discourses, 

Christian  Retirement.  12mo 

Clarke’s  Daily  Scripture  Promises.  32mo.gilt, 
Clark’s  Walk  about  Zion.  12mo.  . 

Pastor’s  Testimony',  .... 

Awake,  Thou  Sleeper 

Young  Disciple, 

Gathered  Fragments,  . . . . l 

Experience.  By  the  same  author.  ISmo. 

Colquhoun’s  World’s  Religion.  18mo.  . 
Commandment  with  Promise.  By  the  author 
of  ‘‘The  First  Day  of  the  Week,”  “Guilty 
Tongue,”  &c.  With  beautiful  illustrations 
by  Howland.  I6mo 


Cowper — The  Works  of  William  Cowper; 

| comprising  his  Life,  Letters,  and  Poems, 
now  first  collected  by  the  introduction  of 
Cowper’s  Private  Correspondence.  Edited 
by  the  Rev.  T.  S.  Grimshaw.  With  numer- 
ous illustrations  on  steel,  and  a fine  portrait 
by  Ritchie.  1 vol.  royal  8vo.  . . . 3 00 


Do. 

do. 

sheep,  3 50 

Do. 

do. 

half  mor.  4 00 

Do. 

do. 

cloth  extra  gilt,  4 00 

Do. 

do. 

mor.  extra,  5 00 

Poetical  Works,  separate.  2 vols.  1 00  j 

Cumming’s  Message  from  God.  18mo.  . 30 

Christ  Receiving  Sinners,  . .30 


C. 


CARTERS’  PUBLICATIONS. 


|,!Z. 


Cunningham's  World  without  Souls.  18mo.  $ 
Dale — The  Golden  Psalm ; an  Exposition  of 
the  1 6th  Psalin.  By  Rev.  Thos.  Dale,  M.A. 
Davies’  Sermons.  3 vols.  12mo.  . . .2 

Davidson’s  Connections.  New  ed.  8vo  . . 1 

David’s  Psalms,  in  metre.  Large  type,  12mo. 

Do.  do  gilt  edge,  1 

Do.  do.  Turkey  mor.  2 

Do.  18ino.,  good  type.  plain  sheep, 

! — Do.  “ do.  Turkey  mor.  1 

Do.  48tno.,  very  neat  pocket  ed.  mor. 

Do.  ••  “ “ gilt  edge, 

Do.  “ “ “ tucks, 

D’Aubignfe’s  History  of  the  Reformation.  Care- 
fully revised , with  various  additions  not 
hitherto  published.  4 vols.  12irio.  half  cloth,  I 

Do.  “ “ full  cloth,  1 

Do.  “ “ 4th  vol.  half  cloth, 

Do.  “ “ “ full  cloth, 

Do.  “ “ Complete  in  1 vol.  1 

Life  of  Cromwell.  12mo. 

Germany,  England,  and  Scotland, 

Luther  and  Calvin.  ]8mo.  . 

Dick’s  Lectures  on  Acts.  8vo.  . . .1 

Dickinson’s  Scenes  from  Sacred  History.  3ded.  1 
Doddridge’s  Rise  and  Progress.  18mo.  . 

Life  of  Colonel  Gardiner.  18ino. 

Duncan’s  Sacred  Philosophy  of  Seasons.  4 v.  3 

Life  by  his  Son.  With  portrait.  12mo. 

Tales  of  the  Scottish  Peasantry.  18mo.  . 

Cottage  Fireside.  18tno 

(Mrs.)  Life  of  Mary  Lundie  Duncan, 

Life  of  George  A.  Lundie.  18mo. 

Memoir  of  George  B.  Phillips,  . 

Erskine’s  Gospel  Sonnets.  New  edition,  . 1 
English  Pulpit;  a collection  of  Sermons  by  the 
most  eminent  English  Divines.  8vo.  . . 1 

Farr’s  History  of  the  Egyptians.  12mo.  . 

History  of  the  Persians.  12mo. 

History  of  the  Assyrians,  Chaldeans, 

Medes,  Lydians,  and  Carthaginians.  12mo. 

History  of  the  Macedonians,  the  Selucldas 

in  Syria,  and  Parthians.  12mo.  . 

Ferguson’s  Roman  Republic.  8vo. . . .1 

Fisk’s  Memorial  of  the  Holy  Land.  With 

steel  plates,  . 

Fleury’s  Life  of  David.  12mo. 

Foster’s  Essays,  on  Decision  of  Character,  &c. 
Large  type,  fine  edition,  12tno. 

Do.  Close  type,  18mo. 

Essay  on  the  Evils  of  Popular  Ignorance 

Ford’s  Decapolis.  ISmo 

Free  Church  Pulpit;  consisting  of  Discourses 
by  the  most  eminent  Divines  of  the  Free 
Church  of  Scotland.  3 vols.  8vo. 

Fry  (Caroline)  The  Listener.  2 vols.  in  one, 
Christ  our  Law.  12ino.  . . . 

Sabbath  M usings.  18ino. 

The  Scripture  Reader’s  Guide.  18mo 

Geological  Cosmogony.  By  a Layman.  18mo 
God  in  the  Storm.  18mo. 

Graham’s  (Miss  Mary  J.)  Life  and  Works.  8vo 

Test  of  Truth,  separate.  18mo.  . 

Green — The  Life  of  the  Rev.  Ashbel  Green 
D.D  , by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Jones,  of  Philadelphia 
Griffith’s  Live  while  you  Live.  18mo.  . 


30 


75 


1 00 


25 


Haldane’s  Exposition  of  Romans.  8vo.  5 
Hall  :Jos.  Bishop  of  Exeter,)  Select  Works, 
Ham. lion’s  Life  in  Earnest,  . 

Mount  of  Olives, 

Harp  on  the  Willows,  .... 

Thankfulness, 

Life  of  Bishop  Hall,  . . . . 

The  Happy  Home.  Illustrated,  . 

Life  of  Lady  Colquhoun.  With  portrait, 

Hawker’s  Poor  Man’s  Morning  Portion.  12mo. 

“ Evening  Portion,  . 

Zion’s  Pilgrim.  18mo 

Hervey’s  Meditations, 

Hetherlngton’s  Hist,  of  the  Church  of  Scotland, 
Hengstenberg’s  Egypt  and  the  Books  of  Moses, 
or  the  Books  of  Moses  Illustrated  by  the 
Monuments  of  Egypt.  12mo. 

Henry’s  (Matth.)  Method  for  Prayer, 

Communicant’s  Companion, 

Daily  Communion  with  God, 

Pleasantness  of  a Religious  Life, 

Choice  Works.  12ino 

Henry  (Philip)  Life  of.  18mo. 

Hill’s  (George)  Lectures  on  Divinity.  8vo.  . 

(Rowland)  Life.  By  Sidney.  12mo. 

History  of  the  Puritans  in  England,  and  the 
Pilgrim  Fathers.  By  the  Rev.  W.  H.Stowell 
and  D.  Wilson,  F.S.A.  With  2 steel  plates, 
History  of  the  Reformation  in  Europe.  18ino. 
Housman’s  Life  and  Remains.  12mo. 

Horne’s  Introduction.  2v.royal  8vo.  halfcloth, 

Do.  1 vol.  sheep,  . 

Do.  2 vols.  cloth,  . 

Do.  2 vols.  library  style, 

(Bishop)  Commentary  on  the  Psalms.  . 

Howard  (John)  or  the  Prison  World  of  Europe, 
Howell’s  Life — Perfect  Peace.  18mo. 

Howe’s  Redeemer’s  Tears,  and  other  Essays, 
Huss’  (John)  Life.  Transl.  from  the  German, 
Jacobus  on  Matthew.  With  a Harmony,  . 

Questions  on  do.  ]8mo. 

On  Mark,  Luke,  and  John,  . 

James’  Anxious  Inquirer.  18mo.  . 

True  Christian.  18mo. 

Widow  Directed.  I8mo. 

Janeway’s  Heaven  upon  Earth.  12mo. 

Token  for  Children  18mo. . 

Jay’s  Morning  Exercises.  12mo.  . . 

Evening  *•  12ino.  . . . 

— — Christian  Contemplated.  I8mo. 

Jubilee  Memorial.  18mo. 

Jerram’s  Tribute  to  a beloved  only  Daughter,  . 
Johnson’s  Rasselas.  Elegant  edition, 

Key  to  the  Shorter  Catechism.  18mo.  . 
Kennedy’s  (Grace)  Profession  is  not  Principle, 

Jessy  Allan,  the  Lame  Girl.  18mo.  . 

Kitto’s  Daily  Bible  Illustrations.  4 vols.  12ino. 
Krummacher’s  Martyr  Lamb.  18ino. 

Elijah  the  Tishbite.  18mo. 

Last  Days  of  Elisha.  12mo. 

Life  in  New  York.  18mo 

Lowrie’s  Letters  to  Sabbath  School  Children, 

(Rev.  W.  M.)  Life.  Edited  by  his  Father, 

Lockwood’s  Memoir.  By  his  Father.  18mo. 
Luther’s  Commentary  on  Galatians.  8vo. 
Martin’s  (Sarah)  Life.  18ino 


1 00 
40 
75 

3 50 

4 00 

4 00 

5 00 
1 50 
1 00 

30 

50 

25 

75 

15 

30 
30 
30 
60 
30 
75 
75 
40 
30 
30 
57 
20 
30 
25 
4 00 
40 
40 
75 
40 
25 
1 50 
40 
1 50 
30 


CARTERS’  PUBLICATIONS. 


Mackay — The  Wyckliffites;  or,  England  in 

the  15th  Century, $ 75 

Martyn’s  (Henry)  Life.  12mo.  . . .60 

Mason’s  Essays  on  the  Church.  12mo.  . . 60 

44  on  Episcopacy.  12mo.  . . 60 

Marshall  on  Sanctification,  ....  50 

Martyrs  and  Covenanters  of  Scotland.  18mo.  40 

Malcolm  on  the  Atonemeut.  18itio.  . . 30 

McOrindell — The  Convent,  a Narrative,  . 50 

McGdvray’s  Peace  in  Believing.  18iuo.  . 25 

McGhee  on  the  Ephesians,  . . . . 2 00 

McLeod’s  Life  and  Power  of  True  Godliness,  60 
McCheyne’s(Kev.  Robert  Murray)  Works.  2 v.  3 00 

Life,  lectures,  and  Letters,  separate,  1 50 

Sermons,  separate,  . . . . 2 00 

Familiar  Letters  from  the  Holy  Land,  50 

McFarlane — The  Mountains  of  the  Bible,  theisr 
Scenes  and  their  Lessons.  With  four  illus- 
trations on  steel.  12mo 75 

■ — Do.  do.  extra  gilt,  i 25 

Meikie’s  Solitude  Sweetened.  12mo.  . . 60 

Miller’s  (Rev.  Dr.  S.)  Memoir  of  Rev.  Dr.  Nishet 

(Rev.  John)  Design  of  the  Church, 

Michael  Kemp,  the  Farmer’s  Lad.  18mo. 

Missions,  The  Origin  and  History  of.  By 
Choules  and  Smith.  With  25  steel  plates, 


75 
60 
40 

3 50 

Moffat’s  Southern  Africa.  l2mo.  ...  75 

Monod’s  Lucilla;  or,  the  Reading  of  the  Bible,  40 
More  (Hannah)— The  Book  of  Private  Devo- 
tion. Large  type,  elegant  edition,  I8mo.  . 50 

Do.  do.  do.  gilt,  75 

Do.  do.  small  ed.  32mo.  20 

Do.  do.  “ gilt,  30 

Morell’s  Historical  and  Critical  View  of  the 
Speculative  Philosophy  of  Europe  in  the 

19th  Century, 3 00 

Murphy— The  Bible  Consistent  with  Geology 
Sly  School  Boy  Days.  I8mo.  . 

My  Youthful  Companions.  lB.ino.  . 

The  above  two  bound  in  1 vol. 

Newton’s  <(Rev.  John)  Works.  2 vols.  8va 

Life,  separate.  18mo.  . 

Memoir  of  M.  Magdalen  Jasper,  . 

Noel’s  Infant  Piety.  I8naa, 

North  American  Indians.  Illustrated.  18mo 
Olmsted’s  Counsels  for  the  Impenitent, 

Old  White  Meeting-House.  18ma. 

<Old  Humphrey’s  Observations, 

Addresses,  . . . . 

Thoughts  for  the  Thoughtful, 

Homely  Hints,  ... 


Walks  in  London,  ... 

Country  Strolls,  .... 

Old  Sea  Captain,  .... 

Grandparents,  .... 

Isle  of  Wight,  .... 

Pithy  Papers,  .... 

Pleasant  Tales,  .... 

Opie  on  Lying.  New  edition,  18mo. 

Owen  on  Spiritual  Mindedness.  12nio.  . 
Paley’s  Horae  Paulin®.  12mo. 

Pascal’s  Provincial  Letters.  Edited  by  M'Grie 

Thoughts  on  Religion.  12jtno. 

Paterson  on  the  Assemb.  Shorter  Catechism, 
Pike’s  True  Happiness.  18mo, 

Religion  and  Eternal  Life.  18mo.  . 


30 
30 
50 
3 00 
30 
30 
25 
50 
50 
40 
40 
40 
40 
40 
40 
40 
40 
40 
40 
40 
40 
40 
60 
75 
1 00 
1 00 
50 
30 
30 


Pike’s  Divine  Origin  of  Christianity.  18mo.  $ 30 
Philip’s  Devotional  Guides.  2 vols.  12mo.  . 1 50 

Marys, 40 

Marthas, 40 

Lydias, 40 

Hannahs, 40 

Love  of  the  Spirit, 40 

Young  Man’s  Closet  Library,  ...  75 

Pollok’s  Course  of  Time.  The  most  elegant 
edition  ever  published ; printed  on  su|ter- 
fine  paper.  16mo.  with  portrait,  cloth,  . 1 00 

gilt,  cloth,  extra 1 50 

Turkey  morocco,  gilt,  . . . 2 00 

Small  copy,  close  type,  18mo.  . 40 

Life,  Letters,  and  Remains.  By  the  Rev. 

James  Scott,  D.D.  With  Portrait,  16mo.  . 1 00 

Tales  of  the  Scottish  Covenanters.  Print- 
ed on  large  paper,  uniform  with  the  above. 

With  portrait, 

Do.  do.  small  copy,  18mo. 

Helen  of  the  Glen.  18mo. 

Persecuted  Family.  18mo. 

Ralph  Gemmell.  18mo 

Porteus’  Leetures  on  Matthew.  12mo.  . 

Psalms  in  Hebrew.  Neat  miniature  edition, 

Reign  of  Grace.  By  Booth,  .... 
Retrospect,  The.  By  Aliquis.  I8mo.  . 
Richmond’s  Domestic  Portraiture.  Edited  by 
Biekersteth.  New  and  elegant  edition, 

Annals  of  the  Poor.  18mo.  . 

Rogers’  Jacob’s  Well.  18mo 

Romaine  on  Faith.  12mo 

Letters.  12mo 

Rowland’s  Common  Maxims  of  Infidelity, 
Rutherford’s  Letters.  New  edition,  8vo. 

Scott’s  Force  of  Truth.  18mo. 

Scougal’s  Works.  18mo.  .... 

Scripture  Narratives.  By  Dr.  Belcher.  12mo. 
Select  Works  of  James,  Venn,  W'ilson,  Philip 
and  Jay.  Eight  complete  works  in  1 vol.  . 
Select  Christian  Authors ; comprising  Dodd- 
ridge, Wilberforce,  Adams,  Hatytmrton, 
a Kempis,  &c.  With  Introductory  Essays 
by  Dr.  Chalmers,  Bishop  Wilson,  &e.  2 v.  2 00 

Serle’s  Christian  Remembrancer,  ...  50 

Sinner’s  Friend.  18mo 25 

Sigourney  (Mrs.  L.  H.)  Water  Drops.  2d  edit.  75 

The  Girl’s  Book.  18mo.,  illustrated,  . 40 

The  Boy’s  Book.  44  44  . 40 

Child’s  Book.  Square,  44  . 35 

Sinclair’s  Modern  Accomplishments,  . . 75 

Modern  Society,  .....  75 

Charlie  Seymour.  18mo.  ...  30 

Hill  and  Valley.  12mo.  ...  75 

Simeon's  Life,  by  Caras.  With  Introductory 
Essay  by  Bishop  Mcllvaine.  With  portrait,  2 00 
Sir  Roland  Ashton.  By  Lady  Catharine  Long,  75 
Sketches  of  Sermons  on  the  Parables  and  Mir- 
acles of  Christ.  By  the  author  of  the  Pulpit 

Cyclop®dia.  12mo 75 

Smyth’s  Bereaved  Parents  Consoled.  12mo.  . 75 

Sorrowing  Yet  Rejoicing.  18mo.  ...  30 

Do.  do  32mo.  gilt,  . . 30 

Spring  (Rev.  Gardiner,  D.D.)— A Pastor’s  Tri- 
bute to  one  of  his  Flock,  or  Memoirs  of  the 
late  Hannah  L.  Murray.  With  a portrait,  . 1 50 


75 

50 

25 

25 

25 

60 

50 

75 

40 

75 

40 

40 

eo 
60 
75 
1 50 
25 
40 
60 

1 50 


4 CARTERS’  PUBLICATIONS. 


Stevenson’s  Christ  on  the  Cross.  12mo.  $ 

— — Lord  our  Shepherd.  12mo.  . 

Sumner’s  Exposition  of  Matthew  and  Mark,  . 
Suddard’s  British  Pulpit.  2 vols.  8vo.  . .3 

Symington  on  the  Atonement.  12mn.  . 
Tacitus’ Works  translated.  Edited  by  Morphy,  2 

Tennent’s  Life.  18ino 

Tholuck’s  Circle  of  Human  Life.  18mo. 
Taylor’s  (Jane)  Life  and  Correspondence, 

Contributions  of  Q.  Q.  New  edition,  with 

fine  illustrations  by  Howland,  2 vols.  in  one,  1 

— Original  Poems.  18mo 

— —.Display,  a Tale.  18mo 

Mother  and  Daughter,.  .... 

Essays  in  Rhyme.  18mo. 

Original  Poems  and  Poetical  Remains. 

With  12  fine  illustrations  by  Howland, 

(Isaac)  Loyola  ; or,  Jesuitism  in  its  Rudi- 
ments, . . . . . . . . .1 

Natural  History  of  Enthusiasm.  12mo.  . 

— (Jeremy).  Sermons.  Complete  in  1 vol.  . 1 
Turretine’s  Complete  Works,  in  original  Latin, 
The  Theological  Sketch  Book ; or,  Skeletons 

of  Sermons,  so  arranged  as  to  constitute  a 
complete  body  of  Divinity.  From  Simeon, 
Hannam,  Benson,  &.c.  2 vols.  . .3 

Tyng’s  Lectures  on  the  Law  and  Gospel.  New 
edition,  large  type,  with  a fine  portrait,  8vo.  1 

Christ  is  All.  8vo.  with  portrait,  . 1 

■ Israel  of  God.  8vo.  enlarged  edition,  . 1 

Recollections  of  England.  12mo.  . 1 

Thucydides’  History  of  the  Peloponnesian 
War.  Translated  by  William  Smith.  8vo.  1 


75 

60 

75 

00 

75 

00 

25 

30 

40 

00 

30 

30 

30 

30 

40 

00 

75 

50 


00 

50 

50 

50 

00 

25 


Turnbull’s  Genius  of  Scotland  ; or  Sketches 
of  Scottish  Scenery,  Literature,  and  Relig- 
ion. New  ed.  with  8 fine  illustrations,  16mo.  1 00 
Pulpit  Orators  of  France  and  Switzer- 
land, with  Sketches  of  their  Character  and 
Specimens  of  their  Eloquence.  With  por- 
trait of  Fenelon,  .....  $1  00 

Waterbnry’s  Book  for  the  Sabbath.  18mo.  . 40 

Whately’s  Kingdom  of  Christ  and  Errors  of 

Romanism, 75 

Whitecross’  Anecdotes  on  Assent.  Catechism,  30 

White’s  (Hugh)  Meditation  on  Prayer.  J8mo.  40 

Believer ; a Series  of  Discourses.  IBaio.  40 

Practical  Reflections  on  the  Second 

Advent.  18mo 40 

(Henry  Kirke)  Complete  Works.  With 

Life  by  Southey.  8vo.  . . . . . 1 50 

Do.  extra  gilt,  . . . 2 50 

Wilson’s  Lights  and  Shadows  of  Scottish  Life,  50 
Do.  on  large  paper,  16mo.  with  8 illus- 
trations, from  original  drawings,  by  Croome, 
Billings,  &c.,  engraved  by  Howland,  . . 75 

Do.  do.  extra  gilt,  1 25 

Williams  (Rey.  John),  Memoir  of,  Missionary 
to  Polynesia.  By  Eb.  Prout.  With  two  ib 

lustrations,  12mo.  1 00 

Winslow  on  Personal  Declension  and  Revival,  80 
Wylie’s  Journey  over  the  Region  of  Fulfilled 

Prophecy, 30 

Xenophon’s  Whole  Works.  Translated,  . 2 00 
Young’s  Night  Thoughts.  Elegant  edition, 

16mo.  with  portrait 1 00 

Do.  do.  extra  gilt,  1 50 


NEW  BOOKS. 


Blunt’s  Coincidences  and  Paley’s  Horae  Paul- 
in®. 2 vols.  in  one,  8vo.  . . . $2  00 

Brown’s,  Rev.  John,  D.D.,  Exposition  of  the 
First  Epistle  of  Peter.  8vo.  . . 

Broken  Bud,  or  Reminisceuces  of  a Bereaved 

Mother.  16mo 

Cecil’s,  Cath.,  Memoir  of  Mrs.  Hawkes.  12mo. 
Cheever,  Rev.  Dr.,  Lectures  on  the  Pilgrim’s 
Progress.  New  edition,  12mo.  . . . 1 00 

David’s  Psalms,  with  Brown’s  Notes.  I8mo. 

sheep,  0 50  ( 

Dickinson’s,  R.  W.,  D.D.,  Responses  from 

the  Sacred  Oracles.  12mo 

Duncan,  Mrs.,  Children  of  the  Manse.  16mo.  1 00 
Do  do.  Gilt,  1 25 

, Mary  Lundie.  Rhymes  for  my  Children. 

Hooker,  Rev.  Herm.,  Uses  of  Adversity.  18mo.  0 30 

, Philosophy  of  Unbelief.  12mo.  . 0 75 

James,  J.  A.,  Young  Man  from  Home.  18tno.  0 30 

Christian  Professor.  12mo.  . 0 75 

Kennedy,  Grace,  Anna  Ross.  With  six  fine 

illustrations.  I8mo 0 30 

Leyburn’s,  Rev.  John,  Soldier  of  the  Cross, 

12mo 

Line  upon  Line.  18mo 0 30 

Lowrie,  Rev.  John  C.,  Two  Years  in  Upper 
India.  12mo. 0 75 


Matthews,  Rev.  James,  D.D.,  The  Bible  and 
Civil  Government.  12mo.  . . . $1  00 

M‘Cosh,  Rev.  J.,  The  Divine  Government, 

Physical  and  Moral.  8vo 

M‘Lelland,  Prof.  Alex.,  on  the  Canon  and  In- 
terpretation of  Scripture.  12mo.  . . 0 75 

New  Cobwebs  to  catch  Little  Flies.  Illustrated. 
Pastor’s  Daughter,  by  Louisa  P.  Hopkins.  . 0 40 
Peep  of  Day.  New  edition.  18mo.  . .0  30 

Pollok’s  Tales  of  the  Covenanters.  Illustrated 
edition.  16mo.  . • . . . . 0 75 

Do.  do.  Gilt.  . . 1 00 

Powerscourt’s,  Lady,  Letters  and  Papers. 

12mo.  ' 0 75 

Precept  on  Precept.  18mo 0 30 

Smith,  Rev.  James,  The  Believer’s  Daily  Re- 
membrancer, or  Green  Pastures  for  the 
Lord’s  Flock.  . ..... 

Taylor,  Jane,  Hymns  for  Infant  Minds.  Illus- 
trated. Square 

Waugh,  Rev.  Ale*.,  D.D.,  Memoir  of,  with 
Selections  from  his  Correspondence,  &c  , by 
Dr.  Hay  and  Dr.  Belfrage.  12mo.  Portrait. 
Wilberforce’s  Practical  View.  Large  type, 

fine  edition.  I2mo 

Winer’s  Idioms  of  the  Language  of  the  New 
Testament.  8vo 2 50 


R.  Carter  &.  Brothers  have  nearly  ready  the  first  volume  of  the  Works  of  John  Owen,”  to  be 
completed  in  sixteen  volumes  octavo.  It  is  their  intention  to  issue  a volume  every  three  months  till  the 
whole  are  issued. 


Ia 


. 

. 


' 


< 


