o  ov


-


*%>*


*  t«v


-


V


THE


EVIDENCES  OF  CHRISTIANITY


J.    L.DAG  G

If


MACON,    Geo.:
J.    W.    BURKE    &    CO.

PPIILADELPHIA  :   CLAXTOX,  REMSEX  &  HAFFELFIXGER.
18  69.

7T


Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1869,  by

J.  W.  BURKE  &  CO.,

in  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  United  States  in  and
for  the  Southern  District  of  Georgia.


The  Library
of  Congress


WASHINGTON


i

o

r

PREFACE


This  volume  aims  to  exhibit  the  evidences  of
Christianity  in  a  clear  and  comprehensive  view,
and  in  the  order  best  adapted  to  produce  con-
viction in  common  minds.  It  directs  the  first
and  chief  attention  to  the  Bible,  investigates  its
character,  and  obtains  proof  of  its  divine  origin,
first  from  obvious  and  well-known  facts,  and  after-
wards from  less  accessible  sources  of  information.

Many  able  writers  on  the  subject  give  the  first
and  chief  place  to  the  historical  evidences,  and
regard  the  other  evidences  as  merely  subsidiary.
The  historical  evidences  require  for  their  full
development  a  laborious  search  into  the  records
and  monuments  of  antiquity.  Few  men  have
the  opportunity  and  ability  to  perform  this  labor.
Hence  the  student  of  the  evidences  feels  com-
l  0)


11  PREFACE.

pelled  to  receive  his  proofs  at  second  hand,  and
to  content  himself  with  a  degree  of  conviction
inferior  to  that  which  would  result  from  personal
investigation.

In  arranging  the  historical  evidences,  it  has
been  usual  to  begin  with  establishing  the  authen-
ticity of  the  Scripture  books,  and  on  this  to  found
the  argument  for  their  credibility.  This  method
is  liable  to  a  grave  objection,  on  account  of  the
obscurity  that  rests  on  the  authorship  of  some  of
the  books.  The  foundation  of  the  argument
ought  to  be  undoubted  truth,  in  order  that  the
conclusion  may  be  received  with  unhesitating  and
unwavering  faith.

The  method  adopted  in  this  work,  founds  the
first  arguments  on  facts  of  which  all  men  of  ordi-
nary information  have  knowledge.  It  begins
with  noticing  some  prominent  singularities  of  the
Bible,  discoverable  by  common  observation,  and
the  aid  of  commonly  received  history ;  and  these
it  notices,  not  so  much  for.  the  sake  of  argument,
as  of  inducement  to  enter  on  the  study  with  ear-
nestness. We  judge  of  a  man's  character  by
what  he  does ;  and  the  method  here  adopted
begins  the  inquiry  into  the  character  of  the  Bible,
by  an  examination  of  what  it  has  done  in  the


PREFACE.  iii

world.  The  first  direct  argument  for  the  di-
vinity of  its  origin  is  founded  on  its  beneficial
effects.  After  having  contemplated  the  streams
of  blessings  which  flow  from  the  Bible,  our  atten-
tion is  next  directed  to  an  examination  of  the
source  from  which  they  emanate.  We  open  the
book  itself,  and  find  that  it  teaches  a  perfect  rule
of  morality,  illustrated  by  a  perfect  example;
and  also  a  system  of  doctrine  which  cannot  be  of
human  origin.  From  these  facts  the  divine
origin  of  the  book  is  established,  by  arguments
with  which  every  reader's  mind  may  directly
grapple.  All  these  subjects  are  disposed  of  before
the  history  contained  in  the  Bible  is  considered ;
and  then  no  higher  respect  is  demanded  for  its
historical  truthfulness,  than  is  due  to  other  well-
received  works  of  ancient  history  ;  but  its  right
to  this  degree  of  confidence  is  established  by  an
amount  of  testimony  which  cannot  be  adduced  in
favor  of  any  other  historical  record  of  antiquity.
To  make  good  so  low  a  claim  to  credibility  is
very  far  short  of  what  is  due  to  the  sacred  histo-
rians; yet  it  suffices  for  the  argument  at  this
point  of  its  progress,  since  it  fully  prepares  for
the  next  two  chapters,  which  treat  of  prophecy
and  miracles.     These  two  chapters  complete  the


IV  PREFACE.

entire  argument,  which  is  cumulative,  and  con-
sists of  five  independent  arguments,  drawn  from
the  effects  of  the  Bible,  its  morality,  its  doctrines,
its  prophecies,  and  its  miracles.  These  five  argu-
ments are  presented  separately  in  Chapters  II.,
III.,  IV.,  VI.,  and  VII.,  to  which  the  other  five
chapters  of  the  work  are  subsidiary.

The  tenth  chapter,  which  shows  the  harmony
between  revelation  and  science,  is  chiefly  designed
to  preserve  the  minds  of  young  students  from  the
scepticism  which  an  imperfect  knowledge  of  sci-
ence is  liable  to  engender.

In  presenting  the  historical  evidences,  I  have
made  free  use  of  Lardner's  work  on  the  Credibility
of  the  Gospel  History,  which  is  so  valuable  that
no  one  who  is  ignorant  of  the  results  of  his  labors,
can  be  said  to  have  thoroughly  studied  the  evi-
dences of  Christianity.  In  stating  the  argument,
I  have  preferred  not  to  encumber  it  with  long
citations  of  testimonies ;  but  have  thought  it
better  to  place  these  separately  in  an  appendix,
in  which  all  the  most  important  testimonies  that
Lardner's  labors  have  brought  to  light,  are
exhibited  in  some  form.  Sometimes  the  whole
testimony  is  given  in  Lardner's  translation  of  the
original   author's  words;    at   other   times    such


PREFACE.  V

extracts  are  made  as  sufficiently  indicate  the
character  and  purport  of  the  testimony,  and  in
the  remaining  cases  the  substance  of  the  testi-
mony is  given,  generally  in  Lardner's  words.
The  reader  who  has  not  access  to  Lardner's  great
work,  or  time  to  read  it,  will  here  find  presented
to  him  in  the  compass  of  a  few  sections,  the  sub-
stantial results  of  that  learned  author's  researches.
Much  other  matter  will  be  found  in  the  appendix,
rendering  it  a  store-house  of  valuable  information,
to  which  the  student  may  refer  for  facts  to  con-
firm his  faith.

In  looking  over  the  following  pages  it  will  be
seen  that,  though  the  references  to  Scripture  are
numerous,  but  few  passages  from  the  sacred  vol-
ume are  quoted  at  length.  Regard  to  brevity
rendered  this  omission  necessary.  Since  in  many
cases  the  argument  cannot  be  understood  without
a  careful  study  of  the  Scriptures  referred  to,  the
reader  who  is  not  well  acquainted  with  the  Bible,
will  find  it  necessary  to  keep  the  holy  volume
near  him  for  the  sake  of  constant  appeal  to  it.
For  the  labor  of  finding  and  studying  the  pas-
sages, he  will  be  more  than  compensated,  by  the
habit  of  searching   the  Scriptures,  and   by  the


VI  PREFACE.


increased  familiarity  which  he  will  acquire  with
divine  truth.

How  far  the  method  of  discussion  here  adopted
may  be  approved  by  others,  I  know  not ;  but  it
is  that  in  which  my  own  mind  approaches  and
contemplates  the  subject  with  the  highest  satis-
faction. In  prosecuting  the  investigation  after
this  method,  I  see  with  my  own  eyes ;  and  after
having  completed  it,  my  own  feet  feel  the  ground
firm  beneath  me.  We  are  all  passing,  one  by
one,  to  a  world  which  human  intelligence  has
never  explored,  and  of  which  the  Bible  gives
the  only  information  that  we  can  obtain.  In
illuminating  our  way  to  that  world,  the  Bible,  like
the  sun  in  the  heavens,  so  shines  upon  us  that  it
reveals  its  character  by  its  own  light ;  and  every
one  who  will,  may  with  his  own  vision,  walk  by
this  light,  without  trusting  a  fellow-traveller  to
lead  him  by  the  hand.  May  the  glorious  efful-
gence of  divine  truth  emanating  from  the  Bible,
banish  all  darkness  of  ignorance  or  doubt  from
the  mind  of  every  reader,  and  guide  his  steps  in
the  way  of  peace  and  holiness  to  life  eternal!


CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION.
Christianity  is  the  Religion  op  the  Bible,


PAGB

13


CHAPTER  I


Prominent  Singularities,
Sec.  1.  Antiquity,
"     2.  Nationality,
"     3.  Respect  obtained,
"    4.  Character  claimed,


CHAPTER  II


Beneficial  Effects,
Sec.  1.  On  Morals,
41    2.  On  Happiness,     .
"    3.  Objection  answered,


CHAPTER  III


Perfect  Morality,

Sec.  1.  Perfect  Precept,  .
"     2.  Perfect  Example,


CHAPTER  IV,

Superhuman  Doctrine,     .

Sec.  1.  Superiority  to  Man's  Invention,
"     2.  Adaptedness  to  Man,    .
**     3.  Completeness  of  System,
"     4.  Connection  with  Morality,    .
"     5.  Beneficial  Tendency,    .
"     6.  Experimental  Proof,     .
"    7.  Connection  with  Historical  Facta,


42
42
53


(7)


Vlll


CONTENTS,


CHAPTER  V.


Truthful  History,

Sec.  1.  Credibility  of  History,

"     2.  Gospel  History,  .

"     3.  Testimony  of  the  Church,

"    4.  Written  Records,

"     5.  Christian  Fathers,

"     6.  Heathen  Testimony,     .

"     7.  Jewish  Testimony,

"     8.  Incidental  Confirmation,

"     9.  Internal  Proof,    .

"  10.  Monumental  Proof,

"  11.  Conclusion,  .


CHAPTER  VI

Prophecy,        .          .         .
Sec.  1.  General  View,     .
"    2.  The  Messiah,
"    3.  The  Hebrew  Nation,
"    4.  Ancient  Cities,    .

Nineveh,

Babylon,     .

Tyre,
"     5.  Tribes  and  Kingdoms,
"     6.  The  Papacy,
"     7.  Christ's  Predictions,
"     8.  Revelation  of  John,

Changes  in.  the  Roman  Empire,

Downfall  of  the  Empire,

The  Reformation,

The  Papal  Power,

Passing  and  Future  Events,
"     9.  Date  of  the  Prophecies,


CHAPTER  VII.


Miracles,        ......

Sec.  1.  Credibility  of  Miracles,
"     2.  Propagation  of  Christianity,
"     3.  Miracles  of  Christ  and  his  Apostles,
"     4.  Attestation  given  by  these  Miracles,
"     5.  Old  Testament  Miracles,
"     6.   Objection  answered,
"     7.  Mahometanism  not  attested  by  Miracles


CONTENTS.


IX


CHAPTER  VIII.


Authenticity,  ;

Sec.  1.  New  Testament,
"  2.  Old  Testament,  ,
"    3.  Preservation,


PAGE
197

197
205
206


CHAPTER  IX.


Inspiration,     .

Sec.  1.  Plenary  Inspiration,
"     2.  Old  Testament,     .
"     3.  New  Testament,  .
"     4.  Mode  of  Inspiration,
"     5.  Objections  to  Plenary  Inspiration,


212
212
214
215

222
222


CHAPTER  X


Harmony  with  Science,    .
Sec.  1.  Geography,
"     2.  Natural  History,
"    3.  Copernican  System  of  Astronomy
"     4.   Geology,     ....
"     5.  Plurality  of  Worlds,    .
"     6.  Unity  of  the  Human  Race,  .


231
233
235
237
239
254
262


APPENDIX


CHAPTER  I.

Historical  Evidences,     ....  ...  271

Sec.  1.  Dr.  Lardner,        .  . 271

"     2.  Agreement  of  New  Testament  History  with  Jewish  and

Pagan  Writings, 272

I.  Princes  and  Governors,      .....  273
II.  State  of  the  Jews  in  Judea  during  the  Ministry

of  our  Saviour  and  his  Apostles,      .  .  .  276

III.  State  of  the  Jews  out  of  Judea,  .  .  .  2S0

IV.  Jewish  Sects  and  the  Samaritans,        .  .  .  280
V.  Expectations  of  the  Jews   and  Samaritans   and

their  ideas  of  the  Messiah,     ....  281

VI.   The  Corruption  of  the  Jewish  People,  .  .  282

VII.  Circumstances  of  our  Saviour's  Last  Sufferings,  .  282

VIII.  Treatment  of  Christians  by  Jews  and  Gentiles,    .  284

IX.   Opinions  and  Practices  of  the  Jews,    .  .  .  284


CONTENTS.

PAGE

X.  Roman  Customs, 286

XI.  Three  Remarkable  Facts,  ....    287

XII.  Alleged  Disagreements,     .....    287

Sec.  3.  Christian  Testimonies,  ......    292

Barnabas,  293  ;  Clement,  294;  Hermas,  295  ;  Ignatius,
295;  Polycarp,  296;   Polycarp's  Martyrdom,  296;
Observations    on    the    Apostolical    Fathers,    296;
Evangelists  in   the  reign  of  Trajan,  297;  Papias,
297;  Justin  Martyr,  300;  The  Epistle  to  Diognetus,
301;  Tatian,  301;  The  Epistle  of  the  Churches  of
Vienna  and  Lyons,  301 ;  Irengeus,  301 ;  Athenago-
ras,  303 ;  Theophilus,  303 ;  Clement  of  Alexandria,
303;  Tertullian,  303;  Caius,  305;  Origen,  306;  Dio-
nysius,  307;  Cyprian,  308;  Lactantius,  308;  Alexan-
der, 308;  Constantine,  308;  Eusebius,  309;  Atha-
nasius,  311;  The  Council  of  Laodicea,  311;  Jerom,
312;   Augustine,   314;    Chrysostom,  315;   Salvian,
315;  General  Review,  315;  Recapitulation,  316.
"    4.  Jewish  Testimonies,    .         .  .         .         .         .    317

"    5.  Heathen  Testimonies,  .......     319

Tacitus,  319  ;  Suetonius,  321 ;  Pliny,  321 ;  Trajan,  321;
Epictetus,  324;  Celsus,  324;  Lucian,  326;  Diogenes
Laertius,  326;  Dion  Cassius,  327;  Porphyry,  327;
Hierocles,  328;  Diocletian's  Persecution,  329;  Ju-
lian, 330 ;  Libanius,  331 ;  Zosimus,  332.

"    6.  Testimony  of  Heretics, 332

Basilides,    333;    Carpocrates,    333;    Cerinthus,    333;
Marcion,  333;  Lucian,  334;  The  Montanists,  334.
"     7.  Testimony  of  Monuments,    ......     335

Coins  and  Medals,   .......     335

Catacombs,      ........     336

"     8.  Internal  Proof, 340

"     9.  Old  Testament  History, 346

Creation  and  Deluge,  346;  Babel,  348;  Origin  of  Na-
tions, 348;  Genesis  xiv.  2-12,  349;  Exodus  of  the
Israelites,  349 ;  Modern  Discoveries  confirming  the
Pentateuch,  349 ;  Joshua's  Conquest  of  Canaan,
350;  Sidon  and  Tyre,  351;  Hiram,  351;  Solomon,
351 ;  Use  of  Gold,  351 ;  Phoenicians,  352  ;  Judah
and  Israel,  352;  Shishak,  352:  Ahab,  352;  1  Kings
xx.  1-25,  352;  Assyrian  Kings,  353;  2  Kings
xviii.  13,  14,  353;  2  Kings  xviii.  37,  353;  Transfer
of  the  Empire  to  Babylon,  353;  The  Captivity,  354;
Nebuchadnezzar,  354;  Belshazzar,  354;  Conquest
of  Babylon,  355;  Duration  of  the  Captivity,  355;
Religiousness  of  the  Persians,  355  ;  Ahasuerus,  356;
Persian  Customs,  356.


CONTENTS.


XI


CHAPTER  II.

PAGE

FULFILMENT  OF  PROPHECY,              .......  357

Sec.  1.  In  the  Old  Testament, 357

Enlargement  of  Japheth,  ......  357

Ishmaelites,     ........  35S

Division  of  the  Roman  Empire,          ....  359

"    2.  In  the  Gospels, 360

Prodigies  preceding  the  Destruction  of  Jerusalem,        .  360

"    3.  In  the  Revelation  of  John, 363


CHAPTER  III.

Pretended  Mip.acles,      .....

.    380

CHAPTER  IV.

Mahometaxism,

.    38S

CHAPTER  V.

MISCELLANEOUS  EXTRACTS,            ....

Heathen  Morality,  ....
Morality  of  Deists,  ....
Traditions  of  the  Deluge,           .          .
Bible  History  confirmed  by  Science,  .         ,

.    399
.    399
.    401
.     406
.    407

CHAPTER  VL

Harmony  of  the  Gospels,        .         #         •         •

.    410

NOTE.

The  reference  to  foot  notes  is  made  with  numerals  in  the
usual  way.  But  when  the  numerals  are  included  within
parenthesis,  the  reference  is  to  articles  in  the  Appendix.
These  articles  are  numbered  consecutively  throughout  the
Appendix.  Where  a  particular  passage  in  any  article  is
referred  to,  it  is  marked  by  a  letter  :  thus  (57  6)  refers  to  the
passage  marked  b  in  article  57.


(xii)


EVIDENCES  OF  CHBISTIASITY.


INTRODUCTION.

CHRISTIANITY  IS  THE  RELIGION  OF  THE  BIBLE.

Christianity  is  the  religion  "which  is  taught  in  the
Bible.  This  well-known  book  consists  of  two  parts,  the
Old  Testament  and  the  New  Testament.  The  Old  Tes-
tament, taken  by  itself,  contains  the  religion  of  the
Jews,  which  is  identical  in  part  with  that  of  Christians.
The  New  Testament  supplies  all  in  which  Christianity
differs  from  Judaism ;  and  therefore  the  entire  Bible
fully  exhibits  the  Christian  system.

The  Evidences  of  Christianity  are  the  proofs  that  the
Bible  possesses  the  authority  of  God,  binding  men  to
believe  the  doctrines  which  it  teaches,  and  perform  the
duties  which  it  enjoins.  "  These  proofs  are  abundant  and
conclusive ;  and  the  study  of  them  forms  an  important
part  of  popular  education,  claiming  the  careful  atten-
tion of  every  one  who  desires  to  be  proficient  in  useful
knowledge.

In  studying  the  evidences  of  Christianity,  we  have  need
to  employ  our  intellectual  powers,  as  in  the  study  of  all
other  science.      Our   holy  religion,    though    requiring

(13)


14  INTRODUCTION.

faith,  is  not  built  on  it  exclusively,  and  does  not  reject
appeals  to  reason,  as  if  unfit  to  endure  such  a  test.  On
the  contrary,  it  challenges  investigation,  and  requires  its
advocates  to  be  ready  always  to  give  an  answer  to  every
man  that  asketh  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  them.1
On  the  testimony  of  parents,  children  believe  facts
which  their  own  senses  have  not  observed,  and  truths
which  their  own  reason  has  not  discovered  ;  and  this
exercise  of  faith  does  not  in  the  least  contravene  rea-
son, or  interfere  with  the  proper  use  of  it.  In  like
manner,  faith  in  the  testimony  of  God  our  Heavenly
Father  neither  supersedes  nor  discourages  the  exercise
of  reason.  The  question  whether  the  Bible  comes  to  us
with  evidences  of  Divine  origin  and  authority,  falls  pro-
perly under  the  investigation  of  reason ;  and  men  do
not  sin  against  God,  when  they  examine  this  question
as  rational  beings.  To  reject  God's  word  when  he
speaks  to  us,  or  to  close  the  eyes  against  the  proofs  that
it  is  God  who  speaks,  is  offensive  to  the  Supreme
Majesty.  Hence  reverence  for  God  requires  a  careful
study  of  the  Christian  evidences.

Apart  from  all  regard  to  the  authority  of  God,  we
act  inconsistently  with  our  nature  as  rational  beings,  if
we  forbear  to  inquire  into  the  origin  and  character  of
the  Bible.  The  book  exists  in  the  world,  and  the
high  respect  which  it  has  received,  and  the  great  influ-
ence which  has  emanated  from  it  in  forming  the  cha-
racters of  men,  and  controlling  their  actions,  render  it  a
proper  object  of  rational  curiosity.  If  we  worthily
employ  our  intellectual  powers  in  observing  the  phe-
nomena of  nature,  and  searching  into  their  causes,  it  no
less  becomes  us,  as  intelligent  beings,  to  inquire  whence

1  1  Pet,  iii.  15.


INTRODUCTION.  15

came  the  Bible,  and  what  is  the  secret  of  its  mysteri-
ous power.

The  moral  endowments  of  man's  nature  constitute
his  highest  excellence.  In  these,  more  than  in  anything
else,  his  likeness  to  God  appears ;  and  on  these  the
well-being  of  individuals  and  of  society  chiefly  depends.
To  man's  moral  nature  the  Bible  is  addressed.  It  is
not  a  work  of  science  intended  for  the  improvement  of
the  intellect  only,  but  it  presents  laws  to  regulate  the
heart  and  life,  and  motives  to  induce  obedience  to  these
laws.  It  claims  that  its  laws  are  the  highest  standard
of  duty,  and  its  motives  the  strongest  that  omnipotent
love  can  present.  These  claims  it  becomes  us,  as  moral
beings,  to  examine:  and,  in  a  matter  which  so  inti-
mately concerns  the  highest  excellence  of  our  nature,
we  are  false  to  ourselves,  if  we  decline  to  make  the
investigation.

The  immortality  of  the  soul  is  a  doctrine  of  natural
religion ;  but  natural  religion  cannot  teach  us  what
enjoyments  or  sufferings  await  us  in  the  future  state.
How  vast  must  be  the  interests  which  it  compre-
hends !  How  infinitely  must  they  transcend  in  value
all  that  is  most  dearly  prized,  in  this  world  of  fleeting
show  !  Yet  all  these  interests  lie  in  a  region  which  no
human  eye  has  ever  explored.  What  they  are,  and  how
to  secure  them,  unaided  reason  cannot  discover.  We
labor  to  look  through  the  darkness  which  hides  the
future  world  from  our  view ;  but  we  labor  in  vain,  till
we  receive  light  from  the  Bible ;  for  life  and  immor-
tality are  brought  to  light  through  the  gospel.1  This
book  describes  an  inheritance  reserved  in  the  heavenly
land  for  all  the  followers  of  Christ,  and  conveys  to  them

1  2  Tim.  i.  10.
2*  B


16  INTRODUCTION.

a  duly  authenticated  title  to  this  vast  estate.  To  study
the  evidences  of  Christianity,  is  to  examine  the  seals
which  authenticate  this  title ;  and  he  who  is  unwilling
to  make  this  examination,  or  who  takes  but  little  plea-
sure in  it,  shows  that  his  heart  and  his  treasure  are  not
in  heaven,  and  proves  himself  unworthy  of  eternal  life.


CHAPTER  I.
PROMINENT  SINGULARITIES  OF  THE  BIBLE.

On  a  cursory  view  of  the  Bible,  some  peculiarities
strike  the  mind,  producing  an  effect  like  the  first  impres-
sions in  forming  acquaintance  with  a  stranger.  The
peculiarities  which  deserve  notice  are  not  in  the  external
appearance.  Sometimes  the  sacred  volume  is  one  of  the
most  highly  ornamented  in  the  library ;  at  other  times
it  appears  in  coarse  binding,  and  printed  with  obscure
type  on  rough  paper ;  but,  whatever  may  be  its  external
dress,  it  is  still  the  Bible,  possessing  that  internal
excellence  which  distinguishes  it  from  all  other  books,
and  constitutes  its  true  value.

To  a  childish  fancy  it  may  seem  desirable  that  the
Bible  should  be  distinguished  by  some  outward  sign,
such  as  an  atmosphere  of  glory  surrounding  it,  like  that
which  is  sometimes  seen  in  paintings  and  engravings
around  the  head  of  our  Redeemer.  Such  a  sign  would
distinguish  it  effectually  from  all  other  books  in  the
library  ;  but  would  it  prove  the  book  to  be  divine  ?
The  glory  would  adhere  to  the  paper,  the  printing,  or
the  binding ;  and  it  would  at  least  be  doubtful,  whether
the  honor  divinely  conferred  did  not  fall  on  the  paper-
maker,  printer,  or  binder,  rather  than  on  the  prophets
and  apostles  by  whom  the  book  was  written.  The  true
glory  of  the  Bible  belongs  to  its  internal  substance,  the
words  which  it  contains,  or  rather  the  thoughts  which
these  words  express.

In  the  following  chapters  the  character  of  the  Bible

(17)


18  SINGULARITIES    OF    THE    BIBLE.

will  be  carefully  investigated,  and  its  distinguishing
excellences  will  be  brought  to  view ;  but  in  the  present
chapter  our  attention  will  be  directed  to  a  few  promi-
nent singularities  which  strike  the  mind  without  any
laborious  investigation.  They  are  the  peculiarities
which  produce  our  first  impressions,  on  looking  at  the
book  in  the  light  which  is  thrown  upon  it  by  facts
generally  admitted,  and  opinions  generally  prevalent
among  men  of  ordinary  information.  We  shall  not  stop
,to  inquire  at  length  into  the  evidence  of  these  facts  and
opinions.  Such  thoroughness  will  be  necessary  in  the
chapters  following.  It  is  wise  to  submit  our  first
impressions  to  subsequent  scrutiny  for  correction  or  con-
firmation ;  but  first  impressions  have  their  importance
as  inducements  to  seek  a  more  thorough  acquaintance.
So  the  prominent  singularities  noticed  in  the  present
chapter  will,  it  is  hoped,  prepare  the  way  for  a  more
earnest  and  profitable  study  of  the  subjects  which  are
discussed  in  the  chapters  ensuing.  To  an  intelligent
mind  they  may  serve  to  distinguish  the  Bible  as  effectu-
ally, and  ought  as  effectually  to  attract  attention  to  it,
as  would  a  blaze  of  glory  miraculously  emanating  from
its  material  substance.

Section  I.    Antiquity.

THE    BIBLE    IS    IN     GREAT    PART     THE    OLDEST   BOOK   IN
THE  WORLD.

The  Bible  consists  of  many  separate  works,  written
at  different  times  during  a  period  of  nearly  1600
years.  The  Old  Testament,  which  constitutes  far
the  larger  part  of  the  volume,  was  written  during
the  first  1000  years  of  this  period ;  and  the  very  lan-
guage in  which  it  was  written  ceased   to  be  in  com-


ANTIQUITY.  19

mon  use,  from  the  time  of  the  seventy  years'  captivity
of  the  Israelites  in  Babylon.  Babylon  has  long  lain  in
ruins ;  and,  far  'back  beyond  the  period  of  her  final
overthrow,  we  look  through  the  years  of  her  gradual
decline,  to  the  days  of  her  highest  glory,  when  Nebuch-
adnezzar, the  conqueror  of  the  Jews,  proudly  exclaimed,
"Is  not  this  great  Babylon  which  I  have  built?"  At
this  time  Rome  was  in  its  infancy,  and,  except  the  poets
Hesiod  and  Homer,  not  one  of  the  Greek  and  Roman
authors  whose  writings  form  our  libraries  of  ancient
literature,  had  then  lived.  But  long  before  the  age  of
these  writers  Moses  wrote  the  first  five  books  of  the
Bible.  Herodotus,  who  is  styled  the  father  of  history,
lived  about  1000  years  after  Moses ;  and,  though  the
Greek  poets  Hesiod  and  Homer  lived  before  Herodotus,
they  were  long  posterior  to  Moses.

We  admit  that  a  deeper  search  into  antiquity  dis-
closes the  fact  that  there  were  writers  more  ancient  than
even  Homer  and  Hesiod.  The  earliest  of  whom  we
have  any  account,  was  the  Phoenician  historian  Sancho-
niathon ;  yet  even  he  was  long  posterior  to  Moses.
Porphyry,  a  learned  heathen  writer  of  the  third  cen-
tury, has  determined  the  comparative  dates  of  these
two  most  ancient  writers,  by  informing  us  that  San-
choniathon  received  materials  for  his  history  from  per-
sons who  lived  "near  to  the  time  of  Moses"  (57  5).  Of
the  work  attributed  to  this  ancient  author,  only  a  few
fragments  now  remain;  and  some  men  learned  in
antiquity  seriously  doubt  whether  the  whole  work  was
not  a  forgery  of  a  comparatively  modern  period  (74  a).
Yet  the  genuine  writings  of  Moses,  though  more  ancient,
are  still  extant,  and  in  common  use.  Malachi,  the  last
of  the  Old  Testament  writers,  was  contemporary  with
Herodotus :  and  hence  the  whole  of  the  Old  Testament


20  SINGULARITIES    OF    THE    BIBLE.

was  completed,  when  profane  history  may  be  said  with
propriety  to  have  been  just  beginning.

The  antiquity  of  the  Bible  does  not  of  itself  prove
that  its  origin  was  divine.  Of  all  merely  human  pro-
ductions, some  one  must  be  the  oldest ;  and,  because
the  Bible  is  the  oldest  of  books,  it  does  not  follow  that
it  has  higher  claims  to  divine  authority,  than  books  of
less  antiquity.  But  the  fact  that  the  Bible  is  separated
from  all  other  books  by  its  antiquity  constitutes  a  singu-
larity which  invites  inquiry  into  its  authorship,  and  at
least  gives  room  for  the  supposition,  that  it  may  be  a
book  prepared  by  the  Father  of  the  human  family  for
the  benefit  of  his  offspring,  before  they  themselves  were
skilled  to  make  books.

The  most  ancient  of  human  writings  were  designed
chiefly  for  amusement ;  and  the  profit  of  the  readers,
even  for  the  present  life,  scarcely  entered  into  the  plans
of  the  authors.  Their  works  in  this  respect  resemble
the  amusements  of  children,  rather  than  the  sober  in-
structions of  aged  parents,  intent  mainly  on  promoting
the  welfare  of  the  family.  The  Bible,  on  the  other
hand,  was  manifestly  not  designed  for  amusement,  but
from  the  very  beginning  it  gives  instructions  affecting
our  highest  interests.  The  character  of  its  instructions
combines  with  its  antiquity,  to  claim  for  it  our  pro-
foundest  regard.  Foolish  children  may  be  so  intent  on
their  youthful  amusements  as  to  contemn  the  lessons  of
parental  wisdom.  Of  equal  folly  are  they  guilty  who
are  filled  with  delight  by  the  study  of  Hesiod  and
Homer,  and  other  works  of  classic  antiquity,  but  turn
away  with  disgust  from  the  sober  teachings  of  the  Bible.


NATIONALITY.  21

Section  II.    Nationality.

THE  HEBREW  NATION  HAS  GIVEN  THE  RELIGION  OF  THE
BIBLE  TO  THE  WORLD,  AND  HAS  EXISTED  FOR  THIS
PURPOSE.

All  the  writers  of  the  Bible  were  men  of  the  Hebrew
nation.  This  is  true  even  with  respect  to  the  New  Tes-
tament, of  which  the  penmen,  though  Christians,  were
also  Jews ;  except  Luke,  who  wrote  under  the  direction
of  Paul,  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews.  They  regarded
Christianity  not  as  a  heresy,  but  as  the  true  faith  in-
culcated in  the  Old  Testament,  enlarged  by  new  revela-
tions from  God.  Paul  said:  "After  the  way  which
they  call  heresy,  so  worship  I  the  God  of  my  fathers,
believing  all  things  which  are  written  in  the  law  and  in
the  prophets."1

The  nation  of  Israel  was  singular  in  the  earth.  It
was  said  concerning  it,  "  Lo !  the  people  shall  dwell
alone,  and  shall  not  be  reckoned  among  the  nations."2
Their  peculiar  usages  separated  them  from  all  other
people ;  and,  though  for  eighteen  hundred  years  they
have  been  scattered  among  the  nations  of  the  earth,
they  still  remain  distinct.  In  their  present  dispersion
the  Jews  are  distinguished  everywhere  from  the  people
of  the  nations  where  they  are  found ;  and  in  the  light
of  history  we  see  them,  in  all  past  ages,  distinct  and
peculiar.

What  has  been  the  grand  peculiarity  of  this  singular
people  ?  It  is  not  that  they  have  excelled  in  arts  or  arms,
or  occupied  the  largest  territory,  or  numbered  the  largest
population.     The  boast  of  this  people  is,  that  they  have

1  Acts,  xxiv.  14.  2  Num.  xxiii.  9.


22  SINGULARITIES    OF    THE    BIBLE.

given  religion  to  mankind.  In  past  ages,  when  poly-
theism prevailed  in  all  other  nations,  and  the  wisest  and
most  refined  of  the  heathens  worshipped  abominable
deities,  among  the  Hebrews  was  preserved  the  knowledge
of  the  one  true  God,  and  through  them  the  world  has
obtained  the  knowledge  of  the  true  religion.  This  is
the  grand  peculiarity  of  the  nation.

The  religion  which  the  Hebrews  have  taught  mankind
is  contained  in  the  Bible.  This  most  ancient  of  books
was  committed  to  them,  and  they  were  taught  to  prize
it  as  their  peculiar  glory.  They  regarded  themselves
as  far  more  blessed  than  the  heathen,  who  knew  not  the
statutes  and  judgments  of  God.  "  He  showeth  his
word  unto  Jacob,  his  statutes  and  his  judgments  unto
Israel.  He  hath  not  dealt  so  with  any  nation,  and  as
for  his  judgments,  they  have  not  known  them,"  x  and
their  wisest  and  best  men  accounted  the  law  of  God  more
to  be  desired  than  gold,  "  Yea,  than  much  fine  gold ;
sweeter  also  than  honey  and  the  honeycomb,"2  and
made  it  the  subject  of  their  meditation.  This  singular
book  was  from  its  remote  origin  committed  to  the  keep-
ing of  this  singular  people ;  and  singularly  preserved  as
they  are  at  the  present  time  among  the  nations  of  the
earth,  they  carry  with  them,  wherever  they  go,  that
part  of  the  sacred  writings  which  they  have  received
from  their  ancestors,  and  preserve  it  with  the  utmost
care.

Natural  religion  should  be  learned,  as  well  from  the
providence  which  governs  the  world,  as  from  the  crea-
tion which  originated  it ;  and  in  both  Ave  may  observe
manifestations  of  contrivance  and  wisdom.  Let  natural
religion  inquire,  for  what  purpose  was  the  Hebrew  na-

1  Psalms,  cxlvii.  19,  20.  2  Psalms,  xix.  10.


X  A  T  I  0  X  A  L  I  T  Y.  23

tion  brought  into  being  ?  Why  does  it  stand  forth  so
singular  among  the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  why  has  it
been  so  singularly  preserved  ?  The  grand  peculiarity
of  the  nation  has  been  the  religion  which,  makes  known

©

the  God  that  created  the  world,  and  overrules  the  affairs
of  all  nations ;  and  the  student  of  providence  may
clearly  see  a  divine  contrivance  in  the  connection  of  this
singular  nation  with  their  singular  religion,  and  the  sin-
gular book  in  which  this  religion  is  contained.  If  there
©  ©

is  a  God  who  governs  the  world,  he  must  be  the  God
of  the  Hebrews  and  the  God  of  the  Bible.

"When  we  open  the  singular  book  which  the  Hebrew
nation  has  given  to  the  world,  we  find  that  its  teachings
confirm  the  deductions  of  natural  religion  with  respect
to  the  purpose  for  which  the  Hebrew  nation  has  existed.
It  was  promised  to  their  great  ancestor,  Abraham,  "  In
thy  seed  shall  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed."1
Their  temple  was  to  be  a  house  of  prayer  for  all  people,2
and  it  was  predicted  by  their  prophets  that  all  nations
should  become  the  worshippers  of  their  God,  and  be
blessed  in  submitting  to  him."3  The  holy  book  suffi-
tly  explains  the  wonderful  preservation  of  the  Jews
in  their  present  dispersion,  as  a  peculiar  dispensation
of  God  with  respect  to  them,  and  as  a  part  of  a  grand
purpose  that  his  name  is  to  be  made  known  through
them  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  The  Bible  and
the  providence  of  God  harmonize  with  and  explain
each  other ;  and  the  natural  if  not  unavoidable  infer-
ence is,  that  they  have  the  same  author.

1  Gph.  xxii.  18.  2  Isaiah,  lvi.  7.

3  Isaiah,  ii.  1-3.     Psalms,  xxii.  27.


24  SINGULARITIES    OF    THE    BIBLE.


Section  III.     Respect  obtained.

THE  BIBLE  HAS  OBTAINED  THE  HIGHEST  RESPECT  FROM
MULTITUDES  OF  THE  WISEST  AND  BEST  MEN  ;  AND  HAS
BEEN  HELD  SACRED  BY  THEM  AS  A  REVELATION  FROM
HEAVEN.

In  our  Christian  country  no  man  is  ignorant  of  the
respect  which  the  Bible  receives.  In  every  city  and
village  through  the  land  congregations  of  intelligent
men  and  women  listen  with  devout  attention  to  the
reading  of  the  revered  book,  and  receive  its  instructions
as  if  the  words  were  uttered  in  their  ears  by  the  imme-
diate voice  of  God.  In  the  cottage  of  the  peasant,  the
Bible  on  the  stand  is  the  great  book  of  the  family  ;  in  the
courts  of  justice,  and  halls  of  legislation,  its  authority
is  acknowledged ;  and  the  great  majority  of  those  who
are  pre-eminent  for  intelligence  and  virtue  zealously  and
in  good  faith  unite  with  the  less  informed  multitude  to
render  homage  to  the  Bible.  This  singularity  of  the
book  can  escape  the  notice  of  no  observer.

The  respect  paid  to  the  Bible  is  not  confined  to  the
men  of  the  present  generation.  The  past  age  honored
it  equally.  The  great  minds  of  Milton,  Newton,  and
Locke  bowed  before  its  authority ;  and  in  the  long  suc-
cession of  clerical  men,  who  have  devoted  their  lives
to  the  study  and  exposition  of  the  sacred  volume,
thousands  may  be  mentioned  distinguished  for  superior
genius,  profound  research,  and  unimpeachable  integrity.
No  other  book  has  received  such  honor.

The  respect  paid  to  the  Bible  extends  back  to  its
origin  in  remote  antiquity.  In  the  earliest,  as  well  as
the  latest  ages,  it  has  been  honored  by  the  wisest  and
best  of  men.     Moses,  the  first  of  the  sacred  writers,


RESPECT     OBTAINED.  25

exceeded  all  the  great  men  of  ancient  times  as  a  law-
giver and  political  leader ;  but  in  all  the  records  "which
he  has  made  of  himself  and  his  deeds,  we  see  him
merely  as  the  servant  and  amanuensis  of  Jehovah.
He  exhibits  himself  as  a  frail  and  erring  man ;  and
teaches  us  to  honor  the  God  whom  he  served,  and  the
revelation  from  God  which  he,  by  divine  command,
committed  to  writing.  After  Moses  came  the  judges,
prophets,  and  kings  of  Israel,  who  rendered  like  rever-
ence to  the  sacred  writings.  Among  these  men  were
many  who  had  no  equals  in  their  generation,  and  of
whom  the  world  was  not  worthy ;  and  all  these  gave
the  full  homage  of  their  understanding  and  hearts  to
the  Bible.

The  respect  paid  to  the  Bible  in  ancient  times  was
not  the  result  of  novelty,  because  it  has  remained
unimpaired  to  the  present  time,  when  the  novelty  has
passed  away.  Nor  can  the  respect  which  it  received
from  the  ancients  be  attributed  to  their  ignorance  and
superstition,  since  it  has  continued  undiminished  while
the  light  of  science  and  philosophy  has  advanced  to  its
present  noonday  splendor.

The  Bible  has  not  obtained  the  respect  which  it  has
received  through  carelessness  in  the  examination  of  its
pretensions.  No  other  book  has  been  subjected  to  such
scrutiny.  It  has  not  been  shut  up  in  some  secret  place,
where  none  but  an  interested  few  could  have  access  to
it ;  but  it  has  been  translated  into  almost  all  languages,
and  published  in  editions  almost  without  number ;  and
copies  have  been  scattered  through  all  accessible  regions
by  the  untiring  zeal  of  its  friends,  who  call  on  all  to
search  it  diligently.  Nor  has  it  been  without  opponents.
Men  of  shrewdness  have  denied  its  authority,  and  dis-
puted its  claim  to  the  respect  which  it  receives.     Con-


26  SINGULARITIES    OF    THE     BIBLE.

troversies  have  arisen,  and  have  been  carried  on  by  men
of  great  ability,  in  which  the  authority  and  credibility
of  the  Bible  have  been  discussed  with  acuteness  and
earnestness.  Many  volumes  have  been  written  on  the
subject;  and  every  form  of  investigation  which  inge-
nuity could  invent  has  been  adopted.  No  other  book
has  ever  been  subjected  to  such  an  ordeal,  yet  it  comes
forth  from  this  scrutiny  still  commanding  the  highest
respect  from  multitudes  of  the  wisest  and  best  men,  and
firmly  believed  by  them  to  be  of  divine  origin.

But  however  numerous,  intelligent,  and  virtuous  the
advocates  of  the  Bible  may  be,  it  would  be  wrong  for
us  to  receive  it  merely  because  they  receive  it.  This
would  be  to  rest  our  faith  on  the  authority  of  men.
We  should  examine  for  ourselves  the  evidences  of  its
divine  origin.  The  men  of  Sychar  who  went  out  to  see
Jesus  at  Jacob's  well,  said  to  the  woman  who  had  in-
formed them  concerning  him,  "  Now  we  believe,  not
because  of  thy  saying ;  for  we  have  heard  him  our-
selves." x  So  every  wise  student  of  the  sacred  scriptures
will  be  able  to  rest  his  faith,  not  on  the  wisdom  or
virtue  of  those  who  receive  the  Bible,  but  on  the  evi-
dences which  attend  the  Bible  itself,  demonstrating  that
it  is  a  revelation  from  God.  The  fact  that  the  Bible  is
singular  in  the  respect  which  it  has  obtained  from  men,
though  not  of  itself  sufficient  to  demonstrate  the
divinity  of  its  origin,  presents  a  strong  inducement  to
study  its  character  and  claims ;  and  harmonizes  well
with  other  facts  which  prove  its  divine  origin.

1  John,  iv.  42.


CHARACTER     CLAIMED.  27


Section  IV.      Character   claimed.

THE  BIBLE  IS  THE  ONLY  BOOK  THAT  EXHIBITS  RESPECT-
ABLE PRETENSIONS  TO  THE  CHARACTER  OF  A  DIVINE
REVELATION.

Various  heathen  nations  have  preserved  with  care
books  which  they  have  esteemed  sacred,  and  have
regarded  with  religious  reverence.  But  none  of  these
are  considered  worthy  of  high  respect  by  any  intelli-
gent persons  in  our  land.  The  only  book  likely  to  be
put  in  comparison  with  the  Bible,  as  a  divine  revelation,
is  the  Koran  of  Mahomet.  Its  pretensions  will  be
examined  hereafter.  At  present  it  will  suffice  to  re-
mark that  he  who  puts  it  in  comparison  with  the  Bible,
does  so,  not  to  establish  the  authority  of  the  Koran,
but  to  bring  the  Bible  into  discredit.  We  may  take  it
for  granted  that  every  one  who  reads  these  pages  will
either  believe  the  Bible  to  be  a  revelation  from  God,  or
deny  that  any  book  in  the  world  has  a  just  claim  to  this
character.  It  will  therefore  be  needless  to  prove  that
the  Koran,  and  the  sacred  books  of  the  heathen,  are
unworthy  of  such  respect  as  it  was  shown  in  the  last
section  the  Bible  has  received  from  multitudes  of  the
wisest  and  best  of  mankind.

The  fact  that  various  nations  have  had  their  sacred
books,  and  regarded  them  with  religious  reverence,
furnishes  strong  proof  that  men  have  felt  the  need  of  a
divine  revelation.  Some  of  the  wisest  among  the  ancient
heathen  expressed  their  sense  of  the  need  in  language
which  has  come  down  to  our  times ;  and  where  is  the
man  who  will  affirm  that  the  morality  and  religion  of
the  heathen  world  have  not  needed  such  correction  as  a
revelation  from  heaven  might  be  expected  to  impart  ?
3*


28  SINGULARITIES     OF    THE    BIBLE.

The  atheist  consistently  rejects  all  revelations  from
God,  because,  according  to  his  creed,  there  is  no  God
to  make  it.  But  the  deist  professes  to  learn  from
nature  that  there  is  a  God  infinitely  powerful,  wise,  and
good ;  and  he  is  therefore  compelled  to  admit  that  such
a  God  is  able  to  make  to  his  creatures  any  revelation
that  may  be  necessary  for  them ;  yet  he  denies  that
such  a  revelation  has  ever  been  made.  He  professes  to
learn  his  religion  from  nature ;  and  sees  in  the  bounti-
ful provision  which  the  author  of  nature  has  made  to
supply  the  animal  wants  of  man  proofs  of  divine
benevolence  which  he  admires  and  extols ;  but  when
man's  moral  wants  call  for  relief,'  and  nature  within  him
cries  to  Heaven,  and  vainly  catches  at  fables  and  bun-
gling forgeries  for  divine  illumination,  the  God  of  Deism
shuts  up  his  benevolence,  and  makes  no  provision  to
supply  the  chief  want  that  his  creatures  suffer.


CHAPTER  II.
BENEFICIAL  EFFECTS.

THE  BENEFICIAL  EFFECTS  OF  THE  BIBLE  HAVE  BEEN  EX-
CEEDINGLY GREAT,  AND  OUGHT  TO  BE  REGARDED  AS
SINGULAR  BLESSINGS  BESTOWED  ON  MANKIND  BY
DIVINE  PROVIDENCE.


Section  I.     On  Morals.

Our  present  concern  is  with  facts.  We  inquire  into
the  effects  which  the  Bible  has  actually  produced  on  the
morals  of  mankind.  Good  precepts  do  not  always  secure
good  conduct.  Parental  commands  are  often  disobeyed
by  children,  and  the  laws  of  a  state  are  often  better
than  the  morals  of  the  people.  The  ethics  taught  by
the  ancient  heathen  philosophers  had  but  a  feeble  prac-
tical influence  on  themselves  and  their  disciples,  and
never  wrought  any  thorough  reform  in  the  populace.
Bible  morality  is  remarkable  for  its  greater  success  in
this  particular.

In  a  general  survey  of  the  nations  which  inhabit  the
earth,  we  cannot  well  avoid  observing  that  the  purest
morality  prevails  where  the  Bible  is  best  known.  The
nations  which  are  in  total  ignorance  of  Christianity  are
deeply  sunk  in  corruption,  and  every  species  of  vice
prevails  among  the  people.  Tyranny  and  cruelty  mark
the  acts  of  those  who  are  in  power ;  the  rights  of  pro-
perty which  have  not  fallen  a  prey  to  official  rapacity,

(29)


30  BENEFICIAL     EFFECTS.

are  often  rendered  insecure  by  predatory  bands  of  rob-
bers ;  fraud  and  falsehood  abound  in  the  intercourse  of
the  people  with  one  another ;  the  benevolent  affections
of  the  heart,  and  the  tender  sympathies  of  human
nature,  are  smothered  in  their  exercise  by  the  prevalent
selfishness  and  sensuality ;  husbands  are  oppressors ;
mothers  are  monsters ;  filial  piety  is  unpractised ;  and
chastity  and  modesty  are  little  known  and  little  appre-
ciated. Here  and  there  the  moral  gloom  may  be  broken
by  fitful  gleams  from  the  expiring  light  of  nature  in  the
hearts  of  men ;  but  it  is  still  true  that  darkness  covers
the  earth,  and  gross  darkness  the  people.  The  descrip-
tion given  by  Paul  is,  in  general,  true  of  all  heathen

nations:   "  Being  filled  with  all  unrighteousness,  form-
es o  "

cation,  wickedness,  covetousness,  maliciousness ;  full  of
envy,  murder,  debate,  deceit,  malignity ;  whisperers,
backbiters,  haters  of  God,  despiteful,  proud,  boasters,
inventors  of  evil  things,  disobedient  to  parents,  without
understanding,  covenant  breakers ;  without  natural
affection,  implacable,  unmerciful."1

Infidels,  while  rejecting  the  doctrines  of  Christianity,
have  generally  admitted  the  excellence  of  its  morality ;
and  while  they  exult  in  being  themselves  free  from  its
bondage,  they  have  admitted  its  beneficial  influence  on
the  mass  of  mankind.  Statesmen  and  legislators  have
been  sensible  of  its  power,  and  have  regarded  it  as  the
surest  foundation  of  virtue,  order,  and  good  govern-
ment. In  proportion  as  Christianity  has  prevailed  in
its  purity  among  any  people,  the  conviction  of  its  utility
has  prevailed  also :  and  while  nations  have  groaned
under  the  burden  of  its  corrupt  forms,  and  have  desired
release  from  the  oppressions  of  its  corrupt  priesthood,

1  Rom.  i.  29-31.


ONMO&ALSi  31

the  general  approbation  of  mankind  Las  been  spontane-
ously yielded  to  its  intrinsic  excellence ;  and  not  only
the  wise  and  virtuous,  but  even  the  vicious,  have  ren-
dered homage  to  it,  and  have  felt  that  its  banishment
from  the  world  would  be  a  great  calamity.

The  eifect  of  the  Bible  in  promoting  virtue  may  be
seen  by  contrasting  the  moral  degradation  of  pagan
countries  with  the  condition  of  society  in  those  lands  in
which  Christianity  exerts  its  purest  and  least  obstructed
influence.  Where  the  Bible  is  unknown  iniquity
abounds  in  every  form,  and  the  very  rites  of  religious
worship  are  polluted.  Contrast  with  these  loathsome
exhibitions  of  human  depravity  the  happy  condition  of
a  community  who  obey  the  precepts  of  the  Bible,  if  you
would  estimate  its  beneficial  influence.

The  debasement  of  morals  in  heathen  lands  cannot
well  be  conceived  by  persons  educated  under  the  influ-
ence of  Christianity.  In  ancient  Greece  and  Rome,
amidst  their  refinement  in  literature  and  the  arts,  and
notwithstanding  the  philosophy  which  their  sages  taught,
crimes  which  no  Christian  community  could  tolerate
were  practised  publicly  without  shame.  Fabulous
accounts  of  some  modern  heathen  nations  have  reported
their  virtues  so  favorably,  that  infidels  have  suggested
the  expediency  of  importing  missionaries  from  them  to
instruct  Christians  how  to  live  virtuously ;  but  Christian
missionaries  sent  to  those  very  lands  have  found  them
to  be  habitations  of  cruelty,  fraud,  falsehood,  lewdness,
and  degrading  idolatry.  A  few,  through  the  labors  of
these  missionaries,  have  received  the  gospel,  and  by
their  sober,  righteous,  and  godly  lives,  contrasted  with
the  prevalent  iniquity,  have  exemplified  the  beneficial
effects  of  the  Christian  religion.  We  know  that  in
many  countries  Christianity  has  supplanted  polytheism,


32  BENEFICIAL     EFFECTS.

and  has  erected  barriers  which  promise  effectually  to
prevent  its  return ;  but  history  does  not  record  a  single
instance  in  which  a  heathen  nation  has  of  its  own
accord,  under  the  influence  of  natural  religion,  aban-
doned idolatry  and  vice,  and  been  converted  to  virtue
and  the  worship  of  the  one  living  and  true  God.

Heathen  nations,  ancient  and  modern,  have  not  been
without  religion,  for  man's  depravity  has  not  wholly
effaced  from  his  heart  the  sense  of  religious  obligation.
But  heathen  religions  are  superstitious  rites  which  have
no  tendency  to  promote  virtue,  and  in  many  cases  are
themselves  moral  abominations.  These  religions  have
their  priests ;  but  the  priests  are  not  employed  in  teach-
ing men  virtue.  On  the  contrary,  these  ministers  of
religion  are  often  the  chief  instigators  of  crime.

If,  in  our  survey  of  the  world,  we  pass  from  pagan
nations  to  those  countries  in  which  the  Roman  Catholic
religion  prevails,  we  shall  perceive  an  improvement  in
the  morals  of  the  people.  The  absence  of  polygamy
and  the  superior  sanctity  of  the  conjugal  relation,  give
worth  and  endearment  to  family  and  home.  The  Sab-
bath, though  too  little  regarded,  is  a  blessing  to  man
and  beast.  The  public  worship  of  God,  though  de-
graded by  ceremonies  of  human  invention,  and  prosti-
tuted to  serve  the  purposes  of  designing  priests  and
rulers,  restrains  the  vicious  propensities  of  men  with  a
sense  of  religious  obligation.  And  the  Christian  pre-
cepts which  are  inculcated  even  in  this  corrupt  form  of
Christianity,  have  their  effect  in  the  public  and  private
charities  which  mitigate  the  evils  of  poverty  and  suffer-
ing, and  in  the  degree  of  security  which  is  given  to  life
and  property.

But  to  understand  the  influence  of  the  Bible  in  pro-
moting morality,  we  must  look  at  Protestant  countries,


oft   Morals.  33

where  the  free  use  of  the  sacred  volume  is  not  only  per-
mitted but  encouraged.  Nor  will  it  suffice  to  satisfy
ourselves  with  a  general  and  careless  comparison  of  Pro-
testant nations  with  others ;  though  even  such  a  com-
parison will  redound  to  the  credit  of  the  too-much
neglected  book.  We  should  search  for  the  communities
where  it  is  best  known,  for  the  families  where  it  is  most
read,  and  for  the  individuals  who  are  most  familiar  with
its  pages.  In  this  search  we  shall  find  the  purity  of
morals  greatest  where  the  Bible  is  permitted  to  exert  its
greatest  influence.

In  a  general  view  of  the  benefits  which  Christianity
has  conferred  on  mankind,  we  may  observe  the  following
facts : —

1.  Christianity  has  wholly  abolished  many  evils  which
prevailed  among  the  heathen.

Idolatry  was  universally  practised  in  the  most  en-
lightened heathen  nations  ;  and  was  sanctioned  by  their
wisest  and  best  men.  Among  their  entertainments
gladiatorial  combats  held  a  prominent  place,  and  polished
men  and  women,  even  beautiful  and  tender  virgins,
gazed  with  intense  delight  on  these  scenes  of  human
slaughter.  The  laws  and  usages  allowed  parents  to
destroy  their  infant  children,  when  unwilling  to  rear
them.  Polygamy  and  divorce  at  pleasure  were  autho-
rized and  freely  practised.

All  these  evils  Christianity  has  banished  wherever  it
has  prevailed.  Idolatry  fell  before  it.  Constantine,
the  first  Christian  emperor,  put  an  end  by  decree  to
infanticide  (38  a)  and  gladiatorial  shows  ;  and  in  modern
times  infanticide  and  the  burning  of  widows  on  the
funeral  pile  of  their  deceased  Jiusbands  have  been  pro-
hibited in  India  by  English  legislation.  And  the  abo-
lishment of  polygamy  and  divorce  has  been  a  chief  cause


84  BENEFICIAL    EFFECTS.

of  the  superiority  which  the  Christian  nations  of  Europe
possess  over  the  inhabitants  of  Asia.

2.  Christianity  has  mitigated  many  evils  which  it  has
not  wholly  abolished.

Wars  were  anciently  undertaken  for  the  avowed  pur-
pose of  conquest,  and  were  conducted  with  ferocious
cruelty.  Conquered  armies  were  massacred  or  enslaved,
the  lands  of  conquered  nations  were  ravaged,  the  pos-
sessions of  the  inhabitants  seized  or  destroyed.  Now
no  Christian  nation  will  make  war  except  for  real  or
alleged  injury ;  and  it  is  necessary  to  the  reputation  of
any  military  chief,  that  he  avoid  as  much  as  possible
the  shedding  of  blood,  and  that  he  treat  with  kindness
the  wounded  and  prisoners  who  may  fall  into  his  hands,
and  that  he  spare  private  property.

Anciently  conquered  people  were  enslaved  ;  and  mas-
ters were  invested  with  the  power  of  life  and  death  over
their  slaves.  They  nailed  them  to  the  cross  at  pleasure,
or  threw  their  bodies  into  the  fish-ponds  to  feed  the
fish ;  and  when  a  master  was  found  dead  by  suspected
violence,  all  his  slaves  might  be  put  to  death.  Now,
slavery  is  not  inflicted  by  Christian  nations  as  a  penalty
on  those  whom  they  conquer ;  and,  where  slavery  has
existed  in  a  Christian  nation,  the  power  of  the  master
has  been  greatly  restricted.  He  has  not  been  legally
permitted  to  take  away  the  lives  of  his  slaves  ;  and  even
to  treat  them  with  cruelty  has  been  held  to  be  a  criminal
and  punishable  abuse  of  power.

The  forms  of  civil  government  have  been  meliorated
by  the  influence  of  Christianity.  Despotism  has  given
place  to  restricted  monarchy  or  republicanism.  Capital
punishments  are  less  frequent,  and  are  not  inflicted  at
the  will  of  the  ruler,  or  without  fair  trial.  Venality  and
corruption  in  the  administration  of.  justice  have  become


ON     MORALS.  35

far  less  common ;  and  far  greater  security  exists  for  life
and  property.  Assassinations  are  far  less  frequent,  and
a  higher  value  is  everywhere  set  on  human  life.

3.  Christianity  has  conferred  many  positive  benefits
on  human  society.

Christianity  has  elevated  the  condition  of  the  female
sex.  The  women  of  heathen  lands  are  the  slaves  rather
than  the  companions  of  the  stronger  sex,  and  are  made
in  degradation  to  minister  to  the  pleasure  of  their  mas-
ters. Christianity  elevates  and  refines  the  sex,  and
creates  sisters,  wives,  and  mothers,  who  sustain  honor-
able relations,  and  perform  duties  that  are  full  of  bless-
ings to  the  family  and  the  nation.

Christianity  elevates  the  condition  of  the  poor,  pro-
motes industry,  encourages  self-reliance,  and  diffuses
intelligence.  It  provides  hospitals,  dispensaries,  and
various  modes  of  relief  to  the  indigent  and  suffering.
Such  benevolence  is  unknown  in  heathen  lands.

Christianity  gives  Sabbaths  for  the  relief  of  our  animal
nature,  and  for  the  cultivation  of  piety.  Natural  reli-
gion teaches  the  obligation  to  worship  God,  but  provides
no  special  time  for  this  service.  The  due  observance  of
the  Sabbath  is  productive  of  the  highest  benefits  to  indi-
viduals, families,  and  communities ;  and  for  this  benign
institution  mankind  are  wholly  indebted  to  the  Bible.

Christianity  confers  blessings  on  all  the  relations  of
domestic  and  social  life.  Husbands  and  wives,  parents
and  children,  masters  and  servants,  learn  and  perform
their  several  duties  to  each  other,  so  as  to  promote  the
happiness  of  all.  The  aged  are  treated  with  a  reverence
which  heathenism  never  inspires,  and  a  care  unknown
to  heathenism  is  exercised  over  the  young.

The  numerous  moral  benefits  which  we  have  contem-
plated, follow  from  the  Bible.  They  are  found  where  the
4


36  BENEFICIAL     EFFECTS.

Bible  is  found ;  and  they  exist  in  the  greatest  degree,
wherever  the  Bible  has  the  greatest  influence.  More-
over, the  men  who  are  most  distinguished  for  moral
purity,  tell  us  that  their  characters  are  formed  by  the
Bible.  They  tell  us  that  it  gives  them  the  precepts
which  they  obey,  the  examples  which  they  imitate,  and
the  motives  which  impel  them  forward  in  the  pursuit  of
holiness.  They  tell  us,  in  short,  that  the  book  is  pre-
cisely adapted  to  make  men  perfect ;  thoroughly  fur-
nished unto  all  good  works.  Our  present  concern  is,
not  to  look  into  the  contents  of  the  Bible,  but  to  take  a
survey  of  the  moral  benefits  emanating  from  it.  After
this  survey,  it  is  natural  to  inquire  how  it  has  happened
that  such  a  source  of  moral  purity  has  been  opened  in
this  sinful  world.  Have  fraud  and  imposture  conferred
this  vast  benefit  on  mankind  ?  If  there  is  a  God  who
rules  in  the  affairs  of  men,  and  if  he  delights  in  virtue,
must  it  not  be  that  he  is  pleased  with  the  effects  which
the  Bible  is  producing  ?  Will  he  be  offended  if  we  study
the  book  that  makes  men  holy,  prize  its  teachings,  and
thankfully  receive  it  as  a  gift  of  his  benevolence  ?

Section  II.     On   Happiness.

In  surveying  the  population  of  the  globe  to  ascertain
where  the  highest  degree  of  happiness  is  to  be  found,  it
will  be  convenient  to  follow  the  same  order  as  that  which
was  adopted  in  the  last  section,  beginning  where  the
Bible  is  unknown,  and  ending  where  its  influence  on  the
conduct  and  character  of  men  is  the  greatest.

In  pagan  nations  misery  abounds  as  well  as  crime.
Governments  are  administered,  not  to  promote  the  good
of  the  people,  but  to  gratify  the  selfishness  and  ambition
of  the  rulers.  Rivalships  for  political  power  give  fre-
quent  occasion  for   civil  wars,  wasting   the  lives   and


ON    HAPPINESS.  37

property  of  the  people,  multiplying  their  miseries,  and
discouraging  the  efforts  of  industry  to  provide  supplies
for  necessary  wants.  Mutual  distrust  prevents  co-
operation to  promote  the  general  good  ;  and  while  each
endeavors  to  appropriate  to  himself  as  much  as  he  can
of  the  scanty  means  of  enjoyment,  no  one  obtains  a  large
share,  and  no  one  has  a  secure  enjoyment  of  the  portion
which  he  obtains.  The  domestic  relations  exist;  but
without  those  refined  affections  that  are  necessary  to
render  home  happy.  Instead  of  the  exquisite  enjoy-
ments of  which  human  beings  are  capable,  the  feelings
become  blunted,  and  the  pleasures  are  few  and  frothy ;
or  sullenness  and  gloom  prevail,  attended  with  an  under-
valuing of  life.  Were  life  filled  with  high  enjoyments,
it  would  be  valued :  but  the  low  estimate  placed  on  it
by  heathen  nations,  demonstrates  that  they  feel  its
emptiness.

In  lands  where  a  corrupt  Christianity  denies  to  the
people  the  free  use  of  the  Bible,  we  find  miseries  pre-
vailing similar  to  those  which  afflict  heathen  nations ;
but  they  are  attended  with  many  mitigations.  Where
the  Bible  is  most  known  and  influential,  governments
are  administered  with  mildness  and  justice,  life  and
property  are  secure,  the  arts  flourish,  industry  is  stimu-
lated, and  mutual  confidence  gives  freedom  to  social
intercourse,  and  success  to  trade  and  commerce.  While
the  means  of  enjoyment  are  multiplied,  the  susceptibility
of  enjoyment  is  increased  by  the  refinement  of  feeling
resulting  from  superior  education  ;  and  while  the  general
condition  of  society  is  greatly  improved,  the  happiness
of  the  domestic  circle  receives  more  than  an  equal  share
of  the  general  improvement.  The  families  where  the
Bible  is  read,  and  the  God  of  the  Bible  devoutly  wor-
shipped, are  heavenly  places  on  earth,  and  in  the  sane-


38  BENEFICIAL     EFFECTS.

tified  intercourse  of  the  members  with  each  other,  a
measure  of  that  bliss  is  experienced  which  the  pious
expect  to  enjoy  to  the  full  in  the  upper  world.

But,  to  estimate  rightly  the  influence  of  the  Bible  in
promoting  human  happiness,  we  must  extend  our  re-
search. Having  entered  a  family  in  which  the  religion
of  the  Bible  has  diffused  happiness,  we  must  select  from
its  members  the  individual  who  loves  the  Bible  most,
and  in  whose  heart  the  word  of  Christ  dwells  most
richly.  Contemplate  the  walk  of  that  individual  on  the
very  verge  of  heaven.  He  has  joys  that  a  stranger
intermeddles  not  with,  and  of  which  no  power  on  earth
can  deprive  him.  He  may  be  poor  in  the  things  of  this
world  ;  but  he  is  rich  in  faith.  He  may  be  wasting  away
with  disease,  or  suffering  torturing  pain  in  his  body ;
but  he  is  strengthened  with  all  might  in  the  inner  man,
and  a  joyful  confidence  in  God  more  than  countervails
the  pain  which  he  endures,  enables  him  to  rejoice  in  the
light  and  momentary  affliction,  which  he  believes  to  be
working  for  him  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight
of  glory.  But  spiritual  enjoyments,  however  exquisite,
are  not  perpetual  in  the  present  life.  Their  tide  has  its
ebb  and  flow,  and  the  most  highly  favored  individual
has  seasons  of  comparative  gloom  and  depression.  Select
his  moments  of  highest  ecstasy,  when  the  tide  of  his
enjoyment  is  at  its  flood ;  and  you  will  find  that  it  is
just  then  the  truths  of  the  Bible  are  nearest  to  his  heart,
and  its  precious  promises  most  clearly  and  ravishingly
unfolded  to  his  view.

The  Bible — wonderful  book  !  How  benign  its  influ-
ence !  Wherever  it  is,  in  proportion  as  its  influence  is
unobstructed,  it  diffuses  virtue  and  happiness  around.
The  more  the  heart  receives  its  teaching,  the  more  is  its
sanctifying  and  beatifying  power  felt  and  manifested.


0  N    IT  A  P  P  I  N  E  S  S .  39

We  know  that  the  sun  is  the  source  of  light  and  heat,
because  the  light  and  heat  increase  as  we  approach  the
centre  from  which  they  emanate.  So  the  Bible  is  a
source  of  holiness  and  happiness,  which  some  power  has
opened  in  this  world  of  sin  and  misery ;  and  from  which
the  sons  and  daughters  of  men  are  deriving  the  best  of
all  blessings.  What  must  be  the  unseen  power  which
has  bestowed  this  inestimable  gift  ?  The  character  of
the  gift  determines  the  character  of  the  giver.  The
holiness  and  happiness  which  it  produces  demonstrate
the  holiness  and  benevolence  of  its  author ;  and  give
proof  that  it  is  what  it  claims  to  be,  the  book  of  God.

Modern  deism  has  had  but  little  opportunity  to  dis-
play on  a  large  scale  its  influence  on  the  morals  and
happiness  of  mankind.  But  at  the  close  of  the  last
century  it  arose  to  power  in  France,  and  a  short  experi-
ment of  a  fewT  years  fully  demonstrated  that  the  evils
of  popish  superstition  and  oppression  to  which  the
people  had  been  accustomed,  were  far  more  tolerable
than  the  illuminations  and  blessings  of  infidelity.

Philosophers  have  proposed  captivating  theories  of
human  perfectibility,  and  have  predicted  a  delightful
state  of  society  to  which,  by  the  power  of  self-love,
mankind  are  to  advance  through  increase  of  knowledge,
and  improvement  in  the  forms  of  civil  government.  But
thus  far  experience  has  never  verified  these  predictions.
It  has  been  found  that  increase  of  knowledge,  if  not
sanctified  by  religion,  gives  increased  power  to  wicked-
ness ;  and  the  wisest  statesmen  have  learned  that  the
best  forms  of  civil  government  are  unavailing,  if  the
morals  of  the  people  are  not  purified  by  religion.

4*


40  BENEFICIAL     EFFECTS.

Section  III.     Objection.

It  is  objected  by  infidels  that  the  Bible  has  caused
much  of  the  war  and  consequent  misery  with  which  the
world  has  been  afflicted,  and  has  originated  an  oppress-
ive priesthood  which  has  been  a  curse  to  mankind.

We  admit  that  the  religion  of  the  Bible  has  been  an
occasion  of  much  bloodshed  and  suffering,  but  deny  that
it  has  been  the  cause.  The  birth  of  Jesus  at  Bethlehem
was  the  occasion  of  Herod's  massacre  of  the  infants  in
that  city,  but  it  was  not  the  cause  of  that  bloody  tragedy.
So  Christianity  is  innocent  of  the  blood  which  its  per-
secutors have  shed.  The  religious  wars  and  clerical
oppression  which  have  claimed  the  sanction  of  Christ,
are  utterly  opposed  to  the  spirit  of  his  religion.  It  will
be  shown  in  the  next  chapter  that  the  morality  of  the
Bible  has  no  tendency  to  produce  these  evils,  and  they
must  therefore  proceed  from  another  cause.  "From
whence  come  wars  and  fightings  among  you  ?  come  they
not  hence,  even  of  your  lusts  that  war  in  your  mem-
bers?"1 These  warring  lusts  Christianity  counteracts
by  a  peaceful  and  benignant  influence ;  and,  instead  of
causing  the  evils  which  the  objection  lays  to  its  charge,
it  is  the  divinely  appointed  remedy  for  their  removal.

The  wars  of  Joshua,  in  the  conquest  of  Canaan,  fur-
nish to  infidels  a  more  plausible  objection,  but  these  are
not  properly  chargeable  on  the  religion  of  the  Bible.
The  Israelites  lived  at  peace  with  surrounding  nations
of  idolaters,  when  undisturbed  by  them ;  and  neither
the  precepts  nor  the  spirit  of  their  religion  required
them  to  war  against  their  neighbors.     The  wars  against

1  Jarnes,  iv.  1.


OBJECTION.  41

the  nations  that  inhabited  Canaan  were  directed  by  the
special  command  of  Jehovah ;  for  the  purpose  of  inflict-
ing a  punishment  which  had  been  deferred  until  the
iniquity  of  the  nations  was  full.1  God  has  an  indis-
putable right  to  punish  nations  for  their  iniquities,  and
to  employ  what  agency  he  pleases  for  the  execution  of
his  judgments.  An  angel  was  sent  to  destroy  the  army
of  Sennacherib;2  and  the  blood  of  the  one  hundred  and
eighty-five  thousand  men  slain  by  him  in  one  night,  did
not  stain  the  moral  purity  of  the  heavenly  messenger.
So  Joshua  and  the  hosts  that  he  led  were  not  chargeable
with  crime  when  they  destroyed  the  Canaanites  by
divine  command.  That  women  and  children  perished  in
the  overthrow  of  these  nations,  is  nothing  different  from
what  happened  in  the  overthrow  of  Sodom  and  Gomor-
rah, and  from  what  happens  whenever  a  country  is
scourged  with  famine  or  pestilence.  The  right  of  God
to  send  such  calamities  deists  cannot  deny  without
rejecting  the  teachings  of  natural  religion,  the  guide
which  they  claim  to  follow.  Hence  their  objection  to
Joshua's  wars  is  unfounded.

1  Gen.  xv.  16.  2  2  Kings,  xix.  35.


CHAPTER  III.
PERFECT  MORALITY.

THE  MORALITY  TAUGHT  IN    THE    BIBLE    IS  PERFECT,  AND
BEARS  THE  IMPRESS   OE  DIVINE  HOLINESS.


Section  I,  Perfect  Precept.

Men  are  endowed  by  nature  with  a  moral  faculty,
which  enables  them  to  distinguish  between  right  and
wrong,  impels  them  to  make  the  discrimination,  urges
the  obligation  of  doing  right,  and  rewards  with  self-
approbation,  or  punishes  with  remorse,  according  to  the
moral  character  of  actions  performed.  This  faculty  is
peculiar  to  human  beings,  distinguishing  them  from  all
other  animals  which  inhabit  the  earth ;  and  the  due  use
and  cultivation  of  it  are  therefore  necessary  to  the
accomplishment  of  the  proper  end  for  which  man  exists.

The  moral  faculty  of  each  individual  qualifies  him  to
comprehend  the  distinction  between  right  and  wrong ;
and  in  some  measure  to  discover,  by  the  light  of  nature,
the  moral  quality  of  actions,  for  his  guidance  in  duty.
But  no  individual  is  indebted,  for  his  moral  knowledge,
to  his  own  experience  and  observation  exclusively.  We
all  owe  much  to  parental  instruction,  the  moral  senti-
ments of  the  community,  and  the  laws  of  society.
Another  and  very  important  source  of  instruction  is
found  in  books  which  the  wisest  and  best  men  have  writ-
ten on  morals  for  the  direction  of  human  conduct.     A

(42)


PERFECT     PRECEPT.  43

few  of  such  books  have  come  down  to  us  from  ancient
times ;  and,  in  modern  times,  a  large  part  of  the  pro-
ductions which  emanate  from  the  press  are  works  of
this  class.

Of  all  the  books  on  morals,  the  Bible,  though  the
oldest,  is  incomparably  the  best.  The  excellence  of  its
morality  even  infidels,  who  reject  its  divine  authority,
are  compelled  to  acknowledge.  Concessions  from  them
to  this  effect  might  readily  be  quoted ;  but  it  will  be
more  profitable  to  examine  the  subject  for  ourselves.

But  does  not  our  belief  that  the  Bible  is  the  highest
standard  of  morals  disqualify  us  for  the  examination
which  we  have  proposed,  and  bind  us  to  the  absurdity
of  estimating  the  morality  of  the  Bible  by  comparing
the  book  with  itself?  It  does  not;  for  the  Bible,
though  it  is  the  highest  standard  of  morals,  is  not  our
only  means  of  knowing  the  distinction  between  right
and  wrong :  but  the  Creator  has  endowed  us  with  a
moral  faculty  for  this  purpose ;  and  so  orders  the  course
of  events  under  his  providence  that  the  moral  quality
of  actions  may  often  be  learned  from  their  effects.  In
geometry  we  regard  Euclid's  Elements  as  a  standard
work,  and  believe  all  its  propositions  to  be  true :  but  if
any  one  should  pronounce  it  to  be  a  work  of  falsehood
and  delusion,  we  are  not  under  the  necessity  of  vindi-
cating it  by  comparing  the  book  with  itself.  We  pro-
duce the  author's  demonstrations,  which  are  an  appeal
to  every  man's  reason.  We  receive  the  facts  of  history
on  authority  ;  and  we  may  so  receive  the  truths  of  geo-
metry from  the  lips  of  a  teacher :  but  when  we  have
studied  the  demonstrations,  we  have  within  ourselves  a
proof  which  is  independent  of  all  authority.  So  we
have  within  ourselves  the  means  for  obtaining  independ-
ent proof  of  moral  truth.     When  our  parents  authori-


44  PERFECT     MORALITY.

tatively  decided  right  and  wrong  for  us  in  our  childhood,
we  had  even  then  our  thoughts  about  the  correctness
of  their  decisions ;  and,  with  whatever  authority  moral
truth  comes  clothed,  our  minds  sit  in  judgment  on  it.
Though  reason  and  the  moral  faculty  are  not'  infallible,
they  are  capable  of  giving  us  a  firm  conviction  that  the
morality  of  the  Bible  is  supremely  excellent,  just  as  we
have  a  firm  conviction  that  the  propositions  of  Euclid
are  certainly  true.

In  the  heathen  world,  the  ablest  instructors  in  morals
have  been  such  men  as  Socrates,  Plato,  Epictetus,
Cicero,  and  Seneca.  It  would  not  be  altogether  fair  to
refer  to  the  lives  of  these  men  for  specimens  of  the
morality  which  they  taught ;  for  many  even  in  Christian
lands  teach  better  morality  than  they  practise :  but
what  said  their  public  instructions  ?  These  justified
drunkenness,  when  it  occurred  in  the  worship  of  Bac-
chus; held  fornication  to  be  innocent;  exalted  lying
to  the  character  of  virtue,  when  used  skilfully  in  man-
aging the  affairs  of  state ;  and  not  only  tolerated  but
approved  compliance  with  the  prevalent  idolatry.  How
different  from  all  these  are  the  pure  precepts  of  the
Bible !  How  does  the  Decalogue  frown  on  the  vices
which  these  sages  not  only  practised  but  approved  !  Let
any  one  open  the  New  Testament,  and  study  the  mo-
rality taught  by  Christ  and  his  Apostles ;  and  he  cannot
but  be  sensible  of  its  great  superiority  to  that  of  the
heathen  philosophers.

The  author  of  the  Koran,  in  founding  the  new  religion
which  he  introduced,  had  the  advantage  of  free  access
to  the  Bible,  and  of  incorporating  its  moral  principles
into  his  system :  but  with  all  this  advantage,  how
degraded  is  the  morality  of  .the  Koran,  compared  with
that  of  the  Bible !     It  corrupts  the  institution  of  mar-


PERFECT     PRECEPT.  45

riage,  dishonors  and  oppresses  the  female  sex,  encour-
ages sensuality,  and  teaches  hatred,  revenge,  and  cruelty.

The  best  books  on  morals,  except  the  Bible,  are
among  the  works  of  modern  Christian  writers ;  and  all
these  with  one  accord  acknowledge  themselves  indebted
to  the  Bible  for  the  principles  which  they  inculcate.
They  refer  to  it  not  merely  as  a  help  in  their  studies,
but  as  the  highest  standard  to  which  they  can  appeal ;
as  a  rule  which  their  best  reasoning  cannot  correct ;  and
as  authority  of  such  tried  and  acknowledged  perfection
that  there  can  be  no  appeal  from  its  decision.

It  is  an  excellence  of  Bible  morality  that  it  elevates  a
class  of  virtues  which  mankind  have  generally  held  in
low  estimation.  The  heroic  virtues  have  attracted  the
admiration  of  the  world,  and  valor,  fortitude,  and  even
revenge,  have  been  held  in  honor :  but  humility,  meek-
ness, gentleness,  forgiveness,  and  all  the  passive  virtues,
have  been  contemned.  In  opposition  to  these  prevalent
sentiments,  the  Bible  assigns  the  highest  place  of  excel-
lence to  the  gentle  virtues ;  forbids  all  revenge ;  teaches
forgiveness  of  injuries,  love  of  enemies,  and  the  return
of  good  for  evil ;  and  promises  the  highest  reward  to
the  meek  and  lowly.  This  system  of  morality,  when
judged  by  its  effects,  is  demonstrated  to  be  the  wisest
and  best ;  and  the  fact  that  we  derive  our  first  know-
ledge of  it  from  the  Bible,  ought  to  inspire  us  with
reverence  for  the  moral  teachings  of  this  ancient  book.

It  is  an  excellence  of  Bible  morality,  that  it  does  not
respect  the  outward  conduct  only,  but  extends  to  the
heart;  and,  by  regulating  the  desires  and  affections,
rectifies  the  first  springs  of  human  action.  It  forbids
anger,  covetousness,  unchaste  desires,  pride,  and  dis-
content. The  teachings  of  the  wonderful  book  probe
the  inmost  depths  of  the  soul,  and  reveal  unsuspected


46  PERFECT     MORALITY.

corruptions  from  which  proceed  the  outward  forms  of
wickedness  that  fill  the  earth.

It  is  an  excellence  of  Bible  morality,  that  it  refers
all  duties  to  a  few  simple  principles,  So  perfect  is  its
generalization,  that  it  reduces  all  duty  to  a  single  affec-
tion, "  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  law."1  It  contem-
plates this  affection  in  a  two-fold  relation,  to  God  and
our  fellow-creature,  and  expresses  the  obligations
thence  arising,  in  two  great  precepts  :  "  Thou  shalt  love
the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart;"  and  "Thou
shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself."2  On  these  two
commandments,  the  comprehensive  system  makes  all  the
law  and  the  prophets  to  depend ;  and  these  two  com-
mandments, by  a  further  unfolding,  adapting  them  to
the  relations  and  circumstances  of  human  beings,
become  the  decalogue  or  ten  commandments,  recorded
in  the  20th  chapter  of  Exodus.  These  commandments
contain  an  admirable  summary  of  human  duties.  They
are  represented  to  have  been  given  by  Jehovah  to  the
people  of  Israel,  as  the  foundation  of  his  covenant  with
them ;  and  to  have  been  engraven  by  him  on  two  tables
of  stone,  and  preserved  by  them  with  special  care,  in
obedience  to  his  command,  in  a  sacred  chest,  called
"the  Ark  of  the  Covenant."  Natural  philosophy
approaches  nearest  to  perfection,  when  it  explains  the
various  phenomena  of  the  material  world,  by  referring
them  to  a  few  simple  principles,  called  laws  of  nature.
In  morals,  the  Bible  has  already  accomplished  what
philosophers  are  laboring  to  accomplish  in  physics.  It
presents  a  perfect  system  of  ethics  made  out  from  a  few
general  principles.

The  moral  system  of  the  Bible  is  complete.     It  regu-

1  Rom.  xiii.  10.  2  Matt.  xxii.  37-40.


PERFECT     PRECEPT.  47

lates  the  duties  appertaining  to  every  relation  in  life,
prohibits  all  forms  of  vice,  and  enjoins  every  species  of
virtue.  Its  requirements  are  not  confined  to  the
external  conduct,  but  as  has  been  already  noticed,
extend  to  the  heart,  and  regulate  the  desires  and  affec-
tions, which  are  the  first  springs  of  action.  So  far-
reaching  is  its  authority,  that  an  ancient  student  of  it
exclaimed,  "  Thy  commandment  is  exceeding  broad,'"1
and  such  did  he  discover  to  be  its  influence  on  the
inner  man,  that  he  testified,  "  The  law  of  the  Lord  is
perfect,  converting  the  soul."2

The  Bible  not  only  gives  to  men  a  pure  and  perfect
code  of  morality,  but  it  also  presents  the  strongest
motives  to  induce  obedience  to  its  requirements.  It
records  the  penalty  affixed  to  the  first  transgression,  "  In
the  day  that  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  surely  die,"3
and  depicts  fearfully  the  woes  which  that  transgression
introduced  into  the  condition  of  human  existence.  In
page  after  page  the  sacred  volume  unfolds  the  terrible
judgments  of  God  on  the  sins  of  men ;  and  the  retribu-
tions of  the  future  world,  which  are  vividly  portrayed
in  the  Bible,  allure  to  virtue  by  the  hope  of  eternal
life,  and  deter  from  crime  by  the  apprehension  of
enduring  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty  for  ever  and  ever.
To  these  strongest  of  motives,  another  of  great  power
is  added,  in  the  exhibition  of  divine  love  and  mercy
which  is  made  in  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Here  the  good-
ness of  God  leads  to  repentance;  and  they  who  cordially
receive  the  gospel,  become  devoted  followers  of  Christ,
who  loved  them  and  died  for  them ;  and  imitate  his
example  of  perfect  virtue.

1  Psalms,  cxix.  96.  2  Psalms,  xix.  7.

3  Gen.  ii.  17.


48  PERFECT     MORALITY.


5Ii(


The  promotion  of  virtue  and  piety  is  the  great  ei
for  which  the  Bible  was  written,  "  All  scripture  is  pro-
fitable ....  that  the  man  of  God  may  be  thoroughly
furnished  unto  all  good  works."1  Among  the  earliest
portions  of  it,  and  possibly  the  first  written  of  all,  we
find  the  decalogue,  which  as  we  have  seen  is  a  brief
code  of  laws,  prescribing  the  duties  of  men  to  God  and
to  one  another.  This  summary  exhibits  the  morality
of  the  Old  Testament ;  and  its  authority  is  recognised
in  all  the  teachings  of  Christ  and  his  apostles.  Christ
taught,  "  Verily  I  say  unto  you,  Till  heaven  and  earth
pass,  one  jot  or  one  tittle  shall  in  no  wise  pass  from  the
law,  till  all  be  fulfilled;"2  and  the  apostles  of  Christ
instructed  men,  both  by  example  and  precept,  to  delight
in  the  law,  and  fulfil  its  requirements.  Some  books
are  commended  for  the  incidental  inculcation  of  pure
morality ;  but  to  make  men  pure  and  perfect,  has  been
the  grand  aim  of  the  Bible  from  its  origin.

We  do  not  enter  at  present  into  the  historical  ques-
tion respecting  the  origin  of  the  Bible.  The  senses
which  nature  has  given  me,  testify  that  the  book  lies
before  me  on  the  shelf;  and  I  can  as  soon  doubt  my  own
existence  as  to  doubt  its  presence.  The  moral  powers
with  which  nature  has  endowed  me,  testify,  after  care-
ful examination,  that  the  moral  system  which  it  presents,
is  transcendently  excellent,  and  precisely  adapted  to
guide  men  into  all  duty.  The  volume  before  me  was
printed  and  bound  a  few  years  ago  in  a  neighboring
city ;  but  the  printer  and  binder  never  claimed  the  au-
thorship of  the  moral  system  which  the  volume  contains,
and  if  impenetrable  darkness  concealed  its  authorship,
the  system  itself  shines  forth  in  brightness  and  beauty.

1  2  Tim.  iii.  16,  17,  2Matt.  v.  18.


PERFECT    PBECEPT.  49

Apart  from  all  inquiry  into  the  origin  of  the  natural
world,  we  admire  the  beauties  of  the  landscape  and  the
flowery  plain ;  and  whatever  may  have  been  the  origin
of  the  Bible,  human  beings  are  false  to  the  noblest
powers  with  which  nature  has  endowed  them,  if  they  do
not  admire  the  morality  of  the  Bible,  and  conform  their
lives  to  its  teachings.

Let  us,  then,  come  to  this  light  by  which  our  steps  may
be  guided  through  all  the  intricacies  of  life's  way.  The
heathen  philosophers  lighted  torches  to  find  the  right
path,  in  the  thick  darkness  which  enveloped  them ;  but
the  Bible  shines  upon  us,  like  the  sun  in  the  firmament.
Whatever  scepticism  may  say  concerning  the  origin  of
the  sun,  and  of  the  Bible,  let  it  be  our  wisdom  to  walk
in  the  light  which  they  give.  And  when  natural  reli-
gion points  out  to  us  the  admirable  contrivance  by  which
the  sun  is  adapted  to  the  accomplishment  of  good,  and
leads  our  thoughts  from  the  glorious  luminary  to  the
glorious  Being  who  made  it ;  let  us  ask  her  to  apply  the
same  mode  of  reasoning  by  which  she  finds  out  that  God
made  the  sun,  to  the  inquiry,  who  is  the  author  of  that
system  of  morality  which  the  Bible  contains.

We  freely  admit  that  iniquity  abounds,  even  in  Chris-
tian countries,  and  that  many  who  profess  to  follow
Christ  are  often  guilty  of  odious  vices.  But  it  is  never-
theless true  that  the  general  morality  of  lands  where
Christianity  prevails,  and  especially  where  it  prevails  in
its  purest  form,  is  greatly  superior  to  that  which  is  found
in  pagan  nations.  And  it  is  true  that  the  brightest
examples  of  virtue  that  have  ever  adorned  the  world,
have  been  exhibited  in  the  lives  of  sincere  Christians.
We  must  not  estimate  the  excellence  of  Christianity  by
the  character  of  those  who  falsely  assume  the  Christian
name.     But  where  are  the  bright  examples  of  virtue  in


50  PERFECT     MORALITY.

heathen  lands  ?  The  very  philosophers  who  taught  men
morals,  were  addicted  to  hateful  vices ;  and  the  very
systems  of  ethics  which  they  taught,  tolerated  such
vices  (157).  The  deists  of  modern  times,  in  forming  a
system  of  morals,  have  many  advantages  over  the  heathen
philosophers,  derived  from  the  prevalence  of  Christianity
around  them ;  but  notwithstanding  these  advantages,
their  morality  in  theory  as  well  as  in  practice,  falls  much
below  the  Bible  standard.

Deists  have  charged  the  Bible  with  being  an  immoral
book,  because  it  contains  descriptions  of  iniquity  which
shock  virtuous  feeling.  But  they  might  with  equal  pro-
priety charge  courts  of  justice  with  being  sources  of  im-
morality, because  they  bring  to  light  the  murders,  thefts,
robberies,  and  other  crimes,  which  are  perpetrated  in  hu-
man society.  The  Bible  as  a  faithful  record  gives  a  true
history  of  crimes  as  well  as  of  virtues ;  but  it  exhibits
crime  as  odious,  and  presents  the  strongest  possible  mo-
tives against  the  practice  of  it.  They  who  study  the
Bible  most  diligently,  and  most  fully  imbibe  its  princi-
ples, abhor  iniquity  most  cordially,  and  exhibit  in  their
lives  the  highest  degree  of  purity  and  virtue.  The  ini-
quities which  disgrace  human  society,  are  not  learned
from  the  Bible ;  but  abound  most  where  the  Bible  is
least  known  and  revered ;  and,  when  fully  rampant,  have
banished  the  holy  volume  from  common  use,  and  from  a
place  in  the  affections  of  the  heart.

Deists  charge  Christianity  with  the  religious  persecu-
tions which  history  has  recorded.  They  allege  that  the
pagan  religions  tolerated  each  other,  and  that  persecu-
tion was  unknown  till  Christianity  arose.  But  when
Christianity  arose,  did  it  begin  and  continue  the  work
of  persecution  ?  Did  Christ  persecute  Herod  and  Pon-
tius  Pilate?     Did  Peter,    James,   and  John   form   an


PERFECT     PRECEPT.  51

inquisitorial  court,  and  persecute  the  Jewish  priests  and
elders  ?  Did  the  Christian  disciples,  everywhere  through-
out the  Roman  empire,  persecute  the  pagan  world  for
three  hundred  years,  and  deluge  the  earth  with  heathen
blood.  Surely  the  fact  that  persecution  slept  till  Chris-
tianity arose,  demonstrates  that  Christianity  differs  from
all  the  corrupt  religions  which  the  god  of  this  wrorld
peacefully  tolerated,  and  demonstrates  also  that  those
religions  which  practise  persecution  under  the  name  of
Christianity,  differ  widely  from  the  religion  taught  by
Christ  and  his  apostles.  But  is  deism  peaceful  and
tolerant  ?  When  in  the  minority,  it  contents  itself  with
reproaches,  reviling,  and  bitter  hatred ;  but  what  it  can
accomplish  when  exalted  to  power,  let  the  history  of  the
French  revolution  testify.

Other  corruptions  which  are  seen  in  papal  and  merely
nominal  Christianity,  have  given  abundant  occasion  for
infidel  invectives.  Under  the  name  of  priests,  the
ministers  of  the  gospel  have  been  reproached  as  univer-
sally mercenary,  ambitious,  intriguing,  and  hypocritical.
But  deists  themselves  know  that  this  was  not  the  charac-
ter of  the  apostles  and  first  ministers  of  Christ ;  and
they  know  howT  to  distinguish  between  those  who  truly
exhibit  the  apostolic  spirit,  and  those  who,  without  that
spirit,  claim  to  succeed  the  apostles  in  office.  The  fact
that  hypocrisy  is  enumerated  among  the  priestly  vices,
demonstrates  that  the  accusers  of  the  priesthood  under-
stand the  distinction  between  the  mercenary,  ambitious,
and  intriguing  religious  officials,  and  the  true  ministers
of  Christ ;  and  the  very  accusations  which  they  bring
against  the  false  pretender,  are  a  compliment  to  Chris-
tianity. But  when  a  deist  is  an  immoral  man,  who
charges  him  wTith  hypocrisy  ?  Who  reproaches  him,  and
sneers  at  him,  for  having  acted  inconsistently  with  his
5*


52  PERFECT     MORALITY.

religious  profession  "i  He  may  be  mercenary,  ambitious,
and  intriguing ;  but  no  one  complains  that  he  is  hypo-
critical in  religion.  The  very  manner  in  which  deists
inveigh  against  the  vices  of  professed  Christians,  and
extenuate  the  vices  of  their  own  party,  shows  clearly
that,  deists  themselves  being  judges,  consistency  does  not
require  the  morality  of  deism  to  be  as  pure  as  that  of
Christianity.

The  lives  of  men  are  books  which  all  may  read.  In
the  lives  of  the  apostles,  and  all  true  disciples  of  Christ,
we  may  read  the  true  character  of  Christian  morality.
Deism  has  its  apostles ;  and  it  will  be  of  great  practical
utility  to  study  in  their  lives  the  character  of  infidel
morality  (158).

The  divine  origin  of  the  Bible  is  sufficiently  proved
by  the  perfection  of  its  morality ;  since  human  wisdom,
even  in  the  wisest  and  best  of  men,  could  not  have  in-
vented so  perfect  a  system.  But  the  strength  of  the
argument  becomes  greatly  increased  by  the  considera-
tion that  the  Bible,  if  it  is  not  what  it  claims  to  be,  is
an  imposture  by  which  mankind  have  been  grossly  de-
ceived. Then  wicked  deceivers  have  invented  the  purest
and  most  sublime  system  of  morality  the  world  has  ever
known ;  and  have  contributed  more  by  their  imposture
to  purify  and  elevate  the  morals  of  mankind  than  has
been  accomplished  by  all  other  agencies  combined.  In
all  other  cases  human  imposture  exhibits  some  marks  by
which  the  sagacious  observer  may  detect  the  motive  from
which  it  originated.  But  everything  in  the  Bible  is  at
war  with  the  supposition  that  it  originated  in  avarice,
pride,  love  of  fame,  love  of  power,  or  any  other  of  the
motives  which  usually  produce  imposture.  It  cannot
be  that  wicked  men  conceived  so  pure  a  system ;  that
by  every  utterance  which  they  made   they  condemned


PERFECT     EXAMPLE.  53

their  own  fraud ;  and  that  they  have  preserved  others
from  perpetrating  like  iniquity  by  denunciations  so  ter-
rible that  the  very  imagination  of  them  is  unwelcome  to
the  minds  of  transgressors.  The  holy  Bible  cannot  be
the  work  of  unholy  deceivers.

The  argument  from  the  perfection  of  Bible  morality
is  of  itself  decisive ;  but  its  force  is  increased  when  the
antiquity  of  the  book  is  taken  into  consideration.  Men
have,  at  different  periods  of  the  world,  invented  various
artificial  lights  to  be  used  in  the  night.  At  first,  the
rude  torch  and  the  glimmering  lamp  dispelled  the  dark-
ness ;  and,  afterwards,  the  ingenuity  of  man  obtained
superior  illumination  from  the  candle,  the  chandelier,
the  gas-light,  and  the  Drummond  light.  But  God's
great  luminary  for  dispelling  darkness  from  the  face  of
the  earth,  and  shedding  on  it  the  light  of  day,  was  per-
fect in  its  origin  ;  and  it  does  not  now  shine  with  greater
brilliance  than  when  it  was  first  set  in  the  firmament.
So,  the  sciences  which  come  from  human  investigation
have,  from  small  beginnings,  made  progress  towards
perfection ;  but  the  system  of  moral  science  taught  in
the  Bible  was  perfect  from  its  origin,  and  when  all  human
science  was  in  its  infancy.  That  the  oldest  writing  in
the  world  contains  a  complete  ethical  system,  which  the
most  cultivated  wisdom  of  man  has  never  improved,
cannot  be  accounted  for,  except  on  the  supposition
that  it  came  from  God.

Section  II.     Perfect  Example.

The  morality  of  the  Bible  tends  to  form  a  perfect
character.  Not  content  with  outward  virtue,  it  regu-
lates the  desires  and  affections  of  the  heart,  and  estab-
lishes pure  habits  of  thought  and  action.  It  may  be
objected  that  such  moral  perfection  is  unattainable,  and


54  PERFECT     MORALITY.

that  therefore  the  morality  of  the  Bible  is  impractica-
ble. But  the  perfection  of  Bible  morality,  instead  of
being  a  valid  objection  to  it,  is  its  highest  recommenda-
tion, and  proves  its  divine  origin.  It  sets  before  all,
even  those  who  have  made  the  highest  attainments  in
virtue,  a  prize  yet  in  advance,  and  engages  all  in  perse-
vering efforts  to  win  it.

The  practicability  of  Bible  morality  is  proved  by  the
lives  of  holy  men  recorded  in  the  book.  In  their  cha-
racters different  virtues  are  illustrated,  blended  more  or
less  with  human  frailty.  But  pre-eminent  among  them
is  the  character  of  Jesus  Christ.  His  life  is  an  exem-
plification of  the  perfect  morality  which  is  enjoined  in
the  divine  code,  and  the  perfection  of  his  example  de-
serves to  be  studied  as  a  peculiarity  distinguishing  the
book  which  contains  his  biography  from  all  human  pro-
ductions. In  making  this  use  of  the  account  which  the
New  Testament  gives  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  is  not  neces-
sary to  assume  the  truth  of  the  gospel  history.  This
will  be  proved  hereafter.  At  present  we  do  not  deter-
mine whether  the  evangelists  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and
John  have  described  a  real  or  a  fictitious  character.  It
will  suffice  for  our  present  purpose  to  show  that  the
character  which  they  have  delineated  is  one  of  perfect
moral  excellence.

1.  The  several  virtues  were  perfectly  exemplified  in
the  character  of  Jesus  Christ.

Devotion  to  God  was  manifest  in  all  his  conduct.  He
came  to  do  his  Father's  will,  and  accounted  the  service
his  meat  and  drink.  At  the  age  of  twelve  he  said,
"  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  my  Father's  busi-
ness?"1 and  at  the  close  of  his  life  he  was  able  to  ad-

1  Luke.  ii.  49.


PERFECT     EXAMPLE;  55

dress  his  Father  in  the  language,  "  I  have  finished  the
"work  that  thou  gavest  me  to  do."1  And  this  devotion,
■which  was  apparent  in  all  his  actions,  was  manifested
also  in  the  habitual  communion  which  he  held  with  his
Father  by  prayer.  For  this  exercise  of  devotion  he
often  withdrew  to  some  lonely  place,  and  sought  the
stillness  of  the  night.  Nor  did  he  cease  to  hold  this
communion  with  his  Father,  when  pressed  by  a  thronging
multitude ;  as  at  the  grave  of  Lazarus,  and  in  the  pre-
sence of  thousands  whom  he  fed  in  the  wilderness  on  a
few  loaves  and  fishes.  When  about  to  send  forth  his
apostles  in  the  beginning  of  that  ministry  on  which  was
to  depend  the  future  success  of  his  religion,  he  spent  a
whole  night  in  prayer.  His  agonizing  prayer  thrice
uttered  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  evinced  his  disposi-
tion to  hold  communion  with  his  Father,  who  was  at  the
very  time  presenting  to  his  lips  the  cup  of  bitterness
which  he  was  to  drink.  In  this  prayer  appears  his  per-
fect resignation  to  his  Father's  will.  He  was  obedient
even  unto  death.  His  zeal  for  his  father's  glory  had
been  manifested  by  twice  purifying  the  temple  of  God,
and  by  rescuing  the  divine  law  from  the  corrupt  glosses
and  opposing  traditions  of  the  Jews ;  but  it  was  mani-
fested in  a  still  higher  degree  by  the  perfect  worship  he
himself  rendered,  and  by  his  perfect  obedience  to  the
law  in  all  the  extent  and  spirituality  of  its  requirements.
In  the  review  of  his  life  he  was  able  to  say  at  its  close,
"  I  have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth."  l

Perfect  benevolence  to  men  was  displayed  in  his  con-
duct. His  mission  from  heaven  to  earth  was  one  of
love ;  and  in  dying  for  us  he  gave  the  highest  exhibi-
tion of  love  that  the  mind  of  man  can  conceive.     All

1  John,  xrii.  4.


66


PERFECT     MORALITY.


his  intercourse  with  men  was  a  perpetual  outflowing  of
love.  With  reference  to  his  immediate  attendants,  the
apostles,  it  is  said,  "  Having  loved  his  own,  he  loved
them  to  the  end,"  l  and,  with  reference  to  the  young
man  who  was  turning  away  from  him,  unwilling  to
become  his  follower,  it  is  said  "  Jesus  beholding  him
loved  him."2  His  travels  and  toils  were  all  for  the
benefit  of  mankind;  for  he  "went  about  doing  good."3
He  mingled  with  the  poor,  the  suffering,  and  the  guilty,
to  confer  such  benefits  as  their  necessities  required;  and
everywhere  he  evinced  for  them  the  utmost  tenderness
and  compassion.  When  multitudes  were  fainting  in  the
wilderness,  he  had  compassion  on  them  and  supplied
them  with  food.  In  cases  innumerable  he  exerted  his
miraculous  power  to  heal  the  sick.  When  he  met  a
poor  widow  who  was  sorrowfully  accompanying  her  only
son  to  the  grave,  his  tender  heart  was  moved  with  pity,
and  the  disconsolate  mother  was  soon  made  joyful  by
receiving  in  her  arms  her  lost  son  restored  to  life.  The
sympathy  of  his  heart  was  manifested  at  the  grave  of
Lazarus ;  and  his  compassion  for  the  guilty  inhabitants
of  Jerusalem  was  expressed  in  language  of  inimitable
tenderness :  "  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  thou  that  killest
the  prophets,  and  stonest  them  which  are  sent  unto
thee  !  how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children
together,  even  as  a  hen  gathereth  her  chickens  under
her  wings,  and  ye  would  not !"  4

To  the  primary  virtues,  piety  and  benevolence,  all
other  virtues  were  added  in  his  perfect  character.  He
was  without  selfishness.  His  miraculous  power,  often
exerted  for  the  relief  of  others,  was  never  used  for  his


1  John.  xiii.  1.  2  Mark,  x.  21.

3  Acts,  x.  38.  *  Matt,  xxiii.  37.


PERFECT    EXAMPLE.  6Y

own  relief.  He  made  no  account  of  his  own  wants.
Though  weary,  hungry,  and  thirsty,  at  Jacob's  well,  he
did  not  seek  rest  by  inactivity,  but  seized  the  opportu-
nity to  instruct  the  Samaritan  woman ;  and  though  he
asked  drink  of  her,  he  was  less  intent  on  receiving  from
her  the  needed  draught,  than  on  communicating  to  her  the
water  of  life.  The  disciples  had  gone  to  the  city  to  buy
food ;  but  the  demands  of  hunger  were  to  him  less
pressing,  than  his  solicitude  to  do  good ;  and  the  food
which  they  brought  was  less  welcome  to  him  than  the
opportunity  which  he  had  enjoyed  of  conferring  benefit :
"I  have  meat  to  eat  that  ye  know  not  of."1  He  once
said,  "  The  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  to  lay  his
head:"2  but  this  expression  was  used,  not  as  a  com-
plaint of  his  hard  lot,  but  for  the  benefit  of  the  person
addressed.  Though  he  could  multiply  loaves  and  fishes,
he  was  content  to  live  in  poverty,  and  to  be  dependent
for  the  necessaries  of  life  on  the  ministrations  of  a  few
women.3  Such  was  his  superiority  to  avarice,  that  he
allowed  a  thief  to  be  his  treasurer ;  and  such  his  supe-
riority to  ambition,  that  he  rejected  regal  honors  when
pressed  upon  him.  He  never  sought  the  favor  of  the
rich  and  great  by  compliance  with  their  wishes,  as  he
might  have  done  in  the  case  of  Herod  who  desired  to
see  him  work  a  miracle ;  nor  did  he  ever  through  fear
of  men  flatter  their  vices,  or  withhold  needed  rebuke.
His  control  over  his  passions  was  perfect.  He  was
never  betrayed  into  rashness,  or  had  occasion  to  recall
a  word  which  he  had  uttered,  or  apologize  for  a  deed
which  he  had  done.  Though  his  hearers  were  often  so
annoyed  by  his  words  that  they  sought  to  kill  him,  it

1  John,  iv.  3.  2  Matt.  viii.  20.

3  Luke,  viii.  3.


58  PERFECT    MORALITY.

was  not  at  any  indiscreet  utterance  which  he  had  reason
to  regret.  Questions  were  repeatedly  proposed  to  him
with  the  malicious  design  of  ensnaring  him ;  but  the
wisdom  and  firmness  which  such  exigencies  demanded,
never  failed  him.  No  act  of  injustice  has  ever  been
laid  to  his  charge ;  and  no  one  has  ever  alleged  that
guile  was  found  in  his  mouth.  Even  Pilate,  who  ordered
that  he  should  be  crucified,  confessed,  "  I  find  no  fault
in  him."1  The  traitor  Judas  bore  testimony  to  his
innocence ;  and  his  testimony  is  of  the  greater  value
because  he  was  one  of  the  twelve  who  were  the  familiar
attendants  of  Jesus,  and  the  chosen  agents  for  execut-
ing his  designs  and  propagating  his  religion.  If  there
was,  in  his  designs  or  any  part  of  his  conduct,  aught
that  was  iniquitous,  Judas  had  the  best  opportunity  for
knowing  it,  and  the  strongest  motive  possible  for  dis-
closing it ;  but  he  made  no  such  disclosure.  On  the
contrary,  remorse  drove  him  to  relinquish  the  reward
which  he  had  received  for  his  treachery;  to  confess
before  his  accomplices  in  guilt,  "  I  have  sinned  in  that
I  have  betrayed  the  innocent  blood,"2  and  to  seal  the
sincerity  and  truth  of  this  confession  by  the  act  of  sui-
cide. In  view  of  Christ's  character,  infidels  who  would
destroy  his  religion  from  the  earth,  are  either  hushed
into  silence  as  if  abashed  in  his  presence,  or  are  com-
pelled to  break  forth  in  panegyric.

II.  The  virtues  which  appear  in  the  character  of
Jesus  Christ  blend  with  each  other  in  perfect  harmony.

Such  is  the  frailty  of  human  nature  that  our  virtues
are  always  liable  to  be  tinged  with  the  vices  to  which
they  are  nearest.  Firmness  is  liable  to  degenerate  into
obstinacy ;  and  gentleness  into  compliance  with  tempta-

1  John,  xix.  4.  2  Matt,  xxvii.  4.


PERFECT     EXAMPLE.  59

tion.  Devotion  may  become  tarnished  by  austerity,  or
may  lead  to  such  retirement  from  the  world  as  is  incon-
sistent with  the  proper  duties  of  life ;  and,  on  the  other
hand,  he  who  performs  these  duties  is  ever  in  danger  of
not  keeping  himself  unspotted  from  the  world.  In  the
character  of  Jesus  Christ  the  virtues  so  blend  that  each
is  perfect.  Perfect  firmness  unites  with  perfect  gentle-
ness. Devotion  to  God  combines  with  the  most  active
performance  of  duties  to  men.  Towards  the  guilty  he
exhibited  compassion,  but  without  any  indulgence  to
their  crimes.  He  mingled  freely  with  publicans  and
sinners,  but  was  nevertheless  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,
and  separate  from  sinners.  Such  were  his  meekness
and  gentleness  that  he  did  not  break  the  bruised  reed,
or  quench  the  smoking  flax ;  and  yet  his  voice  spoke
terror  to  hypocrites,  deceivers,  and  oppressors.

III.  The  virtues  of  Jesus  Christ  accorded  perfectly
with  his  relations  to  God  and  men.

The  duties  of  men  diifer  according  to  the  relations
which  they  sustain.  The  duties  of  father  and  master
differ  from  those  of  son  and  servant.  Hence  we  cannot
estimate  rightly  the  virtues  of  Jesus  Christ,  without
considering  the  relations  which  he  sustained  both  to
God  and  man.

In  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ  divinity  and  humanity
were  united.  As  God  he  did  and  said  things  which
would  be  unlawful  for  any  creature  however  exalted.
Peter,1  Paul,  and  Barnabas2  would  not  bear  for  a  mo-
ment that  such  honor  should  be  rendered  to  them  as  is
due  to  God  only ;  but  Jesus  never  rejected  divine  honor,
or  evinced  uneasiness  when  it  was  offered.  On  the  con-
trary, he  claimed  to  be  the  Son  of  God  in  a  sense  which

1  Acts,  x.  25,  26.  2  Acts,  xiv.  13,  15.

6


60  PERFECT     MORALITY.

implied  equality  with  God,  declared  himself  to  be  one
with  the  Father,  required  that  men  should  honor  the
Son  as  they  honor  the  Father,  and  connected  his  own
glory  with  that  of  the  Father  in  a  manner  which  would
have  been  unsuitable  to  any  mere  creature.  If  we  keep
in  view  the  deity  of  our  Lord,  we  perceive  the  propriety
of  all  that  he  claimed,  and  we  learn  to  appreciate  more
correctly  his  wonderful  condescension.  He  spoke  of  his
Father's  house  and  its  many  mansions  with  such  fami-
liarity as  a  prince  would  manifest  in  speaking  of  his
father's  palace,  but  without  any  of  the  pride  which  a
vainglorious  prince  would  be  likely  to  betray.  Nothing
is  said  for  the  sake  of  ostentation.  All  is  easy  and
natural ;  and  what  he  says  of  the  celestial  world,  or  of
his  own  power  and  glory,  is  never  for  the  purpose  of
gratifying  curiosity,  but  of  doing  good  to  those  who
heard  him.  He  asserted  and  proved  his  power  to  for-
give sins,  that  men  might  come  to  him  for  forgiveness
and  everlasting  life ;  and  he  affirmed  his  ability  to  give
rest,  that  he  might  induce  the  laboring  and  heavy  laden
to  come  and  obtain  it  at  his  hands.

Though  on  proper  occasions,  and  for  suitable  pur-
poses, he  claimed  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  yet  the  title
which  he  usually  assumed  was  'the  son  of  man.'  He
was  human  as  well  as  divine,  and  took  on  himself  the
form  of  a  servant.  In  this  nature  he  suffered  ;  and  in
the  endurance  of  suffering  exhibited  the  patience  and
resignation  which  it  is  our  duty  to  imitate ;  and  in  this
nature  he  sustained  relations,  the  duties  of  which  he
performed  as  an  example  for  his  followers.  During  his
childhood  and  youth  he  was  subject  to  his  parents,1
rendering  to  them  filial  respect  and  obedience ;  and  his
subjection  appears  to  have  continued,  until  at  the  age

1  Luke,  ii.  51.


PERFECT     EXAMPLE.  61

of  thirty  years,  he  entered  on  his  public  ministry.
And  amidst  the  agonies  of  the  cross,  his  tender  regard
for  his  mother,  who  was  probably  then  a  widow,  was
touchingly  exhibited  in  his  commitment  of  her  to  the
care  of  his  beloved  disciple  John.1  He  acknowledged
also  his  relation  to  the  civil  government  exercised  over
his  country,  and  paid  to  Caesar  the  tribute  required.2

IV.  The  virtues  of  Jesus  Christ  were  perfectly
adapted  to  the  work  of  establishing  a  pure  religion  in
the  world.

He  taught  the  purest  morality,  not  only  by  precept,
but  by  his  own  example.  He  made  no  attempt  to  re-
strain vice,  or  gain  converts  to  his  religion,  by  physical
force,  or  by  the  allurements  of  ambition  or  sensual
gratification.  Such  means  would  have  tended  to  estab-
lish a  religion  far  different  from  the  spirituality  and
purity  of  true  Christianity.  Mahomet,  with  his  example
of  sensuality,  with  his  promise  of  a  voluptuous  paradise,
and  with  the  military  power  by  which  he  extended  his
conquests,  established  such  a  religion  as  corresponds  to
the  character  of  its  founder,  and  the  means  employed
to  give  it  success.  But  Jesus  Christ  employed  such
means  only  as,  if  successful,  would  produce  a  pure
religion,  and  such  means  only  as  nothing  could  render
successful  but  divine  power.  Yet  he  speaks  of  the  ex-
tension and  final  triumph  of  his  religion  with  perfect
confidence ;  and  this  faith  in  the  divine  power  for  the
support  of  a  good  cause,  is  a  divine  virtue  which  the
Founder  of  Christianity  exhibited  in  full  perfection.
Now  we  ask  not  whether  he  did  really  found  a  pure
religion,  which  has  existed  to  the  present  time;  nor
even  whether  he  was  a  real  personage.     It  is  enough

1  John,  xix.  26,  27.  2  Matt.  xvii.   24-27.


62  PERFECT     MORALITY.

for  our  present  purpose  that  the  Bible  exists,  and  that
it  tells  the  story  of  Jesus  Christ.  Whence  came  that
wonderful  story  ?

Near  the  beginning  of  the  Christian  Era  the  greatest
of  Latin  poets  employed  his  extraordinary  genius  in
describing  a  hero.  It  was  not  a  picture  of  a  real
character,  but  a  picture  drawn  by  the  brilliant  imagina-
tion of  the  poet,  and  with  full  poetic  license.  This
hero  is  made  illustrious  for  piety  towards  his  father,
and  towards  the  gods.  Yet  so  far  is  his  character  from
being  pure  and  faultless,  that  a  chief  event  in  his  history
is  a  criminal  love  affair,  causing  the  suicide  of  a  female
whom  he  wickedly  deserted.  Such  was  the  hero  of  the
iEneid,  the  boasted  poem  of  the  Augustan  age.  How
came  the  fishermen  of  Galilee  so  far  to  surpass  the
splendid  genius  of  the  Mantuan  bard  ?  What  inspired
them, — not  to  compose  a  poem,  such  as  the  heathen
attributed  to  the  inspiration  of  the  muses ;  for  the
gospels  have  not  the  art  and  decorations  of  a  poem, —
what  inspired  them  to  portray,  in  a  style  of  unrivalled
simplicity,  a  character  of  unparalleled  excellence  ?  If
the  gospel  history  is  a  fiction,  the  inventors  of  the  fiction
must  have  been  divinely  inspired.  That  Galilean  fisher-
men should,  without  supernatural  aid,  invent  such  a
character  as  Jesus  Christ,  and  give  such  a  description
of  their  astonishing  invention  as  is  found  in  the  Gospels,
is  far  less  credible,  than  that  the  character  really  ex-
isted as  they  have  described  it.  But  if  the  account  of
Jesus  Christ  given  in  the  Gospels  is  true,  Christianity,
the  religion  which  he  founded,  is  true,  and  of  divine
origin.  And  were  there  reason  to  believe  that  Jesus
Christ  is  a  fictitious  and  not  a  historical  character,  it
would  still  be  true,  that  the  perfect  morality  exempli-
fied in  the  wonderful  fiction,  and  otherwise  taught  in
the  Bible,  must  bo  of  superhuman  origin.


CHAPTER  IV.
SUPERHUMAN  DOCTRINES.

THE  DOCTRINES  TAUGHT  IN  THE  BIBLE  ARE  NOT  OE
HUMAN  ORIGIN,  AND  MUST  HAVE  PROCEEDED  EROM
GOD.

It  has  been  usual  to  divide  the  evidences  of  Christi-
anity into  External  and  Internal ;  but  it  is  not  easy  in
all  cases  to  apply  the  distinction.  The  beneficial  effects
discussed  in  Chapter  II.  may  be  referred  to  the  class  of
External  evidences,  because  they  are,  so  to  speak,  visible
fruits  by  which  the  tree  is  known.  The  morality  dis-
cussed in  Chapter  III.  may  be  referred  to  the  class  of
Internal  evidences,  because  it  is  found  in  the  Bible
itself,  and  is  seed  from  which  good  fruit  may  be  ex-
pected, but  is  not  itself  the  fruit.  For  the  same  reason
the  doctrines  of  the  Bible  belong  to  the  class  of  Inter
nal  evidences ;  but  in  viewing  their  adaptedness  to  the
character  and  condition  of  man,  they  approach  to  the
nature  of  External  evidences ;  just  as  prophecy,  here-
after to  be  considered,  is  Internal  because  found  in  the
Bible,  and  External  because  its  efficiency  as  proof  de-
pends on  its  fulfilment,  of  which  in  many  cases  the
Bible  does  not  give  us  information.

To  the  whole  class  of  Internal  evidences  an  objection
presents  itself,  which  deserves  consideration.  It  may  be
stated  thus  :  We  are  incapable  of  judging  a  priori  what
kind  of  revelation  Grod  would  make  to  men;  and  an
attempt  to  judge  savors  of  presumption.

6*  E  (63)


64  SUPERHUMAN    DOCTRINES.

To  pronounce  that  the  Bible  possesses  internal  evi-
dences of  its  divine  origin,  is  to  assume,  as  the  objec-
tion alleges,  that  we  are  capable  of  judging  a  priori
what  kind  of  a  book  the  Divine  Being  would  prepare.

This  objection  is  equally  applicable  to  all  the  deduc-
tions of  natural  religion.  We  cannot  judge  a  priori
what  sort  of  a  world  God  would  create,  and  yet  natural
religion  finds  in  the  volume  of  creation  internal  evidence
that  it  proceeded  from  a  divine  author.  An  objection
which  would  abolish  the  whole  system  of  natural  reli-
gion, must  be  invalid.  It  should  have  no  other  use  than
to  guard  us  against  arrogant  reasoning.  If  the  Bible
contains  some  things  which  we  should  not  have  expected
to  proceed  from  God,  we  ought  not  arrogantly  to  infer
that  the  book  cannot  be  God's ;  for  this  would  be  to
assume  that  we  are  capable  of  judging  in  all  particulars
what  sort  of  a  book  God  would  make.  The  same  arro-
gant reasoning  would  decide  that  God  did  not  make  the
world,  because  it  contains  some  things  which  we  would
not  have  expected  to  proceed  from  a  being  of  infinite
wisdom  and  benevolence.

Some,  who  admit  the  use  of  Internal  evidences,  con-
sider them  wholly  posterior  and  subsidiary  to  those
which  are  External.  The  authority  of  a  document  from
the  court  of  one  nation  to  that  of  another,  is  not  deter-
mined by  the  matter  which  it  contains,  but  by  the
external  proofs  of  its  origin.  These  establish  its  authen-
ticity before  the  contents  of  the  document  are  examined.
So  the  External  evidences  of  Christianity,  it  has  been
urged,  ought  to  be  first  studied ;  and,  when  by  means
of  these  we  have  satisfied  ourselves  that  the  Bible  has
come  from  the  Sovereign  of  the  Universe,  we  should
then   reverently  receive   and   study  its   contents ;    but


SUPERHUMAN     DOCTRINES.  65

should  not  attempt,  from  the  character  of  the  contents,
to  judge  of  the  authority  from  whence  they  proceed.
This  restriction,  if  applied  to  natural  religion,  would
render  it  necessary  for  us  to  possess  historical  proof
that  God  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  before  we
can  look  into  them  for  proofs  of  his  power  and  God-
head. The  case  is  not  analogous  to  that  of  a  document
from  an  earthly  court,  which  men  might  readily  coun-
terfeit. Nature  and  the  Bible  contain  within  them-
selves proofs  of  their  divine  origin,  which  cannot  be
counterfeited,  and  which  directly  meet  the  eye  of  the
humble  and  well-disposed  inquirer,  and  bring  conviction
to  his  understanding  and  heart,  when  he  has  not  the
means  and  opportunity  necessary  for  the  investigation
of  historical  proofs.

The  moral  constitution  of  human  nature  supplies
some  means  for  forming  a  judgment  concerning  the
morality  of  the  Bible.  The  reasonableness  and  excel-
lence of  a  law  prescribing  duties  to  man,  we  may  expect
the  mind  of  man  to  be  capable  of  perceiving ;  but  the
doctrines  of  the  Bible  bear  relations  to  God  which  are
incomprehensible  to  finite  minds.  It  is  therefore  espe-
cially necessary  in  our  investigation  of  them  that  we
remember  our  weakness,  and  avoid  arrogance  in  our
judgment.  But  though  we  may  not  presume  to  judge
a  priori  what  doctrines  a  revelation  from  God  ought  to
teach,  we  are  capable  of  judging  what  doctrines  a
human  imposture  would  be  likely  to  originate.  If  the
Bible  is  not  what  it  claims  to  be,  the  book  of  God,  it  is
a  mere  human  production  ;  and  we  know  enough  of  man
to  judge  of  his  works.  To  this  test  we  shall  bring  the
doctrines  of  the  Bible  in  the  next  section,  with  a  view
to  determine  whether  they  are  of  merely  human  origin.


6Q  SUPERHUMAN    DOCTRINES.

Section   I.     Superiority   to   Man's  Inven-
tion.

The  character  of  God  exhibited  in  the  Bible  is  not  a
human  invention.  Men  have  made  .multitudes  of  gods,
some  of  gold,  silver,  wood,  or  stone ;  and  others,  invisi-
ble creations  of  the  imagination,  having  natures  and
attributes  corresponding  to  the  fancies  of  those  who
invented  them.  Such  are  the  gods  of  heathen  nations  ;
but  the  God  of  the  Bible  differs  wholly  from  all  these
man-made  divinities.  The  refined  nations  of  Greece
and  Rome  had  gods  that  were  not  omnipotent,  omni-
scient, omnipresent,  or  unchangeable.  They  opposed
and  thwarted  each  other's  plans ;  and  their  supreme
deity  had  not  the  power  and  wisdom  necessary  to  gov-
ern the  subordinate  divinities,  much  less  to  govern  the
whole  universe.  A  God,  infinite  in  wisdom  and  power,
unchangeable  in  all  his  perfections,  and  present  at  every
point  in  the  universe,  to  work  all  things  after  the  coun-
sel of  his  will,  never  found  a  place  among  the  inventions
of  men ;  yet  such  is  the  God  of  the  Bible.  And  still
more,  the  moral  perfections  of  Jehovah  place  him  at  an
infinite  distance  from  the  deities  of  human  invention.
The  heathen  gods  were  even  more  debased  in  morals
than  their  worshippers ;  and  when  men  were  virtuous,
it  was  not  because  of  their  religion,  but  in  spite  of  it.
A  religion  emanating  from  a  holy  God,  and  exhibiting
his  perfections  as  the  source  and  model  of  all  moral  ex-
cellence, is  unknown  in  all  the  history  of  the  world,
except  in  the  Bible ;  and  hence  the  Bible  has  not  the
character  of  a  human  invention.

The  moral  government  of  God,  which  the  Bible
throughout  reveals,  is  not  a  human  invention.  The
heathen  had  deities  that  presided  over  different  parts  of


SUPERIORITY    TO    MAN'S    INVENTION.    67

nature  ;  but  the  idea  of  a  universal  government  directed
to  moral  ends  never  entered  their  mythology.  Some
notion  of  rewards  and  punishment  after  death,  and  of
retribution  for  crime  in  the  present  life,  was  derived
from  natural  religion ;  but  the  conception  of  a  moral
government  taking  cognisance  of  every  action,  intention,
and  desire,  and  ruling  over  all  by  a  law  of  perfect  mo-
rality, never  entered  into  the  minds  of  any  who  have
attempted  to  instruct  mankind  in  morality  or  religion,
except  from  the  Bible.  To  whom  were  the  writers  of
the  Bible  indebted  for  this  grand  conception  ?

It  cannot  be  a  human  invention.

The  Scripture  doctrine  of  redemption  has  not  the
characteristics  of  a  human  invention.  Natural  religion
may  give  some  knowledge  of  God  and  moral  government,
but  none  whatever  of  redemption.  No  deist,  I  think,
has  ever  maintained  that  natural  religion  teaches  the
propriety  or  necessity  of  a  sacrifice  for  the  expiation  of
guilt :  but,  on  the  contrary,  an  infidel  objection  which
is  frequently  urged  against  the  gospel,  is,  that  the  doc-
trine of  vicarious  sacrifice  is  inconsistent  with  the  prin-
ciples of  justice.  The  sacrifices  which  have  formed  a
part  of  the  various  heathen  religions,  were  probably  de-
rived by  tradition  from  an  ancient  revelation  to  the
fathers  of  our  race.  But  these  fathers  themselves  did
not  understand  the  full  import  of  their  sacrifices,  and
much  less  was  it  understood  by  their  degenerate  sons.
The  idea  of  a  perfect  sacrifice,  which  should  explain  the
meaning  and  remove  the  necessity  of  all  other  sacri-
fices, and  which  being  made  by  the  Son  of  God  incar-
nate should  honor  the  justice  of  God,  sustain  his  moral
government,  effectually  remove  sin  and  provide  for  the
salvation  of  guilty  men, — this  idea  is  too  grand  and
glorious  to  have  proceeded  from  human  invention.


68  SUPERHUMAN     DOCTRINES.


Section  II.     Adaptedness  to  Man.

In  the  adaptations  with  which  nature  abounds,  we
find  manifestations  of  contrivance  which  demonstrate
that  the  world  has  proceeded  from  an  intelligent  author ;
and  the  number,  extent,  and  perfection  of  these  contriv-
ances, furnish  proof  that  the  intelligence  in  which  they
originated  must  be  infinite.  In  this  way  we  study  the
volume  of  nature,  and  learn  from  it  the  existence  and
wisdom  of  God.  By  a  similar  study  of  the  Bible,  we
may  learn  the  wisdom  of  its  author  from  its  adaptedness
to  the  character,  condition,  and  wants  of  man,  for  whose
benefit  it  was  designed.

Before  the  introduction  of  Christianity  the  heathen
nations,  who  had  been  left  to  the  light  of  natural  reli-
gion and  the  obscure  glimmerings  of  tradition,  were  in-
volved in  gross  darkness.  They  had  no  knowledge  of
the  true  God,  no  means  of  moral  reform,  and  no  correct
apprehension  of  the  chief  good  or  the  mode  of  secur-
ing true  happiness.  They  possessed  genius,  and  pushed
their  investigations  with  industry  ;  but  their  understand-
ings, darkened  by  depravity,  failed  to  discover  the
truth.  Conscious  of  their  failure,  they  sighed  for  know-
ledge which  unaided  reason  could  not  attain.  This  felt
want  the  volume  of  revelation  is  precisely  adapted  to
supply.  It  gives  knowledge  of  the  true  God,  provides
for  the  moral  reform  of  mankind,  and  teaches  the  nature
of  true  happiness,  and  the  mode  of  obtaining  it.

The  very  manner  in  which  revelation  addresses  us  is
adapted  to  our  ignorance.  When  human  reason  has
fainted  in  its  pursuit  after  the  knowledge  needed,  the
Bible  gives  immediate  possession  of  the  good  sought.
It  puts  an  end  to  vain  efforts,  uncertain  conjectures,


ADAPTBDNESS     TO     MAN.  69

and  perplexing  doubts,    by    authoritative    declarations
from  the  source  of  infallible  truth.

The  Bible  explains  the  mystery  of  man's  condition.
He  possesses  intellectual  powers  which  place  him  at  the
head  of  this  lower  world,  far  exalted  above  all  the  other
creatures  which  inhabit  it ;  and  moral  powers  which
adapt  him  to  relations  higher  than  the  earth,  and  more
enduring  than  the  present  life.  Yet,  with  all  these
noble  endowments,  he  is  abject,  dependent,  and  wretched.
The  mystery  of  his  condition  revelation  explains.  It
unfolds  the  moral  government  of  God,  and  tells,  not  as
a  philosophic  theory,  but  as  a  historical  fact,  the  simple
story  of  man's  fall.  The  mystery  is  solved ;  and  the
weakest  intellect,  if  willing  to  learn,  may  clearly  com-
prehend the  incongruity  between  the  high  endowments
and  the  deep  degradation  of  man.

The  explanation  which  the  Bible  gives  of  our  present
fallen  condition  is  so  perfect  that  we  learn  our  own
character  from  it  better  than  from  our  own  conscious-
ness. Even  heathen  wisdom  could  deliver  the  precept,
"Know  thyself;"  but  means  of  self-knowledge  are
needed  beyond  those  which  man's  deceitful  heart  sup-
plies. God  searches  the  heart,  and  his  word  is  a  dis-
cerner  of  its  thoughts  and  intents.  Thousands  have
denied  that  the  Bible  description  of  human  depravity
applies  to  them,  simply  because  they  are  strangers  to
themselves.  When  they  begin  to  understand  their  true
character,  they  begin  to  understand  the  correctness  of
the  Bible  description  ;  and  when  they  have  made  further
progress  in  self-knowledge  they  confess  with  astonish-
ment the  accuracy  of  the  dark  picture,  and  are  con-
vinced that  it  must  have  been  drawn  by  the  Searcher
of  hearts.

The  Bible  meets  man  in  his  fallen  condition,   and


70  SUPERHUMAN    DOCTRINES.

precisely  adapts  its  remedy  to  his  actual  necessities.  If
human  philosophy  could  teach  all  that  ought  to  suffice
for  man,  it  cannot  overcome  the  waywardness  of  his
disposition,  and  make  its  instructions  effectual.  But  the
Bible,  besides  revealing  a  mode  of  acceptance  with  God
wholly  undiscoverable  by  philosophy,  reveals  also  a
power  which  applies  the  truth  to  the  renovation  of  the
heart.  The  Bible  exhibits  the  wisdom  of  its  author,
not  only  in  describing  our  moral  disease  with  more  than
human  skill,  but  in  providing  a  remedy  which  human
sagacity  never  could  have  adapted  so  admirably  to  our
necessities.

The  Bible  not  only  meets  man  in  his  fallen  condition,
but  leads  him  out  of  it  to  the  true  end  of  his  being.  It
takes  cognisance  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  powers
with  which  he  is  endowed,  and  provides  for  their  noblest
development  and  exercise.  It  brings  him  back  to  God
from  whom  he  has  wandered,  and  opens  before  him  the
fulness  of  the  Deity  for  his  admiring  contemplation  and
adoring  love.

The  Bible  is  adapted  to  the  condition  of  man  in  all
ranks  and  circumstances  of  life.  Such  is  the  simplicity
of  its  instructions,  that  the  child  may  learn  its  lessons
and  become  wise  to  salvation  ;  and  such  are  the  grandeur
and  extent  of  its  revelations,  that  the  greatest  human
genius  may  in  the  study  of  them  become  conscious  of
its  weakness  and  insufficiency,  and  may  exclaim  with
Paul,  "  0  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom
and  knowledge  of  God  !  how  unsearchable  are  his  judg-
ments, and  his  ways  past  finding  out  I"1

To  the  poor  especially,  that  class  of  men  for  which
human  philosophy  never  sought  to  provide^  the  gospel

1  Rom.  xi.  33.


COMPLETENESS    OF   SYSTEM.  71

adapts  its  provisions,  and  supplies  precisely  such  relief,
support,  and  comfort,  as  are  needed  in  the  hut  of
poverty,  and  in  the  chamber  of  affliction  and  death.

Section  III.     Completeness  of  System.

As  divine  contrivance  appears  in  the  adaptedness  of
Bible  doctrine  to  the  character  and  condition  of  man;
so  it  is  discoverable  in  that  fitness  of  the  several  doc-
trines to  each  other,  by  which  they  become  one  doc-
trine, one  complete  system.  The  completeness  of  the
system  was  not  apprehended  by  the  ancient  prophets,
who  understood  not  their  own  predictions  concerning  the
sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  glory  which  should  follow.1
Yet  this  system  began  to  be  developed  in  the  very
beginning  of  the  revelation.  The  moral  government  of
God  appears  in  the  probation  to  which  he  subjected  our
first  parents  ;  and  his  justice,  in  the  sentence  pronounced
after  their  transgression.  But  with  justice  mercy  was
blended,  in  the  promise  that  the  woman's  seed  should
bruise  the  serpent's  head.  The  acceptance  of  Abel's
sacrifice  gave  further  intimation  of  mercy,  and  the
whole  system  of  sacrifice  in  the  Old  Testament  was  pre-
paratory and  subsidiary  to  the  redemption  by  Christ,
which  the  New  Testament  reveals,  and  the  whole,  there-
fore, makes  but  one  system.  But  the  Jews  are  living
witnesses  that  the  Old  Testament  was  written  long  prior
to  the  New ;  and  the  fact  that  the  great  system  began
to  be  disclosed  by  men  who  did  not  understand  it,
demonstrates  conclusively  that  it  did  not  proceed  from
their  wisdom.  The  more  we  study  the  system  of  re-
vealed truth,  the  more  we  discover  its  completeness  and
perfection ;  and  hence,  to  a  heart  rightly  disposed,  the

1  1  Pet.  i.  10,  11.


72  SUPERHUMAN     DOCTRINES.

study  of  the  Bible  brings  direct  and  satisfactory  prool
that  God  is  its  author.

As  in  nature,  so  in  revelation,  simplicity  and  grandeur
characterize  the  works  of  God.

The  simple  law  of  gravitation  binds  the  material  uni-
verse together,  and  the  centripetal  and  centrifugal  forces
which  move  the  planets  in  their  orbits,  though  always
conflicting  with  each  other,  yet  harmoniously  combine
in  their  eifects  to  produce  the  movement  on  which  the
whole  plan  of  nature  depends.  The  moral  government
which  provides  for  man's  obedience  and  God's  holiness
and  justice,  and  redemption  which  provides  for  man's
salvation  and  God's  mercy,  harmoniously  combine  their
conflicting  tendencies  to  effect  the  glorious  purpose  of
divine  grace.  Revelation,  like  creation,  expands  into
grandeur  before  our  admiring  view ;  and  the  simplicity
discoverable  in  both  furnishes  an  argument  that  they
are  the  work  of  the  same  Author.  Such  harmony  per-
vades the  system  of  nature,  that  the  vast  movements  on
which  the  return  of  the  seasons,  and  of  day  and  night,
depends,  are  necessary  to  the  sustenance  of  animal  life,
and  are  therefore  tributary  to  the  young  sparrow  in  its
nest ;  and  the  power  of  gravitation  which  pervades  and
controls  these  vast  movements,  holds  the  feeble  nestling
in  its  place  or  determines  its  fall  to  the  ground.  Like
harmony  and  unity  may  be  seen  in  revelation.  The
grand  principles  which  it  unfolds,  and  which  have  their
bearing  on  the  whole  universe  of  intelligent  creatures
and  on  their  condition  through  eternal  ages,  are  tribu-
tary to  the  humble  believer  in  his  hourly  experience,
and  have  their  hourly  use  in  regulating  his  obedience
and  faith.  The  completeness  and  perfection  of  the
system  he  does  not  comprehend,  and  the  vastness  of  the
interests  affected  by  it  he  is  wholly  unable  to  compute ;


CONNECTION    WITH     MORALITY.  73

but  nevertheless  his  obedience  has  a  relation  to  God's
moral  government ;  and  his  faith,  to  the  method  of  sal-
vation by  Christ.  As  he  increases  in  spiritual  know-
ledge, he  will  have  clearer  discoveries  of  the  principles
which  regulate  his  faith  and  obedience ;  and  as  he  com-
prehends  more  and  more  of  the  simple,  grand,  and  har-
monious system,  he  will  obtain  increasing  evidence  and
more  assured  conviction  that  its  author  is  God.

Section  IV.     Connection  with  Morality.

The  influence  which  the  Bible  actually  exerts  in  pro-
moting morality  was  considered  in  Chapter  II. ;  and
this  beneficial  influence  was,  in  part,  accounted  for  in
the  last  chapter,  in  which  it  was  shown  that  the  Bible
teaches  morality  by  perfect  precept  and  perfect  example.
But  mere  precept  does  not  insure  obedience,  and  mere
example  does  not  insure  imitation.  Sanctions  and  mo-
tives are  needed,  and  these  the  doctrines  of  Christianity
supply.

1.  The  Bible  enforces  its  morality  by  reference  to
the  moral  government  of  God  and  the  retributions  of
eternity.  It  reveals  an  almighty  God,  rewarding  and
punishing  men  according  to  their  works,  and  measuring
the  duration  of  these  rewards  and  punishments  by  his
own  eternity.  The  morality  of  heathenism  or  deism  is
without  any  such  sanction.  Among  the  heathen,  the
immortality  of  the  soul  was  involved  in  doubt;  and
among  deists,  with  all  the  light  which  they  have  bor-
rowed from  Christianity,  this  important  truth  is  but
dimly  perceived,  and  hence  it  produces  but  little  practi-
cal effect  on  their  morality.  The  Bible  proclaims  the
doctrine  authoritatively  and  indubitably,  and  the  believer
in  Christianity  receives  it  as  a  declaration  of  God,  who
cannot  lie.    Hence  the  precepts  of  the  Bible  are  habitu-


74  SUPERHUMAN    DOCTRINES.

ally  viewed  by  him  in  connection  with  the   sanctions
affixed  by  the  almighty  Governor  of  the  world.

2.  The  morality  of  the  Bible  is  recommended  by  its
likeness  to  the  moral  perfections  of  God.

The  objects  of  religious  worship  among  the  heathen
have  always  been  senseless  or  impure  deities ;  and  the
God  of  the  deists  is  distinguished  by  natural  rather
than  moral  excellence.  But  Christianity  introduces  its
worshippers  to  a  God  of  perfect  holiness,  and  teaches
them  to  worship  in  the  beauty  of  holiness.  Hence,
while  it  inspires  the  mind  with  reverence  for  the  Infinite
One,  it  presents  his  moral  beauty  as  an  object  of  love,
and  secures  obedience  to  the  precepts  of  morality  by
gaining  over  the  affections  of  the  heart  to  holiness.

3.  The  doctrine  of  redemption  by  Christ  furnishes
the  strongest  imaginable  motives  to  holiness.  Its  appeal
to  the  heart  is  not  by  terror,  but  by  the  melting  power
of  love.

A  sense  of  God's  goodness  in  giving  his  Son  for  us,
and  of  Christ's  compassion  in  dying  for  us,  overcomes
the  heart,  leads  to  repentance,  and  constrains  to  a  life
of  holy  obedience.

4.  All  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  have  a  holy  aim
and  tendency.  They  form  a  complete  system ;  and  the
end  of  the  system  is  holiness,  or  conformity  to  God's
moral  image.  The  Bible  nowhere  teaches  its  doctrines
to  gratify  curiosity.  It  leaves  questions  of  mere
curiosity  without  answer.  False  religions  incite  their
votaries  by  promises  of  initiation  into  mysteries ;  but
the  alluring  promise  of  Christianity  is  an  advance  in
holiness  here,  and  complete  holiness  hereafter.  The
religion  proposes  no  enjoyment,  and  claims  no  excel-
lence apart  from  holiness.  In  this  it  differs  from  every
false  religion,  and  manifests  its  divine  origin.


BENEFICIAL    TENDENCY.  75


Section   V.      Beneficial    Tendency.

In  Chapter  II.  we  considered  the  beneficial  influence
of  Christianity  in  the  effects  which  it  has  actually  pro-
duced. In  the  last  chapter  we  considered  its  perfect
morality  taught  by  precept  and  example ;  and  in  the
present  its  superhuman  doctrines  adapted  to  enforce  its
morality  and  to  elevate  and  bless  mankind.  We  see  a
cause  in  Christianity  adapted  to  produce  the  beneficial
effects  which  have  been  attributed  to  it,  and  we  are
therefore  left  without  doubt  that  these  benefits  which
have  been  observed  to  attend  the  religion  are  its  proper
effects,  and  not  merely  accidental  results.

The  effects  which  Christianity  has  actually  produced
are  not  the  proper  measure  of  its  tendency.  Were  the
obstacles  which  oppose  it  removed,  all  its  tendency
would  be  converted  into  effect ;  but,  while  these
obstacles  remain,  their  number  and  the  strength  of  their
opposition  must  be  estimated,  as  well  as  the  effect
actually  produced,  in  order  to  a  just  estimate  of  the
tendency.

The  influence  of  Christianity  on  individuals  is  opposed
by  their  unbelief.  The  truth  does  not  affect  them,  be-
cause their  minds  do  not  receive  it.  Many  even  of
those  who  profess  Christianity  are  not  true  believers,  as
many  who  claimed  to  be  Moses'  disciples  did  not  believe
Moses.1  When  the  truth  forces  a  partial  entrance  into
the  unsanctified  mind,  it  encounters  strong  resistance
from  the  enmity  of  the  human  heart  to  God  and  holi-
ness. And  when  the  sanctifying  power  of  the  truth
has  regenerated  the  heart,  its  full  effect  is  hindered  by

1  John,  v.  46.

7*


76  SUPERHUMAN     DOCTRINES.

unholy  affections  and  passions  which  remaining  depravity
keeps  alive  and  operative.

The  tendency  of  Christianity  to  benefit  the  world  is
hindered,  on  the  one  hand,  by  the  want  of  zeal  in  its
propagation  and  the  unholy  lives  of  its  professors  ;  and,
on  the  other  hand,  by  the  powerful  opposition  of  the
world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  Wickedness  prevails  in
all  the  departments  and  usages  of  society,  in  the  organ-
ization and  administration  of  civil  government,  in  the
various  false  religions  which  exist,  and  in  the  various
corruptions  of  the  true  religion.  Long-continued  habit
has  fortified  iniquity  in  its  strongholds,  and  before  the
gospel  can  gain  complete  success,  it  must  overcome  all
these  strongholds,  and  successfully  wrestle  with  princi-
palities and  powers,  with  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of
this  world,  and  with  spiritual  wickedness  in  high  places.

To  estimate  the  tendency  of  Christianity  to  benefit  an
individual  or  the  world,  we  must  suppose  all  its  tendency
to  become  effect,  by  the  removal  of  opposing  obstacles.
We  must  suppose  that  the  individual  receives  the  gospel
with  ready  and  unwavering  faith,  and  embraces  its
precepts  and  doctrines  with  a  glad  heart,  and  that  every
thought  and  every  imagination  is  brought  into  subjection
to  it.

The  effect  on  such  a  mind  is  joy  unspeakable  and  full
of  glory,  a  commencement  of  heaven  on  earth.

Communities,  nations,  and  the  whole  world,  are  made
up  of  individuals.  If  Christianity  tends  to  produce  per-
fect purity  and  perfect  bliss  in  each  individual,  its  ten-
dency is  to  fill  the  world  with  such  inhabitants,  and
therefore  to  banish  all  crime  and  misery  from  the  earth.
It  would  purify  the  organization  and  administration  of
civil  governments,  or  rather  it  would  render  civil  govern-
ment unnecessary ;  it  would  produce  a  universal  preva-


EXPERIMENTAL     PROOF.  77

lence  of  the  true  religion,  freed  from  all  corruption  ;  and
it  would  bring  down  to  earth  the  holiness  and  felicity  of
heaven.  Such  a  state  of  things,  believers  in  the  prom-
ises and  prophecies  of  the  Bible  are  expecting,  and
toward  it  they  see  the  world  advancing  in  the  progress
of  Christianity.

The  beneficial  tendency  of  Christianity  has  often  been
acknowledged  by  statesmen  and  legislators.  They  per-
ceive its  utility  to  give  sanction  to  oaths,  and  to  supply,
by  the  power  of  an  enlightened  conscience,  the  unavoid-
able defects  of  human  laws.  Infidels  also  have  often
expressed  their  willingness  to  retain  Christianity  for  the
sake  of  its  moral  benefit  to  the  masses  of  mankind,  and
have  sometimes  prudently  concealed  their  sentiments
that  they  might  not  do  harm  to  the  community.  What
other  religion  is  there  in  the  world  that  any  wise  man
would  wish  to  prevail  universally  ?  But  in  view  of  the
benefits  which  Christianity  has  already  produced,  and
which  it  continues  to  produce  more  and  more  as  obstacles
are  removed,  and  in  view  of  the  tendencies  discoverable
in  its  morality  and  doctrine  to  render  the  benefits  per-
fect and  enduring,  every  wise  and  benevolent  man  must
say,  let  it  prevail  over  all  opposition,  and  fill  the  earth.

Section  VI.     Experimental  Proof.

The  facts  on  which  the  theories  of  philosophy  are
established,  are  sometimes  of  so  rare  occurrence  that
few  persons  have  opportunity  to  observe  them.  In  these
cases  the  student  who  investigates  the  theory  is  com-
pelled to  rely  for  proof  of  it  on  the  testimony  of  those
who  have  witnessed  the  facts.  In  many  other  cases  it
is  possible  to  institute  experiments  which  will  bring  the
phenomena  under  the  observation  of  the  student  himself,
and  obviate  the  necessity  of  any  other  testimony  than


78  SUPERHUMAN    DOCTRINES.

that  of  his  own  senses.  The  same  difference  occurs  in
the  evidences  of  Christianity.  The  proof  from  miracles
depends  on  the  testimony  of  those  who  saw  the  miracles  ;
but  the  proof  derived  from  the  beneficial  tendency  of
the  religion  may  be  subjected  to  experiment  by  any  one
who  desires,  and  the  facts  necessary  for  making  out  the
proof,  may  be  learned  from  the  testimony  of  conscious-
ness.

Christianity  is  a  remedial  religion.  Men  are  morally
diseased,  and  Christianity  offers  a  remedy  to  restore
them  to  health.  They  are  unholy  and  unhappy,  and  it
offers  the  means  of  sanctification  and  felicity.  Thou-
sands have  testified  that  they  have  used  the  remedy
proposed,  and  have  found  it  effectual,  but  no  one  is
compelled  to  rely  on  their  testimony,  since  he  may  try
the  remedy  for  himself,  and  ascertain  the  truth  of  its
pretensions  by  his  own  personal  experience.

We  have  before  noticed  the  power  of  the  Bible  to
probe  the  human  heart,  and  reveal  its  depravity.  Paul
teaches  that  by  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin,1  and
states  how  in  his  own  experience  he  obtained  by  the
commandment  knowledge  of  lust  or  unholy  desire  in  his
heart,2  and  how  the  commandment  slew  his  self-righteous
hopes.3  The  perfect  morality  of  the  Bible  serves  to
show  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin.  Let  any  man
study  the  law  of  God,  making  it  his  meditation  by  day
and  night,  and  honestly  applying  it  to  his  conscience,
and  he  will  learn  experimentally  whether  its  tendency
to  produce  conviction  of  sin,  and  self-abasement  before
God,  is  such  as  Paul  attributed  to  it.

The  gospel  professes  to  bring  to  sinners  the  means

1  Rom.  iii.  20.  2  Rom.  vii.  7.

3  Rom.  vii.  9.


EXPERIMENTAL     PROOF.  79

of  sanctification.  Christ  prayed,  "  Sanctify  them  through
thy  truth.  Thy  word  is  truth  i"1  and  he  sanctifies  and
cleanses  his  church  "  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the
word."2  The  same  perfect  law  that  convicts  of  sin,
directs  to  obedience  and  holiness.  The  character  of
God  is  exhibited  in  the  Bible  that  men  may  be  holy  as
God  is  holy.3  The  retributions  of  eternity  are  unfolded
that  we  may  be  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation.4
And  the  grace  of  God  that  bringeth  salvation  by  Jesus
Christ  is  proclaimed,  teaching  us  that  denying  ungodli-
ness and  worldly  lusts,  we  should  live  soberly,  right-
eously, and  godly  in  this  present  evil  world.5  The
tendency  of  the  gospel  to  save  from  sin  is  taught  in
innumerable  passages  of  Scripture ;  and  it  is  expressly
declared  that  the  gospel  is  the  power  of  God  unto  sal-
vation to  every  one  that  believeth.6  Now  let  any  one
who  is  willing  to  bring  this  matter  to  the  test  of  his
personal  experience,  habitually  contemplate  the  perfect
character  of  God  revealed  in  the  Scriptures ;  let  him
habitually  keep  before  his  mind  the  day  of  judgment,
and  the  happiness  and  misery  consequent  on  the  awards
of  that  day ;  let  him  receive  into  his  heart  the  good
news  of  salvation  by  the  death  of  Christ,  and  in  his
feelings  and  contemplations  live  habitually  at  the  foot
of  the  cross ;  let  him  do  all  this,  and  then  inquire
whether  he  finds  in  it  no  tendency  to  save  from  the  love
and  power  of  sin.  Let  him  ask  what  else  has  equal
tendency,  and  to  what  else  will  he  trust  if  this  fails.

The  gospel  is  good  news,  glad  tidings.     They  who
received  it  anciently  had  gladness  of  heart,  joy  unspeak-

1  John,  xvii.  17.  2  Eph.  v.  26.

3  1  Pet.  i.  1G.  4  1  Pet.  i.  15.

5  Tit.  ii.  11,  12.  6Eom.  i.  1G.


80  SUPERHUMAN     DOCTRINES.

able  and  full  of  glory.  They  had  comfort  and  consola-
tion in  the  midst  of  sorrow  and  trials,  and  an  inward
peace  which  the  world  could  not  take  away.  Since  the
gospel  claims  a  tendency  to  produce  such  happiness,
any  man  who  desires  may  test. its  pretensions  by  a  fair
experiment  on  himself.  Let  him,  as  a  guilty,  depraved,
and  wretched  sinner,  receive  the  message  of  salvation
by  Christ ;  let  him  contemplate  the  fulness  of  the  salva-
tion provided,  and  its  adaptedness  to  his  necessities  ;  let
him  listen  to  the  promise  of  free  pardon  and  full  justifi-
cation to  all  who  believe,  and  of  grace  to  help  in  every
time  of  need ;  let  him  attend  to  the  assurance  that,
whatever  may  be  his  trials  and  sorrows,  all  things  shall
work  together  for  his  good,  and  let  him  fix  his  faith  on
the  promise  of  eternal  life  given  in  Christ.

If  in  all  this  he  finds  no  tendency  to  relieve  an  aching
heart,  to  calm  an  agitated  breast,  and  to  inspire  the
troubled  and  sinking  spirit  with  consolation,  he  may
pronounce  that  the  promises  of  the  gospel  are  vain,  or
rather  that  his  experience  differs  from  that  of  all  others
by  whom  the  trial  has  been  fairly  made.

The  Bible  not  only,  like  a  skilful  physician,  describes
our  spiritual  malady  better  than  we  could  ourselves,  but
it  also,  with  like  skill,  describes  the  symptoms  which
indicate  the  progress  of  cure  by  the  remedy  which  it
applies.

The  various  exercises  of  the  renewed  heart  it  accu-
rately delineates.  The  godly  sorrow,  the  humility,  the
reverence,  the  hope,  the  patience,  the  brotherly  love,
and  every  other  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit  by  which  the
converted  man  is  fitted  for  his  new  life,  the  Bible
describes.

Especially  it  explains  the  struggle  between  faith  and
remaining  unbelief,  the  conflict  between  simple  faith  in


EXPERIMENTAL     PROOF.  81

Christ  and  a  self-justifying  spirit,  and  the  warfare
between  the  law  in  the  members  and  the  law  of  the
mind,  in  a  manner  which  indicates  a  perfect  knowledge
of  what  is  experienced  by  the  Christian  under  the
teaching  of  the  divine  spirit.  These  things  the  unre-
newed man  knows  not ;  but  let  him  try  the  experiment
proposed  if  he  would  ascertain  whether  these  things  are
so ;  and  when  he  has  learned  these  truths  let  him  ask
whence  the  Bible  obtained  all  this  knowledge.

It  is  a  doctrine  of  Christianity  that  the  gospel  is
made  effectual  by  the  accompanying  power  of  the  Holy
Spirit.  The  sanctification  and  comfort  of  believers  are
attributed  to  the  Holy  Spirit.  He  helps  their  infirmi-
ties in  prayer,  and  gives  inward  strength  for  any  service
which  they  perform.  He  begins  the  work  of  grace  in
the  heart  by  shedding  abroad  the  love  of  God ;  and
throughout  the  whole  course  of  their  spiritual  lives
Christians  live  in  the  Spirit,  walk  in  the  Spirit,  are  led
by  the  Spirit,  enjoy  the  communion  of  the  Spirit,  and
have  the  inward  witness  of  the  Spirit.  Such  is  the
Bible  description  of  the  Christian  life.

If  true,  human  reason  never  discovered  it ;  for  human
reason,  in  its  pride  and  self-sufficiency,  is  slow  to  receive
the  doctrine.  Yet  every  one  who  is  skilled  in  Christian
experience  receives  the  doctrine,  and  cheerfully  ac-
knowledges his  absolute  dependence  on  the  Holy  Spirit
for  all  interna]  grace.  To  the  man  who  does  not  under-
stand the  necessity  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  influence,  the
promise  that  our  heavenly  Father  will  give  his  Holy
Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him,  possesses  very  little  of
meaning  and  interest ;  but  to  him  who  has  learned  his
helplessness  and  dependence,  no  promise  in  the  covenant
of  grace  is  more  rich  in  blessing  ;  and  there  is  no  prayer
recorded  in  the  sacred  volume  in  which  he  can  more


§2  SUPERHUMAN     DOCTRINES.

cordially  unite  than  in  that  of  the  Psalmist,  "  Take  not
thy  Holy  Spirit  from  me."1  In  the  agreement  of  his
experience  with  the  Bible  the  Christian  has  an  evidence
which  no  other  man  can  possess  or  understand,  that  the
Bible  is  the  word  of  God.  Herein  is  fulfilled  the  decla-
ration, "  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear
him,  and  he  will  show  them  his  covenant."2

The  evidence  arising  from  Christian  experience  is
suited  to  persons  in  all  the  conditions  of  life.  The
illiterate,  who  are  unable  to  appreciate  the  historical
evidence  which  learned  men  value,  and  who  are  wholly
unable  to  cope  with  learned  infidels  in  argument,  have
a  conviction  on  which  their  hearts  rest  in  perfect  quiet,
and  against  which  the  arguments  and  scoffs  of  infidels
are  unavailing.  To  the  learned  Christian  also  the  ex-
perimental evidence  is  of  the  highest  value.  Other
evidence  has  to  him  its  use ;  but  this  abides  with  him  as
a  perpetual  source  of  confidence  and  joy.  He  has  ex-
amined other  evidences,  and  has  laid  up  in  his  memory
the  conviction  which  the  examination  produced ;  but  the
evidence  from  Christian  experience  is  not  a  past  judg-
ment laid  up  in  the  memory.  It  is  like  the  immediate
proof  which  the  beams  of  the  sun  give  to  the  beholder
that  the  luminary  is  in  the  heavens.

The  evidence  from  experience  increases  in  strength  as
the  believer  makes  progress  in  the  divine  life.  The
more  he  enjoys  the  communion  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the
more  sensible  is  he  of  the  presence  and  influence  of
that  divine  agent.

Every  prayer  for  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,
and  every  consciousness  of  having  received  answer  to
the  prayer,  gives  an  increase  of  strength  to  his  faith.

1  Psalms,  li.  11.  2  Psalms,  xxv.  14.


CONNECTION   WITH   HISTORICAL   FACTS.      83

And  he  knows  by  experience  that  nothing  so  much
darkens  his  mind  to  the  evidences  of  Christianity  as
departure  from  Christian  duty.

While  he  lives  near  to  God,  all  is  clear.

From  observation  on  his  own  experience,  he  learns
that  the  secret  of  infidelity  is  an  unholy  life.  The  man
whose  heart  is  right,  finds  nothing  in  the  Bible  to  object
to ;  but  on  the  contrary,  clearly  perceives  in  it  direct
evidence  of  its  divine  origin.

Section  VII.  Connection  with  Historical
Facts.

The  morality  of  the  Bible  is  a  perfect  system  with-
out regard  to  the  history  of  its  promulgation,  or  of  its
exemplification  in  the  lives  of  good  men,  and  of  Jesus
Christ.  But  the  Bible  history  is  useful  in  illustrating
it,  and  teaching  us  to  apply  it  practically  in  the  regula-
tion of  our  conduct.  So  the  moral  government  of  God,
which  would  be  an  important  doctrine,  if  the  Bible  con-
tained no  history,  is  instructively  and  impressively
illustrated  by  the  history  which  the  Bible  records  of
God's  dealings  with  man  in  past  ages.

But  the  doctrine  of  redemption  by  Christ  is  wholly
dependent  on  facts  which  are  reported  in  the  New  Tes-
tament. The  connection  of  this  doctrine  with  the  re-
maining doctrines  of  the  system,  and  with  the  divine
morality  taught  by  precept  and  example,  and  the  union
of  all  in  a  singular  book  of  most  beneficial  influence,  give
strong  assurance,  previous  to  all  historical  inquiry,  that
the  facts  reported  must  be  true :  but  history  waits  to
confirm  our  faith,  and  Christianity  calls  fearlessly  for
its  testimony.

8


CHAPTER  V.
TRUTHFUL  HISTORY.

THE    HISTORY    CONTAINED   IN   THE    NEW   TESTAMENT   IS
TRUE.

The  subject  of  the  present  chapter  is  limited  to  the
historical  books  of  the  New  Testament,  which  are
the  four  Gospels  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  Old
Testament  history  will  be  considered  hereafter ;  and  the
truths  of  the  entire  Bible  will  be  proved  in  the  chapter
on  Inspiration.


Section  I.     Credibility  of  History.

We  are  so  placed  in  the  world,  that  much  of  our
necessary  knowledge  is  derived  from  the  testimony  of
other  persons.  The  merchant  sends  his  ship  to  lands
which  he  never  saw.  How  does  he  know  that  they
exist?  Other  persons  have  visited  these  lands  and
from  their  testimony  he  obtains  his  knowledge,  which
he  uses  with  undoubting  confidence.  He  believes  as
much  in  the  existence  of  India  and  China  as  of  his  own
counting-house  which  his  eyes  see  daily.

As  of  the  distant,  so  of  the  past,  we  obtain  our
knowledge  in  a  large  part  from  the  testimony  of  others,
and  to  reject  all  testimony  concerning  the  past  would  be
to  destroy  all  legal  proceedings,  to  annul  all  laws,  to
abolish  civil  government,  and  to  put  an  end  to  most  of
the  business  and  enjoyments  of  social  life.     Men  must

(84)


CREDIBILITY     OF    HISTORY.  85

believe  and  will  believe  the  duly  authenticated  records
of  the  past.  They  may  be  deceived  sometimes  by  ficti-
tious history,  but  in  general  they  learn  to  distinguish
between  truth  and  fable :  and  if  there  are  some  histori-
cal facts  concerning  which  they  entertain  doubts,  there
are  others  which  they  as  firmly  believe  as  if  they  had
seen  them  with  their  own  eyes.  No  American  more
firmly  believes  that  his  own  parents  lived  and  watched
over  him  in  his  helpless  infancy,  than  he  believes  that
George  Washington  existed  and  fought  the  battles  of
his  country.  No  man  of  information  entertains  a  doubt
concerning  the  existence  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte,  Oliver
Cromwell,  Julius  Caesar,  or  Alexander  the  Great ;  or
discredits  the  general  facts  of  their  history.  The
truth  of  historical  facts  can  be  proved  so  as  not  to  leave
room  for  doubt  in  any  candid  and  well-informed  mind.
It  cannot  be  demonstrated  by  such  processes  of  reason-
ing as  establish  the  Newtonian  theory  of  gravitation,
or  the  geometrical  truth  that  the  three  angles  of  a
triangle  are  equal  to  two  right  angles.  Historical  facts
are  not  learned  by  philosophical  or  mathematical  reason-
ings. Such  reasonings  cannot  prove  that  there  is  a
Bible  on  the  table  where  I  write,  or  that  I  was
accustomed  to  read  the  Bible  in  the  days  of  my  child-
hood ;  yet  I  am  not  less  assured  of  these  facts  than  if
they  were  demonstrated  by  the  clearest  processes  of
reasoning.  The  proofs  rest,  in  one  case,  on  the  testi-
mony of  the  senses ;  and,  in  the  other,  on  the  testimony
of  memory ;  and  memory  and  the  senses  are  as  much
entitled  to  confidence,  as  reason :  and  as  seldom  de-
ceive us.

If  our  own  memory  and  senses  are  entitled  to  confi-
dence, so  also  are  those  of  other  men :  and  if  the
knowledge  which  other  men  obtain   by  observation,  is


86  TRUTHFUL     HISTORY.

truthfully  communicated  to  us,  it  becomes  as  valuable
to  us,  as  if  it  had  been  the  result  of  our  own  personal
experience.  By  means  of  language,  information  is  com-
municated from  one  mind  to  another ;  and  by  means  of
written  language,  it  is  embodied  in  a  durable  form,  in
which  it  serves  to  benefit  future  generations.  History,
therefore,  relies  on  the  testimony  of  the  senses  and
memory  of  those  who  make  the  original  observations  of
facts  :  and  on  the  veracity  with  which  these  observa-
tions are  reported  and  committed  to  record.  Memory
and  the  senses  sometimes  deceive ;  but  no  sane  man  will
therefore  wholly  reject  their  testimony.  Men  sometimes
deceive  each  other  by  the  utterance  of  falsehood :  but
were  all  confidence  in  human  testimony  withdrawn,  our
courts  of  justice  would  be  closed,  the  commerce  of  the
world  would  cease,  and  all  the  benefits  of  society  would
be  banished  from  the  habitations  of  men.  The  possibility
of  being  deceived  is  sufficient  to  awaken  caution ;  and
wise  men  will  exercise  the  necessary  degree  of  caution
without  denying  to  themselves  the  benefits  resulting
from  belief  in  testimony.  Universal  distrust  and  scep-
ticism are  irrational,  a  diseased  state  of  the  mind  un-
fitting man  for  the  duties  and  enjoyments  of  life,  and
therefore  subversive  of  virtue  and  happiness.  It  would
be  madness  to  doubt  that  the  Bible  which  I  see  on  the
table  really  exists,  or  that  I  was  accustomed  to  read  the
Bible  in  my  childhood ;  and  it  would  be  madness  to
doubt,  that  the  Bible  has  been  a  well-known  book  in
America,  from  the  time  that  the  pilgrim  fathers  landed
at  Plymouth.  In  tracing  the  lines  of  history  back
through  a  long  succession  of  years,  it  is  not  unwise  to
proceed  with  increased  caution,  as  we  approach  remoter
periods ;  but  as  in  the  outset  so  in  the  progress  of  our
investigations,  it  is  necessary   to  distinguish   between


GOSPEL     HISTORY.  87

caution  and  scepticism.  The  existence  of  the  Bible
may  be  traced  backward,  from  the  first  settlement  of
America  through  the  various  revolutions  of  the  old
world,  to  a  remote  period  of  antiquity,  of  which  its
records  are  the  chief  and  to  a  great  extent  the  only
memorials.  No  reason  can  be  given  why  the  history
contained  in  the  Bible  is  not  worthy  of  at  least  as  much
confidence  as  any  other  on  which  we  rely  for  our  know-
ledge of  the  past ;  and  its  narratives  so  harmonize  with
all  the  records  and  monuments  of  the  past  and  so  inter-
twine with  them  that  all  history  must  be  rejected,  if
confidence  cannot  be  reposed  in  the  historical  records
of  the  Bible.

Section  II.  Gospel  History.

Christianity  exists  in  the  world,  and  it  is  not  unrea-
sonable to  expect  that  among  the  written  records  or
oral  traditions  of  the  past,  some  account  should  be
found  of  its  origin.  The  persons  who  now  receive  its
doctrines  form  a  large  part  of  the  human  race,  and  a
succession  of  such  persons  in  great  numbers  may  be
traced  by  undoubted  history  in  various  nations  of  the
earth  through  many  past  ages.  All  these,  however  dif-
fering in  language,  manners,  intelligence,  or  any  other
peculiarities,  agree  in  believing  the  follovnng  facts.

The  author  of  Christianity  was  born  in  Judea
under  the  reign  of  Augustus  Cesar,  and  was  cru-
cified near  Jerusalem  under  the  reign  of  Tibe-
rias. Though  of  humble  rank,  he  claimed  to  be
the  Messiah  whom  the  Jews  had  long  expected.
He  preached  new  doctrines,  and  in  confirmation
of  them  performed  extraordinary  works.  after
suffering  crucifixion  he  was  interred  in  a  tomb  ;
but  on  the  third  day  arose  and  showed  himself
s*


88  TRUTHFUL     niSTORY.

ALIVE  TO  MANY  OF  HIS  FOLLOWERS,  TO  WHOM  HE  GAVE
COMMANDS  TO  PROPAGATE  HIS  RELIGION  THROUGH  THE
EARTH.

These  principal  facts  with  many  connected  details  are
recorded  in  the  New  Testament,  a  book  which  Chris-
tians hold  sacred,  and  have  held  sacred  for  many  ages.
We  shall  hereafter  prove  the  divine  origin  and  au-
thority of  this  book ;  but  it  will  answer  our  present
purpose  to  show  that  it  is  a  truthful  history,  worthy  of
as  much  confidence  as  any  other  book  of  history  on
which  men  rely  for  the  knowledge  of  past  events.

The  principal  facts  of  Christianity  are  few  and  sim-
ple, and  they  occurred  publicly  and  within  a  short  space
of  time.  They  were  not,  like  most  of  the  facts  com-
prised in  the  history  of  nations,  connected  with  the
diplomacy  and  intrigues  of  courts,  and  to  be  made  out
from  numerous  documents  prepared  at  distant  times  and
places.  They  were  all  witnessed  by  the  persons  who
first  published  them ;  and  the  publication  was  made  at
the  place  and  immediately  after  the  time  of  their  occur-
rence. The  number,  agreement,  and  character  of  the
witnesses  were  sufficient  to  give  credit  to  their  testimony :
and  it  obtained  credit  among  persons  who  had  ability
and  opportunity  to  judge  of  its  truth.

The  Christian  facts  differ  widely  in  their  character
from  the  fables  of  mythology  in  which  the  origin  of
heathen  religions  is  involved.  The  heathen  gods  were
perhaps  deified  men  of  whose  history  we  have  no  certain
account ;  and  the  stories  of  their  mythology  may  have
originated  in  facts  which  have  been  converted  into  won-
ders by  mistakes  of  language,  or  the  transforming  power
of  a  vivid  imagination.  But  these  fables  are  without
place  and  date,  and  have  no  binding  connection  with
the  facts  of  well-authenticated  history  determining  and


GOSPEL     HISTORY.  89

fixing  their  position  in  the  system  or  aggregate  of
historic  truth.  They  resemble  an  imaginary  country
which  has  no  connection  with  other  countries,  and  to
which  geography  can  assign  no  definite  locality.  But
it  is  far  different  with  respect  to  the  origin  of  Chris-
tianity. Around  the  time  and  place  of  its  origin
authentic  history  casts  a  bright  light.  In  all  the  ages
which  preceded  we  know  that  Christianity  did  not  exist,
for  not  a  trace  of  it  can  be  found  in  all  the  memorials
of  those  ages ;  and  in  all  the  countries  out  of  Judea,
the  new  religion  was  wholly  unknown,  at  the  time  when
it  is  said  to  have  originated  in  that  well-known  land.
With  these  facts  consider  the  definiteness  of  the  state-
ments concerning  the  time  and  place  of  Christ's  birth,
public  ministry,  and  death,  of  which  we  may  take  as  a
specimen  the  words  of  the  evangelist  Luke:  "Now  in
the  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  Caesar,  Pon-
tius Pilate  being  governor  of  Judea,  and  Herod  being
tetrarch  of  Galilee,  and  his  brother  Philip  tetrarch
of  Iturea  and  of  the  region  of  Trachonitis,  and
Lysanias  the  tetrarch  of  Abilene,  Annas  and  Caiaphas
being  the  high  priests,  the  word  of  God  came  unto
John,  the  son  of  Zacharias,  in  the  wilderness."1  We
find  in  this  manner  date  and  place  assigned  to  the  gos-
pel facts,  and  are  able  to  perceive  clearly  their  connec-
tion with  other  history :  and  from  the  time  and  place
assigned  to  them,  their  connection  ramifies  through
succeeding  time,  and  extends  to  all  lands.  The  intro-
duction of  the  new  religion  is  clearly  seen  to  be  an  his-
torical fact  with  which  ten  thousand  other  facts  become
connected,  and  all  the  records  and  monuments  of  history
give  consistent  and  indubitable  testimony  on  the  subject.

1  Luke,  iii.  1,  2.


90  TRUTHFUL     HISTORY.

It  is  scarcely  credible  that  any  sane  man  should  seri-
ously take  the  history  of  Christ  to  be  an  astronomical
allegory.  May  not  some  future  visionary  astonish  the
world  by  explaining  the  history  of  Columbus's  disco-
very of  America  as  an  allegorical  record  of  observations
made  by  an  astronomer  on  the  course  of  an  extraordi-
nary meteor  which  shot  westward  through  the  sky  ?  If
the  account  of  this  successful  voyager  is  too  modern  to
admit  such  allegorical  interpretation,  let  some  ingenious
trifler  try  his  skill  on  Suetonius'  Lives  of  the  Twelve
Caesars,  and  demonstrate  that  this  is  an  allegorical  re-
presentation of  the  twelve  months  which  constitute  the
calendar  year.  He  may  take,  as  a  good  starting-point,
the  undeniable  fact  that  two  of  the  months  bear  the
names  of  Julius  and  Augustus,  two  of  the  Caesars.  If
even  the  age  of  the  Caesars  is  too  modern  for  such
allegorizing,  let  it  be  remembered  that  Julius  Caesar
died  before  Jesus  was  born.  The  facts  that  Julius
lived,  waged  war  in  Gaul,  and  was  assassinated  in  the
Roman  Senate,  are  admitted  by  all  to  belong  to  real
and  authentic  history ;  but  they  are  not  so  near  to
modern  times,  nor  half  so  well  attested,  as  the  facts,
that  Jesus  lived,  preached  his  gospel  in  Judea  and
Galilee,  and  was  crucified  on  Calvary.

The  gospel  facts  are  not  moral  or  religious  myths.
We  may  conceive  it  possible  that  moral  or  religious
truths,  expressed  in  figurative  language,  may  be  mis-
interpreted by  mistaking  metaphor  or  allegory  for  literal
language ;  and  that  myths  originated  by  some  such  pro-
cess may  come  to  occupy  the  place  of  real  history.  But
the  gospel  is  not  a  system  of  myths.  Its  facts  have
real  agents,  known  place,  fixed  time,  historical  antece-
dents, historical  consequents,  historical  connections,  and
all  the  attributes  of  historical  realities.     The  testimony


TESTIMONY    OF     THE     CHURCH.  91

on  which  they  were  first  believed,  and  on  which  they
continue  to  be  believed,  is  such  as  could  not  possibly
attend  a  system  of  myths.

Section  III.     Testimony  of   the  Church.

The  Christian  church  now  existing  in  the  world  is  a
standing  monument  of  the  principal  facts  connected  with
the  origin  of  Christianity.  On  these  facts  the  doctrines
of  the  religion  are  founded.  It  teaches  the  doctrine  of
the  resurrection,  and  establishes  the  doctrine  on  the
fact  that  Christ  rose  from  the  dead.  It  teaches  the
doctrine  of  atonement  for  sin,  and  it  founds  this
cardinal  doctrine  of  the  system  on  the  fact  that  Christ
was  crucified.  Of  these  facts  the  Christian  ceremonies
are  an  abiding  memorial.  Baptism  refers  to  the  death,
burial,  and  resurrection  of  Christ,1  and  every  one  who
is  baptized  into  Christ  is  baptized  into  the  faith  that
Christ  died,  was  buried,  and  rose  again.  The  Lord's
Supper  is  a  memorial  of  Christ's  body  broken  and  blood
shed  for  sin ;  and  every  communicant  declares  in  this
ceremony  his  belief  of  the  fact  that  Christ  died  for
sin.  Even  the  moral  duties  of  the  religion  are  enforced
with  a  constant  reference  to  these  facts.  A  motive  to
brotherly  love  is  drawn  from  the  fact  that  Christ  loved
us,  and  gave  himself  for  us ; 2  and,  after  his  example,
Christians  are  required  to  lay  down  their  lives  for  the
brethren.3  The  grand  motive  to  obedience  is  thus  pre-
sented :  "  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us,  because
we  thus  judge,  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all
dead.  And  that  he  died  for  all,  that  they  which  live
should  not  henceforth  live  unto  themselves,  but  unto
him  which  died  for  them  and  rose  again."4     And  on

1  Romans,  vi.  3,  4.  2  Eph.  v.  2.

3  1  John,  iii.  16.  *  2  Cor.  v.  14,  15.


92  TRUTHFUL     HISTORY.

the  gospel  facts  were  founded  the  hopes  which  animated
Christians  amidst  the  trials  and  sufferings  that  they
underwent.  In  the  belief  that  Christ  died  and  rose
again  they  cheerfully  suffered  in  hope  of  a  joyful  resur-
rection,1 and  of  reigning  for  ever  with  their  risen
Kedeemer.2  In  the  propagation  of  Christianity  the
gospel  facts  were  continually  made  known.  The
preaching  of  the  gospel  was  the  preaching  of  Christ
crucified,  and  of  Christ  risen  from  the  dead.3  Without
the  promulgation  of  these  facts  the  gospel  was  not
preached,  and  without  a  belief  of  these  facts  the  gospel
was  not  received.  These  facts  were  kept  present  to  the
minds  of  Christians  in  every  prayer  which  they  offered,
and  in  every  act  of  religious  service  which  they  per-
formed :  for  they  were  taught  to  hope  for  accept-
ance through  Christ  only.  Every  church  that  was
formed  was  established  on  a  belief  of  the  gospel  facts ;
and  every  minister  that  was  ordained  engaged  to  pro-
claim these  facts.  How  could  a  religion  thus  founded
on  facts  be  introduced  into  the  world  and  gain
credence  among  mankind,  if  the  facts  never  occurred  ?
If  Christianity  originated  in  Judea,  under  the  reign
of  Tiberius  and  the  government  of  Pontius  Pilate,  how
could  its  ministers  gain  converts  by  telling  the  people
that  Jesus  had  preached  in  their  midst  and  been  pub-
licly crucified  among  them,  when  every  man  who  heard
would  know  the  utter  falsehood  of  the  declaration  ?  It
is  manifestly  impossible  that  the  religion  should  have
been  introduced  and  have  gained  credence  at  the  time
and  place  when  and  where  Jesus  is  said  to  have  been
crucified,  if  the  history  of  his  ministry  and  suffering  is

1  Heb.  xi.  35.  2  2  Tim.  ii.  12.

3 1  Cor.  ii.  2 ;  xv.  1-4.


TESTIMONY     OP     THE     CHURCH.  93

fabulous.     And  if  it  was  not  introduced  then  and  there,


it  is  impossible  that  it  should  have  been  introduced  at
some  subsequent  time  or  distant  place.  It  claims  to
have  been  introduced  then  and  there,  and  to  have
spread  from  that  time  and  place  rapidly  through  the
nations  of  the  earth,  and  to  have  been  handed  down
continuously  through  succeeding  generations.  Now
if  all  this  claim  was  without  any  foundation  in  fact,
how  could  the  originators  of  the  new  religion  induce
men  to  believe  their  statements  ?  They  declared  that
the  doctrine  which  they  preached  had  been  first  pro-
claimed in  Jerusalem  many  years  before,  and  when  the
facts  on  which  it  was  founded  had  recently  occurred ;
that  multitudes  had  been  converted  to  the  new  faith ;
that  by  opposition  and  persecution  great  publicity  had
been  given  to  the  new  religion ;  that  men  in  great  num-
bers had  travelled  through  all  countries  zealously
extending  the  doctrine ;  that  churches  maintaining  the
new  faith  had  been  organized  throughout  the  known
world ;  that  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper  had  been
regularly  and  publicly  observed  in  all  these  places  as
well-understood  memorials  of  Christ's  death  and  resur-
rection ;  and  that  assemblies  for  Christian  worship  had
been  held  every  Sabbath  day.  How  could  they  declare
all  these  things  with  any  hope  of  being  believed  ?  Their
declaration  would  be  known  by  every  one  to  be  false
if  no  such  religion  had  been  heard  of  before;  and  it
would  be  impossible  for  them  to  gain  credence.

These  considerations  show  that  the  Christian  church
is  a  monument  of  the  gospel  facts ;  that  it  is  a  monu-
ment set  up  at  the  time  when  the  facts  occurred ;  and
that  it  is  a  monument,  so  to  speak,  on  which  these  facts
have  ever  been  recorded  so  plainly  as  to  be  read  by  all
the  world.


94       ,  TRUTHFUL    II ISTORY.

We  have  another  consideration  to  add,  which  greatly
increases  the  force  of  this  testimony.     The  record  is  not
only  so  plainly  written  that  it  may  be  known  and  read
of  all  men,  but  it  is  written  in  the  blood  of  the  saints.
Whether  the  Bible  be  true  or  false,  and  whether  Chris-
tianity be  a  divine  religion  or  an  imposture,   it  is  an
indisputable  fact  of  history  that  multitudes   have   en-
dured toils,  sufferings,  and  death,  for  their  adherence  to
the   Christian  faith.     The  patience  and   firmness  with
which  these  labors  and  sufferings  were  endured  by  the
Christians  of  former  ages,  fully  establish  the  sincerity
of  their  faith :  for  though  a  false  religion  may  have  its
martyrs,  yet  no  one  charges  these  martyrs  with  insin-
cerity in  their  devotion  to  it.     The  Christian  martyrs
suffered  and  died,  rather  than  renounce  their  religion,
because  they  had  a  firm  conviction  of  its  truth ;  and
whence  did  this  firm  conviction  arise  ?     It  cannot  be
shown  that  they  were  fools  or  madmen  ;  and  the  gospel
which  they  received  was  not  a  speculation  which  bewil-
dered their  minds,  but  a  declaration   of  facts  to  be  re-
ceived on  testimony,  the  sufficiency  of  which  they  were
competent  to  judge.     How,  then,  can  it  be  accounted
for  that  vast  multitudes  of  men  believed  these  facts  from
the  time  of  their  first  promulgation,  and  believed  with  a
conviction  which  the  terrors  of  death  were  unable  to
shake  ?     The  credence  which  the  gospel  obtained  may
be  accounted  for,   if  they  who  professed  to  have  been
eye  witnesses  of  its  facts,  were  men  of  known  veracity,
if  all  the   circumstances   attendant  on  the  delivery  of
their  testimony  combined  to  establish  its  truth,  and  if,
as  is  alleged,  they  confirmed  their  testimony  with  their
blood.     Thus,   and  only  thus,  can   we  account  for  the
fact  that  Christianity  is  in  the  world.


WRITTEN    RECORDS.  95

Section  IV.     Written  Records.

Let  it  be  observed  that  the  proof  of  the  gospel  facts
which  has  been  adduced,  is  independent  of  written  docu-
ments. But  the  Christian  church,  besides  being  itself
a  standing  monument  of  the  principal  gospel  facts,
and  besides  keeping  up  a  constant  memorial  of  these
facts  by  its  ministry,  its  Sabbaths,  its  religious  worship,
and  its  ritual  service,  has  also  written  records  in  which
these  facts  are  fully  and  clearly  set  forth.  The  chief
of  these  is  the  New  Testament.  Without  insisting,  at
present,  that  the  book  is  given  by  inspiration  from  God,
we  may  regard  it  merely  as  an  historical  record ;  and  we
claim  for  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  John,  the  confi-
dence due  to  truthful  historians.  These  Christian  men
were  not  surpassed  in  veracity  by  the  heathen  historians
Herodotus,  Thucydides,  Tacitus,  and  Suetonius.  They
had  better  opportunities  of  knowing  the  facts  which  they
record  :  and  they  have  exhibited  in  their  narratives  such
artless  simplicity,  candor,  freedom  from  passion  and
prejudice  as  are  found  in  no  other  historians.  If  the
four  Gospels  were  written  by  their  reputed  authors,  the
history  which  they  contain  deserves  the  highest  confi-
dence, apart  from  the  considerations  of  its  divine  autho-
rity. A  writer  of  history  is  believed  without  much
inquiry  into  his  private  character  for  veracity,  because
his  historical  reputation  depends  on  his  general  adhe-
rence to  the  truth.  If  what  he  publishes  to  the  world,
the  world  may  readily  know  to  be  a  falsehood,  he  gains
nothing  to  reward  the  labor  of  writing,  and  secures  only
his  own  infamy.  A  single  historian  is  therefore  be-
lieved, when  there  are  no  facts  or  circumstances  known
which  can  discredit  his  testimony.  When  two  unite
their  testimony  in  independent  histories  composed  from
9  g


96  TRUTHFUL     HISTORY.

their  own  knowledge  of  facts,  the  confirmation  which
they  give  to  each  other  is  exceedingly  great.  Matthew
and  John  had  been  personal  attendants  of  Christ,  and
witnesses  of  his  preaching,  miracles,  death,  and  resur-
rection. Mark,  the  companion  of  Peter,  is  reported  to
have  written  his  Gospel  under  that  apostle's  supervision.
Luke,  the  companion  of  Paul,  informs  us  that  he  had
perfect  knowledge  of  the  facts  which  he  records.  We
have,  then,  the  life  of  Christ  wrritten  by  four  contempo-
rary historians,  well  qualified  to  perform  the  service
which  they  undertook.  Has  any  other  individual  ever
lived  whose  biography  has  been  transmitted  to  future
generations  Vfith  equal  attestation  ?  But  it  is  not  our
present  design  to  insist  that  the  four  Gospels  were
written  by  their  reputed  authors.  The  question  of  their
authenticity  is  purposely  postponed.  It  is  enough  for
our  present  purpose  that  the  principal  facts  recorded  in
the  four  Gospels  have  been  believed  by  Christians  from
the  origin  of  the  religion,  and  form  the  basis  of  their
peculiar  system  of  doctrine  and  practice.  Christianity
had  spread  extensively  before  the  Gospels  were  written,
and  their  agreement  with  the  faith  already  widely
spread,  is  demonstrated  by  the  favor  and  respect  with
which  they  were  received.  Proofs  of  such  favor  and
respect  abound  in  the  Christian  writings  of  all  anti-
quity.

Section  V.     Christian  Fathers.

Next  to  the  New  Testament  may  be  mentioned  the
writings  of  the  apostolical  fathers.  Barnabas  (14),
Clement  (15),  Hermas  (16),  Ignatius  (17),  and  Poly-
carp  (18).  These  men  conversed  with  the  apostles,  and
learned  from  their  lips  the  gospel  facts  that  are  directly
described  (14  a,  15  a,  17  a,  18  a),  or  manifestly  implied


CHRISTIAN    FATHERS.  97

in  the  writings  which  they  left,  and  which  have  been
preserved  to  our  time.

After  the  apostolic  fathers  followed  a  long  succession
of  Christian  writers,  who  with  the  works  which  they
have  left,  constitute  an  immense  mass  of  testimony
establishing  beyond  all  possible  doubt  that  vast  multi-
tudes of  persons  professing  the  Christian  religion  have
lived  during  all  these  times,  and  have  agreed  in  the
belief  of  the  gospel  facts.  These  writers,  moreover,
made  direct  quotations  from  the  New  Testament,  and
allusions  to  passages  in  it ;  and  these  are  so  numerous,
that  if  the  New  Testament  itself  had  been  lost,  it
might  in  a  great  measure  be  recovered  out  of  the  writ-
ings which  the  Christian  fathers  have  left.  In  all  these
writings  the  highest  respect  is  evinced  for  the  New
Testament ;  and  the  four  evangelists,  Matthew,  Mark,
Luke  and  John,  are  recognised  as  the  acknowledged
historians  of  Christ.

While  the  Christian  writers  of  past  ages  uniformly
manifest  the  highest  respect  for  the  New  Testament,
they  never  speak  of  it  as  the  original  source  of  informa-
tion respecting  the  gospel  facts.  On  the  contrary,
each  of  the  four  evangelists  furnishes  evidence  that
these  facts  were  first  published  orally,  and  that  multi-
tudes of  converts  were  made  to  the  religion  before  the
facts  were  recorded  in  writing ;  and  Luke  expressly
testifies  that 1  other  written  records  had  been  attempted
before  he  prepared  the  full  and  authentic  account  which
he  has  left  us.  If  the  four  Gospels  when  written  had
not  agreed  as  to  the  gospel  facts  with  the  oral  testimony
which  had  been  everywhere  circulated  by  the  twelve
apostles  and  other  first  ministers  of  the  religion,  and

1  Luke,  i.  1.


98  TRUTHFUL     HISTORY.

which  had  everywhere  been  received  by  the  multitude
of  converts  in  all  lands ;  these  Grospels  could  not  have
gained  the  respect  and  authority  universally  accorded
to  them.  We  have  therefore  full  proof  that  all  Chris-
tian tradition,  oral  and  written,  establishes  the  truth  of
the  New  Testament  history.

Section  VI.     Heathen  Testimony.

Heathen  writers  have  noticed  the  existence  of  Chris-
tianity, so  far  as  it  fell  in  their  way  (49-62) ;  and  all
that  they  have  said  respecting  it  corresponds  with  the
history  of  it  given  in  the  New  Testament,  and  by  the
Christian  fathers.  From  these  pagan  authors,  testimony
may  be  drawn  respecting  the  extensive  spread  of  the
religion,  the  cruel  persecution  which  its  disciples  endured,
the  patience  and  firmness  with  which  they  suffered,  the
harmlessness  and  purity  of  their  character,  and  the
unyielding  steadfastness  with  which  they  adhered  to
their  faith  even  unto  death.  Some  of  the  heathen
writers  expressly  name  Christ  as  the  founder  of  the
religion,  and  the  object  of  Christian  worship  ;  and  those
of  them  who  wrote  against  the  religion,  never  denied
the  great  facts  which  lie  at  its  foundation.

Section   VII.     Jewish   Testimony.

The  Jews  were  the  first  and  most  bitter  persecutors
of  Christianity ;  and,  though  no  testimony  to  its  excel-
lence can  be  expected  from  them,  their  opposition  to  it
from  its  origin  to  the  present  time,  furnishes  proof  of
its  historical  facts.  The  Mishna  and  Talmud  exhibit
hatred  of  Christianity ;  but  contain  admissions  of  its
historic  truth.  Josephus  (48),  a  Jew,  wrote  soon  after
the  time  of  Christ,  and  probably  knew  much  more  con-
cerning the  religion  hated  by  his  countrymen  than  he


INCIDENTAL     CONFIRMATION.  99

was  willing  to  write  ;  yet  he  lias  borne  express  testimony
concerning  John  the  Baptist,  and  has  in  various  other
particulars  confirmed  the  evangelic  history.

Section  VIII.     Incidental   Confirma-
tion.

Besides  the  principal  facts  which  it  was  the  direct
design  of  the  New  Testament  history  to  record,  it
abounds  with  incidental  allusions  to  places,  persons,
usages,  and  events.  Many  of  these  allusions  are  made
with  such  particularity  as  demonstrates  that  the  writers
were  accurately  informed  on  the  subjects  of  which  they
wrote.  If  the  Gospels  had  been  forged  at  some  distant
place  or  time,  the  writers  would  have  made  their  allu-
sions general ;  or,  if  they  attempted  much  particularity,
would  have  fallen  into  such  mistakes  as  would  suffice  to
detect  the  forgery.  But  the  allusions  in  the  New  Testa-
ment harmonize  exactly  with  all  the  known  facts  of
geography  and  history.

The  geography  of  the  Scriptures  has  been  much
elucidated  by  the  labors  of  modern  travellers.  Dr.
Robinson  especially  has  rendered  valuable  service  to
the  cause  of  truth  by  twice  visiting  the  Holy  Land,
and  by  giving  the  result  of  his  explorations  in  a  very
valuable  work  entitled  "  Biblical  Researches."  A  com-
parison of  this  work  with  the  New  Testament  history
confirms  the  accuracy  of  its  geographical  allusions.

Dr.  Lardner  has  devoted  519  pages  of  an  octavo
volume  to  a  comparison  of  the  incidental  allusions  which
are  made  in  the  New  Testament  to  persons,  usages,  and
events  (1-13)  of  which  other  history  gives  account.
His  investigations  have  brought  to  view  incidental
agreements,  so  many  and  so  exact,  that  it  is  impossible
9*


100  TRUTHFU'L     II I  S  T  0  R  Y.

for  any  man  of  sound  mind  who  duly  considers  them,
to  believe  the  gospels  to  be  a  forgery.

Section   IX.     Internal  Proof.

The  harmony  of  New  Testament  history  with  other
history  does  not  furnish  more  satisfactory  proof  of  its
truth,  than  may  be  derived  from  its  consistency  with
itself.  The  forger  of  a  complicated  tale  needs  the  exer-
cise of  much  thought  to  make  all  the  parts  of  his  fiction
harmonize  with  each  other ;  and  it  will  be  very  difficult
to  conceal  the  care  and  effort  which  his  task  demands.
But  when  the  harmony,  instead  of  being  contrived  by
the  author,  is  manifestly  natural  and  undesigned,  it  be-
comes a  proof  that  the  history  describes  facts  taken
from  real  life,  and  not  fictions  from  the  author's  inven-
tion. In  this  way  Dr.  Paley  (72)  in  a  work  which  he
calls  Horse  Paulinse,  has  made  out  a  most  interesting
and  satisfactory  demonstration  that  the  New  Testament
history  is  true,  by  showing  the  undesigned  coincidences
between  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  and  the  Epistles  of
Paul.  He  finds  these  coincidences  so  numerous,  and  so
manifestly  undesigned,  that  a  suspicion  of  forgery  is
completely  excluded.  The  history  proves  the  genuine-
ness of  the  Epistles ;  and  the  Epistles  prove  the  truth
of  the  history.

Section  X.     Monumental  Proof.

A  further  and  most  impressive  proof  of  the  Christian
facts  is  furnished  by  existing  monuments  of  antiquity.
Coins  and  medals  (70)  have  been  found  which  prove
facts  incidentally  stated  in  the  New  Testament ;  and
the  catacombs  (71)  of  Rome  give  indisputable  testimony
that  the  Christians  of  the  second  and  third  centuries
were  so  numerous  as  to  form  a  large  part  of  the  popula-


CONCLUSION.  101

tion  in  the  imperial  city ;  that  multitudes  of  them
suffered  martyrdom  ;  and  that  they  believed  the  facts  of
Christianity  as  recorded  in  the  New  Testament.

Section  XI.     Conclusion.

If  the  gospel  history  is  not  true,  why  have  we  no
correct  accounts  of  the  origin  of  Christianity  ?  So  im-
portant an  event  in  the  history  of  the  world  ought  to  be
accounted  for.  It  did  not  enter  the  world  at  a  dark
corner  where  it  could  not  be  observed,  or  in  a  dark  age
when  no  historian  lived.  Where  then  is  the  record  ?
We  have  no  accounts  different  from  that  which  is  given
in  the  New  Testament.  If  the  gospel  history  had  not
been  true,  its  falsehood  would  have  been  exposed  by  its
enemies,  or  by  apostates  from  the  religion.  Judas,  who
had  been  admitted  to  such  intimacy  as  was  allowed  to
the  twelve  apostles  only,  betrayed  his  master  to  the
chief  priests  and  elders  ;  and,  if  he  had  possessed  know-
ledge of  any  imposture  or  secret  plot  to  deceive  man-
kind, he  was  in  precisely  such  circumstances  as  would
have  called  forth  a  revelation  of  the  wicked  scheme.1
Many  who  were  admitted  to  the  fellowship  of  the  apostles
and  first  Christians,  apostatized  from  their  faith :  but
not  one  of  them  testified  that  the  gospel  facts  were
fictions  or  cunningly  devised  fables.  The  emperor
Julian  (60)  was  an  apostate  from  Christianity  ;  and  had
most  favorable  opportunities  from  his  acquaintance  with
Christians,  his  learning,  and  his  high  position,  to  detect
the  falsehood  of  the  gospel  history,  if  it  had  been  false  ;
yet  his  testimony  confirms  the  principal  facts  of  the
history.  Celsus  (53),  Porphyry  (57),  and  Hierocles  (58),
learned  heathens  who  wrote  against  Christianity  in  early

1  Matt,  xxvii.  4.


102  TRUTHFUL     HISTORY.

times,  admitted  that  Jesus  had  lived,  declared  his  doc-
trines, wrought  miracles,  and  been  crucified ;  and  referred
to  the  Gospels  now  in  our  possession  as  received  accounts
of  his  life  and  ministry.  Though  they  desired  to  banish
the  hated  religion  from  the  world,  they  made  no  attempt
to  disprove  its  principal  facts.

When  the  various  proofs  which  have  been  enumerated
are  duly  considered,  it  will  clearly  appear  that  the  his-
tory of  Julius  Caesar,  which  no  one  doubts,  is  far  less
attested  than  that  of  Jesus  Christ.  Indeed  Christianity
has  been  so  incorporated  with  the  aifairs  of  the  world
for  the  last  eighteen  centuries,  that  if  its  history  is
rejected,  all  history  of  the  past  must  be  rejected  with  it.
Julius  left  his  mark  on  the  history  of  Rome,  by  origi-
nating the  empire  of  the  Caesars  ;  but  the  empire  of  the
Caesars  has  long  since  fallen,  and  little  can  be  found  in
the  present  condition  of  the  world,  which  can  serve  as  a
memorial  of  his  having  lived.  But  Jesus  has  left  a  mark
which  all  have  seen,  and  which  is  now  visible  to  all.  The
kingdom  which  he  set  up  still  stands,  and  is  extending
its  conquests.  And  he  who  contemplates  the  present
condition  of  the  world,  may  trace  the  chief  excellence
of  all  that  blesses  the  human  race  to  the  Author  of
Christianity.

The  resurrection  of  Christ  as  believed  by  Christians,
is  an  event  of  the  kind  denominated  miraculous.  The
subject  of  miracles  is  reserved  for  another  chapter,  and
therefore  we  have  not  in  this  chapter  entered  into  the
inquiry,  whether  any  supernatural  agency  was  concerned
in  the  event.  The  subject  of  inspiration  is  also  post-
poned to  another  chapter.  The  present  chapter  claims
for  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament  the  respect  and
confidence  due  to  truthful  historians,  reserving  for  fu-
ture   consideration    the    question,   whether   the   record


CONCLUSION.  103

which  they  have  given  us  possesses  divine  authority,
and  is  infallibly  true.  All  that  this  chapter  aims  to
establish  is,  that  the  sacred  writers  have  given  us  a
truthful  account  of  what  was  assuredly  believed  by
themselves,  and  by  all  the  Christians  of  ancient  times,
including  the  original  witnesses  of  the  facts  recorded.
As  the  inquiry  into  the  miraculous  character  of  the
facts  has  not  been  introduced,  so  no  notice  has  been
taken  of  the  confirmation  which  the  original  witnesses
gave  to  their  testimony  by  the  performing  of  miracles.
The  resurrection  of  Christ  was  not  a  natural  return  to
life  after  three  days  of  suspended  animation :  but  God
raised  him  by  supernatural  power;  and  the  belief  of
this  great  fact  was  not  founded  on  the  mere  testimony
of  fallible  men  who  might  be  deceived  by  external  ap-
pearances. But  God  confirmed  their  testimony  by  signs,
wonders,  and  divers  miracles,  and  gifts  of  the  Holy
Ghost.1  But  the  present  chapter  views  the  gospel  facts
in  the  light  of  ordinary  history,  and  does  not  enter  into
the  question,  whether  the  events  deemed  miraculous
were  real  miracles,  or  only  appearances  mistaken  for
miracles  by  the  beholders.

1  Heb.  ii.  4.


CHAPTER  VI.
PROPHECY.


FULFILMENT    OF   WHICH     DEMONSTRATES    THAT    THEY
PROCEEDED  FROM  DIVINE  FOREKNOWLEDGE.


Section  I.     General  View.

The  Bible  contains,  in  addition  to  its  morality,  doc-
trines, and  history,  an  extensive  system  of  prophecy,
beginning  with  the  third  chapter  of  Genesis,  and  ending
with  the  last  chapter  of  Revelation.  This  system  in-
cludes the  threatenings  which  enforce  the  moral  pre-
cepts, and  the  promises  which  have  been  given  at  vari-
ous times  for  the  comfort  and  encouragement  of  God's
people.

Among  the  important  purposes  which  the  prophecies
of  the  Bible  subserve,  one  of  great  value  is  the  attesta-
tion which  they  give  to  the  divine  origin  of  the  book.
God  only  possesses  infallible  foreknowledge  of  future
events.  Men  generally  acknowledge  their  ignorance
of  the  future,  and  seldom  attempt  more  than  conjecture
with  respect  to  it.  If  any  make  higher  pretensions,
they  either  express  their  predictions  in  ambiguous  lan-
guage, such  as  was  used  by  the  heathen  oracles,  or  the
subsequent  failure  in  the  fulfilment  of  their  predictions
convicts  them  of  imposture  or  delusion.  But  the  pre-
dictions of  the  Bible  are  made  with  such  definiteness

(104)


GENERAL     VIEW.  105

and  clearness,  in  very  many  cases,  as  to  render  the  ful-
filment of  them  indisputable ;  and  the  number  and
exactness  of  these  fulfilments  prove  beyond  doubt  that
the  predictions  were  not  mere  human  conjectures.

The  design  of  prophecy  was  not  to  gratify  our  curi-
osity, or  to  make  us  prophets ;  but,  when  fulfilled,  the
fulfilment  establishes  our  faith,  and,  by  this  more
beneficial  effect,  proves  the  benevolence  as  well  as  the
prescience  of  the  Great  Author.

So  thoroughly  was  the  system  of  prophecy  incorpo-
rated with  the  dispensation  of  the  Old  Testament,  that
its  divinely  instituted  rites  were  prophetic ;  and  persons
and  places  were  types  of  future  things.  And  the  whole
system  of  prophecy  has  such  relation  to  the  great
scheme  of  salvation  by  Christ,  that  the  testimony  of
Jesus  is  the  spirit  of  prophecy ; l  that  is,  the  testimony
concerning  him  is  the  design,  scope,  and  end  of
all  prophetic  revelation.  The  promise  to  our  fallen
parents  was  a  prediction  of  Christ's  first  coming ;  and
predictions  of  his  second  coming  close  the  sacred
volume.

The  proof  that  the  prophecies  of  the  Bible  proceeded
from  God,  derives  an  increase  of  strength  from  the
character  of  the  prophets  by  whom  they  were  delivered.
They  were  men  of  holy  lives,  and  labored  to  teach  and
persuade  the  people  to  live  according  to  the  law  of  God.
They  reproved  the  vices  of  the  people,  and  denounced
the  judgments  of  God  against  powerful  kings,  and  were
rewarded  for  their  faithfulness  with  persecution  and
death.  So  common  was  this  ungrateful  requital  of  their
faithfulness,  that  Jerusalem,  where  much  of  their  minis-
try was  performed,  was  characterized  thus :  "  Thou  that

1  Rev.  xix.  10.


106  PROPHECY.

killest  the  prophets,   and   stonest  them  that  are  sent
unto  thee."1

The  extent  of  the  prophetic  system,  and  its  subser-
vience to  the  divine  work  of  salvation,  cannot  be  tho-
roughly understood  without  a  careful  study  of  the  Holy
Scriptures.  He  who  would  justly  appreciate  the  argu-
ment from  prophecy,  should  prepare  himself  for  the
examination  of  particular  prophecies  by  a  general  study
of  the  Bible ;  and  in  perusing  the  remaining  sections  of
this  chapter,  he  must  take  the  pains  to  examine  care-
fully the  passages  of  Scripture  which  are  referred  to.
If  he  declines  this  labor,  he  dismisses  the  case  without
a  fair  hearing.

Section  II.     The  Messiah.

The  Old  Testament  contains  numerous  predictions
concerning  the  Messiah,  of  which  the  fulfilment  appears
in  the  history  that  the  evangelists  have  given  of  Jesus
Christ.    *

The  particulars  so  predicted  may  be  briefly  classified
as  follows  : —

I.  Time  of  Ms  birth. — 1.  When  the  sceptre  was  de-
parting from  Judah.2  2.  While  Jerusalem  and  the
second  temple  remained.3  3.  When  a  general  expecta-
tion of  him  prevailed.4  4.  While  the  house  of  David
remained  distinct  but  depressed.5  5.  Within  four  hun-
dred and  ninety  years  from  the  commandment  of  Ar-
taxerxes  to  restore  Jerusalem.6  6.  In  Bethlehem
Ephrata.7

1  Matt,  xxiii.  37  ;  Luke,  xiii.  34.  2  Gen.  xlix.  10.

3  Isaiah,  xl.  9;  xli.  27;  Haggai,  ii.  6,  9.

4  Haggai,  ii.  7  ;  Mai.  iii.  1.

5  Isaiah,  xi.  1 :  liii.  2;  Ezek.  xxxiv.  23,  24.

6  Daniel,  ix.  24,  25.  7  Micah,  v.  2.


THE     MESSIAH.  107

II.  7.  His  descent.  —  From  Abraham.1  Judah.2
David.3

III.  8.  His  forerunner. — John  the  Baptist.4

IV.  9.  His  person  and  history.  —  A  virgin's  son.5
10.  His  flight  into  Egypt.6  11.  His  entrance  into  Je-
rusalem.7 12.  The  cry  of  the  children  that  surrounded
him.8  13.  His  gentleness.9  14.  His  zeal  for  his  Fa-
ther's worship.10  15.  The  price  at  which  he  was  betrayed
and  the  use  made  of  the  money.11  16.  The  treachery  and
end  of  Judas.12  17.  His  last  sufferings  and  his  com-
panions therein.13  18.  The  offer  of  gall.14  19.  His
bones  unbroken,15  and  his  side  pierced  with  a  spear.16
20.  Taunts,  desertion  by  his  Father,  his  last  words,  the
distribution  of  his  garments.17  21.  His  grave.18  22.
His  body  remaining  uncorrupted.19  23.  His  resurrec-
tion on  the  third  day.20  24.  The  establishment  of  his
kingdom.21

V.  His  ministry  and  works.  25.  Miracles.22  26.
His  preaching.23

VI.  His  humanity.      27.  A  branch  from  the  root  of


2  Gen.  xlix.  10.

3  Isaiah,  xi.  1 ;  Psalms,  lxxxix.  4,  27.

4  Mai.  iii.  1;  iv.  5  ;  Isaiah,  xl.  3.  5  Isaiah,  vii.  14.
6  Hosea,  xi.  1.  7  Zech.  ix.  9.

8  Psalms,  cxviii.  26.  9  Isaiah,  xlii.  2,  3.

10  Psalms,  lxix.  9.  u  Zech.  xi.  12,  13.

12  Psalms,  lxix.  25.  13  Isaiah,  liii.  throughout.

14  Psalms,  lxix.  21.  15  Ex.  xii.  46.

16  Zech.  xii.  10.  1T  Psalms,  xxii. ;  xxxi.  5.

18  Isaiah,  liii.  9.  19  Psalms,  xvi.  10.

20  Jouah,  i.  17  ;  Matt.  xii.  39,  40.

21  Psalms,  ii.  6  ;  Ixxii.  8,  9  ;  ex.  1,  2  •,  Isaiah,  ix.  7.

22  Isaiah,  xxix.  18  ;  John,  vii.  31.

23  Isaiah,  lxi.  1-3  ;  Luke,  iv.  16-29.
10


108  PROPHECY.

Jesse,1  a  tender  plant — rejected — oppressed2 — a  worm3
— servant  of  rulers4  —  stone  of  stumbling5  —  without
comeliness,  hated,  reproached6 — falsely  accused7 — a  man
of  sorrows.8

VII.  His  divinity.  28.  The  Son  of  God9— the  Shi-
loh10 — the  Star  of  Jacob11 — Living  Redeemer12 — chief
corner  stone13 — the  Lord  of  David14 — king  of  Israel15 —
Emanuel16 — Wonderful,  Counsellor,  the  mighty  God,  &c.17
— from  everlasting18 — Jehovah19 — object  of  trust  and
worship.20

On  this  comparison  of  these  predictions  with  their
fulfilment  the  following  observations  may  be  made.

1.  The  number  of  the  facts  furnishes  complete  proof
that  the  agreement  between  the  predictions  and  their
fulfilment  was  not  accidental.

If  in  each  particular  case,  the  chances  were  equal
that  the  event  would  or  would  not  happen,  the  proba-
bility of  its  happening  may  be  expressed  by  the  frac-
tion J.  The  probability  that  two  of  the  events  should
happen,  each  in  agreement  with  the  prediction,  will,  as
mathematicians  know,  be  properly  expressed  by  the  frac-
tion J.  For  three  independent  events,  the  fraction  will
be  J ;  for  four,  -^ ;  for  five,  ^ ;  and,  if  we  extend  the

1  Isaiah,  xi.  1.  2  Isaiah,  liii.  2,  3,  7.

»3  Psalms,  xxii.  6.  4  Isaiah,  xlix.  7.

5  Isaiah,  viii.  14.  6  Isaiah,  liii.  2.

7  Psalms,  xxxv.  11,  20.  8  Isaiah,  liii.  3.

9  Psalms,  ii.  7,  12.  10  Gen.  xlix.  10.

11  Numbers,  xxiv.  17.  12  Job,  xix.  23-27.

13  Isaiah,  xxviii.  16.  u  Psalms,  ex.  1.

15  Jeremiah,  xxiii.  5,  6  ;  xxx.  9  ;  Zech.  ix.  9.

16  Isaiah  vii.  14 ;  Matt.  i.  23.

17  Isaiah,  ix.  5,  G.  18  Micah,  v.  2.

19  Jeremiah,  xxiii.  6.  20  Psalms,  ii.  12.


THE     MESSIAH.  109

series  by  a  regular  geometrical  progression,  to  compute
for  twenty-eight  events,  we  shall  find  that  the  chances
of  so  many  agreements,  if  determined  by  chance,  is  as
one  to  268,435,436.

It  has  been  objected  that  some  of  the  passages  re-
ferred to  in  the  preceding  enumeration  do  not  appear
in  the  Old  Testament  to  have  been  designed  for  predic-
tions, and  are  therefore  improperly  set  down  as  prophe-
cies of  Christ.1     It  is  not  needful  for  our  present  pur-

1  The  objection  has  greater  importance  in  its  bearing  on  tho
doctrine  of  plenary  inspiration.

Did  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament  mistake  for  prophecies
of  Christ  passages  of  the  Old  Testament  which  were  not  in-
tended to  be  predictions?

When  these  writers  say  that  an  Old  Testament  passage  which
they  quote,  was  fulfilled  in  an  event  which  they  have  recorded,
nothing  more  may  have  been  meant  than  that  the  language
quoted  fitly  describes  the  event  to  which  it  is  applied.

Fulfilment,  when  there  is  no  prediction,  means  nothing  more
than  full  agreement.  This  explanation  is  sufficient  to  vindicate
the  evangelists  from  the  charge  of  mistake :  but  we  are  not  at
liberty  to  affirm  that  mere  agreement  directed  them  in  applying
these  disputed  passages.  In  some  instances,  as  in  John  xi.  49-
52,  God  meant  language  to  be  prediction,  when  it  was  not  so
understood  by  those  who  uttered  it.  In  some  instances,  as  in
Ex.  xii.  46,  John  xix.  36,  language  which  was  not  predictive  in
its  application  to  a  type,  was  predictive  in  its  relation  to  the  an-
titype. And  in  some  instances,  as  in  Hosea  xi.  1,  language
which  was  not  predictive  in  its  application  to  part  of  a  great  de-
sign, was  predictive  in  relation  to  the  consummation  of  that
design.  Israel  was  delivered  out  of  Egypt  for  the  purpose  of
establishing  the  true  religion  in  Canaan,  and  sending  it  thence
through  the  world  ;  but  this  design  would  have  been  frustrated,
if  Christ,  the  chief  glory  and  excellence  of  Israel,  had  been
suffered  to  remain  in  Egypt.  Hence  the  words  of  the  prophet
not  only  fitly  describe  the  event  to  which  the  evangelist  has  ap-
plied them,  Matt.  ii.  15,  but  they  would  not  have  been  fulfilled,


110  PROPHECY.

pose  to  contradict  this  objection.  If  all  the  doubtful
passages  were  struck  from  the  list,  there  would  remain
indubitable  prophecies  more  than  sufficient  to  sustain
the  argument.  Besides,  the  loss  might  be  countervailed
by  reckoning  the  several  incidents  which  are  compre-
hended in  some  of  the  predictions,  as  so  many  distinct
facts.

For  example,  the  prophecy  of  Christ's  entrance  into
Jerusalem,  No.  11,  states  definitely  several  particulars
in  the  mode  of  his  entrance.  He  was  not  to  walk,  or
to  be  borne  on  the  shoulders  of  applauding  attendants,
or  to  be  conveyed  in  a  vehicle  of  some  sort,  but  to  ride
on  the  back  of  an  animal ;  and  this  animal  was  to  be,
not  a  camel,  a  horse,  or  a  mule,  but  an  ass :  and  with
still  greater  particularity,  the  prophecy  states  that  he
was  to  ride,  not  on  an  old  ass,  but  on  an  ass's  colt.  It
is  manifest  that,  though  the  entrance  into  Jerusalem  is
set  down  in  the  enumeration  as  a  single  fact,  the  pro-
phecy concerning  it  comprehended  many  particulars,  all
of  which  must  concur  to  render  the  fulfilment  complete.
We  may  therefore  conclude  that  the  chances  against  the
exact  fulfilment  of  all  the  prophecies  concerning  Christ
were  not  over  estimated  in  the  last  paragraph.

2.  The  improbability  that  so  many  predictions  should
be  fulfilled  in  one  person,  is  greatly  increased  by  the
circumstance  that  there  is  an  obvious  appearance  of  in-
congruity between  the  predictions.  Thus,  classes  six
and  seven  appear  inconsistent  with  each  other,  and  their
concurrence  in  any  ordinary  person  may  be  pronounced
impossible.  But  in  the  person  of  Jesus  they  were  all
harmoniously  fulfilled,  because  in  him  humanity  and
divinity  were  united.

in  their  comprehensive  and  most  important  sense,  if  this  event
had  not  occurred.


THE    MESSIAH.  Ill

3.  The  force  of  the  demonstration  is  further  increased
by  the  consideration  that  the  predictions  were  delivered
at  different  times,  and  by  different  persons,  and  were
wholly  independent  of  each  other.  They  were  delivered
at  different  times  during  a  period  of  four  thousand
years.  To  the  first  revelations,  which  were  compara-
tively obscure,  additions  were  made  harmonizing  with
those  which  preceded  them,  but  not  growing  out  of  them.

The  Messiah  was  to  be  born  of  Eve,  but  this  did  not
determine  that  he  was  to  be  of  the  seed  of  Abraham ;
and  when  this  was  foretold,  the  prediction  did  not  de-
termine that  he  should  be  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  or  of
the  family  of  David.  Thus,  independent  additions  were
made  from  time  to  time,  unfolding  a  scroll  of  prophecy
in  which  converging  lines  appear  that  at  length  meet  in
the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  concurrence  of  so
many  independent  predictions  proves  that  they  origin-
ated from  one  source,  one  divine  mind,  and  not  from
the  minds  of  the  several  prophets.  The  whole  Hebrew
nation,  with  its  typical  rites  of  religious  worship,  ut-
tered a  continued  prediction  of  Christ  from  the  time
of  Moses.

From  the  first  passover  in  Egypt  to  the  scene  on
Calvary,  when  Christ,  our  passover,  was  sacrificed  for
us,  the  congregation  of  the  Lord  exhibited  its  prophetic
handwriting  of  ordinances  ;  and  when  these  were  nailed
to  the  cross,  the  congregation  was  dissolved,  the  purpose
for  which  it  had  been  divinely  organized  having  been
accomplished.     Yet —

4.  By  an  admirable  arrangement  the  nation  of  Israel
remain  witnesses  of  the  genuineness  of  the  prophecies
which  point  out  their  rejected  Messiah.  They  hold
up  to  the  view  of  the  world  their  sacred  volume,  which
contains  these  predictions,  and  thus  give  honorable  tes-

10*


112  PROPHECY.

tirnony  to  the  prophets,  while  they  reject  their  predic-
tions. They  forbid  the  computation  of  Daniel's  seventy
weeks,  and  the  interpretation  of  Isaiah's  fifty-third  chap-
ter ;  and  herein  convict  themselves  of  rejecting  the
revelations  which  have  been  committed  to  their  keeping
through  these  inspired  men.

5.  The  most  important  predictions  concerning  the
Messiah  are  in  progress  of  fulfilment  at  the  present
time.  He  was  to  be  a  spiritual  deliverer,  bruising
the  head  of  the  serpent,1  blessing  all  nations,2  and  re-
leasing individuals  from  the  bondage  of  sin.3  These
benefits  the  exalted  Jesus  now  confers  on  mankind.
The  evidence  is  before  the  eyes  of  all  in  the  spread  of
Christianity  and  the  benefits  which  it  confers  on  the  na-
tions ;  and  it  is  in  the  heart  of  every  humble  believer
who  has  within  him  the  witness  and  earnest  of  the  Holy
Spirit  given  by  the  ascended  Redeemer.

Section  III.     The  Hebrew  Nation.

The  Old  Testament  contains  numerous  prophecies
concerning  the  descendants  of  Abraham.  Some  of  these
have  been  fulfilled,  and  others  are  in  the  progress  of
fulfilment.

It  was  foretold  that — 1.  The  children  of  Israel  should
go  into  Egypt  and  there  be  enslaved.4 — 2.  They  should
be  delivered  from  this  bondage  at  a  time  designated.5 —
3.  They  should  be  brought  into  Canaan  and  hold  it  as
their  possession.6 — 4.  They  should  become  a  great  na-
tion.7— 5.  They  should  be  carried  to  Babylon  and  be  in

1  Gen.  iii.  15.  2  Gen.  xxii.  18.

3  Isaiah,  lxi.  1.  4  Gen.  xv.  13.

5  Gen.  xv.  14-16.  6  Gen.  xvii.  8  ;  xv.  16.

7  Gen.  xii.  2.


ANCIENT     CITIES.  118

captivity  seventy  years.1 — 6.  They  should  be  besieged
and  overcome  by  a  foreign  warlike  people ;  should  suffer
extreme  famine  in  the  siege.2 — 7.  They  should  be  re-
moved from  their  land,  and  scattered  among  the  nations,
and  in  their  dispersion  should  be  reduced  to  extreme
suffering  and  degradation.3 — 8.  Though  dispersed  and
afflicted,  they  should  still  be  preserved  a  distinct  people.4
— 9.  They  should  be  treated  with  contempt  by  the  na-
tions among  whom  they  would  be  scattered.5 — 10.  Their
sufferings  would  be  of  long  continuance.6

These  predictions  have  all  been  fulfilled,  and  some  of
them  continue  to  be  fulfilled  at  the  present  time,  before
the  eyes  of  all  men.  The  remarkable  people  carry  with
them  everywhere  in  their  dispersion,  and  preserve  with
the  utmost  care,  the  book  which  foretells  their  present
condition,  and  explains  it  as  a  just  judgment  of  God  for
their  sins.  The  long  continuance  of  their  calamity
indicates  that  God  has  been  provoked  by  some  grievous
offence :  and  what  is  this  offence  ?  Can  anything  be
alleged  so  probable  as  the  rejection  and  murder  of  their
Messiah  ?

Section  IV.  Ancient  Cities.
Nineveh.
Ancient  history  informs  us — 1.  That  this  ancient
city  (102  a),  the  metropolis  of  the  Assyrian  Empire,
after  being  besieged  two  years,  was  inundated  by  the
swollen  waters  of  the  river  on  which  it  was  built,  and
its  walls  thrown  down.7 — 2.   That  the  king,  despairing

1  Jer.  xxv.  11.  2  Dent,  xxviii.  49-57.

3  Deut.  xxviii.  57-68.  4  Levit.  xxvi.  44 :  Deut.  xxviii.  65.

5  Deut.  xxviii.  37.  6  Deut.  xxviii.  59.

7  Nahum,  i.  8.


114  PROPHECY.

of  success,  erected  a  funeral  pile,  on  which  he  heaped
his  wealth,  and  with  which  himself,  his  household,  and
palace,  were  consumed  by  fire.1 — 3.  That  the  king  had
appointed  a  time  of  festivity,  and  he  and  his  soldiers
had  abandoned  themselves  to  drunkenness ;  and  the
general  of  the  enemy,  apprised  of  their  condition,  had
attacked  the  Assyrian  army,  destroyed  a  part  of  them,
and  driven  the  rest  into  the  city.2 — 4.  That  many
talents  of  gold,  preserved  from  the  fire,  were  carried
away  to  Ecbatana.3 — 5.  The  overthrow  of  the  city  was
complete  and  final.  It  has  long  lain  in  utter  desola-
tion ;  and  its  ruins,  recently  examined  by  Layard,  har-
monize with  the  account  of  this  ancient  city  given  in  the
Bible,  and  at  the  same  time  prove  the  fulfilment  of  the
Bible  prophecies  respecting  it.4

If  the  above  facts  be  compared  with  the  Scriptures
referred  to,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  overthrow  of  Nine-
veh was  in  exact  fulfilment  of  prophecies  which  had  been
delivered  while  the  city  was  in  its  strength  and  glory,
and  when  its  utter  ruin  was  an  event  which  no  human
sagacity  could  have  foreknown.

Babylon.

1.  This  ancient,  powerful  city  (102  a)  was  besieged
and  taken  by  the  Medes  and  Elamites  or  Persians.5— 2.
The  name  of  the  conqueror  was  Cyrus.6 — 3.  Various
nations  that  he  had  previously  conquered,  had  contrib-
uted to  enlarge  his  army.7 — 4.  Finding  the  city  strongly

1  Nahura,  iii.  15.  2  Nahuru,  i.  10.

3  Nahuin,  ii.  9.

4  Nahum,  i.  8,  9,  10 ;  iii.  7-19 ;  Zeph.  ii.  13,  15.

5  Isaiah,  xxi.  2-9:  Jer.  Ii.  11.

6  Isaiah,  xlvi.  28.  7  Isaiah,  xiii.  4 ;  Jer.  Ii.  27.


ANCIENT     CITIES.  L15

fortified  on  every  side  by  its  immense  walls,  lie  made
preparations  for  a  long  siege,1  by  digging  a  trench  en-
tirely around  it,  and  erecting  towers. — 5.  The  Baby-
lonians, though  their  armies  had  once  been  a  terror  to
the  nations,  evinced  great  cowardice,  and  shut  them-
selves up  within  their  walls.2 — 6.  An  entrance  was
obtained  by  diverting  from  its  channel3  the  river  Eu-
phrates, which  ran  through  the  midst  of  the  city. — 7.
Through  the  channel  Cyrus  led  his  army  by  night,
selecting  for  the  time  a  season  of  festivity,4  in  which  the
gates  leading  from  the  river  into  the  city  had  been
carelessly  left  open.5 — 8.  While  the  king  Belshazzar  and
his  courtiers  were  feasting  and  drinking  wine  out  of  the
vessels  which  had  been  brought  from  the  temple  at  Jeru-
salem, the  conqueror  approached  the  royal  palace  ;  and,
finding  the  guards  intoxicated,6  entered  before  the  king
had  knowledge  of  his  approach.  That  night  Belshazzar
was  slain. — 9.  By  the  conquest  of  Babylon,  Cyrus  be-
came master  of  the  great  riches7  of  the  place,  and
reduced  it  from  an  imperial  to  a  tributary  city.  Sub-
sequently the  height  of  the  wall  was  reduced  by  Darius,
and  the  gates  destroyed. — 10.  Xerxes  afterwards  rifled
the  most  sacred  treasures  which  were  laid  up  in  the
temple  of  Belus,  and  took  away  their  idols.8 — 11.  All
designs  to  restore  Babylon  to  its  ancient  greatness
proved  abortive.  It  gradually  declined,  and  in  the
second  century  of  the  Christian  era  nothing  remained
but  its  walls,  and  under  the  Saracens  it  became  a  com-


1  Isaiah,  xxi.  2  ;  Jer.  1.  29.

2  Jer.  li.  30.

3  Isaiah,  xliv.  27  5  Jer.  1.  38  ;  li.  36.

4  Jer.  1.  24;  li.  39-57.

5  Isaiah,  xlv.  1.

6  Jer.  li.  39-57.

7  Isaiah,  xlv.  3.

8  Isaiah,  xxi.  9  ;  xlvi.  1.


116  PROPHECY.

plete  desolation.1 — 12.  Nothing  of  it  now  remains  but
mounds  of  ruins  amidst  pools  of  stagnant  water.2 — 13.
But  in  another  portion  of  the  space  once  occupied  by
the  city,  the  ground  is  dry  and  barren.3 — 14.  Wild
beasts  and  venomous  serpents  are  the  only  inhabitants
of  the  place,  and  the  wild  Arab  shuns  to  pitch  his  tent
there.4 — 15.  The  temple  of  Belus,5  once  higher  than  the
pyramids  of  Egypt,  is  now  a  shapeless  mound  of  ruins,
as  are  also  the  palaces6  which  were  once  the  abode  of
luxury  and  merriment.7 — 16.  Of  the  immense  walls,  not
even  a  vestige  can  be  found.8 — 17.  Modern  travellers
who  visit  the  place,  contemplate  the  desolation  with
astonishment,9  and  are  overawed  by  its  dreary  solitude.
The  facts  which  have  been  enumerated  above,  and
which  are  gathered  from  historical  records,  were  the
subjects  of  prophecies  contained  in  the  Bible.  A  refer-
ence to  these  prophecies  is  made  at  the  statement  of  the
several  facts ;  and  if  the  facts  be  compared  with  the
passages  of  Scripture  referred  to,  it  will  be  seen  that
they  have  exactly  fulfilled  predictions  that  had  been
delivered  by  the  prophets  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah.  Isaiah
prophesied  at  least  one  hundred  and  sixty  years  before
the  taking  of  Babylon.  Though  Jeremiah  was  a  century
later,  he  sent10  his  prophecy  to  Babylon  fifty-six  years
before  its  capture,  and  while  Nebuchadnezzar  the  Great
was  on  the  throne,  by  whom  Babylon  was  raised  to  the

1  Isaiah,  xiii.  19  ;  xiv.  22,  23  ;  Jer.  1.  13,  23,  39,  40 ;  li.  13,  26,
29,  37,  42,  43.

2  Isaiah,  xiv.  23.  3  Jer.  li.  43.

4  Isaiah,  xiii.  20-22.

5  Isaiah,  xlvi.  1  ;  Jer.  1.  2 ;  li.  44.

6  Isaiah,  xiii.  22.  7  Isaiah,  xiv.  11.

8  Isaiah,  xxv.  12 ;  Jer.  1.  15;  li.  44-58.

9  Jer.  1.  13  ;  li.  37.  10  Jer.  li.  59,  60.


ANCIENT    CITIES.  117

zenith  of  its  power  and  splendor.  There  was  then  no
human  probability  of  its  overthrow  in  little  more  than  a
half  century,  and  much  less  of  its  utter  desolation.  It
was  much  more  probable,  according  to  human  foresight,
that  Jerusalem,  recently  taken  by  Nebuchadnezzar,  and
stripped  of  its  inhabitants,  should  become  utterly  deso-
late, than  that  this  should  be  the  lot  of  Babylon.  Yet
Jerusalem  now  exists,  and  Babylon  has  been  in  ruins  many
centuries.     Who  but  God  could  have  foretold  this  ?

Tyre.
1.  Ancient  Tyre  (102  a)  built  on  the  shores  of  the
Mediterranean,  and  distinguished  in  very  early  times1
for  its  commerce,  opulence,  and  luxury,2  was,  after  a
siege  of  thirteen  years,  destroyed  by  the  Chaldeans
under  Nebuchadnezzar. — 2.  The  dispersed  inhabitants
passed  over  the  sea  to  islands,3  and  distant  countries,
some  of  them  to  Tartessus  in  Spain,  which  is  the
Tarshish4  of  the  prophets. — 3.  After  seventy  years  Tyre
was  rebuilt,5  not  on  the  old  site,  but  on  a  neighboring
island. — 4.  Though  defended  by  the  sea,  and  by  strong
walls,  it  was  besieged,  taken,  and  set  on  fire  by  Alexan-
der the  Great.6  The  conqueror  sold  thirty  thousand  of
the  inhabitants  for  slaves.7 — 5.  In  order  to  approach  it,
he  made  a  causeway  through  the  sea  to  the  island,  with
the  stones  and  rubbish8  of  the  old  city. — 6.  In  modern
times  this  once  magnificent  city  is  described  by  travel-
lers as  a  desolation,   a  barren   rock,   on  which   a  few

1  Isaiah,  xxiii.  7.

2  Isaiah,  xxiii.  3,  8  ;  Ezek.  xxvii.  3-34.

3  Isaiah,  xxiii.  12  5  Ezek.  xxvi.  18.

4  Isaiah,  xxiii.  6.  B  Isaiah,  xxiii.  15,  17.

6  Ezek.  xxvii.  32 ;  xxviii.  18  ;  Zech.  ix.  3,  4.

7  Joel,  iii.  6-8.  8  Ezek.  xxvi.  12.


118  PROPHECY.

fishermen  have  their  huts,   and  where  they  dry  their
nets.1

If  the  above  facts  be  compared  with  the  passages  of
Scripture  referred  to,  it  will  be  seen  that  they  are  the
exact  fulfilments  of  prophecy.  The  predictions  of  Isaiah
concerning  Tyre  were  delivered  one  hundred  and  twenty-
five  years  before  its  first  overthrow  by  Nebuchadnezzar.
It  was  not  foretold,  as  in  the  case  of  Nineveh  and
Babylon,  that  Tyre  should  become  an  utter  desolation.
Though  of  the  old  city  no  remains  are  now  to  be  found,
a  remnant  of  insular  Tyre  may  be  said  still  to  exist  in
the  few  fishermen's  huts  that  now  occupy  the  place,  and
give  proof  of  the  exactness  with  which  the  prophecy  of
the  Bible  has  been  fulfilled.  Who  but  God  could  have
foreknown  that  such  cities  as  Nineveh,  Babylon,  and
Tyre  would  be  destroyed ;  and  who  but  God  could  have
foretold  so  many  centuries  ago  the  precise  condition  of
their  ruins  at  the  present  time  ?

Section  V.     Tribes  and  Kingdoms.

The  patriarch  Noah  prophetically  described  the  con-
dition of  his  posterity,  as  propagated  from  his  three
sons.  "  God  shall  enlarge  Japheth,  and  he  shall  dwell
in  the  tents  of  Shem,  and  Canaan2  shall  be  his  servant."

1  Ezek.  xxvi.  3-5,  14,  21.

2  The  curse,  so  far  as  it  is  expressed  in  the  record,  was  limited
to  the  person  of  Canaan  ;  but  it  was  undoubtedly  understood  by
Moses  to  extend  to  his  descendants,  and  it  was  so  recorded  as  to
encourage  the  children  of  Israel  in  expelling  the  Canaanites
from  the  promised  land.  Whether  more  was  said  by  Noah  than
Moses  has  recorded,  we  have  no  means  of  knowing  :  but  the
crime  which  drew  forth  the  curse  was  committed  by  Ham  ;  and
there  is  no  reason  apparent  why  the  curse  should  not  equally
affect  all  his  children.     Shem  and  Japheth  were  blessed,  but


TRIBES     AND    KINGDOMS.  119

The  pre-eminence  of  the  European  race,  descendants  of
Japheth  (103)  is  here  foretold :  and  the  servile  condi-
tion which  has  been  the  lot  of  Ham's  descendants,  from
the  conquest  of  Canaan  by  Joshua  down  to  the  modern
prevalence  of  African  slavery.

Noah's  prophecy  is  the  more  remarkable,  because,
though  its  fulfilment  is  clearly  seen  in  an  extended  view
of  history,  yet  for  several  centuries  after  it  was  uttered,
and  down  to  the  time  when  it  was  recorded  by  Moses,
the  progress  of  events  was  in  a  contrary  direction.  If
the  curse  denounced  had  fallen  at  once  on  Ham's  de-
scendants, it  might  now  be  alleged  that  Moses  fabricated
the  prediction  to  accord  with  historical  events  of  which
he  had  knowledge.  But  the  same  author  who  recorded
the  prediction  has  transmitted  with  it  such  a  history  as
to  human  view  rendered  the  fulfilment  of  the  prediction
wholly  improbable.  The  first  founder  of  a  great  empire
was  Nimrod,  a  descendent  of  Ham.1  Egypt,  the  land
of  Ham,  witnessed  cruel  bondage,  not  endured  by  the
sons  of  Ham,  but  inflicted  by  them  on  the  most  favored
children  of  Shem.  Egypt  was  not  then  the  "basest"
of  kingdoms ;  but  it  was  foremost  among  the  nations
for  science,  arts,  and  civilization ;  and  furnished  the
school  in  which  Moses  himself  acquired  the  learning  for
which  he  was  distinguished.  Even  the  descendants  of
Canaan,  against  whom  the  curse  was  specially  recorded,
continued,  as  long  as  Moses  lived,  to  enjoy  prosperity
in  the  land  of  Canaan.     Here  Sidon  and  Tyre  began

Ham  was  not:  and  the  mere  withholding  of  a  blessing  was,  in
the  circumstances,  a  virtual  curse  on  the  offender,  even  if  none
was  expressed  ;  and  this  silent  curse  at  least  was  the  inheritance
of  all  his  posterity,  while  the  posterity  of  his  brothers  inherited
their  blessings.
1  Gen.  x.  8,  10.
11


120  PROPHECY.

the  commerce  of  the  world.  Hence  went  out  to  Africa
the  colony  which  founded  Carthage,  the  great  rival  of
Rome  ;  and  hence  went  Cadmus,  who  gave  letters  to  the
Greeks.  From  such  a  history  of  Ham's  progeny  it  was
impossible  for  human  sagacity  to  draw  the  prediction
uttered  by  Noah ;  and  the  fulfilment  of  the  prediction
down  to  our  times,  demonstrates  that  it  did  not  proceed
from  the  wisdom  of  the  historian  who  recorded  it,  or  of
the  patriarch  who  delivered  it.

The  Bible  foretold  that  Amalek,1  Edom,2  and  Moab3
should  lose  their  distinct  existence ;  but  predicted  that
the  posterity  of  Ishmael  (104)  should  continue,  distin-
guished from  other  nations,  and  in  perpetual  hostility.4
The  history  and  present  condition  of  the  Arabs  corre-
spond to  this  ancient  prediction.

Egypt  was  once  powerful,  and  renowned  for  its  learn-
ing ;  and  it  now  contains  the  oldest  monuments  of  art
in  the  world.  While  it  was  still  in  its  greatness,  a  pro-
phecy of  its  degradation5  was  uttered,  not  of  its  over-
throw, as  in  the  case  of  the  Assyrian  and  Babylonian
powers.  For  ages  this  prophecy  has  been  fulfilled.  All
attempts  to  raise  it  to  greatness  have  failed,  including
one  of  modern  times  by  the  powerful  Napoleon.

The  four  great  empires  of  the  world,  the  Babylonian,
the  Medo-Persian,  the  Macedonian,  and  the  Roman,
were  foretold  by  Daniel  with  many  particulars  respect-
ing each.6  The  fulfilment  of  the  prediction  is  exact,
and  extends  down  to  the  present  time.  The  division  of
the  Roman  empire  (105)  into  ten  kingdoms  was  pre-

1  Ex.  xvii.  14.

2  Jer.  xlix.  10;  Ezek.  xxv.  12,  14;  Obad.  10-18.

3  Numbers,  xxiv.  17 ;  Isaiah,  xvi.  14 ;  Amos,  ii.  2.

4  Gen.  xvi.  12.  5  Ezekiel,  xxix.  15.
6  Dan.  ii.  37-40 ;  vii.  1,7,  17.


THE     PAPACY.  121

dieted,  and  the  rise  of  a  power  different  from  all  the
rest.1

Section  VI.     The  Papacy.

The  prophecy  of  Daniel  concerning  the  Little  Horn2
agrees  with  that  of  Paul3  concerning  the  Man  of  Sin,
and  the  Falling  Away ;  and  with  that  of  John  concern-
ing the  Beast  with  seven  heads  and  ten  horns.  All
these  prophecies  relate  to  the  same  thing,  and  find  their
fulfilment  in  the  Roman  Catholic  Church.  The  pro-
phecy of  John,  which  is  far  the  most  minute,  will  be
considered  in  Section  8.  At  present  we  shall  merely
enumerate  some  characteristics  of  the  Papal  or  Roman
Catholic  Church ;  and  refer  to  passages  of  Scripture  in
which  these  characteristics  are  foretold.

1.  Popery  is  not,  like  Mahometanism,  a  new  and
distinct  religion ;  but  is  a  corruption  of  Christianity,  a
falling  away.4  The  little  horn  has  "eyes,"5  which
may  signify  that  it  is  the  Seer  of  the  church,  that  is,  its
overseer  or  Bishop. — 2.  In  this  apostate  church  worship
has  been  rendered  to  demons,  or  angels  and  departed
Saints.6 — 3.  It  has  enjoined  celibacy  on  the  clergy,  and
encouraged  it  in  monks  and  nuns ;  and  has  forbidden
the  use  of  flesh  at  prescribed  fasts  as  a  mortal  sin.7 — 4.
The  pope  has  made  himself  God,  in  affecting  divine
titles,  attributes,  and  honors ;  in  assuming  power  to
dispense  with  divine  commands ;  in  placing  his  foot  on
the  altar  and  table  of  the  law  at  his  inauguration,  and

1  Dan.  ii.  41-43 ;  vii.  19-26.

2  Dan.  vii.  8,  &c.  3  2  Thes.  ii.  3.
4  2  Thes.  Ii.  3;  1  Tim.  iv.  1.                        5  Dan.  vii.  8.

6  1  Tim.  iv.  1,  u  doctrines  [of  devils]  concerning  demons;"
Dan.  xi.  38;

7  Dan.  xi.  37 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  3.


122  PROPHECY.

in  this  posture  receiving  the  adoration  of  his  cardinals.1
— 5.  The  pope  has  claimed  supremacy  over  all  other
bishops,  and  over  the  kings  of  the  earth.2 — 6.  The
papal  church  has  secured  great  wealth  under  the  control
of  its  clergy.3 — 7.  It  has  made  much  use  of  purple  and
scarlet,  and  introduced  costly  decorations  into  its  wor-
ship.4— 8.  It  has  extended  its  power  by  craft  and  pious
frauds.5 — 9.  Also  by  pretended  revelations  and  mira-
cles.6— 10.  It  has  required  implicit  faith  and  obedience,
and  deprived  of  civil  rights  those  who  would  not  con-
form to  its  requirements.7 — 11.  The  Roman  pontiffs
have  caused  the  shedding  of  much  Christian  blood,  and
secured  their  supremacy  by  inquisitions  and  tortures.8 —
12.  The  ungodly  and  covetous  priesthood  of  the  papal
church  have  introduced  false  doctrines  and  unautho-
rized modes  of  worship  ;  and  have  made  merchandise  of
men's  souls  by  the  sale  of  indulgences,  absolutions,  and
releases  from  purgatory.9

Section    VII.      Christ's    Predictions.

Besides  the  general  judgment  and  other  events  which
are  still  future,  our  Saviour  foretold  (106  a)

I.  His  own  death,  with  attendant  circumstances,  which
may  be  enumerated  as  follows  : — 1.  He  was  betrayed  by
one  of  the  twelve  apostles.10 — 2.  All  the  others  forsook

1  Dan.  vii.  25  ;  xi.  36 ;  2  Thes.  ii.  3,  4.

2  Dan.  vii.  20 ;  Rev.  xiii.  7  ;  xvii.  2,  13.

3  Dan.  xi.  39.  *  Rev.  xvii.  4.

5  Dan.  vii.  8  ;  1  Tim.  iv.  2  ;  Rev.  xiii.  11-14.

6  2  Thes.  ii.  9,  10  ;  Rev.  xiii.  13,  14.

7  Rev.  xiii.  16,  17.

8  Dan.  vii.  21-25  5  Rev.  xvii.  6 ;  xviii.  24.

9  2  Pet.  ii.  1 5  1  Jude  4,  &c. ;  2  Tim.  iii.  1.

10  Matt.  xxvi.  21 ;  Mark,  xiv.  18 ;  John,  xiii.  21.


Christ's   predictions.  123

him,  and  fled.1 — 3.  Peter  denied  him  thrice.2 — 4.  He
was  not  thrown  from  a  precipice,  or  stoned  to  death  by
a  Jewish  mob,  but  was  delivered  to  the  Gentiles  to  be
mocked,  scourged,  spit  upon,  and  killed.3 — 5.  He  was
crucified.4

II.  His  resurrection  on  the  third  day,5  and  his  ap-
pearance to  his  disciples  in  Galilee.6

III.  The  success  of  his  apostles  as  fishers  of  men ; 7
their  power  to  speak  with  tongues  and  work  miracles  ; 8
their  publication  of  the  gospel  to  the  uttermost  parts
of  the  earth ; 9  the  persecutions  and  sufferings  which
they  endured ; 10  the  manner  of  Peter's  death  ;  u  the
[intimated]  continuance  of  John  until  after  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem.12

IV.  The  rejection  of  the  Jews  and  the  call  of  the
Gentiles  ; 13  the  great  increase  of  his  church  ; 14  and  its
preservation  and  perpetuity,  though  powerfully  as-
sailed.15

V.  The  destruction  of  Jerusalem.  The  exact  fulfil-
ment of  the  prophecy  relating  to  this  event,  may  be
seen  in  the  following  historical  facts  (106  b) — 1.  Jeru-
salem was  destroyed  by  a  Roman  army,  in  which  an

1  Matt.  xxvi.  31  ;  Mark,  xiv.  27.

2  Matt.  xxvi.  34 ;  Mark,  xiv.  30,  72.

3  Matt.  xx.  19  ;  Mark,  x.  33,  34 ;  Luke,  xviii.  32.

4  Matt.  xx.  19  ;  xxvi.   2;  Luke,  xxiv.  7.

5  Matt.  xx.  19;  Mark,  x.  34;  Luke,  xxiv.  7;  John,  ii.  19.

6  Matt,  xxviii.  10.

7  Matt.  iv.  19  ;  Mark,  i.  17.  8  Mark,  xvi.  17,  18.
9  Matt.  xxiv.  14 ;  Mark,  xiii.  10.

10  Matt.  xxiv.  9 ;  Mark,  xiii.  9 ;  Luke,  xxi.  12.

11  John,  xxi.  18,  19.

12  John,  xxi.  22,  23.  13  Matt.  xxi.  43.

14  Matt.  xiii.  31,  32;  Mark,  iv.  31,  32;  Luke,  xiii.  19.

15  Matt.  xvi.  18.

11*


124  PROPHECY.

eagle,  the  ensign  used  by  the  Romans,  was  borne  at  tho
head  of  each  legion.1 — 2.  It  was  destroyed  A.  D.  70,
within  less  than  forty  years  after  the  crucifixion  of
Christ,  and  while  many  who  had  heard  him  preach  were
still  living.2 — 3.  In  this  short  period  of  forty  years  the
gospel  was  preached  throughout  the  known  world,
giving  "  witness"  before  all  mankind  that  the  Messiah
had  come,  and  explaining  the  awful  calamity  which  fell
on  the  Jewish  people  as  the  vengeance  of  their  rejected
King.3 — 4.  The  gospel  gained  its  success  in  opposition
to  fierce  persecution,4  and  notwithstanding  the  defec-
tion of  many  who,  for  a  time,  numbered  themselves
among  its  followers.5 — 5.  The  latter  part  of  this  inter-
vening period  of  forty  years  was  marked  with  the  occur-
rence of  extraordinary  calamities,  among  which  history
has  recorded  famines  in  Palestine 6  and  Italy ;  pesti-
lences at  Babylon,  Rome,  and  other  parts  of  the  Roman
empire;  and  earthquakes  at  Crete,  Smyrna,  Miletus,
Chios,  Samos,  Rome,  Laodicea,  Campania,  and  Judea.
Moreover,  the  Jews,  who  were  scattered  over  nearly
every  country  of  the  Roman  empire,  attempted  in  many
places  to  break  the  yoke  of  Roman  authority,  and
hence  arose  bloody  civil  wars,7  which,  disastrous  as  they
were  to  the  Jews,  were  only  the  first  drops  of  a  deso-
lating tempest.8 — 6.  Fearful  prodigies  (107),  including
extraordinary  appearances  in  the  heavens,  preceded  the

1  Matt.  xxiv.  28  j  Luke,  xvii.  37.

2  Matt,  xxiii.  36  5  xxiv.  34  ;  Mark,  xiii.  30 ;  Luke,  xxi.  32.

3  Matt.  xxiv.  14-,  Mark,  xiii.10.
*  Luke,  xxi.  12,  16,  17.

5  Matt.  xxiv.  10-12 ;  Mark,  xiii.  12,  13.

6  Acts,  xi.  28.

7  Matt.  xxiv.  6.

8  Matt.  xxiv.  7  ;  Mark,  xiii.  7  ;  Luke,  xxi.  9.


CHRIST'S     PREDICTIONS.  125

destruction  of  Jerusalem.1 — 7.  The  Jews  were  encou-
raged in  their  attempt  to  free  themselves  from  Roman
power  by  the  vain  hope  that  their  Messiah  would  come
for  their  deliverance;  and  hence  numerous  impostors,
who  promised  them  deliverance,  deceived  multitudes,
and  caused  their  ruin.2 — 8.  The  appearance  at  the  holy
city  of  the  Roman  ensign,  which  being  an  object  of
idolatrous  worship,  was  an  "abomination"  to  the  Jews,
became  to  the  Christians  a  signal  for  flight,  that  they
might  escape  the  impending  calamities  ;  and  Providence
gave  opportunity  by  a  temporary  withdrawal  of  the
army  after  its  first  approach.3 — 9.  While  the  Jews  from
all  parts  of  the  world  were  assembled  in  Jerusalem  at
the  feast  of  the  passover,  the  Roman  army  began  a
siege  of  the  city.4 — 10.  During  the  progress  of  the
siege,  the  Jews  suffered  unprecedented  misery,  from  the
assaults  of  the  Romans,  from  internal  dissensions,  and
from  famine.  It  has  been  computed  that  eleven  hun-
dred thousand  were  slain,  besides  multitudes  who  died
of  hunger,  or  committed  suicide;  and  multitudes  of
captives  were  sold  into  slavery.5  Josephus  says,  in
words  which  have  a  remarkable  agreement  with  Christ's
prophecy,  "  Never  did  any  city  suffer  so  great  calami-
ties."6 — 11.  Ultimately  the  city  and  temple  were  burned,
their  walls  completely  demolished,  and  the  very  founda-
tions dug  up.7 — 12.  From  that  time  Jerusalem  has  been
under  the  power  of  Grentile  rulers,  and  in  a  compara-
tively abject  condition ;   and   all  attempts  to   restore   it


1  Luke,  xxi.  11.

2  Matt,  xxiv.  23-26  :  Mark,  xiii.  3-6,    21,    23  ;  Luke,  xxi.

3  Matt.  xxiv.  15,  16;  Mark,  xiii.  14;  Luke,  xxi.  20.

4  Luke,  xix.  43.  5  Luke,  xxi.  24.

6  Matt.  xxiv.  21  ;  Mark,  xiii.  19  ;  Luke,  xxi.  22,  23.

7  Matt.  xxiv.  2:  Mark,  xiii.  2:  Luke,  xix.  44.


126  PROPHECY.

to  its  former  state  have  proved  abortive.  But  though
eighteen  centuries  of  deferred  hope  have  passed,  the
Jews  still  expect  its  restoration,  and  Christians  believe
that  the  time  of  its  restoration  will  be  after  the  heathen
nations  have  been  converted  to  Christianity.1

This  remarkable  prediction  has  been  recorded  by  each
of  the  three  evangelists  who  wrote  before  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem ;  namely,  Matthew,  Mark  and  Luke.
That  the  three  Gospels  which  bear  these  names,  were
written  before  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  is  estab-
lished by  the  concurrent  testimony  of  all  Christian
antiquity ;  and,  with  respect  to  two  of  them,  by  conclu-
sive internal  proof.  In  pre-indicating  the  signal  by
which  the  Christians  were  to  know  when  they  might
escape  out  of  the  city,  it  is  said,  "  Whoso  readeth  let
him  understand."2  This  parenthetical  clause  is  man-
ifestly, not  a  part  of  Christ's  address  to  his  disciples,
for  he  would  have  said,  "  Whoso  hearetli  let  him  under-
stand," but  it  is  introduced  by  the  evangelists,  Matthew
and  Mark,  as  admonitions  to  those  who  should  read  their
Gospels,  to  notice  the  signal  indicated.  This  previous
warning  shows  that  the  books  were  written  before  the
time  referred  to.  We  know  therefore  that  the  predic-
tion was  delivered,  recorded,  and  circulated  before  the
beginning  of  the  calamities  predicted.  When  Jesus
delivered  this  prophecy,  the  Jews  were  at  peace,  and
there  was  no  probability,  to  human  view,  that  such  afflic-
tion would  befall  them.  It  was  improbable  that  their
temple  should  be  so  soon  destroyed,  and  its  massy  stones
removed ;  and  it  was  especially  improbable  that  the
Romans  should  destroy  this  magnificent  edifice,  inas-
much as  they  were  accustomed  to  spare  works  of  art  in

1  Luke,  xxi.  24.  2  Matt.  xxiv.  15:  Mark,  xiii.  14.


CHRIST'S    PREDICTIONS.  127

conquered  nations.  If  human  sagacity  could  have  con-
jectured that  the  Romans  would  lay  Jerusalem  desolate,
it  was  beyond  its  power  to  foretell  whether  the  desola-
tion would  be  temporary,  like  that  which  occurred  at  the
Babylonish  captivity,  or  permanent,  like  that  which  has
befallen  Nineveh,  Babylon,  and  Tyre.  Nothing  less
than  divine  prescience  could  have  foretold  that  the  city
would  continue  to  exist,  though  oppressed  and  trodden
under  foot  by  a  succession  of  Gentile  masters ;  and
that  for  a  long  period  it  would  not  come  again  into  the
possession  of  Israel.

Christ's  predictions  were  like  his  miracles,  designed
to  give  proof  of  his  divine  mission  and  Messiahship.1
This  proof  is  furnished  most  abundantly  and  conclu-
sively by  his  remarkable  prophecy  concerning  the  de-
struction of  Jerusalem ;  and  is  displayed  before  the
eyes  of  all  men  at  the  present  time,  in  the  condition
both  of  the  holy  city,  and  of  the  Hebrew  nation,  who,
with  long  deferred  hope,  still  look  forward  to  the  re-
possession of  their  land.  But  the  calamities  which  have
fallen  on  the  Jews,  furnish  proof  of  the  mission  and
Messiahship  of  Jesus,  beyond  that  which  the  mere  ful-
filment of  prophecy  can  give.  The  destruction  of  Je-
rusalem proves  not  only  the  prescience  which  foretold
it,  but  also  the  divine  power  and  justice  which  inflicted
the  dreadful  calamity  on  the  guilty  nation,  for  rejecting
and  crucifying  their  Messiah.  The  catastrophe  was
deferred  until  the  gospel  had  been  preached  among  all
nations,  and  invitation  thereby  given  to  the  world  to
behold  the  issue  of  the  conflict  between  the  nation  and
their  rejected  king:  and  succeeding  generations  down
to   the  present  time,  are  called   on  to  contemplate  the

1  John,  xiii.  19.

i


128  PROPHECY.

event  and  its  consequences  in  the  same  light.  Jerusa-
lem and  the  Jews  are  now  witnesses  to  the  world,  not
only  that  Jesus  was  a  prophet,  but  also  that  he  ascended
the  throne  as  king,  and  took  vengeance  on  those  who
refused  his  dominion,  and  that  he  still  reigns  with  a
power  which  rebellious  Israel  vainly  opposes.

Section   VIII.     Revelation  of  John.

The  Revelation  of  John,  written  near  the  close  of  the
first  century,  professes  to  be  a  prediction  of  things
which  were  shortly  to  come  to  pass.1  Some  of  the  pre-
dicted events  manifestly  belong  to  a  time  which  is  even
now  future  ;  but  the  beginning  of  the  series  followed
closely  after  the  writing  of  the  book.  Amidst  the
predictions  much  religious  instruction  is  interspersed,
showing  that  the  book,  like  all  other  parts  of  the
Scriptures,  was  designed  to  be  "  profitable,  that  the
man  of  God  may  be  perfect,  thoroughly  furnished  unto
all  good  works."  It  was  not  given  to  gratify  vain
curiosity  ;  and  much  of  its  prophecy  is  expressed  in
dark  symbolical  language,  which  nothing  but  the  fulfil-
ment can  interpret.  But  amidst  the  obscurity  some
things  are  sufficiently  clear  to  serve  for  strengthening
the  faith  and  hope  of  Christians  :  and  as  the  predictions
become  interpreted  by  the  occurrence  of  the  events
foretold,  the  divine  origin  of  the  book  is  demonstrated,
and  the  seal  of  God  is  seen  affixed  to  the  whole  volume,
of  which  this  book  is  the  last  and  completing  part.

It  is  our  present  purpose  to  notice  very  briefly  the
principal  predictions  in  the  book  of  Revelation,  so  far
as  they  have  been  already  fulfilled.  We  shall  be  aided
in  our  examination  of  them  by  the  notes  of  Dr.  Barnes,


1  Ch.  i.  1.


REVELATION     OF     JOHN.  129

who,  after  an  original  and  independent  investigation,
arrived  at  an  interpretation  of  which  he  says,  "  It  sur-
prises me,  and,  under  this  view  of  the  matter,  may-
occasion  some  surprise  to  my  readers,  to  find  how  nearly
the  views  coincide  with  those  taken  by  the  great  body
of  Protestant  interpreters.  And  perhaps  this  fact  may
be  regarded  as  furnishing  some  evidence  that,  after  all
the  obscurity  attending  it,  there  is  a  natural  and  obvious
interpretation  of  which  the  book  is  susceptible."  But
though  the  interpretation  of  Dr.  Barnes  agrees  sub-
stantially with  that  which  has  been  usually  given  by
Protestant  divines,  his  notes  are  specially  valuable
because  he  confirms  the  interpretation  by  reference  to
the  infidel  historian  Gibbon.1

1  Concerning  Mr.  Gibbon,  Dr.  Barnes  says:  "To  my  own  sur-
prise, I  found,  chiefly  in  Gibbon's  Decline  and  Fall  of  the  Roman
Empire,  a  series  of  events  recorded  such  as  seemed  to  me  to
correspond  to  a  great  extent  with  the  series  of  symbols  found  in
the  Apocalypse.  The  symbols  were  such  as  it  might  be  supposed
would  be  used  on  the  supposition  that  they  were  intended  to
refer  to  those  events,  and  the  language  of  Mr.  Gibbon  was  often
such  as  he  would  have  used  on  the  supposition  that  he  had  do-
signed  to  prepare  a  commentary  on  the  symbols  employed  by
John.  It  was  such,  in  fact,  that  if  it  had  been  found  in  a  Chris-
tian writer,  professedly  writing  a  commentary  on  the  book  of
Revelation,  it  would  have  been  regarded  by  infidels  as  a  designed
attempt  to  force  history  to  utter  a  language  that  should  conform
to  a  predetermined  theory  in  expounding  a  book  full  of  symbols.
So  remarkable  have  these  coincidences  appeared  to  me  in  the
course  of  this  exposition,  that  it  has  almost  seemed  as  if  he  had
designed  to  write  a  commentary  on  some  portions  of  this  book,
and  I  have  found  it  difficult  to  doubt  that  that  distinguished  his-
torian was  raised  up  by  an  overruling  Providence  to  make  a
record  of  those  events  which  would  ever  afterwards  be  regarded
as  an  impartial  and  unprejudiced  statement  of  the  evidence  of
the  fulfilment  of  prophecy.     The  historian  of  the  'Decline  and


130  PROPHECY.


Changes  in  the  Roman  Empike.

The  first  prophecy  which  claims  our  attention  de-
scribes by  the  most  appropriate  symbols  the  condition
of  the  Roman  empire,  in  the  principal  changes  which  it
passed  through  after  the  death  of  Domitian,  the  last  of
the  twelve  Cassars.  John  was  banished  to  the  isle  of
Patmos  under  the  reign  of  Domitian,  and  wrote  the
Revelation  just  before  the  death  of  that  cruel  tyrant.
Hence  the  predicted  series  of  events  commenced  almost
immediately  after  the  writing  of  the  book.

The  symbols  used  in  the  prophecy  are  represented  as
portrayed  on  a  scroll,  sealed  with  seven  seals,  and  were
gradually  and  successively  rendered  visible  by  the  break-
ing of  the  seals  and  the  unfolding  of  the  scroll.  The
events  which  these  symbols  denoted  are  the  following : —
1.  A   period    of  great  prosperity  (108)  in  which  the

Fall  of  the'  Roman  Empire'  had  no  belief  in  the  divine  origin
of  Christianity,  but  he  brought  to  the  performance  of  his  work
learning  and  talent  such  as  few  Christian  scholars  have  pos-
sessed. He  is  always  patient  in  his  investigations  ;  learned  and
scholar-like  in  his  references  ;  comprehensive  in  his  groupings,
and  sufficiently  minute  in  his  details ;  unbiassed  in  his  state-
ments of  facts,  and  usually  cool  and  candid  in  his  estimates  of
the  causes  of  the  events  which  he  records ;  and,  excepting  his
philosophical  speculations,  and  his  sneers  at  everything,  he  has
probably  written  the  most  candid  and  impartial  history  of  the
times  that  succeeded  the  introduction  of  Christianity  that  the
world  possesses,  and  even  after  all  that  has  been  written  since  his
time,  his  work  contains  the  best  ecclesiastical  history  that  is  to
be  found.  Whatever  use  of  it  can  be  made  in  explaining  and
confirming  the  prophecies,  will  be  regarded  by  the  world  as  im-
partial and  fair ;  for  it  was  a  result  which  he  least  of  all  con-
templated, that  he  would  ever  be  regarded  as  an  expounder  of
the  prophecies  in  the  Bible,  or  be  referred  to  as  vindicating  their
truth."


REVELATION     OF    JOHN.  131

empire  was  enlarged  by  conquest  to  the  greatest  extent
that  it  ever  attained,  and  enjoyed  a  sort  of  perpetual
triumph,  being  wisely  and  ably  ruled  by  the  good  em-
perors, Nerva,  Trajan,  Adrian,  and  the  Ante-nines  ;  A.  d.
96  to  180. l — 2.  A  time  in  which  prosperity  and  inter-
nal peace  were  banished  from  the  empire,  and  civil  wars
prevailed  with  murders  and  cruel  slaughters  (109).
This  change  began  with  the  accession  of  Commodus,3
A.  D.  180. — 3.  A  time  of  general  calamity  (110)  in
which  wheat  and  barley  were  sold  by  exact  weight,  at
several  times  their  usual  price ;  and  in  which  the  go-
vernment rigidly  and  oppressively  exacted  tribute  on
these  necessaries  of  life ;  and  by  imperial  edicts  with
severe  penalties  forbade  the  doing  of  anything  that
would  lessen  the  income  from  wine  and  oil  as  sources
of  revenue.3  The  severe  exactions  commenced  under
Caracalla,  who  reigned  from  A.  D.  211-217,  and,  after
some  abatement  under  Alexander  Severus,  were  again
revived,  and  under  Diocletian  and  Galerius  were  most
oppressive  and  ruinous. — 4.  A  time  of  great  mortality
from  wars,  pestilence,  famine,  and  wild  beasts  (111),
A.   D.   249,    and   onward.4 — 5.  The   persecution  under

1  Rev.  vi.  2.  2  Rev.  vi.  4.

3  Rev.  vi.  5,  6.

4  Rev.  vi.  8.  Respecting  events  1,  2,  3  and  4,  it  may  be  observed
that  the  first  only  has  a  distinct  period.  It  was  predicted  that  2
would  "  take  peace  from  the  earth,"  or,  as  it  should  be  rendered,
the  peace :  that  is,  it  would  terminate  the  peace  and  prosperity
which  prevailed  during  the  first  period.  The  calamitous  events
2,  3,  and  4  occurred  as  to  their  beginning  in  the  order  designated  ;
but  they  did  not  pass  away  to  give  place  to  the  next  in  succes-
sion. Thus  the  blood}'  civil  wars  of  No.  2  continued  during  the
oppressive  exactions  of  No.  3,  and  the  mortality  of  No.  4.  Be-
tween the  years  250  and  300  no  less  than  thirty  tyrants  usurped
the  throne,  and  were  proclaimed  in  different  parts  of  the  empire  ;

12


132  PROPHECY.

Diocletian- (112)  the  tenth,  last,  and  severest  that  the
Christians  suffered  from  pagan  Rome.  The  martyrs  are
encouraged  with  the  promise  of  divine  favor,  and  of  an
end  to  their  persecutions  ; x  A.  d.  302-313. — 6.  A  time
of  general  commotions  (113) ;  of  political  revolutions
in  which  civil  rulers  would  be  stripped  of  their  glory,
and  fall  from  their  high  places  of  power ; 2  and  also  a
time  of  great  consternation  from  a  dread  of  divine  judg-
ment.3 The  empire  passed  from  heathen  to  Christian
hands  under  Constantine  the  Great,  A.  D.  312.  Northern
hordes,  whose  invasions  of  Italy  filled  the  people  with
consternation,  hovered  about  the  borders  of  the  empire  ;
but  were  held  back  for  a  time,  like  a  rising  wind  or
tempest  held  in  suspense.4  The  suspension  of  this
dreaded  judgment  was  ordered  by  Providence  for  a
purpose  connected  with  the  interests  of  the  church.5
The  divine  judgment  by  ravaging  invasions,  literal
earthquakes,  and  wars,  produced  alarm  and  terror
as  if  the  world  were  coming  to  an  end.6  Though  de-
layed, they  may  be  regarded  as  vengeance  inflicted  for
the  persecution  of  Christians7 — "the  wrath  of  the
Lamb:"8  and  were  probably  so  regarded  by  many  on
whom  these  calamities  fell  with  crushing  weight.  Gale-
rius,  who  instigated  the  Diocletian  persecution,  was
driven  to  issue  the  edict  which  put  an  end  to  that  last

they  were  all  defeated,  and,  with  but  two  or  three  exceptions,
slain.  In  like  manner  the  oppressive  exactions  and  consequent
distress  which  belonged  to  No.  3,  continued  after  the  introduc-
tion of  No.  4,  and  were  never  greater  and  more  ruinous  to  the
empire  than  under  Diocletian  and  Galerius  in  the  time  of  No.  5.

1Rev.  vi.  9-11.  2Rev.  vi.  12,  13.

3  Rev.  vi.  14-17.  4  Rev.  vii.  1,  2.

5  Rev.  vii.  3.  6  Rev.  vi.  14.

7  Rev.  vi.  10.  *  Rev.  vi.  16.


REVELATION     OF     JOHN.  138

persecution  by  an  apprehension  that  a  disease  with
which  he  was  visited  was  a  judgment  inflicted  on  him
by  the  God  of  the  Christians. — 7.  The  catastrophe  of
this  series,  or  the  fall  of  the  judgments  which  had  been
suspended  during  the  time  of  No.  6.  As  these  judg-
ments fell  in  a  succession  of  calamitous  events,  they  are
represented  as  forming  a  new  series  into  which  No.  7  is
subdivided.

The  changes  which  we  have  considered  make  the  out-
line of  Roman  history  from  the  time  of  Domitian  to  the
year  400.  This  history  is  given  with  exactness  in  ex-
pressive symbols  ;  and  it  cannot  be  that  human  sagacity
made  the  prophetic  record.

Downfall  of  the  Empire.

Each  event  of  the  second  series  is  symbolically  intro-
duced by  the  blowing  of  a  trumpet.  They  are  in  order
as  follows  : — 1.  The  invasion  of  the  Goths  (114)  de-
solating the  country  with  fire  and  sword ;  A.  D.  410.1
— 2.  The  depredations  of  the  Vandals  (115).  This
tribe  passed  by  numerous  migrations  from  the  shores
of  the  Baltic  to  the  northern  coast  of  Africa,  where  they
established  themselves  as  a  formidable  maritime  power.
With  strength  and  impetuosity  not  unaptly  represented
by  the  symbol  of  a  volcanic  mountain  thrown  into  the
sea,  they  ravaged  the  Mediterranean,2  and  contributed
much  toward  the  downfall  of  the  Roman  empire ;  A.  D.
428-468. 3— 3.  The  invasion  by  Attila,  king  of  the
Huns  (116).     This  chieftain  resembled  a  meteor  in  bril-

1  Rev.  viii.  7.

2  As  if  Mount  Atlas,  from  which  their  ships  were  built,  had
come  down  on  fire  into  the  sea.

3  Rev.  viii.  8,  9.


134  PROPHECY.

liance,  and  in  the  superstitious  dread  with  which  he  was
regarded.  He  received  the  title  "  The  Scourge  of  God."
His  ravages  fell  chiefly  on  those  parts  of  Italy  in  which
the  rivers  have  their  source,  and  were  in  their  effects  a
"  bitter"  calamity.  The  blow  inflicted  on  the  empire,
is  to  be  attributed  to  the  chieftain  himself,  symbolized
as  a  star,  rather  than  to  his  people,1  A.  D.  447. — 4.  The
subjection  of  Italy  to  barbarian  rule  under  Odoacer,
king  of  the  Heruli  (117).  This  affected  the  supreme
power,  symbolized  by  the  sun,2  and  is  regarded  as  the
consummated  downfall  of  the  Western  Empire.  Yet  the
light  was  not  wholly  extinguished,  but  only  "  a  third
part"  of  it,  some  parts  of  the  old  constitution  were
retained  in  the  West,  and  the  Eastern  Empire  still
remained.

Here  a  pause  occurs  in  the  blowing  of  the  trumpets,
distinguishing  the  first  four  from  the  last  three.  The
first  four  are  grouped  together  as  of  like  kind :  and  so
the  four  events  to  which  they  refer  are  grouped  together
in  history,  as  the  blows  which  effected  the  downfall  of
the  Western  Empire.  The  occurrence  of  these  events
at  the  proper  place  in  chronology ;  their  precise  agree-
ment as  to  number  with  the  number  of  the  symbols  em-
ployed to  represent  them ;  and  the  appropriateness  of
the  symbols  ;  may  suffice  to  assure  us  that  we  have  given
the  right  interpretation  of  the  prophecy,  and  that  the
prophecy  proceeded  from  Divine  foreknowledge. — 5.
The  rise,  spread,  and  tormenting  power  of  the  Saracens
(118).  Their  leader  was  Mahomet,  a  chieftain  of  ex-
traordinary genius,  who  claimed  to  be  the  prophet  of
God.  He  is  symbolized  as  a  star  falling  from  heaven
to  earth.     He  obtained  followers  by  proselyting  them


Rev.  viii.  10,  11.  2  Rev.  viii.  12.


REVELATION    OF    JOHN.  135

to  his  false  doctrine  ;  and  hence  the  host  who  went  forth
under  his  authority  to  afflict  the  world,  originated,  ac-
cording to^  the  symbolical  representation,  in  a  sort  of
spontaneous  generation  out  of  smoke  which  issued  from
the  nether  world.  They  were  numerous  and  destructive
as  the  locusts  which  sometimes  desolate  eastern  nations.
But  they  differed  from  the  Goths,  and  most  other  war-
riors who  had  preceded  them,  as  scourges  of  mankind,
in  that  they  were  prohibited  from  destroying  the  pro-
ductions of  the  earth,  and  committing  indiscriminate
slaughter.  They  made  war  on  idolaters,  and  persons
who  refused  to  receive  their  religion,  and  submit  to  their
authority.  It  was  their  policy,  not  to  kill  men,  but  to
subdue  them  and  exact  tribute  from  them,  and  thus,  to
"hurt"  and  "torment"  them.  This  they  did  for  150
years  (five  prophetical  months).  After  this  they  changed
their  policy,  and  cultivated  learning  and  peaceful  arts.
In  the  prophetic  picture  of  these  warriors,  some  striking
peculiarities  in  their  external  appearance  seem  to  be
marked.  They  wore  yellow  turbans,  and  iron  cuirasses  ;
and  with  the  bearded  face  of  man,  had  the  long  hair  of
woman.1 — 6.  The  overthrow  of  the  Eastern  Empire
(119).  The  Turks  under  Togrul  their  chief  took
Bagdad,  A.  D.  1055,  and  soon  began  to  extend  their
conquests  west  of  the  Euphrates.  Though  Providence
had  prepared  this  powerful  horde  to  effect  the  overthrow
of  the  Eastern  Empire,  various  causes  combined  to  pro-
duce a  delay  of  the  catastrophe  until  A.  D.  1453.  Dr.
Barnes  computes  that  this  interval  of  delay  agrees  well
with  the  prophetic  time  mentioned  by  John,  "  an  hour,  a
day,  a  month,  and  a  year."  In  their  progress  westward
they  may  be  contemplated  as  emerging  from  the  waters  of

1  Rev.  ix.  1-11.
12*


136  PROPHEC  Y.

the  river,  arid  accordingly  the  four  bands  into  which
they  were  divided,  are  symbolically  represented  as  four
angels  loosed  from  their  confinement  in  the  river,  and
going  forth,  after  the  restraints  have  been  removed,  to
accomplish  the  service  to  which  they  had  been  appointed.
In  the  prophetic  vision  the  Turkish  army  by  which  Con-
stantinople was  taken,  is  brought  to  view ;  as  containing
myriads  of  horsemen,  and  dealing  destruction  from  their
ranks  as  if  from  the  mouths  of  their  horses,  by  fire-arms
and  gunpowder,  then  for  the  first  time  used  in  war.
The  symbols  employed  are  not  adapted  to  describe  any
army  that  had  ever  before  been  in  battle.  Some  striking
pecularities  in  the  external  appearance  of  the  host  seem
to  be  marked,  in  the  colors  attributed  to  their  military
dress,  namely,  scarlet,  blue,  and  yellow;  and  in  the
probable  reference  to  the  banner  under  which  they
fought,  which  consisted  of  horses'  tails,  acknowledged
emblems  of  the  authority  by  which  the  army  was  com-
manded.1

Prominent  in  the  history  of  the  times  are  the  two
events  which  we  have  referred  to  the  blowing  of  the
fifth  and  sixth  trumpets ;  and  their  agreement  with  the
prediction  is  so  exact  that  the  prophecy  must  have  pro-
ceeded from  divine  foreknowledge.

The  Reformation.

Six  trumpets  have  sounded,  and  six  judgments  have
fallen  on  the  Roman  empire  involving  it  in  ruins ;  but
the  woes  suffered  by  men  have  not  turned  them  away
from  their  sins.2  A  divine  interposition  of  another
kind  is  needed,  and  this  is  graciously  granted  in  the
Reformation,  which  commenced  sixty-four  years  after

1  Rev.  ix.  13-20.  2  Rev.  ix.  20,  21.


REVELATION     OF    JOHN.  187

the  taking  of  Constantinople.  This  event  is  symbolized
in  the  prophecy  by  the  descent  of  an  angel  from  heaven,
not  blowing  warlike  trumpets,  nor  pouring  out  vials  of
wrath,  but  having  a  rainbow  on  his  head,  the  token  of
peace  and  mercy.1  The  first  movements  in  the  Refor-
mation roused  public  attention,  and  drew  forth  thunder-
ing anathemas  from  the  city  of  the  seven  hills :  but  the
people  of  God  were  instructed  not  to  heed  them,  and
especially  not  to  regard  them  as  utterances  of  divine
authority.2  With  a  solemn  oath  the  angel  is  repre-
sented as  announcing  that  the  time  was  fully  come,  for
a  divine  work  which  would  be  finished  when  the  seventh
angel  should  sound.3

Martin  Luther,  by  a  providence  of  God,  which  was
to  him  like  the  visit  of  a  beneficent  angel,  found  in  his
monastery  a  Bible,  which  became  the  means  of  his  con-
version, and  the  cause  of  the  Reformation.  From  that
time  this  book  has  been  an  "  open"  volume,  and  the  know-
ledge of  it  has  been  diffusing  inestimable  blessings  among
the  nations  of  the  earth.  When  we  observe  that  the  gift
which  the  angel  in  the  symbolic  prophecy  brought  in
his  hand  from  heaven  was  an  open  book,4  we  need  not
be  at  a  loss  to  understand  what  that  book  was.  The
holy  volume  was  read  by  the  reformers  with  eagerness
and  pleasure,  and  was  as  honey  to  the  taste ;  but  the
consequences  were  "  bitter."5  The  free  use  of  the  Bible
restored  the  preaching  of  divine  truth  which  had  been
intermitted  during  long  ages  of  darkness.6  The  in-
crease of  religious  knowledge  at  the  time  of  the  Re-
formation  caused   careful   inquiry  respecting  the   true

1  Rev.  x.  1.  2  Rev.  x.  3,  4

3  Rev.  x.  5,  6.  4  Rev.  x.  2.

5  Rev.  x.  9.  6  Rev.  x.  11.


138  PROPHECY.

church,  the  doctrines  of  propitiatory  sacrifice,  including
that  of  justification,  and  the  distinguishing  character  of
accepted  worshippers.1  The  inquiry  disclosed  the  fact
that  what  had  long  been  regarded  as  the  Holy  Catholic
Church  was  merely  the  outer  court,  trodden  under  foot
by  those  who  were  not  the  true  Israel  of  God.2  The
time  during  which  this  desecration  of  the  holy  place
should  continue  is  stated  to  be  forty-two  prophetic
months,  or  1260  years.  During  this  period  of  papal
ascendancy,  it  was  foretold  that  God  would  have  a
small  but  competent  number  of  witnesses  who  would
stand  up  for  the  truth,  and  denounce  the  judgments  of
God  against  the  crimes  of  men;3  and  that  the  papal
power  would  make  war  against  them  at  a  time  when
they  had  fully,  though  not  finally,  borne  their  testimony
in  circumstances  of  severe  trial;4  and  that  the  perse-
cuting power  would  succeed  in  effectually  silencing  their
testimony  for  the  space  of  three  and  one-half  prophetic
days.5  The  crusade  against  the  Waldenses  fulfilled  this
prediction  ;  and  on  May  5th,  1514,  it  was  proclaimed
in  the  Lateran  Council  that  heresy  had  been  completely
exterminated.  This  triumph  of  the  papacy  lasted  three
and  one-half  years,  until  Luther  posted  up  his  theses  at
Wittemberg  on  October  31st,  1517.  From  that  time
the  testimony  of  the  witnesses  was  renewed,  and  became
triumphant;6  and  a  commotion  among  the  nations  sub-
ject to  the  papacy  followed,  with  a  falling  away  of  part
from  the  papal  dominion.7  This  interesting  portion  of
Revelation  exhibits,  in  a  beautiful  picture,  which  must

1  Rev.  xi.  1.  2  Rev.  xi.  2.

3  Rev.  xi.  3-6.  4  Rev.  xi.  7.

5  Rev.  xi.  8,  9.  6  Rev.  xi.  11,  12.
7  Rev.  xi.  13.


REVELATION     OF     JOHN.  139

have  been  drawn  by  divine  prescience,  the  principal  facts
connected  with  the  Reformation.

The  Reformation  was,  in  its  design  and  effect,  inti-
mately connected  with  the  final  establishment  of  God's
kingdom  on  the  earth,  and  was  therefore  the  beginning
of  that  gracious  work  which  is  yet  to  be  completed.
The  first  four  trumpets  brought  the  Western  Empire  to
a  close ;  and  the  fifth  and  sixth  in  like  manner  termi-
nated the  Eastern  Empire.  But  while  the  Eastern  Em-
pire was  coming  to  its  end,  a  new  power  which  has
continued  to  the  present  century  arose  in  the  West,  and
prolonged  the  duration  of  the  Roman  Empire  under  a
new  form.  This  new  power,  like  the  forms  of  empire
which  preceded  it,  must  pass  away  before  all  has  been
accomplished  that  is  to  follow  the  sounding  of  the
seventh  trumpet,  which  will  bring  the  kingdoms  of  the
world  into  complete  subjection  to  God  and  his  Christ.
This  consummation  will  fulfil  all  that  is  predicted  in  the
symbolical  representations  which  have  thus  far  been
considered.  The  prophecy  now  turns  back  to  take  a
more  particular  view  of  the  papal  power.

The  Papal  Power.

What  follows  under  this  head  may  be  considered  a
continuation  of  Section  VI.

Preparatory  to  a  representation  of  the  Papal  Power,
the  church  is  brought  to  view  as  about  to  have  increase
which  would  rule  all  nations  by  establishing  in  the  earth
a  strong  and  durable  kingdom  of  truth  and  righteous-
ness.1 Satan,  unwilling  to  lose  his  dominion  over  the
world,  sought  to  prevent  the  enlargement  and  dominion
of  the  church  by  devouring  its  increase.2     But  in  this

1  Rev.  xii.  1,  2,  5.  2  Rev.  xii.  3,  4.


140  PROPHECY.

he  was  defeated.  The  increase1  of  the  church  was
taken  under  the  special  guardianship  of  Heaven ;  and
therefore  its  ultimate  rule  over  the  world  has  been
secured.2  The  form  under  which  Satan  is  represented
in  this  malicious  attempt  is  that  of  a  great  red  dragon,
having  seven  heads  and  ten  horns.  We  learn  else-
where,3 that  these  symbols  refer  to  Rome,  the  city  of
the  seven  hills,  and  to  the  power  of  ten  kingdoms  which
Rome  wielded.  In  this  case  the  seven  heads  are  repre-
sented as  wearing  seven  crowns  ;  and  therefore  the  per-
secutions of  imperial  or  pagan  Rome  are  here  intended.

When  the  Roman  empire  passed  from  pagan  to
Christian  hands,  Satan,  as  represented  in  the  symbol,
was  cast  down  from  heaven.4  Being  no  longer  able  to
use  the  supreme  power  of  the  Empire  to  prevent  the
enlargement  and  dominion  of  the  church,  he  aimed  to
engulf  the  whole  church  itself  in  an  inundation  of
worldliness.5  From  this  danger  the  true  people  of  God
escaped  by  retiring  into  obscurity;  and  the  earth
afforded  help  by  furnishing  places  of  retreat  in  which
they  could  live  separate  from  the  world,  and  beyond  the
reach  of  its  pernicious  influence.6

The  attempt  of  Satan  to  inundate  the  church  with
worldliness  was  successful  so  far  as  concerned  the  mass

1  Or  the  prophecy  may  be  interpreted  to  refer  specially  to  the
person  of  Constantine.  The  -woman's  ''travailing  in  birth"'
may  denote  an  agonizing  prayer  of  the  persecuted  church  that
some  one  should  arise  in  their  ranks  who  would  have  power  to
stop  their  cruel  persecution.  This  prayer  was  answered  when
Constantine  appeared  among  the  followers  of  Christ  5  and  his
being  "caught  up  unto  God  and  to  his  throne"  may  denote  his
elevation  to  the  imperial  throne.

2  Rev.  xii.  5.  3  Rev.  xvii.  9-18.
4  Rev.  xii.  9-11.  5  Rev.  xii.  13-15.
6  Rev.  xii.  14-16.


REVELATION     OF    JOHN.  141

of  professing  Christians,  usually  called  the  Visible
Church.

When  profession,  instead  of  exposing  to  persecution,
tended  to  procure  imperial  favor,  multitudes  assumed
the  Christian  name  who  were  destitute  of  the  Christian
spirit.  Unholy  men  filled  the  churches,  and  unholy
pastors  or  bishops,  soon  began  to  exercise  an  authority
which  Christ  never  conferred  on  his  true  ministers.
This  evil  increased,  till  at  length  the  bishop  of  Rome
claimed  to  be  the  supreme  head  of  the  church,  and  ex-
ercised civil  as  well  as  ecclesiastical  jurisdiction.

Satan  accomplished  much  by  the  diffusion  of  worldli-
ness  and  false  doctrines  among  the  professed  followers
of  Christ :  but  this  bloodless  method  of  assailing  the
church  did  not  satisfy  his  cruel  malignity.  He  soon
made  papal  Rome  as  zealous  to  shed  Christian  blood,  as
pagan  Rome  had  ever  been,  fulfilling  the  predictions,
"  The  dragon  was  wroth  with  the  woman,  and  went  to
make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed;"1  and,  "In
her  [Babylon]  was  found  the  blood  of  prophets,  and  of
saints,  and  of  all  that  were  slain  upon  the  earth."2

By  the  elevation  of  the  Pope  a  new  power  arose  in
Rome,  which  re-established  the  ancient  empire  in  a  new
form.  The  Empire  had  received  a  deadly  wound  from
the  sword  of  barbarian  invaders,  A.  d.  476.  But  the
deadly  wound  was  afterwards  healed  by  the  power  which
the  Roman  bishop  had  acquired.3

The  four  great  empires  of  the  world  are  all  symbolized
in  the  prophecy  of  Daniel  by  beasts,  and  after  a  like
mode  of  representation,  the  Roman  empire  is  symbolized
in   the  book   of  Revelation   by  a  beast  having   seven


1  Rev.  xii.  17.  2  Rev.  xviii.  24.

3  Rev.  xiii.  3-15.


142  PROPHECY.

heads  and  ten  horns.  While  pagan  rule  continued,  the
beast  was  represented  as  a  dragon,1  by  interpretation
the  devil,2  as  if  Satan,  the  god  of  idolatry,  had  then
ruled  in  person.  In  the  subsequent  administration  of
the  empire,  the  beast  undergoes  a  change,  but  still
retains  the  seven  heads  and  ten  horns.  The  seven  heads
refer  to  the  seven  hills  on  which  Rome  was  built ;  and
therefore  determine  that  in  all  the  changes  of  power,
its  centre  of  influence  was  Rome.  The  ten  horns  de-
note (105)  the  number  of  kingdoms  included  in  the
extent  of  the  empire,  comprehending  in  round  numbers
ten  kingdoms,  though  their  separate  existence  as  king-
doms was  at  first  merely  prospective ;  for  it  is  said  of
them,  that  they  "  have  received  no  kingdom  as  yet ;  but
receive  power  as  kings  one  hour  with  the  beast."3  To
represent  the  ecclesiastical  or  spiritual  power  of  Rome
another  beast  is  introduced  :  and  the  relations  between
the  two  beasts,  as  described  in  what  is  said  of  their  co-
operation and  mutual  dependence,  symbolizes  the  rela-
tion between  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  power  of  Rome.4
The  bishop  of  Rome  has  directly  exercised  civil  autho-
rity over  a  part  of  Italy,  since  the  eighth  century,  in
which  he  obtained  dominion  over  the  exarchate  of
Ravenna,  the  kingdom  of  Lombardy,  and  the  state  of
Rome  ;  and  assumed  in  consequence  the  triple  crown.
His  indirect  power  over  the  whole  empire  was  fully  es-
tablished, when  at  the  close  of  the  same  century  he  con-
ferred imperial  authority  on  Charlemagne  (120).  At
that  time,  and  for  centuries  following,  he  was  considered
God's  vicegerent  on  earth,  possessing  a  divine  right  to
appoint  or  depose  kings,  and  to  absolve  subjects  from


1  Rev.  xii.  3.  2  Rev.  xii.  9.

*  Rev.  xvii.   12.  4  Rev.  xiii.  11-18.


REVELATION     OF     JOHN.  143

allegiance  to  rulers  who  had  fallen  under  his  dis-
pleasure.

The  secular  power  of  the  pope  was  a  continuation  of
that  which  had  been  exercised  by  the  Roman  emperors,
and  is  properly  represented  by  the  beast  with  seven
heads  and  ten  horns.  This  power  would  have  become
extinct,  if  the  spiritual  power  of  the  papacy  had  not
arisen,  which,  because  distinct  in  origin  and  kind,  is  re-
presented by  a  separate  beast.  The  spiritual  power,
which  was  exercised  over  the  minds  of  men,  and  was
gained  in  part  by  pretended  miracles,1  secured  homage
to  the  secular  power,  and  ultimately  to  that  "  image"
of  it 2  which  was  formed  in  the  person  of  Charlemagne.

The  power  of  the  pope  has  been  declining  ever  since
the  Reformation.  The  monarchs  of  Europe  now  feel
little  obligation  to  him  for  their  authority,  and  little
dread  of  losing  it  by  his  anathema.  At  this  moment
Victor  Emanuel,  a  man  whom  he  has  excommunicated,
is  the  acknowledged  king  of  Italy,  and  into  his  kingdom
those  states  seem  destined  to  become  incorporated  over
which  the  pope  now  exercises  civil  jurisdiction.

In  predicting  the  downfall  of  the  papal  power,  the
prophecy  includes  that  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,
which  it  represents  as  a  woman  sitting  on  the  seven-
headed  beast.3  The  true  church  is  represented  in  its
final  triumph,  as  the  bride,  the  Lamb's  wife;4  and,  in
its  afflicted  and  persecuted  state,  as  a  woman  driven
into  the  wilderness.5  The  symbol  of  a  woman  is  in  like
manner  employed  to  denote  the  corrupt  and  antichris-
tian   church :  but  she  bears  the   character,  and  wears

1  Rev.  xiii.  13   14.  2  Rev.  xiii.  14.

3  Rev.  xvii.  3.  4  Rev.  xxi.  9.

5  Rev.  xii.  6.

13  K


144  PROPHECY.

the  dress  of  a  harlot.1  So  many  particulars  of  the
symbol  agree  with  the  known  character  and  history  of
the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  that  there  is  no  difficulty
in  determining  the  design  of  the  symbol.  But  if  there
were,  it  would  be  removed  by  the  explanation  which  the
Holy  Spirit  has  given,  and  which  amounts  almost  to  a
literal  and  express  declaration  of  the  design.  When  it
is  said,  "  the  woman  which  thou  sawest  is  that  great  cit}
which  reigneth  over  the  kings  of  the  earth,"2  no  other
than  Home  can  be  intended.  Babylon  was  the  seat  of
the  first  great  empire  in  the  world ;  and  Rome,  as  the
capital  of  the  fourth  empire,  took  the  place  of  Babylon,
and  was  not  without  reason  called  in  the  prophecy  by
the  name  of  Babylon.3  But  it  is  manifest  that  the
ancient  city  on  the  Euphrates  cannot  be  literally  in-
tended ;  for  this  had  long  ceased  to  reign  over  the
nations  when  John  wrote.  Farther,  the  mention  of  the
"seven  mountains  on  which  the  woman  sitteth"4  con-
firms the  application  to  Rome,  which  was  built  on  seven
hills.  Also  the  forms  of  government  administered  at
Rome  are  accurately  enumerated.5  Five  of  these,  kings,
consuls,  dictators,  decemvirs,  and  military  tribunes,  had
preceded  the  time  when  John  wrote.  The  sixth,  the
imperial,  was  then  in  existence,  but  John  predicted  that
it  would  not  continue.  A  deadly  wound  was  inflicted
in  the  conquest  of  Rome  by  Odoacer,  who  became  king
of  Italy,  and  removed  the  seat  of  government  to  Ra-
venna. During  the  greater  part  of  the  time  until  the
dominion  of  the  pope  was  established  in  Rome,  the  city
was  governed  by  a  duke,  dependent  on  the  exarch  of

1  Rev.  xvii.  4.  2  Rev.  xvii.  18.

3  Rev.  xvii.  5.  i  Rev.  xvii.  9.

5  Rev.  xvii.  10.


REVELATION     OF    JOHN.  145

Ravenna ;  and  to  this  period  the  words  of  the  prophecy
apply,  "  the  beast  that  was,  and  is  not." 1  If  the  feeble
and  dependent  dukedom  be  numbered,  the  papacy  which
followed  will  be  the  eighth  form  of  government ;  but
the  dukedom  is  not  numbered  as  a  head  of  the  beast.
The  prophecy  marked  the  distinction,  and  history  has
confirmed  its  accuracy.  We  may  notice  moreover  that
the  exposition  of  the  ten  horns  agrees  with  the  suppo-
sition that  Rome  was  intended.  Of  the  four  empires
described  in  Daniel's  prophecy,  the  only  one  divided
into  ten  parts  was  the  fourth,  or  Roman.2  Yet  this
division  had  not  taken  place  when  John  wrote,  and
therefore  he  calls  them  "  Kings,"  which  have  received
no  kingdom  as  yet.3  The  proof  that  Rome  was  intended
would  scarcely  have  been  greater,  if  the  city  had  been
expressly  named.

The  propriety  of  representing  the  Roman  Catholic
Church  as  sustained  by  the  papal  power,  cannot  be
questioned.  Catholics  themselves  maintain  that  the
church  was  built  on  Peter,  and  that  the  pope  is  Peter's
successor.

The  fornication  with  which  the  woman  is  charged,  is
said  to  have  been  committed  with  her  by  the  kings  of
the  earth.4  This  manifestly  alludes  to  that  prostitution
of  things  sacred  and  spiritual,  which  the  papal  church
has  made  to  sustain  the  power  of  kings,  and  which  kings
have  repaid  by  conferring  honor  and  wealth  on  the
clergy,  and  especially  on  the  pope.

In  many  passages  to  which  reference  has  been  made
in  this  section  and  section  6,  Daniel,  Paul,  and  John
have  predicted  the  rise  of  the  papal  power,  the  charac-

1  Rev.  xvii.  11.

3  Rev.  xvii.  12.  *  Rev.  xvii.  2.


146  PROPHECY.

ter  which  it  would  assume,  and  the  acts  which  it  wouh
perform.     A  study  of  these  predictions,  and  a  carefi.
comparison  of  them  with  the  events  foretold,  will  leav
no  reasonable  doubt  that  these  men  were  taught  of  Go
to  write  the  prophecies  which  they  have  left  on  record.
A  remarkable  period  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  th
prophecies  designated  as   "a  time,  times,   and   half  u
time,"  or  three  years  and  a  half,  or  42  months,  or  126
days.     During  this  period,  which  is  understood  to  be
1260  years,  the  papal  power  was  to  continue,  and  God',
witnesses  were  to  prophesy  in  sackcloth.     This  perioo
has  not  yet  terminated ;  for  the  papal  power  still  con-
tinues, and  still  obstructs  the  preaching  of  the  gospel
but  the  manifest  decline  of  this  power  gives  promis
that  the  prediction  of  its  utter  overthrow  will  in  du*
time  be  fulfilled.     As  the  rise  was  gradual,  so  is  th*
downfall.     A  step  was  made  in  the  pope's  advancemen
in  533,  when  the  Emperor  Justinian  appealed  to  him  a
the   highest   ecclesiastical   authority ;    and  a  step   wa
made  in  his  decline  1260  years  after  at  the  commence-
ment of  the  French  revolution,  in  the  progress  of  whicl
he  was  dethroned  and  imprisoned.     Another  step  in  hi*
rise  was  made  in  the  year  606,  when  he  was  declarer
universal  bishop  by  the  Emperor  Phocas ;  and  a  period
of  1260  years  after  this  date  reaches  to  the  present  time,
when  his  throne  is  undermined  by  popular  revolution.
But  the  papal  power  was  not  fully  developed  until  if
assumed  the  triple  crown ;  and  we  must  therefore  wait
patiently  until  the  fulness  of  time  shall  come  for  it&
complete  overthrow.

Passing  and  Future  Events.
Much  that  is  predicted  in   the   book  of  Revelatioi
remains    yet    to    be   accomplished.       From    unfulfilled


REVELATION     OF     JOHN.  147

prophecy  no  direct  argument  can  be  drawn  that  the
prophecies  proceeded  from  divine  foreknowledge.

But  when  a  part  of  the  prophecy  has  been  fulfilled,
and  when  the  remaining  part  opens  to  view  a  grand
consummation  to  which  all  the  fulfilled  part  is  tributary,
the  harmony  and  completeness  of  the  entire  system  give
assurance  that  it  was  arranged  in  wisdom,  and  that  the
foreknowledge  which  past  events  have  already  demon-
strated, comprehended  the  end  from  the  beginning,  and
bore  like  relation  to  the  whole.  Such  is  the  system  of
prophecy  contained  in  the  book  of  Revelation.  The
final  triumph  of  the  Redeemer,  the  complete  establish-
ment of  his  kingdom,  is  an  end  worthy  of  God,  worthy
of  that  overruling  Providence  by  which  all  the  events
predicted  in  the  book  are  directed  to  the  accomplish-
ment of  this  glorious  consummation.

When  prophecy  is  fulfilled  by  events  which  are  now
passing  under  our  eyes,  the  proof  that  it  proceeded  from
divine  foreknowledge  is  in  the  highest  degree  impressive
and  satisfactory,  if  we  are  assured  that  the  events  which
we  observe  are  the  things  predicted ;  but  on  this  point
there  is  danger  of  mistake.  Passing  events  have  to  our
view  a  magnitude  greater  than  they  really  possess,  and
we  are  prone  to  seek  a  place  for  them  in  prophecy,  when
perhaps  the  prophecy  entirely  overlooked  them.  It  is
otherwise  with  respect  to  past  events  which  hay,e  taken
their  proper  place  in  history,  and  appear  to  the  historian
in  retrospect,  as  they  did  to  the  prophet  in  prospect,  all
in  their  fixed  order,  and  each  with  its  proper  degree  of
prominence.  So  the  historian  marks  the  prominent
changes  in  the  Roman  empire,  precisely  as  they  ap-
peared to  John  in  the  opening  of  the  seven  seals ;  and
the  succession  of  blows  which  caused  the  downfall  of  the
empire,  precisely  as  they  were  seen  by  John  in  the
13*


1 18  PROPHECY.

sounding  of  the  seven  trumpets.  The  agreement  is  so
complete  in  both  series,  as  respects  each  event  in  itself
and  as  respects  the  order  of  the  whole,  that  infidelity
must  close  its  eyes  or  become  convinced  that  what  the
historian  has  recorded  is  precisely  what  the  prophet
foresaw.

As  the  period  which  followed  the  opening  of  the
seventh  seal  was  subdivided  into  a  new  series  marked
by  the  sounding  of  seven  trumpets  ;  so  the  period  which
follows  the  sounding  of  the  seventh  trumpet,  is  sub-
divided into  a  new  series,  marked  by  the  pouring  out
of  seven  vials.  These  vials  denote  the  judgments  which
are  now  causing  the  downfall  of  the  papal  power ;  and
consequently  the  period  of  their  being  poured  out  in-
cludes the  time  in  which  we  live.  Though  we  have  less
advantage  for  interpreting  and  applying  the  prophecy
than  will  be  possessed  by  future  generations,  there  are
many  points  which  may  be  determined  with  a  good  de-
gree of  certainty.

The  Reformation  predicted  in  the  10th  chapter,  pre-
pared the  way  for  the  sounding  of  the  seventh  trumpet
which  was  to  complete  the  downfall  of  Roman  power ;
and  an  angel  having  the  everlasting  gospel  to  preach  is
described  in  the  14th  chapter,  as  preceding  the  angel
that  announces  the  fall  of  Babylon.1  There  can  be  no
doubt  that  the  increase  of  spiritual  knowledge  is  an
effectual  means  of  correcting  and  exploding  papal  errors,
and  overthrowing  papal  power  ;  and  there  is  strong  pro-
bability that  the  flight  of  the  angel  having  the  everlast-
ing gospel  to  preach,  denotes  the  extraordinary  effort
which  commenced  just  before  the  close  of  the  last  cen-
tury for  spreading  the  gospel,  by  foreign  and  domestic

1  Rev.  xiv.  6-S.


REVELATION     0  1'     JOHN.  141)

missions,  Bible  societies,  Sunday  schools,  &c.  But  the
means  denoted  by  the  outpouring  of  the  vials,  are  of
very  different  character,  since  what  is  poured  from  the
vials  is  called  "  the  wrath  of  God."1

The  places  in  which  the  seven  vials  are  poured  are  the
same  as  those  which  were  affected  by  the  sounding  of
the  trumpets :  and  are  mentioned  in  the  same  order.
This  fact  suggests  that  the  order  of  succession  in  the
pouring  out  of  the  vials  may  possibly  have  been  deter-
mined by  geography,  rather  than  by  the  chronology  of
events  preindicated.  But,  in  the  scheme  of  interpret-
ation which  will  be  proposed  in  the  next  paragraph,  the
order  of  succession  in  the  divine  judgments  which  are
supposed  to  be  preindicated  will  be  found  to  correspond
in  the  main  with  that  of  the  vials,  especially  if  the  be-
ginnings of  the  several  judgments  are  regarded.  In
the  changes  of  the  Roman  Empire  which  followed  the
opening  of  the  seven  seals,  the  preceding  event  did  not
always  give  way  to  its  successor,  but  remained  and  co-
operated with  it ;  so,  according  to  our  scheme  of  inter-
pretation, one  vial  of  wrath  poured  out  continues  its
destroying  influence  after  the  next  has  followed.

The  events  which  we  suppose  to  be  intended  by  the
outpouring  of  the  seven  vials  are  the  following : — 1.
The  general  prevalence  of  infidelity  and  corrupt  morals 2
exhibited  especially  in  the  French  Revolution,  which
occurred  almost  simultaneously  with  the  rise  of  modern
missions.  The  prevalence  of  infidelity  tended  greatly
to  weaken  the  power  of  popery.  2.  The  naval  battles
which  immediately  followed  the  French  Revolution,  and
destroyed  the  fleets  of  the  nations  that  upheld  the
papacy.3     3.  The  invasion  of  northern  Italy  by  Napo-

1  Rev.  xv.  1.  2  Rev.  xvi.  2.  3  Rev.  xvi.  3.


150  PROPHECY.

leon  Bonaparte.1  4.  The  wars  which  succeeded  in
Europe,  and  kept  it  as  if  in  a  continual  blaze.2  5.  The
dethronement  and  imprisonment  of  Pius  VI.  in  1798 ;
and  the  dethronement  of  Pius  IX.  in  1848,  with  his
subsequent  afflictions.3  6.  The  gradual  wasting  of  the
Turkish  power,4  which  is  fitly  represented  by  the  drying
up  of  a  river,  and  especially  of  the  river  Euphrates,
from  which  it  arose,5  and  to  which  it  extends.  7.  The
seventh  vial  has  not  yet  been  poured  out,  and  the  pre-
ceding six  have  not  yet  completed  their  effect.

Without  undue  confidence  in  the  application  of  pro-
phecy to  recent  and  passing  events,  we  see  in  the  pre-
sent condition  of  the  world  evident  indication  that  the
papal  and  Mahometan  powers  are  near  their  end.  Their
destruction  will  fulfil  prophecy,  and  remove  powerful
obstacles  to  the  spread  of  Christianity.  In  this  general
view  of  passing  events,  whatever  may  be  said  of  minute
details,  the  events  fulfil  the  prophecy,  and  prove  that
it  was  given  by  the  omniscient  God.

No  religion  except  that  of  the  Bible  has  ever  risked
its  reputation  and  success  on  the  prediction  of  future
events.  But  the  Bible  contains  a  system  of  predictions
so  extensive,  and  at  the  same  time,  in  many  of  its  parts-,
so  minute,  that  it  may  be  considered  a  forewritten  his-
tory of  the  world ;  and  the  evidence  which  it  affords
that  God  must  have  been  the  author  of  the  Bible  is
truly  overwhelming.

Section   IX.     Date  of  the  Prophecies.

In  a  few  cases  infidels  have  attempted  to  impugn  the
evidence   from    the  prophecies,  by   alleging  that  they

1  Rev.  xvi.  4-7.  2  Rev.  xvi.  8,  9.

3  Rov.  xvi.  10,  11.  4  Rev.  xvi.  12-16.

5  Rev.  ix.  14.


DATE     OF     THE     PROPHECIES.  151

were  written  after  the  events  which  they  describe.  This
method  was  adopted  as  early  as  the  third  century  by
Porphyry  (57  a),  who  in  opposition  to  historical  proof
maintained  that  Daniel's  prophecy  concerning  the  four
great  empires  of  the  world  was  written  in  the  time  of
Antiochus  Epiphanes,  and  that  as  far  down  as  that  time
it  was  history  instead  of  prophecy.  In  this  unfounded
hypothesis  he  has  admitted  the  exact  fulfilment  of  the
prophecy  down  to  the  time  of  Antiochus,  and  reduced
the  question  between  himself  and  Christians  to  one  of
simple  history,  in  which  his  opponents  had  well-estab-
lished truth  to  oppose  to  his  conjecture.  But  Porphyry,
even  if  we  allow  him  his  conjecture,  is  a  valuable  wit-
ness in  our  favor.  He  gives  proof  that  the  prophecy
in  question  was  certainly  extant  in  his  day ;  and  more,
that  it  was  extant  in  the  days  of  Antiochus  Epiphanes ;
since  so  acute  and  learned  an  opponent  of  Christianity
would  not  have  assigned  so  early  a  date  to  the  prediction
if  he  could  have  found  a  plausible  pretext  for  attribut-
ing to  it  a  later  origin.  Now,  a  large  part  of  Daniel's
prophecy  has  been  fulfilled  since  the  days  of  Antiochus.
It  was  not  until  about  two  hundred  years  after  that  the
death  of  Christ  occurred,  an  event  which  Daniel  pre-
dicted with  a  definite  computation  of  the  time  when  it
was  to  take  place.  In  the  time  of  Antiochus  the  Roman
dominion  had  not  attained  sufficient  extent  to  be  con-
sidered an  empire  of  the  world ;  and  yet  Daniel's  pro-
phecy describes  it  as  the  fourth  great  empire,  more  pow-
erful than  those  which  had  preceded  it.  The  division
of  the  empire  into  ten  kingdoms,  and  the  rise  of  the
papal  power,  events  predicted  by  Daniel,  have  occurred
not  only  since  the  time  of  Antiochus,  but  also  since  the
time  of  Porphyry.

Some  modern  infidels,  in  imitation  of  Porphyry,  have


152  Prophecy.

assumed  that  Isaiah's  prediction  concerning  the  capture
of  Babylon  by  Cyrus  was  written  after  the  event.  In
this  they,  like  Porphyry,  admit  the  exactness  with
which  the  prophecy  was  fulfilled,  and  oppose  mere  con-
jecture to  the  truthful  testimony  of  history.  In  this
case  also,  unfortunately  for  the  conjecture,  the  prophecy
extends  down  to  modern  times.  It  describes  not  only
the  capture  of  Babylon,  but  also  its  utter  desolation,  an
event  which  did  not  occur  until  some  centuries  after
Christ.  Yet,  if  anything  in  history  is  true,  it  is  certain
that  the  book  of  Isaiah  formed  a  part  of  the  Hebrew
Bible  in  the  time  of  Christ.

Many  of  the  predictions  examined  in  the  preceding
sections  of  this  chapter  are  at  the  present  time  in
progress  of  fulfilment.  Respecting  the  date  of  these
there  is  no  need  for  appeal  to  history :  and  these  alone,
if  all  others  were  set  aside,  furnish  sufficient  proof  that
the  Scriptures  contain  revelations  which  have  proceeded
from  divine  foreknowledge.  But  the  dates  of  the  other
prophecies  are  as  well  ascertained  as  the  general  facts
of  ancient  history,  and  are  true  beyond  all  rational
doubt.  The  whole  taken  together  forms  an  immense
mass  of  evidence,  establishing  conclusively  the  divine
origin  of  the  Bible.


CHAPTER  VII.
MIRACLES.


Section  I.     Credibility  of  Miracles.

GOD  HAS  POWER  TO  WORK  MIRACLES  ;  AND,  ON  SUFFI-
CIENT TESTIMONY  THAT  HE  HAS  WROUGHT  A  MIRACLE,
THE  FACT  OUGHT  TO  BE  BELIEVED.

I.   God  has  power  to  work  miracles.

A  miracle  has  been  defined  to  be  a  suspension  of  the
laws  of  nature.  A  universal  suspension  is  manifestly
not  intended  in  this  definition  ;  but  such  a  suspension
only  as  relates  to  the  particular  event.  According  to
the  course  of  nature,  a  dead  man  remains  dead,  and  his
body  gradually  becomes  decomposed.  The  laws  of
nature  which  determine  these  sequences  become  sus-
pended or  inoperative  if  the  dead  man  is  restored  to
life ;  and  the  restoration  is  therefore  a  miraculous  event.
A  miracle  exists  whenever  the  laws  of  nature  become
inoperative,  that  is,  whenever  a  sequence  occurs  which
they  do  not  determine.

To  judge  infallibly  whether  an  event  is  miraculous,
we  must  know  all  the  laws  of  nature  that  can  affect  the
case.  If,  at  the  command  of  some  prophet,  a  ball  of
metal  should  remain  suspended  in  the  atmosphere,  or  an
axe  should  swim  on  the  surface  of  the  water,  the  pheno-
menon would  be  miraculous,  because  it  would  not  be  the
sequence  that  nature's  laws  would  determine ;  but  it  is

(153)


154  MIRACLES.

not  a  miracle  when  a  needle  is  suspended  in  the  air  by
the  attraction  of  a  magnet.  In  the  latter  case  the  law
of  gravitation  is  counteracted  and  controlled  as  truly
and  effectually  as  in  the  former ;  but  the  laws  of  nature
are  not  suspended,  for  the  counteracting  and  controlling
cause  is  natural,  and  operates  in  obedience  to  the  laws
of  nature.  A  person  ignorant  of  magnetic  power  may
be  deceived  into  the  belief  that  a  needle  held  up  by  a
magnet  is  suspended  by  supernatural  influence ;  but
what  at  first  seemed  to  him  supernatural,  appears  natural
as  soon  as  he  has  learned  the  true  limits  of  nature's  power.
The  notions  of  time  and  space  are  not  more  familiar  to
the  minds  of  men  than  the  notions  of  cause  and  effect.
In  the  phenomena  of  the  universe,  innumerable  orders
of  sequences  are  observable,  in  which  the  events  stand
to  each  other  in  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect ;  and
ordinary  men  take  sufficient  cognisance  of  these  se-
quences to  serve  them  for  most  purposes  of  practical
utility.  Philosophers  make  more  extended  researches,
and  discover  orders  of  sequence,  or  laws  of  nature,
which  are  unknown  to  ordinary  men ;  and  they  are  there-
fore better  able  to  judge  in  some  cases  whether  events
are  natural  or  miraculous.

But  philosophers  arrogate  too  much  to  their  science
if  they  claim  either  that  it  has  discovered,  or  that  it  is
able  to  discover  laws  which  determine  the  occurrence
of  all  possible  events.  To  illustrate  this  point,  let  us
imagine  some  philosopher  wholly  ignorant  of  animated
nature,  but  perfectly  skilled  in  the  laws  which  govern
the  material  universe,  and  let  us  introduce  him  to  a  view
of  muscular  motion,  and  call  on  him  to  explain  it.  All
his  knowledge  of  impulse,  attraction,  and  the  modes  in
which  material  bodies  act  and  react  on  each  other,  fails
to  explain  the  phenomena  which  he  beholds.     He  finds


CREDIBILITY     OF     MIRACLES.  155

laws  of  nature  which  he  knows,  controlled  and  sus-
pended by  an  agency  which  he  knows  not.  A  limb  at
rest  does  not  continue  at  rest,  and  a  limb  in  motion  does
not  continue  to  move,  as  his  philosophy  teaches  him  to
expect ;  and  the  whole  body  springs  from  the  ground,
as  if  the  law  of  gravitation  were  for  the  time  repealed.
All  these  phenomena  are  supernatural  to  our  philoso-
pher until  he  has  enlarged  the  boundaries  of  his  know-
ledge, and  explored  a  department  of  nature  in  which
matter  is  operated  on  by  mind.  When  he  has  entered
into  this  department,  how  shall  he  know  its  boundaries  ?
When  brute  minds  operate  on  brute  limbs,  the  operation
is  natural,  and  conforms  to  laws  of  nature.  So  it  is
when  human  minds  operate  on  human  limbs,  or  by
means  of  them  on  material  objects,  or  on  the  bodies
and  minds  of  other  men.  But  how  shall  it  be  deter-
mined that  nature's  realms  extend  no  further,  and  that
she  has  no  laws  which  govern  beyond  these  boundaries  ?
Has  nature  nothing  to  do  with  angelic  agency,  nothing
to  do  with  the  agency  of  God  ?  The  agency  of  God  in
all  the  ordinary  operations  of  his  Providence  we  account
natural ;  and,  if  we  could  comprehend  his  Providence  in
all  his  dispensations,  we  might  discover  that  miracles
have  their  laws  as  well  as  the  movements  of  Providence
to  which  we  are  accustomed.  Miracles,  like  showers  of
stars,  occur  but  seldom  ;  but  it  cannot  be  inferred  from
their  infrequency  that  their  coming  is  not  determined
by  some  law.  As  a  man  who  is  moving  his  limbs  regu-
larly, in  walking  along  in  a  straight  line,  may,  at  a
prescribed  point,  turn  aside  from  this  course ;  so  God
may,  by  a  rule  known  to  himself,  deviate  from  the
ordinary  course  of  his  Providence ;  and,  so  far  as  re-
spects him,  the  distinction  between  what  is  natural  and
what  is  supernatural  or  miraculous  may  be  merely  rela-
14


156  MIRACLES.

tive  to  our  ignorance.  But  God's  miraculous  Works  and
their  laws,  if  they  have  any,  belong  to  a  realm  which
lies  beyond  the  province  of  philosophy,  and  which
philosophy  has  neither  the  means  nor  the  ability  to
explore.

Philosophy  is  guilty  of  something  worse  than  arro-
gance if  it  affirms  that  miracles  are  impossible.  To
affirm  that  nature's  laws  cannot  be  suspended  is  to  deny
the  existence  of  nature's  God.  The  philosopher  who
maintains  that  miracles  are  impossible  is  an  atheist.
All  the  arrangements  and  movements  of  visible  things
are  referred  by  him  to  the  laws  of  nature.  Beyond
these  he  knows  no  governing  power,  and  investing  these
with  supremacy  he  allows  no  place  in  the  universe  to
anything  which  does  not  conform  to  these  rules.  The
pious  mind  cannot  bound  its  view  by  these  abstractions,
but  sees  God  in  all  the  movements  of  nature,  and  re-
gards the  laws  of  nature  as  merely  the  modes  in  which
he  chooses  to  operate.  Hence  true  piety  readily  admits
that  God  may  for  sufficient  cause  change  the  mode  of
his  operations,  or,  in  other  words,  work  miracles.

A  miracle  is  an  event  which  cannot  be  accounted  for
otherwise  than  by  referring  it  to  divine  agency.  Phi-
losophy claims  to  have  accounted  for  an  event  when  it
has  pointed  out  an  antecedent  event  as  its  cause.  It
traces  effects  and  causes  through  lines  of  sequence
which  run  back  to  the  creation,  and  there  terminate,
leaving  philosophy  obliged  to  accept  the  doctrine  of
theology,  that  there  is  a  great  first  cause,  for  whose
existence  and  operations  philosophy  cannot  account,  and
from  whom  all  these  lines  of  sequence  have  originated.
A  miracle  has  its  consequents  like  any  other  event,  but
differs  from  other  events  in  not  having  a  natural  cause
as  its  antecedent.     It  begins  a  new  line  of  sequence,


CREDIBILITY  OF  MIRACLES.      157

which,  like  those  commencing  at  the  creation,  must  be
attributed  to  divine  power.

"When  we  say  that  a  miracle  is  an  event  which  cannot
be  accounted  for  otherwise  than  by  referring  it  to  divine
agency,  full  scope  is  allowed  to  test  it  according  to  the
most  improved  methods  of  scientific  investigation.  But
there  are  many  cases  in  which  unlearned  men  can  judge
of  nature's  powers  as  correctly  as  the  most  learned  phi-
losopher. It  does  not  require  a  philosopher  to  deter-
mine that  a  gentle  call  to  "  arise"  or  "  come  forth,"  has
no  natural  efficacy  to  awake  from  the  sleep  of  death
those  whom  the  loudest  thunders  leave  undisturbed.
"When  a  man  known  to  have  been  born  blind  is  suddenly
made  to  see  by  an  application  of  clay  to  his  eyes  every
one  knows  that  there  is  no  natural  efficacy  in  the  applica-
tion to  produce  vision.  Wrhen  a  congenital  cataract  has
been  removed  by  a  surgical  operation,  and  the  patient
is  made  to  see,  there  is  room  for  scientific  inquiry  into
the  efficacy  of  the  means  employed ;  but  scientific  in-
quiry into  the  efficacy  of  clay  to  give  sight  to  the  blind
is  wholly  useless  ;  and  Galilean  fishermen  can  judge  on
this  point  as  correctly  as  Newton.  As  it  is  possible  for
God  to  work  a  miracle,  so  it  is  possible  for  even  un-
learned men  to  have  a  rational  conviction  that  a  miracle
has  been  wrought.

II.  On  sufficient  testimony  that  God  has  wrought  a
miracle,  the  fact  ought  to  be  believed.

In  admitting  the  general  credibility  of  ancient  hea-
then historians,  we  do  not  hold  ourselves  bound  to  be-
lieve the  accounts  which  they  have  given  of  prodigies
and  supernatural  events.  We  make  allowance  for  the
superstition  of  the  times,  and  acquit  the  historians  of
any  design  to  deceive,  when  they  record  as  facts  legends
and  rumors  accredited  by  themselves  and  popularly  be-


158  MIRACLES.

lieved ;  but  we  take  the  liberty  of  suspecting  that  there
may  be  a  mistake  with  respect  to  these  marvellous  oc-
currences, and  of  examining  for  ourselves  the  testimony
on  which  they  were  admitted  to  record.  Thus  far  we
have  claimed  for  the  sacred  writers  no  other  credit  than
that  which  is  due  to  other  faithful  historians ;  and,  find-
ing in  their  writings  many  accounts  of  miraculous
events,  it  becomes  necessary  to  inquire  into  the  credi-
bility of  these  accounts.  In  a  superstitious  age  fabu-
lous wonders  obtained  a  ready  credence  ;  but  the
philosophic  caution  of  modern  times  inclines  to  suspect
the  truth  of  reports  or  records  which  describe  events
that  cannot  be  accounted  for.  Hence  the  tendency  of
the  present  age  requires  a  strict  scrutiny  of  the  grounds
on  which  the  miracles  of  Scripture  are  to  be  believed,  a
scrutiny  from  which  Christianity  does  not  shrink.

We  the  less  readily  believe  in  miracles  because  we
have  never  witnessed  them  ourselves ;  but  it  does  not
accord  with  philosophy  or  common  sense  to  disbelieve
everything  that  lies  beyond  the  range  of  our  own  per-
sonal experience.  Such  incredulity  is  reproved  by  the
folly  of  the  Siamese  monarch,  who  would  not  believe
that  water  anywhere  becomes  solid  so  as  to  bear  up  the
wheels  of  a  carriage.  Nor  can  we  decide  against  the
credibility  of  miracles  on  the  ground  that  they  are  con-
trary to  universal  experience.  This  would  be  to  assume
that  no  miracle  ever  did  happen,  that  is,  to  beg  the  ques-
tion in  dispute.  If  a  miracle  was  ever  witnessed  by
any  man,  or  number  of  men,  their  experience  would  be
in  favor  of  that  miracle,  and  consequently  the  opposite
experience  could  not  be  universal.  Nor  can  it  be  said
with  propriety  of  all  the  world  beside,  that  their  expe-
rience is  against  the  miracle,  unless  they,  having  been
in  circumstances  favorable  to  the  witnessing  of  it,  know


CREDIBILITY     OF     MIRACLES.  159

that  it  did  not  happen.  Events  are  not  contrary  to  the
experience  of  any  one  merely  because  they  lie  beyond
the  range  of  his  experience.  Of  very  few  persons  can
it  be  said  that  it  has  fallen  within  the  range  of  their
experience  to  witness  electricity  drawn  from  the  clouds,
as  in  Franklin's  experiment :  but  it  is  contrary  to  no
man's  experience ;  and  philosophy  and  common  sense
require  it  to  be  believed  on  the  testimony  of  Franklin
alone-
It  will  perhaps  be  objected  that  Franklin's  experi-
ment may  be  repeated  by  other  men,  and  that  the  result
of  it  is  to  be  believed  because  it  accords  with  the  laws  of
nature ;  but  that  miracles,  not  being  the  result  of  na-
ture's laws,  are  not  to  be  believed  with  like  readiness.
We  admit  the  distinction ;  but  we  deny  that  the  result
of  philosophical  experiments  is  believed  because  it  ac-
cords with  the  laws  of  nature.  These  experiments
sometimes  discover  laws  of  nature  before  unknown,  and
therefore  the  result  must  be  known  before  the  law  can
be  determined.  The  senses  of  the  experimenter  and
other  observers  of  the  experiment,  are  the  original  wit-
nesses of  the  result,  and  on  their  testimony  philosophy
and  common  sense  are  compelled  to  rely.  The  question
arises  whether  the  result  accords  with  known  laws  of
nature,  or  develops  some  law  before  unknown,  or  indi-
cates some  agency  controlling  the  laws  of  nature.

Any  extraordinary  phenomena  which  may  be  believed
on  the  testimony  of  the  senses,  may  be  credibly  testified
to  those  who  have  not  personally  witnessed  them.  Few
persons  have  seen  a  shower  of  stars,  or  a  man  restored
to  life  after  three  days  of  suspended  animation,  or  sight
regained  after  the  removal  of  a  cataract ;  yet  the  credi-
bility of  such  facts,  when  reported  by  truthful  witnesses,
all  persons  admit.     Now  we  maintain  that  the  eye-wit-


160  M  IRACLES.

nesses  of  the  wonderful  works  recorded  in  the  gospel
history,  are  worthy  of  belief;  that  they  have  faithfully
reported  to  us  what  their  senses  testified  to  them,  and
that  the  question  whether  supernatural  agency  was  con-
cerned in  the  event,  appeals  as  directly  to  our  judgment
as  it  did  to  theirs.  They  tell  us  that  water-pots  at
Cana  were  filled  with  water,  and  that  when  drawn  out
it  was  wine ; — that  the  sea  was  boisterous,  but,  after
Christ's  command,  was  calm ; — and  that  Lazarus  was
dead,  and  afterwards  was  alive.  The  facts  presented  to
us  by  their  testimony  are  as  if  our  own  eyes  had  seen
them ;  and  the  question  comes  to  us  for  decision,  just
as  if  we  had  been  the  witnesses  of  the  phenomena,
whether  the  change  produced  indicates  supernatural
agency.

In  the  observations  which  we  have  made  on  the  pro-
phecies of  Scripture  we  have  found  indications  of  divine
agency  obvious  to  our  own  senses.  Our  own  eyes  read
the  predictions,  and  our  own  eyes  see  their  fulfilment.
These  observations  prepare  us  to  admit  the  more  readily
a  divine  agency  in  the  marvellous  works  which  the  Gos-
pels record.  So,  in  the  morality  and  doctrines  of  the
Bible,  and  in  the  wonderful  propagation  of  Christianity,
the  holiness,  wisdom,  and  power  of  God  are  clearly
discernible.  The  morality  and  doctrines  of  Christianity
have  been  already  considered.  In  the  next  section  we
shall  consider  the  propagation  of  Christianity  previous
to  the  examination  of  the  miraculous  works  performed
by  Christ  and  his  apostles,  as  recorded  in  the  New
Testament ;  and  shall  show  that  the  propagation  of
Christianity  may  be  regarded  as  a  stupendous  miracle,
the  result  of  which  is  now  visible  to  the  eyes  of  all.
The  Bible  contains  the  morality  and  the  doctrines  which
have   proceeded   from   God ;    and  the   propagation   of


CREDIBILITY     OF     MIRACLES.  lGi

Christianity  is  a  conquest  which  the  Bible  has  achieved
through  the  power  of  God.  If  such  a  Bible  and  such  a
religion  could  not  exist  in  the  world  without  the  agency
of  God,  we  need  not  hesitate  to  believe  the  miracles
which  that  Bible  reports,  and  by  which  the  religion  was
attested.  We  have  become,  so  to  speak,  familiar  with
displays  of  divinity,  and  therefore  without  surprise  be-
hold them  in  the  miracles  of  the  Bible.  Scepticism  can
no  longer  bar  out  the  belief  of  miracles,  after  we  have
been  compelled  to  admit  the  agency  of  God  in  the  pro-
phecies, morality,  and  doctrines  of  the  Bible,  and  the
propagation  of  Christianity ;  and  to  this  admission  our
own  senses  oblige  us.  On  their  testimony  we  believe
the  facts  which  lie  at  the  foundation  of  natural  religion,
and  their  testimony  can  assure  us  as  well  that  a  God
exists  in  the  Bible  and  Christianity,  as  that  he  exists  in
creation  and  providence.  And  when  the  agency  of  God
has  once  been  admitted  in  however  small  a  degree,
Scepticism  is  dethroned,  and  the  way  is  legitimately
opened  to  the  inquiry,  What  phenomena  ought  to  be
attributed  to  this  agency  ?

The  antiquity  of  the  gospel  miracles  is  no  valid  objec-
tion to  their  credibility.  The  facts  were  committed  to
record  soon  after  they  occurred,  and  while  the  proofs
of  them  were  fresh  and  accessible  to  all.  This  perma-
lent  record  annihilates  the  interval  of  time,  and  carries
is  back  to  the  first  age,  to  study  the  facts  and  judge  of
he  agency  which  produced  them.  If  the  facts  make
'ess  impression  on  our  minds,  at  this  remote  period,  the
lisadvantage  in  this  respect  is  more  than  compensated
by  the  increased  means  which  we  possess  to  form  a  just
judgment  concerning  them.  We  understand  the  laws
>f  nature  better  than  they  did  who  were  eye-witnesses
>f   the    miracles;  and  we    understand   better  than  the


162  MIRACLES.

primitive  Christians  the  laws  of  evidence,  and  the  method
of  determining  facts  by  testimony.  We  now  sit  in  judg-
ment on  records  of  heathen  prodigies  made  by  truthful
historians,  and  pronounce  them  unworthy  of  belief.  To
this  severe  scrutiny  it  is  just  and  right  that  we  should
bring  the  record  of  the  Christian  miracles ;  and  we  shall
find,  to  the  confirmation  of  our  faith,  that  by  an  order-
ing of  divine  wisdom,  the  abundance  and  character  of
the  testimony  are  fully  adapted  to  meet  the  severity  of
the  scrutiny.

We  enjoy  a  further  advantage  over  ancient  Christians
in  the  increased  attestation  to  the  Bible  by  the  fulfil-
ment of  prophecy,  the  propagation  of  Christianity,  and
the  wider  demonstration  of  its  beneficial  influence.
Miracles  arrested  the  attention  of  men  and  made  con-
verts to  the  new  religion.  But  if  the  vivid  impression
of  recent  miracles  has  somewhat  faded  from  the  mind  by
the  lapse  of  time,  those  other  attestations  have  gained
strength,  and  confirm  the  assurance  that  the  miracles
were  wrought  by  the  power  of  God.

Section  II.   Propagation  of  Christianity.

THE   WONDERFUL    PROPAGATION    OF    CHRISTIANITY   WAS
NOT    EFFECTED    WITHOUT   MIRACLE.

The  propagation  of  Christianity  may  be  regarded  as  a
standing  miracle.     In  considering  it,  we  notice,

I.  Its  rapidity  and  extent.  On  the  fiftieth  day  after
the  resurrection  of  Christ,  his  apostles  commenced  their
public  ministry  in  obedience  to  his  last  command ;  and
in  one  day  three  thousand  were  converted,  and  added
to  the  church.  The  number  of  the  disciples  continued
to  increase  in  Jerusalem,  until  they  were  scattered  by
persecution ;  and  then,  by  their  preaching  in  the  places
to  which  they  were  driven,  other  converts  were  made,


PROPAGATION    OF    CHRISTIANITY.  163

and  churches  were  formed  in  all  the  surrounding  coun-
tries. The  New  Testament  history  is  limited  to  the  first
thirty  years  of  the  apostolic  ministry,  and  chiefly  to  that
of  Paul ;  yet  it  records  the  success  of  the  gospel  in
almost  all  the  known  countries  of  the  world.  The  Ro-
•  man  historian  Tacitus  (49),  who  wrote  about  the  end  of
this  period,  has  left  testimony  that  Christianity  had
extended  to  Rome,  and  that  a  great  multitude  in  the
imperial  city  were  so  firmly  persuaded  of  its  doctrines  as
to  suffer  martyrdom  for  their  sake.  The  testimony  of
subsequent  writers  (39  a,  51  a.  53  a,  57  c,  60  a)  shows
that  the  Roman  Empire  became  filled  with  the  new  re-
ligion, that  idolatry  fell  before  it,  and  in  about  three
centuries  became  a  vanishing  relic  of  past  times.  The
catacombs  of  Rome  (71)  also  furnish  testimony  of  the
early  and  extensive  progress  of  Christianity.

II.  The  obstacles.  The  new  religion  had  great  diffi-
culties to  contend  with.  It  was  opposed  bj  Jews  and
G-entiles,  by  civil  and  religious  powers,  by  the  preju-
dices of  the  common  people,  and  the  contempt  of  the
learned  and  great.  The  holiness  of  its  precepts  ren-
dered it  unwelcome  to  the  carnal  heart ;  and  the  respect
which  it  required  for  the  crucified  Nazarene,  rendered  it
offensive  to  human  pride.  They  who  entered  the  Chris-
tian ranks  were  compelled  to  renounce  the  world,  suffer

the  loss  of  all  things,  endure  reproach,  persecution,  and
torture ;  and  multitudes  of  them  were  put  to  death  for
adhering  to  the  hated  religion.

III.  The  agents  employed.  The  propagators  of
Christianity  were  not  men  of  learning,  renown,  or  power.
The  Jews  were  despised  generally  by  the  rest  of  man-
kind ;  and  the  Galilean  Jews  were  despised  by  the  rest
of  their  own  nation.  Out  of  this  despised  class  of  men,
the  agents  for  the  conquest  of  the  world  were  chosen ;


16-1  MIRACLES.

and  not  from  the  highest  ranks  of  these  people,  but
chiefly  from  the  fishing-boats  on  the  Lake  of  Tiberias.
And  these  men  engaged  in  their  work  without  plan.
They  were  slow  to  understand  the  spiritual  nature  of
their  master's  kingdom ;  and,  for  a  considerable  time
after  they  began  their  work,  they  did  not  conceive  that
their  mission  extended  to  uncircumcised  Gentiles.  The}
at  first  confined  their  ministry  to  Jerusalem,  and  it  wa:
not  their  own  plan,  but  the  persecution  of  their  enemies
which  enlarged  the  boundaries  of  their  labors.

IV.  The  means  employed.  The  first  ministers  of
Christ  did  not  adopt  any  of  the  measures  which  tin
policy  of  crafty  men  would  have  suggested.  They  mad;
no  effort  to  ward  off  popular  prejudices,  or  to  insinuatv
their  doctrine  quietly  among  persons  whose  influence,
if  gained  over  to  their  cause,  would  have  conduced  to
its  success.  Without  the  least  effort  to  adapt  their  doc-
trine to  the  acceptance  of  mankind,  they  proclaimed  it
authoritatively,  and  required  men  to  receive  it  as  the
word  of  God.

V.  Time  and  place.  Christianity  was  introduced  m
the  Augustan  age,  one  of  the  most  enlightened  periods
in  the  history  of  the  world.  Had  it  been  an  imposture
the  time  was  most  favorable  for  detecting  it.  In  Judea
where  it  originated,  the  attestations  necessary  to  establisl
the  divine  authority  of  a  religion  were  better  understoo(
than  in  any  other  country.  At  Jerusalem  before  Jewisl
doctors,  and  at  Rome  before  the  brightest  geniuses  of
the  world,  the  new  religion  exhibited  its  pretensions,
and  gained  many  converts.

YI.  Character  of  the  converts.  Among  the  convert;1
were  persons  of  all  ranks  and  conditions  of  life.  Among
the  Jews  no  one  was  better  qualified  than  Saul  of
Tarsus  to  decide  on   the    claims    of   Christianity,  ano


PROPAGATION    OF    CHRISTIANITY.  16-

among  the  Romans  the  deputy  Sergius  Paulus,  whor
the  Jewish  sorcerer  endeavored  to  turn  away  from  th<
faith,1  was  an  intelligent  judge  of  the  evidence  on  which
the  religion  challenged  acceptance.  While  great  men
bowed  in  humility  before  the  doctrines  of  the  cross,
multitudes  who  had  been  degraded  by  their  vices,  felt
the  power  of  the  divine  word,  and  exhibited  its  sanctify-
ing influence  in  lives  of  sobriety  and  virtue.

VII.  Grand  design.  The  propagation  of  Christianity
was  not  a  successful  accident.  It  had  been  foretold  by
the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  the  glory  and
blessing  of  the  coming  age.  Christ  repeatedly  foretold
it  as  the  success  of  his  mission  into  the  world.  He  pre-
faced his  last  commission  to  the  feeble  band  of  his
apostles  with  the  declaration,  "  All  power  is  given  unto
me  in  heaven  and  in  earth,"2  and  the  promise  which
accompanied  the  commission,  pledged  his  presence  to
give  success  to  his  cause  to  the  end  of  the  world.  The
feeble  agents  employed  were  to  go  forth  in  the  strength
of  their  Lord,  and  conquer  the  world  in  his  name,  and
bless  all  nations  with  the  gospel  of  his  grace.  No  simi-
lar design  was  ever  conceived  by  the  founder  or  the
propagators  of  any  other  religion.  The  Jews  mad(
proselytes  to  their  party,  and  Mahomet  sought  to  in-
crease his  power,  by  multiplying  his  followers  :  but  th<
grand  design  to  propagate  a  religion  through  the  eartl
for  the  purpose  of  diffusing  blessings  everywhere  anion*'
all  nations,  ranks,  and  conditions  of  mankind,  is  peculiai
to  the  Author  of  Christianity.

VIII.  Omnipotence  displayed.     In  the  propagation  of
Christianity,  the  power  of  God  has  been  as  truly  dis-

1  Acts,  xiii.  8.  2  Matt,  xxviii.  18.


166  MIRACLES.

played,  though  in  a  different  manner,  as  in  the  miracles
wrought  by  Christ  and  his  apostles.  The  miracles  have
ceased,  but  the  edifice  of  Christianity  reared  by  the
hand  of  the  Almighty,  stands  before  us  as  a  perpetual
miracle.  In  the  power  to  which  the  first  ministers  of
the  gospel  trusted  for  the  success  of  their  ministry,  the
foundation  of  the  edifice  was  laid,  and  the  same  power
has  built  and  defended  the  superstructure.  Papal  cor-
ruptions, state  alliances,  worldly  conformity,  and  false
doctrines,  would  have  destroyed  Christianity  if  divine
power  had  not  preserved  it.

In  viewing  the  propagation  of  Christianity  as  a  great
miracle,  some  difficulty  arises  from  the  distinction  which
has  been  usually  made  between  the  ordinary  spiritual
influence  by  which  regeneration  is  produced,  and  those
extraordinary  operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit  by  which
miracles  were  anciently  wrought.  The  ordinary  regene-
rating influence  has  not  usually  been  called  miraculous.
It  operates  everywhere,  and  at  all  times,  in  connection
with  the  faithfully-preached  gospel,  and  with  so  much
uniformity  as  to  resemble  the  laws  of  nature  in  their
unvarying  course,  rather  than  an  occasional  and  miracu-
lous suspension  of  these  laws.  Moreover,  the  effect  of
the  truth  on  the  mind  is  precisely  that  which  it  ought
to  produce,  and  which  it  would  produce  if  the  heart  were
rightly  disposed.  No  new  powers  are  conferred ;  no
new  revelation  is  made  ;  and  no  law  of  the  mind  appears
to  be  suspended.  The  mode  of  operation  is  to  us  in-
scrutable :  and,  though  not  usually  styled  miraculous,
may  with  propriety  be  called  supernatural.  But  for  all
the  purposes  of  the  present  argument,  the  distinction
between  things  miraculous  and  things  supernatural  is
merely  verbal.     If  men  believe  according  to  the  working


OF     CHRIST    AND     HIS    APOSTLES.         167

of  God's  mighty  power,1  the  production  of  faith  is  a
work  of  omnipotence,  and  affixes  the  seal  of  omnipo-
tence to  the  truth  believed.  Hence  the  propagation
of  Christianity,  even  if  it  had  been  throughout  eifected
without  any  miracle  in  the  restricted  sense  of  the  term,
is  nevertheless  a  display  of  divine  power.  Paul  says,
"  I  have  planted,  Apollos  watered ;  but  God  gave  the
increase;"2  and,  in  another  place,  "The  gospel  is  the
power  of  God  unto  salvation."3

But  the  gospel  cannot  have  been  propagated  without
miracle  in  the  restricted  sense  of  the  term.  It  was
received  from  the  lips  of  the  apostles,  as  confirmed  by
the  miracles  which  they  wrought ;  and  the  multitude
who  saw  the  miracles  believed  in  their  reality  with  a
conviction  which  death  itself  could  not  shake.  Now,
either  the  miracles  were  real,  or  some  miraculous
change  must  have  been  wrought  on  the  senses  or  in-
tellectual powers  of  the  beholders.  In  which  of  these
ways  the  miracle  occurred,  that  is,  whether  it  was
objective  or  subjective,  is  a  matter  of  no  importance  in
the  present  argument.  In  either  view,  Christianity  was
not  propagated  without  miracle.

Section  III.     Miracles  of  Christ  and  his
Apostles.

christ     and    his    apostles    wrought    numerous
miracles.

YvTe  have  seen  that  it  is  not  irrational  to  admit  the
possibility  that  miracles  may  have  been  performed ;  and
we  have  seen,  in  the  fulfilment  of  prophecy  and  the
propagation  of  Christianity,  displays  of  the  Deity  before

1  Eph.  i.  19.  2  1  Cor.  iii.  6.  3  Rom.  i.  16.

15


168  MIRACLES.

the  eyes  of  all  men,  equally  as  supernatural  as  the
power  necessary  to  "work  miracles.  We  are  therefore
prepared  to  enter,  unbiassed  by  scepticism,  on  an  exami-
nation of  the  facts  in  the  New  Testament  history  which
have  been  considered  miraculous.

The  history  contained  in  the  four  Gospels  affirms  that
Christ  wrought  numerous  works  which  wTere  deemed
miraculous,  and  particularly  notices  the  following :  1.
Water  turned  into  wine  at  Cana.1  2.  A  nobleman's  son
healed  at  Capernaum.2  3.  Miraculous  draught  of
fishes.3  4.  A  demoniac  healed  in  the  synagogue.4  5.
Peter's  wife's  mother  healed.5  6.  A  leper  healed.6  7.
A  paralytic  healed.7  8.  An  infirm  man  healed  at  the
pool  of  Bethesda,8  9.  A  withered  hand  healed.9  10.
A  centurion's  servant  healed.10  11.  A  widow's  son
raised.11  12.  A  demoniac  healed.12  13.  Tempest  stilled.13
14.  Two  demoniacs  of  Gadara  dispossessed.14  15.  A
diseased  woman  healed.15  16.  Jairus'  daughter  raised.16
17.  Two  blind  men  healed.17     18.  A  dumb  spirit  cast

1  John,  ii.  1-12.  2  John,  iv.  46-54.

3  Luke,  v.  1-7.

4  Mark,  i.  21-28  ;  Luke,  iv.  31-37.

5  Matt.  viii.  14,  15 ;  Mark,  i.  30,  31  ;  Luke  iv.  38,  39.

6  Matt.  viii.  2-4;  Mark,  i.  40-45;  Luke,  v.  12-14.

7  Matt.  ix.  2-8  ;  Mark,  ii.  1-12;  Luke,  v.  17,  18.

8  John  v.  1-15.

9  Matt.  xii.  9-14 ;  Mark,  iii.  1-6  ;  Luke,  vi.  6-}  1.

10  Matt.  viii.  5-13;  Luke,  vii.  1-10.

11  Luke,  vii.  11-17.

12  Matt.  xii.  22  ;  Luke,  xi.  14,  15.

13  Matt.  viii.  23-27  ;  Mark,  iv.  35-41  ;  Luke,  viii.  22-25,

14  Matt,  viii.  28-34 ;  Mark,  v.  1  ;  Luke,  viii.  26-40.

15  Matt.  ix.  20-22;  Mark,  v.  25-35 ;  Luke  viii.  43-48.
10  Mark,  v.  22-43  ;  Luke,  viii.  4L-56.

17  Matt.  ix.  27-31.


OF    CHRIST    AND     HIS    APOSTLES.         169

out.1  19.  Five  thousand  fed.2  20.  Jesus  walked  on
the  water.3  21.  A  Syro-Phoenician  woman's  daughter
healed.4  22.  A  deaf  and  dumb  man  healed.5  23.  Four
thousand  fed.6  24.  A  blind  man  healed.7  25.  A  de-
moniac healed.8  26.  Tribute-money  miraculously  pro-
vided.9 27.  Ten  lepers  cleansed.10  28.  A  man  born
blind  healed.11  29.  Lazarus  raised.12  30.  An  infirm
woman  healed.13  31.  Two  blind  men  healed.14  32.  Fig-
tree  cursed.15     33.  Miraculous  draught  of  fishes.16

Besides  these  miracles  which  the  evangelists  have
particularly  noticed,  they  inform  us  that  Christ  wrought
many  others.  Thus,  on  the  same  evening  on  which  he
healed  Peter's  wife's  mother,  it  is  said,  "  At  even,  when
the  sun  did  set,  they  brought  unto  him  all  that  were
diseased,  and  them  that  were  possessed  with  devils.
And  all  the  city  was  gathered  together  at  the  door.
And  he  healed  many  that  were  sick  of  divers  diseases,
and  cast  out  many  devils ;  and  suffered  not  the .  devils
to  speak,  because  they  knew  him."17     On  another  occa-

1  Matt.  ix.  32,  33.

2  Matt.  xiv.  15-21;  Mark,  vi.  35-45:  Luke,  ix.  12-17;  John,
vi.  5-14.

3  Matt,  xiv.  22-36  ;  Mark,  vi.  45-56  ;  John,  vi.  15-21.

4  Matt.  xv.  21-28  ;  Mark,  vii.  24-30.

5  Mark,  vii.  32-35.

6  Matt,  xv.  32-38  ;  Mark,  viii.  1-9.

7  Mark,  viii.  22-26.

8  Matt,  xvii.  14-21 ;  Mark,  ix.  14-29  ;  Luke,  ix.  37-43.

9  Matt.  xvii.  24-27.  10  Luke,  xvii.  11-19.
11  John,  ix.  1-41 ;  x.  1-21.  12  John,  xi.  1-46.

13  Luke,  xiii.  10-13.

14  Matt.  xx.  29-34 ;  Mark,  x.  46-52 ;  Luke,  xviii.  34-43.

15  Matt.  xxi.  18-22;  Mark,  xi.  13-21.

16  John,  xxi.  4-6.

17  Mark,  i.  32-34;  Matt.  viii.  16  ;  Luke,  iv.  40-41.


170  MIRACLES.

sion  it  is  said,  "  Jesus  departed  from  thence,  and  came
nigh  unto  the  sea  of  Galilee ;  and  went  up  into  a  moun-
tain and  sat  down  there.  And  great  multitudes  came
unto  him,  having  with  them  those  that  were  lame,  blind,
dumb,  maimed,  and  many  others,  and  cast  them  down
at  Jesus'  feet ;  and  he  healed  them ;  Insomuch  that  the
multitude  wondered,  when  they  saw  the  dumb  to  speak,
the  maimed  to  be  whole,  the  lame  to  walk,  and  the
blind  to  see;  and  they  glorified  the  God  of  Israel."1
Moreover,  there  are  numerous  general  notices  that  he
healed  multitudes  as  he  journeyed  from  place  to  place
during  his  ministry.  "  Jesus  went  about  all  Galilee,
teaching  in  their  synagogues,  and  preaching  the  gospel
of  the  kingdom,  and  healing  all  manner  of  sickness,
and  all  manner  of  disease,  among  the  people.  And  his
fame  went  throughout  all  Syria  ;  and  they  brought  unto
him  all  sick  people  that  were  taken  with  divers  diseases
and  torments,  and  those  which  were  possessed  with
devils,  and  those  which  were  lunatic,  and  those  that  had
the  palsy  ;  and  he  healed  them."2  "  Great  multitudes
followed  him,  and  he  healed  them  all."3  "  God
anointed  Jesus  of  Nazareth  with  the  Holy  Ghost,
and  with  power ;  who  went  about  doing  good,  and
healing  all  that  were  oppressed  of  the  devil."4

Of  the  miracles  wrought  by  the  apostles  before  the
crucifixion  of  their  master,  we  have  no  particular  ac-
counts, but  when  sent  forth  by  him  during  his  personal
ministry,  they  were  commissioned  "  to  preach  the  king-
dom of  God,  and  to  heal  the  sick:"  and  it  is  said
"  they  departed,  and  went  through  the  towns,  preaching
the  gospel,  and  healing  everywhere." 5     After  the  resur-

1  Matt  xv.  29-32.  2  Matt,  i  v.  23,  24 ;  Mark,  i.  39.

3  Matt.  xii.  15 ;  Mark,  iii.  7-12.

4  Acts,  x. -38.  5  Luke,  ix.  2,  6.


OF     CHRIST     AND     HIS     APOSTLES.        171

rection  of  Christ,  the  miracles  wrought  by  the  apostles
must  have  been  exceedingly  numerous.  This  is  mani-
fest from  such  passages  as  the  following :  "  Insomuch
that  they  brought  forth  the  sick  into  the  streets,  and
laid  them  on  beds  and  couches,  that  at  the  least  the
shadow  of  Peter  passing  by,  mig  overshadow  some  of
them.  There  came  also  a  multitude  out  of  the  cities
round  about  unto  Jerusalem,  bringing  sick  folks,  and
them  which  were  vexed  with  unclean  spirits ;  and  they
were  healed  every  one."1  "  God  wrought  special  mira-
cles by  the  hand  of  Paul :  so  that  from  his  body  were
brought  unto  the  sick  handkerchiefs  or  aprons,  and  the
diseases  departed  from  them,  and  the  evil  spirits  went
out  of  them."2

There  were  also  miracles  connected  with  the  person
of  Christ,  which  are  not  included  in  the  preceding
enumeration ;  such  as  his  miraculous  conception,  his
transfiguration,  and  his  resurrection.  Voices  from
heaven  distinguished  his  person  from  other  men ;  the
Holy  Spirit  descended  visibly  upon  him  after  his  bap-
tism in  Jordan ;  angels  announced  his  birth  to  the
shepherds  of  Bethlehem,  and  ministered  unto  him  in  the
wilderness,  and  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane ;  an  angel
rolled  the  stone  from  the  sepulchre ;  and  angels  first
announced  his  resurrection.

On  this  record  of  miraculous  works  we  make  the  fol-
lowing observations : —

I.  The  account  of  works  deemed  miraculous  forms  so
large  a  part  of  the  history,  and  is  so  interwoven  with  the
rest,  that  the  credibility  of  the  whole  must  stand  or  fall
together.  Many  of  the  discourses  recorded  grow  out
of  the  miracles,  and  many  of  the  actions  of  both  friends

1  Acts,  v.  15,  16.  2  Acts,  xix.  11,  12.

15*


172  MIRACLES.

and  foes  are  occasioned  by  them.  Above  all,  if  the
miracle  of  the  resurrection  is  not  true,  the  preaching
and  faith  of  Christians,  as  Paul  has  decided,  are  vain,
and  the  apostles  were  false  witnesses.1  But  if  this  one
miracle  be  admitted,  the  admission  involves  the  credi-
bility of  the  other  miracles.  All  the  arguments  which
establish  the  truthfulness  of  the  sacred  historians,
decide  that  the  miraculous  facts  which  they  record  either
actually  occurred,  or  were  believed  to  have  occurred,  by
friends  and  foes,  just  as  is  affirmed  or  implied  in  the
history.  The  monuments  now  existing  as  standing  wit-
nesses confirming  the  gospel  history,  have  special  refer-
ence to  its  miracles.  The  Christian  Sabbath  commemo-
rates the  resurrection  of  Christ,  and  baptism  and  the
Lord's  Supper  imply  a  belief  of  it.  The  inscriptions
(71  a)  on  the  graves  of  Christian  martyrs,  testify  their
belief  in  the  miracles  recorded  in  the  gospel,  especially
in  that  of  Christ's  resurrection.

II.  The  miracles  recorded  were  so  numerous  and
various,  and  the  circumstances  in  which  they  were
wrought  were  so  numerous  and  various,  that  the  suppo-
sition of  imposture  or  mistake  is  completely  excluded.
If  any  one  miracle  really  occurred,  it  establishes  the
existence  of  a  power  by  which  this  miracle  was  wrought,
and  prepares  the  way  for  accrediting  all  the  rest.  All
sorts  of  objects  were  brought  into  subjection  to  the
miraculous  power :  winds,  waves,  trees,  fishes,  demons,
diseases,  withered  limbs,  blind  eyes,  dead  bodies,  &c,
&c.  The  number  of  the  witnesses  in  the  several  cases
varied  greatly.  Thousands  of  persons  were  fed  in  the
wilderness  by  the  miraculous  multiplication  of  the  loaves
and  fishes,  and  could  not  be  mistaken  as  to  the  facts

1  1  Cor.  xv.  14,  15.


OF    CHRIST    AND     HIS    APOSTLES.         173

that  they  saw,  handled,  and  ate  the  food,  and  had  their
hunger  satisfied.  Many  persons  were  present  when
Lazarus  and  the  widow's  son  at  Naih  were  raised  to
life  ;  and,  if  it  should  be  objected  that  the  presence  of  a
multitude  was  less  favorable  to  a  careful  observation  of
the  facts,  the  daughter  of  Jairus  was  raised  in  the  pre-
sence of  a  few  chosen  witnesses.  Of  those  three  who
were  restored  to  life,  the  circumstances  were  various.
One  had  just  died,  another  was  on  the  way  to  interment,
and  the  third  had  lain  in  the  grave  four  days.

The  subjects  of  the  miracles  were  not  chosen  by  the
operator,  and  therefore  the  suspicion  of  imposture  is
excluded,  as  collusion  was  impossible.  The  widow's  son
was  accidentally  met  as  the  body  was  borne  to  the
grave ;  the  paralytic  was  brought  into  the  presence  of
Christ  by  urgent  and  persevering  effort ;  Bartimeus  and
the  Syro-Phcenician  woman  obtained  the  blessings  sought
by  earnest  importunity ;  the  woman  cured  by  touching
the  hem  of  Christ's  garment  approached  him  stealthily ;
and  the  demoniacs  of  Gadara  met  him  as  he  landed  on
their  coast.

III.  The  miraculous  facts  were  firmly  believed  by
friends  and  admitted  by  foes.  Multitudes  testified  the
sincerity  of  their  faith  in  them  by  enduring  toil,  suffer-
ing, and  death  ;  by  the  renunciation  of  worldly  interests
and  hopes ;  and  by  patient  and  steadfast  adherence  to
the  practice  of  a  holy  and  self-denying  religion.  The  ene-
mies who  opposed  the  religion,  and  persecuted  the  Master
and  his  disciples,  did  not  deny  the  miraculous  facts,  but
attributed  them  to  diabolical  influence,  or  magic ;  or,
without  attempting  to  account  for  them  or  disprove
them,  endeavored  to  suppress  the  publication  of  them
by  threats  and  force.

IV.  The   witnesses    did   not   form    their    judgment


1T4  MIRACLES.

hastily,  and  under  the  influence  of  high  momentary  ex-
citement ;  and  were  not  deceived  by  a  highly  wrought
expectation  of  tire  events.  Hesitation  and  doubt  appear
in  the  case  of  Thomas  and  the  disciples,  to  whom  Jesus
said,  "  Handle  me  and  see  me."  There  was  highly
excited  fear  when  Jesus  was  seen  walking  on  the  sea ;
but  it  was  not  their  fear  which  induced  the  belief  that
the  object  beheld  was  Jesus ;  and  that  the  judgment
formed  was  not  a  mere  work  of  the  imagination,  Peter's
walking  on  the  water  to  meet  Jesus  fully  demonstrates.
Some  of  the  miracles  were  solicited  and  expected,  but
others  came  unexpected.  The  effects  of  most  of  them
were  permanent,  and  gave  full  opportunity  for  calm  and
repeated  examination.  Lazarus,  when  restored  to  life,
did  not  return  after  a  few  short  moments  to  the  grave,
but  lived,  and  conversed,  and  ate  with  many,  and  gave
opportunity  to  friends  and  foes  to  know  the  reality  of
his  resurrection.  The  man  born  blind  did  not  see  for  a
few  moments,  and  then  return  to  his  former  blindness  ;
but  continued  to  see,  and  gave  opportunity  to  the  Jews
to  push  their  inquiries  into  the  fact  and  manner  of  the
wonderful  change.

V.  The  facts  were  not  only  believed  to  be  miracles,
but  were  truly  so.  They  did  not  relate  to  unusual
philosophical  experiments,  developing  new  laws  of  nature ;
but  to  matters  of  daily  experience  among  common  men,
and  about  which  common  men  sufficiently  understand
all  the  laws  of  nature  to  form  a  correct  judgment
whether  the  events  were  natural  or  supernatural.  Laws
of  nature  unknown  to  the  ancient  Christians,  have  since
been  discovered,  but  with  all  our  superior  advantages,
"\fe  sit  in  judgment  on  the  facts,  and  find  no  power  of
nature  adequate  to  their  production,  save  that  of  nature's
author.     They  conform  to  no  law  which  philosophy  has


ATTESTATION    GIVEN    BY    MIRACLES.       175

ever  discovered;  and  are  therefore  to  be  referred  to
special  exhibitions  of  divine  power.

Section  IV.     Attestation  given  by  these
Miracles.

the  miracles  of  the  new  testament  affix  the  seal
of  omnipotence  to  christianity,  and  by  confirm-
ing its  divine  origin,  establish  its  truth.

I.  Jesus  Christ  wrought  miracles  for  the  express
purpose  of  establishing  his  divine  mission  and  authority.
When  about  to  heal  a  paralytic,  he  explained  the  design
with  which  he  performed  the  miracle :  "  That  ye  may
know  that  the  Son  of  man  hath  power  on  earth  to  for-
give sins,  (he  saith  to  the  sick  of  the  palsy)  I  say  unto
thee,  arise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and  go  thy  way  unto  thine
house."1  He  frequently  referred  to  his  miracles  for
proof  that  he  came  from  God,  and  operated  by  the
power  of  God.

II.  Miraculous  powers  were  conferred  by  Christ  on
his  apostles,  for  the  purpose  of  confirming  their  testi-
mony, and  establishing  the  divine  authority  of  their
ministry.2

III.  The  apostles  appealed  to  their  miracles  for  proof
of  their  mission  and  apostolic  authority.  They  them-
selves wrought  miracles,  and,  by  the  laying  on  of  their
hands,  conferred  miraculous  powers  on  others.  Paul
claimed  that  these  signs  of  an  apostle  had  been  exhibited
by  him,  and  from  them  he  argued  the  divine  authority
of  the  gospel  which  he  preached.3

IV.  Miracles  were  a  suitable  attestation  of  the  new
religion.     It  had  been  predicted  that  the  Messiah  would

1  Mark,  ii.  10,  11.  2  Mark,  xvi.  17.

3  2  Cor.  xii.  12;  Heb.  ii.  4.


176  MIRACLES.

perform  miracles,  and  that  they  would  accompany  the
revelation  of  gospel  times.1  This  fact  rendered  them
particularly  suitable  ;  but  besides  this,  there  is  a  general
suitableness  in  the  proof  which  they  furnish,  that  the
power  of  God  is  manifested  in  the  works.  Miracles  are
a  suspension  of  the  laws  of  nature,  and  therefore  re-
quire a  power  superior  to  these  laws,  a  power  which  no
one  but  the  author  of  nature  possesses.  The  manner
in  which  miracles  were  wrought  showed  clearly  that  the
supernatural  power  was  not  exerted  accidentally,  but
such  words  preceded  them  as  fully  indicated  the  design
of  the  operator,  and  his  design  could  have  effected
nothing,  if  God  had  not  co-operated  with  him.  It  is  in
this  way  precisely  that  the  Scriptures  explain  the  attes-
tation which  miracles  gave  to  the  ministry  of  the  apostles.
"  The  Lord  working  with  them,  and  confirming  the  word
with  signs  following."2  "How  shall  we  escape,  if  we
neglect  so  great  salvation ;  which  at  the  first  began  to
be  spoken  by  the  Lord,  and  was  confirmed  unto  us  by
them  that  heard  him ;  God  also  bearing  them  witness
both  with  signs  and  wonders,  and  with  divers  miracles,
and  gifts  of  the  Holy  Ghost?"3

A  miracle  affixed  a  divine  attestation  to  whatever  it
was  intended  to  confirm.  In  the  case  of  the  paralytic
before  referred  to,  Christ  did  not  work  the  miracle  to
prove  that  the  sick  man's  sins  were  forgiven,  but  to
prove  that  the  Son  of  man  had  power  on  earth  to  for-
give sins.  To  this  general  truth  the  miracle  affixed  a
divine  attestation.  It  was  not  necessary  that  every
word  or  proposition  uttered  by  Christ  and  his  apostles
should  be  accompanied  with  a  separate  miracle ;  but  each

1  Joel,  ii.  28-32;  Acts,  ii.  17-21.

2  Mark,  xvi.  20.  3  Heb.  ii.  3,  4.


ATTESTATION    GIVEN    BY    MIRACLES.       177

miracle  was  made  a  proof,  that  the  system  of  doctrine
which  they  taught,  was  from  God :  and  the  proof  was
as  conclusive  for  the  entire  system,  as  for  any  particular
instructions  that  may  have  immediately  accompanied  the
miracles.

The  persons  by  whom  miracles  were  wrought,  were  in
general  good  men,  having  no  inclination  to  use  their
miraculous  powers  for  any  unholy  purpose ;  but  in  some
cases  God  appears  to  have  wrought  miracles  by  unrege-
nerate  men,  and  to  have  made  them  instruments  in  glory-
fying  him,  and  advancing  his  cause.  A  miracle,  by
whatever  instrumentality  it  was  wrought,  was  always
God's  work ;  and  the  wisdom  and  holiness  of  God  give
full  assurance,  that  no  miracle  can  ultimately  promote
falsehood  and  imposture.  If  the  wicked  instruments
that  he  may  sometimes  choose  to  employ,  should  desire
to  effect  some  wicked  purpose  by  miracles,  it  cannot  be
supposed  that  God  would  lend  his  omnipotence  for  the
accomplishment  of  their  design.  All  his  agents  are
completely  under  his  control ;  and  we  may  be  assured
that  all  miracles  wrought  by  unholy  agents,  will  be  so
controlled  as  ultimately  to  promote  the  cause  of  truth
and  holiness.  The  miracles  wrought  by  Christ  and  his
apostles  form  a  vast  mass  of  evidence  in  favor  of  Chris-
tianity ;  and  no  miracle  of  Judas,  or  any  other  wicked
agent,  has  been  permitted  to  operate  to  its  disadvan-
tage. If  Balaam  and  Judas  had  invented  a  system  of
false  religion,  and  if  Providence  had  permitted  it  to
come  down  to  us,  with  attempted  confirmation  by  the
prophecy  of  Balaam,  and  by  miracles  wrought  by  Judas,
and  without  any  controlling  evidence  against  the  impos-
ture, the  case  would  create  embarrassment  in  estimating
the  value  of  evidence  from  miracles,  but  God  had  these
wicked  men  under  his  control  and  compelled  one  of  them


178  MIRACLES.

to  bless  Israel,  and  the  other  to  bear  testimony  to  the
innocence  of  Jesus.  As  the  magicians  of  Egypt1
were  made  to  honor  Moses  ;  so  false  prophets  and  false
apostles  have  been  made  to  honor  the  true  religion  ;  and
no  system  of  false  religion  has  ever  been  able  to  claim
the  divine  attestation  of  prophecy  and  miracle.

The  apostles  wrought  miracles  before  they  understood
that  the  gospel  had  to  be  preached  to  the  uncircumcised ;
and  Peter  wrought  miracles  before  he  received  the  de-
served rebuke  of  Paul  for  dissimulation.  The  miracu-
lous power  co-existed  in  them  with  imperfection  of
knowledge  and  virtue,  and  hence  the  proof  from  mira-
cles is  not  dependent  on  the  knowledge  and  virtue  of  the
agents  by  whom  the  miracles  were  wrought.  God  is
able  to  accomplish  his  purpose  by  imperfect  instruments  ;
and  so  to  manage  these  instruments,  that  their  imper-
fections shall  not  mar  his  work.  Apostolical  imperfection
has  left  no  imperfection  in  the  teachings  of  the  New
Testament  on  the  questions  whether  the  gospel  should
be  preached  to  the  Gentiles,  and  whether  the  dissimu-
lation of  Peter  ought  to  be  approved  and  imitated.

In   estimating  the  argument   from  miracles  we   are

1  The  argument  applies  to  apparent  as  well  as  to  real  mira-
cles. The  feats  of  the  Egyptian  magicians,  whether  performed
by  legerdemain,  or  by  the  aid  of  wicked  spirits,  were  not  real
miracles,  since  they  proceeded  from  the  natural  powers  of  the
evil  agents,  and  were  not  works  of  God.  So  the  serpent's  con-
versation with  Eve,  and  the  actions  and  utterances  of  the  demo-
niac, were  not  in  the  proper  sense  miracles,  and  did  not  even
claim  divine  origin ;  nor  were  they  pretended  or  understood  to
be  proofs  of  any  divine  revelation.  Lying  wonders  may  be
wrought  to  deceive  men,  and  may  succeed  in  deceiving  those  who
have  not  the  love  of  the  truth  ;  but  any  one  who  sincerely  de-
sires to  know  the  truth,  may  safely  confide  that  God  will  give
the  means  of  escape  from  Satanic  delusion.     Mark,  xiii.  22.


OLD     TESTAMENT     MIRACLES.  179

concerned  with  the  inquiry,  Was  a  miracle  wrought?
and,  Was  it  wrought  to  confirm  a  doctrine  ?  If  a  miracle
was  wrought  God  was  the  author  of  it,  whatever  instru-
mentality he  may  have  chosen  to  employ  :  and  if  it  was
wrought  to  confirm  a  doctrine,  that  doctrine  has  divine
authority.  The  proof  is  complete  that  Christian  mira-
cles in  great  numbers  were  wrought,  and  that  they  were
wrought  to  confirm  the  doctrine  which  was  first  taught
by  Jesus  Christ,  and  afterwards  by  his  apostles ;  and
hence  this  doctrine  is  from  God.  Each  single  miracle
establishes  that  God  has  undertaken  the  work  of  giving
instruction  to  men,  and  has  chosen  to  confirm  his
instruction  by  miracle.  What  God  undertakes  to  do  he
will  certainly  accomplish  ;  and  his  work  is  perfect  when
it  fulfils  his  design.  The  miracles  of  the  gospel  lead
our  minds  from  the  human  agents  through  whom  the
gospel  was  published,  to  God  the  author  of  the  system ;
and  give  assurance  to  every  inquirer  after  the  divine
will,  that  the  system  is  what  God  designed  that  it  should
be.  The  miracles  are  God's  seal  affixed  to  the  revela-
tion, and  claiming  for  it  the  respect  and  confidence  due
to  divine  truth.

Section  V.     Old   Testament   Miracles.

THE    OLD    TESTAMENT    HAD    THE  ATTESTATION    OF    MIRA-
CLES.

Moses  wrought  many  miracles  in  the  sight  of  Pha-
raoh, and  appealed  to  them  for  proof  that  the  command
to  let  Israel  go  came  from  God.  The  passage  through
the  Red  Sea,  the  fire,  the  voice,  and  the  thundering  at
Sinai ;  the  descent  of  manna  and  quails  ;  the  supply  of
water  from  the  rock,  and  the  passage  through  Jordan,

were  miraculous  events  in  which  omnipotence  was  dis-
16


180  MIRACLES.

played,  and  proof  given  that  the  God  of  the  Hebrews
was  the  true  God,  and  the  religion  of  the  Hebrews  the
true  religion.  Various  other  miracles  were  wrought  in
subsequent  times,  establishing  the  divine  mission  of
prophets  v  horn  God  sent  to  make  revelation  of  his  will
to  Israel.  All  these  confirm  the  divine  authority  of  the
religion  taught  in  the  Old  Testament.

The  miracles  wrought  in  Egypt,  at  the  Red  Sea,  in
the  wilderness,  and  at  the  passage  of  the  Jordan,  were
in  the  presence  of  many  thousands ;  and  they  did  not
consist  merely  of  visual  illusions,  but  the  multitudes  of
Israel  ate  the  manna,  drank  the  water  from  the  rock,
heard  the  thunders  of  Sinai,  and  the  voice  of  God
speaking  from  the  midst  of  the  fire,  and  passed  alive
through  the  Red  Sea  and  Jordan.  It  was  impossible
that  these  should  be  mistaken.  And  it  was  equally
impossible  that  the  record  of  these  miracles  should  be  a
forgery  palmed  upon  the  Hebrew  nation  at  some  period
of  time  subsequent  to  that  in  which  the  miracles  are
reported  to  have  occurred.  The  passover  was  instituted
on  the  night  in  which  they  left  Egypt,  and  was  designed
to  commemorate  the  deliverance  of  the  first-born  from
the  destroying  angel.  The  rite  was  to  be  observed
annually,  and  parents  were  required  to  explain  its
meaning  to  their  children  from  generation  to  genera-
tion. The  tables  of  stone  prepared  at  Sinai  were  put
in  the  ark,  and  preserved  in  the  nation  from  the  gene-
ration that  had  witnessed  the  wonders  of  the  Mount,
and  heard  the  sound  of  Jehovah's  voice.  The  pot  of
manna  was  put  in  the  ark  at  the  time  when  the  descent
of  manna  ceased.  Stones  taken  out  of  Jordan  were,
immediately  after  the  passage  under  Joshua,  heaped  up
at  his  command ;  and  instructions  were  given  that  the
design  of  the  monument  should  be  explained  to  subse-


OBJECTION.  181

quent  generations.  The  existence  of  all  these  monu-
ments from  the  very  date  of  the  events  which  they
commemorated  excluded  the  possibility  that  the  record
of  these  events  should  be  a  forgery  of  some  subsequent
age ;  for  such  a  forgery  could  never  have  gained  cre-
dence in  any  subsequent  generation.  It  could  not  have
been  palmed  upon  the  people,  for  they  would  say  we
have  never  kept  the  passover,  or  heard  the  explanation  of
it ;  never  have  seen  the  tables  of  stone,  the  pot  of  manna,
or  the  ark  said  to  contain  them,  and  have  never  seen
the  pile  of  stones  at  Gilgal,  or  heard  their  meaning
explained.

Together  with  the  passover  many  religious  rites  were
instituted  for  the  Israelites  by  Moses,  and  laws  were  given
to  govern  them  as  a  nation :  and  the  account  of  these  is
included  in  the  same  record  with  that  of  the  miracles.
These  were  recorded  by  him  in  obedience  to  God's  com-
mand, and  the  record  was  left  with  the  people  for  their
study  and  observance.  These  records  have  been  pre-
served by  them  in  their  several  generations  down  to  the
present  time.  It  is  impossible  that  this  record  should
be  the  work  of  some  forger  living  after  the  time  of
Moses.  A  forged  code  could  not  be  palmed  upon  a
nation  as  a  collection  of  laws  which  they  had  received
from  their  ancestors,  and  which  they  had  been  accus-
tomed to  observe  as  their  supreme  and  only  rule.

Section   VI.      Objection.

It  has  been  objected  by  the  opposers  of  Christianity
that  there  are  other  accounts  as  credible  as  those  in  the
Bible,  of  miracles  wrought  by  men  who  did  not  operate
by  the  power  of  God.

This  objection,  as  urged  by  modern  infidels,  is  directed


182  MIRACLES.

against  the  sufficiency  of  the  testimony  on  which  the
miracles  are  believed.  As  to  the  works  themselves,
modern  infidels  believe  none  of  them  to  have  been  mira-
culous. If  in  the  history  of  pretended  miracles  they
can  find  a  case  of  what  they  themselves  believe  to  be
imposture,  what  is  their  cause  benefited  if  both  they  and
we  are  unable  to  explain  the  imposture  ?  Whatever
difficulty  may  attend  the  explanation  of  such  a  case,
the  abundant  and  overpowering  evidence  of  the  Chris-
tian miracles  is  unaffected  by  it.  Let  infidels  select  the
cases  which  they  suppose  most  favorable  to  their  cause,
and  compare  the  evidence  of  the  pretended  miracles
with  that  on  which  our  belief  of  the  Christian  miracles
rests.  The  comparison  will  serve  to  exhibit  in  a  strong
light  the  truth  which  we  receive  by  contrasting  its
evidence  with  that  on  which  infidels  place  their  acknow-
ledged imposture  or  delusion.  (121,  124)

As  urged  by  the  ancient  opposers  of  Christianity,
this  objection  had  a  different  meaning  and  application.
Celsus,  Porphyry,  Hierocles,  and  Julian  admitted  that
Jesus  had  wrought  miraculous  works ;  but  they  attributed
them  to  a  magical  power  which  he  possessed,  and  which
they  believed  to  be  possessed  by  many  other  persons.
These  ancient  objectors,  therefore,  who  lived  nearer  to  the
source  of  information,  answer  the  cavils  of  their  modern
brethren,  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  testimony  on
which  the  credibility  of  gospel  miracles  rests.  Their
admission  proves  that  the  testimony  in  favor  of  the
Christian  miracles  was  complete;  and  that  no  counter
testimony  existed.

The  Jews,  who  were  spectators  of  the  miracles,  could
not   deny1   their  reality;  but    attributed  them   to    the


1  Acts,  iv.  16.


OBJECTION.  183

power  of  Beelzebub.1  Christ's  reply  to  this  charge  was
triumphant : — "  Every  kingdom  divided  against  itself  is
brought  to  desolation ;  and  every  city  or  house  divided
against  itself  shall  not  stand :  and  if  Satan  cast  out
Satan,  he  is  divided  against  himself;  how  shall  then  his
kingdom  stand?"2  The  benevolence  of  Christ's  mira-
cles was  directly  opposed  to  the  malice  with  which  the
demons  tortured  the  bodies  of  men,  and  proved  that
he  was  not  in  alliance  with  them.  In  like  manner  his
miracles  differed  so  widely  in  character,  tendency,  and
end,  from  all  the  works  attributed  to  magic,  that  they
cannot  be  classed  with  magical  performances,  even  if
these  be  admitted  to  be  without  imposture.  But  the
probability  is  that  most  if  not  all  of  the  works  attri-
buted to  magic  are  imposture ;  and  that  Satan  is  not
otherwise  concerned  in  them  than  in  the  moral  influence
by  which  he  works  in  the  children  of  disobedience,  inclin-
ing them  to  deceive  for  mercenary  and  wicked  purposes.
Egypt  appears  to  have  been  famed  for  the  magic,  and
the  wonders  wrought  by  the  magicians  who  withstood
Moses,  and  deceived  Pharaoh  to  his  ruin,  were  probably
tricks  of  legerdemain.  But  if  they  were  superhuman,
the  end  for  which  they  were  performed  was  unholy,
and  proved  their  evil  origin ;  and  moreover,  they  were
controlled  by  the  superior  power  which  wrought  with
Moses.  Wicked  spirits  have  been  permitted  to  enter
swine,  to  afflict  the  bodies  of  men  with  disease,  as
in  the  case  of  the  demoniacs  whom  Jesus  relieved,
and  sometimes  to  harm  the  person  and  property  of  men
of  God,  as  in  the  case  of  Job.  But  this  power  has
always  been  limited  and  controlled,  and  so  overruled  as
to  result  in  glory  to  God.     The   magicians  of  Egypt

1  Matt.  xii.  24.  2  Matt.  xii.  25,  26.

16*


184  MIRACLE  S.

were  compelled  to  acknowledge  the  superiority  of  Moses;
and  the  demons  expelled  by  Christ  were  compelled  to
acknowledge  his  supremacy  over  them,  and  their  dread
of  his  power.  The  miracles  of  Christ  stand  forth  in
their  incomparable  dignity  and  grandeur,  unlimited  and
uncontrolled  by  any  superior  power,  fully  accomplishing
the  high  end  for  which  they  were  wrought,  and  worthy
of  the  wisdom,  power,  and  holiness  of  God.

Section  VI I.    Mahometanism  kot  attested
by  Miracles.

mahometanism  has  not  the  attestation  of  mira-
cles or  any  other  proof  of  superhuman  origin.
Of  all  the  false  religions  which  have  prevailed  in  the
world,  no  one  affords  so  instructive  a  comparison  with
Christianity  as  Mahometanism.  Christianity  and  Ma-
hometanism  agree  in  having  at  their  origin  remarkable
individuals  as  their  founders,  Jesus  Christ  and  Mahomet,
and  these  are  both  characters  of  real  history ;  not
belonging  to  an  uncertain  region  or  a  fabulous  age ;  but
known  in  history  as  definitely,  both  with  respect  to  place
and  time,  as  any  other  individuals  whose  names  appear
in  the  records  of  the  past.  The  two  religions  agree  in
opposing  idolatry  and  in  worshipping  the  same  God,  the
God  of  the  Hebrews.  They  agree  in  admitting  the
divine  mission  of  Moses  and  the  divine  authority  of  the
revelation  (125  b,  128  a,  128  b,  149  a)  made  through
him  to  the  people  of  Israel.  They  agree  in  maintaining
that  the  soul  is  immortal,  that  there  will  be  a  resurrec-
tion, and  that  the  righteous  will  then  be  received  into
perfect  and  everlasting  felicity,  aad  the  wicked  be  pun-
ished with  everlasting  torments ;  and  also  in  maintaining
the  obligation  of  prayer,  alms-giving,  and  many  other
moral  duties.    Mahometanism  agrees  further  with  Chris-


MAHOMETAN!  SM     NOT     ATTESTED.        185

tianity  in  admitting  the  divine  mission  of  Jesus  Christ
(125  b,  128  a,  128  b),  and  the  excellence  of  the  doc-
trine which  he  taught.  But  it  maintains  that  Jesus
Christ  was  not  God  or  the  Son  of  God  (128  c) ;  that
Christians  have  corrupted  his  doctrines ;  and  that,  by
associating  Jesus  Christ  with  God  as  an  object  of  reli-
gious worship,  they  have  become  idolaters.  Mahomet
strenuously  maintained  the  doctrine  of  God's  unity  ;  and
claimed  that  it  was  his  special  mission  to  destroy  idolatry
in  Jews,  Christians,  and  Pagans.  He  held  that  the
variety  of  religious  sects  had  rendered  a  new  revelation
necessary  to  determine  what  was  truth  amidst  the  con-
flict of  opinions  (139  c,  150).  Another  point  of  agree-
ment between  Christianity  and  Mahometanism  is,  that,
though  they  originated  with  individual  founders  who,  at
first,  had  but  few  disciples,  the  systems  of  religion  which
they  introduced  have  prevailed  very  extensively,  and
have  been  adopted  by  millions  of  mankind.

Though  agreeing  in  so  many  particulars,  Christianity
and  Mahometanism  differ  widely  in  respect  of  the  evi-
dence of  divine  origin.  Both  claim  to  be  from  God ;
and,  with  respect  to  Christianity,  we  have  seen  that  the
claim  rests  on  a  firm  foundation.  Mahometanism,  on
the  other  hand,  is  totally  destitute  of  any  such  founda-
tion ;  and  it  will  be  instructive,  and  greatly  to  the
advantage  of  Christianity,  to  institute  a  contrast  be-
tween the  two  religions  in  this  particular.  The  contrast
will  exhibit  the  value  of  the  Christian  evidences  in  a
strong  light ;  and  will  offer  just  occasion  for  gratitude
to  God,  that  he  has  affixed  his  seal  so  manifestly  and
fully  to  the  only  revelation  which  he  has  given  to  man-
kind, distinguishing  it  most  clearly  from  all  false  revela-
tions. God  has  permitted  one  false  religion  to  arise,
agreeing  with  the  true  religion  in  so  many  particulars


186  MIRACLES.

as  to  render  comparison  possible  and  convenient,  and
demonstrating  by  the  comparison  that  one  of  them  is
from  beneath,  and  the  other  from  above.  In  this
arrangement,  as  in  everything  pertaining  to  Christian
evidences,  we  see  the  manifestation  of  divinity.

In  making  revelation  to  men,  God  has  been  pleased
to  confirm  his  word  with  miracles.  Moses,  and  many
prophets  who  succeeded  him,  Christ,  and  all  his  apostles,
wrought  miracles  in  proof  of  their  divine  mission  and
of  the  doctrine  which  they  taught :  but  Mahomet,  though
he  admitted  the  truth  of  their  miracles  (128  a,  141  a),
wrought  no  miracles  himself.  His  opponents  often
called  on  him  to  give  this  proof  of  the  revelation  which
he  pretended  to  bring  from  God ;  and  in  many  passages
of  the  Koran  he  admits  (129,  135,  136,  137  a,  139  a.
141  a,  142),  that  he  differed  from  the  prophets  who  had
preceded  him  in  not  performing  miracles.  The  call  of
his  opponents  for  a  miracle  evidently  troubled  him,  and
in  many  passages  of  the  Koran  he  has  attempted  to
account  for  this  deficiency  in  his  revelation ;  and  all
these  passages  are  so  many  proofs  that  the  false  prophet
had  not  power  to  work  miracles.  He  pretended  to  have
made  a  miraculous  night  journey  (137) ;  but  no  one
besides  himself  had  knowledge  of  it ;  and  he  persuaded
his  followers  that  a  victory  which  they  obtained  in  the
Valley  Bedr  (126  b)  was  a  miracle.  We  know  from
these  facts  that  he  was  not  averse  to  confirm  his  pre-
tended revelation  by  miracles  if  it  had  been  in  his
power.

If  an  obscure  passage,  which  mentions  a  splitting  of
the  moon  (155),  was  intended  to  signify  that  Mahomet
wrought  a  miracle  on  that  luminarv,  the  statement  is  at
variance  with  his  repeated  admission  that  lie  did  not
work  miracles,  and  gives  room  for  the  suspicion  that  he


MAHOMETANISM     NOT     ATTESTED.       18T

sought  to  avail  himself  of  an  eclipse  or  some  other
natural  phenomenon  to  satisfy  the  incessant  demand
which  was  made  on  him  for  a  miracle  to  confirm  his  pre-
tended revelation.

There  was,  however,  one  miracle  alleged  by  Mahomet
in  proof  of  his  doctrines  ;  and  this,  fortunately  for  the
comparison  which  we  are  making,  it  is  in  our  power  to
examine  at  the  present  time.  The  Koran  itself  he
claimed  to  be  a  miracle  (125  a,  132,  133).  He  pro-
fessed to  be  illiterate  (130),  and  to  have  no  aid  (136  b)
from  any  man  capable  of  writing  such  a  book.  He  even
challenged  all  men  to  write  such  a  book,  and  claimed
that  the  pure  Arabic  of  its  diction,  and  the  excellence
of  its  style,  furnished  sufficient  proof  of  its  divine
origin.  On  this  last  point  every  reader  «f  the  Koran
can  judge  for  himself;  and  the  extracts  given  in  the
appendix  may  be  taken  by  readers  who  have  not  access
to  the  book  as  specimens  of  its  style.  It  is  not  neces-
sary for  us  to  determine  whether  the  work  was  written
by  Mahomet  himself,  or  by  some  assistant  whom  he  em-
ployed. That  its  style  is  manifestly  superhuman  it  is
vain  to  pretend.  No  advocate  of  Christianity  alleges
that  the  mere  style  of  the  Bible  is  of  itself  sufficient
proof  of  divine  origin  ;  yet  it  would  be  easy  to  show
that  the  style  of  the  Bible  greatly  surpasses  that  of  the
Koran.  Mahomet  had  access  to  the  Bible,  which  he
held  to  be  a  divine  revelation ;  and  many  of  the  stories
given  in  the  Koran  as  new  revelations  (134)  from  God,
are  portions  of  Bible  history  with  variations.  A  com-
parison of  these  with  the  originals  in  the  Bible  will  show
that  the  false  prophet  has  not  equalled  the  style  which
he  aimed  to  improve.

Simplicity  and  perspicuity  are  valuable  qualities  of
style  for  which  the  Bible  is  distinguished,  and  which


188  MIRACLES.

are  not  wanting  in  the  Koran  :  but  for  the  highest  quali-
ties of  style  we  are  accustomed  to  look  to  the  effusions
of  poetic  genius.  The  Bible  abounds  with  the  finest
poetry  the  world  has  ever  known ;  but  nothing  of  the
sort  is  found  in  the  Koran.  On  the  contrary,  the  Koran
contains  Mahomet's  acknowledgment  that  he  was  not
endowed  with  poetic  talent.  (145)

The  Bible  contains  a  large  amount  of  useful  history,
for  -which  the  world  is  wholly  indebted  to  the  sacred
volume.  The  Koran  contains  very  little  history  except
what  it  has  taken  from  the  Bible  or  some  apocryphal
book.  Its  extracts  from  the  Bible  are  given  with  many
variations,  some  of  which  consist  of  puerile  fables  added
(140),  and  others  contradict  the  true  inspired  history.
These  contradictions  array  the  authority  of  the  Bible
against  the  Koran :  and  since  the  Koran  admits  the
Bible  to  have  been  given  by  divine  revelation,  it  leaves
to  itself  no  other  ground  for  defending  its  own  claim  to
divine  origin  than  the  very  improbable  conjecture  that
the  Bible  history  has  been  greatly  corrupted.  A  very
important  case  in  which  it  contradicts  the  Bible,  is  its
denial  that  Jesus  was  put  to  death.  (127  e)  It  dis-
tinctly affirms  that  another  person  was  crucified  in  his
stead ;  and  herein  contradicts  Scripture  and  tradition
as  to  a  fact  clearly  ascertained,  and  fully  and  indu-
bitably testified  by  both  friends  and  enemies  of  Chris-
tianity. According  to  the  Koran  God  rescued  Jesus
from  the  power  of  the  Jews  by  taking  him  up  to  him-
self; that  is,  according  to  the  most  obvious  import  of
the  language,  by  miraculously  translating  him  to  heaven.
Unfortunately  for  the  Koran,  in  this  instance,  it  not
only  contradicts  Scripture  and  tradition,  but  it  also
contradicts  itself.  In  another  passage  it  introduces  the
infant    Jesus    miraculously   predicting   (138)    his    own


MAHOMET ANISM     NOT    ATTESTED.        189

death  and  resurrection.  Now,  that  this  prediction  was
in  due  time  fulfilled,  must  be  inferred  from  the  admitted
prophetical  character  of  Christ,  and  also  from  the
miraculous  manner  in  which  the  prediction  was  uttered :
and  if  the  prediction  was  fulfilled,  the  statement  that
Jesus  did  not  die  is  proved  by  the  book  itself  to  be
false.

We  have  seen  that  the  Bible  contains  an  extensive
system  of  prophecy  which  has  been  fulfilled,  or  is  now
in  progress  of  fulfilment.  Nothing  of  this  sort  is  found
in  the  Koran.  Mahomet  predicted  that  his  mission
would  be  successful  (146  a,  147),  but  in  doing  this  he
risked  nothing,  for  a  failure  from  any  cause  would  have
been  as  fatal  to  his  pretensions  without  the  prediction
as  with  it.  It  is  alleged  that  when  on  his  flight  to
Medina  he  predicted  at  Johfa  that  he  would  again
return  to  Mecca.  (141  b)  But  the  chapter  which  con-
tains the  prediction  is  headed  "Revealed  at  Mecca."
If  the  prophet  had  already  returned  to  Mecca  when  the
prediction  was  published,  the  prediction  came  too  late
to  establish  the  prophet's  claim  to  foreknowledge.  If
the  prediction  was  uttered  before  he  left  Mecca,  it  is
merely  another  case  in  which  he  expressed  such  confi-
dence of  ultimate  success  as  any  other  impostor  would
be  likely  to  exhibit.  He  foretold  that  he  would  die,
but  the  manner  in  which  he  spoke  of  this  event
shows  that  he  had  no  greater  foreknowledge  respecting
it  than  other  men.  (135  a,  139  b,  148,  149  c,  152)
Jesus,  on  the  contrary,  foretold  his  death  with  many
attendant  circumstances,  and  also  his  resurrection,  with
important  consequences  which  were  to  follow.

About  the  time  of  Mahomet's  flight  to  Medina,  the
Eastern  or  Greek  Empire,  then  powerful,  was  at  war
with  Persia,  and  suffered  defeat  in  a  battle.     A  predic-


190  MIRACLES.

tion  said  to  have  been  delivered  on  this  occasion  is  re-
corded in  the  Koran  (143). *

To  render  the  passage  an  example  of  prophecy  seve-
ral things  must  be  proved,  among  which  are — 1.  That
the  event  accorded  with  the  prediction ; — 2.  That  the
prediction  was  published  before  its  fulfilment.  If  both
these  points  were  made  out  just  as  Mahometans  would
wish,  the  strong  probability  that  the  predicted  event
would  at  some  time  occur,  and  the  indefiniteness  of  the


On  this  passage  the  translator  of  the  Koran  remarks : —
"  The  accomplishment  of  the  prophecy  contained  in  this  pas-
sage, which  is  very  famous  among  the  Mohammedans,  being  in-
sisted on  by  their  doctors  as  a  convincing  proof  that  the  Koran
really  came  down  from  heaven,  it  may  be  excusable  to  be  a  little
particular.

"  The  prophecy  is  said  to  have  been  revealed  on  occasion  of
a  great  victory  obtained  by  the  Persians  over  the  Greeks,  the
news  whereof  coming  to  Mecca,  the  infidels  became  strangely
elated,  and  began  to  abuse  Mohammed  and  his  followers,  ima-
gining that  this  success  of  the  Persians,  who,  like  themselves,
were  idolaters,  and  supposed  to  have  no  scriptures,  and  also  the
Christians,  who  pretended  as  well  as  Mohammed  to  worship  one
God,  and  to  have  divine  scriptures,  was  an  earnest  of  their  own
future  success  against  the  prophet  and  those  of  his  religion  ;  to
check  which  vain  hopes  it  was  foretold,  in  the  words  of  the  text,
that  how  improbable  soever  it  might  seem,  yet  the  scale  should
be  turned  in  a  few  years  5  and  the  vanquished  Greeks  prevail  as
remarkably  against  the  Persians.

''  That  this  prophecy  was  exactly  fulfilled,  the  commentators
fail  not  to  observe,  though  they  do  not  exactly  agree  in  the  ac-
counts they  give  of  its  accomplishment,  the  number  of  years
between  the  two  actions  being  not  precisely  determined.  Some
place  the  victory  gained  by  the  Persians  in  the  fifth  year  before
the  Hegira,  and  their  defeat  by  the  Greeks  in  the  second  year
after  it,  when  the  battle  of  Bedr  was  fought;  others  place  the
former  in  the  third  or  fourth  year  before  the  Hegira,  and  the
latter  in  the  end  of  the  sixth  or  beginning  of  the  seventh  year
after  it,  when  the  expedition  of  Al  Hodeibiyah  was  undertaken."


MAHOMETANISM     NOT     ATTESTED.        191

time  allowed  for  its  occurrence,  "a  few  years,"  are  im-
portant considerations  in  determining  the  character  of
the  supposed  prophecy,  and  fully  establish  that  it  pos-
sesses not  the  characteristic  marks  of  certain  foreknow-
ledge which  are  conspicuous  in  the  prophecies  of  the
Bible.  This  single  example  of  prediction  would  not
have  been  estimated  so  highly  by  the  followers  of  the
false  prophet,  if  it  had  been  in  their  power  to  adduce
other  and  better  examples.

Though  the  two  religions  nearly  resemble  each  other
as  to  the  extent  of  their  progress,  as  to  the  means
employed  they  are  wholly  dissimilar.  Christianity  was
propagated  by  preaching,  and  without  the  use  of  carnal
weapons  ;  Mahomet  frequently  claimed  to  be  a  preacher
only  (128  d,  135  a,  136  a,  142,  152) ;  but  so  long  as
he  relied  on  preaching  only  for  the  establishment  of  his
cause,  it  made  very  little  progress.  It  was  as  a  mili-
tary chief  that  he  succeeded ;  and  those  against  whom
he  waged  war  found  that  the  adoption  of  his  religion
was  their  best  security  against  his  sword  and  oppressive
exactions.  Christianity,  on  the  contrary,  instead  of
giving  security  for  life  and  property  to  its  converts,
brought  both  into  imminent  danger.  The  love  of  life
and  its  enjoyments  favored  the  progress  of  one  religion,
and  opposed  that  of  the  other ;  and  since  they  never-
theless made  similar  progress,  some  cause  more  pow-
erful than  the  love  of  life  and  its  enjoyments  must  have
favored  the  success  of  Christianity.  No  other  cause
than  the  power  of  God  can  account  for  the  wonderful
effect.

The  doctrine  of  Mahomet  exhibits  no  internal  evi-
dence of  superhuman  origin  in  anything  that  was  pecu-
liar to  his  system.  In  forming  his  creed  he  was  aided
by  the  Bible,  and  derived  from  it  his  best  notions  of
17  N


192  MIRACLES.

religion  and  morals.  Like  modern  Unitarians,  he  held
that  the  Christian  doctrine  concerning  the  Trinity  is
inconsistent  with  the  unity  of  God  (127/,  128  c)  and
like  modern  Unitarians,  in  rejecting  the  doctrine  of  the
Trinity,  he  rejected  that  of  Christ's  mediation  and
atonement.  The  whole  doctrine  of  sacrifices,  so  promi-
nent in  the  Bible,  has  no  place  in  the  Koran ;  and  its
only  atonement  for  sin  is  good  works.  (125  /)  While
the  false  prophet  professed  to  honor  the  law  of  Moses,
he  made  its  whole  system  of  sacrifice  unmeaning ;  and
while  he  professed  to  honor  Jesus  as  a  prophet  sent
from  God,  he  rejected  his  priesthood  and  his  teachings
concerning  the  great  salvation  effected  by  his  death  ;
and  led  away  his  followers  from  the  great  propitiation,
which  is  the  only  hope  of  the  guilty  and  perishing.
Erring  man  is  ever  prone  to  self-justification ;  and  hence
the  Bible  scheme  of  justification  by  grace  through  the
redemption  of  Christ,  is  manifestly  superhuman.  But
the  Koran,  by  preferring  man's  scheme  to  that  which
God  had  devised,  and  which  the  gospel  had  clearly  re-
vealed before  the  age  of  Mahomet,  is  proved  to  be  from
corrupt  man,  and  not  from  God.

While  the  Koran  maintains  a  system  of  justification
by  works,  its  rule  for  good  works  was  miserably  defect-
ive. The  virtue  to  which  the  highest  felicity  of  heaven
was  promised,  consisted  in  fighting  (125  <r?,  127  d,
131,  153  a)  for  the  Mahometan  faith ;  and  the  zeal
for  shedding  blood  was  stimulated  by  Uie  hope  of  a  sen-
sual paradise.  (146, 151, 153  6)  Polygamy  and  divorce,
which  had  been  tolerated  under  the  judicial  law  of  Moses,
the  law  of  Christ  had  rejected  as  inconsistent  with  the
original  institution  of  marriage  :  but  the  Koran  more
(127  a,  127  b,  127  e,  125  e)  than  re-established  the  tol-
eration.    It  extended  the  allowance  of  divorce  bevond


MAHOMETANISM     NOT     ATTESTED.       193

the  permission  given  by  Moses ;  and  it  not  only  tole-
rated polygamy,  but  recommended  (127  a)  it  as  charity  to
the  females  for  whom  it  provided  homes  and  sustenance.
Many  precepts  are  given  in  the  Koran  for  the  regula-
tion of  external  conduct ;  but  the  law  of  love  to  God
and  man,  revealed  by  Moses  and  explained  and  enforced
by  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  foundation  of  the  law  and  the
prophets,  is  not  the  basis  of  the  Mahometan  code,  and
does  not  appear  to  have  attracted  the  attention  of  its
author,  who  was  not  solicitous  to  provide  for  the  sancti-
fication  of  the  heart.  The  Koran  is  not  a  discerner  of
the  thoughts  and  intents  of  the  heart ;  and  no  reader
of  the  book  feels  that  it  is  disclosing  a  fountain  of  cor-
ruption in  his  inmost  soul,  and  teaching  him  to  abhor
himself  because  of  his  exceeding  sinfulness.

The  perfect  morality  of  the  Bible  was  fully  exempli-
fied in  the  life  of  Jesus,  who  did  no  sin,  but  was  holy,
harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners.  Ma-
homet, not  without  just  cause,  confessed  himself  to  be
a  sinner  (154  a),  needing  divine  forgiveness.  Jesus
labored  publicly  and  privately  for  the  good  of  mankind  ;
he  never  did  unkindness  to  any  one,  but  habitually  reliev-
ed the  afflicted  and  comforted  the  sorrowful.  The  benevo-
lence which  he  practised  he  taught  his  disciples  to  imi-
tate ;  he  reproved  them  when  they  asked  leave  to  call
down  fire  from  heaven  on  their  enemies  ;  he  forbade
them  to  use  the  sword  in  his  defence ;  and  when  Peter
had  rashly  inflicted  a  wound  on  the  high  priest's  ser-
vant, he  instantly  healed  the  wound  by  a  miracle.  In
administering  to  others,  he  endured  weariness,  hunger,
and  thirst ;  but  of  self-indulgence  in  any  form  he  was
guiltless.  In  all  these  particulars  what  a  contrast  does
the  life  of  Mahomet  exhibit !  Follow  him  in  his  public
career  to  the  field  of  battle.     View  him  mustering  his


194  MIRACLES.

hosts,  and  stimulating  them  by  the  hope  of  spoils  (154  b,
156),  and  celestial  rewards  (126  c,  131  a),  to  cut  off  the
heads  of  unbelievers.  He  proved  that  his  kingdom  was
of  this  world,  by  requiring  his  servants  to  fight ;  and
that  he  was  a  lover  of  gain  as  well  as  of  power,  by
claiming,  in  the  distribution  of  the  spoils  which  his
armies  won,  the  right  to  appropriate  whatever  part  he
pleased  to  the  use  of  himself  and  his  kindred.  (156)
From  the  bloody  field  follow  this  pretended  prophet  of
God  to  his  private  apartments.  Enter  his  harem,  and
count  the  multitude  of  his  wives.  Observe  the  skill
with  which  he  controls  their  love  of  fine  clothes,  by  a
gently-expressed  threat  of  divorce.  (144  h)  Survey
his  establishment ;  mark  its  adaptedness  to  the  wishes
of  a  voluptuary;  hear  him  claim,  on  the  plea  of  a
special  grant  from  Heaven,  a  larger  provision  (144  c)  for
sensual  indulgence  than  was  allowed  to  any  of  his  fol-
lowers. Notice  the  careful  seclusion  of  his  wives  from
intercourse  with  the  other  sex,  lest  the  tranquillity  of
the  prophet's  mind  should  be  disturbed  by  painful  emo-
tions of  jealousy.  (144  a,  144  d,  144  e)  All  these  ar-
rangements for  his  undisturbed  pleasure  were  made,  as
the  Koran  pretends,  by  the  special  care  of  Heaven  ;  and
Heaven  was  not  content  to  give  a  general  grant  of  car-
nal indulgence  to  its  favored  prophet,  but  minutely  and
specially  provided  that  he  should  select  (144  d)  at
pleasure  from  the  multitude  of  his  wives  the  individual
who  should  for  the  time  become  the  companion  of  his
chamber.  All  this  was  claimed  by  the  Arabian  impos-
tor ;  and  nothing  beyond  this  can  be  needed  to  prove
that  he  had  not  been  commissioned  by  the  God  of
holiness.

We  have  argued  that  the  religion  of  the  Bible  has
not  the  marks  of  human  origin.     We  have  supposed


MAHOMETANISM     NOT     ATTESTED.        195

ourselves  sufficiently  acquainted  with  mankind  to  know
what  sort  of  a  religion  they  would  invent :  but  the
argument  does  not  rest  on  probabilities  and  conjecture.
Mahometanism  is  a  religion  of  human  invention,  the
best  and  most  successful  the  world  has  ever  known.
Our  examination  of  this  religion  has  been  far  more
extended  than  was  necessary  for  the  mere  purpose  of
proving  its  imposture ;  but  in  the  ordering  of  Provi-
dence, this  remarkable  specimen  of  human  religion  has
been  set  before  us  for  our  instruction,  and  our  careful
examination  of  it  ought  greatly  to  strengthen  our  faith
in  Christianity,  and  excite  our  gratitude  to  God  for  the
evidences  that  attend  the  true  revelation  with  which  we
are  blessed.  We  are  disciples,  not  of  an  ambitious  and
avaricious  voluptuary,  but  of  a  holy,  self-denying,  and
suffering  Redeemer :  and  while  our  faith  is  strengthene
by  the  study  of  his  character,  and  the  other  evidences
attending  his  religion,  our  contemplation  of  what  he
has  endured  for  us,  especially  in  his  agonies  on  the
cross,  ought  to  move  our  hearts  to  the  highest  possible
exercise  of  grateful  love.


Our  argument  for  the  divine  origin  of  the  Bible  is
now  made  out.  "We  have  proved  that  the  book  is  a
superhuman  production  ;  and  that  its  author  possesses
benevolence,  holiness,  wisdom,  foreknowledge,  and  power
to  control  nature :  and  the  book  itself  contains  a  direct
account  of  just  such  a  being,  whom  it  calls  God,  and  to
whom  it  attributes  its  own  origin.  Our  proof  is  com-
plete. When  we  study  the  volume  of  nature,  we  find
that  it  also  is  a  superhuman  production ;  and  that  its
author  possesses  benevolence,  wisdom,  and  power :  but
this  volume  contains  no  direct  account  of  God ;  and
when  men,  in  escaping  from  the  claims  of  religion,
17*


196  MIRACLES.

retreat  to  sceptical  notions,  such  as  that  the  world  is
eternal,  or  that  it  came  by  chance,  or  that  it  is  itself
God,  it  is  often  very  difficult  to  drive  them  from  these
retreats  by  the  arguments  which  natural  religion  sup-
plies. But  we  have  never  yet  heard  of  a  sceptic  who
has  imagined  that  the  Bible  is  eternal,  or  that  it  came
by  chance,  or  that  it  is  itself  God :  and,  therefore,  the
existence  of  the  Bible,  and  the  proofs  of  divine  origin
which  attend  it,  furnish  the  best  cure  for  scepticism.


CHAPTER  YLLL
AUTHENTICITY.


Section   I.     New   Testament.

THE  BOOKS  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  NOW  IN  USE  ARE
THE  GENUINE  PRODUCTIONS  OF  THEIR  REPUTED  AU-
THORS, AND  COME  TO  US  WITH  THE  SANCTION  OF
APOSTOLIC    AUTHORITY.

Some  persons  distinguish  between  authenticity  and
genuineness,1  but  the  distinction  is  of  little  importance.
All  that  both  of  these  terms  imply,  we  attribute  to  the
books  of  the  New  Testament.  They  not  only  have  the
authority  of  the  persons  to  whom  they  are  ascribed,  but
are  their  composition.

The  truth  of  authorship,  which  is  our  present  subject,
should  be  distinguished  from  the  truth  of  the  matter
contained  in  the  books.     The  latter  is  usually  called

1  "A  book  may  be  genuine  that  is  not  authentic — a  book  may
be  authentic  that  is  not  genuine.  The  history  of  Sir  Charles
Grandison,  for  example,  is  genuine,  being  indeed  written  by
Richardson,  the  author  whose  name  it  bears ;  but  it  is  not
authentic,  being  a  mere  effort  of  that  ingenious  writers  inven-
tion in  the  production  of  fiction.  The  account  of  Lord  Anson's
voyages,  again,  is  an  authentic  book,  the  information  being
supplied  by  Lord  Anson  himself  to  the  author ;  but  it  is  not
genuine,  for  the  real  author  was  Benjamin  Robins,  the  mathe-
matician, and  not  Walters,  whose  name  is  appended  to  it." —
Gregory's  Letters.

(197)


198  AUTHENTICITY.

their  credibility,  and  is  sufficiently  sustained  by  the
agreement  of  the  books  with  the  faith  of  Christians
from  the  first  propagation  of  the  religion.  The  credi-
bility of  the  facts  recorded  in  the  four  Gospels  does  not
depend  on  the  proof  that  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and
John  were  the  authors  of  the  books.  The  churches
established  and  taught  by  the  apostles,  by  receiving
these  books  as  faithful  histories,  became  witnesses  of
their  agreement  with  apostolic  preaching,  and  therefore
of  their  credibility ;  and  on  their  testimony  we  may
accredit  the  books  as  truthful  history,  without  inquiring
into  their  authorship.

Most  of  the  New  Testament  books  tell  by  whom  they
were  written.  All  the  epistles  of  Paul,  except  that  to
the  Hebrews,  have  his  express  signature.  The  Gospel
of  John  testifies  that  it  was  written  by  the  disciple
whom  Jesus  loved.1  In  all  these  cases  the  authenticity
of  the  books  is  involved  in  their  credibility ;  for  if  all
the  matter  which  they  contain  is  true,  the  truth  of  their
authorship  is  established  by  their  own  declaration.  It
is  apparent,  from  the  use  of  the  pronoun  "we,"  2  that
the  writer  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  was  one  of  Paul's
companions,  and  a  careful  examination  of  the  history
confirms  the  tradition  that  Luke  was  the  person.  The
manifest  connection  of  this  book  with  what  the  writer
calls  the  "former  treatise"3  leaves  no  room  to  doubt
that  the  Gospel  attributed  to  Luke  is  really  a  production
of  the  same  author.  Thus  the  authorship  of  almost  all
the  books  of  the  New  Testament  may  be  made  out  from
the  volume  itself.

It  is  clear  from  the  New  Testament  itself  that  many


1  John,  xxi.  20,  24.  2  Acts,  xxvii.  2,  &c.

3  Acts,  i.  1.


NEW     TESTAMENT.  199

of  its  books  were  written  and  in  common  use  before  the
death  of  the  apostles.  We  read  in  the  first  epistle  to
Timothy,  "  For  the  Scripture  saith,  Thou  shalt  not
muzzle  the  ox  that  treadeth  out  the  corn.  And,  the
laborer  is  worthy  of  his  reward."1  According  to  the
natural  interpretation  of  this  language,  the  phrase
"  The  Scripture  saith"  belongs  as  much  to  the  last  of
the  two  quotations  as  to  the  first :  and  no  one  imagines
the  words  capable  of  any  other  construction,  until  he
has  first  ascertained  that  the  words  "  the  laborer  is
worthy  of  his  reward"  are  not  in  the  Old  Testament.
But  these  words  are  in  the  Gospel  of  Luke,2  and  from
this  fact  arises  a  strong  probability,  at  least,  that  the
Gospel  of  Luke  was  written  before  the  first  epistle  to
Timothy,  and  was  quoted  by  Paul  in  this  passage,  as
Scripture  of  equal  authority  with  the  Old  Testament.
But  if  this  conclusion  be  thought  doubtful,  there  can
be  no  doubt  that  Peter  has  referred  to  the  epistles  of
Paul  as  extant  and  in  use,  and  has  recognised  them  as
Scripture,  which  unlearned  and  ignorant  men  "wrest,
as  they  do  also  the  other  Scriptures,  unto  their  own
destruction."3  Such  sanction  given  by  the  apostles
determined  for  the  church  what  books  were  to  be  re-
ceived, and  the  apostles  would  have  been  faithless  to
the  commission  given  them  by  their  divine  Master,
if  they  had  withheld  their  testimony  on  this  point ;  and
the  churches  to  whom  this  apostolic  testimony  was  given
could  not  readily  misunderstand  it,  or  soon  forget  it.
John  outlived  all  the  other  apostles,  and  he  was  not  at
rest  in  the  grave  before  Christians,  whose  writings  have
come  down  to  us,  began  to  make  numerous  quotations

1  1  Tim.  v.  18.
3  Peter,  iii.  15,  16.


200  AUTHENTICITY.

from  the  books  of  the  New  Testament,  and  name  their
authors.  The  number  of  the  Gospels  is  expressly  stated
by  Christian  fathers  to  be  four,  and  various  catalogues
are  made  out  in  their  writings  of  all  the  books  in  the
New  Testament.

The  authenticity  of  the  sacred  books  was  a  subject
of  scrupulous  investigation  among  the  first  Christians.
This  is  manifest  from  the  discussions  which  they  had  on
the  subject,  and  from  the  hesitation  with  which  a  few
of  the  books  were  received.  Doubts  were  entertained
whether  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  was  written  by
Paul ;  and  the  canonical  authority  of  the  Epistle  of
James,  the  second  Epistle  of  Peter,  the  second  and
third  Epistles  of  John,  the  Epistle  of  Jude,  and  the
Revelation  of  John,  was  questioned  by  some  of  the
Christian  writers.  The  investigation  of  the  subject,
however,  produced  a  general  agreement  with  respect  to
all  the  books  now  received.  In  this  agreement  we  have
the  greater  cause  to  acquiesce,  because  the  two  most
important  of  all  the  books  about  which  doubts  were
ever  entertained,  contain  internal  proof  of  their  divine
origin.  The  Revelation  of  John,  which  was  one  of  the
last  to  gain  universal  credence,  proves  itself  by  the  ful-
filment of  its  prophecies ;  and  the  Epistle  to  the  He-
brews proves  itself,  by  giving  such  an  explanation  of
the  Old  Testament  economy  as  brings  to  view  the  divine
wisdom  which  had  been  veiled  in  that  mysterious  dis-
pensation.

Paul  wrote  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians  with  his  own
hand,1  but  in  writing  to  the  Romans  he  employed  Ter-
tius  as  an  amanuensis.2  It  was  his  custom  to  affix  to
all  his  epistles  written  by  an  amanuensis  a  salutation


Gal.  vi.  11.  2  Horn.  xvi.  22.


NEW     TESTAMENT.  201

written  with  his  own  hand  as  a  token  of  their  authen-
ticity.1 In  declaring  this  to  be  his  custom,  he  indicated
his  desire  that  the  churches  should  not  receive  any
scriptures  which  had  not  proper  proofs  of  authenticity ;
and  in  adopting  the  custom  he  evinced  his  care  that
proper  proofs  of  authenticity  should  be  in  the  posses-
sion of  the  churches.  The  other  apostles,  we  cannot
doubt,  were  also  solicitous  on  both  these  points ;  and,  as
a  necessary  consequence,  the  apostles,  whose  duty  it  was
to  provide  for  the  teaching  of  Christ's  doctrine  and
precepts  to  the  end  of  the  world,  must  have  left  among
the  churches  the  proof  needed  for  determining  the
authenticity  of  all  the  Scriptures  which  were  to  be  per-
petuated as  canonical.

The  general  desire  to  obtain  and  circulate  all  the
sacred  writings,  caused  copies  of  them  to  be  multiplied
faster  than  the  proofs  of  their  authenticity  were  ex-
tended. Hence  the  scrupulous  care  which  the  apostles
had  taught,  caused  doubt  and  hesitancy  until  the  proofs
of  authenticity  became  generally  known.  No  other
means  of  collecting  the  sacred  writings  were  needed
than  the  general  desire  of  Christians  to  possess  and
circulate  them :  and  no  other  means  of  establishing*
their  canonical  authority  were  needed,  than  the  proofs
of  their  apostolic  origin.

It  is  implied  in  the  authenticity  of  the  New  Testa-
ment books,  that  they  have  the  authority  of  the  persons
by  whom  they  were  written.  We  learn  from  very  an-
cient testimony,  that  the  Gospel  of  Mark  was  written
from  discourses  delivered  by  Peter  ;  that  it  received  the
confirmation  of  the  apostle  ;  and  that  it  was  transmitted,
after  the  apostle's  death,  as  a  perpetuation  of  his  preach-

1  2  Thes.  iii.  17.


202  AUTHENTICITY.

ing  (22  b,  22  c,  27  a).  We  learn  also  that  Luke,  the
companion  of  Paul,  wrote  with  the  sanction  of  that
apostle  (27  a,  27  b) — a  sanction  which  Paul  himself  has
committed  to  record,  by  quoting  the  Gospel  of  Luke  as
Scripture.  All  the  other  writers  were  apostles ;  and
hence  the  whole  volume  was  written  with  apostolic
authority.

Some  apocryphal  Christian  writings  have  been  noticed
favorably  by  a  few  ancient  authors ;  but  the  quotations
from  them  are  very  few,  compared  with  those  from  the
canonical  Scriptures ;  and  the  respect  expressed  for
them  differs  greatly  from  that  in  which  the  canonical
Scriptures  were  held.  Whatever  may  be  the  excellence
or  reputation  of  any  apocryphal  book,  it  has  the  defect
of  not  having  proceeded  from  the  apostles.  Of  the
books  not  included  in  the  New  Testament,  no  genuine
work  that  has  come  down  to  us,  claims  to  have  been
written  by  an  apostle ;  and  no  authority  less  than  that
of  an  apostle,  can  render  a  book  canonical.

We  receive  the  Holy  Scriptures  as  a  divinely  ap-
pointed rule  of  faith  and  practice  ;  and  their  divine
appointment  for  this  purpose,  constitutes  what  is  called
*  their  canonical  authority.  The  apostles  of  Christ  were
chosen  and  commissioned  to  teach  his  religion  to  the
world ;  and  his  command  invests  their  teaching  with
canonical  authority.  Hence  we  are  bound  to  receive  as
canonical,  whatever  books  the  apostles  delivered  to  the
primitive  Christians  for  instruction  in  the  faith  and
duties  of  religion.

It  was  not  necessary  for  the  canonical  authority  of
any  book,  that  it  should  come  forth  with  the  signature
of  all  the  apostles.  Each  apostle,  though  acting  alone,
possessed  the  power  of  working  miracles,  and,  with  this
power   as  the  credentials  of  his   high  commission,  he


NEW     TESTAMENT.  203

spoke  and  wrote  in  the  name  and  with  the  authority  of
Christ.  But  the  testimony  which  the  several  apostles
bore  to  each  other's  writings,  gave  them  a  ready  recep-
tion among  Christians  everywhere,  and  procured  for
them  at  once  universal  respect  and  confidence.

The  canonical  authority  of  the  New  Testament  books
is  not  dependent  on  the  church.  The  term  church  is
properly  used  as  a  collective  designation  of  true  Chris-
tians in  all  acres  and  countries.  In  the  first  ages,  when
the  sincerity  of  the  Christian  professors  was  tested  by
persecution,  those  who  rallied  around  the  standard  of
the  cross,  were  in  general  true  Christians.

A  large  body  of  faithful  men,  who  had  received  the
writings  of  the  apostles  from  the  hands  of  the  apostles,
transmitted  them  to  succeeding  generations ;  but  they
never  claimed,  either  individually  or  collectively,  the
power  of  investing  any  writing  with  canonical  authority.
They  were  witnesses,  faithful  witnesses,  that  these  books
had  been  received  from  the  apostles ;  and  this  their  tes-
timony they  were  willing  to  confirm  with  their  blood :
but  they  spoke  and  acted  in  this  matter  as  witnesses
merely.  Any  church  or  council  which  claims  the  power
of  investing  scripture  with  canonical  authority,  proves
itself  to  be  antichristian.

The  canonical  authority  of  the  New  Testament  books
is  not  dependent  on  the  entireness  of  the  volume.  If
some  books  written  by  the  apostles  have  been  lost,  the
loss  of  these  does  not  impair  the  authority  of  those  that
remain  ;  and  if  any  book  in  the  volume  could  be  proved
to  be  spurious,  the  authority  of  the  rest  would  be  un-
disturbed.

The  collection  of  the  books  into  one  volume  is  not  an
apostolic  work,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  apostolic
18


204  AUTHENTICITY.

authority  that  each  book  possesses,  and  has  possessed
from  the  time  that  it  emanated  from  the  apostles.

The  proof  that  the  several  books  of  the  New  Testa-
ment possess  canonical  authority,  may  be  briefly  ex-
hibited thus : —

1.  Christ  commissioned  his  apostles  to  teach  his  re-
ligion to  the  world ;  and  they  failed  to  execute  the
commission,  if  they  did  not  adopt  the  means  necessary
for  transmitting  his  doctrine  uncorrupt  to  future  gen-
erations.

2.  History  renders  it  indubitable,  that,  while  the
apostles  were  living,  and  exercising  care  over  the
churches,  numerous  writings  were  circulated  as  authen-
tic documents  of  the  religion,  and  the  Christians  were
taught  to  respect  them  as  canonical  scripture.

3.  The  true  friends  of  Christianity,  its  false  friends,  and
its  foes,  concurred  in  forming  a  chain  of  testimony,
extending  from  the  ministry  of  the  apostles  down
through  succeeding  ages,  and  giving  proof,  without  a
dissenting  voice,  that,  among  the  books  circulated  as
canonical  under  the  apostolic  ministry,  twenty  of  our
present  New  Testament  books  were  included.

4.  All  the  other  seven  books  except  the  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews,  claim  to  have  been  written  by  apostles,1  and
therefore  all  that  is  necessary  to  establish  their  canoni-
cal authority,  is,  to  prove  that  they  are  not  spurious.

After  some  of  the  apostles  had  suffered  martyrdom  it
is  not  surprising  that  the  writings  of  those  who  sur-
vived, should  meet  with  some  difficulty  in  obtaining
reception  in  some  parts   of  the   Christian  community.

1  The  second  and  third  epistles  of  John,  like  the  first,  do
not  contain  the  name  of  their  author.  He  styles  himself,  not
an  elder,  but  the  elder,  a  title  which  appropriately  designated
the  apostle  John  at  his  very  advanced  age.


OLD     TESTAMENT.  205

They  who  had  received  other  canonical  scriptures  from
the  hand  of  an  apostle,  would  be  slow  to  admit  to  equal
respect  new  works  which  did  not  come  to  them  with  the
personal  recommendation  of  an  apostle.  Hence  a  pru-
dent caution  in  receiving  the  new  works  was  naturally
engendered.

This  led  to  investigations  which  fully  established  to
the  ultimate  satisfaction  of  the  whole  Christian  body,
the  genuineness  and  canonical  authority  of  all  the
books.

5.  The  propriety  of  receiving  the  seven  doubted
books  into  full  confidence,  is  greatly  confirmed  by  the
fact  that  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  and  the  book  of
Revelation,  which  were  the  chief  subjects  of  doubt,  are
found  to  contain  internal  evidence  of  their  divine  origin.

Section  II.     Old  Testament.

THE  HEBREW  BIBLE  NOW  IN  USE  IS  THE  AUTHENTIC
SACRED  BOOK  OE  THE  HEBREW  NATION,  AND  HAS  RE-
CEIVED THE  SANCTION  OF  CHRIST  AND  HIS  APOSTLES.

We  have  very  little  means  for  determining  the  author-
ship of  the  several  books  which  make  up  the  Old  Testa-
ment, beyond  what  the  volume  itself  furnishes.  But
we  know  that  the  volume  as  a  whole  has  been  held
sacred  by  the  nation,  that  it  received  the  sanction  of
Christ  and  his  apostles,  and  that  it  has  been  preserved
as  a  sacred  book  by  both  Jews  and  Christians  down  to
our  time.  We  know  from  the  volume  itself,  and  also
from  the  New  Testament,  that  Moses  wrote  the  chief
part  of  the  first  five  books  called  the  Pentateuch.  But
since  the  latter  part  of  Deuteronomy  contains  an
account  of  Moses'  death  written  by  some  other  hand,
it  appears  that  what  Moses  wrote  was  considered  the


206  AUTHENTIC?  T  Y.

sacred  record  of  the  nation,  and  treated  according!}7.
By  whom  this  record  was  extended  from  time  to  time,
we  have  no  certain  means  of  knowing.  Prophets  were
sent  to  the  people,  bearing  with  them  credentials  of
their  divine  mission  in  the  miraculous  and  prophetical
gifts  with  which  they  were  endowed.  Rules  were  given
in  the  law  for  testing  their  claim  to  the  prophetical  cha-
racter.1 The  great  council  of  the  nation  appears  to
have  been  invested  with  some  power  to  sit  in  judgment
on  such  claims.  Either  by  the  decision  of  this  council,
or  by  the  general  consent  of  the  people,  the  prophetical
character  was  determined  of  those  whose  writings  were
incorporated  into  the  sacred  code.  The  nation  which
persecuted  the  prophets  while  living,  revered  their
memory  when  dead,  and  treasured  up  their  writings  as
sacred.  Thus  Providence  ordered  the  enlargement  and
preservation  of  the  sacred  volume ;  and,  though  Christ
charged  the  Jews  with  killing  the  prophets,  and  with
making  void  the  law  through  their  traditions,  he  never
charged  them  with  destroying,  mutilating,  or  corrupting
the  Scriptures.  By  a  similar  ordering  of  Providence,  the
Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament  come  down  to  us  pure,
through  all  the  corruption  of  the  papacy.

From  what  has  been  said,  it  seems  best  to  contem-
plate the  authenticity  of  the  Old  Testament  as  appertain-
ing to  the  entire  volume.  We  receive  it  from  the  nation
to  which,  as  an  appointed  guardian,  it  was  committed,
and  which,  however  faithless  in  other  particulars,  has
kept  this  trust  without  censure.

Section   III.     Preservation.
In  establishing  the  authenticity  of  the  Scriptures,  it


1  Dent.  xiii.  1-5  ;  xviii.  20-


PRESERVATION.  207

is  necessary  to  prove  that  the  several  books  now  form-
ing the  sacred  volume,  are  true  copies  of  the  works  as
originally  written  or  dictated  by  the  authors  to  whom
they  are  ascribed.  We  have  not  the  autographs  with
which  to  compare  them ;  but  nevertheless  it  may  be
satisfactorily  proved  that  our  present  books  are  true
copies  of  these  autographs.

The  Jews  have  always  been  exceedingly  careful  to
preserve  the  Hebrew  scriptures  from  errors  in  transcrib-
ing :  and  the  purity  of  the  copies  which  were  read  in
the  synagogues  every  sabbath-day  in  the  time  of  Christ,
is  proved  by  his  use  of  them,  and  his  sanction  of  their
divine  authority.  He  never  charged  the  Jews  with
having  mutilated  the  oracles  of  God,  either  through  de-
sign or  negligence ;  and  when  he  declared  that  the
Scripture  cannot  be  broken,1  and  that  not  one  jot  or
tittle  can  pass  away,2  he  made  no  exception  of  corrupt
readings  ;  but  gave  his  sanction  to  the  volume  just  as  it
was.  Since  the  time  of  Christ  both  Jews  and  Christians
have  preserved  the  scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament
with  care.  The  Jews  have  preserved  the  very  passages
which  prove  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus,  and  condemn
their  rejection  of  him  ;  and  which  explain  the  calami-
ties that  have  fallen  on  their  nation,  as  the  penalty  in-
flicted for  their  sins,  in  violating  the  covenant  of  their
God.  Since  these  passages  have  been  preserved  pure,
we  may  safely  conclude  that  the  rest  are  uncorrupt.
The  Jews  persecuted  the  Christians  of  early  times ;  and
professed  Christians  of  modern  times  have  persecuted
the  Jews :  but  both  parties  have  preserved  the  same
sacred  book  ;  and  their  united  testimony  leaves  no  room
for  any  rational  doubt,  that  the  book  which  they  have


1  John,  x.  35.  2  Matt.  v.  1!

18*


208  AUTHENTICITY.

handed  down  to  us,  is  the  same  that  was  read  in  the
days  of  Christ  and  his  apostles.  We  want  no  other
proof  that  the  scriptures  of  the  Old  Testament  now  in
use  are  authentic.

The  books  of  the  New  Testament  were  preserved  by
an  early  multiplication  of  copies.  The  first  Christians
wTere  zealous  on  this  point.  The  introduction  of  Luke's
Gospel1  shows  their  early  anxiety  to  have  the  facts  and
doctrines  of  their  religion  committed  to  writing.  The
epistles  of  Paul  were  in  use  even  by  unlearned  and  unstable
men,  before  Peter's  second  epistle  was  written.  From
the  early  ecclesiastical  writers,  wTe  know  that  evangelists
circulated  the  scriptures,  and  that  copies  of  them  were
numerous.  Of  no  other  books  were  copies  so  multiplied,
and  of  no  other  have  so  many  ancient  copies  come  down
to  our  times.  Some  works  of  ancient  authors  are  pre-
served in  only  a  single  manuscript,  but  more  than  a
thousand  manuscript  copies  of  the  New  Testament  are
known  to  exist.

Great  care  has  been  taken  to  keep  the  text  of  the
New  Testament  pure.  Modern  critics  bestow  great
labor  on  the  collation  of  manuscripts,  with  a  view  to
discover  every  variation  of  reading,  however  slight ;
and  also  to  determine,  where  various  readings  are  dis-
covered, which  of  them  are  to  be  accounted  genuine.
Nor  wTas  this  useful  labor  unknown  to  the  ancients.  Je-
rome, A.  D.  392,  informs  us  that  he  made  a  collation  of
manuscripts  to  determine  the  true  reading  of  the  four
Gospels,  and  says  expressly  that  the  manuscripts  which
he  used  were  "  ancient."  (42  a,  b)  An  ancient  manu-
script in  the  days  of  Jerome  must  have  come  down  from
very  near  the  time  of  the  apostles.     Tertullian  states

1  Luke,  i.  1.


PRESERVATION.  209

that  in  his  day,  A.  D.  200,  the  authentic  letters  (31  a)
of  Paul  were  in  the  churches  to  which  they  had  been
addressed.  If  this  does  not  mean  that  the  original
autographs  were  there,  it  must  mean  that  copies  were
there,  which  were  worthy  of  entire  confidence  as  accu-
rate transcripts  of  the  originals.  These  testimonies  show
the  care  with  which  the  sacred  text  was  preserved.

The  numerous  quotations  of  scripture  in  the  writings
of  the  Christian  fathers,  prove  that  the  books  which
they  used  were  identical  with  ours.  These  quotations
run  back  to  the  very  time  of  the  apostles.  In  the  small
works  of  Barnabas,  Clement,  Hermas,  Ignatius,  and
Polycarp,  all  of  whom  conversed  with  the  apostles,  192
passages  of  our  scriptures'  are  quoted  or  alluded  to.  In
the  writers  who  succeeded  them,  the  quotations  and
allusions  are  very  numerous.  We  have  proof,  therefore,
that  the  same  books  that  Christians  used  from  the  time
of  the  apostles  are  now  in  our  hands.  And  these  quo-
tations not  only  prove  the  identity  of  the  books,  but
they  also  accomplish  much  in  establishing  the  purity  of
our  present  text.  The  agreement  of  the  passages  quoted
with  our  present  text,  proves  that  it  remains  what  it  was
in  the  days  of  the  several  writers  :  and  the  passages
taken  collectively  form  so  large  a  part  of  the  New  Testa-
ment, that  their  purity  substantially  determines  the
purity  of  the  whole  volume.

Various  translations  of  the  New  Testament  have  been
made  from  the  Greek  into  other  languages  ;  and  some  of
them  are  of  so  ancient  date,  as  to  be  highly  valuable  in
establishing  the  purity  of  our  Greek  text.  They  show
the  state  of  the  text  when  the  translations  were  made,
and  are  like  manuscripts  preserved  from  those  times.

As  early  as  a.  d.  200  (32),  catalogues  of  the  New
Testament  books  began  to  be  made.     Several   of  these


210  AUTHENTICITY.

catalogues  have  come  down  to  us,  agreeing  nearly  or
exactly  with  our  present  canon.  That  the  books  which
they  enumerate  were  the  same  as  ours,  is  proved  by  the
quotations  from  them  which  are  extant,  and  by  early
manuscripts  and  versions,  and  by  the  additional  fact
that  in  no  case  has  a  complaint  been  heard  of  fraud,  in
substituting  a  fictitious  for  the  authentic  work.

These  various  proofs  establish  the  authenticity  of  the
New  Testament  books  now  in  use.  No  one  hesitates  to
receive  the  books  generally  ascribed  to  Cicero,  Seneca,
Virgil,  and  Horace,  as  the  genuine  productions  of  these
authors ;  but  the  proofs  of  authenticity  in  the  case  of
these  works,  are  very  far  inferior  to  those  which  attend
the  books  of  the  New  Testament :  and  for  determining
the  purity  of  the  text  in  these  works,  the  means  are
very  far  inferior  to  those  which  are  possessed  by  the
critics  of  the  New  Testament.

The  extensive  lists  of  various  readings  made  out  by
critics  of  the  New  Testament,  show  the  great  pains
taken,  and  the  abundant  means  possessed,  for  determin-
ing the  genuine  text.  No  other  work  has  been  subjected
to  such  scrutiny.  Yet,  though  the  various  readings  dis-
covered are  many,  the  cases  are  few  in  which  any
reasonable  doubt  remains,  on  the  question  which  reading
preserves  the  genuine  text ;  and  the  cases  are  still  fewer
in  which  any  important  doctrine  is  affected  by  a  doubt-
ful reading.  No  man  who  honestly  desires  to  know
what  Christianity  is,  can  be  in  any  danger  of  being
misled,  even  by  the  least  approved  of  the  Greek  manu-
scripts of  the  New  Testament  which  have  been  subjected
to  criticism.

God  has  by  a  careful  providence  guarded  his  word
sufficiently  for  all  practical  purposes,  if  men  are  willing
to  study  it  with  the  helps  which  he  gives  them :  but  he


>  PRESERVATION.  211

has  not  chosen  to  work  a  perpetual  miracle,  in  order  to
preserve  copies  of  it  free  from  all  possible  errors  of
transcribers  and  printers,  merely  to  satisfy  the  demands
of  an  unreasonable  incredulity.


CHAPTER  IX.
INSPIRATION.

THE  HEBREW  OLD  TESTAMENT  AND  THE  GREEK  NEW
TESTAMENT  WERE  GIVEN  BY  DIVINE  INSPIRATION,  AND
ARE  TO  BE  RECEIVED  AS  THE  WORD  OF  GOD.


Section  I.     Plenary  Inspiration.

In  the  preceding  chapters  it  has  been  proved  that  the
books  of  the  New  Testament  were  written  by  truthful
men,  and  contain  a  faithful  account  of  Christ  and  the
doctrines  which  he  taught.  In  the  present  chapter
we  are  to  investigate  the  claim  of  these  writings,  and  those
of  the  Old  Testament,  to  divine  authority.  Are  these
books  to  be  received  by  us  as  if  immediately  written  by
the  finger  of  God  ?

It  has  been  fully  established  that  Jesus  Christ  exhi-
bited satisfactory  credentials  of  a  mission  from  God  to
institute  a  religion  for  the  benefit  of  mankind.  Of  his
character  and  ministry  the  New  Testament  gives  us  an
account,  written  by  men  who  had  the  most  favorable
opportunities  for  knowing  his  history  and  doctrines,  and
who  have  left  us  their  written  testimony  honestly  given
to  the  best  of  their  knowledge  and  belief.  The  excel-
lence of  Christianity,  its  adaptedness  to  the  general
wants  of  men,  and  the  evidences  of  its  divine  origin,  make
it  obligatory  on  us  to  treat  any  credible  account  of  it
with  respect,  and  derive  from  it  all  possible  advantage
towards  attaining   a   knowledge  of  the  religion.     The

(212)


PLENARY     INSPIRATION.  213

New  Testament  professes  to  give  full  and  exact  informa-
tion on  the  subject ;  and  it  is  not  only  the  best  source
of  information,  but  the  only  original  source  on  which
we  can  rely.  The  writers  of  this  book  had  devoted
their  lives  to  the  study,  practice,  and  dissemination  of
the  new  religion.  Their  conduct,  their  principles,  their
passions,  had  all  been  subjected  to  its  rule.  No  teacher
of  philosophy  or  science  was  ever  so  devoted  to  his
favorite  pursuit.  Nor  were  they  unsuccessful  instruct-
ors :  but  they  taught  their  religion  to  hundreds  of
thousands  who  became  proficient  in  the  knowledge  of
the  system,  and  gave  practical  demonstration  of  their
attainments,  and  of  its  excellence.  Now  a  written
account  of  the  system,  prepared  by  these  well-informed
and  successful  teachers,  and  transmitted  to  us  in  a  form
well  adapted  to  our  use,  is  entitled  to  our  respect,  and
ought  to  be  highly  prized  by  us.  We  should  thankfully
receive  it  as  a  benefit  which  Providence  has  kindly
thrown  in  our  way ;  and  in  consideration  of  the  proof
that  the  religion  had  a  divine  origin,  we  should  feel  our
conscience  bound  to  profit  by  all  the  information  respect-
ing it  which  Providence  brings  within  our  reach.  In
this  view  the  New  Testament,  if  regarded  merely  as  a
human  composition,  ought  to  bind  our  conscience ;  but
as  everything  merely  human  is  necessarily  imperfect,
it  will  add  much  to  the  confidence  with  which  we  bring
our  consciences  to  the  rule  of  Scripture,  if  we  can  ascer-
tain that  the  sacred  writers  were  divinely  inspired,  and
that  what  they  have  written  may  be  received  by  us  as
the  word  of  God,  and  used  as  an  infallible  guide  in
faith  and  practice.

Having  ascertained  that  the  Scriptures  of  the  New
Testament  are  worthy  of  our  respect  and  confidence,
as   giving    in    general    a    faithful    and    true    account


21-4  INSPIRATION.

of  the  Christian  doctrine,  we  may  safely  proceed  to
inquire  what  they  teach  on  the  question  of  plenary
inspiration.

Section  II.     Old  Testament.

The  books  of  the  Old  Testament  extant  in  Hebrew  in
the  time  of  Christ,  constituted  the  sacred  canon  of  the
Jews,  publicly  read  in  the  synagogues.  To  it  Christ
and  his  apostles  often  appealed,  as  a  rule  of  divine
authority.  Christ  commanded  to  search  the  Scriptures *
with  a  view  to  learn  and  receive  their  testimony  as
indisputable  truth.  He  charged  the  Jews  with  error,
"  not  knowing  the  Scriptures."2  He  taught  that  what
the  Scriptures  had  said  must  be  accomplished,3  and,  that
"  the  Scriptures  cannot  be  broken." 4  And  he  accounted
words  recorded  by  Moses  in  the  Pentateuch  to  be
standing  declarations  of  God  to  the  people.5  The
apostles  in  like  manner  ascribe  to  the  Holy  Spirit  words
which  were  written  by  David,6  and  Isaiah.7  Though
they  preached  the  gospel  under  the  influence  of  the
Holy  Spirit,  they  never  claimed  higher  respect  for  their
words  than  was  due  to  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  Testa-
ment, but  commended  the  Jews  of  Berea  for  testing
their  teaching  by  that  infallible  rule.8  The  prophecies
committed  to  writing,  as  well  as  those  orally  delivered,
are  declared  by  the  apostle  Peter  to  have  proceeded
from  the  Holy  Ghost.9    Paul,  in  writing  to  the  Hebrews,

1  John,  v.  39.  2  Matt.  xxii.  29.

3  Matt.  v.  18  ;  Luke,  xxi.  22 ;  xxiv.  44.

4  John,  x.  35.  5  Matt.  xxii.  31,  32.

6  Heb.  iv.  7  ;  Heb.  iii.  7 ;  Acts,  ii.  30,  31 ;  xiii.  32-37.

7  Acts,  xxviii.  25.  8  Acts,  xvii.  11.
9  2  Peter,  i.  20,  21.


MEW     TESTAMENT.  215

after  saying  that  God  had  spoken  to  the  fathers  by  the
prophets,  refers  to  the  instructions  which  they  gave  as
contained  in  the  Scriptures,  and  so  complete  does  he
regard  the  written  rule,  that  he  institutes  an  argument
on  its  silence,  "  to  which  of  the  angels  said  he  at  any
time,  &C."1  In  another  epistle  he  declares,  that  the
Scriptures  in  which  Timothy  had  been  instructed  from
his  youth,  are  able  to  make  wise  unto  salvation,2  and
expressly  affirms  that  they  had  been  given  by  inspira-
tion from  God.3

It  is  not  necessary  to  assume  the  inspiration  of  the
New  Testament  in  order  to  render  the  above-cited  pas-
sages decisive  proof  that  Christ  and  his  apostles
accounted  the  Old  Testament  divinely  inspired.  As
honest  men  merely,  the  apostles  could  not  express  other
opinions  on  this  subject  than  those  which  they  really
entertained ;  and  on  this  point  the  supposition  is  inad-
missible that  they  could  have  misunderstood  or  for-
gotten the  doctrine  of  their  master.

Section   III.     New   Testament.

The  following  arguments  prove  the  plenary  inspira-
tion of  the  New  Testament.

I.  The  revelation  of  the  present  dispensation  is  not
less  clear  and  certain  than  that  of  the  former.

The  Old  Testament  predicted  that  the  new  dispensa-
tion would  be  one  of  superior  light,  in  which  the  know-
ledge of  the  Lord  would  cover  the  earth.4  Messiah  was
to  be  a  prophet,  like  unto  Moses,  to  whom  the  people
were  to  hearken,5  and  he  was  to  be  a  light  unto  the
Gentiles.6     It  was  foretold  that  extraordinary  influences

1  Heb.  i.  13.  2  2  Tim.  iii.  15.

s  2  Tim.  iii.  16.  *  Isaiah,  xi.  9.

5  Deut.  xviii.  15.  6  Isaiah,  xlii.  6  ;  xlix.  6.
10


21G  INSPIRATION.

of  the  Spirit  should  be  poured  out,  causing  sons  and
daughters  to  prophesy.1  John  the  Baptist  exceeded  all
the  prophets  who  preceded  him ;  but  so  superior  is  the
revelation  of  the  new  dispensation,  that  the  least  of
those  who  enjoy  it  is  superior  in  spiritual  knowledge  to
John.2  But  whatever  may  have  been  the  superiority  of
the  New  Testament  revelation  at  its  outset,  it  could
not  have  equalled  that  of  the  Old  Testament  in  perma-
nent advantage,  if  it  had  not  been  committed  to  writing
without  human  error.  If  the  New  Testament  is  not  a
work  of  plenary  inspiration,  we  have  now  less  ground
for  confidence  in  what  we  have  learned  through  Christ
than  in  what  we  have  learned  through  Moses.

II.  The  authority  given  by  Christ  to  his  apostles  ren-
dered plenary  inspiration  necessary  to  their  office.

It  was  made  the  duty  of  the  apostles  to  preach  the
gospel,  and  teach  the  observance  of  all  things  that
Christ  had  commanded  them ;  and  the  salvation  of
every  creature  who  should  hear  them,  was  made  depend-
ent on  his  belief  of  their  word.  They  were  to  deter-
mine whose  sins  should  be  remitted  and  retained,  and
what  things  should  be  binding  on  the  consciences  of
men.  Such  was  the  authority  with  which  their  ministry
was  invested ;  and  it  therefore  became  the  duty  of  all
men  to  receive  their  word  as  the  word  of  God.  The
promise  which  accompanied  the  commission,  "  Lo,  I  am
with  you  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world,"  3  im-
plies the  perpetual  force  of  the  commission,  and  the
obligation  of  men  in  all  generations  to  receive  the  word
of  the  apostles  ;  and  this  obligation  must  now  have  re-
spect to  their  written  word,  since  their  oral  ministrations
have  forever  ceased.

1  Joel,  ii.  28,  29.
3  Matt,  xxviii.  20.


NEW     TESTAMENT.  217

III.  The  apostles  were  under  an  extraordinary  influ-
ence of  the  Holy  Spirit  guiding  them  into  all  truth.

Christ  promised  to  his  apostles  that  he  would  send  the
Holy  Spirit  to  abide  with  them,1  guide  them  into  all
truth,2  and  bring  to  their  remembrance  all  things
that  he  had  taught.3  This  was  precisely  what  they
needed  to  qualify  them  to  teach  his  doctrines  and  pre-
cepts with  infallible  certainty.  And  from  the  day  of
Pentecost,  when  the  miraculous  endowments  came  upon
them,  they  became  truly  changed  men.  The  cowardice
which  induced  them  to  flee  when  their  master  was  appre-
hended is  now  gone ;  and  they  boldly  preach  his  gospel,
fearless  of  danger.  With  new  tongues  they  address
the  astonished  multitudes ;  and  with  new  skill  quote
and  apply  the  Scriptures.  They  proclaim  authorita-
tively on  what  terms  sins  shall  be  remitted,  and  they
authoritatively  direct  the  converts  in  their  course  of
duty.  These  walked  in  the  doctrines  of  the  apostles
with  a  full  conviction  that  in  so  doing  they  were  obeying
God.

Less  regard  cannot  now  be  due  from  us  to  the  doc-
trine which  we  have  received  from  the  apostles  in  writ-

1  John,  xiv.  16.  2  John,  xvi.  13.

3  John,  xiv.  26.  It  has  been  objected,  that  what  Paul  said
•when  arraigned  before  Ananias  (Acts,  xxiii.  3)  could  not  have
proceeded  from  the  Holy  Spirit,  since  the  apostle  afterwards
retracted  it ;  and,  therefore,  that  the  promise  of  the  Holy
Spirit's  infallible  guidance,  as  recorded  in  Mark  xiii.  11,  was
not  fulfilled.  But  this  objection  is  founded  on  a  mistake  of
fact.  The  prophetic  denunciation  uttered  against  the  wicked
claimant  of  the  high  priesthood  was  not  retracted :  but  was
without  doubt  approved  by  God,  and  in  due  time  executed.  If
any  knowledge  not  possessed  by  the  apostle  would  have  pre-
vented the  utterance,  that  knowledge  was  providentially  with-
held.


218  INSPIRATION.

ing.  The  spirit  which  was  given  to  abide  with  them
did  not  desert  them  when  they  sat  down  to  write,  but  a
perfect  remembrance  of  their  master's  teaching  was  not
less  needed  or  useful  when  they  committed  his  doc-
trines and  precepts  to  writing  for  the  use  of  distant
unborn  generations,  than  when  they  were  engaged  in
preaching  his  word.

IV.  The  apostles  claimed  that  their  preaching  and
writings  were  with  plenary  inspiration  and  divine
authority.

In  the  first  writing  which  the  apostles  sent  forth,
they  said,  "  It  seemed  good  to  the  Holy  Ghost  and  to
us ;" 1  and  they  sent  forth  the  decree  with  divine  author-
ity for  the  observance  of  all  Christians.  Paul  affirmed
that  the  preaching  of  himself  and  other  ministers  was
in  demonstration  of  the  spirit,2  "  not  in  the  words  which
man's  wisdom  teacheth,  but  which  the  Holy  Ghost
teacheth," 3  and  that  what  he  preached  was  the  testimony
of  God.4  He  pronounced  an  anathema  on  any  who
should  preach  any  other  gospel  than  that  which  he  had
preached,5  and  he  commended  those  who  had  received
it,  not  as  the  word  of  man,  but,  as  it  is,  in  truth,  the
wTord  of  God.6  His  epistles  did  not  teach  a  different
gospel,  but  were  sent  to  confirm  the  faith,  correct  the
errors,  and  enlarge  the  spiritual  knowledge  of  those  to
whom  they  were  addressed ;  and  he  claimed  as  much
respect  for  the  gospel  which  he  committed  to  writing  as
for  that  which  he  delivered  orally.  He  expected  what
he  wrote  to  be  acknowledged  by  those  who  were  en-
dowed with  spiritual  discernment  as  "  the  command-
ments of  the  Lord."7

1  Acts,  xv.  28.  2  1  Cor.  ii.  4.

3  Cor.  ii.  13.  *  1  Cor.  ii.  1.

5  Gal.  i.  8.  6  1  Thes.  ii.  13.
7  1  Cor.  xiv.  37.


N  E  W     TEST  A  M  E  N  T.  219

At  the  close  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  a  remark-
able passage  is  introduced,  affirming  the  inspiration  and
divine  authority  of  the  New  Testament  hooks ;  but  its
meaning  is  obscured  by  a  faulty  translation  of  the
phrase,  "the  Scriptures  of  the  prophets."  In  this
phrase,  as  thus  translated,  the  definite  article  occurs
twice,  though  it  is  not  found  at  all  in  the  Greek  original.
The  proper  sense  would  be  correctly  expressed  by  the
simple  rendering,  inspired  writings.  The  entire  passage
teaches  the  following  particulars : — 1.  At  the  age  in
which  Paul  lived,  a  new  and  greatly  enlarged  revelation
was  made  to  mankind.  "  According  to  the  revelation
of  the  mystery  which  was  kept  secret  since  the  world
began,  but  is  now  made  manifest." — 2.  This  revelation
was  in  part  made  orally.  "  According  to  my  gospel,
and  the  preaching  of  Jesus  Christ." — 3.  It  was  in  part
made  in  writing.  "  And  by  inspired  writings  made
known  to  all  nations  for  the  obedience  of  faith."  The
scope  of  the  passage  shows  that  the  writings  here  re-
ferred to  are  not  the  books  left  in  the  charge  of  the
Hebrew  nation  by  the  ancient  prophets ;  but  writings
which  formed  a  part  of  the  revelation  made  in  the  time
of  Paul,  and  published  to  all  nations. — 4.  This  revela-
tion was  made  by  divine  authority,  and  was  designed  to
be  a  rule  of  faith ;  "  But  now  is  made  manifest,  and  by
inspired  writings,  according  to  the  commandment  of  the
everlasting  God,  made  known  to  all  nations  for  the
obedience  of  faith."

No  man  on  earth  understood  the  Christian  doctrine
concerning  inspiration,  better  than  the  author  of  this
passage.  He  was  an  apostle  of  Christ,  specially  com-
missioned to  carry  this  revelation  to  the  various  nations
of  the  Gentiles  ;  and  he  was  himself  the  writer  of  many
of  the  New  Testament  books.  It  cannot  be  that  he
19*


220  INSPIRATION.

did  not  know  whether  these  writings  possess  such  au-
thority to  bind  the  consciences  of  men,  that  not  to
receive  them  in  faith  is  disobedience  to  God.  What
Paul  calls  "my  gospel,"  consisted  of  his  preaching  and
writings  taken  together.  He  had  received  a  special
"commandment  of  the  everlasting  God,"  to  teach  the
gospel  to  the  Gentiles ;  and  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans
was  a  compendium  of  the  gospel,  sent  by  him  to  the
metropolis  of  the  gentile  world.  How  suitable  it  is  that
in  the  close  of  the  Epistle  he  has  left  a  plain  statement
of  the  claim  which  it,  in  common  with  the  other  books
of  the  New  Testament,  makes  on  the  faith  of  mankind  !
Verily  God's  book  comes  to  us  clothed  with  the  full
authority  of  God.

V.  The  writings  of  the  New  Testament  are  quoted
and  referred  to  by  the  apostles  as  possessing  equal
authority  with  those  of  the  Old  Testament.

Paul  quotes1  two  passages  as  Scripture,  one  from
Deuteronomy,2  and  the  other  from  the  Gospel  of  Luke.3
Peter  reckons  the  epistles  of  Paul  as  a  part  of  the
Scriptures  which  men  abuse  to  their  own  destruction.4
Peter,  when  he  wrote  his  second  epistle,  and  Paul,
when  he  wrote  his  second  to  Timothy,  had  their  decease
in  near  prospect.5  They  evinced  much  solicitude  for
those  whom  they  were  about  to  leave  behind  them,  and
earnestly  recommended  the  Scriptures  as  a  divinely
inspired  rule,6  an  unerring  light  to  guide.7  These  com-
mendations of  the  Scriptures  doubtless  apply  to  those
of  the  Old  Testament,  but  there  is  reason  to  believe
that  they  were  designed  to  apply  equally  to  those  of

1  1  Tim.  v.  18.  2  Deut.  xxv.  4.

3  Luke,  x.  7.  *  2  Pet,  iii.  15,  16.

5  2  Tim.  iv.  6  ;  2  Pet.  i.  15.         6  2  Tim.  iii.  16.
7  2  Pet.  i.  19.


NEW     TESTA  M  E  N  T.  221

the  New  Testament.  Paul  had  quoted  to  Timothy  the
Gospel  of  Luke  as  Scripture,  and  he  speaks  of  faith  in
Christ  Jesus1  in  connection  with  the  Scriptures,  which
he  says  are  "  able  to  make  wise  unto  salvation,  and  are
profitable  to  make  the  man  of  God  perfect,  thoroughly
furnished  unto  every  good  work."  Since  Peter,  in  the
same  epistle  in  which  he  recommends  the  prophetic
revelation  of  Scripture  as  a  guide,  has  associated  the
epistles  of  Paul  with  the  other  Scriptures,  we  have
reason  to  conclude  that  he  esteemed  these  also  as  an
unerring  guide.  "When  these  two  apostles  wrote  these
passages,  almost  the  whole  of  the  New  Testament  was
written,  and  these  passages  may  be  taken  as  apostolic
cofifirmation  of  the  inspiration  and  authority  of  all  the
parts  of  it  which  were  then  in  use.   ■

John,  who  outlived  all  the  other  apostles,  and  wrote
the  last  book  of  the  Bible,  has  affixed  to  it  a  solemn
sanction  which,  if  inspiration  is  homogeneous  through-
out the  sacred  volume,  may  be  considered  to  apply
equally  to  all  the  other  books.  "  If  any  man  shall  add
unto  these  things,  God  shall  add  unto  him  the  plagues
that  are  written  in  this  book  :  And  if  any  man  shall
take  away  from  the  words  of  the  book  of  this  prophecy,
God  shall  take  away  his  part  out  of  the  book  of  life,
and  out  of  the  holy  city,  and  from  the  things  which  are
written  in  this  book."2

VI.  The  fulfilment  of  prophecy  demonstrates  the
plenary  inspiration  of  the  Bible.

This  argument  applies  to  the  Old  Testament  as  well
as  to  the  New.  In  both,  prophecies  are  recorded  which
have  been  fulfilled,  and  therefore  the  predictions  were
divinely  inspired.     Many  of  these  predictions  were  not

1  2  Tim.  iii.  15.  *  Rev.  xxii.  18,  19.


222  INSPIRATION.

understood  by  the  prophets  who  delivered  or  recorded
them ;  and  therefore  thej  must  have  proceeded  wholly
from  the  Spirit  which  dictated  them.

Section  IV.    Mode   of  Inspiration.

How  the  Holy  Spirit  operated  on  the  minds  of  the
sacred  writers  we  are  unable  to  explain.  It  is  enough
for  us  that  God  acknowledges  what  they  have  written
to  be  his  word.  When  he  employed  the  tongues  of  the
apostles  to  preach,  they  spoke  in  human  language,  and
each  with  the  voice  peculiar  to  himself.  Even  the  gift
of  tongues  did  not  destroy  the  peculiarity  of  voice  be-
longing to  each,  or  set  aside  as  useless  the  muscular
power  by  which  the  tongue  was  moved.  So  the  menial
powers  of  the  sacred  writers  were  not  set  aside,  but  the
divine  wisdom  has  used  them,  and  all  the  peculiarities
of  style,  and  modes  of  thoughts,  that  distinguished  the
several  writers,  and  has  by  means  of  them  prepared  just
such  a  book  as  it  was  his  pleasure  to  give  to  mankind.

Section  V.     Objections   to   Plenary  In-
spiration.

It  is  objected  that  the  word  inspiration  does  not
necessarily  imply  the  communication  of  infallibility.
We  admit  the  objection,  but  we  maintain  that  whatever
God  gives  by  inspiration  is  what  he  intended  that  it
should  be.  Life  was  given  to  man  by  inspiration,  for  it
is  said,  "  God  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  breath  of  life,
and  man  became  a  living  soul." l  Understanding  is  given
by  inspiration,  for  it  is  said,  "  There  is  a  spirit  in  man,
and  the  inspiration  of  the  Almighty  giveth  them  under-
standing."2    Life  and  understanding  are  what  God  in-


1  Gen.  ii.  7.  2  Job,  xxxii.  8.


OBJECTIONS.  223

tended  that  they  should  be.  Both  these  were  possessed
by  the  apostles,  before  Jesus  breathed  on  them,  and  said,
"  Receive  ye  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  before  he  said  to  them,
"  Tarry  ye  in  Jerusalem  until  ye  be  endued  with  power
from  on  high."  They  were  coinmis'sioned  to  preach  the
gospel  to  the  world,  and  to  teach  the  observance  of  all
things  that  Christ  had  commanded ;  and  the  new  and
peculiar  inspiration  given  to  them,  was  designed  to  qualify
them  for  this  work.  We  may,  therefore,  conclude  that
the  Scriptures  which  they  have,  in  pursuance  of  their
commission,  left  for  the  instruction  of  mankind,  and  which
were  given  by  divine  inspiration  for  "instruction  in
righteousness,"  are  what  God  intended  that  they
should  be.

It  is  objected  that  there  is  a  human  as  well  as  a  divine
element  in  inspiration,  and  that,  as  the  divine  element
must  be  perfect,  so  the  human  element  must  be  imper-
fect. Our  reply  to  this  is,  that  inspiration  is  not  in  the
proper  sense  a  compound  consisting  of  two  distinct  ele-
ments. God  and  man  were  both  concerned  in  making
revelation  to  the  world  ;  but  their  relation  to  each  other
was  not  that  of  partners.  The  design  was  God's,  and
the  contrivance  of  the  method  was  God's  ;  and  man  had
no  partnership  in  either.  When  man  was  introduced
into  the  work,  it  was  not  as  a  partner,  but  as  an  instru-
ment ;  and  the  whole  work  was  done  with  human  instru-
mentality. If  all  with  which  man  was  concerned,  is
man's  part,  there  is  no  other  part  left  for  God.  We
cannot  say  of  a  manuscript,  that  this  portion  is  the
author's  part,  and  that  portion  the  pen's ;  and,  though
the  instrumentality  of  man  in  the  work  of  revelation  is
different  from  that  of  an  unconscious  pen,  it  is  neverthe-
less instrumentality.  The  whole  of  revelation  is  the
work  of  God  as  the  author  ;  the  whole  is  the  work  of


224  INSPIRATION.

man  as  the  instrument ;  and  the  whole  has  this  perfec-
tion, that  it  exactly  fulfils  the  design  of  him  who
designed  it.

It  is  objected  that  inspiration  is  positive,  not  negative,
imparting  truth  to  the  minds  of  the  inspired,  without
banishing  their  errors  ;  and  that,  in  this  particular,  it  is
like  the  ordinary  influences  of  the  Spirit,  which  have  a
sanctifying  effect  on  the  believer  without  annihilating
his  depravity.  It  is  a  fundamental  error  in  this  objec-
tion, that  it  contemplates  inspiration  as  designed  merely
for  the  benefit  of  the  inspired :  whereas  it  is  clear  that
God  gave  his  word  to  be  spoken  and  written  by  prophets
and  apostles  for  the  instruction  and  benefit  of  other  men,
who  were  required  to  receive  it,  not  as  the  word  of  man,
but  as  in  truth  the  word  of  God,  attested  by  miracles.
Positively,  it  is  divine  truth ;  negatively,  it  is  not  hu-
man error.

Infidels  allege  that  the  Bible  contains  mistakes  in
history  and  science,  and  that  some  parts  of  it  are  incon-
sistent with  others  ;  and  on  these  allegations  they  found
their  most  successful  arguments  against  the  credibility
of  the  book.  The  chief  of  these  alleged  mistakes  and
inconsistencies  are  examined  in  other  parts  of  this
volume,  especially  in  the  next  chapter,  and  in  Chapters
I.  and  YI.  of  the  Appendix.  The  result  of  the  investi-
gation will  be  found  to  be  a  great  abatement,  if  not  a
complete  removal  of  the  difficulties ;  and  it  will  be  seen
that  the  remaining  difficulties,  whatever  may  be  their
magnitude,  do  not  reach  the  vital  question  concerning
the  divine  origin  of  Christianity,  but  lie  merely  as  ob-
jections against  the  plenary  inspiration  of  the  Scriptures.
If  there  are  imperfections  in  the  Bible,  it  has  in  spite
of  them  conferred  such  blessings  on  mankind  as  must
have  had  their  source  in  divine  benevolence.     If  it  con-


OBJECTIONS.  225

tains  mistakes  and  inconsistencies,  it  also  contains  sys-
tems of  morality,  doctrines,  and  prophecy,  which  must
have  proceeded  from  superhuman  wisdom.  And  if  there
is  in  it  an  element  of  human  weakness,  it  contains  also
a  truthful  record  of  miracles  which  must  have  been
wrought  by  the  power  of  God,  and  which  were  wrought
in  attestation  of  the  religion  that  the  book  teaches.
Hence  the  proper  evidences  of  Christianity  are  not  af-
fected by  the  alleged  imperfection  of  the  sacred  record.
Regarding  the  difficulties  from  this  class  of  infidel
objections,  as  relating  properly  to  the  doctrine  of  plenary
inspiration,  the  present  becomes  the  proper  place  for
considering  them ;  and  it  will  be  proper  to  inquire  how
are  these  difficulties  to  be  disposed  of,  and  what  is  our
duty  respecting  them.  On  this  subject  the  following
observations  are  offered : —

1.  The'  investigation  which  has  been  made  of  the
alleged  facts,  not  only  lessens  very  greatly  the  diffi-
culties with  which  they  were  thought  to  embarrass  the
doctrine  of  plenary  inspiration,  but  in  some  cases  it
furnishes  proof  of  the  minute  accuracy  and  truthful-
ness of  the  inspired  record.  It  is  our  duty  to  prosecute
such  investigations  as  we  have  opportunity,  and  we  have
reason  to  expect  that  these  investigations  will  continue
to  lessen  the  difficulties  of  the  subject,  and  present  the
divine  authority  of  the  entire  Bible  in  a  clear  light.

2.  The  difficulties  which  past  investigations  have  not
already  removed,  have  very  little  weight  when  compared
with  the  amount  of  evidence  on  which  our  belief  of
plenary  inspiration  rests.  A  well-balanced  mind  will
yield  its  judgment  to  preponderating  evidence,  and  will
not  give  up  to  universal  scepticism,  because  of  the  diffi-
culties which  everywhere  attend  belief  even  of  demon-
strated truth.     Our  senses  sometimes  deceive  us  ;  and


226  I  N  S  P  I  R  A  T  I  0  N.

even  consciousness  sometimes  permits  men  to  think
themselves  different  from  what  they  really  are ;  but  we
must  not,  therefore,  wholly  reject  the  testimony  of  con-
sciousness and  the  senses,  and  doubt  our  own  existence
and  the  existence  of  the  world  around  us.  We  rightly
confide  in  the  testimony  of  consciousness  and  the  senses,
though  we  may  be  unable  to  explain  away  their  possible
illusions,  and  establish  their  universal  credibility ;  and
we  ought  to  receive  with  unwavering  faith  the  demon-
strated truth  that  the  Bible  is  the  word  of  God,  notwith-
standing some  difficulties  respecting  it  that  may  remain
unexplained.

3.  The  perfection  which  the  doctrine  of  plenary
inspiration  attributes  to  the  Bible,  consists  in  its  being
what  God  intended  that  it  should  be.  Men  may  sit  in
judgment  on  the  works  of  God  in  creation  and  provi-
dence, and  pronounce  them  in  many  particulars  different
from  what  might  rationally  be  expected  to  proceed  from
infinite  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness ;  and,  in  like  man-
ner, they  may  judge  that  the  Bible  contains  things  that
reason  decides  to  be  unsuitable  to  a  divine  revelation.
But,  in  both  these  cases,  it  is  our  wisdom  and  duty  to
let  God  judge  for  himself.  The  evidence  that  God  made
the  world  and  the  Bible  vastly  preponderates  over  all
the  difficulties  of  our  folly  and  scepticism.  If  we  can-
not account  for  some  things  which  we  meet  with  in  the
world  and  in  the  Bible,  we  should  be  willing  to  leave
them  unexplained  until  we  have  further  light.

4.  The  perfection  of  the  Bible  does  not  imply  that  its
language  is  perfect.  The  language  is  human,  and  human
language  is  not  a  perfect  vehicle  of  thought ;  but  God
has  chosen  to  employ  this  vehicle ;  and,  even  if  we
could  assign  no  reason  for  his  choice,  we  may  rest
assured  that  it  was  wise,  and  that  his  design  has  not


OBJECTIONS.  227

thereby  been  frustrated.  Our  duty  is  to  accept  the
revelation  as  he  has  given  it  to  us,  and  to  apply  to  it  the
proper  rules  for  the  interpretation  of  human  language,
that  we  may  learn  from  it  the  divine  truth  which  it
conveys.

5.  The  perfection  which  our  doctrine  attributes  to
the  Scriptures,  belongs  properly  to  the  autographs  of
the  prophets  and  apostles.  God  has  not  judged  it  neces-
sary to  work  a  continual  miracle  of  inspiration,  to  pre-
serve all  the  written  and  printed  copies  of  his  word
from  every  possible  error.  As  he  has  judged  thus,  so
ought  we ;  and  we  ought,  therefore,  thankfully  to  re-
ceive the  copies  and  versions  of  his  holy  word,  as  they
have  come  to  us  under  his  overruling  providence,  not-
withstanding any  imperfections  which  may  have  arisen
from  the  uninspired  agency  of  those  who  have  copied,
printed,  or  translated  it.  But  it  is  also  our  duty  to
employ  whatever  means  may  be  in  our  power  for  ap-
proaching as  nearly  as  possible  to  the  precise  language
and  meaning  of  the  inspired  originals.

It  is  our  duty  thankfully  to  acknowledge  the  goodness
of  God  in  that  the  evidences  of  his  religion,  and  the
great  truths  of  his  gospel,  may  be  clearly  seen,  and
confidently  received,  unaffected  by  the  difficulties  re-
specting the  comparatively  unimportant  matters  on
which  the  objections  now  under  consideration  are
founded.

The  spirit  with  which  the  Bible  is  opposed  may  be
learned  from  the  character  of  the  objections  that  are
urged  against  it.  As  a  specimen  of  these,  we  may
take  the  objection  founded  on  alleged  inconsistencies  of
the  four  evangelists  with  one  another.  These  incon-
sistencies, when  thoroughly  examined,  are  found  to  be
apparent  only;  and  therefore  furnish  no  valid  argument
20


228  INSPIRATION.

against  either  the  credibility  or  the  inspiration  of  the
sacred  narratives.  On  the  contrary,  the  proof  of  the
Gospels  becomes  vastly  increased  in  force.  Imposture
may  under  a  specious  covering  conceal  inconsistencies
which  nothing  but  deep  search  can  reveal ;  but  when
deep  search  reveals  perfect  consistency  under  an  appear-
ance of  contradiction,  the  absence  of  fraud  is  rendered
certain.  Paley's  argument  from  undesigned  coinci-
dences has  weight  in  proportion  to  the  evidence  that  the
discovered  coincidences  were  undesigned :  but  coinci-
dences under  the  appearance  of  contradiction  have  the
highest  possible  proof  of  being  undesigned.  Hence  if
it  can  be  shown  that  the  alleged  inconsistencies  are
apparent  only,  and  that  real  harmony  lies  beneath  them ;
they  furnish  a  very  strong  argument  for  the  truth  of
the  gospel  history,  and  leave  the  question  of  its  inspira*
tion  free  from  all  objections.  All  this  has  been  accom-
plished by  writers  on  the  harmony  of  the  Gospels,  and
by  commentators  on  the  New  Testament ;  but  a  brief
examination  of  them,  will  be  found  in  the  sixth  chapter
of  the  appendix.

From  the  character  of  the  objections  thus  repelled,
the  spirit  of  infidelity  may  be  learned.  The  laws  of
evidence  adopted  in  courts  of  justice  require  that  the
testimony  of  credible  witnesses  should  be  received,  and
apparent  disagreements  harmonized  if  possible.  Infi-
delity will  not  apply  this  law  to  the  case  of  the  evan-
gelists. Their  testimony,  as  was  shown  in  Chapter  V.,
is  in  the  highest  degree  credible.  Yet  infidels  reject  it,
because  of  seeming  inconsistency  which  they  take  no
pains  to  reconcile.  The  prominent  singularities  of  the
Bible,  and  the  beneficial  influence  which  it  has  exerted
on  the  morality  and  happiness  of  mankind,  entitle  it  to
high  respect,  yet  infidels  treat  it  with  irreverence,  before


OBJECTIONS.  229

they  have  taken  pains  to  make  themselves  acquainted
with  its  contents.  When  they  deign  to  read  the  book,
it  is  not  that  they  may  study,  admire,  and  practise  the
perfect  morality  which  it  inculcates  by  precept,  and  ex-
emplifies in  the  holy  character  and  life  of  Jesus  ;  nor  is
it  that  they  may  explore  its  wonderful  system  of  super-
human doctrines,  and  by  personal  experience  test  their
alleged  sanctifying  and  beatifying  power.  Nothing  is
further  from  their  design.  They  read  to  discover  some-
thing at  which  they  may  cavil ;  and  it  gives  them
pleasure  to  find  apparent  disagreements  between  Mat-
thew, Mark,  Luke,  and  John.  These  being  discovered,
they  rashly  reject  the  whole  volume  as  a  fraud  and  im-
posture. The  exact  fulfilment  of  innumerable  prophecies
weighs  nothing  ;  and  the  wonderful  propagation  of  Chris-
tianity, and  all  the  miracles  of  Christ  and  his  apostles,
weigh  nothing  ;  all  rise  in  the  balance  when  a  few  appar-
ent inconsistencies  between  the  evangelical  witnesses  on
points  of  trivial  importance,  are  placed  in  the  opposite
scale.  Infidels  sometimes  say  that  they  cannot  believe
the  Bible,  because  of  its  inconsistencies  ;  but  if  they  would
be  honest  with  themselves,  and  deal  honestly  with  the  sub-
ject which  they  forbear  to  investigate,  they  would  dis-
cover that  their  inability  proceeds  from  an  evil  heart  of
unbelief,  and  is  like  that  of  the  Israelites  to  whom  Joshua
said,  "  Ye  cannot  serve  the  Lord,  for  he  is  an  holy  God."  *
The  true  source  of  infidelity  is  an  unholy  heart.  This
takes  occasion  to  cavil  at  seeming  inconsistencies  :  and
God  has  .been  pleased  to  allow  the  existence  of  the
occasion  that  the  awful  declaration  may  be  fulfilled,
"Because  they  receive  not  the  love  of  the  truth,  that
they  might  be  saved,  God  shall  send  them  strong  delu-

1  Josh.  xxiv.  19.


230  INSPIRATION.

sions,  that  they  should  believe  a  lie ;  that  they  all  might
be  damned  who  believed  not  the  truth,  but  had  pleasure
in  unrighteousness."1  A  candid  mind,  after  contempla-
ting the  overpowering  evidences  of  Christianity,  would
decide  that  the  alleged  disagreements  of  the  evangelists
cannot  furnish  a  valid  objection  to  the  divine  origin  of
the  religion,  even  if  the  apparent  disagreements  could
not  be  harmonized.  But  patient  investigation  converts
these  apparent  inconsistencies  into  undesigned  coinci-
dences, and  finds,  in  the  very  ground  of  infidel  cavils,  a
firm  foundation  for  Christian  faith.

1  2  Thes.  ii.  12.


CHAPTER   X.
HAKMONY  WITH  SCIENCE.

THOUGH   NOT    DESIGNED  TO  TEA
SCIENCE,    IS    IN    STRICT    HARMONY   WITH    IT.

Man's  progress  in  science  is  the  result  of  long-con-
tinued and  laborious  effort.  Each  individual  who  comes
into  the  world  begins  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  as
if  nothing  had  been  learned  by  his  predecessors ;  and
great  labor  on  his  part  is  necessary  even  to  reach  the
boundary  of  their  attainments.  All  mankind  are  labor-
ing to  learn,  and  yet  the  progress  in  knowledge  made
by  new  discoveries  which  extend  the  boundaries  of  hu-
man knowledge  are  few,  and  made  by  a  few  singularly
favored  individuals.

The  labor  necessary  to  acquire  knowledge  is  a  dis-
cipline which  God  has  wisely  assigned  to  the  children
of  men.  It  would  defeat  his  design,  if  a  father  could
impart  all  his  own  knowledge  to  his  children  at  their
birth  ;  and  still  more  effectually  wTould  his  plan  have
been  frustrated,  if  the  Bible,  given  for  the  benefit  of
man,  had  made  a  revelation  of  all  the  sciences  which  it
is  possible  for  man  to  learn.  The  wisdom  and  bene-
volence of  God  have,  in  the  laborious  discipline  given
to  man,  ends  to  accomplish  which  we  cannot  fully  com-
prehend ;  but  we  can  clearly  see  that  the  Bible  har-
monizes with  the  course  of  Divine  Providence,  when  it
leaves  the  knowledge  of  secular  science  to  be  acquired
by  human  labor.

(231)


232  H  A  R  M  0  NY     WITH     SCIENCE.

The  silence  of  the  Bible  on  the  subjects  of  secular
science  accords  with  the  inferiority  of  their  value.  It
may  seem  to  us,  whose  minds  are  so  engrossed  with  the
affairs  of  the  present  world,  that  it  would  have  been
highly  benevolent  if  the  great  Father  of  all  had,  in
making  a  revelation  to  his  children,  instructed  them
in  agriculture,  medicine,  civil  government,  natural  phi-
losophy, and  in  all  the  arts  which  now  confer  so  many
benefits  on  civilized  life.  But  every  reader  of  the  Bible
knows  that  this  formed  no  part  of  its  design.  And  why  ?
The  book  itself  explains  that  a  far  higher  and  nobler
end  was  kept  in  view.  Morals  and  religion  so  far  tran-
scend all  secular  science  in  importance,  that  they  fill  up
the  sacred  volume,  and  matters  of  inferior  interest  obtain
a  place  only  so  far  as  they  subserve  the  grand  design.

The  moral  and  religious  instructions  of  the  Bible  were
given  to  men  who  were  ignorant  of  modern  science ;
and  the  design  with  which  it  was  given  would  have  been
frustrated  if  its  language  had  not  been  accommodated
to  their  habits  of  thought.  It  was  not  more  necessary
that  God  should  use  human  language,  than  that  he
should  address  unlearned  men  in  language  which  they
could  comprehend,  and  therefore  not  in  the  technical
language  of  modern  science.

But  the  Bible,  though  it  adopts  the  language  of  unin-
formed men,  makes  no  mistake  on  scientific  subjects.
Some  of  the  heathen  religions  have  a  false  system  of
geography  so  incorporated  with  them,  that  the  falsehood
of  the  whole  is  detected  by  correct  geographical  instruc-
tion. Infidels  have  repeatedly  announced  that  the  dis-
coveries of  modern  science  have  in  like  manner  over-
turned the  Bible;  but  their  triumph  has  been  vain.  (160)
On  careful  examination,  the  instructions  of  the  holy
book  are  found  to  harmonize  with  all  true  science,  and


GEOGRAPHY.  233

the  completeness  of  the  harmony  becomes  an  argument
that  the  discoveries  of  modern  science  were  not  unknown
to  the  author  of  the  Bible.  The  instructions  given  by
a  scientific  father  to  an  infant  child  do  not  unfold  the
doctrines  of  astronomy,  chemistry,  or  natural  philosophy;
but  if  remembered  by  the  child  at  mature  age,  may
furnish  proof  that  the  father  understood  these  sciences.
It  may  be  discoverable,  in  reviewing  the  manner  of
his  instructions,  that  he  knew  more  on  these  subjects
than  he  attempted  to  impart,  and  that  he  avoided  errors
into  which  an  ignorant  father  would  have  fallen.  So
the  scientific  reader  of  the  Bible  may  discover  proof
in  its  holy  pages  that  the  author  of  the  book  was  not
unacqainted  with  modern  science.

Section    I.     Geography.

In  confirming  the  truth  of  Bible  history,  we  are  not
compelled  to  rely  on  written  testimony  exclusively  ;  but
numerous  monuments  of  ancient  workmanship  remain,
which  carry  us  back  to  remote  times,  and  place  us  in
the  midst  of  living  and  acting  generations  that  have
long  passed  away.  In  confirming  the  truth  of  Bible
geography,  the  monumental  species  of  evidence  presents
itself  abundantly,  with  all  its  impressiveness  and  indu-
bitable certainty.  The  countries,  mountains,  valleys,
rivers,  seas,  and  islands,  which  are  mentioned  in  the
sacred  volume,  still  remain ;  and  even  many  of  the
cities  and  villages  still  occupy  their  ancient  sites.
Modern  travellers  visit  the  places  once  trodden  by
patriarchs,  prophets,  apostles,  and  by  the  Son  of  God
himself;  and  their  reports  give  full  confirmation  to  the
truth  of  Bible  geography.  In  some  cases,  where  cities
have  perished,  and  where  scepticism  would  question  the
possibility  of  their  having  ever  existed  (79),  their  ruins


234  HARMONY     WITH     SCIENCE.

have  been  dug  up,  and  unexpected  confirmation  has
been  given  so  complete  as  to  silence  doubt  and  cavil.
While  the  imperishable  features  of  nature  are  standing
monuments,  bearing  testimony  to  the  truth  of  Bible
geography,  the  disinterred  ruins  of  ancient  cities  tes-
tify to  the  antiquity  of  the  book,  and  satisfactorily
establish  the  truth  of  its  chronology.  Were  the  Bible
a  forgery  of  modern  times,  these  evidences  of  its  faith-
fulness to  antiquity  could  not  exist.  Indeed,  no  forger
who  hoped  to  escape  detection,  would  enter  so  minutely
and  with  so  little  reserve  into  geographical  representa-
tions and  allusions  extending  to  all  parts  of  the  known
world.  The  writers  of  the  Bible  speak  out  like  honest
men  of  things  which  they  knew.  A  forger  would  have
dealt  more  in  generals  ;  or  would  have  failed  in  his
knowledge  at  some  point,  and  exposed  his  forgery  to
detection.

A  few  passages  in  which  the  situation  of  places  is
described  in  relation  to  the  Jordan,  have  furnished  occa-
sion for  infidel  objection.  For  example,  it  is  objected
that  the  following  passage  falsely  locates  on  the  east  of
the  river  a  territory  which  in  truth  lies  on  the  west.
"  The  land  of  Zebulon,  and  the  land  of  Nephthalim,  by
the  way  of  the  sea,  beyond  Jordan,  Galilee  of  the  Gen-
tiles."1 Our  reply  to  this  objection  is  that,  according
to  Septuagint  usage,  which  the  New  Testament  writers
follow,  the  word  which  is  here  rendered  "  beyond''  sig-
nifies by  the  side  of,  without  intending  either  side  as
distinguished  from  the  other.  That  it  does  not  always
signify  on  the  farther  side,  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  it
occurs  in  two  passages2  of  the  Greek  version,  where  it
means  on  this  side,  and  is  so  rendered  in  our  English

1  Matt.  iv.  15.  2  Deut.  i.  1 ;  iv.  49.


NATURAL     HISTORY.  235

version.  In  one  verse1  it  occurs  twice,  referring  one
time  to  the  west  side,  and  the  other  to  the  east.  When
either  side  is  to  be  definitely  signified,  the  addition  of  a
phrase  toivard  the  east,  or  toward  the  sea,  is  necessary.
This  explanation  removes  all  difficulty  from  the  passage,
and  applies  to  other  passages  of  the  kind.

Another  infidel  objection  is,  that  Moses  speaks  of  the
city  Dan,2  when  no  place  of  that  name  was  in  existence ;
since  the  city  which  afterwards  received  this  name,  was
at  that  time  called  Laish.3  We  reply,  first,  that  the
identity  of  the  place  with  the  city  afterwards  called  Dan
is  an  assumption  without  proof.  It  may  have  been  the
river  Dan,  if  it  be  true  that  a  head  branch  of  the  Jor-
dan was  called  by  this  name ;  or  it  may  have  been  some
other  place  of  which  we  have  now  no  knowledge.  We
reply,  secondly,  that  there  is  no  insuperable  difficulty
in  admitting  the  city  Laish  to  be  intended.  The  Old
Testament  is  to  be  considered  the  sacred  book  of  the
Hebrew  nation ;  and,  if  Moses  wrote  Laish,  and  later
inspired  writers  for  the  sake  of  perspicuity  substituted
Dan,  the  new  name  of  the  same  city,  neither  he  nor
they  can  be  justly  charged  with  a  geographical  mistake.

Section    II.     Natural    History.

It  is  objected  that  Jonah  could  not  have  been  swal-
lowed by  a  whale,  because  the  whale's  throat  is  too  small
to  receive  the  body  of  a  man.

The  reply  is,  that  the  word  employed  by  the  sacred
writer  denotes  a  great  fish  in  general.  The  language
is,  "  The  Lord  had  prepared  a  great  fish  to  swallow  up
Jonah,"4  and  the  New  Testament  has  employed  a  Greek

1  Num.  xxxii.  19.  2  Gen.  xiv.  14.

3  Judges,  xviii.  27,  29.  *  Jonah,  i.  17.


236  HARMONY    WITH     SCIENCE.

word  which,  though  rendered  "whale,"  is  not  restricted
in  its  signification  to  the  species  of  fish  that  technically
receives  this  name.  It  is  supposed  that  the  fish  which
swallowed  Jonah  belonged  to  the  species  of  shark,  or
dog  fish,  called  Lamia  eanis  carcharias.  In  fishes  of
this  species  the  bodies  of  men  have  been  found  entire.

It  is  objected  that  Noah's  ark  was  not  large  enough
to  contain  a  pair  of  every  species  of  living  creatures  in
the  world,  with  the  food  necessary  for  their  sustenance.

Our  first  reply  to  this  objection  is,  that  the  length  of
the  cubit  by  which  the  ark  was  measured  is  unknown,
and  therefore  the  capacity  may  have  been  much  greater
than  the  objection  supposes.  A  fabric  which  required
one  hundred  and  twenty  years  for  being  built  must  have
been  of  large  dimensions.  What  the  arrangements
were  for  stowing  away  the  various  creatures,  we  know
not ;  but  we  may  be  assured  that  they  were  the  best  pos-
sible, since  infinite  wisdom  directed  the  plan.  Miraculous
power  must  have  been  exerted,  to  bring  the  creatures
into  the  ark ;  and  the  same  power  could  preserve  them
without  repeated  supplies  of  food,  and  in  a  closely-
crowded  condition.1  Nothing  is  too  hard  for  omnipo-
tence.

Our  second  reply  is,  that  the  deluge  may  have  been
universal  with  respect  to  the  human  race  only,  which
may  have  been  confined  at  the  time  to  a  comparatively
small  part  of  the  earth's  surface.     On  this  supposition

1  We  can  conjecture  that  the  events  may  have  occurred  as
follows  : — After  completing  the  ark,  Noah,  in  obedience  to  God's
command,  collected  a  supply  of  food.  This  being  done,  the
animals,  as  if  moved  by  instinct,  were  under  divine  influence
attracted  to  the  food,  and,  having  taken  a  plentiful  meal,  they
miraculously  retired  to  their  proper  places  in  the  ark,  and  slept
till  the  flood  subsided.


COPERNICAN     SYSTEM.  237

only  so  much  space  was  required  in  the  ark,  as  would
preserve  the  animals  needed  for  man,  and  for  filling  up
the  desolated  territory.  The  catastrophe  was  caused
by  the  sin  of  mankind,  and  that  it  cut  off  the  whole
race  with  the  exception  of  the  few  who  were  preserved
in  the  ark,  is  manifest  from  the  Scripture  account,  and
from  traditions  which  have  been  preserved  in  almost  all
the  nations  of  the  world.  (74,  159)  It  was  not  neces-
sary for  the  purpose  of  the  divine  vengeance,  that
animals  should  be  destroyed  beyond  the  boundaries  of
human  habitation.  The  language  of  Scripture,  if  in-
terpreted by  the  usage  of  those  who  speak  and  write
with  calm  and  philosophical  accuracy,  expresses  more
than  this :  but  the  Bible  abounds  in  figures  of  speech,
and  figures  of  speech  are  departures  from  literal  truth.
When  it  is  said  God  "  is  a  rock,"  no  sane  man  will  take
the  proposition  for  literal  truth,  or  charge  the  Bible
with  falsehood  for  containing  it.  Among  the  figures
used  by  rude  nations,  especially  in  describing  events  or
objects  which  excite  admiration,  the  hyperbole  is  very
common  ;  and  since  the  Bible  adopts  the  common  lan-
guage of  men,  its  style  has  numerous  examples  of  this
figure.  If  all  the  face  of  the  earth  within  the  horizon
of  human  habitation,  was  submerged  by  the  deluge,  and
all  the  creatures  within  that  limit  destroyed,  the  de-
scription of  the  catastrophe  given  by  Moses,  would  suit-
ably represent  the  facts  according  to  the  usus  loquendi.
Compare  Gen.  xli.  56 ;  Deut.  ii.  25 ;  Acts  ii.  5,  &c.

Section  III.     Copernican   System  of
Astronomy.

Among  the  absurdities  of  heathenism,  the  opinion  has
been  held  that  the  earth  is  borne  up,  by  an  elephant
standing  on  a  tortoise.     Considering  the  age  in  which


238  HARMONY    WITH     SCIENCE.

the  Bible  was  written,  some  such  silly  notion  as  this,
would  probably  have  had  a  place  in  its  pages,  if  the
writers  had  been  left  to  the  direction  of  their  own  igno-
rance. But  in  one  of  the  oldest  books  in  the  sacred
volume,  we  find  the  declaration,  "  He  hangeth  the  earth
upon  nothing."1  This  declaration  is  beautifully  con-
sistent with  the  Copernican  system  of  astronomy,  and
if  it  had  been  found  in  the  writings  of  some  ancient
heathen,  might  have  been  sufficient  proof  to  an  infidel
philospher  that  the  writer  understood  the  true  astronomi-
cal doctrine.  The  unlearned  overrate  the  magnitude  of
the  earth,  and  underrate  that  of  the  heavenly  bodies.
The  royal  Psalmist,  in  accordance  with  better  views,
contemplated  man's  littleness,  in  contrast  with  the  moon
and  stars,2  and  Isaiah  represents  the  comparative  little-
ness of  the  earth  in  the  beautiful  language,  "  Who  hath
measured  the  waters  in  the  hollow  of  his  hand,  and  meted
out  heaven  with  the  span,  and  comprehended  the  dust
of  the  earth  in  a  measure,  and  weighed  the  mountains
in  scales,  and  the  hills  in  a  balance."3  The  ancients
conceived  the  blue  sky  to  be  a  solid  vault,  holding  up  a
supply  of  water  that  from  time  to»  time  descends  in  rain
through  openings  called  the  windows  of  heaven.  The
Greek  translators  of  Genesis  have  called  it  by  a  name
which  expresses  solidity,  and  to  which  our  word  "  firm-
ament" corresponds:  but  the  notion  of  solidity  is  not
conveyed  by  the  Hebrew  word  which  Moses  employed,
and  which  maybe  better  rendered  "  the  expanse."  In
such  language  as  the  ancients  could  understand,  Moses
describes  the  philosophic  fact  that  the  atmosphere  bears
up  the  vapors  that  form  rain  and  descend  to  the  earth
in  showers  ;  but  it  is  a  remarkable  and  instructive  fact,

1  Job.  xxvi.  7.  2  Psalms,  viii.  3,  4.

3  Isaiah,  xl.  12.


GEOLOGY.  239

that  his  language  is  free  from  the  philosophical  inaccu-
racy found  in  that  of  the  seventy  translators,  though
they  lived  many  years  after  his  time.

Joshua's  command  to  the  sun  to  stand  still,1  and
various  passages  of  Scripture  which  attribute  stability
to  the  earth,  have  been  thought  inconsistent  with  the
received  theory  according  to  which  the  sun  is  the  centre
of  the  solar  system,  and  the  earth  is  in  motion  per-
petually. Yet  the  language  expresses  in  the  most  in-
telligible manner  the  ideas  intended.  It  is  not  at  all
probable  that  Joshua  understood  the  theory  of  the
earth's  diurnal  revolution ;  and  if  he  did,  it  was  never-
theless necessary  in  speaking  before  the  people,  to  use
the  modes  of  speech  with  which  they  were  acquainted ;
as  modern  astronomers  speak  of  the  sun's  rising  and
setting,  using  popular  rather  than  scientific  language.
A  command  to  the  earth  to  cease  its  rotation,  would  have
needed,  in  order  to  render  it  intelligible,  an  accompany-
ing explanation  of  the  astronomical  theory ;  and  this  it
was  not  the  design  of  God  that  either  Joshua  or  the  Bible
should  give  to  mankind.  In  like  manner  the  stability
attributed  to  the  earth  is  merely  apparent  and  relative,
contrasted  with  the  incessant  motion  and  change  visible
in  other  objects.

Section  IV.     Geology.

The  science  of  geology,  which  has  lately  engaged
much  attention,  is  thought  by  some  to  contradict  the
first  chapter  of  Genesis  with  respect  to  the  date  of
Creation.

The  earth's  crust  contains  innumerable  deposits  of
animal  and  vegetable  remains :  and  from  the  position  of
the  strata  in  which  they  are  found,  geologists  computt

1  Josh.  x.  12.
21  Q


240  HARMOSY     WITH     SCIENCE.

the  dates  when  they  were  deposited.  These  dates,  it  is
alleged,  were  long  anterior  to  that  which  the  Mosaic
account  assigns  to  creation.

The  astronomical  difficulty  before  mentioned,  con-
cerning the  motion  of  the  sun  and  the  stability  of  the
earth,  produced  as  much  embarrassment  in  a  former  age,
as  the  geological  difficulty  just  stated  does  at  the  present
time.  But  the  former  difficulty  has  long  since  vanished ;
and  so  in  due  time  will  the  latter.  Nay,  there  is  reason
to  believe  that  the  new  science  will,  l*hen  better  under-
stood, confirm  rather  than  contradict  the  inspired  record.

If  the  human  race  has  existed  on  the  earth  for  thou-
sands of  ages,  how  has  it  happened  that  all  the  improve-
ments in  arts,  science,  and  literature,  have  been  made
within  the  comparatively  very  short  period  of  which
history  gives  an  account ;  and  how  has  it  happened  that
history  itself  began  its  record  so  recently,  and  that  all
monuments  of  the  intelligence,  labor,  and  very  existence
of  generations  innumerable,  have  been  so  completely
obliterated,  as  to  leave  not  a  trace  behind  ?  If  the
computations  of  geology  differ  much  from  the  Mosaic
account  with  respect  to  the  antiquity  of  the  human  race,
they  would  have  history  and  reason  against  them  as
well  as  the  Bible ;  but  they  do  not  differ.  By  a  general
agreement  of  the  ablest  geologists,  no  human  remains
have  been  found  except  in  the  later  formations.  They
agree  that  many  genera  and  species  of  animals  lived  and
perished  in  periods  long  anterior,  when  no  human  being
trod  the  earth.  Geology  therefore  has  a  record  which,
if  these  interpreters  of  the  science  read  it  correctly,
affirms  in  strict  harmony  with  the  Mosaic  record,  that
man  has  not  always  existed  on  the  earth,  but  came  into
being  at  the  last  period  of  creation,  and  in  the  midst  of
previously  created  animals.


GEOLOGY.  241

"  It  is  surely  worthy  of  remark,  that  while  in  both
the  sacred  and  geologic  records  a  strongly  defined  line
separates  between  the  period  of  plants  and  the  succeed-
ing period  of  reptiles,  and  again  between  the  period  of
reptiles  and  the  succeeding  period  of  mammals,  no  line
in  either  record  separates  between  this  period  of  mam-
mals and  the  human  period.  Man  came  into  being  as
the  last  born  of  creation,  just  ere  the  close  of  that  sixth
day — the  third  and  terminal  period  of  organic  creation —
to  which  the  great  mammals  belong." — Miller.

"  There  is  not  in  any  museum  or  any  private  collec-
tion in  the  world  a  single  human  fossil  that  can  be  traced
to  any  of  the  older  formations." — Baehman.

"  A  few  months  later,  when  he  [Sir  Charles  Lyell]
visited  Tuskaloosa,  I  took  occasion  to  relate  what  Dr.
Koch  had  so  solemnly  assured  me  [that  he  had  dis-
covered the  fossil  remains  of  a  huge  monster,  the  Mis-
sourium,  which  had  evidently  been  killed  by  human
beings].  He  became  quite  indignant  against  Dr.  K.,
called  him  an  impostor,  and  declared  his  utter  disbelief
of  the  whole  story." — Curtis.

The  supposition  that  the  human  race  co-existed  with
the  long  extinct  races  of  the  older  geologic  age  was  so
much  at  variance  with  what  he  considered  the  uniform  tes-
timony of  geologic  phenomena,  that  Lyell  could  not  treat
it  with  respect.  Compare  Lyell's  Elements  of  Geology,
p.  170.

But  Dr.  Curtis  says  :  "  What  are  dates  *  *  to  the
geological  periods  which  Sir  Charles  Lyell  thinks  indi-
cated by  the  sixty  feet  of  penetrated  mud  of  the  Nile,
throughout  which  he  finds  burnt  brick  and  other  evi-
dences of  civilized  man,  without  having  yet  reached  the
bottom  ?  They  appear  to  prove  not  less  than  twelve
thousand  years  and  perhaps  thirty  thousand."


242  HARMONY     WITH     SCIENCE.

This  learned  geologist,  while  allowing  so  many  years
for  the  existence  of  man  on  the  earth,  believed  that  a
far  greater  number  has  passed  since  the  geologic  period
to  which  the  Missourium  must  be  referred,  and  hence
he  could  consistently  reject  the  report  of  Dr.  Koch.
But  while  the  discoveries  of  his  science  justified  this
rejection,  his  discoveries  in  the  deposits  of  the  Nile  do
not  justify  the  inference  respecting  the  antiquity  of  man-
kind, without  supposing  that  the  river  has  made  its
deposits  in  undisturbed  quiet  for  thousands  of  years.
Who  will  suppose  this  ?  Who  will  maintain  that  no
convulsion  has  occurred  to  disturb  the  order  of  the
strata  formed  by  the  deposits  ?  For  a  single  case,  take
the  earthquake  of  A.  d.  365,  of  which  Gibbon  writes
thus  : — "  The  shores  of  the  Mediterranean  were  left  dry
by  the  sudden  retreat  of  the  sea;  great  quantities  of
fish  were  caught  with  the  hand ;  large  vessels  were
stranded  on  the  mud  :  and  a  curious  spectator  amused
his  eye,  or  rather  his  fancy,  by  contemplating  the  vari-
ous appearances  of  valleys  and  mountains  which  had
never  before,  since  the  formation  of  the  globe,  been  ex-
posed to  the  sun.  But  the  tide  soon  returned,  with  the
weight  of  an  immense  and  irresistible  deluge  which  was
severely  felt  on  the  coasts  of  Sicily,  of  Dalmatia,  of
Greece,  and  of  Egypt ;  large  boats  were  transported
and  lodged  on  the  roofs  of  houses,  or  at  the  distance  of
two  miles  from  the  shore ;  the  people,  with  their  habita-
tions, were  swept  away  by  the  waters :  and  the  city  of
Alexandria  annually  commemorated  the  day  on  which
fifty  thousand  persons  had  lost  their  lives  in  the  inun-
dation."

But  do  very  ancient  monuments  of  art  incontrovertibly
prove  a  coeval  antiquity  of  our  race  ?  When  God  sent
the  flood  on  the  earth,  if,  instead  of  preserving  Noah


GEOLOGY.  243

and  his  family  to  repeople  the  world,  he  had  chosen  to
create  a  new  race,  it  is  probable  that  no  record  of  ante-
diluvian man  would  have  existed,  except  that  which
would  have  been  contained  in  the  archives  of  geology.
Now  it  is  conceivable  that  these  archives  may  contain
some  record  of  an  extinct  pre-Adamic  race,  capable  of
producing  works  of  art.  The  conception,  however  wild
and  improbable,  cannot  be  proved  to  be  absurd  or  im
possible :  but  until  this  is  done,  ancient  monuments  of
art  found  in  the  geologic  formations  do  not  incontro-
vertibly  prove  a  coeval  antiquity  of  our  race.

If  geology  should  furnish  proof  that,  before  man  was
created,  there  existed  an  intelligent  race  of  creatures
capable  of  producing  works  of  art,  the  received  doctrine
of  the  science  would  assign  to  that  race  a  lower  rank  in
the  scale  of  being  than  to  man.  That  doctrine  is,  that
in  the  progress  of  creation  through  the  countless  ages
of  the  past,  there  has  been  a  steady  progress  from  the
lower  to  the  higher  orders  of  animated  beings,  the  infe-
rior races  passing  away  and  giving  place  to  superior.
Between  man  and  the  highest  order  of  brutes  now
known,  there  is  an  interval  sufficiently  wide  to  admit  an
intervening  race  as  the  forerunner  of  man.  Of  the
existing  varieties  in  the  human  race,  some  are  further
removed  from  brutes  than  others,  but  the  interval  be-
tween the  highest  and  lowest  varieties  is  less  than  that
between  the  lowest  variety  of  man  and  the  highest
order  of  brutes :  yet  the  first  interval  is  filled  up  with
intermediate  varieties,  while  the  second  is  occupied  by
no  creature  now  known.  If  geology  can  show  that  such
a  creature  once  existed,  perhaps  possessing  intelligence
without  the  moral  endowments  which  now  distinguish
the  human  race  in  all  its  varieties,  the  discovery  might
21*


244  HARMONY    WITH     SCIENCE.

be  consistently  admitted  among  the  truths  of  science,
and  it  would  not  conflict  with  revelation.

A  few  years  ago,  when  Lyell  published  his  Elements
of  Geology,  it  was  a  well-established  doctrine  of  the
science,  that  all  human  remains,  and  all  the  monuments
of  art  were  confined,  not  only  to  the  latest  or  tertiary
formations,  but  to  their  pliocene  or  most  recent  period ;
and  not  only  to  the  pliocene  period,  but  to  its  most  re-
cent subdivision,  the  newer  pliocene :  and  the  existence
of  human  remains  or  monuments  of  art  was  regarded  as
sufficient  proof  that  the  formations  in  Avhich  they  were
found  belonged  to  this  most  recent  period.  But  some
later  discoveries,  if  correctly  reported,  find  monuments
of  art  mingled  in  the  Belgian  caves  with  the  fossil
remains  of  the  mammoth  and  other  animals  belonging
to  a  more  ancient  period.  How  they  came  there  is  yet
to  be  accounted  for.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  remains
considered  human,  which  are  found  in  these  caves,
appear  to  have  belonged  to  creatures  differing  from  the
present  race  of  men,  if  we  may  judge  from  a  particular
description  of  one  of  them  : — "  The  teeth  and  the  skulls
of  these  men  are  found,  and  their  bones,  one  of  the
most  ancient,  the  Neanderthal  bones,  indicating  enor-
mous strength  and  muscular  development,  with  a  skull
the  most  brutal  ever  discovered." — Curtis.

Shall  we  conclude  that  the  monuments  of  art  were
the  workmanship  of  semi-human  beings  belonging  to  an
extinct  race  ?  Or  shall  we  conclude  that  some  rude
sons  of  Adam  took  up  their  abode  in  a  cave  where
ancient  animals  had  left  their  bones ;  that  they  used
these  bones  in  manufacturing  "  bone  needles  seven  or
eight  inches  long,"  now  remaining  as  monuments  of
their  art ;  and  that  they  afterwards  left  their  own  bones
in  the  same  cave  to  mingle  with  the  mass  ?     The  latter


GEOLOGY.  215

hypothesis  agrees  best  with  the  general  testimony  of
geologic  phenomena.

We  wait  with  patient  interest  for  the  opening  of  each
new  page  in  the  geological  record,  and  we  confidently
expect  that  what  God  has  written  in  this  record  will,  if
properly  read,  be  ultimately  found  to  harmonize  with
what  he  has  written  in  the  Bible.

Since  the  preceding  was  written,  the  Annual  Report
of  the  Board  of  Regents  of  the  Smithsonian  Institution
for  the  year  1867  has  come  into  my  hands  ;  and  an  ably
written  article  published  with  it,  entitled  u  Man  as  the
Contemporary  of  the  Mammoth  and  the  Reindeer  in
Middle  Europe,"  is  now  before  me.  This  article  gives
an  account  of  geological  discoveries  made  in  France,
Belgium,  and  other  parts  of  Europe,  from  1828  to  1860,
with  scientific  deductions  from  these  discoveries.  These
deductions  carry  back  the  antiquity  of  the  human  race
thousands  of  years  before  the  time  of  Adam,  but  they
leave  undisturbed  the  received  doctrines  of  geology,
that  long  periods  preceded  the  introduction  of  man  into
the  world,  and  that  when  he  appeared,  he  came  forth
the  last  of  creation

Most  of  the  recent  discoveries  in  the  European  caves
are  manifestly  reconcilable  with  the  supposition  that  the
great  bones  found  there  were  deposited  before  they
lived  who  cracked  them  and  wrought  them  into  needles.
Whether  the  few  discoveries  which  are  thought  to  be
irreconcilable  with  this  supposition  have  been  correctly
interpreted,  is  a  question  which  it  will  be  well  to  reserve
for  further  scientific  examination :  and  there  is  still
another  question  which  must  be  determined  before  the
high  antiquity  claimed  for  our  race  can  be  established.

In  a  former  paragraph  a  hypothesis  is  timidly  pro-
posed, that  a  race  now  extinct,   of  beiDgs  capable  of


246  HARMONY     WITH     SCIENCE.

producing  works  of  art,  may  have  existed  before  the
time  of  Adam.  Let  us  compare  with  this  hypothesis
the  following  from  page  340  of  the  article  before  us : —
"  The  very  few  ancient  skulls  hitherto  found  authorize
us  to  speak  only  with  great  reserve  of  the  type  of  the
races  of  men  existing  at  that  remote  period.  The  skull
discovered  in  a  cavern  of  the  Neanderthal,  near  Dus-
seldorf,  exhibits  an  unusual  thickness.  The  projection
of  the  supra-orbital  ridges  is  enormously  great,  the
forehead  narrow  and  very  low.  The  development  of
the  brain  was  slight,  and  similar  to  that  of  certain  Aus-
tralians. Carl  Vogt  is  of  opinion  that  this  skull  and
that  found  by  Schmerling,  in  the  cavern  of  Engis,  near
Liege,  are  remains  of  a  race  no  longer  existing  in
Europe.  But  scattered  discoveries  like  these  scarcely
entitle  us  to  such  positive  conclusions ;  it  were  well  to
await  further  revelations  before  resigning  ourselves  to
any  settled  determination  on  this  point."

In  this  extract  the  timidly  proposed  hypothesis  comes
forth  with  a  new  aspect :  yet  no  longer  appears  as  a  wild
and  improbable  conjecture,  but  rather  as  a  scientific  de-
duction, confidently  made  by  one  geologist,  and  cauti-
ously submitted  by  another  to  the  further  consideration
of  scientific  men,  that  its  right  to  be  admitted  among  the
established  truths  of  science  may  be  duly  examined.
The  subject  which  these  geologists  have  left  for  consi-
deration possesses,  it  may  be,  far  greater  importance  than
either  of  them  imagined.  It  may  be  that  the  penetra-
tion of  Carl  Vogt  has  discovered  a  clue  which  will  guide
to  a  perfect  reconciliation  between  geology  and  the
Bible.

The  primitive  race  appears  to  have  included  different
varieties,  possessing  likeness  in  different  degrees  to  the
present  race  of  mankind.     The  Neanderthal  skull  pro-


G  E  0  L  0  (I  Y.  247

bably  belonged  to  the  lowest  variety.  Another  variety
is  distinguished  by  the  roundness  of  the  skull.  Some
of  the  bones  indicate  enormous  strength :  others  are
beneath  the  ordinary  stature  of  the  present  race.

The  assumption  which  the  article  before  us  every-
where makes,  that  the  primitive  race  that  coexisted
with  the  mammoths  were  our  forefathers,  is  embarrassed
with  a  perplexing  difficulty  which  is  discussed  at  p.  357
without  obtaining  a  satisfactory  solution.  Many  proofs
are  found  that  the  race  possessed  intelligence  and  skill,
and  that  it  made  considerable  progress  in  arts  and  civil-
ization. The  delineations  of  animals  found  among  their
works  of  art  compare  favorably  with  the  saints  and  Ma-
donnas of  times  long  since  the  introduction  of  Chris-
tianity. It  is  manifest  that  the  improvement  in  arts  and
civilization  was  progressive ;  and  if  it  began  twenty  or
thirty  thousand  years  ago,  how  can  it  be  accounted  for
that  so  little  advance  has  been  made,  and  that  the  rise
and  progress  of  the  arts  needed  to  be  repeated  after
myriads  of  years  ?  The  easiest  solution  of  the  difficulty
is,  that  the  race  has  not  been  continuous.  The  hypo-
thesis of  Carl  Yogt  appears  to  have  had  respect  chiefly,
if  not  exclusively,  to  the  lower  varieties  of  the  primitive
race  :  but  the  difficulty  now  under  consideration  respects
the  higher  varieties,  and  affords  a  strong  argument
against  limiting  the  hypothesis.  Let  the  hypothesis  to
which  the  attention  of  scientific  men  is  invited  be,  that
the  whole  primitive  race  became  extinct,  like  its  sup-
posed contemporary  the  mammoth.

In  the  hypothesis  of  a  pre-Adamic  intelligent  race,  the
conjecture  was  admitted  that  they  may  have  been  without
moral  endowments.  But  if  the  discoveries  made  in  the
cave  of  Aurignac  are  rightly  interpreted  on  pp.  341  and
342,  funeral  rites  were  celebrated  in  that  cave  by  men  of


248  HARMONY    WITH    SCIENCE.

the  primitive  race,  and  offerings  were  made  to  their
departed  dead,  designed  for  their  use  in  the  new  state  of
being  on  which  they  had  entered.  It  is  hence  concluded
that  these  men  believed  in  a  future  state ;  and,  if  so,
they  probably  had  a  sense  of  accountability  and  moral
obligation.

Geology  gives  an  impressive  view  of  God's  eternity,
and  reveals  his  eternal  power  and  Godhead  in  the  crea-
tion and  preservation  of  races  that  have  long  ceased  to
exist.  Since  it  thus  enlarges  our  view  of  his  creation
and  providence,  we  ought  not  to  be  surprised  if  it  should
also  enlarge  our  view  of  his  moral  government,  and
bring  to  our  knowledge  a  race  of  beings  that  have
finished  their  probation,  and  gone  to  the  retributions
of  eternity.  They  may  have  perished  in  some  general
catastrophe,  which  left  no  Noah  surviving  to  perpetuate
the  race ;  or  they  may  have  been  carried  off  by  a  suc-
cession of  disasters.  We  cannot  expect  geology  to  give
us  a  minute  account  of  the  manner  in  which  they  closed
their  lives  :  but  if  its  records  are  correctly  interpreted
on  p.  360,  they  describe  in  part  a  calamity  which  may
have  extended  to  the  destruction  of  the  race.  "But
there  come  days  of  disaster,  and  truly  disaster  is  not
spared  them.     A  concussion,  a  sudden  downfall  drives

them  from  their  rocky  dwelling

But  the  end  of  this  oldest  of  known  epochs  is  at  hand.
Floods  overwhelm  the  region.  The  dwellers,  driven
from  their  caves,  seek  refuge  in  vain  on  the  hills.
Death  overtakes  them;  a  dark  grotto  becomes  the  grave
of  those  hapless  fugitives  who,  as  at  Furfooz,  were  wit-
nesses of  this  great  catastrophe.  Nothing  is  spared  by
the  fearful  element."

After  all  it  may  be  that  our  present  purpose  has  no
need  of  the  new  hypothesis.     If  it  can  be  fully  made  out


GEOLOGY.  249

from  the  recent  discoveries,  that  our  race  at  some  past
time  coexisted  with  the  mammoth  and  reindeer,  this  will
not  prove  that  it  existed  at  the  remote  period  in  which
these  animals  were  most  numerous.  The  reindeer  race
is  not  now  wholly  extinct ;  and  why  may  not  the  recent
discoveries  be  interpreted  to  prove  the  lateness  of  the
mammoth's  extinction,  rather  than  the  great  antiquity
of  man  ?

In  seeking  to  reconcile  geology  and  the  Bible,  we
ought  to  bear  in  mind  that,  though  truth  is  always  con-
sistent with  itself,  its  consistency  is  often  not  apparent.
It  is  possible  for  two  truths  to  seem  contradictory  of
each  other,  so  long  as  we  are  ignorant  of  some  interme-
diate truth  which  unites  and  harmonizes  them.  Take
the  following  for  an  example : — A.  has  five  children,
and  B.  has  three  children  ;  yet,  when  all  these  children
are  counted,  they  are  only  seven  in  number.  That  the
Bible  is  the  word  of  God,  is  a  truth  established  on  irre-
fragable proof;  and  on  this  proof  our  faith  ought  to
rest  without  doubting,  though  we  may  be  unable  to  see
the  consistency  between  the  teachings  of  the  Bible  and
those  of  science.  God  has  given  us  the  Bible  as  a  reve-
lation from  himself ;  and  has  accompanied  it  with  such
proofs  of  its  divine  origin  that  he  authoritatively
demands  our  faith :  and  we  are  disobedient  to  God,
unjust  to  ourselves,  and  false  to  truth,  if  we  withhold
our  faith  from  the  divine  testimony,  until  we  are  able
to  reconcile  it  with  the  deductions  of  geology.

The  Bible  was  given  for  the  moral  and  religious
benefit  of  men,  and  not  to  teach  them  geology.  It  was
needful  for  us  to  know  our  relation  to  the  God  that  made
us,  and  to  understand  that  the  being  whom  we  are
required  to  love  and  worship,  is  the  Creator  of  all
things.     So  much  knowledge  the  brief  history  of  crea-


250  HARMONY     WITH    SCIENCE.

tion,  given  in  the  book  of  Genesis,  sufficiently  imparts.
The  question  whether  long  geological  periods  preceded
the  creation  of  man,  it  neither  proposes  nor  resolves  ;  but
leaves,  with  the  question  concerning  the  mechanism  of  the
solar  system,  to  be  investigated  by  human  labor  and  skill.

The  first  sentence  of  the  Bible  very  briefly  announces
the  fact  that  "  In  the  beginning  God  created  the  heavens
and  the  earth ;"  and  the  next  sentence,  "  The  earth  was
without  form  and  void,"  describes  a  state  of  things
which  probably  existed  immediately  after  the  beginning
in  which  the  earth  was  created ;  but  which  may  have
been  reproduced  many  ages  afterwards  by  some  convulsion
of  nature.  It  may  be  that  the  Mosaic  account  begins
with  this  last  date  to  describe  the  series  of  changes
through  which  the  power  of  the  Creator  in  the  work  of
six  days  brought  the  present  order  of  things  into
existence.

Some  geologists  think  that  they  find  a  harmony  be-
tween the  testimony  of  the  rocks  and  that  of  the  Bible,
not  only  with  respect  to  the  fact  and  date  of  man's
creation,  but  also  with  respect  to  the  order  in  which  all
other  created  things  were  brought  into  being.  In  their
opinion  the  geological  periods  of  which  the  rocks  testify,
form  a  succession  of  progressive  changes  which  are  well
described  by  Moses  as  six  days'  work  of  the  Creator.1

1  It  is  not  a  valid  objection  to  this  theory,  that  the  sun  did
not  make  his  appearance  in  the  firmament  until  the  fourth  day.
Light  was  created  on  the  first  day  ;  but  it  reached  the  earth's
surface  for  the  first  three  days  through  vapors  which  concealed
the  sun's  disc  from  view ;  and  Moses  has  described  events  as
they  would  have  appeared  to  a  beholder  at  the  earth's  surface.
We  have  no  right  to  conclude  from  our  present  experience,  that
the  sun's  disc  may  not  have  been  concealed  by  clouds  and  mists
for  a  long  geological  period.  Geology  furnishes  proof  that  there
was  a  long  carboniferous  period,  during  which  vegetation  at-


GEOLOGY.  251

If  this  harmony  can  be  clearly  and  satisfactorily  made
out,  we  may  conclude  that  some  sufficient  reason  existed
for  using  the  term  day  to  denote  a  long  geological
period,  and  the  terms  evening  and  morning  to  denote
parts  of  the  period.  The  Holy  Spirit,  in  predicting  by
the  prophets  changes  to  take  place  under  divine  Provi-
dence, has  used  the  term  day  to  denote  a  year ;  and  the
same  spirit,  in  revealing  past  changes  which  have  occurred
under  the  operation  of  creative  power,  may  have  em-
ployed the  same  term  in  a  similar  extension  of  its
meaning.  Paul  in  writing  to  the  Hebrews  seems  to  say
that  God's  rest  had  continued  from  the  creation  down
to  gospel  times,  and  that  true  believers  during  all
this  period  had  entered  into  it,  and  enjoyed  fellowship
therein  with  God.1  If  God's  day  of  rest  continued  for
thousands  of  years,  the  same  may  have  been  true  of  his
days  of  labor.  He  now  ceases  wholly  from  creating,
both  in  the  evening  and  the  morning  of  this  day,  which
may  be  periods  distinguished  from  each  other  by  the
rising  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  that  is,  by  the  coming
of  the  Messiah.  Perhaps  the  evening  and  the  morning
of  the  six  preceding  days  may  denote  alternate  periods
of  cessation  and  activity  in  the  exercise  of  creative
power.

As  the  divine  origin  of  prophecy  is  proved  by  its  ful-
filment, so  the  divine  origin  of  the  Mosaic  account  of
creation  is  proved  by  its  agreement  with  the  discoveries
of  geological  science,  and  it  is  no  valid  objection  to
either  that  in  both  the  term  day  is  used  in  an  extraor-
dinary sense.     The  laws  of  interpretation  must  admit

tained  a  rank  luxuriance  wholly  unknown  to  our  times ;  and  the
inference  is  rational  that  a  state  of  atmosphere   of  which  we
have  now  no  experience  prevailed  during  this  period.
1  Heb.  iv.  1-11.


252  HARMONY   WITH    SCIENCE.

words  to  be  used  in  accommodation  to  the  nature  of  the
subject.  A  day's  work  for  man  is  measured  by  a  few
hours ;  but  a  day's  work  of  God,  what  is  its  duration  ?
The  historian  of  the  creation  seems  to  have  intimated
that  he  did  not  use  the  term  day  in  its  ordinary  sense ;
for  after  having  described  the  work  of  six  days,  he  speaks
of  the  whole  as  the  work  of  one  day :  "  In  the  day  that
the  Lord  God  made  the  earth  and  the  heavens."1

The  hypothesis  that  the  words  "  The  earth  was  without
form  and  void"  refer  to  a  state  of  things  produced  by  a
great  convulsion,  allows  the  term  day  in  the  Mosaic  ac-
count of  the  changes  ensuing  to  be  taken  in  its  ordinary
sense.  But  to  this  hypothesis,  it  is  objected  that  geology
furnishes  no  proof  that  such  a  convulsion  occurred.  On
the  contrary,  it  is  alleged  that  the  same  genera  and
species  of  animals  which  had  long  existed  before  man
was  created,  continued  afterwards  to  inhabit  the  world
with  him,  and  therefore  their  lines  of  succession  were
not  broken  by  any  destructive  catastrophe.  This  objec-
tion however  is  not  decisive.  In  the  progressive  changes
of  the  geological  periods,  a  constant  advance  is  apparent
towards  higher  orders  of  beings.  The  advance  from  the
genera  and  species  of  animals  produced  in  the  last  period,
was  not  to  higher  orders  of  brutes,  but  to  rational  man.
If  it  did  not  fall  in  with  the  Creator's  design  to  make
further  improvement  in  brute  animals,  it  was  easy  for
his  power  to  reproduce  the  same  genera  and  species
that  may  have  been  destroyed  by  a  convulsion  of  nature ;
and  such  a  convulsion  may  have  been  as  necessary  to
prepare  the  earth  for  the  habitation  of  a  rational  race,
as  the  general  conflagration  will  hereafter  be  to  render
the  new  heaven  and  the  new  earth  an  abode  of  righte-

1  Gen.  ii.  4.


GEOLOGY.  253

ousness.  Changes  may  have  been  necessary  in  the
elevation  of  mountains,  the  extent  and  position  of  seas,
the  course  of  rivers,  the  fertility  of  lands,  and  the  depo-
site  of  minerals,  to  make  the  globe  such  a  habitation  as
God  was  pleased  to  give  to  men ;  but  no  change  may
have  been  necessary  in  the  genera  and  species  of  brute
animals,  and  the  reproduction  of  pre-existing  genera  and
species  may  have  been  a  sort  of  resurrection,  at  the
beginning  of  the  present  world,  serving  as  a  type  and
pledge  of  the  resurrection  which  is  to  take  place  at  the
end  of  the  world.

Geologists  find  proof  that  in  the  past  ages  numerous
convulsions  occurred,  rending  the  earth's  crust,  and
disturbing  the  order  of  its  strata,  sometimes  elevating
them  to  mountainous  height.  These  convulsions  have
been  the  chief  instrumentality  by  which  the  earth  has
been  made  to  change  its  form,  and  to  become  a  fit  abode
for  man.  When,  by  these  slowly  operating  natural
causes,  the  materials  had  been  collected,  and  put  to-
gether in  nearly  the  order  proper  to  form  a  habitation
for  man ;  and  when  the  time  drew  nigh  for  him  to  be
created,  and  put  in  possession  of  it ;  the  Great  Architect,
to  whom  nothing  is  impossible,  and  whom  no  labor  can
weary,  may  have  chosen  to  perfect  and  beautify  it  by  a
speedy  process,  taking  the  work  to  pieces,  readjusting
its  parts,  and  reconstructing  the  whole  in  such  a  style
that  he  was  willing  to  pronounce  it  "good,"  "  very
good."  So  he  will  at  death  take  to  pieces  the  human
body,  which  is  his  workmanship  by  the  instrumentality
of  slowly  operating  natural  causes,  and  will  afterwards,
by  an  instantaneous  process,  reconstruct  it  in  superior
beauty,  for  the  final  abode  of  the  immortal  spirit.

We  have  thus  seen  that  there  are  two  modes  of  har-
monizing Moses  and  geology,  without  rejecting  the  facts


254  HARMONY     WITH     SCIENCE.

and  doctrines  of  the  science.  FuYther  research  will
throw  more  light  on  the  subject,  and  will  more  fully
elucidate  the  harmony  of  which  our  present  discovery  is
imperfect,  though  more  than  sufficient  to  silence  infidel
doubts  and  cavils.

Section   V.     Plurality   of   Worlds.

Infidels  have  objected  that  the  Christian  doctrine  of
redemption  is  inconsistent  with  the  discoveries  of  modern
astronomy,  which,  it  is  alleged,  have  proved  that  there
are  in  the  universe  innumerable  worlds  of  intelligent
beings  who  need  the  care  and  compassion  of  the  Creator
as  much  as  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  If  it  was
necessary  for  us,  that  the  Son  of  God  should  become
incarnate,  live  more  than  thirty  years  on  earth,  and  then
die  as  an  expiatory  sacrifice,  the  objection  infers  that
it  is  necessary  for  him  to  perform  a  like  mission  to
every  other  world,  and  make  in  each  a  similar  oblation.
That  a  divine  person  should  be  subjected  to  a  perpetual
succession  of  humiliations  and  sufferings,  is  deemed  suf-
ficiently absurd  to  disprove  the  doctrine  from  which  the
conclusion  is  supposed  to  follow.

This  objection  assumes  for  modern  astronomy  much
more  than  it  can  justly  claim.  The  science  has  ascer-
tained that  the  other  planets  of  the  solar  system  have
like  the  earth  a  revolution  of  seasons  and  a  regular  re-
turn of  day  and  night.  It  has  also  discovered  by  the
telescope  innumerable  fixed  stars  which  the  unaided
vision  of  man  cannot  see.  Between  these  fixed  stars
and  our  sun  it  has  shown  that  there  is  an  analogy  which
renders  it  probable  that  each  fixed  star  is,  like  the  sun,
a  centre  around  which  a  system  of  planets  is  arranged
resembling  our  solar  system.  Because  astronomers
have  been  unable  to  comprehend  for  what  purpose  all


PLURALITY     OF    WORLDS.  255

these  worlds  have  been  made,  they  have  conjectured
that  they  were  designed  for  the  accommodation  of  ra-
tional inhabitants,  capable  of  adoring  and  serving  their
Creator.  But  at  the  most  this  is  only  a  probable  con-
jecture, and  astronomers  have  never  pretended  to  prove
it.  Now,  to  set  aside  the  irrefragable  proofs  of  divine
revelation  for  an  astronomical  conjecture,  is  irrational.
If  the  conjecture  cannot  be  entertained  in  harmony  with
divine  revelation,  we  ought  not  to  hesitate  for  a  moment
which  of  the  two  we  should  abandon.

The  objection  assumes  that  the  inhabitants  of  these
innumerable  worlds  are  fallen  creatures,  needing  redemp-
tion. On  this  point  astronomy  furnishes  no  data  for
conjecture.  If  there  are  inhabitants,  the  science  has  no
means  of  ascertaining  their  moral  character ;  and  on
this  point  natural  religion  and  revelation  give  it  no
assistance.

Another  assumption  of  the  objection  is,  that  redemp-
tion must  extend  wherever  there  are  fallen  creatures,  if
it  be  provided  for  mankind.  On  this  point  also  astro-
nomy can  teach  nothing ;  and  natural  religion  knows
nothing  about  redemption.  All  our  knowledge  of  it  is
from  revelation  ;  and  revelation,  instead  of  giving  coun-
tenance to  the  assumption,  plainly  contradicts  it.  The
angels  that  kept  not  their  first  estate  are  fallen  crea-
tures, and  yet  no  redemption  has  been  provided  for
them.  It  is  represented  as  an  act  of  distinguishing
grace,  that  the  Son  of  God  should  from  everlasting
have  his  delights  among  the  sons  of  men,1  and  that  he
should  take  on  him  the  nature  of  man.2  It  is  moreover
represented  that  in  the  nature  of  man  he  has  been
invested    with    power    to    rule    over    all   creatures    for

1  Prov.  viii.  31.  2  Heb.  ii.  1G.

22*  r


256  HARMONY     WITH     SCIENCE.

the  benefit  of  his  redeemed  church ;  and  that  their  re-
demption will  be  his  glory  and  joy  through  eternity ;
his  redeemed  will  be  from  every  kindred,  tongue,  na-
tion, and  people  of  the  earth :  but  that  they  will  be
gathered  from  other  worlds  than  the  earth,  or  other
races  of  apostate  beings  than  man,  is  a  supposition  to
which  revelation  gives  no  countenance,  and  for  which
the  astronomer  cannot  pretend  to  give  the  faintest
shadow  of  proof.

The  Bible  doctrine  of  God's  distinguishing  favor  to
the  human  race  involves  no  impossibility  or  contradic-
tion, and  the  proofs  are  so  abundant  that  we  ought
gratefully  to  receive  the  doctrine,  even  though  we  could
conceive  no  reason  for  it,  or  find  no  analogy  to  it  in
all  the  dispensations  of  God's  government.  But  it  is
conceivable  that  the  highest  honor  of  the  divine  govern-
ment may  be  connected  with  some  special  act  of  grace,
and  that  some  one  place  in  the  wide  dominions  of  the
universal  sovereign  should  be  the  chosen  spot  at  which
this  grace  should  be  displayed,  and  the  monument  of  it
erected.  So  on  the  broad  surface  of  the  earth  there
are  spots  where  victories  have  been  achieved,  or  other
events  have  occurred,  with  which  the  chief  glory  of
kingdoms  has  been  connected.  So  from  all  the  nations
of  the  earth  God  selected  one  to  be  his  peculiar  people ;
and  from  all  the  places  on  earth  he  selected  Sion  for  his
peculiar  dwelling,  and  Calvary  for  the  work  of  redemp-
tion :  and  it  is  analogous  that  the  earth  should  be  chosen
from  all  the  dominions  of  God  for  this  singular  display
of  wisdom  and  benevolence.  The  selection  of  our  little
world  for  the  most  stupendous  of  all  God's  works,  what-
ever mystery  may  attend  it,  is  therefore  not  without
analogy  :  and  though  the  reason  of  it  may  be  undis-
coverable  by  our  finite  understanding,  it  was  doubtless


PLURALITY    OP     WORLDS.  257

clearly  perceived  and  fully  comprehended  by  the  divine
omniscience.

The  objection  which  we  are  considering,  let  it  be
observed,  lies  against  the  matter  of  revelation,  and  not
against  its  evidences.  It  presumes  to  sit  in  judgment
on  the  question,  whether  the  distinguishing  favor  to  the
human  race  revealed  in  the  Bible  is  worthy  of  him  who
created  all  worlds ;  and  having  decided  that  it  is  not,  it
rejects  the  favor  itself  and  the  revelation  which  makes
it  known.  Such  are  the  pride  and  ingratitude  of  infi-
delity, and  they  are  so  obviously  involved  in  the  objec-
tion as  to  furnish  to  the  well-disposed  mind  a  sufficient
refutation  of  it.  But  it  will  be  useful  to  expose  its
unreasonableness  by  the  two  following  considerations.

I.  What  the  objection  takes  for  its  foundation  is  one
of  several  possible  suppositions,  and  ought  not  to  be
assumed  true  until  the  others  have  been  proved  false.

The  moon,  because  it  is  nearer  to  us  than  any  other
heavenly  body,  has  been  more  thoroughly  examined  by
the  telescope.  The  result  of  this  examination  has  not
been  favorable  to  the  supposition  that  it  is  fitted  for  the
habitation  of  animated  beings.  If  the  moon  is  not
inhabited,  the  theory  which  assigned  inhabitants  to  it
may  be  equally  false  in  its  application  to  other  celestial
bodies,  and  may  need  nothing  to  disprove  it  but  better
telescopes.  The  moon  has  other  uses  than  to  sustain
inhabitants ;  and  the  same  may  be  true  of  all  the  celes-
tial bodies,  even  though  their  uses  may  never  have
entered  into  our  imagination.  The  moon  agrees  very
nearly  with  the  earth  in  the  quantity  of  light  and  heat
which  it  receives  from  the  sun :  but  all  the  other  bodies
of  the  solar  system  probably  differ  from  our  world  so
much  in  temperature  that  they  cannot  be  adapted  to
creatures  resembling  man  and  the  other  animals  of  our


258  HARMONY    WITH     SCIENCE.

globe.  If  the  moon,  notwithstanding  its  agreement  in
temperature  with  the  earth,  is  not  inhabited,  an  in-
creased probability  arises  that  the  planets  which  burn
under  the  intense  heat  of  the  sun,  or  freeze  at  immense
distances  from  him,  are  without  inhabitants.  If  it  be
said  that  God  is  able  to  make  creatures  whose  natures
shall  be  adapted  to  the  temperatures  of  their  several
habitations,  we  reply  that  God  is  equally  able  to  adapt
creatures  to  other  modes  of  government  than  that  which
he  has  established  for  man.  The  objection  is  compelled
to  admit  that  the  inhabitants  of  other  worlds  are  not
like  man  in  physical  condition,  and  it  has  therefore  no
right  to  assume  a  likeness  in  moral  condition.

If  the  deductions  of  geology  may  be  relied  on,  our
own  globe  existed  many  ages  without  animated  inhabit-
ants, and  many  ages  more  before  man  was  created.  For
what  purpose  it  existed  so  long  without  any  inhabitant
who  could  adore  and  serve  his  Creator,  infidelity  has  no
right  to  require  us  to  say,  and  we  are  under  no  greater
obligation  to  explain  the  use  of  the  other  worlds  which
astronomy  has  discovered.  The  hosts  of  angels  who
now  visit  the  earth  and  who  sang  together  at  the  crea-
tion of  our  world,  may  have  frequented  the  earth  before
man  was  formed,  and  may  have  used  it  as  a  temple  for
their  devotions,  and  contemplated  with  adoring  praise
the  wonderful  works  of  the  Creator's  hand ;  and  they
may  have  learned  lessons  useful  to  them  as  moral  and
religious  beings,  from  the  exhibitions  by  the  various
races  of  animals,  of  brute  passions  uncontrolled  by  a
moral  faculty.  So  the  angels,  countless  in  number,
may  now  visit  all  the  worlds  through  immense  space,
and  may  find  in  them  all  new  incitements  to  admire,
adore,  and  love  the  Great  Supreme.     The  Creator  may


PLURALITY     OF     WORLDS.  259

be  adored  and  served  in  worlds  that  are  not  the  fixed
abode  of  moral  beings.

Another  supposition  is  possible.  Man,  made  a  little
lower  than  the  angels,  possesses  a  nature  intermediate
between  the  angels  and  the  brutes.  Like  the  angels  he
is  capable  of  aspiring  to  heaven ;  but,  like  the  brutes,
he  is  fastened  to  the  ground,  and  hence  never  visits
other  worlds  as  the  angels  are  capable  of  doing.  The
glorified  body  which  shall  hereafter  be  given  to  the
saints,  and  which  will  be  like  the  body  of  Christ,  will,
we  have  reason  to  believe,  be  uncontrolled  by  the  power
of  gravity.  As  Christ  ascended  from  Mount  Olivet,  so
the  saints  in  the  last  day  will  rise  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the
air.  Sinful  man  is  now  confined  by  gravity  to  the  earth,
as  if  shut  up  in  prison.  It  may  be,  that,  if  our  first
parents  had  stood  the  probation  assigned  to  them  with-
out sinning,  they  would  in  due  time  have  been  changed,
as  the  saints  will  be  in  the  last  day  who  are  alive  on  the
earth  at  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  would  have  been
made  like  the  angels  in  the  power  and  privilege  of  going
at  large  through  all  the  works  of  Jehovah.  It  may  be
that  whole  generations  of  men  might,  in  regular  suc-
cession, have  passed  through  a  probation  resembling,  in
length,  our  present  life ;  and,  after  completing  it  in
innocence,  might  have  been  translated,  like  Enoch  and
Elijah,  without  tasting  death,  and  with  the  privilege  of
frequently  returning  to  some  glorious  Tabor  for  profit-
able and  happy  converse  with  those  left  behind.  Now,
if  other  beings  have  been  formed  in  some  other  worlds
in  whom  spirit  and  matter  are  united  as  in  man,  it
may  be  that  they  have  stood  their  probation,  and  have
joined  the  angelic  hosts  in  their  delightful  visits  to  all
parts  of  creation ;  or,  if,  like  man,  any  of  them  may
have  fallen,  it  may  be  that  God  has  doomed  them  to  be


260  HARMONY     WITH     SCIENCE.

companions  of  the  angels  that  kept  not  their  first  estate.
Shut  up  in  our  prison,  we  are  cut  off  from  intercourse
with  other  parts  of  the  universe ;  and  are,  therefore,
ignorant  respecting  them.  The  infidel  conjectures  which
arise  from  this  ignorance  are  poor  substitutes  for  the
certain  knowledge  which  revelation  imparts.

II.  The  vastness  of  creation,  instead  of  furnishing  a
valid  objection  against  redemption,  greatly  enhances  its
excellence  and  glory.

The  angels  take  delight  in  the  work  of  redemption.
They  joyfully  announced  the  birth  of  the  Redeemer,
and  attended  him  on  his  ministry.     They  now  serve  as
ministering    spirits    to   the  redeemed,   are   desirous   to
understand  the  mystery  of  redemption,  rejoice  when  a
sinner  repents,  and  learn  from  the  church  the  manifold
wisdom  of  God.     Under  Christ  the  angels,  the  saints  in
heaven,  and  the  saints  on  earth,  are  all  gathered  into
one  community,  possessing  a  common  sympathy.     He  is
head  over  all  things  to  the  church  :  therefore  all  holy
intelligences  throughout  the  universe  are,  under  Christ,
included  in  the  common  fellowship  of  which  Christ  and
the  redeemed  church  are  the  centre ;  all  take  delight  in
the  work  of  redemption,  in  the  character  and  person  of
the  Redeemer,  in  the  grace  bestowed  on  the  redeemed,
and  in  the  glory  to  God  which  ensues.    Redemption  will
be  to  all  holy  intelligences  the  means  of  obtaining  the
brightest  discoveries  of  God's  moral  perfections ;  it  will,
therefore,  be  to  them  the  source  of  the  highest  felicity.
The  glory  of  redemption  would  be  great  if  its  benefits
extended  only  to  all  parts  of  the  little  globe  which  we
inhabit ;  but  its  excellence  and  glory  are  enhanced  be-
yond all  computation,  if  its  benefits  extend  to  worlds
innumerable    throughout    the    vast    dominion    of    the
Almighty.


PLURALITY    OF    WORLDS.  261

The  exaltation  of  Christ  to  universal  dominion  is  the
reward  conferred  on  him  for  his  obedience  unto  death.
The  glory  of  redemption  may,  therefore,  be  measured
by  the  extent  of  the  dominion  granted  to  him.  Satan
is  styled  the  god  of  this  world,  and  the  prince  of  the
power  of  the  air.  After  his  successful  temptation  of
our  first  parents  he  appears  to  have  claimed  the  earth
as  his  own,  and  to  have  regarded  it  the  stronghold  of  his
power.  It  seemed  good  to  the  infinite  wisdom  of  God
that  the  Son  of  God  should  enter  the  stronghold  of  the
enemy,  that  the  conflict  with  the  prince  of  darkness
should  be  waged  here,  and  that  he  should  here  place  his
heel  on  the  old  serpent's  head.  When  we  contrast  the
littleness  of  the  earth  with  the  vastness  of  creation,  we
contrast  the  dominion  claimed  by  Satan  with  the  domi-
nion actually  possessed  by  the  Redeemer,  and  the  con-
trast redounds  immeasurably  to  the  glory  of  redemp-
tion.

It  is  a  subject  of  painful  contemplation  that  multitudes
of  our  race  die  in  impenitence  and  are  for  ever  lost.
If  the  moral  condition  of  other  worlds  in  the  universe  is
like  that  of  the  earth's  inhabitants  at  present,  Satan's
cause  has  been  thus  far  triumphant ;  and  when  Almighty
wrath  shall  destroy  him  and  all  his  adherents,  the  num-
ber of  the  destroyed  will  greatly  exceed  the  number  of
the  saved.  We  are  pained  at  the  thought ;  but  our
minds  find  relief  in  the  doctrine  that  Jesus  Christ's
dominion  is  not  confined  to  this  little  world.  Though
multitudes  on  earth  will  not  have  him  to  reign  over
them,  he  has  obedient  subjects  in  other  parts  of  his
empire,  who  rejoice  in  his  victory  over  Satan,  and
delight  to  do  him  honor.  Great  as  is  the  number  of
those  who  reject  his  reign  on  earth,  it  may  be  that  it  is
very  small  compared  with  the  multitudes  of  those  who


262  HARMONY    WITH     SCIENCE.

in  distant  worlds  rejoice  to  render  him  homage.  It  may
be  that  when  the  enemies  of  his  reign  shall  all  perish,
their  number  will  not  bear  a  greater  proportion  to  the
number  of  his  loyal  and  happy  subjects,  than  the  num-
ber of  executioDS  for  capital  crimes  in  the  best  of
earthly  governments  bears  to  that  of  the  orderly  and
virtuous  citizens.

The  vastness  of  creation  not  only  gives  relief  to  the
pain  which  our  minds  suffer  in  contemplating  the  present
prevalence  of  wickedness  in  the  earth,  but  it  also  harmo-
nizes delightfully  with  our  hope  that  the  earth  itself  will
be  delivered  from  the  power  of  the  adversary.  The
fact  that  all  the  rest  of  the  universe  is  in  the  hands  of
our  Redeemer,  encourages  the  hope  that  the  compara-
tively few  enemies  of  his  reign  who  now  on  earth  reject
his  authority,  will  soon  be  brought  into  subjection.
This  world,  polluted  by  sin,  has  been  shut  out  from  the
holy  fellowship  of  worlds,  like  Miriam,  shut  out  for
leprosy  from  the  camp  of  Israel :  but  the  work  of  re-
demption is  effecting  its  cleansing.  The  pollution  will
ere  long  be  removed,  the  earth  will  become  an  abode  of
righteousness,  and  the  universal  fellowship  will  be  re-
stored, when  the  New  Jerusalem  will  descend  from
heaven  to  earth,  and  the  intercommunion  of  worlds,
which  sin  has  interrupted,  shall  be  re-established.

Section  VI.     Unity   of  the  Human  Race.

The  term  race  signifies  descendants  from  a  common
ancestor,  and  is  varied  in  its  application  according  as
the  ancestor  is  more  or  less  remote.  Israelites,  Edomites,
and  Ishmaelites  are  distinct  races,  as  descended  from
Jacob,  Esau,  and  Ishmael ;  and  yet  they  are  of  one  race
as  descended  from  the  remoter  ancestor  Abraham.  So
we  speak  of  Caucasians,  Mongolians,  and  Ethiopians  as


UNITY     OF    THE     HUMAN     RACE.  263

distinct  races,  without  intending  to  intimate  any  doubt
of  their  having  originated  from  a  common  ancestor.

In  zoological  classification  man  belongs  to  the  class
Mammalia,  and  order  Bimana.  This  order  has  not  dis-
tinct genera  and  species.  Cuvier  remarks  :  "  Man  forms
but  one  genus,  and  that  genus  the  only  one  of  its  order."
He  considers  man  as  one  species ;  and  under  the  head
"  Variety  of  the  human  species,"  says:  "  Three  races
appear  very  distinct — the  Caucasian,  or  white,  the  Mon-
golian, or  yellow,  and  the  Ethiopian,  or  negro."  In
explanation  of  the  distinction  between  species  and
variety,  he  says :  "  The  development  of  organized  beings
is  more  or  less  rapid  and  more  or  less  extended,  as  cir-
cumstances are  more  or  less  favorable.  Heat,  the
abundance  and  species  of  nutriment,  with  other  causes,
exercise  great  influence,  and  this  influence  may  extend
to  the  whole  body  in  general,  or  to  certain  organs  in
particular :  thence  arises  the  impossibility  of  perfect
similitude  between  the  offspring  and  parent.

"  Differences  of  this  kind  between  organized  beings,
form  what  are  termed  varieties.

"  There  is  no  proof  that  all  the  differences  which  now
distinguish  organized  beings,  are  such  as  may  have  been
produced  by  circumstances.  All  that  has  been  advanced
upon  the  subject  is  hypothetical.  Experience,  on  the
contrary,  appears  to  prove  that  in  the  actual  state  of  the
globe,  varieties  are  confined  within  narrow  limits,  and
go  back  as  far  as  we  may,  we  still  find  those  limits  the
same.

"  We  are  thus  compelled  to  admit  of  certain  forms,
which,  from  the  origin  of  things,  have  perpetuated  them-
selves, without  exceeding  these  limits ;  and  every  being
appertaining  to  one  or  other  of  these  forms,  constitutes
23


264  HARMONY     WITH     SCIENCE.

what  is  termed  a  species.  Varieties  are  accidental  sub-
divisions of  species.

"  Species  should  be  denned  the  reunion  of  individuals
descended  one  from  the  other,  or  from  common  parents,
or  from  such  as  resemble  them  as  strongly  as  they  resem-
ble each  other.  But  although  this  definition  is  strict,  it
will  be  seen  that  its  application  to  particular  individuals
may  be  very  difficult,  when  the  necessary  experiments
have  not  been  made.  *****  ]?ixe(l  forms  that
are  perpetuated  by  generation,  distinguish  their  species,
determine  the  complications  of  the  secondary  functions
proper  to  each  of  them,  and  assign  to  them  the  parts
they  are  to  play  on  the  great  stage  of  the  universe."

We  have,  therefore,  the  authority  of  this  master  in
zoological  science  for  considering  all  human  beings  as
constituting  one  order,  one  genus,  one  species,  and  for
regarding  the  different  races  of  men  as  varieties  or  acci-
dental subdivisions  of  this  species,  such  as  arise  from
the  influence  of  food  and  climate  on  the  generation  and
growth  of  animals.

The  distinction  between  man  and  all  other  animals  of
the  globe,  is  very  strongly  marked,  inasmuch  as  he  is
the  only  species  of  his  genus,  and  the  only  genus  of  his
order.  But  this  distinction,  so  strongly  marked  in  the
anatomy  and  physiology  of  his  body,  is  still  more
strongly  marked  in  the  moral  and  religious  constitution
of  his  mind.  No  other  animal  on  the  globe  bears  any
resemblance  to  him  in  this  particular ;  and  yet  in  this
particular  all  the  varieties  of  the  human  species  agree.
Races  and  tribes  of  men  may  differ  greatly  in  their
physical  and  intellectual  peculiarities ;  but  they  are  all
alike  in  possessing  a  mental  constitution,  which  renders
them  capable  of  moral  and  religious  sentiment.

Though  food  and  climate  are  known  to  affect  races  of


UNITY     OF    THE     HUMAN     RACE.  265

animals,  and  to  produce  varieties  in  the  different  species,
it  is,  nevertheless,  maintained  by  some  that  the  diversity
which  exists  in  the  human  species,  is  not  to  be  attributed
to  natural  causes.  They  deny  that  the  distinct  races
are  descended  from  one  stock,  having  but  one  pair  of
ancestors.  This  opinion  conflicts  with  Scripture,  which
teaches  that  God  has  made  all  nations  of  one  blood;1
that  all  men  fell  in  Adam ; 2  and  that  Eve  was  the
mother  of  all  living.3  It  is  remarkable  that  another
class  of  scientific  opposers  of  revelation  maintain  a
theory  as  widely  different  from  this  as  possible.  They
hold  that  not  only  the  varieties,  but  also  the  classes,
orders,  genera,  and  species  of  animated  beings,  have  all
come  into  existence,  and  assumed  their  various  forms,  in
obedience  to  the  laws  of  nature ;  and  that  creation  is
only  a  natural  development  of  various  living  forms  from
a  few  ancient  vital  organisms  of  simple  structure,  per-
haps from  a  single  animated  fibre.  It  may  be  needless
to  say  that  both  these  opposite  theories  have  been  advo-
cated with  ingenuity ;  and  that  their  advocates  find
some  phenomena  of  nature  which,  when  considered  alone,
give  a  sort  of  countenance  to  their  speculations.  But
true  science  waits  for  an  extended  survey  of  phenomena,
and  a  wide  induction  of  particulars,  before  it  fixes  its
principles  firmly  ;  and  the  friends  of  revelation  may
justly  demand  that  these  scientific  opposers  of  the
Bible  should  settle  the  differences  between  themselves,
and  determine  what  true  science  teaches  on  the  point,
before  they  affirm  that  its  teachings  contradict  the
Bible.

We  do  not  claim  that  zoological  science  can  prove  all
the  races  of  men  to  have  proceeded  from  one  pair  of

1  Acts,  xvii.  26.  a  Rom.  v.  12.

3  Gen.  iii.  20.


266  HARMONY   WITH     SCIENCE.

ancestors.1  In  the  first  creation  many  animals  of  one
species  may  have  been  formed ;  and  whether  the  human
species  had  one  pair  of  ancestors  or  many,  it  is  beyond
the  power  of  the  science  to  determine.  But  we  deny
that  the  science  can  pronounce  the  descent  of  all  from
one  pair  impossible.  It  admits  that  natural  causes  pro-
duce great  variety  in  animal  races ;  and  the  extent  of
this  variety  it  can  know  from  observation  only.  It  can-
not decide  that  in  the  recondite  and  mysterious  process

1  It  cannot  be  proved  that  God,  in  bringing  the  numerous
races  of  animals  into  existence,  created  only  one  pair  of  each
species  ;  but  Dr.  Bachman,  in  his  work  on  the  Unity  of  the
Human  Race,  has  gone  far  towards  establishing  the  following  as
truths  of  natural  science  : —

1.  The  division  of  animals  into  classes,  orders,  genera,  and
varieties,  is  made  by  scientific  classification,  which  groups  ob-
jects according  to  the  resemblances  that  are  found  in  them  ;  but
the  division  into  species  was  made  by  nature  previous  to  all  sci-
entific investigation,  and  made  with  a  manifest  regard  to  propa-
gation.

2.  Throughout  the  whole  course  of  propagation,  nature  pre-
serves the  distinction  of  species  as  it  has  existed  from  the  begin-
ning, and  never  originates  a  new  species.  The  hybrids  which
are  produced  by  an  unnatural  intermixture  of  two  different
species,  are  incapable  of  propagating  an  intermediate  species.

3.  For  every  distinct  species  of  animals  and  plants  there  has
been,  somewhere  on  the  surface  of  the  earth,  a  centre  of  crea-
tion, at  which  it  was  brought  into  existence  by  a  power  superior
to  nature,  and  from  which  it  has  spread  by  the  natural  process
of  propagation.

4.  Numerous  and  widely  differing  varieties  have  been  pro-
duced by  removal  of  species  from  their  place  of  origin ;  espe-
cially in  those  animals  and  plants  which  by  domestication  and
cultivation  have  come  under  the  power  of  man,  and  have  accom-
panied him  in  his  extensive  migrations.

5.  Different  varieties  of  the  same  species  have  not  originated
at  different  centres  of  creation.


UNITY     OF    THE     HUMAN    BACE.  267

of  generation,  some  extraordinary  cause  may  not  at
some  time  have  operated,  producing  changes  of  extraor-
dinary character  and  rare  or  singular  occurrence.  They
who  maintain  that  the  varieties  of  the  human  species
must  have  been  generated  by  more  than  a  single  pair
of  ancestors,  refer  these  varieties  to  the  will  and  power
of  the  Creator.  Now,  the  Creator  is  also  the  God  of
providence,  controlling  the  operation  of  natural  causes,
both  ordinary  and  extraordinary ;  and,  since  it  was  his
will  that  varieties  in  the  human  species  should  exist,  it
was  in  his  power  to  produce  these  varieties  by  his  pro-
vidence as  easily  as  by  his  creating  hand.  They  who
invoke  divine  power  to  account  for  an  effect  produced,
should  not  rashly  limit  that  power  to  a  particular  mode
of  its  operation.

Cuvier  states  that  there  are  three  distinct  races *  of

1  These  three  principal  varieties  include  subordinate  varieties  ;
and  also,  by  intermixture  with  each  other,  produce  intermediate
varieties.  The  classification  of  varieties  may  be  extended  inde-
finitely, since  no  two  individuals  of  the  race  are  precisely  alike.
No  one  imagines  that  all  these  varieties  had  prototypes  in  the
original  creation.  Many  of  them  have  been  produced  by  natu-
ral causes,  and  why  may  not  all  ?  Why  is  it  that  while  any  two
varieties  of  mankind  may  combine  to  propagate  a  new  variety,  no
one  of  them  combines  in  like  manner  with  any  other  species  of
animals  ?

The  white  man  and  the  negro,  the  extremes  of  diversity  in
the  human  race,  have  been  brought  into  close  proximity  in  the
United  States  ;  and  it  has  been  demonstrated,  by  examples  with-
out number,  that  the  two  varieties  are  capable  of  combining  to
propagate  a  new  variety.  It  has  also  been  demonstrated  by  ex-
amples without  number,  that  the  negro  is  a  moral  being,  and
capable  of  making  high  attainments  in  Christian  piety.  Scien-
tific infidelity  may  declare  that  the  chimpanzee  has  not  much
further  to  progress  to  become  a  negro  than  a  negro  has  to  be-
come a  white  man ;  and  that  the  negro  is  no  more  the  white
23*


268  HARMONY     WITH     SCIENCE.

mankind,  and  tells  what  parts  of  the  world  they  re-
spectively inhabit.  The  Bible  represents  all  mankind  as
descended  from  the  three  sons  of  Noah,  and  as  dispersed
through  the  earth  in  near  agreement  with  the  present
distribution  of  the  three  races.1  A  moral  consideration
drew  forth  a  divine  curse  on  the  descendants  of  Ham :


man's  brother  than  the  owl  is  the  sister  of  the  eagle,  or  the  ass
is  the  brother  of  the  horse.  But  before  such  a  doctrine  can  be
admitted  to  a  place  among  the  truths  of  science,  it  ought  to  be
shown  that  the  negro  and  the  chimpanzee  have  formed  conjugal
relations;  and  that  a  sprightly  progeny  has  been  the  result  of
their  union;  and,  moreover,  that  the  chimpanzee  has  moral
powers  susceptible  of  high  culture,  and  is  capable  of  high  at-
tainments in  piety,  fitting  him  for  honorable  membership  in  a
Christian  church.

1  The  brief  history  which  is  given  in  the  Bible  appears  to
authorize  the  following  conclusions  respecting  the  dispersion  of
mankind  after  the  flood.

The  posterity  of  Ham  removed  to  the  south-western  part  of
Asia,  and  passed  through  the  Isthmus  of  Suez  into  Africa.
Egypt,  the  best  known  part  of  Africa,  is  repeatedly  called  in
Scripture  "  the  land  of  Ham."  The  posterity  of  Japheth  set-
tled in  the  part  of  Asia  which  lies  between  the  three  seas,  the
Caspian,  the  Black  and  the  Mediterranean  ;  and  crossing  the
Bosphorus,  they  took  possession  of  Europe,  called  "the  isles
[transmarine  lands]  of  the  Gentiles."     Gen.  x.  5.

The  posterity  of  Shem  remained  in  Asia,  and  soon  filled  its
eastern  portion  with  a  numerous  population.  Shem  had  united
with  Japheth  in  filial  respect  to  their  father,  and  received  with
him  the  father's  blessing.  It  was  his  portion  to  have  Jehovah
for  his  God,  and  to  be  the  means  of  preserving  the  true  religion
in  the  earth.  God  accomplished  this,  not  by  preserving  all  his
descendants  from  idolatry,  but  by  calling  out  Abraham  from  his
idolatrous  kindred,  and  sending  him  westward  into  the  promised
land.  The  western  portion  of  Shem' s  descendants  inherited  the
blessing  of  their  father,  and  falling  under  the  same  influences
that  elevated  the  character  of  Japheth's  descendants,  became  a
part  in  the  Caucasian  division  of  the  human  family.


UNITY     OF     THE     HUMAN     RACE.  269

and  since  the  providence  and  moral  government  of  God
are  in  harmony  with  each  other,  it  may  be  that  some
extraordinary  cause  was  made  to  impress  a  physical
distinction  on  the  race  subject  to  this  curse.  The
enlargement  prophetically  granted  to  the  sons  of  Japheth
may  have  included  intellectual  elevation ;  and  by  an
ordering  of  Providence  a  seal  of  this  grant  may  have
been  affixed  on  the  descendants  of  this  patriarch  in  the
superior  beauty  of  their  persons.  But  without  attempt-
ing to  determine  when  or  how  the  existing  diversity  in
the  human  species  was  produced,  we  may  be  sure  that
causes  sufficient  to  produce  it  have  at  all  time's  been
under  the  control  of  Divine  Providence,  and  we  are,
therefore,  not  compelled  to  refer  it  to  his  creating
power.  Hence  the  legitimate  deductions  of  science  do
not  contradict  the  historical  testimony  of  the  Bible
concerning  the  original  parentage  of  the  human  race.

Though  we  hold  that  the  varieties  in  the  human  race
have  been  produced  by  natural  causes,  we  hold  it  as  a
doctrine  of  science,  not  of  theology  :  but  our  belief  that
all  mankind  sprung  from  Adam  rests  on  higher  author-
ity than  that  of  human  science.  We  believe  it  on  the
testimony  of  God.  No  zoologist  claims  to  have  learned
by  his  own  observation  all  the  facts  on  which  his  theories
are  based :  but  he  receives  many  of  them  on  the  testi-
mony of  other  men ;  and  he  feels  bound  to  modify  his
theories  when  a  fact  inconsistent  with  them  is  brought
to  his  knowledge  through  the  credible  testimony  of  any
one.  Now,  on  the  question  of  man's  origin,  no  testi-
mony can  be  so  important  as  that  of  him  by  whom  man
was  created ;  and  no  zoologist  who  has  duly  examined
the  evidence  that  the  Bible  is  the  word  of  God,  can
rationally  form  theories  which  contradict  the  divine
testimony.       Let   science   demonstrate,   if  it   can,   that


270  HARMONY    WITH     SCIENCE.

nature  has  no  powers,  either  ordinary  or  extraordinary,
which  are  sufficient  to  produce  the  existing  varieties  of
the  human  race,  and  we  will  then  concur  with  our  oppo-
nents in  attributing  these  varieties  to  an  immediate
exertion  of  divine  power.  But  science  has  never  demon-
strated that  creation  is  the  only  miracle  that  God  can
work.  If  he  wills  that  a  human  being  shall  exist  of  a
variety  which  it  is  beyond  the  power  of  nature  to  pro-
duce, he  can  create  such  a  man  out  of  the  dust  of  the
ground ;  but  he  can  as  easily  accomplish  the  same  by
miraculously  changing  a  man  already  in  existence.  If
the  thing  must  be  referred  to  the  miraculous  power  of
God,  the  testimony  of  God  ought  to  be  allowed  to
decide  by  whai  species  of  miracle  it  was  effected.  When
scientific  infidelity  has  been  compelled  to  admit  the
agency  of  the  Almighty,  it  cannot  consistently  limit  his
mode  of  operation.


APPENDIX.

CHAPTER   I.
HISTORICAL  EVIDENCE.

1.     Section   I.     Dr.   Lardnbr.

Nathaniel  Lardnee,  D.  D.,  was  a  minister  of  the
gospel  among  the  Independents.  He  was  born  June
6th  1684,  and  died  July  24th  1768,  in  the  85th  year  of
his  age.  He  was  a  man  of  talents  and  learning ;  but
was  unsuccessful  as  a  preacher.  He  was  afflicted  with
so  great  deafness  as  to  render  intercourse  with  others
difficult,  and  his  biographer  attributes  to  his  deafness  a
defect  in  his  elocution  which  marred  his  public  speak-
ing. These  circumstances  favored  the  devotion  of  his
life  to  literary  pursuits,  and  it  was  as  an  author  that  he
gained  his  high  reputation.

The  chief  work  of  Dr.  Lardner  is,  "  The  Credibility
of  the  Gospel  History."  This  he  began  to  publish  in
February,  1727,  at  which  time  appeared  in  two  volumes,
octavo,  Part  L,  which  he  had  besn  several  years  in  pre-
paring. He  continued  the  preparation  and  publication
of  the  work  throughout  his  life,  leaving  a  small  portion
of  it  to  be  completed  by  another  hand  from  the  mate-
rials which  he  had  collected.  In  this  great  work  he
collected  from  all  the  writings  of  antiquity,  whether
Christian,  Jewish,  or  Pagan,  whatever  can  throw  light
on  the  truth  of  the  history  contained  in  the  New  Testa-
ment, and  on  the  authenticity  of  the  New  Testament
books.     Lardner's  volumes  have  furnished  a  storehouse

s  (271)


272  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [1.

of  materials  for  all  later  authors  who  have  investigated  the
external  evidences  of  Christianity.  Among  the  English
Independents,  as  among  the  American  Congregational-
ists,  many  have  adopted  the  Socinian  creed.  Dr.  Lard-
ner  was  of  this  number.  It  may  be  regarded  as  a  wise
arrangement  of  Providence  that  a  man  of  his  theological
views  should  have  given  to  the  world  the  ablest  historical
defence  of  Christianity.  Josephus,  an  enemy  of  our
religion,  was  raised  up  by  Providence  to  contribute  by
his  writings  most  reliable  information,  confirming  the
truth  of  Christ's  predictions ;  and  Gibbon,  an  infidel
historian,  has,  in  like  manner,  confirmed  by  his  literary
labors  the  exact  fulfilment  of  the  predictions  contained
in  the  last  book  of  the  New  Testament.  Dr.  Lardner,
though  belonging  to  that  class  of  professed  Christians
who  are  least  removed  from  infidelity,  has  rendered  the
most  valuable  service  in  establishing  the  outworks  of
Christianity.  A  more  fit  agent  for  this  service  could
not  have  been  selected.  A  deist  could  not  have  ren-
dered it  consistently  with  his  avowed  faith ;  and  an
evangelical  Christian  who  should  engage  in  such  a  work
would  be  liable  to  the  charge  of  being  misled  by  enthu-
siasm. The  coolness  of  Lardner's  judgment  will  not  be
questioned,  and  no  one  has  accused  him  of  unfaithful-
ness in  his  extracts.

Section  II.  Agreement  of  New  Testa-
ment History  with  Jewish  and  Pagan
Writings.

the  historical  statements  and  allusions  incident-
ally made  in  the  new  testament  coincide  with
the  true  history  of  the  times.

Part  I.  of  Dr.  Lardner's  Credibility  treats  of  "  the
facts  occasionally  mentioned  in  the  New  Testament,"
and  shows  that  these  were  "  confirmed  by  passages  of
ancient  authors  who  were  contemporary  with  our  Sa-
viour or  his  apostles,  or  lived  near  their  time."  This
part  of  the  Credibility  is  contained  in  the  first  volume
of  Dr.  Lardner's  Works,  and  an  epitome  of  it  is  here


2.]  AGREEMENT     OF     HISTORIES.  273

subjoined,  in  which  ninety-six  historical  facts,  taken  from
Josephus,  Philo,  Tacitus,  Suetonius,  and  other  ancient
authors,  are  enumerated  in  one  series;  and  another
series  is  added  consisting  of  references  to  passages  of
Scripture  in  which  the  same  facts  are  incidentally  stated
or  alluded  to.  A  horizontal  line  across  the  page  sepa-
rates these  two  series  from  each  other ;  and  by  the
arrangement  adopted,  a  comparison  of  the  history  con-
tained in  the  New  Testament  with  that  obtained  from
other  sources  is  rendered  easy ;  and  the  perfect  agree-
ment with  respect  to  these  "occasionally-mentioned"
facts  establishes  the  truth  of  the  sacred  history  in  the
most  satisfactory  manner.

NOTE.

A.  U.  is  used  to  signify  the  year  of  the  city  Rome.

A.  D.  the  year  of  our  Lord ;  that  is,  the  year  from  the  birth
of  Christ  according  to  the  computation  in  common  use,  which
dates  that  event  in  December,  A.  U.  753,  and  begins  the  compu-
tation the  year  following,  Jan.  1,  A.  U.  754.  Hence  in  the  date
of  any  event,  if  753  be  subtracted  from  the  year  of  the  city,  the
remainder  will  be  the  year  of  our  Lord.

2.     I.  Princes  and  Governors.

1.  Herod  reigned  over  Judea  from  A.  u.  714  to
750  or  751,  all  the  land  of  Judea  being  included  in
his  dominion.  2.  He  was  very  cruel  and  put
many  to  death  from  a  jealousy  of  being  supplanted
in  power.  3.  In  the  latter  part  of  his  reign  Anti-
pater,  the  worst  of  his  sons,  participated  actively  in
public  affairs ;  but  being  detected  in  a  conspiracy  to
poison  his  father,  was  put  to  death  by  Herod  only
five  days  before  his  own  decease.  4.  At  Herod's
death  his  kingdom  was  divided  among  his  sons.
Galilee  fell  to  Herod  Antipas,  Idumea  to  Philip,  and
Judea  to  Archelaus,  who  wTas  the  only  one  that
received  the  title  of  kino;  or  was  said  to  reign.  5.
Archelaus  was  the  worst  of  all  Herod's  sons  after
the  death  of  Antipater.  6.  On  complaint  made
against  him  to  the  Roman  Emperor  by  the  Jews  he
was  banished  A.  u.  759.       7.  Judea  then  became  a


274  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [2.

'province  governed  by  Roman  procurators.  8.
Herod  the  tetrarch,  when  on  a  visit  to  his  brother
Herod  Philip,  fell  in  love  with  his  wife  Herodias
and  made  proposals  of  marriage,  which  she  accepted.

9.  She  had  a  daughter  Salome  by  her  first  husband.

10.  Lardner  finds  no  instance  about  this  time  that  a
lady  of  like  station  with  Salome  danced  at  a  public
entertainment.  11.  Herodias  was  full  of  ambition
and  envy  ;  and  having  a  mighty  influence  on  Herod,
was  able  to  persuade  him  to  things  to  which  he  was
not  of  himself  at  all  inclined.  12.  Herod  Agrippa,
grandson  of  Herod  the  Great,  was  made  king  by
Caligula,  A.  D.  37,  over  the  tetrarchies  of  Philip  and
Lysanias,  and  afterwards  that  of  Galilee.  Claudius
afterwards  added  Judea  to  his  dominion.  The  last
three  years  of  his  life  is  the  only  time,  after  the
banishment  of  Archelaus,  that  Judea  was  not  a
Roman  province,  until  A.  D.  66,  when  they  revolted
from  the  Romans.  13.  He  was  much  disposed  to
please  the  Jews.  14:.  His  death  is  thus  described
by  Josephus :  "  Having  now  reigned  three  whole
years  over  all  Judea,  he  went  to  the  city  Cesarea.
Here  he  celebrated  shows  in  honor  of  Caesar.  On
this  occasion  there  was  a  vast  resort  of  persons  of
rank  and  distinction  from  all  parts  of  the  country.
On  the  second  day  of  the  shows,  early  in  the
morning,  he  came  into  the  theatre,  dressed  in  a
robe  of  silver,  of  most  curious  workmanship.  The
rays  of  the  rising  sun  reflected  from  so  splendid  a
garb,  gave  him  a  majestic  and  awful  appearance.
In  a  short  time  they  began  in  several  parts  of  the
theatre  flattering  acclamations  which  proved  perni-
cious to  him.  They  called  him  a  god,  and  entreated
him  to  be  propitious  to  them,  saying,  '  Hitherto  we
have  respected  you  as  a  man ;  but  now  we  acknow-
ledge you  to  be  more  than  mortal.'  The  king  neither
reproved  these  persons,  nor  rejected  the  impious
flattery.  Immediately  after  this,  he  was  seized  with
pains  in  his  bowels  extremely  violent  at  the  very  first.

.  Then  turning  himself  towards  his  friends,  he  spoke


2.]  AGREEMENT     OF     HISTORIES.  275

rto  them  in  this  manner:  'I,  your  god,  am  required
to  leave  this  world ;  fate  instantly  confuting  these
false  applauses  just  bestowed  upon  me ;  I,  who
have  been  called  immortal,  am  hurried  away  to
death.  But  God's  appointment  must  be  submitted
to.  Nor  has  our  condition  in  this  world  been
despicable  ;  we  have  lived  in  the  state  which  has
been  accounted  happy.'  While  he  was  speaking
these  words  he  was  oppressed  with  the  increase  of
his  pains.  He  was  carried,  therefore,  with  all  haste
to  his  palace.  These  pains  in  his  bowels  continually
tormenting  him,  he  expired  in  five  days'  time,  in  the
fifty-fourth  year  of  his  age,  and  of  his  reign  the
seventh."  15.  The  children  left  by  Herod  Agrippa
were  Agrippa,  then  17  years  of  age,  and  three
daughters,  Bernice,  who  was  married  to  Herod,  her
father's  brother,  being  16  years  of  age,  Mariamne
and  Drusilla,  who  were  unmarried,  the  former  10
years  old  and  Drusilla  6.  10.  Felix  was  governor
of  Judea,  and  married  to  Drusilla.  17.  He  wras
wicked,  had  been  guilty  of  abominable  villany,  and
was  capable  of  being  bribed.  18.  He  was  succeeded
in  office  by  Festus.  19.  Agrippa  was  king  over  some
other  parts  of  the  country  which  had  belonged  to  the
family  of  Herod  the  Great,  but  not  of  Judea.  20.
H>  was  trained  by  his  father  in  the  Jews'  religion.


1.  Matt.  ii.  1 ;  Luke  i.  5.  The  true  date  of
Christ's  birth,  according  to  the  best  chronologers,  is
at  least  four  years  earlier  than  that  assigned  to  it
by  the  reckoning  in  common  use ;  and,  therefore,  it
occurred  before  the  death  of  Herod.  2.  Matt.  ii.
3-16.  3.  Matt.  ii.  20.  The  death  of  both  these
princes  in  the  short  space  of  six  days,  accounts  for
the  use  of  the  plural  pronoun,  "  they  are  dead  which
sought  the  young  child's  life."  4.  Luke,  iii.  1 ;
Matt.  ii.  22.  5.  The  character  of  Archelaus  ac-
counts for  Joseph's  going  to  Galilee,  Matt.  ii.  22,
where  he  was  under  the  dominion  of  Herod  Antipas.
24


276  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [3.

6.  The  shortness  of  Archelaus's  reign  accounts  for
the  silence  of  Scripture  respecting  hirn  except  in  a
single  passage.  7.  Luke,  iii.  1.  8.  Matt.  xiv.  3,
4 ;  Mark,  vi.  17 ;  Luke,  iii.  19.  9.  Matt.  xiv.  6 ;
Mark,  vi.  22.  10.  The  unusualness  of  the  dance
which  Herod  requested,  may  account  for  the  high
remuneration  which  Herod  proposed.  11.  Matt.
xiv.  8,  9;  Mark,  vi.  24-26.  12.  Acts,  xii.  1.  13.
Acts,  xii.  3.  14.  Acts,  xii.  19-23.  The  agreement
between  Luke  and  Josephus  is  here  remarkable.
15.  Acts,  xxv.  13;  xxiv.  24.  16.  Acts,  xxiii.  24;
xxiv.  24.  17.  Acts,  xxiv.  25,  26.  18.  Acts,  xxiv.
27 ;  xxv.  14.  19.  Acts,  xxv.  13.  The  case  of
Paul  was  not  referred  to  Agrippa  as  having  autho-
rity in  Judea.  Acts,  xxv.  22,  24 ;  xxvi.  31.  20.
Acts,  xxvi.  3.

3.     II.  State  of  the  Jews  in  Judea  during  the
Ministry  of  our  Saviour  and  his  Apostles.

The  civil  state  of  the  Jews  may  be  considered  in  four
periods : — 1.  From  the  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist
to  the  resurrection  of  Christ.  2.  From  the  resurrection
of  Christ  to  the  time  of  Herod  the  king,  mentioned
Acts,  x.  11.  3.  During  the  reign  of  Herod.  4.  From
the  end  of  his  reign  to  the  close  of  the  evangelical  his-
tory.

The  question  whether  the  Jews  of  Judea  had  the
power  of  life  and  death  demands  special  attention.  It
is  not  our  inquiry  whether  Herod  of  Galilee  had  this
power  in  his  dominions :  and  the  illegal  exercise  of  this
power  by  mobs  or  violent  men  does  not  enter  into  the
consideration.

First  Period.


21.  Pontius  Pilate  governed  Judea  from  A.  D.  26
to  a.  D.  36.  22.  The  Romans  were  accustomed  to
grant  to  the  nations  that  they  conquered  the  free
exercise  of  their  own  religions.  23.  The  Jews  had
the  regulation  of  marriage.  24.  Excommunication
from  the  synagogue,  and  beating,  were  punishments


3.]  AGREEMENT     OF     HISTORIES.  277

the  Jews  were  allowed  to  inflict.  25.  Tribute  was
paid  to  Cresar,  and  his  coin  was  in  circulation.  26.
The  Jews  had  a  council  which  issued  orders  to
apprehend  persons  whom  they  thought  worthy  of
capital  punishment ;  but  they  had  not  the  power  of
inflicting  capital  punishment,  when  they  were  under
provincial  government,  this  'power  being  vested  in
.the  governor.


21.  Between  these  dates,  a.  d.  26  and  A.  D.  36,
and  therefore  under  the  government  of  Pilate,  oc-
curred the  whole  ministry  of  John  the  Baptist  and
of  Christ.     Luke,   iii.   1,   2 ;  Matt,   xxvii.   15,  17.
22.  It  is  apparent  throughout  the  New  Testament
that  the  Jews  attended  their  religious  festivals,  wor-
shipped  at   the   temple,    and   in   their    synagogues,
made   collections  for  religious   service,   and   in   all
respects  enjoyed  unrestricted  freedom   of  religion.
That  Pilate  mingled  the  blood  of  some  worshippers
with  their  sacrifices  was  an  exception  to  the  general
rule.     Luke,  ii.  42  ;  John,  iv.  45  ;  Acts,  ii.  46  ;  iii.
2 ;  Matt.  xiii.  54 ;  Acts,  xv.  21 ;  Mark,  vii.  11,  12
Luke,  xiii.   1 ;  Matt.  viii.  4 ;  Luke,  v.  14 ;  Luke
xiii.  1.     23.  Matt.  v.   31,   32;  xix.   3,   10;  Mark
x.  2-9.     24.  John,  ix.  22 ;  Acts,  xxii.  19 ;  xxvi
11.     25.  Mark,  xii.  15-20;  Luke,  xx.  20-24.     26
Matt.  xii.  14;  John,  v.  15-18;  vii.  1,  25,  32;  x
39;    xi.   45,  47,   53;    xii.   10.     Jesus    was   appre
hended  by  the  order  of  the  Jewish  council,  with  the
band  of  Roman  soldiers,  and  was  brought  first  to
trial  before   the   council,   but   afterwards   taken   to
Pilate.     Matt.  xxvi.  3,  4,  14,  16;    John,  xviii.   3;
Luke,  xxii.  52 ;  John,  xviii.  12,  13 ;  Matt.  xxvi.  57,
59,  60  ;  Mark,  xiv.  64  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  1,  2  ;  Mark,  xiv.
1 ;    Luke,   xxiii.   1 ;    John,   xviii.    28,    29.     Pilate
judged   him   innocent,   but   gave    sentence   against
him  to  gratify  the  Jews.     Luke,   xxiii.  4-8,  13-16,
17-24.     We  may  here  notice  that  the  only  charge
on  which  Jesus  was  condemned  was  that  of  blasphemy
in  claiming  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  and  this  was  an


278        HISTORICAL  EVIDENCE.         [3.

r  offence  against  the  Jewish  law.  John,  xix.  7.  But
though  he  was  condemned  by  the  council  for  this  the
sentence  was  passed  by  Pilate,  John,  xix.  15-19,
and  his  soldiers  executed  it.  Matt,  xxvii.  27,  28.
These  soldiers  were  under  his  command  exclusively,
and  responsible  to  him.  Matt,  xxviii.  11-14.  The
Jews  expressly  declared  that  they  had  not  the
power  to  put  any  one  to  death.  John,  xviii.  31.  But
Pilate  claims  this  power.  John,  xix.  10.  The  Jews
had  endeavored  to  ensnare  Christ  by  inducing  him
to  sanction  the  infliction  of  capital  punishment,  con-
trary to  the  restriction  which  they  were  under.
John,  viii.  6,  7,  9.


Second  Period.

27.  The  latter  part  of  Pilate's  administration  was
weak  through  fear  of  the  Jews,  and  he  was  finally
removed  from  office  on  complaint  made  by  them  to
the  emperor.  Judea  then  became  annexed  to  the
province  of  Syria,  and  was  governed  by  its  presi-
dents, Vitellius  and  Petronius,  of  whom  the  former
was  much  inclined  to  favor  the  Jews.  28.  Under
Petronius  the  Jews  had  much  trouble,  which  began
in  an  order  of  the  Emperor  Caligula  to  have  his
image  set  up  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.

27.  The  weakness  of  Pilate  and  the  indulgence
of  Vitellius  gave  opportunity  for  the  Jews  to
persecute  the  Christians.  Acts,  iv.  1-9-30.  28.
The  troubles  under  Petronius  engrossed  the  atten-
tion of  the  Jews,  and  gave  a  season  of  rest  to  the
Christians.  Acts,  ix.  31.  The  conversion  of  Saul,
Acts,  ix.  3-18,  could  not  have  been  the  sole  cause
of  this  relief ;  for  there  were  other  persecutors,  men
of  age  and  authority.  He  was  himself  afterwards
sorely  persecuted  by  the  Jews.

In  this  period  no  mention  of  a  Roman  governor  is
found  in  the  New  Testament.  The  Jewish  council
apprehended  the  apostles,  bound  them,  put  them  in


3.1  AGREEMENT     OF     HISTORIES.  279

'the  common  prison,  beat  tliera  publicly,  and  took
counsel  to  slay  them,  but  it  does  not  follow  that  they
could  have  legally  put  them  to  death  by  their  own
authority,  since  they  did  as  much  with  respect  to
Jesus.  Acts,  iv.  7-21;  v.  17,  18,  41.  Stephen
was  brought  before  the  council,  witnesses  were
heard,  and  he  made  a  defence,  but  the  opinions  of
the  council  wrere  not  asked,  or  a  sentence  pronounced
as  in  other  cases  recorded.  He  wTas  stoned  by  the
enraged  multitude  without  legal  condemnation.
Acts,  vi.  8-15 ;  vii.  1-60.  Saul  persecuted  the
saints  with  authority  from  the  Sanhedrim,  according
to  which  he  imprisoned  them,  beat  them  in  the  syna-
gogues, and  pursued  them  to  distant  places.  He
desired  to  procure  their  death,  though  he  may  not
have  been  concerned  in  the  killing  of  any  but  Ste-
phen. It  does  not  follow  that  the  council  claimed
the  right  of  putting  to  death  without  higher  autho-
rity.    Acts,  viii.  1,  3;  ix.  1,  2,  13,  14;  xxii.  4,  5,

.19,  20;  xxvi.  9-13.

Third  Period.

29.  This  period  was  during  the  reign  of  Herod
Agrippa,  who  of  course  held  the  power  of  life  and
death.

Fourth  Period.

30.  After  Herod's  death  Judea  again  became  a
province,  and  was  governed  as  it  had  been  under
Pilate.     31.  The  governors  resided  at  Cesarea.

29.  Acts,  xii.  1-19.  30.  Acts,  xxiii.  24.  31.
Acts,  xxiii.  23,  24 ;  xxv.  4.  In  the  fourth  period,
which  followed  the  death  of  Herod  Agrippa,  oc-
curred the  persecution  of  Paul  by  the  Jewish  coun-
cil, in  which  it  is  apparent  that  the  council  merely
brought  the  accusation,  and  that  the  right  of  judg-
ment belonged  to  the  Roman  governor  who  might
have  set  Paul  at  liberty  if  he  had  not  appealed  to
Caesar.  Acts,  xxi.  26,.  34  ;  xxii.  22,  23,  24-30  ;
xxiii.  1-5,  35;  xxiv.  1-22,  27  ;  xxv.  1-9;  xxiii.  6,

58;

24


280  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [5.


4.     III.  State  oe  the  Jews  out  of  Judea.

32.  The  Jews  were  scattered  abroad  in  almost
every  place  in  Europe  and  Asia,  and  the  islands  of
the  Mediterranean.  33.  The  Jews  were  accustomed
in  various  places  to  have  assemblies  for  religious
worship  on  the  shore  of  rivers  or  of  the  sea.  34.
Synagogues  were  numerous  in  Jerusalem.  Many
of  them  were  built  by  Jews  living  in  distant  coun-
tries to  be  for  their  special  use  when  attending  the
feasts,  and  also  academies  were  connected  with  them
for  the  education  of  their  children  in  their  religion.
35.  Many  Jews  were  taken  to  Rome  as  slaves  and
afterwards  set  free :  these  and  their  children  were
called  "Libertines."  30.  The  Jews  were  zealous  to
make  proselytes  to  their  religion,  and  sometimes
proselyted  persons  of  distinction.  37.  There  were
many  proselytes  at  Antioch.


c
u


32.  Acts,  ii.  5.  Frequent  mention  is  made  in  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles  that  they  preached  in  the
synagogues  of  distant  cities.  33.  Acts,  xvi.  13.
34.  John,  ix.  22.  Acts,  vi.  9.  35.  Acts,  vi.  9.
36.  Matt,  xxiii.  15.  Acts,  ii.  10;  xiii.  43;  viii.
26-28.      37.  Acts,  vi.  5.


5.     IV.  Jewish  Sects  and  the  Samaritans.

38.  The  Pharisees  and  the  Sadclucees  were  the  prin-
cipal sects  among  the  Jews.  39.  They  were  much
opposed  to  each  other.  40.  The  Pharisees  had
great  influence  with  the  common  people  and  some-
|£  times  abused  it.  41.  The  Sadducees  had  much
e  influence  with  the  rich.  42.  The  Pharisees  were
strict  in  interpreting  the  law,  and  in  the  practice  of
religious  duties.  Tney  observed  traditions  not  con-
tained in  the  law.  They  believed  in  the  immortality
of  the  soul,  and  future  resurrection ;  and  some  of
them  in  the  transmigration  of  souls.  43.  The  Sad-
ducees, though  less  numerous,  shared  with  the  Pha-
risees  in   the  administration   of  public  affairs,  and


.]  AGREEMENT     OF     HISTORIES.  281

'were  more  inclined  to  severity.  44.  The  high  priest
was  sometimes  of  the  sect  of  the  Sadducees.  45.
The  common  people  were  never  called  Pharisees,
though  adopting  the  principles  of  the  sect.  46.
There  were  men  honored  by  the  people  as  skilful
interpreters  of  the  law,  from  whom  the  young
received  instruction.  47.  The  Herodians,  not  enu-
merated as  a  distinct  religious  sect,  were  adherents
of  Herod.  48.  The  Essenes  were  few  and  lived  in
seclusion,  and  though  they  sent  sacrifices  to  the
temple,  did  not  worship  in  person.  49.  The  Sama-
ritans held  Mount  Gerizim  in  high  honor,  and  be-
tween them  and  the  Jews  there  was  much  enmity.


88.  Acts,  xxvi.  5.  Matt.  xvi.  1 ;  xxii.  23.  39.
Acts,  xxiii.  6-10.  40.  Matt,  xxiii.  14.  Mark,  xii.
38-40.  Luke,  xx.  46.  41.  Acts,  v.  17.  42.  Matt.
v.  20 ;  ix.  14.  Mark,  vii.  3,  4,  9,  13.  Luke,  xviii.
12.  John,  ix.  2.  Acts,  xxiii.  8 ;  xxvi.  58.  43.
Acts,  xxiii.  6;  v.  17.  44.  Acts,  v.  17.  45.  Matt,
xxiii.  4.  46.  Matt.  ii.  4 ;  vii.  29.  Luke,  xi.  46.  47.
Matt.  xxii.  16.  Mark,  iii.  6;  viii.15;  xii.  13.  48.
Because  of  the  seclusion  in  which  the  Essenes  lived
they  had  no  intercourse  with  Christ,  and  hence  no
notice  of  them  appears  in  the  gospel  history.  John,
xviii.  19,  20.  49.  John,  iv.  5-9,  20:  viii.  48;
Luke,  ix.  53.


6.  V.  Expectations  of  the  Jews  and  Samaritans,

AND  THEIR  IDEAS  OF  THE  MESSIAH.

50.  The  Jews  were  at  this  time  in  great  expecta-
tion of  the  Messiah  as  a  powerful  temporal  deliverer.
51.  The  Jews  expected  the  Messiah  to  show  some
sign  of  deliverance.  52.  The  Samaritans  also  were
at  this  time  in  expectation  of  some  extraordinary
divine  interposition.  53.  The  Messiah  was  expected
to  be  a  prophet.


282  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [8.

50.  John,  i.  19,  20.  Luke,  Hi.  15 ;  ii.  25,  26 ;  ix.

46  ;  Matt.  xx.  21.  John,  vi.  14,  15.  Matt.  xxi.  8,  9.

John,  xii.  13.  51.  John,  xx.  30.  Acts,  ii.  22.  Matt.
H  xii.  38 ;  xvi.  1.  John,  vi.  30.  1  Cor.  i.  22.  52.  John,
K  liv.  25,  26,  29,  42.     58.  John,  vi.  14,  15.  *

7.  VI.  The  Corruption  op  the  Jewish  People.

Ph  f  54.  Avarice,  cruelty,  violence,  impiety,  hypocrisy,
c  -J  and  all  kinds  of  wickedness  prevailed  at  this  time
^  [among  the  people.

H  (  54.  Matt.  iii.  7 ;  xii.  39.  John,  viii.  40-44.  Matt.
£  X  xxiii.  5-23  ;  xxi.  13.

8.  VII.  Circumstances  op  our  Saviour's  Last

Sufferings.

55.  Joseph,  who  was  called  Caiaphas,  was  high
priest  all  the  time  that  Pilate  was  in  Judea.  56.
Pontius  Pilate  was  governor  of  Judea  ten  years  be-
fore the  death  of  Tiberius,  and  was  removed  by
Vitellius  A.  D.  37.  57.  Governors  were  at  this  time
permitted  to  take  their  wives  with  them  into  their
provinces,  contrary  to  the  usage  during  the  con-
tinuance of  the  Roman  commonwealth.  58.  Herod
the  tetrarch,  being  a  Jew,  attended  the  feasts  at  Jeru-
salem. 59.  The  high  priests  sometimes  rent  their
clothes  on  extraordinary  occasions.  60.  There  were
persons  called  chief  priests,  besides  the  individual
who  held  at  the  time  the  office  of  high  priest.  61.
Though  the  Roman  procurators  lived  at  Cesarea,
they  were  wont  to  be  in  Jerusalem  for  the  preserva-
tion of  order  at  the  time  of  the  feasts,  especially  of
the  Passover.  62.  Pilate  on  diiferent  occasions  found
the  Jews  zealously  and  firmly  attached  to  their  law
and  disposed  to  rebel  against  his  authority :  and  his
consciousness  of  wrongs  done  in  the  administration
of  his  government  made  him  fear  lest  he  should  be
accused  to  the  emperor.  63.  Judea  belonged  to  the
province  of  Syria,  but  had  its  own  governor  or  pro-
.  curator  who  possessed  the  power  of  life  and  death.


8.]  AGREEMENT     OF     HISTORIES.  283

64:.  It  was  customary  to  affix  "  titles"  to  instruments
of  punishment  setting  forth  the  crimes  for  which  the
condemned  suffered.  65.  It  was  usual  at  this  time
to  set  up  advertisements  written  in  different  lan-
guages, that  they  might  be  read  by  all.  66.  Indig-
nities to  condemned  persons,  and  ridicule  by  mock
emblems  of  royalty,  occurred  in  these  times.  67.
Scourging  before  the  infliction  of  capital  punishment
was  usual.  68.  It  was  the  constant  practice  among
the  Romans  for  malefactors  to  carry  the  cross  on
which  they  were  to  be  crucified.  69.  To  go  out  of
a  city  for  the  infliction  of  capital  punishment  was
conformable  with  Jewish  and  Roman  custom.  70.
The  burial  of  persons  put  to  death  was  required  by
Jewish  law  and  usage,  and  was  usually  granted  by
the  Romans.  71.  It  was  customary  with  the  Jews
to  embalm  the  bodies  of  dead  persons  with  abundant
.use  of  spices.

55.  Matt.  xxvi.  3,  57.  John,  xviii.  13,  24-28.    56.

Luke,  iii.  1,  2  ;  xiii.  1.  Matt,  xxvii.  2.  Luke,  xxiii.
12.  John,  xviii.  33.  1  Tim.  vi.  13.  57.  Matt,  xxvii.
19.  58.  Luke,  xxiii.  7.  59.  Matt.  xxvi.  63-65.
60.  Matt.  xxvi.  59.  Mark,  xiv.  53.  61.  Matt,  xxvii.
2.  Mark,  xv.  1.  Luke,  xxiii.  1.  John,  xviii.  29,
39.  62.  Pilate  feared  the  resentment  of  the  Jews,
if  he  did  not  execute  on  Jesus  the  sentence  of  their
council.  Matt,  xxvii.  18.  Luke,  xxiii.  23.  John,
xviii.  33,  36-38.  John,  xix.  1-8,  12.  Luke,  xxiii.
23-25.  Mark,  xv.  15.  Matt,  xxvii.  24,  25.  63.
John,  xix.  7.  John,  xviii.  29,  30  ;  xix.  10,  16.  The
peculiarity  above  stated  would  very  probably  have
escaped  the  notice  of  a  writer  who  in  a  subsequent
age  should  have  attempted  to  forge  a  history  of
Christ's  life.  It  is  therefore  an  important  proof
that  the  Gospels  were  written  by  persons  who  lived
at  the  time  of  which  they  give  the  history.  64.
John,  xix.  20.  65.  John,  xix.  20.  Luke,  xxiii.
38.  66.  Matt.  xxvi.  67,  68.  Luke,  xxiii.  11.  Matt,
xxvii.  27-31.  Mark,  xv.  16-20.  67.  Matt,  xxvii.
26.     Mark,  xv.  15.     68.  Mark.  xv.  21.     John,  xix.


284        HISTORICAL  EVIDENCE.        [10.

r16,  IT.     Luke,  xxiii.  26.     09.  Matt,  xxvii.  31-33.

Mark,  xv.  20-22.  Luke,  xxiii.  26-33.  John,  xix.  17,

20.     Hebrews,    xiii.  12.     70.  Matt,  xxvii.  58-60.

Mark,  xv.  45,  46.     Luke,  xxiii.  50-53.     John,  xix.

31,  38-40.     71.  John,  xix.  39,  40.     Mark,  xvi.  1.
.  Luke,  xxiii.  55,  56 ;  xxiv.  1.

9.  VIII.  Treatment  of  Christians  by  Jews  and

Gentiles.

72.  The  Jews  regarded  the  Christians  with  bitter
hatred.  73.  The  Romans,  who  were  accustomed  to
grant  to  conquered  nations  the  free  exercise  of  their
religions,  on  this  general  principle,  and  by  express
"■j  decrees  of  the  Senate,  protected  the  Jews  in  their
^  religious  observances.  There  was  nothing  which
i  the  Romans  regarded  so  necessary  to  the  peace  of
the  empire  as  the  toleration  of  all  religions.  74.
The  Roman  laws  prohibited  the  worship  of  new  gods.

72.  Acts,  xvii.  5-9,  13  ;  xviii.  12  ;  xxii.  22  ;  xxiv.
1;  xxv.  2,  3.  1  Thess.  ii.  14,  15.  Gal.  v.  11.
Acts,  xiv.  19 ;  xx.  3 ;  vii.  54.  73.  Acts,  xviii.  14-
16 ;  xix.  24-40 ;  xxiv.  22,  23 ;  xxv.  18,  19 ;  xxvi.
31,  32;  xxyiii.  16,  30,  31.  74.  The  Christians
worshipped  the  same  God  as  the  Jews.  Hence  Paul's
defence,  "so  worship  I  the  God  of  my  fathers,"
Acts,  xxiv.  14,  wTas  valid.  The  Roman  government
had  tolerated  the  different  sects  among  the  Jews,
and  the  Christians  were  regarded  as  a  Jewish  sect
by  the  Roman  governors  :  Acts,  xvi.  20.  Paul  was
charged  at  Athens  as  being  a  setter  forth  of  strange
gods,  Acts,  xvii.  18,  but  he  skilfully  defended  him-
self as  the  worshipper  of  the  unknown  God  to  whom
they  had  an  altar  consecrated :  verse  23.

10.  IX.     Opinions  and  Practices  of  the  Jews.

75.  The  Jews  from    distant    countries    attended

their  feasts  at  Jerusalem,  especially  the  feast  of  the

Passover,  and  so  great  was  the  number  that  at  one

,  feast,  there  were  computed  to  be  present  two  million


10.]  AGREEMENT     OF     HISTORIES.  285

•seven  hundred  thousand  persons  duly  qualified  to
partake  of  the  feast,  besides  uncircumcised  proselytes
and  other  unclean  persons.  Another  estimate  made
the  whole  number  present  three  millions.  76.  They
who  were  in  Jerusalem  went  frequently  to  the  temple
to  worship.  77.  The  third  and  ninth  hours  of  the
day  were  stated  times  of  prayer.  78.  The  Jews
were  exceedingly  zealous  for  the  honor  and  sanctity
of  the  temple.  79.  The  Jews  had  great  respect  for
the  law,  and  could  not  tolerate  indignity  offered  to
it.  80.  They  were  wont  to  worship  in  their  syna-
gogues every  sabbath,  and  in  this  service  the  Scrip-
tures were  read,  and  discourses  delivered.  81.  The
Nazarites'  vow  spoken  of  in  Num.  vi.  18  was  observed
and  was  completed  by  offerings  made  in  the  temple.

82.  The  number  of  stripes  inflicted  as  a  legal  punish-
ment was    by  Jewish  usage  limited  to  thirty-nine.

83.  It  was  held  that  zeal  for  virtue  and  religion
might  justify  private  persons  in  killing  without  legal
trial,  those  who  were  guilty  of  idolatry,  and  other
flagrant  offences  against  the  divine  law ;  and  might
even  require  them  to  do  so.  An  example  of  this
private  zeal  was  a  conspiracy  of  ten  persons  to  kill
Herod.  84.  The  paying  of  tribute  to  the  Romans
was  grievous  to  the  Jews,  and  hence  they  disliked
the  publicans  who  collected  this  tribute.  85.  Many
of  the  publicans  were  Jews,  and  some  of  them  were
virtuous  men.

75.  John,  iv.  45  ;  vii.  1-4 ;  xi.  55,  56  ;  xii.  12, 13,

27.  Acts,  ii.  5.  John,  vii.  30  ;  xii.  20.  76.  Acts,  ii.
46  ;  iii.  1-9  ;  v.  20-25.  77.  Acts,  ii.  13,  15  ;  iii.  1-
9.     78.  Acts,  vi.  13 ;  xxi.  27,  28-32.     79.  Acts,  xxi.

28.  80.  Luke,  iv.  17-20.  Acts,  xv.  21.  Matt.  xiii.
54.  Mark,  i.  21.  Acts,  xiv.  1.  81. 'Acts,  xviii.  18  ;
xxi.  23,  24,  26.  82.  2  Cor.  xi.  24.  83.  Luke,  iv.
28,  29.  John,  viii.  59.  Acts,  xx.  3 ;  xxi.  27-31 ;
xxiii.  10-15  ;  xxv.  1-3.  84.  Matt.  xxii.  17  ;  Mark,
xii.  14.  Luke,  xx.  21,  22  ;  xix.  2,  7.  85.  Luke,  iii.
12.     Matt.  xxi.  31,  32.     Luke,  v.  29.    Matt.  ix.  10.

.Mark,  ii.  14.     Luke,  xix.  2,  8.


286  HISTORICAL    EVIDENCE.  [11.


11.     X.   Roman  Customs.

80.  The  Romans  examined  suspected  persons  by
torture.  87.  Scourging  was  used  in  such  examina-
tions ;  but  it  was  not  allowed  to  scourge  a  Roman
citizen.  Condemnation  and  punishment  were  not
allowed  without  trial.  88.  Citizenship  was  fre-
quently conferred  on  Jews.  80.  Citizenship  was
given  for  money,  and  as  a  reward  for  services.  00.
The  presence  of  both  the  accused  and  the  accuser
was  required  at  trial.  91.  A  Roman  citizen,  though
he  might  not  be  bound  with  thongs  for  the  purpose
of  being  scourged,  might  be  bound  with  chains  for
the  purpose  of  confinement.  The  method  was  to
chain  the  hand  of  the  prisoner  to  the  arm  of  a
soldier.  The  degree  of  confinement  was  dependent
on  the  nature  and  evidence  of  the  prisoner's  crime,
and  other  circumstances.  92.  The  Emperor  Augus-
tus appointed  consular  persons  at  Rome  to  receive
appeals  from  the  provinces.  Persons  were  frequently
sent  from  Judea  and  Samaria  to  Rome  for  trial.
93.  Prisoners  sent  from  the  provinces  were  usually
committed  to  the  captain  of  the  guard,  and  not  to
the  prefect  of  the  city.


'  86.  Acts,  xxii.  24,  25.  87.  Acts,  xvi.  22-37,
xxv.  16.  88.  Acts,  xxii.  26-29 ;  xxi.  37-39,  xxii.
3.  89.  Acts,  xxii.  28.  90.  Acts,  xxiii.  33-35,
xxiv.  7,  8 ;  xxv.  4,  5,  14-16.  91.  Paul's  confine-
ment underwent  several  changes,  and  was  at  last
greatly  mitigated  in  Rome.  Acts,  xxi.  32,  33 ;
xxii.  30 ;  xxvi.  29,  28 ;  xvi.  20,  23.  2  Tim.  i.  16.
Acts,  xii.  6 ;  xxiv.  23 ;  xxviii.  16,  23,  30.  92.
Acts,  xxv.  10,  11,  24,  25.  93.  Acts,  xxvii.  1;
xxviii.  16.


13.]  AGREEMENT    OF     HISTORIES.  287


12.     XI.  Three  Remarkable  Facts.

94.  Herod  the  Great  began  the  repair  of  the
temple,  and  the  work  was  continued  after  his  time,
in  all  more  than  forty-six  years.  95.  A  famine
oppressed  the  land  of  Judea  in  the  fourth,  fifth,
and  sixth  years  of  Claudius,  and  extended  to  seve-
ral other  countries.  96.  Claudius  expelled  the
Jews  from  Rome.

94.  John,  ii.  14-20.  95.  Acts,  xi.  27-30.  "  The
whole  world"  should  be  rendered  "  the  whole  land."
The  connection  shows  the  land  of  Judea  to  be  in-
tended, and  contributions  for  relief  were  obtained
from  other  places  which  were  exempt  from  the
I  famine.     96.  Acts,  xviii.  1,  2.


13.     XII.  Alleged  Disagreements.

I.  It  has  been  alleged  by  opposers  of  revelation  that
no  general  taxing  of  the  Roman  Empire,  in  the  reign
of  Augustus,  as  stated  in  Luke  ii.  1,  2,  has  been
noticed  by  any  Greek  or  Roman  historian.

Lardner  thinks  that  the  phrase  "  all  the  world"1
should  be  rendered  "  all  the  land,"  meaning  all  the
territory  included  under  the  reign  of  Herod  the  Great.
The  word  "  all"  was  appropriately  used  because  of  the
division  of  this  land  after  the  death  of  Herod.  It  is
not  surprising  that  Greek  and  Roman  authors  should
omit  the  mention  of  the  census  or  assessment  of  Judea :
but  it  is  probable,  as  will  be  shown  hereafter,  that
Josephus  refers  to  it ;  and  it  is  mentioned  by  Justin,
Tertullian,  and  the  Emperor  Julian.

II.  It  has  been  further  alleged   that  the  authority

1  If  Luke  used  the  phrase  to  signify  "  all  the  Roman  Empire,"
the  widest  sense  that  any  critic  contends  for,  it  is  still  most  pro-
bable that  the  actual  enrolment  which  he  mentions  as  made
when  Cyrenius  was  governor  of  Syria,  intends  no  more  than  the
fulfilment  of  the  imperial  decree  in  the  land  of  Israel,  the  coun-
try with  ichich  the  sacred  historian  was  concerned.
25  t


288  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [13.

of  Herod  in  his  kingdom  precluded  the  taxing  of  his
subjects  by  the  Roman  government.

The  word  employed  by  Luke  denotes  an  enrolment
or  census.  The  Roman  census  included :  1.  A  report
given  by  individuals  of  their  family  and  possessions ;
and,  2.  An  estimate  by  the  censor  of  the  value  of  these
possessions.  The  term  used  by  Luke  denotes  an  entry,
and  does  not  determine  whether  it  was  of  property  or
persons.  A  passage  in  Josephus  probably  refers  to
this  census,  describing  it  as  an  oath  of  fidelity  taken  by
the  people,  in  which  6000  of  the  Pharisees  did  not
unite.  Herod,  in  the  latter  part  of  his  reign,  fell  under
the  displeasure  of  Augustus,  and  the  decree  of  a  census
was  an  indignity  to  which  he  quietly  submitted.  The
six  thousand  Pharisees  were  fined  ;  and,  by  explanations
made  to  the  emperor  as  to  the  cause  of  his  displeasure,
he  was  appeased.  Hence  it  is  probable  that  the  taxa-
tion, if  intended,  was  not  carried  into  effect.  The  oath
of  fidelity  mentioned  by  Josephus  required  an  entry  or
record  of  the  names,  since  the  number  that  declined  is
specified.  The  entry  implied  in  Josephus's  account,
even  if  it  had  no  respect  to  taxation,  states  all  that
Luke's  words  express.

III.  Cyrenius  was  not  the  president  of  Syria  until
after  the  banishment  of  Archelaus.  He  was  then  sent
to  make  a  census,  but  the  time  was  ten  or  twelve  years
after  the  birth  of  Christ ;  and  hence  infidels  allege  that
Luke's  statement  is  incorrect.

It  is  unquestionable  that  an  enrolment  was  made  by
Cyrenius  after  the  banishment  of  Archelaus.  This
enrolment  is  referred  to  by  Gamaliel,  Acts  v.  37,  and
Josephus  gives  an  account  of  it  in  exact  agreement  with
that  of  Gamaliel.  As  Luke  has  recorded  Gamaliel's
speech,  he  must  be  supposed  to  have  known  the  facts
concerning  the  taxing  and  the  opposition  made  to  it  by
Judas  and  his  party,  all  which  are  cited  by  Gamaliel  as
facts  well  known.  The  enrolment  which  Luke  men-
tions in  his  Gospel,  he  distinguishes  as  the  "first;"  and
it  is  manifest  from  the  context  that  it  was  made  during
the  reign  of  Herod ;    yet  it  seems  to  have  been  con-


13.]  AGREEMENT     OF    HISTORIES.  289

nected  in  some  way  with  the  province  of  Syria.  If  it
had  nothing  to  do  with  the  government  or  governor
of  Syria,  it  is  strange  that  the  evangelist,  in  describing
an  enrolment  of  Herod's  subjects,  should  have  adopted
the  method  which  he  has  employed  for  fixing  the  date
of  the  event.  In  what  way  the  enrolment  was  con-
nected with  the  governor  of  Syria  it  is  not  easy  to
determine.  If  this  were  ascertained,  the  whole  diffi-
culty in  the  passage  would  probably  vanish.

Lardner  translates  the  passage  in  Luke  thus  :  "  This
was  the  first  assessment  of  Cyrenius,  governor  of  Syria."
He  thinks  that  Cyrenius  was  not  governor  of  Syria  at
the  time  of  making  the  assessment ;  and  that  the  title
affixed  by  the  evangelist  was  designed  merely  to  iden-
tify him  as  the  person  bearing  this  name  who  afterwards
became  governor  of  Syria.  Campbell,  in  his  "  Four
Gospels,"  translates  the  passage  thus :  "  This  first
register  took  effect  when  Cyrenius  was  president  of
Syria."  He  thinks  that  the  purpose  for  which  it  was
begun  in  the  clays  of  Herod  was  not  at  that  time
carried  into  effect ;  and  that  after  such  corrections
of  the  register  as  had  become  necessary,  the  purpose
was  accomplished  when  Cyrenius  was  governor  of  Syria.

Lardner  has  shown  that  there  is  no  improbability  in
supposing  Cyrenius  to  have  conducted  the  first  enrol-
ment ;  and  a  passage  which  he  has  quoted  from  Josephus
styles  both  Saturninus  and  Volumnius  governors  of  Sy-
ria, though  the  latter  was  at  the  time  only  the  procura-
tor of  the  revenue.  If  Augustus  had  it  in  view  to  take
Herod's  kingdom  from  him,  and  annex  his  dominions  to
the  province  of  Syria,  as  was  afterwards  done  in  the
case  of  Herod's  son,  Archelaus,  it  is  not  improbable
that  Cyrenius,  when  commissioned  to  take  the  census
of  Herod's  subjects,  was  constituted  assistant-governor
of  Syria,  or  procurator  of  the  revenue,  at  least  so  far
as  concerned  the  contemplated  addition  to  the  province.
The  same  man  was  afterwards,  on  the  banishment  of
Archelaus,  sent  to  perform  the  same  service  or  to  com-
plete what  he  had  previously  begun  ;  and  on  this  second
mission  from  the  emperor,  he  acted  as  governor  of  Sy-


290  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [13.

ria.  The  facts  as  we  have  supposed  them  accord  with
the  most  literal  interpretation  of  Luke's  words,  which
may  be  rendered,  "  This  was  the  first  enrolment  of
Cyrenius  governing  Syria,"  or,  "This  was  the  first  en-
rolment, Cyrenius  governing  Syria."1  In  this  brief
parenthetical  sentence,  the  purpose  of  the  evangelist
did  not  require  him  to  notice  the  change  in  the  extent
of  Cyrenius's  power  from  assessment  governor  to  sole
governor.  Indeed  there  was  no  change  so  far  as  con-
cerned the  taking  of  the  census,  for  in  this  he  acted  as
procurator  of  the  revenue,  even  while  invested  with  the
sole  government  of  the  province.  The  words  best  agree
with  the  supposition  that  both  enrolments  were  conducted
by  him  in  the  execution  of  his  office  as  procurator  of
Syria.  No  difficulty  can  justly  arise  from  the  silence
of  other  historians  respecting  the  agency  of  Cyrenius
in  the  incipient  and  ineffectual  enrolment,  since  the  en-
rolment itself  has  received  from  them  no  other  notice
than  the  obscure  one  of  Josephus,  who  has  not  mentioned
in  any  way  the  Roman  officer  to  whom  it  was  intrusted.

IV.  Infidels  allege  that  Josephus  and  all  other  his-
torians omit  any  mention  of  the  slaughter  of  infants  at
Bethlehem.     Matt.  ii.  16.

The  history  of  Herod's  acts  of  cruelty  as  given  by
Josephus  and  others,  and  especially  of  his  murder  of
persons  whom  his  jealousy  of  power  rendered  objects  of
dread,  corresponds  with  the  horrid  massacre  that  Mat-
thew has  described.  No  historian  records  everything,
and  the  silence  of  each  as  to  some  facts  is  no  objection
to  the  narrations  of  others.  Josephus  could  not  have  re-
corded this  event  without  favoring  the  Christians  more
than  he  desired.


1  If  the  preposition  "of"  be  omitted  in  the  translation,  it  will
still  be  naturally  supplied  in  the  interpretation.  The  omission
of  it  makes  the  Avords  "  Cyrenius  governing"  the  case  absolute,
which  might,  as  in  Luke  iii.  1,  merely  fix  the  date  of  the  event,
if  the  event  were  not  an  act  pertaining  to  the  government  of
Syria.  To  fix  the  date  of  an  act  which  a  Syrian  governor  might
be  expected  to  perform,  by  naming  the  individual  who  was  in
office  at  the  time,  naturally  implies  that  he  was  the  agent.


13.]  AGREEMENT    OF     HISTORIES.  291

V.  The  silence  of  Josephus  as  to  those  whose  blood
Pilate  mingled  with  their  sacrifices,  has  been  noticed  by
infidels  as  an  objection  to  the  statement  in  Luke  xiii.  1.

It  is  a  sufficient  answer  to  this  objection  that  silence
is  not  contradiction.

VI.  Infidels  allege  that  Jesus  was  born  a  consider-
able time  before  the  death  of  Herod,  and  that  in  the
fifteenth  year  of  Tiberius  his  age  was  considerably  more
than  that  ascribed  to  him  by  Luke.     Luke  iii.  1,  23.

After  careful  examination  of  facts  the  conclusion
of  Dr.  Lardner  is  that  the  birth  of  Jesus  occurred
about  eighteen  months  before  the  death  of  Herod ;  and
about  September,  748  or  749,  a.  u.  c.  The  years  of
Tiberius  may  be  reckoned  from  his  being  made  a  col-
league of  Augustus.

Another  solution  is,  that  the  words  of  Luke  were  evi-
dently designed  not  to  give  the  precise  age  of  Jesus.  He
expresses  it  in  round  numbers  with  the  qualifying  word
about.  It  may  be  therefore  that  he  was  thirty  two  or
three  years  old.

Either  of  these  solutions  suffices  for  the  removal  of
the  difficulty.

VII.  Luke  says,  "  Annas  and  Caiaphas  being  high
priests  :"  Luke  iii.  2  ;  but  infidels  allege  that  there  was
only  one  high  priest  at  a  time.

It  is  clear  from  Josephus  that  there  were  in  other
cases  two  persons  who  held  the  highest  authority  under
the  Romans  at  the  same  time.  Annas  had  been  high
priest,  and  being  father-in-law  to  Caiaphas  is  first  named,
and  the  two  held  the  places  of  highest  authority.

VIII.  Infidels  allege  that  Herodias  was  the  wife,  not
of  Philip  the  tetrarch,  but  of  Herod,  an  untitled  brother
residing  in  Jerusalem.  Matt.  xiv.  3;  Mark  vi.  17;
Luke  iii.  19.

The  evangelists  do  not  affirm  that  Herodias  had  been
the  wife  of  Philip  the  tetrarch.  No  one  of  them  affixes
the  title,  as  all  of  them  would  probably  have  done  if
this  had  been  the  person  intended.  The  untitled
brother  had  both  names,  Herod  Philip.  His  injurious
brother,  the  tetrarch  of  Galilee,  was  Herod  Antipas.
25*


292  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [13.

IX.  Infidels  allege  that  Theudas,  mentioned  by  Gama-
liel, Acts,  v.  34,  36,  did  not,  according  to  Josephus,  rise  up
until  several  years  after  the  time  when  Gamaliel  spoke.

The  Theudas  mentioned  by  Gamaliel  and  the  Theudas
mentioned  by  Josephus,  were  different  persons.  The
name  was  not  uncommon.  There  were  several  impostors
who  had  the  name  Simon,  and  three  of  the  name  Judas
within  ten  years.  Several  impostors  arose  about  the
time  of  Herod's  death  whose  names  are  not  given  by
Josephus.  The  Theudas  of  Gamaliel  had  four  hundred
followers,  that  of  Josephus  "a  great  multitude."  The
points  of  agreement  between  the  two  are  fewer  and  less
remarkable  than  between  two  impostors  named  Simon,
of  whom  Josephus  gives  an  account.

X.  Infidels  allege  that  the  number  stated  by  Luke,
Acts  xxi.  38,  of  those  who  adhered  to  the  Egyptian  im-
postor differs  widely  from  that  mentioned  by  Josephus.

Josephus  has  given  two  accounts  of  this  affair  in
which  the  numbers  differ  greatly  from  each  other,  as
well  as  from  that  given  by  the  chief  captain  in  the
words  recorded  by  Luke.  The  three  accounts  refer  to
different  times  in  the  progress  of  the  transaction.  The
impostor  came  from  Egypt  to  Jerusalem,  and  there  suc-
ceeded in  gaining  four  thousand  followers  whom  he  led
out  into  the  wilderness.  Having  at  length  increased
the  number  to  thirty  thousand,  he  returned  to  Mount
Olivet,  where  he  was  attacked  by  Felix.  Most  of  the
company  deserted,  but  a  party  fled  with  the  impostor,
of  whom  four  hundred  were  killed,  and  two  hundred
taken  prisoners.  All  the  accounts  are  thus  harmonized  ;
and  in  many  particulars  the  agreement  of  Josephus  and
the  chief  captain  is  remarkable.

Section   III.     Christian  Testimonies.

THE  PRINCIPAL  FACTS  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  ARE
CONFIRMED  BY  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  ANCIENT  CHRIS-
TIAN WRITERS.

The  first  part  of  Dr.  Lardner's  "  Credibility"  treats
of  facts  "occasionally  mentioned"  in  the  New  Testa-


14.]  C  H  R  I  S  T  I A  H     TESTIMONIES.  293

merit.  The  second  part  treats  of  the  "principal  facts"
on  which  Christianity  is  founded.  This  part  of  the
"  Credibility"  fills  seven  volumes,  in  which  testimonies
are  adduced  from  Christians,  Jews,  Heathens,  and  Here-
tics. To  each  of  these  classes  of  testimony  a  section  is
devoted  in  this  chapter ;  and  therefore  the  present  sec-
tion with  the  three  following,  will  exhibit  these  testimo-
nies as  far  as  I  have  thought  it  needful  to  introduce
them  into  this  small  volume.  In  many  cases  where  the
testimonies  would  have  occupied  too  much  space,  a  con-
densed view  of  them  is  given  in  extracts  from  Lardner's
observations  on  them.  The  testimonies  are  everywhere
given  in  Lardner's  translation  and  the  observations  in
Lardner's  words,  except  where  matter  is  added  in
brackets.  From  all  the  earlier  writers  Lardner  has
copied  out  at  length  their  quotations  of  Scripture  and
their  allusions  to  passages  of  Scripture ;  and  has  placed
over  against  them  in  a  parallel  column,  for  the  sake  of
convenient  comparison,  the  words  of  Scripture  quoted
or  alluded  to.  These  quotations  and  allusions  give
abundant  proof  that  the  books  of  the  New  Testament
were  well  known  to  the  Christian  writers,  and  highly
respected  by  them :  but,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  I  have
selected  one  or  more  of  the  passages  from  each  writer
as  a  specimen,  and  have  subjoined  after  the  letter  N.  the
number  of  such  quotations  and  allusions  found  in  his
writings  by  Lardner.  Thus,  in  the  short  notice  which
follows  of  the  Epistle  of  Barnabas,  only  one  quotation
made  by  him  from  the  New  Testament  appears ;  but
nineteen  others  are  given  by  Lardner,  making  the  whole
number  twenty.

14.  Barnabas  [the  companion  of  Paul],  A.  D.  71.
"  Let  us  therefore  beware,  lest  it  should  happen  to  us
as  it  is  written:1  There  are  many  called,  few  chosen."
N.  20.

[In  an  epistle  of  Barnabas,  the  companion  of  Paul,
probably  genuine,  certainly  belonging  to  that  age,  we
have  (a)  the  sufferings  of  Christ,  his  choice  of  apostles

1  Matt.  xx.  16.


294  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [15.

and  their  number,  his  passion,  the  scarlet  robe,  the
vinegar  and  gall,  the  mocking  and  piercing,  the  casting
lots  for  his  coat,  his  resurrection  on  the  eighth  (i.  e.,
the  first  day  of  the  week),  and  the  commemorative  dis-
tinction of  that  day,  his  manifestation  after  his  resur-
rection, and,  lastly,  his  ascension.  We  have  also  his
miracles  generally,  but  positively  referred  to  in  the  fol-
lowing words  :  "  Finally,  teaching  the  people  of  Israel,
and  doing  many  wonders  and  signs  among  them,  he
preached  to  them,  and  showed  the  exceeding  great  love
which  he  bare  towards  them." — Paley.~]

15.  Clement  [mentioned  in  Phil.  iv.  3],  a.  d.  96.
"  Take  into  your  hands  the  epistle  of  the  blessed  Paul
the  apostle.  What  did  he  at  the  first  write  to  you  in
the  beginning  of  the  gospel  ?  Verily,  he  did  by  the
Spirit  admonish  you  concerning  himself,  and  Cephas,
and  Apollos,  because  that  even  then  you  did  form
parties.1  '  And  let  us  do  as  it  is  written : 2  For  thus
saith  the  Holy  Spirit,  Let  not  the  wise  man  glory  in  his
wisdom.'  Especially  remembering  the  words  of  the  Lord
Jesus,  which  he  spake,  teaching  gentleness  and  long-
suffering.  For  thus  he  said:  'Be  ye  merciful,  that  ye
may  obtain  mercy ; 3  forgive,  that  it  may  be  forgiven
unto  you.4  As  you  do,  so  shall  it  be  done  unto  you ;
as  you  give,  so  shall  it  be  given  unto  you  ; 5  as  ye  judge,
so  shall  you  be  judged ;  as  ye  show  kindness,  so  shall
kindness  be  shown  unto  you ;  with  what  measure  ye
mete,  with  the  same  shall  it  be  measured  to  you.'  By
this  command,  and  by  these  rules,  let  us  establish  our-
selves, that  we  may  always  walk  obediently  to  his  holy
words."     N.  44.

[In  an  epistle  of  Clement,  a  hearer  of  St.  Paul,
although  written  for  a  purpose  remotely  connected  with
the  Christian  history,  we  have  (a)  the  resurrection  of
Christ  and  the  subsequent  mission  of  the  apostles  re-
corded in  these  satisfactory  terms  :  "  The  apostles  have
preached  to  us  from  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  from  God ;

1  1  Cor.  i.  12.  2  Jer.  ix.  23,  24.

3  Luke,  vi.  3G.  4  Verse  37.

5  Ver.se  38.


17.]  CHRISTIAN    TESTIMONIES.  295

for,  having  received  their  command,  and  being  thoroughly-
assured  by  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
they  went  abroad  publishing  that  the  kingdom  of  God
was  at  hand."  (Ep.  Clem.  Rom.  cxliii.)  We  find  no-
ticed also  the  humility,  yet  the  power  of  Christ  (Ep.
Clem.  Rom.  cxvi.),  his  descent  from  Abraham,  his  cru-
cifixion. We  have  (b)  Peter  and  Paul  represented  as
faithful  and  righteous  pillars  of  the  church ;  the  nu-
merous sufferings  of  Peter;  the  bonds,  stripes,  and
stoning  of  Paul,  and,  more  particularly,  his  extensive
and  unwearied  travels. — Paley.~\

16.  Hermas  [mentioned  in  Romans,  xvi.  14],  A.  D.
100.  "  Happy  are  yeT  whosoever  shall  endure  the
great  trial  that  is  at  hand,  and  whosoever  shall  not  deny
his  life.  For  the  Lord  has  sworn  by  his  Son,  that  who-
soever shall  deny  his  Son,  and  him,  being  afraid  of  his
life,  they  will  also  deny  him  in  the  world  that  is  to
come.  But  those  who  shall  never  deny  him,  of  his
great  mercy  he  will  be  favorable  to  them."1     N.  42.

17.  Ignatius,  a.  d.  107.  "  Baptized  of  John,  that  all
righteousness  might  be  fulfilled  by  him."2  "  Be  wise  as
a  serpent  in  all  things,  and  harmless  as  a  dove." 3  N.  48.

[In  the  remaining  works  of  Ignatius,  the  contemporary
of  Polycarp,  larger  than  those  of  Polycarp  (yet,  like  those
of  Polycarp,  treating  of  subjects  in  no  wise  leading  to  any
recital  of  the  Christian  history),  the  occasional  allusions
are  proportionally  more  numerous,  (a)  The  descent  of
Christ  from  David,  his  mother  Mary,  his  miraculous  con-
ception, the  star  at  his  birth,  his  baptism  by  John,  the
reason  assigned  for  it,  his  appeal  to  the  prophets,  the  oint-
ment poured  on  his  head,  his  sufferings  under  Pontius
Pilate  and  Herod  the  tetrarch,  his  resurrection,  the  Lord's
day  called  and  kept  in  commemoration  of  it,  and  the  eu-
charist,  in  both  its  parts,  are  unequivocally  referred  to.
Upon  the  resurrection  this  writer  is  even  circumstantial.
He  mentions  the  apostles'  eating  and  drinking  with  Christ
after  he  had  risen  ;  their  feeling  or  their  handling  him  ;
from  which  last  circumstance  Ignatius  raises  this  just

1  Matt.  x.  32,  33.  2  Matt.  iii.  15.

3  Matt.  x.  16.


296  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [20.

reflection ;  "  They  believed,  being  convinced  both  by
his  flesh  and  spirit ;  for  this  cause,  they  despised  death,
and  were  found  to  be  above  it." — Paley.~\

18.  Polycarp,  a  disciple  of  John,  A.  D.  108.  "  Do
we  not  know  that  the  saints  shall  judge  the  world,  as
Paul  teaches  ? l  i  For  I  trust  that  ye  are  well  exercised
in  the  holy  Scriptures.'  As  in  these  Scriptures  it  is
said  :  '  Be  ye  angry,  and  sin  not.  And  let  not  the  sun
go  down  upon  your  wrath.'  "2     N.  38.

[In  an  epistle  of  Polycarp,  a  disciple  of  Saint  John,
though  only  a  brief  hortatory  letter,  we  have  (a)  the
humility,  patience,  sufferings,  resurrection,  and  ascension
of  Christ,  together  with  the  apostolic  character  of  Saint
Paul,  distinctly  recognised.  (Pol.  Ep.  ad  Phil.  c.  v.  viii.
ii.  iii.)  Of  this  same  father  we  are  also  assured  by
Irenseus  that  he  (Irenseus)  had  heard  him  relate  "  what
he  had  received  from  eye-witnesses  concerning  the  Lord,
both  concerning  his  miracles  and  his  doctrine." — Paley.~\

19.  Polycarp' s  Martyrdom.  "  All  things  that  went
before  were  done,  that  the  Lord  might  show  us  from
above  (or  from  the  very  first)  a  martyrdom  according  to
the  gospel.  For  he  expected  to  be  delivered  up,  as  the
Lord  also  did,  that  we  likewise  might  be  imitators  of
him."

20.  Observations  on  the  Apostolical  Fathers. —
1.  "Barnabas  has  many  more  passages  out  of  the  Old
Testament  than  the  New."  2.  "  Clement  has  more
passages  out  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  oftener  alludes
to  it,  than  the  New."  3.  "  Hernias  quotes  neither  the
Old  nor  the  New  Testament."  4.  "Ignatius  does  not
quote  the  Old  Testament  oftener  than  the  New."
5.  "  Polycarp  has  alluded  above  twenty  times  to  texts
of  the  New  Testament,  or  recited  the  very  words  of
them,  and  scarce  once  refers  to  any  passage  of  the  Old
Testament."

(a)  In  the  writings  of  these  apostolical  fathers  there
is  all  the  notice  taken  of  the  books  of  the  New  Testa-
ment that  could  be  expected.     It  is  apparent  that  they


1  1  Cor.  vi.  2.  2  Eph.  iv.  26.


22.]  CHRISTIAN     TESTIMONIES.  297

have  not  omitted  to  take  notice  of  any  book  of  the  New
Testament,  which,  as  far  as  we  are  able  to  judge,  their
design  led  them  to  mention.  Ignatius  has  made  use  of
terms  denoting  a  code,  or  collection  of  "  Gospels"  and
"  Epistles."

21.  Evangelists  in  the  Reign  oe  Trajan.
Quadrattjs    [one    of    the    number].      "  The    works

of  our  Saviour  were  always  conspicuous,  for  they
were  real ;  both  those  that  were  healed,  and  those
that  were  raised  from  the  dead ;  who  were  seen  not
only  when  they  were  healed  or  raised,  but  for  a
long  time  afterwards ;  not  only  whilst  he  dwelt  on  this
earth,  but  also  after  his  departure,  and  for  a  good  while
after  it,  insomuch  that  some  of  them  have  reached  to
our  times."

[From  Eusebius.]  Among  those  who  were  illustrious
at  that  time  was  Quadratus,  who,  together  with  the
daughters  of  Philip,  is  said  to  have  enjoyed  the  gift  of
prophecy.  And  besides  these  there  were  at  that  time
many  other  eminent  persons,  who  had  the  first  rank  in
the  succession  of  the  apostles ;  who,  being  the  worthy
disciples  of  such  men,  everywhere  built  up  the  churches,
the  foundations  of  which  had  been  laid  by  the  apostles ;
extending  likewise  their  preaching  yet  further,  and
scattering  abroad  the  salutary  seeds  of  the  kingdom  of
heaven  all  over  the  world.  For  many  of  the  disciples
of  that  time,  whose  soul  the  Divine  Word  had  inspired
with  an  ardent  love  of  philosophy,  first  fulfilled  our
Saviour's  precepts,  distributing  their  substance  to  the
necessitous.  Then  travelling  abroad,  they  performed
the  work  of  evangelists,  being  ambitious  to  preach
Christ,  and  deliver  the  (a)  Scripture  of  the  Divine
Gospels.

22.  Papias,  a.  d.  116.  "  I  shall  not  think  much  to
set  down  together  with  my  interpretations,  what  I  have
learned  from  the  elders  [or  presbyters],  and  do  well
remember  confirming  the  truth  by  them.  For  I  took
no  delight,  as  most  men  do,  in  those  that  talk  a  great
deal,  but  in  those  that  teach  the  truth,  nor  in  those  that


298  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [22,

relate  strange  precepts,  but  in  them  that  relate  precepts
which  the  Lord  has  intrusted  us  with,  and  which  pro-
ceed from  the  truth  itself.  And  if  at  any  time  I  met
with  one  who  had  conversed  with  the  elders,  I  inquired
after  the  sayings  of  the  eiders ;  what  Andrew  or  what
Peter  said,  or  what  Philip,  what  Thomas,  or  James  had
said ;  what  John  or  Matthew  or  what  any  other  of  the
disciples  of  the  Lord  were  wont  to  say ;  and  what  Aris-
tion  or  John  the  presbyter,  disciples  of  the  Lord,  say ;
for  I  was  of  opinion,  that  I  could  not  profit  so  much  by
books  as  by  the  living."

Eusebius,  who  quotes  the  above  from  Papias,  adds,
"  It  will  be  worth  while  to  add  here  to  the  fore-cited
words  of  Papias  some  other  of  his  passages,  in  which  he
mentions  some  miracles,  and  other  things  which  had
come  to  him  by  tradition.  That  Philip  the  apostle
resided  with  his  daughters  at  Hierapolis,  has  been
shown  in  some  things  we  have  already  produced.  Now
we  are  to  observe  how  Papias,  who  lived  at  the  same
time,  mentions  a  wonderful  relation  he  had  received  from
Philip's  daughters.  For  he  relates,  that  in  his  time  (a)
a  dead  man  was  raised  to  life.  He  also  relates  another
miracle  of  Justus,  surnamed  Barsabas :  that  he  drank
deadly  poison,  and  by  the  grace  of  the  Lord  suffered  no
harm.  Now  that  this  Justus,  after  the  ascension  of  our
Saviour,  was  sent  forth  by  the  holy  apostles  together
with  Matthias,  and  that  they  prayed  that  one  of
them  might  be  allotted  to  fill  up  their  number  in  the
room  of  Judas  the  traitor,  the  Scripture  of  the  Acts
relates  in  this  manner,  ch.  i.  23,  24,  "  And  they
appointed  two,  Joseph  called  Barsabas,  who  was  sur-
named Justus,  and  Matthias.  And  they  prayed  and
said."  And  other  things  the  same  writer  has  related,
which  he  received  by  unwritten  tradition,  and  some
strange  parables  of  our  Saviour,  and  sermons  of  his,
and  several  other  things  of  a  fabulous  kind.  Among
which  he  says  likewise,  that  there  shall  be  a  thousand
years  after  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  wherein  the
kingdom  of  Christ  shall  corporally  subsist  upon  this
earth.     Which   opinion,  I  suppose,  he  was  led  into  by


22.]  CHRISTIAN     TESTIMONIES.  299

misunderstanding  the  apostolical  narrations ;  and  for
want  of  seeing  into  those  things  which  they  spoke  mys-
tically, and  in  figures.  For  he  was  a  man  of  no  great
capacity,  as  may  be  conjectured  from  his  writings.  Yet
he  gave  occasion  to  a  great  many  ecclesiastical  writers
after  him  to  be  of  the  same  opinion,  who  respected  the
antiquity  of  the  man  ;  as  Irenaeus,  and  the  rest  who  have
maintained  that  opinion.  In  the  same  writings  he  deli-
vers many  other  narrations  of  the  fore-mentioned  Aris-
tion,  of  the  words  of  the  Lord,  and  traditions  of  John
the  presbyter ;  to  which  we  refer  the  curious  reader.

But  it  is  requisite,  we  should  subjoin  to  his  fore-cited
passages  a  tradition  which  he  has  concerning  (b)  Mark,
who  wrote  the  Gospel,  in  these  words :  "  And  this  the
presbyter  [or  elder]  said,  Mark  being  the  interpreter
of  Peter,  wrote  exactly  whatever  he  remembered ;  but
not  in  the  order  in  which  things  were  spoken  or  done
by  Christ.  For  he  was  neither  a  hearer  nor  a  follower
of  the  Lord ;  but,  as  I  said  afterwards,  followed  Peter,
who  made  his  discourses  for  the  profit  of  those  that
heard  him,  but  not  in  the  way  of  a  regular  history  of
our  Lord's  words.  Mark,  however,  committed  no  mis-
take in  writing  some  things,  as  they  occurred  to  his
memory.  For  this  one  thing  he  made  his  care,  to  omit
nothing  which  he  had  heard,  and  to  say  nothing  false  in
what  he  related."

(c)  "  When  Peter  had  come  to  Rome  they  were  so
inflamed  with  love  for  the  truths  of  Christianity  that
they  entreated  Mark  the  companion  of  Peter,  and
whose  Gospel  we  now  have,  praying  him  that  he  would
write  down  for  them,  and  leave  with  them,  an  account
of  the  doctrines  which  had  been  preached  to  them  :  and
they  did  not  desist  from  their  request  until  they  had
prevailed  on  him,  and  procured  his  writing  that  which
is  now  the  Gospel  of  Mark.  When  Peter  came  to  know
this  he  was,  by  the  direction  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  pleased
with  the  request  of  the  people,  and  confirmed  the  Gospel
which  was  written  for  the  use  of  the  churches."

"  Matthew  (d)  wrote  the  divine  oracles  in  the  Hebrew
tongue,  and  every  one  interpreted  them  as  he  was  able."
26


300  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [23.

He  also  brings  testimonies  out  of  the  first  epistle  of
John,  and  of  Peter  in  like  manner.

23.  Justin  Martyr,  a.  d.  140.  "  For  Christ  was
the  Passover  who  was  afterwards  sacrificed  for  us."  l  In
his  oration  to  the  Greeks :  "  Be  you  as  I  am,  for  I  also
was  as  you  are."2    N.  17.

Oeservations. — It  is  time  we  sum  up  the  evidence
of  this  writer.  He  has  numerous  quotations  (a)  of  our
Gospels,  except  that  of  St.  Mark,  which  he  has  seldom
quoted.  He  quotes  them  as  containing  authentic  ac-
counts of  Jesus  Christ  and  his  doctrine.  He  speaks  of
"  memoirs"  or  records  written  by  "  apostles"  and  "  their
companions;"  plainly  meaning  the  apostles  and  evange-
lists, Matthew  and  John  ;  and  by  companions,  or  disci-
ples of  apostles,  Mark  and  Luke.  These  Gospels  were
read  and  expounded  in  the  solemn  assemblies  of  the
Christians,  as  the  books  of  the  Old  Testament  were ;
and  as  they  had  been  before  in  the  Jewish  synagogues.
Whether  any  other  books  of  the  New  Testament  were
so  read  he  does  not  inform  us.  (b)  This  reading  of  the
Gospels  he  mentions  in  his  first  Apology  to  Antoninus
the  Pious.  He  must  have  been  well  assured  of  the  truth
of  what  he  says  ;  and  it  is  likely  knew  it  to  be  the  ordi-
nary custom  of  the  Christian  churches  he  had  visited  in
his  travels.  If  it  had  not  been  a  general  practice,  or
had  obtained  in  some  few  places  only,  he  must  have
spoken  more  cautiously  and  made  use  of  some  limita-
tions and  exceptions.  For  if  there  were  Christian
churches  in  which  the  "  memoirs"  he  speaks  of  were  not
read ;  upon  inquiry  made  by  the  emperor,  or  his  order,
he  had  run  the  hazard  of  being  convicted  of  a  design
to  impose  upon  all  the  majesty  of  the  Roman  empire;
and  that  not  in  an  affair  incidentally  mentioned,  but  in
the  conduct  and  worship  of  his  own  people,  concerning
whom  he  professeth  to  give  the  just  est  information.  The
general  reading  of  the  Gospels,  as  a  part  of  divine  wor-
ship, at  that  time,  about  the  year  140,  or  not  very  long
after,  is  not  only  a  proof  that  they  were  well  known,

1  1  Cor.  v.  7.  2  Gal.  iv.  12.


27.]  CHRISTIAN     TESTIMONIES.  301

and  allowed  to  be  genuine,  but  also  that  they  were  in
the  highest  esteem.(c)  These  Gospels  were  not  con-
cealed. Justin  appeals  to  them  in  the  most  public
manner,  and  they  were  open  to  all  the  world — read  by
Jews  and  others.

The  other  passages  of  Justin  here  alleged  relate  to
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,
the  first  to  the  Corinthians,  the  epistles  to  the  Galatians,
Ephesians,  Philippians,  and  Colossians,  the  second  to
the  Thessalonians,  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  the
second  of  Peter,  and  the  book  of  the  Revelation ;  which
last  he  ascribes  expressly  to  John  the  apostle  of  Christ.
I  shall  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  consider  how  many
of  the  references  to  any  of  the  other  books  are  full  and
clear.  I  think  it  was  not  the  method  of  Justin  to  use
allusions  in  his  style  so  often  as  some  other  writers  do.

[From  Justin's  Works,  which  are  still  extant,  might
be  collected  a  tolerably  complete  account  of  Christ's
life,  in  all  points  agreeing  with  that  which  is  delivered
in  our  Scriptures ;  taken  indeed  in  a  great  measure
from  those  Scriptures,  but  still  proving  that  this  ac-
count, and  no  other,  was  the  account  known  and  extant
in  that  age.(e)  The  miracles  in  particular  which  form
the  part  of  Christ's  history  most  material  to  be  traced,
stand  fully  and  distinctly  recognised. — Paley.~]

24.  The  Epistle  to  Diognetus. — "  The  apostle  says,
Knowledge  puffeth  up,  but  charity  edifieth."1      N.  14.

25.  Tatiant  a.  d.  172.  "This  is  what  is  said:  The
darkness  comprehendeth  not  the  light,  and  the  word  [or
reason]  is  the  light  of  God  :  the  ignorant  soul  is  dark-
ness."2    N.  4.

26.  The  Epistles  of  the  Churches  of  Vienna
and  Lyons,  a.  r>.  177. '  "  Then  was  fulfilled  that  which
was  spoken  by  the  Lord,  that  whosoever  killeth  you,
will  think  that  he  doth  God  service."3     N.  13.

27.  Iren^eus,  a.  d.  178.  "  For  we  have  not  received
the  knowledge  of  the  way  of  our  salvation  by  any  others

1  1  Cor.  viii.  1.  2  John  i.  5.  3  John,  xvi.  2.


302        HISTORICAL  EVIDENCE.        [27.

than  those  by  whom  the  gospel  has  been  brought  to  us ;
which  gospel  they  first  preached,  and  afterwards  by  the
will  of  God  committed  to  writing,  that  it  might  be  for
time  to  come  the  foundation  and  pillar  of  our  faith.
For  after  that  our  Lord  rose  from  the  dead,  and  they  [the
apostles]  were  endowed  from  above  with  the  power  of
the  Holy  Ghost  coming  down  upon  them,  they  received
a  perfect  knowledge  of  all  things.  They  then  went
forth  to  all  the  ends  of  the  earth,  declaring  to  men  the
blessing  of  heavenly  peace,  having  all  of  them,  and
every  one  alike,  the  gospel  of  God.  Matthew  then
among  the  Jews,  wrote  a  gospel  in  their  own  language,
wThile  Peter  and  Paul  were  preaching  the  gospel  at
Rome,  and  founding  a  church  there.  And  after  their
exit  [death],  or  departure,  Mark  (a)  also,  the  disciple
and  interpreter  of  Peter,  delivered  to  us  in  writing  the
things  that  had  been  preached  by  Peter  ;  and  Luke,  the
companion  of  Paul,  put  down  in  a  book  the  gospel
preached  by  him  [Paul].  Aftenvards  John,  the  disciple
of  the  Lord,  who  also  leaned  upon  his  breast,  he  like-
wise published  a  Gospel  while  he  dwelt  at  Ephesus  in
Asia.  And  -all  these  have  delivered  to  us  that  there  is
one  God,  the  Maker  of  the  heaven  and  the  earth,  de-
clared by  the  law  and  the  prophets,  and  one  Christ,  the
Son  of  God.  And  he  who  does  not  assent  to  them,
despiseth  indeed  those  who  knew  the  mind  of  the  Lord  ;
but  he  despiseth  also  Christ  himself  the  Lord ;  and  he
despiseth  likewise  the  Father,  and  is  self-condemned,  re-
sisting and  opposing  his  own  salvation,  as  all  heretics  do."
"  Nor  can  they  pretend  that  Paul  is  not  an  apostle,
when  he  was  chosen  to  this  end ;  nor  can  they  show
that  Luke  (b)  is  not  to  be  credited,  who  has  related  to
us  the  truth  with  the  greatest  exactness.  .  .  .  And
possibly  God  has  for  this  reason  so  ordered  it,  that
many  parts  of  the  gospel  should  be  declared  to  us  by
Luke,  which  all  are  under  a  necessity  of  receiving ;  that
so  all  might  receive  likewise  his  subsequent  testimony,
which  he  has  given  concerning  the  acts  and  doctrine  of
the  apostles,  and  might  have  a  sincere  and  uncorrupt
rule  of  truth  and  be  saved.  Therefore  his  testimony  is
true."


31.]  CHRISTIAN     TESTIMONIES.  303

Observations. (c) — Thirteen  epistles  of  Paul  are
expressly  quoted  as  his  by  Irenseus,  and  most  of  them
frequently,  except  the  epistle  to  Philemon,  which  is  not
quoted  at  all.  The  quotations  of  Paul's  epistles  are  so
numerous,  that  they  must  be  acknowledged  by  all  who
but  cast  an  eye  upon  this  father's  writings.  .  .  .  The
first  epistle  of  Peter  is  quoted  as  his  more  than  once.
.  .  .  The  first  and  second  epistles  of  John  are  expressly
cited  as  John's,  the  disciple  of  the  Lord.  .  .  .  The
Apocalypse,  or  Revelation,  is  often  quoted  by  him  as
the  Revelation  of  John,  the  disciple  of  the  Lord.  .  .  .
He  knew  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  but  was  not  satis-
fied that  it  was  Paul's.

28.  Athenagoras,  a.  d.  178.  "  For  whosoever  says
he  shall  put  away  his  wife,  and  marry  another,  com-
mitteth  adultery.''1     N.  19.

29.  Theophilus  of  Antioch,  a.  d.  181.  "  And  it
[the  divine  word]  teacheth  to  render  to  all  all  things  ;
honor  to  whom  honor,  fear  to  whom  fear,  tribute  to
whom  tribute ;  to  owe  no  man  anything ;  but  only  to
love  all  men."2     N.  31.

30.  Clement  of  Alexandria,  a.  d.  194.
Observations. — I  shall  now  sum  up  the  testimony

given  by  Clement  to  the  books  of  the  New  Testament.
He  has  expressly  owned  the  four  Gospels  of  Matthew,
Mark,  Luke,  and  John,  and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,
which  he  also  ascribes  to  Luke.  He  owns,  likewise,  all
the  fourteen  epistles  of  Paul,  except  the  epistle  to
Philemon,  which  he  has  nowhere  mentioned,  that  we
know  of;  but  this  omission  may  be  very  well  supposed
owing  to  no  other  reason  but  the  brevity  of  that  epistle.
He  has  also  quoted  the  first  epistle  of  Peter,  the  first
and  second  epistles  of  John,  and  the  epistle  of  Jude,
and  the  book  of  the  Revelation  ;  but  we  have  not  found
any  quotations  of  the  epistle  of  James,  the  second  of
Peter,  or  the  third  of  John,  or  any  evidences  that  these
were  owned  by  him.

31.  Tertullian,  a.  d.  200.     "  Well,  if  you  be  willing

1  Luke,  xvi.  18.  2  Rom.  xiii.  7,  8.

26*  u


304:  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [31.

to  exercise  your  curiosity  profitably  in  the  business  of
your  salvation,  visit  the  apostolical  churches,  in  which
the  very  chairs  of  the  apostle  still  preside;  in  which
their  very  authentic  letters  (a)  are  recited,  sounding  forth
the  voice,  and  representing  the  countenance,  of  each
one  of  them.  Is  Achaia  near  you  ?  You  have  Corinth.
If  you  are  not  far  from  Macedonia,  you  have  Philippi,
you  have  Thessalonica.  If  you  can  go  to  Asia,  you
have  Ephesus.  But  if  you  are  near  to  Italy,  you  have
Koine,  from  whence  we  also  may  be  easily  satisfied."

Observations. — There  are  in  Tertullian  plain  testi-
monies to  all  the  books  of  the  New  Testament,  com-
monly received  by  Christians  at  this  time,  except  the
epistle  of  James,  the  second  of  Peter,  the  second  and
third  of  John.  The  epistle  to  the  Hebrews  he  supposed
to  have  been  written  by  Barnabas.  .  .  .  Tertullian
affords  proof  that  there  was  in  his  time  a  Latin  (b)
version  of  some  or  all  the  books  of  the  New  Testa-
ment  The  scriptures  of  the  New

Testament  were  (c)  open  to  all,  and  well  known  in  the
world,  in  the  time  of  Tertullian.  (d)  ....  We
have  now  seen  a  very  valuable  testimony  to  the  scriptures
of  the  New  Testament  in  the  remaining  works  of  Ter-
tullian, written  in  the  latter  part  of  the  second  and  the
beginning  of  the  third  century.  It  is  considerable  for  the
number  of  the  books  cited  by  him,  almost  all  those  which
are  now  received  by  Christians  as  canonical,  without  so
much  as  a  suspicion  of  placing  any  other  in  the  same
rank  with  them,  and  for  the  large  and  numerous  quota-
tions of  them.  There  are  perhaps  more  and  larger
quotations  of  the  small  volume  of  the  New  Testament
in  this  one  Christian  author,  than  of  all  the  works  of
Cicero,  though  of  so  uncommon  excellence  for  thought
and  style,  in  the  writers  of  all  characters  for  several  ages.
And  there  is  a  like  number  of  quotations  of  the  New
Testament  in  St.  Irenseus  and  St.  Clement  of  Alexandria,
both  writers  of  the  second  century.  Tertullian's  tes-
timony is  considerable  too  for  the  evident  tokens  of  that
high  (e)  respect  which  was  paid  to  these  Scriptures.
Indeed,  they  would  not  have  been  so  much  quoted  if
they  had  not  been  generally  esteemed.     Nor  have  the


32.]  CHRISTIAN     TESTIMONIES.  305

differing  sentiments  of  those  called  heretics  done  us  any
lasting  prejudice.  The  contest  which  they  occasioned
has  increased  our  proof  of  the  genuineness,  authority,  and
integrity  of  the  evangelical  and  apostolical  Scriptures.

32.     Caius,  a.  d.  212.

[From  Eusebius.]  "  There  is  also  come  to  our  hands
a  dialogue  [or  disputation]  of  Caius,  a  most  eloquent
man,  held  at  Rome  in  the  time  of  Zephyrinus,  with  Pro-
culus,  a  patron  of  the  Cataphrygian  heresy ;  in  which
also,  reproving  the  (a)  rashness  and  audaciousness  of
the  adversaries,  in  composing  new  writings  [or  Scrip-
tures], he  makes  mention  of  but  thirteen  epistles  of  the
holy  apostle,  not  reckoning  that  to  the  Hebrews,  with
the  rest.  And,  indeed,  to  this  very  time,  by  some  of  the
Romans  this  epistle  is  not  thought  to  be  the  apostle's."

Observations. — Upon  this  occasion  Caius  gave  a
list  or  catalogue  of  the  apostle  Paul's  epistles  received
by  himself  and  the  church  in  general.  ...  It  would
have  been  a  great  pleasure  to  see  thirteen  of  St.  Paul's
epistles  expressly  named,  with  the  churches,  or  particu-
lar persons,  to  whom  they  were  sent ;  or  however
described,  at  least  by  their  several  characters,  in  the
order  then  used,  all  together  in  one  catalogue,  composed
by  this  ingenious  writer,  at  the  beginning  of  the  third
century.  And  I  cannot  but  think  that  Eusebius
deserves  to  be  censured  for  this  omission.

[A  fragment,  supposed  to  be  a  part  of  the  lost  dia-
logue of  Caius,  was  discovered  in  1740,  was  published
in  1814,  and  afterwards  translated  in  Wilson's  Evi-
dences of  Christianity,  vol.  1,  p.  98.  This  fragment,
after  mentioning  the  Gospels  of  Luke  and  John,  and
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  enumerates  all  the  epistles  of
Paul,  now  received,  except  that  to  the  Hebrews ;  also
the  epistle  of  Jude  and  two  epistles  of  John,  as  accounted
genuine  in  the  Catholic  Church.  It  says,  "  The  Apoca-
lypses of  John  and  Peter  are  the  only  ones  we  receive,
which  last  some  Christians  do  not  allow  to  be  read  in
the  church."  After  mentioning  the  epistle  of  Jude  and
the  two  epistles  of  John,  a  sentence  is  strangely  intro-
duced, having  the  appearance  of  interpolation.     "  And


306        HISTORICAL  EVIDENCE.        [33.

the  Book  of  Wisdom,  written  by  the  friends  of  Solomon
in  honor  of  him."]

33.     Origen,  a.  d.  230.

Observations. — Origen  received  as  divine  Scripture
the  four  Gospels  of  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  and  John ;
the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  written  by  the  evangelist  Luke  ;
thirteen  epistles  of  the  apostle  Paul,  and  likewise  the
epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  which  he  continually  quotes  as
Paul's,  though  in  one  place  he  delivers  his  opinion  that
the  sentiments  only  of  the  epistle  were  the  apostle's,  the
phrase  and  composition  of  some  one  else,  whose  he  did  not
certainly  know.  He  received  likewise  the  first  epistle  of
Peter,  and  the  first  of  John.  We  learn  from  him  also
that  the  epistle  of  James,  the  second  of  Peter,  the  sec-
ond and  third  of  John,  and  the  epistle  of  Jude,  were
then  well  known,  but  not  universally  received  as  genu-
ine ;  nor  is  it  evident  that  Origen  himself  received  them
as  sacred  Scripture.  He  owns  the  book  of  the  Revela-
tion for  the  writing  of  John  the  apostle  and  evangelist;
he  quotes  it  as  his  without  hesitation  ;  nor  does  it  appear
that  he  had  any  doubt  about  its  genuineness  or  authority.
Origen  does  mightily  recommend  the  reading  (a)  of  the
Scriptures  of  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  received  in
the  churches  as  sacred  and  divine.  From  the  large
collection  here  made  of  his  quotations  of  ecclesiastical
and  apocryphal  (b)  writings,  and  from  the  observations
that  have  been  made  upon  them,  I  presume  it  appears
that  none  of  these  were  esteemed  by  him  as  books  of
authority,  from  whence  doctrines  might  be  proved  ;  or
Scripture,  in  the  highest  sense  of  that  word.  Indeed
it  is  not  evident  that  Origen  received  as  sacred  books
of  the  New  Testament,  all  that  we  now  receive  ;  but
that  he  admitted  no  other  beside  those  in  our  present
canon,  may  be  reckoned  certain,  or,  however,  in  the
highest  degree  probable.  If  this  has  been  made  out  to
satisfaction,  it  is  a  material  point,  and  worth  all  the
labor  of  this  long  chapter ;  though  I  hope  it  may  like-
wise answer  some  other  good  purposes.  Particularly,
we  may  perceive  hence,  as  well  as  from  other  parts  of
this  work,  that  this  was  not  with  Christians  an  age  (c)


34.]  CHRISTIAN     TESTIMONIES.  307

of  gross  darkness ;  at  least  the  ministers  of  Christ  did
not  encourage  sloth  and  ignorance  in  the  people,  but
earnestly  excited  all  men  to  a  diligent  pursuit  of  reli-
gious knowledge,  according  to  their  several  abilities  and
opportunities,  especially  by  studying  the  holy  Scrip-
tures.

34.     Dionysius,  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  a.  d.  247.

Observations. — Dionysius  received  as  sacred  and
divine  scriptures,  the  four  Gospels  of  Matthew,  Mark,
Luke,  and  John ;  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  the  epistles
of  Paul,  and  particularly  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  as
a  writing  of  that  apostle.  Concerning  the  seven  catholic
epistles,  we  do  not  certainly  know  his  judgment,  but  he
has  mentioned  expressly  and  often  the  three  epistles  of
the  apostle  John ;  the  first  as  unquestionably  genuine
and  received  by  all,  the  other  two  as  well  known.  And
it  may  be  justly  taken  for  granted  that  he  received  the
first  epistle  of  the  apostle  Peter,  it  having  been  all  along
universally  received  by  Catholic  Christians.  As  for  the
rest,  we  can  say  nothing  positively  as  to  his  opinions
about  them.  The  Revelation  he  allowed  to  be  the  work
of  John,  a  holy  and  divinely  inspired  person  ;  but  he
was  not  satisfied  that  it  was  written  by  John,  the  son  of
Zebedee,  apostle  and  evangelist.  However,  in  his  argu-
ment concerning  that  book,  he  lets  us  know  that  it  was
then  generally  received  by  Christians  as  written  by
John  the  apostle.  In  Dionysius  we  have  seen,  like-
wise, evidences  of  that  peculiar  respect  (a)  showed  by
Christians  to  the  sacred  scriptures  ;  which  they  looked
upon  as  the  rule  of  judgment  in  things  of  religion,  by
which  all  points  in  controversy  were  to  be  decided.
And  what  those  scriptures  were,  he  shows  by  these
general  titles  and  divisions  of  them  :  "  The  Law  and  the
Prophets,  the  Gospels  and  Epistles  of  Apostles."  Nor
have  we  perceived,  in  the  remaining  works  and  frag-
ments of  this  great  and  learned  Bishop  of  Alexandria,
any  marks  of  respect  for  any  Christian  apocryphal  (b)
writings.


308  HISTORICAL    EVIDENCE.  [38.

35.  Cyprian,  Bishop  of  Carthage,  a.  d.  248.

Observations. — We  have  seen  in  St.  Cyprian  a  large
canon  of  scripture ;  all  the  books  of  the  New  Testament
commonly  received  by  Christians  at  this  present  time,
except  the  epistle  to  Philemon  (which  may  have  been
omitted  for  no  other  reason  but  that  he  had  no  particular
occasion  to  quote  it),  and  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,
and  the  epistle  of  St.  James,  and  the  second  epistle  of
St.  Peter,  and  the  epistle  of  St.  Jude.  There  is  no
particular  citation  of  the  third  epistle  of  St.  John  ;  but,
considering  its  shortness,  and  that  the  other  two  epistles
of  that  apostle  are  expressly  mentioned,  there  seems  not
to  be  any  good  reason  for  supposing  it  to  have  been
rejected  by  this  writer,  or  unknown  to  him.  Excepting
these  few,  all  the  other  books  of  the  New  Testament
have  an  ample  testimony  given  them  in  the  works  of  St.
Cyprian;  and  they  appear  to  have  been  esteemed
inspired  books  and  writings  of  authority,  the  rule  of
faith  and  practice  to  all  Christian  people.  Nor  is  there
in  this  eminent  and  celebrated  African  bishop  of  the
third  century  one  quotation  of  any  Christian,  spu-
rious, or  apocryphal  (a)  scriptures.

36.  Lactantius.  a.  d.  306.  "  Dei  autem  praecepta,
quia  et  simplicia  et  vera  sunt,  &c.  [because  the  precepts
of  God  are  simple  and  true,  daily  experience  proves
their  power  on  the  minds  of  men.  Give  me  a  man  who
is  choleric,  abusive,  headstrong,  and  unruly ;  with  a
very  few  words — the  words  of  God — I  will  render  him
as  gentle  as  a  lamb.  Give  me  an  unjust  man,  a  foolish
man,  a  vicious  man ;  and,  on  a  sudden,  he  shall  become
honest,  wise,  virtuous]."

37.  Alexander,  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  a.  d.
313.

Observations. — Alexander  received  the   epistle  to

the  Hebrews  as  Paul's He  quotes  the  second  epistle

of  St.  John.

38.  constantine  the  great,  the  first  christian
Emperor,  a.  d.  306.

Observations. — Taking  the  sacred  books  in  his  own


39.]  CHRISTIAN     TESTIMONIES.  309

hands,  he  attentively  read  and  meditated  upon  the
divine  oracles  ;  and  then  recited  the  usual  prayers  with

the  whole  assembly  of  his  courtiers He  ordained,

by  an  edict,  that  the  Lord's  day  should  be  a  day  of  rest

throughout  the  Roman  Empire By  Sozomen  we

are  informed  that  Constantine  abolished  the  punishment
of  the  cross,  which  had  been  so  long  used  bv  the  Ro-

mans He  forbad  the  cruel  sports  of  gladiators  ;  (a)

though  his  authority  was  not  sufficient  to  abolish  them
everywhere  and  entirely.  There  was  need  of  repeated
laws  of  Christian  emperors  for  that  purpose.  He  like-
wise appointed  that  criminals,  which  had  been  hitherto
usually  condemned  to  act  as  gladiators  in  public  shows,

should  rather  be  sent  to  work  in  the  mines Letter

to  the  Bishop  of  Caesarea,  probably  written  about  the
year  332  :  "  The  city  that  bears  our  name,  through  the
goodness  of  Providence,  increases  daily,  and  there  will
be  occasion  for  erecting  in  it  many  churches.  Where-
fore we  hope  you  will  approve  of  our  design,  and  take
care  to  procure  fifty  (c)  copies  of  the  divine  scriptures,
which  you  know  to  be  necessary  in  churches,  of  fine
parchment,  legible,  and  easily  portable,  that  they  may
be  the  fitter  for  use,  transcribed  by  such  as  are  most
skilful  in  the  art  of  fair  writing.  Directions  are  given
to  the  receiver-general  of  the  province  to  furnish  you
with  all  things  needful.  By  virtue  of  this  letter  you
may  demand  the  use  of  two  public  carriages,  for  the
more  commodious  and  speedy  conveyance  of  the  fairly
written  books  to  us.  And  if  you  send  them  by  a  dea-
con of  your  church,  he  will  be  made  sensible  of  our
bounty.  Which  orders,  as  Eusebius  says,  were  imme-
diately obeyed  by  us.  And  we  sent  him  ternions  and
quaternions  magnificently  adorned,  as  appears  by  the
emperor's  answer  contained  in  a  letter  sent  to  us  upon
another  occasion."

39.  Eusebius,  Bishop  of  Cesarea,  a.  d  315.

Observations. — What  we  have  seen  in  the  words  of
this  learned  and  laborious  bishop,  who  flourished  at
about  three  hundred  years  after  our  Lord's  ascension,  is
an  invaluable  testimony  to  the  things  concerning  the


310  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [39.

Lord  J  esus  himself  and  his  apostles,  and  to  the  (a)  swift
and  wonderful  progress  of  the  gospel  and  to  the  scrip-
tures of  the  Old  and  New  Testament.  The  former  were
those  received  by  the  Jewish  people.  The  (c)  number
of  the  books  of  the  New  Testament  does  not  appear  to
have  been  in  his  time  settled  by  any  authority  that  was
universally  allowed  of;  but  the  books  following  were
universally  received,  the  four  Gospels,  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  thirteen  epistles  of  Paul,  one  epistle  of  Peter,
and  one  epistle  of  John.  These,  J  say,  were  univer-
sally received  by  Christians  in  our  author's  time,  and
had  been  all  along  received  by  the  elders  and  churches
of  former  times.  Beside  these,  we  now  generally  receive
an  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  an  epistle  of  James,  a  second
epistle  of  Peter,  a  second  and  third  of  John,  an  epistle
of  Jude,  and  the  Revelation.  And  it  appears  from  this
learned  writer,  that  these  books  or  epistles  were  then
next  in  esteem  to  those  before  mentioned,  as  universally
acknowledged ;  and  were  more  generally  received  as  of
authority  than  any  other  controverted  writings.  Be-
side these,  there  was  the  Gospel  according  to  the
Hebrews,  made  use  of  by  the  Jewish  Christians  ;  being,
probably,  a  translation  of  St.  Matthew's  Gospel,  with
some  additions,  and,  as  it  seems,  containing  little  or
nothing  contrary  to  the  genuine  doctrine  of  Christ  and
his  apostles.  The  book  called  the  Doctrine,  or  Doctrines
of  the  Apostles,  we  have  not  now  a  distinct  knowledge
of;  but,  probably,  it  was  a  small  book,  containing  the
rudiments  of  the  Christian  religion,  and  fitted  for  the
use  of  young  people  and  new  converts,  and  never
esteemed  a  part  of  sacred  scripture. (d)  As  for  the  rest,
they  were  not  very  numerous,  and  their  character  is
easily  determined ;  for  either  they  were  useful  ecclesi-
astical writings,  as  the  epistles  of  Barnabas  and  Clement,
and  the  Shepherd  of  Hermas,  which,  as  we  have  seen
from  the  quotations  of  them  in  the  writers  of  the  first
three  centuries,  were  never  received  as  of  authority,  or
a  part  of  sacred  and  canonical  scripture ;  or  they  were
mean,  absurd,  and  fabulous  compositions,  despised  and
disliked  by  the  sounder  Christians  in  general,  both  of


41.]  CHRISTIAN     TESTIMONIES.  311

our  author's  and  of  former  times.  To  the  books  of
sacred  scripture  the  greatest  respect  (e)  was  shown  ;  they
were  esteemed  as  of  authority  and  decisive  in  all  points
of  a  religious  nature  ;  they  were  publicly  read  (f )  and
explained  in  the  assemblies  of  Christian  people ;  and
they  were  open  (g)  to  be  freely  read  by  all  sorts  of  per-
sons in  private,  for  their  instruction  and  improvement  in
religious  knowledge,  and  their  edification  in  virtue.
Finally,  it  may  be  observed,  that  this  learned  author
makes  little  use  in  his  works  of  apochryphal  (h)  scrip-
tures of  the  Old  Testament ;  none  at  all '  of  Christian
writings,  forged  with  the  names  of  Christ's  apostles,  or
their  companions.

40.  Athanasius,  Bishop  of  Alexandria,  a.  d.  326.
Observations. — This  testimony  of  Athanasius  to  the

scriptures  is  very  valuable  ;  it  appears  from  the  Festal
Epistle,  and  from  his  other  works,  that  he  received  all
the  books  of  the  New  Testament  that  we  do,  and  no
other,  as  of  authority.  And,  considering  the  time  in
which  he  lived,  the  acquaintance  he  had  with  the  several
parts  of  the  Christian  church  at  that  time,  and  the
bishops  of  it,  in  Egypt,  and  its  neighborhood,  in  Europe,
in  Asia,  and  the  knowledge  he  had  of  ancient  Christian
writings  ;  it  must  be  reckoned  of  great  use  to  satisfy  us,
that  notwithstanding  the  frequent  quotations  of  other
books,  in  the  writings  of  divers  ancient  Christians,  they
did  always  make  a  distinction,  and  did  not  design  to
allege  as  of  authority,  and  a  part  of  the  rule  of  faith,
any  books,  but  those  which  were  in  the  highest  sense
sacred  and  divine.

41.  The  Council  of  Laodicea,  a.  d.  363.  [Last
two  canons.]  That  private  psalms  ought  not  to  be  read
[or  said]  in  the  church,  nor  any  books,  not  canonical,
but  only  the  canonical  books  of  the  Old  and  New  Testa-
ment.    "  The  books  of  the  Old  Testament  which  ought

to  be  read,  are  these,  1.  The  Genesis,"  &c.  &c

"  The  books  of  the  New  Testament  are  these  :  The  four
Gospels,  according  to  Matthew,  according  to  Mark,  ac-
cording to  Luke,  according  to  John :  the  Acts  of  the

27


312        HISTORICAL  EVIDENCE.        [42.

Apostles ;  the  seven  catholic  epistles :  of  James  one,
of  Peter  two,  of  John  three,  of  Jude  one,  the  fourteen
epistles  of  Paul :  to  the  Romans  one,  to  the  Corinthians
two,  to  the  Galatians  one,  to  the  Ephesians  one,  to  the
Philippians  one,  to  the  Colossians  one,  to  the  Thessa-
lonians  two,  to  the  Hebrews  one,  to  Timothy  two,  to
Titus  one,  to  Philemon  one."

Observations. — In  this  catalogue  are  omitted,  for  the
Old  Testament,  the  books  of  Judith,  Tobit,  Wisdom,
Ecclesiasticus,  the  Maccabees ;  and  in  the  New  the  Re-
velation, either  not  reckoning  it  a  work  of  John  the
apostle  and  evangelist,  or  not  esteeming  it  proper  to

be  publicly  read  in  the  church Finally,  it  ought

to  be  observed,  that  this  was  a  particular  council  only,
consisting  of  thirty  or  forty  bishops  of  Lydia,  and  neigh-
boring countries.

42.  Jerom,  a.  d.  392.

Observations. — Here  again,  we  see  that  there  is  no
notice  taken  of  any  books  of  the  Old  Testament,  beside
those  of  the  Jewish  canon.  The  books  of  the  New  Tes-
tament are  the  same  with  those  now  commonly  received
and  mentioned  by  Jerom  as  of  authority  in  his  other
works,  excepting  only  the  epistle  of  Barnabas.  The
reason  of  Jerom's  here  taking  in  that  epistle,  Cotelerius
supposes  to  be,  that  he  followed  Origen,  from  whom  the
latter  part  of  this  work  was  borrowed,  for  in  other  places
Jerom  reckons  the  epistle  of  Barnabas  among  apocryphal

scriptures It  is  not  easy  to  forbear  taking  some

particular  notice  of  Jerom's  labors  concerning  the  scrip-
tures. He  (a)  put  out  a  correct  Latin  translation  of
the  books  of  the  New  Testament,  amending  the  Latin
version  before  in  use  by  the  Greek  original.  He  cor-
rected the  Latin  version  of  the  Old  Testament,  which
had  been  from  the  Greek  of  the  Seventy:  which  was
before  in  use  in  the  churches  that  spake  the  Latin
tongue.     He  made  a  Latin  translation  of  all  the  looks

of  the  Jewish  scripture  from  the  Hebrew He

expressly  says,  that  he  had  corrected  the  Latin  transla-
tion of  the  four  Gospels  of  Matthew,  Mark,  Luke,  an  1


42.]  CHRISTIAN     TESTIMONIES.  313

John,  by  the  Greek  copies,  (b)  and  those  ancient, —
"  Igitur  hsec  prsesens  prsefatiuncula  pollicetur  quatuor
tantuin  evangelia ;  quorum  orclo  est  Matthseus,  Marcus,
Lucas,  Johannes ;  codicum  Grsecorum  emendata  colla-
tione,  sed  veterum."

(c.)   JeroniB    Testimony  to  the  character  of  ancient
Oh  ristian  writers .

"  Let  the  enemies  of  our  religion,  who  say  the  church
had  no  philosophers,  nor  eloquent  and  learned  men,  ob-
serve who  and  what  they  were,  who  founded,  established,
and  adorned  it  ;  let  them  cease  to  accuse  our  faith  of
rusticity,  and  confess  their  mistake."  ....  [Having
observed  the  learning  of  Moses,  Solomon,  and  Paul,  he
in  the  next  place  mentions  two  apologists  for  the  Chris-
tian religion  in  the  time  of  Adrian, — Quadratus  and
Aristides.] — "  The  next  to  them  is  Justin,  also  a  philo-
sopher, who  presented  an  apology  to  Antoninus  the
Pious,  and  his  sons,  and  the  whole  senate,  against  the
Gentiles,  warding  off  the  ignominy  of  the  cross,  and
with  full  freedom  and  undaunted  courage  asserting  the
resurrection  of  Christ.  Why  should  I  speak  of  Melito,
bishop  of  Sardis,  and  Apollinarius,  bishop  of  Hierapolis,
and  Dionysius,  bishop  of  Corinth,  and  Tatian,  and  Bar-
desanes,  and  Irenseus,  successor  of  Pothinus  the  martyr  ;
who,  in  many  volumes,  have  detected  the  origin  of  every
heresy,  and  showed  from  what  philosophers  they  were  de-
rived ?  Next,  Pantasnus,  a  philosopher  of  the  Stoic  sect,
and  a  man  of  great  reputation  for  learning.  Clement,
presbyter  of  the  church  of  Alexandria,  in  my  opinion,
the  most  learned  of  all  men,  wrote  eight  books  of
Stromata,  or  Miscellanies,  and  other  works,  in  which
there  is  nothing  unlearned,  nothing  which  is  not  fetched
from  the  depths  of  Philosophy  ;  who  was  also  followed
and  imitated  by  his  disciple,  Origen.  Miltiades  likewise
wrote  an  excellent  book  against  the  Gentiles.  Hip-
polytus  and  Apollonius,  senators  of  Pome,  published
some  works  suitable  to  their  character.  There  are  also
the  works  of  Julius  Africanus  the  chronologer,  and  of
Theodore,  afterwards  called  Gregory,  a  man  of  apostolical
gifts  and  virtues,  and  of  Dionysius,  bishop  of  Alexan-


314  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [43.

dria ;  as  also  of  Anatolius,  bishop  of  the  church  of
Laodicea ;  likewise  of  the  presbyters,  Pamphilus,  Pierius,
Lucian,  Malchion ;  Eusebius  bishop  of  Csesarea,  Eus-
tathius  bishop  of  Antioch,  Athanasius  bishop  of  Alex-
andria, Eusebius  of  Emesa,  Triphyllius  of  Cyprus,
Asterius,  and  Serapion,  Titus  bishop  of  Bostra,  and
the  Cappadocian  bishops,  Basil,  Gregory,  Amphiloehius  ;
who  all  have  so  filled  their  books  with  sentiments  of  the
philosophers,  and  quotations  from  them,  that  it  is  not
easy  to  say,  which  is  more  conspicuous  and  admirable
in  them,  whether  skill  in  profane  learning,  or  the  know-
ledge of  the  scriptures.

"  I  come  now  to  the  Latins.  Who  more  learned,
who  more  acute  than  Tertullian  ?  His  Apology  and
book  against  the  Gentiles  are  filled  with  all  manner  of
learning.  Minucius  Felix,  a  Roman  advocate,  author
of  the  book  entitled  Octavius,  has  left  untouched  no
part  of  human  literature.  Arnobius  wrote  seven  books,
and  his  disciple  Lactantius  as  many,  beside  two  other
volumes  Of  the  Wrath  of  God,  and  the  Creation  of  the
World ;  which  whoever  reads,  will  see  in  them  an  epi-
tome of  the  Dialogues  of  Cicero.  If  Victorinus  was  not
learned,  he  did  not  want  a  good  will  to  learning,  as  ap-
pears from  his  works.  Cyprian  demonstrated  the  vanity
of  idols  in  a  concise  manner,  showing  great  knowledge
of  history,  and  good  sense ;  after  whom  follow  Hilary
and  Juvencus  ;"  and  he  omits  others  he  says,  "both
living  and  dead,  whose  performances  manifest  the  like
abilities."

43.  Augustine,  Bishop  of  Hippo  Regius,  in  Af-
rica, A.  D.  395.  "  We  read  in  the  Acts  of  Apostles  of
some  who  believed,  that  '  they  searched  the  scriptures
daily,  whether  those  things  were  so.'  *  What  scriptures,
I  pray,  except  the  canonical  scriptures  of  the  law  and
the  prophets  ?  To  them  have  been  since  added  the
Gospels,  the  Epistles  of  the  Apostles,  the  Acts  of  the
Apostles,  and  the  Revelation  of  John.  These  do  you
search."  ...  "  Our  canonical  books  of  scripture,  which
are  of  the  highest  authority  with  us,  have  been  settled

1  Ch.  xvii.  11.


46.]  CHRISTIAN     TESTIMONIES.  315

with  great  (a)  care  ;  they  ought  to  be  few,  lest  their  value
should  be  diminished ;  and  yet  they  are  so  many,  and
written  by  so  many  persons,  that  their  agreement
throughout  is  wonderful."  .  .  .  "Among  (b)  transla-
tions let  that  be  preferred  which  is  most  literal  and
clear ;  and  for  correcting  all  manner  of  Latin  transla-
tions recourse  should  be  had  to  the  Greek."  ...  "  As
for  the  New  Testament,  there  can  be  no  question  but
that  we  ought  to  have  recourse  to  the  Greek  copies,  and
especially  such  as  are  to  be  found  with  churches  of  the
greatest  learning  and  knowledge."

44.  John  Chrysostom,  Bishop  of  Constantinople,
a.  D.  398.  "  The  doctrines  and  writings  of  (a)  fishermen,
who  were  beaten  and  driven  from  society,  and  always
lived  in  the  midst  of  strangers,  have  been  readily  em-
braced by  learned  and  unlearned,  bondmen  and  free,
kings  and  soldiers,  Greeks  and  barbarians."  .  .  .  "Not-
withstanding the  absurd  opinions  and  evil  practices
which  had  obtained,  Christ,  in  a  short  time,  delivered
men  from  them  all ;  and  that  not  the  Romans  only,  but
also  the  Persians,  and  the  barbarian  nations.  This  he
accomplished,  not  by  arms,  nor  by  bribes,  nor  by  wars
and  battles ;  but  beginning  with  eleven  men,  and  those
poor,  mean,  illiterate,  unexperienced,  unarmed,  without
shoes,  and  having  one  coat  only,  he  persuaded  great
numbers  of  men  in  all  nations  to  change  their  sentiments
and  manners."

45.  Salvian,  a.  d.  440.

Observations. — Salvian  assures  us,  that  they  who
were  called  heretics  received  the  same  scriptures  that
other  Christians  did  ;  the  same  prophets,  the  same  apos-
tles, and  evangelists.

46.     General  Review.

.  .  .  And  may  I  not  add,  Let  those  conceited  Chris-
tians who  unmeasurably  despise  the  primitive  times  of
Christianity,  learn  to  pay  some  respect  to  their  Christian
ancestors,  in  whom  both  learning  and  an  honest,  fervent
zeal  were  united.  ...  If  I  mistake  not,  it  has  appeared,
27*


316  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [47.

after  a  fair  and  careful  examination,  that  though  there
were  doubts  about  some  of  the  books  now  generally  re-
ceived as  canonical,  yet  there  were  no  other  beside  them
which  those  ancient  writers  received  as  part  of  the  rule
of  faith,  and  that  they  alleged  them  by  way  of  illustra-
tion only.

47.     Recapitulation.

In  this  second  part  we  have  had  express  and  positive
evidence  that  these  books  were  written  by  those  whose
names  they  bear,  even  the  apostles  of  Jesus  Christ,  who
was  crucified  at  Jerusalem  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius
Caesar,  when  Pontius  Pilate  was  governor  in  Judea,  and
their  well-known  companions  and  fellow-laborers.  It  is
the  concurring  testimony  of  early  and  later  ages,  and
of  writers  of  all  countries  in  the  several  parts  of  the
known  world,  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa,  and  of  men  of
different  sentiments  in  divers  respects ;  for  we  have  had
before  us  the  testimony  of  those  called  heretics,  espe-
cially in  the  third  and  fourth  centuries,  as  well  as
Catholics.  These  books  were  received  from  the  begin-
ning with  the  greatest  respect,  and  have  been  publicly
and  solemnly  read  in  the  assemblies  of  Christians
throughout  the  world  in  every  age  from  that  time  to
this.  They  were  early  translated  into  the  languages  of
divers  countries  and  people ;  they  were  quoted  by  way
of  proof  in  all  arguments  of  a  religious  nature,  and
were  appealed  to  on  both  sides  in  all  points  of  contro-
versy that  arose  among  Christians  themselves ;  they  were
likewise  recommended  to  the  perusal  of  others,  as  con-
taining the  authentic  account  of  the  Christian  doctrine ;
and  many  commentaries  have  been  written  upon  them  to
explain  and  illustrate  them  ;  all  which  affords  full  assur-
ance of  their  genuineness  and  integrity.  If  these  books
had  not  been  written  by  those  to  whom  they  are  ascribed,
and  if  the  things  related  in  them  had  not  been  true,
they  could  not  have  been  received  from  the  beginning ;
if  they  contain  a  true  account  of  things,  the  Christian
religion  is  from  God,  and  cannot  but  be  embraced  by
Serious  and  attentive  men,  who  impartially  examine,
and  are  willing  to  be  determined  by  evidence.


48.]  JEWISH     TESTIMONIES.  317


Section   IV.     Jewish   Testimonies.

THE  PRINCIPAL  FACTS  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  ARE
CONFIRMED  BY  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  ANCIENT  JEWISH
WRITERS.

48.  Josephus,  A.  d.  76.  "  But  some  of  the  Jews
were  of  opinion  that  God  had  suffered  Herod's  army
to  be  destroyed  as  a  just  punishment  on  him  for  the
death  of  John,  called  the  Baptist.  For  Herod  had
killed  him,  who  was  a  just  man,  and  had  called  upon
the  Jews  to  be  baptized,  and  to  practise  virtue,  ex-
ercising both  justice  toward  men,  and  piety  toward
God.  For  so  would  baptism  be  acceptable  to  God,  if
they  made  use  of  it,  not  for  the  expiation  of  their  sins,
but  for  the  purity  of  the  body ;  the  mind  being  first
purified  by  righteousness.  And  many  coming  to  him
(for  they  were  wonderfully  taken  with  his  discourses),
Herod  was  seized  with  apprehensions,  lest  by  his  autho-
rity they  should  be  led  into  sedition  against  him  ;  for
they  seemed  capable  of  undertaking  anything  by  his
direction.  Herod  therefore  thought  it  better  to  take
him  off  before  any  disturbance  happened,  than  to  run
the  risk  of  a  change  of  affairs,  and  of  repenting  when
it  should  be  too  late  to  remedy  disorders.  Being  taken
upon  this  suspicion  of  Herod,  and  being  sent  bound  to
the  castle  of  Machasvus,  just  mentioned,  he  was  slain
there."

[The  genuineness  of  the  two  following  passages,
especially  of  the  first,  is  considered  doubtful.  They
appear  in  the  works  of  Josephus,  but  are  suspected  to
be  interpolations.]

"  At  that  time  lived  Jesus,  a  wise  man,  if  he  may  be
called  a  man ;  for  he  performed  many  wonderful  works.
He  was  a  teacher  of  such  men  as  received  the  truth
with  pleasure.  He  drew  over  to  him  many  Jews  and
Gentiles.  This  was  the  Christ.  And  when  Pilate,  at
the  instigation  of  the  chief  men  among  us,  had  con-
demned him  to  the  cross,  they  who  before  had  conceived
an  affection  for  him  did  not  cease  to  adhere  to  him.     For


318  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [48.

on  the  third  day  he  appeared  to  them  alive  again ;  the
divine  prophets  having  foretold  these,  and  many  other
wonderful  things  concerning  him.  And  the  sect  of  the
Christians,  so   called  from  him,  subsists  to  this  time."

"  This  then  being  the  temper  of  Ananus,  and

he  thinking  he  had  a  fit  opportunity  because  Festus  was
dead  and  Albinus  was  yet  upon  the  road,  calls  a  council
of  judges  ;  and,  bringing  before  them  James,  the  brother
of  him  who  is  called  Christ,  and  some  others,  he  accused
them  as  transgressors  of  the  laws,  and  had  them  stoned
to  death."

Observations. — He  [Josephus]  likewise  acknow-
ledges that  there  was  then  in  Judea  a  general  expectation
of  a  great  person  to  arise  among  them,  who  should
obtain  the  empire  of  the  world ;  and  that  this  expecta-
tion was  one  great  occasion  of  the  Avar  with  the  Romans,
and  that  it  was  built  upon  an  oracle  found  in  their
sacred  writings ;  and  that  many  of  their  wise  men  em-
braced it  and  acted  upon  it,  in  their  engaging  in  the
war.  .  .  In  the  Talmudical  writings,  (a)  Jesus  is  men-
tioned ;  but  as  Lightfoot,  who  was  well  acquainted  with
them,  says,  it  was  chiefly  with  a  view  to  wound  and  re-
proach him.  They  call  his  mother  by  the  name
Mary,  but  they  have  aspersed  her  character,  and  have
assigned  to  Jesus  a  spurious  nativity.  They  have  men-
tioned several  of  our  Saviour's  disciples,  who,  as  they
say,  were  put  to  death.  They  say  our  Saviour
suffered  as  a  malefactor  at  one  of  the  Jewish  Passovers,
or  in  the  eve  of  it,  as  the  expression  is.  They  seem  in
some  places  to  acknowledge  the  power  of  miracles  in
Jesus  and  his  disciples;  and  if  they  had  not  known
that  many  miraculous  works  were  ascribed  to  him,  they
would  not  have  insinuated  that  he  learned  magical  arts
in  Egypt,  and  brought  them  thence  in  a  private  manner,
and  then  set  up  himself  among  his  countrymen  as  an
extraordinary  person.


49.]  HEATHEN     TESTIMONIES.  319

Section  V.     Heathen  Testimonies.

THE  PRINCIPAL  FACTS  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT  ARE  CON-
FIRMED BY  THE  TESTIMONY  OF  ANCIENT  HEATHEN
WRITERS.

49.  Tacitus,  a.  d.  100.  "  But  neither  all  human
help,  nor  the  liberality  of  the  emperor,  nor  all  the  atone-
ments presented  to  the  Gods,  availed  to  abate  the  infamy
he  lay  under  of  having  ordered  the  city  to  be  set  on
fire.  To  suppress  therefore  this  common  rumor,  Nero
procured  others  to  be  accused,  and  inflicted  exquisite
punishment  upon  those  people  who  were  in  abhorrence
for  their  crimes,  and  were  commonly  known  by  the
name  of  Christians.  They  had  their  denomination  from
Christus,  who  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius  was  put  to  death
as  a  criminal  by  the  procurator  Pontius  Pilate.  This
pernicious  superstition,  though  checked  for  awhile,  broke
out  again  and  spread,  not  only  over  Judea,  the  source
of  this  evil,  but  reached  the  city  also  ;  whither  flow  from
all  quarters  all  things  vile  and  shameful,  and  where  they
find  shelter  and  encouragement.  At  first  they  only
were  apprehended  who  confessed  themselves  of  that
sect ;  afterwards  a  vast  multitude  discovered  by  them ;
all  which  were  condemned,  not  so  much  for  the  crime
of  burning  the  city,  as  for  their  enmity  to  mankind.
Their  executions  were  so  contrived  as  to  expose  them  to
derision  and  contempt.  Some  were  covered  over  with
the  skins  of  wild  beasts,  and  torn  to  pieces  by  dogs ;
some  were  crucified ;  others  having  been  daubed  over
with  combustible  materials,  were  set  up  as  lights  in  the
night-time,  and  thus  burned  to  death.  Nero  made  use
of  his  own  gardens  as  a  theatre  upon  this  occasion,  and
also  exhibited  the  diversions  of  the  circus  ;  sometimes
standing  in  the  crowd  as  a  spectator,  in  the  habit  of  a
charioteer,  at  other  times  driving  a  chariot  himself;  till
at  length  these  men,  though  really  criminal  and  deserv-
ing exemplary  punishment,  began  to  be  commiserated
as  people  who  were  destroyed,  not  out  of  a  regard  to
the  public  welfare,  but  only  to  gratify  the  cruelty  of
one  man."     [a.  d.  64.]


320  HISTORICAL    EVIDENCE.  [49.

Observations. (a) — He  [Tacitus]  says  that  Judea  was
first  brought  into  subjection  to  the  Romans  by  Pompey.
After  which  he  gives  a  summary  account  of  their  affairs
under  Herod  and  his  sons,  the  emperors  Augustus,  Tibe-
rius, Caligula,  Claudius,  Nero.  He  mentions  Felix,  whom
he  represents  as  a  bad  man,  and  tyrannical  in  his  govern-
ment. "  However  the  Jews,"  he  says,  "bore  the  exac-
tions of  their  governors  till  the  time  of  their  procurator
Gessius  Floras,  under  whom  the  war  began.  Cestius
Gallus,  president  of  Syria,  came  to  his  assistance,  but
he  being  defeated,  Nero  sent  Vespasian  into  Judea,  who
was  a  general  of  great  merit  and  reputation ;  and  hav-
ing also  under  him  good  officers,  in  the  space  of  two
years,"  meaning  the  years  67  and  68,  he  reduced  the
open  country,  and  all  the  cities  of  Judea,  excepting
Jerusalem.  The  next  year,  69,  "was  taken  up  in  civil
wars;"  meaning  the  time  of  the  short  reigns  of  Galba,
Otho,  Vitellius,  till  the  accession  of  Vespasian.  "  The
following  year  [and  the  beginning  of  it]  Titus  was  ap-
pointed to  attend  the  affairs  of  Judea ;  who  now  drew
near  to  Jerusalem  and  besieged  it.  Tacitus  supposeth
that  Titus  was  in  haste  to  go  to  Rome  to  enjoy  the
pleasures  and  splendor  of  the  city.  He  therefore
carried  on  the  siege  with  the  greatest  vigor.  The  army
likewise  were  intent  upon  plunder,  and  eager  to  gratify
their  revenge.  The  city,  however,  was  strong  by  situa-
tion, and  with  good  walls  and  ramparts ;  the  high  tower
Antonia,  conspicuous  from  afar.  The  temple  itself  was
like  a  citadel,  well  fortified.  They  had  a  fountain  of
water  that  ran  continually,  and  the  mountains  were
hollowed  under  ground.  Moreover,  they  had  pools  and
cisterns  for  preserving  rain  water.  And  there  was  a
great  confluence  of  people.  For  the  men  of  the  other
cities  that  had  been  reduced,  and  in  general  all  the  tur-
bulent and  seditious  people  of  the  nation,  came  hither.
There  were  three  captains,  or  heads  of  factions,  "  and
as  many  armies,  Simon,  John,  called  also  Bargioras,
and  Eleazar,  who  occupied  several  parts  of  the  city.
Among  themselves  they  had  fierce  contentions,  and
therein  great    quantities  of  provision  were  consumed.


51.]  HE  A  Til  EH     TESTIMONIES.  Sf21

Eleazar  being  killed,  they  were  reduced  to  two  factions.
These  fought  with  each  other  till  the  near  approach  of
the  Romans  obliged  them  to  agreement."

50.  Suetonius,  a.  d.  110. — u  The  Christians  were
punished ;  a  sort  of  men  of  a  new  and  magical  super-
stition." [Under  Nero.] "  There  had  been,

for  a  long  time,  all  over  the  east,  a  prevailing  opinion
that  it  was  in  the  fates  [in  the  decrees  or  books  of  the
fates]  that  at  that  time  some  one  from  Judea  should
obtain  the  empire  of  the  world.  By  the  event  it  ap-
peared that  a  Roman  emperor  was  meant  by  that  pre-
diction. The  Jews,  applying  it  to  themselves,  went  into
a  rebellion.  At  first  they  had  such  success  that  they
not  only  overcame  their  own  governor,  but  also  defeated
the  proconsular  governor  of  Syria,  who  came  to  his
assistance.  There  being  now  manifest  occasion  for  a
general  of  great  reputation,  and  a  numerous  army,
Vespasian  was  appointed  for  that  service ;  who,  among
other  commanders  under  him,  had  his  eldest  son,  Titus.
Having  put  his  army  into  good  order,  he  entered  upon
the  war  with  great  vigor,  and  not  without  hazard  to  his
person,  having  been  slightly  wounded  in  an  attack  made
at  one  of  their  towns,  and  received  several  darts  upon
his  shield."  ..."  Titus  having  been  left  in  Judea,  to
complete  the  reduction  of  that  country,  he,  in  the  last  siege
of  Jerusalem,  killed  seven  of  the  enemy  with  as  many
darts :  and  he  took  that  city  on  his  daughter's  birth-
day, and  was  then  saluted  by  the  soldiers  with  the  title
of  emperor."

51.  Pliny  the  Younger,  and  Trajan,  a.  d.  106
and  107.  Pliny' 's  letter  to  Trajan. — "  Pliny  to  the  empe-
ror wisheth  health  and  happiness.  It  is  my  constant
custom,  sir,  to  refer  myself  to  you  in  all  matters  con-
cerning which  I  have  any  doubt.  For  who  can  better
direct  me  where  I  hesitate,  or  instruct  me  where  I  am
ignorant  ?  I  have  never  been  present  at  any  trials  of
Christians  ;  so  that  I  know  not  well  what  is  the  subject-
matter  of  punishment,  or  of  inquiry,  or  what  strictness
ought  to  be  used  in  either.     Nor  have  I  been  a  little


322  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [51.

perplexed  to  determine  whether  any  difference  ought  to
be  made  on  account  of  age,  or  whether  the  young  and
tender,  and  the  full  grown  and  robust,  ought  to  be
treated  all  alike ;  whether  repentance  should  entitle  to
pardon,  or  whether  all  who  have  once  been  Christians
ought  to  be  punished,  though  they  are  now  no  longer  so;
whether  the  name  itself,  although  no  crimes  be  detected,
or  crimes  only  belonging  to  the  name,  ought  to  be  pun-
ished.     Concerning  all  these  things  I  am  in  doubt.

"  In  the  mean  time  I  have  taken  this  course  with  all
who  have  been  brought  before  me  and  have  been  accused
as  Christians.  I  have  put  the  question  to  them  whether
they  were  Christians.  Upon  their  confessing  to  me
that  they  were,  I  repeated  the  question  a  second  and  a
third  time,  threatening  also  to  punish  them  with  death.
Such  as  still  persisted  I  ordered  away  to  be  punished ;
for  it  was  no  doubt  with  me,  whatever  might  be  the
nature  of  their  opinion,  that  contumacy  and  inflexible
obstinacy  ought  to  be  punished.  There  were  others
of  the  same  infatuation,  whom,  because  they  are  Roman
citizens,  I  have  noted  down  to  be  sent  to  the  city.

"In  a  short  time,  the  crime  spreading  itself,  even
whilst  under  persecution,  as  is  usual  in  such  cases,  divers
sorts  of  people  came  in  my  way.  An  information  was
presented  to  me  without  mentioning  the  author,  con-
taining the  names  of  many  persons,  who,  upon  examina-
tion, denied  that  they  were  Christians,  or  had  ever  been
so ;  who  repeated  after  me  an  invocation  of  the  gods,
and  with  wine  and  frankincense  made  supplication  to
your  image,  which  for  that  purpose  I  have  caused  to  be
brought  and  set  before  them,  together  with  the  statues
of  the  deities.  Moreover,  they  reviled  the  name  of
Christ.  None  of  which  things,  as  is  said,  they  who  are
really  Christians,  can  by  any  means  be  compelled  to  do.
These,  therefore,  I  thought  proper  to  discharge.

"  Others  were  named  by  an  informer,  who  at  first  con-
fessed themselves  Christians,  and  afterwards  denied  it.
The  rest  said  they  had  been  Christians,  but  had  left
them  ;  some  three  years  ago,  some  longer,  and  one,  or
more,  above  twenty  years.  They  all  worshippel  your
image  and  the  statues  of  the  gods ;  these  also  reviled


51.]  HEATHEN     TESTIMONIES.  823

Christ.  They  affirmed  that  the  whole  of  their  fault  or
error  lay  in  this,  that  they  were  wont  to  meet  together
on  a  stated  day  before  it  was  light,  and  sing  among
themselves  alternately  a  hymn  to  Christ,  as  a  god,  and
bind  themselves  by  an  oath,  not  to  the  commission  of
any  wickedness,  but  not  to  be  guilty  of  theft,  or  rob-
bery, or  adultery,  never  to  falsify  their  word,  nor  to
deny  a  pledge  committed  to  them,  when  called  upon  to
return  it.  When  these  things  were  performed  it  was
their  custom  to  separate,  and  then  to  come  together
again  to  a  meal,  which  they  ate  in  common,  without  any
disorder ;  but  this  they  had  forborne,  since  the  publica-
tion of  my  edict,  by  which,  according  to  your  commands,
I  prohibited  assemblies.

"  After  receiving  this  account  I  judged  it  the  more
necessary  to  examine,  and  that  by  torture,  two  maid-
servants, which  were  called  ministers.  Eut  I  have  dis-
covered nothing,  beside  a  bad  and  excessive  supersti-
tion.

"  Suspending,  therefore,  all  judicial  proceedings,  I
have  recourse  to  you  for  advice ;  for  it  has  appeared  to
me  a  matter  highly  deserving  consideration,  especially
upon  account  of  the  great  number  of  persons  who  are
in  danger  of  suffering.  For  many  of  all  ages,  and
every  rank,  of  both  sexes  likewise,  are  accused,  and
will  be  accused.  Nor  has  the  (a)  contagion  of  this
superstition  seized  cities  only,  but  the  lesser  towns  also,
and  the  open  country.  Nevertheless  it  seems  to  me  that
it  may  be  restrained  and  corrected.  It  is  certain  that
the  temples,  which  were  almost  forsaken,  begin  to  be
more  frequented.  And  the  sacred  solemnities,  after  a
long  intermission,  are  revived.  Victims,  likewise,  are
everywhere  bought  up,  whereas  for  some  time  there
were  few  purchasers.  Whence  it  is  easy  to  imagine
what  numbers  of  men  might  be  reclaimed  if  pardon
were  granted  to  those  who  shall  repent."

Trajan  s  reply.  "  You  have  taken  the  right  method,
my  Pliny,  in  your  proceedings  with  those  who  have
been  brought  before  you  as  Christians ;  for  it  is  impos-
sible to  establish  any  one  rule  that  shall  hold  univer-

28


324  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [53.

sally.  They  are  not  to  be  sought  for.  If  any  are
brought  before  you,  and  are  convicted,  they  ought  to
be  punished.  However,  he  that  denies  his  being  a
Christian,  and  makes  it  evident  in  fact,  that  is,  by
supplicating  to  our  gods,  though  he  be  suspected  to
have  been  so  formerly,  let  him  be  pardoned  upon
repentance.  But  in  no  case  of  any  crime  whatever,
may  a  bill  of  information  be  received  without  being
signed  by  him  who  presents  it:  for  that  would  be  a
dangerous  precedent,  and  unworthy  of  my  government."
Observation. — The  genuineness  of  these  letters  is
unquestioned.

52.  Epictetus  the  Stoic  Philosopher,  a.  d.  109.
"  Is  it  possible  that  a  man  may  arrive  at  this  temper,

and  become  indifferent  to  those  things  from  madness,  or
from  habit,  as  the  Galileans,  and  yet  that  no  one  should
be  able  to  know  by  reason  and  demonstration  that  God
made  all  things  in  the  world — ?   ....

"  Let  this  preparation  of  the  mind  [to  die]  arise  from
its  own  judgment,  and  not  from  obstinacy  like  the
Christians."

53.  Celsus,  a.  d.  176.

Recapitulation. — In  the  passages  alleged  under
the  second  section  we  have  seen  good  proofs  that  the
Jewish  people  had  expectations  of  that  great  person  the
Messiah.

In  the  passages  cited  under  the  third  section,  we
have  seen  many  plain  references  to  the  Gospels,  and  to
several  of  St.  Paul's  epistles,  if  not  also  to  St.  Peter's
and  St.  John's.  We  are  assured  by  Celsus  that  there
were  histories  of  Jesus  written  by  his  disciples,  meaning
his  apostles  and  their  companions ;  and  that  those  books
were  well  known,  and  in  high  esteem  with  Christians
....  Nor  is  there  so  much  as  an  insinuation,  that
the  later  Christians,  of  Celsus's  own  time,  or  there-
about, had  forged  these  histories  to  do  honor  to  Jesus.
He  only  says  that  they  had  altered  some  things ;  but
of  that  he  produced  no  proof;  nor  did  he  allege  any
particular  instances ;  he  only  says  in  the  place  referred


53.]  HEATHEN     TESTIMONIES.  325

to,  if  Origen  has  taken  the  words  of  Celsus  exactly,
"  that  some  of  the  believers  had  taken  the  liberty  to
alter  the  gospel  from  the  first  writing."

In  the  fourth  section  are  many  passages  of  Celsus
bearing  testimony  to  the  books  of  the  New  Testament,
and  the  facts  (a)  contained  in  them  .  .  .  that  by  direc-
tion of  an  angel,  he  [Jesus]  was  carried  by  his  parents
into  Egypt  for  the  preservation  of  his  life ;  where,  as
Celsus  insinuates,  Jesus  learned  the  charms  practised
in  that  country  ....  In  the  history  of  Jesus,  written
by  his  disciples,  he  is  said  to  have  (b)  healed  the  lame
and  the  blind,  and  to  have  raised  some  dead  persons  to
life ;  and  though  he  is  unwilling  to  allow  that  these  were
real  miracles  done  by  the  power  of  God,  he  dares  not
to  deny  their  truth,  and  is  troubled  to  account  for  them,
and  was  almost  reduced  to  the  necessity  of  allowing  the
power  of  magic,  though  he  is  supposed  to  have  formerly
written  against  it  ...  .  Though  he  will  not  admit,
that  Jesus  rose  from  the  dead,  he  acknowledgeth  (c)
the  disciples  to  have  related  it,  and  that  an  angel
descended,  and  removed  the  stone  from  the  door  of  the
sepulchre,  and  that  he  is  said  by  them  to  have  shown
himself  to  one  woman,  and  then  to  others,  and  to  his
disciples  ....  So  that  we  have  in  Celsus,  in  a  man-
ner, the  whole  history  (d)  of  Jesus,  as  recorded  in  the
Gospels ;  for  we  have  traced  in  him  the  history  of  our
Lord's  birth,  life,  preaching,  miracles,  death,  and  resur-
rection ;  all  as  taken  by  him  from  the  writings  of
Christ's  own  disciples.

In  the  fifth  section  we  have  observed  the  notice
which  Celsus  takes  of  some  Christian  principles  in  par-
ticular, the  general  resurrection  of  the  dead ;  as  for  the
moral  doctrine  he  was  not  able  to  find  any  fault  with
it ;  but  he  says  the  like  things  had  been  before  taught
by  the  philosophers,  and  better  expressed.  He  takes
notice  of  the  veneration  which  the  Christians  had  for
Jesus,  as  their  master,  and  the  Messiah  promised  of  old.
But,  he  says  the  Jews  were  mistaken  in  expecting  such
a  person  at  all ;  and  the  Christians  were  mistaken  in


326  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [55.

thinking  he  was  actually  come ;  though,  as  he  allows,
they  argued  from  the  ancient  Jewish  prophets.

In  the  sixth  section  we  have  seen  some  passages  bear-
ing testimony  to  the  great  (e)  progress  of  the  Christian
religion  in  the  world,  notwithstanding  many  difficulties
and  discouragements.  Indeed,  this  whole  work  of
Celsus  is  an  evidence  of  the  prevailing  power  of  the
Christian  religion ;  he  has  sufficiently  acknowledged  the
great  number  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  who  had  been
gained  over  to  this  belief;  and  if  it  had  not  been  still
spreading  and  prevailing,  this  learned  and  ingenious
man  would  have  saved  himself  the  pains  of  this  laborious
argument  to  confute  it.

Under  the  seventh  section  we  saw  how  Celsus  was
disposed  to  charge  the  Christians  with  magical  arts  and
practices.

In  the  eighth  section  are  some  passages  relating  to
Christian  worship.  It  appears  from  what  Celsus  says,
that  they  worshipped  the  one  God,  creator  of  all  things,
and  had  a  high  veneration  for  Jesus  Christ ;  nor  would
they  worship  demons,  or  join  in  the  public  sacrifices  and
festivals  of  heathen  people.  .  .  .  He  owns  they  were
then  sought  (f )  for  to  be  put  to  death.

54.  Lucian  of  Samosata,  a.  d.  176.  .  .  .

"  They  therefore  still  worship  that  great  man  who
was  crucified  in  Palestine,  because  he  introduced  into
the  world  this  new  religion.  .  .  .  Moreover,  their  first
lawgiver  has  taught  them  that  they  are  all  brethren
when  once  they  have  turned  and  renounced  the  gods  of
the  Greeks,  and  worship  that  master  of  theirs  who  was
crucified,  and  engage  to  live  according  to  his  laws.
They  have  (a)  also  a  sovereign  contempt  for  all  things
of  this  world,  and  look  upon  them  as  common,  and  trust
one  another  with  them  without  any  particular  security ;
by  which  reason  any  subtil  fellow,  by  good  manage-
ment, may  impose  upon  this  simple  people,  and  grow
rich  among  them."

55.  Diogenes  Laertius,  a.  d.  210. — "At  this  time
[almost  six  hundred   years  before  the  nativity  of  our


57.]  HEATHEN     TESTIMONIES.  327

Saviour]  the  fame  of  Epimenides  was  very  great  among
all  the  Greeks,  and  he  was  supposed  to  be  in  great  favor
with  the  gods.  The  Athenians  being  afflicted  with  a
pestilence,  they  were  directed  by  the  Pythian  oracle  to
get  their  city  purified  by  expiation.  They  therefore
sent  Nicias,  son  of  iSiiceratus,  in  a  ship  to  Crete,  inviting
Epimenides  to  come  to  them.  He  coming  thither  in  the
forty-sixth  Olympiad,  purified  their  city,  and  delivered
them  from  the  pestilence  in  this  manner.  Taking  several
sheep,  some  black  others  white,  he  had  them  up  to  the
Areopagus ;  and  then  let  them  go  where  they  would ;
and  gave  orders  to  those  who  followed  them,  wherever
any  one  of  them  should  lie  down,  to  sacrifice  it  to  the
god  to  whom  it  belonged.  And  so  the  plague  ceased.
Hence  it  comes  to  pass,  that  to  this  present  time  may
be  found  in  the  boroughs  of  the  Athenians  anonymous
altars,  a  memorial  of  the  expiation  then  made."  [Com-
pare Acts,  xvii.  23.]

56.  Dion  Cassius,  a.  d.  230.  [At  the  close  of  his
account  of  the  siege  of  Jerusalem.]  "  Many  were  taken
prisoners,  and  among  them  Bargioras  their  general ;  who
only  was  put  to  death  at  the  time  of  the  triumph.  Thus
Jerusalem  was  taken  on  a  Saturday,  the  day  still  re-
spected by  the  Jews  above  any  other.  From  that  time
it  was  appointed,  that  all  who  adhere  to  their  religion
should  annually  pay  a  didrachm  to  the  capitol  of  Jupiter.
Upon  this  occasion  both  the  generals  [Vespasian  and
Titus]  received  the  appellation  of  emperor ;  but  neither
took  the  surname  of  Judaicus,  although  triumphal  arches
and  other  honors,  customary  after  great  victories,  were
decreed  to  them."

57.  Porphyry,  a.  d.  270.

[From  Jerom.]  "  He  [Porphyry]  says  that  it  [the
book  of  (a)  Daniel]  was  not  written  by  him  whose  name
it  bears,  but  by  another  who  lived  in  Judea  in  the  time
of  Antiochus,  surnamed  Epiphanes  ;  and  that  the  book
of  Daniel  does  not  foretell  things  to  come,  but  relates
what  had  already  happened.  In  a  word,  whatever  it
contains  to  the  time  of  Antiochus  is  true  history ;  if
28*


328  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [58.

there  is  anything  relating  to  after-times  it  is  all  false-
hood ;  forasmuch  as  the  writer  could  not  see  things
future,  but  at  the  most  only  make  some  conjectures
about  them."

[Quoted  from  Porphyry  by  Eusebius.]  "  Sanchonia-
thon  of  Berytus  writes  the  history  of  the  Jews  very
exactly,  and  mentions  times  and  places ;  taking  his
accounts  from  the  Memoir  of  Jerombal,  priest  of  the
god  Jevo  ;  who  dedicated  his  history  to  Abibal,  king  of
Berytus,  by  whom,  as  well  as  by  others,  his  contempo-
raries, capable  judges  of  the  truth,  it  was  approved.
Their  age  was  before  the  Trojan  times,  and  approaches
near  to  the  times  of  (b)  Moses,  as  is  evident  from  the
succession  of  the  kings  of  Phoenicia.  Sanchoniathon,
who  with  great  fidelity  wrote  their  ancient  history  in
the  Phoenician  language,  collecting  it  partly  from  the
registers  of  cities  <and  partly  from  the  records  kept  in
temples,  lived  in  the  time  of  Semiramis,  queen  of  the
Assyrians,  who  is  computed  to  have  reigned  before  the
times  of  Troy,  or  about  them.  The  work  of  Sancho-
niathon was  translated  into  Greek  by  Philo  Biblius."

[Quoted  by  Eusebius.]  "  And  now  people  wonder  (c)
that  this  distemper  has  oppressed  the  city  so  many
years,  iEsculapius  and  the  other  gods  no  longer  con-
versing with  men.  For  since  Jesus  has  been  honored,
none  have  received  any  public  benefits  from  the  gods."

Review7. — It  manifestly  appears  that  he  [Porphyry]
was  well  acquainted  with  the  Scriptures  of  the  Old  and
New  Testament.  .  .  .  We  have  observed  plain  references
to  the  Gospels  of  Matthew,  Mark,  and  John,  the  Acts  of
the  Apostles,  and  the  epistle  to  the  Galatians ;  and  in
his  remarks  upon  that  epistle,  probable  references  to
others  of  St.  Paul's  epistles.

58.  Hierocles,  a.  d.  803.  [From  Lactantius.]  "  The
other  [Hierocles]  treated  the  same  subject  more  accu-
rately ;  he  was  then  one  of  the  judges,  and  a  principal
adviser  of  the  persecution  ;  and  not  contented  with  that
piece  of  wickedness,  he  also  pursued  those  with  his
writings  whom  he  had  brought  into  trouble.  For  he
composed  two  books,  not  entitled,  Against  the  Christ-


59.]  HEATHEN     TESTIMONIES.  329

ians,  lest  he  should  seem  to  bear  hard  upon  theui,  but
'To  the  Christians,'  that  he  might  be  thought  to  advise
them  in  a  kind  and  friendly  manner :  in  which  books
he  endeavored  to  show  that  the  sacred  (a)  scriptures  over-
throw themselves  by  the  contradictions  with  which  they
abound ;  he  particularly  insisted  upon  several  texts  as
inconsistent  with  each  other :  and,  indeed,  on  so  many
and  so  distinctly  that  one  might  suspect  he  had  some
time  professed  the  religion  which  he  now  exposed.  How-
ever, the  sacred  scriptures  may  have  by  some  accident
or  other  fallen  into  his  hands ;  but  the  scriptures  are  as
far  from  inconsistencies  as  he  was  from  the  truth.  But
he  chiefly  reviled  Paul  and  Peter,  and  the  other  disci-
ples as  propagators  of  falsehoods;  'who,  nevertheless,'
as  he  says,  '  were  ignorant,  and  illiterate,  and  some  of
them  got  their  livelihood  by  fishing ;  as  if  he  was  dis-
pleased that  some  Aristophanes  or  Aristarchus  had  not
handled  the  subject.'  Moreover,  this  writer  endeavors
to  overthrow  Christ's  (b)  miracles,  though  he  does  not
deny  the  truth  of  them ;  he  aims  to  show  that  like
things,  or  even  greater,  were  done  by  Apollonius :  .  .  .
but  Apollonius  is  more  able,  because,  as  you  say,  when
Domitian  would  have  put  him  to  death  he  escaped;
whereas  Christ  was  apprehended  and  crucified."

[From  Eusebius  quoting  Hierocles.]  "  To  what  pur-
pose have  I  mentioned  these  things  ?  That  all  may
perceive  our  just  and  reasonable  judgment,  and  the
levity  of  the  Christians ;  forasmuch  as  we  do  not  esteem
him  who  did  these  things  a  god,  but  a  man  favored  by
the  gods:"  ...  u  It  is  also  reasonable  to  think  that
the  actions  of  Jesus  have  been  magnified  by  Peter  and
Paul,  and  others  like  them,  ignorant  men,  liars  and  im-
postors."

59.  Dioclesian's  Persecution  oe  the  Christians,
a.  d.  303-313.

Observations. — In  the  first  edict  for  the  persecu-
tion, as  we  learn  from  Eusebius,  the  sacred  (a)  scriptures
were  ordered  to  be  burnt ;  and  so  far  as  we  know,  this
is  the  first  imperial  edict  of  that  kind.  .  .  .  Dioclesian's
persecution  (b)  was  very  grievous  :   indeed,   it  was  the


330  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [60.

longest  and  worst  that  the  Christians  had  ever  endured.
Sulpicius  Severus  says,  "Never  was  the  world  more
wasted  by  any  war."

60.     The  Emperor  Julian,  a.  d.  361.

[Quoted  by  Cyril.]  "  I  think  it  right  for  me  to  show
to  all  men  the  reasons  by  which  I  have  been  convinced
that  the  religion  of  the  Galileans  is  a  human  contrivance,
badly  put  together,  having  in  it  nothing  divine  ;  but
abusing  the  childish  irrational  part  of  the  soul,  which
delights  in  fable,  they  have  introduced  a  heap  of  won-
derful works  to  give  it  the  appearance  of  truth."  .  .  .
"  That  Moses  says,  God  was  the  God  of  Israel  only  and
of  Judea,  and  that  they  were  his  chosen  people,  I  shall
demonstrate  presently ;  and  that  not  only  he,  but  the
prophets  after  him,  and  Jesus  the  Nazarene  say  the
same ;  yea,  and  Paul  also,  who  exceeded  all  the  jugglers
and  impostors  that  ever  were."

"  But  Jesus  having  persuaded  a  few  among  you,  and
those  the  worst  of  men,  has  now  been  celebrated  about
three  hundred  years ;  having  done  nothing  in  his  life-
time worthy  of  remembrance ;  unless  any  one  thinks  it
a  mighty  (a)  matter  to  heal  lame  and  blind  people,  and
exorcise  demoniacs  in  the  villages  of  Bethsaida  and
Bethany."

"  But  you  are  so  unhappy  as  not  to  adhere  to  the
things  delivered  to  you  by  the  apostles,  but  they  have
been  altered  by  you  for  the  worse,  and  carried  on  to
yet  greater  impiety.  For  neither  Paul,  nor  Matthew,
nor  Luke,  nor  Mark,  have  dared  to  call  Jesus  God.
But  honest  John,  understanding  that  a  great  multi-
tude (b)  of  men  in  the  cities  of  Greece  and  Italy  were
seized  with  this  distemper  ;  and  hearing,  likewise,  as  I
suppose,  that  the  tombs  of  Peter  and  Paul  were  respected
and  frequented,  though  as  yet  privately  only,  however,
having  heard  of  it,  he  then  first  presumed  to  advance
that  doctrine."  ...  "  But  you  miserable  people,  at
the  same  time  that  ye  refuse  to  worship  the  shield  that
fell  down  from  Jupiter,  and  is  preserved  by  us,  which
was  sent  down  to  us  by  the  great  Jupiter,  or  our  father
Mars,  as  a  certain  pledge  of  the  perpetual  government


61.]  HEATHEN     TESTIMONIES.  331

of  our  city ;  you  -worship  the  wood  of  the  cross,  and
make  signs  of  it  upon  your  foreheads,  and  fix  it  upon
your  doors.  Shall  we  for  this  most  hate  the  understand-
ing, or  most  pity  the  simple  and  ignorant  among  you,  who
are  so  very  unhappy  as  to  leave  the  immortal  gods,  and
go  over  to  a  dead  Jew?"  .  .  .  "You  have  killed  not
only  our  people  who  persisted  in  the  ancient  religion,
hut  likewise  heretics,  equally  deceived  with  yourselves ;
but  who  did  not  mourn  the  dead  man  exactly  in  the
same  manner  that  you  do  ?  But  these  are  your  inven-
tions ;  for  Jesus  has  nowhere  directed  you  to  do  such
things ;  nor  yet  Paul.  The  reason  is,  that  they  never
expected  you  would  arrive  at  such  power.  They  were
contented  with  deceiving  maid-servants  and  slaves,  and
by  them  some  men  and  women,  such  as  Cornelius  and
Sergius.  If  there  were  then  any  other  men  of  eminence
brought  over  to  you,  I  mean  in  the  times  of  Tiberius
and  Claudius,  when  these  things  happened,  let  me  pass
for  a  liar  in  everything  I  say."

Letter  to  Ecditius. — "  Some  delight  in  horses,  others
in  birds,  others  in  wild  beasts ;  from  my  childhood  I
have  been  always  in  love  with  books.  Wherefore  you
must  do  for  me  this  private  piece  of  kindness,  to  get
together  all  George's  books.  He  had  a  large  number
of  books,  many  philosophical  and  rhetorical,  and  also
many  concerning  the  doctrine  of  the  impious  Galileans  ;
which  I  could  wish  to  have  utterly  destroyed ;  but  lest
books  of  value  should  be  destroyed  with  them,  let  these
also  be  carefully  sought  for.  George  had  a  secretary ;
let  him  help  you.  If  he  serves  you  faithfully,  let  him
be  rewarded  with  freedom.  If  he  endeavors  to  conceal
any  of  his  master's  books,  he  may  be  put  to  the  torture.
I  am  not  unacquainted  with  George's  books,  for  when  I
was  in  Cappadocia,  I  borrowed  some  of  them,  though
not  all,  in  order  to  have  them  transcribed,  and  then  re-
turned them  to  him."

61.       LlBAXIUS,  A.  D.  370.

[Panegyric  on  Julian.]  "  By  the  guidance  of  philo-
sophy he  soon  wiped  off  the  reproach  of  impiety,  and
learned  the  truth,   and  acknowledged  those  for   gods,


332  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [63.

who  were  such  indeed,  instead  of  him.  who  was  only
thought  to  be  so.  That  day  I  call  the  beginning  of
liberty  to  the  world."

[Funeral  oration  upon  Julian.]  (a)  "Indeed,  they
who  were  in  wrong  sentiments,  were  filled  with  fear,  and
expected  pulling  out  of  eyes,  beheadings,  and  rivers  of
blood,  flowing  from  innumerable  slaughters  ;  and  that
this  new  lord  would  find  out  new  ways  of  torture ;  and
that  fire,  and  sword,  and  drowning,  and  burying  alive,
and  amputation  of  limbs,  would  be  trifling  things.  Such
things  had  been  practised  by  those  who  went  before ;
but  now  more  grievous  things  were  expected.  But
Julian  dissented  from  those  who  had  practised  such
things,  as  not  obtaining  the  end  aimed  at ;  and  he  was
sensible,  that  no  benefit  was  to  be  expected  from  such
violence."

62.     Zosimus,  a.  d.  425.

Observations. — These  extracts  are  authentic  monu-
ments of  the  ancient  heathen  superstition  and  credulity,
and  of  the  zeal  with  which  the  rites  of  Gentilism  were
upheld  and  defended  by  all  sorts  of  persons,  learned  as
well  as  unlearned ;  and  by  men  of  high  stations,  as  well
as  by  people  of  low  condition.  They  did  (a)  all  that  lay
in  their  power  to  check  or  stop  the  progress  of  Chris-
tianity. They  would  gladly  have  recovered  and  restored
ancient  Gentilism.


Section.   VI.     Testimony   of    Heretics.

THE    PRINCIPAL     FACTS     OF    THE     NEW    TESTAMENT    ARE
CONFIRMED    BY    THE    TESTIMONY    OF    HERETICS.

63.  [From  Irengeus.]  "  Such  is  the  certain  truth  of
our  Gospels  that  the  heretics  themselves  bear  testimony
to  them,  every  one  of  them  endeavoring  to  prove  his

particular  doctrine  from  thence Since  therefore

persons  of  different  sentiments  agree  with  us  in  making
use  of  this  testimony,  our  evidence  for  the  authority  of
those  Gospels  is  certain  and  unquestionable."


67.]  TESTIMONY     OF     HERETICS.  333

64.  Basilides,  a.  d.  112-123.

Observations. — According  to  Irenseus,  he  must  have
disregarded  the  Old  Testament ;  or  at  least  he  could
not  give  the  same  authority  to  that,  as  he  did  to  the

New  (a) As  to  the  New  Testament,  it  doth  not

appear  but  he  received  the  whole,  or  at  least  the  greater
part  of  it.

65.  Carpocrates  and  his  Followers,  [a.  d.  120.]

Observations. — Epiphanius  says,  "  They  rejected
the  Old  Testament ;  perhaps  they  did :  but  I  do  not
know  that  to  be  certain.  Possibly,  however,  the  fact
was  only  this,  they  did  not  respect  the  instructions  of
Moses  and  the  prophets,  equally  with  those  of  Christ  and

his  apostles I  apprehend  that  they  received  (a)

not  that  Gospel  only  [Matthew]  but  the  other  Gospels
likewise,  and  all  the  other  books  of  the  New  Testament,
as  they  were  received  by  other  Christians  in  their  time.

66.  Cerinthus,  [a.  d.  80-101.]

Observations. — Cerinthus  received  the  scriptures  of

the  Old  Testament Upon  the  whole,  it  appears

highly  probable  that  Cerinthus  nourished  in  the  latter
end  of  the  first,  or  very  early  in  the  second  century.
And  it  is  certain,  that  the  Old  Testament — and  several
of  the  books  of  the  New  Testament — were  received  by
him.

67.  Marcion  and  his  Followers,  [a.  d.  127-144.]

Observations. — The  Old  Testament  was  altogether
set  aside  by  him,  as  proceeding  from  the  Creator,  who
was,  in  his  estimation,  void  of  goodness,  and  the  author

of  all  that  sin  and  misery  which  is  in  the  world

Marcion  received  only  eleven  books  of  the  New  Testa-
ment ;  and  these  strangely  curtailed  and  altered

By  (a)  means  of  this  heretic's  rejecting  some  books  en-
tirely, and  mutilating  others,  the  ancient  Christians  were
led  to  examine  into  the  evidence  for  the  sacred  writings,
and  to  compare  copies  together,  and  on  this  account  to
speak  of  whole  books,  and  particular  passages,  very  fre-
quently in  their  works ;  which  hath  enabled  us  of  later
ages  to  authenticate  these  books,  and  to  come  at  the


331  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [69.

genuine  reading  of  many  texts,  in  a  better  manner  than
we  otherwise  could  have  done.

68.  Lucian,  or  Leucius,  [a.  d.  135-150.]
Observations. — One  obvious  conclusion  to  be  drawn

from  this  long  account  of  the  forgeries  of  Leucius  is/that
the  scriptures  of  the  New  Testament,  particularly  the
Gospels  and  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  were  then  received
with  distinguished  respect  (a),  and  regarded  as  writings
of  great  authority  ;  otherwise  he  would  not  have  thought
of  publishing  books  under  the  names  of  the  evangelists
and  apostles.

Besides,  these  forged  writings  do  not  oppose,  but  con-
firm, (b)  the  general  account  given  us  in  the  canonical
scriptures.  They  all  take  for  granted  the  dignity  of  our
Lord's  person,  and  his  power  of  working  miracles  ;  (c)
they  acknowledge  the  certainty  of  there  having  been
such  persons  as  Matthew  and  the  other  evangelists  ;  and
Peter  and  the  other  apostles.  They  authenticate  the
general  and  leading  facts  contained  in  the  New  Testa-
ment. They  presuppose  that  the  apostles  received  from
Christ  a  commission  to  propagate  his  religion,  and  a
supernatural  power  to  enforce  its  authority.  And  thus
they  indirectly  establish  the  truth  and  divine  original
of  the  gospel.

69.  The  Montanists,  [a.  d.  171.]
Observations. — Theodoret   says,    that    "  Montanus

had  two  women  prophetesses,  and  called  their  writings
prophecies."  Afterwards  he  sajs,  that  "  the  prophecies
of  those  two  women  were  in  greater  esteem  with  the
Montanists,  than  the  divine  gospel ;  which  surely  must
be  an  aggravation."  ....  There  can  be  no  good  rea-
son to  doubt  that  they  received  all  the  books  of  the
Old  and  New  Testament  which  other  Christians  did,  and
with  like  respect.

[Here  end  the  quotations  from  Lardner.]


70.]  TESTIMONY    OF    MONUMENTS.  335


Section  VII.    Testimony  of   Monuments.

THE    FACTS    OF    THE     NEW    TESTAMENT   ARE     CONFIRMED
BY  EXISTING    MONUMENTS.

The  church,  the  Christian  sabbath,  and  the  ordinances
of  baptism  and  the  Lord's  supper,  are  monuments  con-
firming the  principal  facts  of  the  New  Testament.  Some
material  monuments  also  exist  by  which  Christian  facts
are  confirmed.

70.     Coins  and  Medals.

[From  Wilson's  Evidences.]  St.  Luke  terms  Phi-
lippi  a  colony,  using  a  word  which  implies  that  it  was  a
Latin  colony ; l  but  as  this  betokens  a  favor  which  such
a  city  had  little  reason  to  expect,  critics  were  embar-
rassed to  account  for  the  title,  till  some  coins  were
brought  to  light,  which  expressly  mention,  that  Julius
Caesar  himself  had  bestowed  the  dignity  on  it.

Again,  the  town  clerk  of  Ephesus  (states  our  sacred
author2),  in  order  to  quell  a  tumult,  thus  addressed  the
Ephesians  :  "  What  man  is  there  that  knoweth  not  how
that  the  city  of  the  Ephesians  is  a  worshipper  of  the  great
goddess  Diana?"  The  original  word  is  NE9.K0P0Z,
literally  temple-sweeper,  equivalent  to  our  church-
warden, an  appellation  taken  by  cities  which  were  dedi-
cated to  the  service  of  some  god  or  goddess.  Now  there
are  medals  still  extant,  on  which  the  front  of  the  temple
of  Diana  is  exhibited.  In  the  centre  is  an  image  of  the
goddess ;  and  around  the  side  and  bottom  is  an  inscrip-
tion, in  which  the  Ephesians  are  called  by  this  very
term.  Besides  the  testimony  furnished  by  this  medal,
there  is  now  extant  at  Ephesus  an  ancient  Greek  in-
scription, which  not  only  confirms  the  general  history
related  in  Acts,  xix.,  but  even  approaches  to  several
sentiments  and  phrases  wThich  occur  in  that  chapter.

1  Acts,  xvi.  11,  12.  *  Acts,  xix.  35.

29  y


336  historical   evidence.  [71.

71.     Catacombs.
From  Raivlinsons  Historical  Evidences.

As  when  we  tread  the  streets  of  Pompeii,  we  have
the  life  of  the  old  pagan  world  brought  before  us  with
a  vividness  which  makes  all  other  representations  appear
dull  and  tame,  so  when  we  descend  into  the  Catacombs
of  Rome  we  seem  to  see  the  struggling,  persecuted  com-
munity which  there  "in  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,"
wrought  itself  a  hidden  home ;  whence  it  went  forth  at  last
conquering  and  to  conquer,  triumphantly  establishing
itself  on  the  ruins  of  the  old  religion,  and  bending  its  hea-
then persecutors  to  the  yoke  of  Christ.  Time  was  when
the  guiding  spirits  of  our  church  not  only  neglected  the
study  of  these  precious  remnants  of  an  antiquity  which
ought  to  be  far  dearer  to  us  than  that  of  Greece  or  pagan
Rome,  of  Egypt,  Assyria,  or  Babylon, — but  even  ven-
tured to  speak  of  them  with  contempt,  as  the  recent  crea-
tions of  papal  forgers,  who  had  placed  among  the  arena-
rise,  or  sandpits  of  heathen  times,  the  pretended  memo-
rials of  saints  who  were  never  born,  and  of  martyrs  who
never  suffered.  But,  with  increased  and  improved  wis-
dom, modern  Anglicans  have  renounced  this  shallow  and
untenable  theory ;  and  it  is  at  length  admitted  univer-
sally, alike  by  the  Protestant  and  the  Romanist,  that
the  Catacombs  themselves,  their  present  contents,  and
the  series  of  inscriptions  which  have  been  taken  from
them  and  placed  in  the  papal  galleries,  are  genuine  re-
mains of  primitive  Christian  antiquity,  and  exhibit  to
us — imperfectly  no  doubt — but  so  far  as  their  evidence
extends,  truly  the  condition  and  belief  of  the  Church
of  Christ  in  the  first  ages.

For  it  is  impossible  to  doubt  that  the  Catacombs
belong  to  the  earliest  times  of  Christianity.  It  was
only  during  the  ages  of  persecution  that  the  Christians
were  content  to  hide  away  the  memorials  of  their  dead
in  gloomy  galleries  deep  below  the  earth's  surface,
where  few  eyes  could  ever  rest  on  them.  With  liberty
and  security  came  the  practice  of  burying  within  and
around  the  churches,  which  grew  up  on  all  sides ;  and
though  undoubtedly  the  ancient  burial-places  would  not


71.]  TESTIMONY     OF     MONUMENTS.  337

have  been  deserted  all  at  once,  since  habit  and  affection
would  combine  to  prevent  such  disuse,  yet  still  from  the
time  of  Constantine  burying  in  the  Catacombs  must
have  been  on  the  decline,  and  the  bulk  of  the  tombs  in
them  must  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  first  three
centuries.  The  fixed  dates  obtainable  from  a  certain
number  of  tombs  confirm  this  view ;  and  the  style  of
ornamentation  and  form  of  the  letters  used  in  the  in-
scriptions are  thought  to  be  additional  evidence  of  its
correctness.

What,  then,  is  the  evidence  of  the  Catacombs  ?  (a)
In  the  first  place,  it  is  conclusive  as  to  the  vast  number
of  the  Christians  in  these  early  ages,  when  there  Avas
nothing  to  tempt  men,  and  everything  to  disincline
them,  towards  embracing  the  persecuted  faith.  The
Catacombs  are  calculated  to  extend  over  nine  hundred
miles  of  streets,  and  to  contain  almost  seven  millions  of
graves.  The  Roman  Christians,  it  will  be  remembered,
are  called  by  Tacitus  "a  vast  multitude" — (ingens  mul-
titudo) — in  the  time  of  Nero ;  by  the  age  of  Valerian
they  are  reckoned  at  one-half  the  population  of  the
city ;  but  the  historical  records  of  the  past  have  never
been  thought  to  indicate  that  their  number  approached
at  all  near  to  what  this  calculation — which  seems  fairly
made — would  indicate.  Seven  millions  of  deaths  in  (say)
four  hundred  years,  would,  under  ordinary  circumstances,
imply  an  average  population  of  from  five  hundred  thou-
sand to  seven  hundred  thousand — an  amount  immensely
beyond  any  estimate  that  has  hitherto  been  made  of  the
number  of  Roman  Christians  at  any  portion  of  the
period.  Perhaps  the  calculation  of  the  number  of
graves  may  be  exaggerated,  and  probably  the  proportion
of  deaths  to  population  was,  under  the  peculiar  circum-
stances, unusually  large ;  but  still  the  evidence  of  vast
numbers  which  the  Catacombs  furnish  cannot  wholly
mislead  ;  and  we  may  regard  it  as  established  beyond
all  reasonable  doubt,  that  in  spite  of  the  general  con-
tempt and  hatred,  in  spite  of  the  constant  ill  usage  to
which  they  were  exposed,  and  the  occasional  "  fiery
trials"  which  proved  them,  the  Christians,  as  early  as


338  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [71.

the  second  century,  formed  one  of  the  chief  elements  in
the  population  of  Rome.

(b)  In  the  next  place,  the  Catacombs  afford  proof  of
the  dangers  and  sufferings  to  which  the  early  Christians
were  exposed.  Without  assuming  that  the  phials  which
have  contained  a  red  liquid,  found  in  so  many  of  the
tombs,  must  have  held  blood,  and  that  therefore  they
are  certain  signs  of  martyrdom,  and  without  regarding
the  palm  branch  as  unmistakable  evidence  of  the  same,
we  may  find  in  the  Catacombs  a  good  deal  of  testimony
confirmatory  of  those  writers,  who  estimate  at  the  high-
est, the  number  of  Christians  who  suffered  death  in  the
great  persecutions.  The  number  of  graves,  if  we  place
it  at  the  lowest,  compared  with  the  highest  estimate  of
the  Christian  population  that  is  at  all  probable,  would
give  a  proportion  of  deaths  to  population  enormously
above  the  average — a  result  which  at  any  rate  lends
support  to  those  who  assert  that  in  the  persecutions  of
Aurelius,  Decius,  Diocletian,  and  others,  vast  multitudes
of  Christians  were  massacred.  Further,  the  word
martyr  is  frequent  upon  the  tombs ;  and  often  where  it
is  absent,  the  inscription  otherwise  shows  that  the  de-
ceased lost  his  life  on  account  of  his  religion.  Some-
times the  view  opens  on  us,  and  we  see,  besides  the  in-
dividual buried,  a  long  vista  of  similar  sufferers — as
when  one  of  Aurelius's  victims  exclaims: — "  0  unhappy
times,  in  which  amid  our  sacred  rites  and  prayers, — in
the  very  caverns, — we  are  not  safe  !  What  is  more
wretched  than  our  life  ?  What  more  wretched  than  a
death,  when  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  burial  at  the  hands
of  friends  or  relatives  ?  Still  at  the  end  they  shine  like
stars  in  heaven.  A  poor  life  is  his,  who  has  lived  in
Christian  times  !"

(c)  Again,  the  Catacombs  furnish  a  certain  amount
of  evidence  with  respect  to  the  belief  of  the  early
Christians.  The  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  is  implied
or  expressed  on  almost  every  tombstone  which  has  been
discovered.  The  Christian  is  not  dead — he  "rests"  or
"sleeps" — he  is  not  buried,  but  "deposited"  in  his
grave — and  he  is  always  "  at  peace,"  (in  pace).     The


71.]  TESTIMONY     OF     MONUMENTS.  339

survivors  do  not  mourn  his  loss  despairingly,  but  express
trust,  resignation,  or  moderate  grief.  The  Anchor,  in-
dicative of  the  Christian's  "sure  and  certain  hope,"  is  a
common  emblem ;  and  the  Phoenix  and  Peacock  are
used  as  more  speaking  signs  of  the  Resurrection.  The
Cross  appears,  though  not  the  Crucifix ;  and  other  em-
blems are  employed,  as  the  Dove  and  the  Cock,  which
indicate  belief  in  the  (d)  sacred  narrative  as  we  possess
it.  There  are  also  a  certain  number  of  pictures  in  the
Catacombs ;  and  these  represent  ordinarily  historical
scenes  from  the  Old  or  New  Testament,  treated  in  a
uniform  and  conventional  way,  but  clearly  expressive
of  belief  in  the  facts  thus  represented.  The  temptation
of  Eve — Moses  'striking  the  rock — Noah  welcoming  the
return  of  the  Dove — Elijah  ascending  to  heaven — Daniel
among  the  lions — Shadrach,  Meshech,  and  Abednego  in
the  fiery  furnace — Jonah  under  the  gourd — Jonah
swallowed  by  the  whale — and  Jonah  vomited  out  on  the
dry  land,  are  the  favorite  subjects  from  the  Old  Testa-
ment ;  while  from  the  New  Testament,  we  find  the  adora-
tion of  the  wise  men — their  interview  with  Herod — the
Baptism  of  Christ  by  John  the  Baptist — the  healing  of
the  paralytic — the  turning  of  water  into  wine — the  feed-
ing of  the  five  thousand — the  raising  of  Lazarus — the
Last  Supper — Peter  walking  on  the  sea — and  Pilate
washing  his  hands  before  the  people.  St.  Peter  and  St.
Paul  are  also  frequently  represented,  and  St.  Peter
sometimes  bears  the  keys,  in  plain  allusion  to  the  gra-
cious promise  of  his  Master.  The  parabolic  teaching
of  our  Lord  is  sometimes  embodied  by  the  artists,  who
never  tire  of  repeating  the  type  of  the  "  Good  Shep-
herd," and  who  occasionally  represent  the  sower  going
out  to  sow  and  the  parable  of  the  wise  and  foolish  vir-
gins. In  this  way,  indirect  evidence  is  borne  to  the
historic  belief  of  the  early  church,  which  does  not
appear  to  have  differed  at  all  from  that  of  orthodox
Christendom  at  the  present  day.
29  *


340  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [72.


72.      Section  VIII.     Internal  Proof.

THE    NEW   TESTAMENT    CONTAINS     INTERNAL     PROOF     OF
ITS    HISTORIC    TRUTH.

Paley,  in  his  excellent  work  called  Horse  Paulinse,
has  conclusively  demonstrated  the  truth  of  the  New
Testament  history,  by  bringing  to  view  undesigned  co-
incidences between  the  epistles  of  Paul  and  the  Acts
of  the  Apostles.  The  value  of  these  coincidences  arises
from  their  not  being  apparent  to  a  careless  observer ;
and  hence  the  investigation  of  them  requires  an  amount
of  labor  which  renders  it  impossible  to  condense  the
work  of  Paley.  The  following  extract  will  give  a  speci-
men of  the  mode  of  argument  which  he  has  employed.

No.  1.

The  first  passage  I  shall  produce  from  this  epistle,
and  upon  which  a  good  deal  of  observation  will  be
founded,  is  the  following :

"But  now  I  go  unto  Jerusalem,  to  minister  unto  the
saints ;  for  it  hath  pleased  them  of  Macedonia  and
Achaia  to  make  a  certain  contribution  for  the  poor
saints  which  are  at  Jerusalem."  Rom.  xv.  25,  26.

In  this  quotation  three  distinct  circumstances  are
stated — a  contribution  in  Macedonia  for  the  relief  of  the
Christians  of  Jerusalem,  a  contribution  in  Achaia  for
the  same  purpose,  and  an  intended  journey  of  St.  Paul
to  Jerusalem.  These  circumstances  are  stated  as  taking-
place  at  the  same  time,  and  that  to  be  the  time  when  the
epistle  was  written.  Now  let  us  inquire  whether  we
find  these  circumstances  elsewhere ;  and  whether,  if  we
do  find  them,  they  meet  together  in  respect  of  date.
Turn  to  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  chap.  xx.  ver.  2,  3,
and  you  read  the  following  account : — "  When  he  had
gone  over  those  parts  (viz.  Macedonia),  and  had  given
them  much  exhortation,  he  came  into  Greece,  and  there
abode  three  months ;  and  when  the  Jews  laid  wait  for
him,  as  he  teas  about  to  sail  into  Syria,  he  proposed  to
return  through  Macedonia."


72.]  INTERNAL     PROOF.  341

From  this  passage,  compared  with  the  account  of  St.
Paul's  travels  given  before,  and  from  the  sequel  of  the
chapter,  it  appears  that  upon  St.  Paul's  second,  visit  to
the  peninsula  of  Greece,  his  intention  was,  when  he  should
leave  the  country,  to  proceed  from  Achaia  directly  by
sea  to  Syria ;  but  that,  to  avoid  the  Jews,  who  were
lying  in  wait  to  intercept  him  in  his  route,  he  so  far
changed  his  purpose  as  to  go  back  through  Macedonia,
embark  at  Philippi,  and  pursue  his  voyage  from  thence
to  Jerusalem.  Here,  therefore,  is  a  journey  to  Jeru-
salem ;  but  not  a  syllable  of  any  contribution.  And
as  St.  Paul  had  taken  several  journeys  to  Jerusalem
before,  and  one  also  immediately  after  his  first  visit
into  the  peninsula  of  Greece,1  it  cannot  from  hence  be
collected  in  which  of  these  visits  the  epistle  was  written,
or,  with  certainty,  that  it  was  written  in  either.  The
silence  of  the  historian,  who  professes  to  have  been  with
St.  Paul  at  the  time,2  concerning  any  contribution,
might  lead  us  to  look  out  for  some  different  journey,  or
might  induce  us  perhaps  to  question  the  consistency  of
the  two  records,  did  not  a  very  accidental  reference,  in
another  part  of  the  same  history,  afford  us  sufficient
ground  to  believe  that  this  silence  was  omission.

"When  St.  Paul  made  his  reply  before  Felix  to  the
accusations  of  Tertullus,  he  alleged,  as  was  natural,
that  neither  the  errand  which  brought  him  to  Jerusalem,
nor  his  conduct  whilst  he  remained  there,  merited  the
calumnies  with  which  the  Jews  had  aspersed  him.
"Now  after  many  years  (i.  e.  of  absence)  I  came  to
bring  alms  to  my  nation  and  offerings ;  whereupon  cer-
tain Jews  from  Asia  found  me  purified  in  the  temple,
neither  with  multitude  nor  with  tumult,  who  ought  to
have  been  here  before  thee,  and  object,  if  they  had
aught  against  me."  Acts,  xxiv.  17-19.

This  mention  of  alms  and  offerings  certainly  brings
the  narrative  in  the  Acts  nearer  to  an  accordancy  with
the  epistles  ;  yet  no  one,  I  am  persuaded,  will  suspect
that  this  clause  was  put  into  St.  Paul's  defence,  either


1  Acts,  xviii.  21.  2  Acts,  xx.  6.


342  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [72.

to  supply  the  omission  in  the  preceding  narrative,  or
with  any  view  to  such  accordancy.

After  all,  nothing  is  yet  said  or  hinted  concerning
the  place  of  the  contribution  ;  nothing  concerning  Ma-
cedonia and  Achaia.  Turn,  therefore,  to  the  First  Epis-
tle to  the  Corinthians,  chap.  xvi.  ver.  1-4,  and  you  have
St.  Paul  delivering  the  following  directions  :  "  Concern-
ing the  collection  for  the  saints,  as  I  have  given  orders
to  the  churches  of  Galatia,  even  so  do  ye;  upon  the
first  day  of  the  week  let  every  one  of  you  lay  by  him  in
store  as  God  hath  prospered  him,  that  there  be  no  gather-
ings when  I  come.  And  when  I  come,  whomsoever  ye
shall  approve  by  your  letters,  them  will  I  send  to  bring
your  liberality  unto  Jerusalem  ;  and  if  it  be  meet  that
I  go  also,  they  shall  go  with  me."  In  this  passage  we
find  a  contribution  carrying  on  at  Corinth,  the  capital
of  Achaia,  for  the  Christians  of  Jerusalem;  we  find
also  a  hint  given  of  the  possibility  of  St.  Paul  going  up
to  Jerusalem  himself,  after  he  had  paid  his  visit  unto
Achaia :  but  this  is  spoken  of  rather  as  a  possibility
than  as  any  settled  intention ;  for  his  first  thought  was,
"  Whomsoever  you  shall  approve  by  your  letters,  them
will  I  send  to  bring  your  liberality  to  Jerusalem;"  and
in  the  sixth  verse  he  adds  "  That  ye  may  bring  me  on
my  journey  whithersoever  I  go."  This  epistle  purports
to  be  written  after  St.  Paul  had  been  at  Corinth ;  for  it
refers  throughout  to  what  he  had  done  and  said  amongst
them  whilst  he  was  there.  The  expression,  therefore,
"when  I  come"  must  relate  to  a  second  visit ;  against
which  visit  the  contribution  spoken  of  was  desired  to  be
in  readiness.

But  though  the  contribution  in  Achaia  be  expressly
mentioned,  nothing  is  here  said  concerning  any  contri-
bution in  Macedonia.  Turn,  therefore,  in  the  third
place,  to  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  chap,
viii.  ver.  1-4,  and  you  will  discover  the  particulai
which  remains  to  be  sought  for  :  "  Moreover,  brethren,
we  do  you  to  wit  of  the  grace  of  God  bestowed  on  the
churches  of  Macedonia ;  how  that,  in  a  great  trial  of
affliction,  the  abundance  of  their  joy  and   their  deep


72.]  INTERNAL     PROOF.  343

poverty  abounded  unto  the  riches  of  their  liberality :
for  to  their  power,  I  bear  record,  yea  and  beyond  their
power,  they  were  willing  of  themselves ;  praying  us,
with  much  entreaty,  that  we  would  receive  the  gift,  and
take  upon  us  the  fellowship  of  the  ministering  to  the
saints."  To  which  add,  chap.  ix.  ver.  2  :  "I  know  the
forwardness  of  your  mind,  for  which  I  boast  of  you  to
them  of  Macedonia,  that  Achaia  was  ready  a  year  ago."
In  this  epistle  we  find  St.  Paul  advanced  as  far  as  Ma-
cedonia, upon  that  second  visit  to  Corinth  which  he  pro-
mised in  his  former  epistle :  we  find  also  in  the  passages
now  quoted  from  it,  that  a  contribution  was  going  on  in
Macedonia  at  the  same  time  with,  or  soon,  however,  fol-
lowing, the  contribution  which  was  made  in  Achaia;
but  for  whom  the  contribution  was  made  does  not  appear
in  this  epistle  at  all :  that  information  must  be  supplied
from  the  first  epistle.

Here,  therefore,  at  length,  but  fetched  from  three
different  writings,  Ave  have  obtained  the  several  circum-
stances we  inquired  after,  and  which  the  Epistle  to  the
Romans  brings  together,  viz.  a  contribution  in  Achaia
for  the  Christians  of  Jerusalem ;  a  contribution  in  Ma-
cedonia for  the  same :  and  an  approaching  journey  of
St.  Paul  to  Jerusalem.  We  have  these  circumstances —
each  by  some  hint  in  the  passage  in  which  it  is  men-
tioned, or  by  the  date  of  the  writing  in  which  the  pas-
sage occurs — fixed  to  a  particular  time ;  and  we  have
that  time  turning  out  upon  examination  to  be  in  all  the
scone;  namely,  towards  the  close  of  St.  Paul's  second
visit  to  the  peninsula  of  Greece.

This  is  an  instance  of  conformity  beyond  the  possi-
bility, I  will  venture  to  say,  of  random  writing  to  pro-
duce. I  also  assert,  that  it  is  in  the  highest  degree  im-
probable that  it  should  have  been  the  effect  of  contriv-
ance or  design.  The  imputation  of  design  amounts  to
this  :  that  the  forger  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  in-
serted in  it  the  passage  upon  which  our  observations  are
founded,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  color  to  the  forgery
by  the  appearance  of  conformity  with  other  writings
which  were  then  extant,  I  reply,  in  the  first  place,  that,


844  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [72.

if  he  did  this  to  countenance  his  forgery,  he  did  it  for
the  purpose  of  an  argument  which  would  not  strike  one
reader  in  ten  thousand.  Coincidences  so  circuitous  as
this  answer  not  the  ends  of  forgery ;  are  seldom,
I  believe,  attempted  by  it.  In  the  second  place,  I  ob-
serve, that  he  must  have  had  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,
and  the  two  epistles  to  the  Corinthians  before  him  at
the  time.  In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles  (I  mean  that
part  of  the  Acts  which  relates  to  this  period),  he  would
have  found  the  journey  to  Jerusalem ;  but  nothing
about  the  contribution.  In  the  First  Epistle  to  the
Corinthians  he  would  have  found  a  contribution  going
on  in  Achaia  for  the  Christians  of  Jerusalem,  and  a  dis-
tant hint  of  the  possibility  of  the  journey ;  but  nothing
concerning  a  contribution  in  Macedonia.

In  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  he  would
have  found  a  contribution  in  Macedonia  accompanying
that  in  Achaia ;  but  no  intimation  for  whom  either  was
intended,  and  not  a  word  about  the  journey.

It  was  only  by  a  close  and  attentive  collation  of  the
three  writings,  that  he  could  have  picked  out  the  cir-
cumstances which  he  has  united  in  this  epistle ;  and  by
a  still  more  nice  examination,  that  he  could  have  deter-
mined them  to  belong  to  the  same  period.  In  the
third  place,  I  remark,  what  diminishes  very  much  the
suspicion  of  fraud,  how  aptly  and  connectedly  the  men-
tion of  the  circumstances  in  question,  viz.,  the  journey
to  Jerusalem,  and  of  the  occasion  of  that  journey,  arises
from  the  context,  "  Whensoever  I  take  my  journey  into
Spain,  I  will  come  to  you ;  for  I  trust  to  see  you  in  my
journey,  and  to  be  brought  on  my  way  thitherward  by
you,  if  first  I  be  somewhat  filled  with  your  company.
But  now  I  go  unto  Jerusalem  to  minister  unto  the  saints  ;
for  it  hath  pleased  them  of  Macedonia  and  Achaia  to
make  a  certain  contribution  for  the  poor  saints  ivhich  are
at  Jerusalem.  It  hath  pleased  them  verily,  and  their
debtors  they  are ;  for  if  the  Gentiles  have  been  made
partakers  of  their  spiritual  things,  their  duty  is  also  to
minister  to  them  in  carnal  things.  When,  therefore,  I
have  performed  this,  and  have  sealed  to  them  this  fruit,  I


72.]


INTERNAL     PEOOF.


345


will  come  by  you  into  Spain."  Is  the  passage  in  italics
like  a  passage  foisted  in  for  an  extraneous  purpose?
Could  anything  be  more  natural  than  that  St.  Paul,  in
writing  to  the  Romans,  should  speak  of  the  time  when
he  hoped  to  visit  them ;  should  mention  the  business
which  then  detained  him ;  and  that  he  proposed  to  set
forward  upon  his  journey  to  them  when  that  business
was  completed?"

The  undesigned  coincidences  examined  by  Paley,  are,


in  number,  as  follows

: —

Romans     .          .          .          .          .         .            8

1  Corinthians

12

2  Corinthians

12

Galatians

10

Ephesians

Philippians

Colossians

5

7
4

1  Thessalonians

6

2  Thessalonians

3

1  Timothy

2  Timothy
Titus

5
5

2

Philemon

4

In  all


83


In  every  case  the  agreement  between  the  historian
and  the  writer  of  the  epistle,  is  shown  to  be  undesigned
on  the  part  of  both.  The  supposition  that  eighty-three
such  agreements  have  all  happened  by  chance,  is  wholly
inadmissible.  No  supposition  remains  but  that  the
authors  agree  with  each  other  because  they  wrote  with
truthful  regard  to  facts  of  which  they  possessed  common
knowledge  ;  and  therefore  these  undesigned  coincidences
establish  the  truth  of  the  New  Testament  history  by  an
argument  which  is  perfectly  conclusive.


346  historical    evidence.  [74,


73.  Section  IX.     Old  Testament  History.

THE  HISTORY  CONTAINED  IN  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT  COIN-
CIDES WITH  THE  MOST  AUTHENTIC  RECORDS  AND  ME-
MORIALS OE  ANTIQUITY.

Iii  the  preceding  part  of  this  work  the  truth  of  the
history  contained  in  the  Old  Testament  was  proved  by
first  establishing  the  divine  inspiration  of  the  volume.
In  the  present  section  proof  to  the  same  effect  will  be
adduced  from  the  coincidence  of  this  history  with  the
most  authentic  records  and  memorials  of  antiquity.  The
former  proof  is  conclusive ;  but  the  satisfaction  which  it
affords  to  the  mind  will  be  heightened  by  the  discovery
that  a  different  and  independent  proof  of  the  same  truth
may  be  derived  from  another  source.

This  section  consists  chiefly  of  extracts  from  "  The
Historical  Evidences  of  the  Truth  of  the  Scripture
Records,  by  George  Rawlinson,  M.  A."  These  extracts
are  included  within  single  quotation  marks.

74.     I.    Creation  and  the  Deluge.

Very  few  records  and  memorials  of  antiquity  now
exist  with  which  the  Mosaic  history,  contained  in  the
first  five  books  of  the  Bible,  may  be  compared.  '  The
only  reliable  authority  that  we  possess  besides  the  Pen-
tateuch for  the  history  of  the  period  which  it  embraces
consists  of  some  fragments  of  Berosus,  Manetho,  an
epitome  of  the  early  Egyptian  history  of  the  latter,  a
certain  number  of  Egyptian  and  Babylonian  inscriptions,
and  two  or  three  valuable  papyri.'

'  Nothing  has  been  said  here  of  (a)  Sanchoniathon,  in
the  first  place,  because  it  seems  more  than  probable  that
the  work  ascribed  to  him  was  the  mere  forgery  of  Philo
Byblius ;  and  secondly,  because  though  called  a  "  Phoe-
nician history,"  the  fragments  of  the  work  which
remain  show  it  to  have  been  mainly,  if  not  entirely,
mythological.'

For  the  earliest  history  of  the  world  it  is  especially
Babylon  which  furnishes  an  account  capable   of  being


74.]  OLD     TESTAMENT     HISTORY.  347

compared  with  that  of  Moses.  The  leading  facts  of
this  cosmogony  and  antediluvian  history  are  manifestly,
and  indeed   confessedly,  in   close   agreement  with   the

Hebrew  records Between  the  first  man  and  the

deluge  are,  in  the  scheme  of  Berosus,  ten  generations,
which  is  the  exact  number  between  Adam  and  Noah ;
and  though  the  duration  of  human  life  is  in  his  account
enormously  exaggerated,  we  may  see  even  in  this  exag-
geration a  glimpse  of  the  truth,  that  the  lives  of  the
patriarchs  were  extended  far  beyond  the  term  which  has
been  the  limit  in  later  ages.  This  truth  seems  to  have
been  known  to  many  of  the  ancients,  and  traces  of  it
have  even  been  found  among  the  modern  Burmans  and
Chinese.  ....  The  account  which  Berosus  gives  of
the  deluge  is  still  more  strikingly  in  accordance  with  the
narrative  of  scripture.  "Xisuthrus,"  he  says,  "  was
warned  by  Saturn  in  a  dream  that  all  mankind  would
be  destroyed  shortly  by  a  deluge  of  rain.  He  was  bid-
den to  bury  in  the  city  of  Sippara  (or  Sepharvaim)  such
written  documents  as  existed ;  and  then  to  build  a  huge
vessel  or  ark."  He  proceeds  with  the  history  of  the
deluge,  agreeing  very  nearly  with  that  given  by  Moses.
.  .  .  .  '  Such  is  the  account  of  Berosus  ;  and  a  descrip-
tion substantially  the  same  is  given  by  Abydenus,  an
ancient  writer  of  whom  less  is  known,  but  whose  frag-
ments are  generally  of  great  value  and  importance.  It
is  plain  that  we  have  here  a  tradition  not  drawn  from
the  Hebrew  record,  much  less  the  foundation  of  that
record ;  yet  coinciding  with  it  in  the  most  remarkable
way.'

In  giving  the  scriptures  by  the  instrumentality  of  in-
spired men,  God  made  room  for  the  use  of  their  mental
faculties,  their  personal  memory  of  events  which  they
had  witnessed,  and  the  knowledge  which  it  was  in  their
power  to  acquire  from  tradition  and  written  records.
The  opportunity  of  Moses  to  obtain  knowledge  of  pri-
meval history  by  tradition,  was  superior  to  that  of  any
writer  with  whom  he  can  be  compared.  '  Adam,  accord-
ing to  the  Hebrew  original,  was  for  two  hundred  and
forty-three  years  contemporary  with  Methuselah,  who
30


348  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [76.

conversed  for  one  hundred  years  with  Shem.  Shem  was
for  fifty  years  contemporary  with  Jacob,  who  probably
saw  Jochebed,  Moses'  mother.  Thus  Moses  might,  by
mere  oral  tradition,  have  obtained  the  history  of  Abra-
ham and  even  of  the  deluge,  at  third  hand ;  and  that
of  the  temptation  and  the  fall  at  fifth  hand.'  The  piety
which  prevailed  in  the  ancestors  of  Moses  inclined  them
to  transmit  carefully  to  their  descendants  correct  know-
ledge of  God's  dealings  with  them.  Hence,  without
taking  into  account  the  inspiration  with  which  the  book
of  Genesis  was  written,  its  records  deserve  to  be  re-
ceived as  credible  history,  and  certainly  more  reliable
than  any  other  in  the  possession  of  mankind.  More-
over, tradition  may  not  have  been  the  only  source  of
information.  '  What  we  know  of  the  antiquity  both  in
Egypt  and  Babylonia,  renders  it  not  improbable  that  the
art  of  writing  was  known  and  practised  soon  after  the
flood,  if  it  was  not  even  (as  some  have  supposed),  a
legacy  from  the  antediluvian  world.'

75.  2.  Babel. — Writers,  whose  Babylonian  history
seems  drawn  directly  from  him  (Berosus),  or  from  the
sources  which  he  used,  give  the  following  account  of  the
tower  of  Babel,  and  the  confusion  of  tongues  :  "  At  this
time  the  ancient  race  of  men  were  so  puffed  up  with  their
strength  and  tallness  of  stature  that  they  began  to
despise  and  contemn  the  gods  ;  and  labored  to  erect  that
very  lofty  tower,  which  is  now  called  Babylon,  intend-
ing thereby  to  scale  heaven.  But  when  the  building
approached  the  sky,  behold,  the  gods  called  in  the  aid
of  the  winds,  and  by  their  help  overturned  the  tower
and  cast  it  to  the  ground.  The  name  of  the  ruins  is
still  called  Babel ;  because  until  this  time  all  men  had
used  the  same  speech,  but  now  there  was  sent  upon
them  a  confusion  of  many  and  diverse  tongues."

76.  3.  Origin  of  Nations. — '  The  Toldoth  Beni
Noah  ["the  generations  of  the  sons  of  Noah,"  Gen.  x.]
has  extorted  the  admiration  of  modern  ethnologists,
who  continually  find  in  it  anticipations  of  their  greatest

discoveries On  the  whole,  the  scheme  of  ethnic

affiliation,  given  in  the  tenth  chapter  of  Genesis,  is  pro-


79.]  OLD    TESTAMENT    HISTORY.  349

nounced  "safer"  to  follow  than  any  other;  and  the
Toldoth  Beni  Noah  commends  itself  to  the  ethnic
inquirer  as  "  the  most  authentic  record  that  we  possess
for  the  affiliation  of  nations,"  and  as  a  document  "  of
the  very  highest  antiquity."  '

77.  4.  Gen.  xiv.  2-12.  <  We  obtain  a  double  wit-
ness [from  the  fragments  of  Berosus  and  from  the
monuments]  to  the  remarkable  fact  of  an  interruption
of  pure  Babylonian  supremacy  at  this  time ;  and  from
the  monuments  we  are  able  to  pronounce  that  the  su-
premacy was  transferred  to  Elam,  and  that  under  a
king,  the  Semitic  form  of  whose  name  would  be  Chedor-
laomer,  a  great  expedition  was  organized,  which  pro-
ceeded to  the  distant  and  then  almost  unknown  west,
and  returned  after  "  ravaging"  but  not  conquering  those
regions.'

78.  5.  Exodus  of  the  Israelites. — '  The  Exodus  of
the  Jews  was  an  event  which  could  scarcely  be  omitted
by  Manetho.  It  was  one,  however,-  of  such  a  nature —
so  entirely  repugnant  to  all  the  feelings  of  an  Egyptian
— that  we  could  not  expect  a  fair  representation  of  it  in
their  annals.  And  accordingly  our  fragments  of  Ma-
netho present  us  with  a  distinct  but  very  distorted
notice  of  the  occurrence.  .  .  .  We  have  here  the  op-
pression, the  name  Moses,  the  national  name  Hebrew,
under  the  disguise  of  Abaris,  and  the  true  direction  of
the  retreat,  which  is  said  by  Manetho  to  have  been  "into
Syria."'

79.  6.  Modern  discoveries  confirming  the  Penta-
teuch.— If  we  look  to  the  geography  we  shall  find  that
till  within  these  few  years  "  Erech,  and  Accad,  and
Calneh,  in  the  land  of  Shinar,"1  Caleh  and  Resen,
in  the  country  peopled  by  Asshur,2  Ellasar,  and  "  Ur
of  the  Chaldees,"3  were  mere  names ;  and  beyond  the
mention  of  them  in  Genesis,  scarcely  a  trace  was  dis-
coverable of  their  existence.  Recently,  however,  the
mounds  of  Mesopotamia  have  been  searched,  and  bricks

1  Gen.  x.  10.        2  Gen.  x.  11,  12.       3  Gen.  xi.  31 :  xiv.  1.


350  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [80.

and  stones  buried  for  near  three  thousand  years  have
found  a  tongue,  and  tell  us  exactly  where  each  of  these
cities  stood,  and  sufficiently  indicate  their  importance.
Again,  the  power  of  Og  and  his  "threescore  cities,"  all
fenced  with  high  walls,  gates,  and  bars,  besides  un walled
towns  a  great  many,1  in  such  a  country  as  that  to  the
east  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  whose  old  name  of  Tracho-
nitis  indicates  its  barrenness,  seemed  to  many  improba-
ble— but  modern  research  has  found  in  this  very  country
a  vast  number  of  walled  cities  still  standing,  which  show
the  habits  of  the  ancient  people,  and  prove  that  the
population  must  at  one  time  have  been  considerable.
So  the  careful  examination  that  has  been  made  of  the
valley  of  the  Jordan  which  has  resulted  in  the  proof
that  it  is  a  unique  phenomenon,  utterly  unlike  anything
elsewhere  on  the  whole  face  of  the  earth,  tends  greatly
to  confirm  the  Mosaic  account,  that  it  became  what  it
now  is  by  a  great  convulsion ;  and  by  pious  persons  will,
I  think,  be  felt  as  confirming  the  miraculous  character
of  that  convulsion.  '  Above  all,  perhaps,  the  absence  of
any  counter-evidence — the  fact  that  each  accession  to
our  knowledge  of  the  ancient  times,  whether  historic  or
geographic  or  ethnic,  helps  to  remove  difficulties,  and
to  produce  a  perpetual  supply  of  fresh  illustrations  of
the  Mosaic  narrative ;  while  fresh  difficulties  are  not  at
the  same  time  brought  to  light,  is  to  be  remarked,  as  to
candid  minds,  an  argument  for  the  historic  truth  of  the
narrative,  the  force  of  which  can  scarcely  be  over  esti-
mated. All  tends  to  show  that  we  possess  in  the
Pentateuch,  not  only  the  most  authentic  account  of
ancient  times  that  has  come  down  to  us,  but  a  history
absolutely  and  in  every  respect  true.

80.  7.  Joshua  s  Conquest  of  Canaan. — '  Moses  of
Chorene,  the  Armenian  historian,  Procopius,  the  secre-
tary of  Belisarius,  and  Suidas,  the  lexicographer,  re-
late that  there  existed  in  their  day  at  Tingis  (or  Tan-
giers),  in  Africa,  an  ancient  inscription  to  the  effect  that
the  inhabitants  were  descendants  of  those  fugitives  who

1  Deut.  iii.  5.


84.]  OLD     TESTAMENT     HISTORY.  351

were  driven  from  the  land  of  Canaan  by  Joshua,  the
son  of  Nun,  the  plunderer.'

81.  8.  Sidon  and  Tyre. — '  The  notices  of  Phoenicia
in  Scripture  are  completely  in  accordance  with  what  we
have  thus  gathered  from  profane  sources.  While  Sidon
alone  appears  to  have  been  known  to  Moses  (Gen.  x.  15),
and  Tyre  occurs  in  Joshua  as  a  mere  stronghold,  in
marked  contrast  with  imperial  Sidon,  "great  Sydon,"
as  she  is  called  more  than  once,1  whose  dominion  seems  to
extend  along  the  coast  to  Carmel,  and  certainly  reaches
inland  as  far  as  Laish.2  In  Samuel  and  Kings  the  case
is  changed ;  Sidon  has  no  longer  a  distinctive  epithet,3
and  it  is  the  "  king  of  Tyre,"  who  on  behalf  of  his  coun-
trymen makes  advances  to  David,  and  who  is  evidently
the  chief  Phoenician  potentate  of  the  period.'

82.  9.  Hiram. — '  That  Hiram  was  really  a  Phoenician
name,  and  one  which  kings  were  in  the  habit  of  bearing,  is
certain  from  the  Assyrian  inscriptions,  and  from  Hero-
dotus, as  well  as  from  the  Phoenician  historians,  Dius
and  Menander.  And  these  last-named  writers  not  only
confirm  the  name  as  one  which  a  king  of  Tyre  might
have  borne,  but  show  moreover  that  it  was  actually
borne  by  the  Tyrian  king  contemporary  with  Solomon
and  David,  of  whom  they  relate  circumstances  which
completely  identify  him  with  the  monarch  who  is  stated
in  Scripture  to  have  been  on  such  friendly  terms  with
those  princes.  They  do  not  indeed  appear  to  have
made  any  mention  of  David  ;  but  they  spoke  distinctly
of  the  close  connection  between  Hiram  and  Solomon.'

83.  10.  Solomon.  —  'The  wealth  and  magnificence
of  Solomon  were  celebrated  by  Eupolemus  and  Theophi-
lus,  the  former  of  whom  gave  an  elaborate  account  of
the  temple  and  its  ornaments.'

84.  11.  Use  of  Gold. — '  The  copious  use  of  gold
in  ornamentation,  which  seems  to  moderns  so  improbable,
was  a  practice  known  to  the  Phoenicians,  the  Assyrians,
and  the  Babylonians.'

1  Josh.  xi.  8.         2  Judges,  xvii.  7,  23.  3  2  Sam.  xxiv.  6.

30*  z


352  HISTORICAL     E  V  I  D  B  N  C  E.  [89.

85.  12.  Phoenicians. — '  The  wealth,  the  enterprise,
the  maritime  skill,  and  the  eminence  in  the  arts  which
were  the  leading  characteristics  of  the  Phoenicians  in
Homer's  time,,  are  abundantly  noted  by  the  writers  of
Kings  and  Chronicles ;  who  contrast  the  comparative
ignorance  and  rudeness  of  their  own  nation  with  the
science  and  "  cunning"  of  their  neighbors.'1

86.  13.  Judah  and  Israel. — '  The  separate  existence
of  the  two  kingdoms  of  Israel  and  Judah  is  abundantly
confirmed  by  the  Assyrian  inscriptions.'

87.  14.  Shishak. — '  The  first  great  event  'in  the
kingdom  of  Judah  after  the  separation  from  Israel,  was
the  invasion  of  Judea  by  Shishak,  king  of  Egypt,  in
the  fifth  year  of  Rehoboam.'2  '  This  success  is  found
to  have  been  commemorated  by  Shishak  on  the  outside
of  the  great  temple  at  Karnac ;  and  here,  in  a  long  list
of  captured  towns  and  districts  which  Shishak  boasts  of
having  added  to  his  dominions,  occurs  the  "  Melchi
Yuda,"  or  kingdom  of  Judah,  the  conquest  of  which  by
this  king  is  thus  distinctly  noticed  in  the  Egyptian
records.'

88.  15.  Aliab. — '  Ahab,  king  of  Israel,  is  represented
as  having  sought  to  strengthen  himself  in  the  position
which  his  father  had  usurped,  by  a  marriage  with  a  for-
eign princess,  and  as  having  made  choice  for  the  pur-
pose of  "  Jezebel,  daughter  of  Eth-Bal,  king  of  the
Zidonians."3  Here  again  not  only  have  we  a  genuine
Phoenician  name,  but  we  have  the  name  of  a  king  who
is  proved  by  the  Tyrian  history  of  Menander  to  have
been  seated  upon  the  throne  exactly  at  this  time.'

89.  16.  1  Kings,  xx.  1-25. — <  We  have  in  the  cunei-
form annals  of  an  Assyrian  king,  a  very  curious  and
valuable  confirmation  of  the  power  of  Damascus  at
this  time — of  its  being  under  the  rule  of  a  monarch
named  Ben-hadad,  who  was  at  the  head  of  a  great  con-

1  1  Kings,  v.  6  ;  2  Chron.  ii.  7  ;  1  Kings,  vii.  14 ;  2  Chron.  ix.
26,  27.

2  2  Chron.  xii.  3.  3  1  Kings,  xvi.  31.


93.]  OLD     TESTAMENT     HISTORY.  353

fcderacy  of  princes,  and  who  was  able  to  bring  into  the
field  year  after   year   vast   armies,  with  which   he    re-

repeatedly  engaged  the  whole  force  of  Assyria

The  same  record  further  verifies  the  historical  accuracy
of  the  Books  of  Kings  by  a  mention  of  Hazael  as  king
of  Damascus  immediately  after  Ben-hadad,  and  also
by  the  s/nchronism  which  it  establishes  between  this
prince  and  Jehu,  who  is  the  first  Israelite  king  mentioned
by  name  on  any  inscription  hitherto  discovered.'

90.  17.  Assyrian  Kings. — '  The  successors  of  Pul
are  represented  to  us  by  the  Biblical  writers,  apparently
in  a  continuous  and  uninterrupted  line — Tiglath-Pileser,
Shalmeneser,  Sargon,  Sennacherib,  and  Esar-haddon,
all  of  them  carrying  their  arms  into  Palestine,  and  play-
ing an  important  part  in  the  history  of  the  favored  race.
It  happens  most  fortunately  (may  we  not  say  providen-
tially ?)  that  records  of  all  these  monarchs — the  greatest
which  Assyria  produced — have  been  recovered ;  and
these  in  some  cases  are  sufficiently  full  to  exhibit  a  close
agreement  with  the  sacred  narrative,  while  throughout
they  harmonize  with  the  tenor  of  that  narrative,  only  in
one  or  two  cases  so  differing  from  the  Hebrew  text  as
to  cause  any  difficulty.'

91.  18.  2  Kings,  xviii.  13,  14.—'  The  annals  of
Sennacherib  contain  a  full  account  of  this  campaign.'

92.  19.  2  Kings,  xviii.  37. — '  It  has  been  generally
seen  and  confessed,  that  the  marvellous  account  which
Herodotus  gives  of  the  discomfiture  of  Sennacherib  by
S ethos,  is  the  Egyptian  version  of  this  event,  which  was
(naturally  enough)  ascribed  by  that  people  to  the  inter-
position of  its  own  divinities.'

93.  20.  Transfer  of  the  Empire  to  Babylon. — With
Esar-haddon  the  notices  of  Assyria  in  the  sacred  history
come  to  an  end.  Assyria  herself  shortly  afterwards
disappears ;  and  her  place  is  taken  by  Babylon,  which
now  for  the  first  time  becomes  a  great  conquering  power.
This  transfer  of  empire  is  abundantly  confirmed  by  pro-
fane authorities.


354        HISTORICAL  EVIDENCE.        [96.

94.  21.  The  Captivity.—'  The  fundamental  fact  of
the  time — the  Captivity  itself — is  allowed  on  all  hands
to  admit  of  no  reasonable  doubt.  Not  only  do  we  find,
from  the  monuments  of  the  Assyrian  kings  and  the  subse-
quent history  of  Persia,  that  such  transfers  of  whole
populations  wTere  common  in  the  East  in  ancient  times  ;
but  we  have  the  direct  evidence  of  Josephus  to  the  fact,
that  Berosus  mentioned  the  carrying  off  of  the  Jews
by  Nebuchadnezzar  and  their  settlement  in  parts  of
Babylonia.'

95.  22.  Nebuchadnezzar. — \  The  splendor  and  mag-
nificence which  this  prince  displayed,  his  military  suc-
cesses, his  devotion  to  his  gods,  and  the  pride  which  he
took  in  adorning  Babylon  with  great  buildings,  are
noted  by  Berosus  and  Abydenus.  Nine-tenths  of  the
inscribed  bricks  from  the  site  of  Babylon  are  stamped
with  Nebuchadnezzar's  name.  The  length  of  Nebuchad-
nezzar's reign  is  stated,  without  any  variety,  by  Berosus,
Polyhistor,  and  Ptolemy,  at  forty-three  years.  The
Babylonian  monuments  go  near  to  prove  the  same  ;  for
the  forty-second  year  of  Nebuchadnezzar  has  been  found
on  a  clay  tablet.      Here  Scripture  is  in  exact  accordance.'

98.  23.  Belshazzar. — Profane  history  makes  Na-
bonadius  the  last  monarch  of  Babylon,  and  states  that
he  was  absent  when  the  city  was  taken.  It  was  difficult
to  reconcile  this  account  with  that  given  in  the  book  of
Daniel,  where  Belshazzar  appears  as  the  last  king,  and
as  slain  in  the  capture  of  the  city.  Infidels  triumphed
in  the  supposed  truth  that  Daniel's  history  was  fictitious  ;
but  out  of  all  this  confusion  and  uncertainty  a  very
small  and  simple  discovery,  made  a  few  years  since,  has
educed  order  and  harmony  in  a  very  remarkable  way.
It  is  found  that  Nabonadius,  the  last  king  of  the  Canon,
associated  with  him  on  the  throne  during  the  later  years
of  his  reign  his  son,  Bil-shar-nzur,  and  allowed  him  the
royal  title.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  it  was  this
prince  who  conducted  the  defence  of  Babylon,  and  was
slain  in  the  massacre  which  followed  upon  the  capture ;
while  his  father,  who  was  at  the  time  in  Borsippa,  sur-


99.]  OLD    TESTAMENT    HISTORY.  355

rendered,   and    experienced    the    clemency   which    was

generally  shown  to  fallen  kings  by  the  Persians

Sir  H.  Rawlinson  made  this  important  discovery  in  the
year  1854,  from  documents  obtained  at  Mugheir,  the
ancient  Ur.  The  fact  that  two  persons  were  at  the
time  associated  in  the  exercise  of  regal  power,  accords
with  and  explains  the  promise  of  Belshazzar  to  Daniel
to  make  him  "  the  third  ruler  in  the  kingdom."1

97.  24.  Conquest  of  Babylon. — '  The  fact  of  the  sud-
den and  unexpected  capture  of  Babylon  by  a  Medo-Persic
army  during  the  celebration  of  a  festival,  and  of  the
consequent  absorption  of  the  Babylonian  into  the  Medo-
Persic  Empire,  is  one  of  those  manifest  points  of
agreement  between  Scripture  and  profane  authors
which  speak  for  themselves,  and  on  which  all  com-
ment would  be  superfluous.'

98.  25.  Duration  of  the  Captivity. — '  It  can  be  clearly
shown  from  a  comparison  of  Berosus  with  Ptolemy's
Canon,  that,  according  to  the  reckoning  of  the  Babylo-
nians, the  time  between  Nebuchadnezzar's  first  conquest
of  Judea  in  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim,  and  the  year  fol-
lowing the  fall  of  Babylon,  when  Daniel  made  his  prayer,
was  sixty-eight  years,  or  two  years  only  short  of  the
seventy  which  had  been  fixed  by  Jeremiah  as  the  dura-
tion of  the  Captivity.'2

99.  26.  Religiousness  of  the  Persians :  Ezra,  i.  2,  3  ;
vi.  8-10;  vii.  12,  13.  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  23.— <  Two
things  are  especially  remarkable  in  these  passages  :  first,
the  strongly  marked  religious  character  very  unusual
in  heathen  documents  ;  and,  secondly,  the  distinctness
with  which  they  assert  the  unity  of  God,  and  thence
identify  the  God  of  the  Persians  with  the  God  of  the
Jews.  Both  these  points  receive  abundant  illustration
from  the  Persian  cuneiform  inscriptions,  in  which  the
recognition  of  a  single  supreme  God,  Ormazd,  and  the
clear  and  constant  ascription  to  him  of  the  direction  of
all  mundane  affairs,  are  leading  features.     In  all   the

1  Dan.  v.  16.  2  Dan.  ix.  19.


356  HISTORICAL     EVIDENCE.  [101.

Persian  monuments  of  any  length,  the  monarch  makes
the  acknowledgment  that  "  Ormazcl  had  bestowed  on
him  his  empire."  Every  success  that  is  gained  is  "  by
the  grace  of  Ormazd."  The  name  of  Ormazd  occurs
in  almost  every  other  paragraph  of  the  Bchistun
inscription.  No  public  monuments  with  such  a  per-
vading religious  spirit  have  ever  been  discovered  among
the  records  of  any  heathen  nation  as  those  of  the  Per-
sian kings ;  and  through  all  of  them,  clown  to  the  time
of  Artaxerxes  Ochus,  the  name  of  Ormazd  stands  alone
and  unapproachable  as  that  of  the  Supreme  Lord  of
earth  and  heaven.'

100.  27.  Ahasuerus  [Xerxes  in  Greek  history.] —
'  Proud,  self-willed,  amorous,  careless  of  contravening
Persian  customs  ;  reckless  of  human  life,  yet  not  actu-
ally bloodthirsty  ;  impetuous,  facile,  changeable — the
Ahasuerus  of  Esther  corresponds  in  all  respects  to  the
Greek  portraiture  of  Xerxes,  which  is  not  (be  it  ob-
served) the  mere  picture  of  an  Oriental  despot,  but  has
various  peculiarities  which  distinguish  it  from  the  other
Persian  kings,  and  which,  I  think  it  may  be  said,  indi-
vidualize it.  .  .  .  We  know  far  too  little  of  the  domes-
tic history  of  Xerxes  from  profane  sources  to  pronounce
the  position  which  Esther  occupies  in  his  harem  impos-
sible or  improbable.'

101.  28.  Persian  Customs. — '  The  intimate  acquaint-
ance which  the  book  of  Esther  shows  in  many  passages
with  Persian  manners  and  customs,  has  been  acknow-
ledged even  by  De  Wette,  who  regards  it  as  composed
in  Persia  on  that  account.'


CHAPTER  II.
FULFILMENT  OF  PROPHECY.

102.    Section    I.    In    the    Old    Testament.

The  prophecies  of  the  Old  Testament  are  so  numer-
rous  and  extensive  that  a  complete  account  of  their
fulfilment  would  make  a  history  of  the  world.  The
examination  of  the  subject  in  Chapter  VI.  was  ne-
cessarily restricted  to  the  most  important  predictions,
and  to  a  very  brief  notice  of  these,  (a)  For  proof  of
the  historical  facts  there  mentioned  as  fulfilments  of
prophecy,  the  reader  is  referred  to  Bishop  Newton's
"Dissertations  on  the  Prophecies,"  in  which  valuable
work  he  will  find  the  subject  treated  at  length,  and  with
great  ability.  Two  extracts  from  it  are  here  subjoined,
illustrating  two  very  ancient  prophecies ;  and  a  third
explaining  the  division  of  the  Roman  empire  into  ten
kingdoms.  Many  other  useful  extracts  might  be  added,
if  space  for  them  could  be  allowed.

103.  Enlargement  of  Japheth.
The  territories  of  Japheth's  posterity  were  indeed
very  large,  for,  besides  all  Europe,  great  and  extensive
as  it  is,  they  possessed  the  lesser  Asia,  Media,  parts  of
Armenia,  Iberia,  Albania,  and  those  vast  regions  to-
wards the  north  which  anciently  the  Scythians  inhabited,
and  now  the  Tartars  inhabit ;  and  it  is  not  improbable
that  the  New  World  was  peopled  by  some  of  his  north-
ern descendants  passing  thither  by  the  straits  of  Anian.
The  enlargement  of  Japheth  may  also  denote  a  numerous
progeny  as  well  as  ample  territory ;  and  if  you  consult
the  genealogies  of  the  three  brothers  comprised  in  the
following  chapter,  you  will  find  that  Japheth  had  seven
sons,  whereas    Ham    had    only  four,    and    Shem    only

(357)


358  FULFILMENT     OF     PROPHECY.         [104.

five ;  and  the  northern  hive  (as  Sir  William  Temple  de-
nominates it)  was  always  remarkable  for  its  fecundity,
and  hath  been  continually  pouring  forth  swarms,  and
sending  out  colonies  into  the  more  southern  parts,  both
in  Europe  and  in  Asia,  both  in  former  and  in  latter
times.

104.  The  Ishmaelites  unsubdued  and  preserved.
The  next  great  conquerors  of  the  east  [after  the
Egyptians  and  Assyrians]  were  Cyrus  and  the  Per-
sians ;  but  neither  he  nor  any  of  his  successors  ever
reduced  the  whole  body  of  the  Arabs  to  subjection.
They  might  some  of  the  exterior,  but  never  reached  the
interior  parts  of  the  country.  .  .  .  Alexander  the
Great  overturned  the  Persian  Empire  and  conquered
Asia.  The  neighboring  princes  sent  their  ambassadors
to  make  their  submissions.  The  Arabs  alone  disdained
to  acknowledge  the  conqueror,  and  scorned  to  send  any
embassy,  or  to  take  any  notice  of  him.  This  slight
provoked  him  to  such  a  degree,  that  he  meditated  an
expedition  against  them,  and  the  great  preparations  he
made  for  it  showed  that  he  thought  them  a  very  formi-
dable enemy ;  but  death  intervened  and  put  an  end  to
all  that  his  ambition  or  resentment  had  framed  against
them.  Thus  they  happily  escaped  the  fury  of  his  arms,
and  were  never  subdued  by  any  of  his  successors.  .  .  .
The  Romans  invaded  the  East,  and  subdued  the  coun-
tries adjoining,  but  were  never  able  to  reduce  Arabia
into  the  form  of  a  Roman  province.  .  .  .  Such  was
the  state  and  condition  of  the  Arabs  to  the  time  of  their
favorite  prophet  Mohammed,  who  laid  the  foundations
of  a  mighty  empire ;  and  then  for  several  centuries  they
were  better  known  among  the  European  nations  by  the
name  of  the  Saracenni  or  Saracens,  the  Aracensi  of
Pliny,  and  the  Hagarenes  of  the  Holy  Scripture.  .  .  .
After  their  empire  was  dissolved,  and  they  were  reduced
within  the  limits  of  their  native  country,  they  still  main-
tained their  liberty  against  the  Tartars,  Mamalucs,
Turks,  and  all  foreign  enemies  whatever.  Whoever
were  the  conquerors  of  Asia,  they  were  still  uncon-
quered,  still  continued  their  incursions,  and  preyed  upon


105.]  IN     THE     OLD     TESTAMENT.  359

all  alike.  .  .  .  Who  can  fairly  consider  and  lay  all
these  particulars  together,  and  not  perceive  the  hand  of
God  in  this  whole  affair  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  ?
.  .  .  Who  but  God,  or  one  raised  and  commissioned
by  him,  could  describe  the  genius  and  manners,  not  only
of  a  single  person  before  he  was  born,  but  of  a  whole
people  from  the  first  founder  of  the  race  to  the  present
time  ?  .  .  .  How  could  a  single  nation  stand  out  against
the  enmity  of  the  whole  world  for  any  length  of  time,
and  much  more  for  near  four  thousand  years  together  ?
The  great  empires  around  them  have  all  in  their  turn
fallen  to  ruin,  while  they  have  continued  the  same  from
the  beginning,  and  are  likely  to  continue  the  same  to
the  end ;  and  this  in  the  natural  course  of  things  was  so
highly  improbable,  if  not  altogether  impossible,  that  as
nothing  but  a  divine  prescience  could  have  foreseen  it,
so  nothing  but  a  divine  power  could  have  accomplished
it.  .  .  .  These  are  the  only  people  besides  the  Jews,
who  have  subsisted  as  a  distinct  people  from  the  be-
ginning.

105.  Division  of  the  Roman  Empire  into  ten
Kingdoms.

The  Roman  empire,  as  the  Romanists  themselves
allow,  was  by  means  of  the  incursions  of  the  northern
nations,  dismembered  into  ten  kingdoms ;  and  Machia-
vel,  little  thinking  what  he  was  doing  (as  Bishop  Chand-
ler observes),  hath  given  us  their  names ;  1.  the
Ostrogoths  in  Mcesia,  2.  the  Visigoths  in  Pannonia,  3.
the  Sueves  and  Alans  in  Gascoigne  and  Spain,  4.  the
Vandals  in  Africa,  5.  the  Franks  in  France,  6.  the
Burgundians  in  Burgundy,  7.  the  Heruli  and  Turingi
in  Italy,  8.  the  Saxons  and  Angles  in  Britain,  9.  the
Huns  in  Hungary,  10.  the  Lombards  at  first  upon  the
Danube,  afterwards  in  Italy.

Mr.  Mede  reckons  up  the  ten  kingdoms  thus  in  the
year  456,  the  year  after  Rome  was  sacked  by  Genseric,
king  of  the  Vandals :  1.  the  Britons,  2.  the  Saxons  in
Britain,  3.  the  Franks,  4.  the  Burgundians  in  France,
5.  the  Wisigoths  in  the  south  of  France  and  part  of
Spain,  6.  the  Sueves  and  Alans  in  Gallicia  and  Portu-
31


360  FULFILMENT    OF     PROPHECY.         [107

gal,  7.  the  Vandals  in  Africa,  8.  the  Alemanes  in
Germany,  9.  the  Ostrogoths  whom  the  Longobarcls
succeeded  in  Pannonia,  and  afterwards  in  Italy,  10.  the
Greeks  in  the  residue  of  the  empire.

[After  giving  enumerations  from  other  authors,
showing  that  at  different  periods  the  number  ten  agreed
well  with  the  division  of  the  empire — ]  Not  that  there
were  constantly  ten  kingdoms,  they  were  sometimes
more,  and  sometimes  fewer ;  but  as  Sir  Isaac  Newton
says,  "  whatever  was  their  number  afterwards  they  are
still  called  the  ten  kings  from  their  first  number."

106.     Section  II.    In  the  Gospels.

Having  established  in  Chapter  V.  that  the  New  Tes-
tament is  a  book  of  "truthful  history,"  we  refer  to  it
for  proof  (a)  that  Christ's  predictions  were  fulfilled  con-
cerning his  death  and  resurrection,  the  labors  and
sufferings  of  his  apostles,  and  the  extensive  spread  of
the  gospel.  The  facts  which  prove  the  exact  fulfilment
of  the  remarkable  prophecies  concerning  the  destruc-
tion of  Jerusalem,  (b)  have  been  stated  at  length  by
Lardner1  and  Newton,2  and  confirmed  by  quotations
from  Josephus  and  other  authors.  A  few  testimonies
on  this  subject  have  been  quoted  in  Chapter  I.  of  this
appendix,  articles  49  a,  50,  56,  but  for  a  full  account
the  reader  is  referred  to  the  "  History  of  the  Jewish
War"  by  Josephus,  who  was  an  eye-witness  of  the  event,
and  an  actor  in  its  scenes.

The  most  doubtful  part  of  the  testimony  given  by
Josephus  respecting  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem,  is  the
following  passage : —

107.  Prodigies  preceding  the  Destruction  of
Jerusalem.
"  Thus  was  this  miserable  people  deceived  by  impos-
tors, who  spoke  lies  in  the  name  of  God.  But  they  did
not  attend  nor  give  credit  to  those  prodigies  which  evi-
dently foretold  their  future  desolation ;  but  like  men
infatuated,  who  have  neither  eyes  to  see  nor  minds  to
consider,   they   disregarded   the   divine    denunciations.

1  Vol.  VI.  pp.  392-479.  2  Diss.  18-21.


107.]  IN     THE     GOSPELS.  361

There  was  a  star,  a  comet  resembling  a  sword,  which
stood  over  the  city  and  continued  for  a  year.  And
before  the  rebellion,  and  before  the  war  broke  out,
when  the  people  were  come  together  in  great  multitudes
to  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  on  the  eighth  day  of
the  month  of  April,  at  the  ninth  hour  of  the  night,  so
great  a  light  shone  round  the  altar  and  the  temple,  that
it  seemed  to  be  bright  day :  which  light  continued  for
half  an  hour.  This,  to  the  unskilful,  seemed  to  be  a
good  sign ;  but,  by  the  sacred  scribes,  it  was  judged  to
portend  what  has  since  happened.  And  at  the  same
festival  a  heifer,  as  she  was  led  by  the  high  priest  to  be
sacrificed,  brought  forth  a  lamb  in  the  midst  of  the
temple.  Moreover,  the  eastern  gate  of  the  inner  court
of  the  temple,  which  was  of  brass,  and  very  heavy,
which  was  not  without  difficulty  shut  in  the  evening  by
twenty  men,  and  rested  upon  a  basis  armed  with  iron,
and  was  fastened  with  bolts  that  went  deep  into  the
floor  which  was  made  of  one  entire  stone ;  was  seen  to
open  of  its  own  accord  at  the  sixth  hour  of  the  night :
whereupon  they  who  kept  watch  at  the  temple  went  to
the  captain  and  told  him  of  it.  He  then  came  thither,
and  not  without  difficulty  had  it  shut  again.  This  also
appeared  to  the  vulgar  a  good  sign :  as  if  thereby  God
opened  to  them  the  gates  of  happiness.  But  the  wiser
men  concluded  the  security  of  the  temple  was  gone,  and
that  the  gate  was  opened  for  the  advantage  of  their
enemies  ;  and  they  said  it  was  a  signal  of  the  desolation
that  was  coming  upon  them.  Besides  these,  a  few
days  after  that  festival,  on  the  one-and-twentieth  day
of  May  there  appeared  a  wonderful  phenomenon,  almost
exceeding  belief;  and  the  account  of  it  might  seem
fabulous  if  it  had  not  been  related  by  those  who  saw  it,
and  if  the  following  events  had  not  been  answerable  to
such  signs  :  for  before  sunset  chariots  and  troops  in
armor  were  seen  carried  upon  the  clouds,  and  surround-
ing cities.  And  at  the  festival,  which  we  call  the
Pentecost,  as  the  priests  were  going  by  night  into  the
inner  court  of  the  temple,  as  the  custom  was,  to  perform
their  ministrations,  they  first  felt,  as  they  said,  a  shak-


362  FULFILMENT     OF     PROPHECY.  [107.

ing,  accompanied  by  a  noise,  and  after  that  a  sound
as  of  a  multitude,  saying,  '  Let  us  remove  hence.'  But,
which  is  still  more  awful,  there  was  one  Jesus,  son  of
Ananus,  of  a  low  condition,  and  a  countryman,  who
four  years  before  the  war  began,  when  the  city  enjoyed
profound  peace  and  flowing  prosperity,  came  up  to  the
festival,  in  which  it  is  the  custom  for  us  all  to  make
tabernacles,  who  on  a  sudden  began  to  cry  out  in  the
temple :  '  A  voice  from  the  east,  a  voice  from  the  west,
a  voice  from  the  four  winds,  a  voice  against  Jerusalem
and  the  temple,  a  voice  against  the  bridegrooms  and  the
brides,  a  voice  against  the  whole  people.'  This  was  his
cry,  as  he  went  about  both  by  day  and  by  night,  in  all
the  lanes  of  the  city.  Some  of  the  chief  men  were
offended  at  this  ill-boding  sound,-  and,  taking  him  up,
laid  many  stripes  upon  him,  and  had  him  beaten
severely.  Yet  he  said  not  a  word  for  himself,  nor  made
any  peculiar  complaint  to  them  that  beat  him  ;  but  went
on  repeating  the  same  words  that  he  had  said  before.
Hereupon,  the  magistrates,  thinking  it  to  be  something
more  than  ordinary,  as  indeed  it  was,  bring  him  before
the  Roman  governor  ;  where  he  was  whipped  till  his
bones  were  laid  bare.  All  which  he  bore  without
shedding  any  tears  or  making  any  supplications ;  but
with  a  mournful  voice  at  every  stripe,  cried  out,  '  Woe
to  Jerusalem.'  Albinus,  the  governor,  asked  him  who
he  was,  and  whence  he  came,  and  why  he  uttered  those
words.  To  all  which  he  made  no  answer,  but  continued
making  his  mournful  denunciations  to  the  city.  Albi-
nus, thinking  him  to  be  mad,  dismissed  him.  And,
thenceforward,  to  the  time  of  the  war,  he  did  not  go  to
any  of  the  citizens  ;  nor  was  he  seen  speaking  to  any  ;
but  only  went  on  with  his  mournful  denunciation,  as  if
it  had  been  his  premeditated  vow  :  '  Woe,  woe  to  Jeru-
salem.' He  did  not  give  ill-language  to  those  who
beat  him,  as  many  did  frequently ;  nor  did  he  thank
those  who  gave  him  food :  but  went  on  repeating  to  all
the  doleful  presage.  But  especially  at  festivals,  his  cry
was  the  loudest.  And  so  it  continued  for  seven  years
and  five  months,  without  his  growing  hoarse,  or  being


107.]     IN     THE     REVELATION     OF    JOHN.  3G3

tired  therewith,  till  he  saw  his  presage  in  the  siege;
then  he  ceased :  for  going  round  upon  the  wall,  with
his  utmost  force  he  cried  out :  '  Woe,  woe  once  more
to  the  city,  and  to  the  people,  and  to  the  temple.'
And  then  at  last  he  added  :  '  Woe,  woe  to  myself  also.'
At  which  instant  there  came  a  stone  out  of  one  of  the
engines  that  smote  him,  and  killed  him  immediately ;
and  whilst  he  was  uttering  these  mournful  presages,  he
gave  up  the  ghost."

On  this  passage  the  following  remarks  are  offered : —

1.  It  corresponds  with  Christ's  prediction  that  there
would  be  fearful  sights  and  great  signs  from  heaven.1

2.  No  one  can  suppose  that  Josephus,  a  Jew  and  an
enemy  of  Christianity,  wrote  this  passage  to  prove  the
fulfilment  of  Christ's  prophecy.  3.  Though  some  of
the  prodigies  related  by  Josephus  may  be  justly  discre-
dited, the  whole  account  cannot  be  rationally  rejected.
Some  of  the  alleged  facts  must  have  been  witnessed  by
multitudes,  if  they  occurred  as  the  historian  has  related  :
and  if  they  did  not,  he  knew,  when  he  penned  his  his-
tory, that  there  were  multitudes  who  could  bear  witness
to  its  falsehood.  4.  No  one  has  a  right  to  assume  that
there  were  no  supernatural  events  attending  this  extra-
ordinary judgment  of  God.  5.  But  if  none  of  the
prodigies  were  supernatural  there  may  still  have  been
"fearful  sights  and  great  signs  from  heaven."  As  the
sun  and  moon  are  "signs"2  in  heaven,  and  the  rainbow
in  the  cloud  "a  token"3  of  mercy;  so  extraordinary
meteors  in  the  sky,  filling  men's  minds  with  terror,  may,
even  though  not  miraculously  produced,  have  been  used
by  Providence  to  awaken  men  from  security,  and  warn
them  of  approaching  evil.

Section  III.    In  the  Revelation  of  John.

The  following  extracts  from  Gibbon's  Decline  and
Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire  show  the  fulfilment  of  pro-
phecies contained  in  the  book  of  Revelation.  A  mar-
ginal analysis  is  added,  with  references  to  the  several

1  Luke.  xxi.  11.  a  Gen.  i.  14.  3  Gen.  ix.  13.

31*


364  FULFILMENT     OF     PROPHECY.  [108.

prophecies.  If  the  propriety  and  expressiveness  of  the
symbols  used  in  the  prophecies  should  not  be  apparent
to  the  reader,  he  will  do  well  to  consult  Barnes's  Notes
on  the  Book  of  Revelation.

Extracts.

108.  1.  If  a  man  were  called  to  fix  a  period  in
The  Roman  the  history  of  the  world,  during  which
pe^ous!aPndSen-  the  condition  of  the  human  race  was  most
quregstd  bKevnvi.  naPPy  and  prosperous,  he  would,  without  hesi-
2-  tation,  name  that  which  elapsed  from  the  death
of  Domitian  to  the  accession  of  Ccmmodus.  The  vast
extent  of  the  Roman  Empire  was  governed  by  absolute
power,  under  the  guidance  of  virtue  and  wisdom.  The
armies  were  restrained  by  the  firm  but  gentle  hands  of
four  successive  emperors,  whose  characters  and  authority
commanded  universal  respect.  The  forms  of  the  civil  ad-
ministration were  carefully  preserved  by  Nerva,  Trajan,
Hadrian,  and  the  Antonines,  who  delighted  in  the  image
of  liberty,  and  were  pleased  with  considering  themselves
as  the  accountable  ministers  of  the  laws.  Such  princes
deserved  the  honor  of  restoring  the  republic,  had  the
Romans  of  their  days  been  capable  of  enjoying  a  rational
freedom The  praises  of  Alexander,  trans-
mitted by  a  succession  of  poets  and  historians,  had  kin-
dled a  dangerous  emulation  in  the  mind  of  Trajan.
Like  him,  the  Roman  emperor  undertook  an  expedition
against  the  nations  of  the  East.  .  .  .  The  success  of
Trajan,  however  transient,  was  rapid  and  specious.
The  degenerate  Parthians,  broken  by  intense  discord,
fled  before  his  arms.  .  .  .  Every  day  the  astonished
senate  received  the  intelligence  of  new  names  and  new
nations  that  acknowledged  his  sway.  They  were  informed
that  the  kings  of  Bosphorus,  Colchos,  Iberia,  Albania,
Osrhoene,  and  even  the  Parthian  monarch  himself,  had
accepted  their  diadems  from  the  hand  of  the  emperor ;
that  the  independent  tribes  of  the  Median  and  Car-
duchian  hills  had  implored  his  protection  ;  and  that  the
rich  countries  of  Armenia,  Mesopotamia,  and  Assyria
were  reduced  into  the  state  of  provinces.


109.]      IN     THE     REVELATION     OF    JOHN.         365

109.     2.  When  Commodus  had  once  tasted  human
blood,  he  was  incapable  of  pity  or  remorse.
The  tyrant's  rage,  after  having  shed  the  no-  «vu  wars,
blest  blood  of  the  senate,  at  length  recoiled
on  the  principal  instrument  of  his  cruelty.    .    .    .    His
cruelty  proved  at  last  fatal  to  himself.     He  had  shed
with  impunity  the  best  blood  of  Rome ;  he  perished  as

soon  as  he  was  dreaded  by  his  own  domestics

After  a  reign  of  sixty-six  days,  Julian  was' beheaded  in
a  private  apartment  of  the  baths  of  the  palace.  [After
a  detailed  account  of  the  two  civil  wars  against  Niger
and  Albinus,  rival  competitors  for  the  empire,  both  of
whom  were  vanquished,  and  both  of  whom  were  put  to
death  in  their  flight  from  the  field  of  battle.]  Although
the  wounds  of  civil  war  were  apparently  healed,  its
mortal  poison  still  lurked  in  the  vitals  of  the  constitu-
tion  It  was  computed  that,  under  the  vague

appellation  of  the  friends  of  Geta,  above  twenty  thou-
sand persons  of  both  sexes  suffered  death.  .  .  Caracalla
was  the  common  enemy  of  mankind.  Every  province
was  by  turns  the  scene  of  his  rapine  and  cruelty.  In
the  midst  of  peace  and  repose,  upon  the  slightest  provo-
cation, he  issued  his  commands  at  Alexandria,  in  Egypt,
for  a  general  massacre.  From  a  secure  post  in  the  tem-
ple of  Serapis,  he  viewed  and  directed  the  slaughter  of
many  thousand  citizens,  as  well  as  strangers,  without
distinguishing  either  the  number  or  the  crime  of  the
sufferers.

[Then  follows  the  account  of  the  assassination  of
Caracalla;  then,  and  in  consequence  of  that,  of  the
civil  war  which  crushed  Macrinus,  and  raised  Elagabalus
to  the  throne ;  then  of  the  life  and  follies  of  that
wretched  voluptuary,  and  of  his  massacre  by  the  prc-
torian  guards  ;  then,  after  an  interval  of  thirteen  years,
of  the  murder  of  his  successor,  the  second  Severus,  on
the  Rhine ;  then  of  the  civil  wars  excited  against  his
murderer  and  successor,  Maximin,  in  which  the  two
emperors  of  a  day,  the  Gordians — father  and  son —
perished  in  Africa,  and  Maximin  himself  and  his  son  in
the  siege  of  Aquileia ;  then  of  the  murder  at  Rome  of


366  FULFILMENT     OF     PROPHECY.  [110.

the  two  joint  emperors,  Maximus  and  Balbinus ;  and
quickly  after  that .  an  account  of  the  murder  of  their
successor  in  the  empire,  the  third  and  youngest  Gordian,
on  the  banks  of  the  river  Aboras  ;  then  of  the  slaughter
of  the  next  emperor,  Philip,  together  with  his  son  and
associate  in  the  empire,  in  the  battle  near  Verona ; — and
this  state  of  things  may  be  said  to  have  continued  until
the  accession  of  Diocletian  to  the  empire,  A.  d.  284.]

110.      3.    Nor   was    the    rapacious   son    of  Severus
[Caracalla]  contented  with  such  a  measure  of
ation.  Ear.  vi.   taxation    as   had   appeared  sufficient  to  his
moderate  predecessors.     Instead  of  a  twen-
tieth, he  exacted  a  tenth  of  all  legacies  and  inheritances ;
and  during  his  reign  he  crushed  alike  every  part  of  the

empire  under  the  weight  of  his  iron  sceptre

[After  noticing  some  relief  by  Alexander  from  the  ex-
cessive taxation.]  But  the  noxious  weed,  which  had
not  been  totally  eradicated,  again  sprung  up  with  the
most  luxuriant  growth,  and  in  the  succeeding  age  dark-
ened the  Roman  world  with  its  deadly  shade.  In  the
course  of  this  history  we  shall  be  too  often  summoned
to  explain  the  land  tax,  the  capitation,  and  the  heavy  con-
tributions of  corn,  wine,  oil,  and  meat  which  were  exacted
of  the  provinces  for  the  use  of  the  court,  the  army,  and

the   capital About  that  time  the  avarice  of

Galerius  [who,  as  Caesar,  acted  under  the  authority  of
Diocletian ;  who  excited  Diocletian  to  the  work  of  per-
secution ;  and  who,  on  the  abdication  of  Diocletian,
assumed  the  title  of  Augustus],  or  perhaps  the  exigen-
cies of  the  state,  had  induced  him  to  make  a  very  strict
and  rigorous  inquisition  into  the  property  of  his  subjects
for  the  purpose  of  a  general  taxation,  both  on  their
lands  and  on  their  persons.  A  very  minute  survey  ap-
pears to  have  been  taken  of  their  real  estates ;  and
wherever  there  was  the  slightest  concealment,  torture
was  very  freely  employed  to  obtain  a  sincere  declaration
of  their  real  wealth.

[A  particular  order,  under  this  oppressive
wine.  Key.  vi.    system  of  taxation,  was  sent  forth  in  the  fol-
lowing words]  : — If  any  one  shall  sacrilegi-


112.]       IN     THE     REVELATION     OF     JOHN.         367

ously  cut  a  vine,  or  stint  the  fruit  of  prolific  boughs,
and  craftily  feign  poverty  in  order  to  avoid  a  fair  assess-
ment, he  shall  immediately,  on  detection,  suffer  death,
and  his  property  be  confiscated.

111.  4.    [Speaking    of   the    period    embracing    the
reigns  of  Decius,   Gallus,  iEniilianus,  Vale-
rian, and  Gallienus :]    From  the  great  secular  from  war,  fain-
games    celebrated    by    Philip    to    the    death  lence.  b^.  vl
of    the    emperor     Gallienus,    there    elapsed

twenty  years  of  shame  and  misfortune.  During  this
calamitous  period,  every  instant  of  time  was  marked,
every  province  of  the  Roman  world  was  afflicted  by  bar-
barous invaders  and  military  tyrants,  and  the  wearied
empire  seemed  to  approach  the  last  and  fatal  moment  of

its  dissolution The  whole  period  [speaking  of

the  reigns  of  Valerian  and  Gallienus]  was  one  uninter-
rupted series  of  confusion  and  calamity.  The  Roman
empire  was,  at  the  same  time,  and  on  every  side,
attacked  by  the  blind  fury  of  foreign  invaders  and  the

wild  ambition  of  domestic  usurpers A  long  and

general  famine  was  a  calamity  of  a  more  serious  kind.
It  was  the  inevitable  consequence  of  rapine  and  oppres-
sion, which  extirpated  the  produce  of  the  present,  and

the  hope  of  future  harvests Famine  is  almost

always  followed  by  epidemical  diseases,  the  eifect  of
scanty  and  unwholesome  food.  Other  causes  must,  how-
ever, have  contributed  to  the  furious  plague,  which,
from  the  year  two  hundred  and  fifty  to  the  year  two
hundred  and  sixty-five,  raged  without  interruption  in
every  province,  every  city,  and  almost  every  family  in
the  Roman  empire.  During  some  time,  five  thousand
persons  died  daily  at  Rome ;  and  many  towns  that  had
escaped  the  hands  of  the  barbarians  were  entirely  de-
populated  [After  computing  the  deaths  at

Alexandria].  Could  one  venture  to  extend  the  analogy
to  the  other  provinces,  we  might  suspect  that  war,  pesti-
lence, and  famine  had  consumed  in  a  few  years  the
moiety  of  the  human  species.

112.  5.  The  design  of  Diocletian's  persecution  was


3C8  FULFILMENT     OF    PROPHECY.  [113.


pcrsecuti  n       ^ie  destruction  °f   Christianity The

christians.         edict  against  Christians  was  designed  for  a

Rev.  vi.  9-11.  ^  O

general  law  of  the  whole  empire.  .  .  .  The
resentment,  or  the  fears  of  Diocletian,  at  length  trans-
ported him  beyond  the  bounds  of  moderation,  which
he  had  hitherto  preserved,  and  he  declared,  in  a  series
of  edicts,  his  intention  of  abolishing  the  Christian  name.
By  the  first  of  these  edicts,  the  governors  of  the  pro-
vinces were  directed  to  apprehend  all  persons  of  the
ecclesiastical  order ;  and  the  prisons,  destined  for  the
vilest  criminals,  were  soon  filled  with  a  multitude  of
bishops,  presbyters,  deacons,  and  exorcists.  By  a  second
edict,  the  magistrates  were  commanded  to  employ  every
method  of  severity  which  might  reclaim  them  from  their
odious  superstition,  and  oblige  them  to  return  to  the
established  worship  of  the  gods.  This  rigorous  order
was  extended,  by  a  subsequent  edict,  to  the  whole  body
of  Christians,  who  were  exposed  to  a  violent  and  general
persecution.  Instead  of  those  solitary  restraints  which
had  required  the  direct  and  solemn  testimony  of  an
accuser,  it  became  the  duty  as  well  as  the  interest  of  the
imperial  officers  to  discover,  to  pursue,  and  to  torment
the  most  obnoxious  among  the  faithful.  Heavy  penal-
ties were  denounced  against  all  who  should  presume  to
save  a  proscribed  sectary  from  the  just  indignation  of
the  gods  and  of  the  emperors.

113.  6.  A.  D.  865.  In  the  second  year  of  the  reign
of  Valentinian  and  Valens,  on  the  morn-
in  the  appre-  ing  of  the  twenty-first  day  of  July,  the
vine  judgments,  greatest  part  of  the  Roman  world  was  shaken
by  a  violent  and  destructive  earthquake.  .  .  .
The  impression  was  communicated  to  the  waters ;  the
shores  of  the  Mediterranean  were  left  dry  by  the  sudden
retreat  of  the  sea ;  great  quantities  of  fish  were  caught
with  the  hand ;  large  vessels  were  stranded  on  the  mud ;
and  a  curious  spectator  amused  his  eye,  or  rather  his
fancy,  by  contemplating  the  various  appearances  of
valleys  and  mountains,  which  had  never  before,  since
the  formation  of  the  globe,  been  exposed  to  the  sun.
But  the  tide  soon  returned,  with  the  weight  of  an  im-


113.]     IN    TliE     REVELATION     OF    JOHN.         369

mense  and  irresistible  deluge,  which  was  severely  felt
on  the  coasts  of  Sicily,  of  Dalmatia,  of  Greece,  and  of
Egypt :  large  boats  were  transported  and  lodged  on  the
roofs  of  houses,  or  at  the  distance  of  two  miles  from  the
shore ;  the  people  with  their  habitations  were  swept
away  by  the  waters ;  and  the  city  of  Alexandria  annually
commemorated  the  day  on  which  fifty  thousand  persons
had  lost  their  lives  in  the  inundation.  This  calamity,
the  report  of  which  was  magnified  from  one  province  to
another,  astonished  and  terrified  the  subjects  of  Rome ;
and  their  affrighted  imagination  enlarged  the  real  extent
of  the  momentary  evil.  They  recollected  the  preceding
earthquakes  which  had  subverted  the  cities  of  Palestine
and  Bithynia ;  they  considered  these  alarming  strokes
as  the  prelude  only  of  still  more  dreadful  calamities,
and  their  fearful  vanity  was  disposed  to  confound  the
symptoms  of  a  declining  empire  and  a  sinking  world.  .  .  .
In  the  disastrous  period  of  the  fall  of  the  Roman  empire,
which  may  justly  be  dated  from  the  reign  of  Valens,  the
happiness  and  security  of  each  individual  was  personally
attacked ;  and  the  arts  and  labors  of  ages  were  rudely
defaced  by  the  barbarians  of  Scythia  and  Germany.  .  .
[Describing  the  consternation  produced  by  the  invasion
of  Alaric,  king  of  the  Visigoths],  The  apprehensions
of  each  individual  were  increased  in  just  proportion  to
the  measure  of  his  fortune  ;  and  the  most  timid,  who  had
already  embarked  their  valuable  effects,  meditated  their
escape  to  the  island  of  Sicily,  or  to  the  African  coast.
The  public  distress  was  aggravated  by  the  fears  and
reproaches  of  superstition.  Every  hour  produced  some
horrid  tale  of  strange  and  particular  accidents ;  the
pagans  deplored  the  neglect  of  omens,  and  the  interrup-
tion of  sacrifices ;  but  the  Christians  still  derived  some
comfort  from  the  powerful  intercession  of  the  saints  and
martyrs.

[Speaking  of  the  time  of  Constantine],  The  threaten-
ing  tempest    of  barbarians,  which   so    soon
subverted  the  foundations  of  Roman  great-  p?."»ded.  Rev.
ness,  was  still  repelled,  or  suspended  on  the
frontiers.


370  FULFILMENT     OF     PROPHECY.  [114.

114.  7.  The  correspondence  of  the  nations  was,  in
that  age,  so  imperfect  and  precarious,  that
Goths.  Rev.  the  revolutions  of  the  North  might  escape  the
knowledge  of  the  court  of  Ravenna ;  till  the
dark  cloud,  which  was  collected  along  the  coast  of  the
Baltic,  burst  in  thunder  upon  the  banks  of  the  Upper
Danube.  The  king  of  the  confederate  Germans  passed,
without  resistance,  the  Alps,  the  Po,  and  the  Apennines  ;
leaving  on  the  one  hand  the  inaccessible  palace  of
Honorius  securely  buried  among  the  marshes  of  Ra-
venna ;  and  on  the  other  the  camp  of  Stilicho,  who  had
fixed  his  head-quarters  at  Ticinium,  or  Pavia,  but  who
seems  to  have  avoided  a  decisive  battle  till  he  had  as-
sembled his  distant  forces.  Many  cities  of  Italy  were
pillaged,  or  destroyed.  The  senate  and  people  trem-
bled at  their  approach  within  a  hundred  and  eighty
miles  of  Rome ;  and  anxiously  compared  the  danger
which  they  had  escaped,  to  the  new  perils  to  which  they
were  exposed.  .  .  The  king  of  the  Goths,  who  no  longer
dissembled  his  appetite  for  plunder  and  revenge,  ap-
peared in  arms  under  the  walls  of  the  capital ;  and  the
trembling  senate,  without  any  hope  of  relief,  prepared,
by  a  desperate  effort,  to  delay  the  ruin  of  their  country.
But  they  were  unable  to  guard  against  the  conspiracy
of  their  slaves  and  domestics ;  who  either  from  birth  or
interest  were  attached  to  the  cause  of  the  enemy.  At
the  hour  of  midnight,  the  Salarian  gate  was  silently
opened,  and  the  inhabitants  were  awakened  by  the
tremendous  sound  of  the  Gothic  trumpet.  Eleven  hun-
dred and  sixty-three  years  after  the  foundation  of  Rome,
the  imperial  city,' which  had  subdued  and  civilized  so  con-
siderable a  part  of  mankind,  was  delivered  to  the  licen-
tious fury  of  the  tribes  of  Germany  and  Scythia.  .  .  .
This  scene  of  peace  and  plenty  [along  the  banks  of  the
Rhine]  was  suddenly  changed  into  a  desert ;  and  the
prospect  of  the  smoking  ruins  could  alone  distinguish
the  solitude  of  nature  from  the  desolation  of  man.  The
flourishing  city  of  Mentz  was  surprised  and  destroyed;
and  many  thousand  Christians  were  inhumanly  mas-
Sacred  in  the  church.     Worms  perished  after  a  long  and


115.]      IN     THE     REVELATION     OF     JOHN.  37  J.

obstinate  siege  ;  Strasburg,  Spires,  Rheims,  Tournay,
Arras,  Amiens,  experienced  the  cruel  oppression  of  the
German  yoke  ;  and  the  consuming  flames  of  war  spread
from  the  banks  of  the  Rhine  over  the  greatest  part  of
the  seventeen  provinces  of  Gaul.  That  rich  and  exten-
sive country,  as  far  as  the  ocean,  the  Alps,  and  the
Pyrenees,  was  delivered  to  the  barbarians,  who  drove
before  them,  in  a  promiscuous  crowd,  the  bishop,  the
senator,  and  the  virgin,  laden  with  the  spoils  of  their
houses  and  altars.

115.  8.  The  experience  of  navigation,  and  perhaps
the  prospect  of  Africa,  encouraged  the  Van-
dals to  accept  the  invitation  which  they  thevandais.
received  from  Count  Boniface  [to  aid  him  in
his  apprehended  difficulties  with  Rome,  and  to  enter  into
an  alliance  with  him  by  settling  permanently  in  Africa]  ;
and  the  death  of  Genseric  [the  Vandal  king]  served
only  to  forward  and  animate  the  bold  enterprise.  In
the  room  of  a  prince,  not  conspicuous  for  any  supe-
rior powers  of  the  mind  or  body,  they  acquired  his
bastard  brother,  the  terrible  Genseric,  a  name,  which,
in  the  destruction  of  the  Roman  empire,  has  deserved  an
equal  rank  with  the  names  of  Alaric  and  Attila.  .  .  .
The  discovery  and  conquest  of  the  Black  nations  [in
Africa],  that  might  dwell  beneath  the  torrid  zone,  could
not  tempt  the  rational  ambition  of  Genseric ;  but  he
cast  his  eyes  towards  the  sea ;  he  resolved  to  create  a
naval  power,  and  his  bold  resolution  was  executed  with
steady  and  active  perseverance.  The  woods  of  Mount
Atlas  afforded  an  inexhaustible  supply  of  timber ;  his
new  subjects  were  skilled  in  the  arts  of  navigation  and
ship-building ;  he  animated  his  daring  Vandals  to  em-
brace a  mode  of  warfare  which  would  render  any  mari-
time country  accessible  to  their  arms ;  the  Moors  and
Africans  were  allured  by  the  hope  of  plunder  ;  and  after
an  interval  of  six  centuries,  the  fleets  that  issued  from
the  port  of  Carthage  again  claimed  the  empire  of  the
Mediterranean.  The  success  of  the  Vandals,  the  con-
quest of  Sicily,  the  sack  of  Palermo,  and  the  frequent
descents  on  the  coast  of  Lucania,  awakened  and  alarmed
32


372  FULFILMENT     OF    PROPHECY.  [116.

the  mother  of  Valentinian,  and  the  sister  of  Theodosius.
Alliances  were  formed ;  and  armaments,  expensive  and
ineffectual,  were  prepared  for  the  destruction  of  the  com-
mon enemy,  who  reserved  his  courage  to  encounter  those
dangers  which  his  policy  could  not  prevent  or  elude.
The  revolutions  of  the  palace,  which  left  the  Western
empire  without  a  defender,  and  without  a  lawful  prince,
dispelled  the  apprehension,  and  stimulated  the  avarice
of  Genseric.  He  immediately  equipped  a  numerous
fleet  of  Vandals  and  Moors,  and  cast  anchor  at  the
mouth  of  the  Tiber.  On  the  third  day  after  the  tumult"
[a.  d.  455,  on  the  death  of  Maximus],  Genseric  boldly
advanced  from  the  port  of  Ostia  to  the  gates  of  the  de-
fenceless city.  Instead  of  a  sally  of  the  Roman  youth,
there  issued  from  the  gates  an  unarmed  and  venerable
procession  of  the  bishop  at  the  head  of  his  clergy.  But
Rome  and  its  inhabitants  were  delivered  to  the  licen-
tiousness of  the  Vandals  and  the  Moors,  whose  blind
passions  revenged  the  injuries  of  Carthage.  The  pillage
lasted  fourteen  days  and  nights ;  and  all  that  yet  re-
mained of  public  or  private  wealth,  of  sacred  or  profane
treasure,  was  diligently  transported  to  the  vessels  of
Genseric.

116.  9.  The  favorite  of  Mars  [as  Attila  was  re-
garded] soon  acquired,  a  sacred  character,
Rev'viii.  which  rendered  his  conquests  more  easy  and
more  permanent ;  and  the  barbarian  princes
confessed,  in  the  language  of  devotion  or  flattery,  that
they  could  not  presume  to  gaze,  with  a  steady  eye,  on

the  divine  majesty  of  the  king  of  the  Huns In

the  reign  of  Attila,  the  Huns  again  became  the  terror
of  the  world  ;  and  I  shall  now  describe  the  character
and  actions  of  that  formidable  barbarian  who  alternately
invaded  and  insulted  the  east  and  the  west,  and  urged
the  rapid  downfall  of  the  Roman  empire.  .  .  .  The
indignant  lover  [Attila]  took  the  field,  passed  the  Alps,
invaded  Italy,  and  besieged  Aquileia  with  an  innumera-
ble host  of  barbarians.  ...  A  large  breach  was  made
in  the  part  of  the  wall  where  the  stork  had  taken  her
flight ;  the  Huns  marched  to  the  assault  with  irresistible


Aftila's  inva
10,  11


117.]      IN    THE    REVELATION    OF    JOHN.         373

fury ;  and  the  succeeding  generation  could  scarcely  dis-
cover the  ruins  of  Aquileia.  After  this  dreadful  chastise-
ment, Attila  pursued  his  march ;  and  as  he  passed,  the
cities  of  Altinum,  Concordia,  and  Padua,  were  reduced
into  heaps  of  stones  and  ashes.  The  inland  towns,
Vicenza,  Verona,  and  Bergamo,  were  exposed  to  the
rapacious  cruelty  of  the  Huns.  Milan  and  Pavia  sub-
mitted, without  resistance,  to  the  loss  of  their  wealth,
and  applauded  the  unusual  clemency  which  preserved
from  the  flames  the  public,  as  well  as  the  private  build-
ings, and  spared  the  lives  of  the  captive  multitude.  The
popular  traditions  of  Comum,  Turin,  or  Modena,  may
be  justly  suspected,  yet  they  concur  with  more  authentic
evidence  to  prove  that  Attila  spread  his  ravages  over
the  rich  plains  of  modern  Lombardy,  which  are  divided
by  the  Po,  and  bounded  by  the  Alps  and  the  Apennines.
....  The  revolution,  which  subverted  the  empire  of
the  Huns,  established  the  fame  of  Attila,  whose  genius
alone  had  sustained  the  huge  and  disjointed  fabric.

117.     10.  Odoacer  led  a  wandering  life  among  the
barbarians   of    Noricum,  with   a   mind    and
fortune  suited  to  the  most  desperate  adven-  power  trans-

-.        ,  i        i       -i    r*         i     i   •  i  1         ferred  to  barba-

tures ;  and  when  he  had  fixed  his  choice  he  rians.  Rev.
privily  visited  the  cell  of  Severinus,  the
popular  saint  of  the  country,  to  solicit  his  approbation
and  blessing.  The  lowness  of  the  door  would  not
admit  the  lofty  stature  of  Odoacer ;  he  was  obliged  to
stoop ;  but  in  that  humble  attitude  the  saint  could  dis-
cern the  symptoms  of  his  future  greatness  ;  and  address-
ing him  in  a  prophetic  tone,  "  Pursue,"  said  he,  "your
design  ;  proceed  to  Italy  ;  you  will  cast  away  the  coarse
garment  of  skins  ;  and  your  wealth  will  be  adequate  to
the  liberality  of  your  mind."  The  barbarian,  whose
daring  spirit  accepted  and  ratified  this  prediction,  was
admitted  into  the  service  of  the  Western  empire,  and
soon  obtained  an  honorable  rank  in  the  guards.  His
manners  were  gradually  polished,  his  military  skill  im-
proved, and  the  confederates  of  Italy  would  not  have
elected  him  for  their  general  unless  the  exploits  of  Odoa-
cer had  established  a  high  opinion  of  his  courage  and


374  FULFILMENT     OF     PROPHECY.  [118.

capacity.  Their  military  acclamations  saluted  him
with  the  title  of  king  ;  but  he  abstained  during  his
whole  reign  from  the  use  of  the  purple  and  diadem,  lest
he  should  offend  those  princes,  whose  subjects,  by  their
accidental  mixture,  had  formed  the  victorious  army
which  time   and  policy  might  insensibly  unite  into   a

great    nation Odoacer  was  the  first  barbarian

who  reigned  in  Italy,  over  a  people  who  had  once
asserted  their  superiority  above  the  rest  of  mankind.
....  Pope  Gelasius  was  a  subject  of  Odoacer;  and
he  affirms  with  strong  exaggeration,  that  in  Aemelia,
Tuscany,  and  the  adjacent  provinces,  the  human  species
was  almost  extirpated.  One-third  of  those  ample  estates,
to  which  the  ruin  of  Italy  is  originally  imputed,  was
extorted  for  the  use  of  the  conquerors.

118.  11.  One  hundred  years  after  his  [Moham-
The  Saracens,  med's]  flight  from  Mecca,  the  arms  and
Rev.  ix.  i-u.  reigns  0f  his  successors  extended  from  India
to  the  Atlantic  ocean,  over  the  various  and  distant  pro-
vinces, which  may  be  comprised  under  the  names  of
Persia,  Syria,  Egypt,  Africa,  and  Spain.

\_Order  given  to  the  Saracens  when  invading  Syria. —
Remember  that  you  are  always  in  the  presence  of  God,
on  the  verge  of  death,  in  the  assurance  of  judgment,
and  the  hope  of  paradise.  Avoid  injustice  and  oppres-
sion, consult  with  your  brethren,  and  study  to  procure
the  love  and  confidence  of  your  troops.  When  you
fight  the  battle  of  the  Lord,  acquit  yourselves  like  men,
vegetation  and  without  turning  your  backs ;  but  let  not  the
spaced. lifKev.  victory  be  stained  with  the  blood  of  women
ix.  4,5.  or   children.      Destroy  no    palm  trees,   nor

burn  any  fields  of  corn.  Cut  down  no  fruit  trees,  nor
do  any  mischief  to  cattle  only  such  as  you  kill  to  eat.
When  you  make  any  covenant  or  article,  stand  to  it,
and  be  as  good  as  your  word.  As  you  go  on  you  will
find  some  religious  persons  who  live  retired  in  monaste-
ries, and  propose  to  themselves  to  serve  God  in  that
way ;  let  them  alone  and  neither  kill  them.]  ....  In
the  siege  of  Tayaf,  sixty  miles  from  Mecca,  Mahomet
violated  his  own  laws,  by  the  extirpation  of  the  fruit


118.]       IN     THE     REVELATION     OF     JOHN.  375

trees The  means  of  persuasion  had  been  tried,

the  season  of  forbearance  was  elapsed,  and  he  was  now
commanded  to  propagate  his  religion  by  the  sword,  to
destroy  the  monuments  of  idolatry,  and  with-

*■  **  Idolaters  de-

out  regarding  the  sanctity  of  days  or  months,  stayed.  Rev.
to    pursue   the   unbelieving   nations    of    the
earth  ....  The  fair  option  of  friendship,  or  submis-
sion, or  battle,  was  proposed  to  the  enemies  of  Moham-
med  A    victorious   line    of  march   had   been

prolonged  above  a  thousand  miles  from  the  rock  of
Gibraltar  to  the  mouth  of  the  Loire ;  the  repetition  of
an  equal  space  would  have  carried  the  Saracens  to  the
confines  of  Poland,  and  the  highlands  of  Scotland.  The
Rhine  is  not  more  impassable  than  the  Nile  or  the
Euphrates,  and  the  Arabian  fleet  might  have  sailed
without  a  naval  combat  into  the  mouth  of  the  Thames.
Perhaps  the  interpretation  of  the  Koran  would  now  be
taught  in  the  schools  of  Oxford,  and  her  pulpits  might
demonstrate  to  a  circumcised  people,  the  sanctity  and

truth  of  the  revelations  of  Mahomet The  calm

historian  who  strives  to  follow  the  rapid  course  of  the
Saracens,  must  study  to  explain,  by  what  means  the
church  and  state  were  saved  from  this  impending  and,
as  it  should  seem,  inevitable  danger.

[A  change  under  the  reign  of  the  caliph  Abdalrah-
man.]     The  luxury  of  the  caliphs,  so  useless  to  their
private  happiness,  relaxed  the    nerves,  and
terminated  the  progress  of  the  Arabian  em-  menting.it

m  i  j  -    •'.         i  ,      i        i     length  term ma-

pire.  lemporal  and  spiritual  conquest  had  ted.  Rev.  ix.  5,
been  the  sole  occupation  of  the  successors  of
Mahomet ;  and  after  supplying  themselves  with  the
necessaries  of  life,  the  whole  revenue  was  scrupulously
devoted  to  that  salutary  work.  The  Abassides  were
impoverished  by  the  multitude  of  their  wants,  and  their
contempt  of  economy.  Instead  of  pursuing  the  great
object  of  ambition,  their  leisure,  their  affections,  and
the  powers  of  their  minds,  were  diverted  by  pomp  and
pleasure :  the  rewards  of  valor  were  embezzled  by
women  and  eunuchs,  and  the  royal  camp  was  encum-
bered by  the  luxury  of  the  palace.  A  similar  temper
32*


376  FULFILMENT     OF    PROPHECY.  [119.

was  diffused  among  the  subjects  of  the  caliph.  Their
stern  enthusiasm  was  softened  by  time  and  prosperity  ;
they  sought  riches  in  the  occupations  of  industry,  fame
in  the  pursuits  of  literature,  and  happiness  in  the  tran-
quillity of  domestic  life.  War  was  no  longer  the  passion
of  the  Saracens  ;  and  the  increase  of  pay,  the  repetition
of  donatives,  were  insufficient  to  allure  the  posterity
of  those  voluntary  champions  who  had  crowded  to  the
standard  of  Abubeker  and  Omar  for  the  hopes  of  the

spoil    of  paradise Their   mutual    designs    or

declarations  of  war  evaporated  without  effect;  but
instead  of  opening  a  door  to  the  conquest  of  Europe,
Spain  was  dissevered  from  the  trunk  of  the  monarchy,
engaged  in  perpetual  hostility  with  the  East,  and
inclined  to  peace  and  friendship  with  the  Christian
sovereigns  of  Constantinople  and  France.

119.  12.  Twenty-five  years  after  the  death  of
The  Turks.  Basil  [the  Greek  emperor],  his  successors
Rev.  ix.  13-20.  were  suddenly  assaulted  by  an  unknown  race
of  barbarians,  who  united  the  Scythian  valor  with  the
fanaticism  of  new  proselytes,  and  the  art  and  riches  of
a  powerful  monarchy,  (a)  The  myriads  of  Turkish  horse

overspread  a  frontier  of  six  hundred  miles,
hodmen.         from  Taurus  to  Arzeroum,  and  the  blood  of

one  hundred  and  thirty  thousand  Christians
was  a  grateful  sacrifice  to  the  Arabian  prophet.  Yet
the  arms  of  Togrul  did  not  make  any  deep  or  lasting
impression  on  the  Greek  empire.  The  torrent  rolled
away  from  the  open  country ;  the  sultan  retired  without
glory  or  success  from  the  siege  of  an  Armenian  city ;
the  obscure  hostilities  were  continued  or  suspended  with
a  vicissitude  of  events ;  and  the  bravery  of  the  Mace-
donian legions  renewed  the  fame  of  the  conqueror  of
Asia.  The  name  of  Alp  Arslan,  the  valiant  lion,  is  ex-
Heads  onions,  pressive  of  the  popular  idea  of  the  perfection
Rev.  ix.  17.  0f  man  .  ancj  ^e  successor  of  Togrul  dis-
played the  fierceness  and  generosity  of  the  royal  animal.

He  passed  the  Euphrates  at  the  head  of  the
Euphrates.        Turkish   cavalry,  and   entered   Cesarea,  the

metropolis  of  Cappadocia,   to  which  he  had


102.]      IN     THE     REVELATION     OF    JOHN.          377

been  attracted  by  the  fame  and  wealth  of  the  temple  of

St.  Basil The  more  rustic,  perhaps  the  wisest,

portion  of  the  Turkmans,  continued  to  dwell  in  the
tents  of  their  ancestors ;  and  from  the  Oxus  to  the
Euphrates,  these  military  colonies  were  protected  and

propagated  by  their  native  princes As  the

supreme  head  of  his  family  and  nation,  the  great  sultan
of  Persia  commanded  the  obedience  and  tribute  of  his
royal  brethren :  the  thrones  of  Kerman  and  Nice,  of
Aleppo  and  Damascus ;  the  Atabeks  and  emirs  of  Syria
and  Mesopotamia,  erected  their  standards  under  the
shadow  of  his  sceptre,  and  the  hordes  of  Turkmans
overspread  the  plains  of  Western  Asia.  After  the
death  of  Malek,  the  bands  of  union  and  subordination
were  gradually  relaxed  and  dissolved ;  the  indulgence
of  the  house  of  Seljuk  invested  their  slaves  with  the
inheritance  of  kingdoms,  and  in  the  Oriental  style,  a
crowd  of  princes  arose  from  the  dust  of  their  feet.

Among  the  implements  of  destruction,  he  Firsts  of  gun-
[the  Turkish  sultan]  studied  with  peculiar  ?,0ewd Eev.  Lat"
care  the  recent  and  tremendous  discovery  of  17, 18-
the  Latins ;  and  his  artillery  surpassed  whatever  had
yet  appeared  in  the  world.  [At  the  siege  of  Constanti-
nople,] The  incessant  volleys  of  lances  and  arrows
were  accompanied  with  the  smoke,  the  sound,  and  the

fire   of  their  musketry  and   cannon The  long

order  of  the  Turkish  artillery  was  pointed  against  the
walls ;  fourteen  batteries  thundered  at  once  on  the  most
accessible  places  ;  and  of  one  of  these  it  was  ambigu-
ously expressed  that  it  was  mounted  with  one  hundred
and  thirty  guns,  and  that  it  discharged  one  hundred  and

thirty  bullets From  the  lines,  the  galleys,  and

the  bridge,  the  Ottoman  artillery  thundered  on  all  sides  ;
and  the  camp  and  city,  the  Greeks  and  the  Turks,  were
involved  in  a  cloud  of  smoke  which  could  only  be  dis-
pelled by  the  final  deliverance  or  destruction  of  the
Roman  empire.

120.    13.  It  was  after  the  Nicene  Synod,  and  un-


378  FULFILMENT     OF     PROPHECY.         [120.

The  rope  re-  der  the  reign  of  the  pious  Irene,  that  the
terneSEmpiJIes"  popes  consummated  the  separation  of  Rome
eov.  xiii.  12.  ancj  j^aly  [from  the  Eastern  empire]  by  the
translation  of  the  empire  to  the  less  orthodox  Charle-
magne. They  were  compelled  to  choose  between  the
rival  nations ;  religion  was  not  the  sole  motive  of  their
choice ;  and  while  they  dissembled  the  failings  of  their
friends,  they  beheld  with  reluctance  and  suspicion  the
Catholic  virtues  of  their  foes.  The  difference  of  lan-
guage and  manners  had  perpetuated  the  enmity  of  the
two  capitals  [Rome  and  Constantinople]  ;  and  they  were
alienated  from  each  other  by  the  hostile  opposition  of
seventy  years.  In  that  schism,  the  Romans  had  tasted
of  freedom  and  the  popes  of  sovereignty ;  their  submis-
sion would  have  exposed  them  to  the  revenge  of  a  jealous
tyrant,  and  the  revolution  of  Italy  had  betrayed  the
impotence    as  well    as    the    tyranny  of  the  Byzantine

court [Charlemagne  was  selected].  ..."  The

title  of  patrician  was  below  the  merit  and  greatness  of
Charlemagne ;  and  it  was  only  by  reviving  the  Western
empire  that  they  could  pay  their  obligations,  or  secure
their  establishment.  By  this  decisive  measure  they
would  finally  eradicate  the  claims  of  the  Greeks ;  from
the  debasement  of  a  provincial  town  the  majesty  of
Rome  would  be  restored ;  the  Latin  Christians  would
be  united  under  a  supreme  head  in  their  ancient  metro-
polis ;  and  the  conquerors  of  the  West  wrould  receive
their  crown  from  the  successors  of  St.  Peter.  The
Roman  church  would  acquire  a  zealous  and  respectable
advocate ;  and,  under  the  shadow  of  the  Carlovingian
power,  the  bishop  might  exercise,  with  honor  and  safety,

the  government  of  the  city If  we  retrace  the

outlines  of  the  geographical  picture,  it  will  be  seen  that
the  empire  of  the  Franks  extended,  between  the  east
and  the  west,  from  the  Ebro  to  the  Elbe,  or  Vistula ;
between  the  north  and  the  south,  from  the  duchy  of
Beneventum  to  the  river  Eyder,  the  perpetual  boundary
of  Germany  and  Denmark.  Two-thirds  of  the  Western
empire  were  subject  to  Charlemagne,  and  the  deficiency
was  amply  supplied  by  his  command  of  the  inaccessible


120.]      IN     THE     REVELATION     OF     JOHN.  379

or  invincible  nations  of  Germany."  ...  On  the  festival
of  Christmas,  the  last  year  of  the  eighth  century,
Charlemagne  appeared  in  the  church  of  St.  Peter ;  and,
to  gratify  the  vanity  of  Rome,  he  exchanged  the  simple
dress  of  his  country  for  the  habit  of  a  patrician.  After
the  celebration  of  the  holy  mysteries,  Leo  suddenly
placed  a  precious  crown  on  his  head,  and  the  dome
resounded  with  the  acclamations  of  the  people,  "Long
life  and  victory  to  Charles,  the  most  pious  Augustus,
crowned  by  God  the  great  and  pacific  emperor  of  the
Romans!"  The  head  and  body  of  Charlemagne  were
consecrated  by  the  royal  unction ;  his  coronation  oath
represents  a  promise  to  maintain  the  faith  and  privileges
of  the  church;  and  the  first  fruits  are  paid  in  rich
offerings  to  the  shrine  of  the  apostle.  In  his  familiar
conversation  the  emperor  protested  his  ignorance  of  the
intentions  of  Leo,  which  he  would  have  disappointed  by
his  absence  on  that  memorable  day.  But  the  prepara-
tions of  the  ceremony  must  have  disclosed  the  secret ;
and  the  journey  of  Charlemagne  reveals  his  knowledge
and  expectation  :  he  had  acknowledged  that  the  imperial
title  was  the  object  of  his  ambition,  and  a  Roman  senate
had   pronounced  that  it  was  the  only  adequate  reward

of  his  merit  and  services From  that  memorable

era  [the  conquest  of  Italy  by  Otho],  two  maxims  of
public  jurisprudence  were  introduced  by  force,  and
ratified  by  time : — I.  That  the  prince  who  was  elected
by  the  German  Diet,  acquired  from  that  instant  the
subject  kingdoms  of  Italy  and  Rome.  II.  But  that  he
might  not  legally  assume  the  titles  of  Emperor  and
Augustus,  till  he  had  received  the  crown  from  the  hands
of  the  Roman  pontiff.


CHAPTER  III.
121.     PRETENDED  MIRACLES.

The  ancient  heathen  opposers  of  Christianity  ad-
mitted the  miracles  of  Jesus,  but  attributed  them  to
magic,  and  labored  to  adduce  examples  of  like  miracles
wrought  by  others,  who  were  supposed  to  ppssess  magic
power.  So  Hierocles  compared  the  works  of  Jesus
with  those  of  Apollonius  Tyanaeus,  who,  it  was  alleged,
cured  demoniacs,  stopped  a  plague  at  Ephesus ;  raised
a  dead  female  to  life  in  Rome,  understood  the  language
of  beasts  and  birds,  and  knew  all  human  languages
without  having  learned  them.  No  infidel  of  modern
times  will  maintain  that  Apollonius  really  wrought
miracles ;  and  the  only  question  with  which  we  are  now
concerned  is,  whether  the  testimony  on  which  these
alleged  miracles  were  accredited  is  equal  to  that  on
which  the  miracles  of  Jesus  were  believed.

Hierocles  accredited  the  miracles  of  Apollonius  on
the  sole  testimony  of  Philostratus,  who  did  not  claim  to
have  had  any  personal  knowledge  of  them,  but  who,  a
hundred  years  after  the  time  of  the  magician,  wrote  an
account  of  him  to  please  Julia  and  Caracalla,  the  former
of  whom  supplied,  in  part,  the  documents  from  which
the  account  was  prepared.  How  unlike  is  this  to  the
testimony  of  those  who  were  eye-witnesses  of  Christ's
miracles,  and  who  recorded  what  they  had  seen,  not  to
please  the  rulers  and  great  ones  of  the  earth,  but  in  the
face  of  their  frowns,  and  threats,  and  persecuting  rage  !

Apollonius  was  a  Pythagorean  philosopher,  who
lived  in  the  time  of  Vespasian.  No  writer  of  his  age,
either  pagan  or  Christian,  has  noticed  the  miracles
attributed  to  him  by  Philostratus ;  and  yet  if  such  mira-
cles had  been  wrought  at  Rome  and  Ephesus,  they  must
have  attracted  public  attention.  Moreover,  Celsus  and
Porphyry,  who  wrote  against  Christianity  before  Hiero-

(380)


122.]  PRETENDED     MIRACLES.  381

cleSj  have  failed  to  notice  the  miracles  of  Apollonius,
though  an  argument  from  them,  if  they  had  believed
their  truth,  would  have  admirably  suited  their  purpose.
Even  Philostratus  himself,  in  speaking  of  the  chief
miracle,  the  raising  of  the  young  woman  to  life,  ex-
presses doubt  whether  she  were  really  dead.  And
Hume,  in  enumerating  the  pretended  miracles  with
which  he  sought  to  disparage  the  history  of  Christ's
miracles,  has  not  included  those  attributed  to  Apollo-
nius.

From  Paley's  Evidences.

They  with  whom  we  argue  have  undoubtedly  a  right
to  select  their  own  examples.  The  instances  with  which
Mr.  Hume  has  chosen  to  confront  the  miracles  of  the
New  Testament,  and  which,  therefore,  we  are  entitled
to  regard  as  the  strongest  which  the  history  of  the  world
could  supply  to  the  inquiries  of  a  very  acute  and  learned
adversary,  are  the  three  following : —

I.  The  cure  of  a  blind  and  of  a  lame  man  of  Alexan-
dria, by  the  Emperor  Vespasian,  as  related  by  Tacitus.

II.  The  restoration  of  the  limbs  of  an  attendant  in  a
Spanish  church,  as  told  by  Cardinal  de  Retz  ;  and

III.  The  cures  said  to  be  performed  at  the  tomb  of
Abbe*  Paris,  in  the  early  part  of  the  present  century.

122.  I.  The  narrative  of  Tacitus  is  delivered  in
these  terms :  "  One  of  the  common  people  of  Alex-
andria, known  to  be  diseased  in  his  eyes,  by  the  admo-
nition of  the  god  Serapis,  whom  that  superstitious  nation
worship  above  all  other  gods,  prostrated  himself  before
the  emperor,  earnestly  imploring  from  him  a  remedy  for
his  blindness,  and  entreating  that  he  would  deign  to
anoint  with  his  spittle  his  cheeks  and  the  balls  of  his
eyes.  Another,  diseased  in  his  hand,  requested,  by  the
admonition  of  the  same  god,  that  he  might  be  touched
by  the  foot  of  the  emperor.  Vespasian  at  first  derided
and  despised  their  application ;  afterwards,  when  they
continued  to  urge  their  petitions,  he  sometimes  appeared
to  dread  the  imputation  of  vanity ;  at  other  times,  by
the  earnest  supplication  of  the  patients,  and  the  persua-


382  PRETENDED     MIRACLES.  [122.

sion  of  his  flatterers,  to  be  induced  to  hope  for  success.
At  length  he  commanded  an  inquiry  to  be  made  by  the
physicians  whether  such  a  blindness  and  debility  were
vincible  by  human  aid  ?  The  report  of  the  physicians
contained  various  points :  that  in  the  one,  the  power  of
vision  was  not  destroyed,  but  would  return  if  the  obsta-
cles were  removed  ;  that  in  the  other,  the  diseased  joints
might  be  restored  if  a  healing  power  were  applied ;  that
it  was  perhaps  agreeable  to  the  gods  to  do  this ;  that
the  emperor  was  elected  by  divine  assistance;  lastly,
that  the  credit  of  the  success  would  be  the  emperor's,
the  ridicule  of  the  disappointment  would  fall  upon  the
patients.  Vespasian,  believing  that  everything  was  in
the  power  of  his  fortune,  and  that  nothing  was  any
longer  incredible,  whilst  the  multitude  which  stood  by
eagerly  expected  the  event  with  a  countenance  express-
ive of  joy,  executed  what  he  was  desired  to  do.  Imme-
diately the  hand  was  restored  to  its  use,  and  light
returned  to  the  blind  man.  They  who  were  present
relate  both  these  cures,  even  at  this  time,  when  there  is
nothing  to  be  gained  by  lying."

Now,  though  Tacitus  wrote  this  account  twenty-seven
years  after  this  miracle  is  said  to  have  been  performed,
and  wrote  at  Rome  of  what  passed  at  Alexandria,  and
wrote  also  from  report :  and  although  it  does  not  appear
that  he  had  examined  the  story,  or  that  he  believed  it
(but  rather  the  contrary),  yet  I  think  his  testimony  suf-
ficient to  prove  that  such  a  transaction  took  place,  by
which  I  mean,  that  the  two  men  in  question  did  apply
to  Vespasian :  that  Vespasian  did  touch  the  diseased  in
the  manner  related ;  and  that  a  cure  was  reported  to
have  followed  the  operation.  But  the  affair  labors
under  a  strong  and  just  suspicion  that  the  whole  of  it
was  a  concerted  imposture,  brought  about  by  collusion
between  the  patients,  the  physicians,  and  the  emperor.
This  solution  is  probable,  because  there  was  everything  to
suggest,  and  everything  to  facilitate  such  a  scheme.
The  miracle  was  calculated  to  confer  honor  upon  the
emperor  and  upon  the  god  Serapis.  It  was  achieved  in
the  midst  of  the  emperor's  flatterers  and  followers  ;  in


122.]  PRETENDED     MIRACLES.  383

a  city  and  amongst  a  populace  beforehand  devoted  to
his  interest  and  to  the  worship  of  the  god ;  where  it
would  have  been  treason  and  blasphemy  together  to
have  contradicted  the  fame  of  the  cure,  or  even  to  have
questioned  it.  And,  what  is  very  observable  in  the
account  is,  that  the  report  of  the  physicians  is  just  such
a  report  as  would  have  been  made  of  a  case  in  which  no
external  marks  of  the  disease  existed,  and  which,  con-
sequently, was  capable  of  being  easily  counterfeited,
namely,  that  in  the  first  of  the  patients  the  organs  of
vision  were  not  destroyed,  that  the  weakness  of  the
second  was  in  his  joints.  The  strongest  circumstance
in  Tacitus'  narration  is,  that  the  first  patient  was  "  notus
tabe  oculorum,"  remarked  or  notorious  for  the  disease
in  his  eyes.  But  this  was  a  circumstance  which  might
have  found  its  way  into  the  story  in  its  progress  from  a
distant  country,  and  during  an  interval  of  thirty  years ;
or  it  might  be  true  that  the  malady  of  the  eyes  was
notorious,  yet  that  the  nature  and  degree  of  the  disease
had  never  been  ascertained  ;  a  case  by  no  means  uncom-
mon. The  emperor's  reserve  was  easily  affected ;  or  it
is  possible  he  might  not  be  in  the  secret.  There  does
not  seem  to  be  much  weight  in  the  observation  of  Taci-
tus, that  they  who  were  present  continued  even  then  to
relate  the  story  when  there  was  nothing  to  be  gained  by
the  lie.  It  only  proves  that  those  who  had  told  the
story  for  many  years  persisted  in  it.  The  state  of  mind
of  the  witnesses  and  spectators  at  the  time  is  the  point
to  be  attended  to.  Still  less  is  there  of  pertinency  in
Mr.  Hume's  eulogium  on  the  cautious  and  penetrating
genius  of  the  historian ;  for  it  does  not  appear  that  the
historian  believed  it.  The  terms  in  which  he  speaks  of
Serapis,  the  deity  to  whose  interposition  the  miracle  was
attributed,  scarcely  suffer  us  to  suppose  that  Tacitus
thought  the  miracle  to  be  real :  "  by  the  admonition  of
the  god  Serapis,  whom  that  superstitious  nation  (dedita
superstitionibus  gens)  worship  above  all  other  gods."
To  have  brought  this  supposed  miracle  within  the  limits
of  comparison  with  the  miracles  of  Christ,  it  ought  to
have  appeared  that  a  person  of  a  low  and  private  sta-
33  2  b


884  PRETENDED     MIRACLES.  [123.

tion,  in  the  midst  of  enemies,  with  the  whole  power  of
the  country  opposing  him,  with  every  one  around  him
prejudiced  or  interested  against  his  claims  and  character,
pretended  to  perform  these  cures,  and  required  the
spectators,  upon  the  strength  of  what  they  saw,  to  give
up  their  firmest  hopes  and  opinions,  and  follow  him
through  a  life  of  trial  and  danger ;  that  many  were  so
moved  as  to  obey  his  call,  at  the  expense  both  of  every
notion  in  which  they  had  been  brought  up,  and  of  their
ease,  safety,  and  reputation ;  and  that  by  these  begin-
nings a  change  was  produced  in  the  world  the  effects  of
which  remain  to  this  day;  a  case  both  in  its  circum-
stances and  consequences,  very  unlike  anything  we  find
in  Tacitus's  relation.

123.  II.  The  story  taken  from  the  memoirs  of  Car-
dinal de  Retz,  which  is  the  second  example  alleged  by
Mr.  Hume,  is  this :  "  In  the  church  of  Saragossa,  in
Spain,  the  canons  showed  me  a  man  whose  business  it
was  to  light  the  lamps ;  telling  me  that  he  had  been
several  years  at  the  gate  with  one  leg  only.  I  saw  him
with  two."

It  is  stated  by  Mr.  Hume,  that  the  cardinal  who
relates  this  story  did  not  believe  it:  and  it  nowhere
appears  that  he  either  examined  the  limb  or  asked  the
patient,  or,  indeed,  any  one,  a  single  question  about  the
matter.  An  artificial  leg,  wrought  with  art,  would  be
sufficient,  in  a  place  where  no  such  contrivance  had  ever
before  been  heard  of,  to  give  origin  and  currency  to  the
report.  The  ecclesiastics  of  the  place  would,  it  is  pro-
bable, favor  the  story,  inasmuch  as  it  advanced  the
honor  of  their  image  and  church.  And  if  they  patro-
nized it,  no  other  person  at  Saragossa,  in  the  middle  of
the  last  century,  would  care  to  dispute  it.  The  story,
likewise,  coincided  not  less  with  the  wishes  and  precon-
ceptions of  the  people  than  with  the  interests  of  their
ecclesiastical  rulers ;  so  that  there  was  prejudice  backed
by  authority,  and  both  operating  upon  extreme  igno-
rance, to  account  for  the  success  of  the  imposture.  If,
as  I  have  suggested,  the  contrivance  of  an  artificial
limb  was  then  new,  it  would  not  occur  to  the  cardinal


124.]  PRETENDED     MIRACLES.  385

himself  to  suspect  it ;  especially  under  the  carelessness
of  mind  with  which  he  heard  the  tale,  and  the  little
inclination  he  felt  to  scrutinize  or  expose  its  fallacy.

124.  III.  The  miracles  related  to  have  heen
wrought  at  the  tomb  of  Abbe  Paris,  admit  in  general
of  this  solution.  The  patients  who  frequented  the  tomb
were  so  affected  by  their  devotion,  their  expectation,  the
place,  the  solemnity,  and,  above  all,  by  the  sympathy
of  the  surrounding  multitude,  that  many  of  them  were
thrown  into  violent  convulsions,  which  convulsions,  in
certain  instances,  produced  a  removal  of  disorders
depending  upon  obstruction.  We  shall,  at  this  day,
have  the  less  difficulty  in  admitting  the  above  account,
because  it  is  the  very  same  as  has  lately  been  experi-
enced in  the  operations  of  animal  magnetism ;  and  the
report  of  the  French  physicians  upon  that  mysterious
remedy  is  very  applicable  to  the  present  consideration,
namely,  that  the  pretenders  to  the  art,  by  working  upon
the  imagination  of  their  patients,  were  frequently  able
to  produce  convulsions ;  that  convulsions  so  produced,
are  among  the  most  powerful,  but,  at  the  same  time,
most  uncertain  and  unmanageable  applications  to  the
human  frame  which  can  be  employed.

Circumstances  which  indicate  this  explication  in  the
case  of  the  Parisian  miracles,  are  the  following : —

1.  They  were  tentative.  Out  of  many  thousand  sick,
infirm,  and  diseased  persons  who  resorted  to  the  tomb,
the  professed  history  of  the  miracles  contains  only  nine
cures.

2.  The  convulsions  at  the  tomb  are  admitted.

3.  The  diseases  were,  for  the  most  part,  of  that  sort
which  depends  upon  inaction  and  obstruction,  as  dropsies,
palsies,  and  some  tumors.

4.  The  cures  were  gradual ;  some  patients  attending
many  days,  some  several  weeks,  and  some  several
months.

5.  The  cures  were  many  of  them  incomplete.

6.  Others  were  temporary.

So  that  all  the  wonder  we  are  called  upon  to  account
for  is,   that  out  of  an   almost  innumerable  multitude


386  PRETENDED     MIRACLES.  [124.

which  resorted  to  the  tomb  for  the  cure  of  their  com-
plaints, and  many  of  whom  were  agitated  by  strong
convulsions,  a  very  small  proportion  experienced  a  bene-
ficial change  in  their  constitution,  especially  in  the  action
of  the  nerves  and  glands.

Some  of  the  cases  alleged  do  not  require  that  we
should  have  recourse  to  this  solution.  The  first  case  in
the  catalogue  is  scarcely  distinguishable  from  the  pro-
gress of  a  natural  recovery.  It  was  that  of  a  young
man  who  labored  under  an  inflammation  of  one  eye,  and
had  lost  the  sight  of  the  other.  The  inflamed  eye  was
relieved,  but  the  blindness  of  the  other  remained.  The
inflammation  had  before  been  abated  by  medicine ;  and
the  young  man,  at  the  time  of  his  attendance  at  the
tomb,  was  using  a  lotion  of  laudanum.  And,  what  is
a  still  more  material  part  of  the  case,  the  inflammation,
after  some  interval,  returned.  Another  case  was  that
of  a  young  man  who  had  lost  his  sight  by  the  puncture
of  an  awl,  and  the  discharge  of  the  aqueous  humor
through  the  wound.  The  sight,  which  had  been  gradu-
ally returning,  was  much  improved  during  his  visit  to
the  tomb,  that  is,  probably,  in  the  same  degree  in  which
its  discharged  humor  was  replaced  by  fresh  secretions.
And  it  is  observable  that  these  two  are  the  only  cases
which,  from  their  nature,  should  seem  unlikely  to  be
affected  by  convulsions.

In  one  material  respect  I  allow  that  the  Parisian
miracles  were  different  from  those  related  by  Tacitus,
and  from  the  Spanish  miracle  of  the  Cardinal  de  Retz.
They  had  not,  like  them,  all  the  power  and  all  the  pre-
judice of  the  country  on  their  side  to  begin  with.  They
were  alleged  by  one  party  against  another,  by  the
Jansenists  against  the  Jesuits.  These  were^  of  course,
opposed  and  examined  by  their  adversaries.  The  con-
sequence of  which  examination  was,  that  many  false-
hoods were  detected,  that  Avith  something  really  extra-
ordinary much  fraud  appeared  to  be  mixed.  And  if
some  of  the  cases  upon  which  designed  misrepresentation
could  not  be  charged,  were  not  at  the  time  satisfactorily
accounted   for,   it  was   because  the  ^efficacy  of  strong


124.]  PRETENDED     MIRACLES.  387

spasmodic  affections  was  not  then  sufficiently  known.
Finally,  the  cause  of  Jansenism  did  not  rise  by  the
miracles,  but  sunk,  although  the  miracles  had  the  ante-
rior persuasion  of  all  the  numerous  adherents  of  that
cause  to  set  out  with.

These,  let  us  remember,  are  the  strongest  examples
which  the  history  of  ages  supplies.  In  none  of  them  was
the  miracle  unequivocal ;  by  none  of  them  were  estab-
lished prejudices  and  persuasions  overthrown  ;  of  none
of  them  did  the  credit  make  its  way  in  opposition  to
authority  and  power ;  by  none  of  them  were  many
induced  to  commit  themselves,  and  that  in  contradiction
to  prior  opinions,  to  a  life  of  mortification,  danger,  and
sufferings  ;  none  were  called  upon  to  attest  them  at  the
expense  of  their  fortunes  and  safety.


CHAPTER  IV.
MAHOMETANISM.

Extracts  from  the  Koran.

125.  Chapter  II.  If  ye  be  in  doubt  concerning
that  revelation  which  we  have  sent  down  unto  our  ser-
vant, produce  (a)  a  chapter  like  unto  it,  and  call  upon

your  witnesses  besides   God,   if  ye  say  truth

(b)  We  formerly  delivered  the  book  of  the  law  unto
Moses,  and  caused  apostles  to  succeed  him,  and  gave
evident   miracles   to    Jesus,    the    son    of    Mary,    and

strengthened  him  with  the  Holy  Spirit (c)  They

to  whom  we  have  given  the  book  of  the  Koran,  and  who
read  it  with  the  true  reading,  they  believe  therein ;  and

whoever  believeth  not  therein,  they  shall  perish

Moreover,  they  who  conceal  any  part  of  the  scripture
which  God  hath  sent  down  into  them,  and  sell  it  for  a
small  price,  they  shall  swallow  unto  their  bellies  nothing
but  fire ;  God  shall  not  speak  to  them  on  the  day  of
resurrection,  neither  shall  he  purify  them,  and  they  shall

suffer  a  grievous  punishment (d)  Fight  for  the

religion  of  God  against  those  who  fight  against  you ;
but  transgress  not  by  attacking  them  first,  for  God
loveth  not  the  transgressors.  And  kill  them  wherever
ye  find  them,  and  turn  them  out  of  that  whereof  they
have  dispossessed  you:  for  temptation  to  idolatry  is
more  grievous  than  slaughter ;  yet  fight  not  against
them  in  the  holy  temple,  until  they  attack  you  therein ;
but  if  they  attack  you,  slay  them  there.  This  shall  be
the  reward  of  infidels.  But  if  they  desist,  God  is  gra-
cious and  merciful.  Fight,  therefore,  against  them,
until  there  be  no  temptation  to  idolatry,  and  the  religion
be   God's ;    but  if  they   desist,   then   let   there   be  no

hostility,   except   against   the   ungodly War  is

(388)


126.]  MAHOMETANISM.  389

enjoined  you  against  the  infidels (e)  Ye  may

divorce  your  wives  twice,  and  then  either  retain  them

with  humanity,  or   dismiss  them  with  kindness

But  if  the  husband  divorce  her  a  third  time,  she  shall
not  be  lawful  for  him  again  until  she  marry  another

husband (f)  If  ye  make  your  alms  to  appear,

it  is  well ;  but  if  ye  conceal  them,  and  give  them  unto
the  poor,  this  will  be  better  for  you,  and  will  atone  for
your  sins :  and  God  is  well  informed  of  that  which
ye  do.

126.  Chapter  III.  There  is  no  God  but  God,  the
living,  the  self-subsisting :  he  hath  sent  down  unto  thee
the  book  of  the  Koran  with  truth,  confirming  that  which
was  revealed  before  it ;  for  he  had  (a)  formerly  sent
down  the  law,  and  the  gospel  a  direction  unto  men ;  and
he  has  also  sent  down  the  distinction  between  good  and
evil.  .  .  .  (b)  Ye  have  already  had  a  miracle  shown  you
in  two  armies,  which  attacked  each  other  ;  one  army
fought  for  God's  true  religion,  but  the  other  were  in-
fidels ;  they  saw  the  faithful  twice  as  many  as  them-
selves in  their  eyesight ;  for  God  strengthened  with  his
help  whom  he  pleaseth.1  ....  (c)  If  ye  be  slain  or  die
in  defence  of  the  religion  of  God ;  verily  pardon  from
God,  and  mercy,  is  better  than  what  they  heap  together
of  worldly  riches.  And  if  ye  die  or  be  slain,  verily  unto
God  shall  ye  be  gathered.


1  The  sign  or  miracle  here  meant  was  the  victory  gained  by
Mahomet,  in  the  second  year  of  the  Hegira,  over  the  idola-
trous Meccans,  headed  by  Abu  Sofian,  in  the  valley  of  Bedr,
which  is  situate  near  the  sea,  between  Mecca  and  Medina.
Mahomet's  forces  consisted  of  no  more  than  three  hundred
and  nineteen  men  ;  but  the  enemy's  army  of  near  a  thousand  ;
notwithstanding  which  odds  he  put  them  to  flight,  having  killed
seventy  of  the  principal  Koreish,  and  taken  as  many  prisoners,
with  the  loss  of  only  fourteen  of  his  own  men.  This  was  the
first  victory  obtained  by  the  prophet,  and  though  it  may  seem
no  very  considerable  action,  yet  it  was  of  great  advantage  to
him,  and  the  foundation  of  all  his  future  power  and  success.
For  which  reason  it  is  famous  in  the  Arabian  history,  and  more
than  once  vaunted  in  the  Koran  as  an  effect  of  the  divine
assistance.


390  MAHOMET  ANISM.  [129.

127.  Chapter  IV.  If  ye  fear  that  ye  shall  not  act
with  equity  towards  orphans  of  the  female  sex,  (a)  take
in  marriage  of  such  other  women  as  please  you,  two,  or
three,  or  four,  and  not  more.  But  if  ye  fear  that  ye
cannot  act  equitably  towards  so  many,  marry  one  only,

(b)  or  the  slaves  which  ye  shall  have  acquired

Ye  are  also  forbidden  to  take  to  wife  free  women  who
are  (c)  married,  except  those  women  whom  your  right

hands  shall  possess  as  slaves (d)  If  they  turn

back  from  the  faith,  take  them,  and  kill  them  wherever

ye  find  them (e)  And  for  that  they  [the  Jews]

have  not  believed  in  Jesus,  and  have  spoken  against
Mary  a  grievous  calumny ;  and  have  said,  Verily  we
have  slain  Christ  Jesus  the  son  of  Mary,  the  apostle  of
God ;  yet  they  slew  him  not,  neither  crucified  him,  but
he  was  represented  by  one  in  his  likeness ;  and  verily
they  who  disagreed  concerning  him  were  in  a  doubt  as
to  this  matter,  and  had  no  sure  knowledge  thereof,  but
followed  only  an  uncertain  opinion.  They  did  not  really
kill  him;  but  God  took  him  up  unto  himself.  ....
(f )  Believe  therefore  in  God,  and  his  apostles,  and  say
not,  There  are  three  Gods ;  forbear  this ;  it  will  be
better  for  you.  God  is  but  one  God.  Far  be  it  from
him  that  he  should  have  a  son.

128.  Chapter  V.   Our  apostles  formerly  came  unto

them,   with  evident  (a)   miracles (b)   We  have

also  sent  down  unto  thee  the  book  of  the  Koran  with
truth,  confirming  that  scripture  which  was  revealed  be-
fore it ;  and  preserving  the  same  safe  from  corruption.
.  .  .  .  (c)  They  are  surely  infidels,  who  say,  Verily  God
is  Christ  the  son  of  Mary.  .  .  .  They  are  certainly  in-
fidels, who  say,  God  is  the  third  of  three,  for  there  is

no   God,   besides   one   God Christ  the  son   of

Mary  is  no  more  than  an  apostle (d)  The  duty

of  our  apostle  is  to  preach  only.

129.  Chapter  VI.  They  have  sworn  by  God,  by  the
most  solemn  oath,  that  if  a  sign  came  unto  them,  they
would  certainly  believe  therein  :  Say,  verily,  signs  are
in  the  power  of  God  alone.


135.]  MAHOMETAN  ISM.  391

130.  Chapter  VII.  I  will  write  down  good  unto
those  ....  who  shall  follow  rny  illiterate  prophet.

131.  Chapter  IX.  Fight  against  those  who  believe
not  in  God,  .  .  .  and  profess  not  the  true  religion  ....
until  they  pay  tribute  by  right  of  subjection,  and  they

be  reduced  low Verily  God  hath  purchased  of

the  true  believers  their  souls,  and  their  substance  pro-
mising them  the  enjoyment  of  paradise  on  condition  that
they  fight  for  the  cause  of  God  ;  whether  they  slay  or
be  slain,  (a)  the  promise  for  the  same  is  assuredly  due
by  the  law,  and  the  gospel,  and  the  Koran.

132.  Chapter  X.  This  Koran  could  not  have  been
composed  by  any  except  God ;  but  it  is  a  confirmation
of  that  which  was  revealed  before  it,  and  an  explanation
of  the  scripture;  there  is  no  doubt  thereof;  sent  doivn
from  the  Lord  of  all  creatures.  Will  they  say,  Moham-
med hath  forged  it  ?  Answer,  Bring  therefore  a  chapter
like  unto  it ;  and  call  whom  you  may  to  your  assistance,
besides  God,  if  ye  speak  truth.

133.  Chapter  XI.  Will  they  say,  he  hath  forged  the
Koran  ?  Answer,  Bring  therefore  ten  chapters  like  unto
it,  forged  by  yourselves :  and  call  on  whomsoever  ye
may  to  assist  you,  except  God,  if  ye  speak  truth.   .   .  .

134.  Chapter  XII.  [After  narrating  the  history  of
Joseph  with  many  variations  from  the  Bible  account — ],
This  is  a  secret  history  which  we  reveal  unto  thee,
0  Mohammed,  although  thou  wast  not  present  with  the
brethren  of  Joseph,  when  they  concerted  their  design,
and  contrived  a  plot  against  him.

135.  Chapter  XIII.  The  infidels  say,  Unless  a  sign
be  sent  down  unto  him  from  his  Lord,  we  will  not  be-
lieve.    Thou  art  commissioned  to  be  a  preacher  only,

and  not  a  worker  of  miracles The  infidels  say,

Unless  a  sign  be  sent  down  unto  him  from  his  Lord,  we
will  not  believe.  Answer,  Verily  God  will  lead  into
error  whom  he  pleaseth,  and  .will  direct  unto  himself
him  who  repenteth,  and  those  who  believe,  and  whose
hearts  rest  securely  in  the  meditation  of  God ;  shall  not


392  M  AXIOM  ET  AN  ISM.  [137.

men's  hearts  rest  securely  in  the  meditation  of  God?  . . .

■  Though  a  Koran  were  revealed  by  which  mountains

should  be  removed,  or  the  earth  cleaved  in  sunder,  or

the  dead  be  caused  to  speak,  it  would  be  in  vain

Moreover,  whether  we  cause  thee  to  see  any  part  of  that
punishment  wherewith  we  have  threatened  them,  or  (a)
whether  we  cause  thee  to  die  before  it  be  inflicted  on
them,  verily  unto  thee  belongeth  preaching  only,  and
unto  us  inquisition.

136.  Chapter  XV.  The  Meccans  say,  0  thou  to
whom  the  admonition  hath  been  sent  down,  thou  art
certainly  possessed  with  a  devil ;  wouldst  thou  not  have
come  unto  us  with  an  attendance  of  angels  if  thou  hadst
spoken  truth  ?  Answer,  We  send  not  down  the  angels
unless  on  a  just  occasion ;  nor  should  they  then  be  re-
spited any  longer.  We  have  surely  sent  down  the
Koran ;  and  we  will  certainly  preserve  the  same  from

corruption If  we  should  open  a  gate  of  heaven

above  them,  and  they  should  ascend  thereto  all  the  day
long,  they  should  rather  say,  Our  eyes  are  only  dazzled  ;
or  rather  we  are  a  people  deluded  by  enchantments.
....  (a)  But  if  they  turn  back,   verily   thy  duty  is

public  preaching  only We  also  know  that  they

say,  Verily,  a  certain  man  teacheth  him  to  compose  the
Koran.  The  tongue  of  the  person  unto  whom  they
incline  is  a  foreign  tongue ;  but  this,  wherein  the  Koran
is  Written,  is  the  perspicuous  Arabic  tongue.

137.  Chapter  XVII.  Praise  be  unto  him  who  trans-
ported his  servant  by  night  from  the  sacred  temple  of
Mecca  to  the  farther  temple  of  Jerusalem.  [From
whence  he  was  carried  through  the  seven  heavens  to
the  presence  of  God,  and  brought  back  again  to  Mecca
the  same  night.1]  ....  (a)  Nothing  hindered  us  from

1  It  is  a  dispute  among  the  Mahometan  divines  whether  their
prophet's  night  journey  was  really  performed  by  him  corpo-
really, or  whether  it  was  only  a  dream  or  a  vision.  Some  think
the  whole  was  no  more  than  a  vision  ;  and  allege  an  express
tradition  of  Moawiyah,  one  of  Mahomet's  successors,  to  that
purpose.  Others  suppose  he  was  carried  bodily  to  Jerusalem,
but  no  further ;  and  that  he  ascended  thence  to  heaven  in  spirit


140.]  MAHOMETANISM.  393

sending   thee   with   miracles,    except   that   the  former
nations  have  charged  them  with  imposture.

138.  Chapter  XIX.  [After  narrating  the  concep-
tion and  birth  of  Jesus,  with  many  and  great  variations
from  the  New  Testament  account,  the  Koran  puts  words
in  the  mouth  of  the  new-born  infant.]  Whereupon  the
child  said,  Verily,  I  am  the  servant  of  God ;  he  hath
given  me  the  book  of  the  gospel,  and  hath  appointed
me  a  prophet.  And  he  hath  made  me  blessed  whereso-
ever I  shall  be ;  and  hath  commanded  me  to  observe
prayer,  and  to  give  alms,  so  long  as  I  shall  live ;  and  he
hath  made  me  dutiful  towards  my  mother,  and  hath  not
made  me  proud  or  unhappy.  And  peace  be  on  me  the
day  whereon  I  was  born,  and  the  day  whereon  I  shall
die,  and  the  day  whereon  I  shall  be  raised  to  life.  This
was  Jesus,  the  son  of  Mary ;  the  Word  of  truth,  con-
cerning whom  they  doubt.

139.  Chapter  XXI.  But  they  say  the  Koran  is
a  confused  heap  of  dreams ;  nay,  he  hath  forged  it ;
nay,  he  is  a  poet ;  let  him  come  unto  us  therefore  with
some  miracle,  (a)  in  like  manner  as  the  former  prophets
were  sent.  None  of  the  cities  which  we  have  destroyed
believed  the  miracles  which  they  saw  performed  before
them  ;  will  they  therefore  believe  if  they  see  a  miracle  ?

(b)  We  have  not  granted  unto  any  man  before

thee  eternal    permanency    in    this    world ;  if  thou  die,

therefore  will  they  be  immortal (c)  The  Jews

and  Christians  have  made  schisms  in  the  affair  of  their
religion  among  themselves.

140.  Chapter  XXVII.  And  Solomon  was  David's
heir  ;  and  he  said,  0  men,  we  have  been  taught  the
speech  of  birds,  and  have  had  all  things  bestowed  on  us  ;
this  is  manifest  excellence.  And  his  armies  were  gath-
ered together    unto  Solomon,   consisting    of  genii    and


only.  But  the  received  opinion  is,  that  it  was  no  vision,  but
that  he  was  actually  transported  in  the  body  to  his  journey's
end  ;  and  if  any  impossibility  be  objected,  they  think  it  a  sufficient
answer  to  say.  that  it  might  easily  be  effected  by  an  omnipotent
airent.


391  MAHOMETANISMj  [143.

men  and  birds,  and  they  were  led  into  distant  lands,
until  they  came  unto  the  valley  of  ants.  And  an  ant,
seeing  the  hosts  approaching,  said,  0  ants,  enter  ye
into  your  habitation,  lest  Solomon  and  his  army  tread
you  under  foot,  and  perceive  it  not.  .  .  .  And  he  viewed
the  birds  and  said,  What  is  the  reason  that  I  see  not  the
lapwing  ?  Is  she  absent  ?  Yerily  I  will  chastise  her
with  a  severe  chastisement,  or  I  will  put  her  to  death,
unless  she  bring  me  a  just  excuse.  And  she  tarried  not
long  before  she  presented  herself  unto  Solomon,  and
said,  I  have  viewed  a  country  which  thou  hast  not
viewed ;  and  I  come  unto  thee  from  Saba,  with  a  certain
piece  of  news.  I  found  a  woman  to  reign  over  them7
who  is  provided  with  everything  requisite  for  a  prince,
and  hath  a  magnificent  throne.  [Here  follows  the  story
of  the  queen  of  Sheba,  with  many  variations.]

141.  Chapter  XXVIII.  Yet  when  the  truth  is  come
unto  them  before  us,  they  say,  unless  he  receive  the
same  (a)  power  to  work  miracles  as  Moses  received,  we
will  not  believe.  Have  they  not  likewise  rejected  the
revelation  which  was  heretofore  given  unto  Moses  ?  .  .  .  .
Verily,  (b)  he  who  hath  given  thee  the  Koran  for  a  rule
of  faith  and  practice,  will  certainly  bring  thee  back
home  unto  Mecca.1

142.  Chapter  XXIX.  They  say,  unless  a  sign  be
sent  down  unto  him  from  his  Lord,  we  will  not  believe.
Answer :  Signs  are  in  the  power  of  God  alone ;  and  I
am  no  more  than  a  public  preacher.

143.  Chapter  XXX.  The  Greeks  have  been  over-
come by  the  Persians  in  the  nearest  part  of  the  land ;
but  after  their  defeat,  they  shall  overcome  the  others  in
their  turn,  within  a  few  years.  Unto  God  belongeth
the  disposal  of  this  matter,  both  for  what  is  past,  and
for  what  is  to  come  :  and  on  that  day  shall  the  believers

1  This  verse,  some  say,  was  revealed  to  Mahomet  when  he
arrived  at  Johfa,  in  his  flight  from  Mecca  to  Medina,  to  comfort
him,  and  still  his  complaints.  But  the  chapter  in  which  it  is
recorded  is  expressly  said  at  the  beginning  of  it  to  have  been
revealed  at  Mecca.


144.]  M  All  0  M  ET  ANISM.  395

rejoice  in  the  success  granted  by  God  ;  for  he  granteth
success  unto  whom  he  pleaseth,  and  he  is  the  mighty,
the  merciful.

144.  Chapter  XXXIII.  The  prophet  is  nigher  unto
the  true  believers  than  their  own  souls ;  and  his  wives
are  their  (a)  mothers.1  ...  0  prophet,  say  unto  thy
wives,  If  ye  seek  this  present  life,  and  the  pomp  thereof,
come,  I  will  make  a  handsome  provision  for  you,  and  I
will  dismiss  (b)  you  with  an  honourable  dismission ;  but
if  ye  seek  God  and  his  apostle,  and  the  life  to  come,
verily  God  hath  prepared  for  such  of  you  as  work  right-
eousness a  great  reward.  [This  passage  was  revealed
on  Mahomet's  wives  asking  for  more  sumptuous  clothes,
and  an  additional  allowance  for  their  expenses:  and
he  had  no  sooner  received  it  than  he  gave  them  their
option  either  to  continue  with  him,  or  to  be  divorced,
beginning  with  Ayesha,  who  chose  God  and  his  apostle,
and  the  rest  followed  her  example ;  upon  which  the
prophet  thanked  them,  and  the  following  words  were
revealed;  viz.  It  shall  not  be  lawful  for  thee  to  take,
other  women  to  wife  hereafter,  nor  to  exchange  any  of
thy  wives  for  them,  although  their  beauty  please  thee,
except  the  slaves  whom  thy  right  hand  shall  possess.
From  hence  some  have  concluded,  that  a  wife  who  has
her  option  given  her,  and  chooses  to  stay  with  her  hus-
band, shall  not  be  divorced ;  though  others  are  of  a  con-
trary opinion.]  ....  (c)  0  prophet,  we  have  allowed
thee  thy  wives  unto  whom  thou  hast  given  their  dower,
and  also  the  slaves  which  thy  right  hand  possesseth,  of
the  booty  which  God  hath  granted  thee;  and  the
daughters  of  thy  uncles,  and  the  daughters  of  thy  aunts,
both  on  thy  father's  side,  and  on  thy  mother's  side,  who
have  fled  with  thee  from  Mecca,  and  any  other  believing
woman,  if  she  give  herself  unto  the  prophet ;  in  case
the  prophet  desireth  to  take  her  to  wife.  This  is  a
peculiar  privilege  granted  unto  thee,  above  the  rest  of
the  true  believers.  .  .  .  We  know  what  we  have  or-

1  Commentators  are  of  opinion  that  the  common  people  •were
here  forbidden  to  marry  any  of  the  prophet's  wives.
34


396  M  A  H  0  M  E  T  A  N  I  S  M.  [146.

darned  them  concerning  their  wives,  and  the  slaves
which  their  right  hands  possess  :  lest  it  should  be  deemed
a  crime  in  thee  to  make  use  of  the  privilege  granted
thee  ;  for  God  is  gracious  and  merciful.  Thou  mayest
(d)  postpone  the  turn  of  such  of  thy  wives  as  thou  shalt
please,  in  being  called  to  thy  bed  ;  and  thou  mayest  take
unto  thee  her  whom  thou  shalt  please,  and  her  whom
thou  shalt  desire  of  those  whom  thou  shalt  have  before
rejected,  and  it  shall  be  no  crime  in  thee,  (e)  And
when  ye  ask  of  the  prophet's  wives  what  ye  may  have
occasion  for,  ask  it  of  them  from  behind  a  curtain.
This  will  be  more  pure  for  your  hearts  and  their  hearts.
Neither  is  it  fit  for  you  to  give  any  uneasiness  to  the
apostle  of  God,  or  to  marry  his  wives  after  him  for
ever :  for  this  would  be  a  grievous  thing  in  the  sight  of
God.

145.  Chapter  XXXVI.  We  have  not  taught  Mo-
hammed the  art  of  poetry ;  nor  is  it  expedient  for
him  to  be  a  poet.  This  book  is  no  other  than  an  admo-
nition from  God,  and  a  perspicuous  Koran.

146.  Chapter  XXXVII.  But  as  for  the  sincere  ser-
vants of  God,  they  shall  have  a  certain  provision  in
Paradise,  namely,  delicious  fruits :  and  they  shall  be
honoured ;  they  shall  be  placed  in  gardens  of  pleasure ;
leaning  on  couches,  opposite  to  one  another ;  a  cup
shall  be  carried  round  unto  them,  filled  from  a  limpid
fountain,  for  the  delight  of  those  who  drink  ;  it  shall
not  oppress  the  understanding,  neither  shall  they  be
inebriated  therewith.  And  near  them  shall  lie  the
virgins  of  paradise,  refraining  their  looks  from  behold-
ing any  besides  their  spouses,  having  large  black  eyes,
and  resembling  the  eggs  of  an  ostrich  covered  with
feathers  from  the  dust (a)  Our  word  hath  form-
erly been  given  unto  our  servants,  the  apostles  ;  that
they  shall  certainly  be  assisted  against  the  infidels,  and

that  our  armies  should  surely  be  the  conquerors

Turn  aside  from  them,  therefore,  for  a  season,  and  see;
hereafter  shall  they  see  thy  success  and  their  punish-
ment.


152.]  MAHOMETANISM.  397

147.  Chapter  XXXVIII.  But  any  army  of  the  con-
federates shall  even  here  be  put  to  flight.

148.  Chapter  XXXIX.  Verily  thou,  0  Mohammed,
shalt  die,  and*  they  also  shall  die,  and  ye  shall  debate
the  matter  with  one  another  before  your  Lord,  at  the
day  of  resurrection.

149.  Chapter  XL.  We  heretofore  gave  unto  Moses  a
direction  ;  and  we  left  as  an  inheritance  unto  the  child-
ren of  Israel,  the  book  of  the  (a)  law (b)  They

who  charge  with  falsehood  the  book  of  the  Koran,  and
the  other  scriptures,  and  revealed  doctrines  which  we
have  sent  our  former  apostles  to  preach,  shall  hereafter
know  their  folly,  when  the  collars  shall  be  on  their
necks,  and  the  chains  by  which  they  shall  be  dragged

into  hell ;  then  shall  they  be  burned  in  the  fire

(c)  Whether  we  cause  thee  to  see  any  part  of  the  punish-
ment with  which  we  have  threatened  them,  or  whether
we  cause  thee  to  die  before  thou  see  it ;  before  us  thou
shalt  be  assembled  at  the  last  day.

150.  Chapter  XLII.  They  who  have  inherited
the  scriptures  after  them  are  certainly  in  a  perplexing
doubt  concerning  the  same.     Wherefore  invite  them  to

receive  the  sure  faith and  say,  I  believe  in

all  the  scriptures  which  God  hath  sent  down  ;  and  I  am
commanded  to  establish  justice  among  you.

151.  Chapter  XLIV.  But  the  pious  shall  be  lodged
in  a  place  of  security,  among  gardens  and  fountains ;
they  shall  be  clothed  in  fine  silk,  and  in  satin ;  and  they
shall  sit  facing  one  another.  Thus  shall  it  be  :  and  we
shall  espouse  them  to  fair  damsels,  having  large  black
eyes.  In  that  place  shall  they  call  for  all  kinds  of
fruits,  in  full  security ;  they  shall  not  taste  death
therein,  after  the  first  death ;  and  God  shall  deliver
from  the  pains  of  hell;  through  the  gracious  bounty  of
thy  Lord.     This  will  be  great  felicity.

152.  Chapter  XL VI.  Say,  I  am  not  singular  among
the  apostles  ;  neither  do  I  know  what  will  be  done  with
me  or  with  you  hereafter ;  I  follow  no  other  than  what
is  revealed  unto  me ;  neither  am  I  any  more  than  a  public
warner.


398  MAHOMETANISM.  [156.

153.  Chapter  XLVIL  When  ye  encounter  the  un-
believers, (a)  strike  off  their  heads,  until  ye  have  made
a  great  slaughter  among  them ;  and  bind  them  in  bonds  ;
and  either  give  them  a  free  dismission  afterwards,  or
exact  a  ransom ;  until  the  war  shall  have  laid  down  its

arms (b)  The  description  of  Paradise,  wmich  is

promised  unto  the  pious :  therein  are  rivers  of  incor-
ruptible water ;  and  rivers  of  milk,  the  taste  whereof
changeth  not ;  and  rivers  of  wine,  pleasant  unto  those
who  drink ;  and  rivers  of  clarified  honey ;  and  therein
shall  they  have  plenty  of  all  kinds  of  fruits ;  and  pardon
from  their  Lord.

154.  Chapter  XL VIII.  Verily,  we  have  granted
thee  a  manifest  victory :  (a)  that  God  may  forgive  thee
thy  preceding  and  thy  subsequent  sin.1  .  .  .  God  pro-
mised you  (b)  many  spoils  which  ye  should  take ;  but
he  gave  you  these  by  way  of  earnest.

155.  Chapter  LIV.  The  hour  of  judgment  approach-
eth ;  and  the  moon  hath  been  split  in  sunder.2

156.  Chapter  LIX.  The  spoils  of  the  inhabitants  of
the  towns  which  God  hath  granted  to  his  apostle  are  due
unto  God  and  to  the  apostle,  and  to  him  who  is  of  kin
to  the  apostle,  and  the  orphans,  and  the  poor,  and  the
traveller ;  that  they  may  not  be  for  ever  divided  in  a
circle  among  such  of  you  as  are  rich.  What  the  apostle
shall  give  you,  that  accept ;  and  what  he  shall  forbid
you,  that  abstain  from ;  and  fear  God  ;  for  God  is  severe
in  chastising.

1  Some  expound  the  words  more  particularly,  and  say  the
preceding  or  former  fault  was  his  lying  with  his  handmaid
Mary,  contrary  to  his  oath  5  and  the  latter  his  marrying  of
Zeinab,  the  wife  of  Zeid,  his  adopted  son.

2  The  passage  is  expounded  two  different  ways.  Some  imagine
the  words  refer  to  a  famous  miracle  supposed  to  have  been  per-
formed by  Mahomet  5  for  it  is  said  that  on  the  infidels  demand-
ing a  sign  of  him,  the  moon  appeared  cloven  in  two,  one  part
vanishing,  and  the  other  remaining,  and  Ebn  Masud  affirmed
that  he  saw  Mount  Hara  interpose  between  the  two  sections.
Others  think  the  preter  tense  is  here  used  in  the  prophetic
style,  for  the  future,  and  that  the  passage  should  be  rendered,
"the  moon  shall  be  split  in  sunder;"  for  this,  they  say,  is  to
happen  at  the  resurrection.


CHAPTER  V.
MISCELLANEOUS   EXTRACTS.

157.     Heathen  Morality. — Gregory.

Nor  did  the  legislators  inculcate  erroneous  notions
with  regard  to  the  gods  alone.  Their  laws,  established
for  the  express  purpose  of  furthering  the  public  virtue
and  happiness,  had  often  a  highly  unfavorable  effect
upon  both.  I  shall  here  only  specify  a  few  of  those  of
Lycurgus,  because  the  united  voice  of  antiquity  speaks
of  him  as  rather  a  god  than  a  man ;  and  Plutarch  pro-
duces him  as  "  an  undeniable  proof  that  a  perfectly  wise

man  is  not  a  mere  notion  and  chimera." Plato,

though  a  great  admirer  of  Lycurgus,  acknowledges,  that
his  laws  were  rather  fitted  to  make  men  valiant  than
just Many  of  his  laws  were  contrary  to  hu-
manity  Lycurgus  enacted  that  deformed  infants

should  not  be  suffered  to  live,  but  be  cast  into  a  cavern
to  perish  gradually  !  Healthy  boys,  on  the  contrary,
were  to  be  treated  charitably,  and  trained  up  to  dexte-
rous thieving,  being  whipped  unmercifully  if  they  were
taken  in  the  fact,  not  for  stealing,  but  for  being  such
bunglers  as  to  expose  themselves  to  detection.  I  will
only  add  farther,  under  this  head,  that  the  Spartans  had
common  baths,  in  which  both  men  and  women  were
compelled  to  bathe  together  ;  and  that  it  was  ordered  by
Lycurgus  that  young  maidens  should  appear  naked  in
the  public  exercises,  as  well  as  the  young  men ;  and
that  they  should  dance  naked  with  them  at  the  solemn
festivals  and  sacrifices

In  regard  to  morals,  they  [the  philosophers]  were
generally  wrong  in  that  part  which  relates  to  purity,
and  continence,  and  the  government  of  the  sensual  pas-
34*  2  c  (399)


400         MISCELLANEOUS     EXTRACTS.  [157.

sions.  Many  of  them,  as  Socrates,  Plato,  Xenophon,
iEschines,  Cebes,  &c,  were  chargeable  with  unnatural
lusts  and  vices,  which  they  reckoned  among  things  of  an
indifferent  nature.  They  generally  allowed  of  fornica-
tion, as  having  nothing  in  it  sinful  or  contrary  to  reason.
Many  of  them  pleaded  for  suicide  as  lawful  and  proper
in  some  cases ;  and  most  of  them  thought  lying  lawful
when  it  was  profitable

Socrates  was  the  first  among  the  Greeks  who  made
morals  the  proper  and  only  subject  of  his  philosophy,
and  brought  it  into  common  life.  .  .  .  [He]  was,  as
Tertullian  remarks,  condemned  at  Athens,  amongst
other  things,  for  sodomy  and  the  corrupting  of  youth ;
and  was  addicted  to  incontinence  and  fornication.

...  I  have  already  adverted  to  the  encouragement
this  philosopher  [Plato]  gave  to  the  habit  of  lying.  He
farther  prescribes  a  community  of  wives  in  his  common-
wealth, and  lays  down  laws  for  the  express  purpose  of
destroying  all  parental  and  filial  affection;  he  gives
great  liberties  to  incontinency,  affirming  "  that  all  things
respecting  women,  marriage,  and  the  propagation  of  the
species  should  be  entirely  common  among  friends ;"
allows,  and  in  some  cases  prescribes,  the  exposing  and
destroying  children,  namely,  the  children  of  mothers
older  than  forty-five,  or  of  fathers  older  than  fifty-five ;
allows  of  drunkenness  at  the  feast  of  Bacchus,  though
not  at  other  times ;  and  prescribes  the  worship  of  the
stars,  which  indeed  are  the  divinities  he  principally
recommends  to  the  people.   .  .  .

.  .  .  Cicero  often  commends  and  justifies  suicide ;
and  warmly  pleads  for  fornication,  as  having  nothing
blameable  in  it,  and  as.  a  thing  universally  allowed  and
practised.

.  .  .  Cato  of  Utica,  who  has  been  held  up  as  "  a
perfect  model  of  virtue,"  but  who  lent  his  wife  to  Iior-
tensius,  was  an  habitual  drunkard,  and  taught  and  prac-
tised self-murder.  .  .  .  Seneca  pleads  for  suicide,  justifies
Cato's  drunkenness,  asserts  that  no  man  in  his  reason
fears  the  gods,  and  contemns  future  punishments  as  vain
terrors  invented  by  the  poets.


148.]         MISCELLANEOUS     EXTRACTS.  401

158.     Morality  of  Deists. — Fuller.

Compare  the  conduct  of  the  leading  men  among  deists
with  that  of  the  body  of  serious  Christian  divines.
Amidst  their  declamations  against  priestly  hypocrisy,
are  they  honest  men  ?  Where  is  their  ingenuousness
in  continually  confounding  Christianity  and  Popery  ?
Have  these  workers  of  iniquity  no  knowledge  ?  "  No,"
say  some,  "  they  do  not  understand  the  difference  be-
tween genuine  and  corrupted  Christianity.  They  have
never  had  opportunity  of  viewing  the  religion  of  Jesus
in  its  native  dress.  It  is  popish  superstition  against
which  their  efforts  are  directed.  If  they  understood
Christianity  they  would  embrace  it."  Indeed!  And
was  this  the  case  with  Shaftesbury,  Bolingbroke,  Hume,
or  Gibbon  ?  or  is  this  the  case  with  Paine  ?  No  ;  they
have  both  seen  and  hated  the  light ;  nor  will  they  come
to  it,  lest  their  deeds  should  be  made  manifest.

It  may  be  thought,  however,  that  some  excuse  may
be  made  for  infidels  residing  in  a  popish  country ;  and
this  I  shall  not  dispute  as  it  respects  the  ignorant  popu-
lace, who  may  be  carried  away  by  their  leaders  ;  but,
as  it  respects  the  leaders  themselves,  it  is  otherwise.
The  National  Assembly  of  France,  when  they  wished
to  counteract  the  priests,  and  to  reject  the  adoption  of
the  Roman  Catholic  faith  as  the  established  religion,
could  clearly  distinguish  between  genuine  and  corrupted
Christianity.  Deists  can  distinguish  between  Christi-
anity and  its  abuses,  when  an  end  is  to  be  answered  by
it ;  and,  when  an  end  is  to  be  answered  by  it,  they  can,
with  equal  facility,  confound  them.

Herbert,  Hobbes,  Shaftesbury,  Woolston,  Tindal,
Chubb,  and  Bolingbroke,  are  all  guilty  of  the  vile  hy-
pocrisy of  professing  to  love  and  reverence  Christianity,
while  they  are  employed  in  no  other  design  than  to  de-
stroy it..  Such  faithless  professions,  such  gross  viola-
tions of  truth,  in  Christians,  would  have  been  proclaimed
to  the  universe,  by  these  very  writers,  as  infamous  de-
sertions of  principle  and  decency.  Is  it  less  infamous
in  themselves  ?  All  hypocrisy  is  detestable  ;  but  I
know  of  none  so  detestable  as  that  which  is  coolly  writ-


402  MISCELLANEOUS     EXTRACTS.  [158.

ten,  with  full  premeditation,  by  a  man  of  talents,  as-
suming the  character  of  a  moral  and  religious  instructor.
Truth  is  a  virtue  perfectly  defined,  mathematically  clear,
and  completely  understood  by  all  men  of  common  sense.
There  can  be  no  baitings  between  uttering  truth  and
falsehood  ;  no  doubt,  no  mistakes,  as  between  piety
and  enthusiasm,  frugality  and  parsimony,  generosity
and  profusion.  Transgression,  therefore,  is  always  a
known,  definite,  deliberate  villany.  In  the  sudden  mo-
ment of  strong  temptation,  in  the  hour  of  unguarded
attack,  in  the  flutter  and  trepidation  of  unexpected
alarm,  the  best  man  may,  perhaps,  be  surprised  into  any
sin ;  but  he  who  can  coolly,  of  steady  design,  and  with
no  unusual  impulse,  utter  falsehood  and  vend  hypocrisy,
is  not  far  from  finished  depravity.

The  morals  of  Rochester  and  Wharton  need  no  com-
ment. Woolston  was  a  gross  blasphemer ;  Blount
solicited  his  sister-in-law  to  marry  him,  and  being
refused  shot  himself.  Tindal  was  originally  a  Pro-
testant, then  turned  Papist,  then  Protestant  again,
merely  to  suit  the  times ;  and  was  at  the  same  time
infamous  for  vice  in  general,  and  the  total  want  of
principle.  He  is  said  to  have  died  with  this  prayer  in
his  mouth :  "  If  there  be  a  God,  I  desire  that  he  may
have  mercy  on  me."  Hobbes  wrote  his  Leviathan  to
serve  the  cause  of  Charles  I.,  but  finding  him  fail  of
success,  he  turned  it  to  the  defence  of  Cromwell,  and
made  a  merit  of  this  fact  to  the  usurper,  as  Hobbes  him-
self unblushingly  declared  to  Lord  Clarendon.  Morgan
had  no  regard  to  truth,  as  is  evident  from  his  numerous
falsifications  of  Scripture,  as  well  as  from  the  vile
hypocrisy  of  professing  himself  a  Christian  in  those
very  writings  in  which  he  labors  to  destroy  Christianity.
Voltaire,  in  a  letter  now  remaining,  requested  his
friend,  D'Alembert,  to  tell  for  him  a  direct  and  palpa-
ble lie,  by  denying  that  he  was  the  author  of  the
Philosophical  Dictionary.  D'Alembert,  in  his  answer,
informed  him  that  he  had  told  the  lie.  Voltaire  has,
indeed,  expressed  his  own  moral  character  perfectly  in
the  following  words  :  "  Monsieur  Abbe,  I  must  be  read ;


158.]  MISCELLANEOUS     EXTRACTS.  403

no  matter  whether  I  am  believed  or  not."  He  also
solemnly  professes  to  believe  the  Catholic  religion,
although  at  the  same  time  he  doubted  the  existence  of  a
God.  Hume  died  as  a  fool  dieth.  The  day  before  his
death  he  spent  in  a  pitiful  and  affected  unconcern  about
this  tremendous  subject,  playing  at  whist,  reading
Lucian's  Dialogues,  and  making  silly  attempts  at  wit,
concerning  his  interview  with  Charon,  the  heathen
ferryman  of  Hades.

Collins,  though  he  had  no  belief  in  Christianity,  yet
qualified  himself  for  civil  office  by  partaking  of  the
Lord's  supper.  Shaftesbury  did  the  same ;  and  the
same  is  done  by  hundreds  of  infidels  to  this  day.  Yet
these  are  the  men  that  are  continually  declaiming
against  the  hypocrisy  of  priests  !  Godwin  is  not  only
a  lewd  character,  by  his  own  confession  ;  but  the  un-
blushing advocate  of  lewdness.  And  as  to  Paine,  he  is
well  known  to  have  been  a  profane  swearer,  and  a
drunkard.  We  have  evidence  upon  oath,  that  "  reli-
gion was  his  favorite  topic  when  intoxicated ;"  and,
from  the  scurrility  of  the  performance,  it  is  not  impro-
bable that  he  was  frequently  in  this  situation  while
writing  his  "Age  of  Reason."

I  shall  conclude  this  catalogue  of  worthies  with  a
brief  abstract  of  the  "  Confessions  of  J.  J.  Rousseau."
After  a  good  education  in  the  Protestant  religion,  he
was  put  apprentice.  Finding  his  situation  disagreeable
to  him,  he  felt  a  strong  propensity  to  vice — inclining
him  to  covet,  dissemble,  lie,  and  at  length,  to  steal — a
propensity  of  which  he  was  never  able  afterwards  to
direst  himself.  "  I  have  been  a  rogue,"  says  he,  "  and
am  so  still  sometimes,  for  trifles  which  I  had  rather  take
than  ask  for."

He  abjured  the  Protestant  religion,  and  entered  the
hospital  of  the  Catechumens  at  Turin,  to  be  instructed
in  that  of  the  Catholics  ;  "For  which  in  return,"  says
he,  "  I  was  to  receive  subsistence.  From  this  interested
conversion,"  he  adds,  "nothing  remained  but  the
remembrance  of  my  having  been  both  a  dupe  and  an
apostate."


404  MISCELLANEOUS     EXTRACTS.  [158.

After  this  he  resided  with  a  Madame  de  Warrens,
with  whom  he  "  lived  in  the  greatest  possible  fami-
liarity." This  lady  often  suggested  that  there  would
be  no  justice  in  the  Supreme  Being,  should  he  be  strictly
just  to  us :  because,  not  having  bestowed  what  was
necessary  to  make  us  essentially  good,  it  would  be
requiring  more  than  he  had  given.  She  was,  neverthe-
less, a  very  good  Catholic,  or  pretended  at  least  to  be
one,  and  certainly  desired  to  be  such.  If  there  had
been  no  Christian  morality  established,  Rousseau  sup-
poses she  would  have  lived  as  though  regulated  by  its
principles.  All  her  morality,  however,  was  subordinate
to  the  principles  of  M.  Tavel  (who  first  seduced  her
from  conjugal  fidelity,  by  urging,  in  effect,  that  expo-
sure was  the  only  crime)  :  or  rather,  she  saw  nothing  in
religion  that  contradicted  them.  Rousseau  was  far
enough  from  being  of  this  opinion :  yet  he  confessed  he
dared  not  combat  the  arguments  of  the  lady ;  nor  is  it
supposable  he  could,  as  he  appears  to  have  been  acting
on  the  same  principles  at  the  time.  "  Finding  in  her,"
he  adds,  "  all  those  ideas  I  had  occasion  for,  to  secure
me  from  the  fears  of  death  and  its  future  consequences,
I  drew  confidence  and  security  from  this  source."

The  writings  of  Port  Royal,  and  those  of  the  Oratory,
made  him  half  a  Jansenist ;  and,  notwithstanding  all
his  confidence,  their  harsh  theory  sometimes  alarmed
him.  A  dread  of  hell,  which,  till  then,  he  had  never
much  apprehended,  by  little  and  little  disturbed  his
security,  and,  had  not  Madame  de  Warrens  tranquil-
lized his  soul,  would  at  length  have  been  too  much  for
him.  His  confessor,  also  a  Jesuit,  contributed  all  in
his  power  to  keep  up  his  hopes.

After  this  he  became  familiar  with  another  female,
Theresa.  He  began  by  declaring  to  her  that  he  would
never  either  abandon  or  marry  her.  Finding  her  preg-
nant with  her  first  child,  and  hearing  it  observed,  in  an
eating-house,  that  he  who  had  best  filled  the  Foundling
Hospital  was  always  the  most  applauded,  "  I  said  to
myself,"  he  tells  us,  "  since  it  is  the  custom  of  the
country,  they  who  live  here  may  adopt  it.     I  cheerfully


158.]  MISCELLANEOUS     EXTRACTS.  405

determined  upon  it  without  the  least  scruple :  and  the
only  one  I  had  to  overcome  was  that  of  Theresa ;  whom,
with  the  greatest  imaginable  difficulty,  I  persuaded  to
comply."  The  year  following  a  similar  inconvenience
was  remedied  by  the  same  expedient :  no  more  reflection
on  his  part;  nor  approbation  on  that  of  the  mother.
She  obeyed  with  trembling.  "My  fault,"  says  he,
"  was  great ;  but  it  was  an  error."

He  resolved  on  settling  at  Geneva ;  and,  on  going
thither,  and  being  mortified  at  his  exclusion  from  the
rights  of  a  citizen  fey  the  profession  of  a  religion  differ-
ent from  his  forefathers,  he  determined  openly  to  return
to  the  latter.  "  I  thought,"  says  he,  "  the  gospel  being
the  same  for  every  Christian,  and  the  only  difference  in
religious  opinions  the  result  of  the  explanations  given
by  men  to  that  which  they  did  not  understand,  it  was
the  exclusive  right  of  the  sovereign  power  in  every
country  to  fix  the  mode  of  worship,  and  these  unintelli-
gible opinions ;  and  that,  consequently,  it  was  the  duty
of  a  citizen  to  admit  the  one,  and  conform  to  the  other,
in  the  manner  prescribed  by  the  law."  Accordingly  at
Geneva  he  renounced  popery.

After  passing  twenty  years  with  Theresa,  he  made
her    his  wife.     He  appears    to  have   intrigued  with   a

Madame  de  "W .     Of  his  desires  after  that  lady  he

says,  "  Guilty  without  remorse,  I  soon  became  so  with-
out measure."

Such,  according  to  his  own  account,  was  the  life  of
uprightness  and  honor  which  was  to  expiate  for  a  theft
which  he  had  committed  when  a  young  man,  and  laid  to
a  female  servant,  by  which  she  lost  her  place  and
character.  Such  was  Rousseau,  the  man  whom  the
rulers  of  the  French  nation  have  delighted  to  honor ;
and  who,  for  writing  this  account,  had  the  vanity  and
presumption  to  expect  the  applause  of  his  Creator.
k' "Whenever  the  last  trumpet  shall  sound,"  says  he,  "I
will  present  myself  before  the  Sovereign  Judge,  with
this  book  in  my  hand,  and  loudly  proclaim,  Thus  have  I
acted :  these  were  my  thoughts ;  such  was  I,  Power
eternal !     Assemble  round  thy  throne  the  innumerable


406  MISCELLANEOUS     EXTRACTS.  [159.

throng  of  my  fellow-mortals.  Let  them  listen  to  my
confession ;  let  them  blush  at  my  depravity  ;  let  them
tremble  at  my  sufferings  ;  let  each  in  his  turn  expose,
with  equal  sincerity,  the  failings,  the  wanderings  of  his
heart ;  and,  if  he  dare,  aver — I  was  better  than  that
man."

v    159.     Traditions  of  the  Deluge. — Kitto.

As  Noah  was  the  progenitor  of  all  the  nations  of  the
earth,  and  as  the  ark  was  the  second  cradle  of  the
human  race,  we  might  expect  to  find  in  all  nations  tra-
ditions and  reports  more  or  less  distinct  respecting  him,
the  ark  in  which  he  was  saved,  and  the  deluge  in  gene-
ral. Accordingly,  no  nation  is  known  in  which  such
traditions  have  not  been  found.  They  have  been  very
industriously  brought  together  by  Banier,  Bryant,
Faber,  and  other  mythologists.  Our  present  concern  is
only  with  the  ark.  And  as  it  appears  that  an  ark,  that
is,  a  boat  or  chest,  was  carried  about  with  great  cere-
mony in  most  of  the  ancient  mysteries,  and  occupied  an
eminent  station  in  the  holy  places,  it  has  with  much
reason  been  concluded  that  this  was  originally  intended  to
represent  the  ark  of  Noah,  which  eventually  came  to  be
regarded  with  superstitious  reverence.  On  this  point
the  historical  and  mythological  testimonies  (as  collected
in  the  authors  to  whom  we  have  referred)  are  very  clear
and  conclusive.  The  tradition  of  a  deluge,  by  which
the  race  of  man  was  swept  from  the  face  of  the  earth,
has  been  traced  among  the  Chaldeans,  Egyptians,  Phoe-
nicians, Assyrians,  Persians,  Greeks,  Romans,  Goths,
Druids,  Chinese,  Hindoos,  Burmese,  Mexicans,  Peru-
vians, Brazilians,  Nicaraguans,  the  inhabitants  of  West-
ern Caledonia,  and  the  islanders  of  the  Pacific ;  and
among  most  of  them  also  the  belief  has  prevailed  that
certain  individuals  were  preserved  in  an  ark,  ship,  boat,
or  raft,  to  replenish  the  desolated  earth  with  inhabitants.
Nor  are  these  traditions  uncorroborated  by  coins  and
monuments  of  stone.  Of  the  latter  there  are  the  sculp-
tures of  Egypt  and  of  India  ;  and  it  is  not  unlikely  that
those  of  the  monuments  called  Druidical,  which   bear


160.]  MISCELLANEOUS     EXTRACTS.  407

the  name  of  kistvaens,  and  in  which  the  stones  are  dis-
posed in  the  form  of  a  chest  or  house,  were  intended  as
memorials  of  the  ark.  *  *  *  *  We  shall  confine
our  medallic  illustrations  to  the  two  famous  medals  of
Apamea.  There  were  six  cities  of  this  name,  of  which
the  most  celebrated  was  that  of  Syria;  next  to  it,  in
importance,  was  the  one  in  Phrygia,  called  also  Kibotos,
which  means  an  ark  or  hollow  vessel.  This  latter  city
was  built  on  the  river  Marsyas  ;  and  there  seems  to  have
been  a  notion  that  the  ark  rested  on  the  adjoining  hills
of  CelaBnae ;  and  the  Sibylline  oracles,  wherever  they
were  written,  also  include  these  hills  under  the  name
of  Ararat,  and  mention  the  same  tradition.  The
medals  in  question  belong,  the  one  to  the  elder  Philip,
and  the  other  to  Pertinax.  In  the  former  it  is  extremely
interesting  to  observe  that  on  the  front  of  the  ark  is  the
name  of  Noah,  in  Greek  characters.  The  designs  on
these  medals  correspond  remarkably,  although  the
legends  somewhat  vary.  In  both  we  perceive  the  ark
floating  on  the  water,  containing  the  patriarch  and  his
wife,  the  dove  on  wing,  the  olive  branch,  and  the  raven
perched  on  the  ark.  These  medals  also  represent  Noah
and  his  wife  on  terra  firma,  in  the  attitude  of  rendering
thanks  for  their  safety.  The  genuineness  of  these
medals  has  been  established  beyond  all  question  by  the
researches  of  Bryant  and  the  critical  inspection  of  Abbe
Barthelemy.

160.     Bible  History  confirmed  by  Science. —
Raivlinson.

There  is  what  may  be  called  the  historico-scientific
argument,  derivable  from  the  agreement  of  the  sacred
narrative  with  the  conclusions  reached  by  those  sciences
which  have  a  partially  historical  character.  Geology —
whatever  may  be  thought  of  its  true  bearing  upon  other
points — at  least  witnesses  to  the  recent  creation  of  man,
of  whom  there  is  no  trace  in  any  but  the  latest  strata.
Physiology  decides  in  favor  of  the  unity  of  the  species,
and  the  probable  derivation  of  the  whole  human  race
from  a  single  pair.     Comparative  philology,  after  diver:-


408  MISCELLANEOUS     EXTRACTS.  [160,

fluctuations,  settles  into  the  belief  that  languages  will
ultimately  prove  to  have  been  all  derived  from  a  common
basis.  Ethnology  pronounces  that,  independently  of
the  scripture  record,  we  should  be  led  to  fix  on  the  plains
of  Shinar  as  a  common  centre,  or  focus,  from  which  the
various  lines  of  migration  and  the  several  types  of  races
originally  radiated.  Again,  there  is  an  argument,  per-
haps more  convincing  than  any  other,  but  of  immense
compass,  deducible  from  the  indirect  and  incidental
points  of  agreement  between  the  Mosaic  records  and  the
best  profane  authorities.  The  limits  within  which  I  am
confined  compel  me  to  decline  this  portion  of  the
inquiry.  Otherwise  it  might  be  shown  that  the  lin-
guistic, geographic,  and  ethnologic  notices  contained  in
the  books  of  Moses  are  of  the  most  veracious  character,
stamping  the  whole  narration  with  an  unmistakable  air
of  authenticity.  And  this,  it  may  be  remarked,  is  an
argument  to  which  modern  research  is  perpetually  add-
ing fresh  weight.  For  instance,  if  we  look  to  the  geo-
graphy, we  shall  find  that  till  within  these  few  years,
"  Erech,  and  Accad,  and  Calneh,  in  the  land  of  Shinar,"  l
— Calah  and  Resen,  in  the  country  peopled  by  Asshur,2—
Ellasar  and  "  Ur  of  the  Chaldees,"3  were  mere  names ;
and  beyond  the  mention  of  them  in  Genesis,  scarcely  a
trace  was  discoverable  of  their  existence.  Recently,
however,  the  mounds  of  Mesopotamia  have  been  searched,
and  bricks  and  stones  buried  for  near  three  thousand
years  have  found  a  tongue,  and  tell  us  exactly  where
each  of  these  cities  stood,  and  sufficiently  indicate  their
importance.  Again,  the  power  of  Og,  and  his  "  three-
score cities  all  fenced  with  high  walls,  gates,  and  bars,
besides  unwalled  towns  a  great  many,"4  in  such  a
country  as  that  to  the  east  of  the  Sea  of  Galilee,  whose
old  name  of  Trachonitis  indicates  its  barrenness,  seemed
to  many  improbable, — but  modern  research  has  found  in
this  very  country  a  vast  number  of  walled  cities  still
standing,  which  show  the  habits  of  the  ancient  people,
and  prove  that  the  population  must  at  one  time  have


^en.  x.  10.  2Gen.  x.  11.  12.

3  Gen.  xi.  31.  *  Dent.  iii.  5.


160.]         MISCELLANEOUS     EXTRACTS.  409

been  considerable.  So  the  careful  examination  that  has
been  made  of  the  valley  of  the  Jordan,  which  has
resulted  in  a  proof  that  it  is  a  unique  phenomenon,
utterly  unlike  anything  elsewhere  on  the  whole  face  of
the  earth,  tends  greatly  to  confirm  the  Mosaic  account,
that  it  became  what  it  now  is  by  a  great  convulsion ;
and  by  pious  persons  will,  I  think,  be  felt  as  confirming
the  miraculous  character  of  that  convulsion.  Above  all,
perhaps,  the  absence  of  any  counter-evidence — the  fact
that  each  accession  to  our  knowledge  of  the  ancient
times,  whether  historic,  or  geographic,  or  ethnic,  helps
to  remove  difficulties,  and  to  produce  a  perpetual  supply
of  fresh  illustrations  of  the  Mosaic  narrative ;  while
fresh  difficulties  are  not  at  the  same  time  brought  to
light — is  to  be  remarked,  as  to  candid  minds  an  argu-
ment for  the  historic  truth  of  the  narrative,  the  force
of  which  can  hardly  be  over-estimated.  All  tends  to
show  that  we  possess  in  the  Pentateuch,  not  only  the
most  authentic  account  of  ancient  times  that  has  come
down  to  us,  but  a  history  absolutely  and  in  every  respect
true.  All  tends  to  show  us  that  in  this  marvellous
volume  we  have  no  old  wives'  tales,  no  "  cunningly
devised  fable;"1  but  "  a  treasure  of  wisdom  and  know-
ledge;"2— as  important  to  the  historical  inquirer  as  to
the  theologian.  There  may  be  obscurities — there  may
be  occasionally,  in  names  and  numbers,  accidental  cor-
ruptions of  the  text — there  may  be  a  few  interpolations —
glosses  which  have  crept  in  from  the  margin  ;  but  upon
the  whole,  it  must  be  pronounced  that  we  have  in  the
Pentateuch  a  genuine  and  authentic  work,  and  one
which — even  were  it  not  inspired — would  be,  for  the
times  and  countries  whereof  it  treats,  the  leading  and
paramount  authority.  It  is  (let  us  be  assured)  "  Moses"
who  is  still  "read  in  the  synagogues  every  Sabbath
day;"3  and  they  who  "resist"  him,  by  impugning  his
veracity,  like  Jannes  and  Jambres  of  old,  "  resist  the
truth."4


1  2  Peter,  i.  16.  2  Col.  ii.  3.

3  Acts,  xv.  21.  *  2  Tim.  iii.  8.


CHAPTER  VI.
161.     HARMONY  OF  THE  GOSPELS.

No  formal  reply  to  the  several  objections  of  infidels
founded  on  the  supposed  inconsistencies  between  the
narratives  of  the  evangelists,  was  attempted  in  the  for-
mer part  of  this  work,  because  these  objections  do  not
touch  the  question  concerning  the  divine  origin  of
Christianity.  But  since  much  use  is  made  of  them  to
bring  the  scriptures  into  disrepute,  it  will  be  useful  to
show  their  utter  futility ;  and  for  this  purpose  they  are
here  subjected  to  a  brief  examination.

Objection  1. — Matthew  and  Luke  differ  with  respect
to  the  Annunciation.  Matthew  says  that  it  was  made
to  Joseph  ;*  Luke  that  it  was  made  to  Mary.2

The  explanation  is  very  easy.  There  were  two
annunciations,  one  made  to  the  Virgin  before  the  con-
ception, the  other  to  Joseph  afterwards.  Luke  relates
the  former  ;  Matthew  the  latter.

Objection  2. — Matthew  and  Luke  differ  in  their  ac-
count of  Christ's  genealogy,3  and  both  genealogies  can-
not be  true.

Since  men  have  two  parents  and  four  grandparents,  it
is  possible  for  the  same  individual  to  have  had  two,  or
even  four  genealogies,  differing  from  each  other,  and  yet
all  true.  If  both  Matthew  and  Luke  designed  to  give
the  genealogy  of  Joseph,  it  may  be  that  one  has  given
the  line  through  his  father,  and  the  other  the  line
through  his  mother.  The  omission  of  the  mother's
name  is  no  insurmountable  obstacle  to  the  supposition.
In  Matthew's  genealogy  several  names  are  omitted,  as
may  be  shown  by  comparing  it  with  the  Old  Testament.
The  first  verse  of  Matthew  may  be  translated,  "  Birth
Record  of  Jesus  Christ,  son  of  David,  son  of  Abraham,"

1  Matt.  i.  20,  21.  2  Luke,  i.  2G-37.

3  Matt.  i.  1-16  :  Luke,  iii.  23-38.

(410)


161.]         &ARMONY    Of    the    gospels.  4il

Conant's  version.  Matthew  wrote  specially  for  the
Jews,  and  it  suited  his  purpose  to  give  a  copy  of  the
birth-record,  such  as  Jewish  families  were  accustomed  to
keep,  better  than  to  make  a.  full  and  accurate  one  by  in-
spiration.

But  enemies  of  Christianity  have  furnished  a  clue  to
what  is  probably  the  true  explanation.  The  Jews  [see
quotations  in  Gill's  Commentary  on  the  passage]  speak
of  Mary  as  the  daughter  of  Heli ;  and  from  this  it  ap-
pears that  Luke's  genealogy  is  that  of  Mary  the  mother
of  our  Lord,  and  not  that  of  Joseph  his  reputed  father.
Both  evangelists  agree  perfectly  in  the  important  fact,
that  Joseph  was  not  his  real  father,  and  if  both  have
given  the  genealogy  of  Joseph,  the  true  line  of  Christ's
natural  descent  is  now  unknown,  and  it  cannot  be
proved  that  he  was  of  David's  seed,  according  to  the
flesh.  Matthew,  who  wrote  for  Jews,  gave  them  the
legal  descent  through  Joseph  ;  but  Luke,  who  wrote  for
Gentiles,  has  given  the  natural  descent  through  Mary.
If  we  omit,  in  Luke's  genealogy,  the  italic  words  which
the  translators  have  supplied,  it  will  be  seen  that  little
more  is  left  than  a  list  of  names.  The  genealogies  were
generally  reckoned  through  the  male  ancestors,  but  in
tracing  the  line  of  Christ's  natural  descent  through  his
male  ancestors  there  was  a  vacancy  at  the  first  step,
because  he  had  no  father  according  to  the  flesh.  This
vacancy  the  evangelist  has  filled  with  the  name  of  Joseph,
but  has  been  careful  to  inform  us  that  this  name  occu-
pies the  place  only  by  supposition.

In  harmonizing  apparently  conflicting  testimonies,  a
probable  conjecture  may  suffice  to  show  that  they  are
not  really  contradictory.  It  is  not  necessary  for  our
purpose  to  decide  positively  that  the  above  explanation
is  the  true  one.  Other  modes  of  harmonizing  have  been
proposed,  which  are  less  probable  than  the  above,  but
are  nevertheless  sufficient  to  remove  the  objection.

Objection  3. — According  to  one  evangelist,  John  the
Baptist  denied  that  he  was  Elias,1  but  according  to
another  Jesus  affirmed  that  he  was.2

1  John.  i.  21.  2  Matt.  xvii.  12,  13.

35*


412  H  A  R  M  0  N  Y     OF     THE     GOSPEL  S.  [161.

It  cannot  be  pretended  that  the  evangelists  contra-
dicted each  other  in  this  case :  nor  is  there  any  real
contradiction  between  John  and  Jesus.  John  denied
that  he  was  literally  Elijah  risen  from  the  dead.  Jesus
affirmed  that  he  was  Elijah  in  the  sense  of  Malachi's
prophecy,  "Behold,  I  will  send  you  Elijah  the  prophet." 1
The  Baptist  came  "in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elijah."
Luke  i.  17,  and  was  therefore  prophetically  called  by  his
name.

Objection  4. — Matthew  and  John  differ  on  the  ques-
tion whether  Jesus  was  personally  known  to  the  Baptist
previous  to  his  coming  to  the  Jordan  for  baptism.2

Before  the  commencement  of  the  Baptist's  ministry
he  lived  in  the  desert  country  of  Judea,3  and  Jesus  lived
in  Nazareth  of  Galilee.  We  have  no  evidence  that  they
were  personally  acquainted  with  each  other.  As  Jesus
approached  the  Jordan  to  receive  baptism,  John,  proba-
bly by  a  prophetic  intimation  just  then  given,  discovered
the  superiority  of  his  character.  This  intimation  was
afterwards  confirmed  by  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Spirit.
John  denies  that  his  knowledge  of  Christ's  character
was  the  result  of  previous  personal  acquaintance.  In
stating  the  means  by  which  he  obtained  this  knowledge,
he  did  not  mention  the  secret  intimation  received  before
the  baptism,  but  confined  himself  to  the  sign  of  the
Spirit's  descent,  a  proof  better  adapted  to  produce  con-
viction on  the  minds  of  others.  With  these  facts,  all
that  is  said  by  both  evangelists  perfectly  harmonizes.

Objection  5. — The  evangelists  do  not  agree  in  their
account  of  the  words  pronounced  from  heaven  after  the
baptism  of  Jesus.  Matthew :  "  This  is  my  beloved  Son,
in  whom  I  am  well  pleased;"4  Mark:  "Thou  art  my
beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased;"5  Luke:
"  Thou  art  my  beloved  Son,  in  thee  I  am  well  pleased."6

The  harmony  in  sense  is  perfect :  and  in  a  court  of
justice  such  slight  disagreements  in  words  could  have
no  effect  to  invalidate  the  testimony  of  witnesses.     It

1  Malachi,  iv.  5.  2  Matt,  iii.  14 ;  John,  i.  33.

3  Luke,  i.  80.  i  Matt.  iii.  17.

5  Mark,  i. .11.  6  Luke,  iii.  22.


161.]  HARMONY     OF     THE     GOSPELS.  413

is  not  probable  that  the  utterance  from  heaven  was  in  the
Greek  language ;  and  since  all  the  reports  of  it  which
we  have  received  are  in  this  language,  we  may  infer  that
in  the  view  of  the  evangelists  and  of  God  who  inspired
them  to  write,  it  was  of  no  importance  to  represent  the
precise  sounds  which  were  uttered,  if  the  sense  which
they  conveyed  was  duly  expressed.  No  one  will  deny
that  the  sense  is  fully  expressed  by  each  of  the  evan-
gelists, and  divine  inspiration  has  not  aimed  to  bind
down  the  minds  and  pens  of  the  sacred  writers  to  an
unnatural  and  unprofitable  uniformity  of  expression —
unnatural,  because  different  minds  naturally  fall  into
different  modes  of  expressing  the  same  ideas ;  and  un-
profitable, because  the  benefit  conveyed  proceeds  from
the  sense,  and  not  from  the  sound.  If  we  have  the
sense  duly  expressed,  we  have  all  that  can  be  useful  to
us ;  and  if  we  choose  to  reject  this  because  God  does
not  choose  to  give  us  the  sound  as  well  as  the  sense,  we
must  account  to  him  for  our  ingratitude  and  unbelief.

The  preceding  remarks  may  be  applied  to  all  the
cases  in  which  the  narratives  of  the  evangelists,  while
agreeing  in  sense,  differ  in  expression.  Several  exam-
ples might  be  cited ;  and  among  them  the  superscription
placed  by  Pilate  over  the  cross  in  Hebrew,  Greek,  and
Latin.  The  evangelists  differ  as  to  the  words  of  this
superscription,  and  it  may  be  that  the  three  forms  used
by  Pilate  were  not  exact  translations  of  each  other.
Agreement  is  seen  in  all  that  Pilate  or  the  evangelists
thought  necessary ;  and  the  variety  in  Pilate's  forms
may  have  given  origin  to  the  variety  of  expression  used
by  the  evangelists.  To  give  the  expression  as  well  as
the  sense,  would  have  required  that  the  evangelists
should  notice  any  varieties  in  the  three  forms  used  by
Pilate :  and  perhaps  to  copy  all  these  forms  in  their
respective  languages.  This  particularity  would  have
answered  no  valuable  purpose.  Neither  the  simple
honesty  of  the  evangelists,  nor  the  inspiration  by  which
they  were  guided,  inclined  them  to  this  useless  care  about
forms  of  expression,  while  intent  on  the  accomplish-
ment of  far  higher  ends.

Objection  6. — Matthew  says  that  a  centurion  went


414  HARMONY     OF     THE     GOSPELS.  [161.

in  person  to  Christ,1  and  Luke  that  he  sent  messengers
to  him.2

According  to  the  usage  of  language,  a  man  is  said  to
do  what  he  accomplishes  by  the  agency  of  others.  So
Pilate  is  said3  to  have  scourged  Jesus,  but  no  one  under-
stands that  he  applied  the  lash  with  his  own  hands.  So
Zebedee's  sons  are  said4  to  have  made  a  request  which
was  presented  by  their  mother.5

Objection  7. — Matthew  gives  an  account  of  two  demo-
niacs healed  by  Christ,6  when  Mark  and  Luke  mention
but  one.7

Mark  and  Luke  do  not  affirm  that  there  was  only
one,  and  therefore  do  not  contradict  the  other  evangelist.
It  is  probable  that  one  of  the  demoniacs  was  much  more
prominent  in  the  transaction  than  the  other,  who  may
have  been  a  lad  or  servant.  This  will  account  for  the
mention  of  but  one  by  Mark  and  Luke.

Objection  8. — According  to  Matthew,  Jesus  foretold
that  he  would  be  in  the  grave  three  days  and  three
nights,8  but  according  to  all  the  evangelists  he  was  in-
terred late  in  the  evening  of  Friday,  and  rose  very  early
on  Sunday  morning.

The  time  of  the  resurrection  is  variously  expressed :
"in  three  days;"9  "after  three  days;"10  "the  third
day."11

According  to  our  usage  these  different  forms  of  ex-
pression do  not  signify  the  same  thing ;  but  according
to  Jewish  usage  in  the  time  of  Christ  their  meaning
was  identical.  From  1  Sam.  xxx.  12,  13,  we  know
that  the  phrase  "  three  days  and  three  nights"  signified
the  same  as  three  days.  Jesus  used  the  modes  of  ex-
pression which  were  familiar  to  his  hearers ;  and  how
they  understood  him  on  this  point  is  clear  from  the  fact
that  the  Jews,   though  they  remembered   that  he  had

1  Matt.  viii.  5-13.  2  Luke,  vii.  1-10.

3  John,  xix.  1.  4  Mark,  x.  35.

5  Matt.  xx.  20.  6  Matt.  viii.  28-34.

7  Mark,  v.  1-21  ;  Luke.  viii.  26-40.

8  Matt.  xii.  40.  9  John,  ii.  19.

10  Matt,  xxvii.  63  ;  Mark,  viii.  31  ;  John,  ii.  19.

11  Matt.  xvi.  21  ;  xx.  19;  Mark,  ix.  31  ;  x.  34;  Luke,  ix.  22;
xviii.  33.


161.]  HARMONY     OF     THE     GOSPELS.  415

said  "  after  three  days  I  will  rise  again,"  yet  requested
Pilate  to  secure  the  sepulchre  "until  the  third  day."1

We  are  under  no  obligation  to  account  for  Jewish
usage  in  the  computation  of  time.  It  is  probable  that
they  understood  by  the  phrase  "  three  days  and  three
nights"  three  successive  periods  of  twenty-four  hours,
each  commencing  at  sunset.  The  continuance  of  Jesus
in  the  grave  extended  to  three  of  such  periods.  In  the
first,  which  terminated  at  sunset  on  Friday,  he  was  in-
terred, in  the  second  he  rested  in  the  grave  undisturbed,
and  in  the  third,  which  commenced  at  sunset  of  Satur-
day, he  rose.

Objection  9. — Matthew  relates  that  Jesus  opened
the  eyes  of  two  blind  men  at  Jericho  :2  Mark  and  Luke
mention  but  one.3  Matthew  and  Mark  say  that  the
miracle  was  wrought  as  Jesus  was  leaving  the  city :
Luke  that  it  occurred  as  he  was  approaching  it.

As  to  the  number  concerned,  the  case  is  like  that  of
the  demoniacs  in  Objection  7.  Mark  and  Luke  do  not
affirm  that  there  was  but  one,  and  therefore  do  not  con-
tradict Matthew.  When  one  of  a  company  speaks  for
all,  it  is  the  usage  of  language  to  say  that  they  all
speak.  Matthew  describes  both  of  the  blind  men  as
speaking  to  Jesus,  yet  it  is  most  probable  that  one  of
them  was  the  chief,  if  not  the  only  speaker,  and  this  is
the  one  whom  Mark  and  Luke  have  particularly  men-
tioned. We  are  informed  that  this  man's  name  was
Bartimeus,  and  we  may  infer  from  this  mention  of  his
name  that  he  afterwards  became  well  known  among  the
disciples  of  Christ.  The  other  man  probably  never  ob-
tained notoriety,  and  may  have  died  soon  after  Matthew
wrote  his  Gospel,  or  even  before.  There  is  no  difficulty
in  conjecturing  such  circumstances  as  these  which  would
naturally  lead  Mark  and  Luke  to  speak  of  Bartimeus
only.  But  whether  we  state  the  true  cause  or  not,  it  is
certain  that  they  do  not  contradict  Matthew.

The  difficulty  as  to  the  place  of  the  miracle  may  be
removed  by  rendering  the  words  of  Luke,  "  When  he

1  Matt,  xxvii.  63,  64.  2  Matt.  xx.  29-34.

3  Mark,  x.  46-52  j  Luke,  xviii.  35-43.
2d


416  HARMONY     OF    THE     GOSPELS.  [161.

was  near  Jericho."  Examples  in  which  the  word  has
this  sense  a.re  found  in  the  New  Testament  and  the  Sep-
tuagint.  It  is  manifest  from  the  narratives  of  the
evangelists,  that  Jesus  did  not  grant  the  request  of  the
blind  men  on  their  first  outcry  to  him.  If  Luke's  ac-
count be  taken  according  to  the  common  translation,  it
may  date  the  transaction  from  the  beginning  of  the  out-
cry, which  may  have  been  as  Jesus  was  entering  the
city,  though  the  favor  solicited  was  not  granted  until
he  was  departing.

Objection  10. — Mark  and  Luke  say  that  Christ's
public  entrance  into  Jerusalem  was  on  an  ass's  colt
which  had  never  been  ridden  before,  and  which  had,  in
obedience  to  his  command,  been  taken  from  the  place
where  it  was  found  tied.1  Matthew  says  that  not  only
the  colt  but  its  dam  also  was  loosed  and  brought  to
Jesus,  and  that  the  people  set  him  on  both.2

The  account  given  by  Mark  and  Luke  does  not  con-
tradict that  of  Matthew,  but  is  included  in  it.  They
notice  the  colt  specially,  because  it  was  on  it  that  Jesus
rode,  and  there  was  probably  special  reference  to  it,
both  in  the  command  of  Jesus  to  bring  the  animals,  and
in  the  inquiry  of  the  owner  respecting  the  use  to  which
they  were  to  be  put,  the  colt  being  little  adapted  to
use.  When  both  were  brought  to  Jesus,  the  people  laid
garments  on  both,  that  he  might  ride  on  either.  Per-
haps they  were  placed  on  the  dam  first ;  but  removed  to
the  colt  when  Jesus  signified  his  pleasure  to  ride  on  it.
Why  he  selected  the  colt  we  are  not  informed ;  and
whether  any  other  use  was  made  of  the  dam  than  to
give  him  an  opportunity  to  make  a  selection  we  know
not.  The  words  "  set  him  thereon"  signify  that  he
was  set  on  the  clothes  just  mentioned,  and  not  that  he
was  set  on  both  of  the  animals.

Objection  11. — Mark  says  that  the  cock  crew  once
before  Peter  had  thrice  denied  Jesus.3  Matthew  and
Luke  say  that  he  did  not  crow  till  afterwards.4

In  interpreting  these  accounts  of  the  several  evange-

1  Mark,  xi.  1-11  ;  Luke,  xix.  29,  44.

2  Matt.  xxi.  1-11.

3  Mark,  xiv.  68.  4  Matt.  xxvi.  74 ;  Luke,  xxii.  60.


161.]  HARMONY     OF     THE     GOSPELS.  41 7

lists,  it  would  violate  the  usage  of  language  to  under-
stand the  phrase  "the  cock"  to  denote  a  particular
individual.  It  must  include  all  the  species,  at  least  to
the  extent  of  hearing  distance  from  the  place.  Even
in  Mark's  account  there  is  no  necessity  for  supposing
that  the  cock  which  crew  the  second  time  was  the  same
that  crew  the  first  time.  The  words  of  Matthew  and
Luke,  "  before  the  cock  crow,"  refer  to  the  general
crowing,  and  not  to  that  of  one  individual.  Mark's
account  is  more  definite,  and  affirms  that  not  even  two
individuals  had  crowed.  Hence  he  agrees  perfectly
with  the  two  evangelists,  according  to  the  true  import
of  their  language,  that  the  three  denials  occurred  before
the  general  cock-crowing,  and  he  affirms  this  truth  more
strongly  than  they,  because  with  more  particularity.
This  is  a  case  of  real  harmony  in  sense  under  the  ap-
pearance of  contradiction ;  and  is  therefore  a  clear
example  of  undesigned  coincidence.

The  circumstance  ought  not  to  be  overlooked,  that
the  most  particular  account  is  found  in  that  Gospel
which  was  written  under  the  special  supervision  of
Peter.  The  particulars  of  the  sad  event  were  more
deeply  impressed  on  his  mind  than  on  that  of  any  other
apostle ;  and  it  was  hence  natural  for  him  to  relate  them
with  greater  regard  to  minute  circumstances.  In  such
incidental  accordances  with  nature,  proofs  may  be  dis-
covered confirming  the  truth  of  the  evangelic  history.

Objection  12. — Luke  says  that  one  of  the  two  thieves
that  were  crucified  with  Christ  was  a  penitent : L  Matthew
and  Mark  say  that  both  of  them  reviled  him.2

The  supposition  that  the  penitent  thief  had  at  first
united  with  his  fellow-sufferer  in  reviling  Christ,  has  in
it  no  absurdity.  He  was  the  subject  of  an  instantane-
ous and  marvellous  change,  wrought  by  omnipotent  grace,
and  displaying  the  power  of  Jesus  to  save  at  the  moment
of  his  deepest  humiliation.

Objection  13. — The  evangelists  do  not  aoree  with
respect  to  the  time  at  which  the  women  came  to  the
sepulchre  on  the  morning  of  the  resurrection.     Matthew,

1  Luke,  xxiii.  39-43.  '2  Matt   xxvii.  -44;  Mark,  sv.  32.


418  HARMONY     OF     THE     GOSPELS.  [181.

Luke,  and  John  say  that  it  was  early  in  the  morning;,
and  John  specifies  that  it  was  while  it  was  yet  dark  ;
but  Mark  says  that  it  was  at  the  rising  of  the  sun.1

The  women,  who  had  engaged  to  assist  each  other  in
embalming  the  body  of  Jesus,  came  together  from  differ-
ent parts  of  the  city,  and  arrived  in  the  garden  at  differ-
ent times.  They  who  came  first  stopped  at  some  place
in  the  garden,  where  there  were  probably  prepared  seats,
and  waited  till  the  arrival  of  others,  before  they  pro-
ceeded to  the  sepulchre  with  their  spices.  But  Mary
Magdalene,  who  was  among  these  first  comers,  went
alone  to  the  sepulchre  "  while  it  was  yet  dark,"  and  saw
that  the  stone  had  been  rolled  away.  The  assembled
company  went  to  the  sepulchre  at  sunrise.  With  these
facts  all  the  accounts  harmonize.

Objection  14. — The  evangelists  disagree  with  re-
spect  to  the  number  of  angels  seen  in  the  sepulchre.
Luke  says  that  there  were  two:2  but  Matthew  and
Mark  mention  only  one.3  They  disagree  also  with  re-
spect to  the  posture :  Mark  says  that  he  was  sitting ;
Luke  that  they  were  standing.

Luke  says  that  the  two  angels  spoke  to  the  women ;  but
the  usage  of  language  authorizes  us  to  understand  that
one  of  the  angels  spoke  for  both.  This  speaker,  it  ap-
pears from  Matthew,  was  the  same  angel  that  had  been
sitting  on  the  stone  at  the  mouth  of  the  sepulchre.
The  silent  and  less  prominent  angel  may  have  been  seer,
by  those  women  only  who  entered  farthest  into  the
sepulchre.  Hence  Matthew  and  Mark  have  said  nothing
of  his  appearance;  but  since  they  do  not  affirm  that
only  one  angel  was  seen,  they  do  not  contradict  Luke.

The  angels  were  sitting  when  first  seen  ;  but  arose
before  they  addressed  the  women.  This  explains  the
difference  in  the  accounts  of  their  posture.


1  Matt,  xxviii.  1 ;  Mark,  xvi.  1,  2;  Luke,  xxiv.  1  ;  John.  xx.  1

2  Luke,  xxiv.  4-8.  s  Matt,  xxviii.  5,  7:  Mark,  xvi.  5-7,


T  H  E     END.


^    V4


**s    "O


v


.v-  *7°

7       -


.?  %.


\.


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process]
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide
Treatment  Date:  August  2005

PreservationTechnologies

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATIOnJ

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive
Cranberry  Township.  PA  16066
(724)  779-21 1 1


■  r


II  h


I


■

■

I  III


■

■■  \m


W


■

■

■

■        1H  u'MW


H  MB  111
