Retgsescerhoet at serttstogpiestcae teeatE Teak tae eottie eee seaas sy ecsuecsr ti cis Venue tetete ch sc5f oat Preniite 
fe Seictt is sei es tau teteteit ose rea sec 7a oalanga Sie eeaicleteeet gps i see 
en ART: A 


eteamann rte. et ttre 
‘ a een 


ts 
i: i n 


Sue rete 51 UNS a UE 


RELOMERE.. 228 
Private Libraiy 
Vol. No.0.3.__ 


PRIVATE LI2n 
No. G3 
OMER_G. NORRIS 


nY¥ 


ATC AES 
:" u a oN 4 
. ¥ Ms 


ny 


THE REVELATION 


_ AN ANALYSIS AND EXPOSITION OF 
THE LAST BOOK OF THE BIBLE 


BY 
ARNO C. GAEBELEIN 


Editor of “Our Hope; Author of the Annotated Bible; 
Exposition of Matthew; Joel; Daniel; Zechariah, etc. 


REV. OMERC. NORRIS 
Private Library 
Vol Ngiecrs eer 


11 Bothwell Circus Auckland 
Glasgow, Scotland New Zealand 


To my Beloved Wufe 
“Emma” 


In appreciation of her prayers and sacrifices, 
which have been for many years a constant 
encouragement and cheer, as well as a help, 
in a busy life of service for God, this volume 


1s affectionately dedicated. 


CONTENTS 


: PAGE. 
ME OPAREVELATION atom wigterne ote ciate Goa he chedanate 7 
Analysiscorithe mb OO Keni cloeren steicie s ol 
Hxegetical Annotations: 22-2... «es 28 


AppendixI. TheSeventy Weeks of Daniel 177 
Appendix II. The Symbolical Names... 196 


Appendix III. Helpful Books on Revela- 
ieikonay Chavel sl ELOY IAVE SG oa ONO ODO OOS 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 


https://archive.org/details/revelationOOO0Oarno_u1t6 


THE REVELATION’ 


“The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave 
unto Him—.” This is the first sentence with which 
this last book in God’s Word begins. The best title 
therefore is, ““The Revelation of Jesus Christ.” Our 
Lord received, according to this opening statement, a. 
revelation from God. This must be understood in 
connection with Himself as the Son of Man. As the 
Only Begotten He had no need of a revelation; in 
His Deity He is acquainted with all the eternal purposes. 
One with God He knows the end from the beginning. 
But He, who is very God, took on in incarnation the 
form of a servant, and thus being in fashion as a 
man, He humbled Himself (Phil, ii:7-8). And as 
the Man who had passed through death, whom God 
raised from the dead and exalted at His own right 
hand, God gave Him this revelation concerning the 
judgment of the earth and the glory of Himself. 
‘God raised Him from the dead and gave Him glory” 
(1 Peter i:21). What this Glory is which He received 
from God is fully and blessedly revealed in this book. 
It is the revelation of His acquired Glory and how 
this Glory is to be manifested in connection with 
the earth. And this revelation He makes known to 
His servants, because His own are sharers with Him 
in all He received from God. 


*Read this introduction several times before taking up the 
study of the book. 


8 THE REVELATION 


Pre-eminently His Revelation 


The Revelation is pre-eminently His revelation; 
the revelation of His Person and His Glory. “In the 
volume of the Book it is written of Me . e 
(Heb. x:7). Martin Luther asked, “What Book and 
what Person?” and answered, “There is only one 
Book—the Bible; and only one Person—Jesus Christ.” 
The whole Book, the Word of God, bears witness of 
Him, Who is the living Word. He is the center, the 
sum total and the substance of the Holy Scriptures. 
The prayerful reader of the Bible will never read 
in vain if he approaches the blessed Book with the one 
desire to know Christ and His Glory. His blessed 
face is seen on every page and the infallible Guide, 
the Holy Spirit, never fails to satisfy the longing of 
the believer’s heart to know more of Christ. Inasmuch 
as this last Bible book is the Revelation of Jesus 
Christ, an “Unveiling” of Himself, we find in it the 
completest revelation of His Person and His Glory. — 

It is here where many expositions of Revelation 
have missed the mark. Occupied chiefly with the 
symbols of the Book, the mysteries, the judgments 
and the promised consummation, they have neglected 
to emphasize sufficiently Him, who throughout this 
Book is pre-eminently the center of everything. The 
reader of Revelation does well to read first of all 
through the entire Book with this object in mind, to 
see what is said of our Lord, of His Person, His present 
and His future Glory. 

We shall find that all the features of His Person 
and His Work are mentioned. He is the Alpha and 
Omega, the first and the last (i:11); the Ancient 


THE REVELATION 9 


of Days (i:14 compare with Daniel vii:9); the “I 
Am,” that is, Jehovah, “I am He that liveth” 
(i:18); the Son of God (ii:18). These terms speak 
of His Deity. His earthly life in humiliation is 
touched upon in the statement, “the faithful Witness” 
(i:5). His death on the cross is likewise mentioned— 
“He hath washed us from our sins in His blood” 
(i:5); ‘He was dead” (i:18); “the Lamb as it had been 
slain” (v:6); “worthy is the Lamb that was slain” 
(v:12). He is mentioned twenty-eight times as the 
Lamb in Revelation and each time it reminds us of 
the cross and the great work accomplished there. 
His resurrection is seen, for He is called, “the First 
begotten from the dead” (i:5), and He speaks of 
Himself as, “He that was dead, and, behold, I am 
alive forevermore”’ (i:18); and again, “these things saith 
the first and the last, who was dead and is alive”’ (ii:8). 

Then we behold Him “in the midst” in glory, seen 
face to face by all the redeemed and worshipped by 
them, as well as by the heavenly hosts and ultimately 
by every creature, the fulfillment of Phil. 11:10-11, 
“that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, 
of things in heaven, and things on earth and things 
under the earth, and that every tongue should confess 
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the 
Father” (Rev. v:8-14). After the fifth chapter we 
have His revelation as the executor of the decreed 
judgments. He opens the seals; He sends forth 
the seven angels with the judgment trumpets and the 
seven angels with the judgment vials, in which the 
wrath of God is completed. ‘“The Father judgeth no 
man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son” 


10 THE REVELATION 


(John v:22). Then He is seen in the glorious union 
with the Bride (xix:7-10) and as the victorious Christ 
who passeth out of heaven followed by the armies 
of heaven (xix:11-21), conquering the opposing forces 
of evil, executing the wrath of Almighty God, appearing 
as King of kings and Lord of lords. The twentieth 
chapter reveals Him as the reigning Christ. He 
and His Saints with Him will reign over the earth 
for a thousand years. And all which follows reveals 
Him and His Glory as well as the blessed and eternal 
results of His work. 


A Book of Prophecy 


Aside from the title of the Book, which indicates 
that it deals with things future, there is a direct state- 
ment which determines its prophetic character. In 
the first beatitude of the seven which are found in 
the Book, we read that it is a Book of Prophecy— 
“Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the 
words of this Prophecy” (i:3). It is known to every 
intelligent student of the Bible that a good part of it 
is Prophecy. The great prophecies concerning the 
people Israel and the nations of the world are found 
in the Old Testament Scriptures. In the New Testa- 
ment there is but one Book of Prophecy, the Revela- 
tion. As it is the capstone of the entire revelation 
of God, without which the Bible would be an unfinished 
book, we find in its pages the consummation of the 
great Prophecies which were given by the Prophets 
of God in Old Testament times. 

For the study of this New Testament Prophetic 
Book the knowledge of the chief content of the Old 


THE REVELATION 11 


Testament Prophetic Word is therefore an absolute 
necessity. For instance to a Christian who does not 
have a fair grasp of Daniel’s great Prophecies, or is 
ignorant of the place which the people Israel hold 
in the purposes of God, the Book of Revelation is a 
sealed book, without any possible meaning. This is 
one of the chief reasons why this Book has suffered 
so much both from the critics and from the hands 
of commentators. ‘The Apostle Peter saith, “Knowing 
this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any 
private interpretation. For the prophecy came not 
in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God 
spake as they were moved by the Holy Spirit” (2 Peter 
i:20-21). The better translation for “private inter- 
pretation” is, “‘its own interpretation.” It means 
that the interpretation of prophecy must be done by 
comparing Scripture with Scripture. The holy men 
of God, the prophets, were the instruments of the 
Holy Spirit and made known God’s purposes in a 
progressive way. To understand any prophecy is 
only possible by taking the entire Prophetic Word 
into consideration. ‘That there is a wonderful harmony 
in the great body of prophetic dispensational truths 
as found in the Bible we have demonstrated in another 
volume.* This principle finds its strongest appli- 
cation in the interpretation of the Revelation. 
The Three Classes 

In 1 Corinthians x:32 the Apostle Paul speaks of 
three classes into which the human race is divided: 

*Harmony of the Prophetic Word”—a volume which has 
been used under God’s blessing to open the minds of many 
to the meaning of Prophecy. 


12 THE REVELATION 


the Jews, the Gentiles, and the Church of God. In 
the Old Testament there was no Church of God, for 
the Church is a New Testament institution. As 
the Revelation is the book of consummation these 
three classes must be seen in the contents of this 
Book. Many expositors have seen nothing but the 
struggles of the Church in her history in this Book. 
This is true of the so-called Preterist school and also 
of the Historical school of interpretation. The Pre- 
terist school teaches a fulfillment of all the apocalyptic 
visions in the struggles of the Church in the past. 
The Historical school also teaches that the visions 
concern mostly the Church. These schools of in- 
terpretation leave out the Jews and what is written 
concerning them and their final history during the 
end of the age, preceeding the glorious appearing of 
our Lord. Of late another school of interpreters has 
come into existence. They teach that the entire 
Book of Revelation concerns the Jewish people and 
that there is nothing about the Church in this last 
Book of the Bible. Any interpretation of Revelation 
which ignores the Jews, the people Israel and the 
fulfillment of Old Testament predictions concerning 
them is wrong. And any interpretation which teaches 
that there is nothing about the Church in Revelation 
is equally wrong. The Church and her destiny on 
earth, the destiny of the true Church and the destiny 
of the apostate Church, or Christendom, is found in 
the Book. The Jews and what concerns them in 
the end of the age, the Gentiles, the nations of the 
earth, and the judgments in store for them, as well 
as the future of the earth, a future of glory and blessing; 


THE REVELATION 13 


all this is found in our New Testament Book of 
Prophecy. 
The True Interpretation 


There is a true interpretation of Revelation which 
is in harmony with all previous prophecies and which 
opens the Book to our understanding. But how are 
we to find this true interpretation? We answer, 
the Book itself furnishes it. This is an important 
fact, both convincing and conclusive. It is therefore 
of no profit to examine the different theories and 
schools of interpretation. We shall avoid the terms 
Preterist, Historical and Futurist, and not try, as it 
has been attempted, to reconcile these different modes 
of interpretation. There must be one true inter- 
pretation and we claim that this is given to us by the 
Lord Himself in this Book. 


The Key Which Fits 


It has often been truthfully said, every Book in 
the Bible contains a key which unlocks the Book. 
The Revelation is no exception. John the beloved 
disciple was in banishment in the isle of Patmos, as 
Daniel the man greatly beloved, was a captive in 
Babylon. The Lord called these two great servants 
to behold the panorama of the future. Both wrote 
down their visions. While in the Book of Daniel we 
find no direct command to write, we find such a com- 
mand in the first chapter of Revelation. John received 
divine instruction how to write the Revelation. We 
find this in the nineteenth verse, “Write therefore 
what thou hast seen, and the things that are, and the 


14 THE REVELATION 


things that are about to be after these.”* John, 
guided by the Holy Spirit, then wrote the Revelation 
according to the divine direction. In examining 
this command to write we find that three things are 
mentioned. He is to write first the things he had 
seen, then the things which are, and finally the things 
that are about to be after these. When John received 
these instructions he had already seen something, and 
the vision he had he was instructed to write down. 
Then present things, the things which are, and future 
things, to be after present things have passed away, 
must be located in this Book. So we have the past, 
the present and the future in this key verse. 

Three Divisions—Where are They? 

It is then clear that the Book of Revelation must be 
divided into three main divisions. How are we to 
locate these divisions? They are marked, so that 
we are not left in doubt about it. In the beginning 
of the fourth chapter we find a significant statement 
which shows where the third division begins. After 
these things, that is after the contents of the opening 
three chapters were past, John heard the same voice 
speaking to him once more. He sees a door opened 
in heaven and is told, “Come up hither, and I will 
shew thee the things which must take place after these 
things” (iv:1). There can then be no doubt at all 
that with the fourth chapter the seer beheld the 
things which take place after the preceding things, 
the things which are, have passed away. The third 
division of Revelation begins with the fourth chapter. 
John beholds future things from heaven into which 


*This is the correct translation of this important verse. 


THE REVELATION 15 


he had been taken “‘in the Spirit.” The things he had 
seen and the things which are, are therefore contained 
in the first three chapters of the Book. 

The first chapter contains the things he had seen. 
‘What thou seest write in a book” was the first in- 
struction John received (Verse 11). In the nineteenth 
verse he is told, “Write therefore what thou hast 
seen.” Between verse 11 and verse 19 he saw a 
vision, which he was to write, and this vision consti- 
tutes the first section or division of the Book. The 
second and third chapters form the second division, 
the things which are. The beginning of the fourth 
chapter to the end of the Book is the final, the third 
division. ‘There is no better and more logical key. 
And this key given in the Book determines the true 


interpretation. 
The Patmos Vision 


“The things thou hast seen’—the first section of 
Revelation is the great Patmos vision, chapter i:12-18. 
It is the vision of the glorified Son of Man in the midst 
of the seven golden candlesticks (or lampstands). 


The Things Which Are 


The things which are, the present things, begin the 
prophetic section of the Revelation. The second and 
third chapters of Revelation, the things which are, 
contain the messages of our Lord addressed to the 
seven churches of Asia Minor. ‘These messages contain 
the first great Prophecy of Revelation. The prophecy 
concerns the Church on earth. We shall show in our 
comment on these two chapters that we have in them 
a divine history of the Church on earth. It is one of 


16 THE REVELATION 


the most remarkable sections of the Prophetic Word. 
What this present age is to be religiously and how it 
will end is made known in other parts of the New 
Testament. Our Lord in some of His Kingdom para- 
bles (Matthew xiii) reveals the characteristics of this 
age. The parables of the sower, the evil seed sown 
into the field, the mustard seed parable and the parable 
of the leaven are prophetic and teach, in part at least, 
what the church messages reveal. The Holy Spirit in 
the Epistolar testimony also reveals the religious and 
moral characteristics of the age, and depicts its depart- 
ure from the truth, and its end. The destiny of the 
ytrue Church is heavenly. She has a “blessed hope,” 


( which is to be with the Lord in Glory. She is called 


a 


| the Body of Christ, and He is the “Head of the Body.” 
, The Church is also the Bride of Christ and He is the 
| Bridegroom. The Body will be united to the Head 


in Glory; the Bride will be joined to the Bridegroom. 
\ 1 Thessalonians iv:13-18 is the Scripture which reveals 


‘this end for the true Church on earth. The professing 


Church, Christendom, which rejects the doctrine of 
Christ and goes into apostasy, has a far different 
destiny. The Lord will disown that which hath 
denied His Name, and judgment’ and wrath is to be 
poured out upon apostate Christendom (2 Thess. 
i:7-9). Now all these previous predictions con- 
cerning the Church on earth are consummated in the 
seven Church messages. When we come to the close 
of the third chapter we find a significant promise, and 
equally significant threat. “TI also will keep thee from 
the hour of temptation (trial) which shall come upon 
all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth” 


THE REVELATION 17 


(iii:10). This is the promise. It tells of the removal 
of the true Church, composed of all true believers, 
from this earthly scene. “I will spue thee out of my 
mouth” (iii:6). This is the threat to the apostate 
Church. Both the promise and the threat will be 
fulfilled. After the third chapter the word church 
does not occur again in Revelation. The reason for 
this is obvious. The history of the Church on earth 
terminates with the close of the third chapter. Because 
the true Church is no longer here but has been taken 
up into Glory, and that which professes to be the 
Church is disowned by the Lord, therefore no more 
mention of the Church is made in Revelation. 


The Things That Are After These 


The future things, things after the removal of the 
true Church from the earth, occupy the greater part 
of this Book. It is of the greatest importance to see 
that nothing whatever after the third chapter of 
Revelation has yet taken place. Some speak of a 
past and partial fulfillment of some of the visions 
found in this section. In view of the scope of the 
Book this is impossible. The open door in heaveh, the) 
voice which calls the seer to pass through that open 
door into heaven, is symbolical of the great coming 
event, the realization of the blessed Hope of the com- 
ing of the Lord for His Saints. That this open door is 
mentioned immediately after the third chapter and 
John is suddenly in the spirit in the presence of the 
throne in heaven is very significant. It proves that 
the entire situation is now changed. And the first 
great vision is a vision of the Saints in Glory, occupying 


2 


y 
a 


ie 


18 THE REVELATION 


thrones and worshipping God and the Lamb. With 
the sixth chapter the great judgment visions of this 
Book begin. These great punitive dealings with the 
earth are executed from above. All transpires after. 
the Lord has taken His Saints into Glory. No seal 
can be broken as long as this event has not been. 
But after the Rapture, the Seals of the Book, which 
the Lamb received, are broken by Him, the trumpet 
and the vial judgments fall upon the earth. All 
this takes place after the home-going of the true Church 
and before the glorious appearing of our Lord Jesus 
Christ (xix:11, etc.). 

Now this portion of Revelation from chapter vi 
to xix contains the events which transpire during 
the end of the age. It is the unfulfilled seventieth 
week of the great prophecy in the Book of Daniel 
(Dan. ix:24-27). This “end of the age” will last 
twice 1260 days, that is seven years. It is absolutely 
necessary to understand the scope of the seventy- 
week prophecy in Daniel in order to understand the 
greater part of these chapters in the Revelation.* 
We are led back upon Jewish ground. Events in 
connection with the Jewish people and Jerusalem are 
before us. The times of the Gentiles have taken 
on their final form of ten kingdoms which Daniel 
saw on the fourth beast as ten horns, and Nebuchad- 
nezzar on the image as ten toes. The empire in which 
these ten Kingdoms come into existence is the Roman 
empire. It will have a revival and come _ into 
existence again. Then a _ wicked leader will take 


*“The Prophet Daniel” by A. C. G. contains a very simple 
exegesis of Daniel’s prophecies. 


THE REVELATION 19 


the headship of that resurrected Roman empire, 
and another Beast, the false prophet, the Anti- 
christ will domineer over the Jewish people and 
persecute their saints, the remnant of Israel, while 
the earth and the dwellers upon the earth experience 
the great judgments. The last half of these seven 
years is called the great tribulation. We must also 
remember that our Lord left behind a great Prophecy 
concerning the end of the age. This Prophecy is 
contained in the Olivet Discourse, the first part of which 
(Matt. xxiv:444) harmonizes in a striking manner 
with the events in Revelation vi-xix. Our Lord 
calls special attention to Daniel and likewise speaks 
of the great tribulation. In our brief exposition we 
shall point out some of the interesting and convincing 
details. 

The glorious climax is the visible manifestation of 
the Lord out of heaven, crowned with many crowns,* 
the defeat and overthrow of the Beast and the kings 
of the earth and their armies, the binding of Satan, 
and the reign of Christ with His Saints for a thousand 
years. After that follows the great white throne judg- 
ment, which is the judgment of the wicked dead, 
the glories of the new Jerusalem, the eternal destiny 
of the redeemed and the eternal destiny of the lost. 

If this great last Book of the Bible is studied in 
this divinely given order it will no longer be, as is so 
often said, a sealed book. All fanciful interpretations 
and applications of these great visions to past or 
present history can no longer be maintained as soon 

*Compare Revelation xix:11-21 with Daniel vii:11-14 and 
Matthew xxiv:27-31. 


20 THE REVELATION 


as we reckon with the fact that these visions are not 
yet fulfilled, and are going to be fulfilled after the 
true Church is no longer on the earth. 


The Promised Blessing 


“Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear 
the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things 
which are written therein, for the time is at hand” 
(verse 3). A blessing is promised to him who readeth, 
and who hears and keeps. It does not say that a 
blessing is for him who understands and knows every- 
thing which is in this Book. If such were the con- 
dition the writer and the reader would have no claim 
on this promised blessing. The Bible-teacher, or any 
other man, who says he knows and understands every- 
thing found in this great finale of God’s Word is very 
much mistaken. We cannot be sure about every- 
thing in some of these visions and the full meaning 
of some may not be understood till the world sees 
the fulfillment. The blessing is promised to all His 
people who give attention to the Revelation of Jesus 
Christ. What is the blessing we may expect through 
the reading and prayerful study of the words of this 
Prophecy? 

First of all we receive through this Book a wonderful 
vision of our Saviour and Lord. This is what we 
need as His people above everything else, and it is 
this which brings blessing into our lives. As stated 
before, this Book is pre-eminently His revelation, a 
blessed unveiling of His Person and Glory. But 
we also get another blessing. In reading through 
this Book we see what is in store for this age, what 


THE REVELATION 3) 


judgments will overtake the world, and how Satan’s 
power will be manifested to the full upon those who 
rejected His grace. Judgment, tribulation and wrath 
are swiftly coming upon this age. Out of all this our 
gracious Lord has delivered us. here. is no judg- 
ment, no wrath for us who know Him as our sin-bearer 
and our hiding-place. Praise must fill our hearts 
when we read the words of this Prophecy and remem- 
ber the grace which has saved us from all which is 
coming upon this age. Another blessing is the assur- 
ance of ultimate victory and glory. Dark is the age, 
and becoming darker, but in Revelation we behold 
the glory which is coming for His Saints first of all 
and after the judgment clouds are gone, for Jerusalem, 
the nations and the earth. Reading Revelation fills 
the heart with the assurance and certainty of the 
outcome of all. It is a solemn atmosphere which fills 
the whole Book of Revelation. As we continue to 
read and continue to breathe t this heavenly and ‘solemn 
atmosphere it will result in a ‘closer. walk y wi h God, 
a more spiritual worship and a greater “and more 
unselfish service for Him “Who loveth us and hath 


OP rent 


washed us from_our sins in His own blood, and hath 
made us s priests and kings unto God His Father.” 


22 


THE REVELATION 


THE ANALYSIS OF THE 


REVELATION 


Title: The Revelation of Jesus Christ. 


I. THE PATMOS VISION OF THE GLORIFIED SON OF 


Non fF YN 


“NI 


MAN. CHAPTER I. 


The Book, its title and introduction. Verses 1-3. 
Greeting and Benediction. Verses 4-5. 

The Outburst of Praise. Verses 6-7. 

The Testimony of the Almighty. Verse 8. 


. Johnin Patmos. Verses 9-11. 


The Great Vision of the Son of Manin Glory. Verses 
12=16: 
The Effect and the Commission. Verses 17-21. 


Il. THE THINGS WHICH ARE. THE SEVEN CHURCH- 
MESSAGES REVEALING THE HISTORY OF THE 
CHURCH ON EARTH. CHAPTERS II-IIl. 


CHAPTER 


bw hD o 


CHAPTER 
bi 
6. 
hes 


10 


Ephesus, the Post-Apostolic Period. Verses 1-7. 
Smyrna, the Period of Persecution. Verses 8-11. 
Pergamos, the Period of Corruption. Verses 12-17. 
Thyatira, the Romish Corruption. Verses 18-29. 


Il. 


Sardis, the Reformation Period. Verses 1-6. 
Philadelphia, the Faithful Remnant. Verses 7-13. 
Laodicea, the Indifferent and Apostate Church. 
Verses 14-22. 


THE REVELATION 23 


lil. THE THINGS WHICH ARE AFTER THESE. THE 
END OF THE AGE, THE CONSUMMATION AND 
THE FINAL MESSAGES. CHAPTERS IV-XXII. 

First Division: The Heavenly Scene. Before the Throne. 
Chapters IV-V. 


CHAPTER IV. 
1. The Open Door and the Vision of the Throne. 
Verses 1=3. 


2. The Twenty-four Elders. Verse 4. 

3. The Description of the Throne. Verse 5. 

4. The Four Living Creatures and the great Praise and 
Worship. Verses 6-11. 


CHAPTER V. 

Who is Worthy to open the Book? Verses 1-3. 

The Answer. Verse 4-5. 

The Vision of the Lamb. Verses 6-7. 

The Worship of the Living Creatures and the Elders. 
Verses 8-10. 

5. The Worthiness of the Lamb Acclaimed by all 

Beings. Verses 11-14. 


Cay ein ath 


Second Division: The Opening of the Seven Seals. Chapters 
VI-VHI:5. 
CHAPTER VI. 
1. The First Seal; the White Horse; the Conquering 
Rider. Verses 1-2. 
2. The Second Seal. The Red Horse; the Rider with 
the great Sword. Verses 3-4. 
3. The Third Seal. The Black Horse; the Rider with 
the Balance. Verses 5-6. 
4. The Fourth Seal. The Pale Horse; the Rider Fol- 
lowed by Hades. Verses 7-8. 
5. The Fifth Seal. The Cry of the Souls Under the 
Altar. Verses 9—11. 
6. The Sixth Seal. The Shaking of all Things. The 
Anticipation of the End. Verses 12-17. 


Between the Sixth and Seventh Seal. A Parenthetical Vision. 
(Chapter VII). 


24 THE REVELATION 


CHAPTER, VII. 
1. The Remnant of Israel Called and Sealed. 
Verses 1-8. 
2. The Saved Multitude of Gentiles Coming out of the 
Great Tribulation. Verses 9-17. 
End of the Parenthests. 
3. The Seventh Seal. Verses 1-5. 


CHAPTER VIII:1-5. 


Third Division: The Sounding of the Seven Trumpets. Chapters 
VITI :6—X1:18. 
CHAPTER VIII:6-13. 
1. The First Trumpet. Verses 6-7. 
2. The Second Trumpet. Verses 8-9. 
3. The Third Trumpet. Verses 10-11. 
4. The Fourth Trumpet. Verses 12-13. 


CHAPTER IX. 
5. The Fifth Trumpet. The First Woe. Verses 1-12. 
6. The Sixth Trumpet. The Second Woe. Verses 
Tos 2 


Between the Sixth and Seventh Trumpets. Parenthetical 


Visions. (Chapters X—XI:14.) 
CHAPTER X. 


1. The Descending Angel. Verses 1-7. 
2. The Little Book. Verses 8-11. 


CHAPTER XI. 
3. The Temple, Altar and Jewish Worshippers. Verses 
tee? 
The Two Witnesses. Verses 3-6. 
The Beast and the Witnesses. Verse 7. 
The Treatment of the Slain Witnesses. Verses 8-10. 
. Their Public Vindication. Verses 11-12. 
. The Great Earthquake. Verses 13-14. 
End of the Parenthesis. 
9. The Seventh Trumpet. Verses 15-18. 


CONAN 


Fourth Division: Satan’s Power and Satan’s Masterpieces. 
Chapters XI:19—XIII. 


THE REVELATION 25 


CHAPTER XI:19. 
1. The Vision of the Opened Temple. Verse 19. 


CHAPTER XII. 
2. The Great Sign. Verses 1-5. 
3: The Escape of the Woman. Verse 6. 
4. War in Heaven, and Satan cast out of Heaven. 
Verses 7-12. 
5. The Dragon Persecuting the Woman. Verses 13-17. 


CHAPTER XIII. 
6. The Beast out of the Sea. Verses 1-10. 
7. The Beast out of the Earth. Verses 11-18. 
Fifth Division: The Power of God in Intervention. Grace and 
Judgment Manifested. Chapter XIV. 


CHAPTER XIV. 
1. The Lamb upon Zion and the 144,000. Verses 1-5. 
2. The Proclamation of the Everlasting Gospel. 
Verses 6-7. 
3. Babylon has Failen! Verse 8. 
4. The Eternal Wrath for the Worshippers of the Beast. 


Verses 9-11. 
5. The Blessed Dead who Die in the Lord. Verses 
12-13. 


6. The Harvest and the Vintage. Verses 14-20. 


Sixth Division: The Seven Angels having Seven Plagues; the 
Vials of Wrath. Chapters XV—XVI. 

CHAPTER XV. 

1. The Seven Angels with the Seven Plagues. Verse 1. 
Another Scene of Worship. Verses 2-4. 
The Seven Angels Proceeding out of the Temple. 
r Verses 5-8. 
CHAPTER XVI. 

4, The First Vial. Verses 1-2. 

5. The Second Vial. Verse 3. 

6. The Third Vial. Verses 4-7. 

7. The Fourth Vial. Verses 8-9. 

8. The Fifth Vial. Verses 10-11. 

9. The Sixth Vial. Verse 12. 


26 THE REVELATION 


Between the Sixth and Seventh Vial, Parenthetical Vision. 
Verses 13-16. 
10. The Seventh Vial. Verses 17-21. 


Seventh Division: The Great Harlot, Babylon, and her Judg- 


ment. Chapters XVII-XVII. 
CHAPTER XVII. 


1. The Description of the Woman. 
2. ‘The Interpretation by the Angel. Verses 7-15. 
3. The Destruction of the Harlot. Verses 16-18. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


4. The Angelic Announcement. Verses 1-3. 

5. The Call to Separate. Verses 4-5. 

6. Her Pride and Righteous Destruction. Verses 6-8. 

7. The Universal Lamentation over Her. Verses 9-19. 

8. The Rejoicing Heavens. Verses 20. 

9. Her Utter and Everlasting Destruction. Verses 
PMNEARY. 

10. The Blood of the Saints found in Her. Verse 24. 


Eighth Division: The Manifestation of the King and the Mil- 
-lennium. Chapters XIX-XX:6. 
CHAPTER XIX. 
1. The Four Hallelujah’s in Heaven. The Marriage of 
the Lamb. Verses 1-10. 
2. Heaven Opened. The Coming of the King. Verses 
LI=16; 
3. The Battle of Armageddon and the Execution of 
Wrath. Verses 17-21. 
CHAPTER XX:1-6. 


4. The Binding of Satan. Verses 1-4. 
5. The Reign of Christ and His Saints for a Thousand 
Years. Verses 5-6. 
Ninth Division: After the Thousand Years. The Vision of the 
New Jerusalem. Chapters XX:7—-XXII:5. 

CHAPTER XX:9-15. 

1. Satan Loosed. The Last Revolt. Verses 7-9. 

2. Satan’s Eternal Doom. Verse 10. 

3. The Great White Throne Judgment. Verses 11-15. 


THE REVELATION 27 


CHAPTER XXI. 

4. The Eternal State. Verses 1-8. ‘ 

5. The Vision of the Holy City of Jerusalem. Verses 

9-27. 

CHAPTER XXII:1-5. 

6. The River and the Tree of Life. Verses 1-2. 

7. The Seven Glories of the Redeemed. Verses 3-5. 
Tenth Division: The Final Messages. Chapter XXII:6-21. 


CHAPTER XXII:6-21. 

1, The Angel’s Message. Verses 6-11. 

2. The Message of the Lord. Verses 12-13. 

3. The Two Classes. Verses 14-15. 

4. The Final Testimony of Christ Concerning Himself. 
Verse 16. 

5. The Answer of the Spirit and the Bride. Verse 17. 

6. The Final Warning. Verses 18-19. 

7. The Final Message; the Final Prayer; the Final 
Benediction. Verses 20-21. 


28 THE REVELATION 


EXEGETICAL ANNOTATIONS 
I. The Patmos Vision of the Glorified Son of Man. 
Chapter I 


1. The Book: Its Title and Introduction. Verses 
1-3. As we have already spoken of the title and the 
prophetic character of the book, we do not repeat 
it here. The book does not contain, as it 1s often said, 
“revelations,” but one great revelation and that the 
Revelation of Jesus Christ. And this revelation is 
“to show unto His servants things which must shortly 
come to pass,” so that they may know the future 
and serve Him with the Glory-light thrown upon 
their path. The vision of the future is much needed 
as an incentive for true and devoted service. 

2. Greeting and Benediction. Verses 4-5. ‘The 
churches which John addressed were in the Province 
of Asia, not the continent Asia, but one of the pro- 
vinces of Asia minor. (See Acts xvi:6; xix:10, etc.). 
These seven churches are representative of the entire 
church, and prophetically unfold the history of the 
church on earth. “Grace unto you and Peace’ is 
the greeting. Grace and peace are the blessed posses- 
sions of the true children of God. Though the pro- 
fessing church may fail in her testimony, and the 
dark days of apostasy increase, grace and peace for 
God’s servants and children will never fail. The 
greeting differs from those found in the Epistles. 
In the Epistles the greetings come from the Father 
and the Son; the Holy Spirit being omitted. Here 


THE REVELATION 29 


Jehovah is mentioned first, “who is, who was and who 
is to come”—“the I Am that I am’”—the Self-existing 
One (Ex. iii:14). Then comes the Holy Spirit, spoken 
of here as “the seven Spirits.” Not as the “one 
Spirit” (Eph. iv:4; 1 Cor. xii:13) is He mentioned, 
but in His own complete fullness and His diverse activi- 
ties (Isaiah xi:2). And finally the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. “He is the faithful witness;” this 
describes His holy and perfect life on earth. “The 
first begotten from the dead.” He died that shameful 
death on the cross and finished the Work the Father 
gave Him to do. Risen from the dead He is the first 
begotten as well as the first fruits. ‘The Prince 
of the kings of the earth.” This is His future title 
and reveals His coming Glory. What comfort there 
is here for God’s people! Oh, the grace and peace 
which flow from a believing contemplation of Him- 
self and the knowledge that we are one with Him! 

3. The Outburst of Praise. Verses 6-7. ‘The last 
sentence of verse 5 belongs to verse 6. This inspired 
outburst of Praise is the true Glory song of the true 
Church. It contains the blessed fundamentals of the 
Gospel of Grace what He has done for us and what He 
has made us and what we shall be with Him. It is the 
first doxology in this book. Others follow and increase 
in adoration. Twofold here; threefold in iv:11; 
fourfold in v:13; sevenfold in vii:12. The tribute 
is followed by a testimony of His Coming. It is 
not His coming for His Saints but His coming to the 
earth. Compare with Acts i:11; Matthew xxiv:30; 
Daniel vii:13; Zech. xii:9-14. 

4. The Testimony of the Almighty. Verse 8. God, 


30 THE REVELATION 


so to speak, puts His seal to it all. The words of the 
preceding verse “Even so Amen” must be read with 
this verse. The speaker is Jehovah. 

5. John in Patmos. Verses 9-11. John was in 
banishment in the isle of Patmos and “became in the 
Spirit on the Lord’s day.” Does this mean “the 
Day of the Lord,” 7. ¢., the day on which He comes in 
power and glory to begin His reign, or does it mean 
the blessed memorial day, the first day of the week? 
It means without doubt the latter. 

6. The Great Vision of the Glorified Son of Man. 
Verses 12-16. John turned to see the voice. He 
beheld the greatest vision human eyes have seen. ‘The 
seven golden candlesticks (lamp-stands) represent 
the seven churches (verse 20) and are symbolical of 
the entire church. He Himself is “in the midst” and 
seen by John “like unto a Son of Man.” But the 
vision makes it clear that He is more than a Son of 
Man, for He is the Ancient of Days as well. The 
title Son of Man belongs to Him both in His humiliation 
and exaltation. He was the Son of Man on earth; 
He is the Son of Man in Glory; and when He comes 
back to earth and receives the kingdom, it will be as 
Son of Man. Judgment will be executed by Him. 
In this vision His judicial character is the leading 
feature. He is clothed with a robe down to His feet. 
While this denotes priestly dignity we see Him not 
engaged in priestly activity. The long-robed figure 
expresses the great dignity of Himself as the Priest- 
King who is about to enter upon His work as Judge. 
The golden girdle is symbolical of divine righteousness; 
His white head and hair identify Him with the Ancient 


THE REVELATION Pe ON 


of Days who sits in judgment (Daniel vii:9-12). The 
flaming eyes, all searching; the fiery burning feet; 
the voice like the sound of many waters (Psalm xxix); 
the two-edged sword; the face which was once marred 
and dishonored, now shining like the sun—all is 
symbolical and speaks of the great dignity and glory 
and the judicial rights of the Son of Man. His judg- 
ment in this book begins with the house of God, that 
which professes His Name; judgment is executed 
by Him on the earth and all culminates in His visible 
and glorious appearing, when all things will be put 
in subjection under His feet. 

There is one feature of the vision which needs an 
explanation. What do the seven stars mean, which 
are in the right hand of the Son of Man? Verse 20 
gives the answer. ‘They are the seven angels of the 
seven churches. Angels and stars are symbolical 
figures. The application of these terms to church- 
officers or bishops and pastors is incorrect. Stars are 
used in Scripture to typify true believers. Stars are 
heavenly bodies which shine during the night; so are 
true believers in a heavenly position with the respon- 
sibility to shine in the night. The lamp-stands repre- 
sent the visible, professing church; the stars represent 
the true believing element in the Church. They are 
in the right hand of Himself, held securely there. Fur- 
thermore, only true believers have an ear to hear 
what the Spirit saith. The stars are called angels, 
because an angel is both a messenger and a represen- 
tative and true believers are likewise that. 

7. The Effect of the Vision and the Commission. 
Verses 17-20. John fell at His feet as dead; the 


32 THE REVELATION 


vision was overpowering. Compare with Daniel x:4-11. 
But He put His hand upon Him. Blessed is His own 
testimony. He is the Living One, which means 
“Jehovah.” He was dead. And alive forevermore; 
He is risen from the dead and hath the keys of Death 
and of Hades. Then follows the command to write 
which we have fully explained in the introduction. 


THE REVELATION 33 


li. The Things whichare. Theseven 
Church Messages revealing the 
History of the Church on Earth 


Chapters Ii and Ill 


These two chapters are extremely rich in prophetic 
and spiritual truths. ‘The things which are,” the 
second division of this book, is now before us. The 
churches mentioned in the two chapters, and never 
after, actually existed. They can easily be located 
geographically and traced historically. We do not 
attempt this as it has no spiritual value. These 
messages of course had a deep and significant meaning 
for the different local assemblies. That there are 
many spiritual lessons written in these messages, is 
also true. However, all this must take a secondary 
place. The primary thing is the prophetic interpre- 
tation. The seven churches represent the entire 
Church on earth, as already stated, and the con- 
ditions of these seven churches foreshadow the different 
periods of the Church on earth from the Apostolic 
times to the ending days, when the Lord calls His 
Saints to meet Him in the air. There were many 
hundreds of churches in existence throughout the 
countries where the Gospel had been preached. But 
messages from the Glorified Son of Man were not sent 
to all of them. Only seven, and these closely con- 
nected in the province of Asia, were selected by the 
Lord. The Son of Man is the omniscient Lord and 
as such He knows the end from the beginning. He 
knew the entire history of the Church from the begin- 


34 THE REVELATION 


ning. He knew the coming persecutions, declensions, 
revivals, the perversions of His truth, the denials of 
His Name, the depths of Satan and the final apostasy. 
In the days of His humiliation that future was not 
hidden from him, for in the Kingdom parables He 
revealed the religious conditions of this Christian 
age (Matthew xiii). With the divine knowledge, 
what this age would bring forth and how it would 
end, He looked with His all-searching eyes into the 
conditions of the different churches. He saw in seven 
of them conditions which were in embryo, the con- 
ditions through which the whole church on earth would 
pass, so that we have in these seven messages, which 
uncover the state of the different churches, the moral 
and religious history of Christendom. Our hints on 
all this must be necessarily brief, but enough will be 
given to prove the assertion. Hundreds of pages 
have been written on these two chapters tracing in 
them the history of the Church. 

1. Ephesus, the Apostolic and Post-Apostolic Period. 
Verses 1-7, Ephesus means “desired;”’? the Church is 
the object of His love, so beautifully stated in the 
Epistle to the Ephesians. He loved the Church and 
gave Himself for it; He cleanseth and sanctifieth it 
and He will present it to Himself a glorious Church 
(Ephes. v:25-27). To that Church was communicated 
the highest revelation, especially the truth concerning 
the Church, the body and glory of Christ. Ephesus 
stands therefore for the first period of the Church on 
earth. The Lord bears witness to its faithfulness. 
For His Name’s sake they labored and fainted not. 
What is especially a mark of the Apostolic and post- 


% 


THE REVELATION 35 


Apostolic times is the statement “‘thou hast tried them 
(tested them) which say they are apostles and hast 
found them liars.” Compare this with 2 Cor. xi:13 
“for such are false apostles, deceitful (lying) workers.” 
Men arose who pretended to be apostles even while 
the apostles were still living and more so after their 
departure. But the early church did not tolerate these 
false apostles who appeared in large numbers during 
the second half of the first century. The deeds of the 
Nicolaitanes they also hated. What the Nicolaitanes 
were we shall find later. But the Lord touches the 
sore spot, the beginning of evil in the words “I have 
against thee because thou hast left thy first love.” 
What is the first love? The Apostle Paul in his heart 
devotion to the Person of Christ, with His burning 
desire to know Christ and to win Christ, with His 
wonderful confession “‘Christ is all in all’—‘“not I, 
but Christ,” illustrates the first love. The affection 
for Christ and devotion to Him, the One altogether 
lovely, was waning. Outwardly everything may have 
looked right, but the Lord, who desires the deepest 
affection of His people, knew that their hearts were 
departing from Him. This is the starting point of 
all church and individual failure. Their hearts were 
growing cold towards Himself. Think it over! The 
beginning of evil, in doctrine or in life, is heart-depart- 
ure from Christ, and not giving Christ the pre-eminence. 
Read also Paul’s prediction concerning Ephesus and 
what should come after his departure (Acts xx:29-30). 

2. Smyrna, the Period of Persecution. Verses 8-11. 
Smyrna stands for the next period up to about 313 A.D. 
Smyrna means “myrrh” which was one of the ingre- 


36 THE REVELATION 


dients used for the embalming of the dead. The Lord 
in addressing this church speaks of Himself as He 
“who was dead and is alive.” It is the Church in 
tribulation and persecution. This is clearly marked 
in the message itself. “Behold the devil shall cast 
some of you into prison that ye may be tried; and. 
ye shall have tribulation ten days; be thou faithful 
unto death and I will give thee a crown of life.” Such 
a martyr-period is recorded in the history of the 
Church. The number ten is of special interest, for 
history informs us that there were just ten great 
persecutions of Christians by the Roman emperors. 
It was the work of the devil. Persecution of the Saints 
of God by pagan Rome, papal Rome or by any other 
power, is always the devil’s work. But who are those 
mentioned here and in the message to Philadelphia, 
who say they are Jews and are not, but are of the 
synagogue of Satan? It is a Judaized Christianity and 
with it a perverted and obscured Gospel. That evil 
was present in the apostolic age; it.is fully mani- 
fested in our own days. They deny the Gospel of 
Grace and put in its place the Gospel of works and 
salvation by character in keeping the law. They make 
much of Sabbath-keeping, ordinances and religious 
observances and yet with it all they obscure the Cross 
and deny the Blood. They are the synagogue of 
Satan, brought together by that cunning being as a 
religious company. It is the false, the spurious 
Church as we see it almost universally about us. 

3. Pergamos, the Period of Worldly Corruption. 
Verses 12-17. Pergamos means “a thorough mar- 
riage.” Pergamos is described as dwelling where 


THE REVELATION 37 


Satan’s throne (not seat) is. And Satan’s throne is 
not in Hell, but his throne is in the world, this present 
evil age, whose god he is (2 Cor. iv:4). This shows 
prophetically that period when the church gave up 
her pilgrim character and was thoroughly married 
to the world. A great change took place. When the 
devil found that “the blood of the martyrs is the 
seed of the Church” he stopped his work as the roaring 
lion and took on the form of an angel of light. What 
had led to Israel’s ruin was brought by the enemy 
into the professing Church, that is an unholy alliance 
with the world. The instrument used to accomplish 
this was the Emperor Constantine. The suffering, 
persecuted Church became joined to the world, wedded 
to the state; Constantine made the Church a world- 
institution. This third church-period corresponds to 
the third parable in Matthew xiii. The little mustard 
seed became a big tree, rooted in the field (the world) 
and the branches filled with birds (representing un- 
converted people). Church historians have spoken 
of Constantine’s work as the work of God and a 
victory of Christianity. It was rather the opposite, 
the work of the enemy and the defeat of true Chris- 
tianity. The name of Balaam appears also. When he 
could not curse Israel, he put the daughters of Midian 
and Moab amongst the people of God and in the 
unlawful mixture which followed he succeeded in 
hurting Israel (Numbers xxxi:16; xxv:1-2; Jude ii). 
And here the Nicolaitanes are mentioned for the 
second and last time. The best and perhaps only 
solution of this mysterious word is to examine its 
meaning. It is a Greek compound. Nzkao means 


38 THE REVELATION 


to have the upper hand, to domineer; /aos means, the 
people (our English “laity’). Nicolaitanes signifies 
“the domineerers of the people.” A priestly class had 
sprung up in the church, domineering over the rest of 
the people, the so-called laity. And this domineering 
class claimed a superior place in the body of Christ 
and a priesthood which rightly belongs to the Lord 
Jesus Christ. This evil was rejected in Ephesus, but is 
fully sanctioned and tolerated in Pergamos. Priestly 
assumption became then, and ever since has been, the 
corruption of Christianity. This is what our Lord 
hates and what He hates we must hate with Him. 

4. Thyatira, the Period of the Romish Corruption. 
Verses 18-29. ‘The corruption which set in like a great 
flood with the fourth century increased till the depths 
of Satan (verse 24) were reached. Thyatira brings 
us into the period of the Papacy and its wickedness, 
ecclesiastical and otherwise. Here our Lord reveals 
Himself as “the Son of God.” Rome speaks more of 
Him as the son of the virgin, the son of Mary, than as 
the Son of God. The Roman Catholic apostasy has 
put a woman in the place of the Son of God. Her 
corruption is fully revealed in verse 20. Jezebel, who 
called herself a prophetess, was permitted to teach and 
seduce God’s servants to commit fornication and to 
eat things sacrificed unto idols. Jezebel the wicked 
woman represents the Papacy. Jezebel was a heathen- 
ish woman married to an Israelitish King. She was 
a queen and an idolatress and persecuted the true 
prophets of God (1 Kings xviii-xxi). Apply all this 
to the Romish church with her spiritual fornication and 
idolatry. The church—more strictly speaking the 


THE REVELATION 39 


Papacy—assumes the place of teacher and dictator; 
and Christ is rejected. Jezebel has a double meaning. 
It means “‘the chaste one” but also means “‘a dunghill.” 
Rome claims to be the Bride of Christ, but in reality 
is a dunghill of all vileness and corruption. In verse 
21 is another significant statement “she repents not” 
(repented is incorrect). Rome does not change. 
She is the same to-day as she was 500 years ago. 
She exists to-day and will continue in her impenitent 
state till the predicted doom will overtake her (verse 
22; Chapter xvii-xviii). In the fourth kingdom 
parable (Matthew xiii) corresponding to this fourth 
church-period, our Lord speaks of a woman, who 
took leaven (corruption) and put it into the fine, 
pure, three measures of meal (symbolical of the doctrine 
of Christ). The woman in the parable of the leaven 
is Rome, the Jezebel in the message to Thyatira. 


Chapter Il! 


5. Sardis, the Period of the Reformation and 
Protestantism. Verses 1-6. We have traced _ briefly 
the decline during the 1450-1500 years of Church 
history. The climax is reached in Thyatira, prophetic- 
ally the Roman abomination and apostasy. In Sardis 
we see the progress of evil stayed. Roman Catholicism, 
as already mentioned, is a fixed and unchanging 
religious system. Rome will yet have for a brief 
season a startling revival and get back her place as 
the mistress of the nations. But in Sardis we see a 
reaction. Sardis means “those escaping.” It is the 
reformation period, the movement which produced 


40 THE REVELATION 


Protestantism. The reformation itself was of God 
and the great men who were used were the most mighty 
instruments of the Holy Spirit. It was the greatest 
work, up to that time, since the days of the apostles. 
But out of it came the human systems which go by the 
name of Protestantism. The reformation began well, 
but soon developed in the different Protestant systems 
into a dead, lifeless thing. They have a name to live 
but are dead. This is the verdict of our Lord upon the 
churches which sprung out of the reformation: “Thou 
hast a name that thou livest and art dead.” 

6. Philadelphia, the Faithful Remnant. Verses 7-13. 
Philadelphia means “brotherly love.” As Sardis 
came out of Thyatira, a protest against it, so Phila- 
delphia comes out of Sardis and is a protest against 
the dead, lifeless, Spiritless condition prevailing in 
Protestantism. Out of the deadness of the state 
churches over and over again came forth companies 
of believers, energized by the Holy Spirit. Philadel- 
phia has been variously applied to Methodism, the 
evangelical movements, missionary efforts and to the 
revivals of the nineteenth century. But it is more 
than that. It is a complete return to the first 
principles. The message makes this clear. It 
is the one message (besides Smyrna) in which. 
the Lord does not say “I have against thee;” it 
is that which pleases Him and which He com- 
mends. It is a revival and turning back to the 
first love. ‘The Lord Jesus Christ is once more 
as the all absorbing object before the heart; Phila- 
delphia repudiates all that dishonors Him and owns 
alone that worthy, ineffable Name. It is a faithful 


THE REVELATION 4] 


remnant gathering around His Name as there was a 
faithful remnant in the closing days of the Old Testa- 
ment (Mal. iii:16-17). All. human pretensions are 
rejected. The truth of the unity of all believers is 
owned and manifested in brotherly love towards all 
the Saints. They walk in the path of separation, in 
self-judgment, in lowliness of mind; they have a little 
strength, which means weakness; they are a feeble 
few. Twice the Lord speaks of obedience to His 
Word. “Thou hast kept my Word’—“‘Thou hast 
kept the Word of my patience.” And the Philadelphian 
does not deny His Name. These are the two chief 
characteristics of this phase of Christianity during 
the closing days of the professing Church on earth: 
Obedience to His Word and faithfulness and devotion 
to His Name. The Word and the Name are denied 
in the last days. The apostasy of Christendom 
consists in the rejection of the written Word and the 
living Word. And turning their backs upon a dead 
profession, going on in confessed weakness are such 
paralyzed in their service? Far from it! The Lord 
promises to open the door for service which no man 
can shut. Every child of God may test this. True 
and continued service is the result of true and con- 
tinued faithfulness to the Lord. Especially is this 
service to be blessed to those who hold to a perverted 
Judaized Gospel (verse 9). And there is the great 
promise for them, which they believe and hope for, 
the coming of Himself to keep them out of the great 
tribulation (verse 10). In Philadelphia there is a 
revival of prophetic truth, an earnest waiting for the 
coming of the Lord. Philadelphia is not a defined 


42 THE REVELATION 


church-period but rather a description of a loyal 
remnant called out by the Spirit of God and bearing 
the final testimony to the whole counsel of God by 
word and deed. If the reader desires to please the 
Lord then study the details of the message to Phila- 
delphia and walk accordingly. 

7. Laodicea, the Indifferent and Apostate Church. 
Verses 14-22. Laodicea means “The judging or rights 
of the People.” It is the opposite from Nicolaitanism. 
The domineerers of the people still go on in Rome, but 
in Protestantism the people (the laity) arise and claim 
their rights and do the judging. This condition was 
also foreseen by the Apostle Paul. ‘For the time will 
come when they (the laity) will not endure sound 
doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to 
themselves teachers, having itching ears” (2 Tim. 
iv:3). We see in Laodicea the final religious and 
apostate conditions of protestant Christendom and 
the complete rejection of the professing body. “I 
will spue thee out of my mouth.” He Himself is 
seen standing outside, which shows that He is rejected. 
But infinite Grace! He knocks and is still willing to 
come in and bestow the riches of His Grace. And the 
Philadelphian-Christian, who is separated from the 
Laodicean state, whose heart is filled with the Love of 
Christ can learn a lesson here. If our Lord stands 
outside and vet knocks and waits in patience, we too 
with Him outside of the camp where He is disowned, 
can try to gain admittance to Laodicean hearts. Epaph- 
ras did this (Col. iv:12-13). Laodicea consists 
in a proudly boasting spirit with total indifference 
to the Lord Jesus Christ and to His Name. It is 


THE REVELATION 43 


religiousness without any truth nor the power of the 
Holy Spirit. Lukewarmness expresses it all. “Luke- 
warmness, a perfect jumble of sacred and worldly 
matters. The word does not point chiefly to half- 
heartedness. But as lukewarmness is produced by 
pouring of hot and cold water together into the same 
vessel, so in the Laodicean state, intense worldliness 
will be varnished over by plausible and humanitarian 
and religious pretences.” Great reformation move- 
ments for the advancement of religion and the better- 
ment of the world, and rejection of the Gospel as the 
power of God unto salvation, are characteristic features 
of this final phase of Christendom. It will continue 
and wax worse and worse till His patience is exhausted. 
Then the true church will be caught up with the de- 
parted Saints to meet Him in the air, and Laodicea will 
be spued out of His mouth. It is important to notice 
that Thyatira (Rome), Sardis (Protestantism) and the 
two phases of Protestantism represented by Phila- 
delphia and Laodicea co-exist. They go on together. 
This is seen by the fact that in each our Lord speaks 
of His second coming (ii:25; 11:3; iv:10-11; 16). 
The Lord takes His own to Himself. Rome and an 
apostate Protestant Christendom continue on earth 
during the period of judgment, preceding the visible 
coming of the Lord. 


44. THE REVELATION 


Il. The Things which are aiter these 
The End of the Age. The consum- 


mation and the final messages 
Chapters IV-=XXII 


FIRST SUBDIVISION. THE HEAVENLY SCENE. 
BEFORE THE THRONE. 


Chapters IV-V 


Chapter IV. The Open Door and the Vision of the 
Throne. Verses 1-3. The scene changes suddenly. 
We are no longer on earth but are transported into 
heaven. The true church is gone and the apostate 
Church, while still on earth to pass into the judgments 
of the great tribulation, is no longer owned by the 
Lord and therefore not mentioned. That is why the 
word “church” disappears entirely from this book 
after the third chapter. ‘The open door and the voice 
which calls ‘“‘come up hither” and John’s presence in 
glory in the spirit, clearly indicate symbolically the 
fulfilment of 1 Thess. iv:15-17. That for which 
the faithful remnant waited, the blessed hope of the 
Church, has suddenly come to pass. The departure 
of the true Church from the earth will be as sudden 
as its beginning (Acts i:1-2). Surely the gathering 
of all the Saints in glory must some day take place. 
He promised it (John xiv:1-3). He prayed for it 
(John xvii:24). The Holy Spirit in the Epistles bears 
constant witness to it. The shout, perhaps the same 
words which John heard “Come up hither,” will open 


THE REVELATION 45 


the graves of all the Saints, and those who are on 
earth at that time will be caught up; yes dear reader, 
we are authorized to say “we who remain shall be 
caught up together with them in clouds to meet the 
Lord in the air.” 

John’s first vision in heaven is the established 
throne, the sign and symbol of the universal govern- 
ment of God. While thrones on earth begin to totter 
and to fall and man’s day closes in the predicted up- 
heavals, there is a throne which cannot be affected 
nor disturbed. Yea, He who sitteth there and looks 
down upon earth and sees man’s rebellion and madness 
laughs at them and holds them in derision (Psalm ii:4). 
The occupant of the throne was to look upon like a 
Jasper and a Sardine stone. They were the first and 
the last precious stones in the breastplate of the 
Highpriest, only the Sardine stone is there the first 
while here it is mentioned last. The names of Benjamin 
(“the son of the right hand’) and Reuben (behold a 
son!) were engraven upon these two stones (Exod. 
Xvili:17-20). The Sardine, probably identical with 
the ruby, is a blood-red stone. ‘The Jasper is not 
the common Jasper of little value. See Chapter xxi:11. 
Many think it is the diamond or perhaps the opal. 
Our Lord and the glory of His Person are thus symbolic- 
ally represented in these stones. His glory in the 
brilliant stone, His redemption work in the blood-red 
sardine. ‘The rainbow in emerald-green tells us that 
in the judgments about to come upon the earth mercy 
will be also remembered. It is the covenant sign. 
Though judgments come, yet mercy is in store for 
Israel and the earth. 


46 THE REVELATION 


2. The Twenty-four Elders. Verse 4. Who is repre- 
sented by these twenty-four elders? They cannot be 
angels. Angels are never seen seated upon thrones, 
(not seats as in the authorized version) nor are they 
crowned, nor can they sing redemption’s song as the 
Elders do. There is only one possible meaning. 
They represent the redeemed, the Saints in glory. 
They are Priests (clothed in white) and they are 
Kings (crowned); they are the royal priesthood in the 
presence of the throne. And why twenty-four? It 
points us back to the work David did for the temple. 
He appointed twenty-four courses of the priests 
(1 Chron. xxiv). Twice twelve would suggest the 
Saints of the Old and New Testament. 

3. The Description of the Throne. Verse 5. There 
were lightnings and voices and thunderings. This is 
repeatedly stated. See viii:5;* xi:185 “xevicle?- des 
the symbol of God’s throne in its judicial aspect. 
And He who occupies that throne is our Lord. 
Heaven’s throne, so to speak, is getting ready for the 
judgments. And the Elders are in perfect peace, 
undisturbed by these otherwise terrifying mani- 
festations, sitting before the throne. There is no 
judgment for them, they are safe at home. 

4. The Four Living Creatures and the Great Praise 
and Worship. Verses 6-11. The sea of glass is a 
reminder of the great laver in Solomon’s temple in 
which the priests had to wash. Now it is solidified, 
because no more water is needed for the cleansing of 
the Saints. The word “beast” should be changed to 
“living creatures” or “living ones.” They are not 
symbolical of the church, or a special class of saints, 


+ THE REVELATION 47 


but they are the same supernatural beings seen in the 
Old Testament and always in connection with the 
throne and the presence of Jehovah. They are the 
cherubim of Ezekiel’s great vision, chapters i and x. 
Their constant cry, Holy, holy, holy, reminds us of the 
seraphim also. (Isaiah vi). The worship here is the 
worship of Him who is the creator. 

“The saints here fall down before the throne, bow 
themselves before His place in glory, and worship Him 
in His endless being, and lay down their given glory 
before His supreme and proper glory, ascribing all glory 
to Him, as alone worthy of it; but here, according to 
the nature of the celebration of it, the Creator for 
whom all things are. In all changes these remained 
true. It will be remarked here, that the living crea- 
tures only celebrate and declare; the Elders worship 
with understanding. All through the Revelation the 
Elders give their reason for worshipping. There is 
spiritual intelligence in them.’’* . 


Chapter V. 1. Who 1s worthy to Open the Book? 
Verses 1-3. Much has been written about the meaning 
of the book written within and sealed with seven seals. 
What the book contains is no secret whatever. Begin- 
ning with the sixth chapter the seals are opened and 
after they are all broken the contents of the book are 
made known. The book contains the judgments 
for this earth preceding His coming in power and 
glory and the beginning of His reign. It is there- 
fore the book of the righteous judgments of God, 
preceding the glorious manifestation of the King 


*Synopsis. 


48 THE REVELATION 


of kings. The same figure of a book is found in 
Ezekiel ii:9-10. And who is worthy to open this 
book and make known, as well as execute, its contents? 

2. The Answer. Verses 4-5. John receives the answer 
to the question the strong angel had proclaimed. One 
of the Elders told him “Behold the lion of the tribe of 
Judah, the Root of David, has prevailed to open the 
book, and the seven seals thereof.” No further comment 
is needed; the Lord Jesus Christ is the Lion of Judah 
and the Root of David. “The King’s wrath is as a 
roaring lion” (Prov. xix:12). He is now to be revealed 
in mighty power and strength to execute judgment. 
See Genesis xlix:9. And He is also the Root of David. 
Both terms tell us that Judah and the house of David 
will be remembered in mercy when the judgment 
sweeps over the earth. The time is at hand when the 
Davidic covenant-promise will be fully accomplished 
by Him who is the Lion of the tribe of Judah. 

3. The Vision of the Lamb. Verses 6-7. And now 
He is seen who alone is worthy to open the book. He 
does not appear as a Lion in majesty, but He is seen 
by John as a Lamb standing, as having been slain. 
The Lamb slain is the Lion. His victory was gained 
by dying and therefore He must have as the Lion the 
victory over all His enemies. Thrice the number 
seven is repeated revealing His perfection. Notice 
especially three descriptions. He is “in the midst.” 
He is the center of God’s government and of heaven 
itself, as He is for His people the center of all their 
thoughts and affections. He is seen “‘as a Lamb stand- 
ing.” Now He is seated at the right hand of God, 
but when the time comes when His enemies are about 


THE REVELATION 49 


to be made His footstool, He will arise to act. He 
will arise and have mercy upon Zion (Psalm cii:12). 
And He is seen as “the Lamb slain.” The Greek word 
here suggests “slain in sacrifice.” In His body after 
His resurrection the Disciples saw the nail-prints and 
the wound the spear had made (John xx:20, 25, 27). 
Here when He is about to take to Himself His rights, 
purchased by His death on the cross, about to usher 
in His reign, the wound-prints are also seen. And 
when He comes in great power and glory the same 
tokens of His passion will be visible, for they shall 
look on Him whom they pierced. And what an 
indescribable scene when He took the book! 


4. The Worship of the Living Creatures and the 
Elders. Verses 8-10. A great worship scene follows 
at once. The four living Creatures join in with the 
Elders, but the latter alone have harps and golden 
bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the 
Saints. The harps express their great joy and praise 
and the bowls full of incense denotes the priestly 
ministry of the redeemed. Such is part of our glorious 
future, an endless praise of deepest joy, and perfect 
ministry. The prayers of the Saints are not the 
prayers of the past, but the prayers which Jewish Saints 
will pray, so beautifully pre-written in the Psalms, when 
the time of Jacob’s trouble is on the earth. And then 
the new song! This is redemption’s song, the song of 
redeeming love; the old song was the praise of God 
as the Creator in His glory (Job xxxviii:7). Redemp- 
tion is now accomplished for the Saints in glory; 
they look forward to the glorious manifestation with 


50 THE REVELATION 


Himself and the great new song bursts forth in all its 
wonderful meaning. We give the better rendering: 
“Worthy art Thou to take the book, and to open the 
seals thereof; for Thou wast slain, and didst purchase 
unto God by Thy blood, out of every tribe, and 
tongue, and people, and nation and madest them unto 
our God kings and priests, and they shall reign over 
the earth.” The great theme is He and His worthi- 
ness. He is worthy; He was slain; He hath pur- 
chased; He purchased the glory for His own. No 
other worship will be known in heaven. Happy are 
we if we sing redemption’s song down here in blessed 
anticipation of the soon coming consummation, when 
we shall see Him as He is “in the midst” and enter 
upon our never ending and glorious inheritance. 


5. The Worthiness of the Lamb Acclaimed by all 
Beings. Verses 11-14. ‘The Praise of Him becomes 
universe-wide. ‘The innumerable company of angels 
join the praise. How many angels? ‘The number 
of them was myriads of myriads and thousands of 
thousands.”* And the Praise described here leads us 
on to the time when God will be all in all. It is the 
never ending praise of all creation. The Hallelujah- 
chorus of redeemed Creation! The four living creatures 
said “Amen;” the Elders worshipped. Omit “Him 
that liveth forever and ever,” as these words do not 
belong here. 


*This is according to the Greek. 


THE REVELATION 31 


SECOND DIVISION. THE OPENING OF THE SEVEN 
SEALS. 


Chapters VI-VIII:5 


The Lamb, invested with all the authority to execute 
judgment, having received His commission from 
God, begins now to open the seals of the book which 
is in His hands, the hands which were once nailed to 
the cross. It is evident that the breaking of the 
seals does not come till His Saints are gathered around 
the throne in glory. As long as this has not been it is 
still the day of Grace. Read Isaiah Ixi:1-2 and 
compare with Luke iv:18-19. When He read from 
the book in the synagogue of Nazareth, He stopped 
with the sentence “to proclaim the acceptable year 
of the Lord.” He did not read “and the day of 
vengeance of our God.” When the Saints are gathered 
home, when the true Church is received into glory, the 
acceptable year of the Lord ends. The door will be 
shut as far as the nations of Christendom are con- 
cerned and the day of vengeance will be executed. 

In Matthew xxiv in the great prophetic Olivet 
Discourse, our Lord speaks of the ending of the age. 
Strictly speaking it is the end of the interrupted 
Jewish age, the final seven years of the prophecy in 
Daniel (Chapter ix). The first things which our 
Lord mentions is, what He calls, ‘the beginning of 
sorrows” (Matt. xxiv:8). And the seal judgments 
are the beginning of sorrows. Let us look at the 
startling agreement. 


Chapter VI. 1. The First Seal. The White Horse: 
the Conquering Rider. Verses 1-2. When the first 


52 THE REVELATION 


seal is opened one of the living creatures said in voice 
of thunder: “Come.” The words “and see” must be 
omitted here and in verses 3, 5, and 7. A rider upon 
a white horse appears; his is a bloodless conquest. 
He has a bow, but no arrow. He receives a crown and 
goes forth to conquer. Many expositors make this 
rider the Lord Jesus or some power which represents 
Him. It is positively incorrect. The Lord is indeed 
pictured as a rider upon a white horse, but when He 
comes it will be at the close of the judgment and 
tribulation period and His victorious conquest will 
be far different from the rider seen under the first seal. 
Read carefully Psalm xlv:1-5; Zech. 1x:9-14; Rev. 
xix:11, etc., also the Apocalypse of Zechariah, especially 
Chapters i-ii. The rider here is a great counterfeit 
leader, not the personal Anti-christ, but the little 
horn which Daniel saw coming out of the ten-horned 
beast (Daniel vii). We are writing in the most 
solemn and ominous times the world has ever known. 
All Europe is on fire. Many are the voices which are 
calling for a great European confederacy and for 
some great leader, another Napoleon. The blinded 
world looks for such a one and expects that he will 
bring peace and order into the prevailing chaos. And 
the Lord will permit such a one to come, deceiving 
the world so that they will say “‘peace and safety” 
(1 Thess. v:1-3). This coming leader of the revived 
Roman empire will go forth to conquer and become 
its political head. He is Satan’s man as we shall 
see later. No human being knows how long God, 
in His infinite patience, may still delay the beginning 
of all these things. But as far as mortal eyes can see, en- 


THE REVELATION 53 


lightened by His Word and Spirit, these things are at 
hand and the outcome of the European war may be 
this confederacy and the rider upon the white horse will 
begin his conquest. And if so, how near, how very 
near, the home-gathering of the Saints must be. And 
this is the first thing our Lord mentions in the Olivet 
Discourse, to take place as the age ends, false Christs, 
deceivers (Matt. xxiv:4—5). 

2. The Second Seal. The Red Horse. The Rider 
With the Great Sword. Verses 3-4. The second seal 
reveals a rider upon a red horse. He takes away the 
false peace, which the rider upon the white horse 
as a divine judgment act established. The universal 
peace of which the world dreams without the presence 
of the Prince of Peace, will be of a short duration. 
Another awful war follows. It will not be war alone 
between nation and nation, but it will be a world- 
wide reign of terror and bloodshed, a carnage unknown 
before in the history of the world. Not a few believe 
that the present war is the second seal. But this is 
not correct because the true Church is still here. Some- 
thing far worse is in store for the earth. Even keen 
observers in the world say that this will not be the last 
war the world will see. Blessed be His Name! that 
we His people will escape these coming judgments. 
See in Matthew xxiv how our Lord mentions the 
great conflict of nation against nation and kingdom 
against kingdom. 

3. The Third Seal. The Black Horse. The Rider 
With the Balance. Verses 5-6. The black horse 
rider brings famine. Exactly what our Lord mentions 
next: “there shall be famines.” Famine always follows 


54 THE REVELATION 


a war and inasmuch as the second seal brings the 
greatest war, the third seal will bring the greatest 
famine. The judgments of God are then on the 
earth. It has been estimated that a denarius (wrongly 
translated penny) was about one dollar and a half 
in our money, and a measure of wheat, a “choenix” 
about one of our quarts. A quart of wheat for a 
dollar and a half. Starvation will come then for 
countless thousands. The rich seem to escape a part 
of this judgment for the oil and the wine, the luxuries 
of the well to do, are not to be hurt. They will receive 
their share of judgment later. And our Lord also 
speaks of famines in Matthew xxiv. 

4. The Fourth Seal. The Pale Horse. The Rider 
Followed by Hades. Verses 7-8. The next rider 
under the fourth seal is named; his name is death. 
And Hades, the region of the unseen, (not hell) is 
populated. Sword, hunger, death, that is pestilences 
and the beasts of the earth, claim an awful harvest 
(Ezek. xiv:21). And so our Lord spoke of “‘pesti- 
lences.”” These four seal judgments are hardening judg- 
ments. The Christless masses of Christendom will not 
recognize the hand of God in these awful visitations. 
It is different in the present war of Europe because 
the testimony of the Gospel is still given, backed by the 
prayers of God’s people. But after the true Church 
is gone and the Lord has spued out Laodicea these 
judgments will only harden their hearts. 

5. The Fifth Seal. The Cry of the Souls Under the 
Altar. Verses 9-11. The four living Creatures had 
uttered their fourfold “Come.” They are thus seen 
in connection with the providential government of 


THE REVELATION 55 


the world. Under the fifth seal the scene changeth 
completely. John saw under the altar the souls of 
them that had been slain. And they cry, “How long, 
O Lord!” Who are they? Not the martyrs of past 
ages. They were raised up and are in glory with 
redeemed bodies. Here the words of our Lord in the 
Olivet Discourse give us the Key. Speaking to His 
Jewish disciples He said: “Then shall they deliver 
you up, and shall kill you and ye shall be hated of all 
nations for my Name’s sake’’(Matt. xxiv:9). The Lord 
speaks of another company of Jewish disciples who will 
bear a witness during the end of the age, after the rap- 
ture of the Church. He will not leave Himself without 
a witness. He calls a remnant of His people Israel and 
they bear a witness to the coming of the Messiah, their 
coming deliverer and King. Many of them suffer mar- 
tyrdom. Their cry, “How long?” is the well known 
prayer of Jewish saints; and their prayer to have 
their blood avenged is equally a Jewish prayer. Chris- 
tians are not supplicating for vengeance on their foes. 
The prayer for vengeance refers us to the imprecatory 
psalms prewritten by the Holy Spirit in anticipation 
of the final persecution of Jewish believers. And the 
fellow servants and their brethren who are yet to be 
killed (verse 11) are the martyrs of that remnant 
during the final three and one-half years, which is the 
great tribulation. See them mentioned in Chapter 
xx:4. Notice the two classes there which we find here 
under the fifth seal. The Saints whom Daniel men- 
tions (Dan. vii:27) who receive the Kingdom are these 
Jewish Saints. The Saints of the Most High as men- 
tioned by Daniel are not the church-saints. 


56 THE REVELATION 


6. The Sixth Seal. The Shaking of all Things. The 
Anticipation of the End. Verses 12-17. Are the 
things mentioned under this seal to be taken in a 
literal sense or symbolically? Most of it is symbolical, 
yet at the same time great physical phenomena are also 
involved. The earthquake possibly means a literal 
earthquake. “Earthquakes in diverse places” our 
Lord predicted. And they increase as the age draws 
to its close. But the language is symbolical. Every- 
thing is being shaken in this poor world. The civil 
and governmental powers on earth all go to pieces; 
every class from kings to slaves are affected by it and 
terrorized. The political and ecclesiastical world is 
going to pieces. See the list of symbolical names and 
their meaning at the close of this volume. And when 
these shaking times have come, when thrones fall and 
anarchy reigns, when the great collapse of civilization 
and human society has come with signs on earth and 
in heaven, the earth-dwellers will see in anticipation 
the approaching day of wrath. Terror fills every 
breast and those who sneered at prayer, as the Christ- 
rejecters do now, will gather for a prayer-meeting to 
appeal to the rocks to cover them. —_—_ Read the follow- 
ing Old Testament passages in connection with this 
seal. Isaiah xxiv; xxxiv:2—4; Joel ii:30-31; Zephaniah 
i; Haggai ii:6-7. 

BETWEEN THE SIXTH AND SEVENTH SEAL. 
A PARENTHETICAL VISION. 


Chapter VII. 


Chapter VII. 1. The Remnant of Israel Called and 
Sealed. Verses 1-8. We reach now the first paren- 


THE REVELATION 57 


thetical vision. It must not be taken chronologically. 
The six seal judgments extend over the entire period 
of the age ending. The rider upon the white horse will 
be on the scene to the end; wars will continue to the 
end, and culminate in the battle of Armageddon, and 
so do the famines and pestilences. And the sixth 
seal brings the end in view. We shall see the corre- 
spondency with the seventh trumpet and seventh vial 
later. The trumpet and vial judgments are more 
intense and more terrible than any of the seal judg- 
ments. In a certain sense they are parallel; the effect 
of each is continuously felt. The parenthetical vision 
of the seventh chapter also covers the entire period of 
the last seven years and brings before us even the 
vision of what will be after the great tribulation. 

How much confusion would have been avoided if 
expositors and Christians in searching for the meaning 
of this vision, had not lost sight of two great facts: 
1. This chapter can have no application to the Church 
on earth, nor to the Church in glory, for the simple 
reason that the Church is already complete and trans- 
lated in glory. 2. The vision states clearly that the 
sealed company is “of all the tribes of the children of 
Israel.” There are to-day perhaps a score or more of 
little sects who all claim to be the 144,000. Holiness 
sects, Adventistic sects, healers, Pentecostal people 
and others, all claim to be the company. We feel 
sorry for those of our brethren who are led astray by 
these false interpretations. If the true interpretation 
of Revelation is seen, that this company is called after 
the rapture of the Church, these confusing theories will 
at once be rejected. 


58 THE REVELATION 


The sealed company is of Israel. After the Church 
is removed to glory, when the fulness of the Gentiles 
is come in (Rom. xi:26) the Lord will turn in mercy 
to Israel and call, before the judgments fall, a remnant 
which will also be sealed (See Ezek. ix). This remnant 
is frequently seen on the pages of Old Testament 
prophecy. We read prophetically their longings and 
their prayers. We give a few passages of the many: 
Ps. xliv:10-26; lv—lvii; lxiv; lxxix; Ixxx; Isaiah Ixii: 
15-lxiv. This remnant, enlightened by the Holy 
Spirit, will pass through the entire seven years. Many 
of them will suffer martyrdom, but the greater part 
will pass through the entire tribulation, enduring to the 
end and then saved by their King, our Lord, when 
He comes in glory. The so-called orthodox Jews 
will probably constitute with members of the other 
tribes* this remnant. ‘The number, 144,000, that 
is, 12,000 out of each tribe, must be looked upon 
as symbolic. It speaks of the complete government, 
which as to the earth, is invested in a redeemed and 
restored Israel. Dan is not mentioned because that 
tribe seems to be identified with: Satan’s work during 
the tribulation (See Gen. xlix:17). This sealed com- 
pany also bears a great testimony. They are the 
preachers of the Gospel of the Kingdom, as a witness 
to all nations before the end comes (Matt. xxiv:14). 
Therefore during the time when the judgments are 
executed from above there will be a world-wide preach- 
ing of the Gospel of the Kingdom, proclaiming the 


*No one knows where the ten tribes are; but God knows and 
He will bring them to light at that time. 


THE REVELATION 59 


coming of the King, calling to repentance and faith in 
His Name, and offering mercy still. 

2. The Saved Multitude of Gentiles Coming Out of the 
Great Tribulation. Verses 9-17. The application of 
this great multitude, John sees next, to the redeemed 
Church in glory is totally incorrect. This is a company 
which comes “out of the great tribulation.” The 
Church enters the glory before that great tribulation ever 
begins. The great multitude represents those Gentiles 
who heard the final testimony and believed. They 
turned in repentance to Him and were also washed 
in His precious Blood. Our Lord speaks of them in 
the great judgment of the nations as sheep, who stand 
at His right hand and inherit the Kingdom (Matt. 
xxv:31, etc.). The brethren of our Lord mentioned in 
Matthew are the remnant of Israel. For a complete 
exposition see ““The Gospel of Matthew,” by the author 
of this volume. ‘This great company therefore does 
not stand before a heavenly throne, but before the 
millennial throne on earth. It is a millennial scene 
after the tribulation is passed. Sometimes the question 
is asked, will there be another chance for the Gospel 
hardened multitudes of Laodicean Christendom during 
the tribulation? Will the large number of nominal 
Christians accept the final message given through 
the remnant of Israel? In view of 2 Thess. 1i1:1-12 
we are bound to answer this question negatively. 
This great company is gathered from all nations, 
many of whom never heard a message of mercy before. 
The temple mentioned is the millennial temple (Ezek. 
xl-xliv). And then there is a description of the mil- 
lennial blessings for these redeemed nations. 


60 THE REVELATION 


Chapter VIII. The Seventh Seal. Verses 1-5. 
What does the silence in heaven mean when the seventh 
seal is opened? It is indicative of the solemn things 
which are now tocome. ‘The scroll is now fully opened 
and there is an ominous hush ere the seven angels 
step forward to sound their trumpets of judgment. 
John beholds these seven angels, but before they 
sound “another angel” is seen standing at the altar. 
This angel is not a creature, but like the angel of Jehovah 
in the Old Testament, is our Lord Himself. He is seen 
as the Priest in behalf of the praying, suffering Saints 
onearth. No angel can offer the prayers of the Saints, 
but He, who is the one Intercessor alone can do that. 
And for what do they pray on earth? For mercy for 
those who persecute the remnant of Israel? No! 
They pray for divine intervention, for the fire of judg- 
ment as Elijah did. And therefore the Lord answers 
them accordingly. He fills the censer with fire of 
the altar of God’s holiness and casts it into the earth. 
And there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, 
and an earthquake. 


THIRD DIVISION: THE SOUNDING OF THE SEVEN 
TRUMPETS 


Chapters VIII:6=XI:18 


Chapter VIII. /. The First Trumpet. Verses 6-7. 
The judgments which follow can hardly be fully com- 
prehended at this time. It would be folly to be dog- 
matic about these matters. The so-called historical 
application we reject entirely, because the scope of 
the book makes it clear that these judgments have 
not yet been. What many of these things mean may 


THE REVELATION 61 


perhaps never be fully understood till they are actually 
in fulfillment. The first four trumpet judgments 
evidently stand by themselves. The cry for judgment 
from the suffering and persecuted remnant of God’s 
ancient people is answered in what happens on the 
earth. The fire the Lord cast down is doing its work. 
The first trumpet manifests the same evidences of 
divine wrath as came upon Egypt, when Israel suffered 
there, under the seventh plague (Exodus ix:23). Hail 
(heat withdrawn), fire and blood are all the symbols 
of divine wrath. The trees and the green grass were 
burned up. The green things are symbols of agri- 
cultural and commercial prosperity. All is then 
passing and man’s boasted prosperity ends in a great 
calamity. The third part mentioned repeatedly in 
these trumpet judgments means the Roman empire. 
Terrible devastation by different agencies, including 
burning heat, will sweep over that empire. 

2. The Second Trumpet. Verses 8-9. That this is 
not a literal mountain is obvious. A mountain in 
Scripture language represents a Kingdom (Isaiah ii: 
2; Zech. iv:7; Psalm. xlvi:2; and especially Jerem. li:25). 
The sea is typical of nations. Some kingdom, inter- 
nally on fire, signifying probably revolution, will be 
precipitated into the restless sea of nations and the 
result will be a still greater destruction of life and 
commerce, which is represented by the ships. 

3. The Third Trumpet. Verses 10-11. In the 
preceding trumpets things were cast upon the earth, 
but here is a star which falls. It is some person who 
claimed authority and who becomes an apostate, whose 
fall produces the awful results given here. It may be 


62 THE REVELATION 


the final Anti-christ who first may have claimed to be 
for Israel a great teacher with divine authority and 
then takes the awful plunge. Worm-wood is his | 
name and the waters became worm-wood and bitter. 
It stands for great corruption. 

4. The Fourth Trumpet. Verses 12-13. The sun, 
the moon and the stars are now affected. The sun 
is the symbol of the highest authority, the moon, who 
has not her own light is symbolical of derived authority 
and the stars are symbolical of subordinate authority. 
The symbolical meaning of this trumpet judgment 
is that all authority within the revived Roman empire 
will be smitten by the hand from above and as a result 
there will be the most awful moral darkness. These 
four trumpet judgments tell a consecutive story. 
Prosperity will be taken first from the earth; a great 
power burning with the fires of revolution will affect 
the nations; a great leader will fall and become worm- 
wood; and authority disowned and smitten will fill the 
territory of the Roman empire with the densest dark- 
ness. Before this great war we often heard people 
say how impossible all this sounds. No one can say 
so any longer. Europe’s condition is appalling and 
what will it be when these judgments fall! 


Chapter IX. 5. The Fifth Trumpet. Verses 1-12. 
The remaining three trumpets have a ‘“‘woe” attached 
toeach. This is announced in the last verse of the pre- 
ceding chapter where the word angel should be changed 
to “eagle.” An eagle, the bird of prey, proclaims 
the three-fold woe. He acts thus as an herald of great 
judgments (Matt. xxiv:28; Rev. xix:17-18). The 


THE REVELATION 63 


fifth trumpet is a special judgment upon apostate 
Israel; because those who suffer are they “which have 
not the seal of God on their foreheads” (verse 4). The 
great tribulation proper, the second half.of the week, 
comes now into prominence. If we turn to chapter 
xii:12 we read something similar to the eagle’s message 
of woe. “Woe unto the inhabiters of the earth and of 
the sea! for the devil is come down unto you, having 
great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but 
a short time.” Preceding the sounding of the fifth 
trumpet the eagle proclaimed the woe upon the in- 
habiters of the earth. The star which is seen fallen 
from heaven with the key of the pit of the abyss is 
Satan himself cast out of heaven. The details of 
this event we learn in the twelfth chapter. He has 
the key to the pit of the abyss, the same word “‘deep,” 
used in Luke viii:31. “And they (the demons) be- 
sought Him that He would not command them to go 
out into the deep (abyss).”” He unlocks the prison 
house of the fallen angels and the most awful satanic 
agencies come forth to begin their awful work of 
torment. The smoke first, symbolical of darkening; 
the locusts next, symbolical of these demon powers. 
Awful darkness prevails and the most diabolical delu- 
sions, producing fearful torments among apostate 
Israel: and the inhabiters of the earth. It is the time 
of the strong delusion (2 Thess. ii:4-11) which has 
come. And over them is a King. His name is given 
in Greek and Hebrew. Both names mean the same— 
“destruction.” Apostate Israel and also apostate 
Christendom will suffer greatly under this trumpet 
judgment and face the desolation of everything relig- 


64 THE REVELATION 


ious. The light is now completely blotted out and 
in the darkness coming from the pit of the abyss the 
demon powers will do their fearful work. Demon- 
possession and the most awful torments for soul and 
body will be the general thing. Because this judg- 
ment also concerns apostate Christendom the Greek 
name of the destroyer is given besides the Hebrew. 


2. The Sixth Trumpet. The Second Woe. Verses 
13-21. The sixth angel is commanded by a voice 
from the horns of the golden altar to loose the four 
angels who are bound at Euphrates and as a result 
an innumerable company of horsemen* is released. 
They are prepared for a specific time to do their work. 
Euphrates is once more mentioned and that under 
the pouring out of the sixth vial. We believe the 
sixth vial judgment gives the key to these horsemen 
here. Euphrates does not mean the Turkish empire 
as we shall more fully show when we come to the 
sixth vial. This river was both the boundary line 
of the old Roman empire and the land of Israel. 
Restraining influences held back the tide of nations 
on the other side of the river; this restraint is now 
removed and therefore a great invasion takes place. 
As the land of Israel is nearest it will suffer first, but 
the revived Roman empire will be the objective of 
these invading hordes. The “third part” stands for the 
Roman empire, the coming European confederacy. 
This invasion is under the King of the North. It 


*Greek: twice ten thousand times ten thousand, that is 
200 million. The number would indicate the immense, un- 
countable hordes, 


THE REVELATION _ 65 


is seen in its beginning here and is consummated 
under the sixth vial. There the “Kings of the Sunrise” 
are included. And under the sixth vial they are more 
specifically gathered for the great day of God Al- 
mighty. We refer the reader to chapter xvi:12. 
The four angels have been variously interpreted. 
They must not be identified with the angels in chapter 
vii:l. We can only say again that these things will 
be fully known when they pass into history. Con- 
nected with this invasion there is another manifestation 
of demon power. Serpents are mentioned. The 
Serpent, Satan, and his serpents, demons, are then 
on the earth. Everything is under Satanic control. 
And the great mass of Apostates who escaped these 
plagues did not repent. ‘They have become so blinded 
that they worship idols again, and demons, and con- 
nected with it are the grossest immoralities. 


BETWEEN THE SIXTH AND SEVENTH TRUMPET. 
PARENTHETICAL VISIONS. 


Chapters X=XI:14. 


As there was a parenthesis between the breaking 
of the sixth and seventh seals so is there a parenthesis 
between the sixth and seventh trumpet and later we 
shall find another one between the sixth and seventh 
vial. 


Chapter X. 1. The Descending Angel. Verses 1-7. 
The proclamation of the mighty angel is the first 
recorded event in this parenthesis. Who is this angel? 
It is Christ Himself. We saw our Lord in angel’s 
form before the opening of the seventh seal and then 


66 THE REVELATION 


He appeared in priestly dignity. Here before the 
sounding of the seventh trumpet he appears again 
in the same form, but He is called a mighty angel 
and we behold Him in royal dignity. The cloud, 
the rainbow, the face like the sun, His right foot 
upon the sea, the left on the earth, the voice like a 
lion and the seven thunders, all declare this to be 
correct. The hour is rapidly approaching when the 
kingdoms of this earth are to become His Kingdom. 
This is seen under the seventh trumpet. And there- 
fore He is seen now in this attitude of royal dignity. 
The words which He speaks (verses 6 and 7) bear 
out this interpretation. “There shall be time no 
longer” means “there shall be no longer delay.” Man’s 
day is about to close. The mystery of God is now 
to be finished ‘fas He hath declared to His servants, 
the prophets,” or in better rendering “the mystery 
of God also shall be completed according to the good 
tidings which He declared by His own servants, the 
prophets.” How great has been that mystery! Evil 
had apparently triumphed; the heavens for so long 
have been silent. Satan had been permitted to be the 
god of this age deceiving the nations. And Israel, 
too, is included in this mystery. And now the time 
has come when the mystery of God will be completed, 
when the glorious messages, the good tidings of the 
prophets concerning Israei’s blessing and the kingdom 
will be fulfilled. 

2. The Little Book. Verses 8-11. But what is the 
little book which the angel holds in His right hand? 
It is not a sealed book, but open. It stands for the 
prophecies in the Old Testament relating especially 


THE REVELATION 67 


to Israel during the time of the great tribulation, 
what is yet to come upon the earth, culminating 
in the personal and glorious appearing of the Lord to 
begin His millennial reign. But we do not need to say 
more. We saw the contents of the seven-sealed book 
in chapter v were made known when the Lamb opened 
the seals. And the contents of the little book we 
shall also know. What follows after the parenthesis 
takes us upon Jewish ground and shows the fulfillment of 
these prophecies. And John was commanded to eat 
the book (see Ezek. ii:8-111:3). It was sweet and bitter. 
Such is the prophetic Word concerning these things. 
Sweet because it tells of deliverance and a glorious 
consummation, but when it is digested, taken in, it 
reveals the bitterness, the sorrows and judgments 
which are connected with it. And John had more 
to prophesy in connection with the end, concerning 
peoples, nations, tongues and many kings. And 
this we find in the chapters which follow. 


Chapter XI. 3. The Temple, Altar and Jewish 
Worshippers. Verses 1-2. We see at once how 
Jewish things come now into view. ‘To apply these 
verses to the Church and make the temple the Church 
is absolutely wrong. The temple and the altar are 
Jewish; the holy city is Jerusalem. After the Church 
has left the earth the Jewish people will be fully 
restored to their own land. They will possess Jeru- 
salem once more. It is even revealed that a power 
beyond the land of Israel, friendly to the Jews, will 
be used in this restoration (Isaiah xviii). It is deeply 
significant to read during this present world-crisis of 


68 THE REVELATION 


the soon coming disposition of Palestine. In the daily 
press and in magazines the suggestion is made that 
Palestine should be handed over to the Jews. When 
one follows the history of Zionism aiming at the estab- 
lishment of a Jewish State and now sees how European 
nations begin to recognize the claims of the Jews, and 
promise their help in their restoration, one cannot but 
feel that these things are very near. A partial restora- 
tion may be looked for even now while the true Church 
is still here. When the Jews are once more masters 
in their own promised land they will erect another 
temple and then restore the Mosaic worship as far as 
it is possible. Such a temple must be in Jerusalem 
(see Isaiah lxvi:1-4). In that temple the personal 
Anti-christ, the beast out of the land of whom we shall 
read in chapter xiii, will appear and claim divine 
worship. See 2 Thess. 11:3-4. The apostate Israel 
altogether in corrupt alliance with equally corrupt 
Gentiles are seen in the opening verses of this eleventh 
chapter, as the court without the temple. But in 
the midst of this corrupt mass, which will follow the 
delusion of the Anti-christ and accept Satan’s man 
as their Messiah, there will be the God-fearing rem- 
nant. This remnant is here divinely recognized 
as worshippers. Therefore that coming temple is 
called “the temple of God” because the Lord owns 
the true worshippers found in the midst of the unbe- 
lieving mass. These godly Jews form an inner circle. 
The inner place is symbolical of the faithful remnant 
of worshippers; the outer court is the symbol of apos- 
tate Israel. ‘The forty-two months are now mentioned 
for the first time in Revelation. They are identical 


THE REVELATION 69 


with the 1,260 days, for forty-two months make this 
number of days, the times, time and half a time in 
the prophecy of Daniel, the last three and one-half 
years of the seventieth week of Daniel.* To make 
these forty-two months 1,260 years, as it has been 
done by many expositors, is a mere invention and 
lacks all Scriptural support. These 1,260 days are 
the great tribulation. Then Israel apostate will be in 
the worst condition, demon-possessed and idolatrous 
(Matt. xii:43-45). Then the Gentiles will do their 
final devastation of Jerusalem and her worst history 
will come to pass. She will have to drink the cup of 
the Lord’s fury to the very dregs. We suggest at this 
point a careful reading of Psalm lxxix and a com- 
parison with this eleventh chapter. It is the prayer 
of the godly remnant. On the measuring see also 
Zech. ii. 

4. The Two Witnesses. Verses 3-6. Much has 
been written on these two witnesses which will then 
appear in Jerusalem. The historical school of inter- 
pretation has named numerous persons and companies 
of people, like the Waldenses and Albigenses, who 
suffered under the papal persecutions. These claims 
we need not to investigate for they are disproven by 
the true interpretation of the book. These two 
witnesses are still future. Their work is done during 
the great tribulation. Others make them Enoch 
and Elijah and others think they will be Moses and 
Elijah returned in person. The late Alexander Dowie 


*We cannot enlarge upon this interesting prophecy so abso- 
lutely necessary for an understanding of this part of Revelation. 
We refer the reader to Appendix I. 


70 THE REVELATION © 


and others before him, claimed to be a reincarnation 
of Elijah, the prophet. The claims of course were 
fanatical. No second coming of Moses is anywhere 
promised in the Word. However, something is said 
about the work of Elijah (Mal. iv:5-6). But the 
words of our Lord in Matt. xi:14, speaking of John the 
Baptist, and Matt. xvii:12, seem to make it clear that 
no literal coming of the same Elijah, who went into 
glory, without dying, is meant. Yet the deeds of these 
two witnesses clearly link them with the work of Moses 
and Elijah. We take it then that these two witnesses 
represent the great testimony to be given in Jerusalem 
during the 1,260 days of the great tribulation. Per- 
haps the leaders will be two great instruments, mani- 
festing the spirit of Moses and Elijah, endowed with 
supernatural power, but a larger number of witnesses 
is unquestionably in view here. They maintain in 
the midst of the Satanic scenes a powerful testimony 
for God. They are called “olive trees,” because the 
energy and power of the Holy Spirit rest upon them. 
See and compare with Zech. iv. Their testimony, 
besides witnessing against the awful corruption, is the 
Gospel of the Kingdom and the glorious coming of the 
King. The judgments through them are their cre- 
dentials. 

5. The Beast and the Witnesses. Verse 7. In verse 
2 the period of the great tribulation was mentioned 
for the first time and here we have the first 
mention of the Beast. Who is this Beast coming 
out of the pit of the abyss, the deep? It is 
the revived Roman empire with the little horn, seen 
by Daniel on the four-horned beast (Dan. vii). While 


THE REVELATION 71 


he domineers over the Gentiles, he will turn in fury 
against these Jewish Saints, and the two witnesses 
will be slain. He makes war with the godly remnant 
(Dan. vii:21). A part of that remnant will be killed. 
Then the company of martyrs mentioned in vi:11 will 
be gathered. This is more fully described in chapter 
xill. Here we look at it and the outcome in a general 
way. 

6. The Treatment of the Slain Witnesses. Verses 
8-10. See again Psalm Ixxix:1-3. The vileness of 
these coming days of Satan’s rule on earth are seen 
in the treatment of the bodies of Jehovah’s servants. 
The wicked are so elated over the silencing of the 
testimony that they refuse to permit their burial so 
that they may feast their eyes upon the sickening 
spectacle. ‘They rejoice and make it a festive occa- 
sion, because torment had come to their consciences 
through the testimony of the slain. Gentiles, who 
side with apostate Israel are mentioned, but especially 
a class which is called “they that dwell on the earth” 
rejoices over the end of the witnesses. The same class 
is mentioned several times. Study the passages where 
they are mentioned: Chapters iii:10; vi:9, 10; vii:13; 
xi:9, 10; xiii:8; xiv:6, 7; xvii:8. Who arethey? They 
are the apostate, nominal Christians who are utterly 
blinded and hardened. Phil. iii:18-19 gives their 
character and destiny. 

7. Their Public Vindication. Verses 11-12. God’s 
power is manifested in their physical resurrection and 
their visible translation. Their enemies see a great 
miracle. The apostates who ridicule even now a physi- 
cal resurrection, who sneer at the blessed Hope of a 


(os THE REVELATION 


coming translation of the Saints, will witness these two 
great facts. No wonder that a great fear fell upon 
them. ‘The raised company belongs to the first resur- 
rection (xx:4). 

8. The Great Earthquake. Verses 13—14. The 
terror becomes still greater when the whole city is 
shaken by a mighty earthquake. This is not a sym- 
bolical earthquake but a convulsion of nature by 
which the fourth part of the city falls and 7,000 men 
are killed. It marks the end of the second woe. Then 
those who escaped the visitation gave glory unto God 
of heaven. It is only inspired by fear. They do not 
turn in repentance unto God. Here ends the paren- 
 thetical vision. 

9. The Seventh Trumpet. The Third Woe. Verses 
15-18. That the seventh trumpet brings us to the very 
end of the tribulation and the beginning of the mil- 
lennial reign does not need any further argument. It 
is Jerusalem’s deliverance. He who alone is worthy 
receives the Kingdom. How clear this ought to make 
the fact that our Lord has no Kingdom now, but He 
receives the promised Kingdom on the earth at the 
end of these things. See Dan. vii:14. Heaven 
worships too; they celebrate the fact that He has 
taken His great power. It is a review of all that 
takes place and what follows when He appears out 
of heaven. The nations were full of wrath (Ps. ii; 
xlvi:6); His wrath is come; resurrection will follow; 
this points to the time after the kingdom (chapter 
xx:12). And His servants, the Prophets and the 
Saints, receive their reward, to reign with Him. 


THE REVELATION 73 


FOURTH DIVISION: SATAN’S POWER AND 
SATAN’S MASTERPIECE. 


Chapter XI:19-XIIE. 


What follows now brings the great tribulation, the 
1,260 days, into prominence. As we have seen the 
seventh trumpet takes us right to the end. But now 
we are led back. 


Chapter XI. 1. The Vision of the Opened Temple. 
Verse 19. "This verse belongs properly to the twelfth 
chapter. The Ark speaks of the covenant made with 
Israel. This is now to be remembered and connected 
with it are the manifestations of coming wrath for 
those who oppress His people. God is now taking 
up the interests of His earthly people and as of old 
the Ark is the token of His presence with them and 
the coming victory. 


Chapter XII. 2. The Woman With Child. Verses 
1-2. Who is represented by the Sun-clothed woman? 
Romanists have made out of her the Virgin Mary. 
Many expositors claim it is the Church which is repre- 
sented by this woman. Some claim the woman is’ 
the professing Church and the man-child represents, 
according to their view, a class of overcomers who 
will escape the tribulation. This is a favored inter- 
pretation of some of the so-called ‘“‘holiness people.” 

In the light of the scope of this book the woman 
cannot possibly have anything to do with the Church. 
Again, Christian Science has made the most absurd 
claim that this woman represents the instrument of 
Satan, the deluded woman, whom they worship as the 
founder of their cult. A hundred years ago another 


74 THE REVELATION 


sect existed in England under the leadership of a woman, 
who also claimed to be the one of this vision. We 
do not need to seek long for the true meaning of the 
woman seen by John. She represents Israel.* Every- 
thing in the symbolical statements bear this out, 
especially the crown with the twelve stars (Gen. 
~xxxvii:9). sits 

“Thus she is seen clothed with the glory of the sun— 
that is, of Christ Himself as He will presently appear 
in supreme power as Sun of Righteousness (Mal. iv:2); 
for the sun is the ruler of the day. As a consequence, 
her glory of old, before the day-dawn, the reflected 
light of her typical system, is like the moon under her 
feet. Upon her head the crown of twelve stars speaks 
naturally of her twelve tribes, planets now around the 
central sun.” 

It is Israel, what she is in the purposes of God. 
And the child, the nation brought forth, is the Messiah, 
Christ. Even so Paul writes of Israel “of whom as 
according to the flesh Christ came, who is over all, 
God blessed forever” (Rom. ix:5). The identity of 
the child is established beyond controversy by the 
fact that the child is caught up unto God and His 
throne, destined to rule all nations with a rod of iron 
(Ps. 11:9; Rev. ii:28). The great red Dragon, the 
enemy of the woman and the child, is Satan. Seven 
crowns are symbolical of his authority as the god of 
this age and the ten horns symbolical of his power. 
These historical facts are seen first through this vision. 
But this is done for the one purpose to bring into 


*Change “wonder” in 1 verse to “sign.” 


THE REVELATION > 


view what is yet in store for Israel during the end time. 
Christ ascended upon high, taking the place at the right 
of God, waiting till His enemies are made His footstool. 
Then the present Christian age began. It is not 
recorded in this vision at all. He who came from 
Israel and who was rejected by His own, is nevertheless 
Israel’s Messiah, the Hope of Israel. In Him and 
through Him alone the promises made to Israel can be 
fulfilled. The fulfillment of these promises is preceded 
by great sorrows and tribulation, the travail pains 
which come upon Israel during the great tribulation, 
before He, whom Israel once disowned, is revealed as 
Deliverer and King. And the red Dragon will do His 
most awful work during that period of tribulation, a 
work of hatred against the faithful seed of the woman. 

3. The Escape of the Woman. Verse 6. ‘The 
flight of the woman, Israel, has been taken by some 
to mean the dispersion of that nation during this age 
and Israel’s miraculous preservation. But that is 
incorrect. It is true Israel has been miraculously 
preserved and Satan’s hatred too has been against 
that nation. But here we have a special period men- 
tioned, the 1,260 days, the last three and one-half years 
of Daniel’s seventieth week. It means therefore 
that when the Dragon rises in all his furious power to 
exterminate the nation, God will preserve her. How- 
ever, before we are told the details of that preservation 
and Satan’s hatred, we read of the war in heaven. 
Satan is cast out of heaven, down upon the earth. 
Verses 15-17 and the entire chapter xiii will tell us 
what he will do on the earth. 

4. War in Heaven and Satan Cast Out of Heaven. 


76 THE REVELATION 


Verses 7-12. This great scene takes place before the 
great tribulation begins. Satan’s place is not in hell 
at this time. As we saw in the message to Pergamos 
his throne is on earth, he is the god of this age. His 
dominion is the air, he is the Prince of the power of 
the air (Eph. jj:2). Our present conflict as believers 
is “against principalities, against authorities, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against the 
wicked spirits in the heavenlies” (Eph. vi: 12). Satan 
as the accuser of the brethren has even access into the 
presence of God. The scene in Job i and ii is not a 
poetical invention, but presents a reality. He is 
still the accuser and our Lord Jesus Christ is our 
advocate. When the Saints are brought into glory they 
will not only behold the Lord Jesus face to face, but, 
we believe Satan, that great fallen Being, may also be 
seen by the Saints. ‘The Lord will rebuke him (Zech. 
iii:2). His accusations are ended. All the redeemed 
are gathered before the throne. All the malice and 
power of Satan could not frustrate the purpose of 
God. His Grace and Power have been victorious. 
Thus when the Saints come into the heavenly possession 
Satan’s dominion there is at an end. The purchased 
possession, the region above, will be redeemed by the 
power of God (Eph. i:13). Michael and his angels 
will begin their short and decisive war against Satan 
and his angels. Michael is the one archangel men- 
tioned in Scripture. It is not the first time he met 
Satan face to face. (Jude 9). And Daniel speaks of 
Michael, “And at that time shall Michael stand up, 
the great prince which standeth for the children of 
thy people; and there shall be a time of trouble, such 


THE REVELATION 77 


as never was since there was a nation even to that 
same time; and at that time thy people shall be 
delivered, every one that shall be found written in 
the book” (Dan. xii:1). From this we learn that 
Michael will not-atome-cause the expulsion of Satan 
out of heaven, but he will also stand up for the believ- 
ing portion of Israel. 

Satan is then cast out into the earth and his angels 
were cast out with him. It is identical with what we 
have seen already under the fifth trumpet, the star 
fallen out of heaven, opening the pit of the abyss with 
the darkening smoke and the locust swarms coming 
forth. ‘Then there is joy in heaven because the accuser 
is cast down and his accusations are forever silenced. 
And the “woe” is pronounced upon those who dwell 
on the earth. 

5. The ‘Dragon FPersecuting the Woman. Verses 
13-17. He turns in fury against the woman which 
brought forth the man child. Satan realizes now 
that his time is short. His expulsion from heaven will 
soon be followed by his arrest and imprisonment in 
the pit for a thousand years, and after that there is 
prepared for him his eternal home of misery, the lake 
of fire. As he knows that Israel is mostly con- 
cerned in the final drama, and the believing portion 
of that nation will inherit the kingdom, he turns in 
wrath against them. Verse 6 should be connected 
with verse 14. It is symbolical language we have here 
-again. The wilderness is a place of isolation, and 
the place prepared, speaks of God’s care for them. 
But it is not the entire nation. The apostate part 
sides with Satan and with Satan’s man, the Anti- 


78 THE REVELATION 


christ. But there is another part, which is preserved. 
This part is in the place of isolation among the nations. 
The water cast out by Satan is symbolical of the 
hatred which Satan stirs up against the people amongst 
the nations. These nations like Russia and others 
under Satanic control will persecute them. But 
there will be other agencies in the earth by which this 
Satanic attempt to wipe off the face of the earth this 
faithful part of the nation will be frustrated. These 
agencies will probably be those nations who have 
believed the final message, the Gospel of the Kingdom. 
Satan seeing himself defeated turns next against the 
godly remnant in the land itself (verse 17). 


Chapter AIII. The Beast Out of the Sea. Verses 
1-10. ‘This chapter brings now fully into view the 
Satanic powers operating during the great tribulation 
—the forty-two months. Satan’s masterpieces are on 
the earth; energized by him and endued with his 
powers they work together to stamp out all that is 
left of the truth on earth. Their combined efforts 
are directed against the godly remnant of Jews and 
against those Gentiles who accepted the message of 
the Gospel of the kingdom, who are seen in the seventh 
chapter emerging out of the great tribulation. They 
are called Beasts. The first is the revived Roman 
empire, which has over it a mighty leader. A careful 
study of Daniel’s prophecy in chapter vii is here 
needed. ‘The beast which John sees rising out of the 
sea is the Roman empire. This Daniel saw as a great 
nondescript, a dreadful beast with iron teeth and 
with ten horns. And John also sees this beast having 


THE REVELATION 79 


ten horns* with crowns and seven heads and these 
heads had names of blasphemy. Daniel had seen 
Babylonia, Medo-Persia and Greco-Macedonia under 
the emblem of the lion, the bear and the leopard. John 
sees this beast here like a leopard, with bear’s feet and 
lion’s mouth. This revived Roman empire is an 
amalgamation of parts of the previous world empires. 
The preceding ones are absorbed by the last, the 
Romanempire. Therefore the revived Roman empire 
will contain the different elements inone great monster. 
This Roman empire will be revived politically in the first 
part of the final seven years. We saw this under the 
first seal. Here in the beginning of the forty-two 
months the Dragon gives to him his power, and his 
throne and great authority. It becomes now fully 
possessed by Satan. The ten horns are the ten king- 
doms which will exist in that empire. We are told 
later that these ten kings “have one mind and shall 
give their power and strength unto the beast” (xvii:13). 
In the same chapter the beast is also seen coming out 
of the abyss (xvii:8) denoting its Satanic occupation. 
The heads represent the complete government which 
the beast has. One of the heads is especially men- 
tioned; latter we read ‘“‘he is the eighth, and is of the 
seven, and goeth into perdition” (xvii:11). It was 
as it were wounded to death, and his deadly wound 
was healed, and all the world wondered after the 
beast. This head denotes the imperial form of govern- 
ment, which had died, and now is revived in the person 


*The correct reading as given in the Revised Version is to put 
the horns first and the seven heads in the second place. 


80 THE REVELATION 


of the leader, the Prince of Daniel ix:27, the little 
horn, which Daniel saw in the midst of the ten horns. 
This will be Satan’s man, one of his masterpieces. The 
whole earth will wonder after that beast and its Satan 
possessed head. 


“The Beast will represent a picture hitherto unknown 
and unseen—one unexampled in the history of the 
race. A human power endowed with Satanic energy— 
openly defying God, and invested with the royal 
power and world-wide authority of Satan will engage 
the rapt gaze of the whole earth. It will marvel at 
the sight. We see no reason to limit the phrase ‘the 
whole earth.’ The revival of the empire must be a 
matter of interest to all embraced within its range and 
influence. The authority of the dragon, and_ his 
far-reaching influence go far beyond the geographical 
limits of the ten kingdoms. The Beast to whom he 
delegates his authority, exercises a commanding 
influence all over the earth—reaching even to the 
limits of heathendom.’’* 


Then when the head of the Beast has his Satanic 
power, the Dragon and the Beast are worshipped and 
for the forty-two months he blasphemes and makes 
war with the Saints and overcomes them (the Jewish 
Saints). And he had power over all kindreds and 
tongues and nations. It is interesting to see that 
Daniel and Revelation agree perfectly in this matter. 
There is only this difference, Daniel describes mostly 
the head of the revived Roman empire, the little 


*W. Scott. 


THE REVELATION 81 


horn; John sees the empire as such. We quote the 
following from our book on Daniel. 


Daniel 

Daniel saw the fourth beast, 
a great nondescript, with ten 
horns. 

The little horn “had eyes 

-and a mouth that spake very 
great things.” 

The little horn: ‘He shall 
speak words against the Most 
High.” 

The little horn: ‘‘He shall 
wear out the Saints of the Most 
High.” 

The little 
domineering power is “a time 
and times and dividing of 
times.” 


horn’s time of 


Revelation 

John beholds a beast out 
of the sea, with ten horns 
crowned (ten kings) and seven 
heads. 

To the Beast “was 
a mouth speaking great things 
and blasphemies.” 

The Beast: “He opened his 
mouth in blasphemy against 
God.” 

The Beast: ‘And it was 
given to him to make war 
with the Saints and to over- 
come them.” 

The Beast has power for 
42 months (31% years). 


given 


“We see from this parallel that the same things 
are said of the Beast in Revelation xiii which are 
said of the little horn. They must therefore be 
identical. But how can we harmonize this if Reve- 
lation xiii, the Beast out of the sea, means the resur- 
rected Roman empire? There lived a French King, 
Louis XIV, and in a famous speech he made the 
declaration ‘I am France.’ The little horn will 
possess such domineering powers, given to him by 
Satan, that he too can say ‘I am the empire.’ He 
will control the entire political sphere of the em- 
pire and thus gives to it his own Satanic God-defy- 
ing character. In Daniel we see the same lesson, 
only in another setting.” 


7. The Beast Out of the Earth. Verses 11-18. 


82 THE REVELATION 


The second Beast is not an empire with a great leader, 
but a person. The first Beast is out of the sea; the 
second out of the earth (land). The first has ten 
horns; the second has two. The Beast out of the 
sea comes first; the other Beast follows him. The 
first Beast is a political power; the second is a religious 
leader. The first is a Gentile power and its head 
a Gentile; the second is a Jew. The first Beast has 
Satanic power; so has the second Beast. The second 
Beast induces the worship of the first Beast whose 
dominion is over the entire Roman world and after 
whom the whole earth wonders; the sphere of the 
second Beast is Palestine. The first Beast through 
its head makes in the beginning of the seven years a 
covenant with many of the Jews, but in the middle of 
the week he breaks that covenant (Daniel ix:27). 
That covenant will be probably the permission given 
to the Jews to build a temple and to resume their 
sacrificial worship. But when the little horn, the 
prince, becomes energized by Satan, he breaks that 
covenant. Then this other Beast appears upon the 
scene and demands the worship of the first beast 
as well as the worship of himself. This second 
Beast is the final, personal Anti-christ. He has two 
horns like a lamb, and speaks like a dragon. He is a 
counterfeit lamb and his two horns are an imitation 
of the priestly and kingly authority of Christ. He is 
the one of whose coming our Lord spoke (John v:43). 
He is the man of sin, the son of perdition described by 
Paul in 2 Thess. ii. He must be a Jew for his claims 
of being Israel’s true Messiah would not be accepted 
by the Jews. The view that it will be Judas Iscariot 


THE REVELATION 83 


raised from the dead is a fanciful speculation. Daniel 
also gives an interesting prophetic picture which 
bears out his Jewish character and his wicked, satanic 
ways. See Daniel xi:36-39.* This second Beast is 
also called the false Prophet (xvi:13; xix:20; xx:10). 
He does lying wonders. He reigns as the false king in 
Jerusalem and sits as god in the temple. He will be 
both, the religious head of apostate Judaism and 
apostate Christendom. It is the strong delusion of the 
second chapter of Second Thessalonians. And he also 
demands the worship of the first Beast. He makes 
an image of the first Beast and gives breath to it, 
so that it can speak. Compare with the image which 
Nebuchadnezzar set up (Daniel iii). This image will 
most likely be put up outside of the land of Palestine, 
perhaps in Rome, and in this way the Beast will be 
worshipped. The most terrible persecution is con- 
nected with this idol-worship. The most awful 
tyranny exists then, for all commerce is controlled by 
the Beast. Whosoever has not the mark of the 
Beast on hand and forehead cannot buy nor sell, and 
whosoever does not worship the Beast will be killed. 
And those who worship the Beast and receive the 
mark are lost souls. Great will be the number of 
martyrs at that time. To find out what the mark is 
and some of the other details would only be guess-work. 
No one can imagine the horrors of that time when 
Satan rules for a short time on earth and produces the 
great tribulation, such as was not before on earth, nor 


*Others apply this passage to the little horn of Daniel vii. 
A careful comparison between Daniel vii and xi:36-39 will 
show that they are two different persons. 


84 THE REVELATION 


ever can be again. May we praise Him for His 
infinite Grace which saves us from that hour and may 
we reach out for those who,without Christ and without 
hope, are the subjects of this coming doom and eternal 
misery besides. 

But what does the number 666 mean? If we were 
to state all the different views on this number and 
the different applications we would have to fill many 
pages and then we would not know what is right and 
wrong. Seven is the complete perfect number; six 
is incomplete and is man’s number. Here we have 
three times six. It is humanity fallen, filled with 
pride, defying God. The number 666 signifies man’s 
day and man’s defiance of God under Satan’s power 
in its culmination. 


FIFTH DIVISION. THE POWER OF GOD IN INTER= 
VENTION. GRACE AND JUDGMENT MANIFESTED. 


Chapter XIV. 


1. The Lamb Upon Zion and the 144,000. Verses 
1-5. A series of blessed visions follow the darkest 
chapter in the Book of Revelation. The awful con- 
ditions under the domineering power of the two 
Beasts are going to be changed. The Lord will answer 
the prayers of the persecuted Jewish people and 
deliver them by His personal coming out of the opened 
heaven. This glorious manifestation is fully revealed 
in the nineteenth chapter. Here it is anticipated. 
There is much said about this intervention in behalf 
of the suffering godly remnant in the Old Testament. 
As an illustration we call attention to Psalms xliv and 


THE REVELATION 85 


xlv. In the forty-fourth Psalm we find a description 
of their suffering and the cry to heaven “Arise for our 
help, and redeem us for thy mercies’ sake.” In the 
forty-fifth Psalm the answer to this prayer is recorded. 
The King riding in majesty, dealing with His enemies, 
surrounded by redeemed companies is beheld in that 
Psalm. The entire Book of Psalms should be studied 
from the viewpoint of ‘prophecy; it will shed much 
light upon these events of this portion of Revelation. 
But who are the 144,000 standing with the Lamb 
upon Mount Zion, having His Name* and His Father’s 
Name written on their foreheads? In the previous 
chapter we saw a company on earth who have the 
mark of the Beast on their foreheads; but here is a 
company who have His Name and the Father’s Name 
on the forehead. A good many have made of this 
company a portion of the Church, a first fruits, who, 
according to this theory, have lived separated lives 
and are caught up into heaven, while the other believers, 
who did not live as near to God as they did, will have 
to suffer in the great tribulation. The reader who 
has followed the unfolding of this book will see at 
ence that such an interpretation is impossible. These 
144,000 have nothing to do whatever with the Church. 
The Elders are mentioned in verse 3 and as distinct 
from the 144,000, and, as we saw, the twenty-four 
Elders include and represent the Church. The 144,000 
are the same company which was sealed in chapter 
vii, but they also include the distinctly Jewish remnant 


*This has been unfortunately omitted in the Authorized 
Version. 


86 THE REVELATION 


which suffered more specifically in Palestine. The 
number 144,000 being symbolical and not actual 
permits such an interpretation. In one word they 
represent the “all Israel” saved by the coming of the 
deliverer out of Zion (Rom. xi:26). They passed 
through the great tribulation and are seen as redeemed 
from the earth. And then there is heard the voice of 
harpers, making sweet music with their harps. They 
sing a new song (not as it were) before the throne and 
before the living creatures and the Elders. And the 
144,000 learn to sing this new song. Who then are 
the harpers? They are the martyred company seen 
in connection with the fifth seal and they also include 
now their brethren which were slain during the great 
tribulation. The characteristics of the 144,000 are 
next given. Verse 4 must not be interpreted in a 
literal sense. Those who apply it to a firstfruits of 
the Church have done so and it has led to much con- 
fusion and even worse things. Literal impurity is 
not in view. If it had a literal meaning this com- 
pany would consist of men only. The woman, the 
great harlot Babylon and her daughters, the God-less 
and Christ-less religious world-systems (chapter xvii) 
are then on the earth. They did not defile themselves 
with the corruptions and idolatries prevalent on the 
earth. They kept themselves from spiritual fornica- 
tion. ‘They are the firstfruits and the earnest of the 
blessings soon in store for the earth.* They were 


*The term firstfruits is also applied to true believers consti- 
tuting the Church (Rom. viii:23; 1 Cor. xv:20-22; James i:18). 
We are the first fruits, the earnest of the coming blessing for 
Israel and the nations. If the faithful remnant of Israel keeps 


THE REVELATION 87 


devoted to the Lamb and no lie (not guile) was in their 
mouth. The lie and delusion of the end-time were 
utterly repudiated by them. 

2. The Proclamation of the Everlasting Gospel. 
Verses 6-7. 'This has nothing to do with the preaching 
of the Gospel during this church-age. The Angel 
must not be taken as a literal angel. The preaching 
of any Gospel to those who dwell on earth is never 
committed to angels, but to men. This is true of 
the Gospel of Grace which redeemed sinners are privi- 
leged to proclaim during this age, and of the ever- 
lasting Gospel during the end of the age. The 
Gospel preached is the Gospel of the Kingdom and the 
preachers are this faithful remnant of God’s earthly 
people. Nothing of this preaching was said in Chapter 
vii, though the result, the gathered multitude coming 
out of the great tribulation is seen there. But here, 
where the moral and spiritual characteristics of the 
remnant of Israel is seen, their testimony also comes 
into view. What this everlasting Gospel is we need 
not to explain for verse 7 gives us the information. 
It is everlasting because it concerns the Creator as the 
only object of worship. And it will sound the loudest 
and go forth in no uncertain sound at the time when 
pandemonium reigns on earth, and heaven is about to 
open to manifest the King of Glory. How great is 
God’s mercy! And the nations who hear and turn 
to God will enter the coming Kingdom. Read in 
connection with verses 6 and 7 Psalm xcvi. It will 


itself undefiled from the religious corruption of the end-time, 
how much more should we keep ourselves as a separated people 
(2 Cor. vi:14; 2 Tim. 1i1:20-21). 


88 THE REVELATION 


give you a great deal of light on this portion of Revela- 
tion. 

3. Babylon has Fallen. Verse 8. This is an antici- 
pative announcement of what will also happen as the 
great tribulation nears its close. The particulars are 
not given here. These and what Babylon is and how 
Babylon the great (city must be omitted in this verse) 
falls, we shall find in Chapters xvii and xviii. God’s 
intervention in judgment upon the great whore is 
simply mentioned here. 

4. The Eternal Wrath for the Worshippers of the Beast. 
Verses 9-11. Here we have a third angelic announce- 
ment. It concerns the worshippers of the Beast. 
They drink of the wrath of God. It is “without mix- 
ture,” that is, no mercy is found in the cup of His 
indignation. It serves as a solemn warning. Babylon 
falls prior to the glorious appearing of the King, and 
the Beast will afterward manifest his power as never 
before. Therefore, the warning concerning the inevit- 
able fate of those who worship the Beast and take its 
mark. ‘The warning cannot be twisted, though men 
like “Pastor” Russell and other deceiving teachers 
attempt it. It is Satan’s deception this increasing 
denial of the solemn truth of an everlasting, conscious 
and awful punishment of the wicked. By these 
denials, Satan prepares gradually, but surely, for the 
final great apostasy. “The smoke of their torment 
ascendeth forever and ever.” There is no end to it. 
Unsaved reader! Be warned and accept Christ. 

5. The Blessed Dead Who Die in the Lord. Verses 
12-13. It is a voice which proclaims this. It has 
nothing to do with those who die in the Lord now. 


THE REVELATION 89 


Certaintly all our loved ones who fell asleep in Jesus 
are blessed. They are absent from the body and 
consciously present with the Lord. But here is the 
comfort for those who faithfully resist the worship 
of the Beast, who refuse to take the mark. They 
become martyrs. The Book of Revelation will be 
read and studied during the great tribulation. Satan 
through the Beasts, will try to annihilate it and the rest 
of the Bible. But it will be a failure as all former 
attempts to get the Bible out of the world have failed. 
Here, then, is first the warning. If they worship the 
Beast they will be lost forever. ‘Then there is the 
alternative to resist the Beast and be killed as to the 
body, but die in the Lord. ‘From henceforth” means ' 
during the tribulation when the great persecution 
goes on. 

6. The Harvest and the Vintage. Verses 14-20. 
This brings now the Coming of the Son of Man with 
judgment power into view. The harvest and the 
vintage have come. The sickle is put in. The 
reapers used will be angels (Matt. xiii:39). The day 
of vengeance has come. Read Isaiah 1xiii:1-6; Joel iii; 
Zechariah xii-xiv. This will greatly help in a better 
understanding of the harvest and the vintage. The 
nations and their armies will be in the land; the As- 
syrian from the North, foreshadowed by the wicked 
work of Antiochus Epiphanes (Dan. viii) will do its 
awful work; the false prophet, the second Beast, is in 
Jerusalem. But then the judgment clouds break. 
The battle of Armageddon comes into view for the 
first time in verse 20. How we ought to praise Him 
that His infinite grace has separated us from these 


90 THE REVELATION 


awful executions of vengeance and wrath. His people 
will be home when all things come to pass. 


SIXTH DIVISION: THE SEVEN ANGELS HAVING THE 
SEVEN PLAGUES. THE VIALS OF WRATH. 


Chapters XV=XVI. 


Chapter XV. 1. The Seven Angels with the Seven 
Plagues. Verse 1. And now the last seven angels 
appear. Seven seal judgments first, followed by seven 
angels with trumpets and next the last seven angels. 
With these seven angels who have the seven last 
plagues for the world, the wrath of God is completed. 
These great final manifestations of the wrath of God 
upon an apostate world are therefore conclusive. 
What wonderful order prevails in this book! What 
unfoldings of the future! What harmony with the 
previous portions of God’s Word! Surely a human 
mind—a genius—could never have put these things 
together in this manner. It is revelation. 

2. Another Scene of Worship. Verses 2-4. Before 
these angels go forth we behold another worship scene. 
Who are they? Not the twenty-four Elders, but they 
are the harpers which we saw harping and singing in 
Chapter xiv:2-3. They are the martyred company 
worshipping in glory. Here we are told of their victory 
and their song, the song of Moses and of the Lamb. 
The song of Moses (Exod. xv) is the song of an earthly 
deliverance and the song of the Lamb concerns a spiritual 
deliverance. They are redeemed by power and by 
blood. 

3. The Seven Angels Proceeding out of the Temple. 
Verses 5-8. A wonderful sight it is. There is again 


THE REVELATION 91 


an ominous silence similar to the silence in connection 
with the opening of the seventh seal. The silence is 
not mentioned. But the text shows an impressive 
scene of silence. Quietly the procession of these 
ministers of judgment file out of the temple. They 
are clothed in pure, white linen; this is symbolical 
of the righteousness which demands the judgment 
wrath about to be poured out. And the golden girdles 
with which their breasts are girded speak still more 
of divine righteousness. God in His righteousness 
must judge and now His wrath in completeness is about 
to be felt on the earth. The angels left the temple 
empty-handed, but the four living creatures give into 
their hands the bowls full of the wrath of God. Then 
the temple was filled with smoke, not the smoke from 
incense, but from the Glory of God. And behind that 
smoke is the fire of judgment. He is hidden in the 
thick darkness of His Glory (Exod. xix:18; Ps. xviii:8; 
Isaiah vi:4). 


Chapter XVI. 4. The First Vial. Verses 1-2. 
The great voice commands the seven angels to go on 
their way and to empty the bowls upon the earth 
(Ps. lxix:24). And these vials of judgments affect 
not alone the Roman empire, but the entire world, 
for the whole world is guilty before God. The first 
vial poured out produces a grievous sore upon the 
worshippers of the Beast. While it is undoubtedly 
true that we have symbols also in these vial judg- 
ments, it is nevertheless possible that some of these 
plagues may have, besides the symbolical, also a 
literal meaning. The sixth plague which came upon 


92 THE REVELATION 


Egypt, the first judgment upon the persons of 
the “Egyptians, “was -als6~-a sore ®s(Exdd= “i 
10-11). The worshippers of the Beast and of the 
image will be dreadfully afflicted. All the internal 
corruption will be outwardly manifested. There will 
be connected with it great agony and suffering; and as 
a sore is a vile thing to behold, we may think of the 
great vileness connected with the moral, apostate 
conditions in the earth, which God will permit to break 
out. 

5. The Second Vial. Verse 3. This is poured out 
into the sea. The sea represents the Gentiles. These 
will now experience the wrath of God. See the plague 
in Egypt (Exod. vii:17—25). That was a literal thing; 
but not so here. Some apply it to the continued car- 
nage which will be one of the leading features of the 
final history of the times of the Gentiles. That it 
presents a state of the most unspeakable corruption 
and spiritual death is obvious. How little we can 
say of all these awful scenes of wrath coming upon 
the earth. It is far better to acknowledge our ignor- 
ance in some of these matters than to indulge in fanci- 
ful speculations. 

6. The Third Vial. Verses 4-7. Another scene 
in which the blood is prominent. The Apostates 
denied the blood, sneered at it as the Unitarians and 
Christian Scientists do in our own days, and now the 
angel of the waters saith, “Thou hast given them blood 
to drink, for they are worthy.” They have to feel the 
dreadful results of having rejected the Christ of God 
and accepted the man of sin. The children of Israel 
had to taste their own idolatry when Moses put the 


THE REVELATION 93 


ashes of the burnt golden calf in the water and made 
them drink it (Exod. xxxii:20). They have to taste 
the vileness and bitterness of their apostasy. They 
reap what they sow. All the joys of life typified by 
rivers and fountains of water, are poisoned and cor- 
rupted. It is a retributive judgment of ou falling 
then upon the earth. 

7. The Fourth Vial. Verses 8-9. The fourth vial 
is poured into the sun and men are scorched with 
great heat. Some also apply this literally, but the 
symbolical meaning is to be preferred. There can be 
no doubt but the powers of nature will also bear 
witness to the wrath of God. Famines, droughts, 
great floods, volcanic disturbances, great and wide- 
spread earthquakes and other physical phenomena 
will occur throughout these days of tribulation. How- 
ever, the sun here is not the physical sun, but means, 
as under the fourth trumpet, the supreme authority 
governing them (the Roman empire). Under the 
fourth trumpet great moral darkness came upon 
all; here it is fearful, fiery agony “‘scorched with 
great heat.” The government, Satan-ruled as it 
is, becomes now the source of the most awful 
torment to those who are under its dominion. 
God, in judgment and in His wrath, permits those 
terrible things to come to pass. Everything under 
these vial judgments will become more aggravated 
than under the trumpet judgment. And what will 
those do who are drinking the cup of wrath? They 
do not repent, but blaspheme. What an evidence of 
their hopeless condition! 

8. The Fifth Vial. Verses 10-11. Under the fifth 


94 THE REVELATION 


trumpet we saw the star fallen from heaven. It 
synchronizes with chapter xii:7-12—Satan cast out of 
heaven. Then Satan fallen from heaven gave his 
power and authority to the Beast, the head of the 
empire. Here the throne (not seat) of the Beast 
is dealt with. His throne and his kingdom is deluged 
with wrath. All becomes darkness.* ‘The boast had 
been “Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to 
make war with him?” (xiii:4). Here God answers this 
boast with wrath. Then they begin to gnaw their 
tongues with pain. However, it is not yet the com- 
plete judgment of the two Beasts. That comes later. 

9. The Sixth Vial. Verse 12. Once more the river 
Euphrates is mentioned. It dries up when the 
sixth bowl is poured out so that the way of the kings 
of the East (literal: from the rising of the sun) might 
be prepared. We have hinted before at the corres- 
pondence between the trumpet judgments and the 
pouring out of the vials. This becomes now very 
marked for under the sixth trumpet the river Euphrates 
is also mentioned. There the forces which keep 
back hostile powers are removed and here the river is 
dried up. The historical interpretation is respon- 
sible for the theory that the Euphrates is Turkey. 
But is there anything in Revelation which would 
warrant the interpretation that this river. means 
Turkey? We know nothing whatever. If the Euph- 
rates really meant the Turkish power then the drying 
up of the river has been going on for a number of 
decades. But here it is not a gradual thing but a 


*See the judgment plague upon Egypt (Exod. x:21-23). 


THE REVELATION 95 


sudden event. Nor does this event take place as 
long as the true Church is here, but after the Church is 
removed. As already stated the Euphrates was the 
boundary of the Roman empire and the land of Israel. 
It is a kind of barrier which separates the West from 
the East. This barrier symbolized by the river 
Euphrates is now completely removed, so that the 
kings from the sunrise can invade the land. This 
invasion is also seen in connection with the sixth 
trumpet. The nations must gather from all quarters 
in and about Palestine. We find much of this revealed 
in the Old Testament and it would be strange if the 
Revelation were silent on so important an event. 
Ezekiel describes a great invader, a confederacy of 
nations (Ezek. xxxvili and xxxix). Gog, Magog, the 
Prince of Rosh* (Russia), Meshech, Tubal, Persia, 
Cush and Put are mentioned as forming this confeder- 
acy. The term “Kings of the sunrise” may even mean 
the far Eastern Asiatic nations, like China and Japan. 
We hear much of “the yellow peril” in our day. Certain 
statesmen predict that ultimately Russia will form an 
alliance with Japan, and, as one expressed it “then let 
Europe tremble.” The drying up of the Euphrates 
seems therefore to mean the removal of the barrier, 
so that the predicted gathering of the nations may 
take place (Joel i1i:2). What began under the sixth 
trumpet is consummated when the sixth vial is poured 
out. Itis an act of judgment-wrath, while at the same 
time these opposing nations are gathering for the 
great day of God Almighty. 


*This is the correct translation of “chief prince.” 


96 THE REVELATION 


Between the Sixth and Seventh Vial. A Parenthetical 
Vision. Verses 13-16. Just as we had a parenthetical 
vision between the sixth and seventh seal, and between 
the sixth and seventh trumpet, so we find here a very 
brief one between the sixth and seventh vial judgment. 
Armageddon is not yet, but it comes now in view. 
Unclean spirits, like frogs, creatures of the slimy, evil- 
smelling swamps and of the night, now proceed out 
of the mouth of the trinity of evil. The Dragon is 
Satan; the Beast the political head of the empire 
and the false Prophet, the Anti-christ. Satanic 
influences, emanating from him and his two master- 
pieces are then at work; and they are of such a nature 
that we cannot fully understand them. ‘They are the 
spirits of demons, working miracles. Doctrines of 
seducing spirits and demons, like Christian Science, 
Spiritism and Theosophy are already in the world. 
They are Satan’s instruments. But when the three un- 
clean spirits come forth it will be far worse. It is a judg- 
ment also. Compare with 1 Kings xxii:13-23. The 
kings are gathered for the battle which is to come. And 
it is God Himself who does this gathering. What will 
happen when they are gathered wé see in chapter xix. 
A final warning is given of His coming. 

10. The Seventh Vial. Verses 17-21. The seventh 
angel pours his vial into the air. This is Satan’s 
sphere. His power and dominion is now dealt with in 
wrath. While Satan was cast out of heaven, he 
may still maintain part of the atmosphere immediately 
above the earth, thus upholding his claim as the 
prince of the power of the air (Eph. ii:2). A great 
voice declares “Jt is done.” All what follows shows 


THE REVELATION 97 


that the climax is reached. The judgment shown is 
Sweeping everything. A great earthquake as under 
the sixth seal and the seventh trumpet takes place. 
The great city Babylon is divided into three parts; 
the cities of the nations fall. It is the hour of collapse, 
when the stone from above does its smiting work 
(Dan. ii). “It is done!’ The Lord has come. The 
nineteenth chapter will furnish us the particulars. 


SEVENTH DIVISION. THE GREAT HARLOT BABYLON 
AND HER JUDGMENT. 


Chapters XVII-XVIII. 


Chapter XVII. /. The Description of the Woman. 
Verses 1-6. Babylon was mentioned for the first time 
in this book in chapter xiv:8; her fall was then anti- 
cipated. In two chapters we have a description of 
her and the details of her overthrow and complete 
destruction. Babylon is seen as a great, world- 
wide ecclesiastical, political and commercial system, 
and her dwelling place, from where she exercises 
authority is.a great city, which is the seven-hilled city 
Rome. There are many who believe that the literal 
Babylon is in view here in these two chapters. It is 
claimed that literal Babylon on the banks of the 
Euphrates is to become once more a large city and the 
seat of government during the end of this age. ‘This 
interpretation is wrong and the best evidences against 
it are the contents of the two chapters. Literal Babylon 
never was a part of the Roman empire and as the 
Babylon of Revelation xvii and xviii is seen in closest 
identification with the empire and for a time at least 
is its center and capital, the Babylon in Asia is ruled 


98 THE REVELATION 


out at once. Rome was the great center of the Roman 
empire and Rome will once more become the seat 
where the woman pictured in this chapter will exercise 
her authority. We fully believe, however, that 
ancient Babylon will also be rebuilt. One only needs 
to turn to Isaiah xii:20—-22 to find the proof of that. 
Such a destruction of literal Babylon has never been. 
Babylon at the present time is quite an influential 
town and constantly growing. Great irrigation 
schemes and railroads are planned for Mesopotamia. 
When Euphrates comes into prominence, as we have 
seen under the sixth trumpet and sixth vial, and the 
invasion from the far East, from the “‘sun-rise” takes 
place, there must needs arise on the banks of the 
Euphrates the ancient city and become a city of 
prominence once more. Then after that her final 
destruction will come. See Jeremiah li. All this is 
clear and cannot be denied. But it is equally clear 
that the Babylon described in these two chapters in 
Revelation is not the literal Babylon. 

In the first part of this chapter we have a description 
of the great harlot Babylon. Who then is this woman, 
branded a harlot, which one of the seven angels who 
poured out the vials showed to John? She represents 
the Papal system in its final power and control in the 
world. We shall see how this assertion is fully con- 
firmed by the words of this chapter. We saw in the 
church-message to Thyatira, which stands for the 
Papacy and its great corruption, that Rome is pictured 
as the woman Jezebel, corresponding to the woman in 
the parable of the leaven. And of Thyatira it is 
said “she repents not.” This shows that Rome will 


THE REVELATION 99 


continue in her corrupt ways to the end, till judg- 
ment overtakes her. She is to be cast into great tribu- 
lation (ii:22). When the true Church is caught up 
the Papal system, as we call it, the Roman Catholic 
“church,” will see a great revival. For a time she has 
been stripped of the power she once had, but it will 
be restored to her. Along with the revival of the 
Roman empire there will be a revival of Papal Rome. 
Indications of this are numerous at the present time. 
While we see the possible European Confederacy 
looming up, culminating in the resurrected empire, 
we see also that Rome will soon see her revival. Many 
voices are heard in Protestantism suggesting a union 
with Rome, thus producing a great ‘“‘world-church,” 
a strange and significant term. This present war 
must end some day and we should not at all be sur- 
prised if the man, who claims to be “‘the head of the 
church on earth,” will play an important part when 
peace is made. ‘The negotiations for peace may be 
made in the city of Rome. But we must look very 
briefly at some of the descriptions of this woman, the 
harlot. “She sitteth upon many waters.’ We find 
the interpretation in verse 15. “The waters which 
thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are peoples, and 
multitudes, and nations and tongues.” Rome even 
now can boast of her children among all nations. She 
gets her support from the whole world. And when 
she gets her revival she will have a still greater domin- 
ion. The kings of the earth then yield once more to 
her spiritual fornication. Then John saw the woman 
upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of blas- 
phemy, having seven heads and ten horns. Who is 


100 THE REVELATION 


the Beast she rides? It is the first Beast of chapter 
xlii, the revived Roman empire. She becomes iden- 
tified with that empire. Her attire is in purple, scarlet, 
and she is decked with gold and precious stones and 
pearls. The Pope and his Cardinals wear these colors. 
Purple and scarlet are the leading colors displayed in 
great Romish celebrations. And gold, precious stones 
and pearls describe her enormous wealth and dazzling 
glory, so attractive to the natural man. And in her 
hand was a golden cup full of abominations and 
filthiness of her fornication. How clearly this des- 
cribes Papal Rome. Her service, called worship, 
her rituals, her splendid edifices, etc., all is fair to 
behold and pleasing to the eye, like a golden cup. But 
inside we find her filthiness in doctrine and in practices. 
She encourages sin by her indulgences. With the 
celibacy there is also filth connected. And then the 
vileness and abomination of the confessional. Her 
shameless character is written upon her forehead. The 
true Church is to have His name upon the forehead 
and the great harlot-system bears also an inscription. 
“Mystery” is the first word. It has been well put by 
another: 

“Her name is Mystery, yet it is written on her forehead. 
Her character is plain, if only you can read it. If you are pure, 
you may soon know that she is not. If you are true, you may 
quite easily detect her falsehood. In lands where she bears 
sway, as represented in this picture, she has managed to divorce 
morality from religion in such a manner that all the world knows 
the width of the breach. Her priests are used to convey the 
sacraments; and one need not look at the hands too closely 
that do so needful a work. In truth, it is an affair of the hands, 
with the magic of a little breath by means of which the most 
sinful of His creatures can create the God that made him, and 


THE REVELATION 101 


easily new-create, therefore, another mortal like himself. This 
is a great mystery, which she herself conceives as “sacrament,” 
and you may see this clearly on her forehead then. It is the 
trick of her trade, without which it could not exist. With it, 
a little oil and water and spittle become of marvelous efficacy 
(the wafer in the mass) her capital stock indeed, out of which, 
at the smallest cost, the church can create riches and power, 
and much that has unquestionable value in her eyes.’’* 


And she is “Babylon the Great.” Babylon means 
confusion; it is the great confusion, all the evils and 
perversions of the truth of God brought into one 
powerful organization. And she is the mother of 
all harlots and abominations on the earth. Every 
religious system which aims at worldly power and 
grandeur and which shares more or less her assump- 
tions and false doctrines is an offspring of her. These 
systems, after the restraining power of the Holy Spirit 
is gone, will naturally unite with ‘mother church” 
and form the great Babylon.t And she was drunken 
with the blood of the Saints and with the blood of 
the martyrs of Jesus, so that John wondered with a 
great wonder. Such were her cruel, wicked, Satanic 
deeds in the past. 

The inquisition, the torture-chambers, the countless 
victims who were burned to death and cruelly tortured, 
the unspeakable horrors of centuries of violence and 
murder come to our mind as we read this description. 
It could never be true of the literal Babylon. Nor 
does it mean, as Roman expositors of this book claim, 


*Numerical Bible. 

+A good part of the “Church of England” is ready to unite 
with Rome. Leading Protestant preachers have also said that 
Christendom should soon unite and acknowledge Rome. 


102 THE REVELATION 


pagan Rome, for if it meant the persecutions under 
the Roman Emperors, John would not have won- 
dered with a great wonder. And the last page of her 
cruel, horrible, persecutions is not yet written. When 
she comes in power again, she will do the same thing, 
enabled, no doubt, by the power of the Beast. Papal 
Rome, the blood-thirsty, corrupt system is what we 
see here and Rome is seen in her coming revival. 

2. The Interpretation by the Angel. Verses 7-15. 
The interpreting angel told John who the Beast 
is, the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is (verse 
8). Itis the Roman empire, as stated before. It was 
in an imperial form in John’s day. In the fifth cen- 
tury, A.D., it ceased existing as imperial Rome; it 
is not. But it is to be again, a revival which is here 
described as coming out of the pit of the abyss (Chapter 
xiii). Verse 9 shows Rome (seven mountains)* where 
the woman sitteth. Therefore Rome speaks of “the 
See of the Papacy” and “See” is derived from the 
Latin Sedes, which means seat or throne. 

The seven kings or heads in verse 10 mean different 
forms of government of the Roman empire. Five are 
fallen; these were Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemvirs 
and Military Tribunes. These are past forms of 
government. But in John’s day the empire had the 
imperial form of government. This is the meaning of 
“one is.’ ‘The other and final form of the Roman 
empire “is not yet come.” That is in John’s day 
it had not yet come. It is the Satanic revival and con- 


*Romans call the seven hills upon which “the eternal city” 
—so-called, is built Montes—mountains. 


THE REVELATION 103 


trol of the empire as we saw it in Chapter xiii. And the 
eighth head, which goeth into perdition, is the man who 
heads the empire, the little horn, which Daniel saw 
on the ten-horned Beast. The ten horns in verses 
12-13 are the kings. They correspond to the ten 
toes on Nebuchadnezzar’s image and the ten horns 
on the fourth Beast which Daniel saw coming out of 
the sea. And these ten kings yield their power and 
strength unto the Beast. In verse 14 their awful 
future is seen. We shall see this more fully in Chapter 
xix:l1-21. They are going to make war with the 
Lamb, and the Lamb, who is Lord of lords and King 
of kings, will overcome them. With Him are the 
called, the chosen and the faithful, that is the redeemed, 
who come with Him and are manifested when He 
appears. 

3. The Desolation of the Whore. Verses 16-18. 
The woman rides the Beast for a short time only. 
She will not be long successful in her regained power. 
The ten horns, the ten kingdoms, and the Beast* 
hate her and turn against the whore. First they 
were all for her and now they unite in making her 
desolate and naked and burn her with fire. But 
more than that “and shall eat her flesh,” just as 
Jezebel was eaten by the dogs. It is God in His 
righteous judgment who decreed her desolation in this 
way. “And the woman which thou sawest is that 
great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth.” 
The City is none other than Rome. 


*“And the Beast” is not in the authorized version; it is added 
in the Revised Version and belongs rightfully into the text. 


104 THE REVELATION 


Chapter XVIII. 4. The Angelic Announcement. 
Verses 1-3. Babylon is now seen under another 
aspect. In the former chapter we have the religious 
center of Rome and her wicked idolatries, in the 
present chapter it includes also the whole system of 
apostate Christendom in its social and commercial 
aspect, the so-called “Christian civilization” in its 
final apostate condition and doom. Papal Rome in_ 
her short revival becomes the head of apostate Chris- 
tendom and controls everything till her appointed 
doom comes upon her. While we saw in the preceding 
chapter the desolation of the whore by the ten kings and 
the Beast, here we see how God views her and that He 
dethrones this system by His judgment. A strong 
angel comes down to announce her doom and to lay 
bare her inner and most awful corruption. And the 
descending Angel* whose glory lightened the earth, 
shows what the boasting thing, she, who bore the blessed 
name of Christ, has become. She is seen to be the 
habitation of demons. Even now behind all the 
denials of the doctrine of Christ and the false doctrines 
which mark the onward march of the predicted apos- 
tasy, demons are the leaders (1 Tim. iv:1). But what 
will it be when the demons are in full power on the 
earth and all Christendom has joined itself to the 
Romish whore! That great ‘“‘world-church” has 
become “the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage 


*This angel may represent the Lord Himself. If this is correct 
we have the third manifestation of our Lord in the garb of an 
angel. viii:3 in His priestly dignity; x:1 in His royal dignity 
and here as the herald and executor of the vengeance of God 
upon Babylon. 


THE REVELATION 105 


of every unclean and hateful bird.” The mustard 
tree parable (Matthew xiii) points out this also. The 
birds which flock into the branches are unclean things. 
Christendom has been this in the past and is it now, 
but when at last all is united with Rome and forms 
one vast ecclesiastical system, then every foul spirit, 
every unclean and hateful bird will be found in her. 
And the nations drank eagerly her cup and the kings 
committed fornication with her. These kings are not 
the ten kings of the Empire for they are used in the 
judgment of the whore, while the kings mentioned 
here bewail her destruction (verse 9). And with 
the system there was connected great commerce; 
merchants through her became rich. 

5. The Call to Separate. Verses 4-5. God always 
calls out His true children from that which is evil. 
His own must be a separated people. Saints in past 
centuries have heard this call and left behind the 
Romish abominations and thousands sealed their 
testimony with their blood. And in these days in 
which our lot is cast, days with increasing signs, 
heralding as never before the approaching end and 
the home-call of His people to meet Him in the air, 
in these days God demands the separation of His 
true children. Christendom is becoming daily more 
and more the religious camp of apostasy. And there- 
fore He calls ‘‘Let us go forth unto Him without the 
camp bearing His reproach” (Heb. xiii:13). He who 
remains in that which denies His Name, is partaker of 
her sins (verse 4, compare with 2 John, verses 10-11). 
As all drifts back to Rome and the coming political 
and religious confederacy, this final Babylon looms up, 


106 THE REVELATION 


God’s people must hear that call. And what shall we 
say of certain professional evangelists who instead 
of sounding this divine call, laud Rome, speak well 
of her, so that their supposed “converts” unite with 
the Romish whore by the hundreds! But there is to 
be a final call to come out of her, after the true Church 
is gone. To whom is this call addressed? Undoubtedly 
to the remnant of God’s ancient people, the believing 
remnant* and also to that large number of Gentiles 
who hear the final message, the Gospel of the Kingdom. 


6. Her Pride and Righteous Destruction. Verses 
6-8. The language of righteous retribution used in 
the sixth verse reminds of Psalm cxxxvii:8. ‘“O 
daughter of Babylon, thou shalt be destroyed; happy 
shall he be, that rewardeth thee as thou hast served 
us.” It is the language not of Christians, who are 
exhorted not to recompense evil for evil, but it is the 
expression of the remnant of Israel. Like ancient 
Babylon, the whole apostate system, Rome and all her 
offspring, was filled with pride. She was lifted up 
in all her earthly glory and now God breaks her com- 
pletely. “She shall be utterly. burned with fire.” 
As her smoke is to arise forever and ever (xix:3) it is 
possible that the proud city, Rome, the center of the 
system of apostasy and commerce will be destroyed 
by volcanic action and where the seven-hilled city once 
stood there may be instead an immense crater, testify- 
ing throughout the millennium of God’s righteous 
retribution. In view of the volcanic conditions on 


*Jeremiah li:6 concerns the literal Babylon of the past. Godly 
Jews were exhorted to flee her. 


THE REVELATION at EO? 


the Italian peninsula this is more than _ possible. 
Rome means “strong,” but her strength will be broken 
when-the strong Lord God judgeth her. 

7. The Universal Lamentation Over Her. Verses 
9-19. And now follows the great and universal 
lamentation over the destruction of the great world- 
system. ‘There is weeping and wailing when at last 
this Anti-christian civilization, all Christendom united 
with Rome, and for a time controlling the commerce 
of the world, is wiped out by the hand of God. The 
kings, the merchants, the shipmasters, the company 
in ships and sailors, all are seen mourning, weeping 
and wailing. The destruction of the system and of 
its proud city affects them all. They bewail their 
great loss. Notice twenty-eight things are mentioned 
by them. The first is gold and the last the souls of 
men. How this describes Rome! She is the trafficker 
in souls and the destroyer of souls as well. And in 
studying the articles of the commerce of apostate 
Christendom we notice that these are nearly all 
articles of luxury. The greatest panic has then come 
and there will be no recovery of the market. The 
rich men will weep and howl for their misery is come 
upon them (James v:1). See also Zeph. i:11; 18. 

8. The Rejoicing Heavens. Verse 20. Heaven is 
called to rejoice over her and three classes are men- 
tioned (Revised Version) Saints, Apostles and Prophets. 
“For God hath judged your judgment on her.” This 
is the better rendering. The judgment which the 
saints pronounced on her is now executed. However, 
the next chapter shows us more fully the rejoicing 
heavens. 


108 THE REVELATION 


9. Her Utter and Everlasting Destruction. Verses 
21-23. In Jeremiah 1i:60-64 we read that Seraiah 
was commissioned by Jeremiah to attach a stone to 
the book containing the prophet’s words and to cast 
it into the Euphrates. ‘‘And thou shalt say, thus shall 
Babylon sink and shall not rise from the evil that I 
will bring upon her and they shall be weary.” Here 
an angel took up a millstone and cast it into the sea 
showing by this action the complete and final destruc- 
tion of the wicked system and the equally wicked city. 
And what revelation there is in the statement “for 
by thy sorceries were all nations deceived.” In Chapter 
xx we read that the old Serpent deceives the nations. 
Sorceries, wicked spirits, demon-powers blinded the 
eyes of the nations to follow Rome’s seductive lure. 
And thus it is with a life-less, spirit-less Protestantism 
and its blood-less Gospel. The sorceries of Rome, the 
demons underneath it all, attract apostate Christendom 
so that all will be united in the great, final Babylon. 

10. The Blood of the Saints Found in Her. Verse 
24. So that we may not err that both chapters refer 
to Rome, though the entire Apostate Christendom is 
also in view, her blood-guiltiness is mentioned once 
more. Chapter xvii:6.* 


*Alas! she has erected the prisons, and prepared the rack, 
and lighted the fires of what she calls the holy office of the 
Inquisition in Italy, Spain, America, and India. She lauds one 
of her canonized Popes, Pius the Fifth, in her Breviary, as an 
inflexible Inquisitor. She has engraven the massacre of St. 
Bartholomew’s Day on her Papal coins, and there represents 
it as a work done by an angel from heaven. And the Roman 
Pontiff of that day went publicly to Church to return thanks 
to God for that savage and treacherous deed.— Wordsworth. 


THE REVELATION 109 


EIGHTH DIVISION. THE MANIFESTATION OF THE 
KING AND THE MILLENNIUM. 


Chapters XIX-XX :16 


We reach the great climax in this wonderful book. 
The King in His glorious majesty is now to be 
manifested to deal with the earth in the great judgment 
and to receive the throne which is promised unto Him. 
The seven years of darkness, apostasy and tribulation, 
the years in which man’s day reached its awful cul- 
mination, the years of manifestation of demon powers 
which produced the greatest wickedness and blasphemy 
the earth has seen, are about over. The Lamb of 
God, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, executed the 
decreed judgments from above. The seals of the 
book He received were opened by Him. The angels 
have blown their judgment trumpets and the things 
written have come to pass. The other seven angels 
poured out their vials upon the earth. The beginning 
of sorrows were followed by the great tribulation. 
Politically and ecclesiastically upheavals indescribable 
have taken place. The great nations formed their 
confederacy, the revived Roman empire, and Satan 
put his man at the head of the empire, the little horn. 
Out of Israel’s land and in the midst of that land the 
second Beast arose, the false prophet, the false Messiah. 
These two Satan possessed instruments, as we saw, 
worked together and through them and other agencies, 
Satan, cast out of heaven, produced the great tribu- 
lation. In the midst of all these terrible scenes of 
bloodshed, revolution and indescribable confusion the 
remnant of Israel gave the faithful testimony, while 


110 THE REVELATION 


the remnant in the land suffered and thousands of 
these faithful witnesses were martyred because they 
refused to worship the Beast and to receive the mark 
of the Beast. And a great multitude of Gentiles were 
saved through the preaching of the Gospel of the 
kingdom, which they heard from the sealed remnant 
of Israel. Then we saw Babylon, the final ecclesiastical 
conditions of apostate Christendom, headed by Rome 
in a world-wide system, and we saw the fall and total 
destruction of the city and the system. The end of 
the seven years has come and heaven is now to speak 
and the King with His heavenly company, the Saints 
and also His angels, is about to appear crowned with 
many crowns. The King is about to come, for the 
great day of God Almighty, when He, as the executor 
of the day of vengeance, is to tread the winepress 
of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. 

Before we enter upon the exposition of this great 
and long-predicted event, the visible and glorious 
coming of our Lord, let us picture briefly the conditions 
on earth when the heavens are about to open and He 
comes back. No human person, however, can do that 
fully, for the conditions and scenes which exist then 
beggar description. In the previous chapter we 
heard the wail and lamentation over the destruction 
of the great Babylon. They cast dust on their heads 
and there was weeping and wailing (xviii:19). These 
lamentations over the loss of earthly prosperity, 
over the destruction of the great ecclesiastical and 
commercial system will continue. But there is 
greater fear than that. The approaching day is felt 
by all. What we saw under the sixth seal is now 


THE REVELATION 111 


being fully enacted. The fulfillment of the words 
of our Lord in Luke xxi:25-27 is at hand. “And 
there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and 
in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations 
with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; men’s 
hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after those 
things which are coming on the earth, for the powers 
of the heavens shall be shaken. And then shall they 
see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power 
and great glory.” While such fear takes hold upon the 
people and the terror of the coming Lord is upon them, 
the Beast, that is the head of the Roman empire, and 
the kings of the earth with him, take another attitude. 
They become under Satanic leadership so darkened 
and possessed that they rush towards the land of 
Israel. The defiance pictured in the Second Psalm 
has reached its climax. Besides this the great gathering 
from beyond the Euphrates under the leadership 
of the King of the North and the Kings from the Sun- 
rise has taken place. The northern and eastern hordes 
sweep into the land and threaten the Beast and the 
Kings with him. The nations are massed with their 
armies in Palestine. In Jerusalem the greatest dis- 
tress prevails. The second Beast, the Anti-christ, 
called also the false Prophet, has his seat there, and as 
we saw in the eleventh chapter as well as in the thir- 
teenth, large numbers of the faithful Jewish remnant 
are slain by him. The city is surrounded by the hostile 
armies and the siege described by Zechariah is taking 
place. And those who endure to the end and hold 
out against the false Messiah (Matt. xxiv) pray as 
never before and call for heaven’s intervention. ‘Their 


% 


112 THE REVELATION 


prayer will be “Oh that Thou wouldest rend the 
heavens and come down” (Is. Ixiv:1). It is then when 
the nations rage and Satan’s power is at its height 
that the answer comes from above. The earth shakes 
in its very foundations and now the powers of the 
heavens also begin to shake. The ominous signs in 
the Sun, in the Moon and in the Stars are seen. The 
fact that something startling is about to happen from 
above is realized by the Beast, and the kings with their 
armies. Then the Beast, the kings of the earth and 
their armies, utterly blinded by Satan, are ready 
to make war against Him who is about to be manifested. 
No doubt their well-equipped aeroplanes and other 
air-crafts circle upward to interfere with the coming 
King and His army. Then the blow falls upon them. 
The stone, which Nebuchadnezzar saw falling out of 
heaven, strikes at last and the Son of Man appears 
in the clouds of heaven to receive the kingdom. And 
now we must look at the details of this great revelation. 


Chapter XIX. 1. The Four Hallelujah’s in Heaven. 
The Marriage of the Lamb. Verses 1-10. Once more 
we find the significant phrase “after these things” 
(Chapter iv:1; vii:l; xviii:l). “After these things’”— 
the things which are described in chapters xvii and 
xvill, the fall of Babylon and the complete destruction 
of the whore and the system over which she presided 
and domineered, aiter these things, voices in heaven 
are heard again. We were first introduced to the 
heavens in this book in the fourth chapter. Then 
a door was opened in heaven, symbolical of the entrance 
of the Saints of God of all ages into glory. It is the 


THE REVELATION 113 


fulfillment of 1 Thess. iv:13-18. Then we saw what 
transpired in glory. All the Saints, God’s redeemed 
people gathered around the throne and occupying 
thrones worshipping and singing the song of redemption. 
Under the fifth seal we had another glimpse of heaven. 
The first martyred company, the souls under the 
altar cried with a loud voice, How long O Lord? And 
they received their white robes. Then we read of 
silence in heaven and saw the Angel-Priest in His 
ministration at the altar (viii:1-5), while in the tenth 
chapter we beheld Him descending out of heaven. 
The martyred Saints during the tribulation we saw 
raised from the dead and taken in the cloud into 
heaven (xi:12), while immediately after, when the sev- 
enth angel trumpeted, the heavens were celebrating in 
worship and in praise the consummation reached and 
the coming reign of the King. Again in the twelfth 
chapter we saw the rejoicing heavens. They that 
dwell in them rejoiced because the accuser of the 
brethren was cast down and knowing what it means 
for the earth when Satan is there, the heavens pro- 
nounced their woe. In chapter xiv we beheld the 
heavens again, the redeemed company praising as 
well as the harpers. Chapter xv revealed another 
heavenly scene. Babylon’s fall was also known to the 
tenants of heaven. We give this brief review to show 
that while these things are going on in the earth, the 
glorified Saints, we His people who shall then be in His 
presence, shall know, and not be ignorant of the events 
on earth. We shall see then all from above and 
praise Him for His grace which saved us and brought 
us to glory. 


114 THE REVELATION 


In chapter xviii:20 we heard the words addressed 
to heaven “Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye 
holy apostles and prophets, for God hath avenged you 
on her.” And now we see heaven rejoicing. “I 
heard as it were* a great voice of a great multitude 
in heaven saying, Hallelujah.” Hallelujah means 
“Praise ye Jehovah.” This Hebrew word is not found 
elsewhere in the New Testament. Four times this 
word of praise is found in the beginning of this chapter; 
the Hallelujah times for heaven and earth are 
imminent. The Book of Psalms closes with many 
Hallelujahs; the blessed time which the Psalms so 
often anticipate, when the earth is judged in right- 
eousness and the glory of the Lord is manifested, is 
now at hand. The praise here is on account of the 
righteousness of God exhibited in the judgment of 
the great whore ‘“‘which did corrupt the earth with her 
fornication” and because the blood of God’s servants 
shed by her is now avenged. The great multitude 
whose Hallelujah is heard first must be the company of 
martyrs who died during the tribulation. The souls 
under the altar and their brethren which were slain 
later utter this praise now. They are seen as a dis- 
tinct company from the twenty-four Elders. A | 
second Hallelujah is uttered by them, while the 
smoke of the destroyed city goeth up forever and ever. 
“And the four and twenty Elders and the four living 
Creatures fell down and worshipped God that sitteth 
on the throne, saying, Amen, Hallelujah.” The whole 
redeemed company, Old and New Testament Saints, 


*Revised Version. 


THE REVELATION 115 


add their Amen and Hallelujah to the outburst of 
praise on account of the execution of the righteous 
judgment. And they worship God, for it is His right- 
eousness which accomplished the destruction of the 
great whore. In the midst of this wonderful and 
impressive worship-scene the throne begins to be 
heard. A voice from the throne saith “Give Praise 
unto God all ye His servants and ye that fear Him 
both small and great.” And the command is at once 
obeyed. John hears the fourth Hallelujah and it is 
the greatest, the most magnificent. It is the great 
Hallelujah-chorus of heaven. Like the voice of many 
roaring waters, like the voice of mighty thunderings, a 
great multitude saith “Hallelujah for the Lord our 
God Omnipotent reigneth.”” Who is this great multi- 
tude? In the first verse we heard the Hallelujah 
of the martyred companies. The twenty-four Elders 
and four living Creatures did not join in this first Halle- 
lujah. Their Hallelujah followed. And now the 
greater outburst of a great multitude. This multi- 
tude includes all the redeemed in glory. And they 
rejoice and give glory for an additional reason which is 
made known for the first time in this book. The 
marriage of the Lamb is about to be consummated. 
“Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to Him, 
for the marriage of the Lamb is come and His wife 
has made herself ready.”’ The harlot being judged, 
she which claimed to be the bride, and now the true’ 
bride of Christ is seen in glory. And it is the mar- 
riage of the Lamb. His joy is now filled full for 
He receives her, who is bone of His bone and flesh of 
His flesh. The second Man, the last Adam, is joined 


116 THE REVELATION 


to her who is to rule and reign with Him. | But who 
is the bride about to become the Lamb’s wife? Some 
teach that it is Israel to be united with the Lord 
in the closest bonds. But these expositors forget 
that the scene is a heavenly one. This marriage does 
not take place on earth where the faithful remnant 
looks up expecting Him to appear for their deliverance, 
but this marriage is in glory. It is true such relation- 
ship is declared to be Israel’s in the Old Testament. 
She was married to Jehovah in a legal covenant and 
on account of her faithless condition, because Jeru- 
salem played the harlot (Ezek. xvi:35), she was put 
away. For a time Israel was the wife of Jehovah 
(Is. liv:1) and then on account of her wickedness 
became divorced. She will be taken back in the day 
of her national repentance when the Lord comes. 
But as one who had been divorced she cannot be a 
bride again. The bride of Christ to become the 
Lamb’s wife is the Church of the New Testament. 
All who accepted Christ as Saviour and Lord ‘since the 
day of Pentecost constitute the bride of Christ. The 
Church began on Pentecost and ‘her completion will 
be the translation to glory (1 Thess. iv:17). She is 
both the body of Christ and the bride of Christ, as 
Eve was of the body of Adam and also his bride. The 
Church is the nearest and the most beloved object to 
His loving heart. ‘He loved the Church and gave Him- 
self for it; that He might sanctify and cleanse it with 
the washing of the water by the word, that He might 
present to Himself a glorious church not having 
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should 
be holy and without blemish” (Eph. v:25-27). She 


THE REVELATION 117 


is the pearl of great price for which He sold all He had. 
The Church is this bride of Christ and even before 
the marriage, the Spirit of God in anticipation addressed 
her assuch. ‘For I have espoused you to one husband, 
that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ” 

(2 Cor. xi:2). And when the Holy Spirit gives 
the blessed exhortation to the Christian family and 
indicates its deeper meaning, that the Christian family 
is typical of Christ and the Church, He adds “I speak 
concerning Christ and the Church.” For we are 
members of His body, of His flesh and of His bones. 
The church is now presented in glory to Himself; 
this is before us in this passage. She comes into view 
as the Lamb’s wife. It is very significant that the 
twenty-four Elders are no longer mentioned after this. 
As we saw the twenty-four Elders are typical of all 
the redeemed, the Saints of both Testaments. But 
here a division takes place. The bride, the church, 
takes her exalted position along side of Himself and 
the Old Testament Saints are there as the friends of 
the Bridegroom (John iii:29). But they do not belong 


to the Church and do not compose the bride of Christ*"™ 


But how has she made herself ready? And what 
does it mean ‘“‘And to her was granted that she should 
be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white for the linen 
is the righteousnesses of the Saints”? The Grace of God 
has supplied the robe and the precious blood is her 
title to glory. In this respect she was ready. But 
the words here refer us to the judgment seat of Christ, 
that award seat before which we must appear. Then 
the hidden things are brought to light and the wood 
and the hay and stubble is burned (1 Cor. iii:12-15). 


— f 
et 


J 


118 THE REVELATION 


Then “every man shall have praise of God” (1 Cor. 
iv:5), and what Grace accomplished in each one and 
oe each will be manifested. And the clean white 
linen “is the righteousnesses of the Saints.” The 
word “righteousness” is in the plural. It means more 
than the righteousness which we are in Christ or the 
faith in Him, which is counted for righteousness 
(Rom. iv:3). It includes all the blessed results in 
life and service produced by the Holy Spirit, the 
practical righteousness of the Saints. And yet even 
these need the washing i in that precious blood without 
which all is unclean 1 and ‘unholy. And so it is Grace 
after all as indicated by the word “given.”*—‘“it was 
given to her to be clothed in fine linen, bright and 
pure.” He Himself has made her_ready.and removed 
every spot, every wrinkle and every blemish. God 
grant that we His people may daily meditate on this 
coming glorious event, the marriage of the Lamb, 
and walk worthy of such a Lord and such a callizis' 
Once more John is commissioned to write. ‘Write, 
Blessed are they which are bidden to the marriage 
supper of the Lamb.” And who can estimate the 
blessedness of being in His ever blessed Presence, at 
His table, at the marriage supper of the Lamb! And 
to this feast sinners are called by the Gospel throughout 
this age, and they who accept the gracious invitation, 
and become His, can look forward with holy antici- 
pation to the coming marriage and the marriage supper, 
the feast of joy and gladness. And to this is added the 
very seal of God. ‘These are the true words of God.” 


*Revised Version. 


THE REVELATION 119 


What assurance this gives to our souls! Because these 
are the very words of God, all will come to pass as 
promised here. It does not matter if our years come 
and go, the ultimate accomplishment will surely come. 
And John was overwhelmed and fell at the feet of the 
angel to worship him. Beautiful it is how the angel 
takes the place as a servant, a fellow-servant of those 
that have the testimony of Jesus. The testimony of 
Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy. And the testimony of 
Jesus bears witness to His resurrection, His presence 
in glory, and His coming again, and all the blessed 
things connected with that day, so fully revealed in 
God’s Word. ‘Thus the testimony of Jesus is the spirit 
of Prophecy. All Prophecy concerns the Lord Jesus 
Christ and all intelligent, scriptural proclamation of 
the coming events are a testimony concerning Himself. 

2. Heaven Opened. The Coming of the Kung. 
Verses 11-16. And now we reach the great event 
so often mentioned in the Old Testament, the event 
for which this world is waiting, the visible manifesta- 
tion of Him, whom the heavens received, who returns 
to judge the earth, to receive the promised King- 
dom and rule over the earth for a thousand years. 
We have reached the great climax in the Revelation. 
In the beginning of the book we read the announcement 
“Behold, He cometh with clouds and every eye shall 
see Him,” and now this long predicted and long expected 
event takes place. To quote the predictions in the Old 
Testament prophetic Word which speak of the Coming 
of the King and His rule would fill many pages. With- 
out quoting the words we give a number of passages 
which every student of Revelation should read and 


120 THE REVELATION 


become familiar with, for they shed their light upon 
this chapter. Psalm ii; xlv; xlvi; xlvii; 1:1-6; lxviii; 
cx. Isaiah xi; xxiv:19-23; xxv; xxvi:20-21; Ixiii:1-6; 
Ixv:5-16. Daniel ii:44-45; vii:9-14; Joel iii; Habak. 
iii; Zech. xiv. These are but a few of many more 
which could be added. His own words are to be 
fulfilled. ‘Immediately after the tribulation of those 
days shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall 
not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, 
and the powers of the heaven shall be shaken. And 
then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man in heaven, 
and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and 
they shall see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of 
heaven with power and great glory” (Matt. xxiv:29-30). 
The angel’s message which was given when He ascended 
into glory is now to be accomplished. “This same 
Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall 
so come in like manner as ye have seen Him go into 
heaven” (Acts i:11). The words of the Spirit of God 
addressed to the Thessalonians are also coming to 
pass. “The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven 
with His mighty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance 
on them that know not God, and that obey not the 
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall perish with 
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord 
and from the glory of His power; when He shall 
come to be glorified in His Saints and marvelled at in 
all them that believed—in that day” (2 Thess. i:7-10). 

Impressive words—‘‘And I saw heaven opened.” 
Heaven was opened unto Him when He came out of 
Jordan at His baptism. While His baptism fore- 
shadowed His death in the sinner’s place, His resur- 


THE REVELATION 121 


rection and ascension are foreshadowed in coming out 
of the waters and the opened heaven. In heaven at 
the right hand of God He has been ever since, unseen 
by human eyes. At last the time has come when 
God is to make His enemies as the footstool of His 
feet. Heaven is opened so that He might be revealed 
in His glorious majesty. And out of the opened 
heavens He comes forth. “Gird thy sword upon thy 
thigh, O most mighty, with thy glory and majesty. 
And in thy majesty ride prosperously, because of truth 
and meekness; and thy right hand shall teach thee 
terrible things. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart 
of the King’s enemies, whereby the people fall under 
thee” (Ps. xlv:3-5). Thus the inspired Psalmist 
foresaw long ago the great event. He comes as the 
mighty Victor to judge in righteousness and to make 
war. “And behold a white horse; and He that sat 
thereon was called Faithful and True and in righteous- 
ness He doth judge and make war.”’ The white horse 
is symbolical of victorious warfare and glorious con- 
quest. When, seven years before the first seal had 
been opened (vi:l), a rider appeared upon a white 
horse achieving great conquest. It was the false 
King who was seen then in vision. He is as the Beast 
on earth with the kings and their armies to make 
war with the coming King who comes out of the opened 
heaven. Glorious sight! He is coming to conquer 
and to claim His inheritance. The appointed day has 
come in which God ‘“‘will judge the world in right- 
eousness by that man, whom He hath ordained; 
whereof He has given assurance unto all men in that 
He hath raised Him from the dead” (Acts xvii:31). 


122 THE REVELATION 


Upon His head are many diadems. The Saints wear 
crowns, but He to whom belongs all power in heaven 
and on earth-wears many diadems, encircling His head 
in dazzling splendor. We look back and see Him 
wearing a crown of thorns, the emblems of the curse. 
What a scene it was when Pilate led Him forth with 
His face marred and dishonored and the cruel thorns 
piercing His blessed brow! And now God has crowned 
Him with supreme authority and He appears in 
Glory to exercise His rights over the earth. It will be 
God’s vindication of His ever blessed Son. His 
Person and His Work had been denied and rejected. 
Boastingly a certain leader of the so-called “new 
theology’’* preached not long ago on “‘the vanishing 
Christ.” He meant by it the denial of the doctrine 
of Christ, His essential Deity, the virgin birth, His 
sacrificial death and His physical resurrection. Thus 
apostate Christendom rejects His Person, and the 
time comes during the great apostacy when they think 
He is a vanished Christ. But when He comes as the 
vanquishing Christ, then His Person will be fully vindi- 
cated by that glorious event. 


“And He had a name written, that no man knew but 
Himself.” And again it is written ‘“His Name is called 
the Word of God.” And on His vesture and on His 
thigh there is a name written “King of kings and 
Lord of lords.”” The unknown Name is the name of His 
essential Deity. No human name can express what 
He is in Himself. ‘No man knoweth the Son but the 


*It is not a new theology, for it is the Devil’s lie as old as 
Eden; nor is it theology, but only foolish ramblings. 


THE REVELATION _ 123 


Father.” His name “the Word of God” refers us to 
the Gospel of John. As the Word He is the express 
image of God. He is the expression of God in His 
character, His thoughts and counsels. And the third 
name mentioned “King of kings and Lord of lords” 
expresses what He is in relation to the earth. 

“‘And He was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood” 
—‘“And out of His mouth goeth a sharp sword, that 
with it He should smite the nations, and He shall rule 
them with a rod of iron, and He treadeth the winepress 
of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God.” The 
blood dipped vesture has nothing to do with His work 
on the cross. He is described in Isaiah Ilxiii:1-4 as 
the One who has the day of vengeance in His heart, and 
this passage in Isaiah is here being fulfilled. The 
two edged sword refers us to Isaiah xi:4. “He shall 
smite the earth with the rod of His mouth and with the 
breath of His lips shall He slay the wicked.” See also 
2 Thess. ii:8. The sentence “He shall rule them 
(the nations) with a rod of iron” is quoted from the 
Second Psalm. In that Psalm we read that God 
saith to Him “Ask of Me and I will give thee the 
nations for thine inheritance and the uttermost parts 
of the earth for Thy possession.” And He asked 
God after His own had been gathered home, and 
the answer is here seen. He comes to rule* the nations 
and to execute the wrath of Almighty God upon His 
enemies. But He is not alone. The armies of heaven 
follow the great King. They are like Him upon white 
horses and are clothed in fine linen, white and clean. 


*Literal “shepherd.” 


124 THE REVELATION 


These armies are not angels. It is true angels will be 
with Him as He comes, for it is written that He shall 
be revealed with His holy angels. Angels will be the 
reapers in the judgment (Matt. xiii:39) when the age 
ends and they will be used in the regathering of Israel. 
(Matt. xxiv:31). But the armies here are not angels. 
They are the glorified Saints; the fine linen, white 
and clean identifies them fully. In faith and blessed 
assurance, you dear reader and the writer can say, 
we shall be in that company with Himself as leader. 
The Son brings His many sons unto glory (Heb. ii:10). 
What a sight that will be for the earth-dwellers! Each 
in that company bears His own image; each reflects 
His own Glory. Then He will be marvelled at in them 
that had believed (2 Thess. 1:10). It is the fulfillment 
of what St. Paul wrote to the Colossians: ‘When 
Christ, who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also 
appear with Him in Glory” (Col. iii:4). The first 
Prophet mentioned in the Bible, Enoch, had predicted 
this event for he prophesied “Behold the Lord cometh 
with ten thousands of His Saints to execute judg- 
ment” (Jude, verse 14). Zechariah saw it in con- 
nection with the gathering of the armies against 
Jerusalem, when the Lord will fight against those 
nations. He announced “the Lord my God shall 
come and all the Saints with Thee” (Zech. xiv:5). 
And the Saints who come with Him share His triumph, 
His glory, and are partakers in the judgment and in the 
reign which follows. “Know ye not that the Saints 
shall judge the world?” (1 Cor. vi:2). Oh! beloved 
readers what a future is ours! To be with Him 
forever and like Him in glory never-ending! And 


THE REVELATION 125 


_ the Saints are seen in this new aspect corresponding 
to what He is and what He does. We shall then be 
one with Him in the fullest sense of the word. 


3. The Battle of Armageddon and the Execution of . 
Wrath. Verses 17-21, And what a sublime vision 
comes next! An angel is beheld by the seer standing 
in the sun and with a loud voice he summons the 
birds that fly in mid-heaven to gather themselves 
to the great supper of God* to eat the flesh of the 
slain. The birds of prey are summoned in anticipation 
of the battle of Armageddon which is then imminent. 
What a contrast this great supper here is with another 
great supper of which we read in the Gospel of Luke! 
(Chapter xiv:15-24). One had said to the Lord 
“Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of 
God.” Then He spoke of a great supper which one 
had made, inviting the guests “Come! for all things 
are now ready.” It is the supper of love and grace 
which God, at the infinite cost-price, the price which 
His Son paid on the cross, provided for lost sinners. 
For almost two thousand years the invitation has 
gone out and uncountable multitudes have come and 
have partaken of the riches of His Grace. But the 
invitation has also been rejected. Yea, as the age 
draws to its close the rejection of the Gospel, of the 
cross of Christ, the precious blood, which alone can 
open heaven and close forever the gates of hell, becomes 
more universal and more pronounced. Not alone 
are the great masses in Christendom rejecting the 


*The authorized version has it “the supper of the great God,” 
which is incorrect; it is “the great supper of God.” 


126 THE REVELATION 


Gospel of Grace wilfully, but they are also accepting 
Satan’s lies and delusions, such as “salvation by 
character” and the wicked anti-christian cults like 
“Christian Science’—‘“Theosophy” and the “new 
theology.” As long as the Lord leaves His Church 
on earth the sound of the true Gospel can never die 
out. It will be heard as long as God’s true people, 
who know the Gospel and love it, are on earth. But 
after the rapture of the Church it will be different. 
Then all who received not the love of the truth but had> 
pleasure in unrighteousness, will be hardened; the 
strong delusion which comes into the world through 
Satan and his demons will be accepted by them. 
(2 Thess. ii:10-12). We have seen this class in 
previous chapters; they are called, “the dwellers on the 
earth.” They are the apostates who rejected the 
Gospel, refused to come to the great supper of God’s 
love and even the severest judgments of God did not 
lead them to repentance. Instead of crying “God be 
merciful to me, a sinner’ they blasphemed (ix:20-21). 
And now the hour of judgment has come. Another 
supper is spread. An angel, standing in the sun, the 
place of supreme authority, gives the invitation to the 
birds of prey to be ready for the feast which a holy and 
righteous God will have for them. The day of wrath 
has come. The slain of the Lord shall be many 
(Isaiah lxvi:16). 

And down on earth there is the greatest gathering 
of armies the world has ever seen. The Beast, the 
head of the revived Roman empire, is the commander- 
in-chief. The kings of the earth are with him. Vast 
army camps on all sides. The great valley on the 


THE REVELATION 127 


plains of Esdraelon is filled with soldiers. The hills 
and mountains swarm with armed men. Satan’s 
power gathered them and Satan blinded this vast 
multitude to the utmost. The unclean spirits, the 
demons working miracles, has brought them together 
to the battle of that day. And the hordes from the 
North, under the Prince of Rosh are also coming. These 
vast multitudes from the North and beyond Euphrates 
are described in Ezekiel xxxviii-xxxix. And in that 
Old Testament prophecy we find a statement which 
reminds us of the great supper of God here in Revela- 
tion. “Speak unto every feathered fowl, and to every 
beast of the field, assemble yourselves and come; 
gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I 
do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the 
mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink 
blood” (Ez. xxxix:17).. “Thus shall ye be filled at 
my table with horses and chariots, with mighty men, 
and with all men of war, saith the Lord God”’ (verse 
20). 

Zechariah xiv:2 is now being fulfilled. While the 
vast armies are covering valleys and hills, the objective 
will be Jerusalem. All nations are gathered against 
her. “For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem 
to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses 
rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city 
shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the 
people shall not be cut off from the city.” Jerusalem’s 
distress is the greatest of her history. And the faithful 
remnant looks up for the promised deliverance. The 
Beast, the Emperor of the empire and the second 
Beast, the Anti-christ, called also the false Prophet, 


128 THE REVELATION 


act together in this final drama. They are seen to- 
gether in verse 20. 

And now as these armies are massed together the 
great battle of Armageddon takes place. They are 
ready to make war against Him, who comes through 
heaven’s portals. Satan has been the usurper for 
almost 6,000 years. As god of this age he controlled 
the kingdoms of this earth; he held them in his grasp. 
He whose right it is, who bought the earth with His 
blood, is about to claim the earth and to receive the 
kingdom. And Satan makes a great attempt to 
dispute His authority. And military Christendom, 
the Gentile nations who even now as we write murder 
each other for the sake of having dominion, are Satan’s 
instruments in this. He goads them on with the 
supremest hatred to fight the King of kings, and so to 
speak, keep Him back from taking possession of the 
kingdoms of this world. Armageddon means “the 
mount of slaughter.” It is the great plain of Esdraelon 
which has been described as follows: 

“It is called, by way of eminence, ‘the great plain’ 
in Scripture, and elsewhere, ‘the great plain,’ or ‘field 
of Esdraelon,’ ‘the field of Megiddo,’ the ‘Galilean 
plain,’ which we found one vast meadow covered with 
the richest pasture. It has been a chosen place for 
encampment in every contest from the days of Nabu- 
chonodosor, king of Assyria, to the disastrous march 
of Napoleon Buonaparte into Syria. Jews, Gentiles, 
Saracens, Christian Crusaders, and anti-Christian 
Frenchmen, Egyptians, Persians, Druses, Turks and 
Arabs, warriors of every nation that is under heaven, 
have pitched their tents on the plain of Esdraelon, 


THE REVELATION 129 


and have beheld the banners of their nations wet with 
the dew of Tabor and Hermon.” 

See also Joel iii:2, 9-12. And then heaven has 
opened. The prayers of the Jewish remnant are 
answered. ‘Triumphantly they will say as they see the 
heavenly glory, the returning Shekinah “Lo, this is 
our God; we have waited for Him, and He will save us; 
this is the Lord; we have waited for Him, we will be 
glad and rejoice in His salvation” (Is. xxv:9). ‘““Then 
shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those nations” 
(Zech. xiv:2). The battle does not consume much 
time. Sennacherib’s army was suddenly smitten and 
they all perished and here are armies in comparison 
with which Sennacherib’s forces are but child’s play. 
One mighty blow from above, one flash of glory and 
all their strength and power is gone. ‘The stone has 
fallen (Dan. ii). With one blow the dominion and 
misrule of the Gentiles is at an end. The words 
our Lord spoke while on earth “on whom this stone 
falls it shall grind him to powder” have been fulfilled 
(Matt. xxi:44). Such is the awful fate which for “Chris- 
tian civilization (?)” and “Kultur (!)”” and a Christ-less 
Christendom is rapidly approaching. Oh! that the 
kings and rulers would hear His word. “Be wise 
now therefore, O ye kings; be instructed ye judges 
of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice 
with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest He be angry and 
ye perish in the way—yet a little and His wrath will 
be kindled” (Ps. ii:9-12). But they will not hear. 
They cast away His Word and ere long the times of 
the Gentiles will end forever in this indescribable 
catastrophe. And while the armies perish as to the 


130 THE REVELATION 


body and God’s wrath sweeps the earth clean of the 
mass of apostates, taking vengeance on them that 
know not God and that obey not the Gospel, the 
Beast (the head of the empire) and the false Prophet 
(the second Beast of chapter xiii), that is the false 
Messiah, the Anti-christ, are cast alive into a lake of 
fire burning with brimstone.* They were not anni- 
hilated, for a thousand years later we still find them 
there (xx:10); and still they are in existence and will 
ever be as individuals in that place of eternal punish- 
ment. And those that were slain as to the body will 
be raised after the millennium and also share the 
place with the two, whom they followed and worshipped. 


Chapter XX. 4. The Binding of Satan. Verses 1-3. 
And now Satan, who was cast out of heaven three 
and one-half years before the visible and glorious 
coming of the Lord, and who has been on earth in 
person, though not beheld by human eyes, is now 
seized to be put into his prison for a thousand years. 
And the demons, who were liberated by Satan (chapter 
ix) are likewise shut up into the bottomless pit, though 
this is not mentioned because it is self-evident. The 
terms “key” and “great chain” are of course figurative. 
He is mentioned in all his infamous titles. He is 
called dragon on account of his horrible cruelty and 
vileness, the old serpent on account of his malicious- 
ness, guile and deception; he is the devil, the arch- 
tempter of man, and Satan because he is the accuser 


*The King of the North, the great invader (the Assyrian of 
the end-time) will also be cast into the lake of fire. See Isaiah 
0.8.0. Gre Oi 


: THE REVELATION 131 


of the brethren, the one who opposed Christ and His 
people. He is now dethroned as the god of this age, 
completely stripped of his power and his dethrone- 
ment means the complete enthronement of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. And here is the important statement 
that this being, the once glorious Lucifer, the Son of the 
morning and light-bearer, who fell through pride, 
has been the deceiver of the nations. It would take 
pages to describe his deceptions and his lies. Never 
before has he been so successful as now, blinding the 
eyes of them that believe not. Idolatry and all the 
perversions of the Truth of God are his work. He is 
the author and supporter of every cult which denies 
Christ. He is the real parent of Higher criticism, 
Mormonism, Russellism, Christian Science, Spiritism, 
Theosophy, Romanism, and all other isms which 
deny the Truth of God. No blessing can be expected, 
no millennium for this earth, till he is bound and thus 
completely restrained from deceiving the nations. 
And this is done. What a happy day it will be when he 
is shut up. Interesting and helpful in connection 
with these opening verses of our chapter are the words 
we find in Isaiah’s little apocalypse (Is. xxiv—xxvii). 
“And it shall come to pass in that day (the day of the 
Lord’s glorious manifestation) that the Lord shall 
punish the host of the high ones on high, and the 
kings of the earth upon the earth. And they shall 
be gathered together as prisoners are gathered in 
the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after 
many days shall they be visited” (Is. xxiv:21-22). 
5. The Reign of Christ and His Saints for a Thousand 
Years. Verses 4-6. Thrones are seen next by the 


132 THE REVELATION 


Seer. ‘And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them 
and judgment was given unto them.” Daniel also 
saw thrones in connection with the judgment of the 
Beast, but nothing is said of those occupying the 
thrones in Daniel’s vision. Here we have the com- 
plete revelation, and several times the blessed state- 
ment is made that Christ and His Saints shall reign 
with Him for a thousand years. The new age in 
which all things are put in subjection of His feet, the 
personal reign of Christ, in which all His redeemed 
people have a share, begins. It will last a thousand 
years. Six times we read of the thousand years in this 
chapter. Because this coming age will last a thousand 
years it has been called by the Latin word “‘millennium.” 
Not a few have made the astonishing declaration that 
such a period of time during which Christ and His 
Saints reign over the earth has but little foundation 
in the Scriptures. Those who believe in it are often 
branded as “‘Chiliasts” and “‘dreamers” or “fanatics.” 
It is quite true that the only place in which the duration 
of such an age is given is this great final Book of Reve- 
lation. And that should be sufficient for any Christian 
to believe in such an age of a thousand years. However, 
such an age’ of unspeakable blessing and glory for this 
earth is revealed throughout the entire Bible. The 
Old Testament contains hundreds of unfulfilled promises 
of blessing for Israel, the nations of the earth and even 
for all creation, which have never seen even a partial 
fulfillment. Isaiah is full of such promises. In the 
New Testament there are also passages which clearly 
teach and point to such an age of glory for this earth. 
Read Matt. xix:28; Acts iii:19-21; Romans viii:19-23; 


THE REVELATION 133 


Eph. i:10; Col. i:20; Phil. ii:9-11. What awful 
disheartening pessimism it would be if we had to 
believe that the terrible conditions prevailing on the 
earth now, conditions which have steadily become 
worse, were to continue and that man’s work is to 
remedy them and produce something better. This 
earth has a bright and glorious future. Nations 
will some day no longer turn, as they do now, their 
plowshares into swords, but change their swords into 
plowshares. Righteousness and peace will surely 
kiss each other and creation’s curse and travail pains 
will end. 

But when?’ Never as long as the great unfoldings 
of this book, which we have briefly followed, have 
not come to pass. There can be no better day for the 
earth as long as He is absent and not on the throne, 
which belongs to Him. But when He comes, when He 
has appeared in glory and in majesty, then the earth 
will find her rest and groaning creation will be delivered. 
As we do not write on the great blessings and glories 
to come when He comes, we must refrain from follow- 
ing these things. Here in our book the revelation is 
given that Christ shall reign for a thousand years and 
His Saints shall reign with Him. Let us notice briefly 
the different classes mentioned who are associated 
with Christ in His personal reign. The entire com- 
pany of the redeemed, as we saw them under the 
symbolical figure of the twenty-four Elders, occupying 
thrones and wearing crowns, are undoubtedly meant 
by the first statement “‘they sat upon them and judg- 
ment was given unto them.” ‘They judge with Him. 
This is the raptured company whom we saw first in 


134 THE REVELATION 


glory in chapters iv and v; and we, dear fellow-believer, 
belong to this company. Then follow the martyrs, 
which we saw under the fifth seal (vi:9-11), “And I 
saw the souls of them that had been beheaded on 
account of the testimony of Jesus and for the Word of 
God.” Then we have a third company. “And I 
saw those who had not worshipped the Beast, nor his 
image, and had not received his mark on their fore- 
head, or in their hands.”” These are the other martyrs 
who were slain during the great tribulation, when the 
Beast set up the image and demanded its worship 
(xiii). They lived and reign with Christ a thousand 
years. The first resurrection is passed and all who 
have part in it reign with Christ, are priests of God and 
of Christ and shall reign with Him a thousand years. 
Oh! wonderful grace which has saved us! Grace which 
has saved us in Christ and through His ever precious 
blood delivered us from eternal perdition! Grace which 
saved us from Satan’s power, from sin and all its 
curse! Grace which has lifted into such heights of 
Glory and has made us the sons of God and the joint- 
heirs of the Lord Jesus Christ! And how little after 
all we enter into all these things, which ought to be our 
daily joy and delight. How little we know of the 
power of the coming glory of being with Christ and 
reigning with Him! How we do cling to the passing 
things of a fast passing age. May the Holy Spirit 
bless us all dear readers as we look forward into the 
coming glory of sharing the glorious inheritance of 
our Saviour Lord and may our lives tell out the wonder- 
ful story that we are the joint-heirs of Christ. 

And even if we were now to enlarge upon the reign 


THE REVELATION | 135 


of Christ, the throne of Christ, the dominion of Christ, 
the glory of Christ, the righteous judgments and 
government of the King, it would be but with a feeble 
pen and with a stammering tongue. Not the half 
can be told. But this we know we shall be with Him 
and enjoy with Him His glorious reign and inheritance. 
The rest of the dead mentioned in the fifth verse are 
the wicked dead; we shal! hear more of them at the 
close of this chapter. 


NINTH DIVISION: AFTER THE THOUSAND YEARS. 
THE VISION OF THE NEW JERUSALEM. 


Chapters XX:7=XXII:5 


The Millennium, the thousand years’ reign of Christ 
with His Saints, will be earth’s jubilee. From certain 
sides, especially the Seventh Day Adventists, the state- 
ment is made in our days that the world is soon going 
to end, that God will destroy the earth by fire and 
thus end all. This is an unscriptural assertion. If it 
were true and the world would come to an end this 
year, or next year, the last word would belong to Satan, 
and God would confess Himself defeated. The 
blessed redemption work of our Lord would then 
likewise be proven insufficient to put things back into 
the condition before sin entered the world. God can- 
not permit the destruction of the earth in the con- 
dition in which it is now. And as already stated 
the entire Bible bears witness to it that there will 
come a better day for this earth before the predicted 
destruction by fire comes. And that promised age of 
blessing and glory comes when the King, our Lord, 


136 THE REVELATION 


has come and reigns in righteousness with His Saints 
over the earth. ‘For He must reign till He hath put 
all enemies under His feet. The last enemy that 
shall be destroyed is death. For He hath put all 
things under His feet. But when He saith all things 
are put under Him, it is manifest that He is excepted, 
who did put all things under Him” (1 Cor. xv:25-27). 
In that age which begins, as we have seen, with His 
visible manifestation, the unfulfilled predictions of 
the Old Testament will find their literal and most 
blessed fulfillment. ‘In His days shall the righteous 
flourish; and abundance of peace,so long as the 
moon endureth. He shall have dominion also from 
sea to sea and from the river unto the ends of the 
earth” (Ps. Ixxii:7-8). “And He shall judge among 
the nations, and shall rebuke many people, and they 
shall beat their swords into plowshares and their 
spears into pruning hooks, nation shall not lift sword 
up against nation neither shall they learn war any 
more” (Isaiah ii:4). ‘“The wolf and the lamb shall 
feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the 
bullock, and dust shall be the serpents meat; they 
shall not hurt or destroy in all my holy mountain, 
saith the Lord” (Isaiah Ixv:25). And many other 
prophecies could be added which will then find a 
literal accomplishment. Long ago Jehovah had said 
“But as truly as I live all the earth shall be filled with 
the glory of the Lord” (Numb. xiv:21). And this 
utterance of an Almighty Lord will find its fulfill- 
ment in the day when He reigns. ‘For the earth 
shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of the 
Lord, as the waters cover the sea” (Hab. ii:14). “The 


THE REVELATION 137 


whole earth is full of His glory” (Isaiah vi:3). The 
earth will be full of His glory and there will be an 
increase and a blessing which no pen can describe. 

But this great and glorious future of the earth is 
not a permanent state. If man had thought this 
out and invented such a future for this earth, man 
might have added, that in this blessed condition the 
earth would remain forever. But no human mind could 
think out all this; what follows now shows us that 
we have here revelation. 


Chapter XX. 1. Satan Loosed. The Last Revolt. 
Verses 7-9. Satan, who was put into the abyss a 
thousand years before, is now loosed out of his prison. 
God permits him to come forth once more. Who 
could have ever thought of such a thing! The arch- 
enemy who had done his vile and wicked work among 
the human race for a thousand years, put at last into 
the place of perfect restraint, and now loosed once 
more to continue, for a brief season, his work! And 
he finds nations ready for his deception, not a few, 
but a number “‘as the sand of the sea.”” God permits 
Satan to come out of his prison, so that the absolute 
corruption of man might be demonstrated. Man has 
been tried and tested under every possible condition. 
He has failed in every age. He failed under the law 
and he failed even more in the grace-dispensation, 
and now under the most glorious conditions, during 
the millennium, when the Lord Himself is known 
in all the earth and reigns in righteousness, when 
want and nearly all the sorrows of a ruined creation 
are banished, when there is peace on earth, man also 


138 THE REVELATION 


fails and does not fully respond to a gracious Lord. 
But here is a difficulty which many have. Many a 
sincere post-millennialist, who studied the pre-millen- 
nial coming of our Lord, has asked this question, 
“if the whole world is converted during the millen- 
nium, how is it then that Satan finds nations ready 
to side with him after the thousand year reign of Christ 
and then leads them on to destruction?” The difficulty 
is far from being as great as it is generally made. In 
fact it is easily explained. As far as Israel is con- 
cerned, the all Israel living, when He comes, the trusting 
remnant of Israel, they will constitute the blessed nation 
in possession of all her promised blessings. They are 
not mentioned as siding with Satan. No more back- 
sliding for that nation. Isaiah lix:20-21 vouches for 
this. “And the Redeemer shall come to Zion (His 
second coming), and unto them that turn from trans- 
gression in Jacob, saith the Lord. As for me, this is 
my covenant with them, saith the Lord. My Spirit 
that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in 
thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor 
out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth 
of thy seed’s seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and 
forever.” “Neither will I hide my face any more from 
them for I have poured out my Spirit upon the house of 
Israel, saith the Lord God” (Ez. xxxix:29). 

And the Gentile nations in the beginning of the 
millennium will also be converted. However, the 
human conditions of the earth will continue. The 
nations are not in a glorified state. Marriage will 
continue. Children will be born during the millen- 
nium. Indeed the earth will be populated as never | 


THE REVELATION 139 


before. Billions of human beings can be sustained 
upon our planet and they will come into existence by 
natural generation during the golden age of glory... 
Wars will be unknown. No longer will the flower 
of manhood be cruelly murdered by human govern- 
ments in that legalized wholesale murder called war. 
Earthquakes will no longer sweep thousands upon 
thousands into an untimely grave, nor can famines and 
pestilences claim their millions. Nor will there be 
the great infant mortality. Physical death will no 
longer be the universal rule, but rather an exception. 
(See Isaiah lxv:20.) Now every child born during the 
millennium of the converted nations comes into the 
world the same as the children in the present age. 
It is still true, conceived and born in sin. And it is 
equally true, they must be born again. And as many 
children of pious, godly parents in this age are Gospel 
hardened and live on in sin, though they hear the Gospel 
and see its power, so in the millennium, an enormous 
multitude will see the glory, live under the best and 
most glorious conditions the earth has seen since the 
fall of man, and yet they will be Glory hardened and 
only submit to the righteousness of that age and yield 
obedience through fear, for disobedience to the govern- 
ing laws of the kingdom on earth, will mean sudden 
and certain judgment. It is not the obedience pro- 
duced by a believing, trusting heart, but only a feigned 
obedience. Three prophetic Psalms which speak of 
these millennial conditions make this clear, if we 
consider the marginal reading. ‘‘As soon as they hear 
of Me, they shall obey Me, the strangers shall yield 
feigned obedience unto Me” (Ps. xviii:44). “Say 


140 THE REVELATION 


unto God, How terrible art Thou in Thy works! 
Through the greatness of Thy power shall Thine 
enemies yield feigned obedience unto Thee” (Ps. lxvi:3). 
“The haters of the Lord yield feigned obedience unto 
Him, but their time might have endured forever” 
(Ixxxi:15). Study these Psalms in their millennial 
bearing. Thus many nations submit while sin is in 
their heart and in their blindness they long and hope 
for the day when they may cast off the restraint.* 
And that day comes when Satan is loosed out of his 
prison to deceive these nations which are in the four 
quarters of the earth. Nor must we overlook the 
fact that before all this happened, throughout the 
millennium, the nations were warned of the pos- 
sibility and the consequences of such a revolt. As 
already quoted in Isaiah lxv:25 we read that while 
the curse is removed from animal creation, the serpent 


*In the Millennium, the heavenly is displayed in connection 
with the earthly. The glory of God is manifested, so that the 
earth is filled with the knowledge of it as the waters cover the 
sea. Righteousness rules, and evil is afraid to lift its head. 
The curse is taken from the ground, which responds with won- 
drous fruitfullness. Amid all this, the spiritual condition is by no 
means in correspondence with the outward blessing. Even the 
manifest connections of righteousness and prosperity cannot 
avail to make men love righteousness; nor the goodness of 
God, though evidenced on every side, to bring men to repentance: 
At the “four corners of the earth,” retreating as far as possible. 
from the central glory, there are still those who represent Israel’s 
old antagonists, and thus are called by their names “Gog and 
Magog.” Nor are they remnants, but masses of populations 
brought together by sympathetic hatred of God and His people— 
crowding alike out of light into the darkness: a last and terrible 
answer to the question, ‘Lord, what is man?”—F. W. G. 


THE REVELATION 141 


alone remains in the place where the curse has placed 
that creature. “And dust shall be the serpent’s 
meat.” ‘The serpent continues crawling in the dust, 
a warning to the nations that the age of glory and 
blessing will end in a manifestation of Satan. And 
there is still another warning voice during the thousand 
year reign of Christ. “And it shall come to pass, 
that from one new moon to another, and from one 
sabbath unto another, shall all flesh come to worship 
before Me, saith the Lord. And they shall go forth 
and look upon the carcasses of the men that have 
transgressed against Me; for their worm shall not 
die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they 
shall be an abhorring unto all flesh” (Is. ]xvi:23-24). 
Here we read that during the millennium the nations 
will go up to Jerusalem to worship there. And after 
they have done so and beheld the visible glory of the 
Lord, which will be seen in and above the city, they 
will be led out to look upon a most awful scene. There 
at one side of Jerusalem is a deep valley. In looking 
down they behold the carcasses of the men who trans- 
gressed against the Lord. Their bodies are seen; 
a never dying worm gnaws there and an unquenchable 
fire burns. An awful picture of another place, where 
the worm does not die and the fire is not quenched. 
It is a solemn warning to these nations that the story 
of sin and apostasy is not yet completed. 

Gog and Magog here must not be identified with 
Gog and Magog of Ezekiel xxxviii and xxxix. The 
invasion of Israel’s land described by Ezekiel took place 
before the millennium, it is pre-millennial. Gog and 
Magog here must not be taken in a literal meaning, 


142 THE REVELATION 


it is used metaphorically. The invasion before the 
millennium is the prototype of this final revolt. Utterly 
blinded, as these multitudes must be, they follow 
willingly Satan’s leadership. Gathering from the four 
corners of the earth they compass the camp of the 
Saints and the beloved city. The beloved city is 
Jerusalem. The “camp of the Saints” may mean the 
heavenly Saints. ‘The redeemed are above the earth 
in the new Jerusalem and yet they have also access 
to the earth and are with the King in the government 
of the earth. Nothing is said about the camp of the 
Saints and the beloved city. They know the out- 
come. God permits the invading hosts with Satan 
at the head to compass them. But suddenly God 
acts. A swift and awful judgment overtakes them. 
Solemnly brief is the announcement ‘“‘fire came down 
from God out of heaven and devoured them.” Nota 
wicked one is left; the earth is completly purged of 
evil-doers. 

2. The Devil’s Eternal Doom. Verse 10. It was 
the final attempt of the dethroned usurper to regain 
his lost dominion. For thousands of years, in the 
all-wise purposes of God, he was permitted to be the 
prince of the power of the air and the god of this age. 
We followed his history in this book and saw how he 
was cast out of heaven upon the earth where he 
produced the great tribulation. Then we beheld 
him stripped of all his power. The kingdoms of the 
world became the kingdom of Christ and the old 
serpent was cast into the abyss where he remained a 
thousand years. lLoosed for a little season he tried 
once more to become earth’s master. And fire out of 


THE REVELATION 143 


heaven devoured the nations who had revolted. The 
devil receives his final doom. He is cast into the 
lake of fire and brimstone. He goes to a fixed place, 
a locality where unspeakable and eternal torment is 
his portion. This place is prepared for the devil 
and his angels (Matt. xxv:41). And all the wicked 
will share that place. And he finds others there. 
The first beings who were cast into this final abode 
were the Beast (the emperor of the Roman empire, 
the little horn of Dan. vii), and the false prophet 
(the personal Anti-christ, the second Beast of Chapter 
xiii). He finds them there. They were put there a 
thousand years before and as they are there as persons 
it shows they were not annihilated. Annihilation is 
an unscriptural and evil doctrine. And they shall be 
tormented day and night for ever and ever—for the ages 
of ages—never ending—for all eternity. What a 
solemn truth this is! Yet men meddle with it and 
deny future punishment, conscious punishment and 
eternal punishment. Besides these three persons, 
the nations who were judged and condemned in the 
beginning of the millennium, when the Son of Man 
sat upon the throne of His glory (Matt. xxv:31) are 
also in the Lake of Fire. 

“There is an awful fitness in the sovereign arrange- 
ment of the holy God, that the devil, and those who, 
by persistence in sin, had made themselves more and 
more like him, should spend their eternity together— 
and that eternity in a place shut out from all that is 
good, which they had hated, and in outer darkness, 
where there is wailing and gnashing of teeth... And 
of this hell-fire, into which those wicked living on 


144 THE REVELATION 


the earth were cast when Christ had judged them, 
the language used is, that it was “prepared for the 
devil and his angels.” But these words seem cer- 
tainly to imply that he had not then been cast into 
ite 

3. The Great White Throne Judgment. Verses 11-15. 
And now we reach the last great judgment scene of 
God’s holy Word. Much confusion prevails among 
Christians about this judgment. There is no such 
thing in the Word of God as a universal judgment, 
nor is there a universal resurrection. Every human 
being which died will be raised at some time. However 
our Lord spoke (John v:28) of two resurrections, a 
resurrection unto life and a resurrection unto damna- 
tion. The Revelation speaks of the first resurrection. 
“This is the first resurrection” (xx:5). And before 
the Apostle wrote of a resurrection from among the 
dead (Phil. iii:11). The first resurrection was finished 
in the beginning of the millennium. “But the rest 
of the dead lived not again until the thousand years 
were finished.” The rest of the dead come now into 
view and they are of necessity the wicked dead, 
who died in their sins, and whose is the resurrection 
unto judgment. Some like “Pastor” Russell, who 
echoes the evil teachings of others, have invented a 
third resurrection, a resurrection of the unsaved for 
a second chance. In the light of this final Bible book 
there is no room whatever for such a resurrection, 
which would give the lost another opportunity. Nor 
does the rest of the Bible mention such a third resur- 


*Lincoln on Revelation. 


THE REVELATION 145 


rection. And this great judgment is not a universal 
judgment. It is taught that the entire human race, 
the living and the dead, will appear before this great 
white throne. But this is incorrect, for it saith “I 
saw the dead, small and great, stand before God.” 
No living people are there at all. Again the judgment- 
scene in Matthew xxv:31, etc., is spoken of as being 
the universal judgment and identical with the judg- 
ment here in Revelation. But this is another error. 
In the judgment of Matthew xxv the dead are not 
there, but living nations are judged in the beginning of 
the Millennium. And these nations are judged on 
account of the treatment of the Jewish preachers of 
the Gospel of the Kingdom heralded by them during 
the last seven years of the age. They did not accept 
the last offer of mercy and that is why they treated 
the messengers as they did. Furthermore the throne 
which the Son of Man occupies in Matthew xxv is 
upon the earth; the throne in Revelation xx:11 comes 
into view after earth and heaven fled away. The 
church and the Saints of God are not concerned at 
all in the judgment of Matthew xxv, nor in the great 
white throne judgment. They are at that time in 
His own presence glorified. Every Christian should 
have these things clearly defined and know that for 
him, as in Christ, there is no more judgment or con- 
demnation (John v:24; Rom. viii:1). The judgment 
seat of Christ before which believers have to appear 
(2 Cor. v:10) does not concern their eternal salvation, 
but their works and rewards. 

Who is the occupant of this great White Throne? 
Not God but the Son, our Lord. “The Father judgeth 


146 THE REVELATION 


no man but hath committed all judgment unto the 
Son” (John v:22). The earth and heaven fled from 
His face. Sin-stained and defiled as they were they 
flee away from the face of the holy One. The great 
conflagration of 2 Peter iii:7-12 takes place. Fire of 
judgment swept the earth before the millennium, the 
day of the Lord, began; but the all consuming fire comes 
after the millennium. Out of that great conflagration 
there arises a new heaven and a new earth (xxi:1). 

“One could readily imagine that the present scene, so 
marred and wrecked, would at once disappear before the 
glory and majesty of such an One, but that is not what 
is seen here. It is the earth and the heaven constituted 
by the Lord Himself as spheres to display His glory 
and righteousness, that cannot abide the glory of His 
face. The millennial scene, both in its higher and lower 
departments, is at the best an imperfect condition. 
‘The earth and heaven fled’—not passed out of 
existence, not annihilated—the next clause carefully 
guards against any such unscriptural deduction, ‘place 
was not found for them.’ It does intimate the com- 
plete disappearance of the millennial earth and heaven. 
Consequent upon the removal of these, new heavens 
and a new earth fitted, furnished, and constituted 
for eternity take their place—are made, (Isa. Ixvi:22; 
2 Peter iii:13). Between the passing away of the 
millennial scene and the introduction of the eternal 
world, material in both cases—the great white throne 
is set up. This consideration imparts profound 
solemnity to the scene before us. For the throne is 
not set on the earth, nor in relation to its dispensations 
and times. It is a scene outside human _ history 


THE REVELATION 147 


entirely. We have passed owt of time and into eternity. 
The judgment therefore of the throne is final and in its 
very nature eternal. We are in God’s eternity. There 
can be no measures of time nor limitations bounded 
by the globe, for that by which all is measured and 
limited has passed away. The judgment is of souls in 
their individual relation to God and is consequently 
final and eternal.”* 


But what about the millions of saved Israelites and 
Gentiles who are on the millennial earth? Where are 
they during this great conflagration? What becomes 
of them? ‘That they share the eternal blessings and 
glories in the eternal state is certain. But their 
abode between the burning of the earth and the calling 
into existence of the new heaven and the new earth is 
unrevealed. Speculation on it would be wrong. We 
should accept the silences of Scripture as much in faith 
as we accept the promises of God. 


And John sees the dead standing before the Throne. 
Books were opened and another book was opened, 
the book of life. “And the dead were judged out of the 
things which were written in the books, according 
to their works.” ‘The books are symbolical; con- 
science and memory will speak loudly. Twice we read 
that they are judged according to their works. Upon 
Romans v:12, the marginal reading “in whom (Adam) 
all have sinned” some have taught that man is held 
responsible for the sin of Adam and the corrupt nature 
man has. But that is a mistake. We are not held 
responsible for having a fallen nature. We are 


*W. Scott on Revelation. 


148 THE REVELATION 


responsible for the outworking of that nature. There- 
fore the dead are judged “according to their works.” 
And in the “Book of Life” none of their. names was 
written, or they would not have been in that company. 
“All this would seem to show that, though a millen- 
nium has passed since the first resurrection, yet no 
righteous dead can stand among this throng. The 
suggestion of the “Book of Life” has seemed to many to 
imply that there are such; but it is not said that there 
are, and the words ‘‘whosoever was not found written 
in the Book of Life was cast into the lake of fire’ may 
be simply a solemn declaration (now affirmed by the 
result) that grace is man’s only possible escape from 
the judgment.”’* 


The second resurrection takes place. The sea gives 
up the dead and death and hades give up the dead. 
Hades gives up the souls, and Death, used here for the 
grave, gives up the bodies. Death and Hades were 
cast into the lake of fire. Both had come into exis- 
tence because man had sinned, and therefore they are 
cast into the place where all belongs which is contrary 
to the holiness and love of God. And then that solemn 
word! “And whosoever was not found written in the 
Book of Life was cast into the lake of fire.” It corres- 
ponds to that other solemn statement in John iii:36. 
“He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life; 
and he that believeth not the Son shall not see life, 
but the wrath of God abideth upon him.” To be 
written in the “Book of Life”? means to trust on Christ. 
Not our works, not our character, not our religious- 


*Numerical Bible. 


7 


THE REVELATION 149 


ness, nor our tears, our prayers and our service can 
put our names in the “Book of Life.” Grace alone 
can do it, and Grace does it as we believe on the Lord 
Jesus Christ. Reader! is your name written there? 

The Saints of God are in eternal glory; the wicked 
dead, the lost are in an eternal lake of fire and suffer 
conscious and eternal punishment. And how man, 
blind, presumptuous man, yea even such who know 
God, rise up against this solemn truth, the eternal 
punishment of the wicked. They accuse God of 
injustice, as if the judge of all the earth would not do 
right. ‘That the suffering of the lost differs is obvious. 
As there are different rewards for the faithful service 
of the Saints, so are there different degrees of punish- 
ment for the unsaved (Luke xii:47-48). This is the 
second death, not blotting out of existence, but endless 
existence in separation from God. The following 
helpful summary appeared in “Our Hope:” 

1. Each individual is in the only possible place for 
which he is adapted by life and nature—his own place. 

2. The varying rewards or penalties have been 
“worked out” by the individual, and are not indis- 
criminate. 

3. Where there has been no opposing will, as in the 
case of infants or those irresponsible, then the will of 
God is not hindered, and He willeth not the death of 
any. By the ransom He has found in Christ all such 
are saved forever. 

4. It is due to human will, not divine, that any are 
lost. 

5. Not one protest will then be heard in any part of 
the universe against the justice of God. 


150 THE REVELATION 


6. All creation will thus be reconciled to, and in 
harmony at least, in the confession of the righteous- 
ness of God. 


7. And thus God shall be all in all; the one to whom 


all submission is accorded, by all, everywhere.* 


Chapter XXI. 4. The Eternal State. Verses 1-8. 
And now the eternal state comes into view. “And I 
saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first 
heaven and the first earth were passed away and the 
sea is no more.” This is the revelation concerning 
the final and eternal state of the earth. “Thou hast 
established the earth and it abideth” (Ps. cxix:90); 
“But the earth abideth forever” (Eccl. i:4). These 
divine statements are now fulfilled. Many Christians 
have a very vague conception of the eternal state of 
the earth and the abode of the redeemed. They think 
of it as a spiritual state destitute of any locality. 
But it is not so. The earth and the heaven abide as 
definite places throughout all eternity. What a 
marvellous fact this is! In chapter xx:ll we read 
that the earth and the heaven fled away and there was 
found no place. We saw that at that time the great 
conflagration of which Peter speaks took place, when 
“the heavens shall pass away with a great noise and 
the elements shall be dissolved with fervent heat, 
the earth also and the works that are therein shall be 
burned up.” (2 Peter iii:10). But we read in the 
same chapter “nevertheless we, according to His 
promise look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein 


*“Our Hope” May ,1915. Notes on Revelation by F. C. J. 


THE REVELATION 151 


dwelleth righteousness” (verse 13). During the mil- 
lennium righteousness reigns upon the earth, but now 
a state comes for the earth when righteousness shall 
dwell there. The great burning up meant not an 
annihilation of the earth and the heavens; God does 
not annihilate anything, nor does Scripture teach an 
annihilation of material things and much less the 
annihilation of human beings, as false teachers claim. 
The conflagration of the earth and the heaven means 
their complete purification. We can do nothing better 
to help in the understanding of this than by quoting 
what another has written on this important and inter- 
esting subject. 

“Let us look at the question of continuity between 
the earth that flees away and the earth that succeeds 
it. At first sight we should surely say, they cannot 
be identical. ‘The well-known passage in the epistle of 
Peter would seem to confirm this (2 Peter iii:10, 12). 
There we learn that ‘the heavens shall pass away witha 
great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent 
heat; the earth also, and the works that are therein, 
shall be burned up.’ And it is repeated, and thus 
emphasized by repetition, that ‘the heavens being 
on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt 
with fervent heat.’ 

“Yet, as we look more closely, we shall find reason to 
doubt whether more is meant than the destruction of 
the earth as the place of human habitation. In the 
deluge, to which it is compared (verses 5-7), ‘the world 
that then was perished: yet its continuity with the 
present no one doubts. Fire, though the instrument 
of a more penetrating judgment, yet does not annihilate 


152 THE REVELATION 


the material upon which it fastens. The melting even 
of elements implies rather the reverse, and dissolution 
is not (in this sense) destruction. 

“Yet the heavens and the earth pass away—that is, 
in the form in which now we know them; or, as the 
apostle speaks to the Corinthians, ‘the fashion of this 
world passes away’ (1 Cor. vii:21): and that this is 
the sense in which we are to understand it other 
scriptures come to assure us. 


“A ‘new’ earth does not necessarily mean another 
earth, except as a ‘new’ man means another man— 
‘new’ in the sense of renewed. And even the words 
here, ‘there was no more sea,’ naturally suggest another 
State of the earth that now exists. This fact is a 
significant one: that which is the type of instability 
and barrenness, and condemns to it so large a portion 
of the globe, is gone utterly and forever. At the 
beginning of Genesis we find the whole earth buried 
under it; emerging on the third day, and the waters 
given their bounds, which but once afterward they pass. 
Now they are gone forever, as are the wicked, to whom 
Isaiah compares it: “The wicked are like the troubled 
sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire 
and dirt.’ This last is the effect of chafing against its 
bounds, as the ‘mind of the flesh’ is ‘not subject to 
the law of God, neither indeed can be’ (Rom. viii:7).* 


With this we fully agree. The heaven mentioned 
cannot be the entire heavens; for there is a heaven 
which cannot be touched by these fires of purification. 
The heaven is that which surrounds the earth and 


*F, W. Grant. 


THE REVELATION 153 


which was once the peculiar sphere of the great usurper, 
the prince of the power in the air. And when Peter 
writes that all this is according to His promise, he had a 
well-known prophetic statement in Isaiah in mind. 
“For as the new heaven and the new earth, which I 
will make, shall remain before me, saith the Lord, so 
shall your seed and your name remain.” (Isaiah lxvi:22. 
See also Ixv:17). From this statement we get very 
definite information that the redeemed Israel estab- 
lished upon the new earth will throughout the eternal 
state be distinct from the saved nations. They will 
throughout all eternity bear witness to God’s faith- 
fulness as the covenant keeping God. The new heaven 
and the new earth are therefore the abodes of the 
redeemed. ‘The new earth, the eternal glory spot of 
the whole universe, will be the dwelling place of 
redeemed Israel and the redeemed nations. And the 
new Jerusalem will come out of heaven to fill the 
new earth and the new heaven as well. “And I, 
John, saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down 
from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned 
for her husband.” 

The new Jerusalem, the holy city, comes into view. 
During the millennium the city of Jerusalem was 
known as the place of glory for the earth. Numerous 
Old Testament predictions were fulfilled. See Isaiah 
iv:5-6; liv:11-14; Ix:11-22. In chapter xx:9 she is 
called “the beloved city.” But in Revelation iii:12 
we have another Jerusalem mentioned, the same city 
which John sees coming down out of heaven, the 
place of the highest glory. It is the church in all her 
glory; the statement “prepared as a bride adorned 


154 THE REVELATION 


for her husband” establishes this beyond controversy. 
She is called “holy” for all is holy; and a “‘city”’ because 
the Saints are in blessed communion and fellowship 
there. In the highest glory she had her abode. But 
now she is being revealed in all her eternal glory and 
beauty. During the millennial reign this wonderful 
city was above the earth and from there Christ reigned 
and His Saints with Him. But here she comes down 
out of heaven. A thousand years before the marriage 
of the lamb had taken place (xix:7-8), and now after 
a thousand years of unspeakable glory, she is still 
seen ‘“‘as a bride adorned for her husband.” And yet 
all these things are given in figurative language. 
What will be the reality! The masterwork of God is 
at last fully manifested; what He accomplished through 
Him, who left the Glory to die on the Cross, is made 
known. The eternal, never ending riches, purchased 
by Him who was rich and became poor for our sakes, 
are beginning to be displayed in all their unfading 
splendor. Then the Saints of God will learn to know 
the full meaning of Eph. i:7. “that in the ages to come 
He might display the surpassing riches of His grace 
in kindness towards us through Christ Jesus.” ‘And 
I heard a loud voice out of heaven, saying, Behold 
the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell 
with them, and they shall be His people, and God Him- 
self shall be with them, and be their God.” This is 
the glorious consummation. It is the goal of a holy, 
loving God. In Eden He visited man unfallen, 
walked and talked with Him. Then sin severed this 
fellowship. He dwelt in the midst of Israel in the 
holiest of the tabernacle. In this age the church is 


THE REVELATION 155 


His habitation by the Spirit, but the blessed consum- 
mation in the eternal state will result in God dwelling 
with His redeemed Creatures. What holy, glorious, 
never-ending intimacy that will be! Itis the time when 
God is all in all (1 Cor. xv:28). When that time has 
come all the former things are passed away. ‘‘And 
God shall wipe away every tear from their eyes, and 
there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, 
neither shall there be any more pain; for the former 
things are passed away.” Tears, death, sorrow, crying, 
pain and suffering, these came into existence through 
sin. And all these things, the effects of sin, are now 
gone. What relief and what joy! The Saints of God 
in countless numbers, ever since sin came into the world 
with all its attending miseries, have looked forward 
through their tears of sorrow and of pain, to the blessed 
day when sorrow and sighing should flee away and all 
mourning be turned into joy. Yea, weeping endureth 
during the night, the dark night of sin, but joy cometh 
in the morning. ‘The morning, when the eternal day 
breaks, will chase all the shadows of the night away. 
May we learn, in the midst of tears and grief, sorrow 
and pain, to look forward in holy and blessed antici- 
pation to the day “when God shall wipe away every 
cents 

Then we hear God’s own voice. “And He that sat 
on the throne said, Behold I make all things new. 
And He saith to me, Write: for these words are true 
and faithful. And He said unto me, It is done. I 
am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. 
I will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain 
of the water of life freely. He that overcomes shall 


156 THE REVELATION 


inherit all things; and I will be His God and he shall 
be my Son.” “It is done,” tells us that all is now 
accomplished through the power of God. At the close 
of the twenty-second Psalm, the Psalm in which the 
sufferings of Christ and His coming glories are revealed, 
we find the significant ending, “He hath done it.’”’* 
When He hung on the cross and was about to bow His 
blessed head and give His life in death, He said, “It 
is finished.” The great work was done. And that 
work which was accomplished on the cross is the foun- 
dation of everything. Then in chapter xvi:17, the 
voice out of the temple from the throne spoke, “It is 
done.” The end of man’s day had then come and 
the day of millennial blessing and glory was ushered 
in. And here it is for the last time that we find this 
divine utterance. All is now accomplished; nothing 
else needs to be done. And it is most blessed to see 
that the precious Gospel itself is not overlooked. Is 
the Gospel precious to our hearts? It certainly is 
to any redeemed one. But we must not forget that 
the same Gospel is even more precious to God Him- 
self, for in the Gospel His own righteousness has been 
so wonderfully exalted and His love has been made 
known. The Gospel is His Gospel and the Gospel of 
His Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. It is the power of 
God unto salvation. And so God delights to mention 
it in this last Book of the Bible a number of times. 
It was a reminder of the Gospel when we heard in 
chapter xix, “‘Blessed are they which are called unto the 
marriage supper of the Lamb!” And once more in the 


*Revised Version. 


THE REVELATION 157 


very end of this book we shall find the Gospel invita- 
tion, “And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever 
will let him come and take the water of life freely” 
(xxii:17). And here it is the Gospel. God, so to 
speak, in revealing this great consummation in the 
eternal state, when He will be all in all, sounds forth 
once more the blessed Gospel promise and assurance. 
The water of life, He will give freely to all who thirst. 
And what a consummation of the Gospel, unfathom- 
ably deep—‘“T will be his God, and he shall be my Son!” 
Perhaps this simple volume may fall into the hands of 
some who have neglected so great a salvation, who have 
rejected God’s beautiful offer. Then let me speak to 
you, dear reader. God wants you in His eternal 
home and glory. Oh! come to Him, who still waits 
and is ready to give you the water of life freely. 

And next comes the eternal state of those who reject- 
ed the Gospel, who lived in their sins and died in their 
sins, unsaved, unregenerated. “But the fearful, and 
unbelieving, and abominable and murderers, and 
fornicators, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars 
shall have their part in the lake which burneth with 
fire and brimstone, which is the second death.” God 
still speaks. How many false teachers are meddling 
to-day with the solemn scripture doctrine of the endless 
punishment of the wicked. Texts of the Word of 
God which declare this solemn truth are perverted 
by them and handled deceitfully. Other texts these men 
declare do not belong in the Bible; they brand them 
as interpolations. But he who touches these words 
in this chapter touches God Himself, and the teacher 
who declares that there is no eternal punishment 


158 THE REVELATION 


rejects the very Word as it comes from God, There 
is an actual place, the new heaven and the new earth, 
for the redeemed; there is also an actual and ever- 
lasting place of punishment for the lost. Eternal is 
the glory; eternal is the punishment. The human 
heart, unregenerated, is here uncovered once more* 
in the description of those who find their eternal 
abode in the lake of fire. And that lake of fire 
“burneth;” there is no cessation. 

5. The Vision of the Holy City, Jerusalem. Verses 
9-27. We followed from chapter xix:1 events which 
are chronological. First we heard the Hallelujah’s 
in glory, heaven celebrating Babylon’s fall. Then 
followed the marriage of the Lamb, and the Bride, 
the glorified church came more fully in view. We saw 
heaven opened and the Lord in all His glorious majesty 
coming forth, attended by the Saints. The Coming 
of the Lord with His Saints took place. Then followed 
the battle of Armageddon, the Beast and the false 
prophet were cast in the lake of fire; the supper of 
the great God, the day of wrath had come. Satan 
was cast into the abyss and the reign of Christ with 
His Saints for a thousand years followed. Without 
any interruption we saw what happens after the 
thousand years are completed: Satan loosed for a 
little season, the final great revolt and its sudden 
termination by the fire of judgment. Then heaven 
and earth fled away, the second resurrection and 
the great white throne judgment passed into history. 
Then we saw the eternal state of the redeemed and 
the lost. 


*See Matt. xv:19. 


THE REVELATION 159 


With the ninth verse we are brought back once more 
to the millennial state. What was briefly stated in 
chapter xx:4-6 is now more fully revealed and we have 
a description of the Bride, the Lamb’s wife in her 
millennial glory, in relation to Israel and to the nations 
on the earth. One of the angels which had the seven 
vials appears on the scene to show something to the 
Seer. A similar scene we had in chapter xvii:1-3. 
There one of these angelic bearers of the vials showed 
to John, the Harlot woman and her judgment; but 
now he is to see, the Bride, the Lamb’s wife. “And 
he carried me away in the Spirit, and set me on a 
great, high mountain and showed me the holy City, 
Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God.” 
She is seen coming down out of heaven. This coming 
down precedes the one mentioned in verses 2-3 by a 
thousand years. Her coming down does not mean 
here that she comes actually down upon the earth, to 
dwell on earth during the millennium. Her coming 
out of heaven in verses 2-3 is undoubtedly to the 
new earth. But here she comes down to be over the 
earth. 1 Thess. iv:17 may serve as an illustration. 
When the Lord descends out of heaven with a shout, 
He does not come down to earth, but He descends to a 
place above the earth. And so here the Bride, the 
Lamb’s wife, descends out of heaven from God to 
hover above the earth. This description is 
symbolical; nor is the city described the Jerusalem 
on the earth as some have taken it in an ultra-literal 
sense. ‘The earthly Jerusalem never leaves the earth 
at all and the glories of the Jerusalem on the earth 
during millennial times are fully pictured by the 


160 THE REVELATION 


Prophets in the Old Testament; there is no need 
for an angel to show the beauty and glory spot of the 
millennial age to John. Isaiah Ixii:2-5 is one of these 
blessed descriptions of the Jerusalem on the earth. 
“And the Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all 
kings thy glory, and thou shalt be called by a new 
name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name. Thou 
shalt also be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord 
and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God. Thou 
shalt no more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy 
land any more be termed Desolate; but thou shalt be 
called Hephzi-bah (my delight is in her), and thy 
land Beulah (married); for the Lord delighteth in 
thee, and thy land shall be married. For as a young 
man marrieth a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee, 
and as the bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride, so 
shall thy God rejoice over thee.” Such will be Jeru- 
salem’s earthly glory and Israel’s relation to God 
throughout the millennium. But here we see the 
Bride, the Lamb’s wife as the holy city Jerusalem 
descending out of heaven from God. This is the 
building of God Himself in all its glory, the eternal 
home of the Saints. “Having the Glory of God.” 
Who is able to understand this one brief sentence? 
It is more than a reflection of the Glory of God; 
the very Glory will be her portion. It will be the 
glorious, though distant vision, for the inhabitants 
of the earth throughout the millennium. This marvel- 
lous city will be seen, resplendent with glory, suspended 
in the heavens and human eyes will look up to behold 
the flashes of glory, never ceasing. In Psalm xix we 
read “the heavens declare the Glory of God and the 


THE REVELATION 161 


firmament showeth His handiwork.” In beholding 
the work of His fingers, the moon and the stars, (Psalm 
viii:3) we behold now His glory as the omnipotent 
Creator. But in one of the millennial Psalms, a 
Psalm which describes the reigning of Jehovah and a 
rejoicing earth, as well as His judgments, we also 
read of the heavens and what they will then declare. 
“The heavens declare His righteousness and all the 
people see His glory” (Psalm xcvii:6). This, no doubt, 
refers to the bright and glorious city, Jerusalem above, 
as it will be seen by the nations during the coming 
millennium. “And her light was like unto a stone 
most precious, even like a Jasper stone, clear as crystal.” 
The Jasper, as we remarked: already in chapter iv 
is not the stone which we know by this name, for our 
Jasper is not transparent. This precious stone men- 
tioned here once more shows the complete identifica- 
tion of the God of Glory with this holy city. (Compare 
with iv:3). “Having a wall great and high, having 
twelve gates and at the gates twelve angels and names 
written thereon, which are the names of the twelve 
tribes of the children of Israel.”” And this symbolica] 
city, composed not of material stones, but of the 
living stones, has a great and high wall. <A wall 
is the means to keep out and to keep in; it denotes 
separation and security. And of course the city 
itself is behind the wall. Seven times the number 
twelve is found in this description. Twelve gates, 
twelve angels, twelve names of Israel, twelve names 
of the Apostles, twelve foundations, twelve pearls, 
and the measurement of the wall and city is twelve 
by twelve cubits. Twelve is the number which 


162 THE REVELATION 


expresses government and here we have the perfect 
government revealed. 

This wall with its twelve gates, twelve angels, 
twelve names of the tribes of Israel, twelve foundations 
with the names of the Apostles of the Lamb, shows 
some kind of connection between the holy city, the 
Bride of the Lamb, and the earthly Jerusalem. (See 
Ezekiel xlviii:31-34.) ‘The wall is what fences a 
city off from without; the gate is what gives it com- 
munication with that which is without. In that which 
marks the exclusive distinction of the Church the 
Apostles appear; in that which marks its relation- 
ship with the world the twelve tribes appear; for the 
Apostles are the foundation of the Church, whereas 
Israel is always God’s first thought in His government 
of the world. In that which symbolizes the going 
forth of the Church’s authority towards the world 
Israel therefore naturally comes into prominence.”* 
The administration of Israel is from the heavenly 
city, which administration will rest in the hands of 
the twelve Apostles according to the promise of our 
Lord “ye shall sit upon twelve thrones judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel” (Matt. xix:28). Then the 
twelve angels at the gates are, what angels always 
will be, ministering spirits. They are at the disposal 
of the Saints, who judge the world and angels (1 Cor. 
vi:2-3). The twelve foundations with the names of 
the twelve Apostles reminds us of Eph. ii:20. 
“And are built upon the foundation of the Apostles 
and Prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief 


*T, B. Baines on Revelation. 


THE REVELATION 163 


corner stone.” And it is a significant as well as 
blessed expression “the Apostles of the Lamb.” The 
Lamb is the foundation of all. But the wall itself 
seems to represent symbolically Israel in her sphere of 
blessing to the millennial earth, standing between the 
heavenly and the earthly. No doubt there will be 
communication also between the earthly Jerusalem and 
the heavenly. It is well to confess our ignorance in 
all these matters. How little after all we know of the 
full meaning. When at last we shall be in that city 
with all the Saints, we shall know as we are known. 
“And the city lieth four-square, and the length thereof 
is as great as the breadth; and he measured the city 
with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs. The length 
and the breadth and the height of it are equal. And he 
measured the wall thereof, one hundred and forty and 
four cubits, according to the measure of a man, that 
is of an angel.” The city is perfect in structure. It 
is described as being a cube. And by this is signified 
that it is the climax of perfection in the symmetry of 
its construction. Such will be the church in glory. 
That this city cannot be an earthly habitation is 
seen by its measurement. It is twelve thousand 
furlongs in length, breadth and heighth. Twelve 
thousand furlongs are fifteen hundred miles. This is 
beyond human comprehension. ‘In Ezekiel (des- 
cribing the millennial Jerusalem) the city is large, 
becoming a splendid earthly metropolis; in Revelation 
the holy city is vast beyond all possible earthly limits. 
In Ezekiel it is of the quadrangular form, often used in 
Scripture to indicate perfect earthly symmetry; in 
Revelation there is another dimension, a height equal 


164 THE REVELATION » 


to the length and the breadth, showing a perfect cube, 
a still higher order of symmetry, heavenly in character, 
and manifestly unsuited to the earth.” 

“It is surely no mere coincidence that the Holy of 
holies in the temple was of the same cubic form. “The 
oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in length, and 
twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty ‘cubits in the 
height thereof: and he overlaid it with pure gold’ 
{1 Kings vi:20). Now David gave to Solomon ‘the 
pattern of all that he had by the Spirit of the courts 
of the house of the Lord.’ (1 Chron. xxviii:12.) His 
plans therefore, like those of Moses, were formed after 
a heavenly model, and had a typical signification, so 
that the cubic form of the holiest place in the temple 
was an inspired type of the perfect symmetry of that 
‘habitation of God’ which formed the pattern of these 
earthly structures. Here too the number of adminis- 
trative perfection twice appears in the twelve thousand 
furlongs which is the length of the side, and in the 
twelve times twelve, or one ‘hundred and forty and 
four cubits,’ of the height of the wall. 

“The measure is ‘the measure of a man, that is, of 
the angel.” The standard therefore is after the meas- 
ure of man, not in his earthly body, but in the body 
he will have after resurrection, when he is clothed upon 
with his house which is from heaven. In these ‘spirit- 
ual bodies’ the ‘children of the resurrection’ are said 
to be ‘equal unto the angels’ (Luke xx:36), and it is 
to this new condition that the standard of measure- 
ment is conformed. The scene, though all symbolic, 
is throughout symbolic of the heavenly, and not of 
the earthly. The symbols are, of course, borrowed 


THE REVELATION 165 


from the earth, but each has a heavenly stamp im- 
pressed upon it.”’* 

And the foundations were all adorned by precious 
stones and these twelve stones all tell out divine glory. 
The Jasper again stands first; the wall itself is of 
Jasper, while the first foundation stone mentioned is 
also Jasper. It stands for the Glory of God. Then 
the stones follow in their order. ‘The Sapphire (blue); 
the Chalcedony (a combination of grey, blue and 
yellow): the Emerald (green); the Sardonyx (of a 
pale blue); the Sardius (bloodred); the Chrysolite 
‘(purple and green); the Beryl (bluish green); the 
Topaz (pale green or golden); the Chrysoprasus 
(mixed blue, green and yellow); the Jacinth (com- 
bination of red, violet and yellow), and the Amethyst 
(purple). And what must be the deeper meaning of 
all these precious stones! What varied aspects of 
the Glory of God they must represent! And the Re- 
deemed in their heavenly city shall know, understand 
and enjoy it all. What wonderful, unspeakable glory 
is ahead of us! May we look forward to it every day 
and willingly serve and suffer the little while down here. 

The city itself was seen by John as of pure gold. 
Gold typifies the righteousness of God in His nature 
and such the holy city is, composed of the Saints who 
were made through grace the partakers of the divine 
nature. “And the twelve gates were twelve pearls, 
each one of the several gates were of one pearl, and 
the street of the city was pure gold as it were transparent 
glass.” How suitable the pearl to form each gate, 
the entrance to the city divine. The Pearl is a type of 


*T. Baines. 


166 THE REVELATION 


the Church. She is the one pearl of great price for 
which the Lord gave all He had (Matt. xiii:45-46). 
And the golden street like unto pure glass shows that 
all the ways and walks in that city are according to 
righteousness and defilement is eternally impossible. 
And there was no temple in that city; the Lord 
God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. 
There is no need any longer of a certain access into the 
presence of God, as it was on earth, but there is a free 
an unhindered fellowship with God and with His ever 
blessed Son, the Lamb. Precious it is to hear Him 
again mentioned as the Lamb. His blessed work 
which He accomplished can never be forgotten by the 
Saigts in Glory. And the light is not created light, 
but the light is the Glory of God and the lamp thereof 
is the Lamb. The Glory of God and Christ the Lamb 
of God will be the light and supersede all created light. 
“And the nations shall walk by its light and the 
kings of the earth bring their glory and honor unto it*; 
and the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day for 
there shall be no night there. And they shall bring 
the glory and honor of the nations unto it.” From this 
we learn that the glory light which shines eternally and 
undiminished in the holy city is the light in which the 
saved millennial nations on the earth walk. And the 
kings of the earth bring their glory and honor unto it; 
not “into” as it is rendered in the Authorized Version. 
The heavens then rule, for Christ and His co-heirs 
are in that holy city, and the government and rule 
over the earth proceeds from there. The kings bring 


*This is the better rendering. 


THE REVELATION 167 


their glory and honor unto it, they bow in homage in 
the presence of the holy city. Heaven is acknowledged 
as the source of all light, glory and blessing. When the 
nations and the kings of the earth go up to Jerusalem 
to worship the Lord of Hosts during the millennial age 
(Psalm Ixxii:8-11; Is. lx:1-3; Zech. xiv:16) we doubt 
not, they will turn their faces upward. Mount Zion 
in Israel’s land will have resting upon it the glory and 
then above it the vision of the City in which the 
Glory dwells and from which the Glory emanates. 
And unto it they bring the honor and the glory. The 
open gates, never closed, denote security and suggest 
also communication and intercourse with the earth. 
“There shall be no night there”; the night of sin and 
sorrow is forever gone for the dwellers in the holy city. 
“And there shall in no wise enter into it anything that 
defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or 
maketh a lie, but they which are written in the Lamb’s 
book of life.” 


Chapter XXII. The River and the Tree of Life. 
Verses 1-2. ‘And he shewed me a pure river of water 
of life, bright as crystal, proceeding out of the throne 
of God and of the Lamb. In the midst of the street 
of it, and on either side of the river was the tree of 
life, bearing twelve manner of fruits, yielding its fruit 
every month, and the leaves of the tree were for the 
healing of the nations.” We must remember that 
this is the heavenly Jerusalem, the holy city over the 
earth. The Jerusalem on the earth in her millennial 
glory has also a river of water. Ezekiel in his great 
temple vision describes that stream. ‘Afterward he 


168 THE REVELATION 


brought me again unto the door of the house, and 
behold waters issued out from under the threshold of 
the house eastward” (Ez. xlvii:1). And Zechariah in 
his final vision, in the chapter in which we see “His 
feet standing upon the Mount of Olives,” tells of that 
stream. “And it shall be in that day that living 
waters shall go out from Jerusalem” (Zech. xiv:8). 
That stream of living water flowing forth from the 
earthly Jerusalem is no doubt a real river of water, 
healing, as it will, the waters of the Dead Sea. It also 
denotes the spiritual blessings which will flow forth 
from Jerusalem. But the pure river of water of life, 
bright as crystal, in the heavenly Jerusalem does not 
proceed from the temple, but from the throne of God 
and the Lamb. The heavenly river is in the fullest 
sense of the word the symbol of all life, blessing, joy, 
peace and all the spiritual blessings the Saints possess 
and enjoy. And when we examine Ezekiel xlvii again 
we find something which corresponds with this vision 
of the heavenly city. ‘And by the river upon the bank 
thereof, on this side and on that side, shall grow every 
tree for meat, whose leaf shall bring forth new fruit 
according to his months, because their waters issued out 
of the sanctuary, and the fruit thereof shall be for 
meat, and the leaf thereof for healing” (Ez. xlvii:12). 
We repeat, this will be in the Jerusalem on the earth. 
Well has it been said “the earthly things are moulded 
after the heavenly” (See Ex. xxv:40; xxvi:30; xxvii:8). 
The river on earth with its trees, fruits and healing, is 
but a shadow of the tree of life, bearing twelve manner 
of fruits, in the Jerusalem above. The tree of life 
reminds us of Eden. It was there, but Adam did not 


THE REVELATION 169 


eat of it in his unfallen state and when he became a 
transgressor by eating of the tree of the knowledge 
of good and evil, the way to the tree of life was barred 
by the Cherubim with the flaming sword. Eating of 
that tree would have meant for Adam to live forever 
as to the body.* And here in the holy city the tree 
of life is seen and the blessed fruit from it is eaten. The 
tree of the knowledge of good and evil is no longer seen. 
As another has said “that tree whose taste brought 
death, was withered up by the cross.” And the 
millennial earth receives the blessing from these 
glorious conditions above. The light from above, as 
we saw, is the light in which the millennial nations walk; 
the government proceeds from above and the leaves of 
the tree of life are for the healing of the nations. But 
the Saints above eat the fruits of that tree. But 
what will this all mean! Surely the half has not been 
told. 


5. The Seven Glories of the Redeemed. Verses 3-5. 
Unspeakably beautiful and glorious are the concluding 
statements of this glory-section of the Revelation. 
Seven glories of the Redeemed are enumerated. 1. 
There will be no more curse. It means a perfect 
sinlessness; perfect holiness. 2. The throne of God 
and of the Lamb is there and the redeemed are forever 
linked with that throne. It is a perfect and blessed 
government which can never be disturbed by disorder. 
3. His servants shall serve Him. Heaven will not 
consist in. idleness. The holy city knows of service. 
And the service the Saints will render to God in glory 


*He did not lose immortality of soul by his transgression. 


170 THE REVELATION 


will be a perfect service. What will it be? We do 
not know what service it will be. God will have many 
surprises for His Saints in glory. 4. There is also an 
eternal vision. ‘‘And they shall see His face.” Oh! 
joy of all the joys in glory to see Him as He is and never 
lose sight of Him in all eternity. 5. His name shall 
be in their foreheads. It tells of eternal ownership 
and eternal possession. His name and the Glory 
connected with it will be ours in eternal ages. 6. An 
eternal day. No more night; no need of any light. 
He is the light for all eternity. 7. An eternal reign. 
And they shall reign forever and ever. What glory 
and blessedness all this means. Such are the coming 
glories of the Redeemed. Oh! the deceitfulness of sin 
and Satan’s power to blind the eyes of humanity! 
They prefer to serve sin and the master who stands 
behind sin and despise such riches of glory which the 
grace of God offers in the Lord Jesus Christ to every 
sinner. Reader! what will be your home in eternity? 


Tenth Division. The Final Messages. 
Chapter XXII: 6-21 


Chapter XXII. The Angel’s Message. Verses 
6-11. The Prophetic Part of the Revelation is ended 
and the Epilogue, containing the final messages of the 
Book, remains to be considered. Once more the 
assurance is given that these sayings (words) are 
faithful and true. In chapter xxi:5 God Himself had 
commanded to write for these words are faithful and 
true. Here it is an angel who speaks. ‘And the Lord 
God of the holy Prophets (literal: of the spirits of the 


THE REVELATION 171 


Prophets) sent his angel to show unto His servants 
the things which must shortly be done.”” This reminds 
us of the beginning of the book, where we find a similar 
announcement. Suddenly some day these things will 
come to pass. The Lord will call His people to glory 
in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, and then these 
things John had beheld will shortly come to pass. And 
then His own voice breaks in: “Behold I come quickly; 
Blessed is He that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy 
of this Book.” ‘Three times we find this announcement 
in the last chapter (verses 7, 12 and 20). Here it is 
connected with the walk of the believer. Just as in the 
beginning of the book a blessing is pronounced upon 
them that read the words of this prophecy (i:3), so 
we have at the close of Revelation a similar beatitude. 
And keeping these blessed words means more than 
believing in them; their power is to shape our conduct 
and walk. What godly lives God’s people would 
live on earth, what unselfish and sacrificing lives, if 
they remembered constantly Him who thus testifies 
three times in the last chapter of the Bible “Behold 
I come quickly.” And the awful results in Christen- 
dom to-day for not having kept the sayings of the 
Prophecy of this Book. The nations to-day would 
not be fighting and killing as they do if they believed 
the sayings of this Prophecy. And John fell down to 
worship before the feet of the angel, who had been the 
instrument to show him these things. But this angel 
like the other angel in chapter xix:10 refused the worship 
of the Apostle. The humility of angels is a forgotten 
truth. They have nothing of the crime of the devil, 
which is pride, in themselves; they honor and worship 


172 THE REVELATION 


God and are jealous of His rights. What an answer 
to Romanism the angels are in their rejection of 
worship! Very foolishly some people have used the 
angel’s words “Worship God” as an indication that 
the Lord Jesus should not be worshipped. One of 
these teachers approached the writer with this strange 
assertion and demanded scriptural proof that the Lord 
Jesus should be: worshipped. We referred him to 
John v:23. And he owes us still the reply to our 
letter. 

Then the Seer is told not to seal the sayings of this 
Prophecy. Daniel was told to do the opposite (Dan. 
xii:4). Old Testament prophecy reveals prophetic 
events in the far distance. They could then not be 
fully comprehended. But after Christ came and the 
full revelation of things to come is given, no sealing is 
needed; the events are at hand, yet grace has delayed 
and delays still the fulfillment. And the heavenly mess- 
enger announces also the fixed state of the two classes 
into which all humanity is divided. The unjust and 
filthy, the unsaved, continue to exist in the nature which 
they possess and the fact that the desires of that 
corrupt nature can no longer be gratified must consti- 
tute in itself an unspeakable torment. The righteous 
and holy, those saved by grace, partakers of the 
divine nature will always be righteous and_ holy. 
Utterly false is it to teach, as it is being done, that the 
righteous are Christians who are justified, and the 
holy are the “believers who made a deeper experience.” 
Every Christian who is justified by faith is also 
sanctified. 


2. The Message of the Lord. Verses 12-13. And 


THE REVELATION 173 


now the Lord speaks again. For the second time 
He announces His coming. Here it is in connection 
with rewards. “My reward is with Me.” He Him- 
self will receive His reward which is due Him as the 
sin-bearer. He will see the travail of His soul and be 
satisfied. And with His coming, His own people 
will receive their rewards. What a stimulating power 
His soon coming is to service! And the coming One 
is the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the 
beginning and the end. 


3. The Two Classes. Verses 14-15. Once more the 
two classes come into view. ‘This is in fullest keeping 
with the end of the Book and the end of the Bible. 
The Authorized Version here is faulty. Instead of 
“Blessed are they that do His commandments” the 
correct reading is “Blessed are they that wash their 
robes.” ‘The former is an interpolation; the latter is 
the divine statement.* Eternal life and eternal glory 
cannot be obtained by keeping commandments, by 
the works of the law. The blood of the Lamb alone 
is the title to glory. And then the other class. The 
one who rejects Christ and thereby denies his lost 
condition and need of a Saviour, loveth and maketh a 
lie. He lives according to the old nature and the 
fruits of the flesh are there. 


4. The Final Testimony of Christ Concerning Him- 
self. Verse 16. Wow He speaks in this last Bible 
book! In the beginning of Revelation we find His 


*All leading scholars like Alford, Darby, etc., make the change. 
Even the Vulgate has it “‘ Beatt, qui lavant stolas suas in sanguinem 
Agni.” 


174 THE REVELATION 


self-witness in the church-message and once more we 
hear His voice, bearing testimony to Himself. How 
majestic, I, Jesus! He reveals Himself once more 
by the name of humiliation. What comfort it must 
have been to John! What comfort it is to us! Then 
He speaks of Himself as the Root and Offspring of 
David. He is David’s Lord and David’s son (Psalm 
cx:1). Heis the Hope of Israel and in Him the promises 
made to David will all be realized. This will be the 
case when He comes to reign in power and great 
glory.. But He also speaks of Himself as “the bright 
and morning-star.” His coming in power and glory 
is the sun-rise for Israel and the Gentiles, the breaking 
of the millennial day. But for His Church He comes 
first as the morning-star, as the morning-star in the 
eastern sky precedes the rising of the sun in all His 
glory. 
~ 5. The Answer of the Spirit and the Bride. Verse 
‘17. As soon as He mentions Himself as the morning- 
star, there is an answer from the earth. The Spirit 
now down here, for He came down from heaven on 
_ Pentecost and the Bride, the Church, say, “Come.” 
‘It is addressed to the Lord. They both long for 
His coming. And each individual believer who heareth 
/ is asked to join in with this “Come.” Surely in these 
days of darkness and world-confusion, the Spirit 
- saith, “Come!” And never before were there so many 
| individual believers on earth who say “Come,” who 
wait for His coming. And the, Come—from loving 
hearts will increase and become a loud and pleading 
_ cry, till one blessed day He will answer and come 
to take His waiting people home. Here also is the 


THE REVELATION 175 


final Gospel message of the Bible. He that will 
let him take the water of life freely. Once more a 
loving God makes it clear that the water of life is free 
to all who want it. It is the last ““Whosoever” in the 
Bible. 

6. The Final Warning. Verses 18-19. And what 
a solemn warning is given! Ina larger sense the warn- 
ing applies to the entire Word of God. Higher criti- 
cism, which takes away, and false teachers, who add 
unto it, find written here their deserved judgment. 
But the Revelation is specially in view. Whosoever 
meddles with His Revelation must fall under the 
severest divine displeasure. Beware! oh ye critics! 
Beware! ye who call this Book un-inspired and warn 
against the study of it! 

7. The Final Message. The Final Prayer. The 
Final Benediction. Verses 20-21. We reach the final 
statements of this great Book. For the third time He 
announces His Coming. ‘‘He that testifieth these 
things saith, surely I come quickly.” It is the last 
time our Lord spoke from heaven. The next time His 
voice will be heard will be on that day when He 
descends out of heaven with a shout. While the 
two former announcements of His coming found in this 
chapter are preceded by the word, “Behold,” this last 
one affirms the absolute certainty of the event.. And 
there is the answer, the blessed response. “Amen. 
Even so come Lord Jesus.” It is the Church which 
answers His positive and certain announcement. It 
is the last word recorded in the Bible coming from the 
lips of man. The first word we hear man address to 
the Lord in the Bible is the solemn word “I heard thy 


176 THE REVELATION 


voice in the garden, and I was afraid” (Gen. iii:10). 
The last word addressed to the Lord by redeemed man 
is “even so, Come Lord Jesus.” And between these 
two utterances in Genesis and Revelation is the story 
of redemption. Well might this final prayer of the 
Bible be termed, the forgotten prayer. But it is 
equally true, with the revival of the study of prophecy, 
more hearts and lips are praying to-day for His Coming, 
as never before. And the prayer will be answered. 
May the reader and the writer pray for His Coming 
daily and may our lives too bear witness to the fact 
that we expect Him to answer the petition of His 
people. The final benediction assures us once more 
of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. The better 
rendering is “The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be 
with all the Saints.” Grace in all its divine and 
never failing fullness will sustain all the Saints, till 
they are gathered in the Father’s house. 

Our task is finished. Humbly we put it into 
His hands and lay this exposition at His feet. If, 
it pleases Him to use it in making the future, coming 
things, and especially His own person and glory, a 
greater reality in the hearts and lives of His people, we 
shall forever praise Him. 


THE REVELATION 177 


APPENDIX I. 
The Seventy-Week Prophecy* 


Daniel ix:24-27. 
A Corrected Text of the Prophecy. The Authorized 


Version is somewhat incorrect. We give therefore first 
of all a corrected translation. 


Seventy weeks are apportioned out upon thy people and upon 
thy holy city to finish the transgression and to make an end of 
sins, and to cover iniquity, and to bring in the righteousness of 
the ages, and to seal the vision and prophet, and to anoint the 
holy of holies. Know therefore and understand: From the 
going forth of the word to restore and to rebuild Jerusalem unto 
Messiah, the Prince, shall be Seven Weeks and Sixty-two Weeks. 
The street and the wall shall be built again, even in troublous 
times. And after the Sixty-two Weeks shall Messiah be cut 
off, and shall have nothing; and the people of the prince that 
shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the 
end thereof shall be with an overflow, and unto the end war, the 
desolations determined. And he shall confirm a covenant with 
the many for one week; and in the midst of the week he shall 
cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease and because of the 
protection of abominations there shall be a desolator, even until 
the consummation and what is determined shall be poured out 
upon the desolater (verses 24-27). 


What are the Seventy Weeks? To many readers of 
the Book of Daniel it is not quite clear what the expres- 
sion “seventy weeks” means, and when it is stated that 
each week represents a period of seven years, many 
Christians do not know why such is the case. A brief 
word of explanation may therefore be in order. The 


*This Prophecy is of such importance in the Study of Revela- 
tion that we quote the exposition as given in our Book on Daniel. 


al 
1 


Ps OINO. yee © 
178 THE REVELATION 


literal translation of the term “seventy weeks” is “‘sev- 
enty sevens.” Now this word “sevens” translated 
““weeks” may mean “days” and it may mean “years.” 
What then is meant here, seventy times seven days or 
seventy times seven years? It is evident that the 
“sevens” mean year weeks, seven years to each pro- 
phetic week. Daniel was occupied in reading the 
books and in prayer with the seventy years of the 
Babylonian captivity. And now Gabriel is going to 
reveal to him something which will take place in 
“seventy sevens,” which means seventy times seven 


_ years. The proof that such is the case is furnished by 
« the fulfillment of the prophecy itself. Now seventy 


times seven years makes 490 years. 

What is to be Accomplished? Verse 24 gives the great 
things, which are to be accomplished during these sev- 
enty year weeks or 490 years. They are the following: 
(1) To finish the transgression. (2) To make an end 
of sins. (3) To cover iniquity. (4) To bring in the 
righteousness of ages. (5) To seal the vision and 
prophet. (6) To anoint the Holy of Hollies. 

Now it must be borne in mind that these things con- 
cern exclusively Daniel’s people and not Gentiles but 
the holy city Jerusalem. It is clear that the finishing of 
transgression, the end of sins and the covering of in- 
iquity has a special meaning for Israel as a nation. 
The foundation upon which this future work of Grace 
for His earthly people rests is the death of Christ. Our 
blessed Lord “died for that nation” as He also died for 
us who are sinners of the Gentiles (John xi:50). Up to 
now the transgression of the Jewish people is not yet 
finished, nor is for them “‘an end made of sins.” The 


THE REVELATION 19 


death of Christ has made this possible for the nations, 
but before it becomes a reality this period of time, 490 
years, must have passed, and when they are accom- 
plished the transgression of His people will be finished 
and all the other blessings will come upon them. That 
will be according to other Scriptures when the times 
of the Gentiles end and when the Son of Man, the re- 
jected One, appears the second time. Then “He shall 
turn away ungodliness from Jacob” and “will take away 
their sins” (Rom. xi:26-27). Many passages in the 
prophetic Word reveal the same promises of national 
cleansing and forgiveness, into which we cannot enter 
more fully. We see at once that the blessings prom- 
ised here to Daniel’s people and to the holy city refer 
us to the time when the Son of Man is manifested, the 
time when the remnant of the nation shall look upon 
Him whom they have pierced (Zech. xii). 

At the same time when God will be merciful to Hie 
people and cover their iniquity “the righteousness of 
the ages” will be brought in. This means the begin- 
ning of that age of blessing, which in the New Testa- 
ment is called “the dispensation of the fullness of times”’ 
(Ephes. i:10), in which the King shall reign in righteous- 
ness. ‘Then righteousness will be established upon this 
earth and the holy city, as Gabriel calls Jerusalem, will 
not only be a sharer of the blessings and glory, but will 
herself be righteous. It is written of Jerusalem “‘after- 
ward thou shall be called, The City of righteousness” 
(Isaiah i:26). Still greater is Jeremiah’s word he re- 
ceived from the Lord concerning that day when the 
righteousness of the ages has come. 

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will perform that 


180 THE REVELATION 


good thing which I have promised unto the house of Israel and 
to the house of Judah. In those days, and at that time, will I 
cause the Branch of righteousness to grow up unto David; and 
he shall execute Judgment and righteousness in the land. In 
those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely 
and this is the name wherewith she shall be called, The Lord our 
righteousness (Jeremiah xxxiii, 14-16). 

The vision and prophecy will be sealed, that is ac- 
credited, because their final accomplishment has been 
reached in these events of blessings for God’s earthly 
people. Also the Holy of Holies will be anointed, a 
statement which many have applied to our Lord. It 
has nothing whatever to do with Him, but it is the 
anointing of the Holy of Holies in another temple, 
which will stand in the midst of Jerusalem. Of this 
great millennial temple the prophetic Word is not 
silent. The other great prophet of the captivity, 
Ezekiel, had a great vision of this temple and its wor- 
ship. 

It is of the greatest importance to grasp the thought 
that these things have nothing to do with Gentiles or 
with the Church. They concern Daniel’s people, the 
Jews and Jerusalem. If this had been understood 
the learned commentators would not have invented 
that misleading, blundering interpretation of the 
seventy weeks prophecy which is so universally taught 
in our day. We shall touch upon these errors in the 
course of our exposition. 

The Division of the Seventy Weeks. After the general 
announcement of the seventy sevens and what is to be 
accomplished for Jerusalem and Daniel’s people when 
this prophetic period of time expires, Gabriel gives fur- 
ther information to the Prophet. This information is 


THE REVELATION 181 


introduced by the exhortation to know and to under- 
stand or to discriminate. What follows is the division 
of the seventy weeks into three parts. The first part 
consists of seven year weeks, that is 49 years. The 
second part consists of sixty-two weeks or 434 years, 
then there is one week, the seventieth, left, which gives 
us the third part. 

The Beginning of the Seventy Weeks. We have to 
ascertain in examining the prophetic history of these 
different divisions when the seventy year weeks began. 
If we were to touch upon the different views and ex- 
planations, which have been made on this point we 
would have to fill numerous pages. One is reminded 
of Job xxxvili:2 in reading the theories of commen- 
tators, “Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words 
without knowledge?” ‘The text is very plain. We 
read the definite beginning in verse 25. It is when the 
command was to be given to restore and build Jerusa- 
lem. From that time to Messiah the Prince are to be 
seven weeks and sixty-two weeks, that is 483 years. 
Now it is wrong to reckon these seventy year weeks 
from the time Daniel prayed or from the time Cyrus 
gave permission for the people to return and to build 
the temple. In Ezra chapter i, we read that it was in 
the first year of Cyrus, King of Persia, that the Lord 
stirred him up, whose coming and work Isaiah had an- 
nounced long before his birth. Significant is the 
proclamation, which Cyrus sent forth. But is has only 
to do with the building of the temple in Jerusalem. 
“The Lord of heaven has given me all the Kingdoms 
of the earth; and He hath charged me to build Him a 
house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah.” But this edict 


182 THE REVELATION 


is not the starting point of the seventy year weeks, for 
they are to begin with the word to restore and build 
the city itself. But in the Book of Ezra also we find in 
chapter vii what happened in the reign of Artaxerxes, 
King of Persia, known in history as Artaxerxes Longi- 
manus. In the seventh year of his reign another edict 
was issued, but a careful reading will show that the com- 
mand to restore and build Jerusalem was not given in 
the seventh year of the reign of Artaxerxes. We have 
to turn to the second chapter in Nehemiah’s writings to 
discover the beginning of these seventy year weeks. 
Then in the twentieth year of the reign of Artaxerxes 
the command was given to restore and build Jerusalem. 
From this time then the seventy year weeks must be 
reckoned. This twentieth year of Artaxerxes was the 
year 445 B. C., which is proven historically. The year 
is not alone mentioned in Nehemiah ii but also the 
month. It was in Nisan. The seventy year weeks 
began therefore in the month of Nisan 445 B. C. 

When we read that “the street and the wall shall be 
built again, even in troublous time” and then up to the 
time when Messiah is to be cut off, it should be sixty- 
two year weeks (434 years), we have the time revealed 
how long it would take to restore the city, namely 
seven year weeks, forty-nine years. 

A Remarkable Prediction. We have then before us 
a remarkable prediction. The exact number of years 
are given when Messiah the Prince, He who is the Hope 
of His people Israel, should appear. But still more 
remarkable is the fact that a certain event of His life 
on earth is predicted. It is not His birth which is to 
take place after the expiration of the sixty-nine year 


THE REVELATION 183 


weeks, but He is to be “‘cut off and shall have nothing.” 
It is a prediction of His death on the cross. It remains 
to be seen if this has found its literal fulfillment and if 
Messiah died at the time when the 483 years reckoned 
from the month Nisan 445 B. C. had expired. Before 
we do so we must call here attention to the pernicious 
critics of the Book of Daniel and their methods. 

Because the critics do not want to believe that it is 
possible to predict far off events, such as are written in 
Daniel, the career and death of Alexander, the work of 
Antiochus Epiphanes and others, they invented an im- 
aginary pious Jew who wrote the Book of Daniel after 
Antiochus Epiphanes had been on the scene. Now if 
this were true and such a “pious Jew” and not Daniel 
wrote this book, how can it be explained that after all 
there is a prediction made which clearly points to the 
death of Christ and which also outlines the result upon 
the city of Jerusalem, that the people of the Prince to 
come are to destroy the city and the sanctuary? These 
gentlemen, whose habit is to deny, solved the difficulty 
here by denying absolutely that the person called 
“Messiah the Prince” is Christ. What dishonest 
methods, juggling and twisting of words, they have used 
to reach this conclusion would be amusing, if it were 
not so sad. Chief among those is Canon Farrar on 
Daniel. We quote from his book: 


“An anointed one shall be cut off.” There can be no reason- 
able doubt that this is a reference to the deposition of the 
high priest Onias III, and his murder by Adronicus (B. C.). This 
startling event is mentioned in 2 Macc. iv:34, and by Josephus, 
and in Daniel xi:22. It is added “and no . . . to him.” 
Perhaps the word “helper” (xi:45) has fallen out of the text, as 
Graetz supposes; or the words may mean “there is no (priest) for 


184 THE REVELATION 


it (the people).”” The A. V. renders it “but not for himself”; and 
in the margin ‘“‘and shall have nothing”; or “and they (the Jews) 
shall be no more his people.””’ The R. V. renders it “and shall 
have nothing.” I believe with Dr. Joel that, in the Hebrew 
words “‘veeyn lo”? there may be a sort of cryptographic allusion 
to the name Onias. ‘‘The people of the coming prince shail 
devastate the city and the sanctuary (translation uncertain). 
This is an obvious allusion to the destruction and massacre 
inflicted on Jerusalem by Appolonius and the army of Antiochus 
Epiphanes (B. C. 167), Antiochus is called the prince that shall 
come “because he was at Rome when Onias III was murdered.” 


But enough of this; the way these men try to avoid 
the truth and by their reasoning methods try to get rid 
of everything God’s people have believed in the past, is 
sufficient to show what spirit stands behind them. 

The Evidence that “Messiah the Prince’ is Christ. 
The question then is do the words “‘Messiah the Prince,” 
the One who is to be cut off and nothing for him, really 
mean Christ or some other anointed one, as the critics 
claim? The evidence that it is the Lord Jesus Christ is 
furnished in the most remarkable fulfillment of the 
prophecy in the time when our Lord came to Jerusalem 
the last time before His passion. Exactly 483 years. 
after the command to restore and build Jerusalem had 
been given, the Lord Jesus Christ entered into Jerusalem 
to present Himself and His claims; a few days after He 
was nailed to the cross. This has been shown in a per- 
fect chronological way so that it is beyond even the 
shadow of a doubt. We give an extract from “Daniel 
in the Critics’ Den” which shows this fact: 


If, therefore, the vision be a Divine prophecy, an era of “Sixty- 
nine weeks” that is 483 prophetic years, reckoned from the 14th 
of March, B. C. 445, should close with the public presentation 


THE REVELATION 185 


and death of ‘‘Messiah the Prince.” No student of the Gospels 
can fail to see that the Lord’s last visit to Jerusalem was not only 
in fact, but in intention the crisis of His ministry. From the time 
that the accredited leaders of the nation had rejected His Mes- 
sianic claims, He had avoided all public recognition of those 
claims. But now His testimony had been fully given, and the 
purpose of His entry into the capital was to openly proclaim His 
Messiahship and to receive His doom. Even His apostles them- 
selves had again and again been charged that they should not 
make Him known; but now He accepted the acclamations of the 
whole multitude of the disciples. And when the Pharisees pro- 
tested, He silenced them with the indignant rebuke, “I tell you 
that if these should hold their peace the stones would immediate- 
ly cry out.”? These words can only mean that the divinely ap- 
pointed time had arrived for the public announcement of His Mes- 
siahship, and that the Divine purpose could not be thwarted. The 
full significance of the words which follow is lost in our Authorized 
Version. As the cry was raised by His disciples, ‘‘Hosanna to 
the Son of David, blessed is the King of Israel that cometh in the 
Name of the Lord,” He looked off towards the Holy City and 
exclaimed, “If thou also hadst known, even ON THIS DAY, the 
things that belong to thy peace—but now they are hid from thine 
eyes!” The nation had already rejected Him, but this was the 
fateful day when their decision must be irrevocable. And we are 
expressly told that it was the fulfillment of prophecy, “Shout O 
daughter of Jerusalem; behold thy King cometh unto thee.” It 
was the only occasion on which His kingly claims were publicly 
announced. 

And no other day in all His ministry will satisfy the words of 
Daniel’s vision. And the date of that first “Palm Sunday” can 
be ascertained with certainty. No year in the whole field of 
ancient history is more definitely indicated than that of the be- 
ginning of our Lord’s public ministry. According to the Evange- 
list it was “the fifteenth year of Tiberius Caesar” (Luke iii:1). 
Now the reign of Tiberius, as beginning from August 19, A. D. 14, 
was as well known a date in the time of Luke as the regin of 
Queen Victoria is in our own day. The Evangelist, moreover, 
with a prophetic anticipation of the perverseness of expositors 


186 cit EV dt 


each one of these is knows to have eee hel 
assigned to him in the year in question. As, there 
Passover of the Lord’s ministry was that of Nisa 
date of the Passion is thus fixed by Scripture it 


the fourth Passover of the ministry. Accordi 
custom, our Lord went up to Jerusalem on the & 


Sabbath at Bethany, He entered the Holy City t 
as recorded in the Gospels. The Julian date of th 
was Sunday the 6th of April, AS Diss22 What 


(476X 365)-+116 days for team years. And from 
6th April, reckoned inclusively according to Jey 
24 days. But 173,746+116+24=173;880. And 
173,880. 


year. In fact B. C, 1 ought to be called B. C. 
scribed by astronomers, with whom B. C. ~ 


three leap years too many in every four centuries 
corrected by the Gregorian reform, which reckons 
years out of four as common years. For instance, 1700, 1800, aid 
1900 were common years, and 2000 will be a leap year. Ro re 


ene 


kes EAELATION 187 
ki 


d_ ee Christ, for He appeared in jee 
ctly the day on which the sixty-nine prophetic 
weeks expired and a few days later He was put to 
eath on the cross. No wonder the critics invent all 
hemes and interpretations to get rid, so to 


all have nothing.” It has been interpreted 
fferent ways. We believe it means that He did 
e then the Messianic kingdom. He was re- 
His own and received not that which belongs 


struction of the City Predicted. Linked with 
ng off of Messiah is another remarkable 
. “And the people of the prince that shall 
ll destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the 
eof shall be with an overflow, and unto the end 
2 desolations determined.” Judgment ac- 
» this is to overtake the city which rejected the 
and both the city and the Temple were to be 
d. This work was #e be done “by the people 
ince that shall come.” ‘The prince of course is 
ssiah the Prince,” it is a prince that shall come. 
e himself is not to destroy the city and the sanc- 
but the people from whose midst that coming 
is to arise will do the destructive work. Now, 
the people who are here in view, are the Romans. Out 
of the Roman empire there shall arise in the future a 
prince. This prince or chief of the fourth empire is 


188 . THE REVELATION 


identical with the little horn of Daniel vii. Once more 
the head of the restored Roman empire as it is to be 
during the time of the end looms up before us in the last 
two verses of this chapter. The people of the coming 
prince, the Romans, were to come and destroy both city 
and temple, after Messiah had been cut off and had 
nothing for Himself. And this came to pass as every- 
body knows. Our Lord had predicted this doom of 
Jerusalem and had wept over it as He beheld the awful 
doom in store for the city. The Jews had anticipated 
what would come, for the chief priests and Pharisees 
declared ““The Romans will come and take away both 
our place and our nation” (John xi:48). The Romans 
under Titus Vespasianus in the year seventy fulfilled 
this prediction and in that year the prophecy before us 
became history. But Titus is not “the prince that 
shall come.” 


The Future of the Jews Foretold. Another prophecy 
is linked with the one just examined. “The end thereof 
shall be with an overflow, and unto the end war—the 
desolations determined.” ‘These words give us the 
history of the Jewish people, of their land and their city, 
up to the present time. It is identical with what our 
Lord said, “and they shall fall by the edge of the sword 
and shall be led away captive into all nations; and 
Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles until 
the time of the Gentiles are fulfilled” (Luke xxi:24). 
Both the prediction as communicated to Daniel by 
Gabriel and the words of our Lord tell of what is to be 
the lot of the Jews and of Jerusalem throughout this 
present age, till the end of the times of the Gentiles has 


THE REVELATION 189 


been reached. History gives the answer about the 
fulfillment of these words. 

The Seventieth Year Week. We have found up to 
this point that sixty-nine weeks of 483 years of the 
seventy year weeks are past. But what about the 
remaining seven years, the seventieth week? The 
last verse of Chapter ix tells us of that one week. It 
has not yet come, but still lies in the future. 

The course of the seventy year weeks was inter- 
rupted by the rejection of Messiah the Prince, who 
came to His own and they received Him not. With this 
event, as we have seen, the sixty-ninth week closed and 
an indefinite period of unreckoned time follows; when 
that is expired the last prophetic week of seven years 
will begin and run its appointed course. 

A close scrutiny of the twenty-sixth verse will make 
this clear. While we know that the Messiah was cut 
_ off immediately upon the close of the sixty-ninth week, 
nothing is said about the time when the destruction of 
the city and the sanctuary should take place. His- 
tory tells us it transpired thirty-eight years after the 
death of Christ. Wars should continue to the end, but 
not a word is said when that end is to come. The one 
week, that is the seventieth week, is mentioned in the 
verse which follows this prediction; it comes, therefore, 
after this long interval has terminated. 

This unreckoned period of time at the close of the 
sixty-ninth week has already lasted almost 1900 years. 
During this time the Jewish people have been scattered 
among all the nations of the earth and the predicted 
miseries written in their own law and in the prophets 
have been fulfilled in every generation. Yet God has 


190 THE REVELATION 


preserved them not alone physically but also as a dis- 
tinct race, even as our Lord announced when He spoke 
of the events of the last week of Daniel in His Olivet 
Discourse (Matthew xxiv). ‘““This generation (race) 
shall not pass away till all these things be fulfilled.” 

During this unreckoned period of time God has made 
known by revelation the blessed mystery of eternity, a 
mystery not made known in other ages, concerning the 
Church. There is now being gathered out from the 
nations a people for His Name and the Church is still 
building. The Gospel is being heralded world-wide. 
The heavens, however, are closed and this unreckoned 
period of time leading up to the end of the times of the 
Gentiles runs its appointed course. As we do not write 
on this present and, in the Old Testament, unrevealed 
age and its characteristics, we must turn our attention 
to the events recorded in verse 27. 

Who Confirms a Covenant? The first thing we read is 
“And he shall confirm a (not the) covenant with the 
many for one week.”” We must remind ourselves again 
that all we read here concerns, as did the previous 
sixty-nine weeks, Daniel’s people, the Jews. When the 
last week of seven years begins, preceding the time of 
ultimate blessing for the Jewish people, one will make a 
covenant with the mass of Jews. ‘The question arises, 
who then is this person and what is the covenant he 
makes? 

We mentioned before an erroneous view, which holds 
that everything predicted in these seventy weeks has 
been fulfilled in the past. The view holds that Messiah 
the Prince, the one who was cut off, is our Lord. How- 
ever, the teaching is that “the prince that shall come” is 


THE REVELATION 191 


also Christ and that it is Christ Himself who confirms 
the covenant in the last week. We quote Dr. Pusey, 
who delivered a series of very learned lectures on Daniel 
at Oxford, and whose book on Daniel is considered an 
authority: 

Not in, but after, these Sixty-two weeks, it is said, Messiah 
shall be cut off. Then follows the subdivision of the last week 
(verse 27), or seven years, wherein he was to be cut off, and yet 
not in the Sixty-nine weeks. He shall make then a covenant 
with many for one week and in the midst of the week he shall 
cause the sacrifice and oblation to cease.* 

The Lord Jesus Christ is believed to be the one who 
makes the covenant. The cessation of the sacrifice and 
oblation in the midst of the week is explained as having 
been accomplished by His death on the cross. But such 
a view is altogether untenable. According to this 
widely accepted theory Christ made a covenant for 
seven years. Where is this stated elsewhere in Scrip- 
ture? Nowhere is there even a hint that Christ was to 
confirm a covenant with many for seven years, but His 
covenant is an everlasting one. ‘The error springs from 
the fact that the future of the Jewish people is not con- 
sidered and the teaching of what is yet to be in the time 
of the end is completely passed by. 

The one who confirms the covenant with the many 
for one week is “‘the prince that shall come”’ of verse 26. 
The prince that shall come, as we have seen, rises from 
the people who destroyed the city and the sanctuary, 
the Roman people. ‘The prince that shall come is the 
dreadful little horn on the fourth beast (the Roman 
empire), the great head of the Roman empire seen as the 


*Pusey, Daniel, page 176. 


192 THE REVELATION 


Beast out of the Sea in Revelation xiii. When the last 
seven years, so pregnant with Jewish events, begins, the 
first thing will be that the Jews look for protection to the 
great Man, who as a mighty prince controls the affairs of 
the Roman empire brought together under him as head. 
The aim of the Jews is to repossess Palestine, to have a 
Jewish state and to gain possession of the city of Jeru- 
salem, so that they may be able to have a temple and 
their sacrificial ceremonies again. Zionism is the step 
towards such a restoration in unbelief, the first begin- 
nings of it. This coming prince, the beast, will take 
the Jews and their desires into consideration, perhaps 
he needs them too in the beginning of his career. He 
will make a covenant with them and under this cove- 
nant, most likely, they will be permitted to possess 
Palestine and to build a temple in Jerusalem. He will 
also promise them protection against any outside foes, 
especially the one who threateningly arises in the North, 
the Assyrian of Prophecy. 

This covenant the Roman prince will make with the 
many, not with all the Jews. Throughout the pro- 
phetic Word we find the clearest evidences of a rem- 
nant of Jews, who trusting in the Lord, will see through 
this wicked prince and refuse to have anything what- 
ever to do with that covenant. Isaiah xxviii 15 and 18 
speak of this covenant. It is there called a covenant 
with death and an agreement with hell. In the Revela- 
tion this faithful remnant is seen witnessing and suf- 
fering and refusing to worship the Beast. All this we 
have learned in our exposition. 

After the first three and one-half years of this last 
prophetic week are gone, he will break the covenant by 


THE REVELATION 193 


causing the sacrifice and oblation to cease. From the 
Book of Revelation we learn that at that time he will 
become possessed by the power of Satan. In fellowship 
with the second beast, the false prophet, the personal 
Anti-christ, who is in Jerusalem, he introduces idolatry 
and the most awful blasphemies among the Jews. All 
the temple ceremonials, sacrifices and oblations will 
have to be abandoned. The apostate nations will accept 
the Anti-christ as their Messiah and king and fall in line 
with his blasphemies. Then the character of the little 
horn and what was said of him will fully come out. ‘‘He 
shall speak great words against the most High, and shall 
wear out the Saints of the most High (the Jews who 
refused to enter his covenant), and think to change 
times and laws, and they shall be given into his hands 
until a time and times and the dividing of time.” 
(Three and one-half years—Daniel vii:25). ‘And there 
was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and 
blasphemies, and power was given unto him to con- 
tinue forty-two months” (Rev. xiii:5). This shows the 
work he will do for 1,260 days, forty-two months, three 
and one-half years, the last half of the seventieth week. 
The part of the personal Anti-christ in these 1,260 days 
and three and one-half years is described in Rev. xiii: 
11-17. An image of the first beast, the wicked head 
of the Roman power will be set up and the great idol 
endued with supernatural, satanic power must be wor- 
shipped under the penalty of death. Anti-christ him- 
self, this wicked counterfeit of the true Christ, takes a 
place in the temple of God and by lying wonders shews 
himself that he is God and exalting himself above all 
that is God and that is worshipped. Then the great 


194 THE REVELATION 


tribulation will be in force and the Jewish faithful rem- 
nant will pass through the deepest waters of suffering. 

We have still something unexplained in the last verse 
of our chapter. We read “and because of the protec- 
tion (lit. wing) of abominations there shall be a desola- 
tor, even until the consummation and what is deter- 
mined shall be poured out upon the desolator.” We 
shall not weary our readers with giving them the differ- 
ent views and opinions on this seemingly difficult pas- 
sage. The abominations mentioned are idols and idol 
worship. The protection, or wing, of these idols is 
sought by the people and God is completely forgotten 
and set aside by the apostate masses, who bow before 
the Antichrist. The fulfillment of the words of our 
Lord in Matthew has come: 

When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh 
through dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none. Then he 
saith, I will return into my house from whence I came out; and 
when he is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and garnished. 
Then goeth he, and it taketh with himself seven other spirits more 
wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there; and 


the last state of that man is worse than the first. Even so shall it 
be also unto this wicked generation (Matt. xii: 43-45). 


The wicked spirit, idolatry, will take hold of them and 
they will be swept along into the worst blasphemies and 
worship Satan’s masterpiece. On account of this 
abomination “there shall be a desolator,” one who deso- 
lates the land. This desolator will continue to plague 
the Jews from the outside, while the Anti-christ is with 
them in Jerusalem. The desolator will devastate the 
land and conquer Jerusalem till the consummation is 
reached. The consummation is the close of the seven 


THE REVELATION 195 


years. When that is reached the desolator himself will 
be dealt with in judgment as well as the two beasts. 
Who is the desolator? The King of the North, the 
Assyrian of the endtime; he is the one of whom we 
read in the previous chapter and whose terrible work 
against the apostate nation is here once more touched 
upon as falling into the second half of the last prophetic 
week. 

Is is interesting to compare the two New Testament 
records which give a larger vision of the events of the 
seven years which are in store for Daniel’s people and 
the Holy City, before the full blessing for the remnant 
of this people and for Jerusalem can come. These 
records are Matthew xxiv and that part of Revelation 
which treats of these coming events, chapters vi-xix. 
The reader will find this followed out in our exposition 
of the Gospel of Matthew.* 

And how far is the beginning of this last week of 
Daniel from our times? No one can give an answer. 
God only knows how soon all will come to pass. How- 
ever, there is a sign present with us which is very sig- 
nificant. It is the restoration movement of the Jews 
and their inability to carry out the plans and schemes 
for their complete restoration. They are waiting for 
“the Prince that shall come.” It behooves us to wait 
and watch. The days of God’s Saints may be very few 
on earth. The last and next great event in the un- 
reckoned period of time, between the sixty-ninth and 
seventieth week, is the coming of the Lord for His Saints, 
and that is imminent. 


*Gospel of Matthew, by A. C. G., $1.50 postpaid. 


7 e 


196 THE REVELATION 


APPENDIX. II. 


Prominent Names and Their Symbolical Meaning in 
Revelation. 


Abaddon. Chapter ix:11. Destruction. The King 
over the Locust army, denoting Satan and his agencies. 

Abyss, The. ix:1; xx:1-3. |The pit of the abyss or 
the deep. This expression occurs seven times in Rev- 
elation. Out of the deep, the lowest pit, there come 
the demons and into the pit of the abyss Satan will be 
cast for 1,000 years. The Lake of Fire is a different 
place. 

Accuser, The. Satan is the accuser of the Brethren. 
xii:10. His expulsion out of heaven occurs in the 
middle of the week, followed by the great tribulation 
on earth. 

Alpha. The first letter in the Greek alphabet; 
Omega is the last letter. Therefore Alpha and Omega 
is equivalent to an A and Z. Symbolical of the first 
and: the last.;> 1:85° xx1:6> xxi1:14, 

Amen, The. A name of our Lord. He is the 
“verily,” the truth, and assurance and certainty are 
expressed by this word. 1:14. 

Angels. Angels are prominently mentioned through- 
out Revelation. The exposition shows that the angel 
mentioned in viit:I1-5, x:1 is the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Angels will be used in the end of the age to carry out 
the decreed judgments. On the angels of the differ- 
ent churches, the symbolical meaning, see the exposi- 
tion chapter 1:20. 


THE REVELATION 197 


Antichrist, The. The final and personal Anti-christ 
is mentioned for the first time in Revelation in chapter 
xiii:l11-18. He is also called the false Prophet, because 
he heads up the ecclesiastical corruption and apostasy 
of the end of the age. He must not be confounded 
with the first Beast out of the Sea, who is a political 
head, the emperor of the revived Roman empire, the 
little horn of Daniel vii, and the Prince that shall come 
of Dan. ix:26. 

Antipas. An unknown faithful martyr in Pergamos, 
known to Christ. ii:13. 

Apollyon. ix:11. The Greek name of Abaddon, the 
King over the Locust army. The name means De- 
struction or Destroyer. 

Ark, The. Chapter xi:19. It is seen by John in the 
temple. It means symbolically the assured presence 
of Jehovah with His people Israel, the faithful rem- 
nant, in the trying times of Jacob’s trouble. 

Armageddon. Mentioned for the first time in the 
parenthesis between the sixth and seventh vial. Chap. 
xvi:12-16. It means “The hill of slaughter.” The 
battle of Armageddon will be of brief duration. It is 
the stone of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream smiting suddenly 
the ten toes, the ten kingdoms (Dan. ii). The battle 
of Armageddon is briefly described in chapter xix:19-20. 

Alleluia. “Praise ye the Lord.” The four Halle- 
lujahs are found in chapter xix:1-5. 

Babylon. On the literal and mystical Babylon see 
exposition of chapter xvii. The literal Babylon will 
undoubtedly be restored as a city of influence. How- 
ever, the city mentioned in chapter xvii is not the lit- 
eral Babylon, but Rome. Not only will the Roman 


198 THE REVELATION 


empire be revived, but also papal Rome. Babylon the 
great, the mother of Harlots, will see a great revival. 
The system in its corruption is described in chapter 
XViii. 

Balaam. The heathen Prophet who could not curse 
Israel, but put a stumbling-block in the way of the 
children of Israel. Used in Revelation to describe 
the corruption in the professing church in giving up 
the divinely demanded separation from the world. 
Chapter 11:14. 

Beast, The. The expression “four Beasts” in Rev. 
iv and v, etc., is faulty. The correct rendering is “the 
four living Creatures” or the “four living ones.” ‘The 
term “Beast” applies to the revived Roman empire 
and its head, the little horn of Daniel, also called Beast 
in Daniel’s vision. The Anti-christ is likewise called 
a Beast. The work of the two Beasts is seen in chap- 
ter X11. 

Birds, unclean and hateful. Symbolical of evil per- 
sons, outwardly professing to be something but full of 
corruption. They describe the apostate masses of 
Christendom. Rev. xviii:2. Also Matt. xiii:31-32. 

Black Horse. The black horse comes into view with 
the opening of the third seal. Black is the color of 
night, darkness and death. 


Blood, with Hail and Fire. Chapter viii:7. Not 
literal things, but symbols of divine judgments for this 
earth. 

Bow, The. Chapter vi:l. The bow without an 


arrow as in possession by the rider upon the white horse 
is the symbol of a bloodless conquest. 


THE REVELATION 199 


Bride, The. xxi:2. The Bride of Christ, the Lamb’s 
wife, xix:7, is not Israel, but the church. 

Brimstone and Fire. The symbols of divine wrath. 
Isa; xxx:33. 

Candlestick, Golden. Symbolical of that which 
gives light. Representing the seven assemblies. The 
church is on earth to give light. 

Crowns. ‘The symbols of given glory and also re- 
wards for service. The crowns seen upon the seven 
heads of the dragon (xii:3) and upon the four horns of 
the Beast (xiii:1) denote despotic authority. 

David, Key of. Symbolical of the right to open and 
to enter in. See Isa. xxii:22. It is a prediction con- 
cerning Christ. 

David, Root and offspring. xxii:16. Christ is the 
Root and offspring of David. 

Demons. Fallen spiritual beings; the wicked spirits 
over which Satan is the head. They will be worshipped 
by the apostates during the end of the age. Demon- 
worship is even now going on to some extent, for the 
anti-christian cults are produced by demons. (1 Tim. 
iv:i). See Rev. ix:20:21. The word devils must be 
changed to demons. There is but one Devil, but 
legions of demons. 

Dwellers on the Earth. This class mentioned re- 
peatedly in Revelation are the large number of pro- 
fessing Christians, who did not receive the love of the 
truth and rejecting the Gospel follow the strong de- 
lusion and are utterly blinded, as well as hardened, 
during the tribulation. 

Eagle. viii:13. The word angel must be changed 
to “eagle.” Symbolical of the coming judgment, as 


200 THE REVELATION 


an eagle is a bird of prey. Eagle’s wings (xii:13-17) 
are symbolical of swift motion, escape and deliver- 
ance. 

Earth. The prophetic territory of the Roman em- 
pire is mostly described by this form, though the entire 
earth is also indicated. 

Earthquake. Symbolical of the shaking of all 
political and ecclesiastical institutions. But, as we 
show in our exposition, literal earthquakes will take 
place. 

Elders, Twenty-four. The twenty-four elders typify 
all the redeemed in Glory. Old and New Testament 
Saints are included. After chapter xix this term does 
not appear again, because the church, the bride of 
Christ, is then seen separated from the entire company 
of the redeemed, and takes her exalted position as the 
Lamb’s wife. 

Eternal State, The. The eternal state is described 
in chapter xxi:1-8. 

Euphrates. This great river is mentioned twice in 
Revelation, ix:14 and xvi:12. It is the boundary line 
of the Roman empire and the land of Israel. See ex- 
position of these passages. 

Everlasting Gospel. xiv:6. The declaration of the 
Gospel of the Kingdom during the tribulation. 

Fire. Often mentioned in this book and symbolical 
of the judgments which will be executed upon the earth 
as well as the everlasting wrath upon the unsaved. 

Forntication. Spiritual wickedness in departing from 
the Truth of God, followed by the literal lusts of the 
flesh. The days of Lot will be on the earth before the 
Son of Man cometh. 


THE REVELATION 201 


Four. This number appears a number of times in 
Revelation. Four living creatures; four corners of 
the earth; four horns of the golden altar; four angels; 
four winds. Four is the number of universality. 

Frogs. Mentioned between the sixth and seventh 
vial. Symbolical of demon influences, denoting filthy 
and wicked things. Frogs come out of slimy and dark 
waters. 

Glass, Sea of. Chapter iv:6. Compare with Exod. 
xxx:18-21 and 1 Kings vii:23, etc. Symbolical of 
lasting holiness. No more water needed for cleansing 
from sin, for the Saints in Glory are delivered from the 
presence of sin itself. 

God, Supper of. Chapter xix:17. Symbolical of 
God’s judgment upon the wicked nations and the earth 
dwellers. 

Gold. Symbolical of divine righteousness. 

Grass. viii:7.. Symbolical of human prosperity. 
Isa. xl:7 and 1 Peter i:24. 

Hades. ‘The region of disembodied spirits; liter- 
ally “the unknown.” Christ has the Keys, and Hades, 
with Death, because they came into existence through 
sin, will be cast into the Lake of fire. 

Harvest of the Earth. The harvest is the end of the 
age. In chapter xiv:14-15 we read of the Lord’s 
judgment dealing with the earth. 

Hidden Manna. ii:17. Symbolical of the reward 
those who overcome will receive from the Lord. 

Horns. Horn is symbolical of power. Horns mean 
typically kings, powers and kingdoms. Dan. vii:24. 

Image of the Beast. xiii:12-15. Compare with 
Dan. iii. It will be a literal image of the princely leader 


202 THE REVELATION 


of the revised Roman empire, the first Beast, which 
John saw rising out of the sea. 

Islands. Mentioned under the sixth seal and the 
seventh vial. Mountains typify kingdoms and govern- 
ments; islands are symbolical of smaller and isolated 
governments. All will be affected. No doubt, when 
the great earthquakes will shake the very foundations 
of the earth, many islands will also disappear. 

Jasper. A precious stone, most likely our diamond. 
See exposition of chapter iv. 

Jerusalem. The earthly and the heavenly Jerusa- 
lem are mentioned in the book. During the tribula- 
tion the earthly Jerusalem will be the seat of the Anti- 
christ, the false Prophet. Jerusalem is for this reason 
called “Sodom and Egypt” (xi:8). Then Jerusalem 
will pass through her worst history. A great siege will 
take place at the close of the tribulation period and the 
city will fall (Zech. xiv). After that Jerusalem will 
become the capital of the kingdom of Christ and a 
great temple will be erected, the universal place of 
worship during the millennium. The heavenly Jeru- 
salem is above the earth. From there the glorious 
reign of Christ and the Saints will be executed. This 
glorious city will come down out of heaven at the end 
of the millennium to find its eternal resting place on 
the new earth. (Chapters xxi—xxii.) 

Jezebel. Symbolical of the Papacy. The corruptress 
which claims to be the Bride of Christ, but plays the 
harlot. See chapters 11 and xvii. 

Judgment. Judgment falls upon the earth during 
the seven years, which constitute the end of the age. 
When the Lord comes in His glory the great judgment 


THE REVELATION 203 


of the nations takes place. Chapter xix:11, etc., com- 
pare with Matt. xxv:31. After the millennium the 
second resurrection takes place and the great white 
throne judgment is the judgment of the wicked dead. 

King of the Nations. xv:2-4. King of the Saints 
should be changed (see margin) to King of the nations. 
Our Lord is the King of the nations, the King of kings. 

Lake of Fire. The place which God has prepared 
for the Devil and his angels. "The Beast and the false 
prophet will be cast there; also the Assyrian, the King 
of the North, the nations who followed the Beast and 
all the wicked dead. Death and Hades will likewise 
be put into that place. 

The Lamb. The Lamb, our Lord in His sacrificial 
character, is mentioned twenty-eight times in Revela- 
tion. The Lamb is worshipped by all. Thus we find 
the Song of the Lamb, the Throne of the Lamb and 
the Marriage of the Lamb, and the Wife of the Lamb 
(the church) in this book. 

Lightning. Symbolical of the divine judgment. 
Wrath. 

Locust Army. Symbolical of the host of demons, 
which come out of the abyss to torment mankind. 

Lord’s Day, The. Mentioned but once in 1:10. It 
is the first day of the week on which John saw the great 
Patmos vision. 

Man-child. Chapter xii. The Man-child is the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 

Mark of the Beast. Some special mark which de- 
clares ownership. As the Holy Spirit seals those who 
trust on Christ, so Anti-christ will put his mark upon 
those who follow him. 


204 THE REVELATION 


Millennium, The. Millennium means “‘a thousand 
years.” Six times this period of blessing and glory is 
mentioned in Rev. xx. 

Moon as blood. The Moon is symbolical of aerial 
authority. Blood is the symbol of death. Apostate 
Israel and the apostate church passing through the 
most severe judgments are symbolized by this figure. 

Morning Star, The. Christ in His Coming for the 
church. Chapter xxii:16. 

Mountain. A kingdom. 

Mountains, Seven. Rome is the city built upon the 
seven hills. See exposition of chapter xvii. 

Nicolaitanes. Mentioned in the messages to Ephesus 
and Pergamos. ‘They signify the domineering, priestly 
cast which assumed an unscriptural place of authority 
in the church. 

Palms. Emblems of victory. 

Rainbow. The symbol of covenant and of mercy. 
Mentioned twice. Around the Throne (chapter iv) 
and around His head (chapter x). 

Rest of the Dead. xx:5. Meaning those who had 
not part in the First Resurrection, hence the wicked 
dead. 

River of Life. xxii:l. Symbolical of the fullness 
of life, glory and blessing. 

Saints. The Saints in Revelation include all the 
Saints. The Old and New Testament Saints are seen 
under the figure of the twenty-four elders. The suf- 
fering Saints are the Jewish Saints and the remnant 
of Israel, as well as the multitude of nations, who accept 
the final message and come out of the great tribulation. 
(Chapter vii). 


THE REVELATION 205 


Satan. ‘The entire book reveals his person, his work 
and his destiny. His work may be traced in the church- 
‘messages. Then we have his work during the tribula- 
tion and his final work after the millennium. 

Scorpions. Symbolical of the torment caused by 
the army of demons under the fifth trumpet judgment. 

Sea. Symbol of the nations. Also the literal sea, 
which gives up the dead. Then there will be no more 
sea. All wickedness and restlessness will cease forever. 

Seven. ‘The divine number. No other Book in the 
Bible contains so many “‘sevens” as this final Bible- 
book, the Revelation. There are seven angels, 
churches, attributes of the Lord, heads, horns, eyes, 
spirits, lamps, seals, trumpets, vials, plagues, stars, 
thunders, times and a sevenfold doxology. 

Song. The songs of the Redeemed and the Song of 
Moses and the Lamb are mentioned in the Book. 

Stars. See exposition on the meaning of the seven 
stars in His hand. Stars are also symbolical of lesser 
authorities, which will all fall during the tribulation 
period. 

Sun. The symbol of supreme authority. 

Synagogue of Satan. Mentioned in the messages to 
Smyrna and Philadelphia. It means a Judaized Chris- 
tianity as seen in Ritualistic, professing Christendom. 

Temple. The tribulation temple is in view in chap- 
ter xi:l-3. The millennial temple is seen in vii:15. 
Then there is the temple in heaven. Chapter xvi:17. 
In the heavenly Jerusalem there is no temple. xxi:22. 

Third Part. Mentioned in connection with men, 
the sea, the stars of heaven, the Sun and the Moon. 
It probably refers exclusively to the Roman empire, 


206 THE REVELATION 


which in its different aspects and authorities, will be 
affected during these judgments. 

Two horns. ‘The Beast out of the land has two horns 
like a lamb, but speaks like the dragon. He is the 
counterfeit Christ. 

Waters, Many. Symbolical of peoples and nations 
over which the Romish whore has authority. 

White. Color of righteousness and purity; also 
denoting victorious conquests. We have in Revela- 
tion, white Robes, the white horses, white linen, a 
white cloud and a white Throne. 

Witnesses. See in Rev. xi about the two witnesses. 

Wrath. We read of the Wrath of God and the wrath 
of the Lamb. The wrath of God is completed with 
the pouring out of the vials. The wrath of the Lamb 
will be executed when He comes in Glory. 

Zion. Mentioned only once in Rev., chapter xiv:1. 
It means the literal Zion in Palestine. Upon that holy 
hill of Zion the glory will rest during the millennium. 
See Psalm cxxxii:13-14. 


THE REVELATION 207 


APPENDIX Il. 


LIST OF RELIABLE WORKS ON THE REVELATION AND 
PROPHECY. 


The Revelation of Jesus Christ, by T. B. Baines. Published 
by H.S. Rouse, London. 325 pages. Price Postpaid... $1.00 


Unfolding of the Ages, by Ford C. Ottman. Published by 


“Our Hope.” Has over 500 pages...... Price Postpaid $2.00 
Exposition of Revelation, by W. -Scott, London. A. 
Holmes, ©4444 paces sci.ee ss cts es Price Postpaid $1.50 


Revelation of Christ to His Servants, by F. W. Grant. 

485 pages. An excellent volume for deeper 

SEU Vaepnetoterfescrocie Senin aioe tele ae e Price $1.00 
Lectures on the Book of Revelation, by W. Lincoln. 450 

pages. Published by F. H. Revell Co., N. Y...Price $1.00 
The Prophetic History of the Church, by F. W. Grant. 

The best treatise on the Seven Churches. Paper 

COVETA WhGOMDARES wrsisjeitetnielialria warereieeleceisie a Miers Price 25cts: 
The Book of Daniel. A key tothe great Prophecies of that 

book. 4th edition, 14th thousand. By A. C. 


Gaebeleins “230 pages....2-s0-- s+ «- Price Postpaid 50cts. 
Lectures on Daniel with practical application, by H. A. 
TESOVNGS Ke Sexes. AeA Mire Da neer ESC Cen Ee Price Postpaid $1.00 


Notes on Daniel, by Wm. Kelly. Very helpful. 
Price Postpaid 75cts. 


The Minor Prophets. Expository and practical, by H. A. 
Promside etree ese oysi sine eres eye co bout Price Postpaid $1.25 


The Harmony of the Prophetic Word, by A. C. Gaebelein. 
The best book to give a good understanding on the 


entire Old Testament Prophecy....... Price Postpaid $1.00 
The Prophet Joel. An interesting exposition with a metri- 
cal version, by A. C. Gaebelein....... Price Postpaid 75cts. 


The Prophet Zechariah. Nearly 15,000 in circulation, by A. 
GG Aebeleinitesns ks scecrrktne ele ens ai Price Postpaid 50cts. 


208 THE REVELATION 


The Prophet Isaiah. An analysis with annotations and 
three lectures on this book, by A. C. Gaebelein, 
Price Postpaid 10cts, 
Plain Papers on Prophetic Subjects, by W. Trotter. Most 
excellent. G00 pages eis dem ae rice Price Postpaid $1.25 
Papers on the Lord’s Coming, by C. H. M.. Price Postpaid IScts. 
The Lessons of the Ages, by F. W. Grant. 125 pages. 
Price Postpaid 35cts. 
The Gospel of Matthew. An exposition of over 600 pages 
containing many helpful hints on the Gospel of the 
Kingdom and things to come, by A. C. Gaebelein. 
Two volumes in one.................Price Postpaid $1.50 
Addresses on Prophecy, by C. I. Scofield. A standard 
work which has helped thousands. 
Price, paper, 25cts—cloth 50cts. 
Things to Come. Four lectures, by A. C. Gaebelein. 
Price Postpaid l5cts. 
The Lord’s Return, by Jesse F. Silver. A valuable work 
tracing the doctrine of the pre-millennial coming 
throughout the history of the church. Over 300 
PARES Ah Pactar McG estan aks eaeae ren nen a eae Price $1.25 
Outline of Revelation, by Judson Palmer, Secretary 
Emeritus of Y. M. C. A., Galveston, Texas. This 
is the best brief outline study we know. Being in- 
expensive it should have a wide. circulation. 
Price Postpaid 10cts. 


