Class 
Book 


S — 


GofpghtN0- 


COPYRIGHT  DEPOSIT; 


Zhc  Jewish  (Question 


THE  JEWISH  QUESTION 


BY 

K.  C.  GAEBELEIN 


PUBLICATION  OFFICE  "OUR  HOPE" 

80  SECOND  STREET,  NEW  YORK 


yv 


5 


<* 


Copyright  1912.  by  A.  C.  Gaebelein. 


&CU314508 
\ 


CONTENTS 

Chapter.                                                                         Page. 
I.     The  Question  Solved 1 

II.     "For  I  am  also  an  Israelite" _  12 

III.  The      Remnant — Israel's     Apostasy     not 

Complete  19 

IV.  Israel's     Apostasy     and     Blindness     not 

Permanent  32 

V.     "To  Provoke  them  to  Jealousy" 41 

VI.     Their  Reception — Life  from  the  Dead 49 

VII.     The  Parable  of  the  Olive  Tree 64 

VIII.     A  Mystery  Made  Known 11 

The  Messianic  Question 1 05 


The  Question  Stated* 

CHAPTER  L 

The  eleventh  chapter  in  the  great  Epistle 
to  the  Romans  is  perhaps  the  least  studied 
of  all  in  this  Epistle  of  our  salvation. 
It  contains  not  alone  deeply  interesting 
truths,  but  is  of  great  importance  and 
puts  before  us  most  solemn  facts.  The  Holy 
Spirit  unfolds  here  the  purposes  of  God  con- 
cerning the  Jewish  race.  The  knowledge  of 
Israel's  place  and  position  in  God's  revealed 
plan  is  of  incalculable  importance.  All  the 
confusion  in  doctrine  and  practice  we  see 
about  us,  is  more  or  less  the  result  of  a 
deplorable  ignorance  which  exists  throughout 
Christendom  concerning  Israel's  place  and 
future.  The  carnalizing  of  the  professing 
church  has  been  the  result  of  this  ignorance. 
All  Christendom  attends  to  Israel's  earthly 
calling,  and  not  only  fails  in  it  most  misera- 
bly, but  also  dishonors  God  and  His  Word. 

If  it  were  possible  to  straighten  out  the 
confusion  existing  about  us  in  the  professing 
church,  the  proper  starting  point  would  be, 
no  doubt,  to  teach  God's  purposes  concerning 
Israel. 


2  The  Jewish  Question. 

Let  us  first  consider  in  what  part  of 
Romans  we  find  the  chapter  which  contains 
the  Jewish  question. 

Romans  is  divided  into  three  parts.  The 
first  section  extends  from  chapter  i-viii ;  the 
second  contains  chapters  ix,  x  and  xi ;  the  last 
is  from  chapter  xii-xvi.  Over  the  first  part 
we  put  the  word  "Salvation"  over  the  second 
"Dispensation"  and  over  the  third  "Exhorta- 
tion." 

This  is  how  God  makes  His  truth  known. 
First  He  tells  us  what  He  has  done  for  us  in 
His  Son,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  how  rich  and 
full  His  Grace  is  toward  all  who  believe,  Jew 
and  Gentile.  In  the  next  place  He  acquaints 
us  with  dispensation;  that  is,  How  He,  the 
Sovereign,  dispenses ;  how  He  deals  with  Jew 
and  Gentile.  In  dispensational  truths  He 
takes  His  child,  so  to  speak,  into  confidence, 
because  He  has  made  him  a  son  and  an  heir, 
and  introduces  him  into  the  knowledge  of  His 
ways  in  the  government  and  future  of  the 
earth.  Having  shown  us  what  He  has  done 
for  us  and  what  He  has  made  us,  He  speaks 
to  us  once  more,  showing  what  manner  of 
men  we  should  be.  This  is  exhortation.  Re- 
verse this  order,  salvation,  dispensation  and 
exhortation,  or  leave  one  out,  and  you  will 
have  but  confusion. 


The  Question  Stated.  3 

Our  chapter  then  stands  in  the  second,  the 
dispensational  part,  that  great  parenthesis, 
in  which  the  Holy  Spirit  traces  God's  righte- 
ous and  merciful  ways.  At  the  end  of  the 
salvation  part  of  this  Epistle  we  find  a  chap- 
ter of  summing  up,  the  eighth.  The  second 
part  has  likewise  such  a  climax,  the  chapter 
which  is  before  us.  It  brings  in  not  only  the 
Jews,  but  the  Gentiles,  and  in  a  measure  the 
church  of  God.  From  this  chapter  we  can 
reach  back  over  the  entire  history  of  Israel. 
From  here  we  can  learn  their  present  condi- 
tion and,  above  all,  we  can  study  their  future 
and  learn  what  God  will  yet  do  in  fulfillment 
of  His  oathbound  covenants. 

There  is,  however,  a  special  reason  why  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  Romans  introduces  the  three 
chapters,  which  form  the  second  part. 

It  is  the  following.  In  the  first  part,  chap- 
ters i  to  viii,  the  Spirit  of  God  shows  that 
Jews  and  Gentiles  have  no  righteousness  and 
are  lost,  that  there  is  not  one  that  doeth 
good,  no,  not  one.  Then  God  reveals  His 
righteousness  and  His  salvation  for  Jew  and 
Gentile,  which  is  by  faith.  An  old  saint  was 
asked  what  the  three  great  lessons  are  which 
he  had  learned  in  his  Christian  experience, 
and  he  said:  "First,  I  learned  that  I  have 
never  done  anything  good  in  my  life ;  second- 


4  The  Jewish  Question. 

ly,  that  I  could  never  do  anything  good;  and, 
thirdly,  that  Christ  has  done  it  all."  This  is 
precisely  what  is  taught  in  the  first  part  of 
Romans. 

Now,  after  the  guilt  and  lost  condition  of 
the  Jew  and  Gentile  are  fully  demonstrated, 
the  Jew  is  left  out  of  sight.  In  this  dispensa- 
tion of  Grace  God  deals  alike  with  the  believ- 
ing Jew  and  Gentile;  there  is  no  difference. 
The  believing  Jew  and  Gentile  are  under 
Grace,  linked  with  the  Second  Man,  in  pos- 
session of  every  spiritual  blessing  in  Christ 
Jesus,  a  Son  and  an  Heir,  destined  to  be  like 
the  Firstbegotten  from  the  dead. 

But  now  comes  an  objection  from  the  side 
of  the  Jew.  Questions  are  frequently  asked 
in  Romans.  The  Jew  now  has  a  question, 
after  he  has  heard  all  about  this  salvation 
by  Grace  for  him  and  for  the  Gentile,  as  well 
as  the  results  of  this  salvation. 

This  is  the  question:  "What  becomes  of 
our  national  promises  and  blessings?  God 
has  promised  us  so  much  as  a  nation,  and 
these  promises  are  not  yet  fulfilled;  will 
He  keep  them?"  In  other  words,  "Does 
God's  dealing  in  Grace  with  the  Gentiles 
mean  that  He  is  through  with  us  as  a  nation, 
that  our  people  are  now  completely  and  final- 
ly rejected  and  are  the  many  promises  con- 


The  Question  Stated.  5 

tained  in  the  oracles  of  God  never  to  be  ful- 
filled?" 

This  question  is  answered  in  the  second 
part  of  Romans.  In  it  the  Holy  Spirit  shows 
how  righteously  and  mercifully  God  deals 
with  the  Jews  and  Gentiles,  and  the  end  of 
the  section,  our  chapter,  shows  most  blessedly 
that  God  has  not  cast  away  His  people;  a 
time  of  their  fullness  and  reception  is  coming 
and  all  Israel  shall  be  saved. 

The  chapter  in  its  construction  is  very 
simple.  In  the  preceding  one  we  read:  "But 
Esaias  is  very  bold,  and  saith,  I  was  found 
of  them  that  sought  me  not;  I  was  mani- 
fested unto  them  that  asked  not  after  me. 
But  to  Israel  he  saith,  All  day  long  I  have 
stretched  forth  my  hands  unto  a  disobedient 
and  gainsaying  people."  The  quotation  is 
from  Isaiah  lxv:l,  2,  and  in  it  the  call  of  the 
Gentiles  is  plainly  foretold  as  well  as  God's 
attitude  towards  His  own  people  Israel.  Now 
if  God  is  found  of  them  (the  Gentiles)  and 
manifested  unto  them  that  asked  not  after 
Him,  and  if  His  own  people  have  no  answer 
to  His  hands  stretched  forth  towards  them, 
would  one  not  be  justified  to  say  He  has  cast 
away  His  people?  The  eleventh  chapter 
therefore  asks  this  very  question:  "Hath 
God  cast  away  His  people  ?"    This  question  is 


6  The  Jewish  Question. 

the  great  superscription  of  this  chapter.  The 
fact  that  God  has  not  cast  away  His  people  is 
demonstrated  throughout  the  chapter.  Up 
to  the  27th  verse  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  seven 
answers  and  proofs  to  this  question  that  His 
people,  Israel,  are  not  finally  nor  completely 
cast  away.  After  this  fact  is  demonstrated 
comes  the  great  and  sublime  ending  (verses 
28-36)  corresponding  to  the  ending  of  the 
doctrinal  part  of  the  Epistle  in  the  eighth 
chapter.  We  shall  follow  in  our  exposition 
these  seven  answers  and  proofs. 
They  are  the  following: 

I.  The  conversion  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  (verse 
1). 

II.  There  is  a  remnant  according  to  the 
election  of  Grace,  hence  Israel  is  not  com- 
pletely cast  away  (verses  2-6). 

III.  The  blindness  of  Israel  is  partial  and 
judicial.  It  is  never  complete  nor  final.  The 
Scriptures  prove  this  fact  (verses  7-10) . 

IV.  Salvation  has  come  to  the  Gentiles  by 
their  fall  and  by  it  God  wishes  to  provoke 
them  to  jealousy  (verse  11). 

V.  There  is  a  promised  fullness  and  receiv- 
ing of  Israel  which  according  to  the  prophetic 
Word  will  mean  greater  riches  for  the  world, 
even  life  from  the  dead  (verses  11-15). 


The  Question  Stated.  7 

VI.  The  parable  of  the  olive  tree  (verses 
16-24). 

VII.  The  mystery  made  known  (verses  25- 
27). 

Look  at  the  question  first  and  its  answer. 
The  answer  is  best  translated  by  "Far  be 
the  thought/'  "God  has  not  cast  away  His 
people  whom  He  f  oreknew."  The  question  of 
the  casting  away  of  Israel*  is,  of  course,  a 
national  question  and  not  the  question  of  the 
individual.  God  had  foreknown  His  people 
and  called  them  to  a  distinctive  and  peculiar 
place  in  the  government  of  the  earth.  The 
nation  is  called  to  be  a  peculiar  treasure 
unto  the  Lord  above  all  people,  a  kingdom 
of  priests  and  a  holy  nation,  a  people  pre- 
pared to  show  forth  His  praises  (Exod.  xix). 
God's  gifts  and  calling  are  without  repent- 
ance. Throughout  the  Word  He  declares 
that  Israel  should  never  cease  to  be  a  nation 
before  Him  and  that  they  shall  be  at  last 
that  in  the  earth,  as  a  nation,  for  which  He 
called  them.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord,  which 
giveth  the  sun  for  a  light  by  day,  and  the 


*We  take  it  for  granted  that  all  our  readers  be- 
lieve that  Israel,  God's  ancient  people,  the  natural 
seed  of  Abraham,  is  meant.  How  one  can  speak  in 
this  chapter  of  a  spiritual  Israel  and  that  the  Church 
is  meant  is  beyond  our  conception. 


8  The  Jewish  Question. 

ordinances  of  the  moon  and  of  the  stars  for 
a  light  by  night,  which  divideth  the  sea 
when  the  waves  thereof  roar;  the  Lord  of 
hosts  is  His  name ;  if  those  ordinances  depart 
from  me,  saith  the  Lord,  then  the  seed  of 
Israel  also  shall  cease  from  being  a  nation 
before  me  forever.  Thus  saith  the  Lord:  If 
heaven  above  can  be  measured,  and  the  foun- 
dations of  the  earth  searched  out  beneath,  I 
will  also  cast  off  all  the  seed  of  Israel  for  all 
that  they  have  done,  saith  the  Lord"  (Jere- 
miah xxxi:35-37).  'Tor  I  am  with  thee, 
saith  the  Lord,  to  save  thee ;  though  I  make 
a  full  end  of  all  nations  whither  I  have  scat- 
tered thee,  yet  will  I  not  make  a  full  end  of 
thee,  but  I  will  correct  thee  in  measure  and 
will  not  leave  thee  altogether  unpunished" 
(Jerem.  xxxrll).  Numerous  other  passages 
could  be  quoted  in  which  God  assures  His 
people  that  He  will  never  abandon  them  for- 
ever. Their  past  history  proves  this.  Again 
and  again  God's  firstborn  Son,  Israel,  (Ex. 
iv:22)  had  been  disobedient,  a  stiff  necked 
people.  They  were  punished  and  led  into 
captivity,  their  city  plundered  and  razed, 
their  temple  burned  and  their  land  laid 
waste,  and  still  God's  infinite  mercy  hovered 
over  the  people  and  the  land  and  He  never 
said  that  He  hath  cast  them  away.    Then  a 


The  Question  Stated.  9 

part  of  the  nation,  the  Jews,  rejected  their 
Messiah  and  King,  who  had  come  to  His  own ; 
they  cried  their  awful  "Away  with  Him!" 
"Crucify  Him!"  "His  blood  be  upon  us  and 
upon  our  children!"  Yet  from  that  cross 
there  came  that  wonderful  prayer,  "Father, 
forgive  them  for  they  know  not  what  they 
do."  Again  the  offers  of  Grace  were  spurned 
by  the  nation,  and  those  of  the  nation  who 
had  believed  were  bitterly  persecuted  and 
some  murdered  by  their  unbelieving  brethren, 
and  yet  over  all  the  Spirit  of  God  hath  put 
the  assuring  statement,  "God  hath  not  cast 
away  His  people  whom  He  foreknew."  The 
temple  was  laid  in  ruins  once  more,  the 
nation  peeled  and  scattered  into  the  corners 
of  the  earth.  Their  saddest  dispersion  began 
and  with  it  trials  and  sufferings  such  as  their 
previous  history  had  not  known,  and  still 
over  this  great  dispersion  and  all  their  ter- 
rible experiences  the  Spirit  of  God  has 
placed  these  words:  "God  hath  not  cast 
away  His  people  whom  He  foreknew." 

What  a  different  answer  Christendom  has 
to  this  question.  If  the  Jew  asks  of  Christen- 
dom the  question  about  his  national  future, 
the  promises  of  blessing  and  glory,  he  re- 
ceives a  strange  answer.  Or  if  he  turns  to 
the  great  commentators  on  the  Bible  he  finds 


10  The  Jewish  Question. 

teachings  altogether  opposite  to  the  plain 
national  promises,  which  belong  still  to  his 
people.  He  is  told  that  God  hath  cast  them 
away  and  that  there  is  nothing  left  for  them. 
He  hears  that  the  church  is  Israel  and  all  the 
promises  given  to  the  original  Israel  find  now 
a  spiritual  fulfillment  in  the  church.  But  the 
intelligent,  orthodox  Hebrew  refuses  to  ac- 
cept this  spiritualizing  mode  of  interpreta- 
tion nor  does  he  find  anywhere  throughout 
Christendom  that  his  national  promises  and 
national  glories  are  now  fulfilled  in  a  spirit- 
ual way  in  the  church.  If  all  this  wrong  and 
confusing  interpretation  of  the  Word  of  God, 
which  does  not  distinguish  between  Israel 
and  the  church,  were  true,  and  if  it  were 
true  that  God  hath  cast  away  totally  and 
finally  Israel,  then  we  certainly  would  have 
to  give  up  the  belief  in  an  inspired  Bible. 
It  would  be  true  what  higher  criticism  is 
constantly  claiming,  that  the  Jewish  prophets 
were  patriots  and  dreamers  and  not  inspired 
by  God.  Furthermore,  God's  gifts  and  calling 
would  be  not  without  repentance ;  God  would 
have  gone  back  upon  His  own  word,  and  in 
consequence  of  this  we  sinners  of  the  Gentiles 
would  have  no  assurance  of  our  salvation. 
For  who  can  assure  us  that  God  really  means 
what  He  hath  said  about  us,  if  He  hath  cast 


The  Question  Stated.  11 

away  Israel  and  is  not  keeping  His  promises  ? 
Will  He  not  do  the  same  with  us  ?  We  learn 
therefore  that  the  question  of  Romans  xi  is 
a  very  important  one  indeed. 


"For  I  Am  Also  An  Israelite/' 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  first  answer  to  the  important  question 
"Hath  God  cast  away  His  people?"  is  the 
great  Apostle  to  the  Gentiles.  We  read  in  the 
first  verse,  "For  I  also  am  an  Israelite,  of  the 
seed  of  Abraham,  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin. 
God  hath  not  cast  away  His  people  whom  He 
f  oreknew."  The  Holy  Spirit  points  then  first 
of  all  to  the  Apostle  and  puts  him  before  us 
as  a  proof  that  God  has  not  completely  and 
finally  rejected  Israel.  It  is  a  significant  fact 
that  in  each  of  the  three  chapters  which  com- 
pose the  dispensational  part  of  Romans  the 
Apostle  Paul  stands  in  the  foreground.  "I 
say  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  my  con- 
science bearing  witness  with  me  in  the  Holy 
Spirit  that  I  have  great  grief  and  uninter- 
rupted pain  in  my  heart,  for  I  have  wished,  I 
myself,  to  be  a  curse  from  the  Christ,  for  my 
brethren,  my  kinsmen  according  to  flesh." 
Thus  the  ninth  chapter  begins  and  in  the 
tenth  we  read  of  his  prayer  for  Israel,  not 
his  prayer  alone  but  surely  the  prayer  of  the 


For  I  Am  Also  An  Israelite.  13 

Holy  Spirit.  "Brethren,  the  delight  of  my 
heart  and  my  supplication  which  I  address 
to  God  for  them  is  for  salvation"  (x:l).  In 
our  chapter,  besides  mentioning  himself  in 
the  beginning,  he  says :  "For  I  speak  to  you, 
Gentiles,  inasmuch  as  I  am  Apostle  of  the 
Gentiles.  I  glorify  my  ministry;  if  by  any 
means  I  shall  provoke  to  jealousy  them  which 
are  my  flesh  and  shall  save  some  from  among 
them"  (verses  13,  14) .  The  instrument  used 
to  make  known  the  mystery  of  God  and  the 
unsearchable  riches  among  the  Gentiles  de- 
clares his  great  love  for  his  kinsmen  and 
prays  for  their  salvation.  While  Gentiles, 
the  nations'  receive  blessings,  Israel  is  still 
"beloved  for  the  Father's  sake"  and  not 
forgotten. 

But  why  is  Paul  personally  mentioned  im- 
mediately after  the  question  concerning 
Israel's  position?  It  is  generally  said  that 
by  referring  to  himself  he  wishes  to  prove 
that  it  is  possible  for  an  Israelite  to  accept 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  to  be  saved;  he, 
an  Israelite  full  of  hatred  against  the  Christ, 
had  been  saved,  and  this  proves  that  God  has 
not  cast  away  His  people.  However,  the  ques- 
tion before  us  is  not  whether  an  individual 
Jew  can  be  saved  or  cannot  be  saved;  it  is  a 
national  question  with  which  we  have  to  deal. 


14  The  Jewish  Question. 

Besides  this,  the  possibility  of  the  salvation 
of  Jews  had  been  fully  demonstrated  on  the 
day  of  Pentecost.  The  three  thousand  who 
believed  on  that  day  were  all  Jews,  as  well 
as  the  thousands  who  believed  after  the 
memorable  day  of  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.  We  have  therefore  to  look  for  a 
deeper  meaning  of  PauFs  name  in  the  begin- 
ning of  this  chapter. 

The  key  to  this  deeper  meaning  is  the  fact 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  makes  the  conversion  of 
Saul  of  Tarsus  not  alone  very  prominent,  but 
also  speaks  of  that  event  as  a  pattern.  He 
has  given  us  three  lengthy  accounts  of  it  in 
the  Book  of  Acts  (chapters  ix,  xxii  and  xxvi). 
In  First  Timothy  we  read:  "But  for  this 
reason  mercy  was  shown  me,  that  in  me  the 
first,  Jesus  Christ  might  display  the  whole 
long  suffering,  for  a  delineation  of  those  that 
should  hereafter  believe  on  Him  to  eternal 
life"  (1  Tim.  i:16).  And  again  it  is  written: 
"And  last  of  all  He  was  seen  of  me  also  as  of 
one  born  out  of  due  time"  (literally  "an  abor- 
tion") (1  Cor.  xv  :2).  These  are  inspired 
statements  which  tell  us  we  have  to  seek  for 
a  deeper  significance  of  the  conversion  of  him 
who  calls  himself  "a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews" 
(Phil,  iii  :5) .  It  has  often  been  remarked  that 
Saul's  conversion  is  the  model  conversion  and 


For  I  Am  Also  An  Israelite.  15 

the  different  steps  are  reproduced  in  every 
genuine  conversion.  But  this  is  far  from  be- 
ing correct.  Saul  of  Tarsus'  conversion  was 
an  altogether  unique  one.  There  has,  up  to 
this  time,  never  been  a  conversion  like  this 
one.  Never  again  were  the  heavens  opened 
and  a  light  shone  brighter  than  the  sun; 
never  again  did  a  sinner,  such  a  blind 
persecutor,  behold  Jesus  in  glory  and  hear 
His  voice,  and  never  again  was  one  called  in 
such  a  way  "to  be  an  elect  vessel"  and  to 
bear  the  Name  of  the  Lord  "before  both  na- 
tions and  kings  and  the  sons  of  Israel."  His 
conversion  is  certainly  not  a  pattern  or  out- 
line of  every  other  conversion  and  yet  it  is 
a  delineation,  a  hypotyposis. 

All  the  great  men  of  the  Old  Testament, 
priests,  prophets  and  kings,  were  in  their 
lives  and  experiences  patterns,  types.  The 
great  Apostle  to  the  Gentiles,  making  known 
the  salvation  to  the  nations,  himself  a  Jew, 
is  no  less  a  type.  His  wonderful  conversion 
is  typical  of  the  future  conversion  of  the  na- 
tion to  whom  he  belonged  according  to  the 
flesh.  What  God  did  in  his  case  He  can  and 
will  do  for  Israel  in  a  future  day.  The  con- 
version of  Saul  of  Tarsus  is  the  type  and 
earnest  of  Israel's  conversion.  In  this  light 
the  full  meaning  of  the  quoted  passages  from 


16  The  Jewish  Question. 

the  first  Epistle  of  Timothy  and  Corinthians 
can  be  easily  understood.  In  Saul's  conver- 
sion Christ  showed  mercy  "the  first"  or  "as  a 
first  one."  There  are  others  to  whom  that 
mercy  is  to  be  shown  and  to  whom  mercy  will 
come  under  the  same  circumstances  and  by 
the  same  heavenly  manifestation  of  the  glori- 
fied Son  of  Man,  and  the  people  to  whom  this 
will  happen  is  Israel.  When  we  read  of  Paul 
that  he  saw  the  Lord  as  one  born  out  of  due 
season,  it  is  the  same  thought  which  under- 
lies this  statement.  The  untimely  birth,  be- 
fore the  time,  suggests  another  birth  time  as 
well  as  another  birth,  the  birth  of  the  nation, 
when  Israel,  the  remnant  of  His  people,  will 
be  born  again  by  looking  upon  Him  in  glory, 
whom  they  have  pierced. 

The  comparison  of  Saul's  conversion  with 
the  future  conversion  of  Israel  as  revealed  in 
the  prophetic  Word  is  extremely  striking. 
The  delineation  is  perfect. 

1.  Saul  of  Tarsus  in  unbelief  typifies  the 
state  of  Israel  as  a  nation  throughout  this 
present  age.  He  was  a  learned  Pharisee,  a 
fierce  persecutor,  breathing  out  threatenings 
and  slaughter  against  the  disciples  of  the 
Lord,  blind  and  unbelieving.  Such  is  Israel, 
another  unbelieving  Saul,  and,  like  him, 
zealous  for  God  without  knowledge. 


For  I  Am  Also  An  Israelite.  17 

2.  The  opened  heavens,  the  vision  and 
voice  of  the  glorified  Jesus,  by  which  Saul  of 
Tarsus  was  arrested  in  his  career,  are  typical 
of  the  coming  day  when  the  heavens  will  be 
opened  again  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will 
be  manifested  in  power  and  in  glory.  At  His 
second  visible  and  glorious  coming  the  rem- 
nant of  Israel  will  behold  Him  and  learn  by 
His  glorious  appearing  that  Jesus  is  their 
Messiah  and  King  (Zechariah  xii:  10-14,  Mat- 
thew xxiv:29,  30,  Revel.  i:7).  The  opened 
heavens,  the  great  light  flashing  forth,  the 
vision  and  voice  of  Jesus,  the  prostrate  Saul 
there  on  the  road  to  Damascus,  was  but  a 
little  sample  of  what  God  will  do  for  the  rem- 
nant of  His  earthly  people  and  how  they  shall 
at  last  know  Him  and  receive  Him. 

3.  Paul's  service  to  nations  and  kings 
foreshadows  Israel's  coming  ministry  to  the 
nations  of  the  earth.  All  nations  are  yet  to 
know  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  but  world  con- 
version is  only  possible  after  Israel  is  con- 
verted. Through  Israel  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth  will  at  last  be  blessed. 

These  three  great  facts  seen  in  the  conver- 
sion of  Saul,  typifying  Israel's  unbelief,  the 
manner  and  result  of  their  conversion,  we 
shall  follow  throughout  the  chapter  and  learn 


18  The  Jewish  Question. 

from  the  Scriptures  some  of  the  revealed  de- 
tails. We  understand  therefore  why  the  Holy 
Spirit  puts  the  Apostle  Paul  immediately 
after  the  question  of  the  chapter  is  asked. 
What  manifestation  of  the  grace  and  wisdom 
of  God !  The  instrument  chosen  to  reveal  the 
mysteries  hidden  in  former  ages  and  to  com- 
plete the  Word  of  God,  the  one  to  whom  is 
given  the  full  knowledge  of  the  Gospel  of 
Grace  to  be  preached  among  the  Gentiles, 
while  Israel  is  set  aside  for  a  time,  is  also 
made  a  type,  a  pattern  of  what  Israel  is  to  be 
and  to  receive  in  the  future,  when  God  will 
arise  and  have  mercy  upon  Zion. 


The    Remnant — Israel's    Apostasy 
Not  Complete* 

CHAPTER  III. 

The  second  answer  to  the  important  ques- 
tion and  argument  that  God  has  not  cast 
away  His  people  Israel  is  continued  in  verses 
2-6.  "God  hath  not  cast  away  His  people 
whom  He  foreknew.  Know  ye  not  what  the 
Scripture  says  in  the  history  of  Elias,  how  he 
pleads  with  God  against  Israel  ?  Lord,  they 
have  killed  Thy  prophets,  they  have  dug  down 
Thine  altars ;  and  I  have  been  left  alone  and 
they  seek  my  life."  But  what  says  the  divine 
answer  to  him  ?  "I  have  left  to  Myself  seven 
thousand  men  who  have  not  bowed  the  knee 
to  Baal.  Thus,  then,  in  the  present  time  also 
there  has  been  a  remnant  according  to  elec- 
tion of  grace.  But  if  by  grace,  it  is  no  more 
of  works;  since  otherwise  grace  is  no  more 
grace." 

It  is  historical  evidence  which  is  placed  in 
these  words  before  us.  The  Holy  Spirit 
reaches  back  into  the  history  of  the  nation 
and  calls  our  attention  to  an  important 
episode.    The  prophet  Elijah  lived  in  a  time 


20  The  Jewish  Question. 

when  almost  everything  among  the  profes- 
sing people  of  God  was  being  swept  away  into 
the  apostasy.  A  great  reformation  took 
place;  God  had  answered  the  call  of  Elijah 
on  Mount  Carmel  by  fire,  and  when  the  fire 
of  the  Lord  consumed  the  burnt  sacrifice,  and 
the  wood  and  the  stones,  and  the  dust,  and 
licked  up  the  water  that  was  in  the  trench, 
and  when  all  the  people  saw,  they  cried  out : 
"Jehovah  is  God !  Jehovah  is  God !"  The  pro- 
phets of  Baal  were  slain  there  and  then.  The 
Lord  also  graciously  opened  the  heavens  and 
there  was  an  abundance  of  rain.  All  this 
has  a  typical  and  dispensational  meaning, 
which  we  cannot  follow  in  detail  at  this  time. 
The  wonderful  manifestation  of  the  Lord  out 
of  the  opened  heavens,  however,  did  not  turn 
the  people  from  the  path  of  apostasy.  A 
little  while  later  Jezebel  sent  a  messenger 
unto  Elijah,  saying,  "So  let  the  gods  do  to  me, 
and  more  also,  if  I  make  not  thy  life  as  the 
life  of  one  of  them  by  to-morrow  about  this 
time"  (1  Kings  xix:2).  Elijah,  in  the  weak- 
ness of  the  flesh,  fails  and  flees.  We  find 
him  a  day's  journey  in  the  wilderness.  There 
we  see  him  under  a  juniper  tree,  and  he  re- 
quested for  himself  that  he  might  die,  and 
said:  It  is  enough;  now,  O  Lord,  take  away 
my  life ;  for  I  am  not  better  than  my  Fathers. 


The  Remnant.  21 

But  the  Lord  meets  His  servant.  "What 
doest  thou  here,  Elijah?"  "And  he  said,  I 
have  been  very  jealous  for  the  Lord  God  of 
hosts;  for  the  children  of  Israel  have  for- 
saken Thy  covenant,  thrown  down  Thine 
altars,  and  slain  Thy  prophets  with  the 
sword ;  and  I,  even  I  only,  am  left ;  and  they 
seek  my  life  to  take  it  away."  Twice  he  re- 
peats this  wonderful  tale,  born  of  a  discourag- 
ed and  unbelieving  heart.  But  now  comes  the 
answer  of  the  Lord  to  him.  He  tells  him  how 
mistaken  he  is  about  being  left  alone,  the 
only  Israelite  who  has  not  fallen  away.  "Yet 
I  have  left  me  seven  thousand  in  Israel,  all 
the  knees  which  have  not  bowed  unto  Baal 
and  every  mouth  which  hath  not  kissed  him." 
The  Lord  had  a  remnant,  a  faithful  remnant, 
among  His  people  even  at  the  time  of  their 
great  apostasy.  This  is  the  thought  and 
argument  here.  The  apostasy  of  Israel  is 
never  a  complete  apostasy.  The  Lord  has  al- 
ways a  remnant  faithful  to  Him  and  the 
covenants  among  them.  In  this  respect  the 
difference  of  the  apostasy  of  Israel  and  the 
predicted  apostasy  of  Gentile  Christendom  is 
very  marked.  One  of  Israel's  race  has  ex- 
pressed it  very  pointedly  in  the  following 
words:* 


*Adolph  Saphir. 


22  The  Jewish  Question, 

"The  apostasy  of  Israel  is  not  as  the 
apostasy  of  Christendom.  The  apostasy  of 
Christendom  is  incurable,  but  the  apostasy 
of  Israel  is  curable.  Although  Israel  have  re- 
jected Jesus,  they  do  not  wish  to  reject  God; 
they  still  believe  in  His  Word;  they  still  in- 
voke His  holy  name.  They  still  remember 
the  Sabbath  Day  to  keep  it  holy.  They  still, 
as  the  Apostle  Paul  says,  have  a  zeal  for  God, 
although  it  is  not  according  to  knowledge. 
The  children  of  Israel  are  like  the  brethren  of 
Joseph.  After  they  had  sold  Joseph  into 
Egypt,  they  returned  to  their  father  Jacob, 
and  then  for  a  number  of  years  their  conduct 
was  less  blamable  than  it  had  been  before. 
They  seemed  to  have  been  anxious  to  please 
their  father  Jacob,  and  to  walk  before  him 
in  the  right  path.  Still,  there  was  upon  their 
hearts  the  blood-guiltiness,  in  that  they  had 
delivered  their  brother  Joseph  into  the  hands 
of  their  enemies.  And  so  it  is  with  Israel 
now.  There  is  still  a  godly  remnant  among 
them.  There  is  still  the  fear  of  God  and  the 
acknowledgment  of  God  before  their  eyes. 
Whereas,  what  is  the  history  of  apostate 
Christendom,  as  it  is  presented  to  us  in  the 
Scriptures,  and  the  beginnings  of  which  we 
can  see  already?  First,  people  do  not  be- 
lieve in  Jesus  as  an  atonement.    They  begin 


The  Remnant.  23 

with  that.  They  do  not  like  the  blood  of 
Jesus.  They  like  the  character  of  Jesus  very 
well.  Then  they  give  up  Jesus  too.  Then 
they  give  up  the  Father  too,  and  do  not  be- 
lieve in  creation.  And  then  they  become 
agnostics,  and  say  they  know  nothing  about 
it — whether  there  is  a  God  or  not — the  worst 
thing  that  this  world  has  ever  seen,  and  the 
most  insulting  to  God.  And  then  they  give 
up  morality,  as  necessarily  they  must  give  it 
up;  and  then  they  fall  into  the  most  abject 
pessimism,  and  look  upon  man  as  a  flower  of 
the  field,  which  is  to-day  and  to-morrow  is 
cast  into  the  oven.  This  is  the  downward 
career  of  the  Gentile  apostasy.  But  in  the 
Jewish  apostasy  there  is  still  kept  the  con- 
necting link,  the  golden  thread — a  spark  dy- 
ing, yet  not  dead,  of  a  belief  in  God,  however 
unenlightened,  and  in  a  f  uture." 

The  Lord  always  has  a  remnant  among  His 
people  and  that  remnant  is  the  sign  and  evi- 
dence that  He  hath  not  cast  away  His  people. 

We  shall,  however,  show  what  we  have  to 
understand  by  "remnant ;"  and  the  remnant 
that  has  been,  and  will  yet  be  called,  we  hope 
to  investigate  more  fully. 

The  question  concerning  the  remnant  is  a 
most  interesting  one.  That  the  Lord  has 
such  a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of 


24  The  Jewish  Question. 

grace  among  His  people,  is,  as  we  have  stated 
before,  an  evidence  that  He  hath  not  cast 
them  away.  There  is  a  double  remnant  which 
is  to  be  considered.  The  remnant  which  has 
been  in  the  beginning  of  this  dispensation  and 
the  remnant  whicn  wih  yet  be  called  for  a 
definite  work  ana  testimony  at  the  time  when 
Israel's  Hope  will  appear  and  the  glorious 
promises  made  to  the  nation  find  their  ful- 
fillment. Between  these  two  remnants,  a 
remnant  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  age 
and  a  remnant  at  the  end,  stands  another 
fact — the  fact  that  the  Body  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  composed  of  believing  Jews 
and  Gentiles  and  that  through  the  preaching 
of  the  Gospel  of  Grace,  not  alone  sinners  of 
the  Gentiles  are  added  to  that  body,  but  also 
Jews  who  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
As  soon,  then,  as  a  Jew  believes  he  ceases  to 
be  a  Jew.  His  Hope  is  no  longer  national 
and  earthly,  but  heavenly;  he  belongs  no 
longer  to  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  but  to  the 
heavenly;  he  has,  like  the  believing  Gentile, 
nothing  to  do  with  the  law,  its  ordinances 
and  ceremonies.  It  is  impossible  to  speak  of 
a  remnant  of  Israel  at  this  time,  which  is 
saved  by  Grace  and  which  holds  a  specific 
national  Jewish  position  in  the  earth.  When 
the  Holy  Spirit  gave  the  full  revelation  con- 


The  Remnant.  25 

cerning  the  church,  the  body  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  we  do  not  read  anything  what- 
ever about  the  believing  Jew,  who,  as  it  is  be- 
ing claimed,  "should  not  sever  his  connection 
with  the  nation,"  and  who  should  still  con- 
tinue in  keeping  Jewish  laws  and  feast  days. 
All  national  distinctions  cease  in  that  body, 
and  to  preach  that  the  believing  Jew  should 
continue  to  keep  the  seventh  day,  practice 
circumcision,  keep  the  Passover  and  other 
feast  days,  is  not  alone  nowhere  taught  in  the 
Epistles,  but  such  teaching  is  unscriptural 
and  brings  in  a  sad  and  confusing  mixture 
which  destroys  the  simplicity  of  the  Gospel. 
Now  in  the  beginning  of  this  present  age 
there  certainly  was  such  a  Jewish-Christian 
remnant  in  existence.  To  this  the  words  of 
the  apostle  refer  us.  "Thus,  then,  in  the 
present  time  there  has  been  a  remnant  accord- 
ing to  the  election  of  Grace."  That  remnant 
of  Jewish  believers  is  seen  in  the  opening 
chapters  of  the  Book  of  Acts.  The  three 
thousand  saved  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  were 
all  Jews.  Soon  there  was  a  very  strong  as- 
sembly composed  of  Jewish  believers  in  Jeru- 
salem, who  were  faithful  witnesses  for  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  who  bore  a  faithful 
testimony  in  Jerusalem,  which  was  fast 
ripening  for  the  great  judgment.    Not  alone 


26  The  Jewish  Question. 

in  Jerusalem,  but  also  in  other  parts  of  the 
land,  Jews  became  believers  and  formed 
Jewish-Christian  synagogues.  When  Paul 
went  to  Jerusalem  the  elders  of  the  Jewish- 
Christian  assembly  said  to  him:  "Thou 
seest,  brother,  how  many  myriads  there  are 
of  the  Jews  who  have  believed,  and  are  all 
zealous  for  the  law.  And  they  have  been  in- 
formed concerning  thee  that  thou  teachest  all 
the  Jews  among  the  nations  apostasy  from 
Moses,  saying  that  they  should  not  circumcise 
their  children,  nor  walk  in  the  customs" 
(Acts  xxi:21).  Paul's  Gospel  certainly 
teaches  this,  and  it  was  the  hour  of  his 
failure  when  he  went  back  to  the  ceremonial 
law.  But  the  passage  tells  us  that  there  were 
myriads  of  believers,  all  Jews  who  continued 
in  the  observance  of  the  law.  They  went  to 
the  temple  to  pray,  kept  the  different  feasts — 
in  one  word,  they  continued  in  all  the  Jewish 
customs.  God's  mercy  was  still  lingering 
over  Jerusalem.  These  Hebrew-Christian  be- 
lievers had  hopes  that  the  nation  would  yet 
receive  their  testimony  and  accept  Him  whom 
they  had  rejected.  They  were  persecuted, 
beaten,  some  killed,  their  goods  spoiled,  cast 
out  of  the  synagogue  and  the  temple,  and  still 
they  continued  in  their  faithful  testimony.  It 
was  a  transition  period,  passing  out  of  the 


The  Remnant  27 

old  into  the  new.    For  a  time  such  an  attitude 
of  Jewish  believers  was  undoubtedly  justi- 
fied.   But  then  the  Holy  Spirit  addressed  an 
Epistle  to  these  Hebrews,  and  that  Epistle 
gives  us  not  only  a  true  insight  into  their 
condition  and  danger,  their  steadfastness  and 
faithfulness,  but  it  also  reveals  how  the  Holy 
Spirit  shows  them  the  better  things  of  the 
new  covenant.    No  one  can  read  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews  without  being  convinced  that 
in  this  wonderful  commentary  to  the  levitical 
institutions,  showing  the  fulfillment  in  Him 
who  is  a  better  priest,  a  priest  after  the  order 
of  Melchizedek,  the  Spirit  of  God  aims  at 
this  very  fact,  that  all  ceremonies,  all  levitical 
observances,  are  to  be  discontinued.    They 
were  all  the  shadows  of  better  things.    In  the 
end  of  the  Epistle  He  speaks  that  Word  which 
showed  these  Hebrew  believers  their  true 
position,  "Let  us  go  forth  to  Him  without  the 
camp,  bearing  His  reproach"  (Hebr.  xiii:13). 
At    last    Jerusalem    fell.     The  temple  was 
destroyed.     The  people  were  scattered.     It 
was  therefore  made  impossible  for  Jewish 
believers  to  continue  in  the  position  which 
they  held  for  years.    Jewish-Christian    as- 
semblies in  their  peculiar  national  character 
ceased  in  their  existence.    While  in  the  be- 
ginning of  this  dispensation  it  was  "to  the 


28  The  Jewish  Question. 

Jew  first,"  that  order  was  stopped  with  the 
full  rejection  of  Jerusalem  and  the  dispersion 
of  the  Jews. 

However,  the  existence  of  a  remnant  of  be- 
lievers among  the  nation,  the  myriads  who 
had  accepted  the  Lord  as  their  Saviour  and 
the  Hope  of  Israel,  was  a  definite  proof  that 
God  had  not  completely  cast  away  His  people. 
It  was  proof  that  He  was  ready  to  deal  with 
them  according  to  His  infinite  mercy. 

A  Jewish  remnant  in  the  sense  of  the 
apostolic  days  is  no  longer  possible.  To  teach 
that  such  a  remnant  is  to  be  gathered  now 
and  to  attempt  the  formation  of  Jewish  na- 
tional assemblies  of  believing  Hebrews,  who 
continue  as  Jews  though  trusting  in  Christ, 
practicing  circumcision,  fasts  and  other 
Jewish  customs,  is  confusing  and  mars  com- 
pletely the  doctrines  of  Grace  and  that  reve- 
lation of  all  revelations,  the  church,  which  is 
His  Body.  We  repeat  it  once  more,  the  be- 
lieving Jew  at  this  time  is  not  "gentilized," 
as  has  been  pressed  so  much  from  certain 
sides,  but  he  becomes  a  member  of  the  body 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  has  with  every 
other  believer  a  heavenly  hope,  a  heavenly 
destiny.  When  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  comes 
to  take  His  own  unto  Himself,  every  believ- 


The  Remnant.  29 

ing  Jew,  saved  by  Grace,  will  be  caught  up 
to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air. 

A  fact  in  this  connection  must  not  be  over- 
looked. The  Lord  has  put  His  hand  through- 
out this  Christian  dispensation,  in  every 
century,  upon  hundreds  and  thousands  of 
Jews,  and  through  His  Grace  they  have  been 
saved,  not  a  few  of  them  in  a  most  remark- 
able way.  The  past  century,  the  nineteenth, 
has  had  more  witnesses  in  this  respect  than 
any  other.  Some  of  the  best  teachers,  ex- 
positors of  the  Scriptures,  were  converted 
Hebrews.  We  mention  Adolf  Saphir,  Dr. 
Edersheim,  Neander,  Cassel,  Gottheil  and 
Rabinowitz.  Some  of  them  were  led  out  of 
the  deepest  darkness  with  thousands  of  others 
whose  names  are  not  so  universally  known. 
This,  too,  is  an  evidence  that  blindness  has 
happened  only  in  part  to  Israel. 

But  there  is  yet  to  be  a  Jewish  remnant, 
a  strong  and  mighty  witness  that  God  hath 
not  cast  away  His  people.  This  future  rem- 
nant of  believing  Hebrews  will  be  called  as 
soon  as  the  church  is  complete  and  removed 
from  the  earth.*    This  remnant  to  be  called 


*If  it  were  true  and  scriptural  that  the  Church  is 
to  pass  through  the  great  tribulation,  it  would  also 
be  perfectly  in  order  to  have  a  Jewish  national  as- 
sembly of  Hebrew  believers  now.    Indeed  the  estab- 


30  The  Jewish  Question. 

through  Grace  corresponds  to  the  remnant 
of  the  beginning  of  this  age. 

Their  Gospel  will  be  the  Gospel  of  the 
Kingdom,  "the  Kingdom  of  the  Heavens  is 
at  hand."  It  will  emanate  from  Jerusalem 
and  will  be  declared  among  all  nations  (Matt. 
xxiv:14).  Of  this  remnant,  suffering  and 
persecuted,  we  read  in  the  Olivet  discourse  of 
our  Lord.  The  Old  Testament  Scriptures  are 
full  with  prophecies  concerning  the  faithful 
remnant  of  the  endtime.  The  Book  of  Psalms 
can  be  best  understood  in  the  light  of  a  be- 
lieving remnant  of  Jews,  suffering  in  the 
midst  of  the  ungodly  nation  and  delivered  by 
the  coming  of  the  King  out  of  the  opened 
heavens.  The  144,000  sealed  in  Revelation 
vii  are  all  Israelites  and  the  company  out  of 
all  nations  and  tongues,  who  come  out  of  the 
great  tribulation,  and  are  seen  as  overcomers 
in  the  second  half  of  this  chapter,  are  the 
fruits  of  the  witness  and  labors  of  this  Jewish 
remnant.  That  they  do  not  belong  to  the 
church  is  evident  from  the  scope  of  the  Book 
of  Revelation.    The  church  is  seen  in  glory 

lishment  of  such  would  then  be  very  desirable  and 
would  be  a  most  definite  mark  of  the  endtime.  On 
the  other  hand,  it  would  produce  two  testimonies,  a 
fact  that  cannot  be  harmonized  with  any  of  God's 
dispensational  teachings. 


The  Remnant.  31 

in  the  crowned  twenty-four  elders  in  chap- 
ters iv  and  v.  Only  after  the  church  is  in  the 
presence  of  the  Lord  can  the  remnant  be 
called  and  sealed  and  begin  its  peculiar  testi- 
mony. Now  this  fact  that  God  has  had  a 
Remnant  and  will  yet  call  such  a  remnant  proves 
that  He  hath  not  cast  away  His  people. 


Israel's  Apostasy  and  Blindness 
Not  Permanent. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

The  next  answer  to  the  question  of  Romans 
xi  and  argument  of  Israel's  position  in  God's 
purposes  is  taken  from  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures. 

"What  is  it  then?  What  Israel  seeks  for, 
that  he  has  not  obtained ;  but  the  election  has 
obtained,  and  the  rest  have  been  blinded,  ac- 
cording as  it  is  written,  God  has  given  to 
them  a  spirit  of  slumber,  eyes  not  to  see,  and 
ears  not  to  hear,  unto  this  day.  And  David 
says,  Let  their  table  be  for  a  snare,  and  for 
a  gin,  and  for  a  falltrap,  and  for  a  recom- 
pense to  them ;  let  their  eyes  be  darkened  not 
to  see,  and  bow  down  their  back  alway" 
(verses  7-10). 

It  is  here  where  commentaries  have  their 
say  about  the  blindness  of  Israel  and  how  God 
has  completely  given  up  the  Jews.  What  a 
strange  way  some  persons  have  in  interpret- 
ing the  Word  of  God.  Some  labor  to  prove 
that  in  the  beginning  of  this  chapter  Paul 
means  the  "spiritual  Israel" — the  church — 


Israels  Apostasy.  33 

and  not  the  literal  Israel,  but  when  the  same 
expositors  reach  the  verses  which  are  before 
us  now,  they  are  quite  correct  and  orthodox 
in  saying  it  is  the  literal  Israel.  Such  method 
of  Bible  exposition  has  done  great  harm  in 
confusing  Christian  believers,  besides  being 
dishonoring  to  God's  Word.  When  the  apostle 
speaks  here  of  the  election  he  means  the  be- 
lieving part  of  the  nation  at  all  times,  the 
remnant  past,  the  remnant  future,  and  all 
those  who  believe  now  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  When  he  speaks  of  the  rest  being 
blinded  he  means  the  remainder  of  the  nation, 
which  is  unbelieving.  As  they  refused  Him 
who  spake,  judicial  blindness  was  put  upon 
them.  Now  this  judicial  blindness  must  not 
be  looked  upon  in  a  way  as  some  have  done, 
and  then  by  inference  to  build  upon  it  such 
abominable  doctrines  as  universal  salvation. 
They  reason  God  blinded  them  and  they  are 
not  responsible  for  what  they  cannot  see. 
God  will  have  mercy  upon  them  all,  and  all 
Jews  will  be  saved  at  last,  all  who  died  with 
this  judicial  blindness  upon  them.  We  shall 
take  up  this  phase  of  error  later  in  our 
exposition. 

The  judicial  blindness  is  certainly  not  to 
be  understood  that  every  Jew  is  born  with 
this    blindness    upon    him.      Far    be    this 


34  The  Jewish  Question. 

thought!  Every  generation  of  Jews,  in  re- 
fusing the  light  which  shines  for  all,  in  shar- 
ing the  sin  of  their  fathers  in  rejecting  their 
Messiah,  in  continuing  in  their  evil  ways  of 
unbelief,  is  put  under  the  sentence  of  this 
judicial  blindness.  The  Jew  may  see  if  he  so 
chooses  and  he  may  refuse  the  light.  God 
declared  in  His  Word  beforehand  what  would 
happen  to  them  in  this  respect. 

Before  us  are  three  quotations  from  the 
Old  Testament  Scriptures.  The  Hebrews  di- 
vide the  Old  Testament  into  three  parts: 
The  Law,  the  Prophets,  and  the  Writings. 
The  Holy  Spirit  here  quotes  from  each  of 
these  divisions.  The  passages  quoted  prove 
that  such  a  judicial  blindness  was  to  come 
upon  them  according  to  God's  sovereign  deal- 
ings. Now  the  most  significant  fact  is  that 
in  none  of  these  passages  to  which  the  Holy 
Spirit  calls  our  attention  the  teaching  is  ad- 
vanced that  this  blindness  is  to  be  permanent 
and  final.  There  is  no  prophecy  in  the  Script- 
ures which  declares  that  the  present  blinded 
condition  of  Israel  is  their  permanent  and 
final  condition. 

The  three  quotations  from  the  Old  Testa- 
ment Scriptures  teach  us  much  on  these  lines. 
The  first  is  taken  from  the  Book  of  Deuter- 
onomy, "Yet  the  Lord  hath  given  you  an 


Israel's  Apostasy.  35 

heart  to  perceive,  and  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to 
hear,  unto  this  day"  (Deut.  xxix:4).  It  is 
well  known  how  the  whole  future  of 
Israel  is  predicted  through  Moses  in  the 
closing  chapters  of  the  last  Book  which  he 
wrote  by  divine  inspiration.  Their  whole 
history  is  outlined.  They  were  to  be  a  people 
blinded,  forsaking  God,  to  be  scattered  in 
consequence  of  it  into  the  corners  of  the 
earth.  Their  whole  career  of  decline  and 
apostasy  is  prophetically  revealed.  But  along- 
side of  all  these  prophecies  of  what  should 
befall  them,  which  were  so  literally  fulfilled, 
we  find  prophecies  relating  to  their  restora- 
tion and  future  blessing.  There  is  not  a  word 
anywhere  in  the  writings  of  Moses  which  de- 
clares that  God  would  ever  leave  them  under 
the  curse  and  in  the  condition  into  which  He 
in  His  governmental  dealings  had  to  put 
them. 

If  we  turn  to  the  prophets,  we  find  that 
Isaiah  xxix:10  is  quoted:  "For  the  Lord 
hath  poured  out  upon  you  the  spirit  of  deep 
sleep,  and  hath  closed  your  eyes ;  the  prophets 
and  your  rulers,  the  seers,  hath  He  covered. 
And  the  vision  of  all  is  become  unto  you  as 
the  words  of  a  book  that  is  sealed  which  men 
deliver  to  one  that  is  learned,  saying,  Read 
this,  I  pray  thee,  and  he  saith,  I  cannot,  for 


36  The  Jewish  Question. 

it  is  sealed."  How  all  this  has  been  fulfilled 
in  the  judicial  blindness,  which  has  come 
upon  Israel !  Eyes  and  they  see  not  and  ears 
and  they  hear  not;  they  read  their  own 
Scriptures  and  worship  the  law  as  the  very 
breath  of  God  and  still  they  see  not  Him  who 
is  the  End  of  the  Law ;  nor  do  they  hear  His 
voice  as  He  speaks  in  the  Book.  Their  own 
Scriptures  are  indeed  a  sealed  Book  to  them. 
But  is  this  condition  to  prevail  forever?  Is 
there  no  hope  for  a  change  ?  Does  Isaiah  or 
any  other  prophet  utter  nothing  but  curse 
and  blindness  upon  a  disobedient  people,  for 
whom  there  is  no  hope?  It  is  far  different. 
Not  alone  does  Isaiah  and  the  rest  of  God's 
prophets  reveal  that  the  apostasy  and  judg- 
ment of  Israel  is  only  temporary,  but  their 
writings  are  full  of  glorious  visions  of  that 
which  is  yet  in  store  for  this  nation.  It  is 
true  a  Christian  exposition  of  the  Scriptures, 
lacking  the  illuminating  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  has  made  sad  havoc  with  these  visions. 
These  visions  of  a  glorious  future  are  almost 
universally  applied  to  the  church,  and  the 
blindness  and  curses  left  to  the  Jews.  Such 
unreasonable  method  of  Bible  interpretation 
still  upheld  results  in  the  greatest  con- 
fusion. 

We  do  not  need  to  go  outside  of  the  chap- 


Israel's  Apostasy.  37 

ter  from  which  we  have  quoted  to  show  that 
the  judicial  blindness  is  not  the  final  state 
of  Israel.  In  the  closing  verses  of  Isaiah 
xxix  we  have  Jehovah's  comfortable  word  to 
Israel : 

"And  in  that  day  the  deaf  shall  hear  the 
words  of  the  Book,  and  the  eyes  of  the  blind 
shall  see  out  of  obscurity  and  out  of  darkness. 
The  meek  also  shall  increase  their  joy  in  the 
Lord,  and  the  poor  among  men  shall  rejoice 
in  the  Holy  One  of  Israel.  For  the  terrible 
one  is  brought  to  naught,  and  the  scorner  is 
consumed,  and  all  that  watch  for  iniquity  are 
cut  of"  (verses  13-20).  This  is  a  prophecy 
relating  to  the  future.  "That  day"  is  the  day 
of  our  Lord's  manifestation  in  power  and 
glory,  and  to  the  blind  and  deaf  people  bles- 
sings are  promised.  Throughout  Isaiah's 
vision  we  find  hundreds  of  promises  which 
belong  to  Israel  and  which  were  never  ful- 
filled in  the  past. 

The  third  division  of  the  Hebrew  Bible,  the 
Writings,  is  represented  in  the  passage  be- 
fore us  by  a  quotation  from  the  Book  of 
Psalms :  "Let  their  table  become  a  snare  be- 
fore them,  and  their  very  welfare  a  trap ;  let 
their  eyes  be  darkened,  that  they  see  not, 
and  make  their  loins  continually  to  shake. 
Pour  out  thine  indignation  upon  them,  and 


38  The  Jeivish  Question, 

let  the  fierceness  of  thine  anger  take  hold  of 
them.  Let  their  habitation  be  desolate;  let 
there  be  no  dweller  in  their  tents"  (Psalm 
lxix:22-24). 

David  uttered  these  words  through  the 
Holy  Spirit.  The  connection  in  which  they 
stand  is  very  significant.  It  is  not  David  who 
relates  his  sufferings  here,  but  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  testifies  beforehand  concerning  the 
sufferings  which  are  in  Christ  and  the  rejec- 
tion of  the  Messiah  by  His  own  people.  "Re- 
proach has  broken  my  heart  and  I  am  full  of 
heaviness ;  and  I  looked  for  some  to  take  pity, 
but  there  was  none ;  and  for  comforters,  but 
I  found  none.  They  gave  me  also  gall  for  my 
meat ;  and  in  my  thirst  they  gave  me  vinegar 
to  drink"  (Psalm  lxix:20).  All  this  was  ful- 
filled in  Christ.  This  very  prophecy  He  re- 
membered on  the  cross  when  He  said,  that 
the  Scriptures  might  be  fulfilled,  "I  thirst." 

The  words  of  imprecation,  which  follow  and 
which  are  quoted  in  our  chapter,  show  what 
was  to  come  upon  the  people  who  treated  Him 
thus.  Even  so  it  has  been.  But  shall  they 
ever  remain  in  that  condition  of  rejection? 
Shall  that  awful  cry  "His  blood  be  upon  us 
and  upon  our  children"  continually  be  ex- 
ecuted upon  all  future  generations,  or  is  a  day 
coming  when  that  precious  blood  in  its  aton- 


Israel's  Apostasy.  39 

ing  power  will  cover  all  Israel  and  blessing 
will  take  the  place  of  the  curse?  We  only 
need  to  turn  to  the  close  of  this  Psalm  to  find 
an  answer  once  more.  "For  God  will  save 
Zion,  and  will  build  the  cities  of  Judah ;  that 
they  may  dwell  there  and  have  it  in  posses- 
sion. The  seed  also  of  His  servants  shall  in- 
herit it;  and  they  that  love  His  name  shall 
dwell  therein"  (Psalm  lxix:35,  36).  Here  the 
future  of  Zion  and  the  nation  is  given.  The 
whole  Book  of  Psalms  is  full  of  the  praises 
of  His  redeemed  people  Israel,  brought  back 
to  God  and  into  their  own  land,  with  Jehovah 
as  King  dwelling  in  their  midst.  These 
praises  are,  of  course,  all  future;  but  these 
Psalms  tell  us  that  God  has  not  finally  cast 
away  His  people.  We  learn  therefore  that 
the  threatened  and  predicted  blindness  of 
Israel,  predicted  in  the  Law,  the  Prophets, 
and  the  Writings,  the  entire  Old  Testament, 
has  come  to  pass.  But  this  blindness  is  not 
complete  nor  final.  The  Lord  who  brought 
blindness  upon  Israel  wrill  yet  bless  His  people 
Israel  with  peace  and  do  all  He  spake  through 
the  mouth  of  His  holy  prophets. 

In  connection  with  this  we  desire  to  point 
out  what  a  witness  the  Jewish  race  is  to  the 
truth  of  God's  holy  Word.  It  is  a  super- 
natural fact,  which  no  infidel  can  explain, 


40  The  Jewish  Question. 

that  thousands  of  years  ago,  the  entire 
history  of  this  remarkable  race  was  divinely 
foretold.  The  curse  which  rests  upon  them, 
the  condition  of  their  land  and  the  city  of 
Jerusalem,  and  much  else,  bear  witness  that 
the  Bible  is  the  Word  of  God,  that  the  re- 
jected Jesus  is  their  promised  Messiah. 

And  the  Word  of  God,  which  has  been  so 
literally  fulfilled  touching  the  curse,  will  some 
blessed  day  be  as  literally  fulfilled  in  blessing. 


"  To  Provoke  Them  to  Jealousy/' 

CHAPTER  V. 

The  next  answer  to  our  question  is  found 
in  the  eleventh  verse.  "I  say,  then,  have 
they  stumbled  in  order  that  they  might  fall  ? 
Far  be  the  thought :  but  by  their  fall  there  is 
salvation  to  the  nations  to  provoke  them  to 
jealousy."  We  have  learned  before  that  the 
setting  aside  of  Israel  is  not  final,  their  blind- 
ness and  hardness  of  heart  is  not  their 
permanent  condition.  They  did  stumble  in- 
deed, but  their  stumbling  was  not  for  the 
sake  of  their  fall.  The  second  time  we  find 
in  the  chapter  the  emphatic  "Far  be  the 
thought/'  Put  this  thought  as  far  away  as 
possible  from  you,  that  God  should  permit 
His  own  people,  His  chosen  people,  the  people 
whom  He  foreknew,  to  stumble  in  order  that 
they  might  fall.  A  wonderful  fact  is  now 
brought  to  our  notice.  God's  deep  councils 
of  mercy  and  wisdom  are  being  put  before  us. 
"By  their  fall  there  is  salvation  to  the  na- 
tions." 

This  great  fact  is  not  altogether  unknown 


42  The  Jewish  Question. 

in  the  predictions  of  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures,  though  its  fulness  is  a  new  revela- 
tion, for  we  read  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephes- 
ians,  that  the  fullness  of  the  grace  of  God 
towards  the  nations  (Gentiles)  is  one  of  the 
mysteries  made  known  through  Paul.  "For 
this  reason,  I  Paul,  prisoner  of  Christ 
Jesus  for  you  Gentiles,  if  ye  have  heard  of 
the  dispensation  of  the  grace  of  God  which 
is  given  me  to  youward ;  how  that  by  revela- 
tion He  made  known  unto  me  the  mystery  (as 
I  wrote  afore  in  a  few  words,  whereby  when 
you  read,  ye  may  understand  my  knowledge 
in  the  mystery  of  Christ),  which  in  other 
ages  was  not  made  known  unto  the  sons  of 
men,  as  it  is  now  revealed  unto  His  holy 
apostles  and  prophets  by  the  Spirit ;  that  the 
Gentiles  should  be  fellowheirs  and  of  the 
same  body,  and  partakers  of  His  promise  in 
Christ  by  the  Gospel"  (Eph.  iii:l-6). 

We  find,  however,  while  the  fact  that  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ  were  to  be 
preached  among  the  Gentiles  for  the  calling 
out  of  the  church,  which  is  His  body,  is  a 
new  revelation,  that  the  very  words  in  the 
verse  before  us  point  us  back  to  the  Old 
Testament. 

In  Deuteronomy  xxxii,  the  farewell  song 
of  Moses,  a  God-breathed  song  and  wonder- 


"To  Provoke   Them   To  Jealousy"       43 

ful  prophecy,  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  us  a 
history  of  Israel.  Their  origin  and  calling, 
the  mercy  and  goodness  of  God  towards  them, 
their  disobedience  and  apostasy,  rejection  and 
punishment,  restoration  and  glorious  future, 
all  is  clearly  predicted  and  outlined.  Let  the 
infidel  and  higher  critic  try  to  answer  this 
argument  of  supernaturalism  contained  in 
the  song  of  Moses.  There  is  no  answer;  it 
is  a  miracle. 

Beginning  at  the  fifteenth  verse  of  that 
chapter  we  read :  "But  Jeshurun  waxed  fat 
and  kicked:  thou  art  waxen  fat,  thou  art 
grown  thick — thou  art  covered !  Then  he  for- 
sook God,  which  made  him  and  lightly 
esteemed  the  rock  of  His  salvation.  They 
provoked  Him  to  jealousy  with  strange  gods, 
with  abominations  provoked  they  Him  to 
anger.  They  sacrificed  unto  demons,  not  to 
God;  to  gods  whom  they  knew  not,  to  new 
gods  that  came  newly  up,  whom  your  fathers 
feared  not.  Of  the  Rock  that  begat  thee, 
thou  art  unmindful,  and  hast  forsaken  God 
that  formed  thee.  And  when  the  Lord  saw  it 
He  abhorred  them,  because  of  the  provoking 
of  his  sons,  and  of  his  daughters.  And  He 
said,  I  will  hide  My  face  from  them,  I  will 
see  what  their  end  shall  be;  for  they  are  a 
very  froward  generation,  children  in  whom  is 


44  The  Jewish  Question. 

no  faith.  They  have  moved  Me  to  jealousy 
with  that  which  is  not  God;  they  have  pro- 
voked Me  to  anger  with  their  vanities,  and 
I  will  move  them  to  jealousy  with  those  that 
are  not  a  people ;  I  will  provoke  them  to  anger 
with  a  foolish  nation"  (Deut.  xxxii). 

Here  we  read  of  Israel's  apostasy.  The 
Rock,  whom  they  lightly  esteemed,  the  Rock 
of  His  salvation,  is  none  other  than  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  In  consequence  of  their  un- 
faithfulness and  provoking  God,  the  Lord 
would  move  them  to  jealousy  with  those 
which  are  not  a  people.  We  notice  that  this 
announcement  comes  in  after  their  apostasy 
was  fully  established.  And  so  it  was  in  its 
fulfillment.  When  the  Lord  Jesus  was  on 
earth  and  preached  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
He  did  so  to  His  own  and  there  was  no 
proclamation  to  the  Gentiles.  His  disciples 
were  commanded  by  Him,  not  to  go  in  the 
way  of  the  Gentiles,  but  to  go  only  to  the  lost 
sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel.  After  His  resur- 
rection, ascension  and  the  pouring  out  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  His  loving  hand  was  still  out- 
stretched towards  His  blinded,  erring  people. 
His  mercy  lingered  over  Jerusalem.  The  first 
part  of  the  book  of  Acts  is  evidence  of  it. 
Only  after  the  apostasy  was  fully  established 
the  instrument  was  called,  the  Apostle  of  the 


"To  Provoke  Them  To  Jealousy!'       45 

Gentiles,  Paul,  to  make  known  the  fact,  "sal- 
vation is  come  by  their  fall  to  the  Gentiles  to 
provoke  them  to  jealousy." 

In  the  ninth  and  tenth  chapters  of  this 
epistle  we  find  other  Old  Testament  passages, 
which  give  glimpses  of  the  rejection  of  Israel, 
for  a  time  and  the  call  of  the  Gentiles,  "Even 
us,  whom  He  hath  called,  not  of  the  Jews 
only,  but  also  of  the  Gentiles.  As  He  saith 
also  in  Osee,  I  will  call  them  My  people,  which 
were  not  My  people,  and  her  beloved,  which 
was  not  beloved.  And  it  shall  come  to  pass 
that  in  the  place  where  it  was  said  unto  them, 
Ye  are  not  My  people,  there  shall  they  be  cal- 
led the  children  of  God"  (Rom.  ix:25,  26, 
compare  with  Hosea  i:10;  ii:23).  "But 
Esaias  is  very  bold  and  saith,  I  was  found 
of  them  that  sought  Me  not;  I  was  made 
manifest  unto  them,  that  asked  not  after  Me. 
But  to  Israel  He  saith,  All  day  long  I  have 
stretched  forth  My  hands  unto  a  disobedient 
and  gainsaying  people"  (Rom.  x:20,  21,  and 
Isaiah  lxv:l-2). 

We  are  aware  we  are  stating  that,  which  is 
accepted  by  all  true  believers  who  read  and 
study  God's  Word.  It  is  not  denied  that  after 
His  own  rejected  Him,  who  is  God  manifested 
in  the  flesh,  that  He  was  preached  to  the  Gen- 
tiles.   By  their  fall  salvation  is  come  to  the 


46  The  Jewish  Question. 

Gentiles,  is  generally  believed  throughout 
Christendom;  but  what  is  not  known  and 
little  believed  is  the  fact  that  salvation  jbs 
come  to  the  Gentiles,  by  their  fall,  in  order 
to  provoke  them  to  jealousy.  In  this  fact  lies 
the  argument  that  God  has  not  cast  away  His 
people;  for  if  He  had  cast  Israel  away,  why 
should  He  wish  to  provoke  them  to  jealousy? 
The  fact  that  His  aim  is  to  provoke  His  earth- 
ly people  to  jealousy  by  having  extended 
salvation  to  the  Gentiles,  they  receiving  bless- 
ings in  Christ,  is  sufficient  evidence  that  He 
is  still  occupied  with  His  people. 

Furthermore,  we  read  in  this  chapter  that 
the  provoking  to  jealousy  is  with  the  view 
of  the  salvation  of  some  of  them  (verse  14). 
Such  is  the  statement  of  the  Apostle  himself. 
How  fully  it  brings  out  once  more  "God  hath 
not  cast  away  His  people."  But  has  the 
divine  purpose  been  realized  ?  Has  there  been 
from  the  sides  of  the  Gentiles  in  possession 
of  salvation,  a  provoking  to  jealousy  for  Is- 
rael ?  Have  the  Jews  learned  through  Chris- 
tianity that  the  Gentiles  are  in  possession  of 
the  better  things,  which  they  and  their 
fathers  rejected  ?  Alas !  History  gives  a  far 
different  picture,  even  up  to  the  present  time. 
In  the  first  night  vision  of  Zechariah*  the 

*See  our  "Studies  in  Zechariah." 


"To  Provoke  Them  To  Jealousy,"       47 

accusation  is  prominent,  "They  (the  Gentiles) 
have  helped  forward  their  (Israel's)  afflic- 
tion." So  it  has  been  for  centuries;  so  it  is 
in  the  twentieth  century.  Instead  of  provok- 
ing the  Jews  to  jealousy,  that  some  of  them 
might  be  saved,  the  Gentiles  have  hated  and 
bitterly  persecuted  the  Jews,  and  by  their  un- 
christian, yea  inhuman,  cruel  and  wicked 
treatment  of  the  Jews,  the  Jews  instead  of 
being  moved  to  jealousy,  have  become  more 
hardened  and  their  afflictions  have  been  in- 
creased. The  sin  against  Israel  is  the  sin  of 
the  Gentiles,  it  will  be  the  sin  for  which  they 
will  be  judged  by  Him,  who  is  not  only  King 
of  kings,  but  also  the  King  of  the  Jews  (Matt, 
xxv :31;  Joel  iii:l-3). 

The  writer  has  spoken  sometimes  the  Word 
to  hundreds  of  Jews.  More  than  once  he  was 
interrupted  to  answer  questions  put  to  him 
concerning  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  of  Na- 
zareth. He  never  had  any  difficulty  in 
answering  Jewish  arguments  against  our 
Lord.  But  he  had  to  hang  his  head  in  shame 
when  some  intelligent  Hebrew  spoke  of  the 
awful  persecutions  his  people  passed  through 
in  the  past  and  when  he  pointed  out  the 
barbaric  treatment  they  receive  in  Russia, 
Austria  and  other  so-called  "Christian"  coun- 
tries.   Once  an  aged  Jew  declared,  "The  Mes- 


48  The  Jewish  Question. 

siah  whose  followers  can  do  such  things  and 
hate  us  cannot  be  our  Messiah." 

And  yet  it  is  not  universally  thus.  In 
these  last  days  many  Christian  believers 
have  a  loving  and  prayerful  interest  in  Is- 
rael and  realize  the  debt  they  owe  to  the  Jew. 
More  prayer  is  made,  we  believe,  for  Israel 
and  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem,  than  has  been 
made  since  the  days  of  the  Apostles.  And 
there  is  no  doubt  that  "some  of  them"  are 
being  saved. 

We  shall  find  with  the  next  verse  the  con- 
nection which  exists  between  the  fact  that 
salvation  came  by  their  fall  to  the  Gentiles, 
and  the  fact  that  a  time  is  coming  when  Is- 
rael will  be  received;  the  time  of  their  full- 
ness. It  is  one  of  the  strongest  arguments 
for  Israel's  Hope  and  calling  which  follows. 

In  conclusion  of  our  meditation  on  this 
verse  let  us  remember  that  while  salvation 
has  come  to  the  Gentiles  by  their  fall,  that 
salvation  as  it  is  offered  now  is  not  continu- 
ally to  be  offered  to  the  world.  The  accepta- 
ble year  of  the  Lord,  having  lasted  for  near- 
ly two  thousand  years,  is  far  spent,  another 
day  is  comingf 


Their  Reception — Life  from  the 
Dead. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

We  reach  now  a  most  important  climax  in 
this  chapter.  First  the  Holy  Spirit  pointed 
us  to  the  Apostle  Paul  as  a  pattern  of  what 
God  in  His  rich  mercy  will  yet  do  for  the 
people,  whom  He  hath  not  cast  away.  Then 
we  learned  that  Israel's  apostasy  is  neither 
complete  nor  final,  and  in  our  last  meditation 
the  fact  was  before  us  that  God  permitted 
His  people  to  fall,  to  be  set  aside  for  a  time, 
to  bring,  by  their  fall,  salvation  to  the  Gen- 
tiles, with  the  purpose  in  view  "to  provoke 
them  to  jealousy." 

We  are  now  led  on  in  the  wonderful  ways 
of  God.  "But  if  their  fall  be  the  world's 
wealth,  and  their  loss  the  wealth  of  the  na- 
tions, how  much  more  their  fulness?  For  I 
speak  to  you,  nations,  inasmuch  as  I  am 
Apostle  of  the  nations,  I  glorify  my  ministry ; 
if  by  any  means  I  shall  provoke  to  jealousy 
them  which  are  my  flesh,  and  shall  save  some 
from  among  them.  For  if  their  casting  away 
be  the  world's  reconciliation,  what  their  re- 


50  The  Jewish  Question. 

ception,  but  life  from  the  dead?"  (verses 
12-15). 

Let  us  notice  that  the  apostle  here  glorifies 
his  ministry  as  apostle  of  the  nations.  The 
whole  epistle  was  addressed  to  the  Romans* 
mostly  believers  from  the  Gentiles,  living  in 
Rome,  later  to  become  the  prison  of  Paul  and 
at  last  the  seat  of  Christianity  in  its  apostate 
and  corrupt  form.  But  here  the  apostle 
makes  still  more  prominent  that  his  word  is 
meant  for  those  of  the  Gentiles.  He  says: 
"I  speak  to  you  the  nations."  We  have, 
therefore,  before  us  a  message,  which  is  of 
special  value  and  importance  to  Gentiles.  We 
have  learned  before  that  Israel's  disobedience 
and  fall  brought  salvation  to  the  Gentiles. 

Thus  their  fall  was  the  wealth  of  the 
world,  their  loss  the  wealth  of  the  nations 
(or  Gentiles)  and  their  casting  away  the 
world's  reconciliation.  But  this  is  not  all. 
All  this  is  far  from  fulfilling  that  gracious 
promise  made  to  the  father  of  the  nation, 
Abraham,  when  God  told  him  "in  thy  seed 
all  the  nations  of  the  earth  shall  be  blest." 
Israel's  fall,  the  means  in  God's  purpose  to 
bring  salvation  to  the  Gentiles,  is  not  the 
final  thing  and  the  blessing  the  Gentiles  re- 
ceived by  their  fall  is  not  the  fullest  blessing 
which  God  has  in  store  for  the  nations  of 


Their  Reception — Life  From  The  Dead.  51 

the  world.  There  is  a  "much  more"  in  Romans 
xi.  In  turning  to  the  fifth  chapter  of  this 
epistle  we  find  the  same  two  significant  words 
used  by  way  of  contrast.  There  it  is  the 
"much  more"  of  salvation.  "For  if,  when 
we  were  enemies  we  were  reconciled  to  God 
by  the  death  of  His  Son,  much  more,  being 
reconciled,  we  shall  be  saved  by  His  life" 
(Rom.  v:10).  Here  it  is  the  "much  more" 
of  dispensational  blessing. 

The  Gospel  is  preached  now  to  the  Gentiles 
for  one  great  purpose.  This  purpose  is  not 
the  conversion  of  the  world,  but  it  is  to  take 
out  of  them  a  people  for  His  name.  (Acts 
xv:14).  This  people  taken  out  or  called  out, 
form  the  church  (ecclesia),  the  body  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  which  every  true  be- 
liever belongs.  It  is,  like  the  human  body, 
composed  of  so  many  members,  a  number, 
known  to  God  alone.  This  body  will  be  com- 
plete some  day  and  then  the  preaching  of  the 
Gospel  of  grace  must  of  necessity  cease,  and 
the  offer  of  salvation  in  its  present  form  and 
under  present  conditions  as  made  to  the  Gen- 
tiles, will  come  to  an  end. 

It  is  all  wrong  to  speak  of  world  conversion 
in  this  age,  in  which  the  church  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  being  called.  There  is  abso- 
lutely not  a  single  promise  in  the  Gospels,  nor 


52  The  Jewish  Question. 

in  the  epistles,  nor  in  any  part  of  the  Newj 
Testament  which  assures  us  of  world  con- 
version,  or  gives  us  a  right  to  pray  for,  or; 
expect  the  conversion  of  the  world  by  present1 
agencies  through  the  church.  The  zvorld  will 
be  converted.  Nations  will  walk  in  the  light  of 
God,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  the 
Lord  will  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover 
the  sea,  the  curse  of  sin  will  be  removed,  na- 
tions will  learn  war  no  more,  righteousness 
and  peace  shall  kiss  each  other;  all  this  and 
scores  of  other  blessings  will  literally  come 
to  pass.  But  all  these  promises  and  predic- 
tions about  subdued  nations  and  a  kingdom  of 
peace  extending  from  sea  to  sea  are  found  ex- 
clusively in  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures  and 
not  in  the  New. 

It  is  a  sad  fact  that  Christendom  has  erred 
in  the  interpretation  of  these  predictions  and 
turned  the  time  and  manner  of  their  fulfill- 
ment upside  down.  In  this  error  lies  the 
cause  of  all  the  present  day  confusion  and  aposta- 
sy of  the  professing  church.  Israel,  which  is  so 
prominent  on  the  pages  of  the  Old  Testament 
in  connection  with  these  great  blessings,  has 
been  interpreted  to  mean  "the  church."  The 
time  in  which  the  blessings  are  to  be  realized 
to  be  the  age  now,  instead  of  the  age  which 
is  to  come.    The  declarations  of  the   Lord 


Their  Reception — Life  From  The  Dead.  53 

about  this  age  and  its  ending,  like  the  days 
of  Noah  and  Lot,  have  been  completely  ignor- 
ed, and  the  same  has  been  done  with  the 
statements  of  the  Apostles  in  the  epistles. 
Nearly  the  whole  of  Christendom  attends  to 
Israel's  earthly  calling  and,  attempting  to  do 
a  work  which  God  never  means  to  have  done 
in  this  age,  fails  most  shamefully  in  it.  As 
one  has  said,  "The  spiritualizing  of  Israel's 
promises  has  been  the  carnalizing  of  the 
church." 

If  we  turn  to  the  Old  Testament  we  find, 
as  we  have  shown  in  our  "Harmony  of  the 
Prophetic  Word,"  everything  revealed  in 
perfect  order.  The  last  event  seen  in  Old 
Testament  prophecy  is  always  the  kingdom 
come,  the  nations  blest  and  under  the  rule  of 
Jehovah ;  peace  on  earth  and  the  deliverance 
of  groaning  creation. 

This  great  and  last  event  of  Old  Testament 
prophecy,  a  subdued  earth  ruled  over  by  the 
King  of  Righteousness  and  Peace,  is  preceded 
by  the  judgments  of  God  executed  in  the 
earth  and  above  all  by  the  spiritual  and  na- 
tional restoration  of  His  ancient  people,  Is- 
rael. The  fullest  blessing  for  nations  and  for 
the  earth  is  altogether  conditioned  by  the 
conversion  of  Israel,  to  become  head  of  the 
nations,  and  possessing  her  God-given  in- 


54  The  Jewish  Question. 

heritance.  Israel  converted  and  restored  will 
result  in  the  conversion  of  the  nations  of  the 
earth.  But  Israel's  conversion  and  restora- 
tion to  the  land  will  not  be  till  the  second 
coming  of  the  Son  of  Man,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  in  great  power  and  glory.  Every- 
where in  the  Old  Testament  we  find  first  of 
all  the  visible  manifestation  of  the  Lord  of 
Glory,  and  at  the  time  of  His  personal,  visible 
and  glorious  manifestation,  His  earthly 
people  are  delivered  and  Jerusalem  is  re- 
stored. We  have,  then,  three  great  events 
in  Old  Testament  prophecy,  still  future: 

1.  The  personal,  visible  and  glorious  mani- 
festation of  the  Lord  from  heaven.  This 
Lord  is  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

2.  The  conversion  and  national  restoration 
of  Israel. 

3.  The  result  of  Israel's  conversion  and 
restoration,  nations  blest  and  going  to  Jeru- 
salem to  worship  the  Lord  of  Hosts,  etc. 

This  order  cannot  be  reversed.  It  is  the 
divine  program.  If  we  were  to  prove  the 
above  statements  we  could  go  through  every 
prophetic  book  of  the  Old  Testament  and  to 
the  Psalms  and  point  out  hundreds  of  pas- 
sages, where  this  is  clearly  taught.  Read,  as 
striking  proofs,  Zechariah  ii:6-13;  Isaiah 
lix:20-21,  and  read  the  Ix  chapter  of  Isaiah. 


Their  Reception — Life  From  The  Dead.  55 

"The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without 
repentance,"  we  find  later  in  our  chapter.  He 
has  undertaken  to  bless  nations  and  the  earth 
through  Israel,  His  earthly  people.  When 
Israel  failed  and  was  disobedient,  He  had 
another  gracious  way  to  reveal.  Salvation 
came  to  the  Gentiles,  to  take  out  a  people  for 
His  name.  This  is  the  work  in  the  present 
age  and  that  is  a  parenthesis.  As  soon  as 
this  is  accomplished  He  resumes  His  work 
with  Israel. 

And  now  we  are  able  to  understand  the 
"much  more"  of  dispensational  truth. 

Israel  is  promised  in  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures  a  fulness  and  a  time  when  they 
shall  be  received.  This  fulness  comes  when 
the  Lord  comes  in  power  and  glory  as  the 
King.  Now,  if  God  brought  blessing  to  the 
Gentiles  by  their  fall,  how  much  more  will 
He  bless  the  nations  when  their  fulness 
comes.  Through  their  fulness  the  whole 
world  will  receive  the  fullest  blessing,  bless- 
ings minutely  given  in  the  Old  Testament  and 
literally  to  be  fulfilled. 

But  there  is  a  phrase  in  the  passage  before 
us  which  claims  our  special  attention.  "Their 
reception  shall  be  life  from  the  dead."  What 
does  it  mean,  "life  from  the  dead?"  It  is 
strange  that  this  phrase  should    be    inter- 


56  The  Jewish  Question. 

preted  as  meaning  a  physical  resurrection. 
Upon  this  passage,  as  well  as  the  passage 
"all  Israel  shall  be  saved,"  and  a  few  others, 
has  been  founded  the  evil  doctrine,  unscrip- 
tural  throughout,  that  all  Jews  who  have 
lived  will  be  raised  from  the  dead,  saved  and 
unsaved,  and  they  all  will  be  brought  back 
to  the  land  to  enjoy  the  blessings  of  the  mil- 
lennial kingdom.  It  is  a  larger  Jewish  Hope 
— a  Jewish  restitution  of  all  things  and  con- 
sequently those  who  hold  this  doctrine  are 
forced  to  believe  also  in  a  restitution  of  all 
things  for  Gentiles.  When  we  reach  the  fact 
that  "all  Israel  shall  be  saved"  we  expect  to 
follow  this  more  fully. 

Physical  resurrection  is  here  not  at  all  in 
view.  Nor  is  it  in  many  passages  in  the  Old 
Testament,  where  physical  resurrection  is 
simply  used  as  a  type  of  a  great  change.  It 
is  so  in  the  New  Testament.  Of  the  prodigal 
it  is  said  "for  this  my  son  was  dead  and  is 
come  to  life."  These  literalists  could  not 
claim  that  he  was  physically  dead.  The 
vision  of  the  valley  full  of  dry  bones  is  gen- 
erally used  by  these  men  who  teach  a 
restitution  by  resurrection.  But  the  vision  is 
a  vision  to  describe  vividly  the  national  resur- 
rection of  Israel  and  not  a  physical  one.  The 
dry  bones  are  the  whole  house  of  Israel  (Ez. 


Their  Reception — Life  From  The  Dead.  57 

xxxvii:12) ;  but  are  these  dry  bones  literally 
dry  bones  or  are  they  used  to  typify  Israel's 
death  spiritually  and  nationally  ?  If  they  are 
literally  dry  bones  how  could  they  say :  "Our 
bones  are  dried  and  our  hope  is  lost ;  we  are 
cut  off  for  our  parts  ?"  Surely,  literal  dry 
bones  have  no  mouth  to  speak.  If  we  read 
that  they  are  in  graves  and  the  Lord  will  open 
their  graves,  it  means  that  He  is  bringing  His 
people  back  from  their  graves  among  the  na- 
tions, where  they  are  buried  nationally. 
Numerous  other  passages  could  be  cited  in 
which  physical  resurrection  is  used  to  typify 
the  spiritual  and  national  revival  of  Israel. 

"Life  from  the  dead"  does  not  mean  a 
literal  resurrection.  It  has  a  double  mean- 
ing. First  it  means  when  their  reception 
comes  it  will  be  for  them,  spiritually  and  na- 
tionally, life;  they  will  live  spiritually  and 
as  a  nation. 

In  the  second  place  the  term  means  that 
the  result  of  Israel's  reception,  coming  into 
the  place  of  blessing,  will  be  for  the  world  at 
large  "life  from  the  dead."  This  is  identical 
with  the  term,  which  the  Lord  uses  in  Mat- 
thew xix:28,  "the  regeneration''  it  will  be  a 
great  change  which  takes  place,  in  resurrec- 
tion power. 

There  is  one  book  which  illustrates  very 


58  The  Jewish  Question. 

blessedly  the  passage  before  us.  It  is  the 
book  so  much  belittled  and  ridiculed  in  our 
day,  the  Book  of  Jonah. 

Our  Lord  said  to  the  Pharisees,  who  de- 
manded a  sign  from  Him  that  no  sign  would 
be  given  them  but  the  sign  of  the  prophet 
Jonas.  (Matt,  xii  :38.)  He  then  spoke  of  His 
coming  resurrection  foreshadowed  by  Jonah's 
experience.  No  doubt  the  proud  and  learned 
Pharisees  turned  away  from  Him;  and  with 
a  smile  the  rationalistic  Sadducee  may  have 
said,  "What  nonsense,  Jonah  never  lived,  it  is 
all  a  myth,  there  is  no  resurrection."  Oh, 
the  adulterous  generation !  Modern  Pharisee- 
ism  and  Sadduceeism,  Higher  Critics,  etc.,  are 
likewise  an  adulterous  generation.  They  tell 
us  what  a  beautiful  book  the  book  of  Jonah 
is,  what  sublime  lessons  it  teaches.  But  did 
Jonah  ever  live?  Of  course  not,  they  say — 
he  never  lived,  his  life  is  a  myth — how  could 
a  fish  swallow  a  man?  etc.  Awful  conse- 
quences! The  Lord  Jesus  used  the  deliver- 
ance of  Jonah  as  a  type  of  His  blessed  resur- 
rection, the  foundation  of  our  holy  faith.  If 
He  did  not  know  that  Jonah  lived,  if  He  used 
a  myth  to  typify  His  resurrection — well, 
then,  His  resurrection  may  not  have  been  a 
real  one,  and  how  could  He  be  the  Son  of 
God? 


Their  Reception — Life  From  The  Dead,  59 

Jonah's  life  is  in  different  respects  typical 
of  Christ,  but  it  has  still  another  meaning 
which  makes  known  the  divine  wisdom  and 
inspiration.  The  life  of  nearly  every  servant 
of  God  in  the  Old  Testament  has  a  twofold 
typical  application — the  one,  Christ,  the  Mes- 
siah, and  the  other,  Israel,  the  chosen  people 
of  God.  Follow  out  this  thought  and  apply 
it  to  Joseph,  David,  Daniel,  the  prophets,  etc. 
Jonah  is  a  type  of  Israel.  The  whole  history 
of  the  seed  of  Abraham,  past,  present,  and 
future,  is  contained  in  a  nutshell  in  that  book. 

1.  Jonah's  call.  He  is  sent  by  Jehovah  to 
preach  to  Nineveh.  He  knows  God  while 
Nineveh  is  in  darkness.  So  God  prepared 
Himself  Israel  a  nation  to  show  forth  His 
praises.  Salvation  is  of  the  Jews.  Through 
them  He  desires  to  make  known  His  loving 
kindness  and  His  redemption.  In  the  seed  of 
Abraham  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  are  to 
receive  blessing.  These  are  God's  gifts  and 
calling.  They  are  without  repentance  (Rom. 
xi:29). 

2.  Jonah  is  disobedient.  He  turns  his  back 
upon  God  and  flees  from  His  face.  He  goes 
on  board  of  a  merchantman.  He  goes  in  the 
opposite  direction.  So  Israel  became  an 
apostate  people,  and  the  Jew  turns  merchant. 
Forsook  God  and  lightly  esteemed  the  rock 


60  The  Jewish  Question. 

of  his  salvation.  Like  Jonah,  disobedient  to 
the  heavenly  vision,  instead  of  being  a  bless- 
ing becomes  a  curse  among  the  nations. 

3.  Trouble  soon  comes  upon  Jonah,  the  dis- 
obedient servant  of  God.  The  storm  of  dis- 
aster tosses  his  ship  upon  the  wild  waves  of 
the  angry  sea.  Everything  is  against  him 
because  he  rebelled  against  God.  Thus  with 
the  Jews.  Misfortune  after  misfortune, 
storm  after  storm  has  broken  over  them  since 
they  rejected  God  and  their  King  Messiah. 
They  are  tossed  about  by  the  nations.  The 
sea  always  represents  nations  in  the  Word. 

4.  Jonah  does  not  deny  his  God  and  his 
nationality.  He  said,  "I  am  a  Hebrew  and  I 
fear  the  Lord,  the  God  of  heaven,  which  has 
made  the  sea  and  the  dry  land."  So  the  Jew 
in  his  apostasy  still  professes  to  be  a  believer 
in  God,  fears  His  name  and  does  not  deny  that 
he  is  a  Jew. 

5.  Jonah  is  cast  overboard.  He  is  given 
up  to  the  angry  waves.  He  is  seen  struggling 
in  the  waves.  Typical  of  the  Jew  being  cast 
away,  though  not  forever. 

6.  The  men  in  Jonah's  ship  when  they  saw 
that  as  soon  as  Jonah  was  in  the  water  the 
waters  calmed  down,  these  men,  who  were  all 
heathen,  feared  the  Lord  exceedingly,  and 
offered  a  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  and  made 


Their  Reception — Life  From  The  Dead.  61 

vows.  What  a  wonderful  illustration  of  the 
very  statement  in  this  epistle:  "By  their 
fall  salvation  has  come  to  the  Gentiles/'  The 
Gentiles  have  received  salvation  when  the 
Jew  was  set  aside  nationally. 

7.  Jonah  is  miraculously  preserved  in  the 
belly  of  a  sea  monster.  (There  is  nothing  in 
the  Hebrew  to  show  that  it  was  a  whale.) 
He  is  to  have  his  abode  there  for  three  days 
and  three  nights.  He  does  not  lose  his  life 
and  existence,  but  he  is  put  into  a  grave  and 
is  there  miraculously  preserved.  The  Jew  is 
likewise  in  his  grave  among  the  nations,  na- 
tionally dead,  but  still  God  keeps  the  Jew  as 
He  did  Jonah.  The  Jew  is  God's  standing 
miracle.  No  infidel  can  explain  away  the  Jew 
and  his  miraculous  existence. 

8.  Jonah  was  not  digested  by  the  fish.  He 
remained  there  undigested.  The  nations 
have  not  digested  the  Jews.  This  people 
shall  dwell  alone  and  not  be  reckoned  among 
the  nations.  The  Jew  is  still  a  Jew.  As- 
similation has  failed. 

9.  Jonah  at  the  end  of  the  appointed  time 
commenced  to  repent  in  his  grave.  He  cried 
to  God.  He  wished  himself  back  to  His  holy 
temple,  and  he  finished  his  prayer  with  the 
believing  shout,  "Salvation  is  of  the  Lord." 
The  Jews  will  also  repent.     There  are  un-* 


62  The  Jewish  Question. 

mistakable  signs  of  a  changed  attitude  of  the 
Jew  noticeable.  Still,  before  that  great  na- 
tional repentance  comes,  there  will  be  like- 
wise first  a  great  tribulation.  Like  Jonah 
many  are  to-day  desiring  for  His  holy  temple, 
and  they  are  getting  ready  to  return  to  the 
land.  At  last  they  will  acknowledge  that 
salvation  is  of  the  Lord,  and  welcome  their 
King  with  the  shout  "Blessed  is  He  that 
cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord." 

10.  God  made  the  fish  vomit  out  Jonah.  He 
that  scattered  Israel  will  gather  them  again. 
They  will  be  brought  back  to  the  land  and 
restored.  They  will  build  the  waste  places, 
the  desolations  of  many  generations.  The 
Word  of  God  has  hundreds  of  promises  which 
belong  to  literal  Israel  and  speak  of  a  literal 
restoration.  If  we  do  not  believe  that,  we 
might  as  well  close  the  Bible  and  become 
Higher  Critics,  unbelievers,  etc. 

11.  Jonah  is  sent  the  second  time,  and  he 
follows  the  command.  So  Israel  is  yet  to  ful- 
fill its  grandest  mission.  Their  King,  our 
coming  Lord,  will  commission  them  again  and 
send  them  forth  to  proclaim  His  salvation. 
Israel  will  then  follow  obediently. 

12.  The  whole  city  of  Nineveh  repented 
after  hearing  the  apostate,  the  punished,  and 
the  restored  Jew  preach.    A  whole*  city  was 


Their  Reception — Life  From  The  Dead.  63 

swept  by  a  revival.  The  masses  were  saved. 
Now  is  the  time  for  the  salvation  of  indi- 
viduals. There  is  no  such  thing  at  this 
present  time  as  saving  the  masses  or  con- 
verting the  world.  The  masses  will  be  saved 
and  the  world  converted  through  the  preach- 
ing of  the  Jews  when  they  are  converted  and 
restored  to  the  land  and  Jesus  is  crowned  as 
their  King  and  sits  upon  the  throne  of  His 
Father  David. 

This  then  illustrates,  at  least  in  part  and 
in  a  faint  way,  what  their  reception  is  and 
means,  "Life  from  the  dead." 


The  Parable  of  the  Olive  Tree# 

CHAPTER  VII. 

In  the  next  place  a  parable  is  given  to  de- 
clare Israel's  position  and  hope  as  well  as  the 
relationship  and  responsibility  of  the  Gen- 
tiles. In  this  portion  of  our  chapter  we  find 
some  very  solemn  truths  for  Gentiles,  and, 
indeed,  as  we  advance  towards  the  end  of 
this  great  dispensational  chapter,  the  Hope 
of  Israel  shines  brighter  till  we  reach  the 
declaration,  that  the  Redeemer  shall  come  out 
of  Sion  to  turn  away  ungodliness  from  Jacob. 

"Now,  if  the  first  fruits  be  holy,  the  lump 
also;  and  if  the  root  be  holy,  the  branches 
also.  Now  if  some  of  the  branches  have  been 
broken  out,  and  thou,  being  a  wild  olive  tree, 
hast  been  graffed  in  amongst  them,  and  hast 
become  a  fellow  partaker  of  the  root  and  fat- 
ness of  the  olive  tree,  boast  not  against  the 
branches;  but  if  thou  boast,  it  is  not  that 
thou  barest  the  root,  but  the  root  thee.  Thou 
wilt  say,  The  branches  have  been  broken  out 
in  order  that  I  might  be  graffed  in.  Right : 
they  have  been  broken  out  through  unbelief, 


The  Parable  of  The  Olive  Tree.  65 

and  thou  standest  through  faith.  Be  n*t 
highminded,  but  fear;  if  God  indeed  has  not 
spared  the  natural  branches ;  lest  it  might  be 
He  spare  not  thee.  Behold  then  the  goodness 
and  severity  of  God:  upon  them  who  have 
fallen,  severity,  upon  thee,  goodness  of  God, 
if  thou  abide  in  goodness,  otherwise  thou  also 
wilt  be  cut  away.  And  they,  too,  if  they 
abide  not  in  unbelief,  shall  be  graffed  in;  for 
God  is  able  to  graff  them  in  again.  For  if 
thou  hast  been  cut  out  of  the  olive  tree,  wild 
by  nature,  and,  contrary  to  nature,  hast  been 
graffed  into  the  good  olive  tree,  how  much 
more  shall  those,  which  are  the  natural 
branches  be  graffed  into  their  own  olive 
tree?"     (verses  16-24). 

The  parable  is  concerning  a  good  and  a  wild 
olive  tree,  branches  which  were  broken  off 
and  branches  which  were  graffed  in  and 
branches  which  are  threatened  with  being  cut 
away,  and  the  broken  off  ones  to  be  graffed 
in  again.  Exhortations  and  solemn  warnings 
are  by  this  parable  given  and  important 
dispensational  teachings  cluster  around  it. 

Before  we  ascertain  the  meaning  of  the 
olive  tree,  we  briefly  touch  on  the  sentence 
"now,  if  the  firstfruit  be  holy,  the  lump  also." 
The  firstfruit  does  not  mean  anything  outside 
of  Israel.    Some  Christians  in  these  days  talk 


66  The  Jewish  Question. 

about  firstfruit,  as  if  in  the  body  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  church,  there  is  a  select 
number,  which  through  self-denial,  service 
and  suffering  obtains  a  special  place  and 
enters  into  the  God-given  inheritance  first. 
When  we  read  in  Romans  viii  of  having  the 
firstfruits  of  the  Spirit,  it  applies  to  all  true 
believers.  In  James  i:18,  "that  we  should 
be  a  certain  firstfruits  of  his  creatures,"  it 
refers  to  Christian  believers,  who  were  Is- 
raelites by  nature,  and  in  Revel.  xiv:4,  "those 
who  have  been  bought  from  men  as  firstfruits 
to  God  and  to  the  Lamb,"  does  not  mean  a 
part  of  the  church,  but  the  Jewish  remnant. 
Here  in  Romans  xi  for  the  fuller  under- 
standing of  the  firstfruit,  which  is  holy,  and 
the  lump,  Num.  xv:  19-21  and  Leviticus 
xxiii:  15-17  have  to  be  taken  into  considera- 
tion. We  cannot  follow  this  in  detail,  but 
rather  turn  to  the  main  argument  of  the  pas- 
sage before  us.  The  good  olive  tree  with  a 
root  and  branches  must  be  considered  first. 
What  does  this  olive  tree  represent?  It  is  a 
type  of  Israel.  God  hath  taken  trees  as  types 
of  His  earthly  people,  because  trees  are 
rooted  in  the  earth  and  extend  their  branches 
upward  towards  heaven  and  they  yield  fruit, 
for  which  He  also  looks  in  His  professing 
people.    Jotham's  parable  in  Judges  ix:7-15 


The  Parable  of  The  Olive  Tree.  67 

has  a  dispensational  aspect.  The  trees  men- 
tioned called  to  be  king  over  the  other  trees 
are  types  of  Israel  and  the  bramble  is  typical 
of  the  Gentiles.  The  olive  tree,  the  figtree 
and  the  vine,  spoken  of  for  the  first  time 
together  in  this  passage,  are  seen  in  different 
parts  of  the  Scripture  as  representing  Israel. 
The  vineyard  so  carefully  kept,  in  Isaiah  v, 
and  the  vine  yielding  wild  grapes,  applies  to 
this  people.  "Thou  has  brought  a  vine  out  of 
Egypt;  thou  hast  cast  out  the  nations,  and 
planted  it. . .  Why  hast  thou  broken  down  her 
hedges,  so  that  all  which  pass  by  the  way  do 
pluck  her?  The  boar  out  of  the  wood  doth 
waste  it,  and  the  wild  beast  of  the  field  doth 
devour  it"  (Psalm  lxxx:8-14).  "Yet  I  planted 
thee  a  noble  vine,  wholly  a  right  seed;  how 
then  art  thou  turned  into  the  degenerate 
plant  of  a  strange  vine  unto  me?"  (Jerem. 
ii:21). 

Of  the  figtree  as  a  type  of  Israel,  we  read 
in  the  New  Testament.  The  parable  in  Luke 
xiii:7-9  meant  primarily  Israel.  The  Lord 
came  and  sought  fruit  for  three  years.  When 
no  fruit  was  found  the  judgment  sentence 
was  carried  out,  it  was  cut  down,  but  the  root 
remained.  In  Matthew  xxi:19  there  is  the 
record  of  a  symbolical  action  of  the  Lord. 
"And  when  He  saw  a  figtree  in  the  way,  He 


68  The  Jewish  Question. 

came  to  it,  and  found  nothing  thereon,  but 
leaves  only,  and  said  unto  it,  Let  no  fruit 
grow  on  thee  henceforward  forever.  And 
presently  the  figtree  withered  away."  And 
the  withering  away,  the  tree  becoming  dead 
in  its  outward  appearance,  stands  for  the 
cutting  off  of  the  nation  during  this  age. 

But  again  the  Lord  said  "Now  learn  a 
parable  of  the  figtree;  when  his  branch  is 
yet  tender,  and  putteth  forth  leaves,  ye  know 
that  the  summer  is  nigh"  (Matt.  xxiv:32). 
The  figtree  will  bud  again.  The  olive  tree  is 
not  only  mentioned  here,  but  we  read  of  it  in 
Jeremiah  xi  :16 :  "The  Lord  called  thy  name 
a  green  olive  tree,  fair,  and  of  goodly  fruit: 
with  the  noise  of  a  great  tumult  he  hath 
kindled  fire  upon  it,  and  the  branches  of  it 
have  broken."  The  olive  tree  typifies  Israel 
in  covenant  relation  with  God.  The  olive  tree 
stands  for  the  Abrahamic  covenant.  The 
olive  tree  is  evergreen.  And  so  that  covenant 
is  lasting  and  forever,  and  changes  not  by 
changing  seasons.  Israel's  disobedience  and 
faithlessness  does  not  annul  it. 

A  root  is  mentioned  and  that  root  is  said 
to  be  holy  (separated).  The  root  is  the  one 
with  whom  the  covenant  was  made,  Abra- 
ham. But  not  alone  he,  but  the  root 
is   threefold,    Abraham,    Isaac   and   Jacob; 


The  Parable  of  The  Olive  Tree.  69 

the  promise  is  repeated  to  each.  In  Exodus 
iii  :15  we  read  how  God  names  Himself  in  con- 
nection with  the  children  of  Israel.  "Thus 
shalt  thou  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel, 
The  Lord  God  of  your  fathers,  the  God  of 
Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac  and  the  God  of 
Jacob,  hath  sent  me  unto  you;  this  is  my 
name  forever,  and  this  is  my  memorial  unto 
all  generations."  Why  should  He  name  Him- 
self thus?  Because  in  this  root,  Abraham, 
Isaac  and  Jacob,  God  hath  revealed  Himself  as 
Father  in  Abraham,  as  God  the  Son  in  Isaac, 
and  in  overcoming  the  flesh  and  in  guidance, 
as  God  the  Holy  Spirit  in  Jacob.  And  this 
root  is  holy,  separated;  so  are  the  branches, 
that  which  springs  out  of  the  root.  God's 
purpose  with  Israel  is,  to  have  in  them  a 
separated,  holy  people.  The  root  vouches  for 
the  final  outcome.  As  wonderful  as  the  be- 
ginning of  that  people  has  been  in  that  sepa- 
rated One,  so  wonderful,  even  more  so,  is 
their  future. 

On  account  of  unbelief  some  of  the 
branches  were  broken  off.  They  lay  on  the 
ground,  separated  from  the  root,  without  life. 

A  wild  olive  tree  is  seen  next  in  the  para- 
ble and  the  wild  olive  tree  is  graffed  in 
amongst  the  branches  and  becomes  a  par- 
taker of  the  root  and  of  the  fatness  of  the 


70  The  Jewish  Question. 

olive  tree.  In  the  wild  olive  tree  we  have  a 
picture  of  the  Gentiles.  It  is,  however,  of  the 
greatest  importance  that  we  see  that  it  is  not 
the  true  church,  which  is  represented  by  the 
wild  olive  tree.  This  is  often  erroneously 
stated.  Later  we  find  the  warning,  and  more 
than  a  warning,  the  fact  that  the  wild  olive 
tree  branches  are  to  be  cut  away,  broken  off, 
removed  from  the  root,  upon  which  they  were 
graffed.  This  can  never  be  true  of  the  indi- 
vidual member  of  the  body  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  nor  of  the  true  church  as  a  whole.  It 
is  true  that  all  believers  are  fellow  partakers 
of  the  olive  tree,  and  they  stand  by  faith. 
"Now,  therefore,  ye  are  no  more  strangers 
and  foreigners,  but  fellow  citizens  with  the 
saints  and  of  the  household  of  God;  and  are 
built  upon  the  foundation  of  the  apostles  and 
prophets,  Jesus  Christ  Himself  being  the 
chief  cornerstone"  (Eph.  ii:19-20).  The 
great  mystery  revealed  is,  "that  the  Gentiles 
should  be  f ellowheirs,  and  of  the  same  body, 
and  partakes  of  His  promise  in  Christ  by  the 
Gospel."  But  to  say  that  the  wild  olive  tree 
represents  the  true  church  graffed  in,  would 
be  far  from  the  truth.  Gentiles  are 
represented  by  it,  all  who  are  privileged  to 
hear  and  come  under  the  influence  of  that 
which  belonged  to  Israel.    When  the  natural 


The  Parable  of  The  Olive  Tree.  71 

branches  were  broken  off,  God  put  the  Gen- 
tiles upon  the  ground  of  responsibility,  where 
Israel  as  a  nation  stood,  and  then  gives  the 
Gentiles  a  chance  to  partake  of  the  root  and 
fatness  of  the  olive  tree.  The  natural 
branches  are  Israel  and  the  branches  graffed 
in  contrary  to  nature  are  the  Gentiles.  The 
wild  olive  tree  represents  the  same  "king- 
dom of  heaven"  as  seen  in  its  mystery  form 
in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  in  the  seven  para- 
bles (chapter  xiii).  As  we  hold  this  clearly 
in  our  mind,  the  meaning  of  all  that  is  before 
us  becomes  plain. 

The  wild  olive  tree,  or  as  we  may  say  just 
as  well,  Christendom,  is  now  solemnly  addres- 
sed and  warned  in  this  parable.  It  is  still, 
"I  speak  to  you,  Gentiles." 

First,  there  is  the  warning,  "Boast  not 
against  the  branches."  Then  an  answer  is 
heard  from  the  side  of  the  wild  olive  tree. 
"Thou  wilt  say  then,  The  branches  have  been 
broken  out  in  order  that  I  might  be  grafted 
in."  To  which  the  Holy  Spirit  answers: 
"Right!  They  have  been  broken  off  through 
unbelief,  and  thou  standest  through  faith. 
Be  not  highminded,  but  fear;  if  God  has  not 
spared  the  natural  branches;  lest  it  might 
be,  He  spare  not  thee." 

This  is  a  most  striking  and  solemn  warning 


72  The  Jewish  Question. 

as  well  as  a  prophecy.  We  remember  once 
more,  that  the  epistle  was  sent  to  Rome  and 
that  from  Rome  proceeded  later  all  the  cor- 
ruption, that  leaven,  which  has  leavened  the 
whole  lump.  If  the  warning  here  had  been 
heeded,  Christendom,  with  its  evil  doctrines 
and  practices,  its  highmindedness,  unbelief, 
apostasy  and  corruption  would  have  been  an 
impossibility.  But  the  very  thing  against 
which  the  Holy  Spirit  warns  has  come  to 
pass.  The  Gentiles,  having  partaken  of  the 
covenant  blessings  of  Israel,  declare  with  a 
boasting  spirit,  "The  branches  were  broken 
off  that  I  might  be  graffed  in,"  and  boast 
against  the  branches.  Instead  of  believing 
God's  revealed  purposes  concerning  the  Jews, 
the  Gentiles  and  the  church  of  God,  Christen- 
dom ignores  them,  and  in  a  spirit  of  high- 
mindedness and  unbelief,  boasts  of  being  an 
earthly  and  permanent  institution,  called  to 
convert  and  civilize  the  world.  Here  is  the 
root  of  all  the  confusion  in  Roman,  Greek  and 
Protestant  Christendom,  with  its  numerous 
divisions.  Christendom  having  forgotten,  or 
misunderstanding  God's  purposes  concerning 
Israel,  has  become  a  boasting,  worldly  organ- 
ization, calling  itself  "Israel"  and  laying 
claim  to  promises  which  are  Israel's  in  the 
age  to  come.    Then  the  Gentiles  have  turned 


The  Parable  of  The  Olive  Tree.  73 

against  the  Jews ;  having  no  faith  that  they 
are  "still  beloved  for  the  Father's  sake,"  and 
that  God  "hath  not  cast  away  His  people." 
They  have  persecuted  them  and  do  so  to  the 
end  of  this  age. 

This  boasting  of  the  wild  olive  tree  is  seen 
in  its  completeness  in  the  last  part  of  the 
third  chapter  of  Revelation.  There  we  have 
the  last  phase,  and  the  saddest  one  of  pro- 
fessing Christendom,  Laodicea.  It  is  boast- 
ing in  riches,  increase  of  goods.  Laodicea 
boasts  of  increase  in  institutions,  millions  to 
extend  educational  work  and  philanthropic 
schemes  to  convert  the  world,  but  it  is  the 
usurpation  of  Israel's  place  and  calling. 

The  warning  is,  of  course,  unheeded.  God 
did  not  spare  the  natural  branches,  He  will 
not  spare  the  branches  which  were  graffed 
in.  And  stronger  still,  He  says:  "Behold, 
then,  the  goodness  and  severity  of  God; 
upon  them  who  have  fallen,  severity;  upon 
thee,  goodness  of  God,  if  thou  shalt  abide  in 
goodness,  otherwise  thou  shalt  also  be  cut 
off."  How  solemn  these  words  are!  Did 
Gentile  Christendom  abide  in  the  goodness  of 
God?  Far  from  it!  It  has  dishonored  Him 
and  His  Word  and  has  made  and  is 
a  greater  failure  than  the  Jews  did.  The  un- 
belief manifested  in  Christendom,  especially 


74  The  Jewish  Question. 

in  our  day,  is  indeed  greater  than  the  unbelief 
of  Israel  ever  was. 

"Thou  also  shalt  be  cut  off."  This  is  the 
sentence  which  will  be  executed  upon  the 
wild  olive  tree.  It  corresponds  to  the  word 
Laodicea:  "So,  then,  because  thou  art  luke- 
warm, and  neither  cold  nor  hot,  I  will  spew 
thee  out  of  my  mouth."  And  this  judgment 
is  not  far  away.  The  apostasy  is  developing 
rapidly.  God  will  not  permit  forever  His 
Holy  Word  to  be  trampled  upon  by  Gentiles 
nor  will  He  stand  the  ever  increasing  rejec- 
tion of  the  Son  of  His  love,  the  denial  of  His 
Deity  and  Lordship.  "Thou  also  shalt  be 
cut  off!"  How  soon  this  may  come  to  pass! 
The  true  church,  composed  of  all  believers 
will  be  taken  into  glory  and  then  there  re- 
mains that  which  boasts  and  is  highminded 
and  upon  this  professing  Christendom  the 
judgment  will  fall  at  last. 

But  this  is  not  all.  We  reach  the  climax  in 
this  wonderful  parable.  "And  they,  too,  if 
they  abide  not  in  unbelief,  shall  be  graffed 
in;  for  God  is  able  again  to  graff  them  in. 
For  if  thou  hast  been  cut  out  of  the  olive  tree, 
wild  by  nature,  and  contrary  to  nature,  hast 
been  graffed  into  the  good  olive  tree,  how 
much  more  shall  they,  which  are  the  natural 


The  Parable  of  The  Olive  Tree.  75 

branches,  be  graffed  into   their   own   olive 
tree." 

From  this  we  learn  two  facts.  The  first 
fact,  God  will  graff  these  broken  off  branches 
in  again;  He  will  put  them  back  upon  their 
own  olive  tree.  And  this  fact  brings  us  back 
to  the  question,  "Hath  God  cast  away  His 
people  ?"  Surely  He  has  not.  The  olive  tree, 
the  covenant  promises  to  Israel  is  as  green 
as  the  olive  tree;  all  that  happened  is  that 
branches,  on  account  of  unbelief,  were 
broken  off.  The  hand  which  broke  them  off, 
and  which  took  the  wild  olive  tree  and  gave 
the  wild  olive  tree,  the  Gentiles,  a  chance, 
that  hand  will  take  these  branches  and  put 
them  back.  Here  again  it  is  "life  from  the 
dead,"  that  which  was  cut  off  is  put  back;  it 
means  the  restoration  of  Israel. 

The  second  fact  is  a  still  more  important 
one.  It  gives  us  the  order  in  which  these 
events  will  come  to  pass.  First,  the  wild 
olive  tree,  graffed  in,  fails,  then  the  wild  olive 
tree  branches  are  cut  off,  and  in  the  third 
place  broken  off  branches,  Israel,  will  be  put 
back  upon  their  own  good  olive  tree.  To-day 
we  witness  the  apostasy  of  Gentile  Chris- 
tendom. The  next  event  will  be  the  removal 
from  earth  of  the  true  church  (1  Thessal. 
iv:  16-18)  and  upon  that  follows  the  cutting 


76 


The  Jewish  Question. 


off  of  that  which  is  only  an  empty  profession, 
judgment  upon  apostate  Christendom,  and 
this  is  followed  by  God  receiving  Israel  back. 
This  is  the  teaching  of  the  parable,  Israel 
shall  be  received  back.  That  the  broken  off 
branches  do  not  mean  individuals  is  clear. 
How  strange  that  men  should  teach,  they 
mean  individuals  which  were  cut  off,  and  that 
all  unbelieving  Jews,  of  all  generations  which 
ever  existed,  will  be  raised  from  their 
graves  and  brought  back  to  the  land  to  enjoy 
there  all  blessings  promised  to  the  faithful 
and  believing  remnant. 

The  next  and  last  demonstration  that  God 
hath  not  cast  away  His  people  will  lead  us 
further  in  the  order  of  events,  when  and 
how  all  Israel  is  to  be  saved. 


A  Mystery  Made  Known* 

CHAPTER  VID. 

We  have  reached  the  final  answer  to  the 
question :  "Hath  God  cast  away  His  people." 
As  the  seventh  and  last  proof  of  Israel's  glori- 
ous future,  it  is  the  completest  of  all.  "For 
I  do  not  wish  you  to  be  ignorant,  brethren, 
of  this  mystery,  that  ye  be  not  wise  in  your 
own  conceits,  that  blindness  in  part  has  hap- 
pened to  Israel,  until  the  fulness  of  the  na- 
tions has  come;  and  so  all  Israel  shall  be 
saved.  According  as  it  is  written,  The  De- 
liverer shall  come  out  of  Sion ;  He  shall  turn 
away  ungodliness  from  Jacob.  And  this  is 
the  covenant  from  me  to  them,  when  I  shall 
take  away  their  sins"  (verses  25-27) .  These 
words  are  not  addressed  to  Gentiles,  and  no 
longer  does  the  apostle  say,  "I  speak  to  you, 
Gentiles,"  but  they  are  addressed  to  "Breth- 
ren," that  is,  true  believers.  It  has  the  same 
meaning  here  as  in  Romans  xii  :1.  He  is  now 
going  to  make  known  a  secret,  a  mystery, 
which  by  revelation  was  made  known  to  him 
and  of  which  he  does  not  want  his  brethren 


78  The  Jewish  Question. 

to  be  ignorant.  It  is  known  to  every  reader 
of  the  Word  of  God  that  the  word  "mystery" 
and  the  revelation  of  mysteries  hid  in  former 
ages  is  found  exclusively  in  the  Pauline 
epistles.  Our  Lord  in  Matthew  xiii,  that 
great  dispensational  chapter,  speaks  of 
the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
(verse  11).  The  seven  parables  contain 
mysteries  concerning  the  present  Christian 
age.  In  the  epistles  given  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
through  the  Apostle  Paul  we  find  the  full 
revelation  of  these  secret  things,  hid  in 
former  ages,  and  now  made  known.  What 
are  these  mysteries  in  the  epistles  of  Paul? 
We  can  count  seven.  "And  without  con- 
troversy great  is  the  mystery  of  godliness; 
God  was  manifested  in  the  flesh,  justified  in 
the  Spirit,  seen  of  angels,  preached  unto  the 
Gentiles,  believed  on  in  the  world,  received 
up  into  glory"  (1  Tim.  iii:16).  This  is  the 
mystery  of  the  blessed  Gospel  itself  in  all  its 
fulness.  In  Colossians  i:26-27,  we  have  a 
second  mystery:  "  .  .  .  .  the  riches  of  the 
glory  of  this  mystery  among  the  Gentiles, 
which  is,  Christ  in  you  the  hope  of  glory." 
Here  the  blessed  union  of  Christ  and  the  be- 
liever is  made  known.  In  Ephesians  iii  and  v 
we  have  a  third  and  fourth  secret.  These  are 
concerning  the  church,  which  is   both    His 


A  Mystery  Made  Known.  79 

body  and  His  bride.  Then  in  1  Corinthians 
xv:51  is  a  fifth  mystery:  "Behold,  I  show 
you  a  mystery.  We  shall  not  all  sleep,  but 
we  shall  all  be  changed."  It  is  the  blessed 
secret  about  the  coming  of  the  Lord  for  the 
gathering  of  His  saints,  more  fully  made 
known  in  1  Thess.  iv:16,  17.  In  2  Thess.  ii 
is  the  mystery  concerning  the  iniquity  and 
the  final  Antichrist,  and  here  in  Romans  xi 
it  is  the  mystery  of  Israel. 

These  secret  things  made  known  through 
Paul  in  these  epistles  are  of  the  greatest  im- 
portance. Ignorance  in  these  is  deplorable; 
the  true  Christian  position,  calling  and 
privileges,  as  well  as  what  the  church  is  and 
the  destiny  of  the  church,  cannot  be  grasped 
without  a  knowledge  of  these  Pauline  mys- 
teries. 

Not  alone  does  Paul  want  the  brethren  to 
know  the  mystery  here,  that  they  may  not  be 
ignorant,  but  he  adds  "that  ye  may  not  be 
wise  in  your  own  conceits."  This  would  be 
a  very  suitable  word  to  put  over  Christendom, 
"they  are  wise  in  their  own  conceits."  It 
characterizes  the  present  day  confusion  and 
falling  away  about  us.  And  why  is  the  pro- 
fessing church  wise  in  her  own  conceit  ?  The 
answer  is  evident,  because  the  professing 
church  ignores  the  mysteries  made  known. 


80  The  Jewish  Question. 

What  a  change  we  would  see  all  about  us  if 
the  mystery  of  the  church,  what  the  church 
is,  the  one  body,  were  known.  If  the  mystery 
were  believed  about  the  union  of  the  believer 
with  Christ,  the  believer's  completeness  in 
Him,  how  different  all  would  be.  Alas !  God's 
secrets  are  ignored  and  religious  man  rather 
follows  traditions  and  great  men,  and  this  is 
why  Christendom  is  wise  in  its  own  conceits. 
And  what  keeps  us  humble  ?  What  keeps  us 
from  following  our  own  thoughts  and  ima- 
ginations and  from  being  wise  in  our  own 
conceits?  Certainly  only  our  complete  sub- 
mission to  that  which  God  has  revealed. 

What  then  is  the  mystery  here,  which  is 
made  known  about  Israel?  It  is  twofold. 
First,  Israel's  blindness  is  only  in  part  and, 
Israel's  blindness  has  a  limit,  it  will  last  up 
to  a  certain  time.  So  God  hath  not  cast  away 
His  people ;  a  time  is  coming  when  the  partial 
blindness  of  Israel  will  cease. 

That  blindness  in  part  has  happened  to 
Israel,  we  have  seen  in  the  parable  of  the 
olive  tree,  where  we  learned  that  some  of  the 
branches  were  broken  off.  But  when  that 
blindness  is  to  be  removed,  we  have  not  yet 
discovered  in  our  chapter.  Here  is  some- 
thing altogether  new.  In  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures  we  read  much  about  Israel's  ju- 


A  Mystery  Made  Known.  81 

dicial  blindness,  the  judgments  to  fall  upon 
them  as  a  nation,  and  their  future  exaltation 
and  blessing.  But  nowhere  do  we  find  definite 
information  when  the  great  event  of  Israel's 
reception  will  take  place. 

When  our  Lord,  before  His  ascension,  was 
asked  by  His  disciples,  "Lord,  wilt  thou  at 
this  time  restore  again  the  kingdom  of  Is- 
rael?" He  answered,  "It  is  not  for  you  to 
know  the  times  or  the  seasons  which  the 
Father  hath  put  in  His  own  power"  (Acts 
i:6,  7).  Here  in  Romans  xi:25  we  have  the 
secret  made  known  and  the  time  is  given, 
when  Israel's  blindness  will  cease.  "Until  the 
fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be  come  in."  The 
fulness  of  the  nations  is  to  come  in  first.  This 
is  the  great  work  which  has  first  to  be  accom- 
plished, the  next  great  event,  and  as  soon  as 
this  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  has  been  brought 
in,  Israel's  hour  of  salvation  and  blessing  will 
come. 

The  important  question  is  next,  What  does 
this  term  "fulness  of  the  Gentiles"  mean  ?  It 
certainly  does  not  mean  what  that  unscholar- 
ly  paraphrase  of  the  New  Testament,  known 
and  circulated  under  the  name  of  "the  twen- 
tieth century  New  Testament"  has  made  of 
it.  That  inferior  translation  says :  "that  cal- 
lousness has  to  some  extent  come  upon  Is- 


82  The  Jewish  Question. 

rael,  and  will  continue  until  all  the  rest  of  the 
world  has  been  gathered  in."  These  trans- 
lators who  call  themselves,  "twenty  eminent 
scholars"  (they  have  chosen  to  hide  their 
identity)  tell  us  that  the  Greek  word  (plero- 
ma)  means  "all  the  rest  of  the  world."  What 
liberty  these  self-styled  eminent  scholars 
have  taken  with  the  Word  of  God !  Pleroma 
does  not  mean  "all  the  rest  of  the  world,"  but 
its  true  meaning  is  "the  full  number,"  or 
translated  with  one  word  "fulness."  The 
full  number  of  the  Gentiles,  or  fulness  of  the 
Gentiles  has  to  be  brought  in. 

This  term  must  likewise  to  be  distinguish- 
ed from  "the  times  of  the  Gentiles,"  which 
are  to  be  fulfilled.  Thus  we  read  Luke  xxi  :24, 
"Jerusalem  shall  be  trodden  down  of  the  Gen- 
tiles, until  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  be  ful- 
filled." Here,  too,  is  an  "until,"  that  little 
word  of  hope  and  cheer  for  poor  Israel.  But 
the  two  terms,  "times  of  the  Gentiles"  and 
"fulness  of  the  Gentiles"  are  not  identical. 

It  is  well  that  we  see  the  difference  at  this 
time.  The  times  of  the  Gentiles  will  end  sud- 
denly. The  times  of  the  Gentiles  began  with 
Nebuchadnezzar,  whose  dream,  divinely  in- 
terpreted by  Daniel  (Dan.  ii)  is  a  prophecy 
about  the  Gentiles,  and  in  that  dream  we  read 
how  the  times  of  the  Gentiles  will  end.    The 


A  Mystery  Made  Known.  83 

stone,  smites  the  great  image  at  its  feet,  the 
ten  toes,  that  future  ten  kingdom  division  of 
the  Roman  empire.  The  stone  which  pul- 
verizes the  image,  is  the  second  visible  and 
glorious  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Then  Jerusalem  will  be  delivered  and  will  no 
more  be  trodden  down  by  the  Gentiles,  but 
become  the  city  of  a  great  king. 

Now,  the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  is  some- 
thing altogether  different.  This  is  an  event, 
which  occurs  before  the  times  of  the  Gentiles 
are  fulfilled.  After  the  fulness  of  the  Gen- 
tiles has  been  brought  in  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles  will  still  go  on  till  the  sudden  end, 
the  great  catastrophe,  as  seen  from  Daniel's 
prophecy. 

The  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  means  a  certain 
number,  a  number  known  to  God  alone,  called 
out  from  the  nations  to  constitute  the 
church;  in  other  words,  the  fulness  of  the 
Gentiles  is  the  completion  of  the  true  church. 
As  soon  as  the  church  is  complete  as  to  num- 
bers, this  fulness  will  be  brought  in,  that  is, 
into  His  own  presence.  A  day  is  coming — 
and  how  soon  it  may  be! — when  the  church 
is  complete ;  the  last  member  has  been  added 
to  the  body  and  then  that  fulness  is  brought 
in.  In  Ephesians  i:23,  the  church  is  called 
His  body,  the  fulness  (pleroma)  of  Him.    An 


84  The  Jewish  Question. 

apostate  "church"  will  be  left  behind  amidst 
the  so-called  "Christian  nations"  and  the 
Gentile  age  will  end  in  its  foretold  tribulation 
and  wrath. 

As  soon  then  as  the  fulness  of  the  Gen- 
tiles is  brought  in,  the  church,  the  body  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  complete,  a  change 
takes  place  with  Israel.  God  begins  to  deal 
again  with  them  in  mercy  and  on  a  national 
basis.  Thus  we  see  in  the  book  of  Revelation 
after  the  removal  of  the  church,  that  a 
remnant  of  Israel,  12,000  of  each  tribe  is  cal- 
led and  sealed  (Revel,  vii.)  This  is  a  believ- 
ing remnant  and  the  blindness  is  no  longer 
upon  them.  And  then,  after  the  rapid  ful- 
fillment of  the  great  prophecies  concerning 
the  time  of  the  end,  Israel  prominently  in  the 
foreground,  the  blessed  and  glorious  moment 
comes  at  last,  when  all  Israel  is  saved.  And 
so  all  Israel  shall  be  saved.  The  "so,"  the 
manner  how  they  are  being  saved  is  given  in 
the  verse  which  follows:  "According  as  it 
is  written,  The  Deliverer  shall  come  out  of 
Sion;  He  shall  turn  away  ungodliness  from 
Jacob." 

But  what  have  we  to  understand  by  "all  Is- 
rael shall  be  saved?"  Some,  like  Calvin,  be- 
lieve that  "all  Israel"  means  the  whole  num- 
ber of  saved  from  the  very  beginning  and  in- 


A  Mystery  Made  Known.  85 

eludes  Jews  as  well  as  Gentiles.  This  is 
wrong  for  it  is  not  the  question  of  Gentile 
salvation,  but  of  Israel's  salvation.  Others 
teach  that  "all  Israel"  means  literally  all  the 
Israelites  who  ever  lived,  the  righteous  as 
well  as  the  unrighteous,  the  believing  ones 
and  the  unbelievers,  in  one  word  that  all  Jews 
who  ever  lived,  with  perhaps  a  few  exceptions, 
will  be  raised  up  at  the  time  to  which  the 
above  Scripture  refers,  and  all  will  then  be 
saved.  This  is  a  theory  which  might  be  cal- 
led "Jewish  Universalism,"  for  it  is  nothing 
less  and  of  necessity  must  lead  to  a  belief  in 
the  final  salvation  of  all  Gentiles.  Indeed, 
the  advocates  of  this  theory  of  a  universal 
Jewish  salvation,  hold  the  restitution  of  the 
Gentiles  as  well,  that  all  unsaved,  with  the 
exception  of  a  few  wicked  persons  of  a  special 
class,  will  be  raised  from  the  dead  at  the  be- 
ginning of  the  millennium  and  brought  back 
to  their  former  condition.  A  certain  Henry 
Dunn  is  the  modern  advocate  of  this  evil 
doctrine;  it  has  become  widespread  through 
the  "Millennial  Dawn  heresy"  and  alas! 
thousands  of  Christian  people  have  accepted 
it.  How  such  theories  are  read  into  the  Word 
of  God  we  learned  but  recently  from  a  volume 
treating  the  Jewish  question.  Matthew  xxiii  : 
37-39  is  used  as  an  argument  to  show  that 


86  The  Jewish  Question. 

"all  Israel"  includes  the  very  people  who  re- 
jected the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  Jerusalem 
and  all  will  be  raised  from  the  dead  to  see 
Him  coming  again  and  then  be  saved.  The 
following  verse  is  quoted:  "0  Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem,  that  killeth  the  prophets  and 
stoneth  them  that  are  sent  unto  her!  how 
often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  to- 
gether, as  a  hen  gathers  her  chickens  under 
her  wings,  and  ye  would  not.  Behold,  your 
house  is  left  unto  you  desolate,  For  I  say 
unto  ye,  ye  shall  in  no  wise  see  me  hence- 
forth, until  ye  shall  say,  Blessed  is  He  that 
cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord."  The  argu- 
ment first  states  that  when  the  Lord  says, 
"your  house  is  left  unto  you  desolate,"  He 
meant,  of  course,  the  people  who  stood  there, 
the  generation  which  saw  Him  and  rejected 
Him,  the  Lord  of  Glory.  It  is  then  claimed 
in  the  most  rigid  literalism  we  have  ever 
seen  in  print,  that  when  the  Lord  said,  "Ye 
shall  in  no  wise  see  me  henceforth,  until  ye 
shall  say,"  etc.,  that  He  meant  that  all  those 
who  stood  there  and  saw  Him  for  the  last 
time  in  the  temple,  that  all  these  individuals 
shall  see  Him  coming  again  and  welcome  Him 
with  "Blessed  is  He  that  cometh  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord."  According  to  this  belief  all 
these  wicked  Pharisees  and  chief  priests  who 


A  Mystery  Made  Known.  87 

rejected  the  Lord  wilfully,  who  accused  Him 
of  driving  out  demons  by  Beelzebub,  as  well 
as  the  mass  of  people  who  cried,  "Crucify 
Him,  Crucify  Him!"  will  be  raised  from  the 
dead  and  then  see  the  Lord  coming  and  be- 
lieve on  Him  and  be  saved.  That  such  is  not 
the  teaching  of  the  Word  of  God,  nor  the 
teaching  of  the  Scripture  quoted  from  Mat- 
thew, can  easily  be  proven.  The  passage  ap- 
pears only  in  the  Gospel  of  Matthew,  and  this 
is  the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom,  the  dispensa- 
tional  Gospel.  All  has  a  Jewish  national 
aspect.  The  words  before  us  are  addressed 
to  "Jerusalem"  and  to  the  nation,  and  Jeru- 
salem and  the  nation  will  abide  to  the  time 
when  He  comes  again.  At  the  time  of  His 
coming  there  will  be  a  believing  remnant  wel- 
coming Him  with  the  words  He  mentions, 
and  these  are  a  quotation  from  Psalm  cxviii. 
The  nation  had  rejected  Him,  but  He  looks  to 
the  time  of  His  coming  again,  when  others 
of  the  nation  living  in  that  day,  shall  wait 
for  the  heavens  to  open,  and  the  cloud  of 
glory  to  bring  Him  back.  Indeed,  these  un- 
believing Jews,  these  Elders  and  Pharisees, 
if  they  believed  not  in  the  offer  made  to  them 
after  the  Cross  (and  perhaps  many  did)  have 
gone  to  their  place  and  await  the  resurrection 
of  the  wicked  and  not  the  resurrection  of  the 


88  The  Jewish  Question. 

just.  But  there  is  a  verse  which  completely 
settles  such  argumentation  as  the  one  we 
have  mentioned.  In  Matthew  xxi  :43,  "There- 
fore, say  I  unto  you,  The  kingdom  of  God 
shall  be  taken  from  you,  and  given  to  a  nation 
bringing  forth  the  fruits  thereof."  The 
question  is  what  nation  does  the  Lord  mean 
here?  The  nation  in  His  day  had  rejected 
Him  and  the  kingdom  is  to  be  taken  away 
from  the  nation — another  nation  is  to  receive 
the  kingdom.  If  the  argument  is  right  that 
"all  Israel"  is  to  be  saved,  that  all  Jews,  the 
very  Pharisees,  who  heard  the  Lord  speaking, 
who  hated  Him  with  a  Satanic  hatred,  are 
to  be  raised  from  the  dead  and  then  receive 
the  kingdom,  why  did  the  Lord  not  say  so  in 
plain  words  and  give  them  such  a  promise? 
Here  He  states  most  positively  that  the  king- 
dom shall  be  taken  from  you,  and  it  must 
mean  that  generation  living,  and  He  does  not 
say  a  word  that  they  ever  will  get  it  back. 
Another  nation  is  to  receive  it.  That  other 
nation  is  not  the  church,  for  the  church  does 
not  inherit  Israel's  earthly  kingdom.  The 
kingdom  is  Israel's,  the  other  nation  is  the 
Israel  of  the  future,  that  remnant  of  His 
people  living  in  the  day  of  His  glorious  mani- 
festation. 

We  care  not  to  follow  other  arguments 


A  Mystery  Made  Known.  89 

which  are  advanced  to  defend  so  unscriptural 
a  doctrine.  These  arguments  are  flimsy  in- 
deed. "All  Israel  shall  be  saved"  means  the 
Israel  living  in  that  day,  when  the  Lord  is 
manifested  in  power  and  in  glory.  In  the 
great  tribulation,  the  time  of  Jacob's  trouble, 
the  whole  nation  will  be  sifted  as  never  be- 
fore. 

"And  it  shall  come  to  pass,  that  in  all  the 
land,  saith  the  Lord,  two  parts  therein  shall 
be  cut  off  and  die,  but  the  third  shall  be  left 
therein"  (Zech.  xiii:8,  9). 

"And  I  will  purge  out  from  among  you  the 
rebels,  and  them  that  transgress  against  me, 
I  will  bring  them  forth  out  of  the  country, 
where  they  sojourn  and  they  shall  not  enter 
into  the  land  of  Israel  and  ye  shall  know  that 
I  am  the  Lord"  (Ezekiel  xx:38).  What  will 
these  restitutionists  do  with  a  passage  like 
this? 

In  Matthew  xxiv,  in  the  prophecy  of  our 
Lord  concerning  the  great  tribulation,  we 
read  it  likewise.  As  it  was  in  the  days  of 
Noah,  so  shall  it  be  again.  Judgment  came 
and  overtook  the  ungodly  but  Noah  and  his 
house  was  saved.  So  will  it  be,  "One  shall 
be  taken  (in  judgment)  and  the  other  left" 
in  the  earth  (Matt.  xxiv:37-41).  Judgment 
and  fire  will  sift  the  nation  during  that  time 


90  The  Jewish  Question. 

of  trouble.  (Isaiah  iv:4.)  A  remnant  of 
the  nation  will  pass  through  it  all,  while  the 
ungodly  who  worshipped  the  false  Messiah 
shall  be  swept  away.  It  is  this  remnant 
which  constitutes  "all  Israel,"  and  which 
shall  be  saved.  However,  we  must  dis- 
tinguish this  part  of  the  nation  saved  in  that 
day  from  the  godly,  believing  remnant,  which 
throughout  the  great  tribulation,  preaches 
the  Gospel  of  the  kingdom  to  the  nations, 
the  remnant,  which  is  sealed,  which  suffers 
and  overcomes.  This  remnant  is  clearly  re- 
vealed throughout  the  prophetic  Word.  In 
Revelation  xii  we  have  the  woman,  who  flees 
into  the  wilderness  and  is  nourished  there 
for  a  time,  times  and  half  a  time  (3^  years), 
during  the  great  tribulation ;  this  is  the  part 
of  the  nation  Israel,  which  is  preserved.  But 
at  the  close  of  the  chapter  we  read,  "And  the 
dragon  was  wroth  with  the  woman,  and  went 
to  make  war  with  the  remnant  of  her  seed, 
which  keeps  the  commandments  of  God  and 
have  the  testimony  of  Jesus  Christ"  (Revel. 
xii:17).  The  remnant  here  is  the  believing, 
witnessing  remnant. 

And  now  the  manner  of  their  salvation. 
"According  as  it  is  written,  The  Deliverer 
shall  come  out  of  Sion;  He  shall  turn  away 
ungodliness  from  Jacob."  This  is  the  return 


A  Mystery  Made  Known.  91 

of  the  Lord  as  Deliverer  of  His  earthly- 
people.  He  comes  again  to  Sion  and  then 
out  of  Sion  He  shines  forth  in  His  mighty 
power  as  Deliverer.  This  a  most  precious 
portion  we  have  reached.  The  fact  given 
here,  that  the  second  coming  of  Christ  in 
His  majesty,  for  the  salvation,  deliverance 
and  restoration  of  His  people,  Israel,  living 
in  that  day,  is  revealed  throughout  the  Old 
Testament.  It  would  be  impossible  to  touch 
upon  all  the  passages  which  teach  it,  and 
types  which  foreshadow  this  great  event. 

Of  the  latter  we  mention  the  story  of 
Joseph.  There  we  see  the  man  in  power  and 
glory,  the  man  before  whom  the  knee  had 
to  be  bowed,  the  Revealer  of  Secrets.  And 
when  his  brethren  came  the  second  time,  he 
made  himself  known  to  them.  There  he 
stood  attired  in  his  royal  robe*  with  royal 
authority.  Before  him  eleven  trembling  men, 
hungry,  in  rags  and  terror  stricken.     And 


*Grand  is  the  scene  in  which  Joseph  makes  him- 
self known  to  his  brethren.  In  the  immense  pillared 
hall,  the  walls  of  which  are  covered  with  mysterious 
hieroglypthics,  there  sits  on  a  golden  throne  the 
second  Pharaoh,  his  tall,  beardless,  statue-like 
figure  clothed  in  white  byssus,  his  bare  arms  orna- 
mented with  golden  bracelets,  on  his  forehead  the 
sacred  golden  serpent,  and,  through  an  interpreter, 


92  The  Jewish  Question. 

now  he  begins  in  the  tenderness  of  his  heart 
to  weep  and  says:  "Come  near  to  me.  .  .  . 
I  am  Joseph  your  brother,  whom  y*  sold  into 
Egypt.  .  .  .  then  he  kissed  all  his  brethren 
and  wept  upon  them."  Blessed  type  of  what 
it  will  be  when  He  comes  the  second  time  and 
will  "forgive  them  their  sins  and  remember 
them  no  more." 

Or  we  think  of  Moses.  When  he  came  the 
first  time  to  his  brethren  to  deliver  them  they 
rejected  him  and  the  second  time,  forty  years 
after,  when  the  tribulation  had  risen  to  its 
greatest  height,  they  received  him  and  he 
led  them  forth.  And  in  the  New  Testament 
we  have  a  type  in  unbelieving  Thomas.  When 
the  Lord  had  appeared  the  first  time  after 
His  resurrection  to  the  shut  in  disciples,  and 
Thomas  was  not  there,  he  declared,  "Except 
I  shall  see  in  His  hands  the  print  of  the  nails, 
and  put  my  finger  into  the  print  of  the  nails, 
and  thrust  my  hand  into  his  side,  I  will  not 
believe"  (John  xx:25).    Seven  days  pass  by. 

is  speaking  cold,  threatening  words  to  frightened 
weather-beaten  shepherd  strangers.  These  are 
conscience  stricken,  and  growing  pale,  whisper  one 
to  another,  "We  are  verily  guilty  concerning  our 
brother."  Then  the  prince  arises,  descends  from 
his  throne,  stretches  his  arms  out  towards  them, 
and  exclaims  in  well  known  Hebrew  accents,  "I  am 
Joseph  your  brother." — F.  Bettex, 


rA  Mystery  Made  Known.  93 

Poor  Thomas,  how  unhappy,  in  doubt  and  un- 
certainty he  must  have  been!  And  after 
eight  days  again  His  disciples  were  within, 
and  Thomas  was  with  them.  Then  came 
Jesus,  the  doors  being  shut,  and  stood  in  the 
midst,  and  said,  "Peace  be  unto  you."  And 
what  will  He  do,  He  who  searches  the  hearts  ? 
Will  He  now  condemn  Thomas  for  his  un- 
belief? Will  He  upbraid  him  for  being  so 
slow  of  heart?  Not  a  word  of  it.  "Then 
saith  He  to  Thomas,  Reach  hither  thy  finger, 
and  behold  my  hands;  and  reach  hither  thy 
hand,  and  thrust  it  into  my  side ;  and  be  not 
faithless,  but  believing.,,  And  Thomas 
answered  Him:  "My  Lord  and  my  God." 
Surely,  thus  it  will  be  again  when  they  who 
knew  Him  not  will  behold  Him,  the  pierced 
One.  There  are  thousands  of  orthodox  Jews 
living  to-day  who  firmly  believe  in  the  coming 
of  Messiah,  thousands  in  whom  a  changed 
attitude  towards  the  person  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  noticeable.  Was  He  perhaps 
the  Messiah  or  was  He  not  the  promised  One  ? 
The  question  will  be  answered  for  them  in 
that  day.  "Immediately  after  the  tribulation 
of  those  days  shall  the  sun  be  darkened,  and 
the  moon  shall  not  give  her  light,  and  the 
stars  shall  fall  from  heaven,  and  the  powers 
of  the  heavens  shall  be  shaken.    And  then 


94  The  Jewish  Question. 

shall  appear  the  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man  in 
heaven,  and  then  shall  all  the  tribes  of  the 
earth  (land)  mourn;  and  they  shall  see  the 
Son  of  Man  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven 
with  power  and  great  glory"  (Matt.  xxiv:29, 
30).  "Behold  He  cometh  with  clouds,  and 
every  eye  shall  see  Him,  and  they  also  which 
pierced  Him,  and  all  the  tribes  of  the  land 
shall  wail  because  of  Him.  Even  so.  Amen" 
(Revel.  i:7).  "And  they  shall  look  upon  me, 
whom  they  have  pierced,  and  they  shall 
mourn  for  Him,  as  one  mourneth  for  his  only 
son,  and  shall  be  in  bitterness  for  his  first- 
born" (Zech.  xii:10,  11).  What  a  day  that 
will  be !  Tribulation  has  reached  its  height. 
There  seems  to  be  no  escape.  All  at  once 
there  comes  an  ominous  lull.  The  sun  is 
gradually  darkening  and  the  moon  dulls, 
while  stars  fall  and  the  heavens  and  the 
earth  are  shaken.  But  what  means  that 
shining  cloud  up  yonder?  In  the  midst  of 
the  awe  inspiring,  fearful  phenomena  of  na- 
ture, a  cloud  full  of  fire  and  glory!  The 
remnant  has  been  praying  for  divine  inter- 
ference, for  a  manifestation  from  above. 
"Oh,  that  Thou  wouldest  rend  the  heavens, 
that  Thou  wouldest  come  down"  (Is.  lxxivrl). 
They  know  at  once  from  their  own  Scripture 
that  that  cloud  is  the  Shekinah,  the  garment 


A  Mystery  Made  Knozvn.  95 

of  Jehovah.  Their  whole  past  history  comes 
up  before  them.  Did  not  Jehovah  dwell  of 
old  with  our  fathers  and  lead  them  ?  Did  He 
not  scatter  our  enemies?  Surely  this  is  Je- 
hovah who  shines  forth!  And  so  we  hear 
them  crying  out  in  that  dark,  dark  night. 
"Lo  this  is  our  God,  we  have  waited  for  Him, 
and  He  will  save  us;  this  is  the  Lord;  we 
have  waited  for  Him,  we  will  be  glad  and 
rejoice  in  His  salvation"  (Isaiah  xxv:9).  But 
the  cloud  ^omes  near,  flashes  of  glory  light 
up  the  heavens  (Hab.  iii  :3) ;  the  mighty  light, 
like  that  light  which  fell  upon  Saul  of  Tarsus, 
the  Pharisee  of  the  Pharisees,  stronger  than 
the  midday  sun,  illumines  everything.  And 
again  they  glance  upward  and  behold  sitting 
upon  the  cloud  is  one  like  the  Son  of  Man 
(Daniel  vii:13).  Again  they  look  upon  that 
wonderful,  wonderful  scene  and  they  see  that 
Son  of  Man  is  pierced.  And  as  it  flashed  upon 
the  brethren  of  Joseph  that  the  man  in  the 
royal  robe  is  their  brother,  whom  they  had 
sold,  thus  it  will  flash  upon  Israel,  it  is  Je- 
hovah-Jesus, whom  they  had  rejected,  their 
Messiah-King,  who  comes  in  power  and  great 
glory.  Then  they  will  say:  "We  hid  as  it 
were  our  faces  from  Him;  He  was  despised 
and  we  esteemed  Him  not.  Surely  He  hath 
borne  our  griefs  and  carried  our  sorrows; 


96  The  Jewish  Question. 

yet  we  did  esteem  Him  stricken,  smitten  of 
God  and  afflicted.  But  He  was  wounded  for 
our  transgressions,  He  was  bruised  for  our 
iniquities ;  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was 
upon  Him ;  and  with  His  stripes  we  are  heal- 
ed" (Isa.  liii:3-5).  "And  His  feet  shall  stand 
in  that  day  upon  the  mount  of  Olives"  (Zech. 
xiv:4).  He  has  come  again  in  like  manner 
as  He  went  away.  And  then  He  will  turn 
away  ungodliness  from  Jacob  and  take  away 
their  sins.  The  iniquity  of  the  land  and  the 
people  is  removed  in  one  day.  (Zech.  iii:9) : 
"Who  hath  heard  such  a  thing?  who  hath 
seen  such  things?  Shall  the  land  be  made 
to  bring  forth  in  one  day  ?  or  shall  a  nation  be 
born  at  once  ?  For  as  soon  as  Zion  travailed, 
she  brought  forth  her  children.  .  .  .  Rejoice 
with  Jerusalem,  and  be  glad  with  her,  all  ye 
that  love  her;  rejoice  for  joy  with  her,  all  ye 
that  mourn  for  her"  (Isaiah  lxvi:8,  10). 
"And  it  shall  come  to  pass  afterward  that  I 
will  pour  out  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh;  and 
your  sons  and  your  daughters  shall  prophesy, 
your  old  men  shall  dream  dreams,  your  young 
men  shall  see  visions"  (Joel  ii:28).  "Neither 
will  I  hide  my  face  any  more  from  them ;  for 
I  have  poured  out  my  Spirit  upon  the  house 
of  Israel,  saith  the  Lord  God"  (Ezek.  xxxix: 
29) .   But  we  must  refrain  from  quoting  more 


A  Mystery  Made  Known.  97 

from  the  promises  and  the  glory  which  are 
Israel's.  There  is  not  one  word  of  all  the 
gracious,  blessed  things,  which  the  Lord  has 
promised  to  Israel  by  the  mouths  of  His  holy 
prophets  which  will  remain  unfulfilled  in  that 
day. 

The  passage  here,  "the  Redeemer  shall 
come  out  of  Zion,"  is  a  quotation  from  two 
Old  Testament  Scriptures.  Isaiah  lix:20: 
"And  the  Redeemer  shall  come  to  Zion  and 
unto  them  that  turn  from  transgression  in 
Jacob,  saith  the  Lord."  The  second,  Psalm 
xiv:7:  "Oh,  that  the  salvation  of  Israel  were 
come  out  of  Zion!  When  the  Lord  bringeth 
back  the  captivity  of  His  people,  Jacob  shall 
rejoice  and  Israel  shall  be  glad." 

May  that  day  be  hastened.  May  we  pray 
earnestly,  "Even  so,  come  Lord  Jesus ;"  may 
He  come  soon  to  take  us  unto  Himself  and 
then  it  will  be  only  a  little  while  and  these 
glorious  scenes  will  be  enacted  upon  this 
earth,  Jerusalem  will  be  delivered  and  become 
a  praise  in  the  earth,  and  the  scattered  nation 
will  be  gathered  by  the  great  Shepherd  of 
Israel,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Righteousness  and  peace  will  kiss  each 
other  then  and  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of 
the  Lord  will  cover  the  earth  as  the  waters 
the  deep.     There  will  be    singing    in    the 


98  The  Jewish  Question, 

heavens  and  singing  on  the  earth,  "Peace  on 
earth  and  glory  to  God  in  the  highest."  The 
center  of  rejoicing  will  be  Jerusalem  and  a 
redeemed  people,  "Sing  and  rejoice,  0  daugh- 
ter of  Zion;  for  lo,  I  come  to  dwell  in  the 
midst  of  Thee,  saith  the  Lord.  And  many 
nations  shall  be  joined  to  the  Lord  in  that  day 
and  shall  be  for  my  people  and  I  will  dwell 
in  the  midst  of  Thee,  and  thou  shalt  know, 
that  the  Lord  of  hosts  hath  sent  me  unto 
thee"  (Zech.  ii:10,  11). 

Thus  the  great  question :  "Hath  God  cast 
away  His  people  ?"  is  fully  answered.  After 
our  meditation  on  these  wonderful  answers 
we  have  learned  why  the  Holy  Spirit  makes 
the  answers  so  emphatic.  Far  be  the 
thought !  God's  own  Word,  faithfulness  and 
righteousness,  are  at  stake.  If  He  had  cast 
away  His  people,  if  there  were  no  future  for 
them,  no  fulfillment  of  Old  Testament  prophe- 
cies, then  might  we  well  close  our  Bibles  and 
despair. 

All  praise  and  glory  to  God  for  He  hath 
not  cast  away  His  people. 


CONCLUSION 

And  now  the  conclusion.  The  doctrinal 
part  of  Komans  has  a  grand  and  glorious 
summing  up  in  Romans  viii,  beginning  with 
the  thirty-first  verse:  "What  shall  we  then 
say  to  these  things  ?  If  God  be  for  us,  who 
can  be  against  us  ?"  The  dispensational  sec- 
tion, Romans  ix,  x,  and  xi  has  also  a  sublime 
conclusion. 

"As  regards  the  Gospel,  they  are  enemies 
on  your  account ;  but  as  regards  election,  be- 
loved on  account  of  the  fathers.  For  the 
gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repent- 
ance. For  as  indeed  ye  also  have  not  believed 
in  God,  but  now  have  been  objects  of  mercy 
through  the  unbelief  of  these;  so  these  also 
have  now  not  believed  in  your  mercy  in  order 
that  they  also  may  be  objects  of  mercy.  For 
God  hath  shut  up  together  all  in  unbelief,  in 
order  that  He  might  show  mercy  to  all.  O 
depths  of  riches,  both  of  wisdom  and  knowl- 
edge of  God!  How  unsearchable  His  judg- 
ments, and  untraceable  His  ways !  For  who 
has  known  the  mind  of  the  Lord,  or  who  has 
been  His  counsellor?    Or  who  has  first  given 


100  The  Jewish  Question. 

to  Him,  and  it  shall  be  rendered  to  him  ?  For 
of  Him,  and  for  Him  are  all  things.  To  Him 
be  glory  forever.    Amen." 

It  is  not  our  intention  to  follow  these  words 
in  detail.  Blessed  it  is  to  read  once  more  the 
grand  assurance,  that  God's  gifts  and  calling 
are  without  repentance ;  He  will  not  go  back 
on  His  Word.  And  Jews  and  Gentiles  are 
all  under  mercy,  which  does  not  mean,  that 
every  Jew  and  Gentile  will  receive  mercy,  as 
taught  by  that  unscriptural  "restitution  of 
all  things."  The  Gentiles  who  believed,  ob- 
tained mercy,  and  when  at  last  the  Lord 
somes  again  Israel  will  receive  blessing,  salva- 
tion, and  enter  on  her  inheritance  through 
the  sovereign  mercy  of  God  alone.  And  thus 
Jew  and  Gentile  is  a  debtor  to  that  wonderful 
mercy. 

It  is  this  fact  which  brings  forth  the 
sublime  doxology.  What  depths  of  riches 
both  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God  in 
God's  merciful  dealings  with  the  Gentiles 
and  with  the  Jews!  How  unsearchable  His 
judgments!  How  untraceable  His  waysl 
May  we  even  now  join  with  our  hearts  in 
the  praise  of  our  God  and  our  Father  and 
delight  ourselves  more  and  more  with  His 
merciful  ways.  And  as  such  who  are  saved 
by  grace  may  we  not  forget  that  they  are 


Conclusion.  101 

enemies  as  regards  the  Gospel  on  our  account 
and  as  regards  election,  beloved  for  the 
Father's  sake.  May  we  remember  Israel,  His 
poor  wandering,  scattered  sheep.  May  we 
not  forget  the  debt  we  owe  to  that  people, 
the  people  "whose  is  the  adoption,  and  the 
glory,  and  the  covenants,  and  the  lawgiving, 
and  the  service  and  the  promises ;  whose  are 
the  fathers ;  and  of  whom  according  to  flesh 
is  the  Christ,  who  is  over  all,  God  blessed 
forever"  (Rom,  ix;45)r 


Zbc  flfcesstanic  (Slueetion 


Ebe  flDessianic  Question 

By.  C.  I.  Scofield. 

It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  "Messiah" 
and  "Christ"  are  exactly  equivalent  terms; 
that  they  mean,  in  themselves,  no  more  than 
anointed.  This  word,  though,  has  come  to 
have  a  special  application  to  that  personage 
upon  whom  the  counsels  of  God  as  unfolded 
in  the  Scriptures  converge.  Really  the  Mes- 
sianic question,  when  we  come  to  look  at  it 
closely,  resolves  itself  into  several  questions. 

First  of  all,  is  it  correct  to  say  that  there 
is  any  Messianic  question?  In  other  words, 
do  the  Scriptures  contain  a  doctrine  of  the 
Messiah?  There  are  some  persons  (not  by 
any  means  destitute  of  learning)  who  deny 
that  rightly  understood,  the  Old  Testament 
contains  any  Messianic  doctrine.  They  claim 
that  it  has  been  altogether  read  into  these 
Scriptures,  first,  by  rabbis  of  olden  time,  the 
scribes  and  rulers,  and  then  taken  up,  ampli- 
fied, and  made  central  in  evangelical  theology 
by  Christian  exegetes.    So  there  is,  as  you 


106  The  Messianic  Question. 

see,  really  a  question  as  to  whether  there  is 
a  Messianic  question. 

I  do  not  regard  this  contention  as  very  im- 
portant for  the  reason,  if  for  no  other,  that  it 
is  not  raised  by  any  considerable  number  of 
persons.  A  little  group  of  Jewish  scholars 
and  a  little  group  of  Gentile  scholars  very 
"advanced"  as  they  call  themselves  do  raise 
the  question,  but  the  great  body  of  Jewish,  as 
of  Christian  exegetes,  maintain  that  there  is 
a  doctrine  of  the  Messiah.  Of  course,  they 
disagree  on  the  one  point  of  the  identity  of 
Messiah;  the  Jews  denying  the  Messiahship 
of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  Christian  exegetes 
affirming  it. 

If  we  answer  this  question  in  the  affirma- 
tive, and  say  that  there  is  a  doctrine  of  the 
Messiah,  we,  of  course,  come  to  another  ques- 
tion: Who  and  what  is  Messiah?  In  other 
words,  what  marks  of  identity  are  attached 
to  this  personage  in  the  Scriptures  so  that 
the  world  may  be  perfectly  sure  it  is  not  de- 
ceived by  an  impostor;  so  that  it  will  not  be 
open  to  any  one  not  the  Messiah,  to  maintain 
a  claim  to  the  character,  and  thus  falsely 
secure  to  himself  the  rights  that  properly  be- 
long to  the  true  Messiah. 

Of  course,  if  there  is  any  prophetic  testi- 
mony concerning  such  a  coming  one,  the  ob- 


The  Messianic  Question.  107 

ject  of  that  testimony  must  be  two-fold: 
First,  to  furnish  these  very  marks  of  identity 
of  which  I  speak ;  and  secondly,  to  prepare  the 
Jews  and  through  them  the  world,  to  receive 
this  personage  when  he  should  come.  These 
two  things  are  evident :  God  would  not  send 
into  the  world  one  having  such  rights  as  we 
shall  find  to  belong  to  Messiah,  without  in 
some  efficient  way  providing  for  his  authen- 
ication.  To  illustrate,  I  understand  there  is 
somewhere  a  young  man  who  claims  to  be, 
not  merely  the  Messiah  of  the  Old  Testament, 
but  the  actual  historic  Christ  of  the  New 
Testament,  and  he  has  gathered  a  number  of 
deluded  people  who  believe  in  him,  and  upon 
whose  credulity  he  is  living.  Now  how  do 
we  know  that  he  is  an  impostor  ?  Because  he 
does  not  answer  to  the  prophetic  portrait  of 
Messiah. 

We  come,  then,  to  our  second  question: 
How  may  we  know  the  Messiah  ?  What  kind 
of  person  will  he  be  ?  Of  what  country  ?  Of 
what  ancestry  ?    What  works  will  he  do  ? 

Thirdly,  we  come  to  the  question  of  funda- 
mental interest  to  us,  as  Christians,  and  sure- 
ly, of  no  less  interest  to  the  candid  Jew :  Was 
Jesus  the  Messiah  ?  A  vast  number  of  people 
(and  no  inconsiderable  number  of  Jews)  have, 
through  all  the  ages,    believed,    with    the 


108  The  Messianic  Question. 

Scriptures  in  their  hands,  that  Jesus  was  the 
Messiah ;  and,  surely,  our  Jewish  friends  who 
do  not  so  receive  Him,  will  admit  that  it  is  a 
question  of  supreme  national  and  personal 
import  to  them  whether  he  be  indeed  that 
personage. 

Now  it  is  evident  that  an  inquiry  as  to  the 
second  of  these  questions  will  indirectly 
answer  the  first.  If  we  can  find  in  Scripture 
certain  marks  of  identity  put  upon  and  about 
a  certain  Coming  One,  that  answers  the  ques- 
tion as  to  whether  there  is  a  doctrine  of  the 
Messiah.  We  shall  not,  of  course,  find  the 
prophetic  portrait  there  unless  there  is  com- 
ing or  already  come,  the  original  from  whom 
the  portrait  was  painted.  If  there  is  no 
doctrine  of  the  Messiah  in  Scripture,  we  shall 
fail  to  find  the  portrait.  If,  on  the  other 
hand,  we  do  find  the  portrait,  then  we  must 
say  that  there  is  a  Messianic  doctrine,  who- 
ever the  Messiah  may  turn  out  to  be. 

It  is  also  evident  that  the  answer  to  the 
second  question  as  to  the  marks  of  identity 
and  of  the  conditions  which  must  be  fulfilled 
by  the  Messiah  when  He  comes,  will  guide, 
and  must  guide  us,  in  the  answer  to  the  third 
question :  Is  Jesus  of  Nazareth  the  Messiah  ? 
If  He  is  the  Messiah,  we  shall  know  Him  to 
be  so  because  He  answers  exactly  to  every 


The  Messianic  Question.  109 

one  of  the  Scriptural  marks  of  identity  given 
by  the  prophets.  That  must  be  the  test.  If, 
in  even  one  of  them — as  many  and  as  minute 
as  they  are — we  find  that  Jesus  fails,  then  we 
must  say  however  great  the  cost  may  be  to 
our  hearts  and  thoughts  and  opinions  that 
he  is  not  the  Messiah.  If,  on  the  other  hand; 
he  fills  out  in  every  detail  the  prophetic 
picture  of  Messiah,  without  one  exception, 
then,  it  seems  to  me  that,  by  the  same  reason- 
ing, and  by  the  same  logical  necessity,  we  are 
forced  to  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah. 

I.  This  is  a  Biblical  question;  it  is  not  a 
question  to  be  settled  by  appeal  to  theologians 
or  rabbis.  For  it  is  perfectly  evident  that  a 
Jewish  scholar,  for  instance,  might  marshal 
as  many  and  as  eminent  authorities  from 
among  his  own  intellectual  and  thoughtful 
people  against  the  Messiaship  of  Jesus,  as  a 
Christian  could  bring  to  its  support.  That 
would  be  simply  a  clash  of  human  and  there- 
fore fallible  opinion.  The  question  is  not  to 
be  determined  by  a  show  of  hands.  We  must 
go  back  to  the  Old  Testament  and  see  for 
ourselves  what  doctrine  of  Messiah  is  there 
unfolded,  and  then  test  the  claims  of  Jesus 
by  that  doctrine. 

Like  all  other  parts  of  God's  revelation  we 
shall  find  it  to  proceed  from  the  simple  to  the 


110  The  Messianic  Question. 

complex — from  outline  to  detail.  It  is  the 
divine  method  of  revelation  to  begin  with 
some  outline  truth,  and  then  gradually,  with 
stroke  upon  stroke  of  the  brush,  to  put  in 
the  details  until  we  have  the  fulness.  "First 
the  blade;  then  the  ear;  then  the  full  corn 
in  the  ear"  is  the  divine  rule.  We  do  not  get 
the  oak  first,  but  the  acorn,  and  afterward 
the  oak. 

Just  so  it  is  with  all  Scripture.  We  shall 
find  it  true  of  this  Messianic  doctrine.  It 
will  begin  with  a  germ-truth  and  proceed 
with  increasing  detail  from  simplicity  to  com- 
plexity. Let  me  turn  now  to  Genesis  iii:14, 
15: 

"And  the  Lord  God  said  unto  the  serpent,  because 
thou  hast  done  this,  thou  art  cursed  above  all  cattle, 
and  above  every  beast  of  the  field;  upon  thy  belly 
shalt  (thou  go,  and  dust  shalt  thou  eat  all  the  days 
of  thy  life.  And  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee 
and  the  woman,  and  between  thy  seed  and  her  seed; 
it  shall  bruise  thy  head  and  thou  shalt  bruise  his 
heel." 

Here  lies  in  germ  all  redemptive  and  Mes- 
sianic truth.  The  woman's  seed  is  to  inflict 
upon  Satan,  finally,  a  fatal  wound,  but  in  so 
doing,  is  to  suffer.  It  does  not  tell  us  much, 
and  we  will  not  read  into  it  a  word  from 
subsequent  revelation,  but  it  does  set  us  look- 


The  Messianic  Question.  Ill 

ing  for  a  descendant  of  that  woman  who  shall 
be  victorious  over  Satan. 

Let  us  turn  now  to  Genesis  xii:l-3: 

"Now  the  Lord  had  said  unto  Abram:  Get  theo 
out  of  thy  country  and  from  thy  kindred,  and  from 
thy  fathers  house,  unto  a  land  that  I  will  shew 
thee.  And  I  will  make  of  thee  a  great  nation,  and 
I  will  bless  thee  and  make  thy  name  great;  and 
thou  shalt  be  a  blessing:  And  I  will  bless  them  that 
bless  thee,  and  curse  him  that  curseth  thee;  and 
in  thee  shall  all  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed." 

Now  let  us  not  treat  these  words  unfairly. 
They  are  luminous  in  the  light  of  what  is  to 
follow,  but,  certainly  are  not  in  themselves 
a  promise  that  of  the  descendants  of  Abra- 
ham there  should  arise  a  Messiah.  I  want 
you  only  to  notice  here  that  a  blessing  is 
promised  to  this  man  Abraham  for  all  the 
families  of  the  earth.  That  is  all,  but  hold 
that  much  firmly  in  mind.  I  will  read  now 
from  Genesis  xv:l-4. 

"After  these  things  the  word  of  the  Lord  came 
unto  Abram  in  a  vision,  saying,  Fear  not,  Abram; 
I  am  thy  shield,  and  thy  exceeding  great  reward. 
And  Abram  said,  Lord  God,  what  wilt  thou  give  me, 
seeing  I  go  childless,  and  the  steward  of  my  house 
is  this  Eliezer  of  Damascus?  And  Abram  said, 
Behold,  to  me  thou  hast  given  no  seed;  and,  lo, 
one  born  in  my  house  is  mine  heir.  And,  behold, 
the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  him,  saying,  This 
shall  not  be  thine  heir;  but  he  that  shall  come  forth 
out  of  thine  own  bowels  shall  be  thine  heir." 


112  The  Messianic  Question. 

Again  in  the  xviii  chapter,  18th  verse: 

"Seeing  that  Abraham  shall  surely  become  a  great 
and  mighty  nation,  and  all  the  nations  of  the  earth 
shall  be  blessed  in  him." 

Again,  be  sure  to  keep  within  the  limits  of 
the  text.  This  is  no  promise  of  a  personal 
Messiah;  so  far  we  have  only  a  nation  in 
which  all  nations  are  to  be  blessed.  Let  me, 
however,  anticipate  enough  to  say  that  I  am 
going  to  connect  by  an  indisputable  chain  of 
evidence,  the  Messiah  with  this  promise. 

Of  course,  I  am  assuming  that  the  Genesis 
story  is  familiar  to  every  one  of  you.  You 
know  that  Abram  had  a  son  born  in  his  house 
named  Ishmael.  At  this  time  he  was  the 
only  son,  and  Abram  besought  God  to  fulfill 
in  Ishmael  the  promises  which  I  have  quoted, 
and  this  is  God's  answer: 

"And  God  said,  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  bear  thee  a 
son  indeed;  and  thou  shalt  call  his  name  Isaac:  and 
I  will  establish  my  covenant  with  him  for  an  ever- 
lasting covenant,  and  with  his  seed  after  him" 
(Gen.  xvii:19). 

Here,  you  see,  the  principle  of  selection,  of 
limitation,  enters.  And,  of  course,  you  see 
the  bearing  of  it  upon  the  identification  of 
Messiah.  Suppose  an  Ishmaelite  comes  to 
me  and  says:  "I  am  the  Messiah,"  I  am 
ready  to  say,  "No,  whoever  the  Messiah  may 


The  Messianic  Question.  113 

be,  you  are  not  the  Messiah,  you  are  a  de- 
scendant of  Ishmael,  and  not  of  Isaac.  The 
Messiah  must  come  through  Isaac.' '  In  this 
way,  as  we  shall  see,  God  narrows  the  pos- 
sibilities of  deception  until  they  are  wholly 
excluded.  Ishmael  and  all  his  descendants 
are  excluded.  The  Messiah  must  come 
through  Isaac.  Let  us  now  turn  to  Gen. 
xxviii:13,  14: 

"And,  behold,  the  Lord  stood  above  it,  and  said,  I 
am  the  Lord  God  of  Abraham  thy  father,  and  the 
God  of  Isaac;  the  land  whereon  thou  liest,  to  thee 
will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed;  and  thy  seed  shall 
be  as  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  thou  shalt  spread 
abroad  to  the  west,  and  to  the  east,  and  to  the 
north,  and  to  the  south;  and  in  thee  and  in  thy  seed 
shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed." 

We  have  here,  as  you  know,  the  scene  at 
Bethel,  where  God  entered  into  covenant  with 
Jacob,  the  son  of  Isaac.  And  here  again  the 
principle  of  exclusion  is  seen.  There  had 
been  another  son,  Esau,  remember  that ;  and 
that  the  Abrahamic  promise  passes  over  Esau 
to  Jacob.  No  descendant  of  Esau  may  claim 
the  Messianic  title. 

And  now  we  are  to  see  eleven  of  the  twelve 
tribes  of  Israel  excluded: 

"Judah,  thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren  shall 
praise;  thy  hand  shall  be  in  the  neck  of  thine 
enemies;  thy  father's  children  shall  bow  down  before 


114  The  Messianic  Question. 

thee.  Judah  is  a  lion's  whelp;  from  the  prey,  my 
son,  thou  are  gone  up:  he  stoopeth  down,  he  couched 
as  a  lion,  and  as  an  old  lion;  who  shall  rouse  him 
up?  The  sceptre  shall  not  depart  from  Judah,  nor 
a  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  until  Shiloh  come; 
and  unto  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people  be" 
(Gen.  xlix:8-10). 

You  see  how  immensely  the  slender  line  of 
promise  here  gains  in  definiteness.  Out  of 
twelve  tribes,  one  tribe  is  chosen,  the  tribe 
of  Judah.  From  henceforth  we  look  ex- 
pectantly to  Judah  only.  It  is  not  enough 
that  the  claimant  of  the  Messiahship  shall 
be  an  Israelite  merely;  he  must  establish  a 
Judaic  descent. 

Here,  for  the  first  time,  we  have  the  word 
"sceptre"  indicating  kingly  power.  We  also 
have  the  word  "Shiloh."  The  old  Rabbis  all 
agree  that  this  is  the  description  of  Mes- 
siah as  the  Prince  of  Peace.  The  word  Shiloh 
implies  that.  Notice  another  significant 
thing  here.  "To  him  shall  the  gathering  of 
the  people  be."  A  Messiah  mark.  The  people 
are  to  gather  to  him  as  a  center. 

In  Numbers  xxiii,  xxiv  we  have  the  suc- 
cessive prophetic  visions  of  Balaam.  I  will 
read  but  one  of  them: 

"I  shall  see  him,  but  not  now:  I  shall  behold  him, 
but  not  nigh:  there  shall  come  a  star  out  of  Jacob, 
and  a  Sceptre  shall  rise  out  of  Israel,  and  shall  smite 


The  Messianic   Question.  115 

the  corners  of  Moab,  and  destroy  all  the  children 
of  Sheth.  And  Edom  shall  be  a  possession,  Seir 
also  shall  be  a  possession  for  his  enemies;  and 
Israel  shall  do  valiantly.  Out  of  Jacob  shall  come 
he  that  shall  have  dominion"  (Num.  xxiv:  17-19). 

Here  we  have  "sceptre"  again.  When  God 
has  added  a  detail  He  never  leaves  it  behind 
any  more;  it  is  always  carried  on.  You  are 
to  note,  too,  that  in  these  passages,  we  get, 
not  only  the  idea  of  dominion,  of  rule,  but 
also  the  idea  of  personality — "I  shall  see  him, 
but  not  now." 

Let  me  anticipate  an  objection  right  here. 
Does  not  this  mean  the  whole  people  of  Is- 
rael ?  Does  not  the  Messianic  doctrine  really 
concern  a  people,  rather  than  a  person,  and 
is  it  not  true  that  the  promises  which  we 
Christians  are  apt  to  make  personal,  are  after 
all,  rather  indefinite  ?  That  question  is  raised 
by  some.  But  notice  the  words :  "There  shall 
come  a  Star  out  of  Jacob,  and  a  Sceptre  shall 
rise  out  of  Israel."  And  to  this  we  may  add 
another  statement  contemporary  with  it: 

"The  Lord  thy  God  will  raise  up  unto  thee  a 
Prophet  from  the  midst  of  thee,  of  thy  brethren  like 
unto  me;  unto  him  ye  shall  hearken"  (Deuteronomy 
xviii:15). 

This  passage,  from  the  lips  of  Moses,  adds 
one  of  the  official  titles  of  Messiah.     The 


116  The  Messianic  Question. 

Sceptred  One  out  of  Israel  is  to  be  a  Prophet 
also. 

Now  we  come  to  another  limitation  of  the 
promise.  It  is  the  promise  made  to  David 
concerning  Solomon: 

"And  when  thy  days  be  fulfilled,  and  thou  shalt 
sleep  with  thy  fathers,  I  will  set  up  thy  seed  after 
thee,  which  shall  proceed  out  of  thy  bowels,  and  I 
will  establish  his  kingdom.  He  shall  build  a  house 
for  my  name,  and  I  will  establish  the  throne  of  his 
kingdom  for  ever.  I  will  be  his  father  and  he  shall 
be  my  son.  If  he  commit  iniquity,  I  will  chasten 
him  with  the  rod  of  men,  and  with  the  stripes  of 
the  children  of  men;  but  my  mercy  shall  not  depart 
away  from  him,  as  I  took  it  from  Saul,  whom  I  put 
away  before  thee.  And  thine  house  and  thy  king- 
dom shall  be  established  for  ever  before  thee;  thy 
throne  shall  be  established  for  ever."  (2  Sam.  vii: 
14,  16). 

Let  us  see  how  David  understood  this  co- 
venant. We  have  his  last  words  in  the  xxiii 
chapter  of  2  Samuel,  verses  1  to  5 : 

"Now  these  be  the  last  words  of  David.  David, 
the  son  of  Jesse  said,  and  the  man  who  was  raised 
up  on  high,  the  anointed  of  the  God  of  Jacob,  and 
the  sweet  Psalmist  of  Israel  said:  The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  spake  by  me  and  his  word  was  in  my  tongue. 
The  God  of  Israel  said,  the  Rock  of  Israel  spake  to 
me:  He  that  ruleth  over  men  must  be  just,  ruling 
in  the  fear  of  God.  And  he  shall  be  as  the  light 
of  the  morning  when  the  sun  riseth,  even  a  morning 
without  clouds;  as  the  tender  grass  springing  out 


The  Messianic  Question.  117 

of  the  earth  by  clear  shining  after  rain.  Although 
my  house  be  not  so  with  God;  yet  he  hath  made 
with  me  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all 
things,  and  sure." 

Here  are  the  last  words  of  David,  the  sweet 
Psalmist  of  Israel ;  his  life  stained  with  many 
sins,  yet  a  man  who  loved  God  supremely. 
As  he  lay  there  dying,  his  last  thoughts 
turned  to  that  promise  which  God  made  con- 
cerning his  seed. 

Let  us  see  now  how  the  prophets  inter- 
preted that  promise: 

"And  there  shall  come  forth  a  rod  out  of  the  stem 
of  Jesse,  and  a  Branch  shall  grow  out  of  his  roots; 
and  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  shall  rest  upon  him;  the 
spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding;  the  spirit  of 
counsel  and  might;  the  spirit  of  knowledge,  and  of 
the  fear  of  the  Lord"  (Isaiah  xi:l,  2). 

Well,  but  some  one  says,  this  might  have 
referred  to  any  descendant  of  David.  It 
might  have  referred  to  the  line  of  King 
Josiah,  for  instance,  who  was  of  the  Davidic 
line.    Let  us  see.    I  will  read  the  tenth  verse : 

"And  in  that  day  there  shall  be  a  root  of  Jesse, 
which  shall  stand  for  an  ensign  of  the  people,  to 
it  shall  the  Gentiles  seek,  and  his  rest  shall  be 
glorious." 

"In  that  day."  What  day?  A  day  which 
has  not  yet  dawned.    Hear  verse  two : 


118  The  Messianic  Question. 

"And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  that  day  that  the 
Lord  shall  set  his  hand  again  the  second  time  to 
recover  the  remnant  of  his  people,  which  shall  be 
left  from  Assyria,  and  from  Egypt,  and  from  Path- 
ros,  and  from  Cush,  and  from  Elam,  and  from 
Shinar,  and  from  Hamath,  and  from  the  islands  of 
the  sea.  And  he  shall  set  up  an  ensign  for  the  na- 
tions, and  shall  assemble  the  outcasts  of  Israel,  and 
gather  together  the  dispersed  of  Judah  from  the  four 
corners  of  the  earth." 

When  Isaiah  wrote  these  words,  the  people 
had  not  gone  into  Assyria,  and  this  prophecy 
has  never  been  fulfilled  down  to  this  day. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  prophecy  of  Jere- 
miah. Of  course,  I  pass  over  chapter  after 
chapter  in  Isaiah  which  might  be  quoted.  I 
want  you  to  notice  the  word  "Branch"  as  a 
mark  of  identification. 

"Behold  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord,  that  I  will 
raise  unto  David  a  righteous  Branch,  and  a  King 
shall  reign  and  prosper,  and  shall  execute  judgment 
and  justice  in  the  earth"  (Jeremiah  xxiii:5).  "For 
thus  saith  the  Lord,  David  shall  never  want  a  man 
to  sit  upon  the  throne  of  the  house  of  Israel;  neither 
shall  the  priests,  the  Levites,  want  a  man  before  me 
to  offer  burnt  offerings,  and  to  kindle  meat  offer- 
ings, and  to  do  sacrifice  continually.  And  the  word 
of  the  Lord  came  unto  Jeremiah,  saying,  Thus  saith 
the  Lord,  If  ye  can  break  my  covenant  of  the  day 
and  my  covenant  of  the  night,  and  that  there  should 
not  be  day  and  night  in  their  season;  then  may  also 


The  Messianic  Question.  119 

my  covenant  be  broken  with  David,  my  servant,  that 
he  should  not  have  a  son  to  reign  upon  his  throne" 
(Jeremiah  xxxiii:  17-21). 

Here  again  is  a  narrowing  of  the  whole 
Messianic  outlook.  We  began  with  a  promise 
that  might  have  been  fulfilled  in  any  man 
born  of  woman;  it  was  narrowed  first  into 
the  man,  Abram;  then  Ishmael  and  his 
posterity  were  excluded  and  Isaac  chosen; 
then  Esau  and  his  descendants  were  excluded 
and  Jacob  chosen;  then  out  of  the  twelve 
sons  of  Jacob  Judah  was  chosen,  and  now, 
out  of  all  Judah,  David  and  his  line.  Who- 
ever the  Messiah  is,  he  must  come  from  the 
kingly  house  of  David,  and  therefore  must 
be  of  Judah — a  Jew.  Do  you  not  see  how  the 
marks  of  identity  are  accumulating?  It 
would  not  do  even  for  a  Jew  to  say  "I  am  the 
Messiah/'  unless  he  could  establish  his  Da- 
vidic  descent. 

II.  It  seems  to  me  that  we  are  getting  a 
very  positive  sort  of  Messianic  doctrine,  and 
very  definite  sort  of  Messianic  doctrine  as 
well. 

And  so  far  it  has  been  perfectly  simple 
and  quite  within  the  limits  of  the  natural. 
But  now  we  come  to  something  in  this  line 
of  descent  which  is  miraculous.  Turn  back 
with  me  to  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah.     I  will 


120  The  Messianic  Question. 

read  the  13th  and  14th  verses  of  the  vii 
chapter. 

"And  he  said,  Hear  ye  now,  0  house  of  David;  Is 
it  a  small  thing  for  you  to  weary  men,  but  will  ye 
weary  my  God  also?  Therefore  the  Lord  Himself 
shall  give  you  a  sign;  Behold  a  virgin  shall  con- 
ceive and  bear  a  son,  and  shall  call  His  name 
Immanuel." 

You  know  the  meaning  of  that  word — "God 
with  us."  I  want  you  to  observe  that  these 
words  are  addressed  to  the  house  of  David. 
You  know  we  speak  sometimes  of  this  or  that 
part  of  Scripture  as  difficult  to  understand. 
Students  have  come  to  me  with  the  ix  chap- 
ter of  Romans  to  say  that  they  could  not 
understand  it;  and  people  say  that  the  pas- 
sage I  have  just  read  is  a  difficult  passage. 
The  fact  is,  that  the  difficulty  is  not  in  under- 
standing it,  but  in  believing  it.  It  is  all  plain 
enough.  There  could  not  be  a  simpler  state- 
ment put  into  words.  God  promised  to  give 
the  house  of  David  a  sign  by  which  it  might 
know  the  long  promised  One  when  He  should 
appear.  The  sign  would  be  that,  in  that 
house  and  family,  a  virgin  should  conceive 
and  bear  a  son;  therefore,  of  course,  super- 
naturally  and  miraculously  conceived.  The 
explanation  of  so  strange  an  event  is  in  the 
name — Immanuel. 


The  Messianic  Question.  121 

Remember,  I  am  reading  now  from  the 
prophecy  of  Isaiah — Jewish  scripture — and 
not  from  the  New  Testament,  The  im- 
maculate conception  and  Deity  of  Messiah  is, 
therefore,  an  Old  Testament  doctrine.  The 
New  Testament  merely  confirms  it. 

And  that  doctrine,  equally  with  all  others, 
is  to  be  received  by  faith.  God  makes  the 
revelation  clear  enough;  then  it  is  to  be  be- 
lieved. We  know  what  it  is — not  always  how 
it  is.  And  how  should  it  be  otherwise  ?  "My 
thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,  neither  are 
my  ways  your  ways,  saith  the  Lord.  For  as 
the  heavens  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  are 
my  ways  higher  than  your  ways,  and  my 
thoughts  than  your  thoughts."  And  that  is 
an  absolutely  necessary  corollary  to  the 
postulate  of  a  God.  If  His  thoughts  were  no 
higher  than  my  thoughts,  He  would  be  pre- 
cisely of  my  dimensions,  and  I  would  not 
worship  Him,  neither  would  I  give  any  heed 
to  His  book. 

I  will  now  trun  to  Isaiah  ix:6,  7: 

"For  unto  us  a  child  is  born,  unto  us  a  Son  is 
given,  and  the  government  shall  be  upon  His  shoul- 
der; and  His  name  shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Coun- 
sellor, the  mighty  God,  the  Everlasting  Father,  the 
Prince  of  Peace." 

This  is  the  same  Davidic  personage,  mark- 


122  The  Messianic  Question. 

ed  by  his  peculiar  kingly  right,  for  the  pas- 
sage proceeds: 

"Of  the  increase  of  His  government  and  peace 
there  shall  be  no  end,  upon  the  throne  of  David  and 
upon  his  kingdom,  to  order  it,  and  to  establish  it 
with  judgment  and  with  justice,  from  henceforth, 
even  for  ever.  The  zeal  of  the  Lord  of  Hosts  will 
perform  this." 

Let  me  recapitulate  for  a  moment : 

(1)  Messiah  must  be  of  the  seed  of  Eve; 
that  is  to  say,  he  must  be  human,  a  man.  An 
angel  cannot  be  Messiah.  One  of  the  Cheru- 
bim or  Seraphim  cannot  be  Messiah.  What- 
soever else  Messiah  is,  he  is  human. 

(2)  He  must  be  the  seed  of  Abraham;  a 
Hebrew,  not  a  Gentile. 

(3)  He  must  be  of  the  line  of  Isaac  and 
Jacob;  not  an  Ishmaelite,  nor  an  Edomite. 

(4)  He  must  be  of  the  tribe  of  Judah — a 
Jew. 

(5)  He  must  be  of  the  royal  family  of 
David,  among  the  families  of  Judah.  Even 
in  Judah  only  David's  family  can  produce 
him. 

(6)  He  must  be  miraculously  born  of  a 
virgin  mother. 

(7)  He  must  be  "Immanuel" — God  with  us ; 
the  mighty  God,  the  everlasting  Father. 


The  Messianic  Question.  123 

But  how  can  the  mighty  God,  the  ever- 
lasting Father,  be  also  a  man  ? 

Where  do  these  ideas  ever  come  together 
again  ?  In  one  of  the  four  Gospels  of  the  New 
Testament.  There  we  find  this  statement. 
Understand  me,  I  do  not  say  an  explanation, 
but  a  statement.  God  is  not  greatly  con- 
cerned to  explain  Himself  to  us.  This  is  the 
statement :  "In  the  beginning  was  the  Word, 
and  the  Word  was  with  God,  and  the  Word 
was  God,  And  the  Word  became  flesh  and 
dwelt  among  us"  (John  i:l,  14).  . 

And  I  submit  that  the  statement  is  ade- 
quate and  satisfying.  If  the  mighty  God 
chose  to  become  "flesh,"  and  to  tabernacle 
among  us  it  was,  most  evidently,  within  His 
power  to  do  it. 

III.  Is  there  nothing  in  addition  to  this? 
Nothing,  for  instance,  as  to  the  time  when 
Messiah  should  appear?  It  is  evident  that 
the  time  of  the  birth  of  Messiah  is,  if  revealed 
a  very  important  mark  of  identification.  I 
think  if  we  look  at  the  prophecy  of  Daniel, 
we  shall  find  there  a  very  clear  revelation  as 
to  the  time  Messiah  should  appear.  Daniel 
ix:21-23. 

"Yea,  whiles  I  was  speaking  in  prayer,  even  the 
man  Gabriel,  whom  I  had  seen  in  the  vision  at  the 
beginning,  being  caused  to  fly  swiftly,  touched  me 


124  The  Messianic  Question. 

about  the  time  of  the  evening  oblation.  And  he 
informed  me,  and  talked  with  me,  and  said  O  Daniel, 
I  am  now  come  forth  to  give  thee  skill  and  under- 
standing. At  the  beginning  of  thy  supplications 
the  commandment  came  forth,  and  I  am  come  to 
shew  thee;  for  thou  art  greatly  beloved;  therefore 
understand  the  matter  and  consider  the  vision. 
Seventy  weeks  are  determined  upon  thy  people,  and 
upon  thy  holy  city,  to  finish  the  transgression,  and 
to  make  an  end  of  sins." 

Remember  Israel  was  now  under  punish- 
ment from  God — not  cast  off,  but  punished 
by  captivity  for  national  sins. 

"And  to  make  reconciliation  for  iniquity,  and  to 
bring  in  everlasting  righteousness,  and  to  seal  up 
the  vision  and  prophecy,  and  to  anoint  the  Most 
Holy." 

That  is,  to  finally  bring  in  the  time,  of 
which  I  shall  speak  when  the  subject  of  the 
millennium  is  before  us,  when  a  restored  Is- 
rael, in  full  fellowship  with  the  God  of  their 
fathers,  shall  be  the  channel  of  His  blessings 
to  the  earth. 

"Know,  therefore,  and  understand,  that  from  the 
going  forth  of  the  commandment  to  restore  and  to 
build  Jerusalem,  unto  the  Messiah  the  Prince,  shall 
be  seven  weeks  and  three  score  and  two  weeks;  the 
street  shall  be  built  again,  and  the  wall,  even  in 
troublous  times.  And  after  three  score  and  two 
weeks  shall  Messiah  be  cut  off,  but  not  for  Him- 
self; and  the  people  of  the  prince  that  shall  come 
shall  destroy  the  city  and  the  sanctuary." 


The  Messianic  Question.  125 

Now  observe,  between  the  time  when 
Daniel  was  seeing  visions  and  the  prophesy- 
ing in  Babylon,  and  the  destruction  of  Jeru- 
salem in  the  year  70  A.  D.,  the  whole  thing 
is  limited.  The  coming  of  Messiah,  and  the 
cutting  off  of  Messiah,  must  take  place  before 
the  sweeping  destruction  of  Jerusalem  and 
the  sanctuary.  Whatever  this  seventy  weeks 
means,  it  is  a  period  (except  the  last  week) 
that  must  fall  between  Daniel's  time  and  the 
year  A.  D.  70,  for  since  the  year  70,  there  has 
been  no  sanctuary  in  Jerusalem.  There  the 
temple  was  destroyed  in  that  year,  and  has 
never  been  rebuilt.  Here  then,  is  another 
vastly  important  condition.  The  Messiah 
must  not  only  possess  the  unique  personality 
which  we  have  been  considering,  but  He  must 
appear  between  the  time  when  Daniel  prophe- 
sied, say  B.  C.  538,  and  the  time  when  Jerusa- 
lem was  destroyed,  A.  D.  70.  So  much  for 
the  time-limit. 

And  now  we  come  to  another  condition 
which  Messiah  must  meet.  The  prophet  Mi- 
cah  foretells  the  very  place  of  his  nativity: 

But  thou,  Bethlehem-Ephratah,  though  thou  be 
little  among  the  thousands  of  Judah,  yet  out  of 
thee  shall  he  come  forth  unto  me  that  is  to  be  ruler 
in  Israel;  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from  of 
old,  from  everlasting  (Micah.  v;2). 


126  The  Messianic  Question. 

Here  we  have  the  Divine  again.  These 
words  are  plain  and  simple  enough.  Who  is 
this  ruler  who  is  to  come  out  of  Bethlehem  ? 
It  is  He  whose  goings  forth  have  been  from 
everlasting. 

Bear  in  mind  now,  that,  to  the  seven  marks 
of  identity  in  our  recapitulation  of  a  few 
minutes  ago,  we  must  now  add  that  Messiah 
must  appear  between  B.  C.  538,  and  A.  D.  70, 
and  that  He  must  have  Bethlehem-Ephratah 
for  His  birthplace.    So  far  all  is  clear. 

IV.  But  the  very  passage  from  Danie. 
which  furnished  us  with  the  time-limit  sug- 
gested also  a  difficulty.  Up  to  that  point  we 
had  been  reading  about  a  sceptred  one,  a 
mighty  king  of  David's  line  who  was  also  the 
mighty  God.  But  Daniel  tells  us  distinctly 
that  after  a  certain  time  "shall  Messiah  be 
cut  off." 

That  raises  a  difficulty.  What  is  this  about 
a  Divine  King  who  is  reigning  victoriously 
over  everything,  being  cut  off,  "but  not  for 
himself?"  Now  this  difficulty  is  not  to  be 
explained  away,  for  if  we  turn  to  Isaiah  and 
the  Psalms,  we  shall  find  a  great  deal  of  the 
same  sort.    See,  for  example,  Isaiah  lii:13: 

Behold  my  servant  shall  deal  prudently,  he  shall 
be  exalted  and  extolled,  and  be  very  high.  As  many 
were  astonished  at  thee;  his  visage  was  so  marred 


The  Messianic  Question.  127 

more  than  any  man,  and  his  form  more  than  the 
sons  of  men." 

But  is  it  Messiah  of  whom  Isaiah  is  talk- 
ing ?    Compare  Zechariah  iii  :8 : 

"Hear  now,  0  Joshua  the  high  priest,  thou  and 
thy  fellows  that  sit  before  thee;  for  they  are  men 
wondered  at;  for  behold  I  will  bring  forth  my 
servant,  The  Branch." 

What  do  we  find  David's  son  called 
throughout  the  prophets?  Just  these  two 
names,  "Branch"  and  "my  servant."  This 
certainly  seems  mysterious;  here  is  Jeho- 
vah's Servant  who  is  going  to  be  extolled,  ex- 
alted and  very  high,  and  yet  his  visage  is  to 
be  more  marred  than  any  man.  And  the  dif- 
ficulty apparently  gets  more  difficult  as  we 
go  on.  To  return  to  Isaiah,  read  the  liii. 
chapter  1-9. 

Then  we  have  the  xxii  Psalm,  which  most 
commentators — Christian  and  some  Jewish 
— agree  is  Messianic,  with  its  despairing  cry, 
"My  God,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken 
me !"  and  its  tragic  burden  of  pierced  hands 
and  feet.  Here  we  have  then,  on  the  one 
hand,  a  glorious  king,  in  Himself  Deity,  so 
that  He  has  all  power,  whose  very  name  is 
Immanuel — "God  with  us ;"  yet,  on  the  other 
hand,  with  His  visage  more  marred  than  any 
man,  His  bones  out  of  joint,    dying    with 


128  The  Messianic  Question. 

thirst,  while  His  vesture  is  parted  and  lots 
cast  for  it.  How  can  Messiah  be  a  mighty 
king,  and  yet  be  such  an  abject  sufferer? 
How  can  he  be  the  great  Davidic  monarch 
restoring  again  the  glory  of  Solomon's  house, 
and  also  a  sacrifice  bearing  the  sins  and  ini- 
quities of  Israel  and  all  the  people?  How 
can  it  be  ?  Clearly,  destinies  so  strongly  con- 
trasted could  not  be  accomplished  simultane- 
ously. There  is  only  one  answer  possible. 
There  is  but  one  word  which  can  link  the 
glorious  reigning  with  the  suffering  and  the 
death  and  that  word  is  "resurrection."  Sup- 
pose that,  in  the  divine  purpose,  the  mighty 
drama  is  to  be  in  two  acts  ?  Suppose  the  suf- 
fering Messiah  and  the  glorious  Messiah  to 
be  one,  divided  by  death,  reunited  by  resur- 
rection? Suppose  Messiah  came,  and  was 
"cut  off"  as  Daniel  predicted,  and  suppose 
that  His  life  came  again;  then  all  the  other 
and  glorious  side  of  the  picture  is  still  pos- 
sible, is  it  not?  If  He  did  not  come  before 
A.  D.  70  He  can  never  come,  and  the  prophets 
are  false  witnesses.  If  He  came  and  died, 
and  went  into  the  grave  and  remained  there, 
then  God  promised  Israel  and  David  some- 
thing that  He  cannot  perform;  but  if  He 
came  forth  out  of  the  grave,  the  earthly  glory 
is  all  possible  yet. 


The  Messianic  Question,  129 

Well,  you  say,  but  is  not  the  doctrine  of  the 
resurrection  a  New  Testament  doctrine?  Is 
it  not  something  that  Christians  invented  to 
bridge  this  very  difficulty,  and  make  it  pos- 
sible to  reconcile  the  prediction  of  Messiah's 
earthly  greatness,  with  the  predictions  of 
His  humiliation  and  death?  No,  indeed; 
resurrection  is  an  Old  Testament  doctrine,  as 
we  shall  presently  see. 

As  matter  of  belief  you  Christians — the 
great  mass  of  you — practically  reject  the 
voluminous  testimony  of  the  prophets  con- 
cerning the  earthly  glory  and  power  of  the 
Messiah  "upon  the  throne  of  David"  (Isa.  ix: 
7) ;  while  you  Jews — the  great  mass  of  you 
— will  not  receive  the  abundant  testimony  of 
your  own  prophets  as  to  Messiah's  humilia- 
tion and  death.  Against  both  of  you  there 
is  levelled  the  reproach  of  Jesus:  "0  fools, 
and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  that  the  pro- 
phets have  spoken."  The  truth  is  that  resur- 
rection is  the  bridge  from  Messiah's  death 
to  Messiah's  glory,  and  that  the  Second  Ad- 
vent supplements  and  completes  the  first. 

Now  I  want  you  to  notice  with  me  just  two 
or  three  Old  Testament  passages  upon  the 
question  of  resurrection.  Take,  for  instance, 
Job  xix:25: 

"For  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that 


130  The  Messianic  Question. 

He  shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the  earth; 
and  though,  after  my  skin,  worms  destroy  this  body, 
yet  in  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God." 

Job  lived  before  the  law,  before  the  Penta- 
teuch was  written.  Did  not  Job  believe  in 
resurrection?  There  was  his  body  which 
was  going  to  be  food  for  worms,  yet,  said  he, 
"In  my  flesh  shall  I  see  God;  whom  I  shall 
see  for  myself,  and  mine  eyes  shall  behold, 
and  not  another." 

In  the  xvii.  Psalm  and  15th  verse,  we  have 
David's  faith  in  the  resurrection: 

"As  for  me,"  says  David,  "I  will  behold 
thy  face  in  righteousness:  I  shall  be  satis- 
fied when  I  awake  with  thy  likeness." 

The  resurrection  is  not  a  new  doctrine;  it 
is  as  old  as  Job,  and  was  David's  hope.  Now 
let  us  turn  to  the  xvi  Psalm  and  see  a 
promise  concerning  the  Messiah.  Many  of 
the  old  rabbis,  as  well  as  commentators,  inter- 
pret the  xvi  Psalm  of  Messiah.  I  will  read 
the  eighth  verse : 

"I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me:  because* 
He  is  at  my  right  hand  I  shall  not  be  moved.  There- 
fore my  heart  is  glad  and  my  glory  rejoiceth;  my 
flesh  also  shall  rest  in  hope.  For  thou  wilt  not 
leave  my  soul  in  sheol;  neither  wilt  thou  suffer 
thine  Roly  One  to  see  corruption." 

Here  is  not  only  the  doctrine  of  the  resur- 


The  Messianic  Question.  131 

rection,  but  a  definite  promise  that  Messiah 
should  be  raised  from  the  dead. 

In  Daniel  xii:2,  the  matter  becomes,  if 
possible,  more  definite  still: 

"And  many  of  them  that  sleep  in  the  dust  of  the 
earth  shall  awake,  some  to  everlasting  life,  and 
some  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt." 

Daniel  went  to  the  grave  with  the  promise 
that  he  should  stand  in  his  lot  at  the  end 
of  the  days.  Resurrection  then  is  the  word 
that  bridges  the  whole  difficulty,  which  re- 
conciles the  apparent  contradiction  of  so 
many  Scriptures.  In  other  words,  Messiah 
comes ;  Messiah  accomplishes  all  that  is  pre- 
dicted of  Him  concerning  suffering,  humilia- 
tion and  death ;  He  rises  from  the  grave,  and 
comes  again  to  set  up  the  kingdom,  and  to 
complete  the  fulfillment  of  prophecy. 

V.  But,  it  may  fairly  be  asked,  is  not  this 
doctrine  of  a  second  advent  of  Messiah  to 
restore  the  Davidic  monarchy  and  make  good 
the  multitudinous  unfulfilled  promises  to 
Israel  a  mere  invention  to  bolster  the  Mes- 
sianic claims  of  Jesus?  In  other  words,  is 
it  clearly  taught  in  Scripture  ? 

Every  Jew  familiar  with  the  words  of  the 
Prophets  is  aware  that  whatever  else  Mes- 
siah does  He  must  restore  Israel  or  leave  the 


132  The  Messianic  Question. 

great  mass  of  prediction  concerning  Him  un- 
fulfilled. 

I  turn  to  the  first  chapter  of  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles,  and  begin  at  the  sixth  verse : 

"When  they,  therefore,  were  come  together,  they 
asked  of  Him,  saying,  Lord,  wilt  thou  at  this  time 
restore  again  the  kingdom  to  Israel?" 

Observe,  the  question  was  not  at  all  as  to 
whether  He  was  going  to  restore  the  king- 
dom to  Israel,  but  simply  and  only  as  to  when 
He  would  do  it. 

Remember,  before  you  begin  to  say  "how 
carnal,  how  material,  how  unspiritual  are 
these  men!  Will  they  never  understand 
Jesus,"  that,  indwelt  by  the  Holy  Spirit 
(John  xx:22),  with  understandings  opened 
to  understand  the  Scriptures  (Luke  xxiv:45) 
they  had  been  sitting  forty  days  at  the  feet 
of  the  risen  Lord  while  He  taught  them  con- 
cerning kingdom  truth  (Acts  i:3).  I  think 
they  had  some  advantages  over  our  com- 
mentators in  the  matter  of  prophetic  study. 
Evidently  they  felt  their  understanding  of 
kingdom  truth  to  be  complete  except  at  one 
point — the  time  of  the  restoration.  Here  is 
Jesus'  answer : 

"And  he  said  unto  them,  it  is  not  for  you  to  know 
the  times  or  the  seasons,  which  the  Father  hath  put 
in  His  own  power." 


The  Messianic  Question.  133 

Suppose  one  agent  after  another,  fully 
authorized  to  speak  for  me,  had  promised  in 
my  behalf  that  at  some  time  I  would  perform 
a  certain  action,  and  that,  finally  interrogated 
in  person  as  to  the  time  when  I  would  per- 
form that  action  I  should  say:  "I  decline 
to  speak  upon  that  point/'  would  it  not  be 
a  monstrous  perversion  to  say  that  I  thereby 
discredited  my  agents,  and  that  my  words 
must  be  understood  as  announcing  that  I 
intended  never  to  perform  the  act? 

In  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  it  is  distinctly  stated  that  after 
gathering  out  of  the  Gentiles  a  people  for 
His  name,  He  will  return.    Sixteenth  verse: 

"After  this  I  will  return,  and  will  build  again 
the  tabernacle  of  David,  which  is  fallen  down;  and 
I  will  build  again  the  ruins  thereof,  and  I  will  set 
it  up;  that  the  residue  of  men  might  seek  after  the 
Lord,  and  all  the  Gentiles,  upon  whom  My  name  is 
called,  saith  the  Lord,  who  doeth  all  these  things." 

Such  is  the  Messianic  doctrine. 

And  now  we  come  to  our  final  question, 
Was  Jesus  that  Messiah? 

No  one  questions  that  Jesus  was  of  the 
family  of  David.  In  all  the  record  of  His 
life,  where  He  was  brought  into  sharpest 
controversy  with  those  who  rejected  utterly 
His  Messianic  claims,  the  objection  never  was 


134  The  Messianic  Question. 

made  that  He  was  not  of  the  line  of  David. 
No  one  ever  denied  that  He  was  a  descendant 
of  Abraham,  or  of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  or 
born  in  Bethlehem  of  Judea.  Don't  you  see 
that  the  sure  and  simple  way  to  settle  for- 
ever the  claims  of  Jesus  to  be  the  Messiah, 
if  He  were  indeed  an  imposter,  was  in  the 
power  of  those  who  were  rigidly  examining 
those  claims?  A  disproof  of  his  Davidic 
descent,  or  a  disproof  of  his  birth  at  Bethle- 
hem, and  every  disciple  would  have  left  him 
at  once. 

Then  again:  Immediately  —  certainly 
within  fifty  days — after  Jesus'  death  was 
accomplished,  men  went  through  Jerusalem 
and  Judea  preaching  that  he  was  risen  from 
the  dead.  There,  again,  was  an  opportunity 
to  end  His  cult  by  simply  disproving  the 
fact.  Indeed,  it  never  could  have  survived 
the  disproof  of  even  one  of  the  eleven  points 
of  identification. 

At  the  present  time  no  man  can  either  es- 
tablish or  disprove  a  claim  to  Davidic  an- 
cestry. For  that  reason  alone,  Messiah  must 
have  come  before  the  genealogical  registers 
were  destroyed.  In  Christ's  day  the  genealo- 
gical registers  were  open  to  all,  and  a  Jewish 
man  could  prove  his  descent,  but  at  present 
he  cannot  do  so,  therefore,  the  Messiah  can- 


The  Messianic  Question.  135 

not  appear  for  the  first  time  now.  Either 
the  whole  Messianic  prophecy  falls  to  the 
ground,  or  the  Messiah  has  already  appeared. 
The  historic  facts  concerning  Jesus  of 
Nazareth  are  notorious,  simple,  undisputed. 
See  how  the  lines  of  proof,  of  identity,  con- 
verge upon  Jesus,  and  upon  no  one  else. 

1.  He  is  a  descendant  of  Eve — a  Man. 

2.  He  is  the  seed  of  Abraham,  nay,  the 
very  seed. 

3.  He  derives  His  Abrahamic  ancestry 
through  Jacob,  not  Esau ;  Isaac,  not  Ishmael. 

4.  He  is  of  the  Tribe  of  Judah. 

5.  He  is  David's  Son,  and  heir  of  the 
Davidic  covenant. 

6.  He  was  miraculously  conceived  in  the 
womb  of  a  virgin. 

7.  He  proved  His  Deity  by  works  beyond 
the  power  of  man ;  by  superhuman  holiness ; 
by  the  resurrection  from  the  dead,  and  by 
His  influence  upon  the  world, 

8.  He  appeared  at  precisely  the  right 
time  according  to  Daniel's  prophecy. 

9.  He  was  born,  against  all  human  proba- 
bility, in  Bethlehem-Ephratah. 

10.  He  fulfilled  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah 
concerning  His  vicarious  sacrifice. 

11.  He  died  in  precisely  the  manner  fore- 
told in  Psalm  xxii.    His  hands  and  feet  were 


136  The  Messianic  Question. 

pierced,  and  His  executioners  cast  lots  upon 
His  raiment. 

It  is  evident,  (1)  that  no  one  could  bring 
these  signs  upon  himself;  (2)  that  they  are 
too  numerous,  specific  and  minute  to  leave 
an  accidental  fulfillment  among  the  possibili- 
ties; (3)  that,  therefore,  the  being  in  whom 
they  all  centre  is  the  Messiah ;  and  (4)  that, 
since  they  all  centre  upon  Jesus,  it  follows 
that  He  is  Messiah. 

And  now,  a  closing  word  to  you,  my  Jew- 
ish readers.  Some  of  you  are  looking  for 
Messiah.  Well,  He  is  coming.  That  is  the 
"blessed  hope"  of  Jew,  and  Christian.  Be- 
lieve this,  hold  it  fast,  whatever  betides.  But 
I  implore  you  by  everything  you  hold  dear, 
believe  also  that  He  has  come.  The  humilia- 
tion, the  sacrificial  death  is  accomplished; 
the  glory  is  coming.  Between  now  and  that 
time  when  Messiah  shall  come  in  glory,  how 
unspeakably  solemn  and  important  is  the 
question  of  our  personal  relation  to  Him. 
My  friends — Jew  and  Gentile  alike — "there 
is  no  other  name  given  under  heaven  whereby 
we  must  be  saved."  The  thought  of  a  sinner 
ever  reaching  God's  presence  apart  from 
sacrifice,  is  foreign  to  the  whole  of  Scripture. 
What  sacrifice  can  we  offer?  The  temple  is 
gone,  the  priesthood  is  gone,  is  there  no  sac- 


The  Messianic  Question.  137 

rifice  for  us?  Yes,  there  is;  there  is  the 
sacrifice  of  Messiah.  I  claim  it  and  need  no 
other.  Having  believed  in  that  sacrifice,  and 
received  Him  as  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  the 
Blessed — I  await,  in  perfect  peace,  the  time 
when  He  shall  gloriously  return  to  receive  me 
to  Himself,  and  to  reign  on  the  earth.  I  may 
die  before  that  time  comes;  even  so  I  shall 
go  to  Him  by  virtue  of  that  sacrifice,  trust- 
ing in  His  shed  blood. 

How  is  it  with  you?  God  has  given  you 
this  chain  of  evidence,  has  affixed  to  that 
one  person,  among  all  the  sons  of  men  and 
sons  of  God,  the  marks  of  Messiah,  will  you 
now  turn  away  from  Him?  Receive  Him 
now.  "He  came  unto  His  own,  and  His  own 
received  Him  not,  but  as  many  as  received 
Him,  to  them  gave  He  power  to  become  the 
sons  of  God."  Will  you  not  say,  and  with 
heartfelt  conviction:  "Thou  art  the  Christ, 
the  Son  of  the  living  God." 


The  Prophet  Daniel 

From  the  large  number  of 
letters  of  appreciation  on  the 
Exposition  oi  Daniel  we  se- 
lect two  which  came  recently 
from  England: 

SIR  R.  JINDERSON, 

himself  a   most  helpful  Writer   on  this   great   book, 
writes  in  a  letter  to  the  author: 

"  I  have  opened  it  (the  Book  on  Daniel)  again 
and  again  and  looked  through  it,  and  very  glad  I 
am  that  such  a  book  is  circulating  in  America.  I 
heartily  congratulate  you  on  its  success." 

Mr.  WALTER  SCOTT, 

the  ccoell-kno%n  expostor  says,  in  a  communication: 

"  Your  work  on  Daniel  is  without  doubt  the  best 
book  on  the  subject.  It  is  just  what  the  reader  and 
prophetic  student  wants  in  the  way  of  help.  Certainly 
we  are  all  indebted  to  you  for  this  timely,  useful  and 
most  helpful  commentary.  It  is  a  book  for  the  day." 

Popular  Edition,  nicely  bound,     •     .     50c. 

Best  Library  Edition, 75c. 

Postage  paid. 

ORDER    SOON. 

Publication  Office  "  Our  Hope," 

80  Second  St.,  New  York  City. 


IMPORTANT  WORKS  ON  BIBLE  STUDY 

The  Prophet  Daniel.  By  A.  C.  Gaebelein,  A  key  to  the  Prophe- 
cies of  Daniel.  Acknowledged  one  of  the  best  Com- 
mentaries on  this  book.     Pop.  Edit.  50c.;  Best  binding.      75c. 

Gospel  of  Matthew.  Vol.  1,  Chaps,  i-xiii ;  Vol.  11,  Chaps, 
xiv-xxviii.  By  A.  C.  Gaebelein.  610  pp.,  well  bound 
in  cloth.     Post-paid $2.00 

The  Harmony  of  The  Prophetic  Word.    Third  edition.   By  A.  C. 

Gaebelein $  1 .00 

Satan:  His  Person  and  Work.    By.  F.  C  Jennings.    One  of 

the  best  books  for  our  times.     Buy  it  and  study  it $  1 .00 

The  Lord  Of  Glory.  Meditations  on  the  Person  and  Glory  of 
Christ.  By  A.  C.  Gaebelein.  Fine  leather  binding. 
Post-paid,  $1.50  ;  cloth $  1 .00 

Studies  in  Zechariah.  By  A.  C.  Gaebelein.  A  complete  com- 
mentary of  the  Prophet  of  Glory.  Very  highly  recom- 
mended by  different  teachers  of  the  Word.  Price, 
pott-paid 50c. 

If  Christ  Should  Not  Return— What  Then  ?    By  A.  C.  Gaebelein. 

Intensely  interesting 5c. 

Better  Not  to  Have  Been  Born.    Gospel  Message.    By  Bishop 

Nicholson 5c. 

Studies  in  Galatians.    By  C.I.  Scofield.    A  helpful  exposition     15c. 

Addresses  on  Prophecy.    By.  Dr.  C.  I.  Scofield.  Excel't  paper     25c. 

Genealogy  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    Matthew  1.    By  A.  C.  G.       5c. 

The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.  By  A.  Saphir.  The  best  exposi- 
tion of  this  Epistle  we  know.     2  vols.. , $2.00 

Christ  and  the  Scripture.    By  A.  Saphir 30c. 

The  Saviour  and  The  Sinner.    By  A.  Saphir.    Excel't  Gospel 

Studies 50Ci 

The  Good  Shepherd  Finding  His  Sheep,    Companion  Vol.  to 

The  Savionr  and  The  Sinner.     By  A.  Saphir 50c. 


IMPORTANT  WORKS  ON  BIBLE  SlUW-Commued 

Joseph  and  His  Brethren.     Christ's  First  and  Second  Coming. 

By  A.  C.  G 5c. 

Morning  by  Morning.    By  Mrs.  George  C.  Needham 75c. 

Jonah  and  the  Whale.    By  A.  C.  G 2c, 

The  Messiah  and  Israel.    By  A.  C.  G 1 5c. 

Knowing  the  Scriptures,    By  Dr.  A.  T.  Pierson.    His  last  and 

best  book,  post-paid. $  1 ,50. 

The  First  Three  Chapters  of  the  Bible.     By  A.  C.  G 5c, 

Faith's  Resources  in  Sickness.    By  S.  Ridout.    A  pamphlet 

for  our  times 5c. 

Characteristics  of  the  Age.    By  Phil.  Maoro 8c. 

The  Day  of  Pentecost.    By  A.  C.  G 20c, 

The  Heavenly  Guest 6c. 

Roger's  Reasons.     No.  l  and  2.     By  Dr.  J.  Urquhart I  0 C . 

Zionism  :  The  Great  Jewish  Revival  of  Nationalism.    By  A.  C. 

Gaebelein ( 0c. 

The  Kingdom  Parables.    Matt.  xiii.    By  A.  C.  Gaebelein 10c. 

Judges  and  Ruth.     An  exposition.   By  F.  C.  Jennings.    300  pp.  $1.00 

Papers  on  the  Lord's  Coming.    By  C.  H.  M 1 5c. 

His  Riches— Our  Riches.  A  Gospel  Message.  By  A.  C.  G.,  paper  1 5c 

Meat  in  Due  Season.   Three  addresses  on  Prophecy.  By  A.C.G.  10c, 

The  Prophet  Joel.     An  exposition  of  the  Book  of  Joel.     By 

A.  C.  Gaebelein.     Nicely  bonnd 75c. 

Satan  and  the  Saints.     A  fine  book  against  Millennial  Dawn 

Delusion,  Christion  Science,  etc.  By  Dr.  James  M.Gray  I5c, 

The  Kingdom  in  the  Old  Testament.  A  lecture  by  A. C. Gaebelein  10c. 

PUBLICATION  OFFICE    "OUR     HOPE," 

80  8ECOND  STREET    NEW  YORK  CITY. 


JUN    3    1912 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process. 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  Feb.  2005 

PreservationTechnologies 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066 
(724)  779-21 1 1 


(*>i\ztf 


