Ao ee BE Og sede Beh
ay Pas ope ota) Pe he r
RY Perey hes wir ie Wie EDL Y
i Po Ae RD IU 5 W if ee she a
f ds di ded Pe rere rw rere ris
f Let Dab ob nie ene w Dror In ROD ee aT
n Pv ae pinay es te it aay
Pap hah 449
seve oa 3 vi
ae ihda ded uyuecenert!
Meta Yee ya ty ade aay ab
bes Wa wtih Stayt
ae See tis ia ah th tote Se 7
Peseta dah tad oe dk Ph APE
Perret Soe et
iit teat rae ban 3
2 sactta 2a rah
SPECS tie Pot
ea dae Wee hss He
fyi ata tas
era the


2
Aa eesti f by
A ei atk, i Aya aN thd
PN tad dd Lik Dy ie
PEI R f Y INP a rere TC NR co serirer tis
BW nee eN A tte a aa ay oo eae aN aoe gta ey
tiheeate’ 6 aA aA ae oetican ue anya Sele me
Uy a ly ah teak Oahehe Se
. 4 qieay ean eae Pt ATMA Mina Sea halos ath Oh
aE ite anes’ tp arte v4 4)
PRN AG 5 : Ran td
inl netted Toth ty ais Haring
tetra i haath Ana Reid
Seer rattan ‘ Seren Ayan
; ee Be Bian aaa EDranntanarer Tere oN PIR aed
RSs ere ee RD Ie RR Ae BE ttt th ait a eh
RPT PaaS eae Oe aD ian ho Cette er We ete )
etm ace ee DOT, : sh Pda ty rhea OM enya yet ah Aaah
Js Potriys wwe SRE nt ih hey ae eie . RE Se A
Meh! 2 Mann hee 5 Netti eatatn tah ae AY Stina tess eke
Ps ry ; Oo ne ie, a Nn hake RA ANC ky Pane ats
oy) 7 Sein an beta Se oe tren tate ah tye ee nin sea
yoy , ; : Soper eee aan a eater acyretits pps
Cis, : Oe kan te : becvisreers Sree ti tat) divine wee
Si nnn Baud pitas yr te
NDS PET in mash? Wine et 4
Naterariierere ert teat oninay penernes nen
PRIN SN ant eA SS RLS ee ne He ay perntatet, rere
AD AAA RAWAM ABest hiv aae nen he Le
Pasar Gana rarer eee yarn Sure eee Ne
ANAT De eT oh AAI A ty atk Ae,
Seat Fiteratee tet eet SAS Kia aes
is ein Ye Saree tr
eA nh eles ROT ata ane Tie Rieter tienen eat td
WAT RIAD AMC ne th ih cele ES terent Wt TA ia tates
han ‘ teu ian, RUSE irate vata aan OSE rN ee
OS Pataca on ee eA Ae ily ertietehteic ecole:
Wan aA CS Aye uci teak ty eA Paes MWe
Bei ft ety ty Mats PARAS GACn A Ra ahr WR IICRA RS, Raat
i ye as ee tein Aa ERA Peeks
A tN AA aha eM Yana Wen re ea, Speed td
a Beton Rtn RA elite ny piee we Petitorertcir Rice hss
ie SUR AA AALBERS, DR Acta aun ra nash care Gaks aS
saul Mein 0 tat 2s SSR Cin EARN AIM
ee Sea idea tk deal AR Sy ; Rare rail tohetcha Ht erect
PCR ISA diana Tana talnic itelin Utter SAA EARNS Hitesatetes
RGR yer PTe aa eter ee TOY Rats Kw Seater er bt ey!
tee Teta Na th Wah tant tt BENE A
SUN MNT tat Se Mase DAAC Sey Siac ak ek ah skh AL
mertotas yee ere RE a
Stine ee enn


WR aA Bd
CAH ein tes,
PRR RA LT DA DIAL
SOTA ay A
Wy ra atch auch ve ah
NN ALA Ah AM,


KLAR NAY,
NR A Ca We aly Say eS SCTE NS
OSE BAR lit AN Ni i eh A A TaN ONY
Po Ne IA RIN Lata Oli hy ied ean aya MIN AN iy ene HAA ace a ar
Tana W ih tet SRN eae SR ty A LO SUSANNA iS IG eH torent i 8
EEK MAK hi N ec aGC Win tata tous eC kth NEEL TS a RN,
OER RANA, Winds eds in a A Tad AN Te ANN a

ARAL LM Wnnay, ae Teta tote Hrs

OA ARAN, NNN Na mda Ay ce AWA,
Tata dade be fy tds Ah DOPED GEENA O Te Pa aL ROR ne rata 187 NAO nn ark sah aN SOR AAA,

PR i ts be bo bake lady Uotaterannm tiie Here Apne gd ne aie FO A A AEA Stet MOK Gt
RRR eA LA AA’, Fitna ten Ae SN Oe lated AIA AA ES atu ee
RMR SI ede wan nn SANA ANA, SOT A

F RRA AA IY Ine a ARAM EA rast RY PARSON)
Me iad ty tate dude dose ded KI AIG, Sotarieene Tee aurea Ne TUe NAIC Pass tortor A,
Pore eee MR aie eh FE ON AAO aCe Mey ACID Aa AAAS
WO Dt dade ded deh, Eran harah era oie MANE an rer aR wae ~ area eh
CHAR RADDA, oN A tae nee aay 7M CY eae!
De ANS ni dy asa ll a ai td Ne
DoF Oe Kn Ae A, Ata RO
ht Be Ue ak ae Fula ASEM le ry SAA A A
Rat eh SOR ra ed ae Ta anata ir Pen Tyay tit NON Dy
Pw ey, UI NOW LIOLGS e Ne at AIR ZAIN
SEN RRA BAC ARE ian ty parriatatitatam eater)
TSAR ne ene UAE NGS Apri or BO RN ee RIE AN
ARN AD AS BA Aaya een toy teh ei rn ah ty IML TY
2 eI nA ft lalate nn We ORR NA OA I
AR RARARAD AALS RATA RA AMAA, Harera ene eet
RR EI RO i ei at nd A? NK OK RCA Ae A
RBEAKA AS 1 Mi TN BA A AIA EO An Thay ihe ACLS
LVN WIS DAP eR RT be tL RADA, A AN NC BN DAN NN A tA Ay
een Coo tiie tan th tk eA NAN e CA ANAK me AA NNN a A on a a *
RR RAD AA KASS CRRA RO a Aca hala A RW Mak tackle
Se a AA AAI Te Pree nes ah telat HAE AS
ds hy Soe LTRS
‘ yy a,
4 OIA AAAS
RS AANA)
. eres BeOS


py
RENAE RD AAS,
REELS


RDA AT DH,
AAA A


Venn Rie,


“


KARA a eh


Ks nde babs
Ten Dh tS NL nt
% a KARA A
URED ADS,
REBAR RAD,
Ve Ae
RAR D ADS
ORK.
AR AAS,
‘i A De RATER N AN
AAA RA AS AAO NAAR ARAN AA NS
SANA AAAS ian AAS


nA nob
NR AAs A


WAAR ARS


RRRRAARAS AAAS
OA CAA RA BALL OLN.
JOON RA ALA, AA
SORA ATLA AO, SOOO,
AAA AA WA AA,


ORR ADL D DD ON CK
alae a take bt DT Ne Bly RRA AA AR AAR A
% OR Ae HAA WA AAAS,
SA Ae AAS A ntatates
ARAN A AAAS RA RADA. WAR A AA,
Bh KARA RAAB, A ANA IN OCA ITA AL
OLEAN RARA RA AD LM, WT a a Ak AAA chee
ina eh a A COLA,
MH KD dh a A s.
SRR AREAL ALL
Se A KAD A AAA RA Sil
en A * eat
PARRA R AD dD AA INA!
PRLLEE & * OO A AA AA NTS
SADA AA NAAN S, SAR RAR AA AAR MANO KA A
DK RRA N He ins : EAA KAKA MAAN AL CW Kk nA!
PPR LERK DDD DAN uti nak ted SAA RAM AAAS a
DAL nits be Pb DNL AN RRA LA RONSON Tes AAA,
CARA DKA DADAM CA A A RNY! RA ae
BN A BAAR, SAAN AD AA AAA ARN
LEAR RRN RARE DDE SR ORR ne tes
Te SIU SAIS : DONA AA AAR A A AAA A
LREELPRA DOD, AAR 0 Nein Kn A AIL NS *
LAPS PEI OTL, ‘ MON an AA AAAI LS,
ARAKI DD DAM Oe yn Mn tA i I
Lng ts ty Pte LAN LS Wyn a % AAA
NER EN ADA AR IS! AA Te MS
ops Mo oe . KAD A AAA
LARRORDEDE, ARORA NBD CRIA AND,
COO Mbt h blll EN RIN e, nk A. SORA AAAS
LRM RRNA AAAI. tt Repent
A OLA, telat
NTO


A CRA,
ICRU A AAA A A A


KR RAR AARA BS
Wee Se i
OLA RDA AM
RNR AR A RA KAD,
NAA A
YOON
KAR AA AAA
RADARS


1001 1320601


ROAR A,
COON A AR AS
AAS AN,


AERE
RRA AAD AAS


WK A RAARAA


PR RRAEA DAL AA, BAA,


School of Theology at Cl


Rete sr Poe So
AR





Gp)


The Library


of the
School of Theology
at Claremont


1325 North College Avenue
Claremont, CA 91711





_ Digitized by the Internet Archive
ne in 2021 with funding from
f Kahle/Austin Foundation


'


https://archive.org/details/preacherscomplet0009unse





THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


BOOKS OF CHRONICLES


THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


OLD TESTAMENT


ON AN ORIGINAL PLAN


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES,
INDEXES, ETC., ETC.


By VARIOUS AUTHORS


In Twenty-One Volumes





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


i hes aa


‘SA HOMILETIC
COMMENTARY


ON THE BOOKS OF


CHRONICLES


BY THE
REV. JAMES WOLFENDALE





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Printed in the United States





MOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON


THE BOOKS OF CHRONICLES.





INTRODUCTION.


Tue two Books of Chronicles, like the Books of Kings, formed originally one,
and were divided, as in the English Bible, by translators of the Septuagint.
The division was adopted in the Latin Vulgate by Jerome, whence it passed into
various branches of the Western Church. In Hebrew the title is Dib-rey hay-
yamim, meaning “ The acts of the days” (acta not verba dierum), a title applied
to accounts which historians wrote of kings. A daily record, a sort of “ Court
Journal,” was usual at Oriental palaces (see Esth. ii. 23; vi. 1; x. 2), cf. Speak.
Com. The Books record the leading incidents of the times. The term chronicon
was suggested by Jerome, as equivalent to the Hebrew title; and this in the
plural form, chronica or chronicorum liber, was adopted in some editions of the
Vulgate, whence the English translators took it.

The Author. Ascribed to Ezra generally. Its close connection with the book of
Ezra is very apparent. ‘The same spirit breathes through both, and numerous
little expressions, identical or nearly so in the two works, indicate almost cer-
tainly the same hand. The curious fact, moreover, that the one Book ends and
the other begins with the same passage, suggests the same author, and probably
indicates that originally the two books were united and formed but one work,
which it was afterwards thought better to divide into two” (Speak. Com.).

The Date. Internal evidence proves that Chronicles were written after the
Captivity. This opinion is supported by the orthography and the nature of the
language employed, both of which are Aramean in complexion, and harmonise
with books written after the exile. ‘If Ezra was the author, the date could not
be much later than B.c. 435, for Ezra probably died about that time. There is
nothing in the contents or style of the work to make the date B.c. 450-435
improbable ; for the genealogy in ch. iii. 23, 24, which appears to be later than
this, may be a subsequent addition ” (Speak. Com.).

The Style. The work is one, a record of annals, a supplement of former
historic books. The Septuagint designates the work Paraleipomena, things left

‘out or unnoticed. We have repetitions of Samuel and Kings, and important
supplements to fill up earlier narratives. A high value is set upon “ Levitical
spirit,” that is, regard to externals in religion. Its history has been termed
J


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.











~ ecclesiastical,” that of Samuel and Kings “ political.” In the mind of the
writer the religious establishment is of primary, the State of secondary import-
ance (cf. Speak. Com.). “There are three principal features—(a) a greater tendency
to dwell on the ritual, on the details of the Temple worship, the various functions
of the Priests and Levites, the arrangement of the courses and the like; (0) a
marked genealogical bias, and desire to record names of persons engaged in
events narrated ; (c) a more constant, open, and direct ascription of all the events
of history to Divine agency, and especially a more plain reference of every great
calamity or deliverance to the good or evil deeds of the monarch, or the nation,
which Divine Providence so punished or rewarded (cf. Speak. Com. ).

The Object. It is historical, yet the writer seems to forget former histories
and gives his own. First to give an entire history from the very beginning to
meet the difficulties of the time—to preserve true genealogies of families—and
aince future prosperity depends upon the preservation of the Temple with its
priests and service, he begins with David, describes Solomon’s acts, and then
follows out the history of Judah (not of Israel), and shows how kings maintained
its worship or introduced idolatry, and were rewarded or punished according to
their conduct. “It is thus apparent that the object of Ezra in writing the
Books of Chronicles was to place before the Jews such an aspect of their past
history as would show them that from the peculiar constitution of their govern-
ment as a Theocracy, the glories and decadence even of the Davidic monarchy
were most closely associated with the recognition of the Lord’s presence by a
faithful maintenance of the worship which he had ordained for that purpose.
Such a view of their history was calculated to strengthen the religious element of
their nationality, to teach them that their highest glory was the special sovereignty
of God over them, and that although that sovereignty was exceptionally exer-
cised through prophets, its natural and ordinary manifestation war to be found
in association with the Levitical system” [J. H. Blunt].

The Analysis. Naturally diviaed into four parts. Part I. a series of
genealogies or a summary of ancient history of man in the line of Israel to
David. 1 Ohr.i-ix. Ch. i. from Adam to Israel ; chs. ii.-vii. the twelve tribes of
Israel ; chs. viii-ix. the inhabitants of Jerusalem. Part II. contains the history
of David’s reign from the death of Saul, partly agreeing with the account in the
Books of Samuel, yet with important additions concerning the Levites, chs.
x.-xxix. Part III., in nine chapters, comprises the reign of Solomon, 2 Chr.
i-ix. Part IV. gives a history of the kingdom of Judah (while Jerael remained,
x.-xxviii.; and after Israel’s downfall), especially in connection with the worship
of God, xxix.-xxxvi. The account continues to the proclamation of Cyrus author-
ising the return of the people and the rebuilding of the Temple. “ There are
twenty whole chapters and twenty-four parts of chapters occupied with matter
not to be found in other books of Scripture. These books, therefore, are highly
important on account of the new material as well as the new aspect of things
which they present.”—See Murphy, The Books of Chronicles (Clark).


‘‘ And these are ancient things” (1 Chr. fv. 32).


CHAP. I.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


re
i


OHAPTER L


Crrrrcau Notes.) The writer gives no explanation or introduction, presumes upcs
the knowledge of the reader, and simply enumerates names from Creation to the
Flood, contained in Gen. v. The Deluge, 1,656 years from the creation of Adam.

Vers. 1-4.—These names embrace Gen. i.-ix., which the reader is presumed to know.
This furnishes a principle of interpretation to other parts of the book. The Hebrew
pointing will often account for the orthography of the names.

Vers, 5-7.—List of sons and grandsons of Japheth (cf. Gen. x., Noah’s sons in order of
Genesis x. 1). Beginning with Japheth, youngest, to dispose of what is not exactly
required, the writer gives seven sons—three through Gomer, the eldest son, and four
through Javan, the fourth son.

Vers. 8-16.—Descendants of Ham, sons, grandsons, and great-grandsons. Four sons of
Ham ; six grandsons, including Nimrod, through Cush, the eldest son of Ham; sever
grandsons through Mizraim, second son of Ham; two great-grandsons through Raamak,
Cush’s fourth son; 30 altogether,

Vers. 17-27.—Shem’s descendants to Abraham. A pause half way at the name of Peleg,
ver. 19, te mention Joktan, his brother, and then Joktan’s thirteen sons, vers. 20-23. Then
repeating the first five names of lineal descent, and picking up the thread at Peleg, the
remaining five to Abraham are given—Gen. xi.-xvii.—given as briefly as possible.
Abraham the tenth from Noah, and twentieth from Adam.

Vers. 28-33.—The collaterals of Isaac. This reaches from Gen. xvi-xxv. Isaac put
first as child of promise, though born fourteen years after Ishmael (Gen. xvii. 25 and
xxi. 5). So Shem put first, though second son. This must be kept in mind in examina-
tion of lists, From call of Abraham to birth of Isaac, thirty years. Vers. 29-31 taken
from Gen. xxv. 12-16. Their generations, a new starting-point, modified from
Gen. xxv. 12, to include Isaac as well as Ishmael Vers. 82,33 abridged from Gen. xxv.
4. The sons of Dedan omitted (Murphy).

Vers. 34-37.— Descendants of Esau (cf. Gen. xxxvi, 10-14). Timna, ver. 36, seems to have
been concubine of Eliphas and Amalek, another son by her. Ver. 87, four grandsons of
Esau by Reuel.

Vers. 38-42.—Descendants of Setr. Seir probably a Shemite, though his relation is un-
recorded (cf. Murphy). Twenty-seven names given agree with Gen. xxxvi. 20-27, except
for Homam, Alian, Shephi, Amram, and Jakan we have Hemam, Alvan, Shepho, Hemdan,
and Akan. .

Vers. 43-50.—The Kings of Edom (cf. Gen. xxxvi. 31-48). Before any king, before
Israel had any civil government, or became a nation with a king. There are eight
names, the parentage or the land of each given, ; .

Vers. 51-54.— The Dukes of Edom. Eleven given. Some think a list of places, not of
persons, compared with Gen. xxxvi. 15, 4], 48. This ch, contains genealogies which
embrace about 2,300years. Not a remark given apparently, moral, religious, or didactic,
I¢ connects Israel with Adam, and retraces the pedigree of men to its original source,


HOMILETICS.


Turez Paces oF Human History.—Ver. 1.


Names are potent things, represent mighty factors, sustaining forces in life,
and important periods in history. We are apt to think genealogies are dry,
and names of no significance, but Scripture nomenclature reads a different
lesson. How suggestive the names in ver. 1!

I. The creation ofman. Adam first and representative of therace. The
historic man, apparently no “prehistoric man.” The creation of man a decree
and last work of God, the crowning point of all. In man, and through man,
nature finds its purpose and transformation. II, The inspiration of
hope. Seth means fixed, settled, or compensation. He came in the place
of Abel taken away. At birth of Cain, Eve hasty in joy (I have gotten the
man); in Abel (vanity, perishable) desponding; in Seth confident. ane


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (cMAP. 1





power compensated for what human cruelty took away, inspired hope of
permanent blessing. God can wonderfully comfort. If one gone, He can
give another. He can strengthen, establish, and perpetuate the family ard the
Church, so that “the gates of hell shall not prevail against them.” IIT,
The beginning of public worship. nos designates weakness,
human frailty, a sorrowful remembrance of Abel (Ps. viii. 5; xc. 3). How
goon are hopes dashed! But God becomes great when we feel small, “Then
began men to call upon (proclaim, announce) Jehovah” (Gen. iv, 26). A new
Kine of promise in Enoch (Enos) after line of Cain had lost it. Hope finds
expression in formal worship. The Sethites merge into a community, outline a
church, and publicly honour Jehovah. In a new race and a believing generation
God’s name ever presented with higher glory and greater attractions.


SoLtemn Views oF Human Lire.—Verses 1=4.


I. The beginning of human life. In Adam a distinct beginning
of humanity on earth, not as a physical act merely or completion of physical
progress. It happened in the supernatural and spiritual, ‘“ Not merely form«-
tion, animation, but direct, divine inspiration” (Gen. ii. 7) [Tayler Lewis].
From the first man spring all the race. History and science cannot present the
contrary. “The first man was made a living soul.” II, The length of
human life. Before the Flood men long-lived (cf. Gen. v.). Accounted for
1. By natural causes. Habits simple, food nutritious, and climate healthy.
2. By providential design. To establish institutions, people the earth, and
propagate truth. III. The corruption of human life. The Cainites
ungodly—first civilisation worldly, art and culture misused, polygamy prevails,
races intermix, unbelief and Titanic pride corrupt the race. “God saw that the
wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the
thoughts of his heart was only evil continually” (Gen. vi. 5). IV. The
destruction of human life. Evil contagious, rapidly spread and
ceteriorated the race. They were jlesh, wholly carnal or animal. “ He also ia
flesh” (Gen. vi. 3). In wanton deeds, divine warnings despised, the Holy
Spirit grieved. The world ripe for judgment. God repented, that is, changed
his procedure, not his purpose, concerning man (Gen. vi. 7, 8). The Flood swept
“ every living thing from off the earth.” WV. The deliverance of human
life. A few were saved (1 Pet. iii. 20). Noal and his family preserved, and
were progenitors of a redeemed race, God held human life sacred, bound him-
self by signs never more to destroy it by flood. Noah, the last of Sethic race
and first in the line of Shem, a second ancestor of the human family. Man
rises to a higher place in the world. As a believer he is saved from general
wreck, inherits @ new earth purged from sin, and becomes heir of a righteous-
ness by faith.


THe Human Raceg, in rts Unity, Procress, ann Dec LEension.—Verses 1-54.


Glancing at these names, what an insight into human life, human activity
and circumstances !

I. The unity of the race. The race not merely represented but com-
prehended in Adam. “ Mace of one (blood) all nations of men” (Acts xvii. 26).
Mankind not “a living sand-heap,” without generic connection. The Bible sees
in Adam “the power of a single life—men one before they became many ; and
as many, still one.” One natural “ fatherhood,” and one “common brother.
hood” in him. “One touch of nature makes the world kin.” II. The
progress of the race. Every movement implies beginning, progress, and
consummation. This makes history. 1. Zn knowledge. Not from barbarism at

4


CHAP. ¥.] HOWMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
(7 Sy ESSE TN a RS — aa ena ce eR |. seen


first, but from supernatural light shining directly or indirectly on human steps.
2. In arts. Lamech’s three sons authors of inventions (Gen. iv. 20-23).
Culture and science as old as humanity. Barbarism and brutality result from
corrupt civilisation. 3. In civil government. Cities built, states founded,
kingdoms formed, titles given, and rulers chosen. 4. Jn population. DBegin-
ning from a single pair, in seven generations the human family attained
considerable increase. “If Abraham’s stock, in less than 400 years, amounted
to 600,000, Cain’s posterity, in the like time, might arise to the like multitude”
[Wellet]. It should remind of the reality and power of God’s blessing (Gen. i. 28).
5b. In religion. Abel’s piety revived in the godly Sethites. ‘“ While the family
of Cainites, by the erection of a city and the invention and development of
worldly arts and business, were laying the foundation for the kingdom of this
world, the family of the Sethites began, by united invocation of the name of
the God of grace, to found and erect the kingdom of God” [Delitzesch]. Separa-
tion from ungodly associates needful. This, with social worship, checks
declension and secures advancement. III. The declension of the race.
Before the Flood, licentiousness and violence, pride and self-gratification. ‘This
1. Seen tn sinful works. Nothing wrong to build cities, handle harps, and
cultivate poetry and music. These intended for the benefit of men, and should
be consecrated to the service of God. But sadly misapplied when they lead to
pride and forgetfulness of God. 2. Seen in ungodly lives. Cain, the murderer ;
Lamech, the polygamist ; Wimrod, the powerful tyrant (Gen. x. 8). “The earth
was filled with violence.” 3. Seen in significant names. Qualities, principles,
and characteristics seen in names of Enoch, Irad, Mehujael, Lamech, dec.
(Gen. iv. 23-26). Adah and Zillah indicative of sensual attractions. Learn
the danger of intellect and civilisation separated from religion, the downward
progress of sin, and the necessity, in these days of science and mechanical
invention, of steadfastly fearing God and maintaining public worship.


“ Grieved at his heart when, looking down, he saw
The whole earth filled with violence ” [ Milton].


Posteriry oF Noan’s Sons.—Verses 5—23.


I. The enemies of the Church. 1. Sons of Japhet (vers. 5-7 and
Gen. x. 2-5). Trace the wide world-wandering, in which future generations
disappear from the theocratic line. 2. Sons of Ham (vers. 8-16). Hamite
culture early, corrupt and mixed with Cainite elements. II. Allies of the
Church (vers. 17-23). In the line of Shem we have the gravitation of
humanity to its centre, the gradual preparation for the calling of Abraham, and
for the Messianic descent. Shem’s history, the last in the world, first in the
kingdom of God.

Tat Micury Hunrer.—Verse 10.


In the formal register of Gen, x. 8-12, a brief account of an individual
inserted. A fact of importance, because it concerned the Hebrews to know
that though their own ancestors came from the region where Nimrod played so
conspicuous a part, the great kingdom, afterwards known as Babylon, was of
Cushite, not of Semitic origin [Dr. Dods]. 1. His descent. Cush begat
Nimrod. He is put back before the time of Abraham and assigned to the
Ethiopian race. 2. His occupation. “ He was a mighty hunter.” Hunting of
ravenous beasts a benevolent act for the human race. Powerful huntsmen
pioneers of civilisation, as in the myth of Hercules. Nimrod, successful, became
a great man, conqueror, and ruler. 3. His extensive empire (Gen. x. 10-1 2).
As a mighty. hunter, he founded a powerful kingdom. The founding of the


kingdom is shown to have been the consequence or result of } is strength in


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. Loar. 1.











hunting, so that the hunting was most intimately connected with the establishi-
ment of the kingdom. Figuratively, he was “a hunter of men” (“‘a trapper of
men by stratagem and force,” Herder), and became a tyrant and oppressor of
liberty (ef. Keil, Gen. x. 9), 4. His great fame. Recognised as mighty ; became
a proverb, ‘It is said,” &. Expression before the Lord added as if God himself
must take note of his skill. Some think that blame is intended, that his
notoriety for boldness and wickedness is expressed ; something s0 bad that God
could not take his eyes from it. ‘Learn the responsibility of power. Check the
tendency to do homage to greatness which takes the form of “ hero-worship.


Wisely use and not abuse the endowments entrusted to your care.


“ © execrable son, so to aspire ;
Above his brethren, to himself assuming
Authority usurped, from God not given” [Milton]


HOMILETIC HINTS


Gencalogies and their use. 1. In
helping Jews to identify their tribes.
After return from captivity, all con-
fusion. In prospect of future, needful
to revise and reconstruct. 2. In illus-
trating Jewish History. Here and
there names of great importance,
and significant of solemn crises of
history. 3. In tracing the descent
of the Messiah.

Vers. 1, 4, 28. Three covenants—
Adam, Noah, and Abraham. Double
names — Abraham, the natural and
spiritual name; Jacob, supplanter
and prince.

Ver. 10. Nimrod’s threefold position.
1. As the pioneer of civilisation; 2.
4s oppressor of patriarchal liberties ;
3. As the instrument of God for the
development of the world [Lange].

Ver. 19. Peleg, or Division of the
earth. Its time, method, design, and
commemoration (Gen. x. 25).

Vers. 24-27 (Gen. xi.). Other na-
tions shaken off—line from Shem to
Abraham given here. 1. IJshmaelites
(vers. 29-31): 12 sons=12 princes
(Gen. xvii. 20). 2. Midianites, children
of Keturah (vers. 32, 33). 3. Hdom-


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 1. These chronicles have a
mission, As no star was useless in
the heavens, and as every atom has
been created for a purpose, so God
would not devote these chapters to

6


AND SUGGESTIONS.


ites (vers. 36-54, of. Gen. xxxvi.): (a
Kings of Edom (vers. 43-50); (6)
Dukes of Edom (vers. 51-54).

Ver. 47. Hadad dead (cf. ver. 43).
Notice 1. Changes in earthly govern-
ments—“ reigned and died.” 2. Un-
certainty of human life: (a) In life’s
circumstances, “ reigned” ; (6) In life’s
end, ‘“‘ died.”


Vers. 1-54. In list we find: 1.
Progenitors of a new race. 2. Foun-
ders of great nations. Napoleon


vowed that he would found a family,
though not himself, of great lineage.
Many famous men: Adam, the first
man ; Methuselah, the oldest ; Lamech,
polygamist, musician, and poet; Enoch,
Noah, Nimrod, Abraham, &c. Great
events: Creation of man; invention of
arts; translation of Enoch; flood of
Noah ; call of Abraham, d&c. Suggested
subjects: “The Antiquity of Man”;
The Origin of Civilisation; The Divi-
sion of Nations; The Unity of the
Race ; The Foundation of the Israelitish
People.


“For human weal, Heaven husbands all
events’ [Young].


TO CHAPTER I.


a pedigree without design. The end is
Christ.

Ver. 1. ddam. Every human being
is a volume worthy to be studied, and
I thank God that my own lot is bound


oHaP. 11, ]


up with that of the human race
Channing]. No man can think too
ighly of his nature, or too meanly of
himself [Young].

Vers. 5-18. Threefold division of
nations according to thenames Japheth,
Ham, and Shem. For part played by
the several races in civilisation, of, Fair-
bairn’s Studies in Phil. of Religion, and
Noah's prophecy (Gen. ix. 25-27), “ All
these sons, the white posterity of
Japheth, the yellow and dark sons of
Ham, however they may live in tem-
poral separation, are all still God’s
children, and brothers to one another.”

Ver, 27. Abram. The tenth from
Noah, and the twentieth from Adam.
The letter H, which was added to the
original name of the patriarch, occurs
twice in the sacred name of Jehovah.
It was added, also, to the name of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; CHRONICLES.
ee a ee





re
Sarai. The addition in each case
seems to mark a new and closer rela-
tion to God. “ And I will write upon
him the name of myGod” [J. H. Bluni|
(Gen. xvii. 5). The sacramental cha
racter of a name consists in its divine
appointment to represent and com-
memorate and testify some special
grace and blessing, and so to be a
permanent pledge of its bestowal.
Wilkinson, Personal Names, &e.

Vers. 44,45. Bela dead, Jobab reigned
tn his stead. A great hand is sometimes
laid even on the fly-wheel of life’s
engine [George Macdonald].


‘* What exhibitions various hath the world
Witness’d of mutability in all
That we account most durable below!
Change is the diet on which all subsist,
Created changeable, and change at laet
destroys them ’ [Cowper].





CHAPTER IIL,


Crrricau Notzs.] The sons of Israel.


regard to order.


Names more numerous than Genesis, without
reater interest by filling up former accounts.


Vers. 3-12.—Posterity of Judah. Vers. 1, 2, sons of Leah first; sons of Rachel between
Dan and Naphtali (cf. Gen. xxix.-xxxv.). Vers. 3-8, Judah first, pre-eminent (Gen. xlix. 8,
and descendants given to third generation. Vers. 3, 4, abridged from Gen. xxxviii., and


ver. 5 found in Gen. xlvi.


the other four given 1 Kings iv. 31; called ‘‘ sons of Mahol,” or “sons of music.”’ c
Ver. 10, Ram, first as ancestor of David. Line given


“The five names from Salma to David cover a period of at least


‘Achan, Josh. vii. 1), “ troubler.”
in Ruth iv 18-22.


Vers. 6-8, descendants of Zerah, Zimri, Zabdi in Josh. vii. 1;


Achar


450 years from the Exodus to the birth of Solomon.”


Vers, 13-15.—Sons of Jesse.
Some think Raddai is Rei (1 Kings i. 8).


Three eldest (1 Sam. xvi. 6-9); next three here only.


Vers. 18-20.—In remainder of this ch. the writer obtains scarcely any assistance from
the earlier Scriptures, and must have drawn almost entirely from genealogical sources,


accessible to him, which have since perished (Speak. Com.).


Caleb, son of H. (ver. 18), to


distinguish him from other Calebs in ch. Hur, companion of Aaron (Gen. xvii. 12),


Bezaleel, famous artificer (Ex. xxxi. 2),


Vers, 21-24.—Resumed reference to Hezron.
belonged to Judah by father’s side, yet attached himself to the house of Machir,


Jair, son of Manasseh (Num. xxxii. 41),
His


wife an heiress, and her inheritance was to follow her tribe (cf. Num. xxvii. and xxxvii.),
ci. Murphy. He pushed his conquests far and wide (Deut. iii. 14).
Vers. 25-41.—A second interruption in account of Caleb’s posterity. Descendants of


Jerahmeel, vers. 25-27.
Shammai, to fourth in Jada.


Vers. 28-33, sons of Onan to seventh generation in line of


Vers. 42-49.—Offspring of Caleb resumed, probably of Jerioth, a different mother, ver.


18. Two concubines of Caleb introduced, ver. 46-49,


Ephah’s sons unknown. Second


eoncubine mother of four or five sons and a daughter.


Vers. 50-55.—A little difficulty in these verses.
others that there were several (cf. Speak. Com.).


Some maintain only one Caleb, and
Ver. 55, scribes, civil or ecclesiastical


officers of Kenite origin, classed with Judah, not as descendants, but dwelling in its
territory, intermixed through kindly feeling and incorporated with them (Ex. xviii. meet


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cHaP. I,





Num. x. 29-32; 1 Sam. xv. 6). Rechab, ver. 53, father or progenitor of the Rechabites
who retained to late date nomadic habits of Kenite ancestors (cf. Jer. xxxv. 10;
2 Kings x. 15).


HOMILETICS.
Tue Tweive Parriarcus.—Verses 1, %.


This is a most important register of Israel, who should dwell alone and not
be reckoned among nations. Notice—I. The six sons of Leah—Reuben,
Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, and Zebulon (Gen. xxix. 32-35). Learn—l. God’s
grace in Leah’s fruitfulness. Leah loved less than Rachel (Deut. xxi. 15).
God works above human thoughts, neither to compensate Leah for lack of
Jacob’s love, nor to punish Jacob for sinful partiality ; but to manifest sovereign
power, to teach that children are a heritage from him, and to indicate his pur-
pose in fixing the line of promise, not by the fruit of nature, but the gift of
grace. 2. Leah’s gratitude expressed in names of her sons—Reuben, behold
a son; Simeon, hearing; Levi, joined; Judah, praise. “God hath endued
me with a good dowry” (Gen. xxx. 20) II. The two sons of
Rachel—Joseph and Benjamin. 1. Jn Joseph renewed fatth ; reproach taken
away, an expression of spiritual life and dependence, not on human device
(mandrakes), but on God for offspring and help. 2. Jn Joseph revived hope.
“ He shall add” another son (Gen. xxx. 24). Grateful for one, she expects God
will give another. Experience of divine faithfulness a great help in looking to
the future. ‘ Experience (worketh) hope, and hope maketh not ashamed.”
The wish was realised, but she died in Benjamin’s birth. The fulfilment of our
wishes may be dangerous and fatal.


A Famity History.—Verses 3-12.


In this record of Judah, as in all families, a record bright and cheering, dark
and disgraceful.

I. A record of family shame. Some were wicked, guilty of abomin-
able crimes. 1. Sin ending with wntimely death. Er’s wickedness great, a
special sin in Israel’s descendants, a defiance of God and his word to make
them a numerous nation. Onan refused to raise up children in his brother’s
name. An indication of his envious disposition and vile pollution of body.
Both displeased the Lord, and were cut off by untimely death. Many, it is
feared, act in the same way—dishonour body and destroy soul (Gen. xxxviii.
8-10). 2. Sin connected with shame. Tamar guilty of incest (Gen. xxxviii.
16-18). 3. Sin bringing trouble. ‘ Achar the troubler of Israel.” “ He trans-
gressed the covenant of the Lord, and wrought folly (trouble) in Israel” (Jos.
vii. 15). In Jsrael, in the Church, and among the people of God, with God’s
presence to provide for them and protect them! guilty of theft, sacrilege, and
invading the rights of God, by converting for private use what is designed for
his glory. Achan, branded with disgrace, a monument of judgment, and a
perpetual warning. These sins were early, unnatural, and grievous. Yet
Thamar received a place in the Toledoth of Christ (Mat. i. 3), and the “ valley
of Achor” becomes “a door of hope” (Hos. ii. 15). IT. A record of
family honour. The potentiality of families great. Children become saints
or scourges, Joys or sorrows. 1. Some greatly distinguished in position. Ram
an ancestor of David (Ruth iv. 18-22); Nahshon, a prince in Judah, and led
the van during encampment of Israel in wilderness; Salma was in post of
honour when they entered Canaan. 2. Others excelled in mental qualities.
Varied gifts of body and mind in members of the same family. (a) Eminent in
wisdom Ethan, Heman, Calcol, and Dara, the glory of their father’s house.
For Ms Seripture magnifies the wisdom of Solomon, he is declared to be wiser


cHaP. 01.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


ra]





eet





than these four men (1 Kings iv. 30), When Joseph was in authority they
dwelt in Egypt, cultivated natural talents, distinguished for social wisdom and
fine arts, and became eminent among the sons of Egypt and the East. (0)
_ Skilled in music. The family of Zerah, or Ezrah, said to be sons of Machol, or
the choir (1 Chr. xv. 17-19). Psalm Ixxxviii. is ascribed to Heman the Ezrahite,
and Psalm lxxxix. to Ethan the Ezrahite. Hence they were choristers, skilled
in music and its kindred arts—poetry, singing, and dancing. These qualities
cultivated in tribe of Judah, and attained highest lustre in David and Solomon.
Thus families have their sunshine and their shame, their glory and decline, their
troublers and comforters. Secure your name in the record of heaven, that wher
the page of history fades, your title may never expire.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Pre-eminence. Reuben, na-
tural firstborn ; Levi, legal firstborn ;
Judah, Messianic firstborn. ‘The
amames of Jacob’s sons a type of
numan weakness and divine salvation
in his house ” [Lange].

Ver. 3. Hr and Onan. One acted
“wicked in the sight of the Lord,”
another “ displeased the Lord.” Both
the same in perverting a natural
ordinance, militating against purity
and development of the theocratic
family, and deserving Divine repro-
bation.

Ver. 4. Tamar. Guilty of tempta-
tion, practised deeption, and com-
mitted incest. These events in Judah’s
family display the goodness and se-
verity of God, illustrative of grace and
judgment. “ Why did God and the


Holy Ghost permit these shameful
things to be written? Answer: 1.
That no one should be self-righteous,
2. That none should despair on account
of sin. 3. To remind us that Gentiles,
by natural right, are mother, brothers,
sisters of our Lord” [Zuther, in Lange,
Gen. xxviii. ].

Ver. 6. Sons of Zerah. A famous
choir. Influence of music in the family
and the Christian Church. “Tho
music of the spheres” [Shakespeare].

Ver. 7. Achor, the transgressor and
troubler. The connection of sin with
trouble. Trouble leadeth to discovery
of sin. Sin ending in death of indi-
viduals and punishment of community,
“That man perished not alone in his
iniquity ” (Jos. xxii. 20).


BHOMILETICS.
THe Famity or Jesse.—Verses 13-15.


* A special account kept of this family for the sake of David and the Son of
Devid, a rod out of the stem of Jesse (Isa. xi, 1).” Several principles illus-
trated in history of this family.

I. The mistakes of human judgment. A family of imposing per-
sons—Eliab, majestic in appearance ; Abinadab and Shammah, great in physical
power and brave in battle (1 Sam. xvii. 13). “Surely the Lord’s anointed is
before him.” No! look not on the beauty of countenance and the height of
stature, &c. IL. The law of divine choice. David chosen. Weak
things to confound mighty ; cripples to overcome giants, and shepherds to rule
men. Unlikely men to the front. God takes out of range of appearances,
pays no regard to human prejudice. “ For the Lord seeth not as man seeth ;
for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart.”
Learn that human judgment is not infallible. God’s choice is best ; submit to
it, and seek its proof in its spiritual gifts and results. ;


HOMILELIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (cHar. im





Toe Descenpants oy OaLtes.—Verses 18=24, 42—49.


In the list we find—

I. Persons of note. ur, the companion of Aaron, who rendered help
to Moses and to Israel on the mount (Ex. xvii. 20); Bezaleel, the famous arti-
ficer of the Tabernacle, grandson of Hur (Ex. xxxi. 2); Jair, the taker of
cities, to which he gave his name (Num. xxxii. 41): threescore cities (towns oF
livings) fell before his valour (Jos. xiii. 30). Hezron himself was eminent, one
of the seventy that went down to Egypt with Jacob (Gen. xlvi. 12). IT.
Illustrative incidents. Events displaying God in history and God in the
family. 1. In human families. One childless (ver. 30); another no sons (ver.
34). Intermarriage in vers. 34, 35. Perhaps the Egyptian was upright and
wise, and became a proselyte to the Jewish religion. 2. In human history.
Ephrath (ver. 19), named after her who gave the name to the town Ephrath,
which is Jerusalem. ‘ We begin here to learn the interesting and unexpected
fact that the intercourse of Israel with the localities in Palestine, where their
ancestors had acquired property, was kept up so long as they were a free and
honoured people” [Murphy]. Machir is called “father of Gilead” (ver. 21),
who was born before death of Joseph (Gen. 1. 23). Gilead, memorable in his-
tory of Jacob and the scene transacted there remembered by Joseph, an
observant youth at the time of the parting covenant between Laban and Jacob.
If Jacob established any title to the mount at that time, this would be an
additional reason for calling a son of Machir after this celebrated spot”
[Murphy]. Thus we learn that God can make the obscurest eminent, and
smallest service memorable. He presides over the destinies of families and the
relationships of life. We can trace Divine impress upon records of history.


OFrFsPrinG oF CALEB CONTINUED.—Verses 50-55.


Since Hur was the son, not the father, of Caleb, a difficulty presented here,
Best way to read “sons” for “son” before the word Hur. All difficulty will
disappear, and we shall have the sense. “These (the list in verses 42-49) were
the sons of Caleb. The sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephratah, were Shobal...
Salma...Hareph.” The clause “these were the sons of Caleb” corresponds
exactly to that which concludes the genealogy of Jerahmeel (ver. 32), and
properly belongs to what has gone before, not to what follows [Speak. Com.}.
In the list we discover—

I. The company of colonisers. Fathers, first settlers of places.
Shobal, Salma, Hareph; the four families mentioned in ver. 53, who left
parents and residence (Kirjath-jearim) to colonise towns and villages in neigh-
bourhood from which sprang Zorah and Eshtaol. II. The family of
scribes (ver. 55). A trio of civil or ecclesiastical officers, the heads of whom
were Tirah, Shimea, and Suchah, of Kenite origin, dwelling in Judah, but dis-
tinguished from another Kenite clan which dwelt in Mannasseh (Judg. iv. 11).
TII. The famous Rechabites (ver. 55). Not only famous for nomadic
habits of their ancestors (2 Kings x. 15), but for honourable connection with
the ancient Abrahamic tribe of the Kenites to which the father-in-law of Moses
belonged (Judg. 1.16; 1 Sam. xv. 6, xxvii. 10). Their descendants were men
of character and influence, and highly commended by God (Jer. xxxv. 18, 19).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 18-15. The story of Boaz. character of J. indicated b
Prominent in the Book of Ruth. Zhe incident Acide oe face!
1Q


CHAP 1.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


mere eee an ape


Ver. 19. Bezaleel, art consecrated
to God. Jair, prowess and valour em-
ployed in advancing the cause of God.

Ver. 24. Hezron was dead. A sug-
gestive hint, a solemn reminder, im
pursuits of life and conquests of nations
that earthly possessions cannot be kept.
* Andthat mall model of the barren earth,

Which serves as paste and cover to our
bones ” [Shakespeare].
* Nothing can we call our own, but Death.”

Ver. 55. Scribes. A class devoted
to exposition of law, instruction of the
nation, and preservation of its records
1. A noble calling. To study and ex-
pound sacred books, intone society,
and spread the will of God. 2. A
family calling. ‘The families of the
scribes.” Hereditary pursuits in all
communities. Advantageous to fix
traditions and habits in persons, to
pursue studies in cities, colleges, and
schools. 3. A needful calling. The
revelation of God, written and printed,
requires study, application, and circu-
lation. A literary profession useful
to society; a learned ministry the
want of the times. “ Writing is now
the mightiest instrument on earth”
[Channing]. “The families of the
scribes. These were the public
notaries, or, as some think, text-men,
who took the literal interpretation, as


distinct from Wise, that is, teachers of
traditions, and from Disputers, that is,
teachers of allegories and mysteries
(see 1 Cor. i. 20; Jer. viii. 9; Ezra vii.
6). The first were the best of the
three, and of these were the Rechabites,
who being Shuchathites, that is, dwell-
ers in tents, might dwell where they
pleased, and now dwelt at Jabez, a
place which seemeth to have its name
from that good Jabez of Judah, who
prayed so hard (ef. iv. 10), having
haply the help of these holy Kenites,
the posterity of Jethro (see Judg. i.
16).” [Trapp].

Vers. 18-55. I. What multitudes un-
known! Men with names and nothing
more. They live, die, and are buried
in oblivion! So we think. But what
do we know of history? Best men,
quiet- service, and patient endurance
gain norecord. II. But men unknown
and most obseure may be honoured.
“ Nobodies” become “ notabilities,”
and through divine grace introduce
Christ to man and bless the world.
“ There will bea resurrection of names
some day,” says Ruskin,


* Whose silent prayers and labours Heaven
employs
To do the good, whilst others make the
noise " [Jane Taylor).


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER II,


Vers. 1-13. Sons of Israel, sons
of Judah, &c. “ The child is truly and
literally ‘the heir of all the ages.’ The
past, with all its legacies, has existed
for it, just as all the future will be its
own. To whatsoever heights of human
excellence it may rise, or to whatsoever
depths of human degradation it may
sink, the child is now an element in
the sum of human life; a new unit in
the aggregate of mankind. It is there-
fore worthy both of study and rever
ence. Did we but form an adequate
conception of the dignity and also the
marvellousness of human existence, the
oldest man might well stand bareheaded
and thoughtful in the presence of a
babe” [Anon.]. (Luther's schoolmaster
taking his hat off to his pupils.)
Vers. 19 and 24. Waus dead,


“ How he marks his way
With dreadful waste of what deserves to
shine!
Art, genius, fortune, elevated power !
With various lustres these light up the
world,
Which Death puts out, and darkens human
race” [Young].


Vers. 18-55. Live for something.
Do good and leave behind you a monu-
ment of virtue that the storms of
time can never destroy. Write your
name by kindness, love, and mercy on
the hearts of thousands you come
in contact with year by year, and you
will never be forgotten, No, your
name, your deeds will be as legible on
the hearts you leave behind as the
stars on the brow of evening. They
ghall shine as brightly on earth as stars
of heaven [Dr. Chalmers],

il


HOILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [oHar. m1





CHAPTER rit.


Carricaz, Norrs.) Having completed list of descendants of Jerahmeel and Calel
writer returns to oh, ii, 15, gives line of David, royal house of tribe of Judah, to the
Captivity and afterwards, Many difficulties in names and order cannot be touched
here.

Vers. 1-9.—Sons of David. First, those born in Hebron. Daniel, Chileab (2 Sam.
iii. 8). Reigned, ver. 4 (2 Sam. ii. 11, v. 6; 1 Kings ii. 11). Second, those born in Jeru-
salem, vers. 5-9. Shimea, Shamnuah; Bathshua, Bathsheba ; Ammiel, Eliam, letters
merely transposed. Concubines.—Ver. 9 (2 Sam. xv. 16), “One daughter (Tamar) men-
tioned according to rule, that daughters are given only when the line is saved, or that
they had for special reasons made a place for themselves in history ” [Murphy].

Vers. 10-16.—Descent to Captivity. First, as far as King Josiah, vers. 10-14, Abia, or
Abijah, for Abijam (1 Kings xv. 1). Azariah (“help of Jah”), called Uzziah (“strength
of Jah”) in 2 Kings xv. 30, immediately after death, and so named elsewhere (2 Chr.
xxvi, 1; 2 Kings xiv. 21). Four successions follow sons of Josiah, vers. 15,16. Jeconiah,
ver. 16, Coniah in Jer. xxii. 24, and Jehoiachin in Kings, meaning “Jehovah will
establish.”

Vers. 17-24,—Descent to Exile and afterwards. This text is difficult and disarranged
apparently. The following arrangement is given by Dr. Davidson (Hermeneutics):
“V. 17. And the sons of Jeconiah the captive; Salathiel (asked of God) (Shealtiel,
Ezra iii. 2; Neh. xii,.1; Hag i. 12,14; ii, 2) his son: v. 18. And the sons of Salathiel ;
Zerubbabel (sown i.e, begotten, in Babylon—who was the direct son of Pedaiah;
but omitting several intermediate links, is called the son of Salathiel, Mat.i.12) and
Shimei (renowned): and the sons of Zerubbabel; Meshullam (friend, é.e., of God),
Hananiah (graciously given of God), and Shelomith (pacific), their sister. V. 19.
And Hashubah (esteemed), and Ohel, and Berechiah (blessed of Jehovah), and Hasa-
diah (beloved of God), Jushab-hezed (whose love is returned). 20. And Malchiram, and
Rephaiah, and Shenazar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah, 21. The sons of Hana-
niah; Pelatiah and Jesaiah: the sons of Rephaiah; his son Arnan, his son Obadiah
(worshipper of Jehovah), his son Shecaniah (dwelling with Jehovah).”

Ver 22.—Shemaiah, or Shimei (ver. 19, cf. Zech. xii, 13), Hattush probably accompanied
Ezra from Babylon to Jerusalem (Ezra viii. 2).


HOMILETICS.
Tur Sons or Davip.—Verses 1-10,


I. Their places of birth. The verses classified according to the place of
birth. In Hebron, six sons born, each of a different mother. In Jerusalem, thirteen,
four of one mother and nine of others not mentioned. Places often identified
with birth of important persons. Bunyan and Bedford, &c. Let character and
conduct give renown to place. II, Their varied lives. Absolalom, son of a
king’s daughter, a murderer and rebel, “died a fool.” Ammon violated his sister
Tamar, and was slain. Adonijah conspired against the throne, and met with bitter
disappointment. Nathan reminded his father of the prophet who reproved
his sin, brought him to repentance, and had the honour of belonging to
the ancestry of Jesus (Lu. iii. 31). Solomon, wisest, most gifted, and successor.
But what checkered lives! Little to give parental joy. Much to cause anxiety
and grief. Amid the splendour of his reign and the power of his palace, his
cup was mixed with grief and sorrow, &c. “Trust not thou in their (children’s)
life, neither respect their multitude: for one that is just is better than a
thousand; and better it is to die without children, than to have them that are
ungodly” (Ecclus. xvi. 3).


“ Virtue, not pedigree, stamps nobility.”
32


CHAP, 111,] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


e—_COCOCO


Tue Gotpen Acr.—Verses 10-16.


David’s successors given up to the Captivity. For convenience call it the
golden age

I. The description of the period. 1. A long period. “Seldom has
a crown gone in direct line from father to son for seventeen descents together as
here”—say Henry. Judah survived Kingdom of Israel by 135 years, and lasted
from B.C. 975 to B.c. 586. 2. A prosperous period. In population, resources, and
empire Judah great; soil fertile; aristocracy hereditary in sacerdotal caste;
an army always subordinate; a venerated centre of worship and administration ;
on the whole, peaceful and uninterrupted success of kings. In language, litera-
ture, and religion a glorious period. II. The nature of individual
reigns. Peaceful and warlike; powerful and weak; long and short. Kings
wise and foolish; godly and idolatrous; reigned by natural right and fixed on
throne by foreign potentates. The first part began in splendour, the latter
ended in desolation. In David and Solomon we pass from conflict to peace; in
Jeconiah and Zedekiah from grief to exile.


* This strange, sad world is but our Father’s school ;
All chance and change His love shall grandly overrule”
[F. R. Havergal}.








S eenineeeiees tae ca


Toe Decayina Giuory.—Verses 17-24.


In these verses we have the royal remnant during captivity. The decaying
glory.

I. The dark beginning. Jeconiah adopted Salathiel, otherwise written
childless, the signet God plucked from his hand, dear as an ornament, yet rejected
(Jer. xxii. 24). There is a striking contrast between this beautiful name
(Jehoiakin, Jehovah will establish) and the miserable fate of the man. Enthroned
by Necho, powerless against Nebuchadnezzar, Jerusalem was besieged, Jeconiah
taken prisoner, bound in fetters and carried to Babylon (2 Chr. xxxvi. 6, 7).
II. The gradual decay, Zerubbabel the last with any shred of authority.
After him royal line disappears into obscure private life. Nehemiah next governor
of whom we read. Sennacherib repulsed, religious revivals under Hezekiah and
Josiah, but the impious reign of Manasseh and the lingering decay of the people
under the four feeble descendants of Josiah prepared for the final ruin, Babylon
in successive deportations drained away their strength. The temple was de-
stroyed amid wailing of prophets; the nation ceased amid taunts of heathen
tribes, released from the yoke of David. “The nation and kingdom that will
not serve thee shall perish: yea, those nations shall be utterly destroyed.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1-24. Review the list.
1. Indicative of Gods providential dis-
ciplune. In bestowing mercy upon bad


come with those that shall come here-
after” (Ecce. i. 11). 3. Indicative of
vanity of worldly fame. The humorist


men, fulfilling his word to good men,
and unfolding his purpose in wonderful
events to all ages. 2. Indicative of
vicissitudes in human life. In joy and
grief, in splendours of the palace and
the obscurity of exile. Revolutions
in time and place. Change every-
where. “There is no remembrance of
former things: neither shall there be
any remembrance of things that are to


Thackeray asks, “ What boots it
whether it be Westminster or a little
country spire which covers your ashes;
or if a few days sooner or later the
world forgets you?”


‘«Thus are we fortune’s pastimes ; one day
live
Advanced to heaven by the people’s breat
The next, hurled down into th’ abyss
death” [May].


18


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





Vers. 10-16. Sketch the lives of
David and Solomon, Hezekiah’s reign,
Manasseh’s wickedness, and Josiah’s
piety.

Ver.19. Zerubbabel. 1. Distinguished
tn work. (a) Leading a liberated
people to their own land. (6) Re-
building the Temple. (c) Instituting
civil government. 2. Distinguished im
the prosecution of that work. Courage,
patience, faith, and enthusiasm. A per-
sonal example and a power among his
people. 3. Distinguished as the object of
prophecy. Often addressed by name by


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 1-24. Sons of, &c. It was,
perhaps, ordained by Providence, to
hinder us from tyrannising over one
another, that no individual should be
of such importance as to cause, by his
retirement or death, any chasm in the
world [ Dr. Johnson}.


“Men die and are forgotten.
world


The great


(cmap. Iv.





Haggai and Zechariah ; received glori-
ous predictions concerning temple he
was building and future magnificence
of Jerusalem and Judah, which exer-
cised great influence upon his mind
‘and preserved a spirit which endured
till the coming of Christ. A name
suggestive of important events. 1. Re-
turn of captives. 2. Restoration of
national government. 3. Establishment
of religious worship. “The hands of
Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of
this house,” &c. (Zech. iv. 9).


TO CHAPTER 111.


Goes on the same. Among the myriads
Of ere that live, or have lived, or shall
ve,

What is @ single life, or thine, or mine,

That we should think all nature would
stand still

If we were gone?

The great are not groat to me unless they
ere good” (S, Richardson}.





CHAPTER [V.


Ourrrcat Nores.}


Hur, Carmi, Hezron, and of Pharez. The


point out founders of some of the towns in the province of Judah (Murphy).


conjectured to be same as Haroeh, ii. 52.


founders of Ktam, a town on rocky hills of Judah (Judg, xv. 8; 2 Ohr. xi. 6).


Obscurity often arising from brevity conspicuous in this passage.
Yet we discern an order in it, indicated in first verse.


It contains descendants of Shobal,


section chiefly of local interest, intended to
Reaiah

8, 4. Descendants of Hur. Father, i.e., joint
Gedor, now


Jedur (Jos, xv, 58). Hushah, of unknown site, but indication of the place (2 Sam. xxiii. 7;


1 Chr. xi 29).


Vers. 5-10.—Descendants of Ashur (Carmi), posthumous son of Hezron by Abia, called
father or chief of Tekoa; with two wives, three children to one, and four to the other,
Jabez, ver. 9, son or maternal kinsman of Ashur, who names the town (ii. 55).


Vers. 11-15.—Descendants of Hezron.


Chelub, brother of Shuah, to distinguish him from


others. The group in vers. 11,12, unknown, In vers. 12-15 return to namer not quite


strange.
(Jehaleel) to have fallen out after Elah.


Even (and) Kenaz, ver. 15, translate aw marg. Uknas, or suppose a name


Vers. 16-20.—Descendants of Phares. From vers. 17, 18, difficult’ to come to any con-


clusions, And these, an interesting phrase, indicative of sojourn of these persons in
Egypt, when Israel was free, prosperous, and respected. ‘It was then as becoming for a
sovereign of Egypt to give # daughter in marriage to Mered, as at a luter period a sister.
in-law to Hadad. This Pharaoh may have been the last of the dynasty that preceded the
eighteenth” (cf, Murphy]. ‘

Vers. 21-23.—Descendants of Judah, We have been ascending from Shobal to Hur, to
Carmi, to Hezron, to Pharez; now we riso to Judah himself. A list of descendants of
his ere here given [cf. Murphy!. Linen, a staple commodity of Egypt. Ashbea, a


CHAP. Iv.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLEs.


descendant of Shelah, had a factory there. Ver. 23, last of Judah, and leave the t.ibe in
obscurity. Some of these potters, and others gardeners.

Vers. 24-48.—The sons of Simeon. Classed with Judah, because possessions partly in
their territory (Jos. xix. 1). Differences of particulars in list occasioned by some hav.1g
more than one name (cf. Gen, xlvi. 10; Ex. vi. 15, and Num. xxvi. 12,18). Ver. 27,
Shimet distinguished from his brethren by a large family. ‘Progeny of Simeon here
traced to settlement in Canaan.” Vers. 28-33, His territory. Highteen cities given in
Jos, xix. 2~7. Changes in name took place in time between Joshua and David. Vers.
34-38, Subsequent increase of certain families of Simeon; princes, ver. 38. ‘The number
of names is thirteen, corresponding to number of cities in first list (vers. 28-31), so that
it may be suspected that the princes mentioned were registered chiefs of those cities iv
time of Hezekiah (see ver. 41)” [Speak. Com.]. Vers. 39, 40, the first migration. Valley
into which mountain streams ran to fertilise the land, suitable for Simeonites, quiet and
peacezble on account of seclusion and long undisturbed inhabitents. I/am, ver. 40, on
their way to Africa induced by fertility of soil and abundance of water. Vers. 41-43,
further migrations. Days of Hez., hence date of Simeonite expedition, before captivity of
ten tribes (2 Kings xviii. 8). Rest, ver. 43, remnant left by Saul’s great slaughter
(i Sam. xv, 7, 8), and by David (2 Sam. viii. 12).





HOMILETICS.
Tue Cuirrs oF JupAH..—Verses 1-23.


Judah the most famous and most important of all tribes, A tribe which
survived other tribes, and whose register was specially cared for. I, Posterity
of Shobal (vers. 1-4). From these came the Zorathites (ch. ii. 53). IT.
Posterity of Ashur (vers. 5-10). Ashur, posthumous son of Hezron
(ch. ii. 24), whose mother was probably a daughter of Carmi. _ If so, he is grand-
son of Carmi, hence introduction of this name in ver.1. III. Posterity
of Chelub (vers. 11-20). Men of Rechah as inhabitants of an unknown
place of that name. IV. Posterity of Shelah (vers. 21-23),
Shelah, son of Judah, a family ingenious and industrious above others. Honest
labourers are the salt of society; the healthy, luxurious and dissolute, the idle
and predatory would corrupt it. 1. Craftsmen (ver. 14). A wise arrangement
that men should be fitted for different employments. 2. Weavers (ver. 21),
This an ancient and skilful labour. Children excelled and became famous in
their business. ‘“ He that handleth a matter wisely shall find good.” 3. Rulers
in Moab (ver. 22). Entrusted with power for many generations, But this long
ago (“ancient things”). A great change. Fathers had dominion then, posterity
in servitude now! 4. Potters, and 5. Gardeners (ver. 23). “With the king,”
on the king’s property ; or preferring to stay with him in Babylon rather than
return to their own country. ‘ Unworthy the name of Israelites are those who
dwell among plants and hedges rather than go to Canaan.”


Janez TaE Honovurrp Name.—Verse 9.


This a strange description in a catalogue of names, The man worthy of
remembrance, an honoured name deserving attention. I. The circum-
stances of his birth. Born in sorrow. 1. Sorrow the lot of all (Gen. iii.
18). Man born to sorrow as sparks fly upward (Job xiv. 1). 2. This, perhaps,
special sorrow, which the mother wished to perpetuate in name. O. T. names
significant of qualities and circumstances of life. Benjamin (Ben-oni), son of my
sorrow, by Rachael ; son of my right hand, by the father,

“*T do beseech you,


Chiefly that I might set it on my prayers,
What is your name?” [Shakespeare].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. for. Iv.





II, The dignity of his character.. “More honourable.” Not a title
of position or office as “The Hon.” and “ The Right Hon.,” &«. 1. Honourable
tn himself, literally “ a man of weight.” Jews say, a famous doctor of the law who
had disciples and founded a city which took his name (ch. ii. 55). But honour-
able and upright in personal character and conduct. A man of prayer and
fervent piety, whose name is held in everlasting remembrance. 2. More honour-
able than others. Some think he was exalted above them as judge, signalised in
war, or gained larger estates than his brethren. Not richer in material wealth,
but in moral worth ; more dignified in private life, more distinguished in action
and public philanthropy. ‘“ The righteous is more excellent than his neighbour.”
Seek this honour of character and life, not worldly honour which decays like a
flower, but honour from God, perpetual and true.


Toe REMARKABLE Prayer.—Verse 10.


Many things deserving attention, which make it a model of thoughtful,
earnest, and successful prayer. I, Its spiritual characteristics.
Devotion an expression of spirit, not lips. 1. Its view of God. Right views
of God essential. “ He that cometh to God must believe that he is,” &c. Not
Jehovah, the Almighty, Self-existent, and Eternal; but God of Israel, the
covenant God who keeps his word and never forgets his people. 2. Its humble
tone, a kind of vow. If thou wilt bless me, thou shalt have my heart and service
(Jacob. Gen. xxviii. 20), but without thee undone, &c. 3. Its earnest spirit. “ Oh
that thou wouldest bless me indeed.” Language of ardent feeling and intense
desire, becoming and needful. “O God, let me not fall from earnestness.
Grant me to hate every false way,” cried Thomas Chalmers. II. Its worthy
object. Most personal and direct, straight as an arrow to the point. 1. For
personal blessing. “ Bless me indeed.” This the beginning, the most needful
of all. 2. For successful undertaking. “Enlarge my coast.” Expulsion of
Canaanites, or special effort in which he desired to succeed. All success from
God. Pray when you enter life, start business, begin some fresh pursuit, take a
journey, or enter a new residence. 3. For preservation from danger. “Thine
hand with me.” His undertaking risky. He wanted something beside reputa-
tion, shields, and soldiers. Wealth, friendship, and human aid, nothing without
God. “Uphold me with thy right hand.” 4. For deliverance from evil. Evil
of sorrow implied in his name. Deeply impressed with his mother’s conduct,
Let it not be. Desired to be joy and help to parents, not a grief. Evil of sin
generally. In remembrance of Achan, perhaps. Sin ever brings sorrow, “ keep
me from evil.” Deliver me from its guilt and consequences. “Let sin have no
dominion over me.” III. Its gracious answer. “God granted him
that which he requested.” God preserved in danger, gave success in enterprise,
delivered from grief and sin, and exalted him to honour and position. This te
magnify his grace, encourage piety and prayer.


‘In all thou dost, first let thy prayers ascend,
And to the gods thy labours first commend}
From them implore success, and hope

A prosperous end.” [W. Fleming].


JaBEZ THE ** HonNOURABLE.”


According to a worldly standard, this list includes more hon. names than that
of Jabez. But in the estimation of heaven, the only reputation that will live
must have connection with God. The words we specially emphasise are, “ Oh
that thou wouldest bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast!” Some analogies
suggested by the sea-coast may teach the following lessons. I. An enlarged

16


CHA? tVv.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,





7
‘*coast”? suggests an expanded horizon. Carnal sympathies and
lack of faith limit to narrow visions of divine truths and holy revelations. Our
spiritual relations determine whether soul vision commands outlook from a small
bay, or toward broad ocean. To the mother of Jabez his entrance into the
world was associated with some special suffering, and she named him “ sorrowful.”
Years rolled on, God by his prophet knighted him and pronounced him “ more
honourable than his brethren.” Even so now according to our faith will be the
significance of our individual history. Let our vision be bounded by time and
sense only, and life will be a baptism of grief. Let faith widen our coast,
expand our horizon, and all along the coast the lamps of “hope” shall hang,
and a “more honourable” name be gained than those who refuse the “ faith,
which is the substance of things not seen, and by which the elders obtained a
good report.” II. An enlarged ‘‘coast”’ suggests a broader
surface. The glory of a coast is its wide sweep of the ocean. There go ships,
whose massive keels skim the surface of the waters. There floods lift up their
voice, whose swelling waves declare the fulness of its strength. Such in figure
is the human soul when possessed and enlarged by the Spirit of God. What
sublime possibilities of divine enlargement belong to the heart of man! Sin
circumscribes, hems in, and we are “straitened in ourselves.” But the coast
may be enlarged; hills of difficulty be removed, and mountains of unbelief
levelled, until an expanded horizon sheds calm and enlivening radiance all
around, and the renewed soul takes up the language of a renewed earth
(Is. lx. 4, 5). IIT. An enlarged ‘‘coast’’ suggests a more
extended pathway. Sometimes a narrow strip of land forms the only
path when walking on the sea-coast. Then we are in danger of falling, slipping
over a precipice; and but for a helping hand many would have thus perished.
These words are singularly applicable. Similar are those of the Psalmist,
Ps. xviii. 35, 36; cxix. 32 (Prov. iv. 12). This enlarged pathway will secure
two things. (1) Safety. “Kept” by the divine hand. No other power to
keep. In the king’s highway alone is security. This a way of holiness. “A
highway shall be there, it shall be called the way of holiness.” (2) Peace. Jabez
not only desires safety, but prays that sin may not “grieve” him. This a fine
test of sincerity of prayer and the cleannees of heart. What various motives,
prompt obedience to divine laws! What a great gulph of moral disparity
between the sayings, Sim hurts me physically, and sin grieves me spiritually / [The
Study, 1874].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 10. The Mighty Hand. Avail-
able, ever ready, and always sufficient.
A hand of universal control and per-
petual activity. “God’s right hand
doeth valiantly.”

Ver. 13. Othniel’s adventure (cf.
Jos. xv. 15, 16; Judg. i. 12, 13; iii. 9).
The brave man waits not for numbers
and applause. Enough for him to
know the cause is just, that danger
threatens, that action is required.

“ Where duty bids, he confidently steers,
faces a thousand dangers at her call,
And, trusting in his God, surmounts

them all,”

Ver. 18. The Egyptian convert. This
passage records a very interesting fact.


the marriage of an Egyptian princess
to a descendant of Caleb. 1. The
marriage must have taken place in the
wilderness. 2. The barriers of a differ-
ent national language and national
religion kept the Hebrews separate
from the Egyptians; but they did not
wholly prevent intimacies, and even
occasional intermarriages between
private individuals of the two nations.
3. Ere such unions, however, could be
sanctioned, the Egyptian party must
have renounced idolatry, and _ this
daughter of Pharaoh, as appears from
her name, had become a convert to
the worship of the Uod of Israel
[ Jamieson}.
AT


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [oHaP. 1


at





HOMILETICS.


Tae Posrerity or Simzon.—Verecs 24-43.


The sons of Simeon are classed with those of Judah, because their possession
was partly taken out of the extensive territory of Judah (Jos. xix. 1).

I. The cities they possessed. The same list given (Jos. xix. 2-6)
with a little difference in spelling; eighteen given. Virtue and self-control
better than taking a city (Prov. xvi. 32). II. The conquests they
made. In the days of Hezekiah a generation animated to conquests. 1
Some took Gedor (ver. 39). A place in Arabia, the entrance of Gedor, inhabited
by Ham’s posterity. 2. Others took Mount Seir (ver. 42). Smote the remnant
of devoted Amalekites and possessed the country. The curse pronounced on
Ham and Amalek, though dormant, was not dead. To Simeon the curse
(Gen. xlix. 5-7) was a blessing, to the others a terrible reality. III. The
prosperity they enjoyed. 1. Increase of numbers. They imcreased
wonderfully, but not like the children of Judah (ver. 27). 2. Enlargement of
boundaries. In possession of limited area, they were forced to seek accominoda-
tion elsewhere. They established themselves in the fertile pastures of Gedor
(Gerar), which soon proved inadequate, and a new colony settled on Mount
Seir. They enjoyed a land of peace and plenty, numerous flocks and quiet
habitations, Thank God for fixed homes, but ever guard against the perils of
prosperity.


Svugvey of THe Geneatocy.—Veress 143,


I. How great the obscurity of most men! Not many known
and prominent here. But obscurity hides not God. We are great if the world
gains by our life and example. II. What folly to seek place and
power only here! From place we shall be ejected, and of power we shall
be deprived. A family of princes were captives in exile (ver. 22). ‘* Where
will ye leave your glory?” III. How needful to secure renown
hereafter! Better to have names written in heaven than rolled in lists of
honour and published in daily papers. “ Rejoice that your names are written m
heaven,” said the dying Haller, when friends congratulated him on the honour
of receiving a visit from the Emperor Joseph II.


Onicin AND Use or Arts amp INveNnTIONS.—Verecs 14, 21~23.


I. Useful arts emanate from the wisdom and goodness of
God. In early history man taught of God in special callings. Human inven-
tions had no existence save in the purpose of God. Proof from reason and
scripture. “This also cometh from the Lord of Hosts, who is wonderful in
counsel and excellent in working.” II. Useful arts are beneficial in
their tendency. They mitigate human toil and alleviate suffering; prolong
human life, increase sources of comfort, and secure universal peace, HS
Therefore all engaged in useful arts promotes the welfare of
society. It is better to excel in trade than to gain dominions of territory.
In the construction of the tabernacle an illustration of this principle. Let us
be among the “ willing-hearted” and the “ wise-hearted,” and contribute our
share. “ Produce! produce! were it but the pitifullest infinitesimal fraction
of a product, produce it in God’s name! "Tis the utmost thou hast in thee: out
with it, then” [Carlyle],

18


CHAP. Ive]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


ES a a a oa
HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 32. These citics wnto retgn of
David. In consequence of the sloth
or cowardice of the Simeonites, some of
the cities within their allotted territory
were only nominally theirs, but were
never taken from the Philistines until
David’s time, when the Simeonites
having forfeited all claim to them, he
assigned them to his own tribe of
Judah [Jamieson]. Hence danger of
delay.

Ver. 33. Habitations and genealogy;
or Homes and Registers.

Ver. 38. Princes m Families.
Thirteen names corresponding with
number of cities in first list (verses
28-31), so that the princes mentioned
were registered chiefs of those cities in
thetime of Hezekiah (see ver. 41) (Speak.
Com.]. 1. Families and kingdoms of
divine appointment. 2. Rulers of
families and kingdoms represented God
and order, justice and truth. 3. Hence
subjection needful for order, happiness,
and success.


Ver. 40. Fat pastures. 1. Prepared


by God, natura] formation. %. Dis-
covered by God’s direction. They found,
did not create. Application in com-
fortable homes, favourable situations
and spiritual refreshment.

Ver. 43. Doomof Amalek. Sinnot
forgotten, judgment not neglected nor
fails in execution. Curses may be
dormant but not dead. “ Preservation
from the sword of Joshua (Ex. xvii.
13), of Saul (1 Sam. xv. 7), and of
David (2 Sam. viii. 12) was but a
reservation to this utter destruction,
which God had solemnly sworn, with
hand laid upon his own throne (Ex.
xvii. 16)” [Zapp].

Vers. 39-43. A fragment of famous
history. Learn. from this chronicle of
events —1. Expedition first, under
thirteen feaders, with many followers,
against Hamites and Mehurrim. 2.
Expedition second, smaller, but more
adventurous. Under four chiefs, a
band of 500 smote powerful enemies
and possessed their quartera. Be
valiant for God spiritually.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER IV.


Ver. 9. Honourable. Virtue and
honour are such inseparable com-
panions that the heathens would admit
no man into the temple of honour who
did not pass through the temple of
virtue.

“Tf it be of a sin to covet honour,

I am the most offending soul alive”

[ Shakespeare},

Ver. 10. vil. The greatest evil
is sin. 1. In the nature of it, as
being contrary to the greatest good,
even God. 2. In the effect and con-
sequences of it here and hereafter.
3. Therefore to pray against sin is to
pray against all other evils whatever ;
for the devil, the evil one, cannot hurt
us but by sin [Bishop Hopkins].

Be with me. Ora et labora is the
legend of the Christian's faith, and
the plan of his life. His fervent


prayer begets honest, manly, unshrink-
ing work; his work as it is faithful
and it is faithful in proportion as he
realises 1t is for God, throws him back
upon prayer [Stevenson].

Vers. 14, 21,23. Craftsmen, potters,
é&c. If all men affected one and the
same trade of life or pleasure of recrea-
tion, it were not possible they could
live one by another; neither could
there be any use of commerce, whereby
life is maintained. It is good reason
we should make a right use of this
gracious dispensation of the Almighty,
that we should improve our several
dispositions and faculties to the advan-
cing of the common stock, and that
we should neither encroach upon each
other’s profession nor be apt to censure
each other’s recreation [Bishep Hall}.


SPL OAR TE ROLE SE TLS CE OIE LEE LEIA LE


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES, (CHAP. v.








CHAPTER V.


Carrroat, Notes.] This oh. contains Reuben, Gad, and the half of Manasseh eact of
Jordan, with two episodes, one on the wars of these tribes, and the other on the removal
by Tilgath-pilneser. The upper Assyrian monarchy began 1273 B.c., the lower 747 B.c.

Murphy |.

yen a 0 Reuben lost his birthright. The priesthood given to Levi; the double
portion (Deu. xxi. 17) to Joseph, whose sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, reckoned as distinct
tribes. Judah had supremacy, ver. 2. Chief ruler, prince, t.e., David, and eventually
Messiah (Mic. v.1). Ver. 3, sons four, as Gen. xlvi.9; Ex. vi. 14. Vers. 4-6. The line
of Joel. Vor. 7. Brethren, kinsmen of Joel, chief was Jeiel. Ver. 10. Hagarites, Hagarenes
(Ps. lxxxiii. 6), a tribe of North Arabia, perhaps Agraict of Strabo [Speak. Com.], or
Ismaelites as descendants of Hagar.

Vers. 11-17.—Gad. Chiefs, ver. 12, and seven others, ver. 13. “Their pedigree traced
back ten generations. For Buz and Ahi are really parts of one name, Buzahi, for which
Sept. has Ahibuz by transposing parts. Not informed to what family Guni belonged ”
[Murphy], must have been contemporary with Solomon or David, therefore before the
secession of ten tribes.

Vers. 18-22.— Wars of Eastern tribes with Arabs, Jetur and Nephish (Naphish) among
descendants of Ismael in Chr. i. 31, and in Gen. xxv. 15. Of Nodab, nothing known.
Hagarites made raids from desert. Hence war in self-defence. Confederate tribes pre-
vailed over invaders. Booty indicates dense population and extensive campaign ; ‘* may
be compared with that from Midianites (Num. xxxi. 32-35), and does not exceed amount
which kings of Assyria constantly carried off in raids upon tribes of nogreat note or name”’
(Speak. Com.]. Captivity of Tiglath-pileser (2 Kings xv. 29).

Vers, 23-26.—Half Manasseh, north of Gad. Three names given of three parts or
‘‘summits”’ of Antilebanon, Valour or special bravery of Manassites (cf. ch. xii. 21).
Famous, i.e., ‘men of names,” celebrated men. Transgressed, a long description in 2 Kings
xvii. He carried, i.e., Vilgath. Pul only levied tribute on the land. Deported to places
named, aa parts of region to which remainder of ten tribes removed by Shalmaneser.


HOMILETICS.


Tur Forrerren Buiessina.—Verses 1<3,


Reuben, rash and impulsive, lost splendid position and power through passion
(Gen, xlix. 4). I. The sin through which the blessing was lost.
A most abominable and iniquitous act, worthy of death under law of Moses
(Lev. xviii. 8), and not to be mentioned among Christians (1 Cor. v. 1). Sin
dethrones from excellency, stamps disgrace upon character, and entails loss upon
posterity. II. The per:ons to whom the blessing was bestowed.
Taken from one and given to another. 1. Joseph's sons had double portion.
Ephraim and Manasseh reckoned distinct tribes; blessed by the expressed will
of Jacob (Gen. xlviii, 22) and in the partition of Canaan (Jos. xvi., xvii.). 2.
Judah had pre-eminence. Honour to Judah, and birthright to Joseph. One need
not envy the other. (a) Jn power. The sceptre assigned to Judah (Gen. xlix,
10). (6) In dignity. From him came chief ruler David first, and afterwards the
Saviour. Those related to Christ, the Prince of Peace, have a better portion
than men endowed with wealth and perishing honour. III. The principle
on which the blessing was given. The writer careful to explain
why Judah was made supreme. ‘The genealogy not reckoned after the birth-
right ;” not in natural, but in providential order ; “not of blood, nor of the will
of aes flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God,”


oHaP. Vv. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





Tae Lars or Revsen.—Verses 1-10,


I. The chief of the tribe. The genealogy traced tu Beerak., the head
of the clan, when carried into Assyria (ver. 6). What are termed * unfortunate
positions” and “evil days” are controlled, if not created, by God. “ My times
are in thy hand.” II. The privileges of the tribe. Degraded, but
not entirely disinherited. Sullied honour not always lost bappiness. Reuben’s
sons had their share of honour and estate, were “ valiant” in war, and “ helped”
in victory, Their inheritance received before Judah or Vipbraim. XII. The
enlargements of the tribe (vers. 9,10). They increased in cattle and
population, crowded out their neighbours, and extended conquests into the
wilderness and near the Euphrates. IV. The disinheritance of the
tribe. The prediction exactly fulfilled in history, “Thou shalt not excel.”
Reuben made no figure, and produced no judge, prophet, or eminent person.
He lingered among the sheepfolds, preferred the shepherd’s pipe to the trumpet
of battle. Robbed of pre-eminence, his individuality fades away. Remote from
the centre of government and religion, he lost faith in Jehovah, “ went after
other gods,” and finally carried off into captivity.


Unity AND ITs ACHIEVEMENTS.—Verses 11-22.


The three tribes united went to war and gained victory. I, A descrip-
tion of the army (ver. 18). 1. Courageous in character. ‘Sons of valour.”
2. Skilful in the use of weapons. “ Men able to bear buckler and sword, and to
shoot with the bow and skilful in war.” 3. Aggresswe in spirit. “ Went out to
war.” 4. Great in number. “Four and forty thousand seven hundred and
threescore.” II. The method in which they fought (ver. 20). 1.
United in rank. ‘Men who could keep rank” (1 Chr. xii. 3). 2. Harnest in
prayer. “For they cried to God in the battle.” 3. Thoroughly reliant upon
God. “They put their trust in him.” “They cried unto thee and were
delivered; they trusted in thee and were not confounded.” III. The
success they achieved. Not only “helped” and “delivered,” but
enriched. 1. The booty enormous. “They took away their cattle,” dc. (ver. 21}.
2. The slain numerous. “There fell down many slain,” &. The Church
united, courageous, and prayerful, ever victorious.


Tus AposTaTE Tripes.—Verees 28-26.


Special attention paid to this great sin of the tribes, this beginning of national
evil and national suffering. I. Shameful apostasy. A full description
in 2 Kings xvii. of idolatries, heathen and native. 1. Beginning in forgetfulness
of God. “ They transgressed against the God of their fathers” (ver. 25). One
known to them as a nation, venerated by their fathers and worthy of their
service. 2. Ending in forsaking God. ‘ Went a whoring after the gods of the
people.” Forsaking their own God, they worshipped idols of the heathen.
Man must have a god, will worship something, even if he adores himself,
Whoring, a strong, emphatic word, indicative of special aggravation and intense
jealousy. II. Merited judgment. We have a full and impressive
vindication of divine procedure. Patience exhausted, and God, whom they had
forsaken, permitted captivity to cure national evils. 1. Utter defeat. (a) First
God stirred up Pul, King of Assyria (ver. 26). The first of northern sovereigns
who invaded Palestine was bribed by silver to return (2 Kings xv. 16-20).
Tribute was imposed, which caused prophetic protest, great ne anne and


“8


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


{cHAP. ¥





impoverished the kingdom by reducing its territory and its inhabitants, (2)


Then Tiglath inflicted utter defeat.
God has left us, defence is gone.


Valour and numbers of no avail.
2. Helpless excle.


When
They were “ carried away”


into distance and slavery. God’s instruments, many and varied, to chastise.
Idolatry most destructive sin to people loved and led by Jehovah, “ Little


childrea, keep yourselves from idols.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. Judah prevailed. 1, God in
family history. 2. Persons giving
pre-eminence to families, David and
Messiah from Judah. 3. Grace dis-
tinguishing families in civil and re-
ligious matters, in national and indi-
vidual life.

Vers. 18-20. Cried in battle. So
did Jabez (ch. iv.); Jehoshaphat (2
Chr. xx.); the thundering legion ; the
late King of Sweden, whose prayer
before the great battle of Lutzen, where
he fell, was, ‘Jesus, vouchsafe this
day to be my strong helper, and give
me courage to fight for the honour of
thy name.” Prayer alone he held the
surest piece of his whole armour
[Zrapp].

Ver. 25. Transgressed. 1. Danger of
proximity to the world. The tribes on
the borders had intercourse with neigh-


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 2. Judah's pre-eminence.
“ pone must be great. Great officers will
rave
Great talents. And God gives to ev'ry man
The virtue, temper, understanding, taste,
That lifts him into life, and lets him fall
Just in the niche he was ordained to fill”
{ Cowper].

Ver. 18. Valiant men. It is not the
will of God that his people should be a
timorous people | Aft. Henry].

Ver. 20. Helped. We are like Wil-
liam of Orange, with a few followers
and an empty purse, making war
against the master of half the world
with the mines of Peru for a treasury.





bouring people, then drawn into sin.
2. Fearful consequences of yielding te
enticements of the world. Cast off by
God, invaded by enemies, and displaced
by Providence. Be governed by faith,
not by sense. Lot.

Ver. 26. Stirred up. 1. God’s in-
fluence over men’s spirit. Stirred up,
moved, prompted. ‘The king’s heart,”
the most absolute and uncontrollable
will, “‘is in the hand of the Lord as
rivers of water” (Prov. xxi. 1), 2.
God’s control over man’s conduct. De-
spotic rule, political projects, and
ambitious wars directed to the fulfil-
ment of his purpose. Pul restrained
in conduct. ‘ Howbeit he meaneth
not so, neither doth his heart think so;
but it isin his heart to destroy and cut
off nations not a few” (Is. x. 7).


TO CHAPTER V.


But like William, too, when questioned
concerning our resources, we can reply,
“ Before we took up this cause we
entered into a close alliance with the
King of Kings” [Sword and Trowel].
Ver. 26. Carried away. When
lesser warnings will not serve, God
looks into his quiver for deadly arrows.
Abuse of mercy ripens us for judgment
[ Nicholls].
oy: gives the needful but neglected
Cail,
What day, what hour, but knocks at
human hearts
To wake the soul tosense of future scenes?”


[Young]





CHAP. VI, | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONIVULES,
LS SS oS





CHAPTER VI.


Crrrrcat, Norrs.] This chapter refers wholly to tribe of Levi. Gives the family of Aaron,
vers, 1-15 ; the descendants of Gershom, Kohath, and Merari, vers. 16-30; the pedigrees
of the song-masters, vers. 31-48; the line from Aaron to Abimaaz, vers. 49-53 ; and the
towns assigned to the tribe, vers. 54-81.

Vers, 1-3.—The sons of Levi. The genealogy of Levi follows (Ex. vi. 16-25), as far as
Phinehas, after which the writer must have had documents before him which have not
some down to us [Speak. Com.].

Vers. 4-15.—Line of priests unto Captivity. This list must have been obtained from the
priestly registers. It is given in inverse order (Hzra vii. 1-5), with omission of names
vetween Meraioth and Azariah II. It wants the name Meraioth between Ahitub II. and
Zadok II. (ix.11). It is not a succession of high priests, but simply the line from Eleazar
to Jehozadak([cf. Murphy]. Zadok, ver 8, priest with Abiathar (2 Sam. viii. 18), one probably
in Gibeon, the other in Zion. Azariah, ver.9, grandson of Zadok, in the court of Solomon
{i Kings iv. 2). Temple, ver. 10, first to distinguish it from second existing in days of
writer. Amariah, ver. 11, high priest under Jehoshaphat (2 Chr. xix. 11). Shallum,
ch. ix. 11 (Neh. xi. 11). Hilkiah, ver. 12, in office under Josiah, took part in reformation
then (2 Kings xxii. 4-14; xxiii. 4; 2 Chr. xxxiv. 9-22). Seraiah, ver. 14, put to death
by Nebuchadnezzar at time of Captivity (2 Kings xxv. 18-21; Jer. lii. 24-27).

Vers. 16-30. —Sons of Levi, Having traced high priestly line from Levi to Jehozadak
(vers. 1-15), writer returns to fountain head and gives general account of branches of
tribe of Levi as far as materials allow. Vers. 16-21. The Gershomites, after first-born of
Moses (Ex. ii. 22). Vers. 17-19. These appear in Ex. vi. Vers. 20, 21. This line appears
to coincide with part of that of Asaph (vers. 39-43), exceptin Jeaterai, who may have been
another son of Zerah. Vers. 22-28. The Kohathites. The same as that of Heman (vers.
33-38). Object of list to trace genealogy of Samuel, prophet and judge of Israel. Vers,
29, 30. The Merarites.

Vers. 31-48.— Pedigrees of the three song-masters. Asaph, Heman, Ethan, or Jeduthan
(Ps. lxxxix.), sons of Korah, set over departments of musical service. House, a tent
erected by David to receive the ark, considerable time before building of the Temple.
Waited in order, instituted by David, doubtless directed by Holy Spirit, for regulation of
worship. 33. Shemuel,t.e, Samuel. Ver. 48. Levites employed in door-keeping or attend-
ing te priests.

Vers. 49-53.—Office of Aaron and his sons (cf. vers. 3-8). Eleazar, third son, chief of
Leyvites (Num. iii. 32), ministered with his brother Ithamar, before death of Aaron, and
succeeded him (Num. xx. 28). In Eleazar’s family high priesthood remained till the time
of Eli, who was descended from Ithamar, It returned to Eleazar in Zadok, fulfilling the
words of 1 Sam. ii. 30.

Vers. 54-81.—The cities given to priestly families and to other Levites. Jos. xxi., its
parallel, 54-60. Cities given to Aaron’s family. Castles, places of defence against robbers
or beasts of prey. Vers. 61-81. Cities of the Levites, their number and distribution:
13 cities to Gershom, ver. 62; 12 to Merari, ver. 63, as in Jos. xxi. 34-40; cities of other
Kohathites, vers. 66-70; of Gershomites, vers. 71-76; and of Merarites, vers. 77-81.
Vers 80, 81, agree with those in Joshua. Ten only of twelve named. Only 42 out of 48
named, and some different from original cities assigned to Levites. This proof of accu-
racy of author. He remembers whole numbers in time of Joshua. But political arrange-
ments readjusted in course of ages. State of things given which had supervened in time


of David (vii, 2) [cf. Murphy],
HOMILETICS.


A Grance or History.—Verses 1-15.


In these verses we have a glance from deliverance in Egypt to bondage in
captivity. Notice two or three features of the period.
I. The inequalities of men. Inequalities physical, mental, and social
appear in whatever light we regard mankind, In this list some exalted te
a3


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. _ femar. v1


sacred office and perform noble deeds. . Others fall into sin and disgrace
Vast differences in character and career! Royalty and beggary, grandeur and
wretchedness, palaces and slums! “There were two men in one city, the one
rich and the other poor.” II. The vicissitudes of families. Aaron
a priest, but Aaron’s sons terrors of divine justice. Samuel a prophet, but
Samuel’s sons perverted justice and dishonoured religion. According to
political and religious feeling, ancestors exalted and descendants rejected. JIT.
The events of Providence. Deliverance from bondage. Scenes of
conflict and triumph. Times of revival, relapse and punishment. Accession and
dethronement of kings Providences, special, striking, and constant. “ He
hath not dealt so with any nation.”


Tue Sons or Lrvi.—Verses 16-30.


I. Their chief Fathers. Gershom the eldest, Kohath the second, and
Merari the youngest son accompanied Levi into Egypt with Jacob (Gen. xlvi.
11), and became heads of three great divisions of Levites. II. Their
numerous descendants. Many unknown or passed over. Others
eminent in character, distinguished in service, and remarkable in career.
Children of privilege and monuments of judgment, born in sunshine and dying
in shadows. What a mixture of good men and bad men in life! What a
contrast between character and circumstances, beginnings and ends |


Tar Ministry or Sonc.—Verses 31-48.


Song a divine gift, has a mission or ministry. I, Sang an element of
Christian worship. “The service of song in the house of the Lord.”
A branch of natural and revealed religion in all ages, prevalent in Jewish and
heathen worship. A duty reverently to be performed. Jts decay a mark of
desolation (Ezek. xxvi. 13). II. Song an expression of human
feeling. Joy and sorrow, gratitude and prayer, must have appropriate and
audible expression. When the ark is in captivity, in times of darkness and
depression, our harps are hung upon the willows. When the ark finds rest and
fixed residence in times of revival, we sing praise to God (David’s joy, 2 Sam.
vi. 17-21, xvi. 1-3). “Is any merry? let him sing psalms.” JII. Songa
power for which its possessors are responsible, In pagan and
Jewish nations recognised as a divine gift. It is a talent entrusted to indivi-
duals ; a faculty to be cultivated, for which there is room, and which should be
consecrated to God. The duty of all who have the gift to lay it upon the altar
of God, in the home, the school, and the sanctuary,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUCGGHSTIONS.


Ver. 1. Three chief Fathers. Their service. High priest in temple of
names, history, and pedigree. Solomon. “ Lxecuted,” &e. Some think
Ver. 3. Nadab wnd Abthu. Im- that he withstood King Uzziah, and


proper spirit in worship ; unlawful

method and awful judgment. Perished

on day of consecratiou! (Lev. x.).
Ver. 4. Phineas, a memorable

name (Num. xxv. 7-13; Jos. xxii.

{0-33 ; Ps. evi. 30, 31).
Ver. 10. Azariah’s important

a4


thus risked life in faithful reproof
(2 Chr. xxvi. 17, 18).

Ver. 13. Hilkiah most celebrated
of seven bearing this name es priest
and reformer. He discovered “ the
Book of the Law” (2 Kings xxii. 8);
was zealous in reformations of Josiah


OHAP. VL]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


ee


(2 Kings xxii. 14-20, xxiii. 4-27); and
prominent in observing the Passover
(2 Chr. xxv. 1-19).

Ver. 15. Jehozadak. Three forms
of this name (see Hara iii. 2; Hag. i. 1;
and this verse). Only two forms in
original, Jehozadak full form, and
Jozadak contracted. The meaning is,
“Jehovah is righteous.” It is noted


as remarkable that the heads of both
the priestly and the royal stock carried
to Babylon should have had names
(Zedekiah and Jehozadak) composed of
the same elements, and assertive of the
“* justice of God,” which their sufferings
showed forth so signally [Speak. Com.].

Ver. 22. Korah’s sin and punish-
ment (Num. xvi. 1-33).


HOMILETICS.
Reticious Worsuip.— Verses 32—53.


The order of song a matter of importance in time of David. The ark had a
settled place. Choral service was established in the Temple, and chief singers
were appointed. I. Worship varied in its forms. Music and singing,
prayer and praise, must not become formal and stereotyped. “ All manner of
service.” II. Lively in its spirit. Dulness and despondency dishonour-
ing to God and unprofitable to men. “ This duty must be our delight.” Then
it becomes attractive and helpful. ‘Serve the Lord with gladness; come
before his presence with singing.” III. Orderly in its method. “ They
waited on their office according to their order.” Things not left to chance ;
arrangements made with care and thought. Each his own work, place, and
time in keeping up the service. ‘ The order of the sanctuary.” “ Let all things
be done decently and in order.” IV. Universal in its participation.
They “ waited with their children” in the choir The service of song for the
whole “congregation” not left to the choir to sing, nor to the preacher to pray.
All hearts and all lips must join. Congregational worship must be sought and
cultivated. “ Let the people praise thee, let ald the people praise thee.”


Tue ANcIENT PrizstHoop.—Verses 49-53.


Aaron and his sons, “the house of Aaron,” appointed to the priestly office.
Other Levites given to them and performed subordinate duties. I. Its
sacred dignity. Not the investure of man; endowments for the work
from God. The office not a personal assumption, but in obedience to divine
call, manifest in Providence, the gift of the Holy Spirit, and the help of
friends. “No man taketh this honour unto himself.” II Its solemn
duties. On the brazen altar, the golden altar and the mercy seat in the holy
of holies, they performed their functions, This chiefly “ to make an atonement
for Israel” (ver. 49). A constant need for this; the life of the individual and
the nation imperilled by sin; covenant relations must be restored. “The day
of atonement,” an impressive scene anda typical truth, III. Its typical
character. The high priests in official character, the ceremony of sprinkling
blood were figures of good things to come. Under the gospel all believers are
priests, ministering to God in his spiritual temple, Each has an appointed
zervice which contributes to the perpetual worship and benefit of the whole,
Only in fulfilment of prescribed ordinance can we secure the presence and favour


of Jehovah.
Crrmes AND Dwe.iines oF Levitzs.—Verses 54-81.


First cities given to the priestly family of Aaron (vers. 54-60). Next the
number and P auitstion of those assigned to other Levites (vers. ol 1).


| HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [omar. 9








Regard them as—I. A fulfilment of prediction. Jacob’s dying prophecy
was accomplished and this tribe was “scattered in Israel” (Gen. xlix. 7). God's
people are preserved, and events are arranged for their possessions. II. An
arrangement of providence. These cities wisely ordered, a provision
of mercy and safety. 1. 7'o facilitate the administration. Centres of justice and
law, freeing individuals from avenging themselves, fixing authority and pro-
moting peace and order. 2. Zo disseminate light. Each city the centre of light
and instruction, the place where law was expounded and administered. A school


of learning and social influence to the people.
Cities allotted to priests and Levites for residence and maintenance.
Men set apart for God, dependent upon
Those who “ preach the gospel” may reasonably expect

“ Let him that is taught in the word communicate to


provisions made for spiritual service.
the people they serve.

“to live of the gospel.”
him that teacheth in all good things.”


3. To support ihe ministry.
Certain


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 31. The vicissitudes of the Ark.
Without a proper resting-place from
victory over Philistines in time of Eli
till the tabernacle of David, about fifty
years (1 Sam. iv.; 2 Sam. vi.).

Vers. 32 and 33. Wazted on their
office. 1. Each an office or work, fixed
in choir, leading in service of song,
officiating at the altar, and waiting at
the door. 2. Each responsible for the
performance of his work—not envy-
ing his neighbour, waiting for some-
thing better ; but with diligence, order,


and delight each fills his position and
renders his service.

Vers. 31-48. Three chief song-
masters. Heman’s pedigree (vers. 33=
38). Pedigree of Asaph, the Gershonite
(vers. 39-43). He stood on right hand.
Pedigree of Ethan, the Merarite (vers.


44-47). He stood on the left of He-
man.
Vers. 49-53. Priests and Levites,


two orders of ministry in the Jewish
Church. Their divine appointment,
special duties, and worldly provision.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER FI.


Ver. 31. Service. The tliree inten-
tions of song: To improve the under-
standing, to improve the heart, and to
soothe the mind. The three things
which ought to pervade song: Perfect
learning, perfect vigour, perfect nature
[Catherall].

Ver. 32. Waited in office. Man
hath his daily work of body or mind
appointed | Miton].

“A servant with this clause

Makes drudgery divine:
Who sweeps a room, as for Thy laws,


Makes that and the action fine”
[ Geo. Herbert].


Ver. 54. Cities, If the history of


cities and their influence on their re
spective territories be deducted from
the history of humanity, the narrative
remaining would be of no very attrac-
tive description. If anything be
certain, it would seem to be certain
that man is constituted to realise his
destiny from his association with man,
more than from any contact with
places. The great agency in calling
forth his capabilities, for good or for
evil, is that of his fellows. The pic-
turesque may be with the country, but
the intellectual, generally speaking,
must be with the town [Dr. Vaughan’s
Age of Cities],





GHAP. vii. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


CHAPTER VII.


Critrcan Nores.) Were. 1-8.—Issachar. A tribe of more than average strencth, since
the entire return from all the tribes, except Judah, was no more than 800,000 men
(2 Sam. xxiv. 9) [Speak, Com.]. In days of David, ver. 2, probably from census taken by
Joab (xxi.).

; Vers. 6-12..—Benjamin, Ten, Gen. xlvi. 21; five, viii. 1; three here, most eminent men-
tioned, or other families extinct. Ver. 7. Beda, list different from ch. viii. 3-5 and from
um. xxvi. 40. ‘* Probably persons mentioned not literally ‘sons,’ but among later
descendants of Bela, chief men of family in time of David’s census ee. Com.]. Ver. 10.
Jediael, sons may include grandsons. Ver. 12. Three other sons of Benjamin named (ef.
Num. xxxvi. 39; Gen. xlvi. 21; and ch. viii. 5).

Ver. 13.—Naphtalt (cf. Gen. xlvi. 24; Num. xxvi. 48). His territory originally
included in Judah (Jos. xix. 40).

Vers. 14-19.—Maznasseh. An intricate and defective passage, appears to refer to western
side of Jordan; other side in ch. v. 23-26. Ver. 15. Daughters (cf. account Jos. xvii.
3-6; Num. xxvi. 33). Vers. 16,17. None of these mentioned elsewhere, unless ‘“* Bedan”
is the ‘‘judge” of 1 Sam. xii. 11. Ver. 19 “This paragraph is of peculiar interest as illus.
trating the freedom and independence with which sons of Israel moved in period before
the new king arose that knew not Joseph ” [Murphy].

Vers. 20-29.—Ephraim. Difficult to solve the question of chronology and genealogy of
this passage. The line of Shuthelah is traced to seventh generation, viz., to another
Shuthelah. ‘Ezer and Elead, perhaps two brothers of the first Shuthelah, i.e., own
sons of Ephraim.” Men of Gath, settled inhabitants (contrasted with strangers,
nomadic Hebrews, Amalekites, &c.), attacked shepherds of Ephraim, and the conflict
produced the usual result. Ver. 23. Beriah, ‘‘ in evil,” some render ‘“‘a gift,” to the house
by the birth of another son. Ver. 24. Beth-horon (Jos. x. 10; xvi. 3-5; xviii. 13, 14).
Vers. 25-27. Two other sons of Ephraim added, Rephah and Resheph, from latter
sprang Joshua (Jehovah, Saviour). Hlishama, son of Ammihud, prince of Ephraim in
time of Exodus (Num. i. 10; ii. 18). Non, for Nun (Num. xiii. 8-16). Vers. 28, 29.
Possessions and boundaries of the two tribes here given.

Vers. 30-40.—Aésher. Sons, daughters, and grandsons, given as in Gen. xlvi. 17 and
partly Num. xxvii 44, if we allow for slight changes of spelling in names,


HOMILETICS.


RecistereEp Soipiers.—Verses 1~40.


In this chapter a genealogy of those tribes only who were “mighty men of
valour.”

I. Issachar, the industrious tribe (ver. 1-5). 1. Patient tm
labour. He possessed a fruitful district, willingly submitted to toil and tribute
(cf. Gen. xlix. 14, 15 ; Jos. xix. 17-22). 2. Great in number (ver. 5). 3. Valiant
in war (ver. 5). II. Benjamin, the warlike tribe (ver. 6-12). Quick,
rapacious, and powerful (Gen. xlix. 27; of. Judg. v. 14, xx. 16). Ehud, Saul,
Jonathan. Paul from this tribe. III. Naphtali, the heroic tribe
(ver. 13), Beautiful and active, comparable to the gazelle (2 Sam. ii. 18).
Remarkable also for culture. ‘“ He giveth goodly words,” rich in poetry and
speech (Gen. xlix. 21). IV. Manasseh, the divided tribe (ver. 14-19).
One half of the tribe on the other side Jordan (ch. v. 23). Division, perhaps,
according to the fitness of those who composed it at the time. More warlike
adapted to coast of Jordan. V. Ephraim, the exalted tribe (ver.
20-29). Manasseh the elder, but Jacob gave the preference to Ephraim
(Gen. xlviii. 10-12). Great things declared of this tribe in best days, Here
potice—1, Ite bereavement (ver. 21). 2. Its posscssions (ver. 28). a Its


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [onar. vit.





vicissitudes. Its predicted greatness (Gen. xlviii. 19) nipped in the bud.
Powerless to protect itself, thrown into grief, humbled, yet comforted and dis-
tinguished in its sons (ver. 27). WI. Asher, the undistinguished
tribe (vers. 30-40). A few “choice and mighty men of valour,” but inferior
in numbers, no great record in sacred history, furnished no hero or judge to the
nation. ‘One name only shines out of the general obscurity. The aged widow,
‘ Anna, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser,’ who, in the very close
of the history, departed not from the Temple, ‘but served God with fastings
and prayers day and night’” [Stanley].


Famity Sorrow.—Verses 21=23.


I. The cause of the sorrow. Gathites robbed sons of E. of their
eattle, and slew them when defending themselves (ver. 21). Life often exposed
and lost by wealth; the sword devours, death takes away children. Families
bereaved and thrown into grief. ‘“ Ephraim mourned many days.” II. The
sympathy inthe sorrow. “His brethren came to comfort him.” ‘The
afiliction of others should excite our own pity and grief. Relatives and intimate
friends should ever be ready “to comfort” the bereaved. Hard to bear the
burden alone. “ Bear ye one another’s burdens.” Most available and tender is
the help of one “touched with the feeling of our infirmities.” III. The
remembrance of the sorrow. Afilictions may be overcome, but
occasions of them never forgotten. 1. Perpetwated im joy. Another son born
(ver. 23) in Beriah. Like Seth, another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew
2. Perpetuated in sorrow. ‘ It went evil with his house.” Weeping yet rejoic
ing ; humbled by the stroke, yet grateful for deliverance. God compensates for
the loss in human sympathy, heavenly gifts, and perpetual joy. ‘The Lord
Li: deth up the breach of his people, and healeth the stroke of their wound.”


“$hrink not from suffering. Each dear blow
From which the smitten spirit bleeds
Is but # messenger to show
The renovation which it needs.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. Valiant men of might. 1. daughter. Sherah, a virtuous woman,


Times of conflict. Days of war in
Israel many. Thank God for peace
and advance of civilisation and human-
‘ty. 2. Men fitted by God to engage
in conflict. “ Apt to the war and to
battle” (ver. 40). Physical strength,
skill in command, statesmanship, and
success. The gift of God needful, and
should be consecrated to holy purposes.

Ver. 17. Bedan (cf. mentioned in
1 Sam. xii. 11). A great deliverer in
Israel.

Ver. 24. Loss replaced or a famous


who built cities at. her own charge (one
Uzzen-sherah, named after her), and
became an honour to the family. “A
gallant woman, famous in her genera-
tion for beautifying and fortifying of
sundry cities. Thus also God made up
Ephraim’s loss” [Z'rapp]}.

Ver, 22. A great leader ; Joshua,
son of Nun. In name and work a
type of Jesus; yet a contrast (Jos,
xiii, 8-16). Human life a register and
rapid genealogy, but we have a place
and work.


CHAP VILL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. CHRONICLES.


SS SE SE PS sl Ss SS SS SRE hse SERS
7


CHAPTER VIIL


Critica Nores.] Benjamin, son of Bilhan (vii. 10), great-grandson of son of Jacob.
Posterity given on account of history of Saul. This tribe remained faithful during the
revolt of the ten, and returned with Judah from Babylon.

Vers. 3-5.—The nine sons of this Bela are all different in name from the five sons of
the earlier Bela (vii. 7). The names Gera, Naaman, and Shephuphan (Num. xxvi. 39)
are heirlooms from the household of the former Benjamin (Judg. iii. 15) [Murphy].

Vers, 6-12.Ehud same as vii. 10; others either Abihud of ver. 3, or Ahoah of ver. 4
Some of sons heads of houses in Geba, now Jeba, probably removed by force to Manhahath,
ver. 7. Ver. 8. ‘‘ Shar, from some untold cause, made a temporary migration to the plains
of Moab, as Elimelech and David afterwards (Ruth i. 2; 1 Sam. xx. 3).” Ver. 9. Hodesh,
third wife, from whom seven sons, some names indicating Moabitish affinity. Ver. 12.
These places mentioned, Ezra ii. 83; Neh vii, 37. Lod, same as Lydda (Acts ix. 32),
which is now Lydd [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 13. Ber. and Sh., names to be attached to last
verse to complete list of sons of Elpaal [ Speak. Com. ].

Vers. 14-18.—Nine sons of Beriah, vers, 14-16 ; seven other sons of Elpaal, vers. 17, 18;
twelve altogether.

: ays 19-21.—Nine sons of Shimi, the Shema (ver. 13), son of Elpaal, associated with
eriah. ;

Vers. 22-28.—Eleven sons of Shashak, son of Beriah, ver. 14. Ver. 27 Jeroham as
Jeremoth, ver. 14. Ver. 28. These, descendants of Bilhan, given from beginning of ch.
Dwelt. Jerusalem partly within the limits of the tribe of Benjamin (Jos. xviii. 28); but
heed not hear of Benjamites inhabiting it until return from Captivity (1 Chr. ix. 13;

eh. xi. 4).

Vers. 29-40.—Genealogy of Saul and Jonathan. Guibeon, not Gibeah, capital of Saul’s
kingdom (1 Sam. x. 26; xiii. 2); modern name £/-j1b, five or six miles from Jerusalem,
Father, i.e., chief of city, whose name Jehiel dropped out here, but given ch. ix. 35, where
this genealogy is repeated. Ver. 30. Baal, between which and Nadab should come ‘‘ Ner,”
restored ch. ix. 36; Zacher (Zacchariah), to which add Mikloth, ch. ix. 37. Ver. 33. Kish,
called after his uncle, ver. 30. Abinadab, another name for Ishui, 1 Sam. xiv. 49; xxxi. 2,
Esh-baal Ish-bosheth (*‘ man of shame "’), as Jerub-baal and Jerub-besheth, 2 Sam, xi. 21.
Merib-baal (‘‘ striving with Baal”) called Mephi-bosheth, 2 Sam. iv. 2. Ver. 36. Jehodah,
Jarah in parallel list, ch. ix. 42; and Rapha (ver. 37) Rephaiah (ver. 43). Ver. 40. Thia
genealogy of the house of Saul appears, by the number of generations, to belong probably
to time of Hezekiah (cf. ch.iv. 41). Uiam’s ‘eens’ sons” are in the thirteenth generation
fom Jonathan, as Hezekiah is in the thirteenth generation from David (Speak. Com.]}.


HOMILETICS.


Tee Narvurze or Insprrep History.—Verses 1-40.


I. The materials of which it is composed. Persons and events
histories and genealogies, exhortations and warnings, giving variety and interest.
II. The difficulties which surround it. In names and repeti-
tions, chronology, numbers, and authorship. Difficulties in history and condi-
tion of text itself. But these do not destroy the value of the record. Difficulties
an evidence in favour of its Divine character, in harmony with its professed
design, and a moral test and training. ‘The very difficulties and limitations of
revelation are adapted to the conditions of moral growth. It requires and repays
toil. It tasks, tries, and puzzles and strengthens faith. It is like man to make
everything regular, easy, and plain; but that is not like the God of nature, of
history, and of the Bible” [Smyth]. III. The principles on which it
is written. Special in design; substantial unity in authorship, periods, and
growth. Hence care in choice of matter, and providence in preservation of the
records. Methods to bring in prominence and to keep in shade. Records in

29


aCGMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHKONICLES. {cHar. FILE


re





full, and apparently insignificant allusions; but one grand aim, one directing
force, one unbroken leadership in all ages, arranging and guiding for the accom-
plishment of one purpose.


Tae Trine or Benzauin.—Verses 1-32.


The tribe mentioned, ch. vii. 6-12; reverted to because Saul, the first king of
Israel, came from this tribe. The genealogy contains its chief men, and forms
an introduction to the history recorded in these books I. The changes
through which it passed. Its history to entrance into Promised Land
as meagre as afterwards full. After departure from Egypt, the smallest tribe
but one (Num. +. 36), in the time of the Judges involved in civil war, upon the
occasion of iniquity uf Gibeah, almost extinguished, and little hope of revival,
for nearly all women slain, and the eleven other tribes bound by oath not to
marry their daughters to any man belonging to Benjamin (Judg. xix. 20, 21;
xxi. 10, 21). But increase of tribe so rapid, that in time of David it numbered !
59,434 able men (1 Chr. vii. 6-12); in that of Asa, 280,000 (2 Chr. xiv. 8); ‘
and in that of Jehoshaphat, 200,000 (2 Chr. xvii.17) The tribe honoured
with giving the first king to Israel, and after the exile, along with Judah, con-
stituted the flower of the Jewish colony (cf. Ezra xi.1; x.9). II. The
notices by which it is characterised. Several circumstances con-
duce to the importance of this small tribe. 1. The only tribe that produced
skilful archers, men expert with the bow, ver. 40 (cf. 1 Sam. xx. 20; 2 Sam.
i. 22; 2 Chr. xvii. 17), and with sling (Judg xx. 16). 2. From this tribe
sprang a deliverer. After first conquest of country the nation under
foreign yoke, groaned in misery, and turned to Ehud, son of Gera, for help
(ver. 6). Proficient in use of left hand, a practice confined to Benjamites,
who did work with small risk (ef. Judg. iii. 15; xx. 16; 1 Chr. xii. 2). 3.
Baanah and Rechab, captains of predatory bands, were of “the children of
Benjamin ” (2 Sam, iv. 2).


THe Rovat Famtty.—Verses 33-40.


A particular account given. I. Its head or chief. “Saul, son of Kish.”
Good-looking and of commanding appearance, the choice of Israel, but not by
the will of God (1 Sam. ix. 2). A man of valour, with capacity to govern
and lead ; the first king of Israel who occupied a position between the heroic
age of Judges and the settled monarchy of David and Solomon. II. Its
posterity. Numerous, able, and honoured in sacred genealogy. Jonathan’s
line given for about ten generations. The list ends in Ulam, whose family
became famous in the tribe (ver. 40), and qualified to serve their country. This
better than wealth and high position. In this list trace the hand of David in
fulfilling his promise (1 Sam. xx. 15; 2 Sam. ix. 1, 3,7). A mark of generosity
to remember in prosperity what we promised in adversity.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 8 and 9. Shaharaim, the Ben- name for Baara, so called because her
jamite polygamist, sent away (by di- husband, after loug desertion, returned
vorce many think) Hushim and Baara, im affection to her,
his wives, and this prepared the way Vers. 9-11. Seven unknown sons,
for another, Hode-h (new, recent), How many pass away never mentioned
Others say that Hodesh is another umknown and buried ia oblivion!

20


OHAP. 1.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


i!





Ver. 13. Drove away. A deed show-
ing—1. That inheritance gained by vio-
lence may be taken away again. It is
insecure. Wicked schemes may prosper,
but justice tracks their steps and ruin
is inevitable. ‘‘So are the ways of
everyone that is greedy of gain, which
taketh away the life of the owners
thereof.” 2. Hence retribution cer-
tain. In ch. vii. 21, the men of Gath
slew the Ephraimites; in this verse
Beriah and Shema “ drove away the
inhabitants of Gath.” “They that take
the swerd shall perish with the sword.”

Ver. 28. Dwelling tn Jerusalem.
After return from Babylon, in the city
was danger, civic duties and lack of
population. Hence—1. Preference for
position of duty and danger. 2. Imi-
tation of noble example. Their ances-
tors dwelt in the city, and they were
induced to take their place. ‘The
glory of children are their fathers.”
Let us become children of “ parents
passed into the skies,” take their place
and carry on their work. 3. Blessed-
ness in the result. ‘The people blessed
all the men that willingly offered them-
selves to dwell at Jerusalem” (Neh.
xi. 2).

Ver. 33. Jonathan, who was, as the


Romans said of Pompey, a most ami.
able son of an odious father [7'rapp].

Vers. 33, 34. Suggestive names.
Esh-baal, Ishbosheth (2 Sam. ii. 8 ; iii.
7-14; iv. 4-12). Meri-baal, Mephi-
bosheth (2 Sam. ix. 12). The Hebrew
word bosheth is always applied in Scrip-
ture to denote an idol, “as exposing
the devotee to shame, as well as being
an abomination to the Lord.” sh, a
man of shame, and Merib-baal (con-
tender against Bal), the destroyer of
shame, exterminator of idols | Geseniws].

Ver, 40. All these sons 1. The
natural succession of the race. We
read of “sons,” “children,” and
“fathers,” and “children’s children.”
“One generation passeth away and
another generation cometh.” “ The
earth is a stage, persons passing and
vanishing before our eyes” [{ Beza].
2. The moral connection of the race.
Men an honour or dishonour to their
own lineage; influenced by their fathers
as they are influencing posterity. There
are laws of influence and dependence
which run through the whole race.
Every human being sustains a relation,
possesses a right and is endowed with
power to subserve the great end. “ No
man liveth unto himself.”





CHAPTER IX.


Caiticau Notes.] In this chapter a list of inhabitants in Jerusalem (vers. 1-84); and
genealogy of Saul repeated (vers. 35-44). Ye

Vers. 1-6.—Reckoned, registered in form of gen. First after captivity, 4 classes.
Nethinims, root nathan, “to give,” a sort of hieroduli, or sacred slaves—persons given to
Levites to perform lower and more laborious duties of sanctuary [Speak. Com.]. Ver.3. Eph.
and Man., some attached themselves to David when a fugitive, and were citizens of Jeru-
salem when it became capital (2 Chr. xxiv. 9). Vers. 4-6. Sons of Judah. Uthwi, chief of
family called after his name and not same as Athaiah in Neh xi, 4 [cf. Murphy]. Ver. 5.
Shilonites (Shelani), family of Shelah, third son of Judah (ch. iv. 21). Zvrah, not men-
tioned after return, though an officer of this house was in Persian court (Neh. xi. 24),

Vers. 1-9.—Sons of Benjamin. Sallu’s gen. different from that in Neh. xi. 7, 8, Vers. 10-13.
Three priests, heads of families in Jerusalem, origin of their names found in ch,

xiv, 7-17.

" Vers. 14-16.-- Levites. Shemaiah head (Neh. xi. 15). Nehemiah and author of Chronicles
fairly agree. The principal differences are that Nehemiah contracts “ Obadiah” into
“ Abda” (ver. 17), gives Shemaiah an additional ancestor, bunni (ver, 15), and in gon, of
Mataniah substitutes “ Zabdi” feu‘ Zichri ” (ver. 16) [Speak. Com.], a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES, (onaP. Em,


i





Vers, 17-27,—Porters, t.e., keepers ef the temple gates (2 Sam, xvii. 26; Mark xiii, 8;
Jehn x.3). Ver. 18. Companies, orders or courses of service. Ver. 19. Korahites occupied
a higher position, their office more directly connected with sacred service than others.
Ver. 21. Porter, chief in reign of David (ch. xxvi. 1,2; xxvii. 2). Tabernacle, lit. tent
of meeting (Ex. xxix. 42), and points to tabernacle on Mount Zion in time of David,
Ver. 22. Seer, ancient popular term for prophet. Ver. 23. Children, ofice hereditary;
wards, according to watches in set time. Ver. 24. Quarters (cf. ver. 18 and ch. xxvi 14-16).
Ver. 25. Seven (2 Kings xi. 5), change of watch on Sabbath, which began at sunset.
Ver. 26. Chambers, for use of priests (1 Kings vi. 6; xii. 18; xxii. 14). Ver. 27. Lodged
during week of office. ihe.

Vers. 28-34.—Various other functions of Levites. Charge of vessels, ‘ sacrificial bowls,
trays for the shew-bread, and cups and flagons for the libations, vessels for holding stores
pot directly used in worship,” also ver. 29. Charge of ointment, compounding which of
special service, ver. 80 (cf. Ex. xxx. 23). Charge of baking, ver. 31. Charge of shew-bread,
laid in order on table every Sabbath, ver. 32 (cf. Lev. xxiv. 8). Charge of singing, ver. 33,
free from any special duty besides supervision, therefore could devote themselves night
and day. Ver. 34, Closes first part of chapter.

Vers. 35-44,—A repetition of ch, viii. 29-88. Some propose to cancel in one place or
other. This unnecessary, jitly given in both places. In cn, viii. an account of sub-
divisions of tribe of Benjamin, and could not properly omit the most celebrated family
of that tribe, that of Saul. Here bent on connecting the genealogical section of work
with historical, and find it most convenient to effect the junction by re-introducing
the gen. of the person with whose death his historical section opens [Speak. Com.},


HOMILETICS.
Rerurnep Exmes.—Veree 2.


Jiret implies that others returned and settled afterwards in places not occu-
pied by first. Numbers returned successively under Ezra, Nehemiah, and in
later periods. Some who returned to the ancient inheritance had lived before
time of captivity (Ezra iii. 12; Hag. ii. 4-10). Four classes, representatives
mentioned. 1. Israelites. Laymen. The whole nation including Judah. The
name “Jews” gradually supplanted the name “ Israelites,” especially among
foreigners. 2. Priests. Mediation essential idea of priesthood. Israel had re-
presentatives between them and Jehovah. The office typical, and a perpetual
inheritance from father to son. 3. Levites. A special order to aid priests in
higher functions. The first-born performed priestly offices before the organised
temple service. To prevent disorder in domestic relations, and secure greater
efficiency, primogeniture conferred upon tribe of Levi, which was to give undi-
vided attention to duties of the sanctuary (Num. iii. 11-13). They had to guard
tabernacle and temple, take charge of vessels, and encamp round the tabernacle
to form a partition between it and the people. 4. Wethinims. As Levites, so
these were given to help. A great increase of them when Gibeonites submitted
(Jos. ix. 23); enlargement made by David (Ezra viii. 20). After return from
captivity, their services most important on account of small number of Levites
who returned (Ezra ii. 40). These classes set forth different kinds of Christian
work. “In the work of the service,” positions of trust and honour, duties
lowly and menial, variety and unity. All appointed by God, calling forth ability
and activity of man. ‘“ Who, then, is willing to consecrate himself ?”


Apitity FoR Gop’s SERVICE «Verses 13=24,


The return was a critical time, exposing to danger, requiring courage and
physical strength. “Able men for the work of the service.” This ability requires
I. Intelligence to understand the work. It must be received as a
divine appointment, “ordained in their set office” (ver. 22). No prosecution
without comprehending its nature, design, and responsibilities. Porters and

32


CHAP. IX.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


3 sr SS ee a ee ee Se 2 2 i ee ee eee





overseers, confectioners and singers, must train and cultivate gifts and power to
work. Be well informed in the science of duty and of God. “Take your wise
men, and understanding, and known among your tribes, and I will make them
rulers over you.” II. Perseverance to prosecute the work.
They lodged all night (ver. 25); attended a week in turn (ver. 25); and were
employed nigh+ and day. Many get tired, work half time, or leave entirely.
The nobles bent not their necks to work, but Nehemiah continwed at the wall
(ch. v. 16). Steady, patient, faithful service acceptable to God. “ Continue
thou in the things which thou hast learned.” “ Pray and stay are two blessed
monosyllables ” [ Donne].


Orper In Gon’s Servicr.m=Verses 23-34,


Extreme care taken to secure regularity and reverence in God’s house,
“Order is heaven’s first law.” I. In the appointment of officers
to rule. Each his own place and authority. Priests at the altar, porters at
the gate, and leaders in the choir. Times of duty and relief fixed. Many dis-
orderly, unsympathetic, and fail, ‘ For we sought him not after the due order”
(1 Chr. xv. 13). II. In the reguiar method of worship. Variety
but unity. In sacrifices to present, bread to lay out, and songs to arrange,
“they waited on their office according to their order.” Order gives cheerfulness,
alacrity, and success. Disorder produces aversion, resistance, and failure, “ Let
all things be done decently and in order.” “ God is not the author of confusion”
(1 Oor. xiv. 33-40).


“The least confusion but in one, not all
That system only, but the whole must fall” [Pope],


Pepicrree or Saut.—Verses 35-44.


To construct Saul’s genealogy, compare various statements in Scriptures (cf. 1
Sam. ix. 1; xiv. 51; 1 Chr. vii. 6-8; viii. 29-33; ix. 35-39). In the choice,
anointing, and pedigree of Saul, which enter the history of Israel, notice—l,
The condescension of God. Both to human weakness, in asking a king, and to
smallest and apparently trivial events in life. 2. The sovereignty of God. Inde-
pendent of earthly and human relations. Saul not notable, from a prominent
family ; but unknown, “from the smallest family of the smallest of the tribes.”
3. The providence of God. In preserving the record for the instruction of others,
“ How has God, the Holy Ghost, stooped to become a historian of the smallest,
most contemptible affairs on earth, in order to reveal to man, in his own Jan-
guage, in his own business, in his own ways, the purposes, the secrets, and the
ways of the Deity ” [Hamann].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1,2. Carried away. 1. Thesin. kept her Sabbaths for those seventy
2. The punishment. 3. The return, years, so the country should be all that
and 4. The restoration. Many re- while kept empty, til the return of
mained in Babylon, others returned to’ the natives ; for we xead not that any
possessions, privileges, and honour. colonies were sent thither, nor any dis-
This typical of spiritual conduct, “A placed to make room for these at their
wonderfu) providence that as the land return” [Zrapp].

33


HOSMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


ee ee ee





Ver. 13. Very able men. Men of
valour or men of work for the service;
in either sense we get aptitude or fitness
for service, bodily, mentally, and spiri-
tually. “Able ministers of the New
Testament” (2 Cor. iii. 6; of Ep. iii.
7; 1 Tim. i. 1, 12).

Ver. 20. Phineas, highly favoured.
1. God’s presence a mark of time. In
individual life and national history.
“The object of this verse is to mark
the time to which the writer refers in
the verse preceding” [Speak. Com.].
2. God’s presence the source of honour.
“The ruler overthem.” 3. God’s pre-
sence the source of success in effort.
“The Lord was with him” in his action
at Baal-peor (Num. xxv.).

Ver. 22. Samuel the seer a privi-
leged person. One who receives dreams
and visions, gets insight into divine
revelation, and is consulted by the
people. All teachers should be seers
in opening the eyes and giving the


fowar. x


light and knowledge of God (2 Oor
iv. 6).

see 26. Doorkeepers. 1. To open
the doors of God’s house every morning
and shut them at night (ver. 27). 2.
To keep off the unclean and hinder
those from intruding who were for-
bidden by the law. 3. To direct and
introduce into the courts those who
came to worship and facilitate their
safety and profit [cf. Henry]. This
required zeal, to be there first; patience,
to stay until the last; and care, to be
exact and successful. A mean employ-
ment in the estimation of many.
Nothing mean for God. “I would
rather be a doorkeeper in the house of
my God than to dwell in the tents of
wickedness.”


“ The trivial round, the common task,
Would furnish all we ought to ask—
Room to deny ourselves—a road


To bring us daily nearer God” [Kebie}.





CHAPTER X.


Garncat, Worzs,] The genealogical introduction now elosed. Narrative fm twenty
chapters describes the reign of David. The first 12 verses in this chapter ® second
edition of 1 Sam, xxxi., with variations in diction and in facts, partly from brevity and
an interval of five or s1x centuries.

Vers. 1-7.—The death of Saul. Gilboa on which Gideon triumphed (Judg. vii. 1-8).
Followed. Hebrew implies that Saul was special object of pursuit, Ver. 2. “ fhe Ofc
without article: four altogether (cf. ix. 39). Ver. 3. Wounded, not dangerousty, perhaps.
s&s Some read he trembled before the archers,” who hit, literally found, reached him in
pursuing. Ver. 4, Abuse me, mock me. Afraid out of respect for royalty and in the
same peril. Ver. 6. House, not whole family or all his sons, for Ishbosheth survived and
succeeded him in portion of kingdom (2 Sam. ii. 8-16; iii. 6-15); but ‘all his heuse-
hold,” or body of attendants in war.

Vers. 8-12.-—Treatment of remains. House of Ashtaroth (1 Sam. xxxi. 16). Customary
to deposit spoils of war in heathen temples, Ver. 10. Head, skull. Dagon (i Sam. y, 2).
This temple destroyed in time of Maccabees (1 Mace. x. 82-85}. The headless corpse
fixed to the wall of Beth-shan (1 Sam. xxxi. 10). Ver. 11. Jub-gil. moved by gratitude
for former help (1 Sam. xi. 1-3). Buried the bones (after burning of the bodies, 1 Sain.
aig 12) peek or fered “the tree” or tamarisk in Samucl. ‘The word in both
places generic, different names from one root, refer to large variet us i. Dr.

The Ld, and Bk., pp. 248, 244). < - Paciga at a

Vers. 13, 14.—Moral of Sauls death. Transgression in sparing king of Amalckites
(1 Sam. x. 8; xili, 15); and in consulting a familiar spirit (1 Sam. xxviii). Ver. 14.
Inquired in form, not in right spirit. Impatient eonsultation considered by the writex ax
go inquiry at all,

a


CHAP. x.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONIC LES





HOMILETICS.
Tre Heicats or Gizpoa.—Verses 1-8.


Mount Gilboa a noted place in the lot of Issachar, “ flanked by the Little
Hermon ridge on north-east, and by Gilboa on south-east ; a mountain range of
ten miles long, about 600 feet high, and mentioned only in the melancholy
connection of this history.” I. The important battle. Philistines an
old and inveterate enemy, more numerous, perhaps better led and better posted,
began attack. Some think Saul had gone to consult the witch and left the camp.
Israel ever exposed to a watchful foe. Christian life a conflict. When thrown off
our guard and God forgotten, we are easily surrounded and overcome. ITI.
The disgraceful flight. Best of troops put into disorder. The people of
God chased by the enemy, and multitudes slain! How different from yore, when
one put a thousand to flight! But when a people walk contrary to Cod, He will
send a faintness into their hearts, and the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase
them; and they shall flee as fleeing from a sword; and they shall fall when none
pursueth (Ley. xxvi. 23-36). III. The pride of Israel slain. Sad
scenes on Gilboa’s top! The chosen of God and the hero of Israel wounded by
archers and falling upon his own sword! The king’s sons, the bodyguard and
the pride of his army, perish with him. “ How are the mighty fallen!” Learn
that one sinner not only destroyeth much good, but entails much suffering. 1.
Upon his own kindred. Parents sin, and children suffer. Princes disobey, and
their heirs are cut off. 2. In society at large. Not only the family, but the
subjects of Saul suffered. How many homes, how many nations have been
thrown into sorrow and deprived of their glory through sinful leaders! Achan
perished not alone in his iniquity. “ If ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be
consumed, both ye and your king.”


Tue Deata or Savuu.—Verses 3-7, 13, 14.


Tho life and conduct of Saul full of incident, dramatic effect, and solemn
warning. Learn—

I. That a splendid beginning may have an awful ending.
Saul loved and elevated, called from obscurity to the service of his country;
had gifts of body and mind; but opportunities lost, calling unfulfilled, and life
a failure! “The chosen of the Lord” died a self-murderer! ‘ All is well that
ends well.” II. That divine judgments overtake men’s sins.
“The Lord slew him.” He had disobeyed law, defied the authority of Samuel;
persisted in his self-will, and became the proud controller of his own life.
Frightful to die in rebellion, to rush unbidden into God’s presence, and become a
monument of judgment! From Scripture, history, and moral law we learn that
“God overthroweth the wicked for their wickedness.” JIT. That in
national calamities the godly suffer with the ungodly. The
sons, the family, and the dynasty of Saul suffered through his guilt. Sin is
personal, but its consequences extensive and self-propagating. The innocent
involved by the guilty. A father’s conduct ruins the children; a monarch’s
government destroys the nation. If by the arrangements of society and by the
law of influence we entail good or evil, let the ungodly beware and the righteous
_be faithful, “for none of us liveth to himself.”


Scenes 1n THE CapiTaL or Gatu.—Verses 7-10.


I, Tidings of the deaths of the royal family. When day after
battle dawned, the Philistines found dead bodies of father and hoes sons.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. fomar. x








Tidings told in capital of Gath and published in the streets of Ashkelon. IT.
Welcome to the victorious army. Daughters of accursed race
rejoiced and welcomed back their victorious army. — Retribution had come for
the fall of their champion leader. III. Trophies suspended in the
temple of the gods. This customary. “As head and sword of Goliath
were carried off to the sanctuary, so head of Saul cut off and fastened to the
temple of Dagon at Ashdod, and his arms—the spear on which he had so often
rested, the sword and the famous bow of Jonathan—were sent round in festive
processions to the Philistine cities, and finally deposited in the temple of
Ashtaroth, in the Canaanitish city of Bethshan, hard by the fatal field. On the
walls of the same city, overhanging the public place in front of the gates, were
hung the stripped and dismembered corpses.” A lasting memorial of Israel’s
ignominious defeat and subjugation.


fue Devorep City.—Verses 11, 13.


I. The patriotism of the city. In general defection trans-Jordanic
towns loyal to the fallen house. Jabesh-gilead specially devoted. Concerned
for the land defiled by exposure of dead bodies, and for the crown of Israel
profaned by uncircumcised. II. The zeal of the city. Enthusiasm
contagious. Seen—1l. Jw arming the people. ‘“* All the valiant men arose.” 2.
In a successful raid. A long journey, a distance of about twelve miles;
dangerous in the night, and by a narrow upland passage; guard surprised and
bodies rescued. IIi. The gratitude of the city. All this in remem-
brance of services rendered by Saul against their enemies (1 Sam. xi. 1-13),
Gratitude expressed—1l. In solemn funeral rites; and 2. In fasting and sorrow.
Rare to show gratitude to a fallen foe. This act commended by David (2 Sam.
ti. 5), and mentioned by Josephus (Antigq. vi. 6, ch. xiv., sect. 8). Cherish the
memory of past help; repay when opportunity comes, for come it will. You
shall reap what you sow, a reward from God and man. “The Lord show
kindness and truth unto you; and J also will requite you this kindness, because
ye have done this thing ” (2 Sam. ii. 6).


Savut’s Transcression.—Verse 14.


I. He was a disobedient king. God’s command definite: “Slay
man and woman.” Saul’s conduct was partial, he spared Ayag the king, and
kept best of cattle (1 Sam. xvi. 1). Men never prosper who violate God’s
commands, Sooner or later punishment overtakes them. Adam, Balaam,
Jonah. II, He was an untruthful king. “I have performed the
commandment of the Lord.” Saul hada bad heart and a ‘false tongue. He
coveted Agar’s wealth and Samuel's blessing. The bleeting of sheep convicted
the lying king. God will expose the untruthful. Abraham, Ananias, &e. III.
He was a hypocritical king, “The people spared the fattest of the
sheep and the oxen to sacrifice to the Lord’’ When convicted of sin he blamed
the people, but attributes their sin toa sacred motive. Hypocrisy adorns herself
in the most attractive attire. One sin opens the gates for another. Dis-
obedience leads to falsehood ; falsehood to hypocrisy ; hypocrisy to ruin. Bad
men disqualify themselves for exalted positions, When kings refuse to obey
God, he will cut them off. When great men fail, God appoints their successers.
God on raise up men for the most arduous duties [J. 7’ Woodhouse},


cHaP. x. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


a cr en
Tue Lost Kinapom.—Verse 14.


I. Lost through sin. Disobedience, obstinate pride, and self-will.
Transferred by divineappointment. “ He turned the kingdom unto
David, the son of Jesse.” God overturns one and raises up another. Royalty
no shelter against judgments, power no defence against heaven. “ Thy kingdom
shall not continue.” A proud man, elated by talent and success; a boasting
church, a people glorying in wealth or wisdom, in anything but Christ, may
soon be abased. God brings down the mighty from their seats and exalts the
humble, “to the intent that the living may know that the Most High ruleth in


II.


the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.”


HOMILETIC HINTS


Vers. 1-7. Battle against Saul, who
was—1l. Abandoned to despair. ‘Sore
afraid,” ver. 4, 1.e., he trembled, was
frightened at archers. After scene of
Endor might well fear. 2. Fazled in
resources. No prophet, no divine guid-
ance, sorely wounded and unable to
defend himself. A fearful thing to
fall into the hands of the living God.

Ver. 2. Jonathan. That peerless
prince, the glory of chivalry, that lumen
et columen of his country. He dieth
among the rest, and hath his share as
deep as any other in that common
calamity; so true is that of Solomon,
“ There is one event to the righteous
and to the wicked ” (Ece. ix. 1, 2) ; but
God maketh them to differ (Mal.
iii. 18), as the harvest-man cutteth
down the good corn and the weeds to-
gether, but for a different purpose
[Trapp].

Ver. 4. Abuse me, ie., my body,
whereof he took more care than for his
precious soul. A common fault. His
body was abused nevertheless [Zrapp].

Ver. 5. Fell likewise. Evil examples,
especially of the great, never escaped
imitation: the armour-bearer of Saul
follows his master, and dares do that
to himself which to his king he durst
not [Bp. Hall]. Fell by Saul’s evil
example, and perhaps in love to him,
as loth to outlive him whom he had
held the joy of his heart, the breath of
his nostrils. He had done better if he
had died by the hand of the enemy, in
his master’s defence [7'rapp].

Ver. 4. Swicide as illustrated by the
case @f Sau. IL. Cases: 1. Not


AND SUGGESTIONS.


merely accumulated misfortunes, but
long-continued wrongdoing; 2. Cow-
ardly fear of suffering (ver. 3), even in
a man formerly brave ; 3. Caring more
for disgrace than for sin; 4, Abandon-
ment of trust in God as to this life
and the future life. II. Effects: 1.
Others led by the example into the
same folly and sin (ver. 5); 2. Personal
dishonour not really prevented (vers.
4,9, 10); 3. A crowning and lasting
reproach to the man’s memory [Lange].

Vers. 11, 12. aplott of men of
Jabesh-gilead. 1. It was a brave deed;
2. A patriotic deed; 3. A grateful
deed (ch. xi); 4. But the bravery,
patriotism, and gratitude had been
better shown before Saul’s death by
helping him (which they do not appear
to have done). Honours after death
make poor amends for neglect and
unfaithfulness during life; 5. And
care of the poor remains could avail
little for the man’s reputation in this
world, and nothing for his repose in
eternity ae:

Ver. 13. Samiliar spirit. He
turned aside (1 Sam. xii. 20), indicat-
ing not only external defection in non-
fulfilment of the word, but internal, a
falling away in fellowship and walk
with God, was not subject to God’s
will and word, Learn—1. Zhe possibility
that a man may fall from spiritual com-
munion with the dwine and invisible.
“God is departed from me and an-
swereth me no more, neither by pro-
phets nor by dreams.” 2. The rapidity
with which a man may fall from
the highest emimence. “ Because thou

37


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


omar. Zi.





ebeyedst not, therefore hath the Lord
done this thing.” 3. The certainty that
one day the impenitent will want their


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver. 6. Saul died. There is not
in sacred history, or in any other, a
character more melancholy to contem-
plate than that of Saul. Naturaily
humble and modest, though of strong
passions, he might have adorned a
private station. In _ circumstances
which did not expose him to tempta-
tion, he would probably have acted
virtuously. But his natural rashness
was controlled neither by a powerful
understanding nor a scrupulous con-
science, and the obligations of duty
and the ties of gratitude, always felt
by him too slightly, were totally dis-
regarded when ambition, envy, and
jealousy had taken possession of his
mind. The diabolical nature of these
passions is seen, with frightful dis-
tinctness, in Saul, whom their indul-
gence transformed into an unnatural
monster, who constantly exhibited the


old teachers, “Bring me up Samuel”
[Crty Temple, vol, i.].


TO CHAPTER X.


moral infatuation so common among
those who have abandoned themselves
to sin, of thinking that the punish.
ment of one crime may be escaped by
the perpetration of another. In him
also is seen the moral anomaly or con-
tradiction which would be incredible
did we not often witness it, of an in-
dividual pursuing habitually a course
which his better nature pronounces
not only flagitious, but insane (1 Sam.
xxiv. 16-22). Saul knew that the
person should be king whom he per-
sisted in seeking to destroy, and so
accelerated his own ruin [X%¢to].

Ver. 14. Turned. Because of un-
righteous dealings, the kingdom is
turned from one people to another
(Ecclus. x. 8).


“ Kings then at last have but the lot of all,
By their own conduct they must stand
or fall” [Cowper}.





OHAPTER XI.


Crrrtoaz Nores.) The writer here passes by the 74 years of David's reign over Judah,
at whish he had glance in his introductory section (chap. iii. 4), and hastens to the


glorious period of his inauguration as king over the whole people of Israel.


This, as


we learn from 2 Sam. iv. 5, was at the death of Ish-bosheth, who succeeded Saul as king


over all the tribes, except that of Judah [Sp.


Vers. 1-4.— David made king.
(Jos. xii. 10; xxi. 11);
(2 Sam. ii. 1).


declared [ef.


ak. Com. ].
Hebron, chap. iii. 4, an ancient royal and priestly city
most mountainous, safest part of Judah, and divinely selected
Ver. 8. Covenant, “league” (2 Sam. v. 3). 1
by writer to mark divine origin of Davidic Monarchy,


By Sumuel (cf. ver. 10). added
which he had not previously


Speak. Com,]—covenant, a solemn transaction before the Lord, united


monarch and people in terms of government and obedience.
Vers. 4-9.—Zion taken from Jebusites. Jebuz (cf. Josh. xv. 8; Judg. xix. 10). Ver. 5


Said abbreviates ;
ing lofty, bare, rocky top,


full speech 2 Sam. v.6. Zion mentioned first in


2 Sam. vy. 7, mean.


exposed to sun; Heb. a fortified place. City extended northward


and southward ; the royal residence and stronghold. Ver. 6. Chief head of government.
Captain command of army. Prowess of Joab on this occasion, and the part which he
took in building city of David, known only from this passage—repaired breaches made in
siege, rebilt houses, demolished and reconstructed old part of city occupied by Jebus,


David bui.t a new town.
Ver. 9.—Waxed. Literally,
the Lord Omnipotent.
aa


“ went on and grew great,” as 2 Sarm.v.10, Hoste. Sept.,


omar. XB] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





Co SSS les ee ee


Vers. 10-47.—David’s mighty men (2 Sam. xxiii. 8-39). Strengthened, exerted them
selves; ‘assisted with all Israel in making David king”—margin, “held fast with him
in affection and obedience. Ver. 11. Number. In Hebrew a plural pronoun (* these *
and a singular noun. Moreover, the number not given; therefore read, “ These are the
names” [ Speak. Com.]. Jash., called son of Zabdiel (ch. xxvii. 2); hence grandson of
Hachmoni (ef. ch. xxvii. 32). Three, 800 in 2 Sam, xxiii. 8. One or other of these corrupt
[ Speak. Com.]. Some suppose he attacked 800 and slew 800 of them. Ver. 12. Eleazar
and Jashobeam only two here; Shammah third in 2 Sam. xxiii.11. Ver.13. Pas, Place
where Goliath slain, between Shoehoh and Azekah (1 Sam. xvii. 1). Ver. 14. Parcel.
This achievement given in detail (2 Sam. xxiii. 9-11). Eleazar had given up from
fatigue, and then Shammah helped by his prowess to keep the field. These feats per-
formed when David acted as general of saul against Philistines. Vers. 15-19. Feat of
three men of the thirty mentioned in vers. 26-40. Rock (cf. 2 Sam. xxiii. 13). Ver. 17.
Well (2 Sam. xxiii. 15-17). This feat performed by a second three, Abishai chief (ver. 20) ;
not the three in vers. 15=29. Ver.21. Hon., yet not on a par with first three. Wer. 22. Kab.
South of Judah (Jos. xv. 21; Neh. xi. 25). Many, three daring deeds given as specimens.
Lionlike, two Ariels; literally, lions of God, great lions, or champions in David's war with
Moab (2 Sam. viii. 2). Wer. 23. Stature, t.e., measure, aspect, conspicuous for size.
Ver. 24. Three mighties. The second three, of whom Benaiah held second place. Ver. 25.
Guard. Ges. gives “‘ David took him into his privy council,” as margin of 2 Sam. xxiii. 23.
He was captain over Kerethi and Pelethi, a body-guard of the king. Vers. 26-47. The
48 men of war. ‘‘ Valiant men of the armies" (cf list in 2 Sam. xxiii. 24-38). Asahel
(2 Sam. ii. 18). Ver. 27. Haroite, Harodite, a native of Hurod (Jud. vid. 1). Helez ‘the
Paltite,” Ver. 28. Tekoite of Tekoa (2 Sam. xiv. 2). Antochite, of Anathoth (Jos. xxi. 18).
Ver. 29. Sib., Mebunnai in Sam. Jai, Zaimon. Ver. 30. Mah., chief of detachment of
guards (ch. xxvii. 13). Ver. 39. Nah., armour-bearer to Joab. Vers, 41-47. These sixteen
are a supplement to Samuel. Uriah, well known (2 Sam, xi.) ; the others associated with
places unknown, or connected with cities and districts on east of Jordan.


HOMILETICS.
THe Cuosen Kine.—Verses 14,


After the death of Saul, country on east of Jordan, and in short time west
also, with exception of province of Judah, over which David ruled in Hebron,
was brought, by skilful generalship of Abner, to acknowledge Ishbosheth as
king (2 Sam. ii. 8 seg.). Not till Abner and Ishboshe.h were dead, and no one
left belonging to house of Saul, but lame Meribosheth, who was then only
twelve years old, that all the Israelites resolved to make David king. Thesa
-verses an account of the assembly in which the resolution was carried into
effect [Kerl].

I. The reasons for the choice of a king. Nota rash, blind, and
imprudent choice. 1. Blood relationship. ‘We are thy bone and thy flesh.”
Close and affectionate relationship, which ensured deep interest and patriotism.
2. Military leadership. “Thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in.”
Past services of value, who so likely in future to rule? Qualifications for
leadership, inborn, called out by circumstances and cultured under a sense of
responsibility. Prove men before you choose them for office. ‘“ Let these also
first be proved.” 3. Divine appointment. “The Lord thy God said.” Samuel
the seer, who anointed Saul, nominated his successor. David often designated,
now chosen by the nation. Trial and patient waiting now rewarded. Time
fulfilled, all things ready, and “ they anointed David king over Israel according
to the word of the Lord.” II. The duties of the chosen king.
~' Thou shalt feed my people Israel, &c.” This first time, the king called pastor.
Tue servant described as the master; the under-shepLerd’s duty like that of
chief-shepherd. 1. Zo rule. Not in pride and tyranny, but in love and
humility ; respecting liberty, property, and human life. ‘“ He that ruleth over
men must be just, ruling in the fear of God” (2 Sam. xxiii. 3). 2. To feed. The
true king a real shepherd to his people, watching over their interests, pee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. {owar. x.


for them and defending them. This picture of a theocratic king invested with
moral grandeur ; should be copied by every servant of God, high or low in posi-
tion ; but only completely realised in Messiah. “4 Governor who shail rule
(shepherd) my people Israel” (Matt. ii. 6). III. The allegiance given
to the chosen king. All Israel were assembled, united and represented
by elders. For once vox popult vow Dei. In this ceremony king reminded of
solemn responsibility and people of implicit obedience. In form @ covenant,
mutual agreement on both sides to be true and helpful one to another. Notice
—l. Unity in the covenant. The unity introduced by Samuel, weakened by
Saul, restored internally and externally on the theocratic basis. ‘“ All Israel”
represented in the choice. 2. Loyalty im the covenant. Attachment to the
person of the king, adhesion to his cause and determination to obey his word.
Service is poor and cold in warmest subject without tne glow of loyalty. Our
Master deserves and seeks it in every servant. “If ye love Me, keep My
commandments.” 3. Solemnity in the covenant. “ Before the Lord,” acting in
his sight. People and king jointly render unconditional obedience to the
Invisible Ruler. ‘“ King David made a league with them before the Lord; and
they anomted David king over Israel” (2 Sam. v. 3).


Toe Capture or THE StRONGHOLD.—Verses 5-9,


David now begins to act, seeks to establish his throne, and subdue his enemies.
Zion the centre, chief stronghold, and boast of the Jebusites (2 Sam. v. 6).
I. The taking of the city. ‘The south and middle of Palestine unsafe,
as long as this citadel unconquered. Its siege and capture a daring act. 1.
Taken against great opposition. Its natural position very strong. Built on a
precipice, waterfalls and gorges round about. Thought to be impregnable.
“ David cannot come in hither.” Its defenders very courageous. Quarters very
close; a matter of life or death; but except the Lord keep the city, builders
and watchmen in vain. 2. Faken by personal valour. Joab scaled the rocks, led
the assault, and captured the city. For this act of bravery he was promoted,
confirmed in position, and increased in influence. 3. Zaken in God's strength.
Valour, numbers, and resources avail not without this. Victory only when God
vouchsafes it. ‘“ All this assembly shall know that the Lord saveth not with
sword and spear: for the battle is the Lord’s” (1 Sam. xvii. 47). II, The
repairing of the city. “David built round about from the Millo (the
mound) and inward” (2 Sam. v. 9); and “ Joab restored (revived) the rest of
the city” (of. Neh. iii. 34). Houses restored, fortifications reared, rebuilding
regarded as restoration to life. No longer a dry, barren rock, but a place of
beauty and strength. “ Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth is
Mount Zion.” III. The royal residence in the city. David took
up his abode, “ therefore it is called the City of David.” It becomes the seat of
government, the centre of festivities, the memorial of its founder’s name.
Mount Zion becomes “ the city of the great king,” a type of the royal seat and
the dominion of Messiah. “TI have set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.”
“Out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from J erusalena.”


Davio’s Prosperity.—Verse 9,


The words, then David went, &c., indicate the point of time from which his
becoming great first dates; then (from the conquest of Jerusalem) David became
continually greater and greater [Keil]. Leam—X. God is the true source
of prosperity. “The Lord of Hosts was with him.” Not fleets and armies,
skill A captains and valour of soldiers; but from presence of God. “ Ascribe


CHAP, XE] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


y?





(by word and conduct, give) ye greatness unto our God” (Deut. xxxii. 3).
“Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory,
and the majesty.” II. Cod determines the real nature of
prosperity. Temporal, spiritual, or both. Regal qualities, prudent
counsellors, faithful friends, and devoted subjects; crowns, capitals, and thrones;
personal influence, religious privileges, gifts of any kind, progress of any degree,
bestowed by God. III. God fixes the exact time of prosperity.
From conquest of Zion a turning-point in David's fortunes. His life a series of
successive stages and positions in which one prepared for the other. “ Even
when Saul was king, David led out and brought in Israel.” After he was
anointed, “he waxed greater and greater,” “ went on growing and growing.”
Our life’s work fashioned by God, not by ourselves, may be long time and go
through strange discipline in its attainment ; but God appoints means and fixes
seasons. “ My times are in Thy hands.” Use the means, wait in faith and seek
the aid of God for progress and position here and hereafter.


HOMJLETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers.1,2. Zhen. 1. Great honours
often preceded by great trials. Through
suffering to glory. If. Great trials
often end with unexpected relief ; or,
1. Men divinely designated, specially
trained for position. 2. When specially
trained, God’s providence fulfils God’s
word in placing them in position. 3.
When so placed by God’s providence,
often an epoch in their own, and a
blessing in history of others. Feed my
people. The shepherd king. Evil
rulers termed roaring lions, devouring
wolves, &c. (Ezek. xix. 2). Teachers
and prophets pastors of people (Ezek.
xxxiv. 23), to feed “by procuring for
them the wholesome food of the word,
by going before them in good example,
by driving away the wolf, by tending
them, and tendering their good every
way ” [Trapp].

Ver. 3. David king. How he
reached the throne. 1. By aspiring
to it only because divinely appointed.
2. By deserving it (a) in what he did ;


(5) in what he refused to do. 3. By
waiting for it: (a) continuing patient
through a long course of trials; (6)
using all lawful means in his power to
gain it (¢g.,2 Sam. ii.5; iii. 20-36);
(c) preparing for it consciously and un-
consciously ; learning how to rule men,
and to overcome difficulties [Lange].

Ver. 5. The Castle of Zion. Like
the human heart, harder to take and
keep for Christ than Khartoum. Pride,
selfishness, and envy must be driven
out. Like heaven, only gained by
violence (Matt. xi. 12), and under the
leadership of the Captain of salvation.
David dwelt (ver. 7). A type of Christ,
who subdueth all our enemies, and
openeth unto us the heavenly Jeru-
salem [7'rapp]. Ver. 8. Joab repaired.
Heb. revived vivificavit vel sanavit, as
2 Chron. xxiv. 13. City of David,
as Constantine called Bizantium Con-
stantinople after his own name; making
it also the metropolis and seat of the
empire [7'rapp].


HOMILETICS.


Famous Expxiorrs.—Verses 10-47.


These are the heads, chiefs of David’s heroes, heroes among heroes, attached te
his person, with whom he carried on the Lord’s war, and whose deeds are


“ works” of “ great deliverance.”


The third, Shammah (2 Sam. xxiii. 11), not given here. ¢
Chief of captains, riders (or knights, Sam.), bodyguard of king.


(ver. 11).


I. The two mighties (ver. 10-14).


1. Luploit of Jashobeam


He lified up, brandished his spear time after time in strength and are and


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY CHRONICLES. [oHAP. XL
SS See


w 300. In Sam. 800 given—attacked 800 and slew 300, or slew 300 at one
ee ae 800 at eee 2. Exploit of Eleazar, <A fugitive in the wilde: ness
with David. (a) Stood when others fled in fear and disgrace. (b) Weary, yet
would not quit the work; hand cramped round hilt of sword, but held the
weapon. Faint, yet pursuing (Judg. viil. 4). Co) Advantage followed up, and
victory gained. “A great victory that day.” Heb. in theocratic form of
deliverance, salvation from God. Aided by Shammah (“they set themselves )
the parcel of ground preserved. (d) Then people returned for spoil and share
honour. Many quit the field in danger, and hasten back for gain, willing to
share the victory, not the fight. The men of Ephraim (Judg. viii. 1). be &
The three captains (vers. 15-19). 1. The chivalrous act they performed
evinces enthusiasm and readiness for humblest wish of the king. (1) 4
dangerous act. To force passage through garrison of the enemy at risk of life.
(2) "A brave act. Fearless of results, glad to defy Philistines, and ambitious te
serve their king. Be you ready, like Jesus, to comply with every intimation of
God by his word and providence. (3) An unselfish act. No thought for them-
selves, all for their sovereign and their fellows, (4) A loyal act. Indicative of
affection and loyalty. No command, no request; perhaps a wish overheard, and
they spring into action. Service free and spontaneous, not pressed nor con-
strained. First a willing mind, then it is accepted to what we can do. 2. The
genervus estimation of the act. ‘The water refused, gained at peril of life, and too
sacred to gratify a wish foolishly expressed. Poured tt out as a libation (Gen.
xxxv. 14; Ex. xxx. 9; Judg. vi. 20). A practical acknowledgment of his
error, an expression of sympathy with the bravery and devotion of the men;
a check to impulse and rashness in future. The sacrifice to God of what we
most desire gives the strength and earnest of future success. III. The
second couple (vers. 20-25). 1. Abishai, “a man of repute,” had a name,
and renuwned for valour; held high position, chief leader of his company; slew
300; but was excelled in heroic conduct by the three in vers. 11-14. 2. Lenaiah,
a valiant man, accustomed to danger, “had done many acts” (great of acts, lit.) ;
commander of bodyguard (marg.,, privy councillor). (a) Slew three heroes.
An Lgyptian, terrible in height and appearance, well armed; thus displayed
courage (only a staff), dexterity, strength, and skill by snatching the spear out
of the giant’s hand and killing him with it (David and Goliath). Slew two lion-
like men, “two sons of Ariel of Moab” [ez]. Ariel a title of honour given to
King of Moab. A feat performed probably in war between David and Moabites
(2 Sam. viii. 2). (0) Slew a lion (ver. 22), “ probably in a cave in which he took
refuge from a snowstorm, and in which a savage lion would have its lair. This
far greater achievement than if the monster had been previously snared in a pit.”
On a snowy day, when greater courage and hardship would be required. Benaiah’s
influence and fidelity known in Solomon’s time (1 Kings i. 8, 10, 44). 3.
Ashael, chief of men historically unknown (2 Sam. xxiii. 24); captain of 4th
division (xxvil. 7); slain by Abner (2 Sam. ii.). After him, names in Samuel
are thirty, and one over Uriah the Hittite. Some of the list are Gentiles, who
cast their lot with Israel, and reminds of that service in which is neither Greek
nor Jew, bond nor free, but all one.


Davin’s Conpuct in Rerusine to Drinx.—Verse 19.


I. An act of great unselfishness. Thought of others, not himself
appreciated the deed of the noble three, and felt that he had no right to claim
the blood of others. Men do not exist for us, but we exist for them. Sir P.
Sidney took the cup from his thirsty lips to give to the poor. II. An exe
pression of profound humility. He bowed before the Lord, laid the
cup ve his feet, through whom it was gained and to whom it belonged. None


OUAP. Xz. J HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,





Sade
so fit to rule as those who stoop. “Before honour is humility.” IIT. An
estimate of the value of human life. Great regard for the worth of
men. Soldiers not made for powder and shot. Blood, sacred and inestimabie.
Human life an opportunity, a power for service, must not be thrown away.
Wellington valued the life of his men, “Of every man will I require the life of
man.” Life is
“No trifle, however short it seem ;
And howsoever shadowy, no dream ;


Its value what no thought can ascertain,
Nor all an angel’s eloquence explain ” | Cowper).


True Heroism.—Verses 10-47.


I. In its real nature. Not mere physical vigour and exuberant spirit.
Not foolhardiness nor reckless waste of strength and life, but self-sacrificing
love, which shuns no duty and braves all danger. Often seen in forbearance, in
provocation, patience, in trial, tenderness towards others, and self-control in
adversity and prosperity. It is the stuff of which martyrs are made, who refuse
wealth, honours, and applause for censcience sake. Seen in Eliot—“ Lion Eliot,
that great Englishman”—who refused the bribes and defied the tyranny of
Charles I. ; in Savonarola, the Italian monk, “a Reformer before the Reforma-
tion”; in Luther, before the Diet at Worms; and in all “brave men of old.”


II. In its hidden source.
him ” (ver. 10).
and conflict


his kn'ghts, Cromwell his Lronsides, and David his heroes,
tollowers devoted to him, led to victory by him.
III. In its noble achievements.


valiantly.”


Love to God, “strengthened themselves with
Acquaintance with David, loyalty to him prompted to arma
Great men attract and excite to enthusiasm. ing Arthur had


Jesus Christ has
“Through God we shall do
fnterprises full of


risks ; leading a forlorn hope; a successful skirmish; a dashing charge and


a splendid capture,


the world, what have we done for God?


In our hearts and lives, in the Christian church and


“ Quit yourselves like men.”


“ Let us go forth, and resolutely dare
With sweat of brow to toil our little day” [Lord Houghton}.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 15. Cave of Adullam. 1. A
place of exile. 2. A centre of attrac-
tion—“a great host, as the host of
God,” gathers round David. 3. A
picture of Christ’s reign. Rejected,
yet gathering those in spiritual debt
and «stress unto himself. “ Every
one that was in distress, and every
one that was in debt, and every one
that was bitter of soul, gathered them-
selves unto him; and he became a
captain over them.”

Ver.41. Uriahthe Hittite (28am. ii. 3),
The mention of this name in list suggests
(1) a man of distinguished merit ; (2) an
aggravation of David’s guilt towards
him. Hewasa foreigner, a Hittite. But
his name and manner of speech indicate


that he adopted the Jewish religion.


Happy the people that has heroes who
(1) advance in God’s strength, (2) cou-
rageously stake their life for God’s
honour and the people’s welfare, and
(3) are counted worthy by God to work
great deliverance for their people.

Hail to the throne that is encompassed
by heroes who (1) find their highest
nobility in the real knighthood that
roots itself in the true fear of God,
(2) with humble heroism defend altar
and throne, (3) seek their highest
honour in being God’s instruments for
the aims of his kingdom and for the
revelation of his power and righteous-
ness, aad (4) set the whole people an
example of self-devoting love and
fidelity and of uanterrified courage
[Lange].

43


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


[omar xYK





ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XI.


Vers. 4-8. During the wars of
Nassau a council of officers debated
whether to attack a certain town. A
Dutch general had so much to say
about the formidable guns mounted on
the defences of the place that many


Ver. 18. Brake through the host.


* He holds no parley with unmanly fears;
Where duty bids, he confidently steers;
Faces a thousand dangers at her call,
And, trusting in his God, surmonnts them

all” [Cowper],


Ver.19. God forbid. That which espe-
cially distinguishes a high order of man
from a low order of man—that which
constitutes human goodness, human
nobleness—is surely not the degree of
enlightenment with which men pursue
their own advantage; but it is self-
forgetfulness, it is selt-sacrifice, 1t 1s
the disregard of personal pleasure and
personal indulgence, personal advan-
tages remote or present [Froude],


grew discouraged and advised giving
up the dangerous job. ‘“ My lords,”
said Sir Horace Vere, a stout English
baron, “if you fear the mouth of a
cannon you must never come into the
field.” Without tl.e Christian’s courage
it is useless toenter the Christian’s fight.

Ver. 11. Lifted up. “Courage
mounteth with occasion” [Shakespeare].


*Do not for one repulse forego the purpose
That you resolve to effect.”





CHAPTER XII.


Carrtcat Nores,] This chapter entirely new matter—supplementary to Samuel—con-
tains a list of those who joined David in time of Saul (vers. 1-22), and of those who came
to make him king over Israel (vers. 23-40).

Vers. 1-7.—Benjamin and Judah came to Ziklag. A town which belonged to Simeon
(Jos. xix. 5), but given to David for residence it fell to Judah. Close, hidden (cf. 1 Sam.
xxvii. 30). Brethren, i.e., Benjamites, i.e, members of the same tribe; disgusted with
his treatment of David or persuaded that God was with him. Ver. 3. Azmay, (vill. 13, 30;
xi. 38). Ver.4. Geder. (Jos. xv. 36). Ver. 5. The Haruph., sons of Hariph (Neh. vii. 24),
perpen Benjamites. Ver.6. Korahites, not of tribe of Levi, but descendants of some

orah of Judah. Ver. 7. Gedor (ch, iv. 4). :

Vers. 8-15.— Gadites aided David. Hold, cave of Adullam, or a fort in wilderness of
Judah (1 Sam. xxii. 5); faces (ef. 2 Sam. i, 2,3; ii. 18); buckler, lance or spear (ver. 24).
Ver. 15. Jordan, to help brethren (cf. Jos. iii. 15), jsirst month, in spring, when river is
swollen ; vailleys, literally all the valley on both sides Jordan, Ver. 14. Over, equal to
(a3 in margin).

Vers. 16-18.—Bflen of Judah and Benjamin, Ver. 17. Meet. David reason to suspect
perhaps, feared treachery and required a solemn declaration, Ver. 18. Came upon, literally
clothed. A. spoke not of himself, but as the Spirit of God prompted him.

Vers, 19-22.Men of Manassehk. Seven are given who joined David, when dismissed
by Philistines from their army (cf. 1 Sam. xxix. 1-11). Ver. 21. Band, the troop of
Amalek (1 Sam. xxx. 8), which sacked Ziklag during absence of David, Ver. 22. Host of
God, a formula for great things,

Vers. 23-40.—Different tribes who attended and made David king at Hebron. Vers. 24, 25.
Judah and Simeon, two southern tribes, had already acknowledged David. Vers. 26-28.
Many of the Levites closely associated with these tribes. Jehoiada, father of Benaiah
(xi. 22); leader, commander of priestly troops. Zadok became high-priest at a later time
(2 Sam. viii. 17; 1 Kinesi.8), Ver. 29. Benjamites few, for greater part still in service
of Saul’s house. Ver. 30. Famous, men of name or renown. Ver. 31. Expressed, ie,
nominated and deputed by the rest of the tribe to go to Hebron and make David king
[Speak. Com.]. Ver. 82. Understanding, best interpreted politically (Esth. i. 13) (Speak,
Com.]. Ver. 33. Not of double heart, falling into rank not with double heart, t.e,, with
firm and faithful mind. Naphtali decided, Dan in full strength, and Asher in great force.
Ver. 87. A large contingent from eastern tribes.

Vers. 88-40.—Great majority enthusiastic, agreed in heart, t.e., had a common wish
(2 Obr. xxx. 12) to make David king. Ver. 40. Tribes, near and distant, brought
banat 7 on beasts of burden; every one made it a festival of joy.


CHAP, x11.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


ee Ce


‘


HOMILETICS.
Tue ASSEMBLY AT ZIKLAG.—Verses 1—23,


These joined David in the time of Saul, were early helpers in the time of .
exile and danger.

I. The ingenious tribe (vers. 1-7). Benjamites, Saul’s kinspeople,
and for some reason not satisfied with his rule. Several leading men given.
Men of great dexterity. 1. Shilful archers. “ Shooting arrows out of a bow.”
2. Famous slingers. “ Hurling stones.” 3. Well disciplined. Active and wonderful
in “use of right hand and left.” IL, The courageous tribe (vers. 8-14).
Gadites. 1. Able-bodied. “Men of might and men of war fit for battle.”
2. Specially trained. “Could handle shield and buckler.” 3. Remarkably fleet.
“Swift as the roes upon the mountains,” not in flying from the foe, but in
pursuing, so that none escaped. “He maketh my feet like hinds’ feet, &c.”
(2 Sam. xxii. 34; Hab. iii. 19). 4. Splendidly courageous. (a) They went over
Jordan in time of floods. (6) They put to flight the people of the valley.
5. Awfully determined. “ Whose faces were like the faces of lions.” Saul and
Jonathan “swifter than eagles and stronger than lions” (2 Sam. i. 23).
III. The suspected tribes (vers. 16-18). Some of Benjamin and
Judah. Benjamites probably invited Judahites to go with them to prevent
suspicion ; their anticipations well founded, as seen by results. David thought
they were secret emissaries of Cush (Ps. vii. inscription), but soon persuaded
otherwise, by (a) their entire submission, “Thine are we David and on thy
side ;” (5) their earnest prayer for his success, ‘‘ Peace be unto thee.” IV. The
volunteer tribe (vers. 19-22). These “fell” not by lot, but by desertion
from one to another. These persons left the service of Saul for that of David.
Transfer allegiance from a bad to a good master, from a losing to a winning


cause. Nothing else known of these seven captains, But one noble act may
immortalise,
HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.
Sauls brethren. Some, akin to Saul Ver. 8. Separated themselves. 1.


came over to David. 1. A testimony
to unblemished character. 2. A pro-
test against grievous wrong (done to
David). 3. A determination to share
the fortunes of the king. “It is God
who worketh men’s hearts and
fashioneth their opinions. Paul had
friends in Nero’s court, and Luther
in the Pope’s” [Trapp].

Ver. 2. Both right hand amd left.
The word “left-handed” (in Septuagint)
in Judges iii. 15 is rendered both-
handed. 1. Some are left-handed, weak
and awkward in every good work,
2. Others are right-handed, active, but
single-handed after all. 3, Both hands
required. Head, hands, heart, and all
for Christ. “ Both hands earnestly”
for good, not for evil.

“Take my hands; and let them move

At the impulse of Thy love.”


From what connections? Service of
Saul and other Gadites who remained
with him. 2. For what purpose? To
serve David, the anointed king.
3. At what time? When David was
in distress and danger. We must come
out of the world, separate from evil
company, and never be ashamed of
Christ and his cause, Thus shall we
be renowned and registered with his
people.

Vers. 17, 18. Notice—I. The earnest
appeal. 1. In its spirit. He does not
imprecate nor condemn. 2. In its pur-
pose. What are you come for, peace
or war? 3. In its requirement.
Loyalty to me. II. The grounds of the
appeal, 1, Their intimate relation.
Both parties descended from the same
ancestors and dependent upon the
same God. “The God of our fathers.”

45


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


2. His solemn declaration of innocence.
“Seeing there is mo wrong in mine
hands.” 3. His reliance upon divine
interposition: An appeal to God as
righteous and omniscient judge to re-
buke, avenge, and help. III. The
response to the appeal. Amasai gave a
beautiful, prompt, and earnest reply.
1. In unconditional submission to the
king. “Thine, David.” 2. In sincere
pledge of their services. ‘ With thee,
son of Jesse.” 3. In wishing success
to his cause. ‘ Peace to thee,” every-
thing thy heart desires. ‘“ Peace to
thy helpers,” among whom we wish to
be numbered. 4. In assurance of divine
help. “For thy God helpeth thee.”
IV. The results of the appeal. When
David saw the passionate earnestness
and the loyal surrender—1. He received
them heartily. “Then David received
them.” 2. He trustfully promotes
them. “ And made them captains of the
band.” Submit to God, follow him
implicitly, and you shall be promoted to
honour.

Vers. 14,15. Sons of Gad. Honour-
able mention. 1. High in command,





[cuar. xm.


“Captains of the host.” 2. Physically
strong. “ Least could resist an hun-
dred, &c,” (cf. margin and Lev. xxvi. 8).
3. Brave in danger. Exploit well
known in crossing Jordan, only needed
simple allusion. 4. Victorious in fight.
They overcame all in the valleys, east
and west of the river.
“¢] sing the warrior and his mighty deeds.”
Ver. 18. The spirit came upon
(clothed) Amasat. An unusual ex-
pression. We hear constantly in O.T.
of “ the Spirit of God,” but only here
(and possibly in 1 Chr. xxviii. 12) of
“the Spirit” absolutely. Clear, how-
ever, the two expressions mean the same
(cf. Jud. vi. 34 and 2 Chr. xxiv. 20).
A. spoke not of himself, but as
God’s spiritual influence moved him
[Speak. Com.]. The need of the Holy
Spirit to submit to Christ and recog-
nise him king—to preach his word and
carry on his cause. Tarry until ye be
endued (clothed) with power from on
high (Luke xxiv. 49).
“ Angels give thee in command


What to the smallest tittle thou shalt
Bay.”


HOMILETICS.


Tur Host of Gop.—Verse 22.


In distress David had few friends, 600 who served as guards. When he had
to act for God many were disposed to help from different tribes. All welcome.
So the army grew “like the host of God,” great in numbers, valour, and success.
I. Animated by the presence of God. David counted for something.
* How many do you reckon me?” said a leader to his fainting soldiers. What
inspiration and strength to have “ the Captain of salvation” with the Church!
Wellington, one day in battle, rode into the midst of his wavering men. One
who saw him cried, “There’s the Duke; God bless him!” Then followed a
tremendous cheer, and the tide was turned. “I am with you always.” ITI.
Increased by the grace of God. God only makes “ willing in the day
of power” (Ps. cx. 3); the power of his Spirit and word. Numbers not always
increase and efliciency. Many desert or weaken the cause. Grace adds such as
are being saved (Acts ii. 47). ‘The Lord make his people a hundred times so
many more as they be.” III. Successful through the help of God.
1. In gathering numbers. Confederates came to David in successive bands “ day
by day,” as emergencies required. A gradual, constant accession, incessant pro-
gress in the army and cause of Christ. 2. In gaining victories. Everything
possible to David's captains, counsellors, and friends. ‘“ Men of might and men
of war.” In service of God warriors numerous as dewdrops of the morning ;
strong in the strength of the Lord of Hosts; certain to overpower all opposition.
< ae is no disputing,” said one to Cesar, “ with him that commands legions”


CHAP. XiL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


eee


“For the Lord your God, he it is that fighteth for you, as he hath promised
you,”


Tue ASSEMBLY AT Hepron.—Verses 23-40.


This was seven years after Saul’s death. “They should have come sooner,”
says Trapp; “ but better late than never.” Briefly classify and describe different
tribes. 1. Judah, the equipped tribe. “ Ready armed” (ver. 24); expecting and
prepared to fight. Though fewer than others, they entertained those from afar.
“Given to hospitality.” 2. Simeon, the tribe of valour. “ Mighty men of valour
for the war” (ver. 25). 3. The Levites, the priestly tribe (vers. 26-28). Earnest,
led by famous men and recognised the providence of God in call of David.
“Priestly troops” required now to fight and to pray. 4. Benjamites, the tribe
small in number. Aftection for their kin and jealousy for their honour kept
many in army of Saul. All must be left for Christ. ‘Kindred should never
over-rule conscience.” 5. Ephraim, the renowned tribe. “ Famous throughout
the house of their fathers” (ver. 30). 6. Manasseh, the deputed tribe. “ Ex-
pressed by name” (ver. 31). “ Deputed by the rest of the tribe to represent
them” [Speak. Com.]. 7. Issachar, the intelligent tribe (ver. 32). (1) Men of
political sagacity. “ Had understanding of the times.” No longer “a strong
ass” (Gen. xlix. 14). (2) Men of insight. Knew “what Israel ought to do”
in their critical condition. (3) Men of authority. For “all their brethrem were
at their command.” Some knew how to rule and the rest how to obey.
8. Zebulon, the enthusiastic tribe (ver. 33). (1) Sincere in heart. “ Not of
double heart,” not of doubtful and divided mind. (2) Fixed in purpose. Not
of distracted mind, divided purpose, and half a heart; but one in effort and
interest. (3) United in discipline. They “could keep rank,” in the march and
on the field. Ever obedient to command and united with the companies.
9. Other tribes are given (vers. 34-37). Naphtali very decided (ver. 34).
Dan in great strength (ver. 35). Asher expert, able to marshal war (ver. 36).
Eastern tribes grouped together, make a large contingent and well-equipped
(ver. 37). Thus came friends and adherents, to make David king and render
loyal obedience to him.


FItNess FOR THE SERVICE OF THE Great Kino.


Each tribe noted for some special quality. Sum all up and describe qualifica-
tions needful in God's service. I, Intelligence is required. Knowledge
enough for personal salvation and for communication. Ignorance is unfitness
and must never be excused. Knowledge must be the mind’s nutriment, “vigour
of mind;” must become wisdom and power in action. Many generals opposed
to Napoleon were acquainted with military science, but he excelled where victory
depended upon wise movement and sudden thought. We must understand the
times in which we live and the duties we have to perform. II. Courage is
required. “Woe be to fearful hearts and faint hands,” says the son of
Sirach. A stout heart a great blessing. Cheering to see men in humble life
and public conflict suffering in patience and triumphing in their integrity.
Instances of courage in daily life and fields of action. ‘The heroic example
of other days is in a great part the source of the courage of each generation;
and men walk up composedly to the most perilous enterprises, beckoned
onwards by the shades of the brave that were” [Helps]. ‘Be strong and of
good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed.” III. Unity is
required. Divided counsel leads to broken ranks. Party spirit and envy
will frustrate design. Rank must be kept in Christian efforts and co-operation

47


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cmar. xIL


given in national interests. “ United we stand,” broken we are scattered from
the field. Tacitus said of Germans what the world says of Christians, “ Whilst
fighting separately, all are conquered together.” One body, one spirit.” IV.
Enthusiasm is required. This makes up for lack in numbers and
weapons, Ardour is a help in life, a useful and energetic motive-power. How
often does it cool down by time, get repressed by toil and sneers! To succeed,
enthusiasm must be contagious in our ranks and never die out. “ Every great
and commanding movement in the annals of the world is the triumph of enthu-
siasm” [Hmerson]. “Stir up (blow up, keep alive, as a dull fire) the gift of God
within thee” (2 Tim. i. 6). Thus are we to qualify and equip ourselves for the
warfare of life. “ Men of understanding,” “mighty men of valour,” and “ ready
armed;” unity, spiritual sagacity and enthusiasm, all needful in leaders of
tribes and soldiers of the “ host of God.”


Tur Propriety of Consipertne Times anp OCrrcumsTaNces.—Verse 32.


From the character here given of the men of Issachar we shall take occasion
to show—I. That our conduct must often be affected by times and circumstances
of whatever nature. 1, Civil; 2, Social; 3, Personal. But your conduct must
be influenced by them in temporal matters. There is still reason to inquire—
II. How far it may be properly affected by them in the concerns of religion.
1. That we may attend to times, &c., is certain (example of Christ and apostles).
2. But how far is not easy to determine, III. What there is in the times, &c.,
of the present day to affect our conduct. Application : suggest a caution or two.
1. Guard against yielding to any corrupt bias. 2. The future judgment will be
Gee to motives. 3. Seek for wisdom that is profitable to direct [C. Simeon,


hue Joyous ENTERTAINMENT.—Verses 38—40.


Supplies of provisions furnished in abundance by neighbours and others from
distant parts. All enthusiastic for David, and wished to feast on a liberal and
magnificent scale worthy of the occasion. I. The cause of joy. Three
reasons for it. 1. United under one king. End of divided rule. Prospect of
settlement under strong government. 2. A king chosen of God. Divine frown,
clouds and darkness taken away. A king given under different circumstances,
“a man after God’s own heart.” 3. Universal loyalty to the chosen king. All
joined in the choice, submission, and gratitude. II, The manifestation
of joy. A cause or religion without expression or room for joy neither suits
the wants of man nor accords with the will of God. 1. In unity of purpose.
“To make David king.” 2. In sincerity of feeling. With a perfect heart.”
No deception, no half-hearted, no double-hearted. ‘Were of one heart and
one soul.” This oneness expressed in thought and act towards each other and
towards their sovereign. 3. In social fellowship, Three days feasting. Not
selfish, individual joy; but domestic, social, and national. III. The extent
of the joy. “All the men of war” and “all the rest of Israel” (ver. 38).
The soldier and the priest, the weak and the strong—all ages, all classes par-
ticipated—none shut out from national feasting and rejoicing. This suggests
the pure and unmixed joy in crowning and serving Christ as our king—the
perfect happiness and order when he shall become the chosen of all nations,
kindreds, and tribea, “The Lord reigneth, let the earth rejoice.”


omar, xu, }


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
¥





HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 28. Zadok the warrior priest
(cf. 2 Sam. viii. 17; 1 Kings i. 8).
Notice—1l. His profession. A soldier
and priest. The cause, a “ holy war.”
2. His qualifications. (a) “A young
man.” (0b) “ Mighty of vaiour.” The
need of young, valiant men, religious
and devoted to God. “The history of
heroes ts the history of youth” [Lord
Beaconsfield].

Ver. 32. Understanding. Noscentes
scite tempora, such as well knew what
was to be done and when to do it, by
a singular sagacity, gotten by long ex-
perience, rather than by skill in astro-
logy. See Esther i. 13. David set a
high price upon these; so doth God on
such as regard and use the season of
well-doing [7'rapp].

Ver. 33. Not of a double heart.
Heb., without a heart and a heart;
plain-hearted ; non aliud in ore promp-
tum, aliud in pectore conclusum ha-
bentes ; downright dealers [Trapp]. 1.
Men of fluctuating sentiments. “A


double-minded man” (having twa
minds) “ is unstable in all his ways”
(Jas. i. 7). 2. Men of compromising
habits. “Woe be to the sinner that
goeth two ways” (Ecclus, ii. 12). 3.
Men of hypocritical worship. ‘Come
not unto the Lord with a double heart”
(Ecclus. i. 28).

Unity of purpose. Ite strength and
advantage. ‘ Napoleon gained his vic-
tories by consolidation. Austria and
Russia attacked in columns and sepa-
rate bodies; he concentrated his forces
and fell on one point like an avalanche.
So it must be with the Church. Scep-
ticism will never be broken, Popery
will never be dissipated, till the whole
Christian Church is more thoroughly at
one with each other” [Dr. Cumming].

Ver. 38. Under discipline. 1. What
keeping rank involves. 1. Obedience
to authority. 2. Regard to the general
peace of the whole. 3. Mutual help.
II. The importance of keeping rank in
church life and action [ Bib. Musewm].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XII.


Ver. 1. These came to David. The
good and the great draw others after
them ; they lighten and lift up all who
are within reach of their influence.
They are so many living centres of
beneficent activity. Let a man of
energetic and upright character be
appointed to a position of trust and
authority, and all who serve under
him become, as it were, conscious of
an increase of power [S. Smiles].

‘¢ Whose spirit lent a fire
Even to the dullest peasant in his camp”
[Shakespeare].
Ver. 8. Separated themselves.


“ The man whom I
Consider as deserving of the name,
Is one whose thoughts and actions are for
others,

Not for himself alone; whose lofty aim,
Adopted on just principles, is ne’er
Abandoned while earth or heaven afford
The means of its accomplishment”

[ Blanchard}.


Ver. 32. Men of umderstamding.


Happy are those that, knowing in
their births they are subject to un-
certain changes, are still prepared and
arm’d for either fortune; a rare prin-
ciple, and with much labour learn’d in
wisdom’s school [Massinger].

Ver. 40. Joy m Israel. Joy is
regarded as a happy accident of the
Christian life, an ornament and luxury
rather than a duty r. Dale}. Joy
in the Lord is strength, positive actual
power for ministry. It creates around
us the most favourable atmosphere for
evoking our resources; raises our entire
nature to the highest pitch of energy,
and gives unwonted elasticity and ca-
pacity of tension to all our faculties.
When the heart is brimming over with
gladness, labour is acceptable, opposi-
tion helpful, duty a delight, and
responsibility a privilege [Dr. Clif-
ford]. ‘The joy of the Lord is your
ihe ” [stronghold, marg.] (Neh. viii,
10).


HOMILELIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. LOHAP. X1IL
RT


OHAPTER XIIL


Crrrroar Nores.] This chapter corresponds closely with 2 Sam. vi. 1-11; but im the
first verse of that chapter is stated, with great brevity, what is given here in full
vers. 1-5). :

Vers. 15, —The Consultation. Leaders (omit and, for leaders intended) are captaina
named, i.e. chiefs of people. If civil and military organisation existed before this,
“David seems to have been the first to recognise in these officers of the host repre-
sentatives of the people, to consult them on public affairs and to give them a certain
political position (see, besides the present place, ch. xv. 25; xxvi. 26; xxviii. 1)” [Speak.
Com.]. Ver. 2. All assembled together ; send quickly everywhere; /eft at home. Ver. 3.
Enquired not (cf. 1 Sam. vii. 1,2; xxviii.6; 1 Chr. x. 14). Ver. 5. Shihor, probably one
of the names of the Nile (cf. Jos. xiii. 3; Is. xxiii. 3; Jer. ii. 18); was the southern
bounds, as Hemath was the northern of Canaan [Pat.]. Kirjath-jearim, where it had
been since it returned out of land of Philistines (cf. 1 Sam. vi.).

Vers. 6-8.—The Undertaking (cf. 2 Sam. vi. 2-11). All Israel, 30,000in Sam. Ver. 6.
Baalah (Jos, xv. 9-60). Whose name, rather ‘‘ who is worshipped there.” Ver. 7 Uzza
and Ahio, sons or grandsons of Abinadab, who from age or death was unable to accom-
pany procession. Ver. 8. ‘ Harps and lutes, stringed instruments; timbre/s and cymbals,
percussive instruments for keeping time in march or solemn dance.” Trumpets used by
priests, generally on joyous occasions (Num. x.; Ps. xcviii. 6). Some suppose that
Ps. xxxiv. was sung in parts on this occasion.

Vers. ®-14.—The Breach. Chidon, Nachon (2 Sam. vi. 6). Stumbled, descent steep
and dangerous. He, ark not to be touched, would not have required it, if in obedienca
to law, it had ween carried on the priests’ shoulders by poles (cf. Ex. xxv. 14; Num.
iv. 15). Ver. 11. Wavid displeased and afraid at such sudden vindication of holiness.
Ver. 14. Obed, » hevite, and afterwards doorkeeper in tabernacle (1 Chr. xv. 18; xvi. 5).
Gittite, of Gath-rimmon, one of the Levitical cities (Jos. xxi. 24),


HOMILETICS.
Tae First Counci:.—!" reese ‘—5,


David securely established on the throne, taken and fortified Jerusalem,
organised and trained an army, turns attention to civil and religious concerns,
First thing to restore the ark to its proper place. Hence consultation with
chiefs. I. The parties of which it was composed. David begins
well. Instead of ignoring the people, he calls their representatives; he
“consults” them and decides nothing absolutely, and unconstitutionally. Many
sovereigns, proud and tyrannical, will yield nothing, give nothing, overrule the
wish and rights of the people. “I am the state,” said one. The people’s
allegiance is best secured by consent in their representatives. “If it seem good
unto you.” II. The purpose for which it was convened. Many
historic councils summoned for important objects. This not called to celebrate
success, organise plans of campaign; but to unite the people and establish the
worship of the sanctuary by the restoration of the most sacred of all symbols.
This—1. A religious movement. Former neglect great, people degenerated by
influence and example of Saul; careless and indifferent concerning ordinances
and worship of God. “ We enquired not in the days of Saul.” 2. A national
movement. “If it seem good unto you.” ‘The throne established, national
government under one head; foundation laid for internal unity by concentratin
national a on its centre and source, Not like other kings, David displays in


- GHAP. XUt.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.








4


proceedings the pepular character of his rule, assembles all round the sanctuary
before the throne, and under the government of Jehovah (Ps. xxiv. 1-10).
3. A diviney sanctioned movement. “If it be of the Lord our God.” All enter-
prises opposed to Azs will, though carried on with numbers and valour, will come
to nought. This first, “Is it the will of God?” For “man proposes, but God
disposes.” “ Ye ought to say if the Lord will we shall live and do this or that.”
IIfi. The decision at which it arrived. The purpose noble, and
reasons for execution weighty and abundant. 1. A wise decision. “It was
right.” Always wise to seek first the kingdom of God, &e. ‘Oh that they
were wise!” 2. A wnanimous decision. “All the congregation said it was right.”
People mghtly consulted readily agree. Leaders should never fear to appeal in
God’s name to the nation, seek to rouse its conscience and gain its sympathies.
The response will be cordial and unanimous. “ The Lord our God will we serve,
and his voice will we obey ” (Jos. xxiv. 24). 3. A firm decision. “ We will do
so.” Needful to be prudent in counsel and firm in execution.


Toe Arx in THE Royat Oiry.


A place of honour, influence, and right, asa—I. The centre of unity.
Politically and morally, outwardly and inwardly people one. Unity in worship
not complete, for there were two holy places, one in Gibeon, another pitched
over the ark, but internal unity which did not exist before. YI, The source
of religious life. Under Saul it had fallen from the height to which
Samuel had brought it. The royal family had lost piety, and, as instanced by
Michail, had become proud. In her father’s house she had an idol god. But
this act—l. Purified religious life. Elevated its tone and grandeur. 2. Unified
religious life. External unity destroyed by war between Saul and David. Now
national life one centre and source in dwelling of God in Zion. The sanctuary
in Gibeon retires from view. 3. Organised religious life. He arranged priests
and Levites, divided them into classes for service, gave anew impulse to music
and culture. Reorganisation raised divine worship from its disintegration and
lawlessness under Saul to an artistic and beautiful order. IIY. The sign of
God’s presence. David had captains and mighty men, but God was
required. Conscious of dependence upon God, he confesses desire to rule
according to the will of God. If it be “of the Lord our God.” This act one
of reverence and gratitude, which enthrones God the king of glory (Ps. xxiv ):
makes Jerusalem the city of the Great King (Ps. xlviii. 3); from whence
proceed all manifestations of glory and might (Ps, xx. 3); and before whom
it is an unspeakable privilege to worship. ‘ Who may be guest in thy tent f
who may dwell on thy holy mountain?” (Ps. xv. 1).


Tue Sotemn Procession.—Verses 6-8.


Extreme anxiety to have the ark in the city, for counsel and succour on
all occasions. To attain this all classes eager to undertake any effort and
submit to any inconvenience. A procession formed which befits the object
in view. I. In military escort. The way rugged, the enemy defeated,
but not destroyed. We must ever be on guard. IL. In united ranks.
“ All Israel” (30,000 in Sam.), king, priests, and people in order and position.
All ranks indebted to God, all should join in service and praise. III. In
festive joy. “The festival,” says Dean Stanley, ‘was one which exactly
corresponded to what in the Middle Ages would have been ‘the hos of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. {cHaP. xmn,


ty





~


the Translation’ of some great relic, by which a new city or a new church
was to be glorified. Long sleepless nights had David passed in thinking of
it (Ps. exxxii. 4), as St. Louis of the transport of the Crown of Thorns to
the Royal Chapel of Paris.” Such joy is natural and becoming, pleasing to
men and acceptable to God.


THe Lzessom or Uzza.—Verses 8-132.


David loved God, venerated the symbol of his presence, desired to restore
appointed worship, and put the ark where it should be. But right things must
be done in right manner, or they will fail. In this case failure, sad and signal,
for Uzza died and the ark turned aside to the house of Obed-edom. I, The
failure. Here multitudes, “David and all Israel,” yet business nought.
Crowds do not ensure blessing. Here pomp, singing, harps, trumpets, &c., yet
ended in mourning. Gorgeous ceremonial no guarantee of grace. Here energy;
“they played before God with all their might”—no dull and sleepy worship,
but a bright, lively service, yet the matter fell through. But there was no
thought as to God’s mind. David confessed, ‘“ We sought him not after the due
order” (1 Chr. xv. 13), The priests not in their places, nor Levites to carry
the ark; oxen took the place of willing men. The worship was not sufficiently
spiritual and humble. There was no sacrifice. This a fatal flaw, for how
can we serve the Lord apart from sacrifice? There was little reverence. We
hear little of prayer, but much of oxen, a cart, and the too familiar hand of
Uzza. Now, even David must keep his place, and the Lord’s command must
not be supplanted by will-worship. Therefore the breach upon Uzza, and
David greatly afraid. May we not expect similar failures, unless careful to act
obediently and serve the Lord with holy awe? Are all observances and prac-
tices of our churches scriptural? Are not some of them purely will-worship!
II. The fear. The terrible death of Uzza caused great fear. Thus the Lord
slew Nadab and Abihu for offering strange fire; and the men of Beth-shemesh
for looking into the ark. ‘I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me, and
before all the people I will be glorified” (Lev. x. 3). Sense of wrong-feeling
caused fear in David, for we read, “ And David was displeased” (ver. 11). We
are too apt to be displeased with God because he is displeased with us. Sense of
unworthiness for such holy work made him cry, “ How shall I bring the ark of
God home to me?” His feeling that he failed in that which God expected of
his servants created a holy fear. “Sanctify yourselves, that ye may bring up
the ark of the Lord God” (1 Chr. xv. 12). He meant well, but erred and came
to a pause; yet not for long. Ark remained with Obed-edom three months, not
more (ver. 14). Some make the holiness of God and the strictness of His rule
an excuse for wicked neglect. Others are overwhelmed with holy fear, and
pause awhile till they are better prepared for the holy service [Spurgeon].


Ricut Tarnes Done mr aA Wrone Way.


«. The matter and right manner of performing duties are,
in the command of God, linked together. He will have his
service well done, as well as really done, with a perfect heart and a willing mind,
for the Lord searcheth all hearts and understandeth all the imaginations of the
thoughts. Masters on earth challenge to themselves a power to oblige their
servants, not only to do their work, but to do it so-and-so; and though they do
the thing itself, yet if not in the manner required, it is not accepted. II. The
pointe of a duty in a wrong manner altcrs the nature of it,


eHAP. x11] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.








1!
and makes it sin. Hence, the ploughing of the wicked is sin (Prov
xxi. 4). Hence, prayer is accounted a howling upon their beds (Hos. vil. 14).
Unworthy communicating is not counted as eating the Lord’s Supper (1 Cor.
xi. 20). Ifa house be built of never so strong timber and good stones, yet if it
be not well founded and rightly built, the inhabitant may curse the day he came


under the roof of it.


III. Duties not prepared according to the


right order are but the half of the service we owe to God,
and the worst half too [Zhos. Boston].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.2. Send abroad. EHrumpamus,
dimittamus. Let us break forth and
send, 2.e., let us send speedily and
sifectually. See his zeal for the Lord
of Hosts [Trapp).

Ver. 8. Played before God. Public
joy should always be as before the Lord,
with an eye to him, and terminating
in him, otherwise it is no better than
public madness, and the source of all
manner of wickedness [ Benson].

Vers. 7-10. Perez-Uzza. 1. The act
of Uzza. Rash, lacking faith in God’s
power or providence to preserve the
ark; irreverent; disobedient. 2. The
punishment of Uzza. Sudden, signal,
and severe. Apparently out of all
proportion to the act. But we are im-
proper judges of wrong, desert, and
divine justice. God displays holiness,
to secure discipline and check sin, to
which we are prone. One instance of
justice may benefit generations and
ages. 3. The results of the punishment
of Uzza. (a) The procession was broken
up. (6) David was afraid. “ How could
such a festal joy which knew nothing
of holy fear, however well meant, prove
acceptable to God? It is not enough
that we mean well, and have pious
thoughts; we must also, in what we
do, hold fast to God’s word and
commandment, and in all our joy in
the Lord must not allow ourselves to
forget that we have to do with a holy
God.”


Uzza, or Irreverence in sacred things.
1. Rashness in devotion. “ God smote
Uzza for his rashness (marg.)” (2 Sam.
vi. 7). Worldly thoughts and plans
brought into the very house and pre-
sence of God. Haste in spirit and
utterance. “Be not rash with thy
mouth,” &e. (Ecc, v. 2). 2. Thought-
lessness in Christian effort. No due
preparation, trust to accidents or
emergencies. Inconsiderate effort has
blasted many a noble project. Pru-
dence and thought required. Collect
and arrange materials ; for an unfur-
nished minister can never be “a wise
master-builder.” ‘ Prepare thy work
(set it in order) without and make it
fit for thyself in the field” (Prov.
xxiv. 27). 3. Sinfulness in the Chris-
tian ministry. Uzza a type of all who,
unsanctified in spirit, take upon them-
selves to rescue the cause of God. “ Be
ye clean that bear the vessels of the
Lord.” Profanation of the ark. It is
of importance to observe the propor-
tionate severity of the punishment
attending the profanation of the ark.
The Philistines suffered by diseases,
from which they were relieved by their
oblations, because the law had not been
given to them; the. Bethshemites also
suffered, but not fatally, their error
proceeding from ignorance or inadver-
tency ; but Uzza, who was a Levite and
well instructed, suffered death for hiv
breach of the law [Jamieson],


HOMILETICS.
Frrrz-Uzza AND ITs Lessons.
Arrangements of David for transport of the Ark differed from those which


God had prescribed (Num. iv.),


ever carry on the work of God by means


53


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. fowar. mz





which God has forbidden. Learn—I. If God be absent from a people,
and the ark be long in obscurity, that people will lose a
sense of reverence. All thought of divine power in the ark forgotten, a
question of mere safety, not reverence; arrangements those of heathen nations,
not divine injunctions. ‘II. That God, mindful of his honour, often
singles out guilty men to be monuments of his displeasure.
God will be sanctified in those who come nigh him (Lev. x. 3). Uzza presump-
tuous and irreverent, like Nadab and Abihua, suffered for sin. “ When many
have sinned, God commonly punishes one or two of the leaders, in order that the
others may remember their sin and beg forgiveness.” III. That by such
examples of terror God warns others. King, priests, and people
inspired with dread of divine majesty. Judgment opened the eyes and humbled
the soul of David, who wisely delayed for thought, self-examination, and, under
divine teaching, to learn the right way. “For when thy judgments are in
(strike) the earth, the inhabitants of the world (earth) will learn righteousness”
(Is. xxvi. 9)-
% Heaven wills our happiness, allows our doom ;
Invites us ardently, but not compels” [ Young}.


Davin’s DispLeasure.—Verecs 11, 12.


The king greatly agitated, dreaded God’s displeasure might be extended te
himself and people if ark further conveyed. Resolved to wait. The word betokens
anger and grief, used by Jonah (iv. 1-9). I. He was afraid of personal
danger. He had neglected duty; knew not what might happen; dangerous
to bring ark into the city. A guilty conscience makes cowards. II.
He was vexed at the interruption of his plan. People disap-
pointed, his prestige damaged, and his enemies encouraged. We are often
tempted to find fault when our religious enterprise is interrupted, when we
as leadera are dishonoured, and our purposes broken. Complain of God’s
providence when we should accuse ourselves. “Should it be according to
thy mind?” JII. He was overcome with superstitious dread.
Something about the ark itself he did not understand. He misinterpreted
the event. Superstition ever misdirects, scares by expected evil. “It were
better to have no opinion of God at all than such an opinion as is unworthy of
him , for the one is unbelief, the other is contumely ; and certainly superstition is
the reproach of the Deity” [Bacon].


Tee House or Osrp-rpom.—Verss 14.


People dismayed, David perplexed, one perfectly calm and ready to welcome
the ark. Obed. not a great warrior; for great talents no guarantee for holy
life and faithful garvice (Balaam, Saul, Byron), but a man of sincere heart and
upright conduct. I, The service which he rendered. The ark
was carried “aside into the house of Obed-edom.” A most signal service which
no one else would undertake. A service for which he was trained, and which he
was ready when required to give. Lonely homes are scenes of highest trust and
purest character. Not the palace, but the cottage often the residence of God,
and the national glory. II. The spirit in which he performed
this service. Uzza slain for rashness, David shrinks in fear, Obed-edom
receives ark gladly. 1. Jn filial fear. In love to God and earnest desire to
help his cause. 2. In striking courage. He knew what had been dope among
the Philistines and the Bethshemites, yet invites the ark to his house. “O the
courage,” says Bishop Hall, “of an honest and faithful heart! Nothing can
make God otherwise than amiable to him; even his justice is lovely.” ITI,

54


CHap. x11. |


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


2 iter mses sae o.oo


The reward which he gained. “The Lord blessed the house.” 1.


A personal blessing.


2. A social blessing.


3. An extensive blessing. “ All


that he had.” None suffer whose guest is the ark of God. Piety is the best
friend to prosperity. Happy and attractive the home in which God dwells.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 9-13. 1. God’s people misin-
terpret his dealings. 2. How much
they lose by this interpretation. 3.
How much they gain who receive
God simply. (1) Beware of flying
from God or shutting out God. (2)
Let God into the heart and the
dwelling [H. Bonar].

Ver. 14. Ark in the house. Family
devotion, its nature, duty, and results,
Howard, the philanthropist, never neg-
lected family prayer, if even but one,
and that his domestie servant, declar-
ing that where he had a tent, God
should have an altar. “ Pour out thy
fury upon the heathen that know thee
not, and upon the families that call not
upon thy name.”


The Ark with Uzza, David, and
Obed-edom; or the Ark the cause of
judgment, fear, and blessing, accord-


ing to its treatment.


Ver. 14. Blessed. As he will do
all those, both small and great, that
favour his cause and further his king-
dom; for he is a liberal paymaster,
and his retributions are more than
bountiful. If Abinadab was not so
well blessed as Obed-edom, it was haply
because he entertained not the ark
with like reverence. As men measure
to God in preparation, &c., so will God
measure to them in blessing [Trapp].

“ A Deity believed, will nought avail,


Rewards and punishments make God
adored” [ Young].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XIII.


Vers. 6-8. Singing Oh that we
might have such joy as that which
inspired the men at the battle of
Leuthen! They were singing a Chris-
tian song as they went into battle. A
general said to the king, “ Shall I stop
these people singing?” “No,” said


the king. “ Men that can sing ltkhe that
can fight” [Talmage].
Ver. 11. Breach. God would have


us read our sins in our judgments,
that we might both repent of our sins,
and give glory to his justice [Bishop
Hail).

Ver. 14, Blessed the house. Parents!
if you would banish Satan from your
households, and with him all the train


of sins that bring misery and desola-
tion into many a home, and convert
into a wilderness with wild beasts what
might be a family paradise, where every
human affection bloomed in beauty,
grew in grace, and brought forth fruit
to God’s glory, seek the constant
presence of Jesus Christ, and covet,
above all earthly honour or renown,
that your family should be like that one
of oldin Bethany which “Jesus loved.”
His presence will be your true pros-
perity, making your daily mercies true
mercies, and your seasons of bereave-
ment seasons of richest blessing and


deepest peace [Rev. Nor. Macleod, D.D.},





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cmar. xav,





OHAPTER XIV.


Gerrroan Norse.) This chapter runs parallel with 2 Sam. v. 11-25, and presents 2
eneral verbal identity, which is insufficiently represented by the Authorised Version.
e only important variations from 2 Sam. v. are in verses 4-7 and 12, in the former of
which passages the sons of David are given somewhat differently, while in the latter the
fact is added that the idols taken from the Philistines were burned [Speak. Com.,].

Vers. 1, 2.—David’s house. H. elsewhere Huram (2 Chr. ii. 3; viii, 18; ix. 10; of.
2 Sam. v.11). A Phoenician, a Canaanite, speaking the language of David, and sovereign
of a city trading in cedars and abounding with craftsmen in stone and wood [cf. Murphy].
Ver. 2. Confirmed in contrast to his former state and the fate of Saul’s kingdom.

Vers. 3-7.— David's family (cf. 2 Sam. iii. 5). Concubines in ch. iii. 9; a list of children
vers. 5-8; those born in Jerusalem, 2 Sam. v. 14-16. But names of Hliphalet and Nogah
not found, and Beeliada appears the same as Hliada.

Vers, 8=17.—Lavid’s victories. Seek to ruin him before consolidated in kingdom. Ver. 9.
Rephaim (xi. 15) south east of Jerusalem, near capital of David. Ver. 10. Enquired for
high-priest to give tone to his reign. Ver. 11. Smote in the engagement at Mount Perazim
(Is. xxxviii. 21), in valley of Rephaim. This first victory. Ver. 12. God’s images
carried into battlefields (1 Sam. iv. 4-11; 2 Sam. v. 21).

Vers. 13-17.—Second victory. Again in next season campaign renewed. Ver. 14. Not
up to meet them directly ; come upon them by stratagem in the rear. Ver. 15. Sound,
the rustling of leaves by strong breeze, the appointed sign and moment for attack. Ver. 16.
Gibeon, now Yefa,in Judah. Ver.17. Fame in all the surrounding nations. This verse
an appropriate conclusion, not found in Samuel.


HOMILETICS.
Tue Buruprne oF THE RoyaL Hovusr.—Verses 1, 2.


David had conquered Jebusites ; made Zion capital; had now wisely made a
weaty with a neighbouring prince. Magnanimous and godfearing. In
Hiram’s conduct notice—I. An instance of true friendship. History
gives noble examples of love and friendship. 1. This was genuine. Real and
excellent. David need of artisans. War and disorder had depopulated. “A
friend in need is a friend indeed.”


“ Tl fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates and men decay.”


2. fhis was lasting. Friends often change with change of principles and
circumstances; vary with temperature and desert in meanness. Hiram did to
the son what he had done to the father (2 Chr. ii. 3); “for Hiram was ever a
lover of David” (1 Kingsv.1), II. An illustration of human agency
in the service of God. None independent. All require friends and help.
Rich to give to poor; wise to teach the ignorant, and kings to rule subjects,
All nay communicate, interchange stores of thought, knowledge, and substance,
1. Ayency in men. Tyrian workmen renowned and skilful; helped David to
build a city, so splendid in cedar structures that Jeremiah exclaimed, “Thou
dwellest on Lebanon and makest thy nest in the cedars” (Jer. xxii. 23). 2.
Agency im materials. Israel agricultural, furnished corn and oil; Tyre commercial,
paces manufactures and foreign produce. Thus mutually helpful. All the
6


OHAP. XIV.) AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





{


treasures of art and materials of nature subserve man’s highest interests and
God’s work. III. A proof of God’s providence. David more than
* fortunate in having a friend in Hiram at this time.” 1. Providence in Hiram's
conduct. God disposed him to render help. The God of infinite wisdom has a
purpose in the rise and fall of empires, in all events of life, obscure or illustrious.
As a gardener directs rills of water through different parts of his ground, so
“the king’s heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water: he turneth
it whithersoever he will” (Prov. xxi. 1). 2. Providence in David’s accession to tha
throne. ‘ David perceived that the Lord had established him king over Israel.”
By internal unity, external peace, and friendly connection with Hiram. 3.
Providence in the honour and extension of David's kingdom. “ And that his
kingdom was exalted on high.” Respected at home and abroad among nations ;
elevated as the people of God above others in knowledge, privilege, and destiny.
In building characters, churches, and societies rely upon God, not too much upon
human friendship and human instrumentality, wealth, eloquent preachers
and active evangelists. Recognition, consciousness of God, gives strength and
success. “ David perceived,” &c.


Hiram AND Davide


The treaty between these two kings illustratee—I, The providence of
God in the exaltation of a good man. “Confirmed him king.”
Scholars, ministers, statesmen, fitted and exalted from obscurity to honour.
Joseph from prison to prime minister; Garfield from log cabin to White House;
Livingstone from Blantyre to Westminster Abbey. “ ‘The Most High ruleth in
the kingdom of men, and giveth it to whomsoever he will.” II, The
influence of a good man upon others when thus exalted.
David’s influence far and near. Men pay homage to moral worth and holy life.
This power every Christian may possess and wield. The secret is, “The Lord
was with him.” III. The design for which God exalts a good
man. “For his people Israel’s sake ” (2 Sam. v.12). Not for themselves,
but for others are men enriched and honoured. Great interests often sacrificed
for selfish ends. Kings, popes, and emperors forget that others are as dear to
God as they. Elevation should never separate. Kings created for the people,
not the people for kings.


HOMILETIC HINT»


Vers. 1,2. 1. David's house built.
Fit for his court and homage. Work-
men of a wealthy prince helped to rear
it, ‘The sons of strangers shall build
up” the walls of the spiritual house,
“and their kings shall minister unto
thee” (Is.lx.10). 2. Dawid’s kingdom
established. Saul not established. No-


thing to shake or disturb possession. _


Exalted before friend and foe. “ Higher
than the kings of the earth.” 3. God's
hand recognised in this. Many blessed
and honoured do not perceive this, will


4ND SUGGESTIONS.
not acknowledge God, talk about their


“ fortune,” “star,” and ‘ chance.”


“David perceived,” &e. ‘ By this I


know that thou favourest me”
(Ps. xli. 1).
Ver. 2. Lifted up. Man throws


down. God lifts up persons, societies,
and nations; lifts up above distress,
opposition, and danger. “ A good man
im great prosperity. 1. He ascribes it
all to the Lord. 2. He regards it as
given him for the benefit of his fellow-


men ” [Lange],


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES, [OHAP. XIV.
%





HOMILETICS.
Tor Extension oy Tak RoyaL Faminy.—Verses 3—7.


When the palace was built and the kingdom established, David’s family
multiplied and increased. Of his sons, see 1 Chr. iii. 1-9; and his concubines,
2 Sam. xv. 16; xvi. 22; xix.5. This—I. In worldly policy. Always
thought to be politic to have many children ; marry them into powerful families,
and thus strengthen interest and gain support. The custom of Oriental
monarchs to gather a numerous harem. This an essential part of court-state,
and a symbol of royal power. But David overstepped the mark and went
astray. ‘Men who have once broken the fence will wander carelessly.” II,
In disobedience to God’scommand. Multiplication of wives expressly
forbidden to the kings of Israel. ‘“ Neither shall he multiply wives to himself,
that his heart turn not away” (Deut. xvii. 17). Worldly policy often contra-
dictory to God’s design. Expediency never safe. Divine wisdom the only
preservative and redemptive force in life. ‘“ When wisdom entereth into
thine heart and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul, discretion shall preserve
thee, understanding shall keep thee.”


“To know
That which before us lies in daily life
Is the prime wisdom ” [Milton].


Famous Barries.—Versee 8-17.


Philistines afraid of David’s growing power—that he would wipe away the
national dishonour of Gilboa, and that his knowledge of the country would give
superior advantage in war—resolve to attack, surprise, and ruin him. Went up
to seek, with intention to crush him before consolidated in his kingdom
(of. 1 Sam. xxiii. 15; xxiv. 2), but were overcome in two famous battles.
I. The counsel by which they were undertaken. “David
enquired of God” (ver. 10); “David enquired again of God” (ver. 13).
In all affairs look to God for direction. Have his will and word for your
guide. Means always at hand to discover his will. Submit thoughts, plans,
and ways to God’s approval—to check if wrong, to perfect if right. If depressed
by their weight, “‘ commit ” (literally, roll as a burden which you cannot bear)
“thy way unto the Lord” (Ps. xxvii. 5). “Roll thy works” (thy undertakings)
“upon the Lord” (Prov. xvi. 3). II. The help by which they were
fought. This from above. 1. Jn divine direction. ‘‘The Lord said unto
him, go up.” Never stir without this. 2. In hearty co-operation. David did
not entrench himself in Zion, nor act merely on the defensive, but made the


attack and conquered. “ To serve the gods was to reign,” said a heathen writer.
IIIf. The victories which they gained. Brilliant and complete.
1. The enemy overcome. “ David smote them ”—like rising waters, overflowing


their banks and sweeping everything before them. 2. Their false confidence
destroyed. Philistines carried their gods into battle, with the belief, common in
ancient nations, that they would grant success. Their owners left them helpless
on the field ; the victors carried them as trophies to the capital, and consumed
them in the flames. ‘They were burned with fire.” 3. David became famous.
“The fame of David went out unto all lands” (ver. 17). Asa great warrior, a
powerful monarch, and a good man. 4. God was honowred. Acknowledged ag
the source of victory—‘“ God hath broken in ” (ver. 11)—praised for his gift and
presence, and feared above all the gods of the earth, Give to him the glory
due to his name,
58


vgap. XIv.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





SienaLs FoR Duty.—Verses 15, 16.


In the responses to David’s inquiries we not simply have commands in words,
and symbols in sound, but signals for duty or action. I. God’s answer to
man’s prayer. Given twice, in terms direct and explicit. 1. Prayer for
knowledge of duty. “Shal. I go?” 2. Prayer for asswrance of success. ‘‘ Wilt
thou deliver them into my hand?” David often defeated. For his own
encouragement and that of his army, he desires grounds of confidence. True
prayer will give knowledge, hope, and strength. II. God’s help in man’s
circumstances. These often strange and apparently against us; render
powerless and insufficient. God’s help adequate to feeble men and scanty
resources. In his service never left without indications of his presence.
“God is gone forth before thee.” III. God's signal for man’s action.
We need not only to know and strength to obey God’s will, but the call to duty
—the signal to “ go” at the exact time. A detachment on one occasion waited
for orders, longed to join their comrades in battle, instead of standing in silence,
exposed to danger. At length Wellington gave the command, and the attach
was successful. “They serve who stand and wait.” <A time to “stand still”
and to “go forward,” but God must give the signal. Wait for his salvation.
“ The vision shall come and not tarry.”


Tue Barrie oF BAau-PERAZIM.—Verses 8-13.


Here the Philistines marched from Rephaim, pitched their tent, and offered
battle (2 Sam. v. 18-20). I. The spirit in which it was fought.
Most commendable and advantageous. 1. A spirit of reliance upon Cod.
“Shall I go?” An attitude of conscious danger and helplessness, 2. A spirit
of humility. David talks of his “ hand,” not his sword. God is the giver, he
only receives with the hand. None fit to be great but those who can stoop
lowest. ‘“ Before honour is humility.” 3. A spirit of obedience. “ They came
up.” Wise to listen to and obey law—to be convinced of its divine authority
and justice. Men ever ready to order, to modify and repeal, in danger and
doubt. But “the wise in heart will receive commandments.” 4. A spirit of
courage. Victory promised by God, hence bravery and enthusiasm. “A good
cause makes a stout heart.”

“He holds no parley with unmanly fears,
Where duty bids, he confidently steers,
Faces a thousand dangers at her call,
And trusting in his God, surmounts them all” [Cowper].


Il. The scenes by which it was characterised. Battlefields
never pleasant to inspect. Great soldiers have often wept on them. 1. Shame-
ful defeat. ‘“ David smote them,” and like an impetuous flood carried all before
him. The defeat terrible, and perpetuated in name of place. “ Baal-perazim
water-breach ” (cf. Is. xxviii. 21). 2. Mational disgrace. The gods were forsaken,
lost, and destroyed. The disgrace of the Philistine’s capture of the ark was
wiped away, and the idolatrous people dishonoured. God makes men weary
of things they love, and compels them to desert what they worship. “In that
day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which they
made each one for himself to worship, to the moles and to the bats”


(Is. ii. 20).
Toe Barrie or Giseon.—Verees 14-17.


Again the enemy renewed hostile attempt with greater force. God interposes
in a peculiar way, caused a sound to be heard, and David suddenly attacked from
59


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (CHAP. XIV














behind the mulberry-trees. Notico—I. A special change in tactics
Much depends upon methods in war. David not permitted toact as im
first battle, though successful. This would have been natural. But God
alone must be followed; not rules of earthly warfare, not past experience,
nor past success must guide. God does ‘a new thing.” ‘Thou shalt not
go up; fetch a compass behind them.” II. A special sign by which
these tactics are carried out. ‘“ When thou shalt hear a sound of
going, &.” 1, A supernatural sign. “Sound of going”—viz., of God.
Soldiers must look to the commander for orders. This, many think, was a
noise made by angels, who came to help (of. 2 Kings vii. 6). 2. A disciplinary
stgn. Requiring an upward look, an open eye to see, an attentive ear to hear.
Duty of soldiers to wait and watch in readiness and order. 3. A typical sign.
In the setting up of Christ’s kingdom, disciples waited to be equipped for work.
The Spirit “came with a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind.”
When they heard and felt that, they bestirred themselves, and went forth to
conquer,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 8. 1. A vigilantfoe. “ Philis-
tines heard.” 2. An army on guard.
“David heard.” 3. An army pre-
pared to meet the foe. “Went out
against them.” A Christian’s duty
like that of a soldier. He does not
attempt to meet temptation, to fight
the enemy in his own strength. His
watchfulness lies in observing its
approach, telling God of it in prayer,
and being prepared in God’s strength.

Ver. 10. 1. The thing to ascertain.
Is it God’s will? 2. The power re-
quired to perform it when known.
Many wish for God’s favour and help
without doing God’s will. The order
can never be reversed; first God’s will,
then God’s help. No answer and no
power, if not in right attitude and
relation to him.

Ver. 11. God hath broken asunder
or through mine enemies as a breach of
waters, z.e., as a violent torrent makes
avif/t or breach. Philistines scattered
suddenly, unexpectedly and violently.
God’s terrors awful. ‘“ Thy fierce anger
goeth over me (as waves of the sea) ;
thy terrors have cut me off. They
came round about me daily like water ;
they compassed me about together”
(Ps. Ixxxviii. 16, 17).

Vers. 9-11. 1. An instance of self-
conquest. David conquered self, and
then consulted God. 2. A lesson of

6


dependence upon God. Pray, look up,
and expect. 3. An instance of success
through obedience.


* God fights the battles of a will resigned.”


Ver. 15. Sound of going applies
figuratively to us also in our spiritual
conflict with the children of unbelief
in the world. There, too, it comes to
nothing that one should make war _
with his own prowess and merely in
the human equipment of reason and
science. Success can only be reckoned
on when the conflict is waged amid
the blowing of the Holy Spirit’s breath
and with the immediate presence of
the Lord and of the truth of his word
[Krummacher]. God before thee. 1. In
the pledge of success. 2. By con-
founding the enemy. Sound some-
thing amazing, like the noise of a
mighty host. Hence panic and flight,

Ver. 15. Before thee. 1. A word of
consolation in sore distress. 2. A
word of encouragement amid inward
conflict, 3. A word of exhortation to
unconditional obedience of faith. 4. A
word of asswrance of the victory which
the Lord gives [Lange]. The rustling
of the Lord’s approaching help in the
tops of the trees. 1. Dost thou wait
for it at his bidding? 2. Dost thou
hear it with the right heed? 3. Dost
thou understand it in the right sense!


owAP. XV.}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


enn EEE a imemeeeeennnEEn
t


4. Dost thou follow it without delay?
[Zdem]. Victory comes from the Lord.
1. When it is beforehand humbly
sked for according to tne Lord’s will

d word. 2. When the batile is


undertaken in the Lord’s name and for
His cause. 3. When it is fought with
obedient observation of the Lord’s
directions and guidance [Idem].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XIV.


Vers. 1,2. Hiram and Dawid.


“A generous friendship no cold medium
knows,

Burns with one love, with one resentment

glows ” [Pope’s Homer].
It was reckoned a crime among the
Romans to be without a friend.
“ Friends,” says one, “are to be in-
ventoried as well as goods.”

Ver. 8. David heard of it. “ Set
double guard on that point to-night,”
was an officer's command when an
attack was expected.

Ver. 10. Shall I goup? The English
Ambassador to the Court of Prussia
sat at a table of Frederick the Great,
then meditating a war whose sinews
were to be mainly formed of English
subsidies. Round the table sat infidel
French wits, and they and the king
made merry over decadent supersti-
tions, the follies of the ancient faith.
Suddenly the talk changed to war.
Said the Ambassador, “ England would,
by the help of God, stand by Prussia.”
“ Ah!” said the infidel Frederick, “I
did not know you bad an ally of that


name,” and the infidel wits smirked
applause. “So, please your Majesty,”
was the swift retort, ‘“ He is the only
ally to whom we do not send subsi-
dies ” eee ee)

Vers, 14-16. Luther’s strength lay
in the way in which he laid the burden
of the Reformation upon the Lord.
Continually in prayer he pleaded,
“Lord, this is thy cause, not mine,
Therefore, do thine own work; for
if this gospel do not prosper, it will
not be Luther alone who will be a
loser, but thine own name will be dis-
honoured” [Spurgeon].

Ver. 17. Fame of David. “ Begin
with modesty, if you would end with
honour.”


“Some men are raised to station and

command,

When Providence means mercy to a land.

He speaks, and they appear; to him they
owe

Skill to direct, and strength to strike the
blow,

To manage with address, to seize with
power

The crisia of a decisive hour ” [Cowper].





CHAPTER XY.


Czrricau Notzs.] The bulk of this chapter consists of new matter, which the writer
of Chronicles found in his authorities, and regarding as important for his purpose, intro-
duced at this point into the narrative. Only verses 25-29 are parallel with 2 Samuel,
corresponding to ch. vi. 12-23 [ Speak. Com. ].

Vers. 1-3.—Preparation to remove ark. Houses. Interval of three months employed
in building his palace and city for accommodation of his wives and family. Tent, a new
one, old one still at Gibeon (2 Chr. xvi, 39; 2 Chr.i. 3); thought to be too old, perhaps.
Ver. 2. None, except Levites, to bear ark, nor convey it in cart (cf. Num. i. 50; Jos.
ix. 7-17), “External things carried on waggons under charge of Gershonites and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cHaP. EV.
oe tc


Merarites; but articles of the sanctuary to be borne on poles by Kohathites ” (Num. iv.).
Ver. 4. All representatives of nation.

Vers, 5-15.—Priests and Levites. ‘ This classification of sons of Aaron, as the special
priests, and of the Levites, is constantly observed (ch. xii. 26, 27; xxvii. 17). The men-
tion of the six representative Levitical families follows. That of Kohath (ver. 5) takes
lead, because, though second in order of birth (Gen. xlvi. 11; Ex. vi. 16-19; ch. vi. 1-30),
its priestly importance gave it always first rank. To the same head belonged also three
of the remaining five families, viz., Hebron (ver. 9) and Uzziel (ver. 10), who were
brothers, as being both sons of Kohath (Ex. vi. 18); and Hlizaphan, who, though son of
Uzziel (Ex. vi. 22), had come to represent a distinct family (Num. iii. 30). The other two
required to complete the six are Asaiah (ver. 6), of the house of Merari, and Joel
(ver. 7), of the house of Gershom. The representatives, then, of these six families, with
the company of the brethren belonging to each of them, and the two priests, Zadok and
Abiathar (ver. 11), are now summoned into the presence of David to receive a short but
special charge.”

Vers. 11-13.—David’s address. Sanctify, according to Mosaic requirements, before
engaging in any service (Num. i. 50; vii. 9; x. 17; 2 Chr. xxix.5). Ver. 13. Did not
sanctify yourselves before. Levites even sadly to blame. Breach (ch. xiii. 11). Order
that ark should be borne on shoulders of Levites (cf. ver. 15).

Vers. 16-21.—The singers. Sacred song in use from earliest times (Ex. xv.; Deut. xxxii. ;
Jud. v.). This first occasion on which duty of conducting musical services expressly laid
on Levites. Hitherto music seems to have been cultivated in ‘‘ schools of the prophets”
(1 Sam. x. 5). Henceforth services of tabernacle and temple were regularly choral, and
a considerable section of Levites was trained in musical knowledge and set apart to
conduct this portion of national worship (cf. ch, xxiii. 5; xxv. 1-31; 2 Chr. v. 12; vii.6;
xxxv. 15) [Speak. Com.].

Ver. 17.—Heman (cf. 1 Kings iv. 81; 1 Chr. ii. 6). Ver. 18. Second, subordinate leaders,
or forming the second choir. Porters applies to Obed-edom and Jeiel (or Jehiah, ver. 24).
Ver. 19. Cymbals, instruments of percussion, making clanging sound. Ver. 20. Psalteries,
a kind of lute. Alamoth, “psalteries of high pitch,’ whose tones resembled voices of
girls (alamoth) [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 21. Shem., the eighth in a series of times, or an instru-
ment with eight strings ; uncertain meaning. acel, lead or preside: harpers with bass
voices led, and lutists with treble followed.

Vers. 22-24.—Bearers of ark. Chen., chief, from his office, and different from Chen. in
ch. xxvi. 29. For song, marg. for carriage. Instructed, presided over bearing. Ski/ful
in customs and observances in carriage of holy things. Vers. 23, 24. This part of cortege
arranged thus: Berechiah and Elkanah went before to open doors. The seven priests
followed, blowing trumpets (Num. x. 8), and Obed-edom and Jehiah brought up the rear -
and closed the doors, when the ark was put in its place. Arrangements here merely for
the occasion, and it was possible for these two doorkeepers to sing in choir and after-
wards close the sacred doors [Murphy].

Vers, 25-29.—T he procession. Ver. 26. Helped, regarded with favour. Offered, distinct
from that in 2 Sam. vi. 13. Ver. 27. Linen, made of buts (byssus), a species of flax; a
robe worn by highest rank kings and priests (Esth. viii.15; 1 Sam. xxii.18), Ali Levites
formed part of procession. Ver. 28. Cornet, first time mentioned. Ver. 29. Danced
accords with brief aceount in 2 Sam. vi. 16, Michal (of. 2 Sam. vi. 20-23).


HOMILETICS.
A Prace PrepareD FoR THE ARK,.—Verses l=4,


David anxious to convey the ark from house of Obed-edom to tabernacle in
Zion. I. An evidence of his desire for God’s presence. He
thought more about a place for the ark of God than the splendour of the palace
end the enlargement of the city. Men build houses, buy land, and make
fortunes, but have no room for God, for a church in the house, for a temple in
the city. IIT. An indication of a better state of mind. Not now
afraid, did not cry, ‘“ How shall the ark of the Lord come to me?” ¢2 Sam.
vi. 9). In three months wonderfully changed. Obed-edom’s prosperity and
divine judgment broke down prejudice, humbled him, and induced him to
arrange for return of ark. “Thy judgments are made manifest.” III. A
proof of anxiety for the welfare of his people. Not anxious to fill

62


CAP. Xv.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





7
the city with soldiers, to build warehouses, but to pitch a tent for God. The
seat of government should be the centre of worship. The presence of the ark
asserted the presence, supremacy, and claims of God. The king desired the
people to remember Him in their homes and their business) IV. An
earnest endeavour to secure that welfare. David first to move,
prominent in effort, and earnest in consulting the people. He prepared a
place, was ready to employ labour, and make sacrifice to accomplish the work.
To “ the chief of the fathers” he gave a solemn charge and a personal example.
Let us thus work ourselves, and incite others to follow our example.


REMOVAL OF THE ARK, OR CARRYING ON THE WORK OF Gop.—Verses 1-24.


The chapter gives an account of preparation and procession in the removal of
the ark. Learn—I, Preparation for God’s work. The work impor-
tant and needful, should never be undertaken without thought, purpose, and
preparation. 1. By personal sanctification. ‘‘Sanctify yourselves” (ver. 12).
Legal defilement unfitted for solemn duties. Removal of sin from heart and
life, the first requisite in seeking and serving God. Secret sin forsaken, the
heart made steadfast and stacere. “If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far
away.” 2. By implicit obedtence te God's command. God’s work done in God’s
way, not in ours. Trifles mest serious. Difference between a cart and poles in
conveying ark seems small, But “to the law and testimony.” No right to put
the plans, the ordinances of men for the commandments of God. II. Hearty
co-operation in God’s work, David sought fit persons, and appealed to
priests and Levites to help. This co-operation given. 1. Gained by consultation.
David could not force, calls the assembly and makes appeal. Well-conducted
meetings. Teachers’ Meetings, Ministers’ Conferences, and National Councils
of great help in effective work. “Come now and let us take counsel together.”
2. Displayed in united ranks. In “due order” (ver. 13). In obedience to God,
and special rank in procession, Neglect of this brought failure at first.
Worship, work, and liberality should be systematic. “Order gave each thing
view” [Shakespeare]. 3. Expressed by indwidual effort. Hach took his place
and gave his work. Some played with cymbals, harps, and psalteries; others
“did blow with the trumpets.” Some sang and others danced. Some door-
keepers and others commanders. All joined the order and the shouts (2 Sam.
vi. 15). “As every man hath received the gift, even so minister the same one
to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.” III. Success
achieved in God’s work. If sincerely consecrated and unitedly engaged,
we shall succeed in God’s service. When all was done reverently and in order,
“ God helped the Levites that bare the ark.” They might tremble in remem-
prance of former judgments; but they did not stwmble. The sacrifices were
acceptable to God, and the favour of God was not withheld. Songs of praise
were given, and the ark “ came to the city of David.”


Tue Procession with THE ARK.—Verses 3-28.


After due preparation, the procession arranged, and we have all particulars.
1. The bearers of the ark. “None ought to carry the ark of God but
the Levites.” David had carefully ascertained legal requirements, and anxious
they should be strictly carried out. 1. kightly chosen. 2. Properly arranged.
Three families of Wevites (vers. 4-7). Kohathites not priests (vers. 8-10);
Zadok and Abiathar, the princes of two priestly lines of house of Aaron.


II. The regulations for conveying the ark. These bari


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [ cHAP. XV.


EL


1. Sacrificial rites. (a) At beginning for. help. (6) At the end in gratitude.
These forgotten in first attempt, hence the breach, 2. Musical accompaniments.
Leaders in song and subordinate or second choir. Psalteries, cymbals, end lutes,
accompanied procession. 3. Rapturous joy. Joy unbounded, expressed in
corresponding gestures and rhythmical movements. (a) The king danced. A
religious ceremony in which highest and holiest feeling found expression.
(b) The people shouted and sang. The festival was popular, right, joyous. The
king took the lead, and God made the whole people glad. Every one did “ soar
above the heights of earth.”


% Joy is the sweet voice, joy the luminous cloud.


We in ourselves rejoice !

And then flows all that charms our ear or sight,
All melodies the echoes of that voice,

All colours a suffusion from that light” [Coleridge].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. A place for the ark, 1. A
lovely thought. 2. A wise consultation
to carry it out. 3, An example worthy
of imitation.

Ver. 2. None ought. 1. Wise men
may be guilty of oversight and wrong.
The king and priests knew the law,
and should have carried it out. 2. God’s
methods of bringing them to acknow-
ledge and confess wrong, often severe,
memorable, and beneficial in results.
“When pious men, who have been
betrayed into unwarrantable conduct,
have had time for self-examination,
searching the Scriptures, and prayer,
they will discover and confess their
mistakes, and be reduced to a better
temper; they will justify God in his
corrections; they will be convinced
vhat safety and comfort consist, not in
ubsenting themselves from his ordi-
uances, or in declining dangerous
services, but in attending to their
duty in a proper spirit and manner;
they will profit by their own errors”
[Scott].


None ought to carry, de. Gentle
reproof. 1. Do we not deserve it? Have
we not erred from God in doctrine and
conduct? 2. Can we receive it with-
out offence from prince or peasant }
3. When thus reproved, are we ready
to amend? “To reprehend well,”
says Feltham, “is the most necessary
and the hardest part of friendship.
Who is there that does not merit a
check? And yet how few will endure
one!” ‘Its nail,” says an old author,
“must be well oiled with kindness
before it can be effectually driven
home.” “Let the righteous smite me,
and it shall be a kindness; let him
reprove me, and it shall be an excel-
lent oil; it shall not break my head.”

Vers. 2-24. 1. The call to service—
personal, pressing, and worthy. 2. The
response to the call—ready, universal,
and immediate. 3. The directions to
carry it out—clear, right, and safe.
““Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as
to the Lord, and not unto men.”


HOMILETICS.
Persona Hotness EssENTIAL TO SACRED SERVICE.—=Verse 18,


Sanctify yourselves, a needful duty for any work for God. Present comfort
_and eternal happiness depend upon this. I. Personal holiness required
in those who serve, Holiness means setting apart, fitting for special use,
God’s servants separated from a profane world and devoted to God. 1. Jn heart.
This ee be purified, and filled with holy thoughts and aspirations. Likeness


CHAP. xv.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
a a)


to God in mind and disposition. Root and eentre of spiritual being rectified.
“ Sanctify the Lord God tn your hearts.” 2. In life. Holiness of heart repro-
duced, translated into life, retain. ‘Be ye holy in all manner of conversation”
(deportment, course of life) (1 Pet. i. 15). II. Personal holiness the
pattern according to which we must serve. “As he who hath
called you is holy, so be ye holy;” “ Be ye holy as I am holy.” Jdea of per-
fection lost through sin. Christ brought God’s holiness from the region of
abstraction within sight and easy reach. Infidels even admire his character,
but to believers he is a model of imitation, the standard, the law of life and
service. There is innate likeness by regeneration and the indwelling Spirit;
outward likeness by conformity, study, and obedience. He did the will of God,
went about doing good, and sets an example. “Be ye therefore followers”
(imitators) “of God, as dear children” (Eph. v. 1). III. Personal
holiness is the only condition on which we can serve. Not
only necessary for personal salvation, but for personal usefulness. 1. By this we
influence others. Doctrines not always understood. Holiness seen, felt, and
admired. Holy living wins to Christ and helps his cause. 2. By this we answer
the end of our being. Of no use whatever without holiness; worse than a rose
without blossom, or a tree without fruit. Use the design in view. “ He hath
not called you to uncleanness, but unto holiness.”


Bacrep Joy: ras Source axp MANIFESTATIONS.


The conveyance of the ark an occasion of general rejoicing (cf. Pss. ci.; xv.;
Ixviil.; xxiv.; cxxxii., which are supposed to commemorate the event). I. The
source of sacred joy. Sacred—that is, true joy, not a common feeling,
must have some cause or spring. By nature, too full of ingratitude and morbid
feeling. 1. Gods presence with ws. In our hearts, renewing and cleansing
them. In our homes, sanctifying bereavements and guiding domestic affairs,
In duties, public and private. With God, even in trouble and obscurity, our
life may be “a sunshine in a shady place.” “All my springs are in thee.”
2. God’s blessing upon our efforts. Effort essential to health and joy. God’s
blessing upon work rightly done gladdens the heart and turns grief into gladness.
“God hath made them rejoice with great joy.” II. The manifestations
of sacred joy. Joy not self-concealing. Here seen in forms fit and natural.
From beginning to end, all “with joy” (vers. 16 and 25). 1. In sacred psalmody
“The singers with instruments of music, é&c.” (ver. 16). Reminding of Milton’s
“sevenfold chorus of hallelujahs and harping symphonies.” 2. Jn sacrificial
rites. Without these, ceremony incomplete. In the success of any enterprise,
the completion of any work, offer thanksgivings, “sacrifices of joy.” Duty
performed with the presence and by direction of God will create enthusiasm in
numbers, and bring many a festal day!

“ A solemn yet a joyfal thing is life,
Which, being full of duties, is for this
Of gladness full, and full of lofty hopes.”


Davip BEFORE THE ARK.—Verses 25-29.


“Tt was the greatest day in David’s life Its significance in his career is
marked by his own pre-eminent position—conqueror, poet, musician, priest in
one ‘The sacrifices were offered by him; the benedictions, both on his people
and on his household, were pronounced by him. He was the presiding spirit of the
whole scene ” eed I. David’s attire. ‘“Clothed with a robe of fine
linen ” (ver. 27). 1. Priestly attire White ephod worn only by priests. aes


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. | C@lar. fv.








the head of “a kingdom of priests” (Ex. xix. 6), and on this occasion performed


the functions of a priest. 2. A cedar dress, Although king, David laid
aside royal robes and put on the dress of a servant, and owned himself as
mere minister of God. He sets forth his humility in the presence of whole
people. In position and spirit expresses dependence upon God, and becomes the
faithful leader and overseer. II, David’s conduct. His joy increased as
procession went on, expressed according to the manner of the times—singing,
shouting, and dancing before the Lord, as music inspired and directed, till the
ark was fixed in position. 1. Misinterpreted by Michal. She had no share in
people’s joy. Her heart not attuned to high devotion. The ceremony a foolish
masquerade to her. A cold, unspiritual nature cannot understand enthusiasm,
any more than an Icelander can understand tropical heat. 2. Defended by
himself (of. 2 Sam. vi. 21-23). In his procedure he had an eye to God’s glory,
from whom he received his kingdom, and before whom he ought to be judged.
He did not lower himself in his own opinion—honoured with being on a level
with the maids whom she despised. Honour with God more highly esteemed
than honour with men (John xii. 43). Davida noble example of firmness and


enthusiasm for God.
“ He put so much of heart into his act
That his example had a magnet’s foroe.”


MiocHar’s Contempt.— Verse 29.


“ One only incident tarnished its brightness. Michal, his wife, in the proud—
we may almost say conservative spirit of the older dynasty, not without a thought
of her father’s fallen house (2 Sam. vi. 21), poured forth her contemptuous
reproach on the king who had descended to the dances and songs of the Levitical
procession. He, in reply, vowed an eternal separation, marking the intense
solemnity which he attached to the festival ” pred 1, Springing from pride.
She blamed him for exchanging royal robes for sacerdotal dress. He forgot his
dignity, mixed with the common people, and put himself on a level with them.
“Worldly hearts see nothing in actions of zeal but folly and madness” [Bishop
Hall}. She could admire his valour, not his piety—the soldier, not the saint.
2. Pumished with barrenness. ‘ Michal had no child until the day of her death”
(of. 2 Sam. vi. 20-23). This a dishonour, the deepest humiliation for an orienta]
woman. She unjustly reproached David, and God put her to perpetual reproach.
me we sow, we reap. “(God hath still a barren womb for mocking Michal,” says

PP-


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 25-28. Sacred joy. Its source,
manifestations, and results. ‘All God’s
services must be performed with joy,
or else they lose their lustre” [rapp).

Ver. 29. Michal a type of many
who despise devotion, enthusiasm, and
liberality in the cause of God. “In
the present day there is no lack of
people like Michal. In the pure fire
of the Spirit from on high these per-
sons also see only a morbid fanaticism;
in the most animated and vigorous ex-
pression of hallowed exultation of soul,
8 hypocritical display. The life from
and ae remains a mystery te every


one until, through the Spirit of God Him-
self, it is unsealed to his experience”
[Krummacher]. Learn—1. To be mis-
understood, ridiculed, and opposed in
God’s service. 2. That a man’s foes
may be those of his own household. 3.
To exercise true charity. Michal should
have commended David; been less
bitter and ironical in spirit. David
calmly defended himself, and explained
to Michal that he had regard to the
glory of God in all his procedure,
“ Charity is not easily provoked, think-
eth no evil.”


CHAP. XvI.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
eee Pare teas I
ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XV. "


Vers. $-24. Order in procession. | haughty temper of her birth. She for
“The heavens themselves, the planets and 80 that there was a greater king than


this centre, Saul or David, before whom the princes
Observe degree, priority, and place, of the earth are as vanity. It is the
a eho course, proportion, se@80B, tree which stands high and alone that
Office, custom, in all line of order” is in danger of being struck by light-
}. ning. Her soul, in its pride, was


Ver. 29. The pride of Michal. She Scorched by the fire of divine judgment
was a king’s daughter, with all the (4. 5. Magazine}





CHAPTER XVL


Aion Norzs.) In 2 Sam. vi, 17-23, only three verses and a clause parallel with
this chapter.

Vers. 1-6._-The ark lodged in tent. After this event Levites entered upon their duties
before the ark, instructed by David. Blessed (ver. 2) as head or father of the people.
Dealt with remains of extensive thankofferings as in ancient royal hospitality. Appointed
(ver. 4) Asaph and associates first company with cymbals; Zechariah and colleagues,
with whom were conjoined Jeiel and seven others, in second company with lutes
and harps.

Vers. 7-37.—A psalm of thanksgiving. First, the order of worship then appointed for
first time. This special hymn prepared for the occasion. ‘‘The language is remarkably
archaic, and there can be no reasonable doubt that it is in the main an extract from a
record of the time of David” [Speak, Sie

Vers. 8-10.— Thanksgiving (cf. Ps. cv. 1- 3 Wondrous miracles. His strength. the
ark called such (Ps. lxxviii. 61; cxxxii. 8) because strength shown by it at Jordan,
Jericho, &c.

Vers. 11-18.—Call to seek the Lord. Seed of Israel (of Abraham in Pa. cv. 6).

Vers. 14-19.—Covenant with Abraham. Mindful, admonition. Few, literally men ef
number (Gen. xxxiv. 30).

Vers. 20-22.—Preservation when wandering. Reproved (Gen. xii. 17; xx. 8), Anointed as
kings, and priests, and prophets (Ex. xix. 6).

Vers. 23-33.—God salvation of all nations (ef. Ps. xovi.). Gladness (beauty); place
(sanctuary); kindreds (ver. 28), generations and families. Give (ascribe); offering (ver. 29)
in public worship. Stable (ver. 30), idea moral, not physical (Ps. xcvi.10). Sea (Medi-
terranean); fulness, striking poetic figure. Trees, allusion to Kirjath-jearim, ‘the city of
woods,’’ where the ark had rested.

Vers. 34-36.—This (ver. 24) verse is found at the commencement of Ps. ovi.; cvii.;
exviii. ; and cxxxvi. It was the ordinary Jewish doxology, and may be regarded as
closing the first or thanksgiving portion of the service, which is then followed by a short
prayer (ver. 35), after which comes a second doxology [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 35, Say (not
found in Ps. evi. 47), a liturgical direction. Deliver, longing for freedom, Amen (ver.
86), a description of the manner in which the ceremony terminated,

Vers. 87-43.—Sequel, a description of appointment of musicians and their respective
duties. Brethren (cf. ch. xxvi.). Porters (door-keepers). Gibeon. Hence two places where
worship was performed in time of David. Continually (Bx, xxix. 88; Num. xxviii. 8-6).


Bless (¢f. 2 Sam. vi. 19, 20).
HOMILETICS.
Tur ImavcupaL Szrvics.—Vorees 1-G.
Stress here laid upon the fact that Asaph entered for the first time upon the


duties assigned him, and that the order of worship appointed by David now com-
67


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (omar. xvi


My





menced. I. Service to commemorate animportant event. “The
ark of God set in the midst of the tent.” No longer in obscurity, nor in a
private house, but fixed in the city, venerated as the centre and symbol of God’s
presence. In the accomplishment of any work, at the beginning of every new
period in life, “thank and praise the Lord.” II, Service conjoined with
sacred rites. Rites significant and expressive, by which king and people
ackfiowledged God’s authority and sought his favour. 1. Appropriate sacrifices.
“Offering the burnt offerings,” by which victims were wholly presented and con-
sumed. “They offered peace-offerings” in acknowledgment of God’s favour. The
former speaks of atonement (Lev. i. 3-9), the latter of reconciliation (Lev. iii. 1-5).
One indicates complete self-surrender, the other thanksgiving to God. Grateful
recognition of divine mercies and entire consecration to God’s service reasonable,
and required at all times. 2. Harnest prayer. David publicly blessed the people
and besought continued help. Needful to petition for future, as well as to be
thankful for past, mercies. 3. Musical arrangement (vers.4—7). Levitical service
of thanksgiving dates from this time. Music cultivated in the schools of the pro-
phets and in the palace of the king now consecrated to the highest service, and
constituted part of the worship of Jehovah. Music should not minister to
debauchery and excess, but to gladness and praise. III. Service connected
with hospitality. Devotion to God will lead us to think of man. When
God blesses us we feel that we should distribute to others. A glad heart will
open a wide hand. David’s generosity was ona large scale. 1. Switable in
cariety. ‘“ Bread,” “ flesh,” and “wine.” Flowers cannot grow in one element.
Man requires variety ; in body, animal and vegetable food, bread and water; in
mind, something more than dogmas. In the house of God a table spread with
boundless variety. 2. Universal in application. Women, a recognised place in
the assembly, or not forgotten in their homes (children, says Josephus). Not
merely to great men, but “he dealt among all the people, even among the whole
multitude of Israel” (2 Sam. vi. 19). In that day the people fared well. “That
they should make them days of feasting and joy, and of sending portions one to
another, and gifts to the poor” (Ezra ix. 22).


A Psaaum or THanxscivinc.—Verses 7-23,


This a composite , represents a form of service rather than a
The whole of it, with slight variations, found in Pss, cv. 1-15; xevi.; and cvi. 47,48.
It celebrates redemption as unfolded in history of Israel, proclaimed to the
world, and triumphant in judgment. This part sets forth—I. An exhorta-
tion to the noblest work. The work of praising God—a work in
which our faculties find their vigorous, harmonious, and happy development—
a work for which all rational and created beings are made. In three ways.
chiefly, is this duty recommended. 1. In giving thanks to God (ver.8). Author
of all benefits, therefore to him all gratitude and praise, (a) By singing
psalms (ver. 9). Best thoughts in sweet sounds, “Sing unto him,” not te
please others or gratify self. (6) By social conversation. “Talk ye”—men love
to speak and to hear of “wondrous works.” Christians have plenty to talk
about—themes interesting and inexhaustible. Wonders of grace, mercy, and
providence. (c) By glorying in his name (ver. 10). A name above every name,
full of wonder and reverence, untainted with lust and blood. A name in which
we may boast without shame, and rejoice without fear. 2. In seeking God
Beek “his face” and “his strength,” his favour and help. (a) Seek earnestly. The
word repeated to stir us up—*seek, seek, seek.” (6) Seek joyfully. Not in
dulness and despair—in gladness of heart and cheerful hope. (c) Seek con-
tinually (ver. 11). Not by assembling occasionally in tabernacle or temple, not


CHAP. KVi.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





by observance of external rites, but in constant fellowship, “for evermore.”
3. In commemorating God's works. “ Remember his marvellous works” (ver. 12).
They are striking and impressive. Remember their nature, number, and
design. What more could God have done for us? Yet how forgetful and
ungrateful! II. Motives to influence us in this noblest work.
The argument founded upon @od’s character and God’s care for them from
beginning of history to removal of ark. 1. G'od’s great love. “The Lord God
of Israel,” “the Lord our God.” A relation filial and unique. But Israel's
election united to universality of Jehovah’s reign, therefore he is the God, not
of one, but of all nations—may be our God and Father. 2. God's great mant-
festations of love. In heaven above and earth beneath, among angels and men.
Making and confirming his covenant, receiving offerings and worship in his
sanctuary. “Glory and honour in his presence, strength and gladness in his
place” (ver. 27). 3. God’s great dominion. Maker of heaven and earth, Uni-
versal Sovereign; ‘above all gods,” for “the gods of the people are idols,”
impotent and worthless—mere nonentities, for an idol is nothing; supreme
in grandeur and government. 4. God’s great claims. For creation, covenant
mercies and protecting care. God has right to homage and praise. They are
due to him. As children, we are bound to love him; as servants, to consult his
will, declare his goodness, and advance his kingdom. 5. God's vindication of
these claims. His rights can never be given to another. Men, however
intelligent ; gods, adorned with gold or silver, must never receive homage due
co him. “He cometh to judge the earth.” ‘He shall judge the people
righteously ;” “ judge the world with righteousness and with truth.”


Tos SEEKER EncovraceD.—Verse 10.


Yet many believe, or pretend to believe, that religion is a joyless thing!
the heart has very little, if any, share in other eajoyments, which only gratify
sppetites, strike senses, and charm iimagination. But where is the heart?
Even in laughter the /eart is sorrowful ; the end of that mirth is heaviness. In
religian the heart finds relief, repose, satisfaction, and joy. “Let the heart of
them that rejoice seek the Lord.” There are three reasons for this. Forst,
because it is an evidence of grace. They may conclude against themselves,
refuse to be comforted; but no man can seek to know, enjoy, and serve God
from mere nature. Actions may not indicate the state of mind, but desires
spring from it. We may be forced to do, but cannot be compelled to prefer and
choose. Secondly, because their success is sure. This the case in no other
pursuit. In fields of worldly labour we spend our strength for nought. A rival
may bear off a prize which we have long been chasing, at the very moment we
are seizing it. The cup of enjoyment, filled with eager hope, is often dashed to
the ground from the very lip that touches it. But their heart shall live that
seek God. “He that goeth forth weeping, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless
return again,” &. “ Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness,
for they shall be filled.” “Is there unfaithfulness in God? Did he ever say to
the seed of Jacob, Seek ye in vain$” Thirdly, because, when they have found,
their aim and wish in seeking are fully answered. All they desire is treasured
up in him, and they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. The
wise man tells us of success in other cases, “All is vanity and vexation of
spirit”’—vexation if we miss, and vanity if we gain. To one of these alternatives
we are inevitably subjected. We must be disappointed in acquiring them, and
this often the case; or in possessing them, and this always the case, Hiverything
earthly falls short of hope, but impossible to form adequate expectation of the
riches of glory of the inheritance in the saints. What to have God himself for
. 69


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


[cHar. xvZ





our possession and exceeding joy |


To be blessed with all spiritual blessings in


Christ! To realise happiness which solitude increases, trouble improves, and


death perfects !


“ Hye hath not seen,” &.


While thus the heart of them that


seek rejoices, the heart of others should be induced to seek him. He invites
you to seek, therefore “Seek ye the Lord while he may be found” [Jay].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 7-11. Holy duties, ‘Give
thanks—call upon—make known—sing
—talk—glory ye.”

Ver. 11. To seek his face is to desire
his presence, smile, and favour con-
sciously enjoyed. First we seek him,
then his strength, and then his face ;
from the personal reverence we pass on
to the imparted power, and then to the
conscious favour, This seeking must
never cease, the more we know the


fulness. “He hath remembered his
covenant” (Ps. cv. 8). 2. Our mind-
fulness of this faithfulness. ‘“ Remem-
ber” (ver. 12), “Be mindful” (ver. 15):
“If the Lord keeps his promise in
memory, surely we ought not to forget
the wonderful manner in which he per-
forms it. To us it should be matter
of deepest joy, that never in any in-
stance has the Lord been unmindful of
his covenant engagements, nor will he


be so, world without end. O that we
were as mindful of them as he is!”
[Spurgeon |.

Vers. 12-15. 1. The operations of
divine providence. Acts wonderful, bene-
ficent, and memorable, compreheuding
the mightiest and most insignificant
creatures. 2. The notice which should
be taken of these operations. Amid


more we seek to know. Finding him,
we must “our minds inflame to seek
him moreand more.” He seeks spiritual
worshippers, and spiritual worshippers
seek him; they are therefore sure to
meet face to face ere Jong [Spurgeon].
Threefold seeking. 1. The Lord for
mercy. 2. His strength for service.
3. His face for happiness [A. G.


Brown). displays of power and beauty we should
Vers. 12-15. Subjects of Remem- not be deaf nor blind, but attentive,
brance. Marvellous works God has appreciative, and apt to learn. We


done, and wonderful judgments (words) should remember, relate, &c.


God has uttered. Or—1l. God’s faith-


HOMILETICS.
Tae NationaL Covenant.—Verses 15-22.


Its nature, blessings, and contracting parties all specially set forth. Learn—
I. That God’s method of intercourse with men has ever been
in the form of a covenant. A covenant is generally defined as an
agreement between two parties, on certain terms—a conditionary and a pro-
missory ; one to be performed and the other to be fulfilled. This method of
divine procedure in Adam and Christ. God requires from us faith and
obedience, then he will give life and salvation. In old time ever reminded of
this by symbol and sacrifice. Hence “the books of the covenant,” “the ark of
the covenant,” ‘‘the blood of the covenant,” and “the tables of the covenant.”
“The old covenant” and “the new covenant.” We must acknowledge God.
“There is no religion without this idea of covenant with a personal God, and
therefore all such views as those of Comte, Mill, and Spencer are, for all
moral and religious purposes, wholly atheistical” (Tayler Lewis]. II. That
this covenant method of intercourse with men displays the
sovereign will and free grace of God. Man not disposed, not able

7 "


OBsP. XVI, | HOMILETIC COMMENTAKY: CHRONICLES.





7
to make an agreement with his Maker. God might have left man in his guilty
condition, without promise, hope, or mercy. But God graciously condescended
to pledge his word and bestow his grace in Christ. Adam failed, in Christ
everlasting life secured. In scripture everything is traced to the sovereign
grace and mere good pleasure of God. Not to merit, foreseen belief, and
holiness, but “‘according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise and
lory of his grace” (Eph. i. 5). III. That this covenant method of
ntercourse puts men under deep obligation to God. Rightly
viewed, it affords no ground of complaint or despair, but for submission and
hope. 1. They are chosen to great favours. “His chosen ones.” Elected,
exalted in mind, character, and destiny. 2. They should render thanks for these
favours. Never be slow to acknowledge debt and praise God for his mercy.
He ceases not to be good, cease not to be grateful. IV. The obligations
of men to God for his covenant mercies can never cease.
As long as we exist we depend upon God and should praise God. He never
ignores his claims, nor alters his covenant. 1. Jt ts of divine authority.
Higher, more sacred, more certain than the law of man. 2. Jt is confirmed
from time to time. Made with Abraham, confirmed to Jacob, established with
Noah (literally, made to stand, Gen. vi. 18), not because impaired, changed, or
destroyed in itself. But it had been broken and forgotten—like something
which had fallen down, it needed repetition and prominence. Hence 3. Jt is
“an everlasting covenant” (ver. 17). To last as long as moral government
through the ages of the world. “Made with man as an immortal being, «nd
in itself an evidence of his designed immortality.” 4 covenant of eternity
(Is. xxiv. 5).


Tue Inrant Nation.— Verses 6-22.


If interesting to trace some mighty river from its source to its entrance into
the sea, some magnificent building from foundation to its topstone, what to
trace the beginning and watch the progress of God’s people! Early incidents and
history briefly given. I, The humble origin of the nation. Numbers
noisy, attract, and commend. Israel “few, even a few” (very few, Ps. cv. 12),
lit. men of number, who could be counted at first ; but “the fewest of all people”
gradually increased and made numerous as the sands and the stars. Small
churches, poverty of members, no barriers to God. II. The wonderful pre-
servation of the nation. Few, unsettled and helpless Israel ever exposed
and kept. 1. In their journeys. Migrating from nation to nation, from one
kingdom to another people. They were not lost, nor prevented from ending
their journeys. “The Lord guided them on every side.” 2. Amidst their enemies.
In Egypt, Philistia, and Canaan, the heirs of promise secure. This not by for-
bearance of neighbours, for many sought to injure and destroy, to cut off root
and branch, but “ He suffered no man to do them wrong, &c.” III. The rich
inheritance of the nation. “The lot of your inheritance” (ver. 18). 1.
Not gained by their own skill. “ For they got not the land in possession by their
own swonl, neither did their own arm save them, &c.” (Ps. xliv. 3). 2. Bestowed
by divine appointment. “The lot of your inheritance.” God planted and enriched
them in gratuitous and sovereign favour. “He cast out the heathen also before
them, and divided them an inheritance by line, and made the tribes of Israel
to dwell in their tents” (Ps. lxxviii. 55). IV. The high destiny of the
nation. Blessed and exalted above all others. 1. Im their special relution to
God. “Children and chosen ones ;” bound to imitate their father in fervent
prayer, holy faith, and obedience. If God seta his choice upon us, let us be
more devout and zealous than others. “A people near unto him.” 2. Jn their
elevation to bless others. Not put into Canaan to be secluded and shut up from

wD.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. {cHaP. XV.


ep


intercourse with other nations, but to bless them. Israel a missionary people,
gave a Bible and a Saviour to the world. “To make thee high above all nations
which he hath made, in praise, in name, and in honour.”


Evizporna Restrainep.—Verses 19-23.


YT resolve the words into three parts. 1. Here is the nearness and dearness
of the saints unto God. They are dearer to him than kings and states, simply
considered ; that is, otherwise than as they in their persons are also saints; for
you see for their sakes he reproved kings, and so showeth that he preferreth
them to kings. 2. Here is the great danger to kings and states to deal with his
saints otherwise than well, It appeareth many ways; for he doth not only in
words give a charge not to touch them, but he carries it in a high way (for so
God will do when he pleads their cause). Touch them not; as if he had said,
Let me see if you dare so much as touch them ; and it is with an intimation of
the highest threatening if they should; upon your peril if you do so; for that
is the scope of such a speech. In deeds he made this good; not that he did
altogether prevent all wrong and injuries, for they received many as they went
through those lands; but at no time did he let it go unpunished. He plagued
Pharaoh for Abraham’s wife's sake (Gen. xii.), and also Abimelech (Gen. xx. 3).
3. Here is the care and protection which God had over them, set and amplified—
(1) By the number and condition of the persons whom he defended; though ‘“‘few
men in number,” that is, soon reckoned, for their power and strength, a few, or
very small, as Septuagint. (2) By what he did forthem. He sufferedno man,
however great, to do them wrong, however small, not without recompense and
satisfaction Thoughthe people had an ill eye at them (Gen. xxvi. 11}, God
caused Abimelech to make a law on purpose, and to charge all his people in
Tsaac’s behalf, and spake in the very words of the text, “He that toucheth this
man or his wife shall be put to death” [Thomas Goodwin).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 19-22. 1. The condition of prophets to declare and set forth his
Teracl. Few, very few, strangers and will. 3. The protection which they
migrating. Menof number, accounted enjoyed. To them intrusted the word
unworthy, not distinguished by exter- of life, preserved to the world. To
nal dignity and power, as Rome marks theta a safe passport to accomplish
her communicants, Humblest partsof God’s design among men.
communities, but honoured of God. Vers. 20-22. 1. God’s people may
2. The estimation in which they are held. often be removed. 2. They can never
God’s anointed kings and prisets, or- be injured. 3. God’s property in them
dained to reign with Christ. God’s will neer be renounced [Spurgeon].


HOMILETICS.
Tue GREATNESS OF JEHOVAH. Verses 323-33,


These verses, like Psalm xevi., celebrate Jehovah’s greatness. Great in essence
and supremecy; great in mercy and dominion. All who hear and know this
greatness are to tell it to others, that heaven and earth may rejoice in his reign.
I. Jehovah’s transcendent greatness. 1. He ts the only true God.
“The gods of the people are idois,” images in wood or stone, vanities and
peor 2. He te the Creator of the world. “The Lerd made the heavens.”


CHAP. Xv. } HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


a  ,


His Godhead, proved by his works, chief of which is the architecture of heaven,
whose lamps shine, and whose rain falls upon all mankind. 38. He is glorious in
operations. His works are “marvellous.” No petty deity presiding over one
nation, or one department of nature. Great in power and act, infinitely to be
adored. Earthly potentates count themselves famous and strong. “God alone
is great,” Massillon declared, and imperial majesties bowed their heads. IT.
Jehovah must be worshipped on account of his greatness.
** Worship the Lord.” ‘Tribes and families called to honour him in his courts,
“All worship be to God only” is a fit motto of a city company. 1. By
submitting to his authority. No worship without submission. Recognise his
claims and authority. Give him “the glory and strength” of intellect, heart,
and life. 2. By presenting our gifts. Sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving
springing from humble submission; gifts of money and effort prompted by
love. ‘To him who gives all, we should gladly “ bring an offering and come into
his courts.” ‘None of you shall appear before me empty.” 3. By a true spirit.
God looks not at architecture and apparel. Worship must not be sinful and
superficial; but reverent and sincere. (a) 2m the beauty of holiness. “ Purity
is the white linen of the Lord’s choristers,” says Spurgeon, “righteousness is the
comely garment of his priests, holiness is the royal apparel of his servitors.”
(6) In profowndest awe. ‘‘ Fear (tremble) before him, all the earth” (Ps. xcvi. 9).
Jehovah no earthly sovereign, but clothed in omnipotent grandeur. Dread of
idols, mere superstition. Holy fear the spirit of true religion. III. Heathen
nations shall know and recognise Jehovah’s greatness.
“ Declare his glory among the heathen” (ver. 24). The name of God dis-
honoured by heathen idolatry, vices, and cruelties. But they shall hear of his
wonders of grace and mercy. The duty, the privilege of the church to tell
them. A truly loyal and living church will resolve to publish salvation to the
ends of the earthh IV. The world shall rejoice in the reign of
the great Jehovah. “Say among the nations, The Lord reigneth*
(ver. 31). 1. Joy im heaven. “Let the heavens be glad.” 2. Joy tw earth.
“ Let the earth rejoice.” 3. Joy in which all creatures shall participate. The
gea, no more troubled over shipwrecked mariners, and rehearsing grief of widows
and orphans, shall adopt a cheerful note.” The fields shall rejoice in culture,
abundant harvests, and freedom from rapine. The trees of the wood, no longer
sheltering horrid cruelty, shall “sing out at the presence” of God in the retire-
ment and devotion of men. “ These verses are full of comprehensive beauty and
power. ‘They present the gathering together of everything under the confessed
dominion of the reigning Christ. Things in heaven, as well as things on
earth, rejoice together in the acknowledged blessing of the Lord of peace.
The Psalm is throughout a very sweet strain of millennial prophecy” [Arthur
Pridham].
# The truth that David learned to sing,
"Its deep fulfilment here attains,
‘Tell all the earth the Lord is King!’
Lo, from the cross & King he reigns!” [Mrs, Charles},


Toe Beavtirvunt Puiace.—Verses 27-29.


Place, abode of the ark, the tabernacle and temple, apply to the sanctuary ;
public worship in God’s house. I. Beautified by God’s presence.
God pleased to locate his presence of old. “ Let them make mea sanctuary that
I may dwell among them.” Here “ glory and honour” are constant attendants.
In God combined, not in outward show and parade, all that is mighty and lovely,
powerful and resplendent. Displays of mercy and love “ beautify the place of
his sanctuary and make the place of his feet glorioua” IT. "rh A ieh by


BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (CHAP. Xvi.





attractive services. 1. Cheerful song. “Sing unto the Lord.” No dismal
rites celebrated ; no bacchanalian shouts heard; mourning turned into joy.
Singing a fitting expression of love, a reverent method of worship. 2. Free-
will offerings. No part given reluctantly, but gladly. Ofierings responsive
signs and inspiriting examples to fellow-worshippers. 3. Spiritwal fervour
In Ps. xcvi. we have a triple call, “ sing... sing... sing.” No discordant note,
no voice silent. Jew and Gentile, heaven and earth should join. ‘The sacred fire
of praise should burn and bless in perpetual fame. III. Beautified by
Joval attendants. The house of God the centre of joys and fellowships.
1. Leegular in attendance. They “come before him,” habitually, punctually, and
reverently ; do not forget to assemble themselves together as the manner of
some, but resolve ‘we will not forsake the house of our God.” 2. Mindful of
tts interests. They bring their offerings, respond to its claims, contribute to its
support, and encourage its enterprises. 3. Obedient to its rules. Law every-
where, and should be decency and order in God’ house. “In beauty of holiness,”
a certain prescribed attire like splendid robes of ancient priests ; or in right form
and spirit, “in holy reverence” [Boothroyd]. Holiness in thought and heart
required. Repeated and solemn warnings on this point. “1 wil be sanctified
in them that come nigh me.”


Rexicious WorsHir —Verses 28, 29.


I. It is due to God. ‘The glory due unto his name.” 1. Jt és right.
However much we adore we cannot give more than he deserves. All honour,
natural and reasonable, due to him as Creator, Preserver, Benefactor, and
Redeemer. 2. Jt és acceptable. Though not enriching, yet well pleasing to him.
“Whosoever offereth praise glorifieth me.” II. It befits our moral
nature. Man made to worship, the only creature capable of it. 1. Zé meets
our aspirations. We long for God, restless and dissatisfied without him, ever
display anxiety to find him. “Qh that I knew where I might find him, that I
might come even to his seat.” 2. Jt satisfies our wants, Nothing but a personal
God will do this. We feel for a living God. No sympathy with force, nor
adoration of mere law. A senseless power satisfies no social or religious instincts,
draws out no song or psalm. “ My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God.”
3. Lt dignifies our character, “In veauty of holiness.” It detaches from earth
and sin, gives beauty to contemplate, strength to imitate, and fear to humble and
guide. Fellowship with God most holy and most exalting. “It is good for me
to draw near to God.”


A Geraxp Exsosprcr.—Verses 30-33.


Here find a splendid prospect fur the heathen, “a d missionary h u
for the Christian Church! I. Jehovah Felpuoeeunnenicloe The
Lord veigneth.” No abstract principle, no blind force nor law rules the world.
Infinite and unchangeable, absolute and independent, almighty and supreme—
the fountain of all being, filling heaven and earth with splendour. IL. The
reign of Jehovah a cause of joy to the world. “The Lord
reigneth ; let the earth rejoice ; let the multitudes of isles be glad.” 1. Jt #¢a
reign of righteousness, Others tyrannical and oppressive have produced
injustice, bloodshed, and terror. Truth and justice conspicuous everywhere in
“4s dominions, shines bright as stars in heaven. ‘The heavens declare (put
before us, in our sight) his righteousness” (Ps. xcvii. 6). 2. A reign of moral
cit “The world,” shaken with revolutions, impaired with sin, “shall be

4


waar. Xvt.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


so eee EEE eee EE — eee eee


stable,” settled in government and free from invasions, “that it be not moved."
Society is safe, social and political order secure where Christ is supreme. 3. A
reign of purity. Idolatry shall cease, peace prevail, the earth purified; blessed
with the presence and delivered by the grace of Messiah. On this account


earth may rejoice and heaven be glad. “ Alleluia: for the Lord God
omnipotent reigneth!”


Tae CLostna Prayer aND Doxo.ocy.—Verses 35, 36.


God’s mercy had commenced deliverance, encouragement is given to pray for
its completion. The prayer is based upon the promise, Deut. xxx. 3, and is
a psalm of thanksgiving for its prospective accomplishment.

I. The Prayer. 1. Jntts spirit. Earnest, humble, and sincere. 2. In
its purpose. (a) For deliverance. ‘Save us and deliver us.” (6) For unity.
“Gather us together.” (c) For gratitude. “To give thanks to thy holy name.”
No longer a scattered people, but united in God’s courts to triumph in praise.
God’s people a prayerful people, saved, united, and grateful to God for his
goodness. Hence—II. The Doxology. 1. Praise to God as their God.
“The Lord God of Israel.” 2. Praise universal. “ Let all the people say,
Amen.” 3. Praise continual. “ For ever and ever.” God blessed from eternity,
will be through eternity, let him be praised without intermission, “ from ever-
lasting to everlasting.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 23-33, A song of praise.
1. Setting forth God’s excellencies.
Creator, Ruler, and majestic. Claiming
homage and service as due to his great
name. 2. Asserting God’s supremacy
in the world. ‘Above all gods,”
overruling physical nature and social
communities for the welfare of men.
3. Predicting God’s universal kingdom.
Triumphant over evil and bringing
universal joy.

Vers, 23, 24. Notice—I, The end
desired. To see the earth singing
unto the Lord and blessing his name.
II. The means suggested. The show-
ing forth his salvation from day to
day; declaring his glory, dc. ILI. The
eertainty of its accomplishment. The
Lord hath said it. “O sing, &c.”
When he commands, earth must obey
[Treasury of David]. I. Declare among
the heathen the glory of God's per-
fections, that they may acknowledge
him as the true God. II. Declare the
glory of his salvation, that they may
accept him as their only Redeemer.
III. Declare the glory of his providence,
shat they may confide in him as their


faithful guardian. IV. Declare the
glory of his word, that they may
prize it as their chief treasure. V. De-
clare the glory of his service, that they
may choose it as their chief occupa-
tion. VI. Declare the glory of his
residence, that they may seek it as
their best home | William Jackson}.
Vers. 28, 29. The claims of God to
the worship and homage of his creatures.
What I have to demonstrate is—
I. That God is entitled to the homage
of his creatures, and claims it as proper
and right. II. That these claims are
made upon ws, his intelligent creatures.
It will therefore be necessary to show
that we are capable of knowing God
to all the extent necessary to excite in
our minds the feelings of awe, rever-
ence, and admiration, since these are
essential to homageand worship. Also
to prove that such claims are not only
reasonable, but founded in justice and
right. ITI. That the worship and hom-
age required is such, that it not only
does not degrade, but elevates the man
that pays it; that itis not the hara
requirement of despotism, but the
16


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,





righteous claim of infinite excellence,
not the service of flattery and servility,
the free-will offering of a discerning
and admiring mind [J. Robinson].
Ver. 29. The beauty of holiness. The
religion of the gospel of Christ is
“the beauty of holiness,” as it concerns
its Author, its plan, its fruits. 1. Asit
concerns its Author. Whatever we can
understand as meant by beauty or
holiness, we see in the attributes of
God, whether we consider them in all
their harmony, or contemplate any
one of them in particular. 2. As to
its plan. Survey the gospel where we
will, or regard whatever we can that is
revealed concerning it, we find it to
be all “beauty ;” and we cannot call it
by a more appropriate name than “ the
beauty of holiness.” 3. As to its frutts.
There is a holy separation, a beautiful


(omar. xvi





character of holiness, a separation as
to character, feelings, and conduct;
these are all the various fruits of
grace; and so the man becomes beau-
tiful in holiness [Legh Richmond,
1772-1827].

Ver. 34. Thanks for divine good-
ness. I. God its source. II. Displayed
in suitable ways. Mercy to the miser-
able. III. Lasting inits nature. Uut-
weighing sin and rebellion. “* Kudureth
for ever.”

Ver. 36. The people’s amen. 1. In
dicating attention, appreciation, and
interest in the service. 2. A solemn
sealing. Ratification and acceptance
of what has been done. 3. A real
duty. The people to respond (not the
minister merely) with hearty and uni-
versal voice. “ Amen so be it.”


HOMILETICS.


MunIsTRY BEFORE THE ARK.—Verses 37-43.


The sequel of this chapter describes the arrangement of services, appointment


of musicians and porters, with their respective duties.


service.


thing view ” [Shaks.].


I. An orderly


Asaph and his brethren officiated as singers ; Obed-edom and Hossab
served as doorkeepers, each in his place and in his time.
IT. A musical service.
where Heman and Jeduthun presided over the sacred music.
“musical instruments of God” used. III, A cheerful service.


“Order gave each
This chiefly at Gibeon,
In both places
6 To


give thanks to the Lord.” It becomes the redeemed to praise God. The greater,
more numerous God’s blessings, the greater honour and service we should feel
are due to him. “Gratitude is the memory of the heart.” IV. A perpetual
service. At Jerusalem before the ark, ministry was “continually as every
day’s work required ” (ver. 37). At the altars at Gibeon, priests attended, incense


burnt “continually, morning and evening.”
regular choir are established, in fixed place and due order.
should ever be kept up in God’s house, and in our own hearts and lives.


A permanent local ministry and
Prayer and praise
6é His


praise shall continually be in my mouth.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 43. David's attention to his
household. Personal religion was ex-
emplified by David. I. By the work
in which he had been engaged. 1. It
was a glorious work. 2. It had been
performed in a manner most accept-
able to God. II. By the work to
which he returned. He returned to
bless his house, that is—l. To obtain
blessing for them by prayers. 2. To

76


render himself a blessing by his con-
duct. Consider (1) How highly we
are privileged. (2) How we should
improve our privileges [C. Simeon,
M.A.|. He that had “blessed the
people” (v. 18) returns to ‘bless his
household” (v. 20). Piety in public
and in private—public worship and
family worship. A good man after
public religious duties, returns joyous,


OHAP. xXvur.]





thankful, and loving to his house (¢
Lange, 2 Sam. vi. 20). Ministers must
not think that their public perform-
ances will excuse them from family
worship; but when they have blessed the
public assembly they are to return and





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





less their own households. And none
43 too great to do this. It is the work
of angels to worship God ; and there-
fore certainly can be no disparagement
to the greatest of men [Benson].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XVI.


Vers. 4-7. With harps. The mean-
ing of song goes deep. Who is there
that, in logical words, can express the
effect that music has on us? <A kind
of inarticulate, unfathomable speech,
whbich leads us to the edge of the infi-
nite, and lets us for moments gaze into
that [Carlyle]. Like her friend Mdlle.
Janotha, Jenny Lind believed her art
was the gift of God, and to be dedicated
to his service. “I have always put
him first,” said she, in her last illness
[Church Worker].

Vers. 8-11. The Psalmist speaks of
singing to the name of the Lord, bless-
ing, extolling, thanksgiving, exalting
(of. vers. 28-31). Just as the stem which
is full of sap throws out many branches,
so the believer who is full of a spirit of
praise will give vent to it in many
different forms [P. B. Power].

Ver. 26. The Lord made the
heavens. This verse is a notandum.
What a tribute to astronomy is it that
the Lord is so often done homage to as
having made the heavens! Let the


theology of nature be blended with
the theology of conscience—a full
recognition of the strength and the
glory which shine palpably forth in the
wonders of creation, with the spiritual
offerings of holy worship and_ holy
service [Thomas Chalmers].


Vers. 32-38. Sea roar, and trees of
the wood sing.


“His praise, yo winds, that from four
quarters blow,
Breathe soft or loud ; and wave your tops,
ye pines,


With every plant, in sign of worship
wave” [WMilten}.
Vers. 34-36. For ever. <A line of


praise is worth a leaf of prayer, and an
hour of praises is worth a day of fast-
ing and mourning [J. Livingstone].
It was the law in some of the old
monasteries that the chanting of praise
should never be interrupted, and that
one choir of monks should relieve
another in the holy service [Bvb.
Museum).





CHAPTER XVIL


Crrricat Notes.) This chapter coincides with 2 Sam. vii.—records David’s purpose to
build a house for God (vers. 1, 2), and Nathan’s approval. God refuses to permit this,
promises a perpetual kingdom in David’s line (vers. 3-15); grateful response to this


promise (vers. 16-27).
Vers. 1, 2.—David’s purpose.


Satin splendour and rest.
David probably fancied the time predicted (Deu. xii. 10, 11) had come.


Curtains as a common tent.
Nathan followed


his own impulse, and fell into mistakes like others (1 Sam. xvi. 6; 2 Kings iv. 27).


Vers. 3-15.—God’s refusal and promise. Thou (ver. 4), Hebrew emphatic, “ Not thou
shalt build,” but some oue else. Tent to tent (ver. 5). “I was walking in a tent and ina
dwelling,” from one place to another travelling and resting with his people. Judges,
suitable antithesis to David. Cedars, costly materials. David elevated from low condition—
“‘ sheepcotes,” rude structures of mud walls—to govern Israel (ver. 7). Name (ver. 8) as
warrior and king. Place (ver. 9) fixed. Settled kingdom, constant changes before. House
(ver. 10), a family, a line of successors. Ver. 11. Go, promise now personal. Seed
indefinite, not yet known which son. Vers. 12-14 refer to Solomon, and faithfully
fulfilled to him, Mercy, alluding toSaul. Hvermore (2 Sam. vii. 16). 7


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES, (owar. EVIL


pn OI A TEI PE RPC AE IY A EN RC I TE A


Vers. 16-27.—David's prayer and thanksgiviny, which indicates teaching of deep signi-
ficance and far-reaching promise, Sat (ef. 2 Sam. vii. 18-29). Avuse, dynasty, family—
i.e.. from David onward in remote future. Knowest (ver. 18), therefore no necessity for
further expression of gratitude [ Keil]. Servants for thy word’s sake (2 Sam. vii.) Heart,
all attributed to divine mercy. Let be estab. (ver. 24), Rather ‘ And let thy name be
estublished and magnified for ever;” that is to say, Let not only thy promise stand
firm, but let thy name also stand firm (continue to be held in honour) and be magnified,
&e. Speak. Com.). To bless (ver. 27), it hath pleased thee (marg). ‘ or thos, O Ler,
bagé blessed it, and may it be blessed for ever” (cf. 2 Sam. vii 29).


HOMILETICS.
THe Kine’s Prorosau.—Verses 1-10.


David had established worship on its proper basis, reorganised the priesthood
and introduced music, yet not content. Gods of other nations had splendié.
temples, why not adorn Jerusalem with a house for God which should be the
emblem of the nation’s consecration 3

I. David's proposal. “ All that is in thine heart.” 1.4 noble purpose.
To build a house for God. Good to erect asylums and benevolent institutions,
more useful to help to build houses for God. Such work needful, must be done,
and greatly appreciated. He “hath built us a synagogue.” 2. A generous pur-
pose. ‘TI dwell in an house of cedars, &c.” He felt ashamed of the contrast
between his house and the house of God. One substantial and costly, the other
only atent. Impropriety, injustice, and dishonour for him to have more costly
surroundings than the ark of God. God should always have our best. Many
have “an house of cedar” for worldly life—best talents, most time and money,
keenest insight for business, but only meagre remnants for God. 3. A purpose
commended by the prophet. Nathan here introduced for first time. The king
opened his mind to him. Purpose reasonable, he commended it. “ Do all, &ec.”
(ver. 2). But holy prophets did not know God’s will until revealed to them;
often spoke as religious men, from human aspects, and found out their error.
Kings and prophets have need to consult God. II. God’s disapproval of
David’s proposal. God not displeased with intention, did not condemn
nor entirely reject, but forbade David to build. ‘Thou shalt not build” (ver. 4).
1. God knows all our purposes. David's known “the same night” it was formed.
He sees the heart and reads our inmost thoughts; knows ‘whether our desires
are mean or generous towards his house. ‘The Lord looketh on the heart.”
A sincere heart better than finest gold, a beautiful life more than cedar. 2. God
often hinders the accomplishment of our purposes. They may be selfish and not
for his glory. We may ignore God in forming them. “If the Lord will, ye
should say.” God may seek to save us from spiritual pride and self-dependence ;
to increase reverence, faith, and purity; to withhold one thing to give a better.
“Oftentimes 1 purposed to come unto you, but was let (hindered) hitherto”
(Rom. i. 13). _“ My purposes are broken off” (Job xvii. 11). III. Reasons
for God’s disapproval of David’s proposal. Some given here and
others found elsewhere. 1. lt was something entirely new. No such building
had ever existed, perhaps not possible in Israel’s wanderings; nor had God ever
commanded the erection of a temple as he did the tabernacle. No suggestion
had been given to tribe, judge, or leader. God had shared the pilgrim lot and
unsettledness of his people. 2. [¢ was untémely in tts beginning. Time for
building not yet. Preseut condition of the people not fit, must be improved.
They were surrounded by hostile nations, had no permanent rest, therefore
God’s sanctuary must still be a tent. Not in David’s reign, but in Soloman's
must plan be accomplished. God's time always best. We delay, act before the
ime, i become too hasty in pian and purpose. Enter upon great engagements


“Bav. vex]


with much thought and prayer.
a necessary evil in his life.
by a man of war.
erection of a church or monastery.
own terms. i





AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES


———————E





3. David was not the right man to build, War
The temple, significant of peace, must not be built
Kings in Middle Ages desired to atone for a wicked life by
God will choose his own men and fix his
“Thou shalt not build a house unto my name, because thou hast


shed much blood upon the earth in my aight” (1 Chr. xxii. 8; 2 Chr. ii. 3).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 3-6. Nathan’s message. 1.
Itsform. “All this vision” (ver. 15).
2. Its contents, showing that God
seeks to correct mistakes of his ser-
vants, that he alone is fit judge
of what is pleasing to him, and
that not even a prophet must step
in between.

Ver. 5. From tent to tent. Not
like heathen «ds, confined to localities,
and carried bout from place to place.
The Heb. Mithhallek a travelling God.
An active, constant companion of his
people, going when they go, resting
when they tent. Learn—l. God’s
condescension. 2. God’s_ providence.
3. God’s help in all its adaptations to
eamp or tent, synagogue or city.
Happy in mean accommodations if God
be with us!

Vers. 5,6. God's house in relation
to man’s condition. 1. It is not re-
quired by God himsclf. The Most
High dwells not in temples made with
hands (Acts vii. 4), neither worshipped
with men’s hands (Acts xvii. 24).
Hence the purity and spirituality of
Bible religion. Other religions mean in
thought, indicate that God needs
temples and gifts. 2. It is required
only by man, as a dependent spiritual
being, craving for God, for a “ taber-
nacle of witness,” that God concerns
himself with man, and will hearken
to prayer. God’s dwelling-place the
human heart; not sacred groves, con-
secrated temples, or grand cathedrals.


“Ye are the temples of the Holy
Ghost.”

Vers. 9,10. Jsracl’s well-being from
God. 1. A place appointed for them.
So for us in habitations and Christian
work. 2. Settlement in the appointed
place. “TI will plant” as a tree, and
they shall grow (a) without disturb-
ance, “Children of wickedness shall
waste,” afflict, or injure them no more;
(6) without termination. ‘Shall be
moved no more,” at least until im-
portant ends are answered. ‘These
gradually advancing manifestations of
the Lord’s favour to David look to the
well-being of the people of Israel. (1)
He thereby prepared a place for them;
that is, by subduing their enemies,
made room for a safe, unendangered
expansion in the promised land; (2)
Planted them ; that is, on the soil thus
cleansed and made safe He established
a firm, deep-rooted national life; (3)
They dwell in their (own) place, their
life-power unfolds itself within the
limits secured them by the Lord ; (4)
They shall no longer be affrighted by
restless enemies. In these words the
discourse turns to the future of the
people. The sense is: after all these
manifestations of favour in the past up
to this time, the Lord will for the /iwture
assure his people a position and an
existence, wherein they shall no more
experience the affliction and oppression
that they suffered from godless nations”
[Lange].


HOMILETICS.


Gop 1x Persona, Lire.—Verses 7, 8, and 11.


God’s grace wonderfully magnified in David’s history. Every age and every
nation its prominent men with special mission, proving the possibilities of
personal life and the providence of Ged in their development. I. God

79


HOMILETIGC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cHar. Xvi.








elevates men from the lowest to the highest station in life.
David, ‘from the sheepcote to the throne ;” Amos, from: flocks of Tekoah to
prophetic office ; fishermen, from their nets te be heralds of the gospel. History
full of illustrations of God selecting, qualifying, and in due time raising men tu
fill their place as reformers, preachers, and rulers. “ He raiseth up the poor
out of the dust, and lifteth up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them among
princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory.” II. God helps men
to do the work for which they are elevated. This special work
not left undone. No failure in God’s plans. “‘ Faithful is he who calleth you,
who also will do it.” 1. Ry his constant presence. ‘I have been with thee
whithersoever thou hast walked.” David, Daniel, Luther never left to them-
selves. 2. By continual victories. Much opposition to overcome. If God with
us, opposition disarmed ; “enemies cut off.” None can prevent us rising, none
frustrate our work. ‘I will work, and who shall let (hinder) it?” (undo it.
Horsley) (Is. xliii. 18). ‘The Lord of hosts hath purposed, and who shall dis-
annul it?” (xiv. 27). III. God honours men for faithful perform-
auce of the work to which they are elevated. David greatly
honoured in his own life and that of his posterity. 1. Honoured in reputed
life. “Made thee a name like the name of the great men that are in the
earth.” Names are made, as well as fortunes, by God. Many ambitious for a
name, but get one of ill-repute. Love of fame, not love of virtue; often
becomes a passion, and tramples on the rights of humanity and sheds innocent
blood. Byron sought fame, pronounced it worthless: “’tis nothing but cold
snow.” ‘“ A good name rather to be chosen”—renders more useful and gains
more respect——“ than great riches.” This we may register in the annals of the
Church and “in the book of life.” 2. Honoured in peaceful death. ‘ When
thy days be expired, thou must go to be with thy fathers” (ver. 11). Days
gradually drawing toanend. Then go to lie with thy fathers (Deut. xxxi. 16).
Death a sleep, quiet and peaceful to the Christian. Not “an eternal sleep”’!
A family gathering hereafter, ‘“‘ with thy fathers.” As Strafford disrobed and
prepared himself for the block, he said, “I thank God that I am nowise afraid
of death, nor am daunted with any terrors; but do as cheerfully lay down my
head at this time as ever I did when going to repose.”


Gon’s Prowrses to Davip.— Verses 11-15.


More given to David than acceptance of his proposal. The spiritual superior
to the material. The political throne falls, but a kingdom is established for
ever. Here are three things chiefly—I. The erection of the house of
God by the seed of David. Seed raised up, one of his sons should suc-
ceed him and build. David lived onin Solomon, who used the materials his father
collected, and carried out the plans that his father suggested. Death never cuts
off the influence nor destroys the work of a good man. ‘‘ When thy days be
fulfilled and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee,
which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom” (2 Sam.
vii. 12, 13). II. The elevation of David’s seed to sonship with
God. “TI will be his father, and he shall be my son.” God a father to
Solomon in early life and reign. Tender love and providential care ever
displayed. Mercy not taken from him as from Saul. He became popular,
wealthy, and wise. What a privilege to take the place and receive the
honour of sons! In bestowment of the blessing a display of love and grace
beyond expression, and calls forth admiration from all who partake. “ Behold
fe of love, de.” TIT. The establishment of everlasting

0


CHAP. XVILLJ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





y!


dominion in David’s seed. Promise added to promise, embracing
present and all future time. ‘God’s thoughts not as our thoughts.” David
dies, Solomon succeeds, the family prospered and remained in power 400 years ;
but “his throne shall be established for evermore” in the Messiah, David's
seed and son,


Davip’s Reception oF THE News.—Verses 16-27.


David sat before the Lord in waiting attitude and devout meditation ; received
the message from Nathan with admiring wonder, and petitioned for its accom-
plishment in himself, family, and kingdom. I. In grateful praise. “The
content of this thanksgiving prayer is like a clear glass, wherein we see into the
innermost depths of David’s heart. His soul wholly taken up with the divine
revelation and promise, expresses itself in the utterances which follow one
another quickly, in accordance with internal excitement of feeling.” 1. Jn spirit
of deep humility. “Who am 1?” (ver. 16). An expression of deep feeling of
nothingness in contrast to God’s greatness and goodness. Divine loftiness and
human lowliness (ef. Ps. viii. 5; cxliv. 3). 2. In astonishment for personal
favours (vers. 17-19). (a) Favour to his house. (6) Favour for the future. If
unworthy to receive former mercies, how should I feel in regard to promises
reaching in the far future—‘“a great while to come”? Silence most befitting
and eloquent, for language fails to express feeling. ‘“ What can David speak
more?” 3. In adoration of Gods greatness (vers. 20,21). He is great; the
incomparable God—* none like thee ;” the only God—none “ beside thee.” Let
his attributes and lovingkindness awaken our gratitude and praise; prompt us
to adore his excellence and glory. 4. Im remembrance of national mercies.
David passes from present blessings to review the past—‘‘rises from his personal
experience to the whole line of God’s glorious manifestations in the history of
his people” (Hengs.). Israel the only nation redeemed by its God. This redemp-
tion incomparable and peculiar, an act which separated them, and made them
independent. Deeds of “greatness and terribleness” followed. Nations
expelled to make room for Israel, whom he claimed as specially his own, adopted
them that he “might become their God.” II. In earnest prayer
(vers. 23-27). Connected with thanksgiving for present and past, David
prays for the future. 1. For the fulfilment of the promise. “ Do as thou hast
said.” Royal dignity set up, “establish it for ever.” Everlasting continuance
promised, let the word become deed. 2. For the glorification of G'od’s name.
This the design or consequence of the fulfilled word. Not the honour of his
house, not the glory of his people, but solely the honour of God had David in
view. 3. For the continuance of the blessing. The blessing secures the con-
tinuance. Neither posterity nor power without this. ‘‘ Except the Lord build
the house, they labour in vain that build it” (literally, its builders labour in vain
in it) (Ps. exxvii. 1). Needful to pray for families, temples, and churches. “ Let
it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, dc.” (ver. 27).


Toe Greatness OF Divine Favours.—Verses 16-19.


We briefly fill up an adapted sketch from Lange (2 Sam. vii. 18). I. They
infinitely surpass human desert. “ Who am I, and what is mine
house?” David's gifts and graces eminent, his honour, success, and reputation
great. His house of the royal tribe, and allied to the best families, but no
worthiness in family or head. II. They fill all times from remotest


past to distant future. “ For a great while tocome.” From peed
8


ye OMILETI C COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (cmaP. xvz.








of David’s reign to end of the world, through David’s seed. From the fall
of man to his redemption in glory. III. They spring from sovereigu
mercy. ‘ According to thine own heart, hast thou done all this greatness.”
People made great not by their own deeds, but by works which God in free
sovereign mercy performs for and in them. IV. They are beyond all
human comprehension. What can David say more? (v. 18). Words
cannot express our obligations, and even a sense of obligation. As heaven is
high above the earth, so are God’s thoughts above our thoughts.


True Prayer.— Verses 23-27.


Founded upon God’s promise and declared purpose. David honoured God’s
faithfulness, expressed his heart’s desire, and becomes a model] to us in this
prayer. I. Itis grounded on God’s promise. “Thou hast spoken.”
Without this darkness and uncertainty—no hope, no encouragement to pray.
The labourer in the field, the soldier in the army, and the maidservant in the
family animated by promise. The Bible filled with promises well adapted to our
moral condition, and reveals “ exceeding great and precious promises.” II. It
regards God’s honour solely. “That thy name may be magnified”
(ver. 24). This shall be the sum and aim of all our prayers. Magnify self less
and God more. Both as “Lord of hosts and God of Israel,” that is as uni-
versal Ruler and covenant God let him be glorified. IIT. It aseribes all to
God's free grace. “Thou hast told thy servant.” The beginning, the
revelation from thee. None could have guessed, been assured, or predicted
without thy word. All of God’s good pleasure, whose name is mentioned no
less than eight times in these few verses (cf. parallel passage, 2 Sam. vii. 24-29).
IV. It appeals to God’s faithfulness, “Thou art God,” unchangeable,
powerful, and fit to be trusted. “‘ Thy words are truth” (2 Sam.), never fail, and
their accomplishment may be relied upon. The Bible invites unbounded trust
in God’s character and procedure—represents it to be the grand duty and
joyous privilege of all men. V. It receives the fulness of God’s
blessing. God blesses now, and his blessing cannot be revoked (ver. 27).
Independent of future mercies, prayer is a training, discipline, and dignity—the
appointed means for our spiritual and future good, and the needed preparation
to attain it. Never in vain. Good to draw near now to receive that blessing,
‘which maketh rich, d&c.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 13. J will be his father and (ver. 16). 2. As the gift of God’s


he shall be my son. This true—1)
of Solomon and other descendants of
David who were kings of Judah ; (2)
of Christ, “the son of David” (Heb. i.
5); (3) of every one who is a believer
in Christ and thus a child of God
(1 Jno, iii. 1; v. 1) [Lange].

Vers. 17-22. A model of devout
thanksgwing. I. Over that he rejoices.
1. Over great blessings received in the
past. 2. Over yet greater blessings
promised in the future (ver. 17). II.
In what spirit he regards these favours,
1. As utterly undeserved by himself

82


sovereign grace | [bid.].

Vers. 20-22. God's relation to his
people. Let us for the illustrating of
these words consider—I. The relation
which God bears to his people. 1. He
has chosen them out of the world,
which lie/h in wickedness. 2. He has
given himself to them in a peculiar
way. 3. He avows that relation to them
before the whole universe. II. Inquire
what, under that relation, we may expect
at his hands. 1. The care of his pro-
vidence. 2. The communications of his
grace. 3. The manifestations of his


OHAP. XVIT.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


Na


love. 4. The possession of his glory.
III. What, under that relation, he is
entitled to expect from us. 1. That
we “be a people to him.” 2. That we
give ourselves to him, as he has given
himself tous. Conclude with two pro-
posals—(1) That we at this very hour
accept Jehovah as our God ; (2) That
we now consecrate ourselves to him as
his people [C. Simeon, M.A.].

Vers. 23-27. The relation between
God's promise and prayer. I. The
promise prompts to prayer. The
character of him who makes the pro-
mise, the value of the blessing promised
stir up and never prevent prayer. II.
The promise assures success in prayer.
It is not a mere venture, presumption,
oF uncertainty, but confident hope of
God’s_ blessing. Characteristics of
true prayer. “The prayer of David
after the reception of the Lord’s pro-
mise of favour bears testimony to the
unexpected, joyfully surprising revela-
tion that was made to him and mirrors


his childlike humility, fervid devotion,


ri
and wnshakable confidence towards his
God.” To this prayer, which proceeds
from a joyfully shocked and deeyly
moved heart, applies (so far as is poss’ ble
from the Old Testament standpoint)
what Bernard of Clairvaux says of true
prayer: “If the way to God’s throne
is to stand free and open to our prayer,
and it is there to find ready acceptance
and hearing, it must proceed from an
humble, fervid, and trusting heart.
Humility teaches us the necessity of
prayer, fervour gives it flight and en-
durance, trust provides it with an
unmovable foundation” [Lange].
“This thanksgiving confirms anew the
fact that the only foundation on which
the true godliness and everlastingness
of the kingdom can rest is the purity
and holiness of an humble heart, and
therefore the hearty and living humility
of David’s thanksgiving may give us
the strongest assurance that here is
really enthroned the culmination of all
royal rule” [Baumgarten].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XVII.


Ver.7. From the sheepcote. Be not
ashamed of your origin. It is well for
the great who have risen to be reminded
of the humble place which they once
occupied. At one of Napoleon’s grand
imperial receptions, where his brothers
and sisters were, all of them elevated
to high rank, and some of them with
royal titles, it is reported that one of
them said to another, ‘What would
our father and mother have said if they
had seen us as we are now}t” [S. 8.
Teacher |.

Ver. 11. Days expired. God respects
aot so much after what manner we die,
as what manner of death we die
[Augustine]. Is that a death-bed where
a Christian dies? Yes; but not hus—
“’tis Death itself that dies” [Coleridge].

Vers. 16-19. What speak more.
Debt to grace. When a friend ob-
served to Rev. John Brown, of Had-
dington, that we must run deeper and


deeper into grace’s debt, be replied,


“Oh, yes; and God is a good creditor ;
he never seeks back the principal sum,
and indeed puts up with a poor annual
rent” [Life of, de.].

Vers. 20-26. A great God to trust
tn. Wesley, preaching at Doncaster,
said, a poor Romanist woman, having
broken her crucifix, went to her priest
frequently crying out, “Now I have
broken my crucifix, I have nothing to
trust in but the great God.” Wesley
exclaimed, “‘ What a mercy she had a
great God to trust in!” A Romanist
present was powerfully affected—“ the
great God to trust in” touched bis
heart. He was very deeply convinced
of his need of salvation, and joined the
Methodist Society, and became an
ornament to religion [ Bib. Musewm).

Ver. 26. Promsed.

“The thing surpasses all my thought,

But faithful is my Lord;
Through unbelief I stagger not,


For God hath apoke the word.”
[John Gell}.
83


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cmap. XVIII
-


eon


‘


OHAPTER XVII.


Currrcan Notes.) This chapter, parallel with 2 Sam. vill., gives an account of David's
wars (vers. se} and a list of his chief officers. ee 4

Vers, 1, %.—Gath, “the arm bridle,” so called (2 Sam. viii. 1) for its supremacy, #8
capital of Philistia, over other towns, or because in its capture and dependencies, David
gained complete control of his restless neighbours. Moab, | Severities by which they
were treated, and probable reason for such retribution, given in Sam. Gifts, #.e., became
tributary to Israel. : i

Vers. 83-8.—Zobah conquered, Had., “derived from Hadad, a Syrian deity. It seems
to have become the official and hereditary title of the rulers of that kingdom [{Jam.}.
Ver. 4. Chariots. Great discrepancy between this and 2 Sam. viil. 3-14. Aoughed, t.e., cut
the sinews, lamed the horses, and made chariots useless. Ver. 6. Garrisons, not in text,
rightly restored from Sam, [Speak, Com.]. Ver. 7. Shields, indicative of wealth. Ver. 8.
These places specially given on account of brass or copper obtained there. seit

Vers. 9-11.— Congratulations from Tou (Toi in Sam.). Ver. 10. Had., Joram. Enquire, “ to
greet him and congratulate him.” Had war, lit, was a man of wars (cf. Is. xli. 12).
Ver. 11. Edom, from Aram; more fully in 2 Sam. viii.

Vers. 12, 13.—Edomites, having provoked David, he sent an army, subdued and made
their country a tributary province. Valley of Salt south of Salt Sea. — This annexation
of Edom enlarged Israel on south-east to Red Sea, fulfilled divine prediction (Ex. xxiii. 31),
and gave command of its ports. Ae

Vers. 14-17.—Officers of the King. Joab, supreme command, minister of war. Jehos.,
not keeper of records merely ; but referee on internal affairs, the chancellor, who drew
up and issued royal decrees. Zadok, became high-priest after David's accession, through
his father Ahitub, a descendant of Aaron’s son Kieazar, Abim., Ahimelech, through
Abiathar from Ithamar, younger son of Aaron (1 Chr. xxiv. 8-6). Shavsha, a variant from
“ Shisha” (1 Ki. iv. 3); the “Sheva” of 2 Sam. xxii. 25, and the ‘‘ Seraiah ” of 2 Sam.
viii. 17, are probably corrupt readings [Speak, Com.]. Scribe, State Secretary. Ver. 17.
Ben., » mighty warrior ef Kabzeel (2 Sam. xxiii. 20-23). Cher. and the Pel., the royal
body-guard attached to the king’s court and person. CaAtef, heads or princes, officers in
the palace.


HOMILETICS.


Davin’s Wans.—Verses 1-8.


A short time elapsed between events of last chapter and events of this, but
David ready for active service. Wonderful promises stirred up to brave deeds.
I. The Philistines are subdued (ver. 1). Ancient inveterate enemies,
finally smitten, bereft of their capital and their towns. ‘“ David smote the
Philistines and subdued (humbled) them” (2 Sam. viii. 1). All must fall before
the authority of Christ. II, The Moabites are smitten. Why Moab
was at enmity with David not known, formerly on friendly terms (1 Sam. xxii.
3,4). The severe punishment inflicted upon them implies some grave offence.
They became servants and paid tribute for a long time. Balaam’s prediction
now fulfilled (Numb. xxiv. 17). IIT. Hadarezer, king of Zobah,
defeated. A powerful king, reigned over a country central and convenient
for help. 1. Defeated when trying to enlarge his kingdom. “ He went to stablish
his dominion” shaken by Saul and to confirm after regaining it. One thing lost
by grasping at another. Worldly possessions uncertain. Wealth, power, and
empire often taken when possessors seek to stablish them. 2. Defeated when
allied with Syrians. Allies m vain when God is opposed. Hand may join hand,
enemies of God’s people may contribute their meu and their stores, but they
often combine to ruin themselves. Their wealth sid up for the just, and the
spoils of nations help to adorn the house and kingdom of God. IV. The
Edomites are conquered (ver. 13). David’s splendour increased by
another victory. Hdomites fancied that David’s wars in north would give them


sujet possession of the southern part of Israelitish territory. But returning
84


OHAP. VIII} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES


a


t


from the conquest of Aramwans and Ammonites he engaged Edomites in Valley
of Salt, slew eighteen thousand, and garrisoned the country. Thus, from north
to south, Israel’s enemies were overcome. David's wars were wars of God. He


overcame, as we must overcome, by God’s presence and help. “He causeth us
to triumph.”


CoNGRATULATIONS OF THE Kina or Hamarn.—Verses 9-11.


Toi heard of the decisive victory over Hadarezer, sent an embassy to greet
David and congratulate him on success. Look at this—I. As an Eastern
custom. “ Who in the East has not witnessed similar things? Has a man
_ gained a case in a court of law; has he been blessed by the birth of a son; has
he given his daughter in marriage; has he gained a situation under government ;
has he returned from a voyage or a journey, or finished a successful speculation ;
then his friends and neighbours send messengers to congratulate him—to express
the joy they feel in his prosperity ; so much so that had it come to themselves
their pleasure could not have been greater” [Roberts]. II. As a stroke of
policy. Had carried on constant war with Toi. Hence joy at deliverance
from an enemy and anxiety to be friendly with the conqueror. It is our interest
to be on terms with God and his people. ‘“ Kiss the son (be subject to him and
reverance him), lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way when his wrath is
kindled but a little” (Ps. ii. 12). III. As an expression of friendship.
Toi sent his son to seek friendly alliance. The rich presents an expression of
respect and submission. Friendship with God procured by dedication of heart
and life to him.


OonsECRATED Sporrs.—Verse 11.


Need not approve of all David’s actions in war, but may commend his spirit
and example in the disposal of his booty. I. As an evidence of loyalty
co God. Many princes adorned their palaces, beautified the arms of their
soldiers, or preserved the spoils of the enemy for their own aggrandisement..
Vavid set them apart from profane to sacred use, put them into the treasury of
the sanctuary. An instance of gratitude to God, by whose aid he had gained
them, seldom imitated by victorious kings. Men not always faithful in
prosperity. If we are successful in studies, business, and pursuits, let us devote
our spoils, our knowledge, wealth, and influence to him from whom comes every
sift. II. As a help to the furtherance of God’s cause. David
gained subjects, territories, and political alliance; received gifts of horses and
chariots, gold and brass, but all consecrated to lawful use. Presents of friends
and spoils of enemies devoted to the Lord, and helped to rear and adorn the
«emple. Many refuse gifts from worldly men for religious purposes, disparage
jberality on the ground that God cares not for material wealth. But God
sonnects the wealth with the work of men, Christ regards whatever is done to
nis people as done to himself, and heathens will turn and bring presents to him
(is, Lx, 6).


Davyin’s ADMINISTRATION AND OrFicers.—Verees 13~17.


Besides military exploits and activity, a description of internal government
with its officials and their duties I. David’s government was
righteous government. One or two qualities chronicled. “ He executed
judgment and justice among all the people.” Right and purity not cote


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (cHar. xvmT





connected with authority. Society is maintained and its advantages consolidated
by justice. Just rulers make contented and united people. Justice in the court,
on the bench, and in the ranks exalts a nation, and gives it a sacred mission to
the world. II. David’s officers were eminent men. The most eminent
of the age composed his cabinet. The commander-in-chief, clever, courageous,
and renowned for military achievements. Faithful to the king, not always
to principle. The chancellor correctly published royal decrees and registered
events in the State archives. The body-guard round the king and priests before
the altar, each in his place and work, gave influence to the reign, and felt
honoured in the service. Thus David’s rule not only associated with military
prowess, but poetic genius and personal piety. Remarkable for men of rank and
administrative ability, and did more for Israel than Charlemagne did for Europe
or Alfred for England.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. l#=3. 1. How traing the life
of David! Its wars, toils, hardships,
and perils great and


lives,and kings their crowns. 4. From
unjust government. He began with
numerous. no fatal blunder, levied no unjust


2. Yet how happy the life of David!
God preserved him, gave honour and
success. He rendered true service;
never separated any part from God to
keep for self. This severs from divine
care, If we take our lives wilfully
into our hands, and devote them to
our own selfish pursuits, God with-
draws special grace, we fall into the
enemy’s hands, and fail to accomplish
the work we might have done.

Ver. 13. The Lord preserved David.
1. From spiritual pride. In exalta-
tion, power and success in battle.
2. From personal injury in war. Often
in danger, but an unseen hand sus-
tained him. 3. From disgraceful
defeat. Many commanders lost their


taxes, introduced no unwise policy, nor
created any disloyalty. He reigned in
the afiections of the people, gave the
glory to God, and was preserved in
honour and prosperity.

Vers. 9-13. Lessons from David's
years of warfare. 1. A pious man
may have many enemies. 2. A pious
man may be required to spend much of
his lifein war. 3. A pious man may be
compelled to inflict severe punishments.
4, A pious man, even though not always
prospered or preserved, is always guided
and blessed. 5. A pious man will re-
joice to consecrate the richest results
of his struggles and toils to God [Lange
2 Sam. viii.}.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XVIII,


Ver. 4. Houghed. The reason of
this mutilation was that, horses being
forbidden by the Mosaic constitution
to the Hebrews, both in war and in
agriculture, it was of no use to keep
them; and their neighbours placing
much dependence on cavalry, but
having, for want of a native breed, to
procure them by purchase, the greatest
damage that could be done to such
enemies was to render their horses un-
serviceable in war (cf. Gen. xlix. 6;
Josh. xi. 6-9) [Jamieson],

RG


Ver. 11. Dedicate. Eastern princes
have always been accustomed to hoard
up vast quantities of gold [see Layard,
“Nineveh and its Remains,” IT,, p.
344]. This is the first instance of a
practice uniformly followed by David,
of reserving, after defraying expenses
and bestowing suitable rewards upon
his soldiers, the remainder of the spoil
taken in war, to accumulate for the
grand project of his life—the erection
of a national temple at Jerusalem
{ bid.}.


GuwaP, rrx,] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


CHAPTER XIX.


Csrrican Notzs.] After thés other wars with Ammon and Arara. The chapter corre-
sponds with 2 Sam. x.

Vers. 1-5.—Insult to David's messengers. Nahash (1 Sam. xi.1; 2Sam.x.1). Kindness,
N. friendly with David, and an enemy to Saul. Comfort, coudole him. Search thy capital,
Shaved half the face. The beard greatly valued in Hast, to violate it the greatest insult.
Tarry in seclusion till the mark of disgrace had disappeared.

Vers, 6, 7.—Ammon and Syria war with David.  Oaious, Israel universally roused te
avenge the insult. Talents, equal to £342,100 ; to procure the help of foreign mercenaries.
Chariots, also riders, or cavalry, accustomed to ight on horseback or in chariots, and
occasionally on foot. Accepting this as the true rendering, the uumber of hired aux-
iliaries mentioned in this passage agrees exactly with the statement in 2 Sam. x. 6 (ef.
Davidson's Hermeneutics, p. 552).

Vers. 8-15.—Joab defeats Ammon. Host, the whole forces of Israel engaged in this war.
Beset by Ammonites in front and by Syrians behind, Joab resolves to attack the latter—
the more numerous and formidable host—while he directed Abishai, with a suitable
force, to attack the Ammonites (vers. 12, 13). This brief address appeals to the courage,
patriotism, and religion of his men. Ver. 15. Mercenaries defeated, the courage of the
Ammonites failed, they took flight and entrenched themselves within fortified wal.

Vers. 16-19.—Second victory over Aram. River, Euphrates. Shophach (2 Sai. x. 15-19),
Seven thousand (cf. 2 Sam. x. 18). ‘ Hither the text in one of the books is corrupt (Aéesi,
Davidson), or the accounts must be combined (Keantcott, Houbigant, Calmei)” [Jameeson }.
Ver. 19. Servests, tributaries.


HOMILETICS.
Tux Messace or ConDOLENCE.— Verses 1-5.


Nahash, a neighbourly king, friendly with David in the days of Saul, and
perhaps congratulated him on accession to the throne. Hanun, son of Nahash,
succeeded after his father’s death. To him David sent an embassy of condolence.
I. The generous message of David. Gratitude not absorbed by
death. Expressions of sympathy needful. Nothing worthier than to requite
kindness with thanks. 1. Jn its occasion. A time of bereavement and sorrow
when such a message is seasonable. 2. Jn its form. The customary method of
sending courtiers to condole with friends in loss or suffering. But Hanun’s loss
was David’s loss. A true friend valued by relatives and neighbours, honoured
in death and memory. II. The disgraceful treatment of David's
messengers. Ii suspected, they might have been dismissed civilly, or kept
in honourable custody till the truth was known. They were treated with the
greatest indignity. Shaving their beards and shortening their garments a
double insult in the East, where long beards and long garments are badges of
honour. Many Orientals would rather die than lose their beards (signs of the
dignity and ornament of freedom), and Turks used to regard beardless
Kuropeans as runaway slaves. III, The considerate kindness for
the disgraced messengers. “Tarry at Jericho, dc.” ‘he first place
they reached in Canaan, a private village, where théy might remain until fit to
appear in public. Men of that character must not be seen dishonoured and
unfit for duty. Character gives influence, commands admiration, and is the
real power of men. “Men of character are the conscience of society to which
they belong” [Hmerson]. If character be lost, then nothing left worth saving.
Ever be concerned for good character. Preserve and keep that from dishonour
and impurity.

R7


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [CHAP. Xxx.


a ee


AVENGING AN InsuLt.—Verses 6~19.


Israel roused by the insult, The Ammonites knew that they had made
themselves “odious” to David, and both sides prepared to engage in foolish
war. I, Insult springing from slight provocation. MHanun
seems bereft of wisdom, acted most foolishly, and brought ruin to himself and
his nation. “Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child.” 1. Hrom a
suspicious mind. Embassy treated as spies. Wicked men measure others by
themselves, and put an evil construction upon the best intention. Bp. Patrick
well says, “There is nothing so well meant but it may be ill interpreted,
and is wont to be so by men who love nobody but themselves.” 2. From advice
of jealous princes. “Thinkest thou that David doth honour thy father?”
Nothing of the kind. They are come to inspect the capital, spy the land, and
prepare for its conquest. ‘These princes were jealous of the mighty growth of
David’s kingdom, counselled the adoption of a hostile policy, and conveyed
slight reproach in their question. The king was influenced, and the insult
committed. II. Insult leading to unjust war. This war, like many
others, commenced by a wrongdoer, and might have been avoided by an
honourable apology or better understanding. One evil leads to another. When
men begin a quarrel, they know not where it willend. “It is one of the mad
principles of wickedness,” says Bp. Hall, “that it is wickedness to relent, and
rather to die than yield. Even ill causes, once undertaken, must be upheld,
although with blood ; whereas the gracious heart, finding his own mistaking,
doth not only remit of an ungrounded displeasure, but studies to be revenged of
itself, and to give satisfaction to the offended.” III. War terminating in
disgraceful overthrow. Syrians from three places hired and headed by
powerful men, fought with chariots, cavalry, and infantry. A vigorous attack
was made, and they fled, “as often happens,” says Bp. Patrick, ‘ with those
that fight for pay alone, without respect to the cause.” 1, Defeat most
humilvating. Syrians first fled, and the Ammonites soon followed, without
fighting at all. They retreated to the city, but stone walls are no defence
without stout hearts. 2. Defeat most complete. The commander was killed,
thousands were slain. Vassal princes submitted to David, and the Syrian nation
forsook their allies, and became tributary to Israel. Persistence in evil-doing
is sure to ruin. Strife spreads. One angry word leads to another. One look
of revenge, one act of resentment, will kindle a fire that may set a neighbourhood
or a nation into flame. ‘Therefore leave off contention before it be meddled


with.”


‘* Contention, like a horse
Full of high feeding, madly hath broke loose,
And bears all before him” [Shakespeare].


THe Wark Ony.—Verses 10-13.


The enemy appeared on the field, divided their forces, the Syrians in front
and the Ammonites behind Joab. But, like an expert commander, he picked
out the best soldiers to engage the Syrians, the strongest and most valiant. He
gave a spirited address to his army, set a brave example, and left the issue with
God.

I. The purpose for which they fought. Not for aggressive or
ambitious purposes. For the cause of humanity, “for our people ;” for religious
freedom and the canse of God, “and for the cities of ovr God.” II. The

88


CHAP. Xx. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


a








method in which they fought. Success always depends upon certain
conditions. Joab owed his victory partly to sagacious command. 1. A wise
economy of forces. Bravest in front, and less trained for less important work.
A strong reserve force, not all concentrated on a given place. Naseby lost to
Charles by Rupert pursuing fugitives too far. The king on the point of over-
powering Fairfax. Cromwell hastened to his chief and decided the battle.
Charles cried in vain to rally his men, “One more charge and we recover the
day.” In the battle of life we should direct our physical and mental powers
wisely—ever seek to have strength reserved for ‘the evil day.” 2. A deter-
_ mination to render mutual help. “ If Syrians be too strong for me, thon thou
shalt help me, &c.” Unity and hearty co-operation essential. The strong should
ever be ready to help the weak. Solitude is selfishness and death in moral
warfare. “Two are better than one. For if they fall, the one will lift up his
fellow ; but woe to him who is alone when he falleth.” III. The spirit in
which they fought. Joab’s advice admirable, though not always practised
by himself. He shared David’s powers, but not David's piety. 1. A spirit of
exalted courage. ‘ Let us behave ourselves valiantly” (ver. 13). Brave words
from a brave heart. “A good leader must, out, of his own abundance, put life
and spirits into all others; if a lion lead sheep into the field, there is hope of
victory” [Bishop Hall]. “ Play the man,” Latimer’s motto ; let it be ours in all
conflicts and departments of life. Idlers, dreamers, and irresolute never win
anything. ‘‘Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people”
(2 Sam. x. 12). 2. A spirit of true patriotism. Personal glory and family
reputation powerful motives. But when a country must be defended and a
people delivered, then a true spirit required. ‘Remember the Lord which is
great and terrible, and fight for your brethren, your sons, and your daughters,
your wives, and your houses.” 3. A spirit of submission to God. “ Let the Lord
do that which is good in his sight” (ver. 13). An element of uncertainty in all
events. Here an expression of confidence, not despair, nor fatalism. The
heraldic motto on a broken helmet in Battle Abbey most suitable, “ L’espoir est
ma force.” Diligently prepare, bravely enter the battle, and humbly submit to
God. ‘The fortune of war” not in our hands, but God’s. “The race is not to
the swift, nor the battle to the strong.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. David said. Let Hanun to another. “One injustice produces


be as graceless as he will, David will
show himself gracious by being grate-
ful. The same Greek word (charts)
signifieth both grace and gratitude.
Neither doth the ill success he had
argue that he did amiss, as Pellican
will have it, for duty is to be done,
however it speed or take with wicked
persons. What if Hanun were a
heathen king? Might not his friend-
ship be therefore sought? might not
his father’s courtesy be requited? If
a very dog fawn upon us we stroke
him on the head, and clap him on the
side; much less is the common band
of humanity untied by grace [Trapp].


Vers. 4-7. One false step leadeth’


another, and drags men on irretardably
to destruction by the resulting chain
of sins and injustices. The King of
Ammon, with sinful levity, lends his
ear to the liars and calumniators that
surround him ; thence comes the most
outrageous insolence towards David’s
ambassadors, and the most abusive
insult to the whole people of Israel ;
on this follows the hasty preparation
and provocation of a wholly unjust,
wicked war; therein the princes are
forced to take part, and so to stake
their land and people. The end is
complete destruction ” [Lange].

Vers. 8-15. Joab’s word to Abishai
is a prelude to the Lord’s word te

89


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


[OHAP. KX


eee reece


Peter: “Strengthen thy brethren.”
Heroic bravery in the war is to be
vombined—I, With the recognition
of those most sacred possessions and


ends for which the struggle is to be,


made ; thereby it is consecrated ; and
9. With humble, trustful submission
to the will of the Lord; thereby it is
preserved from temerity and presump-
tuousness. The war is a just and holy
one, undertaken for the defence of
the possessions received from God, to
guard the honour of God, and in
the name of God [Jbid.]. Ver. 13.


Bravery in battling for the highest
object. 1. It is rooted in fulelity to
God and to our brethren the people of
God. 2. It is proven by devotion of
body and soul and the whole life te
the aims of the kingdom of God. 3. It
is sunctified by unconditional submis-
sion to the purposes and doings of the
will of God [Jbad.]. “ Let us behave our-
selves, ke.” United help by advice,
sympathy, and hearty co-operation in
contending for truth and Christ in the
world. “ United we stand, divided
we fall.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XIX.


Ver, 2. Kindness. How unsuitable
is it for us, who live only by kindness
(Tit. iii, 4-7), to be unkind ! [Zdwards}.

Ver. 3. Thinkest thou. To think
well is the way to act rightly [ Paley].
Itis an easy thing to pick a quarrel
where we intend a mischief [Bishop
Halt). Upright simplicity is the
deepest wisdom, and perverse craft the
merest shallowness [Barrow].

Ver. 12. Unity and unanimous
novement. The strength of the Church
is, not as an army of irregular soldiers,
regiments in loose disorder, uncon-
nected with each other, but when she
goeth forth by bands (Prov. xxx. 27)
united, concentrated, well disciplined,
every officer at his post, every soldier


in his ranks, each under rule, helpful
to each other, and to their great causel
When shall it once be? Lord, heal our
unhappy divisions. Unite our energies
“jin one holy bond of Truth and Peace,
of Faith and Charity ” [Bridges].

Vers. 16-18. Syrians defeated a
second time. So incurable is the folly
and wickedness of some men that,
though to reproofs and chidings you
should add stripes and blows, they
would not grow wiser and better. “ An
obstinate man does not hold opinions,
they hold him” [Pope], “Stiff in
opinion, always in the wrong” [ Dryden].

“ You may as well
Forbid the sea for to obey the moon,


As, by oath remove, or counsel shake
The fabrio of his folly ” [Shakespeare].





CHAPTER XX.


Crrricat Notrs.] This extract from the ancient records tells of Rabbah taken (vera.
1-3); and three sons of the giant of Gath slain (vers, 4-8). It covers 2 Sam. xi—xzi,
[Murphy].

Vers, 1-8.—Rabbah taken, Year, at the return or beginning of the vear, setting in of
spring. Zime, when kings of Israel were accustomed, after winter seasou, to go out to war.
Rabbah besieged to complete chastisement of Ammon for insult to David’s messengers.
Tarried, his presence not required in the war, more needful in seat of government (cf.
2 Sam. xii. 26-81). Crown. When citadel was taken, the king captured or killed; David
took the crown from his head and set if upon his own, to represent himself lord of
the Ammonite territory. Cut (ver. 3, cf. ma/gin, made them sawers of stone. diggers of
iron, and cutters of wood, #.e., condemned them to forced labour; cf. 2 Sam. xii. 30, 31).

Vers. 4-8.— Giants slain. Gezer, Gob (2 Sam. xxi 19). Sibh. (chap. xi. 29). Sippas,
Saph. They, the Philistines, £/A, (2 Sam, xxi. 19; 1 Chr. xi, 26), Gath (ver. 6; Josh. xi.
22). Man (2 Sam. xx. 6,7). Fell (ver. 8, cf. 2 Sauna xx. 22, where an account of a cenfliet
between David and 9 son of Rapha is given»


cHAP. xx} ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.











HOMILETICS.
Tue Oarrure or Raspan.—Verses 1-3.


Punishment of Ammon for treatment of embassy of condolence, hindered by
inclement season, now to be completed. The chief city taken, and its fall the
crowning act of David’s conquests. From the manner of its capture and the
punishment of its people we learn—I. That in spiritual warfare there
must be no cessation. Rest gives advantage to the enemy, and may
delay or frustrate the end in view. “ Forwards, children, forwards!” urged
Blucher, in meeting Wellington at Waterloo. 1. Make needful preparation.
Count cost, and fail not through lack of forethought and preparation. Enter-
prises break down, plans wrecked in every department of labour, through neglect
of this principle. ‘ What king going to make war against another king, sitteth
not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to meet
him that cometh against him with twenty thousand?” 2. Be ready for every
advantage. ‘Ths time to go out” must be discovered and seized. Many such
seasons given to a watchful Christian. “ Take the instant by the forward step.”
‘To everything there is a season, and a time to every purpose under heaven.”
II. That in conducting spiritual warfare opportunity is
given for the display of virtuous qualities. Joab had besieged
the capital, taken lower part of town, or ‘city of waters,” and knowing that it
would soon fall, sent for the king to come in person and have the honour of
taking it himself (¢f. 2 Sam. xii. 26). Taking this acu as that of an adroit
courtier, unwilling to run the risk of exciting the king’s envy by his success, it
was wise. But the act of a devoted servant, denying himself, honouring his
master, and shielding him from popular disfavour (through his conduct with
Bathsheba). Room for us to help the weak, admire the successful, and, above
all, to transfer the glory of our conquests to our gracious “ Commander and
Leader.” IIX. That all things in spiritual warfare wiil bs
subdued under God’s power. The city was taken, and the people
subdued. In Christian warfare, every evil thought in heart, every besetting
sin, and every vicious principle in life, overcome by grace; every stronghold of
Satan, and every enemy to Christ eventually subdued. “He must reign till he
hath put all enemies under his feet.” Great the punishment of those who
resist. Ammonites suffered severely, but “woe to the wicked ; it shall be ill
with him.”


Tae Heroes axp THe Giants.—Verses 4-8.


Individual exploits here given marvellous. Sibbechai, Elhan, and Jonathan
slew their men, sons of Rapha, descendants of the race of Raphaim at Gath,
remains of pre-Canaanitish inhabitants, distinguished by their gigantic size
(cf. 2 Sam. xxi 15-22), Learn—I. The enemies of God's people are
most powerful Giants in appearance and reality. 1. Splendid in equip
ment. Armed with shields and spears, mighty in stature, and conspicuous
among their fellows. Our enemies often powerful in material advantages,
learning, and all appliances of modern science. 2. Defiant in attitude “We
defied Israel” (ver. 7), Thinking much of themselves, highly esteemed, perhaps,
by contemporaries ; men of “a high look and a proud heart.” “The lofty looks
of man shall be humbled,” éc. II. God’s people are ever victorious
in God’s strength. Inferior in number and unequal in outward equip-
ment, yet a match for giants of ignorance, vice, and sin. Shepherd boys have
overthrown kingdoms, and striplings slain giants of evil. Men of faith, with
“lamps and pitchers,” with “the jawbone of an ass,” with the meanest instru-

91


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


{[cHaP. Xz





ments, have overcome men of might and stature.
friends be disheartened by the power and pride of the church’s enemies.
need not fear great men against us while we have the great God for us.


‘Never let the church’s
We
What


will a finger more on each hand do, or a toe more on each foot, in contest with


Omnipotence ?”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. David tarried at Jerusalem.
Out of the way of temptation if he had
gone with the army in active duty.
Temporary rest from work and fight
leads often to (a) moral indolence or
spiritual sloth; (6) carelessness in
office, or unfaithfulness in calling; (e)
temptation and dis “Tdle hours
bring forth idle thoughts, and idle
thoughts are nothing but dry, kindling
wood, that waits only for a spark to be
suddenly a blaze. All have had pain-
ful experience that our sins often have
their roots in indolence and unfaithful-
ness in our calling. As long as we
walk and work in our office, we are
encompassed with a wall; as soon as
we fall out of our office, we fall away
from our fortunes, and become a prey
to the enemy” [ Disselhof’}.

Ver. 2. Crown from off his head.
1. Earthly crowns and kingdoms may
be lost and transferred to others. By
war, wickedness, and death. When
Richard II. was deposed, he was


ILLUSTRATIONS


Ver.2. Anitncorruptible crown. A
French officer, a prisoner on parol at
Reading, met with a Bible ; he read it,
was so impressed with its contents
that he was convinced of the folly of
sceptical principles and of the truth of
Christianity, and resolved to become a
Protestant. When rallied by gay asso-
ciates fur taking so serious a turn, he
said in vindication, “I have done no
more than my old schoolfellow Berna-
dotte, who has become a Lutheran.”
“Yes, but he became so,” said his
associates, “to obtain a crown.” “My
motive,” said the Christian oflicer, “is
the same; we only differ as to the place.
The object of Bernadotte is to obtaina
crown in Sweden; mine is to obtain a
crown in heaven” [Bib. Musewm].

92


brought forth, says the historian, in
a royal robe, and a crown upon his
head. Never was a princes so gorgeous
with less glory and more grief. 2.
Heavenly crowns may be gained.
David set store en this crown from
the King of Ammon. Better far the
crown of God’s favour, the crown of
righteousness, the crown of glory.
These untarnished by blood and
severities, real ornaments to charac-
ter, and unfading with time, &e.

Vers. 4-8. The conflict of the world-
power against Gods kingdom is (1) a
continual conflict ever again renewed
(There was war again, ver. 5); (2) a
conflict carried on with malicious
cunning, frightful power, and mighty
weapons (ver. 5); (3) a conflict peri-
lous to the people of God, demanding
all the power given them by the Lord,
and their utmost bravery; (4) a con-
flict that by God’s help at last ends »
the victory of his kingdom [Lange].


TO CHAPTER XX.


Ver. 3. A lesson to ore
When Edward the Confessor hat
entered England from Normandy te
recover the kingdom, and was ready
to give the Danes battle, one of hir
captains assured him of victory, add.
ing, “We will not leave oue Dane
alive.” To which Edward replied,
“God forbid that the kingdom should
be recovered for me, who am but one
man, by the death of thousands. No-
I will rather lead a private life, un-
stained by the blood of my fellow-men.
than be a king by such a sacrifice,
Upon which he broke up his camp,
and again retired to Normandy, until
he was restored to his throne without
bloodshed [ Percy Anecdotes].


OSAP. XxI.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
A A i SS SN RSI TAS


y


CHAPTER XXI.


Carrroat Norss.] The events here given appear in 2 Sam. xxiv., where the manner in
which the census was taken is fully described, which took Joab nine months and twemty
days. This narrative is condensed. @

Vers. 1-6.—Numbering of people. Satan, the Lord in Sam. “ Both had their hand in the
work—God by permission, Satan by suggestion” [8p. Hall]. Provoked, stirred up.
Trespass (ver. 3), the results of trespass -t.e., punishment. Ver. 4. A summary of five
verses of 2 Sam. xxiv. 4-8, which give route taken by Joab and assistants, and time
occupied to their return. Ver. 5. Number of all lists added together. Discrepancy not easy
to explain. “Tt seems far better to explain, with most commentators, that the numbers
have, in one passage or the other (or possibly in both), suffered corruption” [Speak.
Com.). Ver. 6. Levt, following precedent in Num. i. 47-49; Beij., because Joab desired te
frustrate king’s intention, or because taken on former oecasion (ch. vii. 6-11), and register
preserved in archives of the tribe.

Vers. 7, 8.—God’s displeasure. These words an anticipation of verses 14 and 15; are
placed here, interrupting the narrative, to show that Joab’s artifice was not successful —it
did not avert God’s wrath. David was punished for his intention, though that intention
was not completely carried out by his subordinate [Speak. Com.].

Vers. 9-13.—Gad's message. Seer, prophet elsewhere; perhaps a pupil of David
(2 Sam. xxii. 8), and successor of Samuel in office. Offer, stretch out to thee. Choose,
take to thee. Three things, famine, sword, or pestilence, which often recur in Scripture
(Deut. xxviii. 21-25; Rev. vi. 4-8). ‘This beautiful agreement in the numbers is com-
pletely destroyed by the reading seven” [Keil]. Strait, one form of the evil must be taken,
cannot be avoided. Experience taught him which to choose.

Vers, 14-17.— Ged sends pesitlence. Its form not given; results most sweeping. At length
reached the capital. Angel to destroy it. Ornan and his sons hid themselves on the
apparition of the angel, but came out to welcome David. The king saw the vision,
appeared with the elders in the garb and assumed the attitude of penitence, confessed
their sins, and deprecated the wrath of God.

Vers, 18-22.—David builds an altar. Command to build and choice of site directly from
God, through an angel, to Gad. Altar marked the site for the future temple. Zhreshing-
fioor, the level summit of elevated ground on eastern ridge on which Jerusalem was
situated.

Vers. 23-26.—David buys the threshing-floor. Yo Eastern style of politeness, Ornan offers
the whole to David, as Ephron to Abraham (Gen. xxiii.). Ver. 25. Gave value of the place
here; that of threshing-floor and oxen in Sam. ‘The one writer states the matter of
present interest, the other records the matter of permanent moment ” [ Murphy].

Vers. 27-30.—David sacrifices on the altar. Sacrificed. The whole code of regu-
lations for offerings given in Lev. i-vii. By jfire, answer given on critical occasions
(Lev. ix. 24; 1 Kings xviii. 24-38). Sacrifice accompanied with cessation of plague.
There (ver. 28), regarding that spot as sacred. The altar of burnt-offering still at Gibeon,
where he could not go in present emergency, for fear of the angel, After this divine
institution Mount Moriah (2 Chron. iii. 1) became a place of lawful sacrifice [cf. Murphy].
David knowing that by sacrifice on this altar he had caused the angel to stay his hand,
was afraid to transfer his offerings elsewhere, lest the angel should resume his task, and
pestilence again break out [Speak. Com.},


HOMILETICS.
Tae Wicken Cxensus.—Verses 1-6.


What wrong in numbering the people? A shepherd likes to know the
number of his sheep. A census had been commanded and taken in the
wilderness (Num. i. 1,2). It was customary with other kings, that they
might know what an army to muster for war. Judging from Scripture
accounts, we learn the following truths—I, It was an act instigated


by mysterious influence. Supernatural influence. Satan the adver
93


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cHaP. XXL


o





sary was permitted in some way to move David. God is said in Scripture to
do what he suffers or permits. Man’s free will not forced nor destroyed
by the Divine will. “The web of human actions is very complex. The great
Mover rules over all, but many undermovers intervene in the drama of life;
so that it is not more difficult to foretell the course of the weather than of
the will.” Yet sin is man’s own act, and the punishment of a righteous God
presupposes its guilt. II. It was an act of sinful pride. Enemies
subdued, his rule undisputed, yet not content. Wanted to ascertain and boast
in the military strength of the people, “that I may know the number of the
people” (2 Sam. xxiv. 2; ¢f. 1 Chr. xxvii. 23), “This clear also from the fact
that Joab delayed as long as possible carrying it into Benjamin, in order not
to arouse the insurrectionary spirit of this tribe, which could not forget the
leadership it had possessed under Saul” [Hengs.]. Kings proud, prosperous,
and ambitious, often vain, confident in their own greatness, boastful of the
number of their soldiers and the resources of their subjects. David remark-
ably successful, and thought himself invincible. III. It was an act of
treason against God. Israel were God’s people, not David’s to count
and number as fe thought fit. Disobedient to take a census without God’s
command; perversion of God’s favours to turn them into schemes of self-
agerandizement, and the purposes of God, according to the laws of justice |
and moral order, cannot be obscured or hindered without impunity by proud
acts and ambitious plans of kings. David’s sin akin to that of Nebuchadnezzar,
whom Jehovah taught by bitter experience “to know that the Most High ruleth
in the kingdom of men.” LV. It was an act of peril to the nation.
Joab saw this and remonstrated, “ Why will he be a cause of trespass to Israel ?”
Jt might endanger the liberty of the people, become a State device for heavy
taxation, and would be sure to bring divine displeasure. “‘The apprehension of
a Nemesis on an overweening display of prosperity,” says Dean Stanley, “if not
inconsistent with the highest revelations of the Divine nature in the gospel,
pervades all ancient, especially all Oriental religions.” Presentiments often
forebode evil. “ Be sure your sin will find you out.” V. It was an act
of obstinate persistence. Joab’s rebuke had no effect upon David.
Foolish pride puffed up, and he neither took the counsel of God nor the
advice of friends. With stubborn selfwill he would have his own way—‘ the
king’s word prevailed against Joab.” Advice may demand hard and unpleasant
things, involve humiliation and confession of mistake, and be very different
from the words we expected. Hence disregard to warnings, persistence in evil,
and ultimately inevitable sufferings. ‘The way of a fool is right in his own
eyes ; but he that hearkeneth unto counsel is wise.”


THe Procress oF Truk Penrrence.—Verses 7-13.


In these words a beautiful picture of David's repentance—successive steps of
restoration to God, and the conduct of a real penitent under the chastening
hand of God. I. Jn signs of God's displeasure. ‘God was displeased” (ver. 7).
Displeasure revealed to vindicate God, aid us in apprehending our responsibility
to him, and to secure right mind for due restoration. II. lnm the power of an
awakened conscience. “ David's heart smote him” (Sam.). “The bitter thoughts
of conscience born.” Suggestions from God ; proofs that we are not left alone, nor
hardened beyond hope. ILI. Ja the penitent confession of sin. Accuses himself, and
is deeply grieved that others are involved in his sin (ver. 17). Jam guilty;
these sheep, what have they done? He is so penetrated with sense of guilt, and
with sympathy for his innocent people, that he desires God to send judgments

24


vSae. XX.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


t


SL a ae a eae SGC Tu mceeeeeemecneeerre eer eS


“on him and his house” alone, and spare the people as his flock (these sheep).
EV. In earnest pruyer for pardon. “Take away the iniquity of thy servant”
(Sam.). This only his resource, Acknowledgment of guilt, and entreaty for
divine forgiveness, a proof of true state of heart. WV. In the revelation of God's
wil. The inner cry met by outer word. Gad announced punitive righteous-
hess (ver. 9). This without human means or occasion. God ever ready to give
light and guidance, but in his way and time. VI. In humble submission to God's
will when known. He bows under divine Judgments, yet with hope of delivering
merey.


Tae Awru. JupemMents.—Vereee 11-15.


The judgment descended in the form of a tremendous pestilence— a death,”
as it is expressly termed in the original, like “‘the Black Death” of the Middle
Ages. Appearing in the heat of the summer months, aggravated by the
greatness of the population which had occasioned the census, spreading
with the rapidity of an Oriental disorder in crowded habitations, it flew
from end to end of the country in three days, and at last approached
Jerusalem. The new capital, the very heart of the nation, the peculiar
glory of David’s reign, seemed to be doomed to destruction [Dean Stanley].
I. Judgments entailed by one man’s sin. David responsible chiefly
for its results. Man’s power to entail tremendous evils or greatest blessings
upon others. Seventy thousand human beings cut off by judgment. What
deaths lie at our door! II. Judgments easily prepared for
execution. God has agents ever ready to do his will. Famine, sword, and
pestilence, set in order, waiting the command to attack, and fearful in results,
“The terrcrs of God do set themselves in (military) array against me ” (Job vi. 4).
Iil. Judgmenis sent according to human preference. “Choose
thee.” Wonderful, mysterious offer! Not often done; would not always be
consistent with God’s justice. Weare not always able, enlightened enough to
choose. This a special case, only a temporary fall from loyalty, and the design
was the restoration to full trust. God wise and merciful IV. Judgments
arrested by earnest prayer. oom in the purposes of God and in the
operations of nature for prayer. “ Natural law” interferes not with prayer and
human freedom. Who kuows what judgments may be averted, mitigated, or
turned into blessings, by earnest petition? Scripture and ecclesiastical history
full of illustrations. “ More things are wrought by prayer than the world dreams


of” | Tennyson}.
Davin’s Cuoice.—Verses 11-13.


David offered three things. To show him and the world that the evils
denounced were no casual calamities, nor effects of any natural cause, he was
permitted to choose which should be immediately inflicted. Regard the choice—
I. As the resuit of an awakened conscience. “I am ina great
strait.” The natural feeling of one under the terrors of God; the voice of
conscience in anguish and torture. “ What must I do to be saved ?” Ii. As
the revelation of the principle of Christian life. Famine would
leave Israel dependent upon others for food; defeat, on the mercy of the
heathen; in pestilence, they would have God only to deal with. God the only
refuge; no human power could defend. He left himself confidently with God.
Thus gave a public testimony that it is vain to trust in man; that God only is


supreme, gracious, and wise. III. As a picture of future Ree to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


nena


all.


A choice for us to make.


submission now, or by compulsion at last.
“Now, therefore, advise thyself” (ver. 12).


away.


(omar. =x.


We must fall into God’s hands by voluntary


Decide to-day, before choice is taken


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. Know tt. But what needs
that, now that there was a general
peace or truce with all nations? Curi-
osity, it was at least; yea, it was pride
and creature confidence that pricked
David on to this numbering of the
people, and made him so peremptory.
This Augustus Cesar might do for his
pleasure, and carry it away without
punishment (Luke ii. 1). Not s0
David. God will take that from
others what he will not bear with in his
own (Amos iii. 2), The Philistines
might cart the ark, but David smarted
for so doing [Zrapp].

Ver. 6. The interrupted survey. 1.
Joab from policy did not number all
he people. The work grew tedious,
and Joab did not relish it, “for the
king’s word was abominable to Joab.”
2. But God's providence seen in result.
Other agency beside man’s recognised.
Two tribes not numbered, “ partly
because Levi was devoted to His
service, and Benjamin had become the
least of all tribes (Judges xxi.); and
partly because God foresaw that they
would remain faithful to the house of
David in the division of the tribes,
and therefore would not have them
diminished ” [Jamieson].

‘* There’s a Divinity that shapes our ends,

Rough-hew them how we will.”


Vers. 9,10. Gad an emblem oy a
true minister. His message was—lI.
Divine. So isthe gospel message, of
which there is evidence drawn from—
1. The facts of history. 2. Its con-
gruity with the spiritual constitution
of man. 3, Experience of those who
feel its power. II. An appeal to
choice: ‘* Advise thyself.” 1. You can
reject it. 2. You can accept it. III.
Was to be accounted for: ‘‘ What word,
&ec.” 1, Gad was responsible for its
delivery. 2. David was responsible for
its results [Bib, Mus.].

96


Ver. 8. Foolishly. He thought at
first he had done very wisely ; now he
seeth his error, and disclaimeth it. We
had before his contrition, confession,
and supplication, all which make up
his repentance for sin; here we have
his conversion or reformation, which is
his repentance from sin, his amendment
of life [7'rapp].

Ver. 13. Into the hand of the Lord.
The reason for this choice was partly
his confidence in God’s great goodness ;
partly because the other judgments,
especially the sword, would have been
more dishonourable, not only to David,
but also to God and his people; and
partly because he, having sinned him-
self, thought it just to choose a plague,
to which he was as obnoxious as his
people; whereas he had better defences
for himself against the sword and
famine than they had. True, 7 is a
fearful ching to fall into the hands of
the living God/ Fearful indeed for
those who have, by their impenitence,
shut themselves from his mercy. But
a penitent dares cast himself into God’s
hand, knowing that hes mercies are
great [Benson]. The compelled choice
of punitive infliction, and the dread
alternatives. The Divine mercy amid
calamity. There is here a Contrast
between Divine and Human Chastise-
ments. Strange that men, who are so
near us, should be less trustworthy than
God, who is unseen. Men treat us
worse, God better, than we have de-
served. David's preference is justified
when we consider—1. The harsh judg-
ments men pronounce on each other.
2. The harsh treatment of the guilty
who are in men’s power. 3. The
absence of sympathetic kindness in
human warfare. 4. That when God
punishes he does so in righteousness,
5. That in the treatment of the guilty
God always shows mercy. The lessons
are—]. Submission to God. 2. Hope


BMAP. XSI. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





i)
ful trust. Davids choice. 1. The  tionof atruth, the ground of hope, and
option declined. Had too much of his the testimony of experience. (2) Mot
own will already. Refers it back toGod into the hand of man. The tender
and resigns himself into Ais hands, 2. mercies of the wicked arecruel. Trust
What are the reasons for this? (1) in man destroys freedom, dishonours
“Great are his mercies.” The declara- character, and disappoints hope.


HOMILETICS.
Davin anv IsrarL.—Verses 17-27.


The sad circumstances of David and Israel. David’s wisdom in giving himself
into the hands of God. God’s hand is safest to hold the rod—the hand of a
king, master, father. I. The progressive course of sin. 1. Zempta-
tion (ver. 1). Satan the black fountain of all transgress. David not conscious
that Satan was so near. Insidiousness of Satanic influence. 2. Transgression
(ver. 2). In face of warning (ver. 3). Its desperate folly seen by others (ver. 6).
The deadening, hardening power of any lust. 3. Punishment (vers. 10-12). As
scon will the magnet escape the influence of the pole, the sea the influence of
the moon, an atom the binding force of gravitation, as the sinner escape
punishment. ‘Be sure thy sin.” II, The progressive course of
reconciliation with God. 1. The messenger. (God's afflictive stroke (ver.
7). The prophet Gad (ver. 9). Every person or circumstance that reproves is
God’s messenger. ‘‘God smote.” ‘The Lord spake to Gad, Go, &c.” 2. Con-
viction (ver. 8). The true convict always confesses, never excuses. Not only
owns the sin, but acknowledges its greatness. Text. “ItisI, kc.” 3. Penitence
(ver. 16). “Sackcloth,” emblem of deepest grief; “fell upon their faces ;”
evidence of profound humiliation and utter prostration before God. 4. Accept-
ance. Expressly permitted to worship (ver. 18). Consciously and visibly
accepted in worship (ver. 26). Delivered from the dread visitation. 5. Grate-
ful acknowledgment (ver. 24). Would not offer costless worship. Would not
offer cheap worship—“ full price.” We are to be living sacrifices. III,
Underlying truths. 1. Though man be tempted, sin is his own act. Satan
suggested, ‘ provoked” David, yet the sin was David’s. He might have had
resisting strength. 2. Our sins affect others. How many widows and orphans!
How much anguish and unutterable misery through David’s sin! Any man’s
sins are a widespread and far-reaching curse. Text. David sinned: “these
sheep” were terribly smitten. 3. Though sin be pardoned, it leaves terrible scars
behind. In David’s memory. Gaps in the families and homes of the people.
Avoidance of sin infinitely better than pardon. Christ the great and only sin-
healer. O Holy Ghost, draw, dc. [R. Berry].


Toe AnGEL ARRESTED.—Derses 15-17.


The infliction of pestilence briefly noticed, without account of duration or
ravages; but minute description of visible appearance and menacing attitude of
the angel. Notice—I, The errand of the angel “to destroy it.” Even
angels ready executioners of God’s judgments. Sodom and Jerusalem ; destruc-
tion of firstborn in Egypt and of Sennacherib’s army. Unseen agents often
sent within sphere of things seen, to impress the heart through the senses and
convince of God’s ways. But Christ came not to destroy men’s lives, dec. IT.
The destiny of the angel. Pestilence had swept the country, now sur-

97


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (CHAP. XXE.


rounded the capital. The centre of glory and empire, seat of the palace and
the ark apparently doomed! God strikes at our dearest objects to chastise our
sins and bring us to himself. III. The attitude of the angel. “A
drawn sword in his hand.” Indicative of wrong and determination to punish it.
Giving opportunity to intercede for the city. God ready to punish, yet waits
to be gracious. ‘This attitule warns, yet encourages. IV. The command
tothe angel. “Enough.” God knows exactly how far to go, how much is
required to bring us to submission. ‘Stay now thine hand.” Prayer has been
offered and the design accomplished. ‘The Lord repented him of the evil,”
changed his method of procedure and stayed the plague. In this very spot
Abraham countermanded from slaying his son. For the sake of the great
Sacrifice and Intercessor our lives are preserved from destruction.


Toe Axtar Boitt ann tee Puacur Stayvep.—Verses 14-26.


Here a national calamity traceable to David’s sin, and that sin apparently of
minor magnitude. But what evil in it? It was the result of pride and vain-
glory, to see the army he could raise, and to which he trusted instead of God.
It was ingratitude for past deliverances, &c., hence the wrath of God kindled.
David soon became conscious of guilt. A prophet sent to announce God’s will,
and choice had to be made. Observe—I. A fearful evil. The evil—1. Was
the plague. Some fearful disease, swiftly mortal; for in nine hours, at most,
some think 70,000 died. How awful! and beyond the power of human skill to
deliver. Sudden, terrible, fatal! 2. An angel was the messenger employed. Now
ready to fulfil his commission in Jerusalem, but God stayed him. 3. David
beheld the angel and interceded for the people. A beautiful instance of lofty, con-
scientious feeling. Generousand magnanimous. II. The divine remedy.
An altar must be built, sacrifice offered, &e. 1. Human guilt was acknowledged.
2. God was glorified. Both his justice and wrath in punishing, and his great
mercy in staying his judgments. 3. No doubt the typical end of sacrifices would
be realised. Looking on to the coming of the Lamb of God. For both sin, evil,
and remedy may direct us to the great subject of atonement for a perishing
world, Besides, this altar finely symbolizes the erection of houses for the
worship of God. For, through the divine agency of gospel truth, by these the
plague of the world is removed. Ignorance displaced by knowledge, profligacy
by moral order, irreligion by godliness, unbelief and death by bestowment of
salvation and eternal life. IIT. A generous proposal. Altar to be
erected at a given spot. Nothing in religion left to fancy. David states the
case clearly to Ornan. Then came the proposal. 1. This offer was beyond what
David stated. “I give thee oxen, &.” 2. It was prompt, the result of generous
and pious resolution. 3. It was pressed on David. 4. It was followed with prayer
(2 Sam. xxiv. 23). How pious and noble! A finer specimen of godly liberality
never was exhibited—the act, the manner, the spirit, the prayer! IV. A
noble and self-sacrificing spirit. Ornan did well. David did better.
Selfishness or formality would have accepted it. David desired the offering.
1. Zo be his own. The guilt had been his; so the repentance, so the fruit.
2. He valued his religion more than his wealth. So he paid full worth for the
place. This act of David’s the opposite of two classes in our day—(1) Those
who wish others to pay for their religion ; (2) those who wish to have religion
without cost. Learn—l. The frailty of good men. David numbered the people.
2. The necessary results of sin—misery and ruin. 3. The only way of averting
it. By repentance, coming to the one sacrifice on the only perpetual altar reared
for the world’s guilt. 4. ‘The fruit of a sanctified heart. Holy zeal and liberality
in the cause of God [J. Burns, D.D.}

98


UmaP. xx1.] AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


SS a FP RIT TT Sa aa


Tse Prorimation.—Verses 18-27.


Taking the altar and sacrifice as means of propitiation to reconcile, to restore
man to God, we have an illustration of the atonement of Christ in its design,
method, and results. I. The moral condition which it is designed
to meet. 1. Outward difficulties. Offence committed and punishment due.
God’s anger must be taken away; his justice displayed. Man cannot remove
penalty, dissolve law, nor deliver himself. In the work of Christ claims of
justice satisfied, obstacles to pardon removed, demands of moral government
met. Jehovah “a just God anda Saviour.” 2. Inward feelings. Man’s guilt
ereates fear and distance. “I was afraid and I Aid myself.” ‘‘ He was afraid
because of the sword.” God’s love in Christ represents him unrevengeful, near
and ready to forgive. The Holy Spirit renews the disposition, enlightens the
mind, and takes away fear. Thus distance is destroyed, guilt overcome, and God
and man reconciled. II. The provision made for this condition.
With the distinct understanding that we simply glance at one aspect of this pro-
found subject, we assert that to make atonement for sin required great cost. Not
“by the blood of goats and calves,” not “by gold and silver” are we redeemed,
but by the precious blood of Christ. Christ himself was the sacrifice. Scrip-
ture and history rich in examples of benevolence and self-sacrifice; none like
this. The gift of God’s beloved Son more costly than worlds upon worlds;
inestimable, incomprehensive. ‘Thanks be unto God for his unspeukable gift.”
{II. The results which it accomplished. 1. Danger warded off. When
David repented of sin, God repented of judgment; plague arrested; destroy-
mg angel commanded to stay his hand (ver. 15) and sheath his sword (ver. 27).
2. Sacrifices accepted. “God answered from heaven by fire” (ver. 26), to
signify that anger was turned away and God propitious. ‘So the Lord was
entreated for the land, and the plague was stayed from Israel.” This typical
of the sinner’s reconciliation and acceptance with God through Christ. ‘He
(himself) is the propitiation (propitiatory sacrifice) for our sins; and not for
oura only, but also for the sins of the whole world” (1 Jno ii. 2).


Tue Cost anp Seur-Sacriricg or Reticion.—Verses 22-26.


Sacrifice was to be presented ; specific directions were given. David promptly
obeyed. A generous scene of altercation takes place. A pious and self-sacrificing
decision expressed by David. Acceptable religion is a religion of self-sacrifice—
a religion of cost; and the cost must be personally paid. In illustration of this,
contemplate the subject. I. In reference to the spiritual expansion
of the intell-ctual powers. ‘Theology, the divine science of religion,
one of boundless extent. ‘The greatness, number, variety, and importance of
the subjects. God—his works, his government, his will. ‘The Lord Jesus
Christ—the gospel, eternal life. To understand there must be reading, study,
reflection. A course of divine training—religious education. We may be
Christians without much knowledge, but our honour, glory, felicity, to abound
in knowledge. ‘The cost must be paid, in the attainment. The astronomer pays
it, the man of literature, so the Christian. II. Apply the subject to
the spiritual cultivation of the moral nature. The soul before
vonversion like a barren heath, or desert, arid, &c. It must be cultivated,
ploughed, sown, tilled. Much labour needful. Evil habits to be abaudoned,
Holy habits to be formed. Virtues to be grafted in; graces to be cherished.
Hence duties, toils, and spiritual efforts necessary. Hence the exhortations,
“Be diligent, é&e.,” “Work out your salvation, dc.” Apply the ns


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [CHAP, %Xx











—


III. To the influence of self-denial in adorning the Chris-
tian profession. Self-denial not the abandonment of sin, é&c., but sur-
rendering even of what might be lawfully retained. Hence the case of eating
flesh, &c., as given by the apostle (Rom. xiv. 1). Now our habits, costume,
conversation, spirit, must all be sacrificed, if God’s glory and the good of others
demand it. Our will sacrificed that God’s may be done. Apply the subject—
IV. To the importance of usefulness in the cause of the
Lord Jesus Christ. This one great end of conversion. “I will bless
thee and make thee a blessing, &c.” First, the heart must be given to Christ;
then life, talents, influence, time, wealth. If we will be useful, the cost must
be paid; the law of self-sacrifice must rule us; ease, sordidness, &c., must be cast
off, “Brethren, I beseech you, by the mercies of God, &c.” These cases illus-
trate the subject. But I give additional thoughts. Not only must the cost he
paid, but paid (1) In the right spirit. Not the spirit of ostentation for display ;
of self-righteousness for merit ; of backwardness and grudgingly ; but in humble,
cheerful love to Christ. Felt to be a privilege as well as a duty. Need no force


nor threatening. Not thewhip, but the curb. As David in the text. ‘“ Freely
we have received, &c.” Inthe language of the poet-— ;
“ Had I a thousand hearts to give,
Lord, they should all be thine.”
(2) Observe, this cost paid in religion, is not equal to the demands of sin. Look


at the sacrifice, the worldly, the proud, the sensual make. What money! what
time! what energies! What peace! The way of transgressors is hard, and
the endruin. (3) To pay this cost in the service of Christ, grace is both neces-


sary and provided.
ficient, &c,”


“Without Me ye can do nothing.”
Grace must inspire the desire, purpose, and motive—give the


“ My grace is suf-


ability and elasticity. The grace of God is provided abundantly. It was found


so by Abraham, Moses, David, Daniel, Paul.


1. Lead to examination.
for it? What has it cost us?
persons.
have a costless religion.
own present reward.


ai things, &e.” [J. Burns, D.D.}.


Our subject, then, should—


What has religion done for us? What have we done
Have you the inward sense of God’s full favour?
Have you the testimony that you please God ?


2. It condemns two classes of


Those who wish others to pay for their religion, and those who wish to
Not so David. Forget not—3. That true religion is its
Peace, hope, and joy, now; hereafter, the glories of a~
blissful eternity. Let the spirit of the text ever dwell in you.
sinner. Whois indifferent to religion altogether.


4. Address the
“ Godliness is profitable unto


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 14~17. I. Judgments follow-
ing sin. This a necessary, natural,
and certain sequence. II. Judgments
mixed with merey. 1. Shortened in
duration. 2. Ending in correction,
“ Mercy rejoices over judgment. (1)'The
penitent man casts himself into the
arms of God’s mercy; (2) Mercy falls
intu the arms of justice, in order to
stay its blows; punitive justice must
yield to mercy at the command of the
Lord. ‘It is enough: stay now thy
hand’” [Lange].

Vers. 16-20. 1. David’s ready obedi-

100


ence. 2. David's willingness to suffer
alone. 3. David's intercession for the
people. ‘ Most people, when judg-


ments are abroad, charge others with
being the cause of them, so they can
escape ; but David’s penitent and public
spirit was otherwise affected. As be-
came a penitent he is severe upon his
own faults, while he extenuates those
of the people and intercedes for them.”

Ver. 24. Full price. Apply tu
ministers and Sunday-school teachers iv
preparation for pulpit and class.

Vers, 22-27. 1. Zhe altar purchased


Hap. xx1.]}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


iM i ii


(1) By divine instructions. Concerning
place, person, and purpose. (2) By
honourable transaction, In spirit: of
courtesy, generosity, and self-sacrifice.
Il. The altar accepted. Acceptance by
fire, and hallowed by tokens of God’s
presence, III. The altar perpetuuted.
Partly to meet David’s fears, also to
fulfil God’s purpose. Reverence for
Divine Being led him to stay at the
place, to make additional offerings and
seek favour by earnest prayer. God
was gracious, approved and sanctioned.
Mount Moriah became a place of lawful
and continual sacrifice. “ Rear an altar
unto the Lord! (1) In obedience to
the Lord’s command ; (2) With dedi-
cation of thyself, and what is thine, to
the Lord’s honour; (3) For the con-


tinual preservation of spiritual offer-
ings, which are acceptable to the
Lord ; and (4) For the reception of
the highest gift of grare, peace with
the propitiated God” [Zange]. Chap.
xxi. 1. David’s sin. 2. David’s self-
reproach, penitence, and confession.
3. David’s punishment. 4. David's
supplication and expiatory offering.
5. David’s forgiveness and restoration.
How God meets the presumptuousness of
his favoured ones. (1) He comes upon
them with the edge of the sword;
(2) His sword is not to kill, but to
loose the chains of pride, (3) Where
the sword of the Lord has done its
work, there ne builds his temple of
peace [7 Disselhof].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XX1I.


Ver. 2. The number. This attempt
to take the census was not unnaturally
suggested by the increase of his power,
but it implied a confidence and pride
akin to the spirit inculcated on the
kings of the chosen people [Dean
Stanley].

Ver, 4. King’s word prevailed. Wis-
dom is gotten by hearkening to good
counsel, for none are born so naturally
(Job xi. 12). ‘‘ Many had proved wise
if they had not thought themselves
so” | Bp. Hall]. There cannot be a
more worthy improvement of friend-
ship than in a fervent opposition to
the sins of those we love [Zdid.].

Vers. 9-15. Punishment. He that
would be safe from the acts of evil
must wisely avoid the occasions [ Bp.
Hall|. How hard a master he serves
where the devil gives the employment,
and shame is his entertainment, and
sin is his work, and hell is his wages
[Bp. J. Vaylor}]. “Sinners labour in
the very fire.”

Ver. 7. God was displeased.

“ But Providence will intervene

To throw His dark displeasure o’er the

scene” | Cowper].

Ver. 17. Plagued. The great de-
sign, both in judgment and mercies, is
to convince us that there is none like


the Lord our God; none so wise, so
mighty, so good ; no enemy so formid-
able, no friend so desirable, so valuable
[Mt. Henry]. O God, I have made an
ul use of thy mercies, if I have not
learnt to be content with thy correc-
tions [Bp. Hall]. How sweetly doth
God dispose of all second causes, that
while they do their own will they do
his [/d¢d. ].

Vers.24-27. Full price. A bargain
is sometimes as unmerciful as a robbery
[Nicholls]. Kindness will dictate much
in carrying on business which law can-
not take cognizance cf. It will preserve
from the wretched practice of exclusive
dealing, of punishing a man for his re-
ligion or politics by withholding custom,
of making commerce the instrument of
bigotry and exclusiveness, a practice
which all condemn when they suffer
from it, and all approve when they are
advantaged by st. It will teach us to
give a tender consideration to the cases
of others, to treat inferiors with cour-
tesy and gentleness, to pay respect to
those whose circumstances make them
apt to suspect unkindness, not to make
a vigorous exaction of mere rights, to
allow for unavoidable causes, and by
studious care smooth the path of honest
poverty [A. J. Morris}. =


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (oHaP £x12











OHAPTER XXII.


Carrscan Notes.) The remaining chapters of this book are peculiar to the chronist.
They narrate the arrangements of David for the building of the temple, his relivioue
and political regulations, and his last will and death [Murphy]. ‘This chapter, which
consists entirely of new matter, helps to fill up the gap which had been left by the
earlier authors between 2 Sam. xxiv. and 1 Kings i. [Speak. Com. }.

Vers. 1-5.—Preparations for the Temple. This, the spot on which the altar was built, he
regards as the site of the temple. Ver. 2. Strangers, non-Israelites, descendants of old
Cansanites, war captives from whom exacted a tribute of bond-service (2 Chron. viii. 7-10),
and war captives (2 Chron. ii. 7) reserved for the great work contemplated [Jamieson].
Masons, stone-cutters. Ver. 3. Joinings. braces or brackets for binding wood or stone,
Ver. 4. Zidon, abounded in timber merchants and navigators (cf. 1 Kings v. 1, 15-18;
2 Chron. ii. 16). Ver. & Tender, exact age unknown. ‘It cannot have been more than
24 or 25. It may have been as little as 14 or 15” [Speak. Com.].

Vers, 6-16.—Charge to Solomon. Ver. 6. Called, a short time before his death to give
him special instructions. Ver. 7. Mind, heart (2 Sam. vii. 1-17). Ver. 8. Blood. This
referred to in ch. xxviii. 3 and 1 Kings vy. 17, though not in same terms. Nathan's mes-
sage (ch. xvii. 4-14) assigned no ground for prohibition. In form of command here and
the first intimation of reason why David must not build. On character of David’s wars,
cf. 2 Sam. viii. 2, x. 18, xii. 31; 1 Kings xi.16. Sol., ‘‘had two names—viz., Solomon,
‘peaceful,’ and Jedidiah, ‘beloved of Jehovah’ (2 Sam. xii 25). The former name
prevailed on account of this prophecy, which attached to the name the promise of a
blessing” [Speak, Com.]. Give peuce (1 Kings iv. 20-23, v. 4). Ver. 10. Son in peculiar and
special manner. Ver. 11. Prosper, literally ‘‘ The Lord shall be with thee, and thou shalt
prosper. But future may have an imperative sense” [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 12. Wisdom
(cf. Ps. lxxii. 1; Sol.’s prayer, 1 Kings iii. 5-15). Ver. 13. Strong, words which are found in
Deut. iv. 1, v. 1, vii. 4, xi. 32, xxxi. 6; Josh. i. 7. Ver. 14. Trouble, poverty. ‘* By my
strenuous labour, according to Gen. xxxi. 42; see the precisely similar expression (ch.
xxix. 2), I have prepared with all my might” (Aez/]. Talents, taking usual idea of
talent, this would be more than eighty millions sterling, Hither the talent of smaller
value or text corrupted. “ The latter is certainly the more probable supposition”
(Speak Com.]. Ver. 15. Cunning, i.e., skilful, serfs of ancient kingdoms very numerous
(cf. 2 Chron. ii. 17).

Vers. 17-19.—Charge to Princes. Members of court, including other sons of David.
Ver. 18. Reasons for liberality in giving. Vor. 19, Set, make this your purpose and
effort ; holy vessels used in tabernacle service.


HOMILETICS.


THe Bouiupine or tHe Teurur.—Verses l=},


This chapter and the seven which follow are supplementary to the Second Book
of Samuel, and {. ; up the space between the end of that Book and the beginning
of the First Book of Kings. Preparations for building going on for twenty-five
or thirty years. In times of war and domestic affliction, David accumulated
treasure and materials to be handed over to his successor.

I. The work for which he prepared. “This is house of the Lord
God.” Its building ‘exceeding magnifical.” 1. In the costliness of its materials.
fron and brass, timber and stone, gold and silver. In the spiritual temple the
materials are human beings, intellectual and immortal spirits. The preparation
and forming of these ‘materials into a temple for God includes the calling, regen-
eration, and consecration of men in Christ, “in whom all the building, fitly
framed (exactly fitted) together, groweth into a holy temple in the Lord”
eee 20). 2. Im the grandeur of tts design. Not for earthly and inferior


q@ap, Xxxrt,] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


_ —_—_—_— —-. —





abjects. (1) For the honour of the great God, Lord of heaven and earth.
“ Build an house for the Lord God.” (2) For the benefit of men. “ Of fame and
of glory throughout all countries.” Reminding men of God’s existence and
claims ; the centre of light and purity, bringing heaven down to earth, and
securing the triumphs and praise of redeeming grace. II. The incentives
to the performance of this work. There are many. 1. Consider the
greatness of the work, Move than the erection of a palace, the building of a
city, the founding of an empire. A work agreeing with youth and age ; affords
scope for ambition, enthusiasm, and skill. 2. Divine instructions are given to its
performance. God revealed the site, the plan, the ornaments, and all the
arrangements for service. When way is known, walk in it. Knowledge given
to practice. 3. Good example inspires. ‘Precepts teach, but examples draw.”
Man a creature of imitation by education and habit. A noble example interests,
rouses attention, and stimulates to action. Illustrates the possibility and the
manner of doing what is enjoined. David set a nobleexample. 4. The circwm-
stances of others should influence us. “Solomon is young and tender.” Others
may not be situated, prepared, blessed as we are, may be weak, aged, and helpless.
Consider the wants of the Church—men, money, and materials ; the wants of the
rising generation—good examples, education, and sympathy ; the wants of the
world—temples, Bibles, and missionaries. Care for the future, and if you cannot
build, gather materials.


PREPARATION FOR THE Work or Gop.—Verses 1-5.


This needful, urgent, and within the reach of all. I. By personal effort.
David earnest, patient, and persevering; getting ready in prosperity and
adversity. Warned by shortness of time, infirmity, and approaching end,
“prepared abundantly before his death.” II. By initiation of the work. Gather
materials, begin or enter some work for God. Forethought is the best security
against waste, idleness, and failure. An unfurnished minister, scholar, or church
member cannot be “a wise master-builder.” ‘ Prepare thy work without, and
make it fit for thyself in the field, and afterwards build thine house.” III. By
employment of willing helpers. “Strangers” gathered together and enlisted in
the service. Aliens (the non-Israelite population) hewed wood, carried burdens,
&c. Often questioned whether help for building sanctuaries, supporting and
maintaining religious institutions and worship, should be received from ungodly.
But God urges every one tosurrendertohim. All our possessions are God’s, and
should be consecrated to him. Some are willing, others may be induced. Only
cherish a liberal, kindly feeling, and they “shall be his servants, that they may
know his service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.”


“ All the means of action—
The shapeless masses, the materials,
Lie everywhere about us. What we need
Is the celestiil fire to change the flint
Into transparent crystal, bright and clear ” [Longfellow].


Davin’s CHuarcze To SoLtomon.—Verses 6—16.


Something more than dead materials required. Gold and silver nothing
without willing hearts and active hands. David would gladly have done the
work, but forbidden. Gives a touching and direct charge to incite Solomon to
build. Learn—I. That some originate a good work, but are
not permitted to execute it. David himself gives a ie Ans


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (oHar. xxm.





(ver. 8). Hands siained with blood not fit to build a house of worship, the
abode of love and peace. What a lesson! Sin may be forgiven, but a stain
left behind. Present acts may influence future character, hinder holy work,
decide the lot that should fall to us, or be lost by us. Cruelty and inconsistency
will ever deprive of noble work and honour. II. That others may be
called to execute work which they never originated. David
prepared, and Solomon used the materials. ‘One soweth and another reapeth,”
and thus the work is carried on under a divine plan. A work for us, and a
sphere appointed to do it. What matter middle, beginning, or end? No
Christian effort, no man’s life isolated. In our surroundings and duties our
life’s purpose is unfolded. 1. They are specially designated for the work. ‘“ He
shall build an house.” Cyrus called by name to do God’s pleasure, and set
captives free (Is. xliv. 28; xlv. 1). 2. Opportunities are given them to work.
Solomon had rest from enemies, and Israel enjoyed “peace and quietness” in
his days. Where God gives opportunity, leisure, and talent he expects work.
If not done in time and place, may be left undone, or given to another. ‘‘ Who
knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?”
III. That, when called, they should finish the work given
them to do. “Arise, therefore, and be doing” (ver. 16). 1. Zhe work is
urgent. ‘‘ Arise, &.” We are apt to fall into apathy, formalism, and forgetful-
ness—to be absorbed by earthly cares, or overcome by temptation. Awake to
holy zeal, intense concern for the Redeemer’s work. 2. God has promised help.
Need of men and money, sanctified intellects and eloquent tongues, broad
shoulders and active hands; but with all, and more than all, the Lord’s presence.
Do we rely upon this? Are we earnestly desiring and praying for this? “ The
Lord be with thee, and prosper thee, &c.” (ver. 11).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. Gather the strangers. A Christ. VI. His great work was the


notable type of the calling of the
Gentiles; and the like we may say of
the temples being built on the ground
of a Jebusite, and by the help of Tyrians
and Zidonians, and adorned with the
spoils of divers nations (chap. xviii.)
[Trapp],

Ver. 3. Prepared. Many parents
prepare guilt in abundance, hoards and
heaps of evil-gotten goods—and there-
withal God’s curse—to spend on their
lusts, &c. As for pious and charitable
uses, they cry out with Judas, Whereto
is this waste? [Jdid.].

Ver. 5. agnifical, The second
temple was nothing like it, though the
glory of it was greater (Hag. ii.), by
the presence and preaching of Jesus
Christ in it [Zb¢d.].

Ver. 9. A son predicted. I. Son of


David; so was Christ. II. A man of
rest ; so was Christ. III. The giver
of peace; so was Christ. IV. He had


a significant name ; so has Jesus Christ.
Vv. He was a@ glorious king; so is
104


building of the temple; so is the work
of Christ [ Bib. Museum}.

Vers. 11-13. A father’s prayer for
his son. I. For the possession of moral
qualities. 1. “Wisdom and understand-
wg.” Parents should be anxious for the
education and religious welfare of
children. Inheritance, wealth, and
position nothing without this. Wis-
dom needed to turn all to good account.
‘‘ Wisdom is the principal thing ; there-
fore get wisdom; and with all thy
getting get understanding.” 2. Strength
and moral courage. “ Be strong and
of good courage.” Ver. 13. Enemies
and dangers cause ‘‘dread.” In pos
session of sound wisdom and in vital
alliance with God we are rerfectly safe.
Men without understand‘, and cour-
age, out of place, weak and useless.


“Let not the world see fear and sad
mistrust
Govern the motion of a kingly eye” [Shake
speare],


CHAP. Xxm.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. —


(a)





Il. For the presence of God. “The
Lord be with thee,” A petition often
repeated, too little understood ; needful
and appropriate to all times, under-
takings, and places; the wish of every
good father, and the prayer of every
true Christian for an earnest worker.
“Be strong and of good courage; be
not afraid, neither be thou dismayed,
for the Lord thy God is with thee
whithersoever thou goest.” JII. For
successful undertaking. ‘* Prosper thou
and build.” All parents wish success to


children in every pursuit, possession of
influence and authority, “charge over
Israel.” This often selfish, without
reverent regard for the Lord’s will.
Be anxious for moral integrity and
loyal obedience of youth. No pro
sperity without obedience to “ the law
of the Lord” and regard for his will.
“Then shalt thou prosper, if thou
takest heed to fulfil the statutes, &c.”

*¢’Tis not in mortals to command success,


But we'll do more, Sempronius; we'll
deserve it.”


HOMILETICS.


ConnpitTions oF SuccessruL Errort.—Verses 11-13.


Time procured by our labours or help of others most profitably spent in God’s
service, utilising the preparations, improving the advantages, and carrying on
the work of predecessors. But success only on certain conditions. I, Personal
fitness. There must be ability, power, capacity, physical, intellectual, and
moral. 1. Wisdom to direct. “Wisdom and understanding.” Not worldly
policy, human education, “earthly wisdom;” but “wisdom from above”
(Jas. iii. 15-17), that “ wisdom profitable to direct” (Ecc. x. 10). 2. Strength
to work Weakness, distrust, and hesitancy certain to fail. ‘ Fortune favours
the brave.” ‘“ Woe unto him that is faint-hearted,” says the son of Sirach,
There must be no unfitness in act, heart, or capacity. II. God’s presence
to help in its prosecution. The word only (ver. 12) most suggestive,
indicates entire failure without this. Skilful workmen, wise diplomatists, useful
materials for work, may be needful, but divine help can never be dispensed with.
The wisdom, the royal influence, and the powerful rule of Solomon not sufficient.
“The Lord was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man.” III. Loyal
obedience to God. “ Keep the lawof the Lord.” Success in departments
of nature gained by submission to matter and co-operation with its laws. Our
strength lies in “keeping the law.” The throne of kings, the business of
merchants, the prosperity of churches, established by obedience. “ Observe to
do according to all that is written therein; for then thou shalt make thy way
prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success.”


THe Earnest AprpEau.— Verses 17-19.


Princes urged to help, to consecrate themselves first, for this the foundation of
zeal; then reasons given for liberality in the work. This earnest appeal
suggests—I, That God has a temple to build among men.
‘‘ Build ye the sanctuary.” 1. A sanctuary to be built. Not by earthly materials,
but by “lively (diving) stones” (1 Pet. ii. 5). A spiritual temple, a Christian
church, as well as a material palace. 2. A sanctuary to be furnished. ‘“ Bring
the ark and the holy vessels.” Furnished not with pompous ceremonies and
burning tapers, but with moral beauty, appropriate rites, spiritual songs, devout
attendants, and the presence of God. This the work of Solomon on the throne,


courtiers in the palace, and people im the eottage. Gather your materials, and
105


SOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (oHAP. XXII.





offer your gold and silver; give yourselves, and resolve “to help.” II. That
to this work the Christian Church is called. Not privileged to
help in rearing the first or second temple, but earnestly called to this work.
1. Called by favourable circumstances, Land taken, inhabitants overcome, and
rest given. Hindrances moved, and opportunities many. 2. Called by the will
of God. Expressed in his word, by his servants, and by everything around
us, 3. Called by the urgency of the work. “ Arise, therefore, and be doing.’
Now is the time. Delay risky to yourselves and others, It is sinful
in itself, and an evil example to others. III. That a spirit of
active zeal should characterise the prosecution of this
work. This designed by God in bestowment of gifts and arrangements
of providence. ‘“ Now,” because this done for you, “arise, therefore.” 1. The
heart should be fied on it. Not the work of accident nor compulsion. Must be
your choice and purpose. Energy, aim, and sympathy must be roused and fixed.
Everything within us “se.” 2. Active excitement must be associated with
constant labour. Apt to fall into a state of apathy and formalism. Nothing can
overcome indolence, temptation, and neglect but holy love, heavenly excitement,
and burning zeal. The Church must awake to a lively, intense concern, to adopt,
carry out every plan, and become a diligent, faithful, and working Church.
Listen to the call, and remember the promise of God. Answer every foe with
Nehemiah : “ The God of heaven, he will prosper us; therefore we his servants
will arise and build.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 12. The qualificaitons needed.
The source from whence they come,
The design for which they are given.
Keep the law of the Lord thy God. 1.
God’s will is a@ law. Not an opinion,
creed, or counsel. Something laid
down, revealed, with authority and
publicity. 2. This law should be kept,
“That thou mayest keep the law.” Not
given for mere study, information, or
speculation, but for practice in life.
3. Obedience to this law is wisdom. It
secures physical health, “length of
days and long life.” It improves the
powers of mind, and enlarges the sphere
of usefulness. It is “a crown of
glory,” and the highest possible good,
the summum bonum to men. “ Wisdom
is the principal thing; therefore get
wisdom ; and with all thy getting get
understanding.”

Ver. 19. Seeking after God. I. The
occasion on which this injunction was
given. II, The injunction itself.


1, The great object of our life. 2, In
what way we are to prosecute it. And
now (1) Avail yourselves of the oppor-
tunities afforded for public usefulness ;
(2) Begin with a surrender of your
whole souls to God [C. Simeon, M.A }.
The Important Search. I. The object
searched. “The Lord your God.” An
object supremely great and glorious,
the perfection of all beings, the foun-
tain of life and glory. Seek his favour,
grace, and presence. II. The method
of search. Naturally without God, yet
our duty and privilege to seek, find,
and serve him. 1. Harnestly. “‘ Heart
and soul engaged.” No fits and starts,
not half-heartedness, 2. Resolutely.
“Set your heart.” Nothing accom-
plished without fixed purpose. God
the sublimest object on which we can
fix our hearts. He is merciful and
loveworthy. ‘Ye shall seek me and
find me, when ye search for me with
all your heart.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXII,


Vers, 1-5 and 14~16, David pre-
pared, ‘Let those things,” says an
author, “which are obviously most

106


important and necessary be done first,
and the less urgent afterwards. Let
not a man beyin business by building


owAP. xx1m1.}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,





and expensively furnishing a fine house.
Let the land be first cultivated. Let
your business, whatever its nature, be
faithfully and diligently minded and
well-established, as far as human in-
dustry can effect, or human foresight
calculate. Be content, in the meantime,
with inferior accommodation. A man
should have property well realised and
secured before he enters on schemes of
expensive building. He must not,
with sanguine infatuation, appropriate
the very first proceeds of his trade to
the erection of a palace to live in.”
“ When we mean to build,
We first survey the plot; then draw the
model;
And when we see the figure of the house,
Then must we rate the cost of the erection;
Which, if we find outweighs ability,
What do we then but draw anew the
model


In fewer offices, or at least desist
To build at all? &o.” [shakespeare].


Vers. 6-10. A son. If we would ‘‘mend
the world we should mend ourselves,








t
and teach our children to be not what
we are, but what they should be” [W.
Penn).

Vers. 12, 13. Prosper. “Man’s wis-
dom consists in observing God’s unalter-
able appointments and suiting himself
to them” ea Then the way of
God’s precepts leads to the enjoyment
of his promises. Thou meetest him
that worketh righteousness.

Ver. 18. Bedoing. A pious Scotch
lady, Mrs. Duncan, remarked, “1 feel
that my heart is apt to grow to weeds,
it needs the safeguard of steady em-


ployment.” “Doing nothing is doing
ill.” “Life accordingly is a delight,


just in the degree that it is consecrated
to action, or the conscious, volitional
exercise of our noblest capabilities.
Action and enjoyment are contingent
upon each other; when we are unfit
for work we are always incapable of
pleasure; work is the wooing by which
happiness is won” [Z. Grindon].





CHAPTER XXIII.


Ozrrioan Notes.) é
distribution of their services.


This and following three chapters contain an account of Levites and
Here their number, classification, and work (vers. 1-6). But


vers. 6-32 give heads of houses composing the four Levitefamilies and their offices.


Ver. 1. King. For full particulars cf. 1 Kingsi. * The author of Chronicles, wha
does not concern himself with the domestic history of David, naturally omits the circum.
stances, and merely states the fact’ [Speak. Com.].

Vers. 2-5.—Number and distribution of the Levites. Princes. David made arrangements
with Levites in their assembly (cf. xxv. 1). Thirty, Mosaic census followed (Num. iv. 8).
None counted who exceeded 50 years by man, i.e., reckoning men only. Judges, local
magistrate (chap. xxvi. 29). ‘This office resembled that of the modern Mahometan
Cadi” (Speak. Com.]. Porters (ver. 5), door-keepers by night and day. “ Ps. cxxxiv. is the
chant of the night sentries ”’ [Speak, Com.]. ; ;

Vers. 6-23. Houses or families of Levites. HKnumeration of all Levites, afterwards
distributed into their classes. Courses, divisions definitely numbered and arranged by
David. Vers. 7-11. The Gershonites (Ex. vi. 6). Laadan, called Libni (chap. vi. 17, cf.
use in Ex. vi. 17; Num. iii. 18). Shimei, not that of ver. 7, but another, cf. ver. 10,
Ver. 10. Zina, marg, Zizah. Ver. 11. Not many and did not make separate houses.
Vers. 12-20. The Kohathites (Ex. vi. 16). Separated, therefore not counted in the number
(ver. 3). Burn incense (ef. Ex. xxx. 7,8; Num. vi. 23-27). Named (ver. 14) not like those
of Aaron (ver. 13). Ver. 15. Moses (cf. Ex. xviii. 3, 4). Ver. 16. Shebuel (ef. xxiv. 20),
Ver. 18. Shel., the founder or head. Vers. 21-23. Sons of Merari, two chiefly given
(Num. iii, 20; 1 Chr. vi. 19), but 1 Chr. xxiv. 26 seems to give a third son. bide

Vers. 24-27.—Sons of Levi. Polls (ver- 3). T'wenty, thirty previously fixed, Certain lighter
duties imposed at 25 (Num. viii. 24), but only liable for full service at 30 years, David
made a change. The temple would require a more numerous ministry since the ark
seased to be carried from place to place, This limit continued in after times as David
fixed it. Ver. 27. Last orders or arrangements. Some understand a higtorical work,
drawn up by Gad or Nathan, or @ work of directions for the service of the sees

)7


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. {omar. xx1I1.


re





Vers. 28-30.—Purifying, .e., washing holy things ; shewbread (Lev. xxiv. 5-9); fine flour,
materials for all chief kinds of meat offerings (cf. Lev. ii. 1-5; vi 14, 15; xxiti, 13);
cakes, must be rightly made, &c.; measure of liquids and things dry fixed by law


Ex. xxix. 40; Lev. vi. 20; Num. xv. 4-10). ; ,
: Ver. 31.—By number, exact number of cattle to be offered at various festivals fixed by


law (Num. xxviii. 9-11; xxix. 8-13). ‘ srt
Ver, 32.—Keep, duties of Levites here summed up in words from Num. xviii, 3-6
“This passage (verses 8 to 32) gives the most complete account to be found in Scripture


of the nature of the Levitical office” [Speak. Com.].


HOMILETICS.
Tas Sacrep Trise: rrs Catuina anp 178 Duties.—Verses 2-5.


In view of death, David called a representative assembly. Solomon succeeds
him, and he wishes to arrange for the service of the temple. The Levites called
to officiate ; here classified in order and houses, with distribution and general
regulations for work. I. The sacred calling of the tribe. “To set
forward the work of the house of the Lord.” ‘Their office to wait on the sons
of Aaron” (vers. 28, 29), and “to offer”—to help in the offering of “ burnt
sacrifices” (vers. 31, 32). This a noble, “‘a high calling.” Notice—l. The legal
age of entering the work, ‘ From thirty years old and upward, even until fifty
years old” (Num. iv. 3); then reduced to twenty-five years (Num. viii. 24), and
now fixed “ from the age of twenty years and upward ” (ver. 24). 2. The numbers
engaged tn the work. Thirty-eight thousand, an increase of more than fourfold
since the time of Moses (Num. iv. 47, 48). What a proof of God’s power and
grace, who can make his servants “a thousandfold more.” Considered a
privilege to belong to the retinue of an earthly monarch. What must it be to
be numbered with the household of God on earth, and with the innumerable
company in heaven! II. The special duties of the tribe. We
have four classes given (vers. 4 and 5), which are afterwards described in detail-
1. Lhe overseers. Twenty-four thousand, including priests and attendants, to
(set forward) superintend (ver. 4). They had under their charge the younger
Levites and servants of the sanctuary, devoted to menial duties (ix. 2). 2. The
judges. Administrators of civil affairs ‘‘for the outward business of Israel”
(2 Chr. xix. 5-11). Officers mentioned early (Ex. v. 6), generally foremen ;
judges concerned with religious matters chiefly. 3. The musicians, who praised
on instruments— cymbals, psalteries, harps, trumpets” (2 Chr. v. 12)—which
David might approve or appoint, but not invent for service. He was given to
music, and desired, in his latter days, to give example of its use. Handel
declared, when he finally resolved to consecrate himself to sacred music, “ that
it was better suited to a man descending in the vale of years.” 4. The porters.
At gates, guarding entrance of improper persons, and keeping from profanation
and divine displeasure. In such service we may engage, leading in the song,
and perfecting the praise of the sanctuary ; administering law and government ;
creating, preserving, and perpetuating reverence and truth in all things.


Tue Sacrep Triste: rts Heaps anp ARRANGEMENTS.—Verses 6-24.


After giving number and divisions of Levi according to duties, we have next
an enumeration of heads of houses into which the four families branched, with
a brief account of their work. I. The houses of Gershon (vers. 6--11).
This branches into two—six families for Zaadan, and three for Shimei; nine
pone aera II. The houses of Kohath (vers. 11-20). Aaron


oHAP. xxmt.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


—





not reckoned because specially set apart. His sons form subject of ch.
xxv. 1-19. Hence such descendants of Amram noticed which belonged to
Moses, whose sons were numbered among Levites generally, and did not belong
to that part to whom priestly duties were assigned. Kohath, the founder of
nine fathers’ houses (mertioned ch. xxiv. 20-25). To these must be added
the priests through Aaron and his sons, two houses, making eleven in all.
ITI. The houses of Merari (vers. 21-23). Two sons as two leading
branches, Machit and Mushi (Ex. vi. 19; Num. iii. 33). Merari is third son of
Levi (Gen. xlvi. 11). As there are four houses for him, nine for Gershon, and
eleven for Kohath, we have twenty-four in all of the sons of Levi. Some
give Merari six, and the others nine each, which makes the same number.
IV. The arrangements of the Levites (vers. 24-32). By the last
words of David, at the end of his life, new arrangements were made. He
thought it would contribute to the glory of God to have as many officers as
possible in divine service. 1. The enrolment of office was changed. 'The rule
was to begin at 30 years; for two reasons he relaxed this. First, Jerusalem was
the chosen city, and there would be no more moving from place to place.
Second, the carrying of the tabernacle was not needed any longer. 2. The
duties of office are arranged. Detailed in a few items. Aaron’s sons had
higher office in the service of the house of the Lord. Service in the courts
(Ex. xxvu. 9); the chambers as judges; and in religious work generally. Levites
helped in tlis service, had “to wait on the sons of Aaron.” Several things
mentioned—(1) Keeping things clean. “ Purifying, #.e., cleansing of all holy
things” (ver. 28). Hivoiy places, garments, vessels, and sacrifices. (2) Getting
things ready. The shewbread for priests to arrange on the table; fine flour
morning and evening in just quantity for meat-offering ; unleavened cakes rightly
made. (3) Adjusting weights and measures. Standards of which were con-
sidered sacred, kept in the sanctuary, and not to be altered in liquids (wine,
oil, &c.) or dry goods. (4) Blowing with their mstruments. Every morning and
night “to praise the Lord” in sounding their trumpets (Num. x. 10).
(5) Offering sacrifices. “To offer all burnt sacrifices” (ver. 31). Priests alone
sprinkled the blood, trimmed the fire on the altar, and lay the parts of the
victim on it. Levites did everything preparatory and needful to these priestly
acts. Sacrifices offered in right number (2 Sam. ii. 15; Num. xxviii. 1-31), and
at set feasts: Passover (Lev. xxiii. 4,5); Pentecost (Lev. xxiii. 15-17); and
Tabernacles (Lev. xxiii. 33-37). (6) Guarding the tabernacle, “ Keep the charge
of the tabernacle” (ver. 32). Charge of the tent of meeting, of holy apparatus,
to have everything fit, orderly, and ready for special functions of priests.
(7) Attendance on priests. ““The charge of the sons of Aaron, their brethren.”
Thus service honourable and menial, orderly and regular. Nothing a drudgery,
but pleasant, joyful, and devout.


«“ Who sweeps a room as for God’s laws
Makes that and the action fine” [Herbert].


Toe THREEFOLD Functions.—Verse 13.


The posterity of Aaron advanced to dignity and the priest’s office to “ sanctify
the most holy things.” Their office here described as threefold. 1. Zo make
atonement. Offer burnt incense upon the golden altar in the holy place. For a’
“ stranger to come near” and do this would incur prompt punishment (Num. xvi.
40). Incense-burning a preliminary to morning and accompaniment of evening
sacrifice (Ex. xxx. 7, 9; Lu. i. 9, 10), and a special part of ceremony on Day of
Atonement (Lev. xvi. 11-13). Amid sudden danger and impending wrath, the
priest took the censer of incense “to make atonement” (Num. xvi. 46, 47). ane

10


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES, {cHAP. xxIII





priesthood, no office like this now; but regarding this as typical of diffusive
influence and specific intercession, the minister of the gospel may be an inter-
cessor for his people, render acceptable service and point to the atonement for sin
and the Mediator between God and man. 2. Tomnister to God for man. “To
minister unto him.” This a privilege and within the power of every one. The
Christian minister specially called, and set apart for this work. In prayer,
preaching, and daily work, he should minister to God. 3. Jo bless man for God.
“To bless in his name.” None have power to bless and bestow grace in them-
selves. But first receiving light and life they give—speak of God’s favour to
men, offer pardon and assure of ‘acceptance. They represent God in their
ministry; bring down the influence of Heaven in their walk; and seek to
recover fallen men from sin and death. “Speak unto Aaron and unto his sons,
saying on this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel” (Num. vi. 23).


THe Rest or THE PEOPLE or Gop.—Verse 25.


I. In the mysterious polity of the people of Israel, spiritual and temporal
blessings were so closely allied that the same language might naturally be
employed to signify either. II. Hence David hinted at profounder truths than
lie on the surface of his words. III. It becomes us to secure the great blessing
—the rest that remaineth—as the chief object of existence. 1V. Rest and
peace must fall on a Christian spirit—(1) From the imitation of Christ ; (2) The
singleness of its object; (3) The nature of the Christian affections; (4) To
support and exalt us, heaven must mingle with earth (A. Builer].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.1. 1. An tnstructive view of life.
“ Old and full of days.” Life made up
of days, not years. Day by day given
until the numbers appointed (Job xiv. 5)
are filled up, finished. ‘There is no elixir
of life,” says one, “that can prolong our
days beyond that period. Soon we shall
come to the outer limit; then we must


die.” Isaac died, being “old and full
of days.” 2. A touching picture of old
age. Asa portrait made up of minute


touches, so old age in character, habits,
hopes, and condition. It has peculiar
comeliness and attractiveness of its own
when crowned with piety. Pitiable to
see an ol1 man who has missed the
object of life and spent his days in
folly. ‘The sinner, being an hundred
years old, shall be accursed.” But “the
hoary head is a crown of gold, if it be
found in the way of righteousness.”
3. A solemn warning to all. The end
sure in youthful days or “ full of days.”
“Qld age is near neighbour to death.”
Understand life befors you leave it,
110


If ready to depart we can say cheer-
fully, Vune dimittis.

Ver. 14. doses the man of God ; the
honourable appellation. Given to Moses
five times in the whole of Scripture—
once in the Pentateuch (Deut. xxxi. 1),
once in Joshua (xiv. 6), twice in Chron-
icles (here and in 2 Chr. xxx. 16), and
once in Ezra (iii. 2). It is also assigned
thrice to David (2 Chr. viii. 14; Neh.
xii. 24, 36), and once to the prophet
Shemaiah (1 Kings xii. 22). “ Man of
God,” without the article, is common
[Speak. Com.]. 1. Specially called and
qualified for God’s work. 2. Privileged
with close and familiar intercourse with
God. Face to face with God and “the
similitude of the Lord shall he behold.”
3. Divinely taught to declare the will
of God. ‘‘ With him will I speak mouth
to mouth.” “The law was given by
Moses.” 4. Faithfully carried on the
work of God. “ My servant Moses who
is faithful in all my house.” God gave
orders. Moses verily was faithful as


CHAP, XXIV, |


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


a


a servant (Heb. iii. 5), and obedient in
carrying them out. 5. Wonderfully
honoured by God at the end. God
buried him. “There arose not a pro-
phet in Israel like unto Moses, whom
the Lord knew face to face.” “We
must think and speak honourably of
saints departed” [7'rapp].

Vers. 28-32. Waiting in service.
1. In active work. 2. In orderly
worship. 3. In devout supplication.
4. In watching attitude.

“God doth not need
ae ae work or his own gifts; who
6S
Bear his mild yoke, they serve him best;
his state


Is kingly ; thousands at his bidding speed,

And post o’er land and ocean without rest;

They also serve who only stand and wait”
[Milton].


Rest an argument for service. 1.
Rest affording opportunity. 2. Speci-
ally designed for service. 3. Service,
individual, orderly, and varied. Service
entered upon early, and patiently con-
ducted. Morning and evening thanks.
Needful, demanded, and should be will-
ingly given. “ Every day will I praise
thee.” ‘Evening, and morning, and at
noon will I pray, and cry aloud” (Psalm
lv. 17). “ Pray without ceasing.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXIII.


Ver. 1. Old. I venerate old age,
and I love not the man who can look
without emotion upon the sunset of
life, when the dusk of evening begins
to gather over the watery eye,and the
shadows of twilight grow broader and
deeper upon the understanding [Long-
fellow).

Ver. 6. Courses. If there be any
beauty and comeliness in order, where
should we most expect to find it than
in the divine government, and in the
conduct and management of the affairs
of the supreme and the celestial king-
dom, wherein only the remoteness of
those things from our sense makes
everything seem little and inconsider-
able [J. Howe].


“ All things are infinite in parts, and the
moral is as the material.
Neither is anything vast, but it is com-
pacted of atome” [Martin Tupper].


Vers. 6 and 30. Instruments and
praise. In order to the high result
intended, the music of religion must
be religious. There must be a distinc-
tion of sounds. As this language is
given for the heart, it becomes a first
principle that it must be of the heart,
else it is an unknown tongue. And so
true is this, that nothing really can
fulfil the idea of religious music which
is not the breathing of true love and
worship. Even instruments without
life will not speak the true notes of
power unless the touch of faith is on
them, and the breath of holy feeling
is in them; how much less_ the
voice itself, whose very qualities of
sound are inevitably toned by the
secret feeling of the spirit [Dr. JW.
Bushnell}.





CHAPTER XXIV.


Carrioat Norzs.) In this chapter we have divisions of the 24 orders of priests (vers.
1-19}, and the classes of Levites who attended them in discharge of their sacred


functions.
Vers. 1-6.—The sons of Aaron.


The divisions supply from ver. 6 of chap. xxiii.


The


author had there stated that ‘‘to the sons of Levi David assigned their courses.”
He now adds, “ To the sons of A. also (David assigned) their courses. The sons of A,
(were) Nadab, &o.” [Speak. Com.}. Both, t.¢., Zad. and Abim., assisted David. Ver. 4,


Ill


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cHAP. XxxIV








Chief, more heads of houses. Ver. 5. Lot, that is, the assignment of their order in the
bourses made by lot to the families belonging to both EK. and Ith. Governors or princes of
the sanctuary. Ver.6. Wrote, as lots were drawn forth. Taken alternately.

Vers. 7-19.—The allotted order, Some names in this list found elsewhere and others
not, Ver. 10. Alijah, Abia (Lu. i. 5; Neh. x.7). Ver. 11. Jeshuah, whose descendants
returned from captivity (Ez. ii.6; Neh. vii. 39). Ver. 12. Eliashib, not progenitor of the
one in Neh. iii. 1, 20,21. Ver. 15. Hezir, as a layman (cf. Neh. x. 20). Ver. 16. Peth.,
one of those who separated themselves from alliances contracted in captivity (Ez. x. 23;
Neh, ix. 5). Ver. 17. Jachin (cf. chap, ix. 10; Neh. xi. 10), probably the Achim of Matt. i. 14.
Ver. 19. Orderings, the charge as ver. 8. Under, by the hand of Aaron. Commanded, a
constant expression in the law of Moses (Ex. xxxix. 42; Lev, xxvii. 34; Num, xxxvi, 13;
Deut, xxxiv. 9).

Vers, 20-31.— Distribution of other Levites. The rest. Object of this second enumeration
of the Levitical families (cf. xxiii. 7-23) seems to be the designation of the heads of the
families in David’s time, ‘The omission of the Gershonites is curious, and can only be
accounted for by supposing that the author did not find any account of their heads in his
authorities. The addition to the Merarites (vers. 26, 27) is also curious. It brings the
number of families up to 25, which is one more than we should have expected [Speak.
Com]. Ver. 21. Rehabi. (cf. chap, xxiii. 17). Ver. 22. Shel., Shelomith in chap, xxiii, 18,
a different person from Amramite Shel. (cf. chap. xxvi. 25, 26). He was probably not a
contemporary of David, as the head of the family in David’s time was Jahath [ Speak.
Com.]. Ver. 26. Beno, not really a name; Heb. for his son, and to be attached to Jaaziah.
The meaning of the whole. passage (vers. 26-30) seems to be that there were three
branches of the Merarites—the Beni-Mahli, the Beni-Mushi, and the Beni-Jaaziah—of
whom the first formed a mighty house in David’s time, viz., the Beni-Kish, their head
being Jerahmeel, while each of the other branches comprised three families, the heads of
which were respectively in David’s time Shoham, Zaccur, Ibri, and Mahli, Eder, Jerimoth
[ Speak. Com.]. Ver. 31. Principal, ‘all the Levitical houses enumerated drew lots in their
courses on equal terms, the elder families having no advantage over the younger ones,”
as there were 24 courses of the priests, so we must suppose that there were 24 of the
Levites, though the number of the families as given in the text (chap. xxiii. 7-23;
xxiv. 20-30) is 25 (Speak. Com.].


HOMILETICS.


Tue Divisions or Prizsts (Sons or Aaron).—Verses 1--19.


The word “ divisions” means courses, as ver. 6 in chap. xxiii.; and evidently
continues the subject and construction of that verse. Two sons of A. died, and
the other two supply ‘‘the chief men of the house,” viz., 16 from Eleazar and 8
from Ithamar, 24 in all. I. Divisions to facilitate work. Divided
more easily performed. “ Many hands make light work.” Burdens equalised
carried better. Jealousies are prevented and a true spirit created. “ Be not
solitary, be not idle,” a saying of Burton. II. Divisions by lot (ver. 5).
No ground of choice between the two families, who differed only in number, and
as the highest places had already been filled by both of them, the impartiality of
lot to settle the order of service. 1. Lot appointing to dignified work. “ Forthe
governors (or princes) of the sanctuary” (ver. 5). High priests who exclusively —
could enter into the most holy place before God [Ket]. 2. Lot publicly taken.
““Shem., the scribe, wrote them before the king” (ver. 6). Openly before
witnesses and a clerk acting as secretary to scrutinise. Before king, princes, and
priests the act most solemn. Fraud and suspicionimpossible. ‘The lot causeth
contentions to cease, and parteth between the mighty.” III. Divisions in
specific order (vers. 7-19). Order essential to existence and efficiency. Men
who seek pre-eminence and power create disorder, anarchy, and ruin. Well-
ordered words make good logic; well-ordered regulations preserve the social
constitution ; and well-set stones make architecture. Order in God’s house and
service secures regularity, beauty, and efliciency ; excludes what is called “ good
fortune,” happy “ hits,” and points to the divine side of life on its appointment.
No “chance” work ; all appears to be settled by law. The lot is cast into the
lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.”

112


OHAP xxiv.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





7!


Toe Deata or Navas anp Aninu.—- Verse 2,


The story strange, and understood only by intimate acquaintance with the
Jewish system and the prevailing sentiments of the time. Nadab and Abihu
had been honoured with special privileges, but unduly exalted themselves,
became proud, negligent, and presumptuous. Learn from their death—I. That
sin inverts the natural order of things. ‘They died before their
father.” “Sin,” as “transgression of law,” creates confusion and disorder. It
overturns and inverts. What more natural than a son to outlive his father ;
but wickedness shortens life, and brings untimely death, II. That sin
deprives of blessings which God can bestow. They “had no
children.” Children great blessings, “a heritage from the Lord.” ‘To be child-
less, under Jewish dispensation, considered calamity. Profane thename of God,
and you may be cut off from high honour, just lineage, and blessed memory.
The righteous alone can secure posthumous fame. ‘‘ The memory of the just is
blessed.” III. That sin often overwhelms with fearful ruin.
They died not a natural death. “There went out fire from the Lord and
devoured them.” A punishment sudden and severe, awful and retributive (Lev.
x. 1-4). Indicative of their heinous guilt, and God’s jealousy in punishing it.
IV. That sin is often mentioned in history to warn of its
consequences. This special sin frequently mentioned in Scripture. “ By
this awful judgment the wisdom of God observed the same course, in repressing
the first instance of contempt for sacred things, as he did at the commencement
of the Christian dispensation (Acts v. 1-11).” “The temple mouse fears not the
temple idol,” is a proverb. Those who minister in holy things need be careful
not to arrogate to themselves the glory which belongs to God, but ever keep
before them the solemnity and responsibility of that service in which they are
engaged.


THe Divistons or tHe Levites.— Verses 20-31.


The rest refers to those not of the sons of Aaron, and does not exhaust non-
priestly class, for we find in following two chapters others who were singers,
doorkeepers, and treasurers. Two families given chiefly. Gershonites found
among officers and judges. 1. The family of Kohath (vers, 20-25). 2. The
family of Merari (vers. 26-29). 3. The three sons of Musha (vers. 30, 31). These
all content with an inferior “lot,” anxious to do their best, and joyfully contri-
buting to the whole, “ They were arranged by lot to match the courses of their
brethren, the sons of Aaron, in the presence of the same superiors,” “ The
principal fathers,” or the chief over against his lesser brother, Each, great
and small, his place and his work, and acting under “the great Taskmaster’s
eye.” ‘Let every man be occupied, and occupied in the highest employment of
which he is capable, and die with the consciousness that he has done his best”


[Sidney].


«“ A wise man scorneth nothing, be it never so small or homely,


For he knoweth not the secret laws that may bind it to great effects *
[ Adartin Tupper).


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. Sad deaths. I. The sins commanded them not.” 2. Gross incon-
which caused them. 1. Disobedience sistency. Perhaps they were drunk,
to divine injunction. “They offered hence the law (Lev. x. 8). “They drink


atrange fire before the Lord, which he and forget the law ” (Prov. eek 5).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


[cHaP. XXIV





3. Rashness in approaching God.
They ‘took,” snatched (some read
ver. 1), their censers without reverence
and consideration; rushed into God’s
presence in haste. 4. Presumptuous
in act. Not only did they take
“strange incense,” but went both to-
gether when one only should have
officiated ; intruded into the holy of
holies, to which access denied to all
but high priest, and thus set a prece-
dent most dangerous, and which called
for divine displeasure. IL. The punish-
ment which followed the sins. “They
died.” 1. A dishonourable death.
‘Without children.” 2. A sudden
death. “Fire came out” suddenly.
3. An overwhelming death. Instantly
died as if struck by a lightning-fiash.
4. A retributive death. “Before the
Lord.” Before the veil that covered
the mercy-seat. “ Without mercy,” and
without divine interference. A fore-
taste of torment “in the presence of
the Lamb” (Rev. xiv. 10). God
will be sanctified either actively or
passively, either in u3 or upon us;
sure it is that he will Se no loser by
us. Sanctified he will be, either in the
sincerity of men’s conversation or else
in the severity of their condemnation.
Singular things are expected of all that
draw nigh to God in any duty, but
especially in the office of the ministry.
Those that stand in the presence of
princes must be exact in their carriages.
God appointed both the weights and
measures of the sanctuary to be twice


as large as those of the commonwealth,
to show that he expects much more of
those that serve him there than he
doth of others. The souls of priests
must be purer than sunbeams, saith
Chrysostom ” [Zrapp].

Vers. 56-30. emarkable persons.
Ver. 5, Governors (Leb.), Princes of
the house of God. Chief priests rulers
over others of their own order, and
subject to the high priest. Submission
and diligence give distinction in calling.
“Qest par le travail qu’on regne”
[Louis XIV.]. If translation be Princes
of Holiness, then holiness gives influence
and power; distinction of character
and approbation of God. Good men
are kings of society. Ver.7. Jehoiards,
the father of the Maccabees (1 Mace.
ii. 1). Ver. 10. From Adijah came
Zacharias, father of John the Baptist
(Lu. i. 5). “Old he was, yet not free
from taking his turn. Dumb also for
a time; yet he went on to do his office
in the ministration. The evangelist’s
word of the course (Grk. epi and
émerias, a daily service) importeth a
daily attendance upon the work
while the course continueth” [7rapp].

Ver. 23. Sons of Hebron. The
four persons named appear to have
been contemporaries of David, the
heads of the Hebronite houses in his
time (cf. ch. xxvi. 31) [Speak. Com].
‘What shall I do to be for ever
known?” asked Schiller. Scripture
will give the answer,


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXIV


Ver. 2. Died. It is a dangerous
thing in the service of God to decline
from his own institutions ; we have to
do with a God who is wise to prescribe
his own worship, just to require what
he has prescribed, and powerful to
revenge what he has not prescribed
[Bp. Hull].

Vers. 5 and 31. Zot. Methods are
the masters of masters [Zadlerand].


14


Method is essential, and enables a
larger amount of work to be got
through with satisfaction, ‘ Method,”
said the Rev. R. Cecil, “is like packing
things in a box: a good packer will get
in half as much again as a bad one.”
Cecil’s despatch of business was extra-
ordinary, his motto being, “The shortest
way to do many things is to do one
thing at once” [Siniles],


omar. X<v.] HOMILETIC COMUENTARY: CHRONICLES.


A


CHAPTER XXV.


Crarrtcan Notes.} This chapter relates to the number and offices of the singers (vers.
1-8); alist of the choirs divided by lot into 24 orders (vers. 9-31).

Vers. 1-8.—ZLhe fuwilies of singers, Captains, chiefs who preside over the order cf
service; those mentioned, xxiii. 2; xxiv. 6. Separated, divided or distributed for the
service, Prophesy, publicly recite the sacred service, sing psalms; a reference to the
praising element. Ver. 2. Hands, direction of A., who propesied as an inspired poet,
composed psalms (Ps. L. 73-83). Ver. 3. Siz, only 5 names given; entire list only 23,
which should be 24 according to the account of lots \ vers. 8-31); supply a name (as Sept.),
Shimei, which appears in ver.17. Vers. 4, 5. Uz. (cf. ver. 18); Sheb. (ver. 20). King’s seer,
not to distinguish . above his brethren (ef. 2 Chr. xxix. 30; xxxv.15). All three possessed
prophetic gifts. Words, matters (marg.). Lift up horn. Blow with horn or trumpet
loudly, a fig. expression for honour and dignity (1 Sam. ii. 1, 10; Ps Ixxv. 10; Ixxxix. 17).
Ver. 6. These refers to Heman. According, the reading should be, “ At the kiny’s hands
were Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman,” or under the direction of the king, of A., of Jed., and
of H. Ver. 8. Ward formerly signified a class or division; the term is still used in
hospitals: trans. ‘for the ward (charge) for as well the small as the great, the teacher
with the scholar” i Merria).

Vers. 9-31.—The list of choir leaders. Asaph was given the precedence over his brethren,
and his four courses were assigned the first, and then each alternate place. Jeduthun
took rank next, and received alternate places, first with Asaph, and then with Heman,
until his courses were exhausted. After this, all the later places fell necessarily to
Heman, whose courses continue without interruption from the 15th to the 24th. This
scheme for the apportioning of the courses among the three families must have been a
matter of formal arrangement. What the lot decided was simply, on each occasion,
which course of the family, whose term it was, should fill the place [Speuk. Com.], “ The
series is so determined by the lot, that the four sons of Asaph hold the first, third, fifth,
and seventh places; the six sons of Jeduthun the second, fourth, eighth, tenth, twelith,
and fourteenth places” [ Kez/},


HOMILETICS.
Tue CLASSIFICATION OF SINGERS aND Musictans.—Verses 1-8.


David had settled the courses of Levites who attended to the priests in thei
ministrations ; now he arranges those appointed t» sing and play. Three families
of choristers. I, Their solemn consecration. ‘Separated to the
service.” No disputing, nor taking by force; no self electing, nor promotion by
favour ; each carefully appointed to his place and work. No small honour to be
separated from the world and called into the family and service of God. Greater
honour and responsibility to be further “separated from the congregation of
Israel,” to be brought nearer to God, and “to stand before the congregation and
minister unto them” (Num. xvi. 9). II. Their sacred employments.
These manifold and necessary. 1. Prophets with harps. To reveal the will of
God in song ; sing psalms indited by the spirit of God, Musical instruments to
rouse and quicken the prophetic spirit. This often the method to soothe the
mind, to prepare for the work of praise and prayer. [oom for instruments yet
in service of God; above all, be filled with the spirit, sing with the spirit, and
make melody with the heart (Eph. v. 18,19). 2. Players of instruments. Heman
presided over the wind instruments, and Jeduthun over the harp, to keep time
and observe order. Jfusic may help song ; refine and educate the worshippers of
the sanctuary. ‘‘As well the singers as the players on instruments shall be
there.” 3. Superintendents of order. “Captains of the host” (ver. 1), those
who helped David to arrange and superintend the order of worship; leaders of

115


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [omar. xxv,





the courses of priests and Levites, before whom lots were cast; chiefs of the
sacred order. Captains of armies held responsible positions ; to be leaders in God’s
house a more distinguished privilege and honour. 4. All this designed tc honour
God. Music, instrumental and vocal; choirs and leaders “instructed” (ver. 7)
and employed “ to give thanks and praise the Lord” (ver. 3). This delightful
and “comely to the upright.” Fresh cause for praise every time we enter God’s
house. If no other theme than the love of Christ, which employs the tongues
of heaven, this enough to stir up and perpetuate grateful emotion on earth
IIl. Their astonishing number. Every choir, with its leader, consisted
of 12, and the 24 choirs contained 288 choristers (288 =12 x 24), who served a
week in rotation. ‘These, half of whom officiated every week with a propor-
tionate number of assistants, were skilful and experienced musicians, capable of
leading and instructing the general musical corps, which comprised no less than
4,000 (ch. xxiii. 5)” [Jamieson].


Tar DistincrivE Features or Service.—Verses 1-31,


Many special elements of worship set forth. I. Pleasing variety. Male ana
female (ver. 5), small and great, teacher and scholar” (ver. 8), prophesying with
harps, psalteries, and cymbals (ver. 1). Variety helps to discriminate and
recognise persons, to classify into systems and impersonate with names. “ Variety
is charming,” attractive and beneficial in natural scenery and Christian worship.
Il. Hearty thanksgiving. Most solemn and delightful to hear a large assembly
sing and praise the Lord. May be “like a little heaven below,” or the sweet
earnest of the “song of Moses and the Lamb.” III. Cultured song. “ They
were instructed in the songs of the Lord” (ver. 7). If a regular trained or
cultured choir is impossible, there is no excuse for the slovenly songs which
dishonour many sanctuaries, If spirituality of subjects and proper frame of
heart be an apology, on the same principle may we tolerate bad reading and
wretched delivery. Why should harmonious themes of devotion be rendered
anpleasant to the outward ears, when a little care and culture, spirit and
energy might correct many defects in religious assemblies? IV. Orderly
performance. This observed and insisted upon. All classes and ages co-operated ;
instruction imparted and music regulated for desired end. Order is economy
of time and work, for without it both are lost. The world began and is
ruled with order. Method should characterise our studies, habits, and worship,
V. Kindly feeling. Some dutiful and obedient as sons ; others acted and loved
as brethren. No partiality, dissatisfaction, nor uncharitableness. All united in
feeling, purpose, and effort “for the service of the house of God.” ‘ Behold
how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!” Let
us learn to adapt these ancient rules to modern requirements. Worship should
not be stereotyped, lawless, nor irreverent, but room for improvement in
psalmody, arrangement, and spirituality.


HOMILETIC HINTS 4ND SUGGESTIONS.


and that in our present state of cor-
ruption and infirmity it will not be
done as it should be done, without
labour and struggle. We mast take


Ver. 1. Workmen according to their
service. 1. Each a part in worship.
None silent, none idle. 2. Work no


drudgery, no slavery, no reluctance to


perform it. 3. “‘It intimates that it

is our duty to make a business of it,

and stir up all that is within us to it;
116


pains with our hearts to bring them
and keep them to this work, and to
engage all that is within us.” Zhe


JHAP. xxv. ]


ed


workmen. The use of this noble word
in association with the choral service
of the sanctuary is a warning against
regarding such service as a dilettante
employment. It isa work and labour
in the honourable service of the Lord,
and one that was anciently dignified


with the name of prophecy. ‘The use’


of the word for His ministers was
adopted by our Lord when He said,
“The workman is worthy of his meat”
(Matt. x. 10) ; and was among the last
injunctions that fell from the one who
“laboured more abundantly than you
all,” when he exhorted the young bishop
Timothy, “Study to shew thyself ap-
proved unto God, a workman that
needeth not to be ashamed” (2 Tim.
ii. 15) [Blunt]. Pesalteries. Psalmody
tn God's house. Spiritual in its nature,
metrical (musical) in its form, cultured
in its development. The bearing of
these subjects on selection of hymns
and tunes, training of choirs, and irre-
verent singing.

Vers. 5,6. A family choir. The
fathers Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman


HOMIL ETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


/





presided, and their children were under
the hands of their father (vers. 2, 3, 6).
This (1) an example of parental train-
ing, (2) of obedience in children, (3) of
younger submitting to elder in judg-
ment and conduct. This gives order
and honour to families, churches, and
communities. Jn the words of God
(ver. 5). “I wish the time were come,”
says Andrew Fuller, “when we could
lay aside all men’s compositions and
sing only tke words of Scripture in the
praises of God.” When shall we find
the poet and “the chief musician”?
Ver. 7. Number. A number com-
petent, skilful, orderly, and devout.
What a pattern choir! All may im-
bibe their spirit and follow their ex-
ample. ‘As it is commanded of God
that all should sing, so all should make
a conscience of learning to sing, as it
is a thing that cannot be done decently
without learning. Those, therefore,
who neglect to learn to sing live in
sin, as they neglect what is necessary
to their attending one of the ordinances
of God’s worship” [President Edwards].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXYV.


Ver. 1. Harps, de. History re
minds us that great, religious reforma-
tions have been associated with revived
interest “in the service of song in the
house of the Lord.” Owing to worldli-
ness in the Jewish Church, the beautiful
musical service of the Temple declined;
but at the revival in the reign of
Hezekiah, “the kings and the princes
commanded the Levites to sing praise
unto the Lord, with the words of
David and Asaph the seer.” Concerning
the great American revival in his day,
President Edwards writes: “Our
public praises were greatly enlivened.
In our psalmody God was served in
the beauty of holiness. There has
been no part of divine worship in which
good men have had grace so drawn
forth and their hearts so lifted up in
the ways of God as in singing his


praise. The people sang with unusual
elevation of heart and voice” [J. 8.
Pearsall).

Ver. 3. To praise the Lord. He
praiseth God best that serveth and
obeyeth him most; the life of thank-
fulness consists in the thankfulness of
life [Burkitt].

Ver. 7. Number. “ Nothing pro-
moted the Reformation more,” says
Bp. Jewel, “than inviting the common
people to sing psalms, and that some-
times there would be six thousand
persons at St. Paul’s Cross singing
together, which was very grievous to
the Papists.”


“ From every place below the skies,
The grateful song, the fervent prayer,
The incense of the heart may rise
To heaven, and find acceptance there,”
[J. Pterpont},


Ly


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. {omaP. xxv1,





CHAPTER XXVI.


Crirrcaz Nores.) The courses of the porters (vers. 1-12); lots cast for gate-keepers
(vers. 13-19); keepers of treasures (vers. 20-28) ; the officers and the judges (vers. 29-32),

Vers. 1-12.—Divisions of the porters. On the importance of the office cf. chap. ix. 17-
27; xxiii. 5. There were 4,000 (chap. xxiii. 6), all from the families of Kohathites and
Merarites (ver. 14), divided into twenty-four courses, as the priests and musicians. Mesh,
Seven sons of whom mentioned (ver. 2); eighteen given in ver. 9, which includes rela-
tives. Another name given (ver. 14); probably alluded to in chap. ix.19. Asaph. Not
of preceding chap. A Gershonite, probably the same ae Ab. in Hx. vi. 24; and Ebi,
1 Chr. vi. 37, an actual son of Korah. Ver. 4. Obed, a porter for time of fixing of
ark in Jer. xv. 24; xvi. 38. Bvessed (cf. chap. xxv. 5; 2 Sam. vi.11,12). Ver. 6. Mighty.
Ver. 7. Strong. The office of porters required physical strength to open and close pon-
derous gates, act as guard against theft and insurrection. Ver. 12. Chief men, overseers of
the watch. Translate ‘ to these divisions of the porters, principal men (use assigned) the
watches, together with their brethren, for service in the house of the Lerd,” %.e., the
“chief men,” enumerated in vers. 1-11, and amounting to no more than ninety-three,
kept the watch and ward of the house, together with a further number of their brethren
(4,000 are mentioned in chap. xxiii. 6), who assisted them from time to time [Syeak.
Com.].

Vers. 18-19,—Arrangements of porters. Lots, by which duties assigned to them as to the
other Levites, and names of chiefs or captains given, with respective gates allotted tc
them, Ver. 15. Assupim, literally the house of collections (cf. Neh. xii. 25); probably
a storehouse for grain, wine, and oiferings for sustenance of priests, Ver.16. Sali,
literally ‘“‘the gate of projection,” the gate, t.¢., through which were ‘“‘ thrown out” the
sweepings of the temple, the ashes, the offal of the victims, and the like [Speak. Com.]}.
Ver. 16. Against ward. Watch opposite to watch. Hosah had two watches, western and
the gate Shallecheth, hence kept one watch over against the other. Ver. 17. Six, because
eastward gate most frequented. Ver. 18. Parbar must designate the space between
the western wall of the temple building and the wall of the court, which would be a sort
of ‘‘ precinct ” or “ purlieu” of the temple, Here were two gates, at one of which twe
guards were stationed; while at the other, called Shallecheth, which gave upon the
causeway, there were four. Itis noticeable that in this whole account the Temple is
spoken of as if it were existing, when it was not as yet built. We must suppose that
David formed the whole plan of the Temple, and fixad the stations and numbers of the
porters, though it was left for Solomon to carry his instructions out [Speak. Com.],

Vers, 20-28.—Levites in charge of treasures. Ahijah, doubtful reading. The Scriptures
give Aheyhem, “ their brethren,” which is preferable, especially as there is no other mention
of this A. [Speak. Com.]. Treasures, gitts and payments (Ex, xxx. 12; Num. xviii. 16).
Laad. (chap. vi. 17). Jeht. (ver. 22), the Jehielite. Jehiel gives name to the family, which
accordingly includes his two brothers (xxiii. 8). Two of this family were the grand
treasurers, under whom many of the Gershonites may have been employed [cf. Murphy].
Ver. 23. Of or for the four houses of Kohathites, a kind of preface to rest of the chapter.
Ruler (ver. 24), chief custodian, Wer. 26. Dedicated, for service. Ver. 28. Hand, in the
care of Shel.

Vers. 29-32.—The officers and judges. Officers, scribes or secretaries ; magistrates who
attended by their clerks, exercised judicial functions. Outward, the people’s private and
public affairs, contrasted with functions of sacred worship. ‘ There were 6,000 (chap. ii.
8-4) of them, who probably acted like their brethren on the principle of rotation, and
these were divided into three classes—one (ver. 29) for the outward business over Israel :
one (ver. 30), consisting of 1,700, for the rest of Jordan, ‘in all the business and in the
service of the king’; and the third (vers. 31, 32), consisting of 2,700, were rulers‘ for every
matter pertaining to God, and atfairs of the king’” [Jamieson], t.e, superintended
religious matters and the interests of the king,


HOMILETIC&.
Porters at THE Doons.—Verses 1-19,
Porters not lfxe burden-bearers of modern times, but gate-keepers with


special duties and responsibilities (Tatin ~»ortarius, the man who attends tha
118


CHAP, XXvI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


Ce A a —


porta). I. Their special qualifications. An office of considerable
dignity, and only conferred upon men of first rank. More desirable than a
courtier’s position in a worldly palace. “I had rather be a door-keeper in the
house of my God, &c.” (Ps. lxxxiv. 10), 1. Physical strength “Strong men”
(ver. 7); “able men” (ver. 8). To open and shut heavy gates, ward off attacks,
and quell insurrection, to exclude intruders and unclean, and to guard against
thieves and robbers. In some respects the office military. They were the
soldiers of Jehovah and guards of the temple. 2. Patient in spirit. To
direct the worshippers, to instruct, to encourage the timid, and continue
watch night and day (Deut. x. 10; Lev. viii. 35; Ps. exxxiv. 2). ‘ A man
ealled ‘The Man of the Mountain of the House’ went round every night to see
that all were in their places, and that none of them slept. If he found any
one asleep he struck him, and had liberty to burn his clothes. To this
Lightfoot thinks there is a reference in Rev. xv. 16: ‘Blessed is he that
watcheth and keepeth his garments.’” 3. Fixed in number. No less than
4,000 mentioned, a given number at each door, relieved by others at a certain
time. How the number of porters were distributed under 25 chiefs or the
93 captains not informed. II. Their peculiar mode of appointment.
“ They cast lots” as usual. The lot for sacred purposes sanctioned by divine
authority (Lev. xvi.8; Num. xxvi. 55; 1 Sam. xiv. 41; Prov. xvi. 33), and
tontinued until the time of our Lord (Lukei. 9). Among the heathen often
used in choice of a champion or priority in combat; in the decision of
fate in war; and in the appointment of magistrates, jurymen, and other
functionaries, It appears to be a solemn appeal to an omniscient God, and
teaches that things apparently accidental are under his control. ‘ What is
chance to man, is the appointment of God,” says one. ‘ He hath cast the
lot for them, and his hand hath divided it unto them by line.”


Tue Buessina of OsepEepom.—Verse 5.


“God blessed him,” a short, suggestive phrase connecting past history with
present condition, and giving an insight into Obededom’s history and God’s
providence. Learn—I. That God will honour signal service.
Everything in material creation is made to serve; no insect, element, or atom
created for itself. Manis made toserve. Wealth, social elevation, and privi-
lege put him under greater obligation. Our aim should be to do our duty, that
God may lead us to higher and nobler work. Caleb, Phineas, and Obededom
distinguished for service and honour. 1. Honour is given naturally for service.
In war, commerce, and legislation, men are promoted, knighted, and made peers
of the realm. ‘‘ Whoso keepeth the fig-tree shall eat the fruit thereof (by natural
law, through diligent cultivation); so he that waiteth on his master shall be
honoured” (Proy. xxvii. 18).. 2. Honour is given providentially. “He that
waiteth faithfully on his Divine master shall be honoured.” Joseph, Nehemiah,
and Daniel ‘stood before kings and not mean men.” “If any man serve moe,
him will my Father honour ;” honour with his friendship and presence on earth,
and at length approved before an assembled universe, ‘ Well done, good and
faithful servant.” II. That signal service thus rewarded is com-
mended to our notice. “Honourable mention” often found in Scripture.
1. That we may discern the goodness of God. The smallest service, even a cup of
cold water, not overlooked. He is gracious, accepts and erowns our service for
him. “God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love.” 2. That
we may imitate the example. We may not be in the same circumstances and able
to do the same things, but we may cherish the same spirit and copy their example.
“Nobleness of condition,” says Dr. Chalmers, “is not essential as a epee for

19


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [omap. xxv.





nobleness of character. It is delightful to think that humble life may be just as
rich in moral grace and moral grandeur as the loftiest places in society ; that as
true dignity of principle may be earned by him who in homeliest drudgery plies
his conscientious task, as by him who stands entrusted with the fortunes of an
empire.”
““ Howe’er it be, it seems to me,
’Tis only noble to be good;


Kind hearts are more than coronets,
And simple faith than Norman blood” [Tennyson].


Guanps or Tue Srorzs Typzs oF Carist1an Soupiers.— Verses 20-28.


Temple watch a warfare. Two grand keepers of stores—one to maintain
officers and services, the other for things consecrated to the building, “in the
house of God.” Many assisted, as a kind of brotherhood, in the use and
defence of treasures. This service a type of Christian warfare. I. In the
acquisition of the treasure. Much of it “spoils won in battles,” taken from the
enemy, therefore gained by courage, strength, and conflict. The treasures of
_ Christian experience, the privileges of the Christian Church, and the advance of
Christian missions only acquired through conflict. II. In the defence of the
treasure. Religion in the soul, God’s kingdom in the world must be kepé or
maintained by fighting. Warfare is constant, enemies attack, temptations
surround. The battle not yet over, ‘“‘ Wherefore take unto you the whole armour
of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to
stand.” III. In the use of the treasure. Ancient trophies were hung up in
heathen temples. Plunder was divided, and priests had influence to procure the
gods certain offerings and acceptable presents. Our “spoils” gained through
God, and must be dedicated to him. Samuel, Saul, Abner, and Joab had
collected treasures which David now consecrated to the highest purpose, “ to
maintain the house of the Lord.” Our gold and silver, time and strength,
trophies gained over sin, Satan, and the world, all laid at the Saviour’s feet.
Abraham gave Melchisedec the spoils, and the victorious officers presented their
“oblation to the Lord” (Num. xxxi. 50).


THe OFFICERS AND JuDGES.—Verses 29-332.


Three separate lists presented doorkeepers, treasure-keepers, and rulers of
civil affairs, or “outward business over Israel.” Doorkeepers were Korahites
and Merarites, to whom belonged Obededom and his descendants. The treasures
of God’s house under the charge of Gershonite branches; the dedicated things
under a branch of Kohathites. The service “of scribes and judges” was
committed to the Izarites, along with Chenaniah (ver. 29). Notice—I. The
character of their office. There are two departments. 1. The judges
administered the law. Singers, porters, and Levites employed in the service of
the sanctuary were not concerned in this business. One department enough to
fill and understand. Pray not for enlargement of your sphere, but for ability
to fillit. 2. Lhe officers collected the revenue. Managed “ God’s tithes and the
king’s taxes.” Thus city and country, Jehovah and the king were cared for,
idolatry and injustice avoided, civil and sacred interests interwoven and
advanced. II. The period in which they held office. “In the
fortieth year of the reign of David” (ver. 31), the last year of his reign. He
felt the end approaching, and arranged the orders of the sanctuary. We should
diligently improve our time, and if we do not reap the fruit of our labours, let
us not grudge it to our successors.

120


HAP. EXVI.]








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


1!


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 5. Blessing of Obed. I. What
tt consists of. 1. Family increase. A
large family of eight sons, descendants
of whom he might be proud. 2. Family
honour. His sons exalted to places of
trust in the sanctuary. <A great bless-
ing to have children eminent in the
service of God. 3. Family reputation.
Held in great repute for conduct and
character. ‘The memory of the just
is blessed.” II. How tt is gained. Not
by wealth and worldly influence. 1.
By a right mind. Obed. was willing,
very ready to take the ark when all
others were afraid. When the heart is
rigkt before God, we shall be eager to
render any help. 2. By right action.
This springs from genuine affection.
The mind has its own thoughts and
actings. These anterior to all outward
acts. Hence the saying, “Think be-
fore youact.” “ For as he thinketh in
his heart so is he.”

Ver. 10. A father’s favourite.
Simri made chief, not by right of
primogeniture, but in office. If the
firstborn, that is, the issue of the first-
born had failed: we learn “the
vicissitudes of families,” the uncertain
tenure of earthly fame and fortune.
But very likely he was better qualified
for office than his elder brother. His
father saw in him eminent qualifica-
tions. What differences in the same
family! How anxious parents are to
possess and promote clever children !

Ver. 14. A wise counsellor. Lit.
a giver of counsel with wisdom—a
high commendation. Many have
counsel, but no wisdom. Many give
counsel, but not wisely. Zechariah, a
wise man, equal to his father and held
a chief place. 1. The service of God
requires wise men. 2. God in his
providence raises up wise men. Hence,
3. This service is wisely and efficiently
carried on in all ages.

Vers. 20-28. Ministers stewards in
God’s house. “ Allowed to be put in


the Church.


trust.” Hence responsibility and
honour; requiring piety, administra-
tive ability,and faithfulness. “ Stewards
of the’ mysteries of God.” Not de-
positories, nor owners, but dispensers
(“rightly dividing” or dispensing) the
word to others. ‘“ Moreover, it is re-
quired in stewards that a man be found
faithful” (cf. 1 Cor. iv. 1,2). The
treasury of God’s house. 1. Its origin.
As far back as the time of Samuel its
foundations laid (ver. 28); such had
been once established under Joshua
(vi. 24); but soon exhausted and not
heard of under later judges until
Samuel. 2. Its object. “To main-
tain the house of the Lord” (ver. 27)
in its services and its officials. The
Heb. means to strengthen, not the out-
ward building merely, but to help its
servants, encourage its efforts, and
build up its worshippers. 3. The
necessity of its replenishment. The
more God gives to us the more we
should devote to him. Great success
in business, great “spoils” in war, call
for proportionate returns. Church
revenues ever needed. ‘The Lord’s
position” should never be forgotten.

Vers. 29-32. The two spheres of
Christian service. 1. They are dis-
tinguished from one another, Civil and
religious affairs, Church and State not
opposed to one another, but entirely
distinct. One concerns earthly, and
tho other heavenly affairs in nature
and purpose. “ My kingdom is not of
this world.” 2. They are intimately
related one to another. The Church
may help and intone the State, but the
State should never control nor oppose
“It would certainly be
ruinous to true religion,” says A.
Clarke, “ to make the State dependent
ou the Church ; nor should the Church
be dependent on the State. Let them
mutually support each other; and let
the State rule by the laws, and the
Church live by the Bible.”


121


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





[cHaP. XxXvIL





ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXVI.


Vers. 1-19. Porters. Five things
are requisite to a good officer—ability,


clean hands, despatch, patience, and -


impartiality [W. Penn]. Divisions.
One man perhaps proves miserable in
the study of the law, who might have
flourished in that of physic or divinity ;
another runs his head against the
pulpit, who might have been service-
able to his country at the plough;
and the third proves a very dull and
heavy philosopher, who possibly would
have made a good mechanic, and have
done well enough at the useful philo-
sophy of the spade or anvil [South].
Ver. 27. Spoils. There was a dis-
pute in the army of Mohammed between
young men who had fought and old
who had stayed under the ensigns.
Mohammed pretended to have received
orders from heaven to divide the booty.
This the origin of ch. viii. in The
Koran, “ entitled the Spoils, revealed


at Medina,” beginning thus, “ They wil]
ask thee concerning the spoils. Answer,
The division of the spoils belongeth
unto God and the apostle” [¢f. Ed, by
Geo, Sale]. It was customary among
the Romans, when entering upon war,
to promise some part of their prey to
their deities. There was a temple at
Rome dedicated to Jupiter Predator,
because a part of the prey was due to
him [cf. A. Clarke in loco].

Ver. 29. Officers. The curious fact
comes out in all the arrangements that
office was hereditary. The heads of the
different departments are named after
the heads of the families employed in
them. All that David seems to have
done was to restore and regulate a
system that had been organised at the
first settlement of the nation. In this
respect it presents a striking contrast
to our modern customs [Murphy].





CHAPTER XXVIL


Serrioan Norzs.]


We have captains of monthly divisions of the army (vers. 1-15),


princes of tribes (vers. 16-24), stewards of treasures and possessions of the king (vers.
25-29), and David’s counsellors (vers. 30-34).

Vers. 1-15.— Captains of divisions. Arrangements for army similar to those for priests
and Levites. Military force consisted of 12 companies of 24,000 each, a company serving
a month ata time (2 Sam. xxiii. 8; 1 Chr. xi.11). Chief fathers, princes of tribes and
chief officers of state. Captains, subordinate to commanders of monthly divisions
Officers, scribes who performed duty of commissariat, and kept muster-roll in army.
This verse heads the chapter. ‘It may be safely assumed that the heading originaily
referred to a more elaborate description of the classes and their different officers, for
which we have here only a shorter extract” [Jeil]. Ver. 2. Jash., son of Hachmoni
(ch. xi. 11; 2 Sam. xxiii. 8); Zab., one of his ancestors, or these may be different names
of the same person. Ver. 3. Perez, Pharez. Ver. 4. Dod., read Eleazar, son of Dodo
(ch. xi. 12; 2 Sam. xxiii. 9). Ver. 5. Ben. (2 Sam. xxiii. 20-23). Chief priest, t.e., chiet
prince. Abiathar chief priest, but Jehoiada head of Aaronitefamily. Ver. 7. Asahel,
slain by Abner (2 Sam. ii. 18-23; xxiii. 24); his name given in honour of his memory.
Ver. 8. Sham. (cf. 2 Sam. xxiii, 11; 1 Chr. xi. 27). Ver.11. Sibb., for different spelling see
ch. xx.4; 2 Sam. xxi. 18. Ver. 15. Oth., a descendant of the judge in succession to
Soshua (Judy. iii. 9-11).

Vers. 16-24.—Princes of the tribes. This a civil institution, in contrast to the military
euler. “Rulers” or “princes” of the tribes appear to have been the eldest lineal
descendants of the patriarchs, according to the law of primogeniture [Speak. Com.].
Ver. 18, /ihu, for ‘ Hliab,” eldest son of Jesse (1 Sam. xvi. 6). Ver. 21. Abner, Saul's
general. Ver. 22, These, princes of most of the tribes, for “‘ Gad and Asher omitted.


cHaP. xxv] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


ee





a
: : ui

Similarly, Dan and Zebulon omitted from the genealogical survey of the tribes in
chs. iv.-vii. We can only suppose that the lists, as they came down to the writer of
Chronicles, were incomplete ” [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 23. Took not, but only those above twenty
years, or of those that drew sword (1 Chr. xxi. 5). Satd, therefore to number all above
and under twenty years old would haye been immense trouble and offensive to God.
Ver. 24. Finished not ef. 1 Chr. xxi 6) Chronicles. The census was not completed ;


full details not reported to David by enumerators, and therefore not registered in public
archives or daily records.


Vers, 25-31.—Stewards of royal possessions, Treasures, those in royal palace, private
accumulations. Storehouses, scattered in country, for taxes paid zn kind, not in money.
Castles, watch-towers in border districts exposed to raids from plundering tribes in the
desert (cf. 2 Chr. xxvi. 10; xxvii. 4). Ver. 31. Substance, consisting of money, fruits,
labourers, flocks, and land. ‘“ David had become, by some means or other, a large landed
proprietor, as well as a capitalist, possessed of much moveable wealth ” [Speak. Com.].

Vers, 32-34.—David’s ministers. Compare in contents and style with its counterpart in
2 Sam. viii. 15-18; 1 Chr. xviii. 15-17; 2 Sam. xx. 23-26. “The list is chiefly supple-
mental, the officers mentioned being, in the main, such as have not been noticed before—
¢.g-, king’s counsellor, king’s friend, companion of the king’s sons. The list cannot belong
to a very Jate part of David’s reign, since it contains the name of Ahithophel, who slew
himself during Absalom’s rebellion (2 Sam. xvii. 23) ” [Speak, Com.]. Ver.32. Uncle, David's
“nephew,” as word often used (cf. ch. xx. 7 and 2 Sam, xxi. 21). Ver. 33, Adith., only
mention made by writer of Chronicles. Companion, “ king’s friend” (1 Ki. iv. 5). Ver. 34.
Jehotada, son of Ben., named probably after his grandfather.


HOMILETICS.
Tae Minrrany Force or Dayin.—Versee 1-15.


Here an account of the army, the militia, with its officers and regulations.
The organisation in part inherited from Saul, but greatly developed by David.
I. The strength of its numbers, Twelve legions, each 24,000 men;
divided into regiments of 1,000, and these again into companies of 100 men,
under the command of their respective subalterns, there being 24 captains of
thousands and 240 centurions. This a sufficient force for ordinary purposes of
State; for putting down sudden attacks or popular tumults, and repelling
invasion. ‘“ When extraordinary emergencies demanded a larger force, the whole
standing army could easily be called to arms, amounting to 288,000 or 300,000
including the 12,000 officers that naturally attended on the twelve princes” (vers.
16-24). “There is no king saved by the multitude of an host (by the greatness
of his warlike might). A mighty man (a warrior) is not delivered by much
strength” (Ps. xxxiv. 16). II. The limited period of its service.
“Month by month.” This monthly course would not be burdensome to the
country nor royal exchequer; would be a training and discipline ; and would
permit every soldier to return to the pursuits and duties of private life for eleven
months in the year. None compelled to serve, nor at expeises for more than a
month, which could easily be borne. Every wise king will contribute for public
safety, with as little expense as possible to the people. ‘‘ The prince shall not
take of the people’s inheritance by oppression.” III. The officers by
which it was commanded. These termed “the chief fathers,” the
hereditary *‘ heads of tribes, who, like chieftains of clans, possessed great power
and influence.” 1. Men of great experience. Not ignorant and unaccustomed to
warfare. They are mentioned among David’s worthies in 2 Sam. xxiii. and
1 Chr.xi. “At the head of his army were officers of consummate experience,
and what was more highly esteemed in the warfare of the time, extraordinary
personal activity, strength, and valour. His heroes remind us of those of Arthur
or Charlemagne, excepting that the armour of the feudal chieftains constituted
their superiority ; here main strength of body and dauntless fortitude of mind”
(“ Hist. of Jews,” Milman). 2. Men promoted by merit. Tried and rca


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. {cuaP. xxv





by great actions, then advanced to great preferments. Favoritism had ne
influence. Each appointed to office for which best qualified. Men of worth
thus encouraged, and public efficiency promoted. “Many seek the ruler’s
favour” in social servility ; to whom a smile from superiors is like a suabeam.
But princes find it good policy to promote men of truth and incorruptible
honesty rather than sycophants and time-servers. ‘The king’s favour is towards
a wise servant.” The great King will finally promote “the faithful and wise
servant” who has improved his talents, been diligent in his work, and is ready
for his account.


Taz Civm Orricers or Daviv.—Verses 16-23.


Here a list of hereditary chiefs or rulers of tribes—tribal princes—at the time
of David’s census. Gad and Ashar for some reason excluded. ‘Take the record
—I. As illustrating the optimist style of the writer. David
pictured in his struggles, elevation, and grandeur. His wars and conquests, the
extension of his kingdom, and the list of his officers. Arrangements sacred and
civil, and the use of symbolic numbers illustrate the same tendency. A preference
for brilliant scenes. Parts omitted chiefly dark. ‘Such as would disturb and in
some points obscure the lustre of the picture. He collects all that is fitted to
represent the hero-king in his greatness, and the activity of his reign as an
uninterrupted chain of splendid theocratic events. To finish a picture thai
presents David in the meridian height of his glory and mighty achievements is
the obvious aim of all that our author adds in the way of supplement on the
ground of his resources to the life-picture of the great king as given in the Books
of Samuel” [Zange]. II. As upholding ancient institutions. Moses
gave to every tribe its chief. Many references to the Pentateuch, Levitical rites,
and prescriptions of the law. A few changes are made to meet the exigencies of
the time ; but constant regard is paid to “the command of the Lord God of
Israel” in ancient days. Institutions educational and industrial, social and
religious, have a wonderful energy, re-duplicate human strength, embody and
perpetuate the acquisitions of society in sacred forms. There is much to conserve
as well as create. The spirit of reverence must ever be joined with the spirit of
invention ; the old and the new must be inseparably linked together in the work
of the legislator and social reformer. ‘ Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it.”


Taz Restraints oF Gop ON THE WILL oF Man.—Verses 23, 24.


God restrained David from completing the census, and often controls men’s
actions for the accomplishment of his will. His sway most absolute and indis-
putable. He could not fulfil his designs without this. But no interference with
human volition and responsibility. Divine restraint over the human will difficult
to understand, but involves no absurdity. How does God restrain man’s will?
I. By revealing his own will. “The Lord had said, &.” We are apt
to do what we think is right; hence need fora clear, distinct revelation from
God. This is given. 1. God's will should be our law. It is best, the safest and
only guide. 2. Jo disobey his law ts rebellion. David knew God had promised
that his people shouid be innumerable, yet was determined to number them,
though regarding the custom not to include those under twenty. A full and
unmistakable revelation of duty should induce to its performance and check, as
intended, in disobedience. II, By restraining man’s will. David,
unchecked by Joab, determined to carry out his own wish and make arran


ments for political and military purposes. God restrained him and kept him
124


CHAP, XXvII.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


eee
in bounds. 1. By inward conviction of wrong-doing. “I have sinned.” Wounded
to the quick, as if struck by an arrow. Conscience roused, accused, and checked.
We cannot fly in the face of God without moral rebuke and self-accusation.
2. By outward restraints. When Joab’s reluctance and natural delay produced
no impression, God sent the plague. This answered the end. Thus God controls
the human heart. (Abimelech, Pharaoh, and Babylonish monarchs.) “The
king’s heart is in the hand of the Lord, &c.”


Dayin’s Possrssions.—Verses 25~31.


I, What they consisted of. “The king’s treasures,” royal possessions
in palace, and stores in other places. 1. Treasures, gold, silver, &c., in Jerusalem,
2. Goods in the provinces, grain and stores in castles, cities, villages, and in the
fields (ver. 25). 3. Cultivators of the ground (ver, 26). 4. Vineyards and
their produce (ver. 27). 5. Olive-trees and their produce, and sycamore planta-
tions (ver. 28). 6. Flocks and herds in different districts. 7. Camels and
asses (ver. 30). As younger son, David had not much private property
(1 Sam. xvi. 11-20). Now a large landed proprietor, and a capitalist owning
moveable wealth. II. How they were gained. By successful wars.
During Saul’s lifetime he had made raids and gained wealth (1 Sam. xxvii. 8, 8;
xxx. 20). He received much spoil, and acquired newly conquered countries
(2 Sam. viii. 4). “His olive grounds and sycamore plantations were in the
‘low plain,’ which was the country of the Philistines (ver. 28); camels and
flocks were pastured by Arabs (vers. 30, 31); probably on lands formerly
belonging to Arabs. No doubt he derived considerable revenue from subject
kings (1 Sam. viii. 2; x. 19), as Solomon did (1 Kings iv. 21), and he may have
bought or rented lands in different places. There may possibly have been a
certain quantity of public unassigned land in Palestine at the time when he
became king, which would naturally fall into his hands to be dealt with as he
chose. Further, he enjoyed, of course, the usual rights of a Jewish king over
the landed property of his subjects, and was thus entitled to receive a tithe of
the produce (1 Sam. viii. 15-17). He would also from time to time obtain those
‘benevolences’ which were expected from all on certain occasions” [Speak. Com.].
III. How they were guarded. “All these were rulers of the sub-
stance” (ver. 31). The king divided his private possessions into twelve
departments, like his public affairs, In these departments were choice men,
able to manage and guard his treasure. No officers for state and display, none
for sport, but all for service. Men loyal and obedient, in whom the king could
put confidence. “The hand of the diligent shall bear rule.”


Tue Mriyisters or Davin’s Court.—Verses 32—34,


In this list David’s counsellors, seven men of high position, worthy apparently
of special mention. Four or five known in other capacity (¢f. lists ch. xviil.
14-17; 2 Sam. viii. 16-18 ; xx. 23-26). 1. The counsellors of the king. First
Jonathan, kinsman of David, a politician, scribe, and eminent for wisdom. Then
Ahithophel, cunning ; held in great estimation, and generally followed in counsel.
After death of Ahith., Jehoiada and Abiathar succeeded in the privy councii,
2. The companion of the king. ‘ Hushai was the king’s companion,” the friend
whom he entrusted with secrets, and whose conversation was acceptable (2 Sam.
xvi. 37). H.an opponent of Ahithophel, but honest and faithful. 3. The tutor of
the king’s sons. Jehiel, the Hachmonite, filled this position ; an office mentioned


enly here. 4. The commander-in-chief to the king. Joab, as it ea
12


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [oHAP. XXVIf,





—————


would be in some sense minister of war, and belong to rank of counsellor. As
such he appears to act in taking the census of the people (ch. xxi.). Such
men eminent for wisdom and integrity, most honourable and trusty advisers,
but David preferred his Bible above all, says one. “ Thy testimonies also are my
delight and my cownsellors” (men of counsel) (Ps. cxix. 24). A privilege to be
counsellor to such a king; but Jehovah has friends whom he admits to his
audience, ‘The secret (privy council met for deliberation) of the Lord is with
them that fear him, and he will show them his covenant” (Ps. xxv. 14).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1-23. 1. Davidasa powerful then may we number God’s children!


prince, a type of Christ. Thousands
trained as regular militia for his ser-
vice. His kingdom well defended, and
secure against all assault. Christ’s king-
dom and Church well guarded—never
wants champions; legions of angels at
hiscommand. 2. David's soldiers a type
of Christ's subjects. They are bound to
fight, should never desert, and will be
sure to win if faithful.

Vers. 23, 24. “The Lord said he
would increase Israel.” The wonderful
promise. 1. Embodied in the tradition
of the nation. 2. The ground of hope
for the people. 3. Fulfilled by the
providence of God. Or, dn innumerable
people (cof. Gen. xv. 5; xxii. 17; xxvi.
4). 1. Inactual existence. 2. In future
calculations. The actual number of the
people living at a given time is not the
sum of the Lord’s people. In the
Divine estimate those gone before and
those coming after are taken into
account. QOan we count the stars?


They are perpetually increasing !

Ver.27. A remembered name. Asahel,
captain of the fourth course, died early
in David’s reign (2 Sam. ii. 12-23).
But greatly respected, and gave name
to family or regiment. The value of a
good name. A good reputation insepar-
able from man, outlasts every worldly
blessing. ‘ The righteous shall be had
in everlasting remembrance.”


Ver. 33. The King’s companion.
Heb., friend or companion. A great
privilege and distinction. ‘ Hushai’s


is not obscurely indicated in the ques-
tions which Absalom addressed to him,
“Is this thy kindness to thy friend ?”
Why wentest thou not with thy friend ?
(2 Sam. xvi. 17). On his devotion to
David, see 2 Sam. xv. 32-37; xvii. 5-
16)” [Speak. Com.]. Abraham “a
Sriend of God.” “ Ye are my friends,”
says Christ, ‘‘if ye do what I command
you,”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXVIII.


Vers. 1-15. Captains. An English
captain in the year 1759, who was
beating up for recruits in the vicinity
of Bethlehsm, Pennsylvania, met one
day a Moravian Indian, and asked him
whether he had a mind to be a soldier.
‘“‘'No,” answered he, “I am already
engaged.” ‘‘ Who is your captain?”
asked the officer. ‘I have a very brave
and excelisat captain,” replied the
Indian. “ His name is Jesus Christ.
Him will I serve as long as I live.
My life is at his disposal.” Reproved

126


by the Indian’s answer, the officer left
him unmolested [Baxendale].

Vers. 25-29. Our treasures. If every
man works at that which nature fitted
him for, the cows (ver. 26) will be well
attended [Za Fontaine]. Not what I
have, but what I do, is my kingdom
[Carlyle].

Vers. 32-34. Counsellor. The best
friends are those who stimulate us to
that which is good (Heb. x. 24)
[Nicholls]. Every friend is to the
other a sun and a sunflower also; he


CHAP. XXVIII] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
rm


attracts and follows [Richter]. “A “Ointment and perfume rejoice the
faithful friend is a strong defence, and heart, so doth the sweetness of a
he that hath found such an one hath man’s friend by hearty counsel” (Prov.
found @ treasure” (Ecclua wi. 14). xxvii. 9).





CHAPTER XXVIIL


Crrtrcan Nores.) This chapter and following comprise last words of David, special
directions to Solomon in building the temple and succeeding to the throne.

Vers. 1-4.—The assembly of princes, All various officials, of whom account formerly
given; really the whole court. Princes, the term one under which all persons of import-
ance might be included not comprised in any other of the six classes [ Speak. Com. ).
Ver. 2. Stood. An effort in his age and weakness. Brethren, modest and affectionate.
House of rest. Contrast with movable tabernacle. Ready. Gathered materials. Ver. 3.
bs (2 es vii. 5-13; 1 Kings v. 5). Ver. 4. Judah (Gen. xlix. 8-10), Like me (ef.

am. xvi.)

Vers. 5-8.—Solomon declared successor. Succession indefinite at first through Nathan,
then a distinct revelation that Solomon was chosen. Ver. 6. Courts—i.e., temple courts
(2 Chron. iv. 9). Constant (1 Kings iii. 14; ix. 4), Ver. 8. Now. Appeal to congregation
first, then to Solomon in their presence. Keep and seek. Exhortation similar to that of
Moses (Deut. xxx. 15-20).

Vers. 9, 10.— Charge to Solomon, Know, experimentally. Search. Least failure observed
(cf. Ps. cxxxix, 1-3). Seek him (cf. Ps. ix. 10). Strong (ch. xxii. 13; ¢f. Ps, xxvii. 14;
Ps. xxxi. 24). Ver. 10. Special duty urged,

Vers. 11-21.—The plan of the temple. Pattern, working plan, as Ex. xxv, 10. Set of
directions in writing. Porch before the sanctuary (2 Chron. iii. 4). Houses. Holy and
most holy places. Treas. Chambers built round the wall (1 Kings vi. 5). Upper chambers.
Over most holy place (2 Chron. iii. 9). nner parlours. Lower rooms of side buildings of
holy place, and perhaps also of porch. Ver. 12. By the spirit, Literally the pattern of
all that was with him in the spirit or the form of all that floated before his mind.
David's spirit, not God’s spirit spoken of [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 13. Courses. Explained
chaps. xxiii-xxv. Wer. 14. Weigit. Fixing proportionate weights in things of gold.
Candlesticks in temple were ten (2 Chron. iv. 7); silver ones for uses not specified. Tables,
Ten connected with shewbread (1 Kings vii. 48); silver tables for minor purposes.
Bowls for sprinkling (2 Chron. iv. 11). Cups for libations (Ex. xxv. 29). Basons, covered
vessels, tankards. Chariot. Two cherubs on mercy-seat constituted the chariot on which
Jehovah rides (cf. Ps. xviii. 10; xeix.1). Ver. 19. Hand. Pattern given by one of the
prophets in writing; or by divine revelation, for which hand of Jehovah is equivalent
(2 Chron. xxix. 15). Vers. 20,21. Resume address broken off im ver. 10. For former
part, ¢f.chap. xxii. 18. Command. Literally, for all thy words.


HOMILETICS.
Davin’s ApprRess TO THE Princus.—Verses 1~8,


An assembly convened, consisting of princes of tribes, captains, and subor-
dinate officers of the army, stewards of the royal household, and nobles of the
land. The nation represented. The occasion solemn and important. David
the centre and chief actor of the scene, about to abdicate in a different way from
Charles V., before his grand audience, after a life spent in military pursuits and
ambitious projects. The scene portrayed worth attention. Notice—I. The
attitude which David assumed. “The king stood up upon his feet.”
Probably had been sitting before ; very like’y recovered from eickness cries

12


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. {owar. xxvimt.


wy








‘l Kings i. 1). He receives strength in age and infirmity to stand up to improve
the opportunity, and to inspire his audience with his own earnestness and
enthusiasm. A reverent, dignified attitude that he felt due to the occasion,
indicative of the influence of a great thought over the mind of man, and the
power of that influence even in old age to rouse to duty. “ Forsake me not, O
God, in mine old age, when I am grey-headed, until I have shewed thy strength
unto this generation, and thy power to all them that are yet for to come”
(Ps. Ixxi. 16), II. The spirit which David manifested. “My
brethren and my people.” 1. A hwmble spirit. “My people” whom I rule,
with whom I rank myself in this great work. He is their superior, but does not
forget the command “that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren.”
2. An affectionate spirtt. “ My brethren” whom I love, not servants whom I
command. Affection and condescension to inferiors becoming in monarchs.
Not less honoured, but more beloved. “ Love levels all,” said Cervantes. 3. A
spirit of authority. ‘“ Hear me.” The king’s circumstances, history, and expe-
rience gave weight to his authority. His message solemn, required attention,
and must be obeyed, if the nation prospered. ‘ Where the word of a king is
there is power.” Court and people are bound in faithfulness to their sovereign,
and to the interests of their country. Hence ‘“ Whoso keepeth the command-
ment shall feel no evil thing ” (Ecc. viii. 4,5). III. The ambition which
David cherished. “I had it in mine heart to build, &c.” (ver. 2). His
cherished resolve not to be great, to build a family and extend a kingdom, &c.,
but “to build an house” for God, a purpose which filled his heart, occupied
his time, and to accomplish which he gave his gold and gathered his materials.
A noble purpose of immense value in life in giving strength and direction. To
have one great aim, constantly present and made the habit of mind, to make
every thought and every pursuit to centre upon this aim, will secure the happi-
ness and improvement of life. IV. The confession which David
makes. God denied him the pleasure of building. In his heart, not executed
by his hand, ‘‘ because thou hast been a man of war,” a confession candid and
unreserved. Many things veiled in forgetfulness, passed by in silence, and never
made prominent and public. This a warning to all, that sins stain character,
hinder from noblest work, and give unsuitableness to its accomplishment. “The
Lord hath purposed ; who shall disannul it ?”


‘*A greater power than we can contradict
Hath thwarted our intents” [Shaks.].


Tue Testimony oF A Nogpuie Lirs.—Verses 4-6.


David here reviews his life, and at its close testifies to the goodness and grace
of God. I. In his choice to the throne God displays his
sovereignty. The different steps mentioned. The tribe of Judah, then his
father’s house, and among the sons of his father he alone chosen. Tribe, family,
individual, The choice not according to man’s judgment. One after another
set aside. “The Lord hath not chosen these;” right one found at length.
“ This is he.” II. In his acquisition of the kingdom God mani-
fests his providence. “To be king over Israel for ever.” Trained in
shepherd life under a sense of duty, dependence upon God and self-control,
disciplined by Divine providence to wait and prepare for the throne, gifted by
God’s grace with special characteristics of prudence, wisdom, generosity, and
courage, he was elevated to be king. The recollection of this sudden exaltation
from humble station deeply impressed him through life. His last words a
declaration of God’s providence and mercy. III. In his son’s succession
to the throne God fulfils his promise. “He said unto me, Solomon,


thy cht Re build, &e.” God seen through his own life down to succession of
2


oHAP. xxvii.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


a





his son—who should build the temple, be established on the throne, and be
taken into special covenant with God (cf. 2 Sam. vii. 12-16), Blessings eutailed
upon family and posterity—“ the promise to you and your children.” What we
do, or sincerely design to do for God, though prevented, we shall in no wise lose
reward, Satisfaction to parents while they live, to have signs and assurance
through Divine promise of family piety and prosperity when they are dead.


THE CHorcr or SoLtomon.—Verses 5—8.


David addressing the assembly traces his election to the soversiguty of God.
Solomon presented in the same set speech as successor; chosen on the same
principle as himself, therefore worthy of reception and obedience. Notice—I,
The method by which Solomon came to reign. “ He hath chosen
Solomon to sit upon the throne of the kingdom.” Divine selection all through
history of father and son. Human events to David not fortuitous occurrences,
but Divine acts. Hence design, goodness, power, and providence in individual
hfe. If. The conditions on which his government will be
established. Not by his policy, armies, and fleets; but by loyal obedienca
to God. This the rule for nations, leaders, and king. God purposes and
arranges not in disregard to our response to his commands. 1. The constant
obedience of the sovereign. “I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he be
constant to do wv commandments.” The security and perpetuity of Solomon’s
reign depended «pon this condition. 2. Phe intelligent obedience of the people.
“Keep and seek for wil the commandments” (ver. 8). Seek, inquire to know;
then keep, pract*se that you know; all commandments. Obedience intelligent,
obedience impartial, and obedience uniform, the triple conditions of temporal
prosperity, of real establishment of families and nations—the only way to enjoy
our inheritance and to transmit it sarely to our successors, ‘That ye may
ite this good land, and leave t for an inheritance for your children after you
or ever.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS,


saith the same to all Christian princes,


Ver. 1. David assembled. 1. Ina
but then they must make it their case


critical time of national history—the


king’s departure, and choice of suc-
cessor, 2. To hear parting counsel of
the dying monarch. Advice to Solo-
mon, princes, and all; advice concern-
ing present and future.

Vers. 5-8. Solomon, my son. Scarce
any of the Roman emperors had a son
to succeed him: all, or most of them,
till Constantine, died unnatural deaths
[Trapp]. Shall build a material
temple ; Christ, a mystical, that is the
Church, which is the house of God
(1 Tim, iii. 15). For this and the fol-
lowing promises are, some peculiar to
Solomon, some to Christ, and some to
both as the types and antitypes [Zbid.].
ZT will be his fae (ver. 6). Solomon's
by adoption and regeneration. See
2 Cor. vi. 16. Christ's, by eternal
generation and personal union. God


to build him a spiritual temple [/d7d.].
Be constant (ver. 7). Hebrew, strong ;
for he will be hard put to it. God’s
promises are conditional. See 2 Sam.
vii. As at this day. Solomon had
been well instructed in the ways of
God, both by father (Prov. iv. 4) and
mother (Prov. xxxi. 1), and while
young he did God’s commandments and
judgments, as hinted in these words,
but he was not so constant. Ver. 8.
Keep and seck. Keep what you know
already, and seek to be yet further
instructed. By this latter word
“seek ” tollit ‘tgnorantiam  tlam
crassam, saith Vatablus, he striketh at
affected ignorance [Zdzd. }.

Ver. 8, grounded op this promise
is a double charge; first, to the
people, and then to Soiomen. ied


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


[cmar. XXvzt.


ne


ing and secking the commandments
of the Lord, is at once the test and
the security of his people [Murphy].
A religious training. I. Given with
great affection. Many sons. Solomon
chosen, é&c. (ver. 5). IL. Practical mn
its tendency. ‘Keep and seek for all


intellectually and morally. TII. Solemn
in its sanctions. “In the sight of all
Israel, the congregation of the Lord.
and in the audience of our God.”
IV. Benevolent in its design. Teo be


‘established in our position, and to pre-


serve and hand down our trust to


the commandments of the Lord.” A others. “That ye may possess this
training that deadens; thisquickening good land, &e.”
HOMILETICS.


Daviw’s Coarce to Sotomon.—Verses 9, 10, and 20, 21.


Very touching and important is this charge; everything to give solemnity
and perpetual interest to the scene. Solomon urged to—I. A personal
acquaintance with God. “Know thou the God of thy father ”—not
theoretic knowledge, Solomon plenty of that; but practical and experimental.
David concerned that his son should be religious; not great, popular, and wise.
Knowledge of God the foundation of all religion and usefulness. This knowledge
includes—1. An intelligent view of his nature. Impossible to know God perfectly,
but belief in his existence, holiness, omniscience, and truth. The science of God,
the central, the vital science—that which gives life, unity, and beauty to every
branch of knowledge. 2. This knowledge obtained by obedience. Loving and
serving God the way to know him. “If any man will do his will, he shall know.”
Il. A practical regard to God’s service. Knowledge that is life
first, and then service. Much excitement, effort, and service without personal
acquaintance with God. 1. A willing service. “ With a willing mind.” The
hand may act without the will. Service mechanical, drudgery, unless willingly
given. God requires consent—does not force nor constrain. Taskmasters force
(Pharaoh). God’s service free and voluntary. ‘‘ Who is willing to consecrate
his service?” 2. A stedfast service. “Serve him with a perfect heart”—with
an undivided mind; with the whole heart. Not “a double heart” (Heb., a
heart and a heart), Ps. xii, 2. No duplicity nor deception ; no wavering, halting
between two opinions, nor compromise (Matt. vi. 24). ‘“ Ungodly professors have
two hearts, two lords, two ends, two ways” (Cocceius). ‘Come not unto the
Lord with a double heart” (Eccles. i. 28). III. The importance of the
work bequeathed him to finish. “Thou art to build a house for the
sanctuary.” Solomon’s whole life should be active and holy service. The temple
special and inherited work. 1. Undertake cautiously. ‘Take heed now.” Work
difficult, requiring prudence and care. Solomon young and inexperienced, and
possibly might meet with indifference, if not opposition. 2. Finish it cowragcously.
“ Be strong and do it.” Do it without delay and reluctance. ‘Blessed is the
man that findeth his work,” says Carlyle. Many find, but neglect it. The
blessedness in doing it. “If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them,
IV. The powerful inducements to the performance of this
work. Solomon’s circumstances most eventful and inspiriting. Ever sur
rounded by influences and motives to performance of duty. 1. He ts chosen to
the work. “The Lord hath chosen thee to build.” Not every man is a builder.
Some gather materials, and others plan and lay the foundation. God chooses
and qualifies his architects in Church and State. “I have raised him up .. .
he shall build my city” (Isa. xlv. 13). 2. Zhe people are ready to co-operate with
him im the work, ‘The courses of the priests and the Levites shall be with
thee i eee 21). Advice and help—workmen “ willing and skilful” of great


OMAP, XXviII.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.

> >?
service. When none oppose, when “the princes and all the people are wholly
at command,” then work is likely to succeed, and we should be eager to carry it
on. 3. God will help him. “The Lord God, even my God, will be with thee”
{verse 20). God, who strengthens and prospers the father, will “not fail nor
forsake the son.” These motives fit to stir up, animate true-hearted workers,
and admonish to action. Avoid fear; “fear not, nor be dismayed. Cherish


courage ;” be strong and of good courage. Begin thy work at once, “ do it.”
“‘ Arise, therefore, and be doing, and the Lord be with thee.”


“Do what thou dost, as if the earth were heaven,
And that thy last day were the judgment day:
When all’s done, nothing’s done” FKingsleyy.


Gop’s Reiation To Human Lire.—Verse 9.


This description of God introduced as an argument for sincerity of life. He
sees, knows, our hearts and actions; therefore serve him perfectly, &c. Learn
—I. That our life is exposed to God’s inspection. “The Lord
searcheth al] hearts.” This implies that all our deportment is open to God’s
inspection. Some imagine that God is too great to regard such a creature as
man. But what he created is not beneath him to notice. To Him great and
small are equal. He is cognisant of an atom as of a globe; of an insect as an
angel. From Him nothing hid. “ Hell is naked before Him, and destruction
hath no covering.” ‘“ He looketh to the ends of the earth, and seeth under the
whole heaven.” II. That our service to God should spring from
sincere motives. “And understandeth all the imaginations of the thoughts.”
God’s attention not limited to actions and words—his province and preroga-
tive to read and understand ‘‘ imaginations” (phantases, imaged deeds) *“ of the
thoughts.” Hence no deceiving Him by falsehood and form. He desires “truth
in the inward parts,” as opposed to hypocrisy and self-deceit (Ps. li. 6). Hearts
must be sincere and thoughts of God pure. ‘Be not deceived, God is not
mocked” with heartless, outward service. ‘Search me, O God, and know my
heart ; try me, and know my thoughts,” &c. III. That our welfare
depends upon our conduct towards God. He is to be known and
served. Our interest to obey. 1. True service will be rewarded. ‘“ If thou seck
him he will be found of thee.” The smallest service no trifle to God. David's
desire to build well-pleasing to God. ‘Thou didst well that it was in thine
heart.” The will accepted for the deed. “For if there be first a willing mind,
it is accepted according to that a man hath.” 2. Opportunity neglected will be
disastrous. “If thou forsake him, he will cast thee off for ever.” Forsake, after
knowing, obeying, and working for him. Cast off, as worthless and _ lost.
Solomon’s interest, duty, and danger are put before him in true and impressive
light by a pious and dying father. If youth give no heed to parental requests
and heavenly calls, they forsake their highest interests ; enter a path of folly,
which leads to failure; to death without recovery ; to a future without hope.


Instructions FoR BUILDING THE TEemPLE.—Verses 11-20.


Evidently David wished to make a solemn and formal business, in giving in-
structions and handing over the plans for the Temple with elevations, measure-
ments, apartments, and chief articles of furniture. I. The plan of the
Temple. “David gave to Solomon the pattern.” 1. Divine im its origin.
He claims the divine sanction and inspiration which Moses claimed for the taber-
nacle of old (Ex. xxv. 40). From porch at one end to sanctuary at the other,
nothing left to arbitrary choice, to man’s act and invention ; all Bren by


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. foHAP. XXVIEI.
%





ren ae nae


inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Models given in Christian life and Christian
character; the Spirit will help to carry them out and guide in every detail.
2. Written in form. “The Lord made me understand in writing” (ver. 19).
Visions and dreams pass away. Written instructions abide ; often consulted and
meet our necessities. The word of God is “written for our instruction” in
building up Christian life and the spiritual temple. But “ the hand” must be
upon us to make the word effectual and the work successful. II. The
materials of the Temple. Gold and silver, “wrought stones and brass in
abundance without weight.” Gathered,as we have seen, from all quarters and
in different times. David's work was difficult and thorough ; lasting and worthy
of imitation. He gave time and trouble, his substance, and his heart to
accomplish it. ITI. The furniture of the Temple. Vessels of gold and
silver, candlesticks and lamps, tables and altars, &e. The porch, the holy and
most holy place to be appropriately furnished. In these directions David guided
by Divine will, not by bis own taste. God only knows what is fit for his own
house. Put nothing into it that ought not to be there ; take nothing out which
ought to be there. “Look that thou make them after the pattern which was
shewed thee in the mount.”


Davin’s Appress To SoLomon.


Observe—1. It was an address of a dying fatherto ason. May all our children
read it with a feeling heart! 2. It embraces the sum total of realreligion. This
has two distinct parts—(1) The first includes a knowledge of God: “ Know thou
the God of thy fathers.” 1st. Know him as a sin-pardoning God (Jer. xxiv. 7).
2nd. Know him so as to be at peace with him (Job xxii. 21). 3rd. Know him
so as.to love and live to him. 4th. This true saving knowledge of God may be
known by its peculiar properties. It is, first, experimental (Ps. xxxiv. 8 ; 1 Pet.
ii, 3) ; second, soul-abasing (Job xlii, 5, 6; Ep. iii. 8); third, growing (Job i.
10; 2 Pet. iti. 18); fourth, pure (Jas. iii, 17; 1 Mi. iii. 6) ; fifth, practical
(1 Mi. ii, 3; Mi. x. 4). (2) True piety includes the serving of God “ with a
perfect heart, a willing mind.” Ist. God must be served ; that is, worshipped
and obeyed. 2nd. He must be served “ with a perfect heart ;” that is, with an
entire and undivided heart ; with a heart inflamed with love and burning with
geal for God’s glory. 3rd. “ With a willing mind ;” that is, with alacrity, delight,
and joy. (3) David urged this exhortation upon the attention of his son by a
threefold consideration: 1. By the consideration that God is the searcher of
hearts: ‘The Lord searcheth all hearts.” The heathens had no such exalted
ideas of any of their gods. 2. That he is the rewarder of piety: “If thou seek
him,” in the way he hath appointed, “ he will be found of thee;” will make
himself known to thee as thy Friend, and Father and God in covenant. 8. That
he is the punisher of apostasy: “If thou forsake him,” desert his love and
service and turn from following him, ‘he will cast thee off ;” will withdraw
his gracious and powerful presence from thee, and change his countenance and
course towards thee | Rev. J. Wilson}, :


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 9. The God of thy father. 1. to another. Home influence never
‘fLe rich experience behind these words. _ lost.
2. The force of parental afiection in “The fond attachment to the well-known
giving that experience, 3. The sus- place, :
ceptibility of youth to profit by the pee eres into life's longrace,
teaching, Home instruction needed, We tek a sha sells cielersemicen Sch


may be repeated from one generation day” [Cc
193


age, and at our


@HAP. XXymII.]





If thou seck God, de. 1. The object
of search. God lost through sin ; must
be sought ; worthy of seeking. His
friendship and favour, the best of all
blessings. 2. The promise of success.
“ He will be found of thee.” This
proved from Scripture and experience.
A declaration of David’s experience. 3.
The threatened displeasure. “ If thou
forsake him, &c.” This caution to
guard and stimulate. Forsaking God
to be alienated in thought and affec-
tion. The unregenerate turn their backs
and wander like the prodigal. Uncon-
verted world without God, in dark
regionof atheism Those who remain
in this state will be cast away. But
“God,” says one, “never cast man off
until they first cast Him off.”

Vers. 9, 10. Fathers and Children.
Tn this earnest and affectionate charge
we see one generation—1. ‘Trans-
mitting the knowledge of God to its
successor. 2. Enjoining the service of
God upon its successor. 3. Indicating
God’s method of dealing with its suc-


cessor. 4. Bequeathing its unfulfilled
intentions to its successor [M¢.
Braithwaite}.


Ver. 10, For the sanctuary or for
sanctification—+.e., where God may
sanctify his people in holy ordinances,


ILLUSTRATION TO


Ver. 2. Hear me. The death-bed of a
gaint ofttimes resembles the setting sun,
whose rays are the brightest when it is
nearest the horizon. “ The tongues of
dying men enforce attention, like deep
harmony” [Siaks.].

“The chamber where the good man meets
his fate,

Is privileged beyond the common walk

Of virtuous life, quite in the verge of

heaven ” [Young].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





7
and be sanctified by them in holy
duties [7Z'rapp].

Ver. 11. Place of the mercy scat, lit.
the house of the mercy seat. Seat of
mercy in Holy of Holies, Jesus Christ,
the Christian Church and the human
heart.

Ver. 14. Gold by weight. The
vessels for the holy place were of gold,
as those for the priests’ court were of
silver. Now, like as in the temple
there were some vessels of gold, and
some of silver, and all had their
weight and their use ; so in the Church
of Christ there are diversity of vessels,
and of gifts (2 Tim.ii.) [Zrapp].

Ver. 18. Chariot a fit comparison,
because God is said to sté and to dwell
within them. Because a chariot is
made to carry a person from place to
place, an intimation that God was not
fixed to them by the building of the
temple, but that he would remove from
them if they forsook him [Benson].

Vers. 20, 21. Learn—1. The dignity
and lustre of David’s dying hour. 2. The
usefulness of David’s death, as well as
life. 3. The great privilege of those
interested and blessed with the dying
counsels and prayers of the godly
[J. Burns, D.D.}.


CHAPTER XXVIII.


Ver. 10. Take heed. The substance
of a child’s duty and the foundation of
his happiness lie in these two rules laid
down in Prov. i. 7-9, namely, to fear
God and to honour his parents
[Nicholls].

Ver. 20. My God. How few like
David have God and gold together [G.
Villiers]. ‘There is much religion in
the possessive pronouns” [Leether].


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. fouar. xara





CHAPTER XXIX,


Crrricau Notss.} We have in this chapter contributions of the princes to the temple
(vers. 1-9) ; the public thanksgiving of David (vers. 10-13); David's prayer for Solomon
(vers. 14-19); Solomon’s succession to the throne (vers. 20-25); the close of David’s
reign and life (vers. 26-30).

Vers. 1-9.—Contributions to the temple. Palace, a Persian word (cf. Esther i. 2-5;
Neh. i. 1; Dan. viii. 2) applied to the temple (ver. 19). Ver. 2. Onyx (Gen. ii. 12);
glistering, “coloured stones ;” some dark stones, of a hue like that of the antimony by
which women painted their eyes [Speak. Com.]. Marble, white stones or alabaster, found
near Damascus. Ver. 3. Proper good from private sources, not from spoils in war, &e.
Ver. 4. Ophir, brought by Arabian traders; overlay with veneer, Ver. 5. Consecrate,
literally ‘fill his hands.” Ver. 6. Rulers, probably stewards of the king’s substance
(ch. xxviii. 1; xxvii. 25-31). Ver. 7. Drams, Heb. adarcon (Hizra viii. 27), known as
Persian daric, the same as the darkemon (Ezra ii. 69; Neh. vii. 70), variously valued at
12s, 6d. and 25s. The writer does not intend to say that the Jews possessed darics in
David's time, but to express in language what would be intelligible to his readers, the
value of gold subscribed, and to translate the terms of his document, whatever they
were, into terms in use in his own day [Speak. Com.}. Ver. 8 Jehiel, one of the temple
treasurers (xxvi. 21, 22).

Vers. 10-19.—David’s thanksgiving. Father, Israel (ver. 18). Ver. 11, ef. Rev. v. 12.
Ver. 12. Power, physical and moral. Ver. 15. Strangers (cf. Ps. xxix. 12). Abiding,
literally, ‘‘there is no hope’”—i.e., of abiding or continuing here. Ver. 17. Triest
(cf. Ps. vii. 9; Ps. xvii. 3; 1 Sam. xvi. 7). Ver. 18. This, i.e., ‘‘ preserve for ever this spirit
of liberal and spontaneous giving in the hearts of thy people” [Speak. Com.]. Prepare,
establish their hearts.

Vers. 20-25.—Solomon enthroned king. Worshipped, prostrated themselves to the
ground; same outward reverence to God and king, with the respect due to each.
Ver. 21. Z.e., with drink offerings appropriate to each kind of burnt offering, and required
by law to accompany them (cf. Num. xv. 5,7,10). Ver. 22. Second, for first see 1 Kings
i, 85-39, This a more formal and representative. Ver. 23. Sat. Solomon actually reigned
during some short time of his father’s life (1 Kingsi.), Ver. 24. All sons, even Adonijah
(i Kings i. 53). Vor. 25. Magnijied (1 Kings iii. 13), Solomon’s grandeur traced to God.

Vers. 26-30.—Close of David's reign and life. Ver. 27. Time (cf. 1 Kingsii. 11), For more
exact account of duration of reign, 2 Sam, v.5. Ver. 28. Age, in his seventy-first year.
Ver. 29. Book used by author; of this and book of Gad no account, Seer, a commoner
title than that of Samuel. Ver. 30. Went, a singular expression. ‘‘ No other instance of
this in Seripture. ‘The times that went over David’ were the events that happened
to him. Compare his own words in Ps. uxxi. 15; ‘My times are in thy hand’”
[Speak. Com}


HOMILETICS.
ConTRIBUTIONS FOR BuILDING THE TEMPLE.—Verses 1-10.


David addresses all the congregation respecting his son’s tender age, his
personal gifts, and efforts towards building the temple. He makes an earnest
appeal, and meets with a ready response, I. David’s example in giving,
“I have prepared with all my might.” 1. Giving from his own resources. Pubirc
resources, such as spoils of war, numerous and most valuable. Private resources ;
his own “ proper good” or private property; additional gifts; selected with
great care “the gold of Ophir,” the purest and finest in the world (Job xxii, 24;
Is. xiii. 12); bestowed for a specific purpose; the overlaying of the walls of the
temple. 2. Gwing in right order. The heart first, and then the substance,
True religion touches the heart and conscience, and regulates the gifts. “I
have set my affection to the house of my God” (ver. 3). 3. Giving in true spirit.
‘“‘T have prepared with all my might.” Might, intelligence, and ardour must be
thrown into Ged’s work, or nothing will be dene. David easts not the burden

134


CHAP. XxIX.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


SSS Se LT NE Se a a NR a a


upon princes and people, though the temple for them, but contributes to the
utmost of his power, and sets them a noble example. II. David’s appeal
to others to give. “ Who, then, is willing to consecrate his service ?” (ver. 5),
He levies no tax, but asks for free-will offerings of the people. This the right
way to build, suppo-t, <nd establish the house of God. This appeal founded on
many things. 1. He reminds them of Solomon's necessities. Young and tender,
without much wisdom and experience, but under great responsibilities. Yet
God had chosen him for the undertaking. Hence no reproach to David for
partiality and preference of Solomon. Young people should ever be encouraged
in good works. 2. He sets before them the greatness of the work. “The work is
great.” Great not in outward appearance, but great in purpose. “The palace
not for man, vut for the Lord God.” 3. He stimulates them by his own example,
“‘ Now I have prepared.” Exhortation and appeal must be backed by personal
effort and example to be efficient. III. The response to David’s
appeal (vers. 6-9). They “offered willingly.” The response was: 1. Hearty
response not only filled their hands, but offered “with perfect heart” (ver. 9).
“ Of every man that giveth it willingly with his heart ye shall take my offering”
(Ex. xxv. 2). 2. Immediate response. No hesitation, no consultation nor delay.
This damps ardour, and makes all work difficult. 3. Liberal response. Influenced
by the persuasive address and powerful example of the King, they gave according
to their abilities. Their united contributions amounted to the gross sum—of
gold 5,000 talents and 10,000 drams, of silver 10,000 talents, besides brass and
iron. IV. The results of this response. “They rejoiced ”—“ were
glad with great gladness.” David rejoiced to see the work on which his heart
was set so earnestly carried on. Princes rejoiced under a sense of duty rightly
performed, and God’s acceptance of it. People rejoiced in the generosity of their
rulers. The selfish and niggardly are miserable ; the sympathetic and self-denying
are happy and cheerful. “ The liberal soul shall be made fat”—


“The truly generous is the truly wise;
And he who loves not others lives unblest.”


CrrisT1AN EXPERIENCE AND CHRISTIAN INFLUENCE.—Verses li.


The life of David fitted to encourage faith in God, and proves that a good man
may begin a work which shall continue after his death. Learn;from these verses—
I. The nearer a good man approaches his end, the more spiritually minded he becomes
David intensely anxious about the work of God. Past experience of divine favour
and anticipations of future good—consciousness of God’s presence and of God’s
guidance give hope and assurance. The powers of the world to come influence
and prepare for the end. II. The more spiritually minded a good man becomes,
the greater his influence upon others. ‘The force of his example, the authority of
his teaching, backed by a consistent consecrated life, have more influence than
the sceptre. Exalted in place and dignity, David shone in spiritual character,
drew because he led, stimulated others because earnest himself. III. The greater
influence a good man has upon others, the more certain will God's work be accomplished.
David died before the temple was built, but his influence lived. His persuasion,
not enactment, won the hearts and prompted the efforts of the people. He re-
joiced in the succession of his son to the throne, and in the offerings of the nation


for the work of God.


A Cauy ro Earty Devotepness.—Veree 5.


I. We shall explain what we regard as the consecration of service to God,
1. There must be correct views of the Divine character and claims; 2. A practical


obedience to the will of God; 3. Aetive exertion to promote the rang glory.
38


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (omar. xxrx.








“


IT. We shall present the considerations which ought to urge to an engagement
in the service of God. 1. We are placed under universal and imperative obligation
to do so; 2. The influence his service has in preventing the degradation and pro-
moting the dignity of our nature; 3. The true and solid pleasure his service
communicates to the soul; 4. The glorious recompense by which the engagements
of his service are consummated. III. We shall impress the question by which,
to an engagement in the service of God, you are emphatically challenged


(J. Parsons].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 3. I have set my affection. The
force of religious affection for one
thing. 1. In its possession and govern-
ment of the mind. To build the
thought of his mind, the object of his
life. ‘This one thing I do.” 2. In
its command over the resources of our
life. He prepared and gave with all
his might gold and silver; the spoils of
his enemies, and the treasures of his
palace, devoted to the chosen work, not
to transient pleasure, nor temporal
interests. Such thought and pains,
such concentration of purpose and
affection rebuke the loiterers and half-
hearted.

Ver. 5. Consecration. 1. Service.
Every child of God is a servant, a
worker, a commissioned officer. In
performance of life's duties are de-
manded—First : A settled purpose, a
purpose arising from a survey of our
being, relationships, and surroundings.
Life’s great question, “ What must I
do?” Secondly: An active resolve.
Will the motive power within. The
energies of life in the will—rightly
directed, obstacles like chaff before it.
But religious service specified. Many
receive but give not, unprofitable ser-
vants, &ec. 2. A willing service. ‘‘ Who
is willing?” This is the principal
quality in Christian service. Gigantic
intellect, profusion of gifts, untiring
activity, a great moral force, and all
these put together without the heart,
God will reject ; but two mites and the
heart He willaccept. First: A willing
service is the only efficient service. Things
unwillingly done, badly done. Workers
that need not be ashamed of their
work, put their heart intoit. Secondly :
The willingness of our service ts the

136


only part of tt which is absolutely required,
What God wants is nowhere to be
found except within the human breast,
It is the only treasure God covets.
“ My son, give me thine heart.” 3. An
immediate service. “This day.” Every
Jews attention was fixed on the
cherished object of David’s life. We
are instructed to build a temple for
God, have our work planned and we
can begin “this day.” Look generaily
at the subject. First: Seasons for ser-
vice are never ubsent. A farmer is busy
summer and winter. Christians need
lose no time, nor wait for opportuni-
ties. Some wait for special occasions
which they never find. Ignorant to be
taught, erring to lead home and poor
always with us. Secondly : Efficiency
and pleasure ensue when service is per-
formed in tts own time. Service of
Jesus like a meal, must be taken at its
proper time to produce enjoyment and
strength. If morning prayer be said
at night its unction is lost. Vow is the
gospel’s great time, “the accepted
time.” 4. The highest service. “ Unto
the Lord.” Noble motives produce
highest service. Some serve Satan,
themselves, and the world; as _ the
object, so the nature of the service.
Every service receives its inspiration
from the Master. The service of the
Lord implies, First: That the mind ts
perpetually under the influence of divine
truth. oly thoughts produce holy
living. As we think, so we live; he
who thinks Christ lives Christ. ‘ Let
this mind be also in you, &e.” Secondly:
That holy thoughts are actuated by the
presence of the Spirit in them. This
communion is maintained by prayer,
Best thoughts sent up to heaven te


!


OHAP, XXIX. ]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


a a ee
1!


receive the Master’s living touch. The
fire must be fanned into a flame by his
breath The praying heart has work-
ing hands. Thirdly: Zntire consecra-
tiow. We cannot serve two masters.
Gou’s service enough toabsorb our whole
being. These are the steps—a Saviour
from sin, an example to follow, efforts
put forth, aud a reward in expectation.
“ Not with eye service as men-p!easers,
but as servants of Christ, &c.” [| Lhos.
Davies, D.D.}.

Ver. 9. Liberality and joy. Liberality
often brings temporal wealth, invari-
ably in spiritual matters does it bring
wealth and joy of soul. Every effort
has reaction, and reaction the law of
material and spiritual worlds. The


soul of the miser is always miserable,
and sinks lower into spiritual destitu-
tion. The good man lives like the sun,
and shines to bless in the influence of
ideas, wealth, and effort. “ The bless-
ing of him that was ready to perish
came upon me; and I caused the
widow’s heart to joy, &c.”

Vers. 1-9. The principles of Chris-
tian work. 1. Personal consecration
and example. 2. Willing co-operation
by all. 3. Appropriateness of service
and gifts. 4. Animated by a true
spirit of enthusiasm and joy.

“ Let us do our work as well,
Both the unseen and the seen ;

Make the house where gods may dwell,

Beautiful, entire, and clean”


[Longfellow].


HOMILETICS.
Tue Last THANKSGIVING.—Verses 10-20.


Livery sentence weighed and measured for the occasion. The scene grand and
impressive. ‘ David’s Psalms, towards the latter end of the book, are most of
them Psalms of praise. The nearer we come to the world of everlasting praise
the more we should speak the language and do the work of that world.”
I. The infinite perfections of God. Adores God and ascribes glory
to him. 1. God in his unspeakable grandeur. “Thine, O Lord, is the great-
ness.” “Thou art great, and greatly to be feared ;” the power, ‘in thine hand
is power and might” (ver. 12); the victory, “the victory (strength) of Israel”
(1 Sam. xy. 29); the majesty, “honour and majesty are before him (his
inseparable attendants)” (Ps. xcvi. 6). 2. God in his universal dominéon. ‘Thine
is the kingdom, O Lord.” Exalted over all, ruling without rival. 3. God in
his absolute ownership. ‘All that is in the heaven and in the earth is thine.”
Proprietor, not Trustee, of all the universe. A title underived and not shared
by another. His inheritance infinite and secure. He had no predecessor, will have
no successor, and nothing will ever passfrom him. 4. God in his covenant relation.
“Lord God of Israel, our Father.” The expression more full in ver. 18. He was
the tutelary God and fountain of blessing to the patriarchs, with whom he made
special covenants. 5. God in his goodness to men (ver. 12), ‘Riches and honour”
come from him, He gives strength and makes great. The princes merited
nothing by their generosity. All through the influence of his grace ; therefore,
no ground for boasting. ‘“‘ Let no flesh glory in his presence; for of him, and
through him, and to him, are all things; to whom be glory for ever. Amen.”
II. The peculiar relations of man to the infinite God. The
Psal n not only filled with devout reverence to God, in language of beauty and
fiiai piety ; but a description of man as unworthy, dependent, and short-lived.
1. Man is a dependent creature. The more we think of God’s greatness, the
more we feel this. “Who am I?”—(a) Dependent for substance to give. “ Of
thine own have we given thee.” (6) Dependent for the disposition to give it,
He works in us to will and todo, &e. (c) Therefore, indebted to God for all
things, Thanks due to him for heart and mind, substance and success. 2. Man
is a short-lived creature. The earth abides, its inhabitants die. Life a pilgrim-


age ; we are strangers and sojourners, not at rest, not at home. Life rife
3


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. fomap. xxrr


transient, dark, and vain; ending in perfect darkness or perfect light. Life
uncertain : “there is none abiding.” We can neither expect to stay long, nor
work much while we do stay on earth. If, then, uncertain, what are the
services of a poor short life? God favours us by their acceptance. 3. Man's
conduct is observed by God. “ Thou triest the heart.” Seest the motives, as well
as the gifts for thy cause. Takest pleasure in uprightness of heart. An act, a
life may be misinterpreted or despised, but the good man is conscious of integrity
(“I know”) and may appeal to God, who is acquainted with all our way. We
can neither rejoice nor work without a sense of spiritual rectitude, “If our
heart condemn us, God is greater than our hearts, and knoweth all things.”


Gop’s ProprierorsHie AND Man’s OBLIGATION TO H1iu.—Verses 13-16.


I. God owns all things. 1. Absolutely. “Thine.” 2. Universally. “ Al!
that is in the heavens, &c.” (ver. 11). 3. Perpetually. He will eternally keep his
own. II. Man’s obligation to God. 1. To render thanks to God.
Every gift from thee, therefore thank the Giver. “What shall we render to the
Lord for all his benefits?” 2. To use rightly the gifts of God. Health, time,
and money not to be abused—should be used carefully. Stewards should be
found faithful. ‘Willa man rob God?” All essentially God’s, and should be


willingly given to him.


“Lord, what my talents are I cannot tell,
Till thou shalt give me grace to use them well ;
That grace impart; the bliss will then be mine,
But all the power and all the glory thine.”


Tue SosouRNERS AND THE SHADOW; 08, DirrERENT ASPEcts oF Lirz.— Verse 15.


Those epithets do not apply to all men indiscriminately. Human life has
varied aspects according to moral condition and future expectation. I. All
men are sojourners on earth. David uses language of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, who lived as men without permanent home. All sojowrners or
pilgrims on earth, because all passing through it to a future beyond it. Stern
law compels advance. We live and we must die. Not naturalised, no rights of
inheritance, foreigners here; we should seek home, rest, and bliss in heaven.
If. All men sojourn in shadows on earth. “Our days on earth
are as ashadow.” 1. Life itself is a shadow. In swiftness and uncertainty ;
darkness and perplexing changes, “Shadows in career,” says Geo. Herbert.
We flee as a shadow and continue not (Job xiv. 2). 2. Men walk in shadows.
“ Every man walketh in a vain show (an image) ” (Ps. xxxix. 6). “All shadows and
pursuing shadows,” says Burke. Deluded by sense, refusing to see the only
lasting substance ; men live in lies, dream of false pleasure, and find everything
fleeting and unsubstantial. After all discussions concerning the supreme good.
some pointing to pleasure, some to virtue, and others to apathy, who can give a
definite and decisive answer? Life without God is vain, and not worth living.
“Who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the days of his vain life
which he spendeth as a shadow ” (Hebd, “the number of the days of the life of his
vanity”) (Ecc. vi. 12). III. Only some men are strangers on
earth. Christians are strangers. They feel, dress, and act as such. ‘Confess
that they are strangers and pilgrims on the earth.” But a large class of men to
whom the world is perfectly congenial; who feel nothing strange, nothing
unnatural. They are in their element; find their place and satisfaction in its
pursuits and enjoyments. They desire no better country, but seem to fix their


138


HMOMILETIU COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.

a Ra | Sella dae ee
hearts and homes in this, through which they rapidly pass. What a foolish
exchange; shadows for substance ; trifles or eternity |

“ All on earth is shadow,


All beyond is substance. How solid all
Where change is known no more!® {Young}.


char, XSNix.]





Tae Last Prayer.—Verecs 18, 19.


After solemn recognition of God’s sovereign and universal proprietorship, an
unqualified disclaimer of all merit, we have earnest and appropriate prayer for
people and prince. I, Prayer for the people. Praise should ever end
in prayer for ourselves and others. 1. That they may be kept in the right mt.d.
“Keep this for ever,” &c. This disposition of joyful, willing consecration of
heart and gifts to thee. Let it not be transient and forgotten. 2. That the
perpetuity of this right mind may be properly based. Promises are broken ;
appearances change and hopeful beginnings may fall through. The heart, the
deepest source, must be fixed, framed, and established. “ Prepare their heart
unto thee.” II. Prayer for Solomon. Blessings fit and most needful.
1. That he may obey God. ‘‘ Give to Solomon, my son,” first of all sincerity, a
perfect heart. Then help him ‘to keep thy commandments,” binding on con-
science ; ‘‘ thy testimonies,” evidences of God’s character; “and thy statutes,”
enactments for instruction of the people. 2. That he may build the temple of
God. ‘And to build the palace.” Mark the order—right in heart first, then
engagement in work. True to God, faithful in service. This prayer required
now. We build temples, fortunes, and families—make “ provision” for grand
enterprises, but forget that materials, strength, and stability come from God,
“ Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 15. Apply to the Christian.


Vers. 10-20. David's thanksgiving.
Be vigilant in duty while here. Im-


1. Its adoration of God. 2. Its


acknowledgment of dependence upon
him. 3, Its recognition of the in-
fluence of his grace. 4. Its solemn
appeal to conscious integrity. 5. Its
earnest prayer for king and people.

Vers, 12-14. The right value and
right use of divine gifts. 1. We only
give what has been given tous. 2.
We only give what we must leave. 3.
We have but a short time to give at
all.

Ver. 14. Of thine own have we
given thee. 1. Apply to temporal
things. Money, time, &e. 2. Apply
to spiritual things. Repentance, faith,
and works, bestowed by God and due
to him. ‘“ When ye have done all
those things which are commanded
you, say, Weare unprofitable servants ;
we have done that which was our duty
to do.”


prove the world as much as possible
while in it. Seek to persuade others
to go with you to “a better country,
even a heavenly one.” Our days on
earth, de. 1. The brevity of life.
“Thou hast made my days as a hand-
breadth.” 2. The vanity of life. “Every
man at his best state is altogether
vanity.” 3. The emptiness of life.
“ Every man walketh in a vain show.”
4, The end of life. “Make me to
know mine end.” ‘Days are one of
the shortest measures of time; but
long enough to decipher man’s life by ”


[Trapp].
Ver. 19. To keep thy command-
ments. Not for wealth, power, nor


learning. ‘“ Learn here,” says Trapp,
“ what to pray for in the behalf of our
children, A child of many such
prayers cannot easily miscarry.”

139


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; CHRONICLES. fomaP. XxIz








HOMILETICS.
SoLtomon’s ELEVATION To THE THRONE.—Verses 20-25.


The second time. The first done hastily, on account of Adonijah’s conspiracy
(of. 1 Ki. i. 35-39). This anointment deliberate, most solemn, and by a
representative assembly. I. The Divine choice of Solomon to the
throne. “S. sat on the throne of the Lord.” Not David’s throne, nor
Israel’s to give away. The Lord's in a special sense. Hence the government
called a Theocracy, God’s government, by Josephus. All thrones belong to him.
He sets up, deposes, and determines the destiny of rulers. ‘By me kings rule
and decree justice. By me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges of the
earth.” II. The loyal obedience to Solomon on the throne.
This most joyful atid universal. 1. The people submitted. Represented by “all
the princes and the mighty men,” they put the hand under Solomon’s thigh
and bound themselves by oath to allegiance. “All Israel obeyed him.” 2.
The royal family submitted. ‘All the sons likewise of King David.” Some of
them were elder and of nobler birth or of nobler mothers. But now convinced
by the national act and God’s choice that Solomon was to be king. Adonijah
failed and died. God’s will done notwithstanding man’s claims and ambitious
designs. III. The prosperity of Solomon on the throne. “The
Lord magnified Solomon exceedingly.” Notice—l. The source of prosperity.
Ascribed to the source of all greatness. A majesty “bestowed,” not humanly
creatcd. 2. The peace which attended the prosperity. No rival to disquiet, no
foreign power to oppose. “All Israelobeyed him.” 3. A prosperity unequalled.
“Such royal majesty as had not been on any king before him in Israel.” A fit
type of Christ. ‘‘ He was a king blessed of the King of kings” [Shakes.]. «y
was great and increased more than all that were before me in Jerusalem,


Davin’s Latrer Enp.—Verses 2630.


The writer now finishes a picture which presents the great king in meridian
splendour. The brilliant life is closing and the evening is calm and peaceable.
I. The length of David’s reign. “The time that he reigned over
Israel was forty years.” This divided into two eventful periods. About “seven
years in Hebron” (2 Sam. v. 5), and “three and thirty in Jerusalem.” A
reign of glory, yet falling short of the divine ideal; signalised by services which
contributed to the exaltation of the kingdom and the glory of God; but
darkened by crimes and calamities, and which gradually prepared for the reign
of his successor. II. The end of David’s life. ‘He died.” Then
the mightiest men are mortal ; the most useful withdrawn from ministry ; and
the world can get on without its greatest and best men. “The thing is not to
leave a name behind us—a mere name. It is to leave behind influences that
hearts will feel, memories that will be cherished at home, and that will be
blessed by those whom we have served and helped in life” [Dr. Parker]. He
died. 1. Rich in circumstances. ‘“ Full of riches and honour.” Enough of
this world’s wealth by which he adorned the capital and prepared for the build-
ing of God. 2. In a good old age. Not so old as many predecessors, not
exceeding seventy years. But his life not cut short, lasted the appointed term
and filled with opportunities and work. In expressive Hebrew, “full of days.”
Many days empty and many lives like a blank! Nothing done, everything
lost! 3. Satisfiedin mind. ‘ Full (ae, satisfied) of days” (cf. Gen. xxv. 8; Job
xlii. 17), Satisfied with days given both in number and character ; filled with
gratitude and submission. 4. Ready to depart. He had “served his generation
by the will of God,” now ready to fall wleep. Having seen God’s salvation, he

140


OHAP. XXIX.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.








{


was wishful to depart in peace. A tranquil sunset! III. The records of
David’s kingdom. Not given in full. “The times” indicate--1. His
private life. “Times that went over him,” of joy and sorrow, of conflict and
rest, &c. (cf. Job xxiv. 1; Ps. xxxi. 16). 2. Hts civil career. “And over
Israel.” National changes in political and ecclesiastical affairs. 3. His :vilitary
enterprises. “Over all the kingdoms of the countries,” hostile or friendly. A
sovereign who raised his country to power and dominion, beloved in life and
honoured in death. His “royal majesty,” was not in the splendour of his
palace and retinue; but in the unity and moral worth of his people, the


excellency of his life and the legacy of his reign.


HOMILETIC HINTS


Ver. 20. Bless the Lord. David was
excellent at this—viz., stirring up
others to join with him in praising
God (see Ps. xxxiv. 3 and cili. 20)
[Zrapp|. Worshtp, its true nature:
“‘ Bless the Lord.” Its solemn expres-
sion : “ Bowed down their heads.” Its
sublime object: ‘ Worshipped the
Lord.” Its connection with civil
reverence: “* Worshipped the Lord and
the king.”

Ver. 23. Solomon sat on the throne.
The fulfilment of promise, the display
of power and providence, and the type
of the Lord Jesus. David died and
Solomon reigned in his stead. Compare
them—1. As kings of Israel. 2. As
servants of God. 3. As authors of
inspired songs and literature.

Vers. 29, 30. These words indicate—
1. The fragmentary record. The books
mentioned are lost, except a few parti-
culars in the books of Samuel, Kings,
and Chronicles. They were sources
used by the author. 2. The order in
which events are given. In accord-
ance with his design the writer sig-
nalises the religious aspect of the nation,


ILLUSTRATIONS TO


Ver. 6. Offered willingly. Rich
men’s presents are gold and silver, or
other costly things. Mine must be
recommended by the affectionate
pleasure with which I give them
[The Ven. Bede when dying]. It is
the comfort of poverty that our
affections are valued, not our presents
[Bp. Hall].

Ver. 14. Who am I? What I
have done is worthy of nothing but


AND SUGGESTIONS.


has omitted many events from Mavid’s
history, and enlarged in details of
arrangements of worship and repara-
tions for the building of the temple.
He writes partly as an excerpter and
partly a supplementer.

Ver. 29. Three eminent men, per-
sonally acquainted with David through
the principal part of his life—Samuel,
Nathan,and Gad. “The three (Heb.)
words, Roch, Nabi, and Chozeh, are
here brought together and apparently
contrasted” (cf. 1 Sam. ix. 9) [Dr.
Jamieson.

Infeés changing current. 1. Times
make a deep mark upon the
body, the least important portion of
our complex nature. 2. Equally
marked is the effect of “the times” as
they pass over us upon our intellectual
nature. 3. Not less striking or im-
portant is the stamp of time upon the
history of our sensibilities. 4. The
most important change is the one that
refers to our moral and spiritual state.
5. Our social and relative condition is
subject to the constant variations of
time [Dr. S. 7. Spear].


CHAPTER XXIX.


silence and forgetfulness; but what
God hath done for me is worthy of
everlastingand thankful memory [/did.].

Ver. 15. Shadow. In this I see
that we, all we that live, are but
vain shadows, unsubstantial dreams
[Sophocles].

Ver. 19. Give unto Solomon. No
good man is jealous of his son, but
desires to see his children mere famous
than himself [Z'heodoret},

14]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


Vers. 20-22. Worshipped. Devo-
tion, when it does not lie under the
check of reason, is apt to degenerate
into enthusiasm [Addison]. All is
holy where devotion kneels | Holmes].

Vers. 26-28. Died. The death-bed
of saints often resembles the setting
sun, whose rays are the brightest when
it is nearest the horizon. ‘The tongues
of dying men enforce attention like
deep harmony” [Shakes.].

Ver. 30. Times. Amongst rational
weings that life is longest, whether
brief or protracted its outward tura,


1eB


(CHAP. XXIX


into which the largest amount of mind,
of mental and moral activity, is con-
densed. It is possible for the longest
life to be really briefer than the
shortest, and the child or youth may
die older, with more of life crowded
into his brief existence, than he whose
dull and stagnant being drags on to
an inglorious old age [Caird].
“We must aeced weep the chance and
change of life,
And mortal sorrows touch a mortal's
heart” [Virg. din. L 483}.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


SECOND BOOK OF CHRONICLES.





INTRODUCTION.


Sze the general introduction of the first book for analysis and date. “The
most remarkable feature im the historical books of Scripture, and especially of
Kings and Chronicles, is their religious, theocratic character. Secular history
gives the public changes which nations have undergone, with their causes and
results. Church history traces the progress of sentiment, and of various
influences in relation to the Church. But here, king, church, state are all
represented as under God. The character of each king is decided by his fidelity
to the religious obligations of his office. Of each it is said, ‘ He walked in the
ways of David his father,’ and so prospered, or of Jeroboam, who ‘made Israel
to sin,’ and so failed. These books are valuable as the history of God and His
jaw in the nation, and that nation a monarchy; as the Books of Joshua and
Jndges are the history of God and His law in an aristocracy or democracy, or as
the earlier books are the history of God and His law in the family. In the
Prophets and in the Acts of the Apostles we have glimpses of what is to be the
history of God and His law in the world, Mark, therefore, the prominence
given to the erection of the temple; the numerous references to the ancient
law, especially when the two kingdoms were drawing near to their end, as if to
account for their decay and approaching fall; the frequent interposition of
prophets, now rebuking the people and now braving the sovereign; the depo-
sition and succession of kings; and the connection everywhere traced between
what seem to be mere political incidents and the fidelity or idvlatry of the age,
Were nations wise, these records would prove their best instructors. They are
adapted to teach alike the world and the Church. The genealogical tables,
though to us comparatively uninteresting, were highly important among the
Jews, who were made by prophetic promises extremely observant in these
particulars. These tables give the sacred line through which the promise was
transmitted for nearly 3,500 years, a fact itself unexampled in the history of the
human race” [Angus]. ‘“ This history of the Jewish monarchy, as it is more
authentic, so it is more interesting and instructive than the histories of other
monarchies. We had the story of the house of David before, in the first and
second books of Kings, intermixed with that of the kings of Israel, which there

143


HOMILETIU COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES





ya





took more room than that of Judah; but hera we have it enwre Much is
repeated here which we had before, yet many of the passages of tk» story are
enlarged upon, and divers added which we had not before, especially relating to
the affairs of religion; for it is a church history, and it is written for our
learning, to let nations and families know th xt then, and then only, they can
expect to prosper, when they keep in the wuy of their duty to God; for all
along the good kings prospered and the wicl ed kings suffered. The truth of
the word of God appears, ‘ Those that honows ms I will hoxowr, but those thas
despise me shall be lightly esteemed.’” j


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
ee


OHAPTER If.


Crirroat Norrs.) The reign of Solomon is comprised in nine chapters of this book,
corresponding to 1 Kings i—xi., and forms the third part of the whole work. This
chapter contains the sacrifice at Gibeon, the vision and the wealth of Solomon.

_Vers. 1-6.—Solomon’s offering at Gibeon. Strengthened, a favourite word (cf. xii. 133
Ziil. 21; xxi. 4), meaning established, firmly settled in government. Magnified (1 Chr.
xxix. 25). Ver. 2. Al/ Israel, by their representatives, Captains (1 Chr. xxvii. 1 ; xxviii. 1).
Judges desirable on all occasions like this (1 Chr, xxiii. 4), Chief of fathers. Heads of
families still recognised, though having no special function (cf. Speak. Com.). Ver.8. Gibeon,
Through inroads of Philistines, tabernacle removed from Shiloh to Nob (1 Sam. xxi. 1);
after destruction of Nob by Saul to Gibeon (1 Sam. xxii. 9). Wer. 4. Ark separated from
tabernacle, consequently two centres of worship (ef. account in 1 Chr. xiii. and xv.).
Ver. 5. Altar (marg.) “ was there ;” this, therefore, the legitimate place of worsbip. Sought,
t.e., frequented it, in the habit of making use of it [Speak. “om.]. Some give “ sought
Him, the Lord.”

Vers. 7-12.—Solomon’s viston at Gibson. Night, after sacrifice, through dream (1 Kinga
iii. 5-15). Ver. 8. Me to reign. First case of som succeeding father. Ver. 9. Promise,
special, made to David, that hig successor should be wise and able to judge. Though no
express record, Ps. Ixxii. amounts to nearly the same; a Psalm undoubtedly Messianic,
yet its primary subject is Solomon. May we not understand Solomon here as calling
upon God to make good this prophesy, to “ establish ” this implied ‘‘ promise”? [Speak.
Com.| Ver. 10. Knowledge, insight (ef. Dan. i. 4-17; Ece. x. 20). Wesdom, the power of
applying knowledge rightly. Go eut, do all parts of the kingly office; reminding of
Deut. xxxi. 2; 1 Sam. xviii. 13-16; 1 Kings iii. 7. Vers. 11 and 12. God’s answer. Long
life omitted here, given in 1 Kings iii 14, conditionally. Riches and wealth, stores of
commodities ready for use.

Vers. 13-17.—Solemen’s riches came “ from the high place that was at Gibeon to Jerusalem”
eset Com.)|. Ver, 14-17. This passage is very nearly identical with 1 Kings x. 26-29,

he only difference of any importance is the addition here (ver. 15) of the words ‘‘and
gold,” which do not occur in 1 Kings x. 27. The touch thus added is characteristic of the
writer of Chronicles, who is more rhetorical and more bold in his use of hyperbole than
the author of Kings [Speak, Com.}


HOMILETICS.
Tue Sprenpip Becinnina—Verses 1-18.


Solomon magnified in character, accession, and choice. Many princes have had
good fathers, wise training, and great privileges, but lacked wisdom and turned
out badly. Solomon crowned while David lived, surrounded by a loyal people
and blessed by Divine Providence. His beginning wise, most promising and
glorious. I, Solomon’s accession to the throne was provi-
dentially secured. “The Lord his God was with him,” Chosen, he was
enthroned, not deprived of the kingdom. Endangered by sedition, he was
“ strengthened,” established. The feast of conspirators broken up. Adonijah
fled to the altar for refuge. God’s providence opened up the way, and God’s
promise was fulfilied, In allusion to the rapid suppression of resistance, and to
this signal entrance on his new reign, without rival or rebel, Solomon declares,
*¢As the Lord liveth, which hath established me and set me on the throne of
David ray father,” &c. II. Solomon’s claims to the throne were
sanctioned by a representative assembly. He was confirmed by
recognition and allegiance of all the tribes in representatives. Captains, judges,
and heads of families, princes, and people—all received him. Those in
euthority should side with right and use their influence to promote true religion

145


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHR ONICLES. foHar. £





and God’s glory. Weakness in kings, selfishness in rulers, and disaffection in
people, outrage liberty, destroy the peace, and endanger the throne of kingdoms.


‘¢ Let not the world see fear and sad mistrust
Govern the motion of a kingly eye” [Shakes.].


III. Solomon's accession to the throne was signalised by
solemn acts of worship, “ All the congregation with him,” a vast con-
course of dignitaries in solemn procession on ite way up the hill to Gibeon, six
miles north of Jerusalem, to offer royal sacrifices! 1. In obedience to divine law.
The brazen altar was there (ver. 6); that is, the Gibeonite sanctuary was still
the legal, the official and historically rightful place for burnt offerings.
2. In appropriate magnificence. The holocaust became the rank and attests the
splendour of the sovereign on this occasion. Sacrifices abundant. Zadok the
officiating high priest (1 Chr, xvi. 39). The time-honoured altar prepared by
the skill of Bezaleel in the wilderness (Ex. xxxviii. 1). IV. Solomon’s
accession to the throne was ina spirit of devout supplication.
How many kings begin their reigns; how many youths in critical moments,
turning-points in life, begin their course altogether differently! Alas! many
gain distinctions, enter life fully equipped, for awhile out-distance others; but
with the turn of fortune fall behind and end inruin. Solomon remembered
the position of his predecessor, his own youth and weakness, the responsibility
under which he was placed, and made request for gifts and grace to help him.
When Victoria learned that she was about to become Queen of England, her
first words to the Archbishop of Canterbury were, ‘‘I beg your Grace to
pray for me.” Together they knelt, and the new reign began with prayer.
V. Solomon’s accession to the throne was unequalled in
splendour. None before him, nor after him, had the like (ver. 12),
1. Outward splendour. ‘‘ Riches and wealth and honour.” Good in themselves
and good as a means of usefulness. The good which the world seeks; but this
honour decays. All worldly greatness is fleeting in character and worthless at
last. “We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry
nothing out.” 2. Moral splendour. ‘“ Wisdom and knowledge” higher than
material wealth. The riches of Croesus would not add a fraction of value to a
man. “The gold is but the guinea stamp.” “ How much better is it to get
wisdom than gold! and to get understanding rather to be chosen than silver.”
Better, for it enriches its possessor, creates higher enjoyments, invests with
greater dignity, and is destined to longer existence. “King Solomon exceeded
all the kings of the earth for riches and for wisdom.”


Sotomon’s Cuoice.—Verses 7-13,


Probably at the close of festivities on Gibeon, when the mind of Solomon had
been elevated, and his heart touched, that God appeared to him in a dream ; c@ve
him the option of everything good in the world. He felt intense desire, and
offered earnest prayer for wisdom. Whether the dream was imaginary or not,
the choice was made, and God’s grant of it real. Learn—I. That ability to
discharge the duties of our calling is most desirable. Some
time since a paper appeared in a popular Review under the title, ‘* What know-
ledge is of most worth?” the object of which was to show the sufticiency of whav
is generally called science to guide in life. ‘“ ‘The universal reply is science. This
is the verdict on all counts.” But what is meant by science? If mere education
without religion, knowledge without wisdom, we cannot agree with it. There is
a difference between science and religion. Wisdom is the right use of know-
ledge. Scvenae seaks truth for its own sake, wisdom for practical uses. Science

146


exp. I.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


SPSS SS a EL a EER RRR a oe at


exercises the intellect, wisdom affects the heart. A mn cannot be wise and able
to fulfil his mission who does not use what he knows. Wisdom is the principal
thing, therefore get wisdom, to govern as kings “in righteousness and judg-
ment,” to rule as masters “in the fear of the Lord,” to win souls as ministers,
for “he that winneth souls is wise.” II. That this ability can only
come from God. Solomon’s surroundings favourable, education good,
friends numerous, and wealth enormous, but he lacked wisdom, and looked te
God for it. True wisdom is needed as much to build up the Christian Church, to
govern a kingdom and rule a house, as to rear tne tabernacle. If there be
capacity, culture and application may make a scholar, a philosopher, or an orator.
But “the wisdom which is profitable to direct” is “the wisdom from above.”
We must look to the source from whence Bezaleel and Aholiab gained their skill
and ability (Ex. xxxv. 30-35). ‘Give me wisdom and knowledge.” IIT.
That where the desire for this ability is supreme, God wii:l
honour and blessit. “TI have also given thee that which thou hast not
asked” (1 Kings iii. 13). Great pretension to wisdom often covers the want of
it. Shallow streams make greatest noise. There must be—1. Jntense desire. A
feeling of deep want. ‘This was in thine heart.” Opinionated, self-sufticient
men will never get it. A craving for its possession, growing out of sense of
need, a cry of the soul, “ Where shall wisdom be found?” 2. Earnest seurch.
Mere want or desire not enough. There must be effort, honest, strenuous, and
persevering. A search as for silver and gold. “If thou seekest her as silver,
and search for her as for hid treasures, &c.” 3. There must be prayer. ‘Give
me now wisdom and knowledge.” God will honour our petitions when sincere ;
will give inferior when we ask for superior blessings. God gave the wisdom
asked, and the wealth unasked. If we value and pray for understanding, God
will do for us “exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think.” “ If
any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally and


upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.”





THe BuEssepNess oF Wispom.—Verses 10-12.


I. It helps to govern life. “ Who can judge this thy people?” 1. By
giving insight. “Knowledge of men and things,” understanding of the times in
which we live, and their demands upon us. 2. By imparting activity. ‘That I
may go out and come in before this people.” Public activity unceasing and un-
checked. 3. By teaching us to avoid evil and do good. “ Discretion shall pre-
serve thee, understanding shall keep thee.” ‘“ When thou goest thy steps shall
not be struitened” (freedom in the great highway of life); “and when thou
runncst thou shalt not stumble” (safety in activity) (Prov. iv. 12) UI. It
endows with best wealth. Wealth of soul. “For the soul co be with-
out knowledge it is not good.” Wealth of the character. “She shall give te
thine head an ornament of grace; a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee.”
An ornament better than kings’ robes, a crown not of fading laurels or rusting
metal. Adornments of holiness preparing for the crown of glory which fadeth
not away. Character better than cash, the only wealth that will go into the
other world, and determine condition there. “Treasures of wickedness profit
nothing, but righteousness delivereth from death.” III. It ensures per=
manent gocd. It is excellent in itself, described as ‘“‘ the fear of the Lord,”
and “the knowledge of God,” blessing the intellect and the heart. In this life
often brings riches, honour, length of days, and unequalled privileges. But these
things may all end. Heavenly wisdom is supereminent, an eternal possession, a
treasure we can lay up in heaven. It sets before us the way of life, and


secures our salyation. Worldly good pertains to earth only; here is price


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


[ouar. >





blessing helping to escape the miseries of false choice, and giving endless pos-


session of perfect bliss.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. God with him. 1. God is
often against the kings of the earth.
This seen in the disasters which he
brings on their armies, &c., and may be
illustrated by the histories of many
kings mentioned inthe Bible. 2. God
is with some kings for the punishment
of others. The wicked are the sword
of God. 3. God was with Solomon
for the good of Israel; with him in
answer to prayer. 4. God was not
with Solomon unconditionally [Bi.
Museum}.

Ver. How to get rich. “ Ask
what I shall give thee, &c.” Observe,
for -the acquirement of the highest
wealth that ‘“asking”—1, Is the
simplest method. Only a word. 2.
Is the divinely appointed method (Matt.
vii. 7; Mark xiv. 38). 3. Is the only
method. Purchase is impossible.
Deserts? We have none. 4. Is the
certain method. It never has failed
yet. 5. Is the abundantly enforced
method. Enforced by the whole Bible,
by the story of God’s acts, the promises
and exhortations, the life and death of
Jesus. 6. Has ever been the abun-
dantly successful method [R. A.
Grigin].

Vers. 7-10. Solomon's Choice. I.
The address which God made to Solo-
mon when He said, “Ask, &c.,” He
does in effect make to each of us,


especially to the young. II. Though
we need not the qualification which
Solomon required for his kingly office,
yet we all need spiritual wisdom and
understanding, and may therefore imi-
tate hisexample. III. God is pleased
with those who make the choice and
offer up the prayer of Solomon. Be-
cause—1. It is the effect of His grace;
2. It indicates opinions and feelings
similar to his own; 3. It indicates
humility; 4. It shows a benevolent
concern for his glory, and for the
happiness of their fellow-creatures ; 5.
It actually tends to promote his glory.
IV. All who make this choice and
adopt this prayer shall certainly be
favoured with a wise and understanding
heart [Dr. Payson}.

The Prayer for Wisdom. 1. Come
and see a youth who at a critical mo-
ment is found in prayer. II. Come
and see a king’s son who prays ex-
clusively for wisdom. III. Come and
see a humble one who prays not in vain.
IV. Come and see here a favoured one
who receives much more than he asks
for. V. Come and see an unhappy
one who by his own fault has forfeited
the blessings of his prayer [Dr. J. Van
Oosterzee}.

“To know


That which before us lies in daily life
Is the prime wisdom ” [ Milton].


HOMILETICS.


SoLomon’s Werattu.—Verses 13=17.


_ This passage refers to commerce with Egypt in exports and imports, and is
like 1 Kings x. 26-29. The road from Egypt to Syria not always under the


control of the Israelites.


Solomon gained complete possession of the country


and took the trade in horses. between Egypt and northern nations into his own
hands. I, Wealth derived froni trading speculations. In adii-
tion to large treasures collected and bequeathed by his father, Solomon’s wealth


derived from commerce with other nations.


from Ophir and Tharshish, and made


His fleets brought gold and silver


them plenteous as stones in Jerusalem.


His chariots and chariot horses or chargers were of the best kind of Egyptian
breed and highly valued. Kings of the Hittites and Syria weleomed Jerusalem
as the opening of an emporium for trade, Inland cities founded for special,


148


cHAP. 1] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.








r
markets, and lofty towers on the coast pointed to commerce with distant countries.
II. Wealth acquired in opposition to God’s commands. The
King forbidden to multiply horses and gold under the Theocracy (Deut. xvii.
16,17). He must trust in the Lord God, not in chariots and horses (Ps. xx. 7).
Besides, in a hilly country like Judea, cavalry of no essential service; and going
to Egypt might open up the way to idolatry and corruption again. But Solomon
must equal other nations, hence his passion for horses, a prohibited luxury, led
to risk and excess. Wealth gained unjustly is held insecurely. ‘‘ Better is the
poor that walketh in his uprightness than he that is perverse in his ways though
he be rich.” III. Wealth therefore risky in its possession.
Prosperity of Solomon his great misfortune. Indulgence outran want. Abun-
dant leisure to gratify desires. Prosperous enterprises, rank, riches, and power
were his, His fame spread and raised to the pinnacle of glory among nations.
But ambition mastered him. Wealth the first step downwards. His wisdom
availed little and his end ruin. Sad that a beginning so promising should end
in consequences so fearful. The smallest departure from rectitude may lead to
grievous errors and fearful miseries. Neither wealth nor worldly wisdom can
check a downward course. “ The prosperity of fools shall destroy them.” “In
all time of our wealth, good Lord, deliver us.”


Tue Kina’s Mercnants.—Verse 16.


Linen yarn means influx (mikre), and thence import (ma6o), contrast of export
(Sept. 1 Kings x. 28); in which case the verse would run thus: “ And the export
of horses for Solomon was from Egypt; and the import which the king’s
merchants took was an import in price”—that is, in money. It was more
convenient for Solomon to send cash than commodities in exchange for the
chariots and horses [Murphy]. I. The advantages of commerce. In
softening manners and breaking down prejudices. In helping industry, pro-
moting peace, and stimulating into Nature’s resources. II. The blessings
of the nation whose sovereign takes an interest in commerce,
Kings may aid in developing commerce, reviving depressed industries, and in
adopting enlightened policy. Our own country privileged. ‘As soon as the
commercial spirit acquires vigour,” says Robertson, “and begins to gain an
ascendant in any society, we discern a new genius in its policy, its alliances, its
wars, and its negotiations.” :


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER I.


Vers. 3, 6. The national worship of Gibeon. And now occurred one of


was still in the unsettled state in which
it had been since the first entrance into
Palestine. “The people sacrificed in
high places.” The chief local sanctity
still adhered to the spot where “the
Tabernacle of the congregation ” stood,
on what was called ‘‘the great high-
place of Gibeon.” Hither as on a
solemn pilgrimage, with a vast con-
course of dignitaries, the young King
came to offer royal sacrifices on his
accession. A thousand victims were
eonsumed on the ancient altar. The
night was spent within the sacred city


those prophetic dreams which had
already been the means of Divine com-
munication in the time of Samuel.
Thrice in Solomon’s life—at the three
epochs of his rise, of his climax, of his
fall—is such a warning recorded [Dean
Stanley].

Ver. 10. Wisdom consists chiefly in
three things —l. Knowledge to dis-
cern, 2. Skill to judge. 3. Activity
to prosecute [7'. Watson]. He showed
his wisdom by asking for wisdom. He
became wise because he had set his
heart upon it [Stanley]. mecca


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





Wisdom is preferred to riches, to long
life, and to victory over enemies—the
common ambition of kings. Honour-
able to any man, but especially to one
so young as Solomon; the dictate of
early piety and of the purest patriot-
ism; expressing the most profouud
humility in circumstances favourable
to the growth of pride; so moderate


(omar. 1





Vor. 11. In thine heart. Without
a rich heart wealth is an ugly beggar
[Emerson].

Ver. 12. I will give. God is a


light that is never darkened, an un-
wearied life that cannot die, a fountain
always flowing, a garden of life, a
seminary of wisdom, a radical begin-
ning of all goodness [Quarles].


Vers. 14-17. Prosperity. Many are
not able to suffer and endure pros-
perity; it is like the light of the sun
to a weak eye—glorious indeed in itself,
but not proportioned to such an instru-
ment [Jeremy Taylor}.


and so modest; breathing sentiments
of the deepest gratitude to God, and
of entire devotion to the public wel-
fare [Dr. T. Guthrie].


“ Wisdom is ofttimes nearer when we stoop
Than when we soar” [ Wordsworth}





CHAPTER II.


Crrrican Notzs.] This chapter corresponds with 1 Kingsv. It comprises preparations
for building the temple (vers. 1, 2); Solomon’s message to Huram (vers. 3-10); Huram’s
reply (vers. 11-16); and the census of the strangers (vers. 17, 18).

Vers. 1, 2.—Preparations for building. Determined, t.e.. commanded, gave orders to
build. Name (1 Chr. xxii. 10; ef. 1 Kings v.5). Kingdom, royal palace. Ver. 2. The sub-
stance of this verse given in ver, 18, here indicative of magnitude of the undertaking.

Vers, 3-10.—Solomon’s nessige to Huram. H. had congratulated Sol. (1 Kings v. 1).
Deal (ef. 1 Chr. xiv. 1 and 2 Sam. v. 11). Cedars (1 Chr. xiv. 1). Ver. 4. Incense, lit.
incense of spices (marg.); the regularincense burned every morning and every evening
(Ex. xxx. 7); for symbolic meaning, see Rev. viii 3, 4. Shewbread (ef. Ex. xxv. 30;
Lev. xxiv. 5-9; Num. iv. 7). Moons (Num. xxviii. 11-15). Feasts. three great annual,
Ver. 5. Great, exceeding in size any separate building in Palestine and any temple of the
gods of surrounding nations. See Stanley’s Jewish Ch. vol, ii, p. 224. Ver. 6, Able (ef.
1 Kings viii. 27; 2 Chr. vi. 18). “In the question, ‘Who am I?’ (cj. 1 Chr. xxix. 14)
there is implied: a house for him to dwell in I cannot build; and with this is connected
the antithesis ; but only for the purpose of burning incense before him, t.e., only to main-
tain a place in which God may be honoured by sacrifice, can 1 venture to build him a
house” [Keil]. Ver. 7. Cunning, v.e., skilful to work in gold (1 Chr. xxii. 15) and with
knowledge of sculpture in metal and wood; a man to design and superintend all work in
metals and other materials (Hx. xxv. 4). Ver. 8. Send. ‘The cedar and cypress were
valued as being both rare and durable; the algum or almug trees (likewise a foreign
wood), though not got on Lebanon, is mentioned as being procured through Huram ”
[Jamzeson]. Ver. 9. Wonderful, lit. great and wonderful. Ver. 10. Give. ** According to
Kings, Solomon’s original proposal was simply to pay Hiram’s workmen for their labour,
and it was at Hiram’s suggestion that he commuted his proposed ‘ hire’ into an anuual
payment in kind (see 1 Kings v. 6,9, 11). It would seem, therefore, that the author of
Chronicles here throws into one at least two distinct messages sent by Solomon to
Hirai” [ Speak, Com.}.

Vers. 11-16.—Huram’s reply (cf. 1 Kings v. 8,9). Loved. ‘It would seem that neigh-
bouring sovereigns, in communications with Jewish monarchs, adopted the Jewish name
for the Supreme Being (Jehovah, ‘the Lord’ of our version), either identifying him with
their own chief god or (sometimes) meaning merely to acknowledge him as the special
god of the Jewish nation and country. In Hiram’s case the acknowledgment seems to
be of the former kind” (Speak. Com.]. Ver. 12. The Lord, a formula designating the
Supreme God with several Asiatic nations, In Persian inscriptions Ormazd is con-
stantly called “the great god, who gave (or made) heaven and earth” [Spear, Com. }.
Ver. 13. Huram, the king’s own father’s name appears to have been Abibaal, Father is
used in the honourable sense of master, and the trans. should be as generally admitted.
“TJ have sent a cunning man, endued with understanding, one Huram, ny master-workman,”


150


CHAP. 11.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,
7”


Ver. 14. A Tyrian by race, whose mother was of the daughter of Dan, though her father
was of Naphtali (1 Kings vii. 14), skilled in all things specified, and in wood, stone, and


a linen, Ver. 16. Joppa, now Jaffa, the natural port of Jerusalem, distant about 35
miles.


Vers. 17, 18.—Tire census of strangers. Strangers, descendants of- Canaanites not driven
out ofthe land at the invasion (Judg. i. 21-36; 1 Kings ix. 20), and non-Israelite population
influx from surrounding nations. Numbered, reimposition of bond-service had been dis-
continued between Joshua and Saul David numbered the strangers (¢f. 1 Chr. xxii. 2),
and Solomon imitated his father.


HOMILETICS.
Tue Buinpine or tar Tempie.—Verses 1-16.


Solomon’s wisdom given not for self-adornment and speculation, but for
practical purposes ; to build, govern, and do the work of God. David talked
about the work, gathered materials; Solomon executed. I. The magnitude
of the work. Wonderfully great (ver. 9). Great not so much in outward
structure as in style and design. 1. Great because God, for whom it is built, is
great. ‘For great is our God above all gods” (ver. 5). Infinite, self-existent,
and supreme. Our ideas of God determine our plans in building up character,
family, business, and places of worship. ‘Our theology determines our arcbi-
tecture,” says Dr. Parker. Defective views of God will influence expenditure
and worship. God is great, and should have nothing mean. 2. Great because
tts worship is becoming. ‘To burn sacrifice before him” (ver. 6). The spiritual
always greatér than the material, However magnificent the place, God is
greater than the temple. A great God indicates great worship. A ritual
not to please the eye and gratify the taste, but holy, sincere, and devout.
3. Great because it satisfies great needs. “To burn before him sweet incense, &c.”
(ver. 4). “Solomon seems to mean that to build a temple can only be justified
on the human—not on the divine—side. ‘God dwelleth not in temples made
with hands,’ cannot be confined to them, does in no sort need them. ‘The sole
reason for building a temple lies in the needs of man. Man is finite; his
worship must be local ; the sacrifices commanded in the law had, of necessity,
to be offered somewhere. Only in view of these necessities did Solomon venture
to think of building God a ‘house’” [Speak. Com.]. Man will ever need incense,
which sets forth prayer; the continual shew-bread, or communion with God ;
and the burnt-offering, or propitiation for sin (Ex. xxx. 7; Num. xxviii.;
Lev. xxiii.), II. The spirit in which the work was undertaken.
Solomon felt the necessity, urgency, and responsibility of the work, 1. A spirdt
of determination. “I purpose to build a house” (1 Kings v. 5). Energy,
settled and fixed resolution in himself. Gave orders to others also to help;
stirred up the nation to take an interest in work. Prayer should show itself in
action and enthusiasm for God. “The truest wisdom is a resolute determina-
tion,” says Napoleon. 2. A spirit of humility. ‘ But who is able to build, &ec.?”
(ver. 6). Feeling that he was undertaking an impossible work almost. Not
as a conceited king or wealthy prince, but as unworthy of the work, did he
regard himself. A due sense of insufficiency becoming in the wisest and
strongest; the only way to secure strength and success; will uever lead te
despair, but to do what can be done. ‘“ When ye shall have done all those
things which are commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants ; we have
done that which was our duty to do.” III. The help which was secured
in the execution of the work. Solomon great, wise, and rich but
required help from Hiram. Kings want men! Everything worthy done by
co-operation, reciprocity of labour. 1. Help readily given. No excuse, ne
delay, no mere promise. Willingness combined with respect, congratulations,
and gladness of the opportunity. “When Hiram heard the words of ad


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES, | (omar. 11,


_—





he rejoiced greatly.” 2. Help most skilful. Cut timber, “costly stones and
hewed stones,” the best that could be given. We should contrive more for God.
Give more intelligence, more value in our service; put more cunning in the
fingers, more penetration in the mind, and more polish in the brass; more
beauty in every sacrifice. 3. Help most suitable. One thing not substituted
for another ; cedar-trees for gold, and silver for brass. ‘Timber, stones, and
fine linen in exact quantity and quality. Cunning men “ filled with wisdom
and understanding,” “able to grave,” to superintend and direct. Give what is
suitable and required, and you will help in building the temple.


Hiram ann Soromon.—Verses 2=—16,


Hiram had been a friend of David, now a faster friend of Solomon, with
whom he formed treaties and alliance, by which commerce was extended and
peace maintained. We learn from this intercourse—I. That friendship in life is
helpful. Hiram served both father and son; gratitude and filial loyalty bound
Solomon to him. An old family friend revives touching memories; should
never be forsaken, though you may rise and he may sink in the world, nor
undervalued in counsels and offices of love. ‘Thine own friend and thy father’s
friend, forsake not.” II. Zhat co-operation among men ts desirable. True
friendship leads to common courtesy and co-operation. Kings not independent,
need men, and cannot build without others. Tyre may help Jerusalem, Gentile
the Jew. In the cause of humanity, skilled and unskilled, overseey and common
labourer, may work together. “ Every man has his own kingship. Every man
has something that no other man has. <A recognition of this fact, and a proper
use of its suggestions, would create for us a democracy hard to distinguish
from a theocracy.” III. That men may know God, yet not serve him. Hiram
acknowledged the God of the Jewish people, now known among the nations, but
no reason to think that he was a proselyte to the Jewish religion, The doxology
(“ Blessed, d&c.”) may spring from courtesies of style, community of language,
and religious tradition which existed between Pheenicians and Hebrews. Men
may know much of God, speak well of him, yet withhold homage from him
and give it to idols. IV. Z'hat when God’s people are consistent in their life, their
influence upon others ts for good. Hiram felt more than respect for Solomon;
was well-disposed, through the honour and worship rendered to God. When
Israel were idolatrous, they were weakened; when holy, they influenced and
instructed surrounding nations ; lent, but borrowed not. Let your life be pure,
and the worship of your God sincere, then you overcome opposition, touch the
heart, and secure the help of strangers. ‘The sons of strangers shall build up
thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee.”


NATURALISATION OF FoREIGNERS.—Verses 17, 18.


I. A good Government will tend to make a country attractive to foreigners.
II. Foreigners thus attracted are amenable to the laws of the State. III, Thus
protected, they may contribute materially to the enrichment of a State by the
importation of foreign industries. IV. The kind treatment of exiles often
repays those who so regard them. Illus.: The silk-weavers of Spitalfields.
V. Be kind to strangers [ Bib. Museum).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 3-7. In opening the business temple he proposed to build must be a
Solomon grounded his request for solid and permanent building, because
Tyrian aid on two reasons: 1. The the worship was to be continued in

152


cnap. 11,]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


ee


perpetuity, and therefore the building
materials required to be of the most
durable quality. 2. It must bea mag-
nificent structure, because it was to be
dedicated to the God who was greater
than all gods; and, therefore, as it
might seem a presumptuous idea to
erect an edifice for a Being ‘‘ whom the
heaven and the heaven of heavens do
not contain,” it was explained that
Solomon’s object was not to build a
house fer him to dwell in, but a temple
in which his worshippers might offer
sacrifices to his honour. No language
could be more humble and appropriate
than this, The pious strain of senti-
ment was such as became a King of
Israel [Jamieson].

Vers. 6,7. By the sentence ‘the
heaven and heaven of heavens,” that
is, the heaven in its most extended
compass, “cannot contain God,” Solo-
mon strikes down all rationalistic asser-
tions that the Israelites imagined
Jehovah to be only a finite national
god. The infinitude and supramun-
dane exaltation of God cannot be more
clearly and strongly expressed than it
is in these words. That, however,
Solomon was addicted to no abstract
idealism ic sufficiently apparent from
this, that he unites this consciousness
of the infinite exaltation of God with
the firm belief of his real presence in
the temple. The true God is not merely
infinitely exalted above the world, has
not only his throne in heaven (1 Ki.
viii, 34, 36; Ps. ii, 4; xi. 4; ciil
19; Is. lxvi. 1; Amos ix, 6), he isalso
present on the earth (Deut. iv. 39), has
chosen the temple for the dwelling-
place of his name in Israel, from which
he hears the prayers of his people
| Keil. |

Ver. 7. Sendaman, Men wanted
to consecrate their skill to God and lead
in Christian work, &c, A famous son.
Hiram, the first sculptor and engraver


of Israel, was half a foreigner. His
father was a Tyrian and was dead; but
his mother was a Danite who lived in
Naphtali (1 Ki, vii. 13,14). He thus
sprung on the Israelite side from the
same tribe, and (according to Jewish
tradition) from the same family as
Aholiab, the Danite artist in the
wilderness. So wide was his fame, and
so profound the reverence entertained
for him by the two sovereigns to whom
he belonged, that he is called “the
father,” both of Solomon and of Hiram
[Stanley]. I. A widow’s son trained
in his father’s workshop, helping his
mother, and striving to do his duty.
II. This son, by diligence, faith-
fulness, and skill, became famous,
excelled, and was promoted. III.
This promotion a reward for his
diligence, and a joy to his widowed
mother. Industry, filial love, and per-
severance sure to bring eminence.
** Seest thou a man diligent in his busi-
ness? he shall stand before kings: he
shall not stand before mean men”
(Prov. xxii. 29). (Henry Martin,
known in his college as “ the man who
had not lost an hour.” Joseph, Nehe-
miah, Daniel.)

Vers. 17,18. Solomon’e workmen.
Builders, Israelites and heathen (Ps.
xxii. 29). A prophetic anticipation of
Ep. ii. 14, 19-22; iii, 4-6. Solo-
mon’s treatment of his workmen, Not
arbitrary like Pharaoh, who would
have raised discontent, if not opposition,
but considerate. A wise arrangement
to give rest at home and relief in
labour. Hence no murmuring in work.
This an example to modern builders.
Learn—The temple a house of prayer
for all nations. Many help in the
material work of the church, who do
not enjoy its worship and privileges.
“We, his servants, will arise and build:
but ye have no portion, nor right, nor
memorial in Jerusalem.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER If,


Vers. 3,4. Friendship.
Friendship! mysterious cement of the
soul |


Sweet’ner of life! and solder of society!”
(Blair).


Vers. 5, 6. God above all gods, As
the human mind is finite and conceives
by defining the limits of its thought,
and as God is known to us to be


158


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [oHar. m.
ee


infinite, it is evident that the human Ver. 14. Skilful. The mechanical

mind can never be capable of con- genius of the Phoenicians generally,

ceiving God adequately as He is, or of and of the Sidonians in particular, is

defining His being [Hodge]. noticed by many ancient writers [Speak,
Ver. 7. A man. The mostimpor- Com],

tant point in any affair isto know what.

is to be done [Columedia].








CHAPTER IIL


Critica, Norzs.) In two chapters fs narrated the building of the temple, which
correspond with 1 Kings vi. and vii. Here greater fulness of description, and more
precise introduction and different arrangement of things described,

Vers. 1, 2.—Place and time of building. Moriah (Gen. xxii. 2), from which was named
the land of Moriah—“ land of the appearing of the Lord.” Appeared, ‘‘ which was shown
to David,” as future site (1 Chr. xxi. 15). Prepared, fixed (1 Chr. xxii. 5). Onan,
see 2Sam. xxiv. 18; 1 Chr. xxi. 18. Ver. 2. Second day not in original. Translation
should be ‘‘ He hegan to build in the second month in the fourth year of his reign” (Speak.
Com.]}, about 1012 B.c.

Vers. 3-7.—The holy house and perch. These measures afterwards given. Instructed,
founded (marg.), and translation should be, ‘* Now this is the ground-plan of Solomon for
the building of the house of God.” Cubits, i.e. cubits after the old Mosaic standard.
Threescore, only length and width given here, not height, as 1 Ki. vi 2. Ver. 4. Porch,
in length as breadth of the house. Height a difficulty. Speak. Com. proposes to read
20 for 120. Overlaid (1 Ki vi. 22). Ver. 5. Greater house, i.c., the holy place or chief
room of the house, double in area the holy of holies. Ceiled. The walls were lined with
cedar, and the floor with fir, the ceiling only to be covered with fir and overlaid with
gold (1 Ki. vi. 15). Palm, for ornaments (1 Ki. vi, 29). Chains, probably garlands or
festoons. Ver. 6. Garnished, covered, or ‘‘ paved the house with precious and beautiful
marble” [Kiito]. Stones, gems for “its beautification ” (cf. 1 Chr. xxix. 2), Parvaim, not
found elsewhere, generally taken fora place, but uncertain what place. Ver. 7. House,
the holy place still spoken of, the whole of whose beams, posts, &., had the same
decorations.

Vers. 8-14.—The most holy house, f.e., sanctuary or holy of holies. For its dimensions,
see 1 Ki. vi. 20. Stax hundred talents, an addition to narrative in Kings. Ver. 9. Nails, to
fasten the gold plate on the wooden lining of the walls. Upper chambers, given 1 Chr.
xXXvili. 11; their position uncertain. Wer. 10. Cherubims (cf. image), moveable work}
sculptured work. Original word only found here. Vers. 11-13. Their position described.
They stood on floor, opcupying each a space ten cubits in height and in width (1 Ki. vi. 23).
Wings touched each other over the ark, and stretched across from wall to wall Faces
not looking at each other, like the cherubs of Moses (Ex. xxxvii. 9), but looking outward
from the most holy to the holy place. Ver. 14. Vail, an important addition to Kings.
Blue, exactly the same colours as that of tabernacle (Ex. xxvi. 31).

Vers. 15-17.—The pillars and their ornaments. High(marg.). Long refers to distance of
one from the other; height given 1 Ki. vii 15; 2 Ki, xxv. 17; confirmed by Jer. lii. 21, 22.
They appear to have stood on a line with the front of the porch; their position defined
obscurely. Ver. 16, Chains, chaplets or festoons in the manner of the oracle, which must
have had similar chain work (cf. 1 Ki. vi. 21). Bertheau reads “in a ring,” so as to go all
round the neck as a necklace. Ver. 17. Reared before the temple, conspicuous to beholders,
Jachin, he will establish. Boaz, strength. Possibly proper names, and may belong to
supposed younger sons of Solomon Baan The LXX. trans. direction and strength.
“Lit., Jachin would seem ¢o be, as rendered in the margin, ‘He will establish,’ while
Boaz may either be ‘in strength,’ or ‘in him is strength,’ or ‘in it is strength.’ The
meaning was probably, ‘God will establish in strength’ (i.¢., firmly) the temple and the
religion connected with it” [Speak Com.}


154


CHAP. 111.] BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


a ED


HOMILETICS,
Tue Boriprne or THE TemMpPLe.—Verees 1—14,


This first work that Solomon undertook was long in preparation but lasting in
effect. ‘“ Of all monuments of the internal administration of Solomon, none is to
be compared in itself or in its effect on the future character of the people with
the building of the temple. It was far more than a mere architectural display.
It supplied the framework of the history of the kingdom of Judah. There is
hardly any reign which is not in some way connected with its construction or its
changes” [Stanley]. I. The site chosen. Consecrated by the offering of
Isaac and the gracious appearance of the angel to David. The place selected by
David, bought with his money, and prepared by his labours—pulling down build-
ings, levelling rocks, marking out dimensions—revealed by the Spirit of God
(1 Chr. xxii. 1, 18, 26). Solomon not at liberty to fix nor at a loss to finda
place, Wisdom to submit to God’s appointment and to be guided by his provi-
denee. II. The specifications given. “These are the ground plans, &.”
(ver. 3). There must be foundation or ground plan—many build “in the air,”
build from the top, build without principles, plan, or good materials. We have
need to be ‘ instructed,” not born natural architects like the bee and the beaver.
In life-building keep to the “first measure,” the divine rule. This the only
guide, the only foundation. No other can be laid. III. The time the
work commenced. In the second month and fourth year of his reign.
Time more specific in 1 Kings vi. 1. Memorable day, Many such in Christian
life; not monotonous and commonplace—“red-letter days” crises in life to
remind and help. The day when born again, when school was entered, when
home was left. The month when business started or the Christian church
entered. ‘The year after” some great event. The deliverance from Egypt, from
sickness or spiritual bondage. ‘“ Days should speak” of plans formed aud work
commenced, of special providences and significant events. IV. The form of
the building erected. first, the Porch and its Pillars (vers. 15-17),
“The most startling novelty of the building in which foreign architects had
freest play. In materials it was probably suggested by Assyrian, in elevation
by Egyptian architecture, while Tyrian sculptors displayed their art to the full
in the two elaborate pillars. They stood immediately under the porch, within,
but not supporting it, and were called, either from the workmen or from their
own firmnessand solidity, Jachin and Boaz. Their golden pedestals, bright brazen
shafts, rich capitals, light festoons, were thought prodigies of art so remarkable
that the Israelites were never wearied of recounting their glories” [Stanley].
Second, the Holy Place, “the greater house” (ver. 5), double the area of the
Holy of Holies. “The whole interior was lined with boards richly decorated
with carved work, clusters of foliage and flowers, among which the pomegranate
and lutus, or water-lily, were conspicuous, and overlaid, excepting the floor, with
gold, either by gilding or in plates” (1 Ki. vi.) [Jamieson]. Third, the Most
Holy Place. Its upper chambers (ver. 9); sculptured cherubim of colossal size,
their faces inwards conformably to their use, which was to vail the ark (vers.
10-13). The vail between the Holy and the Most Holy Place (ver. 14) displayed
the beauty of colour, embossed with cherubims, and made of four materials.
This pattern given to Solomon (1 Chr. xxix. 11, 12), not the invention of human
architects. Destitute of invention, we may gather materials and work according
to pattern, But remember the builder depends upon the architect. ‘ Except


the Lord build the house, &o,” 155


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


w


(oHar. mi,





THe DESCRIPTION oF THE TEMPLE.


¥. Solid in its form. Stones and pillars indicate strength and duration.
Whatever God builds is strong and solid. The earth is “established” ; the hills
are “everlasting” ; the church is built on arock. ‘The foundation of the Lord
standeth sure.” II. Costly in its materials. Not only grand and
massive in style, but costly. Best cedars, best gold, and “costly stones”
(1 Ki. vii. 10). The porch, the holy place, and “the most holy house overlaid
with gold.” To the artistic use of precious metals was added the glory of coloured
gems, ,“Garnished the house with precious stones for beauty” (ver. 6).
III. Beautiful in its appearance. The temple of nature is beautiful.
The sky spread out as curtains, and the stars shine as lamps. The decorations
of the Temple were not a form of mere “ barbaric splendour” as thought by some
writers. The skill of the smith, the sculptor, and the engraver lavished upon
substances and in a place rarely seen by the eye of man. In its symmetry, order,
and design, the work was an offering to Jehovah, whose presence filled the
temple. The house of the earthly Jerusalem was a type of the glorified Church,
“the city of pure gold, like unto clear glass,”


® And it is a joy that in every age
The greatest works of mind or hand have bees
Done unto God” [Bailey’s Festus}.


To: Surpassinc Beauty oF THE TrmMPLE.—Verse 6.


Observe—Y. That God did not need this lavish expenditure of gold and gems
and rich ornaments. They were all perishable things. II. Yet divine conde-
scension accepted this offering of human gratitude. III. The beauty and costli-
ness of the temple not without their uses. The temple so adorned served to
impress the mind of surrounding nations with the feelings of the people of Israel
towards their great God. IV. The adornment of the temple a rebuke of the
utilitarian views of those who are advocates of a Judas-like economy, and who
regard as waste all that is given te God beyond the bare necessities of the case


[Bib. Mus],
HOMILETIC HINTS


Ver. 4. Within with pure gold. Such
was Christ’s inside (Col. ii 9); in his
outside was no such desirable beauty
(Is. liii. 2) ; so the church’s glory is in-
ward (Ps. xlv. 13), in the hidden man
of the heart (1 Peter iii. 4) [Zrapp].

Ver. 5. Gold and fir. 1. The best
things employed forGod. 2. The best
employed with no niggard spirit and
empty hand. 3. The best applied to
secure harmony, beauty, and strength,

The lofty buildings set forth “the
germs of all Christian architecture and
the principle of national worship in
fixed places for ever.”

«A thing of beauty is a joy for ever;

Its loveliness increases; it will never

Pass into nothingness,”


156


4ND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 10-13. Cherubims. 1. Image
work, painted to impress mind and life.
Symbols of spiritual truths. “The eye
may help the fancy and the soul; but
if our creed be only painted, it is as a
painted wing: you will always find it
where you left it—a wing that cannot
flutter, much less fly, a wing that is
useless in every respect” [ Dr. Parker].
2. Stood, denoting attendance and ser-
vice. “They serve who also stand
and wait” (of. Ps. citi. 20). 3, Wings
extended, to teach alacrity in service,
“swift as an angel.” 4. Fuces inward,
not fixed on a throne and faced towards
worshippers. God only must be wor-
shipped, not angels who merely attend
and vail their fas before him,


mm.)


———


“Whatever the cherubim were, it is
Certain that they were in no sense
representations or emblems of deity,
like the winged figures of Assyria and
Egypt, with which they have been oftew
compared . . . the representation sim-
ply expresses the claim of Jehovah, the
God of Israel, of such lordship over all
creation as is hymned in the seraphic


song of Is. vi. 3” [Ellicott, O. 7.
Com.}.


Ver. 17. Jachin and Boaz establish-
ment and strength in temple work
(of. 1 Ki. vii. 21). “The pillars were
richly decorated and placed in a very
conspicuous position in front of, and
detached from, the temple. The one
on the dexter side was named ‘Jachin,’
that is, ‘He shall establish,’ and that
on the sinister side ‘ Boaz,’ that is,
‘In it is strength.’ These names seem
to show that they were memorial
columns, such as have often been
erected in one form or another in all


AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





uz ce i oe


ages, and that they commemornted the
Lord’s work in establishing his king-
dom and presence in Jerusaleza. They
thus expressed to future ages the
thanksgiving words of David: ‘Lord,
by thy favour thou hast settled strength
for my mountain’ (Ps. xx. 7, marg.) ;
‘Honour and majesty are before him;
strength and beauty are in his sanc-
tuary’ (Ps. xcvi. 6)” [J. H. Blunt].
Showing not only by the matter—
brass—but by the names of these
pulars, what steadfastness the elect
stand in before God, both for present
and future. For present they have
strength in themselves—Boag, «.¢., in
it is strength; for future God will so
direct and establish them with his
grace—Jachin, ¢.¢., he shall direct or
establish, that they shall never wholly
depart from him. . “ Him that over-
cometh will I make a pillar in the
temple of my God, and he shall go no
more out” (Rev, ili, 12) [Zrapp].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER II.


Ver, 6. Stones for beauty. The
lavish use of the precious metals in
ornamentation was a peculiar feature
of early Oriental architecture [Speak.
Com.|. "Tis the eternal law that
first in beauty should be first in might
[Keats]. Precious stones. They who
are not made saints in a state of grace
shall never be saints in glory. The
stones which are appointed for that
glorious temple above are hewn and
polished and prepared for it here, as
the stones were wrought and prepared
in mountains for the building of the
temple at Jerusalem [Leighton].

Vers. 7-10. The mission of art, Art
is on a mission for the great common


people. It is to educate them. It is
to elevate them. It is to refine them.
It is to do its work now, no longer for
the palace, no longer for the temple,
but for that which has something of
both the palace and the temple in it~
for the family. Art is aiming at the
household, and when it shall have done
its work there, it will be with such
resplendent and wondrous fruits as
shall make all the past as nothing in
the comparison. We are just on the
eve of this great development. The
wealth of the world is increasing, se
that men are beginning to be able to
make their houses richer than Grecian


temples used to be [Beecher }


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES, (ctar. tv,
ts


OHAPTER IV.


Crrrican, Notzs.] This chapter describes the holy furniture of the temple and the court
(vers. 1-10); the brass works of Huram (vers. 11-18); and the golden vessels of the sanc-
tuary (ver. 19; ch. v. 1; cf. 1 Ki. vii. 48-51). ;

Vers, 1-10.—The furniture of the temple court. Ver. 1. Altar, of burnt offering, dimen-
sions not given in Kings, Vers. 2-5. Brazen sea (cf. 1 Ki. vii. 23-26). Oxen, true read-
ing appears to be knops, colocynths, or flower buds, as in 1 Ki, vii.24. The word seems
to have come in by mistake from the next verse [Murphy]. Vers. 4, 5. The exact words
of Kings used until last clause of ver. 5. Lilies (ver. 5), like a lily flower (marg.). Ver. 6.
Ten lavers placed in the court, five on south and five on north side; used for washing
utensils; sea for bathing of the priests. Ver. 7. Candlesticks made after the pattern of
that by Moses (Ex. xxv. 31). Form, no allusion to shape, but to express what more fully
given ver. 20. Ver. 8. Yen tables, one in tabernacle. Ver. 9. Court, inner court (2 Ki,
vi, 86). Great court for the congregation. Ver. 10. Sea, great brazen sea, placed between
the brazen altar and the porch, a little south (1 Ki. vii. 39), where the laver before the
tabernacle formerly stood (Ex, xxx. 18).

Vers, 11-18.—The brass works of Huram. Pots, buckets for carrying ashes from altar.
Shovels to lift them from altar. Basins to receive and pour blood upon altar. Vers. 12-16.
Various things (1 Ki. vii. 40-47). Pommels, balls on top of chapiter, upper parts, or
capital of column. Pomegran. (1 Ki. vii. 20). Ver. 14 Bases mentioned first time, orna-
mental stands for lavers. Ver. 16. Father—i.e., his master-workman, as ii.13, Ver. 17,
Thick clay of the ground. Suc. lay beyond Jordan, south of the Jabbok. Zared., Zarthan.
(1 Ki. vii. 46), probably name of place in time of writer. Ver. 18. Found out, so freely
used that weight was not taken.

Vers, 19-22.—Golden vessels of the sanctuary (1 Ki. vii. 48-51). Tables, the table in
Kings, perhaps the shew-bread never put on more than one of the ten at a time [Spcak.
Com.}. Ver. 20. Candlesticks, law of burning, Ex. xxvii, 20, 21; Lev. xxiv. 2,3. Ver. 21.
Flowers, lamps, &c. (ef. Ex. xxv. 31-39; 1 Ki. vii. 49). Ver. 22. Hntry, the door frame;
the doors, the door leaves. These were overlaid with gold,


HOMILETICS.
Toe FURNITURE OF THE Hoty Court.—Verses 1-10.


A continued account of the furniture, things made of brass and of gold.
Without end within types of good things to come. Here furniture in open
court, in view of all the people; of great significance. 1. The altar of brass.
Twenty cubits (30ft.) square, by ten cubits (15ft.) high. Larger than that in
Tabernacle. Israel more numerous and richer, should be more devout. When
God enlarges our borders and business we should increase our gifts, The burnt
offerings an impressive, instructive sight, before the people in the court. 2. The
sea of brass. For the same purpose as the Laver in Tabernacle, washing hands
and feet of priests while ministering at the altar. Ten cubits (15ft.) in diameter,
by five cubits (74ft.) in height, and raised higher by standing upon 12 brazen
oxen. Reminding that God requires sanctity in all that approach him. Those
that draw nigh must cleanse their hands and purify their hearts (Jas. iv. 8). 3.
The ten lavers (ver. 6}. They were set upon wheels to move about, and used for
the ablution of sacrifices. Not only the priests, but the sacrifices must be washed,
We must purify our persons and performances. Iniquity cleaves te our holy
things. 4. The ten golden cundlesticks (ver. 7). Only one in Tabernacle, Light
increases. Divine direction was given to increase the number of tables for
shew-bread and candlesticks for light. 5. The ten tables. “ Five on right side and

Lbs


oHAP. Iv, ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
a TS


five on the left;” to which belonged 100 basins or dishes of gold (ver. 7).
6. Zhe golden altar, on which incense was burnt (ver. 19); probably enlarged in
proportion to the brazen altar, Christ makes atonement and intercedes for ever
in virtue of thatatonement. But what use all this splendid furniture? Not for
mere display, but utility. Talents, education, the furniture of mind not given
for mere polish, but practical use. Outward adornment, material grandeur only
of service when leading to spiritual results.


Tue Mouren Srs.-—Verses 2-5.


I. Its use suggests purification for God’s service. Priests and people unfit
without this. Holiness becomes God’s house and God's servants. ‘ Be ye clean
that bear the vessels of the Lord.” II, Its size suggests abundant provision
for purification. Not a laver, but a sea; kept full and overflowing for constant
use. A type of that “fountain opened to the house of David and to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and uncleanness.” III. Its construction.
1. The material precious and durable. 2. The oxen, sacrifices of priests,
emblems of strength and patience—looking all ways. The blessings procured by
a holy priesthood would be universally diffused [Adapted].


Tue Brass Works or Hiram.—Verses 11-18.


A detailed enumeration of principal articles executed for sacred edifice (¢f.
1 Ki. vii. 14-46). I, The articles which Hiram made. Hiram
skilled in work in gold, silver, and iron; in wood and stone; in purple, blue,
fine linen and in crimson (2 Chr. ii. 14); but chiefly metal work or works in
brass contributed. Works splendid in material, “bright brass” (1 Ki. vii.
45); numerous in quantity, “in great abundance” (ver. 18), and suitable in
style. II. The foundry at which they were prepared. In neigh-
bourhood of Succoth and Zarthan, in valley of Jordan, where the soil is marl.
What natural abundant provision for man in the earth! If brass or bronze was
not smelted and alloyed by Hiram, but received from Syria as a cribute in manu-
factured form, yet he would melt it down for casting (1 Chr. xviii. 8). Furnaces
would be required and filled with metal. Moulds made in the ground and
national foundry erected far from the capital, which would not be annoyed by
smoke and noxious vapours. Thus we have civilisation in its beginning,
progress, and end.


An Ancient Contract,—Verses 11-18.


“ Hiram finished the work that he was to make for King Solomon” (ver. 11).
The agreement in 2 Chr. xi. I. The contractor, An eminent Tyrian
artizan, skilled in great variety of departments; appointed for his great natural
ability to superintend the execution of all works of art in the temple; anda
faithful, diligent man, worthy of all confidence, II. The articles for
which he contracted. Numerous and most valuable, well-finished and most
suitab'e, The best material and the best workmanship. III. The comple-
tion of the contract. “He made an end of doing all the work” (1 Ki. vii.
41). Finished the work and all the work. No breach of contract; no delay.
iverything completed in time; gave satisfaction; and becomes a model transaction.


“THe Entry or tue Houst.”—Verse 22,


This central, conspicuous, and attractive, suggesting—I. Access to God
in Christian worship. God great and man sinful. The door might have
been for ever closed ; but, in love, Jehovah directs im building a house, promises

; 159


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (CHAP. IV.


to dwell in it, and invites men to meet him there. “ Let them make me a
sanctuary; that I may dwell among them.” II. Access to symbolic
beauty in Christian worship. Perfection of gold, or material prosperity
given to God. /Pulms indicating growth and fruitfulness in Christian life;
flowers, emblems of beauty and fragrance in Christian character ; cherubimes,
suggestive of alacrity in God’s service. Thought is expressed in forms of art,
Beauty pleases the senses, originates in the mind the ideal, calls imagination
into play, and exercises wonderful fascination over man. Delight, love, and


reverence touch the heart, emotions arise and action result.


“ We live by admiration, hope, and love;
And even as these are well and wisely fixed,
In dignity of being we ascend.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 6. Ten lavers. Ten symbol of
completeness. Their position in court,
five on the north, and ‘ive on south
side. Their wse. for washing parts of
offering. Furn ture of splendid skill,
labour, and ex; ns».

Ver. 5. With flowers of lilies, lit. like
a lily flower. Consider—1, That there
is on acceptableness in a good and true
wovk in itself, but much more by rela-
tion; that is, when it is rendered as to
God. We must come to do our best,
because we are doing it for the Lord.
2. The soundness and honesty of service
im God’s spiritual temple. 3. As some
of Hiram’s work was “lily work”
(of. 1 Ki. vii. 22), so, majesty crowned


with gracefulness will be found in all
the Divinest thoughts. 1. The pillars
must be before the florid ornamenta-
tion; 2. But beauty is also in God’s
sanctuary, and “upon the top of the
pillars was lily work” [@. J. Proctor].
In reviewing the whole chapter, we
learn—1l. The beautiful in Christian
architecture ; the temple an example
and stimulus. 2. Art in Christian
service; subservient to xan’s highest
needs and God’s glory. 5. The sym-
bolic in Christian worship, The O. T.
dispensation a picture adapted to infant
minds and first stages of divine instruc-
tion, “a shadow (dim sketch) of things
to come” (Col. ii. 17; Heb. x. 1).


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER IV.


Ver. 14. Bases and lavers. No
heathen parallel to these bases and
lavers ; the whole arrangement, so full
of meaning, appears quite peculiar to
the Israelitish temple, for nothing of
the kind is found anywhere else, either
on Egyptian or Assyrian monuments
[Thencus].

Vers. 19-22. Gold. Symbolic art.
It is an incarnation of fancy, and is a
sort of petrified poetry, or concrete rhe-
toric. It is the blossom of the art-tree,
whose root is thought, and whose trunk
it imagination, It is inventive, imita-
tional, and composite. ... Let our
students follow nature boldly and


160


lovingly, but not servilely—learning to
compose as she does—not following her
laws without laying down his own.
Above all, let him remember that
ornamentation is to art what words
are to thought, and that if design and
architecture are dead, no ornamenta-
tion, however beautiful, can give them
life. It will be, at the best, but a
wreath of flowers round the pale brow
of the corpse.


: “O powers
Hlimitable! ’tis but the outer hem
Of God’s great mantle our poor stars do


gem ”
[Luskin}


;


Omar. V.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


cere a RN ener SEER
; ep
!


CHAPTER VY.


; Carricat Nores.] Removal of the ark (vers. 1-10) is followed by visible token of God’s
favour (vers. 11-14) (cf, 1 Ki. viii. 1-11), an addition to narrative in Kings, is the account
of ths circumstances under which the manifestation took place.

Vers. 1-10.—Tihe ark removed, Dedicated (1 Chr. xxii. 14; xxvi. 26). Ver. 2. Assembled,
the elders in the feast of tabernacles, which began on 15th of Ethanim, the seventh
month (1 Ki. viii. 2). The closing festival of the sacred year. Ver. 4. Levites, such as
were priests, whose office in particular to bear ark (1 Ki. viii. 3). Ver. 5. Tabernacle
brought from Gibeon (2 Chr. i. 3). Ver. 6. Sacrificed through the priests. Told, counted
(i Ki. viii. 5). Ver. 7. Wings, those which met in the middle of the room. Ver. 8.
Covered, shaded. Ver. 9. Drew out, intimating that the ark was not to be moved again.
They rested in the outer wings, so made a barrier. This day, t.e., the time this history
was written. After Babylonish captivity, no trace of ark or staves. Ver. 10. Nothing.
Hence tables of the law put into the ark by Moses (Deut. x 5) existed im time a
Solomon.

Vers. 11-14.—God’s glory manifested. Priests without regard to courses ; all priests at
hand took part in ceremony. Ver. 12. Singers, full choir required on solemn occasions
like this ; all twenty-four choirs combined in white linen (cf. 1 Chr. xv. 27), with instru-
ments proper for the Levites, and trumpets for priests (cf Num. x. 8; 1 Chr. xv. 24;
xvi. 6; 2 Chr. vii. 6; xiii. 12-14). Ver. 13. One. The performance arranged as one whole.
The song of praise usual refrain (1 Chr. xvi. 34; Ps. cxxxvi.). Cloud as in erection of
tabernacle (Ex. xl. 34), the symbol of Divine presence, too dazzling for them to officiate.


HOMILETICS.
DepicateD Taincs.—Verse 1.


This incident worthy of note, something to be commended, thought the
writer. The treasures of David carefully stored into the chambers of the temple.
I. David before his death dedicated certain treasures to God.


With toil, self-sacrifice, and entire devotedness, David collected materials. ‘ In


my trouble I have prepared, &c.” (1 Chr. xxii. 14), His spoils and property
consecrated to the highest uses. The gold of the heathen may enrich the coffers
of the Son of God. II. Solomon most scrupulous in carrying out
his father’s wish. He might have taken them for the expenses of his
house and government. As executor he willingly appropriated all to its lawful
use. Nothing was alienated. The will was felt to bind and fulfilled. Frequently
the wishes of pious parents are evaded by worldly-minded relatives. The manner
important and specific. Thus (ver. 1; of. 1 Ki. viii. 51, so ended, &c.)—
1, Resolving to secure the blessing by fulfilling the conditions, 2. Anxious to
bestow upon the people the best blessings. 3. Continuing the work until com-
pletely finished. ITI. Solomon’s example worthy of our imitation.
Treasures we can give—hearts, personal efforts, contributions and attendance,
sbedience to the Divine will, and prayer for the Divine presence.


Tae RemovaL or tHe ArK.—Verses 2-10.


Along with holy vessels, needful to bring in the ark, the most precious furni-
ture. The occasion one of great interest and solemnity. I. The time of its
removal. 1. Remarkable in itself. The building finished in the month Bul
(November), eighth of the year, eleventh of Solomon’s reign (B.0. aed pate


HUMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (omar. ¥.





occupied workmen seven years and a half (1 Ki. vi. 1, 37, 38). Dedication
began in seventh month of the year Ethanim (October), not the same year in
which completed. Intervening eleven months spent in getting ready; delay to
choose fit time when Jerusalem would be filled with people. Feast of Tabernacles
most suitable season to dedicate temple. 2. Remarkable in its influence. “The
magnitude of the event is marked by the fact that now, for the first time since
the exodus, we have the years and months recorded” [Stanley]. Events often
fix dates in life. ‘I have shewed thee new things from this time.” II. The
method of its removal. Similar to the ceremony of removing from house
of Obededom to Zion (2 Sam. vi. 12; 1 Chr. xv. 25). 1. Representatives of the
nation summoned to take part. Heads of tribes, chiefs of the fathers, senators,
judges, and rulers, 2. Vast spectators met together. “ All the men of Israel
assembled themselves” (ver. 3). Not only chief men, those invited, but vast
numbers of common people to watch the ceremony. 3. An orderly procession
was formed. The king, preceded by his royal guard (1 Ki. xiv. 27, 28), took
the lead; elders of the people followed ; then came the Levites bearing the ark.
This procession was joimed by another on Mount Zion from lofty height of
Gibeon, ‘‘ bearing with it the relics of the old pastoral worship, now to be disused
for ever” (ver. 5). Levite choirs sang joyous psalms (the Psalms of Degrees
cxx.—cxxiv.), in solemn steps, accompanied with cymbals, psalteries, harps, and
trumpets, Up the hill the procession went, and in nearing Moriah they would
sing; “Arise, O Lord, into Thy resting-place, Thou and the ark of Thy strength.”
III. The ceremonies which accompanied its removal. Every-
thing fit for a great and solemn event like this. 1. Jnnumerable sacrifices offered.
Stationed in different places, priests offered “sheep and oxen which could not be
numbered for multitude” (ver. 6). “The ground was moist with drink-offerings
and sacrifices,” says Josephus, 2. Priests attended in a body. This an extra-
ordinary occasion, more than wonted solemnity, All priests came up from all
parts of Judea to take part. ‘* All the priests that were present (found) were
sanctified and did not then wait by course” (ver. 11). 3. Musicians orderly
arranged. The station of priests with instruments at marble table on the
south-west of the altar apart from others. lLevite singers occupied an
orchestra east of the altar. Both stood with their faces to the altar.
The new and gentler notes of David's music blended with the loud
trumpet blast of earlier days in praising God, “for he is good; for his mercy
endureth for ever.” IV. The solemn deposit in its resting-place.
Brought into its place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place, even
under the wings of the cherubims (1 Ki. viii.6). ‘There it is unto this day”
(ver. 9). 1. Its public inspection. “ Before the ark disappeared for the last time
from the eyes of the people, the awful reverence which had kept any inquisitive
eyes from prying into the secrets of that sacred chest gave way before the united
feelings of necessity and of irresistible curiosity. The ancient lid formed by the
cherubs was to be removed; and a new one without them was to be substituted,
to fit it for its new abode, It was taken off, and in so doing the inte rior of +

ark was seen by Israelite eyes for the first time for more than four centuries,
perhaps the last time for ever” [Stanley]. 2. Its careful seclusion. Put into
“the place of its rest” (Ps, cxxxi. 8-14), in token that its wanderings were
over—that God had given rest to the Levites and privilege to minister in fixed
service ; a final pledge of God’s presence with his people in their new capital.
God present in religious assemblies, “ Lo, I am with you always,”


Toe Joy or FinisHep Work.


I. The accomplishment of a good work is the cause of joy.
The building of the first and second temple, the establishment of national
162


oHLP. ¥,] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





7
government and the acquisition of national liberty, the rearing of great monu-
ments and the opening of places of worship, &c. 1. Joy to the builder. Solomon
rejoiced that no accident delayed, that no provider.ce prevented the erection of
the temple. 2. Joy to the nation. The people rejoiced ; all classes represented,
and shared in the consecration. Sacrifice and cymbal ; king, princes, and people
united in praise to God, ‘‘ who keepeth covenant and mercy with them that love
him.” YI. The power to accomplish this work should be
ascribed to God. Not to the skill of the architect, the labour of the
builders, the wealth of the contributors, but to God. Genius to invent, material,
gold, and silver, to give all from him. We return simply what we receive. “ All
things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee.” III. Hence, in
every great undertaking we should ask for God’s direction.
In building ask for a site, materials, and workmen, for time to finish, and
privilege to consecrate. “ All the works of this pattern,” only from the Divine
Architect. If enterprises, social and national, succeed, wisdom from above must
guide. In building a family and a business, if the foundations be laid in
oppression (Hab. ii. 11, 12), and the materials be gathered and put together in
pride and forgetfulness of God, the erection may fall, and great may be the fall.
The best-laid project fails unless God crown it with success. “ Except the Lord
build the house, they labour in vain that build it,”


Toe TempLeE Cuorn.—Verses 12, 13.


A full choir on this occasion. Levites, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps,
their proper instruments; and priests with trumpets. I. Music a revelation
from God. Music of a certain kind in nature—“the notes of birds,” “the
music of the spheres,” &c. But sounds not music until reduced to scale; nota
hymn of praise until formed by the mind of man, taught by the help of God, to
awaken emotions, “ There is no fuller revelation of God in nature than is found
in these laws of sound, by which he comes into the very heart of man, even to its
inmost recesses of love and adoration ; and it requires only a sensitive, child-like
heart to interpret this speechless music locked within nature as the voice of God
pleading to be let out into music, and praise through the heart of man, for so
only can his works praise him” [Munger]. II. Music as a science to
cultivate. Materials and laws of music in nature must be reduced to
harmony, and made the vehicle of thought and feeling. Musicians described as
workmen, a guild of sacred minstrels who labour and study to perfect their art
(1 Chr. xxv. 1). 1. Some may lead. Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthem “set over
service of song.” Leaders required to train and conduct. 2. All may learn.
Voice given to cultivate. Members of the choir and the congregation may
practise singing. All should feel that sacred music pleads for better use and
nobler exercise. III. Music consecrated to its highest use in the
worship of God. The temple the great school of music, which was conse-
crated to worship of Jehovah, hence “songs of the temple” (Amos viii, 3).
Nothing calls for music like religion, It may be left out of other departments
~ of life, but religious worship would suffer without music. Where praise is
repressed for the sake of the sermon the service will become dull and un-

rofitable. Cease to sing, and men will forget to assemble, Music takes to
itself the noblest instruments, attunes and inspires the greatest composers, and
becomes the expression of the greatest reverence, adoration, and praise in the
house of God. The heart has lost its sadness, atheists have wept, and men been
brought to God under the influence of song. “ Both young men and maidens,
old men and children Jet them praise the name of the Lord.”


183


G@OMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES, {OHAP. *.








THe Croup Finuina tae Tempis.—Verses 11-14,


I. As a confirmation of acceptance, By this God approved of
Solomon’s work, honoured the ark and accepted the temple. Priests drew back
in holy dread. Sinful man cannot approach the glory of God, who is like a
consuming fire. But God condescends to meet him, to hear prayer and restore
to friendship. II. As a distinguishing feature of the Jewish
from other nations, Heathen nations had temples, but gods without
glory. No manifestation like that of Jehovah ever seen by them. This cloud a
striking testimony that God took the nation under His care and protection. The
glory, stability, and attractive force of any people is to have God with them.
“ For what nation is there so great who hath God so nigh unto them, as the
Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for?” III. As a symbol
of permanent habitation. After the dedication the visible sign with-
drawn, but God constantly dwelt in the temple. Only driven out when polluted
by manifold idolatry (Ezek. x. 4-18). His return in the Messiah greater than
in the magnificence of temple. IV. A consecrating element in all
sacred buildings. Not until the glory fills the Christian church, the
human heart, and the plans of life, will they become fit for God. “ Let this be a
lesson to all church builders. Your painted windows, and gilded columns, and
majestic roofs are nothing until the living Spirit comes into the sanctuary, fills
it with an illuminating presence. The house is built for God, and until God
comes it is but a structure of calculated matter; when he comes every stone
glows and every corner of the house becomes a sacred refuge, and the whole
temple becomes as it were a part of heaven” [Dr. Parker].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 3. Bring up the ark. Why


and commend to others (2 Tim. i. 13, _
this display and ceremony? 1. The


14).


ark the chief thing in the temple.
The temple without the ark like the
Church without a Bible, the universe
without a sun, 2. The ark in the
temple significant of God’s desire to
be reconciled to man, to dwell with his
people and not be separated from them.
3. The temple, therefore, nothing until
consecrated by the ark. The same with
aspects and departments of human life.
Men, places, and abilities nothing until
utilised for good. How many empty
places and unfulfilled plans and pro-
phecies of life!

Ver. 9. There tts. Things that
remain. 1. Sin and misery remain—
cannot be ignored or explained away.
2. Redemption in Christ remains—
may be enjoyed and offered to all,
3. Religious ordinances remain—the
Bible, the Sabbath, and privileges of
God’s house. There they are, lodged
with us, tokens of God’s favour and
presence committed unto us to enjoy

164


Vers. 12,13. Singers. 1. In beauti-
Jul attire. ‘‘ Arrayed in white linen”
—the symbol of purity, beauty, and
splendour. ‘White is everywhere,”
says one, “the livery and colour of
heaven.” 2. With various instruments.
Stringed and unstringed, all forms and
all ministries, may be employed in
God’s service. 3. With marvellous uni-
son, All the twenty-four choirs com-
bined into one grand choir, Singing
and playing arranged to form one
whole, “ to make one sound” in prais-
ing the Lord. Such strains fit type of
heaven and of the everlasting life of
glorified spirits. A life of melody, love,
and order in themselves. A life in har-
mony with each other and with God.
4. The theme of their song. The good-
ness and mercy of the Lord. “ He is
good, for his mercy endureth for ever.”
The song of the redeemed in heaven.

Ver. 13, The cloud. 1. A type of
Old Testament dispensation, Rites and


CHAP. VI. ]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


t





ceremonies, types and shadows. “ He
made darkness his secret place.” 2.
The present mode of viewing God. Can
only know and see God through a cloud
“darkly.” The clearest conceptions
dark; the greatest capacity limited.
None can find out God by searching.
“The symbol clearly implies a revela-
tion of divine glory, as it is seen, not


in the unveiled brightness of heaven,
but in the glorious cloud of mystery,
through which it must always be .zen
on earth, and which indeed is all vhat
the eye of man can bear to contemprate.
Out of that glory comes the only revuia-
tion which can be destined to ma. ~
the voice or word of the Lord (Deut. ic

12)” [Zldicott’s O. 7. Com.},


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER V.


Ver. 1. Finished. There are some
buildings that are never finished. We
never finish our life building; the life
temple goes up evermore. Let every
man take heed how he buildeth. Do
not suppose that you finish your edu-
cation. In the higher education you


only finish that you may begin; you -


close one book as a pledge of your
qualification to open another. There
is always a higher aspect of things to
apprehend and apply [Dr. Parker].
Vers. 12, 13. Singers and harps.
Theology and music unite and move
on, hand in hand, through time, and
will continue eternally to illustrate,


embellish, enforce, impress, and fix in
the attentive mind the grand and im-
portant truths of Christianity [Andrew
Law, “ Essay on Music”). Man did
not make the laws of music; he has
only found them out, and if he be
self-willed and break them, there is an
end of music instantly; all he brings
out is discord and ugly sounds [Chas.
Kingsley].


“ God is its author and not man; he laid
The key-note of all harmonies; he
plann’d
All perfect combinations; and he made
Us so that we could hear and under-
stand.”





CHAPTER WL


Carricaz. Notes.) Olose parallelism of this chapter and 1 Kings viil, 12-50; ver. 18
only important variation. ee. ;

Ver. 1 (cf. Lev. xvi. 1), darkness, not cloud, but of holy of holies, into which cloud entered.

Vers. 8-11.—Solomon’s address to people. Fuce, from looking towards the temple. Congre-
gation, men, women, and children, Blessed, offered blessings probably in form of
Num. vi. 23-25. Ver. 4. Spake (2 Sam. vii). Ver. 5. Chose until David’stime. Vers. 10,
11. The promise is fulfilled. :

Vers. 12-42.—Solomon’s prayer. Before, eastward of it, with face towards temple, as
speaking for the people. Ver. 13. Scaffold, brazen platform. neeled, in solemn posture.
The prayer sublime and orderly in airangements. Ver. 15, Preface; then three petitions.
First, perpetuate the line of David. Ver. 16. Keep good the promise. Second, regard the
house where name is put. Thy word (1 Chr. xvii, 9-12). Ver. 18. A conception of God's
condescension not limited to the temple. Wer. 19. Prayer, next verse, Ver. 21. Vhird
petition, Forgive in general, not limited sense,

We have now seven different cases in which Israel turns to the temple in prayer.
Ist case. A man wronged by his neighbour (vers. 22, 23). Oath of self-purgation usual
when no witnesses. Requitting, returning equivalent. Do justice to the innocent.
2nd case. When worsted by the enemy (vers. 24, 25). Worse in defensive war (Josh. vii. 5).
Defeated on account of sin. Hear when they repent, 8rd case, Suffering from drought
‘vers. 26,27). Rain, heavens like ® storehouse, may be shut up (1 Ki. viii. Ve when


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (cHar. vi


eee grrr


good way forsaken. 4th case. Visitation by death or any other calamity (vers. 28-31).
Seven kinds of affliction. Dearth, scarcity from other causes thanrain. Pestilence, which
often sweeps over Eastern lands, Blasting, various forms of danger in crops (Deut. xxviii.22).
Locusts (Deut. xxviii. 38). Enemies in gates, none therefore able to go in or come out.
Plagues, sore or sickness of every kind, recognised as Divine chastisement. 5th case. The
stranger coming to pray (vers. 32, 33). As thy people (ver. 33). Rights and privileges of
Israel thrown open to all. May know, godly fear in O.T. the foundation of piety; the
temple the only place where God is worshipped. 6th case. Aggressive war undertaken by
Divine permission (vers. 84, 35). Prayer for God to maintain their cause. 7th case. If
in captivity (vers. 36-39). If captives in war, on account of sin. Bethink, reflect, “ bring
back their heart” (marg.). Consider seriously exact words of Deut. xxx. 1-3, then hear
and forgive. Conclusion.— Vers. 40-42 wanting in Kings. Arise, words spoken probably
when ark was brought into Jerusalem (cf. Ps, oxxxii. 8-10). Resting-place, Holy of
Holies. Turn not, i.e., reject his prayer and cause him to be ashamed. Mercies towarda
David (Ps. lxxxix. 2).


HOMILETICS.
Toe TEMPLE THE Fixep Dwer.Liine-Puace or Gopv,.—Verses 1-10.


To reassure priests and people, Solomon reminded them that the cloud, instead
of being a sign of evil, was the fulfilment of promise. ‘The Lord hath said,”
if not in express words yet by continual course of action, “that he would dwell,
dc.” Hence a token of approval, a method of taking possession of the house,
and this prayer a petition that God would for ever keep possession. I. The
temple now a fixed residence for God. “A settled place for thee.”
1. In opposition to the tabernacle. Which was temporary and provisional. A
tent, a mutable and fragile dwelling ; but a house of stone and cedar, durable
and solid. 2. Aa required by the circumstances of God's people. The dispen-
sation made a fixed place needful. Man required locality, visible signs, and
special adaptations, Now not a question of place, but of being; not in Jerusalem
nor Mount Gerizim. God is spirtt and worshipped not by material representa-
tion, nor ritual, but by the heart, the spirit of man. Not hands, not wood and
stone, but living souls must become God’s abode. II. The temple as a
fixed residence built in fulfilment of God’s promise. “God
hath fulfuled that which he spake” (ver. 4). 1. 4 promise made to David.
Reference to 2 Sam, vii. 1l~14, where Is promised that David’s dynasty should
continue for ever, and David’s son should build a house. Thus the promise
established the royal house by its connection with the royal seed. “I will set
up thy seed after thee.” 2. A promise fulfilled in Solomon. ‘IT am risen up in
the room of my father” (ver. 20). Not in pride, as Ahasuerus made his feast
and Nebuchadnezzar built his cisy; but in a spirit of gratitude Solomon built
she temple and finished his father’s work. Traced the providence of God, and
urged the people to praise him. III. The design of this fixed
residence to perpetuate the presence of God. The temple a
permanent centre of worship to Jehovah. Neither city for worship, nor king to
govern chosen before David’s time. Now God has chosen a residence and
purposed to abide in it for ever. “ This is the hill which God desireth to dwell
in; yea, the Lord wall dwell in it for ever” (Ps. Ixxxviii. 16). Hence God
accessible, Zion secure and communion attractive and blessed. “God is known
in her palaces for a refuge” (literally a high place for shelter and defence
Ps. xlvi. 7-11; Prov. xviii. 10) (Ps. xlviii. 3). ;


THs PERFORM.NCE OF Gop’s Promise.—Verses 411.


God had made good one part of his promise, Solomon prays that he would


porn the other. Concludes, as he began, with thankful acknowledgment of


GHAP. vi.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


pro


Divine goodness in performance of promise. I. That God deals with hig
people in all ages by way of promise. With Adam, Abraham, and
David. Throughout the O. and N. T. dispensation, with individuals and nations
we have promise after promise. “Exceeding great and precious promises,” to
encourage and help. Here we have—l. Promise to build a house. 2. Promise
to raise upaking. II. That the performance of this promise is
a source of joy to God’s people. 1. Jn revealing God to them. God
never compelled to act; enters into engagements and covenants with perfect
freedom ; and never reluctant to bestow what is promised. Hence the goodness
and grace in giving the word, and the veracity, power, and providenee in its
fulfilment. God may be trusted, for “He cannot deny himself.” In this the
true God stands contrasted with the “lying vanities” of heathen deities and
weak, sinful man. “ He is not man that he should lie, &e.” 2. In the actual
bestowment of good to them. Providence on their behalf ; power exercised for
their deliverance, and actual fulfilment in their history and experience. The
covenant kept and mercy bestowed (ver. 14). “There failed not aught of any
good thing which the Lord had spoken unto the house of Israel; al! came to
pass.” IIT. That there are special seasons to testify to God's
goodness in the performance of his promise. “As it is this
day” (ver. 15). In conversion, restoration from sickness and danger; in
dedication of places of worship and in times of special favour, we may testify to
God’s mercy and truth. Numerous are the occasions in which we may
“abundantly utter (lit. bubble forth as from a fountain) the memory of his


great goodness and sing (lit. with loud eulogies) of his righteousness”
(Ps. exlv. 7).


Invocation oF Divine Favours.—Verses 11=24.


Solomon had dedicated the temple, now offered the consecration prayer to God.
He stretched forth his hands in the gesture of Oriental prayer, as if to receive the
blessings for which he sought, and at the same time exchanged the usual standing
posture of prayer for the extraordinary one of kneeling, now first mentioned in
the sacred history, and only used in Kastern worship at the present day in
moments of deep humiliation. The prayer itself is one of unprecedented length,
and is remarkable as combining the conception of the infinity of the Divine
Presence with the hope that the Divine mercies will be drawn down on the
nation by the concentration of the national devotions, and even of the devotion
of foreign nations, towards this fixed locality” [Stanley]. Learn—I. That
God is infinitely great. ‘Heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot
contain thee” (ver. 18). To be infinite is literally to be unbounded, unlimited.
‘This includes omnipresence and incomprehensibility. His immensity extends
infinitely beyond the boundaries of space. God fills heaven, earth, and hell. No
place, no temple contains him as a house is built for man. He was not confined
to the Jewish people, nor “ chiefly to the narrow bounds of the Jewish land,” as
some think ; not a mere “ God of the hills,” a patrial or Gentile Deity. His
settled abode is eternity, “‘inhabiteth eternity.” ‘*Do not I fill heaven and
earth? saith the Lord” (Jer. xxiii. 24). ‘ Where is the house that ye built
unto me? and where is the place of my rest?” II. That God is infinitely
faithful. “Kept that thou promisedst” (ver. 15). The truth of God makes
it impossible for hii not to fulfil whatever he hath spoken. He is “the faithful
God” (Deut. vii. 9). ‘ It is impossible for God to lie.” Performance of threatening
and promise not impracticable. God not liable to forget nor to change. We
may be persuaded that “ there shall not fail one good word of all that the Lord
eur God hath spoken.” III. That God is infinitely good. This attri-
bute may be termed the glory of God. Moses desired to see the gon of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. {cHAP. VL








Jehovah ; the answer was, “ I will make all my goodness pass before thee.” In
this narrative goodness is distinguished by different names, and exercised in
different ways. ‘Goodness is the genus that comprehends mercy, grace, long-
suffering, kindness, and truth in it ; these are branches from that as the root”
[Goodwin on Ex. xxxiii.19]. 1. In answering prayer. Heathen gods had eyes, but
could see not; ears, but could hear not. God is accessible, has not hid himself
from men, nor retired into the bosom of eternity. ‘O thou that hearest prayer,”
‘“‘ Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling-place.” 2. In dwelling with men. In the
hearts of those who love him, and walk before him in daily life. In the temple
with those who worship him in sincerity and truth. ‘“ Though the Lord be high,
yet hath he respect unto the lowly.” “I dwell in the high and holy place with
him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit.” 3. In the bestowment of mercy.
“And shewest mercy” (ver. 14). Mercy suggests misery (Latin miserta),
wretchedness. God relieves in distress, confers favours on undeserving, forbears
to punish, and bestows innumerable favours, ‘ Thou art good, and doest good.”


Tue Sotemn Question —Verse 18.


Will God dwell with man? The question of all ages, the dream, the desire of
humanity. Irrepressible anticipations in the deification of heroic men, the
incarnations of Hindoo gods, and in the Messianic hope of the Jews. I. Where
the answer P Not in ancient philosophy, even with its moral teachings and
intense longings. No God for the poor and illiterate, only for noble and learne}
if for any class. God was thought too great to regard man. Not in modern philo-
sophy. Ungodly science substitutes some abstract principle, “ Infinite Wisdom,”
“the Ruling Principle of the Universe,” or talks of “law” and “ omnipotent
power.” God is not a living personal God, accessible to man, and willing to
dwell with him. II. What saith the Scripture P Manifestations of
God in O.T. symbols in tabernacle and temple. Promises in abundance, not
merely to sojourn as a stranger, to tarry for a night (Jer. xiv. 8), but to settle in
fixed residence among men. ‘“ There shall be a place which the Lord God shall
choose to cause his name to dwell there” (Deut. xii. 11). ‘The hill which God
desireth to dwell in ; yea, the Lord will dwell in it for ever” (Ps. Ixviii. 16). “I
will dwell in the midst of them for ever” (Ezek. xliii. 9). God with men in
Christian worship; in the incarnation of Christ, “God manifest in the flesh ;” in
the human heart by his Holy Spirit; in heaven by special presence.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 6-8. Dvvid’s intention to build
tha temple. 1. Man’s purposes are
sometimes greater than his power.


III. The comfort which these con-
siderations are calculated to afford.
This theme is full of comfort to—1. The


Limitations of—1. Character. 2. Body.
3. Culture. 4, Circumstances—want of
means or liberty. 5. Destiny. 6. Life.
II. The importance and value of these
gracious but unfulfilled intentions.
Earnest purposes, sincere desires, are
facts, and as facts will be recompensed.
1. They are facts to God. 2. They
are facts to those who cherish them.
3. Unfulfilled intentions are not with-
out their practical influence upon society.
168


poor and uneducated. 2. The suffer-
ing. 3. Those who are called to pre-
mature death. 4. All good men in the
presence of their imperfect lives [W. L.
Watkinson}.

Ver. 10. In the room of my father.
1. A succession of men. Joshua after
Moses; Solomon after David, 2. A
succession of office. To some high
responsibility —priesthood, government


—by election, by hereditary descent.


GHAP. VL}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
i


___ OO eee


No mere form to fill the same place
and be surrounded by the very circum-
stances and associations which inspired
our predecessors. ‘“ He took up the
mantle of Elijah.” 3. A succession of
work. Work should be carried on and
finished, if possible, by those called to
it. Thus ideas, liberties, and institu-
tions are handed down from generation
to generation. Thus have we the true
continuity of the Christian church, the
true communion of saints, and the
true identity of man’s life with God’s
work,

Vers. 15,16. The stability and per-
petuity of the Davidic throne, the
sonship of the Davidic King, and the
consequent heirship of all nations (¢f.
2 Sam. vii. 13, 14).

Vers. 14,15. “Lord God of Israel.
This was a worthy precedent for princes,
who, if they would imitate Solomon in
devotion, might likewise share with him
in blessing. This is a long prayer
and full of affection to the end. So to
pray is hard and happy. It is a prece-
dental prayer, as one calleth it. Kept
with thy servant David. We may
pray to good purpose though in the
self-same words as before. Christ him-
self did so in his agony, when he prayed
most earnestly. Let this comfort those
who complain that they cannot vary
their petitions” [Zrapp]. Be verified,
v.17. He reiterateth and reinforceth
his former request; this evinceth his
holy importunity. This he learned of
his father (cf. Prov. iv. 4) [b7d.].

Ver. 18. Wl God, dc.? The great
contrast—1l. Between the heaven of
heavens and the material temple. 2.
Between the infinite grandeur of God


and the unworthiness of man (creature
and sinful creature). 3. The deep
humility which this contrast should
create in our approach to God.


“The more thy glories strike mine eye
The humbler I shall lie,” &o.


Vers. 18-21. The Sanctity of God's
House. 1. As the residence of a great
God. 2. Asthe house of prayer. 3.
As the place consecrated to worship.
God’s name there. The centre and core
of all fellowship,

Vers. 12—21. Solomon’s Prayer. 1.
Position from whence offered. Stood
on scaffold where he could be seen and
heard. 2. Solomon’s attitude. Reve-
rent, kneeled ; expectant, “ spread forth
his hands.” Looked up to heaven in
dependence; kneeled in humility.
“Kneeling never spoiled silk stockings ”
[Herbert]. 3. Its length. Longest
recorded in Scripture. 4. Its spirit.
Hopeful on the ground of fulfilled
promise; humble on account of un-
worthiness, 5. Its language. Beauti-
ful and scriptural, 6. Its purpose.
That God would fulfil the remainder
of his promise. That God would regard
and honour the temple, by watching
over its interests, dwelling in its courts,
answering prayers and pardoning sins.
“Hear thou to thy dwelléng-place im
heaven”—a pregnant expression for,
hear the prayer which ascends or is
sent to thy dwelling place, to heaven.
The last words, “hear and forgive,”
are to be left in their generality, and
not to be limited by any complement.
Forgiveness of sins alone can remove
the curse which transgression drawe


after it” [Kea].


HOMILETICS.


Justice ExecutEp.— Verses 22, 23.


The first specific case of petition is doubtful.
and charges a suspected person, though not able to prove the fact.


A man has sustained injury
Petition


that false oath may not be taken; but that the innocent may be discovered, and
the guilty punished. I, The injury charged. A “trespass against his
neighbour.” If goods or money to be kept be lost; cattle to have died, driven
away, or injured (Ex. xxii. 7-9); if any one over-reached another (Lev. v.


21-25), be suspected of theft, fraud, and wilful damage, be might be sued at


169


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [ouap. VE


i





law to make oath of integrity. II. The solemn appeal made. Punisn-
ment could only be made after discovery of guilty person. 1. An oath was
made by accused. Witnesses could not be found. Dispute or difference to be
settled by oath of accused. Hence party brought before the altar to swear in
all due solemnity. 2. God appealed to. “ Hear thou from heaven.” Many false
oaths might be taken and guilty escape, who then could justify the innocent?
God above sees all, hears all, and never errs. This appeal accords with our
instinct of justice and revelations of Scripture. ‘The works of his hands are
verity and judgment.”


NarionaL DisasteRn.— Verses 24, 25.


Woreted by enemy making inroads upon them, defeating them as predicted
(Lev. xxvi. 3-7; Deut. xxviii. 15-25). I. Sin is the cause of national
reverses. “ Because they have sinned against thee.” Forgetting, forsaking,
denying God, creating displeasure by neglecting his worship and becoming
idolatrous. II. Forsaking sin may ward off national reverses.
Judgments bring to penitence, and those that slight God often solicit his mercy.
“In their affliction they will seek me early.” 1. Wtth earnest prayer. “ Pray
and make supplication.” Afflictions remind of neglected duties, and kill corrup-
tions bred by prosperity. 2. With humble confession. “ And confess thy name.”
This opposed to forgetting, extenuating, or denying sins. They must be acknow-
ledged, not in cold, formal expression; but with deep, humble, and sincere
penitence. 3. With practical amendment. “Shall turn again to thee.” There
is utter renunciation, abandonment. The wicked man “forsakes his way.”
Then comes mercy, restoration, and new life. ‘“ He that covereth his sins shall
not prosper; but whoso confesseth them and forsaketh them shall have mercy.”


Perits To AGRICULTURE.— Verses 26-31.


Various plagues dangerous to growing crops. Grain blasted, cities besieged, and
sickness of every kind upon transgressors themselves. Hence we have—I. A
rebuke to rationalism in natural evils. Mildew and caterpillars,
with their terrible ravages, traceable by modern science to natural causes. But
who originated the causes, laws, or conditions? All meteorological phenomena,
all providential dispensations ascribed to God and under his control. This the
only adequate and satisfactory reply to the question, ‘Is there not a cause?”
The heavens are store-rooms to shut up or open at God’s pleasure. He com-
mands locusts to devour, and smites the land with pestilence (2 Cnr. vii. 13).
In all afflictive evonts God speaks to cities and nations. “The Lord’s voice
crieth unto the city, and the man of wisdom shall see thy name.” II, A
moral design in the infliction of natural evils. ‘When thou
hast taught them the good way.”  Sufferings to nations, as to individuals,
disciplinary, sent to humble, correct, and restore to God. 1. Zo requtte justice.
Retributions inevitable; nations corrupt and idolatrous canne+ escane. God
will not reverse his law. 2. To lead to God. “That they may fear thee.” God
must be acknowledged, to believe in whom is not superstition. The progress of
art and the applications of science must not thrust him out from events. God
smites to deliver, that we may pray to him, stand in awe of his justice, and
adore his goodness. III. A place for prayer in removing natural
evils. This denied by many. Prayer may be necessary for man’s highest
culture. “But no good can come of giving it a delusive value, by claiming for
it @ power in physical nature,” says Prof. Tyndall. We do not classify it with
powers in physical nature. It is not a naturaé but a moral power, and may
have ene over the will of One above nature, viz., “ Nature’s God.” God's

70


Guar. vi.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,





7
laws do not interfere with human will and human choice. The ordination of
God leaves room for prayer. Prayer may be one of the laws of the universe as
certain in its sphere as the laws of heat or of gravitation in their peculiar
realms. Neither history, scripture, nor experience forbid us to pray in times of
national distress, ‘ Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling-place, dc.”


“ More things are wrought by rayer
Than the world dreams of” { Jennyson}.


PraYER FOR THE STRaNGER.—Verses 32, $3.


Prayers in the temple to be answered in such a striking manner that
unbelievers were to see proof of Jehovah’s mercy. Probably many resident
foreigners amongst the Jews. The number would increase by the attractions of
Solomon’s reign. This prayer indicates growing liberality to those “‘ not of the
people of Israel.” I. The benevolence of O. T. spirit. This prayer
larger and more comprehensive than that for the Israelites, a proof of bene-
volent and public spirit. Kindness to strangers argued—1l. From Israe?s own
experience. Springing from humble origin ; delivered from a strange land and
great oppression, they were to love, pity, and relieve the stranger. Events in
their history which might lead to feelings of rancour and revenge, such as in
later periods brought upon them the stigma of being hostes humani generis, were
the very ground on which the Mosaic law taught them benevolence to the
wretched and defenceless of every nation. “The stranger that dwelleth with
thee shall be unto thee even as one born among you, and thou shalt love him as
thine own self. For ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. I am the Lord”
(Lev. xix. 33). 2. From the known character of Israels God. For special

urposes in the interests of humanity the covenant God of Israel. Yet no mere
ocal, national divinity. ‘“ The Lord your God is the God of gods and the Lord
of lords.” ‘ He loveth the stranger.” "very nation teaches hospitality and kind-
ness to strangers, not as a civil and social, but sacred duty. In a higher sense
than Zeus, God is “‘the stranger’s God.” Homer's touching language almost
the sentiment of scripture. ‘Love ye therefore the stranger: for the Lord
loveth the stranger.”

“ Love's special care
Are strangers poor and friendless.”


II, The catholicity of O. T. spirit. The spirit of the petition beyond
Jewish exclusiveness. Often said Jewish religion taught that benevolence should
be confined to the narrow circle of families, tribes, or the nation; while the
Gospel expands into wider fields and sets forth a brotherhood, a “religion of
humanity.” But, says one, “ Little as we may have heeded the fact, yet certain
it is, that expressions of the most expansive philanthropy echoed in the anthems
of the Jewish temple.” In the Pentateuch and in the Psalms the feelings often
overleap the ritual and challenge all nations to partake of Jewish privileges. A
striking contrast to exclusiveness of after times, when Samaritans were indignantly
excluded from sharing in the rebuilding of the temple (Kz. iv. 2, 3); and when
Jews persecuted Paul for speaking of his mission to the strangers for whom
Solomon prayed (Acts xxii. 22). III. The prophetic element of O. T.
spirit. Great anticipations expressed in the prayer. 1. When strangers
would be led to believe in God. They would hear of the marvellous deeds of
Jehovah for his people, be drawn to the temple, worship and join in the devotions
of the chosen people. “ When he shall come and pray toward this house.”
2. When strangers would enjoy equal rights with the Jews. In religious matters,
when all surrounding nations were exclusiva, Israel were commanded Nerina


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


[cHaP. VL


Spa ee


strangers to equal privileges, in the offerings of the tabernacle (Num. xv. 14-16);


and at the solemn reading of the law once in seven years (Deut. xxxi. 12).


In


the spirit of this law Solomon anticipates, if not predicts, the time when from
the remotest nations strangers shall come to pray and hope for acceptance before
God on equal conditions with His people, without becoming citizens of the


Jewish state, without submission to civil law or Mosaic ritual.
”” “Q thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all


as doth thy people Isr.
flesh come.”


“And fear thee,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 26. Heaven shut up. 1. All
things controlled by God. Atheism,
Pantheism, and Materialism, all philo-
sophy which sees nothing but law,
nothing distinct from and above matter,
reproved. 2. All things controlled by
God tm the interests of men. “ All
things work together,” work in har-
mony, and subserve the ends for which
they were made for the good of his
people. 3. These interests are secured
by prayer and submission to God. Not
by ‘science, education, or human
industry without God. A _ regular
system of agency connects results vith
the sovereign will of God. An un-
broken link between the natural and
moral world, between the condzict of
men and the conditions of nature. The
principle of mediation seen in all
departments of God’s government. “ I
will hear the heavens, and they shall
hear the earth; and the earth shall
hear the corn, and the wine, and the
oil, and they shall hear Jezreel.”

Vers. 26, 27. 1. The path forsaken.
“The good way.” Good in itself, end,
and consequences to travellers. 2. The
method of return to tt. Discovery of
wandering, confession of sin, and
return to God. “Confess thy name,
and turn from sin.” 3. The cause of
this return. ‘When thou dost afflict
them.” Some like metals, which
nothing but fierce fire can purify
(Mal. iii. 2,3). Severe corrections
reclaim. Manasseh (2 Chr. xxxiii.
12,13), Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. iv.
34-37). ‘ Before I was afflicted I
went astray, but now have I kept thy
word.” “The order of Solomon’s
prayer is very observable here. First
and eat he prays for their repent-

3


ance and forgiveness, which is the chief
blessing and the only foundation of all
other mercies, and then he prays for
temporal mercies, thereby teaching us
what to desire principally in our
prayers, which also Christ hath taught
us in his perfect prayer, wherein there
is but one petition for outward, and all
the rest are for spiritual blessings”
[Benson].

Vers. 29-31. Heart Disease. Special
instances not given. Grievances innu-
merable. ‘ Every man the plague of
his own heart” (1 Ki. viii. 38). 1. The
diagnosis of the disease. The heart the
seat of sin ; fountain from which issue
sinful thoughts, words, and actions;
“deceitful above all things,” restless
and dissatisfied. “ Who can know it ?”
Many acknowledge it; few really feel,
discover, and confess it. 2. The cure of
the diseass by the great Physician.
Incurable by man. “Canst thou
not minister to a mind diseased?”
When we enter the sanctuary, lament
and seek deliverance, the sore will be
healed. Bodily sufferings may be
endured, but remorse of conscience,
convictions of sin, wound of spirit, God
alone can remove. “ The spirit of man
will sustain his infirmity, but a
wounded spirit who can bear?” 1,
God’s omniscience discerns. ‘‘ Thou
only knowest the hearts of the children
of men.” 2. God’s justice rectifies,
“Render unto every man according
to his ways.” 3. God’s mercy en-
courages. “ Hear thou and forgive.”

Vers. 32, 33. The stranger. 1. The
attractive force of God's house. Not
beauty of architecture or furniture, not
members nor ritual, but God's presence
revealed to devout worshippers, 2. The


CHAP, v1. ]





wonderful provision made for those who
come. Prayer and praise, the reading
and exposition of Scripture. Every
ordinance helpful and needful. “I will
abundantly (surely) bless her _provi-
sion, and satisfy her poor with bread”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





*
spirtt in which we should return. What
we hear of God should be told to
others. His mighty deeds should be
proclaimed to all nations. “That all


people of the earth may know thy
name and fear thee.”


(Ps. cxxxii. 15). 3. The missionary


HOMILETICS.


Diving Commission mt War.—Verses 34—39.


Israel not permitted to war for self-gratification, unlawful or ambitious ends ;
only in just cause, and by divine warrant. “Thou shalt send them.” I. Israel
engaged in wars for God may be delivered into the power of
the enemy. Commission alone would not preserve from sin, might lead to
pride and self-reliance. Then foreign armies would enter the land, take them
captives, and lead them into countries far away. God may send us, but through
apostasy may withdraw and leave us to war alone. II. Earnest prayer
would restore them to liberty. Captivity would lead to reflection,
repentance, and prayer. 1. Prayer offered tn great distress. ‘ Carried captives,”
“in the land of their enemies,” &c. ‘Then they cried unto the Lord in their
trouble, and he saved them out of their distresses.” 2. Prayer offered in deep
reflection. “ Bethink themselves.” Consider their ways, and reflect on the cause
of their distress. Men thoughtless, and receive no correction from affliction.
“In the day of adversity consider.” 3. Prayer offered with humble confession.
“We have sinned, we have done amiss.” Confession should be full and free.
Forgiveness only promised upon confession. “I said I will confess my trans-
gressions unto the Lord, and Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.” 4. Prayer
offered with earnest spirit. “ With all their heart and all their soul.” With
understanding, affections, and will; without delay, with zealous and undivided
hearts. ‘‘ With my whole heart have I sought thee.” 5. Prayer offered in given
direction. “Toward the city chosen, and toward the house.” Thus originated
the favourite custom of ancient and modern Jews of turning towards Jerusalem
in devotions, Prayer should ever be upwards, direct to the presence of God.
Not to man, not without aim, but straight as an arrow to its centre. Not at
random, but with orderly words and definite purpose. “In the morning will 1
direct (set in order as wood upon the altar, and shew-bread upon the table) my
prayer unto thee, and will look up” (Ps. v. 3). Only by this kind of prayer
could they be delivered. Continuance in sin would increase their misery, pro-
long their captivity, and add to their griefs. By repenting and turning to God,
restoration and peace would follow. “I will turn away your captivity, and I
will gather you from all the nations, and from all the places whither I have
driven you, saith the Lord ; and I will bring you again into the place whence I
caused you to be carried away captive.”


Toe ARK AND THE Restinc-PLace.—Verses 40-42.


These words not found in Kings. There seems to be a return to the third
great petition in expressions borrowed from the Psalms, and from the ancient
song in the Wilderness (cf. Num. x. 35). I. The ark the symbol of
divine strength. The sign and pledge of power exerted on behalf of his
people; the symbol of his glory (¢f. Ps. lxxviii. 61); for when the ark waa
waken “the glory” was departed. God’s presence to awe, help, and Ng


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


eo nan


(cuar. VE





“ For the ark was not a dead ghost, but really showed that God was nigh to his
church” [Calvin]. God present now in his word—“ the rod of his strength”
out of Zion, the centre of government from whence the word to overcome
ignorance, prejudice, and opposition; to subdue rebels and win to Christ.
It. An earnest prayer to locate this divine strength. “Arise,
O Lord, into thy rest.” God desires an abode, a resting-place with men; should
not be absent, nor driven away. Power everywhere displayed ; but power of
divine truth concentrated in God’s house and in spiritual worship. Here should
be “the resting-place,” the fixed, permanent habitation of God. In the
Christian Church and in human hearts the power of God should be felt and
displayed. For this we should pray. Without God the ark even of no avail
“Thou and theark.” III. When this divine strength is exhibited
in localities great blessings result. Miraculous deeds and brilliant
victories distinguished the Jews when God was with them ; so now revivals and
abundant signs of divine presence. “ The name of the city from that day shall
be, the Lord is there.” 1. In the fuli equipment of ministers, “ Priests,” all
officials “ clothed with salvation.” Not merely adorned with outward garments
of sacerdotal beauty, but with spiritual gifts, righteous character and life,
acceptable in persons and services before God and the people. 2. Jn the exultant
joy of saints. “ Let thy saints rejoice in goodness.” Joy pure and holy, spring-
ing from God’s presence and successful work. Not that trivial, fleeting, super-
ficial thing which often bears the name; runs out in noise like the crackling of
thorns. But serious, solid feeling which fills the soul as God fills the universe ;
satisfactory, inspiriting, and exultant. ‘And her saints shall shout aloud for
joy.”

Tse Mercies oF Davip.—Verse 42.


4, Remembrance most sacred. “Once have I sworn by my holiness
that I will not lie unto David” (Ps. lxxxix. 35). God is holy, infinitely above
falsehood and deceit. ‘To break his promise would profane his essential attribute,
‘He demands, on the part of his people, truth and fidelity towards himself,
only on the ground of his own truth and fidelity towards them” [ Hengstenberg].
II. Remembrance most unalterable. The unfaithfulness of man
cannot alter the faithfulness of God. ‘My covenant will I not break, nor
alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.” ‘The sure mercies of David.”
IiI. Remembrance most powerful. For David’s sake God raised up
Solomon and spared the: gs of Judah. For the sake of David’s greater Son
and seed he will bless the world. Blessings shall abound on earth, the influence
of his covenant shall last to the end of time. “ His seed shall endure for ever,
and his throne as the sun before me.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 36-39. Sin.


1. A description 1.
of human nature. ‘No man which


Conditions of its enjoyment. 2
Cause of its loss. 3. Method of its


sinneth not.” 2. A moral difficulty
between God and man. ‘ ‘Thou be
angry with them.” 3. A cause of great
trouble in man’s experience. 4. A
bitter experience in man’s history.
Sin in the universality of its exist-
ence, in the moral consciousness of
men, in its prejudicial influence to
sorry interests. Pray toward the land.
474


restoration. Hear and forgive. 1. For-
giveness the great need of man. No
happiness and rest, no heaven and
fellowship with God without. 2. For-
giveness the prerogative of God alone.
Nature, conscience, and law know
nothing of forgiveness. 3. Forgiveness
bestowed through prayer and confession


of sin, This answers God's character


HAP. VI}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


saa ae ca aac remoteness eoeeesemener eee ————EEE————————EEE


and man’s need, upholds moral order,
and argues infinite risk in refusing to
seek it in Christ. “In whom we have
redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of sins.”

Ver. 39. Maintain their cause, The
rights, interests, and cause of God's
people at stake. Require defending,
clearing up, and preserving. 2. This
only done by God's help. Human swords
and hands grow weak and get broken,
Standard-bearers faint and die. Im-
possible for holiest and mightiest to
equal God’s “mighty hand and stretched
out arm.” With me,” said Luther,


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 7, 8. Wishing and willing. To
wish and to will are very different
things. There are a thousand men
who wish, where there is one man that
wills, Wishing is but a faint state of
desire. Willing is a state of the reason,
and of the affections, and of the will in
activity, tosecure what one desires, A
man may wish and yet reject all the
steps and instruments by which that
wish can be carried into effect. No
man wills until he has not only made
up his mind to have the end, but to
have all the steps intermediately by
which that end is to be secured
[Beecher].

Vers. 19, 20. The greatness of God.
Will he indeed, whom the heaven of
heavens cannot contain, take up his
abode with men? What heart among
us but glows with gratitude and love
at these joyful tidings! Let us, at the
bead of our several families in a trans-
port of devout affection, welcome this
kind and generous Guest into our
houses. Let us give him the entertain-
ment he demands, even that of a
cordial love and obedience, Let us
present him the sacrifices he requires,
even those of daily prayer and praise.
And let us tremble at the thought of
so demeaning ourselves in the habita-
tions he has thus honoured, as ever


7


“moral effort is an alternation of rising
and sinking, of advancing and retreat-
ing.” 3. This help must be enlisted by
prayer. “Hear and maintain.” Prayer
and contest combined. The bravest
commanders men of prayer. Prayer a
means of divine fellowship and training,
imparts strength, courage, and victory
in conflict.


“In all thou dost, first let thy prayera
ascend,


And to the gods thy labours first com-
mend;


From them implore success, and hope @
prosperous end” [W. Fleming}


TO CHAPTER VI.


to provoke him to depart thence [S.
Stennett].

-Solomon’s Prayer. He prayed for
wisdom at the outset, and he has
verified the answer to prayer by the
wonderful structure he put up. But
the blessing did not end in architectural
skill; that great proof of the blessing
given to Solomon is to be found in the
prayer which he prayed at the dedica-
tion of the temple. No man could
have prayed that prayer without help.
This we should have said about it in all
honesty if we had found it in Sanscrit;
if we had exhumed it out of Indian
libraries, it would have been due to the
author to have said, “You never
dreamed that dream ; it was a vision of
God.” Read the prayer from begin-
ning to end, and say if this be not so,
How majestic in conception! how
beauteously eloquent in expression |
how wise, how iender, how patriotic,
how philanthropic! How it grows and
swells, and abounds in all elements of
spiritual sympathy! Probably there
is no such prayer in all literary records.
If ever that prayer be excelled it will
be by the Son of God alone, and his
excelling of it will be by contrast
rather than by comparison | Dr,
Parker}.


LYS


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cHAr. Va,


OHAPTER VIL.


Crirtoat Norzs.) This chapter, parallel with 1 Kings viii. 62; ix. 9, records acceptanes
of consecrated temple by fire (vers. 1-10); and answer given by the Lord to Solomon
(vers. 11-22),

Vers. 1-10.—Acceptance of temple by fire. This not mentioned in Kings, which creates
difficulty. ‘What it is important to bear in mind is—1l, That omissions are not contra.
dictions ; and 2. That they occur constantly in all historical writers, and are frequently
quite unaccountable” [Speak. Com.]. Fire as in tabernacle (Lev. ix. 24); glory, chapter
v. 18,14. Ver. 8. Bowed in adoration and reverence. Ver. 4, All people did not offer,
but gave them to be offered on altar. Sacrifices enormous and difficult to realise.
Ver. 6. Waited in their stations to receive, kill sacrifices, &o. Instruments, cymbals,
harps, and psalteries (1 Chr. xv. 16; compare chap. v. 12). Ver. 7. Middle court on
account of blood of sacrifices and burning of fat. Ver. 8. Feast, not feast of dedication
only, but feast of tabernacles also (Lev. xxiii, 34). Hamath to river Sihor, which
separated Egypt from Palestine. ‘ The territory of Israel, according to its whole extent
from north to south” (2 Chr. vii. 8) oe Ver. 9. Solemn assembly closed the festiva!
Kept dedication seven days and feast of tabernacle next seven days (1 Ki. viii. 65)
Festival closed on 22nd of the month, on 23rd people sent home rejoicing.

Vers. 11-22.—God’s answer to Solomon’s prayer. ‘The narrative now runs parallel with
1 Ki. ix. 1-9, but is fuller and presents less of verbal agreement. Vers. 13-15 are additiona}
to the earlier record” [Speak. Com.]. King’s house, i.e., his own palace (cf. 1 Ki, vii. 1-12).
Vers. 12-22. Explicit answer to Solomon. Appeared as at Gibeon (1 Ki. iii. 5; ix. 2),
Ver. 13. If, &c., answer to third petition (vi. 26). Ver. 14 recalls chief points iu
Solomon’s prayer. Ver. 15. Attent, promise accords with very words of petition
(cf. vi. 40). Prayer of this place (marg.) “‘ chosen to include the two cases of prayers
offered in (vi. 24) and towards (vi. 34-88) the sanctuary” [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 16.
Sanctified. ‘Here additions to 1 Ki, ix., end and remainder of chapter adds nothing to
the earlier record.” Ver. 17, Walk refers to first petition; conditions which Solomon
failed to meet. Ver. 19. The other alternative put before Solomon. Ver. 21. This house
high, conspicuous in glory. Astonishment in ruin. Ver. 22. All this the fearful con-
gequenees of apostasy (¢f. Ezekiel’s wailing over the city and temple, xiv. 23; xxxvi. 17-20).


HOMILETICS.
Tae Fira aNnD THE GLory.—Verses 1-3.


Two elements prominent in O. T. symbolism which made the dedication
solemn, impressive, and real. I. As confirmation of acceptance.
Sacrifice accompanied every act of worship. Miraculous fire a sign of acceptance,
as Moses (Lev. ix. 24), Gideon (Judg. vi. 21), David (1 Chron, xxi. 26), Elijah
(1 Ki, xviii. 38). Generally to accept burnt sacrifice in Hebrew was to turn to
ashes. ‘ Remember all thy offerings, and accept (turn to ashes or make fat) thy
burnt sacrifice” (Ps. xx. 3). The surest evidence of acceptance in prayer is the
descent of the holy fire upon us. This fills the heart with reverence and awe,
as the glory filled the temple. This leads te humble submission to divine
authority, and a true sense of unworthiness. “They bowed themselves,” with
profound reverence and humility. II. As symbols of spiritual truths.
The jire indicative of God’s nature, “Our God is a consuming fire,” terrible in
Zion, before whom sinners have reason to fear. But God consumed the sacrifices,
not the offerers; turned away his anger, and showed mercy in their acceptance,
esti great sacrifice for sin, through whom Holy Spirit given to apply the


CHAP, VII.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


i a





word, consume sin, and convert the soul. The glory fills earthly temples, when
his presence dwells in the sanctuary, and the heart is made a living temple—
when Israelites rise from their prostrate attitude, regain their confidence, and
offer themselves as sacrifices upon the altar of God—when hearts are tuned, and
songs abound to God. “ For he is good, and his mercy endureth for ever.”


Tae Depicatep TemPutr.—Verses 1-10,


Dean Milman’s description most truthful and graphic (“ History of the Jews,”
vol. i., pp. 315-318). Here two glances at the scene, showing its outward
deur and inward importance. I. The eternal grandeur of the
event. The vast assembly, “all Israel” present. The enormous sacrifices, on
a scale suitable to the extraordinary occasion, requiring the open court, in which
the assembly only could take part. The preparation and offering of burnt
offerings and peace offerings in festive joy. All—king, priests, and people—
performing their part. The fall of the sacred fire, and the dazzling glory. of the
cloud resting on and then entering into the courts. The music and the oft-
recurring chorus (Ps. exxxvi.). The awe-struck priests and the nation on their
knees would be an impressive sight. But notice—II. The moral signifi-
eance of the event. This ceremonial was not commanded by the law, but
the expression of devout sentiment and reverence in the people. The symbolic
presence led the innumerable multitudes to prostrate themselves on the ground,
the instinctive and natural expression of loving reverence. The prostrate person
and the bended knee tokens of humility, unreserved surrender, and dutiful
obedience. ‘O come, let us worship and bow down. Let us kneel before the
Lord our Maker.” The consuming fire fills with dread. “ Who among us shall
dwell with the devouring fire?” Judgments alarm, glory without mercy leads
to despair, but God accepts the sacrifice, and spares the offerer. “ Which was
the greater, the external magnificence or the moral sublimity of the scene?”
asks Milman. ‘ Was it the temple situated on its commanding eminence, with
all its courts, the dazzling splendour of its materials, the innumerable multitudes,
the priests in their gorgeous attire, the king with all the insignia of royalty on
his throne of burnished brass, the music, the radiant cloud filling the temple,
the sudden fire flashing upon the altar, the whole nation upon their knees?
Was it not rather the religious grandeur of the hymns and of the prayer; the
exalted and rational views of the Divine Nature; the union of a whole people in
the adoration of the one Great. Incomprehensible, Almighty, Everlasting
Creator #”


Soromon’s Sacririces.—Versee 4-7,


I. Sacrifice in its symbolic meaning. Refined nations of modern
times esteem animal sacrifices a cruel and uncultured mode of expressing
religious sentiments. But remembering the genius, habits. and moral instincts
of ancient nations, and the special circumstances of the Jewish people,'we see
cheir fitness and propriety. Use of letters unknown, signs and symbols needful
and beneficial. God instructs, helps, and encourages in this rite. Its value,
therefore, partly actual, and partly typical, but in all respects derived from the
one true sacrifice typified. II. Sacrifice a form of true religion.
Opposed to heathen will-worship in place, method, and in the invention of
costly and monstrous offerings. Amn evidence of obedience to God ; a symbol of
self-dedication, and an expression of thanksgiving. Some form of sacrifice always
required in religion. He who offers nothing accounted irreligious (Hce. ix. 2, of.
(a xliii. 23). We must not forget the higher affections of the heart oe over:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES, (CHaP. Vis


valuing the symbol, and turn our offerings into an opus operatum. “For |
desired mercy, and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more than burnt
offerings.” III. Sacrifice a method of national festivity. Festivals
held in all ancient nations. Sacrificial meals common and under special direction
in Israel. Sometimes in private houses, other times in the temjle. Held
weekly, monthly, and yearly. These methods not orly commemorations of great
national events, but occasions for reunion of friends, enjoyment of hospitality
and interchange of sentiment. Families would be filled with joy. Strangers
fatherless and widows received with religious warmth, The nation bound in
unity, commerce, and brotherhood.


Nationa, Resoicine.— Verses 8-11.


The time of dedication immediately before the feast of tabernacles. The
festival prolonged, and afforded opportunity for large number of peace offerings,
which were the means of national enjoyment. I. Joy in its purest
sources. 1. In Dwine works. “Solomon finished the house.” Joy from
contemplation of the order, beauty, splendour, and completion of temple. Its
vast extent, manifold adaptations, practical use, and symbolic teaching. “I will
triamph in the works of Thy hands.” 2. In the Divine presence. Infinite and
supreme, yet will dwell with man! In the vision and service of God we find the
bliss of heaven. ‘‘ We joy in God.” 3. In acceptance in the Divine presence.
God with man, not to judge, condemn, and destroy. ‘‘ We shall surely die,
because we have seen God,” was the impression of Manoah. <A popular. belief
that the revelation of God’s terrible majesty would cause death, not joy. But
the acceptance of the offerings a pledge of gracious disposition (Judges xiii. 23).
The cloud and the fire at dedication of temple tokens of condescension and
mercy. II. Joy in its vast extent. 1. Jn all classes. Universal joy.
King, priests, and people partook of it. ‘ All Israel with him, a very great con-
gregation” (ver. 8). 2. In all places. In the palace of the king, and the tents
of the people. In the temple of Jehovah, and the homes of the land, “ from the
entering in of Hamath unto the river of Egypt,” the usual and knowm bounds,
the utmost length of the land. “ He sent the people away into their tents, glad
and merry in heart,” thanking God for his goodness to David, to Solomon, a
wise and religious son, and “to Israel his people.” In this spirit we should go
home from God’s house ; rejoice in the grace, advancement, and enthronement of
the Redeemer, and in the sanctification and spiritual welfare of all believers


Gop’s ANswERs to SoLomon’s Prayver.—Verses 12-22.


Acceptance of prayer seen in fire from heaven, and second appearance by
aight. I. Answers to special prayers. Solomon not aimless and
indefinite, but specific. To prayer suggested by Holy Spirit, and offered
according to God’s will, answers are definite and explicit. Vers, 12-15 contain
answer to third petition, ver. 16 to second, and vers. 17-22 to first.
II. Answers exceeding the prayer itself. Solomon desired that
God’s eyes might be directed to the temple continually (ch. viii. 29), The answer
is, ‘“ Not mine eyes only, but mine eyes and mine heurt.” Not only to Solomon’s,
but to prayer made toward that place in future from any person; not to the
thoughts merely, but in the very words of the petitioner. We are straitened
in ourselves, not in God, “who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all
that we ask or think.” III. Answers conditioaally promised.
Suspended on conduct, This a test of faith, a motive to obedience, and a rule of

178


CHAP. VII.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


i


discipline. “If ye walk in my statutes. . . then I will give you, &c. But


if ye will not hearken unto me . . « I will set my face against you”
‘Lev. xxvi. 1—20).


So.emn Warntines.—Verses 19--22.


“The record of this second vision, in which were rehearsed the conditions of
God’s covenant with Solomon, and the consequences of breaking them, is
inserted as a proper introduction to the narrative about to be given
of the king’s commercial enterprises, and ambitious desire for worldly glory.
For this king, by encouraging an influx of foreign people, and a taste for foreign
luxuries, rapidly corrupted his own mind and those of his subjects, that they
turned from following God, they and their children” [Jamieson]. I. God’s
goodness in warning before punishment. God not revengeful and
unjust. Judgment strange to Him. He gives space for repentance, opportunity
to avoid danger; thus declares reluctance to punish, and goodness to warn.
Longsuffering of God signally displayed. “ Because sentence is not executed
speedily,” men should not resolve on sinful courses, and run to ruin. II. Dis-
obedience to warning exposes to punishment. Sentence is gone
forth, judgment only suspended, and seems to loiter, hence the sinner thinks
there is chance of escape. “I shall have peace, though I walk in the way of my
own heart.” But warnings unheeded, calls neglected, hasten the stroke, and
render the judgments heavier. Abuse of mercy only ripens for judgment, “He
that, being often reproved, hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and
that without remedy.” III. Punishment which follows abused
warning is merited and most severe. A limit to discipline and
patience. The time ends and the day of retribution comes. Ruin often sudden
and without remedy. 1. The temple cursed. The house conspicuous for its
sanctity, glory and usefulness, would become a desolation, a byword, and
disgrace. 2. The nition ewrsed, “ Plucked up,” carried away,and exposed to
mockery, insult, and despair in a foreign land. The temple of God no protection
to those who forsake him. Their sins will be read in the judgments they suffer.
Seek to bea monument of grace, not of judgment.


“ Heaven vives the needful but neglected call.
What day, what hour, but knocks at human hearts,
To wake the soul to a sense of furure scenes” { Young).


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1 and 15,16. The Consecrated
House. Solomon builder, God con-
secrated, sanctified it. 1. By the
symbolic cloud and sacred fire. 2. By
his special care. “My eyes shall be
open, we.” (v. 15). 3. By his constant
affection. “ Mine heart shall be there
perpetually.”

Ver. 11. The sum, the greatness, and
the completion of Solomon’s works—
sacred, voluntary, and successful works.
“The house of the Lord was seven
years in building. But the court, the


structed probably after the building
was finished. The builders who were
released from the work of the Lord’s
house were free to betake themselves
to the erection of the royal palace and
other public buildings. At the end of
thirteen years(1 Kings vii.1) the temple
finishings and requisites were all com-
pleted, and everything was ready for
the consecration ” [Murphy].


“In the early days of art,
Builders wrought with greatest care,


pillars, and all the external and
internal fittings began to be cam-


ach iuinute and unseen part;
For the gods cee everywhere,


HOMISETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,








%® Let us do our work as well,
Both the unseen and the seen;
Make the house, where God may dwell,
Beautiful, entire, and clean”


[Longfetlow}


Ver. 12. An house of sacrifice. 1.
In contrast with the synagogue, in
which no sacrifice. 2. Descriptive of
worship of O. T. with its symbolic rites,
social feasts, and moral teaching.
“This expression does not elsewhere
occur. Its meaning, however, is clear,
God declares that Solomon’s temple is
the place which he had promised to
‘choose’ from among the tribes of
Israel, whereto all Israelites were
commanded to bring their burnt offer-
ings and sacrifices ” (see Deut. xii. 5, 6)
[ Speak. Com.]. The Lord appeared.
his vision presents a remarkable con-
trast with that recorded (1 Kings vi.
11-13) while the temple was in build-
ing. Then all was promise and
encouragement; now, not only is
warning mingled with promise, but as
in Solomon’s own prayer, the sadder
alternative seems in prophetic anticipa-
tion to overpower the brighter. In
this there is (as often remarked) a
striking exemplification of the austere
ard lofty candour of the inspired
narrative, sternly contradicting that
natural hopefulness in the hour of
unexampled prosperity, which would
have shrunk from even entertaining
the idea that the blessing of God on
the temple should be frustrated, and the
glory of Israel pass away [ Zilicott, O. 7.


Com.].
Vers, 15, 16. Biblical Anthropo-
morphism. Wumanorgans. The eyes


and ears of God. ‘This language is
used for two purposes. I. To express
His cognisance of man. He knows us,
1. Directly. 2. Thoroughly. II. To
express His interest in man. 1. In
the various capacities of enjoyment
with which He has endowed us, and
the provision He made for them. 9.
In the preservation of our existence,
notwithstanding our sinfulness. 3.
In our redemption by Christ Jesus.
Conclusion: Thou God seest me, we
unite with the blessed fact, “ Thou
God lovest me” [ Bib, Mus]. My name
180


[GHAP. VEL.





there for ever. God's gifts are “ with-
out repentance.” When he puts his
name in the temple he does it, in
intention, for ever. He will not
arbitrarily withdraw it after so many
years, or so many centuries. Once
placed there, it will remain there for
ever, so far as God is concerned. But
the people may by unfaithfulness drive
it away [Speak. Com.].

Vers. 19, 20. Turn away. 1.
Possibility of wrong course. “If ye
turn away.” 2, Rapid progress when
this course is adopted. “ Forsake my
statutes,” easily understood and profit-
able to them, “set before you.”
Wholly forsake God for idols, then—
3. Fearful consequences. Entire de-
flection would cut Israel off from the
land, “This whole passage stands out
in bold relief, when illuminated by the
light of history ” [ Murphy].

Ver. 20. Plucked up. 1. The soil
in which they were planted, chosen
and prepared by the Great Husband-
man. 2. The source of their growth and
fruit. “ From me is thy fruit found.”
3. The danger to which they were
exposed. “ Plucked up.” No growth
independent of God. Plants require
rain, light, and warmth. We can only
live as we live and are rooted in God,
“‘ There would be men who are twice
dead, plucked up by the roots, and the
roots are only fit for burning. We do
not know what God’s burning means.
Let us take care how we exclude the
penal element from our theology and
from our contemplation of the future ”
[Dr. Parker]. Learn—l. The evil of
apostasy. 2. The reality of God’s
government. 3. The terrible effects
of Divine displeasure,

Ver. 22. Why thus? A Problem.
1. The actual fact in history, that the
Jews, the anciently favoured people of
God, found to this day a byword and
a proverb, 2. The question is, why
hath the Lord done this? Has God
changed his purpose, or been unfaithful
to his word? The problem solved by
the conduct of the people who for-
sook God and rejected the Saviour.
“ It is notable, that in its reference te
the two parts of the promise of David


CHAP. VII. |





there is a subtle and instructive dis-
tinction. As for the temple now just
built in fulfilment of that promise, it
is declared without reserve that in
the case of unfaithfulness in Israel, it
shall be utterly destroyed, and become
an astonishment and a proverb of
reproach before the world. But, in
respect of the promise of the perpetuity
of David’s kingdom, the true Messianic
prediction, which struck the key-note of
all future prophecies, it is only said
that Israel shall be ‘cut off from the
land,’ and so ‘become a proverb and
a byword’ in captivity. Nothing is
aaid to contradict the original declara-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


Ka hal he





tion that even in case of sin the mercy
of God would chastise and not forsake
the house of David (2 Sam. vii. 13, 14 ;
Ps, Ixxix. 30-37). Soagain and again
in prophecy captivity is denounced as
a penalty of Israel’s sin, but the hope
of restoration is always held out, and
thus the belief in God’s unchanging
promise remains unshaken. The true
idea is strikingly illustrated by the
prophet Amos (ix. 9-11): I will sift
the house of Israel among all nations.
- - . Yetshall not the least grain
fall upon the earth, . . . I will
raise up the tabernacle of David that
is fallen, &c.” [Elicott, O. T. Com.].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER Vil.


Vers. 4, 5. Sacrifices. Profusion the
usual feature of ancient sacrifices:
300 oxen formed a common sacrifice at
Athens. But all sacrifices offered by
micn to God are inadequate. ‘ Leba-
aon is not sufficient to burn, nor the
beasts thereof sufficient for a burnt
offering.” “ Jehovah being so much
greater than man, how can any sacri-
ficial rites be worthy of Him?”
iCheyne.| ‘‘ What real propitiation
could be effected, though the whole
cegion of Lebanon were made an altar,
rts pines and cedars piled up on it for
dring, and its thousands of beasts
offered as victims? Very different was
she offering which was to procure man’s
redemption” [Kay]. That offering
which alone avails before God is the
sacrifice of Jesus Christ, a sacrifice of
infinite value because He is God. All
oar offerings, our acts of worship, our
self-denial, our good deeds cannot in
memselves avail with God. But they
are accepted when offered upon “the
aitar which sanctifieth the gift,” the
altar of Christ’s merits.

Vers. 8-10. Feasts. All bodily
appetites should be attended to for
purposes of relief, not gratification.
The very moment we seek gratification
in any organ or appetite of the body,


we degrade our nature, and dishonour
our Creator. Our happiness is not in
the body, but in the soul; not without,
but within; and ought never to be
sought for as an end, it comes only in
self-consecration to duty and to God
[Dr. Thomas]. If I see a dish to
please my appetite I see a serpent in
that apple, and will please myself in a
wilful denial [Bishop Hall].

Ver. 12. Heard thy prayer. If I
cared for nothing I would pray for
nothing [Melancthon].

< pus work which is begun well is half-
one;

And without prayer no work is well

begun” [Fanshawe].

Vers. 17-21. Turn away. Those
who forsake God to return to the
world, do it because they find more
gratification in earthly pleasures than
in those arising from communion with
God; and because this overpowering
charm, carrying them away, causes
them to relinquish their first chvice,
and renders them, as Tertullian says, the
penitents of the devil [Blaise Pascal]
“God never leaves any till they first
leave Him.”

Vers. 21,22. Why? Nothing but
grace can teach us to make a right use


of others’ judgments [Bishop Hall}.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [omar. vit








OHAPTER VIIL


Carrrcan Norzs.] Solomon's buildings (vers. 1-6) ; the tributaries (vers. 7-11) ; the festival
vorship (vers. 12-16); and the fleet ot Solomon (vers. 17, 18) (1 Ki. ix. 10-28).

Solomon’s buildings.—Vers. 1-6. Twenty years (cf. 1 Ki. vi. 88; vii. 1; ix.10). Cities north-
west of Galilee, the occupation of which was granted to Huram, who seems, after
consideration, to have refused them as unsuitable to the commercial habits of his people
and returned them to Solomon, who built (Heb. repaired) and filled them with a colony of
Hebrews. Ham., a territory bordering on Zobah, identified in Jewish tradition with
Helbon (Aleppo). Zadmor, the famous Palmyra (palm-city), which became capital of a
province (sent 80,000 men to join the Assyrian army), the splendid ruins of which remain
to this day (a wall 11 miles in circumference). Store cities for provisions, situated on
great trede roads to relieve travellers and beasts of burden. Ver. 5. beth-horons, two
cities in Ephraim, very ancient (Josh. xvi. 8-5; 1 Ki. ix. 27; 1 Chr. vii. 24). Ver. 6.
Baal. belonged to Dan (1 Ki. ix. 18, 19).

Solomon’s tributaries.—Vers. 7-10. Left, descendants of Canaanites in the country
treated as war-prisoners, employed in vast building operations, and had to pay tribute.
Ver. 9. Sons of Israelites not serfs, but soldiers and officers. Wer. 10. Chiefs of Israelites
only given, 250 in number. ‘Ver, 11. Daughter, writer assumes points of narrative in
1 Ki. iii. 1 and 7, 8, and further assigns motive for change of residence. Holy, sanctified
by Peer uce of the ark, and as she was an idolator, therefore could not permanently dwell
in the city.

Solomon’s requlations of worship.—Vers. 12-16. An expansion and amplification of
1 Ki ix. 23. They add several important particulars. Nodeparture from the ordinances
established by Divine authority by Moses or David in offering of sacrifices—arrangements
of priests and Levites (1 Chr. xxiv. 26)—and in provision and management of all sacred
things. Ver. 16. This verse sums up in brief the whole previous narrative on the
subject of the temple, which began with ch. ii. Solomon’s work ‘unto the day of
foundation ” was the subject of that chapter; his work subsequently has been related in
chapters iii.-vili. [Speak, Com.],

Solomon's ficet end yold.—Vers. 17,18. Eloth (lath) CEland of Greeks, north-east of
the Gulfof Akaba. “ The writer of Kings tells us that the fleet of Solomon was built
at Ezion-geber (the giant’s backbone, Num. xxxiii. 35, 36), ‘‘ which is beside Eloth ” (1 Ki.
ix. 26): and Ebon-geber alone is mentioned as the place where Jehoshaphat built his
ships (2 Chr. xx. 36). Solomon, it appears by the present passage, visited both porta
before determining at which he should establish his docks eee Com.}. Ver. 18.
Solomon made his navy by receiving ships as models, materials for building, carpenters,
and ssamen from Huram, who probubly bad ships lying in the ports of the Red Sea.
His own servants went with the Phoenicians on the voyage. Ophir, son of Jokton
(Gen. x. 29) gave name to the land of Ophir, which was at least originally in the south
of Arabia, though some look for it in India or Ceylon. The 450 talents of gold (in Kings,
420) may have been the result of many voyages to this land [Murphy].


HOMILETICS.


Soromor’s Mimirary Enrerprises.—Verses 1-6.


Chiefly in acquiring cities rebuilt and taken from the enemy. Solomon net
satisfied to build God’s house, ambitious to gain cities and enlarge his kingdom.
Lawful ambition desirable—all interested in the welfare of the Christian Church
will scheme for the good of the country. I. Cities for stores (¢/.
1 Ki. ix. 19). Centres, ¢.e., cities in which provisions for beasts, travellers, and
troops (2 Chr. xxxii, 28), Chiefly north, in Hamath (ver. 4), and Naphtali
(ch. a 4). Solomon prudent in action and kind in planning for the necessitiea


CHAP. VIII.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


i!





of his people. II. Cities for colonisation. “Solomon built (rebuilt)
them, and caused the children of Israel to dwell there” (ver. 2). Cities out of
repair, quitted by population, or never occupied by Israelites. Anxious to iocate
trade, promote industry, and for all to dwell in right place. III. Cities for
pleasure. “ Cities for his chariots, and cities for his horsemen ;” dwellings
for pleasure as distinguished from fortresses and store-cities. “I said in mine
heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure.” But
pleasure is expensive, and demands costly sacrifices. ‘‘ He that loveth pleasure
shall be a poor man.” IV. Cities for defence. The cities of Bethhoron
and Baalath were fortified. His kingdom exposed required defence. Surrounding
enemies dangerous, especially in north; strong garrisons required, and a levy of
men and money to support a gigantic military system. Hence danger from
wars, taxation, and oppression. Suggested Lessons from Solomon’s Military
Enterprises.—1. That those who attend to the spiritual will not neglect the
temporal interests of a nation. Solomon built the temple, but patriotic enough
to build cities. True religion ends not in ceremony, but in philanthropy.
Those who build churches build hospitals. A libel to say that Christians who
support missionary agencies neglect home. 2. That amidst the temporal
enterprises of a nation great risks exist. Fortified cities needful, but indicate
evils to be checked; incursions, insurrections, and subjugation. Hence—(1)
Lessons of Prudence. Why “ fenced cities with walls, gates, and bars?” “Silent
witnesses against the honesty of the society in which we live. Every bolt upon
the door is a moral accusation ; every time we turn the lock we mean that there
is an enemy outside who may endeavour to violate the sanctity of the house”
‘Dr. Parker). (2) The Danger of Prosperity. “Commercial intercourse with
foreign nations, the assimilation of the Israelitish monarchy to corresponding
institutions of surrounding kingdoms, though indispensable to certain elements
of the Church and State of Judea, yet was fraught with danger to a people
whose chief safeguard had hitherto been their exclusiveness, and whose highest
mission was to keep their faith and manners distinct from the contagion of the
world around them. The gigantic experiment of Solomon, though partially and
prospectively successful, yet in a greater part and for the moment failed. As he
is the representative of the splendours of the monarchy, so is he also the type
and cause of its ruin” [Stanley].


Sotomon’s STATESMANSHIP.—Versea 7-10.


Civil government a divine institution. Cannot exist without laws and
adjustments. These require wisdom to express and enforce. The people have
instinct to obey, but lack power to govern. Hence need of statesmen and rulers,
Solomon a wise ruler. I. In the tributary services rendered by
the people. 1. Foreigners non-Israclites employed as serfs. Treated as prisoners
of war, compelled to drudgery, hard labour, and to pay tribute (ver. 8). This a
matter of policy and borrowed from Egyptian customs of employing lowest caste on
public works. 2. Wative Jews employed in superior labour. “ Not bondmen,
but men of war, servants, princes, captains, rulers of chariots and of horsemen ”
(1 Ki. ix. 22). Positions of honour and influence. II. In the choice of
officers to rule the people. Officers divided into two bodies. The
lesser consisted of twelve chiefs corresponding to the twelve princes of the
twelve tribes, who administered the kingdom under David. Hence their wisdom
and experience would be profitable to direct. The larger body were officers
chosen from Israelites to control task work, exacted from Canaanites. No way
of accounting for discrepancies in number (¢f. 1 Ki. v. 16; 2 Chr. ii. 18. and

183


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cHaP. VIE,





ver. 10 of this ch.) except by error of copyist, or to imagine with many, that
250 were on duty at once. Solomon desired the ablest men for the best work
Some fitted, born to rule, and others to serve. III, In the appointment
of all classes of the people to their proper sphere. Work for all
and every one at work for which best adapted. Some to labour, others to think
and direct. Not great men to do smal) work and weak men to fail in respon-
sible work. Canaanites and Israelites all useful. This law of adaptation
essential to success in family circles, church government, and national legislation.
“Thou shalt teach them ordinances and laws, and show them the way wherein
they must walk, and the work that they must do.”


Sotomon’s MARRriace.—Verse |


At beginning of his reign he married an Egyptian princess, assigned her a
temporary abode in Jerusalem until a suitable place could be found. I. Asa
matter of worldly policy. A startling act, for since Exodus no inter-
course between two countries. Sprang from desire to counteract influence of
Hadad, who was received with royal honours and formed alliances with king of
Egypt (1 Ki. xi. 14-20); from wish to obtain support for his new dynasty and
recognition from one of older fame and greater power ; from anxiety to strengthen
himself by foreign alliances. Besides the new queen brought with her a frontier
city as a dowry. Gezer still possessed by remnant of Canaanites. Pharaoh
had led his armies against it, and tranquillity of Israel threatened. But this
worldly policy. Many marriages for inferior motives. Better look to bonds
that unite families and thrones to God. II. As a source of moral
perplexity. What must be done with her? If she conformed with the
Hebrew faith, yet as a foreigner she must dwell in a separate place, not near
the ark, the symbol of Divine presence. The house of God, holy, must be free
from personal and official pollution. This a matter of conscience to Solomon,
who felt that God’s presence sanctified all localities; that a broad distinction
must be made between Judaism and heathenism, between idolatry and the
worship of Jehovah. When this distinction is ignored and worldly policy
adopted, men plunge into temptations and find it difficult to rectify errors by
punctilious morality and zealous care about trifle. III. As the beginning
of trouble. The policy advantageous at first, but ultimately proved hollow
and impolitic. A revolution in Egypt changed its dynasty or its policy, and the
court welcomed the fugitive Jeroboam in his efforts to secure kingly power.
By seeking fresh alliances, giving way to lust for “strange women,” Solomon
involved in worship of strange gods, &e, The reign which began so gloriously
ended in gross darkness and fetish worship,


Soromon’s Rexicious Srrvice.— Verses 12


Solomon not only built the temple, but worshipped in it. What use a temple
without worship? The duty of high and low to meet for worship. I. Re-
markable for its conformity to Divine Law. “ According to the
command of Moses.” God the supreme object and his revealed will the rule of
worship. 1. Jn its appointed seasons. Daily sacrifices. ‘ A certain rate every
day.” “ Every day will I bless thee.” “On the sabbaths.” Weekly sacrifices;
monthly “on the new moons ;” and yearly at the three solemn feasts. “Three times
in a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God in the place which
he shall choose.” 2. In tts customary method. As Moses commanded and David
ee (ver. 14), care should be taken to observe divine order, but custom


CHAP, tUI.] HOMILETIiC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,





should never fetter spirit. Daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly, we should be
free, thankful, and devout. ‘The heart will observe its own order.” IT,
Remarkable for its systematic arrangements. “Order is
heaven’s first law.” 1. Arrangements divinely appointed. Priests in their
courses; Levites in their charges ; porters at the gates, and persons to manage
the treasures (cf. 1 Chr. xxvi. 20-23), 2. Arrangements scrupulously observed.
By every person and in every particular, “They departed not from the com-
mand of the king concerning any matter” (v. 15). 3. Arrangements completing
the work. ‘So the house of the Lord was perfected.” This the finishing touch
to erection and consecration. Something incomplete without real worship,
reverent order and self-surrender, Sacrifice the essence and result of worship.
“JT will freely sacrifice to thee,”


“One act that from a thankful heart proceeds,
Excels ten thousand mercenary d ” [Cowper}.


Sotomon’s Greatest Worx.—Verse 16.


This verse a brief summary, describing method and completion of Solomons
greatest work. Temple work was prepared, ¢.e., contemplated and fixed, before
built and completed. I. It was wisely planned. Prudence displayed in
collection and preparation of materials. The cost counted—1l. Suggesting wise
forethought. Every part of an undertaking should be well considered and weighed.
“Prepare thy work without and make it fit for thyself.” 2. Providing against
failure. What wrecks in all departments of human labour through want of
forethought and preparation! ‘“ This man began to build and was not able to
finish.” II. It was nicely furnished. Not half done, nor slovenly done.
Finished in furniture, style, and ceremonies. Perfected in harmony with God’s
will. “A thing of beauty and a joy forever.” Choose your life’s work. Collect
materials and build for God. Begin well and in God’s strength finish. Neves
be

* Like one who draws a model of a house,
Beyond his power to build it; who, half through,
Gives o’er, and leaves his part-created cost
A naked subject to the weeping clouds,
And waste for churlish winter’s tyranny.”


Sovomon’s Firet.—Verses 17, 18,


I, The method of its construction. Huram sent, supplied him, ¢.c.,
sudlt him ships, viz., in docks at Eloth (ef 1 Ki. ix. 26, 27) [Jamieson]. Or
Solomon made his fleet, by receiving model ships, materials, and carpenters from
Huram. “The probability is either that the Tyrians maintained at this period a
fleet in the Red Sea, or that Hiram’s shipwrights constructed, at their master’s
expense, some ships on that sea, and then presented them to the Jewish
monarch” [Speak. Com.]. II. The voyages it undertook. Solomon
monarch and merchant. Egyptians might have been rivals in southern maritime
traffic, but their religion and exclusive principles unfavourable to sea voyages.
They probably abstained from sending their own people abroad for commerce.
Solomon’s fleet opened the Mediterranean, the Red Sea, and the Indian Ocean,
the far east and the far west. The extraordinary influence of these voyages on
their own and on all future times was remarkable [see Stanley’s Jew. Ch,
vol, ii, p. 155]. III, The cargo it brought. Articles of commerce most
abundant; almug, ivory, aloos, cassia, cinnamon, apes and peacocks, ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. foxap. vim.


a


lants arid animals, fragrant woods and brilliant metals, silver and gold. “ Gold
of Ophir” the most famous in the world. Men more precious than gold ;
wisdom more precious “than the merchandise of silver.” ‘I will make a man
more precious than fine gold; even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir.
IV. The sailors who manned it. Hebrews had none capable of
performing distant expeditions; were only fishermen, whose boats coasted on
the shores of the Mediterranean, or plied on inward lakes. Tyrians manned
the navy of Solomon, who excelled in nautical science (¢f. 1 Ki, v. 6; ix. 27)
‘When we consider that in the case of Solomon the commercial wealth of the
entire community was concentrated in the hands of the government, that much
of the trade was a monopoly, and that all was assisted or directed by the
experience and energy of the Tyrians, the overwhelming riches of this eminent


merchant-sovereign are, perhaps, not surprising.”


HOMILETIC HINTS


Ver. 2. Caused Israel to dwell there.
Principles of colonisation—1. A matter
of necessity often. To provide for
employment, surplus population ; and
2. Should always be in the interests of
humanity. Not for national glory,
material prosperity, or destruction of
uncivilised races. What remains of
the colonies founded by ancient nations?
Prosperity and duration only when
God plants a people (America and the
Pilgrim Fathers).

Vers, 4-6. If some of the public
works had the plea of utility, the forti-
fications of some cities for purposes
of defence (Millo the suburb of Jeru-
salem, Hazor, Megiddo, the two Beth-
horons); the foundation of others
(Tadmor and Tiphsah) for purposes of
commerce. These were simply the
pomps of a selfish luxury; and the
people, after the first dazzle was over,
felt that they were so. Forty thousand
horsemen made up the measure of his
magnificence (1 Ki. iv. 26), As the
treasury became empty taxes multiplied,
and monopolies became more irksome,
If, on the one hand, the division of


AND SUGGESTIONS,


the kingdom came aa a penalty for
Solomon’s apostasy from Jehovah, on
the other, it was the Nemesis of a selfish
passion for glory, itself the most
terrible of all idolatries [Btb. Dict.].

Ver. 14. David the man of God. A
wonderful title. Only applied to Moses
and a nameless prophet, besides David.
1. How gained ; 2. What it implies in
character and life.

Vers. 12-18. Here we find—l.
Solomon “ diligent in busines.” Build-
ing and fortifying cities; engaging
ships and trading to Ophir. Thus
occupied usefully for his country, and
employed many that would, perhaps,
have otherwise been idle, 2. Solomon
“fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.”
Carefully guarding the sanctity of
God’s house, duly offering sacrifices at
all appointed times, and seeing that
priests and Levites performed the
sacred duties devolving upon them.
Here Solomon exhibited religion as it
should be; the concerns of life no!
unfitting him for religion, nor religion
unfitting him for the concerns of life
[Ingram Cobbin's Com.]}.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER VIII.


Ver. 3. Cities. Some of these forti-
fied places may have been necessary to
keep in check the Canaanitish popula-
tion, who were likely to fret under the
forced pbs which he exacted from

1s


them "Tuck]. Dwell there. The in-
crease of a great number of citizens in
prosperity is a necessary element to
the security and even to the existence
af a civilised people [Bure]


omar. 1%.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





Vers. 7, 8. Pay tribute. A mercan-
tile democracy may govern long and


widely ; a mercantile aristocracy cannot
stand [Zandor].


“ Ours’d merchandise! where life is sold,
And avarice consents to starve for gold”
[Rowe]


Vers. 12-15. Burnt offerings. Before
we ask what a man worships, we have
to ask whether he worships at all
[ Ruskin}. Solomon was great in burnt
offerings. Do not men sometimes make
up in burnt offerings what they lack
in moral consistency Is not an
ostentatious religion sometimes the
best proof of internal decay? It ought
not to be so. The hand and the heart
should be one, the outward and the
inward should correspond, the action
should be the incarnation of the
thought. We are not always to look
upon the ceremonial action of the
church as indicative of its rea] spiritu-
ality. Sometimes men make a great
noise in order to conceal a courage that
is giving way [Dr. Parker].

Ver. 16. Prepared. When Bishop
Heber read his beautiful poem, “ Pales-
tine,” in manuscript to Sir Walter Scott,
his friend remarked that in speaking of
the temple of Solomon he had for-


7
gotten to refer to the silence which
prevailed during its erection. The
poet immediately retired for a few
minutes, and introduced the following
beautiful lines :—
“No workman's steel, no ponderous axes
wrung ;
Like some tall palm the noiseless fabrio
sprung.”

This circumstance is remarkable as an
indication of the method of preparation
and of the deep sense which Solomon
had of the sacredness of his work.

Vers. 17, 18. Shéps. I am wonder-
fully delighted to see a body of men
thriving in their own fortunes, and at
the same time promoting the public
stock; or, in other words, raising
estatee for their own families, by bring-
ing into their country whatever is
wanting, and carrying out of it whatever
is superfluous. Nature seems to have
taken a particular care tc disseminate
her blessings among the different
regions of the world, with an eye to
their mutual intercourse and trafiic
among mankind, that the nations of
the several parts of the globe mighi
have a kind of dependence upon one
another, and be united together by
their common interest [Addzson].





OHAPTER LX.


CarricaL heared


corresponding with 1 Ki, xi. 41-43.
Vers. 1-12,—The Queen of Sheba’s visit,


Vers. 1-12. This narrative is
it varies little ; Solomon’s glory (vers. 13-28); an


arallel with 1 Ki. x. 1-18, from which
the close of hia reign (vers. 29-31)


Two Shebas, Ethiopian and Arabian. Both


countries have traditious on the visit; in both government by queens was common. Shzba,
in Arabia, was the great spice country and an important kingdom, Sheba in Ethiopia
a mere town and furnished no spices. The expression “Queen of the South” (Matt.
xji 42) corresponds with Hebrew Teman (Arabic Yemen), and Jewish and Christian
traditions in favour of Arabian Sheba. Fame, by the Ophir fleet. Name, Solomon’s great
knowledge of God, or great things which God had done for him. Questions, lit. riddles
(enigmas, Judge xiv. 12; Ps. xlix.4; Prov.i 6; Ezek.xvii 2), In East natural acuteness,
united with idle life, still make these exercises of understanding a favourite amusement,
Ver. 1. Camels, &c., a common method of travelling by these beasts of burden in Arabia,
a country most famous also for spices. In her heart, in her mind. Ver. 8. Told, i.e.,
answered all her questions without any exception. She could not puzzle him. Vers. 4,5
Seen, wisdom, natural endowments. House, the palace ; the variety and luxury of table.
Sitting, i¢., the seats, the place assigned to each to gradation, or oe body


HOMILATIC COMMENTL RY: CHRONICLES, fomar. rx,





and orderly manner of domestic arrangements. Standing posts of ministers; apparel of
(cup-bearers) butlers; ascent (Heb.), burnt offerings which he offered, by Luther, LXX,
and others. Generally thought to be a superb way for the king’s use alone, as Emperors
of China ascend the throne by steps consecrated to their use alone. ‘A stair by which
he went up to the house of God,” “a private way from the palace on the western, across
the ravine up the eastern hill to the temple area” [Keol]. Spirit in her, an expression for
highest degree of admiration and astonishment. er. 5. True report, word of acts, sayings.
Ver. 6. Exceedest, thou hast added to report. Ver. 8. Blessed, a frank acknowledgment
of Solomon's Ged, but no reason to think she adopted Him as her God. Ver. 9. Gave,
not as tribute, but in token of friendship (about £720,000, Jamieson). Vers.10,11. Mer-
eantile transactions. Algum trees, sandal wood. Terraces, high ways (margin), stairs,
steps. Psalteries (1 Samuel x. 5). Ver. 12. Desire,in the way of bounty. Asked, Oriental
custom to ask, specify what is agreeable. Solomon gave ample remuneration for presents
in exchange with him, ie., besides bis presents for hers, he made a free donation of
whatever she liked.

Vers. 13-28.—Solomon’s wealth. Weight (cf. 1 Kings x. 14-29). Chapmen, who buy and
sell, probably smaller retail merchants. Governors in outlying dominions, Heb. pechah.
“Tf connected with pashah, the history of the word would be curious” [Maz Miiller].
Ver. 15. Targets, large shields, covering the whole man, made usually of wood or wicker:
work covered with leather. Zhese made for ornamentation and plated with gold. Ver.
16. House, a part of the royal palace (1 Kings vii. 2-5), resembling a forest in structure ;
used for state purposes and an armoury for targets and shields. Vers. 17-19. The throne
of ivory, not all solid, but parts veneered with it. Footstool, the throne raised. Stays,
arms on each side of seat. Lions, symbols of royal power. Ver. 19. Number alludes to
twelve tribes of Israel. Ver. 20. Accounted, because of abundance; scarcity a value.
Ver. 21. Tarshish, prob. Tartessus in Spain. Peacocks, thought to have come from India,
Some give “ parrots.” Ver, 22. Passed, outrivalled (1 Kings iii. 13). Kings of neighbour-
ing nations. Sought (1 Kings iv. 34). Present tribute of respect year by year. Ver. 25.
Four thousand, not forty thousand, considered an error in copyist (1 Kings iv.%6). Ver.
26. River Kuphrates. Ver. 27. Stones, fig. for abundance and eomparative worthlessness.
Ver. 28. Horses from lands famous for good breeds. ;

Vers. 29-31,—Solomon’s death. Book, words. Three sources given, only in 1 Kings xi.
29. Nathan (2 Sam, vii. 1-17). Abijuh (1 Kings xi. 11-13, 29-39), in earlier part of
Solomon’s life. Iddo (2 Chr. xii 15; xiii. 22), in later years of reigns of Saul and David.
“ The Chronist omits the blemishes that marked the character and administration of
Solomon, and leaves the impression that notwithstanding these he continued to be a
follower of the Lerd unto the end of his career. This is in harmony with his design to
uote the progress of the kingdom of God in ita religious aspect ” [Murphy]


HOMILETICS


Tag Queen or SHesa’s Visir To SoLomon —Verses 1-12,


Solomon’s influence upon surrounding nations very great. Legends abound
in Jewish and Arabic traditions, like those concerning Nimrod and Alexander.
Visit of the queen conspicuous instance and given as a sign to us (Matt. xii. 42),
I. The spirit which prompted the visit. Its method, long train of
camels, in striking harmony with Eastern imagination. What its spirit? 1. A
spirit of curiosity. She heard of Solomon’s wisdom and glory, co-extensive and
manifold in forms. ‘The countries marvelled at thee, for thy interpretations,
songs, and proverbs and parables” (Kcclus. xlvii. 14-17). Solomon’s fame like
Christ’s, could not be hid. Curiosity excited and she desired to know, to
ascertain truth. 2. A spirit of inquiry. She came to hear his wisdom and
enlarge her own; to ask as well as answer questions. ‘“ The spirit of this asking
of questions and solving of dark riddles is of the very nature of true philosophy.
‘To ask questions rightly,’ says Lord Bacon, ‘is the half of knowledge.’ ‘Life
without cross-examination is no life at all,’ said Socrates. When we inquire,
when we restlessly question in our search after truth, when we seek it from
unexpected quarters, we are but following in the steps of the wise King of
Judah and the wise Queen of Sheba” eee: 3. A spirit of restlessness.
Rank, wealth, and position could not satisfy. Something beyond herself and her
wise ae to know and feel. No trifling questions, questions merely to puzzle

1


CHAP. ¥X.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: OHRONIOLES,








Hard questions concerning “ the name of the Lord” whom Solomon worshipped.
Problems ever new and ever old, found in the book of Job and stirring the
hearts of men to-day. “ How shall man be just with God?” ‘“ Where shall wis-
dom be found?” &c. Only “an interpreter, one among a thousand,” can
answer these questions. 4. A epirit of self-sacrifice. Curiosity prompted to
action, anxiety led her to start on a long and risky journey. A reproof, says
Christ, to indifference and stupidity concerning himself. True wisdom is of
great price, Those who know and seek its worth will not begrudge the cost.
II. The mutual intercourse during the visit. Solomon did not
blame her for her trouble and weakness; gave her every encouragement and
permitted her “to commune with him of all that was in her heart,” freely and
fully. 1. He answered her questions. “Solomon told her all her questions”
(ver. 3). Natural, political, intellectual, or religious. He was equal to the test
and could not be puzzled (see traditions), Taught of God, he could teach
others. ‘A divine sentence in the lips” of this king satisfied every inquiry,
Jesus can remove doubt and perplexity, ease the mind, and teach all we desire
to know. 2. He received her gifts. Not content with words, she gave practical
expression to gratitude. Useless are verbal thanks if life be void of iovely
deeds. These rich presents show the extent of her commerce, and the apprecia-
tion of her intercourse with the Hebrew monarch. Solomon accepted her gifts,
and gave, in addition to customary exchanges, “of his royal bounty.” Neither
cared for gold. Both valued wisdom, cultivated and confirmed their friendship
by mutual kindness and conversation. “She communed with him.” III, The
impressions received from the visit. Welcomed sincerely, valuing
her privileges, she was intent on learning and observant of all she could. 1.
She was astonished at the magnificence of Solomon, High culture and magnificence
exceeded anything she had ever seen. Meals served with great state. Tables
at which king, guests, and ministers sat down displayed variety, luxury, and
splendour. The order of domestic arrangements, varied costumes and attire of
ministers, choice vessels of cup-bearers, all impressed her acute mind. The
houses, streets, and buildings of Jerusalem, the temple and the king’s private
entrance into it, like a scene of enchantment to her. She was overwhelmed.
‘There was no more spirit in her,” almost fainted with astonishment. 2. She
was surprised at the wisdom of Solomon. This chiefly impressed her mind.
“When she had seen the wisdom of Solomon” (ver. 3). A word which, in
Hebrew, comprehends not only natural endowments and useful qualities, but
practical knowledge. The economy of his government, the schemes of industry
and the works of art displayed familiarity with natural science and deep insight
into the principles of human nature, This wisdom was superhuman. She
acknowledged it to be from Solomon’s God, “ by whom kings reign and princes
decree justice” (ver. 8, cf. Prov. viii. 15). 3. She was confirmed in her belief
concerning Solomon. “It was a true report which I heard, &c.” (ver. 5).
Faith exercised will be strengthened, really tested will give greater certainty.
“The one-half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me.” This just the
result of honest search after truth, of personal intercourse with Christ and of
engagement in God’s service. This is the way “ to verify your beliefs.” Hear,
see, and feel. Wonders of grace, depths of experience to be discovered beyond
all comprehension! ‘‘That ye may know the love of Christ which passeth
knowledge.”


Heart Communine.—Veres i,


Not generally wise to tell all our heart. Samson reached the climax of folly
when he did this to Delilah. Yet if we could meet with a Solomon who coula
solve all our difficulties we might wisely do so. A greater than erace in

1


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (omar. r&


thy : re At Mee oe ee tk RR gee








Jesus, who is incarnate wisdom. With him too silent, with worldly friends tos
communicative. I. We ought to communicate with him of all
that isin our heart. 1. Neglect of intercourse with Jesus is very unkind.
“Let me see thy countenance, &c.” (Cant, ii, 14.) 2. To conceal anything from
so true a friend betrays the sad fact of something wrong. 3. Shows a want of
confidence in his love, sympathy, and wisdom, if we cannot tell Jesus all in our
hearts, 4, Will be the cause of uneasiness in ourselves if we withhold anything
from him. Responsibility will rest and weigh heavily with us. 5. Will involve
the loss of counsel and help. He meets our case when we unbosom ourselves,
6. Reticence towards Jesus is greatly aggravated by eagerness to tell our
troubles to others, Will you make a confidant of man and hide the matter
from God? II. We need not cease communing for want of
topics. 1. Our sorrows. He knows what they are, will comfort us under
them, help to profit by them, &c. 2. Our joys. He will sober and salt them.
Joy without Jesus, sun without light, the essence gone. 3. Our service. Hea
servant knows our heart, can sympathise with our difficulties. 4. Our plans.
He has zeal, ardour, quick of understanding, and will gladly commune with us
concerning all in our hearts to do for God. 5. Our success and failures should
be reported at head-quarters. The disciples of the martyred John (Matt. xiv. 12),
the evangelists of our Lord, returned to him (Lu. ix. 10). 6. Our desires.
Holiness, usefulness, heaven, awaken the sympathy of Jesus, who prays for us
about these things. 7. Our fears. Fears of falling, needing, failing, dying.
8. Our loves. Of earth and heaven, towards others and himself. 9. Our
‘nysteries. Incomprehensible feelings, uneasiness, emotions, will be better for
ventilation in presence of Jesus. IIT. Nor shall we cease communing
for want of reasons. 1. How ennobling and elevating is intercourse with
Him! 2. How consoling and encouraging with Him who has overcome the
world! 3. How sanctifying and refining union with the Perfect One! 4. How
safe and healthy is a daily walk with ever-blessed Son of Man! How proper
and natural for disciples to talk with their Teacher, and saints with their
Saviour! 6. How delightful and heavenly is rapturous converse with the
Beloved! Warning to those who never speak with Jesus—“I never knew you.”
Complaint of those who seldom commune—“ Is this thy kindness to thy friend ?”
Hint to those usually in communion with hin—Keep up the holy intercourse:
to this end be thorough; unlock every room in the house and let Jesus enter
Congratulation to those who have long enjoyed his fellowship [Spurgeon].


Sotomon’s HovusznoLtp anp Curist’s Hovusrenonp.


Compare them—I. In the splendour of appearance. Solomon
himself, inferior to Christ in person, wisdom, and dominion. The glory of court
artificial, product of labour, and liable to decay ; Christ’s inward, spiritual, and
lasting. II. In the servants engaged 1. Their position: Near the
king, standing, sitting, waiting and watching attitude. 2. Their attire:
Beautiful, costly, fit, and free. 3, Their felicity: ‘Happy are thy servants.”
Apply the eulogy to Christians, happy now and hereafter. III. In the
provision made for members. Costly, abundant, satisfactory, and free,
Wisdom hath prepared a feast; come in and partake. “ Blessed is the man that
heareth me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors,”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1,2. The Queen a Type of for light and knowledge. 3. In her
Truth - seekere. 1. In her spirit.  eelf-sacrifice. Allured from groves of
Reverence for God, sincerity of desire palm to hear and know wisdom, she

190


OwAY. Ix.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


Le


undertouk « journey not much less
than a thousand miles from “ utter-
most parts of the earth,” ¢.¢., from the
extremities of the world then known.
3. In her reception by Solomon.
Illustrates welcome to inquirers by
God “that giveth to all men liberally
and upbraideth not,” with past in-
gratitude or future abuse (as Solomon
abused his wisdom at length). Man
“ giveth little and upbraideth much ”
(of. Ecclus. xx. 15 ; xli. 23). Or—1. She
sought in the right disposition. 2.
She sought from the right source. 3.
She sought in belief of its reality. 4.
She sought to possess it and render
homage to it. The rule “ he who seeks
shall find.”

Vers. 3-8. 1. Experimental evidence.
**T came, and mine vyes had seen it”
(ver. 6). Many hear and admit, but
gospel for trial its power must be felt;
arguments, evidence insufficient with-
out experience. To sceptics and doubt-
ing our appeal is, ‘Come and see.” To
all who come the surprise will be great.


“‘ Now, we believe not for thy saying,
for we have heard him ourselves, and
know that this is indeed the Christ, the
Saviour of the world.” 2. Hapress
testimony. Open confession follows
experimental evidence. Christ tolls all
in our hearts and discloses secrets of
life and conscience, reveals himself to
earnestinquiry, excites wonder, admira-
tion, and love. Grateful acknowledg-
ments.

Ver. 8. 1. The source of Solomon’s
greatness, Queen reminds him that
God must be praised for the greatness
of the nation, and for the wisdom of its
ruler. 2. The design for which the
greatness bestowed. Not for his own,
but for the sake of his people, God
chose him to occupy the throne. He
permits and appoints. Government
in all ministrations. Kings, princes,
nobles, judges, a Divinely constituted
power, to be held in subordination to
“King of kings” and administered for
the good of people, “to do judgment
and justice.”


HOMILETICS.


Wisvom Sovucut.—Verses 1, 23 and 24.


“ All the earth sought to Solomon to hear his wisdom” (1 Kings x. 24).
Sought the face of Solomon, who had unveiled wisdom and given to the world its
beauty and use. I. The indigence of human greatness. A queen
and kings seeking! Rank and wealth of no avail. Monarchs in their palacea,
and peers in their mansions, happy only in loyal obedience, under the dominion
of truth (wise-dom). ‘ Where shall wisdom be found?” Facts in matter and
mind require a solution, problems in moral life press heavily and fearfully upon
the heart. The richest, most learned cry for an interpreting principle. We may
get pearls from the ocean, treasures from the earth, but “ where is the place of
understanding?” ‘God understandeth the way thereof, &c.” II. The
Divine source of supply. God “the only wise God.” “The wisdom of
Egypt” proverbial in geometry, astronomy, and medicine, but ‘ Solomon’s
wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the east country and all the
wisdom of Egypt.” God gives sufficiency to the most indigent and most exalted.
1. It cannot be bought with money. ‘“ Man knoweth not the price thereof.” 2.
It cannot be found by investigation. Search in realms of nature useless. “The
depth saith it is not in me, and the sea saith it is not in me.” The domains of
life and of departed spirits reveal it not. ‘ Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is
wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding.” III. The need of
personal effort to secure this supply. They heard and came to see.
The attainment depends upon the spirit and effort of the seeker. A scorner is

roud, irreverent, “‘seeketh wisdom and findeth it not.” : The slothful excuse
—the distance is great, the price is too muck, “there is a lion Miata f


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: OHRONICLES. [oxap. £2.


Diligence and activity the conditions of getting and enjoying the blessing. True
and earnest inquirers, like Queen of Sheba, Nicodemus, Mary sitting at the
feet of Jesus, and the Ethiopian eunuch travelling hundreds of miles, seek and
secure knowledge, the highest knowledge, the knowledge of God, the centre and
soul of all science. ‘A wise man will hear, and will increase learning; and a
man of understanding shall attain unto wise counsels.”


“Truths on which depend our main concern,
That ’tis our shame and misery not te learn,
Shine by the side of every path we tread
With such a lustre, he that runs may read” [Cowper].


Soriomon’s Guory anp Deatu.—Verses 13-31.


Solomon pre-eminent, surpassed all kings of the earth, &c. I. Solomon’s
glory. Of two kinds, material and moral. 1. Material glory. None with
greater splendour, which glittered in the eyes of his people like the sun. Gold
and silver, large treasures untold. Hmpire and power unique. ‘Tributary princes
and presents from all parts of the known world. Household extensive, exchequer
unlimited, and fame universal. 2. Moral glory. Moral and mental qualities
equal to his surroundings, and preserved harmony between himself and kingly
state. Scripture specially dwells on wisdom. Men of noted intelligence in his own
country : Ethan in charge of temple music, Heman “the king’s seer in the words
of God,” Chalcol and Darda; but Solomon “ wiser than all men” (1 Ki. iv.
29-31). Sage, poet, and naturalist—an intellect stored with vast information ;
active, shrewd, and penetrating ; a heart kind, sympathies wide, rising to high
and noble thoughts of God. These more becoming and better than material
grandeur. Wisdom better than wealth. ‘I count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord.” II. Solomon’s
death. Reign not long, though glorious. End certain. Glory and death
strange association! A common end to great and small. ‘Solomon slept
(lit., lay down) with his fathers.” The crown, the robes of office, and the sceptre
of power must be laid down. ‘‘ To leave these things,” said a nobleman crowned
with honours, “ makes one miserable.” Kings extraordinary and brilliant level
with the meanest in the grave. They come, reign, and sleep, and so history rolls
on, ‘“ Where will you leave your glory?”—in fragrant names, righteous deeds,
and holy life? or in grief, disgrace, and oblivion? ‘A man shall be commended
according to his wisdom.” ‘‘ The righteous shall be had in everlasting remem-
brance,”


MOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.

Vers. 17-19. Solomon's throne. The
symbol of a throne of grace. The seat
of judgment and dominion; of public


put in his heart. Supernatural gifts in
answer to prayer. 1. The lesson. 2. The
learners. 3. The method of teaching.


audience to nobles, strangers, and all
who resorted to him. For beauty and
strength, workmanship and design,
‘“‘there was not the like made in any
kingdom.”

Ver. 23. Wisdom. Knowledge of
God’s works, skill in physic and state-
policy, rules of prudence for human life
and principles of true religion. God

2


4. The warning to us. Application made
in eagerness, to hear Solomonaggravates.
shames and condemns general contempt
for Christ, in whom are “hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge.”
5. A prophecy that “all they froin Sheba
shall come, they shall bring gold and
incense, and they shall show forth the
praises of the Lord.”


omar. x.j


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER fX.


Vers. 1, 3. Philosophy was born a
Pagan; but she may become a Christian,
and should be christened “Mary.” She
may be proud to sit at Jesus’ feet.
Hellas coming to Judea’s Messiah is a
rarely beautiful sight [Dr. Duncan].

Questions. Do not suppose that wisdom
is so much flattered at having you fora
pupil that she will set you easy lessons,
and yet give you the gold medal [7 7.
Lynch}. Questioners must be teachable,
When Haydn was in London, a noble-
man came to him for lessons in music,
but found fault withailthat Haydn said.
At ‘ast, out of patience, the musician
exclaimed, “ I see, my lord, that it is
you who is so good as to give lessons to
me, and I am obliged to confess that [
do not merit the honour of having such
amaster” [Spurgeon]. Communed. Do
you want anything of which you cannot
tell your Lord? It argues either no real
ueed or else little faith. Strong faith
hath free communion with heaven, and
conceals nothing, but tells all. Ep. ii. 12.
“In whom we have boldness.” The
word boldness is “telling all” [Thos.
Boston).

Vers.9 and 24. Presents. There is
no grace in a benefit that sticks to the


fingers [Seneca]. We like the gift when
we the giver prize [Ovid].

Vers. 20-23. Gold. Greatness stands
upon a precipice, and if prosperity car-
ries aman ever so little beyond his poise,
it overbears and dashes him to pieves
[Seneca]. Prosperity seems to be scarcely
safe unless it be mixed with a little
adversity [Hosea Ballow].

Ver. 29. First and last. His first
were best; of his last this historian
saith nothing, but layeth his finger on
the scar [Z’rapp]. Solomon did not live
to a very great age, since he was not
more than twenty years old wher he
ascended the throne. Whether Solomon
turned to the Lord again with all his
heart, a question widely discussed by the
older _ commentators, cannot be ascer-
tained from Scripture. If the Preacher
(Koheleth) is traceable to Solomon, so far
as the leading thoughts are concerned,
we should find in this fact an evidence
of his conversion, or at least a proof
that at the close of his life he discovered
the vanity of all earthly possessions and
aims and declared the fear of God to
be the only abiding good, with which a
man can stand before the judgment of


God [Keil].





CHAPTER X,


Critrcan Nores.] Here begins the fourth part of the book of Chronicles, extending from
the division of the kingdom to the decree of Cyrus, authorising the return of the exilew
and confining itself to the affairs of the kingdom of Judah, The present chapter
includes the proposal of the people to Rehoboam (vers. 1-5); the counsel given to him
(vers. 6-11); and the answer that provokes the revolt (vers. 12-19), This corresponds to
1 Ki. xii. 1-19 [Murphy]. aa ; ,

Vers. 1-5.—Proposal to the people. Shechem, a judicious step, meeting there not simply
because central and convenient, but honouring the capital of Ephraimites and removing
disaffection. King. assembled to receive Rehoboam as lawful king and join in usual
acclamations (1 Sam. x. 24; 1 Ki.i. 39) [of. Speak. Com.]. Ver. 2. Jer. an Ephraimite
appointed by Diora to civil administration of house of J oseph (1 Ki. xi. 28), of which
Ephraim a branch. Cause of flight to Egypt given (1 Ki. xi. 29-40). He returned to be
leader and spokesman of people. Ver. 4. Yoke, pomp and style of Solomon made taxation
heavy. Vast building operations required forced labour, &o, ase, grant relief, make


i most reasonable request.
So Fara @-11s-- Counsel given sasthd king. Old men who served under Solomon ar well


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (omar. &


a


able to advise. Ver. 7. Spake, yield to will of people, for once be servant, be ruled by them
and attach to thyself servants for ever. Ver. 8. Forsook, refused good words, consulted
younger advisers, who gave counsel more flattering and agreeable to king’s temper.

Vers. 12~19.—Little finger. Proverbial for increasing rather than diminishing ourdens.
“Finger not in original; but may be safely implied. The meaning is, ‘You shall find
my hand heavier on you than my father’s; as much heavier as if my little finger were
thicker than his loins’”’ [Speak Com.]. Whips, often with sharp bones or pieces of lead
tied to end. Scorpions, i.e., scourges with sharp points (Latin scorpio), ‘iron thorns
inflicting exquisite pain. Harsh and foolish answer. Wer. 15, Cause, i.e., the turn of
events was from the Lord, to fulfil his word (1 Ki. ii. 29-31). Ver. 16. What portion?
Words of sedition by Sheba (2 Sam. xx. 1), expressing deep-rooted aversion to royal
house and resulting in open rebellion. Ver. 18, Adoram, identified by some with Ad. of
1 Ki. iv. 6; v. 14; and Adoram of 2 Sam. xx. 24. The three names mark three
distinct persons, perhaps of same family, who were respectively contemporary with
David, Solomon, and Rehoboam” [Speak. Com.]. Sent to alleviate burdens. Stoned,
usual mode of mob vengeance. Ver. 18. King himself narrowly escaped the same fate.
From that time Israel and Judah separated and distinguished one from another.


HOMILETICS.


Tur REPRESENTATIVE ASSEMBLY.—Verses 1-5.


I. The place of meeting. “Shechem” wisely chosen by Rehoboam, to
remove dissatisfaction ; at the advice of judicious men, whose counsels he after-
wards rejected. A place of great antiquity, noted for conventions (Jos. xxiv. 1)
and royalty (Judg. ix.). II. The purpose in view. The future govern-
ment of the nation. 1. Zo make Rehoboam king. King with officers of state
around ; tribes drawn up under their leaders ready to receive him. How pro-
claimed? Not with hearty shouts of “God save the king.” A pause and
solemn silence. Jeroboam steps forward! 2. Zo represent the people. ‘‘ Make
our yoke lighter and we will serve thee.” This unexpected ; surprised and
annoyed Rehoboam; not what he came for, not what he liked! Not bold
enough to deny, not grace enough to concede. Delay dangerous, may breed
suspicion and intensify ill-feeling. III. The conclusion arrived at.
“Come again unto me after three days.” King did not commit himself to rash
impromptu reply. Adjournment might seem wise, but demands just, prompt
redress would have been better than prudent caution. “There is a gift whose
recompense is double” (Hcclus. xx. 10).


THe Foorise RULER aND THE ReEvo.tTine Tripes.—Verses 6-19.


The four scenes may be treated separately or im one sketch. I. The
grievance stated. Real, not imaginary; outspoken and not kept back.
“ The grievous servitude of thy father and his heavy yoke that he put upon us.”
1. A reasonable demand. Couched in a spirit of fairness and loyalty. Reason
and justice will ever triumph. Violence and storms spend themselves fox
nothing. (a.) Heavy taxes. Splendour of Solomon’s court, the magnitude of
his undertakings, such that neither tribute of dependent states, presents of
foreign princes, nor profits of commercial enterprises could support. He was
obliged to levy taxes for necessary revenue. (b.) Forced service. This chief
ground of complaint (cf. 1 Ki. iv. 6; v. 13, 14; xi. 28). Each tribe called upon
to render without payment. “ Forced labour has been among the causes leading
to insurrection in many ages and countries. It alienated the people of Rome
from the last Tarquin (Liv. i. 56); it helped to bring about the French
revolution, and it was for many years one of the principal grievances of the


Russian serfs” (Speak. Com.}. (¢.) Long endured. “ Put upon us by thy
194


CHAP. X.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
Al





——


father.” Complaint of past reign. Solomon wise, but oppressive in government.
“No man can always be wise,” says Pliny. We are more apt to eopy the
defects of our ancestors than imitate their virtues; to remember the evil of
their lives, not their benefits. 2. 4 national demand. It was the voice of “all
Israel.” The people unanimous; not a few merely turbulent and dissatisfied.
Thus was prophecy fulfilled. ‘This will be the manner of the king that shall
reign over you; he will take your sons, &c.” (1 Sam. viii. 11-18). II. The
consultation held. If impolitic to delay, it was prudent to seek sdvice,
1. With aged counsellors. Wise, experienced, and suitable. “How do ye
advise?” ‘ With the ancient is wisdom, and in length of days understanding.”
Be kind, concede, speak good words, and they will be thy servants for ever.
Advice—(a), just; (5), timely ; (c), far-seeing ; and (d), wise. Happy the ruler
with such statesmen! No sentimentalists, but true patriots and philosophers !
Kindness wins and overcomes. “A soft answer turneth away wrath: but
grievous words stir og Se 2. With young counsellors. Conceited, proud,
and inexperienced. They recommend oppression and defiance. Yield nothing,
put more on, afflict with scorpions. This considered spirited and kingly! but
(a), unreasonable; (0), foolish ; (c), cruel; and (d), destructive. ‘Wise men lay
up knowledge: but the mouth of the foolish is near destruction.” III. The
decision given. “The king answered the people roughly, and forsook the
old men’s counsel that they gave” (ver. 13), This—1l. Unexpected. Demands
reasonable ; ease and make yoke “lighter.” Delay gave time to think, and this
course resolved upon! 2. Foolish. Rough words unbecoming; display weakness,
ignorance, and pride. A grain of wisdom would have taught that such conduct
would widen the breach between him and his people. 3. Preswmptuous. Kings
made to serve, not to tyrannise; should rule for the good of the people and not
for selfish purposes. ‘The way to govern is to serve. Those kings safest who
stoop lowest. ‘I would rather be king of the French than king of France,”
said Louis XIV., t.e., rule in the hearts of the people than over the territories of
the kingdom. “Whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister ;
and whosoever of you will be chiefest, shall be servant of all.” 4. Mischievous.
This tone like that of the nobility of France before the great revolution,
calculated to irritate (cf. the Ephraimites, Judg. xii. 1-4; men of Israel and
Judah, 2 Sam. xix. 41-43; and the harsh words of Eliphaz, Job xxii. 5), to add
fuel to the fire. Mischievous in themselves and in results. “ How many
thousand souls are hurt every day by the words of others!” [ Baater]. How sad
the result here! “The beginning of the words of the mouth is foolishness: and
the end of talk is mischievous” (Ecclus. xi. 13). IV. The results which
followed (ver. 16). Whatever ground for resisting before, they now receive
provocation, which accounts for strong words and firm resolve. 1. Levolt.
Threatened, insulted, they raised a shout expressive and well understood. “To
your tents, O Israel!” 2. Resistance. Hadoram sent, the man who was “ over
the levy” (Rev. Vers.) of forced labourers, whose presence would rouse Israel
to anger, exasperate, and outrage. A foolish andimprudent act. ‘ Israel stoned
him with stones, that he died.” 3. Final separation (ver. 19). God prevented
the king from filling theland with blood. “ It was with one exception (Hadoram)
a bloodless revolt” [Stanley]. The attempt to recover lost tribes forbidden.
The determination of king, the loyalty and number of Judah and Benjamin of
no avail. The thing was done and could not be altered. The army disbanded
and submitted to the God of battles. ‘“ For the cause was of God, that the Lord
might perform his word.” Even if right appear on our side, better sit still than
fight in disobedienee to God. When God’s will is known ever submit, whatever
loas may be involved,


195


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. {omar x,





Tar Mysrery or Divine Worxkinc.—Verse 15.


The cause, the Hebrew circuit, or turning about, was of God; for here was a
“wheel within a wheel, as Ezek. i.” [Zrapp]. The original idea of the disrup-
tion was that it was a divine dispensation. “The thing was from the Lord.”
“Tt was as much a part of the divine economy of the national destinies, as the
erection of the monarchy itself, or as the substitution of the House of David for
the House of Saul” [Stanley]. I. Events of history controlled and
directed to accomplish divine purposes. God’s will supreme and
ultimate. “The turn of events” not aimless and independent. The current
directed, turned, according to God’s pleasure and word. II. In the accom-
plishment of divine purposes men act as free agents, Neither
the folly of the king, nor rebellion of people pre-ordained. Events from natural
order. Men not fated, but free to act; are under moral, not physical govern-
ment. “ But as for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good,
to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.” III. Men thus
acting as free agents are responsible for their actions. We
are not subjects of accidents, bereft’ of power to do good or evil, but morally
responsible for our actions. The hands of the Jews were wicked in crucifying
Christ, though he was delivered up to them “ by the determinate counsel and
foreknowledge of God” (Acts ii. 23). Those who rebel against God and lose
heaven will have to blame themselves for wilfulness and folly.


Two Metruops oF Treatinc Mgn.—Verses 6—11.


I. The conciliatory. IY. The unconciliatory. Social positions are graduated.
Yet no elevation of social rank gives one man the right to tyrannise over
another, Pass in rapid review a few of the cases in which the two methods of
treating men come into constant operation. The maintenance of a conciliatory
policy is quite consistent with a headship, 1. Firmness; 2. Justice. What is
the cure for all false relations among men? The gospel of reconciliation
[Beecher].


GoveERNMENTS AND SUBJECTS.


From the whole narrative learn—I. That governments create
dissatisfaction among their subjects by injustice. Order,
contentment, and affection essential to prosperity in government. Severe laws,
over-taxation, curtailment of liberties, and coercive measures create uneasiness
and opposition. “The government of a prudent man is well ordered”
(Ecclus. x. 1). II. That it is right for subjects to agitate for the
removal of injustice. Within right to get redress in just and legal
methods. History abounds, in critical and stirring times, in witnesses against
oppression and tyranny. Wrong to submit to despotisms. ‘I know how to
add sovereign to the king’s person, but not to his power,” said Pym. ITT,
That it is wise for rulers to listen to the comp'aints of
Injustice. Concessions more becoming than extravagant assertions of
‘divine right.” Mild and merciful procedure quickens the spirit of freedom ;
lestroys jealousy towards a ruler’s actions and character, and the best safeguard
f thrones and constitutions. ‘When a king speaks ‘good words,’ they seem
tw be better than if spoken by other lips; when a king is kind, he seems to add
to fis kindness by his very kingliness; the stoop of his condescension redoubles
the value of his benefaction. If when the people returned after three days
Rehoboam had spoken so, the welkin would have rung with the resonant cheers
of a dlehted, thankful, because emancipated, people” [Dr. Parker} Hy

t


cHaP. X,]





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


=


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1-12. Rehoboum the headstrong.
Only son of Solomon, but did not profit
by his father’s wisdom. 1. /is training.
Not like that of his father. (a) His
mother an idolatress (2 Chr, xii. 13),
not the wise, good mother which
Solomon seems to have had (Prov. iv. 3).
Hence the mother’s influence over the
young prince. (6) He had not the
good example which Solomon had in
David. Solomon’s later years degen-
erate, what wonder if his son was far
behind! 2. His accession. Without
difficulty (cf. 1 Ki. xi. 43) at the death
of his father, when about 41 years old.
(a) By promise of perpetual sovereignty
to David’s posterity; (6) By public
assembly of representatives. “ Met not
to exercise right of election (1 Sam.
x. 19-21); for after God’s promise,
their duty was submission to the
authority of rightful heir; but their
object was to renew the conditions to
which their constitutional kings were
subject (1 Sam. x. 25), and to the
omission of rehearsing which, under
the peculiar circumstances in which
Solomon was made king, they were
disposed to ascribe the absolutism of
his government” [Jamieson]. 3. die
trouble. Kings not without. ‘Uneasy
is the head that wears the crown.” (a)
A corrupt empire; (b) A dissatisfied
people; (c) A dark future. 4. His
folly. Wisdom not inherited as wealth.
Some infatuated, nothing can teach
them. Men have no right to tyrannise
in social, political, or religious affairs.
The rough answer was a fearful mis-
take. “ He that walketh with wise
men shall be wise; but a companion of
fools shall be destroyed.”

Vers. 2, 3, and 12-15. Jeroboam
the first king of Israel. 1. His early
life. Jeroboam (whose people is many)
“son of Nebat,’ an Ephrathite, te.,
belonging to territory of Ephraim ; of
Zereda (2 Chr. iv. 17 ; of. Judg. v. 22),
a town near Scythopolis. Mother
Zeruah, a widow, reduced by the execu-
tion of her husband at beginning of
Solomon’s reign, if Jeroboam be iden-
tical with Shemei (¢f. 2 Sam. xvi. 5;


of. 1 Ki. ii. 46), 2. His natural ability
“A mighty man of valour” (1 Ki. xi.
27); mighty in power as Nimrod
(Gen. x. 8); in wealth, as Boaz, Kish,
and other Israelites (Ruth ii. 1; 1 Sam.
ix. 1; 2 Ki, xv. 20). But clever, of
strong natural capacity; active and
enterprising (Sept. a man of works).
3. His rapid promotion. Solomon dis:
cerning his talents, “seeing the young
man that he was industrious, that he
did the king’s business (Dan. viii. 27),
made him ruler; set him over all the
charge, the burden;” superintendent
of taxes and public works (1 Ki. xi.
27, 28). “The hand of the diligent
shall bear rule” (Prov. xii. 24; xxii. 29).
4. His prophetic designation. By pro
phet Ahijah in symbolic action (1 Ki.
xi. 29-39). From which time he be-
came a marked man by Solomon. 5
His scditious conduct. Ambitious, im-
patient for the death of Solomon, he
was led to plot and conspire, and in
consequence driven to Egypt. Chosen
of God, yet could not wait for Provi-
dence. Incurred penalty of death by
rebellion. 6. His accession to the throne.
Chosen at length by people and per-
mitted to become first king of Israel.
Ver. 7. Be kind. The power of kind-
ness in winning affection and service.
Lenity and moderation in a prince is
very prevalent with the people, as to
win their afiections at first, so to hold
them in obedience ever after. The
advice of an ancient French counsellor
to his sovereign at his departure from
court was good. Being wished to lay
down some general rules for govern-
ment, he took a paper, and wrote on
the top of it “moderation,” in the
middle of the leaf ‘ moderation,” and
at the bottom “ moderation” [7'rapp].
Vers. 6-11. I. The national council.
1. Assembled and consulted by the
king ; 2. Composed of old and young,
wise and foolish men. II. The resolu-
tion adopted. 1. From whom it came;
2. What its nature; 3. What its
results. Forsook old men, whom he
consulted for fashion’s sake, as Xerxes
did when he invaded Greece. Resolved
197


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; CHRONICLES,





beforehand to stand upon his pantoufles
and not at all to stoop to the people.
He had those about him, doubtless,
that would tell him, as some Court
parasites did our King John, when he
had yielded to the requests of his
barons for the subjects’ liberty, that
now he was “a king without a king-
dom, a lord without a dominion, and a
subject to his subjects” [Trapp]. Con-
sulted young men. So did our king
Richard II., to his utter ruin. So
Xerxes despised the grave counsel of
his uncle Artabanus, and was led
wholly by young Mardonius to the loss
of all. The like is reported of Diony-
sius, king of Sicily; Croesus, king of
Lydia; Nero, emperor of Rome; James
that reigned in Scotland in Edward
IV.’s time ; and Lantrer, of whom it is
reported that he lost the kingdom of
Naples from the French king, his
master, and all that he had in Italy,
because he would not ask nor follow
the advice of those who were wiser than
himself [Zé¢d.].

Vers. 12-15. The adjourned meeting.
1. The decision given. Haughty and
imperious. 2. The effect produced.
(a) On the aged counsellors; (5) On


ILLUSTRATIONS


Vers. 6-10. Cownsel. Judge Buller,
when in the company of a young gentle-
man of sixteen, cautioned him against
being led astray by the example or per-
suasion of others, and said: “If I had
listened to the advice of some of those
who called themselves my friends when
I was young, instead of being a judge
of the King’s Bench, I should have died
long ago a prisoner at the King’s
Bench.”

Vers. 12-15. Answered. Who knows
what he is till he is tried, and until he
meets his own trial? for every one is
not discovered in the same way; he


198


[oHar. %,


—


deputies ; (c) On the nation [adapted
from Bib. Mus.].

Ver. 16. Zo your tents, O Israel.
“ It was a national watchword, and not
the war-cry of a single tribe which led
the revolt” [Stanley]. 1. Its antiquity.
Raised in time of David, now with
fatal effect (2 Sam. xx. 1). 2. Its
ingratitude. What have we to do with
David? 3. Itsselfishness. Cut them-
selves off from their brethren and
their sovereign. To your tents, let us
have a king of our own!

Vers. 16-19. Thegreat secession. 1.
Its strange beginning. 2, Its remark-
able progress. 3. Its fatal consequences,
Two kingdoms; rival worship. Weak-
ness, jealousy, and political decline of
Jewish nation. Terrible is progress of
strife. One angry word, one look of
revenge, one act of resentment, will
kindle a fire which may set a neigh-
bourhood or a nation into flame. A
drop of revenge soon becomes a river,
and the river a torrent, which sweeps
everything before it. ‘The beginning
of strife is as when one letteth out
water. Therefore leave off contention
before it be meddled with.”


TO CHAPTER X.


may be firm in one peril and fail in
another [Jay]. His friends were sum-
moned on a point so nice, to pass their
judgment and to give advice; but fixed
before, and well resolved was he, as
those who ask advice are wont to be
[Pope].

Vers. 16-19. When any one per-
son or body of men seize into their
hands the power in the last resort,
there is properly no longer a govern-
ment, but what Aristotle and his
followers call the abuse and corruption


of one [Swift].





OHAP. Xt. } HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.








sa eeemnnimnee


OHAPTER Xi.


Crrrroan Norzs.] Rehoboam forbidden to war (vers. 1-4). This section a repetition in
abbreviated form of 1 Ki. xii. 21-24. Remainder of chapter new matter. Rehoboam
fortifies many towns (vers. 5-12); receives accessions from Israel (vers. 13-17); and takes
many wives and concubines (vers. 18-23).

Vers. 1-4.—The forbidden war. Fight to crush the rebellion. Fourscore thousand about
one-third of Judah’s number under Joab’s levy (2 Sam. xxiv. 9). Shem. (1 Ki. xii. 22-24) ;
all Israel in Judah and Benjamin now united together.

Vers, 5-12.—Defensive measures. Jerusalem, a judicious step, unlike northern kings, who
shifted their capital. Built, repaired and fortified; fifteen given. Beth., Et., and 7ck.
near together, a little south of Jericho, on way to Hebron. Ver. 7. Beth-rur, a strong
position about five miles north of Hebron, on route between that place and Jerusalem.
It played an important part in the wars of the Maccabees (1 Mac. iv. 29-61 ; vi. 7-26, &c.)
[Speak. Com.}. Shoca, now Sumeikeh, three-and-a-half hours south-west of Jerusalem.
Adul (Josh, xv. 35). Wer. 8. Gath. Exact site not known. Mares. (Josh. xv, 44). Its
importance appears in the invasion of Zerah (ch. xiv. 9); and from 1 Mas, v. 66 ; 2 Mac.
xli. 35. Modern name Marash. Ziph. Two of this name in Judah (Josh. xv, 24-55).
This famous in David’s hivtory (1 Sara. xxiii, 14-24; xxvi. 2-25). TExact site appears to
be the modern Til Zif, about three miles south of Hebron [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 9. Ador.,
Adora or Dora, now Dura, west of Hebron (Josh. xv. 24). Lackish, now Um-Lakish.
Azekah (Josh, x. 10). Wer. 10. Zor. (1 Chr. ii. 53), now Surah; and 4ij., now Yalo, further
north than other cities here meutioned. Both in territory originally assigned to Dan
(Josh. xix. 41, 42), but afterwards absorbed into Judah [Speak. Com.|. Judahand Benjamin,
now the designation of southern kingdom (cf. vers. 12 and 23), Ver. 11. Oil, odoriferous;
wine, sweet, used by ancient Jews and modern Arabs; healthy and useful in hot climates
(cf. Ps. civ. 15).

Vers. 13-17.—Accessions. Left, ejected from their office because they would not
minister to Jeroboam’s calves, who appointed priests not Levites, Suburbs (cf. Num.
xxxy. 1-8). High places, i.e., Dan and Bethel (cf. 1 Ki. xii. 28-83); a kind of contemp.
tuous description as not equal to temple at Jerusalem, only on a level with those in othe
parts. Ver. 15. Devils, a term sometimes used for idols in general (Lev. xvii. 7); here
applied distinctively to the goat-deities, which were probably worshipped chiefly in the
northern parts of the kingdom, where the heathen Canaanites still abounded [Jamieson].
Ver. 17. Strengthened by numbers and moral tone of excellent subjects; but sad change
noted in king next chapter.

Vers. 18-23. Rehoboam’s wives and children. Jerimoth not given among legitimate sons
of David, hence son of concubine. Read David and of Abihail. Mother as well as
father of Mah. is given. Daughter of E., probably ‘‘ grand-daughter,” since an actual
daughter of E. must have been too old to be a fit wife for Rehoboam. Ver. 20. Daughter,
grand-daughter of Abs. (cf. ch. xiii 2). Ver. 21. Threescore (cf. Cant. vi. 8 and 2 Chr.
Kili. 21). Ver. 22. Chief, though not eldest of his sons. Affection for M. led him te
violate the law. Wisely, prudently with calculation (Ex. i.10). Many wives. Rehoboam
careful to please his sons by making them governors of fortresses, and “ sought for them a
multitude of wives” (marg.); perhaps from cities over which they were set. In Persia and
Turkey, younger princes, until lately, were shut up in the harem during their father’s
lifetime ; and to prevent competition, were blinded or killed when their brother ascended
the throne. In former country the old practice of dispersion through the country, like
Rehoboam, has been again revived [Jamicsonw].


HOMILETICS.
Tue Restraints or Divine Provipence.—Verses l=.


Events concerning kingdom of Judah chiefly given after revolt of ten
tribes. Rehoboam determined to enter disaffected provinces ; but divine decree


gone forth, the army overawed, dispersed, and the king obliged to submit.
199


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. {oHaP. xt.


tha


ET


I. Restraints unmistakably clear. “The word came to Shem.,” and was
spoken “unto Rehoboam.” Prophets gave no uncertain sound in either kingdom.
Divine interposition most clear. No visions, no voices now ; but around and in
us as we fight in life, a power above the wiles and schemes of men, secret, in-
visible influences, deep impressions, and mysterious thoughts, amounting almost
to divine revelations, to check or prompt. “Thou shalt not go up.” IL.
Restraints merciful in design. ‘Nor fight against your brethren.”
Nations and tribes bound by natural ties; man-kinned (mankind) should help
each other. “Quarrel with your faults and not with our fellow-men,” was the
motto of Otho II., Emperor of Germany. “Man's inhumanity to man” is great.
If Alexanders, Oxsars, and Napoleons were not restrained, the world would
become a pandemonium. God careful of human life and human weal, prevents
disgrace, mischief, and bloodshed. Men seek to destroy peace, injure reputation
and property. ‘“ Revenge is wild justice,” says Bacon. “Say not thou I will
recompense evil; but wait on the Lord and he shall save thee.” III,
Restraints timely made, God times events and interpositions; permits
much show and great progress, as in Jeroboam’s preparations. Why restrained
when army assembled, everything ready and about to march with every pros-
pect of success? Has God been consulted? Education, preparations, and
enterprises of no avail, if not for him. A thousand forces may be enlisted,
simply to be sent home again! We may form our programme, set an object in
view, adapt our means and arrange time to attain it. Just when attainment
near, lo! deprivation, disappointment. ‘A man’s heart deviseth his way: but
the Lord directeth his steps.” IV. Restraints implicitly heeded.
The prophet represented God. The event could not be changed. ‘They
hearkened,” disbanded, and went home. Another power beside Judah and
Israel must be recognised. Folly to resist, to fight against God! Motives,
arguments, to acquiesce in arrangements of Providence are unanswerable. ‘ Let
the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth,” but ‘‘woe unto him that
striveth with his Maker.”


DerensivE Mrasures.—Verses 6-13.


Rehoboam forbidden to aggress, undertakes to defend the frontiers of his
kingdom. “He built cities for defence.’ The verb denotes fortification of
cities ; “ partly,” says Hengstenberg, “ because in the case of a city already in
existence, the building must necessarily have been restricted to the fortification
of it, and partly because the term city, in its fullest extent, involves the idea of
fortification.” I. He protected against great dangers. 1. From the
atiack of Israel. Disruption of tribal unity brought danger and enemies within.
Israel restless and allied with Egypt. 2. From Lgyptian bondage. From this
quarter greatest danger. Out of fifteen cities all but three, on southern or
western frontier. ‘ And now, for the first time since the Exodus, Judah was
once more threatened with an Egyptian bondage” [Stunley]. II. He dis-
played great wisdom. 1. In retaining the capital. ‘‘ Rehoboam dwelt in
Jerusalem” (ver. 5). Unlike kings of Israel, who shifted their capital from
place to place for convenience and policy, he perceived importance of retaining
hold on the city of David. This central fortress surrounded by a chain of
fortresses, in part to carry out the designs of his father, in part to increase his
atrength. 2. In fortifying the kingdom. Reduced by secession, he sought to
keep what he possessed. He rebuilt, garrisoned, and provided with arms and
stores to stand a siege. If we cannot attack, we can perhaps build; if not
recover lost: privileges, we may defend what we have. “ That good thing (goodly
mea which was committed unto thee, keep ‘guard, cf. 1 Tim. vi. 20) by the

2


CHAP. XI.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.








rn


Holy Ghost, which dwelleth in us” (2 Tim. i. 14). IIT. He illustrated
great principles. Under these measures are hidden powerful principles in
human life. 1. Zhe power of conscience. Accused of doing wrong, he now fears
further mischief. A guilty conscience gives timidity, creates a panic, and
expects retaliation when “no man pursueth.” ‘ Suspicion always haunts the
guilty mind.” 2. Zhe tendency to aggressive war. Jeroboam took similar‘ pre-
cautions to Rehoboam (1 Ki. xii. 25), Kings ambitious and plunge into war.


“ He that is of a proud heart stirreth up strife.” Who can tell the strifes and
aware thus created }


“ Towns turned to ashes, fanes involved in fire’!
These deeds the guilt of rash ambition tell.”


2. Lack of faith in God. This leads to self-sufficiency, mischievous erterprises
and failure. In personal salvation and national deliverances, weak is an arm of
flesh. ‘‘Some remember (trust, glory in remembrance of) chariots, aad some
remember horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our God”
(Ps xx. 7).


Conscientious ScruPLes.—Verses 13—17,


Jeroboam, afraid of reunion of the tribes, took measures to make separation
final. He introduced calf-worship in Bethel and Dan, two distinct places at
opposite ends of his kingdom. He selected priests from the lowest of the
people, thus weakened his kingdom and caused many worthy men to migrate to
Judah, who, faithfully attached to the worship of Jehovah, could not conscien-
tiously bow to idols. I, In refusing to worship idols. They remem-
bered the injunction, ‘‘Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor worship
them.” Daniel’s companions were steadfast. II. In braving the results
of their conduct. The wrath of the king, and the ridicule of the tribes ;
ejection from their oifice, persecution and exile. “ Tbe emperor commands thee
to do sacrifice,” said the Proconsul to Cyprian; “therefore consu!t for thy
welfare.” “Iam a Christian,” was the heroic reply; “and I cannot sacrifice to
your gods; do, therefore, what you are commanded ; as for me, in so just a
cause there needs no consultation.” III. In sesking to worship God
according to conscience. They desired a purer worship and sought a
more convenient place; left their suburbs and their possessions, and came to
Judah and Jerusalem. (Pilgrim Fathers.) In the conduct of these priests and
people we nave—l. A conscience to acknowledge. Some in authority do not
recognise it. Conscience the vicegerent of God, omnipotent, can never be
crushed. Kings may control movements of body, but never alter convictions of
seal. Neither fraud nor force can make good men disobey behests of conscience.
2. A precedent to follow. Men may urge customs of the people and fashions of
the nation ; expediency and personal obligations to superiors ; the dangers of
singularity and terrible penalty of our choice, but we must be faithful; “ Dare
to do right.” ‘We ought to obey God rather than men.”


fue Srrencta aNnp AtrrRacrion oF a Kinapom.—Versea 3 and 13-17,


I. In the unity of its subjects. By blood Benjamin more closely
related to Ephraim than Judah, All traditions of Benjamin antagonistic to
Judah. Now estrangement and feud ceased. Religious and political capital estab-
iished on border line. Two tribes unite, and prepare for defence. Danger
unites all ranks together. (Elizabeth and Spanish Armada.) II. In the purity
of its worship. Benjamin attached to temple worship. Priests and Levites
migrated in large numbers to the southern kingdom for purer bain and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


em ee


{cHaP Xz


safety. Recognition of God greater security than armies and fleets; moral
vigour more attractive than extensive trade. III. In the righteousness
of its rule. Wise to strengthen cities and defend forts; better to consolidate
the throne in rectitude. Numbers give physical strength, but just concessions
and righteous laws support and safeguard the nation, Jeroboam’s kingdom
weakened, Rehoboam’s strengthened.


Yur Famity anp Domestio Pouicy or Renonoam.—Verses 18-23.


Danger past, indulgence began. The domestic policy of Rehoboam might he
worldly wise, but it was sinful. I, The family was founded in dis-
obedience to God. The royal harem inferior to his father’s, equally
in violation of the law. 1. In multiplying wives. (a) For himself; (0) For his
sons, Wives not strangers, but daughters of Israel, and of family of David, yet
forbidden. “ Neither shall he multiply wives to himself.” 2. Jn choice of a
favourite son. He set aside eldest son, preferred Abijah in fondness for his
mother. Solomon had divine warrant, but in destining youngest for kingdom
the king violated the law (Deut. xxi, 15, 16). ‘‘They have set up kings, but
not by me; they have made princes, and I knew it not.” II, The family
was governed by worldly policy. “He dealt wisely”—+e., with
deep and calculating policy (Ex. i. 10). ‘ Rehoboam’s wisdom was shown—
1. In dispersing his other sons instead of allowing them to remain together in
Jerusalem, where they might have joined in a plot against Abijah, as Adonijah
and his brothers did against Solomon (1 Ki. i. 5-10). 2. In giving his sons
positions which might well content them, and prevent them from being jealoue
of Abijah” [Speak. Com.]. Rivalry prevented, public peace and safety secured,
not by worldly sagacity and bestowment of patronage. Trust in God and loyalty
to his commands the best policy.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 13-16. The duty of Pro-
testants. This will lead me to set
before you—I. The conduct of Pro-
testants in that day. 1. In it they


into it. 3. The search steadfast. The
heart fixed, determined, purposed. No
hesitancy, wandering, and half-heart-
edness. ‘“ Qut tradiderunt cor suum,


bore testimony against the reigning
abominations; 2. They steadfastly
adhered to the service of their God ;
3. They renounced all for conscience
sake. II. Our duty as Protestants at
the present day. 1. We should realise
our own religious principles; 2. We
should show their superior efficacy to
sanctify the heart and life. Address
those (1) Who are conforming to this
world; and (2) Those who are like
the Israelites, setting their hearts
fully to seek the Lord their God
(C. Simeon].

Ver. 16. 1. God the object of
search. The sublimest and most need-
ful in creation. The foundation of all
religion and strength. 2. The search
es Heart, all the heart throwa

20


who delivered up their hearts to seek
the Lord; to run any hazard rather
than violate conscience. Such were
the English exiles in Queen Mary’s
days, from whom Stephen Gardiner
vowed so to stop sending of all supplies
that for very hunger they should eat
their own nails, and then feed on their
fingers’ ends; but ‘threatened folk
live long,’ and before these banished
men were brought to that bill of fare,
the Bishop was eaten up of worms”
[Trapp].

These verses describe the condition
of the northern kingdom in Jeroboam’s
time. 1. Disgraced by calf-worship.
2. Lacking the principal thing. Seats
of worship, no true sanctuaries, for the
ark, the symbol of God’s presence


CmaY. x1.)


wanting. Not “ the house of God,” but
‘‘a house of high places.” 3. Weakened
by emigration. Innovations drove the
best from the country. The king
went from bad to worse. :

Ver. 17. Three years, &c. Temporary
Religion. This a brief description of
the spirit of his reign. I. Period of
profession. By apostasy of ten tribes,
and the belief that the thing proceeded
from God as a punishment for Solo-
moun’s idolatry, the king brought to
reflection and obedience. This only
temporary. When kingdom suffi-
ciently fortified, and he thought him-
self secure, he forsook the law of
Jehovah, and all Israel with him (ch.
xii. 1). Many fall away, some before,
and others after three years of pro-
fession. ‘“ Ye did run well, who did
hinder ?” Il. The period of
apostasy. In prosperity or security.
When no dangers nigh. In heart un-
faithful, though external worship un-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


i
disturbed (ch. xii. 28). High places,
monumental stones and idols, dis-
figured the land. Apostasy more
grievous than before. The first three
years walked in the way of David; in
the fourth year, decline which neutral-
ised all advantages of immigration, and
in the fifth year punishment by inva-
sion and success of Shishak (xii. 2).
Such the course of life!

Vers. 18-22. A Family Record. In
which we find—l, Kindred mixed
together. All three wives of David’s
family, and his own kindred. 2. Par-
tiality displayed. “Rehoboam loved
Maachah” (ver. 22) for beauty or con-
formity to his wick.‘ practices.
3. Numbers in abundance. “ Eighteen
wives and threescore concubines, and
begat twenty-and-eight sons and
threescore daughters.” The family a
divine institution, should be the best
of kingdoms and a type of heaven.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XI.


Vers, 1-5. Ye shall not go. Little
can we at the beginning of an action
guess at God’s intention at the conclu-
sion [Bishop eed. It is one of the
greatest praises of God’s wisdom that
he can turn the evil of men to his own
glory [Zbid.].

Vers. 13-15. Worship cast off.
Whatever is morally wrong cannot be
politically right [Burke]. We never
do evil so thoroughly and cordially as
when we are led to it by a false
principle of conscience [Pascal].

* Not thou, O Lord, from us, but we


Withdraw ourselves from thee ”
[French}


Vers. 14-16. Left, de. The good
men in a kingdom counteract the
tendency to anarchy and disruption.
“Righteousness exalteth a nation.”
The guarantee of a nation’s progress
and stability is to be found, not in the
invincibility of its armies, not in the
vastness of its commerce, not in the
genius, the learning, or the wealth of
its citizens, but in the sound morality
and religious sentiment of the people
[Dr. Thomas].


HOMILSTIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. {oHap. xm


ieee


OHAPTER XIL


Oxrrrcaz, Norns.] This chapter parallel with 1 Ki. xiv. 21-81, but considerably enlarges
the narrative contained in that passage. The account of Shishak’s chariots and horse
men, the composition of his army, the warning and the promise of Shemaiah are wholly
new features | Speak. Com. }.

Vers. 1-12.--The invasion of Shishak. Forsook, details in Kings, All Zs., i.e., all Judah
and Benjamin—all Israelites of these tribes, Shishak (Shishonk), first king of 22nd or
Bubastic dynasty, which, after the fall of Thebes from proud position of capital, 990 B.c.,
succeeded to the sovereignty of the whole country [Jam.]. Came to resent provocatiou
or carry out ambitious design, with great number of foreign auxiliaries. Ver. 3. Lubim,
Libyans west of Egypt (cf. ch. xvi. 8; Neh. iii. 9). Suk., called Troglodytes, cave-dwellers
by Sept. Some think they are Semitic Arabs, dwellers in tents, Ethiop., Heb. Cushim
from south of Egypt. Ver. 4. Fenced (ch. xi. 5-12), fortified with so much trouble.
Shem. (ch. xi. 2). The message not in Kings; addressed to Rehoboam and princes while
Shishak before Jerusalem. Ver.6. Humbled, bowed themselves (chs. vii. 14; xiii. 18; xxxii.
26). Jehovah is just (Ezra ix. 15; Neh. ix. 33). Ver. 7. Some deliverance, t.e., deliverance
in a little or short time (cf. Ezra ix. 8); respite from total destruction, yet tributary tc
Egypt. Ver. 8. Know the difference between God’s rule and foreign yoke. Vers. 9-11.
Cime up, &c., resumes description of attack upon Jerusalem. Took everything valuable,
Nhields borne like maces by owners or guard of the palace when they attended the King
in public procession. Ver. 12. Instead of destruction, lit., these were good words; signa
oi national repentance and amendment; good things, purposes, and practices to which
God had regard. ‘“ Ver. 12. Concludes the narrative, is additional to Kings and
characteristic. It aptly terminates the writer’s history of the invasion, which he has
presented to us throughout in a strictly moral and didactic aspect ” [Speak. Com.}.

Vers, 13-16.—Rehoboam’s reign and death. Strengthened, new life and vigour after in.
vasion ; revival of religion and long reign. Years, on age of Rehoboam (ef. 1 Ki. xii. 8;
xiv. 21). Naamah, probably a daughter of Nahash (1 Chr. xix. 1). vil, through unhappy
influence of his mother, a heathen foreigner, he received a bias towards idolatry. Pre-
pared not, fixed not; lacked earnestness and consistency. Book, refers to authorities of


the reign of which he gives account. Wars, not open war, but incursions and skirmishes
on borders for plunder.


HOMILETICS.


Nartonat Ipotatry anp Nationa PunisumMent.—Verses 1-3 and 9—13.


Rehoboam did not check introduction of heathen abominations. The lascivious
worship of Ashtoreth allowed to exist by side of true religion. “Images” of
Baal and fellow-divinities set up, and the worst corruptions tolerated. For
fuller account see 1 Ki. xiv. 22-24, These evils punished and put down by
terrible calamity of Egyptian invasion. I, The national sins. “They
had transgressed against the Lord.” 1. In provoking him to jealousy. God
announced Himself to be “a jealous God” (Ex. xx. 5); a God “whose name
is jealous.” A figure of marriage, in which God, like a husband of his people, is
provoked to jealousy by the unfaithfulness of his wife. A strong, suggestive
term. 2. In public worship of idols. Altars and high places built, woods planted,
gods and graven iinages publicly patronised in utter disobedience to God’s com-
mand. 3. In rapid spread of iminorality. ‘There were also Sodomites in the
land.” They did according to all the abominations of the nations, &c. (1 Ki.
xiv. 24). Paramours consecrated to the gods, a degraded class who practised


immorality, traded in wickedness under the sanction of religion, Judah’s
204


OHAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES


SSSR ST IR HTS TSS


ry
abominations worse than former days. The splendour of the temple and the
pomp of the priesthood ; secular privileges and religious teachers restrained not.
Their sins were grievous and universal; sins “above all that their fathers had
done.” II, The national punishment. Shishak, king of Egypt, in-
cited by Jeroboam, or ambitious of congvest, invaded the land and humbled the
nation in a successful campaigu. 1. The capital was disgraced. Jerusalew
entered and pillaged by a heathen army! A national disgrace for a city to be
broken down, without walls or defencs (Prov. xxv. 28; Neh. ii. 17). 2. The
crttes were taken. Places on whieh nv st such time and treasure to repair and
defend. Great Canaanite towns and Le. «ical cities east and west of Jordan fell
without a struggle. High towers and ‘ortified places no defence against wicked.
ness. ‘A manshall not be established by wickedness.” 2. The treasures carried
away. The palace and the temple robbed. The shields of gold and everything
valuable taken away. Deep humiliation, grievous bondage the price of igno-
minious peace and the retribution of a watchful providence! “TI also left you
in the hand of Shishak.”


THe BELEAGURED CourtT.—Verses 5-8.


While Shishak was before the city, Rehoboam and the princes were delibera-
ting in solemn assembly. Warned of sin and punishment, and spared on account
of repentance. Notice—I, The sins committed. ‘Ye have forsaken
me.” This the gravamen of offence. Though possessing the temple and the
priesthood, yet idolatry mixed with worship of Jehovah. Impure rites and un
checked licence. II. The danger threatened. 1. Forsaken of God.
“ Therefore have I also left you.” Many would think this through negligence
in preparations, impolicy in government. Bereft of strength and defence
because God had forsaken them. 2. Besieged by Shishak. ‘In the hand of
Shishak.” A handstrong and oppressive. This a natural result. When God
forsakes. we are unable to resist, and the enemy cunquers. III, The humilia-
tion produced. Calamity traced to national sins, repentance and contrition
followed. When rebuked we should be humbled, justify God, and judge our-
selves. “ Even kings and princes must bend or brake before God, either be
humbled or be ruined.” IV. The deliverance granted. “TI will grant
them some deliverance.” A short space was given for amendment, wrath was
not poured out like a flood upon the city, yet suzerainty of Egypt had to be
accepted. Punishment delayed, not escaped. Destruction of Jerusalem reserved
for Nebuchadnezzar, Escape only through Christ and righteous conduct.


SHEMAIAH’sS PREACHING.—Verses 7~12.


I. It was divinely taught in its matter. “The word of the Lord
came to Shemaiah.” Not truth from second-hand or traditional forms, The
message not argument nor speculation ; but simple, entire word of God. “The
preaching that I bid thee” was the command to Jonah. “If any man speak,
let him speak as the oracles of God.” II. It was direct in its aim. A
simple, clear utterance, direct as an arrow to its end. Preaching toned down,
lacks point, goes not from the heart to the heart. The end missed for want
of vitality and definite aim. We must not merely arouse emotion to find vent
in action; but preach to save sinners. Chrysostom’s hearers admired and
applauded ; he rebuked and desired araendment of life. “Show your appro-
bation by obedience; that is the only praise I seek.” Massillon’s hearers felt
the word to “ strike and stick.” Peter’s audience “ were pricked to the heart”


by his earnest appeal. III. It was practical in its results. Aah
20


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (cmap. xr


ee a a EE


great and encouraging ; illustrating the power of the Divine word faithfully
preached. 1. In the minds of the people. Why not? Are there not laws in the
moral, like chemical affinities in the natural world ; between religious truth and
the deepest feelings of the human heart? Where one is spoken, why should not
the other respond? (a) In acknowledgment of guilt. “They said, The Lord is
righteous.” (b) In contrition of spirit. “They have humbled themselves.” 2.
In the procedure of God. (a) Divine decree revoked. ‘The wrath of the Lord ~
turned from him, that he would not destroy altogether.” (6) Certain deliver-
ance given. “I will grant them some deliverance.” (c) Measure of prosperity
restored. ‘Also in Judah things went well” (ver. 12). With results like
these pulpit power will never decay. The revivals of Pentecost, of Whitfield
and Wesley, may be accomplished again by right men. ‘Cry aloud, spare not,
lift up thy voice like a trumpet.”


Brass ror Goi, on CounterFzit Principtes.— Verses 9-11.


In the plunder of Egyptian king were “ golden shields,” splendid insignia of
Solomon, Old court etiquette kept up notwithstanding its loss, on public and
solemn occasions. Inferior metal replaced the gold. This typical of counterfeits
in personal conduct, Christian worship, and Christian organisations, I.
Worthless profession instead of real piety in personal life.
Form of godliness without power. Profession “sounding brass or tinkling
cymbal,” hollow, vain, and useless. Professors degenerate in character,
influence, and solid worth. ‘Thy silver is become dross.” Worse even than
this, for baser and harder metals express debased and degenerate life, ‘“ They
are brass and iron” (Jer. vi. 28). II. Idolatrous practices instead of
pure worship of God. Men exchange the glory of God for idols of gold
and silver. ‘The ritual takes the place of the spiritual. God is forgotten, and
images and gaints are adored; Mammon and the world worshipped. “They
changed the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image like to corruptible
man” (Rom, i. 23)—(The infinite, spiritual, and divine changed into something
finite, material, and human). III. False representations by which
institutions hide their decline. What folly for Rehoboam to carry
shields of brass in customary procession! Vain and proud, he was anxious not
to appear degraded by absence of gold shields! In churches deadness and
divisions cannot be hidden by noise, numbers, and display. In kingdoms
rottenness and decay will not be healed by bribery, court splendour, and


successful war. “ How is the gold become dim! How is the most fine gold
changed |”


ReHosoam THE Unreapy.—Verse 12.


This is the summing-up of Rehoboam’s life. He was not so bad as some, but
did evil in various ways, not from design as from neglect. Evil effects of the
father’s sin and mother’s idolatry seen in their son; yet another cause, viz., a
want of heart. He was not thoroughly consecrated to worship of Jehovah,
I. He did not begin life with seeking the Lord. 1. He was
young, should have sought wisdom ; but went to Shechem without prayer or
sacrifice, That which commences without God will end in failure. 2. He
leaned on counsellors, saying, “ What advice give ye?” Of those counsellors, he
chose worst, younger and prouder nobles. Those who reject divine wisdom
generally refuse all other wisdom. 3, He committed great folly by threatening
the people and refusing just demands ; and that before he was accepted as their
king. None of his father’s wisdom. How can they act prudently and prosper-
ouae? are not guided of the Lord? II. He showed no heart in


omaP, xt. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
i


ee een


seeking the Lord afterwards. 1. He obeyed the voice when the man
of God forbade him to fight with Israel; yet afterward forsook the law
(2 Chr. xii. 1), He is said to have been “young and tender-hearted,” which
means sofé (2 Chr. xiii. 7). 2. He winked at most horrible crimes among people
whom he ought to have judged (1 Ki. xiv. 24). 3. He fell into his father’s sins.
4. He busied himself more for the world than for God. We hear nothing of
his worship, but much of his building; nothing of his faith, but much of his
fickleness (2 Chr. xi. 5-12). III. He was not fixed and persevering
in seeking the Lord. 1. For three years loyalty to God made him
prosper, by bringing better sort from calf worship into Judah (2 Chr. xi. 13-17),
yet he forsook the Lord who prospered him, 2. He grew proud; and God
handed him over to Shishak. 3. Humbled himself, was pardoned, yet stripped
the Lord’s house to buy off King of Egypt. 4. Wrought no great reforms,
celebrated no great passover, yet owned “the Lord is righteous” (ver. 6).
IV. He had no care to seek the Lord thoroughly. Yet no man
good by accident ; no one goes right without intention to do so. Without heart
religion must die. 1. Human nature departs from the right way, especially in
kings tolerated in more sin than others. 2. Courtiers usually run the wrong
way, especially young, proud, and frivolous. Rehoboam lived gay and proud,
and gave himself up to their lead. 3. Underlings apt to follow us and applaud
if we go in an evil path, even as Judah followed Rehoboam, Thus those who
should lead are led.

The kind of preparation required in diligent and acceptable seeking of the
Lord. To feel and confess need in whole of life. Cry unto him for help and
wisdom. Yield to his guidance and not follow counsel of vain persons. Be
anxious to be right in everything, searching the Scriptures and seeking by prayer
to know what to do. Serve the Lord carefully and earnestly, leaving nothing
to chance, fashion, or whim. Are there any professors like Rehoboam? Any
hopeful young men who lack whole-hearted devotion to the Lord? Any older
men who have suffered for vacillation, hesitation, or double-mindedness#? Any
just escaped from such trouble, but are not firm and ready even now? Oh, for
a clear sense of the evil and folly of such a condition! Oh, for the confirming
power of the Holy Ghost! Oh, for vital reunion with the Lord Jesus [Spurgeon],


HOMILETIC HINTS


Ver. 1. Strong, and forsook the law.
No danger, no watchfulness. Pro-
sperity leading to apostasy. In poverty
men pray, in weakness and affliction
attend God’s house, &c. “ Established”
and ‘strengthened ” leads to say,
“Depart from us.” ‘The prosperity
of fools destroys them.” All Lerael
with him. 1. The force of bad example.
2. The readiness of men to follow it.
3. The guilt of those who follow, when
they should reprove. Example con-
tagious; beneficially or perniciously
men influence others; raise them up
or bring them down. “ Be not par-
taker of other men’s sins.”

Ver. 5. Forsaken me. Conditions of
enjoyment, prosperity and success.


AND SUGGESTIONS.


Awful results of abandonment by God.
Prevalent corruption, deeper disgrace,
and national disaster.

Ver. 7. Humiliation the means of
deliverance. From the message which
was sent them from the Lord we pro-
perly observe—I. That sin will surely
bring the judgment of God upon us.
Nor is there any possibility of escape
but by repentance, since God has
ordained—II. That sin, in order to
its being forgiven, must be repented of.
It is, however, no little consolation
to know—III. That sin, truly repented
of, shall assuredly be forgiven. Appli-
cation—1l. Have yourepented? 2. Are
you pardoned? [C. Simeon, .A.].
Wrath of God. 1. Its reality. i Tts

2


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


—


cause. 3. Its agencies. 4. Ite sus-
pense. In the midst of judgment God
remembers mercy.

Ver. 8. Know. The discipline of
punishment, or great contrasts.
i. Between the Theocracy, or rule of
God, and foreign rule or “servants”
of Shishak. 2. Between the freedom
of Christ and the bondage of sin.
3. Between correction of providence
and left alone in folly.

Ver. 12. Went well. 1. Many good
men in general defection in whom good
things were found (1 Ki. xiv. 13).
2. Many good things, in prevalent cor-
ruption. Temple, priesthood, sacrifices
and ordinances. A. few may be “ the
holy seed, the substance thereof,” the
preserving principle. Few in Sardis
(Rev. iii. 4). .

Ver. 14. Prepared not. Learn—
1. That serving God will prevent from
evil, 2. That for God’s service the
heart should be prepared and fixed.
3. That when the heart is not fixed or
prepared men are easily drawn away.
4, Thatwhen men are drawn away from





fonar. xm





God into evil, consequences are fearful.
Weakness ensues, corruptions spread,
temptations increase, enemies prevail,
and ruin inevitable!


“ And he that will be cheated to the last,
Delusions strong as hell shall bind him
fast.” :


Ver. 15. Book of Shem. Not now
extant, though God, if he had pleased,
could as well have preserved those
books for the use of the church, as he
did the holy vessels of the temple from
the spoil of Shishak [Zrapp]. Provi-
dence and goodness of God in pre-
serving and handing down Scriptures
to our times, Why not lost, like many
classic authors, amid the ruins of the
barbarians? From the whole chapter
we see—l. Rehoboam forsuking the
law. 2. Rehoboam punished for his
defection. 3. Rehoboam spared on
repenting. 4. Rehoboam ruined at
last for want of decision in religion
[Ing. Cobbin].

“But evil is wrought for want of thought
As well as want of heart” [Hood].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XII.


Ver. 1. Forsook. A man cannot
have been three years wise and then
have returned to old courses without
hia return being marked by aggrava-
tions of evil. The Jast state of the man
is worse than tue first. “The dog is
turned to his own vomit again, and the
sow that was washed to her wallowing
in the mire.” To have been halfway to
heaven, and then to have been thrown
down—what agonies of recollection!
[Dr. eed,

Vers. 6-3. Shematah the prophet.
Ministers of the gospel should be
gentle, tender, and affectionate. They
should be kind in feeling and courteous
in manner, like a father or mother.
Nothing is ever gained by a sour, harsh,
crabbed, dissatisfied manner. Sinners
are never scolded either into duty or
into heaven [A. Barnes.] I never was
fit to say a word to a sinner except
when I had a broken heart myself ;
when I was melted into penitency, and

208


felt as though I had just received

pardon to my soul, when my heart was

full of tenderness and pity { Payson].
Ver. 6. Humbled themselves.


“Tf hearty sorrow

Be a sufficient ransom for offence,

I tender it here ; I do as truly suffer

As e’er I did commit” [Shaks.].

Ver. 8. Servants. It is not in man’s
nature to be out of all service, and to
be self-dependent. We may choose
our master, but God or mammon we
must serve. We cannot possibly be
in a neutral or intermediate state.
Such a state does not exist. If we will
not be Christ’s servants we are forth-
with Satan’s, and Christ set us froe
from Satan only by making us His
servants [J. H. Newman].

Ver. 10. Shields of brass.


“ Thus men go wrong with an ingenioar


8. ’
Bend the straight rule to their owa
crooked will,


OHAP, xrIt.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
eer a —_—_—_—--


{


And with a clear and shining lamp comfortable and satisfactory. That is


supplied, i
First put it out, then take it for a guide” Beske Proper . poe ovat von xEals
question. Things can only go well


0 rT}.
; bee ae when the heart goes well. When things

Ver. 12. Things went well. We are do not go well we should inquire into
called upon to observe the relation moral reasons ; why this affliction, why
and progress of events and to inquire this loss, why this discontent? Out of
into the moral reasons which explain  guch faithful self-dealing will come the
either their ill-going or their happy humbleness, the penitence which are
advancement. We often speak of always followed by pardon, restoration,
things going well in too narrow a and spiritual harmony [Dr. Parker].
sense, simply meaning that property Ver. 15. Wars.
increases, that health is continued,and «Phen time turns torment when man
that the whole outward environment is turns a fool” [Young]


CHAPTER XITl.


Crrticat Nores.] This chapter parallel to 1 Ki. xv. 1-8. Abijah suoceeda and wars
sgainst Jeroboam (vers. 1-4); declares the right of his cause (vers. 4-12); his victory and
end (vers. 13-22).

Vers. 1-3.—The opening war of Abijah. Abijah, Abijam in Kings. Ver. 2. Michaiah,
variation of Maachah (xi. 10; 1 Ki. xv. 2); daughter of Uriel and Tamar, daughter ot
Absalom. Hence called daughter, i.e., granddaughter of Absalom. Ver. 3. War. Probably
Jeroboam sought to wrest whole country from Abijah. Array, i.e., took the field and began
war. ‘‘ The numbers are doubtless large, considering the smallness of the two kingdoms.
It must be borne in mind, however, that Oriental armies are mere mobs, vast numbers
accompanying the camp in hope of plunder; so that the gross numbers described as
going upon the Asiatic expedition are often far from denoting the exact number of the
fighting men. But in accounting for the large number of soldiers enlisted in the respec-
tive armies of Abijah and Jeroboam, there is no need of resorting to this mode of explana-
tion; for we know, by the census of David, the immense amount of the population that
was capable of bearing arms (2 Chr. xxi. 5; ef. ch. xiv. 8; xvii. 14) [Jamieson].

Vers. 4-12.—Abijah’s address to Jeroboam. Ver. 4. Zemaraim, % mount not identified,
amid the great range of Central Palestine; upon borders of the two kingdoms. Ver. 5.
Gave. Divine right claimed, but conditions omitted (Ps. cxxxii. 12; lxxxix. 30-32). Salt,
i.e., a covenant inviolable, irrevocable (Lev. ii. 13; Num. xviii. 19). Salt emblem of per-

etuity. Ver. 6. Rebelled. Jeroboam upbraided as a usurper, and his subjects as rebels,

Ver. 7. Vain men, i.e., ‘low fellows,” ‘‘ persons of the baser sort” (cf. Judg. ix. 4; 2 Sam.
vi. 20). Belial, profitless and evil (Deut. xiii. 13). Young, t.e., new to his work, in.
experienced, Tender-hearted, wanting in resolution and spirit. Ver. 8. Religious condi-
tion of two kingdoms now contrasted. Enemy proud of a great multitude, and with them
golden calves, proofs of apostasy. Ver. 9. Cast out (ch. xi. 14). Seven, “a bullock and
two rams” tha oftering required at original consecration of sons of Aaron (Ex. xxix, i
Lev. viii. 2). lv appears that Jeroboam, for reasons of his own, enlarged the sacrifice
and required it at the consecration of every priest [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 10, Judah had
pure and regular observance of ordinances of Moses. Not forsaken. God with them
only in a certain degree). They had daily sacrifice with all its accompaniments.
aie 11. God himself their captain. Priests with their trumpets brought to war in
remembrance of God's command (Num. x. 9), and example of Moses (Num. xxxi. 6).
The war, therefore, sacred war.

Vers. 13-20.—Abijah’s victory. Ambush. To surprise in front and rear; made while
Abijah was haranguing. Ver. 14. Cried. A panic might have ensued if leaders had not
looked to God and “sounded trumpets,” which was a pledge of victory and help to the
men (Num. x.9; xxxi. 6), Judah responded, and the rush was resistless. Ver. 17, Great
slaughter. Nothing in original to indicate this was allin one day. The writer is pro.
hatly compressing into a few words the circumstances of the whole war [Speak. Coin}.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (CHAP. x1


ener


Ver. 18. Under. Humbled, defeated, not made tributary. Ver. 19. Bethel. Frontier town
in which one of calves placed. Towns, villages or suburbs. Ver. 20. Defeat so great that
Jeroboam did not recover in Abijah’s time. He died in second year of Asa (1 Ki, xv. 25).
Struck. Probably the message of the prophet Ahijah (1 Ki, xiv. 10; xii. 15). : y

Vers, 21, 22.—Abijah’s end. Mighty. ‘Took courage, grew bold,” after seourity ; like
his father and grandfather, gave himself to indulgence and multiplied wives. Ver. 22.
Story, commentary, “the midrash or memoir, which was extant in the time of the
chroniat, or the original form from which he drew his information” [Murphy].


HOMILETICS.


Arrempt to Reverse Diyint ARRANGEMENTS,—Verses 3-19.


God permitted revolt of ten tribes and Rehoboam forbidden to regain them
(ch. x. 15). Frequent skirmishes between kings of Judah and Israel (ch. xii.
15). Jeroboam now takes advantage of Abijah’s youth, and judging from the
speech, claims the crown and invades the territory of Judah. No prophet for-
bade the war, Jeroboam had forfeited all claims to protection, his effort in vain,
the Divine arrangements could not be upset. I. An attempt most daring
in its design. ‘Now yethink to withstand the kingdom of the Lord”
(ver. 8). A kingdom not set up by men, but established and perpetuated by
Divine decree in the house of David. The design indicates pride, presumption,
and impiety. Might as well withstand, resist the rolling planet or the rising
tide. “If this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought (be over-
thrown) ; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, &e.” (Acts v. 39). IT.
An attempt depending upon numbers for its success. “Ye
be a great multitude” (ver. 8). ‘There is no king saved by the multitude of
an host; a mighty man is not delivered by much strength.” “ Behold the
multitude melted away” in the armies of Xerxes, Sennacherib, and Napoleon,
before the presence and purpose of God. ‘ Associate yourselves, O ye people,
and ye shall be broken in pieces.” III. The numbers employed in
the attempt were men of worthless character. The best soldiers,
men of courage and character, generally selected for daring enterprises (Crom-
well’s Ironsides, Havelock’s Saints). But the army of Jeroboam composed of
worthless men. 1. The king himself stained with ungodly actions. Jeroboam
an idolater and innovator in past. Now found rebelling against God and taking
advantage of Abijah’s youth, as he did of Rehoboam’s weakness (ver. 8). 2.
The men employed were a mixed mob. (a) “ Vain men,” loose in character and
useless in war (Cataline’s comrades). Plenty such now, “empty fellows,” ready
to join any cause, follow any leader who pays best. “I have not sat with vain
persons.” (b) The children of Belial, wicked men, hating all control and setting
up any that would carry out their wishes. Abimelech hired “‘vain and light
persons, which followed him” (Judgesix. 4). IV. Hence the utter failure
of the attempt. ‘God smote Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and
Judah” (ver. 15). “‘ When omnipotence goes forth to war, what can be the
issue of the battle? When God takes the glittering sword, and his hand lays
heavy in judgment, can grasshoppers stand before him?” ‘“ There is no wisdom,
nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord.” Julian the Apostate could
not falsify prediction. The word was uttered and the secession a fact. The
powers of earth and hell could not change that. “For ho spake and it was
done; he commanded and it stood fast.” Hence beware “lest haply ye be
found,” in daily life and moral conduct, “even to fight against God.”


A Great Spercn.—Verses 4-13.


Abijah had entered the enemies’ territory—stood upon eminence. Jeroboam’s


army at foot of the hi, and according to ancient; custom Abijah harangued,
210


OHAP, X11. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONI CLES,,





poured out invective and abuse upon the enemy and extolled his own merits.
f{. Its claims concerning Judah. God recognised in the gift of the
kingdom; in the worship of the temple, with its legal priesthood and regular
sacrifices ; in the warfare of life. ‘The Lord is our God and we have not for-
saken him.” He claims the right position and obeys the true commands. Con-
ceptions of God affect doctrine and practice. Custom, law, and outward restraints
may keep right in some things ; but only feeling of dependence upon God, sense
of responsibility to him and constant acknowledgment of him, will give security,
strength, and dignity to inheritance. II. Its accusations against
Israel. Jeroboam a rebel and usurper, and must be put down. He was
leading a revolutionary party, “sons of Belial.” He had not the beauty and
established order of worship, the legal priesthood ; but golden calves, illegal and
heathen priests, desecrated altars, and a hopeless cause. Abijah no usurper nor
idolator! Whatever the corruptions of his kingdom, it was better than Israel,
&e.| Thus men may deny the power of religion and boast of its form—view
themselves not in their defects and infirmities, but in their good qualities and
virtues. In lofty and contemptuous tones recite their merits and condemn their
adversaries. Trust in themselves that they are righteous and despise others.
III. Its passionate appeal to the people. “O children of Israel,
fight ye not against the Lord God of your fathers” (ver. 12). Religion is
appealed to. God is concerned; the war sacred and religious. History appealed to.
Abijah in historic line, they were cutting themselves off from its unity, currents,
and privileges, and setting the God of their fathers at nought. Humanity
appealed to; why engage in a fruitless war? ‘For ye shall not prosper.” What
folly, base ingratitude to fight against God!


A Great Batriz.—Verses 13~20.


Jeroboam planning while Abijah speaking. Address unheeded, A detach-
ment sent quietly round foot of the hill. Abijah and his men found themselves
surrounded. Leaders “cried unto the Lord,” Judah rallied, responded with a
war-shout, which preserved from panic and led to victory. I. Fought with
unequal forces. 1. Human aid on one side. A proud king, immense
multitudes, skill and generalship. 2. God’s presence on the other side. Presence
in temple, on field of battle, and with symbols of victory (Num. x. 9; xxxi. 6).
No wise king enters upon war without due preparation to stand his ground,
despite formidable odds. “ What king going to make war against another king
sitteth not down first, and consulteth whether he be able with ten thousand to
meet him that cometh against him with twenty thousand?” Common sense
should teach us not to begin any costly work without materials to fizsh it; not
to undertake what we have neither strength nor will to achieve, nor that in
which we are not prepared, if need be, to sacrifice life itself. II, Fought
for an impossible end. “For the cause was of God” (ch. x. 15). If
the decree of Darius and the superscription of Pilate could not be altered, neither
could the established fact, the fixed arrangements of God. All opposition abor-
tive, can never set aside the plans and processes of Divine government, and will
re-act upon the rebel himself. The Great Maker and Ruler of the universe does
not act by necessity nor by caprice, but by intelligent plan. Man may change
his purpose, because defective or impracticable. God is absolutely perfect. ‘ He
is in one mind, and who cen turn him?” III. Hence utter failure in
the attempt. “The children of Judah prevailed” (ver. 18). ‘Terrible
slaughter, towns and cities captured. “The children of Israel were brought
under at that time,” utterly defeated in their purpose. ‘“ Ambushment,” strata-
gems cannot thwart God. “Hight hundred tkousand chosen men” trae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [oHar. x11


sunset


avail than one thousand. Folly to resist God and harden ourselves in sin, by
disobeying his commands, by rebelling against his providential dealings, and
by refusing the offers of mercy. “ He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength;
who hath hardened himself against him and prospered?” “Ye shall not
prosper ” (ver. 12).


Rexicious OBsERVANCR AND PRAcTICcAL Apostasy.


Abijah here at his best; eloquent in speech, religious in appearance, and
victorious in conflict. Read account in Kings to form a true estimate. He
walked in the sins of Rehoboam, and his heart “was not perfect before God.”
He boasted of religious observances, yet guilty of idolatry and its attendant
immoralities (1 Ki. xiv. 23, 24). Learn—I. The folly of judging men
by outward forms or special occasions. Forms may be assumed,
put on like clothes for the occasion, Circumstances may call forth the best of
the man. Religious for the occasion. II, Men may hide their sins
under the garb of religious practices. Domestic evils and personal
inconsistency hidden by outward worship, liberal giving, &c. The dark side
eovered with the. bright side, truth defended and its claims resisted. III.
Men may reproach others for sins of which they are guilty
themselves. Abijah blamed Jeroboam for casting off Ged, when he was not
right with God himself. His own character not better than that of his enemy.
The Jews condemned the Gentiles for doing the same things which they virtually
did themselves. Greville, in his memoirs, exhibits the very faults, critics say,
which he freely condemns in kings, queens, and nobles. ‘Thou art inexcusable,
O man, whosoever thou art, that judgest: for wherein (the matter in which)
thou judgest another, thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judgest doest
(substantially) the same things” (Rom. ii. 1).


* Be not too rigidly censorious :
A string may jar in the best master’s hand,
And the most skilful archer miss his aim ” [Roscommon],


As1yan’s RELIGION.


1. Defective m tts source. Springing from a divided heart. “ His heart was
not perfect” and ‘(he walked in the sins of his father.” 2. Occasional in its
appearance. Called into vigour by special exigency, fitful in operation, a religion
for special seasons. Much loud and spurious religion now; demonstrative on
extraordinary occasions, at ordinary times lukewarm and languid. In times of
war many awake, put on armour ; in time of quietness at home and early life
they are found in enemy’s camp. 3. Prominent in its display. Great in reform,
eloquent in speech, prominent in actions, Circumstances brought him to the
front. But only a religion of place and occasional service. 4. Uncertain in ita
duration. David before the giant, Judas Maccabeus before the host of
Epiphanes could not have been more prominent and more ready, but piety no
vital, lasting hold upon him. A heart weakened and dissipated by double
allegiance, became alienated ; service a vicious compromise ; religion a mere
episode, an interlude in a life of flagrant idolatry !


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 5. Covenant of salt. 1. A and mutual attachment,” friendship
bond of intimate friendship. “Toeat inviolable, incorruptible. 2. A pledge


salt together an act of sure friendship ef perpetuity. Salt consolidates and
212


OBAP, xvrt.]


reserves. The “lamp” or “torch” of

avid was always to burn (1 Ki. ii. 36;
2 Ki. viii. 19). Often on verge of
extinction through sins within and
darkness without, but house of David
never perished. “It is the struggle
between these contending elements to
which, after the shock of the disrup-
tion, the kingdom and church of Judah
was exposed, that gives the main
interest to the period of the seven
first successors of Solomon. Both
kingdom and church were menaced
with destruction at its commencement.
At its close both were established on a
basis sufficiently solid to withstand the
dangers of the later period for two mors
centuries” [Standey)

Vers. 6-12. <Abzah’s remonstrance
with Jeroboam. I. We shall consider
the words of our text—1. In reference
to the contest then pending between
Judah and Israel ; 2. Abijah’s address
was certainly striking and judicious;
3. The event justified his expectations.
Il. In reference to the contest now
existing between God and sinners.
1. There is a contest now pending ;
2. Suffer the word of exhortation ;
3. From the former view of this sub-
ject we may learn how to obtain the
blessing of God upon our aims;
4. From the latter view of this sub-
ject we may learn how to escape the
destruction to which we are exposed
[C. Simeon, M.A.].

Vers. 13-17. Man’s extremity and
God's power to help. Judah in very
great danger inveigled by ambushment.
I. God's people often brought into
extremities. 1. By their own foolish
enterprises. 2. By the temptations of
their enemies. 3. By the providence
of God leading them to test and train
them. “Their defence (Heb. shadow.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,





God a shadow from heat and tempest)
departed from them (Num. xiv. 9).
II. Gods people delivered by him in
extremities. Jeroboam had two to one
against Abijah, but lost the day.
Sense sees no deliverance, reason
declares it unlikely, but jwith assures it
will come. “The Lord 1s with us.”
1. By prayer. “They cried unto the
Lord.” 2. By supernatural power.
“ God delivered them into their hand.”
Israel at Red Sea against the
Ethiopians (2 Chron, xiv. 11), In the
day of great distress and great danger
to God’s people in Germany, Luther
cried in his closet, and came out,
declaring to friends “ Vicimus,


. wvicimus,’ we have overcome, we have


overcome. From that day Charles the
Fifth issued a proclamation that none
should be further molested for reli-
gion. “Thou art my deliverer: God -
is the Lord of Hosts, with him alone
is strength and power to deliver Israel.”
Vers. 20-22. Death a common lot.
1. It is tmevitable. Knocks with
impartial step at the door of the
cottage and the palace of the prince,
says Horace. It is appointed unto all
men. Cannot be bribed by prosperity
(“ Abijah waxed mighty”), nor post-
poned by adversity (“neither did Jero-
boam recover strength”). 2. It is
peculiar in method.  Abijah’s a natural
death, “slept with his fathers.” Jero-
boam ‘ struck.” He never survived
defeat ; stung by accusing conscience,
or inflicted by lingering, incurable
disease (like Jehoram, 2 Chron, xxi. 19)
which at last killed him. Death
terminates all earthly glory.
“Death hath ten thousand several doors


For men to take their exits ”
[John Webster].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XII,


Ver. 5. Salt. The Orientals were
accustomed to ratify their federal
engagements by salt. This substance
has, among the ancients, the emblem of
friendship and fidelity, and therefore
used in all their sacrifices and cove-


nants. It isa sacred pledge of hosp1-

tality which they never venture to

violate. Numerous instances occur of

travellers in Arabia, after being plun-

dered and stripped by the wandering

tribes of the desert, claiming ap pro-
2


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES


tection of some civilised Arab who,
after receiving him into his tent and
giving him salt, instantly relieves his
distress, and never forsakes him till he
has placed him in safety. An agree-
ment thus ratified is called in Scripture
“a covenant of salt” [Pasxton].

Vers. 6-12. Religion. When some
people talk of religion they mean
they have heard so many sermons
and performed so many devotions, and
thus mistake the means for the end.
But true religion is an habitual recol-
lection of God, and intention to serve
Him, and thus turns everything into
gold [John Newton]. For in religion
as in friendship, they who profess most
are ever the least sincere [Sheridan].
The dispute about religion and the
practice of it seldom go together
| Young}.

Vers. 13-17. God delivered. The
eraft of the Church’s enemies is never
but accompanied with cruelty, and





[OHAP. XIV.


—_——


their cruelty is seldom without craft,
But in things wherein they deal
proudly, God is above them, and by his
presence with his people he brings all
their plots, counsels, and enterprises to
nought. The enemies of the Jews in
Nehemiah’s time made great brags
at first what they would do, but when
they saw their plots discovered, and
their purposes defeated, they are pre-
sently crestfallen, and have no mind
nor courage to advance at all. To
plotters may be applied what is said of
Charles VIII, King of France, in his
expedition against Naples: “That he
came into the field like thunder and
lightning, but went out like a snuff;
more than a man at first, and less than
a woman at last.” In all ages of the
world, God’s signal presence with his
people hath delivered them and frus-
trated the designs and counsels of the
wicked [Thomas Brooks].





CHAPTER XIV.


Critican Nortzs. }
1-8; cf. 1 Kings xv. 8-12, 14, 15).
Vers. 1-5.—Asa destroys idol,


Strange, gods of foreign origin.
places first mentioned (Num, xxiii. 3).


Idolatry of Judah now detailed for first time.
Images, statues in stone of Baal.
or stocks of trees, dedicated to Ashtoreth, the Venus of Phoonicians.


Asa succeeds, suppresses idols, and defends his kingdom (vera.
Gains victory over Zerah and spoils Ethiopians,

Reigned, mounted the throne very young. Quiet, con-

tinued effect of the great battle of Zemaraim (ef. 1 Ki. xy. 11-14).


Good (ch, xxxi. 20).
High

Groves, trunks
Ver. 5. Images,


sun-images of Baal, different from images im ver. 3 (cf. xxxiv. 4; Lev. xxvi. 30).


Vers. 6-8.—Asa’s military defences.


Built, fortresses dismantled when Shishak made


successful invasion. Judea had been a dependency upon Egypt (ch. xii. 8), and dared
not to erect fresh fortifications. Now Egypt weak, Asa grew bold, strengthened himself
against his southern and northern neighbours. Among cities restored, probably most of
those fortified by Rehoboam (ch. xi. 6-10) [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 7. Land, i.e., unoccupied
by the foe; free and open to go where we please. Ver. 8. Targets, Judah heavy armed;
Benjamin, a warlike tribe, light armed, using sling and bow (Judg. xx. 16; 1 Ch. viii. 40).
The number embraced all capable of carrying arms and liable to service,

Vers. 8-15.—Asa defeats the Ethiopians or Cushites. So called by Greeks, because their
faces were burned or blackened by sun. Zerah, supposed to be Osorken (Usarken) IL,
third King of Egypt after Shishak, second king of twenty-second dynasty. Object of
invasion to chastise Asa and bring Judah under yoke again. Ver.9. MJar., one of cities
fortified by Rehoboam (ch. xi. 8), in line of march from Egypt. Ver. 10. Went out, lit.
before him, sensible of inferiority but confident in God. Nothing with thee, “itis alike to
thee te help the powerful or the weak, thou canst as easily, i.e, help the weak as the
strong te Com.} There is none beside thee to help between the mighty and the

2


CHAP. XIv.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,








ih


powerless, t.e., no other than thou can help in an unequal conflict ; meaning, of course,
give help to the weaker side [Keil]. Ver. 12. Smote, gave strength to smite. Ver. 13.
Destroyed, broken before his camp. Enemy unable to rally, pursued to Gerar, south,
twenty miles at least from scene of battle. Cities of Philistines spoiled, because they
likely accompanied Zerah in his expedition. Ver. 15. ents, nomadic tribes in neigh-
bourhood of Gerar conquered, and camels and sheep taken as prey. Besor flows through
this region, hence fertility and food for man and beast. All terrified at Asa’s victory and
unable to resist.


HOMILETICS.


Asa THE REFORMER.—Verses 1-8,


Asa as # constitutional monarch acted like David, endeavoured to abolish the
traces and polluting customs of idolatry. Pursued his purpose with earnestness
and impartiality. I. The reforms which he introduced. Regarding
God himself, he took advantage of his authority and tranquillity, tried to undo
the evil left by his father (1 Ki. xv. 3), and by his grandfather (1 Ki. xiv. 22).
1. He destroyed idolatry. Altars and high places pulled down; broke images of
Baal; destroyed public objects and relics of idolatry in Jerusalem and other
cities. ‘‘ When God lets loose upon the world a thinker, let men beware,” says
one. When God raises up a true Reformer, he will secure attention and
accomplish a great work. 2. He revived religious worship. Useless to put down
evil without setting up good. Outward reformation defective. A revived religion.
(1.) By personal example. He “did that which was good and right, dec.” (2.) By
the use of his authority. “He commanded Judah, &e.” (ver. 4). Religion
requires no human edicts and decrees to supportit. But those in authority may
recommend it. II. The spirit in which he carried out the
reforms. 1. A apirit of self-consecration. Self first. He did not engage in
work to which he had not devoted himself. Many work for God who are not
consecrated unto God. Reform self before you reform others. 2. A spirit of
zeal. He began early, executed boldly and spared no dignity. The ‘“king’s
mother ” deposed from her position, her idol destroyed, and its ashes thrown into
the brook Kidron (1 Ki. xv. 13). “See, I have set thee over (appointed thee to
the oversight of) the nations and over the kingdoms, to root out and to pull down,
&e.” (Jer.i. 10). III. The rule by which he was guided in the
reforms. “Asa did good and right in the eyesof the Lord.” Not what was
expedient, pleasing to himself, or to his courtiers. He sought to please God.
God discerns conduct ; dishonoured by the zeal of some; susceptibility to be
influenced by him should be cultivated. Act ever under ‘“‘the Great Taskmaster’s
eye.” “Thou God seest me.” Thus Asa the reformer an example to us in
purpose, spirit, and conduct—in pulling down Popery, Ritualism, and idolatry,
in setting forth true religion by personal life and public teaching-


Asa THE PrupEeNnt.—Verses 6—8.


¥4 time of peace he strengthened his kingdom with fortifications and armies.
I. Prudent in tracing peace to the right source. “The Lord had
given him rest.” Not gained by his valour and success over Abijah. No foes at
hand, progress undisputed because God protected. ‘“ When he giveth quietness,
who then can make trouble” in the land? When God bestows comfort and
peace in the home and in the heart, who can take away? But when he hideth
the face (condemns), who then can behold him (enjoy his power or remove the
sentence of death)? Whether it be done against (towards) a nation, or against
aman only? (Job xxxiv. 29). II. Prudent in making the best use of
peace. Like a wise king he observed “ the land before him” free and pas


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cHar. x1¥,





—


improvements. 1. Mindful of danger, he prepared for defensive war. “To be
prepared for war is one of the most effectual means of preserving peace,” said
Washington. 2. Conscious of weakness, he raised an army. Not perhaps a
standing army, but militia, trained-bands of the country. Judah mustered a
share. Benjamin, formerly little Benjamin (Ps. Ixviii. 27), had greatly increased
The little one by God’s blessing had become a thousand. These tribes, armea
offensively and defensively, were ready for action. %, Depending upon his people,
he enlisted their efforts. “Therefore he said, Let us build” (ver. 7). Many
rulers raise an army, levy taxes, and govern without consent of the people. This
arbitrary conduct will create tumult and endanger the throne (Chas. 1.). Self-
willed monarchs have destroyed kingdoms and ruined themselves. “ For by
wise counsel thou shalt make thy war; and in multitude of councillors there is
safety.”
“But war’s a game whick, were their subjects wise,
Kings would not play at ~ [Cowper].


ASA THE CONQUEROR.—=Verses 9~15.


“Zerah the Ethiopian mistook quietness for languor, and made the vulgar mis-
take of supposing that silence was indifference. He did not know that repose is the
very highest expression of power” [Dr. Parker]. An expedition prepared, a
million soldiers gathered to subjugate Asa and bring Judea under Egyptian yoke,
Asa shrank not from war, met and conquered the foe. I. The source to
which he looked for help. “ Asa cried unto the Lord his God.” 1. Zo
God's strength. He knew God in peace and looked to him in war—beliéved in
God’s power to help with few or many, to weak or strong. Man, mortal man,
could not prevail against him. God omnipotent, works how he likes, and depends
not upon numbers. “ For there is no restraint to the Lord to save by many or by
few.” 2. To God's strength gained by prayer. Help ever ready, only available
by seeking. Prayer before battle short, earnest, and intense. Notice ground
of confidence, “Thou art our God,” well tried and ever sufficient ; active reliance
“We rest on thee.” Thus can we only overcome in temptations and spiritual
conflicts. II, The spirit in which he entered the fight. Not
cowardly and fearful. God gives not the spirit of fear, but of courage. “Be
thou strong and courageous.” The war not aggressive, but sacred; for God’s
glory, not his own, “In thy name.” “ Jehovah-Nissi, the Lord my banner,” the
standard or ensign around which we must rally to indicate our party, define our
cause, and march to victory. He is the captain of our salvation, fights our
battles, and wins our victories. He bids us to fight, not his will that we should
be timorous and weak, “In the name of our God we will set up our banner.”
III. The victory by which it was distinguished. “The Lord
smote the Egyptians before Asa.” ‘The foe driven like straw before the wind :
pursued and overcome. Cities smitten, cattle taken, and booty enormous, “ The
defeat of Zerah is one of the most remarkable events in the history of the Jews
On no other occasion did they meet in the field or overcome the forces of either
of the two great monarchies between which they were placed. Under Asa the
appear to have gained a complete and most glorious victory, over the entire force
of Egypt, or of Ethiopia wielding the power of Egypt” [Speak. Com.].


WarFARE AND PRAYER.— Verses 9-12,


Notice in the prayer—TI, A devout acknowledgement of
Divine government. From God alone he received the enon pats
him nk could he defend it, He was supreme, and could help against he great

2


OnAP. xrv.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





multitude.” “He breaketh down” kingdoms and cities—Sodom, Babylon, Petra,

and Pompeii—and “they cannot be built again;” He builds up and none can
“pull down ”—God’s agency is traced over man and nations, in nature and
religion. JI. The obedient method in which he conducted the
war. The spirit of dependence upon God ; the spirit of hope and prayer. The


spirit of Moses, Samuel, and David.


In prayer he may expect courage and help,


such reinforcements “the gift of the knees.”


“ Hast thou not learned what thou art often told,
A truth still sacred, and believed of old,
That no success attends on spears and swords
Unblest, and that the battle is the Lord’s?” [Covwper},


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. Right. 1. Right is good
(acceptable) to God, when the heart is
put into it. 2. Right is good to man,
helpful to temporal and spiritual in-
terests. But right implies rule, law of
rectitude. The rule followed, constantly
obeyed, to be acceptable. God’s law
must be path of duty and this path
pursued firmly, without pause or re-
trograde step.

Ver. 6. Given him rest. 1. God
the sovereign dispenser of quietness or
comfort to individuals. Gives peace to
awakened sinnersin Christ. Peace and
rest the fruit of faithin him. 2. God
the sovereign dispenser of quietness and
comfort to nations and churches. To
nations (1 Chr. xxii. 9-18). To churches
(Acts ix, 31). He makes peace in our
borders (Ps. xiv. 7-14) ; causes wars to
cease to the ends of the earth (Ps. xlvi.
9). Ver. 7. Rest. It did his heart
good to think how piously they had
purchased their present peace ; and
therefore he repeateth it (Zech. viii.
19) [Trapp].

Un-


ers. 9-11. The Holy War.


dertaken for a sacred purpose—with
confidence of divine help, to maintain
the honour and service of God. The
parties most unequally matched. The
Lord Jehovah and mortal, feeble man.
How can man prevail against his Maker!
The folly of opposing God. The war-cry
most stimulating. Assurance in God’s
name gives comfort in trouble, triumph
in conflict. It is strength impregnable
and sufficient for greatest dangers. Only
under this one ensign, lifted above all
other banners of the sacramental host,
bearing this one name, can we ascribe
the words: In hoc vinces.

Ver. 13. Before his host. Before
his camp ; the army of Asa, the camp of
Jehovah, who resided in it, defended it,
and led it to victory. “ Harlier ex-
positors fancied that the reference was
to a heavenly, a host of angels, accord-
ing to Gen. xxxii. 2 seg.” [Keil].

Ver. 14. Fear of the Lord. Ita
effect upon men now renders them fear-
ful and helpless, what hereafter! Who
can stand before him? Resist not, but
humbly submit and be saved.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XIV.


Vers. 2-5. High places. No
sooner is a temple built for God, but
the Devil builds a chapel hard by
[Geo. Herbert]. Man is a born idol-
worshipper, sight-worshipper, so sen-
suous, imaginative is he; and also

artakes much of the nature of an ape
Carlyle).

Oni find them clay”

Tis to make idols, and to (irs i a


Vers. 6-8. Built. Prudence is an
ability of judging what is best in the
choice both of the end and of the means
[Groves]. No evil can surprise us if we
watch, no evil can hurt us if we pray
[Bp. Hall).

Ver. 9. This is the largest collected
army of which we hear in Scripture ; but
it does not exceed the known numbers
ef Oriental armies in ancient a

31


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


tomar. xv


een nan annem aaaT


Darius Codomannus brought into the
field at Arbela a force one million and
forty thousand. Xerxes crossed into
@reece with certainly above a million
of combatants. Artaxerxes Mnemon
collected one million two hundred and
sixty thousand men, to meet the attack
of the younger Cyrus [Speak. Com.].
Vers. 12-15. led. The results
which follow are most striking. The
southern power cannot rally from the
blow, but rapidly declines, and for


effort in this direction. Assyria grows
in strength, continually pushes her
arms further, and finally under Sargon
and Sennacherib, penetrates to Egypt
itself. All fear of Egypt as an aggres-
sive power ceases ; and the Israeliteslearn
instead to lean upon’ the Pharaohs for
support (2 Ki. xvii. 4; xviii. 21; Is. xxx.
2-4), Friendly ties alone connect the two
countries; and it is not till B.c. 60%
that an Egyptian force again entera
Palestine witha hostile intention [Z6¢d. }


above three centuries makes no further


CHAPTER XV.


Orrricaz Nores.) A prophetic warning (vers. 1-7), Asa’s reforms (vera. 8-1));
renewal of covenant (vers. 12-19), and deposes Maachah.

Vers. 1-7.—Azariah warns Asa. Spirit upon A. (ef. Num. xxiv. 2). Oded, bysome Iddo,
prophet and historian of two preceding reigns. Names differ very slightly in Heb. Sceh
him (cf. 1 Chr. xxviii. 9; Jer. xxix. 13), as they had done in battle (vers. 3-6). A future
condition predicted according to some. ‘‘Israel here is used generally for the whole
people of God; and the reference is especially to the many apostasies in the days of the
Judges (Jud. iii, 7-12; vi 1; viii. 33; x. 6), which were followed by repentance and
deliverance” [Speak. Com.]. Priest, succession unbroken, but occasions when none taught
true religion. Ver. 5. Peaee, free communications interrupted; commotions, great
vexations (Amos iii. 9; Deut. xxviii. 20). Ver. 6. Destroyed, different provinces crushed
one another by contentions among themselves, Ver. 7. Strong, i.e., be firm, continue
faithful to Jehovah. Reward will follow, as in conquest of Zerah.

Vers. 8-11.,—Asa’s religious reforms. Earlier reforms only partial success. Animated
by Azariah, he became more zealous, extirpated abominations in his own kingdom, in
cities which his father had taken from Jeroboam, and renewed altar of burnt offering
before porch. Ver.9. Gathered. Pious Israelites drawn into the territory of Judah bv
reformed worship, for solemn renewal of national covenant, Ver. 10. Third month,
Sivan, corresponding with June. Ver. 11. Same time, Heb. in that day; the day on
which the festival was celebrated, sixth of third month, the Feast of Weeks. Offered
peace-offerings, in communion with Jehovah and with one another (Lev. vii. 11-21). Spois
brought by them as thank-oflerings (cf. ch. xiv. 13).

Vers. 12-19.—Renewal of national covenant. Seck the Lord and to execute with vigour
laws which make idolatry punishable with death (Hx. xxii. 20; Deut, xvii. 2-5,
Heb. x. 28). Ver. 15. Oath taken in solemn and joyful emotion. God was found, because
sincerely sought, and gave them rest (ver. 15). Ver. 16. Muachah (cf. 1 Ki. xv. 18) * held
honoured place of queen-mother, like Sultana Walide of Hast,” withdrawn from rank
and her idol destroyed. Ver. 17. High places, hills on which sacrifices were offered, were
not entirely destroyed by people, though intended by the King. Ver. 18 Things, fox
ornament and repairs. Ver. 19. War. As B. died in the 26th year of Asa (1 Ki xvi. 8),
it appears, from ver. 10 and from ch. xvi, 1-9, that the date here ought to be, not the 35th,
but the 25th year of Asa. ‘This allowa @ period of repose after the reform of Asa
[ Adurphy}.

Ele


BHAP. XV.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


——————————$—$—$—$—$—— AL a a ES-ES ESLER GUESSED” Ps PENSE


5
HOMILETICOS.
Recrprocat Fetuowsyie.—Perse %.


The prophet met Asa in returning from victorious pursuit. Signal success
a proof of God’s presence ; victory the reward of implicit trust in him. Keep
close to God and he will bless you; {sake him and you reap the fruits of
apostasy. As you deal with him he will deal with you. . A distin-
guished privilege. God’s presence with them. In the ordinances of his
house, in special providence, and coverant engagements. God owns them as his
people, protects them from enemies, and prospers them in all things. This a
glory and happiness beyond description. Not in good things common to them
with the world, but the distinguished privilege of God’s people, to possess his
favour and enjoy his presence. “ Happy is that people whose God is the Lord.”
II. The conditions on which this privilege is enjoyed. “While
ye be with Him.” Nothing bestowed arbitrarily nor kept without care. The
duration and degree of happiness on certain conditions. 1. Reasonable conditions.
If we do not seek, nor care for God, is it likely that he will be with us? “ How
can two walk together except they be agreed?” 2. Scriptural conditions. A
doctrine of Scripture that God’s continual favour depends upon obedience and
perseverance, “ continuance in well-doing.” ‘Draw nigh to God and he will
draw nigh to you.” “ Ye shall seek me and find me, when ye shall search for
me with all your heart.” 3. Wise conditions. To put us on guard and caution

vainst danger. To comfort in sorrow and encourage in effort. Seek and ye
shall find. Serve and you shall succeed. Forsake God and present triumphs,
present enjoymente ere not secure,


Dark SHapows ox a Betcur Day,—Verses 1-7,


Azaviah did not congratulate Asa on splendid victory, nor indulge in flattery te
pourt princely favour. The speech appears unsuitable for the occasion. Whether
it unfolds future apostasy or describes past history, it is a prophetic warning, a
gloomy picture on a bright day. It proves necessary connection between God’s
service and human weal, and dwells on apostasy with its fearful consequences.
I. The awful apostasy. Turningaway. 1. Practical atheism. “Without
the true God.” A God of truth (Jer. x. 10), “the God of Amen” (Is. Ixv. 16),
idols not true, nonentities. “An idol is nothing in the world.” Hence true
here not only opposed to error and idolatry, but to emptiness, deceit, and God’s
character. Everything else a lie,and idolatry the greatest lie. Practically to
be without God, to be in darkness, error, and uncertainty. 2. Deprived of priestly
function. No instruction and guidance for ministers, or no reverence and regard
for their office. Sad when the light of ministry is darkened. ‘ Without a
teaching priest” descriptive of spiritual destitution. For duty of a priest is to
“keep” (store up and distribute) ‘knowledge, and they (people) shall seek
the law (God’s will) at his mouth, &c.” (Mal. ii. 7, 8). 3. Prevalence of moral
disorder. ‘ Without law.” Where no direction is, no law can govern. God’s
law forgotten, and every one a law to himself. Right neither taught nor
practised. Rectitude perverted, and whatever straight made crooked. Natural
conscience and God’s command defied, and as in age of Nero nothing unlawful.
II. The terrible judgments which followed apostasy. Conse-
quences of forsaking God set forth in expressive terms. 1. Wadespread anarchy.
“No peace to him that went out” (ver.5). No free intercourse nor safe abode
in any village. “The highways were unoccupied,” ¢¢., rested from noise ¢
ehariots, and the feet ef the travellers walked (for safety) through Pilon


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (OHAP. x¥


ce LL


subterranean .Jding-places (ch. vi. 2). 2. Civil dissensions. Vexations im
various regions of the land. “ Nation was destroyed of nation,” beaten in pieces
by oppressicn and war, Gilead against Ephraim, and Benjamin against. other
tribes, until almost axterminated (cf. Judg. xii. 4; xx, 33-48; illus. by Wars of
the Roses, the Comn.onwealth, and American Civil War). 3. General calanuty.
“For God did vex the.n with all adversity, confounded them with all kinds of
oppressions,” social anc national. Depth of corruption brought severity of
chastisement. Idolatry wid evil-doing most provoking; judgment most
crushing and bitter, retribution like a consuming fire. “Through the wrath of the
Lord of hosts is the land darkened (with smoke, ver. 18), and the people shall
be as the fuel of the fire” (Is. ix. 19).
‘Take heed: for God holds vengeance in His hand
To hurl upon their heads that break His law” [Shakes.].

III. The way of escape from these judgments. “The Lord
is with you, while ye be with him, &.” 1. This a fact im Dine procedure.
Proved in days of Judges, division of the two kingdoms, recent victory, and in
all periods of national history. ‘“ Why transgress ye the commandments of the
Lord, that ye cannot prosper? because ye have forsaken the Lord, he hath
forsaken you.” 2. This a warning for the future. Victory over Zerah should
teach something. God’s blessing upon all who steadfastly adhere to him, but
abandon him and he will abandon you. Hence be quickened in your work
(ver. 7). Resolve with energy to carry it on amid opposition. The most
blessed results to yourself and others will follow. “If thou seek him he
will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him he will cast thes off for ever,”


(winding, unfrequented ree (Judg. v. 6). In times of public panic resort to


Asa’'s Conrzxvep Rerorms.— Verses 8-19.


The warning hadinfluence. Asaobeyed, took courage, and entered upon measures
judicious, decisive, and extensive. I. The character of the reforms
upon which he entered. Destructive of evil and establishment of good.
1. He sought to extirpate rdolairy. ‘ Put way the abominable idols. (a) Idolatry
most prevalent. In his own territory, “the land of Judah and Benjamin;” in
cities taken by his father (ver. 8). (6) Idolatry most abominable. Idol of king’s
mother horrible, of some monstrous kind ; so obscene that it was publicly burned
under the walls of Jerusalem (verse 16). We should purify our hearts and
land; destroy gods material, literary and moral, worshipped in our days. 2.
He engaged in ~eedful repairs. ‘* Renewed the altar, &e.” (verse 8). Recon-
structed a temporary altar like that of Solomon (vii. 7), for extraordinary
sacrifices on special occasions ; or renewed, embellished the one desecrated in
reigns of Rehoboam and Abijah. All reforms began here. Prophets and
reformers of O.T. especially concerned for the altar and restoration of Divine
worship. Decayed altars signify neglected sacrifices, perverted religion, and
practical apostasy. In revivals, offerings, and thanksgiving restored. 3. He
pledged the nation to solemn covenant. ‘They entered into a covenant.” Humble
for sin, they renewed their obligations; joined together in pledges to keep the
law and punish disobedience. (a) Jo seek the Lord. Seek the laws, favour, and
help of their father’s God, whom they had forsaken. Seek with heart and ‘soul
with diligence and energy. Naturally without God, he must seek in faith peni-
tence, and under guidance of Holy Spirit. (6) Zo punish idolators. Punish:
ment severe, “put to death;” impartial, “small or great, man or woman;:”
universal, “whosoever, &.” Must not go too far in penalty and severity
Christianity advances by charity, not by persecuticn. ‘We do not find this
sepeen’ expressly made in other renewals of the covenant. It would, how-


CHAP, XV. ] HOMILHTIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


Oa a


ever, be implied in them, since it was one of the commandments (see Ex. xxii. 20;
Deut. xiii. 9-15 ; xvii. 2-7) [Speak. Com.]. II. The spirit in which he
carried out these reforms. 1. 4 spirit of vigour. No trifling with the
vecasion. His foundation broad, and the policy built upon it gracious, energetic,
and complete. 2. A spirit of impartiality. Gods of high places and gods of
groves ; images from the city and of the palace. He would not allow even
his mother to keep an idol. Many are great reformers in national, not in
private matters. Earnest before the public, too lenient at home. Asa knew
nothing about father or mother, partiality or concession. The royal grove cut
down, the favourite god stamped upon, consumed in the flame, and its ashes
thrown into the brook. 3. A spirit of gratitude. He presented votive oflerings
in the temple. “The things that his father had dedicated,” spoils from
Abijam’s victory over Jercboam ; spoils of his own from Zerah, the Ethiopian,
were presented as thank-offerings to him by whose power they had been gained,
and to whom all silver and gold belong. Things dedicated to holy-use should
not be desecrated nor withheld. Our vows should be performed and our first-
fruits offered to God. Gratitude helped by the vow of it. “ Vow and pay to
the Lord your God ; let all that be round about him bring presents unto him
that on cht to be feared.”


“THe SoLtemn LEeacuE AND CovENant.”— Verses 10-15.


“‘ Entered into the covenant.” It is evident that a covenant existed before
this; they renew it with gladness and enthusiasm. “Solemn renewals of
original covenant made in the wilderness (Ex. xxiv. 3-8) occur from time te
time in Jewish history after intervals of apostasy. This renewal in reign of
Asa ig the first on record. The next falls 300 years later, in reign of Josiah
(2 Ki. xxiii. 3). There is a third in the time of Jeremiah (Neh. x. 28, 29).
On such occasions the people bound themselves by solemn oath to observe all
directions of the law, and call down God’s curse upon them if they forsook it”
Speak. Com.|. I. The assembly by which it was ratified.

evresentatives from Judah and Benjamin, strangers from Ephraim, Manasseh,
and Simeon. The king’s own subjects and those who had transferred allegiance
to him from Israel. Outsiders invited, welcomed, and encouraged to acquaint
themselves with God and walk in his commands. II. The solemnities by
which it was accompanied. Besides rededications of themselves and
stern but wholesome Jeague against idolatry—1l. Jnnumerable sacrifices. “They
offered unto the Lord seven hundred oxen and seven hundred sheep.” 2.
Exultant joy. “With shouting, with trumpets, and with cornets.” People
testified unbounded satisfaction with loud voice and instruments. The revival
of religion, the manifestation of God’s presence, a source of pure and permanent
joy. “When his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding


joy.”
HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1, 2. Inspiration and duty. 1, experience; 3. A correction in general


tendencies.


An inspired man is qualified to give
message. Suitable, intelligent, and
timely. 2. An inspired man will give
his message fearlessly and successfully.
3. Inspired men, men taught of God,
not time-servers, required now.

Ver. 2. If ye seck him. 1. A fact in
rational history; 2. A truthin Christian


Neither to presume nor
to despair.

Ver. 3. A picture of utter destitution
tm spiritual life. “ Without the true
God.” Then Israel had false gods?
Yes, innumerable gods even Israel
acquired, notwithstanding the com-
mandment, “Thou shalt have no other
223


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: OHRONICLES.





——— ae


gods before me.” “Tt is not a com-
niandment that can keep a man at
home. No bill of stipulations can con-
vert your children and make them filial,
We may have a time-bill for the action
of the whole day, but the world was
never yet saved by commandments.
Israel trampled ten of them under
foot, and we have trampled ten thou-
sand. We can do despite unto the
spirit of grace; we can insult God.
‘Without a teaching priest,—not an
ornament, nor a ceremonialist, but a
teaching priest. A man whose busi-
ness it was to expound the law and
make the people understand it. So
they preached in olden time; they
took the law syllable by syllable, ex-
plained it word by word, and sentenca
by sentence; they analysed it, took it
member from member. They put it
together again and hurled it upon the
people like a thunderbolt from heaven.
They had naught else to expound, be-
cause they thought nothing else worthy
of exposition. We are lost in details.
Any man may get up a lecture, if he
has great quoting power. It is almost
impossible not to get up a lecture; the
temptations are innumerable, and in
many cases irresistible. Only one
speech is worth listening to, that is the
speech which begins in eternity, sweeps
down through time, leaves behind it
immortal lessons, and ascends to the
fountain of origin. Demand the
gospel of salvation through Jesus
Christ. Bein earnest. ‘Seek ye the
Lord while he may be found, &c.’”
[Dr. Parker].


[ CHAR, SW.





Vers. 8-10. The influence of a great
example. When Asa entered earnestly
upon reform—I. He drew others to his
side. The halting decide, the half-
hearted kindle, before a zealous man.
“They fell to him out of Israel in
abundance.” Armies often perish,
churches decay for want of leaders.
II. He succeeded in his cfforte. Success
not given to hesitancy and idleness.
Asa positive, determined, rallied others
round him and accomplished great
things. III. He gained freedom from
attachment. ‘“ And the Lord gave them
rest round about.” A bold, defiant
attitude frightens the foe. Numbers
and God’s help will overcome them and
ensure peace.


“Virtue ia bold, and goodness never


fearful.”

Ver.18. Heart service. 1. God will
not accept a divided heart. This use-
less. The whole or none. “ Ye cannot
serve God and mammon.” 2%. God re


quires the whole heart. “ With ail
their heart.” 3. This requirement
eminently reasonable and fit. 4. The
heart must be willingly given. Devo-
tion only true when free. When King
William (Rufus) tried to force Anselm
to a certain course, he replied, “ Treat.
me as a free man, and I devote myself
and all I have to your service. Treat
me as a slave, and you shall have
neither me nor mine.” “The servant
(bondslave) of Jesus Christ” (Rom. i.
1). 5. When thus sought and served
he will be fond, “Search me, O God,
and prove tue.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XY.


ers. 1-7. God's presence, Walking
together is a very common action of
human fellowship; much interchange
of thought and opinion takes place in
the long daily walks of two friends,
but this implies a certain evenness and
similarity of gait; for “how can two
walk together except they be agreed §”
In common parlance this is spoken of
as “ scoping step ;” and that this very


thing is required of us, we see in a
very striking and reiterated warning
in Lev. xxvi. 12, 21-28, where God
promises to “walk among His people,”
ready, as it were, for this steady, even
step. “ But if ye walk contrary unto
me,” or as in margin, “If ye walk at
all adventures with me;” or by another
reading, “If ye walk at haphazard
with me,” in a jerking, spasmodic, oom-


OMAP, EVE]


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,





trary fashion, such as, alas! we know

too well, then “ will I also walk contrary

unto you” [Mrs. Gordon}.

** My business now is with my God to walk,
And guided by His holy eye to go;
Sweet fellowship with Him to cultivate,
And His unclouded countenance to know”

[J. F. Elwin].
Ver. 12. Covenant. Charles Kings-
ley wrote, on entering his 22nd year:

“My birth-night. I have been for the

last hour on the seashore; not dream-

ing, but thinking deeply and strongly,
and forming determinations which are
to affect my destiny through time and


and the sleepless sea and stars, I have
devoted myself to God—a vow never
(if He gives me the faith I pray for)
to be recalled.”

Ver. 15. The Lord gave rest. In
1815, when the British Parliament
were voting honours and emoluments
to Wellington, and considering “ the
measures necessary towards forming a
peace establishment,” suddenly ali their
plans were interrupted and their peace
prospects dissipated by the intelligence
that Napoleon had escaped from Elba.
Nothing like this will occur during the
rest which God gives. His enemies


eternity. Before the sleeping earth, once subdued will be subdued for ever.





CHAPTER XVI.


Czrrican, Norrs.] Asa prevents Baasha from invading Judah (vers. 1-6); Asa reproved
by Hanani (vers. 7-10); Asa’s sickness and end (vers. 11-14; cf. parallel in 1 Ki. xv. 16-24).

Vers. 1-6.—Baasha invades Judah. Six and thirtieth. Baasha died before this date
(1 Ki. xv. 53). Critics consider the date calculated from the separation of the kingdoms,
and coincident with 16th year of Asa’s reign. A mode of reckoning generally followed in
the Book of the Kings of Judah and Israel, the public annals of the time (ver. 11), the
source from which the inspired historian drew his account (cf. Jamieson and Keil). Built,
t.e., fortified. Go out, to prevent all communication between the countries, “The fortification
of Ramah by Baasha presupposes his recovery of the cities, which had been taken by
Abijah from the northern kingdom, and which, according to ch. xv. 8, were still in Asa’s
possession” [Keil]. Benhadah, Benhidri in Assyrian monuments; Ader in Sept., to
whom smaller provinces round Damascus (Heb, Darmesck) were subject. Ver. 3. There is,
let there be a league, &c. Ver. 4. jon, city of Naphtali(1 Ki. xv. 20). Dan colonised
(Judg. xviii. ; Jos. xix. 47), Abel-maim, ‘‘ meadow of waters,” supposed to be situated on
marshy plain near uppermost lake of Jordan. Store or ‘all Cinneroth and all the land
of Naphtali” in 1 Ki. xv. 20. Both statements true and supplementary. Ver. 5. Cease.
Baasha might inten to reside in Ramah, Unexpected hostilities from his son and ally
prevented further progross, and Baasha’s death soon after interrupted work of fortifying.
Ver. 6. No actual engagement mentioned. Geba (Jos. xviii. 24), Mizpah (Gen. xxxi.
45-55),

=e 7-10. Asa reproved by prophet Hanani. Hanani, father of Jehu the prophet (xix. 2).
Relied not on God, from whom prosperity and former victory, but on man. Hscaped, That
is, if he had trusted in God he would not only have defeated the army of Baasha, but that
of Benhadad. His conduct in parting with temple treasures and bribing an ally of the
King of Israel most fv.lish and lost him a splendid victory. Ver. 8. The huge host of the
Ethiopians overcome by God’s help. Assyria would have been, had Asa trusted in God
Ver. 9. For, astriking description of divine providence over the man whose heart is perfect
with God. Ver. 10. This address vexed Asa, and spread discontent among his people,
whom he oppressed, tried to crush in some form or other. He maltreated the prophet.
Prison, house of stocks, a sort of torture for crime—Heb., house of distortion, because limbs
were so set and fixed as to be twisted and distorted in it,

Vers. 11-14.—Asa’s sickness and end. Book of Kings, o public record of civil events.
Diseased, a kind of gout, but uncertain, began two years before death (ver. 13), became
greatly ‘ moved upwards ” in body and proved violent in nature. Yet, as in war, so in sick.
neas, he put undue confidence in man. Physicians, Egyptians im high repute aaa ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (OMAP. XV.
Be ee a eh


courts, who pretended to expei disease by charms and mystic rites. Buried him in a rock
tomb; made, digged by himself, in his lifetime, as often done by Oriental kings, with
special funeral magnificence ; odours to neutralise offensive smells of corpse exposed on
“the bed” to public view, or to embalm with aromatic spices in great profusion. Great
burning. According to some, consuming spices customary at funerals of kings; according
to others, for cremation of the body, “a usage which was at that time, and long after,
prevalent among the Hebrews, and the omission of which in the case of royal personages
was reckoned a great indignity (ch. xxi. 19; 1 Sam. xxxi. 12; Jer. xxxiv.6; Amos vi, 10)”


[Jas.].
HCOMILETICS.


Tuer Forty or Brisery.—Verses 1-10.


Asa hired the help of a heathen neighbour, the powerful Ving of Syria,
to defend himself against the attack of Baasha. This considered prudent, a
good stroke of policy, but trust in man, not in God, and met with condemnation
from Hanani the seer. I, It led to sacrilege in religious things.
Treasures of the temple were diverted from sacred to worldly use. The sanctuary
and the palace robbed to bribe an earthly king to help! Religious ordinances
desecrated, justice sold, and men bribed often by “silver and gold”; gifts
bestowed or promised with a view to prevent judgment or corrupt morals
abominable. Bribery a canker in constitutional governments, a disgrace in all
departments of life. He who presents a bribe perpetuates moral evil, sacrifices
both truth and right to selfish interests. Absalom bribed the people to become
the king. Judas bribed by high priests to effect the death of Christ.


“ Judges and senates have been bought for gold:
Esteem and love were never to be sold” {Pope}.


II. It brought down Divine reproof. God not bribed, comes on
the scene in the person of the prophet, “ At that time Hanani the seer came”
(ver. 7). Wrong must be condemned, right declared, and severe reproof
administered to evil-doers. 1. Asa acted unworthy of Gods representative.
Kings, priests, and judges God’s vicegerents, must be free from corruption and
bribery. “Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons,
neither take a gift.” 2. Asa sought not Gods help. “Because thou hast
relied on the King of Syria and not relied on the Lord thy God.” When God
is forsaken he will assert his supremacy and claims in conscience, in providence,
in affliction, Wicked men not allowed to indulge in excuses and selfish pleas;
nor to plead the power of circumstances, the force of reason, and the probability
of success. Never put money before duty, max beforeGod! IL. It defeated
its own ends. “Herein thou hast done foolishly.” Man’s foresight not
always wise. 1. Asa missed the opportunity of a double victory. “There-
fore is the host of the King of Syria escaped out of thine hand” A
victory over the combined forces of Baasha and Benhadad more splendid than
that over the Ethiopians lost by his conduct Possible by unnecessary and
unproper alliances to hinder our good and prevent God from granting deliverance,
2. Asa exposed himself to greater danger. “'Thevefore from henceforth thou
shalt have war” (ver. 9). The cupidity of the one increased the hostility of the
other (1 Kings xv. 32). Those who bribe and those bribed not to be depended
upon. Money will dissolve the most solemn league. For gold men will sell
their votes, their conscience, and themselves. Cate complained that M. Ocelius
the Tribune “ might be hired for a piece of bread to speak or to hold his peace,”
Never rule conduct by the fear of man instead of trust in God. “The fear of
man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lord shall be safe
(may set on high above danger, &c.)” (Prov. xxix. 25).
R24


CHAP. xv] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.








Tas Inriurnce oy Monry,—Verses 2—4.


There seems much to excuse Asa’s conduct. In his days it was often thought
right to buy oneself out of danger. But the bribery of Benhadad condemned
and cannot be justified. Learn the influence of money. I. There is a law-
ful use of money. Used for educational and philanthropic purposes, to en-
courage industry, arts, and sciences, to relieve distress and advance the cause of God,
it is better than fleets and armies. Rightly used, “money answereth all things.”
II. There is an unlawful use of money. Used for selfish ends, to frus-
trate right and bribe men to wrong. It may buy men in limbs, intellect, and con-
science ; make peace and create war. It is one of the mightiest rulers, one of
the most popular gods in the world! “A man furnished with the arguments
from the mint will convince his antagonist much sooner than one who draws
them from reason and philosophy. Gold is a wonderful clearer of the under-
standing, it dissipates every doubt and scruple in an instant ; accommodates itself
tothe meanest capacities ; silences the loud and clamorous, and brings over the
most obstinate and inflexible” [Addison]. ITI. The unlawful use of money
becomesacurse. Put against duty, vi tue,and God, its power is pernicious.
It breaks up alliances, prepares for -em tations, corrupts human nature, and
influences to injustice. “ Benhadad hearkened unto King Asa” and was a striking
contrast to Hanani, True religion only begets love for truth, upholds commercial
honesty, social order, and just government. God rewards the man who resists
bribes and acts uprightly. “He that despiseth the gain of oppressions, that
shaketh his hands from holding of bribes, that stoppeth his ears from hearing
of blood, and shutteth his eyes from seeing evil, he shall dwell on high; his
place of defence shall be the munitions of rocks; bread shall be given him,
his waters shall be sure.”


Asa’s Vary Heip.—Verses 2-4 and 12.


Years of prosperity did not make Asa a better man. “In all time of our
wealth, &c.” He forgot need of help, and in times of danger resorted to worldly
policy and trusted not to God. I. In time of war he relied upon
human help. In northern kingdom, Baasha exterminated posterity of
Jeroboam, ruled upon the throne, and menaced Jerusalem. Ramah, on the
dividing lines of the two kingdoms, built and held in defence. Baasha
strengthened himself in his bold designs by league with King of Syria, but was
bought off, bribed to help Asa. This political wisdom, but spiritual folly ;
prospered for a time, but costly in its triumph. It might be prevalent custom,
but not the path of duty. Is our code of honour any purer? Do we seek to
get out of difficulties by questionable means? Give money for leagues, covenants,
and deliverance? Such reliance is vain help, entails mischiefs in social and
spiritual matters which outweigh all apparent gains. Better confide in God
than in our own schemes. “Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and
maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth from the Lord.” II. In time
of sickness he relied upon foreign physicians. No harm in
physicians, but physicians without scientific training, physicians with only charms
and mystic arts, are “ physicians of no value.” (Heathen doctors and witchcraft.)
1. This foolish conduct. “Sought not to the Lord,” after his former experience
of God’s faithfulness and truth, after his stern reproof by the prophet. What
avails physicians of greatest skill and kindness without God? Entire confidence
in creature, misplaced and dishonours God, 2. This useless conduct, Physicians
could not cure; the disease spread, and recovery impossible. Physicians,
ministers, and friends but men, not to be despised, only used as servants os God,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [ouar. xvz,





and not as sum-totals. I all extremities, sickness, and death, call upon the
Lord for help “Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man, in whom
there is no help (salvation)” (Ps. exivi. 3). “Cease ye from man, whose breath is in
his nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of ?”


Tos Ministzy or Trutu.—Verses 7-10.


I. Exercised by a Divine messenger. “ Hanani the seer came to Asa,
King of Judah”—specially qualified and commissioned by God. “The Lord God
of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up betimesand sending,
because he had compassion on his people and on his dwelling-place.” II. Re-
vealing the true source of help. Asa overcame Ethiopians with very
many chariotsand horsemen. “ Because thou didst rely on the Lord, he delivered
them into thine hand.” Men could not be reproved for doing wrong if they
knew no right—for not trusting God, if God was not revealed to them.
III. Treated with injustice. “ Asa was wroth with the seer and put him
in a prison, &c.” Rejection of Divine reproof sadly common and self-ruinous.
Message despised and messenger persecuted. ‘He that refuseth instruction
(correction) despiseth his own soul.” IV. Justified by its results.
Truth may be kept down, but never crushed ; prophets imprisoned or put to
death, but right prevails. Divine reproofs attested by conscience, vindicated by
providence, Revenge is impotent. God’s purpose cannot be frustrated.


Gop’s PRovIDENCE If THE WoRrLD.—Verse 9.


God would have helped Asa if he had called upon him; for he
is everywhere present in time of need—specially ready to help those
who trust Him. I. Providence benevolent in its design. “To
show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect toward
him.” He not only sees danger, but delivers from it, keeps and defends his
people. If King Philip could sleep safely because his friend Antipater watched
over him, how much more kind and eilicient the providence of God!
II. Providence person«l in its exercise. “We learn from
observation of others. God inspects and rules of himself—not by abstract laws
and principles merely, not by secondary causes, not by the eyes and agencies
of inferior creatures. “ He shews himself strong” in purpose and proceedings.
Til. Providence minute in its inspection. “To and fro,”
publicly and privately, in thought and act. His vigilance ever active and
never worn out. Nothimg escapes his notice nor eludes his grasp. ‘ For his
eyes are upon the ways of man, and he seeth all his goings.” IV. Provi-
dence universal in its extent. “Through the whole earth.”
Diana’s temple was burnt down when she was busied at Alexander's birth, “I
cannot be everywhere present,” cried Napoleon when he lost one battle in trying
to gain another. “The eyes of the Lord are in every place ”—on sea and land,
in society and solitude. We cannot go from his spirit nor flee from hiy
presence, In heaven above and hell beneath (Psa. cxxxix.),


“ What can ’scape the eye
Of God, all-seeing, or deceive his heart
Omniscient ?” [ Milton].


V. Providence swift in its operation, “The eyes of the Lord
run to and fro.” Implying celerity, swiftness in giving relief. Delay only
when needful and good for us. [n promise and fulfilment, “his word runneth
very swiftly.” Lessons—-Encouragement for the believer, a warning to the
wicked, a reason for circumspection to all.

226


CHAP. XVL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





Tae Eyes or ruz Lorpv.—Verse 9.


_I. The description of providence. “ Eyesof the Lord” in Scripture
signify—1. His knowledge. 2. His providence, (1) The immediateness of provi-
dence—His own eyes. (2) Its celerity and speed. (3) Its extent. (4) Its diligence.
(5). Its efficacy. II. The design of providence. “To showhimself strong,
&ec.” 1. He hasstrong understanding,and wisdom to contrive. 2. Strongaffection to
love, 3. Strong words to cheer and fortify. 4. A strong arm to exert almighty
power. The persons for whom those who are truly gracious and sincere


[J. Ryland, sen., 1750].
Asa’s Pertinactty ms WronG-Dorna,


I. When reproved for sin he did not confess it. In consequence
he committed one evil after another. David reproved by Nathan was conscience-
stricken, melted to penitence and confessed, “I have sinned against the Lord.”
Not so Asa. II. He added greater guilt by trying to hide
his sin. He denied it, got intoa rage with the seer, and persecuted him.
Reproved, probably in the presence of courtiers ; he was haughty, took advantage
of his circumstances, and adopted severe measures in apparent refutation of his
sin. ‘To hide @ sin with a lie is like a crust of leprosy over an ulcer,” says
Jeremy Taylor. ‘“‘ He that covereth his sins shall not prosper; but whoso
confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.” III. When he would
neither confess nor forsake his sin God sent affliction, which
did not at first humble him. Man could not lodge Asa from his
hiding-place, but God’s resources are never exhausted. What the final issue
was appears uncertain. From Scripture references the last expedient might
hemble the king and bring him to God. But at beginning of sickness not
in right state of mind, and applied to wrong source forhelp. “ This is a striking
example of pertinacity in sin, which carries with it a solemn warning. Who
would have expected this of the once pious Asa! What an urgent
enforcement does this example furnish of the exhortation of the apostle: ‘Take
heed, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing
from the living God. But exhort one another daily, &c.’ That, indeed, must
be a most treacherous and deceitful thing which could lead a rational and
religious being so far away from the truth and piety as thus to persist in his
iniquity, and attempt to justify himself before God—yea, more than that,
virtually to engage in an unequal warfare with Ilcaven, and to accomplish,


by unblessed means, what God had pronounced impracticable” [Itev, W.
Sparrow].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 5, 6. He built Geba. Forti-
fications demolished. 1. Men pros-
trated in their wicked design. 2. The
materials by which they carried out
that design captured and used for
opposite purposes. Ramah taken, “ the
stones and timber” used to build
other defences, Voltaire’s printing
press, by which he sought to deluge
France with infidelity, fell into the
hands of the Bible Society, and em-


ployed to spread the word of God.
The strongholds of the world become the
defences of the Church. 1.This illustrated
by the case of Ramah, II. It has been
often observed since—1l. The world’s
stronghold of science has been rifled
by the Church for its defence, and the
world defeated with its own weapons.
2. By the grace of God, men who wereas
Ramah—Saul of Tarsus for example-—~
neve been made as the outworks of
227


BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


(oar. xvz,


er


Christianity [Bib. Museum]. It is
a fine use to which Bossuet has turned
this military incident as illustrating
the duty, not of rejecting the materials
or the arguments collected by un-
believers or by heretics, but of employ-
ing them to build up the truth,
“ BaAtissons les forteresses de Juda des
débris et des ruines de celles de
Samarie” [Stanley].

Ver. 9. Whatever is done in the
world falls under the notice of God.
Not that he needs move from place to
place, or run up and down from
country to country to see what is done,
for by one infinite, indivisible act, he
beholdeth all things in all places; but
the Scripture thus teaches the infalli-
bility and particularity of his know-
ledge; even as we are said to know
those things infallibly which we have
viewed upon the place; for otherwise
there is neither high nor low, far nor
near, first nor last, to Goi all things
being at omce before him for ever
(Jer, xxiii, 23), If the Lord is every-
where, let us cverywhere see the
Lord. Moses saw him that was
invisible. Did we but keep this com-
mon principle warm upon our spirits,
The Lord seeth under the whole heaven,
how heavenly would our lives be!
And seeing the Lord seeth as under
the whole heaven, so into the hearts of
all men, how should it deter us, even
from heart sins, and the closest
hypocrisy! Again, the Lord seeing in
all things, disposeth all things. As
his hand set up all in order at first,
so Lis eye hath kept all in order ever


since, and will do for ever. Take
these conclusions concerning the sight
of God: First, the Lord beboldeth all
things distinctly, not in gross only—
the least as well as the greatest. He
looks upon every parcel and opens the
whole pack of human afiairs. Secondly,
he beholds every thing and person per-
fectly, fully, quite through. His is an
intentive and most attentive view.
Thirdly, in seeing he geverns every-
thing effectually and works it to his
own ends. Fourthly, he seeth all
things together, not successively, or
one thing after another. He that is
all eye seeth all at once, all is one.
“Known unto God are al] his works
from the beginning of the world.”
Hence, take two inferences: the first
serving for the instruction and conso-
lation of all who know and fear God ;
and the second for conviction and
terror to the wicked [Caryl].

Vers. 12-14. Asas End. 1. Asa’s
sickness and death. At first affliction
unimproved, grew more severe. Death
sad, certain, and hopeful. 2. Asa’s
burial, magnificent, honoured, and
admonitory. ‘The eminent piety and
usefulness of good men,” says one,
“ought to be remembered to their
praise, though they have had their
blemishes, Let their faults be buried
in their graves, while their services are
remembered over their graves. He
that said, ‘ There is not a just man that
doeth good and sinneth not,’ yet said
also, ‘The memory of the just is
blessed,’ and let it be so.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XVI.


Vers. 3-6. Silver. “A bribe is a
price ; reward, gift, or favour bestowed
or promised, with a view to pervert the
judgment or corrupt the conduct of a
judge, witness, or other person” [Web-
ster]. ‘‘ Philip of Macedon was a man
of most invincible reason this way,” says
Addison. “He refuted by it all the
wisdom of Athens—confounded their
statesmen, struck their orators dumb,
and at length argued them out of their
ge ‘6 ‘ed by Dr. Thomas}.

3


Ver. 9. Strong. Ovssar was accus-
tomed to write short letters. One of
his generals, Quintus Cicero, was in
great extremity, being besieged by
fierce hordes of Gauls, when he received
from him the following message: “Ozsar
to Cicero: Keep up your spirits. Expect
help.” Let us expect help from God,
trust to him instead of relying on man
in times of extremity and danger.

Ver. 10. Wroth with the seer. The
most difficult, province in friendship is


HAP, XvIt.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


ee eeeeeeeeSeSSSSSeeeeeNSFSsSeseSesS


letting a man see his faults anderrors, always be strictly just and not tea
which should, if possible, be so contrived frequent [Bacon].

that he may perceive our advice is given Vers. 13, 14. Asa slept.

him not so much to please ourselves (7.

GET eT hare a \ras tage! The re. Kings then at last have but the lot of all,


: By thei duct th
proaches therefore of a friend should fall” [Couper} nt


OHAPTER XVIL


Curtroan Notes] This chapter is peculiar to the writer ef Chronicles, Jehvushaphat
becoming king takes measures for defence of his kingdom (vers. 1-9); in consequence
grows in power (vers. 10-19).

Vers. 1-6.—Jehoshaphat’s measures for defence. Strengthened, prepared to resist, to defend
against attack from northern kingdom. Ver. 2. Garrisons or governors (cf. 1 Ki. iv.
7-19), all fortresses filled with troops, military stations established in various parts of the
country and in cities of Mount Ephraim which belonged to Jehoshaphat (ch. xv. 8).
Ver. 3. First, ancient imitated piety of his great ancestor in early part of his reign,
Baalim in contrast with the God of his father, idol deities generally (Judg. ii, 11). Ver. 4.
Doings of Israel. Special idolatrous customs of northern kingdom at the time and the
worship of the calves. Ver. 5. Presents, freewill offerings, not ordinary taxes paid to
royal treasury. ‘‘ Some reason to believe that a ‘ benevolence’ of this kind was expected
as a matter of course at the accession of a new sovereign” [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 6.
Iifted up, not proud (chs. xxvi. 16 ; xxxii. 25); exalted by the ways of Jehovah (marg.), was
encouraged, emboldened by a sense of Divine favour and ventured on reforms.

Vers. 7-11.—Moral measures. Princes, extraordinary commissioners and priests along
with them. A deputation of five princes, nine Levites assisted by two priests, tuok a copy
of the law with them, sent on tour in towns of Judah to give religious instruction to the
people. Vers. 9-11. Presents, Philistines tributaries or wishing to become such; Arabians,
nomad tribes on south of Dead Sea, sought protection and paid tribute in cattle.

Vers, 12-19.—Jehoshaphat’s greatness and prosperity. Castles, places of defence situated
for protection of roads, or valleys opening into the country (ch. xxvii. 4). Store, cities for
keeping ammunition and provisions in preparation of siege. Business, much labour also
expended on old “ cities of Judah,” besides building and fortifying other places. Vers
14-19, ‘“ Whenever a census was taken among Israelites, the numbering was by tribes
and families. Hence the expression in text, which occurs thirteen times in first chapter
of Numbers” [Speak. Com.]. Captains, princes of thousands, highest officers in commana.
Three of them, Adnah the highest post. By the side of him who commanded largest
division, Jehohanan and Amaziah had command of 280,000 and 200,000 men. Ver. 16, Amuz.
a volunteer, or by an act of his own devoted himself to the service of Jehovah, Light-
armed and heavy-armed troops waited on the king. “These numbers have been with
good reason regarded as corrupt by most critics, They cannot be successfully defended
either as probable in themselves or as in harmony with the other statements of the
military force, or of the population, contained in our author” [Spcak. Com}. Others
account for the numbers by including every one fit to bear arms in time of peace pursu-
ing their daily callings; auxiliaries from tributary Philistines and Arabs; and all who on
veligious grounds attached themselves to the kingdom of Judah (cf. Murphy].


HOMILETICS.
JznosHaryHats Goon Brcinnina.—Verses 1-19,


Natural for Jehoshaphat to succeed his father, but in defending his kingdom
ae indicated a policy; in rising above his surroundings, resisting prevalent
gustoms, and introducing reforms he made a good beginning. eae the


HTOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. foHAP. Xvi








chapter asa sketch—I, Johoshaphat’s natural defences. Jehosha-
phat “strengthened himself against Israel.” During Asa’s decay Ahab acted
with vigour. Israel getting a formidable kingdom, needful for Jehoshaphat to
bestir himself and maintain his own. ‘This done not by league and bribe, but in
natural, just, and quiet method against possible attack. A prudent man fore-
sees the evil and prepares for it. The tempers of men must be watched, the
threatenings of the times met, and weak places should be strengthened and
guarded, ‘T'o ignore inevitable tendencies, to act without foresight and prepara-
tion, most ruinous. II. Jehoshaphat’s moralreforms. He cared for
the spiritual welfare as well as for the outward security of the kingdom. Anxious
to restore the worship of Jehovah, to instruct the people, and to administer
justice (xix. 5). 1. J’eforms springing from personal picty. He himself upright
and sincere in serving God. A man of foresight and reverence, of deep convic-
tion and uncompromising principle. One who felt God’s presence more needful
than garrisons in cities and forces on land. 2. Reforms displaying zeal against
idolatry. He walked “not after the doings of Israel” (verse 4), was dead
against calf worship, strictly adhered to Divine enactments, removed monuments,
and destroyed groves which disgraced the land, and almost entirely cleansed it
from idolatry (xx. 33). 3. Reforms connected with the instruction of the people.
A commission of education was formed, equipped, and sent “about throughout
all the cities of Judah, and taught the people” (ver. 9). Kings and princes
help a nation, not by stifling inquiry, attempting to force opinion and punishing
heterodoxy ; but by spreading education, encouraging virtue, and exalting God’s
word. Nations who receive this word most tolerant and intelligent, most
philanthropic and exalted. III, Jehoshaphat’s consequent pros-
perity and honour. In personal conduct separated alike from gross
idolatry and Israelitish apostasy ; in government ruling in the fear of God, and
for the good of his subjects, “‘the Lord stablished the kingdom in his hand.” 1. A¢
home peace and plenty. His people loyal and submissive, voluntary offerings
abundant-—“ riches and honour” without stint? 2. Abroad security and honour.
None disturbed his peaceful reign, hostile peoples bowed before him, the tributes
of nations poured into his treasury, and the fear of God “fell upon all the
kingdoms” with ita restraining influence.


JEHOSHAPHATS UPricutness,—Verses 8, 4.


Jehoshaphat expressly commended for integrity, even when condemned for his
sin (xix. 3). This corresponds with his conduct at beginning of his reign,
and the continuance of his uprightness after sad and untoward events. I. A
man’s character is determined by his relation to God. He
acknowledged and “sought the Lord God of his father.” In some relation all
stand to God, and according to conduct, not creed, profession nor opinion, moral
character and condition determined. II. A man’s character and
course of life are specially observed by God. David's life described
in parts, each part uuder God’s inspection, Youth, manhood, and old age;
relapses and restorations known to him. Scripture lives detected, impartially
given in temptations, failings, and virtues. ‘Thou, O Lord, knowest me: thou
hast seen me and tried mine heart toward (with) thee” (Jer. xii.3). III. The
latter part of a man’s life may be worse than the first part.
“The first ways of his father David.” A contrast between the earlier and the
latter days of David, who relapsed and dishonoured in character. Age should
bring wisdom, honour, and meetness for eternity. The seed ripens for the crop.
Youth grows into maturity, and the student should give the accomplished
wren Sad to deteriorate in life (Solomon, Jehoshaphat, &.). “Sad when

3


oHAP. XVII] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





you have to go back to a man’s youth to find his virtues, or his most conspicuous
excellences; but most beautiful when a man’s earlier mistakes are lost in the
richness and wisdom of his later conduct” [Parker]. IV. The good only
and not the evil in a man’s life should be imitated. Jeho-
shaphat walked in the godly ways of David; customary and easier to follow the
evil, Multitudes and fashions influence ; men naturally prone to the inferior
and to forget the lofty and spiritual. The universal influence of bad examples
presupposes a universal readiness to yield to it. “Be ye therefore followers
(Greek, imitators) of God as dear children” (Eph. v. 1).


* Presume not that I am the thing I was,
For [ have turned away my former self,
So will I those that keep me company ” [Shakes. }.


THE Teacnine Commission.—Verses 6-9.


This s counterpoise to influences which had degraded Judah, and a continua
tion of Asa’s reaction. These men employed eminently useful, though otherwise
unknown. I, The persons which composed the commission.
Officers of court and camp, of civil and religious authority. 1. The princes. <A
deputation of five w represent civil and constitutional government. 2. The
Levites, Nine in number to instruct in ritual and temple service. 3. The
priests. Two to explain the nature and enforce the duties of religion, The
commission not warriors nor revolutionists, but reformers and revivalists. To
educate the people in their duty to God, the king, and to each other. II. The
work which the commission had to perform. Educational and
religious. 1. To teach the people. “They taught in Judah” (ver. 9). Educa-
tion required to chase away superstition, ensure just legislation, develop the
energies, and alleviate the condition of the people. 2. Zo expound the word.
“The book of the law” with them. God’s daw their text-book and authority.
The command of the prince, the creed of the priest, and the ritual of the Levite
not to displace God’s word. A law above man, a book more than human to
appeal to: a written statute, an authoritative declaration, a final revelation to
which to call men’s attention. “In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men.” III. The effects which followed
the work of the commission. The nation improved, reformed, and
greatly blessed. 1. /n outward prosperity. Peace and prosperity enjoyed ;
insurrections and wars prevented ; unbroken opportunities for pursuit of educa-
tion and commerce. 2, Jn moral character. People taught the law of God,
returned to religious ways and worship. God’s presence their defence and
dignity (ver. 10). Such the effect of the Bible at all times. Its principles
tend to civilise and elevate, reform and refine. It is the foe of oppression, the
protector of the weak, and the Magna Charta of true liberty. What the
boasted civilisation of ancient or modern nations without the Bible! Judge
Bible teaching by its fruits! Everywhere it justifies its existence and claims.
Its itinerant ministry and popular teaching in the providence of God has preserved
this country from revolutions and wars amid the ruins and dissolutions of


European nations!
JnznosnarnaTs Greatwess.—Verses 12-19,


I. Inthe extent of his possessions. “Castles and cities of store,”
places for victuals and arms. “He had much business,” undertakings of religion,
preparations for peace and war. A great kingdom and great responsibilities


committed to hiscare. II. In the vastness of his army. The Doni


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. {cHaP. Xvir





nnn el


arranged in the army according to their father’s houses. Consisted of five
unequal divisions, comprised 1,160,000 men, without including those who
garrisoned the fortresses. No monarch, since the time of Solomon, equalled
Jehoshaphat in the extent of his revenue, in the strength of his fortifications,
and the number of his troops [Jamieson]. III, In the skill of his
captains. Five great generals, loyal in spirit, mighty in valour, and ready for
any undertaking. “These waited on the king” (ver. 19). ;
“There is not a sovereign in Europe or in the world, but might read this
chapter with advantage. 1. It shows most forcibly that true religion is the basis
of the state; and that wherever it prospers, there the state prospers. 2. It
shows also, that it is the wisdom of kings to encourage religion with all their
power and influence; for if the hearts of the subjects be not bound and
influenced by true religion, vain is the application of laws, fines, imprisonments,
or corporal punishment of any kind. 3. A religious nation is ever a great
nation ; it is loved by its friends, it is dreaded by its enemies. 4. It is ever a
peaceful and united nation: the blessings of religion, and a wholesome and
paternal government, are so fully felt. and prized, that all find it their interest
to preserve and defend them. Harmony, peace, piety, and strength are the
stability of such times. May Britain know and value them!” [A. Clarke].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.
Vers. 4-6. Jehoshaphat’s religion. 1. it;


Practical in its possession. Not formal,
complimentary, nor expedient for the


2. Its policy was not inferior to
its benevolence; 3. The benefits arising
from it were incalculable. IL. The


times. A man of deep conviction,
courage, and generous patriotism. If
the end had only been as beginning,
almost a complete character! 2. Har-
nest in tts nature. He “sought” ear-
nestly and constantly “the Lord God of
his father.” 3. Prominent im tts testt-
mony. For eighteen years—contem-
porary with Ahab and Jezebel, the period
of Baalism in Israel—firm and faithful,
“sought not unto Baalim.” 4. Self-
denying in its example. ‘‘ Not after the
doings of Israel,” fashionable and _pre-
valent ; but “lifted up” in conformity
to God and delight in God’s service.

The working hand and the happy heart.
The chief things for a traveller on such
a pilgrimage as ours is a right goal
before him, the right road before him,
the right impulse within him. The
chief thoughts of which we are here
reminded are; 1. Religion pervading
our life—the Lord. 2. Activity per-
vading our religion—the ways. 3.
Cheerfulness pervading our activity
[Christian Treasury, 1859}.

Vers. 7-11. The royal edict. I. We
notice the edict of king Jehoshaphat:
1. Mark the benevolence displayed im

232


manner in which it was carried into
execution. This suggests—l. That
loyalty tothe king demands our concur-
rence with him in hisgood work; 2. That
gratitude to the Jewish nation demands
it at our hands; 3. A love to the
rising generation should lead us to
avail ourselves of the present oppor-
tunity to promote their welfare; 4.
That a concern for the honour of our
holy religion should operate to unite
us all in executing the royal edict
[C. Simeon, M.A.].

Ver. 13. Business, which he per-
formed diligently, personally, and tho-
roughly. “ Many works (LXX.) going
forward at once; a negotious man was
he. His business, say some, lay in
beautifying and fortifying those cities.
Augustus gloried at his death, that
whereas he had found Rome built with
brick, he had left it made of marble
[Zrapp].

Ver. 16. Wellingly offered himself.
The volunteer—1. Religious in spirit.
Recognition of “the Lord.” 2, Resolute
ia arms. The vows of God upon him.
3. Valiant in service. Like ancient
votaries in Mohammedan armies, never


cmap, Xvm1.}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; CHRONICLES,


a eee


known to return home without victory.


“The people blessed all the men that
willingly offered themselves to dwell at


Jerusalem.”


“He always wins who sides with Thea,
To him no chance is lost ;
Thy will is sweetest to him, when
Ié triumphs at his cost” ([F. W. Faber],


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XVII.


Vers. 3-5. The Lord with him, stab-
lished the kingdom, &ce. God is the only
source of stability as infinite, absolute,
and changeless. He gives stability to
his word, church, and people. ‘In the
great hand of God I stand” [Shake-
epeare].

Vers. 7-9. The book of the law. The
influence of the Bible has been very
efficient towards the introduction of a
better and more enlightened sense of
right and justice among the several
governments of Europe. It taught
the duty of benevolence to strangers,
of humanity to the vanquished, of the
obligation of good faith, of the sin of
murder, revenge, and rapacity. The
history of. Europe, during the earlier
periods of modern history, abounds with
interesting and strong cases to show
the authority of revelation over tur


bulent princes and fierce warriors, and
the effect of that authority in meliora-
ting manners, checking violence, and
introducing a system of morals which
inculcate peace, moderation, and justice
[Chancellor Kent].

Ver. 13. Much business. Nothing
is denied to well-directed labour ; no-
thing is ever to be attained without it
[Str Joshua Reynolds]. All sorts of
mischiefs happen to unoccupied pro-
fessors of religion; there is no evil
from which they are secure. Better
would it be for them to aecspt the
lowest occupation for the Lord Jesus
than remain the victims of inaction
[Spurgeon].


“ Troubles spring from idleness,
And grievous toils from needless ease”
[Franklin].





CHAPTER XVITIL


’


Critica, Norze.) This chapter relates Jehoshaphat’s alliance with Ahab (vers. 1-3);
induced to go to Ram.-gil. (vers. 4-11); Micaiah’s adverse prediction (vers. 12-17) ; cou-
tinued reproof (vers. 18-22); und sufferings (vers. 23-28); the two kings enter battle with
sad results (vers. 23-34). With this chapter corresponds 1 Ki xxii. 1-35. : '

Vers. 1-3.—Jehoshaphat’s alliance with Ahab. Affinity. Joram, his son, married Athaliah,
daughter of Ahab and Jezebel (xxi. 6). Years, in Jehoshaphat’s seventeonth year, eight
after marriage. Killed, gave magnificent feast to influence him in favour of enterprise.
Ramoth., heights of Gilead, in territory of Gad, to wrest from King of Syria. Ver. 3.
Jehoshaphat easily consents, without consulting God. ;

Vers, 4-11.—The consultations. Previous to declaration of war customary to consult
prophets (1 Sam. xxviii.). Ahab complied. 400 prophet, creatures of Ahab connected with
calf-worship, encouraged the king. Ver. 6. Jehoshaphat, dissatisfied, inquired for a true
prophet; besides, in addition, or yet more. Ver. 7. Micaiah, known only from this incident,
sent for. Always evil, lit.. all his days, wanting in Kings. Ver. 8, Ojjice/s, eunuch or cham-
berlain. Ver. 9. Graphic scene, void place (open space, Rev. Vers). A large area for
markets, courts, and business. Wach king on his portable throne, clothed in royal
garments, and spectators all around. Ver. 10. Zed., more prominent than rest.
Had made previously, in anticipation of some such occasion as now given faatss Com.).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cHAP. XVIII.


er re


Horns, like candle extinguishers (often worn as military ornaments) ; iron, symbol of
military power. Pusk, a common metaphor for attacking and overcoming ene nics.
Thus two heroes impersonated ; Kings of Israel and Judah would triumph (Deut. xxxii.
17; Ps. xliv. 5; Dan. viii. 4), ,

Vers. 12-17.—Micatah’s adverse prediction. The well-intentioned messenger tries to
persuade Micaiah to agree with majority, predict success, and be released from prison
and severer punishment. He rejects counsel, remains fearless and firm. Ver. 14, Go up,
the ironical answer of the 400, well understood by Ahab. Adjure, put on oath, he changes
tone and becomes very serious. Ver. 16, Saw, purport of this vision that Israel would be
defeated, dispersed, and king destroyed. -

Vers, 18-28.—Micaiah’s reproof and sufferings. Saw in providence of God events im
fuller detail. Therefore hear the Divine will. Sitting, in splendour snd supremacy
(Ps. ix. 7; xi 4; xlvi. 6, &e.). Standing, about him on both sides. Ver. 19. Entice,
persuade or deceive (1 Ki. xxii. 20). Ver. 20. A spirit, the spirit, z.e., “the evil spirit,”
Satan some; others, “ the spirit of prophecy ” in the 400, under the control and command
of the Governor of the universe, at his direction and permission. Ver. 21. Lying spirit,
to mislead when consulted. ‘The details of a vision cannot safely be pressed any more
than the details of a parable” [cf. Speak. Com.]. Ver. 23. Zed., by this fearful disclosure, is
vexed, presumed upon his favour with Ahab, smote Micaiah in contempt and scorn
(Job xvi. 10; Jer, xx. 2; Lam. iii. 30; Mk. xiv. 65); and insinuates that the spirit did not
speak by him. Ver. 24. The event would be a reply, when he would go from chamber ta
chamber, in some secret place. To hide himself in shame and fear of punishment for
his false predictions. Ver. 25. Micaiah sent back to prison, with scanty prison fare;
submitted, courageously reproves the king ; predicts his death, and appeals to the people,
who should witness the result.

Vers. 29-34.—War undertuken. Ahab afraid, disguises himself, ut.generously advises
Jehosh. to fight in royal attire. Ver. 30, Command of King of Syria proves the prudence
of Ahab’s conduct. Yer, 31. Jehosh. only king in field. Cried out, whether to followers or
to enemy, not stated. Perceived, probably from his cry, and pursuit ceased. Ver. 33.
Venture, i.e, in his simplicity, without special aim or intention. Joints, parts where
pieces of armour fitted together. Ahab wounded, notwithstanding his precaution ; kept
standing in his chariot during the day the battle raged, at sunset all over. The war-cry
went through the host, every man returned to his city and te his country. But Ahab
was carried dead to Samaria, and there buried.


HOMILETICS.
Tue Dancer or Woripiy FrRienpsHip.—Verses 1-3.


Jehoshaphat displeased God by his choice of friends, and began a downward
course, marked by gradual steps. I. Friendship beginning with family
affinity. Jehoshaphat “joined aflinity with Ahab” by uniting his son with
Ahab’s daughter. Perhaps proud, for he “had riches and honour in abundance,”
and did not want Jehoram ‘‘to marry beneath him.” Nothing but marriage with
a royal house would satisfy—perhaps to conciliate Israel and bring them back to
Jehovah. Evil cannot be conciliated. This might be considered good policy,
but morally wrong; disobedient to God’s command, and brought the kingdom
and royal house to verge of destruction. Unsuitable marriages to preserve
name, property in family circle. “Be not unequally yoked together with
unbelievers.” II. Friendship leading to social visits. “After
certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria.” What more natural and
needful to improve acquaintance and inquire about welfare! Received in royal
style, but corrupted in moral character. Joins in converse with ungodly, can
bear their company, and dwell in their house (Lot in Sodom). He becomes
weaker, more complaisant, and exposed to risk. “TI am as thou art, and my
people as thy people.” “ What fellowship hath righteousness with unrighteous-
ness? &c.” IIT. Friendship ending in alliance for war. “He
persuaded him to go up.” Feasted so splendidly, friendship so close, extrication
dificult. The height of incivility, most unreasonable to refuse! Evil wrought
on his mind, spiritual constitution not proof against bad atmosphere. He lost
power to testify; censure lost its energy ; his presencs no longer a restraint on


CHAP, XViTz.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
re ee Ces


folly, and impossible to assume high tone and faithful attitude. “Let not the
king say so,” the only mild rebuke. Difficult to walk wisely, faithfully, and
surely in these days of compromise and fashion. But God looks for entire
separation from the world in character, purpose, and conduct. “Know ye not
that the friendship of the world is enmity with God? Whosoever, therefore,
will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.” “ Shouldest thou help the
ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord #”


Tug Importanr Question: War 08 No War?—Verses 4~23.


Ahab, tired of waiting for peaceful restoration of Ram.-gil., determined to
recover it from the Syrians by force. Aware of the military strength of the
Syrian king (1 Ki. xxii. 3, 4), he takes advantage of visit and friendship of
Jehoshaphat, whose resources are great, and who suggests an immediate inquiry
of the Lord before expedition. I, The tribunal before which to
decide. Picture the open space (ver. 9). The kings robed in splendour ;
the prophets in their imposing ranks and display, confident and insolent in their
lying message ; the one true prophet, hated by Ahab, uncared for by spectators,
yet calm, brave, and true! Luther before the Diet of Worms. II. The
judgments given. Two kinds from two parties. 1. From false prophets.
“‘ Ahab gathered his prophets together, about 400 men,” Every great enterprise
seeks the sanction of God and to clothe itself with Divine authority. Right and
wrong of actions felt to be determined by One higher than man. If Heaven's
signature not gained often forged. Ahab multiplied pagan prophets as Julian
multiplied pagan sacrifices. A band ready to interpret divine decrees in favour of
the king they serve. Think of their number, office, and unanimity / With one
consent they say,Go! 2. From the true prophet. Jehoshaphat not satisfied ;
saw from their manner they were not truthful, not Jehovah-prophets; asks for
“a prophet of the Lord, that he might inquire of him.” The vox populi not
always the vox Dei. Micaiah sent for, appears, determines to speak the truth
fearless of consequences. ‘ Athanasius against the world.” In terms of irony,
in visions of splendour, when adjured by the king and in appealing to the people.
Smitten by the priests and threatened with the prison, the same answer given.
Iii. War foolishly undertaken. Ahab bent on war, Jehoshaphat unable
to check him, ‘“ And they went to the battle” (ver. 29). 1, Reluctantly by
Jehoshaphat. Ventured too much and gone too far; ensnared and drawn along.
“Enter not into the path of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men.”
2. Timidly by Ahab. Desired to falsify prediction, and disguised himself,
What a cowardly act! What friendship to preserve your own life at the
expense of another! ‘A good cause makes a stout heart.” A soldier conscious
of right, accompanied by God, will stand fearless and victorious on the field of
battle IV. War ending in disasters. Death to Ahab. To
Jehoshaphat danger in the field, deserved rebuke from God’s servant (xix. 2),
invasion of the kingdom, and almost total extinction of the family (xxii. 10).
Ever dangerous to fight against God. Enterprises opposed to his will can never
prosper. Inquire, Shall I go or shall I not# When decision known, submit,
and escape the ruin.


© We leap at stars, and fasten in the mud,
&t glory grasp, and sink ia infamy” [Young]


335


AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (cmap. xvite


rn





THe Farrurut Propuet..—Verses T=27.


I. The estimation in which he was held. “I hate him."
Counted like Elijah as an enemy by Ahab. Micaiah consistent in veracity,
courage, and reproof. The king offended, and imputed all to evil disposition,
personal grudge. Hatred, inveterate and strong, often the reward of
fidelity. “Am I therefore become your enemy because I tell you the truth?”
I’, The stand which he takes. “ What my God saith, that will I
speak” (ver. 13). 1. Dependence upon God. In God’s hands, not Ahab’s. “So
nel» me God,” cried Luther, ‘Fear him who can destroy both body and
soul.” 2, Hapectation of God’s help. Assured that God would say something,
teach him, and reveal light. Disciples before councils (Mat. x. 18-19). 3.
Determination to utter God's word. ‘That will I speak.” Balaam could make
no compromise. Reverent attention to divine truth, and determination to die
rather than withhold or betray it, the mark of a true prophet. III. The
pleas urged to move him from this stand. The messenger in kind-
ness warned and advised. 1. The opinion of the majority. 400 prophets
unanimous in decision! Think of their power and position! Why be singular
and foolish in opposing? Agree with the multitude. Unity built on ¢ruth,
better than unity built on men. 2. The difficulty of judging who te right.
“ Which way went the spirit of the Lord from me to thee?” Zedekiah assumed
to possess the spirit alone, ridiculed in scorn the idea of Micaiah having it.
Circumstances make it difficult to judge who is right among many claimants.
But there is a divine word; mn can understand and receive it, must judge
and decide for himself. Know vy results. False prophets assume authority,
take fulfilment of truth im their own hands, despise and persecute others. True
prophets receive and utter the word, leave it with God to verify and vindicate it.
3. The employment of physical force. This is a tyrant’s weapon. ‘The screw,
the prison, and the stake, bonds, persecution, and martyrdom in vain. Micaiah
calm in suffering, as bold in action, immovable as a rock, honoured and exalted


in Israel as independent and true, when prophets of Ahab are confounded and
scattered in shame and disgrace.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 2. Wentdown. The royal visit.
1. The object for which made. 2.
Results to which led. “The bond
between the two families dates, there-
fore, at least from this time, but
apparently it had not hitherto led to
any very close intimacy, much less to
any joint military expeditions, Jehosha-
phat seems to have taken no part in the
former Syrian wars of Ahab, nor did he
join with the great league against the
Assyrians. From this time till the
displacement of Ahab’s dynasty by
Jehu, very intimate relations subsisted
between the two kingdoms (¢f. 1 Ki.
xxii. 49; 2 Ki. iii. 7; viii. 28; 2 Chr.
xx. 36) [Speak. Com.].

Ver. 4. Enquire. God, forgotten in
men’s toate should always be

23


sought, and sought without delay.
“ Enquire to-day.” Ahabnever thought
of this. God not in his thoughts (Ps. x.
4). If Scipio went first to the capital,
and then to the senate; if the
Romans consulted gods and offered
sacrifices before war, should we not
enquire, &c. ?

Vers. 5-7. I hate him. A picture
of present time. 1. Men love to be
flattered. Ahab, satisfied with his
prophets, thought they were inspired
and would listen to no oneelse. 2.
Men speak lies to flatter their superiors,
servants their masters, courtiers their
sovereigns, Thus the very fountains of
life corrupt. Prophets, priests, and
judges encourage falsehood. “ A
wonderful and horrible thing (astonish-


ouap. xvii.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





ment and filthiness) is committed in
the land; the prophets prophesy
falsely, and the priests bear rule by
their means (lit., according to their
hands, t.e., under their guidance and
power), and my people love to have it
so” (Jer. v. 30, 31). (Populus vult
decipi, et decipiatur). 3. In speaking
lies they are influenced by supernatural
powers. Such powers exist and
mysteriously influence the minds of
men. Lying spirits are subtle, wise, aud
numerous ; have easy access to men and
deceive. Seek to hear not what is palat-
able to our corrupt hearts, but what is
true, needful, and profitable to our souls.
“Hear the just law, the judgment of the
skies |

He that hates truth shall be the dupe of lies.

And he that will be cheated to the last,

Delusions, strong as hell, shall bind him


™
Vers. 8-11. A performance at court.
Picture place, kings on their separate
thrones, spectators and performance,
Zed. in employing a symbolic action
was following the example of a former
Israelite prophet, whose “ acted
parable” could never be forgotten in
Israel (of. 1 Ki. xi. 30) [Speak. Com.].
Ver. 13. A faithful ministry. 1.
The necessity imposed on faithful
ministers to speak the truth. God
requires it, needful to the welfare of the
people, and consequences of neglect
fearful. 2. The results of speaking
truth. Hated by those ia authority,
ridiculed and opposed by rivals, treated
with indifference, cruelty, and death.
“So spake the seraph Abdiel, faithful found


Among the faithless, faithful only he”
[ Milton}.


fast” [Cowper}
HOMILETICS.
Pur Propuetic Visions.—Verse 18.


Solemnly urged to give a serious answer, Micaiah declared the visions revealed
to him by the spirit of God. I. The shepherdless people. ‘I did see
all Israel scattered,” &. (ver. 16). 1. The death of the king. Ministers and
kings shepherds of the people to feed, govern, and protect. Ahab feil in battle,
and Israel deprived of ruler. “These have no master.” 2. The defeat of the
army. “ All Israel scattered,” in broken ranks and helpless condition. A picture
of society away from God and divided from one another; inadequately supplied
with helpers, and needing a compassionate Saviour (Mat.'ix. 36-38). II. The
parabolic Providence. “It may be doubted whether we ought to take
literally, and interpret exactly, each statement of the narrative. Visions of the
invisible can only be a sort of parables: revelations not of truth as it actually is,
but of so much of truth as can be shown through such a medium. The details
of a vision, therefore, cannot safely be pressed, any more than the details of a
parable. Portions of each must be accommodations to human modes of thought,
and may very inadequately express the realities which they are employed to
shadow forth to us” [Speak. Com.}. 1. A picture of God's supremacy. “The Lord
sitting upon his throne,” supreme in authority, wisdom, and splendour (Is. vi. 1).
2. An insight into supernatural ministry. ‘“ All the host of heaven” ready to
serve. ‘Satan walks to and fro in the earth” in restless activity to do mischief
to God’s people (Job i. 7). Other spirits sent on divine errands (Zech. i. 10;
Dan. vii. 10). 3. An interpretation of the events of history. Why does this
happen’ God orders or permits it. Sometimes heaven is opened to shadow
forth events on earth, God’s seers only cin interpret and apply the vision—a
privilege to them and a warning to us.


Lyra Spirits iw tHe Proparets.—Verece 18-23.
This chapter gives an insight into the meaning of the awful word “tempta-


tion.” Wet comforting, for it shows how God is long-suffering and cere te


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [onapr. ©7n
ne A





the most hardened sinner; how to the last he puts before him good and evil,
and warns him of his choice and the ruin to which it leads. I. What warning
more awful, yet more plain, than that of the text? Ahab, told that he was
listening to a lie, had free choice to follow that lie or not, and did follow it.
After imprisonment of Micaiah for speaking the truth to him, he went to Ram.
gilead; yet felt that he was not safe. He went into battle disguised, hoping
to escape from evil by these means. But God’s vengeance not checked by paltry
eunning. II. This chapter tells us not merely how Ahab was tempted, but how
we are tempted in these very days. By every wilful sin we commit we give room
to the devil. By every wrong step we take knowingly, we give a handle to some
evil spirit to lead us seven steps further wrong. Yet in every temptation God
gives us a fair chance, sends his prophets, as he sent Micaiah to Aha», to tell us
that the wages of sin is death, to set before us good and evil at every turn, that
we may choose between them and live and die according to choice. The Bible is
a prophet to us. Every man a prophet to himself. The still small voice in the
heart, the voice of God within us; the spirit of God striving with our spirits,
whether we will hear or forbear, setting before us what is righteous, noble,
pure, and godlike, to see whether we will obey that voice, or obey our own
selfish lusts, which tempt us to please ourselves [C. Kingsley, “ Village
Sermons ”}.


Divine Trura anp rvs Typican RECEPTION.


Bible full of human nature. Humanity in varied aspects its excellence and
chief feature. A book forthe world. Its biographies. “ Representative men.”
Here four types of human conduct in relation to divine truth. I, Those
who seek the truth. Micaiah believed in its existence, prayed for its
teaching, and determined to follow its leading. Sought truth under impression
of its reality, from the right source, in order to render homage to it. “ Lead
me by thy truth and teach me.” II. Those who are opposed to
the truth. The priests assumed to be its only depositories, denied the claims
of others, ridiculed and opposed its representative. None so slow to believe in
a Divine spirit as those accustomed to speak Divine words, but in whose hearts
is no Divine life. A lifeless church always bitterest enemy to inquiry, reform,
and independency. “ Ye seek to kill me, a man that hath told you the truth.”
III. Those who believe yet disobey the truth. J. believed the
prophet Micaiah, mildly defended his character, yet would not withdraw from
Ahab. He sinned against light and better judgment. Risky thus to act.
“ Holding (¢.¢., keeping down, obscuring, overbearing) the truth in (a course of)
unrightousness ” is the way to bring down the judgment of God (Rom. i. 18),
to lose the ability to perceive it, and the power to embrace and practise it.

“ Thus men go wrong with an ingenious skill,

Bend the straight rule to their own crooked will;

And with a clear and shining lamp supplied,

First put it out, then take it for a guide” [ Cowper].
IV. Those who are alarmed at-truth. Ahab roused in conscience,
afraid of results, and tried to escape by stratagem, The dupe of his own fears.
The child whom Herod sought to destroy lived, grew, and rose to sovereignty of
the universe. The prediction of Micaiah fuliilled, terror struck into hearts of
soldiers, and the king died in blood-stained chariot.


Gosre, Arcurmry.—Verse 33.


I, The hearts of the unsaved are encased in harness. The harness of (1) In-
difference, (2) pleasure, (3) worldliness, (4) religious formality. II. Having
238


CHAP. XVIII]
Steet Ee





AMOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,
t


ore NR


these harnessed hearts for a mark, the gospel bow must be drawn. At some


must be shot the arrows of (1) Divine goodness,


(3) Divine love [z. Berry]


(2) Divine threatenings,


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 18-22. Lying spirits. 1. A
doctrine of Scripture (Jud. ix. 23; Job
i, 6; 11.1; Ez. xiv. 9; Jno. viii. 44;
Rev. xii. 9). 2. A fact in experience.
Eve seduced. Many now under strong
delusion (error energising and effectual)
that they should believe a lie (2 Thess.
vi. 11,12). 3. A mystery of providence.
The preblem of human character, of
human life and destiny insolvable on
any other hypothesis. Inscrutable
providence |

Ver, 31. Jehoshaphat’s cry. 1. Danger
the result of warning unheeded. 2.
God interfering to deliver. God may
be displeased, never deserts when we
cry unto him. Ahab cared not to
succour, God moved them to depart
from him. 3. Lesson, associate with
evil-doers, then in danger of sharing
their calamities ‘A violent man
enticeth his neighbour, and leadeth
him into the way that is not good.”

Learn from the whole—1l. That the
contrivances of the wicked are cruel
(Prov. xii. 5,10). 2. That in carrying
out these contrivances they are greatly
alarmed. Conscience makes them


cowards (Prov. xxviii. 1). 3, That ir
the eud their fears are realised. In
attempt to ensnare others ensnared
themselves (Prov. xii. 13; xxiv. 15,
16; xxvi. 27); expectations of good
disappointed (Prov. x. 2-28 ; xxiv. 19,
20), and their iniquity becomes their
punishment (Prov, v. 22; xi. 3; xiv.
32).

Ver. 33. Accidents of Providence. I.
The end certain. Bow did its work.
Darts of judgment, designs of Pro-
vidence, never miss the mark. II. The
method of accomplishing the end ap-
parently accidental. At a venture,
casual shot. The hand strengthened,
shaft levelled with unerring eye. What
we term chance, casualty, really Pro-
vidence accomplishing deliberate de-
signs, but interposition concealed. 1.
A comfort to godly in trouble, sorrow,
and peril. 2. A warning to ungodly,
who are not safe, exposed everywhere.
Most common occurrences, those from
which we suspect no harm, may prove
destructive to life.

“The all-surrounding heav’n, the vital air,

Is big with death.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XVII.


Vers. 1-3. Friendship. It is gooa
discretion not to make too much of
any man at the first, because one cannot
hold out that proportion [Bacon].

Vers. 7-22. Lying spirits. Com-
pare Elijah’s tone (1 Ki. xviii. 27).
“Jn the vision which he describes we
feel that we are gradually drawing
nearer to the times of the later
prophets. It is a vision which might
rank with those of Isaiah or Ezekiel”
[Stanley]. Not by any stroke of ven-
geance, but by the very network of
evil counsel which he has woven for
himself, is the King of Israel to be
led to bis ruin [Jbid.].

Ver. 29. Disguised. As knowledge


without justice ought to be called
cunning rather than wisdom, so a
mind prepared to meet danger, if
excited by its own eagerness and not
the public good, deserves the name of
audacity rather than of courage [ Plato}.

Ver. 33. Bow at a venture. It is
marvellous to note on what small con-
tingencies depends our life. An acci-
dental blow, an unexpected fall, a mis-
take in drinking out of the wrong cup,
a misstep in the dark, a fly, a fishbone,
the smallest things often occasion its
termination. This fact is serious enough
to cool ambition, make us thoughtful
in merriest moods, and watchful
against any surprise that death may

239


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cuar. x12.











have in reserve for us. Died—“The truth; and the lie on the throne is on
truth cannot be burned, beheaded, or the way to defeat, and the truth in the
erucified. A lie on the throne isa lie dungeon is on the way to victory,”
still, and truth in a dungeon is still


OHAPTER XIX.


Crrrtcan Nores.] This chapter is entirely additional to Kings, and of great interest. It
deals with three matters only, the rebuke addressed to Jehosh. by the profit Jehu
(vers. 1-3); the personal efforts of Jehosh. to effect a religious reformation (ver. 4) ; and hia
reform of the judicial system (vers. 5-11) [Speak. Com.}.

Vers, 1-3.—The Rebuke of Jehosh. In peace, without capture or pursuit; a fulfilment of
prophecy (ch. xviii.16). Jehu, son of Hanani (xx. 34), of Northern Kingdom in time of
Baasha (1 Ki. xvi.1). Went out (xv. 2). Help, make common cause with Ahab. Wrath,
God angry, and caused expedition to fail, or may be in the invasion of kingdom about to
happen. Ver. 4. Rebuke mild, “ good things” (¢f. xii. 12; 1 Ki. xiv. 13). Groves, stocks of
trees representing Ashtoreth (xiv. 3; xvii. 4-6).

Vers.4-11.—The Reforms of Jehosh. Went, turned and went out. Again, efforts for instruction
resumed, and secured full complement of teachers from the tribe of Levi now fixed in
Judah. Vers. 5-7. Instructions to judges. Jehosh. appointed fresh judges, enlarged their
staff and number; limited to fenced cities, by concentrating power in the hands of a few,
or creating superior courts. Ver. 6. Judge not at dictation or in compliance with wishes
of men, but for Jehovah (Deut. i.17; xvi. 18-20). Jn judgment—i.e., in your decisions.
Ver. 7. Iniquity of inequality or undue leaning to one side (cf. Deut. x. 17; xvi. 19). Vers,
8-11.-—Instructiens to the priests and Levites. Ver. 8. Chief, great patriarchal chiefs,
heads of great houses or clans. *‘ It is interesting to find that such persons were now
admitted to share in the judicial office, which seems in David's time to have been confined
to the Levites” [Speak. Com.]. Judgment of the Lord. Disputes in religious matters,
payments to temple, offerings for firstborn, &o. Controversies, ordinary civil cases.
Jerusalem, seat of supreme tribunal (Ex. xviii. 19; Deut. xvii. 8-13), which was composed
of three classes, to review appellate cases from inferior courts in two divisions, ecclesi-
astical and civil affairs. Decisions of provincial judges might be carried to Jerusalem aa
a court of appeal [cf. Speak. Com.]. Ver. 10. Blood, case of murder or homicide as to
degree of blood-guiltiness (Ex. xxi. 12-23), Law and command, when a conflict of laws,
clashing one with another. Warn, admonish them to abstain from wrong, and avoid
God’s vengeance on the nation. Ver. 11. A chief, high priest, president of court in
religious concerns, Zeb.,in civil or criminal affairs. Levites, superintending managers,
assistants, and servants about court The good, God with upright judges (cf. v. 6 ; xv. 2-6).
Deal, take courage and act.


HOMILETICS.


Tue Stern ResuKce.—Verses 1-3.


Alliance between two kingdoms against a common enemy, substitution of
friendship for hatred and distrust, wise steps to worldly politicians, But one
thing against it. Ahab, an idolator, had introduced a new religion of most
degraded type. Jehosh. did not reject this alliance. As Hanani rebuked Asa
for league with Ben. (ch. xvi. 7), so his son instructed to rebuke Jehosh. for
league with wicked Ahab. Military success from Jehovah ; unlawful alliance, if

#40


GHAP. XIx.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





¥
persisted in, will forfeit this blessing. I. In a timely season. “J. went out
to meet him,” at earliest possible moment, when king had been preserved, and
returning in peace. Hence in fit mind to listen. Rebuke should be timely, in
“‘ due season,” then it comes down upon the heart like rain upon the new-mown
grass. II. In faithful words. Jehu direct and faithful. “Thou hast
helped the ungodly, and loved them that hate the Lord.” No toning down, nor
mincing matters. Man’s reproofs sometimes undeserved, implying guilt which
exists not. Divine reproofs truthful, needful, and attested by conscience.
Faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are
deceitful.” IIT. In mitigating circumstances, “ Nevertheless, there
are good things found in thee” (ver. 3). God displeased, but overlooks not
“ good things” ; in wrath remembers mercy; withholds judgments, and waits to
see how Jehosh. will act in future. In the Church at Ephesus all that God can
find to approve put foremost, and only afterwards notes shortcomings (Rev. ii.
2-4). Then (ver. 6) returns to praise and console. We should have more
pleasure in commending than in fault-finding.


I. The friendship of wicked men one of the most dangerous temptations to
which Christians are subjected. Modern life in cities illustrates this with
special force. 1. The wealth of the world is largely in the hands of men who
are not friends of Christ. 2. In many communities intelligence and culture are
possessed mainly by the irreligious. 3. Interests of business sometimes create
similar peril. 4. In a higher circle of life professional success often tempts
young men of aspiring mind to seek to ally themselves with those who love not
God. II. Of this trial of Christian principle, it may be said that the Christian
religion requires no narrow or ascetic seclusion fic the world. The thing
which Christian principle forbids is seeking worldly friendships and alliances for
selfish ends and to the peril of religious usefulness and religious character,
Ili. The irreligious friendships of religious men violate the ruling spirit of the
Scriptures. It is a policy of life which starts wrong; therefore threatens
catastrophe in the end. IV. Entangling alliances with the world often involve
immense sacrifice of Christian usefulness. V. Christian alliances with the
wicked do not command the respect of the very men for whose favour they are
formed. VI. Loving those that hate God inflicts a wound of great severity on
the feelings of Jesus Christ. It is from Calvary that the voice comes to each
in our solitude, ‘‘Shouldest thou love them that hate the Lord?” [A. Phelps,
0.7. a Living Bk.}.


Tre Rerormina Tour.—Verses 4—7.


While Jehosh. sought to maintain alliance, he was careful to show that he had
no sympathy with idolatry, and determined to keep his people from it. Hence
a second tour to reform what had gone wrong and complete what was wanting.
I. The noble design of the tour. Not to strengthen defences, revive
trade, or relieve distress. 1, To administer justice. “He set judges in the
land,” in centres convenient and accessible. 2. To bring the people back to God.
Many perbaps revolted to idolatry when they saw the king familiar with
idolators. Hence to counteract our bad influence and restore the fallen. ITI,
The vast extent of the tour. Personal inspection through the whole
kingdom from the extreme south to extreme north, from Beer-sheba to Mount
Ephraim. No place should be overlooked, no enemy spared in religious reforms.
JII. The beneficent results of the tour. Personal and thorough,
results encouraging. 1. Local courts established. Existed before ; Jehosh. the
first king to modify them according to requirements of kingdom. ep in


HOMILETIC CUMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (cHar, xm


Se


fortified cities the provincial capitals of the districts (¢f Deut. xvi. 18-20) 3.
Judicial administration purified. Special instruction to judges, high and lofty
motives put before them. Soldiers must not abuse their power by violence and
wrong; magistrates must not degrade their character by injustice and partiality.
All duties to be performed to God, not to man (ver. 6).


Tue Supreme Tripunat.—Verses 8-11.


This institution or Metropolitan Court founded on Ex. xviii. 19-26; Deut.
vii. 8-13. Notice—I. Its representative character. Three classes—
Levites, priests, and chief of fathers; persons learned in law, eminent for
wisdom, and of mature age and experience. “ Peers of the realm.” II. Its


presiding officers. Amariah, high priest over religious causes. “In all
matters of the Lord.” Zebadiah supreme in civil court. To assist both, the
Levites were a kind of counsellors. III. Its executive powers. Appeal


made from inferior courts to this, Pleas for the crown and for religious obser-
vances in one division. In other division common pleas. Controversies between
party and party; differences of blood, manslaughter or accidental murders, or
consanguinity, settlement of inheritance and family claims. Civil affairs between
law and commandments. Conflicts between moral rites and precepts of law, ce.
“Without good and wholesome Jaws no nation can be prosperous, and vain are
the best laws if they be not judiciously and conscientiously administered. The
things of God and the things of the king should never be confounded in the
administration of justice. Amariah the priest, and Zebadiah the ruler, should
ever have their distinct places of jurisdiction” [A. Clarke],


A Tontc Promisze.—Verse 11.


Explain what is meant by “good.” The melancholy fact that a// men are not
good. The promise of the text justifies three inquiries: (1) Why should the
good be fearful? ‘They that be with us,” &c. (2) How can bad designs finally
prevail? (3) How are men to know that God is surely with ihem? The answer
involves character. It is not the Lord shall be with the great, the rich, the old,
&c., but with the good. God identifies himself with all that is good in thought
as well asin act; in purpose as well as in service. This is the security of the
world, Even when the godly man ceaseth, God will maintain the cause that is

ood.

This promise, like all the promises of God, is designated not as a sedative, but
a stimulant. Deal courageously! See how the text might have read: The Lord
shall be with the good, therefore st stl; the Lord shall be with the good,
therefore let wickedness have all its own way in the world ; the Lord shall be with
the good, therefore pay no attention to self-discipline. The text reads contrariwise.
The Lord shall be with the good, therefore deal courageously. Goodness is not
to be merely passive, it is to be active, aggressive, defiant of all evil, sublime in
patience [Dr. Parker, City Temple].


HOMILETIC HINTS


Vers. 1-3. Jehoshaphat’s ‘connection
with Ahab. I. What is that intimacy
with the ungodly which God forbids ?
1. An alliance with them. 2. A
conformity with them, 3. An un-
necessary associaticn with them. IL

242


AND SUGGESTIONS.


Why is it so displeasing to God? 1,
On account of the state of mind it
implies. 2. On accountof its pernicious
tendency. 3. On account of its oppo-
sition to his revealed will [Dr. Chapin].

Ver. %. God's Justice. 1. God just


Guar, xx J HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
ee ae


and righteous in himself. On justice Vers. 6, 7. Address to Judges. 1.
all his proceedings are based and In office they represent God, act
regulated. He is “the Just One,” worthy of God, represent not his law,
Most just,” “Just and right is he” express not his will as crooked and
(of Deut. x. 17; xvi. 19; xxxii, 4). corrupt. “ Ye judge not for man, but
2. Just and righteous in the gift of for the Lord” 2 In spirét the
just laws to mankind. Laws adapted must fear God. Fear to offend
to their natures, powers, and cond- One who sees and knows all. 3. In
tion. The moral code so right and decisions be impartial and just. Give
benevolent as to require no prof. sentence deliberately in conformity
Supreme love to God and true regard with truth. J udges, ministers, all in
to our neighbour. _ 3. Just and high position should be remarkable for
righteous in the administration of these integrity, and free from bribery and
laws—strictly and impartially here. corruption.
No Poo, conniving at guilt,
or overlooking sin. In Christ justice ses
and holiness Gdean avon: and God the menays Serre uceatie mnt epee
justifier of him that believeth. At last Thy God's, and truth’s” [Shakes.],
no iniquity nor respect in the bestow-
ment of rewards and punishments.





*“ Be just and fear not.


CHAPTER XX.


Oxrricat, Notzs.] Narrative to ver. 80 entirely additional to Kings. Invasion of
Moabites (vers. 1-3); fast and supplication of king and people (vers. 3-12); the message
of Jahaziel (vers. 14-19); exhortation and victory of Jehoshaphat (vers. 20-30) ; close of
his reign (vers. 31-37), which runs parallel with 1 Ki. xxii. 41-49.

Vers. 1, 2.—Invasion of Moabites. Ammonites, Sept., some of the Minai, inhabitants of
Maon (Mehunins), a town near Petra. Ver. 2. Sea, Dead Sea. Syria, probably Edom,
Haz.-tam., having come round southern extremity of Dead Sea and entered Judwa from
Edom.

Vers. 3-13.—Fast and supplication. Set himself, his face (resolved, ef. 2 Ki, xii. 18;
Jer. xlii. 15). Seek, i.e., to turn to Jehovah to implore help (xv. 12,13). Fast, national,
the first ‘‘ proclaimed” by authority. New, one of the two courts in Solomon’s temple,
renovated by Jehoshaphat or by Asa (xv. 8), known now as ‘‘ the new court.” Vers. 6-12.
The supplication. Ver. 6. An appeal to God, omnipotent, supreme, and irresistible,
Ver. 7. To God’s covenant, who gave them possession of laud. friend, first historic use
of this title, though repeated Is, xli. 8; Jas. ii, 23. Ver. 8. To God as owner of temple.
Ver. 9. A brief summary of cases described in Solomon’s prayer (ch. vi. 22-39). Vers.
10, 11. Invaders whom Israel were not permitted to touch (dom, Deut. ii. 5; Moab, ii.
9; Ammon, ii, 19), have now entered the land to cast us out. Ver. 12. In despair God
sought. yes, i.e., we look to thee for succour (cf. Ps, xxv. 15; cxli. 8).

Vers. 14-19.—The Message of Jahazicl. A prophet not elsewhere mentioned, but his
claim verified by message and results. Ver. 15. Words familiar to people and connected
with great deliverances (Deut. i. 21 ; Josh, i. 9, &c.) [Speak. Com.], Ver. 16, Clif, ascent of
Ziz (Uiazziz) at end of brook, gully, or dry torrent course. Ver. 17. Stand still, directed to
do nothing, watch the Lord’s course (Ex. xiv. 13,14; Num. xiv. 9). Ver. 18. Reverent
obedience in confidence and gratitude. Wer. 19. Praise from Kohathitesin general, from
Korhites, a branch of them, in particular.

Vers. 20, 21.—The Maichand Exhortation. Went forthearly. Tekoa, ten or eleven miles
from Jerusalem, southerly direction. Stood, exhorted them to be firm and confident.
Singers, line of procession arranged, signal to move forward ; Levites led van with musical

243


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (CHAP. 23.





instruments and song (Ps. oxxxvi.). Vers. 22-30. Overthrow of the enemy. Ambush,
liers in wait. Edomites intending to attack Jews, but through panic fell upon Moabites, and
rest of enemy or angels employed by God to confuse the host and destroy it. Ver. 24
Work completed before Israel on the field, which was strewed with dead bodies. They
had not to fight, but to collect and carry away spoil. Ver. 26. Set out on fourth day te


return in same joyful mood as they came. Ver. 29. Fear salutary fell on surrounding
kingdoms and brought blessings at home.


Vers. 30-83.— Close of Jehoshaphat’s reign (1 Ki. xxii. 41-50). Steadfast and consistently
religious (xv. 18), yet people not wholly diverted from idolatry. In deference to popular
prejudice all high places not taken away. Words of Jehoshaphat not elsewhere noticed,


entered into the book of Kings of Judah, same apparently as the Chronicles of Kings of
Judah, mentioned in Kings [ Murphy].

Vers. 35-37.—Alliance with Ahaziah, closely on death of Ahab, whom A. survived
little more than a year (1 Ki, xxii, 51; 2 Ki. iii.1). Ships, combined fleet destined for
Tartessus, but wrecked. Hlezer denounced the unholy alliance. Ahaziah attributed the
disaster to unskilfulness of Jehoshaphat’s sailors; proposed to fit out another joint fleet with


his own subjects. Jehoshaphat accepted the wreck asa judgment and declined the offer
(cf. 1 Ki, xxii.)


HOMILETICS.
JEHOSHAPHATS War with MOoOABITES AND THEIR ALLIES.—Verses 1-30.


Defeated in a great battle by Joram and Jehoshaphat, the Moabites sought
to retaliate (2 Ki. iii.). Combined with their kinsmen, they entered Judah and
defied its king. I, Theinvading enemy. Formidable, near, and brought
surprise. 1, Jn a spirit of boldness. Great in number of auxiliaries, far
advanced, and most eager for the fight. 2. Ina spirit of ingratitude, “ Behold
how they reward us” (ver. 11). Israel not permitted to touch them nor disturb
them in the least in the march through wilderness (Deut. ii. 5; ix. 19).
Jehoshaphat had lately helped them, now they seek to get the land for them-
selves. Cast Israel out, and thus to requite them evil for good! ‘O our God,
wilt thou not judge them?” (ver. 12). II. Jehoshaphat’s preparations
to meet this army. Alarmed at the intelligence, the danger brings out
his religious feeling. He is equal to the occasion, does not call his forces, but
determines to seek God. 1. He proclaims a national jast. The people of Judah
hasten to Jerusalem. The nation bowed before God and confessed their sins as
one man. The scene touching and solemn, emergency great. 2. He implores
God's help. Prayer embraces every argument which king and people could
urge; concluding with earnest appeal for God to protect them. (a) They are
helpless. No power, “we have no might ;” no plan, “neither know we what to
do ;” no allies, their wives and little ones only increased their anxiety (ver. 13).

b) God could help them. ‘In thine hand is there not power and might?”
ver. 6). God supreme and omnipotent, checks the enemy and defends his
people. (c) They rely upon God, “ Our eyes are up unto thee” in hope and
earnest expectation. III, The encouragement given, Help is pro-
mised. Words familiar and inspiriting fell from the mouth of the prophet,
given by inspiration. 1. Mears are calmed, “Be not afraid nor dismayed by
reason of this great multitude” (ver. 15). Cowardice shall flee, and courage
shall keep the field. 2. Asswrance ts renewed. ‘The Lord will be with you”
(ver. 17). That should be sufficient for any contest! 3. Implicit trust is required.
“Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established” (ver. 20). 4.
Specific directions are given. “'To-morrow go ye down against them, ye shall find
them at the end of the brook” (ver. 16). IV, The method of attack.
Great joy and relief at the prophet’s message. With humble confidence they
prepared for assault. 1. They engaged in reverent worship. The king bowed to


the ground, the people “fell before the Lord, worshipping the Lord ” (ver. 18).
244


CHAP. Xx.] HOMILHETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,





ere


2. They united in joyful praise. Singers were appointed to praise the Lord for
his mercy (ver. 21). 3. They formed orderly procession. Officials and people
united in ranks, and preceded by “singers,” marched till they came “to the
watch-tower in the wilderness” (ver. 24), 4. They fought in confidence of victory.
God had helped them in past (ver. 7); promised at dedication of temple that he
would help them again (ver. 9). None trust him in vain. V. The victory
achieved. Easy, most signal, and wrought for them, not by them. 1. By
divine agency. Whether by hosts of angels or ambushments of their own, we
cannot eliminate divine agency. 2. By self-extermination. In confusion they
fell upon their friends, whom they mistook for enemies. God turned them
against themselves, and the army that came to fight Jehoshaphat destroyed
itself. God can touch the reason of the king, rob the general of command, and
blind the soldiers. A thousand ways at his disposal of which we know nothing.
But victory sure to those who have him as leader. ‘The battle is not yours,
but God’s” VI. The impression of the event on Jews and
neighbours. Report spread in surrounding people; influence remarkable,
1. In giving security and peace to Judah. Nations feared to molest a people whe
worshipped a God who did such wonders. Idolators felt that he had justified
claims to their homage. They were still satisfied among themselves. ‘So the
realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet” (ver. 30). 2. In exercising salutary influence
upon others. God’s victory ended wars; the fear of God fell on all kingdoms,
restrained them from invading Judah. Probably now tribute was brought to
Jehoshaphat from Philistines and Arabians (cf. ch. xvii, 11). “ For his God
gave him rest round about.”


Man’s Extremity 1s Gop’s Opportuntry.—Verses 5-13.


Learn—I. That in the discipline of life we should expect
dangers and extremities. These needful to touch and develop our
powers. History in Old and New Testament full of instances. To know other
resources we must learn the weakness of our own. “ We have no might against
this.’ II. That in these dangers and extremities God has
many ways of deliverance. Human agency but a small part of holy
ministry. Birds and beasts, insects, elements of nature, and hosts of angeis
under his command. Hence the folly of proscribing, measuring, or limiting in
God’s work. III. That in all dangers and extremities of life we
should look to God for help. Depend not upon numbers, generalship,
and human might; but spiritual force, prayer, and presence of God. Then war
easy, loses character of conflict, and becomes a matter of spoil.


Tas Barriz 1s nor Yours, sur Gop’s.—Veree 15.


Tho text addresses a word—l. To all who are bearing Christian protest
against evil. 2. To all who are undergoing severe temptation. 3. To all who
are labouring for the good of the world. 4. To all who are engaged in contro-
versy on behalf of Christian doctrine. If we had to defend everything and
fight everything in our own strength, and for our own ends, the case would be
perfectly different ; but when God says to us, “ Ye have this treasure in earthen
vessels; the excellency of the power is of God, and not of man,” when he teaches
us that we are servants and not masters, creatures and not creators, with no
grasp of eternity, it becomes us patiently to wait, to stand still and see the
salvation of the Lord [Dr. Parker, City Temple}


245


HELOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


On


CHRONICLES. [cHaP. xz





HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 5-9. Invocation of God as—
I. The Ruler of the universe. 1. Seated
in heaven. “God in heaven.” 2.
Governing all nations. “ Rulest not
thou over all the kingdoms of the
heathen?” 3. Secure in his dominions.
“‘ None is able to withstand thee.” IT.
The covenant God of Judah. 1. The
friend of Abraham, the nation’s founder,
“‘ Ahab thy friend for ever” (ver. 7).
2. The guardian of thenation’sinterests.
“Thou didst drive out the inhabitants,
&e.” 3. The centre of the nation’s
worship. “A sanctuary therein for
thy name.” ‘ Jehoshaphat’s appeal is
threefold—1l. ‘ Art thou not the God
omnipotent, and so able to help us?’
2. ‘Art thou not our God, who hast
given us this land, and so art bound
to help us against invaders?’ And 3.
‘ Art thou not the God of this place,
the temple, and so bound to help those
who pray to thee here?’” [Speak.
Com.}.

Ver. 7. Ab, thy friend. 1. By
familiarity in devotion (cf Gen. xviil.
23-33). 2. By promptitude in obe-
dience. 3. By uprightness of life (cf.
Gen. xvii. 1-22; xxii. 1-18).

Ver. 17. Salvation of the Lord. 1.
The deliverance, salvu!ion. Reference


always to evil, te., dangers in Oli
Testament, sins under the gospel. 2.
Its greatness. “ Of the Lord,” not by
human power. So great “salvation”
that every other is nothing; not only
from evils, but to privileges. 3
Method of securing it. Stand still
Picture Israel at Red Sea “Se
yourselves” in hope and firm alliance’
“ stand still,” not in your power to da
anything; ‘‘see,” wait in faith, watch
God’s work for you. Wholly from
him, not from you. “In thee, O God,
do we put our trust; our souls wait
on thee.”

Ver. 20. Believe and be established.
Faith in God’s presence, and God’s pro-
mise, confirms experience in God's
mercy, gives courage in conflict, and
establishes peace and prosperity. Un-
belief brings fear, frustrates God’s
promise, and turns victory into defeat.
Faith in God alone will overcome con-
flicts in heart and convulsions in the
world.

Ver. 21. Beauty of Holiness. Rich
apparel and ornaments of old, typical
of moral character and holy life.
“Worship the Lord in the beauty of
holiness.”


HOMILETICS.


Soncs BEFORE Vicrony.—Veres 2].


Anybody can sing the “Te Deum” when the battle is over. The difference
between an ordinary man-of-war and a Christian is this: a Christian shouts
before the victory, because he knows it is sure to come,

I. We learn here, first, a lesson of patriotism. The foreign policy of Ammon
and Moab seemed very brilliant for a time. They carried everything before
them, but in due time were overthwewn. We must not trust in the numbers of
our soldiers, in the boundless resources of our country, but in the beauty of
holiness, in the justice of our cause, in the purity of our motive ; in one word, in
the blessing of our God. II. The special object of the lesson is to illustrate the
history of the Christian Church, for the Christian Church is engaged in holy
war. If we go forth to war we must do as Jehoshaphat; we must be clothed
with the spirit of holiness. God came down to fill the hearts of his children ;
then they were ready for the great work. The Pentecostal blessing delivered
the early Christians from the three hindrances to the progress of the Gospel—
cowardice, selfishness, and ignorance. Catch the spirit of the Apostles, and you
will ie the whole world [Z. P. Hughes},

24


cHar xx.) HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


ee ee ee Oe
5
JrnosHAPHATS CHARACTER AND Reicn.— Verses 31-34.


I. His general uprightness of character. ‘ He walked in the way
of Asa, his father,” earnestly and constantly. Regarded God’s approval and will,
“doing that which was right in the sight of the Lord.” A prosperous and
successful ruler, his kingdom flourished, and he died in peace. II. His
besetting sins. Leaned to his own understanding in momentous concerns ;
put policy before principle, and sowed seeds of evil which lived and fructified long
after death. 1. In his son’s marriage with Ahab’s daughter. 2. In his guilty
alliances with kings of Israel. Alliances in war, in commerce. The subtlety of
worldly wisdom, and the spurious kindness of worldly liberality interfered with
the simplicity of faith in God and love toward man. “ As the dead fly, though
only a little creature, gives il-savour to most costly ointment ; so even a small
degree of folly mars a fair reputation for wisdom and honour” (Ecc. x. 1),


THe WEECKED FLerer.—Verses 35-37.


I. Notice first the disaster to Jehoshaphat’s shipping. The
eastern arm of Red Sea, Gulf of Akabah, is much deeper than the western; a
narrow, deep ravine, with steep and rocky sides, the valley of which it forms
part stretching far away to the north, till where it holds in its trough the waters
of the Dead Sea. Down through the mountain gorge swept the mad hurricane
with resistless might, shattering the ships of Jehoshaphat to pieces, and leaving
the grey morning to look upon only pitiful wreckage all along the shore.
II. Notice the cause of this disaster. A judgment from Heaven.
The grand mistake and sin of Jehoshaphat lay in associating himself with the
enemies of God. This the signal error of his life. If he had been an openly
wicked man, a mere man of the world, probably this disaster would not have
occurred, but God would not allow one of his own servants to prosper in such an
undertaking. III. The lesson which the disaster teaches is this—
Do not choose your associates amongst those who do not fear the Lord. Always
safest to keep under Christian influences. A man is rarely better than the
company he keeps. Jehoshaphat may hope to bring Ahaziah up to his own level ;
but Ahaziah is much more likely to bring Jehoshaphat down. The lesson of the
text bears also, and with peculiar point, upon all business alliances. You will do
well even to sacrifice a measure of financial interest and worldly prospect.
rather than be associated in business with a man who is out of all sympathy
with you in religion [J. Thain Davidson].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 20, 21. I. The march to batile.


awful defeat. 3. Of enthusiastic joy.
With musical strains. In confidence


Jehoshaphat means Jehovah judges,


of victory. Under divine command
(vers. 26, 27). II. The joyous return.
In solemn order. In grateful spirit. In
triumphant victory.

Vers. 26-30. The valley of blessing.
Wady Bereikut, two miles west of
Tekoa. Jews assembled here after
three days’ plunder, to arrange them-
selves, and return to worship in temple.


1. The place of terrible conflict. 3. Of


hence this valley the type of final con-
flict and final judgment, in which
Jehovah will judge and overthrow (cf.
Joel iii, 2-12).

Vers. 35-37. The wrecked flcet.
1. The cause from God, who reigns
over elements of nature and minds of
men (Spanish Armada). 2. The design
toinstruct. Jehoshaphat had formed
worldly alliances; could not be weaned

247


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cHaP. XXI.
creer er eee


from them, nor see their folly. teach that his blessing rests not upon
Disaster predicted (see history), yet men and ways which are contrary to
refused good advice. Hence must his will.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XX.


Ver. 4. Seek. Seek God upon th Vers. 35-37. Gold. Midas longed for
way, and he will come to thee [Sohaller}. gold, and insulted the Olympians. He
Vers. 17, 18. Stand ye. Prayer got gold, so that whatever he touched
without watching is hypocrisy, and became gold, and he with his long ears
watching without prayer is presump- was little the better for it. Midas had
tion [Jay]. insulted Apollo and the gods; the
“Teach us in watchfulness and prayer gods gave him his wish, and a pair of
To wait for the appointed hour; long ears, which also were a good
And fit us by thy grace to share appendage to it. What a truth in
The triumphs of thy conquering power.” these old fables! [Carly/e].





CHAPTER XXI.


Carrroat Norss.] This chapter corresponds with 2 Ki. viii. 16-24; sontains Jehoshaphat’s
family arrangements (vers. 1-4); beginning and character of Jehoram’s reign (vers,
6-11); the writing of Elijah to Jehoram (vers. 12-15); the end of Jehoram’s reign

vers. 16-20). j

Vers. eye arrangements of J. Six sons, towards whom he pursued the same
policy as Rehoboam (ch. xi. 23). This probably provoked the jealousy of Jehoram and
induced him to put them todeath. J. firstborn (ver. 3), whose natural right to succeed
was carried out (Deut, xxi. 15). Divers, Jehoram’s brothers, supported by some chief men
in country ; or suspected of disloyalty.

Vers. 5-11.—Character of J.’s reign. Ver. 5, Eight years. According to 2 Ki. viii. 16,
began in fifth year of Joram, K. of Is., therefore in twenty-second year of Jehoshaphat.
Four of his eight years coincided nearly with the last four years of his father’s reign, and
after his father’s death he reigned four years (cf. Murphy]. Ver. 6. Daughter, i.e., the
grand-daughter of Omri (2 Ki. viii. 26), Ver. 7. The promise to David and an explanation
of God’s patience to Jehoram. Ver. 8. Edom. Flourishing kingdom of Jehoshaphat
dwindling away. Edomites governed since time of David (1 Ki. xxii. 47; 2 Ki. iii. 9)
revolted, Defeated in first, they made another attempt, succeeded, and Libnah, on south
frontier towards Edom, followed example. Ver.11. fornication, signifying unfaithfulness
in following other gods (cf, 2 Ki. ix. 22).

Vers. 12-15.—-Hlijah’s writing to J. The document in question is not called a letter
(iggereth or sepher), but a writing (micetab), Words. The only notice of E.in Chronicles.
As prophet of northern kingdom, natural that he should engage but slightly the historian
of southern one. Notice one of considerable interest. Shows that E. did not confine
attention to affairs of his own state, but looked beyond its borders, to check progress of
idolatry in Judah. It proves that the prophet was upon earth after the death of
Jehoshaphat (ver. 13), whence it follows (1) that the account of his translation occurs in
Kings out of its chronological order, and that (2) Elisha, who prophesied in the time of
Jehoshaphat (2 Ki. iii. 11-19), commenced his public ministry before his master’s trans-
lation [Speak. Com.]. Some think this was not H. the Tishbite, but one distinct from him;
others that this should be Elisha. Ver. 13. Way, extreme measures which dishonoured
God; better, not idolators, as thou art. Ver. 14. Plague, stroke, invasion of Philistines
(vers. 16 and 17). Ver. 15. Disease, ® chronic and incurable dysentery. Ver. 17. Brake, i.¢.,

248


OWAP. Xx1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.








chien it” (Vulg., vastaverwnt), applied to cities (ef. ch. xxii. 1; Jer. xxix. 3; Ezck
xxx. 16).


Vers. 18-20.—End of Jehoram’s reign, Cut off by his malady in two years. No burning,


not honoured by his subjects; desired, unregretted. Custom of giving or withholding
faneral honours introduced from Egypt into Juda.


HOMILETICS.
Tue Succession or JEHORAM.—Verses 1-20.


I. The cruelty by which he entered upon his reign. “Slew
all his brethren.” In covetousness for their positions, or jealous at their
authority. Pretending he was not secure, or under false accusation. Grievous
sin to cut off kindred because better than ourselves (ver. 13). Fratricide com-
mon. Kings filled with “ maliciousness, envy, murder” (Rom. i. 29).


“ Base envy withers at another’s joy,
And hates the excellence it cannot reach” {Thomson}.


II. The wickedness which dishonoured his reign. He began
wrong and went on to worse. 1. He wedked in idolatrous ways. “ Like as did
the house of Ahab” (ver. 6). The husband of a wicked woman, he became
corrupt, idolatrous, and vile. 2. He drew his people into the same snare. He
encouraged whoredom in high places. By counsel and example, by force and
penalties, “compelled Judah thereto” (ver. 11). In a land where the true God
resided, the sad spectacle beheld of king and people forsaking his service and
giving themselves to excesses and abominations of heathen gods! III. The
calamities to which wickedness exposed his reign. God for-
saken, subjects withdrew allegiance, no defence. 1. Tributary provinces rebelled.
Edom revolted and made themselves a king (ver. 8). Lebnah, a city in his own
kingdom, threw off his yoke (ver. 10). Arabians encouraged to rebellion (ver. 16).
Thus, 2. The kingdom almost politically extinguished. By destruction of his army,
capture of Jerusalem, and plunder of royal palace; by devastation of the country
and deportation of royal family (ver. 17). Wicked men insecure in business,
position, and prospects. “A man shall not be established by wickedness.”
IV. The sad events which terminated his reign through
wickedness. Sins great and retribution grievous, “a great stroke” (ver. 14).
1, Loathsome disease in his person. 2. Unregretted in his life. 3. Dishonoured in
death. At the early age of 40 smitten with disease, a nuisance to himself and
others. The palace turned into a hospital anda tomb. Not loved in life, not
lamented in death. Denied a royal sepulchre, and only out of respect allowed
interment in the city of David! Sad picture, awful moral |


JEHOSHAPHAT’S FAmILy ARRANGEMENTS.—Veraes 1-4.


I. Prudent in plan. The eldest son appointed to succeed, the others
governors of cities and enriched with “ gifts of silver and of gold.” This very
arrangement might provoke jealousy. Look further than time and higher than
worldly prudence. II. Difficult in execution. Jehoram not established
without struggle; slew his brothers, with princes attached to their interest or
ready to avenge their deaths. Thus he disappointed the good intentions of his
father, and, like many, founded his kingdom in blood (Hab. ii. 12). IIT.
Frustrated in purpose. We arrange, others upset. ‘“ Things excellently
designed,” says Cicero, “ have often a very ill event.” Often special trial to leave
the fruits of labour, the treasures of home and empire, “ unto the man that shall
be after us.” Will they be devoted to perpetuate a godly name or desecrated w
the world? “And who knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool $”
(Ece. ii. 18, 19; of. Pas. xlix. 10, xxxix. 6). aye


@OMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (omar. xxs


A TT


Tor Laue or Davin’s Houset.—Verse 7.


tasy would have led to entire extinction of royal family, but for the divine
a eee ee David “to give alway a light (candle or lamp) to his children” (2 Ki.
viii. 24). I, How the lamp was kindled. A divine “gift.” All rights
from God. None can create a family, build a kingdom without him. “TI have
ordained a lamp for mine anointed.” II. How the lamp was preserved
from extinction. The same power that lit, kept the light burning. Wicked-
ness of the king, abominations of the people and surrounding darkness of idolatry
almost destroyed it. God remembered and fulfilled his promise. “ For thou wilt
light my lamp; the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness” (Ps. xviii. 29).
Iil. How the lamp will permanently shine. The dynasty of David
the source of light to all generations—raised from degradation and persecution
to honour and prosperity. The past a pledge for future. In Christ the light
shall shine for ever, can never be darkened nor extinguished. ‘“ Unto his (Solo-
mon’s) son will I give one tribe, that David my servant may have a light (lamp)
alvay before me i Jerusalem?” (1 Ki. xi. 36).


JEHORAM A Warnine History.


I. In marriage neutralising effect of religious education.
Good influences and pious training of early days neutralised. Association with
wicked made him an idolator, worldling, and profligate. A wedding-day may
be a wrong start and turn the joy of life into mourning. II. In conduct
entailing sufferings upon himself and descendants. His example
pernicious, transmitted poison to successive generations, brought terrible retri-
bution upon himself and his kingdom. Achan “perished not alone in his
iniquity.” III. In life a fearful warning to all. To parents not te
marry their children for policy or profit ; to guard their associations, friendships,
and alliances; above all, to set a good example, lest folly in them becomes sin in
their offspring. To young people to shun evil companions and never forget the
claims of truth and God. “ He that walketh with wise men shall be wise, but «
companion of fools shall be destroyed.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 6-11. The unfaithful king.
Calamities which befel Jehoram ap-
pended “because he had forsaken the
Lord God of his father.” 1. Seduced


allurements and partly by affright
ments, as did Julian also the apostate
qui persudendo persectus est” [Trapp].

Vers. 12-15. Hlijah’s writing. Whex


by his wife. Athaliah, daughter of
Ahab, a worshipper of Baal. “There
needs no more than a bad wife to
undo a family” (Bp. Patrick). 2.
Encouraged idolatrous practices. Es-
tablished altars in high places; set up
groves, images, and pillars, and filled
the country with heathen abomina-
tions. 3. Forced the people to follow
his example. “ Compelled Judah ” (ver.
11). ‘‘ This was the worse, because in
Jerusalem, the holy city ; and because
be caused them to do it, partly by his
250


written ? how sent? for what purpose {
Learn the word of God sent to correct,
if despised may become our worst
enemy. This letter foretold the doom
of the king, but unheeded and sad
prediction fulfilled. “Why is he not
then better believed? If some as-
trologer had once or twice prognosti-
cated, and it proved true, he should be
much carried up and credited. And
shall not God’s prophets be so? ‘ Be
lieve the prophets and ye shall pros
per But many believe them xi


CHAP. xxtr.} m





otherwise than they do the predictions
of an almanack, if so much” [Zapp].

Vers. 19, 20. No burning.  Dis-
honoured by his subjects. On account
of (1) sins he committed, (2) cala-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,





mities of his reign, (3) humiliating
nature of his death. J. died in bloom
of manhood, but lived long enough te
teach that “he that soweth iniquity
shall reap vanity.”





OHAPTER XXII


CxiticaL Norges.) In this chapter the reign of Ahaziah


ne aah his end (vers.
et and usurpation of Athaliah (vers. 10-12). Parallel in 2 Ai. viii, 24—
xi. 1-3.


29; ix. 27; and


Vers. 1-4.—Suecession and beginning of A. Ah. (called Jehoahaz, xxi, 17} chosen by the
people, elder brothers slain by Arabs and could not be ransomed. Jurty and two, an
error of transcription for 22 (2 Ki. viii. 26), for J., his father, not more than 40 at
death (xxi. 20) ; daughter, i.e., grand-daughter of Omri, founder of family (2 Ki. viii. 18-26),
Ver. 3. He also as well as his father walked, &o. Ver. 4. They, Athaliah and Jehoram
of Israel, her brother (é/. vers. 1, 8, 5).

Vers. 5-9.— Visit of A. to Jehoram. This ver. and next have come from a source used
also by writer of Kings, and are nearly identical with 2 Ki. viii. 28, 29 [Speak. Com.]. War
of two kings against Hazael, aggressive to recover Ramoth-Gil., which Ahab and
Jehoshaphat had failed to do fourteen years earlier (1 Ki. xxii. 8-36). J. wounded by
Syrians withdrew from siege to Jezreel, leaving his army under Jehu within the walls of
town. Ahaz. went to visit Joram, and met with death. Ver. 8. Sons, princes of royal
house, on a visit met with Jehu, and 42 of them slain (2 Ki. x. 14). Ver. 9. Hid, about to
hide in Samaria, where friends (2 Ki. x. 12-15) were, but turned aside by pursuers,
brought to Jehu, was wounded mortally, fled and died at Megiddo. None left of royal
house to assume rule.

Vers. 10-12.—Athaliah’s usurpation (of. 2 Ki. xi.1-8). Seed royal, who aspired to govern,
Bed-chamber, in a chamber of mattresses, a repository for beds, not a lodging chamber.
Jeh., a8 priest, had @ right to occupy buildings in outer wall, and resided in one of these
apartments.


HOMILETICS.


Avnazian’s Wickep Reian.— Verses 1-9.


I. Its beginning through home influence. Here all start life im
right or wrong direction. Foundations then laid, habits then formed, are
permanent factors in future years. To begin life without godly training and
virtuous principles will ensure failure, often early and final. Home influence
affects societies, churches, and nations. ‘They that rock the cradle rule the
world,” said Napoleon. II. Its continuance by evil counsellors.
A. and her brother counselled A. (ver. 4). Bad training, bad advice. Formed
in childhood, directed as a man, how could his reign be otherwise? “In the
multitude of counsellors there is safety,” and the larger the number the greater
the safety. To one such Pharaoh owed the security of his kingdom from
desolating famine. But “where no counsel is,” or only evil counsel, “ the people
must fall” (Prov. xi. 14). A nation with evil legislators like a ship directed in
the midst of rocks in imminent peril. ‘The counsels of the wicked ae at


MOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (CHAP. Xxx.





—


III. Its end in judgment which it entailed. A. survived to be
the ruin of her son, as she had been the bane of her husband (ver. 10). Under
her influence he began a career of ungodliness and licentiousness which ended in
his destruction. Certain and irretrievable ruin results from wicked counsel and
wicked life. ‘“ How oft is the candle of the wicked put out! and how oft
cometh their destruction upon them! God distributeth sorrows in his anger.”


The Power or a Moruer’s INFLUENCE.—Verse 3.


For is a kind of explanation, the reason assigned for results which are given.
“ For his mother was his counsellor to do wickedly.” I. It begins early
in life. Education begins sooner than parents imagine ; long enough before
they are responsible, even when they begin to see, feel, and observe. Hence
great importance to have first teaching of a child. Early impressions are
elementary principles out of which mature life is organised. ‘“ When should I
begin the education of my children now four years old?” asked a mother from a
clergyman, who replied, “‘ Madam, if you have not begun already you have lost
those four years. From the first smile that gleams upon an infant’s cheek your
opportunity begins.” II. It moulds through life. A living power, form-
ing character and directing conduct. The child becomes a man, the subject
becomes a sovereign; influence is thus repeated and transmitted. Home the most
powerful school in the world. Mother's influence for good or evil mightier than
pulpits and thrones. “ My opinion is,” said Napoleon, “ that the future good or
bad conduct of a child depends entirely on the mother.” III. It leaves
permanent impress uponlife. Alexander the Great could never correct
the faults of gait and manners learned in childhood from Leonidas, his master,
The face, words, and example of mothers leave permanent influence. “ Every
first thing continues for ever with the child ; the first colour, the first music, the
first flower, paint the foreground of life. Every new educator effects less than
his predecessor ; until, at last, if we regard all life as an educational institute, a
circumnavigator of the world is less influenced by all the nations he has seen
than by his nurse” [/ichter}.
“The fond attachment to the well-known placa,

Whence first we started into life’s long race,

Retains its hold with such unfailing sway,

We feel it e’en in age, and at our latest day” [ Comper},


Tue DeatH oF AnaziaH.—Verses 6-9,


I. Untimely inits method. Neither advanced in life, nor delicate in
health. On a friendly visit to see a sick relative! Surely this errand of pity
the occasion of gladness, not grief? Death everywhere at home and abroad, in
our own families and those of friends. From the desk, the pulpit, and the throne
we may be suddenly carried to the grave. II. Brought about. by
companionship with evil men. Intimacy with Joram involved him in
the common ruin of Ahab’s house. “ Tell me with whom thou goest, and I will
tell thee what thou art,” is the Spanish proverb ; rendered into English, “A
man is known by the company he keeps.” To be seen with the frivolous is to
be known as frivolous; to have friendship with the wise is to enjoy reputation
for wisdom ; but “a companion of fools shall be destroyed.”


“ Heaven with a secret principle endued
Mankind to seek their own similitude.”


TII. Arranged by the providence of God. “And the destruction of
A. was of God by coming to J.” (ver. 7). Remarkable that threatened


252


OHAP. XXIL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


ne


vengeance was brought on house of Ahab at the very time King of Judah was
visiting Joram, that he might partake of punishment as a descendant of wicked
Ahab. No evidence that Jehu fixed on this time from wish to include Ahaziah
in punishment; nor was he aware of his presence at Jezreel. Unexpected
concurrence of circumstances. All result of immutable purpose, and accom-
plished by a wonderful arrangement of Providence in time and place. May escape
for a time, but no concealment from divine retribution.


Women Goop ann Bav.—Verses 10-13.


What a contrast in these verses! Two females acting very different parts.
I. A bad woman engaged in wicked designs. Athaliah endea-
vours to destroy seed royal after death of her son. To this wickedness impelled
in rage at destruction of Ahab’s family, hence David’s family must share the
same fate ; in zeal for idolatry and worship of Baal, which she was determined
to uphold amid opposition; in regard to her own defence and in ambitious
desire to usurp the throne and transmit the crown to her own family.
“ Athaliah had inherited the spirit of Jezebel, her mother. As wife of Joram
and mother of Ahaziah, she had guided both the internal and the external policy
of the Jewish kingdom ; she had procured the establishment of the worship of
Baal in Judea (2 Ki. viii. 18-27), and had maintained a close alliance with the
sister kingdom. The revolution effected by Jehu touched her nearly. It struck
away from her the entire support which she derived from the power and
grandeur of her relatives and their readiness to help her at need. It isolated
her religious system, severing the communication with Pheenicia. Moreover, the
death of Ahaziah deprived her of her legal status in Judea, which was that of
Gebtrah, or queen-mother, and transferred that position to the chief wife of her
deceased son. Under these circumstances, which might well have daunted even
a woman of more than ordinary courage, Athaliah’s hereditary spirit and energy
asserted itself. Instead of yielding to the storm, or merely standing on the
iefensive, she resolved to become the assailant, and, before any plans could be
formed against her, to strike” [Speak. Com.]. II. A good woman
engaged in benevolent designs. The family of David not entirely
destroyed. J., daughter of Joram (not of Athaliah, Josephus), wife of Jehoiada,
the high priest, took Joash, her nephew, to conceal and save him (ver.11). The
lineage of David and the human descent of Messiah suspended on the life of a
child one year old! This loyal act a benevolent work, the means of fulfilling
prophetic words and blessing the world! Women may be devils or ministering
angels. “If once she falls, it is the fall of Lucifer” [Colton]. But “in great
crises it is woman’s special lot to soften our misfortunes” [Vapoleon]

* Her office there to rear, to teach,
Becoming, as is meet and fit,


A link among the days, to knit
The generations each with each” [ Tennyson,


263


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES, (oHar. xxm1.





CHAPTER XXIII.


Cartica, Notes.) This chapter parallel with 3 Ki. xi. 4-20, evidently from same
zourse, although presenting certain points of difference. In Ki. narrative related from
aivil point of view, in Chronicles writer concerns himself mainly with the ecclesiastical
aspect of the transaction [Speak. Com.]. Joash is made king (vers, 1~11); Athaliah
slain (vers. 12-15); and worship restored (vers. 16-21).

Vers, 1-11.—Joash made King. J. strengthened, braced himself to the effort from which
he had previously shrunk [ Speak. Com. Captains, centurions of royal guards loyal
to legitimate heir of crown. Covenant for overthrow of Athaliah’s tyranny. Ver. 2.
Gathered, probably at time of festivals, to disarm suspicion. Jsrael, t.e., Judah. Ver. 3.
Conyregation, select Levites and trusty persons, collected by captains from various cities.
Said, Jehoiada said, pointing toJoash. Lord(2 Sam. viii 12, 13). Ver. 4. Ye. Levites
received orders, in Ki. orders to royal guard given. Entering, Levites released each other
every Sabbath day (1 Chron. ix. 25). Porters, watchmen. Doors, Hebrew thresholds.
Ver. 5. Courts, Deowe not admitted ordinarily, on this occasion allowed to witness pro-
ceedings. Remember Athaliah had completely desecrated the entire enclosure [Speak.
Com.]. Ver.6. Watch, see that no worshippers of Baal forced their way in. Ver. 7.
Compass, Levites not ergaged as indicated to surround king at entrance and exit.
Ver. 8. Dismissed, not to keep a sufficient force for the occasion ; armed them within temple
courts to avoid suspicion (ver. 9), and equipped ‘‘ all the people,” 7.¢., combined princes,
guards, and Levites, who surrounded the king, Ver. 11. Testimony. The law according
to which he was to rule (Deut. xvii. 18).

Vers. 12-15.—Athaliah is slain. She is permitted to enter outer court without a
guard, Ver. 13. Pillar, platform on which king elevated to be seen. Treason, conspiracy.
She was taken out of temple grounds to horse gate (for king’s mules), and there slain
(2 Ki. xi. 16-18; xxiii 2, 6, 12).

Vers. 16-21.—Jehoiada’s reforms. J. represented the Lord (2 Ki. xi. 17); ratified
the covenant to be the Lord’s people (ver. 16); destroyed temple of Baal (ver. 17); and
arranged for restoration of priests and Levites, singers and porters. Ver. 20. Brought
down, escorted king to palace, through high gate, chief gate of outer court (gate of guard,
2 Ki. xi. 19). Quiet, a bloodless revolution (except Athsliah’s death) and free from
tyranny and idolatry.


HOMILETICS.
JoasH Mane Kine.—Verses 1-11.


Six years of Athaliah’e cyranny had ripened the people for revolution. They
were weary and ready for change. Agents and managers at hand, and the
revolution was successful. I, The measures adopted, “ Every step was
taken in accordance with the usages which had been gradually gaining head
during the previous reigns, and all the means which his office placed at the
disposal of Jehoiada were freely employed” [Stanley]. 1. He concerted with
the leaders of the army. Indirect communication with the five officers of
loyal guard, whom he bound by solemn oath. 2. He enlisted the co-operation of
the Levttes. These divided into three bands: one to guard the king, the other
two posted at doors and gates. Captains and military officers entered the temple
unarmed to lull suspicion, and furnished with sacred armoury. All courts of
temple filled with those favourable to the cause, and secret kept wonderfully.
“The words of the wise are heard in quiet” (Ecclus. ix. 17). II. Theleading
man to arrange them. Jehoiada chief in this conspiracy. A man of
prudence, piety, and commanding position. United by marriage with the royal
family, he sought to overturn the usurper, and restore lawful sovereignty. As
high priest it was his duty officially to watch over the temple and execute the


er In his signal services to God, his king, and country he was


OHAP. XXIIT.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
rr
supported by chief authorities civil and religious, counselled by the prophets of
his time, and directed by divine guidance. 4e earned a foremost name in Israel,
and was buried with honour in the city of David. III. The time in
which the measures were carried out. Success depends upon time,
the exact moment as well as method. The Sabbath was the day fixed. Need-
ful to have as large a force as possible. Those detained who under other cir-
cumstances would have gone home. But the excitement of the moment did not
nake J. forget the sanctity of God’s house. None but priests and ministering
Levites permitted to enter, and strict orders given to take Athaliah out of
its precincts. IV. The success which attended the execution of
the measures. At the given signal the king was exhibited and crowned.
Bystanders clapped hands together and raised the national shout, “ Long live the
king.” Trumpeters announced the royal inauguration. Athaliah entered the
temple, saw the fatal hour was come, rent her royal robes, and cried out,
“Conspiracy, conspiracy!” but the temple was kept from pollution; the
hrone of David was preserved, and the worship of God restored. A revolution
-arried out with tact, unanimity, and with little bloodshed. “ All the people of
he land rejoiced ; and the city was quiet.”


Tre Rerorms or JeEno1aDa.—Verses 15-21.


Only part of work done by overthrow of tyranny and death of Athaliah, to
-omplete revolution government must be settled and interests of religion secured.
I. The national covenant was renewed. A covenant with Israel
‘to be unto him a people for inheritance” (Deut. iv. 6; xxvii. 9; Ex. xix.), A
threefold covenant by which the king bound himself to rule according to divine
rule, and the people pledged themselves to be loyal to him as God’s representa-
tive—by which the king and people agreed to “ be the Lord’s people.” Sensible
of obligation to God, we are bound closer to one another. Men first give them-
selves to the Lord and then to us (2 Cor. viii. 5). Starting in this spirit they are
more likely to prosper in families, churches, and kingdoms. II. The
idolatry of Baal was destroyed. This immediate fruit of the renewal
of covenant. Baal’s temples, altars, and images shattered to pieces by popular
fury. Beside the altar fell the priest of Baal, for God commanded that seducers
to idolatry should be put to death (Deut. xiii. 5, 6). Sins must be forsaken and
overcome ; every usurper in heart and life dethroned, and God’s reign supreme
over all. III. The worship of Jehovah was restored. Priests
were appointed to their courses, and sacrifices duly offered. Singers and porters
arranged according to former custom. Praise and thanksgiving filled the courts
of God’s house, and worship restored in its ancient purity. IV. The throne
of Judah was established. The young king wonderfully preserved, was
brought down from the temple to the palace, seated on the throne—“ the
throne of the kings of Judah” (2 Kings xi. 19)—and crowned as lawful sovereign,
“ Through the priesthood the lineage of David had been saved and the worship
of Jehovah restored in Judah, even more successfully than it had been in
Samaria through the prophets” [Stanley]. V. The priesthood was
elevated to highest honour. “During minority of Joash, Jehoiada
virtually reigned. The very oflice in some sense created by him. He raised the
priesthood to an importance which (with single exception of Eli) it had never
before attained in history of the Jewish nation, and which it never afterwards
altogether lost. The name of ‘High Priest, which had not been given to
\aron, or Eli, or Zadok, was given to him, and afterwards continued to his
-ecessors. He was regarded as a second founder of the order, so that in after
..ys ke, rather than Aaron, is described as the chief” [Stanley].


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES, {cHaP, xxilt.


pe





TrueLeE WorsHip RestorED AND EsTAaBLisHeD.—Verses 15—21.


Reparation of this venerable fabric first object, and one of the great events of
his reign. From Joash seemed to come the impulse. “Joash was minded
to restore the house of the Lord.” It had suffered from neglect, been
spoiled of its treasures, and only a faded remnant of former splendour.
I. In its structure and worship. Its outward form, its foundations
had been injured, “ broken up” (ch. xxiv. 7) by Athaliah’s workmen taking away
stones for her own temple, Priests had not taken care to repair the breaches,
but the king zealous. Sad to see ministers dilatory in sacred duties, professors
with mere form becoming careless and hypocritical! Spiritually its worship was
restored in purity and attraction. Officers appointed for departments, lawful
sacrifices offered, and true service revived. II. In its method of
support. An account of measures adopted (2 Kings xii.). Three sorts of
money levied—redemption money, estimation money, and freewill offerings. This
method seemed to have failed for some reason, and the plan adopted in chapter
xxiv. (cf. outline). III. In its principles and design. Its purpose to
remind of God and his claims, to afford the privilege of meeting and praising God.
In teaching it set moral before ritual, intoned the minds of kings, the lives of the
people, and the traditions of the nation. From God came restoration from danger,
elevation to honour, and prosperity to all ranks. Hence needful to have a fixed
place to cultivate reverence and social fellowship ; to embody order and devotional
life. Common worship is the necessity of our nature and the command of
Scripture ; the indestructive principle of Sabbatic law and temple ritual. The
recognition of God—the formal recognition of him by the people as Ruler,
Saviour, and Portion—is the germinal moral principle of duty and religion.


* One place there is—beneath the burial sod,
Where all mankind are equalised by death 3
Another place there is—the fane of God,
Where all are equal who draw living breath.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 10-13. Joash made King. 1.
Presented in the temple. 2. Crowned
with the diadem and testimony. “ It
is the first direct example of a corona-
tim. The diadem, probably a band
studded with jewels, was placed on his
head by the high priest, and upon it
the sacred ‘testimony,’ which, in the
reign of Jehoshaphat, had been raised
into new importance. It seemed like
the intimation of a limitation to the
king’s despotic power—an indication
that he was not to be, like David,
above, but beneath the law of his
country” [Stanley]. 3. Avointed with
sacred oil. According to Hebrew text,
2 Ki. xi. 12, by people; to LXX. (of
same), by Jehoiada; to 2 Chr. xxiii. 11,
by Jehoiada and hissons. 4, Accepted
by the nation, Trumpets and shout-
ing, “God save, lit. Long live the king”

256


(ver. 11). A form used among Con-
tinental nations, as the French “ Vive
le Roi.” “Our own form of loyal
acclamation comes from the ritual of
daily responses and of the ancient
coronation service, ‘Domine, salvum
fac Regem,’ which is taken from Ps.
xix. 9, as in Sept. and Vulgate Ver-
sions, Coverdale translation (1537)
gives ‘God save the new kynge’;
Geneva (1560) ‘God save the kynge.’
The Authorised Versions of 1539 and
1572 had ‘God send the kynge life’”
[J. H. Blunt].

Ver. 11. The crown and the testi-
mony. Two important symbols. The
crown the sign of power, and the law
the sign of theocratic wisdom. Finely
are both the crown and the book pre-
sented to the king, that he might be
not only mighty, but also wise, or (ax


OHAP, XXIV.]


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; CHRONICLES.


(Se TTS PSS SSS a7 ETERS 7 ir aac)


we may say) know God’s word and
right, Thus even now we make kings
with a sword and book” [Luther].
Vers. 12-15. Death of Athaliah. 1.
By secret plot. 2. By agency of high
priest. 3. By co-operation of the
people. 4. As a righteous judgment.
“This woman ruled viciously, selfishly,
without regard to patriotic instinct or


patriotic right, and having filled the
cup of her iniquity, the people arose,
and Athaliah was slain with the
sword” [Parker]. Athaliah might
well have written, as Mary Queen of
Scots did in a window at Fotheringay
Castle :-—


“ From the top of all my trust
Mishap hath laid me in the dust” [Trapp},





CHAPTER XXIV


Carricat Norrs.] This chapter parallel with 3 Ki. xii; gives same order of events with
fresh matter and in different style. Joash’s interest in religion under guidance of
Jehoiada (vers. 1-14); forsakes the God of his.fathers after death of Jehoiada (vers,
25-22) ; distressed by Syrians and put to death by his servants (vers, 23-27).

Vers, 1-14 —Zeal of Joash under influence of Jehoiada. Days, Jehoiada lived after
accession of Joash twenty-three years (2 Ki. xii. 6). Idolatry of king confined to last ten
or fifteen years. Ver. 3. Two wives, anxious to secure succession to throne, and limit
licence which kings permitted themselves (1 Ki. xi. 3; 2 Chr. xi. 21; xiii. 21). Ver. 4.
Repair, renew, strengthen. Levites hastened not, through limited funds or indifference
(ver. 5). Ver. 6. Collection, tax assigned by law for tabernacle; half a shekel from every
one (Ex. xxx. 12-16; xxxviii. 25). Ver. 7% Sons, Ahasziah and elder brothers (xxi. 17),
devoted to idolatry, and who carried out their mother’s designs against temple. Ver. 8.
Chest, full particulars 2 Ki. xii. 9. Ver. 9. Collection, contributions flowed in after pro-
clamation. Ver. 10. End, until enough to complete restoration. Wer. 12. Did work,
overseers of work (2 Ki. xii11). Ver. 13. Perfected, lit. the healing (binding, ef. Neh. iv. 1;
Jer. xxx. 17) went up (was laid, Jer. viii. 22). State, lit. on its measure, original propor-
tions Ex. xxx. 32. Ver. 14. To minister, re ishing temple with utensils, &o.

Vers, 15-22.—Joash declines after the death of Jehoiada, This paragraph not in Kinga,
Full of days, not applied to many. Years unparalleled from Exodus downwards. Many
dispute this age, others see no reason to do so. Ver. 17. Obeisance, flattered the king,
requested toleration for idolatry. Hearkened, yieldedto them. Ver. 19. Prophets, names
not mentioned, except Zech., who warned of danger. Ver, 20. Spirit came clothed.
Ver. 21. Consptred, they would inflame the king, urge him to extreme measures. Stones,
the punishment for idolators (Lev. xx. 2). Court, between temple and altar (Mt.
xxiii. 35). Ver. 22. Said, dying words of Zech. utterance of prophetic doom.

Vers. 23-27.—Syrian invasion and death of J. End, turn of the year; time of such
expeditions. Came, led by Hazael, whom Joash bribed to withdraw from siege
(2 Ki. xii. 18), Destroyed, » mere handful of men inflicted humiliating defeat upon
collected force of Israel (ver. 24). Ver. 25. Departed, pressed on against Jerusalem after
defeat of Joash’s army, but retreated because enriched by gold of temple (2 Ki. xii. 18).
Diseases, plural of intensity, sore distress. Bed, where he lay sick. Ver. 26. Zabad,
Zachar perhaps originally, as letters are of like form; in Kings, Jozachar. Shim., Ki.
Shomer. Mothers only given. Ver. 27. Burdens, according to common usage in prophetic
writings (2 Ki ix, 25; Is. xiii.1; Lam. ii 14) are denunciations of coming evila | Keil)
(ver.19), Story (marg.), commentary, the memoir contained in state annals,


HOMILETICS.


Braarp ror Gon’s Housr.—Verece 4—14.


Remarkable that first movement should come from the king and not the priest
to restore temple. Jehoiada had permitted it te remain unrepaired during the
257


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (CHAP. xxry,








whole period of his regency. Now Joash, not regardless of the place which had
given him shelter, displays zeal. I. In repairing its physicel
structure. “ Mindful to repair (renew) the house,” which was in decay. No
right to permit dilapidations in God’s house than in private property. We
should keep it in repair, make it attractive and durable outside as well as inside.
Many more concerned for their own than for God’s house; build and adorn
for themselves, but neglect God. “Is it time for you, O you, to dwell (at
ease) in your ceiled houses, and this house lie waste?” (Hag. i. 4). II. In
urging others to interest themselves in this work. J. con-
sulted officers, advised them to collect expenses from the cities, reproved the high
priest, and urged all to diligence. ‘See that ye hasten the matter” (ver. 5).
Too long had they been negligent. The honour of God and the interests of the
nation demanded exertion. Shamefully remiss are many who ought to be awake
and first. Let us be alive ourselves, and excite others to the work. ‘“ Nothing
of waxth or weight can be achieved with half a mind, with a faint heart, with a
lame eadeavour,” says South. III. In creating a fund to keep it
in repair. 1. A tax was levied upon the people (ver. 5). Priests ordered to
collect the three kinds of money (cf. 2 Ki. xii.), but were careless, and did not
call upon the people, or people had little confidence in management of priests
that they were reluctant to pay dues. What money was collected not applied
to proper use. ‘‘The breeches of the house were not repaired.” 2. A freewill
offering box was provided. The general levy failed. A chest made, hole bored
into lid, and placed at door to receive voluntary offerings of people. A
separation thus made between money for repairs, “incidentals,” and money for
support of priests. This novel, touched the hearts of the people. Cheerfulness
and sufficiency the result (ver. 11). Need of reform in management of Church
finances. Great deficiency in serious consideration, conscientious liberality,
enlightened system and Christian patriotism. IV. In the lawful use of
the fund thus created. Formerly money sadly misappropriated. 1. Duly
audited by proper persons. The Levites took the box to “the king’s scribe, and
the high priest’s officer came and emptied it,” counted it, put it into bags,
labelled and sealed as customary, and delivered them to overseers of building to
pay workmen and buy necessary materials. 2. Thus nothing misappropriated.
Nothing lost. Confidence in financial business. No account exacted, overseers
honest, and surplus, after repairs, appropriated to purchase of temple furniture
(ver. 14). This a type of apostolic method, an example to the Christian Church.
V. In the completion of the work begun. Many hindrances,
Prevalence of idolatrous customs, official dilatoriness, failure of first plan, and
lethargy of people. But work went on, priests ashamed, and consented to
measures adopted. All difficulties finally overcome. “The work was perfected
(healed), restored to beauty, seé in its measure and proportion, and strengthened
in durability and structure” (ver. 13).


The foregoing outline may suggest other thoughts. I. Jt te natural for the
believing heart to regard the house of God. Its interests ever dear to the Christian.
To him the temple is the house of bread—his Bethlehem; the centre of
attraction, fellowship, and joy. It is instinctive for him to mind it, as it is
natural for the hart to pant after the waterbrook, or doves to fly to their
windows. II. When men pay due regard to God’s house, they will provide for its
interests. They build, and keep the fabric in repair; provide for sustenance of
its agencies, and perpetuation of its worship; always and everywhere revere the
place in which God is publicly worshipped. IIl. Jn thus providing for the
interests of God's house, they promote the welfare of the nation. Both intimately
reas eae Associations of worship affect the education, culture, and morals of


CHAP. XXIV. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





’


the community. Public worship is the secret power of the Church, the nurse of
virtue in the nation.


Nationa Renaersg mvro Ipo.atry.—Verses 17-24.


A great change after death of Jehoiada. Many took part in revolution which
dethroned Athaliah and placed Joash on the throne, on political not religious
grounds. Dislike to rule of a woman, a foreigner, without zeal for pure
religion, hence relapse. I, Beginning with the demands of the
princes. “The princes of Judah” came to king (ver. 17). Worldly-
minded, hating priestly power, and tired with thirty years’ pure and simple
worship, yearned for seductive rites of heathenism, They requested permission
to worship in high places, not to be put to expensive and frequent journeys to
Jerusalem. Advised the king to be more tolerant and less under priestly
dominion. By unusual humility, framed a plausible and inoffensive petition,
which was granted. II. Encouraged by the concessions of the
king. Flattered by their “obeisance to the king,” he hearkened to them.
Pleased and weak-minded, their requests were more agreeable than the dictates
of Jehoiada used to be, Princes often flattered and drawn into ruin by those
who promised liberty. George III., after his accession, reproved a high
dignitary for fulsome adulation, and issued an order prohibiting any clergyman
called to preach before him from paying compliments to him. III. Protested
against by the warnings of the prophet. Z., son of J., urged
people from a prominent place not to transgress the commandments of the Lord.
This would never prosper, but bring national disaster. Prompted by irresistible
infinence, he boldly protested against prevailing tendencies. But denunciations
unpalatable to the king, roused fierce passions of multitude, and a bani of
miscreants, instigated by Joash, put him to death (ef. Mt. xxiii. 35). But the
death of the prophet not the destruction of his message. IV. Punished in
awful judgments upon the nation. The dying words, a prophetic
doom of Z., fulfilled at end of the year. Syrians invaded the land, princes of
people destroyed, and immense spoil sent to Damascus. How suggestive the
words, “a small company of men” overcame “a very great host”! To men who
estimate everything by great numbers and dazzling splendour, this would be a
striking calamity. ‘Wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their


trespass.”
Tue Deatn or Joasu.—-Verses 25-27.


I. An end embittered by painful malady. “They left him in
great diseases,” which long confined him in bed. Plural of intensity, a severe
malady. Charles IX. of France, author of Parisian massacre, died in great
distress. Kingly dignity wards not off loathsome disease. II. An end
brought about by conspiracy. Not even permitted to die peaceably
in his own bed. Perhaps in hope of recovery or escape, his own servants
conspired against him. A punishment degrading, depriving death of mitigations
and friendships. III, An end considered as divine judgment.
God smites wicked men in everything; end of one trouble beginning of another.
The winds of divine judgments rise from every quarter, bend and break, and no
escape from tempest. J. plagued with the Syrians and smitten with terrible
disease, met with untimely death, and refused official honour in burial. The
memory of the wicked doomed to perish. “ Let him not be written with the
righteous,”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [omap. XxxTv.


Lire anp CHARACTER OF JOASH.


The beginning well in outward actions and national government. But
evident from the history that the rectitude of administration was owing to his
preserver and tutor, not to his enlightened principles and sincere convictions.
I. The instability of his religion. 1. He was zealous for God under
restraint. ‘Was minded to repair the house,” in excitement and prosperity,
but zeal died out. “When the sun went down the reflected brightness went
with it.” 2. He degenerated when that restraint was taken away. He depended
upon wise counsel and piety of Jehoiada; when prop removed he fell. Had no
root in himself, and left to his own resources, could not stand. Oircumstances
not principles made him what he was. When these changed he changed. His
religion was temporary and superficial. He only “did right in the sight of the
Lord all the days of Jehoiada the priest” (ver. 2). II. The honour and
disgrace of his reign. A mixed reign, marked with singular honour
and stained with remarkable disgrace, 1. Honourable reforms. He rebuilt
and restored temple. Established its order and worship, and thus removed
national scandal. He reproved officers in their languid work, adopted efficient
means to finish it, and at length the temple stood in grandeur and dignity in
which it was left by ancestors, the glory of his own reign and administration of
Jehoiada, 2. Disgraceful crimes. Like Nero, after death of his teacher Seneca,
the philosopher, he was stained with crimes. He not only made shipwreck of
faith, but in a period of ten years, the restorer of the temple became an idolator ;
the ward of Jehoiada was the murderer of his son. A reign under excellent
guardians (like many in the middle ages and modern times, German Emperors
Otto III. and Henry IV., in many respects Louis XIV. of France) at first, ended
in humiliation and war, The memory of a king hopeful in beginnings stands
marked with blood and the ways of Cain. III. The disastrous end of
his life. Complicated in deeds of violence. Horrid outrage on a prophet of
God—base ingratitude to a family who had preserved his life—atrocious treat-
ment of a true Hebrew prophet—illegal exercise of power and authority as
king—some of his acts. Invasion and defeat, severe disease, and smitten while
languishing on his bed, by his own servants. ‘ But they buried him not in the
sepulchres of the kings.” The murderer of the son not permitted to sleep with
that father whose memory he outrageously dishonoured. From this review learn—
1, The responsibility of those to whom care of young persons is entrusted.
2. Caution those yet under guardianship of friends and tutors. & The awful
end of those who turn aside from hopeful beginnings.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1, 2. Under minority of Joash. Vers. 8-11. The alms chest. “It ia


1. The king well trained and prepared
for duty. 2. High priesthood increased
in dignity. “Name ‘High Priest’
not given to Aaron, Eli, or Zadok,
given to him and his successors;
regarded as second founder, and in
after days described as _ chief”
{Stanley}. §. Morality lax. National
religion mixed with worship “in high
places.” Temple neglected, and money
misappropriated.
260


® curiously circumstantial record of a
church restoration fund belonging to a
period 2,730 years distant from our
own time, and perhaps in the lifetime
of Homer” [Blunt].
Vers.15, 16. Jehoiada, As guardian-
eee and patriot. Honoured in age,
urial, and reputation, yet Jacking in
zeal and energy. Melancthon orthodox
and learned, but accomplished no great
reformation. Luther inferior in some


CHAP. XxIV.]


respects, a man for his times and work,
bold and zealous, and, under God,
effected deliverance from Popery, and
the Reformation.

Vers. 18-23. Murder of Zechariah.
1. Horrid outrage on a prophet of the
Lord. A sacred person, a Hebrew
patriot. 2. An instance of base ingra-
titude. To a family who had preserved
his life. 3. A deed of violence involving
great criminality. Illegal and unjust
exercise of power, bringing retribution
upon king and nation. The last words,
“The Lord require tt,’ not vindictive
(then a great contrast to those of
Stephen, Acts vii. 60), but a prophetic
warning to Jews (Mt, xxiii. 35) in
time of Jesus and to us. ‘The act
produced a profound impression. It
was a later Jewish tradition, but one
which marks the popular feeling, that


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,





7
this crowning crime of the House of
Judah took place on the Sabbath day,
on the great Day of Atonement, and
that its marks were never to be
effaced. The sacredness of the person
and of the place, the concurrent guilt
of the whole nation—king, nobles, and
people—the ingratitude of the chief
instigator, the culmination of long
tragedy of the House of Omri, the
position which the story held in the
Jewish canon, as the last great murder
of the last Book of the Old Testament,
all conspired to give it the peculiar
significance with which it is recorded in
the Gospels as closing the catalogue of
unrighteous deaths, from the blood
of righteous Abel to the blood of
Zechariah . . . . who was slain
between the temple and the altar”
[Stanley].


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXIV.


Ver. 5. Hasten. “ That I may be of
the number of those that spend them-
selves with labour, and not of those
who waste in rust and laziness. Lord!
let me rather wear out in the work,
than consume (like a garment laid
by with moths) for want of use”
[Swinnock’s “Christian Man’s Call-

ing”). “J like to be at my post, doing
my duty; indifferent whether one set
or another govern, provided they
govern well” [Str J. Moore].

Vers. 11,12. Money. Wesee here
a distinct indication of a practice still
followed in the East where large sums
of money are concerned, as in the dis-
bursements of the Government, and in
the taxes and tributes paid to the
Crown. The money in such cases is
deposited in long narrow bags, each
containing a certain sum, and carefully
sealed with the official seal [Kitto]. In
East in present time a bag of money
passes (for some time at least) currently


from hand to hand, under the authority


of a banker’s seal, without any exami-
nation of its contents [Burder].

Ver. 18. Left the house of the Lord.
A man’s conception of worship really
reaches his life. Let him lose his
reverence for the Bible, for God, for
man, however much he may boast of it,
will in that measure go down, The
victory of the enemy will be easy and
complete. It cannot be a fatal offence,
it may be thought, to neglect the
assembly of ourselves together at least
occasionally, to regard other occasions
of coming together as of equal import-
ance with meetings in the Church. It
cannot be wrong surely to elevate
certain kinds of intellectual inquiry
into a species of worship on the Lord’s
day; all these thoughts are most in-
sidious, full of temptation, and when
perverted, it is in innumerable cases
not the lower that is lifted up, but the
higher that is degraded or impoverished
[Dr. Parker}.


261


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [CHAP, XXV;








CHAPTER XXV.


Critica, Norrs,}] We have succession of A. (vers. 1-4), his expedition against Moat
(5-13), his idolatry (14-16), his war with Joash (17-24), and his death and burial (25-28).
Parallel 2 Ki, xiv. 1-20.

Vers. 1-4.—A.’s succession (cf. 2 Ki. xiv. 2-6). Perfect, single heart ; not like ancestor
David, but like Joash, father. Ver. 3. Slew, executed justice; an instance of right-doing,
Ver. 4. Not, as Deut. xxiv. 16. Families of traitors often destroyed.

fers, 5-13.— Expedition against Moab. Ver. 5. Old method of organisation by familiea
(Num. ii. 34), under captains of hundreds, &o. Hired, paid for others, his own army too
reduced to protect country. Ver. 8. Jf, dc.,s0me suppose not dropped out, and would
read, “Go alone, and God will not make thee fall,” Generally thought to be ironical.
“Go (if thou wilt be self-willed) thou, act, be strong, it will be of no avail.’’ Ver. 10.
Anger, caused through sudden and apparently unreasonable dismissal. Ver. 11. Swit.
South of Dead Sea, where dwelt Seirites, associated with Edom (Gen. xxxvi. 18). Ver. 12.
Rock, unto the height of Selah. ‘ Battle probably fought not far from Selah (Petra) ;
the captains marched to Petra itself, and precipitated from the steep cliffs in its neigh-
bourhood ” [Speak. Com.}. Ver. 13. Soldiers, mercenaries sent by Joash to ravage Jewish
cities from Sam. to Beth., in revenge for considered insult.

Vers. 14-16.—4A.’s idolatry. Not in Kings. Gods, common practice to carry gods of
comguered places as trophies of victory, not generally to be worshipped. Ver. 16. Valked,
prophets entitled to counsel kings, Art thow, éc.? lit, “‘ Have we made thee a king’s
counsellor?”  Forbare, ceased remonstrance, asserted his right, and consequences of
disobedience.

Vers. 17-24.—A.’s war with Joash (cf. 2 Ki. xiv. 8-14). Advice, counsel not from God.
Face, @ challenge to combat (2 Sam. ii, 13), Ver. 18. Thistle. Parabolic forms employed
in Hast to carry unwelcome truths, or express contemptuous sneers. This designed here,
A thistle, low shrub; represents A. a petty prince; cedar, the potentate of Israel. The
wild beast, the overwhelming army of Israel, would destroy the strength of Judah. The
moral of fable in ver. 19. Ver. 20. Not, sarcastic tone incited more. Asa in a judicial
state of blindness. From God, characteristic of the author. Joash overcame A.,
plundered palace and temple, and took hostages to prevent further war.

Vers. 25-28.—A.’s end. Turn away, apostavy followed by maladministration. King lost
respect, fled to Lachish, frontier town of Philistines, there traced and murdered. Body
brought without pomp in a chariot to Jerusalem, and interred among ancestors.


HOMILETICS.


Awmazian’s Brecinnine.—Verses 1-4.


Son and successor of Joash, ninth king on throne of Judah; 25 years old at
accession, reigned 29 years, B.c, 887-808 (2 Ki. xiv. 1, 2). I. In ordinary
circumstances of succession. A privilege to inherit a crown, great
natural rights and positions. Better to become kings and priests, aristocracy
of God, to rule over the hearts and affections of men, than on thrones of
empires. II, With considerable zeal for Jehovah. Did right,
“but not with a perfect heart,” not like David his father. Half-hearted, zealous
for God, but ‘“‘high places not taken away.” Obeying God and making sacrifices,
but honouring the idols of Edom. Double-minded, his good beginning as that
of Joash unlike his later conduct. III. By an act of justice and
mercy. Punished traitors who murdered his father, as an act of justice; but
was moderate, “ With a mercy shown apparently for the first time in Hebrew
a their children were spared” [Stanley| Generally families of traitors

262


OHA?. XEV.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





yr
were destroyed. This act, therefore, had regard for law of God more than
customs of nations ; displayed kindly feeling, and became a king.


“ No ceremony that to great ones ‘longs—
Not the king’s crown, nor the deputed sword,
The marshal’s truncheon, nor the judge's robe,
Become them with one half so good a grace
As mercy does " [Shakes.].


EXPEDITION aGainst Epvom.—Verses 5-24.


This chief event in reign, an attempt to impose upon Edomites the yoke cast
off in time of Jehoram (2 Ki. viii. 20; 1 Ki. xxii. 48). I. An expedition
ambitious in design. Might be natwral and prudent to assemble army,
class according to respective families, and appoint officers from among brethren,
that all might be an army of brothers, relatives, and friends. Might be patriotic
to reduce insurgents to former subjection. But A. the slave of reckless
ambition ; adventurous, fond of conquest and military renown, prone to ‘“‘meddle
to his hurt.” Real wisdom to cultivate peace, develop internal resources of
kingdom ; real “strength to sit still” at home.


“‘ Vaulting ambition, which o’erleaps itself,
And falls on the other side.”


II. An expedition in which alien forces were hired for the
accomplishment of the design, Edom strong. A. considered his
300,000 troops unequal, hired 160,000 men from Israel, and sets first example
of employing mercenary forces. Such help useless, dangerous, and opposed to
God’s will. He should go alone, in dependence upon God, “ who hath power
to help and to cast down.” Any other plan would displease God and result in
defeat. With God’s presence our own resources sufficient; without, numbers
only ruin, and “make thee fall before the enemy.” IIL. An expedition
the success of which was turned into a curse. A. heeded not
prophet, went, conquered, and captured cities. 1. In the cruelty ewercised.
Savage cruelty dealt out in revenge for barbarities inflicted on Hebrews, or to
strike terror into a rebellious people. ‘ Man’s inhumanity to man.” 2. In the
epirit which it begot. Nota spirit of gratitude and caution. Flattered probably
by those from whom he “took advice” (ver. 17), he became proud and
presumptuous. Burning with revenge for Israel’s insult, not satisfied without
defiant challenge, he undertakes aggressive war. The fruits of victory mis-
appropriated. Unsanctified successes often turned into curses.


Dury anv Seur-Interest.—Verse 9.


A. made every preparation for expedition, ready to start, but suddenly
“there came a man of God” and forbids. But what must he do for the money ?
Lose it and go to war in right way. Learn—I, That we often invest
our resources without prudence or security. Money, friends,
position, and life pledged for wrong purposes. Enterprises without divine
guidance, gifts used sinfully. Men morally going astray, poor and insecure,
though strong and sufficient in their own «stimation. The “ man of God,” the
ministry of the word ever meets in the vays of life, condemning our treaties
and alliances, reproving our plans and investments, and calling us back to God.
II. That we are often called upon to sacrifice our resources:
thus invested. Reluctant to give up besetting sins, worldly pleasure, and to
forsake evil ways. Often much at stake in worldly friendships, Sunday trading,


and unlawful compacts. “ What must we do with our money risked upon it?”
263


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONI CLES. (OHAP. XXv.
Oe


“Why forfeit the deposit?” But why strike the bargain if wrong? Why
make the deposit without prudence and security, &.} The answer to all
questions, God demands. Before divine authority objections ridiculous. In
divine promise compensation for any loss. “ The Lord is able to give thee much
more than this.” IIT. That when called to duty obedience
guarantees success and brings abundant reward. Impossible
to induce obedience without offer of superior good. Motive power needful.
Think not that nature or some law of mind breaks the chains of desire confirmed
by habit and long years of life! Calculate not too confidently on moral powers
wasted in sinful pursuits! It is never easy for a selfish man to renounce himself
even with help of gospel! But God imparts disposition and strength. In sin
“the first loss is the best.” In duty we find compensation and gain. “The
Lord is able to give thee much more than this”—abundant reward for leaving
all and following him. “ Manifold more in this present time, and in the world
to come life everlasting.”


Amazian’s Faun muvro Ipotatry.—Verses 14-16.


A. took the gods of Edom as tokens of victory, but deserted God who
gave victory, and worshipped the idols he captured, like the Romans subduing
nations and paying tribute to their gods. I. Idolatry most gratu-
itous. This not asked of him. Probably he sought to disarm spite of
Edomites for harsh treatment, or attracted by pomp and splendour of worship
of idols. Idolatry, sin fascinates unholy men. But what humility and disgrace
voluntarily and slavishly to bow down! II. Idolatry most unreason-
able. The gods could neither protect themselves nor worshippers, senseless
and most absurd to lean upon them or put them in place of Jehovah! The
sinner, a criminal and a fool, can give no reason for his choice. ‘“ Why hast
thou sought after the gods of the people, &e.?” III, Idolatry most
dangerous. It estranges further from God, confirms self-will, and binds us
faster to the false and debasing. It brings down rebuke from God, and leads to
destruction. ‘ Wherefore the anger of the Lord was kindled against Amaziah.”


Tur Dancers oF Success aNnD AMBITION.— Verses 17-28.


Dangerous to succeed without God. Amaziah’s false step at beginning, and
the spirit in which it was originated turned the end into misfortune. J,
Success begetting pride and ambition. The victory of Edom
made A. proud; its issue unblest ; kindled boldness and a spirit of revenge.
He glories in strength. Success led him on to fresh undertakings which involved
defeat. “Pride cometh before destruction, &c.” II. Pride leading into
presumption. Thought himself more than a match for King of Israel.
He cannot sit still, must punish him for wrong-doing, and sends the challenge,
‘Come, let us look one another in the face.” The bitter and contemptuous
language of the parable only enraged him to repeat the challenge. Nothing
checks. “He is a proud man, neither keepeth at home, who enlargeth his
desire aa hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied.” III. Presumption
ending in destruction. Exultation often the prelude to downfall, down-
fall more dismal and complete on account of previous eminence. Prosperity of
fools destroys them. 1. Warning unheeded. Edom conquered. Be content,
Stay at home. Why meddle tothy hurt? 2. Blinded by self-security. He could
not be defeated, could see no danger, and knew not that God had forsaken him.
3. Miserable failure. Joash surprised him before ready for war; defeated him
iu eye battle; routed his army, and took him prisoner. The disasters of


omar. xxv. ]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


t





his conduct created opposition and conspiracy, and he was slain. No real,


permanent success to ungodly man.


If no reverses in life, death makes him a


wreck. His honours and achievements buried in the dust, and he stands naked


in the presence of God !


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 2. Right, but not with perfect
heart. Many good things in A., had
respect for ordinances of religion, knew
Scriptures, and had desire to do right.
But failed because not thoroughgoing
in principle and piety. 1. Much half-
heartedness, levity, and superficial
goodness. 2. A perfect heart required.
Earnest, consecrated feeling and energy.
“* He had a good name; it imported ‘one
strong in the Lord and in the power
of bis might ;’ but he was far enough
from that” [7rapp].

Vers. 3, 4. 7'wo practices. Revenge
and forbearance. One natural to man
and prevalent in the Kast. “ Revenge
is sweet to man.” Difficult to stop
with one life, without taking another.
But God controls and educates men Ly
law. The other practice of divine
authority. “It is strange at first sight,
that when the law contained sovery plain
a prohibition, the contrary practice
should have established itself. But we
must remember first, that the custom
was that of the Hast generally (see
Dan, vi. 24; Herod. III. 119, &c.); and
secondly, that it had the sarction of
one who might be thought to know
thoroughly the mind of the legislator,
viz., Joshua (cf. Josh. vii. 24, 25)”
gan Com.|. Always better to for-

ear than revenge.


«“ Revenge at first, though sweet,
Bitter ere long back on itself recoils ”

[Milton],
Ver. 16. 1. The question of the king.
‘Art thou of the king’s counsel?”
Who authorises, entitles thee to give
advice? 2. The prophet’s reply. Con-
sists of two parts—(a) He “ forbare”
to dispute. Silence best answer to
some; contention makes them worse.
(b) He predicts. “The prophet ceased
his remonstrances and retired, but
aimed a Parthian shaft on quitting the
royal presence, ‘Jf I am not of thy


counsel, I am of God’s counsel, and
know what is determined there. God
has counselled to destroy thee.’ For
fulfilment of prophecy, see verses 12-24
and 27” [Speak. Com.]. Not hearkened.
1. A sign of hardness, judicial blind-
ness and obduracy. 2. A ground of
desertion by God. Ignored and for-
saken, the result natural. 3. A prelude
to destruction.

Vers. 18,19. Zhe parable of Cedar
and Thistle. 1. The inequalities of
character and condition of men. Great
and little, contented and restless, d&e.
2. The ridiculous conduct and ambition
of some men. The less, the more
unsettled and ambitious, the more
meddlesome, &e. 3. The need to be
satisfied with present possessions,
Grasping after more may lose what
you have. The miseries of discontent.
Quench that fire which
“ Preys upon high adventure, nor can tire

Of aught but rest; a fever at the core,

Fatal to him who bears, to all who ever

bore ” [ Byron}.

Tarry at home. 1. Better for indi-
viduals, than meddle, create mischief
with neighbours, seek home comforts
and decencies. Officious interference
creates discord. Meddling the parent
of strife. “It is an honour for a
man to cease from strife ; but every fool
will be meddling.” 2. Better for
nations to look to themselves, stay at
home and cultivate arts of peace than
engage in aggressive wars. Kings
dethroned, governments upset, and
empires rent asunder through hasty
war.

Ver. 27 Providential consequences.
“After the time from following the
Lord. The writer means to observe
that the violent death of A. followed
on his apostasy not closely in point of
time—for it must have been at least
fifteen years after (ver. 25)—nor waa,
humanly speaking, caused by it; but

265


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


{oHar. xxvi





in the way of a divine judgment—a
complete fulfilment of the prophecy,
ver. 16” [Speak. Com.]. Sequences
in the natural as well as moral world.
Forsake God and duty, violate law,


then risk and disaster. “For it came
of God, that he might deliver them
into the hand of their enemies, because
they sought after the gods of Edom.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXYV.


Ver. 4. Law. When the Lord laid
down that law he taxed human for-
bearance to the uttermost. It may not
seem to be so in reality, but test the
matter by human consciousness and by
human action. Have we not wronged
whole families? Have we not often
thrown in the child as if he were part of
the father, and let both be crushed by
the mill of revenge? [Dr. Lakes):

Vers. 7-9. What of hundred talents
Do your duty and leave the rest with
God [2. Cecil]. This is the first of
rights, the only absolute duty. No
right more sacred [Vénet]. There is
little or nothing in this life worth
living for, but we can all of us go straight
forward and do our duty [Wellington].

Vers. 11-13. Success. There is a
glare about worldly success which is
very apt to dazzle men’s eyes [Hare].
Watch lest prosperity destroy gene-
rosity [Beecher]. Success at first,
doth many times undo men at last
[ Venning].

Vers. 14-16. The gods of the people.
Idolatry is one of the most uncon-


querable of all the corrupt propensities
of the human soul. Miracles under the

new dispensation had scarcely ceased,

apostolic fathers were scarcely cold in

their graves, before idolatrous forms

were again superinduced upon the
ure spirituality of the Holy Gospel
Walker].

Vers. 17-24. See one another in
face. Every presumption is properly
an encroachment, and all encroach-
ment carries in it a still further and a
further invasion upon the person en-
croached upon. Presumption never
stops in its first attempt. If Cesar
comes once to pass the Rubicon, he
will be sure to march further on, even
till he enters the very bowels of Rome,
and break open the Capitol itself. He
that presumes steps into the throne of
God [Dr. South}.

Vers. 27,28. Buried.


“ Death lays his icy hand on kings ;
reel ay and crown must tumble down,
And in the dust be equal made
With the A si crooked scythe and
spade”’ [Shirley].





CHAPTER XXVL


Cxrrrican Nores.] Uzziah’s character (vers. 1-6). “Itis not too much to say that we
are indebted to Chronicles for our whole conception of the character of Uz., and for
nearly our whole knowledge of the events of his reign” [Speak Com.]. U.’sfame and
achievements (vers. 6-15); U.’s sin (vers. 16-21); U.’s end (vers. 22, 23). Parallel to
this in 2 Ki, xiv, 21, 22; xv. 1-7. es

Vers. 1-5.—Uz.’s character. Azariah (help from Jehovah) in Kings. Us. usual form
(strength from Jehovah). loth, an important port (2 Ki. xiv. 22). Ver. 5. Days of Z.,
who sustained relation Uz., as Jehoiada to Joash, exercising salutary influence and
guiding.

Vers. 6-15.—Uz.’s fame and achievements. Not in Kings. Jab., Jabneal (Josh. xv. 11).
Dismantling of these, and building of other cities among the Philistines, is a restoration
of things in time of Jehoshaphat xvii. 11). Ver. & Ammonites. Countries east of

266


OwaP. XXVi.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





NR ER NN


Jordan became tributaries, and by rapid suocess of victories his kingdom advanced ta
Egyptian frontier (cf, Is. xvi. 1-5 with 2 Ki. iii. 4). Vers. 9, 10. Buildings, towers in the
wilderness—t.e., held pasturage on borders of Holy Land as refuges for Hocks and herds
men. Weils (cut out many cisterns) from rock. Low country between hills of Judwa and
sea. Plains east of Jordan. Carmel, not the mountain, but oultivated portions of hill
tract, /H/usb., cultivated agriculture and arts of peace. Vers. 11-15. Army and engines
of war. Ver. 11. ‘en, a body of militia divided into companies or regiments, which
served in rotation. Ver. 12. Number of chiefs, heads of families, occupying positions
over the army. Ver. 13. The number of troops does not exceed that in time of Amaziah
(xxv. 5). Ver. 14. Ditferent weapons for different classes of men. Ver. 15. Engines,
machines for discharging missiles; the balista for stones, and catapult for arrows or
darts.

Vers, 16-21.—U.’s sin and punishment. Lift up to do wickedly, in pride. Priests only
permitted to enter holy place (Num, xviii. 7). U. presumed to act as neighbouring
princes. High priest remonstrated, and intended to expsl or hinder by force. Ver. 19. U.
angry was struck suddenly with leprosy. Ver. 0. Hasted, in fear of death denounced
upon those who invaded priest’s office. Ver. 21. Several, separate, lit., the house of
&beration, an infirmary; he was excluded from communion.

Vers, 22, 23. U.’s end. Isaiah took part in composing the records of the kingdom
(shap i. 1; vi. 6). ‘‘ He cannot have been contemporary with Uz. as an adult for more
than a very small portion of his long reign. Most critics regard him as about twenty
when Uz died. He must then have written his history of Uz.’s reign rather from
documents and accounts of others, than from his own knowledge” [ Speak. Com.]. Ver. 23.
Field, i.e., in the burial ground, but in a separate sepulchre, as the corpse of a leper would
have polluted it.


HOMILETICS.


Uzzian’s CHARACTER AND SuccessFuL Reion.—Verses 1-15.


The reign of U. was vigorous, and sicnally blessed. He was successful as a
king, though he failed asa man. I, Uzziah’s character is promising.
Signs of ability and usefulness. Acts well as a ruler, and fills high office with
eredit to himself, and benefit to the nation. 1. He was active in promoting the
interests of his kingdom. He overcame its enemies in south and west,
strengthened its fortifications and commercial relations, was a patron of agri-
culture, cultivated vineyards, and protected flocks. He administered internal
affairs with peace and prosperity. 2. For the greater part of his reign he lived in
the fear of God. ‘“ Did right in the sight of the Lord” (ver. 4). Never deserted
the worship of the true God, and was much influenced by the prophet Zachariah.
Happy in his guardian, “He sought God,” who made him to prosper.
Ii. Uzziah’s reign is successful. Success crowned all efforts and
enterprises until fatal error blasted his life. 1. Jn tts financial resources. Flocks,
wells, busbandmen, vine-dressers, and foreign commerce. 2. In the extent of his
dominion. He overcame the Philistines, and demolished their cities. “God
helped him against the Arabians.” The Ammonites rendered tribute to him,
and his conquest extended to the Egyptian frontier (ver. 8). 3. In the strength
of his defences. Cities well fortified, military forces well organised, equipped,
and commanded, 4. Jn the splendour of his fame. His name spread far and
wide. Palmy days of David and Solomon seemed to return ; failures of pre-
ceding reign wiped away. Judah possessed an active, enlightened, and
prosperous king, who conducted himself as became viceroy of Jehovah, and
prospered in all things. “ His name spread far abroad, for he was marvellously
helped, till he was strong” (ver. 15).


Uzzi1an’s Six anp Pounisament.—Verses 16-21.
Long and uniform prosperity a severe trial for any prince. Uzziah’s goodness


gave way. “ His heart was lifted up,” and he committed grievous sins, for which
. 267


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES {cHAP. XxXv1.


——.





ety Bre








omen


he suffered severe punishment. I. Uzziah’s sins. 1. He was lifted up with
pride. Elated with a splendid career, he forgot his position and was changed in
spirit. ‘When he was strong, his heart was lifted up.” It is strength, not
weakness, that makes proud and arrogant. Affliction and reverses humble. In
Pharaoh, Sennacherib, and Nebuchadnezzar see fearful evils of pride. “ By that
sin fell the angels.” 2%. He usurped the priestly function. He can do pele
in his kingdom; perhaps thought priestly qualities were natural to royalty, an
that in exercising them he revived suspended rights, and restored primitive
custom. The intrusion a sin of great magnitude, “for he transgressed against
the Lord his God, and went into the temple of the Lord to burn incense,” &c.
3. He showed daring presumption. The act involved a claim to abrogate the
priestly office, a defiance of ancient decree originating in rebellion of Korah
it was rebuked solemnly and signally, but U. defied and resisted opposi-
tion, was determined to minister, “took the censer and was wroth with the
priests.”
“ Pride is still aiming at the blessed abodes,

Men would be angels, angels would be gods” [Pope].


II. Uzziah’s punishment. “The Lord had smitten him.” 1. Retribu-
tive and severe. A leper—‘‘a leper until the day of his death.” The crown lost,
and his forehead stained with marks of guilt. 2. Deprived of his own function
by invading the province of others. U. was obliged to recognise the authority
which he despised ; compelled to leave the palace by venturing into the priest-
hood, and had to dwell in a separate house, “like the slain that lie in the grave,
whom Thou rememberest no more ; and they are cut off from Thy hand.” Be con-
tent with your own place. Discharge your own duties without seeking to intrude
into others. The leprous king is a warning to all that we are not to “ minister
to men in things pertaining to God” without permission. Step out of your
lawful calling, you create disorder, play the fool, and bring destruction upon
yourselves and others.
“God gives to every man

The virtue, temper, understanding, taste,

That lifts him into life, and lets him fall

dust in the niche he was ordain’d to fill.”


Uzzian’s Sux,


Rightly to understand it remember what barriers he had to break before he
could resolve to do it. He had to disregard the direct command of Jehovah,
that priests alone could burn incense upon His altar ; to despise the history of his
people, to defy the holy name by which he himself was called. Therefore because
his rebellion was so great, his defiance of correction and of God so flagrant, the
Lord smote him, and he bore till death the mark of the curse that fell upon him.
I. We see here prosperity and pride. Mere worldly prosperity often
the prelude to daring impiety. U., a good king, but a bad priest: not
the priest whom God had chosen. Statecraft and policy have no claims to
spiritual direction. Spirit of the gospel not that of a successful worldling, but
that of a little child of the kingdom. II. We see here pride and
punishment, It is a part of God’s order of nature that bodily pains should
often rebuke and reveal the workings of an ungodly soul. The solemn truth that
pride and passion are destroyers of men, the remembrance of those destroyed
by them, are admonitions to us, “ Verily he is a God that judgeth in the
earth.” ITI. Punishment and shame. Hope of Uzziah given in record
of eee to go out of the temple. His proud heart broken; he was


OHAP xxv, }


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


FT


smitten with shame.


A man not altogether lost while he can feel shame, God


quickens “the sorrow of the world, which worketh death,” into “ godly sorrow
working repentance to salvation not to be repented of [Dr. A. Mackennal].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. In this and the next ten

chapters we have the histories of
Uzziah and ten more kings of Judah,
in whose days prophesied the most of
the prophets, both major and minor;
to whose writings these eleven chapters
lend not a little light, and are there-
fore diligently to be read and heeded
[Trapp].
. Ver. 15. Marvellously helped till
strong. Two kinds of help, natural
and supernatural. 1. A time when we
cannot help ourselves. Infancy. 2. A
time of growth when we can help our-
selves. Youth, manhood. 3. When thus
strong the supernatural help ceases.
Not less provision made on that account.
There is joy and co-operation with God.
As an earthly father requires to be
obeyed and served, beholds strength
and disposition to co-operate, so the
Heavenly Father, &c. [Dr. Matheson].


Ver. 16. Lifted up. 1. By pride of
money. 2. By pride of intellect. 3. By
pride of wit [Thain Davidson]. Learn—
I. The abominable nature of pride. A
rivalry and robbery of God. The sin of
Satan and unregenerate men generally.
Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, &c. I1. The
awful transgression to which it leads.
Transgressed and went into the temple.
“Men would be angels, angels would be
gods.” III. The power of God to abase
and punish the proud. Honour and
dominion, mind and body under God’s
control. Reason dethroned, the coun-
tenance stamped with idiocy, when he
pleases. Madness, leprosy, and death
at his bidding. ‘Come, and it cometh.”
Most exalted insignificant atoms before
Him. “God resisteth the proud, but
giveth grace unto the humble.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXVI.


Ver. 8. His name spread abroad.


“ Unblemished let me live, or die unknown;
O grant an honest fame, or grant me none”


{ Pope}.


Ver. 16. Went into temple. We do
not believe that the Christian ministry
is any less Divine than the Levitical
priesthood, or that the commission it
oears is less clear and definite. The
conclusion is, that the intrusion into it,
an usurpation of its powers, or a vio-
lation of its order, be it by prince or
peasant, by scholar or unlearned, by
good men ignorantly, or by evil men
presumptuously, cannot be anything
else but offensive to God, and fruitful
of mischief to mankind [&. Hallam,
D.D.}.

oo 18. They withstood. When
Theodosius, the Emperor, was at Thes-
salonica, in revenge for certain of his
judges slain there, made a great


slaughter among the people by his
soldiers, who destroyed 7,000 citizens
Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, heard to his
great grief, and when the Emperor.
afterwards returning to Milan, would
have come, as his manner had been, to
the holy assembly, he stoutly withstood
him, saying, “‘ With what face canst
thou look upon Him who is Lord of
all? With what feet canst thou enter
His house, whom thou hast so deeply
displeased # How canst thou receive
His body with those hands so drenched
in Christian blood? or drink His blood
with that mouth that commanded such
inhuman slaughter? Depart, therefore,
and go not about to add one wickedness
to another, but stand thou excommu-
nicate, till by repentance thou hast
obtained pardon of God, and given
satisfaction to his offended people.”
The good Emperor—religiously brad,
knew well what was fit for a king te
269


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. [cHAP. EXVER.








do and what for a bishop—returned to ution, which, after many rebukes, he
his palace, acknowledged the greatness obtained [7'rapp),

of his sin, and spent eight months in wivhie is sraih the posh titra
weeping and lamentation ; then coming That a sorrow's crown of sorrow is remem


to Ambrose, begged pardon and abso _bering happier things” [Texnyson},





CHAPTER XXVILI.


Cxrricat Norzs.] This chapter is par. with 2 Ki xv. 82-88, and taken mainly from
the same source or sources. Ampler than narrative in Kings, and given with certain
religious reflections after manner of writer (cf. Speak. Com.). Jotham’s character (vers.
1, 2), Jotham’s buildings and wars (vers. 3-6), Jotham’s death and successor (vers, 7-9).

Vers. 1, 2.—J.’s character, Right, better than his father, as he did not intrude into
temple. Ver. 2. Corruptly, which frustrated his efforts to reform (@f. 2 Ki xv. 85). For
general character of corruption, see Is, i-v.

Vers. 8-6.—J.'s conduct. Built, i.e, repaired. High gate, the north hill of temple.
Ophel, i.e., the nnound or eminence on south-eastern slope of temple hill. Muwoh to defend
Jerusalem in every direction. Ver. 4. Mountains, hill tract of Judah. Castles (xviii. 12),
forts to check invaders. Ammon, restless under the yoke of Uzziah (xxvi. 8), revolted
against Jotham. Revolt repressed, and higher tribute exacted. Wer. 6 Prepared, marg.
established ; directed, disposed his ways aright (of. Prov. xxi. 29).

Vers, 7-9.—J.’s death. Wars besides with Ammon, in later years with Rezin and
Pekah (of. 2 Ki. xv. 87). City, t.6., “with his fathers” (2 Ki xv. 88), in the sepulchre
of the kings,


HOMILETICS.
Joruam’s Prosperous Reicn.—Verses 1-8.


I. He began by imitating his father in good, not evil ways.
Amaziah considered a good king in the greater portion of his reign, though
guilty of two great sins of 2 Ki. xiv. 3 and 2 Chr. xxv. 2, 14, 16). J. imitated
his father in all respects, except impious usurpation of priestly office. Far
more easy to copy bad than good deeds. But J. took warning from his father’s
folly and punishment, acted a wise part, and displayed a piety singular and
conspicuous among “the people” who “did corruptly.” II. He became
powerful by the adoption of right measures. He detected the
dangers, and desired the welfare of his kingdom. 1. His military measures.
He strengthened Jerusalem, fortified country places, and repressed revolting
nations, Wise to fortify against attack and guard weak places in character,
churches, and kingdoms. 2. In religious measures. “He prepared his ways
before the Lord his God” (ver. 6), Earnest and whole-hearted in piety.
Thoughts fixed on God, and desired to please him in life. “In all thy ways
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths.” This leads to power and
prosperity, for both come from God. The more steadfast in religion, the more
able to resist evil, perform good, and influence others,


PREPARATION aNp Strencru.—Verse 6,


Here we get an insight into Jotham’s purpose and ways. He prepared hia
ways, exercised forethought, arrangement, and prayer. I. All strength is
gained by preparation. Not the result of accident or negligence,

270


6WAP, XXVIIz. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


i a i a eA Tiere Cir ea nage ee
Strength of body and mind, strength of character and position, result from
exercise, discipline,and growth. The virtue of the soil, the events of Providence,
the creation of the world, and the incarnation of Christ after long and silent
preparation. II. All preparation must be in recognition of God.
This invests all acts with influence, and gives them religious character. “Prepare
thy work without and make it fit for thyself in the field.” 1. In recognition of
Gods eupremacy. ‘Before the Lord.” God sovereign and supreme Ruler.
All power in his hands, all events under his control. 2. In covenant with His
mercy. ‘Before the Lord thy G'od.” Conscious of God’s presence and love; a
sense of interest and sonship. Loving appropriation and humble dependence.
III. When a person thus prepares his ways before God, he
will become mighty. “J. became mighty because he prepared his way.”
Preparations never vain; rashness and haste lead to failure and misfortune.
Strength amd success gained by fixed resolve, entire consecration, and devout
preparation. Mighty in prayer, influence for good given “before God” ;
required in Christian effort and in a sinful world. ‘ Mighty through God.”


HOMILETIC HINTS


Ver. 2. “ According to all that his
father Uzziah did.” One single act
of impiety destroys not general good
character of his reign [Speak. Com.].
People did corruptly, civil injustice and
social cruelty; laborious service and
empty ritual ; foreign oppression and


AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1-9. Jotham’s life. His
mother’s name and relations. His age
at succession (ver, 1). His great
achievements: built cities, conquered
enemies, and became mighty in fame,
wealth, and power. His death a
lamentation, and his son an unworthy


successor. “ Wrought a woeful change,
being optimt patris pessimus filius”
[Trapp


providential misery (gf Is. i—v.).
Jotham a witness for God in prevalent
corruption and national faithlessnesa,





OHAPTER XXVIIL


Crrrican Notre.) This chapter corresponds with 2 Ki. xvi, and gives chief events in
same order. Narrative fuller in military affairs, yet an omission of two or three facts.
Idolatry of A. and its consequences (vers. 1-8); release of captives (vers. 9-15); Assyrian
help sought (vers. 16-21); continued trespass and distress (vers. 22-25); end of A,
(ver. 26, 27).

Vers. 1-8.—Jdolatry of A. and its consequences. Ver. 2. Molten, i.e., representatives of
different forms or characters of the chief Phoenician deity. Return to superstition of
Northern kingdom, from which Judah had been clear since days of Joash. Ver. 8. Burnt,
restored worship of Moloch, savage god of Ammon, Heathen, Canaanites, Ver. 4. T'ree,
great extremes (cf. 2 Ki. xvi.4). Ver. 6. Two battles with Kezin and Pekah not in Kings.
Ver. 7. Agrik., governor, chief officer of royal palace (cf. 1 Ki. iv.6; xviii. 8; 2 Ki. xviii. 18),

Vers. 9-15.— Release of captives. Oded, possibly same as Jddo. Samuria, where Llijah,
Elisha, and other prophets exercised their vocation. Rage, great, violent, and displeasing
to God; reacheth, where God hears. Ver. 10. Purpose, in heart. Sins, with you greater
than in Judah, therefore opprene noterring brothers, Ver. 11. Deliver, send back. Fierce,
law forbade Israel to make bondmen (Lev. xxv. 89-46). Ver. 12. Heads, patriarchol chiefs
who formed king’s counsel. Ver. 18. Forbade captives to be brought into Samaria,
Offended, remembered, confessed their own sins, and felt ashamed. Ver. 14. Remonstrance
successiul, Ver. 15. Name, the four in ver. 12, acting with general cousent of whole body

of princes and people. Ver. 15. Prisoners released, fed with spoil, and conveyed to Jericha
ox their way home, Palm (Deut xxxiv. 8)
$71


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: OHRONICLES. (cHAP. XxXv—IE


es el


Vers. 16-21,.—Assyrian help sought. Time, after disastrous war with Ephraim and Aram,
Kings, more than one in succession or in conjunction ; other versions give singular instead
of plural. Vers. 17, 18. Assign reason for seeking help. Invasion (ver. 18) and refrac-
toriness of Judah (ver. 19). Naked, lit., ‘had caused licentiousness in Judah.” Had
allowed Judah to break loose from religious restraint. Ver. 20. Distressed by heavy
tribute, and no help rendered.

Vers. 22-25.—Continued trespass and affliction Yet more, “trespassed still more.”
Spoliation (ver. 21) of no avail. Ver. 23. Sacrificed, superstition led him to believe that he
might receive aid from the gods of D., Hadad, Rimmon, é&c. (2 Ki. xvi. 10-16). Ver. 24. Cut,
demolished; shut up, suspended worship, and made altars after models at Damascus.
Several, separate.

Vers, 26, 27.—End and burial of A. Written, &c. (2 Ki. xvi.). Ver. 27. Brought not, buried
with his fathers (2 Ki. xvi. 20), but not in sepulchres of the kings. Not an honourable


burial.





HOMILETICS.
Tre Evm Reiaxn or Auaz.—Verses 1-7,


A. forgot principles and example of his father. Soon apparent by what
unhappy influences he was surrounded, and to what degeneracy the people had
fallen. Increase of worldly wealth and luxury in reigns of Azariah and Jotham
introduced corruptions which, by the example of Ahaz, prevailed in idolatrous
practices of every kind (ver. 24). I. The unmitigated wickedness of
Ahaz. A. one of the stupendous examples of Israel, one of the few men in
history of whom not one good thing is recorded. His wickedness uniform,
unmitigated and extraordinary development. 1. He patronised symbolic worship
of Israel. “ Walked in the ways of Israel” (2 Ki. xvi. 3) at beginning of reign.
All forms and practices of heathenism among Israelites he adopted. 2. He
practised gross idolatry of Canaan, Not content with paganism, he imported
fresh modes of worship. He restored idolatry of Moloch, and fixed it under
the very walls of the city, “the valley of Hinnom.” WHe gave personal
sanction to cruel rites, by causing his sons to pass through fire, to burn them to
death, or purify them and dedicate them to heathen gods. A custom in Persia
for the king to send his son, seated on a black horse, to ride through the flames
to prove sacredness of character and to show the people fire will not hurt. This
practice forbidden by law (Lev. xviii. 21; xx. 2; Deut. xviii. 10). II, The
fearful consequences of this wickedness. Having left God, God
forsook him, and a series of calamities happen. 1. Deliverance unto the Syrians
This the issue of a confederate invasion. False dependence, heathen gods Eoakd
not protect. 2. Fearful slaughter. Smitten by kings of Assyria and of Israel
“with a great slaughter,” a complete panic and rout result. Defeat bereft them
of defence, and they allowed themselves to be slaughtered like sheep. 3. Dis:
graceful captivity. “A great multitude of them captives” (ver. 5). Made prisoners
they were divided between allies, sent off under military escort to capitals ie
Syria and Israel, 4. National calamity. Persons of distinction among captured
or slain (ver. 7). The king’s (probably Jotham’s) son, governor of Royal Palace
and Prime Minister. Loss of these chief officers a national calamity. ‘ How are
the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle?” Thus blood shed, country wasted
co ues Satie tac sg A good king may shelter a corrupt people; 5

ad king may bring judgments like a flood. ‘The happin i
valued by mieiea vt Shoiher Bee eee ee has


Toe ReveasE or Caprives.—Versee 8-15.


Report of “brethren” led captive excited indignation in better di
Oded, a prophet, went out, accompanied with princes, to meet the Se oe
apie disgrace of introducing such prisoners into the city. I, Released


CHap, xxvint.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,





1


through stern rebuke of the prophet. 0. did not applaud cheir
valour and congratulate them on their victory—in God’s name declared their
faults and warned them of judgment. 1. Rebuked pride of victory. Not by
superiority in numbers, arms, and valour had they overcome; but in consequence
of Divine judgments against Israel. Not for the righteousness of victors (Deut.
ix. 5), but for the wickedness of the vanquished; therefore boast not, “be not
high-minded, but fear” (Rom. xi. 20,21). 2. Rebuked abuse of power. Victory
gave no authority for cruelty. Offensive to keep “ brethren” as slaves in war.
Might not always right. They had “slain them in a rage,” and they further
‘purposed to keep them under” and sell them as “ bondmen and bendwomen.”
“The wrath of man worketh not the righteousness of God.” 3. Rebuked forget-
fulness of personal guilt. “Are there not with you, even with you, sins against the
Lord your God?” (ver. 10). Ten tribes not innocent, fallen away more com-
pletely, more hopelessly, than the two. Severity would add to their guilt and
aggravate their punishment. “ Thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them
which do such things and doest the same, that thou shalt escape the judgment
of God?” IL Released through the humanity of the people.
Spirited remonstrance not in vain—chiefs, soldiers, and people touched. 1. Dzs-
played tn the opposition of chie/s (ver. 12). Conscience-stricken when reminded
of their own sins. Men of character and high position, remarkable for bene-
volent feeling, forbade entrance of captives into Samaria—took lead in difficult
task of restoring them, and gained themselves a name. 3. Displayed im com-
pliance of soldiers. Soldiers only obeying orders, might have defended what
they gained by sword ; but yielled, left captives and spoil at disposal of “ the
princes” (ver. 14). Right to give up what is wrong to retain—-more generous
to yield to reason and religion than te stick at self-interest. 5. Displayed in the
kindness of the people. Under benevolent superintendence the captives clothed
and fed from the spoils; assisted in their weakness and conveyed on their way
home (ver. 15). A beautiful incident, and full of interest. A proof of loyalty
to law amid national decline, of generosity in scenes of cruelty, and a type of a


greater deliverance in the Gospel.


HOMILETIC HINTS


Vers. 1-5. Like son, like father.
In A. we have—I. A son who rebelled
against the maxims of his father. In-
stead of carrying on improvements
inaugurated by his father, we find
that he initiated altogether a new state
of things. II. A father who was
devoid of natural affection towards his
children. “ He burnt his children in
the fire.” III. The wicked sons of
good fathers may sometimes be fathers
themselves, and the evil they have done
will be repaid to them again [Jib.
Mus.|.

Vers. 9-11. Oded went out--1. In
courageous spirit. Defying risk to
meet face to face, 2. In faithfulness
to God, for whom he acted, and from
whom received help. 3. In benevolent
design. Hear me. Here we have the


AND SUGGESTIONS.


picture of a good preacher, Oded
teacheth, reproveth, exhorteth, turneth
himself into all shapes, of spirit and
of speech, that he may work upon his
hearers; and he had his desire. See
Timothy's task (2 Tim. iv. 2, 3)
[T'rapp|. Reacheth up to heaven.
Sins of violence—l. Seen by God;
2. Provoke God; 3. Will be pun-
ished by God. “Our iniquities are
increased over our head, and our tres-
pass (guiltiness) is grown up unto the
heavens ” (Ez. ix. 6).

Ver. 10. Personal guilt, a sense of
our own sins should check—1. In the
pride of triumph. 2. In the con-
trol of passion, 3. In the neglect
of charity. Know self, moderate re-
sentment, and imitate God’s com-
passion, Or learn—l. Man’s paises

2


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


eS ES Se





ness to judge others. 2. By judging,
treating others harshly, we condemn
ourselves, ‘“ Blessed are the merciful,
for they shall obtain mercy.”


*¢ We do pray for mercy,


And that same prayer doth teach us all to —


render
The deeds of mercy ” [Shakes.}

Ver. 15. Primitive charity. Olothing
the naked, feeding the hungry,
helping the weak, &e. “We can
scarcely find a parallel to this in the


{cwar. xxvim.


universal history of the wars which
savage man has carried on against his
fellows from the foundation of the
world” [4. Clarke], That which
happened in the time of Ahaz, was to
occur again, as Is, xliii. 5, 6, and Ix. 3,
and other similar passages show on
a much larger, more glorious scale at
the time of the greatredemption. We
see at once from the words themselves
with what pleasure the historian dwells
upon this event [Kei].


HOMILETICS.
APPEAL FoR Assygian Hevp.—Verces 16-21,


Invasion of Judah by Rezin and Pekah not mere predatory expedition, but
designed to reduce the country, upset the royal family, and establish another
tributary prince. Extirpation of dynasties common in Hast. Theolder and more
venerated the dynasty, the more needful to destroy it. The unconditional pro-
mise to David prevented change, and occasioned defeat of allies. I. Appeal
inimminent danger. Kingdom reduced to great distress—l. By Invasions
of the enemy. After succession of defeats, retreated within walls of Jerusalem,
and besieged, Country infested north and south, and cities captured. 2. By
Providential disaster. “For the Lord brought Judah low.” Bereft of wealth
and power, humbled and helpless for defence. As despicable as they had been
formidable. 3. By Internal disorder. ‘For he made Judah naked,” caused
licentiousness in Judah. Bonds of government loosened, restraints of religion
thrown off, and idolatry of every degree practised. II. Appeal which
cost immense sacrifice. “A. took away a portion of the house of the
Lord, &e.” (ver. 21). 1. Self independence. “Iam thy servant and thy son”
(2 Ki. xvi. 7), A plain acknowledgment of his dependent position, and the sub-
mission of a vassal, 2. Hnormous treasure. To procure adequate sum for pro-
tection the palace and the temple ransacked. Costly is the price of sin and
departure from God. III, Appeal which ended in disappointment.
Relief only temporary. Assyria prepared for the advantage. ‘The end worse
than the beginning. “The King of Assyria came unto him and distressed him,
but strengthened him not.” Distressed—1l. Byoccupying theland. Hostileinroads
of the enemy devasted the kingdom. Invaders, like Saxons invited by Britons
against Picts and Scots, remained masters of the land. 2. By exacting heavy
tribute, Payments exhausting, impoverished and weakened. The submission of
Judah, proffered by Ahaz, pleasing and of utmost importance to projects of
conquest. Money demanded in return for help. 3. By withholding help desired.
Nothing but disappointment at last: “ But he helped him not” (ver. 21). Ahaz
not placed in a safe and independent position; an aciual for a threatened sub-
jection resulted. It led to further idoiatry and risk, which provoked God’s
anger and tended to ruin the nation. Sin no “help” nor “strength,” but a
cause of “ distress,” Confidence in men, the world, and false ways, create
disappointment and pierce the hand like a broken reed, “Tf ye will not believe,
surely ye shall not be established.” Be firm in faith, or ye will not be mada
firm in fact [Speak. Com., Is, vii. 9}.


274


CHAP, XXvill. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
SSSR See sg Se Sc a a
‘a
Anaz’s Deeper Sivs ann Miserres.—Verses 22-25.


The infatuated king unchastened by distress, surrendered himself to slavish
fear and pursued his course “yet more against the Lord.” Notice—I, The
wilful obstinacy displayed in his evil course. He exerted royal
authority to extend idolatry ; suspended the worship of Jehovah in the temple ;
committed gross sacrilege, and superseded the altar of God by one from Damas-
cus. He discarded the doctrine of one true God and affected polytheism. His
religion was a kind of diplomacy, The Temple, the residence of Jehovah, by the
help of the priesthood, was turned into a shelter for idols, and in the streets of
Jerusalem were erected altars to foreign gods. II. The fearful conse-
quences of this obstinacy. “He sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus
which smote him,” 1. God provoked to anger (ver.25). ‘The wrath of a king
is as messengers of death ; but a wise man will pacify it,” by proofs of penitence
and amendment of life. 2. Ruin brought upon himself and kingdom. “ They
were the ruin of him and of all Israel.” The gods of Syria befriended him no
more than the kings of Assyria. He was cut off in the midst of his days. Per-
nicious influence of idolatry lasted through the reforms of next reign, and only
destroyed after Babylonian captivity. III. The awful stigma which
rested upon him through this obstinate course, “This is that
king Ahaz.” Like “Jeroboam who made Israel to sin,” and Judas who
betrayed the Saviour, he is branded by the spirit of God. If ever a man is to
be held up as a warning, thisis the man. Mark him, shun his ways. Not one
good thing in his life and no hope in his death |


ABUSE OF JUDGMENT,—Verse 23.


“ Trespassed more and more” in utterly forsaking God and selling himself to
sin. I. Judgment abused by mistaking it. He thought because
Syrian gods helped them, they would be of service to him. Jehovah had smitten
him and helped his enemies, but he could or would not see it. He therefore
sacrificed to idols, This a vulgar conception of God, and leads to abuse of
devotion and into greater rick. II. Judgment abused by defying it.
There is still a lofty imperial spirit in Ahaz. Neither judgment nor mercy opens
his eyes, When overthrown he must still fight against God, be master of his
own condition and destiny. He abused the house of God, the altar of God,
and the judgments of God. His heart was more fully set to do evil, and he
“ provoked to anger the Lord God of his fathers.”


Lessons FROM THE Lire or Kina Anaz,


I. Thatacourse of sinis continually downward. Thisis a funda-
mental law of character, the natural working of sin. It propagates itself, but
is not self-reformatory. One kind of sin produces another kind, and the law of
habit applies to physical, mental, and moral actions. Character becomes fixed.
“ His own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with
the cords of his sin.” II. That God is faithful in checking men
in this downward course. “The Lord brought Judah low because of
Ahaz, King of Israel” (ver.19). Disappointed in alliances, overcome in war,
captives taken by thousands, and nothing going well. God contended with him,
but was despised by him; persevered in efforts to check him, but was defied and
resisted. God ever seeks by his providence and spirit to turn men from an
evil course which will end in ruin. “That he may withdraw man from his pur-
pose (marg., work) and hide pride from man. He keepeth back his Gand


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,
y


[cHaP. xxvi,


i


the pit and his life from perishing by the sword.” III. That if men will
not be checked in a downward course they may become


notable examples of punishment.
The end is come, but not the end of life.


22).


“This is that king Ahaz” (ver,
Chastised, but not corrected,


given to idols and let alone, “he did trespass yet more.” What possibilities


of human guilt!


What distinctions in human shame!


“Ts not destruction to


the wicked and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity %”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 16. Send in spite of promise
given by Isaiah (vii.14; viii. 4), the one
immediate and the other remote, that
confederate kings should not prevail
over him. This—l. 4 forgetfulness,
wilful rejection of divine assurance.
Ahaz by his unbelief had not only
disestablished himself (ver. 9), he mort-
gaged the hope of Israel. He had a
policy of his own, and was determined
to pursue it. He betrayed the Mes-
siah and deliverer of his people. The
assurance of this betrayal is the sign
of his obduracy, a signal and terrible
proof of his irretrievable sin in calling
upon the Assyrians, The king has
been found wanting” (cf. Smith’s Bk.
of Is.,p.118). 2. An unworthy acknow-
ledgment of human dependence. God
would have been his help, but he
foolishly turned to those who ruined
him. This proved by Scripture and
by Assyrian monuments, which record
payment of tribute by tribes of Israel.
“« His heart was moved, and the heart
of his people, as the trees of the wood
are moved with the wind,” in craven
fear (Is. vii. 2).

Ver. 19. Israel low. The influence
of the ruler upon the nation’s welfare
and condition. Nakedness or abun-
dance, internal anarchy or prevalent
order. The higher the rank the more
aggravated the sin. A corrupt king a
corrupt court (like that of Charles IT.).
“Woe to thee, O lana, when thy king
is a child.”

Ver. 21 (cf. 2 Ki. xvi. 8). Sacrilege
upon the House of God. 1. The king’s
self-willed assault on established insti-
tutions, II. The high priest’s con-
cessions. See in this a clear picture of
the lack of Christian spirit in the two
be pe ranks, The State desires to

2


see everything arranged according te
its whims: the Church yields for the


sake of temporal advantage [/ib.
Mus.).

Ver. 22. This king Ahas. The
stigma fixed. 1. An expression oy the


writer’s feelings. 2. An example of
the force of sin. 3. A providential
warning to all. “Learn wisdom by
the folly of others.”

Ver. 23. I. The true God forsaken.
1, From wrong views of his character.
3. From false confidence in his rivals.
II. The certain ruin which results
from this course. “ The ruin of him.”
Ruin personal and national, physical
and moral, present and future. Gods
of heathen, gods of sectarianism, gods
of gold, or gods of learning will bring
ruin. Mistake to seek inspiration, to
covet relief, and implore deliverance
from wrong sources. ‘Turn ye unto
him from whom the children of Israel
have deeply revolted.”

Vers. 26,27. Acts of Ahaz, which
may be thus summed up: 1. His
proud and faithless refusal of a sign
by the mouth of Isaiah (vii. 10-13) ;
2. His discontinuance of temple wor-
ship by closing the temple itself; 3.
His desecration of the sacred vessels ;
4, His erection of altars to the false
gods in every corner of Jerusalem, and
in every several city of Judah; 5. His
sacrificing to the gods of Damascus that
they might help him. The first and
last of these offences belonged to the
early part of his reign, the others were
among the latest practices, and to be
reversed by his successor in the king-
dom (2 Ki. xviii. 4; 2 Chr. xxix. 3,
19) [Speak. Com.}.

I. The Character of Ahaz. .. He
was one of those whose iniquity ia


e


CHAP, XxIx.]


enhanced by the contempt of spiritual
privileges; 2. Elis downward career
was rapidly progressive ; 8. He reached
the lowest point of human obduracy.
II. The illustration he affords of the
appalling power of sin. 1. Evil habits
strengthen by indulgence; 2. The


ILLUSTRATIONS TO


Vers. 1-5 Did not right. How
many a son of yodly parents is de-
stroyed by evil communications, Com-
panions first known at school, by near
residence, or picked up casually at a
friend’s house, ofven blight the most
promising young hfe. It would be
mere afiectation to suppose that the
history of Ahaz is unconnected with
the prevalent corruption in Judah
during his father’s reign. Pharaoh
himself was not a wore signal instance
of forbearance of judgment than he.
He had a godly cximple and godly
counsel in his fucher. But other
mercies were given co him, and though
some were severe chastisements, yet
were they mercies nevertheless, and
should have been ror his good [£d.
Walker, Ser. O. T. Subjects].

Vers. 3-5. Children in fire. The king
seems to have had a mania for foreign
religions. The worsnip of Moloch was
now established in the valley of Hin-
nom, in a spot known by the name of


ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,





Ki
world increases its power ever its
votaries as they advance in life; 3.
Sinners in mature years lose the per-
ception of religious truth; 4. There is
a limit to divine endurance, and hard-
ened transgressors are often left to
perish in their sin [Bb. J/us.].


CHAPTER XXVIII


Tophet, close under the walls of Jerusa-
lem. There the brazen statue of the
god was erected, with the furnace
within, or at its feet, into which the
children were thrown. To this dread-
ful form of human sacrifice Ahaz
gave the highest sanction by the devo-
tion of one or more ¢* his sons
[Stanley].

Vers. 9-15. Clemency. The record
of this act of compassion of these
Israelites towards the captives of
Judah is to be noted as affording a
refutation of the allegation of some
modern critics that the writer of
Chronicles was swayed by partiality
for Judah and by prejudice against
Israel [Wordsworth].

Vers. 22-25. Continued sin. The
way of sin is down hill, a man cannot
stop where he would, and he that will
be tampering with dangerous occasions
in confidence of his resolution, shall
often find himself carried beyond his
purpose [Abp. Leighton].





CHAPTER XXIX,


Criricat Norges.) Hezekiah’s reign commenced and carried through four chapters in
marked contrast with corresponding portion (2 Ki, xviii.xx.). The writer of Kings fixes
on civil affairs—the two invasions of Sennacherib and on the embassy of Merodach-baladan,
related at length, passing lightly and hastily over Hezekiah’s reformation (ch. xviii. 4-7),
the author of Chron. gives a full account of this latter in three chapters (xxix.-xxxi,),
eompressing into one (xxxi.) the whole that he has to say of the civil history of the reign.
Thus chs. xxix. to xxxi. of 2 Chron. contain matter which is almost wholly new; while
ch. xxxii. ie littin more than a brief summary of what the writer of Kings has related
tally in the three chapters which he has devoted to this reign [Speak. Com.].

Vers. 1-11.—H.'s good beginning and restoration of worship. Zech., possibly the person
given Is, viii. 2. Right, his tather’s idolatry revolting to him; he began restoration at once,
Ver. 8, Opened doors closed by his father (ch, xxviii. 24) ; repaired, lit. made them strong,
damaged by Ahas (cf. 2 Ki. xviii. 16). Wer. 4. Hast street, probably open space ree

217


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES [cHar. ¥xrx.


Se es a a eer RE A SE SS SS SS SSC RAAENC ER RSLS


eastern gate. Sanctify, Levitical purity (1 Chr. xv. 12,18). lth, stains of idolatry.
Ver. 6. Fathers, Ahaz and his contemporaries. Twrned back, not looking towards rising
sun, a8 Ezek. viii. 16, with their faces from the Temple ; but, figuratively, for neglecting
and despising God. Ver. 7. Acts of Ahaz. Ver. 8. Punishment for these acts in
expressions which are new and have no parallel in the rest of Chron., one which Hez.
might naturally use, for it had oceurred in a prophecy of Micah (vi. 16), his contemporary
and monitor (Jer. xxvi. 18), which was probably uttered towards the close of Ahaz’s
reign, In Jeremiah plrase becomes common (Jer. xviii. 16; xix. 8; xxv. 9, &c.) [Speak.
Com.}. Ver. 9. Of. ch. xxviii. 6-8. Ver. 10. Purpose of H. Ver. 11. Sons, affectionate,
bent ty aPpeet to priests and Levites. Negligent, remiss; burn, make any fire offering
enerally.

: Vers. 15-19. The Temple cleansed. Fourteen chiefs undertake to collect and prepare
their brethren. Ver. 15. At commandment of king, ‘tin the business (matters) of the
Lord,” prescribed by law (Ex. xix. 22; Lev. xi. 44). Ver. 16. Priests only entered the
house of the Lord. Whatever found there unclean they brought into the outer court,
where Levites took it from them to carry beyond boundary of Temple. Kidron (ch. xxx.
14; 2 Ki. xxiii. 12). Ver. 17. Work began first day with purification of courts and
reached porch eighth day. Then eight days more to cleanse Temple ; sixteen altogether.
Ver. 18. Altar, great brazen, before porch. Ver. 19. Cast away (ch. xxviii. 24; 2 Ki.
xvi. 14).

Vore 20~26,— Hez.’s sin-offering. Early next day H. went with princes, without waiting
to assemble representatives of the nation. Ver. 21. Seven, number of covenant. Kingdom,
i.e., for sins of kings and predecessors ; sanctuary, for sins of priests; Judai, for sins of
the nation. Ver, 22. Blood expiates, and Levitical rites duly observed in shedding it.
Ver. 28. Sin-offering; hands (Lev. i. 4; iv. 15, 24). Ver. 24. All Israel repeated twice, for
sanctuary belonged to all Israel, and invitation given for northern tribes to take part in
passover (ch. xxx. 1). ‘‘ Northern kingdom in a state of anarehy. Four Assyrian invasions
had swept over it within thirty-five years. Hoshea, contemporary of Hez., not an inde-
pendent ruler. Hence Hes. invited revolted tribes to return, if not to their old temporal,
to their old spiritual allegiance. To prepare the way for this return, he included ‘all
Israel’ in expiatory sacrifice” [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 25. Cf.1 Chr. xvi. 4; xxiii. 5; xxix. 29.
Trumpets, cf. Num. x. 8; 1 Chr. xv. 24; 2 Chr. v. 12.

Vers, 27-31.—Hez.’s burnt-offering. Consumed on altar, only fat for sin-offering (Lev.
iv. 19). A sound of instruments heard when old worship recommenced, Sang, some
anthem for the occasion. All bowed (ver. 29) in solemn worship. At invitation of king a
great number of thank-offerings presented.

Vers. 31-36.— Order of service completed. Flaying of victims not a priestly function, but
a work of the offerer (Lev. i. 6) at first, afterwards on public occasions by Levites, as here.
Ver. 34. Upright, i.e., displayed more alacrity than priests; perhaps tainted by idolatry,
and looked coldly on reforms of Hez. Ver. 35, Another reason which prevented priests
from flaying to completion, was the great demand upon their time by the work to be done.
Ver. 36. No small joy at opening of newly consecrated Temple. Prepared the people's
minds, or it could not have been done so heartily and immediately.


HOMILETICS.


Hezexian’s Rerorms IN THE TemMpLe.— Verses 1-1].


The reign of H. (726-697) culminating point of interest in history of kings of
Judah, Whether or not contemporary prophecies foretelling the birth of a
Divine Heir to the throne, contained any reference to the son of Ahaz, then a
mere child, it is certain that no other Prince since the death of David could so
well have answered to them (Hezekiah, Jehovah strengthens). In point of fact,
he was the centre of the highest prophetic influence which had appeared since
Flijah [Stanley]. I, The work itself was well chosen. Methods for
extirpating idolatry and accomplishing thorough reformation given in detail.
1. God's work chosen first. Temple, sacred work. Needful to strengthen and
defend his empire, but no work for God can prosper without friendship with
God. H. might have done many useful works, become a benefactor to his
people, but saw re-opening of fellowship with God most required for nations and
individuals. “ Seek first the kingdom of God, &e.” (a) This in opposition to
past example. He did not follow the example of a wicked father, nor listen to


the ‘ag of a corrupt court, &e., but did “that which was good and right and
2


OAR. XXIX.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





$$


truth before the Lord his God.” (b) This as a promise of future usefulness.
Chose out a work of his own, opened doors, repaired and cleansed the Temple.
He pursues work in perplexity, difficulty, and peril. 2. God’s work deliberately
chosen. “ It is in mine heart” (ver. 10), He begins in right way, and at right
end ; shows in what consists true wisdom and wise government. A happy open-
ing, an encouraging pledge of his whole course. A course which begins with
God, will be one of usefulness and triumph. II. The spirit in which
the work was performed was commendable. No compromise;
no half-measures; no delay. ‘In the first year of his reign” he began and
delayed not. 1. Jn personal consecration (ver. 10). All reformation begins here.
Outward work done from life within. Everything depends upon our relation to
God, that is, there is a strong moral link between our estimate of God and
success. 2. In tracing historical relattenship. He looks back, reads providence,
and finds his work. We cannot work efficiently without a survey of the field,
and an insight into present requirements. We have incentives to work when
we see need of its performance, and feel called to perform it. ‘“ Who knoweth
whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?” 3. Jn the
strength of deep conviction. Convinced of sin and bitter fruits of idolatry, he
determines to reverse policy of his father ; announced his resolution at beginning
of his reign, and waited not for consolidation of his rule. Courage and determi-
nation characterise all earnest reformers. 4. Jn seeking co-operation from others.
Desired help from the ministry (ver. 5). ‘‘ Sanctify yourselves.” By legal rites,
specially by penitence, faith and fresh obedience. We should be sensible of our
own, and the sins of our fathers; earnestly cleanse ourselves, and co-operate for
reformation of others. Let each man, therefore, do what he can, but remember
that the secret of social development is combination—that the best social system
is that in which organisation for the eommon good is made most complete and
most efficient.


Tue Levires Enuistep to Hutr.—Verses 11-19,


The response to H.’s appeal given by Levites in united, hearty service. “Then
the Levites arose.” Notice—I. The method in which they rendered
help. 1. They were united. “They gathered their brethren and worked
altogether.” 2. They worked in orderly arrangement. Began with outer courts
—those of priests and people; they proceeded to inner. But as Levites could
not enter the Temple, sweepings were brought by priests to porch, and then
carried to Kidron. No hurry; no disorder. ‘“ All things done decently and in
order.” II. The rule by which they were guided. As “ command-
ment of the king,” but with a desire to obey God’s word. “ Let the priests also,
which come near to the Lord, sanctify themselves, lest the Lord break forth
upon them” (Ex. xix. 22; of. 1 Chron. xxv. 5; 2 Chron. xxx. 12). III. The
report which they made. The house, the altar, and the vessels all
cleansed and ready for use. Glad themselves, they came to gladden the king, not
to seek reward, nor boast of care and trouble. Happy those who can report
successful work. But never failure! To open and repair the door, to light the
lamps and sweep the floor acceptable to God. Let each resolve, “ It isin mine
beart” (ver. 10).


“Do not, for one repulse, forego the purpose
That you resolved to effect ” (Shakes. }.


PRAIsE AND WorsHirp.—Verse 30.


In sixteen days the burnt-offering began; songs were heard, the trumpet rent
the place, and al! hearts quivered with joy. Observe two pointe—I. pthey
2


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (CHAP, XxIx








were old words that the people sang. Moreover H. the king and

‘the princes commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the Lord, with the words
of David and Asaph the seer, What do we want with new words, new hymns,
new forms of praise? The time is coming—would it could hasten its longed-for
advent—when there will be only one book in the Church. At present the
number has been reduced in many instances to two, and one of them we do not
want. The time will come when the Bible will be the only hymn book in the
house of God. What hymns like the hymns of the Bible? What devotional
language like the devotional language of the Psalms? What finer teachers
could we have than David, Asaph, and Isaiah, and the mighty minstrels and
prophets of Israel? The people had the wordsall ready. If we want to sing we
need not wait for some man to make words for us ; so long as the Psalms are before
us we may begin our song at once. IIT. Not only were the words old,
the enthusiasm was new. “And they sang praises with gladness,” literally
with exultation, with rapture. Religion is nothing if not enthusiastic. Praise with-
out exultation is but a skeleton form. The whole place in which Christians are
s.asembled for worship should vibrate, tingle again because of the mighty, gracious,
holy song. Here we have the changeable and the permanent—the permanent
in “the words of David and of Asaph the seer; ” and the changeable or capable
of increase and variation is the gladness, the enthusiasm, the transport, the holy
rapture. ,Nor was it merely vocal in the sense of displaying musical gymnastic
skill, for the people having sung with rapture as if they had not space enough
to sing in, as if they would split the overarching heaven with their cry, “they
bewed their heads and worshipped.” The look was upward, downward; wild
with an infinite rationalistic joy, and subdued because of a sense of the
majesty of heaven (Dr. Parker].


HOMILETIO HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 1,2. Notice—I. A mother’s in-
fluence tm the training of Hezekiah.
“His mother’s name was Abijah, the
daughter of Zechariah.” Ver. 1. Pro-
bably the Zechariah whose influence for
good was signally owned of God in the
reign of Uzziah (ch. xxvi.5). Perhaps
Abijah was neglected by her husband,
surrounded by greatest difficulties, for
every corner of Judah full of idols;
yet she attended to duty, felt the
solemnity of her trust, and wonderfully
succeeded. II. The sovereign grace oy
God in the conversion of Hezekiah. A
wicked father, a corrupt court, and an
idolatrous country, yet Hezekiah
chosen and qualified in youth for the
throne, and became one of the best
three kings of the Jews. ‘“ All except
David, Ezekias, and Josias were de-
fective, for they forsook the law of the
Most Highest; even the kings of
Judah failed” (Ecclus. xlix. 4), This
encouragementto parents. God delights
in miracles of grace ; saves children of

280


unchristian parents, and crowns with
honour the faithfulness of rodly parents.
III. The great work which God performs
in the youth of Hezekiah. Only 20
or 25 years old when he began to
reign, no common character, no ordin-
ary piety in one so young. ‘The work
begun and begun rightly, as soon as
seated on the throne; accomplished
splendidly by the providence of God.
“The Lord was with him, and he
prospered whitherscever he went
forth.”

Vers. 6-10. I. A description of
apostasy. Mark the order of departure,
Trespassed, going beyond; forsaken
him; then turning away their faces
from the habitation; God forsaken,
worship forsaken; finally ‘turned their
backs” entirely and choosing idolatry,
the source of all misery. II. The fear-
ful evils which follow exposed to God’s
wrath manifest—1. In the invasion
and devastation of land, “ upon Judah
and Jerusalem.” 2. In the fall and


CHAP. XXIX.}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES,


_ DI EAA Si cask ha 7. aaa


mourning of families, “our fathers
have fallen by the sword.” 3. In the
evils of foreign captivity, “our sons,
daughters, and wives are in captivity.”
4, In the disgrace to which they were
reduced. Former prosperity and glory
fled, now a byeword and hissing, &c.
IL]. The source to which these evils are
traced. Hezekiah had discernment to
ascribe national calamities to right
cause. God caused them on account
of their sins. Others, servants or
ministers of a moral providence. Men,
forces of nature no power at all except
given from above. Hence (a) no ground
for violence and petty reprisals. Keep
down anger against mere agents; (6)
The necessity of forming correct esti-
mates of outward vicissitudes, and (c)
of learning to discover and submit to
God’s will the great rule of the uni-
verse. As Wordsworth—


‘*One adequate support,
For the calamities of mortal life,
Exists—one only, an assured belief
That the procession of our fate, however
Sad or disturbed, is ordered by a Being
Of infinite benevolence and power,
Whose everlasting purposes embrace
All accidents, converting them to good.”


Ver.11. Mysons. A fatherly king.
With what gentle, paternal eloquence
Hezekiah addressed the men on whose
co-operation he relied. A pastoral
king: a most shepherdly heart was the
heart of king Hezekiah. There is a
fatherliness that does not depend on
age. Hezekiah not an old man, spoke
not from under a crown of hoary hairs;
but a father because of his capacity of
love, unselfish solicitude, patriotic
aspiration. There are young pastors,
born shepherds ; in earliest conscious
life they seem to be made to care for
others. The pastor is a man who can
carry all men. You cannot make
pastors, kings, or fathers. Men may
bear the nominal functions, but here
an entail sanctioned by heaven. Have
not some men a right to accost us as
sons? Is there not a touch which
means solicitude, brotherhood, unity,
mutual understanding? The words
come to Hezekiah as he needs them;
they are his servants, wait upon him.
Thus he talks with healthy frankness,
tender appreciation, and majestic famil-
iarity which cannot be trifled with [Dr.
Parker}.


HOMILETICS.


ConskcRATION AND SacriFices.—Verses 20-31.


I. Sacrifices expiatory. Sin-


offerings to atone and make worshipper


acceptable to God. Unusually comprehensive, embracing four kinds, and seven


of each kind, for sins conscious and
classes.
king orjroyal h
« Atonement for all Israel” as well
dedicatory. After sin-offering, t
of self-dedication to God. This an
consecration.


ear and bring sacrifices” (ver. 31). 4 ,
eae IV. ‘Sacrifices accompanied with symbolic rites.


guilt. sit
ting reverence and adoration, The solemnities
ising, and a proof of God’s presence. “ For


appropriate.
1. Laying on of hands, confessing
gladness. 3. Bowing of heads deno
of the day memorable, typical, surpr
the thing was done suddenly.”


unconscious.
he sanctuary and for Judah”—<.., for
ouse, ministers of the sanctuary, and the people of Judah generally.
as Judah (ver. 24).
he burnt-offering presented, an expression
atural order—acceptance, gratitude, and self-
“Now that you have consecrated yourselves unto the Lord,


“ For the kingdom and for t


II. Sacrifices for all


III. Sacrifices


Sacrifices abundant, generous, and


2. Instruments of music expressing


Musio aNd CHRISTIAN Srrvice.—Verses 25-30.


This scene beautiful and suggestive.


resumed, fresh sacrifices presented, an


Old life forsaken ; new forma of worship
d monarch and people working nee


81


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. fonar. xxix











with gladness and rejoicing. I, Christian service begins with fresh
demands upon our life. ‘Now ye have consecrated yourselves, come
near.” Once far off; now sin forsaken; and all dedicated toGod. Near in faith
and fellowship, in purpose and daily life. Fresh demands upon time, talents, and
efforts. Sacrifices not to self and world, but to God and his cause. Self-
surrender, represented by burnt-offerings, perpetually needful. Will and life
given to another. ‘‘ Present your bodies a living sacrifice.” II. Christian
service is a joyful service when these demands are satisfied.
“The congregation brought in sacrifices and thank-offerings.” No joy in appro-
priating to self and withholding from God what is due. No happy life except in
self-devotion to God and in doing good to others. To live in, and to be of no
service to the world, a terrible thing. ‘“ The liberal soul (lit., the soul of blessing;
z.¢., that blesses others) shall be made fat” (satisfied and gladdened) (Prov.
xi. 25). Always a re-active influence in temporal and spiritual matters; action
and reciprocal influence the law of the universe. Withhold it, will tend to poverty
of spirit; ‘“ give and it shall be given unto you, good measure, dc.”


“The truly generous is the truly wise,
And he who loves not others lives unblest.”


III. This joyful service is the strength of Christian life.
Joy from duty not mere luxury or excitement, but help, strength to more
perfect work. Whatever God is for us—life, light, love, and strength—it is
that we may be the same for others, This is Nehemiah’s gospel. “The joy of
the Lord is your strength.” Joy creates enthusiasm, elevates above despair and
opposition, and develops all our resources. As bodies expand through heat, so
the soul is enlarged, and effort prompted under the genial influence of joy.


Gop’s PRePaRatTion.— Verse 36.


God prepares in nature and in providence. Men gradually fitted and appointed
for their work. Our duty to watch and enter upon work when discovered.
I. God seen in removing difficulties in the work. Idolatry
prevalent, and nation corrupted. The people indisposed, and oflicials reluctant :
the work itself great and perhaps thought impossible by many. II. God seen
in helping on the work to completion. “The service of the Lord
was set in order.” Not only difficulties removed, but strength given to finish.
If priests could not be found, Levites were ready (ver. 34). No delay, no excuse
given. Early in the king’s reign the work began, expeditiously was it finished
“for the thing was done suddenly.” The people seen gathered together. God
gave them “a free heart” and they worked willingly.


and it is marvellous in our eyes.”


“This is the Lord’s doing


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 12-19. The thoroughness of
the work done, the readiness and num-
ber of those who engaged in it, the
method in which they proceeded Nae
15), and the delights that spring from
its completion,

Ver. 13. On triple division of
musical Levites, see 1 Chr. xxv. 1-6;
2 Chr. v.12. When God has a work
to oe = raises up men to do it. But


first in rank and position not always
i for service and most willing to enter
it.

Vers. 11, 30, 32-34. Popular gene.
rosity and cold officialigm. The “ free
heart” of the people a contrast to the
negligence of officials, A reflection
seems to be cast upon their dilatoriness
and negligence in sanctifying them-
selves (ch. xxx. 15), of which they


SHaP, 2xx,)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. CHRONICLES


HT


were afterwards ashamed “ Gene-
rosity may sometimes confuse officialism,
so that people may sometimes get
ahead of the Levites” [Dr. Parker].
Priests should be examples to others,
never be satisfied with worldly emolu-


ments, grossed in earthly affairs, and


forget the demands of the people and
the duties of their calling. The higher
the position, the greater should be the
readiness to work,


“In persons grafted in a serious trust,
Negligence is a crime.”


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXIX.


Vers. 3-7. Door opening. To
cleanse the sanctuary is to pray.
When Hezekiah opened the doors, by
that very act he worshipped; when
Hezekiah repaired the doors of the
house of the Lord, he wrought a
wondrous work upon the heart that
was sore by reason of its long-con-
tinued need and painful solitude. To
repair the building is to worship the
living God ; to give a cup of cold water
to a disciple for Christ's sake is to
oblige herein a Parker}.

Vers. 10, 11. Energy. Energy of
character has always a power to
evoke energy in others. It acts through
sympathy, one of the most influential
of human agencies. The zealous, ener-
getic man unconsciously carries others
along with him. His example is con-
tagious and compels imitation. He
exercises a sort of electric power through
every fibre—flows into the nature of
those about him and makes them give
out sparks of fire [Smiles].

Vers. 14-17. Order. Order is the
best manager of time; for unless work
is properly arranged time is lost ; and
once lost it is gone for ever. Order


illustrates many important subjects.
Thus obedience to the moral and
material law is order. Regard for the
rights and obligations of all is order.
Virtue is order. The world began
with order, chaos prevailed before the
establishment of order [Smiles].

Vers. 25-28. Instrumente. Music
has a most humanising effect. The
cultivation of the art has a most
favourable influence upon public
morals, It furnishes a source of
pleasure in every family. It gives
home a new attraction. It makes
social intercourse more cheerful.
Father Mathew followed up his tem-
perance movement by a singing move-
ment. He promoted the establish-
ment of musical clubs all over Ireland,
for he felt that, as he had taken the
people’s whisky from them, he must

ve them some wholesome stimulus in
its stead. He gave them music, Sing-
ing classes were established, to refine
the taste, soften the manners, and
humanise the mass of the Irish people.
But we fear that the example set by
Father Mathew has already beer
forgotten [Siméles},





CHAPTER XXX.


oras.] Preparations for Passover (vers. 1-12); the k


of Passover


Carrican N
(vers. 13-17) ; Fae for unclean persons (vers. 18-22); the solemnities of the second


seven days.


Vers. et capt Et getocned prt Passover. Sent messengers. Special letters to remote and


near tribes (ef. ch. xxix,


foe object in sending them). Ver. 2. Second month, a time


283


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (OHAP. ExXx.








which allowed for purification of priests, proclamation to be made through all Israel and
for absentees. Ver. 3. Other reasons assigned, Pleased, i.¢., arrangements made. Ver. 5.
Order made and proclaimed from Dan to Beer., i.¢., the extent of Israel; -‘for they had
not (for some time) kept the Passover in full numbers, as required (written) by law. Ver.
6. Posts, runners or bearers of letters (ch. xxiii. 1,2). Remnant, portions of people had
been removed by Assyrian invasions to Asshur (2 Ki, xv. 20), the rest now tributary
(2 Ki. xvii. 1-4). Ver. 8. Stiffnecked, hardening neck (Deut. x. 16); gesture of disobedi-
ence (2 Ki. xvii. 14; Ezra x. 19; Ezek. xvii ae Yield, lit., give the hand, ¢.e., submit
(1 Chr. xxix. 24; Lam. v. 6). Ver. 9. Find,“ shall be for compassion before your captors.”
Ver. 10. Zeb., extreme north. Ver. 11. Divers, certain; representatives of five tribes sent.
Ver. 12. Hand, direct ascription to God for united national response,

Vers. 18-17.—The keeping of Passover. Ver. 14. Altars which Ahaz had erected in city
(ch, xxviii. 24) partly for victims and partly for incense—a sign of earnestness. Ver 15.
Ashamed, behind in zeal for worship or given to idolatry, put now to blush by forwardness
of people; received burnt-offerings from offerers at doors of inner court, and took them
to raven altar in front of porch. Ver. 16. Hand, Levites being obliged to help in


slaying nu.verous victims, Ver. 17. Charge, because unsanctified people could not do it
themselves.

Vers. 18-22.—His prayer for unclean. Otherwise, t.e., contrary to Mosaic rites. Ver. 19.
Prepareth, so is sincere, Ver. 20. Healed, forgave (sin) uncleanness and delivered from
physical or moral consequences, Ver. 21. Seven, according to requirement (Ex. xii. 18;
xxiii. 15); loud, strong instruments, ascribing might to the Lord. Ver. 22. Comfortably,
encouragingly to heart. Confession of past sin and keeping feast full appointed time.

Vers. 23-27.—Solemnities of second seven days. Took, resolved to imitate Solomon’s feast
at dedication of temple (1 Ki. vili. 65). Ver. 24. Give, lit, gave as heaye-offering
(cf. ch. xxxv. 7). Thousand, victims liberally offered by kings and princes, many priests
sanctified themselves to overtake this extraordinary abundance, Strangers responded to
invitation, and not such a national feast since time of Solomon (cf. Josiah’s Passover,
2 Ki. xxiii. 22, 23). Ver. 27. Blessed, benediction of priests, who were entitled to bless,
reached to heaven itself (¢f. Num. vi. 24-26).


HOMILETICS.
THe PROCLAMATION OF THE PassoveR.—Versea 1-12.


Division of kingdom, disorders which followed, and prevalent idolatry prevented
national observance for long time. Hezekiah desired to revive it, consulted
princes and chief men, met with hearty response, and resolved to proclaim it.
I. The invitation to keep the passover. 1. Offcial, from kings and
princes. 2. Special, by decree (ver. 5). 3. Pressing, by letters and proclama-
tion. 4. Universal, to Israel as well as Judah. Indicating zeal, generosity,
and love. 5. 7imely, though temple, priests, and people not duly sanctified
by 14th day of first month Nisan. Yet only postponed till 14th day of second
month, not a whole year. II. The motives to comply with this
invitation. In passionate language he urges personal obedience and ready
response. 1, Their covenant relation urged them. God forsaken, though “the
Lord God of their fathers” and “the Lord their God.” 2. Their present con-
dition wrged them. Trans-Jordanic region desolate. Two tribes in captivity
would find compassion from their captors (Ps. cvi. 46), and God would return
unto the remnant. 3. If they complied God would be gracious. ‘Gracious and
merciful, &e.” (ver. 9). His fierce wrath would be turned away if they sought
him (Joel ii. 13). 4. If they refused God would beangry. Iil. Theresponse
which was given to the invitation. A twofold reception. 1. Some
were ready and willing. ‘“ Divers of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled
themselves and came to Jerusalem.” “In Judah” God’s power seen in zeal and
unanimity of people. 2. Others mocked and insulted. Not merely refused, but
openly derided. “Laughed them to scorn.” A type of gospel message, “a
savour of life unto life or of death unto death.” Which to youf Neutrality
me Are you refusing or yielding? “They mocked the messengers of


CHAP. XXx.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES





S aEEEEESEeeeeneet eee


God and despised his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the
Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy.”


Hezeuran’s Inyrration.— Verses 1-13.


Hezekiah determined to keep passover not in selfish spirit within narrow
limits of Judah or Jerusalem, but commanded “that the burnt-offering and the
sin-offering should be made for all Jsrae.” In this we learn—-I. The centre
of unity for all God’s people. ‘The house of the Lord.” The sanctu-
ary the centre round which all Israel should gather. Through Jeroboam’s act
three centres, Jerusalem, Bethel, and Dan. Hezekiah pointed out one.
“Turn again to the Lord God of your fathers.” Not places of worship, cities of
refuge, creeds or denominations, but Christ the centre and bond of unity. One
Lord, one table, one object. II. The method of securing this unity.
1. Cherish and cultivate a spirit of love. Hezekiah not cold and exclusive, thought
not of his own people merely, but of those in connection with him. Too much
sectarianism and bigotry separate true believers one from another and repel the
world. 2. By personal effort endeavour to bring tt about. Discountenance every-
thing that promotes separation. Encourage and incite in minds of all Christians
a desire to be found together. Not the purpose of God that his people should
be “scattered abroad” in bitter feelings, sectarian feuds, and selfish actions.
Working to secure the unity of the body, we co-operate with God for a divine
object. That “he should gather together tm one the children of God that were
scattered abroaa.”


THE OBSERVANCE OF THE PassovER.—Verseg 13—26,


I. Atan unusual though legal time. “In the second month.”
“ At that time” (in the first month, ch. xxix. 3), they could not keep passover,
because priests had not sanctified themselves in sufficient numbers, nor had the
people assembled. King and princes consulted not to delay another year, but
to hold it second month. Zeal of people might cool down. Present benefit
desired. Let circumstances give way to realities. Never neglect a greater fora
smaller good. II. By an unprecedented number of victims.
Hezekiah gave a thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep. The princes gave
a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep. These besides the stock of sacri-
ficial animals brought by the people which soon were exhausted. Pious example
should ever incite. Rich will never be poorer for genuine liberality. III. By
the great numbers who attended. Some refused, but others gladly
observed passover. All Judah with priests and Levites, some from Israel, the
northern kingdom, and strangers—probably proselytes from both Judah and
Israel. ‘A very great congregation ” (ver. 13), to whom God’s arm was revealed
(is. liii, 1), and who were made willing in the day of God’s power. No passover
like this since the great festival of Solomon, which lasted fourteen days, for
excess of Levitical zeal, unbounded joy, and extent of duration.


Hezexian’s Prayvrrn.—Verses 18-20.


Passover kept, but remarkable is the description, “ otherwise than it was
written.” Many involved in ceremonial or moral uncleanness, and unfit to
slay their own lambs ; needed intercession of the king, who proved himself to be
a trueruler and a true priest for the people. Learn—I, That purity of
heart is required for sanctuary worship. Outward cleansing of

985


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (onar. Xxx.








Old Testament a symbol of inward. Truth in the inward parts, sincerity of
heart and mind needful. Worship is not sensual, but a living fellowship with
Christ; for this, preparation must be made. “If thou prepare thine heart, and
stretch out thine hands towards him, &c.” (Job xi. 13). II, That the best
preparation in sanctuary worship is defective. Not what law
requires, not up to spiritual ideal,‘ according to the purification of the sanctuary.”
Iniquity cleaves to our holy things, and “there is not a just man upon earth,
that doeth good and sinneth not.” Best offerings, holiest worshippers unworthy
—need the intercession, the incense of the great High-Priest. III. That
when the heart is sincere God will hear prayer. God is
Jehovah the good, kind and merciful ; proclaiming goodness in forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin, Prayer to Him will be heard. ‘“‘ And the Lord hearkened
to Hezekiah.” God ever condescending to the upright in shortcomings and
defects. But this no excuse for negligence in preparation, for reliance upon duty
performed as well as we can perform it, norany ground for despair on account of
weakness or imperfection. “If there be first a willing mind, it is accepted
according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not.” .


A Sreconp JoyruL Montu.—Verses 23-26.


A voluntary service made in addition to requirements of law, a fruit and sign
of abundant zeal and gladness. This illustratee—I. The true method of
deliverance from sectarianism. No form prescribed. Law not
exactly obeyed. The sweetness of unity in decided hostility to separation,
idolatry, and narrow-mindedness. Hospitality warmed, the nation enthusiastic
and one ; numbers grow, and pardon multiplies at the feast. II. The true
principle of all reformation. Not to pull down what is false, but to
build up what is érue. Assemble Israel round the altar, lead them into the
presence of the God of their fathers ; then a mighty power will go forth from
Jerusalem to sweep the land from idols, upset the seats of superstition, and
confirm righteous works. Not to resuscitate fallen religion by novel measures, to
promote excitement, and raise up a denomination, but to return to appointed
means, regularly, orderly, and reverently observe divine worship, and restore
to freedom and efficiency old institutions by which God will raise the Church
and bless the nation. IIT. The only way to secure service out of
worship. “ When all this was finished, all Israel that were present went
out to the cities of Judah, and brake the images in pieces,” &c. (ch. xxxi. 1).
Altars not destroyed in going up to Jerusalem. They needed the experience of
the feast, the blessings of worship. Hezekiah began with God in sanctuary,
Israel pursued the same order. Power to reform and execute judgment derived
from God’s presence. Luther and Knox prayerful in closet, therefore successful
ta reform. ‘Not by might, &.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 14-17. Removal of altars. 1. quence of transgression they had cause


Destruction after construction. Evil
taken away before good accomplished.
2. Official lukewarmness to remove evil.
Its widespread and its future end.
3. Personal revival to stir wp others.
Vers. 18-20. Hez.’s prayer. 1. Sin
brings sickness. Ceremonial unclean-
ness exposure to danger. In conse-
236


to fear physical and moral disease
(Lev. xv. 31). 2. God the physician.
Will heal this moral sickness. “The
Lord healed and restored to penitence
and health.” This revealed probably
by a prophet (cf. 2 Ki. xix. 20; xx. 5),

Ver. 22. Hez.’s encouragement to
Levites. Work holy and great. Unity


CHAP. EXXI.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


eT ENE


and resources of all to accomplish it.
Hence “H. spake comfortably.” I,
Qualifications required. (a) Knowledge,
good and extensive, ritual and musical.
(6) Wesdom to execute and consecrate
it to God’s service. (c) Humility before
God. ‘Knowledge is proud because
she knows so much, wisdom humble
because she knows no more.” II. The
advantages of possessing these qualifica-
tions. (a) Ability to encourage others,
(6) Facility to arrange and conduct
public worship.


Vers. 1-27. Reviewing whole, we
have—I. A revival of theocratic spirit.
II. Destruction of idolatrows custome,
Til. Hstablishment of true unity in
public worship. IV. A pattern Refor-
mation, in its benevolent design, in
the spirit in which it was conducted,
and in the priestly blessing it secured.
Benedictions fell from lips of leaders,
praises of the people ascended to heaven,
the nation restored to God “and great


= ”
°


Joy:


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXX.


Vers. 1-12. Zeal (“ My sons, be not
negligent”) should be inspired by
principles, not by circumstances. Yet
the value of circumstances must not
be underrated, for they are means
which God employs to awaken our
attention to duty. It is not difficult
to trace the course of events through
which the dying embers of religious
zeal, and especially of zeal for Christian
missions, have been kindled by the
breath of God. We may not overlook
the happy results from the command-
ing influences of leading men and the
powerful impressions produced on the
lethargy into which the public mind
is ever sinking, by the stirring appeals
of pulpit, platform, and press. By such
means it has pleased God, in a degree,
to conquer public opinion, and they
must continue to be plied with un-
abating energy till the conquest is
complete [WV. H. Stowel, D.D.}.

Ver. 22. Confession.

“ What better can we do than to the place


Repairing where he judged us, prostrate
fall





Before him reverent, and there confess
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg with
tears” [Milton].


Vers. 23-27. Universal joy. Iam
not unmindful of the assertion that the
God of the Hebrews is usually thought
of as a Being of preternatural severity,
overwhelming men by his majesty,
begetting profound and soul-filling awe
by his greatness, dwelling in the thick
darkness, making clouds his chariot,
and sweeping down on his foes like a
cyclone. But this representation is one-
sided and unfair to a religion which
had more festivals than fasts, more
psalms than prophecies, and more
triumphs than despairs, By the side
of intolerance of sin there is mercy
that reacheth to the very heavens,
and near to the righteousness that is
like the great mountains there is a
forgiveness that inspires hopeful peti-
tion, even out of depth of sufferings
and misfortune [Dr. J. Clifford].


CHAPTER XXXI.


Crrt1can Notes.) Destruction of idolatry (ver. 1); H. appoints courses and contributions
(vers. 2-10) ; and arranges the chambers and officers (vers. 11-21).

Ver, 1.— Idol, destroyed (ef. 2 Ki. xviii. 4), After festival, all Judah and Benj, t.e. from
southern kingdom; in Eph. and Man., t.e., in northern kingdom. mages, statues of
Baal; groves, stocks representing Ashtaroth (xiv. 8); utterly destroyed, had made an end,


287


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES, {onar. xxx1.








Vers. 2-10.—H. appoints courses and contributions. Courses a8 appointed by David (1 Chr.
rxiii. 6; xxiv. 1). The tents, i.e., within the gates (precincts) of the Temple. Ver. 3.
King’s portion. H. set example in giving tithes (cf. ch. xxxii. 27-29 for what possession
consisted). Ver. 4. Portion. Having set example, people called to do their part.
Priests, i.e., first-fruits (Num. xviii. 12-18) and tithe (ib. 21-24) ; encouraged, i.e,, that they,
priests and Levites, might devote themselves wholly to their proper work, the service of
sanctuary and teaching of God’s law (ch. xvii. 7-9), and not engage in secular occupations
(cf. Neh. xiii. 10-14) [Speak, Com.]. Ver. 5. Improved state of feeling stirred up to gene-
rosity ; honey (dates), and tithes brought from Israel in Jerusalem. Others (ver. 6) in
country districts brought first-fruits and tithe of sheep and oxen; heaps upon heaps.
Ver. 7. Seventh month, which completed the harvesting. Ver. 9. Questioned. Whether all
he saw was sufficient to maintain priests and Levites. Ver. 10. Azar., possibly A. of
ch. xxvi. 17; replied that there was enough, and that the people were grateful to Jehovah
for his goodness.

Vers, 11-20.—H. provides store-chambers and officers. Chambers (storehouses) always
among rooms (1 Ki. vi. 5) or among outer buildings attached to courts. But disused of
late years, required to be prepared afresh. Faithfully, acting carefully and honestly, not
appropriating for common use (ch. xix. 9). Shimez (ch. xxix. 14), Ver. 13. Jehiel and
Mah. (ch. xxix, 14). Ver. 14. Doorkeeper toward east (1 Chr. ix. 18); freerill, i.e., voluntary
offerings to God (Deut. xii. 17); holy things, portion of sin-offerings, which had to be eaten
by priests in a holy place (Lev. vi. 10-22; vii. 6). Ver. 15. Six Levites situated in cities
of priests to distribute to priestly families, old or young, great or small, their due share of
temple offerings. Those at Jerusalem obtained their share at thetemple. Ver. 17. “ The
writer here proceeds to state nature of lists which guided officers who made distributions.
Three enumerated—one of priests made out according to families ; one of Levites, includ-
ing all above twenty years of age, and made out according to courses; and a third of
priestly and Levitical families, containing wives, sons, and daughters of both priests and
Levites indiscriminately [Speak. Com]. Ver.19. Jn fields, not even country priests and
Levites neglected.

Vers. 20, 21.—Hez.’s thoroughness. Good acting as servant of Jehovah; integrity and


benevolence attested. All his heart, a perfect heart (cf. ch. xix. 9; 2 Ki. xx. 8; Is.
xxxviii. 8).


HOMILETICS.
A Porvunar Movement.—Verse 1.


Many indications in this history that the power of Hebrew kings over people
was not so arbitrary as that of Hastern monarchs in general. Here the people
began a movement, a revival, which ended in destruction of high places, and estab-
lishment of one form of worship. I, The enthusiasm from which it
sprang. Not mere excitement, not violence and tumult, but holy fervour.
Iconoclasm came from religious enthusiasm ; inspiration from God (em and theos),
Different from the wild fanaticism of heathen gods, All reform from deep
religious conviction, from real intercourse with God. The heart must be filled
before the hand can strike. II. The extent to which it reached.
Jerusalem cleansed before Passover, and all signs of idolatry removed. Now the
‘and had to be purged. In the northern and southern kingdoms the movement
spread. Amendment must begin in the heart first, the centre and source of action :
outward sins may be forsaken, and the heart unrenewed. “Cleanse your
heart,” and then “make your ways and your doings good.” III, The
thoroughness with which it was finished, They began and made
a complete finish; did not give up, nor act partially, “all was finished.”
Destruction entire. “Statues” broken in pieces, “the groves cut down.”
‘‘ High places,” time-honoured centres removed ; “altars,” and all remnants of
idolatry, “utterly destroyed.” Every evil must be forsaken, no sin spared
through favour or affection. “Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any
more with idols?” IV. The national peace which resulted from
its completion, “Then the children of Israel returned,” &c. Though leng
absent, they could not return and feel secure, “every man in his possession,”
until ae were destroyed. Idols no longer their gods and defence. They


Gear. xxxr.] HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
A fel NRA


returned to Him from whom they had deeply revolted. “or in that day
every man cast away his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which his own
hands had made unto him for a sin” (Is, xxxi. 7; ii. 20),


Hezexmn EstTapiispes ORDERLY PERFORMANCE oF TEMPLE WorsHIP.—
Versea 2-10.


H. now turns attention to public worship, suspension of which had disarranged
the courses appointed by David, which were intended to relieve each other in
perpetual succession (1 Chron. xxiii. 6; xxiv. 1) I. The arrangement
of priests and Levites in courses. The order settled afresh in
which they should unde: ke their parts of service. Every man found his
work, put into his place, and made to contribute to the whole. “ Levites after
their courses ;” priests “ for burnt-offerings and for peace-offerings,” and Levites
to “minister” to priests, or “give thanks and praise.” But place, time, and
position nothing without heart. They must represent the man himself.
Allegiance to God inspires worship, and worship inspires and sanctions duty.
No motives so strong and overpowering as those which worship kindles and
sustains ; self-approbation, self-respect, regard for esteem of others fail to take
hold of conscience and life. Faith in the ever-present God, actual communion
with the Father of Spirits, will create homage in worship, and faithfulness
in sanctuary work. II. The commands for payment of dues
from the people. When every one had his proper place assigned him, an
edict was issued for the regular payment of dues for revenues of the temple.
1. The king set an example. Contributions from privy purse and royal estate to
defray expenses of altar. A generous act, honouring God, and relieving his
people; after the example of David and Solomon before him (ch. viii. 14; 1 Ki.
ix.25). Kings not exempt; may be noble examples of liberality and duty to
their subjects. 2. Zhe people responded to the call. Formerly the sacred tribute
entirely neglected or withheld by the people because misappropriated by
idolatrous princes ; now improved state of public feeling prompts to ready com-
pliance. First-fruits and tithes poured in from all parts of Judah and Israel,
which astonished the king, proved sufficient for the priests, and expressed
gratitude to God, whose law was obeyed (cf. Ex. xxiii. 19; Num. xviii. 21), who
had crowned the year with his goodness and mercy. Loyal hearts secure liberal
contributions ; liberal contributions will secure God’s blessing. “ Bring ye all
the tithes into the store-house, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove
me now herewith, saith the Lord of Hosts, if I will not open you the windows
of heaven and pour (empty) you out a blessing, that there shall not be room
enough to receive it.”


Hezexiuan’s Provision or Store CoampBers,—Verses 11-19.


I. Chambers were prepared. Storehouses, granaries, or cellars, Old
ones had fallen into decay and needed repairing or fresh ones built. Tithes and
offerings not left exposed in heaps and disorder, liable to be wasted or taken
away, but preserved, consecrated to right use. People encouraged when their
contributions are well received and properly used. II. Officers were
appointed to distribute stores. Officers chosen tor different depart-
ments, and distribution made “by courses” according to three lists of priestly
families. 1. Jmpartial distribution. ‘ As well to the great as to the small.”
Those near, in actual attendance (ver. 17), and those “in the fields of the
suburbs” were not overlooked (ver. 19). 2. Conscientious distribution. “ One
tist of priests made out according to families; one of Levites, including ay ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (ewar. xxx.








swenty years of age, and made out according to courses ; and a tlird of priestly
and Levitical families containing wives, sons, and daughters of both priests
and Levites indiscriminately,” ‘They sanctified themselves,” conscientiously
devoted themselves to their duties, “in their (trust) set office,” in confidence of
support, and were not disappointed. “ Attend to my duties,” said Queen Eliza-
beth to a courtier, ‘and I will attend to thy wants.”


Hezrxian’s THorovenness 1x Gop’s Szervice.—Vorsee 20 and 21.


Other kings good, did right as Solomon, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Joash, and Amaziah,
but fell away from God. Hezekiah remained firm to the last, and prospered in
all things. I, The work he performed. He displayed qualities of a
constitutional sovereign, restored cities and institutions of the land, and gained
renown equal to his predecessors. His work summarised—1. In temple service.
2. “Inthe law.” 3. “In the commandments.” II, The spiritin which
he performed it. 1. A spirit of impartiality. Not religious merely at
home and in the temple, but before his people, “throughout all Judah,” 2. A
spirit of integrity. He was faithful to God like Abraham, and could appeal
to divine justice. He “ wrought that which was good, and right, and truth
before the Lord his God.” 3, A spirit of zeal. ‘“ He did it with all his heart,”
a heart filled with earnestness and sincerity, and not shared or swayed with
rival deities (1 Ki. xi. 4) III. The blessing of God which followed
its performance. ‘And prospered.” In expeditions and in all under-
takings “ the Lord was with him.” He had enormous wealth, shared in authority
over northern kingdom, and had great influence over surrounding nations (cf.
2 Ki. xviii. 7; 2 Chr. xxxii. 22-29). Regard to God’s glory will secure honour here
and reward hereafter.

The text speaks of work. Only adopt Hezekiah’s plan, and “in every work
that you begin to do with all your heart, you may prosper.” I. We learn from
Hezekiah a lesson of concentration of energy. He did not begin half a dozen
things at once, and drivel his energy away upon them; he did not commence
one thing till he had finished another. II. Method and punctuality, too, seem
to be indirectly hinted at in the text, and they are almost indispensable to pros-
perity. III. But the great lesson we learn from the text is the value of
thoroughness in doing whatever we undertake with our whole heart and doing it
well. Do nothing as if it were trifling ; if it be so, it is unworthy of you. IV.
Emulate Hezekiah’s ardent and consistent piety. He stands in the front rank
among the saints of Scripture as a man of prayer. Every difficulty and trouble
he took straight to God, and spread it out before Him [J. Thain Davidson].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 1. Religion at home. Well to
attend public worship, but ‘show piety
at home.” 1. Not in temples and
cathedrals, churches and chapels, in
ritual and forms. 2. Not at feasts, in
excitement, numbers, and haste. 3. Not
in organisations and agencies. In
quietness and domestic duty; before
friends and your own family. Display
the good received in ordinances in the
strength and example of home, “Qo
home to thy friends and tell them how

220


great things the Lord hath done for
thee.”

Ver. 2. Gates of the tent—lit., the
camps of the Lord. Jehovah's camp.
“Fitly compared to a camp, for the
watch and ward there kept by the
priests, and for the convention of the
people thither, as to their rendezvous,
to pray, which is the chief service of
our spiritual warfare” [Trapp]. I. Its
orderly arrangements. IJ. Its sure
defences, III. Its enlisted tribes


CHAP. XXXIL.]





IV. Its central worship. V. Its great
commander.

Vers. 2-5. Priestly maintenance.
1. Due from all those near the temple
at Jerusalem, those in cities of Judah.
2. Due according to the law of God.

3. Due that they might devote them-
selves entirely to their proper work,
the service of the sanctuary and the
exposition of the law, and not engage


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


;
in secular occupations (¢f. Neh. xiii.
10-14).

Ver. 8. They blessed the Lord. The
source of all good. 1. For a bountiful
year. 2. or disposition to consecrate
its gifts. 3. For abundance which is
left (ver. 10). Nothing should be
wasted, only right use of everything
brings blessings.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXXII.


Ver. 1. Reform. Men cannot strike
finally if they only act as reformers.
Reform is an active word, and is to be
regarded with great favour, and is the
only word that is permissible under
some circumstances; but the greater
word is regeneration. Reform that
does not point to regeneration is a
waxen flower that will melt when the
sun is well up in the heavens. It is
not in man to regenerate, therefore;
this is the mystery of God’s action in
the soul. When the man is new the
action will be new. The great process
does not begin with the action, but
with the soul. Make the tree good,
then the fruit will be good [Dr.
Parker}.

Vers. 2-10. Service maintained. This
careful and bountiful provision is pain-
fully deficient in present church econo-
mics, but manifestly essential to liberal
and cheerful giving. No rate of giving
to God, short of sacrifice, is worthy of
those who are redeemed by the price-
less sacrifice of a Saviour’s blood, or is
adequate to the vast requirements of a
ruined world [J. Hess].


Vers. 20, 21. All his heurt. Let us
take heed we do not sometimes call
that zeal for God and his gospel which
is nothing else than our own tempes-
tuous and stormy passion. True zeal
is a sweet, heavenly, and gentle flame
which maketh us active for God, but
always within the sphere of love [Cud-
worth]. Prosperity. Hezekiah “ pros-
pered.” God walks with the good man.
God rewards enthusiasm. We do not
throw our divinely-inspired passion
away to a cold, selfish world. Our
passion may appear to be frenzy, en-
thusiasm, insanity, but the reply is
before us, we can return to it, and if
we can return with a sound heart,
blessed are we; then we can say with
moral emphasis, If we be beside our-
selves it is to God. May we understand
what it is to eat the passover, and
having eaten it, to rise with moral
dignity, that we may smite every un-
holy thing and go about our whole
business with a united heart, expecting
the blessing of God which created the
enthusiasm daily to sustain its holy
fury [Dr. Parker}.





OHAPTER XXXIL


Cririca Norzes.] Sen, invades Israel (vers. 1-5); H.'s preparations (oouecl ‘iw
(vers. 6-8); Sen.’s seductions (vers. 9-15); Sen.’s letter (vers, 16-20): destwuctiou of
Assyrian host (vers. 21-26); end and reign of Hez, (vers. 27-33). Cf. parullel account im


2 Ki, xviii. 13, xix. 37, and Is, xxxvi. and xxxvii.


Vers. 1-5.—Sen, invades Israet, After, t.¢, 14th year of Hes, (2 Ki. xviii 13).


Eistabs,
291


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. {cHar. xxx


.








faithfulness or truth on part of Hez. Sen., Sanherib (Sin-ahi-ir-ba of Assyrian inscriptions),
gon and successor of Sargon, the successor of Shalmaneser and conqueror of Samaria,
Win, breakinto them. Ver. 2, Purposed to fight, face was for war (cf. ch. xx. 8; Lu. ix,
58). Ver. 8. Counsel (ef. xxx. 2). Stop, not whoily, but cover them over (Luther, cover), ta
hide them and to convey water underground for his own supply in siege (cf. Eeclus. xiviii.
17). Ver. 4. Brook, Gihon, brook of valley of Ben-hinnom (ef. ver, 80; 2 Ki, xx. 22).
Kings, mighty men. Ver. 5. Strengthened, made careful inspection of city defences,
renewed the masonry, raised projecting machines to the towers, and specially fortified
Millo, the lower portion of city.

Vers. 6-8.—His preparations, Gathered them in large open space. Comfortably, to their
heart, inspiring courage and confidence (xxx. 22). Ver. 7. More with us (ef. 2 Ki. vi. 16).
Ver. 8. Arm of flesh, designates human weaknees (ef. Is. xxxi. 3; Jer. xvii. 5; Ps. Iwi. 5).
Fight (1 Sam. viii. 20; xviii. 17). Rested, leaned.

Vers. 9-15. —Sen. seduces the people. After this. Hez.’s submission (2 Ki. xviii. 14-16)
omitted and the second expedition given. Lachish approached (cf. xxv. 27). Power, all his
sovereignty with him (cf. Is. xxxiv. 1), Judah (2 Ki. xviii. 27, and ver. 18). Ver. 10. In
siege, in straitness (marg., fortress) (cf. 2 Ki.xxv. 2; Ezek. iv. 7). Jer. not besieged, but
in distress and straitened for supplies. Ver. 11. Persuade, urge you to destruction.
Ver. 12. (cf. 2 Ki, xviii. 22). One altar. “A more distinct reference to exclusive validity
of worship in temple, which had been once more established by Hez.” [Keil]. Miscon-
ception of religious reforms natural to a heathen. Ver. 13, Fathers, ancestors. People,
mentioned 2 Ki. xviii. 35 (cf. Is. x. 8-11; xxxvi. 20; xxxvil. 11-13). Ver. 15. No God, in
addition to reviling God of Israel, and he adds no god of any nation and kingdom can
rescue from him. Vor. 15. Servants, Tartan, Rabsaris, and Rabshakeh the spokesman
(2 Ki. xviii. 19-85).

Vers. 16-20.—Sen.’s insulting letters. Letter, in plural referring to characters in which
written [Murphy], or used as often of a single document [Speak. Com.] (cf. 2 Ki. xix. 14).
Facts co-ordinated in real sequence, not temporal, First speech, then letter, and lastly
demand. Ver. 18. Cried, to produce panic. Ver. 19. Against gods @ Ki, xix. 18), olassi-
fying Jehovah among them, Ver. 20. H.’s prayer given 2 Ki. xix. 15-19.

Vers, 21-23.—Destruction of Assyrian host. Angel (2 Ki. xix. 85). Mighty men, common
. Boldiers (as xvii. 14) in distinction from leaders and princes. Came forth, his own song
(2 Ki, xviii. 87). Ver. 22. Fromhand, guarded, sustained (Gen. xlvii. 17), “ gave them
cest—round about.” Ver. 23. Presents, precious things (xvii. 10; xx. 29).

Vers, 24-33.—Rematning history of Hez. Sickness described in full in 2 Ki. xx. 1-11;
and Is. xxxviii. Sign, going back of shadow on dial. Ver. 25. Lifted up in pride, in
display of treasures (2 Ki. xx. 13). Ver. 26. Wrath, rebuked by Is., humbled himself
(2 Ki. xx. 17, 18). Ver. 27. Riches, personal estates in land and agricultural produce;
accumulated treasures as silver and gold (cf. 2 Ki. xx. 13; Is, xxxix. 2), cattle for stalls,
&e. Ver. 30, Stopped, upper sources of Gihon. Down, underground. This noticed asa great
act of Hez. Ver. 31. Business, interpreters from Babylon,where astronomy was cultivated,
greatly interested and sent on embassy. Wonder, te., going back of shadow. Try (ef.
Deut. viii. 2). Ver. 82. Goodness, good deeds (Neh. xiii. 14). Vision, “title given by Is.
to his prophecy (Is.i.1).” Chiefest, highest, an excavation above all other tombs—in
same repository, but at higher level—intended by some, others that no room in family
sepulchres, and a private tomb constructed for him and successors. Honour, the burning
of spices (cf. xvi. 14; xxi. 19).


HOMILALICS.


SznNACHERID’s ATTEMPT ON JERUSALEM.—Verscs 1—26,


In the spring or early summer of 701 B.0.,S. marched his forces to reduce
rebellious vassals to submission. Sidon and Pheenician cities were taken and
reduced, and bordering kings rendered homage. He climbed the lofty heights
of Lebanon (2 Ki. xix. 23), and “ passed along the banks of the streams,
which he drained by his armies, or over which he threw bridges for them to
cross” (Is. xxxvil. 24, 25, LXX). He was renowned far and wide as the
destroyer. His chief object not Palestine but Egypt, the only rival worthy of
his arms. Useless to take Lachish, with the strong fortress of Jerusalem
in rear. Each stage of march foreseen, all intervening obstacles swept away,
Fenced cities of Judah taken, Zion alone remained. Hezekiah counselled te

292


CHAP, XXXI¥,] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





submit and pay tribute, was shut up in the city, and determined to resist. The
invading army reached the city, “and passed in long defile under the walls,
Chariots and horses filled the ravines, scarlet dresses and scarlet shields blazed
in the sun, and the veil of the city was torn away. The general, accompanied
by high personages, made demands for unconditional surrender” [see Stanley,
vol. ii. Jew. Ch.]. I. Sennacherib’s design. ‘He was purposed to fight
against Jerusalem.” 1. By craft he seeks to withdraw the people from allegiance to
Hezekiah. (a) He will lead them into danger. “ To give over yourselves to die
by famine and by thirst” (ver. 11). (6) He has excited divine displeasure by
removing high places. Hezekiah’s reforms ridiculed. He could not expect help
from Jehovah, the national Guardian or tutelary Deity, for he had forfeited
favour by his sacrilegious conduct in demolition of sanctuaries. But Hezekiah
designed not to exterminate, only to promote worship of God. (6) His forces
will only lead you to ruin (ver. 15). If local gods of those powerful nations
could not deliver people from might of Assyria, how improbable, impossible for
the god of so small a state to deliver them? A contradiction to his boast in
2 Ki. xviii. 25, anda heathenish view of Jehovah. 2. By blasphemy he mésre-
presents Jehovah. He iw put on a level with other gods, “the gods of the
nations.” Heis declared impotent to deliver those who trust in him. “So
shall not the God of Hez. deliver his people” (ver. 17). “The boastful and
blasphemous tone of this caitiff’s speech, which, in the concluding part of it, here
reaches its climax. He spoke of Jehovah as a heathen, and as the representative
of a despot whose head was turned by his hitherto unbroken course of con-
quests” (Jam. on 2 Ki. xviii. 33-35). 3. By self-exaltation he becomes insulting.
A towering pride exalted him above all authority, human and divine. “ Had
not Asshur’s deity proved himself, by the capture of Samaria, to be mightier
than Israel’s! Only one more evidence of this was needed—the capture of
Jerusalem—and then the King of Assyria was undisputed lord of the world”
[Speak. Com}. II, Hezekiah’s preparations to meet this
design. ‘H. responded to the call, By a sustained effort, which gave him
a peculiar renown (Hcclus. xlviii. 17) as a second founder or restorer of the
city of David. 1. He stopped the two springs of Siloam, and diverted the
waters of the Kedron, which, unlike its present dry state, and unusually even
for that time, had been flooding its banks, and in this way the besiegers, he
hoped, would be cut off from all water on the barren hills around. 2. He also
fortified the walls, and rebuilt the towers, which had probably not been repaired
on the north side since the assault of Joash, King of Israel, and completed the
armoury and outworks of the castle or fortress of Milo. 3. He assembled the
people in the great square or open place before the city gate, and there, with his
officers, nobles, and guards, addressed them in a spirit which, combined with his
active preparations, reminds us of the like combination in the well-known speech
of Cromwell. ‘And the people rested on the words of H., King of Judah.’
Well might any nation repose on one to whom even now the world may,turn as
a signal of what is meant by faith, as distinct from fanaticism” eer:
III. Sennacherib’s failure to accomplish his design. Measures
of Rab. entirely ineffectual. Troops at his disposal not sufficient to enforce
submission. He was obliged to report to his royal master unsuccessful mission.
Tis second demand unavailing. H. spread defiant letter before Jehovah, who
intervened to fulfil his word and answer prayer. “The skilled strategy of the
Assyrian will avail him no more; his past career has been in accordance with the
purposes of Providence, but his appointed bound has at length been reached.
Hope still remains for the ‘remnant’ of Judah. ‘ By the way that he come, by
the same shall he return, and unto this city he shall not come, saith Jehovah.’
That night the long series of Isaiah’s predictions received its fulfilment—the


flower of the Assyrian army was cut off and the Assyrian er ard the


HOM-LETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. fowar. xxxIt


—_ ec Or





cumour’ which impelled his return to his own land” [Driver on Isaiah]. He
“decamped, departed, returned, remained at N ineveh” (Is. xxxvii. 37, 38).
Worshipping without attendants, the once triumphant conqueror in humistion
sought the help of his own special god, but was slain by his own sons.


“The Assyrian came down like the wolf on the fold,
And his cohorts were gleaming in purple and gold”
[Byron's Heb. Melo’)


SxennacHeErin’g Letren.—Verses 17-20.


Hez.'s letter different in form from our letters, Assyrians did not use paper
or even skins, but wrote on clay. It is very likely the letter was a tablet of
terra-cotta. I. “ Went up into the house of the Lord” (¢f. 2 Kings xix. 14).
Where so likely to find God as in his house? Notice how he speaks of God
dwelling between the cherubim. Perhaps he had heard how Sen. sat on his
throne between winged bulls and lions ; but he heard Isaiah tell of seeing the
Lord surrounded by winged intelligences. God has only to speak to his winged
messenger and the angel goes to crush the foes of his people. This was a model
prayer, not going all round the world, but fastening on the thing wanted, and
asking for that. If our prayers were more like telegrams we should have
speedier answers. IJ. Was the letter ever answered? Yes, Jehovah answered
it himself. We know what the result was, and how soon the bolt of vengeance
struck down the proud blasphemer. III. There is a postscript to God’s answer.
“Tt came to pass thatnight . . . . they were all dead corpses.” Suppose
we read in the newspaper to-morrow, “ Sudden death of 185,000 soldiers!” What
a stir it would make! Whata sight the camp must have been next morning!
There has been considerable discussion as to the cause of the destruction of so
large an army, and it is generally understood now to have been the simoon.
Cambyses, King of the Medes, lost fifty thousand men by one of these dreadful
winds. But whether the wind was a messenger or an angel, it matters not.
God willed it, and nature hastened to do his bidding [7’. Champnese, “ New
Coins, &c.”].


AssavuLts on Cristian Farrn.—Verecs 9-15.


The Rabshakeh’s plausible speech and Jerusalem’s faith, greatly distressed by
him, are typical. Stillas men hang moodily over the bulwarks of Zion, doubtful
whether life is worth living within the narrow limits which religion prescribes,
or righteousness worth fighting for with such privations and hope deferred,
comes upon them some elegant and plausible temptation, loudly calling to give
the whole thing up. Disregarding the official evidences and arguments that
push forward to parley, it speaks home in practical tones to men’s real selves—
their appetites and selfishness. ‘ You are foolish fellows,” it says, “to confine
yourselves to such narrowness of life and self-denial! The fall of your faith is
only a matter of time; other creeds have gone, yours must follow, and why fight
the world for the sake of an idea, or from the habits of discipline? Such things
only starve the human spirit ; and the world is so generous, so free to every one,
so tolerant of each enjoying his own, unhampered by authority or religion”
[G. A. Smith, Bk. of Is.]. Notico—I. The unwarrantable assump-
tion of unbelief. Rab.’s address a type of modern criticism, the forces of
culture and unbelief, with lofty pretentions, patronising airs, and deceitful
promises, designed to shake confidence in religion, create confusion in Christian
communities, and seduce from Christ. 1. In displays of immense self-confidence.
Hezekiah never styled a king, Rab.’s master was destined toconquer. This an


en for self-glorification. Jarusalem’s detenders underrated. The city te
29


CHAP, XXXII. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


=-





be captured by clever speeches. More in Christianity than human wisdom and
power. It can never be hindered, destroyed by craft, worldly policy, or
worldly wisdom 2. Jé seeks to undermine religious faith. Honouring and
commending and then trampling it under foot. God only on a level with idols,
Christianity only one form among many. Faith is held in risks and ignoble
sacrifice, Your system has had its day, is becoming effete, and its decay only a
matter of time. Predictions which have been, and may again be falsified.
3. Lt offers false liberty. ‘ Makea treaty with me, and come out to me, and eat
every one of his vine, and every one of his fig tree, &c.” (Is. xxxvi. 12). “A
subtle assault upon the companionship, discipline, and patriotism of the common
soldiers by the promises of a selfish, sensuous equality and individualism.” An
independent easy life offered to men who throw off allegiance to God, and
restraints of Christian faith. But no philosopher, sceptic, or unbeliever can
ensure freedom from starvation in unbelief, and captivity in the tolerance of the
world. II. The defence of faith. “If faith be held simply as the
silent garrison of Jerusalem held it, faith in a Lord God of righteousness, who
has given us a conscience to serve him, and has spoken to usin plain explanation
of this by those whom we can see, understand, and trust, not only by an Isaiah,
but by a Jesus, then neither mere cleverness nor the ability to promise comfort
can avail against our faith” [Smith, Bk. of Is.]. 1. Their representutions are false,
Zion is not endangered. Our God is greater than all other gods, worthy of trust
and service. Liberty and satisfaction not given in unbelief, enemies themselves
being witness. Our religion not likely to decay, has recuperative power, and is
destined to triumph over all. What faith makes such heroes and philanthro-
pists, gives such happiness in life, such hope in death? 2. Faith in God ts
reaeonable. He is omnipotent, supreme Ruler, and ever present with his people.
His word is fulfilled by his providence, No home, no freedom away from him.
Unbelief is exile. In his palace, obedient to his law, and standing by his people
will be found our security and peace. Well might Isaiah exclaim on the
morning of the night of destruction to the Assyrian army, “ Jehovah is our
Judge; Jehovah is our Lawgiver; Jehovah is our King: He saveth us.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Vers. 6-8. Hez’s EHxhortation. 1.
Numbers no guarantee of success.
*“ All the multitude with him” availed
not. “Not vy might, nor by power,
&e.” 2. Worldly policy and shrewd-
ness will not ensure success. ‘These


(5) pledged to help, “to help us and
to fight our battles.” Hence be more
anxious about the justice of your cause
and God’s presence to help it on, than
its popularity and favourable circum-
stances. Exercise confidence in God
and speak comfortably to those in his


combined in largest measure have failed
thousands of times. 3. Unlimited re-
sources of all kinds—men, money, or
influence—will not give success against
right and God. All “an arm of flesh,”
and what “an arm of flesh” multiplied
a million times when measured with
the single arm of omnipotence! 4.
God alone can give victory. ‘“ With
us is the Lord our God.” “The import
of ‘Immanuel ;’ by which name Christ
now began to be known amongst them”
Trapp|. God (a) greater than num-
ers, “more with us than with him ;”


service, He that “feareth the fury of
the oppressor forgetteth the Lord his
Maker.”

Ver. 9. In demand of Sen. he seems
—1l. Unchecked by moral obligation.
Would not be satisfied with payment
of tribute from Hez. “ He hath broken
the covenant.” 2. Unchecked by fear
of military defences, “ despised cities.”
3. Unchecked by respect for human
life, “ regardeth not men” (Is. xxxiii. 8).
“Sen., like Napoleon in that terrible
Russian expedition of 1812, had essayed

295


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





a task he was unable to complete. The
Assyrians had no conception of bene-
fiting or civilising the nations which
they conquered; their activity was a
purely destructive one; their only
motive was ambition and lust of do-
minion, And now in pursuing the
same objectless career they were medi-
tating the extermination of a nation
whose preservation was vital to the
future of humanity. The Assyrian,
though he knows it not, is an instru-
ment in the hand of Providence; he
has a mission to execute by the limits
of which his pretensions must be
bounded” [ Driver}.

Vers. 10-15. Wherein your trust?
A most important question for all. 1.
Hez. trusted to Egypt; @ bruised reed,
slender and easily broken. Weakened
by Saragon, Egypt failed to help.
Resolutions of amendment, self-right-
eousness, and vague hopes of God’s
mercy broken reeds, 2. God the only
ground of trust. Well when sinners
are roused by this question. Wisdom
to trust in God, for he can and will


(car. xxxm.


ye say unto me, &e.” (ver. 22). “ Thus
he thinks to beat them off all their
holds that he may bring them to the
bent of his bow. Satan doth the like,
‘whom resist steadfast in the faith’”
[Prapp].

I. What accusations here made: (1)
that Hez. had forfeited their allegiance
and God’s protection by his reforms
(ver. 12); (2) that Hez.’s God only like
other gods, and could not deliver him.
II, What scenes of desolation here
pictured. Nations conquered, gods in
captivity at Nineveh, and everywhere
turned into a desert. III. What
assumptions of pride, power, and pro-
fanity.

Ver. 20. The Wonderful Prayer Meet-
tng. Its purpose. Its attendants (Is.
and Hez., “ Where two or three”). Its
grand results. “The issue was as mo-
menteus as any that have been deter-
mined by the ‘decisive battles of the
world.’ It was a crisis as grave as
when Persia threatened to intercept
the rising civilisation of Greece, or
Vandal and Moor to destroy the


deliver. 93. The test of this trust, “If Christianity of Europe” [Driver's Js.].


HOMILETICS.


THe WoNDERFUL DELIVERANOE.—Verses 16—30.


I. Judah’s helpless condition. City surrounded. Sen. determined.
Egypt driven back. The crisis real, Sen.’s boast true. Resistance desperate
and chances of escape hopeless, To all human appearance fate of city and
inhabitants sealed. IL The concerted prayer. The prophet and the
king bending together in prayer! In estimation of the world this a sign of
weakness, the refuge of cowardice. But confidence not misplaced in this critical
period. United, concerted prayer secures deliverance. “If two of you shall
agree, &e.” (Mt. xviii 19). Illus. from O. T. history, life of Luther, and history
of Christian Church. III. God’s signal interposition. “Man's
extremity” became “ God’s opportunity.” Ina single night miraculous deliver-
ance came—the night in which Isaiah’s predictions came to pass. ‘The rumour
was heard” which compelled Sen.’s hasty retreat. Whether the stroke which
fell upon the Assyrian army was due to natural causes (Herodotus) or super-
natural interposition it was a fact, “a coincidence which no political forecast
could have anticipated, no estimate of probabilities calculated.” “ At eventide,
behold terror! before morning it is not.” IV. The marvellous effect of
this interposition. ‘Remember that it had been foretold by Jehovah's
word, and achieved, despite all human probability, by Jehovah’s own arm, we
shall understand the enormous spiritual impression which it left upon Israel.
1. The religion of the one supreme God, euprene in might, because supreme in
righteousness, received a@ most emphatic historical vindication, a signal and

296


CHAP, XXXuI. } HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





7
glorious triumph. No other god for the present had any chance in Judah,
Idolatry discredited, not by the political victory of a faction, nor by the destruc-
tive genius of a nation, but by an evident act of Providence to which no human
aid had been contributory. It was nothing less than the baptism of Israel in
spiritual religian, the grace of which was never wholly undone” [Smith's /.].
2. Hez. was hwoured before nations (ver. 23). ‘ From surrounding nations
tribute poured in as to an awful avenger” [Stanley]. Precious things laid in
abundance at the feet of Judah’s king, who was magnified as the favourite and
special care of Heaven. God’s help will turn enemies into friends and gain for
us honour and influence. 3. But the effect not confined to the times and
country of Hezekiah. The Egyptian general, Tirhakah, advancing from the
south, as well as Hez. in Jerusalem, heard the results with joy. Three centuries
afterwards, the Psalmist’s exulting language (Ps. lxxvi.) was repeated by Egyptian
priests. The Maccabees were sustained by the recollection of Sen.’s fall in their
struggle against Antiochus (1 Mace. vii. 41), and in the churches of Moscow the
exultation over the event is still read on the anniversary of the retreat of the
French from Russia (ef. Stanley, Jew. Ch., vol. ii.). “One generation shall
praise thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts.”


Hezexran’s Sickness ANB Reoovery.—Verses 24 and 25.


The illness and miraculous recovery, the fall and repentance of Hezekiah, given
very briefly here, more fully in 2 Ki.zx, Learn—I. The great contrasts
in the events of life. In the palace a sick man, a dying king. By his
side quietly stood the faithful prophet who had delivered the prophetic message,
“Set thine house in order; for thou shalt die and not live.” In the public
crisis, there had been excitement, intense anxiety, and great joy at deliverance,
The question personal, “ thine house,” not national. Hezekiah needs protection
as well as his kingdom from God. An air of deep solemnity in the sick-bed of
Hezekiah striking and peculiar. “ No sickness in Jewish annals so pathetically
recorded,” says Stanley. II. The suddenness with which these
events happen. At one time in the midst of victory and joy, at another
“at the gates of the grave.” Now in the sanctuary with head “lifted up
above his enemies round about,” then laid prostrate and the angel of death
ready to cut him down! ‘ Man knoweth not his time” of success or failure, of
life or death. “ As fishes taken in an evil net, and birds caught in a snare, so are
the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon them”
(Ecc. ix. 12). III. The distress with which they are often
attended. In the sickness of Asa, Jehoram, and Uzziah we see divine
visitations, in that of Hezekiah national calamity. 1. Jt was distressing.
Grieved to part with life because promise of a long and prosperous one would
not be fulfilled if ent off. He spoke of upright deeds faithfully done as
conditions to promise made to David. He wept at having no children to
succeed him. The dark and silent world close at hand, in which he would no
longer see and praise God. His thread of life about to be severed ; from morning
to night and from night to morning he wasted away. 2. Jt was hopeless.
The ery of a dying lion, the plaintive murmur of a wounded doe, only sounds
heard in sick-chamber. There seemed no hope whatever of recovery, “'Thou
shalt die and not live” IW. The wonderful deliverance which
God can grant. The disease, of a mortal kind and malignant character,
would prove fatal unless the healing power of God should interpose. 1.
Deliverance given through prayer. Not like Ahab, Hezekiah prayed unto the Lord,
“turned his face to the wall” (2 Ki. xx. 3), to conceal fervency of devotion
from attendants, looking in direction of temple, or in solemn meditation. The
prayer of this righteous man availed much. “ Afore Isaiah was gone out ar the


HOMILFTIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (cHaP. xxx™m


i





middle court, the word of the Lord came to him, saying, Turn again, and tell
Hezekiah, ... I have heard thy prayer, seen thy tears: behold, I will heal thee,”
de. (2 Ki. xx. 4-7). A cluster of figs, an Eastern remedy, applied to the king’s
tumour and instant relief ensued. 2. Deliverance with miraculous signs. Recovery
so unlooked for that Hezekiah, like Ahaz, asked for some token to confirm
belief in the prophet’s word, Sign specified granted to him. Shadow of the
sun went back upon the dial of Ahaz ten degrees. Fifteen years were added to
his life. In three days he appeared in the temple, and “the almost funeral
dirge of his sick-chamber was then blended with the praise of triumphant thanks-
giving with which he returns to the living world of joyous human voices and
sounding music, rejoicing in the Living Source of all life, and looking forward
to the hope of transmitting the truth to children yet unborn” [Stanley].


Hezexian’s Test any Farture.—Verses 25, 26 and 31.


Soon after Hezekiah’s recovery an embassy from Babylon sent to Jerusalem,
to ascertain the internal resources of the country, to inquire as sages into the
astronomical wonder with which Hezekiah’s restoration was connected, to form
an alliance with him, or to join in general homage of surrounding nations,
Whatever the object of the visit, it was famous in the city and a moral test to
the king. I. Hezekiah’s sins. “ His heart was lifted up” in vanity and
ingratitude. 1. By vain display of his treasures. Flattered by the honour,
Hezekiah showed the ambassadors his precious things, regalia, hereditary treasures
belonging to the crown ; his armoury and warlike stores ; and “there was nothing
in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah showed them not.” 2. By
motives of worldly policy. All this display evidently that the deputies might be
more induced to prize his friendship and treat him as an ally on equal terms.
3. By uiter forgetfulness of God. ‘‘ Hezekiah rendered not again according to
the benefit done to him.” Not a word said for God who had so signally blessed
him to foreigners, All about his own house and kingdom. God displeased, his
will opposed to all coquetting with foreign powers; the prophet predicts a darker
prospect. Those treasures carefully accumulated would become the prey of a
new power. Babylon had solicited friendship and would end by enforcing
slavery. We can never pay our debt, but should ever acknowledge it. ‘ What
shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits towards me?” II. Hezekiah’s
humiliation. “ Hezekiah humbled himself.” Isaiah’s searching questiona
and awful predictions not without effect. King and city mourned as guilty
together. Respite was granted and divine judgment not executed during his
lifetime. “So that the wrath of the Lord come not upon them in the days
of Hezekiah.”


Tests oF Moran OCnaracter.—Verse 31.


God looks more narrowly into our ways than the world or the church—will
purify us and {it for service by trial—never rests satisfied with a well-ordered
kingdom, or well-ordered house, but seeks to set up a loftier standard in a well-
ordered /eart and upright life. I, Moral tests in their means. Wealth
and worldly prosperity ; domestic happiness and numerous offspring; sickness,
popularity ; great victories and heavy afflictions; suspension of grace and
withdrawment of comfort. Tests applied to Abraham, Job, and Peter.
II. Moral tests in their design. “To try him that he might know
all that was in his heart.” “Lord, show me myself,” was the prayer of
one. Satan tempts to sin; God tries men to make them conscious of real
self ; to discover qualities of heart and character. Self-knowledge often partial,
part not al/ known ; always needful and always difficult to attain ; only acquired


to Ebe penool of God, by peculiar discipline. “God left him.” III. Moral


CHAP. Xxxm1.}


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


a ee


tests in their results.
fied ; failure in Hezekiah’s case.
Hezekiah more than mortal if


Sometimes virtues and worth confirmed and puri-
From which learn—1l. The insufficiency of man.
he could stand. Highly commended, much to


encourage and rejoice in past deeds; aided by clear teaching of prophet, yet fell
from simplicity of faith. When left of God the strongest falls. 2. The need of
divine interposition, This failure the proof that the blessings which were to
come to all nations could not be realised through any king, priest, or prophet,


not even through the dispensation itself,
Mosaic law. Tendencies in man’s soul w


Not by progressive amelioration under


hich could not be thus eradicated ; in-


creasing sin, signal failures pressing on the world which could not be removed.


In Judea and in Gentile nations “all
burning heat” (Jas. i. 11)


A higher order of
good Nac |


flesh grass,” fading away beneath “ the
r of divine justice.
“righ’e us servant shall justify many.”


3. The glory of God's mercy. A
God’s displeasure removed in Christ.


things introduced, and God magnified for his abundant


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 20. Hez’s prayer in 2 Kings
xix. 15-19; but no distinct mention of
Is. Hez. asked him to pray (ver. 4). In
affliction personal prayer needed. Good
to get others to join. Two better than
one. Isaiah here performs the function
of minister, sick visitor, and physician.
Signs given to Hez. In life God ac
counted him righteous, and gave him
(a)a good conscience, (5) success in
work, best proofs of divine favour. In
sickness a special sign in answer to
prayer, and in which Hez. read a moral
lesson.


Vers. 27-31. Hez.’s wealth. 1. How


he secured it. 2. What he did with
it. 3. What influence it had upon
him. “In all time of our wealth,
good Lord deliver us.”

Vers. 32, 33. Hez.’s death and burial.
1. His death appointed. Though life
prolonged, yet its length decreed. None
exempt. Death ends joys, sorrows, and
probation. Preparation the solemn
duty of all. 2. His burial a national
honour. Funeral marked with un-
usual respect. Royal tribe of Judah
and whole population of Jerusalem
present, and a marked epoch in royal)
interments.


ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXXII.


Vers. 1, 2. War. We possess in
duplicate, on the Taylor cylinder, found
at Nineveh in 1830, and now in the
British Museum, and on the Bull-
inscription of Kouyunjik, Senna-
cherib’s own account of the stages
of his campaign [Driver's Is.].

Vers. 6-8. Cowrageous. Leonidas,
at the Straits of Thermopyle, was not
afraid with 400 men to oppose Xerxes,
the invade of Greece, at the head of a
million. Wiliam Tell, with a handful
of adherents, boldly resisted the
Austrian multitude and repulsed it.


Virtue is bold, and goodness never fear-
ful.”’


Ver. 10. Trust. The practice of


Egypt was to pretend friendship, to
hold out hopes of support, and then to
fail in time of need [ Speak. Com. ].

Ver. 18. Jews speech. Hez.’s repre-
sentatives desire Rab. to speak in
Aramaic, the language of commerce,
and probably of diplomacy in the Hast.
But his aim is to produce an impres-
sion upon the multitude, and he insists
on using Hebrew. His speech breathes
the spirit which pervades all the repre-
sentations of Assyrian power.

Ver. 21. Cut off. The deliverance
was complete and final. The Assyrian
king at once returned, and, according
to Jewish tradition, wrecked his ven-
geance on the Israelite exiles whom he
found in Mesopotamia (Tobit i. 18)

299


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





He was the list of the great Assyrian
conquerors. No Assyrian host again
ever crossed Jordan, Within a few
years from that time the Assyrian
power suddenly vanished from the
earth { Staley].

Ver. 25. Rendered not. Ingratitude


(cmap. exxmz.





without any endeavour to acknowledge
or repay it. It is too base to return a
kindness and too proud to regard it
[South].


st A grateful mind


‘By owing owes not, but still pays, af once


Indebted and discharged ” { A/i/ton},


is an insensibility of kindness received





OHAPTER XXXII,


Criricaz Norzs.] This chapter is parallel with 2 Ki. xxi., yet differs in omitting some
things and adding new matter, especially in central part. Impiety of Man. (vers. 1-10);
his captivity and repentance (vers. 11-17); his end (vers. 18-20), Amon (vers. 21-25).

Vers. 1-10.—Manasseh’s revival of idolatry. Named after a tribe of Israel, born after
his father’s recovery. Evil, through influence of those around him. Ver. 3. Buslt (2 Ki,
xviii. 4); groves, one in 2 Ki. xxi. 3-7, that which was intruded into the temple. Ver. 4.
House, i.e., within precincts of temple and inits courts (ver. 5). Ver. 6. Th ough fire, like
Ahaz (xxviii. 3); observed, bewitched with an evil eye; enchantments, serpent charms;
accustomed to all the black exts of the day. Ver. 7. Carved, in Ki. wooden stock of
Ashtoreth. Ver. 8. Appointed, fixed. Wer. 9. Err, by example and conduct. Ver. 10.
Spake, iull account 2 Ki. xxi. 10-16.

Vers. 11-17,—-Manasseh’s cap. and repentance. Thorns, among which he hid himself
for refuge (1 Sam. xiii. 6); some ‘‘ among the living,” 4.e., took him alive; others ‘‘ which
took M. cap. with rings.” Ver. 12. Besought, lit. ‘stroked or amoothed the face of the
Lord ” (ef, Hx. xxxii. 11; 1 Sam. xili.11; 1 Ki. xiii. 6; Dam ix. 13). Ver. 14. Wail, re-
built or repaired. Gihon, xxxii.4; fishgate, near N.E. corner ef lower city; went round
to Ophel. Ver. 15. Strange (vers. 3-5); idol of ver.7, Ver. 16. Repaired, desecrated, or
damaged altar. Ver. 17. High places (xxxi. 1), prohibited that there might be one
national altar.

Vers. 18-20.—Manasseh’s end. Prayer, preserved in some MSS. of Sept., no claim to be
considered the genuine utterance of Jewish king. The composition of an Hellenistic
Jew, well acquainted with the Sept., writing at a time probably not much anterior to the
Christian Era [Sp ak. Com.], Ver. 19. Seers, of Hozai (marg.), a prophet of the time,
Ver. 20. House, fuller in 2 Ki. xxi, 18. Reason not known.

Vers, 21-25.—Amon’s reign and end. A. re-established the idolatries which his father
put aside; met the fate of Joash and Amaziah from his servants, at whose death executive
government was suspended.


HOMILETICS.
Manassen’s WICKEDNESS.—Verses 1~9,


Hezekiah’s reformation not completed by successors, lost its influence upon
manners of people. Corruption and vice increased and openly practised by
degenerate leaders. Young king trained up in idolatry and introduced
abominations when he became ruler. I, Wickedness determined in its
Spirit. “He wrought much wickedness.” A liberal patron and zealous adept
in Chaldean arts and imposture. Multiplied sins privately and publicly. De-
termined, energetic, and violent in his career. Did wickedness “ with both hands
earnestly.” II. Wickedness awfulin its extent. Upset his father’s
reforms, increased idolatrous customs, raised soothsayers to dignity in his
coutt ioe the land with altars of Baal, and outraged all decency


‘CHAP. xxxmt.]9 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


eC Ch Ht RMR]


by putting an image of Asherah in the very precincts of the temple dedicated
to the true worship of God. III. Wickedness. exceptional in its nature.
He practised sorcery and necromancy, and restored the fires of Tophet. “He
made Judah do worse than the heathen.” He became a cruel persecutor, and
his reign a reign of terror. Streets of Jerusalem ran with innocent blood. “ His
name became in Jewish annals the synonym of infamy ” (cf. 2 Ki. xxi. 16). Sins
terrible in themselves, inexcusable in Manasseh, and most fruitful of evil!
IV. Wickedness unchecked by Divine warnings. “The Lord spake to
M. and to his people, but they would not hearken” (ver. 10). God about to
destroy, not build and defend the city! “Line and plummet” threatened.
Destruction would be entire and unhindered by any destroying angel. People
taken away as “a prey and a spoil.” M. himself a captive in chains and
carried to Babylon. A punishment deserved, sent in mercy, and brought
repentance and restoration.


MANASSEH’S REPENTANCE.—Verses 10-18.


Exact time of Manasseh’s confinement in dungeon of Babylon not known,
but narrative one of deepest interest, one which reveals the glory of un-
paralleled mercy. “The hardships, the loneliness, the disgrace of captivity
were good for M.” J. An exception in youthful experience. “The re-
markable distinction of his career is that he is the only case clearly recorded
in the Scriptures of a youth breaking away from the restraints and example
of a religious parentage, who was recovered by the grace of God, and brought
to repentance” [A. Phelps, D.D.]. II. It was sincere in its character.
The misery and solitude of prison led to calm reflection. 1. His humility was
great. The iron entered his soul. He recalled the days of childhood, thought
of scenes of blood and cries of the murdered. The stars of heaven, which he
had sinfully worshipped, shone in the dark prison to remind him of his guilt.
He saw the vileness of his actions and the evil of his heart. ‘“ He humbled
himself greatly.” 2. His prayer was earnest. He humbly besought God for
pardon; implored for opportunity to evince the sincerity of his sorrow. God
heard, and restored him; “was entreated of him, and heard his supplication,
and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom.” [II, It was per-
manent in its results, On his return he exerted himself to the uttermost
to correct errors of his reign, and establish the worship of God in former purity
and splendour. 1. He was concerned for the temporal welfare of the kingdom.
Repaired the old walls of the city, added a new one; surrounded and fortified
the hill of Ophel; strengthened, garrisoned, and provisioned “ the fenced cities
of Judah.” 2. He endeavoured to practise and promote religion among the,
people. In remembrance of former evils, among multitudes who had been
former associates, and perhaps amid scoffs and taunts of ignominious capture
and disgraceful imprisonment, he purged the land and the temple from
idolatry; repaired the altar of Jehovah, and sacrificed peace-offerings upon it,
and “commanded Judah to serve the Lord God of Israel.” IV. It is most
encouraging to others. A wonderful display of God’s mercy. A proof “ that
the Divine mercy,” says Stanley, “far exceeds the Divine vengeance, and that
even from the darkest reprobation the free will of man and the grace of God
may achieve a deliverance. If Manasseh could be restored, there was no one
against whom the door of repentance and restitution was finally closed.”


MANASSEH’S LIFE AND ITS LESSONS.


I. That the sins of parents arrested in one generation may appear
in another. As diseases pass over some, and reappear in others, so wicked-


801


HOMMETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (CHAP. XXXII


Be a pe ae ee


ness, thought to be extinct, assumes its virulence, and brings forth its fruit.
II. That when children of godly parents sin they often become worse
than others. M. went further, and more guilty of excess, than heathens
around him. ‘“M. seduced them to do more evil than did the nations whom
the Lord destroyed before the children of Israel.” III. That God exercises
providential checks to prevent these sins. Thus far, men can only go.
The end often distant, but certain, when God designs to restore. 1. To fulfil
his covenant. 2. To illustrate his mercy. Paul obtained mercy as a pattern
to others, a form sketch to imitate, to be filled up by others (1 Tim. i. 16).
8. To reveal his nature. “Then M. knew that the Lord He was God.” IV.
That in the conversion of M. we have encouragement to labour and
pray for the salvation of sinners. Give none up in despair. God’s power
omnipotent, and his grace sufficient. Augustine, Newton, Bunyan, &c. This
should be the theme of preaching as it is the doctrine of Scripture. After
teaching theology for forty years, the elder Alexander said: “The longer J
live, the more I incline to sum up my theology in the single sentence, ‘ Christ
Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.’ ”


HEZEKIAH AND MANASSEH: A CONTRAST.


We have in end of one and beginning of the other a magnificent sunset and
a sunrise of quite an opposite description. A good father and king closing life
in Hezekiah; a bad son and successor commencing life in Manasseh. I. Con-
sider Hez. and what we learn about him. 1. That genuine goodness shall not
want appropriate record and remembrance. 2. God the inspirer of goodness in
the hearts of men will not forget it. 3. The beneficiaries of goodness will not
be unmindful of their benefactors. 4. Sympathetic imitators will mirror forth
their goodness from whom they have derived its idea and impulse. II. Now
turn to Man and what the history says about him. 1. A youthful king.
2. A long reign. 8. A life of great wickedness. Application: 1. What may
parents learn from the son of such a father? Hez. hoarded up wealth for his
son. Did he undervalue the moral element in him? 2. What may subjects
learn from the successor of such a king? Not to trust religion to princes who
may be alternately reformers and destroyers [J. Spencer Hill].


LESSONS FROM THE LIFE oF THREE KINGS.—Verses 21-25.


I, Manasseh. There is no limit to the mercy of God. Sinners chief, welcome
to complete forgiveness. If only great saints got into heaven great sinners
would lose hope. But when we see M. and men like him going in and getting
welcome, there is hope for us. If we follow their steps in repentance, we shall
be permitted to join their company in rest.

II. Amon. Beware of turning the riches of God’s grace into a snare. As
Manasseh’s case is recorded in the Bible that an aged sinner desiring to turn
may not be cast into despair, Amon’s case, recorded beside it, that the young
may not delay an hour, lest they perish for ever.

III. None will be lost or saved in consequence of anything in our parents.
Amon saw his father born again when old, but the son did not inherit his
father’s goodness. Josiah the child of an ungodly parent, yet he became a godly
child. Two lessons plainly written in the history—one to make presumptuous
humble, the other to give despairing hope: (1) a converted father cannot secure
the safety of an unconverted son; (2) an unconverted father cannot drag down
a child in his fall if that child follows the Lord [W. Arnot, “ Fam. Treasury ”].


302


CHAP, XXXII]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


o/s
HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.1. Reigned fifty-and-five years.
1. For the punismment of people’s sins.
2. That he might have time enough
to amend his own life. 3. That in
him, as afterwards in Paul, “ God
might show forth all longsuffering ”


[Trapp].


Ver. 8. Israel fixed in God’s house
and in the land. 1. Fixed by God’s
appointment, not their own choice or
preference. 2. Fixed conditionally.
“Only if they will observe, &c.” 3.
Ejected by violation of conditional
promise.


Ver. 9. M. seduced. The power of
example. Ahaz. abandoned worship of
God, but did not seduce generality of
his subjects. Manasseh’s influence
carried the whole nation with him
into idolatry. Evil examples like pes-
tilential diseases.


Vers. 11-13. M.’s conversion. 1.
Affliction its occasion. This designed.
“They shall come with weeping, and
with supplications will I lead them.”
“When the rod spoke he heard it
(Mic. vi. 9) who would not hear the
word (vy. 10). God sent him into the
dungeon to repent; as he did David
into the depths, and Jonah into the
whale’s belly to pray. Adversity hath
whipt many a soul into heaven, which
otherwise prosperity had coached to
hell” [Trapp]. 2. Prayer its accom-
paniment. “ He besought the Lord.”
“His affections, like Ben-hadad’s best
counsellors, sent M. with a cord about
his neck, to the merciful King of Is-
rael” [Trapp]. 38. Amendment its
fruits. Complete reversal of former
policy; zeal in destruction of idols, and
in worship of God; public example
and encouragement to others to do
right. “‘ Fruits meet for repentance.”


Ver. 17. People did sacrifice. The
force of habit. (a) To withstand good
example; (b) To resist religious in-
fiuences; and (c) To despise Divine
warnings. Easier to corrupt than to
reform men, and difficult to break


off evil customs and forsake religious
superstitions,


Vers. 17,18. A dark day anda bright
sunset. Hereisan unostentatious, un-
honoured, and unepitaphed grave, We
have to trace in this case a sunrise of
promise, soon obscured with clouds of
guiltandcrime. These clouds burst in
floods of penitence and sorrow. A
meridian of sudden brilliancy follows.
The sky clears, and the orb of a
chequered life sats cloudless and serene
on the hills of Judah. Standing by
his grave, let us consider—I, Manas-
seh’s sin. Look at (1) His early train-
ing. Hezekiah would well bring him
up; (2) The baneful influence his creed
and example had on his sujects; (3)
His repeated and obdurate rejection
of Divine warning. II. His conver-
sion. His dungeon became the gate of
heaven. Note here the wonderful
power of sanctified affliction. III. His
new life. The grand test of the reality
of conversion is the regenerated being.
The tree is known hy its fruits. We
read that when God brought him
again to Jerusalem into his kingdom,
“then M. knew that the Lord He was
God” [Dr. Macduff].


Ver. 20. Buried in house, “in the
garden of his own house” (2 Ki. xxi.
18). The sepulchre in the garden (cf.
Jno. xix, 41).


Vers. 21-25. Amon trespassed more
and more, lit., multiplied trespasses.
1. He began early. Early in age and
in reign. Only twenty-two, only two
yearsin Jerusalem. 2. He did much in
the time. To do good much effort,
time, and sacrifice required. Easy to
do evil, which spreads quickly and
makes a harvest in short season.
“How then was Manasseh dead? In
what sense was Manasseh buried?
Here is an active boy who has caught
his mantle, and is working with re-
doubled industry ” [Dr. Parker]. “The
evil that men do lives after them.”


303


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





(CHAP. XXXIV.





ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXXIIl.


Vers. 1—7. Did evil. It was the
misfortune of Manasseh to pass the
most critical period of his life, the
transition from youth to manhood, in
an atmosphere so fraught with moral
corruption, unfavourable to the forma-
tion of manly sentiments, holy pur-
poses, and virtuous habits—a court,
the court of a youth, himself the vic-
tim of a deadly miasma; the beams of
his own glory exhaled under such in-
fluences, and the better impressions
of earlier teachings were speedily
erased; and he emerges into notice a
worldling and an idolater, a stain
upon his country’s annals, for fifty
years a scourge and corrupter, him-
self at last saved, but only “in the
furnace of affliction” and “so as by
fire” [Rev. R. Hallam, D.D.].


Vers. 11—13. When in affliction.
Methinks I hear God say, Take this
medicine; it is exactly fitted to the
case, prepared and weighed by my
own hands. Adam’s (Priv. Thoughts)
sin the disease, Christ the physician,
pain the medicine [Cecil]. By pain
God drives me to prayer, teaches me


what prayer is, inclines me to pray
[Adams].


“Prayer is a creature’s strength, his
breath and being;
Prayer is the golden key that can open the


wicket of mercy.”


very


Vers. 21—24. Did evil. M. might
repent and reform—ay, and be ac-
cepted by God; but could he undo the
consequences—the effects upon others
—of his life and wickedness? May as
well expect to prevent the appearance
of disease after having used every
effort to spread infection. The father
may turn to God in true sorrow, but
the son he begat shall follow in his
parent’s course of evil and never turn
from it. Oh, how fearful a thing is
sin! If we put our hands to it, we
know not what we do. The thought
of the irrevocable, irremediable con-
sequences of sin should help to keep
us from sinning [M. J.].


“How many, all weak and withered of their
force,
Wait out the verge of dark eternity,
Like stranded wrecks!”


CHAPTER XXXIV.


Critica, Notes.] This and next chapter give history of Josiah, and parallel with 2 Ki. xxi.


and xxiii. 1-30.


Josiah’s good beginning (vers. 1-7); cleanses temple (vers. 8-13); finds a copy


of the law (vers. 14-17); which is read by Shaphan (vers. 18-22); Huldah’s message (vers. 23-28);


J. reads the law to the elders (vers, 29-33).


Vers, 1-7.—Js good beginning. Walked, declined neither to right hand nor left: honourable contrast


to predecessors.
Ver. 4. Images, sun statues (marg.), xiv. 3.
of crimes of inmates.
xxiii, 13-20). Ver. 6. Cities of Mana.
if not completely broken.
whole land of Is. [Speak. Com.].


Ver. 3. Young, fifteen or sixteen years old. Jewish youths in majority at thirteen.
Dust (Ex. xxxii. 20.) Strewed, as if graves guilty
Burnt, greatest infamy to disinter bones of idolatrous priests (cf. 2 Ki.
The power of Assyria now (B.c. 629-624) greatly weakened
J., it is evident, asserted and maintained a claim to authority over the
Mattocks, ‘‘in their dry (desolate) places” (cf. Ps. cix. 10).


Ver. 7. He had, king himself went in person and purified the land.


Vers. 8-13.—Temple repaired. Purged, first cleansed, then repaired (2 Ki. xxiii. 4).


Shp, Wile.


and J. sent to report progress; repair, carry on the work. Ver. 9. Money collected in temple and


in all parts of Judah and Is.
304


Ver. 10. Workmen, overseers or superintendents (2 Ki. xxii. 5).


CHAP. xxxIvi.} HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
A
i


Eastern people only work under overseers. Ver. 11. Couplings, beams to bind the house and
support joists. Floor, to rafter chambers surrounding temple or outbuildings attached to courts.
Ver. 12, Faithfully, skillfully and diligently. Ver. 13. Scribes, now designating a class, a distinct
division of Levitical body.


Vers. 14-22.—Discovery of a copy of the law. Found, probably an original copy of Pentateuch.
Ver. 15. The boo, the temple copy, kept in most holy place (Deut. xxxi. 26). Shaphan the
scribe able to read it. ‘If this were the very autograph of Moses or his scribe, it would not be
more than 830 years old. Manuscripts exist of nearly twice this age” [Murphy]. Ver. 16. S.
took the book to king and reported the work (2 Ki. xxii. 9). Ver. 17. Gathered, emptied out of
a chest into a bag. Ver. 19. Rent, in distress of mind. Ver. 21. Enquire, from a prophet.
Agitated feelings prompted J. to seek immediate counsel to avert curses under which his kingdom
lay. Huldah, keeper of wardrobe, priestly or royal garments; she dwelt in college, second part or
suburb of city (cf. Neh. xi. 9; Zeph. i. 10).


Vers. 23-28.—Message of Huldah. Tell, oracular response, in which justice is blended with
mercy, announcing impending evil to overtake the city and its inhabitants. Very likely such
places as Ley. xxvi. and Deut. xxviii-xxxii. were read to the king. Ver. 27. Heard, wrath
delayed and prayer of king heard on account of penitence.


Vers. 29-33.—Public reading of the law. King does what he can to bring people to penitence.
Elders, representatives of the nation. Read, caused to be read aloud before the whole assembly.
Ver. 31. Place, upon his pillar, covenanted with his subjects to keep commandments and walk
after the Lord. Ver. 33. Took away. Completes purgation of the land, is followed by the people
in outward reformation during his lifetime; but the special mission of Jeremiah in earlier ministry
to rebuke the error and urge real change of heart and life (cf. Jer. vii. 3, 4, 21-24).


HOMILETICS.
JOSIAH, OR EARLY PIETY.—Verses 1-13.


What Hezekiah had accomplished was soon undone by successors, Manasseh
and Amon. Manasseh brought down God’s judgment for present and awful
threatenings for future. Destruction not averted, but delayed. God’s goodness
and longsuffering displayed. Josiah mounts the throne, and even in youth
shows the power of true religion, and the blessings which it gives to its posses-
sor. I. Displayed in seeking God in youth. “For in the eighth year of
his reign, while he was yet young, &c.” A minor till thirteen years old, he
sought God, in three years after he attained majority. Probably devout and
prayerful before this. No difficulty in young persons serving God. Joseph,
Samuel, David, and Timothy. Boys may evince beautiful character, and give
promise of virtuous life. Beza thanked God, in his last will and testament,
that he became a Christian at the age of sixteen. ‘‘ Those that seek me early
shall find me.” II. Displayed in the administration of his kingdom.
“Tn the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem.” 1. He purged
the temple. In the long reign of his idolatrous grandfather, and short but
wicked rule of his father, the temple neglected and out of repair—dilapidated
and deserted for the gods of heathenism, Concerned for God’s glory and God’s
house—sought to make temple attractive and restore it to former beauty.
2. He cleansed the land. Altars of Baal overturned, images broken down and
turned to dust, and groves uprooted. The shrines of idols forsaken and
obliterated, The land cleansed and the worship of temple restored and per-
formed with scrupulous obedience. JII. Displayed with undeviating con-
sistency. “Declined neither to the right hand nor to the left.” Not satisfied
with first impressions, first convictions, and first feelings towards God, but
reformed the wrong and “ did that which was right.” Surrounded by profli-
gate courtiers, opposed by unprincipled men, he was earnest, decided, persever-
ing, and consistent. ‘He began to seek,” continued and spent a whole life in
setting things right through length and breadth of his kingdom. One of the

805


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. © (CHAP. XXxxtv.





first, he was one of the most zealous converts. Judah never had a more
devoted and earnest prince.


JOSIAH THE YOUNG REFORMER.


I. Reform originated by personal:agency. Personal efforts of king and
priests, elders and officers of the court. Good laws, rekigious institutions, help-
ful, required and not to be ignored; but moral influence essentially personal.
Good men, earnest reformers—originate good laws and good institutions—the
means of revivals and extensive reforms. Luther, Whitfield, and Wesley.
II. The object of reform to restore the worship of God in the land.
Not commerce or education even—not to introduce any new religion, but revive
the old, pure religion which God instituted at first. J. destroyed the evil and
fostered the good; secured workmen and overseers to repair the temple in
great numbers. We are addicted to idolatry, to love the creature more than
the Creator; but God will have no rival, should have the chief place in our
hearts and lives, in our temples and kingdoms. III. Reform was regulated
by the principles of God’s Word. Engaged in the work, he was stimulated
by the discovery of the law. Henceforth he acted with greater intelligence
and reverence for the book. Great reforms have always been preceded and
accompanied by study of God’s Word. In days of Isaiah and Ezra people
brought to penitence and prayer by reading of Script. The Reformation
prepared by the translations of Tyndale and Wycliffe. The germ of the great
movement in days of Whitfield and Wesley, in the “ Holy Club,” a meeting of
a few students and tutors to study the Greek Testament in Oxford University.
Bible study and Christian activity now joined together. ‘“ Have a Bible always
about you,” was Wesley’s injunction. Follow not what is fashionable, prev-
alent, and convenient, but what is right in the sight of the Lord.


THE DISCOVERY OF THE Book.—Verses 14-21.


The Book of the Law found is no other than the temple copy, which was
deposited beside the ark in the holy of holies (Deut. xxxi. 25, 26), and during
the ungodly reigns of Manasseh and Amon, perhaps under Ahaz, when the
temple itself had been profaned by idols, and as we may infer from 2 Chr.
xxxv. 3, the ark also removed from its place, was somehow lost, and was now
found again during the repair of the temple [Keil]. I. The Scriptures may
be lost for a season. If not actually lost, hidden away and forgotten. The
Bible lost by wilful neglect to read; by mere attention to the letter and not
the spirit; by criticising and dissecting it as if the production of man; by every
abuse of it, though beasting of it possession. JI. When found and rightly
read, the Scriptures will quicken spiritual life. Its discovery a complete
surprise to the king, who “ rent his clothes,” studied the book himself, and read
it to others. “It is possible that it may have been a mere rediscovery, like the
revival of the Pandects at Amalfi, like the revival of the Hebrew and Greek text
of the Bible at the Reformation. But, in either case, this sudden appearance of
the Law amounted almost to a new revelation” [Stanley]. 1. It reminded
of neglected duty. Duties of prophets, priests, and kings set forth in the
volume, concerning religious and political unity, the destruction of high places
and obedience to Jehovah. ‘ All that which is written concerning us.” 2. Jt
produced a sense of guilt. “Our fathers have not hearkened unto the words
of this book.” Curse pronounced on apostasy pierces the king’s heart; he rends
garments and bows down in deep sorrow before God. 3. It gave insight into


306


‘CHAP. xxx1v.1 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





God’s service. “ Enquire of the Lord.” The enquiry revealed the moral con-
dition of the nation and urged the necessity of reform. “There was still a
higher purpose which the ‘Second Law’ served, a still nobler spirit in which
Moses might be said to have risen again in the days of Josiah, to promulgate
afresh the code of Sinai. Novw, for the first time, the love of God, as the chief
ground of his dealing with his people—the love towards God as the ground of
their service to him—the spiritual character a free choice of that servico—
were urged on the nation with all the force of Divine and human authority ”
[Stanley]. 4. It stimulated to vigorous activity. King active before, more so
after discovery. Not deterred by stern message from Huldah. Rulers of
people inspired, if not with the spirit of penitence, yet with the burning zeal
that destroys the monuments of idolatry and repeats the deeds of Elijah.
III. Hence, when a right sense of duty is created by reading the
Scripture, a revival of religion will ensue. Spiritual sensibility was main-
tained in the king’s profession and elevation. In the personal life of the
leaders, the religious worship of the temple and the government of the nation.
Political reforms and ameliorations beneficial when a spirit of piety pervades
the people, and the nation fears God. Regard to God’s will the secret of
prosperous churches, happy governments, and genuine revivals. As indi-
viduals, churches, and nation, how do we treat the Bible? Is it losing or keep-
ing its hold upon our religion, our manners and customs? “ Hear ye the word
of the Lord, ye that tremble (with holy awe) at His word” (Is. lxvi. 5).


THE LOSS OF THE SCRIPTURES.


Consider what we should lose if we were to part with the Christian Scrip-
tures, and with all the institutions and blessings for which we are indebted to
them. I. In the loss of the Bible and its fruits, we should lose the knowledge
of the true God. History proves this beyond reasonable dispute. God must
speak, or man does not find him. Mankind needs a book to keep alive in the
earth the knowledge of a spiritual and personal God. II. By the loss of the
Seriptures and their results from the knowledge of mankind, we should lose
sooner or later our institutions of benevolence. Benevolence on a large scale,
and in the form of permanent institutions, and for all classes of mankind, is a
Biblical idea. III. In the loss of the Bible and its fruits, we should sooner or
later suffer the loss of our institutions for popular education. Culture has
existed without a revelation from heaven. Schools are not the product of the
Bible only. But it is beyond question that popular education is of Bible origin.
Other than Christian religions build themselves on the ignorance of the
masses. IV. By the loss of the Scriptures and their creations, we should
sooner or later part with our institutions of civil liberty. History shows that
the great charter of freedom in the world is the Word of God. The great free
nations of the earth are the great Christian nations [A. Phelps, O. T. a
Living Book].


EARLY PIETY AND ITS ADVANTAGES.


I. Enlightened piety consists in seeking God. J. “while yet young
began to seek after God.” God the object of all religion. To seek his favour,
presence, glory, the end of rational and immortal beings. The essence of sin
to deny, dishonour, and disobey God. 1. In seeking earnestly. Not enough to
think, talk, and argue about God. Seek as after riches, “he that seeketh
findeth.” 2. In seeking promptly. J. delayed not. Jehovah had kept him
from influence of corruption, from passing through the fire in his father’s


307


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. (cuap. xxx1v.





reign; but this satisfied not, he sought higher knowledge, “began” early and
promptly “to seek God.” 38. In seeking perseveringly. In youthful inex-
perience, surrounded with temptations and hindered with disadvantages, he
pursued “that which was right with decided steps,” “declined neither tu the
right hand nor to the left.” II, Seeking God early will conduce to
honour. In temporal things it tends to health, reputation, and long life; in
spiritual and eternal more advantageous. 1. It keeps alive religious suscepti-
bilities. “ His heart was tender,” not only in the ardour and sensibility of
youth, but in maturity of age, crowned with regal honours and surrounded by
worldly pleasures. 2. It saves from snares. Temptations like wind, spring
from every quarter. Exposed in company and in solitude, in God’s house and
in our own—always exposed. Business, pleasure, and companions may become
a snare. But great risks in youth. Religion alone can preserve. 3. It brings
eminent usefulness in life. Power in patience, love, courage, and action;
influence over others in relations of life; safety in position. Self-willed
monarchs have brought destruction on themselves and ruin on kingdoms. 4. It
prepares for happy death. J. honoured in age and lamented in death. Virtues
which led to prosperity cherished, and vices which tended to poverty escaped. -
Converted in early morning, his day bright, his work accomplished. Few sins
to bewail at last, no remorse, no sins of youth to fill his bones with pain; his
end, though mysterious, peaceful and triumphant. “Godliness profitable to
all things, &c.”


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver.3. The character of Josiah. I. but to begin ‘to seek.’ What sug-


He began to serve God at a very early
period of life. II. He proceeded in
his career with extraordinary zeal and
diligence. III. He was as zealous in
promoting piety as in suppressing vice.
IV. In all he did he adhered strictly
to the Word of God [Rev. C. Simeon].
Learn—I. That a child may begin to
serve God early. II. That a child may
serve God when the world is most
attractive. Moses, David, Josiah. III.
That when a child begins to serve
God early he will be likely to become
honourable and useful. “ Train up a
child in the way he should go, and
when he is old he will not depart from
it.” A lesson—I. To the young. Avoid
the wrong and “do that which is
right.” 2. To parents and guardians
of youth. Wook well to rising genera-
tion. The welfare of families, churches,
and the-nation depends upon their
training. ‘“ That of all men we meet
with, nine parts out of ten are what
they are, good or bad, useful or not,
according to their education ” [Locke].
Began to seek. ‘Sweet words are
these!—to ‘begin;’ not only to begin,


308


gestions of modesty, lowliness, and
insignificance of effort! What deter-
mination expressed in simple patience!
No violence, no demonstrativeness,
nothing of ostentation, but inquiry,
waiting, expectancy, a look that means
I know not from what part of the
heavens the Lord may come, but from
some point he will presently descend,
and it is for me to seek, to be prepared
to receive him” [Dr. Parker]. The
verse contains a description—I. Of
our moral condition; without God. 2.
Of essential principles of all religion;
seeking God. 3. Of true prayer; ear-
nest desire for God, not cold asking,
formal seeking, &c. The words also
describe the way to (1) eminent piety;
(2) eminent consistency; (3) eminent
usefulness.

Ver. 18. Scribes. Hitherto desig-
nation of a class, officers of state, who
mustered troops and managed finances
(cf. 2 Sam. viii. 17; xx. 25; 2 Ki, xii.
10; Is. xxxiii. 18). Here evdently a
new state of things—an order of scribes
forming a distinct division of Levitical
body. The class term first found in


cHaP. xxxiv.1 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





this passage, yet probably originated
in reign of Hezekiah, who employed
men to “copy out” uncollected pro-
verbs of Solomon (Prov. xxy. 1).
Probably to the rise of this class are
we indebted for preservation of many
prophecies belonging to MHezekiah’s
time, while works of previous prophets
—of Ahijah, Iddo, Shemaiah, Jehu son
of Hanani, and others—have perished
[Speak. Com.].

Ver. 14. Found a Book. 1. The
profound sensation created. 2. The
intense anxiety to know the truth.
The inquiry, personal reading, and
public exposition. 8. The need of the
Book now. To preserve religion, edu-
cate the race, and advance the cause
of God and humanity.

Vers. 23—28. The faithful message.
Notice—1. The estimate of the king.
“Tell the man.” Only a man, sinful
and mortal like other men. Kings
need to be told this truth. “I acknow-
ledge myself a mortal,” said Charles
V. Emperor. With God no respect of
persons. 2. The threatened judgment.
“JT will bring evil upon this place.”
No hiding, no toning down of unplea-
sant truths. 3. The procuring cause
of judgment. “They have forsaken
me.” Announcement to Manasseh
repeated with terrible significance to
Josiah. Repentance will not avail,
now too late to save guilty people.
“Wrath poured out and shall not be
quenched.”

Vers. 26—28. A tender spirit. Hul-
dah in first outburst of prophetic spirit
thinks only of the matter in hand, for-
getting the person of the inquirer; but
when that is past, and the stream flows
more smoothly, the thought of the
person occurs to her, “the King of
Judah” [Speak. Com.]. Here she
giveth him his just title, whom before
she had called “man.” Piety is no
enemy to civility [Trapp]. I. Give a
general account of a tender heart. 1.
It implies a quick and ready sense of
feeling in spiritual things—quickness





of apprehension, ready reflections of
conscience, a dispositon to be easily
affected. 2. A pliable disposition to
yield to Divine influences. II. The way
in which such a temper should express
itself. 1. In relation to the Word of
God. 2.In relation to sin. 3. In rela-
tion to providential events. 4. In rela-
tion to the honour of God. III. What
foundation is laid for such a temper
in Christianity. 1. Good men in the
ancient church were not strangers to
it. 2. The recompenses of the life to
come are more fully revealed. 3.
Richer discoveries of grace are made
to us. 4, Ceremonials have given way >
to substantials of religion. 5. The
softening spirit is more plentifully
communicated. IV. Inferences. 1.
Discern the difference between a truly
Christian temper and some things mis-
taken for it: it is not natural easiness
of disposition, not occasional tender-
ness. 2. Let us all seek after and cul-
tivate this tenderness of spirit. 3. If
conscious of its possession, take the
comfort of it as good evidence of a re-
newed and Christian state [Dr.Hvans].

Vers. .29—33. I. The public reading
of the Book. The Book exists; not
to be invented; only to be found, used,
understood, and obeyed. IJ. The mak-
ing of the solemn covenant. Made with
sincerity, ‘‘ with all his heart and with
all his soul;” made “to perform” in
Kings (xxiii. 2), “to stand to the
covenant.” Many forget and fall away.
III. The impression created upon the
people. The example of the king, re-
forms in the temple and solemn reso-
lution in open covenant. A restraint
for a season. No open idolatry, no
grove, nor Baal worship, yet super-
ficial, not deeply seated amendment.
Did not stand for personal purity and
loyal obedience. The mission of Jere-
miah in his early ministry to rebuke
and urge areal change. “ Except your
righteousness exceed the righteousness
of the Scribes and Pharisees.”


809


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.  tcuap. xxxtv.





ILLUSTRATIONS TO CHAPTER XXXIV.


Vers. 1—7. Hight years old. There
is at the top of the Queen’s staircase
in Windsor Castle a statue from the
studio of Baron Triqueti, of Edward
VI. marking with his sceptre a passage
in the Bible, which he holds in his left
hand, and upon which he earnestly
looks. The passage is concerning
Josiah. “J. was eight years old when
he began to reign . . . and walked in
all the way of David, his father, and
turned not aside to the right hand or
to the left.” The statue was erected
by the will of the late prince, who
intended it to convey to his son the
Divine principles by which the future
governor of England should mould his
life and reign on the throne of Great
Britain [T. Hughes].

Vers. 8—13. Men did work faithfully
(ver. 12). What we are accustomed to
decry as great social evils will, for the
most part, be found to be but the out-
growth of man’s own perverted life;
and though we may endeavour to cut
down and extirpate them by means of
law, they will only spring up again
with fresh luxuriance in some other
form, unless the conditons of personal
life and character are radically im-
proved. If this view be correct, then
it follows that the highest patriotism
and philanthropy consist, not so much
in altering laws and modifying insti-
tutions, as in helping and stimulating
men to elevate and improve themselves
by their own free and independent
individual action [Smiles]. We put
too much faith in systems and look
too little to men [B. Disraeli].

Vers. 14—22. The Bible the Saviour
of the Church. Men say that the Church
has saved the Bible. I say that the Bible
has saved the Church ten thousand
times over. You shall find that when
great questions come up in a commun-
ity churches do not go ahead. You
cannot make them. Churches are like


310


the baggage-waggons of an army.
They carry the provisions and indis-
pensable things; but, after all, bag-
gage-waggons never go first in a
march. And the Church is so busy
taking care of the things which it
carries that it has no time to devote to
new things that present themselves.
Reforms hardly ever originate in
churches. I am not speaking against
churches, I am merely putting them
where they put themselves, and saying
that tendencies to unusual conduct in
the application of gospel principles to
new questions are oftentimes ridiculed
by ministers, rejected from pulpits,
and refused places in conference meet-
ings, and stigmatised by church
members as being fanatical [H. W.
Beecher]. When we find the book of
the law, let us not shrink from finding
its judgments as well as its gospels.
The prophecies must all be fulfilled,
when they indicate that the wicked
shall be destroyed (ver. 25), shall be
driven away in the wrath of God. The
Bible is not all gospel; or where it is
all gospel it involves the element of
judgment and the certainty of doom
[Dr. J. Parker].

Ver. 33. Departed not. The multi-
tude “go at all adventures ” (Lev. xxvi.
21, marg.), careless of their ways, reck-
less of their end. It is with them
searcely worth looking into—whether
God is displeased or not; whether they
be walking in the narrow or broad
path, and what the end of that path
may be. Sometimes they come into the
world fresh from the influence of a
religious education. For a while they
yield alternately to their conscience and
their corruptions. They are touched a
moment under the convictions of the
word, or the corrections of the rod. Yet
the want of steadiness and consistency
soon sweeps all away into “ worse”
hardness than before [C. Bridge].


cHaP. xxxv.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


I


CHAPTER XXXV.


Critica Nores.] The preparations for the Passover (vers. 1-9); the actual celebration (vers.
10-19); Josiah’s defeat by Necho (vers. 20-27). 2 Ki. xxiii, 21-30 corresponds to this chap.


Vers. 1-9.—The preparation. Day not irregular, but time appointed (Ex. xii. 6). Priests
re-established in their courses and duties, as prescribed (cf. ch. xxix. Ds eexxx7 16) eee Viernes
Taught, instructed people in matters pertaining to worship. Put, for some reason removed during
repairs. Burden, ark once in its place, to remain; not to be carried about, as customary before
Temple built. Ver. 4. Prepare, other duties devolved upon them; they must attend with diligence
to regulations of public service (cf. 1 Chr. xxiii.-xxvi.). Ver. 5. A section of Levites to attend
to every division of families of people. Ver. 6. So, particular direction required. Personal
purity required that brethren may be prepared. Vers. 7-9. King and princes give animals. J.
gave (ch. xxx. 24) lambs and kids for the meal; bullocks for burnt-offerings (Num. xxviii. 19)
and thank-offerings. Ver. 8. Willingly, number not given, unless included in next verses. Unto
priests, for poor families of their own order; leading priests furnished offerings; chief Levites
also gave to poor Levitical families.


Vers, 10-19.—The celebration of Passover. So, everything ready, according to law. Ver. 11.
Sprinkled (cf. xxx. 16). Flayed, removed skins. Priests and Levites performed their parts.
Ver. 12. Removed, parts to be consumed on the altar, viz., fat, kidneys, &c.; parts cut off by
Levites and given to offerers for burnt-offerings. Ver. 13. Roasted (Ex. xii. 8, 9) peace-offerings
boiled and eaten on days of unleavened bread. Ver. 14. Therefore, because priests too much
engaged to prepare food for themselves. Ver. 15. Singers divided like other Levites, divided into
courses, took service in turn; the order determined by lot, first lot to sons of Asaph (1 Chr. xxv.
8-31). ‘‘ Probably this course retained its presidency over the rest, and now commenced in the
Temple the restored choral service’? [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 16. Same day, at that time. Ver. 17.
Seven days, Israel, i.e., the whole people (cf. ver. 3 and ver. 18). Hezekiah’s kept fourteen
days (xxx. 26). Ver. 18. Like, for exact conformity to Mosaic law and legal purity. Ver. 19.
Year, culminating point in reforms (2 Ki. xxii. 3).


Vers, 20-27.—The defeat of Josiah, After, thirteen years after, B.c. 608. A blank in Jewish
history. Necho, son of Psammetichus, king of Egypt, against Babylonian forces which he
expected to find near Charchemish, chief city of Northern Syria. N. did not wish to embarrass
Josiah. Ver. 21. House, with which at war and against which he was commissioned by God.
Ver. 22. J. disguised; some, equipped himself; others, was eager; Sept., strengthened himself to
fight. Meg., between Magdol and Hadadrimmon. Ver. 23. Shot by an arrow, J. ordered his
servants to carry him away; but in a second chariot, reserved for flight probably, lighter than a
war-chariot, and taken to Jer. Ver. 25. His death lamented by Jeremiah in words no longer
extant, but preserved and chanted by professional singers long after the event. ‘‘ Some find the
prophet’s elegy in the entire Book of Lamentations; others in a part of it (ch. iv.); most critics of
opinion that the lament is lost’ [Speak. Com.]. Ver. 25. Ordinance, not minstrels, but those in
authority. A certain day set apart, a standing custom to lament. Ver. 26, Goodness, good deeds,
religious faithfulness, acts of kindness or good will, according to that law which he found,
read and remembered.


HOMILETICS.
A CELEBRATED PASSOVER.—Verses 1-19.


Great events and remarkable days—“ red letter days ’’—relieve monotony of
life; stand out prominently in history and create epochs in memory. Such
times afford comfort, inspiration, and never forgotten. No such passover as
this. Notice—I. The devout preparation for its celebration. “So the
service was prepared.” King exhorted and stimulated the indifferent and

311


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. _ (CHAP. XXXV.


are aE A oy Ag nd Pe ee a eS ee ee


unwilling. 1. By rightly fixing the ark. Put away by idolatrous Manasseh,
who set a carved image in its place; or temporarily removed by Josiah during
repairs; it was replaced in temple, not carried about any longer. Now the
priests were discharged from this burden, they must be careful for other duties.
2. By personal sanctification. “ Sanctify yourselves” by separation from un-
cleanness and consecration to God. But not to end here, “prepare their
brethren,” by instruction, exhortation, and example. Self first, others after.
3. By orderly arrangement of classes. “He set them in their charge.” Not
any ‘new work nor novel method; just a return to written divine order. The
written word the rule to which magistrates and ministers should appeal.
“Walk by the same rule.” II, The unlimited numbers which attended.
“‘ Neither did all the kings of Israel keep such a passover as Josiah kept, and
the priests, and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel that were present, and
the inhabitants of Jerusalem.” “If we allow thirteen persons for each lamb
or kid, there were upwards of 500,000 communicants, while so far as we know,
there were only 17,000 sheep presented by Hezekiah and his princes (xxx. 24),
which would not supply more than half the number of partakers” [Murphy].
Ill. The earnest spirit by which it was characterised. Remarkable for
enthusiasm, holy excitement, and unity of heart. 1. A spirit of unbounded
liberality. Multitudes reduced to poverty, especially from Israel by Assyrian
devastations; unprovided with means of commemorations. The king gave to
the people lambs, kids, and bullocks (ver. 7). Princes gave to priests and
Levites; and chiefs of these officers remembered poor families of their order.
Hearts touched, a spirit of brotherhood prevailed and all “ gave willingly.”
2. A spirit of thorough consecration. “The priests stood” waiting “in their
place,” the singers in their station, all “ busied in offering that they might not
leave their place” (ver. 15). None left their posts unless relieved by brethren,
and then return to duty with delight. 38. A spirit of hearty co-operation. They
urged and helped one another, did their work “speedily.” Places not long
empty, viands lost not heat nor flavour through delay. ‘“‘ The service of the
Lord was prepared the same day” (ver. 16). IV. The loyal obedience by
which it was observed. In accordance with law in time, method, and spirit.
1. Right time observed. Day appointed by law (cf. ch. xxx. 2, 13), “ four-
teenth day of the month” (Ex. xii. 6). Nothing must be done untimely. 2.
Personal purity observed. Priests and people sanctified. “So the service was
prepared.” Need for cleansing with more than sprinkling of blood and water
with hyssop—withdrawal from more than earthly pollution. God’s service
pure and loving, “sincerity and truth” (1 Cor. v. 7), like God who is holy
(1 Pet. i. 13) and light and love. 3. Legal authority observed. Not according
to the will of the king, the conjecture of the court, but “ according to the word
of the Lord by the hand of Moses” (ver. 6), “the writing of David and the
writing of Solomon” (ver. 5). “As many as walk according to this rule (lit.
straight line, e.g. of a mason’s rule or a surveyor’s chain), peace be on them
and mercy upon the Israel of God” (Gal. vi. 16).


THE DISTURBED REIGN.—Verses 20-25.


If Josiah thought that after restoration of divine worship and revival of
religion he would have a period of settled peace and national prosperity, he
was disappointed. The bright interval brief. “Too late is written on the
pages even which describe this momentary revival,” says Stanley (Jew. Ch.,
vol. ii.), from whom we condense this outline. “It did not reach the deeply-
seated, widespread corruption which tainted rich and poor alike. Large as is


312


onAP, XxxV.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


a eT ee ee ee


the space occupied by it in the historical books, by the contemporary prophets
it is never mentioned at all.” The kingdom doomed, though day delayed; two
calamities the immediate precursors. I. The invasion of the Scythians
(B.C. 634-639). “ The earliest recorded movement of Northern populations, hid
behind the long mountain barrier, reared by nature between civilised and un-
civilised races of old world. Suddenly appeared those strange, uncouth, fur-
clad forms, hardly to be distinguished from their horses and waggons, fierce
as their own wolves or bears, sweeping towards the southern regions which
seemed to them their natural prey. No wonder that now all the ancient
monarchies of the south—Assyria, Babylon, Media, Egypt, even Greece and
Asia Minor—stood aghast at the spectacle of savage hordes rushing down on
seats of luxury and power. About the middle of Josiah’s reign one division
broke into Syria, penetrated on their way to Egypt, to the southern frontier of
Palestine, were bought off by Psammetichus and retired, after sacking the
temple of Astarte at Ascalon. They left one permanent trace as they scoured
through the plain of Esdrelon. The old Canaanitish city of Bethshan, at
eastern extremity of that plain, from them received the name, which it bore
throughout the Roman Empire, in the mouths of Greeks, Scythopolis, ‘the city
of the Scythians.’” JI, The invasion of Necho. “Strengthened by influx
of Northern nations, Babylon now rising into overwhelming predominance.
Necho, the vigorous King of Egypt, wished to anticipate that growth by secur-
ing himself on east and north. Kingdom of Judah between these contending
powers. Necho advanced through Palestine towards passes of Lebanon on his
way to the great battlefield of Carchemish. In the plain of Esdrelon, the
scene of so many combats in earlier history of Israel, Josiah determined, with
a rashness which appeared to be against the counsels of Providence (2 Chr.
xxxv. 21; I Esdras i. 27, 28), to stay the progress of the Egyptian army. No
details given of the battle. Everything absorbed in one tragical event which
closed it” [Stanley]. ‘“ What stability is there in earthly things? How seldom
is excellency of any kind long-lived? In the very strength of his age, in the
height of his strength, is Josiah withdrawn from the earth: as not without
a merciful intention of His glory on God’s behalf; so not without some weak-
ness on his own... . Sometimes both grace and wit are asleep in the wariest
and holiest breasts. The best of God’s saints may be sometimes miscarried by
their passions to their cost” [Bp. Hall].


Gop’s COMMAND TO MAKE HASTE.—Verse 21.


Applying this to Christians, observe on what command founded. A distinc-
tion between moral and positive duties. Positive right because commanded;
moral commanded because right, founded on the very nature of things. We
may be satisfied, therefore, with God’s revealed will, because sure that it is
founded on rectitude. Here command to make haste founded on three
principles—First, because of the importance of the thing itself. Not a trifle,
put our life, cannot neglect without infinite loss, and plunging into lamentation
and woe. If religion be anything, it is everything; the “one thing needful.”
Secondly, because of the limitation of our opportunities. We have only one
season to regard these things, the world over. “No work, nor device, nor
knowledge in the grave, &.” Several circumstances to be mentioned in regard
to this season of attention. It is short. “ What is thy life? &c.” It is uncertain.
“ Boast not thyself of to-morrow, &c.” It has also much in it not applicable to
any serious and important service. The whole of infancy, much of childhood
youth; lawful business, allowed recreation and necessary sleep. Observe

313


and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. _ (cHAP. XXXxv.


ee es ES ee


also that of this only season for action, many favourable periods may fail before
the end of it. “The harvest may be passed and the summer ended, &e.” Then
of this season much is already gone. Only a day and sun risen very high with
some. “It is high time to awake, &c.” And if this applies to all, with what
force to those of sixty or seventy or more? Thirdly, because of the advantages
to be derived from ardour. Often said, and is literally true, that “the lazy take
the most pains.” They make no progress, because everything a diversion or
hindrance; have to begin again and again. How often have we succeeded
beyond expectation when we have applied ourselves with decision and vigour!
A pleasure in acting with vigour which listless, inert, lounging and yawning
never know. Never so happy as in application. Slothful say, “See a lion in
the way, &c.” But zeal clears the way of the lion, removes impediments, or
turns them into auxiliaries [Jay, “ Evenings with Jesus ”’].


RASHNESS AND RISKS.—Verses 20-24.


From the time of Manasseh, Judah had been a vassal of Assyria, the rival of
Egypt. In this war Josiah might feel bound as a matter of honour to support
the interests of his northern liege-lord and oppose Necho. Might think it per-
fectly legitimate to prevent the march of the enemy through his own territories
—might doubt Necho’s faith in “ Elohim,” whom, he said, gave him commission.
Warnings unheeded, attack made, and results sad! [, Josiah rash in his
conduct. May be excused in some things, but erred in others. All not good
that good men do. ‘ Great men are not always wise.” 1. Josiah’s action was
unwise. Intermeddled with strife not belonging to him. “ His best apology,”
says one, “perhaps would be that Necho was marching through a part of
Judea. But then, first, this part did not belong to him; and, secondly, if Necho
had passed through, he might have done so, as Israel formerly desired to pass
through the borders of Moab, engaging to commit no injury, and to pay for all
they used.” 2. Josiah acted from impulse and not conviction. Passion worse
than conviction, and never a wise counsellor. ‘“ Make no friendship with an
angry man, and with a furious man thou shalt not go, lest thou learn his ways,
and get a snare to thy soul.” 3. Josiah sought not divine counsel. Jeremiah,
Zephaniah, Urijah, and a college of seers with him, but did not ask counsel of
the Lord. “ Shall I go up, or shall I forbear?” If we reject divine counsel, it
betrays consciousness of wrong, and leads to risks in any enterprise. 4. Josiah
rejected urgent warnings. Necho, calm and conciliatory, sent ambassadors.
“What have I to do with thee? &c.” But J. despised—(1) Appeals to reason.
“T come not against thee.” (2) Appeals to religion. “For God commanded me
to make haste.” (3) Appeals to self-interest. ‘“Forbear thee from meddling
with God, who is with me, that He destroy thee not.” JJ. Josiah’s rash
conduct brought fearful results. “J. would not turn his face from him,
&e.” 1. Upon himself. “In his chariot, but disguised, according to the prac-
tice of the royal families of Israel (2 Chron. xxxv. 22; 1 Ki. xxii. 30) in
moments of extreme emergency. The Egyptian archers, such as we see on their
monuments, discharged a volley of arrows against him. He fell, was placed in
his second chariot of reserve, and carried to Jerusalem to die” [Stanley]. A
death untimely, which might have been avoided, but permitted by God, a mys-
tery and a correction. 2. Upon the nation. Unworthy of such a prince, he was
taken away from impending calamities. A striking illustration how “the right-
eous is taken away from the evil to come.” God’s decree took fatal effect, after
delay, in Josiah’s life. Jerusalem taken, and inhabitants carried to Babylon.


THE DEATH OF KING JOSIAH.—Verses 23-25.


I. The mystery of the event. A good man’s end often strange. Steps
taken which result in failure and death. One event, specially stamped with
314


cnap, xxxv.}) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


t





uncertainty, but linked with God’s purpose. “A time to die.” ‘ Who can tell
a man when it shall be?” “In the day of death,” the king impotent to resist
as the beggar; depends upon God’s will, not man’s effort. Drawn by policy,
alliance, or apparent duty; “so are the sons of men snared in an evil time,
when it falleth suddenly upon them.” JJ. The memorial of the event. A
mournful death, without precedent in annals of Judah. Commemorated—
1. In prophetic dirge. “ Jeremiah lamented,” and minstrels, male and female,
sang dirges of the event. 2. In national mourning. “ All Judah and Jerusalem
mourned for Josiah.” A contrast to the unwept fates of those who depart
“without being desired” (ch. xxi. 20). 3. In appointed ordinance. “ Made
them an ordinance in Israel.” The elegy of prophet, chanted at stated public
occasions, long perpetuated, and the lamentation became proverbial for any
great and extraordinary sorrow (Zech. xii. 11). Good men valued by their loss,
honoured by those who live contrary to their teaching, and survive after death.
In long continuance, in holy influence, “the memory of the just is blessed.”


** Unblemish’d let me live, or die unknown:
O grant an honest fame, or grant me none” [Pope].


I. The striking feature of the story is the picture it gives of the quiet manner
in which God’s servants are sometimes allowed to pass away when they have
finished their work. The history of Josiah’s death compared with his life puts
things in right order; his life active, hard-working, and zealous; death quiet,
unexciting, what we call inglorious. The history fitted to check tendency to lay
too much stress upon circumstances of a man’s death; to be fond of exciting
death-bed scenes, to delight in religious books which vividly describe last
moments of departing friends. He who will stand least reprovable at last day,
will be he who has worked most earnestly and vigorously in cause of holiness and
of Christ when all temptations of the world and the strength of Satan have been
opposed to him. II. The moral we draw from the text is that he who does his
work in the proper time, who does not put off till old age the work of youth, nor
the hour of death the labour of life, may be quiet and unconcerned for the way
in which God may please to call him. If called by sudden providence when en-
gaged in work, or summoned by speedy sickness, he may be of good cheer and
of quiet mind, knowing that God will do all things well [Bp. Harvey Goodwin].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 3. Ark replaced. Change of appropriate, and spirited. Certain


circumstances, relief of burden, and
opportunity for more vigorous service
in known duty. Pray not for a larger
sphere, for more work. Do what is
appointed, and fill well present sphere.
Stand in your place.

Ver. 4. Prepare. Heathens saw that
God was not to be served but by those
who were prepared aforehand. Solon
willed in his laws that the sacrifices
should be chosen and selected, and the
sacrificers should purify themselves
some days before [Trapp]. Should not
people long before prepare, when they
come to the Lord’s table? [Jbid.].

Ver. 15. Singers in their place. Song
in God’s house. 1. Its nature. Spiritual,


Psalms cxiii.—cxviii. inclusive. Resolve,
“T will praise the Lord with my whole
heart, in the assembly of the upright
and in the congregation.” 2. Its leaders.
Numbered, stationed, and qualified.
This needful and helpful. Organist,
clerk, and choir should be early in
place, devout in spirit, and orderly in
all things. 3. Its design. Not a musical
performance for gratification of the
people; not to display ability, culture,
and efficiency in singers: but to please
God (Phil. ii. 8—10), and praise
Christ. Pliny found in worship of
Bithynians a hymn “ to Christ as God.”
“Sentimental twaddle, sung by a con-
gregation,is essentially carnalising and


315


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.  {cHaP. XXXv.


a ag Ee


also that of this only season for action, many favourable periods may fail before
the end of it. “The harvest may be passed and the summer ended, &c.” Then
of this season much is already gone. Only a day and sun risen very high with
some. “It is high time to awake, &c.” And if this applies to all, with what
force to those of sixty or seventy or more? Thirdly, because of the advantages
to be derived from ardour. Often said, and is literally true, that “the lazy take
the most pains.” They make no progress, because everything a diversion or
hindrance; have to begin again and again. How often have we succeeded
beyond expectation when we have applied ourselves with decision and vigour!
A pleasure in acting with vigour which listless, inert, lounging and yawning
never know. Never so happy as in application. Slothful say, “See a lion in
the way, &c.” But zeal clears the way of the lion, removes impediments, or
turns them into auxiliaries [Jay, “ Evenings with Jesus ”’].


RASHNESS AND RISKS.—Verses 20-24,


From the time of Manasseh, Judah had been a vassal of Assyria, the rival of
Egypt. In this war Josiah might feel bound as a matter of honour to support
the interests of his northern liege-lord and oppose Necho. Might think it per-
fectly legitimate to prevent the march of the enemy through his own territories
—might doubt Necho’s faith in “ Elohim,” whom, he said, gave him commission.
Warnings unheeded, attack made, and results sad! [, Josiah rash in his
conduct. May be excused in some things, but erred in others. All not good
that good men do. “Great men are not always wise.” 1. Josiah’s action was
unwise. Intermeddled with strife not belonging to him. ‘“ His best apology,”
says one, “perhaps would be that Necho was marching through a part of
Judea. But then, first, this part did not belong to him; and, secondly, if Necho
had passed through, he might have done so, as Israel formerly desired to pass
through the borders of Moab, engaging to commit no injury, and to pay for all
they used.” 2. Josiah acted from impulse and not conviction. Passion worse
than conviction, and never a wise counsellor. ‘‘ Make no friendship with an
angry man, and with a furious man thou shalt not go, lest thou learn his ways,
and get a snare to thy soul.” 3. Josiah sought not divine counsel. Jeremiah,
Zephaniah, Urijah, and a college of seers with him, but did not ask counsel of
the Lord. “Shall I go up, or shall I forbear?” If we reject divine counsel, it
betrays consciousness of wrong, and leads to risks in any enterprise. 4. Josiah
rejected urgent warnings. Necho, calm and conciliatory, sent ambassadors.
“What have I to do with thee? &c.” But J. despised—(1) Appeals to reason.
“T come not against thee.” (2) Appeals to religion. ‘ For God commanded me
to make haste.” (3) Appeals to self-interest. ‘“Forbear thee from meddling
with God, who is with me, that He destroy thee not.” JI. Josiah’s rash
conduct brought fearful results. “J. would not turn his face from him,
&e.” 1. Upon himself. “In his chariot, but disguised, according to the prac-
tice of the royal families of Israel (2 Chron. xxxv. 22; 1 Ki. xxii. 30) in
moments of extreme emergency. The Egyptian archers, such as we see on their
monuments, discharged a volley of arrows against him. He fell, was placed in
his second chariot of reserve, and carried to Jerusalem to die” [Stanley]. A
death untimely, which might have been avoided, but permitted by God, a mys-
tery and a correction. 2. Upon the nation. Unworthy of such a prince, he was
taken away from impending calamities. A striking illustration how “the right-
eous is taken away from the evil to come.” God’s decree took fatal effect, after
delay, in Josiah’s life. Jerusalem taken, and inhabitants carried to Babylon.


THE DEATH OF KING JOSIAH.—Verses 23-25.


I. The mystery, of the event. A good man’s end often strange. Steps
taken which result in failure and death. One event, specially stamped with
314


cHap, xxxv.}) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.
Se a ea 1 ee


uncertainty, but linked with God’s purpose. “A time to die.” ‘ Who can tell
a man when it shall be?” “In the day of death,” the king impotent to resist
as the beggar; depends upon God’s will, not man’s effort. Drawn by policy,
alliance, or apparent duty; “so are the sons of men snared in an evil time,
when it falleth suddenly upon them.” JI. The memorial of the event. A

Commemorated—


mournful death, without precedent in annals of Judah.
“ Jeremiah lamented,” and minstrels, male and female,


1. In prophetic dirge.

sang dirges of the event. 2. In national mourning. “ All Judah and Jerusalem
mourned for Josiah.” A contrast to the unwept fates of those who depart
“without being desired” (ch. xxi. 20). 3. In appointed ordinance. ‘“ Made
them an ordinance in Israel.” The elegy of prophet, chanted at stated public
occasions, long perpetuated, and the lamentation became proverbial for any
great and extraordinary sorrow (Zech. xii. 11). Good men valued by their loss,
honoured by those who live contrary to their teaching, and survive after death.


In long continuance, in holy influence, “the memory of the just is blessed.”


“*Unblemish’d let me live, or die unknown:
O grant an honest fame, or grant me none” [Pope].


I. The striking feature of the story is the picture it gives of the quiet manner
in which God’s servants are sometimes allowed to pass away when they have
finished their work. The history of Josiah’s-death compared with his life puts
things in right order; his life active, hard-working, and zealous; death quiet,
unexciting, what we call inglorious. The history fitted to check tendency to lay
too much stress upon circumstances of a man’s death; to be fond of exciting
death-bed scenes, to delight in religious books which vividly describe last
moments of departing friends. He who will stand least reprovable at last day,
will be he who has worked most earnestly and vigorously in cause of holiness and
of Christ when all temptations of the world and the strength of Satan have been
opposed to him. II. The moral we draw from the text is that he who does his
work in the proper time, who does not put off till old age the work of youth, nor
the hour of death the labour of life, may be quiet and unconcerned for the way
in which God may please to call him. If called by sudden providence when en-
gaged in work, or summoned by speedy sickness, he may be of good cheer and
of quiet mind, knowing that God will do all things well [Bp. Harvey Goodwin].


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 3. Ark replaced. Change of appropriate, and spirited. Certain


circumstances, relief of burden, and
opportunity for more vigorous service
in known duty. Pray not for a larger
sphere, for more work. Do what is
appointed, and fill well present sphere.
Stand in your place.

Ver. 4. Prepare. Heathens saw that
God was not to be served but by those
who were prepared aforehand. Solon
willed in his laws that the sacrifices
should be chosen and selected, and the
sacrificers should purify themselves
some days before [Trapp]. Should not
people long before prepare, when they
come to the Lord’s table? [Jbid.].

Ver. 15. Singers in their place. Song
in God’s house. 1. Its nature. Spiritual,


Psalms cxiii.—cxviii. inclusive. Resolve,
“T will praise the Lord with my whole
heart, in the assembly of the upright
and in the congregation.” 2. Its leaders.
Numbered, stationed, and qualified.
This needful and helpful. Organist,
clerk, and choir should be early in
place, devout in spirit, and orderly in
all things. 3. Its design. Not a musical
performance for gratification of the
people; not to display ability, culture,
and efficiency in singers: but to please
God (Phil. ii. 8—10), and praise
Christ. Pliny found in worship of
Bithynians a hymn “ to Christ as God.”
“Sentimental twaddle, sung by a con-
gregation,is essentially carnalising and


315


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.  (cHAP. XXXVI.


rae: Sl ee ee





of sanctity with regal anointing. “Man proposeth, but God disposeth.” II.
The shortness of his reign. “He reigned three months, and the king put
him down.” Necho on victorious return from the Euphrates deposed him, and
deemed it expedient to have a king of his own nomination on the throne. The
will of the people, the solemnity of anointing of no avail. The autocrat, good
or bad, a Solomon or .a Herod, is without control. (Sie volo; sic jubeo; stat
pro ratione voluntas), “ He doeth whatsoever pleaseth him, and who may say
unto him, What doest thou?” (Ecc. viii. 8-4). III. The taxing of the land.
“Put the land to a tribute” (a hundred talents of silver, £3,418 15s.; and a
talent of gold, £5,475; total amount of tribute, £8,893 15s.). Heb., set a
mulct upon the land (2 Ki. xxiii. 33). This a dishonour, a sign of subjection
and dependence. What a fall from exalted position and former greatness!
IV. The end of his career. The deposed king sent for to Riblah, in Syria,
arrested in chains, taken prisoner, and carried into Egypt, where he died.
“Something there had been in his character, or in the popular mode of his
election, which endeared him to his country. A lamentation, as from his
father, went up from the princes and prophets of the land for the lion’s cub
(Ezek. xix. 34), that was learning to catch his prey, caught in the pitfall, and
led off in chains—by a destiny even sadder than death in battle. ‘Weep not
for the dead, nor bemoan him, but weep sore for him who goeth away.’ He
was the first King of Judah who died in exile. ‘He shall return no more, he
shall return no more to see his native country—his native land no more’
(Jer. xxii, 10-12) ” [Stanley].


JEHOIAKIM, THE WICKED PRINCE.—Verses 3-8.


Jehoiakim second son of Josiah, born B.c. 634, and eighteenth king of
separate throne of Judah for a period of eleven years, set up as vassal of
Egyption king. I, The significant change of his name. Originally Eliakim
(El-yakim), changed into Jehoiakim (Jeho-Yakim). Heathen princes gave new
names to those who entered their service usually after their gods. This an
Israelitish name, bestowed probably at Eliakim’s own request, whom Hengsten-
berg supposes to have been influenced by a desire to be connected with the
promise (in 2 Sam. vii. 12), where not Hl, God, but “Jehovah will set up.”
The change signifies loss of liberty and dependence. A ‘striking contrast
between the beauty of the name and the misery of its fate. Aspire to that
“new name which no man knoweth, saving he that receiveth it.” JT, The
wickedness of his conduct. A reign filled with idolatry, oppression, and
misfortunes. Sketched with masterly hand in Jer. xxii. 18-23, and in Ezekiel
xix. 5-9. 1. In his restoration of idolatry. He followed the example of idolatrous
predecessors, people eagerly availed themselves of vicious license of a lax gov-
ernment. Land filled with heathen “abominations.” 2. In his tyrannical
measures of government. Jeremiah reproaches him for covetousness, cruelty,
injustice, violence, and luxury (xxii. 13-17). Bloodthirsty (xxvi. 20-28), selfish,
and most extravagant. Indifferent to sufferings of his people, and at a time of
impoverishment of land by heavy tributes to Egypt, he squandered large sums
in building luxurious palaces. 3. In his impious defiance of God. From begin-
ning of his reign the voice of Jeremiah predicts and prefigures danger by
striking signs. Attempts to silence the prophet by princes, priests, and false
prophets. Jehoiakim used the penknife to cut up the leaves of the Book and
destroy the effect of the message, at a period of solemn fast. The counsel of
God stood sure, but no impression made upon the mind of the king by the fresh
roll. 4. In his rebellion against Nebuchadnezzar. After three years’ subjec-
tion, deluded by Egyptian party in court, he ventured to withhold tribute and
throw off Chaldean yoke (2 Ki. xxiv. 1). Perhaps desired to spend money

318


CHAP. XxxvI.J HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.





7
in luxury and pride, not to pay the King of Babylon; perhaps sought to become
independent since severance of Egypt from Syria at battle of Carchemish. But
the step, contrary to earnest remonstrance of Jeremiah, in violation of oath of
allegiance, and the ruin of king and country. III, The calamities of his
reign. Scripture statements brief but graphic. 1. The invasion of his king-
dom. Nebuchadnezzar too busy in conflict between Lydian and Median empires
to march against Jerusalem and chastise his rebellious vassal, sent his gover-
nors to rouse surrounding nations, and Syrians, Moabites, and Ammonites
united with Chaldzan forces to harass Judah. No rest or safety out of the
walled cities. At length, in seventh year of his reign (B.c. 598), Nebuchadnezzar
took field in person, concentrated forces, marched first against Tyre, which had
rebelled about time of Judah; then, after investment of city, went against
Jerusalem. 2. The desecration of the Temple. “ Carried the vessels of the house
of the Lord to Babylon.” A portion of sacred vessels, perhaps in lieu of
tribute unpaid, and deposited in the house of Belus, his god (Dan. i. 2; v. 2).
IV. The dishonour of his end. Though a prisoner and chained to be carried
to Babylon at first, he was permitted to remain in his tributary kingdom. In
siege of the city, by an engagement with the enemy, or by the hand of his own
oppressed subjects, who thought to conciliate the Babylonians by the murder of
their king, he came to a violent end in eleventh year of his reign. His body
ignominiously treated as predicted—cast over the walls, left exposed, dragged
away “ with the burial of an ass beyond the gates of Jerusalem” (cf. Jer. xxii.
10 and xxxvi.). Warning lost upon J.; disregarded future with its clear and
awful signs, held the throne in sufferance, until he fell into disgrace and ruin.
“ Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap.”


ZEDEKIAH’S REIGN: THE EXTINCTION OF THE ROYAL LINE.—Verses 11-21.


Zed. the twentieth and last king of Judah. His proper name, Mattaniah,
changed to Zedekiah at accession, may be in allusion to Jeremiah’s prophecy of
Israel’s future as Jehovah-tsidkenu—Jehovah, our Righteousness (xxiii. 5, 8).
Rather weak than wicked, Z. requested the prophet to pray for him, but refused
his advice. Rebellion brought siege to the city, destruction to the Temple, and
exile to himself and Royal family. The events of his reign summed up in brief
record—I. Reckless disregard of Divine warnings. Jeremiah a true
prophet and best friend, but unheeded; treated alternately as a traitor and a
madman (Joseph. Ant. x. 7, sec. 41) ; and at last imprisoned. Admonished, but
amended not. ‘“‘ He humbled not himself before Jeremiah, &c.” II. Ruinous
policy pursued. Policy of Jeremiah prevailed for a while in foreign matters.
An embassy sent to Babylon to take solemn oath with Nebuchadnezzar in
the sacred name of Elohim, which Israel and Babylon alike acknowledged.
1. In throwing off yoke of allegiance. ‘ Rebelled against N., who had made
him sware by God” that he would keep the kingdom for Nebuchad., make no
innovation, enter into no alliance with Egypt (Ezek. xvii. 3; Joseph. x. 7, s. 3).
He acted in contravention to this oath, perjured his character, and committed
the crowning act of wickedness, according to the high standard of prophetic
morality. ‘“ Shall he prosper? shall he escape that doeth such things? or shall
he break the covenant and be delivered? As I live, saith the Lord God, surely
in the place where the king dwelleth that made him king, whose oath he
despised, and whose covenant he brake, even with him in the midst of Babylon
shall he die” (Ezek. xvii. 15,16). 2. In persisting in rebellion. Hananiah’s
prophecy had been falsified, and he himself had died according to the word of
Jeremiah—the folly of a mere remnant opposing a mighty nation was exposed.
Egyptian help in vain, and real alliance with surrounding nations impossible.

319


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.  (cHAP. XXXVI.








Yet the king infatuated, held out and was ruined. III. Incurable idolatry
into which the nation had fallen. 1. All classes were corrupted. “ All the
chief of the priests ” who should have opposed idolatry, “and the people trans-
gressed very much after all the abominations of the heathen.” Into the sacred
precincts of the temple idolatrous rites had crept. In the outer court women
wept and wailed for Tammuz (Ezek. viii. 14); in subterranean chambers in-
cense offered by elders to creeping things and abominable beasts (ib. x. 11);
and at the entrance to the temple building, between porch and altar, the rising
sun was worshipped, by those who turned their backs to the sanctuary and
their faces to the east (ver. 16). Thus “they polluted the house of the Lord
which he had hallowed in Jerusalem.” 2. The prophets of God were insulted.
Mocked in words, opposed openly in acts, and ill-treated in life. This affront
to God who sent them, an evidence of implacable enmity and an invincible
determination to persevere in sin. But those that abuse God’s messengers pro-
voke his wrath and cannot escape. 3. The nation beyond all hope. “The
wrath of the Lord arose against his people, till there was no remedy” (ver.
16). “No healing,” no physician, for a body corrupt and already dead. Sins
beyond mercy, “ which the Lord would not pardon” (2 Ki. xxiv. 4). Possible
to sin too long, to sin away the day of grace. “ They would none of my counsel;
they despised all my reproof, therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their
own way and be filled with their own devices.” [V. The execution of Di-
vine judgments, The end rapidly coming. The city besieged and reduced to
extremities. Fire of besiegers aided by severe famine within. Inhabitants
restored to terrible expedience (Jer. xxxviii. 9; Lam. iv. 10). At length a
breach effected and Chaldzans entered. 1. The temple burned; 2. The city
ruined; and 3. The inhabitants carried to Babylon. Sacred vessels taken,
palaces of princes levelled to the ground, fortifications demolished, and predic-
tions fulfilled to the letter. No escape by flight. Zedekiah pursued, caught,
and despatched to Riblah. Nebuchadnezzar, with cruelty characteristic of the
times, ordered his sons to be killed and his own eyes to be thrust out (cf. Jer.
xxxil. 4 and Ezek. xii. 138). “The king of Babylon bound him in chains and
carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison till the day of his death.” 1.
Transgressors cannot escape from appointed judgments. 2. The bitterness of
sin is seen in the overthrow which it creates. 3. Since we have not otherwise
any guarantee against national humiliation, what need to have the Lord
on our side!


Justice, like lightning, ever should appear
To few men’s ruin, but to all men’s fear” [Swenam].


.


THE PROCLAMATION OF CyRUS.—Verses 22, 23.


God pitied his people in captivity. Predicted long before that he would
restore them again to the land of their fathers. The promise not forgotten.
“Tn the first year,” when Cyrus gained possession of Babylon, an edict grant-
ing exiles permission to return to Jerusalem. [, The work Cyrus was
called upon to undertake, “He hath charged me to build him an house.”
Jerusalem in ruins, materials and men required to rebuild. Some pull down
and delight in destruction. Cyrus felt responsible for rebuilding of Temple,
construction of Theocracy, and arrangements for future kingdom and welfare
of God’s people. The secular welfare of his government and the religious
interests of his own country overlooked. Absorbed in one grand mission.
Israel’s disobedience to God’s charge aggravated by obedience of Cyrus, a
heathen king. II. The proclamation for help in this work. “He made a
proclamation throughout all his kingdom.” His dominions first confined to
province of Persia, successively enlarged by addition of Media, Lydia, Asia.

320


CuaP. Xxxv1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES.


A


Minor, Babylon and Assyria, Samaria and Judea. 1. The proclamation wae
inspired. “ The Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus.” Not the suggestion of
Magi in the city; not the instruction of Daniel, who informed Cyrus of pre-
dictions concerning him. But “the Lord God of heaven,”. who influences the
heart of kings like rivers of water, prompted him to fulfil this duty. 2. The
proclamation was written. Written in Jewish language to be understood by
tribes in distant provinces. “Written and proclaimed aloud, “caused a voice to
pass,” like a jubilee trumpet to sound deliverance to captives. 3. The procla-
mation was gracious. Political considerations might prompt. Egypt a for-
midable rival to the great world empires. Might be advantageous to have
an advanced post in south of Judea to protect against invasion, or from which
to make rapid descent upon lands of the Nile. But higher aim in the emanci-
pation of Jews and liberty to return. IIT. The response to the
proclamation. Cf. Ezra i. Leaders and chief men responded heartily.
God disposed many to make sacrifices and return, others remained in Babylon.
1. The response must be immediate. “ Let him go up without delay.” 2. The
response must be voluntary. ‘“ Who is there among you of all the people?”
3. The response must be accepted. May involve risk, long journey and great
sacrifices ; but duty urges, God promises, and privileges enjoyed if we comply.
The gospel preaches deliverance to the captives, but many in love with sin,
prefer to stay in the world and have no portion in Jerusalem.


HOMILETIC HINTS AND SUGGESTIONS.


Ver. 8. Found in him. 1. Evil
latent in every heart. 2. Circum-
stances only required to discover and


apart ; all- pre-eminently raised ‘above
their fellow-men, “the messengers
of God.” arnestly taught, ‘ Rising


develop it.

Ver. 13. Three steps in wickedness
Broke his engagement, stiffened hid
neck, and hardened his heart. Re-
belled, dc. 1. The sanctity of an oath.
Though taken under compulsion, and
not due on natural equity: yet must be
held sacred, not binding merely till
exigency should pass away. 2. The
danger of infringement. Its violation
not excused, nor passed in silence; but,
the filling up of the cup of the nation’s,
guilf. Contracts and oaths not mere.
legal forms, to be lightly esteemed, but’
solemn obligations. Violations more
criminal than breaking promises; sins
of great deliberation, signs of lax
morals, and may be precursors of
national ruin.

Ver. 16. His prophets. 1. Pro
phetic teaching a constant element in
Israel’s history. Not left in darkness
like heathen nations. Crises and
master minds. Moses, Samuel, David,
Elijah, &c. 2%. The method of this
teaching unique and worthy of con-
sideration. Dwvinely taught. Each set


up betimes,” ¢.¢., earnestly and care-
fully: unwearied anxiety and solicita-
tion. Patiently taught. “ Sending
them” constantly, though ill-treated
and set at nought. What kindness
and forbearance! 3. Rejection of
this teaching brings guilt and danger.
Guilt aggravated, “ until the Wrath. of
the Lord arose.” scape.hopeless, ‘till
there is no remedy.” God’s long-
suffering and earnest entreaties by
servants “rising early and protesting
to them.” The most awful aggrava-
tions of guilt in “refusing to hear”
(of. Jer. xi. 11).


“God sends his teachers with every age,
To every clime and every race of men,
With revelations fitted to their growth
And shape of mind” [Lowel].


No remedy. These words contain
three facts of great importance. 1.
That there was, at least at one time, a
remedy. 2. That the remedy went
on, and might have been used, for a
very long-period. 3. That there came
a time when the remedy ceased. L

321


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: CHRONICLES. |
NE A A


All life is a remedy. The conditions
of things require it Life a great
restorative process, 1. Comes that
marvellous provision of God in Jesus
Christ. 2. Subordinate to this great
remedy of the cross of Christ, and
working with it, all providences have
a curative character. 3. Every one
earries within himself an antidote ‘to
himself. Conscience, till silenced, a
sure antidote for evil. II. Notice the
word “till.” It shows how slow God
is to. take away the remedy. His
mercy holds back the arm of justice.
But we may sin ourselves into a state,
not in which there is no forgiveness,
but no thought or desire to, seek for-
giveness, ‘No remedy,” not on God’s
account, but your own; not in God’s
want of will to- save you, but in your
own incapacity to will your own salva-
tion [J. Vaughan, Sermons].


Ver, 21, Aslong. Seventy years’,


[cHar. xxxvz.!





desolation predicted by Jeremiah.
“The idea that the duration of the de-
solation was determined in the Divine
counsels by the number of the neg-
lected sabbatical years, and that the
enforced fallow was intended to com-
pensate for previous unlawful cultiva-
tion, is not found in Jeremiah, and,
indeed, appears only in Lev. xxvi.
34,35, and in this place” [Speak. Com.].
Learn—1l. The purpose of God in the
affliction of his people. 2. The provi-
dence of God in regulating afflic-
tion for good, and as regards—a,
method; 0, degree; c, time. As the
exodus from Egypt came in the exact
time, so return from Babylon after
seventy years. Times of deliverance
correspond with minute exactness
to prophetic announcements. Hence
patience, submission, and hope. “Even
the selfsame day it came to pass”


(Ex, xii, 41).


So as EES TOES


INDEX.


I—GENERAL SUBJECTS.


ABRAM, 7.

Abijah’s religion, 213.

Adam, 4, 6.

Adullam, cave of, 43.

Affection, religious, 136,

Age, the golden, 13.

Ahaziah’s wicked reign, 251; death, 252.

Ahaz’s evil reign, 272; deeper sins, 276;
lessons from life, 275; acts, 276; and
character, 276.

Altar plague, 98; purchased, 100; removed,
287.


Amaziah’s beginning, 262; fall into idolatry,
264.


Ambition, dangers of, 264.

Amalek, doom of, 19.

Amen, the people’s, 76.

Amon’s trespass, 302, 303.

Angel arrested, 97.

Anthropomorphism, biblical, 180.

Apostasy, 180; and religious observance,
212; described, 280.

Appeal, an earnest, 105.

Archery, gospel, 238.

Agriculture, perils to, 170.

Ark, vicissitudes of, 26; in Royal city, 51
in house, 55; fixed, 62; procession, 63
removed, 161; rested, 173.

Art in Christian service, 160.

Arrangements, Divine, reversed, 210.

Armies, mighty, 217.

Asa, the reformer, 215, 220; conqueror, 216;
vain help, 225; end, 228.

Assembly, representative, 194.


BatTies, famous, 68; Baalperazim, 59;
Gibeon, 59; a great battle, 211; march
of, 247; God’s not ours, 245,

Benjamin, tribe of, 30.

Bible, influence of, 233.

Blessing forfeited, 20.

Book discovered, 306, 309.

Bow at a venture, 239.

Bribery, folly of, 224.


OCAaLEs’s descendants, 9.

Camp of Jehovah, 290.

Captivity, 33, 87.

Captives delivered, 273.

Cause, God’s, maintained, 175.
Census, wicked, 93; interrupted, 96.
City, the devoted, 36.

Clouds, symbolic, 165.

Choir, a family, 117; the temple, 163.
Chariots, 133.


Christian experience and influence, 138.

Colonisation, 186.

Congratulations of Hamath, 85.

Convert, Egyptian, 17.

Contract, the ancient, 159.

Covenants, three, 6; national, 70; of salt,
212


Council, the first, 50.

Councillor, a wise, 121.

Courage in battle, 90.

Court, the beleagured, 205; performance in,
237.

Counterfeit principles, 206.

Crowns, earthly, 92.

Cyrus, proclamation of, 320.


Davin, sons of, 12; unselfishness, 43; dis-
pleasure, 54; and Hiram, 56, 61; sefore
the ark, 66; attention to household, 76 ;
God’s promises to, 80; administration,
85 ; life of, 86; at Jerusalem, 92; choice,
95 ; obedience, 100; charge to Sol., 103,
132; a type, 126; address to princes,
127; latter end, 140.

Day, a dark and bright sunset, 303.

Dark shadows on a bright day, 219,

Death, Hadad’s, 4, 14; sad, 113; a common

lot, 213.

Dedicated things, 161.

Deeds, 31.

Devotedness, call to early, 136.

Discipline, under, 49.

Disobedience, 265.

Divisions of priests, 112; and of Levites, 113.

Deliverance, God’s, in man’s extremity, 213.

Disaster, national, 170.

Doorkeepers, 84; door-opening, 283.

Duty, signals of, 59; a Christian's, 60 ; holy,
70; inspiration of, 221, and self
interest, 263.


EarrTs divided, 6.

Edict, royal, 232.

Early piety, advantages of, 305, 307.

Effort, condition of successful, 104

Entertainment, joyous, 48.

Exiles, returned, 32.

Example, influence of, 222.

Expedition against Edom, 268.

Evidence, experimental, 191.

Evil-doing restrained, 72; latent in the
heart, 321.

Exploits, 37; famous, 43.


Faon, seeking God's, 70.


ff ‘ INDEX.





Fumilies, 19; royal, 30; records, 203.

Father’s prayer for children, 104; favourite,
121; three chief, 24; and children, 133,

Favours, greatness of Divine, 81; Divine,
invoked, 167.

Faith, Christian, assaulted, 394

Fellowship, reciprocal, 219,

Fleet, wrecked, 247.

Fire, children in, 277.

Force, military, of David, 128,

Foreigners, naturalised, 152.

Friendship, danger of worldly, 234.

Functions, the threefold, 109.


Gav's song, 46; an emblem of a true
minister, 96.

Gath, scenes in, 35.

Genealogies, use of, 96; surveyed, 18.

Generosity, popular, and cold officialism,
282


Gilboa’s heights, 35.

Giants and heroes, 91.

Glory, the, and the fire, 176; Solomon’s and
death, 192; the decaying, 13.

ftod, object of search, 202, 236, 246; ser-
vice, 33; hosts, 46; dealinys, 55; order
and help, 60; glory, 75; travelling with
his people, 79; relation to his people,
82; in personal life, 79; secking, 106,
133; greatness, 175; name, 180; in-
spection, 228; forsaken, 276.

Goodness, Divine, 76.

‘Governments and subjects, 196.


HAND, the mighty, 17; right, 45; and heart,
232.

Heart service, 222, 290; disease, 170; com-
munions, 189; not perfect, 265,

Heaven shut up, 170.

Haste, and God’s command, 313.

Help, Assyrian, 275; helped marvellously,
269.

Hezekiah’s reforms, 278; passover, 284;
prayer, 285, 286; templ’e worship, 289;
thorough service, 290; exhortation, 295;
sickness and recovery, 298; tests and
failure, 298; death, 300,

History, three pages of human, 3; a family,


29.

Heroism, true, 43.

Hiram and Solomon, 152; brass works of,
159.

Holiness, beanty of, 76, 246.

Home, 265; religious, 290.

House, entry of, 159; sanctity of God's,
169; consecrated, 179.

House, royal, building, 56; God’s in relation
to man, 79; God’s regarded, 258.

Household, Solomon's and Christ’s compared,
190

Humility, means of deliverance, 209

Hunter, the mighty, 5.


INVENTIONS, origin of, 18,
Insult avenged, 88.
Irreverence in -a¢red things, 83.


8; famous, 18; glance of, 23; inspired,


Isr2el’s condition, 72; well-being for God
79; and David, 97.


JABEZ, the honoured name, 15.

Jehovah's greatness, 72.

Jehoram’s succession, 249; a warning, 250.

Jehoshaphat, beginning, 230 ; greatness, 231;
cry, 239; connection with Ahab, 242;
war with Moabites, 244; character and
reign, 247; family arrangements, 249.

Jehoiakim, the wicked prince, 318.

Jehoahaz, reign, 317.

Jeroboam, first king of Is. 197; remon
strated, 213.

Jehoiada’s reforms, 255, 260.

Jerusalem, dwellers in, 31; taken, 40,

Jews, a problem, 180.

Jesse’s family, 8; character, 10.

Joash, King, 254, 256; death, 259; life and
character, 260.

Josiah, or Karly Piety, 305; reformer, 306 ;
death, 314.

Jotham’s prosperous reign, 270; life, 271.

Jonathan’s character, 37

Joshua, a great leader, 23.

Joy, sacred, its source and manifestation,
66; universal, 287; of finished work,
162.

Judgments awful, 95;
abused, 275,

Justice executed, 169.

Judah, chiefs, 15; prevailing, 22.


follow sin, 100;


KINDNESS, power of, 197.

King, the chosen, 39, 41.

Kings, three, lessons from thefr lives, 303.

Kingdom, the lost, 37; David's, 57; strength
and attraction of, 201.

Korah’s sin, 25.


LAMP, in David's house, 250.

Lavers, the, 160.

League, Solomon's, and covenant, 231,

Levi, sons of, 24.

Levites, dwellings of, 25.

Liberality and joy, 137,

Life, human, Solomon's view, 4; interestin
view of, 11U ; current, 141; spiritual an
desolation, 221.

Like son, like father, 273.

Lying spirits in prophets, 237, 239.


MAINTENANCEK, priestly, 291.

Mauasseh’s sins and repentance, 301, 808;
contract to Hezekiah, 302,

Meeting, the adjourned, 198.

Men, famous, 6; valiant, 28; right, 64;
wanted, 153.

Merchants, Solomon’s, 149,

Message, a faithful, 309.

Methods of treating men, 198,

Mercies of David, 174,

Ministry, before the ark, 76; faithful, 237.

Ministers, stewards of God, 121; David's
court, 125; character, 208.

Michal’s contempt, 66; pride, 67.

Money, influence of, 225.


INDEX. iii





Month, a joyful, 286.

Moses, man of God, 110.

Mother’s influence, 252; over Hezekiah, 280,
Movement, a popular, 288.

Music and service, 281.

Musicians and singers, 115, 11%.

Mystery of Divine working, 196.


NADAB and Abihn, 24.

Names, 11, 14; suggestive, 31; a remem-
bered, 126.

Nation, infant, 71.

Nations divided, 7 ; idolatrous punished, 204;
relapse of, 259.

Nathan’s message to David, 79.

News, David's reception of, 81.

Number, 117.


OATHS, sanctity of, 321.

Obededom’s house, 54; blessing of, 119, 121.

Obligation, man’s to God, 138.

Office, waiting in, 26.

Officers and judges, 120; civil demands,
124.

Orders, Priests and Levites, 26.

Othniel’s adventure, 17.

Opportunity, God's, and man’s extremity,
245.


Pastures, fat, 19.

Passover, a celebrated, 313,

Patriarchs, the twelve, 8.

People, happy, 43; innumerable, 126.

Personal life, God in, 79.

Pillars, the two, 157.

Place, the beautiful, 78.

Phineas, 34.

Porters and doorkeeping, 118.

Prayer, remarkable, 16; true, 82; relation to
promise, 83; Solomon’s, 170, 175; and
Doxology, 75; last, 149; wonderful meet-
ing for, 216.

Preaching, Shemiah’s, 205.

Preparation and strength, 271.

Priesthood, ancient, 25.

Pride, 269.

Procession, solemn, 51,

Progress and true penitence, 94.

Promise, wonderful, 126; a tonic, 242; per-
formance, 167.

Propitiation, the, 99.

Protestants, duty of, 202.

Prosperity, David's, 40, 57.

Prophet, a grand, 74; a faithful, 236 ; teach-
ing of, 321.

Providence, operations of, 70; in the world,
226, 316; described, 227; accidents of,
239 ; timed, 322.

Proposal, the king’s, 78.

Possessions, David’s, 128,

Practices, 265.

Psalm, a thanksgiving, 69.


QUALIFICATIONS for work, 106, 106.

Queen Sheba’s visit to Solomon, 188; a type
of truth-seekers, 190.

Question, the solemn, 168. 19%


RABBAR captured, 91.

Rashness and risks, 314.

Race, human: its unity, progress, and de
clension, 4.

Rechabites, the, 10.

Relation, God’s to life, 131.

Religion: its cost and self-sacrifice, 99; tem-
porary, 203; voluntary, 232.

Rebuke, the stern, 240.

Reforming, the tour, 241.

Reign, the disturbed, 312.

Rehoboam, the headstrong, 197; family and
domestic policy, 202; unready, 206.
Restraints, God’s on man’s will, 124; of Divine

Providence, 199.
Reuben, line of, 21.
Rest, of God’s people, 110, 217.
Remembrance, subjects of, 70.
Rejoicing, national, 178.
Rich, how to get, 148.
Right, 217.
Ruler, the foolish, and revolting tribes, 194.


SACRIFICE, house of, 180; and consecration,
281.

Saul’s pedigree, 33 ; death, 35; transgression,
36; in battle, 37; brethren, 45.

Samuel, 34.

Sacrilege of God's house, 276.

Secession, a great, 198.

Sea, the molten, 159.

Seeker, encouraged, 69; threefold, 70.

Service, inaugural, 67; waiting, 110; restan
argument for, 110; in Church and State,
121; ministerial, 208 ; ability for God’s,
32; orders in, 33; sacred, 64.

Senechrib’s attempt on Jerusalem, 292,
letter, 294; demand, 295.

Separation, 45.

Simeon, posterity of, 18

Scraples, conscientious, 201.

Sons, 31, 83; famous, 153.

Solomon chosen, 129; elevated, 140, 193;
splendid beginning, 145; sacrifice, 177;
prayer answered, 178; military exploits,
182 ; statesmanship, 183 ; marriage, 184;
religious service, 184; greatest work,
185 ; fleet, 185 ; greatness, 191; end, 193.

Soldiers, registered, 27.

Sojourners and shadow, 138.

Sorrow, family, 28.

Song, ministry of, 24; masters of, 26; of
praise, 75; and revivals, 117, 164; in
God’s house, 315.

Spirit, familiar, 37 ; upon Amasal, 46; tender,
309.

Seat, mercy, 307.

Scriptures lost, 307,

Spoils consecrated, 85.

Speech, ignorant, 210.

Btep, a false, 89.

Strangers gathered, 104; prayer for, 171,178

Stronghold captured, 40.

Successions, 168,

Suicide, 37.


TEMPLE, building of, 102, 151, 155; instrao-


fv INDEX.





tions for, 181; contributions to, 134;
described, 156; beauty, 156; clouds,
164; fixed residence of God, 166; dedi-
cated, 177 ; restored, 250.

Testimony of noble life, 128; a crown, 256.

Teaching, commission, 231.

Times considered, 48 ; understanding of, 49.

Thanksgiving, last, 137 ; David's, 139.

Things right, done in a wrong way, 62;
which remain, 164.

Tests and moral character, 298.

Treasury of God’s house, 121.

Training, religious, 130.

Trials, 41,

Tribes, the, 8; apostate, 21; registered, 27 ;
sacred, 108.

Trust, false, 296.

Truth, ministry of, 225; reception of, 238

Tribunal, supreme, 242.


Unity, its achievements, 21; of purpose,
49; prayer for, 90.

Uriah, the Hittite, 43.

Uzzah’s conduct, 52; breech, 53.

Uzziah’s character and reign, 267;
punishment, 268.


sin and


VALUE of Divine gifts, 139.

Valley of blessing, 247.

Victory of God’s cause, 92; songs befere,
246


Visit, royal, 286,
Visions, prophetic, 237.


Wags, David's, 84; Divine commission in,
173; holy, 217; entering upon, 235.

Warfare and Prayer, 216.

Warnings solemn, 179.

War cry, 88.

Watchword, the National, 198.

Wealth, Solomon’s, 148, 186.

Wisdom, blessedness of, 147; prayer fov, .
148, 149; sought, 191.

Wishing and willing, 175.

Works, Solomon’s, 179.

Work, God’s, carried on, 63 ; preparation for,
103; principles of Christian, 137.

Workmen, 116, 117; Solomon’s, 153.

Wonderful deliverance, 296.

World, danger of proximity, 22; its strong-
holds demolished, 227.

Worship, religious, 25, 74; God’s claims
upon, 75; features of, 116, 141; temple,
256 ; and praise, 279.

Wrath of God, 207.

Wrongdoing, pertinacity in, 227.


Years of David's warfare, 86.


ZADOK, the warrior priest, 49,

Zeal, 287.

Zechariah, the murder of, 260.
Zedekiah’s, extinction of royal line, 319.
Zerubbabel, 14.

Zion, Castle of, 41.


Ziglag, assembly of, 45.





IL—AUTHORS QUOTED,


ADAMS quoted, 804.
Addison, 142, 187, 225, 228.
Augustine, 83.


BACON, on superstition, 54; asking ques-
tions, 188; revenge, 200; on friendship,
229.

Barrow, 93.

Barnes, 208,

Baxter, on harsh words, 198.

Bede, Ven., 141.

Beza, 31.

Beecher, on art, 157, 175; success, 268;
Bible, 310.

Blair, on friendship, 153.

Beaconsfield, Lord, on heroes, 49.

Blanshard, 49.

Boston, Thos., 193,

Burke, 203.

Bushnell, H., LIL

Byron, 265, 294.


CARLYLE, on producing, 18; music, 77;
work, 126, 130; worship, 217; gold, 248,

Cecil, Rev. Rd., 114, 266, 304.

Channing, 7, 11.

Charles, Mrs., 78.

tea on life, 11; nobility of character,

Cicero, 249.

Cervantes, 128,

Clifford, Dr. J., $87.

Colton, 253.

Coleridge, 64, 88.

Cowper, 7, 22, 88, 43, 59, 61, 101, 133, 188
192, 209, 216, 229, 237, 252, 268.


INDEX, | ;


a


a


EDWAEDS, Pres., 117.
Emmerson, on enthusiasm, 48; character,
87; wealth, 150.


FELTHAM, on reproof, 64
Fleming, W., 16, 174.
Fontaine, La, 126.

Faber, F. W., 233.

Franklin, 233.

Froude, on orders of men, 44.
Fuller, A., 117.


Goopwtn, Thos., 7%
Gordon, Mrs., 223,
Grindon, 107.
Guthrie, Dr., 150.


HALL, Bp, on evil examph, 87 ; courage, 54;
judgments, 55; insults, 88, 101; visita-
tion, 114; gifts, 141; appetite, 181;
God’s_ interest, 203, 217; earthly
stability, 313; liberality, 316.

Hamam, on providence, 83.

Hare, 266, 268.

Havergal, F. R., 18.

Helps, on courage, 47.

Herbert, Geo., 26, 109, 188, 169, 217.

Hopkins, Bp., 19.

Houghton, Ld, 43,

Howe, John, 111,

Hood, 208.

Hughes, Thos., 310,


JouNsON, Dr., on providence.


Jay, 314, 316.


Kay, on sacrifices, 181,

Keats, 157.

Keble, on duty, 84.

Kingsley, Chas. 131; on musto, 165.


LEwis, Taylor, 4, 70,

Louis XIV., 114,

Leighton, Arbp., 157, 277.
Locke, J., on education, 806,
Longfellow, 103, 113, 137, 179.
Livingstone, J., 77.

Luther, 8, 133, 175, 257.


MacpDONALD, Geo., 7.

Macleod, N., D.D., on a blessed home, 55.

Massinger, 49.

May, 13.

Melancthon, on prayer, 181.

More, Sir J., 260.

Milman, Dean, 123.

Milton, 56, 58, 77, 111, 148, 226, 237, 265,
287, 300.

Munger, on music, 163.


NAPo.eEon I., on true wisdom, 151; sayings,
251, 353.

Newman, J. H., 208.

Newton, John, 213.


Nicholls, on judgments, 22; honour te


parents, 133.
OviD, quoted, 193.


PaRKER, Dr., 156, 164, 196, 208, 281, 291.
Pascal, on apostasy, 181; evil, 203.
Patrick, Bp., quoted, 88, 250.

Paley, quoted, 90.

Penn, W., 122.

Power, P. B., 77.

Pope, 33, 61, 90, 198, 268, 815.

Priests, maintained, 291.

Plato, quoted, 239.

Pym, on oppression, 196.


RICHAEDSON, 6., 13,

Richmond, Legh, 76.

Richter, quoted, 127.

Reynolds, Sir J., 233.

Roberts, 85.

Robertson, quoted, 149.

Ruskin, on names, 11; art, 160; worship,
186.


SOHILLER, quoted, 248.

Seneca, on gold, 193.

Shakespeare, 8, 15, 19, 44, 49, 66, 90, 106,
128, 133, 208, 220, 231, 263,

Shirley, quoted, 266.

Sidney, quoted, 113.

Sheri 213.

Smiles, 8., 49, 283, 310.

Sophocles, 142.

South, 122, 258, 266, 268, 800.

Stanley, Dean, 28, 51, 94, 98, 101, 149, 155,
162, 188, 255, 300.

Spurgeon, 70, 193, 208,

Swift, Dean, 198.

Swinnock, quoted, 260,

Smyth, on inspiration, 29.


Tarior, J., Bp., 101; on prosperity, 150;
hiding sin, 227.

Taylor, Jane, quoted, 11,

Tennyson, 95, 120, 171, 288,

Talleyrand, 114.

Thackeray, quoted, 18,

Thomas, Dr., 203.

Thomson, quoted, 249,

Tupper, Martin, 111, 118.


VAUGHAN, Dr., on cities, 26.
Vinet, quoted, 266.


WASHINGTON, 215.
Webster, quoted, 225.
Wellington, 266.
Wordsworth, 150, 281.
Wordsworth, Bp., 277.


Youna, 5, 11, 22, 53, 65, 133, 140, 2U8, 235,
B16.


vi INDBX,





IIL—ANECDOTES AND ILLUSTRATIVE INCIDENTS.


AMBASSADORS, English, at Persian Court, 61.


Ambrose and Emperor Theodosius, 269.
Alexander the Great, 252.

Alexander, Dr., and preaching, 802.
Augustine’s saying, 232.


BATTLE Abbey, motto of, 89,
Bede, Ven., dying, 816.

Beza’s will, 305.

Blucher at Waterloo, 91.
Brown, J., of Haddington, 88.
Buller, Judge, and advice, 198,
Byron’s fame, 80.


CaMBYSszEs lost army, 294.

Captain, an English, 126.

Cato’s complaint, 224,

Cesar’s letters, 228.

Chalmers’ prayer, 16; on astronomy, 77.

Chanting in old monasteries, 77,

Charles V., 309,

Charles VIII., expedition against Naples,
214.

Charles IX. of France, death of, 259.

Chrysostom’s hearers, 205.

Clifford, Dr., 49.

Councillor French, 197,

Courage illustrated, 300.

Cyprian and Proconsul, 201.


DEATH, nobleman’s, 192,


EDWARD Confessor and kingdom, 9.
Eliot refusing bribes, 43.

Elizabeth, Queen, and courtier, 290.
Emperor Joseph II., visit to Hailer, 18.


FRANOB, nobility of, 194, 198.
French officer’s conversion, 92.


GARDNER, Bp., and English exiles, 201
George III., reproof of clergyman, 259.
God save the , 256,

Greville’s history, 212,


HAYDN’S musical lessons, 198.

Handel and music, 108,

Heber, Bp., poem on Solomon’s temple, 187.
Henry IV. of France, 260.

Horace Vere, Sir, in council of war, 44.


Kin@ John and subjects, 198.

King of Sweden’s prayer before battle, 22;
of Naples and loss, 198,

Kingsley’s, C., birthday, 223,


LATIMER’s motto, 89.


Lind, Jenny, and art, 77.

Livingstone’s journal, 316.

Lowel, 321.

Lewis, St., 52.

Louis XIV., 195, 260.

Luther’s schoolmaster, 11; at Worms, 45;
prayer, 61; in closet, 213.


{| MASSILLON’s preaching, 73.


Mary, Queen of Scots, 257,
Mathews, Father, music of, 282.
Mahommed and army dispute, 128%
Midas and gold, 248.

Mottoes of City company, 73.
Mother and clergyman, 252.


NAPOLEON'S attack, 49; relations, 838;
escape from Elba, 223; saying, 226,
252; Russian expedition, 296.

Nero, 260.


OFFICER’s command,6l,
Orange, William of, in war, 22,
Otho II., Emperor of Germany, 200.


PERSIAN custom and fire, 272; invasion of
Greece. 296.

Philip and Antipater, 226; victory of, 227.

Pliny and worship, 315.


RicHakp II. deposed, 93
Rufus and Anselm, 222


SCHILLER, 114,

Scipio and the Romans, 238
Sennacherib’s fall remembered, 298.
Scotch lady, 106.

Solon’s laws, 315.


peng in battle, 55; ja Ss Paul’s Cross,
‘ 117.


Statue in Windsor Castle, 810.
Stanley, 307.
Strafford and block, 8.


TaciTus, 48.
Turks, 87.


VOLTAIBE’s printing press, 227,
Wak and Romans, 122.


Wellington on battlefield, 43, 69; saluted,
46,


Wesley, Jobn, and Romacilet, 8% ; advias of,


XERXES and Council, 198


INDEX, wi





IV.—ILLUSTRATED TEXTS,


PacE PAGE
65


Acts v. 89... = van eee we 10 | 1 Pot. £ 18 ke pees poo =
” xvii. 26 ooo tee con roe 64 ww fi. 5 ooo vue wo ooo 105
1 Cor. xiv, 33-40... oo eee eco 83 t Ps. v.3 rr won eve =e eoe 173
Wolf 17::.. coe see ooo eee 160 wo xv. Accs seo ooo we eve 5]
Deut. xxxii.3 see ae, an aS YI oo X1i Broce mee ce oe =H RY
Eph. fi. 20 soe as aS a= UY or KX. 0) fees oe ose coe 176, 201
» iii. 123 ove ave eve as USE: en xxi 2 eee ose cee cy dels
mi Ne discs cen mse wes wes «SC | gS EXV. «14 oo gene © 5
Ecc. vi. 12... ooo eee eee ce 138 n Xxvii. 5 woe eve eee ese 58
me ix. 12.2 ooo eee as aa PAY » xxxiv. 16 eee Ae ae as AIR!
Gen. iv. 29 coe ece evo eee 4 n xxxix. 6 wee eos ooo ese 138
“4 vi. 16 eee woe eto ayy hE ” xcvi. 9... eed coe ene oe 13
eee eco owe ee = wees | SC (XC. cos coe Mess ess unas
XO. ooo owe eee woo 6 w» CV. 13... oe wee coe aoe 71
plese = Ser oss ON mrp nCXXVile) eos ove os ee. 81
58. vii. 9 ce eee eee eee eee 274 ” cxlv. lisas eee eee 009 eee 167
We XXivV. 0.00 nee aoe ooo ete rOvaxh 24 eee ae fe aay PAP
rr XXVI a eee eco wee ooo 54 ” xvi. 3 eee ove seo exe 58
" xlili. 16 eee ooo wor eco 80 ” xxi. i, 23 vee ene ene woe 57
> Ixvi. 5 see eee eee eee eee 307 ry xxiv, 27 eee coe ooo eee 53
Jer. yi 16: 2 see coe eee ese 215 ” xxvii. 18 cee owe ooo ese 119
Py oO) 31 ae tee = ae PAYS a Seobe, VAY ay aaa eee coe 4224
SOR ShfS Sa 9 oe ASRS a SS SRT hk Da Sn cay ee eR NRE rae
” xxii. re 13 eee eee ons cod shig y Rom. i. 13 .. “eo ooo ooo eon 78
Josh. vii 15 ooo cos eed on 8 ” ” 23... ose one ees eee «206
Job vi 4 ... ooo coe one Des 95 ” fie leese oe eee eee eee 212
” xxxiv. 29 ooo eee eee ooo 215 2 Sam. v. 9 ove eee eee eo 40
1 John ii 2 eee oo cor ae 99 ” vi. 7 eee woo eee eee §3
1 Kings xL oo eee - <_v 36 a vii. 13 eee eee coe eee 317
Lake i. 5 ... ewe eee ove — 114 1 Tim. i. 16 sec eee eco eee 302
Mal. vii. 82; ooo ere ae fom 219 ” vi. 20 «eo ooo eee on 200
Math, ii. 6... 2ee oe os ee 40 2 Tim. i 14 eee eee eae ete 201
Neh. iii. 34 — zoe med ae 40 ” L650. oo -_ we ooo 48
~ viii 10 = ooo ose 4 49 | 2 Thess. fi. 11,12 wae nee a Sh!)





HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY


ON THE BOOK OF


EZRA.


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTE:
ILLUSTRATIONS, AND INDEXES.


BY


WILLIAM JONES.


Printed in the United States


FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK anp LONDON





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


On TRE


BOOK OF EZRA


——— Gee


INTRODUCTION,


L The Nature of the Book. The Book of Ezra was correctly characterised by
Bishop Hilary as “a continuation of the Books of Chronicles,” The Second Book
of Chronicles brings the bistory of the people of Israel down to the destruction of
the Temple of Jehovah and of the city of Jerusalem, and the carrying captive
into Babylon such of the people that remained in the land. The Book of Ezra
takes up the history of the nation at the close of the seventy years of captivity,
and tells of the return of some of the exiles to Jerusalem under Zerubbabel
prince of Judah, and by permission of Cyrus king of Persia, of the restoration of
the worship of Jehovah and the rebuilding of His Temple by them, of the return
of a second company of exiles many years afterwards under Ezra, the celebrated
priest and scribe, and by permission of Artaxerxes king of Persia, and of the social
and religious reformation which was accomplished under Ezra, And some portion
of this history is given in contemporary historical documents, which seem to have
been written “from time to time by the prophets, or other authorised persons, who
were eyewitnesses for the most part of what they record,” and were collected by the
author and incorporated by him into his work.


IL The Design of the Book. From a survey of the contents of this book, Keil
concludes “that the object and plan of its author must have been to collect only
such facts and documents as wight show the manner in which the Lord God, after
the lapse of the seventy years of exile, fulfilled His promise announced by the
prophets, by the deliverance of His people from Babylon, the building of the
Temple at Jerusalem, and the restoration of the Temple worship according to the
law, and preserved the reassembled community from fresh relapses into heathen
customs and idolatrous worship by the dissolution of the marriages with Gentile
women. Moreover, the restoration of the Temple and of the legal Temple worship,
and the separation of the heathen from the newly-settled community, were neces-
sary and indispensable conditions for the gathering out of the people of God from
among the heathen, and for the maintenanee and continued existence of the nation
of Israel, to which and through which God might at His own time fulfil and realise
His promises to their forefathers, to make their seed a blessing to all the families
of the earth, in a manner consistent both with His dealings with this people
hitherto, and with the further development of His promises made through the
prophets, The significance of the Book of Ezra in sacred history lies in the fact
that it enables us to perceive how the Lord, on the one hand, so disposed the
hearts of the kings of Persia, the then rulers of the world, that in spite of all the

a 1


. HOMILBTIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.





machinations of the enemies of God's people, they promoted the building of His
Temple in Jerusalem, and the maintenance of His worship therein ; and on the
other, raised up for His people, when delivered from Babylon, men like Zerubbabel
their governor, Joshua the high priest, and Ezra the scribe, who, supported by the
prophets Haggai and Zechariah, undertook the work to which they were called,
with hearty resolution, and carried it out with a powerful hand.”


I. The Authorship of the Book. The statement of Keil on this point seems
to us to rest on trustworthy bases: ‘There can be no reasonable doubt that that
author was Ezra, the priest and scribe, who in chaps. vii—x. narrates his return
from Babylon to Jerusalem, and the circumstances of his ministry there, neither ita
language nor contents exhibiting any traces of a later date.” It is not meant by
this that the whole book is the original work of Ezra, but that it was put together
by him, and that the last four chapters, and probably some portions of the other
chapters, were his original work. As illustrations of historical documents which
were collected by Ezra and embodied in his work, we may mention the list of
names in chap. ii, which is also inserted in Neh. vii. 6-73, and “ which must have
been composed in the earliest times of the re-establishment of the congregation”
(see Neh. vii. 5), and the letters and decrees which are given in chaps. iv.—vi.

All that we know as certainly true concerning Ezra is recorded in this book
(chaps. vii—x.), and in the Book of Nehemiah (chaps. viii, and xii 26). He was
eminent for his learning, piety, patriotism, love of the Sacred Writings, and zeai
for the honour of God; and was held in the highest esteem by his countrymen in
ancient times, as he is also by those of modern days,


IV. The Canonicity of the Book. On this point Bishop Hervey says: “There
has never been any doubt about Ezra being canonical, although there is no quota-
tion from it in the New Testament. Augustine says of Ezra, ‘magis rerum gesta.
rum scriptor est habitus quam propheta’ (De Cw. Det, xviii. 36).”— Bibl. Dect.


V. Date of the Book. The first event recorded in this book took place in the
first year uf the rule of Cyrus over Babylon (chap. i 1), which was in the year
536 Bo. ; and the work of Ezra, so far as it is recorded in this book, was completed
in the spring of 457 Bo. (chap. x. 17), which was the first spring after Ezra’s
arrival at Jerusalem, which took place in the seventh year of Artaxerxes (chap. vii.
7,9) or 458 Bo. So that this book deals with a period of about eighty years.
But of fifty-seven of these years, which intervene between the conclusion of chap.
vi. and the commencement of chap. vii., nothing is recorded. From the fact that
the history is carried on in this book so far as the spring of 457 B.o., we conclude
that Ezra could not have compiled it before that year. And from the fact that no
mention is made in it of the mission of Nehemiah to Jerusalem, which took place
in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes (Neh. ii. 1) or about 445 B.a,, we infer that it
was written before that date, The probability, therefore, is that the work of Ezra
the scribe must be assigned to some time between the years 457 and 445 B.o,


VL Analysis of the Contents of the Book.
I. THe RETURN OF THE JEWS FROM BABYLON TO JERUSALEM UNDER ZERUB-
BABEL, AND THE REBUILDING OF THE TEMPLE (chaps, i.—vi.).
iL The return of the Jews from Babylon to Jerusalem under Zerubbabel
(chaps. i. and ii).
1. The edict of Cyrus granting permission to the Jews to return and re-
build the Temple at Jerusalem (chap. i. 1-4).
2. The preparations of the Jews for returning (vers. 5 and 6).
8. The restoration of the sacred vessels of the Temple to Zerubbabel prince
of Judah (vers. 7-11).


BOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZRA,


ie RA Be <a ae oa


4. The list of the names and the number of the people who returned
(chap. ii, 1-64).

5. The possessions of those who returned and their offerings for building

the Temple (vers, 65-70).
ti. The erection of the altar, the restoration of worship, and the commence-
ment of the rebuilding of the Temple (chap. iii.).
hit, The hindrance of the work by the Samaritans (chap. iv.).

1. The request of the Samaritans to co-operate in the rebuilding of the
Temple, and its refusal by the Jewish authorities (chap. iv. 1-3).

2. The opposition of the Samaritans in consequence of this refusal
(vers. 4-6).

8. The letter of the hostile Samaritans to Artaxerxes the king (vers. 7-16).

4. The reply of the king to this letter, in consequence of which the work
was arrested (vers. 17-24

iv. The renewal and the completion of the rebuilding of the Temple (chaps.
v. and 7i.).

1. The renewal of the work in consequence of the prophesying of Haggai
and Zechariah (chap, v. 1, 2).

2. The inquiries of the Persian officers concerning the work, and their
report to Darius the king, which includes the reply of the Jews to
their inquiries (vers. 3-17). —-

8. The reply of Darius to the letter of his officers, including the discovery
of the edict of Cyrus, and the commands of Darius to his officers to
allow and to promote the rebuilding of the Temple (chap. vi. 1-12).

4, The completion of the Temple (vers. 13-15).

5. The dedication of the Temple (vers. 16-18).

6. The celebration of the feast of the Passover (vers. 19-22).

II. THE RETUEN OF THE JEWS FROM BABYLON TO JERUSALEM UNDER Ezra,
AND THE REFORMATION WHICH HE ACCOMPLISHED AMONGST THE PEOPLE (chaps.
vii.—x.).

A The return of Esra and his company from Babylon to Jerusalem (chaps.
vii. and viii.).

1. The genealogy of Ezra, and a statement concerning his going with others
to Jerusalem (chap. vii. 1-10).

%. The letter of Artaxerxes the king, authorising Ezra to do certain
things (vers. 11-26).

8. Ezra’s praise to God for the kindness of the king (vers. 27 and 28).

4, The list of the names and the number of those who accompanied Ezra
(chap. viii. 1-14).

6. Their encampment by “ the river that runneth to Ahava,” from whence
Ezra sent for ministers for the Temple, and prepared for the journey
by fasting and prayer, and by the delivery of the precious things of
the Temple into the hands of twelve priests and an equal number
of Levites (vers. 15-30).

8. The journey “ from the river Ahava” to Jerusalem (vers. 31 and 32),

7. The giving up of the precious things to certain priests and Levites in
the Temple, and the presentation of offerings unto the Lord (vers.
33-35).

8. The deliverance of the king’s decree to the Persian satraps and gover
nors west of the Euphrates (ver, 36).

tt. The social and religious reformation effected by Ezra (chaps. ix. and x.),

1. The evil to be remedied, viz., the marriages of the Jews with heathen
women (chap. ix. 1, 2).

2. The sorrow and prayer of Ezra in consequence of this evil (vera
3-15).





CHAP, L \ HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.








3. The proposal of Sheckaniah for the removal of the evil, and its accept-
ance by Ezra (chap. x. 1-3).

4. The accomplishment of the reformation (vers, 6-17).

5. The names of those who had married heathen wives and put them
away (vers, 18-44).


Respecting our own work, we have very little to add to what we stated in the
introduction to The Homiletic Commentary on Numbers, as the method of that work
is followed in this also,

A considerable number of selected sermon outlines by various authors will be
found in the following pages. By their introduction we bave sought to secure
variety in relation both to the mental view and the homiletic treatmeut of the texta

We wish to acknowledge our obligations to the expositions of Professor Fr,
W. Schultz (in the great work of Dr, Lange), C. F. Keil, D.D., Matthew Henry,
and Thomas Scott.


CHAPTER L


Crrrican awp Exruanatory Nores.] In this chapter we have (i.) the proclamation ef
Cyrus (vers, 1-4); (ii.) the preparation of the Jews for availing themselves of it (vers 5, 6)
and (iii.) the restoration of the sacred vessels (vers. 7-11).

Ver. 1. Now, Heb. }, amd] The conjunction connects the history of the restoration of the Jewa


with the history of the destruction of their capital and kingdom, as in 2 Chron. xxxvi. 22. In
the first year of Cyrus] ie. the first year of his rule over Babylon, which was 5360. Cyrus,
wD is the Hebrew for the ancient Persian Kurus, Greek Kopos. ‘‘ As to the meaning of


the name,” says Fuerst, ‘‘the ancients have already observed that it is an expression for the
sun. The sun was called in old Persian Khor, Khur. v— is the sign of the Persian nomi-
native s or «sh. a cuneiform inscriptions the name is Khurush.” Persia] ‘‘ B98 signifies in
Biblical phraseology the Persian Empire (comp. Dan. vy. 28; vi. 8, &c.)”—Keil. That the
word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah] &c. The prophecy referred to is in Jer. xxv.
11, 12; xxix. 10. The seventy years began in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, when Nebuchad-
nezzar first took Jerusalem and carried Daniel and others, with part of the vessela of the house
of God, to Babylon (2 Kings xxiii, 86-xxiv. 4; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 5-8; Jer. xlvi. 2; Dan. i. 1,
2). This was the year 606 8.o. And, as we have geen, the first year of the rule of Cyrus over
Babylon was 536 8.0., which completes the seventy years, The Lord stirred up the spirit of
Cyrus] i.e. God ipspired within him the desire and the determination (comp, 1 Chron. v. 263
2 Chron. xxi. 16, Hag. i. 14). Made @ proclamation] Margin: ‘‘ Caused a voice to pass,”
The expression signifies to make known by heralds (comp, Exod. xxxvi. 6; 2 Chron. xxx. 53
chap. x. 7; Neh. viii. 15). And put it also in writing] Schultz: ‘‘ And also (made known)
by writing.” In addition to the proclamation by heralds, Cyrus issued written edicts,

Ver. 2, All the kingdoms of the earth] These words, which are not to be taken literally,
‘*are explained, from the wide extent of the Persian Empire. When Cyrus conquered Babylon,
he had already subjugated to himself almost the entire eastern Asia, even to the Indian Ocean
(according to Berosus in Josephus, ¢. Ap.). Afterwards he pressed southward also, and entered
even into Egypt and Ethiopia.”— Schultz. He hath charged me] &. ‘‘It is a reasonable
conjecture,” says Rawlinson, ‘‘that, on the capture of Babylon, Cyrus waa brought into per-
sonal contact with Daniel, and that his attention was drawn by that prophet to the prophecy
of Isaiah (Isa. xliv, 24-28 ; xlv. 1 seg.) Cyrus probably accepted this prophecy asa ‘charge’
to rebuild the Temple.”

Ver. 8. All His people] Not Judah only, but also the descendants of the ten tribes. He
is the God which is in Jerusalem] does not mean that His presence was confined to that
ae but that He had chosen it as the chief seat of His worship (comp, Neh, i. 9, last clause ;

8. xlviii. 1, 2; exxxii, 13, 14),

Ver. 4 And whosoever remaineth] &c. Schultz: ‘‘ And as for every one of the survivors”
(comp. Neh, i. 2; Hag. ii. 8). The men of his place] signifies those who were not Israelites,
Help him] Margin: “Heb. lift him up.” Both Keil and Schults give the meaning “ to assist.”
Goods} Fuerst : ‘‘ Movable property.” Schults: “ Here perhaps clothing or tents.” Beside the
freewill offering] &c. ¢.¢ in addition to the gifts intended for the rebuilding of the Temple.


Ver. v With all] &c. Keil would render this, ‘‘in short,” or, “namely, all whose apirit,”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EERA. OHAP, L.


ft


&. He saya, ‘‘the ° in bab serves to comprise the remaining persona, and may therefore
be rendered by, in short, or namely.” Many elected to remain in Babylon.

Ver. 6, All they that were about them] both their heathen neighbours aad the Jewa whe
preferred to remain in Babylon. Strengthened their hands] The idea is correctly expressed
in the margin: ‘‘that ig, helped them,”

Ver. 7. The vessels of the house of the Lord] &e.
2 Chron. xxxvi. 7, and Dan. i. 2.

Ver. 8. Mithredath] According to Rawlinson, the Persian is Mtthradata, and is made up
of Mtthra, ‘‘the sun-god,” and data past part. of da, ‘‘to give,” and signifies ‘‘given by
Mithra.”” Sheshbazzar] is the Chaldee name of Zerubbabel. The etymology and meaning
of the name are uncertain. The prince of Judah] He was of the royal family of Judah
(1 Chron, iii. 19; Matt. i. 12), and was the recognised head of that tribe at this time.

Vers. 9, 10] I'he usual names for the sacred vessels are not used here, and consequently
there is much uncertainty as to their meaning.

Ver. 11. Five thousand and four hundred] This total is more than double the numbers
which are given in detail in vers. 9,10. The statement of Keil may be correct: “The differ-
ence between the two statements has certainly arisen from errora in the numbers, for the
correction of which the means are indeed wanting.” But we prefer the suggestion of J. H.
Michaelis, “that the author passed over many subordinate vessels in the detail, but in the sum
total has taken them all into consideration.”


Most probably those mentioned ia


Tse FULFILMENT oF THE Worp oF THE LORD.
(Verse 1.)


Here are four things which claim our
attention :—

L The regard of God for His word.
“Now in the first year of Cyrus king
of Persia, that the word of the Lord by
the mouth of Jeremiah might be ful-
filled,” &c. The word referred to is in
Jer. xxix. 10; “Thus saith the Lord,
That after seventy years be accomplished
at Babylon I will visit you, and perform
My good word toward you, in causing
you to return to this place.” The seventy
years were now accomplished, and God
proceeds to perform His word to His
people. He is punctual in the fulfilment
of His promises, ‘God is not a man,
that He should lie” &c. (Num. xxiii. 19).
“ Heaven and earth shall pass away, but
My words shall not pass away.” “The
word of the Lord endureth for ever,”
“ He abideth faithful ; He cannot deny
Himself.” We have in this—

1. An assurance that the prophectes
and promises of His word will be fulfilled.
“ As the architect progressively executes
every part of the plan which he had
delineated, till the whole design is com-
pleted, so God in His providence per-
forms in due order all the prophecies
of His word: a great proportion of His
great scheme has already been accom-
_ plished, and revolving ages will hasten
the performance of all the rest in the
appointed periods.”—Scott. (a)


2. An encouragement to trust in Him,
“Whoso putteth his trust in the Lord
shall be set on high.” ‘‘ Blessed is that
man that maketh the Lord his trust,”
See Ps. xxii 4, 5; xviii. 2. (b)

I. The mercy of God to His people.
This mercy is seen—

1. In the design and effect of the cap-
tivity. The captivity was the punish-
ment of their many sins, and especially
their idolatry; and was designed to
eradicate their apparently inveterate
tendency to idolatry. And in this it
was thoroughly successful, ‘“ Prone be-
fore on every occasion to adopt the
idolatrous practices of the adjacent
nations, the Jews now secluded them-
selves from the rest of the world, in
proud assurance of their own religious
superiority. The law, which of old was
perpetually violated or almost forgotten,
was now enforced by general consent to
its extreme point, or even beyond it,
Adversity endeared that of which in
prosperity they had not perceived the
value. Prone, the mass of them, all
but the wiser and more enlightened,
who worshipped Jehovah, to worship
Him but as a national God, greater and
mightier than the gods of other nations
(a conception in itself polytheistic), they
threw aside this lower kind of pride to
assume that of the sole people of the
One True God.” In this way the pun-

5


ishment of their sins was an expression
of the Divine mercy tothem. ‘‘He doth
not afflict willingly, nor grieve the chil-
dren of men,” ‘Thus the Divine word
of chastisement,” says Schultz, “ ever
goes hand in hand with His word of
salvation. His chastening is in truth
ever a helping; yea, His killing is a
making alive. He puts to death only
the dead.”

2. In the release from captivity. (1.)
As to its time. The emancipation was
not delayed one moment longer than
was necessary. As soon as the exile
had accomplished its purpose, the Lord
brought it to a conclusion. ‘ Though
He cause grief, yet will He have com-
passion, according to the multitude of
His mercies.” (2.) As to its meaning.
It was aa assurance of the Divine for-
giveness of their sins, Isaiah clearly
expresses this: “Comfort ye, comfort
ye My people, saith your God,” &e.
(Isa. xl. 1, 2), Their release was also
the commencement of many and great
blessings, “This chapter contains,”
says Schultz, “nothing less than the
beginning of the fulfilment of all the
great and glorious prophecies with which
the prophets before the exile brightened
the gloomy night of the severe judgments
of God—the dawning light of the grace
of God in all its greatness, that would
reawaken the people of God from death
and the grave, and enable them to live
a new and glorious life—the glorious
liberty of the children of God in the
fullest and highest sense. What a
great revolution of affairs was now to
be expected! What a fulness of salva-
tion after the night of misfortune—the
entire extent of Messianic redemption!”

Il The influence of God upon the
spirit of man. “The Lord stirred up
the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia.”

1. The nature of this tnjfluence. ‘The
Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus,”
“This does not mean,” says Schultz,
“that Cyrus was influenced in the same
way as were the prophets, upon whom,
with their greater susceptibility, the
Spirit of the Lord came; but yet an
influence in consequence of which Cyrus
made the will of God his own will, and
executed it im the things under con-

&


_ HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: EZRA.





sideration, God gave him the resolution
and the desire to execute His intention.”
All the pure desires and noble resolu-
tions of men’s hearts are Divine inspira-
tions, All the good in human life is the


result of Divine influence. (c)


2. The subject of this influence.
“Cyrus king of Persia.” Cyrus was
the greatest king of the mightiest empire
of the world ; he was a heathen, but, in
common with his countrymen at this
period, was probably a pure Theist,
believing in One Supreme Being. As
a prince, he was distinguished for his
justice, and for the mildness and kind-
ness of his administration. His relations
to the people of God, and the terms by
which they are described in the Scrip-
tures, are very remarkable. He is
spoken of as “the righteous man”
(Isa. xli. 2); “ My shepherd” (Isa. xliv.
28), and ‘The Lord’s anointed” (Isa
xlv. 1). God employed this celebrated
heathen monarch in the accomplishment
of His purposes, in the emancipation of
His people, and the rebuilding of His
Temple. (d) “The king’s heart is in the
hand of the Lord, as the rivers of water”
He turneth it whithersoever He will.:
He is now using the powers of the
world to promote the interests of His
cause. We have in this an earnest of
His final victory over all heathen powers,
“The kings of Tarshish and of the isles
shall bring presents,” &e. (Ps. Ixxii
10, 11).

3. The design of thisinfiuence. ‘The
Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, that
he made a proclamation,” &c Divine
influence was exerted upon Cyrus to
cause him to do an act of great gene
rosity and nobility. The intention of
the action of God upon the spirit of man
is always gracious. In all the inspira
tions and impressions which He imparts
to man, His aim is to save and bless
him, and to make him an agent in
blessing others,

IV. The suitable response of man
to the influence of God. ‘‘Cyrus made
a proclamation throughout all his king-
dom,” dc, God’s influence upon the
spirit of man is not irresistible. He
impresses man, but He does not coerce
him. He inspires man, but He does


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: E#RA.





not compel him, Divine influence does
not invade human freedom. Man may
harden himself against it, may resist it
to his own injury. “Ye do always
resist the Holy Ghost,” was a charge
brought by Stephen against the Jews.
Or, like Cyrus, man may yield to this
influence, and suitably and heartily re-
spond to it, When this is the case the
Divine influence results in rich blessings.
“Quench not the Spirit.” “ Grieve not
the Holy Spirit of God.” (e)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Is God all-mighty? Then be assured
that the throne of right shall stand upon the
ruins of all wrong; but here God is apparently
at a disadvantage, because you cannot kill evil
with the sword. The abolition of evil is a
work of time, requiring the combination, the
conspiring of innumerable moral influences
and educational forces; but that conspiring
ig going on, ‘* The Lord is not slack concern-
ing His promises, as some men count slack-
ness.” —Joseph Parker, D.D.


(6) ‘I will go before thee.” This was a
Divine promise made to Cyrus; and God hag
made the same promise to all who put their
trus,in Him. It is surely something to have
a Father's promise singing inthe beart. Many
of us know the inspiration even of a human
promise; many of us know that we never
could have endured this bitter trial, or sur-
mounted that overshadowing difficulty, had
we not enjoyed the presence and hopefulness
of some friendly promise in the heart. What
we want to feel is the triumphant faith that
says definitely to God, “Thou didst promise
this, and we will wait for ite fulfilment,”’—
Ibid.


(c) It is taught that, besides the general
moral influences, unconscious and diffueed—
ag it were distilled, like dew, in silence and
darkness—there is an active energy, arousing,
filling, impelling the souls of men, It is said
that the Spirit of the Lord came upon judges,
that it came upon kings, upon prophets, upon
apostles—came mightily and atirred them up.
As sudden and mighty winds make trees rock,
and wrench them, and even overturn them,
50, a8 by a mighty rushing wind, the Spirit of
God has deacended on men—on Samuel, on
Darid, on Isaiah, on Paul. It is taught, like-
wise, that, while this energy of the Divine
mind prepared certain men for emergencies,
and prepared them to act official parts, all
true Christiana, all godly souls, are opening
to a quickening inflnence, if not so mighty
yet of the same general kind—en influence
which stimulates, asaiste, ripens, and go finally
sanctifies,


OHAP, IL.





The Divine Spirit works along the line of a
man’s own thinking power, along the channel
of a man’s own motive power, and wakes up
in the man that which wasin him. It is not
said that God’s thought rolls along and be-
comes a part—a material part—of the current
of our thought; on the contrary, it is said
that God makes us think, makes us will,
makes us feel, What is the formula? ‘‘ Work
out your own salvation with fear and trem-
bling.” That is, work, work im earnest, as
men do about a thing which they are afraid
they shall not accomplish, Why? Because
‘it is God that worketh in you”—what}
putting His own will there and His own
thought ?—because ‘‘it is God that worketh
in you ¢o will and todo.” There is the point
in which the Divine influence expends itself,
according to the explicit testimony of Scrip.
ture, for the development in man of that
which he had in him of dormant power.—
Hi. W. Beecher.


(d) One of the designations of Cyrus, ‘‘the
man that executeth My counsel,” furnishes
the key to the prophetic view of his character
and position—a view which pervades all that is
said of him, and promised to him. This forms
the most striking and the most sustained of
the instances in which the Lord not only
asserts His supremacy in the government of
the world, but reveals to us the mode in which
that government operates, and the form in
whieh it ig most usually conducted. The
marked manner in whieh Cyrus and his
Persians are represented ag set apart to exe-
cute the purposes of the Lord, while they con-
sidered themselves pursuing their own objects,
cannot fail to suggest many interesting reflec-
tiong respecting the manner in which the Lord
acta in executing the high purposes of His will
—often by agents who little think whom they
are serving, and who are, it may be, aa in this
case, ignorant even of His name,


The greatest difficulty is supposed to be
found in the designation of Cyrus, a heathen,
asa ‘‘righteous man,” But this title, which
indicates one who acts with habitual rectitude,
who would not consciously inflict wrong—a
just man, is not in Seripture confined to
Israelites ; and, what is more, it correctly
describes the character of Cyrus, which, not
less than his military exploits, caused his name
to be long held in honour by his countrymen,
. .» In fact, as Dr. Henderson remarks: ‘It
is not a little remarkable, that of all the virtu-
ous princes of antiquity, he alone was thought
worthy of being exhibited ag a model of just
government, Not only was he exemplary in
private life, but his victories and conquesta
had for their object the vindication of law and
justice. He ia even said to have been an
object of the Divine love (Isa. xlviii. 14), Hia
destruction of the Babylonian Empire and
liberation of the Jews were special acts of
righteousness; and the abolition of idolatry,

in a great measure followed the success


7


Omar, 1





of the Persian arms, comes also under the
game head.” ...

. . . But the Lord had not only called Cyrus
by his name—He had ‘‘surnamed” him, as
our translation somewhat vaguely renders it.
What is meant is, not that He had given him
any surname—for the name already mentioned
was his own proper name—but that He had
made hononrable mention’ of him, and be-
atowed upon him titles of high honour, such
as no heathen prince had ever received. What
were these titles and honourable distinctions ?
One of them, “The righteous man,” has ale
ready engaged our attention. Two more occur
in the passage last extracted (Isa. xliv. 28, xlv.
1-4): ‘‘My shepherd” and ‘‘ Mine anointed.”

As to the first of these titles, that of “shep-
herd,” we know that good kings and rulers
gre called shepherds in Scripture, as they are
in the ancient classics, It is a fact, however,
that David, Cyrus, and Christ in His Messianic
character, are the only sovereigns to whom the
title is personally given. In other instances
it is applied to the office of sovereign rather
than to the person of any particular king.
What ig more remarkable is, that this very
title was one to which Cyrus was partial, and
the purport of which he fully appreciated,
Xenophon describes him as saying, ‘‘ The
basiness of a good king and a good shepherd
are much alike. The shepherd ought, before
all things, to provide for the welfare and safety
of his flock, and to make use of these creatures
consistently with their happiness; and a king
ought, in the game manner, to make men and
cities happy, and in the same manner to make
nee of them.”

Cyrus, again, is called “the Lord’s anointed,”
in reference to the ancient custom of anointing
kings with oil at their inauguration, To be
merely the ‘‘anointed,” was, therefore, no
ghar distinction to Cyrus, but to be ‘‘the

ord’s anointed” was a very high distinc-
tion ; and it is given to him obviously because


HOMSETIO COMMENTARY ; EZRA


:


the Lord had, in His providence, appointed
him to be the prince under whose rule the
Jews were to be restored, and the other pur-
poses of His will accomplished.—John Kitto,
D.D.


(e) When we gee a casket wrenched open,
the hinges torn away, or the clasp destroyed,
we mark at once the hand of the spoiler ; but
when we observe another casket deftly opened
with a master key, and the sparkling contenta
revealed, we note the hand of the owner,
Conversion is not, a8 some suppose, a violent
opening of the heart by grace, in which will,
reason, and judgment are all ignored or
crushed. This is too barbarous a method for
Him who comes not as a plunderer to his
prey, but as a possessor to His treasure. In
conversion, the Lord who made the humana
heart deals with it according to its nature and
constitution. His key insinuates itself inte
the wards; the will is not enslaved but en-
franchised ; the reason is not blinded but en-
lightened ; and the whole man is made to act
with a glorious liberty which it never knew
till it fell under the restraints of grace.—0.
H. Spurgeon.

We are not forced to have God; we can
deliberately take up our pen and atrike His
name out of the page on which we intend to
record our life; or, on the other hand, we can
gay, “ We are of yesterday, and know nothing;
we are so wise as not to be able to tell what
will occur to-morrow; we are so empty and
barren as to carry our little earthly immor-
tality in our nostrils. Lord, lead, and we shall
follow; we accept Thy mercy; we will go
where Thou goest.” So, then, religion is no
tyranny ; it is no pitiless compulsion of under-
standing and heart which we resent, but a
blessing which first makes us poor, that it
may afterwards enrich us with unwasting
riches of purity, and strength, and love.—
Joseph Parker, D.D,


RESEMBLANCE BETWEEN THE PROCLAMATION OF CYRUS AND
THE GOSPEL


(Verse 1.)


IL In the disposition from which it
originated. The motive which actuated
the Persian emperor was benevolence.
The love of Christ.

II. In the deliverance which it an-
nounced. From Babylon to Canaan,
From the captivity of Satan and sin
to a state of salvation here and here-
after,

TIL In the terms which it specifled.


5


No pecuniary compensation for liberty
Salvation by grace.

IV. In the universality of its offers.
Every Hebrew captive. Every sinner is
invited.

V. In the aids it promised. Provi-
sion of help for the journey. Provi-
dential and spiritual aid for Christias.
There were some who did not welcome the
proclamation of Cyrus —George Brooks.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA,


a — eee


{


Tue Epicor or Crrvs.
(Verses 2-4.)


Notice:

I. The devout acknowledgment of
God’s sovereignty.

1. In the bestowment of His favours.
“Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The
Lord God of heaven hath given me all
the kingdoms of the earth.” The Persian
Empire at this time was very vast in its
extent. In Isaiah xli. 2, the Lord is
represented as giving the nations to the
righteous man from the East, and making
him ruler over kings. The prophecy
was remarkably fulfilled in Cyrus. (a),
His attention was probably called to it
by Daniel; and, perceiving its striking
applicability to himself, he speaks of
his wide dominions as given to him by
Jehovah the God of heaven. (4). “The
Most High ruleth in the kingdom of
taen, and giveth it to whomsvever He
will.” ‘¢ His dominion is an everlasting
dominion, and His kingdom is from
generation to generation ; and He doeth
according to His will in the army of
heaven,” &c, (Dan. iv, 32, 34, 35).
“Promotion cometh neither from the
east, nor from the west, nor from the
south: but God isthe Judge ; He putteth
down one, and setteth up another.”
God bestows His gifts according to His
own wise and righteous will, (c).

2. In the authority of Hts commands.
“And He hath charged me to build
Him an house at Jerusalem, which is in
Judah.” In Isaiah xliv. 28, it is pre
dicted that Cyrus would say ‘“‘to Jeru-
sale, Thou shalt be built; and to the
Temple, Thy foundation shall be laid.”
Josephus (Ant. xi. i 1, 2) states that
Cyrus having read the prophecies by
Isaiah on this matter, “an earnest de-
sire and ambition seized upon him to
fulfil what was so written.” He accepted
it as a charge from God. Moreover, it
is probable that God charged him by
His own immediate action upon hia
spirit. As He stirred up his spirit to
make the proclamation, He also pro-
bably charged his spirit to rebuild the
Temple. And the king acknowledged


His authority, accepted the charge, and
proceeded to execute it. (@}. All the
commandments of the Lord are righteous,
and are ever binding. He is infinitely
holy, and His will is ever authoritative
on all moral beings everywhere, (¢).

I. The magnanimous emancipation
of God’s people. ‘“ Who is there among
you of all His people? his God be with
him, and let him go up to Jerusalem
which is in Judah, and build the house
of the Lord God of Israel, He is the God
which is in Jerusalem.” The edict of
Cyrus does not grant political freedom
to the Jews, but full religious liberty,
with permission to go up to Jerusalem
to rebuild the national Temple and re-
store the celebration of its worship.

Notice :

1. The spirtt in which the emancipation
was made. (1.) It was generous, “ Who
among you of all His people$” Hae
does not attempt to keep back any, All
are quite at liberty to depart if they are
so minded, (2.) It was pious, “ His God
be with him.” Thus he wishes them the
presence and blessing of God ; and having
these, they would be sure to succeed.

2. The purpose for which the emanct-
pation was made, “Let him go up to
Jerusalem which is in Judah, and build
the house of the Lord God of Israel, He
is the God which is in Jerusalem.” He
sets them free, not for purposes of war,
but of worship; not for his own ag-
grandisement, but for the honour of
God ; that they might build a temple,
not to Ormuzd the god of the Persians,
but to Jehovah the God of Israel.

III. The generous exhortation to
assist God’s people. ‘ And whosoever
remaineth in any place where he so
journeth, let the men of his place help
him,” dic. (ver. 4).

Notice :

1. The purport of thts exhortation.
That the subjects of Cyrus should assist
the returning Jews with gifts. These
gifts were of two classes :—(1.) Some were
for their personal use. “ Help him with

9


CHAR, &





silver, and with gold, and with goods,
and with beasts.” (2.) The others were
for the great work which they were about
to undertake. “The freewill offering
for the house of God that is in Jeru-
zalem.”

2. The persons to whom it was ad-
dressed. ‘The men of his place” are
those who belonged not to the Israelites
—the heathen amongst whom they had
sojourned, and whose goodwill they seem
to have won, We may view it as an
example of the world helping the Church
in its enterprises. In spiritual things
the world is unable to do this, but by
material gifts it may aid the Church in
the prosecution of its holy mission.

3. The pattern by which it was en-
forced. It is probable that Cyrus en-
forced his exhortation by his example,
in bestowing liberal gifts upon the re-
turning exiles, Rawlinson regards “ the
freewill offering for the house of God” as
the gift of Cyrus himself. This is doubt-
ful; but there is very little reason to
doubt that he did render them personal
help of this kind. He not only wished
them well, but helped them to realise his
wishes.

LEseons :

1. Be prepared to acknowledge and
appreciate moral excellence outside of the
visible Church ef God. Cyrus, the cen-
turion of Capernaum (Luke vii. 1-10),
and Cornelius the centurion (Acts x. 22)
are examples,

2. Imitate Cyrus in his practical ac-
knowledgment of the sovereignty of God.

3. When we cannot offer our labours
in good enterprises, let us cheerfully offer
our gifts,


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(w) In the forty-firat chapter of Isaiah, the
Almighty is sublimely introduced as demand-
ing who it was that had raised up this great
conqueror, this Cyrus, characterised as ‘‘ the
righteous man from the Bast ;” who had called
him to His foot—that ig, had made him the
instrament of the high purposes of His will.
“Who,” the interrogation proceeds,


*€ Gave the nations before him,
And made him ruler over kings?
He gave them as the dust to his sword.
And oe riches stubble to his bow.








_OMILETIO OOMMENTARY: EZRA.





He pursued them, and passed safely ;

Even by the way that he had not gone with
his feet,

Who hath wrought and done it,

Calling the generations from the beginning {

I the Lord, the First,

And with the last; Iam He.”


This assertion of the instrumentality of Cyrus
—of his being in a peculiar manner the child
of the Lord’s providence, is always thus em-
phatically produced, and gives the clue to his
history.

The fact that the Persians had not before
taken part in the affairs of the West, and, in
particular, that Cyrus had not, is clearly pointed
out in the lines which deseribe his westward
march as one not previously known to his feet.
In fact, he had to march so far west as to the
neighbourhood of Sardis, before he was enabled
to meet the enemy in full force and give him
battle. This Sardis was the capital of the
Lydian Empire ; and it seems to have been the
policy of Croesus to draw the Persian far away
from his own resources, and into the district
where his own means were most available,
before he gave him the opportunity of coming
to a decisive action,

The extent of this victory and its important
consequences are indicated by the largeness of
the terms employed ; not one nation, but many
nations, not one king, but many kings, are
given ‘‘as the dust to his sword, and as the
driven stubble to his bow.” Accordingly, the
nations who had leagued against him on this
occasion, and whom he subdued, were Lydian,
Greeks, Egyptians, Babylonians, and all the
nations of Asia Mimor, and, taken in a large
sense, with reference to the final extension of
his power, it embraced the Medes, Hyrcaniana,
Aseyrians, Arabians, Cappadocians, Phrygians,
Lydians, Carians, Phosnicians,and Babylonians,
“He ruled also,” says Xenophon, ‘‘ over the
Bactrians, Indians, and Cilicians, as well ag
the Sacians, Paphlagonians, and Megadinians,
and many other nations, whose names even
one cannot enumerate. He ruled the Greeks
that were settled in Asia; and, descending to
the sea, the Cyprians and the Egyptians. These
nations heruled,though their languages differed
from his own, and from each other; and yet
was he enabled to extend the fear of himself
over 80 great a part of the world, as to astonish
all, so that no one dared to attempt anything
against him.”—John Kitto, D.D.


(0) Cyrus saw and acknowledged the Hand
Ne which his path had been marked out, and
his steps guided ; and he hastened to testify
his convictions and his obedience by executing
with earnestness the remaining task to which
he had been called—that of restoring the Jewa
to their own land. These are the memorable
words of the edict which was promulgated in
writing throagh all his empire: ‘‘ Jehovah, the

of heaven, hath given me all the kingdoms
of the earth ; and He hath charged me to build
Him an house at Jerusalem, which ia in Judah.”
There ie nothing indefinite or uncertain in


SHOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: EZRA.





this. If he had said simply, ‘‘the God of
heaven,” we might have been doubtful as to
his meaning. It might have been understood
of the god he had been used to worship. But
here he gives Him the name by which the
Lord was peculiarly known among the Hebrews
—the great name of Jehovah; and declares
unreservedly his conviction that Hg was “the
God of heaven.” Surely this is a great de-
claration, It shows not only that Cyrus ree
cognised the truth and inspiration of these
prophecies, but that they wrought the convie-
tion in his mind that the Jehovah, in whose
name they were uttered, was, and could be, no
other than ‘‘ the God of heaven.”

That this “Jehovah, the God of heaven,”
and not his own Ormuzd, ‘‘had given him all
the kingdoms of the earth,’ he could only
bave known from Isaiah’s prophecy, which
declared the intention to give them to him, ao
long before he saw the light. Indeed, if he
believed anything at all of the prophecy, he
could not but believe this—that he owed all
his glory and his greatness to his being the
predestinated’and prenominated agent of Je-
hovah ; and that it was He, and no other, who
had made the nations ‘‘as dust to his sword,
and as driven stubble to his bow.’’— Ibid.


{c) The whole world is in the hand of God,
let us be thankful, The whole past is under
His review, let us leave it with the agsurance
that His judgment is righteous. The whole
future is under His eontrol, let us pass into it
with the steadiness, the quietness, and the
majesty of those who know that all the re-
sources of God are placed at the disposal of all
who put their whole trust in His wisdom and
love. —Joseph Parker, D.D.


(d) %t was only throuch Isaiah’s prophecy
that Cyrus could have realised the conviction
that “Jehovah, God of Israel,” had, as he
says, ‘‘charged me to build Him an house at
Jerusalem, which isin Judah,” For nowhere
else is this command given; and nothing but
the convincing evidence of this command being
contained in an old prophecy, which in s0
many other circumstanees unmistakably in-
dicates him and no other, could have inveated
this command, to his thoughtful and sagacious
mind, with an authority and power not to be


CHAP. 1,
4





gainsaid, The intensity of his conviction is,
however, manifested by the alacrity and fulness
with which he discharged the high duty im-
posed upon him. Thia gives a marked inten-
sity to the ‘‘me,” ‘‘ He hath charged wm :”
**Me,” and no other. It was not a duty im-
perative on any king of Persia, but on him
personally and individually.—John Kitto, D.D.


(e) The first act of sovereignty is the making
laws. ‘This ia essential to God; no creature’s
will can be the first rule to the creature, but
only the will of God: He only can preseribe
man his duty, and establish the rule of it;
hencej the law is called “the royal law”
(Jas. ii, 8); it being the first and clearest
manifestation of sovereignty, aa the power of
legislation is of the authority of a prince. Both
are joined together in Isa, xxxiii, 22: “The
Lord is our Lawgiver; the Lord is our King,”
—legislative power being the great mark of
royalty. God, asa King, enacts laws by His
own proper authority, and His law ig a declara-
tion of His own sovereignty, and of men’s
moral subjection to Him and dependence on
Him. His sovereignty doth not appear so
much in His promises as in His precepts: a
man’s power over another is not discovered by
promising ; for a promise doth not suppose the
promiser either superior or inferior to the
person to whom the promise is made, It is
not an exercising authority over another, but
over a man’s self ; no man forceth another to
the acceptance of his promise, but only pro-
poseth and encourageth to an embracing of it,
But commanding supposeth always an autho-
rity in the person giving the precept; it
obligeth the person to whom the command is
directed ; a promise obligeth the pets by
whom the promise is made. God, by His
command, binds the creature; by His promise
He binds Himself ; He stoops below his sove-
reignty to lay obligations on His own majesty;
by a precept He binds the creature, by a pro-
mise He encourageth the creature, to an ob-
gervance of His precept. What laws God
makes, man is bound, he virtue of His erea-
tion, to observe; that respects the sovereignty
of God. What promises God makes, man ia
bound to believe ; but that respects the faith-


fulness of God.— Stephen Charnocke, B.D.


Tur PROCLAMATION OF CrRUB,
(Verses 1-5.)


This proclamation, interesting in it-
self, is adapted to convey instruction of
a very edifying nature if properly con-
sidered. We may view it—

L Ina way of literal interpretation.

1. And here that which frst calls for
our notice is the person by whom this
proclamation was tssued It was Cyrus
king of Persia; who, though by educa-


tion ignorant of God, and how He was
to be served, was yet employed as an
instrument in effecting His gracious pur-
poses—which shows the power He exer-
cises over the spirite of men, a power
far exceeding that merely human, which
extends only to their bodies,

2. But the proclamation ttself is that
which more particularly a our at:

1


CalaP, %


. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA,








tention. In this we see that a great
event was to be effected, namely, the
deliverance of the Jews from Babylon,
after a long and trying captivity ; which
event opened to them the pleasing pro-
spect of again worshipping Jehovah in
their native land. This God had fore
told by the mouth of His servant Jere
miah (chap. xxix. 10); and as He did
not forget His promise, so neither dia
He delay the fulfilment of it beyond the
proper time (Isa. xliv. 26~28).

II. In a way of spiritual improve-
ment. In the proclamation of Cyrus
we may see—

1. What a sad state the men of the
world at large are in. They are slaves
and captives, being in bondage to their
lusts, to the world, to Satan, and to the
grave (Rom. vi, 12, viii 21; Eph. ii.
2; 2 Tim. ii, 26; 2 Pet. ii 19; 1 John
v.19). This is a humiliating, but just,
view of them


3. What an invaluable blessing the
Gospel is, No one needs be told what
a blessing the proclamation of Cyrus
was to the captive Jews; and precisely
such is the Gospel, as announcing de
liverance to us (Isa. xxvii. 13).

3. What will be necessary to obtain
what tt offers? However deeply all are
interested in doing this, too many, alas }
are well contented with their bondage,
displaying thus most inconceivable mad-
ness ; whereas, by repentance and faith,
they should go up out of it; and by re-
turning to God enjoy the glorious liberty
of His children.

4. What is our bounden duty when
has become effectual for our good# God
is said to “raise the spirits” of such as
were ambitious for liberty; and it need
not be said to whom we are indebted,
if we differ from others (1 Cor. iv. 7,
xv. 10; Jaa. i 17).—William Sleigh,


Gop wits Us.
(Verse 3: “ Hia God be with him.”)


Notice :

I. The devout wish expressed. ‘His
God be with him.” It is equivalent to
our “ Good-bye,” which is an abbrevia-


tion of “ God be with you.” This wish
comprises two things—
1. Personal relation to God. ‘‘ His


God.” The expression may be viewed
in two aspects — (l.) ‘His God,” as
opposed to the gods of the heathen,
“Jehovah the God of heaven” be with
him. He is the only living and true
God. (2.) “ His God,” as engaged to
him in covenant relation, God had
condescended to enter into covenant with
the Israelites (Gen, xvii. 1-14; Exod,
xix. 3-8; Jer. xxxii, 38-41; Ezek. xvi.
8). And in the Gospel He enyages, or
covenants, to forgive and save all who
accept Christ by faith, to receive them
as His people, and to be their God.
Thus our Lord speaks: “ My Father and
your Father; My God and your God”
(John xx. 17). All that He has, and
all that He is, He gives to them as their
portion, to be eraployed for their good.
Without any presumption the true be
12


liever in Jesus Christ may say unto the
great God, “My God and my Father.” (a).
Martin Luther said that the sweetness
of the Gospel consisted chiefly in its
pronouns —such as me, my, thy, &c.
“Who loved me, and gave Himself for
me” (Gal. ii. 20). “Christ Jesus, my
Lord” (Phil. iii 8). ‘‘ My Lord and
my God” (John xx. 28). It is the aa-
surance of our personal interest in God,
through Christ Jesus our Lord, that
makes Him so unspeakably precious
unto us. (4).

2. Realisation of the presence of God.
“His God be with him.” He is every-
where present ; but His presence is rea-
lised only by believing, loving, and reve-
rent spirits. Such spirits feel Him near
—they have communion with Him,
&c. (c). His presence is a guarantee of
all the help and blessing which we need,
We have all things in Him. (d). But in
uttering this wish in respect to the Jews,
Cyrus probably had an eye to two things
which the presence of God would secure
to them—(1.) Guidance and guardian-
ship on their log journey. In the pik


HIOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.


CHAP, L
a





grimage of life we have infallible direc-
tion and inviolable protection, if our
God be with us. (2.) Snecess in their
great undertaking, Having the Divine
Presence, the returning exiles would be
able to overcome the difficulties which
lay before them, and to rebuild the
Temple of the Lord their God, The
presence of God is the pledge of the
success and triumph of His people.

IL The kind expression of this wish
The expression of this wish indicates on
the part of Cyrus—

1, Reverence towards God. He does
not utter these words thouglitlessly, but
seriously. His proclamation makes it
quite clear that he entertained reverent
and exalted views of the Divine Being.
In our kind wishes let us never use the
Divine Name except with consideration
and veneration.

2. Kindness towards the captives, He
wished them well, and proved the sin-
eerity of his wishes by practically help-
ing them in their best interests.

CoMCLUSION :

1. Do we sustain this personal relation
to God?

2. Do we realise the blessed presence
of God?

3. Do we desire that others also may
realise His gracious presence?


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) This goodness appears in the choice gift
of Himself which He hath made over in this
covenant (Gen. xvii. 7). You know how it
runs in Scripture : “I will be their God, and
they shall be My people” (Jer. xxxii. 38); a
propriety in the Deity is made over byit. As
He gave the blood of His Son to seal the cove-
nant, so He gave Himself as the blessing of
the covenant; “ He is not ashamed to be called
their God” (Heb. xi. 16). Though He be
eavironed with millions of angels, and presides
over them in an inexpressible glory, He is not
ashamed of His condescensions to man, and to
pass over Himself as the propriety of Hia
people, as well as to take them to be His, It
is a diminution of the sense of the place, to
understand it of God, as Creator. What reason
was there for God to be ashamed of the ex-
pressions of His power, wisdom, goodness, in
the works of Hig hands? But we might have
reason to think there might be some ground
in God to be ashamed of making Himself over
in a deed of gift to a mean worm and a filthy
rebel; this might seem a disparagement to
His majesty; but God is not ashamed of a


title so mean as the God of His despised
people; a title Lelow those others, of the
“ Yord of hosts, glorious in holiness, fearful in
praises, doing wonders, riding on the wings of
the wind, walking in the circuits of heaven,”
He is no more ashamed of this title of being
our God, than He is of those other that sound
more glorious; He would rather have His
greatness veil to His goodness, than His good-
ness be confined by His majesty. He is not
only our God, but our God as He is the God
of Christ; He is not ashamed to be our pro-
priety, and Christ is not ashamed to own Hig
people in a partnership with Him in this pro-
priety (John xx. 17); ‘*I ascend to My God
and your God.” This, of God’s being our God,
is the quintessence of the covenant, the soul
of all the promises; in this He hath promiged
whatsoever is infinite in Him, whatsoever ig
the glory and ornament of His nature, for our
use ; not a part of Him, or one single perfec-
tion, but the whole vigour and strength of all.
As He is not a God without infinite wisdom,
and infinite power, and infinite goodness, and
infinite blessedness, &¢., 80 He passes over in
this covenant ail that which presents Him aa
the most adorable Being to Hia creatures.
He will be to them as great, as wise, as power-
ful, as good as He is in Himself: and the
assuring us in thig covenant to be our God
imports also that He will de e¢ much for ua
as we would do for ourselves were we furnished
with the same goodness, power, and wisdom.
In being our God He testifies it ia all one, as
if we had the same perfections in cer own
power to employ for our use; for He being
possessed with them, it is as much as if we
ourselves were possessed with them, for our
own advantaze, according to the rules of wis-
dom and the several conditions we pass through
for His glory.—Stephen Charnocke, B.D.


(b) Only to be permitted to contemplate such
a Being as Jehovah; to see zoodness, holiness,
justice, mercy, long-suffering, and sovereignty
personified and condensed ; to see them united
with eternity, infinite power, unerring wisdom,
omnipresence, and all-sufficiency ; to see these
natural and moral perfections indissolubly
united and blended in sweet harmony in a
pure spiritual Being, and that Being placed
on the throne of the universe; to see this
would be happiness enough to fill the mind of
any creature in existence, But in addition te
this, to have this ineffable Being for our God,
our portion, our all; to be permitted to say,
“‘This God is our God for ever and ever;” to
have His resplendent countenance smile upon
us; to be encircled in His everlasting arms of
power, and faithfulness, and love ; to hear His
voice saying to us, ‘‘I am yours, and you are
Mine; nothing shall ever pluck you from My
hands, or separate you from My love; but you
shall be with Me where I am, behold My glory,
and live to reign with Me for ever and ever.”
This is too much; it is honour, it ia glory, it
is happiness too overwhelming, too transport-
ing for mortal minds to conceive, or for mortal


13


CHAP, L


frames te support; and it is perhaps well for
as that here we know but in part, and that it
doth not yet appear what we shall be.—Zdward
Payson, D.D.


(ec) My friend has gone away from me over
the sea and beyond the mountain, but I have
him in my heart; his thoughts, his views of
life, his behaviour under given circumstances,
his noble impatience, hig magnanimous scorn
of all that is low and mean, never leave me;
they will mould my life, they will save me
in many a temptation, e ig with me always
because of the realising power of love. And
this that we know something about in friend-
ship, in the family circle, in literature, reaches
its highest consummatien in Jesus Christ; for
though He hag gone away from us, He says,
“Tam with you alway, even unto the end of
the world.” Though we eannot see Him, yet
He Bays, “TJ will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee.” Though we would gladly lay hold of
His wounded hand, He saya it is better not,





~ HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; £2RA.





It #8 expedient for you that fleshly contact
cease, and that you lay hold of Him by the
tendrils of your love. For what if we did
grasp hands, death would break up our union 3
but if we grasp hearta, we are one for ever.—
Joseph Parker, D.D, ~


(d) ‘‘I have read,” says an old divine, ‘*‘ of
a company of poor Christians who were
banished into some remote part, and one
standing by, seeing them pass along, said that
it was a very sad condition those poor people
were in, to be thus hurried from the society of
men, and made companions with the beasts of
the field, ‘True, said another, ‘it were a
sad condition indeed if they were carried to a
ee where they should not find their God;

ut let them be of good cheer, God goea along
with them, and will exhibit the comforts of
His presence whithersoever they go, God's
presence with His people is a spring that never
faila,’”—The Sunday School Teacher.


THe RELEASE OF THE JEWS FROM BABYLON AN ILLUSTRATION OF
THE REDEMPTION OF Man From Sr,


(Verses 3 and 5.)


We discover an analogy in these two
things as regards—

L The subjects. The Jews were exiles
and captives in Babylon. Apart from the
redemptive power of God, man is the
captive of Satan and the slave of sin.
He is “taken eaptive by him at his
will.” He is the slave of sinful passions
and habits. He is captive, imprisoned,
and bound (Isa. Ixi. 1; Luke iv. 18).
“ Whosoever committeth sin is the slave
of sin” (John viii. 34). “I see a law
in my members, warring against the law
of my mind, and bringing me into cap-
tivity to the law of sin which is in my
members” (Rom. vii. 23). In his sinful
state, man is an exile from his true con-
dition and place, and the bondsman of
evil powers. (a).

II. The agents. Cyrus, and Jesus
Christ. The analogy between them is
at least twofold.

1. Both were called of God to thts
work, Ages before his birth Cyrus was
prenominated for this work, and spoken
of as the anointed of the Lord, and as
strengthened by Him for the accomplish-
ment of this work (Isa. xliv. 24—xlv. 6).
And Jesus Christ is pre-eminently the
Servant, the Anointed, the Sent of God
(Isa, a 1; lxi. 1-3; Luke iv. 18, 19;

4


John iii, 16, 17; Gal. iv. 4,5; 1 Jobm
iv. 9).

2. Both effected this work by battling
with and overcoming the oppressors.
Cyrus had to conquer the Babylonian
Empire before he could release the cap-
tive Jews. And our Lord and Saviour,
as the Son of Man, encountered sin and
mastered it ; He resisted temptation and
overcame it; He battled with the devil
and vanquished him; He grappled with
death and abolished it; and thus He
offers freedom from sin and Satan to
all men. (6).

III. The source. In both cases the
blessing flowed from the free and un-
merited grace of God. The Jews had
no claim upon Him against whom they
had so persistently and so grievously re
belled. He “stirred up the spirit ot
Cyrus” to grant them release, of His
own spontaneous and gracious will, In
like manner He gave His Son Jesus
Christ for the salvation of men. “God
commendeth His love toward us, in
that, while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us.” ‘ Herein is love, not that
we loved God, but that He loved us,”
&. “Not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but according ta
His mercy He saved us,” dc, (Tit, iii,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.


5-7). He gave His Son, He bestowed
the Holy Spirit, He instituted means
and ministries of grace, all of His own
sovereign favour, Human redemption
in its origin, in its accomplishment, and
in its conditions, is entirely of divine
grace, “It is of faith that it might
be by grace.” (e).

IV. The extent.

1. Tt 8 offered to all. “Who is there
among you of all His people?” &o
Every Jew was free to go to Jerusalem
if he pleased. Salvation from sin is
provided for all, and freely offered to
all. Christ “died for all” ‘God our
Saviour, who will have all men to be
saved,” &e. “God so loved the world,”
&c. Whosoever will, let him take the
water of life freely.” “Qo ye into all
the world,” &.

2. It ts accepted only by some. “ Then
rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah
and Benjamin, and the priests, and the
Levites, with all whose spirit God had
raised,” &. Great numbers preferred
to remain in Babylon. (1.) Many did
not feel any deprivation or degradation
in their exile and subjection. They had
been born in Babylon, had passed their
lives there, &e. Many do not accept
the offered ‘‘ redemption that is in Christ
Jesus” because they are not conscious of
the slavery of sin, Like the Jews ofa
later age, they say, ‘‘We were never in
bondage to any man.” (d). (2.) Many
had attachments and interests in Babylon
which they could not or would not leave,
And great numbers in this day will not
comply with the conditions of spiritual
redemption. Their love of the things
of this world, and their devotion to tem-
poral things, bind them to the Babylon
of the world and sin, When summoned
to “ Arise, and depart,” they are unwill-
ing to obey.

V. The object. “Go up to build the
house of the Lord which is in Jerusa-
lem.” A striking illustration of the
grand end of redemption, which may be
expressed thus—

1. The universal realisation of the

of God. So St John describes
it: “Behold the tabernacle of God is
with men, and He will dwell with
them,” &. (Rev. xxi, 3),


: OHAR, 1.
{

2. The unsversal presentation of worship
to God. ‘“ And every creature which is
in heaven, and on the earth, and under
the earth,” &c. (Rev. v. 13, 14).


** And the Temple again shall be built
And filled aa it was of yore;
And the burden be lift from the heart ef
the world,
And the nations all adore,
Prayers to the throne of Heaven
orning and eve shall rise ;
And unto and not of the Lamb
Shall be the sacrifice.”—P. J, Bailey.


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) Sin may be conceived of as an object, but
also a8 @ power—as something to which our
actions are directed, but also as something
from which our actions proceed. Sin is an
internal principle, and he who ‘ commita
sin,” who lives in it, obeys it in this sense—
obeys it as a force. Occasional acts may not
represent, bat belie a man’s real nature ; bat
he can do asa habit only what he is, and if
that is sinful, he ia the slave of ain. The
whole and constamt tendency and biaa of the
soul is a despotie rule; it is more than any
external authority or verbal law. It has a
more rigorous and relentless rule. It is more
besetting, has a more constant presence and
constraining power; it acts directly on the
will; it eontrols and stimulates volition, That
is a great bondage which overbears the will,
which brings it against itself into subjection,
which ignores and defies its choice, but that
is a greater far which corrupts and perverts
it, There is no slavery like that in which the
very seat and source of freedom is held cap-
tive. It is the salt itself losing its savour 3
it ig the light leading astray ; it ia the king
and leader falling in battle.—A. J. Morris.


Go to the intemperate man in the morn-
ing, when his head aches, his hand trembles,
his throat burns, and his whole frame is re-
laxed and unstrung: he is ashamed, hates hia
sin, would not do it. Go to him at night,
when the power of habit is on him like a
spell, and he obeys the mastery of his craving.
He can use the language of Rom, vii.: *‘ That
whieh he would, he does not; but the evil that
he hates, that does he.” Observe, he is not in
possession of a true self. It is not he, but sin
which dwelleth in him that does it, A power
whieh is not himself, which ig not he, com-
mands him against himself,

This ia a gross case, but im every more
refined ingtance the slavery is just as real.
Wherever a man would and cannot, there is
servitude, He may be unable to control hia
expenditure, to rouse his indolence, to check
his imagination. Well, he is not free, He
may boast, as tne Jews did, that he is Abra»
ham’s son, or any other great man’s gon; that
he belongs to a free eountry ; that he never

15


GEAR 2%





was in bondage to‘any man; but free in the
freedom of the Son he is not,—/. W. Robert-
son, M.A.


(b) Christ came to open the prison doors
and preach deliverance to the captives. ‘‘ If
the Son, therefore, shall make you free, ye
shall be free indeed.” When Paul was describ-
ing the bitter bondage of the unregenerate
state, he could not finish it without the paren-
thetical exclamation, ‘‘ 1 thank God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.” ‘‘The law of the
spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me
free from the law of sin and death,” &e,
(Rom. viii. 2-4),

Yes, Christ is a Redeemer, a Redeemer from
the slavery of sin, by entering into the per-
sonal contest with evil, with sin, Satan, and
the world lying in wickedness ; suffering, but
not submitting ; falling, but yet a victor;
being ‘‘ made sin for us, though He knew no
sin,” and thus becoming “the Author of
eternal redemption to all them that obey
Him.” He became sin, ‘‘that we might be
made the righteousness of God in Him.”
‘*Through death He destroyed him that had
the power of death.” He ‘‘hath redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse
for as.”

This is our hope. There is no other can
break our chains, or make us wish to have
them broken. There is no other can rescue
os from bondage, or beget in us the love and
aspiration of spiritual freedom. It remains
for us to lay hold of this hope. And this can
be done only by believing His word. ‘‘ Ye
shall know the truth, and the truth shall make
you free.” ‘“ But God be thanked that ye were
the servants of sin ; but ye have obeyed from
the heart that form of doctrine which was de-
livered to you.”—A. J. Morris.


(e) Every good thing that is in a Christian,
not merely begins, but progresses, and is con-
sommated by the fostering grace of God,
through Jesus Christ. If my finger were on
the golden latch of Paradise, and my foot
were on its jasper threshold, I should not take
the last step so as to enter heaven unless the
grace which brought me so far should enable
me fully and fairly to complete my pilgrimage.
Salvation is God’s work, not man’s. This is
thre theology which Jonah learned in the great
fiah eollege, im the umiversity of the great


. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.


deep, to which college it would be a good
thing if many of our divines could be sent, for
human learning often puffeth up with the idea
of human sufficiency ; but he that is schooled
and disciplined in the college of a deep experi-
ence, and made to know the vileness of hia


own heart, ag he peers into its chambers of


imagery, will confess that from first to last
salvation ia not of him that willeth, nor of
him that runneth, but of God that showeth
mercy.—C. H. Spurgeon.


(d) Men may have a high notion of personal
independenca, and make a great boast of
freedom, and yet be in the deepest and most
degrading bondage. And we may extend thig
thought to other things, Moral and spiritual
evil may be, and frequently is, allied toa keen
sense and a tenacious hold of other kinds of
good. We may live in sin, which is the worst
weakness, and yet have reverence for many
kinds of not the lowest power. We may live
in sin, which is the deepeat degradation, and
yet have noble elevation of moral thought and
sympathy. The thought of slavery may fire
our blood with scorn and hate, and yet we
may be slaves of sin.

The reason is obvious, Sin is voluntary.
It must be. Compulsory gin is a contradiction
in terms. Its root and fountain is in the will
It is its being willed that constitutes it sin.
For, as Coleridge said, ‘‘ Nothing is me but
my will.” In sinning men do what they wish,
what gives them pleasure. They feel no con-
straint; they are but acting out their wills,

And then, again, the practice of sin gradu-
ally destroys the power of seeing and feeling
that it is slavery. We see things by meang
of their opposites. We estimate by contrast,
And as we see we feel, It is what is good in
man that resists evil, mourns over it, repents
of it. One wholly evil could do none of these
things, and when mex are wholly evil they are
lost. It is the memory, the feeling, the aspi-
ration of freedom that makes men writheunder
slavery. It is the reason not entirely blinded,
the conscience not utterly seared, that sees and
smarts under sin, And when the sense of
liberty and the sense of holiness have died out,
the man ems hug his chains, and the sinner
is no more able to deliver his soul or say, ‘‘ Ia
there not a lie in my right hand?” And this
is the curse of both slavery and sin.—Aé J.
Morris.


Tue Return or THE EXIves,
(Verses 5 and 6.)


In these verses two main points claim
our attention —

I. The company who returned.
“ Then rose up the chief of the fathers,”
dre, (ver. 5),

1, They were of various classes. ‘‘The
chief of the fathers of Judah and Benja-

16


min, and the priests, and the Levites,
with all whose spirit God had raised,”
It was well that the chiefs, men of expe-
rience and rank and influence, and the
priests and the Levites, men who were
consecrated to the service of God, should
take the lead in this worthy and diff-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZRA,





cult undertaking. They who are con-
spicuous in position should be solicitous
to act becomingly ; and they whose in-
fluence is great should see to it that it
is also good.

2. They were of noble character. “ Ai
whose spirit God had raised.” ‘Only
those marched up,” says Schultz, “whom
the Spirit of God awakened, that is, only
the zealous and the awakened, whose
spirits allowed themselves to be filled
from God with courage and joy to over-
come all the difficulties that opposed
them, and with a longing for the land
of their fathers that outweighed every
other consideration. This limitation was,
moreover, entirely in accordance with
the Divine purpose. They must bring
with them a zeal for the service of the
true God that could not be quenched,
at least entirely, by the difficult and
gloomy circumstances in Judea, that
might be enkindled and fed in some of
them by these very circumstances.” They
were men of—(1.) Piety, as we see from
their zeal for the rebuilding of the Temple
of God, and the restoration of their
national worship. (2.) Patriotism, or
they would not have left Babylon for
their desolate fatherland. (3.) Courage,
or they could not have confronted the
perils of this enterprise. (a).

3. They were exalted in purpose. They
went ‘up to build the house of the
Lord, which is in Jerusalem.” No per-
sonal or selfish aim was theirs; but the
honour of their fatherland, and the
glory of their God.

“ What sought they thus afar!

Bright jewels of the mine?
The wealth of seas? the spoils of war}


They sought a faith’s pure shrine!”
— Hemans.


4, They were comparatively few tn
number, (1.) Only three of the tribes
are mentioned (Judah, Benjamin, Levi)
as availing themselves of the oppor-
tunity offered by the proclamation of
Cyrus. There may have been some of
the other tribes with them ; but if this
were so, their numbers were so few that
they are not noticed in this place, The
ten tribes of Israel are conspicuous by
reason of their absence from this record,
(2.) And of the tribes mentioned only


OWAP, 1.
1!


a portion returned to their own country
There is considerable uncertainty asto the
exact number; but certainly there were
not fifty thousand persons in all. “The
return home,” says Schultz, “ was not a
matter that required no consideration.
Their native land lay either desolate or
occupied with heathen and barbarous
nations. Great dangers threatened the
little nation, that would put itself in
opposition with the inhabitants; and,
indeed, severe tasks awaited them. In
Babylon, on the other hand, their cir-
cumstances had become such that they
could very well endure them, yea, they
were favourable, as we can see from
Isaiah lvi. 11-Iviii., hence ‘many 1e-
mained behind in Babylon, unwilling
to relinquish their property’ (Joseph.
Ant, XL i. 3).” (6). An illustration of
those who are in love with this present
evil world, and decline to enter upon
the Christian life with ita self-denials
aud difficulties,

IL The assistance which they re
ceived.

1. This was general, “ And all they
that were about them strengthened their
bands,” é&c. The Jews who elected
to remain in Babylon would be likely
to aid them liberally, in order to a cer-
tain extent to make up for their appa-
rent neglect in remaining behind. And
the Babylonians, encouraged by the ex-
hortation and example of Cyrus, would
aid them also.

2. This was spontaneous, “ They that
were about them” were not compelled
to aid them at all. It is indeed stated
that the cifts for rebuilding of the Temple
were “ willingly offered ;” and the same
cheerful liberality doubtless characterised
their other gifts, They gave “not grudg-
ingly, or of necessity ; for God lovetl: a
cheerful giver.” In the hearty contri-
butions of these heathens towards build-
ing the Temple of the true God, have we
not a hint and a foreshadowing of the
gathering of the heathen world into the
Church of Jesus Christ #

3. This was honourable to both the
givers and the recewers, (1.) To the
givers, who were not only willing that
the exiles should return home, but
generoualy aided them todoso, (2.) Te


17


CHAP. L





—


the receivers. These gifts are a proof
that inthe land of their captivity their
conduct must have won the esteem of
their conquerors,

CoNncLUSION :

Apply the subject as illustrating the
offers of deliverance from the bondage of
sin which are made in the Gospel, and of
the aids which are provided for those
who accept tlose offers, and urge their
immediate and hearty acceptance,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) The dominion of God is manifested in
raising up and ordering the spirits of men
according to His pleasure. He doth, as the
Father of spirits, communicate an influence
to the spirits of men, as weil as an existence ;
He puts what inclinations He pleaseth into
the will, stores it with what habits He pleases,
whether natural or supernatural, whereby it
may be rendered more ready to act according
to the Divine purpose. The will of man isa
finite principle, and therefore subject to Him
who hath an infinite sovereignty over all
things; and God, having a sovereignty over
the will, in the manner of itg acting, causeth
it to will what He wills, ag to the outward act,
and the outward manner of performing it... .
Thus He appointed Cyrus to be His shepherd,
and gave him a pastoral spirit for the restora-
tion of the city and Temple of Jerusalem (Isa.
xliv. 28); and Isaiah (chap. xly. 5) tells them,
in the prophecy, that He had girded him,
though Cyrus had not known Him ; 7.e.God
had given him a military spirit and strength
for so great an attempt, though he did not
know that he was acted by God for those
Divine purposes. And when the time came
for the house of the Lord to be rebuilt, the
gpirits of the people were raised up, not by
themselves, but by God (Ezra i, 5), ‘* Whose
spirit God had raised to go up ;” and not only
the spirit of Zerubbabel, the magistrate, and
of Jeshua, the priest, but the spirit of all the
people, from the highest to the meanest that
attended him, were acted by God to strengthen
their hands, and promote the work (Hag. i.
14). The spirits of men, even in those works
which are naturally desirable to them, as the
restoration of the city and rebuilding of the
Temple was to those Jews, are acted by God,
ag the Sovereign over them, much more when
the wheels of men’s spirits are lifted up above
their ordinary temper and motion. It was
this empire of God good Nehemiah regarded,
as that whence he was to hope for success ; he
did not assure himself so much of it, from the
favour he had with the king, nor the reason-
ablenegs of his intended petition, but the abso-


» HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY : EZRA.


ee


lute power God had over the heart of that great
monarch ; and, therefore, he supplicates the
heavenly, before he petitioned the earthly,
throne (Neh. ii. 4): ‘(So I prayed to the God
of heaven.” The heathens had some glance
of this; it is an expression that Cicero hath
somewhere, *‘ That the Roman commonwealth
was rather governed by the assistance of the
Supreme Divinity over the hearts of men, than
by their own counsels and management.” How
often hath the feeble courage of men been
heightened to such a pitch as to stare death im
the face, which before were damped with the
least thought or glance of it! This is a fruit
of God’s sovereign dominion.— Charnocke.
For further illustration of this topic, see p. 7.


(6) Some readers may perhaps wonder that,
on this proclamation of Cyrus, the Jews did
not assemble in one body, and directly go and
take possession of their ancient inheritance ;
but a little reflection shows the matter in
another light. The city and Temple lay a heap
of ruins, and it would cost immense labour
and expense to rebuild them. The land was
either wholly desolate or occupied by encroach-
ing neighbours ; and in either case it would
require some time and trouble to procure for
themselves habitations and provisions. The
journey was long, arduous, and perilous to
those who were attended with families and
substance; and many enemies would endeavour
to plunder them by the way, as far as they
could and dared (chap. viii. 21-23 ; Neh. ii.
7). None of the Jews had seen Jerusalem or
the Temple, except such as were above fifty
years of age ; at which period of life the spirit
of enterprise commonly begins to decline.
Few were attached to the Temple by true piety:
and most of them wanted even that attachment
which men naturally feel for the land of their
nativity, having been born in the places where
they were then settled. Some persons of true
and eminent piety were so situated that they
did not think it their duty to remove; as
Daniel in the court of Cyrus. Others would be
hindered by the infirmities of old age, and
the peculiar circumstances of their families
and connections. In short, the difficulties,
hardship, and peril were manifest ; the success
of the attempt would be doubtful to all but
those that were ‘“‘strong in faith;” its tem-
poral advantages were remote and precarious,
and not worth the venture, especially to such
as had obtained comfortable settlements or
occupations in the land of their captivity.
Even the spiritual advantages would appear
to the pious mind more intended for posterity
than for that generation; and to engage in it,
in this view, would require vigorous faith,
lively hope, and an active zeal for the honour
of God, and the benefit of His Church, and
establishment of His worship, in ages te
come.—Thomas Scott.


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : EERA,





Tue Resvuts or ras Captivrry.
(Verses 5 and 6.)


Tt may be well to consider here what
were the actual effects of the captivity
upon the Jewish people. These are well
stated in Dr. Smith’s Dicttonary of the
Bible, art. Cyrus, from which we quote
the following paragraphs :—

The edict of Cyrus for the rebuilding
of the Temple was, in fact, the beginning
of Judaism ; and the great changes by
which the nation was transformed into
a Church are clearly marked.

I. The lesson of the kingdom was
completed by the captivity. The sway
of a temporal prince was at length felt
to be at best only a faint image of that
Messianic kingdom to which the pro-
phets pointed. The royal power had
led to apostasy in Israel, and to idolatry
in Judah; and men looked for some
outward form in which the law might
be visibly realised. Dependence on
Persia excluded the hope of absolute
political freedom, and offered a sure
guarantee for the liberty of religious
organisation,

IL The captivity which was the
punishment of idolatry was also the
limit of that sin. Thenceforth the
Jews apprehended fully the spiritual
nature of their faith, and held it fast
through persecution. At the same time


wider views were opened to them of the
mnseen world, The powers of good and
evil were recognised in their action on
the material world, and in this way some
preparation was made for the crowning
doctrine of Christianity,

Ii The organisation of the out-
ward Church was connected with the
purifying of doctrine, and served as
the form in which the truth might be
realised by the mass. Prayer—public
and private—assumed a new importance,
The prophetic work came to an end.
The Scriptures were collected. The
“law was fenced” by an oral tradition.
Synagogues were erected and schools
formed. Scribes shared the respect of
priests, if they did not supersede them
in popular regard.

IV. Above all, the bond by which
“the people of God” was held together
was at length felt to be religious and
not local, nor even primarily national
The Jews were incorporated in different
nations, and still looked to Jerusalem as
the centre of their faith, The boun-
daries of Canaan were passed, and the
beginnings of a spiritual dispensation
were already made when the ‘ Disper-
sion” was established among the king-
doms of the earth.— B. F. Westcott, M.A.





THe RESTORATION OF THE SACRED VESSELS.
(Verses 7-11.)


Notice :

L The preservation of the sacred
vessels, ‘‘ Also Cyrus the king brought
forth the vessels of the house of the
Lord, which Nebuchadnezzar had brought
forth out of Jerusalem, and had put
them in the house of his gods; even
those did Cyrus king of Persia bring
forth by the hand of Mithredath the
treasurer.” These are the vessels which
are mentioned in 2 Chron, xxxvi. 7, and
Dan. i 2. They did not include all the
eonsecrated things; for we read in 3
Kings xxiv. 13, of some that were after-
wards “cut in pieces” by Nebuchadnes


zar or some of his soldiera But in the
providence of God these vessels were re-
markably preserved, to be in due time
restored to their original place and uses.
Nebuchadnezzar, revarding them as
sacred things, did not appropriate them
to purposes of his own, but placed them
in the temple of his god Merodach, or
Bel, as he was called by the Cireeks, at
Babylon; and in this way they were
preserved,

Learn ;

Since God ts s0 careful of the mere
vessela consecrated to Hus service, may
we not rest assured that He will much

19


O#AP. I,





more preserve His consecrated people?
His children are far more precious in
His sight than the most costly furniture
of His temples. (a).

IL The numeration of the sacred
vessels, ‘‘ Even those did Cyrus king
of Persia bring forth by the hand of
Mithredath the treasurer, and numbered
them unto Sheshbazzar the prince of
Judah.” This numbering indicates—

1. The reverent care of Cyrus for these
sacred vessels,

2. The grave responsibility of: Shesh-
bazzar for these sacred vessels. He would
be held accountable for the number of
them thus counted out to him.

Learn:

That persons, places, and things which
are devoted to religious uses should
be reverently regarded by us. Their
associations should raise them far above
the level of common things. (6).

IIL The restoration of the sacred
vessels. ‘All these did Sheshbazzar
bring up with them of the captivity that
were brought up from Babylon unto
Jerusalem.”

1. Thss was a fulfilment of prophecy
(Jer, xxvii. 22), Prophecy isa “ sure
word.” The predictions of the Holy
Bible will become accomplished facts ; its
promises will all be fulfilled. The vera-
city and the power of God guarantee
the fulfilment of the declarations and
assurances of His Word,

2. This ts an illustration of the resto-
ration of perverted things to their true
uses. Many of the gifts of God are
sadly misused ; e.g., wealth, when it is
employed for purposes of self-indulgence
or vain show, or when it is avariciously
hoarded ; eloquence, when it is em-
ployed to arouse and inspire men in
unworthy enterprises; poetry, when it
is made the vehicle of impure sugges-
tions, or the quickener of corrupt imagi-
nations ; art, dc. All these things, like
.the sacred vessels of the Jews, shall be
restored to their true uses, They shall
be employed in harmony with the will
of God, for His glory, and for the good
of mankind. The Lord Jesus Christ is
the great Restorer of the violated order,
and the broken harmony of the universe
of God. “In the dispensation of the

20





» HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.


fulness of times God will gather together
in one all things in Christ, both which
are in heaven, and which are on earth ;
even in Him.” (c).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) **They shall be Mine, saith the Lord of
hosts, in that day when I make up My jewels.”
God has jewels even amid the ruins of this
shattered and degraded world. ‘‘ Ye are a
chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy
nation, a peculiar people.” Terrible as has
been the havoc created by sin, there are
‘*jewelgs” still on the earth, and no hand can
rifle them. Many times have Satan and. his
legions sought to purloin the treasure, but the
Word of the Lord is faithful—‘‘no man can
pluck them out of My Father’s hand.”’—Joseph
Parker, D.D.

Beneath the wings of the Almighty God,
night with its pestilence cannot smite the
saints, and day with its cares cannot destroy
them ; youth with its passions shall be safely
passed ; middle age with its whirl of business
shall be navigated in safety; old age with ita
infirmities shall become the land of Beulah ;
death’s gloomy vale shall be lit up with the
coming splendour; the actual moment of de-
parture, the last and solemn article shall be
the passing over of ariverdryshod. ‘“ When
thou passest through the waters, I will be
with thee; and through the rivers, they shall
not overflow thee ; when thou walkest through
the fire, thou shalt not be burned ; neither
shall the flame kindle upon thee, saith the
Lord.’”’ ‘‘They shall never perish.”—C. H.
Spurgeon.


(6) It is a dreadful thing to trifle with sacred
matters, If at any time we open the Bible,
or anything out of it be opened to us, and we
have not the serious design before our eyes
and upon our hearts, that we would know more
of divine things, that we may be made more
like God, and be more fitted for His service
and communion both here and hereafter, we
shall be found guilty of trifling with that which
is sacred; and though in this world the punish-
ment may not be so visibly severe, yet the
guilt is undoubtedly greater than that which
Uzzah lay under when he rashly laid hold on
the ark; and the Bethshemites, when they
opened and would be curiously prying into it,
When aman meddleth with the great things of
God, and can give no account for what he does,
but only to satisfy his curiosity, and the idle
fancy of avain mind; this, sooner or later,
must have a aad issue.—John Howe.


(c) The reconciliation which our Lord has
effected has bearings as wide as creation. The
whole creation will be restored, and inherit
with man the peace and glory of Christ. Evil
struggles, and will yet struggle, but it is
doomed, Christ’s death will be fulfilled in
the death of evil throughout all nature. Hig
ascension Will be fulfilled in the universal
diffasion of His Life, Love, and Glory, But


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BERA.


fe will not make haste. By His long patience,
He gives the utmost possibility to the endea-
vours of evil. In the end, evil powers will
work their own confusion and downfall, The
Son of God is sure of final victory. He fore-
sees it. The whole field will come about to
Him. He will wait for it. In His ascension,
all the elements and powers of nature are
already glorified. In Him, they have all come
back to God, with increase. They are no
longer divided and striving. They underwent
their grand decisive and bloody sweat in Him.
The worst is past. ‘* The restitution of all
things” is certain. All things are at peace
in Christ, and the peace is wonderful.

“* Tt is finished,” proclaimed the end of the
fallen order of nature. ‘‘ He is risen,” an-
nounced the beginning of the new order.
Christ glorified is God’s firstfruits of the
whole harvest of }His recovered creation, All
things will be made after the pattern of Christ’s


HAP, OL,


Se ERR: Ce Eye ee eee


unity. The reconciliation of all things in Him
ia very Divine. And when the like reconcilia-
tion is fulfilled, both in man and nature, the
work of the Mediator will be done, and “ the
waystery of God finished.”

Observe once for all, that whoever speaka
Merely of the redemption of mankind, muti-
lates the redemption of God, and is unfaithful
to the New Testament, The mystery of Goul’s
will and purpose, which Paul commends to
ug, is the knitting into unity, the gathering
together in one, of ‘‘all things in Christ, both
the things which are in heaven, and the things
which are on earth; even in Him.” The
Headship of Christ is universal. Heaven and
earth, and ‘‘all things” therein, are to be
brought under One Head; and thus into the
fellowship of a divinely balanced harmony,
The whole course of sin and sorrow is His
chastisement, which He will bear until it melta
into His own Purity and Peace.—J ohn Puls ford.


CHAPTER IL


Criricat axD Exptanatory Norss.] In this chapter we have the list of those who returned
jrom captivity with Zerubbabel, and their contributions for rebuilding the Temple. The contents
may be arranged thus—1l. The description of the chapter (ver. 1), with the names of the leaders
of the exodus (ver. 2). 2. The numbers of the people who returned, arranged—{1) according to
families (vers. 3-19; (2) according to cities (vers. 20-35). 3. The numbers of the prieata and Levites
who returned, arranged according to families (vers, 36-42). 4, The numbers of the Nethinim
and the descendants of Solomon’s servants (vers, 48-58). 5, People and priesta who could not
produce their genealogy (vers. 59-63). 6. The sum total of the persons who returned, with
their servants and beaste of burden (vers. 64-67). 7. The offerings of those who returned for
the rebuilding of the Temple (vers. 68, 69), and a concluding statement (ver. 70). This cata-
logue appears also in the Book of Nehemiah (chap. vii. 6-73), he having ‘‘found” the docu-
ment (ver. 5), and incorporated it in his work. It also appears in the apocryphal book,
1 Esdras y. 7-45. The three texts differ to some extent in the names, and yet more in the
numbers. Tue differences, however, are unimportant, and arose probably from the mistakes of
copyisis, to which there is great liability in transcribing long lists of names and numbers,

Ver. 1. The province] ‘‘i.e. the province of Judea ag a district of the Persian Empire; 80
chap. y. 8, Nel. i. 3."—Keid. Every one unto his city] All who returned did not settle in Jeru-
galem. Many were located in neighbouring cities and viilages.

Ver. 2. Zerubbabel]=‘‘born in Babylon.” His Chaldean name was Sheshbazzar ene rf
8). Jeshua] A later and abbreviated form of Jeboshua. He was the son of Jehozadak (1
Chron. vi. 14), or, as it is written in Hag. i. 1, Jozedech; was probably born in Babylon;
and was the first high priest of the restored community, ‘‘A man of earnest piety, patriotism,
and courage.” The names of nine other persons are given in this verse. Nehemiah (chap.
vii. 7) gives the name of Nahamani, which is not mentioned here, and makes twelve in all,
Of these ten persons we know nothing except their names, and that, with Zerubbabel and
Jeshua, they were probably the twelve heads of twelve divisions into which the new com-
munity was arranged, Nehemiah] is not ‘‘ Nehemiah the son of Hachaliah” (Neh. i. 1);
Seraiah] is Avariah ; Reelaiah] is Raamiah; Mizpar] is Mispereth; and Rehum] is Nehum,
in Neh. vii. 7; Mordecai] not Mordecai the cousin and foster-parent of Esther (Esth. ii. 7).
The pumber of the men of ths people of Israel] is ‘‘the special title of the first division
(vers. 3-35) of the following list, with which the titles in vers, 36, 40, 43, and 55 correspond,
They are called ‘the people of Jerae,’ not the people of Judah, beeause those whe returned

epresented the entire covenant people.”—Keil. Although, as we before stated, those who
*eturned were almost all from the tribes of Judah, Benjamin, and Levi.

Vers. 3-85] It ig not necessary for us to enter into a comparison of the names and numbers
nere given and those of the corresponding passage in Nehemiah.

Vers. 86-29. The priests] This brief catalogue corresponds exactly with Neh. vii, 89-42.

Vers. 40-42. The Levites] were of three classes—l. Those who agaisted the priests in Divine
worship. 2. The singers, 8, The porters, (Comp. 1 Chron. xxiv, 20-31, xxv., and xxvi. 1-19.)

Vers, 48-54, The Nethinims] Nethinim = “‘ given or dedicated ones ;” from {Nj = “to give,”
“dedicate,” &c. They were captives of war, who were given to the Levites to be employed in
the rougher and more laborious duties of their offices (Num. xxxi, 47; Josh. ix. 27). ‘‘The
Nethinims, whom David and the princes had appointed (Heb, gwen) for the service of the
Levites” (chap. viii. 20), Keil briefly designates them ‘‘temple-bondsmen.” 31


CHAP. HL ~HOMILETIO COMMENTARY Y¥ZRA.











Vers 55-57. The children of Solomon’s gervants] were, according to Plumptre (B#dl,
Dict.) and Rawlinson, the descendants of the remnant of the ancient Canaanites, upon whom
Solomon “levied a tribute of bond-service” (1 Kings ix. 20, 21; 2 Chron. viii. 7, 8). But,
according to Keil and Schultz, they were prisoners of war from some other nations, whom
Solomon made to do services similar to those of the Gibeonites (Josh, ix. 27), In rebuilding
the Temple their services would be of great importance,

Ver, 58, Three hundred ninety and two] So also Neh. vii. 60.

Vers, 59, 60. Could not show their father’s house, and their seed] Margin: ‘‘ pedigree.”
“ Although they could not prove their Israelite origin, they were permitted to go up to Jeru-
salem with the rest, the rights of citizenship alone being for the present withheld.”—Feed.

Vers, 61-63. Children of the priests] who could not prove that they belonged to the priesthood.

Ver. 61. Which took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai] &c. Keil and Schultz think
that the daughters of Barzillai were heiresses, and that the priest who married one of them
assumed her name in order to take possession of her inheritance. But this, to say the leant,
is very questionable, seeing that they had brothers (1 Kings ii. 7); and daughters, according
to Jewish law, did not inherit any of their father’s property except in those cases in which he
had no son (Num, xxvii. 8). It is more probable that the name of the wife’s family was pre-
ferred because of the honourable associations of that name; for Barzillat the Gileadite ‘‘ was a
very great man,” and distinguished by reason of his relations to king David (2 Sam. xvii.
27-29, xix. 31-39; 1 Kings ii. 7). The change of name would not invalidate the claim of
the descendants of the family to the priesthood; but in process of time it might have occa-
sioned doubts as to their priestly origin. Pe.

Ver. 62. Therefore, were they, as polluted] &. Margin: ‘‘ Heb., they were polluted from
the priesthood.” They were pronounced unclean, and so excluded from the priesthood.

Ver. 63, Tirshatha] Margin: ‘‘Or, governor.” It is the Persian title of the civil governor,
and is here given to Zerubbabel. It was afterwards applied to Nehemiah (Neh, viii. 9, x. 1).
Not eat of the most holy things] (comp. Lev. ii. 8; Num. xviii. 9), This prohibition involved
their exclusion from the discharge of priestly functions. ‘‘ A portion of the general fees which
were offered to the priests was not denied them, since their right to the priesthood was not
expressly denied, but left in suspenso.”—Schultz, Till there stood up a priest with Urim
and with Thummim] Zerubbabel expected that when the altar and Temple were rebuilt,
Jehovah would again grant them some special manifestation of His presence, and weuld
restore the privilege of obtaining direct answers from Him by means of Urim and Thummim,
His expectation, however, was never fulfilled,

Ver. 64] The number here given agrees exactly with that given both in Nehemiah and in
1 Esdras. ck sum total being alike in all three texts, we are obliged to assume its correct-
ness. ’— Keil,

Ver. 65. Their servants and their maids, of whom there were seven thousand three
hundred thirty and seven] In Neh, vii. 67 the same number of servants is given. Two
hundred singing men and singing women] These singers were employed to increase the
delight of the festivities, and to chant dirges in times of mourning (2 Chron. xxxv. 25;
Eccles. ii. 8); and as they were hired and paid, and were probably not of Israelite origin,
they are here classed with the servants,

Vers, 66, 67] With these verses Neh. vii. 68, 69, exactly agree,

Ver, 65. When they came to the house of the Lord] ¢.¢. to the site of the Temple. Probably
considerable ruins of the Temple were yet remaining,

Ver. 69] The account of the offerings given in Neh. vii. 70-72 differs from that in this
verse, and is held both by Keil and by Schultz to be more correct. Threescore and one
thousand drams, or darica, of gold] According to Rawlinson, the darie was worth £1, 1s. 10$d.
of our money. The 61,000 darics were therefore equal to £66,718, 15s. Five thousand pound,
or mina, of silver] The Greek silver mina was worth a little over £4 of our money ; and the value
of the Hebrew silver manch, according to Rawlinson, was probably not very different from the
Greek. Thus the offering in silver would be worth over £20,000; and the entire offering in
money worth nearly £90,000. Keil, however, reckons the 61,000 darics of gold to be worth
£68,625, and the 5000 mina of silver, £30,000, and the entire offering nearly £99,000,


Gone uP ovr or OCapriviry.
(Verse 1 and part of 2.)


We have here presented to our lon.” The captivity from which they
motice— were escaping was (1.) A degradation.

L The deliverance from captivity. It was the loss of their power and inde-
“These are the children of the promise pendence. (2.) A subjection. It was
that went up out of the captivity, of the loss of their freedom. They were
those which had been carried away, brought under the power of their con-
whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of querors, (3.) A transportation. “Nebu-


pep yon had carried away into Baby- chadnexzar the king carried them away


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.


OM4P, i.


—_—_———————— eee".


unto Babylon.” From their own land,
with all its hallowed and inspiring
memories and associations, they were
forcibly removed unto the land of their
heathen conquerors. (4.) A retribution.
Their captivity was the punishment of
their numerous, heinous, and long-con-
tinued sins against God, and especially
their forsaking Him by the adoption of
dolatrous customs, Nebuchadnezzar was
the rod of God for their chastisement,

The most deplorable degradation and
the most real and terrible subjection are
those of sin.

But now many of the Jews are going
“up out of the captivity.” The offer
of release has been made, and they
who are mentioned in this chapter have
accepted it.

Concerning this deliverance, notice :—

l. It originated in the favour of God
(chap. i. 1).

2. It was effected by an unlikely agent.

Tus,

3. It was permissive, not compulsory.
The Jews were quite free to accept or to
decline the offer of Cyrus.

Salvation from the bondage of sin is
freely offered in the Gospel, but no one is
compelled to accept the offer. All who ac-
cept it do so willingly, of their own accord.

Ii. The journey home. ‘“ And came
again unto Jerusalem and Judah, every
one unto his city.” It is here suggested
that this journey was :—

1. A restoration, “ And came again.”
They were going unto the land which
God had given to their fathers; to the
scenes of the most sacred and stirring
events in their national history.

2. A restoration to their own home.
“Came again every one unto his city.”
It seems to us that where it was prac-
ticable the returning Jews would settle
in the cities where their ancestors had
resided, and take possession of the in-
heritances which they had held. They
went back to the scenes amid which
their forefathers lived and laboured, to
the lands which they had cultivated, to
the places where they had prayed and
worked, rejoiced and wept, loved and
suffered, lived and died. There muat
have been in this a very strong and
tender attraction to many hearts. (c).





“en





7

3. A restoration to religious privileges.
“Came again unto Jerusalem.” Jeru-
salem was not only the metropolis oi
the nation, but the holy city, the place
where the Temple had been and was to
be again. “This Mount Zion, wherein
Thou hast dwelt” (Ps. Ixxiv. 2). “ Jeru-
salem... whither the tribes go up,”
&e, (Ps. cxxii. 4).

The salvation of Jesus Christ restores
man to his true condition and to his
forfeited inheritance. ‘When divins
grace,” said Legh Richmond, “renews
the heart of the fallen sinner, Paradise
is regained, and mueh of its beauty
restored to the soul.”

But they were not returning with
complete independence, They were still
“the children of the province.” Judea
remained a “province” of the Persian
Empire. Full religious freedom was
granted unto them, but politically they
Femained subject to Persian rule. Sin,
even when it is forgiven, blotted out,
always leaves some detriment, or loss,
or pain behind it. (6).

III The subordination to leaders
“Which came with Zerubbabel : Jeshua,
Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai,
Bilshan, Mizpar, Bigvai, Rehum, Baa-
nah.” Zerubbabel prince of Judah was
head over all, Jeshua was the head of
the party as regards its religious duties ;
and in addition to these there were ten
recognised leaders. Society coald not
exist without rulers and leaders, They
are necessary—

1. For the maintenance of order, The
authority of law must be maintained ;
its sanctions must be enforced, or the
bands of society would be utterly dis-
solved, &c. Aud for this purpose rulers
or magistrates are necessary,

2. For insuring progress, The growth
and improvement of a community are
impossible apart from the exercise of
wise leadership.

3. Because of the differences in the
characters and abilities of men. By their
native faculties, their character, and their
training, some men almost inevitably be-
come the rulers and leaders of others. (c).*


*These points are treated in a less frag:
mentary manner in the Hom, Com. on Num
bers, p. 12.

33


OHAP. II,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) There is a sanctity in a good man’s
house which cannot be renewed in every tene-
ment that rises on 1ts ruing: and I believe
that good men would generally feel this; and
that having spent their lives. happily and hon-
ourably, they would be grieved at the close of
them to think that the place of their earthly
abode, which had seen, and seemed almost to
sympathise in, all their honour, their gladness,
or their suffering—that this, with all the record
it bare of them, and all of material things that
they had loved ‘and ruled over, and set the
stamp of themselves upon—was to be swept
away, as soon as there was room made for them
in the grave; that no respect was to be shown to
it, no affection felt for it, no good to be drawn
from it by their children; that though there
was a monument in the church, there was no
warm monument in the hearth and house to
them ; that all that they ever treasured was
despised, and the places that had sheltered
and comforted them were dragzed down to the
dust. I say that a good man would fear this;
and that, far more, a good gon, a noble descen-
dant, would fear doing it to his father’s house.
I say that if men lived like men indeed, their
houses would be temples—temples which we
should hardly dare to injure, and in which it
would make us holy to be permitted to live;
and there must be a strange dissolution of
natural affection, a strange unthankfulness for
all that homes have given and parents taucht,
a strange consciousness that we have been un-
faithful to our father’s honour, or that our own
lives are not such as would make our dwellings
sacred to our children, when each man would
fain build to himself, and build for the little
revolution of his own life only... .

When men do not love their hearths, nor
reverence their thresholds, it is a sign that
they have dishonoured both, and that they
have never acknowledged the true universality
of that Christian worship which was indeed to
supersede the idolatry, but not the piety, of
the pagan. Our God is a household God, as
well as a heavenly One; He has an altar in
every man’s dwelling; let men look to it when
they rend it lightly and pour out its ashes...
It is one of those moral duties, not with
more impunity to be neglected because the
perception of them depends on a finely toned
and balanced conscientiousnegs, to build our
‘dwellings with care, and patience, and fond-
ness, and diligent completion, and with a view
to their duration at least for sueh a period as,
in the ordinary course of national revolutions,
might be supposed likely to extend to the
entire alteration of the direction of local in-
terests.—John Ruskin, M.A.

Home! angels encamp about it. Ladders
sre let down from heaven to every pillow in
that house. Over the child’s rough crib there
are chantings as sweet as those that broke
above Bethlehem, It is home! home! The
children of the family will grow up, and

ae


_HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: EZRA.





though they may get splendid residences of
their own, they will never forget that homely
place, the place where their father rested, and
their mother sang, and their sisters played.
If you wanted to gather up all tender memo-
ries, all lights and shadows of the heart, all
banquetings and reunions, all filial, fraternal,
paternal, conjugal affections, and had only just
four letters with which to spell out that height,
and depth, and length, and breadth, and mag-
nitude, and eternity of meaning, you would
write it oat with these four capital lettere :
H-O-M-E.—7’, de Witt Talmage, D.D.


(6) Even pardoned sins must leave a trace
in heavy self-reproach. You have heard of the
child whose father told him that whenever he
did anything wrong a nail should be driven
into a post, and when he did-what was good he
might pull one out, There were a great many
nails driven into the post, but the child tried
very hard to get the post cleared of the nails
by striving to do right. At length he was so
successful in his struggles with himself that
the last nail was drawn out of the post. The
father was just about to praise the child, when
stooping down to kiss him, he was startled to
see teara fast rolling down hia face, ‘‘ Why,
my boy, why do you cry? Are not all the
nails gone from the post?” ‘*Oh yes! the
nails are all gone, but the marks are left.”
That ia a familiar illustration, but don't de-
gpise it because of that. It illustrates the
experience of many a grey old sire, who, look-
ing upon the traces of his old sins as they yet
rankle in his conscience, would give a hundred
worlds to live himself back into young man-
hood, that he might obliterate the searing
imprint of his follies. Have you never heard
of fossil-rain? In the stratum of the old red
sandstone there are to be seen the marks of
showers of rain which fell centuries and een-
turics ago, and they are so plain and perfect
that they clearly indicate the way the wind
was drifting, and in what direction the tem-
pest slanted from the sky. So may the tracks
of youthful gins be traced upon the tablet of
the life when it has merged into old age—
tracks which it is bitter and sad remorse to
look upon, and which call forth many a boot-
less longing for the daya and months which
are past,—A. Mursell,


(c) In the long run leadership resolves itself
into a question of personal qualification, For
@ time men may arise who claim command-
ing positions who are unable to discharge the
duties which their ambition has coveted. In
such instances there would seem to be a mis-
carriage of the natural law and order of things;
yet it is only temporary ; sooner or later un-
qualified men have to resign positiona which
they ought never to have assumed.—Joseph
Parker, D.D.

In a great leader many elements of qualifi-
eation are combined, Other men may excel
him in detached points, but taken as a whole
he rales not perhaps by one dominant faculty.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZRA.


CHAP, I.





bat by a noble proportion of natural and se.
quired gifts. The position of a leader is not
so easy as it may appear to be to unreflect-
ing observers. Men see the elevation, not the
strain and responsibility which that elevation


rm
involves. The only sound rule for promotion
to influential positions in the Church is, that

, Wheregoever found, in the rich or the
poor, the old or the young, should be reeog-
nised and hbuoured Thr


A Svuagesttve Recorp,


(Verses 2 (last clause)-64: “ The number of the men of the people of Israck: The
chudren of Parosh,” €c.)


Consider :

I. The significance of the fact of the
record.

1. J¢ was an honour to the ptous and
patriotic ones who returned. In going
back to their own land at this time, and
for the purpose of rebuilding the Temple,
they acted very religiously and coura-
geously ; and to their praise their names
were recorded, and in the providence of
God the record has been preserved to
this day. “Them that honour Me I
will honour.”

2. I: ts an tllustration of the Divine
record of God’s spiritual Israel. The
mame of every true believer in Jesus
Christ is “‘ written in the Lamb’s book
of life” (Rev. xxi. 27). “ Rejoice, be-
cause your names are written in heaven”
(Luke x. 20; comp. Exod. xxxii. 32;
Ps, lxix. 28; Phil. iv. 3; Heb. xii. 23;
Rev. xiii. 8). ‘‘The Lord knoweth them
that are His.” (a).

3. It suggests that every one of His
people is precious tn the sight of God.
“A book of remembrance was written
before Him for them that feared the
Lord, and that thought upon His name,
And they shall be Mine, saith the Lord
of Hosts, in that day when I make up
My jewels.” He knows the number of
His people, and the name of every one


of them. ‘He calleth His own sheep
by name.” He will not lose any one of
them. He has not only written their


names in His book of life, but has graven
them upon the palms of His hands
(Isa. xlix. 16). (6).

Il. The significance of the contents
of the record. We have in this list—

1. Significant persons, (1.) Zerubba-
bel, ‘the prince of Judah,” an ancestor
of the Messiah (Matt. i. 12; Luke iti.
27). It was important that his name
should be recorded, that no link might


be absent from the chain of evidence
which shows that our Lord was of the
family of king David (comp. Isa. xi. 1;
Jer, xxiii, 5; Matt. i. 1-17; xxii. 42).
(2.) Jeshua, who was a distinguished
type of Jesus Christ (Zech. iii, vi.
11-13),

2. A significant place. Bethlehem
(ver. 21). This place must be rebuilt,
and reinhabited by Jews; for in the
Divine purposes a great destiny awaited
it (Mic. v. 2; Matt. ii 1). Here, then,
in this record we have two persons and
one place which sustained close relations
to the Messiah.

3. Significant numbers. (1.) The num-
ber of those who settled in Bethlehem
was small—‘“an hundred twenty and
three.” Bethlehem was “little among
the thousands of Judah.” Yet how il-
lustrious and universal is its renown!
Size and populousness are utterly un.
satisfactory tests of worth and greatness.
(c) (2.) The number of those who
gettled in Anathoth was also sinall—“ an
hundred twenty and eight” (ver. 23).
In this we have an illustration of the
fulfilment of the Divine threatenings
(Jer. xi, 21-23). The word of the Lord,
whether it be a promise or a menace,
shall surely be accomplished in due
season. (3.) The number of the whole
was comparatively small. ‘ The whole
congregation together was forty and two
thousand, three hundred and threescore ”
(ver. 64). What a small number as
compared with the 603,550 men “that
were able to go forth to war in Israel,”
who were numbered in the desert of
Sinai! How small, too, as compared
with the 601,730 men “able to go to
war in Israel,” who were numbered in
the plains of Moab, before the entrance
into the Promised Land! The smallness
of the number of those who returned to

25


CHAP. II.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.


—ow





their own land may be viewed—(i.) As
a discredit to those who remained in
Babylon, In them the love of material
prosperity was stronger than the love of
country. They had neither piety nor
patriotism enough to inspire them to
make the sacrifices and encounter the

erils which the return to their own
land involved. (ii.) The greater honour
to those who returned. They acted with
a noble faithfulness and independence
in doing what they deemed to be their
duty and privilege, though they were in
a minority, and though the course they
followed involved loss and danger.
They had the courage of their convic-
tions ; they were heroes in their fidelity
to their country and to their God. (iii)
An element which contributed to the
success of their undertaking. To settle
down again in the deserted land, and to
rebuild the ruined Temple in the face of
difficulty and opposition, demanded men
of the right quality rather than men in
great multitude. It was force of charac-
ter, and not force of numbers, that was
needed for the success of the returning
exiles—men of sincere piety and fervent
patriotism. As the victory of Gideon
over the Midianites was achieved not
by the 32,000, some of whom were fear-
ful and others lacking zeal, but by the
300 eager and heroic ones ; so with this
company under Zerubbabel, success was
to be achieved by their faith and cour-
age, not by their multitudinousness, (d).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) God knows the persons of all His own.
He hath in His infinite understanding the
exact number of all the individual persons that
belong to Him (2 Tim. ii. 19): ‘*The Lord
knows them that are His,” He knows all
things, because He hath created them ; and
He kuows His people because He hath not only
made them, but also chose them. He could
no more choose He knew not what, than He
could create He knew not what. He knows
them under a double title; of creation as
creatures in the common mass of creation, as
new creatures by a particular act of separation.
He cannot be ignorant of them in time whom
He foreknew from eternity. His knowledge
in time is the same as He had from eternity ;
He foreknew them that He intended to give
the grace of faith unto; and He knows them
after they believe, because He knows His own
act im bestowing grace upon them, and His





ewn mark and seal wherewith He has stamped
them. No doubt but He that ‘ calla the stars
of heaven by their names” (Ps. cxlvii. 4),
knows the number of those living stars that
sparkle in the firmament of His Churen, He
cannot be ignorant of their persons when He
numbers the hairs of their heads, and hath


registered their names in the book of life.


As He only had an infinite mercy to make the
choise, 80 He only hath an infinite under-
standing to compreliend their persons. We
only know the elect of God by a moral as-
surance in the judgment of charity, when the
conversation of men is according to the doc-
trine of God. We have not an infallible
knowledge of them, we may be often mis-
taken ; Judas, a devil, may bejudged by man
for s saint till he be stripped of his disguise.
God only hath an infallible knowledge of them;
He knows His own records, and the counter-
parts in the hearts of His people; none can
counterfeit His seal, nor can any raze it out.
When the Church is either scattered like dust
by persecution, or overgrown with supersti-
tion and idolatry, that there is scarce any
grain of true religion appearing, as in the
time of Elijah, who complained that he was
left alone, as if the Church had been rooted
out of that corner of the world (1 Kings xix.
14, 18) ; yet God knew that He had a number
fed in a eave, and had reserved seven thousand
men that had preserved the purity of His
worship, and not bowed the knee to Baal.
Christ knew His sheep, as well as He is known
of them ; yea, better than they can know Him
(John x. 14). History acquaints us that Cyrus
had so vast a memory that he knew the name
of every particular soldier in his army, which
consisted of divers nations; shall it be too
hard for an infinite understanding to know
every one of that host that march under His
banner? May He not as well know them ag
know the number, qualities, influences, of
those stars which lie concealed from our eye
as well as those that are visible to our sense f
Yes, He knows them, as a general to employ
them, as a shepherd to preserve them. He
knows them in the world to guard them, and
He knows when they are out of the world to
gather them, and call out their bodies though
wrapped up ina cloud of the putrefied carcasses
of the wicked. As He knew them from all
eternity to elect them, so He knows them in
time to clothe their persons with righteous-
ness, to protect their persons in calamity,
according to His good pleasure, and at last
to raise and reward them according to His
promise,—Stephen Charnocke, B.D.


(b) Our God has a particular notice of us,
and a particular interest in our personal his-
tory. And this was one of the great usea of
the incarnation 5 it was to humanise God, re-
ducing Him to a human personality, that we
might believe in that particular and personal
love in which He reigns from eternity, For
Christ was visibly one of us, and we see in all
His demonstration that He is attentive t¢


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BZRA.,





avery personal want, woe, cry of the world.
When alone woman came up in a crowd to
steal, as it were, some healing power out of
His person, or out of the hem of His rarment,
He would not let her off in that impersonal,
unrecognising way ; He compelled her to show
herself and to confess her name, and sent her
away with His personal blessing. He pours
out everywhere a particular sympathy on every
particular child of sorrow ; He even hunts up
the youth He has before healed of his blind.
ness, and opens to him, persecuted as he is
for being healed, the secrets of His glorious
Messiahship. The result, accordingly, of this
incarnate history is that we are drawn toa
different opinion of God; we have seen that
He can love as a man loves another, and that
such is the way of His love. He has tasted
death, we say, not for all men only, bui for
every man. We even dare to say, for me—
who loved me and gave Himself for me. Nay,
He goes even further than this Himself, call-
ing us friends, and claiming that dear rela-
tionship with us,—friends because He is on
the private footing of friendship and personal
confidence; ‘‘ The servant knoweth not what
his lord doeth, but I have called you friends,”
He even goes beyond this, promising a friend-
ship so particular and personal, that it shall
be a kind of secret, or cipher of mutual under-
standing open to no other—a new white stone
given by his King, ‘‘and in the stone a new
name written, which no man knoweth saving
he that receiveth it.”

- - His Saviour and Lord is over him
andwith him, as the Good Shepherd calling him
by name ; so that he is finally saved, not asa
man, or some one of mankind led forth by
his Lord in the general flock, but as the Mas-
ter’s dear Simon, or James, or Alpheus, or
Martha, whose name is so recorded in the
“uamb’s book of life.— Horace Bushnell, D.D.


GHAP,. II.





—


+


(c) The moral magnitude of things has ne
relationship to the physical, What if a man
should say that Washingtea was not a great
unin because he was not a ten-thousandth part
as great as the Alleghany Mountains, compar-
ing moral magnitude with physical ? What haa
the size of a man, or the duration on earth of
a man, or his physical powers, to do with the
moral measurement that belongs to the under-
standing, the reagon, or the moral sentiments ?
Is a battle great by the size of the nation that
fought it, or the field that it was fought in!
Or is it great by the skill and the bravery
enacted, and by the long-reaching sequences
that flow from it? The part which this world
is to play in the far future, the experiment of
human life, the story of Divine sacrifice and
love, the part which redeemed men are to
enact in their translation int) the heavenly
splere—these all give a moral grandeur to
this world, and utterly overcome the objection
that God would not be likely to give minute
personal thought to the evolutions of indivi-
dual life. —H. W. Beecher.


(d) Gideon’s army, we see, must be lessened,
And who go fit to be cashiered as the fearful 1
God bids him, therefore, proclaim licence for
all faint hearts to leave the field. God will
not glorify Himself by cowards. As the timo-
rous shall be without the gates of heaven, soe
shall they be without the lists ef God's field.
Reader ! does but a foul word, or a frown,
scare thee from Christ? Doth the loss of a
little land or silver disquiet thee? Doth but
the sight of the Midianites in the valley strike
thee with terror? Home then, home to the
world ; thou art not for the conquering band
of Christ. If thou canst not resolve to follow
Him through infamy, prisons, racks, gibbets,
flames, depart to thy house, and save thyself
to thy loas.— Bishop Hall.


Reuicious SERVIOE.
(Verses 36-58.)


This section of the record suggests the
following observations concerning service
in the Church of God :—

L There are various spheres of ser-
vice in the Church of God. In the
verses before us there are several classes
of persons, and each of these classes had
its own proper duties to discharge. The
priests (vers. 36-39), the Levites who
assisted the priests (ver. 40), the Leviti-
cal choir or choirs (ver, 41), the Levitical
porters or gate-keepers (ver. 42), the
Nethinim, who performed the more
menial and laborious duties (vers.
43-54), and “the children of Solomon’s
servants,” who were a grade lower even


than the Nethinim, and did the humblest
work of all. In these we have an illus-
tration of the various spheres of religious
work in this Christian dispensation, “He
gave gifts unto men. And He gave
some, apostles; and some, prophets ;
and some, evangelists; aid some, pastors
and teachers;” d&e. (Eph. iv. 11, 12).
In our own day we have pastors,
preachers, evangelists, conductors of
prayer-meetings, Sunday-school teachers,
tract distributors, visitors of the sick and
sorrowful, leaders of the psalmody of the
church, and managers of its financial
and other business arrangements, In
the work of the Lord Jesus amongat
27


OBa?P, I.





men there is scope for every kind and
degree of faculty, The feeblest power
may be beneficially employed ; and the
greatest gifts may find spheres of service
which demand their utmost exercise,
This fact deprives the idlers in the
Church of God of any legitimate excuse
for their indolence. There is work for
every one, and suited to every capacity ;
and the obligation of service rests upon
every one, Let every one, then, be up
and doing, &c. (a).

If. The humblest sphere of service
in the Church of God is a place of
privilege and honour. This seems to
us to be fairly deducible from the fact
that the Nethinim and “the children of
Solomon’s servants” are here recorded
and numbered. Even the bondsmen
taken from alien and conquered peoples,
being employed in the most menial ser-
vices in connection with the Temple,
find a place in this sacred record of the
returning people of God. That we are
permitted to do anything for Jesus our
Lord, if it be the very lowest and hum-
blest service, should be regarded as a
precious privilege and a high honour.
Is it not an honour that we may aid in
any way, and in any degree, in the con-
version, education, or progress of a soul
immortal and redeemed by the precious
blood of Christ? Is it not an honour
that we are permitted, nay, called to be
co-workers with our Lord and Saviour
in His great redemptive undertaking }
(b).
III. The privilege of service in the
Church of God is not limited to any
particular races or classes of men.
Neither the Nethinim nor “the children
of Solomon’s servants” were Israelites ;
but they were not excluded from the
privilege of employment in connection
with the Temple and its services, In
this Christian age no races or classes are
privileged to share in this service to the
exclusion of others. All men may par-
ticipate in the blessings of Christ’s sal-
vation ; and every true Christian may
serve in some sphere of holy work, and
ought so to serve. “For there is no
difference between the Jew and the
Greek: for the same Lord over all is
rich unto all that call upon Him,” In

28


_ HOMILET IC OOMMENTARY: EZRA








the Christian life “there is neither Greek
nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision,
barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free; but
Christ is all, and in all.” Neither is
there any exclusive sacerdotal class with
special privileges and powers. Every
sphere of Christian service is open to
every Christian who possesses the quali-
fications for efficiently discharging the
duties of such sphere. (e).

Let every Christian, then, promptly
undertake and faithfully discharge some
service in the cause of our Lord and
Saviour. ‘Son, go work to-day in My
vineyard,” ‘Lord, what wilt Thou have
me to dot”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Every Christian who wants to have a
blessing for himself or for othera, must set to
work by active exertion. Some of you young
men might preach—you have the ability, you
have the time for study; I want you to lay
out your talents in that holiest of enterprises :
in the street corners, anywhere, proclaim
Christ. Some of you ought to be teaching
in Sabbath-schoola, but you are putting that
talent by ; it is rusting, it is spoiling, and you
will have no interest to bring to your Master
for it. I want that Sabbath-school talent to
be used. Many of you might do good service
by teaching senior classes at your own houses,
This work might be moat profitably extended.
If our intelligent Christian brethren and
matrons would try to raise little classes, of
six, eight, ten, or twelve, at home, I know not
what good might come of it. You would not
be interfering with any one else; for in such
a city as this, we may all work as hard as we
will, and there is no chanee of interfering
with each other’s labours. This sea is too
large here for us to be afraid of other folks
running away with our fish. Some of you,
perhaps, will do best in tract distribution ;
well, do it—keep it up; but mind there is
something in the tract—and that is not always
the case—mind there is something worth
reading, which will be of use wien read. Do
not give away somnolent tracts, which are
more likely to send the readers to sleep than
to prayer, Some of them might be useful to
physicians, when they cannot get their patients
to sleep by zny other means. Get somethmg
useful, interesting, telling, scriptural, and give
it away largely out of love to Jesus. And if
these labours do not suit your taste, talk per-
sonally to individuals, Christ at the well!
What a schoolmaster for us! ‘Talk to the one
weman, the one child, the one carter, the one
labourer, whoever he may be. He who makea
sne blade of g:ass grow that would not other-
wise have grown, ig a benefactor to his race;
and he who scatters one good thought which
would not else have been disseminated, has


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.





OHAP, I,
y!





done something for the kingdom of Christ.
I cannot tell you what is most fit for every-
body to do; but if your heart is right, there
is something for each one, There are so many
niches in the temple, and so many statues of
living stone to fill thoge niches, to make it a
complete temple of heavenly architecture,
You and I must each find our own niche,
Remember, Christian, your time is going. Do
not be considering always what you ought to
do, but get to work; shut your eyes and put
your hand out, and ‘‘ Whatsoever thy hand
findeth to do, do it with thy might.” The very
first Christian effort will do, only do it with
your might; do it in the name and strength
of God.—C. H. Spurgeon.


(5) I know of no service that can be more
distinguished than the doing of good, the
scattering of blessings among the sons of men.
Methinks the very angels before the throne
might envy us poor men who are permitted to
talk of Christ, even thouch it be but to little
children. I reckon the humblest ragged-school
teacher te be more honoured than even Gabriel
himself, in being commissioned to tell out the
story of the Cross, and to win youthful hearts
to the Saviour’s service. You are not em-
ployed as scullions in your Master’s kitchen,
though you might be content with such a
gervice; you are not made as His hired
servants, to toil in meanest drudgery, you are
not gent to be hewers of wood and drawers of
water; but you are His friends, the friends of
Jesus, to do such work as He did; and even
greater works than He did are you enabled
to do, becanse He hath gone to His Father.
4«This honour have all the sainta,” the honour
of being gentlemen-at-arms under Jesus, the
Captain of their salvation.—Jbid.


(e) The work of conversion ig not to be the
exclusive prerogative of the pulpit. There is
uo sacerdotalism in the Gospel of Jesus Chriat.


We have a great High Priest, but it is Jesus.
There is a holy priesthood, but it ig no privi-
leged caste, it is no modern tribe of Levi; it
is the whole community of the faithful, the
Church of God which He has purchased with
His own blood. That figment of old Popery,
which restricts all endeavour to spread the
Gospel of Christ to the clergy merely, ig alien
from Apostolic teaching, and would leave the
harvest to rot, neglected in the field, because
of the miserable fewness of the reapers to
gather it in. Thongh I yield to mo man
under heaven in respect for the office of the
Christian ministry ; though I would rather, far
rather if I know myself, have the seal of ita
baptism upon my brow than the coronet of any
earthly-patented nobility, I do feel that I am
but fulfilling one of its most solemn vocations,
when I summon every member of the sacra-
mental host to participate in the glorious war.
God forbid that I should trespass upon the
crown rights of any of the blood royal of
heaven, I should feel as if that were for a
guardian to squander his ward’s inheritance,
or for a father tojparalyse the growing man-
hood of his children, to deprive you, the very
poorest of you, the luxury of doing good. The
highest honour in this world, the honour of
bringing souls to Christ, may be the common
privilege of you all, The child with the linen
coat, who listens, as did little Samuel, when
the Master speaks; the love-watchers of the
paralytic, who, if they can do nothing else, can
take him and let him down through the roof
to the room where Jesus is; the little servant-
maid that waits upon Naaman’s wife—all, all
may have an apostolical commission, and may
share in the glories of an apostolical reward.
There is not a single member of a single
church in the world that is exempt from thia
service, All are summoned to the labour, and
all, oh! infinite condescension! may be workers
together with God.—W. M. Punshon, LL.D.


Toe IurorTANCE o¥ A CLEAR SPIRITUAL PEDIGREE.
(Verses 59-63.)


Consider :

L The doubtful pedigree amongst
the people as an illustration of uncer-
tainty as to our spiritual state, Verses
59 and 60 suggest concerning such un-
certainty—

1. That it may consist with association
with the people of God. Those who
“could not show their father’s house,
and their seed, whether they were of
Israel,” were permitted to go up to Jeru-
salem with those whose Israelitish de-
scent was beyond question, And they
whose evidences as to their spiritual
lineage are not clear and conclusive, may


have a name and a place amongst God’s
spiritual Israel, And more than this,
they may really be true members of that
Israel, Sincere believers in the Lord
Jesus Christ do uot always realise the
blessedness of Christian assurance, Some-
times even he ‘that feareth the Lord,
that obeyeth the voice of His servant,
walketh in darkness, and hath no
light.” (a).

2. That tt must involve spiritual loss.
Those persons of doubtful pedigree who
journeyed with the Jews to Jerusalem,
could not enjoy the full rights of citi.
genship until they proved their Israeli-

29


OHAP. If,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.





tish descent, And doubt as to our
spiritual lineage must involve loss—(1.)
Of spirttual joy. Such doubters are
strangers to the strong consolation which
they enjoy who can say, “I know whom
I have believed, and am persuaded that
He is able to keep that which I have
committed unto Him against that day;”
and who can utter the triumphant chal-
lenge, ‘ Who shall separate us from the
love of Christ? shall tribulation,” &c.
(Rom, viii, 35-39). (6). (2.) Of spire
tual usefulness. Lacking Christian as-
surance, our testimony for Christ would
be likely to be deficient in clearness and
attractiveness, in fervour and force ; it
would especially fail to set forth the
joyful character of true religion. And
thus our religious usefulness would be
diminished. (c).

IL The doubtful pedigree amongst
the priests as an illustration of uncer-
tainty as to our ministerial calling and
condition, A man’s ministerial pedigree
in the Church of Christ may be said to
be unquestionable when he possesses—
1. The Divine vocation. The true
minister is assured that he is called of
God to his work. He can enter into
the feeling of the Apostle, who said,
“Necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe
is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel!”
2. The Divine qualification, If a man
is unfitted for the sacred duties of the
ministry, his ministerial pedigree is
ruinously defective. 3. The Divine
sanction, That a ministry is blessed to
the conversion of sinners and the edifi-
cation of Christian believers is an evi-
dence that it is approved by God.

The verses under consideration (61-
63) suggest—

1. That a ministerial pedigree may
be lost by reason of worldliness, The
children of the priests who could not
find “their register among those that
were reckoned by genealogy,” were de-
scendants of one who “took a wife of
the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite,
and was called after their name.” Now
Barzillai was a great man in his day, and
the priest who married his daughter
seems to have esteemed his alliance with
that distinguished family more highly
than the dignity of his priesthood, and

30


so -he adopted the name of Barzillai for
his family, and his family register was
with the house of Barzillai, and not with
the house of Aaron, and in this way it
seems to have been lost, His preference
‘for worldly distinction issued in the sus-
pension, if not the total loss, of the
sacerdotal heritage of his descendants,
We regard this as an illustration of the
effect of worldliness on the character and
influence of a minister of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ. The eager pursuit of
either the possessions or the distinctions
of this present world tends to despoil
the Christian minister of spiritual power
—to render his perceptions of truth less
quick and clear, his spiritual sympathies
and susceptibilities less true and active,
his spiritual zeal less fervent, his spiri-
tual aspirations less intense and constant,
de. (d).

2. The loss of ministerial pedigree in-
volves a corresponding loss of ministerial
power and reward. The priests whose
pedigree could not be found were pro-
hibited from discharging certain priestiy
functions, and from receiving certain
emoluments of that office. ‘‘ They were
polluted from the priesthood; and the
Tirshatha said unto them that they
should not eat of the most holy things,”
&c. If a minister of the Gospel, from
worldliness or any other cause, suffer
personal spiritual deterioration or losa,
it will tell sadly upon his influence for
good, and upon the joy and spiritual re-
ward which he finds in his work. (e).

3. The final decision as to ihe stand-
ing of a minister of uncertain pedigree
must be gwen by God Himself. “ And
the Tirshatha said unto them, that they
should not eat of the most holy things,
till there stood up a priest with Urim
and with Thummim.” The high priest
in former times sought to know the will
of God by means of Urim and Thum-
mim, and the decisions which were given
by this medium were regarded as those
of God Himself. So the case of the
priests of uncertain pedigree was left
for the decision of God. Doubtlesa
there are certain questions of ministerial
character and qualification with which
Church courts and councils are compe:
went to des. But when a man’s minis


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: FZRA,


OWAP, Yz.


ba





terial pedigree is merely doubtful or un-
certain, the final decision must be left
to the great Searcher of hearts. To
his own Master he standeth or falleth.”


** All to the great tribunal haste,
The account to render there ;
And shouldst Thou strictly mark our faults,
Lord, how should we appear ?”
—Doddridge.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Faith, let us remember, is the root, and
assurance ia the flower. Doubtless you can
never have the flower without the root ; but it
is no less certain you may have the root and
not the flower. Faith is that poor trembling
woman who came behind Jesus in the press,
and touched the hem of His garment (Mark y.
25) ; assurance is Stephen standing calmly in
the midst of his murderers, and saying, ‘I
see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man
standing on the right hand of God (Acts vii.
56). Faith is the penitent thief, crying,
“Lord, remember me” (Luke xxiii. 42);
assurance is Job sitting in the dust, covered
with sores, and saying, ‘‘I know that my
Redeemer liveth” (Job xix. 25). ‘‘Though
He slay me, yet will I trust in Him” (Job xiii.
15). Faith is Peter’s drowning cry, as he
began to sink, ‘‘ Lord, save me!” (Matt. xiv.
80) ; assurance is that same Peter declaring
before the council, in aftertimes, ‘‘ This is the
Stone which was set at nought of you builders,
which is become the head of the corner,
Neither is there salvation in any other; for
there is none other name under heaven given
among men whereby we must be saved ” (Acts
iv. 11, 12). Faith is the anxious, trembling
voice, ‘‘ Lord, I believe ; help Thou mine un-
belief” (Mark ix. 24) ; assurance is the confi-
dent challenge, ‘‘ Who shall lay anything to
the charge of God’s elect? Who is he that
condemneth?” (Rom. viii. 33, 34). Faith is
Saul praying in the honse of Judas at Damascus,
sorrowful, blind, and alone (Acts ix. 11);
assurance ig Paul the aged prisoner, looking
calmly into the grave, and saying, ‘‘1 know
Whom I have believed. ‘There is a crown laid
up for me” (2 Tim. i, 12, iv. 8). Faith is
life. How great the blessing! Who can tell
the gulf between life and death} And yet life
may be weak, sickly, unhealthy, painful, trying,
anxious, worn, burdensome, joyless, smileless
te the very end. Assurance is more than life.
It is health, strength, power, vigour, activity,
energy, manliness, beauty.—Bishop Ryle,

Suppose thou hast not yet attained so much
as to this inward peace, yet know thou hast
no reason to question the truth of thy faith
for want of this. We have peace with God as
soon as we believe, but not aiways with our-
selves. The pardon may be past the prinee’s
hand and seal, and yet not put into the pri-
soner’s hand, Thou thinkest them too rash
(dost not?) who judged Panl a murderer hy


the viper that fastened om his hand, And
who art thou, who condemnest thyself for an
unbeliever, because of those troublea and in-
ward agonies which may fasten fora time on
the spirit of the most gracious child God hath
on earth {—W, Gurnall.


(6) A man may praise God for the redemp-
tion of the world, &c., who has no conscious-
ness of having secured an interest in it, but
not like him who feels he has a property in it.
How diffcrent will be their feelings! Just as
great will be the difference of interest which
will be felt by a stranger passing through a
beautiful estate, and by the owner of it. One
may admire the richness of the soil, the beauty
of its crops, and the stateliness of its trees;
but his interest in it will fall very far short of
his who has the title and property in it.—Z.
G. Salter.


(c) Christianity did not in its beginning
succeed by the force of its doctrines, but by
the lives of its disciples. It succeeded first as
a light, in accordance with the Master’s com
mand, ‘‘ Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in heaven.” Make religion
attractive by the goodness that men see im you;
so sweet, so sparkling, so buoyant, so cheerful,
hopeful, courageous, conscientious and yet not
stubborn, so perfectly benevolent, and yet not
mawkish or sentimental, blossoming in every-
thing that is good, a rebuke to everything that
is mean or little ; make such men of yourselves
that everybody that looks upon you may say,
‘* That is a royal good fellow ; he has the spirit
that I should like to lean apon in time of
trouble, or to be a companion with atall times.”
Build up such a manhood that it shall be win-
ning to men, That is what the early Church
did,—H. W. Beecher.


(d) What the astronomers say of the eclipse
of the sun, that it is occasioned by the inter-
vening of the moon between the sun and our
sight, is true in this case: if the world get
between Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, and
our sight, it will darken our sight of Jesus
Christ, and bring eclipses upon our comforts
and graces. Again, those men that dig deep
into the bowels of the earth, they are often-
times choked and stifled by damps that come
from the earth. So is it with Christians,
those that will be ever poring and digging
about the things of this world, it is a thousand
to one that if from worldly things a damp
doth not arise to smother their comforts and
quench their graces, Lastly, a candle, though
it may shine to the view of all, yet put it under
ground, and, though there be not the least pufl
of wind, the very damp will atifle the light of
the flame; and go it is that men may shine
like candles in their comforts, yet bring them
but under the earth, and a clod of that will
stifle their candle, will damp their spiritual
comforts, and bereave them of those joys that
sre in themselvea unspeakable,—John Magirus.

31


OHAP. I,


ae et


(ce) A true minister is a man whore manhood
itself ig a strong and influential argument with
his people, He lives in such relations with
God, and in such a genuine sympathy with
man, that itis a pleasure to be under the in-
fluence of such a mind. Just as, lying on a
couch on a summer’s evening, you hear from
a neighbouring house the low breathing of an
instrument of music, so far away that you can
only hear its palpitation, but cannot discern
the exact tune that is played, and are soothed
by it, and drawn nearer to hear more; so the
true man, the true Christian minister, is him-
self so inspiring, so musical, there is so much
of the Divine element in him, rendered home-


HOMILETI@ COMMENTARY: EZRA.








like by incarnation with his disposition, brought
down to the level of man’s understanding, that
wherever he goes, little children want to ses
him, plain people want to be with him ; every-
body says when he comes, ‘‘Good ;” and every-
body says when he goes away, ‘‘I wish he had


stayed longer ;” all who come in contact with


nim are inclined to live a better life, Man-
hood is the best sermon, It,is good to fill the
mind with the goodness and sweetness of the
thing itself to which you would fain draw them.
‘¢Go, preach,” was no more authoritative than
“‘ Let your light go shine before men, that they
may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven,”—H. W. Beecher,


PossEssioNs AND OFFERINGS.
(Verses 65-70.)


These verses present the following
homiletical topics, which may be con-
sidered with advantage :—

I. The completion of their journey.
“They came to the house of the Lord
which is at Jerusalem.” No account of
the journey is given by the historian,
It is, however, certain that the journey
was—(1)/long,the distance was more than
one thousand miles, and Ezra and his
company (who went up many years after-
ward) were four months ou the way
(chap. vii. 9); (2) dificult, by reason of
their uncertainty as to the best way, and
the comparatively small number of beasts
of burden ; (3) perilous, as we see from
chap. viii, 22. The country through
which their course lay was infested by
Bedouin Arabs, who frequently plun-
dered and assaulted travellers. But the
returning Jews were sustained, guided,
and guarded by the Lord their God. It
was by His blessing that they reached
their destination in safety. So will He
lead and keep all those who forsake
sin, seek to do His will, and set their
faces Zion-ward. ‘ An highway shall be
there, and a way, and it shall be called,
The way of holiness ; the unclean shall
not pass over it ; but He Himself shall
be with them, walking in the way ; and
the foolish shall not err therein. No lion
shall be there,” &c, (Isa, xxxv, 8-10).

II. The extent of their possessions.
“Beside their servants and their maids,
of whom there were seven thousand
three hundred thirty and seven,” de.
(vers, 65-67). There might have been

32


some wealthy men amongst them; but
viewed as a whole this company was
certainly poor. Their reduced and im-
poverished condition is indicated by the
number of servants and beasts of burden
in relation to the number of persons,
They had only one slave to every six per.
sons, one horse to every fifty-eight per-
sons, one mule to every one hundred and
seventy-three persons, one camel to every
ninety-eight persons, and one ass to every
seven persons. Sin always impoverishes
and degrades the sinner. Some forms
of it lead to temporal poverty, e9.,
drunkenness, indolence, wastefulnesa,
“For the drunkard and the glutton
shall come to poverty ; and drowsiness
shall clothe a man with rags” (Prov. xxiii,
21). ‘I went by the field of the slothful,”
&c. (Prov. xxiv. 30). But the worst
poverty to which sin leads is that of the
spirit. It despoils man of high and holy
thoughts, of pure and pious aspirations,
of generous and noble purposes; it
tends to make him “wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked ;” and to render him unconscious
of his destitution and degradation.

III. The presentation of their offer-
ings. ‘‘ And some of the chief of the
fathers, when they came to the house of
the Lord,” &c. (vers, 68, 69). Notice :

1. The object of their offerings. “They
offered freely for the house of God te
set it up in his place.” Their contri-
butione were for the rebuilding of the
Temple. In this way they sought te
promote the honour of God; and they


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZRA,


OHA, Ii,
mM


—————


were faithfel to the purpose for which
they were permitted to leave Babylon.
Offerings for the building of temples
for the worship of the Most High are
both prudent and pious; they are en-
couraged both by philanthropy and by
religion; they promote the good of
humanity and the glory of God.

2. The spirit of their offerings. (1.)
They offered promptly, without delay ;
soon as “ they came to the house of the
Lord, which is at Jerusalem.” If they
could not begin to rebuild the Temple at
once, they could contribute towards the
expenses of rebuilding, and they did so,
(2.) They offered spontaneously, without
constraint, ‘ They offered freely for the
house of God.” “ Every man accord-
ing as he purposeth in his heart ; not
grudgingly, or of necessity ; for God
loveti a cheerful giver.” It is probable
that gratitude for the mercies received
during the journey, and for their safe
arrival at their destination, would prompt
them to present hearty offerings. (a).

3. The measure of their offerings.
“They gave after their ability unto the
treasure of the work,” &c. This seems
to imply—(1l.) Proportion; that they
gave according to their means, the rich
according to his riches, and the poor ac-
cording to his poverty. “ If there be first
a willing mind, it is accepted according
to that a man hath, not according to that
he hath not.” (6). (2.) Laberality ; that
each one who gave, gave.as much as he
could. The total amount contributed
was, at least, about £90,000; which
gives an average of about £2 per per-
son, including servants, An example
worthy of imitation by many congrega-
tions in our day which are far more
favourably cireumstanced. (c).

IV. The settlement in their cities.
So the priests, and the Levites, and
some of the people, and the singers, and
the porters, and the Nethinims, dwelt
in their cities, and all Israel in their
cities.” Two ideas are suggested—

1. Home after exile. ‘‘ Dwelt in their
cities,” Their cities ; not the cities of
their conquerors. The cities were toa
great extent ruined and desolate; but
they were their own, It was the land
of their fathers, and their owr land. (d).


2. Rest after a long and tedious
journey, The toils and perils of their
pilgrimage were over. Rest in their own
cities would be sweet to their weary feet,
but sweeter still to their spirits.


** But rest more sweet and atill,

Than ever nightfall gave ;

Our yearning hearts shall fill,
In the land beyond the grave.


There shall no tempesta blow,

No scorching noontide beat ;
There shall be no more snow,

No weary, wandering feet,
So we lift our trusting eyes

From the hills our fathers trod,
To the quiet of the skies,

To the Sabbath of our God.”

—Mrs. Hemans,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) ‘‘She hath done what she could.” The
costliness of her gift in proportion to her
means, while it was nothing to Him she would
honour, was a guarantee that she was not
trifling. Had it been far lesa than it was, and
had it been all she could bring, His blessing
would have been the same. For mind, He
does not say, “Stop, consider, this alabaster
box really cost a good deal of money ; it could
not have been bonght for lesa than three hun-
dred denarii.” No; but He says, ‘‘She hath
done what she could;” that is, she hath de-
monstrated the deep and tender attachment
of her soul, She believes on her Lord. She
loves the Saviour for His holiness, His mercy,
His Divine benignity. One penny’s worth, if
it is only the utmost that self-denial can do, is
as good for that as ten thousand shekela, Did
He not declare as much, in what He said of
the two mites that the poor widow cast into
the Temple treasury? Nay, did He not equally
accept, and bless with the same favour,
another woman, poorer and frailer still, who
had nothing to give Him but tears and kisses
for His feet? The whole spiritual meaning
of gifts consists in the digposition of the giver,
Distinctions of weight and measure, standarda
of currency, tables of value, rates of exchange,
calculations of outlay, colour, material, and
shape, vanish before that simple and royal
touchstone in the breast. It is felt to be so,
even in the presents of human friendship;
and spiritual sincerity does not pasa for lesa
in the eyes of Him who searches and sees the
heart.—F. D, Huntington, D.D


(b) Hohannes, the blind missionary of Har-
poot, tells of a place where the Board had
spent much money with little result, where he
was sent. It was a poor place. The people
were to raise six hundred piastres; and the
Boara was to pay the balance of his salary.
The people said they could not raise that sum;
a neighbouring pastor said it was impossible,
they were so poor, Aiter much anxiety, the


33


CHAP, II.


a


missionary laid the case before God in prayer,
when it was impressed upon him that each
should give his tenth. He proposed it to the
people, and they agreed to it. The money
was easily raised, and amounted to more than
the entire salary. That people never prospered
so much before; their crops were abundant,
and their satisfaction great. They not only
supported their preacher and school-teacher,
but gave two thousand piastres to other pur-
poses.—Dict. of Iilust.


(c) If there be any principle in our religion ;
if our obligation to worship be anything more
than a seemly form, or an irksome impost
upon time and thought; if the idea of God
within us be not a remote and impersonal
divinity, but a Being warm, near, watchful,
provident, the living God of our clinging
heart and of our crying soul, then surely it
were mockery to render any homage but the
truest at His footstool, and to offer any gifts
but the chiefest on His altar. The old heathen
understood this matter better. Their eyes
were blinded and their rites were cruel, but
they never erred in this. The goodliest spoil,
the most fragrant libation, the fairest in the
stall, the nearest to the heart, were reserved
to be devoted to their gods; and shall we,
heirs of all the ages and of all the economies,
we on whom God has caused to shine a sun in
His meridian of privilege—shall we anger our
God against us by our selfish indifference to
His claims, or by our unfilial withholding of
His honour? We to whom He has given
every faculty which makes us capable of God,
shall we withhold from Him the hearts which
He asks only to brighten and redeem? We
to whom He has allotted a day so clear and
so brilliant, shall we insult Him by the offer
of the refuse of our time? We who are gifted
by Him alike with our wealth and with our
power to amass it, shall we deal out our
niggard pittance in His cause like the coarse
miser churl who parts with coin like blood?
Brethren, I summon you, with all possible
solemnity, to answer this invocation. If there
has been indifference in the past, let our pen-
itence mourn it, and let our consecration
atone it, to-day. It is but little at the best
that we can offer; our collective wealth would
be absorbed by one single city’s needs. Our
influence, even at its widest, is contracted
within a narrow span. The shadows gather
swiftly upon the noon of our very longest


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.








day. We are feeble, and half our time must be
spentin sleep that we may recruit our strength.
We are frail, and Death standing by laughs
at our arithmetic when we calculate on future
years. We receive unfinished labours from
our fathers, and we transmit them unfinished
to our children. Watchmen in the night, it is
not given to us to tarry until the morning.
Guardians of the battle-flag, we can but wave
it gallantly for awhile; but we know full well
that our hands will stiffen and that our com-
Trades will bury us before the work is done.
But the present is ours. We have room to
work; we have light to work in. There are
ample opportunities, and there are passionate
needs, and there are strong encouragements,
and there are facilities such as no age ever
possessed, for honest work for God. Now who,
then, is willing to consecrate his service this
day unto the Lord? Give Him your hearts,
dear brethren—your costliest and most ac-
ceptable offering. The sordid and the worldly
may despise your choice, but there awaits you
on earth God’s palpable smile, and the bless-
ing of those that are ready to perish; and in
heaven the angel’s welcome, and the con-
queror’s palm, and the King’s palace as the
soul’s home, and the King Himself in His
beauty as your exceeding great reward.—W.
M. Punshon, LL.D.


(d) No bricks and mortar and timber can
make a home. No marble, however fine and
polished, can make a home. No gold, or silver,
or tapestry, or painting, can make a home. It
is that which makes heaven which makes a
home even on this earth. It is love that makes
a home. To love, and to be loved, though it
be in the peasant’s cot, though it be in the
rudest barn through the fissures of which the
wind makes music, is to be at home; and often
you find homes in the rudest dwellings, and
none in the most splendid palaces. But where
love is likely to be disturbed—-where some
rude hand can take the threads that love is
ever spinning and tying and fastening, and
cut them and sever them, the home feeling
must of course be partial. And we long for a
place and a state where those whom we love
will never be taken from us, and where we
shall know that we shall abide eternally in
the presence of those who love us. “We seek
one to come.’ A higher and a settled dwell-
ing-place, a final home, a permanent state of
being.—Samuel Martin.





CHAPTER III.


CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES.] This chapter contains—1. The rebuilding of the altar
(vers. 1-3a). 2. The renewal of the sacrificial worship and of the observance of the religious
festivals (vers. 3b-6a). 3 The preparations for rebuilding the Temple (vers. 6b, 7). 4. The
laying of the foundation-stone of the new Temple, the religious celebration of the occasion,
and the mingled feelings of the people (vers. 8-13).

Ver. 1. The seventh month] i.e. of the year in which they arrived at Jerusalem. The


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA. CHAP II.








seventh month was Tisri, “the month of the full streams,” or ‘‘ floods,” which corresponded
with the latter part of our September and the greater part of October. (For further notes of
time, see notes on ver. 8). As one man] The expression does not signify every man; but,
with great unanimity, ‘“‘ as if inspired by one will.”

Ver. 2. As it is written in the law of Moses] (See Lev. xvii. 2-6; Deut. xil.5-11).

Ver. 3. They set the altar upon his bases] i.e., they built it in its former position
and on the old foundations. For fear was upon them] &c. They were afraid of the
hostility of the neighbouring nations. The people of those countries] are the sur-
rounding peoples, which are mentioned in chap. ix. 1. Burnt offerings morning ani
evening] as commanded in Exod. xxix. 38-42; Num. xxviii. 3-8.

Ver. 4. The feast of Tabernacles, as it is written] (See Lev. xxiii. 33-43). And
offered the daily burnt offerings by number, according to the custom, as the duty of
every day required]. The last clause is in the margin: “The matter of the day in his
day.’’ Vulg.: “‘ Opus dies in die suo.” The offerings for each day of the feast of Tabernacles
are carefully prescribed in detail in Num. xxix. 12-38. ‘‘ The offerings required at this feast
were the largest of all. They amounted to fourteen rams, ninety-eight lambs, and no less than
seventy bullocks, being twice as many lambs and four times as many bullocks as were enjoined
for the Passover. The feast of Tabernacles was especially one of thankfulness to God for the
gifts of the fruit of the earth, and the quantity and nature of the offerings were determined
accordingly.’’—Speaker’s Com.

Ver. 5. After the feast of tabernacles the prescribed order of sacrifices was regularly
observed, viz. The continual burnt offering]i.e. the daily morning and evening sacri-
fice (Num. xxviii. 3-8). Both of the new moons] Rather, “And (the offerings) of the
new moons” (Num. xxviii. 11-15). And of every one that willingly offered] &c. (Lev.
vii. 11-17; Num. xxix. 39; Deut. xvi. 10, 16, 17.)

Ver 6. From the first day of the seventh month] &c. “The altar service, with the
daily morning and evening sacrifice, began on the first day of the seventh month; this daily
sacrifice was regularly offered, according to the law, from then till the fifteenth day of the
seventh month, i.e. till the beginning of the feast of Tabernacles. .All the offerings commanded
in the law for the separate days of this feast were then offered according to the numbers
prescribed; and after this festival the sacrifices ordered at the new moon and other holydays
of the year were offered, as well as the daily burnt offerings,—none but these, neither the
sacrifice on the new moon (the first day of the seventh month), nor the sin-offering on the
tenth day of the same month, i.e. the day of atonement, having been offered before this feast
of Tabernacles.”—Keil. This interpretation is, however, opposed by Schultz, who says: “ It
is merely said (ver. 5) that after the sacrifice of the feast of Tabernacles the usual order of
offerings was again continued, which included the daily offerings, and then also those of the
new moon and other feasts.”

Ver. 7. Meat and drink] i.e. corn and wine. Unto them of Zidon] &c. (Comp. 1
Chron. xxii. 4; 1 Kings v. 6-18; 2 Chron. ii. 3-18.) According to the grant] &c. This
probably refers to the permission to rebuild the Temple, which would involve permission to
negotiate with the Phenicians for such assistance as they needed; for we do not read any-
where that Cyrus made them a grant of Phenician timber.

Ver. 8. Now in the second year of their coming] &c. ‘‘ Whether this second year of
the return coincides with the second year of the rule of Cyrus ’”’ (over Babylon), ‘‘ so that the
foundations of the Temple were laid, as Theophil. Antioch. ad Antolic., lib. 3, according to
Berosus, relates, in the second year of Cyrus, cannot be determined; for nothing more is
said in this book than that Cyrus, in the first year of his reign, issued the decree concerning
the return of the Jews from Babylon, whereupon those named in the list (chap. ii.) set out
and returned, without any further notice as to whether this also took place in the first year
of Cyrus, or whether the many necessary preparations delayed the departure of the first band
till the following year. The former view is certainly a possible though not a probable one,
since it is obvious from iii. I, that they arrived at Jerusalem and betook themselves to their
cities as early as the seventh month of the year. Now the period between the beginning of the
year and the seventh month, i.e. at most six months, seems too short for the publication of the
edict, the departure, and the arrival at Jerusalem, even supposing that the first year of Cyrus
entirely coincided with a year of the Jewish calendar. The second view, however, would not
make the difference between the year of the rule of Cyrus and the year of the return to Jeru-
salem a great one, since it would scarcely amount to half a year.”—Keil. In the second
month] i.e. Zif. (1 Kings vi.1), “the month of ‘blossom;’ or, more fully, ‘the bloom of
flowers,’ corresponding to our May. Appointed the Levites . . . to set forward the
work] i.e. to preside over or superintend the rebuilding of the Temple.

Ver. 9. Jeshua] not the high priest, but the head of an order of Levites (chap. ii.
40.) Judah] is an error of a copyist. It should be Hodaviah, as in the margin, and chap. ii.


35


CHAP, III. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.











40. In Neh. vii. 43, it is written Hodevah. Together] Margin: ‘Heb. as one,” ie. “all,
without exception,’ Lhe sons of Henadad] &c. Keil suggests, as an explanation of the
striking position of the record of ‘‘ the sons of Henadad,” “ that the two classes Jeshua with
his sons and brethren, and Kadmiel with his sons, were more closely connected with each
other than with the sons of Henadad, who formed a third class.’’ The authority of this clause,
however, is doubtful. 2

Ver. 10. They (Zerubbabel and Jeshua) set the priests in their apparel] i.e. in their
Tobes of office (Hxod. xxviii. 40, xxxix. 27-29, 41, and chap. ii. 69). With trumpets]
(Num. x. 8, Xxxi. 6; 1 Chron. xv. 24, xvi. 6; 2 Chron. v. 12). After the ordinance] &c. (1
Chron. xv. 16); xxv. 1): , :

Ver. 11, And they sang together by course] Or, “ And they sang antiphonally.” Fuerst
gives the meaning: ‘‘to sing an alternate song, or in alternate choir (1 Sam. “vill 7} izra
EGA tial . but always to sing in reply, not to sing merely.”” The singing was responsive.
One choir sang, ‘‘ Give thanks unto the Lord, for He is good;” and the other responded,
“For His mercy endureth for ever.” Shouted with a great shout] for joy that the founda-
tion of the Temple was laid.

Ver 12. But many of the priests and Gevites] &c. ‘“ Solomon’s Temple was destroyed
B.C. 588, and the foundation of the subsequent Temple laid B.c. 535 or 534; hence the older
men among those present at the latter event might possibly have seen the former house; in-
deed, some (according to Hag. ii. 3) were still living in the second year of Darius Hystaspes,
who had beheld the glory of the earlier building. Upon these aged men, the miserable cir-
cumstances under which the foundations of the new Temple were laid produced so overwhelm-
ing an impression, that they broke into loud weeping.’’—Keil.


THE REBUILDING OF THE AuTAR: HxemMPuARY FraturRES oF DIVINE
‘WORSHIP.


(Verses 1-3.)


We discover here—

I. Unanimity and zeal in Divine
worship.

Notice:

1. The evidences of unanimity in wor-
ship. “The people gathered themselves
together as one man to Jerusalem. Then
stood up Jeshua,”’ &. The movement
seems to have been a spontaneous one
on the part of the people. They were
not summoned to Jerusalem either by
Zerubbabel the prince or by Jeshua the
high priest, but went there of their own
accord, urged by the religious impulses
of their own souls. And they assembled
“as one man,” i.¢c. as with one heart
and will. And the authorities were not
tardy in taking up the matter and lead-
ing it onward. “ Then stood up Jeshua
the son of Jozadak,” &e. Jeshua with
the priests, and Zerubbabel with the
princes, entered heartily into the move-
ment. Priests and Levites, prince and
people, high and low, cordially united
in the preparation for the restoration
of their national worship.

2. The evidences of zeal in worship.
This great gathering at Jerusalem took
place “when the seventh month was
come, and the children of Israel were
in the cities.” They had only recently
returned from Babylon; their country
was to a great extent desolate, and
would need much cleansing and cultiva-

36


tion ; their houses would need renovation,
or new ones would have to be built by
them; many private interests urgently
claimed their attention; but all these
were freely and resolutely set aside until
they had rebuilt the altar of Jehovah,
and restored His worship, and made
ready to celebrate the sacred festivals
of this seventh month. Such unanimity
and zeal for the worship of God are
worthy of imitation by both individuals
and communities in this age.

II. Sacrifice in Divine worship.
“And builded the altar of the God of
Israel, to offer burnt offerings thereon.”
The altar and the burnt offerings sug-
gest—

1. Man’s need of atonement with God,
The consciousness of guilt, and the de-
sire to propitiate God, or the craving of
the heart for fellowship with Him, are
the experiences which give rise to sacri-
ficial offerings. The altar is an answer
to the deep ery of man, “ Wherewith
shall I come before the Lord, and bow
myself before the high God?” Burnt
offerings were intended, in some eases
at least, to express the idea of expia-
tion, as well as that of self-consecra-
tion; hence they are said “to make
atonement for him” who offered them
(Lev. i. 4; xiv. 20, 31). The tendency of
sin is to estrange man from God; the
tendency of the love of God in the saeri-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.
Sr


fice of Jesus Christ is to destroy the
power of sin in man, and to bind him to
God in loving loyalty. We do not now
need the altar and the expiatory victim;
but we do need the Cross and influence
of the great Sacrifice, which once for all
was offered thereon to putawaysin. (a).


2. Man’s duty of self-consecration to
God. The chief significance of the burnt
offering was that it expressed the self-
consecration of the offerer to God.
Without this, such offerings were worth-
less in the sight of heaven. The moral
or spiritual element was the essential
thing in all the sacrifices. Without
penitence the sin offering was offensive
to God. Without gratitude the peace or
thank offerings were rejected by Him.
And without the self-dedication of the
worshipper the burnt offerings were an
abomination unto Him (comp. Ps. 1.
8-15; Isa. i. 11-15). Our richest gifts
are accepted by God only as they ex-
press our self-devotion to Him. “And
He died for all, that they which live
should not henceforth live unto them-
selves, but unto Him which died for
them, and rose again.” (b).

III. Respect for precedent in Divine
worship. This was manifested by the
Jews at this time in two particulars—
(1.) In assembling at the old place.
“The people gathered themselves to-
gether as one man to Jerusalem.” They
congregated at the place where the
Temple had once stood, and where their
fathers were wont to worship. (2.) In
erecting the altar upon the old founda-
tion, and thus, as it were, associating
it with its distinguished predecessor.
There is much that is commendable in
the feelings which led them to act thus.
It is well to be willing to adopt changes
in our modes and accessories of worship,
when really enlightened judgment, and
cultured taste, and sincere religious feel-
ing unite in recommending them. It is
also well to cling tenaciously to what is
suitable and seemly in existing methods
and arrangements of religious worship.
The site of the former Temple and the
bases of the ancient altar possessed for
the Jews a sanctity and an inspiration
to which no other spots in this wide
world could lay claim. There are memories


CHAP Il.





—


—
and associations clinging around certain
ancient forms and places hallowed by
holy uses which greatly stimulate and
enrich the worship of the devout heart.

IV. Conformity to Scripture in
Divine worship. In building the altar
and in offering their sacrifices, the Jews
did “as it is written in the law of Moses
the man of God.” We must take heed
that in our worship, whether clinging
to precedent, or accepting suggestions
of change, we do not depart from the
principles and spirit of worship, as re-
vealed in or fairly deduced from the holy
Book. There are certain directions which
are unmistakable and imperative: e.g.,
“God is a Spirit; and they that worship
Him must worship Him in spirit and in
truth.” “To this man will I look, even
to him that is poor and of a contrite
spirit,” &e.

V. Fear of enemies in Divine wor-
ship. “Fear was upon them because
of the people of those countries.”

1. The fear of enemies should not
intimidate us from the worship of God.
The Jews built the altar notwithstand-
ing their dread:of they enemies. The
history of religious persecutions sup-
plies many splendid examples of perse-
verance in worship despite the threats
and ecruelties of foes. (c).

2. The fear of enemies should impel
us to worship God. The Jews were the
more eager to build the altar because of
the hostility of neighbouring peoples.
The opposition of man led them the
more earnestly to seek the protection of
God. They were not in a position to
join battle with their enemies, if they
had been attacked by them; but in
placing themselves under the guardian-
ship of the Lord God they did that
which was far wiser and better. The
persecutions of men should cause us to
be more earnest in prayer to God.

VI. Regularity in Divine worship.
“And they offered burnt offerings there-
on unto the Lord, even burnt offerings
morning and evening.” The offering of
the daily sacrifices suggests—

1. Our daily need of atonement with
God. There are daily temptations, omis-
sions, and transgressions, which tend to
alienate the heart from God; hence we
37


CHAP, ITI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.





need daily to realise the reconciling in-
fluences of the Cross of Christ. (d).


2. Our daily need of renewed conse-
cration. Every morning we require a
renewal of our purpose and endeavour
to live to God. The reception of new
mercies also summons us to fresh dedi-
cation of ourselves to the bounteous
Giver of all our mercies.


3. Our daily need of renewed bless-
ings. Forgiveness and grace, guidance
and guardianship, are blessings which
we need every day, therefore we should
seek them in prayer; they are, more-
over, blessings which we receive every
day, therefore we should acknowledge
them in praise to God.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) I do not think any one ever knows the
preciousness of the blood of Christ till he has
had a full sight and sense of his sin, his un-
cleanness, and his ill-desert. Is there any
such thing as really and truly coming to the
cross of Christ until you first of all have seen
what your sin really deserves? A little light
into that dark cellar, sir; a little light into
that hole within the soul; a little light cast
into that infernal den of your humanity, and
you would soon discern what sin is, and,
seeing it, you would discover that there was
no hope of being washed from it, except by
a sacrifice far greater than you could ever
render. Then the atonement of Christ would
become fair and lustrous in your eyes, and
you would rejoice with joy unspeakable in
that boundless love which led the Saviour to
give Himself a ransom, the Just for the un-
just, that He might bring us to God. May
the Lord teach us, thundering at us, if need
be, what sin means. May He teach it to us
that the lesson shall be burned into our souls,
and we shall never forget it. I could fain
wish that you were all burden-carriers till
you grew weary. I could fain wish that you
all laboured after eternal life until your
strength failed, and that you might then re-
joice in Him who has finished the work, and
who promises to be to you all in all when
you believe in Him and trust in Him with
your whole heart.—C. H. Spurgeon.


(b) It is not the greatness of Christ’s suf-
ferings on the cross which is to move our
whole souls, but the greatness of the spirit
with which He suffered. There, in death, He
proved His entire consecration of Himself to
the cause of God and mankind. There, His
love flowed forth towards His friends, His
enemies, and the human race. It is moral
greatness, it is victorious love, it is the en-


ergy of principle, which gives such interest
to the cross of Christ. We are to look through
the darkness which hung over Him, through
H%# wounds and pains, to His unbroken, dis-
interested, confiding spirit. To approach the
cross for the purpose of weeping over a bleed-


_ing, dying Friend, is to lose the chief influ-


ence of the crucifixion. We are to visit the
cross, not to indulge a natural softness, but to
acquire firmness of spirit, to fortify our minds
for harness and suffering in the cause of
duty and of human happiness. To live as
Christ lived, to die as Christ died, to give up
ourselves as sacrifices to God, to conscience,
to whatever good interest we can advance—
these are the lessons written with the blood
of Jesus. His cross is to inspire us with a
calm courage, resolution, and superiority to
all temptation.—W. EH. Channing, D.D.

Mercy, love, is more acceptable worship to
God, than all sacrifices or outward offerings.
The most celestial worship ever paid on earth
was rendered by Christ, when He approached
man, and the most sinful man, as a child of
God, when He toiled and bled to awaken what
was Divine in the human soul, to regenerate
a fallen world. Be such the worship which
you shall carry from this place. Go forth to
do good with every power which God bestows,
to make every place you enter happier by
your presence, to espouse all human inter-
ests, to throw your whole weight into the
scale of human freedom and improvement, to
withstand all wrong, to uphold all right, and
especially to give light, life, strength to the
immortal soul. He who rears up one child in
Christian virtue, or recovers one fellow-crea-
ture to God, builds a temple more precious
than Solomon’s or St. Peter’s, more enduring
than earth or heaven.—Ibid.


(c) Lord Macaulay, writing of the perse-
cutions of the Protestant dissenters in the
reign of James II., says:—The number of the
rebels whom Jeffreys hanged on this (the
Western) circuit was three hundred and twen-
ty. Such havoc must have excited disgust even
if the sufferers had been generally odious.
But they were, for the most part, men of
blameless life, and of high religious profes-
sion. They were regarded by themselves, and
by a large proportion of their neighbours, not
as wrong-doers, but as martyrs who sealed
with blood the truth of the Protestant relig-
ion. Very few of the convicts professed any
repentance for what they had done. Many,
animated by the old Puritan spirit, met
death, not merely with fortitude, but with ex-
ultation. It was in vain that the ministers of
the Established Church lectured them on the
guilt of rebellion and on the importance of
priestly absolution. The claim of the king to
unbounded authority in things temporal, andq
the claim of the clergy to the spiritual power
of binding and loosing, moved the bitter scorn
of the intrepid sectaries. Some of them com-
posed hymns in the dungeon, and chanted
them on the fatal sledge. Christ, they sang
while they were undressing for the butchery,
would soon come to rescue Zion and to make


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZKA.


CHAP IIl.


oe ee SE ee


war on Babylon, would set up His standard,
would blow His trumpet, and would requite
His foes tenfold for all the evil which had
been inflicted on His servants. The dying
words of these men were noted down; their
farewell letters were kept as treasures; and
in this way, with the help of some invention
and exaggeration, was formed a copious sup-
plement to the Marian Martyrology.


Never, not even under the tyranny of Laud,
had the condition of the Puritans been so de-
plorable as at that time (autumn 1685).
Never had spies been so actively employed in
detecting congregations. Never had magis-
trates, grand jurors, rectors, and church-
wardens been so much on the alert. Many
dissenters were cited before the ecclesiastical
courts. Others found it necessary to purchase
the connivance of the agents of the govern-
ment by presents of hogsheads of wine and
of gloves stuffed with guineas. It was impos-
sible for the separatists to pray together with-
out precautions such as are employed by coin-
ers and receivers of stolen goods. The places
of meeting were frequently changed. Worship
was performed sometimes just before break
of day and sometimes at dead of night. Round
the building where the little flock was gath-
ered sentinels were posted to give the alarm
if a stranger drew near. The minister in dis-
guise was introduced through the garden and
the back yard. In some houses there were
trap doors through which, in case of danger,
he might descend. Where Nonconformists
lived next door to each other, the walls were
often broken open, and secret passages were
made from dwelling to dwelling. No psalm
Was sung; and many contrivances were used
to prevent the voice of the preacher, in his
moments of fervour, from being heard beyond


the walls. Dissenting ministers, how-
ever, blameless in life, however eminent for
learning and abilities, could not venture to
walk the streets for fear of outrages, which
were not only not repressed, but encouraged,
by those whose duty it was to preserve the
peace. Some divines of great fame were in
prison. Among these was Richard Baxter.
Others, who had, during a quarter of a cen-
tury, borne up against oppression, now lost
heart, and quitted the kingdom. Among these
was John Howe.—History of England, chap. v.


(d) Is it not said in Scripture, “If any man
sin, we have an Advocate’’? Why is Christ
an advocate to-day? Only because we want an
advocate every day. Does He not constantly
intercede yonder before the eternal throne?
Why does He do that? Because we want
daily intercession. And it is because we are
constantly sinning that He is constantly an
advocate—constantly an intercessor. He Him-
self has beautifully set forth this in the case
of Peter; after supper the Lord took a towel
and girded Himself, and then, taking His
basin and His ewer, He went to Peter, and
Peter said, ‘‘Thou shalt never wash my feet.”
But Jesus told him, “If I wash thee not, thou
hast no partin me.’’ He had been washed once;
Peter was free from sin in the high sense of
justification, but he needs the washing of purifi-
cation. When Peter said, ‘‘Lord, wash not my
feet only, but also my head and my hands,”
then Jesus replied, ‘“‘ He that is washed ”—
that is, he who is pardoned—‘‘needeth not
save to wash his feet, for he is clean every
whit.’’ The feet want constant washing. The
daily defilement of our daily walk through an
ungodly world brings upon us the daily necessity
of being cleansed from fresh sin, and that the
mighty Master supplies to us,——-C, H, Spurgeon.


THe CELEBRATION OF THE SACRED FESTIVALS RESUMED.
(Verses 4-6a.)


In these verses we have the record of
the observance of the religious feasts of
the nation. “ The continual burnt offer-
ing,” which we noticed in our exposition
of the preceding section, is again men-
tioned. The feast of Tabernacles, the
observance of the new moons, and the
presentation of freewill offerings, are
also distinctly mentioned. To these,
therefore, let us direct our attention.
They present to us the following homi-
letic topics :—

I. The commemoration in Divine
worship of national experience and
blessings. Such was the feast of Taber-
nacles.

1. It was a memorial of the emanct-


pation of Israel from Egypt, teaching
us that we should cherish the memory of
former mercies. (See Lev. xxiii, 43.)

2. It was a memorial of their life in
the wilderness, reminding us that our
present condition is that of strangers
and pilgrims. (See Lev. xxiii. 40-43;
Heb. xiii. 14.)

3. It was a thanksgiving for rest and
a settled abode in the promised land,
suggesting the certainty and blessedness
of the rest which remains for the people
of God. (Comp. Lev. xxiii. 40 with Rev.
vii. 9.)

4. It was a thanksgiving for the com-
pleted harvest, teaching us to receive the
precious fruits of the earth a the kind


gifts of a bountiful Providence, (See
Exod. xxiii. 16; Lev. xxiii, 39 ; Deut.
xvi. 13-15.*) But this festival was
specially appropriate and significant at
this time. “It was,” as Schultz re-
marks, “because of the season of the
year in which the congregation had ar-
rived in Canaan that the first feast
which they could again celebrate in ac-
cordance with the law was the feast of
Tabernacles. At the same time, however,
we may see therein a special providence
of God, which was at once lovely and
significant to the congregation, The
booths adorned with foliage and fruits
had previously represented as well the
gracious help in the times of the wilder-
ness, as also the gracious blessings of
harvest in the present; corresponding
with this, the booths now gained of
themselves a reference, on the one side,
to the exhibition of grace during the
new prolonged wilderness-time of the
exile which had entered with so much
gloom into the midst of the history of
Israel ; so to speak to the booths of pro-
tection and defiance which had arisen
for the people, by the grace of the Lord,
even in the heathen world; and, on the
other side, to the new regaining of
Canaan, which, to a certain extent, was
a security and a pledge of all the further
blessings in store for them in this land.
They expressed the thanks which they
owed to the Lord for both of these
blessings in an especially lively and in-
ternal manner. This feast of tabernacles
was a festa] and joyous conclusion of all
the preservations, consolations, and bless-
ings that were behind them, connected
with a joyous glance into the future ; it
was an evidence that a height had been
reached upon which finally even the
last height might be attained, an indica-
tion that some day, after all their strug-
gles and all their labours, a still more
glorious feast of Tabernacles, the Messi-
anie, the eternal and truly blessed one,
would come. (Comp. Zech. xiv.)” The
text distinctly mentions one feature of
this celebration of the feast, viz, the
fidelity with which the original direc-


* For remacks and illustrations on these
points see The Preacher's Commentary on Nwm
bers, pp. rr 530,





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA,





tions for its observance were carried out:
“They kept alao the feast of Tabernacles
as it is written, and offered the daily
burnt offerings by number,” &. The
directions are given in Num, xxix. 13—
39. (See The Preacher's Commentary om
Numbers, p. 528.) For a people in their
straitened circumstances the offerings
required were very numerous ; but they
were fully and cheerfully provided by
them. If their means were small, their
zeal was great. (a).

II. The celebration in religious wor-
ship of the natural divisions of time.
‘“‘And of the new moons.” They pre-
sented the offerings appropriate to those
occasions, ‘The first day of the lunar
month was observed as a holyday. In
addition to the daily sacrifice there were
offered two young bullocks, a ram, and
seven lambs of the first year as a burnt
offering, with the proper meat offerings
and drink offerings, and a kid as a sin
offering (Num. xxviii. 11-15). It was
not a day of holy convocation, and was
not therefore of the same dignity as the
Sabbath. But, as on the Sabbath, trade
and handicraft work were stopped (Amos
viii. 5), the Temple was opened for pub-
lic worship (Ezek. xlvi. 3; Isa. Ixvi.
23), and, in the kingdom of Israel at
least, the people seem to have resorted
to the prophets for religious instruction
(2 Kings iv. 23). The trumpets were
blown at the offering of the special sac
rifices for the day, as on the solemn
festivals (Num. x. 10; Ps. lxxxi. 3).
. . . The seventh new moon of the re-
ligious year, being that of Tisri, com-
menced the civil year, and had a signifi-
cance and rites of its own. It was a
day of holy convocation” (Num. xxix.
1-6). What was the design of this re
ligious celebration of “the beginnings
of their months” $

We suggest :

1. To impress them with the value of
time, Its irrevocableness should suggest
its invaluableness. The religious ob
servance of the new moons was calcu-
lated to emphasise the facts that one
month more had passed away for ever,
with all its possibilities and opportuni.
ties, and that another had commenced
its course, and its opportunities must be


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA,


CHaP. Et.


ef


promptly seised and diligently employed
ere they also departed. (6),

2. To assist them to form a correct
estimate of their life upon earth. “ All
men think all men mortal but them-
selves.” Man needs frequent and for-
cible reminders of the swift flight of
time, and of the brevity of his life upon
earth. “So teach us to number our
days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom.” The religious observance of
the natural divisions of time may be
regarded as an answer to this request,
inasmuch as it helps to impart and to
impress the lesson desired. (c).

3. To arouse them to make a wise use
of the tume which remained to them. As
we realise the fact that one month of
our allotted time upon earth quickly fol-
lows another into the everlasting past,
we should also realise with imperial force
the solemn conviction, “I must work
the works of Him that sent Me while it
is day, the night cometh when no man
can work.” ‘*Whatsoever thy hand
findeth to do, doit with thy might,” &.

Ill. The presentation in Divine wor-
ship of personal voluntary offerings.
“ And of every one that willingly offered
a freewill offering unto the Lord.” These
cilerings were in addition to those re-
quired by the law, and were purely
spontaneous on the part of the wor-
shipper. The law required much, but
in their zeal the returned exiles gave
more. And in Christianity there is
ample room for the expression of the
grateful and reverent emotions of the
soul, ‘ Every man according as he pur-
poseth in his heart; not grudgingly, or
ot necessity ; for God loveth a cheerful
giver.” “In all thy gifts,” says the Son
of Sirach, “ show a cheerful countenance,
aud dedicate thy tithes with gladness,
Give unto the Most High according as
He hath enriched thee; and as thou hast
gotten give with a cheerful eye. For
the Lord recompenseth, and will give
thee seven times as much.” (d)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) The end of the festival days among the
Jews was te revive the memory of those signal
acts wherein His power for them, and His
goodness to them, had been extraordinarily


evident; it is no more but our mouths te

raise Him, and our hand to obey Him, that

e exacts at our hands. He commande us
not to expend what He allows us in the erect.
ing stately temples to His honour; all the coin
He requires to be paid with for His expense ia
the “‘ offering of thanksgiving.” (Pa. 1. 14); and
this we ought to do ag much aa we can, since
we cannot do it as much as He merits, for
“who can show forth all His praise?” (Ps,
evi. 2). If we have the fruit of His goodness
it is fit He should have ‘‘the fruit of our lips*
(Heb, xiii. 15); the least kindness should in-
flame our souls with a kindly resentment,
Though some of His benefits have a brighter,
some a darker, aspect towards us, yet they all
come from this common spring; His goodness
shines in all; there are the footsteps of good-
ness in the least, aa well as the smiles of good-
ness in the greatest ; the meanest therefore is
not to pass without a regard of the Author,
As the glory of God is more illustrious in some
creatures than in others, yet it glitters in all,
and the lowest as well ag the highest adminia-
ters matter of praise; but they are not only
little things, but the choicer favours He hath
bestowed upon us, How much doth it deserve
our acknowledgment, that He should contrive
our recovery, when we had plotted our ruin}
that when He did from eternity behold the
crimes wherewith we would incense Him, He
should not, according to the rights of justice,
cast us into hell, but prize us at the rate of the
blood and life of His only Son, in value above
the blood of men and lives of angela! How
should we bless that God, that we have yet a
Gospel among us, that we are not driven inte
the utmost regions, that we can attend upon
Him in the face of the sun, and not forced to
the secret obscurities of the night! Whatso-
ever we enjoy, whatsoever we receive, we must
own Him as the Donor, and read His hand in
it—S, Charnocke, B,D.


(5) Suppose that God had so cast the arrange-
ments of our system as never to give notice, at
all, of the passage of time, by the distinction
of days, seasons, and yeara, In that case, we
should all be living on together, but how fast
or how slow we could scarcely guess. One
year of men’s childhood seems as long to
them, they say, as two, or perhaps even ten
years, Jater in life. This shows you how they
would mistake if there were no measure of
time save that of their inward judgment. They
would never realise how fast they are living.
They would take the period equal to ten years,
in the later portion of life, to be the same
period which constituted only its tenth part in
their childhood ; and so, when drawing on to-
wards the close of their days,—the very time
when they ought most of all to be awake to
¢he shortness of their stay,—then would they
be, most of all, insensible to the flight of time,
and the swift approach of eternity.

Observe, then, the faithfulness of God. He
has made the very universe to be the clock of
the wniverse, and admonish every mortal heart

41


CHAP. Iii,


. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZRA.





of the sure and constant passage of time. We
are not left to our inward judgments. Time
has its measures without, in the most palpable
and impressive visitations of the senses. Every
twilight tells us that a day is gone, and that
by 2 sign as impressive as the blotting out of
thesun! Itisasif we had a clock, so adjusted
as to give notice of the hour, by displacing, at
a stroke, the light of heaven, suspending the
labours of the world, quenching the fevers of
its earthly schemes and passions, and diffusing
am opiate spell of oblivion over all human con-
sciousness. The impalpable odours of spring
penetrate our secret sense as monitors of time.
Tke summer heat is the heat of time, the
winter’s cold is the cold of time—both forcing
their way into our experience by a visitation
that we cannot resist, One season tells us
that another is gone; and, when the whole
circle of seasons is completed and returned
into itself, the new year tells us that the old is
gone, And a certain number of these years,
we know, is the utmost bound of life. How
sure is the reckoning! It ia even compulsory
—none can escape it.—H, Bushnell, D.D.


(c) A thousand years is a long time, but how
soon it flies! One almost seems, in reading
English history, to go back and shake hands
with William the Conqueror; a few lives bring
us even to the flood. You who are getting on
to be forty years old, and especially you who
are sixty or seventy, must feel how fast time
flies. I only seem to preach sermon one
Sunday in time to get ready for the next.
Time flies with such a whirl that no express
train can overtake it, and even the lightning
flash seems to lag behind it. We shall soon
be at the great white throne; we shall soon be
at the judgment bar of God. Oh ! let us make
ready for it. Let us not live so much in this
present, which is but a dream, an empty show,
but let us live in the real, substantial future.—
C. H. Spurgeon,


(@) Who, with the Word of God in his hand,


but must feel that an era of enlarged Christian
liberality is hastening on?. . .

Now, the Christian professor too commonly
allows his regular contribution to check his
liberality, to prevent his giving more than the
stipulated sum, though there are times when
his benevolent impulses would prompt him
to exceed that sum; then, he will regard his
subscription only as a pledge that he will no¢
give less, but as leaving his liberality open to
ali the impulses of an unrestricted benevolence.
Now, he is too often disposed to shun the
applications for charity, and if he is overlooked
and passed by, to view it as a fortunate escape;
but then he will do good as he hath opportunity
—creating the opportunity which he cannot
find already made to his hands, Now, his
ability exceeds his inclination; but then hig
inclination will be greater than his ability ;
like the Macedonian Christians of whom the
Apostle testifies, ‘‘I bear them record that to
their power, yea, and beyond their power, they
were willing of themselves.” Instead of being
charitable only on comparative distraint, he
will often anticipate application, and surprise
the agents of beneficence by unexpected gifts;
thus strengthening their faith in God, and
inciting them to enlarge their designs for the
kingdom of Christ: like the same believers of
whom the Apostle records, that, instead of
needing to be solicited, they entreated him to
accept their contributions—‘‘ praying us with
much entreaty to accept the gift.” Like the
happy parent of a happy family, he will hailevery
new-born claim on his resources, and cheerfully
deny himself in order to support it, And, in-
stead of giving as he now does, as scantily as if
he only aimed to keep the Christian cause from
famishing, he will then act on the persuasion
that hig own enjoyment is identified with its
growth and prosperity.—John Harris, D.D.

Works of piety and charity should, like water
from a fountain, flow spontaneously from the
gratitude and benevolence of a believing heart,
and not require to be extorted with impor-
tunity, like the toil and trouble of drawing
water from a deep well. Anon.


Tae Work or tHe Day Done In tHE Dar.
(Verse 4: “ As the duty of every day requtred.”)


The pious Jews returned from Babylon
having erected an altar, kept also the
feast of Tabernacles as it is written, and
offered the daily burnt offerings by num-
ber, according to the custom, “as the
duty of every day required.” It is in
the margin, “the matter of the day in
his day.” This has grown into a pro-
verbiai saying among those who love
Scripture phraseology, and teaches us
that we should do the work of the day
in the day,

L ee snolra cite arom anae

»


general. This is called a “day,” and
it is a single day, a short day, a day
which it is impossible to lengthen. And
what is the language of reason, of Scrip-
ture? “To-day, if ye will hear His
voice, harden not your heart.” ‘ Behold
now... is the day of salvation.” And
what will be your language if the same
mind be in you which was also in Christ
Jesus? “I must work the works of Him
that sent Me while it is day; the night
cometh, wherein no man can work ”


IL It will apply to prosperity. This


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA,











ta called a “day;” and Solomon tells
as what is the duty of it. ‘In the day
of prosperity be joyful.” He cannot
intend to encourage extravagance and
excess, We are to “use this world as
not abusing it.” The wise man would
teach us to enjoy the comforts our cir-
cumstances afford, in opposition to that
self-denial that arises not from religious
motive, but from anxiety; from a dis-
position to live comparatively poor and
destitute at present in order to hoard
up for the future; whereas the Apostle
tells us that “God gives us all things
richly to enjoy.” God, like a generous
friend, is pleased to see His presents
snjoyed—* to enjoy is to obey.” But
let us be always joyful in Him; let us
enjoy all in God, and God in all. Behold
another thing that the duty of this day
requires. It is gratetude. Compare your
circumstances with those of others, whose
plans are equally wise, and whose de-
pendencies seemed equally sure. Com-
pare your present with your former
condition ; the “two bands” with the
“staff.” Compare your indulzences
with your deserts, and how can you
be unthankfulf And surely the duty
of this day requires liberality. He has
made you stewards, and not proprietors ;
and He will soon call you to give up your
account. ‘Charge them that are rich
in this world that they do good,” &c.
TL It will apply to adversity. This
is also called a “day ;” and it is said,
“In the day of adversity, consider.”
This is the grand duty of the season.
Whatever be your affliction, it is a
solemn call to consider your ways, to
examine your hearts and lives, to in-
quire wherefore He eontends with you,
and what He would have you to do.
You are also to consider the alleviations
of your suffering; how much worse it
might have been; and to compare your
resources with your difficulties. Another
vart of the duty this “day” requires is
submission. ‘Submit yourselves under
the mighty hand of God,” &. This
subjection does not exclude feeling, but
regulates it; keeping us, while sensible
of the affliction, from quarrelling with
Providence, from charging Him foolishly
or unkindly, and leading us to say, “ It


CHaP. Bik,


A


is the Lord, let Him do what seemeth
Him good.” The duty of this day also
tequires prayer. ‘Call upon Me in the
day of trouble,” &c. “Is any afflicted f
Let him pray.” The very exercise of it
will soothe him, while the answer of it
will deliver him,

IV. We may apply it to the Sabbath.
This is called “the Lord’s-day” because
it is consecrated to the memory of His
resurrection, and is employed in His
service, But as to advantage, it is our
day. It “was made for man.” We are
commanded to “ sanctify it, calling the
Sabbath a delight,” &c. A Christian
will say, “How amiable are Thy taber-
nacles, O Lord of hosts!” &e. He will
take heed what he hears, and how he


hears. But this is not all. He will
retire. He will indulge in private re-
flection.


V. It will apply to every day. No
day comes without its appropriate duty.
We are to do everything in its season ;
to do the work of the day in the day;
and not leave it till to-morrow.

1. Because we may not lwe till to
morrow. ‘We know not what a day
may bring forth.”

2. Hach day will have tts own engage
ments, and it is wrong to surcharge one
pertod with the additional work of an-
other, ‘Sufficient unto the day is the
evil thereof.” It is unlawful to encumber
to-day with the care of to-morrow ; and
to encumber to-morrow with the work of
to-day.

3. Because by thts temporary negle-
gence, we have nothing to do, or too
much; whereas by doing the work or the
day 1N the day, we are never unoccupred,
never oppressed.

4, Because by this means the mind ss
kept cool, and tranquil, and cheerful ;
and we shall know aothing of the per-
plewities and ill-temper of those who are
always in confusion and haste.

To verify this importaat maxim, let
me lay down three rules—

1.) Rise early.

3 Grasp not so much business ag
to “‘entangle yourselves in the affairs of
this life.”

(3.) Arrange a plan of life, and firmly
adhere to it.—Wulam Jay.


Tos PREPARATIONS FOR REBUILDING THE TEMPLE.


(Verses 65, 7: “But the foundation of the Temple of the Lord was not yet laid,
They gave money also,” &c.)


Two chief points are here presented
to our notice—

I. The great work yet to be accom-
plished. Mingled with the joy of the
Jews in their restored worship was the
recollection of the great work which as
yet was not even commenced. “The
foundation of the Temple of the Lord
was not yet laid.” We regard this as an
illustration of —

1. The incompleteness of human joys.
The gladness of the returned exiles in
celebrating the feast of Tabernacles was
tempered by the fact that they had only
an altar; they had no temple. The
brightest day of our life here has its
cloud and its shadow. Our most serene
seasons are not entirely free from dis-
turbance. Our joys are incomplete. Our
gladness is often checked by sadness,
‘There is a cross in every lot.” The
victorious and calm eventide of the life
of king David was darkened by trials in
his family, “ Although my house be
not so with God” (2 Sam. xxiii. 5). St.
Paul “was caught up into Paradise ”
and there received “abundance of reve-
lations ;” but there was given to him
“a thorn in the flesh, the messenger of
Satan to buffet” him. This incomplete-
ness of our joys here is a wise and kind
arrangement, We need the shadow as
well as the sunshine. We are reminded
by vicissitude that this is not our rest,
and urged to set ouraffections on spiritual
and eternal things. (a).

2. The incompleteness of human works.
The altar was built, but the Temple was
not begun, The work of these patriotic
and pious Jews was only just com-
menced. It would be long before it was
completed. The work of the earnest
man is never accomplished. Ere one
task is completed another summons him
to effort. If he were tempted to settle
down to re; ose, his rest would soon be
broken by the demands of unfinished
enterprises, or by challenges to new en-
deavours,


44


“‘ Labour with what zeal we will,
Something still remains undone,
Something uncompleted still
Waits the rising of the sun.”’
—Long fellow.


Even when death approaches, most men
have much which they desire to accom-
plish. The statesman is summoned hence
devising new measures for his country’s
good, which he will not assist in passing
into laws. The author dies leaving his
book unfinished, The Christian minister
lays down his charge, leaving many plans
for the welfare of his people not yet
carried out; and the parent, while he
longs still to do much for the welfare of
his children, Doubtless the good man
is not called to leave this world until his
work here is finished ; but to us it often
seems that life closes here in incomplete-
ness, This incompleteness of our haman
works is also ordered wisely and well
It tends to prevent stagnation ; to rouse
to earnest activities, d&c. (6).

3. The obligation of the Church of
God. The Jews at Jerusalem felt them-
selves bound not to rest content with the
joys and blessings of the altar, but to
proceed to the more arduous task of
rebuilding the Temple. In seasons of
religious worship the Church must not
forget the work which it is called to
accomplish. Our holiest delights should
not detain us from our arduous duties,
The Church should not entertain the
idea of any pause or decrease in ite
labours until the spiritual temple of our
God is raised into utmost and beautiful
completeness out of the ruins of our
fallen humanity, Let Christians labour
ov until the head stone of thie temple
shall be brought forth “with shoutings
of. Grace, grace unto it.” (c).

4I. The prompt preparations fer the
accomplishment of this work. “They
gave money also unto the masons, and
to the carpenters,” &c. (ver. 7). Two
points claim attention—

1. The variety of service and the unity


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BZRA,





ef design, See the various ways in which
different persous contributed to the pre-
parations for rebuilding the sacred edifice.
(1.) Certain Jews gave of their posses
sions to pay the workmen. ‘“ They gave
money also unto the masons, and to the
carpenters; and meat, and drink, and
oil unto them of Zidon, and to them of
Tyre.” (2.) Other Jews laboured in the
work of preparation. ‘The masons and
the carpenters.” (3.) Zidonian and
Tyrian workmen also laboured in this
work, “Them of Zidon and them of
Tyre brought cedar trees from Lebanon
to the sea of Joppa.” And (4) Cyrus
assisted by his patronage and by his
gifts. ‘According to the grant that
they had of Cyrus king of Persia.” And
others might be mentioned who other-
wise promoted the great object ; such as
the Levites who acted as overseers of the
work. All these, each in his own way
and in his own sphere, helped to accom-
plish the end which was so eagerly de-
sired by most of them. And in building
the spiritual temple, there should be
the individual effort of every Christian
for the attainment of the great object
which they all have in common: each
one, in some form or other, should con-
tribute his share in the glorious work,
and all should keep in view the one
grand end. (d).

2. The co-operation of Jews and Gen-
tiles. “It was significant also,” says
Schultz, “that at this building of the
Temple again it was not Canaan proper,
but the Pheenician Lebanon, that pro-
vided the building material, and that
corresponding with this, heathen work-
men and artists also took part in erecting
the house of God. It indicates that the
rest of the earth also, and corresponding
thereto, the rest of mankind, are to
render their gifts and capacities, which
are more and more to take part in the
complete and true worship of the Lord,
chat the Lord by no means regards
chem as profane. The rest of the earth
and mankind become thereby, to a certain
extent, consecrated in advance and de-
signated as one who, if now already in
the Old Testament economy, yet still
more some day in the fulness of time,


would take part in the highest destiny


OMAP, Ix,


of Israel.” (e). In the Church of Christ
“there is neither Greek nor Jew, cir-
cumcision nor uncircumcision, barbarian,
Scythian, bond nor free; but Christ is
all and in all,”

ConcLusion :

1. Are we “as living stones butlt wp”
in the spiritual temple of God? (Comp.
1 Pet. ii, 4-6.)

2. Are we also assisting to build thes
glorious temple? (Comp. 1 Cor. iii.
10-15.) It is paradoxical yet true,
that we should be both stones in the
edifice and toilers for ita completion.
But are we §


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Mark the same people that usnally have
the highest joys, and see whether at other
times they have not the greatest troubles, This
week they are as at the gates of heaven, and
the next as at the doors of hell : I am sure with
many it isso. Yet it need not be so, if Chris-
tians would but look at these high joys as
duties to be endeavoured, and mercies to be
valued ; but when they will needs judge of
their state by them, and think that God is
gone from or forsaken them when they have
not such joys, then it leaves them in terror
and amazement, Like men after a flash of
lightning, they are left more sensible of the
darkness, For no wise man can expect that
such joys should be a Christian’s ordinary
state ; or God should go diet us with a con-
tinual feast. It would neither suit with our
health nor the condition of this pilgrimage,
Live, therefore, on your peace of conscience
as your ordinary diet; when this is wanting
know that God appointeth you a fast for your
health ; and when you have a feast of igh
joys, feed on it and be thankfal; but when
they are taken from you, gape not after them
as the disciples did after Christ at His ascen-
gion, but return thankfully to your ordinary
diet of peace, And remember that these
joys which are now taken from you may 80
return again, However, there is a place pre-
paring for you, where your joys may be full,
—Richard Baxter.


(>) Human life is short ; God’s work is com-
plex and prolonged, and steadily flowing on.
Hence we are continually beginning, and pass-
ing away, and leaving what we begin for
others to finish. Every generation is begin-
ning, and every generation ia passing away
without having finished what it has begun.
Bat that which we begin is not going to stop
because we cease to go forward with it, One
worker dies; the loom goes on, and another
worker takes up the thread that he has laid
down, We paas away, and another man,
somewhere, is prepared to step into our place,
We commence a work, and perform a part of

45


OHAP, IL


‘“HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.


i


it ; when we are gone, others perform another
part ; when they are gone, still others perform
another part; and so that which we under-
take is by othera carried along to ita bright
consummation.—H. W. Beecher.


(c) I ask you to remember that every chiid
whose heart is touched by the love of Christ,
every worker for God who is ready to sacrifice
his time, his comfort, his luxury, his life, for
Christ, whose sympathy with the advance of
God’s kingdom is produced by an intelligent
understanding of the magnitude of the in-
terests that are at stake; every bedridden,
poverty-stricken Christian, who is daily wrest-
ling with God in prayer ; every Sunday-school
teacher who identifies himself with this great
enterprise, not simply by giving money (that
ig sometimes an easy way of putting aside a
pressing claim), but by earnest thought, honest
speech, and loyal feeling ; every one of us who,
appreciating the magnitude, sublimity, and
consecration of Christian missions, does devote
himself to this work, rises up for God against
the evil-doers, enlists in the great battle which
can only terminate when death and hell, the
beast and the false prophet, are cast into the
lake of fire.—H. R. Reynolds, D.D.


(d) I would stir you all up to help in this
work—old men, young men, and you, my
sisters, and all of you, according to your gifts
and experience, help. I want to make you
feel, ‘‘I cannot do much, but I can help; I
cannot preach, but I can help; I cannot pray
in public, but I can help; I cannot give much
away, but I can help; I cannot officiate ag
an elder or a deacon, but I can help; I cannot
shine as ‘a bright particular star,’ but I can
help; I cannot stand alone to serve my Mas-
ter, but I can help.” There is a text from
which an old Puritan once preached a very
singular sermon, There were only two words
in the text, and they were, ‘‘ And Bartholo-
mew.” The reason he took the text was, that
Bartholomew’s name is never mentioned alone,
but he is always spoken of as doing some good
thing with somebody else, He is never the
principal actor, but always second. Well, let
this be your feeling, that if you cannot do all
yourself, you will help to do what you can.—
OC. H. Spurgeon.


(e) here are those in the Church who be-
lieve that God’s express aim in Judaism was


to keep the Jewish people aa separate from the
world as possible ; to keep them, like Noah,
in an ark, while He plagued and punished the
world at His will. But I maintain, on the
contrary, that Judaism was always genial and
benignant to the stranger who would adopt ita
belief and accept its blessings. From the evil
which was in the world God was minded to
keep the Jewish people free at any cost. Fron
idolatry and its attendant pollutions He sought
to deliver them, inasmuch as idolatry in the
long run inevitably leads to national decline
and death. ''o the stranger, the foreign person
or nation, who would dishonour its beliefs and
trample on its blessings, Judaism was stern ag
fate and pitiless as death. The nations which
had filled up the meagure of their iniquity,
whose influence must be corrupting, were
ruthlessly exterminated. . . The Jewe
were simply God’s executioners here, and the
same doom, they are plainly warned, awaited
them if they suffered themselves to be tempted
into the same sins, The nations, of whose
pollutions the very land was weary, were swept
off as the stubble before the flame. But this
was the accident and not the essential ehar-
acter of the dispensation. The law here in
England ia merciful, though it has often to
deal out terrible judgments on flagrant sins.
And I am persuaded that the more carefully
the spirit of the dispensation is studied, the
more plainly will it appear that . . . from
Moses to Zechariah, it is a cry to the nations
not to rot in their own corruption, ‘‘ Come
with us and we wili do you good.” How be-
nignantly, in the closing verses of the eighth
chapter of the book of Joshua, the “‘ strangers
which were conversant among them” are in-
cluded in the benediction! How earnestly
Daniel and his coadjutors sought to diffuse the
blessings of Judaism among the nations which
had enslaved them, and to make the Oriental
despots sharers in the knowledge of the living
God, which by revelation they had gained !
How emphatically the prophets take up and
echo the invitation with growing clearness and
earnestness through the ages, until it breaks
out into full utterance in the great Successor
of Moses, the great Fulfiller of the Law, the
Son of David, the King of Zion, ‘* And /, if J
be lifted up, will draw all men unto Me.”
Judaism in all ages was a witness for God to
the nations, and a means of drawing all that
se be drawn unto Himself.—J, B. Brown,


Layine THE FounpDATION oF THE TEMPLE.
(Verses 8-13.)


Notice :

I The work already done.

1. Something was already accom-
plished. Several months had passed
away since the arrangements mentioned
in verse 7 were made; and during those


46


months the masons and carpenters, and
the Tyrian and the Sidonian workmen,
had not been idle, Considerable labour
must have been expended on the site of
the Temple before it was ready for laying
the foundation thereof,


HORILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA,


y! CE4aP. L





3. Arrangements were made for carry-
ing on the work, ‘Now in the second
year of their coming into the house of
God at Jerusalem, in the second month,
began Zerubbabel,” &c. (vers. 8, &,
And in these arrangements there was »
unanimity which augured well for the
success of the enterprise. ‘“ Zerubbabel
the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son
of Jozadak, and the remnant of the
brethren, the priests and the Levites,
and all they that were come out of the
captivity unto Jerusalem,” were united
in their arrangements and efforts for
prosecuting the work to a successful
issue,

IL The worship offered ‘“ And
when the builders laid the foundation
of the Temple of the Lord, they set the
priests in their apparel with trumpets,”
&c. (vers. 10, 11). Notice:

1. The manner of their worship.
“They set the priests in their apparel
with trumpets, and the Levites, the
sons of Asaph, with cymbals, to praise
the Lord, after the ordinance of David
king of Israel, And they sang together
by course in praising and giving thanks
unto the Lord.” Their worship was
orderly and seemly in manner. It was
conducted by those who were qualified
for the work and called to it by the
command of God, and in accordance
with the arrangements made by king
David (1 Chron. vi. 31, xvi. 4-6, 42,
xxv. 1: Neh. xii. 24).

2. The character of their worship.
“ Praising and giving thanks unto the
Lord,” &c. Their worship consisted cf
grateful and joyful praise ; because of—
(1.) The goodness of God. “ Praising
and giving thanks unto the Lord;


because He is good.” (2.) The per-
petuity of His goodness, ‘‘ For His
mercy endureth for ever.” (3.) Their


perpetual interest in His goodness,
“His mercy endureth for ever toward
Israel.” Reverent and grateful praise
is the highest form of worship which we
present to the Father of spirits. (a).

3. The occasion of their worship,
“ When the builders laid the foundation
of the Temple of the Lord.” We call
attention to the occasion in this place,
because it illustrated and stimulated


their thankful praise. God had vouch-
safed to them unmistakable manifesta
tions of His goodness and mercy, in pre
serving and blessing them in Babylon,
-n granting them so favourable a return
so their own land, and in helping them
thus far with their work of restoration
and renewal, Their own experiences
would give force and fervour to their
worship-soug.

4, The sprrit of their worship. This
was hearty and enthusiastic. “And all
the people shouted with a great shout,
when they praised the Lord, because
the foundation of the house of the Lord
was laid.” Worship which is not hearty,
or which is cold or lukewarm, does not
meet with Divine acceptance.

IIL The emotions excited. ‘“ And
all the people shouted with a great
shout,” d&.

1. Great joy. “ And many shouted
aloud for joy.” This joy probably arose
from—(1.) The consideration of what
was accomplished. ‘Those that only
knew the misery of having no temple at
all,” says M. Henry, “ praised the Lord
with shouts of joy when they saw but
the foundation of one laid. To them
even this foundation seemed great, and
was as life from the dead; to their
hungry souls even this was sweet. They
shouted go that ‘ the noise was heard afar
off.” Note.—We ought to be thankfui
for the beginnings of mercy, though we
have not yet come to the perfection of
it; and the foundations of a temple, after
long desolations, cannot but be fountains
of joy to every faithful Israelite.” Every
step in the progress of our communion
with God should be a matter of great
joy to us. (2.) The anticipation of
what would yet be accomplished. They
looked forward with confident and exul-
tant hope to the completion of the sacred
edifice.

2. Great sorrow. “ But many of the
priests and Levites, and chief of the
fathers, ancient men, that had seen the
first house, when the foundation of this
house was laid before their eyes, wept
with a loud voice.” Their grief arose
chiefly from memories of the past, with
which the present contrasted unfavour-
ably. (1.) Recollections of the former

47





HOHMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZRA.





Temple. They “had seen the first
house,” and they kuew well that they
could not hope to build one which would
be at all comparable with it in magnifi-
cence and splendour, “ Who is left
among you that saw this house in her
first glory } and how do ye see it now #
is it not in your eyes in comparison of
it as nothing ?” (Hag. ii. 3), Moreover,
they might have wept because of the
sins which had led to the destruction of
the former Temple, and the manifold
miseries which had resulted from those
sins. (2.) Recollections of their own
lives. The joyful acclamations of the
young generation probably recalled to
these ‘ancient men ” the brightness and
hopefulness and enthusiasm of their own
youth, and the recollection awakened
sad thoughts, The contrast between the
purpose of early life and the performance
of after days, and the sad disparity
between the hopes of youth and the
attainments of manhood, are generally
sufficient to subdue and sadden the
hearts of the aged. The difference
between the ideal entertained at twenty
years of age and the actual realised at
fifty or sixty is often a mournful thing.
And even if a man is able to carry out
his purposes, and achieves what is com-
monly called ‘success in life,” how
different the objects gained appear in
possession from what they appeared in
anticipation, and how disappointing !
Much, very much, after which men as-
pire and for which they labour, cannot
satisfy them ; and having obtained their
chief aims, they may cry mournfully—


“Years have gone by ! and life’s lowlands are


past,

And I stand on the hill which I sighed for,
at last ;

But I turn from the summit that once was
mIny star,

To the vale of my childhood, seen dimly and


far ;—

Each blight on ita beauty seems softened and
gone,

Like a land that we love, in the light of the
morn.” —T. K. Hervey. (6).


3. Great joy and great sorrow mingled.
“The people could not discern the noise
of the shout of joy from the noise of the
weeping of the people.” We may regara
this scene as—(1.) An illustration of our

48





—$


personal experiences in this world. All
our joys are tinged with sadness; all our
sorrows have their mitigations, and if
they do not yield rich compensations
the blame will be our own. (c). (2.) An
illustration of the experiences of mankind
in this world. The shouts of those who
rejoice and the cries of those who mourn
are ever mingled in this world. The exul-
tations of the victors and the lamenta-
tions of the vanquished rise together from
earth to heaven. (3.) A feature which
distinguishes the present from the future
state. These mingled experiences belong
only to this present life and world. In
hell no one “shouts aloud for joy.” And
in heaven “ God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes ; and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain:
for the former things are passed away.”


(a).
ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) Praise is the very highest mood and
exercise of the religious soul ; it is the expres-
sion towards God of the holiest emotions of
which we are capuble—reverence, obligation,
gratitude, love, adoration. Whenever these
are uplifted to God in admiration and homage,
there is the worship of praise—the highest and
most perfect expression of all that is purest
and noblest in our religious nature. Ag eon-
trasted with the worship of prayer, the worstip
of praise is manifestly transcendent. Prayer
is the pleading of our human indigence and
helplessness ; praise is the laudation of Divine
excellency and sufficiency. Prayer supplicatea
the good that God may have to bestow ; praise
is the adoration of the good that there is in
God Himself. When we pray we are urged by
neceasities, fears, and sorrows,—it is the cry
of our troubled helplessness, often of our pain
or our terror; we are impelled by feelings of
unworthiness, memories of sin, yearnings for
forgiveness and renewal. Praise brings, not a
cry, but a song,—it does not ask, it proffers,—
it lifte, not its handa, but its heart,—it is the
voice, not of our woe, but of our love, not of
beseeching, but of blessing. It comes before
God not clothed in sackcloth, but with ite
‘‘singing robes” about it, not wailing litanies,
but shouting hosannaa, Prayer expresses only
our lower religious moods of necessity and
sorrow ; praise expresses our higher religious
moods of satisfaction and joy. Prayer aska
God to como down to us; praise assays to go
up to God. The soul that prays falls prostrate
with its face to the ground, often being in an
agony ; the soul that praises stands with u
lifted brow and transfigured countenance af
to soar away to heaven. Moreover, the instinct


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA. |


CHAP It.


Oe eee eee


of praise is deeper in the religious heart than
that of prayer; song in the human soul is
earlier, and will be later, than supplication.
Prayer is the accident of our present sinful
necessity ; praise is the essence of all relig-
ious life and joy. The birthplace and home
of prayer is on earth. The birthplace and
home of praise is in heaven.—H. Allon, D.D.


(bo) I used to think a slight illness was a
luxurious thing; . . . it is difficult in the
latter stages; the old postchaise gets more
shattered at every turn, windows will net pull
up, doors refuse to open, or, being open, will
not shut again. There is some new subject of
complaint every moment ; your sickness comes
thicker and thicker, yoursympathising friends
fewer and fewer. The recollection of youth,
health, and uninterrupted powers of activity,
neither improved nor enjoyed, is a poor strain
of comfort. . . Death has closed the long
dark avenue upon loves and friendships; and
I look at them as through the grated doors of
a burial place filled with monuments of those
who were once dear to me, with no insincere
wish that it may open for me at no distant
period, provided such be the will of God. I
shall never see the threescore and ten, and
shall be summed up at a discount; no help
for it, and no matter either.—Sir Walter Scott.


(c)
There is no joy unmixed with grief—


Each garden has more weeds than flowers—
Care rides upon the winged hours,
And doubt for ever haunts belief.


We stop to pluck some beauteous flower,
And cold precaution idly scorn,
To find some sharp and hidden thorn
Exacts a forfeit for the dower.


There have been tears of wormwood shed,
For every pleasure life can bring;
The joys of earth are flowers that spring
From out the ashes of the dead.—#.. H. Dewart.


In the bitterest grief, in the sharpest period
of agony, in the dullest, most hopeless pros-
pect, there is a source of joy which none but
the spirit of Jesus can find or use. St. Paul
calls it rejoicing in the Lord. Then we go


'


t


out of ourselves, as it were, and leave the last
trial like a cloak that is thrown off. We pass


‘from the sharpest and most disappointing


trouble into the presence of the Spirit of the
Lord. We move in by a mental flash, as it
were, and there see the source of life un-
shaken, undimmed, steady, like the shining of
the moon above a battlefield; calm and quiet,
as the sunlight amid the shrieks and tumult
of a pillaged town.—Harry Jones, M.A.
There is great joy of prosperity, of love, of
victory, but there is a joy that belongs to the
experience of suffering and sorrow which is
more divine and exquisite than any joy the
heart ever knows outside of trouble. When a
soul is afflicted till it is driven into the very
pavilion of God, till Christ, as it were, wraps
His arms about it and says, “ Rest here till
the storm be overpast,’’ that soul experiences
an exquisiteness of joy which only those who
have felt it can understand.—H. W. Beecher.


Then happy those, since each must drain
His share of pleasure, share of pain;
Then happy those, beloved of Heaven,
To whom the mingled cup is given,
Whose lenient sorrows find relief,
Whose joys are chastened by their grief.

; —Sir W. Scott.


oS


(d) This is a world of weeping—a vale of
tears. Who is there that has not wept over
the grave of a friend; over his own losses
and cares; over his disappointments, over the .
treatment he has received from others; over
his sins; over the follies, vices, and woes of
his fellow-men? And what a change would it
make in our world if it could be said that
henceforward not another tear would be shed;
not a head would ever be bowed again in
grief! Yet this is to be the condition of
heaven. In that world there is to be no pain,
no disappointment, no bereavement. No friend
is to lie in dreadful agony on a sick-bed, no
grave is to be opened to receive a parent, a
wife, a child; no gloomy prospect of death is
to draw tears of sorrow from the eyes. To
that blessed world, when our eyes run down
with tears, are we permitted to look forward;
and the prospect of such a world should con-
tribute to wipe away our tears here—for all
our sorrows willsoon be over.—A. Barnes, D.D.


Tue BUILDING OF THE TEMPLE.
(Verses 11-13.)


That an exuberance of joy and of
sorrow should be excited at once by the
same event, is undoubtedly a curious
fact; and it will be profitable to show
you—

1. What there was at that time to
call forth such strong and widely dif-
ferent emotions. The Jews, after their
return from Babylon, had just laid the


foundation of the second Temple, and
this was—

1. To some an occasion of exalted joy.
It was not the mere circumstance that
a magnificent building was about to
be raised, but the thought of the use
to which that building was to be
appropriated, that proved to them a


source of joy. The erection of it was
49


CHAP, It.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.





justly regarded by them as a restoration
of God’s favour to them after the heavy
judgments which He had inflicted on
them during their captivity in Babylon.
This event opened to them a prospect of
again worshipping Jehovah according to
all the forms prescribed to them by the
Mosaic ritual. Nor could they fail to
view it as tending to advance the honour
of their God; in which view pre-emi-
nently it must of necessity fill them with
most exalted joy. With such views of
the event before them the people could
not but shout for joy; and “if they had
been silent, the very stones would have
cried out against them.”

2. To others an occasion of the deep-
est sorrow. The persons who manifested
such pungent grief were “ the priests,
and Levites, and the chief of the fathers
who were ancient men, that had seen
the former Temple.” They wept because
they well knew how infinitely this strue-
ture must fall below the former in point
of magnificence. Of necessity it must
want many things which constituted the
glory of that edifice, and could never be
replaced. The Shechinah, the bright
cloud, the emblem of the Deity Himself,
was for ever removed. The ark was
lost, and the copy of the law which had
been preserved in it. The Urim and
Thummim too, by which God had been
wont to communicate to His people the
knowledge of His will, was irrecoverably
gone; and the fire which had descended
from heaven was extinct, so that they
must henceforth use in all their sacrifices
nothing but common fire. And what
but their sins had brought upon them
all these calamities? Would it have
been right, then, in these persons to lose
all recollection of their former mercies,
and of the sins through which they had
been bereaved of them; and to be so
transported with their present blessings
as not to bewail their former iniquities ?
No! I think that the mixture of feeling
was precisely such as the oceasion ealled
for.

II. How far similar emotions be-
come us at the present day.

1. There is at this time great occasion
for joy. We are not, indeed, construcet-
ing a a temple for the Lord; but

5


the whole nation is engaged in endea-
vours to erect aspiritual temple to Him
throughout the world. Never was there
a period since the apostolie age, when
the exertions were so general, so diversi-
fied, so diffusive. And is this no ground
of joy? Is there no reason to rejoice in
what, we trust, is going on amongst us?
If the Gospel be “ glad tidings of great
joy unto all people,” is it no cause for
joy that it is brought to our ears; and
that it is effectual amongst us to convert
men to God? Are there not amongst
you some at least who have been “turned
from darkness unto light, and from the
power of Satan unto God”? Surely we
have reason to rejoice.


2. Yet is there amongst us abundant
occasion for grief also. If we suppose
the Apostle Paul, who witnessed the
state of God’s Church in its primitive
and purest age, to come down in the
midst of ws, what would be his feelings
at the present hour? Would his joy be
unmixed with sorrow? Would he be
satisfied with what he saw? It was with
“weeping ” that St. Paul contemplated
many of the Philippian converts; and
for many of the Galatian Church he
“ agonised as in the pangs of childbirth
till Christ should be more perfectly
formed in them.” And was this from
a want of charity, or from a contempt '
of piety in its lower stages of existence?
No; but from love, and from a desire
that God should be honoured to the
uttermost wherever His Gospel came,
and wherever its blessings were expe-
rienced in the soul.

See, then—

(1.) What, above all things, should
interest our souls. Nothing under heaven ,
should transport us with joy like the
establishment of Christ’s kingdom in the
world and in the soul. Nothing should
produce in us such acute sensations of
grief as a consciousness that God is not
glorified in the midst of us as He ought
to be.

(2.) What use we should make of our
knowledge and experience. It is not so
much an unqualified effusion of joy thatis
pleasing to the Most High, as that which
is moderated with shame, and tempered
with contrition—Charles Simeon, M.A.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA,
KK _—_____ — I


Tae ALTAR AND THE FounpaTION oF THE TEMPLE.


Notes for Scripture Lesson (Whole Chapter).


Our lesson contains the account of
the beginning of the great work of re-
building the Temple. It is sad to
find that through delays and indiffer-
ence twenty years passed before it was
finished, and then only on the arousing
preaching of Haggai and Zechariah.
They, however, began well, collecting
material and laying the foundations by
the fourteenth month after their return.
Of this great and rejoicing day our
lesson coutains the brief account.

Looking carefully atthe chapter, it will
be seen that it contains two things,which,
though related, are quite distinct—

l. Zhe beginning of Worship.

2. The beginning of the Temple for
Worship.

It will also be observed that the
people very properly thought more of
the spiritual worship than of the material
building, and found that they could
have the worship at once, though the
Temple to worship in might be long
unbuilt, The things we give to God,
buildings, &c., must always come second,
and have no value before Him until we
have given Him ourselves. The true wor-
shippers worship “in spirit and in
truth ;” but they properly accept all
the helps of buildings and services,
The key to the lesson may therefore be
the sentence of praise spoken by Paul
concerning the Macedonians (2 Cor. vili.
5). They “first gave their ownselves to
the Lord, and unto us by the will of
God,”

We have then this to set forth and
illustrate, and we call it—

I, The true erder. First the burnt
offering, then the Teinple. First the
self-surrender, then the doing of duty.
First the worship of the soul, then the
work of the hands. The burnt offering
was designed to represent the entire
yielding of the worshipper to God. How
suitable such an act was for the newly-
restored people, just beginning their
national life! They properly began
with a very solemn consecration of the


whole nation to God by burnt offering,
Though we do not bring representative
sacrifices now, we follow the example of
these earnest-hearted men. Tell of the
youth, going out into life from a country
town, not knowing what temptations
might befall him, and solemnly conse-
crating himself to God, and using David’s
resolve, “I will go in the strength of
the Lord God, I will make mention of
Thy righteousness, even of Thine only.”
That was his offering of himself on the
altar of burnt offering, and the right and
noble beginning for his life. That youth
lived to work at building in the world
the great Temple of God. But in the
second part of the lesson we have another
event introduced—laying the foundations
of the second Temple, and this brings
before us—

Ii. The mingled feelings. In the
worship all feelings were absorbed in
solemn joy ; but when the foundations
were laid, such memories blended with
hope, that tears fell plentifully, and the
wail of sorrow almost drowned the shout
of triumph. Laying foundations of a
new temple or church is the occasion for
joy ; show how we decorate with flags,
&c., and have music and song. And yet
now-a-days, when a new church replaces
an old one, we cannot wonder that very
touching memories should crowd round
the elder people, making them sorrow
in the very midst of other joys. So it
is through our life, songs and tears are
blended. Joys and sorrows go hand in
hand continually. And so it must be
in a sin-stricken world until ‘God Him-
self shall wipe all tears from our eyes.”
Impress the duty which surely comes to
all who give themselves to the Lord “a
living sacrifice.” They have work to do
for God in the world, and whatever forms
that work may take, it is really a part
of the work of building a great temple
in the earth for the glory of God; a
great spiritual temple that neede all sorte
of workers and work; and, when one
day complete, will win from ice.

&


CHAP. IV. MOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.


a aseaaeeneanennneneneneennnnnnnnnne nnn





triumphant songs, with which shall blend dwell among them.” God’s temple among
n» sorrow and uo tears, “The Temple men we must help to build.—& Tuck,
of God shall be with men, and He shall BA.


CHAPTER IV.


CriricaL ap Expranarory Nortss.] In this chapter we have—(i.) The proposal of the
Samaritans to unite with the Jews in building the Temple, and its rejection (vers. 1-8),
(ii.) The opposition of the Samaritans because of the rejeciion of their proposal (vers. 4, 5).
(iii) The lettera of the Samaritans to King Artaxerxes against the Jews, one of which is here
given (vers, 6-16). (iv.) The reply of Artaxerxes to their letter (vers, 17-22). (v.) The
stoppage of the building of the Temple (vers. 24, 24),

Ver, 1, The adversaries of Judah and Benjamin] These ‘‘ adversaries” speak of themselves
in the second verse ue having been brought up hither by Esarhaddon king of Assur, They
are the peoples spoken of in 2 Kings xvii. 24: ‘‘And the king of Assyria brought men from
Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and

laced them in the cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel; and they possessed
OER and dwelt in the cities thereof,” hey described themselvess in vers. 9, 10, as ‘‘ the
Dinaites, the apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites,
the Klamites, and the rest of the nations,” &c. They ‘‘were called Samaritans after the
central point of their settlement.” They were a very mixed people, including some Israelites,
but chiefly composed of heathens,

Ver. 2, For we seek. your Ged, as ye do; and we do sacrifice unto Him] They did worship
Jehovah, but not as the faithful Jews did. hey worshipped Him not as the only living and
true God, but as one amongst others, according to the statement in 2 Kings xvii. 29-33.

Ver. 3, Ye have nothing to do with us to build] & ‘The question was not,” as Keil
observes, ‘‘ whether they would permit Israelites who earnestly sought Jahve to participate in
His worship at Jerusalem—a permission which they certainly would have refused to none who
sincerely desired to turn to the Lord God—but whether they would acknowledge a mixed
population of Gentiles and Israelites, whose worship was more heathen than Israelite, and who
nevertheless claimed on its account to belong to the people of God. To such, the rulers of
Judah could not, without unfaithfulness to the Lord their God, permit a participation in the
puilding of the Lord’s house.” But we ourselves together] = ‘‘we ag a compact unity,
excluding others.” —Schulég.

Ver. +, The people of the land]z.. ‘‘the adversaries,” of ver. 1, Weakened the hands]
&c. Hindered them by diminishing their conrage and strength for the work.

Ver. 5, And hired counsellors against them, to frustate their purpose] Whether by “ hired
counsellors” we are to understand ministers of state whom the Samaritans bribed, or legal
agents whom they employed to bring about a stoppage of the work, is uncertain, All the days
of Cyrus king of Persia] &c. ‘‘The machinations against the building, begun immediately
after the laying of its foundations, in the second year of the return, had the effect, in the
beginning of the third year of Cyrus (judging from Dan. x. 2), of putting a stop to the work
tall the reign of Darius,—in all, fourteen years, via., five years of Cyrus, seven and a half of
Cambyses, seven months of the Paeudo-Smerdis, and one year of Darius (till the second years of
his reign).”— Keil,

Vers, 6 and 7, Ahasuerus, .. . Artaxerxes. Heb, Ahashverosh.. .. Artachshashia] Dr.
Cotton, Bishop of Calcutta, says that Ahasuerus ‘‘ must be Cambyses,” the successor of Cyrus,
and Artaxerxes ‘‘must be the Pseudo-Smerdis” (Bibl. Dict.), So also Rawlinson, e¢ al. But
Keil, Schultz, e¢ al., hold that by Ahasuerus we must understand Xerxes, and by Artaxerxes
‘really Artaxerxes”’ Longimanus, The question ig argued by them at considerable length in
their observations in loco, Bishop Hervey takes the same view, and states it thus: ‘‘ Ezra, iv.
6-23 is a parenthetic addition by a much later hand, and, as the passage most clearly shows,
made in the reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus. The compiler who inserted chap. ii., a docu-
ment drawn up in the reign of Artaxerxes, to illustrate the return of the captives under Zerub-
babel, here inserts a notice of two historical facts—of whieh one occurred in the reign of
Xerxes, and the other in the reign of Artaxerxes—to illustrate the opposition offered by the
heathen to the rebuilding of the Temple in the reign of Cyrus and Cambyses. He tells uz that
in the beginning of the reign of Xerxes, t.e. before Esther was in favour, they had written to
the king to prejudice him against the Jews—a circumstance, by the way, which may rather have
inclined him to listen to Haman’s proposition ; and he gives the text of letters sent to Arta-
xerxes, and of Artaxerxes’ answer, on the strength of which Rehum and Shimsbai forcibly
hindered the Jews from rebuilding the city. These letters doubtless came into Ezra’s hands at
Babylon, and may have led to those endeavours on lis part to make the king favourable to
Jerusalem which issued in hia own commission in the seventh year of his reign. At ver. dd


&2


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; E3R4, MAR, EW,








Haggsi’s narrative proceeds in connection with ver. 5.” Fuerst also holds that Ahasuerus waa
Xerxes, but on Artaxerxes he says that the name was ‘borne by Pscudo-Smerdis and Arta-
cerxes Longimanua,”’ But if Ahasuerus was Xerxes, the Artaxerxes of the text must have beea
Artaxerxes Longimanus. Matthew Henry propounds another view, viz., that Ahasuerus (ver,
8) was also called Artaxerxes (ver. 7), and is identical with Cambyses, The view of Rawlinson
is perhaps correct, that the theory that Ahasuerus is Cambyses and Artaxerxes the Pseudo-
Smerdis ‘presenta fewer difficulties than any other.” But, notwithstanding difficulties, the
sachet seems to us to be the true one. It ig beyond our province to enter further into the
ion.

Ver, 7, Bishlam, _Mithredath, Tabeel] ‘‘These names certainly indicate Samaritans who,
without being Persian officials, enjoyed, just as Sanballat subsequently, a certain degree of
consequence.”—Schultz, And the rest of their companions] Margin: ‘Heb. societies,”
Fuerst : ** Associates, colleagues.” The writing of the letter waa written in the Syrian tongue}
It was written in Syriac or Aramaic characters. And interpreted in the Syrian tongue} It
waa in the Syriac or Aramaic language. Both the characters and the language were Aramaic.
The Samaritans ‘‘spoke a language more nearly akin to Hebrew than to” Aramaic 3 and what
they had thought in their own language they translated into Aramaic, and wrote in Aramaic
characters.

Ver. 8. Rehum the chancellor] Heb. pyn->y3, Fuerst; ** Properly, lord of the (royal)
decree, ¢.¢. either stadtholder, and so the parallel is MMB, (comp. Ezra v. 3, vi. 6, or, accord-
ing to Ezra Apoer, ii. 25; Jos. (Arch. xi, 2), and Kimehi, &c.) = WI IBD, chancellor ; but
the former is more probable.” It is probably the title of the Persian governor of the Sam*~*an
province. Shimshai the scribe] Margin: ‘‘ Or, secretary.” Fuerst: ‘‘ Royal scribe,”

Ver. 9. The Dinaites}] were probably, as suggested by Ewald, people from the Median city
Deinaver. Rawlinson suggests that they were the people of Dayan, a country bordering on
Cilicia. The Apharsathchites] were probably the same as the Apharsachites” (chap, v. 6), and
Were perkaps identical with the Parmtacwe, or Parataceni, a tribe of mountaineers living on the
borders of Media and Persia. The Tarpelites}: ‘‘The territory Tarpel has been supposed to
be found in (Tdwrovpa) of Ptolemy, east of Elam, with which it iz mentioned ; more correctly,
perhaps, the territary Tarpel is at the Mmotie swamp, whose inhabitants Tapwryres are men-
tioned in Strabo (i. p. 757). In no case can it be the Pheeniciaa Tripolis,”—Fuerst. The
Apharsites] are by some regarded as Persians, by others as the ¢ixuasii, in eastern Media, The
Archevites| were people from the city Erech, now Warka. The Susanchites], or Susanites, were
from the city of Suga. The Dehavites] were the Dai or Dahi, mentioned by Herodotus (i. 125)
among the nomadic tribes of Persia. The Elamites] were the original inhabitants of the
country called Elam. 2

Ver. 10. The great and noble Asnapper] seems to have been a distinguished officer in the
zervice of Esarhaddon (ver. 2), and employed by him to conduct the colonists to Samaria and
srrange their settlement there. And at such atime] Chaldee MQY3§ = “and so now, Ezra
iv. 10, vii. 12, ¢e. and so forth, et cetera.” — Fuerst. i

Ver. 12. And have set up the walls] &c. Keil would translate: ‘‘ And are setting up its
walls and digging its foundations.” ‘‘ Repairing” (Fuerst) ‘‘its foundations” would perhaps be
better.

Ver. 13. Toll] Rather tax or tribute; the money payment required from every one.
Tribute] ‘‘A tax on articles consumed, excise.—Fuerst. Oustom] ‘‘A road tax, a toll.”
Ibid. Thou shalt endamage the revenue] The meaning of the word rendered ‘‘revenue”
in the text, and ‘‘strength” in the margin, is entirely uncertain. Keil, Rawlinson, and others
aay that ones depends upon the Pehlevi word OVTN and signifies ‘‘at last.” “And go at last


thou shalt endamage the kings.” Fuerst, however, says that thia ‘‘gives no suitable sense.”
But it seems to us, a8 Schultz observes, that ‘‘the meaning of ‘finally,’ ‘at last,’ ia entirely
appropriate,”

Ver. 14. We have maintenance from the king’s palace] Margin: ‘‘ We are salted with
the salt of the palace.” he Heb, is, ‘‘ We salt the salt of the palace;” te. we eat the salt of
the palace; a figurative expression, signifying to be in the king’s service and to obtain
subsistence from him, and implying the obligation to look after hia interests. The king’s
dishonour] Keil: ‘The damage of the king” MJ, deprivation, emptying, here injury to
the royal power or revenue.” ;

Ver. 15. The book of the records of thy fathers.] It is called in Esth. vi. 1, “the book of
the records of the chronicles,” Thy fathers] are the predecessors of the king on the throne,
and the term applies not only to the Medo-Persian but also to the Chaldean sovereigns, Of
old time] Heb.: ‘‘ From the days of eternity,” t.¢. from time immemorial. For which cause
was this city destroyed]|—by Nebuchadnezzar.

Ver. 16, No portion on this side the river] The ata’ement amounts to this, that the
returned Jews, if allowed to rebuild and fertify Jerusalem, would seize all the country west of
the Eaphrates, and so the king would jose that part of his dominions. A very absurd
exaggeration.

Ver. 17. And at such » time] Rather, ‘* And 60 forth.” (See on ver, 10.) re


OHAP. TV, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: BZR4,











Ver. 18, Read before me] Persian monarche were not accustomed to read letters or records
themselves, but te have them read to them by others (comp. Esth. vi. 1).

Ver. 20, There have been mighty kings] &e. This is most applicable to David and Sclomon,
and in a emaller degree to Usziah, Jotham, and Josiah, Ruled over all beyond the river] sz.
ever all the region west of the Euphrates,

Yer, 28. By force and power] Or, as in the margin, ‘‘ By arm and power.” They com-
pelled the Jews to desist from building.

Ver, 24. According to Keil, Schultz, ef al., the historian in this verse takes up the thread of
the narrative which he dropped at the close of verse 5, in order that, by inserting ‘he episodical
section (vers. 6-23), he might give in this place ‘‘a short and comprehensive view of all the
hortile acta against the Jewish community on the part of the Samaritans and surrounding
nations,” In their view this verse refera to the opposition which was commenced in the reign
of Cyrus, while verses 6-23 narrate subsequent hostilities, But according to the view of Bishop
Cotton, that Ahasuerus (ver. 6) must be Cambyses and Artaxerxes (ver. 7) the Psgeudo-Smerdis,
and that this chapter is one continuous narrative, the enforced suspension of the work lasted
for about two years.


Toe Propogal o¥ THE SAMARITANS TO THE JEWS.
(Verses 1-3.)


Notice :

I. The proposal made by the Sama-
ritans. ‘ Now when the adversaries
of Judah and Benjamin heard that the
children of the captivity builded the
Temple unto the Lord God of Israel ;
then they came to Zerubbabel,” dc.
(vers. 1, 2). This proposal was—

1. Plausidble in tts form. They pro-
posed—(1l) 7'o render help in a great
and good work, “ They said, Let us
build with you.” They do not ask for
anything for themselves, except per-
mission to co-operate in buildieg “ the
Temple unte the Lord God of Israel ;”
but they offer something to the Jews,
even their assistance in their great under-
taking. (2.) To render help in this work
for an excellent reason. “ For we seek
your God as ye do, and we do sacrifice
unto Him since the days of Esarhaddon
king of Assur, which brought us up
hither.” They urge that they were
worshippers of Jehovah even as the
Jews were; that they were interested
in the promotion of His honour; and
that it would therefore be appropriate
for them to unite in building a temple
unto Him. Moreover, the returned
Jews being neither a strong nor a
wealthy people, and having much to
occupy their time and energies, would
naturally be prepared to welcome any
suitable offers of assistance. ‘lempta-
tion is always plausible in its presenta-
tion, to the tempted. (a), But this pro-
posal was—

54


2. Evil in itself. Fair and plausible
in appearance, it was false and perilous
in reality, The evil of their proposal
will appear if we consider that—(1.)
They were not Israelites. They were
brought into Samaria by Esarhaddon
king of Assur. ‘‘And the king of
Assyria brought men from Babylon,
and from Cuthah, and from Ava, and
from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim,”
&c, (2 Kings xvii. 24). They were
“ Dinaites, Apharsathchites, Tarpelites,
Apharsites, Archevites, Babylonians,
Susanchites, Dehavites, and Elamites ”
(ver. 9). If it be allowed that these
peoples had become mixed by marriage
with the remnant of the Israelites who
remained in the land at the captivity,
still the heathen elements and usages
and influences were predominant amongst
them. They were not Israelites either
by descent or by sympathy. (2.) They
did not worship Jehovah as the true
God. When they were first planted in
Samaria they were ignorant of the wor-
ship of Jehovah; and after they had
been instructed in it, they adopted it
not as exclusive of the worship of other
gods but in common with such worship.
“They feared the Lord, and served
their own gods,” dc. “ These nations
feared the Lord, and served their
graven images,” d&c, (2 Kings xviii, 24-
41). To have received such a people
into community and co-operation with
the true people ef God would have been
an act of utter uufaithfulness and dis


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.








loyalty to Him. (3.) Their design in
making this proposal was an unworthy
one. “* The occasion of this request of
the Samaritans,” says Schultz, was
the correct recognition of the fact that
those who should have the Temple at
Jerusalem would be regarded as the
leading nation, whilst those who should
be excluded from this central point of
the worship of the land would appear as
less authorised, as intrusive ; they like-
wise no doubt expected, if they were
admitted to participation in the building
of the Temple, as well as to consultation
with reference to it, to gain thereby
influence in shaping the affairs of the
congregation in general. If in addition
to this they had also a religious interest
in the matter, it was only in order to
secure for themselves the favour of the
God of the land, whom they recognised
as Jehovah, and then therewith also the
same possessions and blessings in their
new home as the Jews designed for
themselves. We cannot regard them
as actuated by any higher and purer
motive ; for their entire subsequent
behaviour, which makes them appear as
quite indifferent tc religious affairs, and
also that which we elsewhere learn of
their religion (2 Kings xvii, 24-41), is
opposed to that view.” (4.) The accept-
ance of their proposal would have been
perilous to the Jews. Proneness to
associate with their heathen neighbours
and to adopt their idolatrous customs
had been painfully prevalent in the
Israelites previous to their captivity,
and lgd been the chief cause of their
miseries. To have acceded to the pro-
posal of the Samaritans would have
been to have placed themselves in the
utmost danger of falling again into their
former sins with all their train of bitter
consequences. They were not strong
enougi to overcome the heathen ele-
mentg and influences which they must
have encountered in association with
the idolatrous Samaritans. In such
association there was grave peril to
their best interests, Separation from
the Samaritans was essentia] to the
spiritual safety of the Jews. (6).

Il. The proposal rejected by the
Jews. ‘ But Zerubbabel, and Jeshus,


CHAP, IV.


AY. ann Ba


and the rest of the chief of the fathers
of Israel, said unto them,” &e. (ver. 3).
In this rejection there are several note
worthy points—

1. An exclusive obligation in relation
to the work ts asserted. ‘Ye have no.
thing to do with us to build an house
unto our God; but we ourselves to-
gether will build unto the Lord God of
Israel.” In such an undertaking the
Jews and the Samaritans had nothing
in commen, The obligation to build
the Temple devolved upon the Jews, and
they alone would fulfil that obligation,

2. The alleged similarity of worship
ts indsrectly denied. The rulers of the
Jews in their reply to the Samaritana
speak of “our God” and of “the Lord
God of Israel,” implying that He was
not the God of the Samaritans. The
returned exiles worshipped Jehovah as
the only living and true God, while the
Samaritans worshipped Him simply aa
a local deity, as one god amongst others,
In this sense, then, He was “the Lord
God of Israel,” but not of the Samari-
tans, (c).

3. The command of King Cyrus ts
adduced tn support of this rejection.
“As King Cyrus the king of Persia hath
commanded us.” The authority of Cyrus
was binding upon both the Jews and the
Samaritans. The Jews had his commis-
sion to come to Jerusalem and build the
Temple ; but if it was a work which the
Samaritans could appropriately under-
take, he need not have encouraged or
even allowed the Jews to leave Babylon
to doit. Again, if it was a work which
might be done by others than Jews, why,
seeing that he was so much interested
in it, did he not undertake it himself?
The mentioning of the authority of King
Cyrus by the Jewish leaders was cer-
tainly a prudent thing. “Be ye wise
as serpents, and harmless as doves,”

4. The rejection of the proposal was
unanimous, ‘ Zerubbabel, and Jeshua,
and the rest of the chief of the fathers
of Israel,” t.¢, all the heads of the
people, concurred in declining the co-
operation of the Samaritanz, This una-
wimity is further indicated in the ex-
preasion, ‘‘We ourselves together will
build,” which Schultz correctly explaina.

5b


CHAP. IV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.


a


“we, as a compact unity, excluding
others.” If the Church of Christ would
stand against and conquer its enemies,
it must present to them a compact
opposition. (d).

5. The rejection of the proposal was
prompt and decided, There is neither
hesitation nor uncertainty in the reply
of the heads of the Jewish people to the
Samaritans It is perilous to parley
with evil proposals. They should be
immediately and firmly repudiated. (e).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) It was but ashallow device, and showed
a very imadeauate conception of devilish art,
to represent Satan a hideous and repulsive
figure, with frightful marks to be recognised
by, with a beastly foot to certify his track, and
all concentrated malignities on his distorted
features. Why, men would run from such
ugliness by instinct ; and if this were the type


of evil, it eould never come near enough to_


tempt us. Our virtne would be safe against
a seducer that inspired nothing but disgust,
In the real Satan we must look for a shrewder
cunning, a more subtle diplomacy, a mere
politic disguise. Whatever he may have been
to the superstitious fears of ruder ages, to try
the temper of the nineteenth century he takes
on the address of a courtier, the self-posseasion
of a man of the world, the royal dignity of a
prince, the beauty of a seraph, and the man-
ners of a gentleman. If you meet him now—
and meet him you certainly will to-morrow
and to-day—he will be transformed into an
angel of light.—F. D. Huntington, D.D.


(6) Let not any so much presume upon
their own strength as to imagine that they
ean retain their sincerity, though they keep
wicked company, and rather convert them to
good than be perverted by them to evil, see-
ing this is a matter of great difficulty. ‘To
be good among the good,” says Bernard, ‘‘ has
in it health and safety ; among the wicked to
be so, is alao commendable and praiseworthy:
in that, happiness is joined with much security;
in this, much virtue with difficulty.” For as
he who is running down the hill can sooner
pull with him one that is ascending, than he
who is going up can cause him to ascend that
is running down ; 80 he who holds a headlong
course in wickedness can more easily carry
with him one that ig ascending tne hill of
virtue, being a motion contrary to natural
disposition, than he can cause him to ascend
with him. For in common experience we
gee that the worser state prevails more in
altering the better to ita condition, than the
better to make the worse like itself. The in-
feeted are not so soon cured by the sound, as
they are tainted with their contagion. Rotten
apples lying with the sound are not restored

56


‘in their mortality and corruption.


to soundness, but the sound are corrapted
with their rottenness. Dead carcasses united
to living bodies are not thereby revived, un-
less it be by miracle, as we sce in Elijah and
Peter ; but the living, if they continue any
time united to the dead, partake with them
And thua
it is in our spiritual state, wherein the worse
more prevails to corrupt the better, than the
better to reform the worse.—Downame.


(c) Prone before, on every occasion, to
adopt the idolatrous practices of the adjacent
nations, the Jews now secluded themselves
from the rest of the world in proud assurance
of their own religious superiority. The law,
which of old was perpetually violated, or almost
forgotten, was now enforced, by general con-
senttoitsextreme point, oreven beyondit. Ad-
verzgity endeared that, of which in prosperity,
they had not perceived the value. Prone, the
mass of them, all but the wiser and more en-
lightened who worshipped Jehovah, to wor-
ship Him but as a national God, greater and
mightier than the gods of other nations (a
conception in itself polytheistic), they threw
aside this lower kind of pride, to assume that
of the sole people of the one true God. Their
city, their native soil, their religion, became
the objects of the most passionate attachment,
Intermarriages with foreigners, neither for-
bidden by statute nor by former practice, were
strictly inhibited. The observance of the Sab-
bath, and even of the sabbatical year, wae
enforced with rigour of which we have no
precedent in the earlier annals, even to the
neglect of defence in time of war. In
short, from this period commences that un-
social spirit, that hatred towards mankind
and want of humanity to all but their own
kindred, with which, notwithstanding the
extent to which they carried proselytism te
their religion, the Jews are branded by all
the Roman writers. The best of these writers
could not but be unconsciously or involun-
tarily impressed by the majesty of this sub-
lime monotheism, but their pride resented
the assumption of religious superiority by
this small people ; and the stern self-isolation
of the Jews from all religious communion
with the rest of mankind was beheld only in
ites seemingly proud and lonely obstinacy—in
its refusal to contaminate itself with what it
openly declared to be the unholy and un-
righteous and foolish usages of the world.—
Al, H, Milman, DD.


(a) Union is power. The most attenuated
thread, when sufficiently multiplied, will form
the strongest cable, i single drop of water
is a weak and powerless thing; but an infinite
number of drops, united by the force of at-
traction, will form a stream; and many
atreams combined will form a river; till
rivers pour their waters into the mighty
ocean, whose proud waves, defying the power
of man, none ean stay but He who formed
them, And thus forces which, acting singly,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: KZRA,





are utterly impotent, are, when acting in com-
bination, resistless in their energies, mighty
in power. And when this great union of the
several powers of the Church shall be brought
to bear unitedly on one point, its triumph
will be the subjection of a world to Christ
which now defies the solitary efforts of single
forces.—H, G. Salter.


(ce) Decision of character and promptitude
of action, qualities so important on board
nay ke a storm, in the manauvring of troops
im battle, are indispensable to the Christian





life, both to our gettimg through the ‘strait
gate,” and our getting on in the ‘‘narrow
way.” How often, for example, does it hap-
pen that to hesitate even for one moment
between resisting and yielding to temptation
is to fall! The battle is lost in that moment,
of vacillation. In euch cases, our safety lies
in coming to an immediate decision; in
promptly resolving to dally with the tempter
not an instant, to flee if we can, and if we
cannot flee to fight—so resisting the devil
that if we cannot fiee from him, he shall fiee
from ua, and leave us.— Thomas Guthrie, D.D.


THe Proposats oy THE WICKED AND HOW TO TREAT THEM.
(Verses 1-3.)


“The children of the captivity ” who
had returned to their own land were
true Israelites, both in their origin and
in their sympatlies; the Samaritans
were heathens of various races, or at
best only heathens mingled with Israel-
ites The Jews were decided mono-
theists ; the Samaritans were confirmed
polytheists, and are here correctly de-
scribed as “the adversaries of” the
Jews, For these reasons we may fairly
regard the Jews as representing the true
and good, and the Samaritans the false
and evil Viewed in this respect, the
text suggests—

I. That the wicked often propose
to enter into alliance with the good.
“Now when the adversaries of Judah
and Benjamin heard that the children of
the captivity builded the Temple unto
the Lord God of Israel ; then they came
to Zerubbahbel, and to the chief of the
fathers, and said unto them, Let us
build with you.” For selfish reasons
these idolaters propose to co-operate with
the Jews in building the Temple of the
true and only God. In like manner
worldly and wicked men often seek to
form alliances with the religious and the
godly. These alliances are of different
kinds, ¢g,—

1. Commereial. Partnerships in bust-
ness, dc.

2, Social, Reception into their society,
or personal friendship.

3, Matrimonial. From various selfich
motives the non-religious man may seck
a religious woman for his wife; or the
worldly woman a godly man.

4. And even, as in this case, Religtous.


y


Persons who have no real godliness,
actuatei by unworthy motives, some-
times seek to co-operate in religious
enterprises.

II. That the proposals of the wicked
for alliance with the good are often
supported by plausible reasons. “ For
we seek your God, as ye do; and we
do sacrifice unto Him,” &. How
plausible! And men argue with equal
plausibility for the formation of alliances
between the worldly and the godly in
our own day. Take the alliances men-
tioned above, and see how men argue
for them.

1. Commercial. It is argued that
religious principles have nothing to do
with business transactions,

2. Soctal. Tiat the advantage and
enjoyment of social intercourse is inde-
pendent of the question of personal
piety.

3. Matrimonial, That the ungodly
partner will soon be won over to the
beliefs and practices of the godly one ;
or, at the very least, will derive much
moral benefit,

4. Religious. That there is very little
difference between the two parties ; as,
in the argument of the Samaritans, Such
proposals must needs be plausibly sup-
ported, or they would not have even the
remotest chance of acceptance. («).

III. That the alliances proposed by
the wicked are always perilous to the
good. The Samaritans were “the ad-
versaries of the” Jews, and their pro-
posal was a dangerous one to the Jews.
And the alliances we have spoken of
place the best interests of na godly in





jeopardy. In such business partnerships
the good man’s hiyh standard of morality
and business principle is in sore danger
of asad reduction, In social and mat-
rimonial relationships of this mixed
moral character there is great danger
that the delicate bloom of piety will be
soon swept away, that zeal for truth
and for God will grow cold, that habits
of devotion will gradually fail, and thus
the very life of the soul will be gravely
imperilled, And if the wicked be ad-
mitted into religious alliances and enter-
prises, such enterprises will run immi-
nent risk of being first degraded and then
defeated. (0).

IV. That the proposals of the
wicked for alliance with the good
should always be firmly rejected. The
readers of the Jews are an example to
us in this respect. “ Zerubbabel and
Jeshua, and the rest of the chief of the
fathers of Israel, said unto them, Ye
have nothing to do with us to build an
house unto our God,” &. When the
difference of character is essential and
radical, there should be no hesitation as
to the treatment of such proposals.
Occasional association between the un-
mistakably good and the unmistakably
wicked is sometimes justifiable and
necessary ; as in business transactions
and in the efforts of the good to benefit
the wicked. ‘I pray not,” said Christ,
“that Thou shouldest take them out
of the world, but that Thou shouldest
keep them from the evil.” (c). But the
first suggestion of intimate association
or close alliance between them, however
plausibly presented and enforced, should
b? at once and decisively checked by
the good. “Can two walk together,
except they be agreed?” “Be ye not
unequally yoked together with unbe-
lievers ; for what fellowship hath righte-
ousness with unrighteousness?” de,
(2 Cor, vi. 14-18). Resist temptation
promptly and firmly, (d).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Satan never plays a bold game. He
wins by not showing his worst at first, by een-
eealing his tricks, transformed into an angel
of light. It takes a great deal of effort to put
us thoroughly on our guard against hia wiles ;
but io. it is done, it is worth the paing,

8 :


‘better affections,


_ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BZRA





Tempting men imitate their great leader and
prototype. They never go directly and openly
to their object. If they would bend you from
your integrity, they will flatter your self-respect
by holding out to you a moral inducement. If
they would corrupt your purity, they insinu-
ate the poison through some appeal to your
If they would weaken the
holy restraints that gird in, with their blessed
zone, the innocence of childhood, they will
urge some sly argument to an honourable
pride, or else toa friendly sympatky, or else to
a praiseworthy love of independeuce ; and the
firat battery that has been plied against many
a boy’s virtue has been the cunning caution
that bade him net be afraid of his elders,
They may say, as Milton makes the Archfiend
gay, sitting like a cormorant on a tree that
over.ooked the sinless Eden and the yet inno-
cent inmates, deceiving even his own black
heart —


“Should I at your harmless innocence
Melt, as I do, yet public reason just,
Houvour and empire, with revenge enlarged
By conquering this new world, compels me
now
To do what else, though damned, I should
abhor,”


Theologians can cover their sectarian mis-
representations with the plea of ‘‘ geal for the
cause,” and controversialists baptize their
bigotry with language of Holy Writ wrested
from its meaning.


“The devil can cite Scripture for his pur-
one. .


Oh what a goodly outside falachood hath !”


Says the Apostle Paul, ‘If Satan himself is
transformed into an angel of light, it is no great
thing if his ministers also be transformed ag
the ministers of righteousness; whose end
shall be according to their works,”—F, D.
Huntington, DD.


(6) Man, being a sociable creature, is mightily
encouraged to do ag others do, especially in an
evil example; for we are more susceptible of
evil than we are of good. Sickness is sooner
communicated than health ; we easily catch a
disease of one another, but those that are sound
do not communicate health to the diseased,
Or rather, to take God’s own expression that
seta it forth thus,—by touching the unclean
the man became unclean under the law, but
by touching the clean the man was not puri-
fled. The conversation of the wicked hag
more power to corrupt the good, than the con-
versetion of the virtuous and holy te correct
the jewd.— Manton.


{c) All company with unbelievers or mis-
believers is not condemned. We find a Lot
in Sodom, Israel with the Egyptians, Abra-
ham and Isaac with their Abimelechs; roses
among thorns, and pearls in mud; and Jesus
Christ among publicans and sinners, So
neither we be infected, nor the name of the
ord wronged, to converse with them that we


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA,


CHAP, IV.





may convert them isa holy course. But still
we must be among them as strangers ; to pass
through an infected place is one thing, to dwell
in it another, The earth is the Lord's, and
men are His; wheresoever God shail find the
merchant, let him be sure to find God in every
place.—Thomas Adams.


(d) Keep the devil at arm’s length, and
fight him at a distance. Suffer him, in easy
security, to draw near, and resistance is over ;
the citadel of your soulis won. Nine-tenths
of the gross, degrading, damning sins into
which people are betrayed, are committed
without premeditation, nay, with a clear pur-
pose against them ; but a man or a woman
has toyed with temptation—just thus far I can
venture, and stop short of foul and fatal sin.


And then, as the poor bird when he sees the
bait in the trap, Satan knows he has you fast;
he knows that those encroachments are never
staid. The art of godly living in its earlier
stages is an art of wise defences, a constant,
earnest Vigilance at the outworks of the spirit,
that they may never be stormed or sapped by
the foe, Gradually, asa man grows in grace
and godliness, the outer defence may be aban
doned. Paul, the aged, could look steadily
in the face many a peril which Paul the neo-
phyte would have wisely shunned, But let the
young pilgrim of life beware, and if he feels
himself in an atmosphere of temptation, let
him raise bulwarks of habits and self-deniala
by which the pestilent foe may be kept as far
as may be from the near neigkbourhood of the
soul.—J/. B. Brown, B.A,


Tre TRUE BUILDERS OF THE SPIRITUAL TEMPLE OF Gon,
(Verse 3.)


The chiefs of the Jewish community
here affirm that the building of the
Temple at Jerusalem was their work,
that the Samaritans had no proper part
in it; and that, therefore, they would
do the work themselves, without the
proffered aid of the Samaritans, This
position, which they took up and main-
tained, suggests that the true spiritual
Israelites are the only authorised and
legitimate builders of the spiritual Temple
of God, or that Christian work should
be done only by Christians, This posi-
tion may be supported by the following
reasons -—

I. They alone will build on the
true foundation. ‘Behold I lay in
Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried
stone, a precious corner-stone, a sure
foundation: he that believeth shall not
make haste.” ‘Other foundation can
no man lay than that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ.” He is the enly founda-
tion of a true character ; the only corner-
stone of atruechurch. Neither theolo-
gical creeds or systems, nor ecclesiastical
politics, nor even divinely instituted
sacraments, nor schemes of social im-
provement, nor the unreliable excel-
lences and fancied merits of individuals
—none of these, nor all of them com-
bined, can be the true foundation of the
spiritual Temple of God, Christ is the
only true and sure foundation, And
the true Christian, who is both a stone
in the edifice and also a builder of the


edifice, is himself built upon Christ and.
builds others upon Him. He who is not
himself a true Christian will suggest
some other foundation, &c. (a).

YW. They alone will build with the
true materials. The spiritual temple
ig to be built of living and Christly
souls, ‘Ye also as living stones are
built up a spiritual house, an holy
priesthood.” The Christian Church
should be composed of Christian persons,
and only of them. The great spiritual
dwelling-place of God must be con-
structed of spiritual persons. The car-
nally-minded, the worldly-minded, the
ungodly, have no true place in it, The
Christian builder will seek to build the
edifice of true materials ; he will ‘‘ build
upon this foundation gold, silver, pre-
cious stones.” Those who are not them-
selves true Christians would build of
“wood, hay, stubble ;” they would put
into the edifice unsuitable materials,
&c. (6).

Ill. They alone will build in ac.
cordance with the true plan. The
design of the Church is Divine. They
who labour in the erection of the spirt-
tual temple are not to carry out their
own ideas, but to fulfil the plan of God.
The Lord Jesus is the great Master
Builder: He also superintends the
work, The business of the workmen is
to carry out His directions, Here are
some glimpses of the Divine design for
this temple, “In whom al) the build

59


CHAP, TY,





ing fitly framed together groweth unto
an holy temple in the Lord.” “A glori-
ous Church, not having spot, or wrinkle,
or any such thing ; but that it should
be holy and without blemish.” Only
the members of the true spiritual Israel
will keep the Divine plan in view, and
faithfully build in accordance with it.

IV. They alone will build with the
true aim. What is the great end of
the spiritual temple which ia being built
amongst men? The glory of God. For
this end the Jews rebuilt their Temple.
This is the end of the great redemptive
work of our Lord and Saviour, and of
the Holy Spirit, and of all Christian
agencies. ‘ Ye are builded together for
an habitation of God through the Spirit.”
“Ye are built up a spiritual house, an
holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual
sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ.” ‘Behold the tabernacle of
God is with men, and He will dwell
with them, and they shall be His
people, and God Himself shall be with
them, and be their God.” The final
cause of this spiritual temple is that
God shall be manifest in it everywhere,
realised everywhere, obeyed every where,
adored everywhere. Only the godly
will faithfully labour for this end. The
ungodly, like the Samaritans, will be
moved by political or other inferior con-
siderations, and will aim at some selfish
end.

V. They alone will build in the
true spirit. The true spirit for Chris-
tian work is that of —

1. Obedience, as opposed to self-will.

2. Humility, as opposed to haughti-
ness and self-conceit,

3. Patience in dealing with difficulties
and disappointments, as opposed to
petulance,

4. Trust in God, as opposed to self-
confidence.

5. Self-consecration, as opposed to self-
seeking. This is the true spirit for the
builders of the spiritual Temple of our
God; and this spirit belongs only to
the true people of God. The first and
chief condition of doing good to others
is being good ourselves. To accomplish
successful Christian work we must live
sincere Christian lives, And go our

30


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZRA.





subject brings us to the cross and to
the Saviour, to the atonement and the
example of the Lord Jesus. Fitness for
holy work begins by trusting in Him,


and is maintained by imitating Him, (ce).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Christ is o{ten called the foundation ; the
stone; the corner-stone on which the Church
is reared (Isa. xxviii. 16; Matt. xxi. 42; Acts
iv. 11; Eph. ii. 20; 2 Tim. ii. 19; 1 !et. ii. 6).
The meaning is, that no true church can be
reared which does not embrace and hold the
true doctrines respecting Him—those which
pertain to His incarnation, His Divine nature,
His instructions, His example, His atonement,
His resurrection, and His ascension. The
reason why no true church can be established
without embracing the truth as it is in Chrizi,
is, that it is by Him only that men can be
saved ; and where this doctrine is wanting, all
is wanting that enters into the essential idea
of a church. The fundamental doctrines of
the Christian religion must be embraced, or a
church cannot exist ; and where those doctrines
are denied, no association of men can be recog-
nised as a Church of God. Nor can the foun-
dation be modified or shaped so as to suit the
wishes of men. It must be laid as it is in the
Scriptures; and the superstructure must be
reared on that alone.—Albert Barnes, D.D.


(6) By going to the lowest stratum of human
nature, Christ gave a new idea of the value of
man. He built a kingdom out of the refuse
of society. Tocompare small things with great,
it has been pointed out by Lord Macaulay
that in an English cathedral there is an ex-
quisite stained window which was made by an
apprentice out of the pieces of glass which had
been rejected by his master, and it was so far
superior to every other in the church, that,
according to tradition, the envious artist killed
himself with vexation. All the builders of
aociety had rejected the ‘‘sinners,” and made
the painted window of the ‘‘righteous.” A
new Builder came; His plan was original,
startling, revolutionary ; His eye was upon the
contemned material; He made the first last,
and the last first; and the stone which the
builders rejected He made the head stone of
the corner.—Joseph Parker, D.D.


(c) The true philosophy or method of doin
good is, first of all and principally, to be go
—to have a character that will of itself com-
municate good. There must and will be active
effort where there is goodness of principle ; but
the latter we should hold to be the principal
thing, the root and life of all. Whether it is
@ mistake more sad or more ridiculous, to make
Mere stir synonymous with doing good, we
need not inquire ; enough, to be sure that one
who has taken up such a notion of doing good
ts for that reason a nuisance to the church,
The Christian ie called a light, not lightning


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA,





In order to act with effect on others, he must
walk in the Spirit, and thus become the image
of goodness ; he must be so akin to God, and
so filled with His dispositions, that he shall
seen to surround himself with a hallowed atmo-
sphere, It is folly to endeavour to make our-
selves shine before we are luminous. If the
sun without his beams should talk to the
planets, and argue with them till the final day,
it would not make them shine; there must be
light in the sun itself, and then they will shine,
of course. And this, my brethren, is what
God intends jor you all. It is the great idea





OMAP. FY.
a


of His Gospel, and the work of His Spirit, to
make you lights in the world. His greatest
joy is to give you character, to beautify your
example, to exalt your principles, and make
you each the depositary of His own Almighty
grace. But in order to this, something is
necessary On your part —a lull surrender of
your mind to duty and to God, and a perpetual
desire of His spiritual intimacy ; having this,
having a participation thus of the goodness of
God, you will as naturally communicate good as
the sun communicates his beams.—-//, Bush
nell, D.D.


Tue Hosrinitry or roe SAMARITANS TO THE JEWS.
(Verses 4, 5, and 24.)


The advances of the Samaritans having
been firmly declined by the Jews, they
resorted to opposition, and endeavoured
to thwart them in their great work.
Notice :

IL The tactics of the wicked. Hav-
ing failed to accomplish their selfish
purposes by the proposal to co-operate
in the work, “the people of the land”
at once proceeded to hinder the work.
If the Jews would not accept their prof-
fered assistance, they were resolved that
they should experience their hostility.
The Jews had said that they would do
the work alone, whereupon the Samari-
taus determined that they should not do
it at all. They “weakened the hands
of the people of Judah,” “+.¢., they dis-
couraged and intimidated them as re-
gards their great work. The wicked
are, alas! fertile in resources for the
accomplishment of their evil designs.
Their methods are often manifold and
crafty. If they cannot bend the good
to their wishes and aims by plausible
pretences, they alter their tactics and
betake themselves to unscrupulous op-
position in various forms,


Ul. The venality of the wicked. The


Samaritans “hired counsellors against -


them, to frustrate their purpose.” M.
Henry suggests that these counsellors,
“pretending to advise them for the best,
should dissuade them from proceeding,
and so ‘frustrate their purpose,’ or dis-
suade the men of Tyre and Sidon from
furnishing them with the timber they
had bargained for (chap. iii. 7) ; or what-
ever business they had at the Persian
court, to solicit for any particular grants


or favours, pursuant to the general edict
for their liberty, there were those that
were hired and lay ready to appear of
counsel against them.” Or, as Schultz
suggests, they were hired to get the
edict of Cyrus cancelled by influencing
“the ministers to whom chap. vii. 28
and viii, 25 refer, or other influential
persons, to give advice to Cyrus un-
favourable to the Jews. At court they
naturally did not understand how it
could be that those who were as much
the inhabitants of the land as the re-
turned exiles, and therefore seemed en-
titled to the God of the land, should be
excluded If Cyrus had seen in Jehovah
hie own supreme God, it must have been
all the more annoying to him that those
who apparently had the best intentione
of worshipping Him should be rejected.
It would seem as if the reason why the
Jews opposed the union could only be
a national and political one, and the
suspicion was quite natural, that they
already designed to form not merely a
religious community, but also had na-
tional and political desigus, that they
thus gave an entirely false interpretation
to the decree of Cyrus.” But, however
these counsellors proceeded in their
work, it is reasonable to infer that they
were men of some skill and resource and
power of persuasion, and they deliber-
ately exercised their abilities in an evil
cause for gain, Jn them the voice of
conscience was overwhelmed by the
cravings of cupidity. In the twenty-
fourth chapter of Acts we have twa
Ulustrations of this venality, The learn-
ing and eloquence of Tertullus, a [oman


Gl


CHAP, IV.





barrister, were employed to promote the
cause of tyranny, injustice, and false-
hood, and to persecute a true and holy
man. And Felix the governor refrains,
for the space of two years, from doing
what he is convinced is his duty in re-
leasing St. Paul from his imprisonment,
in the hope of receiving bribes to do so,
It is inexpressibly mournful to see men
prostituting their genius, or learniug, or
wisdom, or eloquence, or power for
money. Yet how numerous are the
forms and instances of it in our own
day, ¢.g., men write fictions and songs
which minister to men’s lower nature at
the expense of their higher nature,
é&e, (a).

It. The temporary triumph of the
wicked. The Samaritans succeeded in
discouraging the Jews, harassing them
in their work, and finally putting a stop
to their work. They frustrated “ their
purpose ali the days of Cyrus king of
Persia, even until the reign of Darius
king of Persia... . Then ceased the
work of the house of God which is at
Jerusalem. So it ceased unto the
second year of Darius king of Persia.”
For the space of fourteen years the
building of the Temple was arrested,
viz., for five years of the reign of Cyrus,
seven and a half of Cambyses, seven
months of the Pseudo-Smerdis, and one
year of Darius, The wicked have often
succeeded in hindering the progress of
the cause of God. St. Paul was hin-
dered by Satan, once and again, from
the execution of his purposes (1 Thess.
ii, 18), Persecution too has frequently
obstructed sadly the work of God, and
inflicted grievous trials and sufferings
upon His people.

IV. The freedom allowed by God te
the wicked. He allowed the Samaritans
to resist His purposes, to persecute His
people, to arrest the building of His
Temple for fourteen years, And still
He allows the atheist to deny His exist-
ence, the blasphemer to blaspheme His
name, and the wicked to “do evil with
both hands earnestly.” He will not in-
vade the mora] freedom with which He
Himself has dowered us, And “sen-
tence against an evil work is not speedily
executed.” His forbearance, even with

62


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA,


the most pernicious and provoking sin-
ners, is very great. “The Lord is merci-
ful and gracious, slow to anger, and
plenteous in mercy.” But let no one
presume upon the Divine patience.


' “Thinkest thou, O man, that thou


shalt escape the judgment of God? Or
despisest thou the riches of His good
ness and forbearance and long-suffer
ing?” dc. (Rom. ii, 4-11). (6), And
in the end the Temple of God shall
be built, and His purposes fully and
splendidly accomplished. The triumph
of the wicked is only temporary. God
will frustrate their deepest designs, and
overrule them for the fulfilment of Hie
own. “Surely the wrath cf man shall
praise Thee: the remainder of wrath
shalt Thou restrain.” Let us learn,
before leaving this section of the nar-
rative, that the most dangerous enemies
of the Chureh of God are hypocritical
adherents to it. Half-hearted, incon-
sistent, ungodly professors of religion
are, in their influence, the worst obstrue-
tions to the progress of the kingdom of


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Gold is the only power which receives
universal homage. It is worshipped in all
lands without a single temple, and by all
classes without a single hypocrite ; and often
hag it been able to boast of having armies for
its priesthood, and hecatombs of human victime
for ita sacrifices. Where war has slain its
thousands, gain has slaughtered its millions;
for while the former operates only with the
local and fitful terrors of an earthquake, the
destructive influence of the latter is universal
aud unceasing. Indeed war itself—what has
it often been but the art of gain practised on
the largest scale? the covetousness of a nation
resolved on gain, impatient of delay, and lead-
ing on its subjects to deeds of rapine and
blood? Its history is the history of slavery
and oppression in all ages. For centuries,
Africa—one quarter of the globe—has been set
apart to supply the monster with victims—
thousands at a meal. And, at this moment,
what a populous and gigantic empire can it
boast ! the mine, with its unnatural drudgery ;
the manufactory, with its swarms of squalid
misery ; the plantation, with its imbruted
gangs; and the market and the exchange,
with their furrowed and careworn counte-
nances,—these are only specimens of its more
menial offices and subjects, Titles and honours
are among its rewards, and thrones are at ite

Among its counsellors are kings,
many of the great and mighty of the earth


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EERA.





are enrolled among its subjects, Where are the
waters not ploughed by its navies? What
imperial element is not yoked to its car? Philo-
sophy itself has become a mercenary in its pay ;
and science, a votary at its shrine, brings all
its noblest discoveries, as offerings, to its feet.
What part of the globe’s surface is not rapidly
yielding up its last stores of hidden treasure to
the spirit of gain? or retains more than a few
miles of unexplored and unvanquished terri-
tory? Scorning the childish dream of the
philosopher’s stone, it aspires to turn the globe
itself into gold.—John Harris, D. D.


(6) The patience of God informs usa of the
reason why He lets the enemies of His Church
oppress it, and defers His promise of the
deliverance of it. If He did punish them pre-
sently, His holiness and justice would be glori-
fied, but His power over Himself in His
patience would be obscured. Well may the
Church be content to have a perfection of God
glorified, that is not like to receive any honour
in another world by any exercise of itself. If
it were not for His patience, He were incapable
to be the Governor of a sinful world; He
might, without it, be the Governor of an inno-
cent world, but not of a criminal one; He
would be the destroyer of the world, but not
the orderer and disposer of the extravagancies
and sinfulness of the world. The interest of
His wisdom, in drawing good out of evil, would
not be served if He were not clothed with this
perfection as well as with others. If He did
presently destroy the enemies of His Church
upon the first oppression, His wisdom in con-
triving, and His power in accomplishing de-
liverance against the united powers of hell and


See Ie a ee ES | 7


Gwar. Iv.





earth, would not be visible, no, nor that powe
in preserving His people unconsumed in the
furnace of affliction. He had not got so great
a name in the rescue of His Israel from
Pharaoh, had He thundered the tyrant into
destruction upon His first edict against the
innocent. If He were not patient to the most
violent of men, He might seem to be cruel.
But when He offers peace to them under their
rebellions, waits that they may be members of
His Church, rather than enemies to it, He frees
Himself from any such imputation, even in the
judgment of those that shall feel most of His
wrath; it is this renders the equity of His
justice unquestionable, and the deliverance of
His people righteoue in the judgment of those
from whose fetters they are delivered. Christ
reigns in the midst of His enemies, to show
His power over Himself ag well as over the
beads of His enemies, to show His power over
His rebels. And though He retards His pro-
mnise, and suffers a great interval of time be-
tween the publication and performance, some-
times years, sometimes ages to pass away, and
little appearance of any preparation to show
Himself a God of truth ; it is not that He hatn
forgotten His word, or repents that ever He
passed it, or sleeps in 2 supine neglect of it

but that men might not perish, but bethink
themselves, and come as friends into His
bosom, rather than be crushed as enemies
under His feet (2 Pet. iii. 9): “The Lord is
not slack concerning His promise, but is long-
suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance.”
Hereby He shows that He would be rather
pleased with the conversion than the destrus-
tion of men.—S. Charnocke, B..D.


THE ANTAGONISM OF THE WORLD TO THE CHURCH.
(Verses 6-16.)


In these versee we have a further
account of the hostility of the Sama
ritans to the Jews in their great work.
Homiletically we may view it as an
illustration of The antagonism of the
world to the Church. This antagonism
as it is here illustrated is—

L Persistent. The opposition to the
Jews was carried on during a consider-
able portion of the reign of Cyrus, the
whole of the reigus of Cambyses and of
the Pseudo-Smerdis; and it was con-
tinued by means of letters of accusation
in the reigns of Ahasuerus (ver. 6) and
of Artaxerxes (ver. 7). ‘Terrible ie the
persistence of the world in its hostility
to the Church of God. In different
forms it is continued age after age ; and
at present we can discover no signs of
its cessation. The spirit of worldliness


is aa hostile now to the spirit of decided
piety aa ever it was. “ Marvel not, my
brethren, if the world hate you.” “If
the world hate you,” said our Lord, “ ye
know that it hated Me before it hated
you,” &, (John xv, 18-21). (a).

IL Authoritative. This letter waa
written and sent to Artaxerxes by two
high officers of the Persian monarch.
It seems to have been devised by
Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and their
associates, and to have been written by
Rehum the Persian governor in Samaria,
and Shimshai the royal scribe in the
same province, The letter of accusa-
tion had all the weight which the
authority of these distinguished officers
could impart to it, The spirit of
gecular governments has often been
fmimical tc the spirit of true godliness,

63


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EERA.








end their action hostile to the principles
of truth and righteousness, ‘ The
kings of the earth set themselves, and
the rulers take counsel together, against
the Lord and against His” Church.

III. Combined. All the colonies of the
Samaritans concurred in the statements
and in the sending of this letter. “‘Rehum
the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe,
and the rest of their companions: the
Dinaites,” &c, (vers. 9, 10). “They
followed the cry, though ignorant of
the merits of the cause.” The popu-
larity of a movement is no proof of ite
truth or righteousness. Numbers are
not # reliable guarantee of the wisdom
and worthiness of a cause, Majorities
have very frequently been on the side
of falsehood, injustice, and folly. Mark
what a combination there was against
the Lord and Saviour. “ Against Thy
holy child Jesus, whom Thou hast
anointed, both Herod and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the
people of Israel, were gathered to-


gether.” There is combination in
hell.
‘Devil with devil damned firm concord
holds,”


TV. Unserupulous. This is very mani-
fest in the gross exaggerations of this
letter. Notice two or three of them.
“Jerusalem ... the rebellious and the
bad city.” A most uajust description
of its character. ‘‘ If this city be builded
and the walis set up, they will not pay
toll,” &c. (ver. 13). An unwarranted aud
slanderous assertion, for these Jews had
never given any cause why their loyaity
to the Persian monarchs should be sus-
pected. “If this city be builded, and
the walls thereof set wp, by this means
thou shalt have no portion on this side
the river.” An extremely absurd exag-
geration. One would suppose that the
authors of it must have known it to be
a gross misrepresentation, The chief
aasertions of the letter were unscrupulous
and base calumnies. The enemies of
the Church of God have never been
particular as to the weapons they should
use against it, Falsehoud and cruelty,
fines and imprisonment, bonds and
banishment, fire and sword, have all
been employed against it,

64


V. Plausible. This letter to Arta
xerxes reveals the craft and plausibility
of the Samaritans—

l. In their profession of loyalty to the
king.» “Thy servants” (ver. 11)...


.“ Now because we have maintenance


from the king’s palace, and it was not
meet for us to see the king’s dishonour,”
&, (ver. 14).

2. In their presentation of proof of
their assertions, They suggest “ that
search may be made in the book of the
records of thy fathers,” &e. (ver. 15).
The remarks of M. Henry on this verse
are admirable: ‘It cannot be denied
but that there was some colour givev
for this suggestion by the attempts of
Jehoiakim and Zedekiah to shake off the
yoke of the King of Babylou, which, if
they had kept close to their religion and
the Temple they were now rebuilding,
they would never have come under,
But it must be remembered—(1.) That
they were themselves, and their ances-
tora, sovereign princes, and their efforts
to recover their rights, if there had not
been in them the violation of an oath,
for aught I know, would have been
justifiable, and succeasful too, had they
taken the right method and made their
peace with God first. (2.) Though
these Jews, and their princes, had been
guilty of rebellion, yet it was unjust
therefore to fasten this as an indelible
brand upon this city, as if that must for
ever after go under the name of ‘the
rebellious and bad city.’ The Jews, in
their captivity, had given such specimens
of good behaviour as were sufficient, with
any reasonable men, to roll away that
one zeproach ; for they were instructed
(and we have reason to hope that they
observed their instructions), to ‘seek
the peace of the city where they were
captives, and pray to the Lord for it’
(Jer. xxix. 7). It was, therefore, very
unfair, though not uncommon, thus to
impute the iniquity of the fathers to
the children.” But it was craftily con-
ceived and executed; and, for a time,
it answered the purpose of its authors,
The Church now has to contend against,
not only the strength but also thesubtlety
of its foes; not only against the “ roar-
ing lion,” but also against the “ old


GOMILBTIO COMMENTARY: BZRA,


serpent.” “Satan himeelf is transformed
into an angel of light.” And the
blandishments of the world are more
perilous to the Church than its threats.
Christians need to be “‘ wise as serpents,”
watchful as trusty sentinels, and prayer-
ful as devoutest saints.

Yet greater is He that is in us and
for as, than all our foes, with all their
might, and malice, and cunning. “ The
Lord is on my side; I will not fear:
what can man do unto me %” (6).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) From the fiery days of the stakes of
Smithfield even until now, the world’s black
heart has hated the Church ; and the world’s
eruel hand and laughing lip have been for ever
against us. The host of the mighty are pur-
suing us, and are thirsty for our blood, and
anxious to cut us off from the earth. Such
is our position unto this hour, and such must
it be, until we are landed on the other side of


OHAP, Fv,


peas a a a eo


Jordan, and unti] our Maker someo to reign
on the earth.—C. 4. Spurgeon,


(6) As for the trouble thou puttest thyself
to concerning the cause and Church of Christ,
which thou mayest see at any time distressed
by the enemy, though God takes thy goodwill
to them (from which those thy fears arise)
very kindly, yet there is no need of toriment-
ing thyself with that which is sure never to
come to passa, The ark may shake, but it
cannot fall. Tho ship of the Church may be
toased, but it cannot sink, for Christ is in it,
and will swake time enough to prevent ite
wreck. There is, therefore, no cause for us,
when the storm beateth hardest upon it, to
disturb Him, aa onee the disciples did, with
the shrieks and outcriea of our unbeliel, as if
all were lost. Our faith is more in danger of
sinking at such a time than the cause and
Church of Christ are. They are both by the
promise set out of the reach of men and devils.
The Gospel is an “everlasting Gospel.”
‘* Heaven and earth shall pass away, but not
one iota of this shall perish.” ‘The Word of
the Lord endureth for ever,” and shall be alive
to walk over all its enemies’ graves, yea to see


the funeral of the whole world.—W. Gurnadl.


Goop Cavust For Great ZEAL.
(Verse 14.)


The facts of the case were these... .
Now let me take these words right out
of those black mouths, and put them
into my own and into yours, They
will suit us well if we turn them to the
great King of kings. We may truly
say, ‘‘ Now because we have maintenance
from the King’s palace,” &c. The text
will enable me to speak on three points,

L We acknowledge a very gracious
fact. ‘‘ We have maintenance from the
kinug’s palace.” Both the upper and the
nether springs from which we drink are
fed by the eternal bounty of the great
King. Hitherto we have been supplied
with food and raiment, Although we
do not drink of the water from the rock,
or find the manna lying at our tent door
every morning, yet the providence of
God produces for us quite the same
results, and we have been fed and satis-
fied ; and, at any rate, many of us, in
looking back, can say, “ My cup runneth
over. Surely goodness and mercy have
followed me all the days of my life,”
Hence, we have thus, even in things
temporal, been made to feel that we
have been maintained from the King’s


palace, But it has been in spiritual
things that our continual experience of
the King’s bounty has been most not-
able. We have a new life, and there-
fore we have new wants, and new
hunger, and a new thirst ; and God has
maintained us out of His own palace as
to this new life of ours. We have had
great hunger at times after heavenly
things, but He has ‘‘satisfied our mouth
with good thinys,” and our youth has
been “renewed like the eagle’s,” Some-
times we have been drawn aside from
our steadfastness, and we have wanted
mighty grace to set us on our feet
again, and to make us once more
“strong in the Lord and in the power
of His might;” and we have had it,
have we not? In looking back upon all
the way wherein the Lord our God has
led us, we can sing of the beginning of
it, we can sing of the middle of it, and
we believe we shall sing of the end of
it ; for all through we have been main-
tained out of the King’s palace, This
is matter of fact both as to things
temporal and things spiritual Be-
loved, it ig & great mercy that you
65


Oiler. IV.





and I have been maintained out of the
King’s palace as believers; because,
where else could we have been main-
tained? As to spiritual things, to whom
could we go but unto Him who has been
so good to ust
ministers are if we look to them! If
we look to their Master, then “the rain
also filleth the pools,” and we find that
there is supply in the preached word for
our consolation, And the books you
once read with so much comfort appear
to have lost their flavour, their aroma,
and their sweet savour, and, I may add,
even the Word of God itself, though it
is unchanged, appears to be changed
sometimes to you. But God, your God,
oh, how graciously has He still supplied
you! “All my springs are in Thee,”
my God; and had they been elsewhere
they long ago had failed.

We may remember that our mainte-
nance from the King’s palace has cost
His Majesty dear. He bas not fed us
for nothing. It cost Him His own dear
Son at the very first. We should not
have begun to live if He had spared His
Son and kept Him back from us; but
the choicest treasure in heaven He was
pleased to spend for our sakes that we
might live; and ever since then we
have been fed upon Jesus Christ
Himself. Let us bless and magnify
our bounteous God, whose infinite fay-
our has thus supplied our wants,
Think over the kind of maintenance you
have had from the King’s palace. We
have had a bountiful supply. As the
sun throws out his wealth of heat and
light, and does not measure it by the
consumption of men, but throws it
broadcast over all worlds, even so does
God flood the world with the sunlight
of His goodness, and His saints are
made to receive it in abundance. Our
receptive faculty may be small, but His
giving disposition is abundant. We
have had an unfailing portion. As there
has been much of it, so it has always
come to us in due season. ‘Times of
need have come, but the needed supply
has come too, The supply has ennobled
us. For, consider how great a thing it
is to be supported from a king’s paiace ;
but it eats greatest of all privileges





What empty wells -


HOMILETIiO COMMENTARY: BRA.





to be living upon the bounty of the
King of kings, “Such honour have
all the saints.” Even those that are
weakest and meanest have this high
honour—to be supplied by Royalty it-
self with all that they need. And there
is reason for good cheer tn this, that we
have such a soul-satisfying portion in
God. A soul that gets what God gives
him has quite as much as he can hold
and as much as he can want. He has
got a portion that might well excite
envy... . Let us rejoice, &ec,

IL Here is a duty recognised. ‘It
was not meet for us to see the king’s
dishonour.” The reasoning comes home
tous, If we are so favoured—we, who
are believers—with such a choice por-
tion, it is not meet for us to sit down
and see our God dishonoured. By every
sense of propriety we are bound not to
see God dtshonoured by ourselves. It is
well to begin at home, Art thou doing
anything that dishonours thy God, pro-
fessor—anything at home, anything in
thy daily avocation, anything in the
way of conducting thy business? Is
there anything in thy conversation, any-
thing in thy actions, anything in thy
reading, anything in thy writing, any-
thing in thy speaking, that dishonours
God? Seeing that thou art fed from
the King’s table, I beseech thee let it
not be said that the King got damage
from thee. Perhaps that dishonour may
come from those who dwell under our
roof, and live in our own house, I
charge you that are parents and masters
to see to this, Do not tolerate anything
in those over whom you have control
that would bring dishonour to God.
We cannot impart to our children new
hearts, but we can see to it that there
shall be nothing within our gates that is
derogatory to the religion of Jesus Christ.

Let the same holy jealousy animate
us among those with whom we have in-
Jluence—as, for instance, amongst those
who wish to be united with us in Church
fellowship. It is the duty of every
Church to try, as far as it can, to guard
the honour and dignity of King Jesus
against unworthy persons, who would
intrude themselves into the congregation
of the saints, of those who are called


STOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RZRA.


OH AP. TY,
1 ’





and chosen, and faithful. To rece%ve
into our membership persons of unhal-
lowed life, unchaste, unrighteous—of
licentious life and lax doctrine, such as
know not the truth as it is in Jesus—
would be to betray the trust with which
Christ has invested us.

Under what sacred obligations do we
stand to maintain the statutes and testi
montes of the Lord/ And, oh, how the
King is dishonoured by the mutilation
and misrepresentation of His Word!
Therefore we are always bound to bear
our protest against falee doctrine. Those
who have their maintenance from the
King’s palace ought not to allow the
Lord to be dishonoured by a neglect of
His ordinances. The Lord Jesus has
given you only two symbolic ordinances.
Take care that you use them well.
Again, let us tale care that He be not
dishonoured by a general decline of His
Church. When churches go to sleep—
when the work of God is done deceit-
fully—for to do it formally is to do it
deceitfully ; when there is no life in the
prayer-meeting, when there are no holy
enterprises afloat for the spread of the
Redeemer’s kingdom, then the world
says, “That is your Church! What a
sleepy set these saints are!” Qh! let
not the King be thus dishonoured.
And, oh, how can we tolerate it that so
many should dishonour Christ by reject-
ing His Gospel/ We cannot prevent
their doing so, but we can weep for
them ; we can pray for them, we can
plead for them, we can make it uncom-
fortable for them to refect that believers
are loving them, and yet they are not
loving the Saviour. Privileged as you
ara, you ought to love your Master, so
that the slightest word against Him
should provoke your spirit to holy
jealousy.

IL A course of action pursued.
“Therefore have we sent and certified
the king.” How shall we do that?


Doubtless we act as it well becomes us,
when we go and tell the Lord all aboug
it? “Certified the King !”—-but does
He not know} Are not all things open
to Him from whom no secrets are hid ¢
Ah, yes; but when Hezekiah received
Rabshakeh’s blasphemous letter he took
it and spread it before the Lord. It is
a holy exercise of the saints to report
to the Lord the sins and the sorrows
they observe among the people—the
griefs they feel, and the grievances they
complain of—to spread before Him the
blasphemies they have heard, and appeal
to Him concerning the menaces with
which they are threatened, After those
people had certified the king, they took
care to plead with him. Plead with
God! That praying is poor shift that is
not made up of pleading. And when
you have done it, do not go away end
make your prayers into a lie by contrary
actions, or by refraining from any action
at all. He that prays hard must work
hard ; forno man prays sincerely who is
not prepared to use every effort to ob-
tain that which he asks of God. We
must put our shoulder to the wheel
while we pray for strength to put if in
motion. A!l success depends upon God ;
yet He uses instruments, and He will
not use instruments that are useless and
unfitted to the work. ‘Therefore let us
be up and be stirring, for if we are
maintained from the King’s palace, it is
not meet that we see the King’s dis-
honour, but it is due to Him that we
should seek His glory. Alas! there are
some here that have never eaten the
King’s bread, and will be banished frox
the King’s presence if they die asthey are,
But, oh remember, the King is always
ready to receive His rebel subjects, and
He is a God ready to pardon, “ Kiss the
Son lest He be angry, and ye perish
from the way when His wrath is kindled
but a little.” ‘ Blessed are all they that
put their trust in Him.” —C. 2. Spurgeon.


OBAP. IY.


el ee nm





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.





Tux Success or THE SusTLE ScHEME OF THE SAMARITANS, OR THE
TEMPORARY TRIUMPH OF THE WICKED.


(Verses 17-23.)


LZ. Examine the letter of the king. ©


“Then sent the king an answer unto
Rehum,” &c. (vers. 17-22). This letter
auggests—

1. hat the subtlety of the wicked
frequently obtains a temporary triwmph
over the good, We have already noticed
that the letter of the Samaritans to the
king was very plausible. And that it
completely succeeded is clear from the
reply of the king to it. (1.) The search
in the archives of the nation which they
recommended (ver. 15) was made. “TI
commanded, and search hath been made”
(ver. 19). (2.) The result which they
predicted (ver. 15) followed the search.
“And it is found that this city of old
time hath made insurrection against
kings, and that rebellion and sedition
have been made therein.” The Jews
had formerly rebelled against foreign
powers by whom they had been sub-
jected. Hezekiah “rebelled againat the
king of Assyria” (2 Kings xviii. 7).
Jehoiakim rebelled against the king of
Babylon (2 Kings xxiv, 1), Zedekiah
also “rebelled against the king of Baby-
lon” (2 Kings xxiv. 20). (3.) The
warnings which they gave (vers. 13, 16)
were heeded. As a result of the exami-
nation of the records of the kingdom,
the king discovered that “there had
been mighty kings over Jerusalem,
which had ruled over all countries be-
yond the river; and toll, tribute, and
custom had been paid unto them ;” and
#0 the warnings of the Samaritans seemed
to him reasonable and timely, and he
acted upon them, inquiring, ‘ Why
should damage grow to the hurt of the
kings?” (4.) The end which they
aimed at was attained. Their object
was to obtain authority to put a stop to
the rebuilding of Jerusalem. And the
king writes, ‘‘Give ye now command-
ment to cause these men to cease, and
that this city be not builded, until
another commandment be given from
me, Take heed now that ye fail not to
do a The misrepresentations of the

8


Samaritans had sufficient truth in them
to completely mislead Artaxerxes the
king and to accomplish their evil design.
“Falsehood,” says Colton, ‘is never se
successful as when she baits her hook
with truth ; and no opinions so fatally
mislead us as those that are not wholly
wrong, as no watches so effectually de-
ceive the wearers as those that are seme-
times right.”


“ A Hie which is half a truth
Is ever the worst of lies.”


2. That ome generation frequently
suffers through the sins of another and an
earlier one. The Jews of this time were
suspected of disloyalty, and were pre-
vented from carrying on their great
work because some of their ancestora
had rebelled against the doniination of
foreign powers. They smarted for the
sins of Jehoiakim and Zedekiah. The
children of the spendthrift, the drunkard,
and the impure man generally have to
bear the iniquities of their fathers,
(Comp. Exod. xx. 5.) This stern fact
should prove a restraint from sin. (a).

2. That the cause of God is frequently
reproached and hindered by the evil con-
duct of some of tts adherents, The re-
bellions of Jehoiakim and Zedekiah
were now made use of to asperse the
Jews and to stop the work of God. “A
few instances of this kind,” as Scott ob-
serves, “ standing on record, whilst the
blameless lives and patient sufferings of
thousands are unnoticed and forgotten,
serve through revolving ages as a pre-
text, by which malignant enmity mis-
leads worldly policy. All who love the
Gospel should therefore walk circum-
spectly, avoiding all appearance of evil,
especially in this particular, lest the
Church of God and posterity should
suffer through their misconduct ; for the
whole body will be condemned without
hearing, if a few individuals act impro-
perly.” (6).

IL Notice the action of the Sama
ritans. ‘‘ Now when the copy of king


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA,





Artaxerxes’ letter was read,” &e, Their
actlon was—

1. Prompt, They allowed no delay
whatever, but eagerly carried out the
royal mandate. “They went up in
haste to Jerusalem,” &e.

2. Personal, ‘They did not depute
others to put a stop to the work of the
Jews: their interest was too deep and
gealous for that, They themselves “ went
up in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews.”

3. Powerful. They “made them to
cease by force and power.” They com-
pelled the Jews by a display of force,
which they probably took with them, to
desist from building the city. Thus the
plotters prevailed; the enemies were
triumphant, and the progress of the good
work was arrested, The tact and energy
and zeal of the Samaritans were worthy
of a good cause, and they were rewarded
with success,

LEARN :

1. That the temporary triumph of a
cause or a party ts not @ proof of its
righteousness. When Jesus Christ was
crucified, dead and buried, the enemies
of truth and light and God appeared to
be completely victorious. (c).

2. That we are not competent to judge
the relation of present events to the pur-
poses and providence of the great God.
These require time for their development,
&c. ‘“‘One day is with the Lord as a
thousand years, and a thousand years as
one day.”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) This is a truth evident by universal ex-

rience. It is seen every day, in every part
of the world. If Mr. Paine indulge in in-
temperance, and leave children behind him,
they may feel the consequences of his mis-
conduet when he is in the grave. The sins of
the fathers may thus be visited upon the
children to the third and fourth generation,
It would, however, be their affliction only, and
not their punishment, Yet such visitations
are wisely ordered us a motive to sobriety, —
Andrew Fuller.

The child generally inherits the natural con.
gtitution, the mental peculiarities, and some-
tizaes even the moral charaeter of his parent,


be OMAP, Ty,

t

His secular condition, teo, rich or poor, ia
frequently determined by his parents, Some
inherit a princcly fortune, and some a crushing
penury, from their ancestors, And their social
status, too, is often ruled by the position and
conduct of those of whom they were born,
Children participate in the shame or the glory
connected with the memory of their parenta.
The brilliant reflection of an illustrious gire
seems to lead his offspring to social honour,
and to shed a radiance on his name. On the
other hand, the infamy which parents by theft,
treason, or murder, have gained for them.
selves, transmits its odious influence down to
their children, depreciating their own personal
worth, and degrading them in the estimation
of their contemporaries.—David Thomas, D.D.


(6) Was there ever a club in all the world
without disreputable persons in it? Was there
ever any association of men that micht not be
condemned, if the fool’s rule was followed of
condemning the wheat because of the chaff?
When with all our might and power we purge
ourselyes of deceivers as soon as we detect
them, what more can we dof? If our rule and
practice is to separate them wholly ag soon aa
we unmask them, what more can virtue itaelf
desire? I ask any man, however munch he may
hate Christianity, what more can the Church
do than watch her members with all diligence
and excommunicate the wicked when dis-
covered? It is a foul piece of meanness on
the part of the world that they shoulii allege
the faults of a few false professors against the
whole Chureh ; it is a piece of miserable mean-
ness of which the world oucht to he ashamed,
Nevertheless, soit is. ‘‘Ha! hal” they say,
**So would we have it! so would we have it!”
The daughter of Philistia rejoices, and tke
uncircumcised triumphs when Jesus is betrayed
by His friend, and sold by His traitorous dis-
ciple, O deceitful professor, will not the Lodr
be avenged upon you for this! Is it nothing
to make Jesus’ name the drunkard’s song?
Nothing to make the enemy blaspheme? O
hardened man, tremble, for this shall not go
unpunished.—0. H. Spurgeon.


(c) If ever failure seemed to rest on a noble
life, it was when the Son of Man, deserted by
His friends, heard the cry which proclaimed
that the Pharisees had successfully drawn the
net round their Divine Victim. Yet from that
very hour of defeat and death there went forth
the world’s life—from that very moment of
apparent failure there proceeded forth into the
ages the apirit of the conquering Cross, Surely
if the Cross says anything, it says that appa-
rent defeat is real victory, and that there ia a
heaven for those who have nobly and truly
failed on earth.—F, W. Robertson, M.A.


omar, V. ~  HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZR&.








CHAPTER V.


Crirtcan avy Expianatory Norrs.] i. The work resumed through the preaching of Haggai
und Zechariah, the prophets (vers. 1,2). ii. The workers interrogated by the Persian autho-
rities west of the Euphrates (vers. 3-5). iii. The letter of the Persian authorities to Darius
the king concerning the work (vers. 6-17).

Ver. 1. Then] shows the close connection of this with the last verse of the previous chapter,
Zechariah, the son of Iddo} He was really the son of Berechiah, and the grandson of Iddo (Zech.
i. 1). It is probable, as Dean Perowne suggests, ‘‘that Berechiah had died early, and that
there was now no intervening link between the grandfather and the grandson. The son, in
giving his pedigree, does not omit his father’s name; the historian passes it over, as of one
who was but little known, or already forgotten.” In the name of the God of Israel, even unto
them] Rather, ‘‘ which was upon them,” #.e. the name of God was called upon them, indicating
that they belonged to Him (comp. Isa. iv. 13 Jer. xv. 16).

Ver. 2. Then rese up Zerubbabel . . . and Jeshua] &c. The exhortations of Haggai were
addressed chiefly to these two leaders (Hag. i. 1, ii. 2, 4), and speedily they responded to them.
‘In the sixth month, in the first day of the month,” the prophet delivered his first message
to them ; and ‘‘in the four and twentieth day of the sixth month,” the ‘‘ work in the house
of the Lord of hosts, their God,” was resumed by them and the people (Hag. i. I, 14, 15).
Beehariah did not enter upon his mission until the eighth month, which was two months later
than Haggai. And with them the prophets of God] Haggai and Zechariah. Helping them]
by exhortation, encouragement, &c,

Ver. 3. Tatnai, governor on this side the river] Tatnai was governor ( peckah) of the entire
country west of the Euphrates, while Zerubbabel was governor (pechah) of Judah only, and
was therefore subordinate to Tatnai, Shethar-bozmai] was probably the royal seribe or secre-
tary. Who hath commanded] &c. In investigating this matter the Persian magistrates only
did their duty.

Ver. 4. Then said we untae them] &c. It is almost certain that the text here has been
corrupted in some way, and that the genuine reading is, ‘‘ Then said they unto them,” &c. The
question was put by the Persian officers to the Jews, as appears from vers. 9, 10.

Ver, 5, And then they returned answer by letter] &c. Schultz: ‘‘‘ And they then brought
back a letter,’ &c. The letter to be brought back was certainly to come from Darius.” Keil:
‘*« And they should then receive a letter,’ &. They (the royal officials) then receive a letter,
é.e. obtain a decision.”

Ver. 6. The Aphorsachites] are probably the same as ‘‘the Apharsathchites” (chap. iv. 9).
See notes on that verse.

Ver. 7. They sent a letter] or a report, a message, All peace] te. ‘peace in all things, in
avery respect.”

Ver, 8. With great stones] Margin: ‘*Chald., ‘stones of rolling.’ So also Fuerst, who
explains it as denoting ‘‘heaviness, weight. Ezra v. 8, vi. 4, stone of heaviness, i.e. a heavy,
large stone, hewn.” And timber is laid in the walls] Rawlinson interprets this as the employ-
ment of timber as the material of the party walls, Schultz, as indicating ‘the inlaying of the
walls with woodwork artistically finished.” Keil: ‘*The placing of wood in the walls refers to
building beams into the wall for floorizg; for the building was not go far advanced as to make
it possible that this should be said of sovering the walls with wainscoting.”

Ver, 11. We are the servants] &, The elders of the Jews when asked for their names
replied by stating their relationship to “the God of heaven and earth,” which implied their
obligation to obey Him. Which a great king of Israel builded and set up] Or, ‘‘and a great
king of Israel built and completed it.”

Ver, 12, But after that our fathers] &. Keil: ‘For this reason, because our fathers,” &¢,
Similarly Schultz: ‘On this account, because our fathers,” &c. The significance of this
verse he expresses thus: ‘‘It is true the Temple has been destroyed, but this does not show
any weakness in their God, but rather His holiness.” Nebuchadnezzar could not have
destroyed their Temple, and carried them away into captivity, if God had not firat withdrawn
His protection from them because of their sins,

Ver. 15. Take these vessels] &. ‘The three unconnected imperatives, ‘take, go forth, lay
down,’ comprehend the three acts, to a certain extent, in one, thus expressing likewise the zeal
of Cyrus, and the zeal that Sheshbazzar was expected to exhibit.’—Schultz, Let the house of
God be builded in his place] ¢.¢, in its former sacred place,

Ver. 16, And since that time even until now hath it been in building] These words were
probably not a part of the answer of the elders of the Jews to Tatnai, but simply his own
statement to the king, which he thought was correct, ‘It was entirely in the interest of the
Jews to be silent Tespecting the fact that Cyrus had allowed an interruption to take place ;”
and okey and his associates were probably quite ignorant of the fact that the work had been
suspended,

tee ae oe king’s era house is Scents in chap. vi. 1, ‘the house of the rolls,
where the treasures were laid up in Babylon. mportant dosuz i
treasure house attached to the eral peidimal As Saat cont aie

70


FHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: RERA.


eee. vO eee
t


Tae Great Worx Resumen,
(Verses 1 and 2.)


The best commentary on these verses
is the first chapter of Haggai. In the
light of that chapter we propose to in-
terpret them, For fourteen years the
rebuilding of the Temple was stayed.
We have now to consider the resump-
tion of the work.

Notice :

L The inciters tothe work. “Then
the prophets, Haggai the prophet and
Zechariah the son of Iddo, prophesied
unto the Jews,” &c.

l. Want of interest im the work is
tmplted. The Jews were backward at
making a new effort to erect the sacred
edifice, and needed stirring up to their
duty in the matter. They had been
building their own houses, attending to
their own affairs, and had become in-
different as to the rebuilding of the
house of God. They said, ‘‘The time
ia not come, the time that the Lord’s
house should be built” (Hag. i. 2). Had
they been zealous in this affair, they
would have renewed their efforts when
Darius came to the throne. But the
spirit of worldliness possessed them,
and they deferred this sacred duty
until they were sharply summoned to
it.

2. Obligation to perform the work ts
implied, The prophets summoned them
to the work “in the name of the God
of Israel which was upon them,” This
implies His authority over them, and their
obligation to render loyal obedience to
Him. In His name Haggai commanded
them to resume this work. ‘ Thus
saith the Lord of hosts;... Go up
to the mountain and bring wood, and
build the house,” &c, (Hag. i. 7, 8).
The Jews did not deny the obligation.
Fourteen years previous they had claimed
it as their exclusive privilege. At that
time they were forcibly prevented from
fulfilling it; and afterwards, in process
of time, they grew indifferent as to its
fulfilment, and while acknowledging the
cbligation, they postponed its discharge.
By neglecting the performance of duty
our sense of its sacredness and im-


perativeness will almost certainly be
diminished.

3, Exhortations to resume the work
were given. ‘The prophets Haggai
and Zechariah prophesied unto the
Jews,” &, The nature of their pro-
phesying we can ascertain by reference
to the books which bear their namea
In the address of Haggai (Hag. i. 1-11,
13), which led to the resumption of the
work, we find—(1.) Earnest remon-
strance because of their neglect (ver. 4).
(2.) Solemn and repeated summons to
reflection, Consider your ways” (vers.
5, 7). (3.) Interpretation of the Divine
dealings with them, showing that God
had withheld His blessing because of
their neglect (vers. 6, 9-11). (4.)
Command to build the Temple (ver. 8).
(5.) Encouragement to them to enter
upon the work (vers. 83,13). Thus the
prophet, under the direction of the Most
High, endeavoured to arouse them from
their sloth, and incite them to interes$
and effort in the good and great work.

U1. The leadersin the work, “ Then
rose up Zerubbabel the son of Sheultiel,
and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and be-
gan to build,” &.

1. They resumed the work readily, In
less than a mouth after the summons of
Haggai they began the work. On the
first day of the sixth month the first pro-
phetic message was delivered to them,
and on the twenty-fourth day of the
same month actual operations were re
sumed at the Temple. The readiness of
their response is commendable. Delay
in the performance of duty is perilous.
Promptitude in ite discharge is both
binding and blessed. (a).

2. They led the work appropriately.
It was becoming that Zerubbabel the
chief prince, the first man in the state,
and Jozadak the chief priest, the first
man in the Church, should take the lead
in such a work. “ Those that are in
places of dignity and power,” as M.
Henry observes, “ ought with their dig-
nity to put honour upon, and with thei
power to put life into every oe work ;


CHAP, ¥.


thus it becomes those that precede, and
those that preside, with an exemplary
care and zeal to fulfil all righteousness
and to go before in a good work.”

3. They led the work tinfluentially.
‘© All the remnant of the people” fol-
lowed their example, ‘and came and
did work in the house of the Lord of
hosts, their God.” The force of ex-
ample is proverbially great; but it is
especially influential in the case of those
who hold the position of leaders amongst
men. The example of those who occupy
high stations is—(1.) Most conspicuous.
It is visible with great clearness and to
great numbers. (2.) Most attractive. To
the majority of mankind the example of
persons in eminent positions, from the
mere fact that they occupy such posi-
tions, has an influence which is denied
to others however wise and worthy they
may be, (b). Great is the responsibility
of those who are called to the high
places of society. ‘‘ For unto whomso-
ever much is given, of him shall be much
required,” &c. (Luke xii, 48).

UL. The helpersin the work. “ And
with them were the prophets of God
helping them.” The nature of the
assistance which the prophets rendered
in the work may be gathered from the
prophecies of Haggai which were de-
livered after the work was resumed
(Hag. ii), They assisted by their—

1. Hahortations to vigorous prosecu-
tion of the work, “ Be strong, O Zerub-
babel, saith the Lord,” dsc. (ver. 4).

2. Assurances of the presence of God
with them, “ For I am with you, saith
the Lord of hosts: according to the
word that I covenanted with you,” &.
(vers. 4,5). This means more than His
mere presence; for He is everywhere
’ present, “Whither shall I flee from
Thy presence} If I ascend up into
heaven, Thou art there,” &c. (Pa.
exxxix, 7-10). It is an assurance of
His gracious and helpful presence—
His presence as their covenant (tod.
With the obedient God is ever present
for their protection, encouragement, as-
Bistance, &c.

3. Promises of future blessings from
God to them. “The desire of all ma-
tions shall come, and I will fill this

72





_ AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BERS.


ed


house with glory, saith the Lord of
hosts,” &c, (vers. 7-9). What a mighty
inspiration there must have been in
promises of such blessings as these,
uttered by the prophet of God! He


who thus encourages the hearts of


workers renders them most valuable
help in their work. Thus the earnest
thinker, and the firm believer in God,
may help those who are engaged in
more active labours in building the
spiritual temple of our Lord.

IV. The great First Cause of the
work, it was God who inspired and
sent forth the prophets, and who excited
the spirit of the Jewish leaders and
people to resume the work, “ The
Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerub-
babel, the son of Shealtiel, governor of
Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the
son of Josedech, the high priest, and the
spirit of all the remnant of the people;
and they came and did work in the
house of the Lord of hosts, their God.”
“ Allholy desires, all good counsels, and
all just werks do proceed” from Him.
He is the great Master-Builder of His
own Church. ‘TI will build My Church,”
said our Lord to Peter, All the in-
spiration and wisdom, the patience and
power of the under-builders, come from


Him. And to Him be all the praise.
(c).
LEARN :—


l. The insidious nature of the sin of
worldliness, See how gradually and
stealthily it came upon the Jews, (d@).

2. The value of farthful ministers,
They both arouse men to duty, and
assist them to perforin it.

3. The solemn obligation of men tn
eminent stations, Let them, like Zerub-
babel and Jeshua, be forward in every
good work.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Pleasant is it to entertain the picture of
ourselves in some future scene, planning wisely,
feeling nobly, and executing with the holy
triumph of the will; but ’tis a different thing

not in the green avennes of the future, but
in the hot dust of the present moment—not
in the dramatic positions of the fancy, but in
the plain prosaic now—to #o the duty that
waits and wants us, and pout forth an instant
and reverential hand to the noonday or even-

task.—James Martineau,


ZOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA,


(6) As we give them (kings) all advantages
ef honour, go do we soothe and authorise all
their vices and defects, not only by approba-
tion, but by imitation also. Every one of
Alexander's followers curried their heads on
one side, as he did, and the flatterers of Diony-
aius ran against one another in his presence,
stumbledat, and overturned whatever wasunder
foot, to show that they were as purblind as
be. Natural imperfection has sometimes also
served to recommend a man to favour. I have
seen deafness affected ; and because the master
hated his wife, Plutarch hag seen his courtiers
repudiate theirs, whom they loved; and, which
ig yet more, uncleanness and all manner of
dissoluteness has been in fashion ; as also dis-
loyalty, blasphemies, cruelty, heresy, super-
stition, irreligion effeminacy, and worse, if worse
there be. And by an example yet more dan-
gerous than that of Mithridates’ flatterers, who,
by how much their master pretended to the
honoar of a good physician, came to him to
have inciasion and sauteries made in their
limbs; for these others suffered the soul, a more
delicate and noble part, to be cauterised. But
to end where I began: the Emperor Adrian,
disputing with the philosopher Favorinus
about the interpretation of some word, Fa-
yorinus soon yielded him the victery; for
which his friends rebuking him, ‘‘ You talk
simply,” said he, ‘*would you not have him
wiser than I, who commands thirty legions }”
—HMontaigne.


(c) The scribe ia more properly said to write
than the pen, and he that maketh and keepeth
the clock is more properly said to make it ge
and strike than the wheels and poises that
hang upon it, and every workman to effect
his work rather than the tools which he uses
as his instrumenta. So the Lord, who is the
ehief Agent and Mover in all actions, may
more fitly be said to bring to pass all things
which are done in the earth than any sub-
ordinate causes, as meat to nourish us, clothes
to keep us warm, the sun to lighten us, friends
to provide for us, &c., seeing they are but His
instruments.—Downame.


CHAP. ¥,








a ca =


Day and night the tides are rising along owt
shores, filling bay and estuary, silently for the
most part, yet surely, The power that drawa
them resides afar off in the heavenly bodies,
and is not seen or noticed, but only inferred,
All the goodness of men, their generous im-
pulses, their loves and faiths and ingpirationa
of purity, their zeal and enthusiasm in self.
denial and devyotion—that great moving tide
of goodness which is moving in upon the hu-
man heart—is derived from God, who, afar off,
silent as the moon in summer nights, is draw-
ing all men unto Him.—A. W. Beecher.


(@) Nearly all can recall that favourite fiction
of their childhood—the voyage of Sinbad the
Sailor into the Indian Sea, They will remem-
ber that magneticrock thatrose from the surface
of the placid waters. Silently Sinbad’s vessei
was attracted towards it ; silently the bolts were
drawn out of the ship’s side, one by one,
through the subtle attraction of that magnetic
rock. And when the fated vessel drew so near
that every bolt and clamp were unloosed, the
whole structure of bulwark, masts, and epare
tumbled into ruin on the ger, and the sleeping
sailors awoke to their drowning agonies, Soa
stands the magnetic rock of worldliness athwart
the Christian’s path, Its attraction is subtle,
silent, slow ; but fearfully powerful on every
soul that floata within its range. Under ita
enchanting spell, bolt after bolt of good re-
solution, clamp after clamp of Christian ob-
ligation, are steadily drawn out. What mattere
it how long, or how fair has been the man
profession of religion, or how flauntingly the
flag of his orthodoxy floats from the mast
head? Let audden temptation smite the un-
bolted professor, and in an huar he is a wreck,
He eannot hold together in a tempest of trial,
he cannot go out on any cruise of Christian
service, because he is no longe? held togther
by a Divine princizle within, It haa been
silently drawn out of him by that mighty
loadstone of attraction—a sinful, godless
self-pampering, Christ rejecting world.—7, I
Cuyler, D.D,


Tae Great Work INVESTIGATED AND CONTINUED.
(Verses 3-5.)


» The sacred work investigated by
the secular authorities. ‘“ At the same
time came to them Tatnai, governor on
this side the river, and Shethar-boznai,
and their companions, and said thus
unto them,” d&c. (vers, 3, 4).

Notice:

1. Vhe nature of the investigation,
Two points are inquired into ae
The authority of the builders. ‘ Who
hath commanded you to build this house,
end to make up this wall+” (2) The


names of the buildera. “ Then said thay
unto them after this manner, What are
the names of the men that make this
building *”

2. The spirit of the investigation. It
is probable that some of the Samaritan
enemies of the Jews, prompted by bitter
and hostile feelings, communicated with
Tatnai and instigated this inquisition
But as regards the inquisition itself there
is nothing to complain of ; for —~(1.)
Tatnai had the authority to make the

73


mar, V,





Investigation. He was “ governor on
this side the iiver;” all the country
west of the Euphrates was subject unto
him. The governorship of Zerubbabel,
being of Judea only, was subordinate
to that of Tatnai, who therefore acted
within the limits of his power in making
this inquisition, (2.) Tatnai exercised
his authority in a commendable manner.
He made no vexatious or impertinent
inquiries. And he presented an impar-
tial and honest report to Darius the
king. Very different was the course
which he and his associates pursued
from that of Rehum and his associates
(chap. iv.). There is nothing in the
conduct of the present Persian officials
which bears any resemblance to the un-
scrupulous and bitter hostility which
their predecessors displayed to the Jews.

The eye of the world is upon the work
of the Church to-day. And while there
are some who would wilfully misrepre-
sent and maliciously oppose that work,
there are others who regard it fairly, and
speak of it with candour and truthful-
ness. Let the members of the Church
see to it that it shall be apparent to all
unprejudiced persons that their work
tends to promote truth and righteous-
ness, purity and peace, piety and patrio-
tism, (a).

TI. The sacred work carried on
through the Divine blessing. “ But
the eye of their God was upon the elders
of the Jews, that they could not cause


them to cease,” dc, These words
suggest—


1. The Divine interest in the work,
“The eye of their God was upon the
elders of the Jews” is an expression
denoting His deep concern in the pro-
gress of their undertaking. As we atten-
tively observe that in which we are
greatly interested, so God regards His
Church and the enterprises in which it
is engaged.

2. The Divine oversight of the work.
His eye ever upon the Jewish leaders
suggests the accuracy and thorougnness
of His knowledge of them and of their
great business. In His providence the
great God watches over the interesta and
efforts of His people. (6).

3, The Divine inspiration of the workers,

74,


_BROMILETIC COMMENTARY ; EZRA,


The consciousness that “ the eye of thels
God was upon” them encouraged the
Jews, made even coward spirits brave,
and nerved even the feeblest arm for
vigorous toil, and so raised them above


fear, and enabled them to carry on the


work, And to-day to godly souls there is
unlimited inspiration in the consciousness
that the Divine Eye is upon them. (c).

4. The Divine protection of the workers.
“The eye of their God upon” them
clearly involved this. The figure implies
not only interest and knowledge and
oversight, but also defence. His eye
was upon them not only to inspire but
also to shield them; not only to mark
their perils, but also to preserve them
from injury, And in this way the work
was carried on. It suffered no interrup-
tion by reason of the inquisition of the
Persian officials, and the reference of the
cease to Darius. (d).

If we are engaged in the work of the
Lord, we may confidently look to Him
for protection. ‘The path of duty is the
path of safety. And the consciousness
of the eye of our God upon us should
make us patient in suffering, calm in
peril, earnest in work, and courageous
in conflict.


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) If the Church will go forth to win new
victories, she needs only to take fearlessly u
the supremacy with which her God has ane
her, namely, the reconciling life of her in-
dwelling Lord. Shutting up all internal ques-
tions that make her militant against herself,
she is to move on in her own absolute, sublime
majesty, militant only against every form of
sin, to enthrone the kingdom of God, She
must cease to beg favours of worldly policy.
She must stop her infamous coquetry with
Mammon. She must not be bowing on Sun-
days to sectarian prejudice, nor on week-days
to social respectability, nor ever whisper guilty
flatteries to popular sins, nor wait till great
public vices are manifestly dying out of them.
selvea, and feeble with approaching dissolution,
before she dares strike at them. The staunch,
uncompromising sincerity of old Puritans and
confessors moust be in her muscles, An awful
real must gird up her loins, Purity, freedom,
equity, are to be more to her than costly
churches; the prayers of saintly men, and
women and children too, her patronage; and
her daily speech, the benediction of charity.—
FP, D, Huntington, DD.


(®) Tho infinite knowledge of God fits Hits


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: LZ 4


a ae


to be a special object of trust. How could we
depend upon Him, if He were ignorant of our
state? His compassions to pity us, His readi-
ness to relieve us, His power to protect and
assist us, would be insignificant; without His
omniscience to inform His goodness and
direct the arm of His power. This perfection
is, as it were, God’s office of intelligence; as
you go to your memorandum-book to know
what you are to do, so doth God to His omni-
science. This perfection is God’s eye, to ac-
quaint Him with the necessities of His Church,
and directs all His other attributes in their
exercise for and about His people. You may
depend upon His mercy that hath promised,
and upon His truth to perform; upon His
sufficiency to supply you, and His goodness to
relieve you, and His righteousness to reward
you; because He hath an infinite understand.
ing to know you and your wants, you and
your services. And without this knowledge
of His, no comfort could be drawn from any
other perfection; none of them could be a
gure nail to hang our hopes and confidence
upon. This is that the Church alway cele-
braied (Ps. cv. 8): ‘‘He hath remembered
His covenant for ever, the word which He com-
manded to a thousand generations ; ” and (ver.
42), “He remembered His holy promise;”
“ And He remembered for them His covenant”
(Pa. evi. 45). He remembers and understands
His covenant, therefore His promise to per-
form it, and therefore our wanta to supply
them.—S. Charnocke, B.D.


{c) Were the Olympian Agonistes inspired
by the admiring gaze of applauding thousands?
Did the thunders of acclamation which awoke
the echoes of Olympus excite the Athietss to
higher energies! How, then, shall we be
affected who believe that we are ever under
the watchful eye of the dread Supreme! The











Kina locks on those who are running the
heavenly raceo—who are wrestling with spiri-
tual antagoniatea—and who are handing “a
cup of cold water” to some drooping and
thirsty disciple! Ag the King’s eye brightens
with approbation, les ua resolve to climb the
hivhest steeps of duty and to walk on the lof-
tiest mountains of holy enterprise !—Joseph
Parker, D.D.


(d) The tribulation and poverty of His
Church is not unknown to Him (Rev. ii. 8, 9):
‘*T know thy works and tribulation,” &c. He
knows their works, and what tribulation they
meet with for Him ; He sees their extremities
when they are toiling against the wind and
tide of the world (Mark vi. 48); yea, the natural
exigencies of the multitude are not neglected
by Him ; He discerns to take care of them.
Our Saviour considered the three days’ fasting
of His followers, and miraculously provides a
dish for them in the wilderness. No good
man is ever out of God’s mind, and therefore
never out of His compassionate care: His eye
pierceth into their dungeons, and pities their
miseries. Joseph may forget his brethren, and
the disciples not know Christ when He walks
upon the midnight waves and turbalent sea;
but a lions’ den cannot obscure a Daniel from
His sight, nor the depths of the whale’s belly
bury Jonah from the Divine understanding:
He discerns Peter in his chains, and Stephen
under the stones of martyrdom; He knows
Lazarus under his tattered rags, and Abel
wallowing in his blood; Higa eye and know-
ledge goes along with His people, when they
are translated into foreign countries, and sold
for slaves into the islands of the Grecians, for
He ‘‘will raise them out of the place” (Joel
iii. 6, 7). He would defeat the hopes of the
persecutors, and applaud the patience of His
people,—8. Charnocke, B.D,


Tae Lerrer to THE Kina Concernina THe Work.
(Verses 6-17.)


This letter has three chief divisions,
each of which requires brief notice.

I. The inquisition of the Persian
authorities. ‘The copy of the letter
that Tatnai, governor on this side the
river,” é&c. (vers, 6-10). Here is a
report of—

1. The observations which they made
(1.) That the work was being well done,
“Be it known unto the king, that we
went into the province of Judea, to the
house of the great God, which is builded
with great stones, and timber is laid in
the walls.” This seems to show that
the work was being done in a substan-
tial and excellent manner. (2.) That
the work was being rapidly done, “And


this work goeth fast on, and prospereth in
their hands.” Inspired by the exhorta-
tions of Haggai the prophet, and en-
couraged by the example of Zerubbabe}
the prince, and Jeshua the chief priest,
the people worked zealously and the
edifice was progressing quickly.

2. The inquiries which they proposed,
(1.) As to the authority of the builders,
“Then asked we those elders, and said
unto them thus, Who commanded you
to build this house, and to make up these
walls?” (comp, ver, 3). (2.) As to the
names of the builders, “ We asked their
names also, to certify thee, that we might
write the names of the men that were
the chief of them” (comp. as

al


ED, F


‘ BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.








I. The repiy of the Jewish leaders.
“ And thus they returned us answer, say-
ing,” de. (vers, 11-16). This answer is
remarkable both for its prudexce and
for its piety. It seems to us to present
the following aspects of the work. That
it was—

1. Not a mere human enterprise, but
a Divine commission. When asked to
give their own names, the Jewish elders
replied, “saying, We are the servants
of the God of heaven and earth,” &c.
Of their personal names and distinctions
they say nothing; but assert that in re-
building the Temple of Jehovah they
were acting as servants of the Supreme
Being, whom they were bound to obey.
The work was to them not optional, but
obligatory.

2. Not an innovation, but a restora-
tion. ‘“ We build the house that was
builded these many years ago, which a
great king of Israel buiided and set up,”
Nearly five hundred years had passed
since Solomon built the first Temple.
The building they were raising was not
a novel invention of their own, but was
supported by the venerable antiquity
of its predecessor, and by the fame
of the great king which built that pre-
decessor.

3. Not in a spirit of preswmption and
pride, but of obedience and humility.
“But after that our fathers had pro-
voked the God of heaven unto wrath,
Ho gave them into the hand of Nebu-
chainezzar the king of Babylon, the
Chaldean, who destroyed this house,
and carried the people away into Baby-
lon.” At least three portions of this
statement have a bearing of more or
less importance in the present position
of affairs, (1.) That the destruction of
the former Temple was not owing to any
imperfection on the part of their God,
Nebuchadnezzar did not prevail against
Him. This testimony vindicates Him
against any imputation of inability to
defend His people and His Temple, (2.)
That the destruction of their former
Temple was owieg to their God having
forsaken them. ‘He gave them into
the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.” He with-
drew His protection from them, and they
Laat fell before the Chaldeans. (3.)

6


That their God forsook them because cf
their numerons and heinous sins. Their
fathers provoked Him unto wravh by
abominable idolatries, and He retired,
leaving them to themselves and to the
gods whom they had chosen, They
forsook God, then God forsook them.
This testimony reveals the fact that it
was in a spirit of penitence rather than
of presumption that they were working,
It also shows the obligatoriness of the
work: having seen the evil of their ways
and returned unto Jehovah their God, it
behoved them to rebuild the Temple for
His worship.

4. Not in opposition to, but in confor-
mity with, royal authority. ‘“ But in the
first year of Cyrus the king of Babylon,”
&c. (vers. 13-16). Three things (which
we have already noticed) are here laid
down. (1.) That the work was com-
manded by King Cyrus, “ King Cyrus
made a decree to build this house of
God. . . . Let the house of God be
builded in his place” (comp. chap. i
1-3). (2.) That the work was assisted
by King Cyrus. ‘ And the vessels also
of gold and silver of the house of God,”
dc. (vers, 14, 15, and comp. chap. i.
4-11). (3.) That the work was carried
on by the officer appointed by king
Cyrus. ‘Then came the same Shesh-
bazzar, and laid the foundation of the
house of God which is in Jerusalem,” &e.
(ver, 16, and comp. ver. 2, and chap, 1
8). Thus they show that in this work
they were obedient and loyal subjects of
the Persian monarch,

5. Not political, but religious tn its
character. They were building an edifice
which was designed not for plotting but
for piety, not for political schemes bat
for religious services—‘‘the house of
God.” Moreover, they were not build-
ing this Temple to any merely local or
national deity, but to the One Supreme
Being—“ the God of heaven and earth.”
Thus the reply of the Jewish elders was
fitted to honour Jehovah their God, and
ta disarm the opposition of men ; it was
ooth pious and prudent. (a).

IIL, The appeal of the Persian authe-
tities to the king. ‘Now, therefore,
t¢ it seem good to the king,” &. They
ask Darius—


SOMILBTIO COMMENTARY: EZRA,
1 '
= ee es ee


1. To ascertain whether Cyrus did
authorise and encourage this work. “ Let
there be search made in the king’s
treasure house, which ia there at Baby-
lon, whether it be that a decree was
made of Cyrus the king to build this
house of God at Jerusalem.”

2. To issue instructions for their guid-
ance in relation to this work, “ And let
the king send his pleasure to us concern-
ing this matter.”

CONCLUSION :

Two things we may well admire and
imitate—

1. The fairness of the Persian officials,
Let us deal justly with those who differ
from us in faith or opinion; let us be
eareful to represent their views and be-
liefs fairly and accurately, &e. (6),

2. The faithfulness of the Jewish
leaders. They “ witnessed a good con-
fession.” Let us imitate them in this,
By the testimony both of the lip and of
the life, Jet us honour “the God of
heaven and earth.” (c).


ILLUSTRATIONS


(a) As the hermits were communing together,
there arose a question as to which of all the
virtues was moat necessary to perfection. One
aaid chastity; anotzer, humility, a third,
pene St. Anthony remained silent till all

ad given their opinien; and then he spoke,
** Ye have all said well, but nome of you have
said aright. The virtue most necessary to
perfection is prudence; for the moat virtuous
actions of men, unless governed and directed
by pradence, are neither pleasing to God, nor
serviceable to others, nor profitable to our-
selves.” —Dict. of /llus.


(b) There are a great many who cannot
accept religion ag a mere fact. There area
great many on whose minds are thronging
thousands of thoughta, There are those who
come to religion from the side of their houge-
hold, and from the side of their affections,
And they cannot doubt. Blessed be that man
who bad such a father and mother, that as
jong as the memory of father and mother lives
he cannot doubt. Under such circumstances,
whatever the intellect may do, the heart recti-
fies it, The intellect may write ‘‘ Scepticism,”
but the heart rubs it ont, and writes ‘‘ Love.”
But many have no such childhood, no such
teaching, and nosuch association, My memory
goes back to the Sabbaths of my childhood—
to the bright hill top, to the ehurch-beli, and
so long as I remember these things, and have
s vision of my mother, and a recollection of
my father, I cannot doubt religion. But there


OMAP. Ve





are many who had no such parents, or none
within their remembrance, Many have had
their whole life’s training in the most material
elements, some in artistic relations, some in
realms of doubt, some in intellectual gladia-
tion. Men come to the subject of religion
from entirely different points, And when
men come to religion in such ways that they
have in themselves no moral witness to the
truth, and have suggestions and doubts that
they do not seek, but that are forced upon
them, there is a certain respect to be paid to
them, and a eertain sympathy to be experi-
enced for them.—H, W. Beecher,


(c) We all have our creeds, and, in spite of our-
selves, we profess them ;—the creed of fashion 3
the creed of appetite ; the creed of a selfish ex-

diency ; the creed of a sect; the creed of in-

ifference, which is 9a irreligions and as bigoted
in its way as any other; or the creed of eternal
right and Gospel faith, Conduct is the great
profesgion, Behaviour is the perpetual reveal-
ing of ua, A man’s doctrines flow from his fin-
gers’ ends, and atand out in his doings. What
he may say is not his chief profession, but how
he acts. Character lets out the secret of hig
belief ; what he does tells what heis, He has
** put on the Lord Jesus Christ,” when he haa
“Christ formed within him.” His profession
ig ag natural as the pulse in his veins. The
good man makes profession of his goodness by
simply being good ; but the Christian man will
not forget that he is not wholly good till he
has joined himself to Christ’s body. He pub-
lishes his adhesion as spontaneously as nature
publishes her laws,—aa the sun its light,—as
the rose its sweetness; by being steadfast;
by shining; by fragrant charities. It costa a
gracefulelm no spasm to paint a graceful
image on our eye, and the sea spreads its mys-
terious arms around the hemispheres without
vanity. They make their nature known by
silently keeping its laws. And because the
Christian soul is made to be a conscious mem-
ber in a living organism or church, it keeps
its own high law only by being there. Religion
belongs in the heartbeat of a man’s affections,
and the breath of his daily desire ; till it has
so possessed him, it is a small matter that he
keeps its effigy as a connoisseur keeps his mar-
ble Apollo,—on the outskirts of his practical
fortunes, The true hospitality takes it to the
heart, But when the heart has taken it in, it
will not lock it there, and make it a prisoner.
It must go abroad again, for the blessing of
man and the praise of God, It will put its
owner into the Church, not to show himeclf,
but that he may the better become one with
his brethren, and their common Head, So
does the religion that is natural unite the
public confession of it with the hiding of ita
inward power.—F, D. Huntington, D.D.

The matter of profeasing Christ appears to
be regarded by many as a kind of optional
duty, just as optional as it is for light to shine,
qx goodness to be good, or joy to sing, or gra-
titude to give thanks, or love to ae and


qmar.¥


sacrifice for ita ends. No, my friends, there
is no option here, save ag all duties are op-
tional, and eternity hangs on the option we
make, Let no one of you receive or allowa
different thought. Expect to be open, out-


~ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.
Set kg ee





standing witnesses for God, and rejcice to be.
In ready and glorious option, take your part
with such, and stifle indignantly any lurking
thought of being a secret follower.—H, Buskh-
nell, D.D,


Tur SUPREMACY or Gop,
(Verse 11.)


“ We are the servants of the God of
heaven and earth.”

These words lead us to consider—

L The universal supremacy of God.
* The God of heaven and earth.” The
idea of sovereignty is involved in the
idea of God. “The very name of a
God includes in ita supremacy and an
actual rule. He cannot be conceived as
God, but He must be conceived as the
highest authority in the world. It is
as possible for Him not to be God as not
to be supreme.” Our text brings to our
notice the extent of the Divine supre-
macy, but we shall do well briefly to
notice—

1. The ground of the Divine supre-
macy. God is the universal Sovereign
because of—(1.) The perfections of His
being. He is infinitely wise, righteous,
aid kind. He is supreme in authority
because He is supreme in ability and
excellence. ‘God therefore being an
incomprehensible ocean of all perfection,
and possessing infinitely all those virtues
that may lay a claim to dominion, hath
the first foundation of it in His own
nature.” (a). (2.) Because all things
were created by Him. The maker of
anything has an undoubted right over
the thing which he has made. The in-
vention is the property of the inventor ;
the picture, of the painter ; the book,
of the author. God’s creatorship is
most complete; all things, in respect
both of matter and of form, were made
by Him; therefore His sovereignty is
absolute. (3.) Because all things are
sustained by Him. ‘* By Him all things
consist.” He “upholds all things by
the word of His power.” ‘In Him we
live, and move, and have our being.”
He is the Foree of all forces ; the Super-
intendent of all laws and processes of
nature, &c, ‘As the right to goverp
resulted from creation, 80 it ia perpetu-

78


ated by the preservation of things.”
(4.) And this supremacy should be the
more heartily recognised and responded
to by us because of the benefits which
He bestows upon us, and especially be-
cause of our redemption from sin by
Jeaus Christ. “Ye are not your own;
for ye are bought with a price: there-
fore glorify God,” d&e. “I beseech you
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of
God, that ye present,” dec. (6).

2. The extent of the Divine supremacy.
(1.) It extends throughout heaven. He
is “the God of heaven.” He is supreme
over heavenly beings. ‘Angels that
excel in strength, do His commandments,
hearkening unto the voice of His word.”
They are “ His hosts, ministers of His,
that do His pleasure.” The music and
joy of their being is in doing His will.
He is supreme over heavenly bodies.
“Lift up your eyes on high, and behold
who hath created these, that bringeth
out their host by number: He calieth
them all by names by the greatness of
His might, for that He is strong in
power ; not one faileth.” ‘He telleth
the number of the stars; He calleth
them all by name.” (2.) It extends
throughout earth. He is “the God of
heaven and earth.”


‘« By knowledge supreme, by wisdom Divine,
God governs the earth with gracious design,
O’er beast, bird, and insect His providence

reigns,
Whose will firat created, whose love still
sustains,”


He rules over all men. The highest
potentate and the humblest peasant are
alike under His authority. He “ bringeth
the princes to nothing ; He maketh the
judges of the earth as vanity,” d&c. (Isa.
xl, 23,24). He rules over men in every
respect, Nothing pertaining to their life
is too great or too small for His over-
sight and control, Even “the bounds


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; B&RA.


OAP, V.


2 eee ee ae ee, «ee ee


of their habitation” are determined by
Him. (3.) It extends throughout hell.
“The devil and his angels” are rebels
against God’s authority, but they cannot
arnul that authority, or free themselves
from the restraints of His arm. Satan
could not afflict Job beyond a certain
limit, which was determined by God
(Job i. 12; ii. 6). “God spared not
the angels that sinned, but cast them
down to hell,” &c. (2 Pet. ii. 4). “ The
angels which kept not their first estate,
but left their own habitation,” &. (Jude
6). Thus the Divine supremacy is uni-
versal in its extent. (c).

IL The great obligation of man.
“We are the servants of the God of
heaven and earth;” and are therefore
under solemn obligations to obey Him.
His will we should accept as our law.
And our obedience to Him should be—

1. Complete. We should conform to
Bis will in all things. No department
of our life is beyond His control. We
may not select certain commandments for
our obedience, and reject or ignore others.
We must “have respect unto all His
commandments.” (d).

2. Perpetual. His kingdom is an
everlasting kingdom. Our obedience
must be continued as long as our being.
The redeemed will “serve Him day
and night in His Temple” through all
eternity.

3. Hearty. Mere mechanical obedience
is not acceptable to Him. The service
of the hireling is an abomination in His
sight; but that which is spontaneous
and sincere He delights in. (e).

4. Joyous. Obedience to Him should
be a pleasure to us. Joyous service is
frequently commended in the Scriptures,
“J will run in the way of Thy command-
ments.” ‘Thy statutes have been my
songs.” “Serve the Lord with glad-
ness.” “I delight to do Thy will, O
my God.” (f).

Il. The exalted privilege of man
It is deemed an honour to serve human
sovereigns and princes. How much
greater—how immeasurably greater—ts
the honour of serving the God of heaven
and earth! When the service of God
is rightly estimated, it is regarded as a
glory, and rejoiced in as a privilege.


Concxusion :

What is our attitude towards the
sovereignty of God? Do we bow to it
only when we are forced to do 80, and
because we are forced to do so? Or do
we rejoice in being “the servanta of the
God of heaven and earth” §


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(e) This is the natural order God hath
placed in His ereatures, that the more excel-
lent should rule the inferior. He committed
not the government of lower creatures to lions
and tigers, that have a delight in blood, but
no knowledge of virtue; but to man, who had
an eminence in his nature above other crea-
tures, and was formed with a perfect rectitude,
and a height of reason to guide the reins over
them. In man, the soul being of a more
sublime nature, is set of right to rule over the
body ; the mind, the most excellent faculty of
the soul, to rule over the other powers of its
and wisdom, the most excellent habit of the
mind, to guide and regulate that in ita deter-
minations ; and when the body and gensitive
appetite control the soul and mind, it is a
usurpation againgt nature, not a rule according
to nature. The excellency, therefore, of the
Divine nature ig the natural foundation for
His dominion, He hath wisdom to know
what is fit for Him to do, and an immutable
righteousness whereby He cannot do anything
bage and unworthy; He hath a foreknowledge
whereby He is able to order all things to
answer His own glorious designs and the end
of His government, that nothing can go awry,
nothing put Him to a stand, and constrain
Him to meditate new counsels. So that if it
eould be supposed that the world had not been
created by Him, that the parts of it had met
together by chance, and been compacted into
such a body, none but God, the supreme and
most excellent Being in the world, could have
merited, and deservedly challenged the govern-
ment of it; because nothing had an excellency
of nature to capacitate it for it, as He hath, or
to enter into a contest with Him for a suffi-
ciency to govern.—S. Charnocke, B.D.


(5) That benefit of redemption doth add a
atronger right of dominion to God ; since He
hath not only ag a Creator given them being
and life as His creatures, but paid a price, the
price of His Son’s blood, for their rescue from
captivity; so that He hath a sovereignty of
grace ag well as nature, and the ransomed ones
belong to Him as Redeemer ag well as Creator
(1 Cor. vi. 19, 20): ‘** Ye are not your own,

or ye are bought with a price;” therefore
our body and your spirit are God’s, By this
He acquired a right of another kind, and
bought us from that uncontrollable lordship
we affected over ourselves by the sin of Adam,
that He might use us as His own peculiar for
His own glory and service. By this redemp-
tion there results to God a Ta over our
9


CAR. V.





bodies, over our spirits, over our services, as
well aa by creation ; and to show the strength
ef this right, the Apostle repeats it, ‘‘you are
bought,” a purchase cannot be without a price
paid; but he adda price also, ‘‘ bought with a
price.” ‘l'o strengthen the title, purchase gave
Him a new right, and the greatness of the
price established that right. ‘lhe more a man
pays for a thing, the more usually, we say, he
deserves to have it; He hath paid enough for
it; it was, indeed, price enough, and too
much for such vile creatures as we are.—/béd.


(ec) The sapphire throne of God, at this
moment, is revealed in heaven, where adoring
angels cast their crowns before it; and its
power is felt on earth, where the works of
creaticu praise the Lord. Even those who
acknowledge not the Divine government are
compelled to feel it; for He doeth as He wills,
not only among the angels in heaven, but
among the inhabitants of this lower world.
Hell feels the terror of that throne, Those
chains of fire, those pangs unutterable, are the
awful shadow of the throne of Deity; as God
looks down upon the lost, the torment that
flashes through their souls darts from His
holiness, which cannot endure their sing. The
influence of that throne, then, is found in
every world where spirits dwell; and in the
realms of inanimate nature it bears rule,
Every leaf that fades in the trackless forest
trembles at the Almighty’s bidding, and every
coral insect that dwelleth in the unfathomable
depths of the sea feels and acknowledges the
presence of the all-present King.—C. Jd.
Spurgeon.


(d) All the commandments have the same
Author, and the same sanction. ' He who
thinks to atone for the breach of one by the
observation of another; he who reserveth to
himeelf a license of indulging in any favourite,
darling lust, while, in general, he preserveth
the appearance of am exemplary conduct, is a


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EERA,





ee ener


hypocrite, and, unless he repent, will be brought
to shame, if not before men here, yet before
men and angels hereafter. —Bishop Horne.
The hypocrite ia in with one duty, and ont
with another: like a globous body, he tuucheth
the law of God in one point—some particular
command he seems zealous for; but meets no


in the rest; whereas, the sincere heart lies


cloge to the whole law of God in his desire and
endeavour,— W. Gurnall.


( As fruita artificially raised or forced in
the hot-house have not the exquisite flavour of
those fruits which are grown naturally, and in
their due season; so that obedience which is
forced by the terrors of the law, wants the
genuine flavour and sweetness of that obedience
which springs from a heart warmed and
meliorated with the love of God in Christ
Jesus.—H, G. Salter.


(f) Men are commonly more cheerful in
their obedience to a great prince than to a
mean peasant, because the quality of the master
renders the service more honourable. It isa
discredit to a prince's government, when bis
subjects obey him with discontent and dejected-
ness, as though he were a hard master, and hia
laws tyrannical and unrighteous. When we
pay obedience but with a dull and feeble pace,
and a sour and sad temper, we blemish our
great Sovereign, imply His commands to te
grievous, void of that peace and pleasure He
proclaims to be in them ; that He deserves ne
respect from us, if we obey Him beeause we
must, and not because we will. Involuntary
obedience deserves not the title: it is rather
submission than obedience, an act of the body,
not of the mind: a mite of obedience with
cheerfulness, is better than a talent without
it. The testimonies of God were David’s
delight (Ps. cxix. 24), Our understandings
must take pleasure in knowing Him, our wills
delightfully embrace Him, and our actions be
cheerfully squared to Him.—-S. Charnoche, B.D


ARGUMENTS AGAINST SINNING,
(Verse 12.)


In this verse we have three weighty
reasons for abstaining from sin.

I. It provokes God. “ Our fathers
provoked the God of heaven unto wrath.”
By many sins, and especially by the
practice of idolatry with its accompany-
ing vices, the people of both Israel and
Judah had long provoked Jehovah before
He suffered them to be carried into exile,
The evil of sin, as a provocation of the
Most High, will be more impressively
realised if we reflect that He is a Being
of-—

it oe purity. He is “glorious


in holiness ;” . . . ‘ ef purer eyes than
to behold evil, and cannot look upon
iniquity.” Sin is the very opposite of
holiness; therefore it grieves Him, and
if persisted in, it provokes Him. It is
the ‘abominable thing, which He hates,”
Have we not in this a reason for shun.
ning it ? (a),

2. Infinite patience. He is “not
easily provoked ;” “The Lord is merci-
ful and gracious, slow to anger, and
plenteous in mercy.” He “ is longsuffer-
ing to us ward, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: ERA,





to repentance.” How wonderful was
His forbearance with His ancient people!
How long He suffered them, notwith-
standing their heinous, widespread, and
long-continued sin! Yet at length they
provoked Him unto wrath. How wicked
and how persistent must the sin be which
provokes sc patient a Being to anger!
Therefore let us flee from sin. (6).

IL It deprives the sinner of His
protection. ‘‘ He gave them into the
hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of
Babylon, the Chaldean.” By their sin
the Israelites deprived themselves of the
sure defence which His presence afforded
to them, and frustrated His gracious
purposes in relation to them. This truth
is pathetically and beautifully expressed
in Ps, lxxxi. 11-16: “ My people would
not hearken to My voice; and Israel
would none of Me,” &c. By his sin the
sinner places himself beyond the protec-
tion of the Divine Providence ; he takes
up the position of a rebel against the
Divine government, and so forfeits the
rights and privileges which that govern-
ment confers upon its loyal subjects.

Iii. It strips the sinner of power
to battle with his foes. ‘‘ Nebuchad-
nezzar the king of Babylon destroyed
this house, and carried the people away
into Babylon.”  Bereft of the Divine
presence and protection, the men of Israel
and of Judah could not stand before their
enemies, Guilt robs a man of courage.
The consciousness of righteous action in
a righteous cause is the mightiest inspira-
tion in conflict and the surest defence in
peril. Sin deprives a man of this. Guilt
brings faintness into men’s “hearts; and
the sound of a shaken leaf shall chase
them ; and they shall flee, as fleeing from
s sword ; and they shall fall when none
pursueth,” &, (Lev. xxvi. 36, 37). “The
wicked flee when no man pursueth; but
the righteous are bold as a lion.” Or, as
Shakespeare expreases it—

** Buepicion always haunts the guilty mind 3
The thief doth fear each bush an officer,”
A guilty ‘‘ conscience does make cowards of

us all”


And Wordsworth ;:


*¢ From the body of one guilty deed
A thousand ghostly feara and haunting
thoughts proceed.” ‘¢),


OHAP, V.





1
By all these reasons let us beware of sin,
shun it, hate it ; and “ follow after holi-
ness.” For in respect of holiness we
may reverse the argument of our subject,
and affirm that (1) it is well pleasing to
God ; (2) it secures to its possessor the
Divine protection; and (3) it invests
its possessor with moral strength and
eourace.


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) Is it (if the supposition may be allowed)
anything merely personal which God con-
demns in the action of the sinner against
Himself? Can the sinner do Ged any harm?
Can the mightiest chief in all the armies of
hell pluck one star from the eky, or keep
back the light of the aun, or bind the sweet
influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of
Orion? God is not, so to speak, alarmed for
His personal government. The offences against
His power cost Him nojeoncern, but the offences
against His holiness afflict Him with great sor-
row.. The parent cares nothing for the mere
blow of the child’s tiny fist, but the passion
which prompted it breaks his heart. God hag
to maintain the public virtue and order of the
universe. He fears no stroke of power; but
if, for mere convenience of expression, we may
distinguish between His personality and His
attributes, we may say that offences against
His person are forgiven, but offences against
His attributes cannot be forgiven apart from
confession and repentance on the side of the
eriminal.—Joseph Parker, D.D.


(b) The more His patience is abused, the
sharper will be the wrath He inflicts, As His
wrath restrained makes His patience long, so
His compassions restrained will make Hia wrath
severe; as He doth transcend all creatures in
the measures of the one, so He transcends all
ereatures in the sharpness of theother, Christ
is described with ‘‘feet of brass, as if they
burned in a furnace” (Rev. i. 15), slow to
move, but heavy to crush, and hot to burn,
His wrath loseth nothing by delay; it grows
the fresher by sleeping, and strikes with greater
strength when it awakes: all the time men
are abusing His patience, God is whetting His
sword, and the longer it is whetting the sharper
will be the edge; the longer He is fetching
His blow, the smarter it will be. The heavier
the cannons are, the more difficultly are the
drawn to the besieged town; but, when eee
they recompense the slowness of their march
by the fierceness of their battery. ‘‘ Because
I have purged thee,” 4.¢., used means for thy
reformation, and waited for it, ‘‘and thou waat
not purged, thou shalt not be purged from thy
filthiness any more, till I have caused My fury
to rest upon thee. Iwill not go back, neither
will I spare; according to thy ways, and ac-
cording to thy doings, shall they Judge thee”
(Ezek. xxiv. 13, 14). God will spare as little
then as He spared much before: His wrath


Al


cuaY, Vi.


_ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA,


a


will be as raging upon them as the sea of their
wickedness was within them, When there is
a bank to forbid the irruption of the stream,
the waters swell; but when the bank is broke, or
the lock taken away, they rush with the greater
violence, and ravage more than they would
have done had they not met with a stop: the
longer a stone is in falling, the more it bruiseth
and grinds tc powder, There is a greater
treasure of wrath laid up by the ahuses of
patience; every sin must have a just recom-
pense of reward ; and therefore every sin, in
regard of its aggravations, must be more pun-
ished than a sin in the singleness and simplicity
of its own nature, As treasurcs of mercy are
kept by God for us, ‘‘He keeps mercy for
thousands ;” so are treasures of wrath kept
by Him to be expended, and a time of expense
there must be. Patience will account to Jus-
tice all the good offices it hath done the sinner,


and demand to be righted by Justice; Justies
will'take the account from the hands of Patience,
and exact a recompense for every disingenuoud
injury offered to it, When Justice comes to
arrest men for their debta, Patience, Mercy,
and Goodness will step in as creditors and clap
their actions upon them, which will make the
condition so much more deplorable.—S. Ohar«
nocke, B.D.


(ce) They say sheep are scared with the clatter
of their own feet as they run; go is the sinner
with the din of hia guilt. No sooner Adam .
saw his plate off, and himself to be naked, but
he is afraid of God’s voice, as if he had never
been acquainted with Him. Never can we
truly recover our courage till we recover our
holiness. ‘‘If our heart condemn us not, then
have we boldness before God ” (1 John iii, 31).
—W. Gurnal,


CHAPTER VL


CrrricaL axp Expranatory Norss.] This chapter contains—(i.) The seareh for and dis-
covery of the decree of Cyrus (vers. 1-5). (ii.) The decree of Darius for the furtherance of the
building of the Temple (vers. 6-12), (iii.) The carrying on and completion of the building of
the Temple (vers. 13-15). (iv.) he dedication of the Temple (vers, 16-18). (v.) The cele-
bration of the feasts of the Passover and of Unleavened Bread (vers. 19-22).

Ver. 1. Then Darius the king made a decree] ‘‘ These words seem to refer only to the
command to make an investigation ; but in reality they serve as an introduction to the decree
which was promulgated to Tatnai, &c. (comp. v. 6). It is ag if the subsequent narrative: and
search was made] were taken up merely as an explanation of the decree following in ver. 6
sq.” — Schultz, The house of the rolls] Margin: “Chald. books.” Schultz: “writings.”
(Comp. chap. v.17.) Laid up] Margin: ‘‘Chald. made to descend.” The apartment was
probably underground,

Ver. 2. Achmetha] i.e, Ecbatana, ‘* The name ’Achmetha, which at first sight seems some-
what remote from Ecbatana, wants but one letter of Hagmatana, which was the native appella-
tion. ... Two cities of the name of Ecbatana seem to have existed in ancient times, one the
capital of Northern Media; the other the metropolis of the larger and more important province
known as Media Magna, The site of the former appears to be marked by the very curious
ruins at Takht-i-Suleiman ; while that of the latter is occupied by Hamadan, which is one of
the most important cities of modern Persia. There is generally some difficulty in determining,
when Ecbatana is mentioned, whether the northern or the southern metropolis is intended.
Few writers are aware of the existence of the two cities, and they lie sufficiently near to one
another for geographical notices in most cases to suit either site. The northern city was the
‘seven-walled town’ described by Herodotus, and declared by him to have been the capital of
Cyrus (Herod. i, $8, 99, 158; comp. Mos. Choren. ii, 84); and it was thus most probably there
that the roll was found which proved to Darius that Cyrus had really made a decree allowing
the Jews to rebuild their Temple.”— Bibl. Dict. A roll] ‘‘ The ancient Persians used parch-
ment for their records, as appears from Ctesias (cap. Diod. Sic. ii. 82)””—Ratlinson.

Ver. 8, In the first year of Oyrus the king] (Comp. chaps. i. 1; v. 18.) Omit “concern.
ing” as supplied by the translators of the A. YV. The house of God at Jerusalem] These
words ‘‘stand alone by themselves, and constitute to a certain extent a title.’ The place
where they offered sacrifices] Keil: ‘‘ As a place where sacrifices are offered.” Schultz: “ As
a place where offerings are brought.” And let the foundations thereof be strongly laid}
Schultz: ‘* ‘And whose foundations are capable of supporting’ (namely, the structure).” The
height thereof threescore cubits] &c. In these dimensions the length is not specified ; probably
because in this respect the new ‘l'emple was to correspond with the former one.

Ver, 4. With three rows of great stones, and a row of new timber] The meaning of this
is uncertain. One interpretation is that the word translated row (42 12) should be rendered
“atorey ;” and that it applies “to the three storeys of chambers that surrounded Solomon’s,
and afterwards Herod’s Temple, and with this again we come to the wooden Talar which sur-
mounted the l'emple and formed a fourth atorey.”—Btbl, Dict. But it is questionable whether
p12 ever signifies “storey,” Fuerat gives, as the meaning of the word, ‘‘a layer, a row,” ag
of stones or bricks in a wall. So also Keii. Schultz says it means “that three of the Temple
walla were of hewn stone, the other, namely, the frent, which must for the moat part be com


82


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BERS, CHAP, Vi.





ri
posed of a large entrance, was to be made of wood.” In support of this view he argues from
1 Kings vi. 86, ‘‘that Solomon provided the inner court (of his Temple) on three sides with
walls of quarried atone, on the one other side, without doubt the front side, where the chief
entrance was, where then there was probably a larger door, with an enclosure of hewn cedar.
. . » In the Temple of Herod also, the entrance side of the holy place was still composed of one
great folding door, sixteen cubits broad.” Another interpretation is that the walls were three
rows or courses of stone in thickness with an inner wainscoting of wood. And another, taking
4273 as signifying row, or layer, is that the walls were built of three layers of large stones and
then a layer of timber, repeated from the base to the summit. But there is a complete absence
of evidence of the existence of buildings of this kind in the East in olden times. And
let the expenses be given out of the king’s house} or from the royal revenues (Comp.
ver. 8.) This must either refer to the cost of only the materials of the building, or it was never
carried into effect; for the Jews themselves contributed largely to the cost of the building
(chaps. ii. 68, 69; iii. 7).

Ver, 5, And also let the golden and silver vessels of the house of God] &. (Comp. chaps,
dept We a kO..)

Ver. 6. Now therefore Tatnai] &c. This is the decree made by Darius the king (ver. 1).
Your companions the Apharsachites] (See on chap. v. 6.) Be ye far from thence] 1.e. do not
trouble or interfere with the Jews in this matter.

Ver. 10. That they may offer sacrifices] &c. This was the object aimed at by Darius the
king in the preceding orders of his decree. ‘‘ We find,” says Keil, ‘‘ that in after times sacrifices
were regularly offered for the king on appointed days: comp. 1 Macc. vii. 33, xii. 11; 2 Mace.
iii. 35, xiii. 23; Joseph. Antig. XII. ii, 5, and elsewhere.”

Ver. 11, Alter this word] either by transgressing or by abolishing it. Let timber be pulled
down from his house, and being set up, let him be hanged thereon] Keil: ‘‘ Let a beam be
torn from his house, and let him be fastened hanging thereon.” Schultz: ‘‘ Let him be fastened
thereon and crucified.” It is almost beyond doubt that crucifixion is the punishment signified
here, And let his house be made a dunghill for this] ‘‘ that is, let it be torn down and changed
into a common sewer, comp. 2 Kings x. 27; Dan. ii. 5.”—Schultz.

Ver, 14. And Artaxerxes king of Persia] ‘‘ This king did not reign till long after the com-
pletion of the Temple, and the ingertion of his name here can only be accounted for by gsup-
posing that the compiler or editor of this record inscribed his name aa one who, in later times,
contributed to the maintenance of the Temple, and so kept up the work his predecessors had
begun.”—Clemance. And Schultz points out that, instead of giving a simple narrative of the
completion of the building, ‘‘the author would rather express recognition and thanks, and
hence could forget none who were deserving of mention. Artaxerxes came into consideration
only on account of the gifts which he caused to be brought to Jerusalem by Ezra ” (chap. vii.
15-20). ;

ven 15, The month Adar] which is the twelfth month, and corresponds with our March. The
building was completed about twenty years after the laying of the foundation by Zerubbabel,
and four years five months and a few days after the resumption of the work by reason of the
prophesying of Haggai (Hag. i. 15).

Ver. 17. An hundred bullocks, two hundred rams] &c. These numbers, though small as
eompared with those offered at the dedication of the former Temple (1 Kings viii. 5, 63), con-
gidering the number and the circumstances of the people, constitute a hearty and joyful offering.
Asin offering for all Israel, twelve he-goats] &c. While the great majority of those who
returned with Zerubbabel were of Judah, it is probable that some families of the other tribes
returned with them, and that for that reason a sin offering was presented for every tribe. More-
over, a8 Keil observes, a sin offering was brought for all Israel, ‘‘ because the Temple waa
intended for the entire covenant people, whose return to the Lord and to the land of their fathera,
according to the predictions of the prophets, was hoped for. (Comp. eg. Ezek, xxxvii. 15, eg.
Jer. xxxi. 27, sq.) ”’ ;

Ver. 18. They set the priests in their divisions, and the Levites in their courses] &c.
(Comp. 1 Chron. xxiii. 6-23 ; xxiv. 1-19; 2 Chron. xxxv. 5, 12.) Asit is written in the book of
Moses] (Comp. Num, iii. 6-10; viii. 5-26.) With this verse the Chaldee section closes.

Ver. 19. Kept the passover upon the fourteenth day of the first month. (Comp. Exod,
xii. 6.

ve 20. For the priests and the Levites were purified] &c. Rawlinson says that thia ia a
mistranslation, and that it should be, ‘‘ For the priests had purified themselves, and the Levites
were all pure as one man, and killed,” &. He further suggests that this was the reason why
the Levites killed the paschal lambs not only for themselves and for the people, but also for their
brethren the priests (Comp. 2 Chron. xxix. 34.) But, as Keil remarks, from the days of Josiah
ig seems to have been castomary for the Levites to slaughter the passover lambs for the whole
community, both priesthood and laity. (2 Chron. xxxv. 11, 14,15). Schultz translates, ‘* For
the priests and Levites had purified themselves as one man, they were all clean, and killed,” &c.
He suggests that the latter slaughtered the lambs “‘ for the priesta, because they were so busy
elsewhere.”


Ver. 21 And all such as hed separated themselves] &c. ‘‘ Those who separated Aeon hte


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.
“


iurrrrrrnsrneEEn pn cn nnn


CHAP. VI.





heathen are not proselytes from heathenism, but descendants of the Jews and
asc tues had remained mo the lad when the rest of the nation had been carried captive,
as all the parallel passages show, comp. ix. 1, 10, x. 2, 10, 11; Neh. ix. 2, x. 28. They had
without doubt intermarried with the heathen, and the more they had entered into communion
with them, the less were they in a position to observe the Mosaic laws respecting food and
purification. ‘To separate themselves from the impuritics of the heathen meant for them ta
fsrgake altovether communion with the heathen, and seek communion with the J ewish congre-
gation.” —sSchuliz. ‘ ts a
Ver, 22, Kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days] (Comp. Exod. xii. 15, xiii. 7, &e.)
The king of Assyria] ‘‘ Darius, the king of Persia, is here called king of Assyria, not only as
ruler of the territory of the previous Persian empire (Keil), or because Assyria from ancient
time had been the usual name for all that region (Clericus), which cannot be proved from
Judith ii, 1; but, above all, likewise, because Darius, a8 head of the great empire of the world,
properly took the same relative position over against the people of God as the Assyrian and
Chaldean kings had once had, because it was properly only a continuation or renewal of the
same, and because the thought was now to be expressed, that finally that very enemy who had
once so fearfully and destructively oppressed the people of God, had been changed by the grace
of God into a friend, so that he had even himeelf strengthened the hands of the congregation
in re-establishing the destroyed Temple.”—Jéid.


A THorovuGH SEARCH AND AN IMPORTANT DISCOVERY.
(Verses 1-5.)


I. The search for the decree of

Cyrus.
1. Was thorough “Search was
made in the house of the rolls, where
the treasures were laid up in Babylon,”
as being the most likely place in which
to find a copy of the alleged decree of
Cyrus. The document, however, was
not found there. But the search was
not abandoned when it failed there, but
was continued at Achmetha, or Ecba-
tana, as being the place where, next to
Babylon, it would most probably be
discovered. The thoroughness of this
search seems to us an evidence of the
desire of Darius the king to deal fairly
and honourably with his Jewish sub-
jects,

2. Was successful. “ And there was
found at Achmetha, in the palace that
is in the province of the Medes, a roll,”
&e. Thus the honest and earnest
search was rewarded, the veracity of
the statement of the elders of the Jews
(chap, v. 13-15) was clearly proved,
and the lawfulness of the authority by
which they acted firmly established.

Learn:

Honest and thorough investigation
promotes the uterests of religion and of
the Church of God. Partial examina-
tion, and yet more, examination by per-
sous whose opinions or feelings are
prejudiced, often leads to conclusions
which are inimical to the cause of God

84


and of religious truth. But sincere,
patient, thorough investigation into the
credentials of Christianity is eminently
desirable, and conduces to its progress.
Merely human systems of religion may
well shun the light; some of. the doc-
trines of men concerning Christianity,
upon examination, may prove unten-
able ; and error may naturally seek to
evade every real test ; but truth, righte-
ousness, and the religion of our Lord
Jesus Christ court inquiry, and by in-
quiry they spread and prevail. (a).

II. The discovery of the decree of
Cyrus. ‘And there was found at
Achmetha, in the palace that is in the
province of the Medes, a roll, and
therein was a record thus written: In
the first year of Cyrus,” &c. (vers. 2-5),
The edict thus brought to light con-
tained three commands of the utmost
importance to the Jews.

1. That thetr Temple should be rebuilt.
“In the first year of Cyrus the king,
Cyrus the king made a decree :—The
house of God at Jerusalem :—Let the
house be built,” &. It was to be
built (1) at the old place ; “at Jerusa-
lem.” This was important, because of
the old and precious associations and
memories which clustered thickly around
it. (2.) For the old purposes, “ The
house of God . . . a place where they
may offer sacrifices.” It was for the
worship of the same holy Being, and in


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY ; EZRA,


the same manner, as their fathers had
worshipped. (3.) In solid and durable
manner, “And let the foundations
thereof be strongly laid,” so as to be
thoroughly capable of supporting the
superstructure, that the edifice may en-
dure the longer.

2. That the expenses of building be
granted them from the royal revenues.
And let the expenses be given out
of the king’s house.” Either this com-
mand was intended to apply only to
the materials of the building, or it was
never fully carried out. It may be
that they did not receive what was here
ordered them, as Matthew Henry sug-
gests, because the face of things at court
was soon changed. But we know that,
out of their own resources, the Jews
contributed largely to the expenses of
the building (chaps. ii 68, 69 ; iii. 7).

3. That the costly and sacred vessels
of the former Temple should be restored.
“And also let the golden and silver
vessels of the house of God,” é&e. (ver. 5),
(1.) These vessels had been degraded to
hase uses by heathen kings. ‘‘ Which
Nebuchadnezzar took forth out of the
Temple which was at Jerusalem, and
brought unto Babylon.” “And he
brought the vessels into the treasure
house of his god” (Dan, i. 2). Belshazzar,
at his great and impious feast, ‘‘ whiles
he tasted the wine, commanded to bring
the golden and silver vessels,” &. (Dan.
v. 2-4). (2.) They had been preserved
_ from destruction or loss in the Providence
of God. God had so ordered events
that these vessels were regarded by the
heathen Nebuchadnezzar as sacred, and
were by him deposited in a secure place.
(3.) They were restored to their original
place and use by a heathen king, who
was moved thereto by the Spirit of
God. Let them “be restored, and
brought again unto the Temple which
is at Jerusalem, to their place, and
(thou) shalt place them in the house of
God.” Seeing that God thus preserves
even consecrated utensils, how much
more will He keep His consecrated
people! “Fear thou not; for I am
with thee: be not dismayed,” d&c. (Isa.
xli. 10, 13). “Fear not; for I have
vedeemed thee, J have called thee by


OMAP. VE
pe


thy name; thou art Mine. When thou
passest through the waters,” dc. (Isa,
xliii, 1, 2).

Learn :

The advantages of written history.
The testimony of the Jewish elders con-
cerning the edict of Cyrus might have
been denied by some, and by others
suspected of exaggeration in their own
favour, and in this way the great work
might have been again arrested; but
this state-document, found in one of the
royal offices or chambers, was unim-
peachable. Tradition is variable and
uncertain; but the record written at the
time of the events is fixed and trust-
worthy. (6). How great should be our
gratitude for the sacred writings—‘ the
Word of God, which liveth and abideth
for ever” ! (c).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) The religion of Christ might be chown
to abound in circumstances whieh contradict
and repel the idea of a human origin. For
example, its representations of the paternal
character of God ; itsinculcation of a universal
charity; the stress which it lays on inward
purity ; its substitution of a spiritual worship
for the forms and ceremonies, which every-
where had usurped the name and extinguished
the life of religion ; its preference of humility,
and the mild, unostentatious, passive virtues,
to the dazzling qualities which had mono-
polised men’s admiration; its consistent and
bright discoveries of immortality; its adap-
tation to the wants of man ag a sinner; ite
adaptation to all the conditions, capacities,
and sufferings of human nature; its pure,
sublime, yet practical morality; its high and
generous motives; and its fitness to form a
character, which plainly prepares for a higher
life than the present ;—these are peculiarities
of Christianity, which will strike us more and
more in proportion as we understand distinctly
the circumstances of the age and country in
which this religion appeared, and for which
no adequate human cause has been or can be
assigned,

Passing over these topics, each of which
might be enlarged into a discourse, I will
make but one remark on this religion, which
strikes my own mind very forcibly. Since
its introduction, human nature has made
great progress, and society experienced great
changes; and in this advanced condition of
the world, Christianity, instead of losing its
application and importance, is found to be
more and more congenial and adapted to man’s
nature and wants. Men have outgrown the
other inatitutions of that period when Chris-
tianity appeared, its philosophy, its cea of


OMAP, Vi.


warfare, its policy, ite publie and private
economy; but Christianity has never shrunk
as intellect has opened, but has always kept
in advance of men’s faculties, and unfolded
nobler views in proportion as they have
ascended, The highest powers and affections
which our nature hag developed find more
than adequate objecta in this religion. Chris-
tianity ia indeed peculiarly fitted to the more
improved stages of society, to the more
delicate sensibilities of refined minds, and
especially to that dissatisfaction with the
present state, which always grows with the
growth of our moral powers and affections.
As inven advance in civilisation, they become
susceptible of mental sufferings, to which ruder
ages are strangers; and these Christianity is
fitted to assuage. Imagination and intellect
become more restless ; and Christianity brings
them tranquillity, by the eternal and magnifi-
cent truths, the solemn and unbounded pros-
pects, which it unfolds, This fitness of our
religion to more advanced stages of society
than that in which it was introduced, to wants
of human nature not then developed, seems
to me very striking. The religion bears the
marks of having come from a Being who
perfectly understood the human mind, and
had power to provide for its progress. This
feature of Christianity is of the nature of
prophecy. It was an anticipation of future
and distant ages; and when we consider
among whom our religion sprung, where, but
in God, can we find an explanation of this
peculiarity i—W. £. Channing, D.D.


(6) In Books lies the soul of the whole Past
Time; the articulate audible voice of the
Past, when the body and material substance
of it bas altogether vanished like a dream,
Mighty fleets and armies,harbours and arsenals,
vast cities, high domed, many engined,—they
are precious, great : but what do they become?
Agamemnon, the many Agamemnona, Peri-


. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.


eleses, and their Greece; all is gone now te
some ruined fragments, dumb mournful wrecks
znd blocks: but the Books of Greece! There
Greece, to every thinker, still very literally
lives ; can be called up again into life. No
magic Rune is stranzer thana Book. All that
mankind has done, thought, gained, or been;
it ig lying as in magic preservation in the
pages of Books. ‘They are the chosen posses-
sion of men.—TZhomas Carlyle.


(c) It is a blessed thought that the words of
the Bible were written for us—that the Spirit
of God looked along the ages, and saw that in
such an event or circumstance of life we
should need just such counsel and help. And
then He inspired a pen to write itdown. Not
for our good only, but for thousands who have
gone before and who will come after. No
promise ig there that has not been proved
thousands of times—no warning, but many
have taken it home. It is like a good chart
which has everything on it that a mariner in
any seas may need. Its truths never wear
out. Says one, who has been a deep student
of it: ‘‘The Bible will bear a thousand read-
ings, and the man who has gone over it the
most frequently and carefully is the surest of
finding new wonders there,”—The Study.

What a wonderful Book is the Bible! Just
let us look at it. There it lies—a Book several
thousand years old—a Book at war with all
the evil passions of a wicked world—a Book
dwelling in an enemy’s country —a Book
exposed to every species of assault—a Book
that has been shot at by innumerable archers,
and yet there it lies, unhurt, invulnerable,
not a crevice to be found in its coat of mail,
not the shadow of a genuine doubt upon its
Divinity, not a speck upon its glorious robes !
Well may we say as we gaze upon it, “ Surely
God ia in this Book! how dreadful is this
Book ! it is none else than the Book of God;
it is the gate of heaven | ’—Anon,


Toe Derorge or Darius,
(Verses 6-12.)


In this royal edict we have:

L A prohibition. ‘“ Now Tatnai, gov-
ernor beyond the river, Shethar-bognai,
and your companions the Apharsachites,
which are beyond the river, be ye far
from thence: let the work of this house
of God alone.” All interference with
the builders and the building of the
Temple 18 nere forbidden by the king,
Tatnai and Shethar-bognai seem to have
acted with conspicuous fairness toward
the Jews ; but it is probable that some
of their former Samaritan enemies would
have hindered them in their great work

86


if they could have done so. Such hin-
drance this edict imperatively prohibits,

IL An injunction. The royal decree
goes on to command Tatnai and _ his
companions in office to help onward the
work of the Jewish builders,

1. They were to allow the building of
the Temple. ‘Let the governor of the
Jews and the elders of the Jews build
this house of God in his place.”

2. They were to assist the building of
the Temple. ‘Moreover, I make a decree
what ye shall do to the elders of these
Jews for the building of this house of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BRERA,


mar, Vi.





God: that of the king’s goods, of the
tribute beyond the river, forthwith ex-
penses be given unto these men, that
they be not hindered,”

3. They were to assist the worship of
the God of the Temple. ‘And that
which they have need of, both young
bullocks, and rams, and lambs, for the
burnt offerings of the God of heaven,
wheat, salt, wine, and oil, according to
the appointment of the priests which
are at Jerusalem, let it be given them
day by day without fail”

Notice:

1. The sufficiency of this assistanee.
It provides for the daily and other burnt
offerings, for the meat offerings, and for
other things according to the expressed
tequirements of the Jewish priests.

2. The continuity of this assistance.
“Let it be given them day by day.”

3. The urgency of the command of
this assistance, ‘‘ Let it be given them
without fail; .. . let it be done with
speed.” In this way unusual importance
is given to this edict for helping for-
ward the Temple and the worship of
Jehovah. The object of the king in thus
aiding their worship is noteworthy:
“That they may offer sacrifices of sweet
savours unto the God of heaven, and
pray for the life of the king, and of his
sons,” This is a remarkable utterance
from a heathen monarch. It reveala—
(1.) His reverence towards God. Twice
in this decree he speaks of Him as “ the
God of heaven;” and from his wish
that sacrifices and prayers should be
presented to Him, it is evident that he
believed in His power to aid and bless
men. (2.) His faith in the efficacy of
prayer to God. Darius knew that the
Jews “were a praying people,” says
Matthew Henry, “and had heard that
God was nigh to them in all that which
they called upon Him for. He was
sensible he needed their prayers and
might receive benefit by them, and was
kind to them in order that he might
have an interest in their prayers, It is
the duty of God’s people to pray for
those that are in authority over them,
not only for the good and gentle, but
also for the froward; but they are par-
ticularly bound in gratitude to pray for


their protectors and benefactors ; and it
is the wisdom of princes to desire their
prayers. Let not the greatest princes
despise the prayers of the meanest
saints ; it is desirable to have them for
us, and dreadful to have them against
us.” (a).

TL A malediction, “ Also I have
made a decree, that whosoever shall
alter this word,” &ec, (vera. 11, 12).

1. Severe penalties are denounced
against any who should violate the de-
eree, (1.) The crucifixion of the offen-
der. ‘‘ Whosoever shail alter this word,
let timber be pulled down from his
house, let him be fastened thereon and
crucified.” (2.) The consignment of
the memory of the offender to shame
and loathing. ‘And let his house be
made a dunghill for this.” Language
such. as this is not unfrequently em-
ployed by Orientals (2 Kings x. 27;
Dan, ii. 5; iii, 29). “They imprecate
all sorta of indignities and abominations
on the objects of their dislike, and it is
not uncommon for them to smear over
with filth what is the object of their
contempt and abhorrence. Thus when
the Caliph Omar took Jerusalem, at the
head of the Saracen army, after ravag-
ing the greater part of the city, he
caused dung to be spread over the
site of the sanctuary, in token of the
abhorrence of all Mussulmans, and of
its being henceforth regarded as the
refuse and offscouring of all things,”

2. A stern <imprecation is uttered
against any who should attempt to injure
the Temple. ‘‘ And the God that hath
caused His name to dwell there destroy
all kings and people, that shall put to
their hand to alter, to destroy this house
of God which is at Jerusalem.” Where
his own power was inadequate to pro-
tect the Jews and their Temple, he in-
vokes the hand of God against those
who would injure the sacred place,

ConcLusIon :

1. See the force of example. Darius
was moved by the example of Cyrus in
thus showing favour to the Jews, In
this case we have—(1.) An example of
excellent character. The conduct of
Cyrus towards the Jews was good aud
noble. (5). (2.) An example of poe

87


Ghar, VL,


%


thumous power. Cyrus had been dead
for several years, but the decree which
he had made determined the conduct
of Darius towards the Jews. Our
influence for good or for evil does not
cease with our life upon earth, (c). (3.)
An example nobly followed. The de-
cree of Darius was even more noble and
generous than that of Cyrus.

2. See the workings of Divine Provt-
dence. In this decree we see that—{1.)
God sometimes uses unlikely agents in
accomplishing His purposes. Darius,
king of Persia, was one of the most im-
portant agents in rebuilding the Temple
at Jerusalem, dc, (2.) God overrules
the opposition of enemies for the accom-
plishment of His purposes, We are far
from saying that Tatnai and Shethar-
boznai were enemies to the Jews; but
we know that the Samaritans were bit-
terly hostile to them ; and now, as the
result of the appeal to Darius, all his
subjects west of the Euphrates are com-
manded to contribute to the Temple and
to the worship of Jehovah. ‘Surely
the wrath of man shall praise Thee; the
remainder of wrath shalt Thou restrain.”


(d).
ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) A man who lives habitually near to God
ua like a great cloud for ever dropping with
fertilising showers, This is the man who can
say, ‘*The earth is dissolved; I bear up the
ee thereof.” France had never seen 80

loody a revolution had there been men of

prayer to preserve her, England, amidst the
commotions which make her rock to and fro,
is held fast because prayer is put up incessantly
by the faithful. The flag of old England is
mailed to her mast, not by the hands of her
gailors, but by the prayers of the people of
God. These, as they intercede day and night,
and as they go about their spiritual ministry,
these are they for whom God spareth nations,
for whom He permitteth the earth still to
exist ; and when their time is over, and they
are taken away, the'salt being taken from the
earth, then shall the elements dissolve with
fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that
are therein, shall be burnt up; but not until
He hath caught away the saints with Christ
into the air, shall this world pags away.—C.
H. Spurgeon.


(b) 1f the present lecturer has a right to
consider himself a real Christian,—if he has
been of any service to his fellow-creatures, and
hag attained to any usefulness in the Chureh

8&8


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.





of Christ, he owes it, in the way of means and
instrumentality, to the sight of a companion,
who slept in the same room with him, bending
his knees in prayer on retiring to rest, That
geene, 80 unostentatious, and yet so wncon-
cealed, roused my slumbering conscience, and
sent an arrow to my heart; for, though I had
been religiously educated, I had restrained
prayer, and cast off the fear of God. My con-
version to God followed, and soon after my
entrance upon colleze studies for the work of
the ministry, Nearly half a century has rolled
away since then, with all its multitudinous
events; but that little chamber, that humble
couch, that praying youth, are still present to
my imagination, and will never be forgotten,
even amidst the splendours of heaven, and
through the ages of eternity.—J. A. James.


(c) The truth is, that no man or woman,
however poor their circumstances or mean
their lot, are without their influence; like an
electrie spark, passing from link to link, that
runs flashing down the chain of successive
generations, Indeed, a man’s life is as im-
mortal as his soul; and by itsinfluence, though
dead, he yet speaketh and worketh. .. .
Men live after they are dead. Ontliving our
memory, and more enduring than any monu-
ment of brass or marble, our example may
prove like the circle that rises round the sink-
ing stone, and growing wider and wider, em-
braces a larger and larger sphere, till it dies
in gentle wavelets on the distant beach. It
reaches a distant shore; your example a dis-
tant time, Take care, then, how you live —
Fhomas Guthrie, D.D.


(d@) All things are for the best, by virtue of
no inherent power in evil to develop good, for
evil must ever gravitate towards an increase
of itself; but by virtue of an overruling Wis-
dem bringing good out of evil, and convert-
ing the evil itself into the inatrument of good.
Thia is true of natural laws. The storm de-
structive of life and property fills the atmo-


_ sphere with the seeds of larger and freer life,


Pestilence ia the providential stimulus of gani-
tary progress. Difficulties and conflicts are
the school of all the heroic virtues. Fortitude,
self-control, heroic force of will, unselfish
generosity, a rational love of liberty, and
liberality tolerant of other men’s opinions, all
grow out of this soil. They are not hot-house
exotics, needing to be stimulated into artificial
life, but vigorous evergreens, flourishing only
in the free air of heaven, and striking their
roots deep only in their native soil. The
exercise of a Divine wisdom and power over-
ordering evil for good ia but the application
of the same principle to the higher sphere of
God’s moral government, but another and a
louder strain of the same harmonious music,
The past history of the world is one long illus.
tration of this truth, The experience of the
past becomes prophetic, and catching ita lan-
guage from the glowing pages of the in

Scripture, sings its songs of triemphant hops


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.





for the future.
forward to the future, faith recognises that
all is best. From the height of the revealed


Looking back to the past and


OMAP. Vi.


promise peeping on tiptée into the future, it


catches a glimpse of a more glorious hereafter.
—Canon Gar


A BELiever’s Exrensss,
(Verse 4.)


“ Tet the expenses be given out of the
king’s house.”

The times are hard. Expenses are very
well when one is able #o meet them easily,
but they involve a thousand perplexities
if the income is insufficient. The most
expensive living possible is that of the
believer, It is not difficult to satisfy
the bare requirements of the body.
There is more swallowed up by the re-
quirements of a man’s position. But
the human soul has the greatest needs,
If we speak of its simple necessities,
what a costly matter is the sustaining
of its life! Think, however, of its ex-
pensive enjoyments, its superabounding
luxuries! From whence do they all
come? We are spiritually penniless.
Are we not living far beyond our in-
come? No, Heaven’s exchequer sup-
plies bountifully all our requirements
and enjoyments.

I. What are our expenses? The
expenses referred to in the text are
those connected with the return of the
Jews to their own land, the rebuilding
of the Temple, and its continual sacri-
fices.

l. Their release from captivity was
doubtless an expensive blessing. Our


release from the thraldom of sin in-°


volved enormous expenditure. Was
paid “out of the King’s house.” Did
not God give His Son? Did not the
Son pay down His blood and His life?
“Ye are not redeemed with corruptible
things such as silver and gold, but with
the precious blood of Christ.” What a
price !

2. Their return to Jerusalem, The
liberated Jews in Babylon were pro-
bably impoverished by their captivity.
Cyrus says, “ Return to your own land,
I will pay your expenses.” The im-
portant step of public profession of
faith in Christ, and of union with Hie
Church, need peculiar supplies of grace.


It is promised to you “ out of the King’s
house.”

3. The material for a new Temple
was provided by king Cyrus. There
is much new material to be built up in
our habits and life, Extensive altera-
tions must be made. We require a new
building, the material of which shall
be faith, hope, love, humility, chastity,
self-denial, &c. Can we obtain these
from our own slender purse ¢

4. Wages for the workmen are part of
these expenses, It was a long job—
the Temple-building—and the workmen
must not stand still, The Christian
who makes no progress in the Divine
life may account for it—his source of
supplies has been neglected — “the
King’s house.”

5. The restoration of the sacred vessels
Srom Babylon (ver. 5) meant expense,
Our bodies being temples of the Holy
Ghost, every physical power and every
mental faculty should be “a vessel unto
honour, sanctified and meet for the
Master's use.” But these, also, have
been profaned and defiled in our capti-
vity tosin. They must now be restored
to their proper use, and purified.

6. The daily sacrifices were a further
item in the expenditure (ver, 9). (1.)
Our hearts are altars whereon should
be offered the sacrifices of worship and
praise. (2.) Our life isan altar whereon
should be offered our whole conduct,
and our special effort for Christ.

IL Where shall we find means to
meet these expenses? ‘There is one
great treasury of light—the sun—in-
exhaustible. ‘The King’s house” is an
inexhaustible treasury of grace.

1. The word of His trwth, Hidden
mines of wealth. Rich doctrines, rich
examples, rich promises, rich pledges.
Our needs appeared big until we saw
the supply here.


2. The throne of Hts grace. “ Let
89


CMAP, WI.





us come boldly,” &. (Heb. iv. 16).
“Ask what ye will,” dc. “ Whatso-
ever ye shall ask,” &.
‘¢ Thou art coming to a King,
Large petitions with thee bring;
For His grace and power are such,
None can ever ask too much.”

3. The fellowship of His people, Ex-
perience tells us of the supplies to be
found here.

4. The dispensation of His providence.
God’s abundant, unasked mercies every
day. Everything in nature is a store-
house of food; the clouds over our
heads, the clods under our feet, the
atmosphere which we breathe, Every-
thing in Providence supplies food for
the believer. ‘‘ We know that all things
work together for good,” &c.

5. The opposition of his foes. The
Persian monarch was naturally Israel’s
enemy, yet God arranges that He shall
pay Israel’s expenses, Even the lions
we may meet shall supply sweet honey
for our nourishment and refreshment.

6. The work of His Son. This in-
cludes all others. ‘My God shall sup-
ply all your need according to His riches
in glory by Christ Jesus.” What is
there wanted that is not to be found
here} ‘In Him dwelleth all the fulness





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.





—


of the Godhead.” “Full of grace and
truth; and of His fulness have all we
received, and grace for grace.”

Il. How shall we act in the pre-
sence of such abundance ?

lL. We need not he afraid of exhaust-
ing Heaven’s treasures, Here is grace
abounding! We may be prodigals, for
our Father has plenty.

2. We dare not be slow in availing
ourselves of these supplies, Live up to
your privileges, or you will suffer, and
the bountiful King will be insulted.

3. We cannot help wondering at the
goodness of the King. Was it not enough
that He should liberate us from sin}
He “crowns us with loving-kindness
and tender mercies.”

4, We will not forget to express our
gratitude to the King. As He is at alt
the expense, He shall have all the praise.
Here I will begin the song, and when I
arrive at the ‘“‘ King’s house” I shall im
richer language

“The gratitude declare
That glows within my ravished heart.”


5. We must not be so selfish as to hide
these glad tidings. ‘This day is a day
of good tidings, and we hold our peace.”
—R. S. Latimer.


Tux Desing or A SOVEREIGN AND THE Doty oF Sussxcts.
(Verse 10.)


I propose to consider the words before
us in a twofold point of view—

%. As the desire of a heathen
prince.

1. It was a just and reasonable desire,
as the history will clearly show. The
Jews, by the permission of Cyrus, had
begun to rebuild their Temple, dc,

Now, consider the obligations which
this benevolent monarch was conferring
on the Jews, and then say whether the
desire which he expressed was not just
and reasonable, He had ordered that
“whatever they had need of, young
bullocks and rams and lambs,” &,
(ver. $). Was it not reasonable that he
should expect these things to be applied
to their distinct use, and that, when he
was showing such a paternal regard for


a?


the welfare of their nation, he should bx
remembered by them in their devotions
and have an interest in their prayers,
Surely this was the least return which
they could render to him for his extreme
kindness,

2. It was also a wise and politic desire.
Religion and loyalty are inseparable. It
cannot be that a man who truly fears
God should fail essentially in honouring
the king. On the other hand, a man
who has no fear of God before his eyes,
has uo principle sufficiently strong to
keep him faithful to his king, if he be
drawn either by interest or inclination
to oppose him. Hence, then, it was
wise in Darius, though a heathen prince,
to encourage piety amongat the Jewa,

Nor was he less politic in desiring s


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EERA,


>





remembrance in their prayers. Inter-
cession will induce a habit of mind
friendly to the person for whom it is
offered, and, if offered in sincerity by
a whole nation, would prove a bulwark
around the throne, stronger than a:} the
fleets and armies that could be raised
for its defence.

II. As the duty of a Ohristian
people.

1, In the service of owr heavenly King,
the “offering of sacrifices to Him of a
sweet savour” may well be considered
as comprehending our duty to Him;
whether as sinners, who stand in need
of His mercy, or as saints, who desire
to glorify His name. The Jewish
sacrifices were presented as an atone-
ment for the sins of the people; and
they prefigured that “Lamb of God,
which in His eternal purpose was slain
from the foundation of the world.”
These we are not required to bring;
because that adorable Saviour, in whom
all the types and shadows of the Mosaic
law were to be fulfilled, hascome. “ He
loved us, and gave Himself for us, an
offering and a sacrifice to God for a
sweet-smelling savour.” This sacrifice
we must ever bring before the God of
heaven and earth. Jesus is “the way,
the truth, and the life.” “‘ His is the
only name whereby any man can be
saved.”

But there are other sacrifices also,
which, as saints, we are to offer, and
which have a sweet savour before God.
Our whole person, body, soul, and spirit,
is to be presented to the Lord, as the
Apostle tells us: ‘‘ I beseech you, by the


GaP. Vi.





7
mercies of God, that ye present your
bodies,” &e. (Rom. xii. 1). And if only
we come to God through Christ, there
is not a service which we can render to
Him which shall not come up with ac-
ceptance before Him, as a sacrifice of a
sweet-smelling savour. Such are our alma
(Heb. xiii, 16); such our prayers (Ps.
evil, 22); such our very sighs (Ps, li,
17); such is our every service, of what-
ever kind (1 Pet. ii. 5).

And do not imagine that your atten-
tion to this duty is unimportant as it re-
spects the welfare of the state. There is
a far closer connection between national
piety and national prosperity than men
generally imagine, (Comp. chap. vii. 23.)

To this must be added your duty to
your earthly prince, to be instant in
prayer to God on his behalf. This ts
your duty; for the Apostle says, “I
exhort that, first of all, supplications,
prayers,” &c, (1 Tim, ii. 1-3).

Ii ts your interest also; for the wel-
fare of every individual in the nation is
bound up in the welfare of the king.

Let us, from the example of this hea-
then prince, learn how to employ our t-
jiuence. Let us use it for “the God of
heaven ;” let us employ it to protect the
oppressed, to encourage piety, and to
maintain the honour of God in the world.

Let us learn also how to improve the
privileges we enjoy. Let us abound in
praises to our heavenly Benefactor, in
affectionate loyalty to our earthly king,
and in every work, whereby God may be
glorified, and the welfare of our fellow-
creatures may be advanced.—C. Simeon,
UA.


Tre ComMPLETION OF THE TEMPLE. ’
(Verses 13-15.)


Let us consider—

I. The ready compliance of the Per-
gian officers with the royal commands.

1. They carried out their commands
faithfully. “Then Tatnai, governor on
this side the river, Shethar-bozmai, and
their companions, according to that
which Darius the king had sent, so they
did.”

3. They carried out their commands


readily. “So they did speedily.”
They exhibited neither reluctance nor
delay in carrying out the directiona
which they had received from king
Darius. We have in this another evi-
dence of the freedom from prejudice,
the impartiality, and the fairness which
marked the conduct of ‘latnai and She
thar-boznai towards the Jews,

IL The satisfactory progress and

9)


GHaP, Vi.


altimate completion of the building of
the Temple. ‘And the elders of the
Jews builded, and they prospered,” dc.
(vers, 14, 15). This successful issue of
their important undertaking was accom-
plished by the co-operation in various
ways of many persons and _ powers,
through the good Providence of God.
Let us glance at such of these as are
here mentioned.

l. The grand Authority for the great
work. ‘ They builded, and finished it,
according to the commandment of the
God of Israel.” The builders prosecuted
their work as “the servants of the God
of heaven and earth” (chap. v. 11).
They were summoned to their work and
encouraged in it by the prophets of
Jehovah, “in the name of the God of
Israel” (chap. v. 1). They were work-
ing in obedience to His express com-
mand, And “there would have been
no command of Cyrus and Darius with-
out God’s command.”

2. The royal promoters of the great
work, ‘*And according to the com-
mandment of Cyrus, and Darius, and
Artaxerxes king of Persia.” Although
Artaxerxes had nothing to do with the
erection of the sacred edifice, he is men-
tioned by the historian because of the
great favour he showed to the good
cause many years afterwards. Each of
these monarchs had rendered valuable
assistance to the Jews in restoring and
carrying on the worship of Jehovah,
(1.) They gave permission for the return
of the exiles and for the rebuilding of
the Temple (chaps. i 1-4; vi. 1-12;
vii, 11-13), (2.) They granted them
protection in rebuilding the Temple (ver.
7). (3.) They bestowed upon them
liberal assistance both for their work
and for their worship (chaps. i. 4-11;
vi. 8-10; vii, 14-23).

3. The worthy leaders of the great
work, ‘“‘And the elders of the Jews
builded.” They were forward in taking
up the work when summoned thereto
by the prophet Haggai (chap. v. 2), and
they continued steadfast and diligent
in the prosecution thereof. By their
example they encouraged the people in
their duty,

4. The inspired inciters tn the great

92





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : BERA.





work. “And they prospered through
the*prophesying of Haggai the prophet
and Zechariah the son of Iddo.” When
the people were disheartened and wearied
through difficulties and hindrances, these
holy messengers of Heaven encouraged
and strengthened them “through the
Divine word and in the power of the
Divine Spirit.” With the assurances of
success in their great work, and of the
rich blessing of their God, they stimu-
lated and invigorated the people in the
prosecution of that work, (Comp. Hag.
ii. ; Zech. iv. 6-10.)

5. The ultimate completion of the great
work. “ And they builded and finished
it,” &. It was completed at last,
There had been difficulties in the way
of the work, and opposition to it, and
for some time lack of interest in it on
the part of the Jews themselves ; but by
the several concurrent favourable influ-
ences, and especially by the blessing of
God, the undertaking was at length
brought to a successful issue, And the
tume of tts completion is significant
“And this house was finished on the
third day of the month Adar, which
was in the sixth year of the reign of
Darius the king.” Says Schultz: “ For
a work of such importance the date is
properly given. . . . It was now for
the first the exactly right time The
Temple was ready just seventy years
after its destruction, so that the pro-
phecy of the seventy years was now ful-
filled exactly thereby.”

CoNCLUSION :

The building of this Temple may be
regarded as a figure of—

1. The building of the temple of God
in individual Christians. “Know ye
not that ye are the temple of God, and
that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?”
&c, (1 Cor, iii, 16,17). “But ye, be-
loved, building up yourselves on your
most holy faith,” &. (Jude 20, 21).
“ Giving all diligence, add to your faith
virtue,” &. (2 Pet. i 5-7), And build-
ing thus, by the blessing of God, this
edifice also shall be completed. “He
which hath begun a good work in you
will perform it until” (Alford : “ will
perfect it up to”) “the day of Jesus
Chriat.” (a).


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.


GHaP, Vi.





3. The building of the temple of God
in the world. A great and glorious
spiritual temple is being erected out of
the ruins of fallen humanity. The work
is frequently and sadly obstructed ; the
adversaries to it are many ; the builders
at times seem only half-hearted in their
work; and the progress appears to be
irregular and slow; but the edifice shall
surely be brought to splendid comple-
tion. Opposition, however crafty and
organised and powerful, can neither
frustrate the purposes nor hinder the
fulfilment of the promises of God. Here
is the grand issue of the work of the
builders of the spiritual temple: “ Be-
hold the tabernacle of God is with men,
and He will dwell with them,” de, (Bev.
xxi, 3, 4). (0).


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) The work of sanctification must go on
until the gaint ean say, ‘‘Il and my Father
are one.” ‘That ig the sublime end of Chris-
tianity. It is not to multiply theological tech-
nicalities ; it is not to build one church spire
higher than another; it is not to furnish a
grindstone on which pugnacious bigots may
whet their little swords; it is to gather up a
shattered and overthrown humanity, to re-
burnish the living stones on which the fire of
an enemy has left traces of fury, to rebuild
the fallen empire of manhood, until it shall
be beautiful and holy ag a palace built for
God.—Joseph Parker, D.D.

It is the part of a good workman not to
leave his work imperfect; a good physician
will not forsake his patient when he has done
but balf his cure; the husbandman gives not
over when he has sown but part of his ground;
and he that does but half build a house is but
half a carpenter. So he that enters into the
way of Christianity, and stands still, is but
half a Christian—the greatest part of his work
is yet behind, It ig not enough to begin well,
but to continue in well-doing; it is not so
much the entrance into, as the perseverance
in goodness that is required. God left not
the great work of the creation in the first or
second day thereof, but in six days finished
it to the glory of His name; not as then in
the generation of His creatures, but now also
in their regeneration; whom He loves, He
loves to the end; and the good work He has
begun in any, shall be perfected. Having,
then, so fair & copy to write by, ao good an
example to live by, let us so run that we may
obtain; so gail in the sea of this world that
we may never give over till we arrive im the





i
desired haven ; 80 to begin as to be sure to
make an end; that it may never be said to
our great and just reproach, ‘‘This man began
to build, but was not able to finish” (Luke
xiv, 80).—Whitiaker.


(b) Inasmuch as ‘all the building is grow:
ing in the Lord” (Eph. ii. 21), and aecording
to His order, it will, in the end, not only be
a glorious temple of humanity, but marvel-
lously adapted for the indwelling and mani-
festation of God. ‘I will dwell in them,
and I will be their God, and they shall be My
people.” I will fill them, and they shall re-
present My fulness, ‘‘The whole building,”
the redeemed of every generation, growing
more and more into unity with each other,
and with Christ, and through Him, with all
the hidden powers of the Godhead, is a work
which is every way worthy of in Almighty
Father, To what glory, to whi: beauty, will
the kingdom grow! to what w sdom will {i=
members attain? what will be sheir powen
what their fellowships ! what tlh cir individual
freedom of action what their s-:vice and en
as one empire in the Son, andi» the Father
—John Pulsford.

Did you ever win a soul to Ch. ‘st # Did you
ever get a grip of the hand of spiritual gratl
tude? Did you ever see the tear starting from
the eye when the convert said, ‘‘ Bless you!
I shall remember you in heaven, for you have
brought me to Christ?” Ah, my dear friend,
you will not be satisfied merely with this,
This isa kind of food that makes men hungry,
Oh, that you had a rich banquet sf it, and yet
wanted more still. The Church vill be built,
If you and I sit still, it will be owilt, This
is a truth, though it is often turscd to a mis
chievous end—the Church will be built, even
without us. But, oh, we shall miss the satis-
faction of helping in its building Yes, it will
grow ; every stone will be put in ite place, and
the pinnacle will soar into ite predestined
place, but every stone from foundation to

innacle, will seem to say to you, ** Thou
Tadet nothing to do with this! ou hadat
no hand in thia!” When Cyrm took one of
his guests round his garden, they uest admired
it greatly, and said he had mush pleasure in
it. ‘* Ah,” said Cyrus, ‘‘ but you have not so
much pleasure in this garden at * have, for I
planted every tree in it myself.* One reason
why Christ has so much pleasure ir. His Church
ig because He did so much for ¢ g and one
reason why some saints will hae a greater
fulness of heaven than others rejoice in
will be because they did more fi. heaven than
others. By God’s grace they wre enabled to
bring more souls there ; and a8+i¢y look upon
the Church they may, without «elf-reliance,
and ascribing it all to grace, rem ember what
they were enabled to de in ite building up,—
@. H. Spwrgeon.


O8aP. Vi


y


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.





es ee ren en


Tue SuBseRVIENCY or A Fairarct Ministry To THE Erection or Gop’s
SprrituaL TEMPLE,


(Verse 14.)


L. The building of the Temple through
the instrumentality of the prophets
Haggai and Zechariah.

1. Many difficulties obstructed the
progress of the work, Scarcely was the
foundation laid, before an attempt was
made to impede the work through the
hypocrisy of pretended friends. The
Samaritans offered to co-operate with
the Jews in raising the intended fabric ;
but their design was to frustrate, rather
than promote, the completion of it.
Many will profess to desire the same
objects, and will offer to concur in pro-
secuting them to a certain point, who,
if their.offers were accepted, would only
defeat the ends proposed, The Jews,
however, determined to prosecute their
work alone (chap. iv. 1-3). That device
having failed, they were assaulted by
the hostility of open enemies. Complaints
were made against them, and they were
represented as plotting to gain their
liberty and independence, &. In this
way the servants of God have been
assailed in all ages: our Lord was
calumniated as an enemy to Cesar ; and
His apostles as “‘ movers of sedition,”
&c. This plan succeeded, the Jews
yielded to despondency, and for the
space of fifteen years suspended the
work (chap. iv, 23, 24) A sportt of
indolence and supineness soon prevailed
among them, and would have operated
to a total dereliction of the work, if
God had not sent His prophets to rouse
them from their lethargy.

2, Through the preaching of the pro-
phets, however, these difficultves were over-
come. The prophet Haggai justly re-
proved them for attending so carefully
to their own accommodation, &c. (Hag.
i. 2-5, 7). The prophet Zechariah also
urged them to bear in mind how awfully
their fathers had suffered for the neglect
of God (Zech. i. 1-6) ; and then, by a
variety of images which he had seen in
visions, encouraged them with assur-
ances of success in their labours (Zech,

94


i.-iv.). Thus were the people stimulated
to exertion. But no sooner did they
resume their work, than their enemies
renewed their application to the govern-
ment to issue again their mandate to
discontinue it (chap. v. 1-10). This
effort, however, was overruled, as similar
effurts have often been, for the further-
ance of the work it was intended to
destroy (comp. chap. vi, 1-10 with Phil
i. 12); and in the short space of four
years the edifice was completed (ver. 15).

II. The subserviency of a faithful
ministry to the erection of Gods
spiritual temple. The Temple of old
was a shadow of that spiritual temple
which is erected for God in the hearts
of men; “ being built on the foundation
of theapostles,” &c. (Eph. ii 20-22), The
erection of this—

1. Is connected with the same difficul-
ties. Who that begins truly to sur-
render up his soul to God, does not
find imany impediments from pretended
frienis? They will profess to approve
of religion, and will propose to go with
us to a certain length, that so they may
have the greater influence to keep us
from ‘“‘following the Lord fully,” and
from serving Him with our whole hearts,
If we are enabled to withstand their
efforts, then we shall be assailed by open
enemies. Not unfrequently will they
become our greatest foes, who by their
relation to us ought rather to become |
our firmest protectors, And too 9ften
do tumzdity and sloth induce us to relax
our efforts, till, if God do not by some
special act of providence or grace awaken
us, we lose the time for working, and,
like the foolish virgins, experience for
ever the fatal effects of our remissness.

2. Is carried on and perfected by the
same means. God has estaldished an
order of men on purpose to carry on thea
spirviual building in the world (Eph
iv. 11-13). The apostles may be called
“master builders;” but every pastor
and teacher is ¢ gaged im the same


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; FZRA,


OBAP. VE,





work, according to the office that has
been assigned him, We call you, then,
30 “ consider your ways ;” consider what
has hindered you hitherto, &c. Consider
too the promises of God. What assur-
ances of success are given, dc. ‘Up


oe
then, and be doing,” every one of you;
and “your God will be with you.”
Yield not to discouragements of any
kind, &c. Seek “ as living stones to be
built up a spiritual house,” dc. (1 Pet.
li, 4, 5).—C. Simeon, M.A.


THE DEDICATION OF THE TEMPLE.
(Verses 16-18.)


The dedication of the Temple was
characterised by—

IL Religious rejoicing. ‘And the
children of Israel, the priests, and the
Levites, and the rest of the children of
the captivity, kept the dedication of this
house of God with joy.” It would not
have been very surprising if they had
mourned because it was so inferior in
maguificenceand splendourtothe Temple
of Solomon. It is probable “that the
carving and the gold, and other orna-
ments of Solomon’s Temple far sur-
passed this, and the pillars of the
portico and the veils may all have been
far more splendid, so also probably were
the vessels; and all this is what a Jew
would mourn over far more than mere
erchitectural splendour.” Moreover,some
of the most sacred and glorious things
of the first Temple were altogether absent
from this one, eg., the Ark of the cove-
nant, the cherubim, the Shechinah, and
the Urim and Thummim. Sometimes
when we have reached the end of long
cherished hopes and efforts, we are dis-
appointed and depressed because the
result does not come up to our ideal and
desire. And we should not, therefore,
have been surprised if the Jews had
looked upon their finished work with
sadness. But it was not so. They
*kept the dedication of this house of
God with joy.” And they had good
reasons for devout gladness ; ¢9.—

1. Protracted labours brought to a
successful termination.

2. The honour offered to Jehovah their
God.

3. The benefits which were likely to
accrue to men through their sacred edifice
and ite worship, Joyousness in the
service of God is a conspicuous feature
of the religious life in post - exile
times. This is especially manifest in


the Psalms of this period. Comp. Ps.
CXXXV., cxxxvi., cxlvi.—cl., and cxviii,
which, says Schultz, “ without doubt
the congregation then sung, although
it was really composed somewhat
earlier; and especially did they ap-
propriate with greatly agitated hearts
the shout of triumph: ‘The right hand
of the Lord is exalted, the right hand
of the Lord doth valiantly. .. . Open
to me the gates of righteousness,” d&c.
And we also should “serve the Lord
with gladness, come before His pre-
sence with singing, enter into His gates
with thanksgiving,” d&c. (a).

II. Devout gratitude. ‘And offered
at the dedication of this house of God
an hundred bullocks, two hundred rams,
four hundred lambs.” In these offer-
ings we discover—

1. An expression of gratitude. They
presented both burnt offerings and peace
offerings; and while both were ex-
pressive of gratitude, the latter were
especially so. The peace offerings were
eucharistic. The Psalmist refers to
them when he says, “I will offer to
Thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving.”
They had great and strong reasons for
gratitude. ‘The Lord had done great
things for them.” And they sang, ‘The
Lord hath done great things for us; we
are glad.” (0).

2. An expression of their complete self:
dedication to God. The burnt offerings
were laid whole upon the altar, and there
consumed by fire, thus setting forth the
entire consecration of the offerer to God.
This was the chief meaning of the burnt
offerings. The dedication of churches
is acceptable to God only as the wor-
shippers dedicate themselves to Him,
“The sacrifices of God are a broken
spirit; a broken and a contrite heart,
O God, Thou wilt not despise.” ‘I be.

95


GaP, Vi





seech you, therefore, brethren, that ye
present your bodies a living sacrifice,”
&c. (¢).

The number of these offerings is small
as compared with the very large number
offered by Solomon at the dedication of
the former Temple. ‘Solomon offered
a sacrifice of peace offerings, which he
offered unto the Lord, two and twenty
thousand oxen, and an hundred and
twenty thousand sheep.” But Zerub-
babel offered only “an hundred bullocks,
two hundred rams, four hundred lambs,
and for a sin offering for all Israel,
twelve he-goats.” The total number of
animals sacrificed then was 142,000;
the total now is only 712. Yet Zerub-
babel and the people with him offered
—(1.) Freely. (2.) Liberally, when we
take into account their small numbers
and reduced circumstances, as compared
with those of the time of Solomon. (3.)
Cheerfully. And “if there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according
to that a man hath, not according to
that he hath not.”

UL Deep humility. ‘And for a
sin offering for all Israel, twelve he-
goats, according to the number of the
tribes of Israel.” Consider—

1. The nature of this offering “A
ain offering.” This was an acknowledg-
ment of sin on the part of those for
whom it was offered, and that the
sinner deserved death by reason of his
sin, but that God in His mercy ac-
cepted the death of the victim as an
atonement for the sinner, And in this
way the people humbly confess their
sin before God, Sin had brought their
miseries upon them, had stripped them
of their national power and protection,
had been the real cause of their cap-
tivity. Hence this sin offering was ap-
propriate in its relation to past sins, and
a hopeful indication as to their future
conduct. (d),

2. The number of the victims composing
this offering. ‘“*A sin offering for all
Israel, twelve he-goats, according to the
number of the tribes of Israel.” The
confession of sin was intended for the
whole nation, and the atonement was
designed “for all Israel.” This was a
secognition on the part of the offerers

96


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EBRA.


of the unity of all the tribes, an evidence
that ‘the Temple was intended for the
entire covenant people,” and an expres-
sion of the hope that all would return
to the land of their fathers, and to the
enjoyment of the full privileges of the


people of God,


IV. Appropriate arrangements for
its future use. “And they set the
priests in their divisions, and the Levites
in their courses, for the service of God,
which is at Jerusalem; as it is written
in the book of Moses.” ‘Thus arrange-
ments were made for—

1. Kegular and orderly services, They
aimed at—(1.) Completeness in their wor-
ship. Both priests and Levites were set
in their respective spheres of work. No
duties were to be neglected. (2.) Con-
tinurty in their worship. They were set
in classes and divisions, so that when
one had fulfilled its appointed term of
service another would take its place.
(Comp. 1 Chron. xxiii.—xxvi.)

2. Scriptural services. “As it is
written in the book of Moses.” They
were careful that their worship should
be in accordance with the expressed will
of God. It is well said by Matthew
Henry: “Though the Temple service
could not now be performed with so much
pomp and plenty as formerly, because of
their poverty, yet perhaps it was per-
formed with as much purity and close
adherence to the Divine institution as
ever, which was the true glory of it.
No beauty like the beauty of holiness.”

It is perhaps unnecessary to add that
the principal points of this exposition are
applicable to the dedication of churches
in our own day.





ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) The priests of old were not to gully them-
selves with sorrow when they performed their
functions, and saints who are of a higher
priesthood should show forth delight in their
approaches to their God. Angels sing, and
why not God’s other servants, who are a little
lower, and yet far higher? David danced
before the ark, which was but a symbol of
Divinity ; what ails us that our heart go sel-
dom dances before the Lord Himself? The
old creation has its sunshine and flowers; ita
lowing herds and bleating flocks; its heaven-
mounting larks and warbling nightingales ;
its rivers laughing, and ite seas clapping


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.


hands; is the new creation of grace to render
less happy worship to God our exceeding
joy? Nay, rather let us come into His pre-
gence with thanksgiving, and show ourselves
glad in Him with psalms. Most of the English
versions alter the old hundredth Psalm into,
‘*Him serve with fear;” but for my part,
by God’s grace I mean to sing it as it used to
be and still is sung in Scotland—


** All people that on earth do dwell,
Sing to the Lord with cheerful voice ;
Him serve with mirvH, His praise forth tell,
Come ye before Him and rejoice.”
—C. H. Spurgeon.


(5) It is an excellent thing when Christian
men know how to sing as well as to work, and
mingle holy music with holy service. The best
musie of a Christian consists in thankfulness
to God. Thanks should be rendered by the be-
liever with all the acts common tomen. Our
eating, our drinking, our social meetings, our
quiet conversings one with another, in all we
should give thanks unto God and the Father,
This we should do in the labours peculiar to
our vocation. Whatever your trade and call-
ing may be, if you cannot sing aloud, you can
ging in your hearts while your hans are busy 3
you can ring out the praises of God as well to
the sound of the hammer on the anvil as to
the peal of the organ ; your feet at the sewing
machine may beat time to a sacred tune ; you
ean ag well praise God while you crack your
whip as when you sing to @ Psalm tune, Why
not? If the heart be right you can mount up
to the heavens from any place of labour.—
Ibid.


(c) It is the end and essence of all religion
to turn the mind from self to God ; to give it
absorbing views of the Divine beauty and glory;
to till it with Divine love and zeal; to make
it feel honoured in honouring God, blessed in
blessing Him; to make it feel that nothing is
good enough or great enough for Him, .. .
A man thus inspired will no more th:ak of
inquiring the advantages, the probable gain
of his deeds and his adoration, than he would
think of the profitableness of gazing with
admiration on a lovely landscape, or regaling
his soul with the noble qualities of a hero or
3 martyr. Such a man has offered himself to





CMAP, VI,


iy
God; he has given hia own goul, with all ite

owers. His other gifts are but resuits and
forms of this first aud greatest gift; all other
offerings are virtually included in this. And,
in truth, this consecration of self is the grand
and essential condition, the seminal principle
of all consecration. We have no just thought
of God, no oneness of spirit with His Spirit,
if we Jook on ourselves simply as sacrificers ;
we are sacrifices as well ; both sacrificers and
sacrifices; we have to present ourselves ag
sacrifices to God. And if there be this first
and best offering, the offering of ourselves, it
will infuse a apirit of life and fulness into all
our service, animating the form, quickenin
the body of all service ; a spirit of delight he
strength and earnestness ; a large and enlarg-
ing, a noble and an ennobling spirit. he
prudent, commercial temper, in religion, is
one of narrowness aud pain and bondage; we
never possess ourselves thoroughly till we for
get ourselves, never realise our power and in-
herit our portion till all spiritual engagements
and acts cease to be the mere meeting of a de-
mand, the mere performance of a condition,
and become the home and rest and reward of
the soul.— A. J. Morris.


(d) The effect of these views and recollee-
tions (viz., those of true Christians) are peni-
tence, contrition, and deep humiliation of
goul, and by them all their religious feelings
are pervaded and characterised. When they
love their God and Redeemer, it is with a
penitent love; when they rejoice in Him, it
is with a penitent joy; when they believe in
Him, it is with a penitent faith; when they
obey Him, it is with a penitent obedience ;
when they offer Him thanksgivings and praises,
penitence mingles with them her humble con-
fessions and contrite sighs; and the place on
earth which they most covet, in which they
most delight, is that of the woman who stood
weeping at the feet of Christ, washing them
with her tears, and wiping them with the
hairs of her head. Even while observing a
joyful festival, tears, the fountain of which
is supplied by godly sorrow for gin, and grati-
tude to the Redeemer ; teara, which it is de-
lightful to shed, are seen on the same couns
tenances which glow with love and hope, and
beam with holy humble joy im God.—d%
Payton, D.D.


Tur CELEBRATION OF THE PASSOVER,
(Verses 19-22.)


A few weeks after the dedication of
the Temple the feasts of the Passover
and of unleavened bread were celebrated ;
and this marked the beginning of the
new period in which the worship of God,
with its festivals and observances, was
regularly and fully carried on.


Notice :

I. The personal preparation for these
sacred festivals. This comprised—

1. Vhe purvfication of the priests and
Levites from ceremonial wneleannese,
“For the priests and Levites had puri-
fied themselves as one man, they were


97


CHAP. Vi


By


wll clean, and killed the Passover for all
the children of the captivity, and for
their brethren the priests, and for them-
selves.” ‘The purity of ministers adds
much to the beauty of their ministra-
tions.” They who “ bear the vessels of
the Lord” should be clean (Isa. lii. 7).

2. The separation of the people from
heathen cssociations and immoralities,
“ And the children of Israel, which were
come again out of captivity, and all such
as had separated themselves unto them
from the filthiness of the heathen of the
land, to seek the Lord God of Israel, did
eat.” And separation from sinners and
their corrupt practices is still indispen-
sable to union and communion with God.
“ Ye are the temple of the living God ;
as God hath said, I will dwell in them,
and walk in them; and I will be their
God, and they shall be My people.
Wherefore come out from among them,
and be ye separate,” &. (2 Cor. vi, 16-
18). We caunot meet with God in holy
fellowship unless we are in a suitable
spiritual condition. And as a rule, men
require preparation of heart (Job xi.
13), in order to meet Him thus. To
enjoy intimate communion with God, we
must turn aside from the ways of dark-
ness, and “ walk in the light as He is
in the light ” (1 John i. 5-7). (a).

IL The principal significance of
these sacred festivals. It would be
out of place here to enter at any length
into a consideration of the meaning of
these feasts. But inasmuch as their
chief significance was emphasised upon
this special occasion, it behoves us to
notice that significance,

1. The Passover was a memorial of
their covenant relation with God. “ The
Exodus,” as Dr, Howson observes, * was
looked upon as the birth of the nation ;
the Passover was its annual birthday
feast. . Nearly all the rites of the fes-
tival, if explained in the most natural
manner, appear to point to this as to its
primary meaning. It was the yearly
memorial of the dedication of the people
to Bim who had saved their first-born
from the destroyer, in order that they
might be made holy to Himself. This
was the lesson which they were to teach
to their children throughout all genera-

98





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA,


tions. When the young Hebrew asked
his father regarding the paschal lamp,
‘What is this?’ the answer prescribed
was, ‘By strength of hand the Lord
brought us out of Egypt,’ &e. (Exod.
xiii. 14, 15). Hence, in the periods of
great national restoration in the times
of Joshua, Hezekiah, Josiah, and Ezra,
the Passover was observed in a special
manner, to remind the people of their
true position, and to mark their re
newal of the covenant which their
fathers had made.” This covenant re-
lation was originally based upon what
God had done for them in bringing
them out of their bondage in Evypt,
and in preserving their first-born from
the destroying angel; and now the
grounds of that relation were strength-
ened. by the deliverance from Babylon,
which He had effected for them, and
by the fact that He had raised up for
them such powerful and liberai friends
as Cyrus and Darius Thus they had
special reasons for celebrating this Pass-
over with extraordinary heartiness and
devotion. How many and mighty are
the reasons which constrain us to de
vote ourselves to God! (1 Cor. vi. 19,
20 ; 1 Pet. i. 18, 19). (0).

2. The feast of unleavened bread waa
@ solemn recognition of their obligation
to live holily unto God, “The unlea-
vened bread signified the abiding state
of consecrated holiness.” “Through
the feast of unleavened bread,” says
Schultz, “ they vowed, in that the strict
abstinence from leaven was connected
therewith, to walk not in the old leaven
of wickedness and wantonness, but in
the unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth.” (Comp. 1 Cor. v. 7,8.) “ We
have far more cogent motives to rise
into the new and pure life of sincerity
and truth.” (c).

il. The special joy in these sacred
festivals. “And they kept the feast of
unleavened bread seven days with joy.”

1, All the ordinary reasons for joy
were applicable upon this occasion. The
great facts commemorated were joy-
inspiring. So also was the covenant
relation which arose from these facta,
with its privileges, dc,

2. There were also special reasons


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : BZRA,





for joy on this occasion. “For the
Lord had made them joyful, and had
turned the heart of the king of Assyria
unto them, to strengthen their hands in
the work of the house of God, the God
of Israel.”

Notice :

(1.) The Author of their joy. “The
Lord had made them joyful.” They
regarded Him as the great fountain of
all their blessings. “ All my springs
are in Thee.” (2.) The occasion of their
joy. That by the favour and assistance
of Cyrus and Darius they had com-
pleted the Temple of God, and were
able to celebrate all the sacred ordi-
nances of their religion in a becoming
manner. (3.) The character of their joy.
It was religious in its source, occasion,
character, and expression. It expressed
itself in the reverent worship of the holy
God. Let our joy be of the same char-
acter. ‘Rejoice in the Lerd alway:
again I say, Rejoice.” (d).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a’ Seqnester yourselves from all earthly
employments, and set apart some time for
solemn preparation to meet God in duty.
You cannot come hot, reeking out of the
world into God’a presence, but you will find
the influence of it in your duties. It is with
the heart a few minutes since plunged into
the world, now at the feet of God, just as with
the sea after a storm, which stili continues
working muddy and disquiet; though the
wind be laid and storm over, thy heart must
have some time to settle. There are few
musicians that can take down a lute or viol,
and play presently upon it, without some
time to tune it. When thou goest to God in
any duty, take thy heart aside, and say, ‘* O
my soul, I am now addressing myself to the
greatest work that ever a creiture was em-
ployed about. I am going into the awful
presence of God, about business of everlasting
moment,”—H, G. Salter.


(3) Dr. Doddridge, on one occasion, inte-
rested himself on behalf of a condemned cri-
minal, and at length succeeded in obtaining
his pardon, On announcing to him the joyful
intelligence, he prostrated himself at the
Doctor’s feet, and exclaimed, “ Oh, sir, every
drop of my blood thanks you, for you have had
mercy on every drop of it! Wherever you go,
I will be yours.” With how much greater pro-
priety may the Christian prostrate himself
at the feet of Christ, and make use of similar
language.— Bible [Mustrations.


(c) “ Holiness to the Lord!” where iz inst


OHAP. VL
re Seana


inscription to be stamped now! Not en the
vestments of any Levitical order; not on plates
of sacerdotal gold, worn upon the forehead,
Priest and Levite have passed by. The Jewiah
tabernacle has expanded into that world-wide
brotherhood where whosoever doeth righteous.
ness is accepted. Morning has risen into day.
Are we children of that day? For form, we
have spirit; for Gerizim and Zion, our common
seenery. The ministry of Aaron ia ended.
His ephod, with its gold, and blue, and purple,
and acarlet, and fine twined linen, and cunning
work, has faded and dropped, The curious
girdle and its chains of wreathen gold are
broken. The breastplate of judgment that lay
against his heart, and its fourfold row of triple
jewelsp—of sardines, topaz, and carbuncle—of
emerald, sapphire, and diamond—of ligure,
agate, and amethyst—of beryl, onyx, and jas-
per—has been crushed and lost. The pome-
granates are cast aside like untimely fruit,
The golden bells are silent, Even the mitre,
with its sacred signet, and the grace of the
fashion of it, has perished, All the outward
beauty and glory of that Hebrew worship which
the Lord commanded Moses has vanished into
the eternal splendours of the Gospel, and been
fulfilled in Christ. What teaching haa it left?
what other than this ?—that we are to engrave
our ‘* Holiness to the Lord,” firat on the heart,
and then on all that the heart goes out into,
through the brain and the hand: on the plates
of gold our age of enterprise is drawing up
from mines, and beating into currency ; on
bales of merchandise and books of account ; on
the tools and bench of every handicraft; on
your weights and measures; on pen and plough
and pulpit; on the doorposts of your houses,
and the utensils of your table, and the walls of
your chambers; on cradle and playthings and
achool-books ; on the locomotives of enterprise,
and the bells of the horseg, and the ships of
navigation ; on music-halle and libraries; on
galleries of art, and the lyceum desk ; on all
of man’s inventing and bnilding, all of his
using and enjoying; for all these are trusts in
a stewardship, for which the Lord of the ser
vants reckoneth.—F, D. Huntington, D,D.








(d) Christianity is not a sepulchral thing,
a gloomy life, a depressed condition of svcial
existence, It is impossible that it can be ao
as ihe world brands it, with such a prescrip.
tion as this from an apostle’s lips, ‘‘ Rejoice
evermore.” True, the Christian has his sor-
rows; but these are not unsweetened. ‘True,
the Christian life has its shadowa and ite
showers; but these are not unmingled with
bright beams of heavenly light; and the sad-
dest aspects of a Christian’s daily life are but
the April showera of apring that usher in the
approaching bright and beautiful summer—
the everlasting and the heavenly sunshine.
Christian life ia not a penance, as the Romanist
thinks it; but a privilege, as God describes it.
It ig not a reluctant sacrifice wrung from na,
but a joyous and freewill offering gladly and
gratefully rendered by og. And, therefore, the


99


CHAP. VL





light of our life is not a dim, but a bright
religious life, The injunction of our Apostle is,
“ Rejoice always ;” and the prayer of the Apos-
tle’s Lord, ‘‘ That My joy might remain in you,
and that your joy might be full.” And Peter,
eatching up the thought of his Lord still shin-
ing with undiminished lusire on the leaves
of memory, answers in his’ epistle, ** Whom,
having not seen, we love; in whom, though
now we see Him not, yet believing we rejoice


Tae DEDICATION OF


» HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : EZRA,








with joy unspeakable and full of glory.” And
the Apostle Paul, echoing the same grand
sentiment, says, ‘* We joy in God.” ‘* Rejoice ;
again I say, Rejoice.” This shows us, that of
all happy men upon earth the Christian should
be happiest. His sorrows come from sin, hia
.griefs spring from evil; his sunshine, his
gladness, and his joy are the spontaneous and
moral elements of his true Christian and holy
life.—John Cumming, D.D.


THe SEconp TEMPLE,


Notes for Scripture Lesson. (Verses 16-22.)


‘The new house at length was ready.
It was larger than the Temple of Solomon
(eee article on Second Temple in any good
Bible dictionary), though very far less
gorgeous. Its size, however, was “not
larger than an average parish church of
the last century. Solomon’s was smaller.”
(Article, “Temple of Zerubbabel,” Smith’s
Bibl. Dict.) There is, too, a very great
contrast between the number of sacrifices
at the dedication of the two Temples
(comp, Ezra vi. 17, with 2 Chron, vii. 5),
as there is also between the gorgeous-
ness of the ritual in one case, and
its comparative plainness in the other.
Each feature noted by Ezra is of interest
and importance,

I. The occasion was one of joy—
the worship of God should be joyful.
Hebrew and Christian worship are joy-
ful, because believers worship a revealed
God of salvation, Heathen worship is
a straining or groping of man after God
(1 Kings xviii. 26-29). It cannot be
joyful. But we worship a God of Love,
who revealed Himself to the Hebrews in
sacrifices and prophecy, and who reveals
Himself to us in Jesus Christ, “full of
beauty, truth, and grace.” If we would
see the gladsomeness of the worship in
the second Temple, let us turn to the
146th, 147th, and 148th Psalms, which
were composed by, or under the direc-
tion of, Haggai and Zechariah, for the
service of this house of God. The
burden of Hebrew song is “ Rejoice in
the Lord !”

II. The service was one for which
all who had to take part in it had
previously purified themselves (ver.
20). All who have to take any part
in the work of teaching, or worship of

100


God’s house, should prepare themselves
for it by communion with God, and s
renewal of the covenant with Him to
put away all iniquity.

IIL There were burnt offerings as
a token of the consecration of the
people (see the title of these Psalms in
the LXX.), heart and soul afresh to
God (ver. 17, lst part). Let us (1)
glory in what God is to us, and (2) give
our whole selves to God.

IV. There were sin offerings — “A
sin offering for all Israel” (ver. 17).
Every tribe was represented. These
sin offerings were “ but shadows of good
things to come” (see Heb. x. 1-12;
John i, 29). In Divine worship there
should always be a recognition of sin,
and of Christ’s having “ put away sin”
by the sacrifice of Himself.

V. There was the observance of the
Passover (Exod. xii.), Doubtless an effort
was made to finish the Temple at the
close of the year, that the feast, which
celebrated the great national deliverance
of the people, might naturally fall in
place during the dedication ceremonies.
Their national life was based on redemp-
tion. They loved God, because God
loved them ; this is the order now, and
we cannot reverse it (1 John iv. 19).

VL The feast of unleavened bread
was kept joyfully for seven days.
(1) A feast in token of national unity
and fellowship ; (2) of unleavened bread,
in token of their desire to cultivate
purity ; (3) a feast in which, as of old,
“the stranger” joined, if ready to
separate himself to Israel’s God (ver.
21; Exod. xii. 48, 49).

VII. The new national life thus
inaugurated had far leas of pomp and


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: EZRA.





show about it than were seen in the
days of Solomon. But there was more
of spiritual power (Hag. ii. 9). The
people had been purified in the furnace


CHAP, Vi.


——
of affliction, and from this time idolatry
was unknown among them, —C. Cle
mance, D.D.


Tur DEDICATION OF THE TEMPLE,
Outline of Scripture Lesson. (Whole Chapter.)


I. The Jews had a truth to learn
which God knew only captivity in a
strange land would teach them. That
truth was, that national and individeal
prosperity depend on the maintenance
of religious worship. The captivity had
the desired effect; the people traced
their fall to its real source (Ps. cxxxvii.
1, 2). Ages before, they, on looking
back, had remembered other things
(Num. xii 4, 5), and would willingly
return to the house of bondage for the
sake of creature comforts. Long ages
of national discipline and Divine teach-
ing had taught them that men do not
live by bread alone. (Comp. Deut. viii.
3 with Matt. iv. 4.) Now they remem-
bered and sighed for the nourishment of
their higher life. Instead of recalling,
with tears, the land flowing with milk
and honey, and their former political
greatness, and the glory of their kings
(as David and Solomon), they “ wept
when they remembered Zion.”

Bring out the province of memory,
and how the character is indicated by
that which memory recalls with most
of joy or of sorrow. The day will come
when the memory of each one will be
most active, when the Lord will sey to
many an one, “Son, remember” (Luke
xvi. 25).

II. They showed how well they had
learned this truth by at once, on their
return, commencing the rebuilding of
the Temple, and persevering with the
work, in the midst of many difficulties
and interruptions, for twenty - one
years. Let the teacher bring out the
ditference between the work of the people
on coming out of the Egyptian house of
bondage; and now, on returning from
the Babylonian captivity, show how the
different work is indicative of great pro-
gress in national sentiment and religious
life. The old work showed that freedom


was then won by the sword; this, that
the greatest freedom and happiness of a
people are secured by the truth (John
vili, 32), the central, liberty - winning
truth being, ‘There is one true and ever-
living God, and that happy is the people
whose God is the Lord (Ps, exliv. 15).

So far, what has been said may be
regarded as recapitulatory exercise.

Ill. Their persevering, self-denying
work was crowned with success—the
Temple. was at length finished. The
completion of great undertakings is a
time of great interest. Take, as examples,
some celebrated buildings, palaces, for-
tresses, exhibition buildings, &c. Will
they answer the purpose for which they
have been erected? Is the purpose one
that warrants the expectation of the
Divine blessing? If not (as the Tower
of Babel), the building will presently
become a monument of human folly
(Ps. exxvii. 1).

Bring out the purpose of this building,
and show its importance, relatively, to
other erections. The Temple was built
before the walls of the city were repaired.
It was the true rock of strength, the for.
tress, the spiritual Gibraltar, the key to
the possession of the Promised Land.
Why? (See Ps, xlvi,; xviii, 2, 3; Ixxi.
3


IV. It was meet that the opening
services should be marked by the live-
liest demonstrations of religious joy.

1. For here was a vast work, pursued
by a small number of people through
many interruptions, and continued for
many years—(during which those who
assisted at the foundation, above twenty
years before, were daily dying otf)—
brought to a successful close ; while
enemies and difficulties increased, the
stimulating influence of the presence of
the elders of the people diminished.

2. Not only was there the joy caused

101


CMAP. VII.


by the ending of the work, joy caused
by retrospective glances, but joy inflamed
by the hope of the future. We are ac-
customed, in the opening of places of
worship, to rejoice in the prospect of the
truth that may be there proclaimed to
future generations,

3. It was joy marked by feasting and
song. Probably they sang Psalms cxlvi.,
exlvii., cxlviii., which, in the Septuagint,
are called Psalms of Haggai and Zecha-
riah. Reference to these Psalms will
show that joy was deep and religious ;
that they praised God as the Creator of
the world, as the God of providence, and
as the God of Israel, and (see Ps. exlviii.
11, 12) that all classes and ages were to
share in the joy and the song.

4. It was joy marked by the controi
of law and order. It was no wild bac-
chanalian revelry, but devout and reve
rential thanksgiving. There was in it
the remembrance of former mercies (see
vers, 20-22). Hence the acknowledg-
ment of the God of the past as the God
of the present, and the belief that He
would be the God of the future.

V. In spirit and principle, this dedi-
cation of the Temple may be applied
in the case of the opening of any build-


BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.
my








ing devoted to religious purposes. Such
an event is an occasion for joy of the
deepest and most holy kind. There is
in it the grateful memory of the past,
and believing hopefulness for tie future.
All places of prayer, and religious work
in the world, are the true successors of
this Temple, whose dedication we have
been considering, They are designed to
conserve and to promulgate that salva-
tion which is of the Jews, and which,
by type and ceremony, was first mani-
fested by shadows in the past, but which
now with clearer light has appeared unte
all men.

WL We are engaged in rearing a
Temple. It is not built of bricks and
stones, but of living souls, In it are our
sons and our daughters, polished after
the similitude of a palace. (1.) Have
we a place therein? (2.) Are we doing
our utmost to bring others in? (3.) Let
us not be content till every one in our
class is built up into this spiritual tem-
ple. (4.) Let us also labour for the
whole school, and for the world at large;
till, as the glory of God filled the Templs
of old, the ‘whole earth may be filled
with His glory ” in the reign of love, and
truth, and salvation.—.J. Cowper Gray.


CHAPTER VIL


CriticaL axp ExpLanatory Notrs.] We now enter upon the second and concluding part
of this book, which treats of the return of certain Jews from Babylon to Jerusalem under
Ezra, and the reformation which he accomplished amongst the people (chap. vii. 10). The
firat section of this part gives the history of the return of Ezra and his company from Babylon
to Jerusalem, with the names of “the chief of their fathers” and the numbers of the respective
families (chaps. vii. and viii.), The present chapter contains—{i.) The genealogy of Ezra and
a brief statement of his journey with others to Jerusalem (vers. 1-10). (ii.) The commission
given by Artaxerxes the king to Ezra (vers. 11-26). iii.) Ezra’s praise to God for the favoura
received from the king (vers, 27, 28).

Ver. 1. Now after these things] Fifty-seven years had elapsed since the events recorded in
the close of the preceding chapter. ‘‘Such gaps,” aa Schultz observes, “the ancient sacred
history has again and again; it is silent respecting the times between Joseph and Moses,
respecting the time passed by the generation rejected of God in the wilderness, respecting the
time of the exile. There was lacking in these times useful material calculated for the edifica-
tion of the congregation.” Artaxerxes king of Persia] Heb. Artachshasta. Artaxerxes Longi-
iianus, son of Xerxes and grandson of Darius, is meant. Egra the son of Seraiah] “Ezra
was probably the great-great-grandson of Seraiah ; for the high priest Jeshua, who had gone
to Jerusalem seventy-eight years before with Zerubbabel, was a grandson of Seraiah. One
hundred and thirty years had already passed since the execution of the latter (2 Kings xxv.
18-21) in the year 588.”—<Schuléz. According to the usage of the writers of Scripture, every
descendant is designated a ‘‘son,” and every progenitor, a “ father.”

Vers. 1-5] A number of generations are not mentioned between Ezra and Aaron. Three
wames are omitted between Ezra and Seraiah (ver. 1), and ‘‘in verse 8 six members of the line
are passed over between Asariah and Meraioth (according to 1 Chron. vi. 7-10), without doubt
only for the sake of brevity, as is frequently the case in the longer genealogies.”

Ver. 6. A ready scribe in the law of Moses] ‘‘The word “iD means in older works


102


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA, CHAP, VIL





{
writer or secretary ; but even as early as Jer. viii. 8, the lying pen of the DYDD is spoken of,
and here therefore IHiD has already attained the meaning of one learned in the Scripture, one


who has made the written law a subject of investigation. Ezra is, however, the first of whom
the predicate THON, 6 ypappareds, is used asa title.”— Keil, Which the Lord God of Israel
had given] It thoroughly accords with the piety of Ezra to regard and speak of the law as the
gift of God. And the king granted him all his request] ‘‘ The question how this favouring of
Ezra is related to the writing of Artaxerxes given in chap, iv., is best answered by the fact that
Ezra’s journey occurred somewhat later, that Artaxerxes, since he had been moved to that writing
by his officials, had paid more attention to the Jews, and that he furthered Ezra’s journey in order
to strengthen the Jewish congregation ; perhaps also in order to show thereby that he actually
was ready to be as just as possible, notwithstanding the prohibition issued respecting the walla
of the city. It is shown then by this approval that he would perhaps recall at a guitable time
even that prohibition which indeed had been issued at first only provisionally.”-—Schuléz,
According to the hand of the Lord his God upon him] This expression is found only here and
in vers. 9, 28; viii. 18; Neh.ii, 8, 18; and with slight variations in chap, viii, 22, 81; and it
signifies, according to the favour and furtherance which God had granted to him.

Ver. 7. And there went up some of the children of Israel] &c. (Comp. chap. ii. 70.)

Ver. 9. For upon the first day of the first month] &e. The journey occupied exactly four
months, which seems an unnecessarily long time. ‘‘The direct distance of Babylon from
Jerusalem,” says Rawlinson, “is no more than about five hundred and twenty miles; and it
may therefore seem surprising that the journey should have occupied four months, But no
doubt the route followed was that circuitous one by Carchemish and the Orontes valley, which
was ordinarily taken by armies or large bodies of men, and which increased the distance to
about nine hundred miles, Still the time occupied is long, and must be accounted for by the
dangers alluded to in chap, viii. 22, 31, which may have necessitated delays and detours to
avoid conflicts.” Moreover, we read of one rest of three days by the river of Ahava (chap, viii.
15), and there might have been other rests during the journey.

Ver. 12. Artaxerxes, king of kings] One of the recoguised titles of the Persian monarelia, to
whom were subject a number of tributary sovereigns. Perfect peace] ‘‘ Peace” has been sup-
plied by the translators of the A.V., and that improperly, in the opinion of some Hebraista.
The explanation of "D4 (from “Di = to complete) is difficult. Fuerst says it is the passive
participle. Keil is inclined ‘‘to regard it as an adverb used adjectively ; To the scribe in the law
of God perfectly, for the perfect scribe, &c., corresponding with the translation of the Vulgate,
doctissimo.” The correct meaning is probably that which is given in the margin of the A.V,,
‘Unto Ezra the priest, a perfect scribe of the law of the God of heaven.” And at such a time]
Rather : et cetera, and so forth, (Comp. chap,iv. 11.) The letter of the king is given in the
Chaldee original,

Ver, 14. His seven counsellors] constituted the supreme court of the kingdom, (Comp.
Esth.i. 14.) To inquire concerning Judah] &c. ‘‘ Probably the commission was general te
inquire into the state of the province. According to Xenophon (Cyrop. VIIL., vi. 16), it was a
part of the Persian system for the king to send an officer once a year into each province to
inspect and report upon it.”—Rawlinson, According to the law of thy God] &c. tc. “‘righte-
ously and justly, accurding to the principle of thy religion.”

Vers. 15, 16, And to carry the silver and gold] &c. ‘‘ Three kinds of offerings for the
Temple are here spoken of: lat, the gifts of the king and his counsellors for the service of the
God of Israel ; 2d, the gold and the silver that Ezra should obtain in the province of Babylon,
i.e. by the collection which he was consequently empowered to make among the non-laraelite
population of Babylon ; 3d, the freewill offerings of his fellow-countrymen,”— Keil.

Ver. 20, Out of the king’s treasure house] te. the royal treasury, ‘‘ The Persian ayatem of
taxing tle provinces through the satraps involved the establishment in each province of at least
one local treasury. Such treasuries are mentioned occasionally in Greek history (see Arrian,
Exp. Alex. 1.17; UL. 18, 19%, &e.).”—Rarolinson,

Ver. 22. Here the limit is stated which the treasurers were not to exceed in their grants to
Ezra. An hundred talents of silver] According to Bishop Cumberland’s computation of the
Hebrew silver talent, this would amount to about £35,350, According to Dr, Arbuthnot's
tab’es it would amount to £34,218, 15s. But according to Mr. R. 8. Poole (‘* Dict. of the
Bible,” articies, Money, and Weights and Measures), it would be ag much us £40,000. But it ia
not certain that the Hebrew talent was meant. An hundred measures of wheat] Margin:
Chald. cors. Cor ia the later word for homer, It was equal to ten ephas or baths, almost two
bushels (1 Kings v.11; Mack. xlv. 14). The bath waa equal to seven and a half gallons, accord-
ing to Dr. Arbuthnot; bul, according to the Rabbinists, to between four and five gallons,
while, according to Josephus, it was between eight and nine gallons, Wheat, wine, oil, and
ealt] were required by the Jews for their meat offerings; and ‘‘as the Persian tribute waa paid

artly in money and partly in kind, the treasuries would be able to supply them as readily as
they could furnish money.”

Ver, 23. Let it be diligently done] Keil tranaiates, ‘‘ completely done.” 80 does Schults
also. Why should there be wrath] &c, (Comp. vi. 10.) et


OuAP, VII. _ HOMILETIC COMMBN!ARY: EZRA,


ee





Ver, 24. We also certify you] or, “and to you it is made known.” ‘'The treasurers
which are beyond the ea a e still addressed. Or ministers] Rather, “and ministers,”
“'The expression comprises any servants of the Temple who might have been omitted in the
classes enumerated.”—Kei, It shall not be lawful to impose] &c, In this respect “ the
decree of Artaxerxes was more favourable to the Jews than those of all previous Persian
monarehs.” Toll, tribute, or custom] (See notes on chap. iv. 18.)

Ver, 25, That is in thine hand] ¢e. ‘‘which thou possessest.”” All the people that are
beyond the river] is limited to Israelites or Jews by the following clause, all such as know the
laws of thy God. And teach ye them that know them not] ‘l'hese words do “ not refer to the
heathen, but to born Israelites or Jews, who, living among the heathen, had not hitherto made
the Mosaic law the rule of their lives, Such were the judges to constrain to the observance
and obedience of the law. gt

‘By granting these privileges, Artaxerxes was not only treading in the footateps of Cyrus
and Darius Hystaspes, but even going beyond these princes in granting to the Jews a jurisdic-
tior of their own.”— Keil. ”

Vers. 27, 28. Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers] &c, “ This abrupt transition from
the words of Artaxerxes to those of Ezra may be compared with the almost equally abrupt
change in vi, 6. The language alters at the same time from Chaldee to Hebrew, continuing
henceforth to be Hebrew till the close of the book.”—Rawlinson,

Ver. 28. And hath extended mercy unto me before the king] i.e. hath awakened in him
such a kind disposition towards me, And I gathered together] &c. Ezra regards this as a
reault of his being ‘‘strengthened.” Chief men to go up with me} These chief men being
heads of householda, their families would accompany them to the land of their fathera


EzrA THE DISTINGUISHED.
(Verses 1-10.)


In this paragraph Ezra appears before
us as—

L A man of distinguished ances-
try. ‘Now after these things, in the
reign of Artaxerxes, king of Persia,
Ezra the son of Seraiah, the son of Aza-
riah, &.” (vers. 1-5), He was able to
trace his pedigree up to Aaron the high
priest; and he was “descended from
the heads of that line.” To have de-
scended from godly progenitors is a
biessing of incalculable worth. This
blessing comprises—

1. The inspiration of noble examples.

2. The inheritance of excellent consts-
tutional moral tendencies. (a).

3. The rich results of parental
prayers. (6).

‘© My boast is not that I deduce my birth

From loins enthroned, and rulers of the

earth ;

But higher far my proud pretensions rise—

The son of parents passed into the akies,”

— Cowper.

Il. Aman of distinguished attain-
ments.

1. Here are distinguished attainments.
“ This Ezra was a ready scribe.” This
does not mean merely a ready writer;
but, as Bishop Patrick observes, ‘“ he
calls himself a scribe, from his declaring
and explaining the things contained im

104


the Scriptures, The word in the ort-
ginal signifies one skilled and learned
in that which was the Book by way of
eminence, a teacher and expounder of
it ; and he was a ‘ ready scribe,’ because
he was peculiarly expert and under-
standing in the law, both in matters
which related to the priesthood, and to
the civil authority.”

2. Distinguished attainments in a
great subject. ‘‘ He was a ready scribe
in the law of Moses.” Ezra was famous
for his learning and skill, not in any
trivial matters, or in things of inferior
importance, but in themes and things of
the most vital and enduring interest.
He was “mighty in the Scriptures.”
And, passing over the Jewish tradi-
tions concerning him in this respect,
we may observe, quoting the words of
Bishop Hervey, “that the pointed de-
scription of Ezra (vii, 6) as ‘a ready
scribe in the law of Moses,’ repeated in
11, 12, 21, added to the information
concerning him that ‘he had prepared
his heart to seek the law of the Lord,
and to do it, and to teach in Israel
statutes and judgments’ (vii. 10), and
his commission to teach the laws of hig
God to such as knew them not (25),
and his great diligence in reading the
Scriptures to the people, all give the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BERA.


= SSA esa va nS a nu Rc eee, umeeel


atmost probability to the account which
attributes to him a corrected edition of
the Scriptures, and the circulation of
many such copies. The books of Nehe-
miah and Malachi must indeed have
been added later, possibly by Malachi’s
authority.” (c).

3. Distinguished attainments in a
great subject by a great Author. “He
was a ready scribe in the law of Moses,
which the Lord God of Israel had
given.” In the estimate of Ezra, the
law was not a human code which origi-
nated with Moses; the Scriptures were
not merely the richest treasures of their
national literature, which had required
many ages for their accumulation. They
had God for their author; they were His
special gift to His chosen peuple; they
were sacred things to this earnest and
reverent student of them.

Iii A man in the enjoyment of dis-
tinguished favour. “This Ezra went
up from Babylon, . . . and the king
granted him all his request.” It is pro-
bable that the officers of the Persian
government in Syria were not faithfully
aud fully carrying out the decree of
Darius as regards the grant of supplies
for the Jewish worship at Jerusalem
(chap. vi 9, 10), and that Ezra, repre
senting the elders of the Jews, requested
the king to issue new commands con-
cerning them; for the commission of
Ezra from the king provides fully for
these things (vers. 15-23). His request
seems also to have been for permission
for himself to go up to Jerusalem, and
for all such as were disposed to accom-
pany him, that they might be allowed
to do so. And this pious and patriotic
scribe stood so high in the estimation of
Artaxerxes that “the king granted him
all his request.” That he should enjoy
so much of the confidence and favour of
such a monarch as Artaxerxes is a valu-
able testimony to the worth of Ezra
“The king’s favour is toward a wise
servant.”

IV. A man of distinguished infln-
ence. ‘And there went up some of
the children of Israel, and of the
priests,” &c. (ver. 7), Ezra was trusted
uot ouly by the king and his counsellors,


but by his own countrymen also, with


whom he had great fafluence This
influence was over—

1, Various classes of men. Prieta,
Levites, people of the other tribes, net
set apart for religious services, and
Nithinim, accompanied him to Jeru-
salem from Babylon.

2. Large numbers of men. Of all
classes there were upwards of 1770
adult males in the party which went
up to Jerusalem with Ezra; so that the
total, including wives, children, and
servants, would probably be from 8000
to 9000 souls, (d).

V. A man of distinguished succesa,
We have an example of this in his
journey from Babylon to Jerusalem.
“He came to Jerusalem in the fifth
month, which was in the seventh year
of the king, For upon the first,” dec
(vers, 8, 9). This journey was—

1. Long. About nine hundred milea
by the route which they probably pur-
sued,

2. Difficult. It was by no means an
easy matter to conduct so large a num-
ber of persons, including many women
and “little ones,” through so long a
journey in those times and countries,
(Comp. chap. viii, 21.)

3. Pertlous. They were in danger of
being attacked by Arabian freebooters,
by whom the country through which
they had to travel was infested. (Comp.
chap, viii, 22, 31.)

4. Successful. “On the first day of
the fifth month came he to Jerusalem,
according to the good hand of his God
upon him.”

VL A man of distinguished aim.
“Ezra had prepared his heart to seek
the law of the Lord,” &c, (ver. 10).
We see that he aimed at—

1, The acquisition of the highest know-

“He had prepared”—set or
fixed—“ his heart to seek the law of the
Lord.” He resolutely sought thoroughly
to know the Scriptures.

2. The practice of the highest know-
ledge. ‘‘And to do it.” He endea
youred to conform his life to the law of
Jehovah. (e).

3. The tmpartation of the highest
knowledge. ‘And to teach in Israel
statutes and judgments.” By both pre

108


(MAP. VO.


SOMILETIO COMMENTARY: ZGRA.








sept and example he strove to bring
the people to know and obey the Divine
law. We must know ourselves what
we would teach others; and if we would
teach with practical effect, we must our-
selves practise what we teach.

Vil. Aman of distinguished bless-
ing. “The king granted him all his
request, according to the hand of the
Lord his God upon him, , . . Came
he to Jerusalem, according to the good
hand of his God upon him.”

1. The blessing of God rested upon
him. By reason of it he was protected
in journeyings, and prospered in his
undertakings.

2. The blessing of God was acknow-
ledged by him. He traced his successes
to their First Cause; and gratefully
ackuowledged the gracious providence
of God in his life. (/).

We are all recipienta of the manifold
blessings of God; let us also heartily
recognise them as such, and gratefully
bless the Giver.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) If you plant seeds for apple-stalks, you
are obliged to grait every one of them; but
if you take from a good apple-tree a cutting,
it will grow up and bear the same kind of
fruit which that tree bears. Now, I do not
gay that literally there is a transfer of qualities
from parents to children, as there is a literal
transfer of fruit from the criginal tree to the
tree which is produced from a cutting, so that
the apples are greenings or pippins according
to the stock from which they sprung; but I
believe it is substantiaily like that. I believe
it ig in the power of father and mother to rear
the childso that from its earliest periods it shall
be drawn by the Spirit of God.— 7. W. Beecher.

Your father was a holy man, — will you
undertake to break the line of a holy succession t
Ought not the fame of his holiness to awaken
your own religious concern? Are you pre-
pared to make yourself the turning-point in
the line of a pious ancestry? Beware lest you
gay in effect, ‘‘For generations my fathers
have trusted in God and looked to Him for
the light of their lives, but now I deliberately
disown their worship and turn away from the
God they toyed.” This you can say if you
be so minded. God does not force Himself
upon you. You may start a pagan posterity
\f you please.—Joseph Parker, D.D.


(t) Though God has not bound Himaeif to
hear the prayers of any one for the salvation
of the soul of another, yet He frequently aoes
40; and ay perhaps, though grace does not


ran in the blood, yet we frequently see it rums
in the line. Many more of the children ol
God’s children prove gracious than those of
others. —Dr. Ryland,


(c) That is 3 good day in which you learn
something new of the Bible. Do not Keep
treading around in just the same plaee, reading
the same Psalms of David over and over again
because they are short, while you neglect
other portions of the Gospel. If your friend
writes you a letter written on four sides of a
letter-sheet, you do not stop after you have
read the first page. You do not treat him
well unless you read the second page, the
third page, and the fourth page, as well as
the first. God our Father has written us a
very long letter, all full of affection and
counsel; and what a mean thing it ia if we
only read one or two of the pages when all of
them demand our attention. How many verses
could you quote to me from Obadiah, or Ha-
bakkuk, or Nahum, or Leviticus! Not one.
Find out what part of the Bible you know the
least about, and study it, Do not spend your
entire time under one tree when there is
around about you a great orchard.—Z'’. De
Wut Talmage, D.D.


(d) The greatest works that have been done,
have been done by the ones. The hundredg
do not often do much, the companies never
do; it is the units, just the single individuals
that, after all, are the power and the might.
Take any Church—there are multitudes in it ;
but it is some two or three that do the work.
Look on the Reformation!—there might be
many reformers, but there wag but one Luther:
there might be many teachers, but there was
but one Calvin. Look ye upon the preachera
of the last age, the mighty preachers whe
stirred up the churches!—there were many
coadjutors with them ; but, after all, it waa
not Whitefield’s friends, nor Wesley’s friends,
but the men themselves, that did it. Indi-
vidual effort is, after all, the grand thing, 4
man alone can do more than a man with fift
men at his heels to fetter him. Look bac
through all history. Who delivered Israel
from the Philistines t—it was solitary Samson.
Who was it gathered the people together, te
rout the Midianites {—it was one Gideon, who
cried, ‘‘ The sword of the Lord and of Gideon!”
Who was he that smote the enemy ?)—It was
Shamgar, with his ox-goad; or it was an
Ehud, who, with his dagger, put an end to hig
country’s tyrant. Separate men— Davids with
their slings and stones—have done more than
armies could accomplish.—C. H. Spurgeon.


(ec) I ask you to remaember, at home, in the
shop, and in the counting-house, that you are
epistles of Christ; and that in your spirit,
habits, and character, His very thoughts are
to be translated into forms which common
men can read and understand. You would
condemn with heaviest censure the presump-
tuous hand which wilfully corrupted the text


BSOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.


GHAP, Vil.





ef the printed book in which the acts and
thoughts of God are preserved for the inatrue-
tion of the world ; you would condemn with
censure hardly less severe the carelessness
which should omit chapter after chapter, and
give false readings instead of true. But you
are the living revelation of God to mankind,
Through you it is meant that the Holy Ghost
should speak, not in mere words, but in acts,
which are more intelligible and emphatic than
words. The very life of the Spirit of God is
intended to be manifest in your conduct, as
the life of a plant is manifested in the flower,
and the life of a tree in the fruit. Are you
giving a true revelation to mankind, or are
you perverting, corrupting, falsifying it?
Your religious emotions irreligious men can
know nothing of, but your virtues and vices are
a language plain and familiar to them as their
mother tongue. They can read these without
note orcomment, Theycanjudge of the Divine
inspiration of these without any argument from
miracles, As the style of a great artist is re-


44
eagnised in the drawing and colouring of hir
pictures ; as the genius of Mozart or Beethoven
may be known at once by the movement of the
melody and the flowing sweetness or myste-
rious complexity of the chorus, so—if you are
really God’s workmanship—there ought to be
the manifested impress of the Divine hand in
your character, and to those who know you
well, your life ought to be plainly the revela-
tion of a Divine idea.—R. W. Dale, Af.A., DD,


(7) When men have had a successful season
in merchandise, they are apt to attribute it to
their own acumen or their partners in business.
When men have had a successful season in
husbandry, they attribute it to the phosphates
used, or to the agricultural journal that gave
them the right kind of information. How
seldom it is that men first of all go to the
Lord, who is the owner of the field, and whe
presides over all merchandise, and who gives
us all our worldly as weH aa our spiritual
success |!—7. De Witt Talmage, D.D.


Sropying, PRactisine, aND TzacHine THE SacRED SoRIPTURES.
(Verse 10.)


The conduct of Ezra as described here
is eminently worthy of imitation. Let us
contemplate its chief features—

L The acquisition of Divine truth
for himself. “For Ezra had prepared
his heart to seek the law of the Lord.”
In aiming at the attainment of a know-
ledge of the Divine law, Ezra adopted—

1. The right method. He sought for
the knowledge which he desired ; he
put forth efforts to acquire it. Would
any one attain a competent knowledge
of any science? He must seek it, he
must read, think,experiment,&c. Would
any one “ know the Holy Scriptures,
which are able to make him wise unto
salvation through faith which is in Christ
Jesus”? He must “search the Scrip-
tures,” &c. Personal effort is indispen-
sable.

2. The right manner. Ezra sought
for this knowledge resolutely and ear-
nestly. ‘ He had prepared ”—4+.e., fized
or set-—“ his heart to seek the law of the
Lord.” He who would seek successfully
must seek resolutely. It is the earnest
student who overcomes obstinate diffi-
culties, disentangles ‘ewildering per-
plexities, and makes glorious discoveries.
Moreover, though it is not mentioned in
this verse, we have abundant evidence
of the fact that Ezra was a devout atu-


dent of the Scriptures. In this province
of investigation, reverence is a3 impor-
tant as earnestness, ‘The meek will
He guide in judgment,” &c “ The
secret of the Lord is with them that
fear Him,” dc.

3. The right place. Ezra sought “the
law of the Lord” in the Holy Scrip-
tures. Divine truth may be discovered
in the material creations of God, in the
revolutions of human history, &c. But
he who would acquaint himself with
moral law, let him “search the Scrip-
tures;” he wio would know the re-
demptive truth of God, let him study
the Bible.

II. The embodiment of Divine truth
in his life. Ezra had set his heart not
only to seek the law of the Lord, but
also “to do it.” He translated his
discoveries into deeds. The truth which
he acquired by his heart and mind, he
practised in his life. In this also he is
an example to us. And the importance
of imitating him im this respect will
appear if we consider that knowledge
misapplied ts—

1, Useless, Knowledge of the laws
of nature benefits us only as it leads us
to act in harmony with those lawa, And
knowledge of Gospel truth becomes a
blessing to us only aa we receive it ints


107


our heart by faith, and give practical
expression to it in our lives, “Not
every one that saith unto Me, Lord,
Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
heaven,” d&c. (Matt. vii. 21-27). It is
the “doer of the work” that is “ blessed
in his deed” (Jas. i. 25). (a).

2. Anoccastonof condemnation, “That
servant which knew his lord’s will, and
prepared not himself, neither did accord-
ing to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes,” dc. (Luke xii. 47, 48). (0).

IIL The communication of Divine
truth to others. Ezra had set his heart
also “to teach in Israel statutes and
judgments.” A solemn obligation rests
upon man not only to acquire truth, but
also to impart it. He who has learned
of others must himself in his turn
become a teacher of others. Here is
the Divine law on the question ; “ Freely
ye have received, freely give.”

“« Thyself and thy belongings

Are not thine own so proper, as to waste

Thyself upon thy virtues, them on thee.

Heaven doth with us, as we with torches do:

Not light them for themselves ; for if our

virtues

Did not go forth of us, ’twere all alike

As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely

touched,

Bat to fine issues ; nor nature never lends

The smallest scruple of her excellence,

But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines

Herself the glory of a creditor,

Both thanks and use.”—Shakespeare.

‘ Measure for Measure,” i, 1.

Esra first learned the truth for himself,
then practised it in his own life, and
then taught it to others. He taught
others both by his speech and by his
action. Merely verbal teaching will not
bear comparison with that which is also
of the character and conduct. The
latter is—

1. More intelligible. Minds which
would utterly fail to follow our argu-
ments can understand our actions.

2. Mare continuous. Instruction by
means of sermons or lessons is neces-
sarily occasional, but the teaching of
the life is constant. (c).

3. More influential. ‘“ How forcible
are right words!” But how much more
forcible are right works! Ezra’s power
ag an expository preacher was great, as
we see from Neh. viii. ; but his power


108





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.


ae


as a holy and zealous man was greater.
And it seems to us that much of his
power as a preacher arose from the saint
liness and strength of his character. (d).

Let all Christians, but especially
Christian preachers and teachers, copy
the example of Ezra, and first study the
Scriptures for themselves, then live the
Scriptures for themselves, and then
teach the Scriptures to others.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) As compared with professions, good
deeds are put into ever-lustrous eminence,
both by their solid quality, and by that grand
refutation of all talking hypocrisy and cere-
monial cant, from the mouth of the Judge
Himself, ‘‘ Not every one that saith unto
Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the king-
dom of heaven, but he that doeth the will of
My Father.” We cannot be wrong—if there
is such a thing as truth in God’s universe, we
must be right—in esteeming one palpable
and ponderable action in Christ’s name before
a library of dogmatic ecredos, subscription to
the straitest ecclesiastical vows, or the hand.
somest adjustment of the mantle of publie
conformity. If we must have one without
the other, an acre of statements must be let go
rather than an ounce of life.—F. D. Hunt-
¢ D.

i beseech you more earnestly endeavour
to reduce the things you know to practice.
Nothing can be more absurd than to content
ourselves with only a notional knowledge of
practical matters. We should think so in
other cases; as if any man should satisfy
himself to know the use of food, but famish
himself by never eating any, when he hath it
at hand! Oh, what holy and pleasant lives
should we Jead in this world, if the temper
and complexion of our souls did but corre-
spond to the things we know. The digesting
our food is what God eminently calla for.—
Jokn Howe.


(6) The more any one doth only notionally
know in the matters of religion, so aa that
the temper of his spirit remains altogether
unsuitable to the design and tendency of the
things known, the more he hath lying ready
to come in judgment against him; and if,
therefore, he count the things excellent which
he knows, and only please himself with hig
own knowledge of them, it ia but a like case
as if a man should be much delighted to be»
hold his own condemnation written in a fair
and beautiful hand; or as if one should be
pleased with the glittering of that sword
which is directed against his own heart ; and
80 little pleasant is the case of him who thus
satisfies his own curiosity with the concerns
of eternal life and death, that any serious
person would tremble on his behalf, at that
wherein he takes pleasure, and apprehend


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.


a er ae a ll sa NE OSE eel





feet horror in that state of the case whence he
draws matter of delight.—Jdia.


(c) lf we disiinguish man as a creature of
language, and thus qualified to communicate
himself to others, there are in him two sets or
Kinds of language,—one which is voluntary in
the use, and one that is involuntary; that of
speech in the literal sense, and that expres-
sion of the eye, the face, the look, the gait,
the motion, the tone or cadence, which is
soinetimes called the natural language of the
sentiments, This natural language, too, is
greatly enlarged by the conduct of life, that
which, in business and society, reveals the
principles and spirits cf men. Speech, or
voluntary language, is a door to the soul, that
We may open or shut at will; the other is a
door that stands open evermore, and reveals
to others constantly, and often more clearly,
the tempers, tastes, and motives of their
hearts. Within, as we may represent, is
eharacter, charging the common reservoir of
influence, and through these twofold gates
of the soul, pouring itself out on the world,
Out of one it flows at choice, and whensoever
we purpose to do good or evil to men, Ont
of the other it flows each moment, aa light
from the sun, and propagates itself in all
beholders,

The door of involuntary communication, I
have eaid, is always open. Of course we are
communicating ourselves in thie way to others
at every moment of our intercourse or pre-
sence with them, But how very geldom, in
eomparison, do we undertake by means of
speech to influence others! Even the best
Christian, one who most improves his oppor-
tunities to do good, attempts but seldom to
sway another by voluntary influence, whereas
he is ali the while shining as a luminous
object unawares, and communicating of hie


heart to the world.—H. Bushnell, D.D.


OMAP. VIL.


(d) If every disciple is to be an “‘ epiatle
known and read of all men,” what shall we
expect but that all men will be somehow
affected by the reading? Or, if he is to be
@ light in the world, what shall we look for,
but that others, seeing his good works, shall
glorify God on his acconnt? How often is it
seen, too, as a fact of observation, that one,
or a few good men, kindle at length a holy
fire in the community in whieh they live, and
become the leaven of a general reformation !
Such men give a more vivid proof in their
persons of the reality of religious faith, than
any words or arguments could yield, They
are active; they endeavour, of course, to exert
a good voluntary influence; but still their
chief power lies in their holiness, and the
sense they produce in others of their close
relation to God.

. - « Where the direct or active influence
of men is supposed to be great, even this is
due, in a principal degree, to that insensible
influence by which their arguments, reproofs,
and persuasions are secretly invigorated. It
is not mere words which turn men; it is the
heart mounting uncalled into the expression
of the features : it is the eye illuminated by
reason—the look beaming with goodness ; it
is the tone of the voice, that instrument of
the soul, which changes quality with such
amazing facility, and gives out in the soft,
the tender, the tremulous, the firm, every
shade of emotion and charaeter, And 80
much is there in this, that the moral stature
and character of the man that speaks are
likely to be well represented in his manner.
If he is a stranger, bis way will inspire con-
fidence and attract good will. His virtues
will be seen, ag it were, gathering round lim
to minister words and forms of thought, and
their voices will be heard in the fall of his
cadences.—/bid,


Tur Curistian MINIstRY.
(Verse 10.)


This learned and pious priest is an
eminent model for the study of those
who are engaged in the public service
of God, Born in Babylon, he neverthe-
less became an Israelite indeed, in whom
was no guile. His zeal for the pure
worship of God—for the reformation of
social manners and faithful administra
tion of the law ; his personal consecra-
tion, his profound study of the sacred
writings, his deep views of the evil of
sin, his power with God in prayer, his
personal humility and true nobleness of
character, entitle him to rank among
the most illustrious of God’s worthies
in the ancient Church.


The text points out some indispensable
qualifications for an able minister of the
New Testament,

I. Devotedness to God’s Word.

1. The minister is called to this; it
is the indispensable requirement of his
office.

2. Its inexhaustible riches require
profound and constant research.

3. Prayer is absolutely necessary for
the right understanding of the Scrip-
tures.

IL Personal religion.

1, Without this all other qualifica
tions will prove unavailing.

2. Its influence upon the minister's

109


o@ay. Vik.


WWOUMILBTIC COMMENTARY: EZRA,


oceans te merenemn





own heart and life is necessary to his
success,

3. Its power over others,

Til. Public instruction.

1. Its subjects, Scripture ;—God in
Christ, sin, salvation,


2. Ita spirit. Dependent on Divine


aid, faithful, bold.


3. Its manner,
earnest, practical,
Preacher’ s Portfoleo.


Simple, unaffected,
affectionate, — 7'ks


Divine SEQUENCE,
(Verse 10.)


In most operations due sequence is of
as great importance, in order to success,
as correct action or proper quality. To
transpose the order in a succession of
processes is certain failure. How mani-
festly fatal as to the result, for a farmer
to sow before ploughing, or to harrow
before sowing! How vain the black-
gmith’s labour if he smite the iron first,
and then make it hot! Everything in
its due order is a universal law, It
applies to Sabbath-school teaching as
inexorably as to other matters, and to
ignore it is culpable folly. The law of
true sequence in this case is plainly
taught in the Word of God, and is for-
cibly illustrated in the conduct of Ezra.

I. There must be diligent searching
for the law of God. ‘Ezra prepared
his heart to seek the law of the Lord.”
Teachers must know before they can
teach, and there is need for searching in
order to knowledge. ‘“ Search the Scrip-
tures” is the first step in the Divine
sequence, ‘Then shall we know, if we
follow on to know the Lord.” And for
effective teaching, to head - knowledge
there must be heart-sympathy.

It. There must be a hearty doing
of the discovered will. Ezra prepared
his heart not only to seek, but “to do”
the law of the Lord, and this is the
second process in the Divine order.
Alas! for him who seeks to teach others
laws which he does not himself obey,
and to enforce commands which he him-
self defies! Doing, moreover, atands in


double relation to knowing and teaching,
“Tf any man will do His will, he shall
know of the doctrine, whether it be of
God” (John vii. 17), Hence its im-
portance in relation to knowledge. It
ia also indispensable to true teaching;
for by our lives we must teach, even
though we be very unskilful with our
tongues. “ Whosoever shall do and
teach, shall be called great in the king-
dom of heaven” (Matt. v. 19).

Til. Then may we teach the law of
the Lord. This is the last step in the
Divine sequence ; and how firm a founda
tion will the teaching rest upon if the
sequence has been duly observed ! Know-
ledge treasured in the heart and acted
in the life will give power and energy
to the teachings, such as can in no other
way be gained. How forcible will such
teaching be—how irresistible! What
efficacy the observance of this Divine
sequence gave to Ezra’s teaching may
be learned from his subsequent history,
for all the congregation were by his
words convinced of their sin, and truly
repenting, they cried, “As thou hast
said, so must we do” (chap, x. 12), and
they did it. So will our scholars act, if
we faithfully fulfil the Divine conditions.
Let us give heed to this sequence. It
is taught in many parts of Scripture;
but let Ezra’s embodiment of it make it
plain. Let his example stir our emula-
tion, and his success whet our desire for
a like result.—B. P. P., in The Sunday
School Teacher.


Tax Commission or ARTAXERKES TO Ezra.
(Verses 11-26.)


L The granting of this commission.
This letter, conveying such large powers,
was givon—

1190


We xee this from ver. 6:


1. In answer to the request of Erra,
“the king
granted him all his request ;” and from


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: BERA,


OMAP, VIX.





ver, 28: God “hath extended mercy
unto me before the king and his coun-
sellors,” &. It was a courageous thing
for Ezra to make such a request before
such an assembly (comp, Neh. ii, 2; Esth.
iv. 11); and the fact that it was granted
is a forcible testimony to the very high
esteem in which he was held,

2. By the supreme authority of the
empire. “Thou art sent of the king
and of his seven counsellors” (ver. 14).
“God hath extended mercy unto me
before the king, and his counsellors, and
before all the king’s mighty princes”
(ver. 28). Thus the commission carried
the greatest weight and importance.

IL The articles of this commission.

1. Those which are addressed to Hzra,
(1.) Permission for him to go up to
Jerusalem with as many of his fellow-
countrymen as wished to do so. “I
make a decree, that all they of the people
of Israel,” &c. (ver. 13). This permis-
sion was necessary to enable them to go
forth, because they were captives. And
it was simply a cordial permission ; it
was not a sentence of banishment from
Babylon, The Jews were not sent away,
but freely allowed to go if they desired
to do so. (2.) Authority to investigate
the affairs of those Jews who were already
settled in their own land. ‘Thou art
sent of the king, and of his seven coun-
sellors, to inquire,” &c. (ver. 14). The
subject of tle inquiry is not stated ;
and it cannot be determined whether it
referred to their general condition and
progress, or more particularly to their
religious condition, But the rule by
which the inquiry was to be conducted
is clearly laid down: “according to the
law of thy God which is in thine hand.”
Thus the Divine law was honoured by
the Persian monarch and his supreme
council. (3.) Authority to receive, con-
vey, and distribute money and other
valuables for the worship of Jehovah at
Jerusalem (vers. 15-19), Notice—(i)
The treasures committed tohim. ‘The
silver and gold which the king and his
counsellors freely offered,” &c. (ver. 15).
The contributions of money which the
non-Israelite population in all the pro-
vince of Babylon, and such Jews as
elected still to remain in Babylon, were


———— So an eS


disposed freely to contribute for the
worship of the God of Israel. ‘“ And
all the silver and gold that thou canst
find,” &e. (ver. 16), And certain vessels
which had been given for use in the
Temple-service at Jerusalem, “The
vessels also that are given thee,” é&c,
(ver. 19). It is probable that the sacred
vessels which Zerubbabel had taken to
Jerusalem were inadequate to their re-
quirements at the great religious festivals,
(ii.) The use to be made of these trea-
sures. The vessels were to be delivered
up in the Temple to the proper persons
for use in its services, “The vessels
... deliver thou before the God of
Jerusalem.” The money was to be
employed in the purchase of animals
and other things for religious sacrifices.
“That thou mayest buy speedily with
this_ money bullocks,” &c. (ver. 17).
And the residue of the money was to be
appropriated to such religious uses as
seemed good to Ezra and to his brethren,
“And whatsoever shall seem good te
thee and to thy brethren,” &c. (ver. 18).
(4.) Authority to obtain further needful
supplies from the royal treasury in Syria,
“And whatever more shall be needful
for the house of thy God,” &e. (ver. 20).
The requirements at Jerusalem could
not be fully known by Ezra until he
had looked into the state of avffairs
there; hence this warrant concerning
further supplies was both thoughtfully
aud generously given. And such a
use of royal revenues was both wise
and worthy in the highest degree. (5.)
Authority to appoint magistrates and
judges with full judicial powers. ‘‘ And
thou Ezra, after the wisdom of thy God
that is in thine hand, set magistrates
and judges,” &c. (vers, 25, 26). Observe:
(i) Their jurisdiction was over the
sews and the proselytes to the Jewish
religion, They were to “judge all the
people that are beyond the river, all
such as know the laws of thy God,”
dc. (ii) Full power was granted to
them for maintaining their authority
and enforcing their decisions. They
were authorised to inflict the severest
penalties which the law prescribed.
“ Whosoever will not do the law of thy
God,” dc. (ver. 26). They were “re
11k





sponsible to the king alone for the
exercise of their authority.”

2. Thise which are addressed to the
Persian treasurers in Syria. “ And I,
even I Artaxerxes the king, do make a
decree to all the treasurers which are
beyond the river,” &c. (vers. 21-24).
These commands refer to two things—
1. To contributions which they were to
make to Hera, They were to furnish
him with certain supplies for the service
of the Temple of the God of heaven,
according to his request. (1.) These
supplies were liberal. ‘“ Unto an hun-
dred talents of silver,” &c. (ver. 22, and
see explanatory note). (2.) These sup-
plies were to be quickly and fully fur-
nished. ‘‘ Whatsoever Ezra the priest,
the scribe of the law of the God of
heaven, shall require of you, it be done
speedily. . . Whatsoever is com-
manded by the God of heaven, let it be
completely done,” &e. (3.) The reason
assigned for furnishing these supplies is
significant. ‘ For why should there be
wrath against the realm of the king and
his sons?” This inquiry implies a con-
viction of several things :—.g., that the
God of heaven is almighty; that the
neglect of His worship was likely to
awaken His anger ; that His anger should
be earnestly dreaded and deprecated ;
and that a liberal regard for His worship
was likely to secure His favour. 2. To
exemptions from taxation which they were
to make, Every minister of the Temple,
from the high priest to the humblest of
the Nethinim, was to be entirely re-
lieved of government taxation. “ Also
we certify you, that touching any of the
priests and Levites,” &c. (ver. 24). This
was at once a liberal favour and an hon-
ourable distinction for all those whom
it concerned,

This official letter reflects very great
credit upon Artaxerxes, It is, as M.
Henry observes, “to the praise of this
heathen king, that he honoured the God
of Israel though His worshippers were
a despicable handful of poor men, who
were not able to bear the charges of their
own religion, and were now his vassala,
and that, though he was not wrought
upon to quit his own superstitions, yet
he protected and encouraged the Jews in

112


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : EZRA.





their religion, and did not only say, ‘ Be
you warmed, and be you filled,’ but gave
them such things as they needed.”

II. The spirit of this commission

The letter indicates clearly a spirit
of—

1. Great reverence for God. Thrice it
speaks of Him as “ the God of heaven,”
thus showing that Jehovah was regarded
by the king not as a mere local deity,
but as the Supreme Being. And the
inquiry, ‘Why should there be wrath
against the realm of the king and his
sons?” implies (as we have mentioned
above) certain important convictions con-
cerning Jehovah, God of Israel. (a).

2. Profound respect for the law of
God. “According to the law of thy
God which is in thine hand” (ver. 14).
“Do after the will of your God” (ver.
18). “ Whatsoever is commanded by
the God of heaven, let it be completely
done,” &c. (ver. 23), Ezra is commis-
sioned to teach those persons the lawa
of God who did not know them (ver.
25). And, according to ver. 26, the law
of Jehovah was made the law of Ar-
taxerxes so far as the Jews were con-
cerned, ‘ The law of thy God, and the
law of the king.” (6).

3. Sincere regard for the worship of
God (vers. 15-24). The munificence of
the royal grant for this worship indi-
cates the depth and sincerity of his re-
gard for it.

4. Hearty appreciation of the char-
acter of a good man, That this large
and liberal commission was granted te
Ezra in answer to his request is an evi-
dence—(1l.) That the life of Ezra must
have been distinguished by wisdom, up-
rightness, and piety. (2.) That Arta-
xerxes sincerely appreciated the wisdom
and worth of Ezra, for in honouring him
the king seems to have taken pleasure,
This letter is greatly to the praise of
both the monarch of Persia and the
scribe of the law of Jehovah. (c).

CoNncLUSION :

The liberal gifts of Artaxerxes for the
support of the worship of God may be
exhibited as —

1. A rebuke to the parsimony of many
Christians in this respect.

2. An example to all Christians. (d).


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: EERA,


CHAP, Vii.





ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) How should we reverence that God that
hath a throne encompassed with such glorious
creatures as angels, whose faces we are not
able to behold though shadowed in assumed
vYodies! How should we fear the Lord of
Hosts, that hath so many armies at His
command in the heavens above, and in the
earth below, whom He ean dispose to the
exact obedience of His will! How should
men be afraid to censure any of His actions,
to sit judge of their Judge, and call Him to
an account at their bar! How should such
an earthworm, a mean animal as man, be
afraid to speak irreverently of so great a King!
Not to fear Him, not to reverence Him, is to
ree His throne from under Him, and make

im of a lower authority than ourselves, or
any creature that we reverence more,—S.
Charnocke, B.D,


(b) We cannot be too strongly impressed
with the goodness or benevolence of the Divine
law. Right and good are correlative ideas,
but we are not equally affected by them. More
spontaneously can we conclude that all good
ig right, than that all right is good. And we
more slowly confess the good of law, because
we commonly regard law itself as restraint
rather than as protection. We forget that it
is far more restraint upon others than upon
ourselves, and that our protection is in that
restraint. Every interdict is on all, and each
one obtains the benefit. Every obligation
binds the whole race to the security and wel-
fare of the individual. The best definition of
liberty ig, protection from wrong. And if we
inspect the great social law, what is it buta
fence and safezuard thrown around our dearest,
most precious, interests? Its heed holds back
that which receives every denouncement, when
we call it lawless. Its olservance defends the
alleciance of our household, the sanctity of our
life, the lexitimacy of our offspring, the posses-
sion of our store, the reputation of our char-
acter, even to the proscription and to the
driving from the heart of any secret wish that
might seek to injure us, It sets a seal upon
all, Our forbearance to aggrieve others, which
must be harmful to ourself, is repaid by for-
bidding any grievance against our welfare from
the millions upon millions who might other-
wise inflict it. The duty which every man
owes to love us as himself, is a blessed and
rich return of our duty thus ourselves to love
every map, Tie rule commands and obliges
every man t love me, to uphold me, —investe
bim as my brother, authorises him as my
keeper, aris him as my defender, pledges
him as my snrety, adorns him as my example,
couples him ae my co-heir, It is the law of
love. It ig the perfect commutative justice,
How benign must be the univeral regulation,
all whose requirements, bearings, consequences,
motives, aima, are fulfilled bylove! Thesame


i!
reflections are appropriate with respect to the
claims of the Deity. ... Let us honour law
as the crowning blessing of blessings. Let ua
remember that intellectual creatureship with-
out it is as inconceivable ag it would be in-
supportable, Let us acknowledge it as the
most sublime of ideas, the true exponent of
happiness, the proper basis of dignity, the
exclusive shield of freedom, the pure fountain
of goodwill,—inaugurating truth in its state,
decking benevolence in its majesty, lifting
right to its throne, and then proclaiming with
imperial authority that all thisis but God, and
that, therefore, there is none good but One,
that is God !—R. W. Hamilton, LL.D., D.D.


(ce) There is something in a holy life which
wonderfully conciliates the mindsof men, At
first, indeed, like a strong influx of light, it
offends their eyes; and the beholders, unable
to bear the effulgence of its beams, turn away
from it, or perhaps degire ita utter extinction,
But when it has shone for a long time before
them, and they have had sufficient opportunity
to contemplate its worth, they are constrained
to acknowledge that ‘‘the righteous is more
excellent than his neighbour ;” and they begin
to venerate the character, whose virtues at
first were occasions of offence.—C. Simeon,
M.A.


(d) In collecting money for the repairs of
the Temple, which Athaliah and her sons had
dilapidated, the good priest did a thing worth
noticing, He had a chest placed right along-
side the brazen altar in front of the Temple,
and in the lid of the chest was a hole bored, and
into the hole the priests, selected for the purpose,
dropped the coins which the people brought,
either as their half-shekel tax, or as the offer.
ing for vows, or as a freewill offering to the
Temple of Jehovah, When I read this story
and then read from Paul’s First Epistle to the
Corinthians, “ Upon the first day of the week”
(the Lord’s-day, mind you!) ‘‘let every one
of you lay by him in store, as God hath pros-
pered him,” I cannot help thinking that giving
ts a part of worship! Close alongside of the
altar, where the type of the Lamb of God was
offered up, was the money chest. How exalted
giving to the Lord’s cause is in thia light!
And Paul calls it Sunday work, puts it with
prayer, and praise, and Bible instruction, and
all that is improving to the soul. I take it
that if all Christians in our land would enter-
tain the notion of Jehoiada and Paul about
giving to the Lord (and it is not their notion,
but the Holy Ghost’s), our spiritual temple
would not be go dilapidated—thougands would
flow forth from willing hearts where now
hundreds are squeezed out. Take the idea,
my brother with the long purse; yes, and my
brother with the short purse, too, Make your
pring a part of your worship, and then thank '

ehoiada and Paul, but above all the Lord,
for making your Christian life the happier. ~
Dr.


° *


11s


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZRA.


-





Reasons ror Active Devotepness To THE CausE or Gop.
(Verse 23.)


Here Artaxerxes issues a decree, gives
wealth, displays great zeal for God, and
as though ambitious to sink the monarch
in the preacher, exhorts to diligence and
fervour in the work. ‘‘ Whatsoever is
commanded by the God of heaven,” &e.
We may well sit at the feet of this lord
of one hundred and twenty-seven pro-
vinces, and learn from heathen lips the
extent of our duty and the nature of
our obligations. We plead for missions,

I. To assign some reasons for active
devotedness to the cause of God and
truth in the world.

1. From the Divine authority by which
u ts enjoined. It ‘is commanded by the
God of heaven.” We love to see the
estimate of Christian duties from the
men of the world, who, while they are
blind as bata in discerning their own
defects, are clear-sighted as eagles to
mark the inconsistencies of the professed

llowers of Christ, They often take
& just measure of our obligations, and
reason with wonderful exactness and
form just conclusions, from the prin-
ciples which we lay down, as to the
course which we ought to follow,—just
as Artaxerxes did here. The text is
remarkable from the quarter whence it
comes; not from the hovel of poverty,
but from the throne of power ; not from
one who prophesied in sackcloth, but
from one clothed in the purple and fine
linen of royal houses,

The law of love to the perishing
heathen is clearly laid down. We labour
under no uncertainty upon the subject.
We are not left to the trembling ifs
and conjectures of mere circuitoas and
inductive reasoning, but the rule is ex-
press and final; ‘Thou shalt open thine
hand wide unto thy brother.” The same
law which says, “Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thine heart,”
says, “Thou shalt love thy neighbour
as thyself.” We should like to see in-
scribed over all our missionary institu-
tions the law, “ Whatsoever ye would
that men should do to you, do ye even
vo to them.” The same God who bids

1lé


us “believe in the Lord Jesus Christ”
that we may be saved, bids us “ Go into
all the world,” &c. God makes man the
medium of His blessings to man. He
blesses us by making us blessings, The
harvest of immortal souls is to be
gathered in, but human hands are to be
employed in the work, The scattered
flock of Christ, wandering upon the dark
mountains of the Eastern and Western
world, claim your ready aid, and Jesus
commissions you td bring them into the
fold.

2. From the wrgent necessity which
exists for your exertions. “In Judah
was God known; His name was great
in Israel;” but His spiritual claims
were unknown and disregarded every-
where else. And the Gospel cannot be
proclaimed in the heathen world except
Christians proclaim it; for “ how shall
they call on Him in whom they have
not believed?” &c. (Rom. x. 14, 15).
We cannot plead ignorance of the state
of the heathen world, or of the religious
destitution of the heathen without the
Gospel. It was never safe to use this
plea as an excuse for indifference, but
it is wholly impossible to urge it now.
“We know that the whole world lieth in
wickedness.” “We know that the whole
creation groaneth and travaileth in pain,”
&c, The islands and continents of the
kingdoms under darkness have been
completely explored. The reports of
travellers, merchants, missionaries, and
scientific men only confirm the testimony
of Scripture as to the moral misery and
degradation of mankind without the
Gospel. Where Christianity is not, the
race is stationary, if not retrograde ;
social life loses its security and charm.


3. From the fearful conseqrences of
the neglect of this duty. ‘For why
should there be wrath against the realm
of the king and his sons?” The king
feared God’s anger, and apprehended
that the neglect of Zion’s interests would
be fata. He could not be ignorant of
the ruin that had overtaken the Pharaohs


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA,
eee


ef Egypt, Sennacherib of Assyria, and
the monarchs of Babylon; and he
trembled for himself, for his sons, and
for the future stability of the Persian
throne.

It is not safe for individuals to eppose
the kingdom of Christ. They who “break
His bands asunder,” do it at their own
peril, And there is no neutrality: not
to assist is to oppose; not to seek Christ
is to neglect Him. Every one of us is
taking a side—for Christ against Satan,
or for Satan against Christ, It is not
safe for churches to do so, What has
become of the Jewish church? of the
seven churches of Asia? &c. Their
golden lamps have been extinguished.
It is not safe for nations to neglect the
interests of religion. ‘The nation and
kingdom that will not serve Thee shall
perish,” whether that nation be Persia
or Judea, Carthage or Rome, Spain or
England. I should tremble for Britain’s
safety, if she forgot her obligations to
the God of the Bible, and failed to pay
some small fraction of the mighty debt
she owes to the Providence that has
exalted her, by extending the Guspel.
God has not raised her so high for any
mean and ignobie purpose. He has not
given her the empire of the seas, and a


CHAP. Vik,


7
voice among the nations at which the
mightiest tremble, and an extent of
colonial territory heretofore unknown,
merely for purposes of national aggran-
disement or personal pride; but to
render us, as we hope, the world’s bene-
factors, the heralds of the Cross, the
willing harbingers of the onward triumphs
of the Prince of Peace. Fulfilling this
duty, Britain stands: failing to fulfil it,
Britain falls; for God’s wrath will be
against the realm of the Queen and her
sons,

4. From the success which has attended
the fulfilment of this duty.

II. To offer some suggestions as to
the spirit and mode in which this work
should be carried on.

1. Harnestly, without remissness, ‘Let
it be diligently done.” Learn a lesson
from the activity of the opposite party.
The infidel and socialist come into your
workshops and manufactories. The
emissaries of the Papacy are not idle.
Popery is fighting, not for existence, but
for dominion.

2. Prayerfully, without pride.

3. Speedily, without delay.


Tue Decree oF ARTAXERXES.
(Verse 23.)


The words before us breathe a spirit
which we should scarcely have expected
to find in a heathen prince; but it is
remarkable that some of the richest
effusions of piety in the whole Scriptures
proceeded from heathen monarchs, ¢.g.,
Darius and Nebuchadnezzar. To make
a due improvement of the words before
us we shall consider them—

I. In reference to the Jewish
Church.

1. The state of the Jewish Church at
this time is not unlike to that in which
ut was in the days of Hzra. Though the
Temple worship was restored, it was
carried on by the Jews without any zeal
for God’s honour, or any of that spiri-
tuality of mind which is the very essence
of all acceptable worship. Nor was the


law of God regarded amongst them with
aay just measure of submission ; for, in
direct opposition to its most authoritative
dictates, they formed connections with
the heathen round about them, &c. (chap.
ix. 1-9). So at this time the Jewish
people are at a very low ebb, both in
respect of morals and religion. .. . It
is impossible to behold them in their
religious services, and not see how thick
a veil is yet upon their hearts. Nor do
they manifest any respect for their own
law in its sublimer precepts, Of real
holiness of heart and life they are
ignorant in the extreme.

2. But to us ts given, no less than to
Ezra, a command to advance theur welfare,
Hzra received ® commission from Ar-
taxerxes to go and rectify the abuses

Ws


may. Vil.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.








which obtained at Jerusalem, &c. And
have we no command to seek the welfare
of that degraded people} Are we not
tel? what God’s purpose is respecting
tlcm; namely, to “raise up the taber-
nacle of David,” dc? (Amos. ix. 11).
This is God’s express command to us
strangers of the Gentiles: ‘The sons
of strangers shall build up thy walls,”
é&c, (Isa. 1x. 10-12). With their matertal
temple we have nothing to do; but for
the erection of God’s spiritual temple
amongst them we are bound to labour,
proclaiming to them the advent of their
Messiah, saying, “Behold your salvation,”
dc. (Isa, lxii 11; xl. 9).

3. In this work we should engage with
all diligence. It is not to be effected
by good wishes merely, but by great
exertions. It was not without great
exertions on the part of men that the
Gentiles were converted to the faith of
Christ ; and the same kind of efforts
which the apostles made for the conver-
sion of the Gentiles we are to make for
the restoration of the Jews to the favour
of their God. This is our duty. God
has told us that He has made us the
depositaries of His Gospel, not for our
benefit merely, but for the benefit of
His outcast people: “As ye in times
past,” &c. (Rom. xi. 30, 31>

Il. In reference to the Church which
is amongst us.

1. Ye, brethren, need to have God's
work advanced in the midst of you. Ye
are God’s house (Heb, iii. 6); ye also
are called the temples of God, in which
He lives and dwells (2 Cor. vi. 16).
But in whom is God honoured as He
ought to be? In whom are found
sacrifices 80 pure, so spiritual, so abun-
dant, as God calls for at our hands}
Truly there is much amiss in all of us;
much evil to be rectified, and much
defective to be supplied.

2. I call woon you, then, to engage tn
the Lord’s work with your whole hearts.
We will suppose that you are built upon
the Lord Jesus Christ, as the foundation
which God has laid in Zion (Isa. xxviii.
16). But no man is contented with
having laid a foundation; he proceeds
to build upon it, and never considers
his work as finished till he has brougbt

116


forth the top-stone. So it must be im
this spiritual building which is begun
within us. We must come to Christ
daily ‘as lively stones, that we may be-
built up,” dc. (1 Pet. ii, 4-6). To this,
then, would I call you, &c. Oh! learn
of a heathen to venerata the Divine
authority, and to exert yourselves to
the uttermost to promote the Divine
glory.

Let me call you to obey this imperial
mandate—

1. In a way of personai reformation.
At the time of the Passover, the Jews
swept every corner of their houses, in
order to purge from them every particle of
leaven which might have escaped their
more general and superficial search. And
this is what we are called to do. Alas!
there are many evil dispositions which
lurk within us, and which a superficial
survey will not enable us to detect.
Pride, envy, discontent, &c, Oh, be
diligent in “ purging out this old leaven,
that ya may be a new lump” (1 Cor.
v. 7, 8).

2. In a way of ministerial exertion,
In this, persons of rank and influence
ought to take the lead. Who can see a
heathen monarch thus interesting him-
self for his Jewish subjects, and not
wish that all monarchs with “their
counsellors ” were embarked in this holy
cause? In this the clergy, also, should
be most distinguished. Gladly did
Ezra avail himself of the liberty accorded
to him of going to Jerusalem for the
purpose of remedying the evils which
obtained there, &c. It was an office of
great labour, yet he willingly undertook
it. And does not this show, how those
who are distinguished for rank and
learning amongst the clergy should em-
ploy their talents and influence for the
Lord ?

The readiness with which the people
of Babylon concurred in this good work
shows how all classes of the community
amongst ourselves should uite ‘n the
work, They contributed no less than
eighty thousand pounds in silver, and
one hundred and fifty thousand pounds
in gold, besides a vast abundance of
wheat, &c. This was done by heathens
to honour the God of the Jews. What.


SHOMILETIO OOMMENTARY ; EZRA,





then, should not be done by us Chris
tians, who profess to serve the God of
the Jews, and to feel our obligations to


CalaP, Vi,
sh 6 len eee





a,


Him for all the wonders of redeaming
love }—C’, Simeon, df.d.


Exemprasy Prarsa.
{Verses 27, 28.)


L The true offerere of praise. We
regard Ezra as an example of the true
and acceptable worshipper. He exhibits
in these verses—

1. Unaffected humility. There is not
here the least indication of self-lauda-
tion or selfcommendation. All thought
of his own character and influence and
work seems lost in his admiration and
thankfulness for the doings of God.
Humility ie always becoming in man ;
but in drawing near to the great and
mighty, the holy and blessed God,
humility i especially incumbent upon
us. (a),

2. Sincere piety, Of this here are
two evidences—(1.) Ezra traces all
good to God. He looks above secon-
dary causes to the great First Cause.
The godly soul sees the hand of God
in all the worthy purposes and kind
actions of mez, sed in all that is true
and good in life. “Every good gift
and every perfect gift is from above,”
@e, (b). (2.) Ezra delighta im tke
aorship of God. It was matter of joy
to him that the king designed ‘to
beautify the house of the Lord which
is in Jerusalem.” ‘We read not of
any orders given to paint or gild it, or
to garnish it with precious stones, but
to be sure that the ordinances of God
were administered there constantly, and
carefully, and exactly, according to the
institution; and that was indeed the
beautifying of the Temple.” When
God is honoured by the erection of
beautiful temples, and more, by the
presentation of spiritual and reverent
worship, the good man realises great joy
af spirit.

3. Practical religioueness. Exra’s pious
feelings were expressed in consistent
actions. He blessed God in words,
and sought to bless Him in works also.
“And I wae strengthened as the hand
of the Lord my God was upoa me, and |


gathered together out of Israel chief
men to go up with me.” ‘The noblest
praise that we can present to God is
that of hearty conformity to His will.
“Thanksgiving is a good thing;
thanksliving is better. (c).

Il. The grand Object of praise.
‘Blessed be Jehovah God of our fa-
thers.”

1. The Supreme Being. ‘‘ Jehovah
God.” ‘‘Jehovah,” 7.e. the Self-Exis-
tent, the Eternal, the Unchangeable
One. ‘‘God,”’—the primary idea of
the word is the Strong One, the Al-
mighty. The true object of worship
for man is the Omnipotent and Hter-
nal, the Supremely Great and Good.

2. The Supreme Being in common
relation with His worshippers. ‘‘Je-
hovah my God” (ver. 28). The Israel-
ites had entered into solemn covenant
relations with God (Hxod. xxiv. 8-8).
God by the Psalmist speaks of them
thus: ‘‘My saints; those that have
made a covenant with Me by sacri-
fice.” Again He says: ‘I will walk
among you, and will be your God, and
ye shall be My people” (Lev. xxvi.
8-13). And the true worshippers to-
day are in covenant relation with God;
they have embraced Him as their Su-
preme Good, and have fully given
themselves to Him.

3. The Supreme Being whom cur
fathers worshipped. There is pathos in
the expression “Jehovah God of our
fathers.” That they worshipped Him
binds us tenderly vet tenaciously to
His service. There is inspiration also
here. He who proved Himself the
unfailing Friend and Helper of our
fathers is worthy of our trust: He will
not fail us, &e.


‘In Thee our fathers put their treat ;
Thy ways they bumbly trod:
Honoured and sacred ia their deas,

And atill thoy live to God,


lid


GaaP. Vil,


Heirs to their faith, their hope, their prayers
We the same path pursue :
Entail the blessing to our heirs ;
Lord, show Thy promise true.”
—Conder. (a).


II. Good reasons for praise. “Blessed
be Jehovah God of our fathers, which
hath put,” &e

1. He inspires the worthy purposes
of men. He put it into “the king’s
heart to beautify the house of Jehovah
which is in Jerusalem.” ‘The king’s
heart is in the hand of the Lord, as the
rivers of water; He turneth it whither-
soever He will.” “ All holy desires, all
good counsels, and all just works do
proceed” from Him,

2. He beneficently injluences the moral
judgments of men. ‘And hath ex-
tended mercy unto me before the king,
and his counsellors, and all bis mighty
princes.” The influence of Ezra over
the sovereign and these mighty princes
was very great; and to his mind the
secret of it was that God had inclined
them to regard him with esteem, and
to give their judgment ™ his favour.

3. He invigorates the heart and life
of His servants, “ And I was strength-
ened as the hand of Jehovah my God
was upon me,” &c. God encouraged
His servant in order that he might
carry out his sacred mission, and he at
once proceeded to do so. The strength
which God gives must be used in ac-
cordance with His will, and for His
glory. “If God gives us His hand, we
are bold and cheerful; if He withdraws
it, we are weak as water. Whatever
service we are enabled to do for God
and our generation, God mast have all
the glory of it. Strength for it is
derived from Him, and therefore the
praise of it must be given to Him.” (e),


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) Two men went up into the Temple to
pray, the one a very righteous man, as he
seemed to himself and to others; but God,
who seeth not ag man seeth, accounted the
unrighteous man the more righteous of the
two. So have I seen two flowers, side by
side, the one erect, and without a misgiving,
looking up to heavens the other, with ita
head sll adown upon ita breast, looking only
to the earth. But the fiower that looked

118


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.


eee nn nnn nee EE EES








earthward, as though not worthy to look
heavenward, was the more heavenly of the
two. Then said I, Pride and self-sufficiency
are a miserable ingufficiency; but meekness
and self-distrust are allied to All-sufficiency.
Question: Does God always give least to
those who think themselves greatest, and most
to those who think least of themselves!
Answer: Humility hath the palm.—Joha
Pulsford.


(b) As rivers empty their streams again inte
the bosom of the sea, whence they at first re-
ceived them; so men give the praise of what
they do unto that by which they do it, If
they attempt any enterprise with their own wit,
you shall have them bring the sacrifice to
their own wit or net. But faith teaches the
creature to blot out his own name, and write
the name of God in ite room upon all he hath
and doth.— W. Gurnall.

What I have done is worthy of nothing but
silence and forgetfulness ; but what God haa
done for me is worthy of everlasting and
thankful remembrance.— Bishop Hall,


(c) Holiness was meant, our New Testa-
ment tells us, for everyday use. It is home-
maade and home-worn, Its exercise hardena
the bone, and strengthens the muscle in the
bedy of eharacter. Holiness is religion shin-
ing. It is the candle lighted, and not hid
under a bushel, but lighting the house. It ia
religious principle put into motion. It is the
love of God sent forth into circulation, on the
feet, and with the hands, of love to man. It
ia faith gone to work. It is charity coined
into actions, and devotion breathing benedic-
tions on human suffering, while it goes up in
intercessions to the Father of all pity. Prayera
that show no answers in better lives are not
true prayers. Of religion without holiness—
or the spurious pretence current under that
name—the world hag seen enough; it has
more than once made society, with all its re-
forma, go backward; it has sharpened the
spear of the acorner, and sealed the sceptic’s
unbelief. It has hidden the Church from the
market. It haa gone to the conference and
communion-table, as to a sacred wardrobe,
where badges are borrowed to cloak the ini-
quities of trade. It has said to many an out-
cast and oppressed class, ‘‘ Stand by thyself ;
the Master’s feast is for me, and not for you.”
It has thinned the ranks of open disciples,
and treasherously offered to objectors the van-
tage-ground of honesty. My friends, get faith,
and then use it, Gain holiness, and wear it.
ERE and watch while you pray. Keep the
Sabbath ; keep it so carefully that it shall keep
you allthe week,—a mutual friendship. Come
to the church ; come to carry the church back
with you, notin ita professions nor its external
credit, but its interior eubatance, into a cone
sistent holiness.—F. D. Huntington, D.D.


(@) The covenant made with the Patriarch
wea made with Abraham and Ais ecced afte


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: FZRA,





Sim. Throughout the Mosaic period, children
were included with their fathers in all the
blessings of the elder Testament. ‘‘The pro-
mise is unto you and your children,” is the
constant doctrine through al] God’s mes-
sages to the Israelites. We are expressly told,
that under Christ, in the New Testament, the
same covenant is renewed, only expanded and
deepened. Throughout, the law of descent is
carefully respected. The hereditary tie is re-
cognised, Offspring, at birth, are supposed
to be bound up in the same bond of Christian
privileges and helps which encircles their be-
lieving progenitors.—Jbid,


(e) What reward shall we give unto the
Lord for all the benefits He kath bestowed }


CHAP. VIE,





7
From the eheerless gloom of non-existenos
He waked us into being ; He ennobled us with
understanding ; He taught us arts to promote
the means of life ; He commanded the prolifie
earth to yield its nurture; He bade the ani-
mals to own us as their lords, For es the
rains descend ; for us the sun sheddeth abroad
its creative beams; the mountains rise, the
valleys bloom, offering ua grateful habitation
and uo sheltering retreat. For us the rivera
flow; for us the fountains murmur; the sea
opens its bosom to admit our commerce ; the
earth exhausts its stores; each new object
Scie a new enjoyment ; all nature pouring

er treasures at our feet, through the boun-
ee of Him who wills that all be ours.
— Basil,





CHAPTER VIL


Crrrtcat anD Exptanatorni Nores.] This chapter eontains—{i.) A list of the heads of
houses, with the number of adult males accompanying each of them, who went with Kura from
Babylon to Jerusalem (vers, 1-14). (ii.) An account of the encampment for three days at the
river Ahava, and the doings there; vis., obtaining ministers for the Temple service (vers, 15—
20); proclaiming and observing a religious fast (vers. 21-23); arranging for the safe keeping
during the journey of the offerings and the precious vessels for the Temple (vers. 24-30). (iii.)
A brief record of their departure from Ahava and arrival at Jerusslem (vers. 31, 32); and (iv.)
Of the careful delivery of the treasures in the Temple (vers. 83, 84), the offering of sacrifices
to God (ver. 35), and delivering their commisaions unto the king’s lieutenants (ver, 86).

Ver. 1. The chief of their fathers] or, ‘‘the heads of their families,’ Heil: “The heads
of the houses.”

Vers. 2-14] This list is parallel with that of chap. ii. 83-19. Many of the family namea
(or, a8 Keil calls them, “ designations of races,” eg. Pharosh, Pahath-moab, &c.) are common
to both ; while some are found in each which are absent from the other. The presence of the
game family names ‘‘in both lists is to be explained by the cireumstance that portions of ” such
families or races “returned with Zerubbabel, and that the rest did not follow till Ezra’s
departure.” The number of families in Ezra’s liat is smaller than in that of Zerubbabel, and
the members of each family less numerous. The total number of adult males, including Levites
and Nethinim (vers. 18-20), who returned with Ezra was 1775, according to thia list.

Vers. 2, 3] The first member of ver. 3 should probably be joined to ver. 2: Of the sons of
David; Hattush, of the sons of Shecaniah] It is almost certain that this is the Hattush of
1 Chron. iii. 22, the son of Shemaiah and grandson of Shecaniah.

Ver. 5] The Hebrew text seems to be imperfect here by reason of the falling out of a name.
Keil suggests that the reading, as in the LKX., should be, ‘‘ Of the sons of Zattu, Shecaniah,
the son of Jahaziel.” (Comp. chap. ii. 8.)

Ver. 10] A similar defect seems to exist in the text of thie verse. The deficiency is thus
supplied in the LXX., “‘ And of the sons of Bani, Shelomith, the son of Josiphiah,” (Comp.
chap, ii. 10.) This emendation is also accepted by Keil.

Ver. 13, And of the last sons of Adonikam] &c. ‘‘ Here, instead of the name of the head of
the house, we read the worda, ‘last, and these their names;’ whereupon three names are given,
and not till then, ‘and with them sixty males.’ Here, then, it is not the head of the house who
is named, but in hia place three heads of families, amounting together to sixty males. Now,
as these three families did not form a house, these sixty sons of Adonikam who returned
with Ezra are, with regard to the six hundred and sixty-six sons of Adonikam who retarned
with Zerubbabel (chap. ii. 18), designated the last, or last arrived, and thus eomprised with
them as one honse,.”— Keil.

Ver. 15. The river that runneth to Ahava] In vers. 21 and 81: ‘‘the river of Ahava.” The
name both of a place and of a river, ‘The latest researches,” according to Mr. Grove (Bibl,
Dict.), ‘‘ are in favour of its being the modern H7, on the Euphrates, due east of Damascus,”
and north-west of Babylon, from which it was about eighty miles distant. The place is famous
for ita bitumen springs, ‘‘The river of Ahava” is a small stream which here flows into the
Euphrates, And there abode we in tents three days] From this statement, and that of ver,
81, “We departed from the river of Ahava on the twelfth day of the first month,” we learn
that they arrived at Ahava on the ninth day of the firat month; the journey from Babylon
having been commenced on tho first day of that momth (chap. vii. 9}. 19


OHAP, VIXL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EXns,








Ver, 17. Casiphia] ‘‘s place of uncertain aite on the road between Babylon and Jerusalem,”
—Bibl, Dict, ‘The place Casiphia is entirely unknown, bat cannot have been far from the
river \hava,’—Keil. It acems that both Levites and Nethinim, the upper and lower orders ef
Temple ministers, had settled in Casiphia; and that Iddo was the ehief man of the place, and

oxsessed considerable influence amongst these ordera,

Ver. 18, By the good hand of our God upon us} (Comp. chap. vii, 6, 9, 28.) Aman of
understanding] Hcb.: Ish sechel, Keil regards this aga proper name. Butitscems to us better
to take it as inthe A.V. 3 or ag Fuerst renders it, ‘4A man of knowledge.” The man of under-
standing was named Sherebiah The 4 copulative (and) was probably ‘‘inserted by a careleaa
eopyist,” or, if it be retained, it should be translated even. ‘‘ A man of understanding, ...
even Sherebinh.” He is again mentioned in ver. 24; Neh. viii. 73 ix. 4, 5; x.123 xii, 24,

Ver, 19. Hashabiah] is again mentioned in ver, 24; Neh. x. 11; xii. 24.

Ver, 20, The Nethinims] (See on chap, ii. 43.) All of them were expressed by name] i.e,
Iddo sent a list of them to Ezra.

Ver, 21. A right way] Fuerst: An “teven” or ‘‘plain way;” #¢. a prosperous journey
(Comp. Jer, xxxi. 9: ‘‘ A straight way, wherein they shall not stumble.”)

Ver. 24. Then I separated twelve of the chief of the priests, Sherebiah}] &c. It seems from
the rendering of the A.V. that Sherebiah and Hashabiah were priests ; but they have been already


described as Levites (vera. 18, 19). The Heb. is maw? ; butin the A.Y., as in the Vulgate,


4 is not translated. Keil suggests that for a we should read 1, and translate, ‘‘ and Shere-
biah ;’’ for this reason that if we retain >, and translate ‘‘ for Sherebiah,” we “ place the priesta
in a servile relation to the Levites, contrary to their true position.” We prefer to retain the
7 and to translate, ‘*Then I separated twelve of the chief of the prieste to Sherebiah,” &e.
This would not involve the subordination of the priests to the Levites; but would mean that
Ezra appvinted twelve chiefs of the priests to act with twelve chief Levites, of whom Sherebiah
and Hashabiah were two, in keeping the offerings for the Temple during the journey.

Ver, 26, 81x hundred and fifty talents of silver] According to Dr. Arbuthnot’s tables thia
would be equivalent to £222,421, 178. 6d. of our money; and according to Mr, R. S. Poole’s
estimate (Bibl, Dict.), to about £260,000. Of gold an hundred talents} or £547,500 of our
money, according to Dr. Arbuthnot, and a little over €1,000,000, according to Mr. Poole.

Ver. 27. Two vessels of fine copper, precious as gold] Margin : ‘‘ Heb., ‘ yellow, or shining
brags, desirable as gold.’” ‘‘ They may have been,” gays Canon Farrar, ‘‘ of orichalcum, like
the Persian or Indian vases found among the treasures of Darius (Aristot. de Mirab. Auscult.).”
— Bibi. Dict. Keil speaks of them thus: ‘‘'l'wo brazen veasels of fine golden brilliancy, precious
as gold.”

Ver, 29, The chambers of the house of the Lord] (Comp. 1 Kings vi. 5; Neh. xiii. 6,)

Ver, 31. The river of Ahava] (See notes on ver. 15.) He delivered us from] &c. (Comp
ver. 22.)

Ver. 32. Abode there three days] for rest after the fatigues and trials of their long journey,
(Comp. Neh, ii. 11.)

Ver, 388. Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest] He is mentioned again in Neh. iii. 4, 21; x.
5; xii. 3. Eleagar the son of Phinehas] is probably the person who is named in Neh. xii, 42.
Meremoth and Hleazar were priests. Jozabad the son of Jeshua] is mentioned in chap. x, 23;
Neh. viii. 7. Woadiah the son of Binnui} is not named in the subsequent history, Jozabad
and Nonadiah were distinguished Levitea.

Ver. 34, By number and by weight] &c. The vessela were both weighed and counted ; the
gold and silver were probably only weighed, And all the weight was written at that time]
“de. an authentic list was made at the delivery which then tovk place.’—Keu.

Ver. 35. The children of those that bad been carried away, which were come out of the
captivity] i.e. those who had returned with Ezra, Offered burnt ofterings] &&. (Comp. chap.
vi. 17; and see notes on that verse.)

Ver. 36. The king’s leutenants] Keil: ‘‘ The satraps of the king.” He says they ‘‘ were
the military chiefs of the province.” Rawlinson saya they ‘‘ were the highest class of the
Persian provincial governors.” The governors] were, according to Keil, “the heads of the
civil government.” Rawlinson: ‘It denotea a lower grade of official.” They furthered the
people| &c., or, ‘they supported the people,” &e.


Toe AssEwBLy at ARAYA.


(Verses 1-20.)


{1 The long journey commenced. went up with me from Babylon,” &a

“ These are now the chef of their fathers, ‘‘ Upon the first day of the first month *

nnd this is the genealogy of them that (chap. vii 9) they set out from Babylon,
120


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BZRA,


Char, Via.





and continued their journey for several
days without any lengthened encamp-
ment. They entered upon their journey,
we conceive, with mingled feelings of
hope and fear. They were eucouraged by
hopes of reaching their famous father-
land, and of there enjoying the precious
privileges of their religion ; but the plea
sure cf these anticipations was moderated
by the thought of the difficulties and
dangers of the long journey that lay
before them. Moreover, it is almost
certain that, in leaving Babylon, most
of them were sacrificing temporal advan-
tages, and breakiny up treasured asso-
ciations, and severing themselves from
dear friends, and these things could not
have been done without much mental
suffering ; but at the summons of duty
and the invitations of sacred privileges,
they deliberately eucountered these triala,
and went up from Babylon. Their de
parture may be looked at as an illustra
tion of the exodus of the soul from the
captivity of a life of sin and its setting
out on its upward pilgrimage.

I. An important inspection made,
“And I gathered them tugether to the
river that runneth to Ahava; and there
abode we in tents three days; and I
viewed the people and the priests.” On
the ninth day of the first month they
encamped at Ahava, they remained there
“jin tents three days” (ver. 15), and
then, ‘“‘on the twelfth day of the first
month,” they departed from the river of
Abava to go unto Jerusalem (ver. 31).
This halt illustrates—

1. The need of seasons of rest. The
company with Ezra needed rest after
the excitement and trials of their depar-
ture, and the toils of the first staye of
their long journey, The Almighty re-
cognised and provided for man’s need
of rest when He ordained the night to
succeed the day, and in the institution
of the Sabbath Jesus Christ recog-
nised it, and said unto His disciples,
* Come ye yourselves apart into a desert
place, and rest awhile.” In our life-pil-
grimage there are times when we need
to rest from our labours for awhile, and,
if possible, to lay aside our cares. (a).

2. The use of seasons of rest. Kara
employed the three days whiek were


spent at Ahava in sich a manner that
great advantages to his company resulted
from them. He reviewed the assembled
people, &c. Rest time should not be
waste time. As individuals we should
use our seasons of rest in reviewing the
way in which the Lord hath led us, in
considering our present condition and cir-
cumstances, and in preparing ourselves
for future work. And if a church hae
comparative rest for a brief season, such
rest should be employed in equipping
its members for more vigorous service,
TL A grave deficiency discovered.
“I viewed the people, and the priests,
and found there none of the sons of
Levi.” There were no Levites in the
company, except such as were priests,
and they had their own proper duties.
All the priests were “of the sons of
Levi,” but all “the sons of Levi” were
not priesta, but those only who were of
the family of Aaron, Of the Levites
proper, members of the other families
of the tribe of Levi, who ministered in
subordination to the priests, Ezra could
not find any in his company. None of
them was present, ‘This was to their
discredit. They should have been most
eager to embrace the opportunity of
going to Jerusalem, and there entering
upon the duties of their sacred calling.
They who are in possession of sacred
privileges and engaged in the perform-
ance of sacred duties, are not always
characterised by personal zeal and de-
votedness in the cause of God. Minis-
ters of religion are sometimes slow in
making personal sacrifices and rendering
personal assistance even in a good enter.
prise. (b). They should be leaders, dre.
IV. The supply of the deficiency
aought. “Then sent [ for Eliezer, for
Ariel, for Shemaiah, and for E]nathan,”
ae. (vers. 16,17), Ezra was unwilling
to proceed until he had secured a band
of Levites to go with them. ‘The means
which he employed to obtain them are
worthy of notice, He sought them—
1. By means of influential men, He
called for eleven leading men of his com-
pany ; nine of them are characterised as
“ chief men,” and the other two as ‘‘ men
of understanding” or wisdom (ver. 16),
and sent them to seek for “ ministers for
131


CHAP, VI.


the house of God.” Such men were
likely to succeed where men of an in-
ferior type would have failed. Important
affairs should be entrusted only to com-
petent men.

2. By sending them to the right place.
He “sent them unto the place Casiphia.”
It has been conjectured that there was
at Casiphia a college “for the educa-
tion of priests, Levites, and Nethinim,
over which Iddo presided ; where they
had the free exercise of their religion,
and had so comfortable a support that
they were not inclined to remove, ‘ It
is very probable they had their syna-
gogues or other places where they met
for religious worship; for we find the
people resorting to Ezekiel in their cap-
tivity, and him preaching to them the
Word of God, in many places of his
book (Ezek. xxxiii 31), &e. And Ezra
in all likelihood was an instructor among
them.’”—Bishop Patrick. But, apart
from conjectures, it is clear that a con-
siderable number of Levites and Nethinim
dwelt at Casiphia, and that Ezra was
cognisant of the fact; therefore to that
place he despatched his messengers,

3. By sending them to the right man.
Ezra “sent them with commandment
unto Iddo the chief,” &. Iddo was
probably a Levite; for the Nethinim
being 2 lower order of Temple servants,
it ia not at all probable that one of their
number would be “chief” over Levites.
Iddo was “the chief at the place Casi-
phia,” was evidently disposed to further
the movement under Ezra, and, from his
sending a list of the names of those who
went from Casiphia (ver. 20), seems to
have been a man of methodical and
business-like habits.

4. By sending them with precise in-
structions, Ezra “told them what they
sbould say unto Iddo,” &c. Margin:
“Heb., ‘I put words in their mouth.’”
Thus this mission was admirably se-
lected and sent forth, and it deserved
success. (c),

V. The supply of the deficiency ob-
tained. “And by the good hand of
our God upon us they brought us a
man of understanding,” dc, (vers. 18—
20). Notice—

1. The supply was suffictenr. About

122


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.





forty Levites and two hundred and
twenty Nethinim went from Casiphia
and joined the returning exiles under
Ezra

2. The supply was various. There
were Levites, and Nethinim “for the
service of the Levites.” Different grades
of ministry are necessary for the various
spheres of service in the Church of God,

3. The supply was remarkable for the
presence of at least one man of distin.
guished ability, ‘They brought us a
man of understanding, of the sons of
Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of Israel,
even Sherebiah.” This man afterwards
rendered important service in the history
of the people, as we see from ver. 24;
Neh, viii. 7; ix 4,5; x. 12; xii. 24.

4. The supply was obtained by the
blessing of God. ‘‘ By the good hand of
our God upon us they brought us,” dc.
Thus Ezra traces the success of this
mission to the gracious assistance of


God.


‘« Except the Lord conduct the plan,
The best concerted schemes are vain,
And never can succeed
We spend our wretched strength for nought |
But if our works in Thee be wrought
They shall be blest indeed.”


—O. Wesley.

“Tf,” says M. Henry, “ where ministers
have been wanting, the vacancies are
well supplied, let God have the glory,
and His good hand be acknowledged as
qualifying them for the service, inclining
them to it, and then opening a door of
opportunity for them.”


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(s) It will be confessed by all men, even by
the veriest slaves to their ever-driving ambi-
tion, that physical rest is sometimes needed.
The aching limb asks for it; the hand that is
so weary that it cannot any longer hold pen,
or tool, or weapon of war, says, in its trembling
weakness, ‘‘ Let me reat awhile;” and the
fevered brain, over-driven, excited almost to
madness, says, in its sleeplessness and throb-
bing and heat, “ Let me rest awhile.” Well,
then, here is so much gained. We shall be
able to make our way from this low point te
a much higher phase of rest, and find our way
upward, from the cry of the feeble and ex-
hausted flesh, to the greater, more solemn, and
urgent wanta of our over-excited spiritual
nature ; we shall underatand, in some degree,
that our highest, divinest faculties must ocea-
sionally pause, rest, and recover themselves, if


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.





they would fully, with completeness and per-
fectnesa, discharge all the duties and obliga-
tions which Almighty God has imposed upon
them. Rest is as necessary as labour, He is
not a philosopher, but a madman, who lights
the candle of his life at both ends.—Joseph
Parker, DD.


(b) There is an old proverb, ‘‘ The temple
mouse fears not the temple idol.” It is a
painful experience, present to the hearts of
most of us, how different is the awe of the
first service in which we ministered, and of
the fiftieth or hundredth. At first, the put-
ting on of the aurplice was a dedication—the
entering of the vestry was a solemnity—the
opening Sentences, the Exhortation, the Con-
fession, read by our lips, seemed as though
they consecrated those lips themselves to a
new nse and a newreligion, So was it with
each function of the holy office. The first
reading of the Commandments—the first Ser-
mon—the first Communion in which we fol-
lowed with the Cup—the first baptism, the
first wedding—the first visit to a sick-room,
the first commendatory prayer beside the
dying, the firat eaying of the words, ‘‘ Dust to
dust,” by the open graye—each was an event,
each was an epoch, of the life within—it had
an effect, a spiritual effect, upon the conscious
immortal man. It may be that we relied upon
thie—thought it needless to impress the feel-
ing, to turn emotion into principle, by prayer
and watching—felt confident that the repeti-
tion of the occasion would revive the effect
—trusted to this, and left it there. A year
afterwards we could stand unmoved by the
grave, talk and laugh in the vestry, fall half
asleep as we read the Prayers, Even with the
best efforts made and persisted in, we could
never reawaken the solemnity of the begin-
ning. Duty becomes habit, habit becomes
familiarity, and familiarity, if it breeds not
contempt, at least forbids that kind of awe
which is more nature than grace,


And some of ua make the fatal mistake of
expecting our Profession to make or to keep
us spiritual, Living always in holy things,
what can we be but holy? We learn a new
lesson as years advance—and although we can
give thanks still for the blessing of having
the inward and the outward life of one piece
and of one colour, occupied inthe same thoughts
and the samestudies, mutually helpful andsym-
pathetic with each other—yet we feel more and
more that there is no security, in this harmony,
for holy living ; that there is no royal road, but


Guar, Vint.


rH


that which is open for all wayfarers, to the
saint’s life and the saint’s reat ; nay, that there
is even an added risk, for the priest of God's
temple, lest he find that ‘common ” to him
which is ‘‘ holy” for all besides, just because
he must daily touch and daily handle, duily
prepare and daily dispense, that bread of life
which souls only can digest, and which his
soul may, by the very having, have not. There
is nothing for it but to say to ourselves, and
act upon it, ‘‘ Like people, like priest.” Just
what they want, I want—just what I bid
them do, I will do. I will prepare for my
work, I will do my work, not as though it
could sanctify, not as though it were (of itself)
either hither or thither as to my soul’s state,
but as needing, like any commonest trade or
handicraft, a soul at peace with God before-
hand, a soul in full communion with God be-
forehand, a soul preoccupied by the Holy Spirit
sought and cherished, a soul setting God always
before it, by Him first quickened, then to Him
afterwards ministering.—C, J. Vaughan, D.D.


(e) Ministers will not be foand ready made,
and ministers cannot be made to order. There
is no reyal road to the supply of the ministry.
There is no climate in which ministers are
indigenous, There is no patent by which
ministers ean be manufactured. Ministry ia
a gift, ministry is a growth, ministry is an
inspiration. It is not every educated man—
still less is it every uneducated man—who ia
even capable of it. The minister is the ulti-
mate product of a long operation of Providence
and of grace, working individually, working
secretly, and giving no account of itself.
When our Lord looked upon the vast shep-
herdless multitudes, He had but one sugges-
tion to make for the ministerial supply : “Pray
ye the Lord of the harvest ’—-and He was there
Himself—“ that He will send forth ”’—and the
word is a very strong one—‘‘ labourers into
His harvest.” This is the one hope now. In
comparison with this, any other suggestion
musi be timid and tentative. Yet something
perhaps might be done by a keen and practised
eye directed towards our schools and homes.
Young intelligence, young diligence, young
devotion, sought out by the loving watchful-
ness of master or minister, might be fashioned,
here and there, even from a humble stock, by
a wise influence and sometimes a generous
bounty, into an eventual aptitude for the
ministry. To foster this promise, but in one
or two cases, into performance, is a noble am-
bition for any one who cares for his Church’s
future.— /bid,


Tur ComMPANIONS OF EzRA ON HIS JOURNEY TO JERUSALEM.
(Verses 1-20.)


The following observations are sug-
gested by these verses :—

1. Whilst love of the world and fear
of the cross induce most men to neglect


the salvation of the Gospel, they who
obey the gracious call stand recorded in
the Book of Life, and will be honoured
by God Himself (vers, 1-14),

123


Ghar, VI,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY. EZRA,








%. When some of a family embrace
the Gospel, they who linger behind
may probably follow; till sometimes,
in answer to fervent prayers, the very
last are brought in (ver. 13).

3. Alas! that professed ministers,
who ought to take the lead in every
good work, are generally so backward
to labour, or venture, or suffer in the
cause of God, and need to be stirred up
by the example and exhortations even of
their lay brethren ! (ver, 15, last part),

4, But such as address them on these
occasions should be “chief men,” or
‘““men of understanding ;” lest they
should be irritated, instead of being per-
suaded (vera, 16,17). They must nos,


however, be left to their negligence:
and their superior brethren, having
given them a good example, may send
or speak to them, with more authority
and effect than others can; and often
those who were before inattentive will
profit by meek and faithful admonitions,

5. When ministers for the work of
the house of our God are raised up, who
are men of piety and understanding, we
should acknowledge “the good hand of
our God upon us,” and give Him the
praise ; as we ought at all times to lift
up our prayers to Him for thie blessing
to His Church (vera, 18-20).— Arranged
from Scott's Comm.


Men or UNDERSTANDING
(Verse 18.)


“ By the good hand of our God upon
ws, they brought us a man of understand-
ing . . . Sherebiah,”

Sherebiah was not merely a man of
knowledge and intelligence, butof wisdom
and prudence, Sechel, here rendered
“understanding,” signifies moral excel-
lences as well as mental abilities, as
may be seen from its use elsewhere.
The word rendered “them of under-
standing” in Dan. xi, 35, and “ they
that be wise” in Dan, xii. 3, comes from
the same verb as sechel, viz., sachal,
“The fear of the Lord is the beginning
of wisdom ; a good understanding (sechel)
have all they that do,” dec. (Ps. cxi. 10),
“There is no solid wisdom but in real
piety.” (a).

The text teaches that—

I. Men of understanding are the
gifts of God. Ezra traces the presence
of Sherebiah amongst them to “ the
good hand of their God upon them.”
Wise men are God’s gifts, inasmuch as—

l. They derive their abilities from
Him. He bestowed upon them the
faculties and capacities of their mental
and moral nature.

2. They rightly develop their abslities
by His blessing. He inspires them to
every worthy purpose, and aids them in
its prosecution,

3. They attain their moral exvellences

124


by Hie blessing. They “are His work-
manship,” &c. (Eph. ii. 10). ‘‘ By the
grace of God they are what they are”
(1 Cor, xv. 10).

IL Men of understanding are of
great worth amongst men. Ezra per-
ceived the vaiue of Sherebiah to his
company, acknowledged the goodness
of God in his arrival amongst them, re-
corded his quality and his coming, and
found him very useful subsequently.
Men of understanding are of great worth
in society because—

1. Understanding ts essential to the
beneficent employment of other gifts and
powers, For example—(l.) Zeal with-
out understanding is a very perilous
thing. ‘ Zeal without knowledge is like
expedition to a man in the dark.” 2.)
Strength without understanding often
acts injuriously. ‘Wisdom is better
than strength. . . . Wisdom is better
than weapons of war; but one sinner
destroyeth much good.”


‘* It is excellent
To have a giant's strength ; but it is tyrannons
To use it like a giant.”—Shakespeare,


(3.) Great gifts of any kind without moral
excellences are productive of great evils,
Without grace, great powers are great
engines of mischief and ruin, a curse
and uot a bleusiug to society. * Good


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: BRA.





understanding ” is needful to ensure the
usefulness of great abilities.

2. The employment of understanding
itself confers great benefits upon society.
(1.) In restraining from unwise and sin-
ful projects. We have an example in
Acts v. 34-40. (2.) In originating and
inciting to wise and good projects.
(3.) In devising appropriate methods
for the attainment of such projects.
(4.) And for direction in life and work
generally. ‘Wisdom is profitable to
direct.” See how useful Sherebiah was
to the Jews (ver. 24; Neh. viii 7 ; ix.
4,5; x. 12; xii 24). (6).

Conctusion: It behoves us—

1. To praise God for men of under-
standing.

2. To prize such men. Too often
they have been neglected, and frequently
cruelly persecuted while living, and
honoured after death, Let us value
them highly while they are yet with
us. (c).

3. To endeavour to become men of
understanding. “ Wisdom is the prin-
cipal thing: get wisdom ; and with all
thy getting get understanding.” “In
understanding be men.” (d).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) The greatest man is he who chooses
right with the most invincible resolution; who
resista the soreat temptation within and with-
out; who bears the heaviest burdens cheerfully;
who is calmest in storms, and moat fearless
under menaces and frowns; whose reliance
on truth, on virtue, and on God is most un-
faltering.—Seneca.

Remember that he is indeed the wisest and
the happiest man who, by constant attention
of thougit, discovers the greatest opportunity
of doing good, and, with ardent and animated
resolution, breaks through every opposition
that he may improve these opportunities,—
P. Doddridge, D.D.


(6) We cannot look, however imperfectly,
upon a great man without gaining something
by him. He is the living light-fountain, whieh
it is good and pleasant to be near; the light
which enlightens, whieh has enlightened, the
darkness of the world; and this, not as a
kindled lamp only, bat rather as a natural
luminary, shining by the gift of Heaven; a
flowing lightfountain, as I say, of native
original insight, of manhood and heroie noble-





CHAP, VER,


pe
ness, in whose radiance al] souls feel that it ta
well with them.—Thomas Carlyle.


(c) Let us not forget that if honour be fer
the dead, gratitude can only be for the living,
He who has once stood beside the grave, te
look back upon the companionship which haa
been for ever closed, feeling how impotent,
there, are the wild love and the keen sorrow,
to give one inatant’s pleasure to the pulseless
heart, or atone in the lowest measure to the
departed spirit for the hour of unkindness,
will scarcely for the future incur that debt to
the heart, which can only be discharged to the
dust, But the lesson which men receive as
individuals, they do not learn as nationa,
Again and again they have seen their nobleat
descend into the grave, and have thought it
enough to garland the tombstone when they
had not crowned the brow, and to pay the
honour to the ashes which they had denied to
the spirit. Let it not displezae them that they
are bidden, amidst the tumult and the dazzle
of their busy life, to listen for the few voices,
and watch for the few lamps, whieh God has
toned and lighted to charm and to guide them,
that they may not learn their sweetness by
their silence, nor their light by their decay.—
John Ruskin, 1.4.


(d) If you look at what keeps the world astir,
you will at once conclude that most men around
you are under the actuating influence of a very
different maxim from that presented in Prov,
iv. 7: ‘* Wisdom is the principal thing: get
wisdom; and with all thy getting, get under-
standing.” You might, without being at all
chargeable with a libel, read, “ Money ia the
principal thing; therefore get money; and
with all thy getting, get a fortune.” Thia,
alas! is the world’s “one thing needful.” All
else is postponed to this. The world’s advice
to the young is, ‘‘Get money first. Secure a
competency,” a word of which the limit is never
defined ; ‘‘and when that hag been done, you
will have leisure to think about what good
folks call ‘better things.’ Mind you the main
chance. This world is the one with which we
have first to do, as we are placed first in it,
This world, then, first, and then the next.” Ah!
what a delusion !—Ralph Wardlaw, D.D.

Labour to be men of knowledge and sound
understanding. A sound judgment is a moat
precious mercy, and conduces much to sound-
neas of heart and life. A weak judgment is
easily corrupted; and if it be once corrupt, the
will and conversation will quickly follow, Your
understandings are the iniet or entrance to the
whole soul; and, if you be weak there, your
souls are like a garrison that hath open or ill-
guarded gates; and if the enemy be once let
in there, the whole city will be quickly his own.
Ignorance is virtually every error ; therefore,
rot the Bible be much in your hands and hearta
—R. Baxter,


120





.. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : ERA,


Ezra’s ConFIDENCE IN Gop.
(Verses 21-23.)


L Confidence in God avowed. “We
had spoken unto the king, saying, The
hand of our God,” &c. (ver. 22). Here
is a declaration of faith—

1. In His providence. Ezra believed
that God was interested in human
affairs ; that ‘“ His eyes are upon the
ways of man, and He seeth all his
goings ;” and that His hand was work-
ing amongst men, directing and con-
trolling, rewarding and punishing them.
a).

a In His providence as efficiently
promoting the interests of His peopve.
“The hand of our God is upon all them
for good that seek Him.” He regards
His people with approval, guides their
footsteps, guards them and their in-
terests, and makes “all things work
together for good to them.”

3. In His providence as opposed to
those who forsake Him. “His power
and His wrath are against all them that
forsake Him.” The power which works
for righteousness must be hostile to the
workers of iniquity. The government
of a holy God must set itself against
impiety and wickedness.

IL Confidence in God tested. A
long journey, which would involve
many difficulties and dangers, was be-
fore Ezra and his great company ; and
he was the responsible leader in that
journey. Can he trust in God and in
His providence now? His confidence
was tested—

1. By thetr need of guidance, The
journey they were entering upon was a
long one; they required some one to
lead them in “a right way.” They had
no visible symbol of the presence of
God with them and guiding them, as
their fathers had in the pillar of cloud
by day and the pillar of fire by night.
Can Ezra and his companions trust the
invisible ‘hand of their God” in this
matter 4

2. By their need of protection. The
journey that lay before them was a
perilous one, (1.) There was danger
from “the enemy in the way.” The

126


country through which they had te
travel was infested with Arabian free.
booters. And it seems probable, from
vers. 22 and 31, that a plan had been
arranged by some of them for attacking
and plundering this company. (2.)
This danger was increased by the trea-
sures which they carried with them.
There was their own “substance,” and
the gold and silver and precious vessela
for the Temple service; the gold and
silver alone, according to one computa-
tion, being worth upwards of three
quarters of a million of our money, and
according to another, upwards of a
million and a quarter. What a temp-
tation this would be to “the enemy in
the way.” (3.) Their danger was also
increased by the character and compo-
sition of their company. Amongst them
were many women and “little ones,”
who in case of an attack would not be
able to assist in repelling it, but would
themselves require defence. Thus, if
they were assaulted, they would be able
to offer only a feeble resistance. Can
Ezra trust their defence to the hand of
their God upon them for good? Can
he go forward towards “the enemy in
the way,” relying upon that power which
is against the wicked? Or, will he
seek for help elsewhere ?

TI. Confidence in God maintained.
Ezra considered their position and pros-
pects, their difficulties and dangers, and
their consequent needs, and he decided
to trust in God for all, and to give
practical proof of their confidence:

1. In not seeking guidance and defence
from the king. “I was ashamed to
require of the king a band of soldiers
and horsemen to help us against the
enemy in the way.” The terms of the
king’s commission to Ezra leave no room
for doubt that if he had requested of
him a military escort, the request would
have been readily granted ; but he deter-
mined not to do so. He and his com-
panions might have adopted the words
of David, “The Lord will hear from
His holy heaven with the saving strength


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZRA,


of His right hand) Some trust in
ehariots, and some in horses; but we
will remember the Name of the Lord
our God” (Ps. xx. 6, 7).

2. In seeking guidance and defence
from God. “Then I proclaimed a fast
there, at the river of Ahava,” dc. (ver.
21). See how they sought unto God
for what they needed—(1.) Humbly.
They fasted and afflicted themselves
before their God, in deep self-abasement
and penitence on account of sin, and
with a view to its forgiveness, (2.)
Believingly. They not only fasted
before God, but they prayed unto Him
for a prosperous journey. Their conf-
dence in Him did not lead them to
neglect praver to Him. True faith in
God and in His gracious providence is
not a substitute for prayer to Him, but
an incentive thereto. (b). (3.) Earnestly ;
as is indicated by their fasting and
prayer, to which for a time they seem
to have entirely given themselves, ‘So
we fasted and besought our God for
this.”

Thus Ezra’s confidence in God, being
tested, did not fail, but was nobly main-
tained «nd manifested. (c).

TY. Confidence in God vindicated.
“ And He was intreated of us.” Their
faith was vindicated—

l. In their inward assurance. They
had a firm conviction that their prayers
were heard and accepted, and that God
would secure to them a prosperous
journey.

2. In the outward result, They were
led by a right way ; they were delivered
from the enemy that lay in wait for
them; they had a prosperous journey,
and arrived safely in Jerusalem, The
confidence in God which they had avowed
and maintained was splendidly vindi-
eated by His hand upon them for good
in their journey. They who honour Him
with their hearty trust, He will honour
with His great salvation. (d).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) But what is to be the justification of
this implicit confidence? It can only be jus-
tified upon the supposition that God is a being
having particular powers, and of a particular
sharacter. Confidence in God, for instanes,


OMAP. VINI,





ar ES





would be entirely irrational if He were con-
ceived of as a destiny, as a force, as a soul of
the universe,—if He were not believed to be
a person distinct from the universe, its ruler,
and its sustainer, ag well aa its creator, acting
upon it in the perfection of His freedom, and
without any sort of limit to His power, except
such limits as His own moral nature may
impose. Again, confidence in God would be
misplaced if it were believed that He ia the
personal, the free, the omnipotent creator ;
and yet if He were imagined to act, as we
should say in human words, capriciously, that
is, without reference to those eternal laws of
righteousness and truth, the traces, the echoes
of which we find within ourselves, and which
are in their essence, and demonstrably, not
fruits of His arbitrary enactment, but consti-
tutive parts of His eternal nature. Our Lord,
therefore, reveals God aa a Father, a revela-
tion which assures us at once of His power
and His love. It is the combination of these
two facts, God’s almightiness and God's love,
which taken together constitute or warrant
what we term His providence, His power, that
is, under the guidance of his love making pro-
vision for the good of His creatures generally,
but supremely and in particular of man, and,
among men, in a yet more eminent degree of
His servanta.—Canon Liddon.


(6) ‘*God’s promises, by reason of His un-
changeableness, may be nites on; what occa-
Bion, then, of prayer, seeing the thing pro-
mised will come round of its own ateady
accord, whether you open your lips or not”
The answer is short and simple. These pro-
mises are made only to those who expect, and
desire, and ask forthem. They are not pro-
mized indifferently, and come out of their own
accord at all, but to such only who have medi-
tated them, and who value them, and desire
them, and earnestly seek them; being, in
truth, too valuable to be thrown about to a
scrambling mob; being the high and holy
attractions by which God intended to work
upon the nature of man, and lead it out of ita
resent low and sunken estate into glorious
liberty and unwearied ambition of every noble
excellence. They are prizes in the hand of
God to stimulate the soul’s activitics,—more
glorious prizes than laurel wreaths, or the
trampetings of fame, or principalities and
thrones,—and they are yielded only to an
application of faculties, at the least, as intense
and ardent ag is put forth in pursuit of human
ambition. God does not cheapen His promises
down to a glance at them with the eye, ora
mouthing of them with the tongue, but He
requireth of those that would have them an
admiration equal to that of lovers, an estima-
equal to that of royal diadems, and a pursuit
equal to that of Olympic prizes.—£d. Irving.


(c) Suppose I were to set out on a pilgri-
mage to Jerusalem, and before I started were
to go to Brown Brothers & Co., and obtain
letters of credit for the cities of Londen,


127


GmAy. VIM,





Jericho, &e. Then, with these papers, which
a child might destroy, which would be but
ashes in the teeth of flame, which a thousand
chances might take from me, I should go on
with confidence and cheer, saying to myself,
“ Ag goon as I come to London | shall be in
funds. 1 have a letter in my pocket from
Brown Brothers & Co. which. will give me five
hundred dollars there ; and in the other cities to
which | am bound I shall find similar supplies,
all at my command, through the agency of
these magic papers and pen strokes of these
enterprising men.” But suppose that, instead
of this confidence, I were to sit down on ship-
beard, and go to tormenting myself in this
fashion—‘' Now, what am I to do when I get
to London! 1 have no money, and how do I
know that these bits of paper which I have
with me mean anything, or will amount to
anything? What shall I dof IT am afraid
1 shall starve in the strange city te which
I am going.” I should be a fool, you
say ; but should I be half the fool that man
is who, bearing the letters of credit of the
Eternal God, yet goes fearing all his way,
cast down and doubting whether he shall ever
get save through his journey! No fire, no
violence, ner any chance can destroy the


BOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZRA.





cheques of the Lord. When He says, ‘I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee,” and ‘‘ My
»-ace shall be sufficient for thee,” believe it ;
acd no longer dishonour your God by with-
holding from Him the confidence which you
freely accord to Brown Brothers & Co.—H.
W. Beecher.


(@) A heathen could say, when a bird
scared by a hawk flew into his bosom, ‘I will
not betray thee into the enemy, seeing thou
fliest to me for refuge ;” how much less will
God yield up a soul to its enemy when it takes
sanctuary in his Name, saying, ‘‘ Lord, I am
hunted with such a temptation, dodged with
such a lust; either Thou must pardon it, or I
am damned; mortify it, or I shall be 4 slave
to it; take me into the bosom of Thy love, for
Christ’s sake; castle me in the arms of Thy
everlasting strength; it is in Thy power to
gave me from or give me up into the hands of
my enemy; I have no confidence in myself or
any other; into Thy hands I eommit my
cause, myns-!f, and rely on Thee.” ‘this de-
pendence of a soul will undoubtedly awaken
the almighty power of God for hia defence, —
W. Gurnall,


Farrag aNnD PRUDENCE.
(Verses 21-23.)


In the text we find Ezra about to re-
turn to Jerusalem, aud ashamed to ask
the king for any military protection.
He had made certain statements to Ar-
taxerxes, and he was reluctant to act in
a@ manner which might bring those state-
ments into question. He felt, what
Christian people often feel, the conflict
between prudence and faith. Prudence
dictates one line of conduct, Christian
consisteucy seems to dictate another, and
the perplexity is sometimes painful.

We observe—

I. That, as a grand rule in the
Christian life, faith and prudence must
go together. ‘he Scriptures often relate
the marvellous helps which good men
have found in the days of peril, but they
give no countenance to presumptuous
reliance on supernatural intervention.
As the rule of life, the Scriptures bind
us to take all human precautions against
the various forms of mischief we have
reason to apprehend. In this unbeliev-
ing generation there is not much reason
to speak against excessive faith, but
there is some reason thug to speak. The

128


workman gave as his reason for not going
to church, ‘‘ That religious people were
hypocrites, because they called the tem-
ple God’s house, and yet put upon it a
lightning rod.” This worldly workman
could not see that God’s Church ought
to recognise God’s law, and act agree-
ably thereto; but he thought he sawa
glaring contradiction in this union of
prudence and piety. And some noble
men in the Church sympathise with this
workman, and reject the securities which
prudence would counsel. They will leave
their property uninsured ; in times of
disturbance they will not claim the pro-
tection of the magistrate ; and in time
of sickness they will not call the physi-
cian. This is, to a large extent, a serious
mistake. As a rule, we are to accept
the band of soldiers which Ezra, in pecu-
liar circumstances, rejected. We must
not rashly cast ourselves into peril on
the idea that “angels have charge con-
cerning us.” We must “not tempt the
Lord our God.” We must not, without
imperative reason, leave the ship and


step upon the sea, otherwizs, with Peter,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA,


GHAP, VITZ





we must suffer disaster. If devout men
do not attend to the dictates of prudence,
they must suffer for it; and not only
so, but they injure Christianity likewise
The truth of religion is based on false
issues, and thus brought into suspicion
or contempt. “The good man guideth
his affairs with discretion.” Yet there
are times—

IL When faith in God must super-
sede the provisions of ordinary pru-
dence. When faith and prudence gave
different counsel, Ezra chose to “ walk
by faith, and not by sight,” and we must
all feel that he did right. The question
is: When are we to go beyond merely
prudential considerations, and venture
all on the unseen power of God? An at:
tentive consideration of Ezra’s situation
and conduct may throw some light on
this delicate question. We are “shut
up to faith” when—

1. Prudential action would most pro-
bably be construed as a dental of the
Divine government. Ezra had told the
king that “the hand of God was upon
all them for good who seek Him.” And
now Ezra considered that to reveal any
anxiety for a guard of soldiers would
appear tothe heathen king like a practical
denial of the overshadowing providence
of Jehovah, A band of soldiers would
have hidden the Shepherd of Israel ;
Artaxerxes alone would have been seen ;
and so Ezra, with a fine spiritual instinct,
saw the hour for simple trust had come,
and by declining the soldiers left open
the full view of God, and His gracious
and glorious government. A line of
action is here marked out for ourselves.
To remove the scruples of the few we
are not to take the lightning conductors
from our temples, and essay similar
reformations ; but we must seek so to
act that we satisfy the world generally
that we do belseve in the Divine super-
intendence and care. A worldly man
believes only in the band of soldiers ;
aud, to let him know that we believe in
something beyond, we must sometimes
be willing to act without the band of
soldiers altogether. Are we not too
anxious about material helps and visible
securities? We have boasted of the
power of the Lord’s good band, and ar


r
we then to resort to sorry shifts for our
safety and success? Has not the Church,
by clinging so feverishly to visible re-
sources, and helps, and defenders, given
some sanction to the world’s unbelief}
When—

2. Prudential action would cause us
to lean on worldly associations and re-
sources. Artaxerxes was an idolater, and
Ezra was anxious not to ask too much
at his hands. It seemed inconsistent to
Ezra that he should be soliciting a band
of pagan soldiers to protect God’s people
and the treasures of God’s Temple.
Here, again, we have a line of action
marked out for us. We are the con-
fessed servants of the Holy One of Israel,
and prudence must not lead us to worldly
alliances and dependence upon sinful
circles. In our personal life we must
observe this, We must beware of com-
promises with the world for the sake of
our personal safety and aggrandisement.
And in regard to God’s Church, we must
observe this. Policy would often direct
us to expect great things from the great-
ness, wealth, or wisdom of unregenerate
men for the Church’s sake. So far from
seeking their assistance, we ought to be
shy of their gold and patronage. Thus
did Ezra. And thus acted Paul and
Silas (Acts xvi. 16-19). When pru-
dence would lead us to seek for much,
either for ourselves or for the Church,
at the hands of unbelieving men, we
must pause and follow the path faith
indicates. Let us dare anything, suffer
anything, rather than compromise our
own character and the character of God,
in the eyes of the world, by linking our
fortunes and the fortune of the Church
with those who are joined to idols
When—

3. Prudential action might embarrass
the progress of God’s kingdom. If Arta-
xerxes had detected any inconsistency
in Ezra, he might have ceased to be
favourable to hia cause, and have pre-
vented or delayed the return to Jeru-
salem. Rather than endanger the popu-
larity and progress of the cause of God,
Ezra was prepared to run great risks,
Here another line of action is marked
out for us. If prudence would circum-
scribe, fetter, or destroy the work of


129


OBAP, VIE
8


God, the time has come to appeal to
loftier considerations, Calculating, cau-
tious piety would condemn the act of
Ezra as imprudent, and no doubt,
speaking after the manner of men, it
was imprudent; but many imprudent
things have been done, or there would
not have been so much Christianity in
the world as there is; and many more
imprudent things will have to be done
before Christianity fills the world, The
practical, calculating spirit of our age
invades the Church, and in the adminis-
tration of its affairs we frequently ask
too anxiously about “ ways and means,”
and are afraid to venture to victories
beyond unless we can “see our way.”
Let us remember that God’s kingdom is
a supernatural one, and in its promotion
we must often act with a boldness which
could not be justified in the court of
prudence, There is a holy venture-
someness in evangelisation which carries
with it a far higher guarantee of success
than do the pondered schemes of a
rationalising statesmanship, Thus, then,
there are times—times which a true,
delicate, noble spirit will not fail to
recognise—when we must renounce the
counsellings of worldly wisdom, and,
stepping boldly into the darkness, cry,
with Ezra, ‘“‘ Help us, O Lord our God,
for we rest on Thee!”





HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : BERA.


oe


Il. The separation of faith from
prudence must be effected only in the
spirit of sincere and earnest depend-
ence upon Heaven (ver. 23). Ne pre
cipitancy, no levity, no presumption.
By fasting and prayer they obtained
the sweet assurance that God would
honour their faith and preserve them.
‘“‘ He was entreated of us.” Not lightly
must we discard ordinary defences and
helps. When we can do no other, we
must humbly, solemnly rest ourselves in
the hand of God. The times come to
us all when faith and policy give con-
tradictory counsel, When such times
come, let us not be found wanting to
our profession and our God. In many
circumstances simple trust in God will
prove the truest policy. ... And, on
the contrary, policy, leading God’s people
to rest on worldly men, and means, and
measures, finally demoralises and betrays
them. Hear how God reproaches Israel
for their lack of faith in the Unseen
Powers: ‘‘Woe to them that go down
to Egypt for help; and stay on horses,
and trust in chariots, because they are
many; and in horsemen, hecause they
are very strong ; but they look not unto
the Holy One of Israel, neither seek the
Lord. . . . Now the Egyptians are men,
and not God,” d&c. (Isa. xxxi. 1, 3),—
W. L. Watkinson,


Ezra AND His TIMxs,
(Verses 21-23.)


Let us see how much is included in
these words of Ezra, and endeavour to
ascertain their bearing on our position
and circumstances,

I. Ezra’s language was in striking
contrast with the general state of
opinion around him. He says, not
egotistically,— great men have no ego-
tism,—but he says, because he cannot
help living when there was a time to
speak, “I was ashamed ; others can take
their own coarse, but I could not ask
our heathen but noble king for a band
of horsemen and soldiers to help us in
the way.” Others might, and probably
did, feel that it would only be courteous


to accept the king’s offer; others, that
1380


it would look more respectable ; others,
that it would be safer ; others, that they
would get through their journey quicker ;
and others, that Ezra was carrying things
rather too far, he might have a little
thought for timid women and children.
Such thoughts as these were very current,
depend upon it, amid that motley crowd,
He knows he is right, and can afford
to be singular; and, as he can bide his
time, he knows the people will one day
thank him for what they may now
condemn. And here we see a guiding
principle for us. At particular crises of
public opinion, it devolves upon some
men to go into the land of the enemy,
that they may bring truth out of cap:


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : EZRA,


OMAP. VII.
y!


a


tivity. It is a perilous and generally
a thankless task; but it must be done,
that it may be brought out into
a glorious enlargement, before men
shall see its form or feel its power.
Such men have no ultimate fear for
truth; they know its vitality depends
upon no accidental prosperity, and can
be destroyed by no accidental adversity ;
such men never change sides; they
have sometimes sailed with truth under
sunny skies into a secure haven ; they
have also sailed with her through many
a “stormy wind and tempest,” and they
have always come right at last. The
world wonders at their eccentricity, and
recommends them to beg or borrow a
band of soldiers and horsemen, to assist
them in their progress; but they are
“ashamed” to think of such a thing;
it hurts their consciences, and wounds
there are long in healing, and when
healed they leave ugly scars. If they
could make truth successful to-morrow,
they must do it with truth’s weapons,
and her weapons only; but they cannot
advance the liberation of truth by any
unworthy means, or by any unnatural
alliance. ‘Christ for ever, and His
word,” cried Luther, as he left Wittem-
berg with a penny in his pocket, and a
threadbare gown upon his back. “Christ
for ever, and His word,” let every
modern Ezra and Luther say, until that
word shall enlighten every mind and
emancipate every heart; and this it will
do, if we will let truth do its work,
without “soldiers and horsemen,”

II. Ezra’s situation afforded him an
opportunity for asserting this great
principle under very trying circum-
stances. In reading the Old Testa-
ment, it is needful to call to mind the
peculiar political constitution of the
Jews. It was a pure theocracy. The
only one the world has ever seen, or
is likely to see. God was their King,
and their King was their God. God
would defend them; He would be a
wall ef fire round about them; He
would lead them forth to battle; He
would be their national safeguard,
This the Jews continually forgot. Their
erying sin was departure from the true
theocratic idea. They trusted in every-


thing but truth; in every one but God,
Egypt and Assyria were, by turns, their
strongholds of confidence, Hence the
prophet’s cry, ‘‘Woe to them that go
ee to Egypt for help,” &c, (Iza. xxxi.
1, &c.).

But Ezra fell back upon the old prin-
ciple of the theocracy What was true
in Judea, he took to be true in Babylon,
That which was true to Isaiah was true
tohim now. He could not vee any clear
path of safety, except in the path of
duty ; and he would rather be there
than in the way of mere expediency.
Others might suggest that, under pre-
sent circumstances, they need not be so
very precise ; they had permission to re-
turn to Jerusalem, was not that enough §
If the king, of his own goodness, chose
to help them with horsemen, they could
accept his offer up to the gates of Jeru-
salem ; they were not now in the land
of the theocracy, and allowance must be
made for their peculiar circumstances ;
and to be so strict about an abstract
principle was being righteous overmuch.
All that was perfectly incomprehensible
to Ezra; he knew of no guiding star
but principle, and that alone be resolved
to follow.

And Christ’s whole life illustrates this
principle of confidence in God and in
truth, once exhibited by Esra under
circumstances of great temptation; a
principle we seek to uphold, as consti-
tuting a very essential part of a free,
& spiritual Church state. ‘“ How often
was Christ urged by the impatient long-
ings, and the worldly spirit of the
Jews, to gratify their intense and long-
cherished hopes, and to establish His
kingdom in a worldly form, before the
last demand was made upon Him, as
He entered, in the midst of an enthu-
siastic host, the capital city of God’s
earthly dominion, before His last re-
fusal, expressed in His submission to
those sufferings which resulted in the
triumph of God’s pure spiritual king-
dom |”

Thus, oftentimes, the good man will
have to strive against the spirit of his
age; but obeying Christ, and confiding
in Christ, whilst doing so, his conflict
will lead to cartain victory : he will not

131


GHar. Vii.


eonquer by “a band of horsemen and
soldiers,” but by the exhibition and en-
forcement of truth, by the use uf weapons
that are not carnal, but spiritual ; wea-
pons mighty, nevertheless, to the pulling


_ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BERA.








down of strongholds, in the use of which
the Christian warrior says, “ Now thanks
be unto God, who causeth us to triumph
in every place, by Jesus Christ.”—W.
G. Barrett.


Ezra AN EXAMPLE IN BOSINESS.
(Verses 21-23.)


The circumstances in which Ezra was
placed were as difficult as can be con-
ceived, He had to contend with the
scorn and opposition of pagans, and
with the corruptions of Jews. He bears
up under his difficulties: he labours
through them; he endures as seeing
Him who is invisible.


I. His humiliation.

I. His faith

III. His prayer.

IV. His holy jealousy.
V. His success.


—&. Ceell,


ConTRASsTS
(Verse 22.)


“The hand of owr God is upon all
them for good,” d&c.

L A contrast of human character.

1. Those that seek God. To seek God
implies—(1.) Faith in Him, Seekers
after God believe in the existence of
truth, righteousness, love ; in the exist-
ence of a Supreme and Perfect Being;
they believe that God ts, (2.) Desire
after Him. Seekers after God believe
in Him as the Supremely Good and
Beautiful—not only the Almighty, but
the All-attractive. They do not simply
seek His blessing or His favour, but
Himself. The former may be mean ; the
latter must be noble. To seek Him is
to desire the highest truth and righte
ousness, goodness and beauty, &c. (3.)
Prayer to Him. They who come to
God believe not only that He is, but
that “‘He is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek Him.” Out of the faith
and longing of their heart they petition
Him for His favour and His presence.
Their attitude and inclination is to-
wards God,

2. Those that forsake God. Sin is
frequently represented as forsaking God,
departure from Him, distance from Him
(Isa. lix, 2; Jer. 1 16, ii, 13; Luke
xv. 13; Eph. ii, 13; Col. i. 21, 22). For-
saking God begins in the heart. Some
sinful thought or purpose has been che-

132


rished, and so God has been shut out of
the heart. Quilt has been contracted,
and the sinner has become afraid of God,
and tried to escape from Him. (Comp.
Gen, iii, 8-10.) This forsaking God
proceeds from the heart to the conduct.
God’s commands may be outwardly
obeyed for a time by one who has for-
saken God Himself ; but ere long the
commands also will be set at naught.
When the affections are estranged from
God, the actions will soon follow, &e.

Here then is the contrast of character:
The one seeks God, draws ever nearer to
Him, &c.; the other forsakes God, departs
ever farther from Him, & Ask your-
self—Which ia my character} AmLa
seeker or a forsaker of Gud?

Il. A contrast of Divine treatment.

1. The hand of our God ts upon all
them for good that seek Him.” His power
is exercised on their behalf; His pro
vidence watches over and secures their
true interests But is this really the
case! Do we not sometimes find those
that seek God in poverty, privation,
aud paint Do they not sometimes
ery, “Thy hand is heavy upon me”!
not, Thy hand is upon me “for good” $
Earthly parents see many things to be
for the good of their children, which
appear unmixed evils to the children
themselves. Does the sick infant see


ROMILETIO OOMMENTARY: KERA.


GHAP. Vili.


nae a at ee a


that the nauseous medicine which heals
him is for his good? Does the young
schoolboy see that it is for his good to
master the declensions and conjugations
of grammar? And
‘*What am If
An infant crying in the night:
An infant crying for the light:
And with no language but a ery.”
— Tennyson.

Not by any hasty conclusions on the
results of human character and conduct ;
not by an induction formed from a brief
and narrow observation of human ex-
periences, must our judgment of the
Divine procedure be determined ; but by
His own revelations of His character and
government, and by the testimonies of
the wise and good amongst men. These
unite in assuring us that ‘“ the hand of
our God is upon all them for good that
seek Him.” (1.) For their good tem-
porally. Being perfectly acquainted
with the circumstances, temperament,
aud tendencies of every man, He gives
to each one who seeks Him what will
really be for his good. ‘No good will
He withhold from them that walk up-
rightly.” (2.) For their good spiritually.
Many and precious are the spiritual
benefits which He bestows upon His
people, ¢g., pardon and peace, purity
and power, grateful recollections and
inspiring anticipations, &c, (3.) For
their good eternally. He is preparing
them for a glorious destiny, and endless.
Our Lord has gone to prepare a place
for us in His Father’s house. And as
He was both guide and guardian to Ezra
and his company from Babylon to Jeru-
salem, so is He the guide and guardian
of all His people to their blessed and
abiding home. They enter heaven
through Him.

2. “His power and His wrath are
against all them that forsake Him.” A
sentimental theory which ignores the
stern aspects of the character of God is
very popular with some people, There
is a growing tendency to magnify the
love of God, and then deny His wrath,
&e, We rejoice in knowing that ‘“ He
will have all men to be saved ;” that
He has “no pleasure in the death of the
wicked, but that the wicked turn from


his way and live ;” but we cannot quea-
tion His wrath. God is tender, without
weakness ; angry, without sin. He is
just, as well as merciful. Sin has been
punished by Him, is punished by Him,
and will be punished by Him. (Comp.
Prov. xi. 21; 2 Pet. ii, 4-9; Rev. vi
16, 17). (a). “His power ;” who can
estimate it? It is “against all them
that forsake Him.” (+). Who can con-
ceive “‘ His wrath”? It is infinite as
His love. It is His love flaming forth
against the incorrigibly wicked. (ce).
“He is mighty in strength ; who hath
hardened himself against Him, and hath
prospered 3”

ConcLvsIon :

1. How solemnly man’s destiny t
tn hts own hands, or, more correctly, in
his own chortce/ “ Deeds are destiny;
character is fate.” For our character
we are each responsible. Heaven or
hell is the result of man’s own choice
and character.

2. In this world character may bs
changed. Those who have forsaken God
may return to Him, assured of a joyous
welcome. By the grace of God sinners
may here and now be converted into
saints. ‘Seek ye the Lord while He
may be found,” dc. (Isa. lv. 6, 7). “O
Israel, return unto the Lord thy God,”
&c. (Hos. xiv. 1, 2, 4).


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) It is very common to separate the ques-
tion of punishment from its strict relationship
to justice, and to argue it on infinite goodness,
What is this proper view of God? ‘Good ia
the Lord.” But is He good to restrain any
administration of government, or to impede
any exercise of law? Does His goodness look
more indifferently on moral evil than His
justice? Is it not its peculiar province to
check the consequences of sint We know not
of the goodness which exists only to pity and
to spare,—which is a misprison of right aud
holy principle, which is a connivance at every
moral perturbation of the universe, It ia easy
to reduce this “awful goodness” to our de-
praved wish and idea... . “Our God is a
consuming fire.” ‘* He ia terrible out of His
holy place.” ‘‘God shall destroy for ever.”
‘“‘The enemies of the Lord shall be as the fat
of lambs.” Those passages which speak of
His ire and wrath are many, reiterated, and
vehement. Do they tell of goodness, partial
and fond, as it ia now presumed? A mere
indulgence! A figure, most beautifu) and

; 133


owaP, VIIL.





frequent, does Holy Scripture present. God ia
our Parent. ‘‘ Have we not one Father?”
it is a figure,—‘“like as afather.” It is argued
that all punishment, except for the improve-
ment of the child, would be inconsistent with
that relation. But may not the case of the
gson’s disobedienze be so heinous, that all,
under the influence of the most natural feel-
ing, would justify a treatment the most ex-
treme! disownment ? disinheritance? final
separation? The paternal relationship, though
not as to its fact, yet, as to its exercise, may
be altered by the conduct of the offspring:
moral government cannot be altered. The
one might be renounced; the other is neces-
sary and ingubvertible. May we not fear that,
in consequence of gin, the paternal favour is
withdrawn, and the filial privilege forfeited ?
Let that father be the magistrate. The child
is now under his jurisdiction as well as dis-
cipline. That child may be the transgressor
of social law. It is conceivable that his father
may be called to pass sentence upon him.
Will not all, if it be his inevitable duty, see
in its discharge a title to their admiration?
Without any impeachment of his tenderness,
is not such bearing truly great? Does not
history hallow it? Has it not saved common-
wealths? Why should not the same suffrage
be accorded te God? He is the “righteous
Father.” He sitteth King forever. He reigns
not for a part, but for the whole. His good-
ness must agree with universal justice, or with
that which is the same thing, the protection
of universal claim and interest... . . And if
this notion of goodness is to be entertained,
how frequently would it have been disap-
pointed! Had earlier creatures than ourselves
been forewarned that our earth was soon to be
formed, and our race to be created, it would
have seemed improbable to them that aught
but good could be admitted. The entire
scheme would have demanded this expecta-
tion. What evils do exist, moral and physical !
Then their idea of that which goodness can
allow would have been disappointed. It would
have been false. When men have been threat-
ened with Divine judgments, they have ima-
gined a presumption against them in the
Divine goodness, ‘To the antediluvian the
impending fate appeared most unreasonable ;
the men of Sodom derided the fear of over-
throw. If they thought of God at all, argu-
ments like those which we have considered were
ready. Goodness forbids it. A parent cannot
do it, &c, Then their idea of that which


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: EZRA.





goodness can allow was disappointed. It wea
false; So we may speculate concerning the
future state, Ite punishment may affect our
views a8 exaggerated beyond all showing of
truth, of reason, of analogy. We may inter-
pose the Divine gooduegss. We may pronounce
that this state of things cannot be. But we
are not placed more favourably to give judg-
ment than they who have palpably erred.
Our idea may be disappointed. It may be
false.—R, W. Hamilton, LL.D., D.D.


(b) How miserable will all wicked rebels be
under this power of God! Men may break
His laws, but not impair His arm; they may
slight His sword, but cannot resist His power.
If He swear that He will sweep a place with
the besom of destruction, ‘‘as He hath thought,
so shall it come to pass; and as He hath
purposed, so shall it stand” (Isa. xiv. 23, 24).
Rebels against an earthly prince may exceed
him in strength, and be more powerful than
their sovereign ; none can equal God, much
less exceed Him, As none can exercise an
act of hostility against Him without His per-
missive will, 0 none can struggle from under
His hand without His positive will. He hath
an arm not to be moved, a hand not to be
wrung aside. God is represented on His
throne ‘‘ like a jasper stone” (Rey. iv. 3), as
One of invincible power when He comes to
judge ; the jasper is a stone which withstands
the greatest force. Though men resist the
order of His laws, they cannot resist the gen-
tence of their punishment, nor the execution
of it. Nonecan any more exempt themselves
from the arm of His strength than they can
from the authority of His dominion. As they
must bow to His sovereignty, so they must
sink under His force. A prisoner in this
world may make his escape, but a prisoner in
the world to come cannot (Job x. 7): “ There
ig none that can deliver out of Thine hand.”
There ig none to deliver when He tears in
pieces (Ps. 1, 22).—S. Charnocke, B.D.


(c) Wicked men hereafter will feel the full
weight of God’s wrath. In this world they
have the wrath of God abiding on them, but
then it will be executed upon them; now they
are the objects of it, but then they will be the
subjects of it. Now it hangs over them, but
then it shall fall upon them in its full weight,
without any alleviation, or any moderation er
restraint.—President Edwards,


SEEKING THE LorD, AND ITs ADVANTAGES.
(Verse 22.)


“The hand of owr God +s upon all
them for good that seek Him,” &e. Our
text contains a great scriptural truth,
applicable to all ages, countries, and
versons. It is a truth which is cor-


134


roborated by many parallel passages,
and therefore expresses a subject of
more than ordinary importance, There
are two things clearly expressed in the
text, — man’s responsibility, and the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.





different results of piety and sin. God’s
hand shall be vpon all those who seek
Him, and that for good, and His wrath
is against those who forsake Him.
Observe, we are directed—

IL. To seeking God, and its advan-
tages. Seeking God denotes—

1. A consciousness of our need of
Him. Men in general do not regard
God, He is not in all their thoughts,
Many feel as Pharaoh did when he
exclaimed, ‘‘ Who is the Lord?” &c.
But the enlightened, convicted sinner,
aud the true Christian, feel that God is
the fountain of their existence, and the
only source of their peace and happi-
ness. ‘Whom have I in heaven but
Thee,” &c. God is all and in all to
the pious mind ; and their need of Him
is every moment’s experience.

2. Earnest and fervent prayer to
God (ver. 23.) Seeking and praying
are synonymous, Thus Christ taught
His disciples, ‘Ask, ... seek,...
knock,” &c. Thus, too, Job says (xxiii.
3), ‘Oh that I knew where I might
find Him!” &. We cannot find God
but by earnest prayer and supplication,
and He is ever near to all who call upon
Him. “ Whosoever shall call upon the
name of the Lord,” &c.

3. T'o seek the Lord 1s to come to Him
tn the way of His appointment. We
may seek anxiously and fervently, but
what will it avail if we seek in the
wrong way? Thus heathen philo-
sophers laboured to know the true God.
Thus, too, many anxious pagans, Many
are like the devotional eunuch, they read,
&c., but understand not. The Word
of God is, however, explicit and full on
this subject. Christ is “the way, the
truth, and the life.” ‘One God, and
one Mediator,” &c. ‘No man cometh
to the Father but by” Christ.

4, To labour in all things to have His
approbation. To commit all to Him;
to refer all to Him; to acknowledge
Him in all; and seek His blessing upon
all our steps. To set the Lord always
before us, and to labour to walk well-
pleasing in His sight.

Notice the advantages arising to those
who thus seek Him, “The hand of our
God is upon all,” &.


GAP. VIE.


ri

(1.) The hand of His pardoning mercy.
To those who thus seek Him, He says,
“T, even I,am He who blotteth out your
iniquities.” ‘Seek ye the Lord,” &c.
Then it follows, ‘ Let the wicked forsake
his ways, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts,” &e,

(2.) The hand of His delivering power.
He delivers the souls of His people,
raises them from the horrible pit, &e.
Translates them from the kingdom of
darkness, brings their spirits out of the
prison of sin, and from the dominion
of Satan, Rescues from “the gall of
bitterness, and the bond,” &ec,

(3.) The hand of His providing good-
ness, They that seek the Lord shall
not want any good thing. He is their
Shepherd, and they shall not want.
He leads them into green pastures, dc.
ee God shall supply all your need,”

c.
(4.) The hand of His heavenly guid-
ance. The Lord leads and guides His
people. “He led them by the right
way,” &c, ‘The Lord shall lead thee
continually,” &c. ‘Thou shalt guide
me with Thy counsel, and afterward
receive me to glory.”

(5.) The hand of Hs sustaining grace.
The Christian is weak and feeble; of
himself, insufficient: exposed to many
enemies and perils. The saints of the
Lord are therefore only absolutely secure
in His hand. He keeps them by His
mighty power; He preserves them for His
kingdom and glory, There is often—

(6.) The hand of Hts manifest prow
dence. How clearly do we see this in
the history of His Church and people !
It is said of one, ‘ So long as he sought
the Lord, the Lord made him to prosper,”
How many thousands have experienced
that “godliness is profitable to all
things,” &c.

I. Forsaking God, and its atten-
dant evils. To forsake God is the op-
posite course to that we have described
in seeking the Lord. It is refusing Him
homage and veneration. It is to disobey
Him ; to live without His fear; to turn
from the way of righteousness ; to with-
draw our hand from the Gospel plough ;
to draw back; to make shipwreck, &c.
Now, against these, His power and


CMAP. VIII.
»


wrath are declared. Power to punish,
wrath to inflict a fearful and eternal
doom. Power and wrath of God to
cast both body and soul into hell fire,
(See Heb. x. 22, &e.) “ A certain fear-
ful looking for of judgment and fiery


indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries.”
Application. We learn:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.





1. The value of true religion, The
good hand of the Lord upon us.

2. The awfulness of apostasy from
the Lord.

3. The necessity of both vigilance
and perseverance. (See Heb. iii, 12;
iv. 10-13.)

4. Urge the unconverted to seek the
Lord, and live.—Jabez Burns, D.D.


Tre GUARDIANSHIP OF THE SACRED TREASURES,
(Verses 24-30.)


Having sought the Divine guidance
and protection in their journey, Ezra
proceeds to make wise arrangements for
the safe conveyance of the offerings for
the service of the Lord at Jerusalem.
True prayer will always be followed by
earnest effort in the same direction.

Notice ;

I, The treasures to be guarded.
“The silver, and the gold, and the ves-
sels, the offering of the house of our
God,” &c. (vers. 25-27). These trea-
sures were—

1. Valuable tn themselves. “Six
hundred and fifty talents of silver,” &c.
(vers. 26,27). (We have already stated
the estimated value of these things: see
Explanatory Notes on ver. 26,and homily
on ‘ Ezra’s confidence in God,” vers,
21-23.)

2. Valuable as being consecrated to
God. Mark how Ezra speaks of them:
“The offering of the house of our God:

. the vessels are holy also; and the
silver and the gold a freewill offering
unto the Lord God of your fathers,”
To every pious mind the fact that they
were designed for sacred uses would
greatly enhance their worth.

3. Valuable as being the spontaneous
guts of friends and well-wishers, “The
king, and his counsellors, and his lords,
and all Israel there present, had offered
... @ freewill offering unto the Lord
God of your fathers.” As expressions
of the good will and kind feeling of the
donors to the returning exiles and to
their religion, these treasures were very
precious, They were well worthy of
the most watchful care,


I. The guardians of the treasures.
136


“Then I separated twelve of the chief
of the priests,” &c, (ver. 24). These
guardians were—

1. Adequate in number. There were
twenty-four of them in all; twelve
priests and twelve Levites. It was well
to have a goodly number for the weighty
responsibility.

2. Appropriate in official character.
They were priests and Levites, Ezra
“said unto them, Ye are holy unto the
Lord ; the vessels are holy also.” The
consecrated things were intrusted to
consecrated persons. This was in har-
mony with Divinely-appointed usage
amongst them (see Num. iii. 5-10), It
was also in accordance with the charge
of God by Isaiah the prophet: “ Be ye
clean that bear the vessels of the Lord”
(Isa. lii, 11). The principle is of uni-
versal application, that holy things
should be committed to the charge of
holy persons.

3. Distinguished amongst their bre-
thren, Ezra selected “‘ twelve of the chief
priests ;” and Sherebiah and Hashabiah
were eminent amongst the Levites (see
on vers. 18, 19). By selecting eminent
men for this trust Ezra acted prudently ;
for they would be the more likely to
keep it with fidelity than untried men.
He also acted religiously ; for he thus
honoured in the eyes of the people the
Lord God, to whom these treasures had
been offered.

_ IIL The charge to the guardians of
the treasures—

1, Potnts out the value of the things
committed to them. In three ways Ezra
does this— 1.) By weighing them so
carefully before delivering them inte


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA,





their hands, He “ weighed unto them
the silver,” &c. (vers. 25-27). (2.) By
reminding them of their source. They
were the voluntary offerings of “the
king, and his counsellors, and his lords,
and all Israel there present.” (3.) By
reminding them of their destination.
They were designed for the service of
the Lord God of their fathers,

2. Enjoins watchful care of these
things. ‘‘ Watch ye, and keep them.”
They were to see to it that they were
neither lost, nor stolen, nor intermingled
with the other possessions of this great
company during their long journey.

3. Indicates their responsibility for
them. ‘‘ Watch ye, and keep them,
until ye weigh them before the chief of
the priests and the Levites,” &c. (ver.
29). Thus Ezra gave them to under-
stand that they would be required to
deliver them up at the end of the jour-
* ney safely and accurately. They would
have to account for them—{1.) Exactly :
“until ye weigh them.” The same
weight which had been given to them
they must deliver up at the end of the
journey. (2.) Unto the chief men of
the nation: “the chief of the priests
and Levites, and chief of the fathers of
Israel.” (3.) In the chief place of the
nation: “at Jerusalem, in the cham-
bers of the house of the Lord.” Thus
Ezra impressed upon them the import
ance and sacredness of the trust com-
mitted to them, and the greatness of
their responsibility.

IV. The acceptance of the guardian-
ship of the treasures. The selected
priests and Levites did not seek to
excuse themselves from this trust and
its onerous obligations; they do not
seem to have offered any demur in rela-
tion to it, but accepted itat once. ‘So
took the priests and the Levites the
weight of the silver,” &c. (ver. 30).

CoNOLUSION :

1. Our subject speaks to ministers of
the Gospel of Jesus Christ. How pre-
cious and sacred is the trust committed
to them! How solemn their responsi-
bility ! (1 Cor. iv. 1, 2; Tit. i 7, 9.)
By the Holy Ghost let them seek to be
faithful to their glorious, awful trust
(1 Tim. vi. 20; 2 Tim, i. 14). (a.)





1

2. To all who have charge of publia
Sunds or the property of others. Let
them copy the scrupulous care and
fidelity of Ezra, that they may be able,
when called upon, to give a punctual
and exact account of the things com-
mitted unto them,

3. Zo all men. God has committed
some gift to every man to be used in
accordance with His holy will; and He
will call every man to account for such
gift. Blessed are they who will be able
to render such an account as shall call
forth from Him the “ Well done, good
and faithful servant!” (Comp. Matt.
xxv. 14-30.) (6.)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Brethren, have we at all understood
what was done to us when we were ordained
—that it was an act of exchange and of inter-
change—we giving ourselves to Jesus Chriat 3
He giving to us a trust of ministry, on the
definite basis of a Divine communication of
truth §

How little have they realised the good de-
posit, who have regarded it as nothing more
than the reading of services or the preaching
of sermons, out of the regources of natural or
acquired knowledge, and as only a part of the
life, of which all other parts might be just ag
earthly, just as self-indulgent, just as frivolous,
ag if no transaction at all had passed between
us and Jezus Christ! How many must con-
fess, sorrowtully and with tears, that they were
not conscious then, if they have ever awakened
to the consciousness afterwards, of anything
whatsoever having been put into their handa
when they became ordained men! Qh, we do
not blame them—still less would we let them
despair. But surely it is something to be
grieved for, that we thus undertook a sacred
office in utter ignorance of its sacredness ;
that we thus took it upon us to tell men the
way of salvation, when we scarcely so much
as knew what they needed to be saved from,
or what it was to be saved.

The good deposit. Let us first of all feel it
to be something. Let us try to touch and to
handle just one substantial ingredient of it,
Let us resolve, let us struggle, let us pray,
that this revelation, this self-manifestation of
God, which is enshrined in this volume called
holy, shall shine out of it upon us, It shall
not be a name, it shall not be a formula, it
shall not be a mere buzzing sound—it shall
be a voice, If we could make one verse speak,
if we could make one little sentence of the
Testament call us by our name, and tell us to
do something because of it, it might be‘ the
beginning of montha” tous. It might be the
dawning of the day—it might be the very
gunrising of an altered life; for then, cer-
tainly, we never “ould reat till it had spoken


CHAP. VETE.


again to us, and again, and again. Then we
should begin to turn to it as our adviser, as
our counsellor, as our friend, Then we should
never attempt to write or to preach till the
revelation had put a word in our mouth; we
should listen for it in the night watches; we
should kneel to it as we rose from our sleep,
God-sustained and God-commissioned.

How serious should we then be—how evi-
dently taken knowledge of as men that had a
trust, and were set and bent upon faithfulness
to it! Men would come then to listen to us,
as to men who were in communication with
the world out of sight—as men who were
charged, each separate time of ministering,
with something special to say, and with the
true way of saying it.—C. J. Vaughan, D.D.


(6) Obligation and capacity are commen-
surate. God docs not desire to ‘‘reap where
He has not sown, nor to gather where He has
not strawed,” but where He has ‘‘ given much,
of them He will expect the more.” He ex-


_HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA,





pects not from a brute the service of a man,
nor from a man the obedience of an angel ;
He expects not from him that hag one talemt
the results of five, nor from him that has five
the results of ten ; but He does expect every-
where, and from all beings, that each shall
serve according to his actual and ‘‘several
ability.”

With respect to the power to do some
thing for Christ, this differs in different men,
and in the same man at different times. There
are differences of talent, wealth, influence,
station, opportunity ; and there are very fre-
quently growth and accession in all these
things as Christians advance and succeed in
life. It will often be found, however, that
the most able and endowed classes do the
Joast ; and of certain individuals it is some-
times true, that as their means increase theiz
doings diminish; for it ig diminution, if,
while Providence enlarges power, the service
rendered is only what it was.—7'’. Binney,
LL.D.


From AHAVA TO JERUSALEM; AN ILLUSTRATION OF THE PILGRIMAGE
OF THE CHRISTIAN.


(Verses 31, 32.)


Notice—

I. The setting out from Ahava
‘Then we departed from the river of
Ahava on the twelfth day of the first
month, to go unto Jerusalem.” They
went forth—

1. From captivity to liberty, In
Babylon they were not in cruel bond-
age, as their fathers had been in Egypt;
and in departing from Babylon they did
not go forth to civil or political freedom,
as their fathers did when they left
Egypt. But in Babylon they were cap-
tives. They could not leave the places
in which they were settled without per-
mission. Their departure is repeatedly
spoken of as a going “up out of the
captivity.” And while they who de-
parted were still subject to the Persian
civil government, they were allowed full
religious freedom, The Christian pilgrim
is emancipated from the captivity of sin.
“Whosoever oommitteth sin is the ser-
vant of sin.” But the believer in Christ
Jesus is “made free from sin;” he is
delivered from “the bond of iniquity,”
from the thraldom of evil habits, &e.
“Ye shall know the truth, and the
truth shall make you free... . If the
Son shall make you free, ye shall be
free indeed.” (a.)

138


2. From exile to their ancestral home.
They were going forth to the land of
their fathers, which was sacred and dear
to them by many precious and glorious
memories and associations. They were
going home. Christians are “strangers
and pilgrims on the earth. They desire
a better country, that is, an heavenly,”
&c. ‘Here have we no continuing city,
but we seek one to come.” “Our con-
versation” (rather, country or citizen-
ship) ‘isin heaven.” We, too, are going
home.

3. From the land of tdolatry to the
scene of true worship. The priesthood,
the altar, and the temple of the true and
living God were at Jerusalem. The chief
reason of their return to their own land
was that there they could more fully
and pericctly worship Jehovah, the God
of Israel. We are travelling to the scene
of pure and perfect and perpetual wor-
ship. Our journey will end in heaven,
and there every thought and affection,
every word and action will be sacred,
(Comp. Rev, vii. 15, xxi. 2, 3.) (6).

“‘There God in Christ revealed
In fulness of His grace


Shall we behold for ever,
And worship face to face,”


YL The progress on the journey.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA,


HAP, VYit.





“And the hand of our God was upon
us, and He delivered us from the hand
of the enemy, and of such as lay in wait
by the way.” They progressed—

1. Notwithstanding enemies. The path
of the Christian pilgrim is beset with
foes. His progress is opposed by—(1.)
Invisible, spiritual enemies. He has to
contend against the wiles of the devil.
For we wrestle not “against flesh and
blood, but against principalities,” dé.
(Eph. vi. 10-17). “ Your adversary
the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh
about,” & (1 Pet. v. 8, 9). (2.) Ene-
mies in human society. The allure-
ments of the world; ‘the deceitfulness
of riches ;” the temptation to substitute
policy for principle, and to sacrifice the
spiritual and eternal for the material
and temporal, &c. (3.) Enemies in our
own nature. “ The flesh lusteth against
the spirit,” &c. (Gal. v. 17). Carnal
appetites contend against spiritual aspi-
rations, &c.

2. By reason of the Divine blessing.
“The hand of our God was upon us,
and He delivered,” &c. He was both
guide and guardian to Ezra and his
company. And He leads and protects
His people in their heavenward journey.
“We are more than conquerors through
Him that loved us.” “ Thanks be unto
God, which always causeth us to triumph
in Christ.” ‘‘ He hath said, I will never
leave thee, nor forsake thee. So that
we may boldly say, The Lord is my
helper,” &c. (Heb. xiii. 5, 6).

IIL The arrival at Jerusalem.
“ And we came to Jerusalem, and abode
there three days,” Their arrival was
characterised by—

1. Grateful rest. For three days they
rested after their long and toilsome
journey. The rest would be very wel-
come, &c. “There remaineth a rest to
the people of God.” In heaven the
Christian pilgrims “rest from their
labours.” (c.)

‘* Rest more sweet and still
Than ever nightfall gave,


Our weary hearts shall fill
In the land beyond the grave,”


2. Joyful welcome. Many of the pil-
ims in Ezra’s company had relatives in
one persons who had gone up there


— —$____—-f ——


with Zerubbabel, or the children of such
persons, and heartily would they wel-
come their newly-arrived kinsfolk, Have
we not kinsfolk in the “ better country”
who wait to greet us on our arrival
there? We are not journeying to a
strange land, but to our “Father's
house.” Many of our loving and be-
loved ones are already there, and wait
to welcome us into their shining ranks,
and sacred services, and delightful so-
ciety. And when once we are united
there, we shall part no more. (d.)


“*O happy world! O glorious place |
Where all who are forgiven
Shall find their loved and lost below,
And hearts, like meeting streams, shall fiow,
For ever one, in heaven.”


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) The work of grace shall conquer the
work of depravity; the law of the Spirit of
life in Christ Jesus shall set free the soul from
the law of sin and death. Nothing else could
do it, nothing external to the soul; no out-
ward law of excellence could do it, nothing
that did not work within the soul as a living
principle of life and action. By this new
principle introduced, this new determination
of the will in accordance with Divine grace,
the man is set free from the evil dispositions
of the unregenerate heart, from its inbred,
habitual, long-cherished, long-growing, and
powerful corruptions; he ia set at liberty to
serve God out of love, no longer bound in
slavery to the law of sin and death in an evil
nature. This is the great deliverance ; this
is freedom indeed; instead of the death of
sin, a death to gin, a redemption from its in-
dwelling power by the working of an opposite
power of holiness and life, which, as Christ’s
own life, imparted to the soul, becomes the
habit of the soul, But it ig too low an expres-
sion when we say imparted to the soul, for in
order to work this freedom, this regeneration,
this new creatureship in Christ, Christ Him-
self takes up Hia abode within the soul, and
works in it. So the man says, this freeman
of Christ, ‘*I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth
in me.” This new life in the soul is not only
a life in Christ, but the life of Christ. “Now
the Lord is that Spirit; and where the Spirit
of the Lord is, there is liberty,”—liberty from
the bondage of corruption, from the law of
sin and death, liberty of life, liberty of holi-
ness, liberty to serve God, not as a slave but
as a child, not with the spirit of bondage to
fear, but with “ the spirit of adoption, whereby
we cry, Abba, Father,”—G. B. Cheever, D.D,


(b) All earthly shrines shall passaway. The
beautiful temples shall fude into oblivion s
the fanes which utter their silver melody as
each Sabbath dawns, awakening tle sweeteat


associations of the soul and calling man from
cares and sorrow to God and peace,—all, all
shall depart. The music, so subtle and deep
and elevating, shall sink into silence; the
prayers, so eloquent and importunate and
fervid, shall cease ; the call to dying sinners,
and neglecters and despisers of Jesus, shall no
longer be heard. Altars and priests shall be
no more, And instead shall come the holiest
worship and the purest homage, and the
sleansed heart and the immortal body, and
man shall walk in that region which sin can-
not enter, and death cannot shadow, and pain
cannot touch, amid scenes of beauty and un-
decaying sweetness, and in that realm whose
King is the Lord of hosts, and whose subjects
are the obedient servants of their lawful
Monareh, and the willing children of their
Royal Parent, And instead of temples for
the hymn of homage, and the prayer of faith,
and the voice of persuasion, there shall be the
spiritual worship of redeemed souls, and an-
gelic beings uttering a deeper language than
ever wag heard on earth, and breathing a more
liquid hymn of tenderness than ever rose from
an earthly pile, and the soft and exquisite ex-
pression shall be fully realised: ‘‘I saw no
temple therein.”—J, W. Lester, D.D.


Sublime beyond the reath of words to ex-
press is the choral service of the heavenly
Temple. Inspiring and thrilling are the
strains that rise from that mysterious mount
on which stands the collective Church of the
First-born, and whose praise swells and flows
trinmphantly away, till the universe is filled
with the harmony which comes ‘rolling back
full on the throne of God,” —R. Ferguson, LL.D,


(c) Peace is the very highest mode of joy.
It is the joy of rest; and this rest partakes
the repose of the Divine nature. It is on
God that the soul is fixed, and hence she can-
not but enjoy the calm and the quiet of Infinite
Perfection.


‘* As the wave a ray of light receives,
And rests unbroken ;”


eo it is the fact of each nature being in im-


Av JERUSALEM: THe Farraru.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.








mediate union with God and of His fulnesa
flowing into it, which ingures its everlasting
re.. In such a case, unrest is impossible,
Here we may see a ripple on the bosom of
the most placid lake, but there every breast
is soothed into unruffled peace. The gentle
words of the Saviour—Fzar Not—addressed
to the spirit as she was passing through the
waters of death, have there deepened into the
tranquillity of a sinless nature, and on the
bosom of her God she will recline for ever.
This deep repose of soul in the world of
glory ia not incompatible with the loftiest and
the most unwearied activity. Rest ia often
eonfounded with sloth, and repose with indo-
lence. But neither indolence nor sloth can
exist in heaven, where the purity of each
individual nature involves a corresponding
vitality, and the vitality a corresponding acti-
vity. Itis true that the motion of the soul
there ig ever towards rest; but it is no less
true that the rest is ever towards motion. In
seeking the one only centre of her life, it is
that the soul may come back replenished and
filled unto the fulness of God, and thus be
prepared to enter on new and still higher
spheres of service. In her moments of most
profound quiet, her every power is on the
utmost stretch and reach of effort.—I bid.


(d@) Thy dead men shall live; that decaying
dust shall rise again. Weep not aga though
thou hadst cast thy treasure into the sea, where
thou couldst never find it; thou hast only laid
it by in a casket, whence thou shalt receive it
again brighter than before. Thou shalt look
again with thine own eyes into those eyes
which have spoken love to thee so often, but
which are now closed in sepulchral darkness,
Thy child shall see thee yet again ; thou shalt
know thy child; the selfsame form shall rise.
Thy departed friend shall come back to thee,
and having loved his Lord as thou dost, thou
shalt rejoice with bim in the land where they
die no more, It ig but a short parting ; it
will be an eternal meeting. For ever with
the Lord, we shall also be for ever with each
other, Let us comfort one another, then,
with these worda.—O, H. Spurgeon.


SURRENDER oF ImPorRTANT TRUBTS,


(Verses 33-36.)


We have here—

I. A sacred trust faithfully dis-
charged. “Now on the fourth day
was the silver and the gold and the
vessels weighed in the house of our
God,” de. (vers. 33, 34). This trust
was discharged —

1. With minute accuracy and reverent
care. Notice—l. The particular accn-
racy with which everything was ac-
counted for, Everything was — (1)

140


weighed. ‘The silver and the gold
and the vessels were weighed,” dec,
“ By weight of every one.” (2.) Num.
bered. “By number and by weight
of every one.” (3.) Inventoried. “ And
all the weight was written at that time.”
2. The reverent care with which these
treasures were delivered up. ‘This is
indicated—(1.) In the sacred place in
which they were delivered. ‘In the
house of our God” (2.) By the conse.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: ESRA.


OHAP. Witt.





crated persons to whom they were de-
livered. “By the hand of Meremoth
the son of Uriah the priest,” &. It
appcars from ver. 29 that “the chief of
the priests and Levites and the chief of
the fathers of Israel” were also present
at the time. (a.)

2. With a grateful sense of relief. It
seems to us that the twelve priests and
the twelve Levites, who had charge of
these treasures during the long and
perilous journey, must have felt relieved
and thankful when the journey was con-
cluded in safety, and the treasures were
surrendered entire and inviolate. Blessed
is he who, in relation to the trusts of life,
will be able to render as satisfactory an
account as this! Blessed who at the
end of life’s journey will be able to say,
“Lord, Thou deliveredst unto me five
talents,” d&c. (Matt. xxv. 20, 21). Or,
with St. Paul, “I have fought a good
fight,” &c. (2 Tim. iv. 7, 8). (b.)

IL Divine worship devoutly offered.
“The children of those that had been
carried away, which were come out of
the captivity, offered burnt offerings
unto the God of Israel,” &ec. In these
sacrifices there was—

1. An acknowledgment of sin and of
the need of atonement with God. They
“offered twelve he-goats for a sin
offering.”

2. An expression of thankfulness and
self-consecration. They “ offered twelve
bullocks for all Israel, ninety and six
rams, seventy and seven lambs; all this
was a burnt offering unto the Lord.”

3. An indwation of the unity of the
twelve tribes of Israel. A sin offering
and a burnt offering was offered for each
of the twelve tribes. ‘“ Offered burnt
offeri:igs unto the God of Israel, twelve
bullocks for all Israel, ninety and six
(8 x 12) rams, twelve he-goats for a sin
offering.” (For further notes on the
significance of these sacrifices, see homilies
on chaps. iii, 1-3, vi. 16-18; and for
illustrations, see those accompanying the
above-mentioned homilies.)

JI. The royal letters duly delivered.
“ And they delivered the king’s commis-
sions unto the king’s lieutenants,” dc.

1, The delivery of these letters was an
evidence of loyalty to the Persian govern-


ae ene


ment. It was an acknowledgment of the
authority of Artaxerxes the king, and of
his officers west of the Euphrates, The
same Word which commands us to “ fear
God” commands us also to “ honour the
king” (1 Pet. ii, 13-17), “Put them
in mind to be subject to principalities
and powers, to obey magistrates,” ‘ Let
every soul be subject unto the higher
powers,” &c, (Rom. xiii, 1-7),

2. The time of their delivery was an
evidence of their supreme regard for
Jehovah their God. Firat, they gave up
the sacred vessels and treasures for the
worship of Jehovah ; then they presented
to Him their humble and grateful sacri-
fices, and then they delivered the king’s
commissions unto the king’s officers,
Our loyalty to the earthly sovereign
must be subordinate to our reverence
for God. To Him must be given our
highest, holiest affections, and our con-
stant and complete obedience.

IV. Valuable help promptly ren
dered. ‘The king’s lieutenants and
governors on this side the river fur-
thered the people, and the house of
God.” They carried out the behests of
the king expressed in the letters which
Ezra delivered tothem. Thus the journey
of Ezra came to a very satisfactory and
successful issue.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(«) Many fill their life with regreta for being
confined to auch a narrow sphere of usefulness,
If they only were in the ministerial office, or
had millions of money, they would do 80 and
so; but what can an ordinary labourer, a poor
Sunday-school teacher, accomplish? Friend,
be content to serve God where He has placed
you ; for there precisely you can accomplish
the most. It is better to make the best of
what you have than to fret and pout for what
you bave not, The man with one talent ia
never accountable for five; but for his one he
must give as strict an account as the other
for his five. It may require more humility to
husband one talent than five ; and, so far aa
the improvement or miaimprovement of either
is concerned, they are both equally important
in the sight of God. The king’s million and
the widow's mite are worth the same with the
Eternal.— Pict. of Must.


(b) ** Well done, good and faithful servant,
enter thon into the joy of thy Lord.” Oh
blissful sentence! Words of unutterable, in-
conceivable import! Language aes poe





ing grace, not now to be comprehended! To
be acknowledged before the assembled uni-
verse, not only as His servanta, but His good
and faithful servants. To be told that we
have served Him faithfully, and told it from
the throne of His glory! ‘To hear Him say
‘*Well done!” and have the plaudit rever.
berated in ten thousand times ten thousand
echoes from the lips of admiring and adoring
angels, till heaven rings with the sound, ‘‘ Well
done, well done, thou faithful servant of the
Lamb!” Nor is this all. “Enter thou into
the joy of thy Lord.” ‘‘ Come into the same
place, yea, into the same joy. Come and
dwell with Me, and have one felicity common
to both.”

This reward will be bestowed on all His
faithful servants without exception. It belongs
not to apostles merely, mor to martyrs, re-


~ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BERA.





the most obscure, and illiterate, and humbls
Christians on earth. It is not the service of
official station merely that is alluded to, but
the service of personal religion. Chriet is as
truly served by the most retired believer,
though not as publicly, nor as extensively, as
by the most popular and successful preacher.
It ia the service of faith, patience, self-denial,
suffering, mortification, that is to be rewarded ;
the service of a devoted heart and a holy life
that is to be thus honoured and blessed, whe-
ther the man who performs it follows Christ
in the retirement of a private or the activities
of a public station. It is true the reward will
be in proportion to the service, and the degrees
of glory according to the degrees of graces
but all faithful servants will be rewarded by
admission to the presence and service and
enjoyment of Chriat in heavea.—J, 4. James.


formers, missionaries, and ministers; but to


CHAPTER LX


Curricat anp Expuaxarorny Nores.] We now come to the social and religious reformation
effeeted by Ezra amongst the Jewa who had previously returned to their own land (chaps. ix
and x.), And in this chapter we have—(i.) The complaint of the princes to Ezra concerning
the mingling of the people of Israel with the idolatrous people of the lands (vers, 1 and 2),
(ii.) The great amazement and grief of Ezra because of this (vera. 3 and 4), (iii.) The con-
fession and prayer of Ezra for the people of Israel (vers, 5-15).

Ver. 1. Now when these things were done] Some time seems to have elapsed between the
events recorded in chap. viii. and those narrated in chap. ix. Ezra and his company arrived
in Jerusalem ‘‘on the first day of the fifth month” (chap. vii. 9), and on the fourth day of
that month they delivered up the treasures in the Temple, and offered burnt offerings and sin
offerings unto the Lord God (chap. viii. 32-35). The next note of time is in chap. x. 9; ‘It
was the ninth month and the twentieth day of the month ” when the great assembly took place
at Jerusalem. This assembly had been summoned three days previously. So that there seems
to have been an interval of more than four months between the arrival at Jerusalem and the
eventa related in chaps, ix.and x. Probably some portion of this time was occupied in making
arrangements with the king’s satraps and governors (chap. viii. 36). The people of the lands]
are the dwellers in the adjacent districts, who are afterwards mentioned. Doing according to
their abominations] It is better to emit ‘‘doing,” which has been unnecessarily supplied by
the translators of the A.V. ‘‘ Have not separated themselves from the people of the lands,
according to their abominations, (even) of the Canaanites,” &c. Or, ‘‘in respect of their
abominations, (even) of,” &c. The Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites,the Jebusites] were
descendants of the ancient Canaanites, whom Israel failed to exterminate, and who were not
carried into captivity with the Israelites, but remained in some parts of Palestine. The Am.
monites, the Moabites] dwelt on the east. The Egyptians and the Amorites] on the south.

Ver. 2, The holy seed] The expression is probably taken from Isa. vi. 13. By calling, by
covenant, and by profession the Israelites were a separate people, a holy people (see Exod. xix,
5-8 ; xxxiii. 16 ; chap. vi. 20, 21). Have mingled themselves with the people of the lands]
thus violating an express command of the Lord their God (Deut. vii. 1-4). Yea, the hand of
the princes and rulers have been chief] &c., te. the upper classes were the firat to transgress
in this respect,

Ver. 3. I rent my garment and my mantle] As an indication of his great grief and horror,
he rent both his outer and inner garments. The custom was a very ancient and a very common
one for expressing sorrow, and is frequently mentioned in the Bible (see Gen. xxxvii. 29, 34;
Josh, vii. 6; 1 Sam. iv. 12; 28am.i.11; 2 Kings ii. 12; Jobi, 20, al.) And plucked of
the hair of my head and of my beard] This also was expreasive of grief, horror, and moral
indignation. To shave the head in great sorrow was not unfrequent amonget the Jews (Job i
20) ; but thia is the only example in the canonical Scriptures of a person plucking out his
own hair by the roots in grief and indignation. And sat down astonied] or ‘‘ benumbed,
stunned,” — Fuerst.

Ver. 4 Every one that trembled at the words of the God of Israel] &c. They trembled
in their alarm because of the punishments threatened in the law of God for such transgressions
as had ve committed. I sat astonied until the evening sacrifice] Inaamvuch as business


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: BRA. cHaP x,








i
is generally transacted in the morning in the East, the princes in all probability made their
complaint to Ezra in the forenoon, in which case he sat stunned and silent for several hours,

Ver. 8. I arose up from mry heaviness] Rather, as in margin: ‘‘ affliction.” Fuerst:
“self-affliction.” Keil: ‘mortification, or humiliation.” And having rent my garment
and my mantle] This does not refer to the former rending (ver. 8). For the second time
he expresses his grief and horror in this manner.

Ver. 6. I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face] &c. Keil: ‘I am ashamed, and
am covered with shame, to lift up,” &c. The same words are used together in Isa, xlv. 16;
Jer. xxxi. 19; and other places. Our trespass is grown up unto the heavens] Margin: ‘our
guiltiness.” Keil: ‘our guiltiness is great, (reaching) unto the heavens.” (Comp. 2 Chron,
XXviii, 9.)

Ver. 7. Since the days of our fathers] This expression may be taken as reaching back te
the time when their fathers came out of Evypt; but it seems probable that Ezra meant by it,
since the time when under their kings idolatry and idolatrous customs were practised amongst
them. To confusion of face] (comp. 2 Chron. xxii. 21; Dan. ix. 7, 8). As it is this day]
They were then in subjection to Artaxerxes,

Ver. 8. For a little space] or,a “little moment.” The eighty years that had elapsed since
the emancipation by Cyrus he speaks of ag ‘‘a little moment,” as compared either “with the
long period of suffering from the times of the Assyrians (comp. Neh. ix. 32) till the reign of
Cyrus”’ (Keil), or with ‘‘the long enjoyment of Divine favour from Abraham to Zedekiah”
(Rawlinson). A remnant to escape] Keil : ‘‘ rescued remnant.” Those who had returned to
the land of their fathers were but ‘‘a remnant” as compared with the numerous population of
former days. And to give us a nail in His holy place] Margin: ‘‘or, a pin: that is a con-
stant and sure abode.” Fuerst: “ID) = a peg, nail, driven into the wall (Isa. xxii, 25;
Ezek. xv. 3) ; a tent pin, to which a tent is fastened (Judg. iv. 21; Exod. xxvii. 19); the fasten-
ing being used as an image of being established (Isa. xxii. 23); of remaining (Ezra ix. 8). for
which Ji stands in ix. 9,” Ezra seems to have regarded the Temple as a pledge of their per-


manence, and a means of increased life and vigour; for he goes on to say ; that our God may
lighten our eyes] &c.

Ver. 9. For we were bondmen] Rather, ‘‘ we are bondmen,” They were still subject to
the Persian king. Only as regards the exercise of their religion were they granted independ.
ence. And to give us a wall] &c. This must be understood figuratively ; for the walls of
Jerusalem were not yet rebuilt (see Neh. i. 8; ii. 13). God had disposed the Persian kings,
Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, to protect them in the possession of their country and capital,
The wall is a figure of defence, safety, and continuance.

Vera. 11, 12. Which Thou hast commanded by Thy servants the prophets, saying, The
land] &c. This is not a verbal quotation, but a statement which correctly represents many
passages of Scripture (see Exod. xxiii. 32, 33, xxxiv. 12-16; Lev. xviii. 24-30; Deut. vii. 1-4,
xxiii. 6, et al.)

Ver. 13. Hast punished us less than our iniquities deserve] The last word is supplied
by the translators of the A.V. Margin: ‘‘Heb. ‘hast withheld beneath our iniquities,’”
Fuerst: ‘‘ Thou hast delivered (us) below our iniquities, z.c. undervaluing our iniquity.” Keil:
“Thou hast spared us more than our iniquity deserved.” Or, ‘‘Thou hast checked, hast
stopped, beneath our iniquities.” Though not a close rendering of the Hebrew, the A.V.
gives the meaning of it. And hast given us such deliverance as this] Rather, “ Thou hast
given us (such) a remnant ag this.”

Ver. 15. Thou art righteous] ‘‘ Ezra appeals to the righteousness of God, ... to rouse
the conscience of the community, to point out to them what, after this relapse into their old
abominations, they had to expect from the justice of God.”—Ketl. Or, he acknowledges the
justice of God in His dealings with them, by which they were reduced to amere remnant. For
we cannot stand before Thee because of this] (comp. Ps. lxxvi. 7; cxxx. 8).


Tur Goop Mawn’s Sorrow over THE PEOPLE’s Sry.
(Verses 1-4.)


selves from the people of the lands,
according to their abominations,” dc.
The men of Israel had taken wives of


Notice :
I. The painful communication made
to Ezra. ‘‘ Now when these things


were done, the princes came to me, say-
ing,” &c. (vers. 1, 2). Information is
here given to Ezra—

1. Of a great sin commited. ‘The
people of Israel, and the priests, and
the Levites, have not separated them-


the idolatrous Canaanites and other

heathen peoples, (1.) This was a posi-

tive transgression of a plain and oft-

repeated command (see Exod, xxiii,

31-33, xxxiv. 12-16; Deut. vil. 1-4;

Josh. xxiii. 12, 13). (2.) It was a peri
143


O#aP. IK,


lous transgression. Every sin is peri-
ious. But this one was especialy so,
The foreign and idolatrous wives were
likely fo lead their husbands into their
sinful customs ; and yet more likely to
tra’’ up their children in them. This
wes expressly pointed out to them by
Moses: ‘* They will turn away thy son
from following Me, that they may serve
other gods,” &, (Deut, vii. 4), Their
previous history contained evidence pain-
fully abundant and conclusive of the
danger of these prohibited marriages.
Even Solomon, notwithstanding his great
wisdom and that he was so richly blessed
by God, erred greatly and sadly through
tue influence of heathen wives. “ His
wives turned away his heart after other
gods” (1 Kings xii 1-13). And this
sin the Jews who had returned to their
own land were guilty of.

2. Of the prevalence of this sin. No
class of the community was free from
it. ‘The people of Israel, and the
priests, and the Levites” (ver. 1) were
all guilty of it. The evil was general
in the community,

3. Of the aggravations of their sin,
(1.) “ The priests and the Levites” (ver.
1), whose business it was to teach the
law and promote obedience to it, were
themselves guilty of violating it in this
respect. The law for the regulation of
the marriages of priests was particularly
atrict (Lev. xxi. 7, 13, 14); and by
reason of this and of their sacred char-
acter and calling, their marriages with
heathen wives were especially reprehen-
sible. (2.) The princes and rulers were
foremost in the offence, ‘ Yea, the
hand of the princes and rulers hath been
chief in this trespass.” It was their
duty to have maintained and enforced
the observance of the law, yet they took
the lead in violating it. Other and
greater princes had done the saine evil
thing; ¢g., Solomon, Ahab, et al,
Again, the eminence of their position
would impart great force to their ex-
ample, and it was their duty to see that
the excellence of the latter corresponded
with the eminence of the former; but
it was the opposite of this. In this
matter, at least, their example was as
pernicious as it was influential. (a)

144





‘peached their order.


HOMILETIL COMMENTARY: BBRA,
*





_—


This distressing communication wae
made to Ezra by persons of unimpeach-
able credibility. They were in respon-
sible positions — “ princes ;”—-and in
making this statement, if they did not
impeach themselves, they certainly im-
It is probable
that they had been stirred up to do so
by the influence of Ezra. During the
four months which had passed since his
arrival at Jerusalem, he had been in-
quiring into the condition of the people
(comp. chap. vii. 14), and the adminis-
tration of justice, and the measure of
their acquaintance with the law (comp.
chap. vii. 25, 26); he had also pro-
bably been expounding and applying the
law ; and the result was, that the minds
of these princes were enlightened, their
consciences were aroused to a sense of
the sin which had been committed, and
they went to Ezra and made known to
him the sin which was so general in the
community.

It. The effect which this communi-
cation produced upon Ezra. “ And
when | heard this thing, I rent my gar-
ment and my mantle,” &c. (ver. 3).
The statement caused Ezra—

l. Great amazement. ‘1 sat down
astonied”—stunned. Domestic life in
the East is characterised by great pri-
vacy ; so that Eara in making inquiries
into the state of the people might well
have been ignorant as to the occupants
of the apartments of the women. The
statement of the princes was quite a
revelation to him, and filled him with
bitter astonishment. The sins of reli-
gious people in our day might well utterly
amaze a really godly man.

2. Deep grief. “I rent my garment
and my mantle,” The usual mode of ex-
pressing sorrow amongst Eastern peoples
was by tearing the garment. The tear-
ing both the outer and the inner garments
may betoken the intensity of Ezra’s dis-
tress. The prevalence of iniquity is ever
a source of pain to the godly, It was so
to the Psalmist: “I beheld the trans-
gressors, and was grieved ; because they
kept not Thy word. Rivers of waters
run down miue eyes,” &e, (Ps. cxix. 158,
438). And to Jeremiah: “Oh that my
head were waters,” d&c. (Jer. ix. 1; xiv,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EERA.





17). Ill fares it with the soul when we
ean contemplate sin without sorrow.

3. Intense moral indignation. “Trent
my garment and my mantle, and plucked
off the hair of my head and of my beard,
and sat down astonied.” Thus he ex-
pressed not only his surprise and grief,
but also his utter abhorrence of the sin
of which they were guilty. God has
declared His hatred of sin (Jer. xliv. 4);
and as His servants grow in likeness to
Him, their hatred of sin will also grow.
We may not hate the sinner; while we
condemn we may also pity him ; but it
behoves us to regard sin with repugnance
and anger,

Ili. The effect of Ezra’s grief upon
others. “'lhen were assembled unto
me every one that trembled at the words
of the God of Israel,” &. Thus the
distress of Exra—

1. Excited their alarm. They “ trem-
bled at the words of the God of Israel,
because of the transgression of those
that had been carried away.” They
were filled with fear lest the judgments
pronounced upon those who were guilty
of this sin should be inflicted upon them.
They could not do otherwise than regard
with consternation that which afflicted
Zzra with so much distress.

2. Attracted them unto him. Every
one who thus trembled at the words of
God assembled unto Ezra. Some might
have been drawa to him by curiosity ;
but certainly they who were alarmed
because of the threatened punishments
were not of the number. They came to
him moved by deep concern on account
of the guilt contracted, and by sympathy
with his sorrow because of it, And he
and they remained apparently speechless
for a considerable time—probably for
three or four hours. Emotions are some-
times too deep to find expression in words.
At such times silence is more expressive
than even the most mighty and moving
words (comp. Job ii 13), Mark the
power of one true and good man to in-
fluence others beneficially. The sorrow
of such a man is deeply impressive ; it
awakens serious reflection, &, And
his moral indignation goes far to carry
conviction of the sinfulness of that which
enkindles it. (0).


t

ConcLusion :

1. Separation from the world ts obli-
gatory upon the true Christian. We do
not by this mean neglect of the secular
duties of life. ‘ Let every man abide in
the same calling wherein he was called.”
“ Diligent in business.” In business the
Christian must associate with the worldly.
Nor do we meau separation from political
parties and pursuits, As citizens we
have duties which we may not neglect
without sin. Nor yet, retirement from
the world into seclusion. ‘I pray not,”
said our Lord, “That thou shouldest take
them out of the world,” &e. We mean
separation from the aims, principles,
spirit, and society of the world. And
this not from any Pharisaic conceit of
our moral superiority, but for our own
safety and usefulness, and for the honour
of God. ‘Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate,” do.
(2 Cor. vi. 14-18). (c).

2. Sin in others should be regarded by
the true Christian with unfeigned sorrow,
and reprobation of the sin. See how
Ezra grieved! how our Lord wept over
guilty Jerusalem! (d).

S. Sinn the avowed people of God ts
especially heinous and mournful. Their
privileges are greater than those of the
world, consequently their obligations
also are greater, and their sin involves
a darker guilt. It is a greater dishonour
to God ; it checks the progress of His
cause and kingdom, é&e.

4, Therefore it behoves Christians to
give all diligence to walk holily and un-
blamably before God and before men.
“Ye are My witnesses, saith the Lord.”
Let us take heed that we be not found
false witnesses, ‘‘ Ye are the salt of the
earth,” d&c, (Matt. v. 13-16). (e).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) If a man could be wicked and a villain
to himself alone, the mischief would be so
much the more tolerable. But the case is
much otherwise. The plague flies abroad and
attacks the innocent neighbourhoed. The
guilt of the crime lights upon one, but the
example of it sways a multitude, especially if
the criminal be of any note or eminence in
the world. For the fall of such an one by any
temptation (be it never so plausible) ia like that
of a principal stone, or stately pillar, tumbling
from a lofty edifice into the deep mire of the


145


OHAP, YX,





street: it does uot only plunge and sink into
the black dirt itself, but it alzo dashes and be-
spatters all that are about or near it when it
falls. Was it not thus with Samson, who, of
a judge of Israel, and a terror to his enemies,
a man all made up of miracle, rendered him-
self both the shame of the former and the
contempt of the latter; a scoff and a byword
to all the nations round about him (as every
vicious and voluptuous prince must needs be);
and all this by surrendering up his strength,
his reagon, and his royal trust to the charms
of a brutish temptation, which quickly trang-
formed and made him a more stupendous
miracle of folly and weakness than ever he
had been of strength; and a greater disgrace
to his country than ever he had been a defence;
or, in a word, from a judge of Israel, a woeful
judgment upon it? And was it not thus also
with David? This was the worst and most
killing consequence of the temptation which
he fell by (2 Sam, xii. 14), that he had by that
enormous act ‘‘given great occasion to the
enemies of the Lord to blaspheme.” And no
doubt the religion he professed, as well as the
sin be had committed, was thereupon made
“the song of the drunkards ;” and pr.
biting jeer was obliquely cast at one, as wel
as directly levelled at the other.—R. South,
D.D.


(6) The Christian ought to clear a space for
himself wherever he goes, Little children,
humble hearts, mourning gouls, reverent,
noble, heavenly - minded persons ought to
come round him and say, ‘‘ Welcome in God's
name. Don’t leave us; abide with us a long
while.” But knaves and hypocrites, people
who are rolling iniquity under their tongue as
a sweet morsel—musked people—ought to feel
terribly uncomfortable when a Christian man
comes among them. ‘hey ought to know
him from afar, There should be surrounding
him a kind of atmosphere in which men that
are evil cannot breathe and live—the knave
should shrink away from hia sight ; the coward
should hide himself in the lowest and vileat
dust; and the man who was contemplating
some keen, clever stroke, in which there
should be dishonour and injuatice, should feel
himself paralysed, disabled, half-damned, in
the presence of a man whose soul is afire with
Divine truth.—Joseph Parker, D.D,


{c) The Jewish law shadowed out an ever-
lasting truth, God’s people are an exclusive
nation; God’s Church is for ever separated
from the world. This is her charter, ‘‘ Come
eut from among them, and be ye separate,
saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing ; and I will receive you, and will be a
Father unto you, and ye shall be My sons and
daughters, saith the Lord Almighty.” God’a
people may break that charter, but they de it
at their own peril. And we may be very sure
of this, when a religious person begins to feel
an inclination for intimate communion with
the world, and begins to break down that

146


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: BERA,





barrier which is the line of safety, the first
step is made of a series of long, dark wander-
ings from God. We are to be separate,
brethren, from the world. Mistake not the
meaning of that word. The world changea
its complexion in every age. Solomon’s world
was the nations of idolatry lying round IJsreel.
Our world is not that. The world is that
collection of men in every age who live only
according to the maxims of theirtime. The
world may be a profligate world, or it may be
amoral world. All that is a matter of aeci-
dent. Our world is a moral world. The sons
of our world are not idolaters, they are not
profligate, they are, it may be, among the moat
fascinating of mankind, Their society is
more pleasing, more lively, more diversified
in information than religious society, No
marvel if a young and ardent heart feels the
spell of the fascination. No wonder if it feels
a relief in turning away from the dulness and
the monotony of home life to the sparkling
brilliancy of the world’s gociety.... And
ee now, pause. ... The Christian must
eave the world alone. His blessedness lies
in quiet work with the Israel of God. Hia
home in that deep, unruffled tranquillity
which belongs to those who are trying to
know Christ.—F. W. Robertson, M.A.


(d) You muat learn to be good haters—but
not of men. You do not need anything to
instruct you on that point, You are too good
in that already. You are to abhor evil, Ah!
there are hundreds of men that know how to
hate men, where there is one that knows how
to love a man and hate evil. Because evil ia
offensive to God, because it is repugnant to
the innate delicacy of every moral sentiment,
because it wastes you, because it wastes your
neighbour, because it is hurtful to society,
because every benevolent instinct requires that
you should hate that which is the common foe
of all mankind, therefore you should hate evil.
We are to hate all qualities and actions which
corrupt the individual, which injure manbood
in man; all that creates sorrow or suffering,
or tends to doit. In short, we are to take our
beginning in the law of God ; and being filled
with goodwill toward every living creature,
that spirit breathing itself like summer
throughont, we are to hate, come from what
quarter it may, everything that intures society,
that injures men in the mags, or that injures
men in their individual capacity. Whether
it be in their bodies, their souls, or their estate,
whatever works mischief to mankind, you are
to be its enemy. The want of this moral re-
bound, and of this indignation, will be found
to be ruinous. The presence of it is whole.
some. The absence of it is effeminating. it
destroys the individual to whom it is lacking,
and it is mischievous to the community in
which it is lacking —H, W. Beecher.


(e) It is recorded of Alexander the Great,
that a soldier was reported to him ae having
betrayed great cowardice on a particular ocea.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: BZRA.





sion, on which Alexander called him to him
and asked his name. On hearing that his
name was Alexander, he upbraided him with
the dishonour that he brought on such a
name, and entreated him either to change his
Manners or to change his name, asking him
how he could dare, while known as Alexander,
to act unworthily # And shall not the Chris-
tian remember the high and holy name by
which he is called, and dread encountering


{


the guilt and meanness of dishonouring hig
Head, who was “holy, harmless, undefiled,
separate from sinners”! That name, in ite
very significition, tells him that he is related
to the anointed One, and that (as the name
implies) all His members, in their measure
and degree, ure anointed ones. How shall
they who take this sacred unction upon them
dare to dishonour this name, and go sin against
Christ !—H, G. Salter.


Tre Goop Man’s ConFression OF THE PEOPLE’s Sim,
(Verses 5-15.)


We have here—

I. Deep personal shame and sorrow
on account of the sins of the people.
These feelings Ezra expresses by—

1, A symbolical action. “ And at the
evening sacrifice I arose up from my heavi-
ness, and rent my garments and my man-
tle.” Thus before the assembled people
he proclaims the grief and moral indig-
nation with which he regarded their sin.

2. A suggestive attitude. “I fell upon
my knees, and spread out my hands
unto the Lord my God.” The posture
indicates deep humiliation before God
and earnest supplication unto Him,

3. An explicit avowal. Ezra said,
“© my God, I am ashamed and blush
to lift up my face to Thee, my God.”
In this avowai notice—(1.) The shame-
fulness of sin. “Sin is a reproach to
any people.” It is an ‘abominable
thing.” (2.) The good man is ashamed
because of the sin of others. He feels
the dishonour which is offered by it
to God, and the ingratitude, folly, and
wickedness of those who commit it.
He cannot be an unmoved spectator of
the workers of iniquity. The know-
ledge of human wickedness affects him
as it did Ezra, or leads him to ery with
the Psalmist, “‘ Horror hath taken hold
upon me because of the wicked that
forsake Thy law.” (3.) The good man
is specially conscious of the shamefulness
of sin when he draws near to God in
worship. In the light of His presence
the exceeding deformity and heinous-
ness of sin are painfully clear; and the
godly soul, burdened in feeling with the
iniquities of others, is ashamed to lift up
his face to God. (Comp.Isa, vi. 1-5.) (a).

IL Humble confession of the sins of
the people. Ezra coniesses—


1. The great accumulation of their
sins, ‘‘QOur iniquities are increased
over our head, and our trespass is grown
up into the heavens.” The idea seems
to be that their iniquities, like waves
of the sea, rolled over them threatening
to overwhelm them; and their guilt
was piled up to the very heavens, The
confession of the Psalmist is similar:
“Mine iniquities are gone over mine
head,” d&c. (Ps, xxxviii 4). ‘ Mine
iniquities have taken hold upon me,”
&c. (Ps. xl. 12).

2. The long continuance of their sine.
* Since the days of our fathers have we
been in a great trespass unto this day.”
From generation to generation they had
been a perverse and rebellious people.
A sad continuity in sin characterised
their history.

3. The sore aggravations of their sins,
(1.) That they had been committed not-
withstanding the Divine judgments.
“For our iniquities have we, our kings
and our priests, been delivered into the
hands of the kings of the lands, to the
sword, to captivity, and to a spoil, and
to confusion of face, as it is this day.”
God had visited them with heavy judg-
ments, but they had not turned from
their iniquities. He had severely re-
proved them, but they were not re
formed. As a people they had suffered
long and sorely for their sins, and yet
they were still guilty of those sins,
(2.) That they had been committed not-
withstanding the Divine mercies. Of
these several are mentioned by Ezra
(i.) Mercy in the measure of the punish-
ment inflicted upon them, “ Thou our
God hast punished us less than our ini-
quities deserve,” God might justly
have entirely forsaken them, or have

147


CHAP. Im,
*%





made an utter end of them; but in His
wrath He had remembered mercy.  (ii.)
Mercy in disposing the Persian mon-
archs to treat them with so much gene-
rosity. ‘For we were bondmen, yet
our God hath not forsaken us in our
bondage, but hath extended mercy unto
us in the sight of the kings of Persia,”
de. “The Lord stirred up the spirit
of Cyrus king of Persia” (chap. i 1)
to grant them permission to return to
their fatherland. He inclined the heart
of Darius to treat them so favourably.
And it was by His good hand upon
Fzra that Artaxerxes “ granted him all
his request” (chap. vii. 6). (iii.) Mercy
in bringing a rescued remnant to their
own land again, ‘ And now fora little
space grace hath been showed from the
Lord our God, to leave us a remnant
to escape,” de.’ A considerable remnant
of the people had been safely restored and
comfortably settled in the country given
by God to their fathera. (iv.) Mercy
in enabling them to rebuild the Temple
of their God. ‘‘To give us a nail in
His holy place,” &c. ‘‘To set up the
house of our God, and to repair the
desolations thereof.” For » people in
their circumstances this was a great
achievement, and a great mercy from
the Lord their God. To the pious
amongst them it would be the crowning
blessing that the Temple was restored,
and that the ordinances of their holy
religion were regularly and becomingly
celebrated. (v.) Mercy in granting them
security in their own land. Two ex-
pressions seem to suggest this: “To
give us a nail in His holy place.” Mar-
gin: “Or, ‘a pin;’ that is, a constant
and sure abode.” “And to give usa
wall in Judah and Jerusalem ;” not a
literal wall, for as yet the walls of Jeru-
salem were not restored; but a shield
and shelter, peace and protection. Their
Samaritan enemies were restrained, and
did net trouble them. And the officers
of the Persian government favoured and
supported them and the house of God,
Yet despite all these mercies, they were
now living in the regular practice of sin
against their gracious God. How black
the ingratitude of such conduct! And
how toolish, for their sins might lead
148





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA,


Him to withdraw His favour from them,
Neither judgmente nor mercies had
availed to restrain them from heinous
transgression. (3.) That they had been
committed against plain and positive
commands. “And now, O our God,
what shall we say after this? for we
have forsaken ‘Thy commandments,
which Thou hast commanded by Thy
servants, the prophets,” d&c. (vers. 10-
12, and see Explanatory Notes on them),
They could not plead ignorance or un-
certainty of the law as an excuse for
their evil doings, (4,) That they had
been committed ayainst commands the
reasons of which had been clearly set
before them. It had been shown to
them that obedience to these commands
was necessary for—(i.) The maintenance
of their power, ‘That ye may be
strong.” (Comp. Deut. xi. 8.) As they
mingled with the heathen they lost
strength and courage. (ii.) Their en-
joyment of the produce of the land.
“ And eat the good of the land.” (Comp,
Isa.i 19.) They should eat it, and not
strangers. They should eat it im peace
and happiness. (iii) Their continued
possession of the land. ‘ And leave it
for an inheritance to your children for
ever.” (Comp. Deut. xii 9; Prov, xiii,
22; Ezek. xxxvii. 25.) Their separa
tion from the heathen was necessary to
their secure possession of their country,
Thus, these commands were not arbi-
trary, but reasonable; and the reasons
for them were stated, Obedience wouid
have been both rational and advanta-
geous; it was both their duty and their
interest, Yet they transgressed these
commands. Noobligation seemed strong
enough to bind them to their duty in
this respect; no motive adequate to
constrain them to obedience. Most
persistent and most aggravated were
their sins, (6).

Itt. A solemn anticipation of the
consequence of the continuance of the
sins of the people. ‘“ And after all that
is come upon us for our evil deeds,
and for our great trespass,” dc, (vers,
13-15).

1. Continuance in sin would lead to
their utter end asa community. “ And
aiter all that is come upon us for our


—_


HOMILETIC OCUMENTARY: BERA.


evil deeds, and for our great trespass,
veeing that Thou our God hast punished
us less than our iniquities deserve, and
hast’ given us such deliverance as this;
should we again break Thy command-
ments, and join in affinity with the
people of these abominations, wouldest
not Thou be angry with us till Thou
hadst consumed us, so that there should
be no remnant nor escaping?” This in-
quiry does not denote doubt, but cer-
tainty. Looking at God’s commands to
them, and His past dealings with them,
Ezra was convinced that if they persisted
in these sinful alliances God would bring
them to an utter end.

2. That such a consequence of continu
ance in sin would be just. “O Lord
God of Israel, Thou art righteous,” &,
(ver. 15). In His past dealings with
them God had been just and merciful.
He would still be just towards them.
They were guilty before Him; they had
nothing to plead in extenuation of their
sins, but must leave themselves in His
hands.

3. That such a consequence of continu
ance in sin was to be dreaded, This is
guite clear from the close of Ezra’s
humble appeal to God (vers. 13-15).
If sin be not truly repented of its con-
sequences will be found to be dreadful.
“ Sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth
death.” ‘He that soweth to the flesh
shall of the flesh reap corruption.” ‘ The
wicked is driven away in his wicked-
ness.”

LEARN:

1. The great evil of sin. It is evil in
itself ; it is a great wrong against God;
it is terrible in its consequences, &c. (c).

2. The grand hope of the sinner. God
is merciful as well as just. The greatest
sinner, being penitent, may approach
unto Him, and, confessing his sin, may
obtain full and free forgiveness. ‘ There
is forgiveness with Thee,” &e. (Ps. cxxx.
3, 4,7). ‘‘ If we confess our sins,” &e.
(1 John i. 9). (d).

3. Lhe right relation of the good man
to sin, Like Ezra, he should hold it in
abhorrence, should be burdened in feel-
ing because of its prevalevce in others,
should exhibit to them its heinousness,
and should humbly confess it befure God.


OGa?. Ik,


ee ee ee See


When iniquity abounds, let God’s faith.
ful people “ weep between the porch and
the altar, and let them say, Spare Thy
people, O Lord,” dc. (Joel ii. 17), (e)


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Our whole lives present one unbroken
series of duties neglected, of favoura not
acknowledged. And, oh! how do they appear,
when we review them in the light of God’s
countenance! When we see before us our
Creator, our Preserver, our Benefactor, our
Sovereign, and our Heavenly Father; when
we see in Him, to whom all these titles be-
long, infinite excellence, perfection, glory, and
beauty; when we see with what profound
veneration, with what raptures of holy, grate-
ful affection He is regarded and served by all
the bright armies of heaven ;—and then turn
and contemplate our past livea, and reflect
how they must appear in His sight, can we
refrain from exclaiming with Job, ‘*‘ We have
heard of Thee by the hearing of the ear, but
now our eyes see Thee: wherefore we abhor
ourselves, and repent in dust and ashes” {
Must not each of us say with the Psalmist,
‘* Innumerable evils have compassed me about;
mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so
that I ara not able to look up; they are mors
than the hairs of mine head; therefore my
heart faileth me”? Nay, more, when you see
what God is, and how He is worshipped in
heaven, and then look at the coldness, the for-
mality, the want of reverence with which you
have often approached Him in prayer, and
listened to His word, must you not feel can-
scious that should He call you into judgment
you could not answer for one in a thousand of
the iniquities which have etained your holy
things, your religious duties !—Z. Payson, 1).D,


(6) The criminality ef any gin is in propor-
tion to the motives and obligations which
opposed its commission. To sin against many
and powerful motives indicates greater de-
pravity, and is, of course, more criminal than
to sin against few and feeble motives, Sup-
pose a person is informed that if he commita
a certain crime he shall be imprisoned, If,
notwithstanding the threatening, he perpe-
trates the crime, he shows that he loves the
erime more than he loves liberty. Aguin,
suppose him to be assured that if he commits
the crime he shall be put to death. Should
he after that commit the crime, it would indi-
cate greater depravity than before, it would
abow that he loved the crime more than life,
But the Word of God threatens sinners with
everlasting misery if they persist in sin, and
promises them everlasting happiness if they
will renounce it. I need not tell you that
what is 2verlasting is in one respect infinite,
viz., in duration. Here, then, are two in-
finitely powerful motives presented to the
sinner to deter him from sin—infinite happi-
nea end infinite misery. pet one, then

49





who persists in sin, notwithstanding these
motives, shows that he loves sin more ‘han
everlasting happiness, that he hates holiness
more than he dreads everlasting misery. His
attachment to sin, and, of course, his depravity
and criminality, are therefore boundless or
infinite.—Jbid,


(c) Every sin is a violation of an infinitely
perfect law. It will readily be allowed that
to violate a good law is a greater evil than to
violate a law the goodness of which is doubt-
ful. It will also be allowed that if there were
any law made by human governments, on
obedience to which the honour, the welfare,
and even the existence of a nation depended,
—to violate that law would be the greatest
crime which a gubject could commit. Now
the law of God ig perfectly holy, just, and
good, If it were universally obsyed, universal
and endless happiness would be the conse-
quence. But disobedienve to this law tends
to produce universal and endless misery. Take
away the law and the authority of God, there
would be no right but that of the strongest ;
violence, discord, and confusion would fill the
universe; sin and misery would overspread
the earth, would ascend to heaven, subvert the
throne of Jehovah, and compel Him to live in
the midst of a mad, infuriated mob, the mem-
bers of which were continually insulting Him
and injuring each other. Now every violation
of God’s law tends to produce this effect.—
Ibid.

Others may throw garlands upon sin,
picturing the overhanging fruits which drop
in her pathway, and make every step graceful
as the dance; but we cannot be honest with-
out presenting it as a giant, black with the
soot of the forges where eternal chains are
made, and feet rotting with disease, and
breath foul with plagues, and eyes glaring
with woe, and locks flowing in serpent fangs,
and voice from which shall rumble forth the
blasphemies of the damned. — 7. De Witt
Talmage, D.D.


(d@) Confession is a neceasary basia of for-
giveness, Confession is not a simple act.
Confession is in reality a multitudinous act;
it is many acts in one; it is a convergence of
right judgment, right feeling, and right action.
There are kinds of confession which are
wholly unavailing. ... This is not the con-
fession in which David poured out his soul ;
his words are full of heart. His language
seems to be baptized with tears. Every word
is a groan from the soul; and consequently
his confeasion comes within the assurance of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BERA.





Sw


that world-enclosing and most blessed promise,
that if we confess our sins, God will erase
them from His book, and remember them no
more for ever, Think of God forgetting.
Think of the Infinite casting aught behind
His back! Back of the Infinite! Where ia
that? He will put our sins away from Him,
as far as the East is from the West. What
geometrician can set forth in lines that
distance, or tell in words the vastness of that
immensity |—Joseph Parker, D.D.


(e) Abhorrence of evil is indispensable to
the purity of a man’s own self who is in the
midst of ‘‘a perverse and crooked generation.”
I do not believe any man can avoid the forma-
tion of feeling, and to a certain extent the
expression of it, and maintain himself in-
corrupt. It is unnatural. What would you
give for a man’s humanity who could stand by
and see a little boy deliberately tortured, and
maintain a sweet and smiling face, and perfect
equanimity, saying, “It is neither my child,
nor the child of anybody that I know any:
thing about;” and gaying, “It is wrong; I
suppose it is wrong; but there is no use of
being excited about it”? What would you
think of a man that could stand and look
upon wickedness and not feel all his nature
rebound at it? You cannot see a man steal
(provided it is not yourself!) without the
utmost horror. You never see a mean thing
done (if it is only done by another) without
some sengibility in regard to it,

Now, the expressions of these feelings are,
by reaction, the modes in which moral sense,
the repugnanze to wickedness, to evil, is
strengthened. And if you, for any reason,
forbear to give expression to the feeling, it
goes out for want of expression, Itis like fire
that is smothered. And the man who is se
extremely prudent that he never does give
utterance to his feelings of indignation against
great wrongs, is a man that emasculates him-
self; and he becomes a moral eunuch. A
man is not worthy of the name of man who
has no power of indignation, A man is not
worthy of being ranked in the roll of manhood
who does not know how to issue soul-thunder.

The feeling, and suitable expression, of in-
dignation, then, is not only salutary as a mode
of penalty, and of restraint to the wickedness
of society, but it is quite indispensable, also,
to the moral purity of the individual, the
spectator, himself. It is ome of those exercises
by which the very moral sense itself, the judge
and test of all things right or wrong, is kept
in tone.—H. W. Beecher,


Ezra’s HvuMILIATION FOR THE SINS OF BIS PEOPLE,
(Verses 5-6.)


L The reason of his sorrow. Many of


other heathens around them, This he


the people had connected themseives in justiy regarded as « most heinous


marriage botb with the Canaanites and
150


evil.


SOMILETIC COMMENTARY; EZRA.





a er


1. As being a violation of an express
command, Ezra himself speaks of it in
this view (comp. vers. 10-12 with Deut,
vii. 2, 3). It is possible that, whilst
the generality sought only the gratifica-
tion of their own corrupt appetites,
“the princes and rulers, who were chief
in this matter,” justified their conduct
on the ground of policy. They might
urge that, being few in number, it was
desirable for their own preservation to
make alliances with those whose hostility
they feared. In this way many set their
own reasonings in opposition to God’s
revealed will. But reason is altogether
out of place on such occasions, We are
not at liberty to sit in judgment on God’s
commands, and to determine how far it
is expedient to obey them, &e.

2. As having an evident tendency to
bring the people back to tdolatry. It
was for their idolatries that the nation
had been sent into captivity; and a
recurrence of the same evil was likely
to result from so intimate a connection
with idolaters. (Comp. Deut. vii. 4.)
Their disregard of this danger showed
how little they had profited by the
judgments that had been inflicted on
them, or the mercies that had been
vouchsafed unto them. But thus it is
with all who seek the friendship of the
world: God has told them that “ friend-
ship with the world is enmity with God”
(Jas. iv. 4); that it is impossible to
maintain communion with both (Matt.
vi. 24; 2 Cor. vi 14, 15); and that
therefore all who cultivate the friendship
of the wor'd will be regarded and treated
as the enemies of God (1 John ii. 15-17);
yet they will run the risk, and for the
sake of gratifying their corrupt wishes,
will endanger the everlasting salvation
of their souls.

IL The expressions of his sorrow.

1. The expression of his grief the instant
he was informed of their misconduct.
This was more violent than any of which
we read in the Holy Scriptures. Often
have men rent their mantle and their
germents ; but of him alone we are told
that “he plucked off the hair of his head
and of his beard.” He was almost dis-
tracted ; he was so overwhelmed as to
be incapable of speech or action; “he


%
sat down astonied,” &o, Shall we think
all this extravagant? No truly, if we
duly estimate the evil they had com.
mitted, and the danger to which the
whole nation was reduced. We are
told of David, that “horror took hold
upon him,” and that “rivers of tears
ran down his cheeks,” &a St. Paul
appeals to God, that he had “great
sorrow and continual heaviness in hia
heart,” &c.

2. His humiliation before God more
particularly demands our attention. “At
the time of the evening sacrifice,” as if
revived and encouraged by the considera-
tion of the great atonement, “he arose
from his heaviness, and fell upon his
knees,” and confessed with shame and
anguish of heart both his own sins and
the sins of all the people. What a
just view had he of national transgres-
sions, Many would have thought that
because he disapproved of the evils that
had been committed, he had no share
in the guilt, nor any occasion to humble
himself before God on account of them ;
but the members of the body politic
are, in their corporate capacity, like the
members of the natural body, all to a
certain degree responsible for those evils
which generally, though not universally,
prevail among them. At the day of
judgment indeed, none will have to
answer for anything but what they
themselves were personally guilty of;
but in this world, where alone nations
can be dealt with as nations, we should
consider ourselves as participating in
whatever relates to the nation at large.
Oh that we felt for our own sins as he
felt for the sins of others! We are told
plainly enough what is that repentance
which godly sorrow will produce (2 Cor,
vii. 10, 11); let us therefore look to it
that we “approve ourselves to be clear
in this matter,”

APPLICATION :

And now the evening sacrifice is just
offered; “now once in the end of the
world, hath Christ appeared,” dic. (Heb,
ix. 26.) Let us spread before Him both
our national and personal transgressions;
not doubting but that “if we confess
our sins, God is faithful,” dc. (1 John i
9).—C. Simeon, M.A.

15)


¥


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EERA,





Ezra’s ADDREBS.
(Verse 8.)


Israel had often suffered for their sina,
especially for idolatry. Worsted by ene-
mies — latterly carried into captivity.
Now, after seventy years, restored. Now
Ezra relates his experience. Deep sorrow
and shame for their sins (ver. 2, é&c.).
His distress, prayer, and confession, &c.
In the midst of this comes our text, full
of instruction, counsel, &c, The subject
shows—

I. The grace they had experienced.

Observe—

1. In bondage. Not desert, but grace
—undeserved favour.

2. Grace from Jehovah, their covenant
God.

3. Grace to preserve. “ A remnant.”
Seventy years’ captivity. Not all extin-
guished. Some kept, sustained—and a
remnant only.

4, To be restored to their land-—nation
— city — worship — inheritances — and
home.

Il. The exalted position to which
they had been raised.

l. “A nail,” or pin—these were in-
serted in the building of the place. De
signed—(1.) For ornament. (2.) For use-
fulness. (3.) For permanence. So Christ,
the Messiah (Isa, xxii. 23), Levites were
nails, pins, The priests—the high priest
—an exalted place. The musicians,

2. In the “ holy place” ef God. Taber-
nacle—Church of the old covenant. Not
in palaces—schools of learning—halls of
science—academies of philosophy; but
in the far higher, holier Church of the
living God. Observe this is expressive
—(1.) Of their honour—true dignity,
(2.) Of their security. (3.) Of their
privileges and favours.

Til. The blessings connected with
these privileges,


And here there is reference—

1. To spiritual illumination. “God
may lighten,” &c. (Ps. xiii. 3; xxxlv. 5).
(1.) Eyes to see their own unworthiness,
rr Their own helplessness, (3.) The
Lord’s goodness. (4.) The Lord’s will
and ways

2. Spiritual reviving. Rekindling of
the fire—stirring up—reinapiring—re.
strengthening—reviving. Faith—hope
—zeal—love—obedience.

3. Gratefulness for deliverances, In
our bondage—that God should show
grace. Deliverance from it, &e. And
now gratefully reviewed, &c.

4. The brevity of these signal mercies
—“‘a little space.” For working—fight-
ing—building up ourselves, Also the
Church—‘“‘a little space.” We are re-
minded of this—{1.) By those who have
passed away. ‘The fathers, &c. Those
we have known—succeeded, (2.) By
the advance we have made in life. Look
back to childhood—youth, &e. How
changed! (3.) By the uncertain, frag-
mentary remains, we can only possess,
“Time is short,” &c. ‘ We spend our
years asa tale that istold.” The Judge
at the door. “I must work the works
of Him that sent me while it is day,”
&c. ‘* Whatsoever thy hand findeth to
do,” d&c. Let the subject be—

l. A test of character. Are we of
the remnant? Called—the chosen—
the faithful.

2. An appeal as to our position, In
the Church, “a nail” or pin—some-
where,

3. A question as to owr desires. Are
we seeking the reviving ¢

4. An exhortation. Appeal to those
outside the Church to come with us, &.
—Jabez Burns, D.D.


ForBIpDEN MARRIAGES.
(Verse 12.)


“Give not your daughters unto their
sons, netther take their daughters unto
your sone.” The Israelites were probi

162


bited from taking heathen women for
their wives, and from giving their
daughters in marriage to the heathen,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: £ERA.


ORAM DM,





And true Christians are commanded
not to marry those who are not Chris-
tians, What are the reasons why such
Marriages should not be contracted ?
Becanse—

I. They are opposed to the express
command of God. “ Be ye not unequally
yoked together with unbelievers,” &c.
(2 Cor. vii 14). “There is,” says
Barnes, “ a difference between Chris-
tians and those who are not so great
as to render such unions improper and
injurious, The direction here refers,
doubtless, to all kinds of improper con-
nections with those who were unbe-
lievers. It has been usually supposed
by commentators to refer particularly
to marriage, But there is no reason
for confining it to marriage. It doubt-
less includes that.” And M. Henry:
“Those relations that are our choice
must be chosen by rule; and it is good
for those who are themselves the chil-
dren of God to join with those who are
so likewise ; for there is more danger
that the bad will damage the good than
hope that the good will benefit the bad.”
Again, &t Paul writes that Christians
are to marry “only in the Lord” (1 Cor.
vii. 39); which Alford explains thus:
*4.¢., within the limits of CAristian con-
nection—in the element in which all
Christians live and walk—‘ let her marry
@ Christian.’ So Tertull., Cypr., Am-
bros., Jerome, Grot., Est., Bengel,
Rosenm., Olsh., Meyer, De W.” Whit-
by: “She must marry a believer, one
who is in Christ by faith and profession,”
And Barnes; ‘ That is, only to one who
is a Christian, with a proper sense of her
obligations to Christ, and so as to pro-
mote His glory.” (a).

Il. They are inconsistent with the
most sacred aspects and ends of mar-
riage. Marriage was instituted by God
(Gen. ii. 20-24; Matt, xix. 4-6); and
it was intended by Him to be a union
of persons not merely as regards their
temporal interests, but in their spiritual
sympathies. In its best aspect marriage
is a union of souls, (6). They who are
thus united bave sympathy with each
other in their deepest, highest, and
holiest experiences. They are one in
soul, one in Christ, and one for eves,


The marriage which js not a union of
souls is defective, and it degrades the
Divine institution, One of the ends
contemplated in the institution of mar-
riage was that they who are joined in
this relation should be mutual helpers,
Woman was created to be “an help
meet for” man. And this must surely
hold good in relation to the highest and
most important concerns of life, viz., the
salvation of their souls, or their life,
health, and progress as spiritual beings.
Husbands and wives should aid each
other in their upward and heavenward
path. But how can they do this if the
genuine Christian is mated with one
who is not a Christian? (c). The ab-
sence of this high and holy union is
sometimes mournfully manifest in mar-
ried life. How inexpressibly sad it is
when in the sore troubles of life hus
band and wife look to different quarters
for relief, and consolation, and help!
The true Christian looks to the Heavenly
Father, and obtains calmness and peace
and hope, to which the unbelieving part-
ner is a stranger. When their union
should be most closely and preciously
realised, the gulf which separates them
is most painfully felt, In like manner
the unbeliever is utterly unable to
enter into the tenderest, holiest, and
most cherished experiences—those of
the religious life—of the Christian
partner.

TIL They imperil the salvation of
the soul. ‘The believing husband or
wife may be successful in leading the
unbelieving partner to real trust im
Christ and hearty consecration to Him.
But in very many instances the actual
result is the opposite of this. “ Did not
Solomon king of Israel sin by these
things}? yet among many nations was
there no king like him, who was be-
loved of his God, and God made him
king over all Israel; nevertheless even
him did outlandish women cause to sin”
(Neh, xiii, 26). “There is far greater
ground of fear that they shall pervert
you, than there is ground of hope that
you shall convert them.” The risk of
this kind which such marriages involve
ia one which nv Christian is justified in
Geliberately encountering. (i).

153


OMAP, IX.


———


6° Maid, choosing man, remember this ;
You take his nature with hia name ;
Ask, too, what his religion is,
For you will soon be of the same.”


IV. They are inimical to wise and
harmonious home government. In such
marriages there is a difference of opinion
as to the ends to be sought and the
methods to be employed in the govern-
ment of the family ; and as to the spirit
which should pervade the home; and,
further, as to the course of life to be
pursued therein. Such differences must
militate against the order and harmony
which should characterise family life.

VY. They are detrimental to the
best interests of the children of the
marriage. One of the objects contem-
plated in the institution of marriage was
the production of “a godly seed” (Mal.
ii, 15), and in the marriages which are
Divinely forbidden this object is likely
to be frustrated. The diversity of spirit,
principles, aims, and methods, which
exists where one parent is really a Chris-
tian and the other is not, must exert an
injurious influence upon the children. (e).
How many and forcible, then, are the
reasons why Christians should marry
“only in the Lord”!


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) They that enter, or think of entering,
into the married state, are required to do
it in the Lord, as an only thing. Marry they
may, ‘‘only in the Lord.” But when they
neglect this, they leave out the only thing
that can make a blessed marriage; which
certainly must argue a very profane mind,
when men and women dare venture, and rush
apon a mutter of so great importance as that,
and leave out the very only thing that con-
eerns them in it.—John Howe.


(6) The relation of which we now treat,
instituted by the benevolent Creator Himself,
is the closest, the most intimate and tender,
of all earthly connections. Its closeness and
endearing intimacy were evidently meant to
be indicated by two circumstances :—(1.) The
roanner of the formation of the first woman ;
not, as the man himself had been, from ‘‘ the
dust of the ground,” but from a bone of his
own body; and that bone one of the safe-
guards of the most important and vital organs
of his frame, being part of the protecting
bulwarks of his heart—the fountain of life
to his whole frame, and the seat of al! his
affections. I dare not for a moment doubt
the embiewatic significance of thia remark-


154





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : BZRA,








able fact. It is aa far as possible from being
fanciful. Adam himself perceived, and felt,
and expressed it, when, on the delicate and
lovely counterpart of himself being brought
to him by the Divine Maker, he exclaimed,
with new, and delightful, and sinless emotion:
«This is now bone of my bone, and flesh


_of my flesh ; she shall be called woman, be-


cause she was taken out of man.” In our


language the sentiment is not, and cannot
be, correctly transfused. In the original the
name for woman is simply that for man, witha
feminine termination, which, from the struc-
ture of our language, we cannot imitate. The
hearest approximation toit would be she-man;
but, unfortunately, it sounds too ludicrously to
be at all sufferable, ‘'o this original forma-
tion of woman Paul beautifully alludes, when
he describes the very thing of which we have
been representing it aa significant of the tender
care with which husbands should regard and
cherish the chosen partners of their lives.
** So ought men to love their wives,” &c. (Eph.
vy. 28-80), (2.) The second thing by whick
this was indicated was the pronouncing of this
relation, by Jehovah Himself, superior in ita
imperative requisitions to every other. The
relation of child to parent is specially tender
and powerful; yet it must give way before
the obligation under which that child, when
he becomes a husband, ia laid to the ‘‘ wife of
his youth:” “ For this cause shall a man
leave his father and hig mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife.” It is the only one of
life’s relations that is represented as consti-
tuting a species of identity—a dual unit:
‘Wherefore they are no more twain, but
one flesh. What therefore God hath joined
together, let no man put asunder.”—R
Wardlaw, D,D.


(ec) Husband and wife should be as the
milch-kine, which were coupled together te
carry the ark of God ; or as the two cherubim,
that looked upon one another, and both upon
the mercy-seat ; or as the two tables of stone
on each of which were engraven the laws o:
God. In some families married persons are
like Jeremiah’s two baskets of figs, the one
very good, the other very evil; or like fire and
water, whilst the one is flaming in devotion,
the other is freezing in corruption, There ia
a twofold hindrance in holiness : firet, on the
rightside; secondly, on the left, On the right
side : when the wife would run in God’s way,
the husband will not let her go: when the
fore-horge in a team will not draw, he wrongs
all the rest; when the general of an army
forbids a march, all the soldiers stand still,
Sometimes on the left: how did Solomon’s
idolatrous wives draw away his heart from
heaven} A sinning wife was Satan’s firat
ladder, by which he scaled the walls of Para-
dige, and took away the fort-royal of Adam’a
heart from him. Thus, she that should have
been the help of his flesh, waa the hurt of hia
faith: hia nature's under propper becomes hia
graces under miner; and she that should be


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : BERRA.


GHAR. Tit,





Rerown on the head, is a crosa on the shoulders.
The wife is often to the husband as the ivy
is to the oak, which draws away his sap from
bim.—W. Secker,


(2) Such unlawful unions have been usually
advocated thus :—The godly party pretends to
make no doubt but that the other party may
be converted : “God can easily convert men
when He will; and if there be but love,
persons are easily won over to the same mind
with those they love.” Answer—(1.) Then it
seems because you love an ungodly person,
you will be easily turned to be ungodly. If
80, you are not much better already. If love
will not draw you to their mind to be ungodly,
why should you think love will draw them to
your mind to be godly? Are you stronger in
grace than they are in sin? (2.) If you knew
well what grace is, and what a sinful, unre-
newed soul is, you would not think it go easy
& matter to convert a soul. Why are there so
few converted, if it be so easy a thing? You
eannot make yourselves better by adding
higher degrees to the grace you have; much
less can you make others better by giving
them the grace which they have not. (3.)
It ig true that God ig able to convert them
when He will; and it is true that, for aught
I know, it may be done. But what of that?
Will you in so weighty a case take up witha
mere possibility? God can make a beggar
rich, and for aught you know to the contrary,
He will do it; and yet you will not therefore
marry a beggar; nor will you marry a leper,
because God can heal him; why then should
you marry an ungodly person, because God
can convert him! See it done first, if yod
love your peace and safety.—R. Baxter.

A consistent Christian young man became
attached to a pleagure-loving and gay young


™
lady, and married her against the advice of
his brethren. Her influence silenced his
prayers, estranged him from the house of
God, and led him to her ways of pleasure.
Sickness called his attention back to religion,
Twice his wife had driven him from his duty,
Now, in agony and remorse, with a fearful
eternity before him, he gaged upon her and
cried, ‘‘ Rebecca, Rebecca, you are the cause
of my eternal damnation!” and died.— Dict.
of Iilust.


(e) Hannah vows, if the Lord will give her
a son, by bearing him, she will return that
son to the Lord by serving Him (1 Sam. i. 11).
A spouse should be more careful of her chil-
dren’s breeding than she should be fearful of
her children’s bearing. Take heed lest these
flowers grow in the devil’s garden, Though
you bring them out in corruption, yet do not
bring them up to damnation. Those are not
mothers, but monsters, that whilst they should
be teaching their children the way to heaven
with their lips, are leading them the way to
hell with their lives. Good education ts the
best livery you can give them living ; and it is
the best legacy you can leave them dying. You
let out your cares to make them great, Ohi lift
up your prayers to make them good; that
before you die from them, you may see Christ
live tm them. Whilst these twigs are green
and tender, they should be bowed towards
God. Children and servants are in a family
ag passengers are in a boat; husband and
wife, they are as a pair of oars to row them to
their desired haven, Let these small pieces
of timber be hewed and squared for the
celestial building. By putting a scepire of
grace into their hands, you will set a erown of
glory upon their heads.— W. Secker.


Usz or Gop’s DIversiriep DISPENSATIONS.


(Verses 13, 14.)


L God's diversified dispensations
towards us. God visited His people of
old with alternate mercies and judg-
ments; and thus He has dealt with us
also,

1. He has visited our sins with judg-
ments. And it is of the utmost import-
ance that we should acknowledge the
hand of God in them. They spring not
out of the dust, &c. God uses men as
instruments, just as He did the Assyrians
and Chaldeans, to punish His people;
but still it is His hand alone that inflicts
the stroke (Ps. xvii. 13; Isa, x. 5-7,
13-15, xxxvii. 24-26; Gen. xlv. 8).
We must confess, however, that our
sufferings have by no means equalled


our deserts (Ps. ciii. 10). Take any
one of our national sins, &c. If God
had proceeded against us according ta
the tremendous aggregate of our iniqui-
ties, we should have been made as Sodom
and Gomorrah.

2. He has also vouchsaved us a delwer-
ance. The “deliverance” granted to
the Jews on their return from Babylon
was not inferior to that which they had
formerly experienced in their departure
from Egypt. And has not ours also
been exceeding great? . . . In this tuo
must we view the hand of God. Who-
ever were the means, God was the author
of it. It 1s He who produces all the
changes in the state of individuals (J

165


OHAP. X&

Sam. ii. 6-8), or of kingdoms (Jer, xviii.
6, 7,9). And as the discerning of His
agency in our «afflictions is necessary tu
effect our humiliation, so the belolding
of it in our mercies is necessary to excite
our gratitude,

I. The effect they should have upon
us. If the destruction of sin be the end
which God proposes to Himself in all
His conduct towards us, then we should
endeavour to make everything subser-
vient to that end. The pointed interro-
gation in the text strongly shows in
what light we should view a renewed
violation of God’s commandments, after
He has taken such pains to enforce the
observance of them.

1. How unreasonable would it be/ No
man can read the account of Pharaoh’s
obstinacy in the midst of all his suc-
cessive judgments and deliverances, and
not stand amazed at his more than
brutish stupidity. Yet it is thus that
we shall act, if we do not now put away
our sins, &c, And how irrational such
conduct would be God Himself tells us:
He even calls heaven and earth to ex-
press their astonishment at it, dc. (Isa.
i, 2, 3). And if we be guilty of it, He
will justly vent His indignation against
us, as He did against His people of old:
“They are a perverse and crooked genera-
tion,” cc. (Deut. xxxii. 5, 6).

2. How ungrateful/ Ingratitude is
considered as one of the greatest aggrava-
tions that can be found in any offence
of man against his fellow-man ; and how
much more must it enhance the guilt


TOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.


we contract in our disobedience to God!
See what a stress God Himself lays upon
this in the transgressions of David (2
Sam. xii 7-9), and Solomon (1 Kings
xi. 9), aud Hezekiah (2 Chron. xxxii
25); and will it not stamp a tenfold


‘malignity also on our offences} (Comp,


Jer. vii. 9, 10.)

3. How dangerous/ This is particu
larly noticed by Ezra, in the words
following the text ; and the state of the
Jews at this moment is an awful com.
ment upon it, God tells us that, as
the impenitence of the Jews was the
reason of His continuing to afflict them
(Isa. ix. 12, 17, 21; x. 4), so He will
“punish us seven times more for our
sins” (Lev. xxvi. 18, 21, 24, 28) if we
now continue in them. ‘To what a state
of misery we may in that case expect to
be reduced, we may judge from what
was actually experienced by the Jewish
nation (Judg. x. 11-14).

ADDRESS ;

Remember that God is not an {in-
different spectator of our conduct. Sin
is that “abominable thing which His
soul hateth” (Jer. xliv. 4); and He
will surely destroy either it or him that
retains it. And if His judgments be
not inflicted on the sinner in this lite,
there still is a future day of retribution,
when every man shall give account of
himself to God, and receive the just
recompense of all his actions. Let every
one of us shudder at the thought of ever
again breaking the least of God’s com-
mandmenta,—C. Simeon, If,A.


CHAPTER X.


CritroaL aND Exrtanatory Norss.] In this chapter we have the account of—{i.) Shechaniah's


proposal to put away the strange wives (vers. 1-5).


(ver. 6).
three days (vers. 7, 8).


than the son of Asahel and others (ver, 15).
17).


(ii.) Ezra’s fast because of the people’s sin


(iii.) The proclamation calling upon all the Jews to assemble at Jeruealem within
(iv.) The coming together of the people at Jerusalem, and their accept-
ance of the proposal to put away the strange wives (vers. 9-14).


(v.) The opporition of Jona-


(vi.) The carrying out of the proposai (vers, 16,
(vii.) The names of the men who had taken strange wives (vers. 18-44).


Ver. 1. Now when Ezra had prayed, and when he had confessed] Rather, ‘‘ Now whilst


Ezra prayed and whilst he confessed.”
Temple.


Before the house of God] ze. in the court of the


Ver. 2, Jehiel] Perhaps the Jehiel whose name occurs in ver. 26, as having married a


heathen wife. Now there is hope in Israell


Rather, ‘‘for Israel.”


He came to this conclu.


sion because the people were sensible of their sin and sorrowing by reason of it.


Ver. 8 According to the counsel of my lord]
But Shechaniah might have inferred what Ezra would counsel


advice in the matter as yet.
from his words and actions (chap. ix, 8-15).


Keil: ‘‘the Lord.’”’ Ezra had given ne


Ver. 6. According to this word] é.¢ according to the proposal of Shechaniah.


156


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BZRA. Omar, V.








yi

Yer. 6. Went into the chamber] (Comp. 1 Kings vi. 5; chap. viii, 29; Neh. xiii. 4, 5.)
Of Johanan the son of Eliashib] We cannot arrive at any certain conclusion as to who this
Jobanan was. According to Mr. Aldis Wright, he was one of the ehief Levites (Neh. xii. 28),
Frem a comparison of Neh, xii. 22, 23, with vers, 10 ana 11 of the same chapter, Rawlingon con-
cludes that he was the grandson of Eliashib the high priest. Keil says, ‘‘ Johanan, the son of
Eliashib, cannot actually be Johanan-ben-Eliashib (Neh. xii. 23) the high priest... . For the
high priest Eliashib was a contemporary of Nehemiah, and the high priest Johanan was not the
son, but, according to the definite statement (Neh, xii. 10), the grandson of Eliashib, and the
son of Joiada (the correct reading of Neh. xii, 11 being, Joiada begat Johanan and Jonathan),
Now a chamber of the Temple could not in Ezra’s time have been as yet called after a grandson
of Hliashib, the contemporary of Nehemiah; and both Johanan and Eliashib being names
which frequently occur (comp, vers. 24, 27, 36), and one of the twenty-four orders of priests
being called after the latter (1 Chron, xxiv. 12), we, with Ewald (Gesch., iv. p. 228), regard the
Johanan-ben-Eliashib here mentioned as an individual of whom nothing further is known,—
perhaps a priest descended from the Eliashib of 1 Chron, xxiv. 12, and who possessed in the
new Temple a chamber called by his name.” He did eat no bread nor drink water] He fasted
strictly. Fasts of this strictness were not common. <A few cases are recorded (see Exod. xxxiv.
28; Deut. ix. 9, 18; Jon. iii. 7).

Ver, 7, And they made proclamation] &. Lit., ‘‘ And they caused a voice to pass through-
out,” &c., i.e, they proclaimed by heralds. (Comp. chap. i, 1.)
ie Ver. 8. Forfeited] Margin: ‘‘Heb., devoted,” i.e. appropriated to the treasury of the

emple.

Ver. 9. The ninth month] was named Chisleu, and nearly corresponds with our December.
In the street] 1) = a wide space, a large, open place. Probably here it means the great
court before the Temple. For the great rain] Chisleu was in the rainy season. ‘‘ During
the months of November and December the rains fall heavily, but at intervals,”— Bibl. Dect.

Ver. 10. Have taken strange wives] Lit., ‘‘ Have caused strange wives to dwell,” 4.2. have
taken them to live with you.

Ver, 14 Let now our rulers of all the congregation stand] or, as Keil, ‘‘ Let then our rulers
stand for the whole congregation,” z,e. for the good of the congregation, and transact ita busi-
ness. With them the elders of every city and the judges] as being acquainted with the several
eases. For this matter] Margin: ‘‘ Till this matter (be despatched).” Keil: “As long as
this matter lasts.” The rulers were to continue to judge the accused as long as the matter
lasted. The latter part of the verse would run thus: ‘‘ Until the fierce wrath of our God be
turned from us, as long as this matter lasts.” The last words define more exactly the leading
idea of the verse.

Ver. 15, Were employed about this matter] Rather, ‘‘Stood up against this (matter),” as
in 1 Chron, xxi. 1; 2 Chron. xx. 23; Dan. viii. 25, xi. 14. Meshullam is probably identical
with the Meshullam of ver. 29, who had taken a heathen wife.

Ver. 16. And the children of the captivity did so] Notwithstanding the opposition of
Jonathan and his companions, the people carried out the determination which they had ex-
pressed. With certain chief of the fathers, after the house of their fathers] Keil translates,
“ And men, heads of houses aecurding to their houses.” The meaning is, that each recognised
house or family was represented on the commission by its head, And all of them by their
names] or, ‘‘and they all by names,” A list of their names was written (comp. chap. vili. 20).
Were separated] or, selected for thia business, The tenth month] 1.¢. Tebeth, which nearly
answers to our January.

Ver. 17. The first month] t.¢. Nisan, which nearly corresponded to our April. The com.
mission sat for three months, and at the end of that time they had completed their basinesa,

Ver. 18, Tee gous of Jeshua the son of Jozadak] ‘This is Jeshua the high priest who came
ep from Babylon with Zerubbabel. ;

Ver. 19. They gave their hands] i.e. ‘‘ bound themselves by shaking handa, to pat ay
their wives, é.¢. to dismiss them, and to sever them from the congregation of Israel.”—Keil.
And being guilty they offered a ram of the flock for their trespass] The Heb. is simply,
** And guilty, a ram of the flock for their trespass ;” which is explained by Keil that they were
eondemned to bring a ram as a trespass offering (Lev. v. 14-16). Fuerst: ‘‘ And the guilty
(gave their hands to bring) a ram for their treepass.” \ a

Vers. 20-22, Of the sons of Immer, Hanani] &c. ‘‘By comparing chap, ii. 36-39, we
perceive tliat not one oi the orders of priests who returned with Zerubbabel was free from
participation in this transgression.” — Feil, i

Ver. 25. The singers and the porters] (Comp, chap. ii, 41, 42.) ; ! A

Ver, 26, Moreover of Israel) ‘‘ As diztinguished from priests and Levites, ¢e. of the laity.
— Keil,

Ver. 44, And some of them had wives by whom they had children] Rather, ‘‘ And there
were among them wives who had brought forth sons.” his fact is mentioned probably to show
how thoroucbly this reformation wus efleeted. it would be more difficult, for several reasons,
to put away 4 wife who hau viven birt to enildren tian to pat away a childless wife; but the
fificulties did not prevent the ereeutivn of tue daiy. 169


UBAP. A.





AOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; BARA.





Tux ReFrorMATION PRoPosED.
(Verses 1-25.)


Three principal points require atten-
tion—

L The proposal of reformation pre-
pared for. ‘Now when Ezra had
prayed, and when he had confessed,
weeping and casting himself down be-
fore the house of God, there assembled
unto him out of Israel,” &c. (ver. 1).
Ezra’s great distress, and humble con-
fession, and earnest appeal to God, had
influenced the people in such a manner
and to such an extent as to prepare them
for such a proposal as that made by
Shechaniah. The impression which Ezra’s
condition and conduct by reason of their
sin produced upon the people was—

1. Sympathetic His horror and self-
abasement on account of their sin aroused
their consciences to a sense of their own
guilt. His great sorrow awakened grief
in them, and they “‘ wept very sore,”

2. Hatenstve. It seems that the fact
of his grievous distress was widely made
known, and all the city was stirred by it.
Very many were moved by his grief and
penitence. ‘There assembled unto him
out of Israel a very great congregation
of men and women and children.” The
fact that both men and women, and so
many of them, were much affected is
important as indicating preparedness for
reformation,

3. Deep. The people in the great
assembly before the house of God were
very much moved. The impression was
profound as well as extensive. “The
people wept very sore;” or “wept a
great weeping.” zra’s influence for
good in this respect was very great.
The distress which he manifested was
contagious, and spread rapidly, widely,
and powerfully amongst the Jews at Jeru-
salem. Now this was indispensable as
a condition for the proposal of any real
reformation with a reasonable prospect
of success. Until the sinfulness of theee
marriages was realised, and genuine con-
cern in relation to them was experienced
by the people, it would have been vain
to have suggested measures for their
abolition, But now this “very great

158


congregation” was in a condition to


. consider such measures, and probably to


adopt and euforce them,

Il. The proposal of reformation made.
“Then Shechaniah the son of Jehiel, of
the sons of Elam, answered and said unto
Ezra,” &c. (vers. 2-4), In this wise and
brave address Shechaniah —

1. Frankly acknowledges the sin.
“We have trespassed against our God,
and have taken strange wives of the
peopie of the land.” We do not find
his name amongst those who had sinned
in this thing; but, like Ezra (chap. ix
5-15), he includes himself amongst the
offenders, He does not attempt either
to extenuate or palliate or excuse the
sin, but ingenuously confesses it. This
was important, The disease must be
discovered before it can be remedied.
The sin must be perceived and acknow-
ledged before it can be forgiven and done
away. There could be no true reforma-
tion without a clear perception and a
humble confession of the sin. (a).

2 Discovers reasons for hope. ‘ Yet
now there is hope for Israel concerning
this thing.” As M. Henry observes:
“The case is sad, but itis not desperate;
the disease is threatening, but not in-
curable. There is hope that the people
may be reformed, the guilty reclaimed,
a stop put to the spreading of the con-
tagion ; and so the judgments which the
gin deserves may be prevented, and all
will be well. ‘Now there is hope;’
now that the disease is discovered, it is
half cured, Now that the alarm is taken,
the people begin to be sensible of the
mischief, and to lament it; a spirit of
repentance seems to be poured out upon
them, and they are all thus humbling
themselves before God for it, ‘ now there
is hope’ that God will forgive and have
mercy. ‘The valley of Achor’ (that ia,
of trouble) is the ‘door of hope’ (Hoa,
ii, 15); for the sin that truly troubles
us shall not ruin us. There is hope now
that Israel has such a prudent, pious,
zealous governor as Ezra to manage this
affair.”


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.


ee ee


Omar, x,


a ee Mie ee Gee ree


3. Proposes the abolition of the sin.
“Now therefore let us make a covenant
with our God,” &c, (ver. 3). His pro-
posal was to the effect that they should
snter into a solemn covenant with God
to make an end of this sin, and to make
an end of it—(1.) Completely. “To
put away all the wives, and such as are
born of them.” Marriage with idolaters
was prolibited as a preventive of ido-
latry and its associated abominations
(Exod. xxxiv. 11-17; Deut. vii. 1-6;
1 Kings xi. 1-8; Neh. xiii, 23-28) ;
and the presence of the idolatrous wives
was a continual temptation to the sin.
The Jews had done wrong in marrying
such women; and Shechaniah would
have them undo that wrong as far as
possible by putting away such wives,
The true penitent abandons the sin for
which he grieves, even though its re-
nunciation be very painful “If thy
right eye offend thee, pluck it out,” d&e.
(Matt. v. 29, 30). It is better that the
surgeon should amputate the diseased
limb, than that we should retain it and
by so doing imperil the life of the body.
So must sin be renounced even at the
cost of sharp sufferings. Moreover, the
true penitent seeks to repair if possible,
and as far as may be, the injury he has
done. Repentance leads to restitution.
“ What has been unjustly got cannot be
justly kept, but must be restored.” It
is one of the sorest sorrows of the peni-
tent soul that complete restitution for
gin cannot be made; that the evil done
can never be undone ; that the false or
malignant speech may be afterwards
contradicted by him who uttered it, but
be can neither unsay it, nor totally
annul its effects. Now, it was in this
spirit, which seeks to repair the wrong
done and to remove the temptation to
do it again, that Shechaniah proposed
“to put away all the wives and” their
children. (5). (2.) In aceordauce with
the counsel of the godly. ‘“‘ According
to the counsel of my lord, and of those
that tremble at the commandment of
our God.” It does not appear that
Ezra and they who sympathised with
him bad as yet advised this or any
other line of action; but from their
distress Shechauiah inferred that bis


proposal would commend itself to them.
Their recommendation of his measure
would contribute to its general accept-
ance. (3.) In accordance with the
commands of God. “And let it be
done according to the law.” I am not
aware of any express command to put
away heathen wives, to which Shecha
niah can refer; but the spirit of the
law, which repeatedly and solemnly pro.-
hibited such marriages, seemed to require
their divorcement. ‘ Divorces were per-
mitted to the Israelites, by the judicial
law, to prevent worse consequences ;”
but there could be no consequences
worse than the seduction of the husbands
and the training of the children to ido-
latry. Moreover, the law which com-
manded the Israelite to put to death
any one enticing him to idolatry, even
if the enticer were his “brother, the
son of his mother, or his son, or his
daughter, or the wife of his bosom, or
the friend, which was as his own soul”
(Deut, xiii. 6-11), would surely sanction
the putting completely away of heathen
wives, If a Christian sin by marrying
an unbeliever, he may not adopt the
course recommended by Shechaniah.
The rule for him, or for her, as the case
may be, is laid down in 1 Cor. vii.
12-14.

4. Summons Ezra to take the lead in
abolishing it. ‘‘ Arise , for this matter
belongeth unto thee,” de. (ver. 4). In
this appeal of Shechaniah to Ezra we
have—(1.) An assertion that the work
pertained to him. It was the business
of Ezra to take this matter in hand, for
two reasons: First, his commission
authorised him to do it (see chap. vii.
26). He was sent by Artaxerxes to
enforce obedience to the law of God,
And, second, his character qualified him
for doing it. His acquaintance with
the law of God, his practical conformity
to that law, his position as a teacher of
it, and his great influence with the
people, all combined to qualify him for
taking the lead in effecting this reforma-
tion. (2.) A call to courage in respect
to this work. ‘Be of good courage.”
Perhaps Ezra took too dark a view of
the case, and was too despondent con-
cerning it, and required this hopeful

159


CHAP, % "


and earnest call to courage. ‘The de-
spondent would never succeed in carry-
ing out such a reformation ; the business
imperatively required a brave and reso-
lute spirit. (3,) A summons to action.
SOATISC.: ols
act.” It was of the utmost importance
to seize the present favourable oppor-
tunity for beginning the reformation.
In their present state of sore distress on
account of the sin, the people of this
great assembly would be ready to enter
upon any possible course for making an
end of that sin, Therefore it beboved
Ezra to arise from his deep grief, and
begin the reformation. Let his deep
feelings now impel him into earnest
action, and the deep feelings of the
people will impel them to unite with
him. The case demanded immediate
and resolute action (comp. Josh. vii,
10-15).

5. Promtses co-operation in abolishing
tt, “We also will be with thee.”
Shechaniah thus takes the place of
spokesman for the “very great congre-
gation” assembled before the house of
God; and pledges them to stand by
Ezra and to work with him in effecting
the great reformation. The co-operation
of such an assembly in this undertaking
would go far to guarantee its success, (c).

IIL The proposal of reformation
accepted. ‘‘ Then arose Ezra, and made
the chief priesta, the Levites,” dc,
(ver. 5).

1, It was accepted tnjfluentially, “The
princes, the priests, the Levites,” the
men of the most eminent position and
commanding influence, gave in their
adhesion to the movement.

2. It was accepted extensively. “And
all Israel.” All that great multitude
which had assembled unto Ezra out of
Israel, pledged themselves to co-operate
in carrying out the proposal of Shecha-
niah. The party of reformation was
strong both in the number and in the
power of its adherents.

3. It was accepted solemnly. Ezra
made them “to swear that they should
do according to this word; and they
sware.” When the keenness of their
present distress had abated, if any of
them had been tempted to draw back,

160


. be of good courage, and ,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA,





they would have been prevented fron
doing so by the solemnity with which
they had pledged themselves to the
undertaking.

CoNCLUSION :

The lessons suggested by this subject
are many and importaut. Let us attend
to the principal oues.

1. The manisestation of intense feeling
is sometimes commendable, and very in-
fluential for good (ver. 1).

2. A deep feeling of the guilt of sin ts
a strong encouragement to hope for for-
gwveness, amendment, &c. (ver. 2). (d).

3. That repentance only is genuine
which leads to restitution and reforma-
tion (ver. 3). (e).

4. It ws of the utmost tmportance te
translate religious feeling into corres-
ponding action without delay (vers. 3,
4). (f).

5. Great leaders may receive valuatle
aid from even their humblest followers.
Shechaniah, apparently an able man,
suggested the reformation and urged
Ezra to attempt it at once; but even
the obscurest person in that “very great
congregation,” by swelling the tide of
penitent feeling, helped to set the pro-
ject of reformation well afloat.

6. /t 1s sometimes wise to fortify good
resolutions by a solemn covenant with

or by a serious pledge to man
(vera, 3, 6).


ILLUSTRATIONS,


(a) Let us strive after God’s view of sin.
To Him sin is infinitely hateful; He cannot
tolerate it with the least degree of allowance ;
it troubles His otherwise perfect and happy
universe; it despoils human nature; it over-
throws all that is Divine in manhood ; it calla
into existence the worm that gnaws for ever;
it is the cause of death and the source of hell,
To under-estimate the heinousness of gin is to
put ourselves out of the line of God’s view; to
understand sin is to understand redemption,
Sin interprets the Cross; sin shows what is
meant by God’s love. We cannot be right in
our relation to Jesus Christ, we cannot be just
to His holy Cross, until we regard sin with
unutterable repugnance, until we rise against
it in fiery indignation, fighting it with all the
energy of wounded love, and bringing upon it
the damnation of concentrated and implacable
anger. Iam not speaking of what are called
great sins; I am not thinking of murder, of
commercial plunder, of adultery, drunkenness,
or theft; 1 am speaking of ain as ain, ain


. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BERA.
ees | nee





nestling secretly in the heart, sin rolled under
the tonyzue as a sweet morsel, sin indulged in
secret places, sin perverting the thought, sin

oigsoning the love, sin sucking out the life-

lood of the soul ; [am thinking of sin, not of
sins—of the fact, not of the details; and | ask,
With passionate yet well-considered pointed-
ness Have we not been led to under-estimate
the guilt of sin ?—Joseph Parker, D.D.


(0) There is often, when men repent, the
necessity of a reparation, A man that in his
past life has been inflicting wrong may not be
able to make all the reparation, A man whose
distributive gains have been flowing in from a
hundred sources, and varying every year, may
not be able to carry back the tribute and re-
bestow it where he fraudulently or wickedly
obtained it. Yet while this is the case fre-
quently in respect to gains, there are many
things which a man may repair. A man may
have wronged a fellow-man by his tongue,
and it ig necessary, if he is going to be a
Christian, that that shall be all repaired. A
man may have a quarrel on his hands, and if
he is going to be a Christian, that quarrel must
come to an end. A man may be high and
obatinate, and that man, if he ia going to bea
Christian, must come down and confess, ‘*I
was wrong, and | give up the transgression
wholly, absolutely.” It may be that a man
has been living on ill-gotten gains, It may be
orphan’s property. No matter if it makes a
beggar of him, the man who is living on
fraudulent gains, if he is going to be a Chria-
tian, must make reparation, and give them
up. lf, tor proper and guitable reasons, he
finds that he cannot give them up, he must at
least confess; for although everybody knows
his sin, everybody does not know that he knows
it—at any rate they do not know that he knows
it in such ~ way that he is willing to confess
it. Confession is a testimony to the power
of God, and to the power of the new-found
virtue in his soul. H. W. Beecher.


(c) The social element in religious move-
ments—that which men often decry in revivals
—is apt to infuse a generous enthusiasm, a
largences, into men’s minds. There are times
when men cannot alone do noble things; but
if there be scores and hundreds of men that
seem at the same time to be filled with the
same influence, then they rise to heroie pro-
portions, and are able to do easily things that
would overtax their individual power,

This seems to have been one of those cases
where men were seized, not simply with a
conviction of sin and with a disposition te
repent; bot with a disposition to repent in a
manner that should be heroic, agd ahould stamp
both their sense of iniquity and transgression,
and their sense of the genuineness of their
repentance and conversion,—/bid.


(d) The essence of repentance is sorrow,
sorrow for our sin, Sorrow is painful, and we
shrink from pain ; we avoid it. To those that


owaPr, x.


have not felt the evil that repentance cures,
how dark and bitter a thing it is to be away
from God, homeless, fatherless, an orphan,
and made 80 by selfish ingratitude,—to those it
will not seem a good, It is a good only to
those who feel the evil it delivers them from,
the nobler peace it brings them to. We know
there is one thing worse than pain; the pain-
less disease that kills; the slow, insidious,
fatal malady that eats away the springs and
energies of life, without giving the warnings
of bodily distress. To stop that, to heal that,
we gladly go in search of pain. We tell the
surgeon to hurt us that we may live. Physical
vitality is often undermined unconsciously,
To avert that process by a pang, by a period
of needful and saving agony, we account a
blessing. After the first stages of suffocation,
the drowning, on their own testimony, pass
into a state of insensibility to suffering, or
even, a8 Many maintain, of positive and ex-
quisite pleasure. Adam Clarke, who went
through it, says, in his autobiography, it was
like being borne gently through the moat
luxurious tropical verdure, the keenest enjoy-
ment.. And when thia swift, easy passage
to destruction is interrupted, and friendship
applies reatoratives, there are spasms, tortures;
the sufferer begs to be let alone, to die. It is
not otherwise with the spiritual sensibilities,
It is their coming back from death to life that
makes their distress. But no wise man, only
the demented man, regrets that distress. Paul,
with his singular exactness of expression, says
that the sorrow that is unto life, the price of
living for ever, needeth not to be repented of,
not to be sorrowed for. The pain that rescues
life is a good.— F. D. Huntington, D.D.


(c) Reformation is just aa essential as re-
pentance, ‘That is, it ia just as essential that
you should, up to your power, do the deeds of
a good man or woman, aa that you should take
the resolution to be a good man or woman. If
you are heartily sorry for misspent years, you
will make it your businegs to spend your future
years wisely. If you are called to renounce an
undevout heart, the same Lord calls you to
work with holy hands. In whatever the past
has been irreligious and mean, the future must
be sanctified and noble. Despising your selfish-
ness, you must go un to generosity. Renounc-
ing a paltry ambition, you must serve humanity
and truth for their own immortal sake. The
invisible enerzy that makes the acorn vital is
nothing, unleas you give it soil and air for
growth and expansion into the fair proportions
of the oak.

Thus, in fact, reformation becomes the test
of repentance, proving ita sincerity and ita
worth. We infer that a miser is penitent,
when we see him giving liberally to the poor,
or to spreading the Gospel. A sensualist may
profess to have repented ; but we are not sure,
till we see him forsaking dissipation, and living
temperately and chastely. <A vain, frivoloua
girl deserves small confidence as repenting, till
her whole appeurance reveals a constant life


161


CHAP, X


hidden with Christ in God, and the dignity of
a sober devotion to the welfare of others. It
is not to be believed that a eullen or angry
temper has been actually repented of, till the
countenance loses its unhallowed fire, and the
voice its asperity, and the words come gently,
like His, who, when He was reviled, reviled
not again. —J bid.


(f) It is a perilous thing to separate feeling
from acting; to have learnt to feel rightly
without acting rightly. It is a danger to
which, in a refined and polished age, we are
peculiarly exposed. The romance, the poem,
and the sermon teach us how to feel. Our
feelings are delicately correct. But the danger
is thie :—feeling is given to lead to action ; if
feeling be suffered to awake without passing
into duty, the character becomes untrue,
When the emergency for real action comes,





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; SERA.








the feeling is as usual produced: but ae
customed as it is to rise in fictitious circam-
stances without action, neither will it lead on
to action in the real ones, ‘‘ We pity wretched-
ness and shun the wretched.” We utter seati
wients, just, honourable, refined, lofty ; but
somehow, when a truth presents itself in the
abape of a duty, we are unable to perform it.
And go such characters become by degrees like
the artificial pleasure grounds of bad taste, in
which the waterfall does not fall, and the gro!to
offers only the refreshment of an imaginary
shade, and the green hill does not atrike the
skies, and the tree does not grow. Their lives
are a augared crust of sweetness trembling over
black depths of hollowness ; more truly still,
“‘whited sepulchres”—fair without to look
upon, ‘‘ within full of all umeleannces.”—
. W. Robertson, M A.


Troe LOYALTY.
( Perse 4.)


The word “loyalty ” ia much used in
these days. A picture here of the
thing. The spirit which was animating
many in Israel at this juncture finds
utterance here from the lips of one. He
speaks in the name of others. The
issue shows he had warrant for so doing.
We also see that he speaks well. By
examining his language we shall find
that true loyalty is marked—

I. By genuine respect. In the
commonwealth of Israel at that time
there was great need of reform. The
people had not long returned from cap-
tivity. They were powerless and few.
Yet the very evil which had previously
occasioned their captivity had begun to
reappear. Steps had been taken which,
if not retraced, would certainly bring
that evil about. Many in high places—
some of the speaker’s own relatives—
were in fault (gee ver. 26). The matter
therefore was pressing. He felt it so.
He desired reform very earnestly; he
recommended it very strongly (see vers.
2, 3). Yet he would not take upon
him to be the first to move in this
matter. He would not set aside those
whose office it was to dothis, “ Arise;
for this matter belongeth unto thee.”
You see exactly the state of his mind.
Notwithstanding the depth of his zeal
and convictions, he would sooner do
nothing than be disrespectful to Ezra

162


No change, in his judgment, would be
proper reform that should set proper
authority on one side.

UL. By sincere sympathy. This is
shown here in the words that come
next: “ We also will be with thee; be
of gond courage, and do it.” It is
possible to defer to authority in a very
cold and unfriendly spirit, to leave too
much on the hands of our rulers, and to
fail in taking our proper share of odiwm
and labour in supporting them and their
measures, We do well, therefore, to
note from this language that we owe
much to them in both these respects,
If we wish to be truly loyal, we are
bound to encourage them openly in their
righteous efforts. We are bound also
to promise them our support and assist-
ance. In fact, to do otherwise is covert
rebellion. Not to encourage is to hinder
in a taciturn way. Not to assist is, in
an indolent fashion, to oppose. How
could Ezra have moved at all in this
matter, how could he have moved to
good purpose, but for this language of
Shechaniah #

We may apply these lessons—

1. Zo the laws of our land. Except
where religious principle is in question,
these should be the laws of our lives,
It is the object of the “criminal classes ”
to try and evade them, It should be
the object of God-fearing persons to try


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BSRA,


I arr


and observe them, “ Render unto Cysar
the things which are Cwsar’s” (Matt.
xxii. 21; see also Rom. xii. 1, 2, 7).
All this should be regarded by us as
part of our duty towards God. This
also should be applied by us carefully
to all the points it embraces; ¢9., our
income-tax returns ; our action towards
contraband trade; our respect for the
administrators of justice ; our support
of its officers, and so on. A bad citizen
will never make a good Christian. A
good Christian, in these matters, would
rather exceed than fall short, after the
example of Christ Himself (Matt. xvii.
24-27).

2. To the laws and officers of our
Church. Esra was acting here ecclesi-


astically as much as politically ; of the
two, perhaps rather more so, So of
our Lord in paying the di-drachma, or
Temple tribute, as above (see also Matt,
xxili, 2, 3). In all things, therefore, in
regard to which a Church hath power to
ordain, in all matters where its ministers
have a right to be consulted, let us not
only acquiesce, but encourage ; not only
encourage, but support. Yet let us
do it without interference, and without
taking their proper work from their
hands. The English word “leader”
signifies both a commander and a guide,
Therefore never be many steps behind
your leader; never be oue step in front.
—W. S. Lewis, M.A. in The Clergy
man's Magazine.


THe Rerormation Drcipgep Urowx.
(Verses 6-12.)


Notice:

L The summons to the people to
rssemble at Jerusalem. Proclamation
was made throughout that part of the
country in which the returned Jews had
settled, requiring them to come to Jeru-
salem within a specified time, and
announcing severe penalties in case any
one failed to do so, Concerning this
summons, notice—

1. The ctreumstances in which it
originated, When the proposal of She-
chaniah was adopted by the great con-
gregation assembled before the house of
God, ‘‘ Then Ezra rose up from before
the house of God, and went into the
chamber of Johanan, the son of Elia-
shib ; and when he came thither, he did
eat no bread, nor drink water ; for he
mourned because of the transgression
of them that had been carried away.”
Here in this chamber Ezra seems to
have consulted the chief men, the princes,
the elders, and the priests, as to the best
measures for carrying out the resolution
which had been so solemnly made. And
his consultations were in a spirit of
profound penitence and earnest piety,
which was manifested by his fasting and
wiourning,

2. The persons to whom ut was ad-


dressed. “They made proclamatfon
throughout Judah and Jerusalem unto
all the children of the captivity.” The
summons was issued to all the adult
male population of the Jews, who out
of exile had returned to their own land,
It applied to the entire Jewish com-
munity in Palestine.

3. The authority by which it was
tssued, “They made proclamation...
according to the counsel of the princes
and the eldcrs.” Not by Ezra alone
was the summons sent forth, but by
him in connection with the recognised
and rightful heads of the community.
The authority of the mandate was un-
questionable.

4. The speedy obedience which tt re-
quired. “That they should gather
themselves together unto Jerusalem
.. » Within three days.” “The limita
of Judea at this time,” says Rawlinson,
“appear to have been Bethel on the
north, Beersheba on the south, Jericho
on the east, and the Mediterranean upon
the west. As the frontier was nowhere
much more than forty miles from Jeru-
salem, three days from the day that they
heard the proclamation would be sufti-
cient time to allow all the able-bodied
men tw reach the capital.” No time


163


. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; EZRA





was grauted for hesitation or delay.
Resolute and quick obedience was de-
manded of all

5. The penalties by which wt was en-
forced. ‘Aud that whosoever would
not come within three days, according
to the counsel of the princes and the
elders,” d&c. (ver. 8). Should any one
prove a defaulter, he is here threatened
with a twofold penalty —(1.) The
forfeiture of his entire property to the
Church, ‘All his substance should
be forfeited ;” or, as in the margin,
“ devoted” (comp. Lev. xxvii. 28). Ezra
was authorised by the Persian monarch
to inflict this penalty (comp. chap, vii.
26). (2.) Personal exclusion from the
community. ‘And himself separated
from the congregation of those that had
been carried away.” He would be de-
prived of all the rights and privileges
which pertained to him as a member of
that community.

Il. The assembly of the people at
Jerusalem in obedience to this sum-
mons. Notice:

1. The universal attendance at the
assemily. © Then all the men of Judah
and Beujamin gathered themselves to-
gether within three days,” There seems
to have been no defaulters. If any were
inclined to disregard the summons, the
severe penalties proclaimed against ab-
sentees constrained them to obey it. And
all were present within the appointed
time.

2. The felt importance of the assembly.
The historian seems to have regarded it
as an epoch in the history of the com-
munity ; for he carefully records the
date of its occurrence. “It was the
ninth month, on the twentieth day of
the month.” The importance of the
great and solemn meeting was doubtless
felt by most, if not by all the people.

3. The depressed spirit of the assembly.
“ All the people sat in the street of the
house of God,” &c. (ver. 9). They were
troubled and alarmed because of—(1.)
The sin by reason of which they had
been called together. “ Trembling be-
cause of this matter.” The consciousness
of guilt distressed them, and made them
fearful. (2.) The extraordinarily heavy
rain which was falling at the time,

164


“And for the great rain,” This great
gatheriug took place in the rainy season ;
but the showers at this time were evi-
dently of unusual severity, and were in
the mind of the people associated with
the fact of their grievous trespass. How
impressive and melancholy a spectacle |
The vast multitude seated before the
Temple of God, tired, troubled, and
trembling, beneath the dark canopy of
heavy clouds, with the rain falling down
upon them in torrents !

IIL The address of Ezra to the
assembled people. ‘And Ezra the
priest stood up, and said unto them,”
&c. (vers. 10, 11). This address com-
prises—

1, A declaration of their sin. “Ye
have transgressed and have taken strange
wives, to increase the trespass of Israel.”
A decided recognition of the sin was in-
dispensable to reformation. By these
marriages they had augmented greatly
the guilt of the community,

2. An exhortation to repentance. He
calls upon them to discharge two of the
principal duties of repentance. (1.) Con-
fession of sin. ‘‘ Now therefore make
confession unto the Lord God of your
fathers, and do His pleasure.” Confes-
sion of sin is a relief to the penitent
soul. (a). It is also an essential con-
dition of forgiveness, (0). ‘ Whoso
covereth his sins shall not prosper ; but
whoso confesseth and forsaketh them
shall have mercy.” ‘If we confess our
sins, He is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins,” &. “TI acknowledged my
sin unto Thee,” d&c. (Ps. xxxii. 5), (2.)
Abandonment of sin. ‘ And separate
yourselves from the people of the land,
and from the strange wives.” This ia
an essential elernent in true repentance.
“Let the wicked forsake his way,” &c,
(Isa. lv. 7). “ Whoso confesseth and
forsaketh his sins shail have mercy.”
“Repentance,” says Shakespeare, “ is
heart’s sorrow, and a clear life ensu-
ing.” (c).

IV. The declaration of the assem-
bled people. “Then all the congrega-
tion answered and said with a loud
voice, As thou hast said, so must we
do.” Thus they announced their deter-
mination to follow the counsel of Ezra.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : BZRA.


Notice—

1. The unanimity of their determina-
toon. “All the congregation answered
and said,” &c. This augurea well for
the success of the movement.

2. The earnestness of their determina-
tion. ‘Answered with a loud voics.”
This was not a half-hearted or reluctant
assent, but a free and whole-hearted
resolution.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) As the frank and dutiful child, when he
has committed a fault, does not wait till
another goes and tells his father, or till the
father discovers by his frowning countenance
that it has come to his ear; but freely, and
of his own accord, goes pleasantly to his
father, and eases his aching heart by a free
and full confession ; and this with such plain-
hearieduess, giving his offence the weight of
every aggravaling circumstance, so that if the
devil himself should come aiter him, to glean
up what he hath left, he should hardly find
wherewithal to make the case appear blacker ;
—thus does the sincere soul to God; adding
to his simplicity in the confession of hia asin
such a flow of sorrow, that God, seeing His
dear child in danger of being carried down
towards despair, if good news from Him do
not speedily stay him, cannot but tune His
voice rather into a strain of comforting him
in his mourning, than chiding him for his
sin.—W, Gurnall,


(5) It ig impossible for the Almighty Him-
self to forgive men unless men come to Him
with contrition, with repentance towards Him-
self, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, Be-
lieve me, there ig no action so difficult as the
action of forgiveness, ‘lhere is no action go
complicated as the action of pardon. It seems
a very simple thing to gay, “| forgive you; say
no more about it; there is an end of the whole
affair: away you go.” He who could speak
80, ig immoral, He who could talk go, is not
to be trusted. Ifa man could treat the moral
relationships of life so, it would but prove that
his conscience had been drugged, that his
judgment had been hoodwinked, and that
there was nothing morally permanent in the
quality of his soul but corruptness,— Joseph
Parker, DD.


(c) Convince a man that the only way to
save his life ia to part with his limb, and he
does not hesitate an instant between living
with one limb and being buried with two.
Borne into the operating theatre, pale, yet
resolute, he bares the diseased member to the





CHAP, K.





ae Seance 6s SA


knife. And how well does that bleeding,
fainting, groaning suflerer teach us to part
With our gins rather than with our Saviour, If
life is better than a limb, how much better is
heaven than a sin}

‘'wo years ago a man was called to decide
between preserving his life, and parting with
the gains of his lifetime. A gold-digver,
he stood on the deck of a ship that, coming
from <Ausiralian shores, bad—as some all
bet reach beaven—all but reached her har-
bouy in safety. The exiles had been coast-
ing along their native shores ; and to-morrow,
husbands would embrace their wives, children
their parents, and not a few realise the
bright dream of returning to pass the even-
ing of their days in happiness amid the
loved scenes of their youth. But as the
proverb runs, there is much between the cup
and the lip. Night came lowering down; and
with the night a storm that wrecked ship, and
hopes, and fortunes all together. The dawn-
ing light but revealed a scene of horror—death
staring them in the face. The sea, lashed into
fury, ran mountains high ; no boat could live
in her, One chance still remained. Pale
women, weeping children, feeble and timid
men must die; but a stout, brave swimmer,
with trust in God, and disencumbered of all
impediments, might reach the shore, where
hundreds stood ready to dash inte the boiling
surf, and, seizing, gave him. One man was
observed to go below. He bound round his
waist a heavy belt, filled with gold, the hard
gains of his life; and returned to the deck,
One after another, he saw his fellow-passengera
leap overboard. After a brief but terrible
struggle, head after head went down—sunk
by the gold they had fought hard to gain, and
were loth to lose. Slowly he was seen to un-
buckle his belt. His hopes had been bound
up in it, It was to buy him land, and ease,
and respect—the reward of long years of hard
and weary exile. What hardships he had
endured for it! The sweat of his brow, the
hopes of day, and the dreams of night were
there. If he parts with it, he is a beggar;
but then if he keeps it, he dies, He poised it
in his hand; balanced it for a while ; took a
long, sad look at it ; and then with one strong,
desperate effort, flung it far out into the roar-
ing sea. Wise man! It sinks with a sullen
plunge ; and now he followa it—not to sink,
but, disencumbered of its weight, to swim ;
to beat the billows manfully; and, riding on
the foaming surge, to reach the shore. Well
done, brave gold-digger! Ay, well done, and


well chosen; but if ‘fa man,” us the devil
said, who for once spoke God’s truth, ‘‘ will
give all that he hath for his life,” how


much more should he vive all he hath for hia
soul? Better to part with gold than with
God ; to bear the heaviest cross than miss @


heavenly crown }—'homus Guthrie, D.D


165





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: BERA.





A Great anp TrousBLED ASSEMBLY.
(Verse 9.)


How much good one man may do
who has the grace of God im his heart
and the fear of God before his eyes!
“One sinner destroyeth much good ;”
one saint may accomplish much. He
may be a centre of gracious influences
to the Church and the world, a terror to
the bad, a tower of strength to the good.
The world owes much to its great men,
more to its good ones. Ezra was one of
these. He was the means of bringing
part of the Church out of captivity, and
of renewing the faded splendours of
holiness and devotion which it had lost.
He stood in the line of illustrious re-
formers, and was considered in the Jewish
Church a second Moses.

The Book of Ezra closes with an ac-
count of their national humiliation for
the sin of taking foreign wives, and the
measures taken for putting them away.
Public proclamation had been made for
this purpose. The text shows the re-
sult. It teaches—

I. That it is the tendency of sin to
produce sorrow and consternation of
soul “All the people sat in the street
of the house of God, trembling because
of this matter, and for the great rain.”
The matter spoken of was the sin of
marrying strange or forcign wives. It
was of great consequence that this evil
should be corrected at this time, that
their genealogies might be kept pure,
that their estates might descend in the
right direction, and, above all, that the
line of the Messiah might be preserved
in the chosen tribe. The deep grief of
Ezra and the ready submission of the
princes and people show its importance
in a national point of view. They all
partook of the feelings of shame and
consternation. They sat trembling in
the open street. “ And for the great
rain.” They probably thought there was
something ominous or judicial in this,
designed to put an accent of terror upon
God’s displeasure at their sin.

Learn, then, that it is the tendency
of sin to produce sorrow, and that the
providences of God often give a voice

166


to conscience, and produce an inward
agony which none but the sinner him-
self can know. There is a scorpion
sting in remembered guilt, when out-
ward troubles and inward fears meet
together. Joseph’s brethren: “‘ We are
verily guilty concerning our brother,”
&c, (Gen, xiii. 21). The sight of Klijah
agonised the mourning mother; “ Art
thou come unto me to call my sin to
remembrance, and to slay my son?”
(1 Kings xvii. 18). Sin often begins
with gladness and ends in terror. Grace
begins with tears and ends witl triumph.

“ The spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmity, but a wounded spirit who can
bear?” The spirit can bear temporal
ills with much fortitude, and arm itseif
against outward or ward affliction ; but
a wounded spirit, pierced and wounded
by those arrows of the Almighty’s quiver,
which find their way to the heart, is in-
tolerable. By a wounded spirit—here
described as a spirit of ‘ trembling’”’—
we apprehend a spirit convinced of sin
under the terrors of the law, led to a
full and just view of its own condition
and condemnation. This is the disposi-
tion to which, under the efficacious influ-
ence of Divine grace, all “ the vessels of
mercy” are sooner or later led, in a
greater or less degree, because the con-
viction of sin is the very beginning, lies
at the foundation of genuine godliness,
Sins overlooked and forgotten now ap-
pear in their true light. Conscience
once asleep is now awakened. The
thunders of the law are heard, and there
are fearful apprehensions of deserved
wrath. ‘The people wept very sore.”
They could not “wash their hands in
innocency,” and therefore they bathed
their eyes with tears. A deluge of ini-
quity in the heart may well produce a
deluge of grief in the conscience, Jere-
miah wished “that his head were waters,
and his eyes a fountain of tears,” d&.
(Jer. ix. 1), And Ezra himself, thougk
not a partaker of the scandalous guilt of
those who had taken foreign wives, ex-
hibits much more earnestuess and inten


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; EZRA,


OHAP. X,





sity than many who had. The practice
of sin hardened their consciences; the
sight of sin softened his (chap. ix. 3-6).

If. That God marks with peculiar
interest the time in which repentance
unto life begins in the soul. “It was
the ninth month, on the twentieth day
of the month.” No breath of prayer,
no exercise of faith, no sigh of repent-
ance can ever escape Him. (God is
very attentive to times and dates, The
dates of the commencement of carrying
out the reformation and of its comple
tion are preserved (vers, 16,17). The
day in which the three thousand were
converted is distinctly recorded: “ When
the day of Pentecost was fully come”
(Acts ii 1), The day in which the
foundation of the second Temple was
laid was memorised: “Consider now
from this day and upward, from the
four and twentieth day of the ninth
month, even from the day that the
foundation of the Lord’s Temple was


; ida
laid, consider” (Hag. ii, 18), And is
He less attentive to the building of the
spiritual temple in the soul? The mo-
ment Saul of Tarsus began to pray was
a memorable season in the calendar of
Heaven (Acts ix. 11). And the prayer
of faith and penitence does wonders.

Ill. That repentance, where it is
real, will be attended with its appro-
priate fruits. The people put away
the strange wives (vers. 11, 12, 16, 17).
“Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of
repentance,” d&c, (Luke iii. 8-14).

IV. That the names and persons of
genuine penitents are for ever pre-
cious to God and recorded in His book.
“And among the sons of the priests
there were found that had taken strange
wives: of the sons of Jeshua the son
of Jozadak,” dc. (vers, 18-44). They
were held up as patterns of sin repented,
sin forsaken, and sin forgiven.—Samuel
Thodey.


Tue REFORMATION EFFECTED.
(Verses 13-17.)


The ¢ assembly having earnestly
decided that the strange wives should
be put away, the next consideration was
as to the mode by which this decision
might be carried out It is frequently,
and especially in a popular assembly,
much easier to resolve that a thing
shall be done, than to devise a pru-
dent and practicable method of doing
it. In the paragraph now before us
we see how the great reformation was
carried out. It was effected—

L Notwithstanding difficulties.
Two difficulties are suggested in the
thirteenth verse :—

1. The greatness of the undertaking.
“Neither is this a work of one day or
two; for we are many that have trans-
gressed in this thing.” The cases being
numerous, considerable time would be
required to deal with them satisfac-
torily. Moreover, some of the cases
would probably need very careful con-
sideration, Amongst the foreign wives
some perhaps had become proselytes to
the Jewish religion; and amongst the


ehildren of these marriages some of the
sons had perhaps been circumcised, and
these wives and sons could not be put
away. It was necessary that an im-
partial and sufficient investigation of
each case should be made, and the cases
were many, so that the task to be per
formed was not by any means a light
or easy one.

2. The inclemency of the weather.
“ But the people are many and it isa
time of much rain, and we are not able
to stand without.” The reformation
could not be carried out by a great
popular assembly, such as that gathered
before the Temple; and, even if it had
been practicable in other respects, the
drenching showers would have prevented
it. The assembly could not have con-
tinued to sustain those showers; and
there was no building in the country
that could have sheltered so vast a
multitude.

Learn : 7'o eradicate sin is a task of
the greatest difficulty. How hard it is
to overcome a sinful habit in ourselves |


167


OHAP. X.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: EZRA.





Only the most patient, persistent,
prayerful, and believing effort has any
chance of success in such an attempt.
How difficult it ig to eradicate an evil,
whether of belief or of practice, from
the Church of God! It is a task re-
quiring the zeal of an enthusiastic re-
former, the piety of a devoted saint,
and the wisdom of a profound sage.
Nothing is easier than the propagation
of moral evil; but its eradicatiou is
supremely difficult. (a).

IL Notwithstanding opposition.
“ Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and
Jahaziah the son of Tikvah stood up
against this ; and Meshullam and Shab-
vethai the Levite helped them,” that is,
in their opposition to this measure of
reform (see Explanatory Notes on ver.
15). It is not surprising that opposi-
tion should have been offered to this
matter. The severance of these mar-
riage ties must have been very painful
to most of the persons concerned there-
in. And very plausible objections might
have been urged against their severance.
The examples of distinguished Israelites
might have been pleaded as precedents
in favour of such marriages. Joseph
had married an Egyptian (Gen. xli. 45) ;
Moses, a Midianite (Exod. ii, 16, 21),
and afterwards a Cushite (Num. xii 1) ;
Boaz, Ruth, a Moabitess (Ruth iv. 9-
13); David, Maacah a Geshurite (2
Sam. iii, 3); Solomon, an Egyptian
princess (1 Kings iii. 1, vii. 8). These
cases might have been adduced and
urged as making against the rigorous
measure proposed at the present time.
It would have been passing strange if
there had been no opposition to this
unsparing reformation, It is surpris-
ing that the opposition was not more
extensive,

Learn ; In effecting any great reforma-
tion opposition ts to be expected. Such
reformations injure the secular interests
of some persons, run counter to the pre-
judices of others, make war upon the
practices of others, and so awaken re-
sistance. Great reformations are gene-
rally carried out despite determined op-
position, (6).

I. With exemplary wisdom and
fairness. ‘Let now our rulers of all

168


the congregations stand, and let all them
which have taken strange wives in our
cities come at appointed times,” &e.
(vers. 14, 16). Thus this reformation
was etfected—

1. By the proper authorities, The
“rulers of all the congregation,” #4,
the princes and elders of the people,
were proposed as a judicial commission
to conduct this matter. “And Ezra
the priest, with certain chief of the
fathers, after the house of their fathers,
and all of them by their names were
separated, and sat down to examine the
matter.” The cases were investigated
and determined by the rightful judicial
authorities of the community, with Ezra
as their president.

2. With competent and reliable wit-
nesses, ‘And with them the elders of
every city, and the judges. thereof.”
“With the accused were to come the
elders and judges of every city, to fur-
nish the necessary explanations and
evidence.” They would be likely to
possess the requisite information as to
the cases in their respective cities, and
their character and position would give
increased weight to their testimony.

3. In the presence of the accused.
“Let all them which have taken strange
wives come at appointed times ” to Jeru-
salem for trial, No one was condemned
in his absence, or without being allowed
an opportunity of pleading his cause if
he wished to do so.

4. With due regard for the convent-
ence of the people. It was arranged
that the cases from each city or locality
should be taken by themselves ‘and
at appointed times,” and not be mixed
with the cases from other localities. By
this plan the Jews from the provinces
would not be unnecessarily detained in
Jerusalem ; but having answered the
summons to appear there, the cases from
their locality would be taken consecu-
tively until they were all adjudicated,
and then they would be at liberty to
return to their homes and duties,

5. With careful inquiry. The time
during which the judicial commission
sat, aud the probable number of casea
investigated, furnish evidence of patient
examination into the cases, The in


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: BZRA.





quiry lasted for three months. They
“sat down in the first day of the tenth
month to examine the matter, And
they made an end with all the men that
had taken strange wives by the first day
of the first month.” It is probable that
they sat for seventy-five or seventy-six
days, and it seems to us that they may
have investigated an average of three
eases a day. One hundred and thirteen
persons were found to have taken foreign
wives; and, in accordance with the de-
cision of the judges, they put them
away. Evidently the examination was
not hurried and superficial, but patien
and tuorough, ;

Learn :

The importance of combining prudence
of method with earnestness of purpose in
carrying out great reformations. Zeal
in a good cause should be guided and
regulated by sound judgment. A noble
aim should be pursued by wise and
worthy methods, or it may never be
attained, or attained with needless loss
and trouble, ‘ Wisdom is profitable to
direct.” (c).

IV. Thoroughly. ‘And they made
an end with all the men that had taken
strange wives.” They completely abo-
lished the evil from the community. It
was most desirable and important for
the people themselves that the wrong
should be courageously grappled with
and utterly done away. If a surgeon
has to remove diseased flesh from his
patient, he must cut it completely away,
or he is neither skilful in his practice
nor kind to his patient, Sin is very tena-
cious in its hold, and though checked
for a time, springs forth into new and
active development. Checking is not
enough, it must be killed. Notwith-
standing the complete abolition of the
foreigu wives from the community at
this time, the evil reappeared and had
to be dealt with by Nehemiah (Neh. xiii.
23-28).

Learn :

The importance of making an end of
sin when we are battling with ut. Let
us put it utterly away, cut off all occa-
sions of it, and shun every temptation
to it, (d). And a yet more effective
safeguard and surety against it, is the


CHAP. i,

- ee
cultivation of the oppesite virtues, Let
the avaricious cultivate generosity, and
the proud man seek after humility, de.
And let every one cry unto God, “ Hold
Thou me up, and I shall be safe.”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) Sometimes this separation from familiar
evil is a struggle as between life and death,
shaking the whole soul, and tearing its shrink-
ing quick in torture. It is like the sword
that pierceth to the dividing asunder of the
joints and marrow. And yet, such is the
power of the conviction of the Spirit of truth
when humility has once begun ita holy and
honest work within us, how many even go out
to meet that saving sorrow! Indeed, when
the heart has slept too long in the lap of in-
dulgence, there often creeps upon it, I believe,
an undefined feeling that before long this rest
must be ended ; the foreshadow of some darker
angel cast across the path, And if the ear of
our sympathy were quicker and finer than it
is, we should doubtless often overhear, in the
tones that breathe around us, the sadness and
the prayer of an unsatisfied spirit striving
against the evil in it! Blessed is the mind
that springs with alacrity and thanksgiving
to its better ministry !

For all true souls really touched with the
apirit, and consecrated to the fellowship, of
Christian obedience will be ready for thia
sacrifice. Not all equally ready. The bonds
of past practice and attachment hang unequal
weights about our necks. But what awakened
soul will not willingly be drifted away from
the accustomed repose, if it is thereby brought
nearer to the righteousness and charity of
Christ? This, in fact, is the test of the
sincerity of faith; the willingness to give up
all that has been precious but not holy, and
launch out upon the future, trusting only to
the Unseen Hand —like the Patriarch, of
whom that beautiful thing is written, that
when he was called to go out into a place
which he should after receive, he obeyed, and
went out, not knowing whither he went, dwell-
ing in the land of ‘‘ promise,” and looking for
a city which hath foundations, whose builder
and maker is God, Great difficulties will
threaten every such obedient foot-—the wilder-
ness before, the bondage to evil behind; but
God is mightier than they—a pillar of fire
for the night, and of bright cloud by day:
** Greater He that is for us than they that are
against us,” Outside our private battle, society
exposes givantic wrongs to be redressed ; but
the right which is to redress them is sure, and
the prophetic ear of hope hears the sound of
its footsteps from afar, There are changed
faces, disappointed companions, an angry class
or denomination forsuken, sneers, imputationa,
false charges, and criticisms — such feeble
weapons of the modern world’s inquigitions as
betray the cowardice of persecution, without
its positive creed or its power. But these are

169


OBaP. &





not a terror to him who hears the voice say,
‘6 Awake, arise, and Christ shall give thee
light !”—F. D, Huntington, D.D,


(b) It is a remarkable, but awful, fact that
liberty and religion both have arisen to pros-

rity in the world on successive stages of
lood. Blood nurtured the tree of Grecian
and of Roman freedom. With bloody swords
eur fathers in the puritanic and covenanting
days gained our civil and religious victories.
Through a shower of blood came down, in
1789 and the after years, the genius of liberty
to the continental shores. kven while we
write (1859), the blood of John Brown of
Virginia is dropping into the dust, to rear a
glorious and a terrible harvest of freedom to
his blask countrymen, And the religion of
Jesus, need we say, arises from the root of a
blood-sprinkled cross, This springs, doubt-
less, in part from the Divine plan and purpose,
but it augurs also something dreadfully wrong
in the present system of things. Through
the dominion of the evil power men’s minds,
in every age, have been steeped in selfishness,
besotted with lies ; and when truth and good
try to stir them, they succeed, but the stir
they produce is that of rage and resistance.
The darkness comprehends them not, but
apprehends and destroys their votaries, and
many of the followers of the prince of evil
perish in the strife, too, and thua ‘‘ blood
toucheth blood.” Nor can we conceive the
final contest of the world decided without a
‘¢ great slaughter” among the ‘‘ multitudes—
the multitudes in the valley of decision ;”
and even the gorgeous Flora of the millennial
meadows shall derive ita glory from transmuted
and transfigured blood.—@. Giljillan, M.A.


(e) The property of cords contracting their
length by moisture became generally known,
it is said, on the raising of the Egyptian
obelisk in the square facing St. Peter's, at
Rome, by order of Pope Sixtus V. he great


- AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.
®&


Se eee ee





work was undertaken in the year 1586; and
the-day for raising the obelisk was marked
with great solemnity. High mass was cele:
brated at St. Peter’s; and the architect and
workmen received the benediction of the Pope.
The blast of a trumpet was the given signal,
when engines were set in motion by an in-
credible number of horses ; but not until after
fifty-two unsuccessful attempts had been made,
was the huge block lifted from the earth. Ag
theropes which held it had somewhat stretched,
the base of the obelisk could not reach the
gummit of the pedestal; wien a man in the
crowd cried out, “ Wet the ropes!” This
advice was followed ; and the column, as of
itself, gradually rose to the required height,
and waa placed upright on the pedestal pre-
pared for it—Ardlical Treasury.


(d) Clip the hairs short, yet they will grow
again, because the roots are in the skull. A
tree that is but pruned, shred, topped, or
lopped, will sprout again; root it up, and it
shall grow no more. What is it to clip the
outward appearances, and to lep the superfluous
boughs of our sins, when the root is cherished
in the heart Thomas Adams, D.D.

How grand a thing to get a passion down
and hold it by the throat, strangling it de-
spite its struggles! It is fine work to hang
up some old sin as an accursed thing before
the Lord, just as they hung up the Canaanitish
kings before the face of the sun; or if you
cannot quite kill the lust, it is honourable
work to roll a great stone at the cave’s mouth,
and shut in the wretches till the evening
comes, when they shall meet theirdoom. It
is a joyous thing when by God’s grace under
temptation you are kept from falling ag you
did on a former occasion, and so are made
conquerors over a weakness which was your
curse in past years. It is a noble thing to be
made atroug through the blood of the Lamb
go a8 to overcome sin.—C. H, Spurgeon.


Tue List oF OFFENDERS,
(Verses 18-44.)


For what purpose is this catalogue of
names inserted here? ‘The list is pro-
bably the final record or report of Ezra
and his fellow - commissioners, and
brought their duties in this matter to
an end, But why is it preserved here
in the sacred Book? Has it any moral
significance? Is it of any permanent
value} And if so, in what way is it
valuable? We suggest, in reply—

L Asa warning against sin. This
catalogue shows us— :

1. Stn extending to all classes. Here
are the names of seventeen priests (vers.


170


18-22) who had committed the sin of
marrying foreign wives, and four of
them belonged to the family of the
higk priest, “Jeshua the son of Jozadak.”
They had transgressed in this matter
notwithstanding their sacred calling, and
that they had received commands im-
posing special restrictions as to their
marriages (Lev. xxi 7). Again, we
have the names of ten Levites of three
different classes, viz., assistants of the
priests. singers, and porters (vers. 23,
24). And besides these there are the
names ot eighty-six laymen. A sacred


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; BZRA.


calling, with its hallowed associations
and solemn obligations, aifords uo exemp-
tion either from temptation to sin or
from the lability to yield to temptation,
Let Christian ministers and teachers
heed well this fact. Sin is not confined
to certain classes or callings. It is
found amongst all classes—the rich and
the poor, the learned and the ignoraut,
&c. “* All have sinned.” (a).

2. Sin injuring the repuiation. The
names of these offenders “are here re-
corded to their perpetual reproach.”
“Sin is a reproach to any people.” Sin
has covered with infamy many a name,
which but for it would have been eminent
and illustrious for great gifte and noble
achievements.

3. Sin corrupting the influence. This
must have been true of every one of
these offenders. The example of each
one would be morally pernicious, tending
to extend the offence of marrying these
foreign wives. But this was especiaily
true in the case of the priests. Their
participation in this sin would cause it
to appear in the eyes of, at least, some
of the people as no sin at all, but quite
consistent with duty and piety. In this
way their influence, which should have
been morally purifying and invigorating,
became corrupt and injurious. Thus
this catalogue remains as a warning
against sin,

Il. As an example of genuine repent-
ance. Three characteristics of true re-
pentance marked the conduct of these
offenders—

lL. They confessed their sin with sorrow.
“The people wept very sore. And
Shechaniah answered and said unto Ezra,
We have trespassed against our God,
and have taken strange wives of the
people of the land.” When Ezra said
to the assembled people, ‘ Now there-
fore make confession unto the Lord
God of your fathers ... all the con-
gregation answered and said with a
loud voice, As thou hast said, so must
we do.” Sincere and sorrowful confes-
sion of sin is a mark of true repent-
ance, and a condition of Divine for-
giveness, “I acknowledged my sin
unto Thee,” &c. (Ps. xxxit 5). “If
we confess our sins, He is faithful ana


OHAP. X,





a
just to forgive us our sins,” &e. (1 John
179),

2. They offered sacrifice on account of
the sim. “ And being guilty, they offered
a ram of the flock for their trespass.”
This trespass offering, as Keil observes,
“was imposed upon them according to


the principle of the law (Lev. v. 14-19),


because they had committed a oyn (tres-
pass) against the Lord, which needed
expiation.” The presentation of this
offering was not limited to the four
priests who “gave their hands” as a
pledge that they would make it. “The
same obligations, namely, the dismissal
of their strange wives, and the bringing
of a trespass offering, were imposed on ”
all the other guilty persons; but these
obligations, having been once stated, it
was not deemed necessary to repeat.
Every offender was required to bring his
sacrifice, and every one did so. And
now forgiveness is offered freely to the
penitent sinner through the blood of
Jesus Christ. ‘We have redemption
through His blood, the forgiveness of
sins.” Repentance is the condition of
forgiveness, and the sacrifice of the Lord
Jesus is the medium through which it
is attained, (6). Where there is true
repentance the need of reconciliation
with God will be deeply felt, and the
sacrifice of the Cross will be accepted
with thankful joy. (c).

3. They forsook the sin. All the
offenders put away their strange wives.
Even when children had been born of
these marriages, rendering the removal
of the wives and mothers much more
difficult and painful, the difficulties were
overcome, the puii was borne, and the
Wives were put away. ‘True repentance
involves practical reformation—change
of conduct, (d). ‘Thns the men whose
names are here recorded are examples of
genuine repentance,

II. As an encouragement to genuine
repentance. ‘Lheir repentance was ac-
cepted by God, and as a result—

l. Their sin was forgwen, If the
sinner “turn from his sin, and do that
which is lawful and right ;” &c. (Kzek.
xxxiii. 14-16).

2. Vhe Divine favour was vouchsafed.
The wrath of their God for this matter

Wi


CHAP. xX.


was tured from them (ver. 14). He
approved their penitence and blessed
them in their obedience,

Let sinners take encouragement to
seek true repentance, “Seek ye the
Lord while He may be found ; call ye
upon Him while He is near: Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the un-
righteous man his thoughts,” &e. (Isa.
lv. 6,7). “There is forgiveness with
God... . With the Lord there is mercy,
and with Him is plenteous redemption.”
‘‘Who is a God like unto Thee, that
pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the
transgression of the remnant of His
heritage? He retaineth not His anger
for ever, because He delighteth in mercy.
He will turn again, He will have com-
passion upon us; He will subdue our
iniquities ; and Thou wilt cast all their
sins into the depths of the sea.” (e).


ILLUSTRATIONS.


(a) The world over, in ita serious houra the
heart longs, sighs, groans, and travails with
sorrows that cannot be uttered, to be delivered
from the bondage of sin and death. The
Scripture has no other doctrine of the matter
on any of its pages, and scarcely one page
where this is not. Read the burning confes-
sions of the fifty-first Psalm, and of many
another before and after it, where the fire of
remorse, which is only the lurid reflection of
sin, almost visibly scorches the Psalmist’s
heart ; read the terrible descriptions of that
state of man without his Redeemer written
by Paul to the Romans; or the tragic picture
of Paul’s own fearful struggles with the law
of his members; or the awful prophecies of
a society forgetting ita Lord, given in Jude.
Recall] the narratives of depravity in Scripture
history, and the denunciations upon it by pro-
phets, and the thrilling exhortations against
it by apostles. Remember that the Bible
begins with the first inroad of sin, and finishes
with warnings of ita punishments, Above
all, remember that the firat word of the new
dispensation was ‘‘ Repent,” and ita consum-
mation was the cross built on Calvary to assure
forgiveness to ‘‘repentance toward God and
faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ;” and
you will hardly need to multiply these con-
vincing tokens that all the ministrations of
our religion to the human soul presuppose
that we all have sinned,—are sinners still.
If any of you are disposed to complain that
there is too much preaching against sin, apply
your criticism to the Bible. The Christ whom
we preach came to be a Saviour from sin, did
He not? How much better to think and feet
thoroughly what sin is now, than when the
‘apace for repentance” is exchanged for the


172





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: EZRA.





determination of the judgmenti!—¥F. D.
Huntington, D.D.


(6) Repentance is necessary to forgiveness
—a sine qua non—a condition, though not im
any respect in the sense of desert, yet in the
sense of indispensable existence or of being
something without which the blessing cannot
be enjoyed. This is a truth, a Bible truth,
But it is not the ground of pardon, or in any
way its meritorious cause. ‘hat is the atone-
ment. And, according to the Bible, instead
of repentance being the ground of forgivenesay
that which is the ground of forgiveness is
iteelf the motive, or inducement, or persua-
aive, to repentance. It is that consideration
by which the Spirit of God in the Word is
ever urging sinners to repent and turn unto
God. . . . Moreover, that repentance ia suffi-
cient to obtain forgiveness, there is nothing
in the analogy of Providence that warrants us
to conclude. ‘here is much to the comtrary.
Repentance and reformation do not, in point
of fact, in the present experience of rankings
place transgressors, with regard to the temporal
effects of their sins, in the same state as if
they never had offended, The ruined health
and fortune of the intemperate and profligate
are not retrieved the instant they repent and
reform. Nor is there anything in reason to
sustain the position. It is very manifest, that
present sbedinnes can only fulfil present obli-
gation, There is, as has often been observed,
just as good ground for affirming that former
obedience atones for present sins, as there ia
for affirming that present obedience atones
for former sins. Repentance neither alters
the nature nor obliterates the guilt of what is
past ; and present duty, even were it free from
all mixture and imperfection, can do no more
than answer for itself. It cannot possess, for
our former selyes any more than for others,
aught of the nature or eflicacy of works of
supererogation. ‘There will be no such worka
rN at the bar of God.—Ralph Wardlaw,


(c) Our want ig deliverance from our evil
including both forgiveness for the past and
strength now; something to


‘* Be of sin the double cure,—
Cleanse us from its guilt and power.”


Manifestly this cannot come from ourselyea,
It must come from Him whom our ingratitude
has offended ; from the Ruler whom our sel-
fish wickedness has wronged, It must come
from God. Look closely at this want ; for it
is that vital spot in all humanity where sorrow
is most keen, and where relief ig most joyful.
The sure result of evil is pain; of persistent
sin is death. Hence the voluntary surrender
to pain, pain even unto the body’s death, ia
felt and has been ever felt, to be the natural
expression of a penitent soul. It is propitia-
tion ; not because God takes pleasure in Hia
children’s suffering, but because that ia the
roala fang tribute to the just majesty of


HOMILETIO COMMBNTARY : EZRA.





goodness and the holy anthority of Richt.
Government without penalty is gone, and all
iis blcased protections are dissolved. Hence
the honest heart cries out in its shame and
fear, ‘‘Let me suffer for my sin.” Suffering
for it there must be somewhere ; transgression
ig a costly business; g0 it must always be and
alwave look ; right must stand at any rate ;
(aw must be sacred, or all is gone; and since
nothing is so dear as life, and blood is the
element of life, life itself must be surrendered,
and ‘‘ without the shedding of blood is no
remission.” Take the next step. Just be-
sause this life is so dear, He who loves us
infinitely, and to whom it is dearer than to
us, will be willing to lay down for us His
own. He will not even wait for our consent ;
but in the abundance of that unspeakable
compassion, in the irresistible freedom of that
goodness, He will do it beforehand—only ask-
ing of us that we will believe He has done it,
and, accepting our pardon, be drawn by that
faith into the same self-sacrificing spirit.
Herein is love indeed. Suifering for our
peace! Sacrifice, not that our service may
profit and pay Him, but that our transgres-
sion of a perfect law may be pardoned,
and the noble life of disinterested goodness
may be begotten in ourselves.—F, D, Hunt-
tngton, D.D.


(d) Some confess their sins without so
much as intending to forsake them. Mar-
vellous delusion! As if it were possible to
impose upon the Almighty Himself. As if
the hollow confession of the lips availed any-
thing againat the stubborn impenitence of the
heart! Very beautiful is that liturgy of the
Established Church, Yet how many are there

ho have knelt in silks and satina to-day, and
ee a certain anodyne for conscience in the
mere repetition of the cry, “‘O God, the Father
of heaven, have merey upon us miserable gin-
ners”? Or, not to look abroad for examples
which may be found at home, how many of





CHAP. &,


om

us within these walla have moved the lips and
bent the knee, while locked up inviolate in a
secure corner of the heart has lurked all the
while that evil thing which the lips have
professed to expel. That ig not repeutanve,
Rather, it resembles a contrivance for begin-
ning the world upon a new score, because the
old hag grown inconveniently long. True
repentance has always an eye to the future as
well as to the past ; and to confess those sins
which you secretly intend to repeat, or which
it is not your settled purpose to abandon, is
to cheat conscience and to mock God.—J. @.
Pigg, B.A.


{e) You cannot believe too much in God's
mercy. You cannot expect too much at His
hands. He is ‘‘able to do exceeding abun-
dantly above all that we ask or think.” No
sin is so great but that, coming straight from
it, @ repentant sinner may hope and believe
that all God’s love will be lavished upon him,
and the richest of God’s gifts granted to his
desires. Even if our transgression be aggra-
vated by a previous life of godliness, and have
given the enemies great occasion to blaspheme,
as David did, yet David’s penitence may in
our souls lead on to David’s hope, and the
anewer will not fail us. Let no sin, however
dark, however repeated, drive us to despair of
ourselves, because it hides from us our loving
Saviour. Though beaten back again and
again by the surge of our passions and sins,
like some poor shipwrecked sailors sucked
back with every retracing wave and tossed
about in the angry surf, yet keep your face
towards the beach where tiere is safety, and
you will struggle through it all, and though
it were but on some floating boards and broken
pieces of the ship, will come safe to land,
He will uphold you with His Spirit, and take
away the weight of sin that would sink you,
by His forgiving mercy, and bring you out of
all the weltering waste of waters to 4he solid


shore,—Alex, Maclaren, D. D.
178





HOMILETICAL INDEX.


CHAPTER I.
The Fulfilment of the Word of the Lord,


Resemblance between the Proclamation of Cyrus and the Goapel,


The Edict of Cyrus, . ° .
The Proclamation of a : A
God with us,
The Release of the Jews from Babylon! an Higetraton ‘of the Bete
tion of Man from Sin, . : ; :
The Return of the Exiles, ; : :
The Results of the Captivity, . .
The Restoration of the Sacred Vesusin °
CHAPTER IL
Going up out of Captivity, . ,
A Suggestive Record, . : . ,


Religious Service, :
The ‘Importance of a Ciear Spiritual Pearce
Possessions and Offerings, . . ‘


CHAPTER ML


The Rebuilding of the Altar: Exemplary Features of Divine Worship,


The Celebration of the Sacred Festivals Resumed,
The Work of the Day done in the Day, :
The Preparations for Rebuilding the Temple, .
Laying the Foundation of the Temple, . :
The Building of the Temple,

The Altar and the Foundation of the omnia


2 @ e .


. . e ° e


175


BSSSS


36
39


44
46
49


~


6}


HOMILETICAL INDEX.


CHAPTER IV.
PAG
The Proposal of the Samaritans to the Jews, . . . : 54
The Proposals of the Wicked and how to Treat them, . A 4 57
The True Builders of the Spiritual Temple of God, . : 59
The Hostility of the Samaritans to the Jews, . : ; ; 61
The Antagonism of the World to the Church, . . ° : 62
Good Cause for Great Zeal, : 65

The Success of the Subtle Scheme of the Samaritans, or the Temporary

Triumph of the Wicked, . . . . : 68

CHAPTER V.
The Great Work Resumed, : ° ’ * 71
The Great Work Investigated and Coudaaed es ° : ; 73
The Letter to the King concerning the Work, . ° : . 75
The Supremacy of God, : . . ° . . 78
Arguments against Sinning, . . . ° e - 80

CHAPTER VL
A Thorough Search and an Important Discovery, . 5 - 84
The Decree of Darius, . ; 3 ; : 2 86
A Believer’s Expenses, . 4 A A 89
The Desire of a Sovereign and the Daty of Subject, . . . 90
The Completion of the Temple, : 91

The Subserviency of a Faithful Mintstry to fis Erection of God's

Spiritual Temple, : : . : . : 94
The Dedication of the Temple, . , P . ‘ . 95
The Celebration of the Passover, 6 4 5 ° 5 $7
The Dedication of the Second papal . 5 ° e = 100
The Dedication of the Temple, . ’ ° . 101

CHAPTER VIL
Zzra the Distinguished, ‘ a 104
Studying, Practising, and cine the Sacred Scriptures * : 107
The Christian Ministry, s : 4 4 109
Divine Sequence, é : : ° ¢ 130
The Commission of Artaxerxes Ss Era : 4 . 110
Reasons for Active Devotedness to the Cause of God, . : ° 114
The Decree of Artaxerxes, : " : é ° . 115
Exemplary Praise, : : : , . . : 117


176


HOMILETICAL INDEX





CHAPTER VUL


The Assembly at Ahava, :

The Companions of Ezra on his J ourney to J erusalem,
Men of Understanding, 5 . °

Ezra’s Confidence in God, 5 . °

Faith and Prudence, . . ° °

Ezra and his Times, . . . .

Ezra an Example in Business, . ° °
Contrasts, : °
Seeking the Tord and its Reyer aves, y 8


The Guardianship of the Sacred Treasures, .


From Ahava to Jerusalem: an Illustration of the Pilgrimage


Christian,


At Jerusalem : the Faithful Surrender of Important Traste,


CHAPTER IX.


The Good Man’s Sorrow over the People’s Sin,

The Good Man’s Confession of the People’s Sin,
Ezra’s Humiliation for the Sins of his People, .
Ezra’s Address, . x “3 : :
Forbidden Marriages, . . .
Use of God’s Diversified Dispesentious


CHAPTER X

The Reformation Proposed, A
True Loyalty, . ; :
The Reformation Decided emt. A
A Great and Troubled Assembly, ° b
The Reformation Effected, “ é 5
e Ls


The List of Offenders, ,


° e e oe °


PAGE
120
123
124
126
128
130
132
132
134
136


138
140


143
147
150
152
152
155


158
162
163
166
167


wit


INDEX OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


PAGE
ASANDONED, sin must be ° . 165
a borrence of sin essential to moral purity 150
Accountability, the measure of our, 138, 141
Acknowiedgment f God’s goodness,


thankful 5 LS
Acting, the danger of separating feeling

from. 162
Ageat in every g good work, God the chief, 73
Avgravations of the guilt of sin. 149


Almightiness of God guarantees the ful-
filment of His word, the : 5 7
Ancestry, blessing of a pious. é 106
Association with the wicked, danger of. 58
Association with the wicked is allowed,
what . 0 . o ao o &


Assurance and faith . $1
Assurance is not always enjoyed by true
Christians : . - 81
Atonement, felt need of "the 4 88
Atonement felt by the ae oe soul, the
need of . 6 5 leh
Authority of Ged, the sovereign 0 5 alll
Benevouence of the Divine law, the . 118
Bible an inexhaustible book, the , . 86
a ‘vonderful book, the é A 5 tke
should be studied, the whole . . 106
Books, the past preserved in , > . 88


Capaorry the measure of obligation . 188
Certainty of the punishment of sin, the . 133
Character of holy men, appreciation of the 113
Children of the godly are included in the
Divine covenant, the . 0 LS
Children to be trained for Gnd, . 155
Christ a Redeemer from the slavery of sin 16
on the Cross an example of self-con-
secration : ° . 5 88


the sure foundation . ° ° TOO
Christian, influence of a ° . . 146
life, joyfulness of the . : ° . 99
sbould hate sin, the . 5 : - 146
should marry ‘‘only in the Lord” . 154
Christianity bears marks of its Divine
origin . 85
Uhristians should be separate from the
world 6 5 146
should honour the Name which they
bear : . o Hee
should reveal God ton men , A 106


Church may win new victories, how the 74
reproached because of the faulte of
some of its members, the : &9


178


Church, certainty of the progress of the .


PAGY
93


the joy of helping to build the . ee.
Communication, ROBIN and involun-
tary ; 108
Confession of sin an | essential condition of
forgivenesa . . 165
of sin a relief to the penitent ° . 165
of sin is followed by its renunciation,
true 5 6 . . 0 elie
of sin, unreal . : : ° eLus
whatitis . . 150
Confidence in God secures His protection 128
in God should be exercised . e . 127
in God, the warrant for . - 127
Conquest of sin a grand thing, the - 170
Consecration to Christ, gratitude a motive
to self- , 88
to Christian work, the noblest worship,
self- 6 A . ° . - 88
to God, self- ; - = 997.
Consequences of sin in eminent persons,
the injurious . 145
Courage indispensable to success in Chris-
tian work 7 27
Covenant is with believers and their
children, the Divine . . - 118
of God with His people, the . - 18
Creation admonishing es of the flight of
time : 41
Cyrus acknowledges the supreme autho
rity of Jehovah . 16, 11
8 great conqueror raised up ‘by Jehovah 11
the character and mission of ° 3 7
Danagr of separating feeling from action 162
Decision in resisting temptation, the im.
portance of —. 67
Deeds better than correct creeda, good . 108
Detinitions of holiness. C 118
Dependence and Divine defence, human 128
Doing good, the true method of . - 60
Doubters to be respected, honest . Sh
Duty, the faithful discharge of present . 72
EMINENT persons, the injurious eonse-
quences of sinin . - 145
Epistles of Christ, Christians should be . 106
Eradicated, sin muat be : 5 - 170
Evil of terrible enormity, sinan . , 150
the good man must abhor , é - 150
Example, the power of , . 88
continues after our death, the power of
our . ' : : c 88


INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS.








PAGE
Faire is sometimes real success, ap-
parent . . : ° . SY)
Faith and assurance ° . . 5 ek
Faithfulness, the reward of , 141
Feeling from action, the danger of. sepa-
rating . ° : LOZ
Flight of time, the swift - +42
Forbearance of God with the ‘wicked 5)
Forgiveness, confession an essentia! con-
dition of . ° - 150, 165
repentance an essential condition of 172
Freedom from sin by Jesus Christ. . 189
Gurrs determined by the disposition of
the giver, the value of . : - 33
Giving is a part of worship . . - 118
our best to the Lord heartily . - 34
proportionate . . - 88
with liberality and cheerfulness . - 42
God acknowledged as the chek source of
ali good . : - 118
against the wicked, the power of. - 184
fer all His benefita, praise ascribed to 119
gives Himself to His people ° “eels
reverence towards - 118
upon the wicked, the execution of the
wrath of ° . ° 134
God’s view of sin . . 1606


Gratitude due to the living . .
Great man a light-fountain, the .
Greatness, size is no criterion of .

true °


oer eee @
-_
iss)
or


Guilt of sin, aggravations of the 149
Harrep of sin, a Christian duty . - 146
of the world to the Church . - 665
Heaven, restof . = : - cp 40
re-union in . . ° . 140
worship of . - 189, 140
Heinousness of sin in the light of God's
presence, the exceeding . ? . 149
Helpers . . ° . ° . 46
Tose defined . ‘i aes
is for everyday wear . . - 118
should characterize the whole life - 99
Home, love makesa ° r oe
sacredness of nme
Hope, the sorrow of repentance inspires 161
Humility and pride contrasted ; 118
Iurration of the wealthy and pores
servile . é ; nS
Individuals, the power of - 2 106
Influence, the continuousness of involun-
tary ° ° - 109
the power of involuntary . . - 109
Influence of a Christian, the, . . - 146
of Christian lives, the attractive, . 81, 82


of God and the freedom of man, the, . 8
of the Spirit of God upon the cis of


man, the. 5 5
Inspiration of ali goodness i in man is from
God, the, 73


Interest in His ‘people individually,
God’s, . ° ° ° . .


Jawxis, Jehovah's, A . - - 2





7"


Jews after the captivity, monotheism of
the, ,
Joy oa grief mingled j in human life, é
Joyfulness in the worship of God, . °
of tue Christian life, the, . . -
Joys, incompleteness of human, .
Judaism towards foreigners, the attitude
Ofte '
J udgment, importance of'a sound, .
KNOWLEDGE not acted upon an occasion
of condemnation, religious, 5


of His people, God’s, . ° .


LangvacE, voluntary and involuntary,
Law, benevolence of the Divine, .
Leadership, qualification for, . °
Living, gratitude due to the, . ae WG
Luminary, the great mana, .


May, the greatest, . ° e ° °
the wisest, .
Marriage of the godly with the umgodly
is perilous, the,
should be contracted with a view to
mutual help in holiness, .
tie, the closeness and tenderness of
the,
to the training of children, the relation


My “ only in the Lord, ” the Christian
sbould, . ° °

Mercy of God an encouragement to re.
pentance, the, . . . bt


Minister, the true, . 5
Ministers, how to maintain the supply
0. . e e e
the spiri tual needa ae . ° . °
the spiritual perils of, . °


Ministry a solemn trust, the Christian, .


NEED of atonement and grace, our daily,
of atonement felt by the penitent soul,


the, ° ° ° e e °

of rest, man’s, . . e e °
OBEDIENCE, complete, . . ° °
hearty, ° ° . ° ° .
joyful, . .
Obligation, capacity the measure of, .
Omniscience of God, ¢ ° .


Opposition offered to great reformationg,
Oversight of God an inspiration, the, ,


PAINFUL, separation from sin is ,

Parentage, the blessing of godly .

Parental obligations . ° °

prayers answered,

Penitence in the experiences of the
Christian .

Penitent soul, confession a relief to the .

Perfection of eg hee Christianity aims
atthe .

Perilous, the marriage of the godly with
the ungodly is

Persecutions of the Protestant dissenters

179


PAGE


108
26


109
113


125
125


125
125


155
154
154
155
154
178


128


155


INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS.





Perseverance to the end required of the
Christian
Power of God is against the ‘wicked, the
of single individuals, the . .
of the social element in religious move-
ments, Che uaar.
Practice is more important ‘than mere
profession ° ° SUR :
Praise and prayer . .
ascribed to God for all His benefits 6
God for His goodness, the obligation to
Prayer, God’s promises an encouragement
and praise . .
Prayers of parents ‘answered, the .
of the godly preserve nations, the
Preparation for communion with God
Presence of Christ with His people
of God, the all-sufficiency of the,
Pride and humility contrasted .
Principal thing,” ‘‘ wisdom is the .
Professing Christ . :
Profession is worthless without practice «
Promises an encouragement to prayer,
God's. . . . . °
of God should be trusted, the . .
Protection of God, ithe omniscient . °
Providence brings good out of evil, Divine
Prudence a necessary virtue . ° .
in work, the importance of . .
Punishment of sin, the certainty of the .


eoeneevee ee


REDEMPTION enhances the claims of God

upon man : cy Sh
Reflections of the aged . (
Reformation essential to true “repentance
Reformations meet with fierce opposition,


great . ’ . ° . ’
Remained in Babylon, ny many of the


Jews . :
Reparation musi follow repentance . .
Repentance an essentia! condition of for-


giveness . AN att KO
leads to reparation, true . . ‘
painful and hopeful . ra °
reformation the test of _.
the mercy of God an encouragement to
Repulsiveness of sin, the


Reverence due to God . °
Reward of faithfulness, the .
Risk of ministers, the spiritual


Resistance of temptation, prompt and
resolute . . ‘ .
Respect for sacred things C f
Rest, man’s need of 6 ° .
of heaven : A
Restitution of all things i in Christ ?
Reunion in heaven 5 0 A


Sarr of the Church of Meri the ,
of the Saints, the :
Salvation by grace. : .
Satan transformed into an angel of light
Separation from sin, the difficulty of ,
a the wicked incumbent de the


frou the world a "Christian duty, .
180


PAGE


98
134
106


169


146


Sermon, the best .
Service for every Christian, a ‘sphere of . .
in the Church of Christ is shea)
the humblest .
not the exclusive prerogative of any
class, Christian f
Sin, aguravations of the guilt of
a grand thing to comquer ,
an evil of great ptetts


°
*
e
.
°
e
e
.


@power . .

deprives man of courage .

freedom fron. ,

grieves God . .

in eminent persons, the injurious ¢on-
sequences of . : . .


is painful, separation from °
ite exceeding sinfulness in the light of
God’s presence ' : '
must be abandoned .
must be eradicated .
provokes God to anger
should be hated by the Christian
the certainty of the aera apes of
the loathsomeneas of . 3
to be viewed with utter repugnance
Sinned, allhave . P
Sins, even when pardoned, ‘leave sad
traces .
of the fathers visited upon the children
Slavery of sin, the. . :
of sin, sinners sometimes unconscious
ofthe . .
Social elemert in religious movement,
the power ofthe .
Sorrow of repentance is hopeful, the 5
Sovereignty of God, the. ; A 5
of God, the ground of the . : *


"2 & @


Shien oe! Sie aa


of God, the universality ef the .
Sphere of service for every Christian, »
Success to secondary causes, attributing
Supply of ministers, the, ° ° .


TauENt to be used well, one , 5 :
Talents and responsibilities
Temple is built, the materials of which
the spiritual :
the redeemed are growing into a ‘glori-
ous. °
Temptations to sin, plausible . :
Tenderness of the marriage relation, the
Thankfulness to God in all thinga, the
Christian’s . .
Trvast in God, the justification of . .
the Christian ministry a solemn , .
Trusting in God’s promises, : ‘


UNDERSTANDING to be sought, sound
Union is atrength .

Universality of sin in this world, the
Use well the talent you have, .


>


Various ways of working in the onase


of God . i : 4 = »
Veneration of holy character . 5
Wakrant for confidence in God, tha  ,
Weeping im heaven, ne , ;


3 ?


Psat


172


125


141


118


127
42


INDEX OF AUTHORS QUOTED.


PAG
Wicked, the execution of the wrath of
God upon the . : 184
the power of God is against the . . 134
Wisdom and goodness are inseparable . 125
in work, the importance of : waZor
“Wisdom is the principal thing” . ~ 125


Works, the incompleteness of human . 45
World, Christians should be separate
from the . . . . . - 146





ss at $e
PAGE

Worldliness injurious to Christian char-
acter and influence . ; , a Ey
the subtle and ruinous power of . 6. tel
Worship, giving is a part of . . 5 sl
of heaven, the . . ‘ - 1389, 140
of wealth, the . ye wy!


Worthy of the Name which they fae
Christians should walk .

Wrath of God upon the wicked, the execu.
tion of the . . ° ’ .


INDEX OF AUTHORS QUOTED.


Apams, Dr. Thomas, 59, 170
Alford, Dean, 158.

Allon, Dr. H., 49.

Anon., 42, 86.


Bary, P. J., 15.

Barnes, Dr. A., 49, 60, 153

Barrett, W. G., 132.

Basil, 119.

Baxter, Richard, 45, 125, 155.

Beecher, H. W., 7, 27, 31, 32, 46, 49, 78, 77,
106, 128, 146, 150, 141.

* Bible Illuetrations,” 5%.

“ Biblical Treasury,” 170.

Binney, Dr. T., 138.

B. PAP., 110:

Brooks, George, 8.

Brown, J. Baldwin, 46, 59.

Burns, Dr. Jabez, 136, 152.

Bushnell, Dr. HL, 27, 42, 61, 78, 108.


CaRLYLE, Thomas, 86, 125.

Cecil, R., 132.

Channing, Dr. W. E., 38, 86.

Charnocke, Stephen, 11, 18, 18, 26, 41, 68, 76,
79, 80, 82, 113, 134.

Cheever, Dr. G. B.. 139.

Clemance, Dr. C., 101,

Cotton, Dr. C. C., 68,

Conder, J., 118.

Cowper, W., 104.

Crosby, Dr., 118.

Cumming, Dr., 106.

Cuyler, Dr. T. L, 78,


Dag, Dr. R. W., 107.

Dewart, E. H., 49.

“Pict. of Illustrations,” 84, 77, 141, 155.
** Dict. of the Bible,” Dr. Smith’s, 82
Doddridge, Dr. P., $1, 125.

Downame, 53, 73.


Epwarps, Pres. 134.
Freraeuson, Dr. R., 140.


Fuerst, Dr. Julius, 4, 58
Fuller, Andrew, 69,


Garzxtt, Canon, 89.


Gilfillan, George, 170.

Gray, J. Comper, 102,

Gurnall, W., 65, 80, 82, 118, 128, 165,
Guthrie, Dr. T., 57, 88, 168.


Hatt, Bishop, 27, 118.

Hamilton, Dr. R, W., 118, 134,

Harris, Dr. John, 42, 63.

Hemans, Mrs., 17, 33.

Henry, ee 47, 64, 87, 96, 112, 153, 158

Hervey, Bishop, 2, 52.

Hervey, T. K., 48.

Howe, John, 20, 108, 154.

Howson, Dean, ‘98.

Huntington, Dr. F. D., 88, 56, 58, 74, 77, 98,
108, 118, 161, 170, 172, 173,


Yerie, Edward, 127.


Jauus, J. A., 88, 14%
Jay, William, 43.
Jones, Harry, 49.


Kei, Dr. ©. ¥., 1, 85, 86, 52, 108, 119, 167
Kitto, Dr. John, 8, 10, 11.


Larrmer, R. 8., 90.
Lester, Dr. J. W., 144
Lewis, W.8., 163.
Liddon, Canon, 127,
Longfellow, H. W., 44.


Macavtay, Lord, 88,
Maclaren, Dr. A., 178%
Magirus, John, 81.
Manton, Dr., 58.

Martin, Samuei, 84
Martineau, Dr. James, 72%
Milman, Dean, 5, 56.
Milton, John, 58.
Montaigne, Michel de, 7%
Morris, A. J., 15, 16, 97.
Mursell, Arthur, 24.


Parker, Dr. Joseph, 7, 8, 11, 14, 20, 24, 6@,
75, a1, 93, 106, 123, 146, 156, 161, 165.

Patrick, Bishop, 122,

Payson, Dr. E., 14, 97, 149, 150,

Perowne, Dean, 70.


INDEX OF AUTHORS QUOTED.





Pigg, J. G., 173.

Pulsford, John, 21, 98, 118.
Punshon, Dr. W. M., 29, 84,
Preacher’s Portfolio, a The, 110.


Rawtinson, Canon, 108, 104, 168.
Reynolds, Dr. H. R., 46.
Robertgon, F. W., 16, 69, 146, 162
Ruskin, John, 24, 126.

Ryland, Dr., 106.

Ryle, Bishop, 31.


Saurer, H. G., 31, 80, 147.

Schultz, Prof. F. W., 4, 6, 17, 40, 55, 84, 92,
95, 103.

Scott, Sir Walter, 49.

Scott, Thomas, 18, 68, 124.

Secker, William, 155.

Seneca, 125.

Shakespeare, William, 81, 108, 124.

Simeon, Charles, 50, 91, 95, 113, 117, 161, 164,





Sleigh, William, 12

South, Dr. Robert, 146.

Bpeaker’s Commentary,” “The, 85.

Spurgeon, O. H., 8, 16, 20, 29, "38, 89, 42, 46,
65, 67, 69, 80, 88, 98, 97, 106, 140, 176


Y Study, % “The, 86.


Sunday Schoo} Teacher,” ‘¢The, 14, 110


TatmaaeE, Dr., 24, 106, 107, 150.
Thodey, Samuel, 115, 167.
Thomas, Dr. David, 69.

Tuck, Robert, 52.


VaucHan, Dean, 128, 188,


Waxpiaw, Dr. R., 154, 172.
Watkinson, W. ie 180.
Wesley, Charles, 122%
Westcott, B. F., 19.
Whittaker, 93.

Wordsworth, Wilkissa, &2.


ANALYTICAL INDEX,





“ A book and an index are to be made on opposite prineiples. A good book cannot be tou


voneise.


A good index can hardly be too prolix. Repetitions are to,be avoided in the former.


In the latter they should abound.”—Lord Brougham.





PaGu
AppREse, Exra’s, . o e e 152
i. The grace they had received, 5 . 152

ii, The exalted position to which they
had been raised, 8 - 152

. The blessings connected with these
privileges, 2 . 152


Ahava, the assembly at (See AssEMBLY),. 120
Ahavato Jerusalem, from ; an illustration
of the pilgrimage of the Christian


(See PineniMaGE), . - 188
Altar and the foundation of the Texaple,
the, . . ° 51


i. The true order, - : - 651

ii. The mingled feelings, . ~ . 61
Altar, the rebuilding of the: Exemplary
features in Divine worship (See

WoRsHIP), : 86
Antagonism of the world to the Church,


the, . - - - 7 - 63
i. Persistent, . e ° ° - 63
ii. Authoritative, e ° e - 63
hi. Combined, . ° ° ° © 64
iv. Unscrupulous, e e - - 64
y. Plausible, . x ; “ .
Arguments against sinning, . . . 80
i. Sin provokes God, - . 80

ii It deprives the sinner of His pro-
tection, . 81

iii. It strips the sinner of power to
battle with his foes, . 5 81


Artaxerxes, the decree of (See Dror), 115
Artaxerxes to Ezra, the commission of
(See Commission), . . - 110
Assembly, a great and troubled, ° - 166
i, It is the tendency of sin to produce
sorrow and consternation of soul, 166
ii, God marks with peculiar interest the
time in which true repentance
begins in the soul, . 5 YS
iii, True repentance will be attended
with its appropriate fruits, - 167
iv, The names and persons of genuine
penitents are precious to God
and recorded in His book, . 167
Assembly at Ahava, the, 2 0 . 120
& The long jov--ey commer ced, . 120


PAGE
if, An important inspection made, . 121
iii. A grave deficiency discovered, . 121


iv, The supply of the deficiency sought, 121
v. The supply obtained, . . - 122


BELIEVER’S Expenses, a (See ExPENsEs), 89


- Builders of the spiritual temple of God,


the true, . 59
The true ‘spiritual Ieraclites, because
they alone will build—
i, On the true foundation, 2 . 59
ii. With the true materials, : . 459
fii, In accordance with the true plan, . 59


iv. With the true aim, C = 60
v. In the true spirit, . fs - 60
Building of the Temple, the, | 6 49


i, What there was at that time to call
forth such strong and widely-
different emotions, . 49

Laying the foundation of the

Temple was—

1. To some an occasion of exalted
joy, 49
2. To others, of the deepest sorrow, 50

fi, How far similar emotions become us
at the present day, . - 450
1. There is great occasion for j joy, . 50

2. There is abundant occasion for


grief also, ° . . ® 50


Captivity, going up out of (See Gorna), 22
Captivity, the results of the(See Resunts), 19
Cause for great seal, good (See Zzat), . 65
Cause of God, reasons for active devoted-
ness to the (See DavorEzDNESS), . 114
Celebration of the Passover, the . . 7
i, The personal preparation for these
sacred festivals, 5 97
1. As regards the priests and Levites, 97
2. As regards the people, : 98
ii, The principal significance of these
sacred festivals, 4 A 98
1, The Passover was a memorial
of their covenant relation with
God, 98
2, That of unleavened bread was a


183


ANALYTICAL INDEX.


PAGE


solemn recognition of their obli-


gation to live holily unto God, . 98

li, The special joy in these sacred fes-
tivals, . 6 . 98

1, There were the ordinary reasons
for joy, . 98

2, There were also apecial reasons
for joy, . 98

Celebration of the sacred festivals re-
sumed, the, . 0 39

i, The commemoration in Divine wor-

ship of national experiences and
blessings, . 39

ii. The celebration in religious worship
of the natural divisions of time, 40

1. To impress them with the value
of time, 40

3. To assist them to form a correct
estimate of their life upon earth, 41

8. To arouse them to make a wise

use of the time which remained
tothem,. . 41

iii, The presentation in Divine worship
of personal voluntary offerings, 41

Church, the antagonism of the world to
the (See ANTAGONISM), . . 63
Commission of Artaxerxes to Exra, ‘the . 110
i. The grant of this commission, aa OU)

1. In answer to the request of
Ezra, . 110

2. By the supreme ‘authority of the
empire, . ° A bat
fi, The articles of this commission, a ng
1. Those addressed to Ezra, . 6 bb

2, Those addressed to the Persian
treasurers, 2 5 28}
fii. The spirit of this commission . 112
1. Reverence for God, . . 112
2. Respect for the law of God, - 112
8. Regard for the worship of God, . 112

4. Appreciation of the character of
a good man, . 112

Companions of Ezra on his "journey to
Jerusalem, the, : . 123
Completion of the Temple, the, e 91

i, The ready compliance of the Per-

sian officers with the royal com-
mands, . 91

ii, The satisfactory progress and ulti-

mate completion of the building
of the Temple, . . 91

1. The grand Authority for the
great work, 92

2. The royal promoters of the great
work, : 92

% The worthy leaders of the great
work, 92

@ The inapired inciters i in the great
work, 92

& The ultimate completion of the
great work, , 62

A figure of the building of the

Temple of God in—

1. The individual ee 92
2. The world, ® 93

Confession of the people's sin, the good
man’s, . ° . . . 147


184


i. Deep personal shame and sorrow
on account of the sins of the





PAGE


people, . : : Alem on Y/
Expressed by—
1. A symbolical action, . 6 . 147
2. A suggestive attitude, . eee ys
8. An explicit avowal, 147


ii. Humble confession of the sins of
the people, 5
1, The great accumulation of their
sins,
2. The long ‘continuance of their
sins,
& The sore aggravations of. their
sins, :
fil, Solemn anticipation of the conse-
quence of the continuance of
the sins of the people,
1. Their utter end as a community,
2. Such a cies ead would be


just,

3. Sich a consequence was to be
dreaded, . 5 ° . °
Learn—


1. The great evil of sin, ° .
2 The grand hope of the sinner, .
8. The righ« relation of the ae


man to sin, 5 *
Confidence in God, Ezra’s . 3 5
i. Avowed, j ; ° i


1. In His providence, 5
3. As protecting the inveresta ot


147
147
1847
. 147
148
148
143
148


149
149


149
126
126
. 126


His people, = 126

8, As opposed to those who forsake
Him, ‘ . 2 . 126
ii. Tested, . 126
1. By ‘their need of guidance, . 126
2. And protection, ° - 126
iii, Maintained, . 126


1. In not seeking guidance and de-


fence from the king, . 128

2. In seeking them from God, eee

iv. Vindicated, . ° ° oy)
1. In their inward assurance, - 127

2. In the outward result, : » 127
Contrasts, AER
i. A contrast of human character, - 132

1. Those that seek God, 5 . 182


2. Those that forsake Him, 3 :
fi. A contrast of Divine treatment, ,
1. God’s hand is upon them for good

that seek Him,
2. His power and wrath are against
them that forsake Him, . P
Cyrus, the edict of (See Epror), . .
Cyrus, the proclamation of (See PRocLAMa-
TION), . . . A . c
Darius, the decree of (see DEcrEs}, :
Day done in the day, the work of the (See


Work),
Decided upon, the reformation (See Re-
FORMATION), . 6 6 .


Decree of Artaxerxes, the, :
i. In reference to the Jewish Church,
ii, In reference to the Church amongst
ua, ,. ° ° ° ° e


132
182


182


133
9


1]
86
42
163
116
11g


116


* ANALYTIOAL INDEX.





PaGh
Call for obedience to this mandate—
1, In a way of personal reforma-
tion, 116


2. In a way of ministerial exertion, 116
Decree of Darius, the, . = » 86
i, A prohibition, 3 5 : ee
ii, An injunction, . 86
1, To allow the building of the
Temple, . 86
3. To assist the building of the
Temple, . ~ 86
8. To assist the worship of Goa, 87
iii. A malediction, 87
1. Severe penalties are denounced, . 87
2. A stern imprecation is uttered, 87
Dedication of the second Temple, the, . 100
i, The occasion was one of joy, . 100
ii. They who took part in the service had
previously purified themselves, . 100
iii. There were burnt offerings as a
token of the consecration of the
people, . . ° . - 100
fv. There were sin offerings, 100
v. There was the observance of the
Passover, . . 100
vi The feast of unleavened bread was
kept joyfully, . 5 - 100
vii, The new national life thus inaugu-
rated had lesa of pomp and show
than were geen in the days of
Solomon, . é . 100
Dedication of the Temple, the, 5 Sen)
Was characterised by—
i, Religious rejoicing, r ° 5 ts
ii. Devout gratitude, . . 2 - $5
iii, Deep humility, 96
iv. Appropriate arrangements for its
future use, . ° . 96
Dedication of the Temple, the, “ 101
i. The captivity was designed to teach
the Jews an important truth, . 101
fi, They showed that they had learned
this truth by their conduct on
their return, 101
fii, Their great work was wawasa with
‘success—the Temple was finished, 101
iv. It was meet that the opening ser-
vices should be marked by de-
monstrations of religious joy, . 101
v. The spirit and principle of this dedi-
cation may be applied to the
opening of any building for reli-
gious purposes, . 102
vii We are rearing a temple of rine
souls, ° 102
Desire of a oe and the duty of
subjects, - 90
i, The desire of » heathen prince, - 90
1. It was just and reasonable, - 90
2. It was wise and politic, . - 90
ii. The duty of a Christian people, . 91
1. To offer sacrifices to our H bes
King, . 91
2. To pray for our earthly sovereign, 91
Devotedness to the cause of God, reasons
for active, 114


i. Beasons for active devotedness: to the


t


a


PAGE


cause of God and truth in the


world, . 1h4
1. The Divine authority by which
it is enjoined, . 114
2. The urgent nevessity for your
exertions, 5 114
8. The fearful consequences of the
neglect of this duty, ° 114
4. The success which has attended
its fulfilment, . 115
id Suggestions as to the apirit and mode
in which this work should be
carried on, 6 a WS
1. Earnestly, without remiseness, . 115
2. Prayerfully, without pride, - 115
3. Speedily, without delay, , » 115
Discovery, a thorough search and an im-
important (See Szarcg), . 84
Dispensations, use of God’s diversified, 5 | 155
L God’s diversified al ee eh to-
wards ug, 155
1. He has visited our sing with judg.
ments, 155
2. He has vouchsafed us deliverance, 155
ii. The effect they should have upon us, 156
They should restrain us from renewed
disobedience, as being—
1, Unreasonable, . 5 A » 156
2. Ungrateful, . . . . 156
8. Dangerous, ‘ - 156
Distinguished, Ezra the (See Ezra), . 104
Duty of subjects, the desire of a sove-
reign and the (See Dusikz), . - 90
Entcr of Cyrus, the, c oe
i. The devout acknowledgment of
God’s sovereignty, . 5 .
1. In the beatowment of His
favours, . 9
2. In the authority of His oom-
manda, : - 9
iL The maynanimous emancipation of
God's people, . §
1. The spirit in which it was made, 9
2. The purpose for which it was
made, 9
iii, The generous exhortation to aseist
God’s people, 9
1. The purport of this exhortation, 9
2. The persons to whom it was ad-
dressed, . 10
8. The p: attern by which it was en.
forced, 10
Effected, the Reformation (Bee RerorMa-
TION), . 167
Erection of God’s ‘spiritual temple, the
subserviency of a faithful ministry to
the, . ° - O4
i, The building of the Temple, ? . 94
1, Was obstructed by many diffi-
culties, . 94
2. Through the preaching of the
prophets these difficulties were
overcome, 94
ii, The subserviency of a faithful raini-
stry to the erection of God’s
spiritual temple, . y . O4


185


ANALYTICAL INDEX.


er


PAGE
The erection of this is—
1. Connected with the same diffi-
culties, . 94
%, Carried on and perfected by the
same means, . . 94
Exemplary features of Divine worship
(See WorsuiP), 5 ° . 86
Exemplary praise (See PRaIsE), é 5. lites
Exiles, the return of the (See Rerugn), 16
Expenses, a believer's, . 5 a eh)
i, What are our expenses ? - 89
ii, Where shall we find means to meet
them? . 89
iii, How shall we act in 1 the ‘presence of
such abundance? . ° . 90
Ezra and his times, . 180
i The principle which Esra asserted
was in striking contrast with the
general state of opinion around
him, - 180
ii, Ezra’s situation afforded him an op-
portunity for asserting this great
principle under pete trying cir-
cumstances, . ‘ - 181
Ezra an example in business, « ° » 182
i, His humiliation, . e ° e 182
ii, His faith, . ° ° ° . 132
iii, His prayer, . ° ° * . 182
iv. His holy jealousy, » ° ° - 182
v. His success, . 5 - 182
Kzra on his journey to Jerusalem, the
companions of, 6 - 123
Ezra’s address (See. AppnEss), 5 152
Rzra’s confidence in God ieee Conrt-
DENCE), . 126
Kara's humiliation for the sing of the
people (See HuminiaTion), . - 150
Ezra, introduction to the Book of, eed
Analysis of its contents, . ° . 2
Tta authorship, . ° ° ° . 2
Itscanonicity, » +. .« .« .o &
Its date, ° . ° ° e ® 2
Its design, . ° ° e ° 9 al
Ita nature, . ay tr sa onan
Ezra the distinguished, ‘ A . » 104
A man of distinguished—
i, Ancestry, : 5 = ‘ e 104
ii. Attainmenta, . ° 2 e 2 104
iii, Favour, « A . ° e - 105
iv. Influence, . A . 5 . 105
v. Sucocesa, e e r) e - 105
vi, Aim, . e e e ° ° 105
vii, Blessing, ° ® e ° ° 106
Farra and prudenea, . ° - 128
i, As a grand rule in the Christian
life, faith and prudence must go
together, 5 - 128
i, Yet there are times when faith in
God ust supersede the provi-
sions of ordinary prudenoe, . 129
Z.g. when prudential action—
1. Would Fh ooagete be construed as
a denial of the Divine govern-
ment, A 129
$. Would cause us to Jean on worldly
associations and resources, - 129


186


Page


8. Might embarrass the progress of
God’s kingdom,

iii, The separation of faith from pru-

dence must be effected only in

the spirit of dependence upon


. 129


Heaven, . - 130
Foundation of the Temple, laying the, . 46
i, The work already done, . E 46
1. Something was opened accom-
plished, é 46
2, Arrangements were made for
carrying on the work, ; . 47
ii, The worship offered, . ° = oy
1. Its manner, . 5 . 5 2
2. Ite character, . Tato one?
8. [ts occasion, . . e - 47
4. Its apir ait, < e ° . 47
fii, The emotions excited, . ° . 47
1. Great joy, ces © . 47
2. Great sorrow, . - 47
8 Great joy and great sorrow
mingled, 48
Foundation of the Temple, the altar and
the (See ALTa®), 51
Fulfilment of the Word of the Lord, the, 5
i, The regard of God for his Word, . 5
ii. The mercy of God to His people, . 5
1. In the design and effect of the
captivity, : - 5
2. In their release fron captivity, a
ili, The influence of God upon the spirit
of man, : 5 . - 6
1. Ite nature, e 5 . » 6
2. Its subject, e e e ® 6
3. Its design, ]
iv. The suitable response of man to the
influence of God, . < - 6
Gon’s diversified dispensationa, use of
(See DIsPENSATIONS),. . 155
God, the supremacy of (See BurnmKact), 78
God with us us, - 12
i, The devout wish expressed, 2 ou
1. Personal relation to God, . 5 3K)
2. Realisation of the presence of God, 12
ii, The kind expression of the wish, . 13
1, Indicates reverence towards God, 18
2. And kindness towards the captives, 18
Going up out of captivity, . . .
i. The deliverance from captivity . 22
1. Originated in the favour of God, 28
2. Was effected _by an unlikely agent, 28
8. Was permissive, notcompulsory, 23
il, The journey home, 5 0 » 23
1, Was a restoration, . ° - 23
2. A rostoration totheirownhome, 23
8. And to religious privileges, - 23


tii, The subordination to leadera, . .


1. Was needful for maintaining ee 28
23


2. For insuring progress, .
8. And because of the differences i in
the characters and abilities of


men
Gospel, resemblance between the procla-
mation of Cyrus and the (See ResEM-
BLANCE),


| Guardianship of the sacred treasures, the, 186


ANALYTICAL INDEX.
a var SS USSneSIninsseemsoaese= oer =


PAGE
i. The treasures to Rs Sapien, were
valuable—
1. In themselves, : . 136
2. As being consecrated to God, . 136
8. As being the free gifts Re friends
and well-wishers, : was
ii, The guardians


of the | treasures

were . 136
1, Adequate in number, ' ; . 186
2. Appropriate in official character, 186
3. Distinguished amongst their bre-


thren, . 186: |
fii. The charge to the guardians of the
treasures 5 1G
1. Points out the “value of the
things committed to them, - 136
2. Enjoins watchful care of these
things, - 187
3. Indic: ates their responsibility for
then. = - 137
iv. The acceptance of the guardianship
of the treasures, . ° ° . 137
= bree of the Samaritans to the Jews,
the, 5 A eel
i. The tactics of the wicked, ° - 61
ii, The venality of the wicked, . 61
iii. The temporary triumph of the
wicked, -
®. The freedom allowed by God to the
wicked, 62
Humiliation for the sins of his people,
Ezra’s, . ; - 150
L The reason of his sorrow, C - 150
The marriages of the Jews with the
Canaanites, which was—
1, A violation of an express com-
mand, . . tie aca ae Cp
2. Had a tendency to lead the Jews
back to idolatry, . . - 151
fi. The expressions of his sorrow, . 151
1. The violent and instantaneous
expression of his grief, . . 151
2. His humiliation before God, . 151
Inrorntance of a clear spiritual pedigree,
the (See PzpicRzx), - 29
Investigated and continued, the work
(Bee Work), . . 2 2 .


JERUSALEM, at: the faithful surrender
of important trusts (See SuRRENDER), 140


Lzerrer to the king concerning the work,
he or cs, . ° . ° °
L The inquisition of the Persian


authorities, . 75
1. hes, iM ters which they ;
5
2. The shigaleten which they pro-
posed, . ° F = - 7
i. The reply of the Jewish leaders, . 76
That the work was—
1. Not a mere human enterprise,
but a Divine commission, . . 6


& Not an innovation, but a resto-
ration, . ° ° ° . 76


{


PAGE
8. Not in a spirit of presumption
and pride, but of obedience and


humility,. . 76

4, Not in opposition to, "but in con-
formity with, royal authority, a the

5. Not political, but religious in its
character, 76

iii, The appeal of the “Persian authori-
ties to the king, : 6

1, To ascertain whether Cyrus au

thorised the work, 7

2. To issue instructions for their
guidance, 7

Lord and ita advantages, seeking the (Bee
SEEKING), ; ; ° . - 134
Loyalty, true, : . 162
i, Is marked by genuine reapect, - 162
ii, By hearty sympathy, . . - 162

fepy these lessons—

o the laws of our land, - 162

3. To the laws and officers of our
Church, . ° elias - 163
Marriaces, forbidden ; - 152


Between Christians and those who are
not Christians, pocnuae

i. They are pppoe ra to the express
command of God, . . 153

ii. They are inconsistent with the “most
sacred specs) and ends of mar-


riage, c - 153
iii. They imperil the salvation of the
soul, . 153


iv. They are inimical to’ wise and har-
monious home government, . . 154

y. They are detrimental to the best
interests of the children of the


marriage, . c Si Sty vs - 154
Men of understanding, A . A - 124
i. Are the gifts of God, . ° . 124
1. They derive their abilities from
Him,
2. They rightly develop their “abili-
ties by His blessing, 5 . 124


8. They attain their. moral excel-

lences by His blessing, . . «© 124
i, Are of great worth amongst men, . 194
1, Understanding is eaential to the
beneficent employment of other

gifts and powers,
2. The loyment of understand.
ing flgelt cictans great benefits


- 124


Upon society, . . . . 125
ated fie the Christ 109
Easen tial characteristios of the ministry
are—
i, Devotedness to God’s Word, . . 100
ii, Personal religion, , A c . 108
fii, Public instruction, . 110


Ministry to the erection of God’s spiritual
temple, the subserviency of a faithful


(See Exxcrion), . . ane 94
Orrznpens, the listof,. . . « 176
i, A warning against sin, . - 170

1, Sin extending to all clases, ° 44


2, Sin injuring the ip iamogae


ANALYTICAL INDEX.





PAGE PAGE
8. Sin corrupting the influence, . 171 1. Are characterised by unaffected
ii, An example of genuine repentance, 171 humility, . ° . ° ° 117
1, They confessed their sin with 2. Sincere piety, A 5 . « 11
SOITOW, . 171 8. Practical religiousness, rae oly
2: They offered eee for thelr ii. The grand object of praise, . aly,
sin, . ; q igi 1. The Supreme Being, 5 Us
Bs They forsook their SINS ee 5. left 2. In covenant relation with His
iii, An encouragement to genuine re- worshippers, . plkd
pentance, é F 6 All 3. And whom our fathers. wor-
1. Their sin was forgiven, ° 171 shipped, . 5 . . ~ 117
2. The Divine favour was youch- iii. Good reasons for praise, . e LES
safed, ‘ Al 1, God inspires the worthy pur-
Offerings, porseasions and (See Posses- poses of men, . . 118
SIONS), « . ri . 6 wed 2. He beneficially influences the
moral judgments of men, . . 118
8. He invigorates the heart and
Passover, the celebration of the as life of His servants, - 118
PasSOVER), . 97 | Preparations for rebuilding "the Temple,
Pedigree, the importance of a . clear spi- the, : 44
ritual, . 29 i The great work yet to be sccom-
i. The doubtful pedigree amongst the plished, . 5 - ° . 44
peeple an illustration of uncer- An illustration of —
tainty as to our spiritual state,. 29 1. The incompleteness of human
1. It may consist with association joys, 44
with the people of God, . 5 2. The incompleteness ‘of human
2. It must involve epiritual losa, . 29 works, , 44
4, The doubtful pedigree amongst the 8. The obligation of the Church of
priests an illustration of uncer- God, 44
tainty as to our ministerial call- fi. The prompt "preparations for the
ing and condition, 30 accomplishment of this work, . 44
1, A winisterial pedigree may be 1. The variety of service and ‘the
lost by woridliness, 80 unity of design, 44
2. The loss of ministerial pedigree 2. The co-operation of. Jews and
involves a corresponding loss of Gentiles, . 48
ministerial power and reward, 80 | Proclamation of Cyrus ‘and the Gospel,
& The final decision as to the atand- resemblance between the (See
ing of & minister of uncertain RESEMBLANCE), . . 5s
pedigree must be given by God Proclamation of Cyrua, the, 5 ee
Himself, 30 i In a way of literal interpretation, . 11
Pilgrimage of the Christian, from Ahava 1. The person by whom was
to Jerusalem, an illustration of the, 138 issued, , . es BY
i, The setting out from Ahava, . 1388 2. The proclamation itself, : ee |
1, From captivity to liberty, . 138 ii, In a way of spiritual improvement, 12
2. From exile to their ancestral 1. What asad state men of the world
home, . 188 arein, . 12
8, From the land of idolatry to the 2 What an invaluable blessing the
scene of true worship, 6 . 138 Gospel ig, . 13
ii, The progress on the journey, . 138 8, What is necessary to obtain what
1. Notwithstanding enemies, . lag it offers? . 12
2. By reason of the Divine biessing, 139 4 What is our duty when it has
fii, Tne arrival at Jerusalem-—charac- become effectual for our good? 12
terised by, : ° . . 139 | Proposal of the Samaritans to the Jews,
1. Grateful rest, . . . . 189 the, . 54
2. Joyful welcome, . . - 139 i. The alge ‘made by the Samari-
Possessions and offerings, A Ge tans, H re ay |
i. The completion of their j journey, - 382 1. Plausible in its form, ‘ - O64
ii. The extent of their possessions, . 32 2. Evil in itself, . 54
iii. The presentation of their offerings, 32 ii The proposal rejected by the Jews, 55
1. The object of their offerings, . 32 1. An exclusive obligation in rela-
2. The spirit of their offerings, oS tion to the work ia asserted, . 56
8. The measure of their offerings, . 338 2. The alleged similarity of worship
iv. The sestlement in their cities, - 33 is denied, , 65
1. Home after exile, 5 - 83 8. The edanaand of King Cyrus i is
2. Rest after a long and tedious adduced, ; BB
journey, . : . . 33 4. The rejection of the proposal was
Praise, exemplary, j uy unanimous, . 86
f, The true offerers of praise, ‘ V7 5. It was prompt and decided, - &4


ANALYTICAL INDEX.





Paas |


Proposals of the wicked and how to treat


them, the, . 57

i, The wicked often propose to enter
into alliance with the good, . 57

ii, These proposals are often supported
by plausible reasons, 57

iii, These proposals are always perilous
to the good, . 57

vi. These proposals should always be
firmly rejected, 58

Proposed, the reformation (See Reror-
MATION, . . 158
Prudence, faith and (See Farrz), . 5 - 128

REBUILDING the Temple, the preparations
for (See PREPARATIONS), . 44
Record, a suggestive, . 25

i The a ignificance of the fact of the
record, , 25

1. It was an honour to those who
returned, . 25

2. It is an illustration of the Divine
record of God’s spiritual Israel, 25

8. It suggests that every one of His

people is precious in the sight of
; - ° . : . 25

ii, The significance of the contents of
the record, 5 . - 26
1. Significant persons, . . - 25
2 A significant place, . . 7 26
8. Significant numbers, , 25

Redemption of man from sin, the release

of the Jews from Babylon an illvstra-
tion of the, . : . ° Pee © |
i, The subjects, . . . ° - 14
iii The agents, . es
1, Both were called of God, . 4

2 Both effected this work by over-
coming the oppressors, , . 14
iii. The source, . - Z « 14
iv, The extent, . ° . oS
1. It is offered to all, ; ay, aa 3
2. It is accepted only by some, TLD
v. The object, ° 15

1. The universal realisation of the
presence of God, . 15

2. The universal presentation of
worship to God, “ Pine
Reformation decided upon, the, . 163

L-Tbhe summons to the people to
assemble at Jerusalem, . 168

1. The circumstances in which it
originated, . - 163

2. The persons to whom it was
addressed, - 163

8, The authority by which it was
issued, , . 163

4. The apeedy obedience which it
required, , . 163

5, The penalties by which it was
enforeed, . 164

iL The assembly ‘of the people at Jeru-

salem in obedience to this sum-
mons, . - 164

1. The universal attendance at the

assembly, . ° ’ ‘ . 164 |


1 '





% The felt importance of the
assembly, . 5
8 The depressed spirit of the
assembly, ;
iii, The address of Eura to the assem-
bled people,
1. A declaration of their sin, . c
2, An exhortation to repentance,
iv. The declaration of the assembled
people,
1. The unanimity of their determi-
nation, .
2, The earnestness of their deter-
mination, e ’ . .
Reformation effected, the, . .
ii Notwithstanding difficulties, . :
1. The greatness of theundertaking,
2. The inclemency of the weather,
ii, Notwithstanding opposition, .
iii, With aoe wisdom and fair-
ness,
1. By the proper authorities, .
2, With competent and reliable wit-

‘messes, .

8. In the presence ‘of the accused, . :

4. With due regard for the conve-

nience of the people, . .

5. With careful inquiry, : 6

iv. Thoroughly, . . .

Reformation proposed, the, : . :

i, The proposal of reformation pre-
pared for, .

This was by the impression which
Ezra’s conduct produced, which
was—

1. Sympathetic, . ° ' .
2, Extensive, * ° . .
8. Deep, F :
ii. The proposal of reformation made, 4
1, It frankly acknowledges the sin,
2. Discovers reasons for hope,
8. Proposes the abolition of the ain,
4. Summons Ezgza to take the lead
in abolishing it, . .
5. Promises co-operation in abo-
lishing it, .
iii, The proposal of reformation accepted,
1, It was accepted -ceciztptermee
2, Extensively, . ° °
3. Solemnly,

Release of the J ewa from Babylon an
illustration of the redemption of man
froin sin (See REDEMPTION), . °

Religious service (See SERVICE)

Resemblance between the proclamation

of Cyrus and the Gospel,

i, In the disposition from which it ori-
ginated,

ii. In the

nounced, .

iii, In the terms which it specified, ;
iv. In the universality of its offers, .
v. In the aids it promised, . . .

Restoration of the sacred vessels, the,

i, The preservation of the sacred ves-

sels, . e

ii, The aumeration of the ssored vessels,


189


deliverance whioh it an-


- 164
- 164


. 164
. 164
. 164


. 164
165
165


5 Gy)


167
167
167
168


- 168


168


- 168
168


168
168
169
158


. 158


158
158
158
158
158


. 158


159
159


160
160


. 160


160
. 160


14
27


“® Op Ge ce es


19


20


A4NALYTIOAL INDEX.





PAGE
fii, The restoration of the sacred vessels, 20
1. A fulfilment of prophecy, . - 20

2. An illustration of the restoration

of perverted things to their true


uses, - ; 5 AY

Results of the captivity, ‘the, ; ° 19
i. The lesson of the kingdom was com-

pleted by it, . 19


ii, It was both the ‘punishment and the
limit of their idolatry, . 19

iii, The organisation of the outward
Church was connected with the
purifying of doctrine, and served
as the form in which the truth
might be reatised by the mass,. 19

fv. The bond by which the people was
held together was felt to be reli-
gious, not local, nor even pri-
marily national, . 19


Resumed, the great work (See Worx) 5 th!
Return of the exiles, the, ° . 16
i. The company who returned, . - 16

1. They were of various classes, - 16

2. Of noble character, . : 5, by


8. Exalted in purpose, . 4 - WV
4, Comparatively few in number, . 17
fi, The assistance which they received, 17
1. Was general, . : ° -


2. Spontaneous, . 17
8. Honourable to both "givers and
receivers, . MeN vik 5 AVS


Samanirans, the saecess of the subtle
scheme of the, or the temporary
triumph of thewicked (See TRIUMPH), 68

Samaritans to the Jews, the hostility of


the (See Hosrixiry), 61
Samaritans to the Jews, the proposal of

the (See Proposatj, : 54
Scriptures, studying, practising, and teach-

ing the (See SrupYING), . . 107
Search, and an important discovery, a

thorough, 84


i, The search for the ‘deeree of Cyrus, 84
1, Was thorough, . . . » 84
2. And successful, . 84
Honest jand thorough investigation
promotes the interestsof religion, 84
ii, The discovery of the decree of Cyrua, 84
1. That the Temple should be re-


built, é 84
2. Thatthe expenses be granted from
the royal revenues, . . 85


8. That the sacred vessels be restored, 85
The advantages of written history, 85


seeking the Lord, and its advantages, . 184
i. Seeking God, and its advantages, . 135
I, What sesking God denotes, - 135

(1.} A coneciousness ef our
init 5 P « 185
(2.) Karneat prayer to Him, . 185


(8.) To come to Him in the way
of His appointment, . - 135
(4.) To labour in all things for


His approbation, f 185
8. What are'the pion of seek-
ing God, . ' : . 188


190





Paen

His hand upon us for our good, 185

ii, Forsaking God, and ita evils, . . 185
1. What it is to forsake God, lob

2. What are the evils of so doing, . 136
ee Divine, . F110


. Diligent searching for the law of
God,

ii, A hearty doing of the discovered
will, 116

iii, Then may we steach the law of the
Lord, . . . e - 110
Service, religious, . 5 eA

i, There are various spheres of service
in the Church, . 5 27

ii, The humblest of these is a place of
privilege and honour, 5 38

iii, The privilege of this service is not

limited to any particular races or
classes of men, . 28

Bin, the good man’s confession of the
people’s (See Convussion), .  . 147


Sin, the good man’s sorrow over the
people’s (See Sorkow), . . 148
Sinning, arguments against (See Anav-
MENTS), . : 80
Sorrow over the people’s sin, the good
man’s . - 143
i The painful communication made to
- 148


1. Of a great ‘sin eommitted, . 6 - 143

2. Of the prevalence of this sin, . 144

8. Of the aggravations of the sin, . 144
fi, The effect of this communication


upon Ezra, . ° . 144
1, Great amazement, A . . 144
2. Deep grief, I . 144


8. Intense moral indignation, - 145
ii, The effect of Ezra’s grief upon
others, . . - 145
1, It excited their ‘alarm, “ - 145
2. It attracted them to him, .
Sovereign and the duty of subjects, the
desire of a (See DzstRp), . A 90
Studying, practising, and teaching the


Sacred Scriptures, . - 107
i, The acquisition of Divine truth for
himself, . - 107
fi, The embodiment of Divine truth in
his life, 107
fii. The communication of Divine truth
to others, - 108
Suggestive record, a (See Ruoonp), - 26
Supremacy of God, the, c : - 78
i, The supremacy of God, . . . 78
. Ite ground, ° e ° e 78
2 Its extent, ry e e 78
ii, The obligation of man, ,. . . 79
To obey Him—
ak Completely, e e 8 - 79
2, Perpetually, . . So) A)
8. Heartily,. . « .« . 79
4, Joyously,. . cme SRD
ili, The privilege of man, . . . 72
Surrender of important trusts, the faith.
ful, ae 140


i A sacred trust faithfully dis-
charged,


ANALYTICAL INDEX.








PAGE


1. With minute Soha and rever-
ent care,


2. With a grateful sense Por relich
ii. Divine worship devoutly offered,

1. An acknowledgment of sin,

2. An expression of thankfulness, .

3. An indication of the unity of the
twelve tribes, . ° .

iii. The royal letters duly delivered, :

1. An evidence of loyalty to the
Persian government, . 4

2, An evidence of their supreme re-
gard for Jehovah,

iv, Valuable help promptly rendered,
Teaching the Scriptures, studying, prac-
tising, and (See Stupyina), .
Temple, laying the foundation of the (See

Founpation),

Temple of God, the true builders of the
spiritual (See BUILDERS),

Temple, the building of the (See Bur.
INQ), A

Temple, the completion of the (See Com-
PLETION), °

Temple, the dedication of the (See Devt
CATION), . 5 5 tes

Temple, the dedication of the second
(See DepiIcaTIon), .

Temple, the preparations for rebuilding
(See PREPARATIONS),

Temple, the subserviency of a faithful
Tuinistry to the erection of God’s
spiritual (See ERECTION), - .

Times, Ezra and his (See Ezra), . °

Triumph of the wicked, tle temporary,
the success of the subtle scheme of
the Samaritans, or, 5 °

ii The letter of the king, .

1, Suggests that the subtlety of the
wicked frequently obtains a tem-
porary triumph over the good,

2. That one generation frequently
suffers pce the sins of an-
other, 2

8. That the cause “of God ia fre-
quently reproached and hindered
vy the evil conduct of some of


its adherents, . . °

ii, The action of the ’ Samaritans, r ;
1. Was prompt, . . . °

2. Personal, . ° . . .

3. Powerful, . : 5 ° °


UNDERSTANDING, men of (See Mex),


VzsseELs, the restoration of the sacred
(See ResToxarion), . . .


WICKED, and how to treat them, the pro-
posals of the (See PROPOSALS),
Word of the Lord, the fulfilment of the
(See FULFILMENT), .
Work investigated and eontinued, the
great, 6
i The sacred work investigated by the
secular authorities, . :


140
141
141
141
141


141
141


141


- 141
141


- 107
46
59
49
91

101

100
44


94
130


68
68


68


68


68
68
69
69
69


124
19


57


78
73





7


1. The nature of the investigation,
2. The spirit ot the investigation, .
ii, The sacred work carried on through
the Divine blessing, °
1. The Divine interest in the work,
2. The Divine oversight of the
work, °
% The Divine inspiration of the
workers, .
4. The Divine protection of the
workers, . °
Work of the day done in the day, the A
Applicable to—
i. Life in general, ,
ii. Prosperity, . °
fii. Adversity, . °
iv. The Sabbath, °
v. To every day, °
Work resumed, the great
i. The inciters to the work, 5
1. Want of interest in the work is
implied, .
2. Obligation to perform the work
is implied, :
&. Exhortations to resume the work
are given, ° ° °
ii, The leaders in the work, A
1. They resumed the work readily,
2. They led the work appropriate ¥,


eeeee
eeeese @


. The helpers in the work, . 0 ;


The prophets assisted by—
1, Exhortations to vigorous proses
cution of the work, . .
2. Ansurances of the prezence of
God with them, :
3, Promises of blessings from God
to them, .
iv. The great first cause of the work, .
Work, the letter to the king converning
the (See Lerrxr), .
Worship, exemplary features “of Divine ;
the rebuilding of the Altar, . °
i. Unanimity and seal, . ‘ .
ii. Sacrifice, 3
1. Man’s need of " stonement with


God,
2. Man’s duty of ‘self-consecration
to God, e ° ° ° e
iii. Respect for precedent, . ° .
iv. Conformity to Scripture, ° Ps
v. Fear of enemies, ,
1. Should not intimidate us from
worship, . °
2. Should Tapel us to worship F
vi, Regularity, .
1. Our daily need of ” atonement
with God,
2. Our daily need ‘of renewed con-
secration,. °


8. And of renewed "blessings, . 2


ZEAL, good cause for great, .
i, We acknowledge a gracious fat,
ii. A duty recognised, . c 5
iii, A course of action pursued, . °


191


m3
78


72
72


72
72


75


86
36
36


86


37
87
87
37


87
87
87


88
38


65
65
66
67





ee


Sins
~


s
: 7
' .
a 1 walt te
rl 4?
7
' La
: . a
ti <a
‘ a
7
* ‘ :
wi
oR
“ar
: ie
r = ; rt
ry
7





HOMILETICAL COMMENTARY


on TE


BOOK OF NEHEMIAH.


(CHAPTERS I, TO VI.)


BEV. W. H. BOOTH, REV. J, H. GOO DMA,


AND


REV. 8S. GREGORY.


Printed in the United State:


FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK anp LONDON





PREFACK,


1818 book is one of a series on the Old Testament, projected by
Mr. R. D. Dickinson of Farringdon Street. The object of the
series is to lend occasional aid to busy men. If the following
pages should help such in the Aomiletic treatment of an unread


Book of the Bible, they will have accomplished their purpose.





eS i







ed cen cody sted aes (neat
ela Pao bie: etet brane, motte he an ae:


oy
ag 1 ie.


mp entha a4” a ae i? se Ly lata ae
te
Soe we Peart saesle 1: sts rad ae rg


eo
a
; 7
-


eo pee & ee





re
7
7 x
4 ;
1
24
a
ae
as
’
1s
* =
= i
i
Ly
7) f
¥,
oe
¥
Miy f
ara |
mie
aa \
t Aan
¢ { yf
4)
a ce us i
Tar


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


NEHEMIAH.





INTRODUCTION.


I Biographical Sketch. Nehemiah was the son of Hachaliah (ch. i. 1), and
brother of Hanani (ch. vii. 7). His father had not availed himself of the permission
to return to his fatherland, withheld probably by possessions and honours acquired
in the land of captivity. He was apparently of the tribe of Judah, since his
fathers were buried at Jerusalem, and Hanani his kinsman seems to have been of
that tribe (ch. ii. 3; vii. 2). Some think he was of priestly descent, because his
name appears at the head of a list of priests in Neh. x. 1—8; but it is obvions
from ch. ix. 38, that he stands there as a prince, and not as a priest. The
expression in v. 18, that Nehemiah “ offered sacrifice,” implies no more than that
he provided the sacrifices. Whilst acting as cupbearer in the royal palace at
Shushan, in the 20th year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, or B. 0. 446, he received
tidings of the mournful] and desolate condition of the returned colony in Judea,
and obtained permission of the king to make a journey to Jerusalem, and there to
act as lieutenant or governor. Being furnished with this high commission, which
included letters to the satraps and subordinates, and enjoying the protection of a
military escort (ii. 9), Nehemiah reached Jerusalem in the year B,o. 446, and
reiaained there till B. 0, 434, being actively engaged for 12 years in promoting
the public good (v. 14). During this time Nehemiah refused to receive his lawful
allowance as governor, in consideration of the poverty of the people, and moreover
maintained at his own expense a table for 150 Jews, at which any who returned
from captivity were welcome. He returned to Persia B.o0. 434, but hearing of
new abuses having crept in during his absence revisited Judea, where he effected
various reforms. It is not unlikely that he remained at his post until about B. 0
405, towards the close of the reign of Darius Nothus. That he lived to be an old
man is thus quite probable from the sacred history, and this is expressly declared
by Josephus, who states that he died at an advanced age. Of the place and year
of his death nothing is known.

II. Authorship of Book. Generally attributed to Nehemiah. The central part
(vii. 6—xii. 31) is somewhat different in style. The writer does not speak in the


2 INTRODUCTION.





first person as elsewhere, and there seems to be a different use of the Divine names,
Jehovah, Adonai, Elohim. These differences are no proof against Nehemiah’s
authorship. The same feature occurs in Daniel. All Old Testament writers use
documents of which they were not the authors. Chap. vii. 6—73 is professedly a
register which Nehemiah found and inserted. Chap. viii—xi. 30, may have been
composed by Ezra and incorporated by Nehemiah into his work. Chap. ix. 5—38
is a prayer probably composed by Ezra, and chaps. x. 1—27 ; xi. 3—26 contain
lists of names doubtless extracted from public annals, Chaps. viii., ix. 3, and x.
28, xi. 2, may have been written either by Nehemiah or some contemporary
Levite. They relate to priestly matters in which the civil governor could not
appear as the most prominent person.

III. Date of Book. Probably compiled by Nehemiah after the 32nd year of
Artaxerxes. Supposing him to have written it about 10 years before his death,
and about thirty years after his first visit to Jerusalem, we arrive at the year B. 0.
415, at which time it would be possible for him to relate and describe all that is
contained in the canonical Book of Nehemiah.

IV. Object of Book. Briefly to describe what Nehemiab effected at one time by
direct personal effort, at another in conjunction with Ezra. As Nehemiah’s efforts
for the civil welfare of the people were but a continuation of those by which
Zerubbabel the prince, Joshua the high-priest, and Ezra the scribe had laid the
foundation of the community of returned exiles, so does his Book form the
continuation and completion of that of Ezra, and may be regarded as its second
part and sequel. It is not only similar in style, but has the same historical object,
viz.—to show how the people of Israel after their return from the Babylonish
captivity, were, by the instrumentality of Nehemiah, fully re-established in the
Jand of Promise.

V. Canonicity of Book. Never seriously disputed. Nowhere quoted in the
New Testament. Generally included in the Book of Ezra.

VI. Language and Style. Similar to that of the Chronicles of Ezra. Some
few words and forms are not found elsewhere in Scripture, but the general Hebrew
is exactly that of books purporting to be of the same age. Several words occur
only in this Book as, Sahvar (to inspect), Mogal (a lifting up), Tahalukah (a
procession), Mikrah (reading), and a few more. The text of Nehemiah is generally
pure and free from corruption, except in the proper names, in which there is
considerable fluctuation in the orthography, both as compared with other parts of
the same Book, and with the same names in other parts of Scripture.

VII. Contemporaneous History. Samaritan. The Samaritans were not
descendants of the ten tribes, but a purely heathen people who at first included
Jehovah in the number of their gods, and by degrees, under the influence of their
relations with the Jews, came to worship him as the only true God. They were
not however recognized by the Jews as having any part in God’s inheritance,
Their attitude was bitterly hostile to the Hebrews, and their power to hinder


INTRODUCTION. 8








ee t

increased by the fact that as native heathen they would be trusted by the Persian
monarch. Sanballat was their chief at this time. Hebrew. Judea was thinly
populated by the returning exiles. Jerusalem, an open village, exposed to all the
attacks of its neighbours. The temple rebuilt by Ezra was still unfinished. A
few isolated dwellings existed amidst the rubbish which lay in such great heaps
about the city that the way round it was impassable. The prophet Malachi closed
the Old Testament canon towards the end of Nehemiah’s life. Persian.
Artaxerxes I. (surnamed Longimanus, on account of his long hands) was king.
Persia was in its zenith of splendour and power, although the elements of decay
were already beginning to work in the empire. Artaxerxes had come to the
throne through the assassination of his father Xerxes by Artabanus the chief of
the guard, At the instigation of Artabanus he put his brother Darius to death as
the murderer of his father, but on discovering the designs of Artabanus against
himself he slew the double traitor. He then subdued a revolt headed by his
brother Hystaspes, reduced rebellious Egypt, and made peace with Greece. The
empire then enjoyed a period of quiet which may be regarded as the culminating
point of its glory, during which the events of Nehemiah’s history occurred.—
Lange. Roman. Herodotus flourished B. oc. 450. Rome governed by Censors,
and Peloponnesian war B. 0. 431. Roman empire was rising into power. (recian.
Pericles flourished at Athens, B.o. 461—429. Socrates, Xenophon, and
Thucydides were contemporaneous with Nehemiah. Plato was born B.o. 429,
the year in which Pericles died, and about fourteen yeara before Nehemiah’s
probable death.


VIII. Contents of Book.
1, ANALYSIS.
(i) Preparation for the wall building.
1. Nehemiah’s grief and prayer (ch. 1.).
2. Nehemiah’s petition to the king (ch. if 1—8),
3. Nehemiah’s journey (ch. ii 9—11).
4, Nehemiah’s inspection and appeal (ii. 12—20).
(ii) The wall building.
. The stations (ch. iii.).
The opposition from without (ch. fv.).
The opposition from within (ch. v.).
. The craft of the enemies (ch. vi).
The guarding of the gates (ch. vii. 1—4),
. The genealogy (ch. vii. 5—73).
(iii.) Discipline of the new community.
1. The public reading of the law (ch. viil. 1—12).
2. The preparations for the feast of tabernacles (eh. viil 13—16),
8. The feast of tabernacles Sega 17, 18).
B


an m oo bh


INTRODUCTION.





4, The special fast (ch. ix, x.).

5. The distribution of the inhabitants (ch. x1).
6, The Levitical genealogy (ch. xii. 1—26).

7. The dedication of the walls (ch. xii. 27—43).


(iv.) Later reforms.
1. Levitical apportionments (ch. xii. 44—47).
2. Separation from strangers (ch. xiii. 1—3).
3. Nehemiah’s reforms 12 years later (ch. xiii. 4—$1).


2. InciDENTAL REFERENCES.


We learn incidentally the prevalence of usury, and of slavery as its consequence ;
the judicial use of corporal punishment (xiii. 25); the continuance of false
prophets (vi. 7, 12, 14); the restitution of the Mosaic provision for the main-
tenance of the priests and Levites, and the due performance of the Temple service
(xiii. 10); the freer promulgation of the Holy Scriptures by the public reading of
them (viii. 1); and the more general acquaintance with them arising from their
col.ection into one volume, and the general stimulus given to the art of reading
among the Hebrews during their residence in Babylon; the reviving trade with
Tyre (xiii. 16) ; the agricultural pursuits, and wealth of the Jews (v. 11; xiii. 5);
the -teudency to take heathen wives, indicating possibly a disproportion in the
number of Jewish males and females (x. 30; xiii. 3); the danger the Hebrew
language was in of being corrupted (xiii. 24); the hereditary crafts practised by
certain priestly families, e, g. the apothecaries, or makers of sacred ointments and
incense (iii, 8), and the goldsmiths, whose business it probably was to repair the
sacred vessels (iii. 8,, and who may be regarded as the ancestors of the money-
changers in the Temple (John ii. 14); and statistics, reminding us of Domesday-
Book, concerning not only the cities and families of the returned exiles, but the
number of their horses, mules, camels, and asses (vii.)—Smith. The list of returned
captives who came under different leaders from the time of Zerubbabel to that of
Nehemiah (amounting in all to only 42,360 adult males, and 7,337 servants), which
is given in ch. vii., conveys a faithful picture of the political weakness of the
Jewish nation as compared with the times when Judah alone numbered 470,000
fighting men (1 Chron. xxi. 5). This explains the great difficulty felt by Nehemiah
in peopling Jerusalem with a sufficient number of inhabitants to preserve it from
assault (vii. 3; xi. 1). It is an important azd too, in understanding the subse.
quent history, and in appreciating the valour and patriotism by which they attained
their independence under the Maccabees. The account of the wall-building contains
the most valuable materials for settling the topography of Jerusalem to be found in
Scripture.


OMAP. 1] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH, §
hr hese
7!


CHAPTER L


Expianwatory Nores.] 1. The words] (Heb. Divray), See 1 Kings xi. 41, where the same
word is rendered ‘‘acts.”” Hachaliah] His ancestral home was Jerusalem (ii, 3). Hence he was
probably of the tribe of Judah. Having amassed a fortune, and gained a position at Susa, he was
unwilling to avail himself of the permission to return to his fatherland. By his influence he had
probably opened a way for the advancement of his still more distinguished son. Chisleu] The third
month of the civil, and ninth of the ecclesiastical year, coinciding with parts of our November and
December. In the twentieth year] That is, of the reign of Artaxerxes I., surnamed Longimanus
(Long-handed), B. 0. 446. Shushan] Sometimes called Susa or Suses, the capital of Persia,
situated in the plains of the Tigris, was from the time of Cyrus the winter palace of the king, and
residence of the Court. Xenophon, Plutarch, and others, mention both Babylon and Ecbatana as its
seat during some part of the year, The province of Susiana is now called Kusistan. Shuster, its
capital, contains 15,000 inhabitants. The Susian palace was a magnificent building, remarkable for
its “ pillars of marble, its pavement of blue, red, white, and black, and its hangings of white, green,
and blue, which were fastened with cords of fine linen and purple to the pillars” (Est. i. 6). The
peas was furnished with couches of gold and silver, on which the guests reclined when they

anqueted. The drinking vessels were also of solid gold (v. 7). The present ruins of Susa cover a
space a mile square, the portion of which near the river Shapur is probably ‘‘ Shushan the palace.”
2. Hanani] Brother by blood relationship (vii. 1), afterwards appointed one of the assistant
- governors of Jerusalem (vii. 2). That had escaped] They had been allowed to return by the edict
of Cyrus (Ezrai.). Came] The distance from Jerusalem to Susa is more than 1000 miles, and at
the usual rate of travelling would occupy 45 days. In winter it would occupy at least 2 months,
Ezra with his caravan was four months on his journey from Babylon to Jerusalem (Ezra vii. 9),
8. The wall of Jerusalem is broken down] In ruins, not utterly razed, or it could not have been
built in 62 days. Nebuchadnezzar had broken it down 142 years before (2 Kings xxv. 10), and the
attempt to rebuild had been stopped by Smerdis 76 years before this date. 4 God of heaven]
(Elohe-hash-shamayim), a phrase not confined to writers of Babylonish period (Gen. xxiv. 3, 7;
Jonah i. 9). It distinguished Jehovah from the gods of earth formed of material substances. The
style is repeated in Rey. xi. 13 (6 Ged¢ rov ovpavov). 5. Terrible] Awe-inspiring (Heb. Norah).
That keepeth covenant and mercy] Lit. “that keepeth the covenant of mercy.’”’ “The great and
terrible God,” is borrowed from Deut, vii, 21, and ‘‘ that keepeth,” &c, from Deut, vii. 9. 6. Let
thine ear be attentive, &c.] A phrase derived from Solomon’s prayer (1 Kings viii. 29), Refers
to the greater attention paid by the ear when the eyes are open towards the source of the sound.
8. The word which thou commandedst thy servant Moses] Not the words, but the spirit of the
promise, is given (Lev. xxvi. 39—42), 11. The king’s cupbearer] (Heb. Mashkeh, one who gives
to drink, Greek eivoydoc, wine-pourer). The office one of great honour and confidence, since it
gave an opportunity of being near the king’s person. It gave Nehemiah an opportunity of
Increasing his fortune, a circumstance which afterwards very much facilitated his mission. —
Hengstenberg, The chief butler or cupbearer to the king of Egypt was the means of raising
Joseph to his hich position, Rabshakeh, who was sent by Sennacherib to Hezekiah, appears from
his name to have fulfilled a like office in the phen court,—Gesenius. Cupbearers are also
mentioned as amongst the attendants of Solomon (1 Kings x. 5; 2 Chron. ix. 4).


HOMILETICAL CONTENTS OF CHAPTER L
Ver. 1—11. Characteristics of a True Reformer. ,; Ver.6. Importunity in Prayer.


» 1. Goodness superior to Circumstances, » 7. Forgotten Sins remembered.
» 2 Aggressive Benevolence, » 8. God's Memory. :

» 3. The baneful consequences of Sin. », 8, 9, Punishment and Penitenee,
» 4 Unselfish Sorrow. » 10. Electing Grace.

» 4. Fasting. »» 10. Modest Goodness,

5» O11, Intercessory Prayer. »» 11, Unanswered Prayers.

y» 6—I11. Prayer for Church Revival, », 11, Man’s Equality before God,
» 5. The Majesty and Merey of God,


OHARACTERISTICS OF A TRUE REFORMER.
i. 1—11. The words of Nehemiah, the son of Hachaliah.


Nenemie the civilian, as contrasted with Ezra the ecclesiastic, is brought
forward in this Book as the patriot deliverer of his people. ia Aeaining’ had fully


¢ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. (CHAP. 1.
a a


qualified him for the onerous position he was called to occupy. He may be
regarded as a typical reformer. No blot can be found on his character, no guile in
his spirit. Note concerning this typical reformer :

I. His motives are pure. Personal ambition is sunk in desire for the public
good. Selfish motives are abandoned for generous impulses, Reward is unthought
of. Truth and freedom are sought for, oblivious of personal gain 1. He accepts
royal distinction that he may advance his people's interests. He had risen from an
exile captive to be a royal cupbearer by the force and moral worth of his character,
in spite of jealousy and an alien creed. The title “Tirshatha,” or commander, had
been given him, and he became one of the most powerful subjects of the Persian
monarch. This honour, though won by personal merit, is not employed in the
service of personal ambition, but in the interests of his oppressed kinsmen and
feliew-citizens. Royal distinction may only be accepted by a true reformer
conditionally, (1) That no vital principle is sacrificed. The Jew must not become
a heathen either in morals or worship. The mandates of a monarch must not
override the monitions of conscience. Truth must not bow to expediency. The
knee must not bend to either Baal or Dagon. The “Golden Image” cannot be
recognized, even though the fiery furnace be the alternative. Nehemiah sacrificed
no vital principle in accepting royal favour. He remained true to his nation
and loyal to his God. He was known as a sympathizer with the cause of the
oppressed exiles. The deputation from Judea came to him openly at the royal
palace, fearing no molestation. Openly he received and welcomed them. Con-
ditionally, (2) That it is made subservient to hés people's good. Apart from this,
Nehemiah’s exalted separation from his oppressed fellow-countrymen would have
been unpatriotic and selfishly mercenary. At Shushan he was really serving
them better than he could have done at Jerusalem. For (1) he was learning the
principles of government at the very seat and centre of the most powerful
government of the world. In the royal palace, and under a right royal sovereign,
he was gaining a royal spirit. Thus had God prepared other great leaders for
their life work. Joseph and Moses in the court of Pharaoh learned lessons which
were invaluable to the chosen seed. (2) He had access to the monarch himself.
Such a boon was no small privilege, and eventually led to events of the utmost
importance. 2. He employs what influence he may possess for the benefit of hia
people's cause. His position gave him considerable influence at Court, which he
wielded, not, as most would have done, for his own personal aggrandizement, but
for the benefit of his people’s cause. Thus, like Joseph and Esther, he was able to
influence royal decrees in favour of the Hebrew exiles. Most of the Jews were
unable to approach Artaxerxes’ person, but the office of Nehemiah gave him an
introduction which he was not slow to use for his country and people. Some have
opportunities of usefulness denied to others. They have the eye, the ear, the
favour of the great. ‘They should use these not for selfish purposes; but to
mention truths which elevated persons seldom hear, to recommend religion which
they generally misunderstand, to plead for those who are seldom represented in
royal circles. Personal influence is one of the talents for which we are responsible
to God. How are we using it? Jerome tells us that Nebridius, though a courtier
and nephew to the empress, never made suit but for the relief of the poor afflicted.
Terence, one of the generals of the emperor Valens, being bidden to ask what he
would, asked nothing but that the Church might be delivered from her Arian foes.
Thereupon, says Theodoret, the emperor tore into shreds his petition and bid him
ask again, when he replied he would never ask anything for himself if he might
not prevail for the Church, 3, He ts always ready to relinguish personal luaury
for the public good. If he enjoys honour and emolument on his brethren’s behalf
the moment their interests demand their surrender the sacrifice must be made.
Herein consists difference between genuine and spurious patriotism. The one
delights in self-sacrifice ; the other feeds on ambition. Such self-denial is required





cuaP, 1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. ?


SO
(1) if the suffering can be the better served. Hitherto it had not been so, The
time had now come when Nehemiah can only serve them by coming amongst
them. Duty summoned him from the ease and luxury, to the privation and
ceaseless toil of Jerusalem, and he ‘‘ conferred not with flesh and blood,’’ but gave
up all at once. Such self-denial is required (2) if personal honour be associated
with the people’s oppression. The true patriot cannot serve two masters, or be
loyal to two antagonistic principles. If the sovereign be a tyrant, his place is
with the people. The side of the oppressed is alike the side of justice and of
mercy. The bread of luxury is then mildewed with the tears of the slave, and
the wine of the banquet mingled with the blood of the rack. Thus are all faithful
servants of God called upon to lay down their goods, and their lives, ¢f need be, in
defence of the Church. For this cause Isaiah gave his body to be sawn asunder.
For this cause Jeremiah was cast into a filthy dungeon, and Daniel into a den of
lions. For this cause Paul pleaded his cause in chains at Jerusalem and Rome
before Festus, Felix, and Agrippa; and Jesus before Annas, Caiaphas, Herod,
and Pilate ; and for this cause John the Baptist lost his head. He that will lose
his life thus shall certainly find it. In this respect Nehemiah was a type of Christ,
who ‘‘ though he was rich, for our sakes became poor,” &c. (2 Cor. viii. 9).





Illustration :—Turner, the greatest of English landscape painters, had a generous nature. He
was one of the hanging committee of the Royal Academy. The walls were full, when Turner’s
attention was attracted by a picture sent in by an unknown provincial artist, “A good picture,”
he exclaimed, “it must be hung up and exhibited.’ ‘“ Impossible,” responded the committee,
“The arrangement cannot be disturbed; quite impossible.” “A good ruses, reiterated Turner,
“it must be hung up;” and finding his colleagues as obstinate as himself, he took down one of his
own pictses and hung up this in its place.


II. His sympathies are generous. 1. His ear is open to the ery of distress.
Though rich he listens attentively to the story of woe: though occupying a high
position he gives heed to the wants of his poorer brethren. Communion and
sympathy are the instincts of a true and genuine patriotism. Nehemiah was
not a mere passive listener, for he “asked them concerning the Jews.” He
entered into particulars, and was minute in his inquiries. The inquiry of
an uninterested or half-interested person, would have been alike curt and
cursory. Court life and duties had not deadened his human sympathy. “The
good man heareth the cause of the poor,” says Solomon (Prov. xxix.). The duty
of every good man to consider his complaint, and pity and help him. 2. His
heart is deeply affected by the tidings which he receives. “The remnant are
in great affliction and reproach,” &c. The tidings were not entirely new, but
probably sadder than he had anticipated. Hence his great distress. His
patriotism not a mental deduction only, but a mighty passion of the soul. He is
not only a human, but a humane being. A prince, a commander he may be ;
put pre-eminently a man and a brother. “The enthusiasm of humanity” was not
unknown even in this remote age. Here is (1) a sudden outburst of generous
sympathy and sorrow. “I sat downand wept.” Passionate grief usually the least
enduring. Not so this, (2) Sorrow increasing rather than diminishing as time
wears on. ‘I mourned certain days,” t. e. four months, from November to April.
Here is another Rachel weeping, &c. ; another Jeremiah exclaiming “Oh that my
head were waters,” &c. (Jer. ix. 1). (3) Sorrow accompanied by abstinence from
food. ‘And fasted.” This another mark of the reality and pungency of his grief.
Ahab may go to the mountain-top to eat and be merry. Elijah must go into
solitude, and pour out his complaint to God. David finds “his heart is smitten
and withered like grass, so that he forgets to eat his bread” (Ps, cii. 4). A sorrow
that rolls in luxury and revels in delightsome pleasure and appetizing food is but a
poor counterfeit. 3, He resolves to identify himself with the cause of the oppressed.
His sympathy does not effervesce in tears. His will is won, and he at once sets
about planning their relief A true reformer 1oust not stand aloof. Isolation is


8 HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. [omap, I





the law of selfishness. Association is the secret of influence. The plans he forms
may involve the sacrifice of all, a long and perilous journey, and even the monarch’s
frown, but he shrinks from nothing that can advance his people’s cause.


Illustrations :—At the siege of Mons, during the career of the great Marlborough, the Duke of
Argyle joined an attacking corps when it was on the point of shrinking from the contest ; and push-
ing them open-breasted he exclaimed, “ You see, brothers, I have no concealed armour: I am
equally exposed with you: I require none to go where I refuse to venture. Remember you fight for
the dibertice of Europe, which shall never suffer by my behaviour.’’ This spirit animated the
soldiers. ‘The assault was made, and the work was carried.—Percy. ‘Sympathy is a debt we owe
to sufferers, It renders a doleful state more joyful. Alexander the Great refused water in a time
of great scarcity, because there was not enough for his whole army. It should be amongst Chris-
tians, as amongst lute-strings, when one is touched the others tremble, Believers should be neither
proud flesh, nor dead flesh,” —Secker.


III. His spirit is devout. Nehemiah no godless reformer seeking for his country-
men emancipation from an alien yoke and nothing more. He sought the moral, as
well as the material welfare of the chosen seed. 1. He recognizes the existence and
authority of the world’s Guardian and Governor. He who seeks to eliminate God
from human affairs is no true patriot. This not a mere dogma, but a regulative
principle with Nehemiah. Divine sovereignty not fiction, but solemn fact. He
believed in a God of Providence. ‘To own God as fashioning every link ia the
complicated chain of our history ; to discern his hand in the least as well as in the
greatest ; to realize a Providence which overrules what is evil, as well as orders
what is good, a Providence which restrains the unwilling whilst it leads the
obedient, a Providenceso transcendent, that none and nothing can thwart it,sominute,
that none and nothing can escape it, a Providence which directs the insect’s wing
and the atom’s flutter, as well as the planet’s course and the archangel’s flight, to
do this clearly, constantly, experimentally, is an attainment in the Divine life as
rare as it is precious. We must interweave these assurances with the tissue and
texture of our lives ; they must enter as an essential element into the formation of
our purposes, and into the conduct of our pursuits. It is thus that we must
‘walk with God.’”—Stowell. 2. He acknowledges Divine aid to be superior to all
other. (1) As the most powerful of all. If Omnipotence be on his side nothing
can withstand. So reasoned Nehemiah. Hence he flies to the source and fountain-
head of all power. He appeals to the throne of the universe before appealing to
any lower tribunal. He who enlists the aid of the Lord of Sabaoth commands
not only myriads of ministering spirits, but all the forces, destructive and benignant,
of the universe. (2) As controlling all other aid. Nehemiah will presently approach
the earthly monarch, whose spirit is in the hands of the King of kings. This he
knows, hence seeks Divine assistance in making successful suit. He desires God’s
aid that he mayask (a) for the right thing, (b) at the right ¢ime, (c) in the right manner.
He who thus seeks human interposition through Divine agency will find the Divine
will working in his favour through human instrumentality. No aid can be so
effectual as that of Omnipotence. 3. He regards prayer as the appointed means by
which Divine aid 18 to be secured. Does not make his belief in the omniscience of
Divine Providence a ground for personal indolence, or restraining prayer. The true
patriot no fatalist. By prayer and supplication he makes known his request unta
God (Phil. iv. 6). This prayer, recorded for our instruction, is one of the model
prayers of the Bible. (1) Reverent in its attitude towards God (v. 5). (2) Per-
sistent in pressing its suit (v. 6). (3) Penitent in tone and temper (v. 6, 7).
(4) Scriptural in argument (v. 8, 9). (5) Child-like in spirit (v. 10, 113
(6) Definite in aim (v. 11).

Illustrations :—Augustus Cesar possessed such an atta i : it A
own daughter, and vahased to be called its master, hone een pyiedi ate eae Sty Pe
After his decease, his disconsolate pore lamented over him, saying, ‘‘O would te God that he hed
never lived, or that he had never died.” A Lacwdemonian mother had five sons in a battle that
was fought near Sparta, and seeing a sui..e: iat had left the scene of action, eagerly inquired of


OHAP. I.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 8





him how affairs went on.


‘* All your five sons are slain,” said he.


“Unhappy wretch! ’ replied


the woman: “TI ask thee not of what concerns my children, but of what concerns my country,”


“ As to that all is well,” said the soldier,
My country is prosperous, and I am happy.”
which the soothsayers said could not be


“Then,” said she, ‘‘ let them mourn that are miserable,
(a) A great chasm opened in the Roman Forum,
ed but by that which was most valuable to the State.


Marcus Curtius, an eminent soldier, mounted his war-horse, and full-armed rode into the gulf, a


noble sacrifice for his country.


Goopnrss SuPERIOR TO CIRCUMSTANCES.


Lal;

I. High social positions are not
genevally favourable to eminent piety.
1. Beewuse luxury and liberty tend to
lus? and licence. Court morals are pro-
verbially corrupt. When wealth to
purchase is united with authority to
command, selfish ambition and sensual
indulgence too often ensue. In high life
the temptations to self-pleasing are
generally too strong for unaided human
nature. Long prosperity breeds a plague
of dust, as does prolonged fair weather
in the Italian valleys. Dust that blinds
the eyes of the soul, and chokes the spirit
with earthly cares. 2. Because the pride
of human pomp ts inimical to the spirit
of true religion. Palaces are above most
places theatres of human exaltation and
proud display. Religion does not flourish
amidst human pompand pride. By the
lowly birth of the Son of God, heaven
has poured its contempt upon the mere
accidentals of greatness. True religion is
by the very humility of its nature anta-
gonistic to the spirit of the world.
Nebuchadnezzar could not withstand
this spirit. In his prosperity and pride
he exclaimed, “ Is not this great Babylon
that I have built,” &c. (Dan. iv. 30).
In his humiliation he regained that
religion which he had lost in his exalta-
tion. 3. Because affluence ts apt to beget
independence of God. When Jeshurun
waxed fat he kicked (Deut. xxxii. 15).
When God’s chosen people prospered
they forgot God (Isa. li. 13; Judg. iii.
7). A sense of need brings men near
to God. When the lap is full, God is
forgotten. Hence the words of Christ,
“How hardly shall they that have
riches,” &c. (Mark x. 23). Rich men
have often to be made poor before they
will acknowledge God. Merchant has
most reason to watch and pray in the
day of his prosperity. Easier to bear


I wae in Shushan the palace.


the ebb of disappointment than the flood
tide of success. Most reason to watch
when we think ourselves most secure. A
poor Christian remarked when receiving
unexpected relief, “Oh! what a blessed
thing it is to be poor, that one may see
the hand of God so plain.” The hand
of God often concealed from the rich in
the very affluence of its gifts; whilst to
the pious poor quite naked. Hezekiah
was humbly grateful when he exclaimed
after the slaughter of the hosts of Senna-
cherib, “ The living, the living, he shal
praise thee, as I do this day” (Isa.
xxxviii 19); yet the sad record of his
after days is, ‘“ But Hezekiah rendered
not unto the Lord, according to the
benefit done unto him: for his heart
was lifted up” (2 Chron. xxxii. 25).
“Tt was as much as we could do to
keep our feet upon the splendid mosaic
floor of the palace Giovanelli, at Venice ;
but we found no such difficulty in the
cottage of the poor glass-blower in the
rear. Observation shows that there is a
fascination in wealth which renders it
extremely difficult for the possessors of
it to maintain their equilibrium; and
this more especially where wealth has
been suddenly acquired; then, unless
grace prevent, pride, affectation, and
other mean vices, stupefy the brain with
their sickening fumes, and he who was
respected in poverty becomes despised in
prosperity. What man can help slipping
when everybody is intent on greasing
his ways, so tha’ the smallest chance of
standing is denied him. The world’s
proverb is, ‘God help the poor, for the
rich can help themselves ;” but it is just
the rich who hava most need of Heaven’s
help. Dives in scariet is worse off than
Lazarus in rags, unless Divine love shall
uphold him.—Spurgeon. 4. Because the
multiplication of cares tends to deaden


10


HOMILETIC COMMENTAL


NEGEMIAL. LCnAP. |


fay sae


pn oe a er EET


spirituality. Increase of wealth means
increase of anxiety. Milton has taught
us by his picture of the man with the
muck-rake that secular cares readily
become all-engrossing, and turn the eyes
away from the crown of life, The
flebrew word for riches signifies
“heavy,” for riches are a burden, and
they that will be rich do but load them-
selves with thick clay. “There is a
ourden of care in getting them, of fear
in keeping them, of temptation in using
them, of guilt in abusing them, of sorrow
in losing them, and a burden of accounts
at last to be given up concerning them.”
—Henry. “As poison works more
furiously in wine than in water, so
corruptions betray themselves more in
a state of plenty than in a state of
poverty.”—Secker. Mr. Cecil called to
see a rich hearer, and said, “I under-
stand you are very dangerously situated.”
The man replied, “ Iam not aware of it.”
“T thought it probable you were not,
and therefore called upon you. I hear
you are getting rich; take care, for it is
the road by which the devil leads
thousands to destruction.” 5. Because
the commands of an earthly monarch
are liable to clash with the mandates of
Jehovah. The earthly king who has no
fear of God before his eyes, will not be
likely to respect the claims of a Higher
Court. He will consequently have no
conscience for sacred things, and will be
likely to ignore such conscience in his
subjects. But the servant of Jehovah
has no choice. He must say with the
noble three, ‘We will not serve thy
god” (Dan. iii. 18); and with Peter and
John, “ Whether it be right in the sight
of God to hearken unto you more than
unto God, judge ye” (Acts iv. 19).
With Daniel and John the Baptist he
must obey God rather than man, though
death be the consequence. Thus is the
path of the just beset with perils in the
high places of power and pomp,


Illustration :—“ Philip, Bishop of Heraclea,
in the beginning of the fourth century was
dragged by the feet through the streets, severely
scourged, and then brought before the governor,
who charged him with obstinate rashness in
disobeying the imperial decrees; but he firmly
answered, ‘ My present behaviour is not the result
of rashness. but proceeds from my love and fear


of God, who made the world, and whose coms
mands I dare not transgress, I have hitherto
done my duty to the emperors, and am always
ready to comply with their just orders, according
to the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ: but I
am obliged to prefer heaven to earth, and to
obey God rather than man.’ The governor on
hearing this speech immediately passed sentence
on him to be burnt, and the martyr expired,
singing praises to God in the midst of the
flames.”


II. Piety is not impossible in any
position of life. 1. Inward grace is
stronger than outward circumstances.
The temptations to slothful ease and self-
indulgence may be fearfully strong, but
not stronger than Divine grace. The
seductions of luxury and the witchery
of pleasure may charm with enticing
subtlety, but cannot ensnare the man
who is faithful to his God, and like
Nehemiah recognizes “ the good hand of
his God.” “Greater is he that is in
you than he that is in the world ” (1 Jno.
iv. 4). “In the world ye shall have
tribulation, but in me ye shall have
peace” (Jno. xvi. 13). Illustrate by
Bunyan’s picture, in the Interpreter’s
house, of fire on which Satan poured
water and Christ oil. “Ifa letter were
to be addressed to that most influential
word, circumstances, concluding thus :—
‘I am, Sir, your very obedient, humble
servant,’ the greater part of the world
might subscribe it.”—Horace Smith. 2.
The God of providence is also the God of
grace. Where he places, there he can and
will sustain, If God puts Nehemiah into
the Persian palace, he will support him
there. Nowhere are faithful witnesses
more needed than in the high places of
the earth. The nearer the fount of social
influence, the greater the power for good
orevil. Grace is adapted to providential
circumstances,


Iilustration :—The trees are adapted to the
demands of their position. The fir of the
northern hills defies the wintry biast by reason
of its strong roots which penetrate the vrevices
of the soil. The tall palms send their roots
down three feet into the earth, and then spread
out, securing a firm anchorage, and are able to
stand the sweep of the desert winds. The roots
of the pine are spread over the surface, but it
grows in less exposed situations, The mangrove
which fringes the estuaries and lagoons of the
tropics, exposed to the tides, on a shifting soil,
supports itself by sending roots from its truak
and lower branches down into the muddy ground,


!


oHAP, 1.)





so that the whole has the appearance of a tree
propped up by artificial stakes. We may infer
that a like adjustment of strength to situation
pervades the moral world.

3. Many of the holiest characters in
history have been found in the most
unfavourable situations. Joseph in
Pharaoh’s court with an adulterous
queen; Moses in the same court;
Obadiah under Jezebel and Ahab;
David exposed to the evil influence of
Saul; Daniel and Mardocheus in the
court of Ahasuerus ; all served God faith-
fully though exposed to the most trying
ordeals, In the New Testament we
find Christians in every station of life:
Zenas the lawyer, Erastus the chamber-
lain, Paul the tent-maker, Luke the
physician, Zaccheus the tax-gatherer,
Peter the fisherman, and Joseph the
carpenter. Learn from this fact, (1) not
to condemn bodies and professions of
men indiscriminately. (2) Not to make
our business an excuse for ungodliness,
Some lines of life are indeed much less
favourable to morality and religion than
others; they afford fewer helps and
more hindrances than others; and this
consideration should powerfully influence
those who have the disposal of youth.
But where the providence of God places
us, the grace of God can keep us.
“These,” says God, “had the same
nature, were partakers of the same
infirmities, and placed in the same
circumstances with yourselves. But
they escaped ‘the corruption that is in
the world, through faith.’ They found
time to serve me. ‘Go thou and do
likewise.’” — Stowell. “Amidst the
sternest trials, the most upright
Christians are reared. The Divine life
within them so triumphs over every
difficulty as to render the men, above
all others, true and exact. Whata noble
spectacle is a man whom nothing can
warp, a firm, decided servant of God,
defying hurricanes of temptation !”—
Spurgeon. Grace makes itself equally
at home in the palace and in the
cottage. No condition necessitates its
absence, no position precludes its flourish-
ing. One may compare it in its power
to live and blossom in all places, to the
beautiful blue-bell of Scotland, of which


the poetess sings :-—





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 1)





——


ri
“No rock is too high, no vale too low,
For its fragile and tremulous form to grow :
It crowns the mountain with azure bells,
And decks the fountain in forest della :
It wreathes the ruins with clusters grey,
Bowing and smiling the livelong day,”


III. Positions perilous to piety
should be avoided except at the
special call of Providence. 1. Material
prosperity should always be regarded ae
subordinate to spiritual vitality. (1) It
really is so. It matters little what be
our position in this world. It matters
everything what is our position in the
next. “What shall it profit,” &.
(Mark viii. 36). Things which are seen
are temporal, things which are not seen
are eternal ” (2 Cor. iv. 18). What man
thinks, of no consequence ; what God
thinks, everything. The life of earth,
whatever be its character, soon termin-
ates ; the life of eternity never. (2) He
who acts upon this principle gains in the
end, Lot chose the fertile plain of Sodom,
and preferring temporal gain lost all.
Moses “ chose rather to suffer affliction
with the people of God,” &c., and be-
came their chosen leader (Heb. xi. 25).
Solomon asked neither long life nor
riches, but he lost neither in choosing
religion (1 Kings iii. 11). (3) Through
neglecting to actupon this principle piety
has often been lost. Many a worldly
marriage has ruined a _ promising
Christian. Many a hopeful life has
been wrecked upon the rocks of un-
curbed ambition. He who places the
world first and heaven seeond will soon
make ambition everything and religion
nothing. ‘Caligula with the world at
his feet longed for the moon, and could
he have gained it, would have coveted
the sun. It is in vain to feed a fire
which is the more voracious the more
it is supplied with fuel. He who seeks
to satisfy his ambition has before him
the labours of Sisyphus, who rolled up a
hill an ever-rebounding stone, and the
task of the daughters of Danaus, who are
condemned for ever to fill a bottomlesa
vessel with buckets full of holes. Could
we know the secret heart-breaks of
those who have forsaken religion for the
sake of gratifying ambition, we should
need no Wolsey’s voice crying, ‘ Fling
away ambition, but should flee fram it


is HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH,


[CHAP. 2





as from the most accursed blood-sucking
vampire which ever uprose from the
caverns of hell.” — Spurgeon. Pope
Adrian VI. had this inscription on his
monument, “ Here lies Adrian VI., who
never was so unhappy in any period of
his life as at that in which he was a
prince.” 2. No one has a right to tempt
God by unnecessarily exposing himself
ty temptation. This sin of presumption,
against which Paul warned Corinthians
(1 Cor. x. 9). Christ met it in the
wilderness in the form, “Cast thyself
down.” God will not protect those who
rashly presume upon his guardianship.
Mockery to pray, “Lead us not into
temptation,” if we run into it unbidden.
When we needlessly expose ourselves
we entice sin and court failure.
“Temptations are enemies outside the
castle, seeking entrance.” If there be no
false retainer within who holds treach-
erous parley, there can scarcely be even
an offer. No one would make overtures
to a bolted door, or a dead wall. It is
some face at the window that invites
proffer. The violence of temptation
addressed to us is only another way of
expressing the violence of the desire
within us. It costs nothing to reject
that which we do not wish: and the
struggle required to overcome temptation
measures the strength in us of the
temptable element. Men ought not to
say, “How powerfully the devil
tempts!” but, “How strongly I am
tempted.” — Beecher. 3. Providence
will protect those whom it calls to
perilous duty. (1) The path of duty
is sometimes a path of danger. Chris-
tian visitors at home endanger their
lives amongst the poor, and Christian
missionaries abroad amongst the heathen.
Not only bodies, but souls are endangered
through the prevalence of surrounding


vice, which Christian workers must come
into contact with. (2) Special guardian-
ship is exercised over those whose
providential path is one of danger.
God will not leave them. Disciples
in storm were not deserted because they
had gone at Christ’s bidding. Nehemiah,
Daniel, Joseph were untainted by court
life because they were surrounded by
Jehovah’s Shield. (3) We should be
careful not to mistake presumption for
providential guidance. Many have done
so and fallen. Peter walking on the
water an instance.


Illustration :—A gentleman who wished tc
test the character of some men who had offered
themselves for the situation of coachman, took
them to a narrow road which bordered on a deep
precipice, and inquired of them how near to the
dangerous verge they could drive without fear,
One named a few inches, another still fewer.
The gentleman shook his head, and dismissed
them. He could not risk his life with them. A
third was asked, “ How near this edge can you
drive in safety?” He drew back replying, “ I
should drive as far from it as possible. The
place is dangerous, I should avoid it alto-
gether.” He was employed, because he could be
trusted not to run into needless per...


Illustration :—A soldier named Miller felt a
strong desire to be a minister though still uncon-
verted. After his conversion he felt a renewal
of this desire. In the battle of Wilderness he
was badly wounded, and remained 24 hours on _
the field. The surgeon refused to operate upon
him, because death was inevitable. He was
removed to Fredericksburg, again examined, and
his wounds pronounced Peal To a friend he
said, “The surgeon says I must die; but I do
not feel that my work isdone yet, When I gave
myself up to God last winter 1 promised him that
I would labour for his cause in the Gospel
ministry. I feel that he has a work for me to
do, and that man is immortal until his work is
done.” A few days after a third consultation of
doctors was held, whose decision was, “ You will
recover ; but it is the most miraculous escape we
have ever seen.” After many months’ confine-
ment he was able to begin his preparation for the
ministry.


AGGRESSIVE BENEVOLENCE,
i. 2. I asked them concerning the Jews, ge.


I. True Benevolence is an active


principle. 1. It seeks that it may save
the lost. Not content with remaining


at home, it goes after the suffering.
Nehemiah not altogether ignorant of
state of Jews, nor accurately acquainted


with it. He solicits particulars. Goes
out of his way to discover need that he
may assist it. The close cross-examina
tion to which deputation were subjected
proved the thorough earnestness of
questioner. Christ great’ example of


OMAP, I,J


active benevolence, alike in the whole
work of redemption, and the details of
his mortal life. The Church works in
game spirit. It comes “not to be
ministered unto, but to minister.” The
true Christian cries out, “The love of
Christ doth me constrain, to seek the
wretched sons of men.” 2. Its motive
therefore is love rather than duty.
Benevolence without love is cold as
ashes. Uncharitable charity a ghastly
mockery. Stern duty seldom prompts
true charity. This must spring from
love alone. Benevolence follows the
example of him who “was rich, but
for our sakes became poor,” &. A
child looking into the face of a lady
who had relieved and nursed her in
sickness artlessly asked, “Are you
God’s wife?” God is love, and true
benevolence is lovingly God-like.

If. Trne Benevolence is not deterred
from painful investigation through
fear of possible sacrifices. 1. It seeks
to know the worst. Nehemiah not
satisfied with superficial knowledge.
He probed the national sore. True
benevolence acts in the same spirit. It
fathoms the abyss that it seeks to close ;
it probes the wound it seeks to heal.
(1) Philanthropy deals with the worst
human ailments. It shrinks from no
contagion, and shuns no patient however
loathsome. Its home is the hospital and
fever ward. (2) It grapples with the
blackest facts of human histury, and
sheds light upon darkest, foulest blots
in human nature, Nothing daunts,
nothing drives it to despair. For the
most hopeless there is hope; for the
worst there is mercy. (3) It seeks to
alleviate the direst sufferings of the
Church. No breach too wide to be
healed. No Church tao dead to be
revived. No persecutions too cruel to
be endured. It seeks not to heal lightly
or suddenly, but thoroughly. 2. ft
shrinks from no sacrifice. Nehemiah
was aware that he could not relieve his
brethren without great personal sacrifice.
Not only wealth, but probably position,
and perhaps even life, would have to be
surrendered. This did not deter him.
Self-sacrifice the mark of true benevo-
lence. Hireling charity shuns this test.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH, 33


. (1) Money, (2) Time, (3) Personal am-


bition all freely given up for the sake
of the suffering Church.

Tlustration :—When a teacher was wanted by
Dr. Mason of Burmah for the war-like Bghais,
he asked his boatman, Shapon, if he would go;
and reminded him that instead of the fifteen
ly a month which he now received, he could
only have four rupees a month as teacher. After
praying over the matter he came back; and Dr.
Mason said, *‘ Well, Shapon, what is your de-
cision P Can you go to the Bghais for four rupees
a month?” Shapon answered, * No, teacher: I
could not go for four rupees a month ; but I can
do it for Christ.” And for Christ’s sake he went,


III. True Benevolence is not easily
discouraged. 1. It regards no case
as absolutely hopeless, Jerusalem and
its inhabitants were in a pitiable plight,
yet Nehemiah did not sit down in
despair. He woapt, it is true, but he
prayed, and for four months he continued
to pray with an importunity that nothing
could discourage. Humanity may be
very corrupt, but not hopelessly so. The
Church may be at a low ebb, but the
lowest ebbing point is nearest the
flowing point. The night was very dark,
but ’tis ever darkest before the dawn.
Benevolence knows that what is impos-
sible with man, is possible with God.
(1) It helps not only the needy, but the
most needy. (2) It believes in the
possible regeneration of human nature,
however degraded. (3) It believes in
the possible revival of the Church, how-
ever encrusted with superstition or
formalism. 2. It recognizes the infinite
resources of Jehovah. If looked earth-
ward only, been discouraged. Would
have exclaimed mournfully, ‘“‘ Who is
sufficient,” &c. But looking heavenward
its eye rests upon the unspeakable riches
of God in Christ. Remembering the
Divine omnipotence it has no fear. It
remembers the infinite resources, (1) of
Divine pity, (2) of Divine power, ts) of
Divine pardon. None need despair, even
when engaged in the most arduous work
for such a master as God. (a) His
wealth is boundless. The universe
belongs tohim. (4) This infinite wealth
is treasured up for the benefit of his
needy servants. (c) This boundless
wealth is accessible to all who need it,
and apply in faith.


ié MOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[CHAY, 1.





yy

Illustrations :—(a) ‘‘It is said of the Lace-
deemonians, who were a poor and homely people,
that they offered lean sacrifices to their gods; and
that the Athenians, who were a wise and wealthy
people, offered fat and costly sacrifices ; and yet
in their wars the former always had the mastery
over the latter. Whereupon they went to the
oracle to know the reason why those should speed
worst who gave most.
answer to them—That the Lacedemonians were
a people who gave their hearts to their gods, but
that the Athenians only gave their gifts to their
gods.” Thus a heart without a gift is better
than a gift without a heart.—Secker.

St. Thee when commencing her homes of
mercy with only three half-pence in her pocket,
said, * Theresaand three half-pence can do nothing,
but God and three half-pence can do everything,”
Dr. Judson laboured diligently for six years in
Burmah without baptizing a convert, At the
end of three years, he was asked what evidence
be had of ultimate success. He replied, “ As
much as there is a God who will fulfil all his
promises.’’ A hundred churches and thousands
of converts already answer his faith. We will
suppose that some opulent person makes the tour
of Europe. If his money fall short he comforts
himself with the reflection that he has a sufficient
stock in the bank, which he can draw out at any
time by writing to his cashiers. ‘his is just the
case spiritually with God’s elect. They are
travellers in a foreign land remote from home.
Their treasure is in heaven, and God himself is


The oracle returned this,


their banker, When their graces seem to be
almost exhausted, when the barrel of meal and
cruse of oil ld ead to be failing, they need but
draw upon God by prayer and faith and humble
waiting. The Holy Spirit will honour their bill
at first sight; and issue to them from time to
time sufficient remittances to carry them to their
journey’s end. “I have heard of a Spanish
ambassador, who, coming to see the treasury of
Saint Mark in Venice, fell a-groping at the
bottom of the chests and trunks, to see whether
they had any bottom; and being asked the
reason why he did so, answered, “ My Master’a
treasure differs from yours, and excels yours in
that his have no bottom, and yours haye.”’ All
men’s mints, bags, purses, and coffers may be
quickly exhausted and drawn dry; but God is
such an inexhaustible portion that he can never
be drawn dry; all God’s treasures, and his minta
and his bags, are bottomless, Thousands of
millions in heaven and earth feed upon him every
day, and yet he feels it not: he is still giving,
and yet his purse is never empty: he is still
filling all the court of heaven, and all the
creatures on earth, and yet he is a fountain that
still overflows. There are some who say, that it
is most certainly true of the oil at Rheims, that
though it be continually spent in the inauguration
of the kings of France, yet it never wastes: but
whatever truth is in this story, of this I am most
sure, that though all the creatures in both worlds
live and spend continually on Christ’s stock, yet
it never wasteth.— Brooks.


Tue Banerut Consequences oF Sin.


i. 3. The remnant that are left .


This state of things would never have
come to pass, but for the disobedience
and idolatry of the children of Israel. It
was the natural and inevitable fruit of
their own sin. Not mere unfortunate
calamity, but punitive and penal dis-
cipline, From the text we learn,—

I. That sin brings misery upon
human souls. ‘In great affliction,”
7. e. misery, want, privation. Suffering
always follows sin in the nature of
things. 1. Because sin is a violation of
law. Sin transgresses the eternal law of
righteousness, which cannot be broken
with impunity. Its penalty is pain, and
eventually death. Law-breakers every-
where must suffer. (1) See this in
relation to laws of health. Violate those
laws by unwholesome food, self-indulgent
excesses, absorption of poison, and de-
rangement or death will ensue. (2) See
this in relation to the laws of society.
Ul-manners provoke exclusion. None


defy these rules without paying penalty.


.. are in great affliction and reproach, $e.


(3) See this in relation to national laws.
What mean our courts of justice, our
prisons and penal settlements, but that
law cannot be transgressed without
suffering (2). 2. Because sin separates
Jrom God. Its very nature, essence, is
antagonism toGod. Wherever it reigns
it produces tastes and dispositions
contrary to the will of God. Now God
is the author of all happiness. The
opposite of happiness is misery. Man
severed from God like branch cut from
tree, or limb torn from body. The maz
who has not made peace with God can-
not be happy, because the “ wrath of
God abideth on him.” No real peace
when hostile to God. 3. Because sin
creates discord. Where there is discord
there is misery. Sin works discord—
(1) In the individual, It stirs up evil
passions against the reign of conscience.
No internal peace until the Stronger has
cast out the strong man armed who
usurps his place in the heart. Christ


CHAP. I.]





alone can “say to our warring passions,
peace.” (2) In the Church. It provokes
enmity between man and man, and
different sections of the one great body of
Christ. (3) In the world. It lifts up
the war sign, and mingles nations in the
bloody embrace of strife. When sin
comes to an end men shall learn war no
more. Want of harmony always painful.
Inharmonious colours pain the eye, and
inharmonious sounds jar upon the ear.
All discord is the enemy of peace and
pleasure. :

II. Sin brings reproach upon the
Church. “In great affliction and re-
proach.” The Jews were not only ina
desolate condition, but were taunted by
the Samaritans with being in that con-
dition. “Sin a reproach to any people”
(Prov. xiv. 34), especially to the Church
—for, 1. It destroys her power, and
paralyzes her efforts. Spirituality secret
of Church’s power. Stripped of this,
she is like Samson shorn of his locks,
An unholy Church is a mournful spec-
tacle, a miserable ruin. The Church at
Jerusalem was now demoralized through
her unspirituality and want of faith.
2. It provokes the taunts of blasphemy.
Church’s enemies always vigilant. Did
not hesitate to throw insinuation in her
teeth. ‘Where is now their God?”
“ As it is a pitiful sight to see a prince
or nobleman cast from his dignity, spoiled
of his honour, lands, and goods, and
forced to become a carter, and drive the
plough, or lie in prison; so surely it
must needs move any heathen man, to
see the city where he and his elders were
born and buried to be overthrown, lie
open to all enemies, unfenced with walls
or gates, and inhabited only by a few
cottagers, and no better than the poorest
ragged hamlet in the country.” —Pilking-
ton. 3. It encourages the growth of
infidelity. Sceptics, both intellectual and
sensual, not slow to point to Church’s
failure in support of their boastful pre-
tensions. Perhaps the Church’s failures
and discords have done more to
strengthen atheism than any books or
arguments levelled against religion.

III. Sin removes national defences.
‘Tne walls are broken down.” This
material dismantling only a type of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 15





national demoralizatién which had taken
place. 1. Unity is a national defence.
(1) A nation divided against itself can
no more stand than a city, whereas a
thoroughly united people can resist al-
most any attack from without. (2) Sin
undermines national unity by sowing
discord and jealousy, and creating party
feeling. It sets all the classes of society
against each other (masters and servants,
landowner and labourer), and seeks to
stifle charity and forbearance. 2. Bodily
vigour is a national defence. (1) It
saves from poverty in time of peace.
Strong manhood a security against penury
if united with temperance and industry.
(2) It enables resistance to become effect-
ual in time of war. Sensuality under-
mines manhood, and unfits for arduous
toil in peace or war. Refer to Franco-
German warasinstance. French people
were socially demoralized by vice.
Their manhood was undermined. Re-
ligion teaches the sanctity of the human
body, and thus preserves it from prema-
ture corruption. 3. Domestic purity is
a national defence. What the family
life is, the national life will soon beconie.
Domestic fidelity begets a sense of re-
sponsibility. It promotes healthy moral
tone. This, backbone of a nation’s
vigour. Sin encourages lust and breaks
down all social barriers, and thus robs a
nation of one of its most powerful bul-
warks, 4. Force of character is a
national defence. ‘This made England
what she is, and America. It is this
which gives weight to our words and
actions in foreign courts and countries,
Force impossible where sin reigns.
Why? Because no true cohesion where
no godliness, An unholy life is under
no regulating principle, but at the
mercy of passions and desires. Where
there is internal anarchy, and no central]
principle of rectitude ruling the conduct,
there can be no true decision or moral
force in the life.(a)

IV. Sin dishonours national govern-
ment. ‘The gates thereof are burned
with fire.” City gates not only for re-
sistance, but also the seat of government.
There the assembly of chiefs gathered ;
there criminals were tried ; there justice
was administered, and important subjects


16


HOMILETIU COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[orar. 2


ee ee ee ere


discussed. Compare “ Ottoman Porte,”
where word for gate is synonym for
government; also, “on this rock will I
build my church, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it.” Here
‘‘gates” equivalent to kingdom. The
demolition of the city gates suggests—
1. That the administration of justice was
neylected. Crime ran riot. There was
no security, no confidence, no defence,
therefore none dare seek redress where
none vould be obtained. Bribery and
terrorism the offspring of lax morality.
The moral sense deadened, justice
impossibie. 2. That the inroads of
enemies were unchecked. No barriers
to midnight marauders. Whole nation
manifestly paralyzed and dispirited.
National honour. and independence
trodden in the dust. ‘The walls are
destroyed, and the gates burned,” when
the rulers and ministers do not their
duty, but care for other things. And
as this wretched people had justly, for
their disobedience, neither walls left to
keep out the enemy, nor gates to let in
their friends, but were all destroyed ;
so shall all godless people be left with-
cut godly magistrates to govern them,
and live in slavery under tyrants that
oppress them, and be led by blind
guides that deceive them.— Pilkington.
The Jews to this day when they build.
2 house (say the Rabbins) leave one par*
of it unfinished in remembrance that
Jerusalem and the temple are at presen’
desolate; or they leave about a yard
square unplastered on which they write
the words of the Psalmist, “If I forget
Jerusalem,” &c. (Ps. cxxxvii.); © else
the words, “‘ Zechor Lechorbor,’ “ The
memory of the desolation.”


Vv. Sin brings a blight upon the
whole land. When Adam sinned, the
earth, which was before decked with
fruits, brought forth weeds, The wicked-
ness of Sodom punished not only by the
destruction of its inhabitants, but by


the desolation of the land, so that even


the air is so pestilent that birds fall dead
as they fly over it. The whole country
of Palestine, “a land flowing with milk
and honey,” for the sins of the Jews has
become barren, as David said, ‘The Lord
turneth a fruitful ground into a barren,
for the wickedness of the dwellers in it”
(Ps. evii.). Jerusalem was not only
destroyed now, but afterwards by Ves-
pasian, whose general, Titus, left not
“one stone standing on another” (Matt.
xxiv. 2). “Herein behold the vileness
of sin, that not only man, but the earth,
stones, cities, trees, corn, cattle, fish, fowl,
and all fruits are perished, punished and
turned into another nature, for the sin of
man: yea, and not only worldly things,
but his holy temple, law, the ark, the
cherubims, mercy-seat, Aaron’s rod, and
holy jewels, are given into the hands of
a heathen king, because of the disobedi-
ence of his people.” — Pilkington.


Jiiustrations :—(a) When Nicephorus Phocas
bad built a wall about his palace for his own
security in the night-time, he heard a voice crying
to him, “ Oh! emperor, though thou build thy
walls as high a3 the clouds, yet if sin be within
it will overthrow all.”

(8) “ Suppose I were going along the street,
and were to dash my hand through a large pane
of glass, what harm should I receive? You
would be punished for breaking the glass, Would
that be all the harm that I should receive? No,
you would cut your hand with the glass. So it
Is with sin. If you break God’s laws, you will
be punished for breaking them; and your soul
is hurt by the very act of breaking them.”


UnskLFIsH Sorrow.


i, 4, I sat down and wept, and mourned certain days.


I. The occasion of his grief. ‘‘ When
I heard these words I sat,” &c. 1. Not
personal loss, Men mourn when death
enters the home and robs them of their
loved ones ; when privation comes and
strips chem of their luxuries ; when dis-
appointment blights their ambition ;
when disease or accident deprive them


of vigorous health. Nehomiah’s grief
not caused by any of these things. He
was in no danger at present of losing
either friend, or substance, or good name.
Nor would he thus have mourned if he
had. 2. Not spiritual despair. He cer-
tainly discovered imperfections in his life
not before observed, but nothing to drive


CHAP. 1]


nim to religious despair. Condemnation
and shame follow the awakening of con-
science. His not asleep. Religious
declension had not estranged him from
God. He had walked with God even
in the palace, 3. But public calamity.
“When I heard these words I sat down
and wept.” What words? Those by
which his brother had just described the
“affliction and reproach” into which
the Church at Jerusalem had fallen.
(1) His brethren were in distress. His
human sensibilities not blunted by the
formalities of court life. Poor relations
not to be forgotten when fortune favours
us. (2) The Church was desolate. This
as important toa good man as if his own
home was burnt or wrecked. (3) The
holy city wasin ruins. Other cities had
been razed to the ground, and he felt
no grief like this. Babylon, a much
greater city, had been taken by Cyrus not
long before ; Samaria, their neighbour,
by Sennacherib and Shalmaneser. But
this was “the holy city” (Matt. iv.).
Over its final destruction Christ wept
(Luke xix.). It had been beautified
with temple, priests, and holy ordinances ;
and strengthened by many worthy
princes and laws, and was a wonder to
the world. Its fall was synonymous
with the disgrace of true religion.
(4) Sin was triumphant. The sin of
unbelief and moral impotence within,
and of blasphemy an4 boastful arrogance
without. Persecution and poverty are
the Church’s glory ; but impotence and
discord her eternal shame, ‘ Where is
the Lord God of Elijah?” her enemies
asked ; and in bitter irony are ever
ready to exclaim, ‘See how these
Christians love one another!” When
God’s cause languishes and his Church
is dishonoured it is time for good men to
weep. In time of common calamities
“ Should we then make mirth?” (Ezek.
xxi. 10).


Illustrations :—‘‘The Romans severely pun-
ished one that showed himself out of a window
with a garland on his head in the time of the
Punic war, when it went ill with the common-
wealth, Justinus, the good emperor of Constan-
sinople, took the downfall of the city of Antioch
by an earthquake so much to heart that it caused
him a grievous sickness, A.D, 527, When Pope
Clement and his cardinals were imprisoned by


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 11


the duke of Bourbon in St.Angelo, Cesar in Spain
forbade all interludes to be played. In England
the king was exceedingly sorry, and Cardinal
Wolsey drained the land of twelvescore thousand
“aca to relieve and ransom the distressed pope,
‘or whom he wept grievously.” — Trapp.

II. The characteristics of his grief.
1. It was intense. “I sat down and
wept.” Probably he had stood to hear
their story. Now his heart melts like
wax. His grief is overwhelming. Fall-
ing into his seat he gives vent toa flood
of weeping. Not the transitory ruffling
of the emotions, nor mere sentimental
sympathy elicited by a tale of woe.
His brethren’s sorrows became his own.
Jeremiah’s prayer answered, ‘“ Oh that
my head were waters,” &c. (Jer. ix. 1).
With David, he “watered his couch with
his tears.” The sins of his people became
in some measure his own. In this see
faint type of Christ, who “bore our
griefs,” &c. Faint anticipation of that
“man of sorrows,” who “offered up
prayers and supplications with strong
crying and tears” (Heb. v. 7) in the
garden of Gethsemane. 2. It was en-
during. “And mourned certain days.”
Not the evanescent passion of superficial
sorrow, but the deep soul-stirring grief of
a noble and generous nature. Blind and
violent sorrow generally dies away like
the noisy crackling of thorns in the fire.
Its very intenseness makes its brevity.
Grief that has a deep and abiding
provocation dies not thus. It contem-
plates the future as well as the present.
The past it mourns, but seeks help for
the future. Nor can it be appeased
until the disgrace is wiped away, and
deliverance found. Like Mary, it waits
at the sepulchre until the angel appears
to assure it of the resurrection of
buried hopes. 3. Jt was self-denying.
“ And fasted.” Not the comfortable and
self-indulgent grief that makes the very
sorrow an excuse for sottish excess.
All such grief bears a lie upon its face.
The mind affects the body. Severe
mental strain, whether of agony or
rapture, weakens appetite and kills
desire. Real heart-pain ts always
ascetic in ite bodily aspect. The grief
of the hypocrite or half-hearted is self-
indulgent and short-lived because super-
ficial. The grief of an earnest man of


18 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


- —


truth is terrible and irresistible because
of its self-forgetfulness. Fasting is
(1) Often associated with profound grief
in Scripture (2 Sam, i. 12; xii, 16—
—21; Ps. xxxy. 13; lxix) 10; Dan-
vi. 8; Jonah iii. 5). (2) May be the
natural attendant of grief, or the outward
symbol of its presence. (3) Is recognized
and commended in Scripture as a reli-
gious exercise (1 Sam. vii. 6 ; Jer. xxxvi.
9; Matt. vi 17; Acts x. 30; 1 Cor.
vii. 5).

III. The issue of his grief. “And
prayed before the God of heaven.”
Herein consists difference between godly
and selfish sorrow. The one ends in
blank despair, the other finds relief in
prayer. The passionate writhing of a
rebellious heart dares not look up. It
leads to suicide and madness. Note, 1.
Grief is sanctified by prayer. Pain
no inherently sanctifying or softening
virtue. Only when borne in faith and
godly resignation does it leave a blessing.
It then becomes sacred, and softens the
heart, like dew upon mown grass, or
showers on the thirsty soil. Submissive
and prayerful sorrow one of the most
gracious experiences that can happen to
man. 2. Grief is relieved by prayer.
“Be careful for nothing, but in every-
thing by prayer and supplication,” &c.
(Phil iv. 6), In prayer the burden is
cast upon One who is able and willing


[CHAP L





to bear it. If men find their burdens
and anxieties lighter when they speak
of them to their fellows, surely the relief
must be greater when they unburden
their mind to God, who is not only
willing, but able to succour. Pent up
mountain torrents are turbulent and
furious ; open streams are calmer, and
more placid in their flow. 3. Grief is
made fruitful by prayer. Sorrow with-
out an outlet produces not good, but
harm. It renders the spirit morose, and
comforts no mourner. Only when grief
is poured into the ear of God can it
bear any good fruit. A saint’s tears are
better than a sinner’s triumphs. Bernard
saith: “Lachryme pcenitentium sunt
vinum angelorum.” ‘The tears of pe-
nitents are the wire of angels.” St.
Lawrence Justinian, Patriarch of Venice,
says: ‘He cannot help sorrowing for
other people’s sins, who sorrows truly for
his own.” St. Augustine: “ We mourn
over the sins of others, we suffer violence,
we are tormented in our minds.” St.
Chrysostom : ‘‘ Moses was raised above
the people because he habitually deplored
the sins of others. He who sorrows for
other men’s sins, has the tenderness of
an apostle, and is an imitator of that
one who said: “ Who is weak, and I
am not weak? Who is offended, and I
burn not?” (2 Cor. xi. 29).


Fastinc.
i 4. And fasted.


I. Occasions of fasting. 1. Afflic-
tions of the Chureh (Nehemiah). 2.
National judgments (Joel). 3. Domes-
tic bereavement (David). 4. Imminent
danger (Esther). 5. Solemn ordinances
(Paul and Barnabas set apart).

II. The design of fasting. 1. To
assist penitence. ‘‘To afflict the soul,”
a phrase often employed im connection
with abstinence (Lev. xvi. 29; Isa.
iviii. 5). Without spiritual repentance
bodily mortification worthless, and
meaningless. 2. To mortify bodily lusts
and promote heart purity. Fasting not
end, but means. Not essential to holi-
ness; only an accidental of our fallen
state. No fasting in heaven, »scauee


no fleshly corruptions. Without falting
into Manichean heresy, which makes sin
necessarily inherent in the human body,
we must regard the body as an enemy
to spirituality. Paul did; hence, “I
keep under my body,” &c. (1 Cor, ix. 27).
3. To humble and give sympathy with
the poor. Opulent classes sympathize
too little with struggling poor, because
do not understand meaning of want. If
practise occasional abstinence, and really
suffer hunger, can better understand
what others suffer constantly.

III. The duty of fasting. 1. Forms
part of general principle of self-denial
essential to true discipleship. “Tf any


man will be my disciple let him take


OHAP. I.]


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 19





up his cross daily,” &c. (Luke ix. 23).
This duty not to be despised because
some abuse it. Because some make it
meritorious, no reason why we should
neglect it altogether. Most sacred
ordinances (Lord’s Supper) have been
most grossly perverted, and most gracious
privileges most grossly abused. Counter-
feits only prove the value of true
coin. 2. Implied, and therefore en-
joined, by words of Christ. ‘This
kind goeth not out but by prayer
and fasting” (Matt. xvii. 21). 3. En-
forced by the example of Christ. In all
things he our pattern. What Christ
sanctioned by his own act cannot be
considered as either superfluous, or super-
stitious. Point all objectors to him. 4.
Associated in Scripture with the bestowal
of great blessings. Nineveh spared when
the inhabitants prayed, and mourned,
fasting (Jonah iv. 11). Ahab pardoned
when he humbled himself with fasting
(1 Kings xxi. 29). Christ promises
heavenly reward to those whose fasting
is sincere (Matt. vi. 16).

IV. The manner and degree of
fasting. 1. Sometimes total abstinence
from food for a time (Esther iv. 16), 2.
More often abstinence from superfluous
food (Dan. x. 3).

V. The spirit in which to fast. 1.
With sincere humility. Ostentation
condemned by Christ (Matt. vi. 16).
Uncharitableness or peevishness often
accompany the exercise and deprive it
of all sweetness and profit. It may
become a source of pride and a cover
for sin. 2. With true repentance. This
the essential principle of all abstinence.
The sacrifice of the will is the truth
forthshadowed. This only one outward
sign of the complete surrender of the
will in all things. Nothing meritorious.
Only means to an end. That end the


complete subjection of flesh to spirit, of
the carnal nature to the spiritual. If it
be objected, “ You should pay attention
to the weightier matters of morality
and benevolence,” we reply: ‘These
ought ye to do, and not to leave the
others undone.” These outward things,
as kneeling, weeping, and fasting, are
good helps and preparations unto prayer.
As Sarah continued three days in fasting
and prayer, that the Lord would deliver
her from her shame (Tobit iii.); so
Tobias maketh it a general rule, saying :
“Prayer is good joined with fasting.”
Ecclesiasticus says (xxx. 5): “The
prayer of him that humbleth himself
pierceth the clouds, and she will not be
comforted until she come nigh, nor go
her way until the highest God have
mercy upon her.”


Illustrations :—Neander says, “Although the
early Christians did not retire from the business
of life, yet they were accustomed to devote many
separate days entirely to examining their own
hearts, and pouring them out before God, while
they dedicated their lives anew to him with
uninterrupted prayers, in order that they might
again return to their ordinary occupations with
renewed zeal and earnestness, ‘These days of
holy devotion, days of prayer and penitence,
which individuals appointed for themselves, were
often a kind of fast days, They were accus-
tomed to limit their corporal wants on those
days, or to fast entirely. That which was spared
by their abstinence was applied to the support of
their poorer brethren.”

“There are Christians whose ‘flesh,’ whether
by its quantity, or natural temperament, renders
them sluggish, slothful, wavering, and physically
by far too fond of the ‘good things’ of the
table and the wine-cellar, That sort of Chris-
tian pressingly needs fasting, ay, thorough fasting.
Brave, large-hearted Martin Luther nobly con-
fessed his need, and nobly acted it out, not
without strife and ‘lusting,’ Of fasting as a
whole, and as applying to all, it may be said
that while it has been perverted into a pestilent
superstition, yet, in the words of Bishop
Andrews, ‘There is more fear of a pottingerful
of gluttony, than of a spoonful of superstition.’”’
—Grosart.


INTERCESSORY PRAYER.


L 5—11.


And prayed before the God of heaven.


Prayer variously designated invocation, petition, supplication, or intercession,
according to the aspect in which it is regarded. The subject of this paragraph is
intercessory prayer, t. €. prayer offered by one human being on behalf of another.
That such intervention is admissible, and effectual in the Divine economy, is evident


from the teaching of Scripture.


1. It is frequently enjoined (Numb. vi. 23—26 ;


Job xlii. 8; Ps. cxxii. 6; Jer. xxix. 7; Joeli’ 17; Matt. v. 44; Ephes. vi. 18;
foe


20 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. [cHaP. 1





1 Tim. ii. 1; Jas. v. 14; 1 Jno. v. 16). 2. Illustrations of its efficacy abound.
Abraham (Gen. xvii. 18—20; xviii. 23; xx. 7—18). Moses (Exod. viii. 12—31 ;
ix. 33; xvii. 11—13; xxxii. 11—34), Jacob (Gen. xlvii. 7; xlix.). David
(2 Sam. xii. 16). Ezra (ix. 3—15). Job (i. 5; xlii. 10). Elijah (1 Kings xvii,
90—23). Peter (Acts ix. 40). Paul (Acts xxviii. 8).

I. Here is intercessory prayer, based upon a true conception of the Divine
character. 1. It regards him as the majestic ruler of the world. ‘“‘O Lord God
of heaven, the great and terrible God.” Great in power and government. Terrible
in judgment and punishment. Such views of the Divine majesty calculated to
inspire reverence and wholesome fear. Would check any tendency to presumption,
and place the suppliant in a true position at the Divine footstool (Ps. xcix. 5;
exxxli. 7). 2. It regards him as ihe faithful and compassionate Father of his
children. (1) Faithful, “that keepeth covenant.” Some parts of covenant uncon-
ditional ; a promise concerning seasons (Gen. viii. 22); destruction of the world
(Gen. ix. 14—17). Some conditional upon moral conduct (Josh. vii. 11; xxiii. 16).
(2) Compassionate, “and mercy” (Exod, xx. 6). (3) To his children. ‘Them
that love him, and keep his commandments.” This, beautiful description of filial
spirit. The motive principle and the manifest conduct both indicated. First,
inward affection, “that love him ;” then, outward obedience, “that keep his com-
mandments.” The first revealing itself by the second. The second the offspring
of the first. ‘That he may at once both tremble before him, and trust upon him ;
he describeth God by his goodness as well as by his greatness, and so helpeth his
own faith by contemplating God’s faithfulness and loving-kindness.” —Trapp.

II. Here is intercessory prayer, untiring in its importunity and unselfish
in its benevolence. 1. Unwearied in tts importunity. ‘Which I pray before
thee now day and night” (v. 6). Four months elapsed between the commencement of
his intercession in Chisleu (i. 1), and the beginning of its fulfilment in Nisan (ii 1).
Night and day, @. e. unceasingly, did Nehemiah press his suit. Such importunity
sure to prevail, Inspired by the Holy Ghost, commended by the Saviour, and
encouraged by the word of God, it cannot fail eventually (Acts xii. 5 ; 2 Cor, xii.
8; 1 Thess. iii. 10). ‘The kingdom of heaven suffereth violence,” &c. (Matt. xi.
12). Parable of the unjust judge (Luke xviii. 5). Perseverance necessary not
because God reluctant to hear, but because men are slow to value his gifts. When
we rightly appreciate God’s mercies he bestows them freely, not before. The
“Jews divide their day into prayer, work, and repast; neither will they omit
prayer for their meat or labour. The Mahommedans, what occasion soever they
have, either by profit or pleasure, to divert them, will pray five times every day;
and upon the Friday (which is their Sabbath) six times. How few and feeble
are our prayers in comparison, either for ourselves or our brethren in distress.”
2. Unselfish in its benevolence. Much anguish of mind, and self-sacrifice, accompanied
the urging of this prayer. Rest forsook his frame and slumber his eyelids (Ps.
exxxii. 4; Prov. vi. 4). His whole soul so thoroughly stirred that he cared
neither for sleep nor food, Such intercession has all the marks of sincerity, and
every probability of success,

III. Here is intercessory prayer, accompanied by self-abasement and
contrition. ‘“ And confess the sins of the children of Israel, which we have sinned
against thee ; both I and my father’s house have sinned” (v. 6). From the spirit
and language of this prayer we learn—l. That close approaches to God reveal
unsuspected moral defects in the character even of good men. “TI and my father’s
house have sinned.’’ Though a sincere believer and servant of Jehovah, Nehemiah
now discovered and remembered personal and family sins which bowed him to the
earth in sorrow. The more closely he approaches the “ Holy One who cannot look
upon sin” (Heb. i. 13), the more distinctly and painfully does he perceive his
unworthiness and demerit. Thus was it with Manoah (Judg. xiii.), and Isaiah
(Isa, vi.), and St. Jobn (Bev. i) When want real power in times of urgent


OMAP. 1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 21





need they discove: their weakness, When daring suppliants press up to the steps
of the mercy-seat they discover stains previously unsuspected. Comparatively
innocent they may be (as Nehemiah was), but not without sin, and such as needs
to be confessed and pardoned. 2. That the discovery of moral defects teaches good
men their common depravity and mutual need of Divine mercy. ‘Confess the sins
of the children of Israel which we have sinned” (v. 6). He discovers that in God’s
sight there is ‘‘ no difference.” He needs mercy and deserves wrath as much as they.
Their sins are identified with his own. The suppliant who pleads for others’ sins,
as though he had real contact with them, and felt their burdensomeness, will
prevail. He who pharisaically thanks God that he is not as other men, in his
prayers will not succeed much. When we can say, “of whom I am chief,” God
will pardon both us and those for whom we intercede. 3. That the discovery of
moral defects deprives good men of all right to intercede for others on the ground of
their own merit. The holiest may not approach the throne of Mercy in his own
name, or make his relationship to God a ground of appeal. Only one name, one
plea, will avail. The name and blood of Christ are our grounds of appeal. The
promise and character of God were theirs of old. ‘ For thy name’s sake ” was the
Old Testament form of “ For Christ’s sake” in the New. When we have done our
utmost we are only unprofitable servants dependent upon Divine forbearance, and
can perform no works of meritorious supererogation. 4. That the discovery of moral
defects brings good men into that state of humility which ts essential to success in
prayer. “To that man will I look; even to him that is poor and of a contrite
spirit, and trembleth at my word” (Isa. lxvi. 2). Self-sufficiency renders God’s arm
powerless to hear or help. Self-despair, which casts itself at the feet of God, saying,
“Tf thou canst do anything, have compassion,” is sure to meet with a realy
response. Human weakness commends itself to Divine omnipotence and compas-
sion. Our impotence is our strongest recommendation to God.

IV. Here is intercessory prayer fortifying itself with strong arguments, and
appealing to the most powerful motives. 1. Jt makes the promise of God iis
ground of appeal. ‘ Remember, I beseech thee, the word which thou commandedst
thy servant Moses” (v. 8; Deut. iv. 25—31; xxx. 1—10). No argument so
powerful with God as ‘‘ Remember.” When men honour God's Word, he will not be
slow to hear their words. When the prayer of faith builds upon the word of
promise it rests upon a sure foundation. ‘God not a man that he should lie, or
the son of a man that he should repent” (Numb. xxiii. 19). 2. It regards the veriji-
cation of one word as a reason for expecting the fulfilment of another. . “If ye
transgress, I will scatter you... If ye turn, I will gather you” (v. 8, 9).
Half the prophecy had been carried out; Nehemiah claims the fulfilment of the
other half. ‘ All the promises of God are yea” (2 Cor. i. 20). “ No variableness
or shadow of turning with God” (Jas. i. 17). He who kept his covenant with Noal:
will keep it with his posterity to the end of time. 3. It regards the verification
of maledictions as a ground for expecting the still more certain fulfilment of bene-
dictions. If the curses were literally carried out, how much more willingly will
the great Father bestow the promised blessings. If in chastising he was faithful,
surely he will not be less so in healing and restoring. The fact of their dispersion
becomes the basis of his claim for their restoration. He who is faithful in that
which he does unwillingly, will not be less faithful in that which he delights to do.
If, because of his word, he punished, because of his word he will show mercy. 4. Jt
appeals to the relationship existing between God and his chosen people, “These are
thy servants, and thy people” (v. 10). Can he who has borne with them so long
and so tenderly desert them now? The paternal heart is appealed to, If an
earthly parent acknowledges this as the most powerful sentiment in his nature, how
much more the heavenly. Had he not said, “Can a woman forget her sucking
child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb! Yeu, they
may forget, yet will I not forget thee” (Isa, xlix. 15). 5. It repudiates a disloyal


22 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIARA. [CHAP. ¥
———— ee na


or presumptuous motive. “Thy servants, who desire to fear thy name” (v. 11).
Not that they might boast and defy the God who had delivered them, as their
fathers had done; not that they might free themselves from a heathen yoke only ;
but that they might fear and worship the God of Israel. Blessings that are to be
laid on God’s altar when received will not be long withheld. 6. It makes past
deliverance the ground of present expectation. ‘“ Whom thou hast redeemed by thy
great power, and by thy strong hand.” The memory of the exodus from Egypt,
and the victories of the wilderness and Canaan, excites the hope that God will
again interfere on behalf of his people. The remembrance of those years of the
right hand of the Most High, stimulates Nehemiah’s prayer. Thus should the
past ever instruct the present. He who studies the Church’s history will find
ample material for the nourishment and strengthening of his faith in God.

V. Here is intercessory prayer accompanied by diligence in the performance
of daily duties. “And grant him mercy in the sight of this man. For I was
the king’s cupbearer” (v. 11). The most earnest supplication not exonerate from
personal effort, and the discharge of necessary duties. Prayer not to be made a
substitute for work. The suppliant must relax no painstaking effort, and watch
for the openings of Providence. Every step must be taken as though all depended
on our own effort, and yet in entire dependence on Divine guidance. Thus may
we in a sense answer our own prayers. Not necessary to leave ordinary spheres
of work, Nehemiah asks Divine guidance in regular duty, that the monarch may
be induced to grant him the petition which he was anxious to present at the first
favourable epportunity.


Illustrations :—One of the holiest and most devoted of modern missionaries, who after surmount-
ing almost insuperable obstacles, at ee completed his translation of the Scriptures into a
language of surpassing difficulty, inscribed upon the last page of his manuscript these words :—“ I
give it, as the result of long experience, that prayer and pains, with faith in Christ Jesus, will
enable a man to do anything.”

Aschylus was condemned to death by the Athenians, and about to be executed. His brother
Amyntas had signalized himself at the battle ef Salamis, where he lost his right hand. He came
into court, just as his brother was condemned, and without saying a word, held up the stump of his
right arm in the sight of all. The historian says that, ‘““when the judges saw this mark of his
sufferings, they remembered what he had done, and for his sake pardoned the brother whose life had
been forfeited.””

‘*At the time the Diet of Nuremberg was held,” says Tholuck, ‘‘ Luther was earnestly praying
in his own dwelling; and at the very hour when the edict was issued, granting free toleration to all
Protestants, he ran out of his house, crying out, ‘ We have gained the victory.’ ”

Rev. Charles Simeon wrote to a friend: ‘‘ With the hope of ultimate acceptance with God, I
have always enjoyed much cheerfulness before men; but I have at the same time laboured incessantly
to cultivate the deepest humility before God. I have never thought that the circumstances of God
having forgiven me, was any reason why I should forgive myself; on the contrary, I have always
judged it better to loathe myself the more, in proportion as I was assured that God was pacified
toward me (Ezek. xvi. 63). Nor have I been satisfied with viewing my sins, as men view the
stars on a cloudy night, one here, and another there, with great intervals between; but have
endeavoured to get, and to preserve continually before my eyes, such a view of them as we have of
the stars in the brightest night: the greater and the smaller all intermingled, and forming as it
were one continuous mass. There are but two objects that I have desired for these forty years to
behold ; the one is my own vileness, the other is the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; and
I have always thought that they should be viewed together, just as Aaron confessed all the sins of
the children of Israel, whilst he put them on the head of the scape-goat. Tho disease did not keep
him from applying the remedy; nor the remedy from feeling the disease,”


Prayer FoR CHurcu REVIVAL


i. 5—11. And prayed before the God of heaven, ge.


I. Prompted by love for the Church. 1. Therefore persistent, “Day and
night.” This love not fickle, or easily discouraged. “‘ Many waters cannot quench
love” (Cant, viii. 7). Not fruitless emotion, but practical in its aim. 2. There
fore fervent, ‘Wept and mourned.” The love deep, :2t superficial ; therefore the


OHAP. 1.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 23











,
prayer was fervent. This love, previously slumbering, now fully awakened ; there-
fore prayer intense. This love, now sorely tried; therefore fervent prayer required.

II. Recognizes the personal unworthiness of the petitioner. “Both I and
my father’s house have sinned.” This confession consistent with the priestly
intercession of those who stand before God in the people’s name. Jewish high
priests “‘ offered sacrifice first for their own sins, and then for the sins of the people”


(Heb. vii. 27).
God’s mercy.
IIT. Is full of faith.


Church’s declension.


“ Remember the word” (v. 8).
Sin not overlooked, or ignored; but viewed in the light of


Must come not as having any right to intercede, but as magnify ing


1. Notwithstanding the


Divine mercy. Confessed, pardoned, and forsaken, it no longer becomes a hindrance.
God will not remember against them his people’s sin when they repent thereof. 2.


Because of the veracity of the Divine promise.


hope then and new.


“T will gather.” This, basis of all


When pleading the promises, should do so in faith, nothing


doubting, for “God hath magnified his word above all his name” (Ps. exxxviii. 2).


This promise embraces—(1) The assurance of mercy after chastisement.


scatter . . . I will gather” (viii. 9).


“T will
(2) The renewal of former kindness,


“ Whom thou hast redeemed by thy great power, and by thy strong hand” (v. 10).


(3) The vindication of the Divine name and honour.


and thy people” (v. 10).


“These are thy servants,


Iilustrations :—It is related of an ancient king that-he never granted a petition that was offered


with a trembling hand, because it marked a want of confidence in his clemency.


God ” (Mark xi. 22),


“ Have faith in


A pious sick man in the western part of New York, used to pray for the preachers and the


churches of his acquaintance daily at set hours.


In his diary were found entries like this, “I have
been enabled to offer the prayer of faith for a revival in such a place.”


So through the list. It is


said that each church was soon enjoying a revival, and nearly in the order of time named in the


diary.


Tue Masesty anp Mercy or Gop.


i. 5. The great and terrible God, that keepeth covenant and mercy.


From this sublime invocation we
gather—

I. That there is perfect harmony in
the attributes of the Divine nature.
God is one. His nature indivisible.
Men speak as though justice were
necessarily opposed to mercy. No
necessary antagonism. A God all mercy
would be a God not only unkind, but
unjust. Mistake to speak of mercy
triumphing over justice. Mercy har-
monizes with justice, never annihilates
it. God is just, and “yet the justifier
of him that believeth” (Rom. iii. 26).
In the pardon of a sinner we see the
vindication of Divine justice no less than
the magnifying of Divine mercy; and
Divine mercy unites with Divine justice
in the destruction of the finally impeni-
tent. No wrath so fearful to contem-
plate as “the wrath of the Lamb”
(Rev. vi. 16).

II. That the Divine attributes are
equally enlisted in the work of human


salvation. Salvation as much an act
of justice as of mercy. The holiness
of God an important factor in the
production of both repentance and re-,
generation. By the view of holiness, sin
is discovered in its true colours. By
the indwelling of the spirit of holiness,
sin is destroyed and eradicated. ‘“ Mercy
and truth are met together” (Ps. Ixxxv.
10). Hence Watts has truthfully
sung—
“Here the whole Deity is known; nor dares a
creature gucss,
Which of the glories brightest shone; the
justice or the grace.”

III. That the harmony of the
Divine nature is the only true basis
of moral goodness. 1. The contempla-
tion of Divine compassion alone tends to
antinomianism. Mercy may be magnified
at the expense of the moral law. God
willing to forgive, but equally willing to
defend against and deliver from sin


itself. Guard against danger of so


24 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


—_——____ Ss eee








magnifying Divine mercy as to make
sin a light offence. God’s law is, “Sin
shall not lave dominion over you.”
“ Reckon ye yourselves to be dead unto
sin” (Rom. vi.). Then, as a merciful
provision, “If any man sin we have an
advocate,” &e. (1 Jno.i.). 2. The con-
templation of the Divine holiness alone
tends to legalism. By viewing the
spotless purity of the Divine character,
and the rigid requirements of Divine
law, apart from the gracious promises of
Divine 1nercy, a spirit of legal bondage, or
self-righteous asceticism, is engendered.
Hence spring meritorious works, pen-
ances, and self-inflicted flagellations and
othe: useless tortures. ‘“ Not by works
of righteousness which we have done,
but according to his mercy he hath
saved us” (Lit, ii 5). 3. The contem-
plution of the unity of the Divine nature
is essential to the formation of a true
moral character, The spotless purity
and immaculate holiness of the Divine
nature deter from iniquity, and the
violation of God’s law; whilst the
tender mercy and loving-kindness of
his nature encourage the penitent to
crave pardon and grace.

IV. That the harmony of the Divine
nature furnishes the only true ideal
of moral goodness. 1. Human good-
ness 13 at best one-sided. Some virtues
developed at expense of others. Few
Christians are fully and evenly matured.
One aspect of moral goodness cultivated
to the exclusion of others. Men follow
too much their natural disposition in
this. The gentle are apt to cultivate
the passive graces alone, whilst the bold
forget to clothe themselves with the
meekness and gentleness of Christ. 2.


Divine goodness alone is perfectly impar- .


tial. God both majestic and merciful ;
infinitely high, yet infinitely condescend-
ing. No exaggeration, nor inequality,
nor partiality characterizes his nature or
his government. His purity unsullied,
his peace unrufiled, his dignity uncom-
prom.sed, his fidelity unchallenged, &c.


V. That notwithstanding the har-


(CHAP. L


mony of the Divine nature, men come
into contact with different aspects of
that nature according to their moral
condition. As the magnet draws to
itself certain metals similar in nature,
and rejects certain others alien from it ;


‘so do men in their various characters


attract different phases of God’s nature.
1. A penitent spirit is necessary to the
experience of Divine mercy. Only such
will seek it; only such require it: only
such are capable of receiving and living
in the enjoyment of it. 2. An obedient
spirit is necessary to the continued
eapertence of Ctod’s favour. Paternal
benedictions only promised to those who
possess a filial spirit. “If ye love me,
keep my commandments, and I will
pray the Father,” &c. (Jno. xiv. 15).
Disobedience always incurs Divine dis-
pleasure, and obscures the light of the
Father’s countenance. 3. A rebellious
spirit will infallibly provoke the exercise
of Divine wrath. “The soul that sinneth,
it shall die” (Ezek. xviii. 4). “God
cannot look upon iniquity ” (Deut. xxxii.
4). His character is pledged to active
antagonism to evil. Sin not punished
now as it deserves, because this is “ the
day of salvation ;” and the mediatorial
intercession of Christ holds back the
thunderbolts of righteous anger.


Illustrations :—A Jew entered a Persian
temple, and saw there the sacred fire. He said,
‘How do you worship fire?’ He was told.
Then the Israelite replied, ‘‘ You dazzle the eye
of the body, but darken that of the mind; in
presenting to them the terrestrial light, you take
away the celestial.” The Persian then asked,
“How do you name the Supreme Being?”
“We call him Jehovah Adonai; that is, the
Lord who was, who is, and who shall be.’
‘*Your word is great and glorious; but it is
terrible,” said the Persian, A Christian ap-

roaching, said, “‘ We call Him Abba, Father.”

hen the Gentile and the Jew regarded each
other with surprise, and said, “ Your word is
the nearest and the highest ; but who gives you
courage to call tiie Eternal thus?’’? ‘The
Father Himself,” said the Christian, who then
expounded to them the plan of redemption,
Then they believed, and lifted up their eyes to
heaven, saying, “ Father, dear Father;” and


joining hands, called each otber biethren,~
eee ves"


HAP, L)








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 25





/ '


ImporTUNITY IN Prayer.
16. I pray before thee now day and night.


I. Nat-ral. 1. If tt be the expression
of real need. When children want, they
ask; when they feel deeply, they ask
earnestly. This prayer protracted
through four months; yet not mere
repetition of words. Difference between
real and artificial want: one listless in
prayer, the other importunate. Con-
scious want asks and asks again. Prayer
not to be regarded as end, but means.
Many reverse this order. Nehemiah did
not pray for sake of prayer, but for sake
of object sought. 2. If it be the expres-
tion of urgent need. When we suffer
pain we cry out. Starving man always
importunate. The more needy the more
earnest. Sinners under conviction of
sin, groan and wrestle in agonizing im-
portunity until they find relief. Chris-
tians wrestle with “strong crying and
supplications” until they prevail.
Sailors in a sinking vessel and miners
in the prospect of certain death pray with
real importunity because they are in
urgent extremity. In the same spirit
should we approach the throne of grace ;
for our need is the same, though we may
not feel it. 3. If it be the expression of
hopeful need. None can _ persevere
earnestly in a cause known to be hope-
less. Hope cheers on the most despairing.
Without hope nothing arduous could be
undertaken. This inspires prayer. It
looks to the goal, and anticipates event-
ual success. This hope must have a true
foundation, and not rest on desire or
possibility only. The word of God is
the only secure foundation on which it
can build (v. 8).

II. Necessary. 1. In order that the
suppliant may be rightly affected. No-
thing truer than that success in prayer
depends on spirit of suppliant. Impor-
tunity promotes—(1) Tenderness, (2)
Spirituality, (3) Humility, (4) Zeal
Often the petitioner is not morally fit to
reseive the grace or gift desired. Prayer
purifies the heart, sanctifies the will, and
removes hindrances out of the way. 2.
In order that the gifts may be rightly
appreciated. God will not cast his


pearls before swine. He will only give
when his gifts are valual. What we
seek for long and earnestly, we value
highly when we gain. What easily
won, lightly esteemed and easily lost.
This true of money, lands, home, child,
&ec. The more hardly money is earned,
the more carefully it is used. Those
who have never earned, but inherited
wealth, generally become spendthrift,
because ignorant of value of money
Home only possesses its full significance
to those who have crossed oceans and
continents, and endured perils on land
and sea to reach it. That life {he most
precious to the parent which has been
oftenest snatched from the jaws of
death. Gifts nearly lost, or «early
bought, are counted to be most precious
and priceless. 3. In order that God's
conditions may be fulfilled. (1) Faith
required, ‘ He that cometh unto God,”
&e. (Heb. xi. 6). (2) Whole hearted
earnestness required. “ When they seek
me with their whole heart” (Ps. cxix. °
2). (3) Submission to the Divine will
required. “Thy will be done.” All these
conditions are promoted by contiimued
importunity.

IIT. Scriptural 1. The Bib/e enjoins
it by precepts the most explicit. (Deut.
iWed. 1 Ch. xvi, dls e2+Ch: vite 4,
Job viii. 5. Ps. 1.15; Ixxxi. 10; exlv.
18. Prov. it. 3. Isa. xxx: 19; lviu. 9)
Jer. xxxi. 9. Lam. ii, 19. Matt. vii. 7.
Luke xviii. 1. Rom. xii. 12. Vhil.
iv. 6. 1 Thess. v. 17.) 2. he Lible
encourages it by examples the snost
striking. (Gen. xviii. 32; xxxii 26.
Exod. xxxii. 32. Deut.ix.15, Judges
vi, 39. 1 Sam. i.10; xii. 23. Nzra ix.
Oi SLA XVIG) GSS 22 es Danavis 10:
ix, 3. Matt. xv. 23; xx. 31. Acts vi.
45 xu, 5. 2 Cor. xii. 8. 1 ‘J'heaa. ti.
10.

IV. Successful. Though long dolayed
the answer came, and Nehemiali’s impur-
tunity was amply rewarded. J. iVot in
the sense that God's will can be affected
by man’s importunity. That will is
perfect and immutable. “I am God, I


26
‘


AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


(CHAP L





change not” (Mal. ui. 6). If that will
were variable there could be no confid-
wnce amongst men. The government
of the world would rest upon no firm and
solid foundation. Whilst the Divine
will can never be changed, the exercise
of that will may be affected by human
conditions. The Father’s will is to save
the whole race; for “ he willeth not the
death of the sinner ;” but according to
the laws which he has appointed for
man, his will is limited by certain con-
ditions which must be fulfilled before he
can exercise that will. The same occurs
in earthly relations. A wise father has
a spendthrift son, whom he loves and
would gladly treat with lavish gener-
osity, but that he knows it would be his
ruin. That son becomes reformed, and
(not the father’s will, for that has re-
remained the same, but) the father’s
treatment of his son is altered accord-
ingly. He can now do what he had
the heart and will to do before, but not
the judgment. 2. Not in the sense that
God is reluctant, and can be overcome
by human persuasion. This, a common
error. Seen not so much in distinct
affirmation as in public prayers, religious
literature, and devout conversation. For
our sakes, not for God’s sake, impor-
tunity required. Parable of unjust
judge only designed to teach one salient
truth, viz. the necessity for unwearying
devotion in prayer, not the unwilling-
ness of God to hear. The Old Testament
passages (Gen. xviii. 32; Exod. xxxii.
32), which represent God as apparently
reluctant, and eventually persuaded, are


anthropomorphic, God’s actual, practical
government of the universe is amenable
to the intercessions of the righteous.
Certain blessings are promised only in
answer to “effectual fervent prayer”
(Jas, v. 16). 3. In the sense that im-


portunity and prevalence are mystert-


ously, but certainly, connected, The
“how” we may not be able to
define; but the fact we cannot deny.
The process here as elsewhere is mys-
terious, but the result is patent to all
thoughtful and devout minds. Who can
explain the connection between the seed
and the plant, or between mind and
matter? The presence of a mystery does
not destroy our faith in the fact. “ Elias
was a man subject to like passions as we
are; yet he prayed,” &c. (Jas. v. 17). Let
them deny the facts who can; and they
are worth many arguments.


Iliustrations :—Prayer pulls the rope below,
and the great bell rings above in the ear of God.
Some scarcely stir the bell, for they pray so
languidly ; others give an occasional niaek at
the rope: but he who wins with heaven is the
man who grasps the rope boldly, and pulls
continuously with all his might.—Spurgeon.


“Tf from the tree of promised mercy thou

Sones win the good which loadeth every
ough,

Then a the promise well with pleading cries,

Move heaven itself with vehemence of sighs;

Soon shall celestial fruit thy toil repay—

Tis ripe, and waits for him who loves to pray.

What if thou fail at first, yet give not o’er,

Bestir thyself to labour more and more ;

Enlist a brother’s sympathetic knee,

The tree will drop its fruit when feo agree;

Entreat the Holy Ghost to give thee power,

Then shall the fruit dsacend in joyful shower.”


Forcotren Sins REMEMBERED.
i. 6. Both I and my father’s house have sinned.


I. Sins forgotten are not necessarily
sins forgiven. 1. Wicked men soon
forget. their sins. This arises from in-
ditierence to the nature and consequences
of sin. Sin becomes a trifling matter
easily committed, readily forgotten. Not
therefore either forgotten or forgiven by
God. “TI have spilled the ink over a
bill, and so have blotted it till it can
hardly be read, but this is quite another
thing from having it blotted out, for that
cannot be till payment is made. Soa


man may blot his sins from his memory,
and quiet his mind with false hopes, but
the peace which this will bring him is
widely different from that which arises
from God’s forgiveness of sin through
the satisfaction which Jesus made in his
atonement. Our blotting is one thing,
God's blotting out is something far
higher.” —Spurgeon. 2. Good men may
Jorget their sins. They often do. Nehe-
mish had done. Not heinous and wilful
sins, for such they do not commit. “He


OHAP. 1]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 37





that committeth sin is of the devil”
(1 John). Sins of ignorance and of
inadvertence, as well as of unbelief, &c.,
may be committed even by believers, and
then forgotten—(1) Through neglecting
faithful self-examination, (2) Through
an uneducated or half-enlightened con-
science, (3) Through a low moral sense,

II. Forgotten sins often hinder
prayer. They did so in Nehemiah’s
case. Not until his own and his father’s
sins had been acknowledged and par-
doned could he prevail in prayer. What
earnest Christian not had similar experi-
ence? The spirit of prayer mysteriously
absent ; oft repeated requests strangely
unanswered. On carefully searching
have found the hidden sin and put away
the hindrance. (1) They deprive the
soul of the spirit of supplication. (2)
They act as barriers preventing access
to God.

III. Forgotten sins eften interfere
with Church prosperity. No blessing
for the Church at Jerusalem until these
sins and theirs had been confessed and
put away. Achan and his wedge of
gold brought shame and defeat upon the
armies of Israel. Secret evils cherished
often cause great disaster and moral
feebleness to the Church. 1. By de-
priving her of that joy which is her
strength. “The joy of the Lord is your
strength.” Without the clear assurance
of the Divine favour joy impossible,
When Church depressed and doubting,
her work languishes. 2. By hindering


God’s blessing from attending her efforts.
Without his benedictions all the
Church’s enterprises must fail. Paul
may plant, Apollos may water, but God
gives the increase.

IV. Forgotten sins are often re-
membered in seasons of gracious
visitation. When God comes near and
manifests himself as refiner’s fire, his
servants are quick to discern, and sensi-
tive to feel their most hidden faults, for
—l. Revivals of religion promote self-
examination and abasement. 2. Re-
vivals of religion create a higher moral
sense.

V. Forgotten sins must be confessed
when brought to remembrance. 1.
Vicariously. Not only own sins but
sins of brethren and family, and Church.
If we pray for them God will give them
repentance and they will be saved.
“They shall be made willing in the day
of his power.” 2. Separately. As, in
the text, Nehemiah confesses their sins
by name, so should all earnest suppliants
acknowledge their failures, not in general
terms only, but in detail and separately.
This will produce clear views of sin in
all its reality, and will deepen the sorrow
of a sincere repentance. 3. Accompanied
by prayer for mercy. This, great end of
confession, viz. that guilt be cancelled,
and sins remitted. Confession in itself
no virtue, unless it spring from a desire
for pardon, and a determination to shun
the cause of sin in the future.


Gop’s Memory.
i. 8. Remember, I beseech thee, the word that, §e.


I. God’s memory is _ infallible.
1 Its records are accurate. No hu-
man records are so. Errors in every-
thing human. Memory of man fails,
and deceives him. God’s memory abso-
lutely infallible, because he alone can
see things as they really are. 2. Its
records are impartial. Prejudice and
personal bias enter into all human his-
tories. This bias often quite unconscious
and unavoidable. Perfect disinterested-
ness impossible under existing limit-
ations of human life. God only can
look down from the serene heights of


immaculate purity, and impartially record
the transactions of men. 3, Its records
will form the basis of man’s acquittal -r
condemnation at the Day of Judgment.
The verdict pronounced by Christ in the
case of the seven Asian churches, a pre-
lude of the General Judgment of all
churches and peoples. Each letter com-
mences with, “I know thy works”
(Rev. ii.), implying that the judgment
pronounced is infallibly true. Such
momentous issues, as eternal life and
eternal death, could not depend upon
anything less than an infallible record


38 HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH,


of the whole period of earthly probation ;
and none but God can furnish such a
record. Not one shall be unrighteously
condemned. No miscarriage of justice
can possibly occur at that tribunal.

II. God’s memory is omniscient.
Hence the appeal, “‘ Remember.” 1. Jt
takes cognisance of the most obscure
events as well as the most public. No
deed of darkness or act of cruelty un-
observed. No cup of water or widow’s
mite given without the notice of at least
One Eye. “ What was done in secret
shall one day be proclaimed on the
housetop.” ‘ All things are naked and
open to the eyes of him.” ‘Hell is
naked before him, and destruction”
(Job xxvi. 6). 2. It is acquainted with
the most microscopic details of human
life. Not only does he observe and re-
gulate suns and starry systems in their
orbits, but the most infinitesimal ani-
malcule live and move and have their
being under his eye. If he be any-
where, he is everywhere; if he be in
anything, he is in everything. If he
order the seraph’s flight, he ordains the
sparrow’s fall: if he tells the number of
the stars, he numbers the very hairs of
the heads of his saints. The minute-
ness of Providence its perfection. Since
he is above all, and through all, and in all,
let us look to him for all, let us look to
him in all. 3. Jt fathoms the most secret
thoughts and motives. “Thou compassest
my path,” &c.; ‘for there is not a word in


_ his word.


[omaPp. I





it altogether” (Ps. cxxxix.). Thoughts
unbreathed in word are recorded in his
memory ; and motives unsuspected by
the most intimate friend are there written
down.

III. God loves to be reminded of
«Remember, I beseech thee,
the word which thou commandedst thy
servant Moses” (v. 8). 1. Not that he
needs to be reminded of it. Strictly
speaking God can neither remember nor
forget, for all things are present with him.
Figuratively he is said to do both (Isa.
lxii 6, 7). 2. Not that he desires to
forget. He delights to honour the word
of his promise, and is “not slow con-
cerning his promise, as some men count
slackness ” (2 Pet. iii. 9). 3. But because
he loves to see his children believing his
word. All men love to be trusted.
Parents especially delight to see their
children exercise the most implicit trust
in their veracity. God also seeks to be
trusted, and is pleased when his word is
believed. Christ’s upbraiding couched
in these words: “O slow of heart to
believe” (Luke xxiv. 25).


Illustration :—“ There is a recent application
of electricity by which, under the influence of
its powerful light, the body can be so illuminated
as that the workings beneath the surface of the
skin may be seen. Lift up the hand, and it will
appear almost translucent, the bones and veins
clearly appearing. It is so in some sense with
God’s introspection of the human heart. His
eye, which shines brighter than the sun, searches


us, and discovers all our weakness and infirmity.”


my tongue, but lo,O Lord, thou knowest —Pitkington.


PUNISHMENT AND PENITENCE.
L 8, 9. If ye transgress, I will scatter you, &e.


Here we trace that sequence which is everywhere taught in Bible, viz :

I. That sin is invariably followed by punishment. 1. Sometimes with loss a
temporal good. “TI will scatter youabroad.” The loss of national status and social
integrity followed loss of God’s favour. They are to-day a standing witness to all
the world of the faithfulness of Jehovah’s word. Josephus says that in his time
they had grown so wicked, that if the Romans had not destroyed and dispersed
them, without doubt either the earth would have swallowed them up, or fire from
heaven would have consumed them, This kind of punishment not always inflicted.
Wicked men flourish and grow rich, yet their end is miserable enough. 2. Always
with loss of spiritual blessing. ‘Friendship of world enmity against God.” God’s
favour only secured and continued by separation from sin. Withdrawal of Divine
approval must follow deviation from path of Divine precepts. 3. Hereafter with
the loss of all good. Hell is most frequently referred to-as a loss, the negation of all
that is dear and sweet and to be desired ; loss of heaven, of peace, of God’s presence,


CHAP, 1.7 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 29





of opportunity, of gracious influences of the Holy Spirit, in word}'tho loss of the soul.
The loss of hope bitterest ingredient in cup of despair. Sin not always manifestly
punished in this world ; but always really so. In the next life the punishment
will be manifest to all the universe, Sin shall not go unpunished, “The thought
of the future punishment for the wicked which the Bible reveals is enough to make
an earthquake of terror ina man’s mind. I do not accept the doctrine of eternal
punishment because I delight in it. I would cast in doubts if I could, till I had
filled hell up to the brim: I would destroy all faith in it: but that would do me
no good ; I could not destroy the thing. Nor does it help me to take the word
‘everlasting,’ and put it into a rack like an inquisitor, until I make it shriek out
some other meaning ; I cannot alter the stern fact.” ‘The pea contains the vine,
and the flower, and the pod in embryo: and I am sure when I plant it, that it will
produce them and nothing else. Now every action of our lives is embryonic, and
according as it is right or wrong, it will surely bring forth the sweet flowers of joy,
or the poison fruits of sorrow. Such is the constitution of this world; and the
Bible assures us that the next world only carries it forward. Here and hereafter
‘whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap,’ ”—Beecher.

II. That true penitence is invariably followed by pardon. “But if ye tum
unto me, and keep my commandments,” &c. The sequence carried out in this
history. National repentance was followed by national restoration to God’s favour
and forfeited privileges. 1. True repentance implies the forsaking of evil. This,
first step. Greek words (metameleia, and metanoya) signify change of purpose, and
change of thought. Not mere desire or emotional sorrow: but deep contrition
resulting from clear view of heinous character of sin. Only when Jews abandoned
idolatry and heathen associations could they be received again as God’s heritage.
2. True repentance implies turning to God. By sin do men turn from God : by repent-
ance they return and cleave to him. Judas an instance of insincere repentance ; he
turned from his sin, but turned not to God, but went straight into arms of
despair. Peter’s true repentance urged to the feet of his offended Saviour, where
he found mercy. 3. True repentance includes a determination of future obedience.
This mentioned as a condition in God’s promise, and quoted in Nehemiah’s prayer,
“if ye turn unto me, and keep my commandments,” §c. Evangelically keep them,
for with a legal obedience none can do so. The penitent must have at least an
earnest desire and firm resolve to do them as far as he can by God’s grace. 4. Pardon
is as certain to follow true penitence as punishment sin. Both rest upon God’s “ J
will.” His threatenings and his promises both stand true. If he fulfil the curses,
he will certainly fulfil the benedictions, If punishment has followed sin, we may
confidently look for mercy to follow the forsaking of sin. God not less ready to
restore than to scatter. 5. Pardon is accompanied by the restoration of forfeited
privileges. “ Yet will I gather them from thence, and will bring them into the place
which I have chosen, to set my name there” (v. 9). Not only would they be
redeemed from exile and captivity, but re-established in Jerusalem, and enjoying all
the privileges of God’s special providence and protection. When sinners turn to
God they receive all the evangelical blessings of the New Testament Covenant
through Christ. Adoption, assurance, sanctification, heirship, heaven, are all theirs,
through faith in Jesus Christ.


Illustrations :—* ‘ Let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me: and he shall
make peace with me.’ I think I can convey the meaning of this passage by what took place in my
own family within these few days. One of my children had committed a fault, for which I thought
it my duty to chastise him. I called him to me, explained to him the evil of what he had done, and
told him how grieved I was that I must punish him for it. He heard me in silence, and then rushed
into my arms, and burst into tears, I could sooner have cut off my arm than have struck him for
nis fault; he had taken hold of my strength, and had made peace with me.”—R, Tolls,

The first physic to recover our souls is not cordials, but corrosives ; not an immediate stepping into
heaven by a present assurance, but mourning and lamentations, and a bitter bewailing of our former


30 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


">


transgressions,


{[cHa¥ 1.


With Mary Magdalene, we must wash Christ’s feet with our tears of sorrow,


before we may anoint his head with ‘‘ the oil of gladness.” — Browning.
Like Janus Bifrons, the Roman god looking two ways, a true repentance not only bemoans the


past, but takes heed to the future,


Reperttance, like the lights of a ship at her bow and her stern,
not only looks to the track she has made, but to the path before her.


A godly sorrow moves the


Christian to weep over the failure of the past, but his eyes are not so blurred with tears, but that he
can look watchfully into the future, and, profiting by the experience of former failures, make straight
paths for his feet.—Pilkington. Repentance without amendment is like continual pumping ata ship,


without stopping the leak.


Evecrinc GRAcE.


i 9—10. Now these are thy servants, and thy people.


I. Achosen place. ‘‘ The place that
I have chosen to set my name there.”
1. Historically, Jerusalem. By God’s
appointment this city is called the “holy
city ;” because he chose it for the
dwelling-place of his people, and the site
for his temple. Hence the Psalmist:
“The Lord hath chosen Zion, he hath
chosen it for a dwelling-place for himself:
this is my resting-place for ever: here
will I awell, because I have chosen it”
(Ps. cxxxii.). For this reason it was
holy, though the people by their wicked-
ness had defiled it. Other towns and
countries have been chosen by God to
play an important part in working out his
gracious purposes in the redemption of
man, as Bethlehem, Nazareth, Babylon,
Rome, &e. Jerusalem exalted above all
other cities. The place, however, can
make no one holy or acceptable before
God: for “he chose not the man for
the place’s sake, but the place for the
man’s sake.”—Pilkington. 2. Typically,
the Church militant. The Christian
Church is now to the world what the
holy city was of old. There God dwells,
and appoints his ordinances and mani-
fests his glory. Asin the holy city so
in the Christian Church, there may be
worldlings and aliens who nominally
belong to the Church, but really have no
right or portion therein. Membership in
the Church does not necessarily involve
spiritual life in the New Testament any
more than it did in the Old Testament
dispensation. ‘The Church is God’s
workshop, where his jewels are polishing
for his palace and house; and those he
especially esteems, and means to make
most resplendent, he hath oftenest his
tools upon.”—Leighton. ‘ Hypocrites
are not real members, but excrescences


of the Church, like falling hair or the


parings of the nails are of the body.”—
Salter. 3. The Church triwmphant.
The Chureh militant and the Church
triumphant really one ; like a city built
on both sides of a river. There is but a
stream of death between grace and glory.
Heaven is the final home of God’s chosen
people. There he has recorded his name,
and there doth he dwell in unclouded
light. Often called the New Jerusalem.

II. A chosen people. “These are
thy servants and thy people.” His by
separation from the surrounding heathen,
by redemption from Egypt, by special
and unnumbered favours. From these
words we may gather who are God’s
elect. 1. God’s elect are they who
recognize himas Lord. ‘Thy servants.”
Entering his service they obey his be-
hests, and in all things submit to his
will As servants who are diligent
and dutiful have a right to the care and
protection of their masters, so Jehovah’s
servants may reckon upon his providence
and grace. Let the obedience and joy-
fulness of our lives proclaim the character
of the God we serve, else the world may
say of us, as Aigoland, king of Saragossa,
said of certain lazars and poor people,
whom he saw at the table of Charlemagne
when he came to be baptized, “that he
would not serve a God who did no more
for his servants than had been done for
those poor wretches.” 2. God’s elect
are they who recognize him as their king.
“ And thy people.” As such they render
him regal homage, and honour all his
laws, because they love his person. And
as earthly subjects look up to their
monarch and his government for protec-
tion and relief, so do the subjects of the
King of kings look up to him for assist-
ance and deliverance in their extremity.
3. God's elect recognize him as their great


OHAP, 1.)


Redeemer. “ Whomthou hast redeemed,”
&c. Israel only thus redeemed, none
others could claim this mark of electing
grace. If not redeemed, then non-elect.
Same mark of Divine election still holds
good. Whatever men may imagine, only
those are elect who show by their life
that they have come: out of spiritual
bondage. Note concerning this redemp-
tion, (1) That it was a Divine work.
“Thou hast redeemed.” An act worthy
of God: impossible to any one but God:
refiecting highest glory on the character
of God. Nothing less than Divine power,
joined with infinite love and unerring
wisdom, could have accomplished the
world’s redemption through the atone-
ment of Christ. (2) That it was a work
of surpassing difficulty. ‘“ By thy great
power and by thy strong hand.” The
redemption from Egypt was difficult
because of the waywardness of the
Israelites, and the opposition of Pharaoh,
The ransom of the race from the penalty
of sin still more difficult, on account of
the depravity of fallen humanity, and
on account of the claims of God’s inviol-
able law. The provision and subsequent
government of Israel a work of gigantic
and humanly insurmountable difficulty.
Yet as Jehovah fed and led, and settled
his people not only in the wilderness
but in Canaan, so will he supply all the
need of all his children. “ He is able
to save them to the uttermost, that come
unto God by him” (Heb. vii. 25).
(3) That it was a work accomplished
through human agency. Moses was the
leader and deliverer of Israel under God’s
direction, “ Thy strong hand” may re-
fer to his agency, as “‘thy great power”
indicates the source of his strength. The
second redemption required a human
agent. Christ came as God’s “ strong
hand” to lift up and lead out of captivity
the enslaved human race,


I/lustrations :—A senator related to his son
the account of the book containing the names of
illustrious members of the commonwealth. The
son desired to see the outside, It was glorious
to iook upon, “‘Oh! let me open it,” said the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 31


-_—


son. “ Nay,’’ said the father, “tis known only
to the Council.” ‘ Then,” said the son, “ tell
me if my name is there.” “And that,” said the
father, “is a secret known only to the Council,
and it cannot be divulged.”” Then he desired to
know for what achievements the names were
inscribed in that book. So the father told him;
and related to him the achievements and noble
deeds by which they had eternized their names,
““Such,’”’ said he, “are written, and only such
are written in this book,” “And will my name
be there,’’ asked the son, “J cannot tell thee,’
said the father; ‘‘if thy deeds are like theirs,
thou shalt be written in the book; if not, thou
shalt not be written.” And then the son
consulted with himself; and he found that his
whole deeds were playing, and singing, and
drinking, and amusing himself; and he found
that this was not noble, nor temperate, nor
yaliant, And as he could not read as yet his
name he determined to make “ his calling and
election sure.”

We may adopt Archbishop Leighton’s beauti-
ful illustration of a chain, which he describes as
having its first and last link,—election and
final salvyation,—in heaven, in God’s own hands;
the middle one—effectual calling—being let down
to the earth into the hearts of his children; and
they laying hold of it, have sure hold of the
other two, for no power can sever them.

“Though the mariner see not the pole-star,
yet the needle of the compass that points to it,
tells him which way he sails, ‘Thus, the heart
that is touched by the loadstone of Divine love,
trembling with godly fear, and looking towards
God in fixed believing, points at the love of
election, and tells the soul that its course is
heavenward, towards the haven of eternal rest.
He that loves may be sure that he was loved first ;
and he that chooses God for his delight and
portion, may conelude confidently that God hath
chosen him to be one of those that shall enjoy
him for ever; for that our love, and electing of
him, is but the return and re-percussion of the
beams of his love shining upon us.”—Salter,

Suppose a rope cast down into the sea for the
relief of a company of poor shipwrecked men
ready to perish, and that the people in the ship,
or on the shore, should cry out unto them to lay
hold on the rope that they may be saved; were
it not unreasonable and foolish curiosity for any
of those poor distressed creatures, now at the
point of death, to dispute whether the man who
cast the rope did intend and purpose to save them
or not, and so minding that which helpeth not,
neglect the means of safety offered? Thus it is
that Christ holdeth forth, as it were, a rope of
mercy to poor drowned and lost sinners. It is
our duty then, without any further dispute, to
look upon it asa principle afterwards to be made
good, that Christ hath gracious thoughts towards
us: but for the present to lay hold on the rope.—
Rutherford.


83 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.





[omar. L


— ee ete +





Monpersr GoopnEss.


£11. Thy servants, who desire to fear thy name.


I. Itcounts it an honour to serve
God in any capacity. “Thy servants.”
1. It regards God as Master as well as
Father. Dutiful obedience to explicit
commands, required no less than filial to
devotion. It surrenders not only affec-
tion, but will. 2. Ié regards the meanest
task in God’s service as an unspeakable
honour. The lowest office in the court
of an earthly monarch is a post of honour ;
how much more so the lowest footstool
in the house of the King eternal. The
service not a task, because offspring of
love. (a)

II. It makes very humble profes-
sions before God. “ Who desire to fear
thy name.” 1, Jé dares not mention
faultless conduct. With Abraham it
says, “I, that am but dust and ashes, have
taken upon me to speak unto the living
God” (Gen. xviii. 27); with Jacob, “I
am not worthy of the least of all the
mercies ” (Gen. xxxii. 10) ; with Asaph,
‘‘So foolish was I, and ignorant, I
was as a beast before thee” (Ps.
Ixxiii, 22); and with Paul, “I am
less than the least of all saints” (Eph.
iii. 8). The Pharisee appealed to his
virtuous conduct, and was rejected ; the
publican, to his unworthiness, and was
accepted, This, a sphere of action and
of trial, rather than of rapture and
triumph. “Blessed is the man that
feareth always.” 2. Ié¢ makes profession
only of good intentions. ‘Who desire
to fear thy name.” Even Nehemiah can
boast of nothing higher. The whole
life of a Christian is nothing else but
sanctum desiderium, a holy desire ;
seeking that perfection which cannot be
fully attained on earth (Phil iii. 12).
3. Jt does not remain satisfied with good
desires. Many there are who cannot
speak with assurance of any higher
experience than the presence of holy
purposes and intentions. They cannot
yet say they do fear, or love him, but
that they desire to do so. Encouraging
promise for all such :—“ Blessed are they
that do hunger and thirst after righteous-
ness,” &c. (Matt. v.). These desires are


proofs of something good, and pledges of
something better. They are evidences
of grace, and forerunners of glory. They
are the pulse of the soul, indicating the
state of spiritual health. But these
desires must be active ones, issuing in
realized power and purity, and Christ-
like gentleness. Desires which issue
in no effort to attain them are like the
vain prayer of Balaam, who could say,
‘Let me die the death of the righteous,
and let my last end be like his” (Num.
xxiii. 10); but who had no concern to
live their life. Herod wished to see our
Saviour work a miracle, but would not
take a journey for the purpose. Pilate
asked, “ What is truth?” and would not
wait foran answer. Desires are nothing
without endeavours. (3)—Jay.

III, It cherishes a reverent fear of
God. ‘Who desire to fear thy name.”
1. Not fear of punishment. Such fear
cast out by love. All fear that hath
torment eradicated in the believer by the
“expulsive power of a new affection.’’
(y) 2. The jilial fear of grieving an
infinitely tender Father. “God has three
sorts of servants in the world ; some are
slaves, and serve him from a principle of
fear ; others are hirelings, and serve him
for the sake of wages; and the last are
eons, and serve him under the influence
of love.”—Secker.


Illustrations : (a) When Calvin was banished
from a Soe oe Geneva, he said, “‘ Most assur-
edly if 1 had merely served man, this would
have been a gas recompense; but it is my
happiness that I have served Him who never fails
to reward his servants to the full extent of his
promise.”

(8) Sir Joshua Reynolds, like many other dis
tinguished persons, was never satisfied with his
own efforts, however well they might satisfy
others,” When M. Mosnier, a French painter,
was one day praising to him the excellence of one
of his pictures, he replied, ‘‘ Alas, Sir! I can
only make sketches, sketches.’’

irgil, who was called the prince of the
Latin poets, was naturally modest, and of @
timorous nature. When people crowded to gaze
upon him, or pointed at him with the finger
in raptures, the poet blushed, and stole away
from them, and often hid himself in shops to
escape the curiosity and admiration of the


CHAP, 1]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAR.


33





ublic, The Christian is called upon to “let
is light shine before men:” but then it must
be with all meekness, simplicity, and modesty.
(y) Pagan nations have always stood in awe
of deities, whose wrath they have deprecated,
and whose love they have never hoped for.
Their worship is one of slavish joy -killing dread.
Tn the East India Museum, in London, there is
an elaborately carved ivory idol from India,


with twelve hands, and in every hand a different
instrument of cruelty. On the door of tho
Cathedral of St. N sialan in Friburg, Switzer.
land, is a notice requesting the prayers of the
charitable, for the souls of the departed, who
are represented as being surrounded by purga-
torial flames. Underneath is a contribution-box
with this inscription, “Oh! resoue us; you af
least who are our friends,”’


UNANSWERED PRAYERS.


El.


Here is help urgently needed, earnestly
solicited, yet unaccountably delayed.
The prayer does not seem to have been
answered until four months later, though
offered continually. Prayer may remain
unanswered—

I. Through some defect in the spirit
of the suppliant. 1. Want of submis-
sion. The Lord’s prayer is the model
for all prayer. There we find three con-
ditions preceding the only petition for
temporal good, viz. “‘ Hallowed be thy
name ; thy kingdom come ; thy will be
done,” &c. These implicitly precede all
true prayer. Unsubmissive prayers some-
times answered to teach men their folly
in choosing their own way in preference
to God’s. Payson was asked, when
under great bodily affliction, if he could
see any particular reason for this dispens-
ation. “No,” he replied, “but I am
as well satisfied as if I could see ten
thousand ; God’s will is the very perfec-
tion of all reason.” It is said that Dove,
the Leeds murderer, was preserved from
what appeared to be the certain fatal
termination of an illness, by the passion-
ately unsubmissive prayers of his mother,
who lived to see her son led to the
gallows. 2. Weakness of faith. “He
that cometh unto God must believe,”
&c. “ Without faith it is impossible to
please God” (Heb. xi. 6). This truth
illustrated by most of Christ’s miracles.
3. Self-secking motives, God regards
the spirit, and will grant nothing to
gratify unhallowed and selfish ambition.
We ask amiss if we seek for good that
we may consume it on our lusts (Jas. iv.
3). Thus did Simon Magus desire the
gift of the Holy Ghost for the sake of
personal gain and fame, but was detected
and punished (Acts viii. 9—13). (a)


dD


Prosper, I pray thee, thy servant this day, $c.


4, An unforgiving spirit. “ Let us lift
up holy hands, without wrath,” &c.
(1 Tim. ii. 8). An uncharitable spirit
condemns itself whenever it repeats the
words, “ Forgive us owr trespasses as
we forgive them that trespass against us.”
“Tf we regard iniquity in our heart God
will not hear us” (Ps. lxvi. 18). The
importance of a forgiving spirit in ap-
proaching the throne of mercy is fully
and clearly expressed in the opening
sentences of the Communion Service.
“Ye that do truly and earnestly repent
of your sins, and are in love and charity
with your neighbours, draw near,” &c.
5. A superficial sense of want. God
only promises to satisfy real, not fancied
wants. Until we come to feel the pain
of want, not able fully to value heavenly
gifts. God bestows few blessings where
not wanted, or not valued.

II. Through some defect in the
nature of the petition. 1. Jt may be
unsuitable. This, not cause of delay in
Nehemiah’s case, The king’s favour was
necessary to the success of his enterprise.
Good men err in judgment. God may
answer prayer, but not as we expected.
The means desired may not be the most
suitable for the attainment of the end
contemplated. 2. It may be harmful
Child may ask for a razor to play with.
Father refuses because life would be
endangered. Our Father loves his
children too well to grant them whet
he knows would ruin both body and
soul, 3. Zé may be impracticable.
Whilst true that nothing is impossible
with God, also true that he has chosen
to govern the moral and material universe
by certain fixed laws, some of which he
never interferes with, and others only
for very momentous reasons, Our


.


34


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[CHAP. L





=


prayers may require the over-riding of
these laws on insufficient grounds ; hence
their failure. This he will make known
to the sincere suppliant by the inspiration
and illumination of the Holy Ghost.
III. Through immaturity in the
conditions required to give full value
to the blessing sought: This probably
the cause of the delay in Nehemiah’s
case. He was a good and upright man,
and his petition was unimpeachable, for
it was eventually granted. Circum-
stances were not ripe. Answers are
sometimes delayed: 1. Because God's
agents are not yet in full sympathy with
the work. King not yet in favourable
mind, people not yet driven to ex-
tremity. All God’s agents are to be
educated in his school for his work.
When their training complete he brings
them forth and uses them, not before.
Thus Moses, David, Paul, &c. were
educated. 2. Circumstances are not yet
congenial, Every great enterprise needs
favourable surroundings for its inception,
as much as the seed requires good soil,
Bury the acorn,in the sand, and it
remains barren. Cast the corn-seed into
the ocean, and it produces no harvest.
Even so, the most laudable enterprise,
the most desirable reformation, planted


in the midst of unfriendly circumstances
will come to nought. Germany was
ready for Luther, England for Wesley,
Scotland for Moody, hence their success
where others failed. 3. Because the time
was not opportune. The hour had not
yet come. God’s times are in his own
hands. Of the times and seasons know-
eth no man. Having done all, it is our
duty to wait the moving of the pillar.
At the right moment God will manifest
himself, and appear on behalf of his
people. i


Illustration: —(a) It is recorded of an
architect of the name of Cnidus, that having
built a watch-tower for the king of Egypt, to
warn mariners from certain dangerous rocks, he
caused his own name to be engraved in large
letters on a stone in the wall, and then having
covered it with plaster, he inscribed on the
outside, in golden letters, the name of the king
of Egypt, as though the thing were done for
his glory, He was cunning enough to know
that the waves would ere long wear away the
coat of plastering, and that then his cwn name
would appear, and his memory be handed down
to successive generations. How many are there
who, whilst affecting to seek only the glory
of God and His Church, are really seeking
whatever is calculated to gratify self-love.
Could the outer coat of their pretences be
removed, we should see them as they really are,
desirous not of God’s glory, but of their own —
Trench,


Man’s Equariry BEFORE Gop.


Talis


The familiar way in which Nehemiah
speaks of the king before God suggests—

I. That the greatest earthly poten-
tates are themselves subjects of a
higher King. They equally under his
laws and subject to his will. (a) They
and their meanest subjects on a perfect
level in the heavenly court. God no
respecter of persons, This thought should
enable us to conquer the fear of man.
This thought should make us satisfied
with our lot. Their Master and Judge
and ours the same. (3)

If. That the most powerful mon-
archs are but men. “ Zhis man.”
1. Fallen men. “ All we like sheep,”
&e. “There is no difference,” &c.
“None righteous, no not one” (Ps. xiv.
2; Rom. iii. 9; Isa. lili. 6; Ps. culiii.


In the sight of this man.


2. All needing the same mercy; all
requiring to seek it in the same way
(humbly), and on the same terms (re-
pentance and faith). “ All stand before
judgment-seat of Christ” (Rom. xiv.
10; 2 Cor. v. 10). 2. Suffering men.
Liable to same pains, infirmities, be-
reavements, accidents, &c. One touch
of nature makes all the world akin.
One pang of suffering too. 3. Dying
men, All amenable to king of terrors,
He enters the palace as well as poor-
house. Queen Elizabeth begged for
another hour to live, but death was in-
exorable. It lays the monarch low with
the same stroke that smites his meanest
subject. Honours thus fleeting not to
be compared with the everlasting joys
which are at God’s right hand.


OHAP. 1.]


III. That God is no respecter of
human distinctions. 1. Not that he
disapproves of the ordinary distinctions
of social position. This inevitable. If
all men made equal to-day, some would
have risen and others have fallen by
to-morrow. Masters and _ servants,
monarchs and subjects, teachers and
taught, there must of necessity be as
long as human society exists. The
ideas of the socialist contrary alike to
Divine law and practical utility. Only
before God are men in any sense equal.
2. But that he regards character as
everything; the accidentals of social
position as nothing. What a man ia,
not what he Aas, commends him to
God. (y)

IV. That the best means of influ-
encing earthly monarchs is to secure
the aid of Jehovah. So did Nehemiah.
The propriety of this act seen in his
management of the undertaking. Inter-
course with God will best prepare for
dealings with men. When we thus
address ourselves to God, difficulties
vanish. “ His kingdom ruleth over all.”
Every event under his direction ; every
character under his control. When
Herod imprisoned Peter, the Church
assembled together, not to draw up a
petition and address it to the king ; but
to seek God’s interposition. They ap-
plied, not to the servant, but the master ;
to one who had Herod completely under
check: “Prayer was made, without
ceasing, of the Church unto God for


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAR. 85


him.” What was’ the consequence 1
“ When Herod would have brought him
forth,” &. (Acts xii. 6). Solomon says,
“The king’s heart is in the hands of the
Lord, as the rivers of water ; he turneth it
whithersoever he will” (Prov. xxi. 1).
Eastern monarchs were absolute; yet God
had them more under his command than
the husbandman has a direction of the
water in a meadow. There isa two-fold
dominion which God exercises over the
mind of man. 1. By the agency of his
grace, as in the case of Saul of Tarsus.
From a furious persecutor, he becomes
at once an apostle. 2. By the agency of
his providence. History is full of this.—
Jay.


Tilustrations :—(a) What are they when they
stand upon the highest pinnacles of worldly
dignities, but bladders swelled up with the breath
of popularity P nothings set astrut; chessmen,
that on the board play the kings and nobles, but
in the bag are of the same material, and rank
with others.—By. Hopkins.

(8) King Canute was one day flattered by his
courtiers on account of his power. Then he
ordered his throne to be placed by the sea-side.
The tide was rolling in, and threatened to drown
him. He commanded the waves to stop. Of
course they did not. Then he said to his flatterers,
“‘ Behold how small is the might of kings.”

(y) With God there is no freeman but his
servant, though in the galleys; no slave but the
sinner, though ina pales none noble but the
virtuous, if never so basely descended ; none rich
but he that possesseth God, even in rags; none
wise but he that is a fool to the world and him-
self; none happy but he whom the world pities.
Let me be free, noble, rich, wise, happy to God.
—Bp, Hall,





ADDENDA TO CHAPTER L


{ 3. Sm rvuins a Kinepom.


I. If there be a moral governor of
the universe, sin must provoke him.
A righteous God must love righteous-
ness; a holy God, holiness; a God of
order, order; a God of benevolence,
benevolence ; and accordingly he must
abhor all that is opposite to these.
Hence, it is said, that “God is angry
with the wicked everv day; the wicked


shall not stand in his sight ; he hateth
all workers of iniquity.” And this is
essential to every lovely and reverential
view we can take of God. For who
could adore a being who professed to
govern the world, and suffered the
wicked to go on with impunity.

II. If sin provoke God, he is able
to punish it. Heis “the Cord of Hosta,


36 HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.
I ee


the Lord strong and mighty, the Lord
mighty in battle.” All the elements
are his. Every creature obeys his nod,
from an archangel to a worm. How
idle therefore to talk of armies, navies,
and alliances, and say after comparing
force with force, “Oh! the enemy
cannot come!” He cannot come unless
God send him; but he can come easily
enough if he should. Is anything too
hard for the Lord, when he would either
show mercy or execute wrath.

III. Bodies of men are punishable
in this world only. In eternity there
are no families, churches, nations. If
therefore a country is to be destroyed,
it is tried, condemned, and executed
here. When we see an individual
sinner prospering in the world, and not
immediately punished, our faith is not
staggered ; for we know that “his day
is coming.” But if a wicked people were
allowed to escape, we should be con-
founded, we should ask, “ Where is the
God of Judgment?” For in this case
they are not punished now; and they
cannot be punished hereafter.

IV. There is a tendency in the very
nature of sin to injure and ruin a
country. It violates all the duties of
relative life. It destroys subordination.
It relaxes the ties which bind mankind
together, and makes them selfish and
mean. It renders men enemies to each
other. Social welfare cannot survive
the death of morals and virtue.

V. God’s dealings with guilty
nations are confirmed both by his
word andall human history. He has
invariably punished them in due tirae.
Witness the state of Nineveh, Babylon,
and others. Thus the nation Samuel
addressed put his declaration to the
trial and found it true. A succession
of severe judgments befell them, till at
last wrath came upon them to the utter-
most, and “the Romans came and took
away both their place and nation.”

VI. God always gives previous
intimation of his coming to judge a
nation. So that were men not blind
and deaf, they must see and hear his
coming. When you see the body
wasting away by disease, and every
complaint growing more inveterate, you


(CHAP. 3,





suspect that death will be the conse-
quence; it is already begun. Christ
said, “‘ When ye see a cloud rise out of
the west, straightway ye say, There
cometh a shower; and so it is... Ye
hypocrites! ye can discern the face of
the sky, and of the earth; but how is
it that ye do not discern this time ?”

VII. If God has favoured a nation
with the revelation of his will, their
sins are aggravated by means of this
light. ‘Where much is given, much
will be required.” “ He that knew his
Lord’s will, and did it not, shall be
beaten with many stripes.” Thus, a
heathen country committing the very
same sins with a country enlightened.
with the Gospel, is far less criminal.
A country overspread with superstition,
where the Bible is searcely known,
would be far less guilty than a country
favoured with a purer worship, and
where evangelical instruction is open to
all.

VIII. When God has distinguished
a people by singular instances of his
favour, that people will be propor-
tionally criminal, unless they dis-
tinguish themselves by their devoted-
ness to him. Thus God from time to
time aggravated the sins of the Jews.
“He made them ride upon the high
places of the earth,” &. ‘But Jeshu-
run waxed fat, and kicked,” &e.

IX. When a nation is under the
corrections of the Almighty, they are
eminently sinful if they disregard the
tokens of his wrath. Hence Isaiah
says, “‘In that day did the Lord God of
Hosts call to weeping and to mourning,
&c., and behold joy and gladness ; let us
eat and drink, for to-morrow we die.”
Jeremiah also says, “ Thou hast stricken
them, but they have not grieved ; thou
hast consumed them, but they have
refused to receive correction ; they have
made their faces harder than a rock ; they
have refused to return.”

X. Shameless sinning is a sure
proof of general corruption. And
where is there a man who is not more
ashamed of a threadbare coat than e
dishonest action? To fail in business,
and defraud innocent sufferers of they
lawful property, is no longer scandalous


vray, 1}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 87





Impurity is tolerated. Behold the
experiments which fashion has tried
apon the reserve, the decency, the purity
sf woman! lLearn—l. Who is the
worst enemy of his country—the sinner.


i 7. Forcorren

1. We wre wil chargeable with
faults. Testimony of Scripture and
eonscience are both against us. ‘There
is not a just man upon earth, that doeth
good and sinneth not.” ‘They are all
gone out of the way: there is none that
Joeth good, no, not one.” (Eccl. vii.
20; Rom. iii 12). David feared God,
and hated evil. yet needed to pray,
“Cleanse thou me from secret faults”
{Ps. xix. 12). James, though an apostle,
affirms, “Jn many things we offend all.”
John was beloved above all the apostles,
and bore most of his Master’s image, yet
he declares. “If wesay that we have no
sin, we deceive ourselves” (1 Jno. i. 8).
“ All have sinned, and come short of the
glory of God.” This fact is confirmed
by everything we feel within us, and
observe without us. What faults? We
have forgotten the Son of God, the Lord
of life and glory. We are chargeable
with ingratitude, not against an earthly
benefactor, but a heavenly one. Every
forbidden action that we have done,
every sinful word that we have spoken,
every irregular thought that we have
entertained, or unhallowed wish that we
have harboured in our breast, accumulates
our load of guilt.

II. We are liable to forget our
faalts. Men have convictions of sin,
but they stifle them. Amidst the
pleasures or employments of time, they
lose even the recollection of their guilt ;
and go forward in the same course,
suspecting no danger, till utter destruc-
tion overtakes them. 1. Through ignor-
ance of the true nature of sin. Its
malignity 1s not properly understood.
Men think of sin as a light matter: if
it inconvenience them, they exclaim
against it; if not, they practise it with
little compunction or concern. They do
not refiect on what sin is in the sight of
God, nor think as they ought of its
result in a future world: and hence


2. Who is the best friend—the Christian.
“ By the blessing of the upright the city
is exalted: but it is overthrown by the
mouth of the wicked.”—Jay, abridged.


Srxvs Rex weerep,


they forget it. 2. Through self-love,
Self-love when regulated is laudable and
useful; because it leads to the hatred of
what is evil, and to the pursuit of what
is good. But that love of self which
possesses and actuates thousands, is little
different from the love of sin; they love
indolence, sensual gratification, and ease ;
they resemble a man with a diseased
limb, who chooses death by fatal degrees,
rather than amputation. 3. Through
hurry of business. 4. Through elevation
in worldly circumstances. Great num-
bers, from the pressing importunity of
their secular concerns, from the eager
desire of getting forward in the world,
forget their souls, forget their sins, for-
get the Saviour, and abide in the most
dangerous state of folly and insensibility.

III. Various circumstances are
adapted to remind us of our faults,
1. Providential occurrences. These
regard ourselves, the affliction of our
persons, or our immediate connections.
The case of the widow of Zarephath an
illustration. She had one son; the
prophet Elijah resided in her house ; no
affluence was there: but by him, the
Lord made her barrel of meal not to
waste, and her cruse of oil not to fail.
Suddenly her son was taken from her
by the stroke of death; hear what she
said to the prophet, “Art thou come
unto me to call my sin to remembrance,
and to slay my son?” (1 Kings xvii. 18).
Had her son lived, and Providence
continued to smile, probably her con-
victions would have remained asleep.
Other providential occurrences regard the
condition of those about us, and thus
strike our observation. We witness
sometimes the difficulties in which others
are involved; we think of what occa-
sioned such difficulties, and are reminded
of similar causes in ourselves, which
might have produced similar effects
An idle mas. sees in another the « ffects o°


3A HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


indolence,—that he is reduced to poverty,
and clothed in rags ; a drunkard observes
in another the effects of intemperance,—
that his health is impaired his circum-
stances embarrassed, and his character
rained. These things are adapted to
awaken conviction, to bring a man’s
own faults to remembrance. Illustration
furnished by the account of “the wo-
man taken in adultery” (Jno. viii.
7—9); Josepn’s interview with his
brethren (Gen. xlii. 21), and Belshazzar’s
feast (Dan. v. 1—7). In each case the
men remembered their faults. 2. The
ministry of God’s word. This word is
profitable not only for “doctrine and
instruction,” but also for “correction
and reproof.” See this in the case of
the Jews who stoned Stephen. ‘“ They
were cut to the heart” (Acts vii. 45).
[he case of Felix also another illustra-
tion in point. Whilst Paul “ reasoned
of righteousness, temperance, and judg-
ment to come, Felix trembled” (Acts
xxiv. 25). When Peter preached on
the day of Pentecost, “ they were pricked
in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and
to the rest of the apostles, Men and
brethren, what shall we do?” (Acts ii.
37). David and Nathan (2 Sam. xii.
7—12). “By the daw is the knowledge
of sin” (Rom. iii. 20).

IV. When we are reminded of our
faults we should be ready to confess
them. ‘Confess yeur faults one to
another” (Jas. v. 16). This gives no
countenance to the arbitrary practice of
popish confessions; for according to
this passage the people have as much
right to demand confession from the
priests, as the priests have from the
people. It enjoins candour, and open
confession ef blame, when professing
Christians have offended one another.
Confession also must be made to God.





[CHAP, 1


rns


“He that covereth his sins shall not
prosper; but whoso confesseth and for-
saketh them sha‘l have mercy” (Prov.
xxviil. 13). This clearly implies that
they can have no mercy who do ot
confess their sins. Let a man proudly
persist in maintaining his innocency ;
let him think highly of what he calls
his moral rectitude; let him vainly
imagine that his good deeds outweigh
his bad ones; or let him sink into a
state of obstinate indifference—that man
is certainly not in the way of mercy.
“Tf we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves.” “If we confess our
sins, God is faithful and just to forgive
us our sins” (1 Jno. i. 8, 9). What
sins? Lament before God a hard heart,
a proud heart, a corrupt heart. Lament
before him a fretful temper, a peevish,
a passionate temper. Lament the weak-
ness of your faith, the deadness of your
hope, the languor of your love, the
coldness of your zeal, the inefficiency of
all your desires and resolutions.

V. Confession of faultsshould always
be attended with real amendment.
This is an incumbent duty ; for what is
repentance? It includes a disposition
to undo all the evil which we have done.
Zaccheus’ repentance was of the right
kind, for he offered to make restitution.
“Lord, the half of my goods I give to
the poor; and if I have taken anything
from any man by false accusation I
restore him fourfold” (Luke xix, 8).
Repentance is nothing without reforma-
tion; and reformation, in many instances,
is a mere name without restitution:
“Surely it is meet to be said unto God,
I have borne chastisement, J will not
offend any more. If I have done in-
iquity, I will do no more” (Job xxxiv,
31, 32).—Ktdd, abridged.


i 10. An Execr PEoru.


I. True believers are the objects of
a special choice. Note—1l. Its author.
“God hath from the beginning chosen
you to salvation.” We cannot, without
contradicting Scripture, dispute the fact
that God’s people are a chosen people—
chosen of God. Do not object to the


term ; remember where you find it; seek
rather to understand the subject, and
objections will subside. Whilst God
tnjures none, surely he may confer special
benefits on some. Let it be granted that
the choice of some implies that others are
not chosen; yet who can gainsay the


CHAP. 1]





~


language of St. Paul, “ Nay but, O man,
who art thou thatrepliest against God?”
&c. (Rom. ix. 20). “Shall not the
Judge of all the earth do right?”
Doubtless he shall !—of this we may rest
assured : “ The Lord is righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works.”
2. The date of this choice. ‘ From the
beginning.” This expression must be
explained by similar passages which
relate to the same subject. St. Peter
says, “ Ye are a chosen generation, elect
according to the foreknowledge of God ”
(1 Pet. ii. 9; 1.2). St. Paul, “whom
he did foreknow, he also did predes-
tinate.” Foreknowledge leads us back
to some period previous to the existence
of those persons; and there is no text
more explicit than that which occurs in
the Epistle tothe Ephesians, ‘“ According
as he hath chosen us in him (Christ),
before the foundation of the world.”
Now, what was before the foundation of
the world must have been in eternity;
for we cannot conceive a point of time,
before time commenced. Time is a
parenthesis m eternity ; a limited dura-
tion which regards creatures. Here then
is taught the freeness of this choice. If
it was from the beginning, it was before
man had his being : consequently there
could be no worthiness in us, or any of
our race, influencing the Most High to
suchachoice. 3, The end of this choice.
“To salvation.” The Israelites as a
nation were chosen of God, but not all
of them to salvation, for many fell ; and
we are admonished to take heed lest we
“ fall after the same example of unbelief”
(Heb. iv. 11). The twelve were chosen
to the office of apostleship, but not all of
them to salvation, for Judas was of their
number. ‘“ Have not I chosen you
twelve, and one of you is a devil?” (Jo.
vi. 70). Do you ask, “ What is salva-
tion?” Itis heaven. It includes the
complete deliverance from all evil, and
the full possession of all good ; it includes
an entire freedom from sin, and the
constant enjoyment of purity and peace ;
it includes an everlasting release from all


that is painful and distressing, and the





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 38


endless fruition of whatever can satisfy
and exalt the immortal mind, the eternal
fruition of God himself.

II. True believers are persons of a
peculiar character. The people of God
are ‘‘ predestinated to be conformed to
the image of his Son.” They are chosen
in Christ before the foundation of the
world, “that they should be holy and
without blame before him in love”
(Ephes. i. 4). 1. They are believers of
the truth. Chosen to salvation, “through
belief of the truth.” Not possible to give
a more concise definition of faith than
here—“ the truth ;” hence our Lord said,
“ Ye shall know the truth, and the truth
shall make you free.” Believing the
truth is receiving it as the record of God,
in such a way as to feel affected and in-
fluenced by it according to the nature of
the things which it regards. Are we
believers of the truth? If not, we have
no Scriptural evidence of our election
of God to salvation. 2. They are par-
takers of the Spirit. “If any man have
not the Spirit of Christ he is none of
his” (Rom. viii. 9), A man is not born
again but of the Spirit; and the new
birth or regeneration is the commence-
ment of the new life. “ Know ye not
that ye are the temple of God, and that
the Spirit of God dwelleth in you” (1
Cor. iii. 16). Not without reason are
we admonished, “Quench not the Spirit.”
3. They are the subjects of sanctification.
The Holy Spirit produces it, and gradu-
ally promotes it; they are chosen to sal-
vation “through sanctification of the
Spirit.” Sanctification is holiness, and
there is no way of attaining holiness but
by “ the Spirit of Holiness.” Sanctifica-
tion is the best evidence of faith; it is
also the best possible mark of election to
salvation. We have proof that we are “of
God,” only so far as we are like God. Is
he our Father? Where then is resem-
blance to him? If multitudes of profess:
ors examine themselves by this test, it is
to be feared they will have little hope
left of their interest in evarlasting love.
—Kidd


40 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


KS








(CHAP, I


(LLUSTRATIONS.


Benevolence. 1. It is said of Lord Chief


Justice Hale, that he frequently invited his poor |


neighbours to dinner, and made them sit at table
with himself. Tf any of them were sick, so that
they cou:d not come, he would send provisions to
them from bis own table. He did not confine
his bounties to the poor of his own parish, but
diffused supplies to the neighbouring parishes as
occasion required, He always treated the old,
the needy, and the sick with the tenderness and
familiarity that became one who consi‘ered
they were of the same nature with himself, and
were reduced to no other necessities but such as
he himself might be brought to. Common
beggars he considered in another new. If an
of these met him in his walks, or came to his
door, he would ask such as were capableof working,
why they went about so idly. If they answered,
it was because they could not get employment,
he would send them to some field, to gather all
the stones in it, and lay them ina heap, and then
paid them liberally for their trouble. This being
done, he used to send his carts, and cause the
stones to be carried to such places of the highway
as needed repair. 2. “I often think,” says
Coleridge, “ with pleasure, of the active practical
benevolence of Salter. His rides were often
sixty, averaging more than thirty miles a day,
over bad roads, and in dark nights; yet not once
was he known to refuse a summons, though
quite sure that he wonld receive no remuneration;
nay, not sure that it would not be necessary to sup-

ly wine, or cordials, which, in the absence of
the landlord of his village, must be at his own
expense. This man was generally pitied by the
affluent and the idle, on the score of his constant
labours, and the drudgery which he almost seemed
to court ; yet with little reason, for I never knew
a man more’to be envied, or more cheerful, more
invariably kind, or more patient ; he was always
kind from real kindness and delicacy of feeling,
never being even for a moment angry.

Prayer must be submissive. 1. A Christian
widow in London saw, with great alarm, her
only child taken dangerously ill. As the illness
increased she became almost distracted from a
dread of losing her child; at length, it became
so extremely ill, and so convulsed, that she
kneeled down by the bed, deeply affected, and in
prayer said, ‘* Now, Lord, thy will be done,”
From that hour the child began to recover, till
health was perfectly restored, 2. Lord Boling-
broke once asked Lady Huntingdon how she
reconciled prayer to God for particular blessings,
with absolute resignation to the Divine will.
“Very easily,” answered her ladyship, “just es
if 1 were to offer a petition to a monarch, of


whose kindness and wisdom I had the highest
opinion. In such a case my language wculd be,
—I wish you to bestow on me such or such a
foyour; but your Majesty knows better than I,
how far it would be agreeable to you, or right in
itself, to grant my desire, I therefore content
myself with humbly presenting my petition, and
leave the event of it entirely to you.” 3. The
late Mr, Kilpin of Exeter writes, ‘‘I knew a
case in which the minister praying over a
child apparently dying, said, “If it be thy will
spare ” The poor mother’s soul, yearning
for her beloved, exclaimed, “It must be his will,
I cannot bear ¢fs,"’ The minister stopped, To
the surprise of many the child recovered ; and the
mother, after almost suffering martyrdom by him
while a stripling, lived to see him hanged before

2 was twenty-two! It is good to say, “ Not
my will, but thine be done.”

Modest goodness. 1. Two or three years before
the death of John Newton, when his sight was
so dim that he was no longer able to read, an
aged friend and brother in the ministry called on
him to breakfast. Family prayer succeeded. It
was the good man’s custom to make a few remarks
upon the passage read. After the reading of the
text, “ By the grace of God I am what I am,’
he paused for some moments, and then uttered
the following affecting soliloquy :—‘‘I am not
what I ought to be! Ah, how imperfect and
deficient. I am not what I wish to be, I am
not what I hope to be. Soon, soon, I shall put
off mortality, and with mortality, all sin and
imperfection, Yet though I am not what I
ought to be, nor what I wish to be, nor what I
hope to be, I can truly say I am not what I once
was, @ slave to sin and Satan, and I can heartily
join with the apostle and acknowledge, ‘ By the
grace of God I am what I am.’ Let us pray,”
2, “An individual,” says a missionary, “ em-
ployed in the translation of the Scriptures at a
station where IJ resided, on arriving atthe passage,
‘Now are we the sons of God’ (1 Jno, iii. 2),
came running to me in great haste, exclaiming,
No, no, it is too much; allow me to render it,
‘Now are we permitted to kiss his feet’ A
simple and beautiful representation of those feel-
ings with which Christiansshould ever contemplate
the dignity of their character, and the honour
conferred upon them.” 3. Dr. Lathrop was a
man of generous piety, but muck opposed to the
noisy zeal that seeketh the praise of men. A
young divine, who was much given to enthusiastis
cant, one day said to him, “ Do you st ppose you
have any real religion?” “None to weak of,"
was the excellent reply.





OHAP, II.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 41


—





CHAPTER I


Expranatory Norns.] 1. Nisan] Called Abib in Exod. xiii, 4, first month in Hebrew national
year. Corresponds to parts of our March and April. 3, Let the king live for ever] (Heb. ham-
melek l’olam yihyeh.) (Comp, 1 Kings i, 31; Dan, ii, 4; vi. 6—21.) The mere formula of
address, like our ‘‘God save the Queen.” Even Daniel used it without compunction. The place of my
fathers’ sepulehres] The Persians regarded their burial-places as peculiarly sacred. 6. The queen
also sitting by him] Some have thought this was Esther, but ‘‘ Shegal”’ refers to the prirc-pal
wife of the king. Damaspia was the name of the chief wife according to Ctesias. 7. The governors]
(Heb. pahawoth, modern pacha.) Orieztal name for viceroy. Beyond the river] i. ¢, Kuphrates,
8. Asaph, the keeper of the king’s forest] may have been a Jew. Name, Hebrew. Word trans-
lated “forest” is ‘‘ pardes,’”” our “ paradise.” It signifies a walled rownd place, a preserve of trees.
Probably a royal park of which Asaph was keeper. The palace which appertained to the house]
Probably Solomon’s palace, situated at the south-east corner of the temple-area, was next to the house ;
i. e., the temple as the house of God (2 Chron. xxiii. 12—15), The house that I shall enter into]
Some think this refers also to the temple, which Nehemiah would enter into to inspect; more
probably the house where he would dwell during his stay in Jerusalem. 10. Sanballat the Horonite]
(Beth-horon, in full.) Two Horons in Palestine, a few miles north of Jerusalem ; also Horonaim in
Moab. Sanballat, probably a native of the last mentioned, was a Moabite ; and satrap of Samaria
under the Persians. Tobiah, his vizier or chief adviser, Origin of name Sanballat uncertain.
Tobiah, the servant, the Ammonite] Tobiah, a Jewish name (Hzra ii. 60; Zech. vi. 10), Probabi
a renegade Jew, who had become a slave, and had risen by his talents and cunning to be Sanballats
chief officer, hence the epithet, ‘‘ Tobiah, the s)ave.”” 18: The gate of the valley] (Heb. Sha’or hag-
gai.) Probably overlooking valley of Hinnom, called in Jer. ii, 23 simply “the valley.” It was
about 1200 feet south of the present Jaffa gate. The Septuagint calls it Portam Galilw; the gate of
dead men’s skulls, because that way they went to Golgotha. The dragon well] So called either
because some venomous serpent had been found there, or because the waters ran out of the mouth
of a brazen serpent. (Heb, Fountain of the sea-monster.) The dung port] (Rather, Rubbish-gate.)
Tks gate near which the refuse of the city was cast, and burned, Directly before that part of Hinnom
known as Tophet (Jer. vii. 31, 32; xix. 6—14). 14. The gate of the fountain] A gate in front
of the pool of Siloam (ch. iii. 16). The king’s pool] (Berechath hammelek.) The pool of Siloam,
ao called because it watered the king’s garden. There was no place for the beast that was under
me to ee The ruin was great, and the rubbish so accumulated, that Nehemiah could not pursue
his course along the wall any further, but was obliged to go down into the valley of the brook Kidron
(Nachal, the brook.) 15. And viewed the wall] That which was left of it. 16. The rulers}
A Persian word (Seganim) signifying the executive officers of the colony. Nor to the nobles] (Heb.
white ones.) Among the Jews great men robed in white, as among the Romans in scarlet or purple.
Herod and Christ (Luke xxiii, 11; Matt. xxvii, 28). 19. Geshem the Arabian] Lieutenant
of Arabia under the king of Persia, or chief of those Arabs whom Sargon had settled in Samaria
(Bawlinson’s Anc. Mon., vol. ii. p. 146).


HOMILETIC CONTENTS OF CHAPTER IL


Yer. 1—8. Divine Interposition. Ver. 10. First Hindrance,—Secret Jealousy.
», 1—8. Disinterested Love for a suffering | ,, 11. ageing Retirement.

Church. » i2—16. The Walls inspected.
» 1, 2. Subject and Sovereign, y 12. A Time for Silence.
» 4. Spiritual Recollectedness, » 17,18. An Appeal for Help.
» 6. Hjaculatory Prayer. » 18 The Strength of Unity. ;
»» 7,8. Religious Prudence, » 19. Second Hindrance.—Open Derision .
» 8. The Hand of God. », 20, Confidence in God, an Incentive to
»  9—20. The Incipient Stages of a great Work.

Reformation. » 20, The miserable condition of the Church’s
»» 9. Beoular Aid for Spiritual Work. enemies,


Diving INTERPOSITION.
ii 1—8. And tt came to pase in the month Nisan, ge.


Tue first chapter occupied with account of state of Jerusalem and Nehemiah’s
grief and prayer. This opens with the re’ation of those circumstances which led


43 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. OHAP, I.


ey


to the fulfilment of his desires, and the accomplishment of his purposes. We learn
from text—

I. That God’s interposition was opportune. “It came to pass in the month
Nisan” (v. 1). The best month, because the one chosen by God. Chosen by God
because the best. Note—l. That God’s plans are worked out with the utmost
precision, Trace this in Bible. Often find expressions such as—‘‘In due time,”
“ Fulness of time,” “ Appointed time,” “ Mine hour is not yet come,” “ A set time,”
&c. God’s timepiece never gains or loses. All his plans carried out with unfailing
accuracy. He is neither slack, “as some men count slackness,” in fulfilling his
threats or his promises. Many details, apparently insignificant, combine to work out
the most magnificent plans. A loop is a small thing, yet most gorgeous tapestry
woven in single loops. A link a small thing, yet chain depends on support of
every link. Trifles are links in the chain of God’s providential government, or
rather there are no trifles. [lustrate by complex machinery of Lancashire cotton,
or Coventry silk, or Kidderminster carpet machinery, which whilst wonderfully
intricate, works out the appointed pattern with utmost precision and accuracy. Yet
all human exactness fails in comparison with God’s perfect accuracy. 2. That God
often interferes on his people's behalf when they least expect it. Through not dis-
cerning God’s methods of working, they get discouraged, and think themselves over-
looked. Whilst we look for him to appear in one way he comes in another, and
whilst we mournfully strain our eyes down one path, lo, he comes by another. Our
most unlikely times are God’s most favourable ones. 3. That God generally inter-
feres on his people’s behalf in their most urgent extremity. It wasso here. Nehemiah
so distressed that his countenance was sad for first time. The case of the Jews was
becoming desperate. God interferesin their extremity as he had done on the shores
of the Red Sea—(1) To try their faith, (2) To elicit their gratitude, (3) To
impress upon them their dependence upon him. The text suggests—

II. That God’s interposition required human co-operation. God’s agents are
of two kinds, willing and unwilling, allied and non-allied. Both of these found
in this history. 1. Allied. As Esther came to the kingdom, so Nehemiah to his
office, for such a time as this (Esth. iv. 14). Though he was a prisoner, a stranger,
of an alien religion, yet is he God’s agent as well as the king’s servant. Note con-
cerning him,—(1) That he was duly qualified for his appointed work. Mentally he
possessed forethought (ch. ii. 5), tact (ch. v. 5), and ingenuity (ch. iii.). His address
to Artaxerxes a marvel of clever pleading. Words carefully chosen, respect humbly
paid to rank, superstitious reverence for burial-grounds introduced. No argument
more powerful with an Eastern monarch. Spiritually, he was richly endowed
with every grace required in so difficult a work. Courage, sympathy, generosity,
and profound piety all combined to make him an eminently spiritual man. Such
agents God chooses for important enterprises, utilizing great endowments for arduous
tasks. Note, (2) That he was favourably situated. When God has work for his
servants to do, he by his providence places them where they can do it. Nehemiah
evidently a favourite with Artaxerxes, from fact of his having chosen him to this
important office, over the heads of the Persian nobles. Had he been otherwise
situated, or appointed to any other offive, he would not so readily have found access
to the king’s ear. God appoints our lot and circumstances, and requires us to make
the best of them, and not seek to leave them, with the idea that we can best serve
him elsewhere. Note, (3) That he was rightly actuated. No personal ambition
inspired his petition, but pure, unalloyed, unselfish desire for the prosperity of God’s
Church, and the holy City. No desire for gain, for he used his fortune in feeding
the poor, and entertaining the returning exiles in his own house at Jerusalem.
They who are engaged in God’s work must lay aside all thoughts of worldly gain
or personal honour. Reward there is, but not usually of a worldly sort. 2. Un-
allied. God employs unconscious agents as well as willing onea. “As he put
small thoughts into the heart of Ahasuerus for great purposes” (Esth. vi. 1), 30 here


OHAP, H,] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 43








ke caused a heathen prince to favour a hostile religion, and to defend a people
whom his subjects hated. God even employs his enemies (though not in the same
sense in which he employs his friends), to carry out his purposes. Pharaoh,
Philistines, Chaldeans, Romans, &c.

ITI. That God’s interposition was accompanied by providential coincidences.
All these known to Divine omniscience and taken into account. 1, Nehemiah was
unusually sad. “T had not been beforetime sad in his presence.” No mourner
might be seen in Ahasuerus’ court (Esth. iv. 4). Momus wished that men had
windows in their breasts, that their thoughts might be seen. This not necessary,
for “‘a merry heart maketh a glad countenance ; but by sorrow of heart the spirit
is broken” (Prov. xv. 13). Nehemiah had been afflicting his soul for four months,
No wonder he betrayed it in his countenance. The Hebrews say that a man’s inside ia
turned out, and discovered in oculis, in loculis, in poculis, in his eyes, purse, ard eup.
2. The king was unusually friendly. Most Eastern monarchs would have condemned
him at once either to banishment or death. Artaxerxes might have done so at
another time. Sad looks were, in their eyes, bad looks, and savoured of assassina-
tion : but love thinketh no evil, and the king had confidence in his servant. 3. The
queen also was present. Not Esther, the queen-mother, for Hebrew word signifies
wife. “‘ Because ‘the queen sat by,’ it is probable that there was some solemn feast
that day ; for the queens of Persia used not to come into the king’s presence, but
when they were called by name, as it is written in the book of Esther.” This
might be the cause of Nehemiah’s great fear: but would also be in his favour.
The presenes of a woman, even without her personal intercession, would temper any


harshness the king might feel, and thus aid the suppliant’s suit.


DISINTERESTED LOVE FOR A SUFFERING CHURCH.
ii 1—8. And tt cameto pass, §c.


I. Its sorrow. “ Why is thy countenance sad?” &c. (v. 2). -1. In spite of
personal prosperity. This often hardens heart and deadens sympathies. So long
ns their own homes are flourishing many care little how God’s house fares. This
cannot satisfy a truly good man who has the welfare of God’s cause at heart. No
measure of personal prosperity will compensate for spiritual dearth and deadness in
the Church. 2. In the very midst of social festivities. The revelry of the banquet
could not repress the wretchedness of his heart, for whilst he was in the midst of
rejoicing and mirth his spirit was not there. The inward grief was stronger than
outward surroundings, and broke through all restraint. The wound of a broken
heart carinot be healed by any outward gaiety of circumstance.

II. Its confession. ‘Why should not my countenance be sad?” (v. 3). 1. Zt
is not ashamed of the people of God. “The city the place ef my father’s sepulchres.”
Surrounded by Persian nobles not an easy matter to thus avow friendship for an
alien and oppressed people. Many temptations to expedient silence would have to
be overcome. Much was risked by this avowal. Much probably to be gained by
ignoring them. True piety is courageous. It says, “‘ Thy people shall be my people”
(Ruth i.), for richer for poorer, for better for worse, at all hazards and in all times. “A
friend loveth at all times, and a brother is born for adversity” (Prov. xvii. 17).
“There is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother” (Prov. xvili. 24). 2. Not
ashamed of poor relations. When men rise from a low estate into high circles they
readily forget those who once were equals, unwilling to betray their humble origin.
Such pride always despicable as useless. No disgrace to have poor relations. The
disgrace is in disowning them. Nehemiah not guilty of such folly or cowardice.
He not only acknowledges, but pleads forthem. 3. Not afraid of personal danger
Royal displeasure no trifle under the sway of Oriental despots. Witness recent eventa
in Turkey. Thrones overturned by plots and intrigues continually. The nearer the


(cHaPr. nm.


a4 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH,








throne. the more likely to incur suspicion. Artaxerxes had come to the kingdom
through intrigue and bloodshed. Would ‘be naturally vigilant and wary on this
account, Hence the danger incurred by one even so favoured as Nehemiah, when
he dared to avow sympathy with a captive and recently conquered people inhabiting
a neighbouring province. Fervent love always self-forgetful. It confers not with
flesh asid blood, but willingly incurs danger for sake of its object. This, type of
Christ’s love for his Church.

JIT. Its petition. “And I said unto the king,” &c. (v. 5). 1. It seeks help from
Got. “I prayed unto the God of heaven” (v. 5). This, first step. God has more
interest in his Church than any other, and can do more. If his aid be secured, it
matters little who else fails. If his denied, none can do much. 2. Jt craves human
assistance. “Tf it please the king, let letters be given me,” &c. (v. 7). Recognizes the
principle that God always works by human agency, and helps man by man, to
teach him lessons of mutual sympathy and mutual dependence. 3. It asks per-
mission to give its own aid, and that with self-denial. Nehemiah not one who would
only work at others’ expense. No bargain for costs or travelling expenses. He
asks that he may be permitted to engage in an enterprise that will considerably
diminish his private resources, and involve constant and heavy personal sacrifices
If we desire success in great reformations we must be prepared to make great sacrifices.
Our gifts joined with God’s, will accomplish almost anything. We have no right
to expect God to render his assistance where we withhold our own.

IV. Its joy. , “So it pleased the king to send me” (v. 6). 1. Its prayer ts
granted. Both Jehovah and Artaxerxes looked favourably upon his request.
W hen prayer is thus graciously answered, men should rejoice and speak good of the
name of the Lord. Thus did the royal Psalmist often extol Jehovah’s name.
2. Its way is providentially opened. And this more prosperously than he could
have anticipated. Not only permission granted to leave Persia fora time, but also
tu take with him an escort ; and full authority to build, and command supplies, when
ne arrived at Jerusalem (v. 7, 8). Thus does God cause our cup to overflow with
mercy, giving us far more than we deserve, and more than we either asked or had
reason to expect. Not only out of, but according to, his riches in glory, does he
supply his children’s wants. A millionnaire might give a penny owt of his abund-
ance; but not if he gave according to (in proportion to) his riches. Then must
he give what would be a fortune toa poorman. Even so, God gives not grudgingly,
or stintedly, but royally. “It was but ask, and have; and so it is betwixt God
and his people. When there was a discussion amongst some holy men as to which
was the most profitable trade, one answered, beggary ; it is the hardest, and the
richest trade. Common beggary is the commonest and easiest, but he meant prayer.
A courtier gets more by one suit often than a tradesman or merchant haply wit)
twenty years’ labour ; so doth a faithful prayer.” Trapp.


SupsEect anp SovEREIGN.
ii. 1,2. And I took up wine, and gave it to the king, §c.


I. He did not allow his duty to God otherwise. So lived Pharaoh, Daniel,
to clash with his duty to his sovereign. Mardocheus, Ezra, and others. Jeremiah
His religion not diminish his civility. and Baruch taught the Jews thus to
“Jf it please the king.” “Fear God, pray for those under whose sway they


and honour the king,” both enjoined in
apostolic precept. He had been taken
from his native land and placed under
another king, whom it was his duty to
serve and obey, in all quietness and
meekness, until God ordered his lot


were living as captives, “ Pray for the
life of Nebuchadnezzar, and Belshazzar
his son ; seek the peace of that country
whither ye be carried away captives”
(Jer. xxix.; Baruch i). St. Peter
taught the Christians that servants


JHAP. 11.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAR. 46





should not forsake their masters, though
they did not believe (1 Pet. ii). Both
St. Peter and St. Paul command the
faithful wife to abide by her unfaithful
husband (1 Cor. vii. ; 1 Pet. iii.). The
Scriptures enjoin faithfulness, duty, and
obedience toward all men, so far as we
offend not God thereby. Duty to God
and duty to man two aspects of same
life, One requires the other. Each
incomplete, being alone. The more
efficiently we discharge one, the more
perfectly do the other. Neither may
be made a substitute for the other.
“This ought ye to have done, and not to
leave the other undone,”

II. He did not allow spiritual
exercises to interfere with the dis-
charge of secular duties. He prayed
incessantly, yet failed not in discharge
of duties as cupbearer. The believer
should be “ diligent in business,” as well
as “fervent in spirit,” lest he bring
reproach upon religion. Spiritual
activity no excuse for neglecting secular
duty. To be slothful in business will
quench devotion as fatally as to pur-
sue business with inordinate affection.
The hardiest devotion healthiest. The
devotion of the cloister, for the most
part, like the ghastly light that hovers
over decomposition and decay; the
devotion which characterizes the diligent,
spiritually-minded man of business,
resembles the star which shines on in the
storm as in the calm, when the sky is
clouded as when it is serene.

IIl. He regarded the path of duty
as the path of providential blessing.
Not forsaking the common duties of his
daily calling, he waited for the opening
of his providential path. The faithful


discharge of duty itself a;blessing. This,
the channel through which special grace
most likely to flow. Men need not leave
the world to find the secret of holiness ;
or their ordinary sphere of work to find
the secret of blessing. The patient,
conscientious discharge of life’s ordinary
tasks, always the safest path to pur-
sue. (a)

IV. He found the favour of his
sovereign of great service in carrying
out the work of God. His civility and
humble demeanour had won the con-
fidence and esteem of his royal master.
This friendship now stood him in good
stead. Yet he presumes not upon this
regard, but approaches the throne
tremblingly, as a subject should, even
the most favoured. Monarchs like not
presumption even in their courtiers.
Diogenes says, “ A man should use his
prince or peer, as he would do the fire.
The fire if he stand too near it will burn
him ; and if he be too far off he will be
cold. So to be over-bold, without blush-
ing or reverence, bringeth into discredit of
both sides ; for the king will think him
too saucy, and the subject will forget his
duty.” Courteous and kindly behaviour
has nothing to lose, and much to gain.
Civility costs little, and is often worth
much,


Illustration :—(a) Mr. Carter, a pious minis-
ter, once coming softly behind a religious man of
his own acquaintance, who was busily engaged
in tanning a hide, and giving him a tap on the
shoulder, the man started, looked up, and with a
blushing countenance said, “ Sir, J am ashamed
that you should find me thus,’’ To whom Mr,
Carter replied, ‘‘ Let Christ, when he cometh,
find me so doing.’”? ‘‘ What!’’ said the man,
“doing thus?”  ‘ Yes,” said Mr. Carter,
“ faithfully performing the duties of my calling.”


SprriruaL REcOLLECTEDNESS.
ii, 4. So I prayed to the God of heaven.


This, a remarkable illustration of
religious presence of mind.

I. The outcome of a consecrated
life. Unless he had been in the habit
of making everything a matter of prayer,
would not have been able thus to collect
himself whilst trembling with excite-
ment, fear, and suspense before the king.


Having formed the habit of doing
nothing without consulting God, had no
difficulty in acting upon it. Agitated
and affrighted, it would have been
perfectly natural for him to have
stammered forth his appeal in some
incoherent manner. But here the


irrepressible spirit of devotion, which


4% HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.








permeated his whole life, revealed itself.
If a man never prays anywhere save at
stated times, and on public occasions,
there is reason to fear that he never
prays at all. If a man lives in the
spirit of prayer, sudden emergency will
spontaneously summon the familiar
habit to his aid. Special prayer should
be the outcome of constant prayerfulness.
The way to have the heart in harmony
with the worship of the sanctuary, is
never to suffer its chords to be jarred.
It was said of a distinguished Christian
that he lived on the steps of the mercy-
seat. It was said of a recent Bishop,
who was sent to Western Africa, that
“he lived upon his knees.” This is to
live safely. This is to live in the porch
of heaven. Hence it was said of a
dying saint, “‘I am changing my place,
but not my company.” Like Enoch,
he had walked with God, and death
was to him only like passing out of the
vestibule into the inner sanctuary.

II. The result of long habit. Holy
recollectedness not come naturally, nor
easily, even to good men. Repeated
action becomes habit. Practice makes
perfect in this, as in other things.

III. A mark of self-distrusting
humility. He dared not ask, without
seeking wisdom higher than his own, in
matter of such momentous issues. Self-
diffidence impelled him to cast the
burden of his responsibility upon one
who was an unerring counsellor.
“ Travellers make mention of a bird so
timid in disposition, and so liable to the
essaalts of unnumbered enemies, that


[CHAP IL


she almost lives in the sky, scarcely ever
venturing to rest her wings; and even
when forced through very weariness to
repose, she seeks the loftiest rock, and
there still keeps her eyes only half shut,
and her pinions only half folded, in
readiness, on the first sign of danger, to
spread her wings, and soar away to the
heavens for safety.” True emblem of
how the child of God should “ pass the
time of his sojourning here in fear.”
Seldom should the wing of his devotion
droop, or the eye of his watchfulness
close ; and even when he must repose it
should ever be in an attitude of vigilance
and prayerfulness.”—Stowell.

IV. A source of incalculable bless-
ing. 1. It imparts confidence. “He
that believeth shall not make haste” —
(Isa. xxviii. 16). He shall not be afraid
of evil tidings, whose heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord. “ Thou wilt keep
him in perfect peace, whose mind is
stayed upon thee,” &c. The calmness
which comes from reliance upon a wisdom
that is superhuman; the consciousness
of Divine support. 2. It preserves from
missing the providential path. The God
of providence will direct those who cast
themselves upon his care. Such “ shall
not full direction need ; nor miss their
providential way.” 3. It conduces to
the accomplishment of God’s will. When
everything is submitted to that will,
and the stumbling-blocks of self-will,
pride, ambition, &c. are removed, nothing
can hinder the fulfilment of the purposes
of Jehovah.


EsyacuLatory Prayer.
fi. 4. So I prayed to the God of heaven.


I. It was suddenly required. A
question addressed to Nehemiah by the
king, point-blank, upon which hung,
possibly, not only issues of life and
death, but the success or failure of his
long-prayed-for object. Great emergency.
Great benefit to be able to seek aid of
Omnipotence. Long formula impossible.
No audible petition could be offered.
Quick as thought the silent prayer of the
heart flew to the ear of God, and not in


vain. “ He will fulfil the desire of them
that fear him” (Ps. cxlv. 19). “The
devout spirit, like the well-strung Eolian
harp, not only gives out sweet sounds
when woke by the gentler breathings
that steal over its chords, but when
vibrating under the ruder blasts that
sweep across its strings.” “On many
occasions the servant of God requires
special assistance, care, and counsel.
Men of business are frequently called


ORAP, 11.)





upon to decide summarily on questions
big with importance, to make up their
judgment at once on measures the issues
of which they can neither over-estimate
nor foresee. How commonly is the
physician forced to form his conclusions
in a moment; yea, to form them on
uncertain grounds, and indeterminate
symptoms. Yet a mistaken conclusion
may endanger the life of his patient.
Now if in such circumstances the medical
man, or the merchant, rely simply on
his own skill, and confer simply with
his own judgment, to the neglect of
calling in the wisdom and blessing of
the Almighty, what a fearful risk and
burden does he bring upon himself!
But let his heart breathe forth the
aspiration to God — ‘Lord, direct me.’
Will he not then, having cast his burden
on the Lord, having invoked unerring
skill, be able to act with faith, and nerve,
and calmness} Call ye this fanaticism 4
The grossest fanaticism is that which
leaves out God.”—Stowell. (a)

II. It was silently offered. No
opportunity for audible vocal prayer.
This, good when alone, or in public
assembly for worship, but not possible
now. A sudden and secret desire darted
up to heaven. Thus Moses cried unto
God, yet said nothing (Exod. xiv. 15).
Hannah was not heard, yet she prayed
(1 Sam.i.). Austin reports it to be the
custom of the Egyptian Churches to
pray frequently and fervently, but
briefly and by ejaculation, lest their
fervour should abate. It is the praying
and crying of the heart that God delights
in, Let no man then excuse himself
and say he cannot pray; for in all
places he may lift up his heart to God,
though in the market, or on the moun-
tain. (3)

III. It was suitably addressed.
“To the God of heaven.” Ezra had
previously used this expression. (See
axplanatory notes). It recognized the
supremacy of Jehovah, and his power


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 47


7
over human hearts and events. Thus
calculated to impart confidence, and
destroy the fear of man. The expression
is similar in meaning to “Lord of
Sabaoth,” or “Lord of Hosts.” ‘ All
power is given,” &c.

IV. It was very brief. Yet quite
long enough. Not time for much. A
question had been asked and an answer
was required, Yet, between question
and answer, was ample time for sending
prayer to heaven, and receiving a reply.
Length no virtue in prayer. Faith and
fervour the two principal elements of
success. St. Augustine says, “ He that
earrieth his own temple about with him,
may go to prayer when he pleaseth.”
How quickly thought can fly! many
thousands of milesina minute. Prayer
can travel as rapidly as thought towards
heaven.

V. It was completely successful.
1. In that wisdom to ask aright was
given. Nehemiah’s petition was marked
by—(1) Becoming humility. “If it
please the king.” (2) Tact. “The place
of my fathers’ sepulchres.” (3) Fore-
thought. ‘Let letters be given me.”
2. In that the king's heart was favourably
disposed towards him. ‘And the king
granted me,” &c. This, God’s doing, in
direct answer to prayer. Nehemiah
confesses this when he adds, “ according
to the good hand of my God upon me.”


Illustrations ; — (a) ‘* Sudden extremity is a
notable trial of faith, or any other disposition of the
soul. For as, in a sudden fear, the blood gathers
suddenly to the heart, for guarding of that part
which is principal; so the powers of the soul
combine themselves in a hard exigent, that they
may be easily judged of.” —Bp. Hail,

(GB) ‘* As the tender dew that falls during the
silent night makes the grass, and herbs, and
flowers to flourish and grow more abundantly
than great showers of rain that fall in the day,
so secret prayer will more abundantly cause the
sweet herbs of grace and holiness to flourish and
grow in the soul, than all those more public and
open duties of religion, which too often are
mingled with the sun and wind of pride and
hypocrisy.” —Brooks,


Reicious PRUDENCE.
ii. 7. Moreover, I said unto the king, fe.


Not satisfied with bare permission to
go to the relief of his co-religionis‘s at


Jerusalem, he makes provision for al:
contingencies, and anticipates every


48 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


®p


difficulty that is likely to arise. From
this learn :—

I. That prudent forethought is
essential to success in spiritual as in
secular enterprises. For, 1. God has
nowhere commended rashness. The re-
verse of this enjoined and approved in
word of God. “He will guide his
affairs with discretion” (Ps, exii. 5).
“The fool shall be servant to the wise
of heurt,” (Prov. xi. 29). ‘A prudent
man,” &e, (Prov xii 23: xiv 15)
‘He that handleth a matter wisely shail
find good” (Prov. xvi. 20). “Give not
that which is holy” (Matt. vii. 6).
“Which of you intending to build,” &e.
Luke xiv. 28). Examples. — Jacob
Ge xxxil.), Joseph(Gen. xli.). Jethro
(Exod. xviii). David (1 Sam. xvii.).
Abigail (1 Sam. xxv.). Paul (Acts xvi.)
Town-clerk of Ephesus (Acts xix.).
2. Pains-taking effort is at the foundation
of all human success. ‘ By the sweat
of thy face shalt thou eat thy bread”
(Gen. iii. 19), is the curse pronounced
upon all human labour. Even the curse
turned into blessing, for labour is not
necessarily an evil. ‘“ No gains without
pains,” under present social laws. No
reaping without sowing. No permanent
and substantial success in business, or
art, or literature, or religion, without
earnest, patient, unremitting diligence
(2 Pet. i. 10). This inexorable law
reigns in the spiritual realm as in the
secular, for—3. Spiritual work as well as
secular is amenable to natural law.
Miracles wrought now in the moral
rather than in the physical universe.
Not obsolete in the latter, more frequent
in the former, Natural law is no
respecter of persons. It demands alle-
giance from the saint and sinner alike,
Errors in spiritual work are as surely
followed by penalties as in secular.
Sloth and senility undermine the success
of religious as certainly as profane enter-
prises. Here, as elsewhere, “ whatsoever
a man soweth, that shall he also reap.”

Ii. That prudent forethought is
not opposed, but helpful, to spiritual
faith. 1. Lt furnishes a rational basis
for expecting success. No right to expect
success, merely because we hope for and
earnestly desire it. ‘“ We are saved by


[CHAP 11


hope ;” but it must rest on a solid
foundation. Hope without faith is dead.
If there is a living, there is a dead, hope
(1 Pet. i. 3). The one stimulates, the
other seduces. Faith must have a
rational basis to distinguish it from
credulity. The basis may appear ir-
rational to men who do not acknowledge
God or the supernatural 2. I¢ acts
upon the supposition that mental powers
were given to be employed in the series
of God. The use of — - faculty mo


more opposed to strong faith and intense
spirituality, than the use of other mental
powers, as memory, imagination, per-
ception, &c. All powers are to be con-
secrated to holy purposes, and diligently
employed in assisting faith. 3. It takes
no step without seeking Divine guidance
and approval. Nehemiah used every
precaution to ensure success, and made
every needful arrangement beforehand,
but not without previous thought and
earnest prayer. Even so must we take
each step, in religious work especially,
depending on the Holy Ghost for direc-
tion. He committed himself to God;
yet petitions the king for a convoy;
teaching that in all our enterprises God
is so to be trusted as if we had used no
means ; and yet the means are so to be
used as if we had no God to trust in.


Illustrations :—As the hermits were commun-
ing together, there arose a question as to which
of all the virtues was most necessary to perfection
One said, chastity ; another, humility ; a third,
justice, St. Anthony remained silent until all

ad given their opinion: and then he spoke,
“ Ye have all said well, but none of you have said
aright, The virtue most necessary to perfection
is prudence; for the most virtuous actions of
men, unless governed and directed by prudence,
are neither pleasing to God, nor serviceable to
others, nor profitable to ourselves.” Juvenal
speaks to the same effect : “No other protection
is wanting, provided you are under the guidance
of prudence.” Bishop Hacket bears. similar
testimony :—‘‘ He that loves to walk dangerous
ways shall perish in them, Even king Josiah,
one of the most lovely darlings of God's fayour
among all the kings of Judah, fell under the
sword for pressing further against his enemies
than the word of the Lord did permit him, The
ancient Eliberitan Council enacted, that all those
who plucked down the idols or temples of the
heathen should not be accounted martyrs, though
they died for the faith of Christ, because they


plucked persecution upon themselves, and pro:
voked their own martyrdom.”


ORAP. .}





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMI AG. ai





Tue Hanp or Gop.
ii 8. According to the good hand of my God upon me,


The hand sometimes used in an ill
sense, for inflicting punishments (Ruth
i. 13; Jer. xv. 17), for we strike with
the hand. Sometimes in a good sense,
for helping others, for we bestow favours
with the hand. Jn Psalm lxxxviii. 6,
“Cut off from thy hand,” means fallen
from thy favour. Pindar uses the ex-
pression, “ @e@ ovy radayg,” in the sense
of “by the aid of God.” Thus
Nehemiah is to be understood. By the
Divine favour, which inclined the king
to do what he desired, his suit had
prevailed.

I. The hand of God is with his
peeple for protection. Nehemiah’s life
was in jeopardy in God’s service. Hence
God’s special protection. 1. He was
protected from the wrath of the king.
Had the king been in an angry mood
Nehemiah might have paid for his
temerity with his life. ‘The wrath of
man” doth he restrain. David delivered
from the outburst of Saul’s murderous
anger. Nehemiah saved from the out-
bursting of Artaxerxes’. God will ever
defend those who trust him and seek
his glory, from the malice of evil op-
pressors. 2. He was protected from the
hostility of his enemies. The Samaritans
and surrounding heathen would have
not only hindered his work, but probably
taken his life, but for the military guard
which the king granted, through God’s
gracious influence. Thus will the Lord
“make a hedge about his people” (Job
ii.), for “the angel of the Lord encamp-
eth round about them tha fear him”
(Ps <xxiv.). a,

II. The hand of God 1s with nis
people for providential guidance.
l. The hand of God guided Nehemiah
to the Persian court. 2. To the official
position which brought him into the
presence of the king. 3. The providence
of God directed him when to speak, and
4, what to say. “ If it please the king,”
&c. “Silken words must be given to
kings, as the mother of Darius said
(4 dioia, # fxcora); neither must they be


vudely and roughly dealt with, as Joab


dealt with David (2 8am. xix. 5), whe
therefore could never well brook him
afterward, but set another in his place.”—
Trapp.

ITI. God’s servants should thankfully
acknowledge the good which they
receive from him. Nehemiah does not
take any credit to himself, but gives all
glory to God. This conduct requires—
1. Genuine humility. He might have
boasted of his services to the king, of
his place and authority in the Persian
Court, and arrogated to himself the
credit of success ; but he was of another
spirit, and ascribed all to the “ good
hand of his God.” Ingratitude is the
child of pride; thankfulness the off-
spring of humility. A proud man will
never be truly grateful; a humble man
possesses the first element of gratitude.
Benefit a vain man, and he will ascribe
the service to his own desert, he will
regard it as no more than a just tribute
to his excellence ; but serve a lowly man,
and he will attribute the service to the
kindness of his benefactor. A proud
child thinks that he has laid his parents
under obligation; a lowly child feels
that he can never liquidate the debt of
gratitude he owes to them. The same
holds good in relation to God. We
must be lowly to be grateful. The lark
hides her nest in the grass, but her flight
is far up in the heavens. This spirit
continually exclaims, “It is of the Lord’s
mercies that we are not consumed,” &c. ;
and, “ I am less than the least of all his
mercies ” (Lam. iii. 22), Paula striking
illustration of it: ‘‘To me, who am less
than the least of all saints, is this grace
given,” &c. David also exclaims when
the splendid offerings had been collected
for the erection of God’s house ; “ Thine,
O Lord, is the greatness,” &c. (1 Chron.
xxix. 11). 2. True faith. The believer
in chance who ascribes everything to
fortune, or fatality, cannot own a Divine
hand. Faith, discerning the Almighty
hand within the machinery of second
causes, actuating, controlling, determin-
ing all, is the parent of sincere gratitude,


50 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


{OHAP. IL


a


Men of business, from the very nature
of their occupations, specially liable to
lose the lively exercise of this practical
faith. ‘ Hard by the altar of incense
in the ancient temple, stood the altar of
burnt-offering. As the one signified the
atonement to be made by Christ, and.
the other the fragrant merits of that
atonement; so did the latter represent
also the offering of prayer to God through
Christ’s mediation by his faithful people,
and the former the oblation of praise,
presented through the same interces-
sion, as a sweet-smelling savour to God.
Prayer and praise are twin services.
They should always go hand in hand.
Praise is the fragrance breathed from the
flower of joy. He is happiest who is
thankfullest. This lesson taught by the
brute creation. Morose and unkindly
animals express as little of enjoyment
as they do of gratefulness by their
snarling and growling sounds. The
beasts and birds of night are rarely glad-
some. But the lambs which sport and
yambol in their green pastures, and the
birds which in the early morning wake


the echoes of the woodland with their
songs, all tell most unmistakeably that
they are happy. How much more then
must it be the blessedness of man ‘ tu
look through nature, up to nature’s God,’
and glorify the giver in all his varied
gifts.”——-Stowell. (See Addenda.)


Ilustrations :-— Your father had a battle with
Apollyon,’”’ said Great-heart to Samuel, ‘‘at a
lace yonder before us, in a narrow passage, pe
haveae Forgetful Green, And indeed the place
is the most dreadful place in all these parts; for
if at any time pilgrims meet with any brunt, it
is when they forget what favours they have re-
ceived, and how unworthy they are of them.
This is the place, also, where others have been
hard put to it.””—Bunyan,

Luther said when he heard a little bird sing,
when he was out in the fields one morning,
“The bird had no storehouse or barn, and did
not know of any provision for the future, and yet
it seemed to sing, ‘ Mortal, cease from toil and
sorrow, God provideth for the morrow.’ We do
not find any sparrows with large storehouses, or
any swallows with a great quantity of grain laid
by for the morrow; yet never find a sparrow
starved to death, or a swallow that has perished
from cold. God ‘careth for them, and are ye
not much better than they P’”’


Tuer Initrat Sraces or A GREAT REFORMATION.


ii, 9—20. Then I came to the governors, $c.


I. Great reformations often have an insignificant commencement, and are
slow in developing their true proportions. Who would have expected such
great things to spring from that interview in the palace, and now from the visit of
this one man to Jerusalem? Yet who dare “despise the day of smali things”
How slight the first streak of dawn! How minute the grain of mustard-seed |
Some of the noblest exploits of the Church have had the feeblest beginnings. A
few Christian men met together in the vestry of a plain chapel; they pondered
and prayed over the state.of the heathen world ; they conceived and planned the
glorious enterprise of evangelizing all pagan lands. They arose and built. The
Church Missionary Society is the result. Not onty small at beginning but slow in
developing. May travel rapidly on land or by wa, but in morals must be content
to proceed gradually. Deep-rooted evils, profligute and abandoned habits, not to be
eradicated in a moment; nor are excellent characters manufactured in a moment.
as a piece of work from the loom. The restoratioa of God’s image rather resembles
the growing likeness to its beautiful original im the canvas of the artist. At first
the outline, and slowly the form and features, of the human face appear ; gradually
they assume more distinctness and expression, and the likeness stands confessed.
So does the Holy Ghost restore the waste places of Christ’s Church, and the moral
deformities of his children.

II. Reformation work requires a vigorous leader. Nehemiah eminently
qualified for the post, for—1. He occupied a commanding social position. The offica
of cupbearer a very honourable one with the Persians. A son of Prexaspes, a
distinguished person, was made cupbearer to Cambyses The poets make Gany:


CHAP. 11] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 61





medes to be cupbearer to Jupiter, and even Vulcan himself is put, into this office.
It gave him influence with king and court, and status amongst even Persian nobles.
2. He was inspired with intense enthusiasm. Without this fire no hearts melt,
no great work accomplished. It burns up all evil sordid desires, and kindles all
goodness. Jeremiah was influenced by it. Kept silence for a time, but was
constrained to break out again, saying the word within him was like burning fire
(Jer. xx.). To the same effect Elijah cries out: “I am very zealous for the Lord
of Hosts” (1 Kings xix.). Moses prayed to be blotted out of God’s book, rather than
his people should be destroyed (Exod. xxxii.). St. Paul “counted not his life dear
unto him,” &c. (Acts xx.). Phineas, when none else would take the sword to vindi-
cate the outraged laws of Jehovah, himself slew the offenders (Numb. xxv.), Our
Lord himself, moved with indignation, drove out the profaners of his sanctuary
(John ii.), Such holy enthusiasm glowed in Nehemiah’s heart, and urged him to
undertake this difficult and dangerous work. 3. He possessed unwearied energy
and perseverance. His enthusiasm not fitful, but patient. He had calculated the
difficulties of his undertaking, and was prepared to carry it through. No great
work will succeed without plodding. A great statesman once answered a friend
who inguired to what he attributed his great success in life, thus—‘ I know how to
plod.” Without this virtue Nehemiah must have succumbed to the almost over-
whelming difficulties that beset his path.

Ili. Reformation work should not be undertaken without a deliberate
estimate of its magnitude and difficulty. Blind courage that counts no costs
always short-lived. This stood the tests which it had to endure because founded
upon intelligent and mature conviction. 1. Nehemiah forestalled opposition. An
escort had been asked for and granted (v.10). Forewarned is forearmed. Thus
did he fortify himself against failure from this quarter. Christian soldiers “‘ must
put on the whole armour of God” (Eph. vi. 11), and expect to be assailed. No
mistake greater than presumption. To despise or ignore an enemy sure sign of
weakness. 2. He carefully examined the work to be done. ‘ And I arose in the
night,” &. (v. 12). Wise proceeding before engaging in a work that might prove
to be impracticable. Accurate knowledge helps the judgment and stimulates courage.
3. He weighed the matter before proceeding to action. ‘So I came to Jerusalem,
and was there three days” (v. 11). Days spent in seclusion not spent in vain, if
time be occupied in thought and prayer. (See outline on ‘‘ Preparatory Retirement.”)

IV. Reformation work in its initial stages is almost certain to provoke
opposition. ‘‘ When Sanballat the Horonite,” &c. (v.10), 1. This often proceeds
from a misconstruction of the nature of thework. ‘“ Willye rebel?” (v. 19). Bad
men always ready to attribute evil motives. Sometimes springs from ignorance,
more often from wilful malice. Charges of treason more frequently brought against
reformation work than any other. Insinuation often more deadly in its operation
than open calumny. 2. This often springs from aversion to self-sacrifice. For this
reason the men of Jabesh-Gilead stood aloof when Benjamin was to be punished ;
and were afterwards destroyed for their neutrality (Judges xxi.). Work that requires
self-denial and hard toil cannot be good in the eyes of those who have no love for
any but themselves.

VY. Reformation work cannot be carried on without mutual co-operation.
“So they strengthened their hands for this good work” (v. 18). Necessary as a
security against discouragement, Individual workers labouring in isolation always
liable to discouragement. ‘‘ Not good for man to be alone.” Christ recognized
this principle in religious work, when he sent his disciples by twos, Mutual sym-
pathy and counsel will often cheer faltering courage, and strengthen failing hope.
2, Necessary as a safeguard against combined opposition. Good men must combine,
and present a united front to the combined forces of wickedness and opposition.
Unity is strength in all work, and in all conflict.

VL Reformation work cannot succeed without the Divine blessing. “The

R23


62 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. (CHAP. lu.





2


God of heaven, he will prosper us” (v. 20). When every precaution has been


taken, and all available human aid enlisted, still all depends on God for success.
1. Because the forces of evil are too strong for the unaided powers of man. Melancthon
found this by experience, when he thought to convert the world to Christianity in
a very short time. ‘“ Without me ye can do nothing.” “Not by might, nor by
power,” &c. 2. The blessing of God will compensate for any amount of opposition.
“ If God be for us,” &. “ Greater is he that is in you,” &c.


Tilustrations :—(a) The artist Correggio, when young, saw a painting < Raphael. Long and
ardently did the thoughtful boy gaze on that picture. His soul drank in its beauty as flowers drink
moisture from the mist. He waked to the consciousness of artistic power. Burning with the
enthusiasm of enkindled genius, the blood rushing to his brow, and the fire flashing from his eyes,
he cried out, “I alsoam a painter!” That conviction carried him through his initial studies ; it
blended the colours on his palette; it guided his pencil; it shone on his canvas, until the glorious
Titian, on witnessing his productions, exclaimed, “ Were I not Titian, I would wish to be Correggio.”

(8) In the museum at Rotterdam is the first piece painted by the renowned Rembrandt, It is
rough, without marks of genius or skill, and uninteresting, except to show that he began as low down
as the lowest. In the same gallery is the masterpiece of the artist, counted of immense value.
What years of patient study and practice intervene between the two pieces! If all have not geniua,


all have the power to work ; and this is greater than genius,


(y) Coleridge, one day when some one was enlarging on the tendency of some good scheme to
regenerate the world, threw a little thistle-down into the air, which he pagers to see by the road-


aide, and said, “The tendency of this thistle-down is towards China!


ut I know, with assured


certainty, it will never get there; nay, it is more than probable, that after sumdry eddyings and


gyrations up and down, backwards and forwards, it will


it grew.”
diction.


found somewhere near the place where


Such is the history of grand schemes of reformation apart from Divine power and bene-


(6) William Rufus, having seen the coast of Ireland from some rocks in North Wales, is reported


to have said, “I will summon hither all the ships of my realm, and with them make


attack that country.”


bridge to


This threat being reported to Murchard, Prince of Leinster, he paused a


moment, and then said, “ Did the king add to this mighty threat, if God please #?”’ and being assured
he made no mention of God in his speech, he replied, rejoicing in such a prognostic, “Sure, that
man puts his trust in human, not in Divine power, I fear not his coming.”


SzcutarR Arp ror SpirituAL Work.


ii. 9. Now the king had sent captains of the army, ge.


This martial escort granted to
Nehemiah in response to his own request.
As an official dignitary, had right to
public honour and body-guard. Learn—

I. That the Church may employ
secular power for purposes of pro-
tection. When one has suitable means
at hand for avoiding danger, he must not
despise them (Josh. i 15; 2 Cor. xi.
33). -1. Every law-abiding subject has
a right to claim the law’s protection.
This holds good except in the case of
conduct which is likely to provoke a
breach of the peace. 2. Ié is a good
man's duty to seek the protection of
secular power rather than rashly to
expose himself to danger. Paul sought
the shield of the law when certain men
had taken an oath to kill him (Acts
xxuL). 3. When secular aid is denied,
or granted only on terme ineonsistent


with righteousness, the believer may con-
jidently cast himself upon the protection
of Jehovah. “When my father and
mother forsake me,” &c. Under such
circumstances the three Hebrews and
Daniel committed their case to God.
“This poor man cried, and the Lord
heard him ” (Ps. xxxiv.).

II. That the Church may not
employ secular power in matters of
faith. Ezra’s work had been more
purely spiritual than Nehemiah’s now
was, hence he sought no such aid as
this. Both sought the religious reforma-
tion of the people, but Nehemiah’s chief
mission was to restore the city of Jeru-
salem and rebuild the walls. 1. God
has never authorized the use of any but
moral means in spiritual work. Ali
coercion inadmissible. “My kingdom
is not of this world.” “Go ye into all


CHAP. 1.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 53





the world,” is the commission which
follows upon the proclamation of Divine


sovereignty. “All power,” &. ‘ He
that wmeth souls is wise.” The fire


and the rack may command submission,
but will never win the heart, or convince
the conscience. (2) 2. The employment
of secular power in matters of faith has
always been productive of disastrous
results. This method predominated
over all others in the dark or mediaeval
ages. Hence the war and _ bloodshed,
strife and controversy, hatred and heresy
that prevailed. A notable exception
was Stephen, king of Poland, who when
urged by some of his subjects to con-
strain certain who were of a different
religion to embrace his creed, nobly
answered, “I am king of men, and not


of conscience. The dominion of con-
science belongs exclusively to God.”


Tilustrations :—(a) An old lady taking a long
railway journey, prayed almost all the time that
God would protect her from harm. When she
reached the last platform, and was but a few
minutes walk from her home, she felt that now
she could take care of herself; but just here she
fell, and received an injury from which she was
a long time recovering, We must trust in God
at all times,

(8) The missionaries to the Fiji islands were
threatened with destruction by the enraged
natives, and had no means of defence except

rayer, Their enemies heard them praying,

ecame fearful, and fled, ‘The reason was given
by one of themselves. “They found you were
praying to your God, and they know your God
is a strong God; and they are gone.” St.
Augustine was saved from death by a mistake of
his guide, who lost the usual road, in which the
Donatists had laid wait to murder him,


First Hinprance.—Sgcret JEALOvsyY.


ii. 10.

The name Sanballat signifies a pure
enemy; for he belonged to a spiteful
people who had always been troublesome
to the children of Israel, and did con-
stantly vex and provoke them to evil
(Numb. xxii. 3, 4).

I. Here is jealousy tyrannical in its
spirit. The Hebrews in Palestine had
been hitherto poor and helpless. They
were anxious to improve their condition,
but these enemies were eager to keep
them poor that they might be able to
oppress and plunder them. Jealousy
naturally cruel, inasmuch as it feeds upon
the poverty and destitution of others,
and fears their prosperity, lest it should
lose its food. They probably heard of
this new enterprise through their wives,
who might be Jewesses. Among the
Turks every vizier used to keep a Jew
as private counsellor, whose malice was
thought to have had much to do with
the Turks’ bitter persecution of Chris-
tianity.

II. Here is jealousy anti-religious
in its attitude. Grieved that any should
“seek the welfare of the children of
Israel” (v. 10). Their opposition
doubled by the fact that this was God’s
work, and these were his people. They
hated the name and worship of Jehovah.


When Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah, gc.


The malice of unbelievers and scoffers
against the kingdom of God can never
be satisfied. If envy had not blinded
these men, they might have seen that
they meant them no harm. As the build-
ing of this Jerusalem had many enemies,
so the repairing of the spiritual Jerusalem
(the Church) by the preaching of the
gospel hath many more.—Pilkington,

III. Here is jealousy covetously
selfish in its motives. Samaria had
become the leading state west of Jordan,
and any restoration of Jerusalem might
interfere with this predominance. The
fear of losing their gains had much to
do with the acrimony of their opposition.
Hippocrates in his epistle to Crateva
gives him this good counsel ; that if it
were possible, amongst other herbs, he
cut up that weed covetousness by the
roots, that there be no remainder left ;
and then know certainly that together
with the bodies, he would be able to
cure the diseases of the mind.

IV. Here is jealousy self-torturing
in its effects. “It grieved them exceed
ingly” (v. 10). The expression a very
strong one. (Compare Ps, exii) ‘The
wicked shall see it, and be grieved; he
shall gnash with his teeth.” Keen
mental tortureimplied. Envy compared


54 HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[oHaP. 0


eran ag Ne aaa


to a poisonous serpent. Because it can-
not feed upon other men’s hearts it
feedeth upon its own, drinking up the
most part of its own venom, and is
therefore like the serpent Porphyrius,
which was full of poison, but wanting
teeth, hurt none but itself. Austin
describes it as a “ madness of the soul ;”
Gregory, as ‘a torture ;” Chrysostom,
‘an insatiableness ;” Cyprian, “ blind-
ness, a plague subverting kingdoms and
families, an incurable disease.” A disease
that neither Esculapius nor Plutus could
cure; a continual plague and vexation
of spirit, an earthly hell.


Tilustrations :-—The poets imagined that Envy
dwelt in a dark cave; being pale and lean,
looking asquint, abounding with gall, her teeth
black, never rejoicing but in the misfortunes of
others, ever unquiet and careful, and continually
tormenting herself. (See Addenda.)

‘(The Bible abounds with instances of this sin.


We find it in Cain, the proto-murderer, who
slew his brother in a fit of jealousy. We find itin
the dark and gloomy and revengeful spirit of Saul,
who under the influence of jealousy plotted for
[an the slaughter of David. We find it in the

ing of Israel when he pined for the vineyard
of Naboth, and shed his blood to gain it, Yea, it
was envy that perpetrated that most atrocious


. erime ever planned in hell or executed on earth,


on which the sun refused to look, and at which
nature gave signs of abhorrence by rending the
rocks; I mean the crucifixion of Christ; for the
Evangelist tells us, that for envy the Jews
delivered our Lord.”—J, A. James,

The infatuated Caligula slew his brother,
because he was a beautiful young man. Mutius,
a citizen of Rome, was reputed to be of such an
envious and malevolent disposition, that Publius,
one day observing him to be very sad, said,
“Kither some great evil hath happened to Mutius,
or some great good to another.” ‘ Dionysius the
Tyrant,” says Plutarch, ‘‘ out of envy punished
Philoxenius the musician, because he could sing,
and Plato, the philosopher, because he could
dispute better than himself.” Cambyses killed
his brother Smerdis, because he could draw a
stronger bow than himself or any of his party,


PREPARATORY RETIREMENT.


ii. 11.


God's servants frequently thus retired
for deliberation before entering upon
arduous tasks. Moses had a forty-years
half-involuntary preparation for his life
work, in the wilderness of Midian.
Paul spent three years in Arabia before
commencing his career as a missionary.
The disciples were commanded “ to tarry
at Jerusalem until,” &c. Our Lord him-
self, at the commencement of his public
ministry, was “ led of the spirit into the
wilderness to be tempted.” And here
we see Nehemiah spending three days in
retirement, before entering upon a work
that would tax all his powers and graces
to the very utmost. Consider the reason
of this—

I. It gave him time to look round.
Jerusalem altogether strange to him.
Unacquainted with the exact state of
affairs or parties in the city. To have
rushed headlong without premeditation
into so gigantic an enterprise would
have been madness, Probably made
secret inquiries as to vigilance of foes,
and spirit of people, as well as their
numbers, character, and wealth, Know-
ledge always source of power to workers


So I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days.


and leaders. Knowledge of human
nature, human history, and character, of
great service in Christian work.

II. It gave him time to look for-
ward. Evidently a man of wise fore-
sight. Could see both difficulties and
the way to meet and overcome them.
Careful, yet not over-anxious, because
made God his counsellor and guide.
Neither optimist nor pessimist. By
anticipating difficulties we may obviate
them, and so make them comparatively
harmless when they do come. Guard
against other extreme, of making them
when there are none, and magnifying
them when they are insignificant. Such
pre-vision not inspiriting, but dis-
heartening.

III. It gave him time to look
within. Now was the time for self-ex-
amination. Motives tested, heart probed.
Trying moment to faith. Looking at
self alone drives to despair. “Who is
sufficient for these things?” the ery of
one burdened with such tremendous
responsibility. Luther spent the night
before the Diet of Worms on the floor
of his little chamber, humbling himself


CHAP. 11, ]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH, 5E





before God, and laying hold on Divine
atrength. No wonder he triumphed.
IV. It gave him time to look up-
ward. The contemplation of his own
faults and frailty alone would have
completely unnerved him for the work
he had come to accomplish. His eye
would turn from personal demerit to
infinite perfection; from personal im-
potence to infinite strength, From
penitence to prayer a single step, thence
to confidence and hope. Such prepara-
tion necessary for all who would achieve
great works for God. Careless self-
confidence as sure to meet with failure
as humble and contrite faith to be
crowned with success, (See Addenda.)


Illustrations :-—“ Domitian, about the begin-


ning of his reign, usually; sequestered himself
from conn an hour every day; but did
nothing the while but catch flies, and kill them
with a penknife, God’s people can better em-
ploy their solitariness, and do never want com-
pany, as having God and themselves to talk with.
And these secret meals are those that make the
soul fat. It was a wise speech of Bernard, that
“Christ, the soul’s spouse, is bashful, neither
willingly cometh to his bride in the presence of
a multitude,”’— Trapp,


The noblest works, like the temple of Solomon,
are brought to perfection in silence.—Sir A.
Helps.


Solitude hath been the custom not only of
holy men, but of heathen men, Thus did Tully,
and Anthony, and Crassus, make way to that
honour and renown which they afterwards
obtained by their eloquence; thus did they pass
a solitudine in scholas, ascholis in forwn, ‘ from
their secret retirement into the schools, and from
the schools into the pleading place.” — Farindon.


‘Tar Watts INSPECTED.
fi. 12. And I arose in the night, ge.


I A work involving considerable
danger. 1. From the ruined state of
the walls (v. 13—15). No safe path.
Stones scattered along road made travel-
ling dangerous. God’s servants often
required to traverse perilous roads.
Missionaries often wonderfully preserved
when journeying. 2. From the enmity
of the Samaritans. Had they known
would probably have waylaid so small
and defenceless a company. Exposed
to the midnight marauders who lurked
about the city, taking advantage of its
open condition. This danger did not
deter. God often protected his servants
from malice and bloodthirstiness of
hostile nations, Missionary annals of
Church furnish many instances of sub-
limest heroism and hair-breadth escapes
from threatened destruction.

II. A work requiring personal
sacrifice. 1. He gave up his much-
needed rest. The physician will watch
by his patient all night. The captain
will not think of sleep if his vessel be
in danger. So should the Christian
forego his rest in times of danger, that
he may call upon God in faithful prayer.
David “rose at midnight to give
praise ” unto the nae of the Lord (Pa.
exix.). Our mortal enemy, Satan, sleep-
eth not night or day, but continually


“goeth about like a roaring lion, seeking
whom he may devour ;” and had we not
an equally vigilant watchman we should
be destroyed. ‘Behold, he neither
slumbereth nor sleepeth, that is the
watchman of Israel” (Ps. exxi.). Christ
himself set us an example of self-denying
vigilance ; prayed the whole night be-
fore sending forth his disciples (Luke
vi.). Joshua marched all night to
conquer the Amorites (Josh. x.). Gideon
arose in the night to pull down the altar
of Baal (Judg. vi.). 2. He laid aside
his official dignity. Might have sent a
deputy, or gone attended by strong escort,
or numerous retinue; but preferred to
go himself, to teach us that nothing
should be painful or degrading to any
man, however exalted his station, which
concerns the prosperity of Gud’s City
and Church. David, when the ark was
brought out of Abinadab’s house, played
on instruments, and after casting off his
kingly apparel, danced before the ark in
his ephod. Michal mocked, and was
punished ; but David declared that he
would yet ‘more lowly cast himself
down,” and was blessed of the Lord (2
Sam. vi.). Moses forsook the dignity
and pleasure of Pharaoh’s court to be-
come a tender of sheep, that he might
serve the cause of God (Heb. xi).


56 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEPEMIAH.


{[cHAP,





Christ washed the disciples’ feet, and
humbled himself to the death of the
cross, that he might effect our redemp-
tion. Such humble self-abasement is
the greatest honour that can come to a
man. Pride has its own reward, and a


paltry one it is; but humility shall be.


rewarded by the great Father in heaven.

III. A work requiring great moral
courage. The view of such a wreck
likely to dishearten. The magnitude of
the task would appear all but over-
whelming. Would serve to impress him
with a sense of personal insufticiency for
so gigantic a work. Ezekiel, surrounded
by the valley of bleached bones, when
suddenly asked, “Son of man, can these
bones live ?’’ in despair could only reply,
‘©O Lord God, thou knowest.” Nehe-
miah, surrounded by a ruin equally hope-
less, can only cast himself and his work
upon the strength of the Omnipotent. (a)

IV. A work which had an import-
ant bearing upon subsequent opera-
tions. 1. fi furnished accurate inform-
atuon uf the work to be done. Some
render the words, ‘ viewed the walls,”
“ bre be the walls” (7. e. broke olf a piece
of the wall), to try the soundness of it,
that he might know whether it required
to be pulled down entirely, or might
be repaixed on the same foundation.
Must have been moonlight, or could not
have seen to do this; as, to have carried
torches or lamps would have betrayed
their presence. Knowledge obtained by
personal investigation always most
valuable. Illustrate this in the caso of
pastors, sick visitors, and Sunday School


teachers. They who come into personal
contact with human nature in its varied
phases know best how to remedy its ills,
repair its losses, and alleviate its woes,
In all religious work knowledge is power.
2. It kindled his enthusiasm jor the
performance of the work. The greater
the ruin, the greater the work of restora-
tion. Small works require common-
place zeal ; but great enterprises demana
extraordinary grace. Two truths brought
home to him by sight of ruins. (1) How
faithful God is. He threatened that
Jerusalem should become a heap (Isa.
xxv. 2). Here was the manifest fulfil-
ment of the threat. Surely, if God be
fathful in punishing, he will not be less
faithful in healing. (2) How vile sin ta,
This desolation the result of Israel’s dis-
obedience. The restoration of the city
should be a sign of Israel’s return to
obedience ; these thoughts would serve
to inflame Nehemiah’s zeal. The same
thoughts are calculated to stimulate all
Christian effort.


Illustration :—(a) As Luther drew near to the
door which was about to admit him to the Diet
of Worms, he meta valiant knight, the celebrated
George of Freundsberg, who four years later
drove the French into the Ticino. The brave
general, seeing Luther pass, tapped him on the
shoulder, and shaking his head, blanched in
many battles, said kindly: ‘“ Poor monk, poor
monk! thou art now going to make a nobler
stand than I or any other captain have ever
made in the bloodiest of our battles. But if thy
cause is just, and thou art sure of it, go forward
in God’s name, and fear nothing. God will not
forsake thee.” He went forward and won a
glorious victory.


A Time ror SILENCE.
ii. 12. Neither told I any man what God, $e.


There is a time to keep silence, and a
time to speak (Eccl. ii. 7). Taciturnity
in some cases an eminent virtue. He is
a wise man who can discern the proper
season for its exercise. Jerome says,
‘Let us first learn not to speak, that we
may afterwards open our minds with
discretion.” Solomon puts silence be-
fore speech, as a virtue rarer and more
precious. Learn—

I. Good intentions are best kept


secret until they are ascertained to be
practicable. Nehemiah would only
have marred his work by disclosing his
intention before he was sure it was worth
disclosing. Ideas are prolific as insects,
but few of them are fit to live. When
Nehemiah had viewed the walls, he was
able to render a reason, and expound his
plan for their restoration. A good rule
for all who contemplate any work of
importance. They should first consider,


oHAP. I1.]





then speak. Rashly to enter upon a
crude enterprise is to court failure. A
wise man will not open his mouth to
others until he has formed some plan for
the accomplishment of his purpose.
Guard against other extreme of obstinate
persistence in a course condemned by
others as unpractical.

II. Good intentions are best kept
secret until they can be carried out
with decisive energy. Great enter-
prises demand great faith, and intense
enthusiasm. Many a grand reform has
prematurely failed through the half-
heartedness of its chief supporters. Had
Luther been less bold he would have
been unfit for the work which God
entrusted tohim. Courage is contagious,
and cowardice too.

III. Good intentions are best kept
secret from those who are likely to
oppose them. Nehemiah aware of the
vigilance and enmity of Sanballat and
his party. Careful to avoid betraying
his purpose to those who were related to
them by inter-marriage. Herein we see
the prudence of this great man. In this,
worthy of our imitation, who are engaged


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 8t





in good works for God. ‘Take no counsol
with scoffers, nor give them any advan-
tage in their profane opposition. Caution
and forethought as necessary in this
warfare as in carnal. We must not cast
pearls before swine.

IV. Good intentions are best kept
secret until the co-operation essential
to success can berelied on, This work
impossible without co-operation. Useless
to attempt it until this secured. By
personal effort and interview we prepare
the way for united action and ultimate
success. The soldiers must be enlisted
one by one, then the battle-cry may be
sounded. Workers in the Church must
be secured one by one, then the work
may be openly announced. This pre-
paratory work done in silenceand secresy,
afterwards declared openly.


Illustration : —‘* When Homer makes his
heroes to march, he gives them silence for their
guide; on the contrary, he makes cowards to
babble and chatter like cranes. The one pass
along like great rivers, letting their streams glide
softly with silent majesty; tbe others only
murmur like bubbling brooks. A sign of not
being valiant is to strive to seem valiant.”


An APPEAL FoR HELP.


shed WE


I. The ground of theappeal. “Ye see
the distress that we are in” (v. 17). An
appeal to their patriotism, their pity,
and their piety. God's city is desolate,
your city is in ruins. “ We (putting
himself along with them) are in distress.”
A reproach to the Church, an object of
derision to the world, shall we rest
satisfied where weare? “ Yesee.” The
fact is patent, it cannot be concealed.
No need to expatiate on this point, for
you are mourning on account of it every
day. See here model for all Christian
appeals. Shame a powerful motive. To
this Nehemiah appealed. What incon-
sistency in theirconduct !—that they who
boasted of the greatness and goodness of
their God should be living in this
miserable plight, as though he could not
or would not deliver them! For very
shame we should arise and build the
waste places of Zion; strengthen her


Then said I unto them, §e.


stakes, and lengthen her cords; then
shall her converts be multiplied.

II. Thenatureofthe appeal. “Come,
and let us build.” 1. Zé solicited personal
effort; “let us build.” Time for debating
and discussing past. Time for work had
come, Nehemiah not satisfied with their
good wishes, or money, or prayers; but
sought their personal assistance. Every
Christian is called upon to take his share
of workin the Church. Not all adapted
for same kind of work. All kinds of
work, intellectual and manual, may be
sanctified to the cause of God. In
Israel’s battle with Midian, when Sisera
was defeated and slain, we find all kinds
of work recorded and commended
(Judges v. 14). Meroz was cursed for
its cowardly neutrality. We may not
substitute money, or prayers, or good
wishes for work. “ Every man’s work
shall be tried,” &e. “ Let your light so


&8 HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH,


—_*





shine before men, that they may see you
good works.” “ Well done, good and
faithful servant.” The child and the
invalid, the school-girl and maidservant,
the merchant and his errand-boy, have
all some work to do for God. To every
believer he says, ‘“ Go work to-day in
my vineyard.” At our peril do we say
” and go not. 2. It promised
id. “Letusbuild.” Notgo,
but “come :” not go ye, but come, “let
us build.” An example as noble as rare,
to see a courtier leave that wealth, and
ease, and authority in the midst of which
he was living, and go to dwell so far
from court in an old, torn, and decayed
city, where he should not live quietly,
but toil and drudge like a day-labourer,
in dread and danger of his life. Yet
they who are earnest in God’s work think
not of ease, and bid none go where they
are unwilling to go themselves, or do
work which they are too proud to touch.
Personal example in workers, and soldiers
especially, far more powerful than per-
sonal authority. Come, always more
successful than go.

III. The motive urged. “ That we
be no more a reproach” (v. 17). Here
we see the misery they were in urged as
a motive for action. Several years had
elapsed since Cyrus gave them permission
to return, and yet hitherto they had been
anable to rebuild the walls. This plea
often occurs in the Bible. “ For thy
great Name’s sake,” an argument often
employed by eminent pleaders, (2
Kings xix. 4; Ps. xlii. 10; lxxiv. 18;
lxxixs 12 Ixxxix, O39 Prov. xiv..31:;
1 Kings viii. 41, 42; 1 Chron. xvii. 24 ;
Ps. xxv. 11; Ps, lxxiv. 10; Jer. xiv.
7.) Jehovah jealous for his name, and
will vindicate his character. When his
Church is reproached and scorned he is
assailed, and in jealousy for his honour
will defend his own. Christ said to Saul
of Tarsus, ‘‘ Why persecutest thou me ?”
The wounds inflicted upon the members
of his body on earth, were felt by him,
the living head, in heaven,

IV. The encouragement offered.
“Then I told them of the hand of my
God,” &c. (v. 18). The time for silence
now past, and the time for speech come,
The walls inspected, the work carefully


(omar. 11,


planned and thoroughly resolved upon,
it only remained to make a bold appeal
for immediate help, and commence forth-
with, before the enemy could muster
their forces or mature their plans. Note,
promptness in religious work will often


. Bweep away like a tornado all obstacles,


and baffle all opponents. He assured his
co-patriots—1l. That God was the insti-
gator of the work. “TI told them of the
hand of my God, which was good upon
me” (v. 18). In previous verse the law
was preached, here the gospel. First, he
set forth their misery, then encouraged
them by the promise of God’s mercy.
This order the true one for all teachers
and ministers. They are the best
scholars who will work without the
rod: yet none so good but need the rod
sometimes. A wise schoolmaster will
make such use of both gentleness and
severity as to gain his point with the
least possible friction. 2. That the king
approved of the work. “ Also the king’s
words that he had spoken unto me.”
God had given him such favour in the
king’s sight, that as soon as he asked
licence to go and build the city, where his
fathers lay buried, it was granted ; and
the liberality and goodwill of the king
were so great that he granted him sol-
diers to conduct him safely to Jerusalem,
and commission to his officers for timber
to build with. Why should they mis-
trust or doubt? With both God and
the king on their side, what needed they
more} God’s servants should always
seek to make themselves agreeable to
those in high station, that they may
receive their help in doing his work.
Learn to be thankful for wise and
benevolent rulers, and pray for their
conversion (1 Tim. ii. 2).

V. The success of the appeal. “ And
they said, Let us rise and build ” (v. 18).
1. The response was prompt. Without
delay or discussion they entered with
spirit upon the work there and then.
Would that all congregations were
equally prompt in accepting the invita-
tions of the Gospel! ‘Now is the
accepted time, behold, now is the day of
salvation” (2 Cor. vi. 2). Would that
all Christians were as ready to work !
2. The response was practical. “ Let us


UC BAP. II]





rise and éui/d.” Not propose substitute,
or alternative, but undertook the work
required of them. Example for all
Christian workers, not to go round diffi-
culties, but meet them in the face.
Practical work must be done in a
practical way. Fancy and flimsy
methods break down, whilst simple and
personal effort accomplish great results.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 63
a


3. The response was tinanimous. “ Lot
us rise and build.” Even the listless
were stirred for the time (Eliashib for
instance), All with one accord under
took to carry out the work by God’s
blessing, and the king’s favour. Co-
operation necessary to the success of any
large undertaking. World never con-
verted until the churches are united,


Tux SrrenctH or Unity.


ii 18.


I. Consists in its power to protect
individual workers against dis-
couragement. 1. Jsoluted workers are
always liable to depression. This, the
result of bearing alone the burden of care
and duty incident to their work. Few
men have the indomitable courage of a
Nehemiah, a Paul, a Luther. Most
spirits quail when unsupported by the
aid and sympathy of kindred workers.
2. Mutual sympathy and conference re-
lieve mental strain, and renew exhausted
energy. ‘Iron sharpeneth iron, so a
man sharpeneth the countenance of his
friend” (Prov. xxvii. 17), Burdens
confessed are half removed. Mutual
counsel will cheer the drooping spirit,
and stimulate to increased effort. Christ
recognized this when he sent out his
disciples two and two. It is not good for
man to be alone. ‘‘ Where no counsel is
the people fall” (Prov. xi. 14). “Two
are better than one, for if they fall, the
one will lift up his fellow ; but woe to
him that is alone when he falleth” (Eccl.
170,110).


dilustration There are stragglers in the
Church as well as in the army, who fall out of
the ranks and are lost. Sometimes they manage
to subsist for a while, living on the charity of the
people and the seraps left by those in camp, but
generally fall a prey to their isolation and
exposure. One such found his way, during the
American war, to the hospital at Sedalia, He
was dying then, and could not give his name or
regiment. He was a mere boy, and unequal to
the toil of marching. He was wet and cold and
weary, and in a few hours died, and was buried
in a nameless grave. So do many fall out of the
Church’s ranks, and soon faint by the way.
Pliny writes of a stone in the island of Scyros,
that if it be whole, though a large and hea
one, it swims above water, but bein broken ¢
sinks. So long as saints keep ein: nothing


So they strengthened their hands for this good work.


shall sink them; but if they break up, and
divide, they are in danger of going down.


II. Consists in its power of resisting
combined opposition from without.
1. The full force of individual strength
only awakened by the enthusiasm of
united action. Men are like the stone
pyrites, which is cold and dull until well
rubbed ; then it becomes so brilliant and
hot as to burn the hand. Intense earn-
estness only kindled by the contagion
of glowing spirits. Coals need to be
pressed together to become thoroughly
hot. So do souls require to be brought
into very close contact, and inspired by
one common impulse, to be fully roused
to fervour and self-sacrificing devotion.
2. In unity, the full force of individual
strength is directed against the common
enemy. Not as separate individuals,
but as forming one combined and
glowing mass. Such union is resistless
as a stream of glowing lava.


Illustrations :—The sand-reed, which grows on
the sandy shores of Europe, represents the influ-
ence of religion and the Church upon society.
Its roots penetrate to a considerable depth, and
spread in all directions, forming a net-work
which binds together the loosest sands; whilst
its strong tall leaves protect the surface from
drought, and afford shelter to small plants, which
soon grow between the reeds, and gradually form
a new green surface on the bed of sand. But for
the sand-reed, the sea-wind would long since have
wafted the drift-sand far into the interior of the
country, and have converted many a fruitful acre
into a waste; but that invaluable grass opposes
ite stubborn resiziznce to the most furious gale.
So does the united front of Church organization
present an insuperable barrier to the aggressions
of profanity and unbelief,

tanding one day before a beehive, Gotthold
ebserved with delight how the little honey-birda
departed and arrived, and from time toe time


60 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAA.
Se ee ee ea


returned home laden with the spoils of the
flowers, Meanwhile a great yellow hornet, the
wolf among bees, came buzzing up in eager
quest of prey. As it was evening-tide, and the
bees after the heat of the day had settled about
the mouth of the hive to breathe the cool air, it
was amusing to observe that their fierce adver-
sary lacked courage to attack their combined
host and serried ranks. True, he often advanced
for the purpose, but seeing how densely and
compactly they were sitting, was forced to retreat
empty-handed. At last, a bee, somewhat belated,
arrived by itself; and on this straggler he
instantly seized, fell with it to the earth, and
instantly devoured it.


III. Consists in its power to cope
with the inherent difficulties of the
work, which otherwise would be in-
surmountable. 1. Work which cannot
be done by few may be accomplished by
many. This true of the wall-building.
A small company of workers, however
willing, would have been altogether in-
adequate for the work to be done, True
of many other large Christian under-
takings. Especially true of church or
zhapel building where the workers are
mostly poor. 2. Work which cannot be
lone by many acting separately, may be
accomplished by the same acting tn
unison. Unity is strength. It doubles
the capacity of each individual worker.
A hundred separate links or threads will


[cHaP. i.





accomplish nothing; but join into a
chain or a cable, and they may save a
hundred lives.


Illustrations :—“ Separate the atoms which
make the hammer, and each would fall on the
stone as a snow-flake; but welded into ove, and


. wielded by the firm arm of the quarryman, it will


break the massive rocks asunder, Divide the
waters of Niagara into distinct and individual
drops, and they would be no more than the falling
rain; but their united body would quench the
fires of Vesuvius, and have some to spare for
other volcanoes.” —Guthrie,

“Union is power. The most attenuated
thread when sufficiently multiplied will form the
strongest cable. A single drop of water is a weak
and powerless thing; but an infinite number of
drops united by the force of attraction will form
a stream, and many streams combined will form
a river; till rivers pour their water into the
mighty oceans, whose proud waves, defying the
power of man, none can stay but he who formed
them. And thus, forces which, acting singly, are
utterly impotent, are, when actingin combination,
resistless in their energies and mighty in power.”
—Saiter.

‘“‘A thousand grains of powder, or a thousand
barrels, scattered, a grain in a place, and fired at
intervals, would burn, it is true, but would pro-
duce no concussion, Placed together in effective
position, they would lift a mountain, and cast it
into the sea, Even so, the whole Church, filled
with faith, and fired by the Holy One who gave
the tongues of fire on the Day of Pentecost, will
remove every mountain. fill up every valley, cast
up the highway of the Lord, and usher in the
jubilee of redemption.’’—Boardman.


SECOND HINDRANCE—OPEN DERISION.


ii. 19. They laughed us to scorn, and despised us.


I. Here is an attempt to stop the
work of God by the combined opposition
of wicked men. ‘When Sanballat the
Horonite, and Tobiah,” &c. 1. The
work of God is sure to meet with oppo-
sition from wicked men. They must
hate and hinder it, because they are
opposed to all that is good or godly.
The triumph of good means the over-
throw of evil. They will find some
excuse for their oppression, and thus
endeavour to make their conduct ap-
pear reasonable. 2. The work of God
will often provoke the combined hos-
tility of those who have nothing else in
common. Thus did the Canaanites,
Hittites, Hivites, Perizzites, &c., com-
bine for the destruction of Israel, but
in vain, for Jehovah brought to nought


their evil counsels. Such opposition
Luther met with when he began to re-
form. The pope excommunicated him;
the emperor proscribed him; Henry,
king of England, and Lewis, king of
Hungary, wrote against him; but the
work prospered, because it was of God.

II. Here is an attempt to stop the
work of God by pouring contempt upon
it. “They laughed us to scorn.” 1.
They despised the workers. “As a
company of fools, who could never effect
what they attempted. So Erasmus and
Sir Thomas More thought to ridicule
the Lutherans out of their religion.
This the Scripture calls cruel mocking
(Heb. xi. 36), and ranks it with bloody
persecution. The bitterest persecution
which man can inflict is that of cruel


HAP. 11]


—_—_—


taunts and scurrilous invectives: but the
least harmful also.. Jude, Peter, and
Paul, all foretold that in the last days
there should come mockers (2 Pet. iii. ;
2 Tim. iii; Jude). Christ thus spite-
fully treated by Herod, Pilate, the
priests, and the people. Solomon says,
“He that mocketh shall be mocked”
(Prov. iii). David thus describes the
reward of mockers, “ He that dwelleth
in the heavens shall mock them, and the
Lord shall have them in derision ” (Ps.
ii.). Michal was childless all her life as
a punishment for mocking David (2
Sam. vi.). The children that mocked
Elisha were devoured by bears (2 Kings
ii.). Belshazzar, king of Babylon, was
destroyed with his kingdom when he
despised the warnings of God (Dan. v.).
2. They ridiculed the work. ‘ What is
this thing that yedo?” Scoffingly they
asked the question, as Pilate asked,
“What is truth?” Wicked men will
never be fast fora taunt. If the Church’s
character be above reproach, the Church’s
work is ridiculed as impossible or
aseless,

III. Here is an attempt to stop the
work of God by insinuating an evil


design. ‘“ Will ye rebel against the
king)” 1. When a good work cannot


otherwise be hindered an evil motive is
sure to be suggested. The work is open,
the motive secret. More easy to explain
and defend former than latter. Men
fear what is secret. Wicked men em-
ploy this dread for their own ends. 2.
Disloyalty to the State has always been
a favourite charge with the Church's
enemies. Elijah is accused by Ahab of
being a troubler of Israel (1 Kings
xviii.). David was persecuted by Saul
because the people sung, “Saul hath
slain his thousands, and David his ten
thousands ” (1 Sam. xviii.). Daniel was
accused of disobedience, and consigned to
the lions’ den, because he prayed to the
God of heaven (Dan. vi.). The Israelites
were persecuted in Egypt lest they should
rebel against Pharaoh (Exod. i.), Herod
sought to slay the infant Christ, lest He
should dethrone him (Matt. ii.). Christ
was accused and executed as a malefactor
guilty of treason (Jno. xviii.). The
Apostles were accused of teaching sedi-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIA, 6}





tion, and subverting the’ commonwealth
(Acts v.). St. Paul was charged witb
the same crime at Athens (Acts xvii.).
Luther was called a “trumpeter of
rebellion.” To excuse the shameful
massacre of St. Bartholemew, a medal
was struck with the inscription, Valour
against the rebels, on one side, and on
the reverse, Piety hath excited Justice.

IV. Here is an attempt to stop the
work of God utterly frustrated.
‘Then answered I them, and said,” &e.
(v. 20). The boastful arrogance of
Sanballat nothing daunted Nehemiah ;
and as they were not ashamed to charge
him and his people unjustly, so he is not
ashamed to step forth boldly in defence
of the work they had undertaken. Thus
Moses bearded Pharaoh ; thus Jephthah
withstood the Ammonites (Judg. xi.);
thus Hezekiah defended the Jews from
the blasphemies of Rabshakeh ; thus
David stood up against Goliath (1 Sam.
xvii.); thus did Moses and Aaron with-
stand the reviling and calumny of Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram (Numb. xvi.).
Nehemiah here in the same spirit ap-
peals to God as the ground of his hope,
and the source of his confidence.
Balak, the king of Moab, hated the
camp of Israel, and bribed Balaam, a
prophet, to curse them. Just so does
the world hate the Church, and is never
happier than when it can hire the
ministers of the Church to turn against
it, and betray its interests. But it can
no more succeed by its curses than the
wicked Balak could; it must seduce
Christians to sin, and then it prevails ;
not by its own power, but by tempting
the Church to provoke the anger of
God. (See Addenda.)


Lilustrations ;—(a) Pliny, governor of Pontus,
under the emperor Trajan, was appointed to
punish the Christians, but seeing their great
number he doubted what he should do, and
eventually wrote to the emperor that “ he found
no wickedness in them, but that they would not
worship images, and that they would sing psalms
before day-light unto Christ as God, and did
forbid all sins to be used among them.” Tha
emperor hearing this became a great deal more
gentle to them (Euseb, Lib, iii. cap, 38), Sallust,
tormenting Theodorus, # Christian, in various
ways, and for a long time, to make him forsake his
faith, but all in vain, went to the emperor Julian,
and told him what he had done, counselling him


62 HOMILEViIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


{[onaPr. ©








that “he should prove that way no more by
eruelty, for they got glory by suffering patiently,


and he got shame in punishing so sharply *
because they would not yield to him.


ConripENcE In Gop an IncenTIVE to Work.
ii. 20. The God of heaven, he will prosper us, therefore, Sc.


“Knowledge is power,” says the


philosopher ; “faith ts power,” says the
saint. And what is faith? Confidence
in God, in his almighty power and faith-
fulness ; a confidence which nerves the
soul for every task. No principie can
brace a man like the principle of implicit
trust in God. It leads not to indolence,
but to effort, because—

I. It suggests almighty protection.
“The God of heaven.” 1. Jt regards
Jehovah as King of the celestial universe.
“Lord of Hosts,” one of God’s most
frequent names (Ps. xlvi. 7; Isa. i. 24;
Jer. xlvi. 18; Zech. i 6; Mal. i
14). “All power is given unto me in
heaven” (Matt. xxviii.). When the God
“who rolls the stars along,” and “ up-
holdeth all things by his word ;” the
God who doeth according to his will
amongst the armies of heaven, and con-
trols the hidden forces of the universe ;
the God who is Almighty, and Omni-
scient, and Eternal, to whom every celes-
tial knee bows in willing homage and
adoration ; when this God is on our side,
who can be afraid }—what can hinder ?
2. It regards Jehovah as the providential
ruler of the terrestrial universe. This
implied rather than expressed. “ All
power is given to me in heaven and in
earth.” In earth because in heaven.
All destinies in his hand, all events
ander his control.

II. It suggests providential direo-
tion. “He will prosper us.” 1. The
way may be dark, but God will unfold tt.
When we have, like Nehemiah, done our
best, and given our utmost, then we may
safely commit our cause to God and
patiently await the issue. Thus Abra-
ham followed the leadings of Providence
(Gen, xii.). Thus confidingly did he
place his son Isaac on the altar (Gen.
xxii), saying, “ God will provide himself
a sacrifice,” Thus the apostles went
at the Saviour’s bidding without scrip,
&c. (Luke xxii.). In this spirit let all
who fear God boldly begin his work,


and continue it stead{astly, looking for
his guidance, and they shall not be
disappointed.


Iilustration :—A Swiss chamois hunter, cross-
ing the Mer de Glace, fell into one of the enor-
mous crevasses that rend the ice in many places,
He fella hundred yards without serious injury ;
but his situation seemed hopeless. He could
not climb out; and the cold would socn freeze
him to death. A stream of water ran down the
crevasse; he followed it, wading, stooping,
inion S or floating as best he could. At length
he reached a vaulted chamber from whieh there
was no visible outlet. The water heaved threat-
eningly. Retreat was impossible. Delay was
death. Commending himself to God the hunter
plunged into the whirling flood. Then followe
a moment cf darkness and terror; then he was
thrown up amid the flowers and hay-fields of
the vale of Chamouni. Thus mysteriously are
we led by a gracious Providence to safety and
success,


2. The way may be crowded with diffi:
culties, but God will remove them. “Hy
will prosper us.” Difficulties as many
as Nehemiah encountered may beset om
path and work, but not more or mightier
than God can remove. How deliverance
shall come we know not, and must leave
to God. All we know is that 7¢ will
come in due time. On one occasion
Luther was very importunate at tha
throne of grace to know the mind of
God, and it seemed to him as if God
spoke aloud and said: “I am not to be
traced.” We can trust where we cannot
trace. The Almighty has his “times
and seasons.’ An eminent saint thus
wrote to a friend: “It has frequently
been with my hopes and desires in
regard to providence, as with mv wateh
and the sun. My watch has often been
ahead of true time; 1 have gone faster
than providence, and have been forced
to stand still and wait, or I have been
set painfully back.” Flavel says, “some
providences are like Hebrew letters,
they must be read backwards.”

III. It suggests Divine benediction.
“ He will prosper us.” 1. J¢ matters
not how men may hinder if God prosper


CHAP. I1.]





the work. ‘If God be for us, who can
be against us?” 2. It matters not how
the king's favour may fluctuate if
Jehovah’s remain the same. He is the
Unchangeable One. Man’s favour may
be fickle, and therefore little to be
relied upon, God’s never fails, therefore
with confidence his saints may say, “ He
will prosper us.”

IV. It anticipates ultimate success.
“He will prosper us.” 1. It concludes that
what God initiates he intends to complete.
A good beginning is a strong reason to
persuade a man that God will grant
good success in the end. David com-
forted himself when he met Goliath by
the thought that he who had delivered
him from the lion and the bear, would
now continue his gracious interposition.
God’s plans never fail. 2. It concludes
that what G -1 commences he is able to
consummate. When God said to Paul
that all the souls with him should be safe,
there were various means used ; all were
not able to swim to the shore, and the
ship was not able to bring them all to
shore, but yet by broken boards and by


Tue MisERABLE ConpDITION


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.





83


one means or other, all got to shore.
So the Lord brings things to pass in a
strange, but a sure manner; sometimes
by one way, sometimes by another. He
breaks in pieces many ships, that we
think should bring us to shore, but then
he casts us on such planks as will event
ually bring us there.


Iilustration :—* 1 looked upon the wrong side
of a piece of tapestry, and it seemed to me a con-
tinued nonsense, There was neither head nor
foot therein, a company of thrums and threads,
with many pieces and patches of several sorts,
sizes, and colours, all ea signified nothing to
my understanding, But then looking on the
reverse, or right side, all put together did spell
excellent proportions, and figures of men and
cities ; so that indeed it was a history, not wrote
with a pen, but wrought with a needle. So, if
men look upon some of God’s providential deal-
ings with a mere eye of reason, they will hardly
find any sense therein, But alas! the wrong
side is before our eyes, whilst the right side is
presented to the God of heaven, who knoweth
that an admirable order doth result out of this
confusion; and what is presented to him at
present, may hereafter be so showed to us as to
convince our judgments of the truth thereof.”—
T. Fuller,


OF THE OCHuRCH’s ENEM1E8,


ii, 20. Ye have no portion, nor right, nor memorial, Sc.


I. They are excluded from the
Church’s pale. 1. Jerusalem a type of
the Church militant and the Church
triumphant. There God’s name recorded.
2. From which sinners are self-excluded.
By their country, creed, and conduct
Sanballat and his friends were excluded
from communion with the true Israelites.
Scoffers by their own conduct condemn
themselves to separation from the true
spiritual Church of God, Idolaters can
have no part with those who worship the
true God, for he will be worshipped in
“ spirit and in truth.”

II. They are cut off from the
Church’s privileges. 1. The privilege
of Church membership. “ No portion.”
This a privilege which many ignore. If
the Church is the Body and the Bride
of Christ, surely it must be an honour
to belong to it. 2. Privilege of Church
support, “Nor right.” To the poor
and afflicted this a great boon. As in the


Apostles’ days, so now the Church unaer-
takes to care for its poor. 3. Privilege
of ancestral reputation. ‘‘ Nor memorial.”
The Samaritans endeavoured to claim
Jewish ancestry, but unsuccessfully.
Saints are held in sweet remembrance in
the Church. Their name is often “as
ointment poured forth.” This honour
denied to the families of those who have
no fellowship with the Church.

III. They are forbidden to partici-
pate in the Church’s work. As they
feared not their threats, so now they
would have none of their help. “Be
ye not unequally yoked,” &. God's
servants are knit together by two bonds;
the one is Christ their head ; the other,
brotherly love. Neither of these exist
amongst idolaters. This work is—l. The
most exalted in which any human being
can engage. Work for God, for human
souls, for the Church which Christ has
~edeemed by his own blood, for all


Ga





eternity, cannot but exalt and ennoble
those who take part init. 2. The most
remunerative in which any human being
can engage. All is pure gain without
any loss, The gain is not temporal, but
eternal. The reward is found in the
glory that is brought to Christ, the.
salvation that is brought to men, and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


{CHAP,








the reflex benefit which descends upon
the soul of the worker. 3. Work which
requires moral qualificunons possessed
only by the true servants of God. Hence
the unfitness of the Samaritan un.
believers. God never sends men out into
the world as apostles until they have
become true disciples j:: heart and life.


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER IL


iS,


I. The duty of thanksgiving.
“Giving thanks,” a duty commanded
(Eph. v. 20). When thanks are given
thankfulness is implied, or it is mere
formality. The seat of thankfulness is
the heart ; there it ought to be cherished
with the utmost care, and every motive
remembered by which it is enlivened
and increased. If the heart be thankful,
it is perfectly reasonable and proper that
its feelings be expressed. The most
powerful arguments enforce this duty.
1. Its antiquity. It is as old as the
creation. No sooner did intelligent be-
ings exist than gratitude was expressed :
“the morning stars sang together, and
all the sons of God shouted for joy”
(Job xxxviii. 7). Paradise was the seat
of thanksgiving before man fell; and
consequently before the voice of prayer
was heard, or the sigh of penitence was
known. 2. Its perpetuity. It not only
commenced sooner, but will continue
longer than other duties ; it will survive
most other acts of service. Prayer will
cease ; repentance will be no more ; faith
and hope, as to their present use, will
terminate; but thanksgiving will be
the delightful business of the upper
world, and will extend to the countless
ages of eternity. 3. Haprese tnjunc-
tions to give thanks are numerous in
Holy Scripture. “O give thanks unto
the Lord, for he is good” (Ps. evii. 1).
“Praise ye the Lord, for it is good to
sing praises unto our God” (Ps. cxlvii.
1). 4. Example of the best men. What
good men have lived without gratitude?


THe Jlann or Gop,—THANKSGIVING.


What eminent characters are recorded
in the Bible who abound not in thanks-
giving? Nature conspires to engage
us in this employment. “ All thy works
praise thee, O Lord, and thy saints shall
bless thee.” “Bless the Lord, all his
works, in all places of his dominion ;
bless the Lord, O my soul.”

II. To whom thanksgiving is to be
offered. 1. To men. We ought to
give thanks to men for the favours we
receive from them. So far as they are
our benefactors they are entitled to
grateful acknowledgments, and ingrati-
tude is justly marked as one of the
worst of crimes, and as evidencing the
basest disposition of heart. 2. To God.
He is our greatest benefactor: every
other is but his instrument and agent.
The Most High is our best Friend ; for
other friends we are indebted to him,
and they are all of his sending. Hence
the injunction, ‘“‘ Offer unto God thanks-
giving; and pay thy vows unto the
Most High” (Ps. 1, 14). “Giving
thanks unto God, even the Father.”
Here we are reminded of his paternal
character. He has the heart of a father,
the tenderest feeling, the kindest affec-
tion. “Like as a father,” &c. Such is
the God to whom our thanksgivings are
offered.

III. The time when thanksgiving
is seasonable. 1. When we enter the
sanctuary. “Enter his gates with
thanksgiving, and his courts with praise.”
2. When we are the recipients of abound-
ing mercies, And who is not! He


oHAP. II.]


HOMILETIC COMMEN(VAaY: NEHEMIAG.


65





daily loadeth us with benefits. 3. When
we have received some special favour, or
been delivered from some great calamity.
Hannah prayed and wept, and returned
to offer thanksgiving in the place where
she had prayed (1 Sam. i.). The lepers
were reproached by Christ for not re-
turning thanks for their miraculous cure.
Nehemiah acknowledged “the good hand
of God,” which had been over him for
good, opening alike the king’s heart, and
his own providential path. 4. Always.
“ Giving thanks always.” “I thank my
God alway, on your behalf.” “TI will
bless the Lord always; his praise shall
continually be in my mouth” (Ps. xxxiv.


A


The pleasures and advantages of
solitude have been often admired, and
recommended. All love the world ; yet
all complain of it; and whatever schemes
of happiness are devised, the scene is
always laid in a withdrawment from it.
It is there the warrior feeds his courage,
and arranges the materials of victory.
It is there the statesman forms and
weighs his plans of policy. There the
philosopher pursues his theories and
experiments. There the man of genius
feels the power of thought, and the glow
of fancy. And retirement is friendly
to communion with God. Consider—

I. The duty of retirement. Premise
two things—1. The place is indifferent.
It matters not whether it be a private
room, or an open field. 2. It is not a
state of absolute retirement. Man was
made for society as well as solitude. A
great part of our religion regards our
fellow-creatures, and can only be dis-
charged by intermixing with them.
What our Saviour thought of hiding in
woods and cells, appears obviously from
his words, “Ye are the light of the
world. Let your light so shine before
men,” &c. It is therefore possible for a
Yhristian to be alone, when he ought to
be abroad. It may be much more
pleasing often to sit alone, reading or
reflecting, than to be calied forth to give
advice or to visit the afflicted. What
God requires is comparative and occa-


¥


1). Saints are not to be always singing
praises, or with their lips expressing
gratitude ; yet there is a sense in which
they are always to be “ giving thanks.”
They ought to cherish a thankful heart,
a disposition of gratitude ; and should
frequently take occasion, by every suit-
able means, to manifest and express it.
Thanksgiving should therefore be offered
to the end of life, and in every changing
circumstance of life. “In everything
by prayer and supplication with thanks.
giving,” &c. (Phil. iv. 6). This service
is never unseasonable; and sometimes
it is peculiarly appropriate.— Kidd.


PREPARATORY RETIREMENT.


sional secession for moral and spiritual
purposes. ‘“ Stand in awe, and sin not;
commune with your own heart upon
your bed, and be still.” ‘Enter into
thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy
door, pray to thy Father which is in
secret.” This duty enjoined by example
as well as by precept. ‘Isaac went out
into the field at eventide to meditate.”
“Jacob was left alone, and there
wrestled with him a man, until the
dawning of the day.” ** Then went king
David in, and sat before the Lord, and.
he said, Who am J, O Lord God, and
what is my house,” &c. Daniel retired
three times a day. Peter went up to
the house-top to pray about the sixth
hour, and received a Divine communica-
tion. Of our Saviour, whose life has the
force of a law, it is said, “ In the morn-


‘ing, rising up a great while before day,


he went out, and departed into a solitary
place, and there prayed.” At another
time, “he went cut into a mountain to
pray, and continued all night in prayer to
God.” The Sabbath brings us immedi-
ately into the presence of God, and gives
us an opportunity to examine our charac-
ter and condition, such as cannot be
obtained during the six days of toil. It
renews those pious impressions, which
our intercourse with the things of time
and sense is continually wearing off.
This retirement often enforced by the
dispensations of Providence. Affliction


86 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


(oHAP. II


% .


poth disinclines us to social circles, and
disqualifies us for them. Sickness
eeparates a man from the crowd, and
confines him to his bed that he may ask,
“Where is God my maker, who giveth
songs in the night?” A reduced con-


dition will diminish your associates. It»


will drive away the selfish herd, who
think that afriend is born for prosperity.
This retirement produces—l: A devo-
tional temper. There we can divulge
what we could not in the presence of
the dearest earthly friend. 2. A desire
to rise above the world. This will induce
a man to retire. Where is the world
conquered? In a crowd? No—but
alone. In the midst of its active pur-
suits 1 No—but viewed in the presence
of Jehovah, and in the remembrances of
eternity. Then its emptiness appears.
Then the fascination is dissolved. Then
we look upward, and say, “ Now what
wait I for? my hope is in thee.” 3. A
wish to obtain self-knowledge. Only
when alone can he examine his state,
estimate his attainments, explore his
defects, discern the source of past danger,
or set a watch against future temptations.
4. Love to God. When we are supremely
attached to a person, his presence is all
we want ; he will be the chief attraction,
even in company. Friendship deals
much in secrecy; kindred souls have a
thousand things to hear and to utter
that are not for a common ear. This
pre-eminently the case with the intimacy
subsisting between God and the believer.
“The heart knoweth his own bitterness,
and a stranger intermeddleth not with
his joy.” Behold, I will allure her,
and bring her into the wilderness, and
there will I speak comfortably unto her.”

II. The advantages of retirement.
l. Zt furnishes opportunity for com-
munion with God. “ Arise, go forth
into the plain, and I will there talk with
thee” (Iizek. iii. 22). We admire the
nobleman that kindly notices a peasant ;
and the sovereign who deigns to converse
with one of his poorer subjects. But


here is ~the Creator talking with hie
creature. Some of us cannot aspire
after intercourse with many of our
fellow-creatures by reason of our con-
dition, and our talents. But whatever
be our condition, or our talents, we have
a free and invited access to God. The
eubject of this communion is variously
called “ his secret,” and “‘ his covenant.”
“The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, and he will show them
his covenant.” “He will speak peace
unto his people.” “The meek will he
teach his way.” ‘The mode of this
communion is not supernatural, as of
old, God talked with Moses, as a man
talketh with his friend. It is mere
fanaticism to expect God to commune
with us in dreams, visions, sudden im-
pulses, and audible sounds. He opens
our understandings in the Scriptures.
He leads us into all truth. He applies
the doctrines and promises of his word
by his Spirit. The result and evidence
of this communion will be that our
hearts will burn within us. Other
effects produced by thiscommunion are—
1. A deep and solemn sense of our vanity
and vileness, Fellowship with God,
instead of encouraging unhallowec
presumption, gives a man such intimate
views of the peculiar glory of God as
fill him with godly fear. Thus was it
with Jacob, Moses, Elijah, Job, Isaiah,
and Peter. 2. An unquenchable desire
for closer communion. That which con-
tents the believer makes him insatiable.
He desires no more than God; but he
desires more of him. 3. An ever~in-
creasing likeness to God. ‘He that
walketh with wise men shall be wise.”
Some boast of being much with God ;
but so censurable are their conduct and
temper, that fear of their fellow-creatures
would like to have much to do with
them. “The wisdom that is from above
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and
easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
good fruits, without partiality, and with
out hypocrisy.” —Jay.


CHAP. IL,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 8)





i, 19. Open Derision.


I. The sin of mocking weakens
every virtuous restraint. There are
restraints of education, of example, of
regard to reputation. But when a man
becomes a mocker, such restraints are
relaxed ; they gradually lose their hold.
With every advance in levity and jest-
ing, a sense of shame subsides, the fear
of incurring censure abates, respect for
the authority of parents and for the
opinion and expostulation of friends
declines, custom degenerates intc nabit,
and habit becomes settled and easy.

II. The sin of mocking strengthens
vicious propensities. This naturally re-
sults from the preceding. As the one
declines the other gains ground. Let
a man become indifferent to what is
right, and he will practise what is wrong;
let him cease to do good, and he learns
te doevil. Isa bad temper, for instance,
which is never repressed, no worse after
years of indulgence? Does harmless
mirth never proceed to profaneness!
Does the habit of loose talking never
lead to falsehood, nor settle in deceit
You cannot mock at the Bible without
your regard for the sacred Book sinking
in proportion. You cannot mock at sin
but your aversion to sin dies and your
love to sin revives.

III. The sin of mocking gives great
advantage to your worst enemies.
Such are improper companions. Go
with them one mile, and they will easily
induce you to go two. Every compli-
ance only emboldens their demands, and
facilitates their conquest; and every
victory they gain only throws you more
completely into their power. Walk in the
counsel of the ungodly, and stand in the
way of sinners, and ere long you wil


sit “in the seat of the scornful.” But
there is a worse enemy than these ; “the
spirit which now worketh in the children
of disobedience,” “that old serpent,
called the Devil, and Satan, which
deceiveth the whole world.” Resist
him, and he will flee from you; but
invite his attacks, and you inevitably
fall into his hands. We read of those
““who are taken captive by him at his
will” These are they who indulge the
tempers he would have them indulge,
who practise the works which he instigates
and approves.

IV. The sin of mocking exposes to
peculiar marks of God’s displeasure.
Witness the destruction of the youths
who mocked Elisha (2 Kings ii, 23).
Some who have scoffed at the Bible and
blasphemed its author have been struck
dead in a moment. Persistence in sin
has more often been followed by judicia!
hardness. Men who have begun with
jesting at the things of God,-and sporting
with their own iniquity, have been given
up to strong delusions and final impeni-
tence.

V. The sin of mocking terminates
in remediless ruin. There is a world
beyond the present. There mockers of
every class have their full recompense.
“ They have chosen their own ways, and
their soul delighteth in their abomina-
tions; I also will choose their delusions,
and will bring their fears upon them.”
“Ye have set at nought my counsels,
and would none of my reproof; I also
will laugh at your calamity, I will mock
when your fear cometh.” “ Behold, ye
despisers, and wonder, and perish”
‘Tse Levi. 3, 43 Prov. i. 25, 26).—Kidd.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[OHAP. II.





ILLUSTRATIONS.


The hand of God. Protection. 1. John Knox,
the celebrated Scotch reformer, had many re-
markable escapes from the malicious designs of
his enemies,
head of the table in his own house, with his back
to the window; but on one particular evening he
would neither himself sit in his chair, nor allow
any one else to do so, That very evening a
bullet was shot through the window, puxposely
to kill him; it grazed the chair in which he
usually sat, and made a hole in the foot of the
candlestick, 2. Posidonius, in the Life of Augus-
tine, relates that this good man, going on one
occasion to preach at a distant town, took with
him a guide to direct him in the way. This
man, by some unaccountable means, mistook the
usual road, and fell into a by-path. It after-
wards proved that in this way the preacher’s life
had been saved, as his enemies, aware of his
journey, had placed themselves in the proper
road with a design to kill him.

Envy. ‘Dionysius the tyrant,” says Plu-
tarch, ‘‘out of envy, punished Philoxenius the
musician, because he could sing, and Plato the
philosopher, because he could dispute better than
himself,” Cambyses, king of Persia, slew his
brother Smerdis, out of envy, because he could


He was accustomed to sit at the


draw a stronger bow than himself or any of his
followers; and the monster Caligula slew his
brother because he was a beautiful young man.


“ Base onvy withers at another’s joy,
And hates that excellence it cannot reach.”


Derision. A poor man who had heard the
preaching of the gospel, and to whom it had been
greatly blessed, was the subject of much profane
ridicule and jesting amongst his neighbours. On
being asked if these persecutions did not some-
times make him ready to give up his profession
of religion, he replied, ‘‘ No. I recollect that our
good minister once said in his sermon, that if we
were 80 foolish as to permit such people to laugh
us out of our religion, till at last we dropped
into hell, they could not laugh us out again.”
Admiral Colpoys relates that when he first left
his lodgings to join his ship as a midshipman,
his landlady presented him with a Bible and a
guinea, saying, ‘God bless you, and prosper
you, my lad; and as long as you live never
suffer yourself to be laughed out of your money
or your prayers.” The young sailor carefully
followed this advice through life, and had reason
to rejoice that he had done so.


CHAPTER IIL


Expiamatory Norzs,] 1. Eliashib] The grandson of Jeshua, and the first high priest after


the return from Babylon.


gate probably the wpoBarix) of


No reason to doubt that the same Eliashib is referred to in Ezra x. 6.
The sheep ell In regard to the gates of ancient Jerusalem much uncertainty prevails,
obn y. 2, translated in E, V. “sheep market.”


The sheep
Modern topo-


graphers seek it near the present St. Stephen’s gate, through which the Bedouins to this day drive


sheep into the town for sale,


Near the temple area.


Sanctified] Consecrated it by special cere-


monies. ‘It was the first-fruits, and therefore, in the sanctification of it, the whole lump and


building was sanctified.”’— Poole.
Hebrew word for ‘‘a hundred,”
towers were derived is unknown.


The tower of Meah, the tower of Hananeel] Meah is the
Fuerst translates it the giant tower.

2. And next unto him] Lit. And at his hand.
divided into portions, one of which was assigned to each of the great families,
Hassenaah] Rather, the sons of Senaah (see Kzra ii, 35).


Whence the names of these
The wall was


r 3. The sons of
Senaah was a city or perhaps a district.


6. The old gate Keil reads, “ gate of the old wall,’’ as referring to the old wall in distinction
g 8 g


from the broad wall,’’ which was newer.


8. The broad wall] “or double wall, formerly broken


down by Joash, afterwards rebuilt by Uzziab, who made it so strong Chaldeans left it standing.”


— Jamieson,


9. The rulor of the half part] A half district; the district being diyided into two


that it might be managed more easily (comp. vers. 12, 14, 16, 16, 17, 18). 18. Zanoah] The name


of two towns in the territory of Judah.


wall across the


14, Beth-haccerem| From Jeremiah yi. 1 we find that it
was used as a beacon-station, and that it was near Tekoa,
lia on the hill called by Europeans ‘‘ The Frank Mountain.’’
t.e, along the Head cliffs of Zion.—Barclay.


Supposed to be now occupied by Bethu-
16. The sepulchres of David, &c.]
19. At the turning of the wall] i.e. the


yropwon being a continuation of the first wall, connecting Mount Zion with the


temple wall—Barelay, 25. The tower which lieth out from the king’s high house] Solomon’s
eon doubtless occupied the south-east corner of the present Haram. 26. The Nethinims] The


ethinim were a servile and subject caste,


“Not only the priests and the Levites, but the meanest


persona that belonged to the house of God acetributed to the work.” —Bishop Patrick.


GAP, 111.] HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 69





y!
HOMILETIC CONTENTS OF CHAPTER IIL
Wer. 1—32. The Moral Significance of Namea. ,{ Ver. 6. The Old Gate,


» 1—32. Life’s Masonry. on 8. The Broad Wall

w» 1—32. A Suggestive Church Record. “A 12, Family Zeal.

a 1, Priesthood. »» 18—19. High Men at Lowly Taska,
" 1, Ministerial Adaptability. y 15, 16. David, the National Hero,
- %, 3. System and Detail in Work. » 20—32. The Workmen’s Day-Book:
» §. Rival Classes;


THe Morat Sieniricance or NAmgs.


A cHarTer of names. To be passed over by the bulk of Bible readers. But the
names are biblical. The chapters of names are a noticeable part of the Book of
Nehemiah, as they are of the Bible.

I. The meaning of individual names. The origin of language is mysterious.
But in earliest times amongst all nations—our own not excepted—names meant
things. Specially true of the Jewish nation. Names were not given from caprice
or because others bore them. They shadowed forth the character, or commemorated
a circumstance, or prophesied a future,

Abel signified breath, vapour—a sign of the transitoriness of his life. David
meant dearly-beloved. noch, disciplined. Elijah, God the Lord, or the strong
Lord. Elisha, “to whom God is salvation.” Abraham, “the father of a multi-
tude,” and Moses, “drawn out of the water,” were commemorative. Sometimes
the name was a protest. Amittai, a veracious man living in a time of laxity.

Eliashib’s name (ver. 1) perpetually reminded him that “ God was in heaven, and
governed the world he created.” Nehemiah could not have borne a name better
adapted for a work so arduous as his. Nehemiah means, “‘ whom God comforts.”
Meremoth (ver. 4), if true to his name, should be a firm man. Jehoiada (ver. 6)
needed no priest to remind him that he was known of God. Uzuiel (ver. 8) might
work fearlessly, for, said his name, “God is my strength.” Malchijah (ver. 11)
would hardly be afraid of Sanballat’s anger or Tobiah’s scorn. “Am not I Mal-
chijah,” he would say, “and does not that tell me that God is my king!” The
Nethinims (ver. 26) were the dedicated ones.

In other languages the same law prevailed. A man bearing the name of Andrew
was courageous, and an Augusta majestic. Arthur was a strong man. She who
was honoured with the name Agnes was chaste. An Alice was noble, and a Louisa
modest.

In more artificial times names lost their meaning. When the mother of John
Baptist declared that he should be called John, her friends said, ‘“ There is none of
thy kindred that is called by this name.” Names were losing their meaning. Here
was a man born into the world filled with the grace of God—what shall his name
be? “ Zacharias,” they say; “that is his father’s name.” They ask the dumb
father, and he writes “John.” Now-a-days a man may have the name of John
and be graceless enough. We have no proof that Charles will be noble. We give
our children fancy names. Family names are reasonable; fancy names are foolish.
Except that they are given thoughtlessly, their morality would be doubtful. Our
true name is our Christian name.

II. The solemn significance of names. A name is a key to the nature or
history of the thing which bears it. In the history of the creation we read that
‘God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; and brought
them unto Adam to see what he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called
every living creature, that was the name thereof.” And so it has been well said by
Cazlyle that not only all common speech, but science, poetry itself, is no other than


70 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. [OHAP. II1.





aright naming. Some languages have the same expression for woRD and THING.
Jesus Christ said, “Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh ”
(Matt. xii. 34). “As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he” (Prov. xxiii. 7).
“ Lie not one to another ’—not because you will not be trusted, but because—
“ye have put off the old man with his deeds” (Coloss. iii. 9). Wise men say that
you can tell the character of any nation by its language. “There was a time in
the history of Europe when the controversy about what a name represents involved
issues so grave that men were burnt for taking what was considered the heretical
side of this controversy.”"—R. W. Dale. ‘‘Our general terms, man, tree, insect,
flower, are the names of particular or single specimens extended, on the ground of
a perceived similarity, to kinds or species. They come in this manner to stand fcr
millions of particular men, trees, insects, flowers that we do not and never can
know. They are, to just this extent, WORDS OF IGNORANCE; only we are able, in
the use, to hold right judgments of innumerable particulars we do not know, and
have the words so far as WORDS oF wispoM.”—Horace Bushnell. Reality is a
cardinal virtue. Speech is not given us to hide our thoughts. What is truth but
the correspondence of words with things, of life with speech? “ By thy words
thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned” (Matt.
xii, 37).

it. ‘The relation of the individual to the race. Names perpetuate memories.
William is named to-day after a William of sixty years ago. Of this latter there
is only a name. “One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh”
(Eccles. i 4). TH pay or Jup@MENT will harmonize names and things. “Then
shall the King say,” &c. (Matt. xxv. 34—46).


ILLUSTRATIONS,


Hebrew names, “The Hebrew names were nearly all significant, Sometimes commemoration
was in aname. Sometimes it uttered a testimony. Sometimes a prophecy stirred in it. The very
name of a man sometimes shone like a burning lamp in the darkness of an evil time. When need
was, a new name was taken or given, in addition to, or in place of, the original one, and borne as
men bear a banner or speak a watchword.” —Alexander Raleigh, D.D.

Names and periods in Hebrew history. ‘What signifies a name? In these days, when names
are only epithets, it signifies nothing. ‘Jehovah, Jove, or Lord,’ as the ‘ Universal Prayer’ insinuates,
are all the same. Now, to assert that it matters not whether God be called Jehovah, Jove, or Lord
is true, if it mean this, that a devout and earnest heart is accepted by God, let the name be what it
will by which he is addressed, But if it mean that Joveand Jehovah express the same Being—
that the character of him whom the pagan worshipped was the same as the character of him whom
Isracl adored under the name of Jehovah—that they refer to the same group of ideas—or that
ALWAYS names are but names, then we must look much deeper.

“In the Hebrew history are discernible three periods distinctly marked, in which names and words
bore very different characters. These three, it has been observed by acute philologists, correspond to
the periods in which the nation bore the three different appellations of Hebrews, Israelites, fee

“In the first of these periods names meant truths, and words were the symbols of realities. The
characteristics of the names given then were simplicity and sincerity. ‘They were drawn from a few
simple sources ; either from some characteristic of the individual, as Jacob, the supplanter; or Moses,
drawn from the water; or from the idea of family, as Ben-jamin, the son of my right hand; or from
the conception of the tribe or nation, then gradually consolidating itself ; or, lastly, from the religious
idea of God. But in this case not the highest notion of God; not Jah, or Jehovah, but simply the
earlier and simpler idea of Deity: El—Israel, the prince of El; Peniel, the face of El. In these
days names were real, but the conceptions they contained were not the loftiest,

‘The second period begins about the time of the departure from Egypt, and it is characterized by
anabated simplicity, with the addition of sublimer thought and feeling more intensely religious.
The heart of the nation was big with mighty and new religious truth, and the feelings with which
the national heart was swelling found vent in the names which were given abundantly, God, under
nis name Jah, the noblest assemblage of spiritual truths yet conceived, became the adjunct to names
of places and persons. Oshea’s name is changed into Je-hoshua,

‘“‘Observe, moreover, that in this period there was no fastidious, over-refined chariness ir the use of
that name. Men conscious »f deep and real reverence are not fearful of the appearance of irre.
verence. The word became a common word, as it always may, so long as it is FELT, and awe is
epat, A mighty eeder was called a cedar of Jehovah; a lofty mountain, a mountain of Jehovah


CHAP. m1} HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. us|





Humar beauty even was praised by such an epithet. Moses was divinely fair, beautiful to God.
The eternal name became an adjunct. No beauty, no greatness, no goodness was conceivable except
as emanating from him: therefore his name was freely but most devoutly used.

“« Like the earlier period, in this too words meant realities ; but, unlike the earlier period, they are
impregnated with deeper religious thought.

“The third period was at its zenith in the time of Christ: words had lost their meaning, and shared
the hollow, unreal state of all things. A man’s name might be Judas, and still he might be a traitor.
A man might be called Pharisee, exclusively religious, and yet the name might only cover the
hollowness of hypocrisy; or he inight be called most noble Festus, and be the meanest tyrant that ever
sat upon a pro-consular chair. This is the period in which every keen and wise observer knows that
the decay of national religious feeling has begun. That decay in the meaning of words, that
lowering of the standard of the ideas for which they stand, is a certain mark of this. The debase-
ment of a language is a sure mark of the debasement of a nation. The insincerity of a language is a
proof of the insincerity of a nation: for a time comes in the history of a nation when words no longer
stand for things; when names are given for the sake of an euphonious sound; and when titles are
but the epithets of unmeaning courtesy ; a time when Majesty, Defender of the Faith, Most Noble,
Worshipful, and Honourable not only mean nothing, but do not flush the cheek with the shame of
eonvicted falsehood when they are worn as empty ornaments.”—F. W. Robertson,

Origin of language. ‘The opinions about the origin of Janguage may be divided into three
classes, as follows :—

“(a) The belief that man at his creation was endowed with a full, perfect, and copious language,
and that as his faculties were called forth by observation and experience, this language supplied him
at every step with names for the various objects he encountered. In this view, which has found
many able 4 Sele speech is separated from and precedes thought ; for as there must have been
a variety of phenomena, both outward and in his mind, to which the first man was a stranger,
until long experience gradually unfolded them, their names must have been intrusted to him long before
the thoughts or images which they were destined ultimately to represent were excited in his mind.

‘ (2) The belief that the different families of men, impelled by necessity, invented and settled by
agreement the names that should represent the ideas they possessed. In this view language is a
humen invention, grounded on convenience, But to say that man has invented language would be
no better than to assert that he has invented law. To make laws, there must bea law obliging all
to keep them; to form a compact to observe certain institutes, there must be already a government
protecting this compact. To invent language presupposes language already, for how could men agree
to name different objects without communicating by words their designs? In proof of this opinion.
appeal is made to the great diversity of languages. Here it is supposed again that thought and
language were separate, and that the former had made some progress before the latter was annexed
to &.

“(c) The third view is, that as the Divine Being did not give man at his creation actual know-
ledge, but the power to learn and to know, so he did not confer a language, but the power to name
and describe. The gift of reason, once conveyed to man, was the common root from which both
thought and speech proceeded, like the pith and the rind of the tree, to be developed in inseparable
union. With the first inspection of each natural object the first imposition of a name took place
(Gen, ii. 19), In the fullest sense language is a Divine gift; but the power, and not the results of its
exercise, the germ, and not the tree, was imparted, A man can teach names to another man, but
nothing Jess than Divine power can plant in another’s mind the far higher gift, the faculty of naming.
From the first we have reason to believe that the functions of thought and language went together,
A conception received a name; a name recalled a conception; and every accession to the knowledge
of things expanded the treasures of expression. And we are entangled in absurdities by any theory
which assumes that either element existed in a separate state antecedently to the other.”—Arch-
bishop of York.

“We do not make words; they are given to us by One higher than ourselves. Wise men say that
you can tell the character of any nation by its language, by watching the words they use, the names
they give to things; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. It is God, and Christ,
the Word of God, who gives words to men, who puts it into the hearts of men to call certain things
by certain names ; and according to a nation’s godliness, and wisdom, and purity of heart will be its
power of using words discreetly and reverently. That miracle of the gift of tongues, of which we
read in the New Testament, would have been still most precious and full of meaning if it had had
no other use than this—to teach men from whom words come. When men found themselves all of
a sudden inspired to talk in foreign languages which they had never learnt, to utter words of which
they themselves did not know the meaning, do you not see how it must have made them feel that all
language is God’s making and God’s giving? Do you not see how it must have made them feel
what awful, mysterious things words were, like those cloven tongues of fire which fell on the apos-
tles? The tongues of fire signified the difficult foreign languages which they rete began to
speak as the Spirit gave them utterance. And where did the tongues of fire come from? Not out
of themselves, not out of the earth beneath, but down from the heaven above, to signify that it is not
from man’s flesh or brain, or the earthly part of him, that words are bred, but that they come down
from Christ, the Word of God, and are breathed into the minds of men by the Spirit of God.”—
Charles Kingsley.


73 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. (OHAP. IIL,





Lirr’s Masonry.


Inrropuorion. — The Scriptural figures of life’s work as a building. St
Peter's description of God as building up a fabric of “lively stones” (I Peter
ii. 4, 5). It is his remembrance of the Saviour’s own use of the figure in
Matt, xvi. 18: “ Upon this rock I will build my Church.” St. Paul’s description
of his own apostolic life as that of a “ wise master-builder ”—a spiritual Nehemiah
(1 Cor. iii. 1O—15).

I. Every one to contribute his life-toil to the building up of the city of
God. 1. True of the individual character—the fallen, ruined ‘city of Mangoul.”
Not what we rake together of earthly things, but what we rear in the edifice of
our personal character, our true work. 2. True of society. The history of the
world a history of the restless reconstructions of society. The reformers and
teachers of every age, scanning the desolations of their time, have said, ‘‘ Let us
arise and build!” and with none of Babel’s profanity have said in hope, “ Go to,
let us build a tower whose top shall reach to heaven!” That is what the piled-
up fruit of generations of toil shall be.

II. Every man has his own appointed sphere and kind of work. 1. The
manifold division of labour in the erection of a great edifice may become to us a
parable of the various uses of human character and ability. ‘To some the strong
work—the foundations and buttresses—plain, practical usefulness. To others
there is given work at the gates of knowledge and intercourse. To some it is the
task to beautify and embellish life and its surroundings, to sculpture bright things
and thoughts. To the sagacity of others is committed the towers of outlook and
defence for human society. 2. Every man to find his own task. Providential
circumstances and the bent of wise inclination point us to our share of the wall
The ruin lying nearest our feet, the weak place nearest our own home, is our task-
work. 3. Every man to be content with his own task. Who does not at times
sigh in envy of his brother's portion in life’s great enterprise! We think we
could work with less moiling, and get the lines truer, if we were working on
some other piece of ground. It’s better as it is. “To every man his work”
(Mark xiii. 34).

III. Every man contributes but a fragment to the great whole. All each
builder does is to contribute so many feet of the great girdle of masonry ; but it is
the multiplication of these small piles which completes the circumference, 1.
Individual life. Do not judge of experiences singly and alone. Life is a com-
plex and mingled process, and that which seems to have no uses of edification
may be one of many powers which uplift the character. Our life is a great whole.
Ws “walk to-day and to-morrow, and the THIRD day wx are perfec


“Tf sad thy present, fancy not
The whole of life is in to-day ;
To past and future look away ;
Thy dife is mot thy present lot.’


2. Socially. Do not judge a life with regard to society in its mere isolation or as 8
disconnected unit; it is a length of fabric to join on with some one else’s work.

Moses bursts out of Egypt; Joshua leads through Jordan into Canaan ; David
prepares for a consolidated nation ; Solomon ushers in the rest and magnificence of
peace: each builds his own layer and length of the history.

One man toils to feed the people; another gives them garments ; another settles
their quarrels ; another tells them the story of the day’s life ; another teaches them
knowiedge ; another pleads with them for God; another heals their sickness ;
another goes out to sea for their merchandise ; another gives them a book of cheer


CHAP. 11. | HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. i3





ing song ; and each contributes to the walls and gates and towers of man’s life
elow.

Eacu is but a small length, but att make the mighty ring.

IV. Every man to work in harmonious aim with his fellow builders. 1.
Recognizing the one reigning purpose—the editication of a city of God; to make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth and a city of the great King. 2. Recognizing the
worth of his brother's work. He has his own task, and has not to work by our
piece of the plan. 3. Hecentric people who will pile their stones in other people's
way, and blind other people with their chippings and the bespatterings of their
mortar. Do not hinder your “ brother mason.”

V. The united work is superintended by the great Architect. 1. He onl,
understands the whole of the great intricate plan of life. He has surveyed the
whole field, and has appointed each one his place. To understand our own section
and task, and to trust to the great unifying power above, is all we can do. These
broken, incomplete piles rising in their fragmentariness will, under his direction,
circle into the order of his great will. The full plan of life is only seen and
understood in heaven, but it 1s understood THERE. 2. He is near us with direc-
tions. In their straits these amateur masons must have often summoned Nehemiah
as he rode round among the workers. In all perplexities we can call in Divine
direction. “If any man lack wisdom, let him ask of God” (Jamesi. 5). 3. Let
the thought “THov Gop szest ME” animate us at our toil. (a) It is a cheering
thought. No eye can look so indulgently as his. ‘He knoweth our frame,” &c.
(Ps. citi. 14). (b) Zé is an admonitory thought. He wit have true work; an]
all the wrong that we pile up he will push down.


“ As ever in my great Taskmaster’s eye.”


Conciusion. — What this finished work shall be we read in the closing
chapters of the Bible. The New Jerusalem is man’s work transfigured by the


glory of God.
The rude foundations we have put in with weariness and toil shall show them-


selves “garnished with all manner of precious stones.” The gates so clumsily
made will shine “every several gate of one pearl.” The building of the wall
shall be “ as jasper,’ and the shapeless, disjointed masses shall be all joined and
balanced: “ the length of it, and the breadth of it, and the height of it equal.”

“ And the throne of God and of the Lamb shall be in it. And there shall bo
no night there; for the Lord God giveth them light: and they shall reign for ever
and ever.”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


Sacredness of labour. “Two men I honour, and no third, First, the toil-worn craftsman that
with earth-made implement laboriously conquers the earth, and makes her man’s. Venerable to me
is the hard hand—crooked, coarse ; wherein notwithstanding lies a cunning virtue, indefeasibly royal,
as of the sceptre of this planet, Venerable too is the rugged face, all weather-tanned, besoiled,
with its rude intelligence ; for it is the face of a man living man-like. 0, but the more venerable
for thy rudeness, and even because we must pity as well as love thee! Hardly entreated brother !
for us was thy back so bent, for us were thy straight limba and fingers so deformed: thou wert our
conscript, on whom the lot fell, and fighting our battles wert so marred, For in thee too lay a
God-created form, but it was not to be unfolded; encrusted must it stand with the thick adhesions
and defacements of labour; and thy body, like thy soul, was not to know freedom. Yet toil on,
toil on: THOU art in thy duty, be out of if who may; thou toilest for the altogether iiisj:usuble,
for daily bread. : ; ch be

“4 second man I hononr, and still more highly : him who is seen toiling for the spiritually
indispensable; not daily bread, but the bread of life. Is not he too in hie duty; endeavouring
towards inward harmony; revealing this, by act or by word, through all his outward endeavours, bu
they high or low? Highest of all when his outward and inward endeavours are one ; when we can
name him artist ; not earthly craftsman only, but inspired thinker, who with heaven-made imple-
ment conquers heaven for us! If the poor and humble tou that we have food, must not the high


74 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAE, (omaP. It





and glorious toil for him in return, that he have light, have guidance, freedom, immortality ?
These two, in all their degrees, I honour: all else is chaff and dust, which let the wind blow

ither it listeth.
shi Unspeakably touching is it, however, when I find both dignities united, and he that must toil
outwardly for the lowest of man’s wants is also toiling inwardly for the highest. Sublimer in thig
world know I nothing than a peasant saint, could such now anywhere be met with. Such a one
will take thee back to Nazareth itself; thou wilt see the splendour of heaven spring forth from the
wumblest depths of earth, like a light shining in great darkness.’’—Carly/e,

Work is the common duty of all, “It would be very strange if it were not so, The first
thing we read of God doing for man when he made him was to assign him work, Before he gave
him a right to eat of the fruit of the trees, ‘he put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and
to keep it’ (Gen, ii. 15). When man is translated to the heavenly Eden it is not to idleness:
‘they serve him day and night in his temple.’ The wise man when he looked abroad on the
world made this deep reflection : ‘ All things are full of labour.’ The calm stars are in ceaseless
motion, and every leaf is a world with its busy inhabitants, and the sap coursing through its veins
as the life-blood through our own, He who made all worlds has said, ‘My Father worketh hitherto,
and I work.’”—John Ker, D.D.

All the workers shall be rewardee, “ Bach shall find that he has a share in the completed
results, where the labours of all are represented. What does it matter in which stage of the great
process our co-operation has been enlisted? Every man that has had a part in the building skall
have a share in the glory. What does it matter whether we have been set to dig out the foundation,
working amongst mud and wet, or have laid the lowermost courses, which are all covered up and
forgotten, or happen to have been amongst those who bring forth the head-stone with shoutings? We
are all builders all the same. The main thing is that we have some work there. Never mind
whereabouts it is. Never mind whether it be visible or no. Never mind whether your name is
associated with it. You may never see the issues of your toils. If you can see them they will
generally not be worth looking at, We work for eternity. We may well wait for the scaffolding
to be taken away. Then we shall find that preparatory work is all represented in the final issue ;
even as the first film of alluvium, deposited in its delta by some mighty stream, is the real
foundation for the last, which, long ages after, rise above the surface and bear waving corn and
the homes of men.’’——.A/erander Maclaren, D.D.


A Suaexstive Caurcu Recorp.


and effort which a great emergency
demands and is calculated to bring
about. All rivalries forgotten in the
great aim—to again rebuild Jerusalem.

VII. The diversity of gifts which
a great emergency calls into requisi-
tion.


I. The potency of personal infiu-
ence. Nehemiah created a spirit of
enthusiasm which set all this train of
exertion in motion.

II The force of example. The
priests took the lead in the common
labour.

III. Advantages of systematic or-
ganization. Each volunteer made re-
sponsible for some limited portion of
work,

IV. The gigantic results achievable
by individual action. Like coral in
sects ab work, the multitude of builders
each did his part of the whole.


Illustrations :—


“No life is waste in the great Worker’s han
The gem too poor to polish in itself
{s ground to brighten others,”"—P, J. Baily.


“Do your work, and I shall kuow you. Do
your work, and you shall reinforce yourself.”—
Emerson.

“The body is not one member, but many”


V. The diversity of disposition
revealed by a great emergency. 1.
Kathusiastie work. 2. Refusal to put
the neck to the yoke.

VL The consentaneity of purpose


(1 Cor. xii, 4—27).

“Clouds when full pour down, and the presses
overflow, and the aromatical trees sweat out
‘their precious and sovereign oils; and every
learned scribe must bring out his treasure for
the Church’s behoof and benefit.” —John Trapp


CHAP, III]





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 15


PrresTHoop.


ii. 1. Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brethren the priests, and they
builded the sheep gate; they sanctified it, and set up the doors of it; even unto
the tower of Meah they sanctified it, unto the tower of Hananeel.


IntRopuction. — Priest and king
amongst the most terrible words in


language. War, oppression, rapine have
come at their call. 1. Elevation is
dangerous. Separateness from sympa-


thies and ways of common men a mis-
fortune. Men easily enslave those whom
they see to be lower than themselves,
2. Privilege and responsibility are
co-extensive. Shepherd feeds and guards
flock. King lives for subjects. Priest
must think, speak, and act for his fel-
lows. Noblesse oblige. What is true
priesthood ?

I. A true priest identifies himself
with men. Institution and consecration


(Exod. xxviii, xxix.). Interpretation
(Heb.).

1. Called from amongst men (Heb.
V4).


2. Offers gifts and sacrifices (v. 1).

3. Compassionates weakness and ig-
norance (v. 2).

4. Comes between men and God. (a)
‘lo present intercessions. (b) To reveal
God’s will.

A priesthood is necessary. “You
tell me, my sceptical friend, that religion
is the contrivance of the priest. How
came the priest into being? What gave
him his power?”—Channing. [See illus-
tration below, “ Christian worship.”

Priest’s dress, robes, &c. stand for a
NEEDED and SUPPOSED sanctity. If not
sacred, all the worse for the priest.
Must come to his work from a higher
ground. Of the people, but above the


people. More thoughtful, not less
saintly. Manxoop first, PRIESTHOOD
afterwards.


II. A true priest identifies thought
with life. The wall-building was Ne-
hemiah’s THoveHT. Eliashib and his
brothers helped to make it REALITY.

Priest makes God’s thoughts man’s
life. “Be ye holy” (Lev. xi. 44; 1 Pet.


i. 15), God’s thought. How to become
holy, priest’s life-work. A sinless and
sorrowless world, God’s thought. How
to approximate to this a priest’s work.
Obedience to Divine laws, God’s pur-
pose ; enunciations of these and incite-
ments to keep them, priest’s work.

1. Harmonizes ideai and actual.

2. Harmonizes thought and practice.

3. Harmonizes inclination and con-
science,

III. A true priest identifies the
lower with the higher, the common
with the sacred, earth with heaven.
Priests “sanctified the wall;” built
near the temple. God’s house and city
wall both sacrep. Sanctity is relative
or real. The temple; the temple utensils.
Churches (e.g. Corintn) with unholy
members in them are sanctified or holy
relatively. Only individual believers
really sanctified. Broad distinctions
between sacred and secular not well.
Sabbath sacred ; make all days. God’s
house is sacred ; 80 is yourown. Bible
sacred ; read nothing impure.


Tilustrations :—Christian worship, ‘‘ There
have been those who have sought to disparage
worship by representing it as an arbitrary,
unnatural service, a human contrivance, an in-
vention for selfish ends. I will meet the objec-
tion by a few remarks drawn from history,
There have been, indeed, periods of history in
which the influence of the religious principle
seems to have been overwhelmed; but in this it
agrees with other great principles of our nature,
which in certain stages of the race disappear.
There are certain conditions of society in which
the desire of knowledge seems almost extinct
among men, and they abandon themselves for
centuries to brutish ignorance. There are com-
munities in which the natural desire of reachin
a better lot gives not a sign of its existence, ead
society remains stationary for ages, There are
some in which even the parental affection is so
far dead that the new-born child is cast into the
stream or exposed to the storm. So the religious
principle is in some periods hardly to be dis
cerned; but it is never lost. No principle is
more universally manifested. In the darkest


16


ages there are some recognitions of a superior
Power. Man feels that there is a Being above
himself, and he clothes that Being in what to
his rude conceptions is great and venerable. In
countries where architecture was unknown men
. chose the solemn wood or the monntain-top for
worship ; and when this art appeared its monu-
ments were temples to God. Before the inven-


tion of letters hymns were composed to the»


Divinity, and music, we have reason to think,
was the offspring of religion. Music in its
infancy was the breathing of man’s fears, wants,
hopes, thanks, praises to an unseen power. You
tell me, my sceptical friend, that religion is the
contrivance of the priest. How came the priest


into being? What gave him his power? Why
was it that the ancient legislator professed to
receive his laws from the gods? e fact is a


striking one, that the earliest guides and leaders
of the human race looked to the heavens for
security and strength to earthly institutions, that
they were compelled to speak to men in a higher
name than man’s. Religion was an earlier bond
and a deeper foundation of society than govern-
ment, It was the root of civilization. It has
founded the mightiest empires; and yet men
question whether religion be an element, a prin-
ciple of human nature !

“In the earliest ages, before the dawn of science,
man recognized an immediate interference of the
Divinity in whatever powerfully struck his
senses. . . . . Every unusual event was a
mizacle, a prodigy, a promise of good or a
menace of evil from heaven. The
heavens, the earth, the plant, the human frame,
now that they are explored by science, speak of
God as they never did before. His handwriting
is brought out where former ages saw but a
blank. . . . . The profoundest of all human
wants is the want of God. Mind, spirit must
tend to its source. It cannot find happiness but
in the perfect Mind, the infinite Spirit. Worship
has survived all revolutions. Corrupted, dis-
honoured, opposed, it yet lives. It is immortal
as its object, immortal as the soul from which it
ascends.”’—W. E. Channing, D.D.

The origin of the Christian clergy. ‘ Amongst
the gifts which our blessed Lord gave to mankind
during his life on earth, the Christian ministry
as we now possess it was not one of them. The
twelve apostles whom he chose had no successors
like them. ‘The seventy disciples also, who went
forth at the Lord’s command to preach the
gospel, they, too, were soon buried in their
graves, but no order of the same kind, or of the
game number, came in their stead.

‘“‘Yet there was another sense in which the
Christian ministry was the gift of their Divine
Master, and it was that which St. Paul so well
expresses ; ‘When he ascended up on high he
gave gifts unto men. And he gave some, apostles ;
and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and
some, pastors and teachers,’ Now what was it
thet was meant by this statement—this very


 e. @ «©


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMTAH.
'





pointed statement—thet it was only after hie
ascension, after his withdrawal from earth, that
he gave those gifts to men, and amorgst those

ifts were the varions offices, of which the twe

st named contained the germ of all the future
elergy of Christendom? What was toeant was
surely this, that not in his earthly life, not in
his direct communication with man, not as a
lak of the original manifestation of Christianity,

ut as the result of the complex influences which
were showered down to the earth after its Founder
had left, as part of the vast machinery of Christian
civilization, created by the spirit of Christ for
filling up the void of his absence, were the
various gifts and professions of Christian forms,
and amongst these were the great vocation, the
sacred profession of the Christian miniatry, Look
at the gradual growth of the Christian ministry,
In no single instance did the order of clergy now
resemble what it was in the first century or even
the second, ‘The deacons of every existing
Church were very different from the seven deacons
of the apostolic age. The presbyters of every
Church were either in themselves or in their
relations to their brethren very different to the
presbyters of the first or second century. Take
the bishops; in many important respects they
differed essentially from those who bore that title
seventeen hundred years ago. ‘They all varied
in each age and country, according to the varieties
of the age and country; according to the civil
constitutions under which they lived; according
to the geographical area; according to the
climates and customs of east, west, north, and
south; in regard to their election, whether by
breathing, by popular election, by internal elec-
tion, by ministerial election, by ordination, by
sacred relics, by the elevation of hands, by the
imposition of hands ; spheres more or less limited,
a humble country village, a vast town population,
or a province as large as a kingdom, These
variations were not a condemnation, but a justi-
fication rather, of their existence. They showed
that the order of the Christian clergy, instead of
remaining a stiff and useless relic of the past,
had grown with the growth and varied with the
variations of Christian society, This, therefore,
was at once the Divine and the human origin
of the Christian ministry; Divine, because it
belonged to and formed an important link in the
inevitable growth of all Christian communities,
of Christian aspirations, and of Christian sym-
pathies ; human, because it arose out of and was
subject to the necessities and vicissitudes of
human passions and human infirmities, and in se
far as it was of a permanent and Divine character,
having a pledge of an immortal existence so long
as Christian society exists; in so far as it was of
human character, needing to accommodate itself
to the want of each successive age, and needin,
the support, the sympathy, and the favour of a.
the other elements of social intercourse by whish
it was surrounded,” —Dean Stanley,


OHAP. II1.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. |





Mrnister1aL ADAPTABILITY.


es 3


I. The priests sharing the interests
and toils of common manhood. A
minister's power lies not in that in
which he differs from others, but in that
in which he is like them — “ brother-
hood.” He shares their weaknesses. He
knows headache and heartache, weari-
ness and worry, trouble and temptation ;
and just in proportion as he is a man
will his ministry be sometimes powerful
and sometimes powerless. At times he
will wish himself in the most distant
seat in the Church; at other times
speech will be like the upliftings of
angels, and the declaration of the gospel
as admission into the paradise of God.
A white tie, a black coat, and conven-
tional manners do not make a minister ;
let him come and say, “ Brethren, I am
as ye are.”

II. The priests an example to the
people. The high priest and his sub-
ordinates were the first to build. Then
common people tied on their aprons and
took trowel in hand.

There must be leaders; then there
will be followers. Simon Peter said,
“T go a fishing.” The rest say unto
him, “We also go with thee” (John
xxi). The rank and file will ride into
any valley of death if the officers say,
“Comrades, come on.” When he “ put-


Then Eliashib the high priest rose up, &c.


teth forth his own sheep he goeth before
them” (John x. 4).

III. Sacredness of work depends
not on its nature, but on its purpose
and spirit. ‘‘ They sanctified ” a common
wall, They were toiling for hearth and
home, for the city of their fathers and
the temple of their God. Our work in
the world not important; the spirit in
which we do it the main consideration.
A mother who represents Christ to her
children, who becomes to them their
idea of what God must be, is as sacredly
engaged as some woman of genius whose
fame fills a hemisphere. The blood and
bones of the man who digs out the
foundation are as necessary as the
architect’s skill. In building Solomon’s
temple the noise and dust of cutting and
polishing the stones were confined to the
quarry ; in the temple all was calm.

In this world of striving and unattain-
ment, of sin and sorrow, we do not see
the plan, That is in the mind of the
great Architect. Out of confusion he
will educe order. ‘ Whatsoever thy
hand findeth to do, do it” (Eccles, ix.
10).

Illustration :—“ Man, it is not ae works, which
are all mortal, infinitely little, and the greatest
no greater than the least, but only the spirit thou


workest in, that can have worth or continuance.”
—Carlyle.


System anp Detain tn Work.


iii. 2,3. And next unto Eliashib builded the men of Jericho.


uilded Zaceur the son of Imri.


And next to them


But the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah


build, who also laid the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, the locks


thereof, and the bars thereof.


* We live not to ourselves, our work is life;
In bright and ceaseless labour as a star
Which shineth unto all worlds but itself.”’


Then life is 4 VOCATION.


“T beseech you that ye walk worthy of the vocation
wherewith ye are called” (Ephes. iv. 1).


“Your calling” (Ephes, iv. 4). “ Let


every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called” (1 Cor. vii. 20). In
modern phrase, a man’s trade or profession is his calling. This gives work


dignity. Labourer,


ter, mason, sailor, surgeon, preacher, schoolmaster.


carpen
newspaper editor, thou art called, A hand not thine own placed thee where thou


78 MOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. [OHAP. IL








art. Every man’s work should have a Pentecost. Manual labour is honourable.
It must be redeemed from a spurious disregard. Indolence is degrading; dis-
honesty is ruinous; honest toil need fear no shame.

“ None of us liveth to himself” (Rom. xiv. 7). Then life is a mmyistry. This
redeems it from selfishness. “My servants” (John xviii. 36). ‘Let a man so
account of us as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God”
(1 Cor. iv. 1). Not Paul, Peter, and Apollos only. Judgment-day decisions turn
on this—“ Inasmuch as ye have done,” or, “ Inasmuch as ye did not to the brethren”
(Matt. xxv.). Ban or blessing each man carries in himself. Influence is conscious,
direct, and intentional ; then it is occasional, and often fails. Influence is uncon-
scious, indirect, and streams on, like light from the heavens; then it is constant
and all-pervasive. Life is more solemn than death. A man’s daily work is not
only religious, it is his religion. There he fights and conquers, or fights and falls.
Well for him if he

‘be up and doing,
With a heart for any fate ;
Btill achieving, still pursuing,
Learn to labour and to wait.”

On the work of life let Nehemiah and his noble band teach us somewhat.

I. A great work can only be planned by a great mind. Many saw the
desolations of the city ; some wept over them. Nehemiah only had a vocation and
talents to “build the old wastes and repair the desolations of many generations ”
(Isa. lxi. 4). An equality is impossible. In any circle of twelve there will be a
Peter to lead. These are Kings by Divine right. The laureate’s wreath is only
green on the brows of him who utters nothing base. Nehemiahs have comprehen-
_ sive minds, like some insects that put out “feelers” on all sides. Insight is a
dangerous gift, hence granted only to the elect ones. Nehemiah rebuilds Jerusalem ;
Augustine governs a period ; Wesley organizes a society ; Shakespeare Shakespear-
izes a language :—they are “ born to command.”

II. A great work can only be carried out by division of labour. Nehemiah’s
organizing brain needed the hands of the men of Jericho. Farmer requires plough-
man, horsekeeper, diggers, and delvers. Architect, clerk of works, mason, carpenter,
stone-cutter, hod-man. Writer, an amanuensis, a printer, binder, bookseller. How —
long it would take one man to make a pin; by dividing the work they are counted
by millions. Miner, sailor, soldier hazard their lives for the general good. One
goes abroad, another stays at home ; this man works with the hand, that with the
brain; the husband rules without, the wife rules within ; all obeying the same
law, the needs be that into the world’s mill each one casts some corn.

III. A great work can only be accomplished by attention to details. “ Bars
and locks.” Gates and doors without bars and locks useless. ‘There must be
detail in every great work. It is an element of effectiveness which no reach of
plan, no enthusiasin of purpose, can dispense with. Thus, if a man conceives the
idea of becoming eminent in learning, but cannot toil through the million of little
drudgeries necessary to carry him on, his learning will be soon told. Or, if a man
undertakes to become rich, but despises the small and gradual advances by which
wealth is ordinarily accumulated, his expectations will, of course, be the sum of
his riches. Accurate and careful detail, the minding of common occasions and
small things, combined with general scope and vigour, is the secret of all the
efficiency and success in the world.”— Bushnell. 1. Young man carving out his
fortunes. ‘“ By little and little.” “Take care of the pence,” &c. ‘rifling
delinquencies ; white lies are the unlocked gates througn which “seven spirits
worse” than these enter. Regard to minor courtesies, use of spare moments,
buying up opportunities, lead on to honour always, to fortune sometimes. 2.
Church work. Sunday schools, mission bands, tract distributors, missionary
collectors are needed. Churchwardens, sidesmen, deacona, stewards, let each fill


OHAP. 111. ] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAR., 79





his place and attend to the duty specially allotted him. Hast ‘thou a contracted
sphere? Thou mayest fill it better. Is thy work humble? It is not of necessity
mean,
“Forth in thy name, O Lord, I go,

My daily labour to pursue;

Thee, only thee, resolved to know

In all I think, or speak, or do.”


IV. A great work brings out special adaptations. The men of Jericho built
wall, But the fish gate with its locks and bars did the sons of Hassenaah

uild.

The disciples of Christ. Provhecy-reading Philip finds prophecy-reading
Nathaniel (John i. 4351). Pete: speaks and acts impetuously, and dies courage-
ously (John xxi.). John, with a piercing insight, writes the angelic Gospel, and
waits to see and war against rising error (John xxi.; Epistles of John; Revela-
tion).

Does the hero mould the age, or the age mould the hero? Partly both.

In the Church “ every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this manner,
and another after that” (1 Cor. vii. 7). The eloquent Apollos expounds the
Scriptures ; the deft-handed Dorcas clothes the naked ; the man of wealth sustains
the charities ; the strong minister to weakness; the wise enlighten the ignorant.
“There is a different colour of beauty in different stones that are all of them
precious. One man may be burnishing to the sparkle of the diamond, while
another is deepening to the glow of the ruby. For this reason there are such
different temperaments in Christian character and varying circumstances in Chris-
tian life, that the foundations of the wall of the city may be garnished with all
manser of precious stones. Each Christian has his own place and lustre in that
temple, and therefore there is no ground to disparage our neighbour, and none to
despair of ourselves, if we are both in the hand of Christ.” Ker,

V. A great work must have regard to practical utility. The fish gate as
necessary as the repairing of temple wall. Began at the temple, but did not stop
there. What is it fori to be asked of every man’s work. Does it begin and
end in itself. True work should brighten somebody’s dark life, cast out the
stones from the rugged road along which some brother’s stumbling feet must go,
expel some one of the legion of demons that possess men.

VI. A great work must be inspired by a lofty purpose. Nehemiah and his
fellows were rebuilding the city of David (ver. 15). Milton chose ‘ Paradise Lost,’
and aimed to justify the ways of God to men. The painters find the sufferings of
Christ an inexhaustible subject. A great religious reformer desired to spread
holiness throughout the land. Man, art thou moved by a lofty motive inspired by
God’s good Spirit to take unto thee thy office in the world and Church #

VII. A great work must look on to the future. I¢ must have in it the
element of permanence. They were rebuilding the chosen city—the city of the
future, as they fondly hoped.

Conciusion.—In heaven “they have no rest day nor night” (Rev. iv. 8).
Two worlds, but only one law. Here from grace to grace, there from glory to
glory. Here “faithful in that which is least” (Luke xvi. 10), there “ruler over
many things” (Matt. xxv. 23). The first word is, Be faithful ; and the second, Be
faithful ; and the third, Be faithful.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


Verse 3. “1f a man would stand on figures and allegories, this gate may well signify Christ, who
made his apostles and preachers fishers of men, who by him brought and daily bring them into this
spiritual Jerusalem; for he is only the door whereby all must enter into the Lord’s city. These
men, like good builders, leave nothing undone that might fortify that gate; for they set on not only
the doors, but also bolts and locks, So must God’s Church be made strong by laws, discipline, and


80 HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. [oHaP. m2.








authority, that ravening lions and filthy swine rush not in and disquiet or devour God’s people; and
the wholesome doctrine must be confirmed with strong arguments and reasons against false
teachers, ””—Pitkington.

Working for the unknown future. “ An old tattered volume found among his father’s books,
Bunny’s ‘ Resolutions,’ aroused Richard Baxter to concern; and Sibb’s ‘ Bruised Reed’ led him te
the Saviour. From Baxter’s pen proceeded ‘The Call to the Unconverted,’ which, in addition te
its most extensive circulation elsewhere, was given by a beg<sar at the door where Philip Doddridge
lived. It was the voice of God to the youthful reader, who became the author of ‘The Rise and
Progress of Religion in the Soul’—a book which gave the first impression to William Wilberforce.
He became the author of ‘ A Practical View of Christianity,’ which was blessed to the conversion of
Leigh Richmond, a successful minister, and author of ‘The Dairyman’s Daughter’ and ‘ Young
Cottager,’ little works that have had many seals in souls won to God, The ‘ Practical View’ was
also instrumental in the saving change of Dr. Chalmers, whose works are world-wide, and whose
labours were so eminently owned for the revival of religion in the ministry and people of Scotland.”
—Dr, Steel.


RrvaL C1LasszEs.


iii. 5. And next unto them the Tekoites repavred ; but their nobles put not their
necks to the work of their Lord.


The rivalry of classes in all history. 1. Use of this rivalry. The mutual
suspicion and watchfulness of classes serves to put all on their best behaviour ;
one is as a goad to the other for exertion in industry and excellence. 2. Abuse of
this rivalry. All the hatreds and bigotries and wars of mankind.

I. Rival classes. 1. A noble peasantry. ‘The Tekoites.” (1) Simplicity.
Lowly life is favourable to simplicity of aim and endeavour. Among the poor you
find the most faithful servants ; among the poor the Church finds her most diligent
workers. Men who have been grinding at the tread-mill of hard labour all the
week are the men who work the wheels of Christian service on a Sunday. Among
the ‘‘better people” of religious communions “the labourers are few.” (2)
Devotion. Steady adherence to great principles is more often found amongst the
poor. There is something in the saying about ignorance being the mother of
devotion. Not in the cynical sense. But those who see only the hard realities of
life are often capable of deep attachment to friends and to God and to a great
cause, while the dilettante “feels no interest” in anything human or Divine.
Enthusiasm is a popular quality. 2. An effeminate aristocracy. (1) Selfishness.
Not confined to one class, but in its hardest manifestations to be found among the
gay and worldly, who have multiplied their natural wants by a thousand artificial
needs. To expect a burst of noble-hearted, generous enthusiasm from the frozen
circle of worldly society is to look for grapes on thorns and figs from the thistle.
stalk. [Of course in all this contrast we are only keeping in mind the really
worldly circle, and are not forgetting the fact that in Jerusalem’s rebuilding and
in the reconstructions of English history the noble have nobly stood to the front. |
(2) Pride. Beautiful is the way in which modern society is returning in many
respects to humility in regard to practical things. A Prince of Wales sends his
boys to the routine of a sailor apprenticeship ; a Duke of Argyle sends his son to
a house of business; a gentleman’s son doffs his neat coat and stoops down,
hammer in hand, in the engineer’s yard. In this there is a more hopeful sight
than when the proud nobles of Jerusalem disdained the rough work which the
God-inspired Nehemiah designed.

II. Rival views. 1. Popular desire for reform. (1) Politically. Trace
course of national history. Instance the case of the Corn Laws, with its mechanic
poet Ebenezer Elliott. (2) Ecclesiastically. Nothing is so fatal to a Church as for
the people to let Church government alone and leave it to professional men. The
sheep are for the sake of the shepherd in farming ; but Christ’s shepherds are for
the sake of the flock. In our Lord’s time “the common people heard him gladiy’
(Mark xii. 37) ; but it was asked as an incredible thing, “ Have any of the rulers


OHAP, IIT.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 81


<a ee
or of the Pharisees believed on him?” (John vii. 48). The Reformation was a
reply to the people, who groaned by reason of the afflictions wherewith the task-
masters afflicted them. (3) Theologically. The popular sentiment is the curb of
theological opinion. What men, as men, think and feel are the governor-halls of
the great logic-engine of systematic theology. The mother’s heart in the theologian
adjusts his harsh, cold views of God. 2. Reform cried down by the nobles. The
doctrine of standing still is only preached by the few who find the place comfort-
able; the “noble discontent” which spurs on the needy and oppressed is the
animation of all reform in State or Church.


“ Tl fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates, and men decay ;
Princes and lords may flourish or may fade ;
A breath can make them, as a breath has made;
But a bold peasantry, their country’s pride,
When once destroyed, can never be supplied.”
Goldsmith's ‘ Deserted Village.’


Application. 1. Beware of luxurious aspirations. Think not merely of the
pleasures of greatness, but of its enervating perils. 2. Remember that the duties of
individual manhood and the sources of happiness in the individual character remain
the same under all changes of costume and title. A man is never more or less than
a servant of the great Taskmaster, and a fellow-labcurer with others in the ruined
city of MansouL 3. Beware of indolence and pride, and do thy task Sor God and


man.
ILLUSTRATIONS.


A life of idleness, And who art thou that braggest of thy life of idleness ; complacently
showest thy bright gilt equipages, sumptuous cushions, St amare for folding of the hands to mere
sleep? Looking up, looking | Beaks around, behind, or before, discernest thou, if it be not in May-
fair alone, any tdle hero, saint, god, or even devil? Nota vestige of one, In the heavers, in the
earth, in the waters under the earth is none like unto thee. hou art an original figure in this
creation, a denizen in Mayfair alone, in this extraordinary century or half-century alone! One
monster there is in the world—the idle man.” —Carly/e, , ‘ :

Rich and poor, “Let not the rich misread the signs of the times, or mistake their brethren ;
they have less and less respect for titles and riches, for vestments and ecclesiastical pretensions: but
they have a real respect for superior knowledge and superior goodness; they listen like children to
those whom they believe to know a subject better than themselves, Let those who know it say
whether there is not something inexpressibly touching and even humbling in the large, hearty,
manly English reverence and love which the working-men show towards those who love and serve
them truly, and save them from themselves and from doing wrong. Alas! we have been very ready
to preach submission. For three long centuries we have taught submission to the powers that be, as
if that were the only text in Scripture bearing on the relations between the ruler and the ruled,
Rarely have we dared to demand of the powers that be justice; of the wealthy man and the titled
duties. We have produced folios of slavish flattery upon the Divine right of power. Shame on us !
we have not denounced the wrongs done to weakness, and yet for one text in the Bible which
requires submission and patience from the poor, ie will find a hundred which denounce the vices of
the rich ; in the writings of the noble old Jewish prophets, that, and almost that only ; that in the
Old Testament, with a deep roll of words that sound like Sinai thunders ; and that in the New
‘Testament in words less impassioned and more calmly terrible from the apostles and their Master;
and woe to us, in the great day of God, if we have been the sycophants of the rich instead of the
redressers of the poor man’s wrongs.”—F, W, Robertson, ; j

What the poor have done, “Thomas Cranfield, a tailor, established & prayer-meeting among the
brickmakers in Kingsland, which was held every morning at five o'clock. He established schools at
Rotherhithe, Tottenham, Kent Street, Southwark, the Mint, Garden Row, St. George’s, Rosemary
Lane, and Kennington. John Pounds, a Portsmouth cobbler, was the founder of ragged schools.
Harlan Page consecrated letter-toriting to the highest end—the salvation of souls.”—Dr, Steel.

Handicraft. “It is not a mean thing to labour with the hand. There is a dignity in every duty,
and especially in this. Since the Carpenter of Nazareth toiled at his bench and made tools for
Galilean peasants, labour has hada dignity, and artisans an elevation, and workshops a consecration.
After this, the lantern-making of King Aropus, the ship-building of the Ozar Peter, or the wateh
making of the Emperor Charles V., could do little te exalt it,”—Dr. Steel.

@


82


A ON a





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.





(Omar. Ik





“ Let not ambition mock their useful toil,
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure;
Nor grandeur hear with a disdainful smile
The short and simple annals of the poor.”


Gray's Elegy.


Tar Onn Gate.


iid 6.


Memory needs to be awakened. For-
getting may be impossible, but we can-
not always recollect.


Tlustration :— I am convinced that the dread
book of account which the Scriptures speak of is,
in fact, the mind itself of each individual, Of
this at least I feel assured, that there is no such
thing as forgetting possible to the mind; a
thousand accidents may and will interpose a
veil between our present consciousness and the
secret inscriptions on the mind ; accidents of the
same sort will also rend away this veil; but
alike, whether veiled or unveiled, the inscription
remains for ever, just as the stars seem to with-
draw before the common light of day, whereas,
in fact, we all know that it is the light which is
drawn over them as a veil, and that they are
waiting to be revealed when the obscuring day-
light shall have withdrawn,” — De Quincey.


I. The old gate brought up memories
of the PAST. The past is valuable.
God does not work instantaneously.
Instance the seasons. Jewish law that
the land should rest (Lev. xxv.). Our
fathers made the roads, built the
churches, founded schools, started com-
merce. Art, science, mechanical inven-
tions are improvements. We build upon
the past as on a bed of rock. “ Custom


Moreover the old gate repaired Jehoiada, &c.


passes into law from precedent to pre
cedent.” Civilization does not grow up
in a night, like Jonah’s gourd. Right
and wrong are as old as the creation.

Iilustration :—“ Every master has found his
materials collected. What an economy of power!
and what a compensation for the shortness of
lif! Allis done to his hand, The world has
brought him thus far on his way. The human
race has gone out before him, sunk the hills,
filled the hollows, and bridged the rivers. Men,
nations, poets, artisans, women, all have worked
for him, and he enters into their labours.”—
Emerson.

II. The old gate was an incentive
to exertion in the PRESENT. Our
fathers’ gate. Patriotism fired their
blood.

III. The old gate was a dumb
prophet of the FUTURE. The builders
were gone, but their work abode. So
would theirs. So will ours.

Application. 1. Work, for Heaven so
wills. 2. Work, under the recollection
that you are treading in the steps of the
true nobility of the past. 3. Work, be-
cause the day is passing. 4. Work, and
etermity shall reward you.


THe Broap WALL.


tii. 8. The broad wail.


Around Jerusalem in her days of
splendour there was a broad wall, her
defence and glory. Jerusalem is a type
of the Church.

A broad wall suggests SEPARATION,
SECURITY, and ENJOYMENT.

I. Separation. 1. Hvery Christian
should be more scrupulous than other men
in his dealings. 2. By his pleasures the
Christian should be distinguished. 3. In
everything that affects the Christian; e. g.
home business; going in and coming out;
staying a night in a friend’s house. 4.


Most conspicuously in the spirit of his
mind,

The wall should be very proaD. 1.
There should be a broad distinction
between you Christians and unconverted
people. 2. Our Lord Christ had a
broad wall between him and the ungodly.
3. A broad wall is abundantly good for
yourselves. 4. You will do more good t9
the world thereby.

II. Safety. 1. The Christian is sur-
rounded by the broad wall of God's
power, 2. By the broad wall of God's


OHAP, I. ]


love. 3. By the broad wall of God's law
and justice. 4. By the broad wall of
God's immutability. 5. By the broad wall
of God’s electing love. 6. By the broad
wall of God’s redeeming love. 7. The work
of the Holy Spirit is a broad wall. 8.
Every doctrine of grace is a broad wall.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NAHEMIA. 83





9. The honour of Christ is a broad wall.

III. Enjoyment. On the walls ot
Nineveh and Babylon men drove,
walked, chatted at sunset. Broad walla
at York. 1. Rest. 2. Communion.
3. Prospects and outlook. The god:
less !— Spurgeon, abridged.


Famity Zmau.


ii, 12.


Women building stone walls. Per-
haps they were heiresses or rich widows,
who undertook to defray the expense
of a portion of the wall. Perhaps!
perhaps not. In crises women have
donned armour—why may not these
have wrought at the wall? When
men have shown the white feather,
women have turned bold. ‘ Women’s
rights.” The story of women’s wrongs
has not yet been told. Woman’s in-
fluence a practical, ever-pressing ques-
tion.

I. Notable women. 1. Within the
circle of Biblical story. ‘In redemp-
tion’s history we have Sarah’s faith,
Ruth’s devotion, Abigail’s humility,
Shunammite’s hospitality, Esther’s pa-
triotism, penitence of her anointing
Christ, Canaanite’s importunity, Mary
of Bethany’s love, Lydia’s confidence,
Dorcas’ benevolence, Phcebe’s kindness,
Priscilla’s courage, Tryphena and Try-
phosa’s diligence, and Persis’ affection—
honoured of God.”—Van Doren.

Most books of the Bible canonize
women. Genesis, Eve, Rebekah, Rachel.
Exodus, Miriam. Judges, Jephthah’s
daughter and the poetess Deborah.
Solomon sings the praises of a good
woman ; and the Gospels of Jesus contain
Marys, Martha, and the unnamed who
ministered to him. The Epistles teach
women their duties, and reveal the
depth of their influence and the width
of their power.

2. In history. The mother of the
Gracchi; the mother of the Wesleys;
the mother of St. Augustine; the
mother of George Washington. Mar-
tyred women; songstresses. Elizabeth
Fry, who never forgot the mother in


Shallum repaired—he and his daughters.


the philanthropist. Madame Guyon.
whose faith she thus expressed :

“To me remains nor place nor time,—

My country is in every clime ;

I can be calm and free from care

On any shore, since God is there.”
Countess of Huntingdon; Lady Mary
Wortley Montagu; and time would
fail us to tell of “the nameless,” whose
records are on high.

II. Woman's influence. 1. For evil.
Jezebel ; Solomon’s wives ; devotees of
fashion ; women who spend their all at
the gin-palace, and leave their children
in dirt and destitution. A man must
toil without; a woman must guard
within. 2, For good.

Application. 1. Influence %3 not
measurable by its circumference. “May
be no larger than a house, no wider than
a workshop. 2. Every mother should
be a missionary to her children. She
may save her husband (1 Cor. vii. 16).
She has her children before teachers and
ministers can influence them. To them
she should represent God’s care and
Christ’s mind, not by her words only,
but in her life. Nothing can supersede
the religion of the hearth.

Illustrations ;—-*‘ One third more females
church-members than males,”— Edwards.

“The commonest and the least remembered of
all great-little heroisms is the heroism of an
average mother. Ah, when I think of that last
broad fact I gather hope again for poor
humanity, and this dark world looks bright,
this diseased world looks wholesome to me once
more, because, whatever it is or is not full of, it is
at least full of mothers,”—Charles Kingsley.


“Be good, sweet maid, and' let who can be
clever ;
Dolovely things, not dream them, all day long
And so make life, death, and that vast for ever
One grand, sweet song.”’
Charles Kingsley to his nieos.


HOMILETIV COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[OHaP. It





Hien Megn at Lowny Tasks.


fii, 13—19.


The fusion of classes. Ordinarily
society builds a broad wall betwixt class
and class. But in the presence of a
common danger, or under the inspira-
tion of a common resolve, men break
down all barriers, and stand side by
side. Too often ‘‘the kings of the earth
and the rulers take counsel together
against the cause of the Lord” (Ps. il.) ;
but the word of God standeth for ever.
“Kings shall see and arise, princes also
shall worship. . . . Kings shall be thy
nursing fathers, and queens thy nursing
mothers ” es xlix:).

I. The differences and unities of the
race. We make too much of distine-
tions; eg. rich and poor, learned and
ignorant, toilers and thinkers, manufac-
turers and hands, up-town and down-
town, West-end and East-end. One
God created us, one cross redeems us,
one Spirit inspires us ; the same book
teaches us, similar demons tempt us,
similar sorrows confront us, a common
grave awaits us, the same heaven is
open to us. Society rings itself round.
The aristocracy of birth says of the aris-
tocracy of money, “Only a merchant.”
Better that emperor’s wife who often
said to her husband, “ Remember what
you were, and what you now are, and
then you will be always thankful to
God.”

II. Historical illustrations. The
Romans called rulers “fathers of their
country.” The Greeks styled them
“ shepherds of their people.” Most revo-
lutions in Church and State have ranged
high and low side by side. Paul was
aided by “ Erastus, the city chamberlain”
(Rom. xvi. 23), “and they of Caesar's
household” (Phil. iv. 22). The Re-
formation was indebted to the Elector
Frederick. Lord Cobham’s castle af-
forded shelter to Lollard preachers.
England owes a debt of gratitude to
“ Albert the Good” for his devotion to
science and art, and whatever would
ameliorate the people’s conditions,


The valley gate repaired Hanun, &c.


III. Practical purport. 1. With
honour comes responsibility. May I not
do what I will with mineown? No;
thou art only a steward. Hast thou
wealth? The poor shall never cease out
of the land ; they are lawful claimants
on thy sympathy. Hast thou wisdom?
Teach the ignorant, guide the perplexed.
Art thou elevated? Stoop to those who
are low, lift down a helping hand to
those who have stumbled and fallen.

‘“‘ Heaven does with us as we with torches do;

Not light them for themselves; for if our virtues

Did not go forth of us, ’twere all alike


As if we had them not. Spirits are not finely
touch’d

But to fine issues ; nor Nature never lends

The smallest scruple of her excellence,

But, like a thrifty goddess, she determines

Herself the glory of a creditor—

Both thanks and use.”


2. Be not deceived by appearances,
Not what a man hath, but what s man
is, determines his worth. It is the cause,
not the suffering, makes the martyr.
The motive decides the action. Pierce
beneath the surface, plant thy foot on
the rock of reality. 3. Gather courage
and patience from the thought of the
future. Look unto Jesus, who for the
joy that was set before him endured, &c.
(Heb. xii. 2). Remember Moses (Heb.
xi. 26). Whose names were in the foun-
dations of the city of vision? Not the
leaders only (Peter, James, and John),
but “the twelve apostles” (Rev. xxi. AN
“The Holy Ghost hath registered unto
us the names and diligence of the
builders of this earthly city Jerusalem,
by the pen of his faithful servant Nehe-
miah, for our comfort; and to teach us
that much more he hath registered the
names of the builders of the spiritual
Jerusalem in the book of life, where no
devil can scrape them out, but shall be
the dear children of the Lord God,
defended by him from all ill. Let us
therefore cast away this slothful sluggish-
ness wherein we have lain so long, rise
up quickly, work lustily, spit on our


OHAP. III] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. BE





hands and take good hold, that we fall house than to live the easiest life that
not back again from our Lord God. It the world can give.”—-Pilkington.
is more honour to be a workman in this


Davip tHE National Hero.
iii, 15. The city of David. iii. 16. The sepulchres of David.


They were working on sacred ground. Hence their enthusiasm. Effort must
have inspiration. This city David conquered ; he beautified it; here he reigned ;
here he sleeps. They did not stay to shape such thoughts as these. They were
instincts. Patriotism lives not by bread only, but by sentiments, by every word
that proceedeth out of the mouth of good king and wise teacher in the ages past.
Theme, Daviv’s LIFE-worK the basis of national hero-worship.

I. Preparing for a throne. “He that is born is listed; life is war.” ‘The
foundation of David’s character is a firm, unshaken trust in Jehovah, a bright and
most spiritual view of creation and the government of the world, a sensitive awe
of the Holy One of Israel, a striving ever to be true to him, and a strong desire
to return after errors and transgressions.” —Ewald. Ps, lxxviii. 70 tells how
David was God’s elected king. The prophet Samuel shaped the character of the
period. His work was long developing. Takes months for common seed to grow.
Samuel cast seed into God’s world-field ; David and Solomon put in the sickle and
reaped. What of that? Sower and reaper equally indispensable (John iv.
36—38). David had a creative faculty—he was the poet of song. We have
“the book of the chronicles” of King David ; we have, too, the books of psalms,
hymns, and spiritual songs he sang and wrote. Saul’s rarau Day not the day of
the battle of Gilboa, but the day of the battle with Amalek; not the day when
Saul died, but the day when Saul disobeyed, led to David’s election and anointing.
The story is told in the Book of Samuel (I. xvi.). Eliab is rejected. The height of
a man’s stature and the beauty of his countenance shall not henceforth be signs in-
fallible that God has endowed that man with kingly qualities. God-eiected shall
be God-endowed. That day David anointed, but God’s hand had been upon him
in the pastures of Bethlehem. There he thought out, if he did not write, Ps, xxiii.
There he discerned a presence which beset him behind and before (Ps. cxxxix.).
To him the heavens declared God. How perfect God’s law was, and what God’s
fear meant, he was being taught by the order of God in nature; how guilty and
feeble he was, he was being taught by the voice of God in his own conscience
(Ps. xix.). David’s God was a living, ever-present, helping God (Ps. xxvii.).
From the sheepfolds David came to encounter Goliath. From the sheepfolds he was
ewmmoned to be harp-player to King Saul. He was anointed, but not enthroned.
He must learn to wait. God never extemporizes. ‘Soon ripe, soon rot.” Moses
eighty years of preparation. Elijah a full-grown man before he appears in sacred
history. Jesus Christ eighteen quiet, uneventful years after seeing the holy city,
and afterwards forty days in wilderness. The harvest of God in human souls ripens
slowly. As David thought of his great work, and felt himself a child with a giant’s
task, he said, “O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who
hast set thy glory above the heavens. Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings
hast thou ordained strength” (Ps. viii.). He recollected the storms he had witnessed
as he watched the sheep when he wrote Ps. xxix. But after the longest night the
morning breaks. David was called to the court as harp-player to King Sal.
Saul’s servants described David to the king as “a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite,
that is cunning in playing” (1 Sam. xvi. 18). David was an artist, as we now
speak. In Eastern lands shepherd-life and songs have always gone together. The
elected king is harpist to the enthroned king. How slowly David ascended the
steps to the throne. We, who look back, see some reasons why ascent was gradual.
In the pastures he had time to thenk; in the court he had oppertunity to observe,


86 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. [OHAP. III.
@





David’s harp quieted Saul’s excitement (1 Sam. xvi. 23) ; David’s harp helped him
to compose his Psalms for the song-life of the Church universal. His chequered life
fore-shadowed in Saul’s court. To-day the king’s bosom friend, to-morrow the butt
for the king’s javelin. The love of David and Jonathan the one bright and beauti-
ful thing. Purer and more constant friendship was never known. With his
escape from Saul’s court began—

Ii. The work and warfare of David’s life. 1. Asa freebooter. 2. As king.
1, Ag a freebooter, Cave of Adullam (1 Sam. xxii. 1, 2). Wild wilderness life.
Hunted by Saul (1 Sam. xxiii, 25—29; xxiv. 8—22). Saul’s hope failed him
in the hour of need, and he fell on Gilboa’s fatal field. 2. David was king. First
over Judah, then over all Israel. David’s reign was one of creation; Solomon's
was one of consolidation. A brilliant reign of a great and good man; but, like
all things human, not without fault (2 Sam. xi.; 1 Chron. xxi.). The fifty-first
Psalm the cry of this kingly penitent. But did “ the free spirit” ever come back
again as in the earlier days? However, Carlyle’s words are both wise and chari-
table. ‘ Who is called ‘the man after God’s own heart’? David, the Hebrew
king, had fallen into sins enough—blackest crimes—there was no want of sin;
and therefore the unbelievers sneer, and ask, ‘Is this your man according to God’s
heart?’ The sneer, I must say, seems to me but a shallow one. What are faults,
what are the outward details of a life, if the inner secret of it, the remorse, tempt-
ations, the often-baffled, never-ended struggle of it be forgotten? David’s life and
history, as written for us in those Psalms of his, I consider to be the truest emblem
ever given us of a man’s moral progress and warfare here below. All earnest souls
will ever discern in it the faithful struggle of an earnest human soul towards what
is good and best.. Struggle often baffled, sore baffied, driven as into entire wreck ;
yet a struggle never ended, ever with tears, repentance, true, unconquerable purpose
begun anew.” He died full of age and honours, and his sepulchre Nehemiah looked
upon with reverence, Peter the apostle spoke of with exultation, and to it the feet
of countless thousands of weary pilgrims have been directed.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


A trwe man.— “ Every true man is a cause, a country, and an age; requires infinite spaces and
numbers and time fully to accomplish his design; and posterity seem to follow his steps as a train
of clients, A man Cesar is born, and for ages after we have a Roman empire. An institution is
the lengthened shadow of one man: as monachism of the hermit Antony; the Reformation, of
Luther; Quakerism, of Fox ; Methodism, of Wesley; Abolition, of Clarkson. Scipio, Milton cailed
‘the height of Rome;’ and all history resolves itself very easily into the biography of a few
stout and earnest persons,’ — Emerson,

Sepulehres,— Next to the wells of Syria, the most authentic memorials of past times are the
sepulchres, and partly for the same reason. The tombs of ancient Greece and Rome lined the
public roads with funeral pillars or towers. Grassy graves and marble monuments fill the chureh-
yards and churches of Christian Europe. But the sepulchres of Palestine were like the habit-
ations of ita earliest inhabitants, hewn out of the living limestone rock, and therefore in-
destructible as the rock itself. In this respect they resembled, though on a smaller scale, the
tombs of Upper Bayt 3 and as there the traveller of the nineteenth century is confronted with
the names bad records of men who lived thousands of years ago, so also in the excavations of the
valleys which surround or approach Shiloh, S*echem, Bethel, and Jerusalem he knows that he
sees what were the last resting-places of the guserations contemporary with Joshua, Samuel, and
David. And the example of Egypt shows that the identification of these sepulchres even with their
individual occupants is not so improbable as might be otherwise supposed. If the graves of
Rameses and Osirei can still be ascertained, there is nothing improbable in the thought that the
tombs of the patriarchs may have survived the lapse of twenty or thirty centuries. ‘The rocky cave
on Mount Hor must be at least the spot believed by Josephus to mark the grave of Aaron. ‘The
tomb of Joseph must be near one of the two monuments pointed out as such in the opening of the
vale of Shechem. The sepulchre which is called the tomb of Rachel exactly agrees with the
spot described as ‘a little way’ from Bethlehem. The tomb of David, which was known with
certainty at the time of the Christian era, may perhaps still be found under the mosque which bears
his name in the modern Zion. Above all, the cave of Machpelah is concealed, beyond all reasonable
doubt, by the mosque at Hebron. But, with these exceptions, we must rest satisfied rather with the
general than the partioular interest of the tombs of Palestine.” Stanley's ‘ Sinai and Palestine,’


CHAP. UL]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


87





t


Tae Woerxmen’s I)ay-Boox.
iii 20—-32. After him Baruch the son of Zabbai, &e.


x. Avery man is carefully credited
with his own tasks and achievements.
Rulers, priests, slaves (Nethinims), men,
women (ver. 12). Nobody is forgotten.
The humblest not passed by in con-
temptuous silence.

II. Special honour is accorded
special work. Levites and priests
began at the temple, but did not stop
there (vers. 22,28). Zabbai, who earnest-
ly repaired a second piece, having com-
pleted his task did not fold his arms,
but went with open eyes and willing
hands to seek another task. The gold-
smiths and the temple traders came
down to the wall not to inspect, but
labour (vers. 31, 32).

III. Regard is had to the men of
practical wisdom. Benjamin and others
built over against their house (vers, 23, 28,
29). Meshullam built over against his
chamber (ver. 30). Perhaps he was a


ADDENDA TO
ToPOGRAPHY OF THE


Tux only description of the ancient
eity of Jerusalem which exists in the


Bible so extensive in form as to enable


to follow it as a topographical de-
cereal is that found in the Book of


lodger. (a) They were men of practical
sense. Work was near at hand; why go
abroad? ‘There are many Christians
who can never find a place large enough
to do their duty. Some Churches seem
to feel that if anything is to be done
some great operation must be started.
They cannot even repent without con-
cert and a general ado.” — Bushnell.
(6) These men found here an inspiration
Jor effort—the defence of home. With
practical enthusiasm, Hananiah and
others built ‘‘ another piece.” All can-
not keep the same pace, but all can
build,

Let us hear the conclusion of the
whole matter. ‘The Son of man shall
come... and then he shall reward
every man according to his works”
(Matt. xvi. 27). “ Be thou faithful unto
death, and I will give thee a crown of
life” (Rev. ii. 10).


CHAPTER III.
Boox or NEHEMIAH.


Nehemiah, and although n is hardly
sufficiently distinct to enable us to settle





all the moot points, it contains such
valuable indications that it is well
worthy of the most attentive examina


HOMILETI: C COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[CHAP IIT





tion. The easiest way to arrive at any
correct conclusion regarding it, is to take
first the description of the dedication of
the walls in ch. xii. (31—40), and,
drawing such a diagram as this, we
easily get at the main features of the
old wall at least.

The order of procession was that the
princes of Judah went up upon the wall
at some point as nearly as possible
opposite to the temple, and one half of
them turning to the right went towards
the dung gate, “and at the fountain
gate, which was over against them” (or,
in other words, on the opposite or temple
side of the city), “went up by the stairs
of the city of David at the going up of
the wall, above the house of David,
even unto the water gate eastward.” The
water gate, therefore, was one of the
southern gates of the temple, and the
stairs that led up to it are here identified
with those of the city of David, and
consequently with Zion.

The other party turned to the left, or
northwards, and passed from beyond the
tower of the furnaces even “unto the
broad wall,” and passing the gate of
Ephraim, the old gate, the fish gate, the
towers of Hananeel and Meah, to the
sheep gate, “stood still in the prison
gate,” as the other party had in the
water gate. “So stood the two com-
panies of them that gave thanks in the
house of God.”

If from this we turn to the third
chapter, which gives a description of the
repairs of the wall, we have no difficulty
in identifying all the places mentioned
in the first sixteen verses with those
enumerated in the twelfth chapter. The
repairs began at the sheep gate on the
north side, and in immediate proximity
with the temple, and all the places
named in the dedication are again named,
but in the reverse order, till we come to
the tower of the furnaces, which, if not
identical with the tower in the citadel,
so often mistaken for the Hippicus, must
at least have stood very near to it.
Mention is then made, but now in the
direct order of the dedication, of “the
valley gate,” the “dung gate,” the
“ fountain gate ;” and lastly, the “ stairs
that yo down from the city of David.”


Between these last two places we find
mention made of the pool of Siloak and
the king’s garden, so that we have long
passed the so-called sepulchre of David
on the modern Zion, and are in the
immediate proximity of the temple;


’ most probably in the valley between the


city of David and the city of Jerusalem.
What follows is most important (ver.
16): “After him repaired Nehemiah
the son of Azbuk, the ruler of the half
part of Bethzur, unto the place over
against the sepulchres of David, and to
the pool that was made, and unto the
house of the mighty.” This passage,
when taken with the context, seems in
itaelf quite sufficient to set at rest the
question of the position of the city of
David, of the sepulchres of the kings,
and consequently of Zion, all which
ceuld not be mentioned after Siloah if
placed where modern tradition has
located them.

If the chapter ended with the six-
teenth verse there would be no difficulty
in determining the sites mentioned above,
but unfortunately we have, according
to this view, retraced our steps very
nearly to the point from which we
started, and have got through only half
the places enumerated. Two hypotheses
may be suggested to account for this
difficulty : the one, that there was then,
as in the time of Josephus, a second
wall, and that the remaining names
refer to it; the other, that the first six-
teen verses refer to the walls of Jerusa-
lem, and the remaining sixteen to those
of the city of David. An attentive
consideration of the subject renders it
almost certain that the latter is the true
explanation of the case. In the enumer-
ation of the places repaired, in the last
part of the chapter, we have two which
we know, from the description of the
dedication, really belonged to the temple.
The prison court (iii. 25), which must
have been connected with the prison
gate, and, as shown by the order of the
dedication, to have been on the north
side of the temple, is here also connected
with the kiny’s high house; all this
clearly referri'.g, as shown above, to the
castle of David, which originally occu-
pied the site of the Turris Antonia, We


CHAP. III.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.





have on the opposite side the “ water
gate,” mentioned in the next verse to
Ophel, and consequently as clearly
identified with the southern gate of the
temple. We have also the horse gate,
that by which Athaliah was taken out
of the temple (2 Kings xi. 16 ; 2 Chron.
xxiii. 15), which Josephus states led to
the Kedron, and which is here mentioned
as connected with the priests’ houses,
and probably, therefore, a part of the
temple. Mention is also made of the
house of Eliashib the high priest, and
of the eastern gate, probably that of the
temple. In fact, no place is mentioned
in these last verses which cannot be
more or less directly identified with the
localities on the temple hill, and not one
which can be located in Jerusalem. The
whole of the city of David, however,
was so completely rebuilt and remodelled
by Herod that there are no local indi-
cations to assist us in ascertaining


whether the order of description of the
places mentioned after ver. 16 proceeds
along the northern face, and round by
Ophel, and up behind the temple back
to the sheep gate; or whether, after
crossing the causeway to the armoury
and prison, it does not proceed along
the western face of the temple to Ophel
in the south, and then, along the eastern
face, back along the northern, to the
place from which the description started.
The latter seems the more probable
hypothesis, but the determination of the
point is not of very great consequence.
It is enough to know that the description
in the first sixteen verses applies to
Jerusalem, and in the last sixteen to
Zion, or the city of David, as this is
sufficient to explain almost all the diff-
cult passages in the Old Testament
which refer to the ancient topography
of the city.— Fergusson in Sinith’s ‘ Bible
Dictionary.’


Mopren J&RUsALEM.


The first sight of Jerusalem as seen
from the south, the first moment when
from the ridge of hills which divide the
valley of Rephaim from the valley of
Bethlehem one sees the white line
crowning the horizon, and knows that it
is Jerusalem, is a moment never to be
forgotten. But there is nothing in the
view itself to excite your feelings. Nor
is there even when the Mount of Olives
heaves in sight, nor when “the horses’
hoofs ring on the stones of the streets of
Jerusalem.” Nor is there in the sur-
rounding outline of hills on the distant
horizon. Nebi-Samuel is indeed a high
and distinguished point, and Ramah and
Gibeah both stand out, but they and
ali the rest in some degree partake of
that featureless character which belongs
to all the hills of Judea.

In one respect no one need quarrel with
this first aspect of Jerusalem. So far as
localities have any concern with religion,
it is well to feel that Christianity, even
in its first origin, was nurtured in no
romantic scenery ; that the discourses in
the walks to and from Bethany, and in
earlier times the pealme and prophecies


of David and Isaiah, were not, as in
Greece, the offspring of oracular cliffs
and grottos, but the simple outpouring
of souls which thought of nothing but
God and man. It is not, however, in-
consistent with this view to add, that
though not romantic, though at first
sight bare and prosaic in the extreme,
there does at last grow up about Jeru-
salem a beauty as poetical as that which
hangs over Athens and Rome. First,
it is in the highest degree venerable.
Modern houses it is true there are; the
interiors of the streets are modern. Tha
old city itself (and I felt a constant
satisfaction in the thought) lies buried
twenty, thirty, forty feet below these
wretched shopsand receptacles for Anglo
Oriental conveniences. But still, as yor
look at it from any commanding point,
within or without the walls, you are
struck by the gray ruinous masses of
which it is made up; it is the ruin, in
fact, of the old Jerusalem on which you
look-——the stones, the columns ; the very
soil on which you tread is the accumu-
lation of nearly three thousand years,
And as with the city, so it is with the


90


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[oHAP. HO


ne


view of the country round it. There is,
as } have said, no beauty of form or
outline, but there is nothing to disturb
the thought of the hoary age of those
ancient hills; and the interest of the
past, even to the hardest mind, will in


spite of themselves invest them with a -


glory of their own.

The view of the Moab mountains is
constantly intermingled with the views
of Jerusalem itself. From almost every
point there was visible that long purple
wall, rising out of its unfathomable
depths, to us even more interesting
than to the old Jebusites or Israelites,
They knew the tribes who lived there;
they had once dwelt there themselves.
But to the inhabitants of modern Jeru-
salem, of whom comparatively few have
ever visited the other side of the Jordan,
it is the end of the world ; and to them,
to us, these mountains have almost the
effect of a distant view of the sea; the
hues constantly changing, this or that
precipitous rock coming out clear in the
morning or evening shade—there the
form of what may possibly be Pisgah,
dimly shadowed out by surrounding
valleys; here the point of Kerak, the
capital of Moab and fortress of the
Crusaders—and then at times all wrapt
in deep haze, the mountains overhanging
the valley of the shadow of death, and
all the more striking from their contrast
with the gray or green colours of the
hills, and streets, and walls through
which you catch the glimpse of them.
Next there are the ravines of the city.
This is its great charm. The Dean of
St. Paul’s once observed to me that he
vhought Luxembourg must be like Jeru-
salern in situation. And so to a certain
extent it is. I do not mean that the
ravines of Jerusalem are so deep and
abrupt as those of Luxembourg, but
there is the same contrast between the
balduess of the level approach, the walls
of the city appearing on the edge of the
table-land, and then the two great
ravines of Hinnom and Jehoshaphat
opening between you and the city; and
again the two lesser ravines, rival
claimants to the name of Tyropcon,
intersecting the city itself. In this re-
svect 1 never saw a town so situated,


for here it is not merely the fortress,
but the city, which is thus surrounded
and entangled with natural fosses , and
this when seen from the walls, especially
from the walls on the northern side,
and when combined with the light and
shade of evening, gives the whole place
a variety of colour and of level fully
sufficient to relieve the monotony which
else it would share with other Eastern
cities. And, thirdly, it must be remem-
bered that there is one approach which
is really grand, namely, from Jericho
and Bethany. It is the approach by
which the army of Pompey advanced,—
the first European army that ever con-
fronted it,—and it is the approach of the
triumphal entry of the gospels. Probably
the first impression of every one coming
from the north, the west, and the south
may be summed up in the simple ex-
pression used by one of the modern
travellers, “I am strangely affected, but
greatly disappointed.” But no human
being could be disappointed who first
saw Jerusalem from the east. The
beauty consists in this, that you then
burst at once on the two great ravines
which cut the city off from the surround.
ing table-land, and that then only you
have a complete view of the mosque of
Omar. The other buildings of Jerusalem
which emerge from the mass of gray
ruin and white stones are few, and for
the most part unattractive. The white
mass of the Armenian convent on the
south, and the dome of the mosque of
David ; the castle, with Herod’s tower
on the south-west corner; the two
domes, black and white, which surmount
the Holy Sepulchre and the Basilica of
Constantine ; the green corn-field which
covers the ruins of the palace of the
Knights of St. John; the long yellow
mass of the Latin convent at the north-
west corner, and the gray tower of the
mosque of the Dervishes on the tra-
ditional site of the palace of Herod
Antipas, in the north-east corner; these
are the only objécts which break from
various points the sloping or level lines
of the city of the Crusaders and Saracens.
But none of these is enough to elevate
its character. What, however, these
fail to effect is in one instant effected


OHAP. Iv.]


by a glance at the mosque of Omar.
From whatever point that graceful dome
with its beautiful precinct emerges to
view, it at once dignifies the whole city.
And when from Olivet, or from the
governor’s house, or from the north-east
wall, you see the platform on which it
stands, it is a scene hardly to be sur-
passed. A dome graceful as that of St.
Peter’s, though of course on a far smaller
scale, rising from an elaborately-finished
circular edifice; this edifice raised on a
square marble platform rising on the
highest ridge of a green slope, which
descends from it north, south, and east
to the walls surrounding the whole
enclosure; platform and enclosure di-
versified by lesser domes and fountains,
by cypresses, and olives, and planes,
and palms; the whole as secluded and
quiet as the interior of some college or
cathedral garden, only enlivened by the
white figures of veiled women stealing


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 91


like ghosts up and dowh the green slope,
or by the turbaned heads bowed low in
the various niches for prayer,—this is
the mosque of Omar, the Haram es-
Sherif, “the noble sanctuary;” the
second most sacred spot in the Ma-
hometan world—that is, the next after
Mecca; the second most beautiful
mosque—that is, the next after Cor-
dova. I, for one, felt almost disposed
to console inyself for the exclusion by
the additional interest which the sight
derives from the knowledge that no
European foot, except by stealth or
favour, had ever trodden within these
precincts since the Crusaders were driven
out, and that their deep seclusion was as
real as it appeared. It needed no sight
of the daggers of the black Dervishes
who stand at the gates to tell you that
the mosque was undisturbed and ip
violably sacred.— Dean Stanley.





CHAPTER IV.


Expiaxatory Norzs.] Vers. 1—6 are in the Hebrew vers, 33—38 of chap. iii. 1. Sanballat]
See on chap. ii. 10. That we builded the wall] That we were building it (participle expresses
not merely resolve, but act of commencing). Mocked] Afraid to use violence, 2. Before his
brethren] i. ¢. Tobiah and his brethren in council. The army of Samaria] It is likely that
Sanballat hud brought an armed force in sight of the city. What do these feeble Jews? &c.]
Keil makes two pairs of questions. Will they leave the building of the fortified walls to them-
selves? 7. 6, Do they think they are able with their poor resources to carry out this great work?
Will they sacrifice? ¢.¢. bring sacrifices to obtain God’s miraculous assistanceP Sanballat casts
scorn upon the Jews’ ability and upon their faith in God. Second pair of questions: Will they
finish the work to-day, directly? Have they even the requisite materials? Will they revive? &c.
The building-stone of Jerusalem was limestone, which, softened by fire, loses its vitality. 8. Tobiah]
See on chap. ii. 10. If a fox go up] Foxes in great numbers infested the ruined and desolate
places in the mount and city of Zion (Lam. v. 18). 4, Hear, 0 our God] An imprecatory prayer
anticipating God’s justice. 5, Cover not] «. ¢. forgive not (Ps. Ixxxv. 2). 6. All the wall was joined
together unto the half thereof] Completed to the half of the intended height. 7. The Arabians]
Those in Samaria. See on chap. ii. 19. The Ammonites} Incited by their countryman Tobiah.
Ashdodites] Inhabitants of Ashdod, a Philistine city destroyed three hundred years ufter. That
the walls of Jerusalem were made up| Lit. that a bandage was applied to the walls of Jerusalem.
A Biblical expression (2 Chron. xxiv. 13; Jer. viii, 22; xxx. 17; xxxiii. 6). 9. We] Nehemiah
and the superintendents of the work. 10. Judah said, &c.] The labour is beyond our power, 12.
Ten times] i. ¢. frequently. 18. Therefore set I, &c.] Nehemiah placed detachments pee armed
at such points of the walls as had attained the least height, and were most exposed to attack.— Crosby.
14. And I looked, &c.] These words can only mean, When I saw the people thus placed with their
weapons, I went to them, and said to the nobles, &c., “ Be not afraid of them” (the enemies) : ‘remember
the Lord, the great and the terrible,” who will fight for you against your enemies (Deut. iii. 22 ;
xx. 4; xxxi. 6), and fight ye for your brethren, your sons and daughters, wives and houses, whom
the enemies would destroy.— Kei. 15, God had brought their counsel to nought] Although by
natural means, 1€. My servants] Nehemiah’s personal retinue, Habergeon] Old English for
“goat of mail.” The rulers, &c.] %.¢. each was behind his own people who were employed on the


92 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. (OHAP. Iv.


work, to encourage them in their labour, and in case of attack to lead them against the enemy. 17.
They which builded, &c.] The burden-bearers worked with one hand and held a weapon with the
other. 18. The builders, &c.] Needing both hands for their work, had swords girt to their sides,
22. Lodge within Jerusalem] Those that had their homes in the villages and distant towns should
now continue night and day in the city, 28, Saving that every one put them off for behest
A puzzling sentence, Conjectures and emendations have been resorted to. The idea of the whole
verse is clear—unceasing watchfulness,


HOMILETICAL CONTENTS OF CHAPTER IV.


Ver. 1—28, An Undaunted Heart. Ver. 4, 5, Imprecations.

» 1—28, Active Hostility frustrated. == 11, The Craft and Cruelty of the
»  1—28. The Soldier Builders. Church’s Adversaries,

»,  1—8, The Laws of Opposition. 3 11. Satanic Subtlety.

es 1, Anger. » 15. A Pause in the Work. ;

= 2. The Day of Small Things, », 17, 18. The Work and Warfare of Lif


o 4—9. Praying and Working.


An Unpavntep Heart,
Chap. iv.


Tus childlike piety and the white integrity of Nehemiah not more marked than his
heroic undauntedness. Recapitulate his progress from the first resolution :—silent
cherishing of his purpose ; maturing of his plans ; organized schemes and allotments
of labour; vigilant precautions; cheery “Fear not!” ‘Be not ye afraid” (ver.
14). A model to the Christian workman and soldier.

I. Reasons for fear. 1. Ridicule (vers. 1—3). ‘“Mocked.” Jesus Christ
mocked and spitted on. And it is enough for the disciple that he be as his Master
(John ix. 28). Foolishness” of apostolic preaching. Greek philosophy and
Roman civilization, scorn and reviling of the Nazarenes. Religion not the only
department in which the right has been reviled by the wrong. Science has always
begun to climb upward amid the laughter of circling ignorance. Most great
principles have had a point in their history when they were believed in by one and
ridiculed by all the rest. Instance—George Stephenson and the railway enterprise.
(a) Don’t be ashamed of your Christian faith; let Sanballat and Tobiah laugh
themselves hoarse ; follow thou after life! (6) Don’t be ashamed of your Christian
work. It is easy for a keen witling to pull out his cigar and point to a humorous
element in your little tasks. ‘ What do these feeble Christians? Will they revive
the stony hearts of fallen men, and rear a dwelling-place for truth and peace amid
the rubbish of the world?” They will, God being their helper! 2. Guile. In
chap. vi. are accounts of strategy adopted by Nehemiah’s opponents where it required
a wise head to keep the heart firm. Plausible pretences of enemies and feigned
friendship were of no avail to bend the iron purpose of the Jewish liberator.
Nehemiah’s enemies bade him join them for a conference in order to trap and
hinder him (vi. 2, 3); they warned him to beware of his reputation (vi. 6);
they urged him to “show the white feather” (vi. 11). ‘Satan is transformed into
an angel of light” (2 Cor. xi. 14). (a) How many plausible excuses a treacherous
heart and a worldly friend can coin for postponement of religious decision and
devotion. (b) How many reasons might not every one find in the world’s opinion
for leaving his Christian work undone. “Be ye wise as serpents” (Matt. x. 16).
3. Force (iv. 8). The conspiring rabble around the rebuilders of Jerusalem but an
emblem of the circling forces which press upon the servant of God. Our way is
like the way of Paul’s mariners, against “contrary winds.” Our progress is
disputed “inch by inch.” (1) The oppositions to the culture of the Christian
character are manifold. A false heart within; a sin-maximed world without;
break-downs and discouragements in experience. (2) So of the oppositions to
Christian work. You must rebuild your fallen fellows into society not because
you are invited to do it, but in face of oppositions; nay, “the very stones will ery


OHAP. Iv.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 93
SSS
out ;” the people you want to lift up will try in this to throw you down, or at
least will “conspire to hinder.” “ But consider him!” (Heb. xii. 3).

II. Motives for courage. 1. The power of God (iv. 14, 15). The courage of
Moses based on the “Certainly I will be with thee” of God (Exod. iii. 12).
David’s fearlessness rested on the “ Some trust in chariots, and some in horses : but
we will remember the name of the Lord our God” (Ps, xx. 7). The three Hebrew
children were firm because “our God is able to deliver us” (Dan, iii. 17). The
undaunted apostles were fixed on the same centre (Acts iv. 29, 30).


“And were this world all devils o’er,
And watching to devour us,
We lay it not to heart so sore;
Not they can overpower ua,
And let the prince of ill
Look grim as e’er he will,
He harms us not a whit.
For why? His doom is writ;
word shall quickly slay him.”


3. The strength of right. “Thrice is he armed who hath his quarrel just.”


“ My strength is as the strength of ten,
Because my heart is pure,”


“Great is truth, and shall prevail.” All such maxims of the ancient and the
modern world bear the popular faith that riauT is miauT. ‘The world passeth
away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever”
(1 John ii. 17). To have “this testimony, that we please God,” is to be clad in
triple steel.

Til. Expedients of the imperilled. 1. Prayer (vers. 4,9). “ We made our
prayer unto God.” “T cried unto the Lord” is the Christian’s explanation of
wany a hairbreadth eseape. 2. Vigilance (ver.9). “ We set a watch against them
day and night.”





“ Hear the victors that o’ercame,
Still they mark each warrior’s way,
All with one sweet voice exclaim,

Watch and pray.”


3. Hope (ver. 20). “ Owr God shall fight for us.” Giant Despair is a sad foe of
Christian souls. The stroke of despondency stuns us like a blow on the head ;
therefore “take the helmet of hope” (1 Thess. v. 8). 4. Perseverance (ver. 21
and ver. 23). ian

Application. In Christian life and in Christian work take as a motto Poly-
earp’s words to his pupil— Stand thou firm as an anvil that is beaten,’


‘© Write on thy heart this holy principle,
Nobly resolve and do as thou resolvest,
Thou shalt not die till victory crown thy brows.”


Active Hostinrry Frustrarep.
Chap. iv.


Various forms of active hostility frustrated through the combined vigilance and
prayer of the Church. ‘The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces ”
(1 Sam. ii, 10). Whenever a door of usefulness is opened there are many
adversaries (1 Cor. xvi. 9). Stand firm and fearless, “in nothing terrified by
your adversaries” (Phil. i, 28). “Be not ye afraid of them: remember the
Lord!” (a) Remember the Lord God, who has been described as Alleye. Let
this encourage. He knows all the details of individual lives. Let this warn. He


94 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. [ CHAP. Iv.





®
scrutinizes all thoughts and deeds. (6) Remember the Lord Christ. “ All his
adversaries were ashamed ” (Luke xiii. 17).

I. Hostility to the work of God assuming phases of growing intensity. i.
Bage. Sanballat had laughed (ii. 19); now he is enraged (ver. 1). 2. Mockery
(ver. 2). Tobiah was only Sanballat’s echo (ver. 3). 3. Conspiracy (vers. 7,8). This
opposition a sign of success; an honour paid to truth. When Dr. Johnson wrote
anything that was not vilified he said, “I did not strike hard enough, or the blow
would rebound.” “Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you!”
(Luke vi. 26).

II. The Church fortifying herself against expected assault. 1. By appealing
to God (vers. 4,5). ‘‘ Hight times in this book Nehemiah interjectsa prayer. They
are prayers while writing, not while acting. The grounds of this prayer are—(1)
God’s people are despised ; (2) excited to fear by the enemy.”—Crosby. “ Prayer
is a sure anchor in all storms; and they never perish that humbly fly unto it and
cleave unto it. Prayer is a salve for all sores; yea, it healeth not only body and
soul, but even hard stony walls. No kind of earthly physic that God hath made
is good for all kind of folk at all times, and all kind of diseases ; but this heavenly
physic of prayer, in wealth and woe, in plenty and poverty, in prosperity and
adversity, in sickness and in health, in war and peace, in youth and age, in life
and death, in mirth and sadness, yea, in all things and times, in the beginning,
midst, and ending, prayer is most necessary and comfortable. Happy is that man
that diligently useth it at all times."—Pukington. 2. By redoubled activity in
prosecuting the work. “So built we the wall,” &c. (ver. 6). “ Prayer did not
slacken the energy of the Jews. They experienced the redoubled zeal and activity
which all true prayer produces. They made their prayer to God, and set a watch
against their foes day and night. All the natural means, whether of mind or
matter, form channels through which God conveys his grace in answer.to prayer.
To stop these channels is to cancel prayer. Prayer was never intended to foster
idleness or diminish responsibility.”—Crosby. 3. By organized vigilance (ver. 9).
4. By defensive preparations (ver. 13). ‘The Lord said unto Moses, Wherefore
eriest thou unto me? speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward”
(Exod. xiv. 15). There is a time to pray and a time to prepare to fight. Let
the farmer sow his seed, and then pray for rain and sunshine. 5. By mutual
encouragement (ver. 14). Workers tire; warriors flee when hope dies. 6. By
self-denying assidutty (vers. 16, 21—23).

ItI. The evil counsels of the Church’s adversaries frust:ated by Divine
interposition. ‘God brought their counsel to nought” (ver. 15). “Our God
shall fight for us.” There are laws; is there not a law-giver? There are agencies ;
point they not to an agent? Will our modern magicians never say, like those of
Egypt (Exod. viii. 19), “This is the finger of God.”

“ Oft in danger, oft in woe,
Onward, Christians, onward go;


Fight the fight, maintain the strife,
Strengthened with the bread of life.


Onward, then, to glory move,

More than conquerors ye shall prove :
Though opposed by many a foe,
Christian soldiers, onward go.”’


Tae Sonpier Buripers


Chap. iv.


Energy, unity, and perseverance (chap. iii.) give way to discouragement within
and conspiracy without.
L Combination of prayer and watchfulness (ver. 9). Prayer without waton-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 88


OHAP. Iv. ]}





fulness is hypocrisy ; watchfulness without prayer is presumption: An old writer,
speaking of men as stewards, urges wise trading. Their wareHouss (2. 6. heart and
memory) must store up precious things—holy affections, grateful remembrances,
celestial preparations. Their worKHoUsE (or their actions), wherein they retail to
others. Their oLOCK-HOUSE (e. g. their speech), which must speak the truth. Their
COUNTING-HOUSE (or conscience), which should be scrupulously kept, or everything
else will fail.

II. Combination of precept and example. Nehemiah “looked, and rose up,
and said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, Be not ye


afraid,” &c. (ver. 14). But he was not content with that. “Wu returned to the


wall” (ver. 15). “ He that sounded the trumpet was by me” (ver. 18).


III. Every builder was also a soldier.


“They which buiided on the wall,


and they that bare burdens, with those that laded, every one with one of his hands


wrought in the work, and with the other hand held a weapon.


For the buclders,


every one had his sword girded by his side, and so builded” (vers. 17, 18).
Iv. A mutual co-operation went hand in hand with personal work and


responsibility.


“ Every one unto his work” (ver. 15).


(Abridged from Rev. J. M. Randali’s ‘ Nehemiah, his Times and Lessons.’)


Tue Laws or Oprosirion.


iv. 3. But it same to pass, &c.


The unconscious working of men’s
minds is a servant of law. There is a
reign of law. Distinguished Christian
thinkers hold that the great scientific
doctrine of evolution “ratifies all that is
highest and holiest in the nature of
man,” and makes out a new “claim to
reverent acceptance of supernatural
truths.” There is a Divine government
of the passions of men. “Surely the
wrath of men shall praise thee,” &.
(Ps. Ixxvi. 10). “The emotions ex-
cited by the passions in our senses are
not free. An angry man is carried be-
yond himself in spite of himself. These
emotions are not proportional. A
timorous man turns as pale at the sight
of a fanciful as of a real danger. These
e.aotions do not obey the orders of our
will. The movement is not a gentle
stream, but a rapid flood.” — Saurin.
Sanballat was angry ; Tobiah was scorn-
ful.

I. Men seek in others what they
find in themselves. The old maxim of
English law. Every man is to be deemed
honest until he is proved to be a rogue ;
the dishonest the reverse. Cowards dis-
believe in bravery. There is a moral
obliquity of vision. The unjust cannot
appreciate justice. Impure men suspect


impurity everywhere. The compact of


the wicked is not binding. Judas and
the priests. ‘I havesinned.” ‘ What
is that to us?” (Matt. xxvii. 4—6).
They cast off Judas when he had served
their purpose, and took back their own
accursed coins. All wrong-doing is
blunder as well as crime. Marvellously
deep and philosophic are the prophet’s
words : ‘“‘ Wherefore do ye spend money
for that which is not bread?” (Isa.
lv. 2).

II. All the branches of opposition
grow out of the great trunk of selfish-
ness. Sanballat the Samaritan and
Tobiah the Ammonite rejoiced in the
laying waste of Jerusalem. Its loss
was their gain. ‘“ Our gain” explains
many facts of history in ancient and
modern times. Selfish gain has entered
temples, disgraced senate houses, tar-
nished otherwise fair reputations. Gain
has been England’s god. Speculation
has been a species of madness. ‘ Look
not every man on his own things, but
every man also on the things of others,”
is a peculiarly Christian injunction.

III. Great work is generally accom-
plished by a committee of one. There
was one Nehemiah against Sanballat,
Tobiah, men of Arabia, &c. (ver. 7); ones
Inuther against Rome, the monks, and
the schoolmen; one Tindal against


96 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.





Bishop Tonstal and Sir Thomas More.
John Evangelist Gossner was a solitary
worker — “ One-in-hand” somebody
styled him. “ It’s quite true,” he said,
laughing, when it came to his ears ;
‘and yet old ‘ One-in-hand’ carries
more passengers than your Four.”
Organize, organize—that is well. But
individuality is lost in the mass.

Application. 1. “We mortal millions
dwell alone.” 2. The way of sorrow
leadeth to the city of God. 3. Whatever
has valwe is bought at a high price.


Illustrations -—The spirit of cynicism. “The
Cynics were a sect of philosophers among the
Greeks, founded by Antisthenes, who, on account
of his snappish, snarling propensities, was fre-
quently called ‘the dog ;’ and probably enough
it may have been on account of this that his
school of philosophy was called the Cynic or Dog
school, He waa stern, proud, and unsympathetic.
He taught that all human pleasure was to be
despised. He was ostentatiously careless as to
the opinions, the feelings, and the esteem of
others. He used to appear in a threadbare
dress, so that Socrates once exclaimed, ‘I see
your pride, Antisthenes, peeping through the
holes in your cloak!’ His temper was morose,
and his language was coarse and indecent. It is
from this old school of philosophy that we derive
the term cynicism; and we commonly apply it
now-a-days to that mood or habit of mind which
looks out upon mankind with cold and bitter
feeling, which finds little or nothing to admire
in human character and action, which systematic-
ally depreciates human motives, which rejoices
to catch men tripping, which sneers where others
reverence, and dissects where others admire, and
is hard where others pity, and suspects where
others praise, Distinguish between cynicism and
satire, No doubt the cynic is often satirical ;
satire is just the kind of weapon that comes
ready to his hand. But the same weapon may


(CHAP. IV.





be wielded by very different hands, and in very
different causes; and satire may often be em-
ployed by men who are anything but cynical,
There is such a thing as genial satire—the light
and even humorous play of irony or sarcasm
around some venial fault, or some peculiar ex-
crescence of character, ‘Then there is also the
satire of moral indignation, which applies the


‘ stinging lash to manifest vices, or pours the vials


of scorn on some detestable meanness, in order
to make the shameless ashamed, or to infuse a
healthy contempt of vice into the souls of those
who are still uncontaminated by it. The old
Hebrew prophets knew how to wield this weapon,
and even in the pages of the New Testament it
finds its fitting place. In fact, all such satire as
this—whether of the genial or the vehement
type—is often used by men who are passionate
admirers of human excellence, and who are not
only warmly attached to individuals, but also
earnest lovers of their race. Whereas it is the
very characteristic of cynicism that it lacks
earnestness, It knows nothing of a noble
scorn, Its satire is neither genial nor vehement.
Even its humour is always sardonic. Its very
bitterness, although intense, is unimpassioned.
It is a kind of acrid gelatine. The fully-deve-
loped cynic prides himself on his indifferentism.
Remorselessly he dissects and analyzes human
character and action; for, like Iago, he ‘is
nothing, if not critical;’ but his criticism has
no useful end in view; he is not seeking to make
others wiser or better, He is scarcely earnest
enough even to care about his success in stingin
and wounding? It is simply his ‘ way’ to ate
faults and to sneer. We find the culmination of
this cynicism in Goethe’s ‘ Mephistopheles; ’ and
indeed the word ‘devil’ itself means ‘accuser’
—the slanderer of God and man.” —Fin/layson.
“ Let us keep our scorn for our own weaknesses,
our blame for our own sins, certain that we shal
ain more instruction, though not amusement,
y hunting out the good which is in anything
than by hunting out the evil.’— Kingsley.
“Sarcasm I now see to be, in general, the
language of the devil; for which reason I have
long since as good as renounced it.” —Carlyle,


ANGER.


iv. 1.


It is not a sin to be angry, but hard
not to sin when we are angry. Anger
is a tender virtue, and such as by reason
of our unskilfulness may be easily
corrupted and made dangerous. He
that in his anger would not sin, must
not be angry at anything but sin. Our
Saviour was angry with Peter, and
angry with the Pharisees for the hard-
ness of their hearts (Matt. xvi. 23; Mark
iii. 5). Moses was even blown up with
holy anger at the people for the golden
salf. “Do not I hate them that hate


Sanballat was wroth, and took great indignation.


thee? I hate them with a perfect
hatred,” saith David; “I count them
mine enemies” (Ps. cxxxix. 21). This
is the anger of zeal, found in Phinchas,
Elijah, Elisha, our Saviour, John ii. 17 ;
and should have been found in Adam
towards his wife, in Eli towards his
sons, in Lot towards his servants (Gen.
xiii. 7). It must have a good rise and a
good end, saith Bucer, else it becomes a
mortal, not a venial, sin, as the Papista
fondly conclude from Matt. v. 23:
“Whosoever is angry with his brother


CHAP. Iv.]


without a cause,” &c. There is a just
cause then of anger; sin, as an offence
to God. And there must be a just
measure observed, that our anger for sin
render us not unfit either to pity the
sinner (as our Saviour in his anger did
the obstinate Pharisees) or to pray for
him (as Moses for those idolaters he
was so enraged at—Exod. xxxii. 31,
32). Anger that is not thus bounded
is but a “momentary madness,” saith
the heathen; it resteth in the bosom of
fools, saith Solomon, whether it be
anger, wrath, or hatred (for into those
three degrees Damascen distinguisheth
it). The one, saith he, hath beginning
and motion, but presently ceaseth; the
other taketh deep hold in the memory ;
the third desisteth not without revenge.
Clichloveus compareth the first to fire in
stubble; the second to fire in iron; the
third to fire that is hid and never
bewrayeth itself, but with the ruin of
the matter wherein it hath caught.
Some are sharp, some are bitter, a third
kind are implacable, saith Aristotle.
The first are the best, that, as children,
are soon angry and as soon pleased
again. “Be ye children in malice”
(1 Cor. xiv. 20). Of Beza, his
colleagues would often say that, like
the dove, he was without a gall. Giles
of Brussels, martyr, when the friars
(sent to reduce him) did any time mis-
call him, he ever held his peace, inso-
much that those blasphemers would say
abroad that he had a dumb devil in
him. Cassianus reports that when a
certain Christian was held captive of
infidels, tormented with divers pains
and ignominious taunts, being demanded
by way of scorn and reproach, “Tell
us what miracle thy Christ hath done?”
he answered, ‘“‘He hath done what you
see, that I am not moved at all the
eruelties and contumelies you cast upon
me.” Christ did “not strive, nor cry,
nor did any man hear his voice in the
streets ;” who, “when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered, he
tnrestened not; but committed himself
to him that judgeth righteously ” (Matt.
xii. 19; 1 Pet. ii 23). So did Moses
when murmured against by Aaron and
Miriam. He was meek, and complained


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


84


not. The less any man strives for him-
self, the more is God his champion.
Anger is a short devil, saith Chrysostom;
the fury of the unclean spirit. ‘‘ Wrath
killeth the foolish man” (Job v. 2),
delivers him to the destroyer, if it rest
in his bosom especially, and lodge a
night with him, which is the second
degree above mentioned.

“ Let not therefore the sun go down
upon your wrath ;” for that is all one as
to give place to the devil, who hereby
entereth the heart and takes possession.
Many there are that suffer the sun not
only to go down upon their anger, but
to run his whole race, yea, many races,
ere they can be reconciled; whereby
their anger becomes inveterate, and turns
into malice, for anger and malice differ
but in age. Now “cursed be this anger,
for it is fierce; and this wrath, for it is
cruel” (Gen. xlix. 7). It is the murder
of the heart (Matt. v. 21 seg.); the
fountain of the murder both of the
tongue and hand. Hence it is said, “‘ He
that hateth his brother is a man-slayer”
(1 John iii. 15). He is so in desire, he
would be so in deed if he durst. There -
is a passion of hatred and there is the
habit of it. The former is a kind of
averseness and rising of the heart against
& man when one sees him, so that he
cannot away with him, nor speak to nor
look courteously or peaceably upon him,
but one’s countenance falls when he sees
him, and he even turns away, and by
his good will would have nothing to do
with him: this is the passion of hatred.
The habit of it is when the heart is so
settled in this alienation and estrange-
ment that it grows to wish and desire
and seek his hurt. This is that third
and worst sort of anger. Are we mortal,
and shall our anger be immortal? To
be revenged is more honourable than to
be reconciled, saith Aristotle. This is
the voice of nature. Thus “the spirit
that is in us lusteth toenvy.” But God
giveth more grace. 1. Cease therefore
trom anger and refrain strife. ‘ Fret
not thyself in any wise to do evil” (Ps.
xxxvii. 8). When thou findest thyselt
ineensed and chafing ripe, presently lay
a necessity of silence upon thyself; as
Ahasuervs walked a while in his garden

Bg


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


(omar. Iv.





ere he would pass ecutence upon Haman.
Another repeated the Greek alphabet ere
he would say or do anything in his
anger. He doth better that repeateth
some grave sentences of Scripture, such
as these: “Be angry, but sin not; be
slow to wrath; avenge not yourselves,
but give place to wrath ; submit to God ;
resist the devil, and he will fly from you.”
This devil of anger, if thus resisted by
Scripture, will surely fly; he cannot bide
by it; especially if we set ourselves to
pray it down, 2. Get thy heart purified
by faith, for faith makes patience. When
the disciples heard that they must for-
give till seventy times seven times in a
day, they prayed, ‘ Lord, increase our
faith” (Luke xvii. 5). The wisdom
from above is first pure, then peaceable
(James iii, 17) Unrepentant David
was cruel to the Ammonites. The devils


are most impure, and therefore most
malicious; Christ, on the other side, most
pure, and therefore most gentle, 3.
Study to be quiet and do tour own
business. Seldom is a patient man
inquisitive, or an inquisitive man patient.
It doth require much study to live
quietly. 4. Consider the deformity, dis-
grace, and danger of anger. Plato and
Seneca have advised the angry man to
look at his face in a glass. Anger
hurteth not great minds. 5. Consider
wisely of God's providence, presence,
patience. Set God before thy passions,
and they will be soon hushed. 6. Add
a constant endeavour to be lowly. Keep
the strict watch of the Lord over your
heart ; pray down your passions. Your
labour will not be in vain.

(From Trapp's ‘Marrow of many
good Authors.’)


Tue Day or Smart Tunas.


iv. 2.


Two great events in the history of the
returned captives from Babylon : build-
ing the second temple ; rebuilding and
fortifying the city. Subject—That God
produces great events by comparatively
feeble means.

I. As it relates to the objects of
personal religion. “What do these
feeble Jews?” Zechariah said, Who hath
despised the day of small things? (iv.
10). We may ask, Who has not? All
do. It is quite to the taste of human
nature in its seareh after that which is
great to overlook that which is small.
The captives did so as well as their
heathen persecutors; they wept when
they saw the foundation (Ezra iii, 12).
Zerubbabel and Zechariah probably did
too. “Not by might!” (Zech. iv.
6). Good men do, both in judging
of their own religion and that of other
people, It is possible to err on the side
of despondency as well as on that of
presumption. We dishonour God as
much by denying the grace we have as
by boasting of the grace we have not.
We ought not to despise it because ¢ ts
day. (a) A day which God originates ;
(8) the day of Christ’s power ; (y) a day


What do these feeble Jews ?


which must advance to its perfection,
and shall never know a night. Though
man despises it, God does not. He sees
the flower in the bud, the pearl in the
shell, the man in the infant, the heir of
glory in the child of grace. He sees not
only what they are, but what they shall
be. Remember that God accomplishes
his greatest designs by apparently slight


and inconsiderable means. (a) In
nature. (b) In providence. (c) In
grace. The birth of an infant child in


the manger at Bethlehem seemed a very
ordinary occurrence, but it was an event
on which the salvation of the world was
made to turn. ‘The cross of Christ is to
them that perish foolishness; to the
saved it is the power of God (1 Cor.
i. 18). The rod of Moses; Gideon’s
lamps, pitchers, and trumpets ; the rams’
horns at Jericho; David’s sling and stone,
worked wonders. Pharaoh’s dreams
were made the means of Joseph’s ad-
vancement. The ark, though small,
saved the heirs of a shipwrecked. word.
Zoar, a little city, saved Lot from the
shower of fire. The mantle of Elijab
divided the waters of Jordan. The
kingdom of heaven is like a grain oa


mustard seed (Matt. xiii. 31, 32). The
stone which the builders rejected was
made the head of the corner. This is
the Lord’s doing ! (Matt. xxi. 42.)

II. That God accomplishes great
events by small means encourages
in all our efforts to promote the good
of others. 1. To the preaching of the
gospel at home and the diffusion of the
gospel abroad. “ We have this treasure
in earthen vessels” (2 Cor. iv. 7). We
are often discouraged. The dispropor-
tion between the means and the end;
the slow progress of the renovating
principle. We would recognize the
presence ana advances of the kingdom of
God. Where is the Lord God of


99


‘ Bes
Elijah ? (2 Kings ii. 14). Where are
the kings for nursing fathers? (Isa.
xlix. 23). Where are the great masters
of science and literature? Where are
the nations born in a day? The con-
federacies of guilt are still powerful, and
the enemies of the truth replete with
confidence. The answer to all this is,
God’s ways are not our ways. That we
can clothe our exertions with a power
not our own. Remember, the most
weak and uninfluential may be made to
effect great things, as Naaman’s little
maid, A mite cast into the treasury of
God is not overlooked. It may produce
ten talents. 2. The parent and Sunday
school teacher.— Anonymous.





Prayina anp Workma.


iv. 4—9.


The man-ward side of prayer.

I. It narrows the conditions of the
strife. Who are Sanballat and Tobiah ?
Men of position, ranging under them
Arabians, Ammonites, and Ashdodites—
a crowd of warriors. Who is Nehe-
miah? A chieftain of a handful of
“feeble Jews.” “ Hear, O our God!”
The cause is thins. “ Let thy work ap-
pear unto thy servants, and thy glory
unto their children. Establish thou
the work of our hands upon us” (Ps.
xc. 16, 17). When, like ‘“ Moses the
man of God,” any man of God discovers
that God’s work and his work are one
and the same thing, the aspect of affairs
is changed. The contest is then spiritual.
[he forces arrayed are light and dark-
ness, truth and error, God and the
devil.


II. It inspires energy. “So built
we the wall,” &. (ver. 6). ‘‘ Neverthe-
less we made,” &c. (ver. 9). Neverthe-


less! The foes were many, powerful,
determined, blocdthirsty. Nevertheless
God was approachable. Work was
possible, pressing, needing earnest minds
and willing hands.

III. It awakens faith. Prayer first,
then work, in the assurance that the
prayer will be answered and the work
successful.


Hear, O our God ; for we are despised, &c.


‘* Patience! have faith, and thy prayer will be

answered,

Look at this delicate plant that lifts its head
from the meadow,

See how its leaves all point to the north as
true as the magnet ;

It is the compass-flower, that the finger of God
has suspended

Here on its fragile stalk, to direct the traveller's
journey

Over the sea-like, pathless, limitless waste of
the desert.

Such in the soul of man is faith.”


Illustrations ;—“ ‘Ora et labora, writes Dn
Wichern in one of his pleasant papers, ‘is
carved on a peasant’s house in the Vierland. “ It
must be French,” said a neighbour's wife, as I
stood looking at the legend; “ but you know it
just means—


With this hand work, and with the other pray,
And God will bless them beth from day to day.”’’


“ Ora et labora is the legend of the Christian’e
faith, and the plan of his life. His fervent
prayer begets honest, manly, unshrinking work ;
hia work, as it is faithful, and it is faithful in
proportion as he realizes it is for God, throws
him back upon prayer. It is true that this con-
nection is regarded with some suspicion, It is
associated with the failure, and worse, of mo-
nastic life. Ora et labora was the monkish
watchword with which men went into the
wilderness, and builded up their lonely cells, and
toiled at their simple gardens, and knelt in
solemn thought of the world behind them,
through long fastings and wakeful nights, But
on their lips it was a profound mistake, They
had cut themselves off from brotherly gympathies
and social duties, from the entire sphere of


H2


100


Christian work, They had thrown themselves
upon the selfishness of lonely hours and solitary
thoughts. Their ora, earnest and well meant at
first, became mechanical and unreal ; their /abora
was a fiction, They had no right to their motto.
And remembering the hollowness and hypocrisy
to which their system brought them, its utter
worthlessness, its world-wide scandal, men have
shrunk with fear from the -truth they misused.
Nox are they alone guilty. Those who by prac-
tice or speech arrogate to prayer the time and
place of ordinary duties are in the same error.
Divorced from the common charities of life,
prayer must become mechanical and untrue. If
it be used to set some apart, on some sacred and
haughty height above the rest and the ordinary
obligations of society, if it only make them more
rigid censors of others, while they themselves are
less kindly, less helpful, less useful, who can
wonder that the world revolts, or that the more
thoughtful and reverent minds are carried to the
other extreme, and boldly say that work is
prayer? Work is no more prayer than prayer


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.
%





‘[oHap. Iv.





is work, although the looseness of the expression
is often forgiven for the deeper truth of the
thought. Work is no more prayer than a walk
in the fields is religious worship. To the
devout man both are devout; to the undevout
man they are nothing. Nay, work without
prayer is as dangerous, ay, and more, than prayer
without work. It is the practical ignoring of
God, of a spiritual world and spiritual laws. It
is the start downwards to the grossest and most
superstitious materialism. It is a clear peril of
our present time. We do not want to be re-
minded of the need and dignity and sacredness of
work ; the whole century is preaching that ; but
we do want to be taught the need and sacred-
ness of prayer, and that it is a force, of which
though the world knows nothiag, yet it estab-
lishes greater than the world’s werks.”’—Steven-
son.
“Prayer is a strong wal] and fortress of the
Church. It is a godly Christian’s weapon, which
no man knows or finds but only he who has the
spirit of grace and of prayer.”—Luther,


IMPRECATIONS.
iv. 4,5. Hear, O our God; Jor we are despised, &c.


This prayer takes its tone, form, and
expression from the imprecations in the
Psalms — the “ Cursing Psalms,” as
some have styled them. Consider we
then some specimens of such Psalms,
that we may know where the difficulty
lies ; and in what way, if any, this diffi-
culty may be solved,

I. The following are fair specimens :-—


Ps. v. 10. ‘‘ Destroy thou them, O God; let
them fall by their own counsels; cast them out
ix the multitude of their transgressions ; for
they have rebelled against thee.”

Ps. x. 15. ‘Break thou the arm of the
wicked and the evil man: seek out his wicked-
neas till thou find none,”

Ps, xxviii. 4. “Give them according to their
deeds, and according to the wickedness of their
endeavours : give them after the work of their
hands; render to them their desert,”

Ps. xl. 14. “ Let them be ashamed and con-
founded together that seek after my soul to
destroy it; let them be driven backward and
put to shame that wish me evil.”

Ps. Ixviii. 2,“ As smoke is driven away, so
drive them away: a8 wax melteth before the
fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of
God.”*

Ps. lxxxiii. 9—17. “Do unto them as unto
the Midianites ; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the
brook of Kison ; which perished at Endor : they
became as dung for the earth. Make their
nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea, all their
princes as Zebah, and as Zalmunna. O my God,
make them like a wheel; as the stubble before
the wind. As the fire burneth a wood, and as the


flame setteth the mountains on fire ; so persecute
them with thy tempeet, and make them afraid
with thy storm. Fill their facer with shame;
that they may seek thy name, O Lord. Let
them be confcunded and troubled for ever ; yea,
let them be put to shame, and perish.”

Ps, cix. 6—16. “Set thou a wicked man
over him: and iet Satan stand at his right hand.
When he shall be judged, let him be condemned :
and let his prayer become sin, Let his days be
few; and let another take his office. Let his
children be fatheriess, and his wife a widow. Let
his children be cottinually vagabonds, and beg ;
let them seek their bread also out of their deso-
late places. Let the extortioner catch all that he
hath ; and let the strangers spoil his labour. Let
there be none to extend mercy unto him;
neither let there be any to favour his fatherless
children. Let his posterity be cut off; and in
the generation following let their name be blotted
out. Let the iniquity of his fathers be remem-
bered with the Lord; and let not the sin of
his mother be blotted out. Let them be before
the Lord continually, that he may cut off the
memory of them from the earth.”

Ps. exxxvii. 7—9, ‘Remember, 0 Lord,
the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem ;
who said, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation
thereof. © daughter of Babylon, who art to be
destroyed; happy shall he be, that rewardeth
thee as thou hast served us. Happy shall he be,
that taketh and dasheth thy little ones againat
the stones,”


These passages seem to breathe e
vindictive spirit ; they seem to be op
posed to the spirit of the New Teste
ment,


_ GELAP, Iv.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


101





II. In what way is the difficulty to be
solved? 1. Whatever difficulty there exists
te created by the Bible itself. It cannot be
said that the writers indulged in feelings
which they were unwilling to recerd.
The Bible is thus a book of candour.
There was some reason for making the
record. 2. It may be a fair subject of
inquiry how much of what ts charged
as wrong, harsh, and vindictive belongs
to the spirit of the age. To know how
much words express, we must under-
stand the customs and habits of the
times. The strong language used by
a Covenanter or a Puritan may have
expressed no other internal emotion than
would be expressed by the milder lan-
guage which we should use. 3. Part
of these passages may undoubtedly be
regaraéa as prophetic: expressing what
would bs, rather than indicating any
wish that such things should be. Part—~
not all 4. Some of the expressions are
a mere record of the feelings of others.
The inspired writer is only responsible
for the fairness of the record; «6. g.
cruelty of sons of Jacob (Gen. xxxiv.
25—29 ; xlix. 6, 7), David (2 Sam. xii.
31), Joab, Ahithophel, Ahab. In Ps.
exxxvii. 8, 9 the pleasure which they
would actually feel who should wreak
vengeance on Babylon is described. 5.
Can such imprecations ever be right?
(a) David was a magistrate,aking. Asa
magistrate, he represented the state, the
majesty of the law, the interests of


justice. (6) Punishment is right when
properly inflicted. (c) Arrangements
are made in every community for detect-
ing and punishing crime, (d) A judge
who prays that he may discharge his
duty has no vindictive feeling. 6.
There is another solution of the diffi-
culty. These expressions are @ mere
record of what actually occurred in
the mind of the Psalmist, and are pre-
served to us as an tllustration of human
nature when partially sanctified. If
such is a just view of the matter, then
all that inspiration is responsible for
is the correctness of the record; the
authors of the Psalms actually recorded
what was passing in their own minds.
They gave vent to their internal emo-
tions. They state feelings which men
have actually had. They do not apolo-
gize for it ; they do not pause to vindi-
cate it ; they offer no word in extenu-
ation of it, any more than other sacred
writers did when they recorded the
facts about the errors in the lives of the
patriarchs, of David, and of Peter. In
some of these ways it is probable that
all the difficulties with regard to “im-
precations” in the Bible may be met.
Those who deny the inspiration of the
records that contain them should be
able to show that these are not proper
explanations of the ditliculty; or that
they are not consistent with any just no-
tions of inspiration.— Barnes, abridged.


Taz Crarr anp Crurity or tHe Cuurcn’s ADVERSARIES.


fy:


And our adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see, till we come in


the midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease.


Chapter gives view of Nehemiah’s
discouragements. Like waves of the
sea breaking upon him, he an unshaken
rock. Like Job’s messengers, one hard-
ly gone before another comes. Like
Fzekiel’s prophecy, mischief upon mis-
chief.

First verse: adversaries’ rage. Second
verse ; venting itselfin foam. But this
is cool: it reaches blood-heat (vers. 7, 8).

I. A strong combination against
the Church of God. “ Adversaries.”

UW. A wicked design they were


combined in. “ 7o cause the work to
cease.”

III. A bloody means propounded.
“ Slay them.”

IV. A subtle way projected for the
effecting of this. ‘“ Secretly, suddenly.”

Sum of the whole. The great design
of the enemies of the Church is by craft
or cruelty, or both, to hinder any work
that tends to the establishment or pro-
moting of the Church’s g 0d. — Matthew


Newcomen, 1642





[OHAP. Iv.


8e3 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.
Satanic Supriery.
iv. 11. And our adversaries said, They shall not know, neither ses, till we come in


the midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease.


The malice of Satan by his members
is so great against the building of God’s
city, that by all means, inward enemies
and outward, fair words and foul, sword,
fire and faggot, war and peace, in teach-
ing or holding their tongue, knowledge
or ignorance, undermining or conspir-
acies, and all other devices whatsoever,
they let none slip, but try all, that they
may overthrow all, and not so munch to
do themselves good as to hinder others ;
to set up themselves in the sight of the
world, and to deface the glory of God;
but in the end all is in vain, and our
God shall have the victory. They will
not yet use any open violence, but
cunningly come on them unawares.

1. In this serpentine, crafty, and
malicious dealing of these wicked men
appeareth the old serpentine nature and
malice of Satan, that old enemy of
God and man from the beginning. God
said to the serpent that the seed of the
woman should tread upon his head, and
the serpent should tread upon his heel
(Gen. iii.). Crafty and subtle men,
when they will work a mischief, go
privily about it, to deceive the good
man. God endued man, when he made
him, with such a majesty in his face.
afore he fell to sin, that all creatures did
reverence and fear him; and although
sin hath muck defaced and blotted out
tnat noble majesty and grace that God
endsed him with, yet it is not utterly
disgraced and taken away, but some
spark and relic remaineth at this day,
that no wild nor venomous beast dare
look a man in the face boldly and hurt
him, but will give place for the time,
and seek how he may privily wound or
hurt him when he seeth him not. These
crafty and subtle foxes, therefore, like
the seed of the serpent, would not openly
invade nor gather any great power of
men against them, but at unawares steal
on them privily, afore they should sus-


pect any such thing. This is the nature
of wicked men, so craftily to undermine
the godly.

2. The next property of the serpent
that appeareth in these wicked men is,
that they mercilessly would murder
them when they had once thus suddenly
invaded them. Satan was “(a murderer
from the beginning,” as St. John saith ;
and therefore no marvel if his children
be bloodsuckers, like unto the father.
When he would not spare the innocent
Lamb of God, Jesus Christ, but most
cruelly crucified him, why should we
marvel to see him by his wicked chil-
dren so greedily seek to shed innocent
blood still?

3. The last property of Satan appeareth
here most plainly in these wicked men, in
that they would 80 gladly overthrow this
building of Jerusalem, that it should
never be thought on any more, Satan is
“the prince of this world,” and there-
fore cannot abide another king to reign,
nor any kingdom to be set up but his
own; and for maintaining of that he
will strive by his members unto death.
And as it falleth out thus generally in
the building of God’s spiritual house
and city that all sorts of enemies most
diligently apply themselves, their labour,
wit, power, policy, and friendship te
overthrow the true worship of God, so
particularly “Satan goeth about like a
roaring lion, seeking whom he may
devour,” and therefore every man hath
great need to be wary and circumspect,
that ne be not suddenly overthrown, but
let him watch and put on “the whole
armour of God” (Ephes. vi. 13—18),
that he may stand stoutly in the day of
battle, and through the might of his
God get the victory. The devil never
ceaseth, for if he cannot overthrow the
whole Church, yet he would be glad to
catch any one that belongeth to the
Lord if he could.— Bishop Pilkington.


CHAP. IV.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


108





A Pavusz m THE Worx.


fv. 15.


A dangerous pause. Judah had be-
come faint - hearted (ver. 10). The
opponents were gaining strength (ver.
11). Terror had taken hold upon the
neighbouring Jews (ver. 12.) An armed
outlook was necessary (ver. 13). Nehe-
mish encouraged the workers to wait
the issue (ver. 14). The enemy noted
the attitude and saw that God had
brought their counsel to nought (ver.
15). The pause was over. Once again
to the work. ‘There is the truth of life
in this parable.

1. A period of preparation is essen-
tial to successful work. Lightly begun
means easily discontinued. Count the
cost (Luke xiv. 28—-33). Raw haste is
sister to undue delay. Find thy task,
calculate thy strength, and rest not until
the evening. Impetuous natures need
patience and perseverance ; fearful and
timid natures need courage and _ self-
reliance; all need encouragement. Moses
—‘‘ Who am I, that I should go unto
Pharaoh ¢” (Exod. iii. 11—22). Joshua
—“ Be strong” (Josh. i 1—9). Jeremiah
—“TI am a child” (Jer. i: 4—10).
Ezekiel — “Be not afraid of them”
(Ezek. ii. 3—8). Nehemiah’s work-
men — “Be not ye afraid” (iv. 13,
14).

II. Joyous acceptance of the al-
lotted task is a great element of


strength. Duty as duty, or duty
joyously done, how different! Love
thy task. Do it for its own sake, and


it will become easier. Such service is
perfect freedom. Men see what most
interests them. An artist on entering
@ room sees pictures ; a student books ;
an architect decorations.


We returned all of us to the wall, every one unto his work.


“The wide world
Is full‘of work, and everything therein
Finds in it its best blessedness. The bee
Sings at his task throughout the summer day.”

III. Earnest work is sure to pro
voke opposition. Ridicule (ver. 1),
compromise (vi. 2), misrepresentation
(vi. 7), attack (iv. 8).

IV. Work is instrumental in de-
veloping personal character. What
canst thou do? Nehemiah proved his
men by trial.

V. Fluctuation in the success of an
undertaking is no reason for relin-
quishing it (vers. 10—15).

George Stephenson’s motto was “‘ PER-
SEVERE.” ‘Go on, sir, go on,” was
D’Alembert’s advice to a young dis-
couraged student. John Wesley, interro-
gated as to the remarkable success of his
followers, said, “They are all at it, and
always at it.”

VI. The power of combined action
in meeting a common foe (vers. 13,
23). Nelson the day before Trafalgar
took two officers who were at variance
to the spot where they could see the fleet
opposed to them, “ Yonder,” he said,
“are your enemies; shake hands and be
friends, like good Englishmen.”

‘Oh! ye the ministers of Christ, and stewards
of his truth,

Lead ye the band, all vigorous in faith’s im-

mortal youth.
But not alone shall ye repair,
For all must aid in toil and prayer.

Then let them say the work is nought, to scoff

us into fear.

What is the answer we must make? Calmly

the walls to rear ;
Building with weapons girded on ;
Warriors until the work is done.”
Enlarged from ‘Scenes from the Life of
Nehemiah,’


Taz Work and WakrrFARE oF LiFE.


ivAl?, 18.


They which builded on the wall, and they that bare burdens, with


those that laded, every one, &c.


Nehemiah iv. one of the Bible scenes
that has indelibly impressed itself upon
the popular imagination, Like the


“lamps, pitchers, and trumpets” of
Gideon’s army, the “ sword and trowel’
of Nehemiah’s army has passed into


104





proverb. Only scenes, books, pictures,
sculptures become popular that present
the elementary conditions of human
life, that go down to the rock on which
the structure of human society rests,
e. g. the parables of Jesus, Bunyan’s
‘Pilgrim’s Progress,’ Nehemiah iv. a
picture of the work and warfare of
life.

I. The conditions of the conflict. 1.
Against the solicitations of self-indul-


gence. ‘The people had a mind to
work” (ver. 6). Not always so. The
spirit is not always willing. And when


the spirit is willing the flesh is often
weak. True (a) of the cultivation of
personal character. To conquer pride,
subdue passion, root out evil dispositions,
to “grow in grace,” not an easy thing.
In this sense ‘ flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of God.” A Chris-
tian does not always “sail with a straight
course,” as did Paul on his first voyage
to Europe (Acts xvi. 11). Oftener, like
the same apostle on a later voyage, he
“sails slowly” (Acts xxvii. 7), or the
“ship sticks fast and remains unmove-
able” (Acts xxvii. 41). Speak to the
children of Israel that they go forward, is
God’s message to the inspired leaders of
every age. What doest thou here? is his
question to every dispirited and inactive
Elijah. Jonah may sit for awhile under
the shadow of the gourd, but when the
morning calls him to his work and to his
labour the gourd perishes. True (6) of
working for one’s fellows. Social and
philanthropic work. How little response
of gratitude from those to whom you
give, from those whom you toil to raise.
Religious teaching and influence. Mani-
fold are difficulties and discouragements.
Unless work be its own reward, who
shall continue? No motive lower than
the stars, no inspiration less stable than
trust in God, will enable a man to war
against the lust of self-indulgence. 2.
Against foes. (a) Foes may be violent
and pronounced as Sanballat (ver 1).
With such as these a man can count.
Rouse a lion, and the consequences are
elear. The arch foe and many of his
emissaries are not unwilling to show a
bold front to a servant ‘of God. Speci-
ally if it can be said of him—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


(CHAP. Iv,





“‘ Servant of God, well done!
Well done! thy words are great and bold;
At times they seem to me
Like Luther’s in the days of old,
Half battles for the free!”


Words for freedom, for brotherhood,
against oppressors, against shams, must
count the cost. Reformers, Covenanters,
Puritans “resisted unto blood, striving
against sin” (Heb. xii. 4). (6) Foes
may }e subtle and plot in secret (ver.
11). Against these we are comparatively
defenceless. It is dastardly to stab in
the dark. But the assassin is dastardly.
Guilt makes cowards. (c) Foes have
the advantage of numbers and posses
sion (ver. 7). They were on the ground.
Nehemiah and his compatriots’ loss was
their gain. ‘They conspired all ot
them together,” &c. (ver. 8). The good
have always been a minority. The
great have too often been on the side of
the majority. ‘Not many wise, not many
mighty,” &c. (1 Cor. i. 26—29). ‘We
wrestle not against flesh and blood ”
only, “but against principalities,” &e.
Ephes. vi. 12,13). 3. Against friends.
a) Half-hearted friends (ver. 12). They
had patriotism enough to warn Nehe-
miah of danger. But they dwelt near
the adversaries. A decided foe better
than a doubtful friend. Gideon’s 300,
who had not time to kneel to drink,
better than countless crowds of self-
indulgent people (Judges vii.). “ Art
thou for us?” said Joshua to the angel-
captain (Josh. v.). For or against is
understocd. But half-heartedness never
won a battle, never gained a victory. (0)
Dispirited friends (ver. 10). The wall
was built somewhat, but they feared
their strength would give out. Fear
and faith are antagonists. Trust in thy
cause, trust in the God of thy cause,
cures for dispiritedness.


“T know not what the future hath

Of marvel or surprise,

Assured alone that life and death
His mercy underlies,

And if my heart and flesh are weak
To bear an untried pain,

The bruised reed he will not break,
But strengthen and sustain,”


II. The conditions of victory. 1. All
ati (ver. 13). Every man at work.
Every man at hisown work. Everv man


CHAP, Iv.]


under discipline—under the rulers (ver.
14), under Nehemiah (vers. 18—20).
Generalize these particulars. Nobody
can do my work. My task is my own.
No man can lift responsibility off his
own shoulders. There is a cry to every
man from some helpless man, or mass of
men, ‘‘Come over and help us,” The
unnamed disciple of John xx. did outrun
Peter, and came first to the sepulchre ;
but Peter first went into the sepulchre.
Had he more courage or less reverence }
Never mind—each left the other scope
to work. St. John has left a greater
name than his brother James. But
James died for the truth. In this holy
war men call life the feeble cannot be
dispensed with. Nehemiah conferred
with the nobles (ver. 14). Nehemiah
needed the bearers of burdens (ver. 17).
2. Unslumbering vigilance. We “set a
watch” (ver. 9). “I set the people,”
&e, (ver. 13). ‘‘ And it came to pass,”
&c. (ver. 16). There is a lesson of life
in the heading of this chapter in our
Bibles—“ Nehemiah prayeth and con-
tinueth the work.” Patient waiting is
@ grace; perseverance is a virtue. Men
are sometimes eneryated by success.
They become unwatchful. “Doctor,”
said his wife to Martin Luther one day,
“ how is it that, whilst subject to papacy,
we prayed so often and with such fer-
vour, whilst now we pray with the
utmost coldness and very seldom?”
“Every one with one hand held a
weapon ” (ver. 17). ‘‘ He that sounded
the trumpet was by me” (ver. 18). “In
what place ye hear the sound of the
trumpet, resort ye thither unto us” (ver.
20). These are only the dictates of
worldly prudence. So true is it that
“the children of this world are in their
generation wiser than the children of
light’? (Luke xvi. 8). What said the
greatest Christian Teacher? ‘The Son
of man is as a man taking a far journey,
who left his house, and gave to every
man his work, and commanded the
porter to watch. Watch ye therefore.
What I say unto you, I say unto all,
Watch ” (Mark xiii. 34, 35, 37).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


105





Tilustration :—“ That manis happy who can
combine work and watching in perfect harmony
—who has Stephen’s life of labour and Stephen’s
vision in the end, In every soul there should be
the sisters of Bethany, active effort and quiet
thought, and both agreeing in mutual love and
help. But Mary no longer sits at the feet of
Christ and looks in his face; she stands at the
door and gazes out into the open sky to watch
the tokens of his coming, while in this hope her
sister in the house still works. In due time
he will be here to crown every humble effort
with overflowing grace, to satisfy the longing
soul that looks for him, and to raise all the
dead for whom we weep.”—Dr. Ker.


3. Resort to the unseen Refuge.
“Hear, O our God” (ver. 4). “ Be
not ye afraid: remember the Lord”
(ver. 14). ‘Our enemies heard that
God had brought their counsel to
nought” (ver. 15). ‘Our God shall
fight for us” (ver. 20), Our God—the
attestation of experience. “He shall
deliver thee in six troubles: yea, in
seven there shall no evil touch thee”
(Job v. 19). The Apostle Paul ap-
pealed from Festus unto Casar.
Nehemiah appealed from Sanballat to
God. In the miracle of feeding our
Lord turned an inward look upon the
troubled, calculating thoughts of his dis-
ciples, though ‘he himself knew what
he would do.” He turned an outward
look upon the hungry, trustful crowd :
“Make the men sit down.” He directed
an upward look to God : “ When he had
taken the five loaves and the two fishes
he looked up to heaven.” The inward
look revealed distrust ; the outward look
revealed need ; the upward look re-
vealed strength and supply. A parable
of life. Look abroad —the work is
great ; look within—calculate resources ;
look up—‘“ Thy God hath commanded
thy strength.” ‘ Not unto us, O Lord,
not unto us, but unto thy name give
glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth’s
sake. The Lord hath been mindful of
us: he will bless us. He will bless
them that fear the Lord, both small
and great. We will bless the Lord from
this time forth and for evermore. Praise


the Lord” (Ps. cxv.).


106





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


(OHAP. Ty,





ADDENDA TO CHAPTER IV.


Senrencres rrom O_p WRiTERS.


Sanballat’s opposition (vers. 1, 2).
“The devil and his servants have ever
been utter enemies to reformation.
Jabesh-gilead would send in none to
help the Lord against the mighty
(Judges xxi. 9); no more would Meroz
(Judges v. 23). Josiah met with much
opposition; so did St. Paul wherever
he came to set up evangelical and
spiritual worship, which is called a
reformation (Heb. ix. 10). All the
world was against Athanasius in his
generation, and Luther in his; rejecting
what they attempted with scorn and
slander. Nehemiah and his Jews were
not more busy in building than the
enemies active in deriding, conspiring,
practising to hinder and overthrow
them.” “If thou hast not the favour
of men, be not grieved at it; but take
this to heart, that thou dost not behave
thyself so warily and circumspectly as
it becometh the servant of God and a
devout, religious man.” “ Why art thou
troubled when things succeed not as
thou wouldest or desirest? For who is
he that hath all things according to his
mind ?”

Tobiah’s scorn (ver. 3). ‘Say not,
‘Should I suffer these things from so
contemptible a fellow as this?’ Yes,
truly ; in consideration of that patient
and meek spirit which was in Christ.
No man will ever be reconciled by wrath
or revenge. Victory consists in virtue,
not in vice.” ‘‘One devil does not
drive out another.” “ We chiefly seek
God for our inward witness, when out-
wardly we be contemned by men, and
when there is no credit given unto us.”
“Thou canst not have two paradises.”
“Christ was willing to suffer and be
despised; and darest thou complain of
any man?” “Let thy thought be on
the Highest.” “Whom God will keep
no man’s perverseness shall be able to
hurt.” ‘Have a good conscience, and
God will well defend thee.”

Nehemiah’s prayers (vers. 4, 5, 9).
“Nehemish hateth not the men, but


their wickedness ; so we learn to put a
difference betwixt the man and the sin
of man, and pray for mercy to the one
and justice to the other. Man is God’s
good creature, and to be beloved of all
sorts; sin is of the devil, and to be fled
of all sorts.” ‘ His prayer is not long,
but full.” ‘Faithful prayer is never
ineffectual So built we the wall. This
followed upon Nehemiah’s prayer as a
gracious answer to it; the people were
encouraged, and the wall finished.”
“Beware of hating the person whilst
thou abhorrest his sin.” ‘ Prayer is the
key of heaven ; the pillar of the world ;
the fire of devotion ; the light of know-
ledge; the repository of wisdom; the
strength of the soul; the remedy against
faint-heartedness; the forerunner of
honour; the nurse of patience; the
guardian of obedience; the fountain of
quietness ; the comfort of the sorrowful ;
the triumph of the just; the helper of
the oppressed ; the refreshment of this
life; the sweetening of death; and the
foretaste of the heavenly life.” “God
prevents our prayers, meets us (as it
were) half-way, and courts our friend-
ship, being a thousand times more ready
to give than we are to receive.”

Nehemiah’s watchfulness (ver. 9).
“Tt is not sufficient to pray and then
to neglect such means as God hath ap-
pointed us to use for our defence and
comfort, no more than it is to say, when
he hath prayed, I will live without meat
and drink, and God himself shall feed
me. For as the Lord hath taught us to
pray, ‘Give us this day our daily bread,’
so he hath commanded us to work for it,
and saith, ‘If any will not work, neither
shall he eat.’” ‘Sin opens the door to
the devil.” “ Awaken us, O God, that
we may watch; draw us to thee, and we
will run the straight way, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.”

Judah’s defection (ver. 10). “It is
an easy matter to begin a good work,
but a special gift to stand in all storms
end continue to the end.” “Judah's


CHAP. Ly]


escutcheon was a lion, but here he is
unlike himself.” ‘“ Nehemiah might well
have said to these men of Judah, as
Alexander once did to a faint-hearted
soldier of his that was of his own name,
‘ Hither leave off the name of Alexander,
or be valiant.’ So either hold out and
bear up under your burdens, or be Judah
no more. Never was anything too hard
for Alexander, because he never held
anything impossible to be effected.”
Nehemiah’s policy and appeal (vers.
1i1—14). “Their brethren from abroad
gave the workmen intelligence ; and this
was a friendly office, for premonition is
the best means of prevention.” ‘It was
their duty to have come home, stood in
storms, and help to build Jerusalem.
But God, which turneth our negligence
and foolishness to the setting forth of
his wisdom and goodness, gave them a
good will and boldness to further that
building as they might.” ‘ Away with
that cowardly passion which unmans a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAE.


107


man. Remember the ,Lord, whom he
that feareth needs fear none else.” “ God
and the world cannot be friends; and
that maketr so few courtiers to tread
this road.”

Soldier-Luilders (vers. 15 — 23).
“Courage and strength without wisdom
is foolish rashness, and wisdom without
courage and strength is fearful cowardli-
ness.” ‘‘ Nehemiah was an active man,
trading every talent.” “In the Chris-
tian’s panoply there is no mention of
armour for the back, though there is for
the breast, because a Christian soldier
should never fly.” ‘In God’s cause a
man must be bold and blush not.”
“Fear of the enemy did not weaken
them, but waken them.” ‘Time was
precious, and they redeemed and im-
proved it. The common complaint is,
We want time; but the truth is, we
do not so much want as waste it.”
“Nehemiah said not to his men, Go
rg, but, Go wz”





CHAPTER V.


Exrianatory Norzs,}
were that said] Keil divides into three classes.
Those who had mortgaged their fields, vineyards, and houses. (c) Those who had borrowed money
for the king’s tribute upon their fields and vineyards. 2. We take up corn] Not by force. The
words mean, We desire that corn may be provided. 8. Because of the dearth] Probably Sanballat
and his army intercepted the supplies. 4. For the king’s tribute] We have made our fields and
our vineyards answerable for money for the king’s tribute (Bertheau), 7. e. We have borrowed money
upon our fields for tribute. This they could only do by pledging the crops (comp. the law, Lev.
xxv. 14,17). 5. “Our brethren’’] The richer Jews, The sense of the first half of the verse is,
We are of one flesh and blood with theserich men. ‘The law not only allowed to lend to the poor on
a pledge (Deut. xv. 8), but also permitted Israelites, if they were poor, to sell themselves (Lev. xxv.
89), and also their sons and daughters, to procure money. It required, however, that they who were
thus sold should not be retained as slaves, but set at liberty without ransom, either after seven years
or at the year of Jubilee (Lev, xxv, 39—41; Exod, xxi. 2 seg.). It is set forth asa special hardship
in this verse that some of their daughters were brought into bondage for maidservants.—Keil, Neither
is it in our power] Lit. Our hand is not to God (Gen, xxxi. 29). Keil explains thus: The power to
alter it is not in our hand, Our fields and our vineyards are in the hands of others, 7. I consulted
with myself] My heart took counsel upon it. Yeexact usury] Usury and injustice are closely allied.
8. We redeemed. Ye sell] Strong contrast. The sale of their brethren for bondservants forbidden
(Lev. xxv. 42). 11. Hundredth part} autccan be monthly interest. 12. I called the priests] ‘I’
witness the oath. 18. I shook my lap] A symbolical action. ‘“ The lap of the garment, in which
things are carried (Isa. xlix. 22), where alone the word is again found.”’—Kevl. See for this
significant action Acts xviii, 6. 14] Crosby says this verse and those which follow form an
itterruption of the narrative. They show that Nehemiah was for twelve years governor of Judah,
aud did not write this history till the expiration of that time. The bread of the governor] The food
and wine with which the community had to furnish him. 15. Even their servants bare rule|
Arbitrary, oppressive rule. Abuse of power for extortions, 17. The rulers} The heads of the different
houses of Judah. 19. Think upon me] (Comp. xiii. 14 and 31).


1. Against their brethren] ¢. ¢. the richer portion (ver. 7). 2—4. There
(a) The workers, who had no property. (4)


108 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


nner anne nEnnnnnnenesemnetteneemumenennstenetemetarsteaserenemessasaiaioaiatall


HOMILETICAL CONTENTS OF CHAPTER V.


Ver 1—19. Greed corrected. Ver. 10. What Others do no Excuse for My

» 1—19. Godless Rich Men. doing.

» 1—13, A Great Schism averted. » 12, Clenching a Good Resolution.

- 1. The Accusing Cry of Humanity. » » 13, The Terrors of the Lord persuading

»  8—6. The Miseries of Debt. Men.

Ae 6, Righteous Anger. » 14. A Man foregoing his Rights for the

” 7. Introspection. sake of his Duties.

- 7. An Assembly convoked against| ,, 15. A Motto for a Manly Life.
Sinners, » 19. Conscious Integrity.

» 8, Inconsistency without Excuse. » 19. The Saint’s Support.

” 9. God’s People under the Eye of a| ,, 19. The Remembrance of Good Deeds a
Critical World, Pillow of Rest for a Good Man.


GrrEep CorRRECTED.
Chap. v.


Tux chapter is complete in itself. Itisnot only astory, but a paraole of everlasting
suggestiveness, In the history of every generation we find some situation similar
to the one recorded here. The great humanness of the Bible is not less striking
than its divinity. God’s book is sublimely crowded with pathetic interest in man’s
life. Here is a picture of the desolations of greed and their correction.

I. The desolations of greed. The cry of the people in the first verse is a note
in the “still, sad music of humanity” which has rung out in every age. The cry
of the people in the days of Norman tyranny ; the wail of nations in the priest-
ridden dark ages ; the lamentations of the negro race in the slaveries of the last
century ; the shriek of the despised people prior to the bloody struggle of the French
Revolution ; the clamour of the English poor in the days of the Corn Laws,—are all
re-echoes of this old cry. ‘So I returned, and considered all the oppressions that
are done under the sun: and behold, the tears of such as were oppressed, and they
had no comforter ; and on the side of their oppressors there was power; but they |
had no comforter” (Eccles. iv. 1). Such was the melancholy view which made
Solomon praise the dead, whose eyes were shut upon the scene, and the unborn, who
had the chance of coming to look upon a better spectacle. In this fifth chapter of
Nehemiah we have the whole of the dark parable of poverty and oppression—
hunger, debt, mortgage, serfdom. Jesus Christ redeemed poverty by himself
becoming poor; not to show that poverty is a good, but to show that the
highest moral conditions of man’s soul may co-exist with these hard conditions.
He, Jesus of Nazareth, was (temporally speaking) a vassal of Rome, and had
not where to lay his head. This story of the earthly sojourn of the mighty
God is a golden ray which gilds the deep valley of humiliation, where millions
walk all through their threescore years and ten; but woe to those who help
to deepen the gloom of that dreary place by their own narrow and damnable
selfishness. “I was angry,” says Nehemiah, “when I heard their cry” (ver.
6); and he did well to be angry. 1. Want. Bread! bread! bread! what a
cry is that to be the chief cry of immortal creatures. Yet such is and will
yet be the wail of the hungry. “God deliver us,” says Isaac Walton, “from
pinching poverty.” ‘Feed me with food convenient for me,” meekly said the good
man in olden days. By industry and frugality let us offer this prayer. 2
DEGRADATION is the result of this want, Great are thy temptations, O Poverty. What
will not the poor man in the wilderness, with hunger in his body and the devil beside
him, do to make stones into bread? How can a man be a man while he is kept in
wlavery to his pinching need? Again let the woe, woe, woe go forth upon those


DHAP. V.] -HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 108





whose selfish greed breaks the staff of bread forthe people. 3. Hopunussnuss, Here
is a picture from one of Thomas Carlyle’s graphic books. ‘Passing by the work-
house of St. Ives in Huntingdonshire, on a bright day last autumn ” (about 1840), “T
saw sitting on wooden benches, in front of their Bastille, and within their ring-wall
and its railings, some half hundred or more of these men. Tall, robust figures; young
mostly, or of middle age; of honest countenance ; many of them thoughtful and even
intelligent-looking men. They sat there, near by one another ; but in a kind of
torpor, especially in a silence, which was very striking. In silence; for, alas, what
word was to be said? An earth all lying round, crying, Come and till me, come
and reap me ;—yet we here sit enchanted! In the eyes and brows of these men
hung the gloomiest expression, not of anger, but of grief, and shame, and manifold,
inarticulate distress, and weariness. They returned my glance with a glance that
seemed to say, ‘Do not look at us. We sit enchanted here; we know not why.’
There was something that reminded me of Dante's hell in the look of all this, and
I rode swiftly away.” What a dark outlook utter want has! what a dreary night-
mare to lie on a human spirit! In the poor wretches whose condition stirred
Nehemiah’s anger with their want and their hopeless debt and their heart-breaking
family separations, as son and daughter went in pawn for bread, there is a scene to
smite the buried conscience of the grinding oppressor, and to call forth some
natural tears from the eyes of onlooking philanthropists. ‘“ Man’s inhumanity to
man makes countless thousands mourn.”

II. The corrections of philanthropy. Like a Howard moved with pity and
shame for the prisoner as if he had been his own mother’s son, or a Wilberforce
making his vow to break the iron chain of the negro, Nehemiah rose up to mend
the evil. It was a monster that would have frightened back to Persia a less
dauntless man, but fear and discouragement were his playmates. Nehemiah
proceeded to correct this evil by his exhortation and by his example. 1. Exhorta-
tion. We rebuked the greed of gain. In vers, 6 —8 we have the grand
outpouring of his aroused sympathies. ‘Then they held their peace, and found
nothing to answer.” Read from verse 12 to 13, Knowing how subtle is the devil
of greed, Nehemiah called the priests to a religious solemnity, that the promise of
the repentant oppressors might as it were be written down in the great doom-book of
God, so that each man might go back to his money-bags with his own Amen! with
the curse on greed ringing in his ears. Here is an example. What is good to be
done should be done in the solemn name of God. Strike the iron of a good
resolution while it is hot. Second thoughts are selfish thoughts in all Divine things.
Bind the soul while it is willing fast to God’s altar. Pledges, vows, oaths; let those
mock these who will. Our evil nature is a Samson, who snaps cords like tow ; nay, a
demoniac whom no man can bind, no, not with chains. If the obligations of a
solemn pledge to God can do it, let it be done. “I called the priests, and took an oath
of them, that they should do according to this promise.” You who are meditating
surrender to Christ, or reformation from drunkenness, or abandonment of some evil
thing or associate, go and do likewise. 2. Eaample. Grand as was Nehemiah’s
exhortation, his example is still grander. He enforced his sermon by living wt out
before his congregation. The perquisites of his office he abandoned for the sake of
example (ver. 15); what he might have regarded as a right he surrendered in order
to be himself a type of unselfishness. His chances of gain were many. He knew
what his plans were, and could have invested well in the new city ; but, says he,
“ Neither bought we any land,” @ suggestion to public persons whose office gives them
the chances of gain. “I took no advantage of my opportunites.” Besides his
servants, he maintained himself. The men he had brought to do the noble work
of renovation were men who had claim to reward ; and what was needful Nehemiah
gave them out of his own private means. He wanted to build Jerusalem as
Michael Angelo said he would build St. Peter’s—* for the glory of God.”

Application, 1. Have an ear for the ory of the poor and oppressed. Keep a


410 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. [ CHAP. 9.





heart alive for such as be prostrate. 2. Hmutate Nehemiah’s self-sacrifice. Do not
say, ‘He was a hero.” His character made hima hero. His sublime fear of God
and pity for man did not flow from his heroism so much as make it. He was but
a cupbearer to the king, and had a snug birth and a good stipend and great
expectations, but these were chaff when compared with an opportunity of making a
good mark in his generation, and of writing his name in the book of life. “ By
faith he obtained a good report !”


Illustrations :—‘** Every grain of riches hath a vermin of pride and ambition init.” ‘“ Oppression is
a bony sin’? (Amos v. 12, 13). ‘*As God hath enlarged any man in his outward estate, he must be
answerably enlarged in works of mercy.” ‘It is one thing to be rich in this world, and another
thing to be rich towards God, as our Saviour phraseth it ; to be rich in knowledge, a3 St, Paul hath
it; rich in faith, as St. James.” ‘‘ Highmindedness, causing men to think great things of themselves,
and to seek great things for themselves, is a blab that the devil will easily blow up in rich misers, to
think themselves simply the better men because richer than others, which is all one as if the silly
ant, the higher she ee upon her hillock, the greater she should conceit herself.”’—Trapp. ‘* Poverty,’
it has been said, “has many wants; but avarice is in want of everything.”


‘*The sense to value riches, with the art
T’enjoy them, and the virtue to impart,
Not meanly nor ambitiously pursue
Not sunk by sloth, nor raised by servitude $
To balance fortune by a just expense,
Join with economy, magnificence ;
With sp’endour, charity ; with plenty, health ;
O teach us.” — Alexander Pope.


Goptzss Ricoh Men.
, Chap. v.


This is not the only page of the Bible on which the sins of covetousness, oppression,
and luxury are linked together and denounced. Isaiah represents the Lord of
Hosts looking for judgment, but behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a
ery ; and then hurls a Divine woe against those that join house to house, that lay field
to field, till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of the
earth ; that rise up early in the morning that they may follow strong drink, &c.
(Isa. v. 7—12). Amos speaks of those who cause the seat of violence to come
near, that lie upon beds of ivory (Amos vi. 3, 4). Micah utters a woe against
those who covet fields and houses, and take them by violence (Micah ii. 2). Hven
Ohrist takes wp his parable against those who devour widows’ houses (Matt. xxiii.
14). The apostles follow his example. But they remind us that other gifts may
be misused—power, beauty, any gift of God.

I. The value of wealth. The word of God does not despise wealth. The
references to riches and rich men are no fewer than one hundred and seventy—
descriptive, regulative, corrective. 1. Riches are God’s gift. Not invariably. He
has not ordained that right and riches should be inseparable, or that wrong and want
should be invariably cause and effect. Still it is true that “ the Lord maketh poor
and maketh rich.” ‘‘ Riches and honours come of him.” ‘The earth is full of his
riches.” The virtuous he “ maketh fat and flourishing.” He has not made poverty
the outward and visible sign of his displeasure, nor wealth of his favour. Had he
done so the Church would have been sectional. Large numbers would have been
shut out by circumstances. It would have been in antagonism to human weal.
There is a working force and a conserving force. 2. Wealth isman’sglory. With
it he can surround himself with all that is ennobling in science and art, the con-
veniences of life. With it he canrule men. It elevates, Prosperous families and
prosperous nations become refined.

II. The responsibility of wealth. We take this responsibility to be personal


OHAP. V.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH, 111





—_——-


and relative. 1. A man owes a duty to himself. The first contrast here is between
getting and covetous hoarding. The Bible preaches no Crusade against getting.
It does not say, “Take no care for the morrow.” It does say, “Take not anxious,
boding thought.” Christianity is a system of prudence. It imposes restraint
because license leads to ruin. It gives a premium to diligence. Idleness is treated
with scorn by the inspired writers. The sun shines on no fairer prospect than a
diligent person ; whatever his station, whatever his aim, the first condition of success
is toil, the second is toil, the third is toil. But the crucial test is, ‘‘ Are we getting
to live?” or, ‘ Are we living to get?” Do we lay up or lay out? At every step
ijn our inquiry we are upon the horns of a dilemma. The breakers are on every
side. The vessel needs careful piloting. Laying up is not wrong, and nature as
well as revelation teaches that he that does not provide for his own house is worse
than an infidel. ‘Naked came we into this world, and naked shall we return thither ;”
but we do not read that we must leave those naked whom we leave behind. For the
majority this must be so. The law of life for most is from hand to mouth. Very
literally their prayer is answered, “ Give us this day our datly bread.” But for
the middle and upper classes John Wesley’s famous rules apply. “Get all you can,
save all you can, give all you can.” At eighty years of age he thus narrated his
own experience. ‘ Two-and-forty years ago I wrote many books. Some of these
had such a sale as I never thought of, and by this means I unawares became rich.
I gain all I can without hurting either my soul or body. I save all I can, not
willingly wasting anything, not a sheet of paper, or a cup of water. I do not lay
out anything, not a shilling, unless as a sacrifice to God. Yet by giving all I can
I am effectually secured from laying up ‘treasures upon earth.’ And J am secured
from either desiring or endeavouring it as long as I give all I can. But my own
hands will be my executors.” Generally no better executors can be found. The
Peabodys and Burdett-Coutts act on this principle, and their memorial remains in
model cottages and Christian sanctuaries. Howard’s rule was “that our superfluities
give way to other men’s conveniences ; that our conveniences give way to other
men’s necessities ; and that even our necessities sometimes give way to other men’s
extremities.” “Charity,” says Chrysostom, “is the scope of all God’s commands,’’
2. A man owes a duty to others. “No man liveth to himself.” (a) We ‘have
spoken of the kingly rule of wealth. A king’s is a noble office. But sometimes
kingship becomes kingeraft. Kingship rules for the good of the subject ; kingcraft
rules for personal ends, and then power becomes tyranny. To rule wellisa difficult
task. In most men the love of power is a ruling passion. In no form is it stronger
than in ruling men. The pages of history are stained with the blood shed by the
oppressor. But there are other thrones than that on which the monarch sits,
Every master is a king. Let him never forget that kingly honours imply kingly
reponsibilities. ‘“ Read the indictment in Epistle of James v. 1—6.” The
“labourers” are dependent on you—their masters. The moral claim is stronger than
the legal. There are forms of oppression which are too subtle for the coarse
instruments of law. But God has a special controversy with the oppressor. ‘ He
raiseth up the poor out of the dust.” “The poor, and him that hath no helper,” find ¢
helper in God. One duty of a Queen’s Counsel is to plead the cause of the queen’s
subject, who would otherwise be defenceless. The queen is the defender of the weak.
“ Now will I arise,” saith the Lord, “ for the oppression of the poor, for the sighing
of the needy” (Ps. xii. 5) ; “ He shall judge the poor of the people ” (Ps. xxii. 4) :
and, not to quote passages, he is the Advocate of the poor, the Elevator of the poor,
the Satisfier of the poor, the Deliverer of the poor. The sin of oppression is the child
of covetousness. Yeexact usury! Sins which are passed by because of the power of
those who commit them, or passed by because of the poverty and powerlessness of
those who suffer from them, are said to cry to God. There are many species of
slavery below the actual thing. When we get from our servants more than they
are well able to do, when remuneration is insufficient, when in any way we prey


112 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. [CHAP. V


"e
er


upon their necessities we are slaveholders in oll but the name. Remember, “ the
Lord of Hosts”’ is the poor’s Avenger. What hosts he can send against us. Wilt
thou contend with God? “It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God” (Heb. x. 31). It is hard to possess riches without sin. They are called
“the mammon of unrighteousness.” They are often possessed by the wicked, much
admired by them, and not seldom gained by fraud. Many a fortune is built on
wrong, and wrong is a foundation of sand. It is not easy to have them and not be
hindered by them. A ship that takes in too much cargo is liable to sink. Many
rich men bend under their mountain of gold. A man who should bear this burden
should be a very Atlas for moral strength. The beasts become tierce when well fed.
And it is hard for the purse-full te be other than purse-proud. God can hest be
served by a mean, “Give me not riches, lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who
is the Lord?” “ Give me not poverty, lest I take the name of God in vain.” It
riches increase, set not thine heart upon them. ‘ Possess them; let them not
possess you.” ‘ God gives riches to the good lest they should be thought evil ; he
vives them to the bad lest they should be thought the only good.” It is not
impossible for a rich man to be virtuous. Abraham and Job were the wealthiest men
ot the East. In the highest circles the fair flower of piety flourishes. Those, how-
ever, who have so much to keep them here may well find it difficult to be absorbed
in the contemplation of a hereafter. Prosperity begets security.

III. The punishment of misused wealth. Nehemiah cites them, as it were, to
God’s judgment-seat. They are called upon to plead their cause. 1. The punishment
is self-caused. ‘‘ Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days,” as the New
Testament apostle teaches (James v.). The punishment grows out of the gain. The
wind shakes the tallest trees. The willow bends under the storm and rises when
the gust is over; the oak stands until endurance is no longer possible. Men fall from
eminences. He who keeps on the ground has generally secure foothold. 2. The
ounishment ts self-inflicting. All speech is translatable by God. ‘The young lions’
cry for prey is an appeal to God, and he gives scent and swiftness. The parched
ground speaks to him and pleads that the windows may be opened, and the rain-drops
fall from the closed storehouse. There is something terribly suggestive in the RUST
of wrongly-withheld gain, and the helpless corres of the defrauded poor passing up
through distant space and taking their case to the highest tribunal, pleading with
an earnestness akin to that of the woman who came to the unjust judge, but, unlike
her, pleading with the Judge of the whole earth, the only absolutely righteous Judge,
who will surely avenge his own elect. Heard by God, it becomes the instrument of the
punishment. ‘The canker and rust shall witness against you.’’ “ Miseries shall
come upon you.” Calamities everywhere attended the Jews soon after the ascension
of Christ. Proverbial for their wealth, they were ransacked,and punished. From
then till now they have been a persecuted people, and mainly through their wealth.
Every one remembers Shakespeare’s Shylock, and Sir Walter Scott’s Isaac of York.
Covetousness brings God’s curse on our estates. He sends putrefaction, the rust, and
the moth. Ill gains are equivalent to losses, because providence often scatters them.
There is a “ withholding that tends to poverty.” ‘He that will save must lose”
is the gospel riddle. The best way of bringing in is laying out. What is given to
the poor is lent to God, and he is a safe banker ; he repays with interest. God can
easily corrupt that which we lay up, and make the worm breed in manna. God is
in no lack of servants to carry information or effect his ptrposes. Corruption,
canker, moth, all are at his beck and call. Some rise from within, as corruption ;
some attack from without, as the moth; the rust corrupts the substance, eats it away.
He can arm the elements of fire, wind, and water. He can take the lightning into
his hand. The stormy wind and vapour fulfil his word, and these he can bring at
last as witnesses against us. Sealed volumes, God breaks the seal, and each circum:
stance becomes an unbribed witness. Many things now fair-seeming will show rotten-
ness in the day of judgment, Vividly does the prophet tell us of the houses built by


OMAP. vV.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 118
SE te le tS at elo le LE aa SS ane ie Re ea


oppression coming as witnesses against the owners. “The stoné shall ery out of
the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.” The stones will say,
‘ We were hewn by violence,” and the timbers, “ We were inlaid by fraud.” Many
of the yreat works of ancient times, ¢. ¢. the pyramids, many colossal fortunes and
magnificent mansions of modern times, were built with bones and cemented with
blood—the blood and bones of the men who built them, or the men from whom the
wealth was obtained. The circumstances of sin are so many memorials to put us
in mind of guilt and to put God in mind of vengeance. Conscience writes when it
does not speak. There is a book of remembrance. All couceptions of torment
indicate a relation between sin and punishment not only in justice and duration, but
in kind. In this world each sin has its own avenger; many sins are their own
avengers. Anger—the agitation and unrest, are not they like whips whose lashes
are weighted with lead 4

Application. 1. Let us learn to weep tears of penitence, that we may not have to
shed tears of remorse. After great showers the air is clear. It is better to weep in
a way of duty than to weep in a way of judgment. 2. Let us learn the secret of
happiness. The saint in the Old Testament commanded his soul to be merry because
God was the light of his countenance ; the fool in the gospel because he had much
goods laid up for many years, 3. Let us learn to provide ourselves bugs which waa
not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no thief approacheth nor moth
corrupteth. For all that is in the world is not of the Father. And the world
passeth away, but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


The rich man’s empire.—“ The empire which a rich man exercises finds no nation or tribe that
wishes to resist it. It commands the services of man wherever man can be reached, because it offers
to the desires of man the power of acquiring whatever objects of external enjoyment he is most eager
to acquire. From the north to the south, from the east to the west, everything that can be rendered
active is put in motion by him, who remains tranquilly at home, exciting the industry of those of
whose very existence he is ignorant, and receiving the products of labour for his own use without
knowing frem whom he receives them. It is almost as in the magic stories of romance, in which the
hero is represented as led from the castle-gate by hands that are invisible to him, ushered to a splen-
did banquet, where no one seems present, where wine is poured into the goblet before him at his very
wish, and luxurious refreshment after refreshment appears upon the nee but appears as if no hand
had brought it. To the rich man, in like manner, whatever he wishes seems to come merely because
he wishes it to come. Without knowing who they are who are contributing to his idle luxury, he
receives the gratification itself, and receives it from hands that operate as invisibly as the fairy hands
at the banquet. He gathers around him the products of every sea and every soil. The sunshine of
one climate, the snows of another, are made subsidiary to his artificial wants; and though it is im-
possible to discern the particular arms which he is every instant setting in motion, or the particular
efforts of inventive thought which he is every instant stimulating, there can be no doubt that such a
relation truly exists, which connects with his wishes and with his power the industry of those whe
labour on the remotest corner of the earth which the enterprising commerce of man can reach.’’—Dr,
Thomas Brown,

Possessions. —Possessions distinguish man from the brute, and civilized man from the savage,
Labour finds in possessions its normal fruit; possessions are labour as pe een reality, The
brute is possessionless because he does not labour. In property man ceases to be a mere isolated indi-
vidual of his species ; he creates for himself a world about himself which he can call his own ; his
property is the outward manifestation of his inward peculiarity, ‘The fact that he who possesses much
is also much regarded and esteemed in the world is indeed often very hollow and baseless, though in
reality it springs from the correct consciousness that possessions are the fruit of labour, the result of
moral effort. He who acquires nothing for himself passes in the world, not without reason, for vn-
respectable, Of a special virtue of possession-despising, as with the mendicant monks, there can,
in the ante-sinful state, be no question ; and even after the fall possessions are presented asa perfectly
legitimate end of moral effort, and their being increased as a special Divine blessing. Cain and Aba
possess already personal property ; and the God-blessed possessions of the patriarchs occupy a very large
place in their morally religious life [Gen. xii. 5, 16; xii. 2; xiv. 14; xxiv. 22, 86, 63; xxvi. 13,
14; xxvii, 28; xxx, 27, 30,48; xxxi. 42; xxxii, 5, 10, 13 egg. ; xxxili, 115 xxxix. 6; xlix. 25;
¥xod, xxiii, 25; Ley, xxv, 21; Deut. ii, 7; vii. 18; xv. 14 egg. 5 xvi. 16, 17; xxviii. 3 egy.
rxxiii, 18 sgg.; xxiv. 25: comp. 1 Kings iii, 13; Ps, evil, 38; cxii. 2,3; cxxxii. 16]. Property
being the life-sphere of the moral person,—im some sense his enlarged personality itself,—

I


ila HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. [oHaP. ¥.








the moral phase thereof lies not merely in its antecedent ground, namely, labour, but also in its moral
uge and application, To its enjoyment man has a moral right, as such enjoyment is the reward of
labour; but to the exclusive enjoyment of it for himself alone he has no moral right, seeing that he
is bound to other men by love, and love manifests itself in communicative distribution.” — Wuttke’s
‘ Christian Ethics.’


A Great Scuism Avurrzp.
v. 1—13. And there was a great cry of the people, &c.


The paragraph teaches—

I. That social injustice may exist
3ven amongst fellow-workers in a
zreat and good cause (vers. 1—6).
The complaint of the poor was forced
from them. Wrong may be long en-
dured ; but it will find a voice, a cry
“not loud, but deep.”

II. That social injustice, if not cor-
rected, will undermine the stability
of any cause, however righteous.
Sanballat’s army less fatal than the
nobles’ avarice.

III. That social injustice should be
regarded by all good men with feel-
ings of righteous indignation (ver. 6).
From a realization of the brotherhood
of men; of interdependence; of a Divine
purpose in the elevation of the down-
jrodden,


V. That social injustice, whenever
discovered, should be calmly yet
promptly dealt with (ver. 7). The
prudent Nehemiah brought a moral
force to bear upon the offenders. “Set an
assembly.” The courageous Nehemiah
rebuked the offenders, albeit they were
highest in name and station. The far-
seeing Nehemiah discerned ruin if inter
nal wrongs remained unredressed.

V. That conciliatory appeals are
sometimes more efficacious than coer-
cive measures in dealing with social
injustice (vers. 8—13). Nehemiah used
persuasive arguments. 1. The efforts
already made to redeen their captive
brethren (ver. 8). 2. The exposure of
the national cause to reproach (ver. 9).
3. His own unblemished life and fit
example (ver. 10).


Tae Accusine Cry or Houmanrry.


v. 1.


There was a great cry of the people and of their wives against thetr


brethren.


Tur aocousers.—“ The many” who
lack bread (ver. 2). THmr AcousED.—
‘“- Their” richer “ brethren,” “the nobles
and the rulers” (vers. 1, 7). TH acous-
ation.—“ Ye exact usury. Ye have
our lands and vineyards.” A story of
the olden time of ever-new significance,
A twice twenty-times told tale.

I. The unending struggle. Wealth
and poverty, knowledge and ignorance,
brain and brawn, capital and labour—
when in all the ages have not these
come into collision? Communists,
Socialists, Nihilists—are not these to-
day voices from many lands (whether
rightly or wrongly) ; the “great cry” of
the poor of many nationalities against
their richer brethren? The prayer of
the philanthropists of every age has


been expressed by a poet of our own :—


“ Ring out the false, ring in the true;
Ring out the darkness of the land ;


Ring out the feud of rich and poor ;
Ring in redress to all mankind;


Ring out the want, the care, the sin,
The faithless coldness of the times ;


Ring in the love of truth and right ;

Ring in the common love of good.”
THe HEBREW PROPHETS declare that
they that be slain with the sword are
better than they that be slain with
hunger; for these pine away, stricken
through for want of the fruits of the
field (Lam. iv. 9). They tell how
God’s judgments came upon the land
because the righteous were sold for
silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes
(Amos ii. 6). The scathing words of


OnAP. V.}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


113





Jesus CuHrist were reserved for those
who used the pride of place to oppress
the poor and him that hath no helper.
The EARLY PERIOD of English history
is associated with William the Conqueror.
The park aces had light enough to
show the few how to prey upon the
many. Through much _ tribulation
Nations have emerged into the light,
and onasses burst the shackles of
slavery and proclaimed their freedom.
With a great sum England obtained
the freedom of the West Inpizs. The
blood of AmeERIca’s sons wiped out the
stain of slavery which disgraced the
greatest republic the world has seen.
A great cry has gone up to God as our
poor world has struggled on towards
knowledge and liberty.

II. Elements of bitterness in this
struggle. 1. On the side of the op-
pressors there is power. They are “the
nobles and the rulers’’ (ver. 7). ‘The
names of king and priest are the most
appalling in history.” So perverted
have they become. Anciently to rule
was also to feed (Ps. lxxviii. 71, 72).
A bishop is a shepherd. The pastoral
staff is the shepherd’s crook. 2. The
oppressed are the brethren of the op-
pressors. “Our flesh is as the flesh of
our brethren, our children as their chil-
dren.” Same blood, same love of chil-
dren, same sensitiveness topain. Hath
not a poor man eyes, hands, organs,
dimensions, senses, affections, passions 4
Is he not fed with the same food, hurt
with the same weapons, subject to the
same diseases, healed by the same means,
warmed and cooled by the same winter
and summer as @ rich man? If you
prick a poor man, will he not bleed? if
you tickle him, will he not laugh? if
you poison him, will he not die? 3.
They were engaged in a common caus
— rebuilding God's chosen city. To
make this world a paradise; to compel
all kings to recognize the King of
kings; to set up a kingdom of right
eousness and peace, is not this the task
given to humanity, the goal toward
which our world should move 4

III. Light in the darkness. “Watch.
man, what of the night? The watchman
said, The morning cometh.” 1. Christ-


13


came to proclaim the' brotherhood of
humanity. His Beatitudes direct men
to look to character, not to position, for
Divine approval. The strait gate must
be passed through by rich and noble
as well as by poor and unknown. Jesus
spoke to the poor, felt for the degraded,
raised hope in the oppressed. 2. Signs
of the times. The “many” (ver. 2)
are not unheard; their influence not
unfelt. There is wrong, but society
tends towards redress. Ignorance
abounds, but the teacher is abroad.
Many rich forget their duties—not all.
Tennyson’s Sir Walter Vivian is not
the creation of a poet’s fancy.


“ Sir Walter Vivian all a summer’s da

Gave his broad lawns until the set of sun

Up to the people: thither flocked at noon

His tenants, wife and child, and thither half

The neighbouring borough, with their Institute,

Of which he was the patron.

Why should not these great Sirs

Give up their parks some dozen times a year
To let the people breathe ? ”


Tennyson’s vision will one day be
actualized.


“‘T dipt into the future, far as human eye could

see,

Saw the vision of the world, and all the wonder
that would be;

Saw the havens fill with commerce, argosies of
magic sails,

Pilots of the purple twilight, dropping down
with costly bales ;

Heard the heavens fill with shouting, and there
rain’d a ghastly dew

From the nations’ airy navies grappling in the
central blue ;

Far along the world-wide whisper of the south
wind rushing warm,

With the standards of the peoples plunging
through the thunder-storm ;

Till the war-drum throbb’d no longer, and the
battle-flags were furl’d

In the parliament of man, the federation of the
world.

There the common sense of most shall hold a
fretful realm in awe,

And the kindly earth shall slumber, lapt in
universal law.”


“‘ How long, O Lord ?”


ILLUSTRATION.


The passion for power,—‘‘ Christianity has
joined with all history in inspiring me with a
peculiar dread and abhorrence of the passion for
power, for dominion over men, There is nothing
in the view of our Divine Teacher s0 hostile to
his Divine spirit as the lust of domination. This


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.
%y


(omar. V





146
we are accustomed to regard as eminently the
sin of the arch-fiend. ‘By this sin fell the


angels.’ It is the most Satanic of all human
passions, and it has inflicted more terrible evils
on the human family than all others. It has
made the names of ore and priest the most
appalling in history. ere is no crime which


has not been perpetrated for the strange pleasure _


of treading men underfoot, of fastemng chains
on the body or mind. The strongest ties of
nature have been rent asunder, her holiest feel-
ings smothered, parents, children, brothers mur-
dered to secure dominion over man. The people
have now been robbed of the necessaries of life,
and now driven to the field of slaughter like


flocks of sheep to make one man the master of
millions. Through this passion government,
ordained by God to defend the weak against the
strong, to exalt right above might, has up to
this time been the great wrong-doer, Its crimea
throw those of private men into the shade. Its
murders reduce to insignificance those of the
bandits, pirates, highwaymen, assassins against
whom it undertakes to protect society. Power
trampling on right, whether in the person of
king or priest, or in the shape of democracies or
majorities, is the saddest sight to him who
honours human nature and desires its enlarge-
ment and happiness,”— W. FE, Channing.


Tos Miseris or Dest.
v. 3—5. Some also there were that said, &c.


Dr. Jamieson, the Bible interpreter,
thus writes on this passage :—‘“‘ The poor
made loud complaints against the rich
for taking advantage of their necessities,
and grinding them by usurious exactions.
N-umbers of them had, in consequence
of these oppressions, been driven to such
extremities that they had to mortgage
tleir lands and houses to enable them to
pay the taxes to the Persian Government,
aud ultimately even sell their children
for slaves to procure the means of sub-
sistence.” Generalizing this particular
instance, we have the subject of debt
and its miseries,

I, Mental unrest. Credit is necessary.
The world’s business could not otherwise
be carried on. The every-day word trust
is, like most every-day words, suggestive.
It is confidence between man and man.
It supposes an honourable undertaking.
Faith is not only a theological word ; it
is a force in this working-day world.
No man ought to receive credit without
a prospect of being able to pay. The
violation of this rule is dishonest. To
take a man’s purse is stealing. So is
taking up goods without paying for them,
and receiving wages for which the
stipulated labour has not been given.
Unless hardened through a long series
of dishonesties, a man cannot be con-
tented who does not obey the New
Testament law, “Owe no man any-


thing.”


II. Social degradation. It is pro
verbial that to be in debt is to be in
danger; danger of detection and ex-
posure. Do not pretend to be what you
are not; do not keep up a style and
scale of cost beyond your means.

III. Family ruin. A man owes a
first duty to his own house. The help-
less hang on him. He may bring ruin
through extravagance.

IV. A disregard of a Divine com-
mand. “THOU SHALT NOT STEAL” was
written with the finger of God. This
law has not been abrogated.

Application. 1. Christians should set
the world an example. 2. Watch the
beginnings of extravagance. 3. In small
things as well as in greater act on Chris-
tian principle. ‘“ He that is faithful in
that which is least is faithful also in
much ; and he that is unjust in the least
is unjust also in much.”


Illustrations :—‘ The Persians reckoned these
two very great sins. 1. To bein debt, 2. To
tell a lie; the latter being often the fruit of the
former.”

“ By the twelve tables of Rome, he that owed
much, and could not pay, was to be cut in pieces,
and every creditor was to have a piece of him
according to the debt.”

“We read of a certain Italian gentleman who,
being asked how old he was, answered that he
was in health; and to another that asked how
rich he was, answered that he was not in debt
He is young enough that is in health, and rich
fccak that is not in debt.”— Trapp.


CHAP. V.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


li


a a a RS


al


RigHrrous ANGER.
v. 6. And I was very angry when I heard their ery and these words.


“Ezra and Nehemiah were both of
them very wise, good, useful men; yet
in cases not unlike theirs there is a
great deal of difference between their
management. When Ezra was told of
the sin of the rulers in marrying strange
wives he rent his clothes and wept, and
prayed, and was hardly persuaded to
attempt a reformation, fearing it 1m-
practicable ; for he was a man of a mild,
tender spirit. When Nehemiah was
told of as ill a thing he warmed pre-
sently, fell foul upon the delinquents,
incensed the people against them, and
never rested till, by all the rough
methods he could use, he forced them
to reform ; for he was a man of a hot
and eager spirit. Very holy men may
differ much from each other in their
natural temper, and in other things that
result from it. Again, God’s work may
be done, well done, and successfully,
and yet different methods taken in doing
it; which is a good reason why we should
neither arraign others’ management nor
make our own a standard. There are
diversities of operation, but the same
spirit.”—Matthew Henry. Nehemiah’s
soul was stirred within him as he saw
the oppression of his voiceless brethren.
But they who were not able to help
themselves were uot therefure to remain


unhelped.


“The voice of their indignation
Rose up to the throne of God,”’


They bore long, antil suffering was no
longer endurable; and then they ap-
pealed from Festus unto Cesar, from
the nobles and rulers who were set over
them to Nehemiah under whom they all
served. The longer Nehemiah mused
the more fiercely the fire of his anger
burned. There cannot be supreme love
of right without bitterest hatred of
wrong. Admiration of virtue and scorn
of vice are correlative. There is such a
thing as righteous anger

I, The righeousness of anger de-
pends upon its cause and occasion.


“What is anger? It is displeasure felt
in a high degree ; a feeling which is awak-
ened when we think ourselves injured.
It is usually attended with a restless un-
easiness of mind, and frequently with
something worse. But is anger in no
case allowable? Perhaps it is. ‘God
is angry with the wicked every day ’
(Ps. vil. 11); that is, he is highly
displeased with their sinful conduct,
and resolved to punish them on its
account; yet anger in God is infinitely
remote from anything of turbulence and
malevolence. We read of our Lord
Jesus looking round on the people, par-
ticularly on the Pharisees, ‘with anger,
being grieved for the hardness of their
hearts’ (Mark iii. 5) ; but this anger was
perfectly consistent with the purest
benevolence, with the tenderest, the
most disinterested kindness. Anger in
depraved creatures is certainly very
different from what it is in God, and
from what it was in Jesus Christ; and
we should be cautious how we give the
least allowance to so dangerous a passion.
It has been judiciously remarked, when
anger ‘proceeds from pride, or from selfish-
ness; when it rises high, or continues
long ; and when it is accompanied by
anything like hatred or ill-will towards
the person who is its object, then it is
sinful and hurtful. But whatever we
may think of the lawfulness or unlaw-
fulness of anger in iteelf, and how
difficult it may be to ascertain in what
cases and in what degree it is allowable,
one thing is evident—we cannot be too
cautious of yielding to its influence.
It is a passion so difficult to be regulated
and so dreadful often in its effects; so
destructive of that meekness, gentleness,
and love which form the very essence
of the Christian character ; so expressly
forbidden in various passages of the New
Testament, and so carefully guarded even
in those where it seems to be in some
measure allowed, that we have much
more reason to restrain than to encourage
it even in the smallest degree.’ There


118


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH,


[CHAP. We





=


is one object against which anger may
be innocently directed, and this object is
sin; either sin in ourselves, or sin in
others. Peter was angry, exceedingly
displeased with himself, when, at the
recollection of his sin in denying his


blessed Lord, ‘he went out and wept.


bitterly.’ The brethren of Joseph were
angry with themselves, displeased at
their base behaviour, when convinced of
their cruelty towards an unoffending
brother; and doubtless the feeling was
jaudable. The soul of righteous Lot
was ‘vexed ;’ he was angry with the
filthy conversation of the wicked among
whom he dwelt; and as we dwell
among a people of unclean lips and
unholy conduct, our blame would be
great if we felt not displeasure at what
we hear and witness.”—Kidd. We read
of the fierce anger of the Lord when
Israel joined himself unto Baal-Peor
(Num, xxv. 1—-9), Pronounced upon
disobedience (Deut. xxix. 20). When
Jesus Christ looked upon his spying
enemies with anger, being grieved for
the hardness of their hearts, which pre-
dominated, the anger or the grief?
Yontrast the anger of Sanballat (chap.
iv.) with the anger of Nehemiah (chap.
v.); how different the occasion, how
unlike the cause, For a good work
Sanballat was prepared to stone the
Jews; for an evil act of oppression
Nehemiah rose up to rebuke the nobles.
Be ye angry and sin not in reference to
cause.

II. The righteousness of anger de-
pends upon its spirit and limitations.
Note, especially, the anger of Jesus Christ
had reference to the evil, the hardness
of their hearts. Righteous anger is
against wrong, not against wrong-doers.
Must have in it no personal malice, no
spleen. Must not cross the line to
revenge. Anger is the basis of magis-
tracy, the support of laws, and the pillar
of decency and right conduct. ‘ Magis-
trates are mortal gods, and God is an
immortal magistrate; therefore, as the
merciful God heareth in his holy habit-
ation in heaven the cry of the miserable,
oppressed people in earth, so should
every godly ruler hear and relieve the
pitiful ory of the oppressed, being his


brethren, seeing he is God’s lieutenant,
and hath the sword and law in his hand
to bridle such ill-doers, and must not
for favour, gifts, nor fear suffer it un-
amended; else he doeth not his duty
unto the mighty Lord, who set him in
that place, gave him the authority, and
will ask a strait account how he hath
used it to the relief of the oppressed.
Some be of opinion that a magistrate
should not be moved with anger in doing
his office, but give every man fair words,
pass over matters slowly, please all men,
though he do them little good; but,
the truth being well considered, it may
be judged otherwise. Lactantius writeth
a book wherein he proveth, that God
himself is angry, and every anger is not
sin. If God then be angry against sin,
why may not a good man in Gods cause
then do the same? Hate not the man,
but his ill-doing ; be not angry without
a just cause unadvisedly ; keep not thy
anger long, that it grow not into hatred ;
let it be no more nor no less than the
fault deserveth, and let it be without
raging, fuming, fretting, swelling, and
raving and disquieting of body or mind ;
not for malice of revenging, but for pity
or justice to correct and amend; and
anger well qualified is not ill. This is
not spoken to give liberty to anger, for
we are too ready to it by nature; but
rather to bridle it, seeing it standeth on
so narrow a point to keep measure in.
This qualifying of anger is declared in
the Scripture as that it should not con-
tinue. St. Paul saith, ‘Let not the sun
set upon your anger ;’ and that it should
not be rashly, without cause, nor more
than the cause requireth. The gospel
teacheth, saying, ‘He that is angry |
with his brother without a just cause is
guilty of judgment.’ This anger of
Nehemiah was just in all circumstances,
and kept the rule of St Paul, ‘Be angry
and sin not,’ which is a hard point to
keep.”— Pilkington. He who hates sin
will escape it. An extreme sentiment-
alism would make all virtue consist in
amiability. Men have proclaimed the
love of God as if it denied his justice.
“God is love.” “ Our God is a consum-
ing fire.” The two poles of the Divine
character.


CHAP. V.]





Application. 1. Temperamental anger
a be subdued by holy thought, prayer,
and effort. Lay aside every weight,

and the sin that doth so easily be-
set. 2. Distinguish between the wrong
and the wrong-doers. Vengeance is
mine ; I will repay, saith the Lord. 3.
Remember Christian doctrine of forgive-


HOMILETIC COMMENYauil < NEHEMIAH.


119





ness. If thy brother''trespass against
thee and return, saying, Repent, forgive
him. Let the daily prayer be, Forgive
us our trespasses, and help us to forgive
them that trespass against ua. For this
doctrine of forgiveness is one of the


hard sayings of Jesus Christ.


InTROSPECTION.
v. 7. Then I consulted with myself.


The position was perilous. The
nobles and the rulers were powerful ;
their services were needed. The toilers
were embittered; the common cause
endangered. Too little courage or too
much prudence, cowardice or temporiz-
ing, would prove fatal. ‘Then I con-
sulted with myself.” His heart took
counsel upon the injustice. From this
instance of introspection or self-commu-
nion let us consider self-communion
generally.

I. The value of self-communion.
Thought comes in solitude. Character
is formed by self--communings. A
preacher must return sometimes to
“fructifying silence.” We are not
enough alone. Our age is restless. It
craves results—speedy and sure. Too
much bustle and hurry. Duty treads
upon the heels of duty. Moses, Elijah,
Johu Baptist, Paul, yes, and Christ
himself, lived in the wilderness alone
with God. Cecil, Scott, Newton, Wes-
ley, the spiritual giants, were men of
solitary hours. Too much familiarity
with men breeds contempt and distrust.
Know thyself! “Come ye yourselves
apart,” said Jesus to disciples flushed
with success (Mark vi.), Need of reat
and self-communion evident in all spheres
of life. Restlessness characterizes most
men. Space and time are nearly anni-
hilated. Parliamentary speech spoken
in the early hours of the morning is
printed and transmitted to the breakfast
table. Markets of Odessa, Alexandria,
New York, Calcutta, and Sydney hardly
closed ere the electric current has flashed
the quotations. Rest and time to think
almost denied many commercial and


professional men. It was the sin of


Israel. ‘ My people doth not consider.”
“Consider your ways”—there speaks a
prophet. “'Think on these things” —
there speaks an apostle, ‘‘ Hear ye the
word of the Lord” ushers in the Old
Testament. ‘He that hath ears to hear
let him hear” introduces the New. He
who pleads the pressure of business has
too much business. Men must find
time to prepare for eternity. Too much
religious work dangerous. ‘They made
me the keeper of the vineyards, but
mine own vineyard have I not kept”
(Song of Solomon). “I keep under
my body, and bring it into subjection ;
lest that by any means, when I have
preached to others, I myself should be
a castaway’’ (Paul). “Nothing is so
important as to keep an exact proportion
between the interior source of virtue
and the external practice of it, else, like
the foolish virgins, we shall find that
the oil in our lamps is exhausted when
the bridegroom comes” (Chrysostom).
Is this the meaning of our Lord’s solemn
words, “Many will say to me,” &e.
(Matt. vii. 22, 23)% Christian charity
begins at home. It is possible to build
reformatories and be ourselves unre-
formed; possible to send the Bible to
others and ourselves forget to read it;
possible to lay costly gifts on God’s
altar and not bow in penitence at his
footstool. The Christian life a growth
It is the burden of direct precept. “Grow
in grace and in knowledge” (2 Pet. iii.
18). “ Add to your faith” (2 Pet. i. 5).
It is variously illustrated. “The right-
eous shall hold on his way, and he that
hath clean hands shall be stronger and
stronger” (Job xvii. 9). “He shall
ithe a tree planted by the waters,


120


os
%


and that apreadeth out its roots by
the river” (Jer. xvii. 8). It is the


subject of apostles’ joy when Christians ©


“stand fast in the Lord” (Phil. iv. 1).
Can this be effected without time and
thought? Does not the garden of the
soul require culture? Do the flowers
of humility and charity grow wild?
Does business demand application, but
the soul’s commerce none? Must the
children’s minds be educated and their
hearts remain untrained? Each must
come into some desert place and rest
awhile with Christ.

II. The dangers of seif-communion.
1. Morbid religion. Don’t be always
a spiritual anatomist. Too frequent
looking within brings depression. Re-
ligious depression arising from neglect
of duty or commission of sin cannot co-
exist with spiritual life. But very much
depression is needless or self-induced.
We may say sometimes, “ Why art thou
cast down, O my soul?” (Ps. xlii. 11).
A man feels forsaken, and, projecting
his own feelings, imagines God has for-
saken him. Do not rashly imagine that
because you cannot every hour “ read
your title clear” that therefore your


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


NEHEMIAH. [CHAP. ¥.





name is erased from the book of life.
2. Out of undue self-communion arose
asceticism of middle ages; arises some
conventual tendencies of our own. Dream
not of becoming unworldly by escaping
from duty. “I pray not that thou
shouldest take them out of the world,
but that thou shouldest keep them from
the evil” (John xvii. 15).

III. The safe-guards of self-commu-
nion. 1. Action. From the temple
to the city.


“?Twixt the mount and multitude,
Doing or receiving good,”


Thought the basis of action. Acts
become habits) “I must work the
works of him that sent me” (John ix
4). “As the Father hath sent me into
the world, even so have I sent them into
the world” (John xvii 18; xx. 21).
Do not put asunder what God hath
joined together. Different temperaments
will give varying prominence to contem-
plation and action ; the inward and the
outward. But woe to those who neglect
either. A pure heart the indispensable
condition of a noble life. 2. God’s word.
Make that the only guide.


AN ASSEMBLY CONVOKED AGAINST SINNERS.


Lod
Vires


Partly because persons implicated
were numerous and powerful to show
them that greater numbers disapproved,
and partly to cause such shame and
remorse as might lead them to renounce
their criminal practices. The measure
was successful. Show impenitent sin-
ners how great an assembly may be set
against them. Sinners rely on being a
majority. They are decidedly superior
to the servants of God; not only in
number, but in wealth and power and in-
fluence. Were the great question What
is truth? to be decided by numbers,
they could easily determine it in their
own favour. Show that those whose
opinions and approbation are more im-
pertant are against them.

I. The good men now in the world.
Not necessarily professors of religion.
Many professors not good men. By


And I set a great assembly against them.


good men is meant men whom God will
acknowledge to be good.


II. All the good men who have ever
lived. These compose an assembly far
exceeding in number all the good
men who are now alive. Abel, Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, Moses, Elijah, John
Baptist, disciples of Jesus, early Chris-
tians, martyrs, reformers, men of ‘ May-
Flower.’


III. All the writers of the Old and
New Testaments. They are good men;
they are more—they are inspired men.
Being taught by the eternal Spirit of
God, with one voice they cry, Woe to
the wicked ; it shall be ill with him!
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but
tod’s words never.


IV. The holy angels. Consider
oumber, character, and intellectual rank.


OHAP. V.]


Perhaps exceed in number the human
race. ‘An innumerable company.” In
comparison with the least angel the
wisest human philosopher is a child.
Their holiness is perfect, spotless. They
execute the will of God.

V. The Lord Jesus Christ. The
Lord of angels and men, the appointed


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMFAH.


121


Judge, who will pronounce a sentence
on both.

VI. God the Father. Sinners strive
with their Maker. Survey the whole
assembly which is arrayed against evil
and evil-doers. Terrible to sinners ;
consolatory to Christians.— Dr. Payson,
abridged.


INconsIsTENCY witHouT Excuse.


v. 8. And I said unto them, We after our ability have redeemed our brethren the Jews,
which were sold unto the heathen ; and will ye even sell your brethren ? or shall
they be sold unto us? Then held they their peace, and found nothing to answer.


They found nothing to answer. For
what answer could be given? They
which heard Nehemiah’s accusation were
convicted by their own conscience.
Brotherhood, memories of bondage, the
great price at which they had redeemed
their brethren from Persian masters,
the inspiration of their journey to the
decayed city, the work God had given
them to do—these rose up like prophets
of evil tidings to second the noble
censures of Nehemiah. Their inconsist-
ency was without excuse.

I. The admirableness of consistency.
It is manly. Everybody reverences it.
Even in an unworthy cause it extorts
@ momentary recognition. In a worthy
cause all bow the knee and do it homage.
The heroes of history by flood and field,
the redressers of human wrongs at home
and abroad, the characters of Bible story,
were consistent. They had a purpose
and stuck to it. Despised of men,
mocked at by demons, are those whom
the inspired apostle describes as ‘‘ waver-
ing like a wave of the sea driven with
the wind and tossed ; the double-minded,
who are unstable in all their ways”
(James i. 6—8). Dignity is robbed of
its excellency and power of its strength in
the Reubens who are “unstable as water”
(Gen. xlix. 3, 4). Be persistent. Be
consistent. Is it consistent for Chris-
tian men to enter into partnership with
those who work without a conscience }
Ought Christian parents to consult first
and foremost the worldly convenience
and advantage of their children? If
religion be true, should it not decide
the just weight and the true measure !


In business, in pleasure, at home, abroad,
through the week as well as on the
Sabbath, be consistent.

II. The inexcusableness of incen-
sistency. Has nothing to recommend
it. Nothing gained. Brings discredit
upon any cause. The inconsistent man
has no faith in his position, An incon-
sistent Christian may profess but does
not possess a good creed. The creed
which influences conduct is not that
which a man holds, but that which holds
him. Life is the expositor of doctrine.
Nehemiah’s nobles called the workmen
brethren. But that was only a word of
the lip. The deed of the life made
them slaves and foreigners, Fors time
the nobles prospered. Success smiled
upon oppression. But a reckoning day
came. Summoned to Nehemiah’s bar,
they “found nothing to answer.” A
New Testament parable is recalled.
The man who had not on a wedding
garment was “speechless” (Matt. xxii.
1— 14). Profession and possession,
reality and hypocrisy, are not always
distinguishable here and now. Parable
of tares: “ Let both grow together until
the harvest” (Matt. xiti, 24—30). In
earlier times men strove for a pure visible
Church. That impossible. Our eyes
cannot distinguish true from false in
every instance. By-and-by incousist-
ency will stand self-convicted. At
heaven’s judgment-seat every one must
give an account.

Application. 1. The supreme import-
ance of character. “ As aman thinketh
in his heart, 80 is he” (Prov. xxiii. 7).
“Keep thy heart with all diligence;





for out of it are the issues of life”
(Prov. iv. 23). 2. The value of self-
reliance. Wrong-doing is contagious.
One noble imitated another in exacting
usury. Those who were half conscious
that they were doing wrong were en-


couraged by the evil example of others..


Trustthyself when thou hast the approval
of thy own conscience. 3. Remember
the bar of God. He who made Nehe-
miah upright “is a God all whose ways
are judgment: a God of truth and with-
out iniquity” (Deut. xxxii. 4). “He
that planted the ear, shall he not hear?
he that formed the eye, shall he not
see?” (Ps. xciv. 9).


Samz THEME.


The marvellous personal power of
Nehemiah. Great individuality tri-
umphs over all things. Napoleon
laughed away the pretensions of rank
by saying, “I am an ancestor.” The
force of personal character makes all
other forces give way. Especially
when the individuality is a good indi-
viduality ; when the strength of man-
hood is backed by the strength of right.
Illustration of this in the text, where
the dumbfounded nobles stand ashamed
before the challenge of the man who has
come to spy out their faults and to mend
them at all costs to himself. Subject,
the inexcusableness of inconsistency.

I. The inconsistency. Define in-
consistency. Want of harmony in the
parts of a man’s life. The presence in a
man’s being of two things which cannot
be together. A man who swears the
British oath of allegiance and takes the
pay of the English state would be an
inconsistent man if he betrayed state
secrets to a hostile country, or gave
guidance to an invading foe. That
would be treason. Religious incon-
sistency is treason against the King of
kings—treason and treachery against
the truth. 1. Worldly inconsistency.
Worldly men point sneeringly to any
little deviation from consistency in
Christian people; but if Christian charity
did not forbid the sneer might be re-
turned. The cant and pretence and
selfish departure from avowed principles


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMTAH.


[OHAP. V,





which fills the life of the children of
this world may well creep a little inte
the Church. A politician who loves
liberty, and is at the same time a tyrant
in his household and to his servants ;
a man who loves to reud and to talk
fine sentiment, and whose common life
runs along a low level of worldly mean-
ness, are examples of inconsistency. The
world had need to pluck the beam out
of its own eye before meddling with the
mote in the eye of the Church. 2. Re-
ligious inconsistency. Example of
Balaam, who prayed, “Let me die the
death of the righteous,” and who died
with a sword drawn against God ; the
Puritan, who fought for liberty to wor-
ship God, and then would not grant
toleration to his brother’s creed ; the
professing Christian of even late years,
who bought and sold men, women, and
children as slaves, are glaring instances
of contradictions in character and con-
duct. Enumerate common forms of
inconsistency in the ordinary life of
professedly Christian people... 3. Injuri-
ous effects of inconsistency. (a) To self.
It blunts the conscience, and so damages
the finer spiritual perceptions as to
deprive the soul of the perfect peace of
those who are in perfect truth. (8) To
others. It seems a contradiction of
religion, a confession of its inadequacy
to master the sin in a man, and shakes
the faith of an onlooking world in the
power of the gospel.

II. The inexcusableness. With
heads hanging like bulrushes the dumb-
founded men stood before Nehemiah, as
now the incohsistent stands before the
convictions of God’s Spirit and the
reproach of the world. 1. Infirmity is
often pleaded as an excuse. The fol-
lower of the meek and lowly Jesus so
excuses his outbursts of violent passion.
The man who hides his convictions in a
worldly circle so excuses his want of
religious courage. The man who grasps
at some questionable advantage of the
world so covers the selfishness which
has shown itself mightier than his
Christian self-denial. It is dangerous to
so shake hands with our own infirmity.
2. Ignorance is another excuse. Want
of true perception of God’s law and lack


oHAY. v.}


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH,


123


ny pe


of thoughtfiiness concerning the true
significance of his own actions are a
reason, but not an excuse, for much
inconsistency among the professed
servants of God. As some uninstructed
persons are not sure of the difference
between green and blue, and are not
pained by want of harmony in colours
that are joined but not reconciled to each
other, so a blunt moral sense may not
detect all the contradictions of his own
religious character. 3. But infirmity may
be strengthened and ignorance may be
instructed. These are not excuses,
“Truth in the inward parts” is the


requirement of him “those we are, and
whom we serve.” To be sanctified
wholly (not one-sidedly or partially) is
the Christian’s prayer—body, soul,
and spirit all penetrated through and
through with holiness,

Application. 1. Do not leave to others
the task of detecting your inconsistency.
Find it out yourself. 2. Do not weakly
reconcile yourself to things which can
have no place in a complete Christian
character. 3. Seek more of that freedom
of the truth which liberates a man from
these reproaching faults.


Gop’s PEOPLE ONDER THE Hye or a Crrrican Wor.
v. 9. Also I said, It ts not good, &e.


The world has a spleen against the
Church. The Church is an incarnate
condemnation of the world. “I have
saved them out of the world.” However
full of charity the elect of God may be,
they stand rank on rank, by their creed
and their practice, witnessing with silent
censure against all ungodliness. Hence
in self-defence the world watches for
the Church’s faults, “rejoicing in in-
iquity ’”—the discovered iniquity of the
professedly good. Our religious self-
government is watched by a critical
“ opposition,” ever ready with its “ re-
proach.” Nehemiah asks a fair question:
“Ought ye not to walk in the fear of
God becanse of the reproach of the
heathen our enemies?”

I. The reproach of the enemy. The
world’s criticism of God’s people is very
merciless and very unfair. It makes no
allowances. It does not “remember
that we are dust.” It has no place for
the extenuations of charity. The world
will not under-rate, but over-rate, the
defects of the good. Malicious rumour
makes a mountain out of a molehill;
like photography, it exaggerates every
freckle or scar on the countenance of a
good man’s life. Beware of the reproach
of the world our enemy. 1. Accapt
thes condition of life. It is useless to
kick against the pricks. We may be
moved to scorn by the mean carping of
the foe; but it flings back its motto,


“ All’s fair in war.” If you contend
with an uncivilized enemy you get ready
for uncivilized deeds. Give mercy, but
expect none. Do not call the world
hard names; the world is simply the
world, and no more, “Fret not thyself
because of evil-doers,” nor because of
their evil tongues. 2. Do not despise
this power of enmity. (a) There is a
noble scorn of the evil-tongued society.
Here is an old motto of an independent
mind. “They say! What do they
say? Let them say!” Do not be
afraid to live. Let us not creep apolo-
getically through the world. We owe
no one an apology for our fear of God.
It is they who are wrong, and most of
them know it very well. If you carry
the Christian flag as if ashamed of it
the world will despise you all the more.
It likes out and out manhood. Do not
“ liberalize” your creed, or conceal your
conviction, or blush at your good deeds
for fear of reproach. ‘‘ Whosoever is
ashamed of me and of my words, of
him will I be ashamed.” Be no “reed
shaken with the wind.” (8) But there
is an unwise scorn of the world’s opinion.
A thing lawful for me as a man may be
inexpedient for me as a Christian man.
Many good men are doing hurt to
Christ’s cause by a reckless bravado,
which flows out of an uncontrolled
independence or out of an unthinking
foolishness. A man in ambush may


124


show he is no coward by exposing him-
self to danger before the enemy,-but he
may show that he is a fool by revealing
the position of his comrades and involv-
ing them in peril. ‘Walk circumspectly,
not as fools, but as wise.” 3. For the
world’s own sake have a eare of the
world’s reproach. (1) You may make
the evil man doubt the God you fear.
“ Another saint unmasked,” says the
world, as it exults over the declared
inconsistency of a Christian. “ By one
judge all,” says the critic. You cast a
veil over God’s face, and put truth at
the bar “on suspicion,” when you do
not walk before the enemy in the fear
of God. (2) You may hurt the con-
science of the worldly man. To let him
see his own fault in you is to justify
his fault to his pliant conscience. When
you do an ill thing you endorse the ill
things another does. (3) You cast
away your influence for good. All
things are possible to you if the world
believes in you. You can cast out its
devils and tread on its serpents and
scorpions, and nothing shall by any
means hurt you. But if you cast away
the confidence of your unconverted
brother you can do nothing with him
because of his unbelief. We want to
have faith in God and to make the
world have faith in us,

II. The caution of the godly.
“ Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts :
... having a good conscience; that,
whereas they speak evil of you, as of evil-
doers, they may be ashamed that falsely
accuse your good conversation in Christ.”
1. Elements of caution. (a) Be strong in
the fear of God. Let the solemn thought
of his watchfulness guide your steps.
Remember the one omnipresent Witness
whose eye shines like a star over the
darkest gloom of secrecy. “ Fear him,
ye saints, and ye shall then have nothing
else to fear.” Cultivate the sentiment
of that ancient saying, “Thou God seest


[OHAP. ¥


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


me!” If clear of his reproach, the re-
proach of the enemy shall be but as a
hailstone against the flint. (8) Be rigor-
ous in self-condemnation. Be charitable
in judging others; be just in judging
thyself. If you are lax, let it not be
with self. For your own sake be what
you would seem. Above all fear of the
world’s reproach, fear the reproach of an
indignant self. ‘To thine own self be
true, and it shall follow, as the night the
day, thou canst not then be false to any
man.” 2, Spheres of caution. (a) Per-
sonal life. In all those elements of life
which are “your own business, ’’ and
not the world’s affair, be on your guard.
Reverent behaviour, amiable temper,
truth and kindness of tone and speech
in conversation, godly direction of your
habits and your household—let these be
above suspicion. Your habits are the
atmosphere and your home the environ-
ment of yourself; let them become you.
(8) Public life. Though in Rome, despise
the ill-doer’s motto. In the world; be
not of it. Where association makes
you unable to prevent be no advocate of
evil. Do the world’s work and change
the world’s gold with Christian fingers.
(y) Church life, Remember that in all
Church life higher maxims and nobler
usages than those of the world should —
predominate. Do not blare out the
faults of fellow Christians. For Christ’s
sake, for the world’s sake, cast a cloak
of charity over the misunderstandings
and the misunderstandable doings of the
household of faith. Do not tell your
enemy how weak your own brother is.
In private life, in public life, in Church
life, walk in the fear of God because of
the reproach of the heathen our enemies.
Application. 1. Pray. “ Who is
sufficient for these things?” Draw
deep inspirations of the Holy Spirit of
God. 2. Watch. Keep open eyes on
yourself and on your temptationa.


Wuart Orgers vo no Excusr ror My porne.


v.10. I likewise, and my brethren, and my servants, might, &c.


Mehemiah’s great strongth of good-
mees and his nobleness of mind made


him in his historic conduet a law untae
himself. 1. He rose above all example.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH,


The contrast between nimself and the
common run of his contemporaries is
evident throughout the story. “He
heard a voice they could not hear.”
2. He rose above all the bare requtre-
ments of law. ‘Is it so nominated in
the bond?” is never the question of a
heroically good man. Not what I am
required to do, but what I am able to
do; not what I am commanded, but
what I can, ishisrule of action. 3. Hts
generous goodness made him a law unto
himself. See this illustrated in the
text. What others do is no excuse for
my doing the same. “I might exact of
them.”

I. Common contravention of this
rule. 1. A common reason for wrong-
doing is that others dott. Easy to find
precedent and example for anything we
wish to do. Im the practices of the
world and in the faults of good men we
can find, if we are perverse enough,
plenty of examples of evil 2. A more
powerful reason still is the fact that tt
will be done, so I may as well do it, and
have the benefit of it. This will justify
anything to aman. The schoolboy in


1254





Cowper’s story robs the orchard because
his companions will go even if he should
remain away. The business man con-
tents himself with iniquitous action
because others would do it in any case,
and he may as well have the benefit as
another. The legislator enacts an un-
righteous statute or favours an unholy
conquest because these things will be
done,

II. Vindication of thisrule. 1. Not
another’s conscience, but his own conscience,
tsaman’s guide. If every one descended
to the lower level of his neighbour, the
world would go with swift slide into
the bottomless pit. To stand faithful
where others fail is the glory of the
servant of the Lord. “They do it, and
will do it :—let them do it; I will not.”
2. The evil doings of others will not
eave a man from the doom of hte own
wrong-doing. “Thou hast delivered thy
soul.” That surely is some consolation
for the man who stands aloof from evil.
“T likewise, and my brethren, and my
servants, might exact of them money
and corn,” if this wrong exaction by
others might justify it in us


Crencuinc A Goop Resorvrion.


v. 12.


“Tn a time of danger we understand
a general interest. Every one is called
in to take a part in the struggles that
we make for liberty. And yet when
the toil was a little over some of them
acted as if they thought that Providence
was not a public friend, but only a sort
of a factor to a few private families. It
is a misrepresentation of him who gives
us the mercy if we do not make it
extensive. He accepts not the persons
of princes nor regards the rich more
than the poor, for they are all the work
of his hands. You must not think he
is so lavish of his bounty to the great
men of the earth merely that they may
glitter upon a throne, but be his minis-
ters for good; and this they cannot be
if they resolve to confine their influence.
Princes love to be called God’s repre-
sentatives, but they usually understand
it in no other attribute than his power ;


Then said they, We will restore, &e.


whereas that is incommunicable; it is a
glory that he never gives to another.
The chief titles in which he would be
represented by them are those of justice
and mercy.” These strong, brave, and
true words were written by Thomas
Bradbury more than a century and a
half ago, and applied to his own times.
The human heart is the same in all ages.
It is treacherous. Nehemiah knew this.


‘The words of the oppressors were fair-


“We


seeming. ‘We will restore.”
will require nothing of them.” ‘“ We
will do as thou gayest.” But the very


greatness of the promise constitutes its
danger. It is too good to be true;
needs binding force. The priest’s pre-
sence will give the oath “legal validity
for judicial decisions.” It will also
impart solemnity. If tempted to op
press again the awful oath will rise to
recollection. There is the truth of life


126








in this old-world sesne. Men need all
the helps they can get.

I. In the resistance of temptation.
The balance of our lives has need of
one scale of reason to poise another of
passion, The proverbs of many peoples
speak of the fragile nature of promises.
and vows. He who ‘stands on his un-
aided resolution has insecure footing.
Forgetting is easy. Self-interest is
powerful. The present moment out-
weighs the future hour. Philosophy
would teach us to forego a moment's
rapture for lifelong peace; but we are
not all philosophical. The now is here,
the rapture is possible; the future is
uncertain, the peace is contingent. All
experience of life teaches that men will
barter future blessedness for present
happiness, “The things which are seen”
bulk larger in the eyes of men than
‘“‘the things which are not seen.” We
cannot afford to neglect (a) the daily
reading of the word of God ; (0) private
and ejaculatory prayer; (c) covenant en-
gagements with God. Many Christians
have found it helpful to enter into a
written covenant. The signature has
had the same effect as Nehemiah’s oath.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[OHLAP. V.


Any system of spiritual mnemonics ts
valuable. What is wanted is quickness
to discover temptation, and firmness to
resist it, ‘Thy word have I hid in
mine heart, that I might not sin against
thee” (Ps. cxix. 11). ‘It is written!”
Jesus answered and said to the.tempter
(Matt. iv.). “Watch and pray, that
ye enter not into temptation” (Matt.
xxvi. 41). All inspirations that are
available are needed.

II. In the performance of duty.
Doing good is a more comprehensive
phrase than easy task. ‘ Virtue is its
own reward.” Possibly, but not always
so regarded. A hard task trying to
help those who hinder. He who will
serve must suffer. Let him despise not
the smallest strength from any quarter.
Bind thyself to God’s altar with any
cords thou mayest obtain. Reliance on
God will bring the only safe self-reliance.
For each day’s task God has promised
daily strength. For rugged paths he
has provided wear-resisting shoes, Lift
up thy burden. Put thy foot forward
along the path God has marked out,
“ Trust in the Lord and do good.” “ Thy
God hath commanded thy strength.”


Tus Trrrors or THe Lorp PERsuaDmG MEN.
v. 13. Also I shook my lap, and said, &c.


This text describes a solemn scene.
A reformer with a stern, hard nerve of
righteousness arraigning a guilty band
of fellow mortals before God. The
nobles feel the spell of Nehemiah’s
strong conscience and the still stronger
spell of Jehovah’s threatening, and have
promised to reform their deeds. Their
ruthless friend, having compelled them
to swear to their resolves, turning upon
them, exclaims, “ Now you are committed
to your course.’ ‘TY shook my lap, and
said, So God shake out every man that
performeth not this promise. And all
the congregation said, Amen.” A similar
scene is recorded in Deut. xxvii.,
where the curses of God were read as
the doom of those who broke the laws
solemnly repeated before the people, and.
where, like the murmur of a surge on
the coast, the deep Amen of the people


rolled back in acceptance of the stern
alternative — obedience or the curse.
Twelve times over from the slopes of
Ebal rang the “ Cursed be he” of the
officiating Levite, and twelve times was
flung back the united Amen of Israel. In
a similar spirit Nehemiah extemporized
this solemn binding ceremony of the
text.

I. The doom of unrighteousness ac-
knowledged. Amen in one significance
means “verily,” “truly,” “so it is and
shall be.” The Lord will shake out
from his lap the wicked like a man
shaking the worthless dust from his
garment. It is even so. Amen/ Say
to the wicked, It shall be ill with
him. 1. Natural instinct asserts this.
By natural instinct one holds no precise
philosophical dogma. This is enough
for our purpose very rational mind


CHAP, v.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


127





in a land of light and knowledge has
the deep, inwrought conviction that
doom must follow misdoing. Fiery
sentences asserting this are written in
legends of the heathen world. Nemesis,
like a bloodhound, follows the wrong-
doer. Ancient poetry grows terrible in
is tragic representations of this great
belief. “ Our heart condemns us.” God’s
warning words are answered by the
soul’s Amen/ It is even sol 2. The
operation of natural law exhibits this
great principle, that God must one day
shake away the worthless. ‘‘ Nature
gives us a word and a blow, and the blow
first.” Excess or transgression of phy-
sical law threatens us as with fixed
bayonets. Put a bound upon thy lust
and appetite, or beware, is the voice of all
experience. No less a human than a
Divine proverb is the saying, “ He that
breaketh the hedge, the serpent shall bite
him.” The sensual, who has lost his
health ; the drunkard, who has pulled
down the pillars of his home; the dis-
honest, who is cast out a despised and
characterless thing, all point one way.
It is nature’s Amen to the Bible curse—
It is so. 3. History fills her picture
galleries with illustrations of this point.
The history of nations is a story of well-
doing and its reward, prosperity, and of
ill-doing and its sure-footed vengeance.
History puts her brazen trumpet to her
lips and blows out an assenting Amen!
It isso. God will shake out as he has
shaken out the wicked. You cannot
argue with or alter this stable law of
life. You may lay an unbelieving hand
upon the letters of doom, you may cast
doubt after doubt into the bottomless
pit, but not one jot or tittle of the
world’s law which is God’s law can be
alfected thereby. “Be sure your sin
will find you out.”

II. The doom of unrighteousness
accepted. Amen not only means “ It
is so,” but, “So let i be.” By their
Amen the people signed their agreement
to the conditions, their acceptance of
the pains and penalties of the trans-
gressor. The repentant people said
Amen to the curse. They indignantly
denounced their baser self. “If I could
be so base as to neglect my vow to God,


let it be even thus—tet me be shaken
out of God’s lap of rest and blessed-
ness.” That is the significance of their
Amen! 1. Yet tt is dangerous to mis-
understand this, Many a struggling
man, after being repeatedly vanquished
by a bad habit, has in an hour of de-
spair clutched at something like this as
tf to frighten his own soul. He has
invoked a conditional curse upon his
head. “If 1 repeat this let me perish
by it!” has gone from the half-mad-
dened mind in the hour of self-disgust.
Then there has come the repetition of
the sin, “for the strongest oaths are
straw to the fire in the blood,” and the
poor sinner has settled down with the
thought that his doom is sealed. There
ts not a litile of this practical fataliem,
Avoid it! ‘That way madness lies |”
2. But there ts no need to pray for a
curse. If we sin the curse is sure; and
the Amen of the repentant soul, whose
only wish is for well-doing, is merely,
a waking up of the conscience to this
gloomy fact. Let it sink into the soul.
Our God is a consuming fire, therefore
know “the terrors of the Lord.” We
may look at the mild glories of mercy
until we forget the sterner side of life.
Brace the soul by meditations on the
deep, inexorablesternness of offended lai.
3. When engaging in formal covenant
with God, when taking the pledge of
conversion, when engaging in the solemn-
ities of public or private worship, we
virtually bind our souls with this curse.
To give ourselves up to blessing is to
denounce upon our backsliding self the
curse. When a soldier takes his oath
he insures his fidelity of the reward and
prospective promotion, and by that same
act says Amen to the law, “Thou shalt
be shot for desertion or for treachery !”
It is the same in citizenship. All well-
doing, right-loving citizens agree to the
pains and penalties which await their
possible malefactions. It is thus that
life is girdled with a deep gulf of doom.
Evil to the evil-doer is the proposition.
It is so. Amen! says every voice that
can argue with man. So be tt, Amen/
says the soul that rises up to follow
good.

III. The doom of unrighteousness


128


Phy





avoided. ‘And the people did accord-
ing to their promise.” 1, The good
man shuts himself up to his course.
Like Simon Peter, he can turn nowhere.
“To whom shall we go” but unto Thee.
No turning, like Lot’s wife. The fire of


doom is the end of all backward steps. .


Paul-like, let us ‘leave the things that
are behind.” 2. The good man must not
depend upon the mere binding force of
his oath. Pledges and prisons are but
geeen withes on the strong man of sin if
there be no other bond. Goodness by
the rop is not safe or real or lasting.


A Man rorrcorne gis Rieuts


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH,





{oHar. Vv





The commandment often arouses the
contrary desire. 3. “ My grace is suf-
Jicient for thee.” The vow of the soul is
its warrant of sincerity; the steadfast
faith of the soul in the grace of Jesus
Christ is its defence against temptations
to desertion and disobedience.

Application. 1. Ponder the inevitable
terrors of the Lord against all unright-
eousness. 2. Vow solemnly the vow of
repentance and reformation. 3. Pray
for hourly strength to do according to
this promise.


FOR THE SAKE oF HIS Doutizs.


v. 14. Moreover from the time that I was appointed, &c.


Nehemiah was a law unto himself.

Refused to be guided by others’ example.
- “JT might exact of them money and
corn” (v.10). Rose superior to insist-
ence on his own rights. ‘The former
governors were chargeable unto the
people” (v. 15). The principle is this :
—A man must sometimes forego his
rights for the sake of his duties,

I. Rights must be asserted. It will
not do to weakly allow selfishness to
trample upon the too submissive soul.
St. Paul’s insisting on his privileges as a
Roman citizen an example.

II. Rights must not be pressed too
far. A man has prejudiced views of
his own worth and deserts. According
to his self-importance will be the large-
ness of his views of his own rights.
“The rights of man” is frequently a
hollow cry of selfishness.

III. Rights must be tempered by
considerations «f duty. Duty is a
grand governing word. It sways men
more than we think. The holiday-
maker is restless after a while to get
back to the routine of his duties. Duty
is our home; pleasure is the place we
take a trip to now and then. Our happi-
ness is more bound up with our duties
than with our rights. We can survive
being cheated of a right, but we cannot


escape if we have neglected our duties.
It was such considerations as these
which swayed the Jewish liberator.

IV. The due adherence to this prin-
ciple is the self-sacrificing spirit of
Christianity. ‘The Son of man came
not to be ministered unto, but to min-
ister.” The crowning glory of the re-
demptive life of Jesus is, that though
he was rich, yet for our sakes he became
poor. In the second chapter of the
Philippian Epistle we have the Christian
setting of this doctrine. The example
of Nehemiah, who came among the
miserly, selfish Jews, and flung back to
the people even the dues and monies
which were properly his, in the great-
ness of his self-sacrifice shrinking from
insistence on his own rights as he would
from sin, was like an incarnation of
nobleness for the fallen minds of his
contemporaries to look at and emulate.
In the sweet story of old this same grand
law is carried higher. In the life of St
Paul it is repeated. In the story ot
missionaries and martyrs there is a pro-
longation of this line of light. Blessed
are they who reflect its blaze and join
this glorious succession,

Application. 1. Guard against the
selfish spirit of the world. 2. Seek and
show the unselfish spirit of Christ,


GHP, V.]


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: NEHEMIABR


29


RN


t


A Morro vor a Mamty Lirn.
v.15. So did not I, because of the fear of God,


There is a motto for a manly life.
The key-note of his character was not
fear of the crowd, but fear of his own
conscience. Whata noble thing is the
tron sense of duty. This was the strong
sinew of the Duke of Wellington’s great
nature. Whether in the Church or the
world, every circle feels the presence and
reverences the career of one who bears
this hall-mark of duty. So will not I, for
conscience’ sake, Briefly sketch the story
of Nehemiah, as illustrating his adher-
ence to his self-chosen motto. It was the
banner of his whole life-battle, and he
held it with a clenched hand in every
high place of temptation.

I. The regulative power of a lofty
motive. In manifold forms the firm
and heroic have ruled their lives by a
power superior to their own lower nature.
l. “* The fear of God” is Nehemiah’s
phrase. That reverential, loving awe of
the all-holy Father and Ruler of men. 2.
“The love of Christ” is the warmer
sentiment which corresponds to this in
Paul’s phraseology. Fuller light brought
a deeper sentiment. The thought of
Christ’s love awakening love for Christ,
and becoming in man an incarnation of
heavenly inspiration. 3. “ Religious
principle” is another colder, broader, yet
noble expression of the same animator
of good men. 4. “‘Conacience,” “the
sense of duty,” “the instinct of right”
are less precise variations of the motives
which sway all whose lives are redeemed
from the ignoble.

II. The courage to be singular is
implied in this motto of the Jewish
liberator. 1. Let there be no singularity
for singularity’s sake. Opposition may
be our misfortune, but must not be our
ambition. To sing out of tune for the
sake of having your voice heard is
weakness, not strength. 2. Yet this
world has always rested as on granite
pillare on men who could be singular.
Moses refusir.g to be identified with the
godless nationality of Egypt. The three
Hebrew children standing upright in


Kk


Babylon like watch-towers of truth.
Peter and John giving their summary
answer to the council: “We ought to
obey God rather than man.” Luther at
Worms crying out, “ It is not wise or safe
for a man to do anything against his con-
science.” These men and their heroic
brethren in resistance have all glorified
their lives by this motto: “So did
not I.”

III. Applications of this principle
in the commonplace life of all men.
1. To HIMSELF @ man must say No!
“‘ Let him deny himself” is a precept we
must practise if we would even live. It
is also a necessity of our happiness.
“True quietness of heart is gotten not
by obeying our passions, but by resisting
them,” It is essential to our self-respect
in “the struggle of the instinct that
enjoys with the more noble instinct
which aspires.” The mastery of self ia
the foundation-victory. ‘To thine own
self be true, and it shall follow, as the
night the day, thou canst not then be
false to any man.” 2. To THE WORLD
a man must say NO! Prevalency of
temptations fora man to lethimselfdown,
to barter purity for pleasure and honour
for gold. How many poor men sell
their birthright of immortality for some
animal gratification! How many sell
their Lord for thirty pieces of silver, more
or less, 3, “So did not I” is the YouTH’s
motto. “Tf sinners entice thee, consent
thou not.” It is a manlier and a stronger
thing to go right than to go wrong.
“Stand thou firm as an anvil that is
beaten.”

IV. The simplicity and directness
of this life-motto. Nehemiah’s reason
for his nonconformity was « very simple
one. ‘In my view this practice is not
right!” You cannot be always arguing
a thing. You cannot be “ seeking truth”
(to quote the world’s cant expression for
moral irresolution) all your life. Hind
it quickly, and stick to italways. Pro-
viding a man’s heart is had enough, his
head will usually be clever enough to


120


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[cHaAP. ¥





argue for his defence. The devil is said
to be the best of advocates, and can quote
Seripture to his purpose. But in plain
matters of right and wrong “ there is a
spirit in man, and the inspiration of the
Almighty giveth him understanding.”


Nehemiah’s reason for not pocketing the ©


money as others had done was a very
simple answer— I fear God.”

V. This motto is our guide in
doubtful matters. Many bad things
are doubtful for want of a sensitive
nerve in the soul, That which to one
is “but a choleric word, to another is
flat blasphemy.” To Nehemiah’s con-
temporaries and predecessors this prac-
tice of money-making had seemed a
lawful one, but Nehemiah said that it
was one in which a man could not keep
clean hands, The scrupulous has the
solution of his difficulties in his own
conscience. Forego the doubtful for
God’s sake. Make your self-denial in
that matter a sacrifice to God, and it
shall be to him as the odour of incense.

Application. 1. Let us understand
and acquire this great life-principle.
The fear of God is not fear or dread of
a Being outside us, but reverence and
submission to a holy Spirit within. 2.
Let it be our strife, at whatever sacrifice,
to reverence this powerful sentiment.
“ Hear the conclusion of the whole
matter: Fear God, and keep his com-
mandments: for this is the whole duty
of man.”


TiuuustRativE Porm :-—


“ Brother, up to the breach
For Christ’s freedom and truth;
Let us act as we teach,
With the wisdom of age and the vigour of youth.
Heed not their cannon-balls,
Ask not who stands or falls,
Grasp the sword
Of the Lord,
Aad forward!


Brother, strong in the faith
That “ the right will come right,”
Never tremble at death,
Never think of thyself ’mid the roar of the fight,
Hark to the battle cry
Sounding from yonder sky!
Grasp the sword
Of the Lo
And for !


Brother, sing a loud psalm ;
Our hope’s not forlorn,
After storm comes the calm,
After darkness and twilight breaks forth the
new morn.
Let the mad foe get madder ;
Never quail! up the ladder
Grasp the sword
Of the Lord,
And forward !


Brother, up to the breach
For Christ’s freedom and truth ;
If we live we shall teach,
With the strong faith of age and the bright
hope of youth.
If we teal then o’er us
Will ring the loud chorus ;
Grasp the sword
Of the Lord,
And forward !—Norman MacLeod,


ILLUSTRATIONS.


Singularity.— We must learn to say ‘No.’
We must dare, if need be, to be singular. Like
the young Joseph, when you are tempted astray
by seducing voices, let your answer be, ‘How
can I do this great wickedness and sin against
God?’ Like the young Daniel, when forbidden
pleasures and questionable delights are urged
upon your appetites, be ‘purposed in’ your
‘heart that’ you ‘will not defile’ yourself
with them, and choose pulse and water with the
relish of a good conscience rather than such
dainties. Like the same Daniel, when the
crowd are flocking at the sound of the sackbut
and ects 2 to worship some golden image,
keep your knees unbent amidst the madness,
learn to stand erect though you alone are up-
right in the midst of a grovelling multitude,
and protest, ‘We will not serve thy gods nor
worship the golden image which thou hast set

.’ Like Nehemiah, dare to lose money rather
than adopt sources of profit which others may
use without a thought, but which your eon-
science shrinks from; and to all the various en-
ticements of pleasure, and gain, and ease, and

pular loose maxims for the conduct oppose

ovable resistance, founded on a higher law
and a mightier motive. ‘So did not I, because
of the fear of God.’””—4. Maclaren, D.D.

The mighty motive. “So did not I, because of
the fear of God.” “The heart cannot be pre-
vailed upon to part with the world by a simple
aot of resignation, But may not the heart be
prevailed upon to admit into its preference
another, who shall subordinate the world, and
bring it down from its wonted ascendancy? It
the throne which is placed there must have an
oceupier, and the tyrant that now reigns hag
occupied it wrongfully, he may not leave a
bosom which would rather detain him than be
left in desolation, But may he not give way to
the lawful sovereign ?’’—Chalmers.

“ By his place Nehemiah had an advantage
of oppressing his brethen, if he durst have been


wo wicked; and from those that had before him


ORAP. V.]


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


131





been honoured with that office he had examples
of such as could not only swallow the common
allowance of the governor without rising in
their consciences, which showed a digestion
strong enough, considering the peeled state of
the Jews at that time; but could, when them-
selves had sucked the milk, let their cruel serv-
ants suck the blood of this poor people also by
illegal exactions; so that N AAS coming
after such oppressors, if he had taken his allow-
ance, and but eased them of the other burdens
which they groaned under, no doubt might have
assed for merciful in their thoughts. But he
not go so far, A man may possibly be an


Cowsorovs


oppressor in exacting his own. Nehemiah knew
they were not in a condition to pay, and there-
fore he durst not require it. But as one whe
comes after a bad husbandman, that hath driven
his land and sucked out the heart of it, casts it
ap fallow for atime till it recovers its lost
strength, so did Nehemiah spare this oppressed
po And what, I pray, was it that preserved

im from doing as the rest had done? We have
the answer in his own words ; ‘ But so did not
I, because of the fear of the Lord.” The man
was honest, his heart touched with a sincere fear
of God, and this kept him right.”-—Gwrnad/,


INTEGRITY.


v. 19. Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have done for
this people.


Nehemiah’s appeal to God to deal
with him according to the integrity of
his life is several times repeated in this
book (xiii. 14, 22). “ He fed the people
in the integrity of his heart, and guided
them by the skilfulness of his hands,”
God-fearing, faithful, and unselfish, in
every step he could boldly look back
upon his progress and take the satis-
faction of an approving conscience,
There is something noble and something
dangerous in this sentiment.

I, The habit of righteousness. To
eome men it is given to possess great
accuracy of character, to others it is
given to be exposed constantly to a
course of honest blundering. Llustrated
in the sphere of intelligence. One man
can never write a letter to satisfy him
the first time—he must re-write it; while
another lays a firm hand on the paper
and never writes anything that he needs
to erass or be sorry for. Among men
of genius there are some who are dash-
ing and brilliant in their thoughts and
deeds, but now and then their work is
weakened by the mistakes found therein ;
while there are others who seem never
to be inaccurate in thought or blunder-
ing in deed. “The Duke of Wellington
is, I believe (says Niebuhr), the only
general in whose conduct of war we
cannot discover any important mistake.”
The mind of such men is a chronometer
as compared with the cheap clock-work
of less careful and less certain minds.
So it is in the moral sphere. One has
a severely even and consistent nature,


another full of moral eccentricities.
Bursts of virtue and of faultiness alter-
nate in these last-named so as to make
them a continual perplexity to their
friends. Goldsmith happily touches
this in his pleasantry on a contemporary.


‘‘ Here lies Edmund Burke, whose genius was
such
We scarcely can praise it or blame it too much,”


Yet when we consider how an hour’s
Sault may undo a week's virtue, how by
one error or sin you may put back your
nature or your work more than you
promote it by many excellences, it is
wise to be severe upon “ faults,” especi-
ally upon our own. To be “without
fault in the day of God is the mark of
all Christian longing ; to have ‘“ neither
spot nor wrinkle nor any such thing”
in his glorious vesture the Church is the
desire of that Lord of whom it was said
while he tabernacled among men, “I
find in him no fault at all.” 1. Aim at
a perfect walk with God. “Search me,
O God, and see if there be any wicked
way in me.” See ver. 9: “Ought ye
not to walk in the fear of our God be-
cause of the reproach of the heathen our
enemies.” ‘Ye are the temples of the
Holy Ghost” is the restraining thought
to keep us from fault. “The blood of
Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin”
is our refuge in our stumbles. 2. Strive
to remedy the faults of your brother. To
mend his character is better than to
mend his fortune; to perfect him is
better than to perfect the surroundings


132


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[OHAP. V





which he must leave behind him. 3.
At the same time, cover with charity and
bear with patience the failures of weak
human nature. You cannot measure
the greatness of his inward difficulties.
‘¢ What's done-you partly may compute,
But never what’s resisted.”
Be severe on your own fault; be gentle
with the fault of your brother.

II. The noble refuge of the right-
eous. A little poem, whose every line is
a thread of gold, speaks of the man
“whose conscience is his strong retreat.”
In every circumstance and crisis of life
this is a safe place for the thoughts to
dwell. 1. In prosperity. It is a joy
to know that good has come by good
means. The rich man whose money-
bags are all witnesses of iniquity, whose
every gain signifies dishonour, must
have a wasp-sting in every fruit he
tastes. Accumulated wealth is but an
accumulation of doom to the man who
prospers wrongfully. But to have oa
good conscience as the companion of good
fortune is to drink of the sweetest cup
of earthly happiness. 2. In adversity.
When other miseries are upon a man it
is glorious to be free from that arch-
angel of misery, a guilty conscience. The
drunkard, who looks upon the desolation
of his family, and who knows that his
own trembling hands have pulled down
the pillars of his home; the extravagant
and reckless, who see in their ruin the
ripe harvest for which they sowed, sit
in the dark place with no consolatory
light at all. If I am bereft of my
integrity I am bereaved. Sweet it is in
adversity to sit without the whips and
scorns of self-accusation. 3. In the
relationships of life. To know I have
not wilfully hurt the health, or con-
science, or happiness of my fellow is
an angel remembrance as life’s evening
comes on. Guilty men have repented


and found a Saviour’s mercy before now
whose after-thoughts have been gloomy
with remembrance of injuries done to
their fellows. So St. Paul meekly
sorrows over the madness which had in
former days damaged the flock of God.


.4. In death. O death, where is thy


sting if the soul is found in Christ, and
the memory plays like a setting sun ona
well-spent life? ‘ All that I have done
for this people.” The good deeds of a
well-spent life are shining companions to
the soul as it goes through the windings
of the last dark valley. Contrast with
ceeen the guilty thoughts of the bad


“T have lived long enough; my way of life
Is fallen into the sear, the yellow leaf;
And that which should accompany old age
I must not look to have; but in their stead
Curses, not loud but deep, mouth-honour breath
Which the poor heart would fain deny, but
dare not,”


ITT. The dangers of the righteous.
To stand upon our righteous habits is
to select a wrong basis. Goodness is
rather the buttress of the wall than its
foundation.


‘‘ Nor alms or deeds that I have done
Can for a single sin atone;
To Calvary alone I flee ;
O God, be merciful to me,”


Self-righteousness brings pride and
uncharitableness. When Archbishop
Whateley lay dying some one said, “ It
is the greatness of your lordship’s mind
that supports you.” “ No, it isnot” (he
said); “it is faith in Christ that sup-
ports me.” That is the Rock of ages,

Application. 1. Strive after such
integrity as will bring satisfaction to the
soul in the great review at the last. 2.
Let no thought of your own goodness
come as a shadow in front of the cross to
rob the Redeemer of the glory of his sal-
vation,


Tae Sanrr’s Surrort.
v.19, Think wpon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have done for
this people.


Two motives induced Nehemiah to
pray thus: the many great and good
things he had done for Church and


state; the many great and desperate
dangers he had already met with, and
would still have to encounter. There


OHAP. V.]


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


133





were three solemn comings of three
famous persons to Jerusalem—Zerub-
babel, Ezra, and Nehemiah. The secret
of Nehemiah’s courage—his heart was
on his God.

First, of the sense of the text. “Think,”
properly “‘remember.” To remember is
(a) to keep and hold fast in memory ;
opposed to forgetting. (6) To call to
mind forgotten things. A word derived
from this root is put for a memorial
(Exod. xxviii. 12) and for records
(Esther vi 1). Remembering is in
Scripture applied to (1) God and (2)
man. To God properly in first signifi-
cation. God never forgets. ‘“ Known
unto him are all his works” (Acts xv.
18). Remembrance is also applied to
God in the second signification (Job
vil. 7; x 9; xiv. 3). He has a book
of remembrance (Mal. iii, 16). These
are to be taken “ tropically,” by way of
similitude. Nehemiah’s “ remember”
means, “May I have assurance and
others’ evidence.” ‘My God,” an ap-
propriating particle (“‘ God” — Heb.
Elohim), a plurality of persons, a unity


of nature, “For good,” ¢. 6, goodnoss.
The saint’s support is God.

1. The person petitioned. 2. The
point prayed for.

I. The person.
“God.” 2. Special relation. ‘ My.”

II. The point prayed for. 1. The
kind of it, 2. The end of it. 1. The
kind. (1) An act desired of God.
‘Think upon.” (2) The special object.
“Me.” 2. The end. (1) Generally
“For good.” (2) Particularly. (a) The
ground—* that I have done.” (6) Th-
rule—“ according to.” (¢) The extent
—“all.” (d) The limitation—“ for this
people.” Observations hence arising.
1. God the support of his saints. 2. Pe-
culiar God to believer. “My.” 3. God
hath remembrancers. 4. God is soonest
drawn to his own. 5. Prayer proper
Jor one’s own good. 6. Works may be
pleaded before God. 17. Man’s works
are the rule of God's reward. 8, Every-
thing well done shall be rewarded. 9.
Good done to God's people ts most
acceptable._—Dr. Wm. Gouge, 1642.


1. General title.


Tos Rewewszance or Goop Dexzps a Prttow or Rest ror a Goop Man.
v.19. Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have done for
this people.


“Wehemiah’s soul was frank with
God. There is freedom of access to a
throne of grace for every believer (Heb.
iv. 16), ‘Think upon me, my God, for
good, according to all that I have done
for this people,’ is not a presumptuous
conceit, but a childlike simplicity. The
gross mind of the world would confound
the two. Where we know that God
has led us in paths of righteousness,
we may well use that knowledge, and
encourage our souls by it, Nehe-
miah had but few around him who
could reach high enough to sympathize


fully with him; and it was thus his


great comfort to pour out his soul,
according to truth, before the God
whose good hand had guided him. God
wishes no mock modesty from us. His
grace in our hearts and lives should be
acknowledged (comp. 1 Tim. i 12).”—
Orosby. The personal pronoun ia very


prominent in David’s autobiography.
“T have preached.” “TI have not refrained
my lips” (Ps. xl.). “My defence is of
God” (Ps. vii). ‘‘ Thou hast tried me,
and shalt find nothing” (Pa xvii.).
St. Paul boldly cites his own example.
Readers of his epistles note his self-
consciousness. ‘ Whatsoever things ye
have learned, and received, and heard,
and seen in me, do” (Phil iv. 9).
“‘ Brethren, be followers together of me”
(Phil iii, 17). ‘I beseech you be as I
am” (Gal. iv. 12), “These hands have
ministered to my necessities” (Acts xx.
34). “I have fought a good fight” (2
Tim. iv. 7).

I. Life’s review will be a review of
the whole of life, Its good as well as
its evil. When ‘backward are our
glances bent ’’ we shall need the recol-
lection of every pure thought, guiding
word, kindly deed. When we lie down


134 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. (omar. VI.


in the long sleep men call death may ness of works. “We must all appear
no pleasant dreams come 4 before the judgment-seat of Christ ; that

Il. Life’s reward will be rendered every one may receive the things done
according to itsdeeds. God will“ give in his body” (2 Cor. v. 10). “ Blessed
every man according as his work shall are the dead which die in the Lord;
be” (Rev. xxii. 12). Weare saved by their works do follow them” (Rev. xiv.
grace, “looking for the mercy of our 13). ‘We carry nothing out of the
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life” world with us but the conscience and
(Jude 21). But there is a rewardable- comfort of what we have done for God.”


CHAPTER VL


Exrianarory Norzs.] “When Sanballat and the enemies associated with him were unable
to obstruct the building of the wall of Jerusalem by open violence, they endeavoured to ruin
Nehemiah by secret snares, They invited him to meet them in the plain of Ono (vers. 1, 2); but
Nehemiah, perceiving that they intended mischief, would not come, After receiving for the fourtk
time this refusal, Sanballat sent his servant to Nehemiah with an open letter, in which he accused
him of rebellion against the king of Persia. Nehemiah repelled this accusation as the invention of
Sanballat (vers. 3—9), Tobiah and Sanballat hired a false prophet to make Nehemiah flee into the
temple from fear of the snares Piet for him, that they aa fs then be able to calumziate him
(vers, 10—14), The building of the wall was completed in fifty-two days, and the enemies were
disheartened (vers. 15, 16), although at that time many nobles of Judah had entered into epistolary
correspondence with Tobiah to obstruct the proceedings of Nehemiah (vers, 17—19),”’— Keri.

1, When Sanballat . . . . heard] “In the indefinite sense of it came to his ears, The

use of the passive is more frequent in later Hebrew; comp. vers. 6, 7; xiii. 27.”—Kev/. The rest
” of our enemies] Seeiv. 7. 2. Come, let us meet together] for a discussion = Let us take counsel
together (ver. 7). Qno] According to 1 Chron. viii, 12, situated in the neighbourhood of Lod
(Lydda), and is therefore identified by Van de Velde and Bertheau with Kefr Anna, one and three-
quarter leagues north of Ludd, pe te compares it with Beit Unia, north-west of Jerusalem,
not far from Bethel. There may have been two places of the same name. They thought to do
me mischief] Probably they wanted to make him a prisoner, perhaps even to assassinate him,
8. I am doing a great work: I cannot come down] Could not undertake the journey because his
presence in Jerusalem was necessary for the uninterrupted prosecution of the work of building,
4! They sent unto him four times in the same manner, and Nehemiah gave them the same
answer, 6. An open letter] That its contents might alarm all the Jews and create opposition
to Nehemiah. In Western asia letters, after being rolled up like a map, are flattened, and, instead
of being sealed, are pasted at the ends. In Eastern Asia the Persians make up their letters in form
of a roll, with a bit of paper fastened round it, Letters were and are still sent to persons of dis-
tinction in a bag or purse, and to equals inclosed; to inferiors, or to express contempt, open.
6. It is reported] Sanballat throughout makes no accusation, but refers to rumour. Nehemiah’s
answer is, “ here is not according to these words which thou sayest;’’ ¢. ¢ there is no such
rnmour (ver, 8). 7, Thou hast appointed prophets to preach of thee] To proclaim concerning
thee in Jerusalem, saying, King of Judah. 8. Thou feignest} Nehemiah charges his enemy with
devising a wicked slander, 9, “‘¥For’—adds Nehemiah, when writing of these things —‘ they
all desired to make us afraid, thinking, Their hands will cease from the work, that it be not
done’) Keil. Strengthen my hands) Taken from Nehemiah’s journal kept at the time of
building. Quotes to show where his dependence was at that trying time. 10. Shemaiah] ‘A
faise prophet hired by Tobiah and Sanballat, who sought by prophesying that the enemies of Nehe-
miah would kill him in the night to cause him to flee with him into the holy place of the tempie,
and to protect his life from the machinations of his enemies by closing the temple doors. His pur-
pose was, a3 Nehemiah subsequently learned, to seduce him into taking an illegal step, and 80 give
occasion for speaking evil of him,”—Kew, The gift of prophecy did not prevent a man from selling
himself to lie for others (see 1 Kings xxii. of Shut up] Perhaps in performance of a vow,
or as a mere pretence, ‘ Your foes are my foes, Let us escape together.” Im the house of God,
within the temple] Within the holy place, where no layman was allowed to enter. And let us
shut the doors, &c.] “ He secks to corroborate his warning as a special revelation from God by
making it appear that God had not only made known to him the design of the enemies, but also the
precise time at which they intended to carry it into execution.” Kets, 11. Should such a man ax


CHAP. VI.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 135
a ea enone
I fies 3] Nehemiah had ayer and alarm, but no cowardice, To save his life] ‘‘‘ That he may
live.” May mean ‘to save his life ;’ or, ‘and save his life.” Not expiate such a transgression of the
law with his life.”—Kei?, 14. The prophetess Noadiah, and the rest of the prophets] Vers. 10
—13 only a specimen case. Nothing more is known of Noadiah. 15. Elul] The sixth month,
Parts of August and September. 16, They perceived that this work was wrought of our God]
Accomplished in so short a space of time, 17—19.] A supplementary remark that in those days
even nobles of Judah were in alliance and active correspondence with ‘Pobiah because he had married
into a respectable Jewish family. 19, His good deeds] ‘‘Good qualities and intentions.”’—Ber-
theaw. : hey were trying to effect an understanding, Bertheau and Keil think. Or were they not
traitors


HOMILETICAL CONTENTS OF CHAPTER VL


Vex. 1—19, The Perils of Greatness. Ver. 11. Self-respect.
»  i—4. Persistency. xy 11. Christian Firmness,
= 1,2. Old Foes with New Faces. = 12. Human Prescience,
= 3. The Great Work. “ 13. Bribery.
~ 3. Hindrances to Revivals. ms 15. Fifty-two Days’ Work.
»  6&—8. Slander. rs 16. The Godward Side of Things,
= 6. Rumour. . 16. The Overruling God.
= 8. Boldness, 16. The World’s Acknowledgment of
+ 9. Fear and Faith. God.
a 9. Felt Weakness. », 17—19. The Oppositions of Influence,
» 10—18. Panic. 9 17, 18, Deserters,
i 10. Lying Prophets. x 19. The Bad Man praised.
ss 11. Personal Responsibility.


Tux Perits or GReaTNuss.
Chap. vi.


Tue interest of the history centres in the man. All history is the biography of
the most eminent men. “Men of the time” make the time. We have met
Nehemiah before, but under different conditions. The accidents of men’s lives
change ; the character remains. Not in what a man does, but in what a man 7s,
look we for permanence. Nehemiah the Persian cup-bearer becomes tho reformer
of abuses and rebuilder of the decayed city of God. Nehemiah, to-day cunfronted
by visible armies, is to-morrow confronting the unseen foes of stratagem and
deception. ‘ Sanballat and Geshem sent unto me, saying, Come, let us meet
together. But they thought to do me mischief” (ver. 2). ‘It is reported among
the heathen that thou and the Jews think to rebel ; it is reported that thou hast
appointed prophets to preach of thee at Jerusalem, saying, There is a king in
Judah. Come, let us take counsel.—There are no such things done as thou sayest”
(vers. 6—8). ‘Shemaiah was hired, that I should be afraid, and sin” (vers.
10—14). “The nobles of Judah reported Tobiah’s good deeds before me, and
uttered my words to him. And Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear” (vers. 17—19).
The Book written by inspired men gives the teaching of observation and experi-
ence when it says in every variety of expression, and with all the cumulative
force of its progressive teaching, ‘‘Be watchful. ‘The conditions of the conflict
of life change; the conflict never ceases. In this battle there is no truce. He
that endureth to the end shall be saved.”

I. The perils of greatness. High places are dangerous places, as poets, moral-
ists, and preachers have told us with perhaps wearisome iteration. That each man
should do his duty in that state of life in which God has placed him used to be a
favourite text with many. The laws of self-help are, if not of recent date, at least
of recent definition. That the battle be to the strong and the race to the swift;
that all be unhelped and all unhindered, is historically of recent date. We must
sot forget to proclaim that the powers that be are ordained of God. There may be
insanity in hero-worship over-much ; but it is idiotic to refuse to recognize the hero.
The celebrated valet sees no genius in his master. Is it because he is too near, or


136 HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH, [cHaP. VI.





because he is too ignorant? That there be men of Nehemiah’s stamp occupying
Nehemiah’s station is indispensable. The world must have leaders who can infuse
their own courage into their followers. Nehemiah’s men were devoted—but only in
his presence and under his izspiration. They were liable to panic and subject to
craven fear. In doing the world’s work there must be some who have opportunities
for clearer vision and deeper knowledge. , The general on the heights, not the private
in the thick of the fight, gives the word of command. To the captain the charts are
an alphabet employed without distinct consciousness ; leave to him the steering,
whilst you walk or sleep. Kings have committed acts of folly ; but has King Mob
been alwaysa Solomon? There is a needs-be for the king on his throne, the senator
in the council-room, the judge on the bench, the barrister at the bar, the poet
in the study, the painter in the grove, the preacher in the pulpit, the teacher at
his desk. But let none dream that these offices are sinecures, or that the men who
hold them are free from the thousand ills to which flesh is heir. It is a fierce
light that beats upon a throne. No man yet climbed the heights without the
dogs of envy, hatred, and malice barking at his heels. Not Nehemiah’s labourers,
but Nehemiah, was the object of Sanballat’s force and fraud. Strike him, and all
are struck. The most eminent men are the best-hated men, .In any task the
responsibility of the second man is proverbially easier than that of the first. It
is not always needful to point out the moral that adorns the tale of human life.
II. The deportment of the imperilled. The great thing to be desired for
those who hold high office in our world is the conviction that God has appointed
their station, set the bounds of their habitation, and allotted their task. In this
conviction there is power ; from it courage springs. This was Nehemiah’s strength.
“ Tam doing a great work.” And he explains the “1.” “ This work was wrought of
our God.’ Hence the sublime trust of Moses in the day of God’sanger. ‘‘ Let thy
work appear unto thy servants” (Ps. xc.). When neither sun nor stars in many days
appeared, and men’s hearts failed them for fear, Paul strengthened himself in the
recollection of his mission. ‘‘ There stood by me this night the angel of God,
whose [ am, and whom I serve” (Acts xxvii.). In the darkest hour of Luther’s
life he lifted up his eyes to God and cried, ‘‘ Jt is not my cause, but thine.’ ‘*‘ Not -
unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be the glory of the strength
and endurance we have manifested,” is the substance of the impassioned utterances
of the noble army of martyrs, workers, and warriors from the days of Abel down
to the last hours of the sainted sufferer who but yesternight went home to God.
The truest self-reliance rests upon the rocky foundations of trust in God. That
thousands of professedly Christian and Bible-reading people are little bettered,
but rather grow worse in temper and character, needs no proof—it is evident to the
all but blind ; but that the Christian and Bible-reading nations are immeasurably
superior to the peoples that sit in the darkness of nature and the shadow of
heathenism is indisputable. Any man who would be in any measure faithful
to himself and equal to his life-task must ‘‘ believe that God is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him.’’ This is nota blind, unreasoning trust 5
not a reliance on another to do what the man can do himself. Nehemiah threw
all his soul into those two little words in the fourteenth verse, ‘‘ my Gop.’’ But he
did not neglect to be watchful. ‘‘ They thought to do me mischief”’ (ver. 2), He was
anxious to discover the truth, and sought out the origin even of misrepresentation.
‘*T perceived that God had not sent the prophet ; Tobiah and Sanballat had hired
him’’ (ver. 12). He recognized the appointed channels of God’s revelation. ‘I
came unto Shemaiah the prophet’’ (ver. 10). He was fearless in denouncing wrong-
doers, albeit they sat in high places. ‘‘ There are no such things done as thou sayest,
but thou feignest them out of thine own heart’ (ver. 8). Above all, he renewed his
strength by waiting upon God. ‘‘ Now therefore, O God, strengthen my hands”
(ver. 9). From God came his task ; from God must come the strength to accomplish
it. A great historian, after telling the tale of the life of a king of France, adds,


CHAP. VI.] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 137





‘Let no meanest man lay flattering unction to his soul. Louis was a ruler, but
art not thou also one? His broad France looked at from the fixed stars is no wider
than thy narrow brick-field, in which thou too didst faithfully or didst unfaithfully.”
Brother, thy task is not Nehemiah’s, nor Paul’s, nor Luther’s, nor John Wesley’s,
nor Calvin’s, but it is thy task ; and if thou strivest faithfully thou wilt find it thy
task. The work of a man’s life is no child’s play. Do not sport with everything
It is said that when Carlyle was shown a Comic History, he inquired when we were
to have a Comic Bible. To such a man the word of God and the life of man were
terribly earnest. To all earnest men their daily task is earnest, The humblest is
a witness to the power of his own convictions of what he is, where he is, and whom
he serves. Let him take care to bear a constant, unfaltering, and ever-growing
testimony. Let him be more anxious to be great than to do some great thing. Let
him be more concerned to work faithfully than to work successfully, and by and
by to the question, “ Is all well?” he shall give the answer, “ All is well!” ‘ Let


your light shine before men” (Matt. v. 16)


Tlustration :—Grown great,


“Some divinely gifted man,
Whose life in low estate began,
And on a simple village green ;
Who breaks his birth’s mvidious bar,
And grasps the skirts of happy chance,
And ets the blows of circumstance,
And grapples with his evil star ;
Who makes by force his merit known,
And lives to clutch the golden keys,
To mould a mighty state’s decrees,
And shape the whisper of the throne;


The centre of a worltl’s desire ;

Yet feels, as in a pensive dream,
When all his active powers are still,
A distant dearness in the hill,

A secret sweetness in the stream,
The limit of his narrower fate,
While yet beside its vocal springs
He play’d at counsellors and kings,
With one that was his earliest mate ;
Who ploughs with pain his native lea
And reaps the labour of his hands,


And moving up from high to higher, Or in the furrow musing stands ;

Becomes on fortune’s crowning slope ‘ Does my old friend remember me ?’”

The pillar of s people’s hope, Tennyson.
PERSISTENCY.


vi 1—4. Now i came to pass, when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and Geehem the
Arabian, heard, &.


To doa thing and see it all frustrated,
and to begin again coolly, calmly, quietly,
and repeat the action, that is a very
necessary power in this world. In your
summer idleness you break a spider’s
web with your stick or disturb an ant-
hill, and the tiny operatives, without
wasting one moment, steadily begin again
and repair their damaged property.
These illustrate a grand faculty of man.
In life you want the power to begin
again and to keep on in spite of
whatsoever break-down or hindrance.
Nehemiah gives grand example of this.
Our text is a text on inane

reisteney of opposition, persistency 0
Be caver. the opponents of this Jewish
Garibaldi try one move more to check-
mate and hinder the great Liberator,
and, like the moon when the watch-dog


barks, he simply keeps on doing what
he was doing, unterrified, unmoved. I
cannot meet you. for conference (he
said); I am too busy, and cannot stop
the work for you or for any one or for
anything. He had no time to say this
in person; he “ sent messengers ” “ four
times after this sort.”

I. This principle of persistency is
illustrated in all the circle of nature
and life. 1. Hwverywhere there is em-
hibition of hostile force. Universal
life is a conflict. The “ Peace Society,”
who have the noblest of all objects, the
suppression of strife, have but few
clients in inferior nature. All natural
forces, all life, energy, creep to their
goal as the wave creeps to the shore
after many a rebuff and after many a


spurning. The seed struggling up from


138


its grave, the sapling bending through
the crevice in the ruin, the tree battling
with the sweep of the tempest—all are
persistent fighters of opposition. The
insect striving with its mortal foe in the
cup of a tiny flower, the bird with
vigilant eye watching foes below and
above, the beast of the forest amid its
dangers, are all showing us on what
terms a place is to be found on earth—
clinging pertinacity. You must not be
tempted or coerced from your aim by
hostility. 2. It ¢s so with man in all
social life. The boy at school wrestling
with competitors for his prizes or his
juvenile influence, the man of business
watching the mischances and the ad-
versaries of his success, the popular
character striving against the envious
among his contemporaries and the
changefulness of the people, show us
under what tenure the prizes, noble and
ignoble, of social life are held. ‘To
him that overcometh” the crown of
life is given. 3. Consistently with this
analogy of nature, the Bible represents
all moral victory as against deep and
persistent hostility. A legion of devils,
from without, a legion of lusts within
seek to snare and to frighten the soul
from its work. The Bible moves and
stirs in eagerness to warn and to inspirit
the threatened soul.

II. This principle of persistency
is illustrated in the general history
of the kingdom of God. 1. The Bible
ie one long history of God’s controversy
with his opponents. From one gener-
ation to another, through millenniums
of history, the Almighty Sovereign of
the world is battling with opposition.
Physically speaking, God can do what-
ever he will; but morally speaking, God
must do what he can aguinst the wills
of moral creatures who “dare defy the
Omnipotent to arms.” And our Bible
is the Tliad of heaven against earth.
The clash of battle rings through its
mighty leaves. ‘This is the value of Old
Testament history—it is God saving men
in spite of the resistance of the men he
seeks to save, Hence the history of one
chosen people has become the world’s
parable of life and salvation. Jewish
history is an immortal text-book con-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


{cHAP. Vi,


cerning this Divine controversy and
conflict. 2. Christian history is in the
same tone. (a) The Captain of our
salvation is set forth in the gospel story
as in warfare with the obstinate and
prejudiced all the way to his transcend-
ent triumph. “I would and ye would
not” is the burden of the solemn story.
(0) Apostolic history makes a harmony
with what has gone before. The chosen
apostles and all who took up their great
watchword, Christ, were gladiators in
the great arena of the world; “of all
men tnost miserable” unless their cause
were Divine and eternal. And the
closing words of God’s Testament fade
away ir St. John’s Apocalyptic visions
of wars in heaven, and the noise of him
who goes forth conquering and to con-
quer. (c) Nor have we seen the end
The Church is a “militant Church ”—
every saint a soldier; and the world,
the flesh, and the devil set in battle
array. Heathen creeds, worldly maxims,
carnal forces, all opposing the will of
the redeeming Lord.

III. It is the same with regard to
-his principle of persistency in in-
dividual salvation and work. 1. To
save your own soul is “a great work”
—a work that is hindered. This is why
the gate of life is strait; not that it is
narrow in itself, but it is narrowed by
the throng of foes that block it to the
soul, Jobn Bunyan saw in his dream a
gate leading to a beautiful palace. At
the gate sat a man with a book to
record the names of such as would
enter. Around the gate stood armed
foes to drive back all who came. At
length a man with ‘a stout coun-
tenance” came, and said to the recorder,
“Set down my name, sir!” and then,
girding on his sword, he set to and fought
his way in, “ but not before he had given
and received many wounds.” It ia
thus that most of us enter into life.
Persistent opposition beaten back by
persistent determination. This is what
the Saviour means by those who are
worthy of him, those who will have
him, The elect are the sclect spirits
who must enter into life because the
must is in their will. They will go
in, though hell move from beneath to


CHAP. VI.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


138


EERSTE: sre me


oppose. If you are about this purpose,
the one purpose of man, you are doing
a great work, and cannot come down
from that, or you fail. 2. To be instru-
ments of salvation to others is a great
work that is hindered, but must not cease,
The parent lovingly battling with the
wills of his children, the Sunday School
teacher bearing with the waywardness
of a circle of opposing spirits, the
minister standing as God’s watchman in
his congregation, the man of business
striving to live without damage to the
soul of his brother, and to live with
good influence upon those who meet
him in life’s conflict, are Nehemiahs all
of them. He toiled on amid the stones of


Jerusalem, they amid the living stones
of a better city of God. But the story is
one story—the world-wide story of good
hindered and opposed, but triumphant.

Application. Helps to persistency. 1.
Do not magnify your foes. Right is
itself “a big battalion.” Greater is he
that is for us than all that can be against
us. 2. Do not wnder-estimate your
work, All good work is “a great
work.” Let its loftiness fill and inflame
you. 3. Do not fail in hope. Hope
on, hope ever. ‘‘ Hope thou in God.”
On this rock of Peter-courage and in-
flexibility Christ will build his Church,
“and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it.”


Otp Fors with New Facsgs.


vi. 1, 2. Now tt came to pass, when Sanbullat, and Tobiah, and Gesiem the Arabian,
and the rest of our enemies, heard that I had builded the wall, and that there
was no breach left therein ; (though at that time I had not set up the doors upon
the gates ;) that Sanballat and Geshem sent unto me, »aying, Come, let us mect


tegether in some one of the villages in the plain of Ons.


me mischief.


The enemies of reformation in Nehe-
miah’s day were fertile in resources as
well as persistent in opposition. When
mockery failed to dishearten, and threats
to drive Nehemiah from his task, Sanbal-
lat, Tobiah, and Geshem tried the art of
deception. The same men, with purpose
unchanged, but masked faces. ‘The
voice is Jacob’s voice, but the hands are
the hands of Esau.” ;

““My son, thou art never secure in
this life, but as long as thou livest thou
shalt always need spiritual armour.
Thou dwellest among enemies.” This
golden sentence from the lips of Thomas
& Kempis contains the moral application
we may make of this historical passage.

I. Faults of character. ‘The na-
tural man” is in Biblical language distin-
guished from “the spiritual man.” “The
past of our life;”—‘“the rest of our
tims.” The dividing line we popularly
call conversion. “If any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature: old things
are passed away ; behold, all things are
become new.” That is the ideal; does
not become the actual in a day. The


But they thought to dv


life religious is a growth. A man be-
comes a Christian; supposes that con-
version makes all things new; is soon
disabused. He was before an angry man;
he blazes up again in an unwatchful
moment. He was full of health and
vigour; animalism ruled him; he dis-
covers that he needs to lay a strong hand
upon himself. Temptability remains.
“The snake is scotched, not killed.”
The natural prayerlessness of men creeps
insensibly upon an unwatchful Christian.
A principal will connive at the doubtful
deeds of an agent—deeds which he him-
self would not stoop to do. There is a
moral obliquity of vision. “If the light
that is in thee be darkness, how great is
that darkness.” “Can’t see” is pitiable;
‘won't see” is criminal. An under-current
is often fatal when a hurricane would
have been harmless. Against the second
the captain would provide; of the first
he might have no knowledge, The
signing of the pledge does not of itself
quench the burning thirst. The Church
roll does not make defection impossible,
Every man has one great foe—himeelf.


146


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[OHAP VL





* Worse than al] my foes I find

The enemy within,

The evil heart, the carnal mind,
My own insidious sin;

Sree every moment waits

o render me secure,

And all my paths with ease besets,

To make my ruin sure.”


Faults of character are foes to interest.
Nobody has a fault thatis not injurious.
“ There is a bwé in every man’s fortunes,
because there is a bué in every man’s
character.” Maclaren, A good cause is
sometimes injured by the intemperance
of its advocates; more often by their in-
consisten¢y. Creed and conduct are not
always equal. Beware of little sins.

II. Foes to progress. Nehemiah was
reforming, uplifting the nation. Sanbal-
lat, Tobiah, and Geshem were advocates
of things as they were. Indolence and
selfishness of individuals are aggregated.
In the movements of history there has
been presented the spectacle of men flee-
ing from persecution to become perse-
cutors in their turn. Presbyter was
priest writ large. Human nature is
much the same under all conditions.
Luther overthrew the Pope’s infallibility
to meet claimed infallibility in his own
followers. Only to patient faith is the
prize sure, They who work for eternity


can afford to listen calmly to the bab-
blings of contemporary opinion. Utter
no rebuking word, although the “ meet-
ening for the inheritance” and the
unsuccess of your toils require you to
possess the patience of God. “One day
is with the Lord as a thousand year,
and a thousand years as one day.”


“ Christian! seek not yet repose,
Cast thy dreams of ease away ;
Thou art in the midst of foes ;

Watch and pray.


Principalities and powers,

Mustering their unseen array,

Wait for thy unguarded hours;
atch and pray.


Gird thy heavenly armour on,

Wear it ever night and day;

Ambushed lies the evil one ;
Watch and pray.


Hear the victors who o’ercame ;

Still they mark each warrior’s way;

All with one sweet voice exclaim,
Watch and pray.


Hear, above all, hear thy Lord,

Him thou lovest to obey;

Hide within ned heart his word ;
Watch and pray,


Watch, as if on that alone

Hung the issue of the day;

Pray that help may be sent dowm;
Watch and pray.”


Toe Great Work.


vi. 3. And I sont messengers unto them, saying, I am doing a great work, eo thai
T cannot come down: why should the work cease, whilst I leave it, and cama dow


to you?


Religion the most momentous and important matter that can possibly engage


the attention.
well as the most interesting subject.


Either the veriest dream of superstition, or the most stupendous as
This is the great work.


I. The great work in which Nehemiah was engaged. Repairing the wall


and setting up the gates around the city of Jerusalem. He had many powerful
enemies. They first tried to ridicule him and his brethren out of the undertaking ;
and this failing, they endeavoured to terrify them; and not succeeding in this, they
had recourse to craft and stratagem. In the verse preceding Nehemiah says,
* Sanballat and Geshem sent unto me,” &e. And in the verse following Nehemiah
tells us that they sent unto him four times, after the same sort, and he answered
them after the same manner. What is fortifying, defending, and preserving a ¢ity
when compared with the salvation of our immortal soul? If we are really on the
Lord’s side we shall assuredly be opposed as he was, and perhaps more strenuously,
by ridicule, stratagem, and force. To all opposition let us reply, “I am doing a
great work.’ Some say the business of salvation so far as we are concerned is ng
work at all Surely faith and love have something to do with salvation; and


CHAP VI.) HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 141





although these graces of the Spirit may apparently be the farthest removed from
what may be termed a work, yet we read in Scripture of “the work of faith, anc
the labour of love.” Yes, faith worketh by love. True, as far as merit is con
cerned, salvation is not of works ; yet there is a sense in which we are to * worl
out our own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that worketh in us
both to will and to do according to his good pleasure.” The believer “fears the
Lord and his goodness.” He fears to offend against infinite holiness, or to “ grieve
the Holy Spirit.” He fears to bring guilt upon his conscience. And he trembles
to be found “an unprofitable servant.” Faith enables the believer to see the path
of obedience, and love constrains him cheerfully to walk therein. The work of
Christ, so far from freeing us from obedience, lays us under greater obligations to
devotedness.

II. The opposition Nehemiah had to encounter in his undertaking. 1. He
was assailed by ridicule (see chap. ii. 19; iv. 1—%). You may profess what you
please without molestation, but if you proceed to act up to your profession you
will certainly not escape opposition. How did Nehemiah meet the scoffs of his
enemies? He did not desist from his purpose, nor did he take the matter of
revenge into his own hands. 2. Nehemiah’s enemies attempted also to assail him
by force (iv. 7, 8). We ought to give all due obedience, in things lawful, to
those who in the providence of God may have control over us, but there isa point
beyond which to yield would be sin. When human authority is exerted contrary
to the Divine command we ought not a moment. to hesitate to “obey God rather
than man.” 3. Nehemiah’s enemies assailed him also with craft and cunning.
“Sanballat and Tobiah sent unto me, saying,” &c. More persons are enticed and
allured into sinful compliances by plausible inducements than by any other means.
Never expect any spiritual advantage from the proposal of a confederacy with
worldly men. 4. When Sanballat could not succeed by stratagem, he endeavoured
to effect his purpose by putting Nehemiah in fear. Raised false reports against him,
representing that he was building the wall that he might set up himself as a king
end rebel against his Persian master. Expect misrepresentation. It was said of
the apostles of old, ‘These that have turned the world upside down are come
hither also.” Think it not strange if modern Christians be accused of being
enemies to the peace of society. When we see Sanballat not only falsely accusing
Nehemiah, but also hiring the professed prophets of God to endeavour to turn him
from the work in which he was engaged, let us learn the great need of watchful-
ness, caution, and circumspection, ‘‘ Be ye wise as serpents.” If an angel from
heaven should speak anything contrary to the doctrine of godliness, shun his
counsel, Even Satan can transform himself into the appearance of an angel of
light, and his angels imitate his example. ‘“ Prove all things, and hold fast that
which is good.” Nehemiah went to Shemaiah for godly counsel and advice, little
expecting that he was in the service of his great enemy (vers. 10—14). God wiil.
expose the snares and bring to nought the devices planned against his faithful
servants, “TI perceived,” saith Nehemiah, “that God had not sent him.” And as
before he answered the rumours of Sanballat by saying, “ There are no such things
done as thou sayest, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart ;” so now he
boldly answers the counsel of the lying prophet who would have him shamefully
neglect his duty, and shut himself up in the temple to save his life, by saying,
“‘ Should such a man as I flee—I on whose presence at the building of the wall
so much depends, and who believe and have professed that God will protect and
defend me?” When we are tempted to make sinful compliance, let us call to
mind the noble answer of Nehemiah, and adopt similar language ; let us say to
every temptation to evil, “Should such a man as I, who profess to be a dis-
ciple of, yea, a joint-heir with, Christ, a son of God, and an heir of immortality—
should such an one as I condescend to bring disgrace upon my profession,
and thus dishonour God and sin against my own soul!” Or with Joseph


142 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. [CHAP. VL


let us ask our own conscience, “ How van I do this great wickedness and sin
against God?”

III. The magnitude of the work required that Nehemiah should not cease
It was a great work, for the walls of Jerusalem extended some miles round th
city; and it was a very necessary work to be completed for the defence of th
inhabitants, Of what momentous importance is the salvation of a man ! The destruc-
tion of the temple and city of Jerusalem is said to have forced tears from the
eyes of its heathen conqueror; but what is a flaming temple or the destruction of a
city to the destruction of an immortal spirit | Let your careful and constant attention
be given to the one thing needful. “For it is not a light thing, because it is your
life,” Nehemiah succeeded in accomplishing the work he had in hand by prayer,
watchfulness, and painstaking diligence (vers. 15, 16). So will all the enemies of
God’s truth be finally cast down in their own eyes; they will be utterly ashamed
and confounded, while they will be constrained to confess that the salvation of the
righteous is of the Lord. The wall was built in troublous times, and we often
find Nehemiah supplicating help from the mighty God of Jacob, like Jehoshaphat,
who said, ‘‘ Lord, we know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee;” and
while he was unceasing and fervent in prayer, he was also watchful and diligent in
the work.— Rev. James Shore, M.A., abridged.


Hinprances to Revrva.s.


vi. 3. Iam doing a great work, &c.


Sanballat’s opposition — threatened ;
complained ; insisted that Nehemiah’s
design was not pious, but political.
Nehemiah went on.

{. A revival of religion is a great
work. It is a great work because in it
great interests are involved. In a re
vival of religion are involved both the
glory of God, so far as it respects the
government of this world, and the sal-
vation of men. The greatness of a
work is to be estimated by the greatness
of the consequences depending on it.
And this is the measure of its importance,

II. Several things may put a stop
to a revival. A revival is the work of
God, and so is a crop of wheat; and
God is as much dependent on the use of
means in one case as the other. 1. A
revival will stop whenever the Church
believe it is going to cease. No matter
what the enemies of the work may say
about it, predicting that it will all run out
and come to nothing, they cannot stop
it in this way. But the friends must
labour and pray in faith to carry it on.
2. A revival will cease when Christians
consent that tt should cease. When
Christians love the work of God and
the salvation of souls so well that they
are distressed at a mere apprehension of


a decline, it will drive them to agony
and effort to prevent its ceasing. 3. A
revival will cease whenever Christians
suppose the work will go on without
their aid. The Church are co-workers
with God in promoting a revival, and
the work can be carried on just as far as
the Church will carry it on, and no
farther. 4. A revival will cease when
Christians begin to proselyte. Do not
raise selfish strife, and drive Christians
into parties. 5. When the Church in
any way grieve the Holy Spirit. 6.
When Christians lose the spirit of
brotherly love. 7. A revival will de-
cline and cease unless Christians are fre-
quently reconverted.

III. Things which ought to be
done to continue a revival. 1. Minis.
terial humiliation. Ministers must not
only call upon the people to repent;
they must be ensamples to the flock.
2. Churches which have opposed revivals
must repent. 3. Those who promote
the work of revivals must repent their
mistakes. There is a constant tendency
in Christians to backsliding and declen-
sion, Let us mind our work, and let
the Lord take care of the rest; do ow
duty, and leave the issue to God—
Finney, abridged.


CHAP. VL]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


SS


148





SLANDER.
wi. 5—8. Then sent Sanballat his servant unto me, de.


An attempt to frustrate Nehemiah by
a false report concerning his intentions
is described in these verses, This petty
wasp of slander may sting the even-
minded Reformer, and make him swerve
from his steadiness. Sanballat sent to
say that it was a “common report”
that Nehemiah was meditating the
ambitious project of becoming a king;
and to make the matter circumstantial,
Gashmu was quoted as the authority
for this information. Nehemiah, with
noble indifference, brushed away the
wasp—sent a short, sharp answer back
—and then, dismissing the matter, went
on with his work.

I. The slander. Isaac Barrow’s
biographer quaintly wishes he could
find an enemy of his hero, that he might
have the honour of defending the
memory of the great divine. All men
are not so fortunate. The faultless have
some fault found with them, and the
faulty have their faults exaggerated.
Let the most blameless man in the town
offer himself ascandidate for parliament,
and the organ of the rival political party
will give a picture astounding to the
friends of the good man. Shimei finds
foul things to say about David, and
Gashmu knows a damaging thing about
Nehemiah. In this example of the
text there are three stages of slander.
1. The common report. “It is com
monly reported among the heathen that
thou and the Jews think to rebel.”
Who got up that report? is a common
question about similar matters now-a-
days. Who was the man in the iron
mask? Who executed Charles I.? Who
invents the lie that sings in the air
about some faultless man? These are
conundrums to “give up.” Where all
the gnats come from that fill the window-
pane was a puzzle to our childhood.
Where all the lies come from that buzz
round our neighbourhoods is a puzzle to
our later life. ‘‘It ts commonly re

/” Woe to the tongue ingenious
in this art! For our own part, let us


beware of giving our jealousies and
suspicions wings. Let them die in the
egg. Keep the door of the lips,
especially when conversing with a fool.
And eqvally necessary is it to beware of
eager listening to groundless suggestions,
born of malice and envy and uncharita-
bleness. The demand creates the supply.
Send these hawkers of mischief away
from the door. Keep the door of the
ears. 2. The authority for the “ fact.”
“Gashmu saith it.” Who's Gashmu !
A very common authority on thes:
matters. He's very often a myth.
There is no Gashmu at all. Try to find
him, and he is always ‘removed.’
Tracking a slander is often like seeking
a grasshopper. It chirps here and there
and everywhere, except on the han:iiful
of grass youlay yourhandon. Looking
for Gashmu is like hunting the cuckoo
— it’s “a voice, a mystery.” Gashmu /
He is not, or you find him not. Some-
times Gashmu is real enough. If you
hear the report, you need not be told
where it came from. Gashmu “his
mark” is on the forehead of the slander.
He sits in his window blowing peas at
all passers-by. There are human crea-
tures who delight in this kind of
cowardly damage of other men’s reput-
ations. For some wise end they were
created—all things gre. The nettle
and the hornet and the slanderer—per-
haps these have their part to play.
“ Gashmu” might be carved on some of
the graves— Here rests one who never
let any one else rest.” 3. The informant.
Sanballat sent the letter. These are the
three steps: “Common report” -—
“ Gashmu ”—“ Sanballat.” An illustra-
tion of the development theory! The
slander is born out of nothing ; it is
generated in that inorganic matter of
lies which fills the atmosphere of the
globe; it takes form and organization in
Gashmu, in him it becomes a real thing ;
then Sanballat conducts it to its goal.
Sanballat, who writes the letter of


information, or whispers the thing in


144





confidence, is often the mischievous
originator of the whole mystery of lies
—the predecessors are but imaginary.
Sometimes he is “not a knave, but a
fool” merely, some one who means well,
a friend who thinks it is a part of
friendship to do things like this. But
for him the slander would be unknown
and harmless ; it is his work to post up
the information in the window. The
ill that is wrought for want of thought !
It is only thinking that can stop that.
II. Treatment of slander. 1. Give
it no foundation in yourself. Such a
thing is said of you! exclaimed a
zealous friend once. Ah! coolly an-
swered the victim, and the worst of tt, it’s
true. “Be ye wise as serpents and
harmless as doves.” There is a spirit of
slumbering fairness in society. Do not
say in your “ haste, all men are liars.”
It is not so. Do not be soured by the
abundance of mischief and the super-
fluity of naughtiness among men. But
at the same time beware! Avoid the
appearance of evil. Like Cesar’s wife,
be “above suspicion.” Do not be
content with such integrity as will go
with the average ; let your white be snow-
white. [Illustrate by the grand integrity
of Nehemiah.] Not in fear of the
slander, but in love of what is right and
cood, seek the lofty character of the
righteous man. Whatsoever things are
true and lovely and of good report take
as the garb of your character. 2. Take
no notice of it. As the children say,
“Don’t believe it!” See the grand
style of verse 8: “Then I sent unto
him, saying, There are no such things as
thou sayest, but thou feignest them out
of thine own heart”—a message for
Sanballat to think about. To have his
elaborate slander crumpled up and flung
at his head with the label “‘ tims” on it
would be disappointing to this officious
person, Silence is the best reply asa
rule. We cannot waste the day in
explanations. ‘ When I have written
an angry reply to a letter, I never send
it off at once. I read it over. I often
re-write it, and put more sting into the
sentences. Then I argue thus. This
letter will do if I send it in twenty-four
hours. It shall not go earlier on any


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[OHAP. VIL.





eonsideration. To reserve my reply
will show I was not annoyed much, and
that 1 am a tranquil master of myself.
I consequently lock up my letter, all
sealed and addressed. And at the end
of the twenty-four hours I take out the
letter, and without reading it throw it on
the fire. That has always been my
course since I once wrote and posted
immediately one of those replies. It
proved to be a mistake. Since then I
have done as I have said. It always
relieves me—serves as a waste-pipe—and
I never have to repent of harsh corre-
spondence.” 3. Go on with your work.
Slander as a rule does the yood man no
harm, unless it stop him in his work
and make him lay down his enterprise
in disgust. Many a man has given up
his Master's work of “doing good”
because his good was evil spoken of.
Illustrate from the life of Jesus.]

hen the Lord of the vineyard cometh
and asks, “Why did you leave my
work?” what can you say? At your
peril keep to the good course, This
sharp-shooting of criticism is to try the
soldier. Endure as seeing Him who is
invisible, “They say? What do they
say Let them say.” Many a man has
given up the good work of his soul’s
salvation for a similar reason. It some-
times falls to the lot of a minister to be
sent for to some dying man, and this is
the story which comes from the depart-
ing deserter. ‘I was once a member of
such and such a church, and there I was
not treated as, &c., &c.; I took offence,
and have hardly been in a place of
worship since. It is ten years ago.”
“My brother,” thinks the minister
though he takes care not to say it, “do
you think that excuse will cover those
ten wasted years?” You are responsible
for the effect of the slander ; another may
have a heavy score to pay on account of
its origin.

Application. 1. Live for the approval
of the Lord of all. Do not root yourself
on the shallow, changing opinion of man.
Seek a higher basis for endeavour,
animated by the solemn fear of God.
2. Consider the importance of life and
tts work. Do not suppose you may
please ycurself whether you keep your


CHAP. V1.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


146





hand on the plough or not. Woe to
Jonah, whatever be the cause of hie
flight from his God-appointed task. &,
Accept criticism—as an instructive cor
rector; and slander—as a discipline of
patience and firmness,


‘Lord, I adore thy gracious will,
Through every instrument of ill
My Father’s goodness see ;
Accept the complicated wrong
Of Shimei’s hand and Shimei’s tongue
As kind rebukes from thes,”


Roumovr.


vi. 6.


It is reported among the heathen, and Gashmu saith it, that thou and the


Jews think to rebel: for which cause thou buildest the wall, that thou mayest be


their king, according to these words.


Matthew Henry well expresses the his-
torical sense of this passage. “ Sanballat
endeavours to possess Nehemiah with an
apprehension that his undertaking to
build the walls of Jerusalem was gener-
ally represented as factious and seditious,
and would be accordingly resented at
court. The best men, even in their most
innocent and excellent performances,
have lain under this imputation. This
is written to him in an open letter, as a
thing generally known and talked of;
that it was reported among the nations,
and Gashmu will aver it for truth, that
Nehemiah was aiming to make himself
king, and to shake off the Persian yoke.
Observe, it is common for that which is
the sense only of the malicious, to be
falsely represented by them as the sense
of the many.” From this particular
instance let us consider generally the
tongue, its use and abuse.

I. Use of the tongue. 1. To express
thought and emotion. A word is the
incarnation of a thought. It lay hidden
and formless in the thinker’s mind. The
word is the body prepared for it. The
thought stands out clear to the gaze of
others. There is a language understood
by the animals. A child speaks because
of the necessity it feels to express its
thought. It understands before it can ex-
‘ress itself. The first dawn of intelligence
is in a child’s smile ; it enters into a new
world when it utters the first word. The
fountains of the great deep of intelligence
are broken up. The child performs “the
miracle of speech.” Were thought pent
ap in our minds without the medium of
expression which words give, each one
would live in a world of his own. We

&


- cannot conceive of a famity, a social state,


a nation without language. ‘Speak.
that I may see thee,” said one to »
fair-haired youth. As “ we know metals
by their tinkling,” so we know men by
their speech. Dumbness excites pity,
Expression is the first and simplest use of
the tongue. 2. To glorify God. “ There-
with bless we God.” We are not alone
in this. “The heavens declare the glory
of God; and the firmament showeth his
handywork. Day unto day uttereth
speech, and night unto night showe'h
knowledge.” God is known by the
works of his hands. But it is our pro-
vince explicitly to bless God. The glory
of the heavens is the glory of inference ;
our glory is the glory of reference. “The
whole creation is as a well-tuned instru-
ment, but man maketh the music.” Men
of science reduce the myriad things in
nature to laws; and these to still fewer ;
until all causes resolve themselves into
the Cause of causes—God. To him all
things tend. From him, as a fountain,
all streams flow ; to him, as a sea, they all
return. 3. To fan the flame of devotion
in others. ‘Death and life are in the
powerof thetongue.” Words have moved
the world. Pulpits, senaies, law courts are
centres from which words proceed. Men
of words as necessary as men of action.
Armies, nations have been stirred by
eloquent speech. Possibilities of speech
should make us humble, if not make us
tremble. Words escape our lips big with
eternal issues. ‘ By thy words thou shalt
be justified, and by thy words thou shalt
be condemned.” “Foolish talking” is
condemned as well as “ filthy communi-
cation.”


146


IY. The abuse of the tongue. “Take
heed,” says an Arabian proverb, “ thy
tongue cut not thy throat.” 1. Self-
misrepresentation. (1) Under-statement.
Half - truths ; concealing some material
thing, We are not bound to satisfy





everybody’s curiosity. Two legitimate ©


times for speaking—-when God would
be glorified or man benefited. But having
professed to tell and then conceal is de-
‘ception. There are spoken lies and acted
lies. (2) Over-statement. Speaking in
superlatives. A habit easily contracted.
“ All his geese are swans.” (3) False
statement. God and men hate lying.
You may be clever, amiable, attractive ;
but if you lie, the swift, sure, terrible
Nemesis is, you will never again be
trusted. For this there is no place of
repentance, though you seek it carefully
‘ with tears. Lying is a sin of which it is
peculiarly true—“ Be sure your sin will
find you out.” 2. Defamation of others.
Grosser forms—evil speaking with malice
aforethought ; bearing false witness;
slander. A form of this punishable by
law. But some of the keenest slanders
elude law. “A good name is great
riches.” Itisto be desired. We must not
superciliously discard the good opinion
of others ; we need not fawningly seek
it. To some a good name is all they have;
e.g. domestic servants, professional men.
Studied wickedness is worst of all. “TI
saw,” said Augustine, “a little child pale
with envy.” How many town scandals
would have been avoided, how many
Church quarrels prevented, had men acted
on that golden rule—“ If thy brother
shall trespass against thee, go and tell him
his fault between thee and him alone.”
Be patient under detraction. ‘ Blessed
are ye when men shall say all manner
of evil against you falsely.”


ILLUSTRATIONS.


Silence and speech, “Why tell me that a
man is a fine speaker if it is not the truth
that he is speaking? Phocion, who did not
speak at all, was a great deal nearer hitting
toe mark than Demosthenes. He used to tell
the Athenians, ‘You can’t fight Philip. You
have not the slightest chance with him. He is
a man wno holds his tongue; he has great dis-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


(CHAP. VI





eiplined armies; he can brag anybody you like
in your cities here; and he is going on oe
with an unvarying aim towards his object ; an
he will infallibly beat any kind of men such as
you, going on raging from shore to shore with
all that rampant nonsense.’ Demosthenes said
to him one day, ‘The Athenians will get mad
some day and kill {hor ‘Yes,’ Phocion says,
‘when they are mad; and you, as soon as they

et sane again.’ It is told about him going to
Weasiua on some deputation that the Athenians
wanted on some kind of matter of an intricate and
contentious nature, that Phocion went with some
story in his mouth to speak about. He was a
man of few words—no unveracity; and after he
had gone on telling the story a certain time, there
was one burst of interruption, One man inter-
rupted with something he tried to answer, and
then another, and, finally, the people began brag-
ging and brawling, and neo end of debate, till it
ended in the want of power in the people to say
any more. Phocion drew bick altogether, struck
dumb, and would not speak another word to any
man, and he left it to them to decide in any way
they liked. It appears to me there is a kind of
eloquence in that which is equal to anythin
Demosthenes ever said. ‘Take your own way, an
let me out altogether.’ ”’—Carly/e,

Slander. “Tn St. James’s day, as now, it would
appear that there were idle men and idle women,
who went about from house to house, dropping
slander as they went, and yet you could not take
=p that slander and detect the falsehood there.

ou could not evaporate the truth in the slow pro-
cess of the crucible, and then show the residuuin of
falsehood glittering and visible. You could not
fasten upon any word or sentence and say that it
was calumny ; for in order to constitute slander
it is not necessary that the word spoken should
be false—half truths are often more calumnious
than whole falsehoods, It is not even necessary
that a word should be distinctly uttered; a
dropped lip, an arched eyebrow, a shrugged
shoulder, a significant look, an incredulous ex-
pression of countenance, nay, even an emphatic
silence, may do the work; and when the light
and trifling thing which has donethe mischief has
fluttered off, the venom is left behind, to work and
rankle, to inflame hearts, to fever human exist-
ence, and to poison human society at the fountain
springs of life. Very emphatically was it said
by one whose whole being had smarted under
such affliction, ‘ Adders’ poison is under their
lips’ ”—F. W. Robertson,

“We have no right to spread an injurious report
merely because somebody brought it tous. It is
a crime to pass bad money as well as to coin it.
We are bound to consider whether the person
from whom we heard the report had oppor-
tunities of knowing the truth, was likely to form
a sound judgment of the facts which came under
his knowledge, and whether we should have
believed him if he had said the same thing to us
about some person to whom we bore no ill-will,
There would be very much less scandal manu-
factured if there were less disposition to circulats
it"—B. W. Date


GHAar. VL}





Same THEME.


One great sin wherein the corruption
of human nature bewrayeth itself is
detraction, or depriving others of a good
repute. Here I shall show—

I. What is detraction. 1. The
nature of it in general. It is an wn-
just violation of another’s fame, reputa-
tion, or that good report which is due to
him. God, that hath bidden me to love
my neighbour as myself, doth therein
bid me to be tender not only of his
person and goods, but of his good name.
And indeed one precept is a guard and
fence to another. I cannot be tender of
his person and goods unless I be tender
of his fame; for every man liveth by
his credit. (1) It is a sin against God,
who hath forbidden us to bear false
witness against our neighbour, and to
speak evil of others without a cause.
Eph. iv. 31: “ Let all evil-speaking be
far from you.” By evil-speaking is
meant there disgraceful and contume-
lious speeches, whereby we seek to stain
the reputation of others. (2) It is a
wrong to man, because it robbeth him
of his good name, which is so deservedly
esteemed by all that would do anything
for God in the world. ‘A good name
should rather be chosen than great
riches” (Prov. xxii. 1). Therefore, as he
himself should not prostitute his good
name, so others should not blast it and
blemish it ; for it is a greater sin than
to steal the best goods which he hath,
and it is such an evil as scarce admits
any sound restitution ; for the imputa-
tion even of unjust crimes leaveth a
scar though the wound be healed. (3)
The causes it proceedeth from are these.


(a) Malice wnd ill-will, which prompteth |


us to spuak falsely of others, so to make
them odious, or do them wrong or hurt.
To hate our brother in our heart is no
way consistent with that charity which
the impression of the love of Christ
should beget in us. The hatred of
offence, which is opposite to the love of
complacency, may be justified as to the
wicked. Prov. xxix. 27: “An unjust
man is an abomination to the just, and
bs that is upright in the way is an


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


147


—


abomination to the wicked.” But then
we should first and most abominate our-
selves for sin; this very hatred and
abhorrence should begin at home, and
we should be most odious to ourselves
“or gin, for we know more sin by our-
selves than we can do by another. But
for the hatred of enmity, which is oppo-
site to the love of benevolence, that
should be quite banished out of the
heart of a Christian. (8) It comes
from uncharitable credulity, whereby
men easily believe a false report, and
so propagate and convey it to others.
Jer. xx. 10: “I have heard the de-
faming of many. Report, say they, and
we will report it.” If any will raise a
report tending to the discredit of another,
some will foster it ; and it loseth nothing
in the carriage, till by additions and
misconstructions it groweth to a down-
right and dangerous infamy. (y) It
comes through rashness and unruliness
of tongue, Some men never learned to
bridle their tongues, and the Apostle
James telleth us that “therefore their
religion is vain” (James i. 26). Till
we make conscience of these evils, as
well as others, we content ourselves
with a partial obedience, and therefore
cannot be sincere. Whisperers must be
talking. (8) It comes from carnal zeal,
which is nothing else but passion for our
different interests and opinions. Many
lies walk under the disguise of religion.
Is all speaking evil of another unlawful!
I cannot say so, but yet it is hard to
keep it from sin. 1. He that doth it
without just cause is plainly a detractor,
and so a grievous sinner before God.
God doth not only reject the liars for
hypocrites, but also the backbiters and
slanderers. 2. He that doth but speak
what he hath heard from others, with-
out any assertion or asseveration of his
own, as not knowing the truth of the
report, can hardly be excused from sin.
He reporteth those things which may
induce the hearers to think ill of another,
and if without just cause he is in part
accessory. 3. He that doth speak that
which is true, but tendeth to the infamy
of another, may be guilty of sin if he
have not a sufficient call and warrant.
If it be a matter we have nothing to do





148


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[CHAP VI.


EE EEE EISEESE SEE nanan


with Sut only speak of their faults for
talk sake. If we aggravate things be-
yond their just size and proportion. If
we urge their crimes and deny their
graces. Ig there no good amongst all
this evil? 2. The kinds of detraction.
(1) Whispering, which is privy defam-.
ation of our brother, to bring him into
disfavour and disrespect with those
that formerly had a better opinion of
him. Herein whispering differeth from
backbiting, because the whisperer sting-
eth secretly, but the other doth more
openly attack our credit. Now this
whispering is a great sin; it is reckoned
among the sins which reigned among
the heathen, and God hath expressly
forbidden to his people. Lev. xix. 16:
“Thou shalt not go up and down as a
tale-bearer among thy people.” It is
against natural equity, because they do
that to others which they would not
have done to themselves It is a grief
to the party wronged, and a cause of
much debate and strife. (2) Backbiting
is a more public speaking evil of our
absent brother, to the impairing of his


credit. Now this may be done two
ways. With respect to the good things


found in him, and with respect to the
evil supposed to be committed by him.
With respect to the good things found
in him:—When we deny those good
things which we know to be in another.
When we lessen the gifts and graces of
others. When we own the good, but
deprave it by supposing a sinister inten-
tion. When we have just occasion to
speak of a man’s due commendation, but
enviously suppress it. As to evil sup-
posed to be committed by them :—When
we publish their secret slips, which in
charity we ought to conceal. Prov. xi.
13: “A tale-bearer revealeth secrets.”
When a man intrudeth himself into
the mention of things faulty, which he
might with better manners and more
honesty conceal, it is the effect of a
ease heart. When, in relating any evil
action of snother, we ~ 3 harder terms
than th» quality of fact requireth,
and make evila worse than they are,


beams of motes, and mountains of mole-
hills. We should lessen sins all that
we can; I mean the sins and faults of
others. By imposing false crimes. The
most godly and innocent persons cannot
escape the scourge of the tongue, and
unjust calumnies.

II. The heinousness of the sin. 1.
In general, that is evident from what is
said already. Two arguments more I
shall urge. (1) Men shall be called to
an account for these sins as well as
others. (2) It is the property of a
citizen of Zion—one that shall be not
only accepted with God now, but dwell
with God for ever—not to be given to
backbiting (Ps. xv.). 2. More parti-
cularly, it is the more heinous, (1)
Partly from the person against whom it
is committed ; ¢ g. the godly; public
persons. (2) From the persons before
whom the slander is brought, as suppose
kings and princes; so that they are
deprived not only of private friend-
ships, but the favour and countenance of
those under whose protection they have
their life and service. (3) From the
end of it. If it be done with a direct
intention of hurting another’s fame, it
is worse than if out of a rash levity and
loquacity. Some men have no direct
intention of mischief, but are given to
talking; others sow discord. (4) From
the great hurt that followeth, be it loss
of estate or general trouble. When
men’s good names are buried, their per-
sons cannot long subsist afterward with
any degree of service. And all this
may be the fruit of a deceitful tongue.
The use is, to show how good-natured
Christianity is, and befriendeth human
societies ; it condemneth not only sins
against God, but sins against our neigh-
bour. Let us not speak evil of others
behind their backs, but tell them their
faults. Remembering our own faults,
looking at home, will not only divert us
from slandering of others, but make us
compassionate towards them, and breed
comfort in our own souls. Manéon,
abridged.


CHAP. VI.]





Bo.pness.


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH,


149


vi. 8. Then I sent unto him, saying, There are no such things done as thou sayest,
but thou feignest them out of thine own heart.


A bold word this to fling in the
teeth of authority.

I. Men of courage are men of con-
victions. | Nehemiah’s consciousness
that he was doing a great work made
him bold. Physical courage is a thing
of blood and nerve. The morally
courageous man may be nervous, shrink-
ing, fearful. He is self-reliant because
reliant on God. The men without con-
victions, what have they done? ‘Those
who tell us it is doubtful if there be a
God, religion is the poetry of con-
science, the Bible is a fetish, whom
have they blessed? for whom have
they agonized? Has the world’s suffer-
ing wrung from them any great sweat
of biood? The world’s hard work has
never been done by the mealy-mouthed.
Great reformations have not been accom-
plished by the nerveless souls without
strong convictions for or against. Men
of one idea have made mistakes, but not
the mistake of leaving the work undone.
This Jewish Reformer and Liberator
reminds us of Martin Luther, the stories
of whose boldness have passed into
proverbs; and of John Knox, whom
Scotland delights to honour. Of him
Carlyle tells the following story in his
own inimitable way :—“In the galleys
of the river Loire, whither Knox and
the others, after their castle of St.
Andrew’s was taken, had been sent as
galley slaves, some officer or priest one
day presented them an image of the
Virgin Mother, requiring that they, the
blasphemous heretics, should do it rever-
ence. ‘Mother! mother of God!’
said Knox, when the turn came to him.
‘This is no mother of God; this is “a
pented bredd”—a piece of wood, I tell
you, with seint on it. She is fitter for
switaming, « think, than for being wor-
shipped,’ sdded Knox, and flung the
thing into tae river,” Rather dangerous
sport thati “The courage of his con-
vietions” makes a wan a hero. There
was a sacred must in the highest life.
“JT must work the works of him that


sent me.” “He steadfastly set his face
to go to Jerusalem.” Another story
which Carlyle tells of John Knox will
illustrate how these elect spirits shrank
from the tasks laid upon them. “In
an entirely obscure way Knox had
reached the age of forty; was with the
small body ef Reformers who were
standing siege in St. Andrew’s Castle,
when one day in their chapel the
preacher, after finishing his exhortation
to these fighters in the forlorn hope,
said suddenly, that there ought to be
other speakers, that all men who had a
priest’s heart and gift in them ought
now to speak ;—which gifts and heart
one of their own number, John Knox
the name of him, had. Had he not? said
the preacher, appealing to all the audi-
ence. What then is his duty? The
people answered affirmatively ; it was a
criminal forsaking of his post if such a
man held the word that was in him
silent. Poor Knox was obliged to
stand up; he attempted to reply, he
could say no word ; burst into a flood
of tears, and ran out.” “ Carlstad,” said
Luther, ‘‘ wanted to be the great man,
and truly I would willingly have left
the honour to him, so far as it had not
been against God. For, I praise my
God, I was never so presumptuous as to
think myself wiser than another man.
When at first I wrote against indulg-
ences, I designed simply to have opposed
them, thinking that, afterwards, others
would come and accomplish what I had
begun.” To be out of the roll of com-
mon men is not desirable. But wher
self- will and God’s will come into
collision, the will of the Lord be done.
Don’t be a straw upon the stream. Get


convictiens. Hold them. Search the
Scriptures, Be loyal to conscience.
Obey God. Spheres are narrow or
wide. What matters that? In the


narrowest men may fail; in the widest
they can but be faithful. Reverence
“the sacred must” in thy life and
work,


180


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[OHAP. VL





IX. Applications of this principle.
1. A man’s real joe is himself. “ No-
thing,” says St. Bernard, “can work
me damage except myself; the harm
that I sustain I carry about with
me, and never am a real sufferer but
by my own fault.” The powerful op-
position or skilful deception of the
Sanballats and Gashmus within my
sphere may make my duty more difficult,
but cannot wholly prevent my perform-
ance of it. There is such a thing as
self-degradation. This position is not
uncommon—to do our duty and suffer :
to leave it undone and escape the suffer-
ing. But to do the latter is to degrade
oneself. 2. Not such boldness, but some
boldness is required of us all, We may
have opportunities of speaking the truth
in love ; we must not shrink from the
responsibility of speaking the truth.
Force, fraud, falsehood were arrayed
against Nehemiah, are arrayed against
us. The holy war arises out of an
enmity of long standing. 3. Pay
homage to thy convictions. Honour the


grey-headed truths in the faith of whick
apostles, martyrs, and saints have lived
and died. God’s love, Christ’s atone
ment, your pardon and need of renewal
—hold fast these convictions. ‘ Take
unto you the whole armour of God, that


.ye may be able to withstand in the evil


day ”—the conquered soldier can do
that; “and having done all to stand”
—only the conquering soldier can do
that. So thou soldier of God. 4. Do
the task allotted thee. ‘ Work, in
every hour, paid or unpaid; see only
that thou work, and thou canst not
escape the reward; whether thy work
be fine or coarse, planting corn or writ-
ing epics, so only it be honest work,
done to thine own approbation, it shall
earn a reward to the senses as well as to
the thought; no matter how often de-
feated, you are born to victory. The
reward of a thing well done is to
have done it.”—EHmerson. Nehemiah
sent his message, and then went on
with his work. “So the wall was
finished.”


Frag anp Farra.


vi. 9. For they all made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from
the work, that it be not done. Now therefore, O God, strengthen my hands.


The words come after the story of a new scare to Nehemiah. [Describe his


anxieties from various forms of enmity.]


Fear and Faith.
I. Fear.


foes and fears,


however, who “ make us afraid.”


“ For they all made us afraid.”


Words suggest two companion topics,


Man is accompanied through life by


In some cases the fears are more numerous than the foes.
Frequently the only thing to be afraid of is our own fear.
To have an iron spirit not easily quailed is a


There are foes of us all,


yreat gift, and to have a spirit like a sensitive plant, which curls at every touch and
interrupts its functions, is a great misery. We may allow fears to grow upon us,
until they become an atmosphere to the soul. 1. Causes of fear. With Nehemiah
there were causes enough—real flesh and blood foes, who made his career in
Jerusalem one long vigil, always listening for the loud alarum of strife. Similarly
with most men in most of life’s enterprises. The soul has its foes ; “they are
lively and they are strong.” All religious work is done against obstacles which
“make us afraid.” (a) The devil ts a downright foe. We are not so much
alarmed at him now as in days of superstition. Luther threw his ink-pot at the
arch-enemy of his soul, and we smile at the picture of the rough student rising
from his Bible and casting such a very material defiance at such a very immaterial
foe. We have refined the devil since then toa “general expression for,” &c. But
was not the mistaken Reformer nearer right than ourselves? ‘ Your advercery the
devil” is not a mere generalization. (8) Foes hide themselves or show themselves in
our fellow-men. The man who hinders my work for God is my foe, whether he scare
me by opposition, or ‘nterrupt me by an unprofitable friendship. The foe who


OHAP. VI.] HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 151





pushes me down the precipice, and the foe who persuades me to go to sleep in the
sun, are alike reasons for fear. (y) The sinful nature inimyself ts my enemy. “No
one’s enemy but his own” is a common form of speech. Every man is a ship with
a mutinous crew on board, and destruction is averted only by the masterful
assertion of my better self against my lower self, of my conscience against my
passions, of the grace of God against the sin that dwelleth in me.


“ Christian, seek not yet repose,
Cast thy dreams of ease away ;
Thou art in the midst of foes;

Watch and pray.”


2. Effects of fear. (a) Ezxaggeration of peril. Life grows very gloomy when
the soul is afraid. Fear is a fearful thing. The palpitating, perspiring rustic in
the dark lane misinterprets every shadow, and hears a voice of threatening in
every sound, when once anything like superstitous terror has seized him. When
you are frightened you are not in a position to judge of your situation. Allow for
the enlargements of fear. Sometimes when we hear a sensational story we say,
Ah, Mr. Superlative told you that; take off ninety per cent. Now if we could
so deal with the alarming suggestions of our own fears it would be well. They
deceive us. When the disciples saw Jesus walking on the sea, they were troubled,
and supposed that they had seen a spirit; but he said, “ Be not afraid; it is I!”
(8) Paralysis of strength. ‘The hearts of the people melted and became as water ”
—not much lion-work of fighting for them. A child can take the sword of
frightened man. Be very courageous if you would be very strong.

II. Faith. ‘“ Now therefore, O God, strengthen my hands.” “ What time I am
afraid I will trust in the Lord.” The word of God is full of presuppositions o,
man’s timorousness and fear. It speaks gently, and as to a child, and bids its organs
be soft. “Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem!” Fear not, Abraham, I am thy
shield! Fear not, Moses—Joshua—David—Daniel: all through the story of
man’s struggle God’s ringing cry of Fear not ! falls upon him from heaven. Do not
over-chide yourself if you are of a timorous make, for why should there be chapter
after chapter of bugle-calls to courage, except that men never have been overstocked
with that grace. After faith in St. Peter’s teaching comes courage: ‘‘Add to your
faith virtue” (courage). Now faith stands as the counterpart of fear. 1. In causes
of fear. Against our array of foes it brings into view the presence of God. We
should strive to think God as real as our foes are, whereas we commonly in our
panic see only the peril, and not the Saviour. At Waterloo the French were
ranged on one side of a valley in brilliant force, while on the other side of the
valley waited the army that was to conquer—an army mostly hidden, It is thus
in religious life. 2 Kings vi. 15—17 gives a beautiful illustrative story. Those
“horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha ” were hidden to the servant, though
seen by the clear-eyed faith of his master. ‘‘ Elisha prayed, and said unto the Lord,
I pray thee, open his eyes, that he may see.” Look not on the foes only, but see
God. “ Hell is nigh, but God is nigher,

Circling us with hosts of fire.’’


2. Against the effect of fear (despair) let us set the spirit of hope, “Take for a
helmet the hope of salvation.” That will prevent. you being stunned by fear.
What incitements to hope we find. (1) In the history of God’shelp. Dealings with
faithful in all generations, (2) In experience of God’s help. Our own remembered
deliverances. Read St. Paul’s grand defiance of all foes, visible and invisible,
present and to come, in his glorious burst at end of the eighth of Romans: “‘ Whe
shall separate us from the love of Christ” (Rom. viii, 35—39)

Application. 1. Be aware of your foes. 2. Do not make too much of them.
3. Remember that tt ts not your own strength that wins, but the God who strengthens


your hands, 4, Never despair.


152





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[OHAP. V&


Farr Weakness.
vi. 9. O God, strengthen my hands,


Inrropuction.—Outline Nehemiah’s


position :—fierceness of foes; fear of


friends; work endangered; his own
heart failing him for fear. A critical
moment, requiring instantaneous de-
cision. Felt weakness casting itself on
God.

I. The habit of devotion. This
prayer not uttered whilst writing. He
recalls his experiences in that time of
danger. Such a trial-hour would stamp
itself in the memory. Nehemiah is
remarkable for his ejaculatory prayers.
They were the habit of his life. You
cannot be always devotional, if you
mean by that engaged in acts of devo-
tion. Habit will make you ready for
occasion. A school-boy cannot be all
day long repeating his father’s name;
enough if when a temptation arises to
do what would offend his father he
refuses. Bible precepts cannot be al-
ways on the tongue’s end, but a Christian
man should be so under the influence
of Biblical principles that he will shrink
instinctively from wrong-being and
wrong-doing.


“{ want a principle within

Of jealous, godly fear,

A sensibility of sin,
A pain to feel it near;

I want the first approach to feel
Of pride, or fond desire,

To catch the wandering of my will,
And quench the kindling fire,


That I from thee no more may part,
No more thy goodness grieve,
The filial awe, the fleshy heart,
The tender conscience give.
Quick as the apple of an eye,
God, my conscience make !
Awake my soul when sin is nigh,
And keep it still awake.”


Some ask only for a sentiment. That
is insufficient. Devotion must reach
the core of our being. We must be
“throughout Christian.” Habit implies
formation. Not by a sudden bound do
men reach perfection, Halting and
stumbling characterize a Christian’s first
efforts to walk alone. God regards the
bent of the will, the direction of the


desires. ‘‘He knoweth our frame ; he
remembereth that we are dust.’’ Don’t
be discouraged by failura, repeated
failure. Begin again. Learn ‘o pray.
Habituate thyself to devotional exercises.

II. The limits of solitariness. “O
God, strengthen my hands.” The hands
of the workers needed to be strengthened.
But on Nehemiah rested the responsi-
bility. He stood alone. If his strength
should fail in the day of adversity, all
would be lost. The tallest trees feel
the stress of the blast. Highlv-wrought
natures are subject to imuences unfelt
by coarser minds, Christ is the great
champion here—the loneliest man that
ever lived. You canuot read the Gospels
without feeling how far apart from him
even the disciples were. The best of
the outside world had so little in com-
mon with him. And through the ages
nen have had to thank God for the
lonely spirits. The noblest work is
achieved by personal and ionesome
effort. Sunday schools, prison zeforms,
hospital management, religiuus re
vivals, revolutions in Church and State
are the result of the genius and energy
of individual men and women. They
strike out the path along which the less
gifted, but not less earnest, travel. Doubt-
less there are times when the terrible
loneliness of their position startles such
men. Such a time came to Nehemiah,
and he cried unto God. And in the
commonplace life of all of us there is
solitariness. For the value of a life
does not depend upon externals, To
himself the life of a peasant is as im-
portant as is the life of a prince. No
second life is given. Great and small
are relative terms, be it remembered.
None is alone who has God with him.
“ Jesus said, Behold, the hour cometh,
yea, is now come, that ye shall leave me
alone: and yet J am not alone, because
the Father is with me.”

III. The value of certitué«.
God, strengthen my hands.”


“Zam weak, but thou art mighty,
Hold me with thy powerful hand,”


QO


OHAP, VI.]





That was about all Nehemiah knew.
His creed was short, but he held it firmly.
Sanballat and Gashmu might gather
fresh forces or bribe Nehemiah’s body-
guard; one thing was clear amid the
haze of others, God was Almighty, and
always approachable. We have a fuller
ereed ; have we a sublimer trust? A
motto of the Apostle Paul—“ We know.”
Nor is St. John one whit behind his
brother-apostle. The circle of religious
knowledge might be almost completed
from his First Epistle alone. ‘“‘ We know
that the Son of God is come.” “We
know that we are of God.” “We
know that we know him.” “ We know
that we are in him.” “We know that
he abideth in us.” ‘We know the
Spirit of truth and error.’’ “We know
that he heareth us.” “ We know that
when he shall appear we shall be like
him.’”’ That which we have experienced
becomes certain. ‘“‘ We speak that we
do know.” “One thing I know, that
whereas I was blind, now I see.”

IV. The secret of steadiness. “They
all made us afraid, saying, Their hands
shall be weakened from the work, that
it be not done. Now therefore, O God,
strengthen my hands. So the wall was
Jinished.” “ Unbelief,” says Gurnall,
“is a soul-enfeebling sin. It is to
prayer as the moth is to the cloth; it
wastes the soul’s strength, so that it
cannot look up to God with any hope.
‘They made us afraid, saying, Their
hands shall be weakened.’ Resist, there-
fore, Satan; be steadfast in the faith.
Never let thy heart suffer the power,
mercy, or truth of God to be called in
question ; thou hadst as good question
whether he can cease to be God.”

Application. 1. In striving to attain
personal excellence be patient. Effort
and failure mark much of our life. The
task we have in hand is herculean; the
opponents are numerous and powerful.
2. In any form of Christian enterprise
moderate your expectations, Opposition
will arise when least expected. Those
for whom you toil will seldom appreciate
your motives, Success may linger. 3.
Make the secular sacred by infusing into
it a sacred spirit. Refuse to call any-
thing common and unclean.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


16a
!
ILLUSTRATIONS.


Kjaculatory prayer.—‘' Kjaoulatory prayer is
prayer darted up from the heart to God, not at
stated intervals, but in the course of our daily
occupations and amusements, The word ‘ejacu.
latory’ is derived from the Latin word for a
dart or arrow, and there is an idea in it which
one would be loath indeed to forfeit, Imagine
an English archer, strolling through a forest in
the old times of Crecy and Agincourt, when the
yeomen of this island were trained to deliver
their arrows with the same unfailing precision
as ‘a left-handed Gibeonite’ discharging a stone
bullet from his sling. A bird rises in the brush-
wood under his feet, a bird of gorgeous plumage
or savoury flesh, Ho takes an arrow from his
quiver, draws his bow to its full stretch, and
sends the shaft after the bird with the speed of
lightning, Scareely an instant elapses before
his prey is at his feet. It has been struck with
unerring aim in the critical part, and drops on
the instant, Very similar in the spiritual world
is the force of what is called ejaculatory prayer.
The Christian catches suddenly a glimpse of
some blessing, deliverance, relief, a longing after
which is induced by the circumstances into
which he is thrown. Presently it shall be his,
As the archer first draws the bow in towards
himself, so the Christian retires, by a momentary
act of recollection, into his own mind, and there
realizes the presence of God. ‘Then he launches
one short, fervent petition into the ear of that
awful Presence, throwing his whole soul into
the request, And lo! itisdone! The blessing
descends, prosecuted, overtaken, pierced, fetched
down from the vault of heaven by the winged
arrow of prayer.” —Goulburn,

“ Ejaculations take not up any room in the
soul, They give liberty of callings, so that at
the same instant one may follow his proper
vocation. The husbandman may dart forth an
ejaculation, and not make a balk the more. The
seaman, nevertheless, steers his ship right in the
darkest night. Yea, the soldier at the same
time may shoot out his prayer to God, and aim
his ristel at his enemy, the one better hitting
the mark for the other, The field wherein bees
feed is no whit the barer for their biting; when
they have taken their full repast on flower or
grass, the ox may feed, the sheep fatten on their
reversions, ‘he reason is, because those little
chemists distil only the refined part of the flower,
leaving the grosser substance thereof. So ejacu-
lations bind not men to any bodily observance,
only busy the spiritual half, which makes them
consistent with the prosecution of any other
employment,”

“In hard havens, so choked up with the
envious sands that great ships drawing many
feet of water cannot cume near, lighter and
lesser pinnaces may freely and ARS arrive,
When we are time-bound, pase bonte so that
we cannot compose ourselves to make a large,
solemn prayer, this is the right instant for ejacu-
lations, whother orally uttered or only poured
forth inwardly in the heart.” —Frdller.


164


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[cmAr. VI.





Pawre.
vi. 10—13. Afterward I came unto the house of Shemaiah, &e.


In the varying romance of Nehemiah’s


brave struggle with difficulties occurs an —


instance of panic, or of what might have
been panic to a less steadfast soul. A
man was shutting himself up in alarm—
real or assumed—and endeavoured to
persuade Nehemiah to do the like, to
turn the temple into a fortress, and to
make the open porch of God’s house a
shelter for merely personal fear. But
Nehemiah (as always) was “ steadfast,
unmoveable.” His resolute, fearless “ I
will not goin /” settled the matter, which
after all turned out to be a mere
theatrical scare, got up to order in the
interest of Tobiah and Sanballat. Panic
is our subject —its effect and its cor-
rectives.

I. Panic. Originally suggestive of
Pan, the god of the woods. To ignorant
men the deep solemn shades of the
virgin forests were fraught with awe, and
full of causes for sudden alarm. Un-
reasoning, helpless FRIGHT ts the idea,
i. National panic. A people suddenly
exaggerating a state danger, and acting
in a way to be sorry for afterwards, 2.
Business panic. A trading community
or firm scared out of its even regularity
into some wild action. 3. Personal
panic. Sudden trouble not bravely met
with a breastplate of patience and a
helmet of hope, but with helpless alarm,
4, Spiritual panic. Those soul-shiver-
ings which are like fits in religious life,
These are common familiar forms.
Panic is commonly groundless. That is,
the wave is not so high as it seems to
the retreating bather, who hears its hiss
behind him. No man is so bad as
sudden indignation paints him, and few
crises in man’s history are so alarming
as to the alarmed they appear. The
downfall of the state—the end of the
world—the collapse of trade—the ruin
of a house—the overthrow of good—
these are often only scares.

II. The effect of panic. To gather
all the selfishness of man to a focus or
to substitute a brief madness for calm


thoughtfulness and decision. 1. Ii
makes a man behave unworthily of him-
self. The leader shows his flying form
as a scoff to the after-judgment of men.
& Unsoldierly conduct in presence of the
enemy.” Shall that be said of the
pillars of the state, or of the strong
support of the home, or of the Christian
soldier in his discouraging battle with
sint Shall Nehemiah be hidden in
some corridor of God’s temple, or pesp
in alarm from the shut window of Zion?
2. It makes a man behave unworthily
toward his fellows. The man who
tramples upon the woman in a burning
theatre ; the craven who sinks the boat
which might have saved “all hands”
in his eagerness for personal security
the soldier who deserts the companion:
whom he might have helped to con-
quest—these are all exhibitions of tne
unlovely possibilities of human nature,
Is Nehemiah to imperil the Jews by
scrambling for a place a sword-length
away from danger? 3. It makes a man
behave unworthily of his God. Is not
God ror the hour of peril? Am I to
trust in Providence up to the dangerous
moment, and then become my own provi-
dence ? Is God’s house to be a robbet’s
den for timorous culprits to shelter
in? Let a man die ¢m God’s hands,
not “fleeing from the presence of tha
Lord.”

III. The correctives of panic.
“ Prevention, not cure,” is the motto,
1. Remembrance of a man’s own dignity.
“T said, Should such a man as I flee f
and who is there, that, being as I am,
would go into the temple to save his
life} Iwill not goin” For a man’s
elf to fall is worse than to fall before a
foe. Let not the supreme fear be
personal fear, “fear of them that can
kill raz-Bopy.”’ Moral’ degradation ia
worse than physical death. 2. Remem-
branes of others, Carry the alarms of
others as corrective of your own. Waar
for others, lest. your own fear become too
great, Nehemiah hears the ery of


CHAP. VI.]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH,


155


!


helpless Jews, and he will not fly and
leave them. 3. Remembrance of God.
Nehemiah’s book shows how the idea of
“my God” had become part of his
mental habit. His “ heart was fixed,
trusting in the Lord.” Read Ps. xlvi.
at the first murmur of unworthy alarm—
“God is our refuge,’ &c. The iron
nerve of Luther’s hymn is a cry to turn
the tide of warring fears. Paul is serene
in the danger of shipwreck—nay, in the


7
certainty of it—because of the forewarn-
ing of the Angel of the Lord, “ whose I
am, and whom [ serve.” That “ Fear
not, Paul/” made him deaf to the roar
of the threatening sea, Cultivate a
habit of confidence in God. Man’s
extremity is God’s opportunity.

Application. Keep a short account
with conscience, and you will be able to
make small account of panic.


Lyra Proruets.
vi. 10. Afterward I came unio the house of Shemaiah, de.


“Shemaiah was such a common name
among the Jews, that it is impossible to
identify this prophet with any other
person of his name. He must, how-
ever, have been a man of prominence,
and one, too, who had been in
Nehemiah’s confidence, or else the
attempt would never have been made
by Tobiah and Sanballat through him.
It may have been the high position and
reputation, of Shemaiah that led the
prophetess Noadiah and the rest of the
prophets (ver. 14) into the false dealings
with Nehemiah.”—Dr, Crosby.

I. Great gifts may be dissociated
from pure life. Shemaiah lied. The
gift of God in Shemaiah, Noadiah, and
the rest of the prophets had been sold
for money. Two lists of prophets may
be compiled from “the Book” — the
true, the false. Of the latter—Balaam
(Num. xxiii), the old prophet (1
Kings xiii), Zedekiah and the rest who
seduced Ahab to his destruction (1
Kings xxii.), Hananiah (Jer. xxviii.).
Character is primal element of a concep-
tion of true prophet. “A grace does
not differ from a gift in this, that the
former is from God, and the latter from
nature. As a creative power there is no
such thing as nature; all is God’s. A
grace is that which has in it some moral
quality ; whereas a gift does not neces-
sarily share in this. Graces are what
the man 7s; but enumerate his gifts,
and you only know what he has.”—
F. W. Robertson. Gifts are sacred. We
speak of gifted men as men of talent.
That word talent was probably borrowed


from our Saviour’s parable of the man
who was travelling into a far country,
who called his servants and delivered
unto them his goods. Unto one he gave
five talents, to another two, and to
another one: to every man according to
his several ability, and straightway took
his journey. Unfortunately gifts may
be abused. They have been abused.
They have been used as instruments of
oppression. And, shuddering at their
abuse, Christian people have often
condemned them as if they were the
devil’s gifts, not God’s. Now this course
is unwise; it is dangerous. We rob
ourselves of so much power by re-
fusing to enlist into the service of God
whatever is good. In the early Church
the gifts of prophecy, of healing, of
miracles were abused. St. Paul de-
nounces the abuse, but not the gift.
On the contrary, he enumerates them ;
he states their relative importance ; he
calls them emphatically spiritual (1 Cor.
xii. xiv.). The gifta of our age are
spiritual ; the talented men of our time
are inspired. Knowledge is power, but
it is not piety. The poets of ethereal
intellects have not always been men of
etherealized lives.

II. Great gifts may lead to deterior-
ation of character. Shemaiah had
been a true prophet, whom Nehemiah
had found trustworthy. The hypocrite
pays unconscious homage to virtue.
Prophets and prophetess had gone from
bad to worse through Sanballat’s gold.
The qualifications which the Jewish
doctors deemed indispensable to a


186


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[CHAP. VL





prophet were “‘ true probity and piety.”
“ That God may choose of men whom he
pleaseth, and send him, it matters not
whether he be wise and learned, or
unlearned and unskilful, old or young ;


only that this is required, that he be


@ virtuous, good, and honest man ; for
hitherto there was never any that could
say that God did cause the Divine
majesty to dwell in a vicious person,
unless he had first reformed himself.”
—Maimonides. The “lying spirit” en-
tered into them and they fell. ‘Now
these things were our examples.” Use
your gifts, not display them, Be not
vain of them. Has God given thee a
clear judgment, penetration, retentive
memory, or an eloquent tongue, thank
him by cultivating it. Has he endowed
thee with health, thank him for it by
preserving it. Has he given thee
mechanical skill or business aptitude,
recognize the Giver by turning it to best
advantage. As God has appointed to
every man his work, so he has given
to every man his gift. The sacred call
of duty is heard along all the ranks of
existence. Let not the humblest
amongst us imagine that his gifts are
unnecessary or valueless—they are his.
The drop of water in which the animal-
cule live is to them what the sea is to
behcmoth, The falling leaf is as great
a catastrophe to the insect that feeds
upon it as is a burning world to an
angel. Dost thou scorn the lesser
gifted? Bethink thyself. The God
who endowed thee endowed them; the
Spirit who inspired thee inspires them.
“Who maketh thee to differ from
another? and what hast thou that thou
didst not receive?’”’ Are you discon-
tented with your gifts, and envious of
the more highly endowed? Forget not
that God who lights the sun lights the
stars. He does not disown the meanest
flower that blows. The seraph nearest
to his throne does not cause him to
forget the humblest missionary toiling in
some island of the Southern Seas. 1.
Accept thy position. God, who has
appointed the bounds of our habitation,
has fixed the limits of our power. 2.
Cultivate your gifts. Be not contented.
Do not repine. 3. Remember that gifts


are not graces. ‘Though [ speak with
the tongues of men and of angels, and
have not charity, I am become as
sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal.
And though I have the gift of prophecy,
and understand all mysteries, and all
knowledge ; and though I have all faith,
so that I could remove mountains, and
have not charity, I am nothing.” The
only undying faculties are the affections ;
the only permanent work is that we do
for others.


ILLUSTRATIONS.


Aha’’s lying prophets (1 Kings xxii). “ Ahab
consulted all his false prophets as to whether or
not he should go to attack the Syrians at Ramoth-
Gilead. They knew what to say; they knew
that their business was io prophesy what would

ay them—what woui3 be pleasant to him.
They did not care whether what was said was
true or not; they lied for the sake of gain, for
the Lord had puta lying spirit into their mouths,
They were rogues and villains from the first.
They had turned prophets, not to speak God’s
truth, but to make money, to flatter King Ahab,
to get themselves a reputation. We do not hear
that they were all heathens. Many.of them may
have believed in the true God. But they were
cheats and liars, and so they had given place to
the devil, the father of lies; and now he had
taken possession of them in spite of themselves,
and they lied to Ahab, and told him that he
would prosper in the battle at Ramoth-Gilead.
It was a dangerous thing for them to say ; for if
he had been defeated, and returned disappointed,
his rage would have most probably fallen on them
for deceiving him. And as in those Hastern
countries kings do whatever they like, without
laws or parliaments, Ahab would have most
likely put them all to a miserable death on the
spot. But however dangerous it might be for
them to lie, they could not help lying. A spirit
of lies had seized them, and they who began by
lying because it paid them, now could not help

oing so whether it paid them or not.”

Prophets of to-day. “* Do not fancy that there
are no prophets in our days, unless the gift of
the Holy Spirit, which is promised to all who
believe, i adream and a lie. There are pro-
phets now-a-days —yea, I say unto you, and
more than prophets. Isnot the Bible a prophet?
Is not every holy and wise book, every holy and
wise preacher and writer, a prophet, expounding
to us God’s laws, foretelling to us God’s opinions
of our deeds, both good and evil? Ay, is not
every man a prophet to himself? That ‘still
small voice ’—1is not that a prophecy in a man’s
own heart? Truly itis. It is the voice of God
within us, it is the Spirit of God striving with
our spirits, whether we will hear, or whether we
will forbear—setting before us what is righteous,
and noble, and pure, and what is manly and
godlike ; to see whether we will obey that voice,
or whether we will obey our own selfiab \nats,


OHAP. VI.]


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


157





which tempt us to please ourselyes—to pamper
ourselves, our greediness, covetousness, ambition,
or self-conceit. And if you ask me how to try
the spirits, how to know whether your own
thoughts, whether the sermons which you hear,
the books which you read, are speaking to you
God’s truth, or some lying spirit’s falsehood, I
can only answer you, ‘To the law and to the
testimony’—to the Bible; if they speak not
according to that word, there is no truth in them.
But how to understand the Bible? for the fleshly
man understands not the things of God. The
fleshly man, he who cares only about pleasing


himself, he who goes to the Bible full of self-
conceit and selfishness, wanting the Bible to tel!
him only just what he likes to hear, will only
find it a sealed book to him, and will very likely
wrest the Scriptures to his own destruction.
Take up your Bible humbly, praying to God to
show you its meaning, whether it be pleasant to
you or not, and then you will find that God will
show you a blessed meaning in it; he will open
your eyes, that you may understand the wondrous
things of his law ; he will show you how to try
the spirit of all you are taught, and to find out
whether it comes from God.”-—Charles Kingsley.


PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY.


vi 11. Should such a man as I flee?


Character, position, recollection, Nehemiah opposed to Shemaiah’s cowardly
proposal Personal responsibility overpowered all considerations of expediency,
Let the instance suggest the wider theme. ‘‘ We mortal millions dwell alone.”
“ Every one of us shall give account of himself to God.”

I. A law of the Divine procedure. God has not dealt with men in the mass.
He is not far from any one of us. 1. Law implies individual responsibility. The
word contains the idea of pointing out, directing, leading; hence a rule of conduct.
National law does not treat men as a society, but as a mass of responsible units,
All our jurisprudence is based on this. The Bible axiom that every man shall
give account of himself has been brought into the sphere of political life. Moral
law rests on the same foundation. Its violation is sin; its honour is righteousness.
In this none can be surety for his brother. Laws are for the safe-conduct of
individual lives. The general good is contained in that of the individual. The
true communism is not that which would adopt the impossible expedient of
dividing to all alike, but that which shall secure to every individual the scope for
working out his responsibility as a man, a citizen, and a Christian. 2. The history
of God's dealings 1s in harmony with this, Angels—so far as the Bible and
analogy lead us to infer—are subject to a similar moral government. They had
their testing-time. They stood in probation as individuals. The most exalted
spirits in the universe are amenable to God. There can be only one Supreme.
They fell as individuals, Satan is distinctive.


“He, above the reat
In shape and gesture proudly eminent,
Stood like a tower; his form had not yet lost
All her original clap nor appeared
ruined,”’


Less than archange
But they were all “fellows of his crime.” He only “led the embattled seraphim
to war.” “His angels were cast out with him.” They are “the angels that
sinned.” “ By ambition fell the angels.”


“ Of their names in heavenly records now
Be no memorial, blotted out and razed
By their rebellion from the book of life,”


The rest stand as individuals having kept their first estate. Their past faithfulness
insures the future. Michael, Gabriel, Uriel, the Prince, the Archangel, whether they
are personal, or like thrones, dominions, principalities, and powers, representative
of ranks, are distinctive. For if not individual in themselves, they represent the
ministry and defence of the angels. Nations. The Israelites were elected as a
nation; but they fell as individuals. One terrible verse sums up all. “ Their


168 HOMILETIOC OOMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. (CHAP. VB





carcases fell in the wilderness.” History confirms this. When honour is lost in
public men, when domestic ties are violated, nations fall. A man’s great enemy
is himself ; a nation’s great enemy is itself; Truth and justice, law and order, the
bond of a nation. The enemy without does not knock at the gates for almission
until the enemy within has prepared the way for conquest. Churches. The
Churches of the Revelation of St. John are typical. There is a common danger.
“He that overcometh!” belongs to Smyrna and Pergamos, to Ephesus and
Sardis, to Philadelphia, Thyatira, and Laodicea. But right and wrong are not
massed. Declension, false doctrine, seduction, semblance, are severally con-
demned. Hatred of evil, whether in doctrine or conduct, endurance, adherence
to truth, charity, undefiledness, are severally praised. So with individual lives,
The stern-souled prophet and the confiding Mary; the martyr Stephen and the
traitor Judas; the impressible Herod and the unmoved Baptist; the faithful
James and the faithless Peter: each stood alone—alone in relation to God, alone
in relation to duty. 3. Christianity recognizes personal responsibility. Christ
dealt with men as individuals. In his teaching, miracles, sympathies. One
woman elicited his best teaching; one family found his great love; one widow
sufficient to move his miraculous arm. Acceptance of Christianity personal.
Repentance, faith, forgiveness, Exhibition of Christianity personal. Cross-bear-
ing, truth-speaking, forgiveness, humility, unselfishness, generosity, work. The
Church is a body fitly joined together. Every man hath his proper gift of God.

II. A fact in human experience. As every leaf among the myriad leaves of
the forest is governed by the laws of growth, and yet in its conformation is distinct,
so every man is subject to the general laws of Divine procedure and the special
which apply only to himself. No two men are exactly alike in character or cir-
cumstances. 1. Responsibility. Each is required to work out his destiny. The
foundation of a noble life is Christ, but every man must take heed how he buildeth
thereupon. Alone each must return his Lord’s money. Every one will be brought
unto him. It will not be important how much we return, but what is the measure
of increase. If to the two talents by wise use of opportunities we add other two,
we shall receive the same commendation as those who to the five talents add other
five. 2. Mystery. There is a strange mixture of good and evilin us. Our feet
stand on the earth and our head points toward heaven, as if significant of our
heavenly aspirations and earthly tendencies. We can talk of the beauty of virtue
whilst deliberately indulging in vice. Pilate-like, we can wash our hands in
affected innocency whilst the guilt of blood rests upon us. A business loss, a
bereavement, a change in circumstances, and all a man’s fine talk about superiority
to circumstances, the vanity of riches, and futility of earthly things avails nothing.
The mystery of the future is sometimes agonizing. 3. Gutlt. We cannot shift
upon the first sinner the guilt of our iniquity. “ My sin is ever before me” is the
wail of every kingly soul. Nor can we cast our guilt upon circumstances, No
man is forced to violate his conscience. Where there is no will there is no guilt.
A man must rule his circumstances, not be ruled by them. 4. Faith. Creeds
and Churches will not save us. They presuppose our salvation. The reason why
the faith of so many is feeble is that they have never tested it. It is an unproved
armour, and when the hour comes to encounter Goliath they are afraid. Every
man must come into contact with God. “O taste and see that the Lord is good.”
One real wrestle with God will teach more about prayer than a treatise on it.
Faith in God in an hour of real danger better explains it than a sermon on its
philosophy. ‘Search the Scriptures.” ‘“‘ Prove all things,” that you may “hold
fast that which is good.” 5. Temptation. From this there can be no escape.
Were we able to say as Christ did, “The prince of this world cometh and hath
nothing in me,” temptation would be powerless. Not here, but yonder, will the
sons of God present themselves before the Lord and Satan not come among them.
6. Sorrow. “The heart knoweth his own bitterness,”


OHAP. YL] HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 15¢


era Se cL a

TI. A prophecy of destiny. 1. What a man is now, that He will be arRe-
aFTER, God will judge every man according to his works, as these are the
evidences of the man. Heaven may be a change of locality and circumstances,
but not character. This is indestructible, 2. There ts no injustice, because each
man ts judged. To one he gives five talents, to another two, and to another one;
to every man according to his several ability ; and he will expect a proportionate
return. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal.
Unto every one of us is given grace. God is not a hard master, reaping where he
has not sown, and gathering where he has not strawed. 3. We are now fuelling
the revealing jire—a fire that shall try every man’s work of what sort it is. Nothing
ends in this world. Thoughts become incarnated as soon as we express them.
Words live in those who hear us. Deeds have an undying influence. God will
gather up the fragments of our daily lives, that nothing be lost. And the day
shall declare every man’s work.


Sxir-RespPecr,


Should such a man as I flee? and who is there, that, being as I am,
would go into the temple to save his life? I will not go in.


Wioii,


Nehemiah would not run away, be-
cause he could not fancy himself doing
anything of that sort. “Should such a
man as I flee?” Our theme then is
self-respect. Religion, though it brings
with it humility,—an unnatural grace of
character, an exotic from the gardens
of the skies planted on earth by Divine
hands,—though religion induces humil-
ity, it promotes self-respect. The eighth
Psalm teaches not merely the littleness
of man, but his greatness. Throughout
the book of Nehemiah the Jewish patriot
is not wanting in manly self-respect.

I. The ground of self-respect. 1.
False grounds. (a) Money. The vul-
garest form of human conceit. To bea
money-bag, and nothing else! (5) Birth.
A by no means contemptible ground, if
the greatness from which a man is born
is bred into his own character. (c)
Intelligence. Too frequently a reason
for the smallest vanity. Vanities of
authors and pride of bookmen. (d)
Office and association. These are no
necessary reasons for self-pluming, but
may be the merest accidents. 2. True
grounds. Moral worth. Personal noble-
ness and sincerity of character and life.
Under the eye of God, and in view of a
Christian relation to God, a man may
stand upright before the world. (a)
Sonship with God. “That we should
be called the sons of God” is a ground
for dignity—to be of the inner elect
family of God. (6) Brotherhood with


the good. To be in the bead-roll of
that long line of Divine heroes of al!
ages — following, but not with equal
steps—-that stirs the blood. “ Brothers,
we are treading where the saints have
trod.” (c) Service in righteousness. The
great cause of God gives dignity to the
meanest servant. “I had rather be a
doorkeeper,” &c. (d) Heirship with the
skies. ‘The celestial expectations of the
good give grandeur to their earthly
being.

II. The influence of self-respect.
1. Negatively. (a) Not petty, strutting
pride. ‘Not I, but Jesus Christ that
dwelleth in me.” The dignity of the
child of God—in its possessions and
honours and hopes—is too tremendous
to be proud of. (2) Not contempt of
others. “He that is greatest among
you, let him be your servant.” Jesus
has a name above every name, because
“he took on him the form of a servant.”
2. Positively. (a) The effect of self-re-
spect in duty. To exalt all duty into
the sublime, and to do it, beyond all its
temporal and transitory purposes, “as
unto the Lord.” (6) In temptation.
To make sin beneath a man, “He
cannot sin, because he is born of God”
—as a spotless Washington “cannot
lie.” Joseph’s indignant “ How can I
do this great wickedness, and sin against
God?” (c) In trouble. It prevents a
man becoming unworthy of himself.
‘“‘T know how to be abased.” “Tf thon


180


faint in the day of aiversity, thy strength
is small.” In worldly scenes and senses
pride is a great restrainer of weakness.
“ Burning pride and high disdain for-
bad the rising tear to flow.” So in the
spiritual life the man of God chides his


trembling soul: ‘ Why art thou cast.


down, O my soul?”


CHRISTIAN


ah Wy


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIA ¥.


(oHAP. Vi.


Application. Know thyself/ 1. A
child of God. Are you a child of God}
2. Then rightly view the dignity of your
being. On the human side, a vessel of
clay, brief in life, weak in powers,
limited by worldly accidents; but on
the Godward side, an heir of God and
a joint heir with Christ.


FIRMy ess.


And I said, Should such a man as I flee? and who ta there, that, being as


T am, would go into the temple to save hia life? I will not go in.


Whoever examines the character of
the primitive saints will see how religion
dignifies and ennobles the mind of man.
Nehemiah had engaged in an arduous
work. In this he was opposed. From
Shemaiah, a prophet, he might have
expected better things.

I. The subtlety with which our
great adversary will assault us. How
apecious was the proposal made to Nehe-
miah. Our adversary will propose to
us—1l. To neglect our eocial duties to
further our spiritual welfare. A com-
mon temptation and specious. Apprentice
and servant neglecting duty to attend
religious ordinances. ‘These ought ye
to have done, and not to leave the other
undone.” 2. To conform to the world,
with a view to conciliate their regard.
By conforming to the world we shall
confirm them in their persuasion, that
religion does not require that measure
of spirituality which the saints of old
maintained. 3. To use undue means
with a view to obtain some desirable end,
Safety was desirable to Nehemiah, but
secretion not a desirable way to obtain
it. Many objects are desirable, but
must not be sought by any sacrifice of


duty or couscience. The greater the
subtlety of Satan is, the greater should
be our vigilarce, and the more immov-
able.

II. The firmness with which we
should resist him. ‘Shall such a man
as I flee—a man invested with authority,
& man engaged for the Lord, a man in
whom any act of cowardice will be pro-
ductive of injurious effects}” Thus
should we set the Lord ever before us,
bearing fully in mind—1. Our relation
to him. A servant of the living God.
A child of the Father in heaven. My
calling. 2. Our obligations to him.
Shall I offend God? I will render unto
the Lord according to the benefits he
has conferred upon me.
ations from him. For eternity I have
been redeemed, sanctified; and for
eternity alone will I both live and die,
4. The interest which God himself has
in the whole of our conduct. God's
enemies endeavour to beguile us, in
order that they may triumph over us
and exult in our shame. On review of
the subject—l. Huxpect temptation. 2.
In every circumstance place your entire
confidence in God.—Simeon, abridged.


Human PREScrENCE


vi 12.


“ Because,” says Gill, “he advised to
that which was against the cause of
God and true religion.” That helped
Nehemiah to discern Shemaiah’s trea-
chery; but wasthatall? The treachery
was not yet discovered. Afterwards


And, lo, I perceived that God had not sent him.


Nehemiah learned that “ Tobiah and
Sanballat had hired him.” Is there not
a spirit in man—a spirit of divination ?
What do observation and experience
teach? Are not men and women
continually sitting in judgment upon ona


3. Our eapect- —


QHAP. VI.]}


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


161





another? ‘To two states of soul it is
given to detect the presence of evil,
states the opposite of each other—
innocence and guilt. It was predicted
of the Saviour while yet a child that by
him the thoughts of many hearts should
be revealed ; the fulfilment of this was
the history of his life. He went through
the world, by his innate purity detecting
the presence of evil, as he detected the
touch of her who touched his garment in
the crowd. Men, supposed spotless
before, fell down before him crying,
‘Depart from me, for I am a sinful man,
O Lord!’ This in a lower degree is
true of all innocence. You would think
that one who can deeply read the human
heart and track its windings must be
himself deeply experienced in evil. But
it is not so—at least not always.
Purity can detect the presence of the
evil which it does not understand. Just
as the dove which has never seen a
hawk trembles at its presence, and
just as a horse rears uneasily when the
wild beast unknown and new to it is
near, so innocence understands, yet
understands not, the meaning of the
unholy look, the guilty tone, the sinful
manner. It shudders and shrinks from
it by a power given to it, like that which
God has conferred on the unreasoning
mimosa. Sin gives the same power, but
differently. Innocence apprehends the
approach of evil by the instinctive tact
of contrast; guilt. by the instinctive
consciousness of similarity.”—F. W.
Robertson. Faces never lie, it is said.
Falsehood has not a clear, calm gaze.
The grosser vices leave their mark upon
the countenance. The drunkard, the
libertine, the deceiver write the story
of their lives upon the fleshly table of the


body. The laws of God are written in
the nature of things as well as in the
Scripture of truth. Mahomet said,
“Paradise is under the shadow of
swords.” All men pay the penalty of
their position. A good gained, an ill
averted, must reckon with the sweat of
the brow or the sweat of the brain.
Wise men, who are they but the far-
seeing, the foresighted? As those chil-
dren of Issachar to whom is given
honourable mention, as being “men that
had understanding of the times to know
what Israel ought to do” (1 Chron. xii
32). Nehemiah “saw through” She
maiah. It needed no miracle to reveal
his fraud.

Learn—I. The supreme importance
of truth and uprightness. The Bible
revelation does not make truth, truth ;
falsehood, falsehood ; it only declares
what they are, Close your Bible, and
still deception will bring disgrace, dis-
honesty will not be the best policy,
judgment will track the wrong-doer.
‘Be sure your sin will find you out” is
written in history and biography.

See—IT. An evidence of the Bible.
The book does not stand alone, The
heavens above and the earth beneath,
the nature and constitution of man,
confirm its truth.

Mark—III. Confirmation of the doc-
trine of a judgment to come. Men
are being judged. A book of remem-
brance each of us is writing. In the
failure of falsehood and deception, in
the discovery and condemnation of every
unrighteous compact, in the fall of
dynasties resting upon oppression and
bloodshed, in the histories recorded by
the daily press, see you not premonition
of a day of judgment !


Barpgry.


vi. 13. Pherefore was he hired, that I should be afraid, and do 80, and sin, and
that they might have matter for an evil report, that they might reproach me,


In this paragraph Nehemiah dwells
apon the hirelings who were paid to do
him mischief. The wrong-doer becomes
dignified by association with his petty


exalted into the originals of mischief in
contrast with the ready agents who did
the mischief for money. Bribery.

I. Its existence and varieties.


tools, and Tobiah and Sanballat are Among heathen states and in the godless


162


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


[CHAP V1





associations of the world this guilt is not
unnatural, but alas for its commonness
in Christian times. From Judas, who
took the bribe of thirty pieces of silver,
down to the last transaction of the kind
yesterday, the world is full of it, 1. In
statecraft.
wards of more locks than we know of ;
it buys eloquence in debate, and logic
in the newspapers, and valour or
cowardice in the field. 2. In trade.
Talk to any business man about his
particular avocations, and get him into
the anecdotal strain, and you will find
out among what snares an honourable
man is compelled to walk day by day.
The business man has to battle every-
where with an underground foe. 3. In
morals and religion. For fear of seeming
cynicism let us not pursue this theme.
But the purchase system has no respect
for sacred things, and the modern temple,
like the ancient temple, has its herd of
traffickers, which, if driven out with a
whip of cords, would leave the Church of
God purer and the homes of England
safer. In Nehemiah’s case the prophets
were bought, and the so-called messengers
of God were, Balaam-like, guided not by
a star from heaven, but by the glitter of
golden coins.

II. Its effects. 1. Personal degrad-
ation. To buy a man in a slave-market
is to make him but half a man; but to
buy a man’s soul in a conscience-market
is to degrade him from manhood alto-
gether, “for in the image of God made
he man.” To buy from some poor man
his birthright of honour, to take away
man’s Christ and leave him thirty


This golden key finds the.


pieces of silver as an equivalent—that ix
devil’s work in the doer, and it is damn-
ation in him in whom the thing ts done.
2. General disorganization. The great
laws of this world are just, and all
departure from them must work down-
fall. Violation of the laws of health is
a wandering towards death. Corruption
and jobbing in the state means rottenness
and downfall of a nation. . Bribery in
trade is ‘‘ a missing of the mark,” a sin
against the true end of trade, and its
revenge is sure. 3. Hindrance of all
good. The Achan gold-ingot in the
tent makes God’s army of righteousness
weak. ‘Neither will I be with you
any more, except ye destroy the accursed
from among you.”

III. Itscure. 1. The first ingredient
of the cure is self-denial. ‘ They all do
it” is no matter; you had better not.
We can only win in this fight by having
the courage to lose (1 Sam. xii. 2—5).
2. The second is resolute unmercifulness
to the briber. For the good of the
community and the glory of God let
the briber’s head be stuck ona pole. 3.
The third is trust in God and faith in
right. God is strong, and if we will
honour him he will honour us. He that
sitteth in the heavens shall laugh at the
petty power of bribery. “ Great is truth,
and shall prevail,” is not a motto to be
illuminated on a card, but to be illus-
trated in a life.

Application. ‘Seek jirst the king-
dom of God and his righteousness.”
Let that be the guiding law of life and
have faith in its success, and it shall
succeed,


Firry-two Days’ Worx.
vi. 15. So the wall was finished in fifty and two days.


To draw a circumference of fortifica-
tions of such dimensions in such short
time was no doubt a great engineering
feat. The pluck, decision, promptness,
and laborious industry and despatch of
such a task are very stimulating to read
of. Let us, however, make a parable of
the story, and use the text as a motto of
a deeper theme. The circling year furn-
ishes ua with fifty-two days of special


work for God. The wall-building of
Christian Nehemiahs in the spiritual
city of God is mainly done on Sundays,
of which the year supplies fifty-two or
thereabouts, Of that jifty-two days and
of their work let us speak. Fifty-twa
Sundays.

I. How quickly they pass! To a
child how slow the movement from
Sunday to Sunday—what a space in


OHAP. VI. ]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


168





the great time-field! But to a worn,
worried, work-wearied man a week is
but a quick flash of days, “ swifter than
a weavers shuttle.” Monday with its
yawnings and stretchings, Tuesday with
its markets, Wednesday with its solid
tasks, Thursday with its deeper toil,
Friday with its haste “to get it done,”
Saturday with its summing up and its
payments, and then the Sabbath bell
and all the associations of the house
of God. It is a quick passage from
Sunday to Sunday. We soon round a
circle of fifty-two. The first Sunday of
the year, with its cheery, greeting sermon
of hope, and then in a little while the
last Sunday, with its solemn review and
reflection. It soon goes, this year of
Sundays. 1. How many circles have
you passed? 2. How many more do you
look for #

II. What opportunities they furnish!
1. What opportunities of nest! The
glory of the Sabbath as a rest day, the
pillow of the work-wearied world. The
Ri@uTs of MAN in this matter. 2. What
opportunities of spiritual friendship!
The Sabbath a great holiday and reunion
of kindred hearts. The gathering of
the brotherhood of Christians in their
souls’ home. 3. What opportunities of
Divine instruction! The lessons rubbed


off the slate during the week, or rubbed
into indefinite blurs ; the new writing of
God’s word on the tablets of the heart.
4. What opportunities of moral renewal /
The religious recreative power of Sab-
bath thoughts and engagements. 5.
What opportunities of refreshing HorE!
God’s promises breaking like stars upon
the soul escaped from the glare of the
world’s gas-lamps. God’s heaven de-
scending upon the eye of meditation,
like the New Jerusalem which John saw.
End your Sabbath with St. John’s vision
at the close of Revelation. Fifty-two
Sundays ! what golden coins from God’s
mint.

III. What results they leave! 1. Zn
memory. (a) Truths taught. (b) Me-
mories cherished. 2. In life. (a) If
improved. Growing Christian character
—another ring of fortification against
the world, the flesh, and the devil. (d)
If unimproved. A hardening of the
moral sense, a deadening of the power of
truth, a deepening of the fatal work of
worldliness, 3. For judgment. (a)
Condemnation, if abused. (0) Safety, if
used,

Application. 1. Thank God for the
day of days. 2. Use each day as
comes. 3. Determine upon @ rounded
result for each cycle of fifty-two.


Tos Gopwarp Sipe or Tues.
vi. 16. They perceived that this work was wrought of our God.


An outer and an inner view. “They
all made us afraid, saying, Their hands
shall be weakened from the work, that it
be not done” (ver. 9). The work went
on; the wall was finished. “And it
came to pass, that when all our enemies
heard thereof, and all the heathen that
were about us saw these things, they
were much cast down in their own eyes:
for they perceived that this work was
wrought of our God” (ver. 16). There
is an upper and an under side to many
things. Work man-ward or work God-
ward.

I. Work Divinely inspired. “The
good hand of God that was upon him,”
Nehemiah is never tired of recognizing.
“T heard the voice of the Lord, saying,


Whom shall I send, and who will go for
us? Then said I, Here am I; send me.”
—Isaiah, ‘The word of the Lord came
unto me, saying, I have ordained thee a
prophet unto the nations. Then said I,
Ah, Lord God! behold, I cannot speak :
for I am a child. But the Lord said
unto me, Say not, I am a child: for
thou shalt go to all that I shall send
thee, and whatsoever I command thee
thou shalt speak.”—-Jeremiah. ‘I was
no prophet, neither was I a prophet’s
son; but I was an herdman, and a
gatherer of sycamore fruit; and the
Lord took me as I followed the flock,
and the Lord said unto me, Go, prophesy
unto my people Israel.”-—Amos, “I
must work the works of him that sent


mu 2


164


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


(CHAP. Vi





me.” “As my Father hath sent ma
even so send I you.”—Jesus, “The
Lord spake to Paul in the night by a
vision, Be not afraid, but speak, and
hold not thy peace.”—Aets of Apostles.
“‘T was in the Spirit, and heard behind


me a great voice, saying, What thou ©


seest, write,”—St. John. More to the
same tune and words in biography of
martyr and missionary saint and apostle
of modern times. ‘These great muster
spirits of the world are not so much
distinguished, after all, by the acts they
do, as by the sense itself of some
mysterious girding of the Almighty
upon them, whose behests they are set
on to fulfil, And all men may have
this; for the humblest and commonest
have a place and a work assigned them,
in the same manner, and have it for
their privilege to be always ennobled in
the same lofty consciousness. God is
girding every man for a place and a
calling.” “Every human soul has a
vomplete and perfect plan cherished
for it in the heart of God—a Divine
biography marked out, which it enters
into life to live. This life, rightly
unfolded, will be a complete and beau-
tiful whole; an experience led on by
God and unfolded by his secret nurture,
as the trees and the flowers by the
secret nurture of the world; a drama
cast in the mould of a perfect art, with
no part wanting; a Divine study for the
man himself, and for others—a study
that shall for ever unfold, in wondrous
beauty, the love and faithfulness of
God ; great in its conception, great in
the Divine skill by which it is shaped ;
above all, great in the momentous and
glorious issues it prepares. What a
thought is this for every human soul to
cherish! What dignity does it add to
life! What support does it bring to
the trials of lifel What instigations
does it add to send us onward in every-
thing that constitutes our excellence !
We live in the Divine thought. We
fill a place in the great everlasting plan
of God’s intelligence. We never sink
below his care, never drop out of his
counsel.” — Bushnell,

II. Workers Divinely helped. “It
is not strange that Sanballat saw that


the wall-building was wrought of Israel’s
God. The trouble with God’s enemies
is not that their knowledge is defective,
but that their hearts are alienated.
Evidences are multiplying constantly
before them, but produce no change in
their opposition. Sanballat was vexed
because he was thwarted by the Lord
God of Israel. Those fifty-two days of
wall-building were clearly to his mind a
token of Divine assistance; but this
knowledge did not stop his opposition.”
—Crosby. Nevertheless the work was
hastened ; the opposition was resisted ;
then all was finished. God is at work
where he is needed. Our God is a
living God. He is a present God. He
is a God who inspires men to-day. He
is as mindful of us as was Jesus of the
hungry, shepherdless crowds of Judza
(Matt. x. 36; xiv. 14—16). God is at
work when he is not perceived. The
fabric cannot be judged in the loom.
Our life is sectional. God sees the end
as well as the beginning. There may
be periods of life when the thought of
God is not forced in upon us. But
when life becomes only a consciousness
of suffering, what then?


“ Be near me when my light is low,
When the blood creeps, and the nerves prick
And tingle, and the heart is sick,
And all the wheels of being slow.”


When duty is plain, but the will is
wanting, there is stimulus in the remem-
brance of “God which worketh in you
both to will and to do.” When the
spirit is willing and the flesh is weak,
then may we hear the still, small voice
of promise: “ My strength is made per-
fect in weakness.” And when the
tasks of life are completed we shall
perceive that “the work was wrought
of our God.”


Inyustrative Porm.
THE BUILDERS.


“ Aut are architects of Fate,
Working in these walls of Time;
Some with massive deeds and great,
Some with ornaments of rhyme,


Nothing useless is, or low;
Each thing in its place is best ;
And what seems but idle show,
Strengthens and supports the rest,


OHAP. VI.) HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. 166





For the structure that we raise, Make the house, where,Gods may dwell,
oes at Roh ee filled ; Beautiful, entire, and clean,
to-days and yesterdays Else our lives are incomplete,

Are the blocks with which we build. Standing in theso walls of Time,
Truly shape and fashion these ; Broken stairways, where the feet

Leave no yawning gaps between ; Stumble as they seek to climb.
Think not, because no man sees, Build to-day, then, strong and sure,

Such things will remain unseen, With a firm and ample base ;


And ascending and secure


In the elder days of Art, Shall to-morrow find its place,


Builders wrought with greatest care,


Each minute and unseen part ; aunt ae can we attain
For the Gods sec everywh: ‘o those turrets, where the eye
4 a Bees the world aa one vast plains
Let us do our work as weil, And one boundless reach of sky.”
the unseen and the seen ; Longfellow.


Tux Overrviine Gop.


ri, 16. And it came to pass, that when all our enemies heard thereof, and all
the heathen that were about us saw these things, they were much cast down in thei?
own eyes: for they perceived that this work was wrought of our God.


If we consult the Jewish history, we soon understand what the work was which
is here confessed (though unwillingly, it seems) to have been wrought of God; it
was the rebuilding of Jerusalem upon the return of that people to their own land.
after a total destruction of the one, and a grievous captivity of the other, by a crue!
and unrelenting conqueror. This great and surprising event (a bondage of seventy
years having worn out all their hopes, and left them no reasonable prospect of
deliverance) must have been brought about in a way very wonderful indeed, and
sufficiently astonishing, since, according to the text, whatever favourable circum-
stances might appear, or second causes be instrumental in it, the hand of God was
owned apparently to give effect unto it by enemies, whose malice sought the ruin
of their state; by heathens, whose religion abhorred the object of their worship.
What occasioned an acknowledgment so just and so ingenuous, when we consider
what was wrought ; so strange and unusual, when we reflect upon the temper and
interests of those who, to their shame and disappointment, made it, may be
learned, I conceive, from that prevailing instinct in mankind which disposes us to
look up for an overruling cause when any extraordinary accidents happen here
below. And, indeed, if we do confess any miraculous alterations in the natural,
we are obliged to conclude a Divine Power immediately directing the great
revolutions of the civil, world.

I. God is truly Lord, and his kingdom ruleth over all the earth, Now
Christians we know are to suppose this article to be true as having the Word of
God himself a voucher for it; because with them at least no human argument
cught to dispute against his authority. The prophecies of the Old Testament
prove a Divine prescience, and the promises of the New allow God to be concerned
for his Church. It follows then that no contingencies can escape his observation,
nor contrivances disappoint his designs. Would we appeal to reason, testimony,
or experience, more to satisfy the scruples or to silence the petulancy of other
men than to obtain and secure the belief of this point unto ourselves, here also
we are safe. 1. Why so profuse a waste of wisdom and of power in the formation
and contrivance of the world, if tt might not deserve hie future care, who at first
condescended to the making of tt? Or, how indeed could it continue to exist in
all that beauty and order which we so much admire had he ever withdrawn his
hand, upon whom it always must depend, because it was created by him. Hence,
if man be the noblest part, he is the peculiar object of the Divine care, nay, he
seems to need it most; and then from the goodness of God we conclude him


6 HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. [CHAP, VI





entitled to the distinguishing protection of it. This cannot be expressed or turned
to our use unless all events are under his eye, and all our counsels are submitted
to his rule ; considering how little we can foresee of what is to come, able less to
provide against it; how much we are in the dark as to consequences from the
management of other men, and at a loss what to promise even from ourselves.
This way of reasoning holds stronger yet with regard to public communities than
to private persons ; here in this life are they only to be taken notice of, here only,
in the visible scenes of human occurrences, can Providence appear concerned for
them. And though government be an ordinance and a blessing too from God, yet
how often without are fightings and within are fears? And who ean prevent or
compose these disorders but he alone who restraineth the spirit of princes and
stilleth the madness of the people. Then when God giveth quietness who can
give trouble? Whether it be done for or against a nation or a man only. 2.
Whatever difficultics the metaphysical considerations of a few, whatever disgrace
the superstitious abuses of more, have brought upon it, yet the solemnity of public
worship and the sincerity of private prayer, the allowed obligations of an oath, and
the unavoidable effects of conscience, declare mankind subscribing to this truth.
In fact, the most desperate and independent tempers, upon some unusual emergencies,
have been subdued to a confession of it. To this copious and instructive theme
do we owe all those noble sentiments of heathen philosophy which advance human
nature above the casualties of fortune, and support the efforts of virtue against the
tyranny of fate. From hence did ancient tragedy dress its awful scenes and take
its affecting images, to represent a superior dominion over all; which may
mysteriously perplex for a while, yet at last conducts the puzzling incidents to an
end, confessing equity and right. What in truth is history but a long detail of
God’s interfering providence? 3. We ourselves are living witnesses. If any of us
have ever at a venture drawn our bow, and hit at once surprisingly a mark that
others with the most likely skill have often sought to touch in vain, who directed
our arrow! If ever the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, who
causes our feet to stumble, and gives success unto the weak? Second causes are
phe servants of his will, who is truly Lord of what we call nature or mistake for
chance.

II. We may inquire by what characters a work such as the text is speaking
of may be perceived to be wrought of our God. It is not always easy nor even
safe boldly to point out what God has done. Yet he does sometimes so show
himself as that we may perceive his hand. We are often called upon to see the
wonderful operations of it. Where any event comes to pass beyond the reasonable
expectations of mankind, or any effect is produced by means altogether unequal to
it, an invisible Mind is plainly concerned in the one, and a supernatural Cause
actually gives birth unto the other. Jf an event thus strangely brought about
eminently consults the honour of God’s haly name and the maintenance of true religion
and the prosperity of the people, in these instances God appears. Upon such
occasions, doubtless, we may say the arm of the Lord has been revealed, and we
have seen the salvation of our God.— Rose Ley, 1737.


Tas Worip’s AcknowLepemmnr or Gop.
vi. 16. And tt came to pass, that when all our enemies heard, &e.


The success of Nehemiah against such I, World’s past acknowledgment of
odds proved the success to be Divinely God. 1. Biblical instances. The Bible
given. They, the enemies, perceived story is the story of God’s works and
that this work was wrought of God. wonders of salvation, and all througy
World’s acknowledgment of God. that story we see this: the w


CHAP. V .]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


167





struggling like a maniac in paroxysms of
wickedness, but now and again bowing
down and crying, “ It’s no use; the Lord
he is God, the Lord heis God!” The
magicians in Egypt threw down their
conjuring tools, and exclaimed of God’s
miracles by Moses, “ This is the finger
of God.” The heathen peoples of whom
we read in the book of Daniel now and
then confess the living God, and sob
like resisting children whose spirits are
broken, “ that he is the living God, and
steadfast for ever.” The sailors in the
book of Jonah exemplify the same
thing. The people around the cross
“ smite their breasts ” and own, “ Truly
this was the Son of God.” The magis-
trates and rulers in the book of Acts
make tacit or open confessions of the
same thing. Ail through the Bible
story we have illustrations of this text.
2. Later instances. Early Church his-
tory, martyr stories, stories of heathen
lands submitting to the gospel, confes-
sions of men who thought themselves
infidels, but who were forced like the
brute in Balaam’s story to speak for
God—these furnish exemplifications of
this great principle, a rebellious world
owning God’s presence and power.

II. World’s present acknowledgment
of God. 1. Uneonscious acknowledg-
ment. Think of the way Christianity
penetrates the life of our modern world;
take England for example. Our throne
is based on God’s word. A representa-
tive of the Christian religion gives the
Queen her crown. Our legal oath is
taken on God’s gospel; that little book
is “kissed” by the villam in our law
courts, and it is supposed that if he ever
did speak the truth, he will with that
“book” before him. A seventh part of


our time is devoted fo education con-
cerning God. Our books, our pictures,
our music are full of him. The world
gives an unconscious chorus of acknow-
ledgment. 2. Unwilling acknowledg-
ment. The testimony of sceptics to the
morals of Christianity. John Stuart
Mill would have the life of Jesus taught
in our schools. The “ new lights” of our
time steal their oil from Hebrew seers
and lawgivers and from Christian
apostles, and strike their matches on the
covers of the Bible, and then run out
with their paper lanterns of essays and
theories. Oh, the blindness of the
fools who are trying to illuminate the
world on new systems, and who pretend
not to know that the world can see
God’s word to be the “ main pipe” of
their illuminations. 3. Frank acknow-
ledgment. How many worldlings dare
deny God? When Christianity takes
them by the button they say, “ You are
right, and we are wrong, and we shall
perhaps come round to you when we
have had our fling.” “They are cast
down in their own eyes, for they per-
ceive that this work is wrought of om
God.”

III. The world’s future acknowledg-
ment. 1. Willing. How prophecy
lights up the world’s future Men
shall confess God. Instance prophecies
of this. 2. Enforced. The tremendous
confession of the last day: ‘“ Behold, he
cometh in the clouds, and every eye
shall see him,” &c. Whata melancholy
thought that men shall fight against God
until he has built the wall which fences
them out of hope.

Application. 1. Make acknowledg-
ment of God. 2. Now. “Choose ye
this day.”


Oprositions oF INFLUENCE.
vi. 17—19. Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah, &e.


Tobiah, the foe outside Nehemiah’s ranks, and “the nobles of Judah” inside,
were eminent and influential persons, who were a sore thorn to the good man. He
fought against an influential opposition, and suggests to us other oppositions of


influence.


I. Infiuence is opposed to God’s work. Influence and respectability |


A man


with a hundred a year may be orthodox in belief, and diligent in Christian work,
as in the Sunday-school and im the prayer-meeting, but this man perhaps invents


(68 HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH. [OHAP. V1.


a new kind of blacking, and makes £2000 a year by it, or his aunt dies and leaves
him £5000 a year: the man is the same man, but his income is changed, and you
do not find him in the Sunday-school any more; the night air is dangerous, so he
absents himself from the prayer-meeting. Is not this a true story? The man has
become an influential man. Respectability! In one of our law trials a man
described another as “respectable.” “‘ What do you mean by respectable?” said the
judge. “ Why,” explained the witness, “he kept a gig!” Now it is a fact that
such a man’s sneer at religion has weight. If he had no “gig” I should think him
a fool to say what he says; but he has a “gig,” and his opinion is not to be set aside.
{ know a man who worked as a schoolmaster for £100 per annum, and he fought
Christ’s battle then in a ragged school; but he got a berth at £850 per annum asa
schoo! inspector, and five months later resigned the ragged school and became
“broad ” in his views. This is the kind of influence most of us come in contact
with, and this is its natural history.

XI, Influence is contemptible in its opposition. ‘‘The kings of the earth set
themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his
anointed. , ... He that sitteth in the heavens shall Lavan; the Lord shall
have them in derision.” 1. Their power is contemptible. Crowns, sceptres, swords,
cannons, thrones, statutes, put these in one scale, and then put the short, uncertain
life of man which a pin-prick can destroy in the other scale. Look through the
drapery at the man, and who is he among these everlasting hills of earth, and these
rolling histories of the human race, and these solemn eternities of God? What a
manikin to play such fantastic tricks before high heaven! Cash-boxes and “ gigs ”
and villas—ah me! as the Chelsea sage would say, what things these are to sway
the immortal minds of men! Death breathes on “ influence,’ and then we have
a white marble stone with some poetry on it, and that is the last of influence. 2.
Their opposition is contemptible. A Galilean sat down on a green hill-side and
talked “ golden rules” to a crowd of country-folk, that was how it began. And
“ Influence” has drawn its sword and bent its bow against Christianity for near
2000 years, and now it gives colour to every lofty thing among the first nations
of earth, and millions crowd in fear to own its divinity every Sabbath day, and like
a stone down a mountain-side it rolls on its omnipotent course. Do not let us
exaggerate “ influence.”

III. Influence has to be dealt with. 1. Do not let us provoke it. If the lion
is asleep and you can pass the den without waking it, let it sleepon. Do not make
martyrdoms. As a rule, let the martyr’s crown come like other honour, wnsought.
But if it come hail it with a doxology. 2. Do not let us be afraid of it. (a) Its
power ts often hollow. The godless judge who tries the prisoner “ trembles and’
says, Go thy way for this time ;” the King Agrippa of this world says in dainty jest
(with a grim reality concealed), ‘ Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian !”
‘‘Tnfluence ” sneers at you, and then goes to bed and lies awake all night wondering
if you are not right after all. (6) Do not let tt sway your convictions. The bare
stern front of God’s truth must be more potent with us than any form which
presents itself to our eye or our imagination. Let no man’s life or opinion be a
necessary factor with us as we sit solitary, making up the great reckoning of life.
Do not copy from another's slate. You have to do the sum yourself. (c) Do not
let it damp your hope. God is strong. Truthis mighty. To Jesus Christ “all
power is given in heaven and on earth.” The crash of fallen “ influence” in
history is but a feeble prophecy of the downfall of it hereafter. ‘“ He musé reign

imtil he hath put all enemies under his feet.”’

Application. 1. Rightly estimate the worth and weight of things temporal.
2. Duly ponder the eternal life and power of things Divine. 3. Trust simply ta
God.


CHAP. VI. }


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


168





DEsERTERS.


vi 17,18. Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah sent many letters unto
Tcbiah, and the letters of Tobiah came unto them. For there were many in
Judah sworn unto him, because he was the son in law of Shechaniah the son of
Arah ; and his son Johanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the eon of


Berechiah.


“ Meshullam” wrought well at the
wall-building (iii, 4); but he ensnared
himself. “ The nobles” had not retained
a pure faith and an unfaltering patriotism.
Under the influence of personal interests
they forgot the commonwealth.

I. The secret of desertion. Lot
went down to Sodom under the impulse
of a worldly choice; and its consequences
were that he left part of his family
there to encounter the doom-storm, and
with the rest brought away the taint of
a worldly spirit (Gen. xix.). ‘“ Demas
hath forsaken me, having loved this
present world” (2 Tim. iv. 10). Thus
patriarch and apostle bridge the gulf of
centuries by a similar experience of the
fatal consequences of worldly alliances ;
Old Testament and New proclaim the
need of nonconformity. The nobles
were not outwardly at feud with Nehe-
miah. Their duplicity made them dan-
gerous. Hand and tongue were seem-
ingly engaged in the good cause ; heart
had long since deserted it. In soul
they were men of the world, who had
their portion in this life. 1. In self-
cultivation the graver danger ia from
withir. To repress passion harder than
to resist tempter. “The prince of this
world cometh and hath nothing in me.”
Could we say that temptation would be
powerless. “Every man is tempted
when he is drawn away of his own
lust, and enticed.” When the tree is
“desired” it needs hardly a serpent’s
voice to cause us to “eat of the fruit
thereof.” 2. In the prosecution of any
good task fear most friends’ treachery.
The untiring opposition of foes may be
met by sleepless vigilance; the luke
warmness of friends is fatal to progress.
We are dependent on co-operation.

IL Practical unworldliness. “Be
ye not unequally yoked together with
anbelievers: for what fellowahip hath


righteousness with unrighteousness ”
(2 Cor. vi 14)% “ Have no fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness ”
(Ephes. v. 11). In some soils the plant
of piety cannot thrive. Men pray to be
kept from temptation and then boldly
enter into it. If in any society I cannot
retain my purity, if under any set of
circumstances I am unable to maintain
my integrity, let me forsake that com-
panionship, avoid that position, Where
duty calls follow the sacred voice, and
God shall give his angels charge con-
cerning thee. But if pleasure or passion
or curiosity bid thee enter, beware. That.
way ruin lies. Moral deterioration has
begun. “Enter not into the path of
the wicked, and go not in the way of
evil men. Avoid it, pass not by it,
turn from it, and pass away ” (Prov. iv.
14, 15).


Illustrations :— What Paul writes concerni
false brethen (2 Cor. xi. 26), that has Nehe
also experienced for his portion, And it is
indeed one of the heaviest griefs of the true
servants of God, when they must see that thoee
connected with them in religion, yes, indeed, at
times their colleagues, who labour with them in
the same work, stand in prejudicial intercourse
with the enemies of Christ and his Church, and
yet wish to be considered as co-members, strivin;
for the honour of God. Those whom G
awakens for spiritual building should conduct
themselves ledacge tiled and courageously
against the snares of the enemy, and not allow
themselves to be frightened off by their slander,
but cheerfully proceed, In the end the enemy
will be cast down with fear in their consciences,
and must acknowledge that the work is of God
(Acts vy. 39). When we wander in the midst of
ston God refreshes us, and stretches his hand
over the rage of his enemies, and helps us with
his right hand (Ps. xevii. 10) .""—Starke.

“T care not at all for an open enemy of the
Church, such as the Papists, with their power
and persecutions; I regard them not, for by
them the true Church cannot receive hurt, nor
can they hinder God’s word; nay, the Churca,
through their raging and persecution, rather
increases. Bc’ it is the inward evil of false
brethren that will do mischief to the Church.
Judas betrayed Ohrist; the false apostles oon


170


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


{OHAP. VI.





fused and falsifled the gospel. Such are the
real fellows through whom the devil rages and
spoils the Church.” —LZuther.

‘“ What every one is in God’s sight, that is he,
and no more.”—&¢t. Francis of Assist.

“The fervent and diligent man is prepared for
all things. It is harder to resist vices and
passions than to toil in bodily labours. Be
watchful over thyself, stir up thyself, warn
thyself, and whatsoever becomes of others, neg-
lect not thyself.”— Thomas @ Kempis.

“«Some professors of religion resemble trees,
the pereenet which fall o hen winter ap-

roaches, but appear in when the season
bccites more favourebls aed mild; for in the


winter of adversity they conceal their lusts,
and restrain their sinful propensities ; but when
prosperity smiles upon them they break out
ain, as at the first, and recruit themselves
with further supplies of folly and of vanity.
This is a genuine evidence of hypocrisy; for
nothing is more hateful to a real Christian than
such conduct, who in all circumstances, and
under very vicissitude, whether public or private,
is always the same, and remains unalterably
fixed in his God. He preserves an uniform
piety both in prosperity and adversity, in poverty
and in affluence, veeadily cleaving to God, and
meeting with resignation every afilictien that
Providence lays upon him.”—John Arndt.


Tae Bap Man PRaIsED.
vi 19. They reported his good deeds before me.


The noblesof Judah reporting Tobiah’s
“good deeds” to Nehemiah is a piece of
humorous irony often repeated. What
heroes this world does select! “Not this
man, but Barabbas!” Historians have
made rose-coloured villains into heroes.
Poets have set to bewitching music
names that ought to “ blister the tongue.”
Preachers have written original and
beautiful sermons to whitewash poor
Cain and Judas and Pilate, and, like the
Scotch minister of the story, have looked
with almost admiration, at least with
sympathy, on the “poor deil.” Some-
times this is mawkish perverted senti-
ment, sometimes cant. The bad man
praised.

I. Bad men do get praised. 1.
Sometimes this praise is real. (a) No
man without some trait of good. A
hand strewed flowera on Nero’s grave.
The dark rock of guilt may be streaked
with a thread of gold or sparkle with
some spot of crystal. This is the
handle for the man’s redemption, but
not a peg on which to hang draperies to
hide real evil. (b) A bad habit of life
may be broken by occasional goodness.
The miser gives money away, the merci-
less has a tender thought, the bad does
a good action contrary to all the common
strain of his life. These do not com-
pound for the evil, but are God’s calls
and strivings asserting and demonstrat-
ing themselves, 2. Sometimes this
praise ts mistaken. (a) The bad seldom
shows a bold front of hardness, but winds
@ rose garland round his sin and covers


it with hypocritical pretensions A
man can generally give a virtuous ex-
planation of vice, or at least an explan-
ation that leans toward virtue. The
“cant” of goodness, of which the world
speaks bitterly at times, is nothing com-
pared with the “cant” of badness. (0)
Courteous conciliation of persons often
throws dust in the eyes of the world. A
man who bows gracefully to me is in
danger of compelling a too favourable
interpretation of his deeds to others.
Let us not French-polish wickedness.
Softened names of things, graceful
euphemisms for bad things in place of
the “sword-cuts of Saxon speech,” have
often made blame sound very like praise.
3. Sometimes this praise is fictitious
altogether. (a) In eulogizing a bad
man other men are frequently praising
their own likeness. (5) Eulogy of the
evil man is often a subtle way of reflect-
ing suspicion on moral standards.

II. Bad men are anxious for praise.
No bad man wishes to be considered
bad. 1. In thie there is a sentence of
condemnation. In hunting for false
praise an evil man is but subponaing
witnesses against his own real inner
self. Every sound of undeserved praise
is a sentence against the “hidden man
of the heart.” 2. In thie there is an
indirect homage to virtue. You do not
believe evil to be good; you want the
evil to be called a good that it is not.
To waft the incense of praise to a bad
man is to confess there is a noble style
of manhood worthy of praise. 3. Im


CHAP. V1. ]


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


171





this anxiety for pratse the bad man is
frequently at as much trouble as it would
cost him to gain the goodness he secks
credit for. To pretend is nearly as
difficult a task as to be. If self-defence
cvuld kneel down and become prayer,
if seeming could break its bonds and
strive for reality, the bad man might
deserve the character he would like to
hold in the estimation of the world.
III. Bad men are not hidden by
the praise of the world. 1. Good men
detect. There is a subtle power of
penetration in goodness. As the calm
eyes of honesty look into the blinking
eyes of the liar, the lie stands exposed.
And this is a sore trouble to the evil
man. He forgets the praise of fifty
fools while reflecting on the unspoken
censure of one wise man. Czsar com-
plains in the poem of “that spare
Cassius” who “looks quite through
the deeds of men.” Haman finds that


ADDENDA TO


SENTENCES FROM


I. Opponents (vers 1—4). “ An-
other let to the good work in hand.
That in the fourth chapter was external
only ; that in the fifth internal only ;
this here is mixed, that is, partly cast in
by the enemies without (those cruel
crafties), and partly helped on by the
perfidious prophets and ignobles within,
conspiring with the enemy against the
good of their own country.” The rest of
our enemies. ‘The Church’s enemies
are not a few (1 Cor. xvi. 9). She is
like unto a silly poor maid, saith Luther,
sitting in a wood or wilderness, com-
passed about with hungry wolves, lions,
boars, bears, assaulting her every moment
and minute. The ground of all is that
old enmity (Gen. iii. 15).” Sanballat
and Geshem sent unto me. ‘As if
solicitous of my safety, and careful of
the common good. Nehemiah well
knew that all this pretended courtesy
was but dross upon dirt, a fair glove


all this honour “ availeth him nothing”
so long as Mordecai sits with his still
dark eye to look into his real soul. 2.
God detects. 1. Now. Amid the music
of men’s flattery comes the boom of
God’s censure. In the banqueting
chamber the fingers of God write fiery
sentences to be read in the pauses of
the revel. 2. Hereafter. ‘“ Every man
must give account of himself to God”
The ears will soon be stopped to men’.
praise, the eye will have no power te
look on the fawning smile of the flatterer
any more; one voice will fill the ear,
one sight fix the eye—God—God—God
—the “most worthy Judge eternal.”

Application. 1. Do not be discouraged
by this misdirected praise. Live for
God’s praise. “Be thy praise my
highest aim, be thy smile my chief
delight.” 2. Do not be deceived into
any lowering of the standard of right:
eousness.


CHAPTER VI.


O_p WRirEzs.


drawn upon a foul hand, a cunning
collusion to undo him. He therefore
keeps aloof.” “ Our deceitful hearts do
too often draw us away from the prose-
cution of good purposes, by casting
many other odd impertinent matters in
our way.” ‘ Nehemiah went not, but
sent. This was to be wise as a serpent.
God calleth us not to a weak simplicity,
but alloweth us as much of the serpent
as of the dove, and telleth us that a
serpent’s eye in a dove’s head is a
singular accomplishment.” ‘“ Nehemiah
was the driver-on of the business. His
hands were full of employment. Let
the tempter ever find us busy, and he
will depart discouraged ; as Cupid is said
to do from the Muses, whom he could
never take idle. An industrious Nehe-
miah is not at leisure to parley with
Sanballat, lest if he let any water go
beside the mill he should be a great
loser by it. His employment is as a


172


guard or good angel, to keep him both
right and safe.” They sent unto me four
times, “ As thinking to prevail by their
importunity. Sin hath woaded an im-
pudency in some men’s faces.” “ We
may style Nehemiah as one doth
Athanasius, the bulwark of truth, the
Church’s champion.” ‘“ True love teaches
as to be angry with none but ourselves.
True peace consists not in having much
wealth, but in bearing patiently what-
ever goes against our nature.” “If thou
canst be silent and suffer, without doubt
thou shalt see that the Lord will help
thee.” “Regard not much who is for
thee, or against thee; but mind what
thou art about, and take care that God
may be with thee in everything thou
‘ioest.” “It belongs to God to help,
and to deliver from all confusion.”

II. The tongue (vers. 5—9). It is
reported, “ And therefore must be true.
But who knows not that rumour is a
loud liar, and that every public person
needeth carry a spare handkerchief to
wipe off dirt cast upon him by disaffected
persons, that seek to fly-blow their reput-
ation and to deprave their best actions.”
Gashmu saith so, ‘ A worthy wight, a
sredible witness ! He was known to be
one that had taught his tongue the art
of lying.” “Any author serves San-
ballat’s turn, who for a need could have
sucked such an accusation as this out of
his own fingers.” “If dirt will stick to
a mud wall, yet to marble it will not.”
“‘ Nehemiah is not over-careful to clear
himself. This was so transparent a lie
that a man might see through it, and
was, therefore, best answered with a
neglective denial. It falls out often
that plain dealing puts craft out of
countenance.” ‘Faith quelleth and
killeth distrustful fear.” ‘These men
first mock the Jews, and scornfully
despise them for enterprising this build-
ing, thinking by this means to discourage
poor souls, that they should not go for-
ward in this work; after that they
charge them with rebellion. These two
be the old practices of Satan in his
members to hinder the building of
God’s house in all ages.” “Empty
vessels are full of sound; discreet
silence, or a wise ordering of ¢pecch, is


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAA.





[OHAP. VI





a token of grace.” ‘‘ Better a mountain
fall upon you than the weight of your
own tongue.” “A pure heart is the —
tongue’s treasury and storehouse.” “It
is observable, that when the apostle
giveth us the anatomy of wickedness in
all the members of the body, he stayeth
longest on the organs of speech, and
goeth over themall: ‘Their throat is an
open sepulchre ; with their tongues they
have used deceit ; the poison of asps is
under their lips : whose mouth is full of
cursing and bitterness.’” “One reck-
oneth up twenty-four several sins of the
tongue.” “ Light words weigh heavy in
God’s balance.” “God in nature would
show that he hath set bounds to the
tongue, he hath hedged it in with a row
of teeth. Other organs are double ; we
have two eyes, two ears, but one tongue.”
“Christianity doth not take away the
use of speech, but rule it.’’ “ Slanderers
ate the devil’s slaves.” ‘ Covetousness
sold Christ, and envy delivered him.”
“ Contemplate the life of Jesus, who did
not so much as open his mouth against
his enemies, nor pour forth any bitter
and vehement speeches, but gave bless-
ing and life to those that hated him.”
“ Oftentimes I could wish that I had
held my peace when I have spoken.”
“Tt is easier not to speak a word at all
than not to speak more words than we
should.”

IIT. False prophets (vers. 10—14).
Shemaiah. “Fallen, as a star from
heaven! Blazing stars were never but
meteors. Demas not only forsook Paul,
but became a priest in an idol’s temple
at Thessalonica, if Dorotheus may be
believed. A priest Shemaiah was, and
would seem to be a prophet; but he
proved not right (1 Chron. xxiv. 6). All
is not gold that glitters.” “ Nehemiah
went to Shemaiah’s house to know what
was the matter, supposing him to be a
friend, but finding him suborned by the
enemy.” “ Nothing betrays a man
sooner than his causeless fear. God
helpeth the valiant.” Should such a
man as I fiee? ‘To the dishonour of
God, and the discouraging of the people 4
to the scandal of the weak, and the scorn
of the wicked? There is a comeliness,
a seemliness, a suitableness appertains


Ow@AP. VI.}


to every calling and condition of life;


and nature hath taught heathens them-
selves to argue from dignity to duty, and
to scorn to do anything unworthy of
themselves.” ‘ The heavens shali sooner
fall than I will forsake the truth,” said
a martyr. “Life in God’s displeasure
is worse than death; as death in his
true favour is true life.” I perceived
that God had not sent him. “ By my
spiritual sagacity I smelt him out; as
having my inward senses habitually
exercised to discern good and evil.
What though we have not received the
spirit of the world (we cannot cog and
comply as they can, yet), we have
received a better thing, the Spirit of God,
the mind of Christ (1 Cor. ii. 12, 16).”
He pronounced this prophecy against me,
“To make my righteous soul sad with
his lies, and to bring me to disgrace and
danger. Luther was wont to advise
preachers to see that these three dogs
did not follow them into the pulpit:
pride, covetousness, and envy.” Tobiah
and Sanballat had hired him. “A
minister, as he should have nothing to
lose, so he should have as little to get;


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: NEHEMIAH.


1%





he should be above all. price or sale.”


Therefore was he hired that I should be
afraid. “ But they were much mistaken
in their aims; this matter was not
malleable. Nehemiah was a man of &
Caleb-like spirit ; he was full of spiritual
mettle, for he knew whom he had
trusted.” ‘‘ Nehemiah feared nothing
but sin, and the fruit thereof, shame
and reproach, so great was his spirit, so
right set were both his judgment and
affections.” ‘‘ We should so carry our-
selves that none might speak evil of
us without a manifest lie.” The rest of
the prophets. ‘“ Multitude and antiquity
are but ciphers in divinity.”

IV. Foes foiled (vers. 15—19). So the
toall was finished. ‘“ Though with much
ado, and maugre the malice of all foreign
and intestine enemies. So shall the
work of grace in men’s hearts; it is
perfected there by opposition, and grows
gradually, but constantly and infallibly.”
“God was much seen herein, and the
enemies’ courage much quailed.” ‘ Envy
is the devil’s disease, and those that
are troubled with it can never wani


woe.”


ERD OF VOL. 17,


Pi APs
CLAREM


AG4av2]


. aw aT
wit i g Wf A feos P


a?


a ‘ é
Aaa


~







ees
ty: t -

7 ra ¥ 4
PU GAS hep Ries hss
- 4 0 a i me ~~ P
pear Ser wie 4 : a ee ee








‘ ae 7 ant
E or 2° es ¥





— . = pe Tie
i ;
i 7 . ;
a *
} = 7
3 7 : 3 a, Swe ee
Sua ——
Fa
m0) ; as tr fis
or |
~
. —e. -
a ) 2 ks ten
s y Fi
ee
- .-_ :
e ~~ oe «
ve ~ it
-
aie : ‘


a
i

.
‘ 7

r ’
:

+

Sw
or
7
av, hy
— 1
ro . =
ay os

'

;

- 4
Ds
1
« * - » 7
‘ fr

















The Preacher s complete homiletical com


ie P65 / vol 9 }


Bs

4idy
PbS
LF


THEOLOGY LIBRARY
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT

CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA


foe ie Fe |


wre Ps
b> cee
Saget ate tates seis


saat
ages


My
Palys
ans


4adesats
Re peeees


seek
eH)


Sageasaeasae ot ss osat eda i
3 ae e5e54 Seppe PE Py P LPL PLO


i ;
Stokit ste ae eas


New


wale


Rees
rors


sea
eee i
agate eres
4 4 Soh eS he2 tatedeteseiedeseseces< esse
seas eae. es Age <. a KStotet stot stote


Sficdc'


son
eA
A ARR AOS
Perera
re


Pari’
Cann


aus siiuedeccaec
atetge82 PP pe bebe per be Pr Pe Peet)
Se sreeceeeeeeesees Subsea acne ot ESR
Sdatsdit seat ates et tates 292 Sebaselaegececead stats catatekesesese
Sielettetensitietessecteteteces eis ceiesste se tests Potobpbeshepepentbers
ata tatatet ete’ D3 . 5454562425258 28 2 382 PGP PE PLP Pa 2
SEbeb rE o EPs PS x ate barb, bee Bes Be 5 e5455<5<seseees 3
ot atetesetatatat 25 e828 28282) 5 i PSPS PoPaPaP arate bebe br bl
a aaheGatatesactsqatatatseieesaeesetes $e505<5492385 Aetaketetetestesesenesessaeeca’
dete PAS tite asset etatetetatassteseteses paper prpn bs by Pe |
5055 Pa Va PsP SPseah bt SSE DENT DEDEDE DL be DEDEDE DUBE PL DL PD UD DPCP ge bab Setee
S3e Seat asec aSasase tees t assesses sase sstgtecotaseseessas 4iee Set ek et esasestcenee
SAS 52 $2525 25252565 252525 255555236 2< 2428 a5 ote SWS <Se5<3<see639 S655 4 e eS eee os et cS etas,
Basa eseia ies eseacsestesetatecetasasen stesesasetesesed S25 eSe 5454 cess eet asasee
Sates eSesesesege rest sates eta eee asa tasee sates Retob arpa pep eta Deo Pray $
a £23565 4e05<245426 540% 282525200
Rep erbebhb bios ba br bubs PubL DDL oh bt Ds DE Pins Do pb Par De!
= bebe tpt ot BC pL to SS Ph Paha Pats -
ee SC etas geek at ehet et etetatese
Pir > See e ak etosotatctetetek,


Morera
‘in
am
As
SH
aan


rw


AA


oyaeae
SA


ey


=t2i<3


re
Teeny


or
teseteteiet


SeSasaiesayeseaeedse 4st ses Basch aSeses 2oescs sana dseacanceaeee
sg Sao Fusaesaed seated seagate


esrb bub bebe pe! fectgiseietecetasase Rerhree bree pe
ed Sutdtatesg tase saad 1a ceed eee ets tse td tet eres:
asStetetet gt alass sete tase tascsecieiessieesscesesnee aceek ee

3 SeSeS<3e5<5254 3454 2e seeks ox 38 ah es esas aka set St $524a82te82
2 PEPE SU PaO) PSPs PS Parsi arora SPEPL PL PL DLL PE Ds Pee E bE DP DPS 238838 26 ote 2505 2%2
‘ sas atats$as seals latatasss. Per pr bh be be PE be De Dt DL PL Da PLP SLPS DDS PSP ODOT DES Sef bcos etch atatete

dot statat eta sane seeesaee sate Beate tat ates en sete SeSeiasesencses<acscaestees sea ge5e eh eSasesesesesestssesasee

bebe eeepc papa pup oe ah bet PU PLL Pa PSPS PRES PSE DPS 5424 She sesascetatesaeseee sone Sepeprae ee pepe pepe oe DL DEOL ERPS Ps Pa Ps PP t
< $3 ese Seat ssat tat elasetasesesess 2nek. LPEPaPL PSPS PEPE PEPE OS PL REDE SEDO DT 4585254242828 28 esos eees tease Ses <SeS bese seat tis et es cies 45
Slovo et Ste ot pe ms PDe be De De Pybh Py Pat Pata PPR EDES PES PDE DC oL DLS Sprpeven abe vabepeunes tar eeh ba bbs at aapbot ots DDL aRe TERE ety
SeSeSeteleces zac sces states se stat aesesesesageeees ee seeasee Pear Deae Dent Ded PE Para Pat DPE RE Dy pepe be bebe Peps


PCPS]
fessncss) eeetey
eleictesesaseseseséaees


545 ge ss es eseeeses


es ate


< Rekate<ereseses
Sz a5 $334545¢2 > » Ppa bebe be DEOL Dr SPE
Esp abor poet sept ee ppt bree bree pe BUST Se be Se Br Py OU PT DED DES bo cpbbe pe Pep ebe De Db Db is Davee byat pe bebe Debt be be Bt DE DEDEDE DEES On
SeSeSc cei se casaseecssie nae cs ctataeg es ssteceses aeczetegss edecetetaseceteceseseseseccaceseteseseeste

Baeses Soakeitecsaceseaccosereieiessesesess 45524 Gas eases esesansias cyeoereatesassesieesetesesetecs SSeS Se5 eSa6 coe chelate seca tg sete teses
Popup batusseatobe eb obtbeer bree bio be pep DED ppp DL rea vE OED DEPLPLPL PL PS Pe Poh on rah ot bret hte DeDLDa| Se eaS eh esas esas es tet hop ates heteteset

dS Saha S54 diese ses sa tskgs ese SeSesaseseiesesdcsstessasaesse ete Sesesetesccenesenesessseazeceeeea sere eS<seseSe ce serene esse e626 28 ge

poppy sen prmeP et oP at pe peat pe a Bt be Be Da Be DL tbs by bues Doee ph pe DSN ODED Dat De ESE DEDEDE. bapores
Sasa siece skates sees chases es :


SeSeSeSe Sosa Sesesesece cece es eeesesaset ese
evs ob oa perpr att ae ot ot ba os De DEDEDE OT


S555 eS alah sh eles esesene Sh oteketekes
bLEP SE et ae Pr pe dh beer EPL PL LPL PE LPL Pa
<= 8 Fi Sep oper oe bree ee be be bt or St ot De PL De PPL PEPE PS PSPS DLP bed pos pe Pepe rtps Daron arn eer bean be br be be BR bt bt Ds PODS
sade Radce NERA P SPP ae One Ste eh Est op Shope SP ot SD EERE NL EE ST tot om Aegecesatatesese nese ee seat eget Sek etek Sede cesesessseseatasecascessesasece 5
Stare pantera pbs Pay Dap nap PPD ENE SE SEDO EOED esa SeSe Ses seat Teae cece shee sea ts ata ens eakeceeeeeeseesaeates revere pion pepe bebe pr be ema Ps be pe rbon ee)
Fetes teh Sane tek tess tess tet ss Sera SP ares BS eS 2828 282 AS eh aS 2 35854243654 252 6562 este PEPE OL S58 2S35 252825 242828 SPLPa PL PEP Pars
SS ecesescceceseceseceed ess adeg mcs cneten tet asencsetcscecaceesseuegeseeseeesecaseceseees aSeceseees DSDEP ar pe bt pe bebe pe be be be De beer Peas
SES SseceseesaceSeaasccaseiacesesastcasdeneceseeateceeseses eS as aseneececeke teksto hatek cscs eteeSeaes Sabre er bebe bo pepe be er be aa bem
mesegee ss Seaatasetesesasessnecececeaeceatetsseseseseseeese® Sotpe os Peps te phos eb Per br be sehr Stor bt ot Ds Dive DD eDS ery ches ese Soha tetctasaseecet estes
Pec procseotnnoceetppee premieres et be beh? SeseseteSedesesesesestcsesaseseceseccsesesecs $2525 28e Sates sede sececegea ses aoe Behe So8a 6262528 e Fas ecteescec ees
Sas Seco tesctetesesctasecescessssessagssetes esos sees see aaeceeeeetee pErS Pereretoe pi be bebe pr be pt bs he Pe? PSPS: eee kel eke CeSeSciese 2<
g33 233 Es Saceaacaosasesaseseseseseseeeses DSPSP SPS Pao bron pe pre br pe es Pyotr Pepi ebna pens pubabper best eter ey pe bt ony Soi esetescseSese Sa sece ssc texckescs
sabsenatatiaateseteresesaseteieses robber npaberoeptoeprpeba bebe bs em $35 25252535 2525 e528 Sa cesece ken seeks Seesekesekescsecesccsececaseseseses:
SSeS eaten ae coat eset esac aeseseseseses aaeseaeesceatatateteseee pueteepep eps es bron bee pipe pa rps paps POPS MDD PSD DE pieprerpe bebe bobs pe pep pa brea PUP OES
PEEPCEEE RSDP DE PS PEM Pere Pere PL LO MPEP Reb? bP ar SPbeDEpT Dt pr DE PEPER DE Dy PoPEe eben ar bebe be ps Py prt pr Pe Ps DBE DL DE DL PO PUSS PEP PSPS Par ety? oe bo bebe Debt ptr Des
Sanestsasasesaueseieeseapeetes esas et at et ese! PuPepr eS PEPLDS PLO PEPE bP oP bra? Dros al ESPoc pepe Ev at LPL PEPE DESEO LE PL Ia be es Bose o4 oso t eS eset ese hese terete shoe tenes
PeBe abe PsP LPS Pa OS taPaitp ene peer ne at br bt LOT De PM Dt ng SPE PEP SP a Perel ot Stet br pt aibh boon be Pt DL PSPSPS OLDE DE DS PSPS OER DELP EDLOE! SEpE DLL ob PrP p Dep PE oe Der eb bibs bt ba:
aes sisteee tse sietctesese SRSgaSe SESE sEe cased ceeseata See ec hac ete zeccctaseegeacuaeeeteceseeesesesgees s ea83¢ she hs fesesesececsecssstssacases
Pub ptutet et oe ne ot ee beat be pc peo Pr PC Or bs De PL PE PS PEPLPL PS PE DDD bo bI Dy SeeeSessseceaccsesede x4 PPE Py Pa i Se DSP ae pe DEE PE DEDL OD DES <
asaieresgeaaes SeLisSe deci ceee ecceseesstes case seceseceseeecaaes Scteses SSRSPt Sea DEES LRSEES ESPON RSD ORENSE EDRs ESD SES SpE ESSE SE EER paesp ston:
bepeater pt pe ot bebs pe mtbr pry Dir Pay Pap ba Ps Sesrpestpepe peer oe me peoe etre baba bea pepe pep DSS ana eSctesesetetesece tase sacesecegeceeses
meet at eteset eS ese! PSP et} =, 52858252552) =f, Sehet shee ASS LIES S Pa ee br bebe 5 3525 2545 25250545654 265 62482824 2605 634595465456 2454 0525
SSS PPL PD PEPPER rb Par Sehr arbre bert PL PCPs PS Perera tor ararer ae pepe pepr pepe on DDL PL PL DOPED St aPa? we be BET pe DT Ot mt be Dt OLDS DE DSN Sete
bs ESS BS S28 SBS aS 2858 2S eS PIPED TPS PS Po Paar a Par at erator $2555 35 SFE SSeS eS e 2 Ses eS DED Pa Pa Paar aryl ater er Ter PT et Seessetes:
Seshessees Sqaese bEbpeteppb pe pepe eens man pet ODL ORO Sy SD bP pba St apoE OE oe ata ba ee De ie PED SP SDS PSPS USP ar pt <$28sh2
ese Se3e S826 TS seS43s Ss 26c 82 SeSeScSeseted cree seskagekcsekesetesosese BSpSPS Esto tor pcon pn be babe Pama osha be by OnPs Me Ua eons Er DDE pte Depa Pe Dey
a8 Esssssoaseenbases tes eieeseceescoreseeeaeentNeeoUnntEs SES EERE URES CSESES ETRE DRONES SN REES DRESS Re SERERS ROR $5
Pi PPPS PEP Pa PRPs PP aD Phebe bEDE aE DE bt br DEDEDE DS DE De PEPE P LI eS P ats eeekesese tess berber pron bebe prot pr tpt EPL PS DEP Da Pa PRP SDE D SDE P SDSL DEDEDE
Stes deasatasesesetetete peecotpey baba pcrarers re pe ee ePePeDpercbes Caen pepeoe nee Dy Pion Dea epareDst ater et or bE oy DE DT DED SE DE pL PEP Pe DS PEDy besrorerbepr peer pe ped
goisdadsessgacensstaenocceseseescecs


ahekeSeSehaessaeeeege

43 EI KS KIS0K SESS SS cal >
S45 eSeSei<SeSsecstesete RSe esate seseaerece seat ceetetet cea tatcsasase
PSPSPS Pura br brsP pret pre bry

SaSetesesese cece
B5ghatetahesates


ia
Vian
ee
CR


ivi


ae
Ste nee
fret
pent
en


Mie tee

as

SOR IORR RAMS
fe

Forge


oir


Te pr PLP PL PPS < <

a seSesesesesesase SPEDE PL PL POPE PS bP arb Pet ai ater brat bt S252 6 DEPP Phe app RPDP SPD DE Dr er are! Gok oS ok eke SesakcSshete te
2 Soaseseseteseteses 3ea8as2: oak csetatesese sa sansesaseeasescecnses ie SeSeSeSeSeSeisissessec es asus 5 et ees.
eesesenaessecseses: SescicSaseseceeceseceaceccssceteseseceeseees SERRE pippr protean pa ph bata baoe h ppp Spy rap DD ann SSeSesesesaceses
aos esas etesasese: Speen bey cbs ba PEP PEPE PL PE PL MA PSPSPL ED PDI Par bee er ont ShiSak het eSetesetacatesct esa sesesetcses: EM PPPSPSPSPS PDP DP DOR DED DEBE DE pao |
Seetieseaccaseasescscecee sete sese saeo sees ncteteseeseseeieseses pepe br pepe De PL PEPS EDS SED Sa543< oe gecess ess prarerseprecpe pe beeps pepr ee oa DDoLDSPeD:
setesetenesusesesae: EEN Ds EOE PE PIS PEPSI SPD SERED EDT prt SEP Pe DEDEDE PL PL ISPS PSP SPL PSPS S PERO PoP arar seri de peda pe Pe be D. Da Pa DL PL EPL PL PLPS PLP
prbpstpebretyer SSeceekcheseSeceteresesactacosase seseneseteseceseeees PeryeererePepene peor pear Ps potbroperprospr as ps)


A a4


re


24 cecsespeceeeseens ase asceeeees
segtoccecscte Paks $ PEPaPaP peer bebe pepe br Pepe pe Pepe DEDEDE DDS PEPE PS Pa!
Se SeceSesedesessesseaseseses pots oi nap pasep epee pera ieee tot pepe Pepa POD OADL SPDs peprpepteeereh pep St See pe pea Pee Pa Dabs
Ppeprer ar stat PDE RPE PL DLP PSP EPSP SPOS Pa aro? hi Parr oc hr pt DL Os Pe PL PL PEPE PLL Dh 342656565556 545828 2 FeSesceasectee esse
43 EH PER PEPS PPD PDT Ri SP pt ne beat be bt PEPE ee Pb Pt De PLDs OLDS DED S PEP DDD Dn DER DET siekesaseseteteseseseseseesss
236 25c545eSete Sesatese ak ee saSeteSetesesese tase tase eses 3428 2628828 a5e 825 Brae br pe Depa Pe Pe Pr PSPSPS PL PED
he sehs2etelesegectatesosese sa sasa see seek Seek ea eee Pht pepr peer pee be eS Spr peer pr pr Dep PL Pe Pr Pa!
aproret peer orpepret penn bane ps br Data taba Pa DOP ate D aro p ar otp Ene bcos DL pepe Paes Syepepraton pester de Prot PE DDS PEPE.
Barpcpipeptecnl pept rpc pe bs bs Pa bL bs PEPE aPs POPS PEP peParhr pr bt hobs pe PL Or PePe DL DOD SOLER EE ahh ass ese Sess ese See ees
Sede" SS SaSeSehade Se Sekezsts se sccdsesesesecescscsesaseseseseseceeeessc 8 S28<S<5< Perper pres pepe pr at ae)
3533S <o55sdh os aseseseseceseseseteces S565 SS S55 ESSE KSEE LESS ES ESS RES ease SK SSeS Se8eS5Se8<E cE<Es
abaeatacsssesesee pebepe bebe pepe pr pr pres Seppe ono pL DEOL PLL OS PS Po PRPS EDE DERE DED! RSS EESS ES KS eke StS
BEERS eS Eetbreretpnepenee pe ph PEDS PE PSP RSP RRSP SPDeD tpt pep pep pE DED aS DLO DEDEDE : Sockesesesesecesenees
SERERRE SSceigeseseseteiecssecste SeSascsesscsccctesesacesetesece


x


AKA


<


as


Pre IO


eaatetes.


A


SSN BSE IS 2S


ts


sects ; ESSE
Rese aeeees, DEPP phe ae ipr er pr pepe ae be pE pr De bP Pe DL PL D> DL DL DS SDS PPh <3 Rr,
Pbpb bps bl per Pe PL Opt pt bs Pe Pe Pe OLDE PL Pe hh Pi Pd Pa Pb Pee 353555 e8 eS es eS
BpesRonener spear ener enCReSLat UaDE CM PSTESR SL UPDRS PRESS DPOR EDIE SPORES
Pree SSPE PL POPS PSDP Pal hese hesesesesatescsenene SESESES SS ES oS EES SSeS aS <3soss <.
erarprarer ee pibe Prot bem Papa PL LOL PREPS PDD ES PS PSPS EDL DL Dt REDE SP ROEM at asesases ete cesesecseseseceses
Saeasekasasssesedassascsescsesaseseeatesetecenes caccacceoee em ssesesesee ceases ese apPEP POP ar ater oe ps pepe ey
SEBEL esuseseiesecece peop pp both PDP nDee Deer RMR DE DE DESDE SPS EDPS DODDS SPD PPD ESTO ED!
peepee eEneeesept ape p pp Dt ne DCD DE DDD DS OS REDE ND pap PDE DE LEE DID De PRDEREDEDE DS DEDEDE PD
Erenerh Bare EarSe pL aa PROC D PLSD SPEER DDD RRDD IRS D TRIER Bape arb eer ee PLP PPS D
Sasqseses: Pea bePaPee pier st ee ppen bebe ps Pap prpbnrnrntbe ped DEP PL OE DISD PSPSPS Is SSRIS TESS TE SS SES ES gS esse
SeSad sseS2ee sa gescesasese seca aes aeosateteuccagecscactascsasece te Saeeeeeeee cesee PSPoPPp Per pr prar nr prt pr bron ba
RSS SSE ESE Sek ekasedesessseseseseses sce les ess ses ses ees aek Dp Porererpnryr pen: err re
spegesesehesesestesetesese esesecesecesecaccatacstcee SeSehcdedcSesefeieg See SS Es TESS KSC SSEEAES.
SUSESSSISISISISIS ES ESS 28282 SSESESG SES Es SSS SES bPaP err erat prot be by be Pa be PLL PSPSPS Pa Pa
PoP Pare PS Pera? See pepr me pepr ore Pe DL De PL DL On De DE PE PS POPDPS EDP SD ODD D ED: Pa Po Pa Pa Po PSPS POPS PLDs
BSBSIS Sets PEP DL Ph Pa Para a Pat PoP er Perper Dl bt bt Deh Do De Pe De Pe PLL PS PPS PLES SPD Par ans
Pepees De ee Da P PPE PeD Pb Pee here D prea Rabe DEP ee DLP e De Dt ntprprpoprerpree pepe pr pepe penny
eoapheprerpr pear per nthe be babeba pe PDA PLP SPL PLPS PPD IOP SPD DE Dratgrarorprpepepere pepe pepe Pe)
SateSacasescseseses So SaS4Sase5424 3454525 EPEPLPRPLOL PS DP Pe PPMP PDP pear oD ar pr DEDEDE bs De PS De!
Sikh RaPprpreepr tpt pr pe pepe abr be me: Pabe Pa e PL PPA PLPLPDD prot ero erpepepepe or nr eee)
<' geese tetas TS, Pet rete. SoS 25BS Sys. se 1g Setar ar eter Para Phra
peeterprpreepe pebe pepe babs pubs vee Pepe Pe ESS Seas Esco aeeS a SeSeSe cee SK aces
emacs asta seseseses BRERHRES AKERS ES SEER SS SSeS hese Soeesece se seneeee ee
SSSSSSESERES Ra paphereneber nape P NTS MP PeP DS Paeararars io Pape ror pben rarer ph bron bran)
SSS Poe ai arr pert ts Pa epee PEPPER DS PaPbPer hr pr mr ded, orb. Ps Se3eS<$


AA


Banke
ieee

af

Wma ene
y eA


Mens


i


Sapese lesa deseseasseseasetesesesese
SIS TRIRISISISISISISZA ISIS
Tene elk 61a Soke a8 aS.


pares
WAR
‘an


cnn
*


na,


ew
rors


SEEMS
= é Se $e dee3e3<se
SaSgsaka sate sece sess sersssee taser eo oR ec ea ea ease tate setae
aba seaeatetesetese Rpcien pope PLP DE DS Dh DPD Ps Pa PSPS ODED D LOT
prerptpnprne pape ps babs be Phot Ps OEP De PaPOPS Pp Par ePnr ta!
S E88. Retesecececancsecees cece SaSeS43458 iS
= R44 35382 Sale Re cde ix ele se 362626 7<2
Dye eneta rete re S355 SMES Seescaeseseseqesege mI
SESTEISISESR SSS. 2 ISIS IS SUS 24243454 BS S4 AIS SE
esenctaia terete ss SPerarereys <. Porter pr prt pepe PLD re py
4 SASSS4ES TES, aS43SESISS. Perper repr mr or pe ne Pee Pa)
SSIS SISSIES. S3634343s282 <2 BS PESS ISA TAES.
POPP! a Sa3S 3438255524
SSS SRE


PERS


ry


OK.


ARS,
ees


eRe


Pyeraen
*


SSSSSESS
SSRIS.
SME
S38:


Por bee Pe Pas
SSSESRSESS
Siesecee
SESS

S85


SESES
SASS SENSES.

SS 5 SS ISS S28 SAIS
saSase =


Un BR
na ws


ie


Kes
Ware
